THIS  VOLUME  HAS  BEEN 

REVIEWED 

FOR  PRESEWATIO*. 


UNIVERSITY 
OF  FLORIDA 
LIBRARY 


IN   MEMORIAM 

REV.  REES  W.  EDWARDS 


r 


t 


■■i 


Authorized  Edition.] 

'analytical 

CONCORDANCE    TO    THE    BIBLE 


ON    AN    ENTIRELY    NEW   PLAN 


CONTAINING  EVERY  WORD  IN  ALPHABETICAL  ORDER,  ARRANGED 
UNDER'ITS  HEBREW  OR  GREEK  ORIGINAL 

WITH  THE  LITERAL  MEANING  OF  EACH,  AND  ITS  PRONUNCIATION 

EXHIBITING  ABOUT   THREE   HUNDRED  AND   ELEVEN   THOUSAND    REFERENCES 
MARKING  30,000  VARIOUS    READINGS   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT 

Wity  tlje  latest  infonmitbtt  mx  §xMxxal  (fkngrapljg  anb  |Utiqtutus 


ETC.  ETC.  ETC. 


DESIGNED  FOR  THE  SIMPLEST  READER  OF  THE  ENGLISH  BIBLE 

ALONG  WITH  THE  "ANALYTICAL  BIBLE  TREASURY" 


By    ROBERT    YOUNG,    LL.D. 

AUTHOR   OF   A    NEW   LITERAL  TRANSLATION   OF  THE    HEBREW   AND    GREEK   SCRIPTURES,    CONCISE  CRITICAL  COMMENTS  ON  THE   SAME,  A   GRAMMATICAL 

ANALYSIS   OF  THE   MINOR    PROPHETS    IN    HEBREW,    BIBLICAL   NOTES  AND   QUERIES,    HEBREW  GRAMMAR,   VOCABULARY,   ROOTBOOKS, 

VERBS.  ISRAELITISH   GLEANER,    CHRISTOLOGY  OF   THE   TARGUMS,    GUJARATI    GRAMMAR,    ETC.   ETC. 


FOURTH      REVISED      EDITION, 


EDINBURGH  :     GEORGE    ADAM    YOUNG    AND    COMPANY 

NEW   YORK:     I.    K.    FUNK    AND    COMPANY,    10   &    12    DEY    STREET 

MDCCCLXXXI. 
Printed  by  the  Government  Book  Pi  inters,  Edinburgh.] 

\ 


|OU 


«?l 


PREFATORY  NOTE  TO  THE  ANALYTICAL  CONCORDANCE. 


THE  VALUE  of  a  CONCORDANCE  to  any  large  work 
is  well  known  and  admitted,  yet  it  can  only  be  duly 
appreciated  by  those  who  are  really  interested  in  the  Work  of 
which  it  treats.  And  the  Sixty-six  Writings  of  the  OLD  and 
NEW  TESTAMENTS  stand  in  a  very  peculiar  position,  as  I 
have  remarked  elsewhere  : — 

"  Apart  altogether  from  the  claims  of  the  Bible  to  be  regarded 
as  an  authentic  Record  of  the  revelation  with  which  the 
Divine  Being,  from  time  to  time,  was  pleased  to  favour  the 
children  of  men,  it  is  by  far  the  most  unique  volume  ever 
presented  to  the  human  race,  whether  we  consider  the  number 
of  its  penmen,  their  diversified  characters,  positions  and  times, 
or  the  singular  variety  and  intrinsic  greatness  of  the  topics 
treated  of  ;  the  astonishing  amount  and  degree  of  harmony 
throughout  it  in  reference  to  all  essential  points  of  doctrine 
regarding  moral  truth ;  or  the  wonderful  and  unparalleled 
style  and  manner  in  which  the  whole  is  handled,  These  have 
often  called  forth  the  spontaneous  and  exuberant  plaudits  of 
accomplished  literary  and  artistic  critics,  who,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
were  content  to  admire  the  purity  of  the  diction,  the  sublimity 
of  the  style,  the  grandeur  of  the  thoughts,  and  the  excellency 
of  the  morality,  without  allowing  themselves  to  be  practically 
influenced  by  its  divine  life-giving  power. 

"  We  are  accustomed,  and  that  most  justly,  to  consider 
the  Bible  as  one  Book ;  but  we  ought  to  remember  that  it 
is  also  a  collection  of  books  (pamphlets  or  tracts,  we  might 
call  them),  not  less  than  sixty-six  in  number,  written  origin- 
ally in  at  least  three  separate  languages — Hebrew,  Chaldee, 
and  Greek  (the  most  famous  and  extensively  spoken  of 
all  antiquity),  and  composed  during  a  period  of  1600  years, 
between  the  time  of  Moses  and  that  of  the  Apostle  John. 
Written,  too,  by  legislators,  patriarchs,  prophets,  priests,  kings, 
statesmen,   physicians,    shepherds,    taxgatherers,    tentmakers, 

-  fishermen ;  in  short,  by  men  of  every  class  of  the  com- 
munity, in  every  stage  of  human  progress  and  experience, 
both  in  poetry  and  in  prose,  on  the  most  exalted  and  interest- 
ing subjects,  such  as  the  earliest  origin  and  history  of  the 
human  race,  the  providential  government  of  God,  the  gradual 
development  and  exhibition  of  human  progress  and  declension, 
aud  of  God's  ways  and  dealings  with  men,  and  the  consum- 
mation of  Divine  wisdom,  purity,  love,  and  life,  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  It  embraces,  in  short,  the  history  and 
fate  of  nations  and  individuals ;  an  extensive  and  luminous 
code  of  laws,  civil,  sacred,  and  ceremonial ;  an  unrivalled  col- 

I  lection  of  psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs;    of  pro- 
phecies, biographies,  and  epistolary  correspondence  ;  of  philoso- 
phical disquisitions,  nuptial  songs,  and  mournful  elegies  ;  yet 
q  all  agreeing,    in   the    most   wonderful    manner,   to    present 

.  essentially  the  same  sublime  views  : — of  God,  as  to  his  nature, 
character,  works  and  words  ; — of  Man,  as  to  his  origin,  fall, 
depravity,  hopes,  and  final  destiny  ;  his  duties,  responsibilities, 

:    and  privileges  as  a  creature  ;  in  all  his  relations  of  life  as  a 

1  superior,  an  inferior,  or  an  equal  In  a  word,  it  gives  all  that  we 
are  to  believe  concerning  God,  and  all  the  duty  God  requires  of 

§  man  ;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  most  simple,  artless,  pleas- 
ing, truthful,  and  practical  way  possible.  Consider  all  this,  I 
>say, — and  remember,  that  it  is  but  the  barest  outline  of  this 
most  wonderful  Volume, — and  will  you  not  join  in  saying  that 

I  the  Bible  is  its  own  best  witness  that  the  Intelligent  Mind 
which  planned  its  formation,  and  employed  its  penmen,  was  as 
truly  Divine  as  that  which  set  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  keeps 


the  planed  in  their  spheres,  and  gives  us  this  rational  soul, 
those  moral  and  mental  powers,  and  this  human  form,  '  so 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made  V  " 

Without  attempting  to  define  minutely  the  doctrine  of 
Verbal  Inspiration,  the  present  writer  holds  very  decidedly 
that  of  a  full  or  plenary  one,  which  gives  us  real  veracious 
facts  and  truths  in  the  best  and  most  appropriate  language  and 
style,  adopted  originally  by  the  Writers  through  their  own 
idiosyncracies,  yet  so  overruled  as  not  unfrequently  to  convey 
thoughts  which  they  themselves  did  at  first  but  faintly 
apprehend,  and  which  they  were  afterwards  compelled  labori- 
ously to  study.  (See  the  apostolic  testimony  on  this  point  in 
1st  Peter  i.  10-12.)  With  this  understanding  the  Sacred 
Scriptures  are  to  be  studied  and  investigated  like  every  other 
human  composition ;  for,  as  remarked  elsewhere,  "  the  Bible 
was  written  by  Men,  for  Men,  and  in  the  ordinary  language  of 
Men." 

For  such  a  VOLUME,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  numerous 
"  Concordances "  have  been  prepared,  suitable  either  to  the 
Original  Texts,  or  to  the  various  Translations.  Cardinal 
HUGO  is  the  first  of  whose  work  we  have  any  account.  He 
is  said  to  have  employed  five  hundred  monks  on  his  Concord- 
ance to  the  Vulgate,  till  its  completion.  (He  died  a.d.  1262.) 
At  present  the  best  Concordance  to  the  HEBEEW  Text  of 
the  Old  Testament  is  that  of  Julius  Eurst,  [or  the  Hebraist's 
Vade-mecum,  a  Complete  Verbal  Index] ;  to  the  GEEEK 
Text  of  the  Septuagint  that  of  Abraham  Trommius  ;  to  the 
GREEK  Text  of  the  New  Testament  that  of  C.  H.  Bruder  ; 
to  the  LATIN  Vulgate  that  of  Cardinal  Hugo,  as  edited  by 
Lucas  Brugensis ;  and  to  the  ENGLISH  Version  that  of 
Alexander  Cruden,  who  issued  his  third  and  last  edition  in 
1763.  This  has  been  reprinted  (generally  abridged)  in  very 
many  forms  by  Brown,  Bulterworth,  Eadie,  Hawker,  Smith, 
Ynungman,  and  others,  with  varied  degrees  of  accuracy  or 
otherwise. 

After  CRUDEN'S  work,  which  is  truly  wonderful  for  his 
day,  there  appeared  nothing  in  the  English  language  worth 
mentioning  in  the  shape  of  a  Concordance  till  George  V. 
Wigram  issued  the  "  Englishman's  Hebrew  and  Clialdee  Con- 
cordance," and  the  "Englishman's  Greek  Concordance  to  the 
New  Testament"  Shortly  after  this  appeared  the  "  Bible 
Student's  Guide,"  or  an  English,  Hebrew,  and  Chaldee 
Lexicon  and  Concordance,  by  the  Rev.  William  Wilson, 
D.D.,  and  then  the  "  Criticcd  Greek  and  English  Concordance 
to  the  New  Testament,"  prepared  by  C.  H.  Hudson,  H.  L. 
Hastings,  and  Ezra  Abbot,  LL.D. 

These  works,  however,  can  only  be  used  with  any  satisfac- 
tion or  safety  by  a  Hebrew  or  Greek  scholar ;  but  to  such 
they  are  of  very  considerable  value,  and  without  their  aid,  to 
no  small  extent,  the  present  Work  could  never  have  obtained 
the  thoroughness  and  completeness  it  presents. 

Notwithstanding  the  admitted  excellences  of  these  works, 
as  first  attempts  they  are  necessarily  imperfect,  and  hence  the 
present  writer  hopes  ere  long  to  issue  a  "Hebrew  and  Greek 
Concordance  "  on  a  new  plan,  which  will  also  at  the  same 
time  serve  as  an  Index  (or  Reversed  Part)  to  the  present 
Work.     [Lexicons  and  Appendixes  are  now  ready.] 

The  only  other  work  that  remains  to  be  mentioned  is,  an 
"  Interpreting  Concordance  to  the  New  Testament,"  showing 
the  Greek  original  of  every  word,  with  a  Glossary  explaining 
all  the  Greek  words  of  the  New  Testament,  and  giving  them 


114246 


PREFATORY  NOTE  TO  THE  ANALYTICAL  CONCORDANCE. 


their  varied  renderings  in  the  Authorised  Version,  by  the 
Rev.  James  Gall.  This  work  gives  the  Greek  words  only 
in  Roman  Letters,  without  any  meaning  attached,  which  the 
student  has.  to  ascertain  by  turning  to  the  "  Glossary,"  at  the 
end  of  the  work.  Mr  Bullinger's  work  on  the  New  Testa- 
ment (now  completed)  is  also  to  be  specially  noted  for  its 
remarkably  minute  sub-divisions,  carried,  it  may  be,  to  an 
unnecessary  extreme  in  this  respect. 

The  present  Work  is  the  result  of  very  many  years'  labour, 
and  is  designed  to  lead  the  simplest  reader  to  a  more  correct 
understanding  of  the  common  English  Bible,  by  a  reference  to 
the  original  words  in  Hebrew  and  Greek,  with  their  varied 
shades  of  meaning,  as  explained  by  the  most  recent  critics — 
Furst,  Eobinson,  .fee.  Every  word  in  the  English  Bible  is  cast 
into  proper  alphabetical  order,  these  are  then  arranged  under 
their  respective  original  words,  all  in  their  own  proper  alpha- 
betical order.  To  each  of  these  the  literal  meaning  is  prefixed, 
and  the  pronunciation  appended,  with  certain  figures  which 
indicate  the  number  of  the  Hebrew  conjugation ;  which  latter 
sign  is  of  great  value,  since  each  conjugation  has  more  or  less  a 
definite  signification  of  its  own.  Thus  Nos.  1,  3,  5  are  active, 
Nos.  2,  4,  6  passive,  and  No.  7  reflexive.  So  that  if  qatal  in 
the  first  conjugation  is  "he  killed,"  the  second  is  "he  was 
killed,"  the  third  "  he  killed  violently,"  the  fourth  "  he  was 
killed  violently,"  the  fifth  "  he  caused  to  kill,"  the  sixth  "  he 
was  caused  to  kill,"  and  the  seventh  "  he  killed  himself " 
Though  many  exceptions  are  found,  the  general  formula  holds 
good  very  distinctly. 

NOUNS,  ADJECTIVES,  VERBS,  AND  ADVERBS,  are 
here  given  generally  at  full  length,  with  the  exception  of  the 
word  or  phrase  "  The  Lord,"  which  it  has  been  deemed 
unnecessary  to  insert,  as  it  is  uniformly  printed  in  the  Common 
Version  in  small  capitals — "  the  Lord  " — and  is  thus  easily 
distinguished.  It  occurs  no  less  than  5000  times,  and,  if 
printed  in  full,  would  alone  have  occupied  above  fifteen  pages 
of  this  Concordance. 

THE  HEBREW  PARTICLES  (specially  those  inseparable) 
have  few  or  no  illustrations  presented,  but  the  Greek  ones  are 
more  extended ;  yet  in  such  cases  as  dAAa,  8e,  &c,  they  are 
much  too  numerous  for  a  separate  exhibition  at  length. 

THE  ITALICS  of  the  English  Bible  are  enclosed  within 
parenthesis  (),  while  the  VARIOUS  READINGS  of  the 
GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT  are  marked  by  brackets  [], 
and  amount  to  about  30,000  in  all.  Unfortunately,  the  entire 
lack  of  ancient  Hebrew  MSS.  prevents  the  same  course  from 
being  followed  with  the  Old  Testament  quotations;  but  we 
are  not  without  hopes  that  future  excavations  in  the  Temple 
Area  in  Jerusalem  may  yet  provide  us  with  MSS.  of  the  age 
of  Josiah,  or  of  David,  if  not  with  the  very  Autographs  once 
preserved  with  the  Ark  of  the  Tabernacle. 

THE  PROPER  NAMES  of  Persons  and  Places  are,  in  all 
existing  Concordances  (almost  without  a  single  exception), 
either  omitted,  or  put  at  the  end  under  a  separate  alphabet ; 
they  are  here,  for  the  first  time,  inserted  in  their  proper  alpha- 
betical order,  with  the  literal  meaning  of  each,  as  far  as  can  be 
at  present  ascertained.  Their  proper  syllables  are  also  marked 
and  accented  according  to  the  principles  of  Hebrew  and  Greek 
— the  accent  being  placed  only  on  the  last  or  on  the  second 
last  syllable  of  the  word,  never  on  the  ante-penultimate. 

THE  GEOGRAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  and  BIO- 
GRAPICAL  remarks  have  been  generally  limited  (after  the 
first  ninety-six  pages)  to  Biblical  details  ;  and  the  modern 
names  of  ascertained  Bible  sites  have  been  given  in  accordance 
with  the  researches  of  Robinson,  Baedeker,  the  Palestine  Ex- 
ploration Society,  &c.  The  thorough  veracity  of  the  Scriptures 
is  thus  incidentally  confirmed  by  existing  facts  that  cannot  bo 
denied  or  ignored,  and  are  of  priceless  value. 

In  consulting  this  Work,  the  student  is  to  bear  in  mind 
that  it  is  a  Concordance  of  W  ords,  not  of  Phrases  save  in  so 


far  as  any  given  Hebrew  or  Greek  word  may  be  translated  in 
the  English  Bible  not  by  a  word  merely,  but  by  a  phrase ; 
thus  the  word  "  great "  will  be  found  not  only  under  the 
adjective,  but  also  under  the  words  "  authority,  deal,  delight, 
desire,  do,  drops,  drought,  flame,  forces,  grasshqper,  hailstones, 
how,  lion,  man,  mercies,  noise,  owl,  pain,  power,  price,  shew,  so, 
stature,  swelling,  teeth,  toe,  very,  way,  what,  while  to  come, 
wonders,"  &c,  in  all  which  cases  it  is  not  a  separate  word  in 
the  original,  but  indicates  simply  what  the  Translators  deemed 
to  be  necessary  to  express  the  full  force  of  each  of  the  words 
in  question. 

SO  WITH  THE  VERBS.  These  are  arranged  under 
separate  headings,  e.g.,  "  to  come,  come  in,  come  upon,"  &c. 
Yet,  under  the  simple  verb  "  to  come,"  the  student  will  find 
numerous  cases  where  Come  in,  come  upon,  &c,  occur.  The 
explanation  is,  that  in  such  cases  the  adverbs  are.  separate 
particles,  and  are  no  part  of  the  signification  of  the  verb  itself. 
Passives  are  sometimes  to  be  found  under  Actives,  especially  in 
the  Greek. 

As  Cruden's  DEFINITIONS,  though  many  of  them  in- 
teresting and  good,  often  express  too  decidedly  his  own  specific 
view  of  religious  truth  to  be  satisfactory,  the  present  Work 
confines  the  definitions  strictly  to  their  literal  or  idiomatic  force  ; 
which,  after  all,  will  be  found  to  form  the  best  (and  indeed 
the  only  safe  and  solid)  basis  for  theological  deductions  of  any 
kind. 

The  present  Work  is  thus  an  entirely  independent  one,  and 
in  no  sense  an  edition  of  Cruden,  either  in  its  plan  or  its  exe- 
cution. Its  great  object,  as  Tyndale  says  of  his  New  Testa- 
ment, is  to  enable  every  "  plough-boy  "  to  know  more  of  the 
Scriptures  than  the  "  ancients,"  by  enabling  him  at  a  glance  to 
find  out  THREE  DISTINCT  POINTS— First,  What  is  the 
original  Hebrew  or  Greek  of  any  ordinary  word  in  his  English 
Bible  :  Second,  What  is  the  literal  and  primitive  meaning  of 
every  such  original  word  :  and  Third,  What  are  thoroughly 
true  and  reliable  parallel  passages. 

In  carrying  out  these  three  important  Points,  the  following 
plan  has  been  adopted  :  First,  One  Hundred  and  Eighteen 
Thousand  references  have  been  given,  which  are  not  found  in 
Cruden.  Second,  Every  passage  in  the  New  Testament  which 
critical  investigators,  like  Grksbach  and  Tischendorf,  have 
noted  as  doubtful,  or  as  having  a  Various  Reading,  has  been 
marked  by  brackets.  Third,  The  Proper  Name  of  every  Person 
and  Place  has  been  given,  with  the  literal  meaning.  Fourth, 
The  date  or  era  of  every  Person,  so  as  to  distinguish  him  from 
every  other  of  the  same  name.  Fifth,  The  location  of  every 
place  in  its  tribe,  with  the  modern  name  (if  identified),  so  as 
to  form  a  complete  Scripture  Geography  and  Gazetteer. 

But  the  predominating  feature  of  this  work  is  the  Analytical 
arrangement  of  each  English  word  under  its  own  proper  original 
in  Hebrew  or  Greek,  with  the  literal  meaning  of  the  same. 
By  this  means  the  reader  is  enabled  to  distinguish  things  that 
differ,  which  are  frequently  confounded  in  the  English  Bible, 
and  for  the  elucidation  of  which  Cruden  offers  no  real  help  at 
all,  and  which  indeed  have  hitherto  been  the  exclusive  property 
of  scholars.  Eorour  Translation  often  renders  one  Greek  word 
by  ten  or  twenty  English  ones;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  some- 
times employs  one  English  word  to  translate  ten  or  twenty 
Greek  ones. 

In  sending  forth  this  "  Analytical  Concordance  "  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Christian  student  of  Holy  Writ,  the  Author 
trusts  that  as  it  is  only  the  practical  outcome  of  all  his  previous 
Biblical  Studies,  many  of  his  readers,  lay  as  well  as  clerical, 
may  give  themselves  more  to  the  study  of  the  Original  Scrip- 
tures, which  have  "  God  for  their  Author,  Truth  without 
mixture  .  ""ror  for  their  Matter,  and  Salvation  for  their 
End." 

ROBERT  YOUNG. 

Edinbuegu,  September  10,  1879. 


ANALYTICAL     CONCOKDANCE. 


AARON 


AARON 


AA'-KOIi,  [iiQX  enlightened,  illumined. 
He  was  the  first  high  priest  of  Israel :  of  the  family 
ox  Kohath  the  second  son  of  Levi  the  third  son  of 
Jacob;  he  had  Miriam  for  an  elder  sister,  and  Moses 
for  a  younger  brother;  his  father's  name  was  Amram, 
and  his  mother's  Jochebed  ;  he  married  Elisheba, 
daughter  of  Amminadab,  and  sister  of  Naashon  ;  and 
by  her  had  four  sons,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  Eleazar  and 
Ithamar,  Exod.  6.  16-20.  He  was  an  excellent  speaker, 
and  was  appointed  to  be  the  prophet  or  spokesman  of 
Moses ;  he  was  theu  directed  by  God  to  meet  Moses, 
and  did  so  at  the  Mount  of  God,  and  received  the 
good  news ;  lie  went  in  with  Moses  to  Pharaoh,  did 
the  signs  foretold,  and  the  plagues  commanded, 
iv.-xi. 

He  was  murmur  a  I  against  along  with  Moses  for 
the  want  of  bread,  and  called  on  the  people  to  come 
near  before  the  Lord  ;  was  commanded  to  lay  up  a 
p  ot  full  of  manna  before  the  testimony;  held  up  the 
hand3  of  Moses  during  the  battle  with  Amalek  ;  eat 
bread  with  Jethro,  fat.ier-in-Iaw  of  Moses,  xii.-xviii. ; 
was  called  to  come  up  into  Sinai  to  the  LORD  ;  along 
with  the  elders  I13  saw  the  God  of  Israel;  tarried  be- 
low with  the  people  when  Moses  went  up  ;  was  set 
apart  with  his  w.iole  family  to  the  priesthood;  had 
sacred  garments  prepared  for  him  ;  was  anointed  and 
consecrated  to  his  odi^e  by  Moses,  appointed  to  light 
the  lamps,  and  burn  incense  and  make  atonement, 
to  wash  his  hands  an. I  feet,  xxx.  He  is  persuaded  by 
the  psople  to  mike  a  molten  image,  and  is  reproved 
for  it  by  Moses,  xxxi. ;  he  sees  the  shining  of  Moses" 
face,  and  Is  afraid,  xxxiv.  ;  holy  garments  are  made 
for  him,  xxxix. ;  he  and  his  sons  are  sanctified,  and 
wash  their  hands  and  feet,  xl. 

The  priestly  duties  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  are  pre- 
scribed in  Lev.  i.-ix. ;  his  two  eldest  sons  being  de- 
stroyed for  offering  strange  fire,  he  is  silent  and  sub- 
missive ;  he  receives  various  prohibitions  and  regula- 
tions, x.  ;  how  lie  was  to  enter  the  holy  place,  xvi. ; 
not  to  mourn  for  the  dead,  xxi.  ;  nor  touch  the  holy 
things  in  uu:;leamiess,  xxii.  He  was  commanded  to 
numbar  the  people  with  Moses  and  the  twelve  princes 
of  Israel,  Num.  i.  ;  \\i  receives  the  tribe  of  Levi  for 
helps,  iii. ;  numbers  the  Xohathites,  Gershonites,  and 
Merarites,  iv.  ;  receives  the  form  for  blessing  the 
people,  vi.  ;  lights  the  lamps,  offers  the  Levites  before 
the  Lord,  and  mikes  atonement  for  them,  viii.  He 
aud  Miriam  speik  against  Moses,  and  are  reproved 
by  God  for  it,  xii. ;  spoken  against  by  Korah,  Dathau, 
and  Abiram,  also  by  the  whole  congregation  of 
Israel,  he  intercedes  with  God  for  them,  xvi. ;  his  rod 
flourishes,  and  is  preserved  for  a  memorial,  xvii. ;  he 
receives  a  charge  from  God  of  various  duties  and 
privileges,  xviii. ;  the  people  again  murmur  against 
him  and  Moses;  he  dies  on  Mount  Hor,  in  the  land 
of  Edom,  and  is  buried  there,  xx.  Born  B.C.  1574,  he 
dies  B.C.  14.51,  aged  123  years. 
Exod.4.  14 (Is)  not  A.  the  Levite  thy  brother? 

4.  27  the  Lord  said  to  A.,  Go  into  the  wilderness 
4.  28  And  M.  told  A.  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 
4.  29  And  M.  and  A.  went  and  gathered  together 

4.  30  And  A.  spake  all  the  words  which  the  Lord 
5-    1  And  afterward  Moses  and  A.  went  in 

5.  4  Wherefore  do  ye,  M.  and  A.,  let  the  people 

5.  20  And  they  met  Moses  and  A.,  who  stood  in 

6.  13  And  the  Lord  spake  uuto  M.  and  unto  A. 
6.  20  and  she  bare  him  A.  and  Moses 

6.  23  And  A.  took  him  Elisheba,  daughter  of 
6.  25  And  Eleazar  A.'s  son  took  him  (one")  of  the 
6.  26  Thesefare)  that  A.  and  M.,  to  whom  the  Lord 

6.  27  these  (are)  that  Moses  and  A. 

7.  1  and  A.  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet 

7.    2  and  A.  thy  brother  shall  speak  unto  Pharaoh 
7.   6  and  A.  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  them 
7.    7  A.  [was]  fourscore  and  three  years  old,  when 
7.    8  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  unto  A. 
7.    g  thou  shalt  say  unto  A.,  Take  thy  rod,  and 
7.  10  And  M.  and  A.  went  in  unto  Pharaoh 
7.  10  and  A.  cast  down  his  rod  before  Pharaoh 

1 


Exod.  7. 
7- 
7- 


12  but  A.'s  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods 

19  Say  unto  A.,  Take  thy  rod,  and  stretch 

20  And  Moses  and  A.  did  so,  as  the  Lord 

5  Say  unto  A.,  Stretch  forth  thine  haud 

6  And  A.  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the 

5  Then  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  and  A.  and 
12  And  M.  and  A.  went  out  from  Pharaoh 

16  Say  unto  A.,  Stretch  out  thy  rod,  and 

17  for  A.  stretched  out  his  haud  with  his  rod 

25  Pharaoh  called  for  M.  and  for  A.,  and  said 
8  the  Lord  said  unto  M.  and  unto  A.,  Take 

27  and  called  for  M.  and  A.,  and  said  unto 
3  And  Moses  and  A.  came  in  unto  Pharaoh 

8  And  Moses  and  A.  were  brought  again  unto 
16  Then  Pharaoh  called  for  M.  aud  A.  in  haste 
10  M.  and  A.  did  all  these  wonders  before  Ph. 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  aud  A.  in  the  land 

28  as  the  Lord  had  commanded  Moses  and  A. 

31  And  he  called  for  Moses  and  A.  by  night 
43  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses  and  A.,  This  (is) 
50  as  the  Lord  commanded  M.  and  A.,  so  did 

20  the  sister  of  A.,  took  a  timbrel  in  her  hand 

2  murmured  against  Moses  and  A.  in  the 

6  and  A.  said  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel 

9  Moses  spake  unto  A.,  Say  unto  all  the 
10  as  A.  spake  upto  the  whole  congregation 

33  And  Moses  said  unto  A.,  Take  a  pot 

34  so  A.  laid  it  up  before  the  Testimony 

10  Moses,  A.,  and  Hur  went  up  to  the  top  of 
12  and  A.  aud  Hur  stayed  up  his  hands 
12  and  A.  came,  and  ail  the  elders  of  Israel,  to 
24  thou,  and  A.  with  thee :  but  let  not  the 
1  thou,  and  A.,  Nadab,  and  Abihu,  and 
9  Then  went  up  Moses,  and  A.,  Nadab 
14  and,  behold,  A.  and  Hur  (are)  with  you 

21  A.  and  his  sons  shall  order  it  from  evening 
1  take  thou  unto  thee  A.  thy  brother,  and 

1  (even)  A.,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  Eleazar  and  A. 

2  thou  shalt  make  holy  garments  for  A.  thy 

3  they  may  make  A.  's  garments  to  consecrate 

4  they  shall  make  holy  garments  for  A.  thy 
12  A.  shall  bear  their  names  before  the 

29  A.  shall  bear  the  names  of  the  children  of 

30  they  shall  be  upon  A.'s  heart,  when  he 

30  A.  shall  bear  the  judgment  of  the  children 

35  it  shall  be  upon  A.  to  minister :  aud  his 
38  it  shall  be  upon  A.'s  forehead 

38  that  A.  may  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

40  And  for  A.'s  sons  thou  shalt  make  coats 

41  thou  shalt  put  them  upon  A.  thy  brother 

43  they  shall  be  upon  A.,  and  upon  his  sons 

4  A.  and  his  sons  thou  shalt  bring  unto 

5  and  put  upon  A.  the  coat,  and  the  robe 

9  thou  shalt  gird  them  with  girdles,  A.  and 

0  thou  shalt  consecrate  A.  and  his  sons 
10  A.  and  his  sons  shall  put  their  hands 

So  in  v.  15,  19. 

20  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of  A. ,  and  upon 

21  and  sprinkle  (it)  upon  A.,  and  upon  his 

24  thou  shalt  put  all  in  the  hands  of  A.,  and 

26  the  breast  of  the  ram  of  A.'s  consecration 

27  (even)  of  (that)  which  (is)  for  A.,  and  of  (that) 

28  it  shall  be  A.'s  and  his  sons'  by  a  statute 

29  the  holy  garments  of  A.  shall  be  his  sons' 

32  A.  and  his  sons  shall  eat  the  flesh  of 

35  thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  A.,  and  to  his  sons 

44  I  will  sanctify  also  both  A.  and  his  sons 

7  And  A.  shall  burn  thereon  sweet  incense 

8  when  A.  lighteth  the  lamps  at  even 
10  A.  shall  make  an  atonement  upon 
j£  For  A.  and  his  sons  shall  wash  their 

,  .  thou  shalt  anoint  A.  and  his  sons 
-}the  holy  garments  for  A.  the  priest 

1  together  unto  A.,  and  said  unto  him 

2  A.  said  unto  them,  Break  off  the 

3  in  their  ears,  and  brought  (them)  unto  A. 
5  when  A.  saw  (it),  he  built  an  altar 

5  and  A.  made  proclamation,  and  said 

21  And  Moses  said  unto  A.,  What  did 

22  And  A.  said,  Let  not  the  anger  of  my  lord 


Exod.  3 
32 
34 
34 
35 


25  for  A.  had  made  them  naked  unto 

35  because  they  made  the  calf,  which  A.  made 

30  when  A.  and  all  the  children  of  Israel 

31  A.  and  all  the  rulers  of  the  congregation 

19  the  holy  garments  for  A.  the  priest,  and  the 
21  by  the  hand  of  Ithamar,  son  to  A. 

1  and  made  the  holy  garments  for  A. 
27  fine  linen  (of)  woven  work  for  A, 

41  the  holy  garments  for  A.  the  priest 

12  thou  shalt  bring  A.  and  his  sons  unto 

13  thou  shalt  put  upon  A.  the  holy  garments 
31  A.  and  his  sons  washed  their  hands 

5  the  priests,  A.'s  sons,  shall  bring  the  blood 

7  the  sons  of  A.  the  priest  shall  put  fire 

8  the  priests,  A.'s  sons,  shall  lay  the  parts 

11  the  priests,  A.'s  sons,  shall  sprinkle  his 

2  he  shall  bring  it  to  A.'s  sons  the  priests 

3, 10  of  the  meat  offering  (shall  be)  A.'s  and 
2  and  A.'s  sons  the  priests  shall  sprinkle 

5  And  A.'s  sons  shall  burn  it  on  the  altar 

8  and  A.'s  sons  shall  sprinkle  the  blood 

13  and  the  sons  of  A.  shall  sprinkle  the  blood 

9  Command  A.  and  his  sons,  saying 

14  the  sons  of  A.  shall  offer  it  before  the  Lord 
16  the  remainder  thereof  shall  A.  and  his 

18  among  the  children  of  A.  shall  eat  of  it 

20  the  offering  of  A.  and  of  his  sons 

25  Speak  unto  A.  and  to  his  sons,  saying 

10  shall  all  the  sons  of  A.  have,  one  (as  much) 

31  the  breast  shall  be  A.'s  and  his  sons' 

33  He  among  the  sons  of  A.,  that  offereth 

34  and  have  given  them  unto  A.  the  priest 

35  of  the  anointing  of  A.,  and  of  the 
2  Take  A.  and  his  sons  with  him 

6  Moses  brought  A.  and  his  sons,  and 

12  And  he  poured,  .oil  upon  A.'s  head 

13  Moses  brought  A.'s  sons,  and  put  coats 

14  A.  and  his  sons  laid  their  hands 

So  in  v.  18,  22. 

23  the  tip  of  A.'s  right  ear,  and  upon  the 

24  And  he  brought  A.'s  sons,  and  Moses 
27  he  put  all  upon  A.'s  hands,  and  upon 

30  and  sprinkled  (it)  upon  A.,  (and)  upon  his 

30  and  sanctified  A.,  (and)  his  garments 

31  Moses  said  unto  A.  and  to  his  sons 
31  saying,  A.  and  his  sons  shall  eat  it 

36  So  A.  and  his  sons  did  all  things  which 

1  (that)  Moses  called  A.  and  his  sons,  and 

2  lie  said  unto  A.,  Take  thee  a  young 

7  Moses  said  unto  A.,  Go  unto  the  altar 

8  A.  therefore  went  unto  the  altar,  and 

9  the  sons  of  A.  brought  the  blood  unto 
12,  18  and  A.'s  sons  presented  unto  him 

21  the  right  shoulder  A.  waved  (for) 

22  And  A.  lifted  up  his  hand  toward  the 

23  Moses  and  A.  went  into  the  tabernacle 
1  the  sons  of  A.,  took  either  of  them  his 

3  Moses  said  unto  A.,  This  (is  it)  that  the 

3  I  will  be  glorified.     And  A.  held  his  peace 

4  the  uncle  of  A.,  and  said  unto  them,  Coma 
6  Moses  said  unto  A.,  and  unto  Eleazar 

8  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  A.,  saying 

12  M.  spake  unto  A.,  and  unto  Eleazar,  and 
16  the  sons  of  A.  (which  were)  left  (alive), 
10  And  A.  said  unto  M.,  Behold,  this  day 
1  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  to  A.,  saying 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  A.,  saying 

2  he  shall  be  brought  unto  A.  the  priest,  or 
33  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  unto  A.  ,saying 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  to  A.,  saying 

1  of  the  two  sons  of  A.,  when  they  offered 

2  Speak  unto  A.  thy  brother,  that  he  come 

3  Thus  shall  A.  come  into  the  holy  (place) 
6  A.  shall  offer  his  bullock  of  the  sin 

5  And  A.  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goafs 

9  And  A.  shall  bring  the  goat  upon  which 
ii  And  A.  shall  bring  the  bullock  of  the  sin 
21  And  A,  shall  lay  both  his  hands  upon 

23  And  A.  shall  come  into  the  tabernacle 
2  Speak  unto  A.,  and  unto  his  sons,  and 


AARON 


ABDON 


Lev. 


Num. 


20. 
25. 

25- 

26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 

3fc 

■  I 

33- 
Dent.    9. 


*rosh.  2x, 


1  the  sons  of  A.,  and  say  unto  them,  There 
17  Speak  unto  A.,  saying,  Whosoever  (lie  he) 
21  of  the  seed  of  A.  the  priest  shall  come  nigh 
24  Moses  told  (it)  unto  A.,  aud  to  his  sons,  and 
2,  18  Speak  unto  A.  and  to  his  sons 
4  of  theseedof  A,(is)aleper,orhatharunning 
3  shall  A.  order  it  from  the  evening  unto  the 
9  And  it  shall  be  A.'s  and  his  sons";  and 

3  thou  and  A.  shall  number  them  by  their 
17  Moses  and  A.  took  these  men  which  are 

44  which  Moses  and  A.  numbered,  and  the 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  unto  A.,  saying 

1  the  generations  of  A.  and  Moses  in  the  day 
2,  3  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  A. 

4  office  in  the  sight  of  A.  then'  father 

6  and  present  them  before  A.  the  priest 
9  the  Levites  unto  A.  and  to  his  sons 

10  thou  shalt  appoint  A.  and  his  sons,  and 

32  the  sou  of  A.  the  priest  (shall  be)  chief  over 

38  and  A.  and  his  sons,  keeping  the  charge 

39  which  Moses  and  A.  numbered  at  the 
48  redeemed,  unto  A.  and  to  his  sons 

51  that  were  redeemed  unto  A.  and  to  his  sons 
1,  17  Lord  spake  unto  M. and  untoA., saying 

5  A.  shall  come,  and  his  sons,  and  they  shall 

15  when  A.  and  his  sons  have  made  an  end 

16  the  son  of  A.  the  priest  (pertaineth)  the  oil 
19  A.  and  his  sons  shall  go  in,  aud  appoint 

27  the  appointment  of  A.  and  his  sous  shall  be 

28  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  A.  the  priest 

33  under  the  hand  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  A. 

34  And  M.  and  A.  and  the  chief  of  the 

37  which  Moses  and  A.  did  number  according 
41  whom  Moses  and  A.  did  number  according 

45  whom  Moses  and  A.  numbered  according 

46  whom  Moses  and  A.  and  the  chief  of  Israel 

23  Speak  unto  A.  and  uuto  his  sous,  saying 

8  the  hand  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  A.  the  priest 

2  Speak  unto1  A.,  and  say  unto  him,  When 

3  Aud  A.  did  so ;  he  lighted  the  lamps 

11  And  A.  shall  offer  the  Levites  before 

13  thou  shalt  set  the  Levites  before  A.,  and 

19  the  Levites  (as)  a  gift  to  A.  and  to  his  sons 

20  And  M.,  and  A.,  and  all  the  congregation 

21  and  A.  offered  them  (as)  an  offering  before 

21  and  A.  made  an  atonement  for  them 

22  before  A.,  and  before  his  sous:  as  the  LOKD 

6  they  came  before  Moses  aud  before  A. 
8  And  the  sons  of  A.,  the  priests,  shall 

1  Miriam  and  A.  spake  against  Moses 

4  the  LORD  spake,  .uuto  M„,  and  unto  A. 

5  and  called  A.  and  Miriam  ;  and  they  both 

10  and  A.  looked  upon  Miriam,  and,  behold 

11  A.  said  unto  Moses,  Alas,  my  lord,  I 

26  came  to  Moses,  and  to  A.,  aud  to  all  the 

2  murmured  against  Moses  and  against  A. 

5  Then  Moses  aud  A.  fell  on  their  faces 
26  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  aud  uuto  A. 
33  brought  him  unto  Moses  and  A.,  and 

3  against  Moses  and  against  A.,  aud  said 

1 1  and  what  (is)  A . ,  that  ye  murmur  agaiust  him  ? 

16  thou,  and  they,  and  A.,  to  morrow 

17  thou  also,  aud  A.,  each  (of  you)  his  censer 

18  of  the  congregation  with  Moses  and  A. 
20  the  Loud  spake  uuto  Moses  aud  unto  A. 
37  the  son  of  A.  the  priest,  that  he  take  up  the 

40  which  (is)  not  of  the  seed  of  A.,  come  near 

41  murmured  against  M.and  against  Assaying 

42  was  gathered  against  Moses  and  against  A. 

43  Moses  and  A.  came  before  the  tabernacle 

46  Moses  said  uuto  A.,  Take  a  censer,  and 

47  And  A.  took  as  Moses  commanded,  and 
50  And  A.  returned  unto  Moses  unto  the  door 

3  thou  shalt  write  A.'s  name  upon  the  rod 

6  and  the  rod  of  A.  (was)  among  their  rods 
8  the  rod  of  A.  for  the  house  of  Levi  was 

10  Bring  A.'s  rod  again  before  the  testimony 
1  the  Lord  said  unto  A.,  Thou  and  thy 
8  the  Lord  spake  unto  A.,  Behold,  I  also 
20  the  Lord  spake  unto  A.,  Thou  shalt  have 
28  the  Lord's  heave  offering  to  A.  the  priest 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  unto  A. 

2  together  agaiust  Moses  and  against  A. 

6  Aud  Moses  and  A.  went  from  the  presence 
8  thou,  and  A.  thy  brother,  and  speak  ye 

10  and  A.  gathered  the  congregation  together 
12.  23  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  A. 

24  A.  shall  be  gathered  unto  his  people 

js  Take  A,  and  Eleazar  his  son,  and  bring 
26  And  strip  A.  of  his  garments,  and  put 
26  A.  shall  be  gathered  (unto  his  people) 
28  Moses  stripped  A.  of  bju3 garments",  and 

28  and  A.  died  there  in  the  to))  of  the  mount 

29  all  the  congregation  saw  that  A.  was  dead 
29  they  mourned  for  A.  thirty  days,  (even)  all 

7  the  son  of  A.  the  priest,  saw  (it),  he  rose 

11  the  sou  of  A.  the  priest,  hath  turned  my 
1  Eleazar  the  son  of  A.  the  priest,  saying 
g  against  Moses  and  against  A.  in  the 

s  .  she  bare  unto  Aiiiram  A.  and  Moses 
So  And  unto  A.  was  born,  Nadab,  and  Abihu 
64  whom  Moses  and  A.  the  priest  numbered 
-  :  tli\  people,  as  A.  thy  brother  was  gathered 

1  armies  under  the  hand  of  Moses  and  A. 
(8  And   V  the  priest  went  up  into  mount 

1  Vud  v  (waj )  an  huadri  -1  and  twenty 
zo  tlte  Lobd  was  \<  r>  angry  with  A.  to 
20  I  prayed  for  A.  also  the  same  time 

■    there    \    died,  and  then'  he  was  buried 

\   thy  brother  died  in  mount  Hor 
.i  and  the  children  oi  A.  the  priest,  (which 
10  Vluch  tjie  children  of  A.,  (being)  of  the 


Josh 


Jud£ 
1  Sa. 


[  Ch. 


Ezra 
Neh. 


Bsa. 


Mic. 
Luke 
Acts 
Heb. 


11.  13  they  gave  to  the  children  of  A.  the  priest 
21.  19  of  the  children  .of  A.,  the  priests,  (were) 
24.    5  I  sent  Moses  also  and  A.,  and  I  plagued 
24.  33  Eleazarthesonof  A. died;  and  they  buried 

,  20.  28  Eleazar,  the  sou  of  A.,  stood  before  it 

12.  6  that  advanced  Moses  and  A.,  and  that 

12.  8  the  Lord  sent  Moses  aud  A.,  which 
6.    3  the  children  of  Amram ;  A.,  and  Moses 
6.    3  The  sons  also  of  A.  Nadab,  and  Abihu 
6.  49  But  A.  and  his  sons  offered  upon  the 
6.  50  these  (are)  the  sons  of  A. ;  Eleazar  his  son 
6.  54  of  the  sons  of  A.  of  the  families  of 

6.  57  And  to  the  sons  of  A.  they  gave  the 
15.    4  David  assembled  the  children  of  A.,  and 
23.  13  The  sous  of  Amram  ;  A.  and  Moses  ;  and 
23.  13  and  A.  was  separated,  that  he  should 
23.  28  on  the  sons  of  A.  for  the  service  of  the 

23.  32  and  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  A.  111611* 

24.  1  the  divisious  of  the  sons  of  A. 
24.    1  The  sons  of  A. ;  Nadab,  and  Abihu 
24.  19  under  A.  their  father,  as  the  Lord 
24.  31  the  sons  of  A.  in  the  presence  of  David 

13.  9  the  sons  of  A.,  and  the  Levites,  aud  have 
13.  10  (are)  the  sous  of  A., and  the  Levites  (wait) 
26.  18  the  sons  of  A.,  that  are  consecrated  to 
29.  21  the  sons  of  A.  to  offer  (them)  on  the 
31.  19  Also  of  the  sons  of  A.  the  priests,  which 
35.  14  the  priests  the  sons  of  A.  (were  busied) 
35.  14  themselves,  and  for  the  priests  the  sons  of  A. 

7.  s  Eleazar,  the  son  of  A.  the  chief  priest 
iu.  38  the  priest  the  son  of  A.  shall  be  with 
12.  47  sanctified  (them)  unto  the 
77.  20  like  a  flock  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  A. 
99.    6  Moses  aud  A.  among  his  priests,  and 

105.  26  his  servant,  (and)  A.  whom  he  had  chosen 

106.  16  in  the  camp,  (aud)  A. the  saint  of  the  Lord 
115. 10  O  house  of  A.,  trust  in  the  Lord 
115.  12  Israel ;  he  will  bless  the  house  of  A. 
118.    3  Let  the  house  of  A.  now  say,  that  his 
133.    2  down  upon  the  beard,  (even)  A.*s  beard 
135.  19  bless  the  Lord,  O  house  of  A. 

6.  4  I  sent  before  thee  Moses,  A.,  and  Miriam 
1.    5  (was)  of  the  daughters  of  A.,audhername 

7.  40  Saying  unto  A.,  Make  us  gods  to  go  before 
5.    4  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  (was)  A. 
7.  11  and  not  he  called  after  the  order  of  A? 

9.    4  and  A.'s  rod  that  budded,  and  the  tables 

AA-RO-NITES,  jiin^  lit.  of  or  belonging  to  Aaron. 

The  descendants  of  the  preceding  person  are  so 
called  in  1  Ch.  12.  27,  where  we  read  that  Jehoiada 
their  leader  with  3700  men,  also  Zadok  aud  22  cap- 
tains, joined  David  in  Ziklag;  aud  in  27.  17,  that  this 
Zadok  was  their  ruler  afterwards;  and  in  Luke  1.  5, 
that  Zacharias's  wife  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron. 

From  Josh.  21.  13-19,  it  appears  that  the  Aaronites 
had  thirteen  cities  assigned  to  them,  viz.,  Hebron, 
Libnah,  Jattir,  Eshtemoa,  Holon,  Debir,  Aiu,  Juttah, 
and  Beth-shemesh,  out  of  Judah  and  Simeon  ;  Gibeon, 
Geba,  Anathoth,  and  Almon,  out  of  Benjamin;  while 
the  Kokathites  had  ten,  viz.,  Shechem,  Gezer,  Kib- 
zaim,  and  Beth-horon,  out  of  Ephraim;  Eltekeh, 
Gibbethon,  Aijalon,  and  Gath-rimmon,  out  of  Dan; 
Taanach  and  Gath-rimmon,  out  of  the  half  tribe  of 
Manasseh;  aud  the  Gerxhonites  had  thirteen,  viz., 
Golan  in  Bashan,  and  Beesh-terah,  out  of  the  other 
half  tribe  of  Manasseh;  Kishon,  Dabareh,  Jarmuth, 
and  Engannim,  out  of  Isaachar ;  Mishal,  Abdon, 
Helkath,  and  Rehob,  out  of  Asher ;  Kedesh  in  Galilee, 
Hammoth-dor,  and  Kartan,  out  of  Naphtali;  and 
the  Jtlerarites  had  twelve,  viz.,  Jokneam,  Kartah, 
Dinmah,  and  Nahalal,  out  of  Zebulun;  Bezer, 
Jahazah,  Kedemoth,  ami  Mephaath,  out  of  Reuben ; 
Ramoth  in  Gilead,  Mahanaim,  Heshbon,  and  Jazer, 
out  of  Gad.  In  all  forty-eight  cities  with  their 
suburbs.  The  high-priesthood  continued  in  the 
family  of  Eleazar,  the  third  son  of  Aaron,  till  the 
time  of  Eli,  B.C.  1200-1141,  who  was  of  the  family  of 
Ithamar,  the  younger  son,  but  it  was  restored  to  the 
house  of  Eleazar  in  the  person  of  Zadok,  who  received 
it  when  Abiathar  was  dismissed  by  Solomon,  1  Ki.  2. 
35,  thus  fulfilling  the  prediction  in  1  Sa.  2.  30. 

1  Ch.  12.  27  Jehoiada  (was)  the  leader  of  the  A. 

27.  17  [the  ruler],  .of  the  A.,  Zadok 

A-EAD'-DON,  a^ahbuu  destruction,  i.e.,  destroyer. 
The  king  and    angel  (or  messenger)  of  the    abyss, 
whose    name    translated     into    Greek    is    APOLLYON 
(which  see),  who  was  manifested  after  the  fifth  angel 
{or  messenger)  had  sounded. 

Rev.    9.  ii  whose  name  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  (is)  A. 

A-BAG'-THA,  Nn;rN;  happy,  prosperous,  felix. 
One  of  the  seven  chamberlains  or  eunuchs  that 
served  in  the  presence  of  Ahasuerus,  also  called 
Xerxes,  king  of  Persia,  B.C.  485-467.  Compare  other 
Persian  names  such  as  Bigtha,  Bigthan,  Biythuna, 
Bigvai. 

Esth.  1.  10  the  king,  .commanded.  .Bigtha  and  A. 

A-BA'-NA,  n.UN  pronanent,  perennial. 
A  river  rising  at  a  height  of  1141  feet  on  the  top  of 
Anti-Libanus,  near  Zfioduny,  and  (along  with  the 
Aifnj  or  Pharpaxj,  flowing  through  the  city  and  plain 
of  Damascus,  which  is  twenty-three  miles  off.  It  is 
now  called  Barada  or  Chrysorrhoas,  and  is  the  larger 
of  the  two  rivers;  it  loses  itself  in  the  marsh  Btthret 
el  Kibliyeh  ;  fourteen  villages  arc  more  or  less  de- 
pendent on  this  river  for  water. 

2  Ki.    5,  12  (Arc)  not  A.  aud  Rharpar..  better  than 


A-BA'-RIM,  D'l^j;.  giassages,  fords,  ridges. 
The  two  sides  of  a  range  of  high  and  rugged  moun- 
tains E.  of  the  Jordan,  in  Moab,  facing  Jericho, 
stretching  from  Gilead  to  the  Arnon ;  its  highest 
point  is  Mouut  Nebo,  now  Jebel  A'ebbtfi,  the  top  of 
the  "Pisgah,"  whence  Moses  viewed  the  land  before 
his  death;  here  Israel  pitched  after  leaving  Almon- 
Diblathaim. 

Num.  27. 12  Get  thee  up  into  this  mount  A. 

33.  47  in  the  mountains  of  A.,  before  Nebo 
33.  48  they  departed  from  the  mountains  of  A. 

Deut.  32.  49  Get  thee  up  into  this  mountain  A. 
ABASE,  to  — 
To  wake  low,  humble,  bB$  shaphel,  5,  %y  5. 

Job    40.  11  behold  every  one(that  is)proud,and  abase 

Eze.    21.  26  exalt(himthatis)low,andabase(himthat 

Dan.    4.  37  those  that  walk  in  pride  he  is  able  to  abase 
ABASED,  to  be  — 
To  make  low,  humble,  T<nreiv6u)  tapeinoo. 

Matt.23. 12  whosoever  shall  exalt  himself  shall  he  ah. 

Luke  14.  11  whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  ab. 
18.  14  every  one.  .exalteth  himself  shall  be  ah. 

rhil.    4.  12  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know 
ABASING  — 
To  make  low,  humble,  Tairz u/6co  tapeinoo. 

2  Co.  11.    7  Have  I  committed  an  offence  in  abasing 
ABASE  one's  self,  to  — 
To  be  humble,  to  submit  oneself,  njn  anah. 

Isa.  31.    4  (lie)  will  not.  .abase  himself  for  the  noise 
ABATE,  to  — 
To  flee,  hasten  away,  D«  nns. 

Deut. 34.    7  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force  abated 
ABATED,  to  be  — 
l.To  cut  off,  diminish,  withdraw,  i'"n  gara,  2. 

Lev.  27.  18  it  shall  be  abated  from  thy  estimation 
2.  To  be  lacking,  wanting,  ipn  chaser. 

Gen.   8.    3  after  t'ae  end.  .the  waters  were  abated 
Z.  To  become  light,  lightened,  swift,  hhft  qalal. 

Gen.    8.    8  to  see  if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off 
8.  11  so  Noah  knew  that  the  waters  were  abated 
4.  To  be  feeble,  desist,  fall,  nfl"i  raphah, 

Judg.  8.    3  Then  their  anger  was  abated  toward  him 

AB'-EA,  afifia,  a,  Chaldee  word  signifying  "father" 
Mark  14.  36  Abba.Father,  all  things  (are)  possible  unto 
Rom.  8.  15  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father 
Gal.     4.    6  sent  forth,  .iuto  [your]  hearts,  crying,  A. 

AB'-DA,  to?"  servant,  slave,  worshipper. 

1.  Rather  of  Adoniram,  Solomon's  tribute  officer. 

2  Ki.    4.    6  Adoniram,  the  son  of  A.  (was)  over  the 

2.  A  chief  Levite  in  Jerusalem  after  the  exile,  the 
son  of  Shammua,  called  Obadiah  sou  of  Shemaiah  in 
1  Ch.  9.  16. 

Neh.  11. 17  A.  the  son  of  Shammua,  the  son  of  Galal 
AB-DE'-EL,  Sn^  servant  of  God. 
The   father   of  Shelemiah  whom  Jehoiakim,  king   of 
Judah,  ordered  to  apprehend  Baruch  the  scribe  and 
Jeremiah  the  prophet. 

Jer.  36.  26  Shelemiah  the  son  of  A.,  to  take  Baruch 
AB'-DI,  ^ny  servant  ofJah. 

1.  A  Merarite,  grandfather  of  Ethan,  one  of  those 
whom  David  set  over  the  service  of  song. 

iCh.  6.    44  hand:  Ethan  the  sonofKishi.thesonof  A. 
2  Ch.29.  12  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  Kish  the  son  of  A. 

2.  A  descendant  of  one  of  the  two  Elams,  who  had 
taken  a  strange  wife  during  the  exile,  a  thing  forbid- 
den by  the  law  of  Moses. 

Ezra  10.  26  of  the  sons  of  Elam.  .A.,  and  Jeremoth 
AB-DI'-EL,  S^nsy  servant  of  God. 
The    ancestor   of    a   family    of   Gadites  dwelling  in 
Gilead  in  Bashan,  as  reckoned  in  the  days  of  Jotham 
and  Jeroboam,  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel,  B.C.  825-742. 

x  Ch.  5.  15  Ahi  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Gum 
AB'-DON,  \vq#  service,  sereile. 

1.  A  Levilical  city  in  Asher,  now  called  Abdch,  at 
the  N.  of  Acre,  on  the  banks  of  the  Wady  Kuin; 
called  Hebron  (Ebron)  in  Josh.  19.  28. 

Josh. 21.  30  A.  with  her  suburbs 
1  Ch.  6.  74  A.  with  her  suburbs 

2.  A  son  of  Hillel  the  Pirathonite  (perhaps  the  same 
as  Bedau  in  1  Sa.  12.  n);  he  judged  Israel  eight  years, 
B.C.  IT20-IH2,  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  grandsons, 
who  rode  on  seventy  ass  colts,  was  buried  in  Pirathon 
in  the  land  of  Ephraim  in  what  was  called  the  mount 
of  the  Amalekites. 

Judg.  12.  13  A.,  son  of  nillel,  aTirathonite,  judged 
12.  15  A.,  son  of  Hillel  the  Pirathonite  died 

3.  A  Eenjamite  in  Jerusalem. 

1  Ch.  8.  23  And  A.,  and  Zichri,  and  Hanan 
4  The    firstborn    son   of    Jehicl    from     Maaehah,    in 
Gibeon  of  Benjamin. 

1  Ch.    8.  30  And  Ins  firstborn  sen  A.,  and  Zur,  and 
9.  36  And  his  firstborn  son  A.,  then  Zur,  and 
r>  A   son    of  Micah,   and    sent  with  others  by    king 
Josiah  to  liuldah  the  prophetess  to  enquire  of  Jeho- 
vah regarding  th-;  words  of  the  Book  of  the  Law  found 


ABEDNEGO 


ABIDE 


in  the  temple,  B.C.  624.    He  is  called  ACHBOR  in  2  Ki. 

22  12. 

2  Ch.  34.  20  the  king  commanded.  .A.  son  of  Micah 
A-BEB-NE'-GO,  NU2  12^  servant  of  Nego. 
A  name  given  by  the  prince  of  the  eumichs  of  Ne- 
buchadnezzar, kiug  of  Babylon,  to  Azariah,  one  of 
the  four  young  princes  of  Judah  who  were  carried 
away  B.C.  607.  He  was  one  of  the  three  companions 
of  Daniel  that  were  cast  into  the  burning  fiery  furnace 
for  refusing  to  bow  before  the  gulden  image  set  up 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Babylon. 

Dan.    1.    7  for  he  gave  unto.  .Azariah  [thename]of  A. 

2.  49  and  he  set.  .A.,  over  the  affairs  of 

3.  12  whom  thou  hast  set  over  the  affairs.  .A. 
3.  13  Nebuchadnezzar .  .commanded  to  bring  A. 
3.  14  (Is  it)  true,  O  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  A. 
3.  16  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  A.,  answered  and 
3.  19  changed  against  Shadrach,  Meshach,  <&  A. 
3.  20  his  army  to  bind  Shadrach,  Meshach,  &  A. 
3.  22  slew  those  men  that  took  up.  .A. 

3.  23  And  these  three  men.  .A., fell  down  bound 
3.  26  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  A.,  ye  servants  of 
3.  26  Then  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  A.,  came 
3.  28  Blessed(be)theGodofShadrach,M.,andA. 
3.  29  speak  anything  amiss  against . .  God  of . .  A. 

3.  30  Then  the  king  promoted.  .A.,  in  the 

A'-BEL,  Snw  fresh,  grassy,  meadow. 

1.  A  stony  place  in  the  field  of  Joshua  the  Bethle- 
hemite,  in  the  N.W.  of  Judah,  between  Ekron  and 
Beth-shemesh,  whereon  the  ark  was  left  by  the 
Philistines,  B.C.  1140. 

1  Sa.    6.  iS  the  great  (stone  of)  A.,  whereon  they  set 

2,  A  city  in  Naphtali  (now  called  Abil,  three  miles 
N.E.  of  Beth-rehob),  where  Joab  besieged  Sheba, 
whose  head  was  given  up  to  him  at  the  suggestion  of 
a  wise  woman  of  Abel  of  Beth-maachah. 

2  Sa.  20.  14  And  he  went  through,  .unto  A.,  v.  15,  16. 
A-BEL-BETH-MA-A'-CHAH,  nsj^gn  TV3  *?3N  meadow 

of  the  house  of  Maachah. 
A  city  in  Manasseh  or  Naphtali,  which  is  mentioned 
along  with  Ijon,  and  Dan,  and  Jauoah,  and  Kedesh, 
and  Hazor,  as  being  taken  by  Tiglath-pileser  B.C.  740, 
and  the  inhabitants  carried  off  to  Assyria. 

1  Ki.  15.  20  Ben-hadad.  .smote.  .A., and  allCinneroth 

2  Ki.  15.  29  Tiglath-pileser.  .took  Ijon  and  A.,  and 
A-BEL-KE-RA'-DUM,    D*D~J|    Snx     meadow    of   the 

vineyards. 
A  place  E.   of  the  Jordan  beyond  Aroer,   and   now 
called  Abila,  six  or  seven  miles  beyond  Rabbah  (or 
Philadelphia)  of  the  Ammonites. 

Judg.n.  33  smote  them,  .unto  the  plain  of  the  v.-y. 

A-BEL-MA'-IM,  0)0  Six  meadow  of  the  waters. 
Apparently    another   name    for    Abel-beth-maachah ; 
it  was  smitten  by  the  armies  of  Benhadad  B.C.  940,  in 
the  days  of  Asa. 

2  Ch.  16.    4  they  smote  Ijon,  and  Dan,  aud  A. 
A-BEL-ME-HO'-LA,  rrpirp  S2N  meadow  of  the  dance. 
A  city  in  Issachar,  at  the  N.  of  the  Jordan  Valley, 
and  ten  or  twelve  miles  S.  of  Beth-shean ;  the  birth- 
place of  Elisha  the  prophet,  son  of  Shaphat. 

Judg.  7.  22  the  host  fled,  .to  the  border  of  A.,  unto 
1  Ki.    4.  12  from  Beth-shean  to  A.,  (even)  unto  (the 
39.  16  and  Elisha,  the  son  of  Shaphat  of  A. 

A-BEX-TYTTZ -RA'-IM,  Dn^D  Sns  meoxlow  or  mourn- 
ing of  the  Egyptians. 
A  place  at  the  threshing  floor  at  Atad,  "beyond 
Jordan,"  probably  on  the  W.  between  it  and  Hebron, 
at  Beth-hogla,  now  Ain-Hajla;  according  to  others, 
at  El-Haram,  near  Hebron.     See  Atad. 

Gen  50.  11  wherefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  A. 
A-BEL-SHIT'-TIM,  cptrn  S?n;  meadow  of  tlie  acacias. 
A  place  iu  the  plains  (or  deserts)  of  Moab  E.  of  the 
Jordan,  about  seven  miles  off,  opposite  Jericho,  and 
nearly  W.  of  Heshbon.  It  was  the  extreme  N.  border 
of  the  last  encampment  of  Israel  before  passing  over 
the  Jordan,  B.C.  1451.    See  Shittim. 

Num.  23-  49  pitched.. unto  A.,  in  the  plains  of  Moab 
A'-BEX,  Snn  transitoriness. 

The  second  son  of  Adam  and  Eve,  and  apparently 
the  twin  brother  of  Cain.  He  was  a  shepherd,  and 
at  the  end  of  a  certain  time  brought  an  offering  to 
Jehovah  of  the  best  of  his  flock.  Cain  being  dis- 
pleased, slew  him  "  in  the  field,"  as  all  the  ancient 
versions  declare.  His  blood  is  represented  as  "crying 
from  the  ground. 

Gen.   4.    2  And  she  again  bare  his  brother  A.  And  A. 

4.  4  A., he  also  brought,  .had  respect  unto  A. 
4.    8  And  Cain  talked  with  A. .  .against  A. 

4.    9  said  unto  Cain,  Where  (is)  A.  thy  brother  ? 
4.  25  another  seed  instead  of  A.,  whom  Cain 
Matt23.  35  from  the  blood  of  righteous  A.,  unto  the 
Luke  11.  51  From  the  blood  of  A.  unto  the  blood  of 
Heb.  11.    4  By  faith  A.  offered  unto  God  a  more 
12.  24  speaketh  better  thiugs  than  (that  of)  A. 
A'-BEZ,  |\?n  white,  shining. 

A  city  in  Issachar,  near  Kishion  or  Remeth  (perhaps 
the  same  as  Thebez,  now  Tubas),  near  Enganniu  and 
Shunem. 

J  osh.  iq.  20  r  border  was  toward  ] . .  Kishion  and  A 


ABHOR,  to  — 

1.  To  abhor,  bnz  bachal. ' 

Zech.  11.    8  loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also  abhorred 

2.  To  sejmrate,  cast  away,  loathe,  Sya  gaal. 

Lev.   26.  11  among  you:  and  my  soul  shall  not  abhor 
26.  15  or  if  your  soul  abhor  my  judgments,  so 
26.  30  I  u  ill  destroy . .  and  my  soul  shall  abhor 
26.  43  and  because  their  soul  abhorred  my 
26.  44  neither  will  I  abhor  them,  to  destroy 

3.  To  nauseate,  abhor,  hni  zahain,  3. 

Job  33.  20  So  that  his  life  abhorreth  bread,  and  his 

4.  To  be  indignant,  defy,  abhor,  Dyi  zaam. 
Prov.  24.  24  the  people  curse,  nations  shall  abhor 

5.  To  despise,  reject,  loath,  dno  maas. 

Job   42.    6  Wherefore  I  abhor  (myself),  and  repent 
Psa.  36.    4  He  deviseth.  .he  abhorreth  not  evil 

78.  59  he  was  wroth,  and  greatly  abhorred  Israel 
89.  38  But  thou  hast  cast  off  and  abhorred,  thou 

6.  To  despise,  pierce,  sting,  j'N'j  naatz,  1,  3. 
Deut.32.  19  And  when  the  Lord  saw  (it),  he  abhorred 
1  Sa.    2.  17  for  men  abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord, 
Psa.  10.    3  the  covetous  (whom)  the  Lord  abhorreth 
Jer.    14.  21  Do  not  abhor  (us),  for  thy  name's  sake 

7.  To  reject,  cast  down,  *inj  naar,  3. 

Lam.   2.    7  the  Lord,  .hath  abhorred  his  sanctuary 

8.  To  be  vexed,  wearied  with,  pp  guts. 

Lev.  20.  23  these  things,  and  therefore  I  abhorred 

1  Ki.  11.  25  he  abhorred  Israel,  and  reigned  over  S. 
Isa.     7. 16  the  land  that  thou  abhorrest  shall  be 

9.  To  have  in  abomination,  \'^yy  shaqats,  3. 

Psa.  22.  24  not  despised  nor  abhorred  the  affliction  of 

10.  To  contemn,  abhor,  reject,  2NjT  taab,  3. 

Amos  6.    S  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  and  hate 
11. To  have  in  abomination,  reject,  dj/fi  taab,  3. 

Deut.  7.  26  and  thou  shalt  utterly  abhor  it ;  for  it  (is) 
23.  7  Thou  shalt  not  abhor  an  Edomite  ;  for  he 
23.    7  thou  shalt  not  abhor  an  Egyptian;  because 

Job     g.  31  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me 
19.  19  All  my  inward  friends  abhorred  me 
30.  10  They  abhor  me,  they  flee  far  from  me 

Psa.    5.   6  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and 

106.  40  insomuch  that  he  abhorred  his  own 

107.  18  Their  soul  abhorreth  all  manner  of  meat 
119.  163 1  hate  and  abhor  lying ;  (but)  thy  law  do  I 

Tsa.   49.    7  to  him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth 
Amos  5. 10  they  abhor  him  that  speaketh  uprightly 
Mie.    3.    9  ye.  .princes  of .  .Israel,  that  abhor 

12.  To  shrink  from,    aTroarvyeoo  apo-stugeo. 
Rom.  12.    9  Abhor  that  which  is  evil ;  cleave  to  tkat 

13.  To  have  in  abomination,  PSsKvo-a-opat. 
Bom.    2.  22  thou  that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou 

ABHORRED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  or  become  stinking,  e;N2  baash,  2. 

2  Sa.  16.  21  Israel  shall  hear  that  thou  art  abhorred 
2. To  be  indignant,  defy,  abhor,  V£\zaam. 

Prov.  22.  14  he  that  is  abhorred  of  the  Lord  shall 

ABHORRED,  to  make  to  be  — 
l.To  cause  to  stink,  ii:xn  baash,  5. 

Exod.    5.21  ye  have  made  our  savour  to  be  abhorred 

1  Sa.    27.  12  He  hath  made,  .utterly  to  abhor  him 

2.  To  make  abominable,  reject,  nj:n  taab,  3. 
Eze.  16.  25  hast  made  thy  beauty  to  be  abhorred 

ABHORRING  — 

An  object  of  abhorrence,  pay\  deraon. 

Isa.    66.  24  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  unto  all  flesh 

A'-BI,  '2$  Jah  is  father. 

The  daughter  of  Zechariah,  wife  of  Ahaz,  and  mother 
of  Hezekiah,  kings  of  Judah,  (called  Abijah  in  2  Ch. 
29.  1,)  B.C.  726. 

2  Ki.  18.   2  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  A. 
A-BI'-A,  A-BI'-AH,  r$3N  Jah  is  father. 

1.  The  second  son  of  Samuel  the  prophet  and  judge 
of  Israel;  with  his  brother  Joel  or  Vashni,  he  judged 
in  Beersheba,  and  did  wickedly,  so  that  Israel  desired 
and  obtained  a  king. 

1  Sa.    8.    2  and  the  name  of  his  second  A.  ..judges  in 
1  Ch.  6.  28  of  Samuel;  the  first-born  Vashni,  and  A. 

2.  The  wife  of  Hezron  grandson  of  Judah  by  Pharez, 
and  mother  of  Ashur  father  of  Tekoa. 

1  Ch.    2.  24  then  A.  Hezron's  wife  bare  him  Ashur 

3.  A  son  of  Rehoboam,  called  Abijam  in  1  Ki.  14.  31  ; 
15.  1,  7,  8. 

1  Ch.   3.  10  Solomon's  son  (was)  Rehoboam,  A.  his 
Matt.  1.    7  and  Roboam  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat 

4.  The  seventh  son  of  Becher  son  of  Benjamin. 

1  Ch.  7.    8  And  the  sons  of  Becher ;  Zemira.  .and  A. 

5.  A  priest  in  the  days  of  David,  set  over  a  particular 
course  of  service  in  the  Tabernacle. 

Luke  1.    5  priest . .  Zacharias,  of  the  course  of  A. 

A-BI-AL'-BON,  faff]}  ^father  of  strength. 

One  of  David's  mighty  men,  from  Arabah  or  Beth- 
arabah,  a  city  in  the  N.  of  the  country  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  adjacent  to  the  territory  of  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin.    He  is  called  Abiel  in  1  Ch.  11.  32. 

2  Sa.  23.  31  A.  the  Arbathite 


A-BI-A'-SAPH,  f]g$*3«  father  of  gathering. 
The  third  son  of  Korah  first-born  of  Izhar,  second  son 
of  Kohath,   second  son  of  Levi    third  son  of  Jacob. 
See  Ebiasayh 

Exod.  6.  24  And  the  sons  of  Korah ;  Assir .  .and  A. 
A-BI-A'-THAR,  *\^2X  fo  ther  of  superfluity. 
The  eleventh  high- priest  in  succession  from  Aaron  : 
son  of  Ahimelech,  son  of  Ahitub,  priest  at  Nob.  He 
escaped  when  Doeg  the  Edomite  slew  his  father  and 
85  priests,  and  fled  to  David  in  the  cave  of  Adullam  ; 
was  sent  back  to  Jerusalem  with  the  ark  when  David, 
fled  from  Absalom  ;  was  joint  high-priest  with  Zadok ; 
conspired  to  make  Adouijah  king;  was  banished  to 
his  birth  place,  Anathoth  in  Benjamin:  and  at  last 
was  expelled  from  Ins  office  by  Solomon,  B.C.  1014. 

1  Sa.  22.  20  And.  .A.,  escaped,  and  fled  after  David 

22.  21  And  A.  shewed  David  that  Saul  had 

22.  22  And  David  said  unto  A.,  I  knew  (it)  that 

23.  6  when  A. . .  fled  to  David . .  he  came  down 

23.  9  David,  .said  to  A.  the  priest,  Bring 

30.    7  And  David  said  to  A. . .  bring  me  hither 

30.  7  And  A.  brought  thither  the  ephod  to 

2  Sa.    8.  17  And  Zadok.  .and  Ahimelech  the  son  of  A. 

15.  24  and  A.  went  up,  until  all  the  people 
15.  27  two  sous  with  you, .  .and.  .the  son  of  A. 
15.  29  Zadok  therefore  aud  A.  carried  the  ark 
15.  35  not  there  with  thee  Zadok  and  A.  the 
15.  35  thou  shalt  tell  (it)  to  Zadok  and  A.  the 
15.  36  there  with  them,  .and  Jonathan  A.'s 

17.  15  Then  said  Hushai  unto  Zadok  and  to  A. 

19.  11  David  sent  to  Zadok  and  to  A.  the  priests 

20.  25  and  Zadok  and  A.  (were)  the  priests 

1  Ki.    1.    7  he  conferred  with  Joab.  .and  with  A. 

1.  igandhath  called. .A.  the  priest,  and  Joab 
1.  25  and  hath  called  all.  .and  A.  the  priest 

1.  42  Jonathan  the  son  of  A.  the  priest  came 

2.  22  even  for  him,  and  for  A.  the  priest,  and 
2.  26  And  unto  A.  the  priest  said  the  king 

2.  27  So  Solomon  thrust  out  A.  from  being 
2.  35  Zadok.  .the  king  put  in  the  room  of  A. 
4.    4  and  Zadok  and  A.  (were)  the  priests 
1  Ch.  15.  11  David  called  for  Zadok  and  A.  the 

18.  16  Zadok.  .and  Abimelech  the  son  of  A. 

24.  6  before  the  kiug,  and.  .the  son  of  A. 

27.  34  after  Ahithophel  (was)  Jehoiada.  .and  A. 
Mark  2.  20  into  the  house  of  God,  in  the  days  of  A. 

A'-BLB,  a\?N  sprouting,  budding. 
The  first  month  of  the  sacred  and  seventh  of  the 
civil  year  of  the  Hebrews,  on  the  15th  of  which  Israel 
left  Egypt.  It  commenced  at  the  new  moon  of  April 
or  March  (according  to  the  Rabbis),  and  was  consti- 
tuted the  first  month  of  the  year  in"  commemoration 
of  the  release  from  Egyptian  slavery. 

Exod.  13.   4  This  day  came  ye  out  in  the  month  A. 
23.  15  in  the  time  appointed  of  the  month  A. 
34.  18  bread,  .in  the  time  of  the  month  A. 
34.  18  in  the  month  A.  thou  earnest  out  from 

Deut.  16.    1  Observe  the  month  of  A.  and  keep  the 
16.    1  for  in  the  month  of  A.  the  Lord  thy  God 
A-BI'-DA,  A-BI'-DAH,  J>T*W  faifter  of  knowledge. 
The  fourth  son  of  Midiau  the  fourth  son  of  Keturah 
aud   Abraham.     Comp.   the  city  of    Eboda,  between 
Canaan  and  Sinai. 

Gen.  25.    4  the  sons  of  Midian ;  Ephah..andA. 

1  Ch.    1.  33  the  sons  of  Midiau ;  Ephah.  .and  A. 
A-BI'-DAN,  ]T$vt  father  of  judgment. 
The  son  of  Gideoni,  a  chief  Benjamite,   who  was  ap- 
pointed along  with  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  a  chief  man 
out  of  every  tribe,  to  number  the  people. 

Num.  1. 11  Of  Benjamin  ;  A.  the  son  of  Gideoni 

2.  22  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Benjamin.  .A. 
7.  60  On  the  ninth  day  A.  the  son  of  Gideoni 
7.  65  this  (was)  the  offering  of  A.  the  son  of 

10.  24  And  over  the  host,  .(was)  A.  the  son  of 
ABIDE,  to  — 
l.To  go  in,  enter,  come,  M3  bo. 

Num.31.  23  that  may  abide  the  fire,  .all  thatabideth 

2.  To  sojourn  as  a  stranger,  ih  gur. 

Psa.  15.    1  Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle? 
61.    4  I  will  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  for  ever 

3.  To  stay,  wait  for,  Sin  chul. 

Hos.  11.    6  And  the  sword  shall  abide  on  his  cities 

4.  To  encamp,  incline  downward,  ~Jn  chanah. 
Num.  9.  20  according  to  the.  .they  abode  in  their 

9.  22  children  of  Israel  abode  in  then  tents 

31.  19  do  ye  abide  without  the  camp  seven 
Ezra   8.  15  and  there  abode  we  in  tents  three  days 

5.  To  sit,  sit  down,  settle  down,  dwell,  2ty;  yashab. 
Gen.  22.    5  Abide  ye  here  with  the  ass  ;  and  I 

24.  55  Let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  (a  few) 
29.  14  And  he  abode  with  him  the  space  of  a 
29.  19  And  Laban  said, .  .abide  with  me 

44.  33  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the  lad 
49.  24  But  his  bow  abode  in  strength,  and 
Exodi6.  29  See.  .abide  ye  every  man  in  his  place 
Lev.    8.  35  Therefore  shall  ye  abide  (at)  the  door  of 
Nmn2o.    1  and  the  people  abode  in  Kadesh 
22.    5  and  they  abide  over  against  me 
22.    8  the  princes  of  Moab  abode  with  Balaam 

25.  1  And  Israel  abode  in  Shittim 

35.  25  he  shall  abide  in  it  unto  the  death  of 
Deut.  1.  46  So  ye  abode  in  Kadesh  many  days 

3. 19  your  wives,  .shall  abide  in  your  cities 

3.  29  So  we  abode  iu  the  valley  over  against 
"9.  9  then  I  abode  in  the  mount  forty  days 


ABIDE 


4 


ABIJAH 


Josh.  2.  22  and  abode  there  three  days,  until  the 
5.  8  that  they  abode  In  their  places  iu  the 
8.    9  and  abode  between  Beth-el  and  Ai 

Judg.  5.  16  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds 
11.  17  and  Israel  abode  in  Kadesh 

19.  4  and  he  abode  with  him  three  days 

20.  47  and  abode  in  the  rock  Rimmon  four 

21.  2  and  abode  there  till  even  before  Gdd  - 

1  Sa.    1.  22  before  the  Lord,  and  there  abide  for 

1.  23  So  the  woman  abode,  and  gave  her  son 
5.    7  The  ark.  .shall  not  abide  with  us 
7.    2  while  the  ark  abode  iu  Kirjath-jearim 
13.  16  And  Saul,  .abode  in  Gibeahof  Benjamin 
19.    2  and  abide  in  a  secret  (place),  and  hide 

22.  5  the  prophet  Gad  said . .  abide  not  in  the 
22.    6  (now  Saul  abode  in  Gibeah  under  a  tree 

22.  23  Abide  thou  with  me,  fear  not :  for  he 

23.  14  And  David  abode  in  the  wilderness 
23.  18  and  David  abode  in  the  wood,  and 
23.  25  and  abode  in  the  wilderness  of  Maon 

25.  13  and  two  hundred  abode  by  the  stuff 

26.  3  But  David  abode  in  the  wilderness 

2  Sa.    1.    1  and  David  had  abode  two  days  in 

11.  11  The  ark,  and  Israel,  and  Judah,  abide 
11.  12  So  Uriah  abode  in  Jerusalem  that  day 
15.    8  thy  servant  vowed,  .while  I  abode  at 

15.  19  return  to  thy  place,  and  abide  with  the 

16.  3  Behold,  he  abideth  at  Jerusalem 

16.  18  and  with  him  will  I  abide 

1  Ki.  8.  13  a  settled  place  for  thee  to  abide  in  for 

17.  19  carried  him  up  into  a  loft,  where  he 

2  Ki.  19.  27  But  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thy  going 
2  Cli.  25.  19  abide  now  at  home  ;  why  shouldest 

32.  10  that  ye  abide  in  the  siege  in  Jerusalem? 
Ezra  8.  32  we  cf»me  to  Jerusalem,  and  abode  there 
Job    24.  13  nor  abide  in  the  paths  thereof 

3S.  40  (and)  abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  wait? 
Psa.  55.  19  even  he  that  abideth  of  old 

61.    7  He  shall  abide  before  God  for  ever 
125.    1  (which)  cannot  be  removed,  (but)  abideth 
Isa.   37.  28  But  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thy  going 
Jer.  21.    9  He  that  abideth  in  this  city  shall  die  by 

38.  28  So  Jeremiah  abode  in  the  court  of  the 
42.  10  If  ye  will  still  abide  in  this  land 

49.  18  no  man  shall  abide  there,  neither  shall 

49.  33  there  shall  no  man  abide  there,  nor 

50.  40  (so)  shall  no  man  abide  there,  neither 
Hos.    3.    3  Thou  shalt  abide  for  me  many  days 

3.  4  the  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many 
Mic.    5.    4  and  they  shall  abide  :  for  now  shall  he 

6.  To  bear,  hold  out,  sttstain,  Si3  kul,  3cc 
Mai.    3.    2  But  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his 

7.  To  lodge,  pass  the  night,  ]r?  lun,  1,  7a- 

Job    39.    9  Will  the  unicorn . .  abide  by  thy  crib  ? 

39.  28  She  dwelleth  and  abideth  on  the  rock 
Psa.  49.  12  man  (being)  in  honour  abideth  not 

91.    1  He  that  dwelleth.  .shall  abide  under  the 
Prov.  15.  31  The  ear  that  heareth.  .abideth  among  the 

19.  23  and  (he  that  hath  it)  shall  abide  satisfied 

S.To  stand,  stand  still,  remain,  "isj;  aviad. 

Josh.  18.    5  Judah  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the 
Psa.  1 19.  90  established  the  earth,  and  it  abideth 
Eccl.   1.    4  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever 

Q.To  rise,  rise  it}),  stand  ujy,  be  fixed,  dp  qum. 
Nah.   1.    6  who  can  abide,  .fierceness  of  his  anger? 

10.  To  recline,  tabernacle,  ]?$  shaken. 

Exod  24.  16  the  glory  of  the  Lord  abode  upon  mount 

40.  35  because  the  cloud  abude  thereon 
Num.  9.  17  and  in  the  place  where  the  cloud  abode 

9.  iS  as  long  as  the  cloud  abode  upon  the 
24.    2  and  he  saw  Israel  abiding  (in  his  tents) 
Judg.  5.  17  Gilead  abode  beyond  Jordan  ...Asher...a. 
Prov.  7.  11  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  house 

11.  To  be,  exist,  continue,  x-n  liayah. 

Num.  9.  21  when  the  cloud  abode  from  even  unto 
11.  35  the  people  journeyed,  .and  abode  at 

12.  To  turn  up  "-"I  down,  avaaTpetya)  ana-strepho. 
Matt  17.  22  And  while  they  abode  in  Galilee,  Jesus 

13.  To  remain  in  a  courtyard,  av\i£o/nai  aulizomaA. 
Luke  21.  37  and  abode  in  the  mount  that  is  called 

1  4.  To  rub  away,  spend,  Siarpt&a)  dia-iribo. 

Acts  12.  19  from  Jmheato  Ciesarea.  and(there)abode 
14.    3  Long  time  therefore  abode  they 
14.  28  there  they  abode  long  time  with  the 
16.  12  and  we  were  in  that  city  abiding  certain 

20.  6  to  Troas.  .where  we  abode  seven  dayB 

15.  To  remain  in  or  on,  ktri^ivui  e2nmcnd. 

Acts  15.  34  Notwithstanding  it  pleased  Silas  to  abide 
Gal.     i.  18  to  see  Peter,  and  abode  with  him  fifteen 

10.  To  place,  cause  to  stand,  'i(rry]pn  histemi, 

John   S.  44  and  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there 

1  7.  To  remain  steadily,  Ka.rafx4vu>  kata-meno . 
Acts    1.  13  an  upper  room,  where  abode  both  Peter 

18.  To  remain,  cnntinit-r,  /j.eva>  mend. 

Matt. 10.  11  and  there  abide  till  ye  go  thence 
Mark  6.  10  there  abide  till  ye  depart  from  that  place 
Luke   1.  56  Ami  Mary  abode  with  her  about  three 
8.  27  neither  abode  in  (any)  bouse,  but  in  the 

0.  4  ye  enter  into,  there  abide,  and  thence 
m,    s  for  to  day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house 

24  29  Abide  with  us:  for  it  is  toward  evening 
John  1.  32  I  saw  the  spirit,  .and  it  abode  upon  him 

1.  39  they  came,  .and  abode  with  him  that 
3.  36  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him 


Juhu  4.  40  with  them  :  and  he  abode  there  two  days 
5  38  And  ye  hare  not  his  word  abiding  in  you. 

7.  9  When  he  had  said,  .he  abode  (still)  in 

8.  35  theservant  abideth  not.  .the  Son  abideth 

10.  40  went  away  again,  .and  there  he  abode 

11.  6  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same  place 

12.  24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat,  .die,  itabideth 
12!  34  We  have  heard .  .that  Christ  abideth  for 

12.  46  on  me  should  not  abide  in  darkness 

14.  16  Comforter,  that  he  may  [abide]  with  you 

1 5.  4  Abide  in . .  except  it  abide . .  except  ye  a. 
15.    5  He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him 
15.    6  If  anian  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth 
15.    7  If  ye  abide  in  me, and  my  wordsabide  in 
15.  10  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love.  .1.  .abide  in 

Acts  16.  15  come  into  my  house,  and  abide  (there) 
18.    3  the  same  craft,  he  abode  with  them,  and 

20.  J3  saying  thatbonds  and  afflictions  abide 

21.  7  the  brethren,  and  abode  with  them  one 
21.  8  which  was  (one)  of  the  seven  ;  and  abode 
27.  31  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye 

1  Co.    3.  14  If  any  man's  work  abide  which  he  hath 

7.  8  It  is  good  for  them  if  they  abide  even  as 
7.  20  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 
7.  24  let  every  man.  .therein  abide  with  God 
7.  40  But  she  is  happier  if  she  so  abide,  after 

13.  13  And  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity 
Phil.   1.  25  I  know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue 

2  Ti.    2.  13  If  we  believe  not,  (yet)  he  abideth 

4.  20  Erastus  abode  at  Corinth ;  but  Trophimus 
Heb.    7.    3  Without  father,  .abideth  a  priest 
1  Pe.    1.  23  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth 

1  Jo.    2.    6  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him  ought 

2.  10  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in 
2.  14  strong,  and  the  word  of  God  abideth  in 
2.  17  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for 
2.  24  Let  that  [therefore]  abide  in  you,  which 
2.  27  abideth  in  you,  and.  .ye  shall  abide  in  him 

2.  28  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  him 

3.  6  Whosoever  abideth  in  him  sinneth  not 
3.  14  He  that  loveth  not.  .abideth  in  death 

3.  15  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in 
3.  24  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by  the 

2  Jo.         9  abideth  not  in . .  doctrine . .  He  that  abideth 

19.  To  remain  alongside,  irapafx^vcc  para-^meno. 
1  Co.  16.    6  And  it  may  be  that  I  will  abide,  yea 

20.  To  do,  make,  TroUta  poied. 

Acts  20.    3  And  (there)  abode  three  months 

21.  To  remain  behind,  vtvo{x4vo>  hupo-meno. 
Acts  17.  14  but  Silas  and  Timotheus  abode  there 

ASIDE,  to  be  able  to  — 

To  contain,  bear,  7)2  kul,  5. 

Jer.   10.  10  the  nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  his 
ABIDE  all  night,  to  — 
To  lodge,  pass  the  night,  pS  lun. 

Gen.  19.    2  we  will  abide  in  the  street  all  night 

Lev.  19.  13  shall  not  abide  with  thee  all  night 
ABIDE  behind,  to  — 
To  stand,  stand  still,  remain,  TDj;  amad. 

1  Sa.  30.  10  two  hundred  abode  behind,  which  were 
ABIDE,  can  — 
To  contain,  bear,  ^3  kul,  5. 

Joel    2.  11  the  day  of  the  LORD,  .who  can  abide  it? 
ABIDE  fast,  to  — 
To  cleave,  adhere,  purstte,  p3*n  dabeq. 

Ruth  2.    8  abide  here  fast  by 'my  maidens 
ABIDE  in,  to  — 
To  remain  on,  continue,  4Tri/j.4vto  epi-mend. 

Rom. ii.  23  and  they  also,  if  they  abide  not  still  in 

Phil.    1.  24  Nevertheless  to  abide  in  the  flesh  (is) 
ABIDE  in  the  field,  to  — 
To  be  in  a  fold  in  the  fold,  aypav\eu>  agrauleo. 

Luke  2.    8  were,  .shepherds  abiding  in  the  field     „ 
ABIDE,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  sit  or  dwell,  settle,  3g>;  jashab,  5. 

1  Sa.  30.  21  whom  they  had  made  also  to  abide 

ABIDE  still,  to  — 

To  remain  towards,  or  on,  irpoafievto  pros-menu. 

1  Ti.    1.    3  As  I  besought  thee  to  abide  still  at  Eph. 
ABIDE  with,  to  — 
To  be  joined,  ny?  lavnh. 

Eccl.  8.  15  forthat  shall  abide  with  him  of  his  labour 

ABIDING  — 

1.  To  sit,  sit  still,  dwell,  atf;  yashab. 

Judg.  16.    9  Now  (there  were)  men.,  abiding  with  her 

16.  12  And  (there  were)  liers  in  wait  abiding  in 
"l.ITnpc,  expectation,  ri)pp  miqveh. 

1  Ch.  29.  15  and  (there  is)  none  abiding 
■j.  To  he  admitted,  join  oneself  to,  n^p  saphach,  7. 
1  Sa.  26.  19  driven  me  out  this  day  from  abiding  in 

A-BI'-EL,  Sn'Hx  fatlicr  of  might. 

1.  Son   of    Zeror,  and    father    of    Ner,   and    of   Kish 
who  was  father  of  Saul  the  first  king  of  Israel. 

1  Sa.    q.    1  a  man  of  Benjamin.  .Kish,  the  son  of  A. 

14.  51  Ner  the  father  of  Abner  (was),  .son  of  A. 

2.  One    of    David's    thirty    mighty  men,  called  ABI- 
albon  in  2  Sa.  23.  31. 

1  Ch.  11.  32  A.  the  Arhathitc 


A-BI-E'-ZER,  1}% lit  father  of  help. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Manasseh,  probably  the  same  as 
Jeezer,  son  of  Gilead,  Num.  26.  30. 

Josh.  17.    2  was  also  (a  lot)  for.  .the  children  of  A. 

1  Ch.    7.  18  sister  Haiumoleketh  bare  Ishod,  and  A. 

2.  A  district  in  Manasseh  inhabited  by  the  Abiezrites. 

Judg.  6.  34  came  upon  Gideon,  .and  A.  was  gathered 
8.    2  gleaning  of . .  better  than  the  vintage  of  A.  1 

3.  A  native  of  Anathoth  in  Benjamin  (now  Anata),  two 
miles  E.  uf  Gibeah,  and  one  and  a-half  hours  from 
Jerusalem,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Wady  Selam. 

2  Sa.  23.  27  A.  the  Anethothite 
1  Ch.  11.  28  A.  the  Autothite 

27.  12  ninth  (captain),  .(was)  A.  the  Anetothitc 

A-BI-EZ-RITE,  Hjwn  \?ij  belonging  to  Abiczer. 

The  Abiezrites  were  descendants  of  Manasseh  the  elder 

son  of  Juseph. 

Judg.  6.  11  oak.  .that  (pertained)  unto  Joasli  the  A. 
6.  24  altar,  .yet  in  Ophrah  of  the  A. 

8.  3^  buried,  .in  Ophrah  of  the  A. 

A-BI-GA'-IL,  *?T?x  source  or  cause  of  delight. 

1.  Wife  of  Nabal  the  Carmelite ;  she  met  and  pacified 
David,  and  afterwards  became  his  wife,  and  was  the 
mother  of  Daniel  or  Chileab. 

1  Sa.  25.    3  Nabal ;  and  the  name  of  his  wife  A. 

25.  14  But  one  of  the  young  men  told  A. 
25.  18  Then  A.  made  haste,  and  took  two 
25.  23  And  when  A.  saw  David,  she  hasted,  and 
25.  32  And  David  said  to  A.,  Blessed  (be)  the 
25.  36  And  A.  came  to  Nabal ;  and,  behold, 
25.  39  David  sent  and  communed  with  A.,  to 
25.  40  the  servants  of  David  were  come  to  A.  to 

25.  42  And  A.  hasted,  and  arose,  and  rode  upon 

27.  3  David  dwelt  with  Achish.  .and  A.  the 
30.    5  David's  two  wives  were  taken  captives . .  A. 

2  Sa.    2.    2  David  went  up.  .and  A.  Nabal's  wife 

3.    3  And  his  second,  Chileab,  of  A.  the  wife  of 

1  Ch.    3.    1  the  second  Daniel,  of  A.  the  Carmelitess 

2.  A  daughter  of  Nahash  or  of  Jesse,  and  sister  or 
niece  of  Zeruiah.  She  was  the  mother  of  Amasa, 
whom  Absalom  made  captain  in  place  of  Joab. 

2  Sa.  17.  25  Itbra.  .went  in  to  A.,  the  daughter  of  N 
1  Ch.    2.  16  [David]. . whosesisters(were)Zeruiahifc  A. 

2.  17  And  A.  bare  Amasa:  and  the  father  of 

A-BI-GIB-E'-ON,  pjQJ  '?x  father  of  Gibeon. 
A  descendant  of  Benjamin  who  dwelt  at  Gibeon ; 
his  family  afterwards  settled  at  Jerusalem.  In  the 
commou  version  this  name  is  translated  as  a  patro- 
nymic ;  but  as  it  occurs  in  a  list  of  persons  specially 
named,  it  seems  to  denote  an  individual. 

1  Ch.  8.  29  And  at  Gibeon  dwelt  the  father  of  Gibeon 

A-BI-HA'-LL,  ^n*3x  father  of  might. 

1.  A  Levite,  father  of  Zuriel,  the  chief  of  the  Merarites 
in  the  time  of  Moses. 

Num.  3.  35  the  chief,  .(was)  Zuriel  the  son  of  A. 

2.  The  wife  of  Abishur,  a  descendant  of  Hezron  of 
Judah. 

1  Ch.    2.  29  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Abishur  (was)  A. 

3.  Head  of  a  family  of  the  tribe  of  Gad. 

iCh.   5.  14  These  (are)  the  children  of  A.  theson  ofH. 

4.  A  daughter  of  Eliab  David's  brother,  aud  wife  of 
Rehoboam. 

2  Ch.  11.  18  Rehoboam  took. ,  A.  the  daughter  of  E. 

5.  Father  of  Esther,  the  niece  of  Mordecai,  who  be- 
came queen  of  Persia  as  wife  of  Ahasuerus  {i.e. , 
Xerxes),  in  the  stead  of  Vashti. 

Esth.  2.  15  the  turn  of  Esther,  the  daughter  of  A. 

9.  29  Esther,  .daughter  of  A.,  and  Mordecai 

A-BI'-HU,  MiT^n  he  is  my  father. 

A    son  of    Aaron,    who    was     destroyed    with    his 

brother  Nadab  for  offering  strange  fire. 

Exod.  6.  23  Elisheba.  .bare him  Nadab,  and  A.,  Eleaz. 

24.    1  Come  up  unto  the  LORD,  thou,  and.  .A. 

24.    9  Then  went  up  Moses,  .and  A.,  and 

28.  1  take  thou,  .that  he  may  minister.  .A. 
Lev.  10.  1  And  Nadab  and  A.,  the  sous  of  Aaron 
Num.  3.    2  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Aaron.  .A. 

3.  4  And  Nadab  and  A.  died  before  the  Lord 

26.  60  And  unto  Aaron  was  born.  A. 

26.  61  And  Nadab  aud  A.  died,  when  they 
1  Ch.    6.    3  The  sobs  also  of  Aaron;  Nadab,  and  A. 
24.    1  The  sons  of  Aaron ;  Nadab,  and_A.,  E. 
24.    2  But  Nadab  and  A.  died  before  their 

A-EI'-HUD,  -\W2.x  father  of  honour. 
A  son  of  Bela,  son  of  Benjamin. 

1  Ch.    8.    3  And  the  sons  of  Eela.  .Addar.  .and.  .A. 

A-BI'-JAH,  ,t^n  my  father  is  Jah. 

1.  A  son  of  Jeroboam  who  died  in  youth. 

1  Ki.  14.    1  At  that  time  A.  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell 

2.  A  priest  in  the  time  of  David,  to  whom  it  fell  by  lot 
to  be  the  head  of  the  eighth  course  in  the  service  of  the 
temple.     See  Abiah. 

1  Ch.  24.  10  the  eighth  (lot  came  forth)  to  A. 

26.  20  And  of  the  Levites,  A.  (was)  over  the 

3.  A  son  of  Rehoboam.  His  mother  was  Maachah,  a 
daughter  of  Absalom. 

2CI1.  11.  20 Maachah.  .daughter of  Absnlom.  .bare  A. 
11.  22  Rehoboam  made  A. .  the  chief,  (to  be) 


ABIJAM 


ABLE 


2  Ch.  12.  16  and  A.  his  sou  reigned  in  his  stead 

13.    1  in  the  eighteenth  year,  .began  A.  to  reign 
13.    2  And  there  was  war  between  A.  and  J. 
13.    3  And  A.  set  the  battle  in  array  with  an 
13.    4  And  A.  stood  up  upon  mount  Zemaraim 
13.  15  God  smote.  .Israel  before  A.  and  Judaii 
13.  17  And  A.  and  his  people  slew  them  with  a 
13.  19  And  A.  pursued  after  Jeroboam,  and  took 
13.  20  Neither  did  Jeroboam,  .iu  the  days  of  A. 
13.  21  Eut  A.  waxed  mighty,  and  married 

13.  22  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.,  aud  his 

14.  1  So  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

4.  Mother  of  Ilezekiah,  king  of  Judah. 

2  Ch.  29.    i  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  A.,  the 

5.  A  priest  that  sealed  the  covenant  made  by  Xehemiah 
aud  the  people  to  serve  the  LORD. 

Neh.  10.    7  Meshullam,  Abijah,  Mijamin 
G.  A  priest  that  went  up  from  Babylon  with  Zeruhhabel. 
Perhaps  the  same  as  the  preceding. 

Neh.  T2.  1-4  these  (are)  the  priests.  .Iddo,  G.  and  A. 
12.  12-17  tae  chief  of  the  fathers.  .01  A.,  Ziclui 
A-BI'-JAM,  c;^N  father  of  light. 

The  name  of  Rehoboam's  son  who  succeeded  his  father 
as  king  of  Judah  ;  in  2  Chrunicles  he  is  called  Abijah. 

1  Ki.  14.  31  And  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

15.  1  in  the  eighteenth  year,  .reigned  A.  over 
15.    7  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.  and  all  that 
15.    7  And  there  was  war  between  A.  aud  J. 

15.    8  And  A.  slept  with  his  fathers ;  and  they 

AE-I-LE'-NE,  'A&ik7}V7}  region  of  Abila. 
A  province  or  tetrarchy,  situated  at  the  extreme  X.  of 
Palestine,  and  E.  of  the  Jordan  ;  it  was  so  named  from 
the  city  Abila  or  Abela(now.4bi7),  which  is  about  twenty 
miles  N.W.  of  Damascus  towards  Baalbek  or  Heliopolis, 
lying  among  the  mountains  of  Antilibauus,  iu  lat.  330 
30  V,  long.  360  1  a'  E.  In  the  time  of  John  the  Baptist 
bvsAMAS  was  its  tetrarch.  It  was  given  by  Claudius 
to  Herod  Agrippa,  A.D.  53. 

Luke  3.    1  and  Lysauias  the  tetrarch  of  Abileue 
ABILITY— 
1. Power,  strength,  wealth,  nb  koach. 

Ezra    2.  69  They  gave  after  their  ability  unto  the 

Dan.    1.    4  and  such  as  (had)  ability  in  them  to  stand 
2.  To  (cause  to)  reach,  attain,  ft'i  nasag,  5. 

Lev.  27.    8  shall  value  him ;  according  to  his  ability 
3. Sufficiency \  fulness,  abundance,  ^  dai. 

Neh.    5.  8  We  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  our 
4.Poiver,  might,  strength,  Bvi/afj.is  dunamis. 

Matt.25.  15  to  every  man  acco.  to  his  several  ability 
5.  To  go  on  well,  €ir7rop4ofia.i  eu-por  eomai. 

Acts  11.  29  disciples,  every  man  acco.  to  his  ability 
G. Strength,  vigour,  iVx^s-  ischus. 

1  Pe.    4.  11  if  any  man  minister,  .as  of  the  ability 
AB-I-MA'-EL,  ^N'^'^k  my  father  is  God. 
A  son  of  Joktan  of  "the  family  of  Shem.      The  place 
where  Abimael's  descendants  settled  is  still  unknown, 
but   it    is    supposed    to  have  been  in  some  part  of 
Arabia-Petra;a. 

Gen.  10.  26-28  And  Joktan  begat  Almodad.  .and  A. 

1  Ch.   1.  20-22  And  Joktan  begat  Almodad.  .and  A. 
A-BI-2LE-LECH,  -Ss'nx  father  of  the  king. 

1.  King  of  Gerar  in  the  time  of  Abraham. 

Gen.  20.    2  and  A.  king  of  Gerar  sent,  aud  took  Sarah 
20.    3  God  came  to  A.  in  a  dream  by  night 
20.    4  But  A.  had  not  come  near  her :  and  he 
20.    8  Therefore  A.  rose  early  iu  the  morning 
20.    9  Then  A.  called  Abraham,  and  said 
20.  10  And  A.  said  unto  Abraham,  What 
20.  14  And  A.  took  sheep,  aud  oxen,  and  men- 
20.  15  And  A.  said,  Behold,  my  laud  (is)  before 
20.  17  So  Abraham  prayed,  .and  God  healed  A. 

20.  18  closed  up  all  the  wombs  of  the  house  of  A. 

21.  22  A.  aud  Phiehol.  .spake  unto  Abraham 
21.  25  Abraham  reproved  A.  because  of  a  well 
21.  25  which  A.'s  servants  had  violently  taken 
21.  26  And  A.  said,  I  wot  not  who  hath  done 
21.  27  Abraham  took  sheep,  .gave  them  unto  A. 
21.  29  Aud  A.  said  uuto  Abraham,  What  (mean) 
21.  32  then  A.  rose  up,  aud.  .returned  into  the 
26.    1  And  Isaac  weut  unto  A.  king  of  the 

26.    8  A.  king  of  the  Philistines  looked  out  at  a 
26.    9  And  A.  called  Isaac,  aud  said,  Behold 
26.  10  And  A.  said,  What  (is)  this  thou  hast 
26.  11  And  A.  charged  all  (his)  people,  saying 
26.  16  And  A.  said  unto  Isaac,  Go  from  us ;  for 
26.  26  Then  A.  went  to  him  from  Gerar,  and 

2.  Son  of  Gideon  by  a  concubine  in  Shechem. 

Judg.  8.30-31  Gideon  had.  .a  son,  whose  name.. A. 
9.    1  And  A. .  .went  to  Shechem  unto  his 
9.    3  their  hearts  inclined  to  follow  A.;  for 
9.    4  A.  hired  vain  and  light  persons,  -which 
9.    6  made  A.  king,  by  the  plain  of  the  pillar 
9.  16  have  done  truly,  .in  that  ye  have  made  A. 
9.  18  made  A. .  .king  over  the  men  of  Shechem 
9.  19  rejoice  ye  in  A.,  and  let  him  also  rejoice 
9.  20  let  fire  come  out  from  A.,  and  devour  the 
9.  20  let  fire,  .men  of  Shechem.  .and  devour  A. 
g.  21  And  Jotham  ran  away,  .for  fear  of  A.  his 
9.  22  A.  had  reigned  three  years  over  Israel 
9.  23  God  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  A.  and 
9.  23  the  men  of  S.  dealt  treacherously  with  A. 
9.  24  and  their  blood  lie  laid  upon  A.  their 
9.  25  the  men  oi  Shechem  set  Uers.  .was  told  A. 


Judg.  9.  27  they  went . .  and  did  eat  and  drink,  aud . .  A. 
9.  28  Gaai  the  son  of  Ebed  said,  Who  (is)  A. 
9.  29  would  I  remove  A.    And  he  saith  to  A. 
9.  31  And  he  sent  messengers  unto  A.  privily 
9.  34  And  A.  rose  up,  and  all  the  people  that 
9.  35  and  A.  rose  up,  and  the  people  that  (were) 
9.  38  Who  (is)  A.,  Uiat  we  should  serve  him? 
9.  39  And  Gaal  went  out.  .and  fought  with  A. 
9  40  And  A.  chased  him,  aud  he  lied  before 
9.  41  And  A.  dwelt  at  Arumah  :  and  Zebul 
9.  42  people  weut . .  iuto  the  lield ;  and . .  told  A. 
9.  44  Aud  A.,  and  the  company  that  (was)  with 
9.  45  And  A.  fought  against  the  city  all  that 
9.  47  Aud  it  was  told  A.,  that  all  the  men  of 
9.  48  And  A.  gat  him  up  to  mount  Zalmon,  he 
9.  48  aud  A.  touk  an  ax  in  his  hand,  and  cut 
9.  49  and  followed  A.,  aud  put  (them)  to  the 
9.  50  Then  went  A.  to  Thebez,  aud  encamped 
9.  52  And  A.  came  uuto  the  tower,  and  fought 
9.  53  And  a  certain  woman -cast,  .upon  A.'s 
9.  55  when  the  men  of  Israel  saw  that  A.  was 
9.  56  Thus  God  rendered  the  wickedness  of  A. 
10.    1  And  after  A.  there  arose  to  defend  Israel 

2  Sa.  11.  21  Who  smote  A.  the  son  of  Jerubbeshethv 

3.  Father  or  son  of  Abiathar  the  high  priest  iu  the  time 
of  David.    In  one  passage  he  is  called  Ahimelech. 

1  Ch.  18.  16  and  A.  the  son  of  Abiathar,  (were)  the 

4.  In  the  title  of  Psa.  34  this  name  is  given  apparently 
to  Achish  king  of  Gath,  to  whom  David  had  tied,  as 
stated  in  1  Sa.  21.  10. 

Psa.  34.  title,  of  David,  .his  behaviour  before  A. 

A-BI-NA-DAB,  lysis  father  or  source  of  liberality. 

1.  An  Israelite  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  who  lived  near 
Kirjath-jearim,  and  in  whose  house  the  ark  was  placed 
after  beiug  sent  back  by  the  Philistines. 

1  Sa.    7.    1  and  brought  it  into  the  house  of  A.  in  the 

2  Sa.    6.    3  out  of  the  house  of  A. .  .the  sons  of  A. 

6.    4  And  they  brought  it  out  of  the  house  of  A. 
1  Ch.  13.    7  carried  the  ark.  .out  of  the  house  of  A. 

2.  Second  sou  of  Jesse,  the  father  of  David. 

1  Sa.  16.    8  Then  Jesse  called  A.,  and  made  him  pass 
17.  13  Eliab  the  first-born,  and  next  unto  him  A. 
1  Ch.    2.  13  Jesse  begat  his  first-born  Eliab,  and  A. 

3.  A  son  of  king  Saul  slain  at  Gilboa  by  the  Philistines, 
together  with  his  brother  Jonathan. 

1  Sa.  31.    2  and  the  Philistines  slew  Jonathan,  and  A. 

1  Ch.    8.  33  Saul.  .Jonathan,  and  Malchi-shua,  and  A. 

9.  39  Saul . .  Jonathan,  and  Malchi-shua,  and  A. 

10.    2  and  the  Philistines  slew  Jonathan,  aud  A. 

4.  Father  of  one  of  Solomon's  officers,  who  was  set  over 
Dor  in  the  territory  of  Issachar. 

1  Ki.    4.  11  The  son  of  A.,  in  all  the  region  of  Dor 
A-BI-NO'-AM,  Cj.'j'?N  father  of  pleasantness. 
Father  of  Barak  (of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali),  an  Israelite, 
who  defeated  the  army  of  Jabin,  B.C.  1296. 

Judg.  4.    6  she  sent  and  called  Barak  the  son  of  A. 

4.  12  shewed  Sisera  that  Barak  the  son  of  A. 

5.  1  sang  Deborah  and  Barak  the  son  of  A. 

5.  12  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  thou  sou  of  A. 

A-BI'-RAIH,  irvnx  father  of  elevation-. 

1.  A  son  of  Eliab,  a  Reubenite,  who  with  Dathan  his 
brother,  Koran  a  Levite,  and  On  a  Reubenite,  conspired 
against  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  wilderness,  and  perished 
with  his  accomplices. 

Num  16.  1  Now  Korah . .  and  Dathan  and  A. . .  took 
16.  i2  And  Moses  sent  to  call  Dathan  and  A. ,  the 
16.  24  the  tabernacle  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  A. 
16.  25  Moses  rose  up  and  went  unto  Dathan.  .A. 
16.  27  theygatupfromthetabernacleof .  .and  A. 
16.  27  and  Dathan  and  A.  came  out,  and  stood 
26.  9  sons  of  Eliab ;  Nemuel,  aud  Dathan,  and  A. 
26.    9  This  (is  that)  Dathan  and  A.,  (which  were) 

Deut  11.    6  And  what  he  did  unto  Dathan  and  A. 

Psa.  106.  17  The  earth,  .covered  the  company  of  A. 

2.  First-born  son  of  Hiel  the  Bethelite,  who  began  to 
rebuild  Jericho.  He  died  when  his  father  laid  the  foun- 
dations of  that  city,  as  Joshua  had  foretold  of  him. 
(Josh.  6.  26). 

1  Ki.  16.  34  he  laid  the  foundation  thereof  in  A.  his 
A-EI'-SEAG,    j^"3n    father    of    error,    i.e.,    cause 

of  wandering. 
A  beautiful  damsel  of  the  town  of  Shunem  in  Issachar. 
She  was  employed  to  nurse  David  in  his  old  age. 

1  Ki.    1.    3  they,  .found A.  a  Shunammite,  <fc  brought 

1.  x5  and  A.  the  Shunammite  ministered  unto 
2. 17  Speak,  .unto  Solomon.,  that  he  give  me  A. 

2.  21  Let  A.  the  Shunammite  be  given  to  A.  thy 
2.  22  why  dost  thou  ask  A.  the  Shunammite 

A-BI'-SHAI,  'v*2it  source  of  wealth. 
A  son  of  David's  sister  Zeruiah,  and  a  bi'other  of  Joah. 
After  numerous  victories,  and  slaying  the  Philistine 
giant  Ishbibenob,  he  obtained  a  place  among  David's 
thirty  valiant  men.  In  the  margin  of  1  Ch.  18.  12,  he  is 
called  Abshai. 

1  Sa.  26.    6  David,  .said  to  A. .  .And  A.  said,  I  will 
26.    7  So  David  and  A.  came  to  the  people  by 
26.    8  Then  said  A.  to  David,  God  hath  delivered 
26.    9  And  David  said  to  A.,  Destroy  him  not 
2Sa.    2. 18  And  there  were,  .there,  Joab,  and  A.,  and 

2.  24  Joab  also  and  A.  pursued  after  Abner 

3.  30  Joab  and  A.  his  brother  slew  Abner 
10  10  he  delivered  into  the  hand  of  A.  his 

10. 14  then  fled  they  also  before  A.,  and  entered 


2  Sa.  16.   9  Then  said  A. .  .Why  should  this  dead  dog 
16.  11  David  said  to  A. . .  Behold,  my  son,  which 
18.    2  sent . .  a  third  part  under  the  hand  of  A. 
18.    5  And  the  king  commanded  Joab  and  A. 

18.  12  the  king  charged  thee  and  A.  and  Ittai 

19.  21  But  A. .  .answered  and  said,  Shall  not  S. 

20.  6  David  said  to  A.,  Now  shall  Sheba  the 
20.  10  Joab  and  A.  Ins  brother  pursued  after 
21. 17  But  A. .  .succoured  him,  and  smote  the 
23.  18  And  A. .  .was  chief  among  three.    And  he 

1  Ch.  2.  16  And  the  sons  of  Zeruiah ;  A.,  and  Joab 
11.  20  And  A.  the  brother  of  Joab,  he  was  chief 
18.  12  Moreover,  A. .  .slew  of  the  Edomites 
19. 11  he  delivered  into  the  hand  of  A.  his 
19. 15  they  likewise  lied  before  A. . .  and  entered 

A-BI-SHA'-LOM,  ciSyrriK  father  of  peace. 

Father  of  Maachah,  wife  of  Jeroboam ;  in2Ch.  n.  20,21, 

the  name  is  Absalom. 

1  Ki.15.    2  hismother'snnme(was)Maachah..of  Abi. 
15.  10  hismother'suame(was)Maachah.  .of  Abi. 

A-BI-SHTJ'-A,  ywis  father  of  safety. 

1.  Son  of  Phinehas,  grandson  of  Aaron. 

1  Ch.  6.    4  EleazarbegatPhinehas.Phinehasbegat  A. 
6.    5  And  A.  begat  Bukki,  and  Bukki  begat 
6.  50  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Aaron;  Eleazar..A. 

Ezra    7.    5  A.,  the  son  of  Phinehas,  the  son  of  Eleazar 

2.  A  son  of  Bela  the  son  of  Benjamin. 

1  Ch.  8.    4  [sons  of  Bela  were,  Addar].  .And  A.  and 
1  A-BI'-SHUR,  t^'^n  father  of  oxen. 
A  sou  of  Shammai  the  grandson  of  Jerahmeel,  the  great- 
grandson  of  Judah. 

1  Ch.    2.  28  the  sons  of  Shammai ;  Nadah,  and  A. 

2.  29  the  name  of  the  wife  of  A.  (was)  Abihail 

A-EI'-TAL,  Si^n  source  of  dew. 

A  wife  of  David  and  mother  of  his  fourth  son   She- 

phatiah. 

2  Sa.    3.   4  and  the  fifth,  Shephatiah  the  son  of  A. 
1  Ch.  3.    3  The  fifth,  Shephatiah  of  A. 

A-BI'-TUB,  210»5«  source  of  good. 

A  son  of  Shahariam,  a  descendant  of  Benjamin.    In  the 

common  version  it  is  Ahitub. 

1  Ch.  8.  11.  And  of  Hushim  he  begat  A.,  and  Elpaal 
A-BI'-TTD,  H.T5N  father  of  honour. 
A  son  of  Zerubbabel,  omitted  in  1  Ch.  3.  19. 

Matt.  1.  13  And  Zorobabel  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat 
AEJECTS,  smitten,  striclcen,  .133  nekeh. 

Psa.  35. 15  the  abjects  gathered  themselves  together 
ABLE  — 
1.  Sufficiency,  fulness,  abundance,  >rldai. 

Lev.    5.    7  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb 

12.  8  if  she  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb 
25.  26  And  if.  .himself  be  able  to  redeem  it 

25.  28  if  he  be  not  able  to  restore  (it)  to  him 
2. Strength,  might,  *?:n  chayil. 

Exod  18.  21  shalt  provide  out  of  all  the  people  able 

18. 25  And  Moses  chose  able  men  out  of  ali 
iCh".   9.  13  very  able  men  for  the  work  of  the  service 

26.  8  able  men  for  strength  for  the  service 

'S.Power,  strength,  na  koach. 

1  Ch.  29.  14  we  should  be  able  to  offer  so  willingly 

2  Ch.    2.    6  who  is  able  to  build  him  an  house,  seeing 
Ezra  10.  13  we  are  not  able  to  stand  without,  neither 

4. Powerful,  mighty,  strong,  §vvclt6s  dunatos. 
Luke  14.  31  consulteth  whether  he  be  able  with  ten 
Acts  25.    5  Let  them  therefore,  .among  you  are  able 
Rom.  4.  21  what  he  had  promised,  he  was  able  also 
11.  23  for  God  is  able  to  graff  them  in  again 
14.    4  for  God  is  able  to  make  him  stand 
2  Co.    9.    8  God  (is)  able  to  make  all  grace  abound 
2  Ti.    1.  12  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep 
Tit.     1.    9  that  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine 
Heb.  11.  19  Accounting  that  God  (was)  able  to  raise 
Jas.     3.    2  (and)  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body 

5. Sufficient,  Ikclv6s  hikanos. 

2  Tim  2.    2  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also 
ABLE,  be  — 

Gift  of  the  Hand,  t  n£D,  T  rijp;?  mattath  yad. 
Deut  16.  17  Every  man  (shall  give)  as  he  is  able 
Eze.  46.    5  for  the  lambs  as  he  shall  be  able  to  give 
46.  11  and  to  the  lambs  as  he  is  able  to  give 
ABLE,  to  be — 
l.To  be  able,  h'2]  yakol. 
•  Gen.  15.    5  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number 
Exod  10.    5  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  earth 
18.  18  thou  art  not  able  to  perform  it  thyself 
18.  23  thou  shalt  be  able  to  endure,  and  all  this 
40.  35  And  Moses  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the 
Num.  1 1.  14  I  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this  people 

13.  30  for  we  are  well  able  to  overcome  it 

13.  31  We  be  not  able  to  go  up  against  the  people 

14.  16  the  Lord  was  not  able  to  bring  this  people 
22.  11  peradventure  I  shall  be  able  to  overcome 
22.  37  am  I  not  able  indeed  to  promote  thee 

Deut.  1.    9  I  am  not  able  to  bear  you  myself  alone 
9.  28  Because  the  Lord  was  not  able  to  bring 
14.  24  thou  art  not  able  to  carry  it 
Judg.  8.    3  what  was  I  able  to  do  in  comparison  of 
1  Sa.    6.  20  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  Lord 
17.   9  If  he  be  able  to  fight  with  me,  and  to 
t  r.  33  Thou  art  net  able  to  go  against  th-s 


ABLE 


a 


ABOMINATION 


i  Ki.    3.    9  who  is  able  to  judge  this  thy  so  great  a 

9,  2i  were  not  able  utterly  to  destroy 
2Ki.  18.  23  if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  set  riders 

18.  29  he  shall  not  be  aide  to  deliver  you 

2  Ch.  7.    7  the  brasen  altar,  .was  not  able  to  receive 

32.  13  were  the  gods,  .any  ways  able  to  deliver 

33.  14  that  your  God  should  be  able  to  deliver 

32.  15  no  god.  .was  able  to  deliver  his  people 
Neft.    4.  10  so  that  we  are  not  able  to  build  the  wall 
i'sa.    18.  30  wounded  them  that  they  wore  Soot  able  to 

ax.  11  a  mischievous  device,  .they  are  not  able 
36.  i2  cast  down,  and  shall  not  be  able  to  rise 
40.  12  so  that  I  am  not  able  to  look  up 
Eccl.  8.  17  yet  shall  not  he  be  able  to  find  (it) 
Isa.    36.    8  I  will  give  thee.. if  thou  be  able  on  thy 
36.  14  he  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  you 
47.  11  thou  shalt  not  be  able  to  put  it  off 
47.  12  if  so  be  thou  shalt  be  able  to  profit 
Jer.    11.  11  they  shall  not  be  able  to  escape 

49.  10  he  shall  not  be  able  to  hide  himself 
Lam.   1.  14  hands,  (from  whom)  I  am  not  able  to  rise 
Eze.     7.  19  their  gold  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver 

33.  12  neither  shall  the  righteous  be  able  to  live 
Dan.    3.  17  our  God, ..is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the 

4.  18  the  wise  (men)  of  my  kingdom  are  not  a.  to 
4.  37  those  that  walk  in  pride  he  is  able  to 
6.  20  is  thy  God.  .able  to  deliver  thee  from  the 
Amos  7.  10  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  words 
Zeph.  1.  iS  nor  their  gold  shall  be  able  to  deliver 

2.  To  be  able,  Sn?  kehal. 

Dan.    2.  26  Art  thou  able  to  make  known  unto  me 

4.  18  thou  (art)  able ;  for  the  spirit  of  the  holy 

3.  To  (cause  the  hatid  to) reach,  attain,  yyinasag,  5. 

Lev.    5.    7  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb 

5.  11  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  two  turtledoves 
12.    8  if  she  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb 

14.  22  And  two  turtledoves  or . .  such  as  he  is  able 
14.  31  (Even)  such  as  he  is  able  to  get 

14.  32  whose  hand  is  not  able  to  get  (that  which) 
25.  26  And  if.  .himself  be  able  to  redeem  it 

25.  28  if  he  be  not  able  to  restore  (it)  to  him 
25.  49  if  he  be  able,  he  may  redeem  himself 

4.  To  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  "isy  atsnr. 

1  Ch.  29.  14  we  should  be  able  to  offer  so  willingly 
2CI1.   2.    6  but  who  is  able  to  build  him  an  house 
20.  37  they  were  not  able  to  go  to  Tarshish 

5.  To  find,  meet,  come  on,  N^t?  matsa. 

Lev.  12.    8  if  she  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb 

25.  28  if  he  be  not  able  to  restore  (it)  to  him 
[See  also  Bear,  bring,  get,  go,  go  forth,  stand] 

6.  To  be  powerful,  have  power,  Svj/a/j.ai  dunama/i. 
Matt.  3.    9  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up 

9.  28  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this? 
10.  28  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul 
10.  28  which  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and 

19.  12  He  that  is  able  to  receive  (it),  let  him 

20.  22  Are  ye  able  to  drink.  .We  are  able 

22.  46  And  no  man  was  able  to  answer  him  a 

26.  61  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God 
Mark  4.  33  they  were  able  to  hear  (it) 

Luke   1.  20  thou  shalt  be  dumb,  and  not  able  to 
3.    8  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up 

12.  26  If  ye  then  be  not  able  to  do  that 

21.  15  your  adversaries  shall  not  be  able  to 
.Tohn  10.  29  no  (man)  is  able  to  pluck  (them)  out  of  my 
Acts  20.  32  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up 
Kom.  8.  39  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to 

J5.  14  filled  with  all  knowledge,  able  also  to 

1  Co.    3.    2  ye  were  not  able,  .yet  now  are  ye  able 

6.  5  no,  not  one  that  shall  be  able  to  judge 
10. 13  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able 
10.  13  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  (it) 

2  Co.    1.    4  that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them 
Eph.    3.  20  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding 

6.  11  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against 
6.  13  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the 

6.  16  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench 
Tbil.    3.  21  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to 

2  Ti.    3.    7  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge 

3.  15  scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  thee 
Heb.    2.  18  he  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are 

5.  7  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from 

7.  25  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them 
Jas.     1.  21  engrafted  word,  which  is  able  to  save 

4.  12  one  lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  save  and  to 
Jude       24  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you 
Rev.    5.    3  And  no  man.  .was  able  to  open  the  book 

6.  17  and  who  shall  be  able  to  staud? 

13.  4  the  beast?  who  is  able  to  make  war  with 

15.  8  and  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the 

1  .To  have  full  power,  ££to-xvv  e.rischuo. 

Eph.  3.  18  [that  ye],  .may  be  able  to  comprehend 
8.  To  have,  hold,  possess,  e^w  echo. 

2  Pe.  1.  15  that  ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease 
0.7*0  have  power,  la-xvoo  ischuo. 

Luke  13.  24  will  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  he  abb' 

14.  29  the  foundation.andisnot  able  to  llnisb(it) 

14.  30  to  build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish 
John  sx.    6  and  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw  it 
Acts    6.  10  And  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the 

15.  10  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to 
ABLE  to  endure,  to  be  — 

The  foot  (lit  according  /<>  th-~  /',.,,/  <>f),^iiregel. 

Gen.  33.  14  according  as.. the  children  be* able  boe:  (3 
ABLE,  to  make  — 
To  mol\-  sufficient,  lnavou>  IUko 

2  Co.  3     0  Who  also  hath  made  us  aide  ministers  of 


AB'-NEE  (or  A-U-ncr),  112K  father  of  light. 

Son  of  Saul's  uncle  Ner,  and  captain  of  Saul's  army. 

From  his  relationship   to  the   king,  and  Ins  force  of 

character,  he  exercised  great  influence  during  Sauls 

reign  as  well  as  afterwards.  _ 

iSa.  14.  50  the  name  of  the  captain  of  his  host(was)A. 
14.  51  and  Ner  the  father  of  A.  (was)  the  son 
17-  55  Saul,  .said  unto  A.  ..A.,  whose  son  (is) 
17.  55  And  A.  said  (As)  thy  soul  liveth,  0  king 
17.  57  A.  took  him,  and  brought  him  before 
20.  25  and  A.  sat  by  Saul's  side,  and  David's 
26.    5  and  A.  the  son  of  Ner,  the  captain  of  his 
26.    7  but  A.  and  the  people  lay  round  about 
26.  14  David  cried  to  the  people,  and  to  A.  the 
26.  14  saying,  Answerest  thou  not,  A.?    Then  A. 

26.  15  David  said  to  A.  (Art)not  thou  a(valiant) 
2  Sa.    2.    8  But  A.  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  Saul's 

2.  12  And  A.  the  son  of  Ner,  and  the  servauts 
2.  14  And  A.  said  to  Joab,  Let  the  young  men 
2.  17  there  was  a  very  sore  battle,  .and  A.  was 
2.  19  And  Asahel  pursued  after  A. ;  and  in 
2.  19  nor  to  the  left  from  following  A. 
2.  20  Then  A.  looked  behind  him,  and  said 
2.  21  And  A.  said  to  him,  Turn  thee  aside 
2.  22  And  A.  said  again  to  Asahel,  Turn  thee 
2.  23  he  refused  to  turn  aside  :  wherefore  A. 
2.  24  Joab  also  and  Abisbai  pursued  after  A. 
2.  25  gathered  themselves  together  after  A., 
2.  26  Then  A.  called  to  Joab,  and  said,  Shall 
2.  29  And  A.  and  his  men  walked  all  that 
2.  30  And  Joab  returned  from  following  A. 

2.  31  had  smitten  of  Benjamin,  and  of  A.'s  men 

3,  6  that  A.  made  himself  strong  for  the  house 
3.    7  and  (Ishbosheth)  said  to  A.,  Wherefore 
3.    8  Then  was  A.  very  wroth  for  the  words  of 
3.    9  So  do  God  to  A.,  and  more  also,  except 
3.  11  And  he  could  not  answer  A.  a  word  again 
3.  12  And  A.  sent  messengers  to  David  on  his 
3.  16  Then  said  Abuer  unto  him,  Go,  return 

3.  17  And  A.  had  communication  with  the 
3.  19  And  A.  also  spake  in  the  ears  of  Benjamin 
3.  19  and  A.  went  also  to  speak  in  the  ears  of 
3.  20  So  A.  came  to  David  to  Hebron,  and 
3.  20  And  David  made  A.  and  the  men  that 
3.  21  And  A.  said  unto  David,  I  will  arise 
3.  21  And  David  sent  A.  away;  and  he  went 
3.  22  but  A.  (was)  not  with  David  in  Hebron 
3.  23  A.  the  son  of  Ner  came  to  the  king,  and 
3.  24  behold,  A.  came  unto  thee  ;  why  (is)  it 
3.  25  Thou  knowest  A.  the  son  of  Ner,  that  he 
3.  26  when  Joab  was  come . .  he  sent . .  after  A. 
3.  27  And  when  A.  was  returned  to  Hebron 
3.  28  guiltless,  .for  ever  from  the  blood  of  A. 
3.  30  So  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brother  slew  A. 
3.  31  and  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  and  mourn 
3.  32  And  they  buried  A.  in  Hebron :  and  the 
3.  32  the  king,  .wept  at  the  grave  of  Abner 
3.  33  And  the  king  lamented  over  A.,  and  said 
3.  33  the  king,  .said,  Died  A.  as  a  fool  dieth? 

3.  37  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  slay  A .  the  son  of 

4.  1  when  Saul's  son  heard  that  A.  was  dead 
4.  12  and  buried  (it)  in  the  sepulchre  of  A.  in 

1  Ki.   2.    5  unto  A.  the  son  of  Ner,  and  unto 

2.  32  A.  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  the  host  of 

1  Ch.  26.  28  Saul  the  son  of  Kish,  and  A.  the  son  of 

27.  21  of  Benjamin,  Jaasiel  the  son  of  A. 
ABOARD,  to  go — 

To  go  on  or  upon,  4iri$aha}  epibai?w. 

Acts  21.   2  finding  a  ship,  .we  went  aboard,  and  set 
ABODE— 
Home,  mansion,  permanent  place,  /xovfi  mone. 

John  14.  23  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode 
ABOLISH,  to— 

1.  To  change,  pans  on  or  away,  *\hn  chalaph. 

Isa.      2.  18  And  the  idols  he  shall  utterly  abolish 

2.  To  make  thoroughly  inactive,  Karapyew,  katnrgrn. 

2  Co.  3. 13  look  to  the  end  of  that  which  is  abolished 
Eph.  2. 15  Having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  enmity 
2TL     1.  10  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolished  death 

ABOLISHED,  to  be  — 

1.2*o  be  broken  down,  cast  down,  nnn  chathath,  2. 
Isa.    51.    6  my  righteousness  shall  not  be  abolished 

2.7*0  wipe  away,  blot  out,  nnz  machah,  2. 
Eze.    6.    6  and  your  works  may  be  abolished 

ABOMINABLE — 

1.  Indignation  (worthy  of),  DJJT  mam. 

Mic.    6. 10  the  scant  measure  (thatis)  abominable? 

'2. Abominable,  impure  thing,  7)Z$piffgul. 

Lev.  19.    7  on  the  third  day,  (it)  is  abominable 
Isa.    65.   4  broth  of  abominable  (things  is  in)  their 
Eze.     4.  14  neither  came  there  abominable  flesh  into 

3, Abominable,  detestable  thing,  yp&  slieqets. 

Lev.  7.  21  unclean  beast,  or  any  abominable  unclean 
Eze.    8.  10  behold  every  form  of.  .abominable  beasts 

4.  To  be  abominable,  3j*n  taab,  2. 

Job  15.  16  Howmuchmoreabominableandfilthy(is) 
Isa.    14.  19  cast  out  of  thy  grave  like  an  abominable 

6.  Without  law,  unlawful,  aOe/xiros  Orthemitos. 

1  l'e.    4.    3  we  walked  in.  .abominable  idolatries 
6. Abominable,  disgusting,  /35e\uKvro's  bdeluJctos. 

Titus  1.  16  in  works,  .deny  (him),  being  abominable 
ABOMINABLE,  to  be— 
1.  To  be  abominable,  -vo  taab,  2. 

1  Ch,  2i,    <:<  for  the  king's  word  was  abominable  to 


2.  To  have  in  abomination,  &§s\v<ro~op.ai. 

Rev.  21.    8  But  the.  .abominable,  .shall  have  their 
ABOMINABLE,  to  commit  more — 
To  do  abominably,  nyn  taab,  5. 

Eze.  16.  52  thou  hast  committed  more  abomiuable 

ABOMINABLE  CUSTOM— 

Abomination,  n^yin  toebah. 

Lev.  18.  30  commit  not.,  of  these  abomiuable  customs 
ABOMINABLE,  to  do — 
To  do  abominably,  3$in  taab,  5. 

Psa.  14.    1  they  have  done  abominable  works 
53.    1  and  have  done  abominable  iniquity 

ABOMINABLE  FILTH— 

Abominable,  detestable  thing,  y>py  shiqqids. 

Nah.    3.    6  And  I  wrill  cast  abominable  tilth  upon 
ABOMINABLE  IDOLS— 
Abominable,  detestable  thing,  ]')pp  shiqquts. 

2  Ch.  15.    8  and  put  away  the  abominable  idols  out  of 

ABOMINABLE,  to  make— 

To  act  abominably,  PpEJ  shagals,  3. 

Lev.   11.  43  Ye  shallnotmakeyourselvesabominable 
20.  25  ye  shall  not  make  your  souls  abominable 

ABOMINABLE  thing— 

1.  Abominable,  impure  thing,  ?W3  piggul. 

Isa.   65.   4  and  broth  of  abominable  (things  is  in)their 

2. Abomination,  nrjj/in  toebah. 

Deut  14.    3  Thou  shalt  not  eat  any  abominable  thing 
Jer.    16.  18  carcases  of  their,  .abominable  things 
44.   4  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable  tiling  that  I 

ABOMINABLY,  to  do- 
To  do  abominably,  3"$  taab,  5. 

1  Ki.  21.  26  And  lie  did  very  abominably  in  following 
ABOMINATION— 
1. Abominable,  impure  thing,  7?3| piggul. 

Lev.    7.  18  it  shall  be  an  abomination,  and  the 

2. Abominable,  detestable  thing,  ppc*  shiqqids. 
Deut. 29.  17  And  ye  have  seen  their  abominations 

1  Ki.  11.    5  For  Solomon  weut  after,  .the  ab.  of 

11.    7  the  abomination  of  Moab,  in  the  hill 
11.    7  the  abomination  of  the  children  of  A. 

2  Ki.  23.  13  the  abomination  of  the .  .the  abomination 

23.  24  and  all  the  abominations  that  were  spied 
Isa.  66.  3  theirsoul  deUghteth  in  their  abominations 
Jer,     4.    1  if  thou  wilt  put  away  thine  abominations 

7.  30  they  have  set  their  abominations  in  the 
13.  27  thine  abominations  on  the  hills  in 

32.  34  But  they  set  their  abominations  in  the 
Eze.    5.  11  and  with  all  thine  abominations,  therefore 
20.    7  Cast  ye  away  every  man  the  abominations 
20.    8  every  man  cast  away  the  abominations  of 
20.  30  and  commit  ye  whoredom  after  their 
Dan.    g.  27  for  the  overspreading  of  abominations  he 

11.  31  they  shall  place  the  abomination  that 

12.  11  andtheabomination  that  maketh  desolate 
Hos.  9.  10  and  (their)  abominations  were  according 
Zeeh.  9.    7  And  I  will  take  away.. his  abominations 

0. Abomination,  detestation,  J'i^  sheqets. 

Lev.  11. 10  they  (shall  be)  an  abomination  unto  you 
11.  11  abomination,  .ye  shall  have,  .in  abomina. 
11.  12  that  (shall  be)  an  abomination  unto  you 
11.  13  and  these,  .ye  shall  have  in  abomination 
11.  20  All.  .that creep . . (shall  be)an  abomination 
11.  23  But  all  (other) . .  (shall  be)  an  abomination 
11.  41  every  creeping  thing,  .(shall  be)  an  aboni. 

11.  42  for  they  (are)  an  abomination 

4. Abomination,  nnyin  toebah. 

Gen.  43.  32  for  that  (is)  an  abomination  unto  the 

46.  34  for  every  shepherd  (is)  an  abomination 
Exod.  8.  26  we  shall  sacrifice  the  abomination  of  the 

8.  26  shall  we  sacrifice  the  abomination  of  the 
Lev.  18.  22  Thou  shalt  not  lie  with  mankind,  .abom. 

18.  26  and  shall  not  commit  (any)  of  these  ab. 
18.  27  For  all  these  abominations  have  the  men 
18.  29  whosoever  shall  commit  any  of  these  ab. 
20. 13  both  of  them  have  committed  an  ab. 
Deut.  7.  25  for  it  (is)  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  thy 
7.  26  Neither  shalt  thou  bring  an  abomination 

12.  31  for  every  abomination  to  the  Lord,  which 

13.  14  (that)  such  abomination  is  wrought 

17.    1  for  that  (is)  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord 

17,  4  (that)  such  abomination  is  wrought  in 

18.  9  to  do  after  the  abominations  of  those 
1 8.  12  all  that  do  these  things  (are)  an  ab. 

18.  12  because  of  these  abominations  the  Lord 

20.  iS  not  to  do  after  all  their  abominations 

22.  5  all  that  do  so  (are)  abomination  unto 

23.  18  these  (are)  abomination  unto  the  Lord 

24.  4  for  that  (is)  abomination  before  the  Lord 

25.  16  (are)  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  thy 
27.  15  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  maketh.  .an  ab. 

32.  16  with  abominations  provoked  they  him  to 

1  Ki.  14.  24  according  to  all  the  abominations  of  the 

2  Ki.  16.    3  according  to  the  abominations  of  the 

21.  2  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 
21.  11  hath  done  these  abominations,  (and)  hath 
23.  13  the  abomination  of.  .the  abomination  of 

2Ch.  28.    3  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

33.  2  like  unto  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

34.  33  And Josiahtookawayalltheabominations 
36.    8  and  his  abominations  which  he  did,  aud 


ABOMINATION 


ABOVE 


2  Ch.  36. 
Ezra   9. 


Psa. 
Prov. 


Jer. 


Mai. 


23- 

33- 
33- 
36. 
43- 
44. 

44- 
44. 


14  after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 
1  (doing)  according  to  their  abominations 

11  with  their  abominations,  which  have 

14  people  of  these  abominations?  wouldest 
8  thou  hast  made  me  an  abomination  unto 

32  For  the  froward  (is)  abomination  to  the 

16  seven  (are)  an  abomination  unto  him 

7  and  wickedness  (is)  an  abomination  to 

1  A  false  balance  (is)  abomination  to  the 
20  They,  .of  a  froward  heart  (are)  ab.  to  the 

22  Lying  lips  (are)  abomination  to  the  Loud 
19  but  (it  is)  abomination  to  fools  to  depart 

8  the  wicked  (is)  an  abomination  to  the 

9  The  way  of  the  wicked  (is)  an  abomination 

26  The  thoughts  of  the  wicked  (are)  an  ab. 

5  one  (that  is)  proud  in  heart  (is)  an  ab. 

12  (It  is)  au  abomination  to  kings  to 

15  even  they  both  (are)  abomination  to  the 

10  both  of  them  (are)  alike  abomination  to 

23  Divers  weights  (are)  an  abomination  unto 

27  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  (is)  ab. 

9  the  scorner  (is)  an  abomination  to  men 

25  (there  are)  seven  abominations  in  his 
9  even  his  prayer  (shall  be)  abomination 

27  An  unjust  mau  (is)  au  abomination  to  the 
27  upright  in  the  way  (is)  abomination  to 

13  incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me 

24  an  abomiuation  (is  he  that)  chooseth  you 

19  shall  I  make  the  residue  thereof  an  ab.  ? 

7  and  made  mine  heritage  an  abomination 
15  ashamed  when  they  had  committed  ab. 

30  We  are  delivered  to  do  all  these  ab. 

12  ashamed  when  they  had  committed  ab. 

35  that  they  should  do  this  abomination 
22  because  of  the  abominations  which  ye 

9  I  will  not.  .because  of  all  thine  ab. 

1 1  and  with  all  thiue  abominations,  therefore 
9  for  the  evils,  .in  all  their  abominations 

11  Alas  for  all  the  evil  abominations  of  the 

3  will  recompense  upon  thee  all  thine  ab. 

4  and  thine  abominations  shall  be  in  the 

8  will  recompense  thee  for  all  thine  ab. 

9  thine  abominatious  (that)  are  in  the 

20  but  they  made  the  images  of  their  ab. 

6  (even)  the  great  abominations  that  the 
6  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations 

9  behold  the  wicked  abominations  that 

13  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations 

15  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations  than 

17  a  light  thing,  .that  they  commit  the  ab. 
4  cry  for  all  the  abominations  that  be 

18  and  all  the  abominations  thereof  from 

21  and  their  abominations,  I  will  recompense 

16  that  they  may  declare  all  their  ab. 

6  turn  away  your  faces  from  all  your  ab. 

2  cause  Jerusalem  to  know  her  abomiuations 

22  And  in  all  thine  abominations  and  thy 

36  with  all  the  idols  of  thy  abominations 
43  lewdness  above  all  thine  abominatious 
47  nor  done  after  their  abominations  :  but 

50  and  committed  abomination  before  me 

51  thine  abominations,  .thine  abominatious 
5S  Thou  hast  borne,  .thine  abominations 

12  his  eyes  to  the  idols,  hath  committed  ab. 

13  he  hath  done  all  these  abominations;  he 
24  doeth  according  to  all  the  abominations 

4  cause  them  to  know  the  abominations 
2  yea,  thou  shalt  show  her  all  her  ab. 
11  And  one  hath  committed  abomination 
36  yea,  declare  unto  them  their  abominations 

26  ye  work  abomination,  and  ye  defile  every 
29  because  of  all  their  abomiuations  which 

31  your  iniquities  and  for  your  abominations 
8  by  their  abominations  that  they  have 

6  let  it  suffice  you  of  all  your  abominations 

7  they  have  broken,  .because  of  all  your  ab. 
13  and  their  abominations  which  they  have 
11  and  an  abomination  is  committed  in 


5.  Abomination,  fi§e\vy/j.a  bdelugma. 

Matt  24.  15  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation 
Mark  1 3.  14  ye  shall  see  the  abomination  of 
Luke  16.  15  esteemed  among  men  is  abomination 
Rev.  1 7.    4  having  a  golden  cup . .  full  of  abominations 
17.    5  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations 
21.  27  that  defileth,  neither,  .worketh  abomina. 

ABOMINATION,  to  be  had  in— 

To  be  stinking,  abhorred,  e>N2  baash  2. 

1  Sa.  13.    4  (that)  Israel  also  was  had  in  abomination 
ABOMINATION,  to  have  in  - 

To  make  detestable,  j'p?  shaqats,  3. 

Lev.  11.  11  shall  have  their  carcases  in  abomination 
ABOUND,  to— 
l.Many,  much,  enough,  T}  rah. 

Prov  28.  20  A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with 
29.  22  and  a  furious  man  aboundeth  in 

2.  To  be,  become,  make  more,  TrXeovafa  pleonazo. 
Rom.  5.  20  offence  might  abound.    But  where  sin  ab. 

6.    1  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ? 
Phil.    4.  17  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your  account 

2  Th.   1.    3  the  charity  of.  .toward  each  other  ab. 
2  Pe.    1.   8  if  these  things  be  in  you,  and  abound 

3.  To  be  multiplied,  TrXnOvvui  plethimo. 

Matt.24. 12  And  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the 

4.  To  be  over  and  above,  -Trepttro-euw  jyemse?«>. 
Rom.  5.  15  the  grace  of  God.  .hath  abounded  unto 

15.  13  that  ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through  the 
1  Co.  15.  58  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 


Eph. 
Phil. 


Col. 
1  Th. 


.    5  Tor  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in 
.    5  consolation  also  abouudeth  by  Christ 
.    2  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their 
.    7  Therefore,  as  ye  aboundin  everything,  in) 
.    7  (see)  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also 
.    8  that  ye.  .may  abound  to  every  good  work 
.    8  Wherein  he  hath  abounded  toward  us  in 
.    9  that  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and 
.  12  I  know  how  to  abound .  .both  toabound 
.  iS  But  I  have  all,  and  abound :  I  am 
.    7  abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving 
.    1  (so)  ye  would  abound  more  and  more 


Song 
Jer. 


Eze. 


ABOUND,  to  make  — 

To  be  over  and  above,  7repto-o"ei5w  perisscuo. 

2  Co.    9.    8  God  (is)  able  to  make  all  grace  abound 

1  Th.  3. 12  make  you  to.  .abound  In  love  one 

ABOTJND,  to  more  — 

To  be  over  and  above,  irtpLcraeia'  perisseud. 

Rom.  3.    7  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  more  abounded 

ABOUND,  to  much  more  — 

To  be  over  abundant,  virtpirepiao-eva). 

Rom.  5.  20  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  ab. 

ABOUNDING  with  — 

To  be,  or  become  heavy,  "na  kabed,  2. 

Prov.  S.  24  when,  .no  fountains  abounding  with 

ABOUT  {Prep.)— 

1.  Unto,  to,  hx  el. 

2  Ki.  11.    7  even  they  shall  keep  the  watch,  .about 

2.  For,  in  behalf  of ,  "lya.  Vad. 

Job     1.  ioabout  him,  and  about  his  house,  and  about 
Psa.  139.  11  even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  me 

3.  Before,  in  presence  of,  133  neged. 

Neh.  13.  21  Why  lodge  ye  about  the  wall?  if  ye  do 

4.  Round  about,  around,  T3D  sabib. 

Num.  2.    2  far  off  about  the  tabernacle  of  the 

16.  24  Get  you  up  from  about  the  tabernacle  of 
Deut.17. 14  like  as  all  the  nations  that  (are)  about 

2  Sa.  24.    6  they  came  to  Dan-jaan,  and  about  to 
1  Ki.    7.  23  round  all  about,  and  his  height  (was) 
"    iS.  32  he  made  a  trench  about  the  altar,  as 
Ezra    1.    6  they  that  (were)  about  them  strengthened 
Neh.    5.  17  from  among  the  heathen  that  (are)  about 

6.  16  the  heathen  that  (were)  about  us  saw 
Job    29.    5  with  me,  (when)  my  children  (were)  about 
Psa.  89.    7  reverence  of  all.  (that  are)  about  him 

3.    7  threescore  valiant  men  (are)  about  it,  of 

17.  26  and  from  the  places  about  Jerusalem, 

32.  44  and  in  the  places  about  Jerusalem,  and 

33.  13  and  in  the  places  about  Jerusalem,  and 
48.  17  All  ye  that  are  about  him,  bemoan  him 

48.  39  so  shall  Moab  be .  .to  all  them  about  him 

49.  5  from  all  those  that  be  about  thee ;  and 
1.    4  and  a  brightness  (was)  about  it,  and  out 
5.    2  smite  about  it  with  a  knife :  and  a 

12,  14  I  will  scatter,  .all  that  (are)  about  him 
32.  22  his  graves  (are)  about  him :  all  of  them 
36.    7  Surely  the  heathen  that  (are)  about  you 
43.  17  and  the  border  about  it  (shall  be)  half  a 
43.  17  bottom  thereof  (shall  be)  a  cubit  about 
Dan.   9.  16  a  reproach  to  all  (that  are)  about  us 

5.  On,  upon,  over,  hy.  al. 

Dan.   5.    7  and  (have)  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck 
5.  16  and  (have)  a  chain  of  gold  about  thy  neck 

5.  29  and  (put)  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck 
[See  also  Beset,  bind,  hounds,  bring,  carried,  carry, 

cast,  come,  compass,  fence,  fetch,  gad,  give,  go, 
go  round,  going,  gone,  lead,  places,  round, 
scatter,  set,  turn,  turned,  walk,  whirl,  winding, 
wrapped.] 

6.  In  among,  by,  with,  eV  en. 

Luke  2.  49  thatlmustbeaboutmyFather'sbusiness? 

7.  On,  upon,  over,  4-kI  epi  (g.  d.  ac.) 

Matt  18.    6  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 
Marki4.  51  alinen  cloth  cast  about  (his)  naked  (body) 
John  20.   7  the  napkin,  that  was  about  his  head 
Acts  11.  19  the  persecution  that  arose  about  Stephen 

8.  About,  Kara  kata. 

Acts    2. 10  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Cyrene 

12.  1  Now  about  that  time  Herod  the  king 

27.  27  about  midnight  the  shipmen  deemed  that 

9. Around,  about,  wepi  peri  (ac.ff.) 

Matt.  3.    4  and  a  leathern  girdle  about  his  loins 
8. 18  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about  him 
20.    3  And  he  went  out  about  the  third  hour 
20.   5  Again  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and 
20.    6  And  about  the  eleventh  hour  he  went  out 
20.   9  that  (were  hired)  about  the  eleventh  hour 
46  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried 
6  with  a  girdle  of  a  skin  about  his  loins 
8  and  they  about  Tyre  and  Sidon,  a  great 
32  And  the  multitude  sat  about  him,  and 
34  on  them  which  sat  about  him,  and  said 

6.  48  and  about  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night 
9.  14  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  them 

9.  42  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 
Luke  10.  40  Martha  was  cumbered  about  much  serving 
10.  41  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things 

13.  8  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  (it) 
17.    2  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 

John   3.  25  of  John's  disciples  and  the  Jews  about 
Acts  10.    9  went  up.  .to  pray  about  the  sixth  hour 


Mark 


27. 

k  1. 
3- 
3- 
3- 


Acts  15.    2  the  apostles  and  elders  about  this  question 
ig.  23  there  arose  no  small  stir  about  that  way 
22.    6  about  noon,  .a  great  light  round  about 
25.  15  About  whom,  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem 
25.  24  about  whom  all  the  multitude  of  the  Jews 

1  Ti.     6.    4  but  doting  about  questions  and  strifes 
Jude         7  and  the  cities  about  them  in  like  manner 

9  he  disputed  about  the  body  of  Moses 
(About,  they  that  were,  ot  irepi  hoi  peri). 
Maivk  4.  10  they  that  were  about  him  with  the  twelve 
Luke  22.  49  When  they  which  were  about  him  saw 

10.  Towards,  wpo's  pros  (d.  oc\) 

Mark  2.    2  not  so  much  as  about  the  door :  and  lie 
Rev.    1.  13  girt  about  the  paps  witli  a  golden  girdle 

11. From  round  about,  kvk\68<-v  kuklotlien. 

Rev.    4.    8  had  .each  of  them  six  wings  about  (him) 
ABOUT  (adv.)  :— 

1.  Somewhere,  wov  pou. 

Rom.  4.  19  when  he  was  about  an  hundred  years  old 

2.  As,  so  as,  is  hOs. 

Mark  5.13  (they  were  about  two  thousand ;)  and  were 

8.    9  that  had  eaten  were  about  four  thousand 

Luke  2.  37  a  widow  of  about  fourscore  and  four  years 

8.  42  only  daughter,  about  twelve  years  of  age 
John  1.  39  abode,  .for  it  was  about  the  tenth  hour 

6.  19  rowed  about  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  fur. 
11. 18  Bethany  was.  .about  fifteen  furlongs  off 
Acts  1.   15  together  were  about  an  hundred  and 

5.  7  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after,  when 
13.  18  And  about  the  time  of  forty  years  suffered 
13.  20  about  the  space  of  four  hundred  and  fifty 
19.  34  about  the  space  of  two  hours  cried  out 

Rev.    8.    1  silence . .  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour 
16.  21  (every  stone)  about  the  weight  of  a  talent 

3. As  if,  as  though,  coo-el  hosei. 

Matt  14.  21  were  about  five  thousand  men 

Mark  6.  44  that  did  eat  were  [about]  five  thousand 

Luke  1.  56  Mary  abode  with  her  about  three  mouths 

3.  23  began  to  be  about  thirty  years  of  age 

9.  14  they  were  about  five  thousand  men. 

9.  28  about  au  eight  days  after  these  sayings 
22.  41  withdrawn  from  them  about  a  stone's  east 

22.  59  about  the  space  of  one  hour  after  another 

23.  44  And  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour,  and 
John  4.    6  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour 

6.  10  the  men  sat  down,  in  number  about  five 
19. 14  it  was.  .about  the  sixth  hour,  and  he 

19.  39  Nicodemus.  .brought,  .about  an  hundred 
Acts    2.  41  there  were  added,  .about  three  thousand 

4.  4  number  of  the  men  was  about  five 

5.  36  a  number  of  men,  about  four  hundred 
10.    3  He  saw.  .about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day 

19.  7  And  all  the  men  were  about  twelve 
[See  also  under  Bear,  bound,  carry,  cast,  come,  com- 
pass, country,  gird,  go,  hang,  lead,  minister,  put 
round,  turn,  walk.] 

ABOUT,  to  go- 
To  go  round  about,  surround,  nzip  sabab. 

2  Ki.   3.  25  the  slingers  went  about  (it),  and  smote  it 
2  Ch.  17.    9  and  went  about  throughout  all  the  cities 

23.    2  And  they  went  about  in  Judah,  and 
Eccl.   2.  20  Therefore  I  went  about  to  cause  my 

12.    5  and  the  mpurners  go  about  the  streets 
Song   3.    3  The  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city 

5.    7  The  watchmen  that  went  about  the  city 
Isa.    23.  16  Take  an  harp,  go  about  the  city,  thou 

ABOUT,  to  make— 

To  go  round  about,  surround,  3„3D  sabab,  5. 

2  Ch.  14.    7  build  th^se  cities,  and  make  about  (them) 

ABOUT  on  every  side,  to  be  — 

To  be  round  about,  surround,  33.D  sabab. 

1  Ki.    5.    3  wars  which  were  about  him  on  every  side 
ABOUT,  to  be— 
To  seek,  desire,  fnrew  zeted. 

Acts  27.  30  shipmen  were  about  to  flee  out  of  the 
ABOUT   THE   TIME— 
Upon,  on,  over,  iiri  epi  (g.) 

Matt.  1.  11  about  the  time  they  were  carried  away  to 

ABOUT,  (there)  — 

Concerning  this,  r,repi  rovrov  peri  toutou. 

Luke  24.    4  they  w°re  much  perplexed  thereabout 
ABOUT,  to  be  — 
To  be  on  the 'point  of ',  delay,  p.4\\w  mello. 

Acts    3.    3  seeing  Peter  and  John  about  to  go  into 
18. 14  Paul  was  now  about  to  open  (his)  mouth 

20.  3  as  he  was  about  to  sail  into  Syria,  he 
Heb.   8.    5  when  he  was  about  to  make  the 

Rev.  10.    4  I  was  about  to  write :  and  I  heard  a  voice 

ABOVE  — 

l.From,  out  of,  )nmin. 

Lev.    9.  10  the  kidneys,  and  the  caul  above  the  liver 

l.From  on,  or  upon,  Syo  me-al. 

Gen.    6.  16  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finish  it  above 
Exod2o.    4  (of  any  thing)  that  (is)  in  heaven  above 

25.  21  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy  seat  above 

26.  14  and  a  covering  above  (of)  badgers'  skins 
28.  27  over  against  the  (other)  coupling,  .above 
30.  14  one.  .from  twenty  years  old  and  above 
36.  19  a  covering  (of)  badgers'  skins  above  (that) 
39.  20  over  against  the  (other)  coupling,  .above 


ABOVE 


8 


ABRAHAM 


Exot^o.  19  put  the  covering  of  the  tent  above  upon 
40.  20  put  the  mercy  seat  above  upon  the  ark 
Lev.  11.  21  which  have  legs  above  their  feet,  to  leap 

27.  7  And  if.  .from  sixty  years  old  and  above 
Num.  4.  25  the  badgers'  skins,  .above  upon  it 
Deut.  4.  39  he  (is)  God  in  heaven  above,  and  upon 

5.    8  (of  anything)  that  (is)  in  heaven  above 

28.  13  thou  sbalt  be  above  only,  and  thou  shalt 
Josh.  2.  11  your  God,  he  (is)  God  in  heaven  above 

1  Ki.    7.  3  covered  with  cedar  above  upon  the 

7. 11  And  above  (were)  costly  stones,  after  the 
7.  20  chapiters . .  (had  pomegranates)  also  tfbove 
7.  25  and  the  sea  (was  set)  above  upon  them 
7.  29  upon  the  ledges,  .a  base  above :  and 

7.  31  within  the  chapiter  and  above  (was)  a 

8.  7  covered  the.  .staves  thereof  above 

8.  23  uo  God  like  thee,  in  heaven  above,  or  on 

1  Ch.  23.  27  from  twenty  years  old  and  above 

2  Ch.   4.    4  and  the  sea  (was  set)  above  upon  them 

5.  8  covered  the.  .staves  thereof  above 
25.    5  from  twenty  years  old  and  above 

Job   18.  16  and  above  shall  his  branch  be  cut  off 

31.  28  have  denied  the  God  (that  is)  above 
Prov.  8.  28  When  he  established  the  clouds  above 

15.  24  The  way  of  life  (is)  above  to  the  wise 
Isa.     6.    2  Above  it  stood  the  seraphims :  each  one 
7.  11  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  height  above 
14.  13  I  will  exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of 
Jer.     4.  28  For  this  shall  the.  .heaven  above  be 
31.  37  Thus  saith  the  LORD ;  If  heaven  above 
35.    4  which  (was)  above  the  chamber  of  M. 
52.  32  spake  kindly,  .and  set  his  throne  above 
Eze.    1.  22  stretched  forth  over  their  heads  above 

1.  26  And  above  the  firmament  that  (was)  over 
1.  26  as  the  appearance  of  a  man  above  upon  it 

10.  19  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  over  them  above 

11.  22  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  over  them  above 
37.    8  skin  covered  them  above :  but  (there  was) 

o.More,  irKe'icou  pleidrt. 

Acts.  4.  22  the  man  was  above  forty  years  old,  on 

4. Above,  up,  upwards,  6.va>  and. 

John   S.  23  I  am  from  above:  ye  are  of  this  world;  I 
Acts    2.  19  I  will  show  wonders  in  heaven  above 
Gal.     4.  26  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free,  which 
Col.     3.    1  seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where 
3,    2  Set  your  affection  on  thiDgs  above,  not  on 

5.Abovc,  superior  to,  eVcUw  epano. 

John  3.  31  He  that  cometh...is  above  all. ..above  all 

1  Co.  15.    6  seen  of  above  five  hundred  breth.  at  once 

6. Higher  up,  avdrepou  anuteron. 

Heb.  10.    8  Above  when  he  said,  Sacrifice  and  offering 

l.Up>on,  07i,  over,  eV/  epi  {g.  d.  ac.) 

Luke  3.  20  Added  this  yec  above  all,  that  he  shut 
Eph.    4.    6  who  (is)  above  all,  and  through  all,  and 

6.  16  [Above]  all,  taking  the  shield  of  faith 
Col.     3.  14  And  above  all  these  things  (put  on) 

2  Th.  2.    4  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called 
S.Ahiigside  of,  beside,  irapd  para  {ac.) 

Luke  13.  2  were  sinners  above  all  the  Galileans 

13.  4  sinners  above  all  men  that  dwelt  in 

Rom  14.  5  Onemanesteemethonedayaboveanother 

Heb.    1.  9  God,  hath  anointed  thee.  .above_thy 

9.  Around,  its  pi  peri  (g.) 

3  Jo.         2  I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou 
10. Before,  irp6  p>ro. 

2  Co.  12.    2  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen  ;  Ja.  5.  12. 
1  Pe.  4.    8  above  all  things  have  fervent  charity 

11. Over,  above,  in  behalf  of ,  vir4p  liuper  (ac.) 
Matt  10.  24  disciple  is  not  above,  .the  servant  above 
Luke  6.  40  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master  :  but 
Acts  26.  13  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun,  shining 

1  Co.    4.    6  not  to  think  (of  men)  above  that  which  is 

10.  13  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye 

2  Co.    1.    8  were  pressed  out  of  measure,  above 

12.  6  think  of  me  above  that  which  he  seeth 
Gal.     1.  14  profited .  .above  many  my  equals  in 
Eph.   3.  20  able  to  do .  .above  all  that  we  ask  or  think 
Phil.   2.    9  a  name  which  is  above  every  name 
Phm.      16  Not  now  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  servant 

[See  also  Abundantly,  far,  measure.] 
ABOVE,  far  — 
A  height,  high  place,  Dhn  marom. 

Psa.  10.    5  thy  judgments  (are)  far  above  out  of  his 
ABOVE,  from  — 

l.From  above,  n^&O^D,  ^,'CD  milmalah,  mimmaal. 
Josh.  3.  13  the  waters  that  come  down  from  above 

3.  16  the  waters  which  came  down  from  above 
Job     3.    4  let  not  God  regard  it  from  above 

31.    2  what  portion  of  God  (is  there)  from  above? 

Psa.  78.  23  he  had  commanded  the  clouds  from  above 

Isa.   45.    8  Drop  down,  ye. heavens,  from  above,  and 

Amos  2.    9  I  destroyed  his  fruit  from  above,  and  lus 

%A  height,  high  place,  oriO  marom. 

2Sa.  22.  17  lie  sent  from  above,  he  took  me;  he  drew 
Psa.  18.  10  lie  sent  from  above,  he  took  me;  he  drew 
i4t-7  Send  thine  hand  from  above;  rid  me,  and 
Lam.  1.  1  ;  Prom  above  hath  he  sent  fire  iuto  my 
Z.From  above,  ava>B$v  anOthen. 

John  3.  31  He  that  cometh  from  above  is  above  all 

19.  11  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above 
Jas.     1.  17  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and 

3.  15  This  wisdom  doscendeth  not  from  above 
3.  17  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  first 


AB-RA'HAM,  GrrpN  father  of  a  midtitude. 
The  name  given  to  Abram  when  the  promise  of  a 
numerous  progeny  was  renewed  to  him  by  God.  He 
was  the  youngest  son  of  Terah.  and  born  1996  B.C.,  and 
died  at  the  age  of  175,  B.C.  1821.  A  native  of  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees,  and  descended  through  Heber  in  the 
9th  generation  from  Shera  the  eldest  son  of  Noah,  he 
was^the  progeuitor  of  the  Hebrews,  and  of  several 
cognate  tribes. 

Gen.    17.    5  thy  name  shall  lie  A.  ;  for  a  father  of 

17.    9  And  God  said  unto  A. ;  Thou  shalt  keep 

17.  15  And  God  said  unto  A.,  As  for  Sarai 

17.  17  Then  A.  fell  upon  his  face,  and  laughed 

17.  18  And  A.  said  unto  God,  Oh  that  Ishmael 

17.  22  and  God  went  up  from  A. 

17.  23  And  A.  took  Ishmael  his  son,  and  all  that 

17.  23  every  male  among  the  men  of  A.'s  house 

17.  24  And  A.  (was)  ninety  years  old  and  nine 

17.  26  In  the  selfsame  day  was  A.  circumcised 

18.  6  A.  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  Sarah 
18.    7  And  A.  ran  unto  the  herd,  and  fetcht  a 
18.  11  Now  A.  and  Sarah  (were)  old  (and)  well 
18.  13  the  Lord  said  unto  A.,  Wherefore  did  Sarah 
18.  16  and  A.  weut  witli  them  to  bring  them  on  the 
18.  17  Shall  I  hide  from  A.  that  thing  which  I  do 
18.  18  Seeing  that  A.  shall  surely  become  a  great 
18.  19  that  the  Lord  may  bring  upon  A.  that 

18.  22  the  men  turned  their  faces,  .but  A.  stood 
18.  23  And  A.  drew  near,  and  said,  Wilt  thou 
18.  27  And  A.  answered  and  said,  Behold  now 
18.  33  as  soon  as  he  had  left  communing  witli  A. 

18.  33  and  A.  returned  unto  his  place 

19.  27  A.  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to  the 

19.  29  God  remembered  A.,  and  sent  Lot  out  of 

20.  1  A.  journeyed  from  thence  toward  the  south 
20.    2  A.  said  of  Sarah  his  wife,  She  (is)  my 

20.    9  Then  Abimelech  called  A.,  and  said  unto 
20.  10  And  Abimelech  said  unto  A.,  What  sawest 
20.  11  And  A.  said,  Because  I  thought,  Surely  the 
20.  14  Abimelech  took  sheep,  .and  gave,  .unto  A. 
20.  17  So  A.  prayed  unto  God  :  aud  God  healed 

20.  18  because  of  Sarah  A.'s  wife 

21.  2  and  bare  A.  a  son  in  his  old  age 

21.    3  A.  called  the  name  of  his  son  that  was  born 

21.    4  And  A.  circumcised  his  son  Isaac 

21.    5  A.  was  an  hundred  years  old,  when  his 

21.    7  Who  would  have  said  unto  A.,  that  Sarah 

21.    8  A.  made  a  great  feast  the  (same)  day  that 

21.    9  which  she  had  born  unto  A.,  mocking 

21.  10  Wherefore  she  said  unto  A.,  Cast 

21.  11  the  thing  was  very  grievous  in  A.'s  sight 

21.  12  God  said  unto  A.,  Let  it  not  be  grievous 

21.  14  A.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 

21.  22  spake  unto  A.,  saying,  God  (is)  with 

21.  24  And  A.  said,  I  will  swear 

21.  25  And  A.  reproved  Abimelech  because 

21.  27  A.  took  sheep  and  oxen,  and  gave 

21.  28  Aud  A.  set  seven  ewe-lambs  of  the 

21.  29  Abimelech  said  unto  A.,  What  (mean) 

21.  33  And  [A.]  planted  a  grove  in  Beersheba 

21.  34  A.  sojourned  in  the  Philistines'  land 

22.  1  God  did  tempt  A.  and  said  unto  him,  A. 
22.    3  And  A.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 
22.    4  Then  on  the  third  day  A.  lifted  up 

22.    5  A.  said  unto  his  young  men,  Abide 
22.    6  A.  took  the  wood  of  the  burnt-offering 
22.    7  Isaac  spake  unto  A.  his  father,  and  said 
22.    8  A.  said,  My  sou,  God  will  provide  himself 
22.    9  and  A.  built  an  altar  there,  and  laid  the 
22.  10  A.  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  took 
22.  11  and  said,  A.,  A.:  aud  he  said,  Here  (am)  I 
22.  13  And  A.  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked 
22.  13  and  A.,  .took  the  ram,  and  offered  him 
22.  14  And  A.  called  the  name  of  that  place 
22.  15  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  unto  A.  out  of 
22.  19  So  A.  returned  unto  his  young  men,  and 
22.  19  to  Beersheba;  and  A.  dwelt  at  Beersheba 
22.  20  it  was  told  A.,  saying,  Behold,  Mileah 

22.  23  Mileah  did  bear  to  Nahor,  A.'s  brother 

23.  2  and  A.  came  to  mourn  for  Sarah,  and  to 
23.    3  And  A.  stood  up  from  before  his  dead 

23.    5  the  children  of  Heth  answered  A.,  saying 
23.    7  And  A.  stood  up,  aud  bowed  himself  to 
23.  10  Ephron  the  Hittite  answered  A.  in  the 
23.  12  And  A.  bowed  down  himself  before  the 
23.  14  Ephron  answered  A.,  saying  unto  him 
23.  16  And  A.  hearkened  unto  Ephron 
23.  16  and  A.  weighed  to  Ephron  the  silver 
23.  18  Unto  A.  for  a  possession  in  the  presence  of 
23.  19  A.  buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  cave  of 

23.  20  were  made  sure  unto  A.  for  a  possession 

24.  1  And  A.  was  old,  (and)  well  stricken  in 
24.    1  the  Lord  had  blessed  A.  in  all  things 
24.    2  And  A.  said  unto  his  eldest  servant  of 
24.    6  And  A.  said  unto  him,  Beware  thou 
24.    9  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh  of  A.  his 
24.  12  O  Lord  God  of  my  master  A.,  I  pray 
24.  12  shew  kindness  unto  my  master  A. 

24.  15  Mileah,  the  wife  of  Nahor,  A.'s  brother 

24.  27  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  A. 

24.  34  And  he  said,  I  (am)  A.'s  servant 

24.  42  O  Lord  God  of  my  master  A.,  if  now 

24.  48  and  blessed  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  A. 

24.  52  when  A.'s  servant  heard  their  words,  he 

24.  59  they  seut  away  Rebekah.  .and  A.'s  servant, 

25.  1  Then  again  A.  took  a  wife,  and  her  name 
25.    s  And  A.  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  Isaac. 
25.    6  unto  the  sons,  .which  A.  had,  A.  gave  gifts 
25.    7  these  (are)  the  days,  .of  A.'s  life  which  he 
25.    8  Then  A.  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died  in  a 
25.  10  The  field  which  A.  purchased  of  the  sons  of 


Gen.  25.  10  there  was  A.  buried,  and  Sarah  his  wife 
25.  11  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of  A. 
25.  12  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Ishmael,  A  's 
25.  12  son,  whom  Hagar.  .bare  unto  A. 

25.  19  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Isaac,  A.'s 

26.  1  the  first  famine  that  was  in  the  days  of  A. 
26.    3  I  will  perforin  the  oath  which  I  sware  untoA. 
26.    5  Because  that  A.  obeyed  my  voice,  and  kept 
26.  15  father'sservantsliaddiggedin  thedaysof  A. 
26.  18  which  they  had  digged  in  the  days  of  A.  his 
26.  18  Philistines.,  stopped.,  after  the  death  of  A. 
26.  24  I  (am)  the  God  of  A.  thy  father :  fear  not 
26.  24  will  bless  thee,  .for  my  servant  A.'s  sake 
28.    4  give  thee  the  blessing  of  A.,  to  thee,  aud  to 
28.    4  mayest  inherit  the  land.  .God  gave  unto  A. 
28.    9  Esau.,  took.,  the  daughter  of  Ishmael  A.'s 
28.  13  I  (am)  the  Lord  God  of  A.  thy  father,  and 
31.  42  the  God  of  my  father,  the  God  of  A. 

31.  53  The  God  of  A.,  and  the  God  of  Nahor,  the 
9  And  Jacob  said,  O  God  of  my  father  A. 

12  Aud  the  laud  which  I  gave  A.  and  Isaac 
27  Hebron,  where  A.  and  Isaac  sojourned 

15  before  whom  my  fathers  A.  and  Isaac  did 

16  and  the  name  of  my  fathers  A.  and  Isaac 

30  which  A.  bought  with  the  field  of  Ephron 

31  There  they  buried  A.  and  Sarah  his  wife 

13  which  A.  bought  with  the  field  for  a 
24  unto  the  land  which  he  sware  to  A. 
24  God  remembered  his  covenant  with  A. 

6  I  (am)  the  God  of  thy  father,  the  God  of  A. 

15  The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of  A. 

16  the  God  of  A. .  .appeared  unto  me,  saying 
5  the  God  of  A. .  .hath  appeared  unto  thee 

3  Aud  I  appeared  unto  A.,  unto  Isaac,  to 
8  which  I  did  swear  to  give  it  to  A. 

13  Remember  A.,  Isaac,  and  Israel,  thy 

1  unto  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  A. 
42  Then  will  I  remember,  .my  covenant  with  A. 
11  shall  see  the  laud  which  I  sware  unto  A. 

8  the  Lord  sware  unto  your  fathers,  A. 

10  which  he  sware  uuto  thy  fathers,  to  A. 

5  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fathers,  A. 

27  Remember  thy  servants,  A.,  Isaac,  aud 
13  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers,  to  A. 
20  which  the  Lord  swear  unto  thy  fathers,  to  A. 

4  This  (is)  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  A. 

2  Terah,  the  father  of  A.,  and  the  father  of 

3  And  I  took  your  father  A.  from  the  other 
36  Elijah  the  prophet.. said,  Lord  God  of  A. 
23  because  of  his  covenant  with  A.,  Isaac,  and 
23-27  sons  of  Joktan.  .Abram  ;  thesame(is)  A. 

28  The  sous  of  A. ;  Isaac,  aud  Ishmael 

32  Now  the  sons  of  Keturah,  A.'s  concubine 
34  And  A.  begat  Isaac 

16  (Even  ofthecovenant)which  he  made  with  A. 
18  O  Lord  God  of  A.,  Isaac,  and  of  Israel,  out 

7  and  gavest  it  to  the  seed  of  A.  thy  friend 

6  turn  again  unto  the  Lord  God  of  A., 

7  Thou  (art),  .the  God  who  didst  choose  A. 

9  the  people  of  the  God  of  A. :  for  the  shields 
6  0  ye  seed  of  A.  his  servant,  ye  children  of 
9  Which  (covenant)  he  made  with  A.,  and  his 

42  remembered  his  holy  promise,  (and)  A.  his 
22  thus  saith  the  Lord,  who  redeemed  A. 

8  But  thou,  Israel,,  .the  seed  of  A.  my  friend 
2  Look  unto  A.  your  father,  and  unto  Sarah 

16  Doubtless  thou  (art)  our  father,  though  A. 
26  I  will  not . .  (to  be)  rulers  over  the  seed  of  A. 

.  24  A.  was  one,  and  lie  inherited  the  land 
20  the  mercy  to  A.,  which  thou  hast  sworn 

1  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David,  the  son  of  A. 

2  A.  begat  Isaac  ;  and  Isaac  begat  Jacob 

17  all  the  generations  from  A.  to  David  (are) 

9  We  have  A.  to  our  father :  for  I  say  unto 
9  God  is  able,  .to  raise  up  children  unto  A. 

11  many,  .shall  sit  down  with  A.,  and  Isaac 
32  I  am  the  God  of  A.,  and  the  God  of  Isaac 
26  God  spake . .  saying,  I  (am)  the  God  of  A. 
55  As  he  spake  to  our  fathers,  to  A.,  and  to 
73  The  oath  which  he  sware  to  our  father  A. 

8  We  have  A.  to  (our)  father :  for  I  say  unto  you 
8  God  is  able,  .to  raise  up  children  uuto  A. 

23-34  Jesus.,  being.,  son  of  Joseph.,  (son)  of  A. 

16  this  woman,  being  a  daughter  of  A.,  whom 

28  when  ye  shall  see  A.,  and  Isaac,  and 

22  carried  by  the  angels  iuto  A.'s  bosom 

23  lifted  up  his  eyes . .  and  seeth  A.  afar  off 

24  he  cried  and  said,  Eather  A.,  have  mercy 

25  But  A.  said,  Son,  remember  that  thou 

29  A.  saith  unto  him,  They  have  Moses  and 

30  And  he  said,  Nay,  father  A. :  but  if 

19.  9  forsomuch  as  lie  also  is  a  son  of  A. 

20.  37  when  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of  A. 
8-  33  We  be  A.'s  seed,  aud  were  never  in 
8.  37  I  know  that  ye  are  A.'s  seed ;  but 
S.  39  They  answered  and  said  unto  him,  A.  is 
8.  39  Jesus  saith.  .If  ye  were  A.'s  children 
8.  39  Ye  would  do  the  works  of  A. 
8.  40  Ye  seek  to  kill  me.  .this  did  not  A. 
8.  52  A.  is  dead,  and  the  prophets ;  and  thou 
8.  53  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  A. 
8.  56  Your  father  A.  rejoiced  to  see  my  day 
8.  57  Thou  art  not  yet.  .hast  thou  seen  A..' 
8.  58  Jesus  said.  .Before  A.  was,  1  ai.i 
3.  13  The  God  of  A. .  .hath  glorified  his  Son 
3.  25  covenant  which  God  made,  .saying  uuto  A. 
7.    2  God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our  fatm  r  A 
7.    8  so  [A.]  begat  Isaac,  and  circumcised  him 
7.  16  the  sepulchre  that  A.  bought  for 
7.  17  the  promise,  .which  God  had  sworn  to  A. 
7.  32  the  God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  of  A. 

13.  26  children  of  the  stock  of  A.,  and  whosoever 


32- 

35- 

35- 

48. 

48. 

49- 

49. 

50. 

50. 

Exod 

2. 

3- 

3- 

3- 

4- 

6. 

6. 

32. 

33- 

Lev. 

26. 

Num 

32- 

Deut 

1. 

6. 

9- 

9. 

29. 

3°- 

34- 

Josh 

24- 

=4- 

1  Ki. 

18. 

2  Ki. 

13- 

iCh. 

1. 
1. 

1. 
1. 

16. 

29. 

2Ch. 

20. 

3°- 

Neh. 

9- 

Psa. 

47- 

105. 

105. 

105. 

Isa. 

29. 

4i- 

Si- 

63. 

Jer. 

33- 

Eze. 

33- 

Hie. 

7. 

Matt 

1. 

1. 

1. 

3- 

3- 

8. 

22. 

Mart 

12. 

Luke 

1. 

1. 

3- 

3- 

3- 

13' 

13- 

16. 

16. 

16. 

16. 

16. 

16. 

ABRAM 


9 


ABUNDANCE 


Rom. 


4.    1  What  shall  we  then  say  that  A.,  our  father 
4.    2  For  if  A.  were  justified  by  works,  he  hath 
4.   3  A.  believed  God  ;  and  it  was  counted  unto 
4.    9  we  say  that  faith  was  reckoned  to  A. 
4.  12  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of  our  father  A. 
4.  13  For  the  promise,  .not  to  A.,  or  to  his  seed 
4.  16  to  that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  A. 
9.    7  Neither,  because  they  are  the  seed  of  A. 
11.    1  I  also  am  an  Israelite,  of  the  seed  of  A, 
2  Co.    11.  22  Are  they  the  seed  of  A.?  so  (am)  I 
Gal.      3.    6  Even  as  A.  believed  God,  and  it  was  ac. 
3.    7  the  same  are  the  children  of  A. 
3.    8  scripture,  .preached,  .the  gospel  unto  A. 
3.    9  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with.  .A. 
3.  14  That  the  blessing  of  A.  might  come  on  the 
3.  16  Now  to  A.  and  his  seed  were  the  promises 
3.  18  but  God  gave  (it)  to  A.  by  promise 

3.  29  If  ye  (be)  Christ's  then  are  ye  A.'s  seed 

4.  22  it  is  written,  that  A.  had  two  sons,  the  one 
Heb.     2.  16  he  took  on  (him)  the  seed  of  A. 

6.  13  For  when  God  made  promise  to  A.,  because 

7.  1  Melchisedec.  .met  A.  returning  from  the 
7.    2  To  whom  also  A,  gave  a  tenth  part  of  all 
7.    4  unto  whom  even  the  patriarch  A.  gave  the 
7.    5  though  they  come  out  of  the  loins  of  A. 

7.    6  But  he.  .received  tithes  of  A.,  and  blessed 
7.    9  Levi,  .receiveth  tithes,  payed  tithes  in  A. 

11.  8  By  faith  A.,  when  he  was  called  to  go  out 
11.  17  By  faith  A.,  when  he  was  tried,  offered  up 

Jas.      2.  21  Was  not  A.  our  father  justified  by  works 
2.  23  A.  believed  God,  and  it  was  imputed  unto 

1  Pe.     3.    6  Eveu  as  Sarah  obeyed  A.,  calling  him  lord, 

AB'-RAM,  D-nx  father  of height 

The  original  name  of  Abraham, 

Gen.  11.  26  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  A. 
11.  27  Terah  begat  A.,  Nahor,  and  Haran 
11.  29  And  A.  and  Nahor  took  them  wives 
11.  29  the  name  of  A.'s  wife  (was)  Sarai 
11.  31  And  Terah  took  A.  his  son,  and  Lot 

11.  31  Sarai  his  daughter  in  law,  his  son  A.'s 

12.  1  the  Lord  had  said  unto  A.,  Get  thee 
12.    4  So  A.  departed,  as  the  Lord  had  spoken 
12.    4  and  A.  (was)  seventy  and  five  years  old 
12.    5  And  A.  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and  Lot 

12.    6  And  A.  passed  through  the  land  unto 
12.    7  And  the  Lord  appeared  unto  A.,  and 
12.    9  And  A.  journeyed,  going  on  still  toward 
12.  to  and  A.  went  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn 
12.  14  when  A.  was  come  into  Egypt,  the 
12.  16  And  he  entreated  A.  well  for  her  sake 
12. 17  the  Lord  plagued  P..  because  of  Sarai  A.'s 

12.  18  And  Pharaoh  called  A.,  and  said.  What  (is) 

13.  1  And  A.  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  he,  aud 
13.    2  And  A.  (was)  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver 
13.    4  and  there  A.  called  on  the  name  of  the 
13.    5  And  Lot  also,  which  went  with  A.,  had 
13.    7  a  strife  between  the  herdmen  of  A.'s 

13.    8  And  A.  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no 
13.  12  A.  dwelled  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  L. 

13. 14  Aud  the  Lord  said  unto  A.,  after  that 

13.  18  Then  A.  removed  (his)  tent,  and  came  and 

14.  12  And  they  took  Lot,  A.'s  brother's  son 
14.  13  came  one  that  had  escaped,  and  told  A. 
14. 13  and  these  (were)  confederate  with  A. 

14.  14  And  when  A.  heard  that  his  brother  was 
14.  19  Blessed  (be)  A.  of  the  most  high  God. 
14.  21  the  king  of  Sodom  said  unto  A.,  Give  me 
14.  22  And  A.  said  to  the  king  of  Sodom,  I  have 

14.  23  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  I  have  made  A. 

15.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  A.  in  a 
15.  1  saying,  Fear  not,  A.:  I  (am)  thy  shield 
15.  2  And  A.  said,  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou 
15.  3  And  A.  said,  Behold,  to  me  thou  hast 
15.  11  fowls  came  dowu  upon  the  carcases,  A. 
15.  12  was  going  down,  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  A. 
15.  13  And  he  said  unto  A.,  Know  of  a  surety 

15.  18  day  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  witli  A. 

16.  1  Now  Sarai  A.'s  wife  bare  him  no  children 
16.    2  Aud  Sarai  said  unto  A.,  Behold  now,  the 
16.    2  And  A.  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Sarai 
16.    3  And  Sarai  A.'s  wife  took  Hagar  her  maid 
16.    3  after  A.  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  laud 
16.    3  and  gave  her  to  her  husband  A.  to  be  his 
16.   5  And  Sarai  said  unto  A.,  My  wrong  (be) 
16.    6  But  A.  said  unto  Sarai,  Behold,  thy  maid 

16. 15  And  Hagar  bare  A.  a  son  :  and  A.  called 
16.  16  And  A.  (was)  fourscore  and  six  years  old 

16.  16  when  Hagar  bare  Ishmael  to  A. 

17.  1  And  when  A.  was  ninety  years  or   and 
17.    1  the  Lord  appeared  to  A.,  and  said  unto 
17.    3  And  A.  fell  on  his  face :  and  God  talked 
17.    5  shall  thy  name  any  more  be  called  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  27  A.;  the  same  (is)  Abraham 
Neh.   9.    7  Thou  (art)  the  Lord  . .  who  didst  choose  A. 
ABROAD  — 
1.  The  outside,  without,  pn  chuts. 

Gen.  15.    5  And  he  brought  him  forth  abroad,  and 

19.  17  they  had  brought  them  forth  abroad 
Exod  12.  46  thou  shalt. not  carry  forth  ought,  .abroad 

21.  ig  If  he  rise  again,  and  walk  abroad  upr- 
Lev.  14.    8  after  that  he  shall,  .tarry  abroad 

iS.    9  (whether  she  be)  born  at  home,  or  born  ah, 
Deut.23.  10  then  shall  he  go  abroad  out  of  the  camp 

23.  12  a  place,  .whither  thou  shalt  go.  .abroad 

23.  13  when  thou  wilt  ease  thyself  abroad,  thou 
24. 11  Thou  shalt  stand  abroad,  and  the  man  to 

24.  11  shall  bring  out  the  pledge  abroad  unto 
Judgi2.   9  thirty  daughters,  (whom)  he  sent  abroad 

12.  9  and  took  in  thirty  daughters  from  abroad 
1  Sa.    9.  26  weDt  out .  .he  and  Samuel,  abroad 

2 


2  Ki.   4.    3  Go,  borrow  thee  vessels  abroad  of  all  thy 
2  Ch.29.  16  Levites  took  (it),  to  carry  (it)  out  abroad 
Psa.  41.    6  (when)  he  goeth  abroad,  he  telleth  (it) 
Prov.  5.  16  Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  abroad 
Jer.     6.  11  upon  the  children  abroad,  and  upon  the 
Lam.  1.  20  abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home 
Eze.  34.  21  till  ye  have  scattered  them  abroad 

2.  To  break  forth,  rnaparach. 

Lev.  13.  12  if  a  leprosy  break  out  abroad  iu  the  skin, 

3.  To  break  forth  or  through,  fl?  parats. 

1  Ch.13.    2  let  us  send  abroad  unto  our  brethren 
[See  also  All,  break  out,  cast,  come,  far,  go,  scattered, 

send,  spread,  walk,  wander.] 

i. Manifest  to,  <pavsp6v  els  phaueroneis. 
Matt.  4.  22  but  that  it  should  come  abroad 
Luke  8.  17  shall  not  be  known,  and  come  abroad 
5.  To  become  manifest,  (pavepos  yivo^at. 
Mark  6.  14  for  his  uame  was  spread  abroad 
[See  also  Blaze,  come,  disperse,  go,  noise,  scatter, 
shed,  spread.] 

AB-SA'-LOM,  cityzm  father  of  peace. 

Third  son  of  David  by  his  wife  Maacah,  daughter  of 

Talmai,  king  of  Geshur,  B.C.  1000. 

2  Sa.    3.    3  and  the  third,  A.  the  son  of  Maacah  the 

13.    1  A.  the  son  of  David  had  a  fair  sister 
13.    4  I  love  Tamar,  my  brother  A.'s  sister 
13.  20  A.  her  brother  said  unto  her,  Hath  Am. 
13.  20  remained  desolate  in  her  brother  A.'s 
13.  22  And  A.  spake  unto  his  brother  Amuon 
13.  22  for  A.  hated  Amnou,  because  he  had 
13.  23  A.  had  sheepshearers  iu  Baal-hazor 
13.  23  A.  invited  all  the  king's  sons 
13.  24  And  A.  came  to  the  king,  and  said 
13.  25  the  king  said  to  A.,  Nay,  my  s«jn,  let  us 
13.  26  Then  said  A.,  If  not,  I  pray"thee,  let  my 
13.  27  But  A.  pressed  him,  that  he  let  Amnon 
13.  28  Now  A.  had  commanded  his  servants 
13.  29  the  servants  of  A.  did  unto  Amuon  as  A. 
13.  30  A.  hath  slain  all  the  king's  sons,  and 
13.  32  for  by  the  appointment  of  A.  this  hath 
13.  34  But  A.  fled 
13.  37  But  A.  fled,  and  went  to  Talmai,  the  son 

13.  38  So  A.  fled,  and  went  to  Geshur,  and  was 
J3-  39  (tne  soul  of)  king  David  longedtogo.  .to  A 

14.  1  the  king's  heart  (was)  toward  A. 

14.  21  go  therefore,  bring  the  young  man  A. 
14.  23  So  Joab  arose,  .and  brought  A.  to 
14.  24  So  A.  returned  to  his  own  house,  and  saw 
14.  25  none  to  be  so  much  praised  as  A.  for 
14.  27  Aud  unto  A.  there  were  born  three  sons 
14.  28  So  A.  dwelt  two  full  years  in  Jerusalem 
14.  29  Therefore  A.  sent  for  Joab,  to  have  sent 
14.  30  And  A.'s  servants  set  the  field  on  fire 
14.  31  Joabarose,andcametoA.  unto  (his)  house 
14.  32  And  A.  answered  Joab,  Behold,  I  sent 
14.  33  when  he  had  called  for  A.,  he  came  to 

14.  ^^  and  the  king  kissed  A. 

15.  1  A.  prepared  him  chariots  and  horses 
15.    2  And  A.  rose  up  early,  and  stood  beside 
15.    2  then  A.  called  unto  him,  and  said 

15.    3  And  A.  said  unto  him,  See,  thy  matters 
75.    4  A.  said  moreover,  Oh  that  I  were  made 
15.    6  And  on  this  manner  did  A.  to  all  Israel 
15.    6  so  A.  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel 
15.    7  A.  said  unto  the  king,  I  pray  thee,  let 
15.  10  But  A.  sent  spies  throughout  all  the 
15.  10  then  ye  shall  say,  A.  reigneth  in  Hebron 
15.  11  And  with  A.  went  two  hundred  men  out 
15.  12  aud  A.  sent  for  Ahithophel  the  Gilonite 
15.  12  people  increased  continually  with  A. 
15.  13  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel  are  after  A. 
15.  14  for  we  shall  not  (else)  escape  from  A. 
15.  31  among  the  conspirators  with  A. 
15.  34  say  unto  A.,  I  will  be  thy  servant,  0  king 

15.  37  and  A.  came  into  Jerusalem 

16.  8  Lord  hath  delivered .  .into  the  hand  of  A. 
16.  15  And  A.,  and  all  the  people  the  men  of 
16.  16  when  Hushai.  .was  come  unto  A. 

16.  16  that  Hushai  said  unto  A.,  God  save  the 
16.  17  And  A.  said  to  Hushai,  (Is)  this  thy 
16.  18  And  Hushai  said  unto  A.,  Nay;  but 
16.  20  Then  said  A.  to  Ahithophel,  Give 
16.  21  And  Ahithophel  said  unto  A.,  Go  in  unto 
16.  22  So  they  spread  A.  a  tent  upon  the  top  of 
16.  22  and  A.  went  in  unto  his  father's  con. 

16.  23  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel . .  both  with . .  A. 

17.  1  Moreover  Ahithophel  said  unto  A.,  Let 
17.  4  And  the  saying  pleased  A.  well,  aud  all 
17.  5  Then  said  A.,  Call  now  Hushai  the  Archite 
17.  6  when  Hushai  was  come  to  A.,  A.  spake 
17.  7  And  Hushai  said  unto  A.,  The  counsel 
17.  9  slaughter  among  the  people,  .follow  A. 
17.  14  And  A.  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  said 

17.  14  the  Lord  might  bring  evil  upon  A. 

17.  15  thus  did  Ahithophel  counsel  A.  and  the 

17.  18  a  lad  saw  them,  and  told  A.:  but  they 

17.  20  And  when  A.'s  servants  came  to  the 

17.  24  And  A.  passed  over  Jurdan,  he  and  all  the 

17.  25  And  A.  made  Amasa  captain  of  the  host 

17.  26  So  Israel  and  A.  pitched  in  the  land  of 

18.  5  king  comm .  Joab . .  (Deal)  gently . .  with  A. 
t8.  5  gave  all  the  captains  charge  concerning  A. 
18.    9  And  A.  met  the  servants  of  David 

18.  9  And  A.  rode  upon  a  mule,  and  the  mule 
18.  10  a  certain  man  saw  (it),  .and  said..  I  saw  A. 
18.  i2Beware  thatnone(touch)theyeungman  A. 
1?.  14  and  thrust  them  through  the  heart  of  A. 
18.  15  young  men.  .compassed"  about.,  smote  A. 


2  Co. 


Phil . 
Col. 


2  Sa.  iS.  17  And  they  took  A.,  and  cast  him  into  a 
18.  18  Now  A.  in  his  lifetime  had  taken  and 
18.  iS  it  is  called  unto  this  day,  A.'s  place 
18.  29  the  king  said,  Is  the  young  man  A.  safe  ? 
iS.  32  king  said.. (Is)  the  young  man  A.  safe? 
18.  33  0  my  son  A.,  my  son,  my  son  A.  !  would 

18.  33  died  for  thee,  O  A.,  my  son,  my  sou  ! 

19.  1  the  king  weepeth  and  moumeth  for  A. 
19.    4  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  0  my  son  A.,  O  A. 
19.    6  this  day  I  perceive,  that  if  A.  had  lived 
19.    9  now  he  is  fled  out  of  the  land  for  A. 

19.  10  And  A.,  whom  we  anointed  over  us,  is  dead 

20.  6  shall  Sheba.  .do  us  more  harm  than.  .A. 
1  Ki.    1.    6  and  (his  mother)  bare  him  after  A. 

2.    7  when  I  fled  because  of  A.  thy  brother 
2.  28  Adonijah,  though  he  turned  not  after  A. 
1  Ch.   3.    2  The  third,  A.  the  son  of  Maachah  the 
2CI1.  11.  20  her  he  took  Maachah  the  daughter  of  A. 

11.  21  Kehoboam  loved,  .the  daughter  of  A. 
Psa.3.^e.  A  Psalm  of  David,  when  he  fled  from  A. 
ABSENCE  — 
.4  being  off  from,  airovaia  apovsia. 

Phil.    2.  12  but  now  much  mure  in  my  absence 
ABSENCE  of — 
Without,  &rep  ater. 

Luke  22.  6  to  betray  him.  .in  the  absence  of 
ABSENT,  to  be — 

1.  To  be  hidden,  "inp  satar,  2. 

Gen.  31.  49  The  Lokd  watch,  .when  we  are  absent 

2.  To  be  away  from,  &tt<-lij.l  apeimi. 

1  Co.    5.    3  I  verily,  as  absent  in  body,  but  present 
10.    1  but  being  abseut  am  bold  toward  you 
10.  11  in  word  by  letters  when  we  are  absent 

13.  2  being  absent  now  I  write  to  them 
13.  10  I  write  these  things  being  absent 

1.  27  whether  I.  .see  you,  or  else  be  absent 

2.  5  though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet  am  I 

3.  To  be  away  from  ones  people,  eVo^e'cn  ekdenud. 

2  Co.   5.  6  in  the  body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord 

5.    8  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body 
5.    9  whether  present  or  absent,  we  may  be 

ABSTAIN,  to— 

To  hold  off  from,  aiv^xoiiai  apechomiai. 

Acts  15.  20  we  write  unto  them,  that  they  abstain 
15.  29  That  ye  abstain  from  meats  offered  to 
1  Th.  4.    3  will  of  God.. that  ye  should  abstain 
5.  22  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil 
1  Ti.     4.    3  Forbidding  to  marry  (and . .)  to  abstain 
1  Pe.    2.  11  I  beseech,  .abstain  from  fleshly  lusts 

ABSTINENCE  — 

Want  of  food,  aairia  asitia. 

Acts  27.  2T  after  long  abstinence  Paul  stood  forth 

ABUNDANCE  — 

1. Multitude,  fiorr  ho/mon. 

1  Ki.  18.  41  for  (there  is)  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain 
Eccl.  5.  10  nor  he  that  loveth  abundance  with 
Isa.    60.    5  be  enlarged ;  because  the  abundance  of 

2. Brightness,  V]  ziz. 

Isa.    66.  11  delighted  with  the  abundance  of  her 

3. Abundance,  remnant,  rnrr  yithrah. 

Isa.   15.    7  Therefore  the  abundance  they  have  gotten 

±. Strength,  substance,  nc^'u  otsmah. 

Isa.   47.    g  for  the  great  abundance  of  thine 

5. Abundance,  residue,  rnnj;  athereth. 

Jer.   33.    6  aud  will  reveal  unto  them  the  abundance 

G. Abundance,  multitude,  nh  rob. 

Dent. 28.  47  for  the  abundance  of  all  (things) 

1  Sa.    1.  16  for  cut  of  the  abundance  of  my  complaint 

1  Ki.     1.  T9  he  hath  slain,  .sheep  in  abundance 

1.  25  hath  slaiu  oxen.. and  sheep  iu  abundance 
10.  10  there  came  no  more  such  abundance  of 

10.  27  that  (are)  in  the  vale,  for  abundance 

1  Ch.  22.    3  David  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  the 

22.    3  and  brass  in  abundance  without  weight 
22. 14  without  weight ;  for  it  is  in  abundance 
22.  15  workmen  with  thee  in  abundance 
29.    2  stones,  and  marble  stones  in  abundance 
29.  21  and  sacrifices  in  abundance  for  all  Israel 

2  Ch.    1.  15  that  (are)  in  the  vale  for  abundance 

2.  9  Even  to  prepare  me  timber  in  abundance 
4.  18  all  these  vessels  in  great  abundance 

9.  1  bare  spices,  and  gold  in  abundance 
9.  9  and  of  spices  great  abundance,  and 
9.  27  that  (are)  in  the  low  plains  in  abundance 

11.  23  he  gave  them  victual  in  abundance 

14.  15  aud  carried  away.. camels  in  abundance 

15.  9  for  they  fell  to  him.  .in  abundance 

17.  5  he  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance 

18.  1  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance 
18.    2  killed  sheep,  .for  him  in  abundance 
20.  25  they  found  among  them  in  abundance 
24.  11  Thusthey.. gathered moneyin  abundance 
29.  35  burnt-offerings  (were)  in  abundance,  with 
32.    5  made  darts  aud  shields  in  abundance 
32.  29  flocks  and  herds  in  abundance 

Neh.    9.  25  and  fruit  trees  in  abundance 
Psa.  37.  it  delight  themselves  in  the  abundance  of 
52.    7  but  trusted  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches 
72.    7  and  abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the 
Isa.     7.  22  And.  .for  the  abundance  of  milk  (that) 
Zech  14.  14  silver,  and  apparel,  in  great  abundance 

7.  To  make  abundant,  rt2~]  robah,  5. 

2  Sa.  12.  30  spoil  of  the  city  in  great  abundance 


ABUNDANCE 


10 


ACCOMPLISH 


8.  Satiety,  plenty,  fulness,  y$y  saba. 

Eccl.  5.  12  but  the  abundance  of  the  rich  will  not 

Q.£ase,  rest,  m?tf  shalvah. 

Eze.  16.  49  and  abundance  of  idleness  was  in  her  and 
10.  Abundance,  v$&  shepha. 

I)eut33.  19  they  shall  suck  (of)  the  abundance  of  the 
11. Abundance,  company,  nests'  shiphah. 

Job  22.  n  Or  darkness,  .and  abundance  of  waters 
38.  34  that  abundance  of  waters  may  cover  thee? 

Eze    26.  10  By  reason  of  the  abundance  of  his  horses 

ll.Number,  "i£pp  mispar. 

1  Ch.  22.    4  Also  cedar  trees  in  abundance  :  for  the 
13. Abundance,  a,Zp6T-ns  hadrotes. 

2  Co.  8.  20  no  man . .  blame  us  in  this  abundance 
ILPoiver,  ability,  Svi/a/xts  duuamis. 

Rev.  iS.    3  the  abundance  of  her  delicacies 
1 5.  Over ■■abundance,  irepiacreia.  perisseia. 

Horn.  5.  17  they  which  receive  abundance  of  grace 
2  Co.    S.    2  great  trial  of  affliction  the  abundance  of 

16. Superfluity,  ■Ktp'Mjvzvp.a.  perisseuma. 

Matt  12.  34  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
Luke  6.  45  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  his  mouth 
2 Co.   8. 14  your  abundance.. that  their  abundance 

17.  To  be  over  and  above,  ireptao-eva)  perisseuo. 

Marki2.  44  all.  .did  cast  in  of  their  abundance 

Lukei2.  15  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of 
21.    4  these  have  of  their  abundance  cast  in 
13. Excess,  over -abundance,  virepfioX-f}  huperbole. 

2  Co.  12.    7  exalted,  .through  the  abundance  of  the 
ABUND..^CE,  to  have — 
To  be  over  and  above,  irepicrcrevQ)  perisseuo. 

Matt??.  29  every  one.  .and  he  shall  have  abundance 
ABUNDANCE,  to  have  more  — 
To  be  over  and  above,  irepia-o'ev'a. 

Matt  13.  12  he  shall  hive  more  abundance  :  but  who 
ABUNDANCE,  to  bring  in  — 
To  make  abundant,  n^n  rabah,  5. 

2  Ch.  31.    5  Israel  brought  in  abundance  the  first 
ABUNDANCE,  in  — 
I. To  make  heavy,  weighty,  -qs  kabar,  5. 

Job    36.  31  he  giveth  meat  in  abundance 
'Z.Many,  much,  y\  rah. 

Esth.  1.    7  and  royal  wine  in  abundance,  according 
ABUNDANT  — 
I. Many,  much,  an  rab. 

Exod34.    6  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness 

Jer.    51.  13  abundant  in  treasures,  thine  end  is  come 
'2. Residue,  superfluity,  *ijr  yetJier. 

Isa.    56.  12  as  this  day,  (and)  much  more  abundant 
3. To  be  over  and  above,  ir€pt(T(reva>  fjerisseuo. 

2  Co.    9.  12  is  abundant  also  by  many  thanksgivings 
4.7*0  become  more,  increase,  irXeovafa  pleonazo. 

2  Co.    4.  15  for  your  sakes,  that  the  abundant  grace 
5. Many,  muck,  woAvs  joo^ws. 

1  Pe.    1.    3  which  according  to  bis  abundant  mercy 
ABUNDANT,  to  be  exceeding  — 
To  become  more  abundant,  virspTrhtovafa. 

1  Ti.     1.14  the  grace,  .was  exceeding  abundant  with 
ABUNDANT,  to  be  more  — 
To  be  over  and  above,  it  spiv  atom  perisseuo, 

Phil.    1.  26  your  rejoicing  may  be  more  abundant 
ABUNDANT,  more  — 
l.More  abundant,  Trepiero-oVepos  perissoteros. 

1  Co.  12.  23  bestow  more  abundant.. more  abundant 

12.  24  having  given  more  abundant  honour 
l.More  abundantly,  Tr€pL(r(roT€pws  p>erissoterds. 

2  Co.   7.  15  his  inward  affection  is  more  abundant 

11.  23  in  labours  more  abundant,  in  stripes 

ABUNDANTLY  — 

J.  To  break  forth,  n*i?  parach. 

Isa.  35.    2  It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and  rejoice 

I.Many,  much,  3n  rah. 

Num.ra.  11  and  the  water  came  out  abundantly,  and 
Job    36.  28  clouds,  .distil  upon  man  abundantly 

3. Multitude,  abundance,  :n  rob. 

1  Ch.  12.  40  and  oxen,  and  sheep  abundantly ;  for 

[See  also  22.  5,  8;  2  Ch.  31.  5.] 
4.  To  make  many,  nyi  rabah  5. 

Tsa.  55.    7.  he  will  abundantly  {lit,  multiply  to)  par. 
o.Xnto  abundance,  e's  -Kepia-atia  eis  pcrisseian. 

2  Co.  10.  15  according  to  our  rule  abundantly 
6. Richly,  vAovo-icos  2>lousib~s. 

Titus  3.    6  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus 

sPe.    1.  11  entrance  shall  be  ministered.,  abundantly 
ABUNDANTLY  above,  exceeding  — 
Over,  above,  unep  £k  wepHro-ov, 

Eph.    3.  20  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above 
ABUNDANTLY,  more  — 
1. Above  the  conDrion,  irepiaa6$. 

John  10.  10  might  have  (it)  more  abundantly 


2.  More  abundant,  7repio'a"o'Te/>os,-ws\  p>en'iS5°ieros- 

x  Co.  15.  10  I  laboured  more  abund.  than  ;  Heb.  6.  7. 

2  Co.    1.  12  more  abundantly ;  2, 4;  12.15;  lTh.  2- 17* 

[See  also  Bread,  bring  forth,  drink,  increase,  harden. 

satisfied,  utter,  water,  weep.] 

ABUSE,  to  — 

1.7*0  do,  roll  oneself  on  or  upon,  VbjJ  alal,  7. 
Judg  19.  25  they  knew  her,  and  abused  her  all  the 
1  Sa.  31.    4  lest  these  uucircumcised.  .abuse  me 
1  Ch.  10.    4  lest  these  uncircumcised.  .abuse  me 

2.7b  use  badly,  Karaxpao/xat  katachraomai. 
1  Co.  7.  31  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing 

9. 18  that  I  abuse  not  my  power  in  the  gospel 

ABUSERS  of  themselves  with  mankind  — 
Lying  with  a  male,  apo-evonuirns  arsenokoites. 
1  Co.    6.    9  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind. 

AC'-CAD,  -13N  castle,  fortress. 

A  city  in  the  land  of  Shinar  (near  Babel,  Erech,  and 
Calneh),  supposed  by  the  Targums  to  be  Nisibis  in  Meso- 
potamia. In  the  LX£.  it  is  called  Archad,  and  in  the 
Talmud,  Bashkar. 

Gen.  10.  10  begin,  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel,  and. .A. 
ACCEPT,  to  — 
1.7*0  reduce  to  ashes,  \u^\  daslien,  3. 

Psa.  20.  3  Remember  all  thy  offerings,  and  accept 
2. 7*o  take,  receive,  rip1?  laqach. 

Exod  22.  1 1  and  the  owner  of  it  shall  accept  (thereof) 
3.7*0  lift  up,  a'yi  nasa. 

Gen.  19.  21  See,  I  have  accepted  thee  concerning  this 
32.  20  peradventure  he  will  accept  of  me 

1  Sa.  25.  35  and  have  accepted  thy  person 

Job   13.    8  Will  ye  accept  his  person?  will  ye  contend 

13.  10  if  ye  do  secretly  accept  persons 

32.  21  Let  me  not,  I  pray  you,  accept  any  man's 
34.  19  (How  much  less  to  him)  that  accepteth 
42.    8  for  him  will  I  accept :  lest  I  deal  with  you 

42.  9  them :  the  Lord  also  accepted  Job 
Psa.  82.    2  and  accept  the  persons  of  the  wicked? 
Prov  18.    5  (It  is)  not  good  to  accept  the  person  of  the 
Mai.    1.    8  will  he.  .accept  thy  person?  saith  the  L. 

4.  To  smell,  nn  ruach,  5. 

1  Sa.  26.  19  let  him  accept  an  offering :  but  if  (they  be) 
5. 7*o  he  pleased,  nyn  ratsah. 

Lev.  26.  41  and  they  theu  accept  of  the  punishment 
26.  43  and  they  shall  accept  of  the  punishment 
Deut33.  11  and  accept  the  work  of  his  hands 

2  Sa.  24.  23  Arauuah  said.  .The  Lord  thy  God  accept 
Psa. 119. 108  Accept,  I  beseech  thee,  the  free-will 
Eccl.  9.    7  for  God  now  accepteth  thy  works 

Jer.   14. 10  therefore  the  Lord  doth  not  accept  them 

14.  12  I  will  not  accept  them:  but  I  will  consume 
Eze.  20.  40  there  will  I  accept  them,  and  there  will  I 

20.  41  I  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet  savour 

43.  27  and  I  will  accept  you,  saith  the  Lord  God 
Hos.    8.  13  (but)  the  Lord  accepteth  them  not ;  now 
Amos  5.  22  I  will  not  accept  (them) ;  neither  will  I 
Mai.    1.  10  neither  will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your 

1.  13  should  I  accept  this  of  your  hand? 

6. 7*o  receive  off,  from,  aTroBexofxai  apodechomai. 

Acts  24.  3  We  accept  (it)  always,  and  iu  all  places 
7. 7*o  receive,  5e'xo/icu  dechomai. 

2  Co.  8.  17  For  indeed  he  accepted  the  exhortation 
11.    4  or  another,  .which  ye  have  not  accepted 

S.Tc  receive,  take  hold  of,  \a/i^duw  lambano. 

Luke  20.  21  neither  acceptest  thou  the  person(of  any) 
Gal.     2.    6  God  accepteth  no  man's  person 

9. 7*o  receive  to  (oneself),  Trpoabexop-ai  prosdechomai. 
Heb.  11.  35  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance 

ACCEPTABLE  — 

1.7*0  be  chosen,  selected,  "in?  bachar,  2. 

Prov.21.    3  To  do  justice,  .(is)  more  acceptable  to  the 

2. Pleasure,  delight,  |"Dn  chephets. 

Eccl.  12. 10  sought  to  find  out  acceptable  words :  and 

3.  Pleasure,  good  pleasure,  ps*i  ratson. 

Lev.  22.  20  for  it  shall  not  be  acceptable  for  you 
Psa.  69.  13  (in)  an  acceptable  time :  O  God,  in  the 
Prov.  10.  32  the  righteous  know  what  is  acceptable 
Isa.   49.    8  In  an  acceptable  time  have  I  heard  thee 
58.    5  wilt  thou  call  this,  .an  acceptable  day  to 
61.    2  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Jer.     6.  20  burnt-offerings  (are)  not  acceptable,  nor 

i.A  rr.ptable,  receivable  from,  anSSeKros  apodektos. 

1  Ti.    2.    3  this  (is)  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight 
5.    4  their  parents ;  for  that  is . .  acceptable 
^.Acceptable,  receivable,  S^nrds  dektos. 

Luke  4.  19  To  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the 

Phil.  4.  18  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to 
§.  Well -2)1  easing,  euapetTTo?  euctrestos. 

Uom.12.    1  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable 

2.  2  what  (is)  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and 
14.  18  he  that..serveth  Christ  (is)  acceptable 

Eph.   5.  10  Proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord 

7.  Very  acceptable,  tvirpSo-o'eKTos  euprosdektos. 
Rom. 15.  16  the  offering  up.  .might  be  acceptable 
1  Pe.    2.    5  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God 

S.Grace,  kind7i#ss,  x&Pls  charis. 

1  Pe.    2.  20  take  it  patiently,  this  (is)  acceptable 


ACCEPTABLE,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  p>leascd,  nyi  ratsah. 

I*eut33.  24  let  him  be  acceptable  to  his  brethren,  and 
2,Pleasure,  good  pleasure,  jisn  ratson. 

Psa.   19.  14  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  0  Lord,  my 

Prov,  10.  32  the  righteous  know  wiiat  is  acceptable 
3. 7*o  be  fair,  "15^  shejihar 

Dan.  4.  27  let  my  counsel  be  acceptable  unto  thee 
ACCEPTABLY  — 
Pleasingly,  euapeo-Tces  euarestds. 

Heb.  12.  28  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably 
ACCEPTANCE  — 
Pleasure,  good  pleasure,  pin  rodson. 

Isa.   60.    7  they  shall  come  up  with  acceptance  on 
ACCEPTATION  — 
Full  reception,  hiroZox'h  ajjodoche. 

1  Ti.    1.  15  faithful,  .and  worthy  of  all  acceptation 

4.    g  faithful,  .and  worthy  of  all  acceptation 

ACCEPTED  (of)  — 

1. Acceptable,  receivable,  o*€kt6s  dektos. 

Luke  4.  24  No  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own 
Acts  io.  35  worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with 

2  Co.    6.    2  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted 

2.  Well  pleasing,  evdpeo-ros  euarestos. 

2  Co.   5.   9  or  absent,  we  may  be  accepted  of  him 

3.  Very  acceptable,  einrpoVSe/cros-  eup>rosdek'tos. 
Rom. 15.  31  my  service,  .may  be  accepted  of  the 

2  Co.   6.    2  behold,  now(is)  the  accepted  time;  behold 
8.  12  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath 
ACCEPTED,  be  — 
A  lifting  up,  nx^  s'-eth. 

Gen.    4.    7  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted?  , 
ACCEPTED,  to  be  — 
1 .  7*o  be  good,  D&;  yatab. 

Lev.  10.  19  should  it  have  been  accepted  iu  the  sight 

1  Sa.  18.    5  and  he  was  accepted  in  the  sight  of  all 

2. 7*o  fall,  Sty  naphal. 

Jer.  37.  20  let  my  supplication,  .be  accepted  before 
42.    2  Let.  .our  supplication  be  accepted  before 
3.7*0  be  pleased,  nyn  ratsah,  2. 

Lev.    1.    4  and  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him  to  make 
7-  18  it  shall  not  be  accepted,  neither  shall  it 
[Sve  also  19.  7 ;  22.  23,  25,  27.] 
4. 7*o  be  2>leasing,  pleased  with,  rrfiratsah. 

.Esth.  10.  3  and  accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  fere. 
5.  Pleasure,  good  pleasure,  ps~j  ratson. 

rxod2$.  38  that  they  may  be  accepted  before  the 
Lev.  22.  21  it  shall  be  perfect  to  be  accepted ;  there 
23.  11  before  the  Lord,  to  be  accepted  for  you 
Isa.  56.    7  then*  sacrifices  (shall  be)  accepted  upon 
ACCEPTED,  to  make  — 

7*o  make  gracious  or  acceptable,  ^apiTo'aj  charitoo. 
Eph.    1.    6  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved 
ACCESS  — 
A  leading  unto,  irpoaaycoyrj  prosagdge. 

Rom.  5.    2  By  whom  also  we  have  access  by  faith 
Eph.    2.  18  through  him  we  both  have  access  by  one 
3.  12  In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access 

AC'-CHO,  isy  compressed. 

The  city  JPtolemais,  in  isher,  on  the  coast  of  the  Medi- 
terranean or  Great  Sea,  now  called  Akka  and  St  Jean 
d'Acre,  in  lat.  320  54',  long.  350  6'  E. 

Judg.  1.  31  did  Asher  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  A. 
ACCOMPANY,  to  — 
1.7*0  come  with,  tpxof.iat  avv  erchomai  sun. 

Acts  11.  12  these  six  brethren  accompanied  me,  and 
2. 7*0  have,  hold,  keep,  e^w  echo. 

Heb.    6.    9  things  that  accompany  salvation,  though 
3.7*0  send  forward,  TrpoTr^jx-woi  propemptd. 

Acts  20.  38  they  accompanied  him  unto  the  ship 
4.7*o  folhno  with,  a-vviirofxat  suneptomai. 

Acts  20.    4  there  accompanied  him  unto  Asia  Sopater 
5.7*0  come  with,  0-vi/cpxop.at  sunerchomai. 

Acts  10.  23  certain  brethren  from  Joppa  accompanied 
ACCOMPANYING  — 
With,  along  with,  ny  im. 

2  Sa.    6.   4  they  brought  it.  .accompanying  the  ark 

ACCOMPLISH,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  completed,  fmished,  n?3  kalah,  3. 

Lam.  4.  11  The  Lord  bath  accomplished  his  fury 
Eze.    4.    6  And  when  thou  hast  accomplished  them 

6.  12  thus  will  I  accomplish  my  fury  upon  them 

7.  8  and  accomplish  mine  anger  upon  thee 
13.  15  Thus  will  I  accomplish  my  wrath  upon 
20.    8  I  will  pour  out  my  fury,  .to  accomplish 
20.  21  to  accomplish  my  anger  against  them  in 

Dan.  12.    7  when  he  shall  have  accomplished  to 

2.7*0  make  full,  fulfil,  a1*?  male,  3. 

Dan.    9.   2  he  would  accomplish  seventy  years  in  the 

3.  To  do,  execute,  make,  n";pjj  asah. 

1  Ki.    5.   9  and  thou  shalt  accomplish  my  desire 
4. To  separate,  distinguish,  tq^pala,  3. 

Lev.  22.  21  off ereth.  .unto  the  Lord  to  accomplish 


ACCOMPLISHED 


11 


ACCURSED 


5. To  establish,  confirm,  raise  apt  D?p  gum,  5. 

Jer.  44.  25  ye  will  surely  accomplish  your  vows,  and 

6.  To  he  pleased,  nyi  ratsah. 

Job    14.    6  till  he  shall  accomplish,  as  an  hireling 

7.  To  be  perfected,  JtmsJted,  c?ri  tamam. 

Psa.  64.    6  they  accomplish  a  diligent  search 
S.Itcaine  that  ice  perfected,  eyevero  Tjp.a$  i^aprlaai. 

Acts  21.    5  when  we  had  accomplished  those  days 
9. To  end  f  idly,  £irtTe\<Ea}  epiteleo. 

Heb.  9.    6  into  the  first  tabernacle,  accomplishing 

1  Pe,   5.    9  the  same  afilictious  are  accomplished  in 

lO.^o  be  or  become  full,  Tr\r}dw  pletlw. 

Luke  1.  23  of  his  ministration  were  accomplished 
2.    6  the  days  were  accomplished  that  she 
2.  21  when  eight  days  were  accomplished  for 
2.  22  when  the  days,  .were  accomplished,  they 

ll.To  make  full,  fill  out,  ir\r\p6o3  pleroo. 

Luke  9.  31  his  decease  which  he  should  accomplish 
12.7b  end,  complete,  T€\e'w  teteo. 

Luke  12.  50  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished  ! 
18.  31  all  things,  .shall  be  accomplished 
22.  37  this,  .must  yet  be  accomplished  in  me 

John  19.  28  that  all  things  were  now  accomplished 
ACCOMPLISHED,  to  be  — 
1.7b  he,  exist,  rrn  hayah,  2. 

Prov.  13.  19  The  desire  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the 
2. To  he  completed,  finished,  n^3  kalah. 

2  Ch.  36.  22  that  the  word,  .might  be  accomplished 
Eze.  5.  13  Thus  shall  mine  anger  be  accomplished 
Dan.  11.  36  till  the  indignation  be  accomplished 

3.  To  he  full,  filled  out,  N^a  male. 

Esth.  2.  12  days  of  their  purifications  accomplished 
Isa.   40.    2  cry.  .that  her  warfare  is  accomplished 
Jer.  25.  12  when  seventy  years  are  accomplished 
25.  34  days  of.  .dispersions  are  accomplished 
29. 10  That  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished 

4.7*0  be  filled,  completed,  nSd  male,  2. 

Job    15.  32  It  shall  be  accomplished  before  his  time 

5. 7*o  he  perfected,  consummated,  D!?£  iamam. 
Lam.   4.  22  punishment  of  thine,  .is  accomplished 

ACCOMPLISHMENT  — 

Entire  fulfilment,  €KTrXi)pcoa-Ls  ekplerOsis. 

Acts  21.  26  to  signify  the  acjomplishment  of  the 

ACCORD  — 

1.  Mouth,  na  peh. 

Josh.  9.    2  gathered,  .to  fight,  .with  one  accord 

2.  Joint-soul,  Gvfxtyvxvs  sumjysuclios, 

Phil.   2.    2  having  the  same  love,  .of  one  accord 

ACCORD,  of  one's  own  — 

l.Choosing  of  himself  avdaipsros  autliairetos. 

2  Co.    S.  17  of  his  own  accord  he  went  unto  you 
2.Moving  of  itself ,  avrofiaros  automatos. 

Acts  12.  10  opened  to  them  of  his  own  accord 

ACCORD,  with  one  — 

Like-minded,  6p.odufj.ad6v  homotlmmadon. 

Acts    1.  14  all  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer 
2.    1  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  one 
2.  46  they,  continuing  daily  with  one  accord 

4.  24  lifted,  up  their  voice,  .with  one  accord 

5.  12  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  S.'s  porch 

7.  57  and  ran  upon  him  with  one  accord 

8.  6  the  people  with  one  accord  gave  heed 
12.  20  they  came  with  one  accord  to  him,  and 
15.  25  good,  .being  assembled  with  one  accord 

18.  12  Jews  made  insurrection  with  one  accord 

19.  29  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  theatre 

ACCORDING-  as  — 
l.The  mouth,  .13 peh. 

Mai.    2.   9  according  as  ye  have  not  kept  my 
2.Even  as,  because  that,  ko.66ti  kathoti. 

Acts    4.  35  unto  every  man  according  as  he  had  need 
3. Even,  as,  like  as,  kclQws  kathos. 

Rom.  11.    8  According  as  it  is  written,  God  hath 

1  Co.    1.  31  That,  according  as  it  is  written,  He  that 

2  Co.    9.    7  Every  man  according  as  he  purposeth  in 
Eph.    1.    4  According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him 

LAs,  that,  in  order  thai,  on  Vie  ground  that,  o>$  hos. 
Rom.  12.    3  but  to  think  soberly,  according  as  God 
2  Pe.    1.    3  According  as  his  divine  power  hath 
Rev.  22.  12  (is)  with  me,  to  give  every  man  accord,  as 

5.  Down,  according  to,  Kara,  kata. 

2  Co.   4.  13  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  according  as  it  is 

ACCORDING  to  — 

I. To,  unto,  Sx  el. 

Josh.  15.  13  according  to  the  commandment  of  the 
2.Sufnciency,  enough,  *i  dai. 

Deut.25.   2  to  be  beaten,  .according  to  his  fault 
Z.Even  as,  in?  kemo. 

Zech.  5.    3  shall  be  cut  off.  .according  to  it 
4. As  on,  as  upon,  Sj.'b  k'-ol. 

Isa.    59.  18  According  to  (their)  deeds,  accordingly  he 
5. Oh,  upon,  over  by  a.L 

Gen.  43.    7  we  told  him  according  to  the  tenor  of 


(y.The  mouth,  12^  lepihi. 

Gen.  47. 12  with  bread,  according  to  (their)  families 
Exod  12.    4  every  man  according  to  his  eating 

16. 16  Gather  of  it  every  man  according  to  his 
16.  18  they  gathered  every  man  according  to 
16.  21  every  man  according  to  his  eating :  and 
Lev.  25.  16  according  to  the  multitude,  .according 
25.  51  according  unto  them  he  shall  give  again 

25.  52  according  unto  his  years  shall  he  give 
27.    8  according  to  his  ability  that  vowed  shall 
27.  16  thy  estimation  shall  be  according  to  the 
27.  18  shall  reckon,  .according  to  the  years 

Num.  6.  21  according  to  the  vow  which  he  vowed 
7.    5  to  every  man  according  to  his  service 
7.    7  sons  of  Gershon,  according  to  their 
7.    8  sons  of  Merari,  according  uuto  their 

26.  54  to  every  one  shall,  .be  given  according  to 
26.  56  According  to  the  lot  shall  the  possession 
35.    8  according  to  his  inheritance  which 

Deut  17.  10  And  thou  shalt  do  according  to  the 

Josh. 18.    4  and  describe  it  according  to  the 

1  Ki.  17.    1  there  shall  not  be  dew.  .but  according  to 

1  Ch.  12.  23  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

2  Ch.  31.    2  every  man  according  to  his  service,  the 

7. From,  out  of,  \o  min, 

Ezra   6. 14  according  to  the.  .and  according  to  the 

S. Before,  over-against,  73$  qobel. 

Ezra   6. 13  according  to  that  which  Darius  the  king 

9.Accordi?ig  to,  by,  Kara,  kata  (ac.) 

Matt.  2.  16  according  to  the  time  which  he 

9.  29  According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you 
16.  27  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his 
25.  15  to  every  mau  according  to  his  several 
Mark  7.    5  Why  walk  not  thy  disciples  according  to 
Luke  1.    9  According  to  the  custom  of  the  priesfs 

1.  38  be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy  word 

2.  22  when  the  days,  .according  to  the 

2.  24  to  offer  a  sacrifice  according  to  that 
2.  29  depart  in  peace,  according  to  thy  word 
2.  39  performed  all  things  according  to  the 

23.  56  according  to  the  commandment 

John   7.  24  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance 

18.  31  and  judge  him  according  to  your  law 
Acts    2.  30  [fruit  of  his  loins,  according  to  the  flesh] 

7.  44  make  it  according  to  the  fashion  that  he 
13.  23  hath  God  according  to  (his)  promise 

22.    3  taught  according  to  the  perfect  manner 
22.  12  Ananias,  a  devout  mau  according  to  the 

24.  6  [would  have  judged  according  to  our  law] 
Rom.  1.    3  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the 

1.  4  Son  of  God.  .according  to  the  spirit 

2.  2  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to 
2.    6  render  to  every  man  according  to  his 

2.  16  by  Jesus  Christ  according  to  my  gospel 
4.  18  according  to  that  which  was  spoken 

8.  27  intercession,  .according  to  (the  will  of) 

8.  28  who  are  the  called  according  to  (his) 

9.  3  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh 

9.  11  the  purpose  of  Ged,  according  to  election 

10.  2  zeal,  .but  not  according  to  knowledge 

11.  5  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of 

12.  3  according  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every 

12.  6  according  to  the  grace,  .according  to  the 

15.  5  like  minded,  .according  to  Christ  Jesus 

16.  25  according  to  my.  .according  to  the 

16.  26  prophets,  according  to  the  commandment 

1  Co.    3.    8  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own 

3.  10  According  to  the  grace  of  God  which  is 
15.  3  Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 
15.    4  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the 

2  Co.    1.  17  do  I  purpose  according  to  the  flesh 

10.    2  as  if  we  walked  according  to  the  flesh 
10.  13  measure,  but  according  to  the  measure 

10.  15  enlarged  by  you  according  to  our  rule 

11.  15  end  shall  be  according  to  their  works 

13.  10  sharpness,  according  to  the  power  which 
Gal.     1.    4  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our 

3.  29  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise 
Eph.  1.    5  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will 
1.    7  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches 
1.    9  the  mystery  of  his  will,  according  to  his 
1.  11  being  predestinated  according  to  the 

1.  19  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of 

2.  2  in  time  past  ye  walked  according  to  the 

3.  7  Whereof  I  was  made  a  minister,  accord,  to 
3, 11  According  to  the  eternal  purpose  which 
3.  16  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 

3.  20  according  to  the  power  that  worketh 

4.  7  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure 
4,  16  according  to  the  effectual  working  in  the 
4.  22  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the 

6.    s  (your)  masters  according  to  the  flesh 
Phil.    1.  20  According  to  my  earnest  expectation  and 

3.  21  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is 

4.  19  supply  all  your  need  according  to  his 
Col.     1.  11  might,  according  to  his  glorious  power 

1.  25  a  minister,  according  to  the  dispensation 
1.  29  I  also  labour,  striving  according  to  his 

3.  22  Servants,  obey,  .masters  according  to  the 
2  Th.  1.  12  according  to  the  grace  of  our  God  and 

1  Ti.     1.  11  According  to  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 

1.  18  son  Timothy,  according  to  the  prophecies 
6.    3  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness 

2  Ti.     1     1  according  to  the  promise  of  life  which  is 

1.    8  gospel  according  to  the  power  of  God 

1 .  9  not  according  to  our  works,  but  accord,  to 

2.  8  Jesus . .  was  raised . .  according  to  my 

4.  14.  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  works 
Titus  1.    1  according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect 


Titus  1.    3  uuto  me  according  to  the  commandment 
3.    5  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by 
3.    7  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of 

Heb.   2.    4  gifts,  .according  to  his  own  will? 

7.  5  according  to  the  law,  that  is,  of  their 

8.  4  that  otter  gifts  according  to  the  law 
8.    5  make  all  things  according  to  the 

8.  9  Not  according  to  the  covenant  that  I 

9.  19  spoken,  .to  all  the  people  according  to 
Jas.     2.    8  royal  law  according  to  the  scripture 

1  Pe.    1.    2  Elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge 

1.  3  which  according  to  his  abundant  mercy 
1. 17  who.  .judgeth  according  to  every  man's 

3.  7  dwell  with  (them)  according  to  knowledge 

4.  6  judged  according  to  men.  .according  to 
4.  19  sutler  according  to  the  will  of  God 

2  Pe.   3. 13  we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for 

3.  15  Paul  also  according  to  the  wisdom 

1  Jo.    5.  14  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will 
Rev.    2.  23  I  will  give,  .according  to  your  works 

{See  also  18.  6;  20.  12,  13.] 
10. According  to,  KaOws  kathos. 

Acts  11.  29  every  man  according  to  his  ability 
11.  Toward,  Trp6s  pros. 

Luke  12.  47  neither  did  according  to  his  will,  shall 

2  Co.    5.  10  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
Gal.     2.  14  walked  not  uprightly  according  to  the 

ACCORDING  to  that  — 
According  to  that,  KaBo  katho. 

2  Co.    8. 12  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath 
ACCORDINGLY  — 
As  on-f  or  upon,  *?j?3  1^-al. 

Isa.    59. 18  According  to  (then-)  deeds,  accordingly  he 
ACCOUNT  — 

1.  Thought,  device,  reckoning,  p3*frr   cheshbon. 

Eccl.   7.  27  one  by  one,  to  fiud  out  the  account 
2. Taste,  reason,  Di'O  taam. 

Dan.    6.    2  that  the  princes  might  give  accounts 
3. Number,  account,  ispp  mispar. 

1  Ch.  27.  24  neither  was.  .put  in  the  account  of  the 
■^.Inspection,  oversight,  nip?  pequddah. 

2  Ch.  26.  11  the  number  of  their  account  by  the 
5,  Word,  reckoning,  \6yos  logos. 

Matt  12.  36  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of 

iS.  23  king,  which  would  take  account  of  his 
Luke  1 6.    2  give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship ;  for 
Acts  19.  40  we  may  give  an  account  of  this  concourse 
Rom.14,  12  every  oue  of  us  shall  give  account  of 
[See  also  Phil.  4.  17 ;    Heb.  13.  17 ;  1  Pe.  4.  5.  j 
ACCOUNT,  to  — 
1. To  reckon t  account,  Xoyi^opaL  logizomai. 

Heb.  11.  iq  Accounting  that  God  (was)  able  to  raise 

2.  To  go  before,,  guide,    think,  yyeo/xat  hegeomai.   , 

2  Pe.    3.  15  And  account  (that)  the  long-suffering  of 
ACCOUNT,  to  give  — 
T'o  answer,  respond,  njj;  anah. 

Job   33.  13  he  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his 
ACCOUNT  of,  to  make  — 
1.7V)  think,  devise,  reckon,  2pn  chashab,  3. 

Psa.  144.  3  of  man,  that  thou  makest  account  of  him  i 
2.To  make  a  reckoning,  Aoyi£op.ai  logizomai. 

1  Co.   4.    1  Let  a  man  so  account  of  us,  as  of  the 
ACCOUNTED,  to  be  - 
l.To  be  thought,  reckoned,  2?'n  chashab,  2. 

Deut.  2.  11  Which  also  were  accounted  giants,  as  the 

2.  20  That  also  was  accounted  a  land  of  giants 

1  Ki.  10.  21  it  was  nothing  accounted  of  in  the  days 

2  Ch.  9.  20  it  was  (not)  anything  accounted  of  in  the 
Isa.     2.  22  for  wherein  is  he  to  be  accounted  of? 

2.  To  be  numbered,  i?d  saphar,  4. 

Psa.  22.  30  it  shall  be  accounted  to  the  Lord  for  a 

3.  To  appear,  have  the  appearance,  5o/cea>  dokeo. 

Mark  10.  42  they  which  are  accounted  to  rule  over 
Luke  22.  24  which  of  them  should  be  accounted  the 

4.  To  make  an  account  of  \oyl(o/j.aL  logizomai. 

Rom.  8.  36  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for.. .Gal.  3.  6. 
ACCURSED  — 
\.A  devoted  thing,  Din  cherem. 

Josh.  6.  17  And  the  city  shall  be  accursed,  (even)  it 
7  12  their  enemies,  because  they  were  accursed 
7.  12  except  ye  destroy  the  accursed  from 

2.A  thing  lightly  esteemed,  n^p  qelalah. 

Deut  21.  23  for  he  that  is  hanged  (is)  accursed  of  God 

3. A  thing  put  up,  devoted,  auddefia  anathema. 
Rom.  9.    3  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ 
1  Co.  12.    3  no  man.  .calleth  Jesus  accursed:  and 
Gal.     1.    8  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be  accursed 
1.    9  ye  have  received,  let  him  be  accursed 

ACCURSED,  to  be  — 

To  be  lightly  esteemed,  !&j?  qalal,  4. 

Isa.    65.  20  but  the  sinner,  .shall  be  accursed 

ACCURSED,  to  make  — 

T'o  devote  (to  God  or  destruction),  Din  charam,  5. 

Josh.  6.  18  lest  ye  make  (yourselves)  accursed,  when 
ACCURSED  THING  — 
A  devoted  thing,  Dirt  cherem. 

Josh.  6. 18  keep  (yourselves)  from  the  accursed  thing 


ACCUSATION 


12 


ACT 


Josh.  6.  i3  when  ye  take  of  the  accursed  thing 

7.    1  committed  a  trespass  in  the  accursed  thing 
7.    1  for  Achan.  .took  of  the  accursed  thing 
7.  11  have  even  taken  of  the  accursed  thing 
7.  13  an  accursed  thing,  .the  accursed  thing 
7.  15  he  that  is  taken  with  the  accursed  thing 
22.  20  commit  a  trespass  in  the  accursed  thing 

1  Ch.   2.    7  Aehar.  .who  trans,  in  the  thing  accursed 

ACCUSATION  — 

1. Accusation,  n;pb'  sitnah. 

Ezra   4.    6  wrote  they  (unto  him)  an  accusation 

2.Cause,  matter,  atria  aitia. 

Matt  27.  37  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation 
Markis.  26  the  superscription  of  his  accusation  was 
Acts  25.  18  they  brought  noue  accusation  of  such 

Z.A  speaking  down,  tcaTTjyopia  kategoria. 
Luke  6.    7  that  they  might  find  an  accusation 
John  18.  29  What  accusation  bring  ye  against  this 

1  Ti.     5.  19  Against  an  elder  receive  not  an  accusation 

4.Judgment,  KpivLs  krisis. 

2  Pe.    2.  11  bring  not  railing  accusation  against 
Jude         9  durst  not  bring,  .a  railing  accusation 

ACCUSATION,  to  take  by  false  — 

To  disclose  about  figs,  avKocpavrtw  sukophanteo. 

Luke  19.    8  from  any  man  by  false  accusation,  I 
ACCUSE,  to  — 
1.7fc  eat  pieces  torn  off,  py-ip  Ssk  akhal  qartsin. 

Dan.    3.    8  Chaldeans  came  near,  and  accused  the 
6.  24  brought  those  menwhich  had  accused  D. 

2.  To  use  tlie  tongue  freely,  ]%h  lashan  5. 

Pro  v.  30.  10  Accuse  not  a  servant  unto  his  master 
3.7*0  call  in,  syKaKw  engkaleo. 

Acts  23.  28  wherefore  they  accused  him,  I  brought 
23.  29  Whom  I  perceived  to  be  accused  of 
26.    2  touching  all.  .whereof  I  am  accused  of 

26.  7  For  which  hope's  sake.  .1  am  accused  of 
4. To  speak  down,  Karnyoptot  kategored. 

Matt  12.  10  sabbath  days?  that  they  might  accuse 

27.  12  when  he  was  accused  of  the  chief  priests 
Mark  3.    2  sabbath  day ;  that  they  might  accuse 

15.    3  the  chief  priests  accused  him  of  many 
Luken.  54  something,  .[that  they  might  accuse  him] 
23.    2  they  began  to  accuse  him,  saying.  We 
23.  10  scribes  stood  and  vehemently  accused 

23.  14  touching  those  things  whereof  ye  accuse 
John  5.  45  I  will  accuse  you.  .that  accuseth  you 

8.    6  [tempting,  .they  might  have  to  accuse] 
Acts  22.  30  known.. wherefore  he  was  accused  of  the 

24.  2  Tertullus  began  to  accuse  (lrim).  saying 
24.    8  knowledge  of  all . .  whereof  we  accuse 

24.  13  prove  the  things  whereof  they  now  accuse 

25.  5  go  down  with  (me),  and  accuse  this  man 
25.  11  whereof  these  accuse  me,  no  man  may 
25.  16  before  that  he  which  is  accused  have  the 

28.  19  not  that  I  had  ought  to  accuse  my  nation 
Rom.  2.  15  thoughts  the  mean  while  accusing  or  else 
Rev.  12.  10  which  accused  them  before  our  God  day 

ACCUSE  falsely,  to  — 

l.To  injure,  harass,  insult,  i-nnp^a^oo  epereazo. 

1  Pe.    3.  16  may  be  ashamed  that  falsely  accuse  your 
2, 7*0  disclose  about  figs,  (rvKotyavrtw  sukophanted. 

Luke  3  14  no  man,  neither  accuse  (any)  falsely 
ACCUSED  — 
Cutler  accusation,  iv  KaTwyopla  en  kategoria. 

Titus  1.    6  having  faithful  children,  not  accused  of 
ACCUSED,  be  — 
To  be  thrust  through,  Sta$d\ko^.at  diaballomai. 

Luke  16.    1  the  same  was  accused  unto  him  that  he 
ACCUSER  — 
One  who  speaks  down,  Karyyopos  kategoros. 

John  8.  10  [where  are  those  thine  accusers?  hathl 

Acts  23.  30  gave  commandment  to  his  accusers  also 
23-  35  I  w'h  hear  thee,  .when  thine  accusers 

24.  8  [Commanding  his  accusers  to  come  unto] 

25.  16  have  the  accusers  face  to  face,  and  have 
25.  18  when  the  accusers  stood  up,  they 

Rev.  12.  10  for  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast 
ACCUSER,  false  — 
A  thrnster  through,  SiajSuAor  didbolos. 

2TL    3.    3  Without  natural  affection. .  false  accusers 

Titus  2.    3  not  false  accusers,  not  given  to  much 
ACCUSTOMED  — 
Taught,  trained,  "HB^  limmud. 

Jer.    13.  23  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil 
A-CEL-DA'-MA,  *AKe\$aiia  portion  of  blood. 
The  piece  of  ground  purchased  with  the  thirty  pieces  of 
silver  which  Judas  received  for  betraying  Jesus,  but 
which  were  afterwards  thrown  down  by  him  In  his  re- 
morse. 

Acts    1.  ig  that  field  is  called.  .A.,  that  is  to  say 
A-CHAI'-A,  'A^ofo  land  of  Achaicus. 
Classic  name  of  that  part  of  Greece  which  lies  along 
the  s.  cast  of  the  Gulf  of  Corinth.    This  name  is  some- 
times used  tor  the  whole  of  Greece,  and  Corinth  was  its 
capital. 

Acts  18.  12  And  when  Gallio  was  the  deputy  of  \ 

18.  27  And  when  he  was  disposed  to  pass  int..  \ 

19.  2t  he  had  passed  through  Macedonia  and  \. 


Rom  15.  26  it  hath  pleased  them  of  Macedonia  and  A. 

16.    5  Epametus.  .the  tirstfruits  of  [A.]  unto 

1  Co.  16.  15  Stephanas,  that  it  is  the  tirstfruits  of  A. 

2  Co.    1.    1  with  all  the  saints  which  are  iu  all  A. 

9.    2  I  boast,  .that  A.  was  ready  a  year  ago 
11.  10  stop  me  of  this  boasting,  .regions  of  A 
1  Th.  1.    7  So  that  ye  were  ensamples  to  all.  .in.  .A. 
i.    8  sounded  out  the  word,  .not  only  iu.  .A. 

A-CHAI'-CUS,  'Axa'iKos  belonging  to  Achaia. 
A  Corinthian  who  visited  Paul  at  Philippi. 

1  Co.  16.  17  glad  of  the  coining  of  Stephanas,  .and  A. 

A '-CHAN,  A'-CHAR,  joy,  Ipu  trouble. 
One  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  who,  at  the  destruction  of 
Jericho  by  Joshua,  stole  part  of  the  spoil  and  hid  it, 
and  was  put  to  death  in  cousequeuce,  B.C.  1451. 
Josh.  7.    1  for  A.  the  son  of  Carmi.  .took  of  the 
7.  18  and  A.,  the  son  of  Carmi.  .was  taken 
7.  19  And  Joshua  said  unto  A.,  My  sou,  give 
7.  20  And  A.  answered  Joshua,  and  said 
7.  24  And  Joshua,  .took  A.  the  son  of  Zerah 
22.  20  Did  not  A.  the  son  of  Zerah  commit  a 
1  Ch.    2.    7  And  the  sons  of  Carmi;  A.,  the  troubler 

A'-CHAZ,  *Axa£  inx  he  holds. 

The  Greek  form  of  Ahaz,  oue  of  the  kings  of  Judah. 

Matt.  1.    9  Joatham  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat  Ezekias 
ACH'-BOR,  ii3?y  a  mouse. 

1.  Father  of  the  seventh  Edomite  kiug. 

Gen.  36.  38  Saul  died,  and  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  A, 
36.  39  And  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  A.  died,  and 

1  Ch.    1.  49  Baal-hanan  the  sou  of  A.  reigned  in  his 

2.  One  of  Josiah's  messengers  sent  to  inquire  concern- 
ing the  denunciation  of  wrath  against  the  national  sins, 
as  found  recorded  in  the  book  of  the  law  discovered 
by  Jlilkiah  in  the  temple,  B.C.  641.  Iu  2  Ch.  34.  20 
Abdon  is  named  in  the  place  of  Achbor, 

2  Ki.  22.  12  the  king  commanded.  .A.  the  sou  of  Mi. 

22.  14  SoHilkiah  the  priest.,  and  A...  went  unto 

3.  A  Jew,  whose  son  was  sent  by  Jehoiakim  to  bring 
back  Urijah  the  prophet  out  of  Egypt,  B.c  600. 

Jer.    26.  22  the  king  sent . .  Eluathau  the  son  of  A. 
36.  12  princes  sat  there..  Eluathau  the  son  of  A. 

A'-CHIM,  "Ax^i/J.  woes. 

An  ancestor  of  Joseph,  husband  of  Alary,  mother  of 

Jesus 

Matt.  1.  14  Sadoc  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat  Eliud 
A'-CHISH,  trpx  seiyeut-charmcr, 

1.  A  king  of  Oath  to  whom  David  lied,  B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa.  21.  10  David  arose,  .and  went  to  A.  the  king  of 
21.  11  the  servants  of  A.  said  unto  him,  (Is)  not 
21.  12  David,  .was  sore  afraid  of  A.  the  king  of 
21.  14  Then  said  A.  uuto  his  servants,  Lo,  ye 
27.    2  David  arose,  aud  he  passed  over,  .unto  A. 
27.    3  David  dwelt  with  A.  at  Gath,  he  and 
27.    5  David  said  unto  A.,  If  I  have  now  found 
27.    6  Then  A.  gave  him  Ziklag  that  day 
27.    9  David  smote  the  land,  .returned,  .to  A. 
27.  10  And  A.  said,  Whither  have  ye  made  a 

27.  12  And  A.  believed  David,  saying,  He  hath 

28.  1  And  A.  said  uuto  David,  Know  thou 
28.    2  David  said  to  A.,  Surely  thou  shalt 

28.  2  And  A.  said  to  David,  Therefore  will  I 

29.  2  David,  .passed  on  in  the  rereward  with  A. 
29.  3  And  A.  said  unto  the  princes  of  the  Phil. 
29.  6  Theu  A.  called  David,  and  said  unto  him 
29.  8  David  said  unto  A.,  But  what  have  I 

29.    9  And  A.  answered  and  said  to  David,  I 

2.  A  king  of  Gath,  who  reigued  about  forty-five  years 
later  than  No.  1,  in  the  time  of  Solomon,  B.C.  1013. 

1  Ki.    2.  39  the  servants  of  Shimei  ran  away  unto  A. 
2.  40  Shimei  arose,  .and  weut  to  Gath  to  A.  to 

ACH-ME'-THA,  KODrjN  a  place  of  horses. 
A  city  of  Media,  perhaps  the  same  as  Ecbatana,  i.e.  the 
modem  llamadan.     N.  lat.  34°  47',  E.  long.  47"  52'. 
Ezra   6.    2  there  was  found  at  A.,  iu  the  palace 
A'-CHOR,  "uaj/  trouble. 

\  valley  near  Jericho,  in  which  Achan  and  his  property 
was  destroyed  and  buried,  B.C.  1451. 

Josh.  7.  24  they  brought  them  unco  the  valley  of  A. 
7.  26  name  of  that  place  was.  .The  valley  of  A. 
15.    7  border  went  up.  .from  the  valley  of  A. 
Isa.   65.  10  the  valley  of  A.  a  place  for  the  herds  to 
Hos.    2.  15  and  the  valley  of  A.  for  a  door  of  hope 
ACH'-SA,  ACH'-SAH,  nosy  serpent-charmer. 
Daughter  of  Caleb,  and  wife  of  Othuiel,  B.C.  1440. 
Josh.  15.  16  He  that  smiteth.  .to  him  will  I  give  A. 

15.  17  and  he  gave  him  A.  his  daughter  to  wife 
Judg.  1.  12  He  that  smiteth.  .to  him  will  I  give  A. 

1.  13  and  he  gave  him  A.  his  daughter  to  wife 
1  Ch.    2.  49  and  the  daughter  of  Caleb  (was)  A. 
ACH'-SHAPH,  r\ypx  dedicated. 

A  Phenician  city,  at  the  foot  of  Carmel,  ullotted  to 
Asher;  now  called  Khaifa. 

Josh.  11.    1  Jabin  king  of  Hazor.  .sent  to.  .king  of  A. 
12.  7,  20  these  (are)  the  kings,  .the  king  of  A. 
19.  24,  25  children  of  A. .  .border.  .Helkath.  .A. 
ACH'-ZIB,  3'PN'  a  winter  brook,  a  lie. 
1.  A  town  in  W.  of  Judah.    Comp.  Gen.  38.  5. 

Josh.  15.  33,  44  in  the  valley. .  Keilah.  and  A.,  and  M,  i 
Mic.    1.  "14  the  houses  of  A  (shall  be)  a  lie  to  the 


2.  A  city  of  Asher  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  and  19  miles 

from  Accho,  and  now  called  Es-zib. 

Josh.  19.  29  are  at  the  sea  from  the  coast  to  A. 
Judg.  1.  31  did  Asherdriveout  the  inhabitants,  .of  A. 

ACKNOWLEDGE,  to  — 

l.To  know,  jrv  yada. 

Psa.  5i.    3  For  I  acknowledge  my  transgressions 
Prov.  3.    6  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  him,  and 
Isa.   33.  13  ye  (that  are)  near,  acknowledge  my  might 
Jer.     3.  13  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity,  that 
14.  20  We  acknowledge,  OLuRB-,  our  wickedness. 

2.  To  make  known,  jn;  yada,  5. 

Psa.  32.    5  I  acknowledged  my  siu  uuto  thee,  and 

3.  To  make  known,  discern,  151  nakar,  5. 

Gen.  38.  26  And  Judah  acknowledged  (them),  and 
Deut.21. 17  But  he  shall  acknowledge  the  son  of  the 

33.    9  neither  did  he  acknowledge  his  brethren 
Isa.   61.    9  all  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge 

63.  16  though,  .be ignorant.  .Israel acknowledge 
Jer.  24.    5  Like  these,  .so  will  I  acknowledge  them 
Dan.  11.  39  whom  he  shall  acknowledge  (and)  increase 
4.To  make  known  fully,  iiriyivwo-Kw  ejnginosko. 

1  Co.  14.  37  let  him  acknowledge  that  the  things  that 

16.  18  therefore  acknowledge  ye  them  that  are 

2  Co.    1.  13  shall  acknowledge,  .or  acknowledge 

1.  14  As  also  ye  have  acknowledged  us  in  part 
ACKNOWLEDGING  — 
Full  knowledge,  eVryroxns-  ejrignosis. 

2  Ti.     2.  25  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowled. 
Titus  1.    1  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth  which 
Phm.        6  become  effectual  by  the  acknowledging 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  — 
Full  knowledge,  i-rriyvwo-is  cpignosis. 

Col.    2.    2  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  of 
ACQUAINT  self,  to  — 
To  make  profit,  j?o  sakan,  5. 

Job  22.  21  Acquaint  now  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at 
ACQUAINTANCE  — 
l.JTo  know,  yyr  yada. 

Job    19.  13  and  mine  acquaintance  are  verily 

42.  11  they  that  had  been  of  his  acquaintance 
2.  To  be  known,  yi;  yada,  4. 

Psa.  31.  11  and  a  fear  to  mine  acquaintance  :  they 
55.  13  But  (it  was)  thou,  a  man.  .acquaintance 
88.    8  Thou  hast  put  away  mine  acquaintance 
88.  18  far  from  me,  (and)  mine  acquaintance 

3. One  known,  discerned,  13D  makkar. 
zKi.  12.    5  every  man  of  his  acquaintance 

12.    7  receive  no.  .money  of  your  acquaintance 

4. One  known,  yvuxrrSs  gnostos. 

Luke  2.  44  they  sought  him  among  .  .acquaintance 
23.  49  all  his  acquaintance,  and  the  women  that 
ACQUAINTANCE,  his  — 
One^s  070/1,  iStos  idios. 

Acts  24.  23  forbid  none  of  his  acquaintance  to 
ACQUAINTED,  to  be  — 
To  make  useful,  acquainted,  |3D  sakan,  5. 

Psa.  139.    3  and  art  acquainted  (with)  all  my  ways 
ACQUAINTED  with,  to  be  — 
To  know,  J7T  yada. 

Isa.    53.    3  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with 

ACQUAINTING  — 

/""  Irad,  drier,  3ru  nahag. 

Eccl.  2.    3  yet  acquainting  mine  heart  with  wisdom 

ACQUIT,  to  — 

J'n  declare  innocent,  cut  off,  t\\>i  naqah,  3. 

Job    10.  14  and  thou  wilt  not  acquit  me  from  mine 
Nah.    1.    3  The  Lord,  .will  not  at  all  acquit 

ACRE  — 

I.  A  yolce  (of  oxen),  ipx  tsemed. 

Isa.     5.  10  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath 
'2. A  furrow,  rny.D  maanah. 

1  Sa.  14.  14  half  acre  of  land,  (which)  a  yoke  (of  oxen) 
&CT  — 

{.Word,  thing,  "irn  dabar. 

i  Ki.  10.    6  I  heard  in  mine  own  laud  of  thy  acts  and 
11.  41  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon,  and 

11.  41  iu  the  book  of  the  acts  of  Solomou? 
14.  19  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jeroboam 

14.  29  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Rehoboam 

15.  7  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Abijam,  and 
15.  23  The  rest  of  all  the  acts  of  Asa,  aud  all 

15.  31  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Nadah,  ami 

16.  5  Mow  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Baasha,  and 
16.  14  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Elah,  and  all 
16.  20  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Zimri,  and 
16.  27  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Omri  which 
22.  39  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Ahab,  and  all 
22.  45  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jeboshaphat 

2  Ki.    1.  18  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Ahaziah 

8.  23  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Joram,  aoid  all 
10.  34  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehu  and  all 

12.  19  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  ot  Joash,  aud  all 

13.  8  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehoahaz 

13.  12  And  the  rest  oi  the  acts  of  Joash  and  all 

14.  15  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehoash 

14.  18  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Amaziah,  (are) 


ACT 


13 


ADINO 


a  K±.  U  2S  ^ow  f  ae  rest  of  tlie  acts  of  Jeroooam 
15  6  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Azariah,  and 
15  11  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Zachariah 
15.  15  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Shallum,  and 
15.  21  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Meuahem 
15.  26  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Pekahiah 
i5.  31  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Pekah,  and 

15.  36  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jotham,  and 

16.  19  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Ahaz  which 

20.  20  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Hezekiah 

21.  17  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Manasseh 
21.  25  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Anion  which 

23.  28  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Josiah,  and 

24.  5  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehoiakim 

1  Ch.  29.  29  Now  the  acts  of  David  the  king,  first 

2  Ch.   9.    5  I  heard  in  mine  own  land  of  thine  acts 

9.  29  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon 

12.  15  Now  the  acts  of  Rehoboam,  first  and  last 

13.  22  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Abijah,  and 
16.  11  And,  behold,  the  acts  of  Asa,  first  and 
20.  34  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat 

25.  26  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Amaziah 

26.  22  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Uzziah,  first 

27.  7  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jotham,  and 

28.  26  Now  the  rest  of  his  acts  and  of  all  his 

32.  32  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Hezekiah 

33.  iS  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Manasseh 

35.  26  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Josiah,  and 

36.  8  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehoiakim 

Deut.  11."  3  And  his  miracles,  and  his  acts,  which  he 
11.    7  But  your  eyes  have  seen  all  the  gTeat  acts 
2  Ki.  23.  19  according  to  all  the  acts  that  he  had  done 
Esth.  10.    2  And  all  the  acts  of  his  power  and  of  his 
3. Service,  deed,  nTOj;.  abodah. 

Isa.   28.  21  and  bring  to  pass  his  act,  his  strange 

4. Act,  action,  nV?X  alildh. 

Psa.103.    7  He' made  known  his.  .acts  unto  the 

5. Act,  deed,  doing,  hi&poal. 

2  Sa.  23.  20  Benaiah .  .who  had  done  many  acts,  he 
1  Ch.  11.  22  Benaiah.  .who  had  done  many  acts 
Isa.   59.    6  the  act  of  violence  (is)  in  their  hands 

ACT,  in  the  very  — 

Jn  tlie  very  theft,  4TravTo<pwpq>  epautophoro. 

John   S.    4  [this  woman  was  taken.. in  the  very  act] 
ACTION  — 
Act,  action,  nV^  alilah. 

1  Sa.    2.    3  and  by  him  actions  are  weighed 

ACTIVITY  — 

Strength,  force,  hy\  chayil. 

Gen.  47.    6  if  thou  knowest  (any)  men  of  activity 

AD-A'-DAH,  iTTyry  bordering. 

A  city  in  S.  of  Judah,  near  Dimonah. 

Josh.  15.  21,  22  the  coast  of  Edoni  southward.  .A. 
A'-DAH,  ni^  pleasure. 

1.  One  of  the  wives  of  Lamech,  B.C.  3874. 

Gen.    4.  19  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  A.,  and  the 
4.  20  And  A.  bare  Jabal :  he  was  the  father  of 
4.  23  Lamech  said  unto  his  wives,  A.  and 

2.  Oue  of  the  wives  of  Esau,  B.C.  1750. 

Gen.  36.    2  A.  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite,  and 
36.    4  And  A.  bare  to  Esau  Eliphaz ;  and 
36. 10  Eliphaz  the  son  of  A.  the  wife  of  Esau 
36.  12  these  (were)  the  sons  of  A.  Esau's  wife 
36.  16  (are),  .dukes,  .these  (were)  the  sons  of  A. 

A-DA'-IAH,  ;vnj£  pleasing  to  Jah. 

1.  Maternal  grandfather  of  king  Josiah,  B.C.  641. 

2  Ki.  22.    i  mother's  name  (was),  .the  daughter  of  A. 

2.  A  Levite  descended  from  Gershom. 

1  Ch.   6.  41  the  son  of  Zerah,  the  son  of  A. 

3.  A  son  of  Shinihi  the  Benjamite. 

1  Ch.    8.  i2~2i  The  sons  of  Elpaal. .  A.,  and  Beraiah 

4.  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Aaron,  and  head  of  a  family 
in  Jerusalem. 

1  Ch.    9.  10-12  of  the  priests.  .A.  the  son  of  Jeroham 

5.  The  father  of  a  captftin  that  aided  Jehoiada  to  put 
Joash  on  the  throne  of  Judah. 

2  Ch.  23.    1  Jehoiada.  .took.  .Maaseiah  the  son  of  A. 

6.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani,  who  took  a  strange  wife 
during  the  exile,  B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  29  of  the  sous  of  Bani;  Meshullani.  .and  A. 

7.  Another  of  a  different  family  of  Bani,  who  had  also 
taken  a  strange  wife,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  34-39  of  the  sons  of  Bani.  .Nathan,  and  A. 

8.  A  descendant  of  Judah  by  Pharez. 

Neh.  1 1.    5  [children  of  Judah] . .  Maaseiah . .  son  of  A. 

9.  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Aaron,  probably  the  same 
as  No.  4. 

Neh.  11.  12  and  A.  the  son  of  Jeroham,  the  son  of  P. 
A-DAL'-IA,  n;V]K  honour  of  1  zed. 
One  of  the  ten  sons  of  Hainan  who  were  hanged  along 
with  their  father,  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    8  A. . .  The  ten  sons  of  Haman  the  son  of  H. 
AD'- AM,  cnx  of  tJie  ground,  firm. 
1.  The  man  that  God  created  and  placed  in  the  garden 
of  Eden,  B.C.  4004. 

Gen.    2. 19  the  Loud  God . .  brought  (them)  unto  A.  to 


Gen.    2.  19  whatsoever  A.  called  every  living  creature 
2.  20  And  A.  gave  names  to  all  cattle.and  to  the 
2.  20  but  for  A.  there  was  not  found  an  help 
2.  21  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  A. 

2.  23  A.  said,  This  (is)  now  bone  of  my  bones 

3.  8  and  A.  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from 
3.   9  And  the  Lord  God  called  unto  A.,  and 

3.  17  And  unto  A.  he  said,  Because  thou  hast 
3.  20  And  A.  called  his  wife's  name  Eve 

3.  21  Unto  A.  also  and  to  Ins  wife  did  the  Lord 

4.  1  And  A.  knew  Eve  his  wife ;  and  she 

4.  25  And  A.  knew  his  wife  again ;  and  she  bare 

5.  1  the  book  of  the  generations  of  A. 

5.  2  and  called  their  name  A. ,  in  the  day  when 
5.  3  And  A.  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years 
5.  4  And  the  days  of  A.  after  he  had  begotten 
5.    5  And  all  the  days  that  A.  lived  were 

Deut  32.    8  when  he  separated  the  sons  of  A.,  he  set 

1  Ch.    1.    1  A.,  Sheth,  Enosh 

Job    31.  33  If  I  covered  my  transgressions  as  A. 

Luke  3.  38  Seth,  which  was.  .of  A.,  which  was.  .of 

Bom.  5.  14  Nevertheless  death  reigned  from  A.  to 
5. 14  after  the  similitude  of  A.'s  transgression 

1  Co. 15.  22  For  as  in  A.  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
15.  45  The  first  man  A.  was  made  a  living  soul 

15.  45  the  last  A.  (was  made)  a  quickening  spirit 
1  Ti.     2.  13  For  A.  was  first  formed,  then  Eve 

2.  14  And  A.  was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman 
Jude       14  And  Enoch  also,  the  seventh  from  A. 

2.  A  town  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  12  miles  from 
Zartan  in  Manasseh,  and  36  miles  N.  of  Jericho.  In 
the  LXX.  it  is  called  Kiriatharim,  and  the  termination 
arim  may  be  =  adam.  It  would  thus  mean  "the  city 
(Kiriath)  of  Arim  or  Adam." 

Josh.  3.  16  waters.,  rose  up ..  very  far  from  the  city  A. 
A-DA'-MATT,  nonx  ground,  fortress. 
A  fenced  city  in  Naphtali. 

Josh.  19.  35,  36  And  the  fenced  cities.  .A.,  and  Bamah 
ADAMANT   stone  — 
Brier,  diamond  point,  VD$  shamir. 

Eze.     3.    9  As  an  adamant  harder  than  flint  have  I 

Zech.  7.  12  made  their  hearts  (as)  an  adamant  stone 

A-DA'-MI,  'D-w  fortified. 

A  city  of  Naphtali,  the  same  as  Adamah. 

Josh.  19.  33  their  coast  was  from  Heleph.  .and  A. 

A'-DAR,  17b*  ft re  god. 

The  12th  month  of  the  Jewish  sacred  year,  from  the 
new  moon  of  March  till  the  one  of  April,  and  was 
doubled  seven  times  in  nineteen  years  to  synchronise 
the  lunar  and  the  solar  years. 

Ezra    6.  15  was  finished  on  the  third  day  of.  .A. 

Esth.  3.    7  twelfth  (month),  that  (is),  the  month  A. 

3.  13  twelfth  month,  which  (is)  the  month  A. 

8.  12  twelfth  month,  which  (is)  the  month  A. 

9.  1  the  twelfth  month,  that  (is)  the  month  A. 
9.  15  the  fourteenth  day  also  of  the  month  A. 
9.  17  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 

9.  19  made  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 
9.  21  keep  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 

A'-DAR  or  AD'-DAR,  T)N  height,  honour. 

1.  A  city  called  also  Eazar-Addar,  in  the  S.  of  Judah, 
near  Edom. 

Josh. 15.    3  and  went  up  to  A.,  and  fetched  a  compass 

2.  Son  of  Bela,  and  grandson  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1680. 

1  Ch.    8.    3  And  the  sons  of  Bela  were,  A.,  and  Gera. 
AD-BE'-EX,  Vx^nx  languishing  for  God. 
Son  of  Ishmael,  and  grandson  of  Abraham,  B.C.  1840. 

Gen.  25.  13  firstborn  of  Ishmael,  Nebajoth ..  and  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  29  firstborn  of  Ishmael,  Nebajoth . .  and  A. 

ADD,  to  — 

I. To  add,  increase,  ^p;  yasaph. 

Lev.  27.  13  then  he  shall  add  a  fifth  (part)  thereof 
27.  15  then  he  shall  add  the  fifth  (part)  of  the 
27.  19  then  he  shall  add  the  fifth  (part)  of  the 
27.  27  he  shall  redeem  (it),  .and  shall  add 
Deut.  5.  22  and  he  added  no  more.  And  he  wrote  them 
19.    9  then  shalt  thou  add  three  cities  more  for 

1  Sa.  12.  19  for  we  have  added  unto  all  our  sins  (this) 
Isa.   38.    5  behold,  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen 
Jer.  45.    3  for  the  Lord  hath  added  grief  to  my 

2.  To  add,  increase,  continue,  *]p;  yasaph,  5. 
Gen.  30.  24  The  Lord  shall  add  to  me  another  son 
Lev.     5  16  and  shall  add  the  fifth  part  thereto,  and 
6.    5  and  shall  add  the  fifth  part  more  thereto 
27.  31  shall  add  thereto  the  fifth  (part)thereof 
Num.  5.    7  and  add  unto  it  the  fifth  (part)  thereof,  and 
Deut.  4.    2  Ye  shall  not  add  unto  the  word  which  I 
12.  32  thou  shalt  not  add  thereto,  nor  diminish 

2  Sa.  24.    3  Now  the  Lord  thy  God  add  unto  the 

1  Ki.  12.  11  I  will  add  to  your  yoke  :  my  father 

12.  14  and  I  will  add  to  your  yoke :  my  father 

2  Ki.  20.    6  And  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years 

1  Ch.  22.  14  and  thou  mayest  add  thereto 

2  Ch.  10.  14  butlwilladd thereto:  myfather chastised 

28. 13  ye  intend  to  add  (more)  to  our  sins  and  to 
J°b   34-  37  F°r  he  addeth  rebellion  unto  his  sin,  he 
Prov.  3.    2  length  of  days,  .shall  they  add  to  thee 

10.  22  it  maketh  rich,  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow 

16.  23  The  heart  of  the  wise,  .addeth  learning  to 
30.   6  Add  thou  not  unto  his  words,  lest  he 

■3.  To  give,  jrn  nathan. 

Num.  35.    6  to  them  ye  shall  add  forty  and  two  cities 
Psa.   69.  27  Add  iniquity  unto  their  iniquity ;  and 


4.  To  add,  "3?  sapliah. 

Deut  29.  19  though  I  walk  in  the  imagination . .  to  add 

Isa.    29.    1  add  ye  year  to  year ;  let  them  kill  sacrifice  - 

30.    1  not  of  my  spirit,  that  they  may  add  sin  to 

0.  To  bear  or  bring  upon,  eVt^epw  epiphero. 
Phil.    1.  16  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds 

6.  To  furnish  abundantly,  iTrixoprjyew  epichoregeu. 

2  Pe.    1.    5  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith 

7.  To  put  to,  or  f oi' ward,  irpoo~Ti9t)ii.i  prostitliemi. 
Matt.  6.  27  can  add  one  cubit  unto  his  stature? 

6.  33  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you 
Luke  3.  20  Added  this  yet  above  all,  that  he  shut  up 
12.  25  with  taking  thought  can  add  to  his  stature 
12.  31  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you 
19.  11  as  they  heard  these  things,  he  added  and 
Acts    2.  41  the  same  day  there  were  added  (unto 

2.  47  the  Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such 
5.  14  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the 
11.  24  much  people  was  added  unto  the  Lord 
Gal.    3.  19  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions 
ADD  in  conference,  to  — 

To  add  up  together,  irpoaavaTid-n^LL  2>rosanatithemi . 
Gal.     2.    6  in  conference  added  nothing  to  me,  but 
ADD  (thereto),  to  — 

To'ar range  throughout  in  addition,  4tn^iard(r(TGp.a.i. 
Gal.    3.  15  no  man  disanuulleth,  or  addeth  thereto 
ADD  unto,  to  — 
To  put  on,  ar  upon,  tiriTidwfj.1  epitithemi. 

Kev.  22.  18  If  any  man  shall  add  unto-. .shall  add  uu 
AD-DAN,  J-jN  strong. 

The  name  of  a  place  from  which  some  of  the  inhabit- 
ants came  with  Zerubbabel  to  Jerusalem ;  others  con- 
sider it  the  name  of  a  man  who  was  unable  to  show  his 
genealogy  to  be  of  Israel,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  59  these  (were)  they  which  went  up  from.  .A. 
ADDED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  added,  p,p;  yasaph,  2. 

Jer.   36.  32  and  there  were  added  besides  unto  them 

2.  To  be  added,  qp^  yesa2)h,  6. 

Dan.    4.  36  and  excellent  majesty  was  added  unto  me 
ADDER — 
1. Adder,  ^E;py  alcshub. 

Psa.  140.    3  adders'  poison  (is)  under  their  lips 
2. A  sjy,  ]J)3petJten. 

Psa.  58.    4  (they  are)  like  the  deaf  adder  (that) 

91.  13  Thou  shalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder 
3. Basilisk,  cockatrice,  *31JJ£?  tsijihoni. 

Pro.  23.  32  At  the  last  it.  .stingeth  like  an  adder 
LAdder,  viper,  first?  shephiphon. 

Gen.  49.  17  Dan  shall  be.  .an  adder  in  the  path,  that 
AD'-DI,  'AdSl  (meaning  uncertain). 
An  ancestor  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary  mother  of 
Jesus. 

Luke  3.  28  which  was  (the  sou)  of  A.,  which  was  (the 
ADDICT,  to  — 
To  arrange,  set  oneself,  Ta.<r<ru>  lasso. 

1  Co.  16.  15  and  (that)  they  have  addicted  themselves 
ADDITIONS  — 
Joinings,  wreaths,  rixh  loyoth. 

1  Ki.    7.  29  (were)  certain  additions  made  of  thin 

7.  30  undersetters  molten,  at'the  side  of  every  a. 
7.  36  proportion  of  every  one,  and  additions 
AD'-DON,  jVIN  stro?ig. 
The  same  perhaps  as  Addan,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.    7.  61  these(were)theywhichwentup.  .from. .A. 
A'-DER,  -n;.',  T]J>  a  flock. 
A  son  of  Berah,  grandson  of  Shaharaim,  a  Benjamite. 

1  Ch.   8.  15  And  Zebadiah,  and  Arad,  and  A. 
A-Df-EL,  Sx-i^.  ornament  of  God. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Simeon. 

1  Ch.   4.  36  and  Jaakobah,  and  Jeshohaiah . .  and  A. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Aaron. 

1  Ch.    9.  12  and  Maasiai  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of 

3.  Asmaveth's  father,  who  was  David's  treasurer  (per- 
haps the  same  as  No.  2.),  B.C.  1030. 

1  Ch.  27.  25  the  king's  treasures  (was) . .  the  son  of  A. 

A'-DLN,  jnj;  ornament. 

l.One  whose  descendants  returned  from  Babylon  with 

Zerubbabel,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra    2.  15  The  children  of  A.,  four  hundred  fifty  and 
Neh.    7.  20  The  children  of  A.,  six  hundred  fifty  and 

2.  One  whose  posterity  came  up  with  Ezra. 

Ezra   8.    6  Of  the  sons  also  of  A. ;  Ebed  the  son  of  J. 

3.  The  name  of  a  family  who  with  Nehemiah  and  the 
people  sealed  the  covenant. 

Neh.  10.  14-16  [The  chief  of  the  people],  .A. 
A-DI'-NA,  KP'SL  ornament. 
A  Reubenite  captain  of  David's,  B.C.  104S. 

1  Ch.  11.  42  A.  the  son  of  Shiza  the  Reubenite,  a 
A-DI'-NO,  U"]Ji  ornament. 
One  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men,  B.C.  1048. 

2Sa.  23.   8  The  Tachmonite.  .the  same  (was)  A.  the 


ADITHAIM 


14 


ADULTERY 


A-DI-THA'-IM,  D'nn^  two  ways,  or  passages. 
A  city  in  the  plain  of  Judah. 

Jo3h.  15.  33-36  in  the  valley.  .Sharaini,  and  A.,  and 
ADJURE,  to  — 
1.7V?  cause  to  take  oath,  rhii  alah,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  24  for  Saul  had  adjured  the  people,  saying 
2.7V)  cause  to  swear,  j/37  shaba,  5. 

Jos,     6.  26  And  Joshua  adjured  (them)  at  that  time 

1  Ki.  22.  16  How  many  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  that 

2  Ch.  18.  15  How  many  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  that 
3.  To  adjure  thoroughly,  ££opKi(w  exorkizo. 

Matt  26.  63  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God, that  thou 
A, To  adjure,  bpiclfa  horMzo. 

Mark  5.    7  I  adjure  thee  by  God,  that  thou  torment 

Acts  19.  13  We  adjure  you  by  Jesus  whom  Paul 
AD-LAI,  *^ny  lax,  weary. 

-Father  of  Shaphat,  who  was  overseer  of  the  herds  in  the 
lowlands  in  David's  time,  B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  27.  29  over  the  herds.  .(was)ShaphatthesonofA. 
AD'-MAH,  nOTN  cartlnonrk,  fortress. 
A  town  in  the  vale  of  Siddim  which  was  destroyed  with 
Sodom,  Gomorrah,  Zeboim,  B.C.  1897. 

Gen.  10.  19  as  thou  goest  unto.  .Gomorrah,  and  A. 
14.  2  made  war  with.  .Shinab  king  of  A.,  and 
14.    8  there  went  out.  .the  king  of  A.,  and  the 

Deut  29.  23  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  A. 

Hos.  11.   8  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  A.? 

AD-MA'-THA,  NnniN  God-given. 

One  of  the  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  Media  in  the 

reign  of  Ahasuerus,  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  1.  14  the  next  unto  him  (was)  Carshena.  .A. 
ADMINISTERED,  to  be  — 
To  minister,  StaKoviw  diakoneo. 

2  Co.   8.  19  which  is  administered  by  us  to  the  glory 
8.  20  this  abundance  which  is  administered  by 

ADMINISTRATION  — 
Ministry,  btaicovia  dlakouia. 

1  Co.  12.    5  there  are  differences  of  administrations 

2  Co.    9.  12  For  the  administration  of  this  service 
ADMIRATION  — 

Wonder,  8av/ia  thauma. 

Rev.    17.  6  I  wondered  with  great  admiration 
ADMIRATION,  to  have  in  — 
To  wonder,  Bav/j.d£c0  thaumazd. 

Jude       16  having  men's  persons  in  admiration 
ADMIRED,  to  be  — 
To  wonder,  6avp,d(w  thaumazd. 

2  Th.   1.  10  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe 
ADMONISH,  to  — 

1.  To  testify,  say  again  and  again,  "ny  ltd,  5. 
Jer.   42.  19  know  certainly  that  I  have  admonished 

2.  To  put  in  mind,  vovdeTeco  noutlieted. 

Rom. 15.  14  able  also  to  admonish  one  another 
Col.     3.  16  teaching  and  admonishing  one  another 

1  Th.    5.  12  we  beseech  you.  .and  admonish  you 

2  Th.    3.  15  but  admonish  (him)  as  a  brother 

3.  To  recommend,   irapaivew  paraineo. 

Acts  27.    9  was  now  already  past,  Paul  admonished 
ADMONISHED,  to  be  — 
To  he  shone  on,  *irn  zahar,  2. 

Eccl.  4.  13  king,  who  will  no  more  be  admonished 
12. 12  further,  by  these,  my  son,  be  admonished 

ADMONISHED  of  God,  to  be  — 

7*0  have  a  divine  oracle,  xpn^ari^w  chrenuitizo. 
Heb.    8.    5  as  Moses  was  admonished  of  God  when 

ADMONITION  — 

A  putting  into  the  mind,  vovQeaia  noutliesia. 
1  Co.  10.  11  they  arc  written  for  our  admonition 
Eph.    6.    4  bring  them  up  in  the . .  admonition  of  the 
Titus  3.  10  an heretick,  after  the.  .second  admonition 

AD'-NA,  Nj~iy  pleasure. 

1.  One  of  the  family  of  Pahath-moab  who  had  taken  a 
strange  wife  during  the  exile,  B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  30  of  the  sous  of  Pahath-moab ;  A.,  and 

2.  A  priest  in  the  time  of  Joiakim,  grandson  of  Jozadak. 

Neh.  12.  12-15  [the  chief  of  the  fathers]..  Of  Hanm,A. 
AD'-NAH,  rtiny.  pleasure. 

1.  A  captain  of  Manasseh,  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag, 

B.C.   1048. 

1  Ch.  12.  20  there-  fell  to  him  of  Manasseh,  A.,  and 

2.  The  chief  captain  of  the  armyofJehoshaphat,B.C.9i4. 

2CI1. 17.  14  Of  Judah.  .A.  the  chief,  and  with  him 
ADO,  to  make  an  — 
To  be  tumultuous,  Oapv&touat  fhorubeomai. 

Mark   5.  39  he  salth..Why  make  ye  tbis  ado,  and 

A-DO-NI-BE'-ZEK,  PH"*ftj  lord  of  lightning. 
A  king  of  Bezek,  captured  by  the  men  of  Judah  and 
Sinuitii  and  taken  tu  Jerusalem,  where  he  was  mutilated 
and  died,  B.O.  1449. 

Judg.  1.    5  And  they  found  A.  in  Bezek:  and  they 
1.    6  But  A.  Bed  ;  and  tliey  pursued  after  him 
1.    7  And  A.  said,  Threescore  aud  ten  kings 


A-DO-NI'-JAH,  n;iiK  Jah  is  my  lord. 

1.  Fourth  son  of  David,  born  in  Hebron,  and  afterwards 

put  to  death  by  Solomon  for  aspiring  to  the  throne, 

B.C.  1015. 

2  Sa.    3.    4  [unto  David  were  sons  born] . .  fourth  A. 
1  Ki.    1.    5  Then  A.  the  son  of  Haggith  exalted 
1.    7  and  they  following  A.  helped  (him) 
1.    8  Zadok  the  priest,  and.  .were  not  with  A. 
1.    9  And  A.  slew  sheep  and  oxen  and  fatcattle 
1.  11  saying,  Hast  thou  not  heard  that  A.  the 
1.  13  Solomon,  .shall  reign,  .why  then  doth  A. 
1.  18  And  now,  behold,  A.  reigneth ;  and  now 
1.  24  Nathan  said,  .hast  thou  said,  A.  shall 
1.  25  behold,  they,  .say,  God  save  king  A. 
1.  41  And  A.  and  all  the  guests  that  (were)  with 
1.  42  And  A.  said  unto  him,  Come  in ;  for  thou 
1.  43  Jonathan  answered  and  said  to  A.,  Verily 
1.  49  all  the  guests  that  (were)  with  A.  were 
1.  50  And  A.  feared  because  of  Solomon  and 

1.  51  it  was  told  Solomon,  saying,  Behold,  A. 

2.  13  And  A.  the  son  of  Haggith  came  to  B. 
2.  19  king  Solomon,  to  speak  unto  him  for  A. 
2.  21  And  she  said,  Let  Abishag..begivento  A. 
2.  22  why  dost  thou  ask  Abishag.  .for  A.  ?  ask 
2.  23  God  do  so  to  me  and  more  also,  if  A.  have 
2.  24  A.  shall  be  put  to  death  this  day 

2.  28  Joab  hath  turned  after  A.,  though  he 

1  Ch.  3.  1.  2sonsof  David,  .third  Absalom,  .fourth  A. 

2.  One  of  the  Levites  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the 
law,  B.C.  914. 

2  Ch.  17.    8  with  them  (he  sent)  Levites.  .A.,  and 

3.  A  chief  of  the  people  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed  the 
covenant,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10. 14, 16  The  chief  of  the  people . .  A.,  Bigavi, 

A-DO-NI'-KAM,  DiJUlN  my  lord  has  risen. 

1.  An  Israelite  whose  descendants  came  up  from  Babylon 
after  the  exile,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  13  the  children  of  A.,  six  hundred  sixty  and 
Neh.    7.  18  the  children  of  A.,  six  hundred  threescore 

2.  One,  some  of  whose  posterity  came  up  from  Babylon 
with  Ezra,  B.C.  457.     This  may  be  the  same  as  No.  1. 

Eza.     8.  13  of  the  last  sons  of  A.,  whose  names  (are) 

A-DO-NI'-RAM,  DTjik  my  lord  is  high. 
A  tribute  officer  of  Solomon's,  B.C.  975. 

1  Ki.    4.    6  aud  A.  the  son  of  Abda  (was)  over  the 

5.  14  and  A.  (was)  over  the  levy 

A-DO-NI-ZE-'DEK,  piS-'^N  lord  of  justice. 

A  king  of  the  Canaanites  or  Amorites  in  Jerusalem,  and 

slain  by  Joshua,  B.C.  1452. 

Josh.  10.    1  when  A.  king  of  Jerusalem  had  heard 
10.    3  Wherefore  A.  king  of  Jerusalem  sent 

ADOPTION  — 

Placing  as  a  son,    vlodeata  huiothesia. 

Rom.  8. 15  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption 

8.  23  waiting  for  the  adoption,  (to  wit),  the 

9.  4  to  whom  (pertaineth)  the  adoption,  and 

ADOPTION  of  sons  or  children  ^- 

Placing  as  a  son,  vLodeata  huiothesia. 

Gal.     4.    5  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons 
Eph.    1.    5  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  ofc. 

A-DO-RA'-IM,  D;inx  double  honour. 

A  city  in  the  S.W.  of  Judah,  built  by  Rehoboam,  son  of 

Solomon,  and  now  called  Dura,  5  miles  S.W.  of  Hebron. 

2  Ch.  11.    5,  9  Rehoboam  dwelt  in  Jer.,  and  built.  .A. 
A-DO'-RAM,  dtik  high  honour. 

1.  An  officer  of  David's,  set  over  the  tribute  :  supposed  to 
be  the  same  as  Adoniram,  B.C.  975. 

2  Sa.20.  24  And  A.  (was)  over  the  tribute  :  and 

2.  An  officer  of  Solomon's  and  afterwards  of  Rehoboam's. 

1  Ki  12.  iS  Then  king  Rehoboam  sent  A.,  who  (was) 

ADORN,  to  — 

I.  To  pass  on  or  over,  niy  adah. 

Isa.    61.  10  ornaments,  and  as  a  bride  adorneth 

2. To  polish,  adorn,  noa^ita  kosmeo. 

Luke2i.    5  how  it  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones 
1  Ti.     2.    9  also,  that  women  adorn  themselves 
Titus  2.  10  that  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God 
1  Pe.    3.    5  holy  women  also,  .adorned  themselves 
Rev.  21.    2  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband 

ADORNED,  to  be  — 

To  be  passed  on  or  over,  n1v  adah. 

Jer.  31.   4  thou  shalt  again  be  adorned  with  thy 

ADORNING  — 

Ornament,  k6(tj.i.os  kosmos. 

1  Pe.    3.    3  Whoseadorninglet  it  not  he  that  outward 

AD-RAM-ME'-LECH,  "^T)N  honour  of  the  ting. 

1.  An  idol  of  the  Sepharvitcswhom  Shalmaneser  brought 
to  people  the  cities  of  Israel  after  carrying  their  in- 
habitants captive  to  Assyria. 

2  Ki.  17.  31  Sepharvites  burnt  their  children,  .to  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Sennacherib,  king  of  Assyria,  who,  with  his 
brother  Sharezer,  sh*w  their  father  in  the  temple  of  Nis- 
roch,  B.C.  721. 

2  Ki.  19.  37  A.  and  Sharezer  his  sons  smote  him  with 
Isa.    37.  38  it  came  to  pass . .  that  A. . .  smote  hinrwith 


AD-RA-MYT'-TIUM,  ' ' h^payLvrrnvds. 

A  seaport  of  Mysia  in  Asia  Minor,  colonised  by  the 

Athenians. 

Acts  27.    2  entering  into  a  ship  of  A.,  we  launched 
A-DRI'-A,  'ASplas. 

The  sea  on  the  E.  of  Italy  called  the  Adriatic,  or  Gulf 
of  Venice.  In  Paul's  time  it  embraced  also  the  part  of 
the  Mediterranean  between  Greece  and  Sicily. 

Acts  27.  27  we  were  driven  up  and  down  in  A. 

AD-RI'-EL,  bxn-ij;  honour  of  God. 

A  man  of  Issachar,  to  whom  Merab  (Saul's  daughter)  was 
given,  B.C.  1064. 

1  Sa.  18.  19  she  was  given  unto  A.  the  Meholathite 

2  Sa.  21.    8  whom  she  brought  up  for  A.  the  son  of 

A-DTJL'-LAM,  bVtJ^  resting  place. 
1.  A  royal  city  S.W.  of  Jerusalem. 

Josh. 12.  7-15  these  (are)  the  kiugs.  .the  king  0!  A. 
i5-  33-35  in  the  valley.  .Jarmuth  and  A.,Socoh 

2CI1.  11.  57  Rehoboamdweltin Jer.,  and  built. .A. 

Neh.  n.  25-30  the  children  of  Judah  dwelt  at.. A. 

Mic.     1.  15  he  shall  come  unto  A.  the  glory  of  Israel 
2.A  large  cave  near  the  city  (No.  1). 

1  Sa.  22.    1  David,  .escaped  to  the  cave  A. :  and 

2  Sa.  23.  13  of  the  thirty,  .came,  .unto  the  cave  of  A. 
1  Ch.  11.  15  three.. went  down.. into  the  cave  of  A. 

A-DUL-LAM-ITE,  vty,  a  native  of  Adullam. 

Gen.  38.    1  Judah  went . .  and  turned  in  to  a  certain  A. 
38.  12  he  and  his  friend  Hirah  the  A. 
38.  20  sent  the  kid  by.  .his  friend  the  A. 

ADULTERER  — 

1.7V)  commit  adultery,  ^N3  naaph. 

Lev.  20.  10  the  adulterer  and  adulteress  shall  surely 
Job  24.  15  The  eye  also  of  the  adulterer  waiteth  for 

2.7V>  commit  adultery,  f)Xj  naaph,  3. 

Psa.  50.  18  and  hast  been  partaker  with  adulterers 
Isa.  57.  3  the  seed  of  the  adulterer  and  the  whore 
Jer.     9.    2  go  from  them !  for  they  (be)  all  adulterers 

23.  10  For  the  land  is  full  of  adulterers ;  for 
Hos.    7.    4  They  (are)  all  adulterers,  as  an  oven 
Mai.    3.    5  and  I  will  be.  .against  the  adulterers 

S.Adidterer,  /xoix^s  moichos. 

Luke  18. 11  I  thank  thee.  .1  am  not  as.. adulterers 

1  Co.   6.   9  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers 
Heb.  13.    4  whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will 
Jas.     4.    4  adulterers  and  adulteresses,  know  ye  not 

ADULTERESS  — 

l.To  commit  adultery,  f]N3  naaph. 

Lev.  20.  10  the  adulterer  and  the  adulteress  shall 

Eze.  23.  45  them  afterthemannerof  adulteresses,  and 
23.  45  because  they  (are)  adulteresses,  and  blood 
2. To  commit  adultery,  ffii  naaph,  3. 

Hos.    3.    1  yet  an  adulteress,  according  to  the  love 
3.77ie  wife  of  a  man,  tf'tj  na!N  esheth  ish. 

Prov.  6.  26  and  the  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the 
4. Adulteress,  /xotxaAts  moichalis. 

Rom.  7.    3  called  an  adulteress,  .is  no  adulteress 

Jas.     4.    4  Ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses,  know  ye 
ADULTERIES  — 
1. Adulterous  objects,  CT*)1fllJ3  )!".aphuphim. 

Hos.    2.    2  therefore  put  away.. her  adulteries  from 
2. Adulteries,  U%pHl  niuphim. 

Jer.  13.  27  I  have  seen  thine  adulteries,  and  thy 
ADULTERIES,  in  — 
Adulterous  acts,  O'BUi  niuphim. 

Eze.  23.  43  I  unto  (her  that  was)  old  in  adulteries 
ADULTEROUS  — 
l.To  commit  adultery,  *\X)naapih,  3. 

Prov. 30.  20  such  (is)  the  way  of  an  adulterous  woman 
2. Adulteress,  fioixahis  moichalis. 

Matti2.  39  An  evil  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh 
16.    4  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh 

Mark  8.  38  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation 
ADULTERY  — 
1. Adulteress,  p,otxct\ls  moichalis. 

2  Pe.    2.  14  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  aud  that 
2. Adultery,  fxoixtla,  moichda. 

Matt  15.  19  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed,  .adulteries 
Mark  7.  21  of  the  heart  of  men,  proceed,  .adulteries 
John  8.    3  unto  him  a  woman  taken  in  adultery 
Gal.    5.  19  works  of  the  flesh  are.  .Adultery 

ADULTERY,  to  commit  — 

l.To  commit  adultery,  q.vj  naaph. 

Exodao.  14  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery 

Lev.  20.  10  And  the  man  that  conunitteth  adultery 

20.  10  (even  he)  that  committeth  adultery  with 
Deut.  5.  iS  Neither  shalt  thou  commit  adultery 
lYov.  6.  32  (But)  whoso  committeth  adultery  with  a 
Jer.     3.    9  committed  adultery  with  stones  and  with 
5,    7  they  theu  committed  adultery,  and 
7.    9  Will  ye.  .murder,  and  commit  adultery 
23.  14  they  commit  adultery,  and  walk  in  lies 
2.T"  commit  adultery,  t\x\  naaph,  3. 

Jer.     3.    8  backsliding  Israel  committed  adultery 

29.  23  and  have  committed  adultery  with  their 
Eze.  16.  32  (But  as)  a  wife  that  committeth  adultery 


ADULTERY 


15 


AFFECTION 


Eze.  23  37  That  they  have  committed  adultery,  and 

23.  37  with  their  idols . .  committed  adultery 
Hos.    4.  13  and  your  spouses  shall  commit  adultery 

4.  14  your  spouses  when  they  commit  adultery 

3.  To  commit  adultery,  fioixdo/j.at,  moichaomai. 

Matt.  5.  32  causeth  her  to  commit  adultery :  and 

5.  32  shall  marry  her.  .committeth  adultery 
19.    9  committeth  adultery . .  doth  commit  adul. 

Markio.  n  and  marry  another,  committeth  adultery 
10.  12  and  he  married,  .she  committeth  adultery 

4.  To  commit  adultery,  ^oixe^a?  moicheuo. 

Matt.  5.  27  Thou  shult  not  commit  adultery 

5.  28  whosoever  looketh.  .committed  adultery 

19.  18  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery 
Markio.  19  Thou  knowest.  .Do  not  commit  adultery 
Luke  16.  iS  committeth  adultery,  .committeth  adul. 

18.  20  Thou  knowest.  .Do  not  commit  adultery 
Rom.  2.  22  commit  adultery,  .dost  thou,  .adultery 

13.  9  For  this,  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery 
Jas.  2.  11  not  commit  adultery,  .commit  no  adultery 
Rev.   2.  22  and  them  that  commit  adultery  with 

ADULTERY,  committing  — 

To  commit  adultery  *|NJ  naqpk. 

Hos.    4.    2  and  stealing,  and  committing  adultery 

ADULTERY,  in — 

To  commit  adultery,  fxoix*vu)  moiclieuo. 

John  8.    4  [Master,  this  woman,  .taken  in  adultery] 

A-DTTM'-MIM,  D'anx  red  places. 

A  ridge  of  hills,  W.   of  Gilgal,   between  Judah  and 

.Benjamin. 

Josh.  15.    7  Gilgal,  that  (is)  "before  the  going  up  to  A. 
18. 17  Gililoth.  .over  against  the  going  up  of  A. 
ADVANCE,  to  — 
1.  To  make  great,  bii  gadal,  3. 

Esth.  10.    2  whereunto  the  king  advanced  him,  (are) 
2. To  lift  up,  Hi:'}  nasa.,  3. 

Esth.  3.    1  and  advanced  him,  and  set  his  seat  above 
5.  11  and  how  he  had  advanced  him  above  the 

3.  To  do,  make,  n'pjj  asah. 

1  Sa.  12.    6  (It  is)  the  Lord  that  advanced  Moses  and 

ADVANTAGE  — 

l.Over  and  above,  superfluity,  irepio-oSs  perissos. 

Rom.    3.    1  What  advantage  then  hath  the  Jew  ? 
^.Profit,  advantage,  a!<£e\eia. 

Jude       16  persons  in  admiration ..  of  advantage 

ADVANTAGE,  to  be  of  — 

To  profit,  be  useful,  [2D  sakan. 

Job    35,    3  thou  saids't,  What  advantage  will  it  be 

ADVANTAGE,  to  get  an  — 

To  get  more  than  another,  irKeoveKTea  pleonekteo. 

2  Co.   2.  11  Lest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  of  us 

ADVANTAGED,  to  be  — 
To  profit,  axpeKzu)  upJieleo. 

Luke  9.  25  For  what  is  a  man  advantaged,  if  he  gain 

ADVANTAGETH  — 

Profit,  advantage,  otyehos  ophelos. 

1  Co.  15.  32  what  advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead 
ADVENTURE  self,  to  — 
To  give,  give  up,  SiSw^ut  didomL 

Acts  19.  31  not  adventure  himself  into  the  theatre 
ADVENTURE,  to  — 
l.To  try,  attempt,  ngi  nasah,  3. 

Deut.28.  56  which  would  not  adventure  to  set.  .her 

l.To  send  forth,  l\b$  shalal;  5. 

Judg.  9.  17  my  father  fought  for  you,  and  adventured 

ADVERSARY  — 

l.To  bind,  distress,  straiten,  *fls  tsur. 

Exod23-  22  an  adversary  unto  thine  adversaries 
2. Strait ness,  straitener,  is  tsar. 

Deut32.  27  lest  their  adversaries  should  behave 

32.  43  will  render  vengeance  to  his  adversaries 
Josh.  5.  13  (Art)  thou  for  us,  or  for  our  adversaries  ? 
Ezra  4.    1  Now  when  the  adversaries  of  Judah  and 
Neh.    4.  11  And  our  adversaries  said,  They  shall  not 
Esth.  7.    6  And  Esther  said,  The  adversary  and 
Psa.  74.  10  how  long  shall  the  adversary  reproach  ? 
81.  14  turned  my  hand  against  their  adversaries 
89.  42  set  up  the  right  hand  of  his  adversaries 
Isa.     1.  24  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries,  and 
-     9.  1 1  Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of  Rezin 
59.  18  he  will  repay,  fury  to  his  adversaries 

63.  18  our  adversaries  have  trodden  down  thy 

64.  2  to  make,  .known  to  thine  adversaries 
Jer.   30.  16  and  all  thine  adversaries,  every  one  of 

46,  10  may  avenge  him  of  his  adversaries 
50.    7  and  their  adversaries  said,  JVe  offend  not 
Lam.  1.    5  Her  adversaries  are  the  chief  her  enemies 
1.    7  the  adversaries  saw  her,  (and)  did  mock  at 

1.  10  The  adversary  hath  spread  out-his  hand 
t.  17  (that)  his  adversaries  (should  be)round 

2.  4  he  stood,  .as  an  adversary,  and  slew  all 
2. 17  hath  set  up  the  horn  of  thine  adversaries 
4.  12  not  have  believed  that  the  adversary  and 

Amos  3.  11  An  adversary  (there  shall  be)  even  round 
Mic.    5.    9  Thine  hand,  .upon  thine  adversaries 
Hah.   1.   2  will  take  vengeance  on  his  adversaries 


Z.Straitness,  .Tjy  tsarah. 

1  Sa.    1.    6  and  her  adversary  also  provoked  her  sore 

4.  To  straiten,  distress,  Tiy  tsarar. 

Exod  23.  22  an  adversary  unto  thine  adversaries 
Psa.  69.  19  mine  adversaries  (are)  all  before  thee 
Isa.    11.  13  and  the  adversaries  of  Judah  shall  be  cut 

5.  To  strive,  plead,  2'~lrib,  5. 

1  Sa.  2.  10.  The  adversaries  of  the  LORD  shall  be 
6. Accuser,  opponent,  ja';'  satan. 

Num  22.  22  angel  of  the  Lord  stood,  .an  adversary 

1  Sa.  29.    4  lest  in  the  battle  he  be  an  adversary  tu  us 

2  Sa.  19.  22  that  ye  should  this  day  be  adversaries 
1  Ki.   5.    4  (so  that  there  is)  neither  adversary  nor 

11. 14  And  the  Lord  stirred  up  an  adversary 
11.  23  God  stirred  him  up  (another)  adversary 
11.  25  he  was  an  adversary  to  Israel  all  the  days 

7.  To  accuse,  oppose,  jeV  satan. 

Psa.  71.  13  Let.  .be.  .consumed  that  are  adversaries 
109.  20  this  (be)  the  reward  of  mine  adversaries 
109.  29  Let  mine  adversaries  be  clothed  with 
S.Oicner  of  a  judgment,  B5ifO  S53  baal  mishpat. 
Isa.   50.    8  who  (is)  mine  adversary?  let  him  come 
9. A  man  of  strife,  3*1  tTN  ish  rib. 

Job    31.  35  and  (that)  mine  adversary  had  written  a 
10. Opponent  in  law,  avriStKos  antidikos. 

Matt.  5.  25  Agree  with  thine  adversary.. .lest  the  a. 
Lukei2.  58  when  thou  goest  with  thine  adversary  to 

18.    3  saying,  Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary 
1  Pe.    5.    8  because  your  adversary  the  devil 

11. To  be  laid  in  opposition,  apriKetfiat  antikeimai. 
Luke  13.  17  all  his  adversaries  were  ashamed  :  and 
2i.  15  which  all  your  adversaries  shall  not  be 
1  Co.  16.    9  opened  unto  me,  and.  .many  adversaries 
Phil.    1.  2S  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries 
1  Tim.  5.  14  give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to 

12.0ver  against,  virevavrios. 

Heb.  10.  27  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries 

ADVERSARY,  to  be  an  — 

To  accuse,  oppose,  \tiy  satan. 

Psa.  38.  20  They  also  that,  .are  mine  adversaries 
109.    4  For  my  love  they  are  my  adversaries :  but 

ADVERSITY  — 

1. Halting,  limping,  ypv  tsela. 

Psa.  35.  15  But  in  mine  adversity  they  rejoiced,  and 

'l.Straitness,  distress,  rny  tsarah. 

2Sa.    4.    9  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  adversity 
2Ch.  15.    6  for  God  did  vex  them  with  all  adversity 
Psa.  31.    7  thou  hast  known  my  soul  in  adversities 
Prov.17.  17  and  a  brother  is  born  for  adversity 
24.  10  (If)  thou  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity 

Z.Straitness,  straitener,  is  tsar. 

Isa.  30.  20  the  Lord  give  you  the  bread  of  adversity 
i.Evil,  V~i  ra. 

1  Sa.  10.  19  saved  you  out  of  all  your  adversities  and 
Psa.  10.   6  for  I  (shall)  never  (be)  in  adversity 

94.  13  give  him  rest  from  the  days  of  adversity 
Eccl.  7.  14  in  the  day  of  adversity  consider 

ADVERSITY,  to  suffer  — 

Held  by  evil,  KaKovxovfxivos  kakouchoumenos. 

Heb.  13.    3  them  which  surfer  adversity,  as  being 
ADVERTISE,  to  — 
l.To  counsel,  \"T,  yaats. 

Num.24.  J4  1  wil1  advertise  thee  what  this  people 
2.  To  uncover,  the  ear,  \\h  n^a  galah  ozen. 

Ruth  4.    4  I  thought  to  advertise  thee,  saying 
ADVICE  — 
l.Wordj  "13*3  dabar. 

Judg  20.'  *7  give  here  your  advice  and  counsel 

2  Sa.  19.  43  advice  should  not  be  first  had  in  bringing 

2. Taste,  reason,  Dj,'t?  taam. 

iSa  25.  33  blessed(be)thyadvice,andblessed(be)thou 

Z.Counsel,  nyjg  etsah, 

2  Ch.  10.  14  and  answered  them  after  the  advice  of 

4.0 'pinion  founded  on  knowledge,  yva>/j.i]  gnome. 

2  Cor.  8.  10  And  herein  I  give  (my)  advice  :  for  this  is 
ADVICE,  good  — 
Combinations,  ni^irJR  lachbuloth. 

Prov.20.  iS  and  with  good  advice  make  war 
ADVICE,  to  take  cr  give  — 
l.To  give  or  take  counsel,  J*y;  yaats,  2. 

2  Ch.  10.    9  What  advice  give  ye  that  we  may  return 
25.  17  Then  Amaziah  king  of  Judah  took  advice 

2.  To  take  counsel,  py  tits. 

Judg  19.  30  consider  of  it,  take  advice,  and  speak 
ADVISE,  to  — 
l.To  kno-w,  VI)  yada. 

2  Sa.  24.  13  now  advise,  and  see  what  answer  I  shall 

2.  To  he  counselled,  py;  yaats,  2. 

1  Ki.  12.   6  How  do  ye  advise  that  I  may  answer  this 

3.  To  give  counsel,  {$qv\t}v  Tidnp.1  boulen  tithemi. 

Acts  27.  12  the  more  part  advised  to  depart  thence 
ADVISE  self,  to  — 
To  see,  nsn  raah. 

1  Ch.21.  12  advise  thyself  what  word  I  shall  bring 


ADVISZD,  -well  — 

To  be  counselled,  ]'ill  yaats,  2. 

Prov.13.  10  but  with  the  well  advised  (is)  wisdom 
ADVISEMENT  — 
Counsel,  ~s£  etsah. 

1  Ch.  12.  19  the  Philistines  upon  advisement  sent  him 
ADVOCATE  — 
One  called  alongside  (to  heljA,  irapdicKrjTOs. 

1  Jo.    2.    1  And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate 
AE-NE'-AS,  Atv&v  praise. 
A  paralytic  of  Lydda  healed  by  Peter. 

Acts    9.  33  there  he  found  a  certain  man  named  A. 
9.  34  Peter  said  unto  him,  A.,  Jesus  Christ 

AE'-NON,  Alv&v    (natural)  fountains. 

A  place  near  Salim  (a  little  N.  of  it,  and  now  called 

Aynum),  at  the  head  of  the  valley  of  Shechem.  Copious 

springs  are  still  here,   in  a  broad  open  valley  called 

Wady-Farah. 

John  3.  23  John  also  was  baptising  in  A.  near  to  S. 

APAR  (off)  — 

1.4  place  far  off,  50"!«?  merchaq. 

Psa.  138.  6  but  the  proud  he  knoweth  afar  off 

Jer.  31. 10  nations,  and  declare,  .in  the  isles  afar  off 

2.  Far  off,  pirn,  rachoq. 

Gen.  22.    4  Abraham  lifted  up . .  saw  the  place  afar  off 

37.  18  they  saw  him  afar  off.  .before  he  came 
Exod.   2.  4  And  his  sister  stood  afar  off,  to  wit 

20.  iS  the  people  saw  (it)t  they,  .stood  afar  off 
20.  21  And  the  people  stood  afar  off 
24.    1  seventy  of  the  elders,  .worship,  .afar  off 
Num.  9.  10  If  any  man.  .(be),  .in  a  journey  afar  off 

1  8a.  26.  13  stood  on  the  top  of  an  hill  afar  off 

2  Ki.  2.  7  fifty  men . .  went,  and  stood  to  view  afar  off 
Ezra  3.  13  people  shouted,  .noise  was  heard  afar  off 
Neh.  12.  43  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  even  afar  off 
Job     2. 12  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off 

36.  25  Every  man.  .may  behold  (it)  afar  off 
39  25  Ha.  .he  smelleth  the  battle  afar  off 
39.  29  she  seeketh.  .her  eyes  behold  afar  off 
Psa.  10.    1  Why  standest  thou  afar  off,  0  Lord? 

38.  11  My  lovers . .  and  my  kinsmen  stand  afar  off 

65.  5  them  that  are  afar  off  (upon)  the  sea 
139.    2  thou  understandest  my  thought  afar  off 

Isa.    23.    7  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  oil' 
59.  14  And.  .justice  standeth  afar  off 

66.  19  (to)  Tubal,  and  Javan,  (to)  the  isles  afar  off 
Jer.    23.  23  a  God  at  hand,  .and  not  a  God  afar  off? 

46.  27  behold,  I  will  save  thee  from  afar  off 
51.  50  go  away,  .remember  the  Lord  afar  off 
Mic.    4,    3  he  shall,  .rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off 

3.  To  pttt  oi'  go  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Exod  33.  7  and  pitched  it.  .afar  off  from  the  camp 
■i.Far,  distant,  fiatcpdv  makran. 

Acts  2.  39  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  (even)  as  many 
Eph.  2.  17  peace  to  you  which  were  afar  off 

5. From  far,  fj.anp6dev  makrothen. 

Markn.  13  seeing  a  fig  tree  afar  off,  having 
Luke  18.  13  the  publican,  standing  afar  off,  would 

16.23;  22.    54;   23.49;   Ma-tt.    26.    58;  27.   55  j 
Mark  5.  6 ;  14.  54  ;  15.  40 ;  Rev.  18.  to,  15.  17 

0. From  after,  Troppcodev 2}orrothen-* 

Luke  17.  12  that-  were  lepers,  which  stood  afar  off 
Heb.  11. 13  but  having  seen  them  afar  off 

AFFAIR  — 

l.Word,  thing,  ttj  dabar. 

1  Ch.  26.  32  made' rulers,  .for.  .affairs  of  the  king 
Psa.  112.    5  he  will  guide  his  affairs  with  discretion 

^.Service,  ny3j£  dbidah. 

Dan,    2.  49  he  set.  .over  the  affairs  of  the  province 
3.  12  certain,  .thou  hast  set  over  the  affairs 

Z.The  things  concerning,  tcc  ir€pl  ta peri. 

Eph.  6.  22  that  ye  might  know  our  affairs,  and  (that) 
Phil.  1.  27  I  may  hear  of  your  affairs,  that  ye  stand 

4.  The  things  concerning,  rd  Kara,  ta-  kata. 

Eph.    6.  21  But  that  ye  may  know  my  affairs, 
5. Business,  matter,  irpaynaTela pragmateia. 

2  Ti.     2.   4  entangleth  himself  with  the  affairs 
AFFECT,  to  — 

l.To  roll,  move,  act,  ihy  alal. 

Lam.  3.  51  Mine  eye  affecteth  mine  heart 
2.  To  be  or  make  zealous,  £-q\6oj  zeloo. 

Gal.    4.  17  exclude  you,  that  ye  might  affect  them 
AFFECT,  to  zealously  — 
To  be  or  make  zealous,  (tjKSqj  zeloo. 

Gal.     4.  17  They  zealously  affect  you,  (but)  not  well 
4, 18  good  to  be  zealously  affected  always 

AFFECTED,  to  make  evil  — 
To  make  evil,  /ca/C(Jw  kakoo. 

Acts  14.    2  made  their  minds  evil  affected  against 
AFFECTION  — 
1. Feeling,  passion,  -jra07jna  pathema. 

Gal.    5.  24  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts 

2. Feeling,  passion,  irddos  ^ai/ios. 

Rom.  1.  26  God  gave  them  up  unto  vile  affections 

AFFECTION,  inordinate  — 
Feeling,  passion,  Trd8os  pathos. 

Col.    3.    5  fornication,  uncleanness,  inordi.  affection 


AFFECTION 


16 


AFFRIGHTED 


AFFECTION,  inward  — 
Bowels,  o-irXayxva-  splangchna. 

2  Co,   7.  15  Ins  inward  affection  is  more  abundant 
AFFECTION  on,  to  set  the  — 
To  mind,,  think,  <ppoi>€<t>  phroneo. 

Col.    3.    2  Set  your  affection  on  things  above,  not  on 
AFFECTION  to,  to  set  — 
To  be  pleased,  nyi  ratsah. 

1  Ch.  29.    3  have  set  my  affection  to  the  house  of  my 

AFFECTION,  without  natural  — 
Without  affection,  oVropyos  astorgos. 

Rom.  1.  31  without  natural  affection;  2  Tim.  3.  2 
AFFECTIONED,  kindly  - 
Lovingly  affectioned,  <piKu(TTopyos  philostorgos. 

Rom  12.  10  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another  with 
AFFECTIONATELY  desirous  of,  be  — 
To  long  or  yearn  for,  i-j.eipofj.ai  hvmeiromai. 

1  Th.    2.    8  So  being  affectionately  desirous  of  you 

AFFINITY,  to  join,  join  in,  make' — 
To  join  oneself,  |nrj  chathan,  7. 

1  Ki.   3.    1  Solomon  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh  king 

2  Ch.  18.    1  Jehoshaphat.  .joined  affinity  with  Ahab 
Ezra    9.  14  Should  we.  .join  in  affinity 

AFFIR!U  confidently,  to  — 

To  asseverate  thoroughly,  ouo~xvp't(°/J-at  diischuriz. 

Luke  22.  59  another  confidently  affirmed,  saying 
AFFIRM  constantly,  to  — 

1.  T<> maintain  strongly,  b*La&e(3aiuofj.atdiabcbaioom. 

Titus  3.    8  I  will  that  thou  affirm  constantly 

2.  To  asseverate  thoroughly ,  Zuaxvp'LC0fJI-ai  diischur. 

Acts  12.  15  But  she  constantly  affirmed  that  it  was 
AFFIRM,  to  — 

1.  To  maintain  strongly,  OLa@€fiai6o/u.cu  diabebaioom. 
2TL     1.   7  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm 

2.  To  say  frequently,  <pao-Kw  phasko. 

Acts  25.  19  Jesus,  .whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  alive 
3.7*0  say,  tyy/ii  pTierni. 

Rom.  3.    8  as.  .reported,  and  as  some  affirm 
AFFLICT  lightly,  to  — 
To  esteem  lightly,  ^  qalal,  5. 

Isa.     9.    1  at  the  first  he  lightly  afflicted  the  land 
AFFLICT,  to  — 
l.To  afflict,  grieve,  nj;  yagah,  5. 

Isa.   51.  23  into  the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee 

Lam.  1.    s  for  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  her 

1   12  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  (me) 
2.To  p>rcss,  j*n?  lachats. 

Amos  6.  14  they  shall  afflict  you  from  the  entering 

3.  To  lower,  afflict,  ruj;  anah,  3. 

Gen.  15.  13  they  shall  afflict  them  four  hundred  years 
31.  50  If  thou  shalt  afflict  my  daughters 

Exod.  1.  11  they  did.. afflict  them  with  their  burdens 
1.  12  the  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more 
22.  22  Ye  shall  not  afflict  any  widow 

22.  23  If  thou  afHict  them  iu  any  wise 
Lev.  16.  29  the  month,  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls 

16.  31  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls,  by  a  statute 

23.  27  and  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls 

23.  32  and  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls 

Num  24.  24  the  coast  of  Chittim,  and  shall  afHict 

24.  24  and  shall  afflict  Eber.  .he  also  shall 

29.  7  and  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls 

30.  13  every  binding  oath  to  afflict  the  soul 
Deut  26.    6  evil  entreated  us,  aud  afflicted  us 
Judgi6.    5  we  may  bind  him  to  afHict  him 

16.    6  thou  mightest  be  bound  to  afflict  thee 
16.  19  and  she  began  to  afflict  him 
2  Sa.    7.  10  children  of  wickedness  afflict  them 

1  Ki.  11.  39  And  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  seed 

2  Ki.  17.  20  all  the  seed  of .  .afflicted  them 

Job    30.  11  hath  loosed  my  cord,  and  afflicted  me 

37.  23  plenty  of  justice  :  he  will  not  afflict 
Psa.  88.    7  thou  hast  afflicted  (me)  with  all  thy 

89.  22  nor  the  son  of  wickedness  afflict  him 

90.  15  the  days  (wherein)  thou  hast  afflicted  us 
94.    5  They  break  iu  pieces,  .and  afflict  thine 

119.  7s  thou  in  faithfulness  hath  afflicted  me 
Isa.    58.    3  (wherefore)  have  we  afflicted  our  soul 
58.    5  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  soul? 
60.  14  The  sons.,  that  afflicted  theeshallcome? 
64.  12  wilt  thou  hold  thy  peace,  and  afflict  us 
Lam.  3.  33  For  he  dotli  not  afflict  willingly 
[See  also  Nah.  1.  12,  12  ;  Zeph.  3.  19.J 
4.  To  lower,  afflict,  ny^  anah. 

Psa.  55.  19  God  shall  hear  and  afflict  them,  even  he 
5. To  lower,  afflict,  rnj;  anah,  5. 

1  Ki.    8.  35  their  sin,  when  thou  afflictest  them 

2  Ch.  6.  20  their  sin,  when  thou  dost  afflict  them 
6.  To  straiten,  Ty$  tsarar. 

Psa.129.    1  Many  a  time  have  they  afflicted  me 
143-  12  destroy  all  tlir-m  that  afflict  my  soul 
Amos  5  12  they  afflict  the  just,  they  take  a  bribe 
"i-To  do  evil,  pjri  ran,  5. 

Num.i.  11  Wherefore  hast  thou  afflicted  thv  servant? 
ijutii  1.  21  and  the  Almighty  hath  afflicted  me? 
1  sa.  44.    2  (how)  thou  didst  afflict  the  people 
Jer.  31.  28  and  to  destroy,  and  to  afflict 
Mic.    4.    6  and  her  that  I  have  afflicted 


8.  To  press,  6\e(3a>  thlebo. 

■2  i  o.    1.    6  whether  we  be  afflicted,  (it  is)  for  your 

1  Ti.    5.  10  if  she  have  relieved  the  afflicted,  if  she 
Heb.  11.  37  wandered  about,  .destitute,  afflicted 

AFFLICT,  to  more  grievously  — 
To  make  heavy,  "Q3  kabad,  5. 

Isa.    9.    1  did  more  grievously  afflict 
AFFLICT  selves,  to  — 
To  lower,  afflict  oneself,  nj>;  anah   7. 

Ezra   8.  21  that  we  might  afflict  ourselves  before 
AFFLICTED  — 
I. Bruised,  ^"i  dak. 

Prov.26.  28  A  lying  tongue  hateth  (those. .)  afflicted 
2. Lowered,  humbled,  "ty  ani. 

2  Sa.  22.  28  And  the  afflicted  people  thou  wilt  save 
Job    34.  28  he  heareth  the  cry  of  the  afflicted 
Psa.  18.  27  thou  wilt  save  the  afflicted  people 

22.  24  abhorred  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted 

25.  16  I  (am)  desolate  and  afflicted 

82.    3  do  justice  to  the  afflicted  and  needy 
88.  15  I  (am)  afflicted  and  ready  to  die  from  (my) 
102.  title.  Prayer  of  the  afflicted  when  he  is 
140.  12  will  maintain  the  cause  of  the  afflicted 
Prov.15.  15  all  the  days  of  the  afflicted  (are)  evil 

22.  22  neither  oppress  the  afflicted  in  the  gate 
Isa.   49.  13  will  have  mercy  upon  his  afflicted 

51.  21  Therefore,  hear  now  this,  thou  afflicted 
54.  11  0  thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  tempest 
Zeph.  3.  12  I  will,  .leave,  .an  afflicted  and  poor 
%.Son  of  affliction,  ^*|3  ben  oni. 

Prov.31.    5  pervert  the  judgment,  .of  the  afflicted 
4. Straitness,  15  tsar. 

Isa.    63.    9  In  all  then  affliction  he  was  afflicted 

5.  To  press,  8\i&a>  thlibo. 

1  Tim. 5   10  if  she  have  relieved  the  afflicted, 
AFFLICTED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  afflicted,  grieved,  ru;  yagah,  2. 

Lam.    1.    4  her  priests  sigh,  her  virgins  are  afflicted 
2.  To  be  lowered,  humbled,  ruy  anah. 

Psa.  1 16.  10  I  believed . .  I  was  greatly  afflicted 
119.  67  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray 

3. To  be  lowered,  humbled,  niy  anah,  2. 

Psa.119.  107  I  am  afflicted  very  much :  quicken  me 
Is**   53-    7  He  was  oppressed,  and  he  was  afflicted 
58.  to  the  hungry,  and  satisfy  the  afflicted  soul 

4.  To  be  lowered,  humbled,  niy  anah,  4. 

Lev.  23.  29  that  shall  not  be  afflicted  in  that  same  day 
Psa. 119.  71  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted 
Isa.   53.    4  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted 

5. To  lower  or  afflict  oneself,  ny>!  anah,  7. 

1  Ki.    2.  26  been  afflicted,  .my  father  was  afflicted 
Psa.  107.  17  because  of  their  iniquities,  are  afflicted 

6.  To  press,  8\i$w  thlibo. 

Cor.     1.    6  whether  we  be  afflicted,  .your  consolation 
Heb.  11.  37  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented 

7. Pressure,  6\7}pis  thliiysis. 

Matt  24.    9  they  deliver  you  up  to  be  afflicted 

8.  To  suffer  evil,  KaKoiradew  kakopatliso. 

Jas.     5.  13  Is  any  among  you  afflicted?  let  him  pray 

9.  To  bear  labour,  TaXanrwpea)  talaipdred. 

Jas.     4.    9  Be  afflicted,  aud  mourn,  and  weep 

AFFLICTED,  him  that  is  — 

One  that  is  melting  away,  DC  mas. 

Job     6.  14  To  him  that  is  afflicted  pity  (should  be 

AFFLICTION  — 

l.Inifpiity,  vanity,  |ix  aven. 

Job     5.    6  Although  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of 
Jer.      4.  15  a  voice,  .publisheth  affliction  from 
Hab.    3.    7  I  saw  the  tents  of  Cushan  in  affliction 

^.Pressure,  j'n?  lachats. 

1  Ki.  22.  27  bread  of  affliction  and  with  water  of  a. 

2  Ch.  18.  26  bread  of  affliction  and  with  water  of  a. 
Isa.   30.  20  the  Lord  give  you.  .the  water  of  affliction 

^.Pressure,  straitness,  njjjjiD  mvaqah. 

Psa.  66.  ti  thou  laidst  affliction  upon  our  loins 
4.  Eye,  aspect,  j'j;  ay  in. 

2  Sa.  16.  12  the  Lord  will  look  on  mine  affliction 
h.To  be  lowered,  humbled,  ni»  anah,  4. 

Psa.  132.    1  remember  David,  (and)  all  his  afflictiuns 

^.Lowered  one,  or  state,  TiMQenuth. 

Psa.  22.  24  nor  abhorred  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted 

7. One  lowered,  humbled,  *!%  oni. 

Gen.  16.  n  because  the  Lord  hath  heard,  .affliction 

29.  32  the  Lord  hath  looked  upon  my  affliction 
31.  42  God  hath  seen  mine  affliction 

41.  52  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  my  afflictimi 
Exod.  3.    7  I  have,  .seen  the  affliction  of  my  people 

3.  17  I  will  brins:  ynu  up  out  of  the  affliction 

4.  31  that  he  looked  upon  their  affliction 
Deut  16.    3  seven  days  shalt  thou  eat.  .bread  of  afflict. 

26.  7  the  Lord,  .looked  on  our  affliction 

1  Sa.    1.  11  look  on  the  affliction  of  thine  handmaid 

2  Ki.  14.  26  For  the  Lord  saw  the  affliction  of  Israel 
Xeh.    9.    9  the  affliction  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt 
Job    10.  15  of  confusion  ;  therefore  see.  .mine  afflict 

30.  16  the  days  of  affliction  have  taken  hold 
30.  27  the  days  of  affliction  prevented  me 


Job  36.    8  (and)  beholden  in  cords  of  affliction 
36.  15  He  delivereth  the  poor  in  his  affliction 
36.  21  this  hast  thou  chosen  rather  than  afflict. 
Psa.  25.  18  Look  upon  mine  affliction  and  my  pain 
44.  24  thou,  .forgettest  our  affliction  and  our 
88.    9  Mine  eye  mourn eth  by  reason  of  affliction 
107.  10  set  in  darkness  . .  (beiug)boundmaffliction 
107.  41  settethhethe  poor  on  nigh  from  affliction 
119.  50  This  (is)  my  comfort  in  my  affliction 
119.  92  should  then  have  perished  in  mine  afflict 
119.  153  Consider  mine  affliction,  and  deliver  me 
Isa    48.  10  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  afflict. 
Lam.  1.    3  because  of  affliction,  and  because  of  great 
1.    7  Jerusalem  remembered,  .her  affliction 
1.    9  0  Lord,  behold  my  affliction 

3.  1 1  (am)  the  man  (that)  hath  seen  affliction 
3. 19  Remembering  mine  affliction  and  my 

S. Straitness,  li:  tsar. 

Psa.  106.  44  Nevertheless  lie  regarded  their  affliction 
Hos.    5.  15  and  seek  my  face  :  in  their  affliction 
Zech.  8. 10  there  any)  peace . .  because  of  the  afflict. 

9. Straitness,  nny  tsarah. 

2  Ch.  20.    9  we.  .cry  uuto  thee  in  our  affliction 
Isa.  63.    9  In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted 
Jer.  15.  11  entreat  thee  (well),  .in. .time  of  affliction 

16.  19  and  my  refuge  in  the  day  of  affliction 
Jon.     2.    2  I  cried  by  reason  of  mine  affliction 
Nah.    1.    9  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the  second 
Zech.io.  11  he  shall  pass  through  the  sea.  .affliction 

Iti.Ecil,  VI  ra. 

Neh.    1.    3  the  captivity . .  (are)  in  great  affliction 
Psa.  34.  19  Many  (are)  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous 
107.  39  brought  low  through  oppression,  affliction 
Jer.  48.  16  the  calamity  of  Moab..his  affliction 
Obad.     13  not  have  looked  on  their  affliction 
Zech.  1.  15  and  they  helped  forward  the  affliction 

11. Breach,  breaking,  ~qv  sliehcr. 

Jer.  30.  15  Why  criest  thou  for  thine  affliction? 
Amos  6.    6  but  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction 

V2.  Pressure,  6\tyis  tkli'psis. 

Mark  4.  17  afterward,  when  affliction  or  persecution 

13.  19  For  (in)  those  days  shall  be  affliction 
Acts    7.  10  delivered  him  out  of  all  his  afflictions 

7.  11  Egypt  and  Chauaan,  and  great  affliction 
20.  23  that  bonds  and  afflictions  abide  n  e 

2  Co.  2.   4  out  of  much  affliction  and  anguish  of  heart 

4.  17  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a 
6.   4  of  God,  in  much  patience,  in  afflictions 

8.  2  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction 

Phil.    1.  16  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds 

4.  14  ye  did  communicate  with  my  affliction 
Col.     1.  24  and  fill  up . .  the  afflictions  of  Christ 

1  Th.  1.    6  received  the  word  in  much  affliction 

3.    3  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these  afflict. 
3.    7  we  were  comforted  .  .in  all  our  afiiction 
Heb.  10.  S3  both  by  reproaches  and  all  ictions;  and 
Jas.     1.  27  To  visit  the  fatherless,  .in  their  affliction 
IS. Evil  treatment,  kolkooo-ls  hakosis. 

Acts    7.  34  I  have  seen  the  affliction  of  my  people 
1 4. Suffering,  feeling,  irdOvfia  patkema. 

2  Ti.    3.  11  Persecutions,  afflictions,  which  came  unto 
Heb.  10.  32  ye  endured  a  great  fight  of  afflictions 

1  Pe.  5.    9  knowing  that  the  same  afflictions  aie 
AFFLICTION,  to  be  partaker  of  — 

To  suffer  evil  together,  cvyKaKo-rradiw. 

2  Ti.    1.    8  be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the 
AFFLICTION  with,  to  suffer  — 

To  be  evil  treated  together,  avyKaKovx*<0- 

Heb.  11.  25  Choosing  rather  tu  suffer  affliction  with 
AFFLICTION,  suffering  — 
Suffering  evil,  KanoTrddeia  kakopatheia. 

Jas.    5.  10  for  an  example  of  suffering  affliction,  and 
AFFLICTION,  to  be  in  — 
To  straiten,  send  distress,  TYif  tsarar,  5. 

2Ch.  33.  12  when  he  was  in  affliction,  he  besought 
AFFLICTIONS,  to  endure  — 
To  suffer  evil,  KaKoiradtw  kaJcopatheo. 

2  Ti.    4.    5  watch  thou  in  all . .  endure  afflictiuns 
AFFORDING  — 
To  being  out,  pis  pucj,  5. 

Psa.144.  13  garners. .  full,  affording  all  manner  of 
AFFRIGHT,  to — 
l.To  make  afraid,  terrify,  nys  booth,  3. 

Isa.  21.    4  My  heart  panted,  fearfulness  affrighted 
2.  To  make  afraid,  K"V  yare,  3. 

2CI1.  32.  18  to  affright  "thein,  and  to  trouble  them 
AFFRIGHTED  — 
In  fear,  ey.<pof3os  emphobos. 

Luke24.  37  they  were  terrified  and  affrighted 

Rev.  11.  13  the  remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave 

AFFRIGHTED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  trouble*/,  ^  bahal,  2. 

Jer.   51.  32  and  the  men  of  war  are  affrighted 

2.  To  be  broken  down,  nnn  chathath,  2. 

Job    39.  22  He  mocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  affrighted 

3.  To  be  terrified,  \'TJ  arats. 

Deut.  7.  21  Thou  shalt  not  he  affrighted  at  them 

4.  To  lay  hold  on  fear,  *\&'  inx  achaz  saar. 

Job   18.  20  as  they  that  went  before  were  affrighted 


AFOOT 


17 


AFTER 


5. To  wonder  greatly,  eK9a.fj.f3ea},  ekthambeo. 
Marki6.    5  aud  they  were  affrighted 

16.    6  he  saith  uuto  them,  Be  not  affrighted 

AFOOT  — 

On  foot,  -n-nCv  jV&k- 

Mark  6.  33  ran  afoot  thither  out  of  all  cities 

APOOT,  to  go  — 

To  be  or  go  on  foot,  ire^evw,  pezeuo. 
Acts  20.  13  minding  himself  to  go  afoot 

AFORE  — 

I. Face,  front,  WiB  panim. 

Isa.   18.   5  For  afore  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is 
Eze.  33.  22  in  the  evening,  afore  he  that  was  escaped 

H. Former  state  or  time,  HDip  qadmah. 

Psa.129.   6  which  withereth  afore  it  groweth 

AFORE,  to  promise  — 

To  tell  about  beforehand,  irpoeirayyeWofxaL. 
Rom.  1.    2  Which  he  had  promised  afore  by  his 

APORE  or  aforetime,  to  write  — 

To  write  beforehand,  ■Kpoypa.tyca,  prographo. 
Eph.    3.    3  as  I  wrote  afore  in  few  words 
Rom.  1 5.    4  whatsoever  things.-  written  aforetime 

AFOREHAND,  to  come  — 

To  take  beforehand,  irpoXafifiava}  prolambano. 

Mark  1 4.    8  she  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body 
AFORETIME  — 
l.Face,  front,  wib panim. 

Neh.  13.    5  where  aforetime  they  laid  the  meat  offer. 

Job    17.   6  and  aforetime  I  was  as  a  tabret 
2. East,  former,  before,  Dnp,  qedem. 

Jer.  30.  20  Their  children  aUo  shall  be  as  aforetime 
3.  Once,  iroTe,  pote. 

John  9.  13  They  brought,  .him  that  aforetime  was 
k.From  before  this*  nil  nonp.  \Q  min  qadmath  denah. 

Dan.    6.  10  gave  thanks  before  his  God,  as . .  aforetime 
AFRAID  — 

I,  Trembling,  inn  chared. 

Judg.  7.    3  Whosoever  (is)  fearful  and  afraid,  let  him 

2.Fearingt  &n;  yare. 

Deut.  7.  19  all  the  people  of  whom  thou  art  afraid 
1  Sa.  23.    3  Behold,  we  be  afraid  here  in  Judah 
Jer.  42. 11  Be  not  afraid,  .are  afraid,  .be  not  afraid 

3.  In  fear,  €fj,<po&os,  emphobos. 

Luke24.    5  as  they  were  afraid,  and  bowed  down 
Acts  10.    4  when  lie  looked  on  him,  hewasafraid,and 
22.    9  they,  .saw  indeed  the  light,  .were  afraid 

AFRAID,  to  be  — 

l.Tobe  troubled,  ^na  bahal,  2. 

Job  21.    6  Even  when  I  remember  I  am  afraid 

Isa.  13.    8  And  they  shall  be  afraid 

2.To  be  terrified,  afraid,  nyn  baath,  2. 

1  Ch.  21.  30  to  enquire  of  God  :  for  he  was  afraid 
Esth.  7.    6  Hanian  was  afraid  before  the  king 
Dan.    8.  17  I  was  afraid,  and  fell  upon  my  face 

3.  To  be  afraid,  "fla  gur. 

NUIT122.    3  And  Moab  was  sore  afraid  of  the  people 
Deut.  1.  17  ye  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the  face  of  man 

18.  22  thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  him 

1  Sa.  18.  15  when  Saul  saw.  .he  was  afraid  of  him 
Job    19.  29  Be  ye  afraid  of  the  sword 

41.  25  raiseth  up  himself,  the  mighty  are  afraid 

4.  To  be  grieved,  melted,  JNn  daag. 

Isa.   57.  11  of  whom  hast  thou  been  afraid 
Jer.  38.  19  I  am  afraid  of  the  Jews  that  are  fallen 
42. 16  the  famine,  whereof  ye  were  afraid 

5.  To  be  afraid,  to  creep,  ?n)  zaclial. 

Job  32.    6  ye  (are)  very  old ;  wherefore  I  was  afraid 

6.  To  be  girded,  restrained,  "m  chagar. 

2  Sa.  22.  46  they  shall  be  afraid  out  of  their  close 

7.  To  be  pained,  Tn,  ?^n  chul,  chil. 

Psa.  77.  16  the  waters  saw  thee  ;  they  were  afraid 

8.  To  be  girded,  restrained,  Jnn  charag, 

Psa.  18.  45  and  be  afraid  out  of  their  close  places 
9.7*0  tremble,  inn  char  ad. 

Gen.  42.  28  their  heart  failed,  .they  were  afraid 
Ruth  3.    8  it  came  to  pass,  .the  man  was  afraid 
1  Sa.  21.    1  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  the  meeting 

28.    5  when  Saul  saw  the  host,  .he  was  afraid 
1  Ki.    1.  49-the  guests  that  (were)  with  A.  were  afraid 
Isa..  10.  29  Ramah  is  afraid ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled 

19.  16  and  it  shall  be  afraid  and  fear 
41.    5  the  ends  of  the  earth  were  afraid 

Amos 3.    6  and  the  people  not  be  afraid? 

10.  To  be  cast  doxon,  nnn  chathath. 

Isa.   20.    5  they  shall  be  afraid  and  ashamed  of  E. 
31.   9  his  princes  shall  be  afraid  of  the  ensign 

II.  To  be  cast  down,  nnn  chathath,  2. 

Isa.   31.    4  will  not  be  afraid  of  their  voice 

51.    7  neither  be  ye  afraid  of  their  revilings 

Mai.    2 .    5  wherewith  he . .  was  afraid  before  my  name 
12.2*0  be  afraid,  nr  yagar. 

Deut.  9.  19  For  I  was  afraid  of  the  anger 

2S.  60  all  the  diseases,  .thou  wast  afraid  of 


Job     3-  25  that  which  I  was  afraid  of  is  come 

9.  28  I  am  afraid  of  all  my  sorrows 
Jer.  39.  17  the  men  of  whom  thou  (art)  afraid 

13.  To  fear,  reverence,  Ni;  yare. 

Gen.    3.  10  I  was  afraid,  because  I  (was)  naked 
18.  15  I  laughed  not ;  for  she  was  afraid 
20.    8  and  the  men  were  sore  afraid 
28,  17  he  was  afraid,  and  said,  How  dreadful 

31.  31  and  said  to  Laban,  Because  I  was  afraid 

32.  7  Then  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid  and 

42.  35  father  saw  the.  .money,  they  were  afraid 

43.  18  And  the  men  were  afraid 

Exod.  3.    6  Moses  hid  his  face ;  for  he  was  afraid 
14.  10  and  they  were  sore  afraid 
34.  30  they  were  afraid  to  come  nigh  him 
Num  12.    8  then  were  ye  not  afraid  to  speak 
Deut.  1.  29  Dread  not,  neither  be  afraid  of  them 
2.    4  and  they  shall  be  afraid  of  you 

5.  5  for  ye  were  afraid  by  reason  of  the  fire 
7  18  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  them 

20.  1  and  seest  horses, .  .be  not  afraid  of  them 
28.  10  and  they  shall  be  afraid  of  thee 

Josh.  9.  24  we  were  sore  afraid  of  our  lives 

11.    6  Lord  said . .  Be  not  afraid  because  of  them 

1  Sa.    4.    7  And  the  Philistines  were  afraid,  for  they 

7.    7  Israel  heard  (it),  they  were  afraid 
17.  11  they  were  dismayed,  and  greatly  afraid 

17.  24  all.  .fled  from  him,  and  were  sore  afraid 

18.  12  And  Saul  was  afraid  of  David 

18.  29  Saul  was  yet  the  more  afraid  of  David 

21.  12  was  sore  afraid  of  Achish  the  king  of 
28.    5  he  was  afraid,  and  his  heart  greatly 
28.  13  the  king  said  unto  her,  Be  not  afraid 

28.  20  was  sore  afraid,  because  of  the  words  of  S. 

31.  4  would  not;  for  he  was  sore  afraid 

2  Sa.    1.  14  wast  thou  not  afraid  to  stretch  forth  thine 

6.  9  David  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day 

2  Ki.    1. 15  Go  down  with  him :  be  not  afraid  of  him 
10.    4  But  they  were  exceedingly  afraid,  and 

19.  6  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  which  thou 

25.  26  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  Chaldees 

1  Ch.  10.    4  would  not ;  for  he  was  sore  afraid 

13. 12  David  was  afraid  of  God  that  day 

2  Ch.  20.  15  Be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  by  reason 

32.  7  be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for  the  king 
Neh.   2.    2  Then  I  was  very  sore  afraid 

4.  14  Be  not  ye  afraid  of  them  :  remember  the 
6. 13  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and  sin 

Job     5,  21  neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  destruction 

5.  22  neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  the  beasts 

6.  21  see  (my)  casting  down,  and  are  afraid 
Psa.    3.    6  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands  of 

49.  16  Be  not  thou  afraid  when  one  is  made  rich 
56.    3  What  time  I  amafraid,  I  will  trust  in  thee 
56.  11  I  will  not  be  afraid  what  man  can  do 
65.    8  They  also  that  dwell . .  are  afraid  at  thy 
91.    5  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by 
112.    7  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings 
112.    8  His  heart  (is)  established,  he.  .be  afraid 
119.  120  and  I  am  afraid  of  thy  judgments 
Prov.  3.  25  Be  not  afraid  of  sudden  fear 

31.  21  She  is  not  afraid  of  the  snow  for  her 
Eccl.  12,    5  they  shall  be  afraid  of  (that  which  is) 
Isa.    10.  24  O  my  people . .  be  not  afraid  of  the 

37.    6  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  that  thou  hast 

40.  9  lift  up  thy  voice,  .be  not  afraid 

51.  12  that  thou  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  man 

Jer.     1.    8  Be  not  afraid  of  their  faces :  for  I  (am) 

10.    5  Be  not  afraid  of  them ;  for  they  cannot 

26.  21  when  Urijah  heard  it,  he  was  afraid 

41.  18  Chaldeans :  for  they  were  afraid  of  them 

42.  11  Be  not  afraid  of  the  king  of  Babylon 
42.  1 1  be  not  afraid  of  him,  saith  the  LORD 

Eze.    2.    6  be  not  afraid  of  them .  .neither  be  afraid 
2.    6  be  not  afraid  of  their  words,  nor  be 

Joel    2.  22  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field 

Jon.    1.    5  Then  the  mariners  were  afraid,  and  cried 
1.  10  Then  were  the  men  exceedingly  afraid 

Hab.  3.    2  I.  .heard  thy  speech,  (and)  was  afraid 
14.7*0  be  afraid,  to  tremble,  rrv  yarah. 

Isa.   44.    8  Fear  ye  not,  neither  be  afraid  :  have  uot 
15. To  be  affrighted,  pjj  arats. 

Deut  31.    6  fear  not,  n'or  be  afraid  of  them 

Josh.   1.    9  be  not  afraid,  neither  be  thou  dismayed 
16.7*0  declare  fearful,  pj;  arats,  5. 

Isa.     8.  12  neither  fear  ye.  .Dor  be  afraid 
17.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  hasten,  inppachad. 

Job   23.  15  when  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  him 

Psa.  27.    1  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ? 

Prov.  3.  24  thou  liest  down,  thou  shalt  not  be  afraid 

Isa.   12.    2  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid 

19.  17  every  one.  .shall  be  afraid  in  himself 

33.  14  The  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid 

Jer.  36.  16  they  were  afraid  both  one  and  other 

36.  24  Yet  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  rent  their 

Mic.    7.  17  they  shall  be  afraid  of  the  Lord  our  God 
18.7*0  be  angry,  tremble,  Tjn  ragaz. 

Exod  15.  14  people  shall  he'ar,  (and)  be  afraid 
19.7*0  be  afraid,  to  tremble,  nnnrahah. 

Isa.    44.    8  Fear  ye  not,  neither  be  afraid :  have  not 
"20.  7*o  be  ivhirled  away,  ny'p'  saar. 

Eze.  27.  35  their  kings  shall  be  sore  afraid,  they  shall 

32.  10  their  kings  shall  be  horribly  afraid  for 
21.7*0  be  timid,  shrinking,  SeiKidw,  deiliao. 

John  14.  27  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid 
22.7*0  tremble,  rpifita,  tremo. 

2  Pe.    2.  10  not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of  dignities 


23.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  <po@eofj.at,  phobeomai. 
Matt.  2.  22  he  was  afraid  to  go  thither 

14.  27  Be  of  good  cheer . .  be  not  afraid 

14.  30  he  was  afraid;  and  beginning  to  sink 
17.    6  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore  afraid 

17.  7  Jesus,  .said,  Arise,  and  be  not  afraid 
25.  25  I  was  afraid,  and  went  and  hid 

28.  10  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them,  be  not  afraid 
Mark  5.  15  his  right  mind  :  and  they  were  afraid 

5.  36  he  saith  unto  the  ruler. .  Be  uot  afraid 

6.  50  Be  of  good  cheer,  .be  not  afraid 

9.  32  not  that  saying,  and  were  afraid  to  ask  him 
10.  32  as  they  followed,  they  were  afraid 
16.    8  anything  to  any  (man) . .  they  were  afraid 
Luke  8.  25  And  they  being  afraid  wondered,  saying 

8.  35  in  his  right  mind  :  and  they  were  afraid 

12.  4  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body 
Johu   6.  19  see  Jesus  walking,  .and  they  were  afraid 

6.  20  he  saith  unto  them,  .be  not  afraid 
19.    8  that  saying,  he  was  the  more  afraid 
Acts    9.  26  they  were  all  afraid  of  him,  and 

18.  9  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and  hold  not 
22.  29  and  the  chief  captain  also  was  afraid 

Rom  13.    3  Wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the 

13.  4  But  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid 
Gal.  4.  11  I  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed 
Heb.  11.  23  and  they  were  not  afraid  of  the  king's 

1  Pe.    3.    6  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement 

3. 14  and  be  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither 
AFRAID,  sore  — 

Greatly  fearing,  etctpo&os  ekphobos. 
Mark  9.    6  for  they  were  sore  afraid 

AFRAID,  to  be  sore  — 

They  feared  a  great  fear J<pof3r}9n<rav  (p40ov  /j.4yau. 
Luke  2.   9  the  glory .  .shone,  .they  were  sore  afraid 

AFRAID,  to  be  horribly  — 

7*o  be  whirled  axoay,  "ij?^  saar. 

Jer.     2.  12  be  horribly  afraid,  be  ye  very  desolate 
AFRAID,  to  make  — 
1.7*0  trouble,  hasten,  hrt^  bahal,  3. 

Psa.  83.  15  make  them  afraid  with  thy  storm 
2.7*o  make  afraid,  terrify,  nys  baath,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.    5  floods  of  ungodly  men  made  me  afraid 
Job    13.  11  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid? 

13.  21  and  let  not  thy  dread  make  me  afraid 

15.  24  anguish  shall  make  him  afraid 

18.  11  Terrors  shall  make  him  afraid  on  every 

33.  7  my  terror  shall  not  make  thee  afraid 
Psa.   18.    4  floods  of  ungodly  men  made  me  afraid 

3. 7*o  make  afraid,  bni  dechal,  3. 

Dan.    4.    5  I  saw  a  dream  which  made  me  afraid 

4. 7*o  cause  to  tremble,  trouble,  "inn  charad,  5. 
Lev.  26.    6  and  none  shall  make  (you)  afraid 
2  Sa.  17.    2  I  will  come,  .and  will  make  him  afraid 
Job  11.  19  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make,  .afraid 
Isa.    17.    2  aud  none  shall  make  (them)  afraid 
Jer.  30.  10  quiet,  and  none  shall  make  (him)  afraid 

46.  27  Jacob,  .none  shall  make  (him)  afraid 
Eze.  30.   9  to  make  the  careless  Ethiopians  afraid 

34.  28  safely,  and  none  shall  make,  .afraid 
39.  26  safely,  .and  none  made  (them)  afraid 

Mic.    4.    4  and  none  shall  make  (them)  afraid 
JMah.   2.  11  whelp,  and  none  made  (them)  afraid? 
Zeph.  3.  13  and  none  shall  make  (them)  afraid 

5.7*0  cast  down,  nnrr  chathath,  5. 

Hab.    2. 17  spoil  of  beasts,  .made  them  afraid 

6.  To  make  afraid,,  K*v  yare,  3. 

2  Sa.  14.  15  because  the  people  have  made  me  afraid 
Neh.    6.    9  For  they  all  made  us  afraid,  saying 

7.7*o  cause  to  shake  or  tremble,  tryn  raash,  5. 

Job   39.  20  Canst  thou  make . .  afraid  as  a  grasshopper? 

AFRESH,  to  crucify  — 

2*o  crucify  again,  or  anew,  avao-ravpSaj,  anastauroo. 
Heb.   6.   6  crucifytothemselvesthesonofGodafresh 

AFTER,  (that  follow) — 

i. After,  nntt  achar. 

Gen.    5.    4  And  the  days  of  Adam  after  he  had 
5.    7  Seth  lived  after  he  begat  Enos 
5.  10  And  Enos  lived  after  he  begat  Cainan 

I.Last,  latter  end,  j'nnt-:  acharon. 

Gen.  33.    2  he  put.  .Leah  aud  her  children  after 
1  Ki.  17.  13  and  after  make  for  thee  and  for  thy  son 
Job    18.  20  They  that  come  after  (him)  shall  be 
Eccl.    1.  11  come  with  (those)  that  shall  come  after 
4.  16  they.. that  come  after  shall  not  rejoice 

3. After,  'nriN*  achare. 

Dan.    7.  24  and  another  shall  rise  after  them 

4.  Unto,  to,  b#  el. 

Lev.  20.    6  And  the  soul  that  turneth  after  such 

5.  When,  n0?3  kaasher. 

Judgi6.  22  hair,  .began  to  grow  agam  after  he  was 

6. After,  step,  walk,  nnx  athar. 

Dan.    2.  39  after  thee  shall  arise  another  kingdom 

7. From  (the  time)  that,  *^D  midde. 

1  Sa.  18.  30  it  came  to  pass,  after  they  went  forth 

%.From,  |p  min. 

1  Ch.  8.  8  (children),  .after  he  had  sent  them  away 
Ezra  5.  12  after  that  our  fathers  had  provoked  the 
Dan.  4.    26  after  that  thou  shalt  have  knowu 


AFTER 


18 


AFTERWARD 


9.0?;,  upon,  in  addition  to,  "jJJ  ol* 

Gen.  48.   6  shall  be  called  after  the  name  of  their 

10. According  to  the  mouth,  *S7  lephi, 

Jer.  29.  10  That  after  seventy  years  he  accomplished 

11. From  the  end,  {'P?  miqaets. 

Gen.  1 5.    3  after  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the 
Nam  13.  25  returned  from  searching,  .after  forty 
2  Sa.  15.    7  And  it  came  to  pass  after  forty  years 

1  Ivi  17.    7  And  it  came  to  pass  after  a  while 

2  Ch.  18.  2  And  after  (certain)  years  he  went  down 
Neh.  13.  6  and  after  certain  days  obtained  I  leave 
Esth.  2.  12  after  that  she  had  been  twelve  months 
Jer.   13.    6  And  it  came  to  pass  after  many  days 

42.    7  And  it  came  to  pass  after  ten  days 
Dan.  11.  13  shall  certainly  come  after  certain  years 

l%From  the  end,  nxpQ  miqtseh. 

Josh.  3.    2  And  it  came  to  pass  after  three  days 

13.7V>  go  out,  n>*;  yatsa. 

2  Ch.  21. 19  it  came  to  pass,  .after  the  end  of  two 

lLThefoot,  hr\  reffel- 

1  Sa.  25.  42  five  damsels  of  her's  that  went  after  her 

2  Sa.  15.  16  went  forth,  and  all  his  household  after 

15.  17  went  forth,  and  all  the  people  after  him 
15. 18  six  hundred  men  which  came  after  him 

15.At  the  time,  nyS  le-eth. 

j  Ch.  20.    1  it  came  to  pass  that  after  the  year  was 

16.  Through,  during,  after,  Ma  dia. 

Mark  2.  1  And.  .he  entered  into  Capernaum  after 
Acts  24.  17  Now  after  many  years  I  came  to  briny 
Gal.     2.    1  Then  fourteen  years  after  I  went  up  again 

17.  In,  by,  4v,  en. 

Heb.    4.  it  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example 

18.  Upon,  on  account  of,  iirl  (dat.)  epi. 

Luke    1.  59  called  him  Zacharias,  after  the  name 

19.  Upon,  eVt  epi  (ace.)  Luke  15.  4. 

20. Down  towards,  according  to,  Kara  [ace.)  kata. 
Matt  23.    3  but  do  not  ye  after  their  works :  for  they 
Luke  2.  27  to  do  for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  law 

2.  42  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem  after  the 
John  8.  15  Ye  judge  after  the  flesh ;  I  judge  no  man 
Acts  13.  22  the  (son)  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  mine  own 

23.  3  for  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after  the 

24.  14  I  confess  unto  thee,  that  after  the  way 
26.    5  that  after  the  most  straitest  sect  of  our 

Roni.  2.    5  But  after  thy  hardness  and  impenitent 

7.  22  hi  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man 

8.  1  [walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  thej 
8.    4  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the 
8.    5  are  after  the  flesh . .  are  after  the  Spirit 
8.  12  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live  after  the  flesh 
8.  13  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die 

1  Co.    1.  26  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh 

7.  40  if  she  so  abide  after  my  judgment 
10.  18  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh :  are  not 

2  Co.    5.  16  no  man  after  the .  .Christ  after  the  flesh 

10.    3  we  do  not  war  after  the  flesh  ;  7.  9,  n. 

10.  7  Do  ye  look  on  things  after  the  outward 

11.  17  I  speak  (it)  not  after  the  Lord,  but  as  it 
21.  18  seeing  that  many  glory  after  the  flesh 

Gal.     1.  11  was  preached  of  me  is  not  after  man 
4.  23  of  the  bondwoman  was  born  after  the 
4.  29  born  after  the  flesh.. after  the  Spirit 

Eph.    1.  11  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of 

4.  24  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness 
Col.     2.    8  after.. men,  after  the  rudiments.. after 

2.  22  after  the  commandments  and  doctrines 

3.  10  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image 
2  Th.   2.    9  whose  coming  is  after  the  working 

3.    6  not  after  the  tradition  which  he  received 
2  Ti.     4.    3  after  their  own  lusts  shall  they  heap 
Titus  1.    1  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  .after 

1.    4  Titus,  (mine)  own  son  after  the  common 
Heb.    5.    6  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever  after  the 

5.  10  Called  of  God  an  high  priest  after  the 

6.  20  an  high  priest  for  ever  after  the  order 

7.  1 1  after  the  order  of  M. . .  after  the  order  of  A. 
7.  15  forthatafterthesimilitudeof  Melchisedec 
7.  16  not  after  the  law.  .but  after  the  power 

7.  17  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order 

7.  21  Thou(art)apriestfor  ever[afterthe  order] 

12.  10  For  they  verily. .  after  their  own  pleasure 
Jas.     3.    9  which  are  made  after  the  similitude  of 

2  Be.    3.    3  scoffers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts 
2  Jo.  6  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his 

Jude        16  These  are  murmurers, . .  walking  after 

18  who  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly 
21. After,  upon,  ixstcl  (ace.)  meta. 

Matt.  1.  12  after  they  were  brought  to  Babylon 

17.    1  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James 

24.  29  Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those 

25.  19  After  a  long  time  the  lord  of  those 

26.  2  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is 

26.  32  But  after  I  am  risen  again,  I  will  go 

26.  73  And  after  a  while  came  unto  him 

27.  53  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his 
27.  63  After  three  davs  I  will  rise  asain 

Mark  1.  14  after  that  John  was  put  in  prison 

8.  31  be  killed,  and  after  three  days  rise  again 

9.  2  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  (with  him) 

13.  24  m  those  days,  after  that  tribulation 

14.  1  After  two  days  was  (the  feast  of)  the 
14.  28  after  that  I  am  risen.  I  will  go 

14.  70  And  a  little  after,  they  that  stood  by 
16.  12  [After  that  be  appeared  in  another  form] 
16.  19  [So  then  after  the  Lord  bad  spoken  unto] 
Luke   1.  24  And  after  those  days  his  wife  Elisabeth 


Luke  2.  46  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  three  days 
5.  27  And  after  these  things  he  went  forth 
9.  28  about  an  eight  days  after  these  sayings 

10.  1  After  these  things  the  Lord  appointed 
12.    4  and  after  that  have  no. more  that  they 

12.  5  Fear  him  which  alter  he  hath  kilied  hath 
15.  13  And  not  many  days  after  the  younger  son 
22.  20  Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper,  sa>  ing 
22.  58  after  a  little  while  another  saw  him 

John  2.  12  After  this  he  went  down  to  Capernaum 

3.  22  After  these  things  came  Jesus  and  his 

4.  43  after  two  days  he  departed  thence,  and 

5.  1  after  this  there  was  a  feast  of  the  Jews 

5.  4  [whosoever  then  first  after  the  troubling] 

6.  1  After  these  things  Jesus  went  over  the 

7.  1  After  these  things  Jesus  walked  in 

11.  7  Then  after  that  saith  he  to  (his)  disciples 

11.  11  and  after  that  he  saith  unto  them.  Our 

13.  27  after  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him 

19.  28  After  this,  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things 

19.  38  after  this  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  being  a 

20.  26  after  eight  days  again  his  disciples 

21.  1  After  these  things  Jesus  shewed  himself 
Acts    1.    3  he  shewed  himself  alive  after  his  passion 

5.  37  After  this  man  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee 
7.    5  and  to  his  seed  after  him,  when  (as  yet) 

7.  7  and  after  that  shall  they  come  forth,  and 
10.  37  and  began  from  Galilee,  after  the  baptism 
10.  41  who  did  eat.  .after  he  rose  from  the  dead 

12.  4  intending  after  Easter  to  bring  him  forth 

13.  15  And  after  the  reading  of  the  law  and 
13.  20  And  after  that  he  gave  (unto  them) 

13.  25  But,  behold,  there  cometh  one  after  me 
15.  13  And  after  they  had  held  their  peace 

15.  16  After  this  I  will  return,  and  will  build 
15.  36  And  some  days  after  Baul  said  unto 

18.  1  After  these  things  Paul  departed  from 

19.  4  on  him  which  should  come  after  him 

19.  21  After  these  things  were  ended,  Paul 

20.  1  after  the  uproar  was  ceased,  Paul  called 
20.    6  we  sailed  away  from  Philippi  after  the 

20.  29  I  know  this,  that  after  my  departing 

21.  15  after  those  days  we  took  up  our  carriages 
24.    1  after  five  days  Ananias  the  high  priest 

24.  24  after  certain  days,  when  Felix  came  with 

25.  1  after  three  days  he  ascended  from 

28.  11  after  three  months  we  departed  in  a  ship 
28.  13  after  one  day  the  south  wind  blew 
28.  17  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  three  days 
Gal.     1.  18  Then  after  three  years  I  went  up  to 

3.  17  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after 
Titus  3.  10  A  man  that  is  an  heretick  after  the  first 
Heb.    4.    7  To  day,  after  so  long  a  time ;  as  it  is  said 

8.  10  this  (is)  the  covenant,  .after  those  days 

9.  3  after  the  second  veil,  the  tabernacle 
9.  27  but  after  this  the  judgment 

10.  15  for  after  that  he  had  said  before 

10.  16  This  (is)  the  covenant  that,  .after  those 

10.  26  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have 

2  Pe.    1.  15  Moreover  I  will  endeavour,  .after  my 
Rev.    4.    1  After  this  I  looked,  and,  behold,  a  door 
7.    1  after  these  things  I  saw  four  angels 

7.  9  After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great 

11.  11  after  three  days  and  an  half  the  Spirit 

15.  5  And  after  that  I  looked,  and,  behold 

18.  1  after  these  things  I  saw  another  angel 

19.  1  after  these  things  I  beard  a  great  voice 

20.  3  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little 
22.  The  next  in  order,  t|^s  hexes. 

Luke  7.  11  and  it  came  to  pass  the  day  after,  that 
2d. According  to  order,  tea.6e£ris  kathexes. 

Acts    3.  24  from  Samuel  and  those  that  follow  after 
24. From  after,  from  behind,  owto-dev  opisthen. 

Matt  15.  23  Send  her  way ;  for  she  crieth  after  us 

Luke  23.  26  that  he  might  bear  (it)  after  Jesus 

25. After,  behind,  birio-oj  opiso. 

Matt.  3.  11  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier 

10.  38  followeth  after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me 

16.  24  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let 
Mark  1.    7  cometh  one  mightier  than  I  after  me 

1.  17  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Come  ye  after  me 
1.  20  they  left  their  father,  .and  went  after 

8.  34  "Whosoever  will  come  after  me,  let  him 
Luke  9.  23  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let 

14.  27  bear  his  cross,  and  come  after  nie 

19.  14  and  sent  a  message  after  him,  saying 

21.  8  go  ye  not  therefore  after  them 
John   1.  15  He  that  cometh  after  me  is  preferred 

1.  27  He  it  is,  who  coming  after  me  is  preferred 
1.  30  After  me  cometh  a  man  which  is  preferred 

12.  19  behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  him 
Acts    5.  37  drew  away  much  people  after  him  :  he  also 

20.  30  to  draw  away  disciples  after  them 

1  Ti.    5.  15  some  are  already  turned  aside  after  Satan 

2  Pe.  2.  10  chiefly  them  that  walk  after  the  flesh 
Jude  7  going  after  strange  flesh,  are  set  forth 
Rev.  12.  isithe  serpent  cast  out.  .after  the  wo.13.  3. 

26.  To  be  held  around,  irepiexofiai,  Acts  23.  29. 

27.  When,  ore  hote. 

John  13.  12  So  after  he  had  washed  their  feet,  and 
2S.As,  thaty  when,  after  that,  ws  hos. 

Acts  16.  10  And  after  he  had  seen  the  vision 

19.  21  After  I  have  been  there,  I  must  also  see 

21.  1  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  we  were 

29.  To  come  through,  pass,  Staylvopai   diaginoniai. 
Acts  25.  13  after  certain  days  kin-;  Agrippft  and 

30.  To  fill,  fulfil,  Tr\r)p6o}  pleroo. 

Acts  24.  27  after  two  years  Porcius  Festus  came  into 


Bl-To  he,  begin,  vnapx^  huparcho. 

Acts  27.  21  after  Ion;  abstinence  Paul  stood  forth  in 
[See  Ask,  come,  covet,  feel,  follow,  long,  looking, 
lust,  manner,  seek,  that.] 
AFTER,  here  — 
After  these,  /xera  Tavra.  meta  tauta. 

John  13.    7  not  now  ;  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter 
Rev.    1.  19  and  the  tilings  which  shall  be  hereafter 
4.    1  shew  thee  things  which  must  be  hereafter 
9.  12  there  come  two  woes  more  hereafter 
AFTER  our  ability  — 
According  to  sufficiency,  '~3  Jceddai, 

Neh.    5.    8  We  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  our 
AFTER  should,  that  — 
To  be  about  to,  fx4xKoi  niello. 

Heb.  11.    8  a  place  which  he  should  after  receive  for 
2  Pe.     2.  6  those  that  after  should  live  ungodly 
AFTER  that  — 
1. After,  "inN  acliar. 
Gen.    13.  14  after  that  Lot  was  separated  from  him 
18.    5  hearts;  after  that  ye  shall  pass  on 

24.  55  the  damsel,  .after  that  she  shall  go 
Lev.  13.  55  look  on  the  plague,  after  that  it  is 

14.  43  after  that  he  hath  taken  away  the  stones 

15.  28  and  after  that  she  shall  be  clean 

25.  48  After  that  he  is  sold  he  may  be  redeemed 
Num.  6.  20  after  that  the  Nazarite  may  drink 

12.  14  and  after  that  let  her  be  received  in 

30.  15  make  them  void  after  that  he  hath  heard 
Deut24-    4  may  not  take  her.  .after  that  she  is 
Judgis.    7  and  after  that  I  will  cease 

2  Sa.     1.  10  he  could  not  live  after  that  he  was 

2  Kl  14.  22  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 

1  Ch.    2.  24  And  after  that  Hezron  was  dead 

2  Ch.  25.  14  after  that  Amaziah  was  come  from  the 
Eccl.   9.    3  and  after  that  (they  go)  to  the  dead 
Jer.    12.  1.5  after  that  I  have  plucked  them  out 

24.    1  after  that  Nebuchadnezzar,  .had  carried 
28. 12  after  that  Hanauiah.  .had  broken  the 

29.  2  after  that  Jeconiah .  .and  the  queen . .  were 

31.  19  Surely  after  that  I  was  turned,  I 

34.    8  after  that  the  king . .  had  made  a  covenant 
36.  27  after  that  the  king  had  burned  the  roll 
40.    t  after  that  Nebuzar-adan .  .had  let  him  go 
51.  46  and  after  that  in  (another)  year  (shall 

2.After  that,  [""in**  alutre-ken. 

Gen.    6.    4  after  that,  when  the  sons  of  God  came  in 

3.  Then,  afterwards,  tiro  eita. 

Mark  4.  28  then  the  ear;  after  that  the  full  corn  in 

8.  25  After  that  lie  put  (his)  hands  again  upon 

John  13.    5  After  that  he  poureth  water  into  a  bason 

4.  JVhen  truly,  circiST)  epeide. 

1  Co.    1.  21  For  after  that  in  the  wisdom  of  God 

5.  Afterward,  eweira  epeita. 

1  Co.  12.  28  after  that  miracles,  then  gifts  of  healing 

15.    6  After  that,  he  was  seen  of  above  five 
15.    7  After  that  he  was  seen  of  James ;  then 
Heb.   7.    2  and  after  that  also  King  of  Salem,  which 
§.Yet,  still,  any  more,  «ti  eti. 

Luke  20.  40  And  after  that  they  durst  not  ask  him  any 
7. No  more,  ovkcti. 

Mark  12.  34  And  no  man  after  that  durst  ask  him 
S.  When,  ore  hote. 

Matt  27.  31  And  after  that  they  had  mocked' Ti.  3.  4. 
Q.At  the  coming  time,  els  to  fx4x\ou,  Luke  13.  9. 
10. As,  that,  when,  after  that,  ws  hos. 

Acts    9.  23  after  that  many  days  were  fulfilled 

AFTER  that  manner  — 
According  to,  thus,  n^?  kakah. 

2  Ch.  18.  19  and  another  saying  after  that  manner 
AFTER  the  manner  of  — 

According  to,  down,  Kara,  (ace.)  kata. 

John  2.    6  after  the  manner  of  the  purifying  of  the 
AFTER  the  same  manner  — 
In  the  same  manner,  wo-avrws  hosautos. 

1  Co.  11.  25  After  the  same  manner  also,  .the  cup 
AFTER  this  manner  — 

l.Thus,  np3  kakah. 

2  Ch.  iS.  19  one  spake  saying  after  this  manner 
2.To  hold  or  have  around,  Kept^x®  periechS. 

Acts  23.  25  he  wrote  a  letter  after  this  manner 
AFTER  this  sort  — 
According  to  this,  ni"t3  kidnah. 

Dan.    3.  29  no  other!  .can  deliver  after  this  sort 
AFTERNOON  — 
The  declining  of  the  day,  cvn  rnu3  netoth  hay-yom. 

Judg  19.    8  they  tarried  until  afternoon,  and  they 
AFTERWARD  — 
l.Af'  r,  afterward,  y\H  ochar. 

Gen.  10.  18  afterward  were  the  families  of  the 

15.  14  afterward  shall  they  come  out  with  great 

30.  21  And  afterwards  she  bare  a  daughter 

32.  20  and  afterward  I  will  see  his  face 
38.  30  And  afterward  came  out  his  brother 

Exod.  5.    1  And  afterward  Moses  and  Aaron  went  to 
Lev.  14.  19  and  afterward  he  shall  kill  the  burnt 
14.  36  afterward  the  priest  shall  go  in  to  see 
22.    7  he. . shall  afterward  eat  of  the  boh '  things 


AFTERWARDS 


19 


AGAIN 


Xum.  5.  26  the  priest,  .afterward  shall  cause  the 

12. 16  And  afterward  the  people  removed  from 
19.    7  and  afterward  he  shall  come  into  the 
31^  2  afterward  shalt  thou  he  gathered  unto 

31.  24  and  afterward  ye  shall  come  into  the 

32.  22  then  afterward  ye  shall  return,  and  be 
Deut  24. 21  vineyard, . .  shalt  not  glean  (it)  afterward 
Josh.  2.  16  hide  yourselves . .  and  afterward  may  ye 

24.    5  I  plagued  Egypt . .  and  afterward  I 
Judg.  1.    9  And  afterward  the  children  of  Judah 

7. 11  afterward  shall  thine  hands  be  strength. 
19.    5  Comfort  thine  heart,  .and  afterward  go 

1  Ch.  2.  21  afterward  Hezron  went  in  to  the  daughter 

2  Ch.  35.  14  And  afterward  they  made  ready  for 
Job  iS.  2  mark,  and  afterwards  we  will  speak 
Psa.  73.  24  Thou  shalt  guide  me.  .and  afterward 
Prov.20.  17  afterwards  his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with 

24.  27  Prepare  thy  work  without,  .afterwards 
28.  23  He  that  rebuketh  a  man  afterwards  shall 

Hos.    3.    5  Afterward  shall  the  children  of  Israel 
2. Last,  latter,  at  last,  ji"mN  acharon. 

Deut  13.    9  afterwards  the  hand  of  all  the  people 

17.  7  afterward  the  hands  of  all  the  people 
Isa.     9.    1  afterward  did  more  grievously  afflict  her 

Z. After  it  was  so,  j"!.n«;  achare-ken. 

Gen.  15. 14  afterward  shall  they  come  out  with  great 
^/Second*,  secondly,  Sevrepos  deuieros. 

Jude        5  how  that  the  Lord,  .afterward  destroyed 
O.Then,  afterwards,  eirct  eita. 

Mark  4. 17  afterward,  when  affliction  or  persecution 
6.  Afterward,  iVetTa  epeita. 

1  Co.  15.  23  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his 
15.  46  that  which  is  natural ;  and  afterward 

Gal.     1.  21  Afterwards  I  came  into  the  regions  of 

7. The  next  in  order,  KaQetfis  kathe.'cis. 

Luke   S.    1  it  came  to  pass  afterward,  that  he 
S.Aftcr  these,  fiera  ravra  meta  tauta. 

Luke  17.    S  afterward  thou  shalt  eat  and  drink? 

18.  4  afterward  he  said  within  himself,  Though 
John  5.  14  Afterward  Jesus  ftndeth  him  in  the 
Heb.    4.    8  then  would  he  not  afterward  have 

9'.After  then,  /ieTeVeiTa  vietepeita. 

Heb.  12.  17  ye  know  how  that  afterward,  when  he 
10. Afterwards,  vo-repou  husteron. 

Matt.  4.    2  he  had  fasted,  .he  v.  as  afterward  an 
21.  29  but  afterward  he  repented,  and  went 
21.  32  repented  not  afterward,  that  ye  might 

25.  11  Afterward  came  also  the  other  virgins 
Mark  16.  14  [Afterward  he  appeared  unto  the  eleven] 
Luke  4.    2  when  they  were  ended,  he  afterward 
John  13.  36  but  thou  shalt  follow  me  afterwards 
Heb.  12.  11  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the 

AFTERWARDS,  till— 

Behind,  backwards,  liny  achor. 

Prov.29. 11  wise,  .keepeth  it  in  till  afterwards 

AG-AB'-TJS  — 

1.  A  prophet  from  Jerusalem  who  went  to  Paul  at 
Antioch  and  foretold  a  great  famine. 

Acts  11.  2S  And  there  stood  up  one  of  them.  .A. 

2.  A  disciple  who  went  from  Judea  to  Ptolemais  and 
foretold  the  imprisonment  of  Paul.  (Probably  the  same 
as  No.  1.) 

Acts  2i.  10  there  came  down.  .a.  .prophet,  named  A. 

A'-GAG,  33H  high,  warlike. 

A  poetic  name  of  Amalek,  derived  from  a  particular 

dynasty. 

Kuni24.    7  his  king  shall  be  higher  than  A.,  and  his 

1  Sa.  15.    8  And  he  took  A.  the  king  of  the  Amalek. 

15.    9  Saul  and  the  people  spared  A.,  and  the 
15.  20  Saul  said.. I  have.. brought  A.  the  king 
15.  32  Then  said  Samuel,  Bring,  .to  me  A.  the 
15.  32  And  A.  came  unto  him  delicately 
15.  32  And  A.  said,  Surely  the  bitterness  of 
15.  33  And  Samuel  hewed  A.  in  pieces  before 

A-GA-GITE,  '3JN,  belonging  to  A  gag. 

The  Agagites  were  an  Amalekite  tribe. 

Esth.  3.    1  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the  A. 
3.  10  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the  A. 

8.  5  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the  A. 

9.  24  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the  A. 
AGAIN  — 

1. Behind,  TO  achar. 

Deut  24.  20  thou  shalt  not  go  over  the  boughs  again 

2.Even,  also,  D3  gam. 

Eccl.  4.  11  Again,  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have 
3. Again,  Tiy  od. 

Gen.    4.  25  And  Adam  knew  his  wife  again 
4.  Second,  '•yg  sheni. 

Lev.  13.    6  the  priest  shall  look  on  him  again 
13.    7  he  shall  be  seen  of  the  priest  again 

2  Sa.  16. 19  And  again,  whom  should  I  serve? 

Eze.  4.  6  lie  again  on  thy  right  side,  and  thou  shalt 
Hag.  2.  20  again  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  H. 
Zech.  4.  12  And  I  answered  again,  and  said  unto  him 
MaL    2. 13  And  this  have  ye  done  again,  covering 

5. Second,  mr^Pi  tinyanuth. 

Dan.  2.    7  They  answered  again  and  said,  Let  the 

6.  To  go,  T]?;  yalak. 

Eccl.  1.    7  whence  the  rivers  come . .  they  return  again 

7.  To  add,  *]p;  yasaph. 

Gen.   8.  12  which  returned  not  again  unto  him  any 


c  Sa. 


2Sa. 


>Ki. 


Gen.  38.  26  And  he  knew  her  again  no  more 
Num  32.  15  he  will  yet  again  leave  them  in  the  wild. 
t  Sa.  27.    4  and  he  sought  no  more  again  for  him 
2  Ki.  19.  30  house  of  Judah  shall  yet  again  take  root 
Isa.   37.  31  the  remnant,  .shall  again  take  root 
S.To  add,  p]BJ  yasaph,  5. 

Gen.    4.    2  And  she  again  bare  his  brother  Abel 

8.  10  and  he  again  sent  forth  the  dove  out  of 

8.  21  I  will  not  again  curse,  .again  smite  any 

18.  29  And  he  spake  unto  him  yet  again 

25.    1  again  Abraham  took  a  wife,  and  her  name 
38.    5  And  she  yet  again  conceived,  and  bare  a 

Exodio.  29  I  will  see  thy  face  again  no  more 

14. 13  ye  shall  see  them  again  no  more  for  ever 

Xum22.  15  And  Balak  sent  yet  again  princes 

22.  25  crushed  Balaam's  foot,  .smote  her  again 
Deut  18.  16  Let  me  not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the 
Judg.  3.  12  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again 

4.  1  the  children  of  Israel  again  did  evil 

9.  37  And  Gaal  spake  again  and  said 

10.  6  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again 

11.  14  Jephthah  sent  messengers  again  unto  the 
13.    1  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again  in 
20.  22  and  set  their  battle  again  in  array 

20.  23  Shall  I  go  up  again  to  battle  against  the 
20.  28  Shall  I  yet  again  go  out  to  battle  against 
3.    6  the  Lord  called  yet  again,  Samuel 
3.    8  the  Lord  called  Samuel  again  the  third 
3.  21  the  Lord  appeared  again  in  Shiloh 
9.    8  the  servant  answered  Saul  again,  and 

19.  8  there  was  war  again :  and  David  went  out 

19.  21  Saul  sent  messengers  again  the  third  time 

20.  17  Jonathan  caused  David  to  swear  again 

23.  4  David  enquired  of  the  Lord  yet  again 
27.    4  and  he  sought  no  more  again  for  him 

2.  22  And  Abner  said  again  to  Asaliel 

3.  34  all  the  people  wept  again  over  him 

5.  22  the  Philistines  came  up  yet  again 

18.  22  Then  said,  .the  son  of  Zadok  yet  again 

24.  1  again  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled 
24.    7  the  king  of  Egypt  came  not  again 

1  Ch.14.  13  the  Philistines  yet  again  spread  themselves 
Esth.  8.    3  Esther  spake  yet  again  before  the  king 
Prov.19.  19  if  thou  deliver,  .thou  must  do  it  again 
Isa.     7.  10  Moreover  the  Lord  spake  again  unto  A. 
8.    5  The  Lord  spake  also  unto  me  again 
11.  11  the  Lord  shall  set  his  hand  again 
24.  20  it  shall  fall,  and  not  rise  again 
Dan.  to.  18  Then  there  came  again  and  touched  me 
Amos  7.    8  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more 

7.  13  prophesy  not  again  any  more  at  Beth-el 

8.  2  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more 
Jon.     2.    4  I  will  look  again  toward  thy  holy  temple 

To  turn  back,  2)ty  shub. 

Gen.  26.  iS  Isaac  digged  again  the  wells  of  water 
30.  31  I  will  again  feed  (and)  keep  thy  flock 
Xum  ii.    4  the  children  of  Israel  also  wept  again 
Deut 24.    4  Her.  .husband, .  .may  not  take  l\er  again 
9  the  Lord  will  again  rejoice  over  thee  for 

2  circumcise  again  the  children  of  Israel 
7  therefore  he  lodged  there  again 
5  he  said,  I  called  not ;  lie  down  again 

6  1  called  not,  my  son ;  lie  down  again 
1  Ki.  13.  33  made  again  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 

19.  6  drink,  and  laid  him  down  again 
19.  20  Go  back  again :  for  what  have  I  done  to 

11  Again  also  he  sent  unto  him  another 

13  And  he  sent  again  a  captain  of  the  third 
25  Jehoash  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  took  again 

9  he  sent  messengers  again  unto  Hezekiah 

3  For  he  built  up  again  the  high  places 

4  he  went  out  again  through  the  people 
3  For  he  built  again  the  high  places 

14  Should  we  again  break  thy  command. 
Neh.   9.  28  after  they  had  rest,  they  did  evil  again 
Job   10.  16  again  thou  shewest  thyself  marvellous 
Psa.  71.  20  (Thou)  shalt  quicken  me  again 

71.  20  and  shalt  bring  me  up  again  from  the 
85.    6  Wilt  thou  not  revive  us  again 

Jer.  18.    4  so  he  made  it  again  another  vessel 
36.  28  Take  thee  again  another  roll 

Dan.    9.  25  the  street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the 

Zech.  8.  15  So  again  have  I  thought  in  these  days 
10. To  cause  to  turn  back,  3«a  shub,  5. 

1  Sa.  17.  30  the  people  answered  him  again  after  the 
[See  also  Answer,  back,  break,  bring,  brought, 
build,  carry,  circumcise,  come,  conceive,  deli- 
ver, dig,  doubtless,  evil,  feed,  fetch,  gathered, 
get,  give,  go,  lay  down,  lie  down,  lift  up,  lodge, 
make,  pay,  place,  pull  in,  put,  rejoice,  render, 
restored,  return,  ring,  rise  up,  send,  set,  sound- 
ing, take,  turn,  turn  back,  vomit,  weep.] 

11. A  second  time,  Sevrepov  deuteron. 

Rev.  19.    3  And  again  they  said,  Alleluia. 
12.^4  second  time,  ck  devrepov  ek  deuterou. 

John  9.  24  Then  again  called  they  the  man  that  was 

Acts  11.   9  the  voice  answered  me  again  from  heaven 
lB.From  above,  &vvdcv  anothen. 

John  3.    3  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 

3.  7  that  I  said.  .Ye  must  be  born  again 
14.  Twice,  Sis  dis. 

Phil.   4.  16  For.  .ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my 
1  Tli.    2.  18  even  I  Paul,  once  and  again ;  but  Satan 
15. Again,  on  the  other  hand,  iraKiv palin. 
Matt.  4.    7  Jesus  said.  .It  is  written  again 

4.  8  Again,  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an 

5.  33  Again,  ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been 
13.  44  [Again],  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 


30. 
Josh.  5. 
Judg.  19. 
1  Sa.  3. 
3- 


*Ki. 

19. 

21. 

>Ch.i9. 

33- 
Ezra  9. 


Matt  13. 
13- 


26. 
26. 
26. 

26. 

Mark  2 


14. 

14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 

iS- 
15' 
IS- 

Luke  1 3. 
John  1. 

4' 


Acts  : 


27 
Pom.  8. 


15. 

15' 

15 

I  CO.    3. 

7- 


2  Co. 


45  Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto 
47  Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto 

19  [Again],  I  say  unto  you,  That  if  fewo  of 

24  again  I  say  unto  you,  It  is  easier 

5  Again  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and 

36  Again,  he  sent  other  servants  more  than 
1  Jesus  answered,  .again  by  parables,  and 
4  Again  he  sent  forth  other  servants,  saying 

42  He  went  away  again  the  second  time,  and 

43  he  came  and  found  them  asleep  again 

44  he  left  them,  and  went  away  again 
72  again  he  denied  with  an  oath 

50  Jesus,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a 
1  again  he  entered  into  Capernaum 

13  he  went  forth  again  by  the  sea  side 
1  he  entered  again  into  the  synagogue 

20  the  multitude  cometh  together  again 

t  he  began  again  to  teach  by  the  sea-side 

21  when  Jesus  was  passed  over  again  by 

31  again,  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre 
13  entering  into  the  ship  again  departed  to 

25  After  that  he  put  (Ins)  hand  agaiu  upon 

1  resort  unto  him  again,  .he  taught,  .again 
10  his  disciples  asked  him  again  of  the  same 
24  Jesus  answereth  again,  and  saith  unto 

32  he  took  again  the  twelve,  and  began 

27  they  come  again  to  Jerusalem :  and  as 

4  again  he  sent  unto  them  another  servant 

5  And  [again]  he  sent  another;  and  him  they 

39  agaiu  lie  went  away,  and  prayed 

40  he  found  them  asleep  agaiu,  (for  their 

61  Again  the  high  priest  a^ked  him,  and  said 

69  a  maid  saw  him  again,  and  began 

70  he  denied  it  again,  .said  again  to  Peter 
4  Pilate  asked  him  again,  saying 

12  Pilate  answered  and  said  again  unto 

13  they  cried  out  again,  Crucify  him 

20  again  he  said,  Whereunto  shall  I  liken 

20  Pilate,  .to  release  Jesus,  spake  again  to 
35  Again  the  next  day  after  John  stood 

3  He  left  Judea,  and  departed  [again]  into 
13  Whosoever  drinketh .  .shall  thirst  again 

46  So  Jesns  came  again  into  Cana  of  Galilee 
54  This  (is)  again  the  second  miracle  (that) 
15  departed  [again]  into  a  mountain  himself 

2  [early  in  the  morning  he  came  again  into] 
8  again  he  stooped  down,  and  wrote  on 

12  Then  spake  Jesus  again  unto  them,  saying 

21  Then  said  Jesus  again  unto  them,  I  go 

15  Then  again  the  Pharisees  also  asked  him 
17  They  say  unto  the  blind  man  again 

26  Then  said  they  to  him  [again],  What  did 

27  wherefore  woulds  ye  hear  (it)  again?  will 
7  Then  said  Jesu  unto  them  again,  Verily 

17  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again 

18  I  have  power  to  take  it  again 

19  There  was  a  division  therefore  again 

31  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to  stone 

39  Therefore  they  sought  again  to  take  him 

40  And  went  away  again  beyond  Jordan  into 

7  Let  us  go  into  Judasa  again 

8  disciples  say.  .goest  thou  thither  again? 

38  Jesus  therefore  again  groaning  in  himself 

22  again  Andrew  and  Philip  tell  Jesus 

28  glorified  (it),  and  will  glorify  (it)  again 

39  because  that  Esaias  said  again 

12  was  set  down  again,  he  said  unto  them 

3  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto 
16,  17,  ig  again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall 

22  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart 

28  again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the 
7  Then  asked  he  them  again,  "Whom  seek 

27  Peter  then  denied  again :  and  immediately 

33  entered  into  the  judgment  hall  again 

38  went  out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and  saith 

40  Then  cried  they  all  again,  saying,  Not 

4  Pilate  therefore  went  forth  again,  and 

9  went  again  into  the  judgment  hall,  and 

37  again  another  scripture  saith.  They  shall 
10  Then  the  disciples  went  away  again  unto 
21  Then  said  Jesus  to  them  again,  Peace  (be) 
26  after  eight  days  again  his  disciples  were 

1  Jesus  shewed  himself  again  to  the 

16  He  saith  to  him  again  the  second  time 

15  the  voice  (spake)  unto  him  again  the 

16  the  vessel  was  received  up  [again]  into- 
10  all  were  drawn  up  again  into  heaven 

32  We  will  hear  thee  again  of  this  (matter) 
21  I  will  return  again  unto  you,  if  the 

28  they  sounded  again,  and  found  (it)  fifteen 

15  ye  have  not  received,  .again  to  fear 

23  for  God  is  able  to  graff  them  in  again 

10  again  he  saith.  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with: 

11  again,  praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles 

12  again,  Esaias  saith,  There  shall  be  a  root 

20  again,  the  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts 

5  and  come  together  again,  that  Satan 

21  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no 

16  to  come  again  out  of  Macedonia  unto 
1  that  I  would  not  come  again  to  you  in 

1  Do  we  begin  again  to  commend  ourselves: 
12  we  commend  not  ourselves  again  unto  you 
7  let  him  of  himself  think  t'  is  again,  that 

16  I  say  again,  Let  no  man  think  me 

19  [Again],  think  ye  that  we  excuse  ourselves 
21  lest,  when  I  come  again,  my  God  shall 
9  As  we  said  before,  so  say  I  now  again,  If 

17  I  went  into  Arabia,  and  returned  again 
1  I  went  up  again  to  Jerusalem  with 

18  For  if  I  build  again  the  things  which  I 
9  whereunto  ye  desire  again  to  be  in 

19  I  travail  in  birth  again  until  Christ  be 


\ 


AGAIN 


20 


AGAINST 


Gal.    5.    1  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke 
5.    3  For  I  testify  again  to  every  man  that 

Phil.  1.  26  your  rejoicing,  .my  coming  to  you  again 
2.  28  that,  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may 
4.    4  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway :  (aud)  again  I 

Heb.    1.    5  again,  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father 

1.  6  again,  when  he  bringeth  in  the  first-begot. 

2.  13  again,  I  will  put . .  trust  in  him.  Aud  again 
4.    s  And  in  this  (place)  again,  If  they  shall 

4.  7  Again,  he  limiteth  a  certain  day,  saying 

5.  12  ye  have  need  that  one  teach  you  again 

6.  1  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of  repent. 

6.  6  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance 
10.  30  again,  The  Lord  shall  judge  his  people 

Jas.     5.  18  he  prayed  again,  and  the  heaven  gave 
2  Pe.  2.  20  they  are  again  entangled  therein,  and 

1  Jo.  2.    8  Again,  a  new  commandment  I  write  unto 
Rev.  10.    8  Aud  the  voice,  .spake  unto  me  again 

10.  11  Thou  must  prophesy  again  before  many 
16.  The  second  time,   els  to  -naXiv. 

2  Co.  13.    2  that,  if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  spare 
17. Again  anew,  tvo.Klv  &v<*>Bev. 

Gal.   4.   9  whereuutoyedesu-eagaintobeuibondage? 
AGAIN,  to  come  — 
To  turn  back,  l\v$  shub. 

Gen.  15. 16  But.  .they  shall  come  hither  again 

22.  5  I  aud  the  lad  will  go.  .and  come  again  to 
28.  21  So  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house 
50I    5  Now.  .let  me  go  up.  .1  will  come  again 

Exodi4.  26  that  the  waters  may  come  again  upon  the 
24.  14  Tarry  ye.  .until  we  come  again  unto  you 

Lev.  14.  39  the  priest  shall  come  again  the  seventh 

14.  43  And  if  the  plague  come  again 
Num35.  32  he  should  come  again  to  dwell  in  the 
Josh  18.    8  walk  through  the  land .  .and  come  again 
Judg.  6.  18  I  will  tarry  until  thou  come  again 

8.  9  saying,  When  I  come  again  in  peace 

15.  19  when  he  had  drunk,  his  spirit  came  again 
21.  14  And  Benjamin  came  agaiu  at  that  time 

Ruth  4.    3  that  is  come  again  out  of  the  country 
1  Sa.  23.  23  come  ye  again  to  me  with  the  certainty 
30.  12  he  had  eaten,  his  spirit  came  again  to  him 

1  Ki.   2.  41  Shimei  had  gone . .  and  was  come  again 

12.    5  (for)  three  days,  then  come  again  to  me 

12.  12  Come  to  me  again  the  third  day 

12.  20  when.  .Jeroboam  was  come  again 

17.  21  let  this  child's  soul  come  into  him  again 

17.  22  the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again 

19.  7  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  again 

20.  5  And  the  messengers  came  again 

2  Ki.    2.  18  And  when  they  came  again  to  him. 

4.  22  run  to  the  man  of  God,  aud  come  again 

4.  38  And  Elisha  came  agaiu  to  Gilgal 

5.  10  and  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  to  thee 

5.  14  and  his  flesh  came  again,  .and  he  was 

7.  8  and  went  and  hid  (it) ;  and  came  again 

9.  18  came  to  them,  but  he  cometh  not  again 
9.  20  He  came,  .them,  and  cometh  not  again 
9.  36  Wherefore  they  came  again,  and  told  him 

2  Ch.io.    5  Come  again  unto  me  after  three  days 
10. 12  Come  again  to  me  on  the  third  day 

30.  9  that  they  shall  come  again  into  this  laud 
Ezra    2.    1  aud  came  again  unto  Jerusalem 

6.  21  which  were  come  again  out  of  captivity 
Neh.  7.    6  came  again  to  Jerusalem,  and  to  Judah 

8.  17  them  that  were  come  again  out  of  the 
Esth.  6.  12  Aud  Mordecai  came  again  to  the.  .gate 
Ps.    78.  39  passeth  away,  and  cometh  not  again 
Prov.  3.  28  Say  not.  .Go,  and  come  again 

Jer.  31.  16  they  shall  come  again  from  the  land 

31.  17  that  thy  children  shall  come  again 
37.    8  And  the  Chaldeans  shall  come  again 

2ech.  4.    1  angel  that  talked  with  me  came  again 

AGAIN,  to  do,  feed,  speak  — 

To  repeat,  n$  shanah,  3*t?  shub. 

Gen.  30.  31  I  will  again  feed  (and)  keep  thy  flock 
Neh.  13.  21  if  ye  do  (so)  again,  I  will  lay  hands  on  you 
Job  29.  22  After  my  words  they  spake  not  again 
AGAIN,  to  send  — 
Tosend  besides,  irpoaedero    irefxtyat. 

Luke2o.  11  again  he  sent  auother  servant :  aud  they 
20.  12  again  he  sent  a  third :  and  they  wounded 
[See  also  Alive,  answer,  ask,  beget,  bid,  born, 
bring,  build,  come,  deliver,  flourish,  foam,  give, 
go,  live,  measure,  put  up,  raise,  raise  to  life, 
remembrance,  restore,  return,  rise,  rising,  send, 
set,  that,  turn,  word.] 
AGAINST  (you)  — 
] .  Unto,  to,  "?X  el. 

Gen.  4.    8  Cain  rose  up  against  Abel  his  brother 
2,Withs  near,  ecen,  by,  nx  eth. 

iKi.  16.  22  Omri  prevailed  against  the  people 
3.  Over  against,  ^id  mid. 

Josh.  8.  33  half  of  them  over  agaiust  mount  Gerizim 
9.    1  coasts  of  the  great  sea  over  agaiust  Leba. 
22.  11  an  altar  over  against  the  land  of  Caanan 
1  Ki.     7.    5  and  light  (was)  agaiust  light  (in)  three 
^.Before,  in  front  of,  til  neged. 

Num.25.  4  hang  themup  before  the  Lorp  against 
Judg2o.  34  there  came  against  Gibeah  ten  thousand 
5.  Over  against,  rnj  nokach. 

1  Ki.  22.  35  the  king,  .in  his  chariot  against  the  Syr. 

2  Ch.  18.  34  tlie  king.,  in  (his)  chariot  against  the  Syr. 
Q.Unto,  in  ad. 

Gen.  43.  25  And  they  made  ready  the  preseut  against 
(  On,  upon,  concerning,  Sy  al. 

Gen.  40.    2  Pharaoh  was  wroth  against,  .his  officers 


Ezra  4.    8  the  scribe  wrote  a  letter  against  Jerusalem 

4.  19  this  city . .  hath  made  insurrection  against 

7.  23  why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the 
Dan.    3.  19  form  of  his  visage  was  changed  against 

3.  29  which  speak  anything  amiss  against  the 

5.  23  hast  lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord 

6.  5  We  shall  not  find,  .occasion  against  this 
S.Withj  Dy  im. 

Deut.  9.    7  ye  have  been  rebellious  against  the  Lord 

9.  With,  "ie»  immad. 

Job  23.    6  Will  he  plead  against  me  with  (Ids)  great 

10.  Over  against,  near,  just  as,  naj;  ummah. 

1  Ch.  25.    8  And  they  cast  lots,  ward  against  (ward) 
26.  12  (having)  wards  one  against  another 
26.  16  by  the  causeway,  .ward  against  ward 

Eze.     3.    8  against  their  faces,  .against  their  foreh. 
11. Face,  presence,  dus  panim. 

Deut3i.  21  this  song' shall  testify  against  them 
32.  49  that  (is)  over  against  Jericho 
34.    1  that  (is^  over  against  Jericho 

1  Sa.  15.    7  that  (is)  over  against  Egypt 

2  Ch/20.  12  we  have  no  might  against  this  great 
Eze.  41.  15  he  measured  the  length,  .over  against 

48.  15  in  the  breadth  over  against  the  five 

48.  2 i  against  the  five . .  against  the . .  against  the 

12.  Concerning,  "is?  tsad. 

Dan.    7.  25  he  shall  speak  (great)  words  against  the 

13.  Ore?-,  beyond,  nny  eber. 

Exod25.  37  they  may  give  light  over  against  it 

14.  To  meet,  *Otj?. 

Gen.  15. 10  laid  each  piece  one  against  another 
Exod  14.  27  and  the  Egyptians  fled  against  it 
Nuni2o.  18  lest  I  come  out  against  thee  with  the 

20.  20  Edom  came  out  against  him  with,  .people 

21.  23  he  came  to  Jahaz  aud  fought  against 

21.  33  the  king  of  Bashan  went  out  against 

22.  34  I  knew  not  that  thou  stoodest.  .against 
Deut.  1.  44  the  Amorites.  .came  out  agaiust  you 

2.  32  Then  Sihon  came  out  against  us 

3.  1  the  king  of  Bashan  came  out  against  us 
29.    7  Sihon.  .came  out  against  us  unto  battle 

Josh.  8.    5  when  they  come  out  against  us 

8.  14  the  men.  .went  out  against  Israel  to 

8.  22  issued  out  of  the  city  against  them 

n.  20  they  should  come  agaiust  Israel  iu  battle 
Judg.  7.  24  Come  down  against  the  Midianites 

14.  5  a  young  lion  roared  against  him 
-15. 14  the  Philistines  shouted  against  him 

20.  25  Benjamin  went  forth  against  them 
20.  31  Benjamin  went  out  against  the  people 
1  Sa.    4.    1  Israel  went  out  agaiust  the  Philistines 

4.  2  put  themselves  in  array  against 

9.  14  Samuel  came  out  against  them 

17.    2  set  the  battle,  .against  the  Philistines 

17.  21  Philistines  had  put.  .army  against  army 
17-  55  David  go  forth  against  the  Philistine 

23.  28  and  went  against  the  Philistines 

25.  20  David  and  his  men  came  down  against 
z  Sa.  10.    9  put  (them)  in  array  against  the  Syrians 
10.  10  might  put  (them)  in  array  against  the 
10.  17  Syrians  set  themselves,  .against  David 

18.  6  people  went  out  into  the  field  against  I. 

1  Ki.  20.  27  children  of  Israel,  .went  agaiust  them 

2  Ki.   g.  21  and  they  went  out  agaiust  Jehu 

23.  29  and  king  Josiah  went  out  against  him 

1  Ch,  19.  10  put  (them)  in  array  against  the  Syrians 

19.  11  they  set.  .in  array  against  the  children 
19.  17  and  set.  .in  array  against  them 

19. 17  put  the  battle  in  array  against  the  Syr. 

2  Ch.  35.  20  and  Josiah  went  out  against  him 
Psa.   35.    3  and  stop  (the  way)  against  them 

15./?t  reference  to,  with  regard  to,  els  eis. 
Matt  1*8.  isthy  brother  shall  trespass  [against]  thee 
18.  21  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me 
Mark  3.  29  he  that  shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy 
Luke  7.  30  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  against 

12.  10  against  the  Son.  .against  the  Holy  Ghost 

15.  18,  21  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven 
17.    3  If  thy  brother  trespass  [against]  thee 

17.    4  if  he  trespass  against  thee  seven  times 
22.  65  things  blasphemously  spake  they  against 
John  12.    7  Then  said  Jesus,  Let  her  alone:  against 

13.  29  Buy.  .that  we  have  need  of  [against]  the 
Acts    6.  1 1  We  have  heard  him  speak . .  against 

q.    1  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord 
25.    8  against  the . .  against  the . .  against  Cfcesar 
Rom.  8.    7  the  carnal  mind  (is)  enmity  agaiust  God 
1  Co.    6.  18  committeth  fornication  sinneth  against 

8.  12  against  the  brethren,  .sin  against  Christ 

1  Ti.    6.  19  a  good  foundation  against  the  time  to 

2  Ti.    1.  12  which  I .  .committed  unto  him  against 
Heb.  12.    3  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
2  Pe.    3.    7  reserved  unto  fire  against  the  day  of 

16.Be/ore,  in  the  face  of  e/xirpoo-dev  emprosthen. 
Matt  23.  13  shut' up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against 
17. In,  4v  en. 

Rom.  2.   5  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation 
IS. On,  upon,  eirl  {dat.)  epi. 

Luke  12.  S2  three  against  two,  and  two  against  three 
12. 53  against,  .son.  .against,  .father,  .against 
12.  53  against,  .mother,  .against  her.  .against 
19. On,  upon,  M  {ace.)  epi. 

Matt  10.  21  and  the  children  shall  rise  up  against 
[See  also  Matt.  12.  26;  24-  7,  n\  26.  55:  Mark  3.  24, 
25,  26;  10.  11;  13.  8,  8,  12;  14.  48;  Luke  9.  5  ; 
11.  17,  17.  18;  12.  53,  53;  14.  31;  zi.  io,  10;  22. 
52,  53;  John  13.  18;  Acts  4.  27;  8.  1 ;  13.  50.  51! 
Rom.  1.  18;  2.  2;  2  Co.  10.  2;  1  Pe.  3.  12.] 


20.  Against,  kotoI  (gen.)  kata. 

-Matt.  5.  11  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you 

5.  23  that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against  thee 

10.  35  agaiust  his.  .against  her.  .against  her 
12. 14  held  a  council  against  him,  how  they 
12.  25  divided  against  itself.. divided  against 
12.  30  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me 

12.  32  against  the  Son. .  against  the  Holy  Ghost 

20.  11  they  murmured  against  the  goodmau  of 

26.  59  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus,  to  put 

27.  1  counsel  against  Jesus  to  put  him  to  death 
Mark  3.    6  took  counsel  with  the  Herodians  against 

9.  40  For  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our 

11.  25  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  any 
14.  55  sought  for  witness  against  Jesus  to  put 
14.  56  many  bare  false  witness  against  him,  but 
14.  57  bare  false  witness  against  him,  saying 

Luke  9.  50  for  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  for  us 
11.  23  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me 

John  18.  29  What  accusation  bring  ye  against  this 
19.  n  couldest  have  no  power,  .against  me 

Acts   4.  26  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Christ 

6.  13  ceaseth  not  to  speak,  .against  this  holy 
14.  2  made  their  minds  evil  affected  against 
16.  22  the  multitude  rose  up  together  against 
19.  16  overcame  them,  and  prevailed  against 

21.  28  teacheth  all.  .every  where  against  the 

24.  1  who  informed  the  governor  against  Paul 

25.  2  chief  of  the  Jews  informed  him  against 
25.    3  desired  favour  against  him  that  he 

25.    7  complaints  [against  Paul],  which  they 
25.  15  desiring  (to  have)  judgment  against  him 
25.  27  not  withal,  .the  crimes  (laid)  against  him 
27.  14  not  long  after  there  arose  against  it  a 
Rom.  8.  31  If  God  (be)  for  us,  who  (can  be)  against 

11.  2  he  maketh  intercession  to  God  against 

1  Co.    4.    6  that  no  one  of  you . .  one  against  another 

2  Co.  10.    5  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against 

13.  8  For  we  can  do  nothing  against  the  truth 
Gal.     3.  21  (Is)  the  law  then  against  the  promises  of 

5.  17  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against 
5.  23  Meekness,  temperance  :  agaiust  such 
Col.     2. 14  the  handwriting,  .that  was  against  us 
1  Ti.    5.  19  Againstan  elder  receive  not  an  accusation 
Jas.     3.  14  and  lie  not  against  the  truth 

5.    9  Grudge  not  one  against  another,  brethren 

1  Pe.    2.  11  abstain  from,  .lusts,  which  war  against 

2  Pe.  2.  11  bring  not  railing  accusation  against  them 
Jude  15  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  him 
Rev.   2.   4  Nevertheless  I  have  (somewhat)  against 

2.  14  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  because 

2.  20  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  because 

12.  7  Michael  and  his  angels  fought  [against] 

21.  With,  fxerd  (g.a.)  meta. 

Rev.    2.  16  will  fight  against  them  with  the  sword 
11.    7  the  beast,  .shall  make  war  against  them 

19.  19  agaiust  him  that  sat.  .aud  against  his 
22. Beside,  alongside  of,  irapd  para.  (dat). 

Rom.  1.  26  natural  use  into  that  which  is  agaiust 

4.  18  Who  against  hope  believed  in  hope,  that 
23. Around,  concerning,  -n-epi  (gen.-)  peri. 

Matt  20.  24  were  moved  with  indignation  against  the 
Acts  25. 18  Against  whom  when  the  accusers  stood 

li.Towards,  irp6s  (ace.)  pros. 

Matt.  4.    6  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 
Marki2. 12  that  he  had  spoken  the  parable  against 
Luke  4.  11  thou  dash  thy  foot  agaiust  a  stone 

5.  30  scribes  and  Pharisees  murmured  against 

20.  19  that  he  had  spoken  this  parable  against 
Acts    6.    1  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecians  against 

9.  5  [hard  for  thee  to  kick  agaiust  the  pricks] 
9.  29  disputed  against  the  Grecians :  but  they 
19.  38  have  a  matter  against  any  man,  the  law 
23.  30  to  say  before  thee  what  (they  had)  against 
24. 19  if  they  had  ought  against  me 

25.  19  But  had  certain  questions  againt  him  of 

26.  14  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks 

1  Co.  6.  1  Dare  any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against 
Eph.    6.  11  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the 

6.  12  against  flesh . .  against  princ. . .  against  po. 
6.  12  against  the  rulers.. against  spiritual  wic. 

Col.     3.  13  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any 

3.  19  love  (your)  wives,  .not  bitter  against  them 
Heb.  12.    4  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  a.  Re.  13.  6. 

25.  To  you,  vfuv  humin,  Luke  10.  II. 
26*.  Contrary  to,  evavrlos  enantios. 

Acts  28.  17  though  I  have  committed  notliing  against 
AGAINST,  as  — 
.Is  against,  7«|  ke-al. 

2  Ch.  32. 19  as  against  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the 
AGAINST  he  come  — 

To  meet,  x~®. 

Exod.  7.  15  by  the  river's  brink  against  he  come 
AGAINST,  over  — 
I, Over  against,  WiD  mol. 

Neh.  12.  38  the  other,  .went  over  against  (them) 
2. Over  against,  "?io  mol. 

Deut  1.    1  iu  the  plain  over  against  the  Red  (sea) 
3.0rer  against,  bus  mid. 

Num.  8.    2  lamps  shall  give  light  over  against  the 
8.    3  lighted  the  lamps,  .over  against  the 
22.    5  and  they  abide  over  against  me 

Deut.  2.  19  thou  comest.  .over  against  the  children 

3.  29  we  abode  iu  the  valley  over  agaiust 

4.  46  in  the  valley  over  against  Beth-peor 


AGAR 


21 


AHAB 


Deut  ii.  30  which  dwell,  .over  against  Gilgal 

34.    6  he  huried  him.  .over  against  Beth-peor 
Josh.  1 8.  18  passed,  .toward  the  side  over  against 
1  Sa.  14.    5  overagainstMiehiuash..overagainstGib 
2 Sa.    5.  23  come  upon  them  over  against  the.. trees 
1  Ki.    7.  39  the  house  eastward  over  against  the  south 

1  Ch.  14.  14  come  upon  them  over  against  the.  .trees 

2  Ch.  4.  10  set  the  sea . .  over  against  the  south 

4.  Before,  in  the  presence  of,  1J3  neged. 

Gen.  21.  16  and  sat  her  down  over  against  (him) 
1  Ch.   8.  32  these  also  dwelt,  .over  against  them 
Neh.  3.  2S  every  one  over  against  his  house 
Eze.  41.  16  the  galleries,  .over  against  the  door 

5.  Straight  forward,  straight  before,  n?i  nokach. 

Exod.26.  35  the  candlestick  over  against  the  table 
40.  24  put  the  candlestick,  .over  against  the 
Josh.18.  17  which  (is)  over  against  the  goiug  up  of 
Judgig.  10  and  came  over  against  Jebus 

20.  43  trode  them  down,  .over  against  Gibeah 

1  Ki.  20.  29  they  pitched  one  over  against  the  other 
Esth.  5.  1  over  against  the  king's,  .over  against  the 
Eze.  47.  20  till  a  man  come  over  against  Haniath 

6. Straight  before,  nrn  nekach. 

Eze.  46.    9  but  shall  go  forth  over  against  it 
7. Near,  just  as,  over  against,  nsj?  ummah. 

Exod  25.  27  Over  against  the  border  shall  the  rings  be 
28.  27  over  against  the  (other)  coupling  thereof 
37. 14  Over  against  the  border  were  the  rings 

39.  20  over  against  the  (other)  coupling  thereof 

2  Sa.  16.  13  Shimei  went  along,  .over  against  him 

1  Ki.    7.  20  over  against  the  belly  which  (was)  by  the 
1  Ch.  24.  31  These  likewise  cast  lots  over  against 
24.  31  principal  fathers  over  against  their 
Neh.  12.  24  David  the  man  of  God,  ward  over  against 
Eccl.    7.  14  hath  set  the  one  over  against  the  other 
Eze.     1.  20  the  wheels  were  lifted  up  over  against 
1.  21  the  wheels  were  lifted  up  over  against 

3.  13  the  noise  of  the  wheels  over  against  them 

40.  18  the  pavement . .  over  against  the  length  of 
42.  7  wall  that  (was)  without  over  against  the 
45.    6  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy 

45.    7  the  length  (shall  be)  over  against  one  of 
48.  13  over  against  the  border  of  the  priests 
48.  18  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
48.  18  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
48.  21  over  against  the  portions  for  the  prince 

S.Over  against,  auriKpv  antikrh. 

Acts  20.  15  came  the  next  (day)  over  against  Chios 
9. Over  beyond,  avrtiripav  antiperan. 

Luke  8.  26  Gadarenes,  which  is  over  against  Galilee 

10.  Over  against,  a-Kevavri  apenanii. 

Matt  21.    2  Go  into  the  village  [over  against]  you 
27.  61  Mary,  sitting  over  against  the  sepulchre 

11.  Opposite,  contrary,  e£  ivavrias  ex  enantias. 
Markis.  39  centurion,  which  stood  over  against  him 

12. Doion,  down  by,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Acts  27.    7  when  we  had.  .come  over  against  Cnidus 
27.    7  we  sailed  under  Crete,  over  against 
13.  Over  against,  KarivavTi  katenanti. 

Markn.    2  Go  your  way  into  the  village  over  against 

12.  41  Jesus  sat  [over  against]  the  treasury 

13.  3  mount  of  Olives  over  against  the  temple 
Luke  19.  30  Go  ye  into  the  village  over  against  (you) 

[See  also  Beat,  boast,  bring,  crime,  cry,  mad, 
murmur,  over,  prate,  prevail,  quarrel,  rejoice, 
rise  up,  say,  speak,  spokeu,  strive,  war,  will.] 

A'-GAR,  "Ayap. 

Greek  name  of  Sarah's  handmaid  Hagar. 

Gal.    4-  ^4  Sinai,  which  gendereth  to  bondage,  .is  A. 

4.  25  For  this  A.  is  mount  Sinai  in  Arabia,  and 

AGATE  — 

1.  A  gate  or  rvhy,  13*73  kadkod. 

Isa.   54. 12  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  agates 
Eze.  27.  16  fine  linen,  and  coral,  and  agate 

2. Agate,  achates,  wa>  shebu. 

Exod  28. 19  the  third  row.  .anagate,  and  an  amethyst 
39.  12  the  third  row.  .an  agate,  and  an  amethyst 

AGE  — 

1. Revolution,  "fn  dor. 

Job     8.    8  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  former  age 
Isa.  38.  12  Mine  age  is  departed,  and  is  removed  from 

2.0ld  age,  |j3T  zoqen. 

Gen.  48.  10  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age 

'^.Lifetime,  ~hn  cheled. 

Job  11. 17  (thine)  age  shall  be  clearer  than  the  noon 
Psa.  39.    5  mine  age  (is)  as  nothing  before  thee 
■i.Day,  d'v  yom. 

Gen.  18.  11  (were)  old.  .well  stricken  in  age 

24.    1  Abraham  was.  .well  stricken  in  age 
Josh. 23.    1  Joshua  waxed  old  (and)  stricken  in  age 

23.    2  I  am  old  (and)  stricken  in  age 
Zech.  8.    4  his  staff  in  his  hand  for  very  age 

5. Old  age,  greyheadness,  Tvr  seb. 

1  Ki.  14.   4  his  eyes  were  set  by  reason  of  his  age 

6. A  son,  |3  ben. 

Num.  S.  25  from  the  age  of  fifty  years  they  shall 
1  Ch.  23.    3  from  the  age  of  thirty  years  and  upward 
23.  24  from  the  age  of  twenty  years  and  upward 


7. Life,  existence,  'n  chai. 

Gen.  47.  28  the.  .age  of  Jacob  was  an  hundred  forty 
[See  also  Flower,  great,   old,   pass,   stoop  for, 
whole.] 
S. Maturity,  i}\iKia  helikia. 

Heb.  11.  11  delivered  of  a  child  when  she.  .past  age 
AGE,  full  — 
l.Full  age,  rhz  kelach. 

Job     5.  26  shalt  come  to  (thy)  grave  in  a  full  age 
2.C'omplete,  perfect,  rt\eios  teleios. 

Heb.   5. 14  strong  meat . .  to  them  that  are  of  full  age 
AGE,  old  — 
Full  age,  n?3  kelach. 

Job    30.    2' me,  in  whom  old  age  was  perished? 
AGE,  to  be  of  — 
l.Se  has  maturity,  TjXaciatf  (=xet  helikian  echei. 

John  9.  21  we  know  not :  he  is  of  age ;  ask  him 

9.  23  Therefore  said  his  parents,  He  is  of  age 
I.Day,  7){j.4pa  hemera. 

Luke  2.  36  daughter  of  Phanuel.  .was  of  a  great  age 
AGE,  whole  — 
Days  of  the  years  of  the  life,  'n  *$  \p'. 

Gen.  47.  28  the  whole  age  of  Jacob  was  an  hundred 
AGED  — 
1.  Aged,  bearded,  ]p.\  zaqen. 

Job    12.  20  takeUi.  .the  understanding  of  the  aged 
32.   9  ueitherdothe  aged  understand  judgment 

Jer.    6.  11  the  aged,  with  (him  that  is)  full  of  days 

I.One  white,  grey,  old,  dry,  btb>;  yashish. 

Job    29.    8  the  aged  arose,  (and)  stood  up 
Z.Aged,  advanced  in  days,  itpio BCttis  presbutes. 

Phm.       9  as  Paul  the  aged. . now  also  a  prisoner 
AGED  man  — 
l.Aged,  bearded,  |j3J  zaqen. 

2  Sa.  19.  32  Barzillai  was  a  very  aged  man 
2. Aged,  advanced  in  days,  irpeaBorvs. probates. 

Titus  2.    2  aged  men  be  sober.. in  faith,  in  charity 
AGED  man,  very  — 
One  white,  grey,  old,  dry,  n'V*  yashish. 

Job    15.  10  very  aged  men,  much  elder  than  thy 
AGED  woman  — 
Aged  female,  wpeo-fiuris  presbutis. 

Titus  2.    3  The  aged  women  likewise,  that  (they  he) 
A'-GEE,  n:n  fugitive. 

The  father  of  Shammah,  one  of  Davids  valiant  men 
B.C.  1080. 

2Sa.  23.  11  after  him  (was)  Shammah  the  son  of  A. 
AGES  — 
I. Age,  dispensation,  o\6v  aion. 

Eph.    2.    7  That  in  the  ages  to  come  he  might  shew 

Col.     1.  26  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from  ages 
2. Generations,  yzved  genea. 

Eph.    3.    5  Which  in  other  ages  was  not  made  known 
3.  21  throughout  all  ages,  world  without  end 
AGO  — 
1. Former  time,  nDIp  qadmah. 

Ezra  5.  11  house,  .was  builded  these  many  years  ago 
2.(Third  day  of)  tlie  days,  D'D»n  hayyamim. 

1  Sa.    g.  20  asses  that  were  lost  three  days  ago 
3. From,  airo  apo. 

Acts  10.  30  And  Cornelius  said,  Four  days  ago  I  was 
15.    7  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while  ago 

2  Co.   8.  10  but  also  to  be  forward  a  year  ago 

9.    2  that  Aehaia  was  ready  a  year  ago 
4. Before,  trpo  pro. 

2 Co.  12.    2  I  knew  a  man.. above  fourteen  years  ago 
AGONE  — 
The  third  day,  nyhy  D'vn  hay  yom  sheloshah. 

1  Sa.  30. 13  because  three  days  agone  I  fell  sick 
AGONY  — 
Agony,  contest,  ayavia  agdnia. 

Luke  22.  44  And  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed  more 
AGREE  — 
1.2*0  be  into  or  for,  el/ii  els  eimi  eis. 

1  Jo.    5.    S  and  these  three  agree  hi  one 
2. To  be  in  good  mind,  evvoeai  (et/xi  eimi)  eunoeo. 

Matt.  5.  25  Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly 

3.7*0  be  the  same,  Xtros  elfii  eimi  isos. 

Mark  14.  56  but  their  witness  agreed  not  together 
14.  59  But  neither  so  did  their  witness  agree 
4.  To  be  like  or  similar,  duotdfa  homoiazo. 

Mark  14.  70  [and  thy  speech  agreeth  (thereto)] 
5. To  persuade,  prexo.il  upon,  Trei6a>  peitho. 

Acts    5.  40  And  to  him  they  agreed :  and  when  they 
Q.To  make  one  opinion,  irot^aaL  ixiav  yv&p.t\v. 

Rev.  17.  17  and  to  agree,  and  give  their  kingdom 

7 .To  sound  or  speak  together,  ovu<ptov4to  sumphonco. 

Matt  iS.  19  That  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth 
20.    2  And  when  he  had  agreed  with  the 

Acts  15.  15  And  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the 
S.To  put  togetlier,  o-vpTie-n/xi  suntithemi. 

John  9.  22  for  the  Jews  had  agreed  already,  that  if 

Acts  23.  20  The  Jews  have  agreed  to  desire  thee  that 


AGREE  together  — 

To  sound  or  speak  together,  avp:<Ptoviaj  sumphoneo. 

Acts    5.    9  How  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together 
AGREE  with  — 
To  sound  or  speak  together,  avp.<pwv4<u  sumphoneo. 

Matt 20.  13  didst  uot  thou  agree  with  me  for  a  penny ! 

Luke  5.  36  the  piece  that  was.. agreeth  not  with 
AGREED,  to  be  — 
To  be  met  together  (by  appointment),  ny;  yaad,  2. 

Amos  3.    3  Can  two  walk,  .except  they  be  agreed  ' 
AGREED  not  — 
Xot  sounding  together,  aavp.cpcoi'os  asumphonos. 

Acts  28.  25  when  they  agreed  not  among  themselves 
AGREEMENT  — 
l.A  seer,  vision,  n\h  chozeh. 

Isa.    28. 15  with  hell  are  we  at  agreement 
2.  Vision,  rmn  chazuth. 

Isa.  28. 18  your  agreement  with  hell  shall  not  stand 
^.Upright  things,  D,-Jp'p  mesharim. 

Dan.  11.    6  come  to  the.  .north  to  make  an  agreement 
4.A  putting  doion  together,  avyKardQea-ts. 

2  Co.    6.  16  what  agreement  hath  the  temple  of  God 
A-GRXP'-PA,  'A7pi7T7ras. 

Great-grandson  of  Herod  the  Great.  His  father  being 
eaten  of  worms,he,  as  Herod  Agrippa.  succeeded  (A.D.53) 
as  tetrarch  of  Abilene,  Galilee,  lturea,  and  Trachonitis. 

Acts  25.  13  after  certain  days  king  A.  and  Bernice 
25.  22  Then  A.  said  unto  Festus,  I  would  also 
25.  23  on  the  morrow,  when  A.  was  come,  and 
25.  24  And  Festus  said,  King  A.,  and  all  men 

25.  26  I  have  brought.. before  you..O  king  A, 

26.  1  Then  A.  said  unto  Paul,  Thou  art 

26.    2  I  think  myself  happy,  king  A  ,  because  I 
26.    7  For  which  hope's  sake,  king  A.,  I  am 
26.  19  Whereupon,  O  king  A.,  I  was  not 
26.  27  King  A.,  believest  thou  the  prophets?  I 
26.  28  Then  A.  said  uuto  Paul,  Almost  thou 
26.    32  ThensaidA.uutoFestus.Thismanmigbt 
AGROUND,  to  run  — 
To  force  upon,  4ttok4\\co  epokello. 

Acts  27.  41  they  ran  the  ship  aground;  and  the 
A'-GTJR,  nwN  gatherer. 

The  son  of  Jakeh.  Jerome  and  others  consider  this 
name  as  symbolical  of  Solomon  himself ;  but  this  is 
inconsistent  with  the  designation  a  Sou  of  Jakeh,' 
and  Solomon,  in  the  same  book,  is  expressly  called 
Son  of  David." 

Prov.30.    i  The  words  of  A.  the  sou  of  Jakeh.. the 
AH    — 
l.Ahaf  {complaint),  nnx  ahah. 

Jer.     1.   6  Ah,  Lord  God!  behold,  I  cannot  speak 
4.  10  Ah,  LoRDGod' surely  thou  hast,  .deceived 
14. 13  Ah,  Lord  God!  behold,  the  prophets 
32. 17  Ah  Lord  God  !  behold,  thou  hast  made 
Eze.    4. 14  Ah  Lord  God  !  behold,  my  soul 

9.    8  Ah  Lord  God  !  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the 
11. 13  Ah  Lord  God  !  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end 
20.  49  Ah  Lord  God  !.. Doth  he  not  speak 
2.Ah /  {grief),  nx  ach. 

Eze.  21. 15  ah !  (it  is)  made  bright,  (it  is)  wrapped  up 
Z.He!  he-ah!  {malicious  joy),  nxn  he-ach. 

Psa.  35.  25  Ah,  so  would  we  have  it :  let  them  not 
4.i/o/  (threatening,  grief,  exhortation),  'in  hoi. 
Isa.     1.    4  Ah  sinful  nation,  .laden  with  iniquity 
1.  24  Ah,  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries 
Jer.  22.  18  saying,  Ah  my  brother !  or.  Ah  sister ! 
22.  18  saying.  Ah  Lord  !  or,  Ah  his  glory ! 
34.    5  Ah,  Lord  !  for  I  have  pronounced  the 
5.0,  ah  (derision,  insult),  ohd  oua. 

Mark  15.  29  Ah,  thou  that  destroyest  the  temple 
AHA  — 
He!  ('malicious  joy),  nsstn  he-ach. 

Psa.  35.  21  Aha.  aha,  our  eye  hath  seen  (it) 

40.  15  Let  them  be  desolate,  .that  say.  .Aha 
70.    3  Let  them  be  turned,  .that  say,  Alia,  aha 
Isa.    44.  16  Aha,  I  am  warm,  I  have  seen  the  fire 
Eze.  25.    3  thou  saidst,  Aha,  against  my  sanctuary 
26.    2  Aha,  she  is  broken  (that  was)  the  gates 
36.    2  Alia,  even  the  ancient  high  places  are 

AH'-AB,  2xr\x fathers  brother  (=uncle.) 
1.  Son  of  Omri,  and  his  successor  as  7th  king  of  Israel 
(919-897  B.C.)  He  married  Jezebel,  daughter  of  Eth- 
baal,  king  of  the  Zidoniaus,  and  was  led  by  her  into 
idolatry  and  incited  to  the  persecution  of  the  pro- 
phets of  Jehovah.  The  most  remarkable  incidents  in 
his  life  were  his  defeating  Beuhadad.  whom  he  freely 
dismissed,  and  his  seiziug  the  vineyard  of  Naboth. 
During  his  reign  appeared  the  great  prophet  Elijah, 
who  came  into  direct  collision  with  Jezebel  when  she 
attempted  to  introduce  the  worship  of  Baal  and  the 
goddess  Astarte,  of  whom  her  father  had  been  a  priest 
before  he  usurped  the  sovereignty  of  Tyre,  B.C.  goo. 
1  Ki.  16.  2S  So  Omri  slept  with  his  fathers,  .and  A. 

16.  29  in  the  thirty  and  eighth  year,  .began  A. 

16.  29  and  A.  the  son  of  Omri  rei^ued  over 

16.  30  And  A.  the  son  of  Omri  did  evil  in  the 

16.  33  And  A.  made  a  grove 

16.  33  and  A.  did  more  to  provoke  the  Lord 

17.  1  And  Elijah,  .said  uuto  A.,  (As)  the  Lord 


AHARAH 


AHIJAH 


21. 
21. 


i  Ki.  18.    i  Go,  shew  thyself  unto  A. ;  and  I  will  send 
18.    2  Ami  Elijah  went  to  shew  himself  unto  A. 
18.    3  And  A.  called  Obadiah,  which  ^was)  the 
18.    5  And  A.  said  unto  Obadiah,  Go  into  the 
1 8.    6  A.  went  one  way  by  himself,  and 
18.    q  wouldst  deliver,  .into  the  hand  of  A. 
18.  i2  when  I  corae  and  tell  A.,  and  he  cannot 
i3.  16  So  Obadiah  went  to  meet  A.,  and  told 
iS.  16  and  A.  went  to  meet  Elijah 
i3.  17  it  came  to  pass,  when  A.  saw  Elijah 
jS.  17  that  A.  said  uuto  him,  (Art)  thou  he  that 
18.  20  So  A.  sent  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel 
iS.  41  And  Elijah  said  unto  A.,  Get  thee  up,  eat 
18.  42  So  A.  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink 
i3.  44  And  he  said,  Go  up,  say  unto  A.,  Prepare 
18.  45  And  A.  rode,  and  went  to  Jezreel 

18.  46  Elijah,  .ran  before  A.  to  the  entrance  of 

19.  1  And  A.  told  Jezebel  all  that  Elijah  had 

20.  2  And  he  sent  messengers  to  A.  king  of 
20.  13  behold,  there  came  a  prophet  unto  A. 

20.  14  And  A.  said,  By  whom  ?  And  he  said 

21.  1  had  a  vineyard . .  hard  by  the  palace  of  A. 
21.  2  And  A.  spake  unto  Naboth,  saying,  Give 
21.  3  And  Naboth  said  to  A.,  The  LORD  forbid 
21.    4  And  A.  came  into  bis  house  heavy  and 

8  So  she  wrote  letters  in  A.'s  name,  and 

15  Jezebel  said  to  A.,  Arise,  take  possession 

16  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  A.  heard  that 
16  A.  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the  vineyard  of 
18  Arise,  go  down  to  meet  A.  king  of  Israel 

20  And  A.  said  to  Elijah,  Hast  thou  found 

21  Behold,  I.  .will  cut  off  from  A.  him  that 

24  Him  that  dieth  of  A.  in  the  city 

25  But  there  was  none  like  unto  A. 
27  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  A.  heard  those 
29  Seest  thou  how  A.  humbleth  himself 
20  the  Lord  said,  Who  shall  persuade  A. 

39  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.,  and  all  that 

40  So  A.  slept  with  his  fathers  ;  and  Ahaziah 

41  began  to  reign,  .in  the  fourth  year  of  A. 
49  Then  said  Ahaziah  the  son  of  A.  unto 
51  Ahaziah  the  son  of  A.  began  to 

1  Moab  rebelled,  .after  the  death  of  A. 
1  Now  Jehoram  the  son  of  A.  began  to 

5  But  it  came  to  pass,  when  A.  was  dead 

16  in  the  fifth  year  of  Joram  the  son  of  A. 
1 3  And  he  walked,  .as  did  the  house  of  A. 
1 3  for  the  daughter  of  A.  was  his  wife 
25  the  twelfth  year  of  Joram  the  sou  of  A. 

27  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  house  of  A. 
2  7  the  house  of  A. . .  the  h.  of  A. . .  the  h.  of  A. 

28  And  he  went  with  Joram  the  son  of  A. 

29  Ahaziah . .  went . .  to  see . .  the  son  of  A. 

7  And  thou  shalt  smite  the  house  of  A. 

8  For  the  whole  house  of  A.  shall  perish 

8  and  I  will  cut  off  from  A.  him  that  pisseth 

9  And  I  will  make  the  house  of  A.  like  the 
25  when  I  and  thou  rode  together  after  A. 

29  eleventh  year  of  Joram  the  sou  of  A. 
1  And  A.  had  seventy  sons  in  Samaria 
1  wrote,  .to  them  that  brought  up  A.'s 

10  which  the  Lord  spake  concerning  the . .  A. 

11  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  of . .  A. 

17  slew  all  that  remained  unto  A.  in  Samaria 

18  A.  served  Baal  a  little ;  (but)  Jehu  shall 

30  thou,  .hast  done  unto  the  house  of  A. 
3  and  made  a  grove,  as  did  A.  king  of  Israel 

13  and  the  plummet  of  the  house  of  A. 

1  Now  Jehoshaphat . .  joined  affinity  with  A. 

2  after  (certain)  years  he  went  down  to  A. 

2  And  A.  killed  sheep  and  oxen  for  him  in 

3  And  A.  king  of  Israel  said  unto  Jehosha. 

19  the  Lord  said,  Who  shall  entice  A.  king 

6  he  walked,  .like  as  did  the  house  of  A. 
6  for  he  had  the  daughter  of  A.  to  wife 

21.  13  like  to  the  whoredoms  of  the  house  of  A. 

22.  3  He . .  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  house  of  A. 
22.  4  Wherefore  he  did  evil,  .like  the  house  of  A. 
22.  5  He.  .went  with  Jehoram  the  son  of  A. 
22.  6  Azariah.  .wentdown  to  see.  .the  son  of  A. 
22.  7  whomtheLoRDhadanointedtocutoff.  .A. 
22.    8  Jehu  was  executing  judgment  upon.  .A. 

Mic.    6.  16  and  all  the  works  of  the  house  of  A. 

2.  A  false  prophet  who  was  in  Babylon  during  the  early 
part  of  the  exile,  but  was  put  to  death  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, B.C.  600. 

Jer.  29.  21  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  .of  A.  the 
29.  22  make  thee  like  Zedekiah  and  like  A. 

A-HA'-KAH,  rnrm  brother  of  Rack,  or  after  a  brother. 
Third  son  of  Benjamin,  elsewhere  called  Ehi,  Ahiram, 
and   Vher,  B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.    3.    1  begat  Bela  his  firstborn,  .and  A.  the 

A-HAR'-HEL,  Srnnss  brother  of  Rachel \vr Qfter  might. 

Sun  of  Harum,  a  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb, 
1    of  Hur,  u.o.  1430. 

1  Ch.    4.    8  And  Coz  begat.,  the  families  of  A.  the 
A-EA'-SAI.'inx  my  holder,  protector. 
A  priest  of  the  family  of  Immer,  some  of  whom  dwelt 
in  Jerusalem  after  the  exile,  B.C.  445. 

Nfeu.li.  13  Amaahai  the  son  of  Azareel.  the  son  of  A. 
A-HAS'-BAI,  '3Cn*«  blooming,  ahining. 

•  tii  ir<ofone«f  Davids  valiant  mem,  whose  family  had 
been  early  settled  at  Maachah,  B.C.  1080. 

2Sa.  23.  34  [<>f  the  thirty]..  Eliphclet..  sou  of  A. 


21. 

21. 

-Ch.  iS. 
18. 
18. 
1 3. 
iS. 
21. 
21. 


A-EAS-TT-E'-RTTS,  B'hlB'rjN  Mug. 

1.  A  king  of  Persia  (529-521  B.C) ;  was  the  Cambyses  of 
profane  history. 

Ezra    4.    6  And  in  the  reign  of  A.,  in  the  beginning 

2.  The  father  of  Darius  the  Mede,  or  Astyages  (594  B.C.) 

Dan.  9.    1  In  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  son  01  A. 

3.  Xerxes,  the  son  of  Darius  Hystaspis  (4S5  B.C.) 

Esth.  1.  1  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  A.,  (this  (is)  A. 
1.  2  when  the  king  A.  sat  on  the  tlirone  of  his 
1.  9  royal  house  which  (belonged)  to  king  A. 
1.  10  chamberlaius  that  served . .  presence  of  A. 
1.  15  not  performed  the  commandment  of.  .A. 
1.  16  in  all  the  provinces  of  the  king  A. 
1.  17  The  king  A.  commanded  Vashti  the 

1.  19  that  Vashti  come  no  more  before  king  A. 

2.  1  when  the  wrath  of  king  A.  was  appeased 
2.  12  every  maid's  turn,  .to  go  in  to  king  A. 

2  16  So  Esther  was  taken  unto  king  A.  into 

2.  21  Bigthan.  .sought  to  lay  hand  on.  .A. 

3.  1  After  these  things  did  king  A.  promote 
3.    6  throughout  the  whole  kingdom  of  king  A. 
3.    7  in  the  twelfth  year  of  king  A.,  they  cast 
3.    8  And  Haman  said  unto  king  A.,  There  is  a 
3.  12  in  the  name  of  king  A.  was  it  written 

6.  2  who  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  A. 

7.  5  Then  the  king  A.  answered  and  said  unto 

8.  1  On  that  day  did  the  king  A.  give  the 
8.    7  Then  the  king  A.  said  unto  Esther  the 
8.  10  And  he  wrote  in  the  king  A.'s  name 

8.  12  one  day  in  all  the  provinces  of.  .A. 

9.  2  throughout  all  the  provinces  of .  .A. 
9.  20  in  all  the  provinces  of  the  king  A. 

9.  30  to  the.  .provinces  of  the  kingdom  of  A. 
10.    1  And  the  king  A.  laid  a  tribute  upon  the 
10.    3  Mordecai  the  Jew  (was)  next  unto  king  A. 
A-HA'-VA,  tonx  stream. 

A  river  in  the'  N.E.  of  Media  near  the  district  of  Casi- 
phia ;  some  think  it  the  same  as  the  A  diaba  in  Adiabene, 
or  Hit,  due  E.  of  Damascus,  on  the  Euphrates.  On  a  tri- 
butary of  this  river  Ezra  assembled  the  Jews  before 
starting  on  their  journey  to  Jerusalem.  Some  consider 
the  name  as  applying  to  a  district  in  the  plains  of  Baby- 
lon. 

Ezra  8.  15  to  the  river  that  runneth  to  A. ;  and  there 
8.  21  proclaimed  a  fast  there,  at  the  river  of  A. 

8.  31  Then  we  departed  from  the  river  of  A.  on 
A'-HAZ,  tniy  he  holds. 

1.  Son  of  Jotham,  king  of  Judah,  and  father  of  Heze- 
kiah.  He  succeeded  his  father  as  eleventh  king  of 
Judah,  and  reigned  sixteen  years  (740-724  B.C.) 

2KL  15.  38  And  Jotham  slept.,  and  A.  his  son  reigned 
16.    1  A.  the  son  of  Jotham  king  of  Judah  began 
16.    2  Twenty  years  old  (was)  A.  when  he  began 
16.    5  and  they  besieged  A.,  but  could  not 
16.    7  So  A.  sent  messengers  to  Tiglath-pileser 
16.    8  And  A.  took  the  silver  and  gold  that  was 
16.  10  And  king  A.  went  to  Damascus  to  meet 
16.  10  and  king  A.  sent  to  Urijah  the  priest  the 
16.  11  an  altar  according  to  all  that  king  A. 
16.  11  the  priest  made  (it)  against  king  A.,  came 
16.  15  And  king  A.  commanded  Urijah  the  priest 
16. 16  according  to  all  that  king  A.  commanded 
16.  17  And  king  A.  cut  off  the  borders  of  the 
16.  19  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.  which  he 

16.  20  And  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

17.  1  In  the  twelfth  year  of  A.  king  of  Judah 

18.  1  Hezekiah  the  son  of  A.  king  of  Judah 
20.  11  which  it  had  gone  down  in  the  dial  of  A. 
23.  12  on  the  top  of  the  upper  chamber  of  A. 

1  Ch.    3.  13  A.  his  son,  Hezekiah  his  son,  Manasseh 

9.  42  And  A.  begat  Jarah ;  aud  Jarah  begat 
2CI1.  27.   9  Jotham  slept,  .and  A.  his  son  reigned  in 

28.    1  A.  (was)  twenty  years  old  when  he  began 
28.  16  At  that  time  did  king  A.  send  unto  the 
28. 19  the  Lord  brought  Judah  low  because  of  A. 
28.  21  For  A.  took  away  a  portion  (out)  of  the 
28.  22  this  (is  that)  king  A. 
28.  24  And  A.  gathered  together  the  vessels  of 

28.  27  And  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

29.  19  Moreover  all  the  vessels,  which  king  A. 
Isa.      1.    1  The  vision  of  Isaiah,  .in  the  days  of.  .A. 

7.    1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  A. 
7.    3  Go  forth  now  to  meet  A.,  thou,  and 
7.  10  Moreover  the  Lord  spake  again  unto  A. 

7.  12  But  A.  said,  I  will  not  ask,  neither  will  I 
14.  28  In  the  year  that  king  A.  died  was  this 
38.    8  which  is  gone  down  in  the  sun  dial  of  A. 

Hos.    1.    1  The  word  of  the  Lord  . .  in  the  days  of . .  A . 
Mic.    1.    1  The  word  of  the  Lord,  .in  the  days  of.  .A. 

2.  A  Benjamite,  of  the  family  of  Saul. 

1  Ch.    8.  35  And  the  sons  of  Micah  (were). .A. 

8.  36  And  A  begat  Jehoadah ;  and  Jehoadah 

9.  41  And  the  sons  of  Micah  (were.  .A.) 

9.  42  And  A.  begat  Jarah ;  and  Jarah  begat 

A-HAZ-I'AH,  ^ip.x  rrMns*  Jah  holds,  possesses. 

1.  A  son  of  Ahab,  who  succeeded  as  eighth  king  of  Israel 
and  reigned  two  years  (896  and  895  B.C.). 

1  Ki.  22.  40  So  Ahab  slept,  .and  A.  his  son  reigned 
22.  49  Then  said  A.  the  sou  of  Ahab  unto 
22.  51  A.  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign  over 

2KI    1.    2  And  A.  fell  down  through  a  lattice 

1.  18  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A,  which  he 

1  Ch.   3.  11  Joram  his  son,  A.  his  son,  Joash  his 

2  Ch.  20.  35  did  Jehoshaphat.  .join  himself  with  A. 

20.  37  Because  thou  hast  joined  thyself  with  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Jehoram  (or  Joram),  who  succeeded  as  fifth 
king  of  Judah.  He  is  also  called  Jehoahaz  and  Azariah, 
and  reigned  only  one  year  (S84  B.C.). 


2  Ki.  8.  24  And  Joram  slept,  .and  A.  his  son  reigned 
8.  25  twelfth  year  of  Joram . .  did  A. . .  begin  to 
8.  26  Two  and  twenty  years  old  (was)  A.  when 

8.  29  And  A. .  .went  down  to  see  Joram  the  son 

9.  16  And  A.  king  of  Judah  was  come  down  to 
9.  21  Joram  king  of  Israel  and  A.  king  of  Judah 
9.  23  Joram.  .said  to  A. .  .treachery,  O  A. 

9.  27  But  when  A.  the  king  of  Judah  saw  (this) 

9.  29  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Joram.  .began  A. 
10.  13  Jehu  met  with  the  brethren  of  A.  king  of 

10.  13  they  answered,  We  (are)  the  brethren  of  A. 

11.  1  when  Athaliah  the  mother  of  A.  saw  that 

11.  2  the.  .sister  of  A.,  took  Joash  the  son  of  A. 

12.  18  hallowed  things  that  Jehoshaphat.  .and  A. 

13.  1  three  and  twentieth  year  of.  .the  son  of  A. 
14. 13  Amaziah . .  son  of  Jehoash  the  son  of  A. 

1  Ch.    3.  11  Joram  his  son,  A.  his  son,  Jotham  his  son 

2  Ch.  22.    1  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  made  A. 

22.    2  Forty  and  two  years  old  (was)  A.  when  he 
22.    7  And  the  destruction  of  A.  was  of  God  by 
22.    8  of  the  brethren  of  A.  .that  ministered  to  A. 
22.    g  And  he  sought  A.:  and  they  caught  him 
22.    9  So  the  house  of  A.  had  no  power  to  keep 
22.  10  when  Athaliah  the  mother  of  A.  saw 
22.  11  Jehoshabeath.  .took  Joash  the  son  of  A. 
22.  11  Jehoshabeath.  .was  the  sister  of  A. 

AH'-BAN,  linx  brother  of  intelligence. 

Son  of  Abishur,  a  descendant  of  Jerahmeel,  grandson  of 

Pharez,  B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.    2.  29  Abihail.  .bare  him  A.,  and  Molid 
A'-HER,  "tnN  one  that  is  behind. 
A  Benjamite  (perhaps  the  same  as  Ahiraro),  "B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.    7. 12  of  Ir,  (and)  Hushim,  the  sons  of  A. 
A'-EI,  tin  my  brother. 

1.  A  head  of  the  families  of  Gad,   B.C.  1363. 

1  Ch.    5. 15  A,  the  son  of  Abdiel,  the  son  of  Guni 

2.  An  Israelite  of  the  tribe  of  Asher. 

1  Ch.    7.  34  the  sons  of  Shamer ;  A.,  and  Kohgah 

A-EI'-AH,  n;m:  Jah  is  a  brother. 

1.  Grandson  of  Phinehas  son  of  Eli,  B.C.  1080. 

1  Sa.  14.    3  And  A.,  the  son  of  Ahitub,  I-chabod's 

14.  18  And  Saul  said  unto  A.,  Bring  hither 

2.  One  of  Solomon's  scribes. 

1  Ki.   4.    3  Elihoreph  and  A.,  the  sons  of  Shisha 

3.  A  descendant  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.    8.    7  And  Naaman,  and  A.,  and  Gera 

A-Hl'-AM,  DN'nN  a  mother's  brother. 

One  of  David's  thirty  mighty  men,  and  son  of  Sharar 

the  Hararite,  who,  in  1  Ch.  11.  35,  is  called  Sacar,  B.C. 

1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  33  A.  the  son  of  Sharar  the  Hararite 
1  Ch.  11.  35  A.  the  son  of  Sacar  the  Hararite 

A-HI'-AN,  };i™  brother  of  day. 

Son  of  Shemidah,  a  Manassehite,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7.  19  the  sons  of  Shemidah  were,  A.,  and 

A-HI-EZ-ER,  iiynN  hetyim/  brother. 

1.  A  prince  of  Dan,  appointed  to  assist  Moses  in  num- 
bering the  people,  B.C.  1491. 

Num.  1.  12  Of  Dan ;  A.  the  son  of  Ammishaddai 

2.  25  of  Dan  (shall  be)  A.  the  son  of  Ammisha. 
7.  66  On  the  tenth  day  A.  the  son  of  Aniniisha. 
7.  71  this  (was)  the  offering  of  A.  the  son  of 

10.  25  and  over  his  host  (was)  A.  the  son  of 

2.  A  Danite  chief  who  joined  David  when  lying  at  Ziklag 
for  fear  of  Saul. 

1  Ch.  12.    3  The  chief  (was)  A.,  then  Joash,  the  sons  of 

A-HI'-ETJD,  th'TO  brother  of  honour. 

A  prince  of  Asher,  appointed  to  allocate  the  land  W.  of 

the  Jordan,  B.C.  1491. 

Num.34.  27  of  Asher,  A.,  the  son  of  Shelomi 

A-HI'-HTTD,  in'riN  brother  of  mystery. 

A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Ehud,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.    7  he  removed  them,  and  begat  I:zza,  and  A. 
A-HI'-JAH,  n;nx  Jah  is  brother. 

This  name,  though  variously  expressed  in  the  English 
version  is  the  same  in  every  passage  in  which  it  oceurs 
in  the  origiual.     See  Ahiah. 

1.  A  prophet,  probably  of  Ephraim,  who  foretold  to 
Jeroboam  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes,  B.C.  980. 

1  Ki.  11.  29  the  prophet  A.  the  Shilonite  found  him 
"  11.  30  And  A.  caught  the  new  garment  that 
12.  15  which  the  Lord  spake  by  A.  the  Shilonite 
14.    2  behold,  there  (is)  A.  the  prophet,  which 
4  to  Shiloh,  and  came  to  the  house  of  A. 

4  But  A.  could  not  see ;  for  his  eyes  were 

5  And  the  Lord  said  unto  A.,  Behold 

6  And  it  was  (so),  when  A.  heard  the  sound 

8  by  the  hand  of  his  servant  A.  the  prophet 

9  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  A.  the 
>  Ch.   9.  29  and  in  the  prophecy  of  A.  the  Shilonite 

io.  15  which  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  A.  the 

2.  Father  of  Baasha  who  conspired  against  Nadab  son 
of  Jeroboam  and  reigned  in  his  stead,  B.C.  953. 

1  Ki.  15.  27  And  Baasha  the  sou  of  A.,  of  the  house  of 

15-  33  began  Baasha  the  son  of  A.  to  reign  over 
21.  22  like  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  A. 

2  Ki    9.   9  and  like  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  A. 


AHIKAM 


23 


AI 


3.  Son  of  Jerahmeel,  brother  of  Caleb  (or  Chelubai),  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah. 

i  Ch.   2.  25  and  Enuah,  and  Oren,  and  Ozeni,  (and)  A. 

4.  One  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men,  B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.  11.  36  Hepher  the  Mecherathite,  A.  the  Pelonite 

5.  A  Levite  set  over  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  God 
in  the  time  of  David,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  26.  20  And  of  the  Levites,  A.  (was)  over  the 

6.  A  Levite  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant 
B.C.  445- 

Neli.  10.  26  And  A.,  Hanan,  Anan 

A-HI'-KAM,  Di2"nK  my  brother  has  risen. 

An  officer  in  Josiah's  court,  the  son  of  Shaphan,  who 

was  one  of  the  king's  officers,  B.C.  641. 

2  Ki.  22.  12  and  A.  the  son  of  Shaphan,  and  Achbor 

22.  14  So  Hilkiah  the  priest,  and  A.,  and  Achbor 
25.  22  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Shaphan,  ruler 
2  Ch.  34.  20  the  king  commanded  Hilkiah,  and  A.  the 
Jer.   26.  24  the  hand  of  A.  the  son  of  Shaphan  was 

39.  14  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Shaphan,  that 

40.  5  the  son  of  A.  the  sou  of  Shaphan,  whom 
40.    6  the  son  of  A.  to  Mizpah ;  and  dwelt  with 
40.    7  the  son  of  A.  governor  in  the  laud,  and 
40.    9  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Shaphan  sware 
40. 11  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Shaphan 

40.  14  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  believed  them  not 

40.  16  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  said  unto  Johanan 

41.  1  unto  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  to  Mizpah 
41.    2  smote  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of 
41.    6  Come  to  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A. 

41.  10  had  committed  to  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A. 
41.  16,  i3  had  slain  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A. 
43.    6  with  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of 

A-HT'-LTJD,  i^'nx  a  brother  born. 

An   Israelite  whose  son  Jehoshaphat  was   appointed 

recorder  by  David,  B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    8.  16  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  A.  (was)  recorder 

20.  24  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  A.  (was)  recorder 
1  Ki.   4.    3  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  A.,  the  recorder 

4. 12  Baana  the  son  of  A.;  (to  him  pertained) 
1  Ch.  18.  15  and  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  A.,  recorder 

A-HI-MA'-AZ,  \"il&~x  powerful  brother. 

1.  Father  of  Ahinoam,  wife  of  king  Saul,  B.C.  1090. 

1  Sa.  14.  50  Ahinoam,  the  daughter  of  A.:  and 

2.  A  son  of  Zadok  the  priest,   who  carried  tidings  to 
David  of  the  proceedings  of  Absalom,  B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.  15.  27  your  two  sons  with  you,  A.  thy  son,  and 

15.  36  with  them  their  two  sons,  A.  Zadok's  (son) 

17.  17  Jonathan  and  A.  stayed  by  En-rogel 

17  20  Where  (is)  A.  and  Jonathan?    And  the 
iS.  19  Then  said  A.  the  son  of  Zadok,  Let  me 

18.  22  Then  said  A.  the  son  of  Zadok  yet  again 
38.  23  Then  A.  rau  by  the  way  of  the  plain 

18.  27  is  like  the  running  of  A.  the  son  of  Zadok 
18.  28  And  A.  called,  and  said  unto  the  king 
iS.  29  And  A.  answered,  When  Joab  sent  the 
1  Ch.    6.    8  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  begat  A. 

6.    9  And  A.  begat  Azariah,  and  Azariah  begat 
6.  S3  Zadok  his  son,  A.  his  son 
S.  One  of  Solomon's  officers  who  had  the  charge  of 
victualling  the  king's  household  for  one  month  in  the 
year.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.   4.  15  A.  (was)  in  Naphtali ;  he  also  took 
A-HI'-MAN,  jirnx  brother  of  Man. 

1.  A  son  of  Anak,  who  dwelt  in  Hebron,  B.C.  1450. 

XU11113.  22  where  A.,  Sheshai,  and  Tahuai,  the 
Josh. 15.  14  sons  of  Anak,  Sheshai,  and  A.,  and 
Judg.  1.  10  and  they  slew  Sheshai,  and  A.,  and 

2.  A  Levite  porter  in  the  temple,  B.C.  1000. 

1  Ch.    9.  17  and  Talmon,  and  A.,  and  their  brethren 

A-HI-ME'-LECH,  ~Sp'"«  brother  of  the  king. 

1.  A  priest  slain  in  consequence  of  assisting  David  when 
he  fled  from  Saul,  B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa.  21.    1  Then  came  David  to  Nob  to  A.  tlie  priest 

21.  1  and  A.  was  afraid  at  the  meetingof  David 
zi.    2  And  David  said  unto  A.  the  priest,  The 

21.  8  Aud  David  said  unto  A.,  And  is  there 

22.  9  coming  to  Nob,  to  A.  the  son  of  Ahitub 
22.  11  Then  the  king  sent  to  call  A.  the  priest 
22.  14  Then  A.  answered  the  king,  and  said 
22.  16  Thou  shalt  surely  die.  A.,  thou,  and  all 

22.  20  And  one  of  the  sons  of  A.  the  son  of 

23.  6  when  Abiathar  the  son  of  A.  fled  to  David 
30.    7  David  said  to  Abiathar  the  priest,  A. '3 

2Sa.    8.  i7*and  A.  the  son  of  Abiathar,  (were)  the 
1  Ch.  24.    3  and  A.  of  the  sons  of  Ithamar 

24.  6*and  A.  the  son  of  Abiathar,  and  (before) 
24.  31  and  Zadok,  and  A.,  and  the  chief  of  the 

Psa.   52.  title.  David  is  come  to  the  house  of  A. 
*  [The  names  iu  these  verses  are  supposed  to  have 
been  transposed  by  a  copyist.] 

2.  A  Hittite  officer  in  the  service  of  David,  B.C.  1048. 

1  Sa.  26.    6  Then  answered  David  and  said  to  A.  the 
A-HI'-MOTH,  ;v£\-x  brother  of  death. 
Son  of  Elkanah,  a  descendant  of  Kohath  son  of  Levi. 

1  Ch.   6.  25  the  sons  of  Elkanah  ;  Amasai,  and  A. 

A-HT-NA'DAB,  3-irrx  brother  of  liberal if". 

Son  of  Iddo,  and  one  of  Solomon's  twelve  purveyors, 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.    4.  14  A.  the  son  of  Iddo  (had)  Mahanaini 


A-HI-NO'-AM,  cj^'rix  ]}leasant  brother. 

1.  Wife  of  Saul  first  king  of  Israel,  B.C.  1090. 

1  Sa.  14.  50  the  name  of  Saul's  wife  (was)  A.,  the 

2.  A  woman  of  Jezreel  who  became  wife  of  David  during 
his  wandering,  and  went  with  him  and  his  other  wife, 
Abigail,  to  the  court  of  Achish  in  Gath.  She  was  mother 
of  Aniuon,  David's  eldest  son,  B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa.  25.  43  David  also  took  A.  of  Jezreel ;  and  they 

27.   3  withhistwowives.A.the  Jezreelitess,  and 
30.    5  were  taken  captives,  A.  tl.2  Jezreelitess 

2  Sa.    2.    2  and  his  two  wives  also,  A.  the  Jezreelitess 

3.    2  his  firstborn  was  Amnon,  of  A.  the 

1  Ch.  3.    1  the  firstborn  Amnon,  of  A.  the  JezreeUtess 

A-EI'-O,  vox  his  brother. 

1.  Son  of  Abinadab,  in  whose  house  the  ark  of  God  re- 
mained for  twenty  years  after  being  sent  back  by  the 
Philistines,  B.C.  1045. 

2  Sa.    6.    3  And  (.'zzah  and  A.,  the  sons  of  Abinadab 

6.  4  the  ark  of  God,  and  A.  went  before  the 

1  Ch.  13.   7  of  Abinadab  :  and  Uzza  and  A.  drave  the 

2.  An  Israelite  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin. 

1  Ch.  8.  14  And  A.,  Shashak,  and  Jeremoth. 

3.  A  Benjamite  of  the  Gibeon  family  from  winch  Saul 
sprang. 

1  Ch.  8.  31  And  Gedor,  and  A.,  and  Zacher 

9.  37  And  Gedor,  and  A.,  and  Zechariah 

A-Hf-KA,  jrrnx  brother  of  evil. 

A  chief  of  Naphtali  when  Moses  took  the  census  shortly 

alter  the  exodus,  B.C.  1491. 

Num.  1.  15  Of  Naphtali ;  A.  the  son  of  Enan 

2.  29  of  Naphtali  (shall  be)  A.  the  son  of  Enan 

7.  78  On  the  twelfth  day  A.  the  son  of  Enan 
7.  83  this  (was)  the  offering  of  A.  the  son  of 

10.  27  the  children  of  Naphtali  (was)  A.  the  son 

A-HI-RAM,  C"ynx  exalted  brother. 
A  Benjamite  from  whom  a  family  was  named.     He  is 
called  Ehi  in  Gen.  46. 21,  and  is  supposed  to  he  the  same 
as  the  Aher  of  1.  Ch.  7.  12.     B.C.  1680. 

NuTO.26.  38  of  A.,  the  family  of  the  Ahiramites 
A-HI-KAM'-ITE,  "P"?™*  belonging  to  Ahiram. 
The  Ahiramites  were  an  Israelite  family. 

Nuin26.  38  Ashbelites:of  Ahiram, thefamilyoftheA. 
A-HI-SA'-MACH,  ~?D'nx_  supporting  brother. 
Father  of  Aholiab,  a  Dahite  B.C.  1500. 

E.\od3i.    6  with  him  Aholiab,  the  son  of  A.,  of  the 
35.  34  Aholiab  the  son  of  A.,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan 
38.  23  Aholiab,  son  of  A.,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan 

A-HI-SHA'-HAE,  "in?>'nx  brother  of  the  damn. 
Son  of  Bilhau  and  grandson  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   7.  10  The  sons  also  of  JediaeL.Zethan.  .and  A. 
A-HI'-SHAR,  Tf-nx  brother  of  song. 
Controller  of  Solomon's  household,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.   4.    6  And  A.  (was)  over  the  household :  and 

A-HX-THO'-PHEL,  *?ErrnK  foolish  brother. 
A  native  of  Giloh  in  the  highlands  of  Judah,  and  privy 
counsellor  to  David ;   but  joined  A.bsalom,  and  then 
hanged  himself,  B.C.  1023. 

2  Sa.  15.  12  And  Absalom  sent  for  A.  the  Gilonite 

15.  31  And(one)toldDavid, saying,  A.(is)among 
15.  31  turn  the  counsel  of  A.  into  foolishness 

15.  34  mayest  thou,  .defeat  the  counsel  of  A. 

16.  15  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  A.  with  him 
16.  20  Then  said  Absalom  to  A.,  Give  counsel 
16.  21  And  A.  said  unto  Absalom,  Go  in  unto 
16.  23  And  the  counsel  of  A.,  winch  he 

16.  23  so  (was)  all  the  counsel  of  A.,  both  v  ith 

17.  1  Moreover  A.  said  unto  Absalom,  Let 

17.    6  saying,  A.  hath  spoken  after  this  manner 
17.    7  The  counsel  that  A.  hath  given  (is)  not 
17. 14  counsel,  .(is)betterthan  the  counsel  of  A. 
17.  14  to  defeat  the.  .counsel  of  A.,  to  the  intent 
17.  15  Thus  and  thus  did  A.  counsel  Absalom 
17.  21  for  thus  hath  A.  counselled  against  you 

17.  23  And  when  A.  saw  that  Ins  counsel  was 
23.  34  Eliam  the  son  of  A.  the  Gilonite 

1  Ch.  27.  33  And  A.  (was)  the  king's  counsellor 

27.  34  And  after  A.  (was)  Jehoiada  the  son  of 

A-HI'-TUB,  mtrnx  a  good  brother. 

1.  Son  of  Phinehas,  and  grandson  of  Eli,  B.C.  1100. 

1  Sa.  14.  3  the  son  of  A.,  I-chabod's  brother,  the  son 

22.  9  comingtoNob,  to  Ahimelech  the  son  of  A. 
22.  11  to  call  Ahimelech  the  priest,  the  son  of  A. 
22.  12  And  Saul  said,  Hear  now,  thou  son  of  A. 
22.  20  of  Ahimelech  the  son  of  A.,  named 

2.  Father  of  Zadok  the  high-priest  in  the  time  of  David, 
B.C.  1060.    Perhaps  the  same  as  No.  r. 

2  Sa.    8.  17  And  Zadok  the  son  of  A.,  and  Ahimelech 
1  Ch.  6.    7  and  Amariah  begat  A. 

6.    8  And  A.  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  begat 
6.  52  Amariah  his  son,  A.  his  son 

18.  16  And  Zadok  the  son  of  A.,  and 
Ezra    7.    2  the  son  of  Zadok,  the  son  of  A. 

3.  Another  priest,  in  the  7th  generation  after  No.  2, 
B.C.  758. 

1  Ch.   6.  11  begat  Amariah,  and  Amariah  begat  A. 

6.  12  A.  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  begat  Shallum 

4.  Another  priest,  progenitor  of  Seraiah,  and  ruler  of  the 
house  of  God  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah. 

1  Ch.  9.  11  son  of  A.,  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 
Neh.  11.  11  the  son  of  Meraioth,  the  son  of  A. 


AH'-LAB,  3^flK  fruitful  place. 

A  city  of  Astier  from  which  the  C'anaanites  were  not 

driven  o"Qt. 

Judg.  1.  31  nor  the  inhabitants  of  Zidon,  nor  of  A. 
AH'-LAI,  '^mX  Jah  is  staying. 

1.  A  daughter  of  Sheshan,  a  descendant  of  Pharez,  B.C. 
1430. 

1  Ch.   2.  31  And  the  children  of  Sheshan  ;  A. 

2.  Father  of  one  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men,  B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.  11.  41  Uriah  the  Hittite,  Zabad  the  son  of  A. 
A-HO'-AH,  ninx  a  brother's  reed. 
Son  of  Bela  and  grandson  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.   8.  4  Abishua,  and  Naaman,  and  A. 
A-EO-EITE,  *-inS  belonging  to  A  ho  ah.  , 

1.  A  patronymic  derived  from  Ahoah,  a  grandson  of 
Benjamin. 

2Sa.  23.  28  ZalmontheA.,Maharai  the  Netophathite 

1  Ch.  11.  12  Eleazar  the  son  of  Dodo,  the  A.,  who 

11.  29  Ilai  the  A. 

27.    4  the  second  month  (was)  Dcdai  an  A. 

2.  This  word  occurs  in  the  common  version  of  2  Sa.  23.  a, 
but  in  the  original  the  expression  used  is  Ben  Ahohi 
"  son  of  Ahohi,"  which  thus  seems  to  be  a  proper 
name,  not  a  patronymic.    B.C.  1650. 

2  Sa.  23.    9  (was)  Eleazar  the  son  of  Dodo  the  A. 
A-HO'-LAH,  nSnx  her  own  tent. 

A  symbolic  name  for  Samaria  and  the  ten  tribes. 

Eze.  23.    4  And  the  names  of  them  (were)  A.  the  elder 
23.    4  Thus  (were)  their  names ;  Samaria  (is)  A. 
23.    5  And  A.  played  the  harlot  when  she  was 
23.  36  Son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  A.  and 
23.  44  went  they  in  unto  A.  and  untoAholibah 

A-HO-LI'-AB,  nx-'prix  a  father's  tent. 

A  Danite,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  appointed  by  God  to 

work  with  Bezaleel  in  preparing  the  tabernacle,  B.C. 

1490. 

Exod3i.    6  I  have  given  with  him  A.,  the  son  of 

35-  34  (both)  he,  and  A.,  the  son  of  Ahisamach 
36.  1  Then  wrought  Bezaleel  and  A.,  and  every 
36.    2  And  Moses  called  Bezaleel  and  A.,  and 

35.  23  And  with  him(was)  A.,  son  of  Ahisamach 
A-H0-LI'-3AE,  nzr'pnx  my  tent  (is)  in  her. 

A  symbolic  name  for  Judah  and  Jerusalem. 
Eze.  23.    4  A.  her  sister  :  and  they  were  mine 

23.   4  Samaria  (is)  Aholah,  and  Jerusalem  A. 

23.  11  when  her  sister  A.  saw  (this),  she 

23.  22  Therefore,  OAholibah,  thus  saith  the  Lord 

23.  36  wilt  thou  judge  Aholah  and  A.  ? 

23.  44  so  went  they  in  unto  Aholah  ar,d  unto  A. 

A-HO-LI-BA'-SLAH,  .T^nx  tent  of  the  high  place. 

1.  Granddaughter  01  Gideon  theHivite,  and  wife  of  Esau. 
She  is  called  Judith  in  Gen.  26.  34.     B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  36.    2  A.  the  daughter  of  Anah  the  daughter  of 

36.  5  And  A.  bare  Jeush,  and  Jaalam,  and 

36.  14  these  were  the  sons  of  A.,  the  daughter  of 
36.  18  And  these  (are)  the  sons  of  A.  Esau's  wife 
36.  iS  these  (were)  the  dukes  (that)  came  of  A. 
36.  25  Dishon,  and  A.  the  daughter  of  Anah 

2.  A  chief  that  sprang  from  Esau,  B.C.  1470. 

Gen.  36.  41  Duke  A.,  duke  Elan,  duke  Pinon 

1  Ch.   1.  52  Duke  A.,  duke  Elah,  duke  Pinon 
A-ETJ'-MAI,  ^'n^  lieated  by  Jah. 
Grandson  of  Shobal,  son  of  Judah,  B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.   4.    2  begat  Jahath ;  and  Jahath  begat  A. 
A-ETJ'-ZAM,  L]~:i  a  holding  fast. 
A  son  of  Ashur,  a  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb 
son  of  Kur,  B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.   4.    6  And  Naarah  bare  him  A.,  and  Hepher 
A-HTJZ'-ZATH,  njnx  holding  fast. 
A  friend  of  Abimelech,  king  of  the  Philistines  in  the 
time  of  Isaac,  B.C.  1804. 

Gen.  26,  26  Abimelech  went  to  him.  .and  A.  one  of 
A'-I,  'yn  "yrr  the  heap. 

A  city  near  Bethel,  and  about  10  miles  N.  of  Jerusalem, 
within  the  territory  of  Benjamin.  See  ^.-1  iath,  A  ija,  and 
Hai,  other  forms  of  the  name.  Its  modern  name  is  Et 
Tec!,  "  the  heap." 

Josh.  7.   2  Joshua  sent  men  from  Jericho  to  A. 
7.    2  And  the  men  went  up  and  viewed  A. 
7.    3  three  thousand  men,  go  up  and  smite  A. 
7.    4  they  Red  before  the  men  of  A. 

7.  5  And  the  men  of  A.  smote  of  them  about 

8.  1  go  up  to  A.:  see,  I  have  given  into  thy 
8.    1  the  king  of  A.,  and  his  people,  aud  his 
8.    2  And  thou  shalt  do  to  A.  and  her  king 
8.    3  So  Joshua  arose,  .to  go  up  against  A. 
8.    9  and  abode  between  Beth-el  and  A. 

8.    9  on  the  west  side  of  A. :  but  Joshua 
8.  10  elders  of  Israel,  before  the  people  to  A. 
8.  11  side  of  A...  a  valley  between  them  and  A. 
8.  12  in  ambush  between  Bethel  and  A. 
8.  14  when  the  king  of  A.  saw  (it),  that  they 
8.  i6*all  the  people  that  (were)  in  A.  were 
8.  17  there  was  not  a  man  left  in  A.  or 
8.  18  spear  that  (is)  in  thy  hand  toward  A. 
8.  20  And  when  the  men  of  A.  looked 
8.  21  turned  again,  and  slew  the  men  of  A. 
8.  23  And  the  king  of  A.  they  took  alive,  and 
8.  24  slaying  all  the  inhabitants  of  A. 
8.  24  all  the  Israelites  returned  unto  A. 
[*  The  Hebrew  text  has  "  in  the  city."] 


AIAH 


24 


ALIKE 


Jc  ~h.  8.  25  twelve  thousand,  .all  the  men  of  A. 
8.  26  destroyed  all  the  inhabitants  of  A. 
8.  28  And  Joshua  burnt  A.,  and  made  it 

8.  29  And  the  king  of  A.  he  hanged  on  a  tree 

9.  3  Joshua  had  done  unto  Jericho  and  to  A. 
10.    1  when,  .heard  how  Joshua  had  taken  A. 
10.    1  so  he  had  done  to  A.  and  her  king 

10.    2  because  it  (was)  greater  than  A.,  and  all 
12.   9  the  king  of  A.,  which  (is)  beside  Beth-el 
Ezra    2.  28  The  men  of  Beth-el  and  A.,  two  hundred 
Neh.    7.  32  The  men  of  Beth-el  and  A.,  an  hundred 
Jer.   49.    3*Howl,  O  Heshbon,  for  A.  is  spoiled  :  cry 
[*  Here  the  article  is  omitted.] 

A'-IAH,  A'-JAH,  jtn  a  vulture. 

1.  Son  of  Zibeon,  son  of  Seir  the  Horite,  B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  24  these  (are)  the  children  of  Zibeon;  both  A. 

1  Ch.   1.  40  And  the  sons  of  Zibeon  ;  A.,  and  Anah 

2.  The  father  of  Rizpah,  Saul's  concubine,  B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.    3.    7  name  (was)  Rizpah,  the  daughter  of  A. 

21.  £  two  sons  of  Rizpah  the  daughter  of  A. 
21.  10  And  Rizpah  the  daughter  of  A.  took 
21.  11  what  Rizpali  the  daughter  of  A.,  the 
AI'-ATH,  n;y  a  heap,  a  ruin. 

The  feminine  form  of  Ai,  but  it  is  not  certain  that  it 
applies  to  the  same  place. 

Isa.  10.  28  He  is  come  to  A.,  lie  is  passed  to 
AID,  to  — 
To  strengthen,  pin  chazeq,  3. 

Judg.  9.  24  men  of  Shechem.  .aided  him  in  the 
AI'-JA,  ay_  a  heap,  a  ruin. 
One  of  the  forms  of  Ai. 

Neb.  11.  31  (dwelt)  at  Michmash,  and  A.,  and  Bcth-el 
AI-JA'-LON,  A-JA'-LON,  fb% 

1.  The  name  of  a  valley  in  Dan. 

Josh  10. 12  and  thou,  Moon,  in  the  valley  of  A. 

2.  A  Levitical  town  in  Dan,  so  called  from  its  situation 
in  or  near  the  valley  of  Ajalon. 

Josh.  19.  42  And  Shaalabbin,  and  A.,  and 

21.  24  A.  with  her  suburbs,  Gath-rimmon  with 
Judg  1.  35  Amorites.  .dwell  in  mount  Heres  in  A. 

3.  A  place  in  the  tribe  of  Zebulun. 

Judg  12.  12  and  was  buried  in  A.  in  the  country  of 

4.  A  town  in  Benjamin  or  Judah,  or  perhaps  identical 
with  Ajalon  in  Dan. 

1  Sa.  14.  31  smote  the  Philistines  that  day.  .to  A. 

1  Ch.   8.  13  fathers  of  the  inhabitants  of  A. 

2  Ch.  11.  10  And  Zorah,  and  A. .  .which  (are)  in  Judah 

28.  18  and  had  taken  Beth-shemesh,  and  A.,  and 

5.  A  Levitical  city  in  Ephraim,  probably  the  same  as  No.  2. 

1  Ch.   6.  69  A.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Gath-rimmon 
AI-JE-LETH  SHA'-HAR  — 
Hind  of  the  morning,  vic>  n?>N  ay-ye-leth  Shachar. 

Psa.      22.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  A.  S. 
AIL,  to  — 
What  to  thee  ?  37  "no  mah-leha. 

Gen.  21.  17  What  aileth  thee,  Hagar?  fear 

Judg  18.  23  What  aileth  thee,  that  thou  comest  with 

1  Sa.  11.    5  What  (aileth)  the  people  that  they  weep '? 

2  Sa.  14.  5  Whataileth  thee?.  .I(ain)indeed  a  widow 
2  Ki.  6.  28  What  aileth  thee?,  .she  answered.  .Give 
Psa.114.  5  What  (ailed)  thee,  O  thou  sea,  that  thou 
Isa.   22.    1  What  aileth  thee  now,  that  thou  art 

A'-IN,  i*y  py  a  {natural)  fountain. 

1.  A  place  in  the  N.E.  of  Caanan,  between  Riblah  and 
the  Sea  of  C'hinnereth. 

Num.  34.  11  Shepham  to  Riblah,  on  the  east  side  of  A. 

2.  A  Levitical  city  in  Simeon,  at  first  belonging  to  Judah. 

Josh.15.  32  Lebaoth,  and  Shilhim,  and  A.,  and 
ig.    7  A.,  Remmon,  and  Ether,  and  Ashan 
21.  16  And  A.  with  her,suburbs,  and  Juttah 

1  Ch.   4.  32  Etam,  and  A.,  Riinmon,  and  Tochen 

Ant  — 

l.Air,  wind,  rrti  ritach. 

Job.  41. 16  no  air  can  come  between  them 
2.  Heaven,  tr^  shamayim. 

Gen.    1.  26  have  dominion  over  the .  .fowl  of  the  air 
1.  28  have  dominion  over  the.  .fowl  of  the  air 

1.  30  to  every  fowl  of  the  air 

2.  19  Lord  God  formed  every .  .fowl  of  the  air 
2.  20  gave  names  to.  .the  fowl  of  the  air 

6.  7  I  will  destroy .  .the  fowls  of  the  air 

7.  3  fowls  also  of  the  air  by  sevens . .  the  male 
0.   2  the  fear,  .upon  every  fowl  of  the  air 

Deut.  4.  17  winged  fowl  that  flieth  in  the  air 

28.  26  shall  be  meat  unto  all  fowls  of  the  air 

i  Sa.  17.  44  give  thy  flesh  unto  the  fowls  of  the  air 
17.  46  I  will  give,  .unto  the  fowls  of  the  air 

2  3a.  21. 10  suffered  neither  the  birds  of  the  air  to  rest 
1  Ki.  14.  11  him  that  dieth .  .the  fowls  of  the  air 

16.    4  shall  the  fowls  of  the  air  eat 

21.  24  Him  that  dieth .  .the  fowls  of  the  air  cat 
Job    12.    7  ask.  .the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they  shall 

28.  21  it  is.. kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air 
P3fl.    8.    8  The  tow]  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea 
1'niv.  jo.  19  Tin-  way  of  .in  eagle  in  the  air 
Eccl.  [o.  20  a  bird  of  the  air  shall  carry  the  voice 
V..  Air,  atmosphere,  a-ijp  aer. 

Acts  22.  23  and  threw  dust  into  the  fair] 
1  Co.    9.  26  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air 

14.    9  for  ye  shall  speak  into  the  air 


Eph.    2.    2  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air 
1  Th.  4.  17  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall 
Rev.    9.    2  and  the  sun  and  the  air  were  darkened 
16. 17  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  air 

4. Heaven,  obpavos  ouranos. 

Matt.  6.  26  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air :  for  they  sow 

8.  20  and  the  birds  of  the  air  (have)  nests 

1 3.  32  so  that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge 
Mark  4.    4  and  the  fowls  of  the  [air].,  and  devoured  it 

4.  32  so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  may  lodge 
Luke  8.    5  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  devoured  it 

9.  58  Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  of  the  air 
13.  19  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  lodged  in  the 

Acts  10.  12  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the  air 

11.  6  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the  air 

A'-KAN  or  JA'-KAN,  Jj%  acute,  twisted. 
Son  of  Ezer,  son  of  Seir  the  Horite,  B.C.  1780. 

Gen.  36.  27  (are)  these ;  Bilhan,  and  Zaavan,  and  A. 

1  Ch.   1.  42  sons  of  Ezer;  Bilhan,  and  Zavan,  (and)  J. 

AK'-KTJB,  39pa  lain  in  wait. 

1.  Son  of  Elioenai,  of  the  family  of  David. 

1  Ch.    3.  24  and  Eliashib,  and  Pelaiah,  and  A.,  and 

2.  A  porter  in  the  second  temple. 

1  Ch.    9.  17  the  porters  (were),  Shallum,  and  A.,  and 
Neh.  11.  19  Moreover  the  porters,  A.,  Tahnon,  and 

12.  25  Talmon,  A.,  (were)  porters  keeping  the 

3.  A  family  of  hereditary  porters  in  the  temple. 

Ezra    2.  42  children  of  A.,  the  children  of  Hatita 
Neh.   7.  45  children  of  A.,  the  children  of  Hatita 

4.  The  chief  of  a  family  of  the  Nethiuim  who  came  up 
to  Jerusalem  after  the  exile. 

Ezra    2.  45  the  children  of  Hagabah .  .children  of  A. 

5.  A  priest  employed    by  Ezra   to   make  the  people 
understand  the  law  when  it  was  read  to  them. 

Neh.    8.    7  Jamin,  A.,  Shabbethai,  Hodijah,  M. 

AK-RAB'-BIM,  Ds3-]py  curves  or  scorpions. 
An  ascent  from  the  S.  of  the  Salt  Sea,  curving  eastward 
near  Kadesh  Barnea,  along  which   the   S.  border  of 
Canaan  was  traced,  now  called  Kuikes-Sufa. 

Nuni34.   4.  to  the  ascent  of  A.,  and  pass  on  to  Zin 
Josh.15.  3-  ^  went  out  to  the  south  side  to  M.-ac. 

ALABASTER  BOX  — 

Alabaster,  a\afiao~T  pov  alabastron. 

Matt  26.  7  a  woman  having  an  alabaster  box 
Mark  14.  3  a  woman  having  an  alabaster  box 
Luke  7.  37  brought  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment 

A  LA'-METH,  ni?Vj;  youthful  vigour. 
Son  of  Becher,  and  grandson  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1650. 
1  Ch.    7.    8  Jerimoth,  and  Abiah,  and  Auathoth.  .A. 

A-LAM-ME'-LECH',  3^g  the  ling's  oak. 
A  town  in  Asher,  marked  now  by  the  Wady-el-Melek,  a 
small  stream  running  into  the  Kishon,  6  miles  inland 
from  Hhaiffa. 

Josh.  19.  26  And  A.,  and  Amad,  and  Mishael;  and 

A-LA'-MOTH,  nis^y,  soprano  or  treble. 
A  term  derived  from  Ahnah  "a  virgin,"  in  reference 
to  the  higher  pitch  of  her  voice  when  compared  with 
that  of  an  adult  male's. 

1  Ch.  15.  20  and  Benaiah,  with  psalteries  on  A. 

Psa.  46.  title,  for  the  sons  of  Korah,  A  Song  upon  A. 

ALARM  — 

Shout  {of  jubilee  or  battle), *nynn  teruah. 

Num  10.    5  When  ye  blow  an  alarm,  .parts  shall  go 
10.    6  When  ye  blow  an  alarm  the  second  time 

10.  6  they  shall  blow  an  alarm  for  their 
Jer.     4.  19  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  alarm 

49.    2  I  will  cause  an  alarm  of  war  to  be  heard 
Zeph.  1.  16  clay  of.. alarm  against  the  fenced  cities 
iSee  also  Blow,  cry,  sound.  ] 

ALAS  — 

l.Ahal  {complaint)  nns*  ahah. 

Josh.  7.   7  Joshua  saidj  Alas,  0  LORD  God 
Judg.  6.  22  Gideon  said,  Alas  !  0  Lord  God  I 

11.  35  Alas,  my  daughter  !  thou  hast  brought 

2  Ki.    3.  10  Alas  !  that  the  Lord  hath  called  these 

6.    s  Alas,  master  !  for  it  was  borrowed 
6.  15  Alas,  my  master  !  how  shall  we  do? 

Joel    1.  15  Alas . .  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  at  hand 
2.0,  oh!  {grief)  'IX  0. 

Num  24.  23  Alas,  who  shall  live  when  God  doeththis  ! 
Z.Ahl  {grief)  nu  ach. 

Eze.     6.  11  Alas  for  all  the  evil  abominations  of  the 
\.f  pray  thee,  *2  bi. 

Num  12.  11  Alas,  my  lord,  .lay  not  the  sin  upon  us 
5. Exhortation,  grief  threatening,  '"\r\ho. 

Amos  5.  16  say  in  all  the  highways,  Alas  !  alas  ! 
G. Exhort \a (/<><>,  grief,  threatening,  'in  ftoi. 

1  Ki.  13.  30  they  mourned  over  him,  (saying),  Alas,  my 

Jer.     30   7  Alas!  for  that  day  (is)  great.. none  (is)  like 
7.  IVo,  oval  OUai. 

Rev.  18.  10  savin?,  Alas,  alas  that  great  city  Babylon 
18.  16  And  saying,  Alas,  alas  that  great  city 
18.  19  Alas,  alas  that  great  city,  wherein  were 
ALBEIT  — 
Th<>t,  'Iva.  hina. 

I'hm.       19  albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest 


A-LE'-METH,  nD^  n£^y  hiding  j?race. 

1.  A  Levitical  city  of  benjamin. 

1  Ch.    6.  6o'and  A.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Auathoth 

2,  A  descendant  of  Jonathan,  son  of  Saul. 

1  Ch.  8.  36  and  Jehoadah  begat  A.,  and  Azmaveth 
9.  42  and  Jarah  begat  A.,  and  Azmaveth 
A-LEX-AN'-DER,  'AX^avdpos   helper  of  man. 

1.  Son  of  Simon  the  Cyrenian  who  was  compelled  to 
carry  the  cross  of  Jesus. 

Markis.  21  the  father  of  A.  and  Rufus,  to  bear  bis 

2.  A  leading  man  in  Jerusalem  when  Peter  and  John 
were  apprehended,  a.d.  33. 

Acts    4.    6  and  John,  and  A.,  and  as  many  as  were  of 

3.  A  convert  who  was  with  Paul  when  the  Ephesian-s 
raised  a  tumult ;  perhaps  the  same  as  No.  1. 

Acts  19.  33  And  they  drew  A.  out  of.  .And  A. 

4.  A  convert  who  afterwards  apostatised. 

1  Ti.     1.  20  Of  whom  is  Hymeneus  and  A, ;  whom  I 

5.  A  person  who  opposed  Paul,  perhaps  the  same  as 
No.  4. 

2  Ti.    4.  14  A.  the  coppersmith  did  me  much  evil 
A-LEX-AN-DRI-A,  yA\e^afSpevs  of  Alexander. 

A  city  in  Egypt,  founded  by  Alexander  the  Great,  B.C. 
332,  near  the  W.  branch  of  the  Nile  where  it  flows  into 
the  Mediterranean.  It  was  long  one  of  the  most 
celebrated  cities  in  the  world,  the  metropolis  of  Egypt 
as  well  as  a  grand  seat  of  commerce  and  wealth.  Jews 
dwelt  in  it  in  great  numbers.  The  modern  city  is  built 
on  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  one,  about  125  miles  N.  of 
Cairo.  It  is  still  the  seat  of  extensive  commerce,  and 
has  nearly  50,000  of  a  population. 

Acts    6.    9  certain  of  the  synagogue . . of  the .  .A. 

18.  24  born  at  A.f  an  eloquent  man,  (and)mighty 

27.  6  the  centurion  found  a  ship  of  A.  sailing 

28.  11  we  departed  in  a  ship  of  A.,  which  had 
ALGUM  trees  - 

A  cosily  wood,  D'CrtinN  aJgummim. 

2  Ch.   2.    8  Send  me  also . .  algum  trees,  out  of  Leba. 
9.  10  the  servants.. brought  algum  trees 
9.  11  the  king  made  (of)  the  algum  trees 
AL'-IAH  or  AL'-VAH,  iT^y  m^y  sublimity. 
A  duke  of  Edom,  descended  from  Esau. 

Gen.  36.  40  the  names  of  the  dukes,  .of  Esau,  .duke  A. 
1  Ch.   1.  51  dukes  of  Edom  were  ;  duke  Timnah.  .A. 

AL'-IAN,  or  AL'-VAN,  ];Sy  fJ^JJ  sublime. 
A  son  of  Shobal,  a  descendant  of  Seir. 

Gen.  36.  23  the  children  of  Shobal  (were)  these ;  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  40  The  sons  of  Shobal ;  A.,  and  Manahath 
ALLEN  — 
1. Sojourner,  "la  ger. 

Exod  18.    3  I  have  been  an  alien  in  a  strange  land 
^.Unknown,  T3j  nekar. 

Isa.  61.    5  sons  of  the  alien  (shall  be)  your  plowmen 
3.  Unknoion,  *"pj  nokri. 

Deuti4.  21  thou  mayest  sell  it  unto  au  alien 

Job  19.  15  I  am  an  alien  in  their  sight 

Psa.  69.    8  I  am .  .an  alien  unto  my  mother's  children. 

Lam.  5.    2  to  strangers,  our  houses  to  aliens 
4. Belonging  to  others,  aWorptos  allotrios. 

Heb.  11.  34  turned.. the  armies  of  the  aliens 
ALLEN,  to  be  — 
To  allot  to  others,  alienate,  k-wa.WoTpi6u>. 

Eph.  2.  12  being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
ALIENATE,  to  — 
l.To  2^ass  over,  isy  ahar. 

Eze.  48.  14  they  shall  not.  .alienate  the  first-fruits 
'2. To  cause  to  pass  over,  *ny  ahar,  5. 

Eze.  48.  14  they  shall  not.  .alienate  the  first-fruits 
3.  To  give  to  others,  a-xaWoTptSu}  ajnrflotrioo. 

Eph.    4.  18  the  understanding,  .being  alienated  from 

Col.     1.  21  you,  that  were  sometime  alienated 
ALLENATED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  disjointed,  I'p;  yaqa. 

Eze   23.  17  her  mind  was  alienated  from  them 
23.  18  my  mind  was  alienated  from  her 
'l.To  be  disjointed,  ypi  naqa. 

Eze.  23.  18  my  mind  was  alienated  from  her  sister 
23.  22  from  whom  thy  mind  is  alienated 
23.  2S  from  whom  thy  mind  is  alienated 
ALIKE  — 
l.One,  "inx  echad. 

Eccl.  11.    6  whether  they  botli  (shall  be)  alike  good 
2.As,  just  as,  it^ws  kaasher. 

Eccl.   9.    2  All  (things  come)  alike  to  all 
3.  Also,  even,  ca  gam. 

Prov.20.  10  both  of  them  (are)  alike  abomination  to 
4. Together,  in;. 

Deuti2.  22  and  the  clean  shall  eat  (of)  them  alike 
15.  22  the  clean  (person  shall  eat  it)  aiike 

i  Sa.  30.  24  his  part  (be),  .they  shall  part  alike 

Job    21.  26  They  shall  lie  down  alike  in  the  dust 

Psa.  33.  15  He  fashiuneth  their  hearts  alike 
ALIKE,  to  be  — 
To  be  or  show  oneself  equal,  trw  shavah,  8. 

Pi'ov.  27.  15  and  a  contentious  woman  are  alike 


ALIVE 


25 


ALL 


ALIVE  — 

1, Alive,  living,  'n  chai. 

Gen.  43.    7  (Is)  your  father  yet  alive?  have  ye 
43.  27  the  old  man.  .(Is)  he  yet  alive? 
43.  28  in  good  health,  he  (is)  yet  alive 
45.  26  Joseph  (is)  yet  alive,  aud  he  (is)  governor 
45.  28  enough ;  J  oseph  my  son  (is)  yet  alive 
46.-30  seen  thy  face,  because  thou  (art)  yet  alive 
Exod.  4.  18  aud  see  whether  they  be  yet  alive 

22.    4  be  certainly  found  in  his  hand  alive 
Lev.  14.    4  that  is  to  be  cleansed  two  birds  alive 

.    16. 10  shall  be  preseuted  alive  before  the  Lord 
Num,i6.  33  went  down  alive  into  the  pit 
Deut.  5.    3  who  (are)  all  of  us  here  alive  this  day 

31.  27  I  am  yet  alive  with  you  this  day 
Josh.  8.  23  The  king  of  Ai  they  took  alive,  and 
1  Sa.  15.    8  took,  .the  king  of  the  Amalekites  alive 
2Sa.  12.  18  while  the  child  was  yet  alive,  we  spake 
12.  21  weep  for  the  child,  (while  it  was)  alive 
12.  22  While  the  child  was  yet  alive,  I  fasted 
iS.  14  he  (was)  yet  alive  in  the  midst  of  the  oak 
*  1  Ki.  20.  18  come  out  for  peace,  take  them  alive 
20.  18  come  out  for  war,  take  them  alive 

20.  32  And  he  said,  (Is)  he  yet  alive? 

21.  15  Naboth  is  not  alive,  but  dead 

2K1.    7.  12  we  shall  catch  them  alive   and  get  into 
10.  14  Take  them  alive.. they  took  them  alive 
2Ch.  25.  12  And  (other)  ten  thousand  (left)  alive 
Prov.  1.  12  Let  us  swallow  them  up  alive 
Eze.     7.  13  although  they  were  yet  alive 

^Remaining  one,  remnant,  T~!"£'  sarid. 

Nuni2i.  35  smote  him,  and. .none  left  him  alive 
3.  To  live,  (dot  zao. 

Acts     1.  3  To  whom  also  he  shewed  himself  alive 
9.  41  saints  and  widows,  presented  her  alive 
20.  12  they  brought  the  young  man  alive,  and 
25. 19  Jesus . .  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  alive 
Bom.  6.  n  reckon  ye  also  yourselves,  .alive  unto  God 
Rev.    1.  18  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore 
19.  20  These  both  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of 
[See  also  Preserve,  save.] 

ALIVE  again,  to  be  — 

To  live  again,  ava^dco  anazad. 

Luke  15.  24  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again 
15.  32  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is  alive  [again] 

ALIVE,  to  be  — 

To  live,  be  active,  £dv  zao. 

Matt  27.  63  while  he  was  yet  alive,  After  three  days  I 
Marki6.  u  [they  had  heard  that  he  was  alive] 
Lukez4.  23  which  said  that  he  was  alive 
Acts  25.  19  Jesus . .  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  alive 
Rom.  6.  13  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead 
7.   9  For  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once 
1  Th.   4.  15  that  we  which  are  alive  (and)  remain 

4.  17  Then  we  which  are  alive  (and)  remain 
Rev.    2.    8  and  the  last,  which  was  dead  aud  is  alive 

ALIVE,  ta  keep  — 

\.To  keep  living  or  alive,  rvn  chayah,  3. 

Gen.  7.    3  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of  all  the 
Psa.  22.  29  none  can  keep  alive  his  own  soul 
30.    3  thou  hast  kept  me  alive 
33.  19  and  to  keep  them  alive  in  famine 
41.    2  The  Lord  will,  .keep  him  alive 

2.  To  keep  living,  restore  life,  n;n  chayah,  5. 
Gen.    6.  19  to  keep  (them)  alive  with  thee 

6.  20  shall  come  unto  thee,  .keep  (them)  alive 
Num.31;  iS  with  him,  keep  alive  for  yourselves 
Josh.  14. 10  behold,  the  Lord  hath  kept  me  alive 
2Sa.    8.    2  with  one  full  line  to  keep  alive 

3.7*0  keep  living,  n;ri,  «;q  chayah,  5. 
Dan.    5.  19  whom  he  would  he  kept  alive 

ALIVE,  to  leave  — 

To  keep  living  or  alive,  n;n  chayah,  3. 

1  Sa.  27.    9  left  neither  man  nor  woman  alive 

ALIVE,  to  make  — 

l.To  keep  living  or  alive,  n;n  chayah,  3. 
Deut32.  39  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive 
1  Sa.   2.   6  The  Lord  killeth,  aud  maketh  alive 

2. To  keep  living,  restore  life,  rrri  chayah,  5. 

2  Ki.    5.    7  (Am)  I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive 
Z.To  make  alive,  faoTroLeco  zdopoieo. 

1  Co.  15.  22  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive 

ALL  — 

l.All,  hb  kol. 

Gen.    3. 17  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  (of)  it  all  the 
%All,  b'3  kol. 

Ezra  4.  20  mighty  kings .  .have 'ruled  over  all 

5.  7  writteu  thus;  Unto  Darius  the  king,  all 

6.  12  destroy  all  kings  and  people,  that  shall 

6.  17  lambs,  .for  a  sin  offering  for  all  Israel 

7.  13  all  they,  .will  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
7. 16  all  the  silver  and  gold  that,  .in  all 

7.  21  I.  .make  a  decree  to  all  the  treasurers 
7.  25  judges,  which  may  judge  all.  .all  such 
Dan.    2.  12  the  king,  .commanded  to  destroy  all  the 
2.  38  he.. hath  made  thee  ruler  over  them  all 
2.  39  which  shall  bear  rule  over  all  the  earth 
2.  40  subdueth  all .  .as  iron  that  breaketh  all 
2.  44  shall  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all 

2.  48  the  king  made  Daniel,  .chief,  .over  all 

3.  2,  3  all  the  rulers,  .were  gathered  together 
3.  =;,7, 10, 15  the  sound  of.  .all  kindsof  music 

4 


Dan.     3.    7  all  the  people  heard,  .all  the  people 

4.    1  all  people,  .that  dwell  in  all  the  earth 
4.    6  bring  in  all  the  wise  (men)  of  Babylon 
4.  11  to  the  end  of  all  the  earth 
4.  12,  21  aud  in  it  (was)  meat  for  all.  .all  flesh 
4.  18  all  the  wise  (men)  of  my  kingdom  are  not 
4.  20  and  the  sight  thereof  to  all  tiie  earth 
4.  28  All  this  came  upon  the  king 
4.  35  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 

4.  37  the  King  of  heaven,  all  whose  works  (are) 

5.  8  Then  came  in  all  the  king's  wise  (men) 
5.  19  he  gave  him,  all  people,  .and  languages 
5.  22  though  thou  knewest  all  this 

5.  23  and  whose  (are)  all  thy  ways 

6.  7  All  the  presidents  of  the  kiugdom 
6.  24  aud  brake  all  their  bones  in  pieces 

6.  25  Darius  wrote  unto  all  people,  .iu  all  the 

7.  7  it  (was)  diverse  from  all  the  beasts 

7.  14  that  all  people,  .and  languages,  should 
7.  16  and  asked  him  the  truth  of  all  this 
7.  19  which  was  diverse  from  all  the  others 
7.  23  which  shall  be  diverse  from  all  kingdoms 
7.  27  all  dominions  shall  serve  aud  obey  him 

3.  Complete,  wholly,  T?$kalil. 

Exod.  28.  31  the  robe  of  the  ephod  all  (of)  blue 

39.  22  the  ephod  (of)  woven  work,  all  (of)  blue 

4.  Multitude,  m  rob. 

Deut.  28.  47  for  the  abundance  of  all  (things) 

Job       4.  14  which  made  all  my  bones  to  shake 

6. All  together,  anas  hapas. 

Matt.   6.  32  after  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles 

24.  39  until  the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all 
28.  11  shewed  unto  the  chief  priests  all  the 

Mark    5.  40  But  when  he  had  put  them  all  out 

11.-32  for  all  (men)  counted  John,  that  he  was 

16.  15  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach 
Luke    3.  16  John  answered,  saying  unto  (them)  all,  I 

3.  21  Now  when  all  the  people  were  baptized 

4.  6  All  this  power  will  I  give  thee,  and 

5.  11  they  forsook  all,  and  followed  him 

5.  26  they  were  all  amazed,  and  they  glorified 
5.  28  he  left  all,  rose  up,  and  followed  him 
7.  16  there  came  a  fear  on  all :  and  they 
9.  15  they  did  so,  and  made  them  all  sit  down 

15.  13  the  younger  son  gathered  all  together 

17.  27  the  flood  came,  and  destroyed  them  all 
17.  29  it  rained  fire,  .and  destroyed  (them)  all 
19.    7  when  they  saw  (it,)  they  all  murmured 

19.  48  all  the  people  were  very  attentive  to  hear 
21.    4  all  these  have  of  their  abundance  cast. .  all 

21.  12  before  all  these,  they  shall  lay  their  hands 
sActs     2.    1  they  were  [all]  with  one  accord  in  one  place 

2.  4  they  were  all  tilled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
2.  14  Ye  men  of  Judea,  and  all  (ye)  that  dwell 

4.  31  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

5.  12  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  Solomon's 

6.  15  all  that  sat  iu  the.  council,  looking 

11.  10  all  were  drawn  up  again  into  heaven 

13.  29  when  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was 

16.  3  they  knew  all  that  his  father  was  a  Greek 
16.  28  Do  thyself  no  harm  :  for  we  are  all  here 
27.  33  Paul  besought  (them)  all  to  take  meat 

Eph.     6.  13  and  having  done  all,  to  stand 
Jas.      3.    2  For  in  many  things  we  offend  all 

6.  The  whole,  o\os  holes. 

Matt.    1.  22  all  this  was  done;  that  it  might  be 

4.  23  Jesus  went  about  all  Galilee,  teaching 
4.  24  his  fame  went  throughout  all  Syria 
g.  26  the  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all  that 
9.  31  spread  abroad  his  fame  in  all  that  country 

14.  35  they  sent  out  into  all  that  country  round 

20.  6  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ? 

21.  4  [All]this  was  done;  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 

22.  37  all  thy  heart.. all  thy  soul,  .all  thy  miud 

22.  40  On  these  two  commandments  hang  all 
24.  14  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world 

26.  56  all  this  was  done,  that  the  scriptures 
26.  59  the  chief  priests,  and  elders,  and  all  the 
Mark    1.  28  his  fame  spread  abroad  throughout  all 
1.  33  all  the  city  was  gathered  together  at  the 

1.  39  And  he  preached,  .throughout  all  Galilee 

12.  30  all  thy  heart,  .all  thy  soul,  .all  thy  min..all 
12.  33  And  to  love  him  with  all  the  heart 

12.  33  and  with  all  the  understanding 
12.  33  [with  all  the  soul, ]and  with  all  thestrength 
12.  44  all  (they)  did  cast  in  of  their  abundance 
14.  55  the  chief  priests  and  all  the  council 
Luke    1.  65  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round 

4.  14  a  fame  of  him  through  all  the  region 

5.  5  Master,  we  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and 

7.  17  this,  .went  forth  throughout  all  Judea 

8.  43  which  had  spent  all  her  living  on  physicians 
10.  27  all  thy  heart,  .all  thy  soul,  .all  thy  s'tre..all 

23.  5  He  stirreth  up.  .teaching  throughout  all 
23. 44  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the  earth 

Acts    2.    2  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were 

2.  47  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all 
5.  11  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  church 

7.  10  delivered  him  out  of  all  his  afflictions 

7.  11  Now  there  came  a  dearth  over  all  the  land 

8.  37  If  thou  believest  with  [all]  thine  heart,  thou 

9.  31  throughout  all  Judea,  Samaria,  and  G. 
9.  42  it  was  kMowntrrc-ugbbuB  all'-^oppa; 

10.  22  of  good  ltpoH  afaong- all 'the  natron' 
iov37',whit1f  wa>  published  fl^'opghou*'  .til  Judea 
1^  28  9fflou54  <be'a  great  dearth  throughout  all^ 
13? 40 .the  word.. throughout  all  the  region  ' 
-,  ?8.  .■•a  believed  on  the  Lord  with  all  his  house 
:g.  27  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth 
,    ,       21.  30  all  thte  city  "*\ts  maved;»and  the  people 


Acts    21.  31  that  all  Jerusalem  was  in  an  uproar 

22.  30  the  chief  priests  aud  all,  Ro.  8.  36;  10.  21. 
2  Co.     1.    1  all  the  saints  which  are  in  all  Achaia 
Phil.     1.  13  bonds  iu  Christ  are  manifest  in  all 

1  Th.     4.  10  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren 
Heb.     3.   2  as  also  Moses  (was  faithful)  in  all  his  house 

3.    5  Moses  verily  (was)  faithful  in  all  his  house 
Rev.     3.  10  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world 
13.    3  all  the  world  wondered  after  the  beast 

7.  How  much,  great,  many,  long,  tio-os  hosos. 

2  Co.    1.  20  all  the  promises  of  God  in  him  (are)  yea 
8. All,  any,  every,  iras  pas. 

Matt.    2.    3  he  was  troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with 
3.    5  Jerusalem,  and  all  Judea,  and  all  the 
3.  15  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all 

6.  29  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not 

18.  32  0  thou  wicked  servant,  I  forgave  thee  all 
18.  34  till  he  should  pay  all  that  was  due  unto 
21.  10  when  he  was  come  into  Jerusalem,  all  the 

23.  27  are  within  full.. of  all  uncleanuess 

23.  35  That  upon  you  may  come  all  the  righteous 
27.  25  Then  answered  all  the  people,  and  said 

27.  45  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto 

28.  18  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and 
Mark    1.    5  there  went  out  unto  him  all  the  land 

2.  13  all  the  multitude  resorted  unto  him 

5.  33  and  told  him  all  the  truth 

7.  14  when  he  had  called  [all]  the  people 

9.  15  straightway  all  the  people,  when  they 

11.  18  all  the  people  was  astonished  at  his  doctrine 
Luke    2.    1  that  all  the  world  should  be  taxed 

2.  10  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people 

3.  3  he  came  into  all  the  country  about  Jordan 

3.  6  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God 

4.  13  when  the  devil  had  ended  all  the  tempta. 
4.  25  great  famine  was  throughout  all  the  laud 

6.  17  multitude  of  people  out  of  all  Judea 

7.  17  rumour,  .went  forth  throughout  all  Judea 

7.  29  And  all  the  people  that  heard  (him) 

8.  47  she  declared  unto  him  before  all  the 

9.  13  and  buy  meat  for  all  this  people 

10.  19  and  over  all  the  power  of  the  enemy 

12.  27  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not 

13.  17  all  his  adversaries  were  ashamed 

18.  43  all  the  people,  when  they  saw  (it) 
20.    6  [all]  the  people  will  stone  us  ;  for 

20,  45  in  the  audience  of  all  the  people 

21.  38  all  the  people  came  early  in  the  morning 

24.  19  a  prophet  mighty,  .before,  .all  the  people 
John    5.  22  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son 

6.  37  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come 

6.  39  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should 
8.    2  [and  all  the  people  came  unto  him] 

16.  13  he  will  guide  you  unto  all  truth 

17.  2  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh 
Acts      1.    8  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea 

1.  21  which  have  compauied  with  us  all  the  time 

2.  17  I  will  pour  out  of  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh 

2.  36  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly 
3'.    9  all  the  people  saw  him  walking  aud 

3.  11  all  the  people  ran  together  unto  them 

4.  29  that  with  all  boldness  they  may  speak  thy 

5.  21  all  the  senate  of  the  children  of  Israel 

5.  34  a  doctor  of  the  law.  .among  all  the  people 

7.  14  all  his  kindred,  threescore  and  fifteeu  souls 

7.  22  And  Moses  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom 

8.  27  who  had  the  charge  of  all  her  treasure 
10.    2  one  that  feared  God  with  all  his  house 

10.  41  Not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses 

1 1.  14  whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be 

12.  1 1  and  (from)  all  the  expectation  of  the  people 

13.  10  O  full  of  all  subtility  aud  all  mischief.. all 
13.  24  the  baptism  of  repentance  to  all  the  people 
13.  39  And  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified 
15.  12  all  the  multitude  kept  silence,  and  gave 
17.  11  they  received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of 
17.  26  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations 

17.  26  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth 

19.  27  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth 

20.  18  I  have  been  with  you  at  all  seasons 

20.  19  Serving  the  Lord  with  all  humility  of  mind 
20.  27  to  declare  unto  you  all  the  counsel  of  God 

20.  28  Take  heed,  .unto  yourselves,  and  to  all 

21.  27  stirred  up  all  the  people,  and  laid  hands- 

22.  5  and  all  the  estate  of  the  elders  :  from 

23.  1 1  have  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before 

24.  3  "We  accept  (it)  always,  and  in  all  places 

25.  24  Festus  said,  King  Agrippa,  aud  all  men 

26.  20  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Judea 

27.  20  all  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was 

28.  31  with  all  confidence,  no  man  forbidding 
Rom.    1.  18  the  wrath  of  God.,  against  all  ungodliness 

1.  29  Being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness 

3.  19  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before 

4.  16  Abraham;  who  is  the  father  of  us  all 

9.  17  name  might  be  declared  throughout  all 

10.  18  their  sound  vent  into  all  the  earth 

11.  26  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  :  as  it  is 

15.  13  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
15.  14  filled  with  all  knowledge,  able  also  to 

1  Co.     1.    5  in  all  utterance,  and  (in)  all  knowledge 

13.    2  understand  all  mysteries,  and  all 

15.  24  he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule  aud  all 

15.  39  All  flesh  (is)  not  the  same  flesh  :  but 

2  Co.      1.    3  Father  of  mercies,  aud  the  God  of  all 

1.  4  Who  comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribu.  6.  4. 
7.  1  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness 
7.    4  I  am  exceeding  joyful  iu  all  our  ;  v.  n. 

,    B.    7  and  knowledge,  and  (in)  all  diligence,  and 
A.    8  God  (is)  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  .  .all 

'    9.  11  Being  enriched  in  everything  to  all 


ALL 


26 


ALL 


Gal. 
Epb. 


Phil. 


>Th. 


*Ti. 


Pe. 


2Pe. 

i  Jo. 


Jude 
Rev. 


6  having  in  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  n.  o, 
12  were  wrought  among  you  in  all  patience 

14  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  iu  one  word 

3  who  hath  blessed  us  witli  all  spiritual 

8  he  hath  abounded  toward  us  in  all  wisdom 
21  Far  above  all  principality,  and  power,  and 

21  In  whom  all  the  building  fitly  framed 

19  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness 

2  With  all  lowliness  and  meekness,  with 

,  19  to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness 
31  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and.  .all 

3  But  fornication,  and  all  uncleanness,  or 

9  (For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (is)  in  all 

18  with  all  prayer,  .all  perseverance,  .for  all 

,    9  your  love  may  abound,  .(in)  all  judgment 

20  but  (that)  with  all  boldness,  as  always 

29  Receive  him.  .in  the  Lord  with  all  gladness 

7  the  peace  of  Gud,  which  passeth  all 

19  But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need 

6  Which  is  come  unto  you,  as.  .in  all  the 

9  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding 

10  ye  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all 

11  Strengthened  with  all  might.. all  patience 
19  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell 

23  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  wisdom  ;  that 
2  and  unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of 
9  iu  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 

10  which  is  the  head  of  all  principality  and 
19  from  which  all  the  body  by  joints  and 

16  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom;  teaching 

12  that  ye  may  stand,  .in  all  the  will  of  God 

7  in  all  our  affliction  and  distress,  by  your 
9  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your 

22  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil 

11  and  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  (his) 
4  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called 

9  with  all  power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders 

10  with  all  deceivablenesa  of  unrighteousness 
16  The  Lord  (be)  with  you  all 

15  afaithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  accepta. 

16  Jesus  Christ  might  sTiew  forth  all  long-sull 
2  For  kings,  and  (tor)  all  that  are  in  authority 

11  Let  the  woman  learu  iu  silence  with  all 

4  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all 
9  a  faithful  saying  and  worthy  of  all  accepta. 
2  the  younger  as  sisters,  with  all  purity 

1  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all 

16  All  scripture  (is)  given  by  inspiration  of 

17  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works 

2  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort  with  all  long-surf. 
10  Not  purloining,  but  shewing  all  good 

14  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity 

15  These  things  speak,  .and  rebuke  with  all 

2  gentle,  shewing  all  meekness  unto  all  men 

15  deliver  them  who.  .were  all  their  lifetime 

16  an  oath.. (is)  to  them  an  end  of  all  strife 
7  without  all  contradiction  the  less  ia 

19  to  all  the  people .  .and  all  the  people 

2  count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into 

21  lay  apart  all  filthiness  and  superfluity 
16  ye  rejoice  in  your  boastings  :  all  such 

24  all  flesh  (is)  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory 

1  all  malice. .all  guile,  .all  evil-speakings 

18  (be)  subject  to  (your)  masters  with  all  fear 
7  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him  ;  for  he 

10  But  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called 

5  beside  this,  giving  all  diligence,  add  to 

7  and  the  blood,  .cleanseth  us  from  all  sin 
9  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness 

16  For  all  that  (is)  in  the  world,  the  lust 

17  All  unrighteousness  is  sin  :  and  there  is  a 

3  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to  write  to  you 

6  the  seven,  .sent  forth  into  all  the  earth 

4  there  were)  sealed .  .of  all  the  tribes 
9  which  no  man  could  number,  of  all 

17  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from 

7  and  all  green  grass  was  burnt  up 

6  and  to  smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues 

5  who  was  to  rule  al!  nations  with  a  rod 

7  power  was  given  him  over  all  kindreds 

12  he  exerciseth  all  the  power  of  the  first 
12  all  thyine  wood,  .all  manner,  .all  manner 
17  every  shipmaster,  and  all  the  company  in 

4  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from 


Plural. 
Matt.    1, 


17  So  all  the  generations  from  Abraham  to 
2.    4  when  he  had  gathered  all  the  chief  priests 
2.  16  slew  all  the  children  that  were  in.  all  the 
4.    8  sheweth  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
4.    9  All  tliese  things  will  I  give  thee,  if 

4.  24  they  brought  unto  him  all  sick  people 

5.  15  it  giveth  light  unto  all  that  are 

5.  18  one  tittle.. till  all  be  fulfilled 

6.  32  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things 
6.  33  all  tliese  things  shall  be  added  unto 

8.  16  word,  and  healed  all  that  were  sick 

9.  35  Jesus  went  about  all  the  cities  and 

10.  30  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered 

11.  13  all  the  prophets  and  the  law  prophesied 
n.  28  Come  unto  me,  all  (ye)  that  labour  and 

12.  15  great  multitudes,  .and  he  healed  them  all 

12.  23  all  the  people  were  amazed,  and  said 
13-  32  Which  indeed  is  the  least  of  all  seeds 

13.  34  All  these  things  spake  Jesus  unto  the 
13.  44  for  joy  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all 

13  46  went  ami  sold  all  that  he  had,  and 
13.  51  Have  ye  understood  all  these  things? 

13.  56  are  they  not  all.  .whence,  .all  these 

14.  20  And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled 

14  35  brought  unto  him  all  that  were  dismned 

15.  37  And  they  did  all  eat,  aud  were  flllod 


Matt.  iS 
18, 
18, 
18. 
19. 
19. 


23 

23 

23 
24. 
24. 

24, 
24. 
24. 
24 
24, 
24. 
24. 
25 
25 
25 

=  5 

26, 

26. 
26. 
26, 
26 
26, 
26, 
27. 
27 
28. 

Mark    1 . 


Luke 


.  25  and  all  that  he  had.  and  payment  to 

26  Lord,  have  patience.  .1  will  pay  thee  all 

29  Have  patience,  .and  1  will  pay  thee  [all] 
31  told  unto  their  lord  all  that  was  done 
20  All  these  things  have  1  kept  from  my 

27  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and 
12  and  cast  out  all  them  that  sold  and 

26  for  all  hold  John  as  a  prophet 

10  and  gathered  together  all  as  many  as 

27  And  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

28  in  the  resurrection,  .for  they  all  had 

3  All  therefore  whatsoever  they  bid  you 

5  But  all  their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen 
8  (even)  Christ ;  and  all  ye  are  brethren 

36  All  these  things  shall  come  upon  this 

2  See  ye  not  all  these  things?  verily  1 

6  for  [all]  (these  things)  must  come  to  pass 

8  All  tliese  (are)  the  beginning  of  sorrows 

9  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  nations 

14  this  gospel,  .shall  be  preached  in  all  the 

30  and  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth 

33  when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things,  know 

34  this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these 

47  he  shall  make  him  ruler  over  all  his  goods 
5  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all 

7  Then  all  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed 

31  and  all  the  holy  angles  with  him,  then 

32  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations 

1  when  Jesus  had  finished  all  these  sayings 
27  saying.  Drink  ye  all  of  it 

31  Then  saith  Jesus  unto  them,  All  ye  shall 

35  Likewise  also  said  all  the  disciples 

52  for  all  they  that  take  the  sword,  shall 

56  Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  him,  and  fled 

70  But  he  denied  before  (them)  all,  saying 

1  When  the  morning  was  come,  all  the  chief 

22  all  say  unto  him,  Let  him  be  crucified 
19  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations 

5  there  went  out  unto  him  all  the  land 

27  they  were  all  amazed,  insomuch  that  they 

32  they  brought  unto  him  all  that  were 

12  went  forth  before  them  all;  insomuch.. all 

28  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  All  sins  shall  be 

13  how  then  will  ye  know  all  parables? 

3 1  less  than  all  the  seeds  that  be  in  the  earth 

32  it.  .becometn  greater  than  all  herbs 

12  [all]  the  devils  besought  him,  saying,  Scud 

26  and  had  spent  all  that  she  had,  and  was 

33  ran  afoot  thither  out  of  all  cities 

39  he  commanded  them  to  make  all  sit 

41  two  fishes  divided  he  among  them  all 

42  And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled 

50  For  they  all  saw  him,  and  were  troubled 

3  For  the  Pharisees,  and  all  the  Jews,  except 

19  goeth  out  into  the  draught,  purging  all 

23  All  these  evil  things  come  from  within 

35  shall  be  last  of  all,  and  servant  of  all 

20  all  these  have  I  observed  from  my  youth 
28  we  have  left  all,  and  have  followed  thee 
44  the  chiefest,  shall  be  servant  of  all 

17  My  house  shall  be  called  of  all  nations 

22  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

28  Which  is  the  first  commandment  of  all  ? 

29  The  first  [of  all  the  commandments].  .Hear 
33  all  the  heart . .  all  the . .  all  the  soul . .  all  the 

43  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  more  in  than  all 

44  For  all  (they;  did  cast  in  of  their  abundance 

4  what  (shall  be)  the  sign  when  all  these 
10  gospel  must  first  be  published  among  all 

30  this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these 

37  what  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all 

23  he  took  the  cup.  .and  they  all  drank 

27  And  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  All  ye  shall 
29  Peter  said  unto  him,  Although  all  shall 

31  Likewise  also  said  they  all 

50  And  they  all  forsook  him,  and  fled 

53  with  him  were  assembled  all  the  chief 

64  they  all  condemned  him  to  he  guilty 

6  they  were  both  righteous,  .walking  iu  all 

48  behold,  from  henceforth  all  generatious 
63  And  they  marvelled  all 

65  on  all.  .all  these  sayings,  .all  the  hill 

66  And  all  they  that  heard  (them)  laid  (them) 

71  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us 

75  In  holiness,  .before  him,  all  the  daya 
3  all  went  to  be  taxed,  every  one  into 

18  all  they  that  heard  (it)  wondered  at 

19  Mary  kept  all  these  things,  and  pondered 
31  thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all 

38  spake  of  him  to  all  them  that  looked 
47  all  that  heard  him  were  astonished 

51  his  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in 

15  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  John 

19  for  all  the  evils  which  Herod  had  done 

20  Added  yet  this  above  all,  that  he  shut 

5  the  devil.. shewed  unto  him  all  the 

7  If  thou,  .wilt  worship  me,  all  shall 
15  And  he  taught,  .being  glorified  of  all 
20  the  eyes  of  all  them  that  were  iu 

22  all  bare  him  witness,  and  wondered  at 

28  all  they  in  the  synagogue  when  they 

36  they  were  all  amazed,  and  spake  among 

40  all  they  that  had  any  sick  with  divers 
9  he  was  astonished,  and  all  that  were 

jn -V rt Unbound. Mo irt  upon  them  all,  he 
!iq  wnt .virtue  u,ut .  .and  htalp d  (them)  all 

26  Wop  uvXo  yoa  when -fall  Mne'n  phyll  speak 
1  Now  when  he  had  ended  tilLips  savings 

18  the  disciples,  .shewed  him'of  all  thece 

35  Wisdom  is  justified  of  [all]  her  chihiroi. 

40  for  they  were  all  waiting  for  him 

45  J23US  Baid,,  Who  tout hed- me?    When  nil  - 


Luke    8 


John 


Acts 


52  And  all  wept,  and  bewailed  her:  but  he 
54  And  he  [put  them  all  out,  and]  took 

1  gave  them  power  and  authority  over  all 
7  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  all  that 

17  And  they  did  eat,  and  were  all  filled 

23  And  he  said  to  (them)  all.  If  any 

43  they  were  all  amazed  at  the  mighty 
48  for  he  that  is  least  among  you  all 

50  That  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets,  which 

7  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered 

18  there  will  I  bestow  all  my  fruits 

30  all  these  things  do  the  nations  of 

31  [all]  these  things  shall  be  added 

41  this  parable  unto  us,  or  even  to  all? 

44  that  he  will  make  him  ruler  over  all 

2  these  Galileans  were  sinners  above  all  the 

3  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise 

4  think  ye  that  they  were  sinners  above  all 

5  except  ye  repent,  ye  shallall  likewise  perish 

17  all  his.  .all  the  people,  .for  all  the  glorious 

27  depart  from  me,  all  (ye)  workers  of  iniquity 

28  when  ye  shall  see  Abraham,  .and  all  the 

18  they  all  with  one  (consent)  began  to 

29  all  that  behold  (:t_)  begin  to  mock  him 
33  whosoever  he  be.  .that  forsaketh  not  all 

1  Then  drew  near  unto  him  all  the  publicans 
14  when  he  had  spent  all,  there  arose 

31  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine 

14  the  Pharisees  also,  .heard  all  these  thiugs 

26  beside  all  this,  between  us  and  you 

10  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  those  things 
12  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess 

21  he  said,  All  these  have  I  kept  from 

22  Vet  lackest  thou  one  thing :  sell  all 

28  Peter  said,  Lo,  we  have  left  [all.]  aud 

37  for  all  the  mighty  works  that  they 

32  Last  [of  all]  the  woman  died  also 

38  for  all  live  unto  him 

3  widow  hath  cast  in  more  than  they  all 

15  I  will  give  you  a  mouth,  .which  all 

24  shall  be  led  away  captive  into  all 

29  Behold  the  tig  tree,  and  all  the  trees 
32  generation  shall  not  pass  away  till  all 

35  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all 

36  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  all 
70  Then  said  they  all,  Art  thou  then  the 

48  all  the  people  that  come  together  to 

49  all  his  acquaintance,  and  the  women 

9  aud  told  all  these  things,  .to  all  the  rest 

14  they  talked  together  of  all  these  things 
21  beside  all  this,  to-day  is  the  third  day 

25  O  fools,  aud  slow  uf  heart  to  believe  all 

27  all  the  prophets,  .in  all  the  scriptures  the 
47  repentance,  .be  preached,  .among  all 

16  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received 

15  he  drove  them  all  out  of  the  temple 

31  He  that  cometh  from  above  is  above  all 

31  he  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  above  all 

39  He  told  me  all  that  ever  I  did 

28  the  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all 

45  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God 

21  I  have  done  one  work,  and  ye  all  marvel 

8  All  that  ever  came  before  me  are  thieves 

29  My  Father,  .is  greater  than  all ;  ami  no 

10  aud  ye  are  clean,  but  not  all 

11  Ve  are  not  all  clean 

iS  I  speak  not  of  you  all :  I  know 
21  all  these  things  will  they  do  unto 
10  all  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are 
21  That  they  all  may  be  one  ;  as  thou 

40  Then  cried  they  all  again,  saving,  Not  this 
1  The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  .of  all 

14  all  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer 
iS  and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out 

19  it  was  known  unto  all  the  dwellers 

7  they  were  [all]  amazed,  and  marvelled 
7  are  not  all  these  which  speak  Galileans? 

12  they  were  ail  amazed,  and  were  in 

32  whereof  we  are  all  witnesses 

39  the  promise  is  unto  you.  .and  to  all 

44  all  that  believed  were  together,  and  had 

16  this,  .soundness  in  the  presence  of  you  all 
18  had  shewed  by  the  mouth  of  all  his 

21  God  hath  spokeu  by  the  month  of  all 

22  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things  whatsoever 
_-.i  Yea,  and  all  the  prophets  from  Samuel,  aud 

25  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  kindreds  of 

10  Be  it  known  unto  you  all,  and  to  all 

16  a  notable  miracle  .(is)  manifest  to  all  them 

24  thou  (art)  God,  which  hast  made,  .all  that 

33  great  grace  was  upon  them  all 

5  great  fear  came  on  all  them  that 

11  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  church 

17  Then  the  high  priest  rose  up,  and  all 

20  Go.  .stand  and  speak,  .to  the  people  all 

23  The  prison  truly  found  we  shut  with  all 

36  all,  as  many  as  obeyed  him.  were 

37  all,  (even)  as  many  as  obeyed  him 

10  delivered  him  out  of  all  his  afflictions 

50  Hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  things? 

1  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  throughout 
10  To  whom  they  all  pave  heed,  from  the  least 

40  he  preached  in  [all  1  the  cities,  till  he  came 
14  here  he  hath  authority,  .to  bind  all 

21  all  that  heard  (him)  were  amazed,  and 

26  they  were  all  afraid  of  him,  and  v.  3?. 

35  all  that  dwelt  at  Lydda  aud  Saron 

39  all  the  widows  stood  by  him  weeping 

40  Peter  put  them  all  forth,  and  kneeh  d 

33  Now  therefore  are  we  all  here  present  before 

36  Jesus  Christ :  (he  is  Lord  of  all) 

38  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of 


ALL 


27 


ALL 


10.  43  To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness 
10.  44  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  them  which 
ii.  23  Who,  when  he  came.. exhorted  them  all 

13.  22  a  man.. which  shall  fulfil  all  my  will 

14.  16  Who  iu  times  past  suffered  all  nations  to 

15.  3  they  caused  great  joy  unto  all 
15  17  the  residue  of  meu  might  seek,  .all  the 

15  17  saith  the  Lord,  who  doeth  [all  these  things] 

15.  iS  [Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works],  from 

16  26  immediately  all  the  doors  were  opened 

16  32  and  to  all  that  were  in  his  house 

16.  33  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway 

17  7  Whom  Jason  hath  received  :  and  these  all 

17.  21  all  the  Athenians  and  strangers  which 
17  25  seeing  he  giveth  to  all  life.. and  all  things 
17.  30  now  conimandeth  all  men  everywhere 

17.  31  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  (men) 

18.  2  that  Claudius  had  commanded  all  Jews 
18.  17  all  the  Greeks  took  Sosthenes,  the  chief 

18.  23  he  departed,  and  went  over  (all)  the 

19.  7  Aud  all  the  men  were  about  twelve 
19.  10  so  that  all  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia 

19.  17  brought,  .books,  .and  burned,  .before  all 
19  34  all  with  one  voice,  .cried  out,  Great  (is) 

20.  25  Aud  now,  behold,  I  know  that  ye  all 
20.  26  I  (am)  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  (men) 
20.  32  to  give  you  an  inheritance  among  all 
20.  36  he  kueeleddown.  and  prayed  with  them  all 

20.  37  they  all  wept  sore  and  fell  on  Pauls: 

21.  s  they  all  brought  us  on  our  way 
21  18  aud  all  the  elders  were  present 
21  20  and  they  are  all  zealous  of  the  law 
21.  21  thou  teachest  [all]  the  Jews  which  are 

21.  24  and  all  may  know  that  those  things 

22.  3  and  was  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all 
22.  12  having  a  good  report  of  all  the  Jews 

15  thou  shalt  be  his  wituess  unto  all  men 
5  a  mover  of  sedition  among  all  the  Jews 
8  thyself  mayest  take  knowledge  of  all  these 

24  King  Agrippa-  and  all  men  which  are  here 

3  (I  know)  thee  to  be  expert  in  all  customs 

4  My  manner  of  life.. know  all  the  Jews 
14  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth 

29  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day 
24  aud,  lo,  God  hath  given  thee  all  them 

35  gave  thanks  to  God  in  presence  of  them  all 

36  Then  were  they  all  of  good  cheer 

37  And  we  were  in  all  in  the  ship 
44  that  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land 

30  received  all  that  came  in  unto  him 

5  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all 

7  To  all  that  be  in  Rome,  beloved  of  God 

8  First,  I  thank  my  God.  .for  you  all 

9  that  they  are  all  under  sin 
12  They  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  they 
22  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe 

22  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all 

23  all  have  sinned,  aud  come  short  of  the 

11  that  he  might  be  the  father  of  all 

16  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed 
18  upon  all  men  to.. upon  all  men  unto 

12  so  death  passed  upon  all  men.  for  that  all 
8.  32  delivered  him  up  for  us  all  how  shall 

8.  37  Nay,  iu  all  these  things  we  are  more 

9    5  Christ  (came),  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed 

9.  6  they  (are)  not  all  Israel,  which  are  of  Israel 
9.    7  Neither,  .are  (they  all)  children ;  but 

10.  12  the  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all 

10.  16  But  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the  gospel 

11.  32  concluded  them  all.  .have  mercy  upon  all 

12.  4  and  all  members  have  not  the  same  office 
i2.  17  Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all 
12  18  If  it  be  possible,  .live  peaceably  with  all 

13.  7  Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues 

14  10  we  shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment 
15. 11  Praise.  .allyeGentiles.  .laud,  .all ye  people 

15.  33  Mow  the  God  of  peace  (be)  with  you  all 

16.  4  but  also  all  the  churches  of  the  Gentiles 
16.  15  Salute  Philologus.  and  all  the  saints  which 
16  24  The  grace  of  our  Lord,  (be)  with  you  all 
16.  26  made  known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience 

:  Co.  1, 10  I  beseech  you.. that  ye  all  speak 
3.  22  or  things  to  come ;  al!  are  yours 
7,    7  For  I  would  that  all  meu  were  even 

7.  17  Aud  so  ordain  I  in  all  churches 

8.  1  we  know  that  we  all  have  knowledge 
9  19  For  though  I  oe  free  from  all  (men) 
9  24  that  they  which  run  in  a  race  run  all 

10.    1  how  that  all  our  fathers  .all  passed 

10.    2  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the 

10.    3  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat 

10.    4  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink 

10.  11  [all]  these  thiugs  happened  unto  them 

10.  17  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread 

10.  31  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God 

12.    6  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in  all 

12.  11  all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the 

12  12  aud  all  the  members  of  that  one  body 

T2.  13  For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized,  .all 

12.  19  if  they  were  all  oue  member,  where 

12.  26  all  the  members  suffer,  .all  the  members 

12.  29  all  apostles.,  all  prophets,  .all  teachers  .all 

12.  30  Have  all  the  gifts  of  healing  ?  do  all . .  do  all 

13.  2  uuderstaud  all  mysteries,  andallknowledge 

13.  3  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed 

14.  5  I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues 
14.  18  I  speak  with  tongues  more  than  ye  all 

14.  23  and  all  speak  with  tongues,  and  there  come 
14.  24  But  if  all  prophesy,  .he  is  judged  of  all 
14.  31  For  ye  may  all  prophesy,  .all  may.  .all  may 

14.  33  as  in  all  churches  of  the  saints 

15.  7  he  was  seen  of  James ;  then  of  all  the 


22 

24 
24, 
25 
26 
26. 
26. 
26 
27. 
27. 
27 
27. 
27. 
28. 
Rom.    1 


1  Co. 


>Co. 


Eph. 


Col. 


;Th. 


[Ti 


15.    8  And  last  of  all  he  was  seen  of  me  also 
15.  10  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all 
15.  19  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable 
15.  22  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ,  .all 
15.  25  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet 

15.  28  all  things,  .put  all  thiugs.  .be  all  in  all 
J5-  S1  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all 

16.  20  All  the  brethren  greet  you.     Greet  ye  oue 
16.  24  My  love  (be)  with  you  all  in  Christ 

with  all  the  saints  which  are  in  all  Achaia 
confidence  in  you  all  that,  .joy  of.  .all 
that  I  may  not  overcharge  you  all 
Ye  are  our  epistle .  .read  of  all  men 
we  all,  with  opeu  face  beholding  as  in 
we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead 
And  (that)  he  died  for  all,  that  they 
because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you  all 
he  remembereth  the  obedience  of  you  all 
whose  praise  (is),  .throughout  all 
Beside,  .the  care  of  all  the  churches 
and  to  all  other,  that  if  I  come  again 
All  the  saints  salute  you 
The  grace  of  the  Lord,  .(be)  with  you  all 
all  the  brethren  which  are  with  me 
I  said  unto  Peter  before  (them)  all,  If 
In  thee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed 
the  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under 
For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God 
for  ye  are  all  oue  in  Christ  Jesus 
the  heir,  .though  he  be  lord  of  all 
which  is  the  mother  of  us  [allj 
communicate  unto  him.  .in  all 
and  love  unto  all  the  saiut3 
fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all 
Among  whom  also  we  all  had  our 
who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints 
May  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  saints 
exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask 
Unto  him  (be)  glory,  .throughout  all  ages 
of  all.  .above  all.  .through  all.  .in  you  all 
that  he  might  fill  all  things 
Till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of 
[Above  all],  taking  the  shield  of  faith.. all 
Praying  always  with  all  prayer  and 
Grace  (be)  with  all  them  that  love  our  Lord 
to  all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which 
for  you  all  making  request  with  joy 
of  you  all.  .ye  all  are  partakers  of  my  grace 
how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all  in 
my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest  in  all 
I  know  that  I  shall  abide,  .with  you  all 
I  joy,  aud  rejoice  with  you  all 
For  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things 
For  he  longed  after  you  all,  and  was 
Let  your  moderation  be  known  tmto  all 
But  I  have  all,  and  abound  :  I  am 
All  the  saints  salute  you,  chiefly  they  that 
The  grace  of  our  Lord,  .(be)  with  you  all 
the  love  (which  ye  have)  to  all  the  saints 
In  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of 
having  forgiven  you  all  trespasses 
Which  all  are  to  perish  with  the  using 
But  now  ye  also  put  off  all  these 
but  Christ  (is)  all,  and  in  all 
above  all  these  things  (put  on)  charity 
whatsoever  ye  do.  .(do)  all  in  the  name 
All  my  state  shall  Tychicus  declare  unto 
We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all 
So  that  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that 
and  are  contrary  to  all  men 
at  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  .with  all 
the  Lord  (is)  the  avenger  of  all  such 
indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren 
Ye  are  all  the  children  of  light,  and 
Greet  all  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss 
that  this  epistle  be  read  unto  all 
the  charity  of  every  one  of  you  all  toward 
for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your 
and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that 
That  they  all  might  be  damued  who 
The  grace  of  our  Lord,  .(be)  with  you  all 
I  exhort  therefore,  that,  first  of  all.  .for  all 
For  kings,  and  (for)  all  that  are  in 
Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved 
Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all 
the  living  God.  who  is  the  saviour  of  all 
that  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  all 
Them'that  sin  rebuke  before  all   that 
the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil 
This  thou  knowest,  that  all  they  which 
for  their  folly  shall  be  manifest  unto  all 
but  out  of  (them)  all  tfie  Lord  delivered 
Yea  aud  all  that  will  live  godly  iu 
unto  [all]  them  also  that  love  his  appearing 
and  (that)  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear 
Eubulus  greeteth  thee . .  and  all  the 
the  grace  of  God.  .hath  appeared  to  all 
shewing  all  meekness  unto  all  men 
All  that  are  with  me  salute  thee,  .you  all 
Hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith,  toward  all 
let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him 
1.  11  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment 

1.  14  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent 

2.  8  Thou  hast  put  all  things  in  subjection 

2.  11  For  both  he  that  sanctifieth.  .(are)  all  of 

3.  16  howbeit  not  all  that  came  out  of  Egypt 

4.  4  God  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from  all 

5.  9  he  became  the  author  of.  .salvation  unto  all 

7.  2  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  part  of  all ;  first 

8.  11  for  all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least 

9.  21  he  sprinkled  likewise  with  blood .  .all  the 


2 
2 

4 
6 

4 

10 

4 

15 

2T1 

5 
6 

1 

20 

TO 

IS 

3- 

Q 

3 

11 

3- 
4- 

12 
8 

4- 

»7 

Titus 

4- 
2. 

21 
II 

3- 

2 

Phm. 
Heb. 

3- 
1. 

15 
1 

Heb.   11.  13  These  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received 

11.  39  these  all,  having  obtained  a  good  report 

12.  8  if  ye  be  without  chastisement,  whereof  all 

12.  23  to  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  the 

13.  4  Marriage  (is)  honourable  in  all,  and  the 
13  24  all  them  that  have  the  rule  over,  .and  all 
13.  25  Grace  (be)  with  you  all.     Amen 

Jas        1.    8  A  double-minded  man  (is)  unstable  in  all 
2.  10  he  is  guilty  of  all 

1  Pe.     2.    1  Wherefore  laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all 

3-  8  ;  5.  5 1  5.  14  ;  2  Pe.  3.  9,  1 1,  16 ;  1  Jo.  2. 19; 

2  Jo.  1  ;  3  Jo.  12 ;  Jude  15 ;  Rev.  r.  7 ;  2.  23 ;  5.  13  ;  7. 
11 ;  8. 3  ;  12.  5  ;  13.  8,  16 ;  14.  8 ;  15.  4 ;  18.  3,  19,  23,  24; 
ig.  5,  17,  21 ;  21.  8  ;  22.  21. 

[See  also  Any,  at,  first,  glorious  here,  house,  in, 
most,  no,  places,  put,  sorts,  speed,  therein.] 

9.  Number,  "SPP  mispar. 

Eccl.   2.    3  which  they  should  do.. all  the  days  of 

5.  18  under  the  sun  all  the  days  of  his  life 

6.  12  all  the  days  of  his  vain,  .which  he  spen. 
ALL  (men,  points,  things) — All,  -rras  2?as. 

Matt.  7.  12;  10.  22;  11.  27;  13.  41;  17.  11;  19.  11, 
26;  21.  22;  22.  4;  23.  20;  26.  33;  28.  20;  Mark  1.  37;  4. 
34 ;  5.  20  ;  6.  30 ;  7.  37  ;  9.  12,  23  5  J0-  27  I  "•  "  ;  *3-  *3> 
23;  14.  36;  Luke  1.  3 ;  2.  20;  9.  43;  10.  22 ;  n.  41 ;  14. 
17;  18.  31;  21.  17,  22;  24.  14;  John  1.  3,  7;  2.  20,  24;  3. 
26,  35;  4.  25,  29,  45;  5.  20,  23;  10.  41;  11.  48;  12.  32; 
*3-  3>  35 ;  T4-  20>  26 ;  15.  15 ;  16.  15,  30 ;  17.  7 ;  18.  4 ;  19. 
28  ;  21.  17 ;  Acts  1.  24;  2.  45 ;  3.  21,  22;  4.  21 ;  10.  33, 
39 ;  r3-  39  '>  *4-  *5  ;  17-  22,  24,  25  ;  19.  19 ;  20.  35  ;  21.  28; 
22.  10 ;  24,  14;  26.  2  ;  Rom.  8.  28,  32 ;  11.  36  ;  14.  2,  20 ; 
16.  19;  1  Co.  2.  10,  15;  3.  21;  4.  13;  6.  12,  12,  12;  8.  6, 
6;  9.  12,  19,  22,  22,  25:  10.  23,  23,  23,  23,  33,  33;  11.  2, 
12;  13.  7,  7,  7,  7 ;  14.  26,  40;  15.  27,  27,  27,  28,  28;  16. 

14  ;  2  Co.  2.  9 ;  4.  15 ;  5.  17,  18 ;  6.  10 ;  7.  14;  9.  8,  13 , 
11.  6;  12.  19;  Gal.  3.  10;  6.  10;  Eph.  1.  10,  11,  22, 
22  J  3-  9»  9;  4-  io,  15;  5.  13,  20;  6.  21 ;  Phil.  2.  14;  3.  8, 
8,  21;  4.  12,  13;  Col.  1.  16,  16,  17,  17,  iS,  20;  3.  20,  22; 
4-  9 '.  1  Th.  3.  12 ;  5.  14,  15,  21 ;  2  Th.  3.  [2  ;  1  Ti.  3.  n ; 
4.  8 ;  6.  13,  17  ;  2  Ti.  2.  7,  10,  24 ;  4.  5,  16;  Tit.  1. 15 ;  2. 
7,  9,  10 ;  Heb.  1.  1,  2,  3 ;  2.  8,  8,  so,  10, 17 ;  3.  4  ;  4.  13, 

15  I  8-  5  J  9-  22  ;  12.  14 ;  13.  18  ;  Jas.  1.  5  ;  5.  12 ;  1  Pe. 
2.  17  ;  4.  7,  8,  11 ;  2  Pe.  1.  3  ;  3.  4 ;  1  Jo.  2.  20,  27 ;  3.  20; 

3  Jo.  2 ;  Rev.  4.  11 ;  18.  14;  19.  18 ;  21.  5,  7. 
ALL  abroad  — 

To  spread  out,  npy  shatach. 

Num  11.  32  and  they  spread  (them)  all  abroad  for 
ALL  along  — 
1.7*0  go,  go  on,  ^hn  halak. 

Jer.  41.    6  to  meet  them,  weeping  all  along  as  he 
2.  Fulness,  K^p  melo. 

1  Sa.  28.  20  Saul  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the 
ALL,  at  — 
Wholly,  irdvTcos  pantos. 

1  Co.  16.  12  but  his  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at 
ALL  at  once  — 
All  together,  7ra/.i7rA^0ct  pampletliei. 

Luke  23.  18  And  they  cried  out  all  at  once,  saying 
ALL  gone,  to  be  — 
To  be  finished,  Den  tamam. 

1  Ki.  14  10  taketh  away  dung,  till  it  be  all  gone 
ALL  here,  to  be  — 
To  be  finished,  DEn  tamam. 

1  Sa.  16.  11  Are  here  all  (thy)  children?  And  he  said 
ALL,  in  — 
All,  bbl-ol 

Num.31.  35  thirty  and  two  thousand  persons  in  all 
ALL  life  long  — 
Again,  yet,  Til?  od. 

Gen.   48  15  God  which  fed  me  all  my  life  long 
ALL  manner  (of  J  — 

I. All,  hskol. 

Exod35.  35  wisdom  of  heart,  to  work  all  manner  ol 

2,  All,  any,  every,  tras  pas. 

Matt.  4.  23  all  manner  of.  .and  all  manner  of  disease 
5.  11  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against 
10.    1  all  maimer  of  sickness  and  all  manner 
12.  31  Wherefore  I  say  unto  you,  All  manner  of 
Luken.  42  ye  tithe  mint  and  rue  and  all  manner 
Rom.  7.    8  sin.  .wrought  in  me  all  m.  of  Ac.  10. 18. 
1  Pe.   1.  15  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation 
Rev.  21.  19  foundations. -srarnished  with   11m. 18.12. 

3.  The  whole,  oAos  holos,  Rom.  8.  36;  10.  21. 

ALL  night  — 

[See  Abide,  lie,  lodge,  tarry.] 

ALL  that  — 

How  much,  great,  long,  many,  ocros  hosos. 
Luke  9.  10  the  apostles  .  .told  him  all  that  they 
Acts    4.  23  let  go,  they  went,  .and  reported  all  that 
14.  27  they  rehearsed  all  that  God  15.  4. 

ALL  that  is  therein  — 
Fulness,  Ubo  melo. 

Isa.  34.    1  the  earth. ..and  all  that  is  therein 

42. 10  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  therein 
Jer.     8.  16  the  land,  and  all  that  is  in  it 

47.    2  the  land,  aud  all  that  is  therein 
Eze.  12.  19  be  desolate  from  all  that  is  therein 

30.  12  the  land  waste,  and  all  that  is  therein 
Amos  6.    8  up  the  city,  with  all  that  is  therein  - 
Mic.    1.    2  O  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is 


ALL 


28 


ALREADY 


ALL  THINGS  (that)— 
l.All  together,  aims  hapas. 

Luke  2.  39  when  they  had  performed  all  things 

Acts    2.  44  believed  were  together,andhad_all  things 
4.  32  they  had  all  things  common,  10.  8 
2. .4s  many  as,  baa  hosa,  Rev.  1.  2. 
ALLEGE,  to  — 
To  put  alongside,  irapaTidn/j.i  paratithemi. 

Acts  17.    3  Openiug  and  alleging,  that  Christ  must 
ALLEGORY,  to  be  a  — 
To  speak  otherwise,  aWiyyopsw  allegoreo. 

Gal.     4.  24  Which  tilings  are  an  allegory  :  for  these 

ALLELTJIA  — 

JJraise  Jah,  a\\y}\ou'Ca  allelouia. 

Rev.  19.    1  I  heard  a  great  voice,  .saying,  Alleluia 
19.    3  And  again  they  said,  Alleluia 
19.    4  worshipped  God . .  saying,  Amen ;  Alleluia 
19.    6  mighty  thunderings,  saying,  Alleluia 

ALLIED  — 

jYear,  aiijj  qarob. 

Neh.  13.  4  the  house  of  our  God,  (was)  allied 

AL'-LON,  i'l^N  an  oak. 

1.  A  city  near  Kadesh  Naphtali. 

Josh.  19.  33  their  coast  was.  .from  A.  to  Zaanannim 
'2.  The  chief  of  a  family  in  Simeon,  B.C.  715. 

1  Ch.   4.  37  the  son  of  Shiplu,  the  sou  of  A.,  the  son 

AL  LON-BA'-CHUTH,  niD3  ji'rN  oak  of  weeping. 
A  place  near  Bethel  where  Deborah  was  buried. 

Gen.  35.   8  and  the  uame  of  it  was  called  A.  B. 
ALLOW,  to  — 
l.To  know,  recognise,  yivd>o~KU}  ginosko. 

Roin.  7.  15  that  which  I  do  I  allow  not 

2.  To  make  trial,  test,  proof,  5o/a,ua£a>  dokimazd. 

Rom.  14.  22  in  that  thing  which  he  alloweth 

1  Th.  2.    4  as  we  were  allowed  of  God  to  he 

3.  To  receive  to  oneself,  Trpo<roexoi±ai  prosdechomai. 

Acts  24.  15  which  they  themselves  also  allow,  that 

4.  T'i  think  well  of  together,  avvevdoKtco  suneitdokeo. 
Luke  1 1.  48  ye  bear  witness  that  ye  allow  the  deeds 

ALLOWANCE  — 

Customary  or  usual  diet,  nrnx  aruchah. 

2  Ki.  25.  30  allowance  (was)  a  continual  allowance 
ALLURE,  to  — 

\. To  persuade,  entice,  nn3  pathah,  3. 

Hos.    2.  14  I  will  allure  her,  and  bring  her 
2.2*0  lay  a  bait,  5e\ea£w  deleazo. 

2  Pe.    2. 18  they  allure  through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 
ALMIGHTY  — 
1. Sufficient,  mighty,  'tjJ  shaddai. 

Gen.  17.    1  I  (am)  the  Almighty  God ;  walk  before 

28.  3  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  make  thee 
35.  11  I  (am}  God  Almighty  :  be  fruitful  aud 
43.  14  God  Almighty  give  you  mercy  before  the 

48.  3  God  Almighty  appeared  unto  me  at  Luz 

49.  25  by  the  Almighty,  who  shall  bless  thee 
Exod.  6.    3  by  (the  name  of)  God  Almighty 
Mum  24.    4  which  saw  the  vision  of  the  Almighty 

24.  16  (which)  saw  the  vision  of  the  Almighty 
Ruth  1.  20  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly 

1.  21  the  Almighty  hath  afflicted  me  ? 
Job.    5.  17  despise,  .the  chastening  of  the  Almighty 
6.    4  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  (are)  within 
6.  14  he  forsaketh  the  fear  of  the  Almighty 
8.    3  doth  the  Almighty  pervert  justice? 
8.    5  make  thy  supplication  to  the  Almighty 
11.    7  canst  thou  hud  out  the  Almighty 
13.    3  Surely  I  would  speak  to  the  Almighty 
15.  25  he  streugtheneth.. against  the  Almighty 
21.  15  What  (is)  the  Almighty,  that  we  should 

21.  20  shall  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty 

22.  3  (Is  it)  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty 
22.  17  what  can  the  Almighty  do  for  them  ? 
22.  23  to  the  Almighty,  thou  shalt  be  built  up 
22.  25  the  Almighty  shall  be  thy  defence 

22.  26  thou  have  thy  delight  in  the  Almighty 

23.  16  and  the  Almighty  troubleth  me 

24.  1  times  are  not  hidden  from  the  Almighty 
27.    2  the  Almighty,  (who)  hath  vexed  my  soul 
27.  io  Will  he  delight  himself  in  the  Almighty? 
27.  11  which  (is)  with  the  Almighty  will  I  not 
27.  13  they  shall  receive  of  the  Almighty 

29.  5  the  Almighty  (was)  yet  with  me 

31.    2  (what)  inheritance  of  the  Almighty  from 

31.  35  Oli.  .(that)  the  Almighty  would  auswer 

32.  8  the  Almighty  giveth  them  understanding 

33.  4  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life 

34.  10  far  be  it.  .(from)  the  Almighty,  (that  he) 

34.  12  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert 

35.  13  neither  will  the  Almighty  regard  it 

37.  23  (Touching)  the  Almighty,  we  cannot  find 

40.    2  Shall  he.  .with  the  Almighty  instruct 
Psa.  68. 14  the  Umighty  scattered  kings  in  it 

91.  1  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty 
Isa.  13.  6  come  as  a  destruction  from  the  Almighty 
Eze.    1.  24  as  tin-  voice  of  the  Almighty 

10.    5  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty  God 
Joel    1.  15  as  a  destruction  from  the  Almighty 
%. All-powerful,  TravTOKpar^p  pantokratdr. 
2C0,    6.  1.3  liL-  a  Father,  .saith  the  1,  ird  Almighty 


Rev.    1.    8  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Almighty 

4.    8  saying,Holy,holy,holy,  Lord  God  Almighty 

11.  17  give  thee  thanks,  0  Lord  God  Almighty 

15.  3  marvellous,  .works,  Lord  God  Almighty 

16.  7  Even  so,  Lord  God  Almighty,  true  and 
16.  14  gather  them  to  the  battle.  .God  Almighty 
19.  15  he  treadeth  the  winepress,  .of  Almighty 
21.  22  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb 

AL-MO'-DAD,  ti'idSn  the  agitator. 

Son  of  Joktau,  of  the  family  of  Shem,  B.C.  2210. 

Gen.  10.  26  And  Joktau  begat  A.,  and  Sheleph,  and 
1  Ch.    1.  20  And  Joktan  begat  A,,  aud  Sheleph,  and 

AL-'MON<  pD7J2  hiding  place. 
A  Levitical  town  in  Benjamin. 

Josh.  21.  iS  and  A.  with  her  suburbs;  four  cities 

AL-MON-DLB-LA-THA'-IM,  ns;rr);n  jlD^u. 
The  39th  encampment  of  Israel  after  leaving  Egypt,  the 
28th  from  Sinai,  and  the  8th  from  Eziongeber.  It  was 
in  the  territory  of  Sihon,  and  probably  N.  of  the  wilder- 
ness of  Kedemoth.  See  Beth-diblathaim.  Nu. 33.46,47. 
ALMOND  — 
Almond j  ipa'  shaqed. 

Gen.  43.  11  a  little  honey,  .nuts,  and  almonds 
NU11117.    8  bloomed  blossoms,  and  yielded  almonds 

ALMOND  TREE  — 

Almond  tree,  "ipy  shaqed. 

Eccl.  12.    5  and  the  almond  tree  shall  flourish 
Jer.     1.  11  I  see  a  rod  of  au  almond  tree 

ALMONDS,  made  after  the  fashion  of  — 
To  be  like  almonds,~\$&  shaqad,  4. 

Exod  37. 19  bowls  made  after  the  fashion  of  almonds 
ALMONDS,  made  like  — 
To  be  like  almonds,  "\$j  shaqad,  4. 

Exod  25.  33  three  bowls  made  like  almonds 
37.  19  three  bowls  made  like  almonds  in 
37.  20  four  bowls  made  like  almonds 
ALMONDS,  made  like  unto  — 
To,  be  like  almonds,  Ips*  shaqad,  4. 

Exod  25.  33  Three  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds 
ALMOST  — 
l.A  little,  few,  ay?  me-at. 

Exod  17,   4  they  be  almost  ready  to  stone  m : 
Psa.  73.    2  my  feet  were  almost  gone 

94.  17  my  soul  had  almost  dwelt  in  silence 
119.  87  They  had  almost  consumed  me  upon 
Prov.  5. 14  I  was  almost  iu  all  evil 

2.  In  or  with  a  little,  iv  hxiyy  en  oligo. 

Acts  26.  28  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul,  Almost  thou 
26.  29  both  almost,  and  altogether  such  as  I  am 

3. Almost,  nearly,  ax^o6u  sc/iedon. 

Acts  13.  44  the  next  sabbath-day  came  almost  the 
19.  26  almost  throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul 
Heb.   9.  22  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged 

ALMOST,  to  be  — 

To  be  about  to,  fxeWai  mello.  , 

Acts  21.  27  when  the  seven  days  were  almost  ended 
ALMS  — 

Kindness,  kind  act,  i\ewp.oo~vvw  elcemosune. 
Matt.  6.    1  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  [alms] 

6.    2  Therefore  when  thou  doest  (thine)  alms 
6.    3  But  when  thou  doest  alms,  let  not  thy 
6.    4  That  thine  alms  may  be  in  secret 
Luke  11.  41  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye 

12.  33  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms 
Acts    3.    2  to  ask  alms  of  them  that  entered  into 

3.    3  seeing  Peter  and  John,  .asked  an  alms 
3.  10  it  was  he  which  sat  for  alms  at  the 
10.    2  devout  (man),  .which  gave  much  alms 
10.    4  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  come 
».  31  and  thine  alms  are  had  in  remembrance 
24.  17  I  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation 
ALMSDEED  — 
Kindness,  kind  act,  iKev/J-oa-vun  eleemositne. 

Acts    9.  36  tins  woman  was  full  of.  .almsdeeds 
ALMUG-TREE  — 
Almug-tree,  D*31oSn  almuggim. 

1  Ki.  10.  11  from  Ophir  great  plenty  of  almug  trees 
10.  12  the  king  made  of  the  almug  trees  pillars 
10.  is  there  came  no  such  almug  trees 
ALOES  (trees  of  lign) — 
1. Aloes,  lign-alocs,  rnSrtx  ahaloth. 

Psa.  45.    8  garments  (smell)  of  myrrh,  aud  aloes 
Song  4,  14  all  trees  of  frankincense,  .and  aloes 
2.  A  Iocs,  lign -aloes,  D,(?nx  ahalim. 

Kum  24.   6  as  the  trees  of  lign  aloes,  which  the  LORD 
Pro.     7.  17  I  have  perfumed  my  bed  with.. aloes  . 

3. Aloe,  a\6yj  aloe. 

John  19.  39  brought  a  mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes 
ALONE  — 
I. One,  "tnx  eckad. 

Josh.  22.  20  and  that  man  perished  not  alone 

Isa.    51.    2  for  I  called  him  alone 

2.  A  lone,  separate,  12  had. 

Xuiii  11.  14  not  able  to  bear  all  this  people  alone 
Dent.  1.    q  I  am  not  able  to  bear  you  myself  alone 

3.7*0  be  separate,  T!J  badad. 

Psa.  102.    7  1  watch,  aud  am  as  a  sparrow  alone 


Isa.    14.  31  none  (shall  be)  alone  in  his  appointed 
Hos.     8.    9  a  wild  ass  alone  by  himself 

^.Separate,  ~n$  badad. 

Lev.  13.  46  he  (is)  unclean;  he  shall  dwell  alone 

NU11123.    9  lo",  the  people  shall  dwell  alone 

Deut32.  12  the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him 
33.  28  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone 

Jer.  15.  17  I  sat  alone  because  of  thy  hand 
49.  31  gates  nor  bars,  (which)  dwell  alone 

Lam.  3.  28  He  sitteth  alone  and  keepeth  silence 
5. By  itself  Ka&  eavTT)v  kath  heauten. 

Jas.     2.  17  Even  so  faith,  .is  dead,  being  alone 
Q.Hy  themselves,  Karloiav  katf  idt'an. 

Mark  4.  34  when  they  were  aloue,  he  expounded  all 

7.  Apart,  in  private,  Kara^iovas  katamonas. 
MarK  4.  10  when  he  was  alone,  they  that  were 
Luke  9.  18  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  was  alone  praying 

8. Alone,  povov  monon. 

John  17.  20  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for 
Acts  19.  26  Moreover  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone 
Rom.  4.  23  Now  it  was  not  written  for  his  sake  alone 

9. Alone,  povos  monos. 

Matt.  4.    4  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  lyit 
14.  23  the  evening  was  come,  he  was  there  alone 
18.  15  go  and  tell  him  his  fault,  .alone 
Mark  6.  47  and  he  alone  on  the  land 
Luke  4.    4  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone 

5.  21  Who  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  alone? 

6.  4  but  for  the  priests  alone 

9.  36  when  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was . .  alone 
to.  40  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve  alone  ? 
John  6.  15  again  into  a  mountain  himself  alone 
6.  22  his  disciples  were  gone  away  alone 
8.    9  [Jesus  was  left  alone,  and  the  woman] 
8.  16  for  I  am  not  alone,  but  I  and  the  Father 

8.  29  the  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone 
12.  24  it  abideth  alone :  but  if  it  die,  it 

16.  32  aud  shall  leave  me  alone,  .yet.  .not  alone 
Rom  11     3  and  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek 
Gal.     6.    4  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself  elone 
1  Th.   3.    1  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone 
Heb.   9.    7  into  the  second,  .the  high  priest  alone 

ALONG  — 

l.A  way,  7172  derek. 

Judg.  9.  25  robbed  all  that  came  along  that  way 

9.  37  another  company  come  aloug  by  the  plain 

2.  To  go  on,  ^n  halak. 

1  Sa.    6.  12  And  the  kine.  .went  along  the  highway 

2  Sa.    3.  16  her  husband  went  with  her  along  weeping 
Jer.  41.    6  Ishmael.  .went  forth,  .weeping  all  along 

3. The  fulness  of  his  stature,  in  Dip  n4??  meloqomatho. 

1  Sa.  28.  20  Saul  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the 
[See  also  All  along,  draw,  go,  lay,  pass,  run.) 
ALOOF  — 
From  before,  133D  minneged. 

Psa.  38.  11  my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  sore 
A'-LOTH/n'iSj;  ascents,  steepts. 

A  hilly  region  near  Asher.  But  if  the  name  is  Bealoth, 
as  some  translate  the  original  (making  "in"  the  first 
letter  of  the  root  instead  of  a  preposition),  then  it  would 
be  a  town  in  the  S.E.  of  Judah. 

1  Ki.   4.  16  Baanah.  .(was)  in  Asher  and  in  A. 
ALOUD  — 
l.(With)  the  throat,  j'na  garon. 

Isa.    58.    1  Cry  aloud,  spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice 
2.(With)  might,  "?;n  chayil. 

Dan.    3.    4  au  herald  cried  aloud,  To  you  it  is  com. 

4.  14  He  cried  aloud,  and  said  thus,  Hew  down 

5.  7  kingcried  aloud  to  bring  in  the  astrologers 
':!.  (  ryvng  out,  shouting,  xn  re-a. 

Mic.    4.    9  Now  why  dost  thou  cry  out  aloud  ? 

4.^-1  great  voice,  ?iia  Tip  kol  gadol. 

1  Ki.  18.  27  Elijah  mocked  them,  aud  said,  Cry  aloud 
18.  28  And  they  cried  aloud,  aud  cut  themselves 
5.  To  lift  up)  {the  voice),  on  rum. 

Ezra    3.  12  and  many  shouted  aloud  for  joy 
[See  also  Cry,  sing.] 

ALOUD  for  joy  — 

To  sing  or  cry  aloud,  jri  ranan,  3. 

Psa.  132.  16  her  saints  shall  shout  aloud  for  joy 
AL'-PHA,  *A\<pa  (first  letter  of  the  Greek  alphabet). 
A  title  of  Christ,  descriptive  of  his  position  in  relation 
to  the  new  economy,  "the  beginning."     See  also  Omega. 
Rev.    1.    8  I  am  A.  aud  Omega,  the  beginning  and 
1. 11  Saying,  [I  am  A.  and  Omega,  the  first] 
21     6  1  am  A.  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and 
22.  13  I  am  A.  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and 

AL-PHE'-TJS,  'A\(/>a?oy  leader,  chief. 

1.  Father  of  James,  oue  of  the  twelve  apostles. 

Matt  10.  3  James(theson)of  A.,  and  Lebbeus,  whose 
Mark  3.  iS  and  James  the  (son)  of  A.,  and  Thaddeus 
Luke  6.  15  James  the  (son)  of  A.,  and  Simon  called 
Acts    1.  13  James  (the  son)  of  A.,  and  Simon  Zelotes 

2.  Father  of  Levi  (or  Matthew)  the  apostle  and  evangel- 
ist.   Perhaps  the  same  as  No.  1. 

Mark  2.  14  he  saw  Levi  the  (son)  of  A.  sitting  at  the 
ALREADY  — 
1. Already,  ""D?  lehir. 

Feci.    1.  10  it  hath  been  already  of  old  time 


ALSO 


ALTAR 


Eccl.  2.  12  that  which  hath  been  already  done 

3.  15  that  which  is  to  be  hath  already  been 

4.  2  I  praised  the  dead  which  are  already  dead 
6. 10  That  which  hath  been  is  named  already 

H.JVow,  at,  or  by  this  time,  fjdrj  ede. 

Matt.  5.  28  committed  adultery  with  her  already 
17.  12  That  Elias  is  come  already,  and  they 
Markis.  44  Pilate  marvelled  if  he  were  already 
Luke  i2.  49  what  will  I,  if  it  be  already  kindled 
John  3.  18  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already 
4.  35  for  they  are  white  already  to  harvest 
9.  22  the  Jews  had  agreed  already,  that  if 
9.  27  answered  them,  I  have  told  you  already 
n.  17  that  he  had  (lain),  .four  days  [already] 
19.  33  and  saw  that  he  was  dead  already  Ac.  2  7.9 

1  t-'O.    5.    3  For  I  verily,  .have  judged  already,  as 
Phil.    3.  12  Not  as  though  I  had  already,  .already 

2  Th.   2.    7  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work 

1  Ti.     5.  15  some  are  already  turned  aside  after 

2  Ti.    2.  18  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already 
1  Jo.    4.    3  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world 

[See  also  Attain,  now,  sin.] 
ALSO  — 
1.  Or,  either,  rather,  in*. 

Prov.  30.  3 1  A  greyhound ;  an  he-goat  also ;  and  a  king 

2.0nly,  ^n  ak. 

Lev.  23.  27  Also  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  this  seventh 

Z.Also,  f]N  aph. 

Gen.  40.  16  he  said  unto  Joseph,  I  also  (was)  in  my 
1  Ch.   8.  32  these  also  dwelt  with  their  brethren 

4. Also,  F]N  aph. 

Ezra  5.  10  We  asked  their  names  also,  to  certify  thee 
5. 14  the  vessels  also  of  gold  and  silver  of  the 
6.    5  also  let  the  golden  and  silver  vessels 

Dan.    6.  22  also  before  thee,  O  king,  have  I  done  no 
5. Even,  also,  na  gam. 

Gen.    3.    6  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her 

1  Sa.  19.  24  ;  Eccl.  1.  17 ;  2.  15 ;  8.  14. 
6. Also,  even,  a\\d  Kai  alia  kai,  Rom.  6.  5. 
7.  And,  also,  even  Kai  kai. 

Matt.  22.  26;  Luke  23.  27;  1  Co.  7.  34;  15.  40;  Ph.  4.  3. 
S.Thits,  .13  koh. 

1  Sa.  25  22  So  and  more  also  do  God  unto  the  enemies 

Q.And  with  this,  dy.a  Se  Kai  hama  de  kai. 

Acts  24.  26  He  hoped  also  that  money  should  have 
\QTridy,  indeed,  5^  de. 

Matt  13.  23  which  also  beareth  fruit,  and  bringeth 

1 1^4  ay  more,  yet,  still,  'in  eti. 

Luke  14.  26  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my 
12. And  truly  indeed,  (xevroi  Kai  mentoi  kai. 

Jude         8  Likewise  also  these  (filthy)  dreamers  defile 

13. And,  also,  re  te. 

Heb.  11.  32  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of.  .David  also 

ALSO,  for  that  — 

In  their  erring,  Daty?  beshaggam. 

Gen.    6.    3  the  Lord  said,  .for  that  he  also  (is)  flesh 

ALSO  if — 

And  if,  Kav  laCn. 

Matt  21.  21  also  if  ye  shall  say  unto  this  motiutain 

ALSO  not  — 

Not  even,  ouSe  oude. 

Kom.11.  21  (take  heed)  lest  he  also  spare  not  thee 

ALTAR  — 

\.Lion  of  God,  "rs'nx  oriel. 

Eze.  43.  15  So  the  altar  (shall  be)  four  cubits 

'2. Hill  of  God,  ^in  harel. 

Eze.   43. 15  from  the  altar  and  upward  (shall  be)  four 

3. Slaughter  place,  nnip  madbach. 

Ezra    7. 17  offer  them  upon  the  altar  of  the  house  of 
4,  Slaughter  place,  n?ip  mizbeach. 
Gen.  8.  20  Noah  builded  an  altar  unto  the  LORD 
8.  20  and  offered  burnt  offerings  on  the  altar 
12.    7  there  builded  he  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 

12.  8  there  he  builded  an  altar  unto  the  LORD 

13.  4  Unto  the  place  of  the  altar,  which  he  had 
13.  18  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 

22.    9  Abraham  built  an  altar  there  and  laid  the 
22.    9  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the  wood 
26.  25  he  builded  an  altar  there,  and  called  upon 
33.  20  he  erected  there  an  altar,  and  called  it 
35.    1  make  there  an  altar  unto  God,  that 
35.    3  I  will  make  there  an  altar  unto  God 
35.    7  he  built  there  an  altar,  and  called  the  place 
Exod.  17.  15  Moses  built  an  altar,  and  called  the  name 
20.  24  An  altar  of  earth  thou  shalt  make  unto 
20.  25  if  thou  wilt  make  me  an  altar  of  stone 

20.  26  Neither,  .go  up  by  steps  unto  mine  altar 

21.  14  thou  shalt  take  him  from  mine  altar 

24.    4  builded  an  altar  under  the  hill,  and  twelve 
6  half  of  the  blood  he  sprinkled  on  the  altar 
[  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  (of)  shittim  wood 
1  the  altar  shall  be  four  square 
5  put  it  under  the  compass  of  the  altar 

5  may  be  even  to  the  midst  of  the  altar 

6  thou  shalt  make  staves  for  the  altar 

7  shall  be  upon  the  two  sides  of  the  altar 

28.  43  when  they  come  near  unto  the  altar  to 

29.  12  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 
29.  12  the  blood  beside  the  bottom  of  the  altar 
29.  n  kidneys  .and  burn  (them)  upon  the  altar 


24. 

2  7- 

27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 


Exod.  29, 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29, 
29. 
29. 
-9. 
30. 
30. 
3°' 
3<>< 
30. 
3*' 
31- 
32- 
34' 
35- 
35- 
37- 


16  sprinkle  (it)  found  about  upon  the  altar 
18  burn  the  whole  ram  upon  the  altar 

20  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round 

21  take  of  the  blood  that  (is)  upon  the  altar 
25  burn  (them)  upon  the  altar  for  a  burnt  off. 

36  thou  shalt  cleanse  the  altar,  when  thou 

37  shalt  make  an  atonement  for  the  altar 

37  the  altar,  .shall  be  an  altar  most  holy 

38  which  thou  shalt  offer  upon  the  altar 
44  sanctify  the  tabernacle,  .and  the  altar 

1  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  to  burn  incense 
18  put  it  between  the  tabernacle .  .and  the  altar 
20  when  they  came  near  to  the  altar  to  minis. 

27  and  his  vessels,  .and  the  altar  of  incense 

28  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  all  his 

8  And  the  table. .  and  the  altar  of  incense 

9  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  all  his 

5  Aaron  saw  (it)  he  built  an  altar  before  it ' 
13  ye  shall  destroy  their  altars,  break  their 

15  And  the  incense  altar,  and  his  staves 

16  The  altar  of  burnt  offering,  with  his  brasen 

25  he  made  the  incense  altar  (of )  shittim  wood 

1  he  made  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (of) 

3  he  made  all  the  vessels  of  the  altar 

4  he  made  for  the  altar  a  brasen  grate 

7  the  staves  into  the  rings,  .of  the  altar 
30  therewith  he  made,  .the  brasen  altar 
30  and  all  the  vessels  of  the  altar 

38  the  golden  altar,  and  the  anointing  oil 

39  The  brasen  altar,  and  his  grate  of  brass 

5  thou  shalt  set  the  altar  of  gold  for  the 

6  shalt  set  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 

7  laver  between  the  tent,  .and  the  altar 

10  thou  shalt  anoint  the  altar  of  the  burnt  off. 

10  the  altar,  .shall  be  an  altar  most  holy 

26  he  put  the  golden  altar  in  the  tent 

29  he  put  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (by)  the 

30  laver  between  the  tent,  .and  the  altar 

32  when  they  came  near  unto  the  altar,  they 

33  the  court  round  about,  .the  altar 

5  sprinkle  the  blood,  .upon  the  altar 

7  And.  .shall  put  fire  upon  the  altar 

8  the  fire  which  (is)  upon  the  altar 

9  priest  shall  burn  all  on  the  altar 

11  on  the  side  of  the  altar,  .upon  the  altar 

12  on  the  fire  which  (is)  upon  the  altar 

13  priest  shall  burn .  .(it)  upon  the  altar 
15  the  priest  shall  bring  it  unto  the  altar 

15  off  his  head,  and  burn  (it)  on  the  altar 

16  cast  it  beside  the  altar  on  the  east  part 

17  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar 

2  burn  the  memorial  of  it  upon  the  altar 

8  he  shall  bring  it  unto  the  altar 

9  and  shall  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar 

12  they  shall  not  be  burnt  on  the  altar 

2  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upou  the  altar 
5  Aaron's  sous  shall  burn  it  on  the  altar 

8  shall  sprinkle  the  blood,  .upon  the  altar 

11  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar 

13  sprinkle  the  blood  thereof  upon  the  altar 
16  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

7  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the 
7  all  the  blood,  .at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 
10  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

18  of  the  altar  which  (is)  before  the  Lord 
iS  all  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 

19  he  shall,  .burn  (it)  upon  the  altar 

25  horns  of  the  altar,  .the  altar,  .of  the  altar 

26  shall  burn  all  his  fat  upon  the  altar 

30  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 

20  all  the  blood . .  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 

31  priest  shall  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar 

34  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 

35  priest  shall  burn  (them)  upon  the  altar 

9  sprinkle,  .upon  the  side  of  the  altar 

9  be  wrung  out  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 

12  a  memorial,  .and  burn  (it)  on  the  altar 

9  because  of  the  burning  upon  the  altar  all 
9  and  the  fire  of  the  altar  shall  be  burning 
10  the  fire  hath  consumed . .  on  the  altar 

10  he  shall  put  them  beside  the  altar 

12  the  fire  of  the  altar  shall  be  burning  in  it 

13  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar 

14  Aaron  shall  offer  it.  .before  the  altar 

15  shall  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar  (for)  a  sweet 
2  blood,  .shall  he  sprinkle,  .upon  the  altar 
5  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

31  priest  shall  burn,  .upon  the  altar 

1 1  sprinkled  thereof  upon  the  altar  seven  times 

11  and  anointed  the  altar  and  all  his  vessels 
15  horns  of  the  altar,  .the  altar,  .of  thealtar 

15  poured  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 

16  and  Moses  burned  (it)  upou  the  altar 

19  sprinkled  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round 

21  Moses  burnt  the  whole  ram  upon  the  altar 
24  sprinkled  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round 
28  burnt  (them)  on  the  altar  upon  the  burnt 
30  the  blood  which  (was)  upon  the  altar 

7  Go  unto  the  altar,  and  offer  thy  sin  offerii; 

8  Aaron  therefore  went  unto  the  altar 

9  put  it  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 

9  out  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 
10  But  the  fat.  .he  burnt  upon  the  altar 

12  sprinkled  round  about  upon  the  altar 

13  and  he  burnt  (them)  upon  the  altar 
i4  upon  the  burnt  offering  on  the  altar 

17  burnt  (it)  upon  the  altar,  beside  the  burnt 

18  he  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  round  about 

20  and  he  burnt  the  fat  upon  the  altar 

24  and  consumed  upon  the  altar  the  burnt  off. 
12  and  eat  it  without  leaven  beside  the  altar 
20  offer  the  burnt  offering,  .upon  the  altar 


Deut 


18. 
18. 
18. 
23- 
23- 

23 
23, 
23, 
23. 
23 
7> 


2Sa. 
iKi. 


16. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
33- 


Josh.    8. 


19. 
19. 


take  a  censer  full,  .from  off  the  altar 
And  he  shall  go  out  unto  the  altar 
put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 
made  an  end  of  reconciling,  .the  altar 
the  fat . .  shall  he  burn  upon  the  altar 
he  shall  make  an  atonement . .  for  the  altar 
shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  the  altar 
I  have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar 
he  shall  not.  .come  nigh  unto  the  altar 
an  offering  by  fire  of  them  upon  the  altar 
(is)  by  the  tabernacle,  and  by  the  altar 
their  charge  (shall  be)  the.  .altars 
upon  the  golden  altar  they  shall  spread  a 
they  shall  take  the  ashes  from  the  altar 
the  censers,  .all  the  vessels  of  the  altar 
(is)  by  the  tabernacle  and  by  the  altar 
shall  wave,  .and  offer  it  upon  the  altar 
memorial,  .and  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar 
both  the  altar  and  all  the  vessels  thereof 
offered  for  dedicating  of  the  altar 
offered  their  offering  before  the  altar 
prince,  .for  the  dedicating  of  the  altar 
This  (was>  the  dedication  of  the  altar 
This  (was)  the  dedication  of  the  altar 
broad  plates  (for)  a  covering  of  the  altar 
broad  (plates  for)  a  covering  of  the  altar 
put  fire  therein  from  off  the  altar 
not  come  nigli  the  vessels,  .of  the  altar 
ye  shall  keep,  .the  charge  of  the  altar 
your,  .office  for  every  thing  of  the  altar 
sprinkle  their  blood  upon  the  altar 
Build  me  here  seven  altars 
Balaam  offered  on  (every)  altar  a  bullock 
he  said . .  I  have  prepared  seven  altars 
and  I  have  offered  upon  (every)  altar  a 
built  seven  altars,  and  offered  a  bullock 
and  a  ram  on  (every)  altar 
Balaam  said.  .Build  me  here  seven  altars 
and  offered  a  bullock,  .on  (every)  altar 
ye  shall  destroy  their  altars,  and  break 
And  ye  shall  overthrow  their  altars 
offer  thy  burnt  offerings,  .upon  the  altar 
blood . .  shall  be  poured  out  upon  the  altar 
any  trees  near  unto  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
and  set  it  down  before  the  altar 
then  shalt  thou  build  an  altar 
an  altar  of  stones :  thou  shalt  not  lift 
Thou  shalt  build  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
whole  burnt  sacrifice  upon  thine  altar 
Then  Joshua  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
an  altar  of  whole  stones,  over  which  no 
for  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  even  unto  this 
Mauasseh  built  there  an  altar . .  a  great  altar 
children  of  Reuben,  .have  built  an  altar 
in  that  ye  have  builded  you  an  altar 
in  building  you  an  altar  beside  the  altar 
That  we  have  built  us  an.altar  to  turn 
Let  us  now  prepare  to  build  us  an  altar 
Behold  the  pattern  of  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
to  build  an  altar,  .beside  the  altar 
children  of  Reuben,  .called  the  altar  (ii'd) 
ye  shall  throw  down  their  altars 
Gideon  built  an  altar  there  unto  the  Lord 
and  throw  down  the  altar  of  Baal 
And  build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
behold,  the  altar  of  Baal  was  cast  down 
second  bullock  was  offered  upon  the  altar 
he  hath  cast  down  the  altar  of  Baal 
because  (one)  hath  cast  down  his  altar 
because  he  hath  thrown  down  his  altar 
the  flame  went  up.  .from  off  the  altar 
angel,  .ascended  in  the  flame  of  the  altar 
that  the  people,  .built  there  an  altar 
I  choose  him.  .to  offer  upon  mine  altar 
I  shall  not  cut  off  from  mine  altar 
and  there  he  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
Saul  built  an  altar,  .the  first  altar 
Go  up,  rear  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
to  build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
David  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 
caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 
and  they  brought  him  down  from  the  altar 
caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 
and,  behold,  (lie  is)  by  the  altar 
thousand  burnt  offerings,  .upon  that  altar 
and  (so)  covered  the  altar  (which  was  of) 
also  the  whole  altar . .  he  overlaid  with  gold 
the  altar  of  gold,  and  the  table  of  gold 
Solomon  stood  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
and  the  oath  come  before  thine  altar  in 
he  arose  from  before  the  altar  of  the  LORD 
because  the  brasen  altar,  .(was)  too  little 
upon  the  altar  which  he  built  unto  the 
and  he  offered  upon  the  altar 
he  offered  upon  the  altar,  .the  altar 
Jeroboam  stood  by  the  altar  to  burn 
he  cried  against  the  altar,  .altar,  altar 
Behold,  the  altar  shall  be  rent 
which  had  cried  against  the  altar,  .altar 
The  altar  also  was  rent,  .from  the  altar 
saying  which  he  cried . .  against  the  altar 
And  he  reared  up  an  altar  for  Baal 
And  they  leaped  upon  the  altar  which  was 
And  he  repaired  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
And  with  the  stones  he  built  an  altar 
and  he  made  a  trench  about  the  altar 
And  the  water  ran  round  about  the  altar 
Israel  have,  .thrown  down  thine  altars 
Israel  have,  .thrown  down  thine  altars 
(along)  by  the  altar  and  the  temple 
his  altars  and  his  images,  .before  the  altar 


ALTAR 


30 


ALWAYS 


2  Ki.    12.    9  set  it  beside  the  altar,  on  the  right  side 
z6.  io  an  altar  that  (was)  at  Damascus,  .altar 
16.  ii  And  Urijah  the  priest  built  an  altar 
16.  1 2  come . .  the  king  saw  the  altar . .  altar 
16.  13  sprinkled  the  blood,  .upon  the  altar 
16.  14  brought  also  the  brasen  altar,  .the  altar 
16.  14  and  put  it  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar 
16.  15  the  great  altar  burn  the  morning,  .altar 
18.  22  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  taken  away 

18.  22  shall  worship  before  this  altar  in  Jerusalem? 
21.    3  he  reared  up  altars  for  Baal,  and  made  a 
21.    4  he  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
21.    5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 
23.    9  the  priests,  .came  not  up  to  the  altar 

23.  12  the  altars  that  (were)  on  the  top 
23.  12  the  altars  .which  Manasseh  had  made 
23.  15  Moreover  the  altar  that  (was),  .that  altar 
23.  16  and  burned  (them)  upon  the  altar 
23.  17  thou  hast  done  against  the  altar  of  Beth-el 
23.  20  that  (were)  there  upon  the  altars 
1  Ch.     6.  49  Aaron  and  his  sons  offered  upon  the  altar 
6.  49  and  on  the  altar  of  incense,  (and  were  ap.) 
16.  40  To  offer  burnt  offerings,  .upon  the  altar 
2i.  18  David  should  go  up,  and  set  up  an  altar 
21.  22  that  I  may  build  an  altar  therein  unto  the 
21.  26  And  David  built  there  an  altar  unto  the 
21.  26  he  answered  him.  .by  Are  upon  the  altar 

21.  29  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  .and  the  altar 

22.  1  this  (is)  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 
28.  18  for  the  altar  of  incense  refined  gold 

Ch.     1.    5  brasen  altar  that  Bezaleel.  .had  made 
1.    6  Solomon  went  up  thither  to  the.  .altar 

4.  1  Moreover  he  made  an  altar  of  brass 
4. 19  the  golden  altar  also,  and  the  tables 

5.  12  stood  at  the  east  end  of  the  altar 

6.  12  And  he  stood  before  the  altar  of  the  LORD 

6.  22  and  the  oath  come  before  thine  altar 

7.  7  because  the  brasen  altar,  .was  not  able 

7.  9  kept  the  dedication  of  the  altar  seven  days 

8.  12  offered  burnt  offerings,  .on  the  altar 

14.  3  took  away  the  altars  of  the  strange  (gods) 

15.  8  and  renewed  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
23. 10  set  all  the  people,  .along  by  the  altar 
23. 17  brake  his  altars  and  images .  .his  altars 
26.  16  and  went,  .to  burn  incense  upon  the  altar 
26.  19  rose  up.  .from  beside  the  incense  altar 

28.  24  he  made  him  altars  in  every  corner 

29.  18  We  have  cleansed,  .the  altar  of  burnt  off. 
29.  19  they  (are)  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
29.  21  commanded,  .to  offer  (them)  on  the  altar 
29.  22  priests,  .sprinkled  (it)  on  the  altar 

29.  22,  22  sprinkled  the  blood  upon  the  altar 
29.  24  made  reconciliation . .  upon  the  altar 

29.  27  offer  the  burnt  offering  upon  the  altar 

30.  14  they  rose  and  took  away  the  altar  that 

31.  1  threw  down  the  high  places  and  the  altars 

32.  12  taken,away  his  high  places  and  his  altars 

32.  12  Ye  shall  worship  before  one  altar 

33.  3  he  reared  up  altars  for  Baalim. 

33.    4  he  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
33.   5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host 
33.  15  all  the  altars  that  he  had  built 

33.  16  he  repaired  the  altar  of  the  Lord 

34.  4  they  brake  down  the  altars  of  Baalim 
34.    5  burnt  the  bones,  .upon  their  altars 

34.  7  when  he  had  broken  down  the  altars 

35.  16  to  offer  burnt  offerings  upon  the  altar 
Ezra     3.    2  and  builded  the  altar  of  the  God 

3.    3  And  they  set  the  altar  upon  his  bases 
Neh.    10.  34  to  burn  upon  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our 
Psa.     26.    6  so  will  I  compass  thine  altar,  O  Lord 
43.   4  Then  will  I  go  unto  the  altar  of  God 
51.  19  shall  they  offer  bullocks  upon  thine  altar 
84.    3  thine  altars,  0  Lord  of  hosts,  my  King 
118.  27  unto  the  horns  of  the  altar 
£sa.       6.    6  (which)  he  had  taken,  .from  off  the  altar 
17.    8  And  he  shall  not  look  to  the  altars 

19.  19  In  that  day  shall  there  be  an  altar 
27.    9  he  maketh  all  the  stones  of  the  altar 

36     7  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  taken  away 

36.  7  Ye  shall  worship  before  this  altar 
56.    7  sacrifices,  .accepted  upon  mine  altar 
60.    7  they  shall  come  up.  .on  mine  altar 

Jer.     11. 13  set  up  altars  to  (that)  shameful,  .altars 
17.    1  and  upon  the  horns  of  your  altars 
17.    2  their  children  remember  their  altars 
Lam.    2.    7  The  Lord  hath  cast  off  his  altar 
Eze.      6.    4  And  your  altars  shall  be  desolate 

6.    5  scatter,  .bones  round  about  your  altars 
6.    6  that  your  altars  may  be  laid' waste 
6.  13  among  their  idols,  .about  their  altars 
8.    5  northward  at  the  gate  of  the  altar 

8.  16  between  the  porch  and  the  altar  (were) 

9.  2  and  stood  beside  the  brasen  altar 

40.  46  the  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  altar 

40.  47  and  the  altar,  .before  the  house 

41.  22  The  altar  of  wood  (was)  three  cubits  high 
43-  13  (are)  the  measures  of  the  altar,  .altar 

43.  iS  These  (are)  the  ordinances  of  the  altar  in 
43.  22  and  they  shall  cleanse  the  altar 
43.  26  Seven  days  shall  they  purge  the  altar 
43.  27  make  your  burnt  offerings  upon  the  altar 
45.  19  four  corners  of  the  settle  of  the  altar 
47.    1  at  the  south  (side)  of  the  altar 
Hos.     8.  11  hath  made  many  altars  to  sin,  altars 

10.  1  of  his  fruit  ho  hath  incrrnspd  the  altars 
10.    2  he  shall  break  down  their  altars 

10.    8  thistle  shall  ooroe  up  on  their  altars 

12.  11  their  altars  (arc)  as  heaps  in  the  furrows 

Joel     1.  13  howl,  ye  ministers  of  the  altar 

2.  17  weep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar 

Amos  2.    8  clothes  laid  to  pledge  oy  every  altar 


Amos  3.  14  I  will  also  visit  the  altars  of  Beth-el 
3.  14  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be  cut  off 

9.  1 1  saw  the  Lord  standing  upon  the  altar 
Zech.  9.  15  as  the  corners  of  the  altar 

14.  20  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the  altar 
Mai.   1.    7  Ye  offer  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar 

1.  10  neither  do  ye  kindle  (tire)  on  mine  altar 

2.  13  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  tears 

5.A  raised  glace,  $<*>ijl6s  bdmos. 

Acts  17.  23  I  found  an  altar  with  this  inscription 
G.J  place  of  sacrifice,  dvciaar-ripiov  thusiasterion. 

Matt.  5.  23  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar 

5.  24  Leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar 
22.  18  Whosoever  shall  swear  by  the  altar 
22.  19  or  the  altar  that  sanctifieth  the  gift 

22.  20  Whoso  therefore  shall  swear  by  the  altar 
22.  35  slew  between  the  temple  and  the  altar 

Luke  1.  11  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar 
1 1.  5 1  winch  perished  between  the  altar  and  the 

Rom. 1 1.    3  and  digged  down  thine  altars ;  and  I  am 

1  Co.   9.  13  altar,  .and  they  which  wait  at  the  altar 

10.  18  not  they  which  eat.  .partakers  of  the  altar 
Heb.    7.  13  no  man  gave  attendance  at  the  altar 

13.  10  We  have  an  altar  whereof  they  have  no 
Jas.  2.  21  had  offered  Isaac  his  son  upon  the  altar 
Rev.    6.    9  I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them 

8.    3  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar,  .altar 

8.  5  and  filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar 

9.  13  the  golden  altar  which  is  before  God 

11.  1  measure  the  temple,  .and  the  altar 

14.  18  another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar 
16.    7  1  heard  another  out  of  the  altar  say 

A1TARS  for  incense  — 

Incense  altars,  ni~iBj2P  meqatteroth. 

2  Ch.  30.  14  all  the  altars  for  incense  took  they  away 
ALTARS  of  brick  — 

Brick  altars,  Tij^b  lebenah. 

Isa.  65.    3  and  burnetii  incense  upon  altars  of  brick 
AL-TASCHITH  — 
Destroy  or  corrupt  not,  rtnifn  ?N  al-tashcheth. 

Psa.  57.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A.-t.,  Michtam 

58.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A.-t.,  Michtam 

59.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A.-t.,  Michtam 
75.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A.-t.,  A  Psalm 

ALTER,  to  — 

l.To  exchange,  *l?n  chalaph,  5. 

Lev.  27.  10  He  shall  not  alter  it,  nor  change  it 

2.  To  pass  on,  or  away,  *nj£  ada. 

Dan.    6.    8  the  law  of  the  Medes.  .which  altereth 

6.  12  the  law  of  the  Medes.  .which  altereth 

3.  To  change,  x$  shena,  5. 

Ezra    6.  11  a  decree,  .whosoever  shall  alter  this 
6.  12  that  shall  put  to  their  hand  to  alter 

4.  To  change,  n$  shanah,  3. 

Psa.  89.  34  My  covenant  will  I  not  break  nor  alter 

ALTERED,  to  be  — 

l.To  fiass  over,  ->3J>  abar. 

Esth.  1.  19  commandment,  .that  it  be  not  altered 

2.  To  become  of  another  kind,  yivofiai  erepos. 
Luke  9.  29  fashion  of  his  countenance  was  altered 

ALTHOUGH  — 

l.That,  because,  "3  hi. 

Exod  13.  17  land  of  the  Philistines,  although  that 
2. Although,  '3  *]N  aph  ki. 

Job   35.  14  Although  thou  sayest  thou  shalt  not  see 

2>.And  if,  koX  el  kai  ei. 

Marki4-  29  Although  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  (will) 

4.  And  tndy,  kclitoi  kaitoi. 

Heb.    4.    3  although  the  works  were  finished  from 

ALTOGETHER  — 
l.One,  irjN  echad, 

Jer.   io. "  8  But  they  are  altogether  brutish  and 
2.  Together,  in;  yachad. 

Psa.  19.    9  judgments,  .(are)  ..righteous  altogether 
53.    3  they  are  altogether  become  filthy 
62.    9  they  (are)  altogether  (lighter)  than  vanity 
Isa.    10.    8  (Are)  not  my  princes  altogether  kings 
Jer.     5.    5  these  have  altogether  broken  the  yoke 

3. A II,  ^3  kol. 

Psa.  39.    5  his  best  state  (is)  altogether  vanity 

4.  Wholly,  ftbs  Jcalah. 

Gen.  18.  21's'ee  whether  they  have  done  altogether 
Exod  ii.  1  shall,  .thrust  you  out  hence  altogether 
2Ch.  12. 12  he  would  not  destroy  (him)  altogether 

5.  Vanity,  Sdh  hchel. 

Job   27. 12  why  then  are  ye  thus  altogether  vain? 

6.  Wholly,  o\os  holos. 

John  9.  34  Thou  wast  altogether  born  in  sins,  and 
7. .  I  Itogeiher,  iravrm  pantos. 

1  Co.    5.  10  Yet  not  altogether  with  the  fornicators 
9.  10  Or  saith  he  (it)  altogether  for  our  sakes  ? 

S.In  or  with  much,  eV  iroWw  en  polio. 

Acts  26.  29  [altogether]  such  as  I  am,  except  these 


A'-LTJSH,  t^x  wild  place. 

The  9th  encampment  of  Israel  on  the  way  from  Sin  to 

Sinai. 

NUIU33.  13  And  they  departed,  .and  encamped  in  A. 
33.  14  And  they  removed  from  A.,  and  encamped 

AX'-VAH  or  AL'-IAH,  m^tt,  ^?1  sublimity. 

A  duke  of  Edom,  descended  from  Esau,  B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  36.  40  names  of  the  dukes . .  of  Esau . .  duke  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  51  dukes  of  Edom.  .duke  Timnah,  duke  A. 
AX'- VAN",  pby,  |£«  sttblime. 
Son  of  Shobai,  a  descendant  of  Seir,  B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  36.  23  the  children  of  Shobai  (were)  these  ;  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  40  The  sons  of  Shobai,  A.  and  Manahath 
ALWAY  — 

l.(For)  pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  nyi  netsach. 
Psa.    9.  18  the  needy  shaU  not  alway  be  forgotten 

2.  (For  an)  indefinite  time,  D^iy  olam. 

Job     7.  16  I  loathe  (it);  I  would  not  live  alway 

3.  Continually,  Tpn  tamid. 

Exod 25.  30  set  upon  the  table,  .before  me  alway 
Num.  9.  16  it  was  alway:  the  cloud  covered  it  (by  day) 

2  Sa.    9.  10  shall  eat  bread  alway  at  my  table 
Prov.28.  14  Happy  (is)  the  man  that  feareth  alway 

4.  All  the  days,  D'p;n  Sb  kol  hay-yamim. 

Deutn.    1  judgments, and  his  commandments,  alway 
28.  33  shalt  be  only  oppressed  and  crushed  alway 

1  Ki.  11.  36  David  my  servant  may  have  a  light  alway 

2  Ki.   8.  19  promised  him  to  give  him  alway  a  light 

5. Through  all  {time),  StawavT6s  diapantos. 

Acts  10.  2  much  alms,  .and  prayed  to  God  alway 
Rom.  1 1.  10  and  bow  down  their  back  alway 

6. All  the  days,  iraaas  tcls  7}fj.epas. 
Matt  28.  20  and,  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway 

7. Always,  wdi/TOTe  pantote. 

John   7.    6  but  your  time  is  alway  ready 

Phil.   4.    4  rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  :  (and)  again  I 

Col.     4.    6  Let  your  speech  (be)  alway  with  grace 

1  Th.    2.  16  to  fill  up  their  sins  alway  ;  for  the  wrath 

2  Th.    2.  13  But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway 
8.  Ever,  always,  aei  aei. 

2  Co.    4.  11  For  we  which  live  are  alway  delivered 

6.  10  As  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing ;  as  poor 
Titus  1.  12  Cretians  (are)  alway  liars,  evil  beasts 
Heb.  3. 10  They  do  alway  err  in  (their)  heart;  and 

ALWAYS  — 

1. [For)  pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  n^3  netzack. 
Psa.  103.  g  He  will  not  always  chide  ;  neither 
Isa.    57.  16  neither  will  I  be  always  wroth 

%(For  an)  indefinite  time,  D?iy  olam. 

Gen.  6.  3  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
1  Ch.  16.  15  Be  ye  mindful  always  of  his  covenant 
Jer.   20.  17  her  womb  (to  be)  always  great  (with  me) 

3. Continually,  ~rc:n  tamid. 

Exod  27.  20  to  cause  the  lamp  to  burn  always 

28.  38  it  shall  always  be  upon  his  forehead 
Deutn.  12  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  .(are)  always  upon 
Psa.  16.    8  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me 
Prov.  5.  19  be  thou  ravished  always  with  her  love 
Eze.  38.    8  mountains,  .which  have  been  always 

4. All  the  days,  D'p.'rr  hb  kol  hay-yamin. 

Deut.  5.  29  keep  all  my  commandments  always 
6.  24  to  fear  the  Lord,  .for  our  good  always 
14.  23  mayest  learn  to  fear  the  Lord,  .always 
2CI1. 18.   7  he  never  prophesied  good.. but  always 

h.In  all  time,  nj;"Sp3  be-kol-eth. 

Job  27.  10  will  he  always  call  upon  God? 
Psa.  10.    5  His  ways  are  always  grievous ;  thy 
Prov.  8.  30  daily,  .delight,  rejoicing  always 
Eccl.  9.    8  Let  thy  garment  be  always  white,  and 

b.Ever,  always,  aei  aei. 

Acts  7.  51  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost :  as 

1  Pe.  3.  15  ready  always  to  (give)  an  answer  to  every 

2  Pe.  1.  12  to  put  you  always  in  remembrance  of 
7. Through  all  (time),  Bid  iravT6s,  diapantos. 

Matt  18.  10  in  heaven  their  angels  do  always  behold 
Acts  2.  25  I  foresaw  the  Lord  always  before  my  face 
2  Th.  3.  16  give  you  peace  always  by  all  means 

8.  Through  all  (time),  Hia.Tra.vT6s  diapantos. 
Mark  5.    5  always,  night  and  day,  lie  was  in  the 
Acts  24.  16  to  have  always  a  conscience  void  of 
Heb.  9.    6  priests  went  always  into  the  first  tabern. 

9. Each  time,  eKaarore  hekastote. 

2  Pe.    1. 15  have  these  things  always  in  remembrance 

10. In  every  season,  ev  iravrl  Kaiptp. 

Luke  21.  36  Watch  ye,  therefore,  and  pray  always 
Eph.    6.  18  Praying  always  with  all  prayer  and 

W.In  every  way,  iravr-n  pante. 

Acts  24.    3  We  accept  (it)  always,  and  in  all  places 

12.  Always,  iravT ore  pantote. 

Matt 26.  11  poor  always,  .me  ye  have  not  always 
Mark  14.  7  you  always,  but  me  ye  have  not  always 
Luke  18.    1  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
John  8.  29  I  do  always  those  things  that  please  him 

11.  42  I  knew  that  thou  hearest  me  always :  but 

12.  8  poor  always,  .but  me  ye  have  not  always 
18.  20  in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  [always] 

Rom.  1.  9  I  make  mention  of  you  always  in  my 
1  Co.   1.    4  I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf 


AMAD 


31 


AMBASSADOR 


i  Co.  15.  58  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord 
2  Co.   2.  14  which  always  causeth  us  to  triumph  in 

4.  10  Always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the 

5.  6  Tnerefore .  .always  confident,  knowing 

9.    8  always  having  all  sufficiency  in  all(things) 
Gal.    4.  iS  good  to  be  zealously  affected  always  in 
Eph.  5.  20  Giving  thanks  always  tor  all  things  unto 
Phil.  1.    4  Always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  tor  you 

1.  20  but.  .with  all  boldness,  as  always,  .now 

2.  12  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed 
Col.     1.    3  We  give  thanks .  .praying  always  for  you 

4.  12  always  labouring  fervently  for  you  in 

1  Th.   1.    2  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all 

3.  6  ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us  always 

2  Tb.  1.    3  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you 

1.  11  Wherefore  also  we  pray  always  for  you 
Phm.        4  making  mention  of  thee  always  in  my 

AM' -AD,  Tj£Oy  a  station. 

A  town  on  the  border  of  Asber,  near  Alammeleeh. 
Josh.  19.  26  And  Alammeleeh,  and  A.,  and  Misheal 

A'-MAX,  hoy  labouring. 

A  descendant  of  Asher  through  Beriak  bis  son,  B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.   7.  35  Aud  the  sons  of  his  brother  Helem. .  A. 
A-MA'-LEK,  p*7&SL  warlike,  dweller  in  the  vale. 

1.  Son  of  Eliphaz  and  grandson  of  Esau,  B.C.  1680. 

Gen.  36.  12  and  she  bare  to  Eliphaz  A.  :  these  (were) 
36.  16  Duke  Korah,  duke  Gatam,  (and)  duke  A. 
1  Ch.   1 .  36  The  sons  of  Eliphaz ;  Teman . .  and  A. 

2.  The  name  is  also  applied  to  hie  descendants,  who  are, 
however,  generally  called  Amalekites. 

Exod  17.    8  Then  came  A.,  aud  fought  with  Israel 
17.   9  Choose,  .men,  and  go  out,  fight  with  A. 
17.  10  So  Joshua,  .fought  with  A.:  and  Moses 
17.  11  when  he  let  down  bis  hand,  A.  prevailed 

17. 13  Joshua  discomfited  A.  and  his  people 

17. 14  I  will,  .put  out  the  remembrance  of  A. 
17. 16  the  Lord  (will  have)  war  with  A.  from 

Num  24.  20  when  he  looked  on  A.,  he  took  up  his 

24.  20  and  said,  A.  (was)  the  first  of  the  nations 
Daut  25.  17  Remember  what  A.  did  unto  thee  by  the 

25.  19  thou  shalt  blot  out  the  remembrance  of  A. 
Judg  3.  13  he  gathered  unto  him  the  children  of.  .A. 

5.  14  Out  of  Ephraim. .  a  root  of  them  against  A. 
1  Sa.  15.    2  I  remember  (that)  which  A.  did  to  Israel 

15.    3  Now  go  and  smite  A.,  aud  utterly 
15.    5  Saul  came  to  a  city  of  A.,  and  laid  wait 
15.  20  and  have  brought  Agag  the  king  of  A. 
28.  18  nor  executedst  his  fierce  wrath  upon  A. 
2Sa.    8.  12  of  the  Philistines,  and  of  A.,  and  of  the 
iCh.18.  11  that  he  brought  from. .the  children  of  A 
Psa.  83.    7  Gebal,  and  Amnion,  and  A.;  the  Philistines 

A-MA-LE-E3TE,  'p1??^.  belonging  to  Amalek. 
The  name  of  a  people  and  country  smitten  by  Chedor- 
laomer  and  his  confederates  in  the  days  of  Abraham, 
B.C.  1917  (Gen.  14.  7),  erroneously  supposed  by  some  to 
be  the  descendants  of  Amxlek,  the  son  of  Eliphaz  (eldest 
son  of  Esau,  Gen.  36.  10-16;  1  Ch.  1.  36),  by  his  concubine 
Timna.  Without  any  provocation  they  came  and  at- 
tacked the  rear  of  Israel  as  they  were  journeying  through 
the  wilderness,  but  were  defeated  by  Joshua  at  Rephidim 
(Exod.  17.  8-16),  and  iu  consequence  of  this  assault  a 
perpetual  war  was  declared  against  them  by  Jehovah ; 
they  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  S.  of  Judah  (Num.  13.  29), 
and  in  the  valley  (Num.  14.  25);  along  with  theCaauan- 
ites  they  defeated  the  rash  attack  of  Israel,  and  drove 
them  even  uuto  Hormah  (Num.  14.  43-45);  they  are 
called  by  Balaam  "  the  first  of  the  nations"  (or  Goyhn), 
either  from  their  antiquity,  or  then*  warlike  character, 
or  from  their  being  the  first  to  attack  Israel  (Num.  24. 20), 
which  was  henceEorth  required  to  "remember"  their 
treacherous  attack  (Deut.  25.  17-19).  They,  along  with 
the  children  of  Amnion,  joined  with  Eglou,  king  of  Moab 
(B.C.  1354),  to  attack  Israel,  and  took  Jericho,  the  city 
of  palm-trees  (Judg.  3.  13);  they  were  successfully 
opposed  by  the  Ephraimites  in  the  conflict  with  Jabin, 
king  of  Hazir,  B.C.  1256  (Judg.  5.  14);  they  joined  with 
the  Midianites  an  I  the  children  of  the  East  (or  Kedeni) 
in  the  days  of  Gideon,  the  son  of  Joash  the  Abi-ezrite, 
B.C.  1256  (Judg.  6.  3),  but  were  defeated  by  him  in  the 
valley  of  Jezreel(Judg.  6.  33,  7. 12-22);  they  are  mentioned 
among  the  oppressors  of  Israel  (Judg.  10.  12);  they  had 
once  possession  of  a  mountain  in  the  land  of  Ephraim, 
in  which  Abdon,  the  son  of  Hillel  the  Pirathonite  was 
buried,  B.C.  1112  (Judg.  12.  15);  they  were  smitten  by 
Saul,  B.C.  ioS5  (1  Sa.  14.  48);  again  by  him,  B.C.  1079, 
throughout  their  whole  country  "from  HavilahtoShur," 
on  the  border  of  Egypt,  when  Agag  then*  king  was  cut 
in  pieces  (1  Sa.  15.  2-33);  they  were  invaded  and 
destroyed  by  David  (1  Sa.  27.  8-10) ;  their  previous  non- 
destruction  by  Saul  was  the  cause  of  his  rejection  (1  Sa. 
28.  18);  in  David's  absence  they  invaded  and  plundered 
Ziglag,  B.C.  1056,  and  carried  off  his  two  wives  and  others 
as  captives,  but  they  were  pursued,  overtaken,  and 
defeated  by  David  (1  Sa.  30.  1-3 1);  one  of  their  nation 
accusing  himself  of  Saul's  death  was  rut  to  death  by- 
David  (2  Sa.  1.  1-16),  by  whom  their  silver  and  gold  was 
dedicated  to  Jehovah  (2  Sa.  8,  12 ;  1  Ch.  18.  11);  they 
were  again  smitten  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  B.C.  726-693, 
by  five  hundred  men  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  who  there- 
after dwelt  in  their  place,  at  the  east  of  the  valley  of 
Gedor,  or  Gerar  (1  Ch.  4.  39-43) ;  they  are  mentioned 
with  Amnion  and  the  Philistines  as  among  the  enemies 
of  Israel  (Psa.  83.  7).  They  are  not  again  noticed  in 
Scripture,  except  Haman  the  Agagite  be  reckoned  one 
of  their  nation,  which  is  not  improbable  (Esth.  3.  1),  &c. 
Comp.  Num  24.  7. 

Gen.  14.    7  and  smote  all  the  country  of  the  A. 

Nunn3.  29  The  A.  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  south 
14.  25  Now  the  A. .  .dwelt  in  the  valley 


Num  14.  43  the  A. .  .(are)  there  before  you,  and  ye 

14.  45  the  A.  came  down,  and  the  Canaanites 
Judg.  6.    3  and  the  A. . .  even  they  came  up  against 

6.  33  the  A...  were  gathered  together,  and  went 

7.  12  the  A. .  .lay  along  in  the  valley  like 

10.  12  the  A. .  .did  oppress  you ;  aud  ye  cried  to 
12.  15  and  was  buried  in.  .the  mount  of  the  A. 

1  Sa.  14.  48  smote  the  A.,  and  delivered  Israel 

15.  6  get  you  down  from  amongst  the  A.,  Ie3t 
15.    6  the  Kenites  departed  from  among  the  A. 
15.    7  Saul  smote  the  A.  from  Havilah  (ttntil) 
15.    8  he  took  Agag  the  king  of  the  A.  alive 

15.  15  They  have  brought  them  from  the  A.:  for 
15. 18  Go  and  utterly  destroy .  .the  A.,  and  fight 
15.  20  and  have  utterly  destroyed  the  A. 
15.  32  Bring  ye.  .Agag  the  king  of  the  A. 
27.    8  and  invaded . .  the  A. :  for  those  (nation) 
30.    1  that  the  A.  had  invaded  the  south,  and 
30. 13  I  (ara)a . .  servant  to  an  A. ;  and  my  master 
30.  18  David  recovered  all  that  the  A.  had  earned 

2  Sa.    1.    1  was  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  A. 

1.    8  And  I  answered  him,  I  (am)  an  A. 

1.  13  I  (am)  the  son  of  a  stranger,  an  A. 

1  Ch.   4.  43  they  smote  the  rest  of  the  A.  that  were 

A'-MAW,  D£x  gathering  place. 

A  city  near'siiema  and  Moladah,  probably  in  the  south 

of  Judah. 

Josh.15.  26  Aniam,  and  Shema,  and  Moladah 
A-MA'-NA,  rn£.\*  permanent. 

The  northern  ridge  of  Antilibanus,  as  Hernion  was  the 
southern. 

Song  4.    8  look  from  the  top  of  A.,  from  the  top  of 

A-MAR-I'AH,  n;->£X  i;v~)£n  Jah  has  said. 

1.  Grandfather  of  Zadokj  a  high  priest  in  the  time  of 

David,  B.C.  1100. 

ICh.   6.    7  Meraioth  begat  A.,  and  A.  begat  Ahitub 
6.  52  Meraioth  his  son,  A.  his  son,  Ahitub 

Ezra  7.  3  The  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Azariah,  the  sou 
'2.  The  sou  of  Azariah,  a  high  priest  in  the  time  of  Solo- 
mon, B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.   6.  11  And  Azariah  begat  A.,  and  A.  begat 

3.  A  descendant  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  23.  19  the  sons  of  Hebron.  .A.  the  second 

24.  23  And  the  sons  (of  Hebron).  .A.  the  second 

4.  Chief  priest  in  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat,  B.C.  912. 

2  Ch.  19.  11  behold,  A.  the  chief  priest  (is)  over  you 

5.  A  Levite  appointed  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah  to  dis- 
tribute the  tithes  and  oblations  among  his  brethren 
B.C.  727. 

2  Ch.  31.  15  And  next  him  (were)  Eden,  and.  .A.,  and 

6.  A  man  of  the  family  of  Bani,  who  took  a  strange  wife 
during  the  exile,  B.C.  465. 

Ezra  10.  42  Shallum,  Amariah  (and)  Joseph 

7.  A  priest  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant, 

B.C.  445- 

Nell.  10.  3  Pashur,  Amariah,  Malchijah 
12.  2  Amariah,  Malluch,  Hattush 
12.  13  Of  Ezra,  Meshullam ;  of  A.,  Jehohanan 

8.  A  descendant  of  Judah  by  Pharez,  some  of  whose 
posterity  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  after  the  exile,  B.C.  465. 

Neh.  11.    4  Of  the  children  of  Judah.  .A.,  the  son  of 

9.  An  ancestor  of  Zephaniah  the  prophet  in  the  time  of 
Josiah,  B.C.  630. 

Zeph.  1.    1  which  came  unto.  .A.,  the  son  of  Hizkiab 

A-MA'-SA,  Np'cy.  burden -bearer. 

1.  David's  nephew,  whom  Absalom  made  captain  over 
his  rebel  army,  B.C.  1023. 

2  Sa.  17.  25  Absalom  made  A.  captain  of  the  host 
17.  25  which  A.  (was)  a  man's  son,  whose  name 

19.  13  And  say  ye  to  A.,  (Art)  thou  not  of  my 

20.  4  Then  said  the  king  to  A.,  Assemble 

20.    5  So  A.  went  to  assemble  (the  men  of)  Judah 
20.    8  which  (is)  in  Gibeon,  A.  went  before  them 
20.   9  And  Joab  said  to  A.,  (Art)  thou  in  health 
20.    9  And  Joab  took  A.  by  the  beard  with 
20. 10  But  A.  took  no  heed  to  the  sword  that 
20.  12  And  A.  wallowed  in  blood  in  the  midst 
20.  12  he  removed  A.  out  of  the  highway  into 
1  Ki.    2.    5  what  Joab.  .did.  .unto  A.  the  son  of 

2.  32  and  slew.  .A.  the  son  of  Jether,  captain 

1  Ch.   2.  17  And  Abigail  bare  A. :  and  the  father  of 

2. 17  and  the  father  of  A.  (was)  Jether  the 

2.  The  name  of  an  Ephraimite  who  with  others  resisted 
the  bringing  into  Samaria  of  the  Jews  made  prisoners 
in  the  time  of  Aliaz,  B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.  28. 12  and  A.  the  son  of  Hadlai,  stood  up  against 

A-MA'-SAI,  *)£>&&  burden -bearer. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi,  B.C.  1045. 

1  Ch.    6.  25  And  the  sons  of  Elkanah,  A.,  and  Ahimoth 

6.  35  Elkanah,  the  son  of  Mahath,  the  son  of  A. 

2  Ch.  29. 12  the  Levites  arose,  Mahath  the  son  of  A. 

2.  A  captain  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag. 

1  Ch.  12.  18  Then  the  spirit  came  upon  A. .  .chief 

3.  A  priest  who  assisted  at  the  bringing  up  the  ark  to 
the  house  of  Obed-edom,  B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.  15.  24  A.,  and  Zechariah . .  did  blow  with  the 
A-MASH'-AI,  'p^Dy.  carrying  spoil. 
A  priest  of  the  family  of  limner  dwelling  at  Jerusalem 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11. 13  A.  the  son  of  Azareel,  the  son  of  Ahasai 


A-MAS  r*-AH,  irpcj/.  Jah  has  strength. 
Chief  captain  of  the  army  of  Jehoshaphat. 

2  Ch.  17. 16  next  him  (was)  A. .  .who  willingly  offered 
AHA  ZED  — 
Amazement  fell,  ylvofxai  6d/j.l3os  ginomai  thambos. 

Luke  4.  36  they  were  all  amazed,  and  spake  among 

AMAZED,  be  greatly  or  sore  — 
To  be  greatly  amazed,  iKBaufZtw  ekthambeo. 
Mark  9.  15  straightway  all.  .were  greatly  amazed 
14.  33  began  to  be  sore  amazed,  and  to  be  very 

AMAZED,  to  be  — 

I.  To  be  troubled,  Vns  bahel,  % 

Exod  15. 15  the  dukes  of  Edom  shall  be  amazed 
Judg 20.  41  the  men  of  Benjamin  were  amazed 

2. To  be  cast  down,  r\m  chathath. 

Job     32.  15  They  were  amazed,  they  answered  no 
3.  To  be  cast  down,  nnn  tamah. 

Isa.   13.    S  they  shall  be  amazed  one  at  another 
4. To  be  exceedingly  struck,  iKirX-fjo-a-ofiai  ek}}lesso. 
Matt  19.  25  they  were  exceedingly  amazed,  saying 
Luke  2.  48  when  they  saw  him,  they  were  amazed 
9.  43  they  were  all  amazed  at  the  mighty 

5.  To  be  in  an  ecstasy,  tuo-rao-is  Zhafizv  or  eix€- 
Luke  5.  26  they  were  all  amazed,  and  they  Mr.  16.  8. 

6.  To  be  astonished,  e£i<rvn/nat  existemai. 

Matt  12.  23  all  the  people  were  amazed,  and  said 
Mark  2.  12  insomuch  that  they  were  all  amazed,  and 

6.  51  they  were  sore  amazed  in  themselves 
Acts    2.    7  they  were  all  amazed,  and  marvelled 

2.  12  they  were  all  amazed,  and  were  in  doubt 
9.  21  all  that  heard . .  were  amazed,  and  said 

7.  To  be  astonished,  awed,  Qafx^4op.ai  thambeomai. 

Mark  1.  27  they  were  all  amazed,  insomuch  that 

10.  32  they  were  amazed ;  and  as  they  followed 

AMAZED,  to  make  — 

To  make  astonished,  cdw  shamem,  5. 

Eze.  32.  10  I  will  make  many  rjeople  amazed  at  thee 

AMAZEMENT  — 

1.  Ecstasy,  eKaratrts  ekstasis. 

Acts    3.  10  were  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement 

2.  Terror,  ivrSncns  ptoesis. 

1  Pe.    3.    6  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement 

A-WAZ-T'att,  rvssx,  *n;?DN  Jah  has  strength. 

1.  Son  of  Joash.  king  of  Judah,  who  succeeded  after 

the  slaughter  of  his  father,  B.C.  839. 

2  Ki.  12.  21  and  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

13.  12  he  fought  against  A.  king  of  Judah 

14.  1  reigned  A.  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah 
14.   8  Then  A.  sent  messengers  to  Jehoash 

14.   9  the  king  of  Israel  sent  to  A.  king  of 
14.  11  But  A.  would  not  hear.     Therefore  Jeho. 
14.  11  he  and  A.  king  of  Judah  looked  one 
14.  13  Jehoash  king  of  Israel  took  A.  king  of 
14.  15  how  he  fought  with  A.  king  of  Judah 
14. 17  A.  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah  lived 
14.  18  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.  (are)  they  not 
14.  21  made  him  king  instead  of  bis  father  A. 

14.  23  In  the  fifteenth  year  of  A.  the  son  of  Joash 

15.  1  began  Azariah  the  son  of  A.  king  of 
15.   3  according  to  all  that  his  father  A.  bad 

1  Ch.  3.  12  A.  his  son,  Azariah  his  son,  Jotham  his 

2  Ch.  24.  27  And  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

25.    1  A.  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old  (when) 
25.    5  Moreover  A.  gathered  Judah  together 
25.    9  And  A.  said  to  the  man  of  God,  But 
25.  10  Then  A.  separated  them,  (to  wit),  the 
25.  11  A.  strengthened  himself,  and  led  forth 
25.  13  the  soldiers  of  the  army  which  A.  sent 
25.  14  after  that  A.  was  come  from  the  slaughter 
25.  15  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  A. 
25.  17  Then  A.  king  of  Judah  took  advice,  and 
25.  18  Joash.  .sent  to  A.  king  of  Judah,  saying 
25.  20  But  A.  would  not  hear ;  for  it  (came)  of 
25.  21  they  saw  one  another,  .he  and  A.  king  of 
25.  23  Joash.  .took  A.  king  of  Judah,  the  son  of 
25.  25  A.  the  son  of  Joash,  king  of  Judah  lived 
25.  26  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.,  first  and  last 

25.  27  after  the  time  that  A.  did  turn  away 

26.  1  made,  .king  in  the  room  of  his  father  A. 
26.   4  according  to  all  that  his  father  A.  did 

2.  A  man  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon. 

1  Ch.   4.  34  and  Jamlech,  and  Joshah  the  son  of  A. 

3.  A  Levite  descended  from  Merari. 

1  Ch.  6.  45  Hashabiah,  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of 

4.  Priest  of  the  idol  set  up  in  Bethel,  B.C.  787. 

Ainos  7.  10  Then  A.  the  priest  of  Beth-el  sent  to 

7.  12  A.  said  unto  Amos,  0  thou  seer,  go^fiee 
7.  14  and  said  to  A.,  I  (was)  no  prophet 

AMBASSADOR  — 

1. Interpreter,  p?  hits,  5. 

2  Ch.  32.  31  in.  .ambassadors  of  the  princes  of  Baby. 
^.Messenger,  agent,  ^iyD  malak. 

2  Ch.  35.  21  he  sent  ambassadors  to  him,  saying 
Isa.  30.    4  and  his  ambassadors  came  to  Hanes 

33.    7  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  bitterly 
Eze.  17.  15  against  him  in  sending  his  ambassadors 


AMBASSADOR 


AM3ASSAD0R,  to  be  an  — 
To  be  elders,  seniors,  7rpco'f&e6w  presbeuo. 

2  Co.  5.  20  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ 
Eph.   6.  20  For  which  I  am  an  ambassador  in  bonds 

AMBASSADOR,  to  make  as  if  one  had  been  — 
To  feign  to  be  a  wanderer,  t?  tsir,  7. 

Josh.  9.    4  made  as  if  they  had  been  ambassadors 

AMBASSAGE  — 

Age,  eldership^  embassy,  irpefffiela  presbexa. 

Luke  14.  3?  he  sendeth  an  ambassage,  and  desireth 
AMBER  — 
Amber,  electfrum,  bspQ  choshmal. 

Eze.    1.    4  the  midst  thereof  as  the  colour  of  amber 
1.  27  I  saw  as  the  colour  of  amber,  as  the 
8.    2  the  appearance,  .as  the  colour  of  amber 

AMBUSH  — 

To  be  behind,  to  weave  plots,  3*in  arab. 

Josh.  8.    2  lay  thee  an  ambush  for  the  city  behind  it 
8.    7  ye  shall  rise  up  from  the  ambush 
8.  12  set  them  to  lie  in  ambush  between 
8.  14  he  wist  not  that,  .liers  in  ambush 
8.  19  ambush  arose  quickly  out  of  their  place 
8.  21  Joshua.. saw  that  the  ambush  had  taken 
Jer.   51.  12  prepare  the  ambushes  for  the  Lord 

AMBUSH,  lie  in  — 
Ambush,  3*i«n  maarab. 

Josh.  8.   9  they  went  to  lie  iu  ambush,  and  abode 
AMBUSHMENT  — 
l.To  put  behind,  weave  plots,  m*J  arab,  3. 

2  Ch.  20.  22  Lord  set  ambushments  against . .  Amnion 
'l.Ambvslt,  tike  ma-arab. 

2  Ch.  13.  13  Jeroboam  caused  an  ainbushment  to  come 
13.  13  and  the  ainbushment  (was)  behind  them 

A'-MEN,  jcx,  afxr}v  it  is  steadfast. 

Rev.    3.  14  These  things  saith  the  A.,  the  faithful 

AMEN  — 

I.  Amen,  so  be  it,  so  it  is,  }px  amen. 

Num.  5.  22  And  the  woman  shall  say,  Amen,  amen 
Deut27.  15  the  people  shall  answer  and  say,  Amen 

[So  also  in  v.  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26.] 
1  Ki.   1.  36  answered  the  king,  and  said,  Amen 
1  Ch.  16.  36  people  said,  Amen,  aud  praised  the  LORD 
Neh.   5.  13  all  the  congregation  said,  Amen,  and 

8.  6  all  the  people  answered,  Amen,  Amen 
Psa.  41.  r3  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  . .  Amen,  and  Amen 

72.  19  eartli  be  filled,  .his glory  ;  Amen,  &  Amen 
89.  52  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  for . .  Amen,&  Amen 
106.  48  and  let  all  the  people  say,  Amen 
Jer.   28.    6  Jeremiah  said,  Anieu  :  the  Lord  do  so 

2.Amen,  steadfast,  afi-qv  amen. 

Matt.  6.  13  [the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever.  Amen] 

28.  20  unto  the  end  of  the  world.     [Amen] 
Luke  24.  53  praisiug  aud  blessiug  God.     [Amen] 
J0I1U21.  25  books  that  should  be  written.     [Amen] 
Rom.  1.  25  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever.     Amen 

9.  s  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.     Amen 
11.  36  to  whom  (be)  glory,  for  ever.     Amen 

I5-  33  God  of  peace  (be)  with  you  all.     [Amen] 
16.  20  The  grace  of .  .(be)  with  you.     [Amen] 
16.  24  The  grace  of.  .(be)  with  you  all.     [Amen] 
16.  27  through  Jesus  Christ  for  ever.     Amen 

1  <  '■>.  14.  16  say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of  thanks 

16.  24  My  love  (be)  with  you  all.  .[Amen] 

2  Co.    1.  20  and  in  him  Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God 

13.  14  grace  of  the  Lord . .  with  you  all.    [Amen] 
Gal.     1 .    5  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen 

6.  iS  Brethren,  .grace,  .with  your  spirit.  Amen 
Eph.    3.  21  (be)  glory,  .world  without  end.     Amen 

6.  24  that  loveour  Lord. .in  sincerity.    [Amen] 
Phil.    4.  20  (be)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen 

4.  23  The  grace,  .(be)  with  you  all.     [Amen] 
Col.     4.  18  Grace  (be)  with  you.     [Amen] 

1  Th.  5.  28  grace  of  our  Lord  .  (be)  with  you.     [Amen] 

2  Tli.   3.  18  The  grace .  .(be)  with  you  all.     Amen 
j  Ti.     1.  17  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen 

6.  16  honour  and  power  everlasting.     Anion 

6.  21  Grace  (be)  with  thee.     [Amen.] 

2  Ti.    4.  18  (be)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen 

4.  22  Grace  (be)  with  you.     [Amen] 
Titus  3.  15  Grace  (be)  with  you  all.     [Amen] 
Phm.       25  grace,  .(he)  with  your  spirit.     [Amen] 
Hob.  13.  21  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever  aud  ever.    Amen 

13.  25  Grace  (be)  with  you  all.     [Amen] 
1  Pe.   4.  11  to  whom  (be)  praise  and  dominion.  .Amen 

5.  11  To  whom  (be)  glory  and  dominion..  Amen 
5.  14  Peace  (be)  with  you  all.  .[Amen] 

2Pe.  3.  18  (be)  glory  both  now  and  fur  ever.    [Amenl 

1  Jo.  5.21  Little  children,  keep.,  from  idols,  [Amen] 

2  Jo.  13  children  01  thy.  .sister  greet  thee.  [Amen] 
Jude  25  To  .God  (I'^^lory.  .now  and  ever.  Amen 
Rev.  1.    6  (lie)  glory  and  dominion  for  ever. .  Amen 

1.    7  he  cometb  with  clouds. .Even  so.  Amen 
1.  i3  behold.  1  am  alive  for  evermore.  [Ainen] 
3.  r  j  These  things  saith  the  Amen,  r:)e  faithful 
5.  1 1  An  1  the  four  beasts  said.  Am-  n 

7.  i2  Saying,  Amen:  Blessing,  and  glory,  and 
7.  is  unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.    [Amen] 

r>    4  the  four  beasts  fell  down  ..saving.  Amen 
-  Surely  1  come  quickly;  Amen.     Even  so 
22.  21  The  grace    <!>._■>  with  you  all.     [Amen] 
AMEND,  ti  — 
l,To  strength},  pjg  cJinzeq,  3. 

2CI1.  34.  1  1  gave  it     to  repair  and  amend  the  house 


32 


AMMON 


2. To  make  good,  do  well,  nu;  yatab,  5. 

Jer.     7.    3  Amend  your  ways  and  your  doings,  and 
7.    5  if  ye  throughly  amend  your  ways  and 
26.  13  amend  your  ways  and  your  doings 
35.  15  Return  ye.  .and  amend  your  doings 
AMEND,  to  begin  to  — 
To  hare  oneself  better,  exo>  Ko/j.\pOTepov. 

John   4.  52  Then  enquired,  .when  he  began  to  amend 
AMENDS,  to  make  — 
To  complete,  recompense,  zn$  shalam,  3. 

Lev.    5.  16  he  shall  make  amends  for  the  harm 
AMERCE,  to  — 
To  fine,  vi]},  anash. 

Deut  22.  19  they  shall  amerce  him  in.  .silver 
AMETHYST  — 
1. Amethyst,  HD7D8  achlamah. 

Exod28.  19  third  row  a  ligure.  .and  an  amethyst 
39.  12  third  row,  a  ligure.  .aud  an  amethyst 

2. Amethyst,  afiedvaros  amethustos. 

Rev.  2i.  20  a  jacinth;  the  twelfth,  an  amethyst 
A'-MI,  'Dk  {meaning  uncertain.) 
A  servant  of  Solomon,  whose  descendants  came  up  with 
Zerubbabel  from  Babjion.     In  Neh.  7.  59  he  is  called 
Amon  ("  steadfast "),  B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  57  Pochereth  of  Zebaim,  the  children  of  A. 
AMIABLE  — 
Beloved,  TyTyaJid, 

Psa.  84.    1  Howamiable(are)thy tabernacles,  OLokp 

A  MTN-A'-DAB,  *Ajxiva5df$  my  people  is  willing. 

Son  of  Aram  (or  Ram),  son  of  Esrom. 

Matt.  1.    4  Aram  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat  Naasson 
Luke  3.  33  Which  was  (the  sou)  of  A.,  which  was 

AMISS  — 

I. Out  of  place,  &tottos  atopos. 
,   Luke  23.  41  but  this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss 
2. Evilly,  wickedly,  kclkcos  kakds. 

Jas.     4.   3  ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  consume  (it) 
AMISS,  to  do  — 
To  do  perversely,  pervert,  rnj;  ava.h,  5. 

2CI1.  6.  37  We  have  sinned,  we  have  done  amiss 
AMISS,  thing  — 
Error,  rashness,  )b$3  nby  shalu,  shalah. 

Dan.  3.  29  every  people,  .which  speak  anything  amiss 

A-MIT'-TAI,  %ftDN  truthful. 

A  Zebulouite,  father  of  the  prophet  Jonah,  B.C.  890. 

2KL 14.  25  the  hand  of  his  servant  Jonah,  .son  of  A. 

Jon.    1.    1  came  unto  Jonah  the  son  of  A.,  saying 

AM'-MAH,  npS',  an  aqueduct. 

A  hill  E.  of  Giaii  near  Gibeon  of  Benjamin,  where  Abner 

was  defeated,  B.C.  1053. 

2  Sa.   2.  24  they  were  come  to  the  hill  of  A.,  that 
AM'-MI,  'ey  my  people. 

A  symbolic  name  which  the  ransomed  people  are  directed 
by  the  Lord  to  use. 

Hos.    2.    1  Say  ye  unto  your  brethren,  A.;  and  to 

AM- MI' -EL,  ^x'ay  my  people  is  strong. 

1.  One  of  the  spies  sent  out  by  Moses,  B.C.  1490. 

Num  13.  12  Of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  A.  the  son  of  Gemalli 

2.  A  Manassehite  of  Lodebar,  near  Mahanaim,  in  the 
time  of  David,  B.C.  1070. 

2  Sa.   9.    4  the  house  of  Machir,  the  sou  of  A.,  in 

9.    5  the  house  of  Machir,  the  son  of  A.,  from 
17.  27  and  Machir  the  son  of  A.  of  Lo-debar,  and 

3.  Father  of  Bathshua,  a  wife  of  David,  B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.   3.    5  four,  of  Bathshua  the  daughter  of  A. 
[These  names  in  2  Sa.  n.  2  are  Bathshcba  and  Eliam.] 

4.  A  Levite,  a  son  of  Obed-edom,  and  a  porter  in  the 
tabernacle  in  the  time  of  David,  B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.26.    5  A.thesixth,Issachartheseveuth,Peulthai 

AM-MI'-HTJD,  ni.Tsj?  my  people  is  honourable. 
1.  Father  of  Elisham,  chief  of  Ephraim,  B.C.  1510. 
"Num.  1.  10  of  Ephraim ;  Elishama  the  son  of  A. 
2. 18  of  Ephraim.  .Elishama  the  son  of  A. 
7.  48  Elishama  the  son  of  A. .  .(offered) 
7.  53  the  offering  of  Elishama  the  son  of  A. 
10.  22  over  his  host.  .Elishama  the  son  of  A. 
1  Ch.    7.  26  Laadan  his  son,  A.  his  son,  Elishama  his 
i.  A  Kimeonite  whose  son,  Shemuel,  was  appointed  for 
the  divison  of  the  land,  B.C.  1492. 

Nuni  34.  20  children  of  Simeon,  Shemuel  the  son  of  A 

3.  A  Naphtalite  whose  son,  Pedehel,  was  appointed  for 
the  division  of  the  land,  B.C.  1492. 

Nuni34.  28  of..Naphtali,  Pedahel  the  son  of  A. 

4.  Father  of  Talmai,  king  of  Geshur,  to  whom  Absalom 
fled  after  slaying  his  brother  Amnon,  B.C.  1045. 

7  ->a.  1-   --  to  Talmai,  the  son  of  A.,  king  of  Geshur 

5.  ft  man  01  I  .dab,  descended  from  Fharez,  B.C.  536. 

1  Ch.  0.    4  Uthai  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Omri,  the 
AM-MI'-HTJR,  -*n"?i.*  my  people  is  noble. 

Father  of  Talmai.  (This  is  the  textual  reading  which, 
in  the  Masoretic  correction,  is  made  Am  milt  ml.)  B.C. 
1045. 

2  Sa.  13.  5;  went  to  Talmai.  the  son  of  A.,  king  >">f 


AM-MI-NA'-DAB,  rHJ'Sj.'  my  people  is  u-illing. 

1.  A  Levite,  Aaron's  father-in-law,  B.C.  1520. 

Exod.  6.  23  Aaron  took  him  Elisheba,  daughter  of  A. 

2.  A  prince  of  Judah  (perhaps  the  same  as  No.  1),  B.C. 
1 5 10. 

Num.  1.    7  Of  Judah ;  Nahshon  the  sou  of  A. 

2.    3  and  Nahshon  the  sou  of  A.  (shall  be).. 

7.  12  he  that  offered,  .was  Nahshon  the  son  of  A. 

7.  17  the  offering  of  Nahshon  the  son  of  A. 
10.  14  over  his  host  (was)  Nahshon  the  son  of  A. 
Ruth  4.  19  Hezron  begat  Rani,  and  Ram  begat  A. 

4.  20  A.  begat  Nahshon,  and  Nahshon 
1  Ch.   2.  10  Ram  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat  Nahshon 

3.  A  son  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi.     Perhaps  the  same  as 
No.  1. 

1  Ch.  6.  22  The  sons  of  Kohath ;  A.  his  son,  Korah 

4.  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Kohath,  who  assisted  in 
bringing  up  the  ark  out  of  the  house  of  Obed-edom, 

B.C.  1045. 

1  Ch.  15.  10  Of  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  A.  the  chief 

15.  11  And  David  called  for.  .the  Levites..  and  A 
AM-ME-NA'-DIB,  3Hj  »au  my  people  is  liberal. 
Perhaps  this  is  not  an  appellation. 

Song  6.  12  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  .the  chariots  of  A. 

AM-MI  SHAD'-DAI,  '^'Sy  my  people  is  mighty. 
Father  of  Ahiezer,  captain  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  in  the 
time  of  Moses,  B.C.  1510. 

Num   1.  12  Of  Dan  ;  Ahiezer  the  son  of  A. 

2.  25  of  the  children.  .Ahiezer  the  son  of  A. 
7.  66  On  the  tenth  day  Ahiezer  the  sou  of  A. 
7.  71  (was)  the  offering  of  Ahiezer  the  son  of  A. 
10.  25  over  his  host  (was)  Ahiezer  the  son  of  A. 

AM-MI-ZA'-BAD,  "orsy  my  peopjle  is  endowed. 
Sun  of  Benaiah,  third  of  David's  captains,  B.C.  1015. 
1  Ch.  27.    6  Benaiah . .  and  in  his  course  (was)  A. his  son 

AM'-MON,  fiey  a  fellow-countryman. 
The  name  of  the  descendants  of  Ben-Ammi,  the 
younger  son  of  Lot  by  his  younger  daughter,  born  in  a 
cave  of  a  mountain  near  Zoar  (now  called  Zi'ara,  a  few 
miles  from  Heshbon),  B.C.  1897.  Their  country  lay  at 
the  N.E.  of  Moab,  and  E.  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben, 
between  the  Anion  and  the  Jabbok.  Their  border  was 
strong  (Num.  21.  24);  they  were  not  to  be  distressed  or 
meddled  with  by  Israel;  the  original  inhabitants  of 
their  country  were  giants,  and  called  Zamzummim 
(great,  and  tall,  and  many  as  the  Anakim),  who  were 
destroyed  by  the  Ammonites  (Deut.  2.  19,  20,  37);  their 
chief  city  was  Rabbath-Animou,  and  it  contained  the 
gigantic  bedstead  of  Og,  king  of  Bashan  (Deut.  3.  n); 
the  river  Jabbok  was  their  border  (Deut.  3.  16);  none 
of  their  nation  was  to  be  allowed  to  enter  the  congre- 
gation of  Jehovah  to  the  tenth  generation  (Deut.  23.  3); 
Jabbok  is  again  mentioned  as  their  border  (Josh.  12.  2; 
13.  10,  25);  they,  along  with  Amalek,  joined  Eglon, 
king  of  Moab,  B.C.  1354,  and  smote  Israel,  and  took 
Jericho,  the  city  of  palm-trees  (Judg.  3.  13);  their  gods 
were  served  by  the  children  of  Israel,  B.C.  1161,  so  that 
Jehovah  sold  the  latter  into  their  hands,  and  they 
served  them  eighteen  years,  on  both  sides  of  the  Jordan. 
Israel  crying  to  Jehovah,  the  Ammonites  encamped  in 
Gilead,  but  were  defeated  by  Jephthah,  who  drove  them 
from  Aroer  to  Minnith  (Judg.  10.  6-18 ;  n.  1-33);  their 
chief  national  god  was  Chemosh  (Judg.  n.  24);  they 
besieged  Jab esh- Gilead,  when  Nahash  their  king  threat- 
ened its  inhabitants  with  a  severe  penalty,  but  he  was 
discomfited  by  .Saul  (1  Sa.  n.  i-n;  12.  12);  they  were 
accordingly  vexed  by  Saul  afterwards  (1  Sa.  14.  47); 
their  silver  and  gold  taken  iu  battle  were  dedicated  to 
Jehovah  by  David  (2  Sa.  8.  12;  1  Ch.  18.  11);  Hauun 
their  king,  the  son  of  Nahash,  having  insulted  the  mes- 
sengers of  David,  hired  the  Syrians  to  help  him,  but 
they  were  defeated  by  Joab  and  Abishai  (2  Sa.  10.  1-19 ; 
1  Ch.  19.  1-19);  who  also  besieged  Kabbah  his  capital, 
and  took  it, 'whereon  David  went  to  complete  the  cap- 
ture, and  took  all  the  spoil,  and  humbled  the  inhabit- 
ants (2  Sa.  11.  1;  12.  26-31;  1  Ch.  20.  1-3);  Shobi,  the 
son  of  Nahash,  and  brother  of  Hanun,  of  the  city  of 
Kabbah,  however,  brought  provisions  to  support  David 
at  Mahanaim  when  he  was  fleeing  from  Absalom  (2  Sa. 
17.  27);  Zelek,  also  an  Ammonite,  was  one  of  David's 
thirty  valiant  men  (2  Sa.  23.  37 ;  1  Ch.  n.  30);  Solomon 
loved  several  women  of  that  nation,  and  went  after 
Milcom  their  abomination,  and  also  built  a  high-place 
for  Molech  (1  Ki.  n.  1,  5,  7,  33);  his  wife,  the  mother 
of  Rehoboam,  was  Naamah,  ~an  Ammonitess  (1  Ki.  14. 
21,  31;  -Ch.  12.  13);  along  with  the  Moabites  and  the 
Edcimites  they  attacked  Jehoshapha  t,  but  were  defeated, 
B.C.  896,  and  destroyed  each  other(2  Ch.  20.  1-23) ;  Zabad, 
the  son  of  Shimeath  mi  Ammonites^,  conspired  with 
Jehozabad,  the  son  of  Shimrith  a  Moabitess,  against 
Joash.  king  of  Judah,  and  slew  him,  B.C.  839  (?<  fh.  24. 
26) :  the  Ammonites  gave  gifts  to  Uzziah,  B.C.  810  (2  Ch. 
26.  8);  Jotham  again  reduced  them  to  tribute,  B.C.  758 
(2  Ch.  27.  5);  Josiah,  B.C.  624,  defiled  the  high-place 
which  Solomon  had  built  in  Jerusalem  for  Milcom  (2  Ki. 
23.  13);  the  Ammonites,  along  with  others,  invaded 
Judah  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim,  B.C.  610-599. 

Their  abominable  customs  still  infected  the  Jews  in 
the  time  of  Ezra.  B.C.  457  (Ezra  9.  1);  Tobiah  an  Am- 
monite, along  with  Sanballat  the'  Horonite,  B.C.  445, 
mocked,  reviled,  and  tried  to  hinder  Nehemiah  in  his 
workfNeh.  2.  10. 10  ;  4.  3,  7);  the  Jews,  though  acquainted 
with  the  law  against  admitting  an  Ammonite  to  the 
tenth  generation,  nevertheless  married  wives  of  that 
nation  (Neh.  13.  1,  23);  they  are  mentioned  along  with 
Amalek  as  among  tlie  enemies  of  Israel  (Psa.  83.  7);  yet 


AMMON 


33 


AMONG 


:is  becoming  obedient  to  the  people  of  God  in  the  latter 
days  (Isa.  n.  14) ;  they  cruelly  used  the  women  in  Gilead, 
and  were  threatened  with  destruction  B.C.  878  (Amos 
1.  13-16);  aud  because  of  their  reviliugJudah,  and  mag- 
nifying themselves  against  Jehovah,  they  are  again 
threatened  with  destruction,  B.C.  630  (Zeph.  2.  8-n); 
they  are  described  as  beiug  uucircumcised  iu  flesh,  aud 
as  punished  with  the  uncircumcised  in  heart  of  the 
house  of  Israel  (Jer.  9.  26) ;  as  receiving,  along  with  the 
other  nations,  from  Jeremiah  the  cup  of  the  Lord's 
anger  (Jer.  25.  21);  as  having  a  yoke  sent  to  their  king 
by  Jeremiah  in  token  of  their  subjection  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (Jer.  27.  3) ;  as  having  afforded  shelter  to  the 
Jews  who  feared  Nebuchadnezzar  (Jer.  40.  n);  their 
king  Baalis  is  said  to  have  sent  Ishmael,  son  of  Netha- 
niah,  to  slay  Gedaliah,  son  of  Ahikam  (Jer.  40.  14) ;  Ish- 
mael tried  to  carry  off  his  captives  to  the  Ammonites 
(Jer.  41. 10),  but  being  defeated  escaped  himself  to  them 
with  only  eight  men  (Jer.  41.  15);  the  destruction  of 
Kabbah,  Heshbon,  aud  Ai,  was  foretold  by  Jeremiah, 
with  their  restoration  (Jer.  r.  1-6);  Ezekiel  foretells  the 
coming  of  the  sword  of  Nebuchadnezzar  to  Rabbah  and 
the  people  (Eze.  21.  20,  28) ;  also  the  coming  of  the  chil- 
dren of  the  East,  or  of  Kedem  (Eze.  25.  2-10),  hut  they 
were  to  escape  from  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (Dan.  n.  41;. 

Gen.  19.  38  same  (is)  the  father  of  the  children  of  A. 

Nuni2i.  24  the  children  of  A. .  .the  children  of  A. 

Deut.  2.  19  thou  comest.  .against  the  children  of  A. 
2. 19  for  I  will  not  give  thee  of  the  land  of..  A. 

2.  37  Only  unto  the  land  of  the  children  of  A. 

3.  11  (is)  it  pot  in  Rabbath  of  the  childrenof  A. 
3.  16  (which  is)  the  border  of  the  children  of  A. 

J  osh.  1 2.    2  (which  is)  the  border>f  the  children  of  A. 

13. 10  unto  the  border  of  the  children  of  A. 
13.  25  and  half  the  land  of  the  children  of  A. 

Judg.  3.  13  he  gathered  unto  him  the  children  of  A. 
10.   6  and  the  gods  of  the  children  of  A. 
10.    7  and  into  the  hands  of  the  children  of  A. 

10.  9  Moreover  the  children  of  A.  passed  over 

10. 11  (Did)  not  (I  deliver  you),  .children  of  A. 
10. 17  Then  the  children  of  A.  were  gathered 

30.  18  What  man  (is  he)  that,  .the  children  of  A. 

11.  4  And  it  came  to  pass,  .the  children  of  A. 
11.    5  that  when  the  children  of  A.  made  war 
11.   6  that  we  may  fight  with  the  children  of  A. 
11.    8  and  fight  against  the  children  of  A. 

11.    9  Jephthah  said . .  agaiust  the  children  of  A 

11.  12,  14  the  king  of  the  children  of  A. 

11.  13  the  king  of  the  children  of  A.  answered 

11.  15  nor  the  land  of  the  children  of  A. 

11.  27  the  children  of  Israel,  .the  children  of  A. 

31.  28  Howbeit  the  king  of  the  children  of  A. 
11.  29  he  passed  over  (unto)  the  children  of  A. 
11.  30  thou  shalt  without  fail  deliver  the.  .of  A 
11.  31  when  I  return  in  peace  from  the.  .of  A. 
11.  32  passed  over  unto  the  children  of  A.  to 
11.  33  Thus  the  children  of  A.  were  subdued 

11.  36  the  Lord  hath  taken  vengeance,  .of  A. 
i2ft   1  Wherefore  passedst  thou  over . .  the . .  of  A. 

12.  2  at  great  strife  with  the  children  of  A. 
12.    3  passed  over  against  the  children  of  A. 

iSa.  12. 12  Nahash  the  king  of  the  children  of  A. 
14.  47  So  Saul  took,  .against  the  children  of  A. 

2  Sa.   8.  12  Of  Syria,  .and  of  the  children  of  A. 

10.    1  that  the  king  of  the  children  of  A.  died 
10.    2  David's  servants. .  of  the  children  of  A. 
10.    3  And  the  princes  of  the  children  of  A.  said 
10.    6  when  the  children  of  A.  saw  that  they 
30.    6  the  children  of  A.  sent  and  hired  the  Sy. 
10.    8  And  the  children  of  A.  came  out 
10.  10  in  array  against  the  children  of  A. 
10.  11  but  if  the  children  of  A.  be  too  strong  for 
30.  34  when  the  children  of  A.  ..returned  fm.. A. 

10.  39  So  the  Syrians  feared  to  help  the.  .of  A. 

11.  1  and  they  destroyed  the  children  of  A. 

12.  9  him  with  the  sword  of  the  children  of  A. 
12.  26  against  Rabbah  of  the  children  of  A. 

12.  31  unto  all  the  cities  of  the  children  of  A. 
17.  27  Nahash  of  Rabbah  of  the  children  of  A. 

1 KL  11.    7  the  abomination  of  the  children  of  A. 

11.  33  and  Milcom  the  god  of  the  children  of  A. 
2  Ki.  23.  13  the  abomination  of  the  children  of  A. 

24.  2  against  him  bands,  .of  the  children  of  A. 
1  Ch.  18.  11  that  he  brought  from,  .the  children  of  A. 

19.    1  the  king  of  the  children  of  A.  died 
19.    2  into  the  land  of  the  children  of  A.  to 
19.    3  the  princes  of  the  children  of  A.  said 
19.    6  when  the  children  of  A.  saw  that  they 
19.    6  Hauum  and  the  children  of  A.  sent  a 
19.    7  the  children  of  A.  gathered  themselves 
39.    9  Aud  the  children  of  A.  came  out,  and 
19.  31  set  (themselves)  in  array  against,  .A. 
19.  12  but  if  the  children  of  A.  be  too  str.  v.  15. 

19.  19  Syrians  help  the  children  of  A.  any  more 

20.  1  wasted  the  country  of  the  children  of  A. 
20.   3  the  cities  of  the  children  of  A. 
20.    1  and  the  children  of  A. . .  came  against 
20.  10  now,  behold,  the  children  of  A.  and 
20.  22  ambushments  against  the  children  of  A. 
20.  23  the  children  of  A.  and  Moab  stood  up 
27.    5  fought  also  with  the  king  of  the  A. 
27.    5  the  children  of  A. .  .the  children  of  A. 

13.  23  Jews  (that)  had  married  wives,  .of  A. 
83.    7  Gebal.and  A.,andAmalek;  the  Philistines 
11.  14  the  children  of  A.  shall  obey  them 

9.  26  Egypt,  aud  Judah . .  and  the  children  of  A. 

25.  21  and  the  children  of  A. 
49.    6  again  the  captivity  of  the  children  of  A. 
11.  41  and  the  chief  of  the  children  of  A. 

Amos  1.  13  three  transgressions  of  the  children  of  A. 
Zeph.  2.    8  I  have  heard . .  the  revilings  of. .  A. 

2.   9  the  children  of  A.  as  Gomorrah,  (even) 

5 


1  Ch. : 


Neh 
Psa. 
Isa. 
Jer. 


Dan. 


AJff-MO-NTTE,  '3iDy.      See  Amman. 

Deut.  2.  20  the  A.  call  them  Zamzummims 

23.    3  An  A.  or  Moabite  shall  not  enter  into 


iSa. 


-Sa. 


1  Then  Nahash  the  A.  came  up,  and 
11.    2  And  Nahash  the  A.  answered  them 
13.  11  and  slew  the  A.  until  the  heat  of  the  day 
23.  37  Zelek  the  A.,  Nahari  the  Beerothite 


*3- 

*3- 
13- 
'3- 
13- 
*3- 
13- 


1  Ki.  11.    1  loved  many  strange  women,  .of  the.  .A, 
11.    5  the  abomination  of  the  children  of  A. 
14.  21  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an  A. -ess 
14.  31  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an  A. -ess 

1  Ch.  11.  39  Zelek  the  A.,  Naharai  the  Berothite 

2  Ch.  12. 13  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an  A. -ess 

20.  1  with  them  (other)  beside  the  A.,  came 

24.  26  Zabad  the  sou  of  Shimeath  an  A.-ess 

26.  8  And  the  A.  gave  gifts  to  TJzziah 

27.  5  He  fought  also  with  the  king  of  the  A. 
Ezra   9.    1  according  to  their  ab... of  the.. A. 
Neh.  2.  10  aud  Tobiah  the  servant,  the  A.,  heard 

2.  39  and  Tobiah  the  servant,  the  A. .  .heard 
4.    3  Now  Tobiah  the  A.  (was)  by  him,  and  he 
4.    7  and  the  A. .  .heard  that  the  walls  of 

13.    1  therein  was  found  written,  that  the  A. 
Jer.  27.   3  send  them.,  to  the  king  of  the  A. 

40.  11  that  (were)  in  Moab,  and  among  the  A. 

40.  14  that  Baalis  the  king  of  the  A.  hath  sent 

41.  10  and  departed  to  go  over  to  the  A. 

41. 15  Ishmael.  .escaped,  .and  went  to  the  A. 
49.    1  Concerning  the  A.,  thus  saith  the  Lord 
49.    2  cause,  .to  be  heard  in  Rabbah  of  the  A. 
Eze.  21.  20  Appoint  a  way.  .to  Rabbath  of  the  A. 

21.  28  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  concerningtheA. 

25.  2  set  thy  face  against  the  A. 

25.    3  And  say  unto  the  A.,  Hear  the  word  of 
25.    5  And  I  will  make,  .the  A.  a  couching 
25. 10  Unto  the  men  of  the  east  with  the  A. 
25.  10  that  the  A.  may  not  be  remembered 

AM'-NOH",  p:pN  prpx  tutelage,  up-bringing. 
1.  Eldest  son  of  David,  by  Ahinoam,  and  slain  by  Absa- 
lom, B.C.  1035. 

2  Sa.    3.    2  his  first-born  was  A.,  of  Ahinoam  the 

13.    1  Tamar ;  and  A.  the  son  of  David  loved  her 
13.    2  And  A.  was  so  vexed,  that  he  fell  sick  for 
13.    2  and  A.  thought  it  hard  for  him  to  do 
13.    3  But  A.  had  a  friend,  whose  name  (was) 
13.    4  And  A.  said  unto  him,  I  love  Tamar 
6  So  A.  lay  down,  and  made  himself _sick 

6  A.  said  unto  the  king,  I  pray  thee" 

7  saying,  Go  now  to  thy  brother  A.'s  house 

8  So  Tamar  went  to  her  brother  A.'s  house 

9  And  A.  said,  Have  out  all  men  from  me 
10  And  A.  said  uuto  Tamar,  Bring  the  meat 
10  and  brought  (them)  into  the  chamber  to  A 

13.  15  Then  A.  hated  her  exceedingly 
13.  15  And  A.  said  unto  her,  Arise,  be  gone 
13.  20  Hath  A.  thy  brother  been  with  thee? 
13.  22  Absalom  spake  unto  his  brother  A. 
13.  22  for  Absalomhated  A.,  because  he  had 
13.  26  I  pray  thee,  let  my  brother  A.  go  with  us 
13.  27  that  he  let  A.  and  all  the  king's  sons  go 
13.  28  saying,  Mark  ye  now  when  A.'s  heart  is 
13.  28  when  I  say  unto  you,  Smite  A.;  then  kill 
13.  29  the  servants  of  Absalom  did  unto  A.  as 
13.  32  A.  only  is  dead :  for  by  the  appointment 
13-  33  let  notmy  lord.. think.. for  A.  onlyisdead 
33.  39  king  David,  .was  comforted  concerning  A. 
1  Ch.   3.    1  the  sous  of  David,  .the  firstborn  A.,  of 

1.  Son  of  Shimon,  of  the  family  of  Caleb,  son  of  Jephun- 

neh,  B.C.  1000. 

1  Ch.   4.  20  And  the  sons  of  Shimon  (were)  A.,  and 

A'-MOK,  piDjj  deep. 

A  priest  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.   7  [these  (are)  the  priests] . .  Sallu,  A. ,  Hilkiah 
12.  20  [chief,  .fathers].  .Of  Sallai,  Kallai ;  of  A. 

A'-MON,  |3N,  pDN  workman. 

1.  Governor  of  the  city  (of  Samaria)  in  the  time  of  Ahah, 

B.C.  900. 

1  Ki.  22.  26  Take,  .and  carry  him  back  unto  A. 

2  Ch.  38.  25  Take,  .and  carry  him  back  to  A. 

2.  Son  of  Mauasseh,  and  fifteenth  king  of  Judah,  B.C.  643. 

2K1.  21.  18  and  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 

21.  19  A.  (was)  twenty  and  two  years  old  when 
21.  23  Aud  the  servants  of  A.  conspired  against 
21.  24  that  had  conspired  against  king  A. 
21.  25  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.  which  he 

1  Ch.   3.  14  A.  his  son,  Josiah  his  son. 

2  Ch.  33.  20  and  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

33.  21  A.  (was)  two  and  twenty  years  old  when 
33.  22  for  A.  sacrificed  unto  all  the  carved 
33.  23  but  A.  trespassed  more  and  more 
33.  25  that  had  conspired  against  kin^  A. 

Jer.    1.    2  Josiah  the  son  of  A.  king  of  Judah,  in  the 
25.    3  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  the  son  of  A. 

Zeph.  1.    1  in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  A.,  king 

3.  A  descendant  of  the  servants  of  Solomon  (called  Ami 
in  Ezra  2.  57),  B.C.  536. 

Neh.    7.  59  [of  Solomon's  servants],  .children  of  A. 

4.  A  son  of  Manasses,  in  Christ's  ancestry. 

Matt.  1.  10  Manasses  begat  A.;  and  A.  begat  Josias 
AMONG  — 
l.Unto,  to,  Vn  el. 

Josh.  13,  22  among  them  that  were  slain  by  them 
2.  With,  near,  r\x  eth. 

Judg.  1. 16  they  went  and  dwelt  among  the  people 


Z.Betiveen,  p3  ben. 

Judg.  5.  16  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds 

Dan.    7.    8  there  came  up  among  them  another  little 
i.In  between,  j'?3  beben. 

Isa.  44.    4  they  shall  spring  up.  .among  the  grass 
5. From  between,  |*3p  mibben. 

Psa.  104. 12  the  fowls,  .sing  among  the  branches 

6.  M hist,  13  gev. 

Job    30.    5  They  were  driven  forth  from  among 

7.  In  the  sufficiency  of,  **]3  bede. 

Job    39.  25  He  saith  among  the  trumpets,  Ha,  ha  • 
$.Fro?n,  out  of,  fp  min. 

Lev.  11.  13  (which)  ye  shall  have,  .among  the  fowls 
9. On-,  upon,  in  addition  to,  Sy  al. 

Exod3o.  13  every  one  that  passeth  among  them 
10.  With,  oy  im.  ^ 

Josh. 22.    7  gave  Joshua  among  their  brethren 
11. In  the  midst,  heart  of,  y$  qereb. 

Gen.  24.    3  the  Canaanites,  among  whom  I  dwell 

Exodi7.    7  saying,  Is  the  Lord  among  us,  or  not? 

31.  14  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people 

34.    9  let  my  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  go  among  us 

34.  10  all  the  people  among  which  thou  (art) 

Lev.  17.    4  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people 

17.  10  the  strangers  that  sojourn  among  you 

18.  29  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  their  people 
20.    3  will  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people 
20.    s  will  cut  him  off . .  from  among;  their  people 
20.    6  will  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people 

20.  18  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  then  people 
23.  30  will  I  destroy  from  among  his  people 

Num.  5.  27  the  woman  shall  be  a  curse  among  her 
11.    4  the  xnixt  multitude  that,  .among  them 
11.  20  the  Lord  which  (is)  among  you,  and  have 
11.  ei  Moses  said,  The  people,  among  whom  I 
14.  11  signs  which  I  have  shewed  among  them? 
14.  33  thou  broughtest  up.  .from  among  them 
14.  14  that  thou  Lord  (art)  among  this  people 

14.  42  Go  not  up,  for  the  LORD  (is)  not  among 

15.  30  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people 
Deut.  1. 42  Go  not  up.  .for  I  (am)  not  among  you 

2.  14  were  wasted  out  from  among  the  host 
2.  15  to  destroy  them  from  among  the  host 
2.  16  men . .  were . .  dead  from  among  the  people 
4.    3  Lord,  .hath  destroyed  them  from  among 
6. 15  Lord  thy  God.  .a  jealous  God  among  you 
7.  21  for  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  among  you 
13.    1  If  there  arise  among  you  a  prophet 
13.  11  do  no.  .wickedness  as  this  is  among  you 
13.  13  men.  .are  gone  out  from  among  you 
13.  14  (that)  such  abomination  is.  .among  you 

16.  11  and  the  fatherless,  .that  (are)  among  you 

17.  2  If  there  be  found  among  you,  within 

1 7.    7  shalt  put  the  evil  away  from  among  you 

17.  15  from  among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set 

18.  2  have  no  inheritance  among  their  brethren 

18.  18  a  Prophet  from  among  their  brethren 

19.  19  shalt  thou  put  the  evil,  .from  among  you 
19.  20  henceforth  commit  no.  .evil  among  you 

21.  9  put  away  the  (guilt),  .from  among  you 

21.  21  thou  put  evil  away  from  among  you 

22.  21,  24  thou  put  evil  away  from  among  you 

23.  16  He  shall  dwell  with  thee,  .among  you 

24.  7  shalt  put  evil  away  from  among  you 
26.  11  and  the  stranger  that  (is)  among  you 
31.  16  whither  they  go.  .among  them,  and 
31.  17  because  our  God  (is)  not  among  us? 

Josh.  3.   5  the  Lord  will  do  wonders  among  you 
3. 10  know,  .the  living  God  (is)  among  you 
4.    6  That  this  may  be  a  sign  among  you 
7.  12  ye  destroy  the  accursed  from  among  you 

7.  13  take  away  the  accursed  thing  from  among 

8.  35  the  strangers  that  were,  .among  them 

9.  7  Peradventure  ye  dwell  among  us ;  and  how 
9.  16  theyheard.  .(that)theydweltamongthem 
9.  22  far  from  you  ;  when  ye  dwell  among  us? 

10.    1  inhabitants  of  Gibeon.  .were  among  them 
13.  13  Geshurites.  .dwell  among  the  Israelites 
16.  10  Canaanites  dwell  among  the  Ephraimites 
18.    7  the  Levites  have  no  part  among  you 
24.    5  according  to  that  which  I  did  among  them 

24.  23  the  strange  gods  which  (are)  among  you 
Judg.  1.  29  Canaanites  dwelt  in  Gezer  among  them 

1.  30  Canaanites  dwelt  among  them,  and 
1.  32  Asherites  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites 
1.  33  he  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites,  the 
3.    5  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the 
10.  16  put  away  the  strange  gods  from  among 
r  Sa.    4.    3  when  it  cometh  among  us,  it  may  save  us 
Psa.  55.  15  for  wickedness  (is),  .among  them 
82.    1  God.  .he  judgeth  among  the  gods 
Prov.  15.  31  The  ear  that  heareth . .  abideth  among  the 
Mic.    3. 11  and  say,  (Is)  not  the  Lord  among  us? 

12.ln  the  midst  of,  Tpfi  tavelc. 

Gen.  23.    6  thou  (art)  a  mighty  prince  among  us 

23.  10  Ephron  dwelt  among  the  childre  n  of  Heth 
35.    2  Put  away  the  strange  gods . .  among  you 
40.  20  the  chief  baker  among  his  servants 
42.   5  to  buy . .  among  those  that  came 

Exod.  2.    5  she  saw  the  ark  among  the  flags 

7,    5  bring  out  the  children . .  from  among  them 
i2.  31  get  you  forth  from  among  my  people 
12.  49  the  stranger  that  sojoumeth  among  you 

25.  8  that  I  may  dwell  among  them 

28.  1  take  thou,  .from  among  the  children 

29.  45  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of 
29.  46  that  I  may  dwell  among  them 

Lev.  15.  31  my  tabernacle  that  (is)  among  them 


AMONG 


34 


AMOEITE 


Lev.  16.  29  a  stranger  that  sojourneth  among  you 
17.    8  the  strangers  which  sojourn  among  you 
17.  10,  13  of  the  strangers  that  sojourn  among 

17.  12  any  stranger  that  sojourueth  among  you 

18.  26  any  stranger  that  sojourueth  among  you 
20.  14  there  be  no  wickedness  among  you 

22.  32  I  will  be  hallowed  among  the  children  of 

24.  10  an  Egyptian,  went  out  among  the  children 

25.  33  their  possession  among  the  children  of 

26.  11  I  will  set  my  tabernacle  among  you 

26.  12  I  will  walk  among  you,  and  will  be  your 
26.  25  I  will  send  the  pestilence  among  you 
£Tuni.  1.  47  their  fathers  were  not  numbered  among 

1.  49  the  sum  of  them  among  the  children  of 

2.  33  Levites  were  not  numbered  among  the 

3.  12  I  have  taken  the  Levites  from  among  the 

4.  2  Take  the . .  sons . .  from  among  the  sons  of 

4.  18  families  of  the  Kohathitesfromamongthe 
m             j.  21  a  curse  and  an  oath  among  thy  people 

5.  6,  14  the  Levites  from  among  the  children  of 
8.  16  they  (are)  wholly,  .from  among  the 

8.  19  to  his  sons  from  among  the  children  of 

9.  7  his  appointed  season  among  the  children 
15.  14  whosoever  (be)  among  you  in  your 

15.  26,  29  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 

16.  3  everyone,  .and  the  Lord  (is)  among  them 
16.  21  Separate  yourselves  from  among  this 

16.  33  they  perished  from  among  the  congrega. 

16.  45  Get  you  up  from  among  this  congregation 

17.  6  the  rod  of  Aaron  (was)  among  their  rods 

18.  6  I  have  taken . .  the  Levites  from  among  the 
18.  20  ueither  shalt  thou  have  any  part  amoug 
18.  20  I  (am)  thy  part  and .  .inheritance  among 
18.  23  that  among  the  children  of  Israel  they 

18.  24  Among  the  children  of  Israel  they  shall 

19.  10  the  strauger  that  sojourneth  among  them 
19.  20  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  the  congrega. 
25.    7  he  rose  up  from  among  the  congregation} 

25.  11  he  was  zealous  for  my  sake  amoug  them 

26.  62  they  were  not  numbered  among  the 

26.  62  was  no  inheritance  given  them  among  the 

27.  4  be  done  away  from  among  his  family 
27.    4  possession  among  the  brethren  of  our 
27.    7  possession  of  an  inheritance  among  their 
32.  30  they  shall  have  possessions  among  you 
35.  15  for  the  sojourner  among  them:  that 

35.  34  the  Lord  dwell  among  the  children  of 
Deut  32.  51  ye  trespassed  against  me  among  the 
■Tosh.   8.    9  Joshua  lodged  that  night  among  the 

14.  3  he  gave  none  inheritance  among  them 

15.  13  hegaveapart among thechildren of  Judah 

16.  9  children  of  Ephraim  (were)  among  the 

17.  4  to  give  us  an  inheritance  among  our 
17.    4  he  gave  them  an  inheritance  among  the 
17.    6  Manasseh  had  an  inheritance  among  his 

17.  9  cities  of  Ephraim  (are)  among  the  cities 

19.  4g  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  among  them 

20.  9  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among  them 
22,  19  take  possession  amo.  g  us :  but  rebel  not 
22.  31  we  perceive  that  the  Lord  (is)  among  us 

Judg  12.    4  among  the  Ephraimites.  .among  the  E. 

18.  1  fallen  unto  them  amongthe  tribes  of  Israel 
1  Sa.    7.    3  put  away.  .Ashtaroth  from  among  you 

10.  10  and  he  prophesied  among  them 

10.  23  when  he  stood  among  the  people,  he  was 
15.  6  get  youdown  from  among  the  Amalekites 
15,    6  Kenites  departed  from  among  the  Amale. 

1  Ki.    6.  13  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel 

11,  20  Genubath  was . .  among  the  sons  of  Phara. 

14.  7  I  exalted  thee  from  among  the  people 

2  Ki.    4.  13  I  dwell  among  mine  owu  people 

9.    2  arise  up  from  among  his  brethren 
11.    2  stole  him  from  among  the  king's  sons 
^3.    9  eat  of  the  unleavened  bread  among  their 

1  Ch.  21.    6  Benjamin  counted  he  not  among  them 

2  Ch.  22.  11  stole  him  from  among  the  king's  sons 
Neh.    4.  11  we  come  in  the  midst  among  them 
Esth.  9.  28  should  not  fail  from  among  the  Jews 
Job      1.    6  and  Satan  came  also  among  them 

2.    1  Satan  came  also  among  them  to  present 
2.    8  and  he  sat  down  among  the  ashes 

15.  19  and  no  stranger  passed  among  them 

42.  15  father  gave  them  inheritance  among  their 
Psa.  57.    4  My  soul  (is)  among  lions :  (and)  I  lie 

68.  25  among  (them  were)  the  damsels  playing 
109.  30  I  will  praise  him  among  the  multitude 
136.  11  And  brought  out  Israel  from  among  them 
Prov.  1.  14  Cast  in  thy  lot  amoug  us;  let  us  all 

17.  2  of  the  inheritance  among  the  brethren 
27.  22  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  among  wheat 

Isa.    24.  13  in  the  midst  of  the  land  among  the 

61.    9  their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the 
■Ter.    12.  14  pluck  out  the  house  of  Judah  from  among 

29.  32  a  man  to  dwell  among  this  people 

37.    4  came  in  and  went  out  among  the  people 

39.  14  so  he  dwelt  among  the  people 

40.  1  being  bound  in  chains  among  all  that 

40.  5,  6  and  dwelt  with  him  among  the  people 

41.  8  ten  men  were  found  among  them  that 
Eze.    1.    1  as  I  (was)  among  the  captives  byithe  river 

2.  5  there  hath  been  a  prophet  among  them 

3.  15  remained  there . .  among  them  seven  days 
3.  25  thou  shalt  not  go  out  among  them 

6.  13  their  slain,  .shall  be  among  their  idols 
9.    a  one  man  among  them . .  clothed  with  linen 

11.  1  among  whom  I  saw  Jaazaniah  the  son 

12.  10  the  house  of  Israel  that  (are)  among  them 
12.  12  the  prince  that  (is)  among  them  shall  bear 

18.  18  did  (that)  which  (is)  not  good  among  his 

19.  2  she  nourished  her  whelps  among  young 
19.    6  he  went  up  and  down  among  the  lions 

30.  9  before  the  heathen,  among  whom  they 


Eze.  22.  26  and  I  am  profaned  among  them 

29.  12  her  cities  among  the  cities,  .laid  waste 

33.  33  know  that  a  prophet  hath  been  among 

34.  12  in  the  day  that  he  is  among  his  sheep 
34.  24  my  servant  David  a  prince  among  them 
44.    9  any  stranger  that  is  among  the  children 
47.  22  among  you.  .among  you.  .among  the 

Hag.   2.    5  so  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you 

13.  Through,  by  means  of,  8m  dia  [gen.) 

2T1.    2.    2  the  things  that  thou  hast  heard.. among 

1 4.  Into,  toward,  among,  els  eis. 

Matt  13.  22  He . .  that  received  seed  among  the  thorns 
Mark  4.    7  some  fell  [among]  thorns,  and  the  thorns 
4.  18  are  they  which  are  sown  among  thorns 
8. 19  When  I  brake  the  five  loaves  among  five 
8  ao  when  the  seven  among  four  thousand 
13. 10  gospel  must  first  be  published  among 
Luke  8.  14  that  which  fell  among  thorns  are  they 

10.  36  was  neighbour*  unto  him  that  fell  among 
24.  47  repentance . .  should  be  preached . .  among 

Johu  6.    9  but  what  are  they  among  so  many? 

21.  23  Then  went  this  saying  abroad  among  the 
Acts    2.  22  a  man  approved  of  God  among  you  by 

4.  17  that  it  spread  no  further  among  the  people 

14.  14  they  rent  their  clothes,  and  ran  in  among 

20.  29  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you 

2  Co.  11.    6  we  have  been,  .made  manifest  among 

1  Th.    5.  15  both  among  yourselves,  and  to  all  (men) 

t  Pe.    4.    S  above  all  things  have . .  charity  among 

15.  Out  of,  4k  ek. 

Matt  12.  11  Whatman  shall  there  be  among  you,  that 
John  12.  20  there  were  certain  Greeks  among  them 

12.  42  amongthe  chief  rulers  also  many  believed 
Acts    6.    3  look  ye  out  among  you  seven  men  of 
27.  22  there  shall  be  no  loss  of.  .life  among 
16.7"??.,  ev  en. 

Matt.  2.    6  thou  Bethlehem . .  art  not  the  least  among 
4.  23  all  manner  of  disease  among  the  people 
9.  35  healing,  .every  disease  [among]  the  people 

11.  11  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Among  them  that 
16.  7  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 
16.  8  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves,  because 
20.  26  not  be  so  among  you.  .be  great  among 

20.  27  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you,  let 

21.  38  they  said  among  themselves,  This  is  the 

26.  5  lest  there  be  an  uproar  among  the  people 

27.  '56  Among  which  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and 
Mark  5.    3  Who  had  (his)  dwelling  among  the  tombs 

6.  4  in  his  own  country,  aud  among  his  own 
10.  43  not  be  among  you.  .be  great  among  you 

15.  40  among  whom  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and 
Luke  1.    1  those  things  which  are.  .believed  among 

1.  25  to  take  away  my  reproach  [among]  men 

1.  28,  42  [blessed  (art)  thou  among  women] 

2.  44  they  sought  him  among,  .kinsfolk  and 
7. 16  a  great  prophet  is  risen  up  among  us 

7.  28  Among  those  that  are  born  of  women 
9.  46  there  arose  a  reasoning  among  them 

9.  48  he  that  is  least  among  you  all,  the  same 

16.  15  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men 

22.  24  there  was  also  a  strife  among  them,  which 
22.  26  he  that  is  greatest  among  you,  let  him  be 

John  1.  14  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among 
7.  12  was  much  murmuring  among  the  people 

7.  43  So  there  was  a  division  among  the  people 
9.  16  And  there  was  a  division  among  them 

10.  19  There  was  a  division,  .among  the  Jews 

11.  54  Jesus,  .walked  no  more  openly  amongthe 
15.  24  If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works 

Acts    4.  12  there  is  none  other  name,  .given  among 

4.  34  Neither  was  there  any  among  them  that 

5.  12  signs  and  wonders  wrought  among  the 

6.  8  Stephen,  .did  great  wonders,  .among 

12.  18  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  soldiers 

13.  26  whosoever  among  you  feareth  God  to 
15.    7  God  made  choice  among  us,  that  the 
15.  12  wonders  God  had  wrought  among  the 
15.  22  Silas,  chief  men  among  the  brethren 

17.  34  among  the  which  (was)  Dionysius  the 

18.  11  teaching  the  word  of  God  among  them 
20.  25  among  whom  I  have  gone  preaching  the 

20.  32  to  give  you  an  inheritance  among  all 

21.  19  what  things  God  had  wrought  among  the 
21.  34  some  cried  one  thing,  some . .  among  the 

24.  21  that  I  cried  standing  among  them 

•  25.    5  which  among  you  are  able,  go  down  with 

25.  6  when  he  had  tarried  among  them  more 

26.  4  which  was  at  the  first  among  mine  own 
26. 18  and  inheritance  among  them  which  are 

28.  29  [had  great  reasoning  among  themselves] 
Rom.  1.    5  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  nations 

1.    6  Among  whom  are  ye  also  the  called  of 

1.  13  fruit  among  you.  .as  among  otherGentiles 

2.  24  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among 

8.  29  that  he  might  be  the  firstborn  among 

11.  17  wild  olive  tree,  wert  graffed  in  among 

12.  3  I  say.  to  every  man  that  is  among  you 

15.  9  I  will  confess  to  thee  among  the  Gentiles 

16.  7  fellow-prisoners,  who  are  of  note  among 
1  Co.    1.  10  (that)  there  be  no  divisions  among  you 

1.  11  that  there  are  contentions  among  you 

2.  2  I  determined  not  to  know  any.  .among 

2.  6  we  speak  wisdom  amoug  them  that  are 

3.  3  whereas  (there  is)  among  jrou  envying 
3.  18  If  any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  be 

5.  1  fornication  among  you.  .among  the 

6.  5  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  among  you  ? 
6.    7  Now . .  there  is  utterly  a  fault  [among]  you 

11.  18  I  hear  that  there  be  divisions  among  you 


1  Co.  11.  19  heresies  among  you.  .manifest  among  you 

11.  30  many  (are)  weak  and  sickly  among  you 
15.  12  how  say  some  among  you  that  there  is 

2  Co.   1. 19  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  preached  among 

10.  1  who  in  presence  (am)  base  among  you 

1 1.  26  in  the  sea,  (in)  perils  among  false  brethren 

12.  12  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought  among 
Gal.     1.    6  that  I  might  preach  him  among  the 

2.  2  that  gospel  which  I  preach  among  the 

3.  1  Christ  hath  been.. .  set  forth .  .[among]  you 
3.    5  and  worketh  miracles  among  you,  (doeth) 

Eph.   2.    3  Among  w;hom  also  we  all  had  our 

3.    8  that  I  should  preach  [among]  the  Gentiles 
5.    3  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  you,  as 
Phil.   2.  15  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the 
Col.     i.  27  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the 

1  Th.    1.    5  men  we  were  among  you  for  your  sake 

5. 12  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you 
5.  13  be  at  peace  among  yourselves 

2  Th.   3.    7  we  behaved  not . .  disorderly  among  you 

3.  11  there  are  some  which  walk  among  you 
Jas.     1.  26  If  any  man  [among]  you  seem  to  be 

3.    6  so  is  the  tongue  among  our. members,  that 

3.  13  and  endued  with  knowledge  among  you? 

4.  1  whence  (come)  wars  and  fightings  among 

5.  13  Is  any  among  you  afflicted  ?  let  him 

5.  14  Is  any  sick  among  you  ?  let  him  call  for 

1  Pe.    2.  12  Having  your  conversation  honest  among 

5     1  The  elders  which  are  among  you  I  exhort 
5.    2  Feed  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you 

2  Pe.   2.    1  among  the  people,  even  as . .  among  you 

2.    8  that  righteous  man  dwelling  among  them 
17.  On,  upon,  hrt  epi  {ace.) 

Matt  13.    7  some  fell  among  thorns  ;  and  the  thorns 
Acts    1.  21  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us 
2  Th.   i.  10  (because  our  testimony  among  you  was 
Rev.    7. 15  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among 
18. At,  in,  Kara  (ace.)  kata 

Acts  21.  21  teachest  all  the  Jews  which  are  among 
26.    3  and  questions  which  are  among  the  Jews 

19.  In  the  midst,  /iecros,  iv  /x4(rcj>  avd  jxeaov. 
Luke  8.    7  some  fell  among  thorns  ;  and  Mt.  13.  25. 

10.  3  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  wolves 
22.  27  I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth 

22.  55  And.  .Peter  sat  down  among  them 
John  1.  26  there  standeth  one  among  you,  whom  ye 

1  Th.   2.    7  we  were  gentle  among  you,  even  as  a 

20.  With,  /xerd  meta  {gen.) 

Luke  22.  37  he  was  reckoned  among  the  transgressors 
24.   5  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead? 
John  6.  43  Jesus,  .said,  .murmur  not  among 

11.  56  sought  they  for  Jesus,  and  spake  among 
16.  19  Do  ye  enquire  among  yourselves  of  that 

21. Alongside  of,  irap&para  (dat.) 

Matt28.  15  this  saying  is  commonly  reported  among 
Col.     4.  16  when  this  epistle  is  read  among  you 
Rev.    2.  13  my  faithful  martyr,  .slain  among  you 

22.  Toward,  irp6s  pros  (ace.) 

Mark  1.  27  insomuch  that  they  questioned  among 

8.  16  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 

9.  33  What  was  it  that  ye  disputed  [among] 
9.  34  by  the  way  they  had  disputed  among 

10.  26  saying  among  themselves,  Who  then  can 

12.  7  those  husbandmen  said  among  themselves 

15.  31  also  the  chief  priests  mocking,  .among 

16.  3  they  said  among  themselves,  Who  shall 
Luke  4.  36  they  were  all  amazed,  and  spake  among 

20.  14  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 
22.  23  they  began  to  enquire  among  themselves 

John  6.  52  The  Jews  therefore  strove  among 

7.  35  Then  said  the  Jews  among  themselves 
i2.  19  The  Pharisees  therefore  said  among 
16.  17  Then  said  (some)  of  his  disciples  among 
19.  24  They  said  therefore  among  themselves 

Acts  4.  15  But.  .they  conferred  among  themselves 
28.  4  they  said  among  themselves,  No  doubt 
28.  25  when  they  agreed  not  among  themselves 

2  Co.  12.  21  my  God  will  humble  me  among  you 
23. By,  under,  vtt6  hupo  [gen.) 

Acts  10.  22  a  just  man .  .and  of  good  report  among  all 
[See  also  Compare,  dwell,  fall,  from,  in,  out,  speak.] 
A-MO-RITE,  nbx  mountaineer. 
A  race  or  tribe  descended  from  Canaan,  the  fourth  son 
of  Ham,  the  younger  son  of  Noah ;  it  is  mentioned 
after  the  Jebusite  and  before  the  Girgashite  (Gen.  10. 16 ; 
1  Ch.  1.  13);  some  of  them  dwelt  in  Hazezon-tamar,  or 
Engedi,  on  the  W.  of  the  Salt  Sea,  and  were  smitten  by 
Chedorlaomer,  in  the  days  of  Abraham,  B.C.  1913 
(Gen.  14.  7);  three  of  their  chiefs,  Manure,  Eschol,  and 
Aner,  were  confederates  of  Abraham  (Gen.  14.  13);  the 
iniquity  of  the  tribe  (as  the  representative  of  the 
Canaanites  generally)  was  not  yet  full  (Gen.  15.  16,  21); 
they  seem  to  have  contended  unsuccessfully  with 
Jacob  (48.  22) ;  they  are  mentioned  between  the  Hittites 
and  Perizzites,  as  inhabitants  of  Canaan  (Exod.  3.  8,  17; 
Judg.  3.  5;  Neh.  9.  1);  between  the  Hittites  and  the 
Hivites  (Exod.  13.  5);  before  the  other  tribes  (Exod.  23. 
23);  between  the  Canaanite  and  the  Hittite  (Exod.  33. 
2;  Josh.  11.  3);  before  the  Canaanites  and  the  other 
tribes  (Exod.  34.  n);  as  dwelling  in  the  mountains  of 
Judah  (Num.  13.  29);  as  having  the  river  Arnon  as  their 
dividing  line  from  Moab  (Num.  21.  13);  as  having  a 
king  named  Sihon,  B.C.  1452,  who  not  only  refused  to 
let  Israel  pass,  but  came  and  attacked  them  at  Jahaz, 
when  he  was  defeated  and  his  land  taken  possession  of 
by  Israel  (Num.  21.  21-32);  it  was  given  to  the  two-and- 
a-half  tribes  (Num.  32.  33) ;  the  chief  city  of  the  south 


AMORITE 


35 


ANANIAS 


portion  of  the  tribe  was  Hesbbon  (Deut.  i.  4);  the 
"mount  of  the  Aniorites"  was  apparently  another 
name  for  Canaan  (Deut.  1.  7,  19,  20);  Israel  was  afraid 
of  them  (Deut.  1.  27);  and  was  beaten  by  them  in  Seir, 
even  unto  Hormah  (Deut.  1.  44);  their  land  was  to  be 
possessed  by  Israel  (Deut.  3.  2),  even  from  the  river 
Arnon  to  Mount  Hermon,  including  the  land  of  Og, 
who  reigned  in  Edrei  in  Bashau  (Deut/3.  8,  9 ;  4.  46,  47); 
mentioned  between  the  G'irgashites  aud  the  Canaanites 
(Deut  7.  1);  between  the  Hittites  aud  the  Canaanites 
(Deut.  20.  17;  Josh.  9.  1;  12.  8);  their  fate  seems  to 
have  terrified  the  other  peoples  (Josh.  2.  10 ;  9.  10) ; 
mentioned  between  the  Girgashites  and  the  Jebusites 
(Josh.  3.  10);  mentioned  along  with  the  Canaanites  as 
the  sole  inhabitants  of  the  land  W.  of  the  Jordan 
(Josh.  5.  1);  alone  mentioned  as  such  (Josh.  7.  7);  five 
of  their  kings  besiege  Gibeon,  but  are  defeated  (Josh. 
10.  5-12). 

They  bad  a  variety  of  gods  (Josh.  24.  15 ;  Judg.  6.  10); 
they  forced  the  children  of  Dan  into  the  mountain 
(Judg.  1.  34);  they  were  reduced  to  tribute  by  the  house 
of  Joseph  (Judg.  1.  35);  their  border  was  from  the 
ascent  of  Akrabbini  northward  (Judg.  1.  36);  they  were 
at  peace  with  Israel  in  the  days  of  Samuel,  B.o.  1171- 
1061  (1  Sa.  7.  14) ;  the  Gibeonites  were  a  remnant  of 
them  (2  Sa.  21.  2);  Geber,  the  son  of  Uri,  was  over  their 
land  E.  of  the  Jordan  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  B.C.  1014 
(1  Ki.  4.  19) ;  then-  remnant  was  reduced  to  servitude 
by  Solomon  (1  Ki.  9.  20,  21 ;  2  Cbron.  8.  7);  their  idol 
worship  was  followed  by  Ahab,  B.C.  899(1  Ki.  21.  26); 
also  by  Manasseb  (2  Ki.  21.  n);  their  abominations  by 
the  Jews  under  Ezra  (9.  8).  The  overthrow  of  Og  and 
Sihon  was  celebrated  (Psa.  135.  n;  136.  19);  Judah, 
because  of  her  sins,  is  represented  as  having  an  Amorite 
for  a  father,  a  Hittite  for  a  mother,  and  Samaria  and 
Sodom  for  sisters  (Eze.  16.  3,  45);  the  Amorite  is  repre- 
sented as  tall  and  strong,  yet  destroyed  before  Israel, 
to  whom  his  land  was  promised  (Amos  2.  9,  10). 

Gen.  10.  16  [Canaan  begat],  .the  Jebusite,  and  the  A. 
14.    7  smote  all  the  country  of.  .the  A.,  that 

14.  13  he  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Manire  the  A. 

15.  16  for  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  (is)  not  yet  full 
15.  21  [have  I  given  this  land].  .And  the  A 

48.  22  which  I  took  out  of  the  hand  of  the  A. 
Exod.  3.    8  to  bring  theni . .  unto  the  place  of  the . .  A. 
3.  17  Iwillbringyou..uutothelandof..theA. 
13.    5  shall  bring  thee  into  the  land  of.  .the  A. 

23.  23  Angel  shall,  .bring  thee  in  unto  the  A. 

33.  2  I  will  drive  out  the  Caananite,  the  A. 

34.  11  behold,  I  drive  out  before  thee  the  A. 
Niuuij.  29  the  Jebusites,  and  the  A.,  dwell  in  the 

21. 13  that  cometh  out  of  the  coasts  of  the  A. 
21.  13  Arnon  (is),  .between  Moab  and  the  A. 
21.  21  Israel  sent,  .unto  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 
21.  25  Israel  dwelt  in  all  the  cities  of  the  A. 
21.  26  Hesbbon.  .the  city  of.. the  king  of  the  A. 
21.  29  into  captivity  unto  Sihon..  king  of  the  A. 
21.  31  Thus  Israel  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  A. 
21.  32  the  villages  thereof,  and  drove  out  the  A. 

21.  34  as  thou  didst  unto  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 

22.  2  saw  all  that  Israel  had  done  to  the  A. 
32.  33  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 

32.  39  children  of  Machir.  .dispossessed  the  A. 
Deut.  1.  4  After  be  had  slain  Sihon.  .king  of  the  A. 
1.  7  Turn  you.  .and  go  to  the  mount  of  the  A. 
1.  19  by  the  way  of  the  mountain  of  the  A. 
1.  20  Ye  are  come  unto  the  mountain  of  tbe'A. 
1.  27  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  A.,  to 

1.  44  And  the  A.,  which  dwelt  in  that  mountain 

2.  24  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Sihon  the  A. 

3.  2  as  thou  didst  unto  Sibon  king  of  the  A. 
3.    8  out  of  the  hand  of  the  two  kings  of  the  A. 

3.  9  Hermon . .  the  A.  call  it  Shenir 

4.  46  in  the  land  of  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 

4.  47  Ana  they  possessed,  .two  kings  of  the  A. 
7.    1  the  Lord  thy  God . .  hath  cast  out . .  the  A. 

20.  17  But  thou  sbalt  utterly  destroy.. the  A. 
31.    4  as.  .to  Sihon  and  to  Og,  kings  of  the  A. 
Josh.  2.  10  what  ye  did  unto  the  two  kings  of  the  A. 
3.  io  he  will  without  fail  drive  out . .  the  A. 

5.  1  to  pass,  when  all  the  kings  of  the  A. 
7.    7  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  A. 

9.    1  when,  .the  A.,  the  Canaanite,  the  Ferizz. 

9.  10  he  did  to  the  two  kings  of  the  A. 
10.    s  Therefore  the  five  kings  of  the  A.,  the 
10.    6  all  the  kings  of  the  A.  that  dwell  in  the 

10.  12  when  the  Lord  delivered  up  the  A. 

11.  3  [Jabin  king  of  Hazor.  .sent  toj.  .the  A, 

12.  2  Sihon  king  of  the  A.  who  dwelt  in 

12.  8  the  Hittites,  the  A.,  and  the  Canaanites 

13.  4  unto  Aphek,  to  the  borders  of  the  A. 

13. 10  all  the  cities  of  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 
13.  21  all  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 

24.  8  I  brought  you  into  the  land  of  the  A. 
24.  11  men  of  Jericho  fought  against  you,  the  A. 
24.  12  drave  them  out.  .the  two  kings  of  the  A. 
24.  15  the  gods  of  the  A.,  in  whose  land  ye  dwell 
24.  18  the  Lord  drave  out.  .the  A.  which  dwelt 

Judg.  1.  34  And  the  A.  forced  the  children  of  Dan 

1.  35  But  the  A.  would  dwell  in  mount  Heres . 
1.  36  And  the  coast  of  the  A.  (was)  from  the 
3.   5  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the.  .A. 
6. 10  fear  not  the  gods  of  the  A.,  in  whose  land 

10.  8  in'the  land  of  the  A. ,  which  (is)  in  Gilead 

10. 11  (Did)  not  (I  deliver  you)  from  the.  .A. 
11. 19  messengers  unto  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 

11.  21  Israel  possessed  all  the  land  of  the  A. 
11.  22  they  possessed  all  the  coasts  of  the  A. 
11.  23  LORD  God  of  Israel,  .dispossessed  the  A. 

1  Sa,   7. 14  there  was  peace  between  Israel  and  the  A. 
2Sa.  21.    2  Gibeonites.  .of  the  remnant  of  the  A. 
1  Ki.  4. 19  the  country  of  Sihon  king  of  the  A. 


1  Ki.  9.  20  all  the  people  (that  were)  left  of  the  A. 

21.  26  the  A.,  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  before 

2  Ki.  21.  11  abominations .  .above  all  that  the  A.  did 

1  Ch.    1.  14  The  Jebusite  also,  and  the  A.,  and  theGii 

2  Ch.  8.    7  (As  for)  all  the  people,  .left  of.  .the  A. 
Ezra    9.    1  according  to . .  abominations . .  of  the . .  A. 
Neh.  9.    8  a  covenant,  .to  give  the  land  of.  .the  A 
Psa.135.  11  Sihon  king  of  the  A.,  and  Og  king  of 

136.  19  Sihon  king  of  the  A. :  for  his  mercy 
Eze.  16.    3  thy  father  (was)  an  A.,  and  thy  mother 

16.  45  mother . .  an  Hittite, and  your  father  an  A. 
Amos  2.    9  Yet  destroyed  I  the  A.  before  them 
2.  10  led  you.  .to  possess  the  land  of  the  A. 
A'-MOS,  DlDjg  burden-bearer. 

1.  A  native  of  Tekoa,  a  place  about  6  miles  S.  of  Beth- 
lehem in  Judah ;  originally  he  was  a  shepherd  and 
dresser  of  sycamore  trees,  but  was  called  to  be  a  pro- 
phet, and  exercised  his  office  (about  808  B.C.)  duiiug 
the  reign  of  Uzziah,  while  Isaiah  and  Hosea  also  pro- 
phesied. 

Amos  1.    1  The  words  of  A.,  who  was  among  the 
7.    8  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  A.,  what 
7.  10  A.  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the 
7.  11  For  thus  A.  saith,  Jeroboam  shall  die  by 
7.  12  Also  Amaziah  said  unto  A.,  0  thou  seer 

7.  14  Then  answered  A.,  and  said  to  Amaziah 

8.  2  And  he  said,  A.,  what  seest  thou?  And  I 

2.  An  ancestor  of  Joseph,  husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  25  (the  son)  of  A.,  which  was  (the  son)  of 
A'-MOZ,  pcx  strong. 

Father  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  and  apparently  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  B.C.  800. 

2  Ki.  19.    2  sent,  .to  Isaiah  the  prophet  the  son  of  A. 

19.  20  Then  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.  sent  to  Hezek. 

20.  1  And  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  A. 
2  Ch.  26.  22  acts  of  Uzziah . .  did  Isaiah . .  son  of  A. 

32.  20  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.,  prayed 
32.  32  vision  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  A. 
Isa.     1.    1  The  vision  of  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.,  which 
2.    1  The  word  that  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.  saw 

13.  1  burden  of . .  which  Isaiah  the  son  of  A. 
20.  2  spake  the  Lord  by  Isaiah  the  son  of  A. 
37.    2  unto  Isaiah  the  prophet  the  son  of  A. 

37.  21  Then  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.  sent  unto 

38.  1  And  Isaiah  the  prophet  the  son  of  A. 

AM-PHI'-PO  US,  'Afj.*l-rroAts  about  the  city. 
A  city  of  Macedonia,  on  the  river  Strymon,  which 
flows  nearly  round  the  town ;  whence  its  name.  It  was 
called  Popolia  under  the  Byzantine  empire.  Its  site 
is  now  occupied  by  a  village  called  Neokboria,  in 
Turkish,  Jeni  Keni,  literally  "new  town." 

Acts  17.    1  when  they  had  passed  through  A. 
AM-PLI'-AS,  'Au7r\(as. 
A  convert  that  dwelt  at  Rome. 

Horn.  16.    8  Greet  A.  my  beloved  in  the  Lord 
AM'-RAM,  n-)py  exalted  people. 

1.  A  son  of  Kohath,  Levi's  son,  and  father  of  Aaron, 
Moses,  and  Miriam.  He  died  in  Egypt,  aged  137  years, 
B.C.  1540. 

Exod.  6.  18  And  the  sons  of  Kohath;  A.  and  Izhar 
6.  20  And  A.  took  him  Jockebed  his  father's 
6.  20  and  the  years  of  the  life  of  A.  (were)  an 
Num.  3.  19  the  sons  of  Kohath  by  their  families ;  A. 
26.  58  And  Kohath  begat  A. 
26.  59  And  the  name  of  A.'s  wife  (was)  Jockebed 
26.  59  and  she  bare  unto  A.  Aaron  and  Moses 
1  Cb.  6.    2  And  the  sons  of  Kohath ;  A.,  Izhar,  and 
6.    3  And  the  children  of  A. ;  Aaron,  and  Moses 
6.  18  And  the  sons  of  Kohath  (were),  A.,  and 
23.  12  the  sons  of  Kohath;  A.,  Izhar,  and 

23.  13  The  sons  of  A. ;  Aaron  and  Moses,  and 

24.  20  Of  the  sons  of  A. ;  Shubael :  of  the  sons 

2.  A  son  of  Bani,  who  bad  taken  a  strange  wife  during 
the  exile,  B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  34  Of  the  sons  of  Bani ;  Maadai,  A.,  and 
AM'-RAM,  pen  red. 

A  son  of  Dishon,  son  of  Anah,  and  great-grandson  of 
Seir  the  Horite,  B.C.  1709. 

This  name  should  be  written  Hamram  or  Hamran.  It 
is  given  to  Hemdan,  "desirable,"  in  Gen.  36. 26,  which  is 
probably  correct.  The  form  adopted  in  the  common 
version  is  manifestly  incorrect. 

1  Cb.    1.  41  And  the  sons  of  Dishon ;  A.,  and  Eshban 
AM-RAM-ITE,  'p-py  belonging  to  Amram. 
Patronymic  of  the  family  of  Amram,  father  of  Miriam, 
Aaron,  and  Moses. 

Num.  3.  27  of  Kohath  (was)  the  family  of  the  A. 

1  Ch.  26.  23  Of  the  A., (and)  the  Izharites,  the  Hebron. 

AM-RA'-PHEL,  ^"JpN  powerful  people. 
A  king  of  Shinar  in  the  time  of  Abraham,  B.C.  1920. 
Gen.  14.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  A.  king  of 

14.  9  [they  joined  battle  with].  .A. king  of  Shinar 

ABf-ZI,  'spy  my  strength. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Merari,  son  of  Levi,  and  progenitor 
of  Ethan,  whom  David  set  over  the  service  of  song, 

B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.   6.  46  The  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Bani,  the  son  of 

2.  Ancestor  of  Adaiah,  a  returned  exile,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  12  Pelaliah,  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Zechar. 
A'-NAB,  n:j£  a  hill. 

A  city  in  the'S.  of  Canaan,  inhabited  by  Anakim.  It  is 
still  called  Anab,  and  is  equidistant  from  Sochob  and 
Eshtemoa. 


Josh  11.  21  Joshua,  .cut  off  the  Anakims  from.  .A. 
15.  50  [in  the  mountains].  .A.,  and  Eshtenioh 
A'-NAH,  n:j£  answering. 

1.  A  daughter(?)  of  Zibeon,  a  Hivlte,  B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  36.    2  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  A.  the 

36.  14  sons  of  Aholibamah,  the  daughter  of  A. 
36.  18  Ahobbaniab  the  daughter  of  A.,  Esau's 
36.  25  the  children  of  A.  (were)  these 
36.  25  and  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Seir  the  Horite,  and  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
land. 

Gen.  36.  20  These .  .the  sons  of  Seir.  .Zibeon,  and  A. 
36.  29  These,  .the  dukes,  .duke  Zibeon,  duke  A. 
1  Ch     1.  38  And  the  sons  of  Seir.  .Zibeon,  and  A. 

3.  A  son  of  Zibeon,  son  of  Seir,  B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  36.  24  children  of  Zibeon ;  both  Ajah,  and  A. 
36.  24  this  (was  that)  A.  that  found  the  mules 
1  Ch.    1.  40  And  the  sons  of  Zibeon :  Aiah,  and  A. 

1.  41  Thesons  of  A.;  Dishon.    And  the  sons  of 
A-NA-HA'-BATH,  rnrnx  narrow  way. 

A  town  in  Issachar. 

Josh  19.  19  [border  was  toward] .  .Shihon,  and  A. 
A-NA-I'AH,  ."v:^  Jah  answers. 

1.  A  priest  or  prince  that  stood  on  the  right  hand  of 
Ezra  while  he  read  the  law  to  the  people,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.    8.    4  Ezra  the  scribe  stood,  .and  A. .  .on  his 

2.  A  Jew  who,  with  Neheniiah,  sealed  the  covenant,  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.  10.  22  [The  chief  of  the  people].  .Hanan,  and  A. 

A'-NAK,  piy_,  p^H  giant,  long-necked. 
Son  of  Arba,  and  ancestor  of  the  Anakini. 

Numi3-  22  Hebron;  where. .  the  children  of  A.,(were) 
13.  28  moreover  we  saw  the  children  of  A.  there 

13.  33  there  we  saw  the  giants,  the  sons  of  A. 
Deut.  9.    2  Wbo  can  stand  before  the  children  of  A. 
Josh  15.  13  the  city  of  Arba  the  father  of  A.,  which 

15.  14  Caleb  drove  thence  the  three  sons  of  A. 
15.  14  Animan,  and  Talmai,  the  children  of  A. 

21. 11  the  city  of  Arba  the  father  of  A. 
Judg.  1.  20  expelled  thence  the  three  sons  of  A. 

A-NA-KTTff,  O'p^  giants. 

The  descendants"  of  the  preceding  Arba,  one  of  the 
"  sons  of  Heth"(Geu.  23.  3);  who,  seven  years  be  lure  the 
building  of  Zoar  in  Egypt  (Gen.  23.  2 ;  Num.  13.  22 ;  Josh. 
15-  13.  54)>  built  Hebron,  which  was  hence  called  Kir- 
jath-arba,  i.e.,  the  city  of  Arba.  Anak,  bis  son,  had 
three  distinguished  descendants  in  the  days  of  Moses 
and  Joshua,  B.C.  1490  (Num.  13.  22),  whose  names  were 
Ahiman,  Sheshai,  and  Talmai,  and  who  dwelt  in  He- 
bron ;  in  whose  presence  the  Israelites  reckoned  them- 
selves only  as  grasshoppers  (Num.  13.  28,  33);  this 
greatly  disheartened  Israel  (Deut.  1.  28);  the  Anakim 
were  like  the  Emim,  who  were  great,  and  many,  and 
tall,  but  who  were  dispossessed  by  Moab  (Deut.  2.  10, 
ii,  21);  it  was  a  common  saying,  Who  can  stand  before 
the  sons  of  the  Anakim?  (Deut.  9.  2),  but  Joshua  cut 
them  off  from  the  mountains,  and  from  Hebron,  Debir, 
and  Anab,  so  that  only  a  few  were  left  in  Gaza,  Gath, 
and  Ashdod,  cities  of  the  Philistines  (Josh.  n.  21,  22); 
they  had  great  and  fenced  cities,  the  chief  of  which  was 
Hebron,  which  they  had  called  Kirjatb-arba,  or  the  city 
of  Arba,  who  had  been  a  great  man  among  them  ( Josh. 

14.  12,  15);  and  who  was  also  the  father  of  Anak  (Josh. 

15.  13) ;  this  Anak  had  three  leading  descendants  in  He- 
bron (Josh.  15.  14),  which  city  was  afterwards  assigned 
to  the  Kohathites  for  a  possession  (Josh.  21.  11).  The 
tribe  lost  its  separate  existence  among  the  Philistines. 

Deut.  1.  28  we  have  seen  the  sons  of  the  A.  there 

2.  10  great,  and  many,  and  tall,  as  the  A. 
2.  11  also  were  accounted  giants,  as  the  A. 
2.  21  great,  and  many,  and  tall  as  the  A. 
9.    2  great  and  tall,  the  childien  of  the  A. 

Josb.11.  21  time  came  Joshua,  and  cut  off  the  A. 

11.  22  There  was  none  of  the  A.  left  in  the  land 

14. 12  heardest  in  that  day  how  the  A.  (were)  -. 

14.  15  Arba  was)  a  great  man  among  the  A.         ■-,  \ 
A-NA'-MUff,  D*p^:  rochnen. 

A  Mizraite  people,  of  whose  locale  nothing  certain  is 
known ;  but  it  was  most  probably  in  Northern  Egypt. 

Gen.  10.  13  And  Mizraim  begat  Ludim,  and  A. 

iCh.    1.  11  And  Mizraim  begat  Ludim,  and  A. 

A-NAM-ME'-LECH,  ^B&  the  ling's  rock. 
An  idol  whose  worship  among  the  Sepharvaim  wa& 
transplanted  to  Israel  when  Shalmaneser  peopled  the 
cities  of  Israel  with  the  Sepharvaim. 

2KL  17.31  Sepharvites  burnt.,  children  in  fire  to..  A. 

A'-NAN,  JlJJ  he  beclouds. 

An  exile  who,  with  Nehemiali,  signed  the  covenant,  B.C. 

445- 

Neb.  10.  26  [chief  of  the  people ;]  Ahijah,  Hanan,  A. 

A-NA'-NI,  \ijJJ.  my  cloud  (i.e.,  protector). 
Son  of  Elioenaf,  of  the  family  of  David,  B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.   3.  24  sons  of  Eboenai  (were).  .Dalaiah,  and  A. 

A-NAN-I'AH,  rr^Jj;  Jah  is  a  cloud  (i.e. , protector). 
Grandfather  of  Azariah,  a  returned  exile,  B.C.  460. 
Neh.   3.  23  repaired  Azariah . .  the  son  of  A.  by  bis 

A-NAN-IAS,  'Avavlas  Jah  is  gracious. 
1.  A  disciple  whose  wife  conspired  with  him  in  attempt- 
ing to  deceive  the  apostles  in  regard  to  the  value  ob- 
tained for  their  property,  A.D.  35. 

Acts   5.    1  But  a  certain  man  named  A.,  with  Sapphira 


ANATH 


36 


AND 


Acts    5.    3  But  Peter  said,  A.,  why  hath  Satan  filled 
5.    5  And  A.  hearing  these  words  fell  down,  and 

2.  A  disciple  at  Damascus  to  whom  was  made  known 
the  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  A.D.  35. 

Acts    9.  10  there  was  a  certain  disciple,  .named  A. 
9.  10  to  him  said  the  Lord  in  a  vision,  A. 
9.  12  hath  seen  in  a  vision  a  man  named  A. 
9.  13  Then  A.  answered,  Lord,  I  have  heard  by 
g.  17  And  A.  went  his  way,  and  entered  into 

22.  12  And  one  A.,  a  devout  man  according  to 

3.  A  high  priest  at  Jerusalem,  A.D.  60. 

Acts  23.    2  And  the  high  priest  A.  commanded  them 
24.    1  And  after  five  days  A.  the  high  priest 

A'-NATH,  n;n.  answer. 

Father  of  Shamgar,  third  judge  after  Joshua,  B.C.  1360. 
Judg.  3.  31  after  him  was  Shamgar  the  son  of  A. 
5.    6  In  the  days  of  Shamgar  the  son  of  A. 

A-NA'-THE-MA,  avaQepa. 

Any  thing  "put  up"  iu  the  temple  of  a  god,  set  apart 

or  separated,  consecrated,  devoted. 

1  Co.  16.  22  if  any . .  love  not . .  let  him  be  A. 

A-NA'-THOTH,  nimj/  answers. 

1.  A  Levitical  city  in  Benjamin,  3  miles  N.  of  Jerusalem, 
the  birthplace  of  Jeremiah,  now  called  Anata. 

Josh. 21.  18  A.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Almon  with  her 
1  Ki.   2.  26  Get  thee  to  A.,  unto  thine  own  fields ;  for 
1  Ch.   6.  60  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  .A.  with  her 
Ezra   2.  23  The  men  of  A.,  an  hundred  twenty  and 
Neh.  7.  27  The  men  of  A.,  an  hundred  twenty  and 

ir.  32  [children .  .of  Bei^jamin.  .dwelt  at].  .A. 
Isa.    10.  30  cause  it  to  be  heard  unto  Laish,  O  poor  A. 
Jer.     1.    1  the  priests  that  (were)  in  A.  in  the  land 

11.  21  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  the  men  of  A.,  that 

11.  23  I  will  bring  evil  upon  the  men  of  A. 

29.  27  hast  thou  not  reproved  Jeremiah  of  A. 

32.   7  Buy  thee  my  field  that  (is)  in  A. :  for  the 

32.    8  Buy  my  field,  I  pray  thee,  that  (is)  in  A. 

32.    9  I  bought  the  field,  .that  (was)  in  A. 

2.  The  eighth  of  the  nine  sons  of  Becher,  son  of  Benja- 
min, B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.   7.    8  And  the  sons  of  Becher. .  A.  and  Alemeth 

3.  One  of  the  chiefs  that  signed  the  covenant  with  Nehe- 
miah,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  19  Hariph,  A.,  Nebai 

ANCESTOR  — 

First,  former,  |'it;!Kl  rishon. 

Lev.  26.  45  remember  the  covenant  of  their  ancestors 

ANCHOR  — 

An  anchor,  &yKupa  angkura. 

Acts  27.  29  they  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  stern 
27.  30  they  would  have  cast  anchors  out  of  the 
27.  40  when  they  had  taken  up  the  anchors,  they 

Heb.  6.  19  Which.,  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul 

ANCIENT  — 

l.Aged,  senior,  jpj  zaqen. 

Psa.  119. 100  I  understand  more  than  the  ancients 
Isa.     3.    2  mighty  man.  .prudent,  and  the  ancient 
3.    5  behave  himself,  .against  the  ansfent 
3.  14  will  enter  into  judgment  with  the  ancients 
9.  15  The  ancient  and  honourable,  he  (is)  the 
24.  23  and  before  his  ancients  gloriously 
47.   6  upon  the  ancient  hast  thou  very  heavily 
Jer.   19.    1  ancients  of  the  people,  .ancients  of  the 
Eze.    7.  26  priest,  and  counsel  from  the  ancient 

8.  11  there  stood,  .seventy  men  of  the  ancients 

8.  12  hast  thou  seen  what  the  ancients,  .do  in 

9.  6  Then  they  began  at  the  ancient  men 
27.   9  The  ancients  of  Gebal  and  the  wise 

2.  White,  grey,  old,  dry,  K?VJ  yashish. 

Job  12.  12  With  the  ancient  (is)  wisdom  ;  and  in 
Z.Age,  indefinite  time,  oSiy  olam. 

Prov.22.  28  Remove  not 'the  ancient  landmark,  which 

Isa.  44.    7  since  I  appointed  the  ancient  people  ? 

Jer.     5.  15  mighty  nation,  it  (is)  an  ancient  nation 
18.  15  stumble  in  their  ways,  .the  ancient  paths 

Eze.  36.    2  Aha,  even  the  ancient  high  places  are  our's 

4.  Removed,  p'fly  attiq. 

1  Ch.   4.  22  And  (these  are)  ancient  things 
Dan.    7.    9  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  whose  garment 
7.  13  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 
7.  2?  Until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and 
5. Ancient  times,  D'pnp  qedumim. 

.  Judg.  5.  21  that  ancient  river,  the  river  Kishou 
6. East,  that  which  is  before,  D*ip  qedem. 

Deut33.  15  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient  mountains 
2|Ki.  19.  25  Hast  thou  not  heard,  .of  ancient  times 
Isa.    19.  11  I  (am)  the  son  of.  .ancient  kings? 

23.  7  whose  antiquity  (is)  of  ancient  days? 
37.  26  Hast  thou  not  heard,  .of  ancient  times 
5t.   9  awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the 

7.  Eastern,  what  is  before,  via"P  qadmoni. 

1  Sa.  24.  13  As  saith  the  proverb  of  the  ancients 
ANCIENT  man  — 
Aged,  senior,  elder,  |pt  zaqen. 

Ezra   3.  12  many  of  the  priests,  .ancient  men 
ANCIENT  time  — 
1 . Indefinite  time,  D?iy  olam. 

Psa.  77.    5  I  have  considered . .  the  years  of  ancient  t. 


'2. East,  what  is  before,  nip  qedem. 

Isa.   45.  21  who.  .declared  this  from  ancient  time  ? 
46.  10  Declaring  the  end  from,  .ancient  times 
ANCLE  — 
Ancle,  end,  den  ephes. 

Eze.  47.    3  he  brought  me  through,  .to  the  ancles 

ANCLE-BONE  — 

Ancle-bone,  cr<pvp6u  sjdiuron. 

Acts  3.    7  immediately  his.  .ancle  bones  received 
AND  — 
l.Or,  in  o. 

Song   2.    7  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  fields 
3.    5  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  fields 

2.  Also,  ^N  aph. 

1  Sa.   2.    7  The  Lord  bringeth  low,  and  lifteth  up 

3.  When,  '3  ki. 

1  Sa.    2.  21  And  the  Lord  visited  Hannah,  50  that  she 

4.  Unto,  *iy  ad. 

Gen.  6.  7  I  will  destroy,  .both  man,  and  beast 
Judg  20.  48  the  beast  and  all  that  came  to  hand 
Dan.    7.  13  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 

5. On,  upon,  in  addition  to,  ?y  al. 

Judg  15.    8  he  smote  them  hip  and  thigh  withagreat 

6.  With,  oy  ivi. 

Judg  20.  38  the  men  of  Israel  and  the  liers  in  wait 

AND  — 

1. But,  aWa  alia,  ak\d  ye  alia  ge. 

Luke  17.    8  And  will  not  rather  say  unto  him 

24.  21  and  beside  all  this,  to-day  is  the  third  day 

2. Together  with,  a/xa  hama. 

Acts  27.  40  to  the  sea,  and  loosed  the  rudder  bands 
3. By  (distributively),  ava  ana. 

Luke  10.    1  sent  them  two  and  two  before  bis  face 
4. For,  verily  then,  ydp  gar. 

John  4.  37  And  herein  is  that  saying  true,  One 

Acts    8.  39  and  he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing 

2  Ti.    2.    7  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding 

5.  And,  then,  now,  so,  but,  5e  de. 

Marki2.    5  beating  some,  and  killing  some 
Luke  18.    9  And  he  spake  this  parable  unto  certain 
1  Co.  15.  56  and  the  strength  of  sin  (is)  the  law 
Gal.     3.  17  And  this  I  say,  (that)  the  covenant,  that 

6.  Certainly,  now,  877  de. 

Acts  15.  36  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren 

7.  Or,  than,  1j  e. 

Mark  6.  n  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  [and]  Gomorrha 
1  Co.  11.  27  [and]  drink  (this)  cup  of  the  Lord  unwor. 
1  Pe.    1.  18  with  corruptible  things ..  silver  and  gold 

8. And,  also,  ical  kai. 

Matt.  1.    2  Jacob  begat  Judas  and  his  brethren 

P.  With,  usTa.  meta  (gen.) 

John  3.  25  between.  .John's  disciples  and  the  Jews 

10.  Whosoever,  Zarts  hostis. 

Acts    9.  35  all.  .saw  him,  and  turned  to  the  Lord 

11 .  Therefore,  then,  oi>u  oun. 

Matt  1*8.  29  And  his  fellow  servant  fell  down  at  his 
John  6.  62  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man 

20.  11  and  as  she  wept,  she  stooped  down 
Acts  15.  39  And  the  contention  was  so  sharp  between 

25.  23  And  on  the  morrow,  when  Agrippa  was 

12.  Therefore  indeed,  moreover,  (x\v  olv  men  oun. 
Luke  3.  18  And  many  other  things  in  his  exhortation 
Acts   5.  41  And  they  departed  from  the  presence  of 

8.  25  And  they,  when  they  had  testified  and 
15.    3  And  being  brought  on  their  way  by  the 
17.  30  And  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God 
28.    5  And  he  shook  otf  the  beast  into  the  fire 

Id. And,  also,  ri  te. 

Matt  23    6  [And]  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts 

27.  48  a  spunge,  and  filled  (it)  with  vinegar 

28.  12  and  had  taken  counsel,  they  gave  large 
Markis  36  spunge  full  of  vinegar,  [and]  put  (it)  on 
Luke  2.  16  came  with  haste,  and  found  Mary,  and 

12.  45  and  to  eat  and  drink,  and  to  be  drunken 

21.  11  And  great  earthquakes  shall  be  in  divers 

21.  11  and  fearful  sights  and  great  signs  shall 

22.  66  and  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  came 
24.  20  And  how  the  chief  priests  and  our  rulers 

John   2.  15  all  out  of  the  temple,  and  the  sheep,  and 
4.  42  And  said  unto  the  woman,  Now  we 
6.  18  And  the  sea  arose  by  reason  of  a.  .wind 

Acts  2.    3  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon  each  of  them 

2.  9  And  in  Judea,  and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus 
2.  10  Phrygia,  and  Pamphylia.  .Jews  and  pros. 
2.  33  and  having  received  of  the  Father  the 
2.  37  and  said  unto  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the 
2.  40  and  with  many  other  words  did  he  testify 
2.  43  and  many  wonders  and  signs  were  done 

2.  46  and  they,  continuing . .  and  breaking  bread 

3.  10  And  they  knew  that  it  was  he  which  sat 
4. 13  and  they  took  knowledge  of  them,  that 

4.  33  and  great  grace  was  upon  them  all 

5.  19  and  brought  them  forth,  and  said 

5.  35  And  said  unto  them,  Ye  men  of  Israel 

5.  42  And  daily  in  the  temple,  and  in  every 

6.  7  and  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were 
6.  12  and  they  stirred  up  the  people,  and  the 

6.  13  And  set  up  false  witnesses,  which  said 

7.  26  [And]  the  next  day  lie  shewed  himself  unto  i 


Acts   8.    1  [and]  they  were  all  scattered  abroad 

8.    3  and  haling  meu  and  women  .  .to  prison 
8.    6  And  the  people  with  one  accord  gave 
8.  13  and  wondered,  beholding  the  miracles 
8.  25  and  preached  the  gospel  in  many  villages 

8.  31  And  he  desired  Philip  that  he  would  come 

9.  6  [And  he  trembling  and  astonished  said] 
9.  15  before,  .kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel 
9.  18  and  he  received  sight  forthwith,  and  arose 
9.  24  [And]theywatched  thegatesday  and  night 

10.  22  and  of  good  report  among  all  the  nation 
10.  28  And  he  said  unto  thtm,  Ye  know  how 
10.  33  and  thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art 

10.  48  And  he  commanded  thtm  to  be  baptized 

11.  13  [And]  he  shewed  us  how  he  had  seen  an 
11.  21  was  with  them  :  and  a  great  number 

11.  26  And  the  disciples  were  called  Christiana 

12.  6  and  the  keepers  before  the  door  kept  the 
12.    8  [And]theangel  said  unto  him,  Gird  thyself 

12.  12  And  when  he  had  considered,  he  came  to 

13.  1  and  Manaen,  which  had  been  brought  up 

13.  4  and  from  thence  they  sailed  to  Cyprus 

14.  12  And  they  called  Barnabas,  Jupiter;  and 

14.  21  And  when  they  had  preached  the  gospel 

15.  4  and  they  declared  all  things  that  God  had 
15.    s  and  to  command . .  keep  the  law  of  Moses 

15.  39  one  from  the  other  :  and  so  Barnabas  took 

16.  11  we  came.  .to.  .and  the  next,  .to  Neapolis 
16.  12  [And]from  thence  to  Philippi,  which  is  the 
16.  13  And  on  the  sabbath  we  went  out  of  the 
16.  23  And  when  they  had  laid  many  stripes 

16.  26  [and]  immediately  all . .  doorswere  opened 

16.  34  And  when  he  had  brought  them  into  his 

17.  4  and  of  the  devout . .  and  of  the  chief 
17.    4  aud  of  the  chief  women  not  a  few 

17.    5  an  uproar,  aud  assaulted  the  house  of 
17.  19  and  they  took  him,  and  brought  him  unto 

17.  26  And  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations 

18.  4  and  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks 
18.  11  [And]he continued  ..aycarandsixmonths 

18.  26  And  he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the 

19.  3  And  he  said  unto  them,  Unto  what  then 
19.    6  and  they  spake  with  tongues,  and  prophe. 
19.  11  And  God  wrought  special  miracles  by 
19.  12  and  the  evil  spirits  went  out  of  them 

19.  18  And  many  that  believed  came,  and 

19.  29  and  having  caught  Gaius  and  Aristaichus 

20.  3  And  (there)  abode  three  months.     And 
20.    7  and  continued  his  speech  until  midnight 
20.  11  [and-]  talked  a  long  while,  even  till  break 

20.  35  and  to  remember  the  words  of  the  Loid 

21.  11  [and]  bound  his  own  hands  and  feet,  and 
21.  18  unto  James  ;  and  all  the  elders  were 

21.  20  and  said  unto  him,  Thou  seest,  brother 
21.  28  and  further  brought  Greeks  also  into  the 
21.  30  And  all  the  city  was  moved,  and  the 

21.  37  And  as  Paul  was  to  be  led  into  the  castle 

22.  7  And  I  fell  unto  the  ground,  and  heard  a 
22.    8  And  he  said  unto  me,  I  am  Jesus  of  Naz. 

22.  28  [And]  the  chief  captain  answered,  With  a 

23.  10  take  him.  .and  to  bring  (him)  into  the 
23.  24  Aud  provide,  .beasts,  that  they  may  set 

23.  35  And  he  commanded  him  to  be  kept  in 

24.  s  and  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of. .  Nazarenes 
24.  23  [And]he commanded.  .andtolet(him)have 
24.  27  and  Felix,  willing  to  shew  the  Jews  a 
26.  10  and  when  they  were  put  to  death,  I  gave 
26.  11  and  being  exceedingly  mad  against  them 
26.  16  which  thou  hast  seen,  and  of  those  things 
26.  20  and  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Judea 

26.  30  thus  spoken, the  kingroseup.  .andBernice 

27.  3  And  the  next. .  And  Julius  courteously 
27.  5  And  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of 
27,  8  And,  hardly  passing  it,  came  unto  a  place 
27.  17  and,  fearing  lest  they  should  fall  into  the 
27.  20  and  no  small  tempest  lay  on  (us),  all  hope 
27.  21  and  to  have  gained  this  harm  and  loss 
27.  43  and  commanded  that  they  which  could 

Rum.  1.  27  [And]  likewise  also  the  men,  leaving  the 
2.  19  And  art  confident  that  thou  thyself  art  a 
14.  8  and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord 
16.  26  and  by  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets 

1  Co.    1.  30  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness 
4.  21  in  love,  and  (in)  the  spirit  of  meekness? 

Eph.    3.  19  And  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which 

Heb.  1.  3  and  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of 
4.  12  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow,  and  (is)  a 
6.  2  and  of  laying  on  .  .and  of  resurrection  of 
6.  4  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and 
6.  5  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come 
9.    1  of  divine  service,  and  a  worldly  sanctuary 

11.  3s  to  tell  of  Gideon,  and  (of)  Barak,  and  (of) 

12.  2  and  is  set  down  at  the.  .throne  of  God 
Jas,     3.    7  every  kind  of  beasts,  and  of  birds,  and  of 
•I  ude        6  And  the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first 
Rev.    1.    2  Christ,  and  of  all  things  that  he  saw 

21.  12  [And]  had  a  wall  great  and  high 

AND  afteiwaxd  — 

And  from  thence,  kclk€i6€v  kakeithen. 

Acts  13.  2i  And  afterward  they  desired  a  king;  and 
AND  even  — 
Nevertheless,  '6fxcos  homos, 

1  Co.  14.    7  And  even  things  without  life  givingsouud 
AND  from  thence  — 
And  from  thence,  k<xks?6€v  kakeithen. 

Markio.    1  And  he  arose  from  thence,  and  cometh 

Acts    7.    4  and  from  thence,  when  his  father  was 
21.    1  Rhodes,  and  from  thence  unto  Patara 


AND 


37 


ANGEL 


Acts  27.  4  And  when  we  had  launched  from  thence 
28.  15  And  from  thence,  when  the  brethren 

ANDI  — 

And  7,  Kaydt  hago. 

Matt  11.  28  Come  unto  me.,  and  I  will  give  you  rest 

26.  15  What,  .and  I  will  deliver  him  unto  you? 

Luke  2.  48  father  and  I  have  sought  thee  sorrowing 

11.  9  And  I  say  unto  you,  Ask,  and  it  shall  be 

16.  g  And  I  say  uuto  you,  Make  to  yourselves 
22.  29  And  I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom,  as 

John  1.  31  And  I  knew  him  not :  but  that  he  should 
1.  33  And  I  knew  him  not :  but  he  that  sent  me 
1.  34  And  I  saw,  and  bare  record  that  this  is 

5.  17  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work 

6.  56  He  that,  .dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him 
6.  57  and  I  live  by  the  Father :  so  he  that  eateth 
8.  26  and  I  speak  to  the  world  those  things 

10.  27  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them 
10.  28  And  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life ;  aud 
10.  38  that  the  Father  (is)  in  me,  and  I  in  him 

12.  32  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth 

14.  20  in  my  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I  in  you 

15.  4  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch 
15.    5  He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the 

17.  21  as  thou,  Father,  (art)  in  me,  and  I  in  thee 
17.  26  the  love.,  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them 
20.  15  hast  laid  him,  and  I  will  take  him  away 

Acts  22.  10  And  I  said,  What  shall  I  do,  Lord  ?   And 

22.  19  And  I  said,  Lord,  they  know  that  I 
Rom. 11.  3  and  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek  my 

1  Co.    2.    1  And  I,  brethren,  when  I  came  to  you 

2  Co.   6.  17  touch  not  the  unclean  (thing);  aud.  I  will 

12.  20  and  (that)  I  shall  be  found  uuto  you  such 
Gal.     6.  14  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world 
Phil.  2.  28  and  that  I  may  be  the  less  sorrowful 
Heb.   7.    8  And  as  I  may  so  say,  Levi  also,  who 
Jas.    2. 18  and  I  have  works,  .and  I  will  shew 

AND  if — 

A  nd  if,  kolv  kan. 

Marki6.  18  [and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thiug] 
Luke  13.    9  And  if  it  bear  fruit,  (well) :  and  if  not 
Jas.     5.  15  aud  if  he  have  committed  sins,  they  shall 

AND  if  so  much  as  — 
And  if  k&v  Jean. 

Heb.  12.  20  And  if  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the 
AND  not,  cni  vehn. 

Gen.  14.  23  and  that  I  will  not  take  anything  that 
AND  so  — 
Then,  ovv  own. 

Acts  16.    5  Aud  so  were  the  churches  established  in 
AND  there  — 
A  nd  there,  Ka/ce?  kakeL 

Matt.  5.  23  and  there  rememberest  that  thy  brother 
10.  11  and  there  abide  till  ye  go  thence 
28.  10  go  into  Galilee,  and  there  shall  they  see 
Mark  1.  35  into  a  solitary  place,  and  there  prayed 
John  11.  54  and  there  continued  with  his  disciples 
Acts  14.    7  And  there  they  preached  the  gospel 

22.  10  go  into  Damascus,  and  there  it  shall  be 
25.  20  and  there  be  judged  of  these  matters  27.6. 
AND  when — Then,  t6tc  tote,  Acts  13.  3. 
AND  they  — 
Who,  oo-rts  hostis. 

Acts    5.  16  and  they  were  healed  every  one 

23. 14  And  they  came  to  the  chief  priests  and 

AND  truly  — 
Then,  ovv  oun. 

John 20.  30  And  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in 
AND  [two  AND  two]  — 
Two  and  two,  ava  Svo  ana  duo. 

Luke  10.    1  sent  them  two  and  two  before  his  face 
AND  yet  — 
Although,  Kalirep  hxiper. 

Rev.  17.    8  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and  yet  is 
AN'-DREW,  'ArSpe'as  manly. 
Brother  of  Simon  Peter,  and  one  of  the  apostles. 

Matt.  4.  18  Simon  called  Peter,  and  A.  his  brother 
10.    2  first,  Simon,  who  is  called  Peter,  and  A. 

Mark  1.  16  he  saw  Simon  and  A.  his  brother  casting 
1.  29  entered  into  the  house  of  Simon  and  A. 
3. 18  And  A.  and  Philip,  and  Bartholomew,  and 

13.  3  and  A.  asked  him  privately 

Luke  6.  14  Simon  (whom  he  also  named  Peter)  and  A. 
John  1.  40  One  of  the  two  which  heard,  .was  A. 
1.  44  Philip  was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  A. 
6.    8  One  of  his  disciples,  A. .  .saith  unto  him 
12.  22  telleth  A.:  and  again  A.  and  Philip 
Acts    1.  13  upper  room,  where  abode . .  Peter . .  and  A. 

AN-DRO'-NI-CTJS,  ,Avh'p6viKos,  conqueror. 
A  kinsman  of  Paul  at  Rome,  a.d.  60. 

Rom.  16.    7  Salute  A.  and  Junia,  my  kinsmen 
A'-NEM,  Ciy  double  fountain. 

A  Levitical  city  of  Issachar.  It  is  omitted  in  the  lists 
in  Josh.  19.  21,  and  instead  of  it  we  find  En-gannim. 
The  one  is  probably  a  contraction  of  the  other,  as  Ka  rta  n 
for  Kirjathaim.  It  is  now  called  Jenin,  and  is  at  the 
opening  of  the  spreading  valley  into  the  plain. 

1  Ch.  6.  73  P^amoth  with  her  suburbSj  and  A.  with 
A'-NER,  T3jj  sjirout,  waterfall. 
1.  Brother  of  Mature,  the  Amorite,  Abraham's  ally,  B.C. 
191 2. 


Gen.  14.  13  brother  of  Eshcol,  and  brother  of  A. 

14.  24  the  men  which  weut  with  me,  A.,  Eshcol 
•2.  A  Levitical  city  in  Manasseh,  W.  of  Jordan.  It  is  the 
"Taanach"  of  Josh.  21.  25.  The  modern  village  of 
Anim,  near  Ta'anik,  is  probably  the  site  of  "Aner," 
which  is  substituted  for  "  Taauach"  in  1  Ch.  6.  70,  as 
below. 

1  Ch/  6.  70  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh;  A.  with 

A-NE-THO-THITE,  'rih?J7  'iTlFi^'. 

A  native  of  Anathoth,  a  place  in  Benjamin. 

2  Sa.  23.  27  Abiezer  the  A.,  Mebuunai  the 

1  Ch.  27.  12  The  ninth  (captain . .  was)  Abiezer  the  A. 

ANGEL  — 

1. Mighty,  YSN  abbir. 

Psa.  78.  25  Man  did  eat  angels'  food:  he  sent  them 

2. Messenger,  agent,  ^nS1?. 

Gen.    16.    7  the  angel  of  the  Lord  found  her  by  a 

16.  9,  10,  11  theangelof  theLORDsaiduntoher 
19.  1  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  even 
19.  15  when  the  morning  arose,  then  the  angels 

21.  i7;the  angel  of  God  called  to  Hagar  out  of 

22. 11  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  uuto  him 

22. 15  the  angel  oftheLoRDcalleduntoAbraham 
24.    7  he  shall  send  his  angel  before  thee,  and 
24.  40  The  Lord,  .will  send  his  angel  with  thee 

28. 12  and  behold  the  angels  of  God .  .on  it 

31.  11  theangelof  God  spake  unto  me  iu  a  dream 

32.  1  and  the  angels  of  God  met  him 

48.  16  The  Angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  evil 
Exod.   3.    2  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him 
14.  19  the  angel  of  God,  which  went  before  the 
23.  20  I  send  an  Angel  before  thee,  to  keep  thee 

23.  23  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee,  and  bring 
32.  34  behold,  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee 
^2-    2  I  will  send  au  angel  before  thee ;  and  I 

Num.  20.  16  heard  our  voice,  and  sent  an  angel,  and 

22.  22  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  the  way  for  an 
22.  23,  25,  27  the  ass  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
22.  24  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  path  of  the 
22.  26  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  further,  and 
22.  31  he  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  iu  the 
22.  32  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  him 
22.  34  Balaam  said  unto  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  I 
22.  35  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  Balaam,  Go 

Judg.    2.    1  an  angel  of  the  Lord  came  up  from  Gilgal 
2.    4  when  the  angel  of  theLORDspake  these  words 

5.  23  Curse  ye  Meroz,  said  the  angel  of  the  Lord 

6.  11  there  came  an  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  sat 
6.  12  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him 
6.  20  the  angel  of  God  said  unto  him,  Take  the 
6.  21  the  angel  of  the  Lord  put  forth,  .the  staff 
6.  21  the  angel  of  the  Lord  departed  out  of  his 
6.  22  Gideon  perceived,  .he  (was)  an  angel  of  the 
6.  22  because  I  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord 

13.    3  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  the 
13.    6  his  countenance,  .like,  .an  angel  of  God 
13.   9  the  angel  of  God  came  again  unto  the 
13.  13  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  Manoah 
13.  15  Manoah  said  unto  the  angel  of  the  Lord 

13. 16  theangelof  the  Lord.  .  an  angel  of  the  Lord. 

13. 17  Manoah  said  unto  the  angel  of  the  Lord 

13. 18  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  him 

13.  20  the  angel  of  the  Lord  ascended  in  the  flame 
13.  21  the  angel  of  the  Lord  did  no  more  appear 

13.  21  Manoah  knew  that  he  (was)  an  angel  of  the 

1  Sa.    29.   9  thou  (art)  good,  .as  an  angel  of  God 

2  Sa.    14  17  for  as  an  angel  of  God,  so  (is)  my  Lord  the 

14.  20  according  to  the  wisdom  of  an  angel  of  God 
19.  27  my  lord  the  king  (is)  as  an  angel  of  God 

24.  16  when  the  angel  stretched  out  his  hand 
24.  16  said  to  the  angel  that  destroyed 

24.  16  the  angel  of  the  Lord  was  by  the  threshing 
24.  17  he  saw  the  angel  that  smote  the  people 

1  Ki.   13  18  an  angel  spake  unto  me  by  the  word  of 

19.    s  an  angel  touched  him,  and  said  unto  him 
19.    7  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  again  the 

2  Ki.  jjfi,    3  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  Elijah  the 

1. 15  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  Elijah 
19.  35  the  angel  of  the  Lord  weut  out,  and  smote 

1  Ch.  si.  12  the  angel  of  the  Lord  destroying 

21.  15  sent  an  angel,  .the  angel,  .the  angel 
21. 16  David,  .saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stand 
21.  18  the  angel  of  the  Lord  commanded  Gad 
21.  20  Oman  turned  back,  and  saw  the  angel 
21.  27  the  Lord  commanded  the  angel ;  and  he 
21.  30  afraid  because,  .of  the  augel  of  the  Lord 

2  Ch.  32.  21  the  Lord  sent  an  angel,  which  cut  off  all 
Job       4.  18  his  angels  he  charged  with  folly 

Psa.    34.    7  The  angel  of  tluTXoRD  eucampeth  round 
35.    5  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  chase  (them) 
35.    6  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  persecute  them 
78.  49  He  cast,  .trouble,  by  sending  evil  angels 
91. 11  he  shall  give  his  augels  charge  over  thee 

103.  20  Bless  the  Lord,  ye  his  angels,  that 

104.  4  Who  niaketh  his  angels  spirits ;  his 
148.    2  Praise  ye  him,  all  his  augels :  praise 

Eccl.     5.    6  neither  say  thou  before  the  angel,  that  it 
Isa.     37.  36  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  forth,  and 

63.    9  the  angel  of  his  presence  saved  them 
Dan.     3.  28  who  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  delivered 
6. 22  My  God  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  hath 
Hos.    12.   4  he  had  power  over  the  angel,  and  prevailed 
Zech.    1.    9  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  said  unto  me 
1. 11  they  answered  the  augel  of  the  Lord 
1.  12  the  angel  of  the  Lord  answered  and  said 

1.  13  the  LORD  answered  the  angel  that  talked 
1. 14  the  angel  that  communed  with  me  said 

1. 19  I  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked  with  me 

2.  3  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth 


Zech.     2.    3  and  another  angel  went  out  to  meet  him 

3.  1  Joshua,  .standing  before  the  angel  of  the 

3.  3  Now  Joshua,  .stood  before  the  angel 

3.  5  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by 

3.  6  the  angel  of  the  Lord  protested  unto 

4.  1  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  came  again 
4.  4  I  answered  and  spake  to  the  angel 

4.  5  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  answered 

5.  5  the  augel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth 

5.  10  Then  said  I  to  the  angel  that  talked  with 

6.  4  I  answered  and  said  unto  the  angel 
6.  5  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  me 

12.  8  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them 

3. Messenger,  agent,  &yye\os  anggelos. 

Matt.    1.  20  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  untt>  him 

1.  24  Joseph,  .did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had 

2.  13  the  augel  of  the  Lord  appeareth  to  Joseph 
2.  19  when  Herod  was  dead,  behold,  an  angel 

4.    6  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning 

4.  11  angels  came  and  ministered  unto  him 

13.  39  and  the  reapers  are  the  angels 

13.  41  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels 
13.  49  angels  shall  come  forth,  and  sever  the 
16.  27  Son  of  man  shall  come,  .with  his  angels 
18.  10  in  heaven  their  angels  do  always  behold 
22.  30  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven 
24.  31  he  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  great  sound 

24.  36  not  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  my  Father 

25.  31  all  the  holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 

25.  41  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels 

26.  S3  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels? 
28.   2  the  augel  of  the  Lord  descended  from 

28.    5  the  augel  answered  and  said  unto  the 
Mark    1. 13  and  the  angels  ministered  unto  him 

8.  38  when  he  cometh.  .with  the  holy  angels 

12.  25  are  as  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven 

13.  27  then  shall  he  send  his  angels,  and  shall 
13.  32  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven 

Luke     1.  11  there  appeared  unto  him  an  angel  of  the 
1.  13  the  angel  said  unto  him,  Fear  not 
1.  18  Zacharias  said  unto  the  angel.  Whereby 
1.  19  the  angel  answering  said  unto  him,  I  am 
1.  26  in  the  sixth  month  the  angel  Gabriel 
1.  28  [the  angel]  came  in  unto  her,  and  said 
1.  30  the  angel  said  unto  her,  Fear  not,  Mary 
1.  34  Then  said  Mary  unto  the  angel,  How  shall 
1.  35  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  her 

1.  38  And  the  angel  departed  from  her 

2.  9  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them 
2. 10  the  angel  said  unto  them,  Fear  not :  for 
2.  13  And  suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel  a 
2.  15  as  the  angels  were  gone  away  from  them 
2.  21  Jesus,  which  was  so  named  of  the  angel 
4. 10  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee 

9.  26  in  his  own  glory,  .and  of  the  holy  angels 
12.    8  also  confess  before  the  angels  of  God 

12.   9  shall  be  denied  before  the  angels  of  God 

15.  10  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels 

16.  22  the  beggar,  .was  carried  by  the  angels  into 

22.  43  [there  appeared  an  angel  unto  him  from] 
24.  23  they  had  also  seen  a  vision  of  angels 

John    1.  51  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending 

5.  4  [an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  season] 

12.  29  others  said,  An  angel  spake  to  him 

20.  12  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting,  the  one 
Acts     5.  19  the  angel  of  the  Lord  by  night  opened 

6.  15  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel 

7.  30  there  appeared  to  him.,  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
7*  35  by  the  hand  of  the  angel  which  appeared 
7.  38  This  is  he,  that  was.  .with  the  angel  which 

7.  53  the  law  by  the  disposition  of  angels,  and 

8.  26  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  untp  Philip 
3  He  saw  in  a  vision  evidently,  .an  angel 
7  when  the  angel  which  spake  unto  Cornelius 

:o.  22  was  warned  from  God  by  an  holy  angel 

1.  13  how  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  his  house 

2.  7  the  augel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  (him) 
2.    8  the  angel  said  unto  him,  Gird  thyself,  and 
2.    9  which  was  done  by  the  angel ;  but  thought 
2.  10  forthwith  the  angel  departed  from  him 
2.  11  that  the  Lord  hath  sent  his  angel,  and 
2.  15  Then  said  they,  It  is  his  angel 

2.  23  immediately  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote 

23.  8  is  no  resurrection,  neither  angel  nor  spirit 
23.   9  if  a  spirit  or  an  angel  hath  spoken  to  him 

27.  23  there  stood  by  me  this  night  the  angel  of 
Rom.    8.  38  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither,  .angels,  nor 

1  Co.     4.   9  for  we  are  made  a  spectacle  unto,  .angels 

6.    3  Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels? 

11.  10  power  on  (her)  head  because  of  the  angels 

13.  1  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues,  .of  angels 

2  Co.   11. 14  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel 
GaL       1.    8  though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven 

3.  19  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a 

4.  14  received  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  (even)  as 
Col.      2.  18  humility  and  worshipping  of  angels 

2  Th.     1.    7  shall  be  revealed,  .with  his  mighty  augels 
1  Ti.      3.  16  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  .seen  of  angels 

5.  21  I  charge(thee) before,  .the  elect angels.that 
Heb.      1.   4  made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he 

1.    s  unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any 

1.    6  let  all  the  augels  of  God  worship  him 

1.    7  of  the  angels  he  saith.  .his  angels  a  flaming 

1.  13  to  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any 

2.  2  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast 
2.  5  unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  in  subjec. 
2.  7  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels 
2.  9  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels 

2.  16  took  not  on.  .angels;  but  took  on  the  seed 

12.  22  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels 

13.  2  thereby  some  have  entertained  angels 


ANGELS 


38 


ANGRY 


i  Pe.     i.  12  which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into 
3.  22  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being 

2  Pe.     2.    4  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned 
2.  11  angels,  which  are  greater  in  power  and 

Jude  6  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate 

Eev.      1.    i  he  sent  and  signified  (it)  by  his  angel 

1.  20  The  seven  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  seven 

2.  1  Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesus 
2.    8  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Smyrna 
2.  12  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Pergamos 

2.  18  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Thyatira 

3.  1  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Sardis 

3.    s  I  wiI*  confess  his  name,  .before  his  angels 
3.    7  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Philadelphia 
3.  14  unto  the  angel  of  the  church.  .Laodiceans 
5.    2  I  saw  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  a 
5.  n  I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  round 
7.    1  I  saw  four  angels  standing  on  the  four 
7.    2  another  angel,  .cried,  .to  the  four  angels 

7.  11  all  the  angels  stood  round  about  the 

8.  2  I  saw  the  seven  angels  which  stood 
8.    3  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the 
8.    4  up  before  God  out  of  the  angel's  hand 
8.    5  the  angel  took  the  censer,  and  filled 
8.    6  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven 

8.    7  The  first  [angel]  sounded, and  there  followed 
8.    8  the  second  angel  sounded,  and  as  it  were  a 
8.  10  the  third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fellv.n. 
8.  12  the  fourth  angel  sounded,  and  the  third 
8.  13  I  beheld,  and  heard  an  [angel],  .saying 

8.  13  voices  of  the  trumpet  of  the  three  angels 

9.  1  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I  saw  a  star 
9.  11  theyhadaking.  .the  angel  of  the  bottomless 
9.  13  the  sixth  angel  sounded,  and  I  heard  a  voice 
9.  14  Saying  to  the . .  angel . .  Loose  the  four  angels 
9.  15  the  four  angels  were  loosed,  which  were 

10.    1 1  saw  another  mighty  angel  come  down 
10.    5  the  angel  which  I  saw  stand  upon  the 
10.    7  in  the  days,  .of  the  seventh  angel,  when 
10.    8  which  is  open  in  the  hand  of  the  angel 
10.    9  I  went  unto  the  angel,  and  said  unto 

10.  10  I  took  the  little  book  out  of  the  angel's  hand 

11.  1  [the  angel  stood,]  saying,  Rise  and  measure 
11  15  the  seventh  angel  sounded;  and  there  were 

12.  7  his  angels  fought  against,  .his  angels 

12.  9  and  his  angels  were  cast  out  with  him 
14.    6  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of 
14.    8  there  followed  another  angel,  saying,  B. 
14.    9  the  third  angel  followed  them,  saying  with 
14. 10  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in 
14. 15,  17  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple 
14.  18  another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar 

14.  19  the  angel  thrust  in  his  sickle  into  the 

15.  1  I  saw  another  sign,  .seven  angels  having 
15.    6  the  seven  angels  came  out  of  the  temple 

13.  7  one . .  gave  unto  the  seven  angels  seven 

15.  8  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels 

16.  1  I  heard,  .saying  to  the  seven  angels 

16.  3,  4,  8,  io,  12  [angel]  poured  out  Iris  vial  upon 
16.    5  I  heard  the  angel  of  the  waters  say,  Thou 

16.  17  the  seventh  [angel]  poured  out  his  vial  into 

17.  1  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  which 

17.  7  the  angel  said  unto  me.  Wherefore  didst 

18.  1  after  these  things  I  saw  another  angel  come 

18.  21  a  mighty  angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a 

19.  17  I  saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  sun  ;  and 

20.  1  T  saw  an  angel  come  down  from  heaven 

21.  9  there  came,  .one  of  the  seven  angels  which 
21.  12  [at  the  gates  twelve  angels,  and  names] 

21.  17  the  measure  of  a  man,  that  is,  of  the  angel 

22.  6  the  Lord  God . .  sent  his  angel  to  shew 
22.    8  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  the  angel 

22.  16  I  Jesus  have  sent  mine  angel  to  testify  unto 

A3TGELS  — 

I.God,  a  god,judges  D'-r^f  elohim. 

Psa.    8.    5  made  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels 

^.Repetition,  \K}P  shinan. 

Psa.  68. 17  chariots  of  God.  .thousands  of  angels 

ANGELS,  equal  unto  the  — 

Mgual  or  like  to  the  angels,  io-dyye\os  isanggelos. 
Luke  20.  36  they  are  equal  unto  the  angels ;  and  are 

ANGER.— 

I.Anger,  snorting,  f]N'  wph. 

Gen.   27.  45  Until  thy  brother's  anger  turn  away  from 
30.    2  Jacob's  anger  was  kindled  against  Rachel 
44.  18  let  not  thine  anger  burn  against  thy  servant 
49.    6  in  their  anger  they  slew  a  man,  and  in 
49.    7  Cursed  (be)  their  anger,  for.  .fierce ;  and 

Exod,  4.  14  the  anger  of  the  Lord  whs  kindled  against 
11.    8  went  out  from  Pharaoh  in  a  great  anger 
32.  19  Moses'  anger  waxed  hot,  and  he  cast  the 
32.  22  Let  not  the  anger  of  my  lord  wax  hot 

Uum.  11.    1  the  Lord  heard  (it);  and  his  anger  was 

11.  10  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  greatly 

12.  9  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 
22.  22  God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went 
22.  27  Balaam's  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  smote 

24.  10  Balak's  anger  was  kindled  against  Balaam 

25.  3  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 
25.  4  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  may  be  turned 
32.  10  the  Lord's  anger  was  kindled  the  same  time 
32.  13  the  Lord's  anger  was  kindled  against  Israel 
32.  14  to  augment  yet  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 

Deut.  6.  15  lest  the  anger  of  the  Lord  thy  God  be 

7.    4  so  will  the  anger  of  the  Lord  lie  kindled 
9.  19  I  was  afraid  of  the  anger  and  hot  displeasure 

13.  17  that  the  Lord  may  turn  from . .  his  anger 
29.  20  the  anger  of  the  Lord,  .shall  smoke  against 
29.  23  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  his  anger 


Deut.  29.  24  what,  .the  heat  of  this  great  anger? 

29.  27  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 
29.  28  rooted  them  out  of  their  land  in  anger 

31.  17  my  anger  shall  be  kindled  against  them 

32.  22  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  anger 

Josh.    7.    1  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 
7.  26  So  the  Lord  turned  from,  .his  auger 
23. 16  shall  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be  kindled 
Judg.    2.  14  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel 

2.  20  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel 

3.  8  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel 

6.  39  Let  not  thine  anger  be  hot  against  me 

9.  30  when  Zebul . .  heard . .  his  anger  was  kindled 
10.  7  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel 
14.  19  his  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  went  up 

1  Sa.    11.    6  and  his  anger  was  kindled  greatly 

17.  28  Eliab's  anger  was  kindled  against  David 
20.  30  Raul's  anger  was  kindled  against  Jonathan 

20.  34  Jonathan  arose  from  the  table  in  fierce  anger 

2  Sa.     6.    7  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

12.    5  David's  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against 
24.    1  again  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled 
2  Ki.    13.    3  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

23.  26  his  anger  was  kindled  against  Judah 

24.  20  through  the  anger  of  the  Lord  it  came  to 

1  Ch,  13.  10  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

2  Ch.  25.  10  their  auger  was  greatly  kindled  against 

25.  10  and  they  returned  home  in  great  anger 
25.  15  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

JSTeh.     9.  17  a  God  ready  to  pardon . .  slow  to  anger 
Job       9.    5  which  overturneth  them  in  his  anger 
9.  13  God  will  not  withdraw  his  anger 

18.  4  He  teareth  himself  in  his  anger 

21.  17  distributeth  sorrows  in  his  anger 
35.  15  he  hath  visited  iu  his  anger;  yet  he 

Psa.      6.    1  0  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thine  anger 

7.  6  Arise,  0  Lord,  iu  thine  anger,  lift  up 
27.    9  put  not  thy  servant  away  in  anger 

30.  5  his  anger . .  a  moment ;  in  his  favour  (is)  life 
37.    8  Cease  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath 

56.    7  in .  .anger  cast  down  the  people,  O  God 
69.  24  let  thy  wrathful  anger  take  hold  of  them 
74.    1  doth  thine  anger  smoke  against  the  sheep 

77.  9  hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender  mercies? 

78.  21  and  anger  also  came  up  against  Israel 
78.  38  many  a  time  turned  he  his  anger  away 
78.  49  He  cast  upon  them,  .his  anger,  wrath 
78.  50  He  made  a  way  to  his  anger;  he  spared 
85.    3  thou  hast  turned .  .from .  .thine  anger 
85.    5  Wilt  thou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever? 
90.    7  we  are  consumed  by  thine  anger,  and  by 
90.  11  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger? 

103.    8  The  Lord  (is)  merciful  and.  .slow  to  anger 
145.    8  The  LoRD(is)gracioiis.  .slow  to  anger,  and  of 
Prov.  15.    1  but  grievous  words  stir  up  anger 

r5.  18  (he  that  is)  slow  to  anger  appeaseth  strife 

16.  32  slow  to  anger  (is)  better  than  the  mighty 

9.  11  The  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his  anger 
21. 14  A  gift  in  secret  pacifieth  anger 
27.    4  Wrath  (is)  cruel,  and  anger  (is)  outrageous 
Isa.      5.  25  Therefore  is  the  anger  of  the  Lord  kindled 
5.  25  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away 
7.    4  for  the  fierce  anger  of  Rezin  with  Syria 
9.  12,  17,  21  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned 
10.    4  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away 
10.    5  O  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  mine  anger,  and 
10.  25  and  mine  anger  in  their  destruction 

12.  1  though  thou  wast  angry  with  me 

13.  3  called  my  mighty  ones  for  mine  anger 

13.  9  both  with  wrath  and  fierce  anger 
13. 13  and  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  anger 

14.  6  he  that  ruled  the  nations  in  anger 

30.  27  Behold,  .burning.. his anger,andtheburden 
30.  30  with  the  indignation  of  (his)  anger 
42.  25  poured  upon  him  the  fury  of  his  anger 

48.  9  my  name's  sake  will  I  defer  mine  anger 
63.    3  I  will  tread  them  in  mine  anger 

63.    6  I  will  tread  down  the  people  in  mine  anger 
66.  15  Lord  will,  .render  his  anger  with  fury 
Jer.       2.  35  surely  his  anger  shall  turn  from  me 

4.    8  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  is  not  turned 
4.  26  were  broken  down,  .by  his  fierce  anger 
7.  20  mine  anger,  .shall  be  poured  out  upon  this 
10.  24  O  Lord,  correct  me.  .not  in  thine  anger 
12.  13  because  of  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 

15.  14  for  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  anger 

17.  4  for  ye  have  kindled  a  fire  in  mine  anger 

18.  23  with  them  in  the  time  of  thine  anger 
21.    5  I  myself  will  fight,  .even  in  anger 

23.  20  The  anger  of  the  Lord  shall  not  return 
25-  37  because  of  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 
25.  38  desolate,  .because  of  his  fierce  anger 
30.  24  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  shall  not  return 
32.  31  a  provocation  of  mine  anger  and  of  my 

32.  37  I  have  driven  them  in  mine  anger,  and  in 

33.  5  whom  I  have  slain  in  mine  anger  and  in 
36.    7  great  (is)  the  anger  and  the  fury  that  the 
42.  18  mine  anger  and  my  fury  hath  been  poured 
44.    6  my  fury  and  mine  anger  was  poured  forth 

49.  37  will  bring,  .my  fierce  anger,  saith  the  Lord 

51.  4s  deliver,  .from  the  fierce  anger  of  the  LORD 

52.  3  through  the  anger  of  the  Lord  it  came 
Lam.     1. 12  Lord  hath  afflicted,  .in.  his  fierce  anger 

2.    1  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion.  .in  his  anger 
2.    i  remembered  not  his  footstool  in.  .auger  ! 
2.    3  He  hath  cut  off  in.  .fierce  anger 
2.    6  hath  despised,  .in.  .his  anger  the  king 
2.  21  hast  slain,  .in  the  day  of  thine  anger 

2.  22  so  that  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger 

3.  43  Thou  hast  covered  with  anger 

3.  66  Persecute  and  destroy  them  in  anger 

4.  11  he  hath  poured  out  his  fierce  anger 


Eze.      5.  13  Thus  shall  mine  anger  be  accomplished 
5.  15  I  shall  execute  judgments  in  thee  in  anger 
7.    3  I  will  send  mine  anger  upon  thee 
7.    8  and  accomplish  mine  auger  upon  thee 
13.  13  and.. an  overflowing,  .in  mine  anger 
20.    8  I  will . .  accomplish  my  anger  against  them 
20.  21 1  would,  .accomplish  my  anger  against 
22.  20  so  will  I  gather,  .in  mine  anger 
25.  14  they  shall  do.  .according  to  mine  anger 
35.  11  I  will  even  do  according  to  thine  anger 
43.    8  I  have  consumed  them  In  mine  anger 

Dan.     9.  16  let  thine  anger  and  thy  fury  be  turned 
11.  20  he  shall  be  destroyed,  neither  in  anger 

Hos.     8.    5  mine  anger  is  kindled  against  them 
11.    9  I  will  not  execute  the.  .of  mine  anger 

13.  11  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  auger 

14.  4  mine  anger  is  turned  away  from  him 
Joel      2.  13  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger 
Amos    1.  11  and  his  anger  did  tear  perpetually 
Jon.      3.    9  and  turn  away  from  his  fierce  anger 

4.    2  gracious  God,  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger 
Mic.      5.  15  I  will  execute  vengeance  in  anger 

7.  18  he  retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever 
Nah.     1.    3  The  Lord  (is)  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in 

1.  6  who  can .  .in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger? 
Hab.     3.    8  (was)  thine  anger  against  the  rivers? 

3.  i2  thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  anger 
Zeph.    2.    2  fierce  anger,  .before  the.  .auger  come 

2.  3  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger 

3.  8  to  pour  upon  them,  .all  my  fierce  anger 
Zech.  10.    3  Mine  anger  was  kindled  against  the 

2. Indignation,  Dyi  zaam. 

Psa.  38.    3  no  soundness,  .because  of  thine  anger 

o.Fury,  heat,  non  chemoJi. 

Esth.  1.  12  the  king,  .his  anger  burned  in  him 

4.Anger,  sadness,  Dys  kaas. 

Psa.  85.    4  and  cause  thine  anger  toward  us  to  cease 
Eccl.    7.    9  for  anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools 

5. Passing  over,  transgression,  rrpjj  ebrah. 
Prov.22.    8  and  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall  fail 

6  .Face,  countenance,  D'J3  panim. 

Psa.  21.  9  make  them,  .in  the  time  of  thine  anger 
Jer.  3.  12  I  will  not  cause  mine  anger  to  fall  upon 
Lam.  4.  16  The  anger  of  the  Lord  hath  divided  them 

7. Spirit,  rrti  ruach. 

Judg.  8.  3  their  anger  was  abated  toward  him 

8. Anger,  bpyf)  orge. 

Mark  3.  5  when  he  had  looked,  .with  anger,  being 
Eph.  4.  31  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger 
Col.     3.    8  ye  also  put  off  all  these ;  anger,  wrath 

ANGER,  to  — 

To  make  ivroth,  rpg  katsaph,  5. 

Psa.  106.  32  They  angered,  .at  the  waters  of  strife 

ANGLE  — 

Angle,  hook,  -isn  ehakkah. 

Isa.   19.    8  all  they  that  cast  angle  into  the  brooks 
Hab.  1.  15  They  take  up  all  of  them  with  the  angle 

ANGRY  — 

I.To  be  indignant,  nyi  zaam,  2. 

Prov.25.  23  an  angry  countenance  a  backbiting  tongue 

2. Anger,  sadness,  oys  kaas. 

Prov.21. 19  with  a  contentious  and  an  angry  woman 
Z.Bitter,  in  mar. 

Judg  18.  25  lest  angry  fellows  run  upon  thee 

ANGRY,  to  te  — 

1.3*0  snort,  be  angry,  r\3\<  anaph. 

1  Ki.   8.  46  If  they  siu.  .and  thou  be  angry  with  them 

2  Ch.   6.  36  If  they  sin . .  and  thou  be  angry  with  them 
Ezra  9.  14  wouldst  not  thou  be  angry  with  us  till 
Psa.    2.  12  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry 

79.    5  How  long,  Lord?  wilt  thou  be  angry 
85.    5  Wilt  thou  be  angy  with  us  for  ever? 
Isa.   12.    1  though  thou  wast  angry  with  me 

l.To  show  oneself  angry,  *|JN  anaph,  7. 

Deut.  1.  37  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sakes 
4.  21  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sakes 
9.    8  so  that  the  Lord  was  angry  with  you 
9.  20  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  Aaron 

1  Ki.  11.    9  the  Lord  was  angry  with  Solomon 

2  Ki.  17.  18  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  Israel 

3. Anger,  frjK  a  ph. 

Psa.  76.    7  who  may  stand.. when,  .thou  art  angry? 
4.  To  be  angry,  dj?  benas. 

Dan.    2.  12  For  this  cause  the  king  was  angry 
5. To  bum,  be  heated,  .Tin  charah. 

Gen.  iS.  30,  32  Oh  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry 

45.    s  be  not.  .angry  with  yourselves 
2  Sa.  19.  42  wherefore  then  be  ye  angry  for  this 
Neh.    5.    6  I  was  very  angry  when  I  heard  their  cry 
Jon.    4.    1  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  he  was  very  angry 
4.    4,  9  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the 
4.    9  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  .unto  death 

6. To  be  burning,  burnt,  Tin  charar,  2. 

Song  1.    6  my  mother's  children  were  angry  with  me 

7. To  be  angry,  sad,  Dys  kaas. 

Eccl.    7.    0  Be  not  hasty  in  thy  spirit  to  be  angry 
Eze.  16.  42  be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  more  angry 


ANGRY 


39 


ANOTHER 


8. To  smoke,  J#fl  wham,. 

Psa.  80.   4  wilt  thou  be  angry  against  the  prayer 

9.  To  be  wroth,  FpB  qatsaph. 

Lev.  10.  16  he  was  angry  with  Eleazar  aud  Ithamar 
Eccl.   5.    6  wherefore  should  God  be  angry  at  thy 
10. To  be  angry,  6pyi(ofj.at.  orgizomai. 

Matt.  5.  22  I  say  unto  you,  That  whosoever  is  angry 
Luke  14.  21  the  master  of  the  house  being  angry  said 

15.  28  And  he  was  angry,  and  would  not  go  in 
Eph.    4.  26  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not :  let  not  the 
Rev.  11.  iS  the  nations  were  angry,  and  thy  wrath  is 

11. To  be  full  of  bile,  x°*«w  cholao. 

John  7.  23  are  ye  angry  at  me,  because  I  have  made 

ANGRY,  soon  — 

Prone  to  anger,  bpyiXos  orgilos. 

Titus  1.    7  a  bishop  must  be.  .not  soon  angry 

ANGUISH  — 

1. Straitness,  anguish,  p^RD  mutsaq. 

Isa.     8.  22  behold  trouble .  .dimness  of  anguish 
^.Straitness,  anguish,  pteB  matsoq. 

Psa.ng.143  Trouble  and  anguish  have  taken  hold  on 

3.  Straitness,  anguish,  npsa  metsuqah. 

Job    15.  24  Trouble  and  anguish  shall  make  him 

4.  Straitness,  anguish,  n^lx  tsuqah. 

Prov.  1.  27  when  distress  aud  auguish  cometh  upon 

Isa.     8.  22  behold  trouble  and.  .dimness  of  auguish 

30.   6  into  the  land  of  trouble  and  anguish 

5. Straitness,  distress,  is  tsar. 

Job     7.  n  I  will  speak  in  the  anguish  of  my  spirit 

6.  Straitness,  distress,  rny  tsarah. 

Gen.  42.  21  in  that  we  saw  the  anguish  of  his  soul 
Jer.     4.  31  the  anguish  as  of  her  that  bringeth  forth 
6.  24  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us 

49.  24  anguish  and  sorrows  have  taken  her 

50.  43  anguish  took  hold  of  him.  .pangs 

7.  Straitness,  distress,  ns'p  qotser. 

Exod.  6.    9  they  hearkened  not . .  for  anguish  of  spirit 

8.  Confusion,  y^y  shabatz. 

2  Sa.    1.   g  anguish  is  come  upon  me,  because 
QC.Pressure,  Bhfyis  thlipsis. 

John  16.  21  she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish 

10.  Straitness,  strait  place,  a-revoxoopia. 

Rom.  2.    9  Tribulation  and  anguish,  upon  eveiy  soul 

11.  Holding  together,  anguish,  trvvoxh- 

2  Co.   2.   4  out  of  much  affliction  and  anguish  of 

ANGUISH,  to  be  in  — 
To  be  pained,  h"-  n  ckul. 

Deut.  2.  25  and  be  in  anguish  because  of  thee 

A-NT-AM,  Oinx  lamentation  of  the  people. 
A  son  of  Shemidah,  a  Manassehite,  B.C.  1400. 
1  Ch.    7.  19  And  the  sons  of  Shemidah  were.  .A. 

A'-NTK,  0'iy  fountains. 

A  city  among  the  mountains  at  the  N.W.  of  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  50  And  Anab,  and  Eshtemoh,  and  A. 
ANISE  — 
Anise,  dill,  &wn9ou  anethon. 

Matt  23.  23  ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and 
AN'-NA,  "Awa  grace. 

A  prophetess  of  the  tribe  of  Asher  at  the  time  of  the 
birth  of  Jesus. 

Luke  2.  36  And  there  was  one  A.,  a  prophetess,  the 

AN'-NAS,  "Kvvas  grace  of  Jah. 

A  Jewish  high-priest,  the  son  of  Seth,  and<appointed 
high-priest  in  his  37th  year  (a.D.  7)  by  Quirtnus,  the 
imperial  governor  of  Syria,  after  the  battle  of  Actium, 
but  was  obliged  to  resign  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign 
of  Tiberius  (A.D.  14). 

Luke  3.    2  A.  and  Caiaphas  being  the  high  priest 
John  18.  13  And  led  him  away  to  A.  first 

18.  24  Now  A.  had  sent  him  bound  unto  Caiaphas 
Acts     4.  6  And  A,  the  high  priest,  .were  gathered 

ANOINT,  to  — 

\.  To  fatten,  fan  dashen,  3. 

Psa.  23.    5  thou  anointed  my  head  with  oil 

2.  To  smear,  anoint,  n&>0  mashach. 

Gen.  31.  13  where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar 
Exod28.  41  his  sons  with  him ;  and  shall  anoint  them 
29.    7  pour  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  anoint  him 

29.  36  thou  shalt  anoint  it,  to  sanctify  it 

30.  26  thou  shalt  anoint  the  tabernacle 

30.  30  thou  shalt  anoint  Aaron  and  his  sons 
40.   g  thou  shalt.  .anoint  the  tabernacle 
40.  10  thou  shalt  anoint  the  altar  of  the  burnt 
40.  11  thou  shalt  anoint  the  laver  and  his  foot 
o.  13  thou  shalt  put  upon  Aaron .  .and  anoint 
40. 15  shalt  anoint  them,  as  thou  didst  anoint 
Lev.     7.  36  in  the  day  that  he  anointed  them,  (by) a 
8.  10  Moses,  .anointed  the  tabernacle  and  all 
8.  11  anointed  the  altar  and  all  his  vessels 
8.  12  and  anointed  him,  to  sanctify  him 
16.  32  the  priest,  whom  he  shall  anoint,  and 
Num.  7.    1  had  anointed  it,  and  sanctified  it 

7.    1  had  anointed  them,  and  sanctified  them 
Judg.  9.    8  The  trees  went  forth .  .to  anoint  a  king 
9. 15  If  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  over  you 


1  Sa.    9.  16  thou  shalt  anoint  him  (to  be)  captain 

10.  1  (Is  it)  not  because.  .Lord  hath  anointed 

15.  1  Lord  seut  me  to  anoint  thee  (to  be)  king 
15. 17  the  Lord  anointed  thee  king  over  Israel 

16.  3  thou  shalt  anoint  unto  me . .  whom  I  name 
16. 12  the  Lord  said.  Arise,  anoint  him  :  for 
16.  13  anointed  him  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren 

2  Sa.    2.    4  there  they  anointed  David  king  over  the 

2.    7  thehouseof  Judah  have  anointedme  king 

5.  3  they  anointed  David  king  over  Israel 

5.  17  heard  that  they  had  anointed  David  king 
12.    7  I  anointed  thee  king  over  Israel,  and  I 
19.  10  Absalom,  whom  we  anointed  over  us 

1  Ki.   1.  34  let  Zadok.  .anoint  him  there  king 

1.  39  Zadok  the  priest,  .anointed  Solomon 

1.  45  have  anointed  him  king  in  Gihon 

5.    1  heard  that  they  had  anointed  him  king 
19.  15  anoint  Hazael.  .king  over  Syria 
19.  16  shalt  thou  anoint,  .shalt  thou  anoint 

2  Ki,   9.    3,  6,  12,  I  have  anointed  thee  king  over 

11.  12  made  him  king,  and  anointed  him 
23.  30  anointed  him.  aud  made  him  king 

1  Ch.  11.    3  they  anointed  David  king  over  Israel 

29.  22  anointed,  .unto  the  Lord,  .the  chief 

2  Ch.  22.    7  whom  the  Lord  had  auointed  to  cut  off 

23.  11  Jehoiada  aud  his  sons  auointed  him 
Psa.  45.    7  God,  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of 

89.  20  with  my  holy  oil  have  I  anointed  him 
Isa.   21.    5  arise,  ye  princes,  .anoint  the  shield 

61.    1  the  Lord  hath  anointed  me  to  preach 
Dan.   9.  24  and  to  anoint  the  most  Holy 

3.  To  pour  out,  Tpo  suk. 

Deut  28.  40  but  thou  shalt  not  anoint . .  with  the  oil 
Ruth  3.    3  Wash  thyself  therefore,  and  auoint  thee 
2  Ch.  28.  15  gave  them  to  eat.  .and  anointed  them 
Eze.  16.    9  from  thee,  and  I  anointed  thee  with  oil 
Mic.    6.  15  but  thou  shalt  not  anoint  thee  with  oil 

4.  To  anoint,  a\ei<pco  aleipho. 

Matt.  6.  17  thou,  when  thou  fastest,  anoint  thine  head 
Mark  6.  13  anointed  with  oil  many  that  were  sick 
16.    1  that  they  might  come  aud  anoint  him 
Luke  7.  38  kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed  (them)  with 

7.  46  thou  didst  not  anoiut.  .hath  anointed 
John  1 1.    2  It  was  (that)  Mary  which  anointed  the 

12.  3  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus,  aud  wiped  his 
Jas.     5.  14  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of 

5. To  rub  in,  4yx?'LOi  engchrio. 

Rev.   3.  18  anoiut  thine  eyes  with  eyesalve,  that  thou 

6.  To  rub  on,  iwixp'^  iiri  epichrio  epi. 

John  9.    6  he  auointed  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man  with 
9.  11  A  man  that  is  called  Jesus,  .anointed  mine 

7.  To  anoint  with  aromatics,  fivpifa  murizo. 

Mark  14.    8  she  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body 

8.  To  rub,  xp'iu  <-'hrio. 

Luke  4.  18  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the 
Acts    4.  27  child  Jesus,  whom  thou  hast  anointed 

10.  38  How  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with 
2  Co.    1.  21  he  which . .  hath  anointed  us,  (is)  God 
Heb.  1.   9  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee  with  the 

ANOINT  self,  to  — 

l.To  pour  out,  Tpo  sulc. 

2  Sa.  14.    2  anoint  not  thyself  with  oil,  but  be  as  a 
Dan.  10.    3  neither  did  I  anoint  myself  at  all,  till 

2.  To  cause  to  pour  out,  ^d  suk,  5. 

2  Sa.  12.  20  aud  washed,  and  anointed  (himself) 

3.  To  smear,  anoint,  nwo  mashach. 

Amos  6.    6  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief  ointms. 

ANOINTED  — 

1. Smeared,  anointed,  ri^pp  mimshach. 

Eze.  28.  14  Thou  (art)  the  anointed  cherub  that 

2.  Smeared,  anointed,  nvn  mashiach. 

Lev.    4.    3  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin 

4.    5,  16  And  the  priest  that  is  anointed  shall 

6.  22  that  is  anointed  in  his  stead  shall  offer  it 
1  Sa.    2.  10  and  exalt  the  horn  of  his  anointed 

2.  35  lie  shall  walk  before  mine  anointed  for 
12.    3  here  I  (am),  .and  before  his  anointed 
12.    5  and  his  anointed  (is)  witness  this  day 

16.    6  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  (is)  before  him 
24.    6  unto  my  master,  the  Lord's  anointed 
24.    6  seeing  he  (is)  the  anointed  of  the  Lord 
24.. 10  for  he  (is)  the  LORD'S  anointed 
26.    9  his  hand  against  the  Lord's  anointed 
26.  11  mine  hand  against  the  Lord's  anointed 
26.  16  ye  have  not  kept,  .the  Lord's  anointed 
26.  23  mine  hand  against  the  Lord's  anointed 
2Sa.    1.  14  thine  hand  to  destroy  the  Lord's  anointed 
1.  16  saying,  I  have  slain  the  Lord's  anointed 
1.  21  the  shield  of  Saul.  .not.  .anointed  with  oil 

19.  21  because  he  cursed  the  Lord's  anointed 

22.  51  shewethmercytohisanointed, unto  David 

23.  1  the  anointed  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  and  the 

1  Ch.  16.  22  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my 

2  Ch.   6.  42  turn  not  aw  ay  the  face  of  thine  anointed 
Psa.    2.    2  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anointed 

18.  50  sheweth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to  David 

20.  6  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  anointed 
28.    8  the  saving  strength  of  his  anointed 
84.    9  look  upon  the  face  of  thine  anointed 
89.  38  hast  been  wroth  with  thine  anointed 

89.  51  reproached  the  footsteps  of  thine  anointed 
105.  15  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my 
.   132.  10  turn  not  away,  .thine  anointed 
132.  17  oriained  a  lamp  for  mine  anointed 


Isa.   45.    1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  his  anointed 
Lam.  4.  20  the  anointed  of  the  Lord,  was  taken  in 
Hab.  3.  13  for  salvation  with  thine  anointed 
3.  To  anoint,  smear,  nt^D  mashach. 

Exod2g.    2  and  wafers  unleavened  anointed  with  oil 
Lev.    2.    4  or  unleavened  wafers  anointed  with  oil 

7.  12  and  unleavened  wafers  anointed  with  oil 
Num.  3.   3  the  priests  which  were  anointed,  whom  he 

6.  15  wafersof  unleavened  bread  anointed  with 
2Sa.   3.  39  I(am)thisday  weak, thuughauoiuted king 

ANOINTED  one  — 

Son  of  the  oil,  shining  one,  Irt^B  ]2  ben  hay-yitshar. 
Zech.  4.  14  These  (are)  the  two  auointed  ones,  that 

ANOINTED,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  mix,  anoint,  S^3  balal. 

Psa.  92.  10  I  shall  be  anointed  with  fresh  oil 

2.  To  smear,  anoint,  rr^c  mashach. 

Nuni35.  25  which  was  anointed  with  the  holy  oiT 

3.  TV  be  smeared,  anointed,  nete  mashach,  2. 

Lev.    6.  20  Aaron,  .in  the  day  when  he  is  anointed 
Num.  7.  10  altar  in  the  day  that  it  was  anointed 

7.  84  altar,  in  the  day  when  it  was  anointed 
7.  88  altar,  after  that  it  was  anointed 

1  Ch.  14.    8  heard  that  David  was  anointed  king  over 

4. Smearing,  anointing,  nntf'D  moshchah, 

Exod2g.  29  to  be  anointed  therein,  and  to  be  conaec. 

ANOINTING  — 

1. Smearing,  anointing,  nn^p  mishchah. 

Exod25-   6  for  the  light,  spices  for  anointing  oil 
2g.    7  Then  shalt  thou  take  the  anointing  oil' 

29.  21  thou  shalt  take  of  the.  .anointing  oil 

30.  25  it  shall  be  an  holy  anointing  oil 

30.  31  This  shall  be  an  holy  anointing  oil  uuto- 

31.  11  the  anointing  oil,  and  sweet  incense 
35.  8  spices  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  the 
35.  15  the  anointing  oil,  and  the  sweet 

35.  28  for  the  anointing  oil,  and  for  the 

37.  29  he  made  the  holy  anointing  oil,  and  the 

39.  38  the  golden  altar,  and  the  anointing  oil 

40.  g  shalt  take  the  anointing  oil,  aud  anoint 
Lev.    7.  35  This,  .of  the  anointing  of  Aaron 

7.  35  and  of  the  anointing  of  his  sons 

8.  2  the  garments,  and  the  anointing  oil 

8.  10  Moses  took  the  anointing  oil,  and  anointed 
8.  12  he  poured  of  the  anointing  oil  upon 
8.  30  Moses  took  of  the  anointing  oil,  and  of 
10.    7  the  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  you 
21..  10  upon  whose  head  the  anointing  oil  was 
21.  12  crown  of  the  anointing  oil  of  his  God  (is) 
Num.  4.  16  meat-offering,  and  the  anointing  oil 

2.  Smearing,  nn^c  moshchah, 

Exod4o.  15  their  anointing  shall  surely  be  an  everlg. 
NumiS.    8  given  them  by  reason  of  the  anointing 

3.  Oil,  ]W  shemen. 

Isa,   io.  27  destroyed  because  of  the  anointing: 

4. Anointing,  rubbing  in,  xp''-a'!J-a  chrisma. 

1  Jo.    2.  27  But  the  anointing,  .the  same  anointing 
ANON  — 
1. Straightway,  directly,  zvOeais  eutheos. 

Mark  1.  30  fever,  and  anon  they  tell  him  of  her 
^..Straight,  direct,  ei/dvs  evthus. 

Matt  13.  20  word,  and  [anon]  with  joy  receiveth  it 
ANOTHER  — 
1.-4  man,  human  being,  dik  adam. 

Eccl.  8.    9  one  man  ruleth  over  another  to  his  own 
2.  One,  inN  echad. 

Exod2(5.  ig,  21,  25  two  sockets  under  another  board 
36. 10  one  unto  another,  .one  unto  another 

36.  12  the  loops  held  one.  .to  another 

36.  13  coupled  the  curtains  one  unto  another 
36.  22  equally  distant  one  from  another 

36.  24,  26  two  sockets  under  another  board 

37.  8  another  cherub  on  the.  .end  ou  that  side 
37.  ig  bowls  made  like  almonds  in  another 

Deut  21.  15  wives,  one  beloved,  and  another  hated 
Judg.  9.  37  another  company  come  along  by  the  plain 

16.  7,  11  I  be  weak,  and  be  as  another  man 

1  Sa.  10.    3  another  carryiug  three,  .another  carrying 
13.  18  auother  company,  .and  another  company 
1  Ki.  18.    6  Obadiah  went  another  way  by  himself 
Job   41.  16  One  is  so  near  to  another,  that  no 
Eze.  10.    9  another  wheel  by  another  cherub :  and 

17.  7  There  was  also  another  great  eagle  with 
19.    5  then  she  took  auother  of  her  whelps 

33-  30  speak  one  to  another,  every  one  to  his 
37.  16  take  auother  stick,  and  write  upon  it 
37.  17  join  them  one  to  another  into  one  stick 

40.  26,  49  one  on  this  side,  and  another  on  that 

41.  11  one  door  toward  the  north,  and  another 
Dan.  8.  13  I  heard  one  saint  speaking,  and  another 
Amos  4.  7  I  caused  it.  .not  to  rain  upon  another  city 
Zech.  8.  21  inhabitants  of  one  .  .shall  go  to  another 

3.-4  brother,  nx  ach. 

Gen.  26.  31  they  rose  up.  .and  sware  one  to  another 
37.  19  said  one  to  another,  Behold,  this  dreamer 

42.  21  said  one  to'another,  We  (are)  verily  guilty 
42.  28  saying  one  to another,\Vhat(is)this.  .God 

Exod  10.  23  They  saw  not  one  auother,  neither  rose 
16.  15  said  one  to  another,  It  (is)  manna :  for 
25.  20  their  faces  (shall  look)  one  to  another 
37.   9  seat,  with  their  faces  one  to  another 

Lev.    7.  10  all  the  sons . .  have,  one . .  as  another 


ANOTHER 


40 


ANSWER 


Lev.  25.  14  ye  shall  not  oppress  one  another 

25.  46  ye  shall  not  rule  one  over  another 

26.  37  they  shall  fall  one  upon  another,  as  it 
Num  14.    4  said  one  to  another,  Let  us  make  a 
Deut25.  ri  When  men  strive.. one  with  another 

2  Ki.   7.    6  said  one  to  another,  Lo,  the  king  of  Israel 
1  Ch.  26.  12  chief  men.  .wards  one  against  another 
Neh.   4.  19  upon  the  wall,  one  far  from  another 
Job  41.  17  They  are  joined  one  to  another,  they  stick 
Jer.   13.  14  I  will  dash  them  one  against  another 

25.  26  far  and  near,  one  with  another,  and  all 
Eze.    4.  17  be  astonied  one  with  another,  and 

24.  23  away,  .and  mourn  one  toward  another 
47.  14  ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well  as  another 
Joel    2.    8  Neither  shall  one  thrust  another;  they 

4.  A  sister,  ninN  achoth. 

Exod.26.    3  one  to  another,  .one  to  another 

26.  5  the  loops  may  take  hold  one  of  another 
26. 17  tenons,  .set  in  order  one  against  another 

Eze.     1.    9  Their  wings,  .joined  one  to  another 

3. 13  living  creatures  that  touched  one  another 

5.  Another  "inx  acker. 

Gen.  4.  25  For  God.  .hath  appointed  me  another  seed 
26.  21  they  digged  another  well,  and  strove  for 
26.  22  he  removed .  .and  digged  another  well 

29.  19  than  that  I  should  give  her  to  another  man 

30.  24  The  Lord  shall  add  to  me  another  son 
37.    9  he  dreamed  yet  another  dream,  and  told 

Exod2i.  10  If  he  take  him  another,  .her  food,  her 
Lev.  27.  20  if  he  have  sold  the  field  to  another  man 
Num  14.  24  because  he  had  another  spirit  with  him 
23.  13  Come,  .with  me  unto  another  place,  from 

23.  27  Come.  .Iwillbringtheeuuto'anotherplace 
36.    9  remove  from,  .tribe  to  another  tribe 

Deut2o.  5  in  the  battle,  and  another  man  dedicate 

20.  6  in  the  battle,  and  another  man  eat  of  it 

20.  7  in  the  battle,  and  another  man  take  her 

24.  2  she  may  go  and  be  another  man's 

28.  30  a  wife,  and  another  man  shall  lie  with  her 

28.  32  thy  daughters.,  given  unto  another  people 

29.  28  cast  them  into  another  land,  as.  .this  day 
Judg.  2.  10  there  arose  another  generation  afterthem 
Ruth  2.    8  Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field,  neither 

1  Sa.  10.    6  and  shalt  be  turned  into  another  man 

10.    9  God  gave  him  another  heart:  and  all  those 

17.  30  he  turned  from  him  toward  another,  and 

2  Sa.  18.  20  thou  shalt  bear  tidings  another  day :  but 

18.  26  the  watchman  saw  another  man  running 

1  Ki.    7.    8  (had)  another  court  within  the  porch 

13.  10  So  he  went  another  way,  and  returned 
20.  37  Then  he  found  another  man,  and  said 

2  Ki.    1.  11  sent  unto  him  another  captain  of  fifty 

7.    8  came  again,  and  entered,  .another  tent 

1  Ch.   2  26  Jerahmeel  had  also  another  wife,  whose 

16.  20  and  from  (one)  kingdom  to  anotherpeople 

2  Ch  32.    5  and  built  up.  .another  wall  without 
Esth.  4.  14  arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place ;  but 
Job  31.    8  let  me  sow,  and  let  another  eat;  yea,  let 

31.  10  let  my  wife  grind  unto  another,  and  let 
Psa.  16.    4  multiplied  (that)  hasten  (after)  another 

105.  13  they  went  from  one  nation  to  another 
109.    8  be  few ;  (and)  let  another  take  his  office 
Prov.25.    9  and  discover  not  a  secret  to  another 
Isa.    28.  11  with  stammering  lips  and  another  tongue 
42.   8  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another 
48.  11  I  will  not  give  my  glory  unto  another 
65.  15  and  call  his  servants  by  another  name 
615.  22  They  shall  not  build  and  another  inhabit 
65.  22  they  shall  not  plant  and  another  eat 
Jer.     3.    1  she  go  from  him,  and  become  another 
18.    4  so  he  made  it  again  another  vessel,  as 
22.  26  I  will  cast  thee  out . .  into  another  country 
36.  28  Take  thee  again  another  roll,  and  write 
36.  32  Then  took  Jeremiah  another  roll,  and 
Eze.  12.    3  shalt  remove  from  thy  place  to  another 
Joel    1.    3  and  their  children  another  generation 
Zech.  2.    3  another  angel  went  out  to  meet  him 

6. Another,  **inw  ochori. 

Dan.   2.  39  another  kingdom,  .anotherthirdkingdom 
7.    5  another  beast,  a  second,  like  to  a  bear 
7.    6  I  beheld,  and  lo  another,  like  a  leopard 
7.    8  there  came  up  among  them  another  little 
7.  Another,  pnx  ochoran. 

Dan.   5.  17  give  thy  rewards  to  another;  yet  I  will 
7.  24  another  shall  rise  after  them ;  and  he 
S.A  man,  individual,  b^n  ish. 

1  Sa.  2.  25  If  one  man  sin  against  another,  the  judge 
Isa.  3.  5  shall  be  oppressed,  every  one  by  another 
Eze.  1.  11  wings,  .(were)  joined  one  to  another,  and 
22.  11  another  hath  lewdly  defiled . .  and  another 
Hos.  4.  4  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another 
9.A  mortal  man,  BhaK  anosh. 

Job   13.    9  as  one  man  mocketh  another,  do  ye 
10.  Revolution,  generation,  "in  dor. 

Psa.  145.  4  One  generation  shall  praise,  .to  another 
W.A  stranger,  in  zur. 

Job    19.  27  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another 
Jer.   18.  14  waters  that  come  from  another  place  be 
12. New  moon,  sabbath,  Bhh  chodesh. 

Isa.   66.  23  new  moon  to  another,  and.  .to  another 
18  Instrument,  vessel,  'V?  keli. 

Esth.  1.    7  (the  vessels,  .diverse  one  from  another) 
1  4.  Wing,  *]J2  kanaph. 

1  Ki.    6.  27  their  wings  touched  one  another  in  the 
15. Runner,  y\  rats. 

Jer.    51.  31  One  post  shall  run  to  meet  another,  and 


16. Announcer,  van  maggid. 

Jer.   51.  31  one  messenger  to  meet  another 
17.  Fellow  countryman,  n'p^  amith. 

Lev.  19,  11  Ye  shall  not.  .neither  lie  one  to  another 
25.  17  Ye  shall  not  therefore  oppress  one  another 
IS. Friend,  ID.rea. 

Gen.  11.    3  they  said  one  to  another,  Go  to,  let  us 
11.    7  may  not  understand  one  another's  speech 
15.  10  and  laid  each  piece  one  against  another 
31.  49  when  we  are  absent  one  from  another 
43.  33  and  the  men  marvelled  one  at  another 

ExodiS.  16  I  judge  between  one  and  another,  and  I 
21.  18  one  smite  another  with  a  stone,  or  with 
21.  35  if  one  man's  ox  hurt  another's,  that  he  die 

Judg.  6.  29  said  one  to  another,  Who  hath  done  this 
10.  18  princes  of  Gilead  said  one  to  another 

Ruth  3.  14  she  roSe  up  before  one  could  know  another 

1  Sa.  10.  11  then  the  people  said  one  to  another,  What 

20.  41  one  another,  and  wept  one  with  another 

2  Ki.    3.  23  the  kings,  .have  smitten  one  another 

7.    3  said  one  to  another,  Why  sit  we  here 

7.  9  said  one  to  another,  We  do  not  well :  this 
2  Ch.  20.23  an*l-  .every  one  helped  to  destroy  another 
Esth.  9.  19,22  day.  .sending  portions  one  to  another 
Isa.  13.  8  they  shall  be  amazed  one  at  another 
Jer.  46.  16  yea,  one  fell  upon  another:  and  they  said 
Mai.    3.  16  feared  the  Lord  spake,  .one  to  another 

19.^4  female  friend,  mjn  reulh. 

Esth.  1.  iy  king  give  her  royal  estate  unto  another 
Zech  11.    9  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  another 
20. Second,  \ia>  sheni. 

Num.  8.    8  another  young  bullock  shalt  thou  take  for 
Neh.   3.  19  another  piece  over  against  the  going  up 
3.  21  After  him  repaired  Meremoth..  another 
3.  24  After  him  repaired  Binnui . .  another  piece 
3.  27  After  them  the  Tekoites  repaired  another 
3.  30  After  him  repaired  Hauauiah.  .another 
Eccl.  4.  10  alone  when  he  f alleth ;  f or . .  not  another 

21.  Other,  not  the  same,  &AAos  alios. 

Matt.  2.  12  into  their  own  country  another  way 

8.  9  to  another,  Come,  and  he  cometh;  and  to 
10.  23  you  in  this  city,  flee  ye  into  [another] 

13.  24, 31  Another  parable  put  he  forth  unto 

13.  33  Another  parable  spake  he  unto  them 

19.    9  shall  marry  another.committeth  adultery 

21.  33  Hear  another  parable:  There  wasacertaiu 
26.  71  he  was  gone  out.  .another  (maid)  saw 

Mark  10. 1 1  shall  put  away  his  wife  and  marry  another 
10.  12  be  married  to  another,  she  committeth 
12.    4  again  he  sent  unto  them  another  servant 
12.    5  again  he  sent  another;  and  him  they 

14.  19  [it  I?  and  another  (said,  Is)  it  I?] 

14.  58  within  three  days  I  will  build  another 
Luke  7.    8  to  another,  Come,  and  he  cometh ;  and  to 

7.  19  Art  thou  he.  .or  look  we  for  [another]? 

7.  20  Art  thou  he.  .or  look  we  for  another? 
John  5.    7  while  I  am  coming,  another  steppeth 

5.  32  There  is  another  that  beareth  witness  of 

5.  43  if  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name 
14.  16  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 
18.  15  Peter  followed  Jesus,  .(so  did)  [another] 
21.  18  another  shall  gird  thee,  and  carry 

1  Co.    3.  10  I  have  laid  the  foundation,  and  another 

12.    8  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the 
12.   9  to  another  the  gifts  of  healing  by  the 
12.  10  To  another,  .miracles  ;  to  another  proph. 
12.  10  to  another,  .to  another  the  interpretation 

14.  30  If.  .be  revealed  to  another  thatsittethby 

15.  39  another  flesh,  .another  of.  .another  of 
15.  41  another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  another 

2  Co.  11.    4  he  that  cometh  preacheth  another  Jesus 
Gal.     1.    7  Which  is  not  another;  but  there  be  some 
Heb.   4.    8  would  he  not.  .have  spoken  of  another 
Rev.    6.    4  there  went  out  another  horse  (that  was) 

7.  2  I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the 

8.  3  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the 

10.  1  I  saw  [another]  mighty  angel  come  down 

12.  3  there  appeared  another  wonder  in  heaven 

13.  n  I  beheld  another  beast  coming  up  out 

14.  6  I  saw  [another]  angel  fly  in  the  midst 
14.    8  there  followed  another  angel,  saying 
14.  15  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple 
14.  17  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple 

14.  18  another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar 

15.  1  I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  great 

16.  7  I  heard  [another]  out  of  the  altar  say 
18.    1  after  these  things  I  saw  another  angel 

18.  4  I  heard  another  voice  from  heaven,  saying 
20.  12  another  book  was  opened,  which  is 

22.  Another,  the  other,  erepos  heteros. 

Matt.  8.  21  another  of  his  disciples  said  unto  him 

11.  3  Art  thou  he.  .or  do  we  look  for  another  ? 
Marki6.  12  [After  that  he  appeared  in  another  form] 
Luke  6.    6  it  came  to  pass  also  on  another  sabbath 

9.  56  And  they  went  to  another  village 

9.  59  And  he  said  unto  another,  Follow  me 
9.  61  another  also  said.  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee 
14.  19  another  said,  I  have  bought  five  yoke 
14.  20  another  said,  I  have  married  a  wife,  and 
14.  31  going  to  make  war  against  another  king 
16.  7  Then  said  he  to  another,  And  how  much 
16.  18  putteth  away  his  wife,  .marrieth  another 

19.  20  And  another  came,  saying,Lord,  behold 

20.  11  again  he  sent  another  servant:  and  they 
22.  58  after  a  little  while  another  saw  him 

John  19.  37  again  another  scripture  saith,  They  shall 
Acts    1.  20  and  his  bishopric  let  another  take 

7.  18  Till  another  king  arose,  which  knew  not 


Acts  12.  17  he  departed,  and  went  into  another  13.35. 
17.    7  saying  that  there  is  another  king 

Rom.  2.  1  for  wherein  thou  judgest  another,  thou 
2.  21  Thou  therefore  which  teachest  another 
7.  3  to  another  man.  .be  married  to  another 
7.  4  that  ye  should  be  married,  (even)  to  him 
7.  23  I  see  another  law  in  my  members,  wan-ing 
13.    8  Owe  no  man.  .but  to  love  one  another 

1  Co.   3.    4  another,  I  (am)  of  Apollos ;  are  ye  not 

4.    6  be  puffed  up  for  one  against  another 
6     1  Dare  any.  .a  matter  against  another 
10.  24  seek  his  own,  but  every  man  another's 
12.    9  To  another  faith  by  the  same  Spirit 
12.  10  to  another  (divers)  kinds  of  tongues 

2  Co. 11.    4  ye  receive  another  spirit . .  or  another 
Gal.    1.    6  the  grace  of  Christ  unto  another  gospel 

6.  4  rejoicing  in  himself .  .not  in  ano.  5.  6 
Heb.   7.  11  further  need  (was  there)  that  another 

7.  13  things  are  spoken  pertaineth  to  another 
7.  15  after  the  similitude  of .  .ariseth  another 

Jas.    2.  25  and  had  sent  (them)  out  another  way  ? 
4.  12  who  art  thou  that  judgest  [another]? 
[See  also  As  well  as,  compassion,  feign,  justle, 
look,  one,  other,  performing,  see.] 
ANOTHER  man  — 
1. Another,  "inx  acher. 

Exod  22.    5  shall  feed  in  another  man's  field  ;  of  the 

^en-    5-    5  f°r  other  men  have  our  lands  and  viney. 
2.  A  stranger,  "fit  zur. 

Prov.27.   2  Let  another  man  praise  thee,  and  not 
ANOTHER  man's  — 
Belonging  to  another,  aWSrptos  allotrios. 

Luke  16.  12  faithful  in  that  which  is  another  man's 

Rom  14.    4  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  another  man's 
15.  20  lest  I  should  build  upon  another  man's 

2  Co.  10.  15  Not  boasting,  .of  other  men's  labours 
10.  16  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  li.1Ti.s-2?. 
Another,  other,  &\Xos  {rts)  1  Co.  10.  29;  Lu.  22.  2y. 
ANOTHER  nation,  one  of  — 
Of  another  tribe,  a\\6<pvAos  allophulos. 

Acts  10.  28  or  come  unto  one  of  another  nation:  but 
ANOTHER  place,  to  come  from  — 
Strange,  "til  zur. 

Jer.    18. 14  waters  that  come  from  another  place  lie 
ANSWER  — 

1.  Saying,  1CN  emer. 

Judg.  5.  29  yea,  she  returned  answer  to  herself 

2.  Word,  -n?  dabar. 

2  Sa.  24.  13  see  what  answer  I  shall  return  to  him 
2  Ch.  10.    6  What  counsel  give  ye.  .to  return  answer 
10.    9  What  advice  give  ye  that  we  may . .  answer 
Prov  24.  26  kiss,  .lips  that  giveth  a  right  answer 
Jer.   44.  20  which  had  given  him.  .answer,  saying 
[See  also  1  Sa.  17.  30;  1  Ki.  12.  6,  9;  Neh.  2.  20; 
Prov.  27.  11.] 

3. Answer,  rnjjp  maaneh. 

Job  32.    3  because  they  had  found  no  answer,  and 

32.    5  no  answer  in  the  mouth  of.  .three  men 

Prov.  15.    1  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath:  but 

15.  23  A  man  hath  joy  by  the  answer  of  his 

16.  1  the  answer  of  the  tongue,  (is)  from  the 
29.  19  though  he  understand  he  will  not  answer 

Mic.    3.    7  ashamed . .  for  (there  is)  no  answer  of  God 
A.  Matter,  word,  Dans  pithoam. 

Ezra    4.  17  (Then)'sent  the  king  an  answer  unto  Re. 
5.11  thus  they  returned  us  answer,  saying,  We 
5. Answer,  res2)onse,  nyt&n  teshnbah. 

Job    21.  34  seeing  in  your  answers  there  remaineth 
34.  36  Job  may  be  tried,  .because  of.  .answers 
6.  Word,  n  k)  millah. 

Job   35.   4  I  will  answer  thee,  and  thy  companions 
7. An  answer,  AttSkpio-is  apohrisis. 

Luke  2.  47  And  all . .  were  astonished  at  his . .  answers 

20.  26  they  marvelled  at  his  answer,  and  held 
John   1.  22  Who  art-thou?  that  we  may  give  an  answer 
19.    9  But  Jesus  gave  him  no  answer 
8.  An  apology,  awoKoyta  apologia. 

1  Co.    9.    3  Mine  answer  to  them  that  do  examine 

2  Ti.    4,  16  At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with  me 
1  Pe.   3.  15  ready  always  to  (give)  an  answer  to  every 

9. An  asking  aboxti,  eVepwT-n/xct  eperoteMa. 

1  Pe.    3.  21  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward 

ANSWER,  to  — 

1.7*0  say,  ton  amar. 

Gen.  43.  28  they  answered,  Thy  servant  onr  father 
Josh.  2.  14  the  men  answered  her,  Our  life  for  your's 

4.  7  ye  shall  answer  them,  That  the  waters 
15.  19  Who  answered,  Give  me  a  blessing;  for 
17.  15  Joshua  answered  them,  If  thou  (be)  a 

Judg.  8.  18  they  answered,  As  thou.  .so.  .they  ;  each 
8.  25  they  answered,  We  will  willingly  give 
11.  13  the  king,  .answered  unto  the  messengers 
15.    6  Who  hath  done  this  ?  And  they  answered 
15.  10  they  answered,  To  bind  Samson  are  we 
Ruth  2.    4  they  answered  him.  The  Lord  bless  thee 
3.    9  she  answered,  I  (am)  Ruth  thiue  handm. 
1  Sa.    2. 16  he  would  answer  him.  .but  thou  shalt 
3.    4  Lord  called  Samuel :  and  he  answered 
3.    6  he  answered,  I  called  not,  my  son  ;  lie 
3.  10  Samuel  answered,  Speak ;  for  thy  servant 
3.  16  Samuel,  my  son.    And  he  answered,  Here 

5.  8  they  answered,  Let  the  ark  of  the  God 


ANSWER 


41 


ANSWER 


iSa.    6. 


2Sa. 


21. 
[Ki.     g. 


;Ki. 


4  They  answered,  Five  golden  emeiods 
22  Lord  answered,  Behold,  he  hath  hid 

2  Mahash  the  Ammonite  answered  them 

5  And  they  answered,  (He  is)  witness 
44  Saul  answered,  God  do  so  and  more  also 

27  the  people  answered  him  alter  this 
58  David  answered,  (I  am)  the  son  of  thy 
17  Michal  answered  Saul,  He  said  unto  me 

12  And  he  answered,  Here  I  (am),  my  lord 
8  he  answered  him,  Pursue  ;  for  thou  shalt 

4  he  answered,  That  the  people  are  fled 

7  And  I  answered,  Here  (am)  I 

8  And  I  answered  him,  I  (am)  an  Amalekite 

13  he  answered,  I  (am)  the  son  of  a  stranger 
20  (Art)  thou  Asahel  ?    And  he  answered,  I 

6  And  he  answered,  Behold  thy  servant ! 

12  she  answered  him  Nay,  my  brother,  do 

5  she  answered,  I  (am)  indeed  a  widow 
32  Absalom  answered  Joab,  Behold,  I  sent 

3  the  people  answered,  Thou  shalt  not  go 
29  Ahimaaz  answered,  When  Joab  sent  the 
32  Cushi  answered,  The  enemies  of  my  lord 
26  he  answered,  My  lord,  0  king,  my  servant 
38  the  king  answered,  Chiumani  shall  go 

17  And  he  answered.  .And  he  answered 

1  the  Lord  answered,  (It  is)  for  Saul,  and 
5  they  answered  the  king,  The  man  that 

9  they  shall  answer,  Because  they  forsook 
22  he  answered,  Nothing :  howbeit  let  me 

5  he  answered  him,  I  (am) :  go,  tell  thy 

18  he  answered,  I  have  not  troubled  Israel 

14  Who  shall  orderthe  battle?    And  heans. 

6  he  answered,  I  will  not  give  thee  my 
20  he  answered,  I  have  found,  .because 

15  he  answered  him,  Go,  and. prosper:  for 
8  they  answered  him.  .an  hairy  man,  and 
5  he  answered,  Yea,  I  know  (it);  hold  ye 

8  he  answered,  The  way  through  the 

13  she  answered,  I  dwell  among  mine  own 

14  Gehazi  answered,  Verily  she  hath  no 
26  well  with  the  child,  .she  answered, (It  is) 

2  Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee . .  And  he  answered 

3  go  with  thy  servants.    And  he  answered 

16  he  answered  .Fear  not :  for  they  that  (be) 
22  he  answered,' Thou  shalt  not  smite 

28  She  answered,  This  woman  said  unto  me 

12  he  answered,  Because  I  know  the  evil 

13  Elisha  answered,  The  Lord  hath  shewed 

14  he  answered,  He  told  me . .  thou  shouldest 
ig  Jehu  answered,  What  hast  thou  to  do 

22  (Is  it)  peace,  Jehu?    And  he  answered 
13  they  answered,  We  (are)  the  brethren  of 

15  Jehonadab  answered,  It  is.    If  it  be,  give 

10  Hezekiah  answered,  It  is  a  light  thing 

15  Hezekiah  answered,  All.  .that  (are)  in 
3  Joab  answered,  The  Lord  make  his 

11  Huram  the  king  of  Tyre  answered  in 

10  Thus  shalt  thou  answer  the  people  that 

3  he  answered  him,  I.  .as  thou,  .and  my 

9  the  man  of  God  answered,  The  Lord  is 
io  Azariah  the  chief  priest,  .answered  him 

23  she  answered  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 

16  Memucan  answered  before  the  king  and 

4  Esther  answered,  If.  .good  unto  the  king 

7  Haman  answered  the  king,  For  the  man 

5  Ahasuerus  answered  and  said  unto  Esther 

11  he  answered,  Until  the  cities  be  wasted 
4  Hezekiah  answered,  All  that  (is)  in  mine 

ig  then  shalt  thou  answer  them,  Like  as 
9  they  shall  answer,  Because  they  have 

18  Baruch  answered  them,  He  pronounced 
7  thou  shalt  answer,  For  the  tidings 

20  I  answered  them,  The  word  of  the  Lord 
3  And  I  answered,  0  Lord  God,  thou 

19  he  answered  me,  These  (are)  the  horns 
13  he  answered  me  and  said,  Knowest  thou 

2  I  answered,  I  see  a  flying  roll ;  the  length 

6  he  shall  answer,  (Those)  with  which  I 

2.  To  speak,  13^  dabar,  3. 

2  Ch.  10.  14  answered  them  after  the  advice  of  the 

3.  To  make  known,  VTT  yada,  5. 

Job  38.    3  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  answer  thou 

4.  To  answer,  xiy  anah. 

Gen.  iS.  27  Abraham  answered  and  said,  Behold  now 
23.  5  the  children  of  Heth  answered  Abraham 
23.  10  Ephron  the  Hittite  answered  Abraham 

23.  14  Ephron  answered  Abraham,  saying  unto 

24.  50  Laban  and  Bethuel  answered  and  said 
27.  37  Isaac  answered  and  said  unto  Esau 

27.  39  Isaac  his  father  answered  and  said  unto 

30.  33  So  shall  my  righteousness  answer  for  me 

31.  14  Rachel  and  Leah  answered  and  said  unto 
31.  31  Jacob  answered  and  said  unto  Laban 

31.  36  Jacob  answered  and  said  unto  Laban 
31.  43  And  Laban  answered  and  said  to  Jacob 

34.  13  the  sons  of  Jacob  answered  Shechem  and 

35.  3  who  answered  me  in  the  day  of  my 

40.  18  Joseph  answered  and  said,  This  (is)  the 

41.  16  Joseph  answered  Pharaoh,  saying,  (It  is) 

42.  22  Reuben  answered  them,  saying,  Spake  I 
45.    3  his  brethren  could  not  answer  him ;  for 

Exod,  4.    1  Moses  answered  and  said,  But,  behold 
15.  21  Miriam  answered  them,  Sing  ye  to  the 
19.    8  all  the  people  answered  together,  and 
19.  19  Moses  spake,  and  God  answered  him  by 
24.    3  all  the  people  answered  with  one  voice 

Mum  11.  28  Joshua .  .answered  and  said,  My  lord 

22.  iS  Balaam  answered  and  said  unto  the 

23.  12  he  answered  and  said,  Must  I  not  take 
23.  26  Balaam  answered  and  said  unto  Balak 

6 


1  Ch.  2i, 
2CI1.  2. 


Esth. 

Isa. 
Jer. 

Eze. 

Zech.~ 


3«- 
34- 

z. 
5- 
6. 

7- 
6. 

39- 

5- 

22. 

36 

21. 
24- 

37- 

.    1. 

4- 
5- 
13- 


Mum 32.  31  the  children  of  Gad.  .answered,  saying 
Deut.  1.  14  ye  answered  me  and  said.  The  thing 

1.  41  ye  answered  and  said  unto  me,  We  have 

21.  7  they  shall  answer  and  say,  Our  hands 
25.    9  shall  answer  and  say,  So  shall  it  be  done 
27. 15  all  the  people  shall  answer  and  say  ^ 

Josh.  1.  16  they  answered  Joshua,  saying,  All  that 
7.  20  Achan  answered  Joshua,  and  said,  Indeed 
g.  24  they  answered  Joshua,  and  said,  Because 

22.  21  children  of  Reuben. .  answered, :and  said 

24.  16  the  people  answered  and  said,  God  forbid 
Judg.  5.  29  Her  wise  ladies  answered  her,  yea,  she 

7.  14  his  fellow  answered  and  said,  This  (is) 

8.  8  the  men  of  Penuel  answered  him  as  the 

18.  14  Then  answered  the  five  men  that  went  to 

19.  28  Up,  and.  .be  going.    But  none  answered 

20.  4  the  Levite.  .answered  and  said,  I  came 
Ruth  2.   6  the  servant,  .answered  and  said,  It  (is) 

2.  11  Boaz  answered  and  said  unto  her,  It  hath 

1  Sa.    1.  15  Hannah  answered  and  said,  Mo,  my  lord 

1.  17  Eli  answered  and  said,  Go  in  peace  :  and 
4.  17  the  messenger  answered  and  said,  Israel 
4.  20  she  answered  not,  neither  did  she  regard 

9.  8  the  servant  answered  Saul  again,  and  said 
9.  12  they  answered  them,  and  said,  He  is 

9.  ig  Samuel  answered  Saul,  and  said,  I  (am) 
g.  21  Saul  answered  and  said,  (Am)  not  I  a  Benj. 
10. 12  one  of  the  same  place  answered  and  said 
14.  12  the  men  of  the  garrison  answered 
14.  28  Then  answered  one  of  the  people,  and 
14.  37  But  he  answered  him  not  that  day 
14.  3g  not,  a  man  among  all.  .people,  .answered 
16.  18  Then  answered  one  of  the  servants,  and 

18.  7  women  answered . .  as  they  played . .  Saul 
20.  10  or  what  (if)  thy  father  answer  thee 

20.  28  Jonathan  answered  Saul,  David  earnestly 

20.  32  Jonathan  answered  Saul  his  father,  and 

21.  4  the  priest  answered  David,  and  said 

21.  s  David  answered  the  priest,  aud  said  unto 

22.  g  Then  answered  Doeg  the  Edomite  which 

22.  14  Then  Ahimelech  answered  the  king,  and 

23.  4  the  Lord  answered  him  and  said,  Arise 

25.  10  Mabal  answered  David's  servants,  and 

26.  6  Then  answered  David  aud  said  to  Ahim. 
26.  14  Answerest  thou  not. . Abner  answered 
26.  22  David  answered  and  said,  Behold  the 
28.    6  Lord  answered  him  not,  neither  by 

28.  15  Saul  answered,  I  am  sore  distressed ;  for 

29.  9  Acliish  answered  and  said  to  David,  I 
30^  22  Then  answered  all  the  wicked  men  and 

2  Sa.    4.    9  David  answered  Rechab  and  Baanah  his 

13.  32  Jonadab,  the  son  of  Shimeah.  .answered 

14.  18  the  king  answered  and  said  unto  the 

14.  19  the  woman  answered  and  said,  (As)  thy 

15.  21  Ittai  answered  the  king,  and  said,  (As)  the 

19.  21  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah  answered  and 
19.  42  the  men  of  Judah  answered  the  men  of  I. 

19.  43  the  men  of  Israel  answered  the  men  of 

20.  20  Joab  answered  and  said,  Far  be  it,  far  be 
22.  42  unto  the  Lord,  but  he  answered  them 

1  Ki.    1.  28  king  David  answered  and  said,  Call  me 

1.  36  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  answered 

1.  43  Jonathan  answered  and  said  to  Adonijah 

2.  22  Solomon  answered  and  said  unto  his 

2.  30  Thus  said  Joab,  and  thus  he  answered 

3.  27  the  king  answered  and  said,  Give  her  the 
12.    7  If  thou,  .wilt  serve  them,  and  answer 

12.  13  the  king  answered  the  people  roughly 

13.  6  king  answered  and  said  unto  the  man  of 
18.  21  And  the  people  answered  him  not  a  word 
18.  24  the  God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let  him 
18.  26  but.  .no  voice,  nor  any  that  answered 
18.  29  that,  .neither  voice,  nor  any  to  answer 

20.  4,  11  the  king  of  Israel  answered  and  said 

2  Ki.    1.  10  Elijah  answered  and  said  to  the  captain 

1.  11  he  answered  and  said  unto  him,  O  man 
1.  12  Elijah  answered  and  said  unto  them,  If 

3.  11  one  of  the.  .servants  answered  and  said 

4.  29  if  any  man  salute  thee,  answer  him  not 
7.  2  Then  a  lord,  .answered  the  man  of  God 
7.  13  one  of  his  servants  answered  and  said 

7.  19  that  lord  answered  the  man  of  God,  and 
18.  36  people  held  their  peace,  and  answered 
18.  36  king's  commandment  was,  saying,  Answer 

1  Ch.  12.  17  David .  .answered  and  said  unto  them,  If 

21.  26  he  answered  him  from  heaven  by  fire 
21.  28  the  Lord  had  answered  him  in  the 

2  Ch.  10.  13  the  king  answered  them  roughly;  and 

2g.  31  Hezekiah  answered  and  said,  Mow  ye 
34.  15  Hilkiah  answered  and  said  to  Shaphan 
Ezra  10.    2  Shechaniah.  .answered  and  said  unto 

0.  12  all  the  congregation  answered  and  said 

8.  6  all  the  people  answered,  Amen,  Amen 

5.  7  Then  answered  Esther,  and  said,  My  pet. 

7.  3  Esther  the  queen  answered  and  said,  If 

1.  7,  9  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said 

2.  2,  4  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said 

4.  1  Eliphaz  the  Temanite  answered  and  said 

5.  1  if  there  be  any  that  will  answer  thee 

6.  1  But  Job  answered  and  said,  Oh  that  my 

8.  1  Then  answered  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and 

9.  1  Then  Job  answered  and  said,  I  know 
9.    3  he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand 
9.  14  How  much  less  shall  I  answer  him 
9.  15  I  were  righteous,  (yet)  would  I  not  answer 
g.  16  If  I  had  called,  and  he  had  answered  me 
9.  32  not  a  man.  .(that)  I  should  answer  him 

11.  1  Then  answered  Zophar  the  Maamathite 

12.  1  And  Job  answered  and  said,  Mo  doubt 

12.  4  who  calleth  upon  God,  and  he  answereth 

13.  22  Then  call  thou,  and  I  will  answer :  or  let 

14.  15  Thou  shalt  call,  and  I  will  answer  thee 


Meh. 
Esth. 


Job 


Job  15.  1  Then  answered  Eliphaz  the  Temanite 
16.  1  Then  Job  answered  and  said,  I  have 
16.    3  what  emboldeneth . .  that  thou  answerest  ? 

18.  1  Then  answered  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and 

19.  1  Then  Job  answered  and  said,  How  long 

20.  1  Then  answered  Zophar  the  Maamathite 

21.  1  But  Job  answered  and  said,  Hear 

22.  1  Then  Eliphaz  the  Temanite  answered  and 

23.  1  Then  Job  answered  and  said,  Even  to  day 
23.    s  know  the  words  (which)  he  would  answer 

25.  1  Then  answered  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and 

26.  1  But  Job  auswered  and  said,  How  hast 

31.  35  my  desire,  .the  Almighty  would  answer 

32.  1  So  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  Job 
32.    6  Elihu.  .answered  and  said,  I  (am)  young 
32. 12  none  of  you.  .that  answered  his  words 
32.  15  They  were  amazed,  they  answered  no 
32. 16  they  spake  not.  .answered  no  more 

32.  17  I  will  answer  also  my  part,  I  also  will 

32.  20  I  will  open  my  lips  and  answer 

33.  12  I  will  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater 

34.  1  Furthermore  Elihu  answered  and  said 
38.    1  Lord  answered  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind 
40.    1  Moreover  the  Lord  answered  Job,  and 
40.    2  he  that  reproveth  God,  let  him  answer  it 
40.    3  Then  Job  answered  the  Lord,  and  said 
40.    5  Once  have  I  spoken ;  but  I  will  not  answer 
40.    6  Then  answered  the  Lord  unto  Job  out  of 
42.    1  Then  Job  answered  the  Lord,  and  said 

Psa.  18.  41  They  cried,  .but  he  answered  them  not 

27.  7  have  mercy  also  upon  me,  and  answer  me 
65.    5  wilt  thou  answer  us,  O  God  of  oursalvation 
81.    7  I  answered  thee  in  the  secret  place  of 
86.    7  call  upon  thee:  for  thou  wilt  answer  me 
91.  15  shall  call  upon  me,  aud  I  will  answer  him 
99.    6  called  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  answered 
99.    8  Thou  answeredst  them,  0  Lord  our  God 

102.    2  in  the  day.  .1  call  answer  me  speedily 
108.    6  save  (with)  thy  right  hand,  and  answer 

118.  5  the  Lord  answered  me.  .in  a  large  place 

119.  42  So  shall  I  have  wherewith  to  answer  him 
138.  3  the  day  when  I  cried  thou  answeredst  me 
143.    1  in  thy  faithfulness  answer  me.  .in  thy 

Frov.  1.  28  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer 
15.  28  heart  of  the  righteous  studieth  to  answer 
18.  23  but  the  rich  answereth  roughly 
26.   4  Answer  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly 
26.    5  Answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly 

Eccl.  10.  19  but  money  answereth  all 

Isa.   14.  32  What  shall  (one)  then  answer  the  messen. 
21.    9  he  answered  and  said,  Babylon  is  fallen 
30.  19  when  he  shall  hear  it,  he  will  answer 
$6.  21  they  held  their  peace,  and  answered  him 
36.  21  commandment  was,  saying,  Answer  him 
46.    7  shall  cry  unto  him,  yet  can  he  not  answer 
50.    2  when  I  called,  (was  there)  none  to  answer  ? 
58.   9  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall  answer 
65.  12  when  I  called,  ye  did  not  answer;  when 

65.  24  before  they  call,  I  will  answer ;  and  while 

66.  4  because  when  I  called,  none  did  answer 
Jer.     7.  13  and  I  called  you,  but  ye  answered  not 

7.  27  also  call,  .but  they  will  not  answer  thee 
11.    5  Then  answered  I,  and  said,  So  be  it,  O 
23.  35  What  hath  the  Lord  answered?  and 
23.  37  What  hath  the  Lord  answered  thee? 
33.    3  Call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee 

35.  17  have  called,  .but  they  have  not  answered 
42.  4  whatsoever  thing  the.  Lord  shall  answer 
44.  15  all  the  people,  .answered  Jeremiah,  sajing 

Joel    2. 19  Lord  will  answer  and  say  unto  his  people 
Amos  7.  14  Then  answered  Amos,  and  said  to  Amaz. 
Mic.    6.    5  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  answered  him 
Hab.   2.  11  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it 
Hag.   2.  12  And  the  priests  answered  and  said,  No 
2.  13  The  priests  answered  and  said,  It  shall  be 

2.  14  Then  answered  Haggai,  and  said,  So  (is) 
Zech.  1.  10  the  man.  .answered  and  said,  These 

1. 11  they  answered  the  angel  of  the  Lord  that 

1.  12  the  angel  of  the  Lord  answered  and  said 
1. 13  the  Lord  answered  the  angel  that  talked 

3.  4  he  answered  and  spake  unto  those  that 

4.  4  So  I  answered  and  spake  to  the  angel  that 
4.    5  the  angel,  .answered  and  said  unto  me 

4.    6  he  answered  and  spake  unto  me,  saying 
4.  1 1  Then  answered  I,  and  said  unto  him,  What 
4.  12  I  answered  again,  and  said  unto  him 
6.    4  I  answered  and  said  unto  the  angel  that 
6.    5  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  me 

5.  To  be  answered,  rujj  anah,  2. 

Eze.  14.   4  I  the  Lord  will  answer  him  that  cometh 
14.    7  I  the  Lord  will  answer  him  by  myself 

6.  To  make  or  give  an  answer,  H3J7  anah,  5, 
Eccl.  5.  20  God  answereth  (him)  in  the  joy  of  his 

7.  To  make  or  give  an  answer,  7\i]}_  anah. 

Dan.   2.    5  king  answered  and  said  to  the  Chaldeans 

2.  7  They  answered  again  and  said,  Let  the 
2.    8  king  answered  and  said,  I  know  of  certain. 
2.  10  The  Chaldeans  answered  before  the  king 
2.  15  He  answered  and  said  to  Anoch  the 

2.  20  Daniel  answered  and  said,  Blessed  be  the 
2.  26  The  king  answered  and  said  to  Daniel 
2.  27  Daniel  answered  in  the  presence  of  the 

2.  47  The  king  answered  unto  Daniel,  and  said 

3.  24  They  answered  and  said  unto  the  king 

3.  25  He  answered  and  said,  Lo,  I  see  four 

4.  19  Belteshazzar  answered  and  said,  My  lord 

5.  17  Daniel  answered  and  said  before  the 

6.  12  The  king  answered  and  said,  The  thing 
6.  13  Then  answered  they  and  said  before  the 


I 


ANSWER 


42 


ANSWERABLE 


S.To  turn  bach,  2>r  shah,  5. 

2  Ch.  io.  16  the  people  answered  the  king,  saying 
Neh.    6.    4  I  answered  them  after  the  same  manner 
Esth.  4.  13  Mordecai  commanded  to  answer  Esther 
Job    13.  22  or  let  me  speak,  and  answer  thou  me 

31.  14  when  he  visitetn,  what  shall  I  answer 

32.  14  neither  will  I  answer  him  with  your 

33.  32  If  thou  hast  any  thing  to  say,  answer  me 
Pro  v.  22.  21  that  thou  mightest  answer  the  words  of 

9.  To  turn  back  (a  word),  Tyi  2\&  shtib,  5. 

2  Sa.    3.  n  he  could  not  answer  Abner  a  word  again 
1  Ki.  12.    6  How  do  ye  advise  that  I  may  answer  this 
12.    9  What  counsel  give  ye  that  we  may  answer 
12.  16  the  people  answered  the  king,  saying 
Neh.   2.  20  Then  answered  I  them,  and  said  unto 
Joo   33.    5  If  thou  canst  answer  me,  set.  .in  order 
35.    4  I  will  answer  thee,  and  thy  companions 
40.    4  I  am  vile ;  what  shall  I  answer  thee  ? 
Prov.18. 13  He  that  answereth  a  matter  before  he 
24.  26  shall  kiss,  .that  giveth  a  right  answer 
27.  11  that  I  may  answer  him  that  reproacheth 
Isa.   4r.  28  that,  when  I  asked  of  them,  could  answer  a 
Hab.   2.    1  what  I  shall  answer  when  I  am  reproved 

10.  To  turn  bach,  mn  tub,  5. 

Ezra   5.    5  they  returned  answer  by  letter  concerning 
Dan.    2.  14  Daniel  answered  with  counsel  and  wisdom 
3. 16  we  (are)  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in 

11.  To  ansiver,  airoKpivoftai  apokrinoma-i. 
Matt.  3.  15  Jesus  answering  said  unto  him.  Suffer 

4.    4  he  answered  and  said,  It  is  written,  Man 
8.    8  The  centurion  answered  and  said,  Lord 
11.    4  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Go 

11.  25  At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said,  I 

12.  38  the  Pharisees  answered,  saying,  Master 
12.  39  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  An  evil 

12.  48  he  answered  and  said  unto  him  that 

13.  11  He  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Because 

13.  37  He  answered  and  said  unto  them,  He 

14.  28  Peter  answered  him  and  said,  Lord,  if  it 

15.  3  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Why 
15.  13  he  answered  and  said,  Every  plant,  which 
15.  15  Then  answered  Peter,  and  said  unto  him 
15.  23  But  he  answered  her  not  a  word.    And 
15.  24  he  answered  and  said,  I  am  not  sent  but 
15.  26  he  answered  and  said,  It  is  not  meet  to 

15.  28  Then  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  her 

16.  2  He  answered  and  said  unto  them,  When 
16.  16  Simon  Peter  answered  and  said,  Thou  art 

16.  17  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Blessed 

17.  4  Then  answered  Peter,  and  said  unto 
17.  11  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them 

17.  17  Jesus  answered  and  said,  0  faithless  and 
19.    4  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Have 

19.  27  Then  answered  Peter  and  said  unto  him 

20.  13  But  he  answered  one  of  them,  and  said 

20.  22  JeBus  answered  and  said,  Ye  know  not 

21.  21  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Verily 
ax.  24  And  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them 
21.  27  they  answered  Jesus,  and  said,  We  cannot 
21.  29  He  answered  and  said,  I  will  not :  but 

21.  30  he  answered  and  said,  I  (go,)  sir:  and 

22.  1  Jesus  answered  and  spake  unto  them 
22.  29  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Ye 
22.  46  no  man  was  able  to  answer  him  a  word 

24.  4  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them 

25.  9  the  wise  answered,  saying,  (Not  so  ;)  lest 
25.  12  he  answered  and  said,  Verily  I  say  unto 
25.  26  His  lord  answered  and  said  unto  him 

25.  37  Then  shall  the  righteous  answer  him 
25.  40  the  King  shall  answer  and  say  unto  them 
25.  44  Then  shall  they  also  answer  him,  saying 

25.  45  Then  shall  he  answer  them,  saying,  Verily 

26.  23  he  answered  and  said,  He  that  dippeth 
26.  25  Judas,  which  betrayed  him,  answered 
26.  33  Peter  answered  and  said  unto  him 

26.  62  high  priest  arose,  and  said. .  Answerest 
26.  63  the  high  priest  [answered  and]  said  unto 

26.  66  They  answered  and  said,  He  is  guilty  of 

27.  12  when  he  was  accused,  .he  answered 
27.  14  And  he  answered  him  to  never  a  word 
27.  21  The  governor  answered  and  said  unto 

27.  25  Then  answered  all  the  people,  and  said 

28.  5  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  the 
Mark  3.  33  he  answered  them,  saying,  Who  is  my 

5.  9  [answered],  saying,  My  name  (is)  Legion 

6.  37  Ue  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Give 

7.  6  He  [answered  and]  said  unto  them,  Well 

7.  28  she  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Yea 

8.  4  his  disciples  answered  him,  From  whence 
8.  28  [they  answered,]  John  the  Baptist :  but 

8.  29  Peter  answereth  and  saith  unto  him 

9.  5  Peter  answered  and  said  to  Jesus,  Master 
9.  12  he  answered  and  told  them,  Elias  verily 
9.  17  one  of  the  multitude  answered  and  said 
9.  19  He  answereth  him,  and  saith,  0  faithless 
9.  38  John  r answered]  him,  saying,  Master,  we 

10.    3  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  What 
10.    5  Jesus  [answered  and]  said  unto  them,  For 
10.  20  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Master 
10.  24  Jesus  answereth  again,  and  saith  unto 

10.  29  Jesus  [answered  and)  said,  Verily  I  say 
10  51  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  What 

11.  14  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  it,  No 

11.  22  Jesus  [answering]  saith  unto  them,  Have 
ti.  29  Jesus  [answered  and]  said  unto  them 
11.  29  I  will  also  ask.  .one  question,  and  answer 
11.  30  The  baptism  —  from  heaven,  .answer 
11.  33  they  answered  and  said  unto  Jesus,  We 
11.  33  Jesus  [answering]  saith  unto  them 
xa.  17  Jesus  [answering]  said  unto  them,  Render 


Markis.  24  Jesus  [answering]  said  unto  them,  Do  ye 
12.  28  perceiving  that  he  had  answered  them 
12.  29  Jesus  answered  him,  The  first  of  all  the 
12.  34  when  Jesus  saw  that  he  answered  discre. 

12.  35  Jesus  answered  and  said,  while  he  taught 

13.  2  Jesus  [answering]  said  unto  him,  Seest 

13.  5  Jesus  [answering]  them  began  to  say 

14.  20  he  [answered  and]  said  unto  them,  .one  of 
14.  40  neither  wist  they  what  to  answer  him 
14.  48  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Are 
14.  60  asked  Jesus,  saying,  Answerest  thou 

14.  61  he  held  his  peace,  and  answered  nothing 

15.  2  he  answering  said  unto  him,  Thousayest 
15.  4  Pilate  asked  hhu  again,  saying,  Answerest 
15.    5  Jesus  yet  answered  nothing ;  so  that 

15.    9  Pilate  answered  them,  saying,  Will  ye 
15.  12  Pilate  answered  and  said  again  unto 
Luke  1.  19  the  angel  answering  said  unto  him,  I 
1.  35  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  her 
1.  60  his  mother  answered  and  said,  Not  (so) 
3.  11  He  answereth  and  saith  unto  them,  He 

3.  16  John  answered,  saying  unto  (them)  all,  I 

4.  4  Jesus  answered  him,  saying,  It  is  written 
4.    8  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Get 

4.  12  Jesus,  answering  said  unto  hiru,  It  is 

5.  5  Simon  answering  said  unto  him,  Master 
5.  22  But  when  Jesus  perceived,  .[answering] 

5.  31  Jesus  answering  said  unto  them,  They 

6.  3  Jesus  answering  them  said,  Have  ye  not 

7.  22  Jesus  answering  said  unto  them,  Go 

7.  40  Jesus  answering  said  unto  him,  Simon 

7.  43  Simon  answered  and  said,  I  suppose 

8.  21  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  My 

8.  50  when  Jesus  heard  (it),  he  answered  him 

9.  19  They  answering  said,  John  the  Baptist 
9.  20  Peter  answering  said,  The  Christ  of 

9.  41  Jesus  answering  said,  O  faithless  and 
9.  49  John  answered  and  said,  Master,  we  saw 
10.  27  he  answering  said,  Thou  shalt  love  the 
10.  28  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  answered 

10.  41  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  her,  Martha 

11.  7  he  from  within  shall  answer  and  say 
11.  45  Then  answered  one  of  the  lawyers,  and 
13.    2  Jesus  answering  said  unto  them,  Suppose 
13.    8  he  answering  said  unto  him,  Lord,  let 
13.  14  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  answered 

13.  15  The  Lord  then  answered  him,  and  said 

13.  25  he  shall  answer  and  say  unto  you,  I 

14.  3  Jesus  answering  spake  unto  the  lawyers 

14.  5  And  [answered]  them,  saying,  Which  of 

15.  29  he  answering  said  to  (his)  father,  Lo 

17.  17  Jesus  answering  said,  Were  there  not  ten 
17.  20  he  answered  them  and  said,  The  kingdom 
17.  37  they  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Where 

19.  40  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  I  tell 

20.  3  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,  I  will 
20.  7  they  answered,  that  they  could  not  tell 
20.  24  They  answered  and  said,  Cesar's 

20.  34  Jesus  [answering]  said  unto  them,  The 
20.  39  certain  of  the  scribes  answering  said 
22.  51  Jesus  answered  and  said,  Suffer  ye  thus 

22.  68  if  I  also  ask  (you),  ye  will  not  answer  me 

23.  3  he  answered  him  and  said,  Thou  sayest 
23.    9  words ;  but  he  answered  him  nothing 

23.  40  the  other  answering  rebuked  him 

24.  18  Cleopas,  answering  said  unto  him,  Art 
John  1.  21  Art  thou  that  prophet?   And  he  answered 

x.  26  John  answered  them,  saying,  I  baptize 
i.  48  Jesus  answered  and  Baid  unto  him,  Before 
1.  49  Nathanael  answered  and  saith  unto  him 

1.  50  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him 

2. 18  Then  answered  the  Jews  and  said  unto 

2.  19  Jesus  an3wered  and  said  unto  them 

3.  3  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him 

3.    5  Jesus  answered,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
3.   9  Nicodemus  answered  and  said  unto  him 
3.  10  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Art 

3.  27  John  answered  and  said,  A  man  can 

4.  10  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  her,  If 
4.  13  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  her 

4.  17  The  woman  answered  and  said,  I  have 

5.  7  The  impotent  man  answered  him,  Sir,  I 
5.  11  He  answered  them,  He  that  made  me 

5.  17  Jesus  answered  them,  My  Fatherworketh 

5.  19  Then  answered  Jesus  and  said  unto  them 

6.  7  Philip  answered  him,  Two  hundred 

6.  26  Jesus  answered  them  and  said,  Verily 
6.  29  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them,  This 
6.  43  Jesus  therefore  answered  and  said  nnto 
6.  68  Simon  Peter  answered  him,  Lord,  to 

6.  70  Jesus  answered  them,  Have  not  I  chosen 

7.  16  Jesus  answered  them,  and  said,  My 
7.  20  The  people  answered  and  said,  Thou 
7.  21  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  them,  I 

7.  46  The  officers  answered,  Never  man  spake 
7.  47  Then  answered  them  the  Pharisees,  Are 

7.  52  They  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Art 

8.  14  Jesus  answered . .  said  unto  them,  Though 
8.  19  Jesus  answered,  Ye  neither  know  me 

8.  33  They  answered  him,  We  be  Abraham's 
8.  34  Jesus  answered  them,  Verily,  verily,  I 
8.  39  They  answered,  .said  unto  him,  Abraham 
8.  48  Then  answered  the  Jews,  and  said  unto 
8.  49  Jesus  answered,  I  have  not  a  devil ;  but 

8.  54  Jesus  answered,  If.  I  honour  myself,  my 

9.  3  Jesus  answered,  Neither  hath  this  man 
g,  11  He  answered  and  said,  a  man  that  is 

9.  20  His  parents  answered  them  and  said,  We 
9.  25  He  answered  and  said,  Whether  he  be  a 
9.  27  He  answered  them,  I  have  told  you  already 
9.  30  The  man  answered  and  said  unto  them 
9.  34  They  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Thou 


John  9.  36  He  answered  and  said,  Who  is  he,  Lord 
10.  25  Jesus  answered  them,  I  told  you,  and  ye 
10.  32  Jesus  answered  them,  Many  good  works 
10.  33  The  Jews  answered  him,  saying,  For  a 

10.  34  Jesus  answered  them,  Is  it  not  written 

11.  9  Jesus  answered,  Are  there  not  twelve 

12.  23  Jesus  answered  them,  saying,  The  hour 
12.  30  Jesus  answered  and  said.  This  voice  came 

12.  34  The  people  answered  him,  We  have  heard 

13.  7  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  What 
13.    8  Jesus  answered  him,  If  I  wash  thee  not 
13.  26  Jesus  answered,  He  it  is,  to  whom  I  shall 
13.  36  Jesus  answered  him,  Whither  I  go,  thou 

13.  38  Jesus  answered  him,  Wilt  thou  lay  down 

14.  23  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  If  a 
16.  31  Jesus  answered  them,  Do  ye  now  believe? 
18.    5  They  answered  him,  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
18.    8  Jesus  answered,  I  have  told  you  that  I 
18.  20  Jesus  answered  him,  I  spake  openly  to 
18.  22  Answerest  thou  the  high  priest  so? 
18.  23  Jesus  answered  him,  If  I  have  spoken 
18.  30  They  answered  and  said  unto  him,  If  he 
18.  34  Jesus  answered  him,  Sayest  thou  this 
18.  35  Pilate  answered,  Am  I  a  Jew?  Thine  own 
18.  36  Jesus  answered,  My  kingdom  is  not  of 

18.  37  Jesus  answered,  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a 

19.  7  The  Jews  answered  him,  We  have  a  law 
19. 11  Jesus  answered,  Thou  couldest  have  no 
19.  15  The  chief  priests  answered,  We  have  no 

19.  22  Pilate  answered,  What  I  have  written  I 

20.  28  Thomas  answered  and  said  unto  him 

21.  5  have  ye  any  meat?     They  answered  him 
Acts    3.  12  when  Peter  saw  (it),  he  answered  unto 

4.  19  Peter  and  John  answered  and  said 

5.  8  Peter  answered  unto  her,  Tell  me 
5.  29  Peter  and  the  (other)  apostles  answered 
8.  24  Then  answered  Simon,  and  said,  Pray  ye 
8.  34  the  eunuch  answered  Philip,  and  said 

8.  37  [he  answered  and  said,  I  believe  that] 

9.  13  Ananias  answered,  Lord,  I  have  heard 

10.  46  Then  answered  Peter,  Can  any  man 

11.  9  the  voice  answered  me  again  from  heaven 

15.  13  James  answered,  saying,  Men.  .brethren 
19.  15  And  the  evil  spirit  answered  and  said 

21.  13  Paul  answered,  What  mean  ye  to  weep 

22.  8  I  answered,  Who  art  thou,  Lord?  And 
22.  28  the  chief  captain  answered,  With  a  great 
24.  10  Paul,  .answered,  Forasmuch  as  I  know 

24.  25  Felix  trembled,  and  answered,  Go  thy  ' 

25.  4  Festus  answered,  that  Paul  should  be 
25.    9  Festus.  .answered  Paul,  and  said,  W;ilt 
25.  12  Festus.  .answered,  Hast  thou  appealed 
25.  16  To  whom  I  answered,  It  is  not  the 

Col.     4.    6  that  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer 

Rev.    7.  13  one  of  the  elders  answered,  saying  unto 
12.  To  speah  off,  airoKoyio^ai  apologcmnai. 

Luke  12.  11  what  thing  ye  shall  answer,  or  what  ye 
21.  14  meditate  before  what  ye  shall  answer 

Acts  24.  10  I  do  the  more  cheerfully  answer  for 
13.7*0  speah,  say,  eVat,  elirov  epd,  eipon. 

Luke2o.    3  answer  me :  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it 
H.To  take  up,  vwoXa/x^dyw  hupolambano. 

Luke  10.  30  Jesus  answering  said,  A  certain  (maD) 

ANSWER  again,  to  — 

1.7*0  txiA'ii  back  a  word,  "en  y$>  shub,  5. 

1  Sa.  17.  30  the  people  answered  him  again  after  the 
2, To  answer  in  return,  ayrairoKplvojj,ai. 

Luke  14.    6  they  could  not  answer  him  again  to 
3.7*0  speak  in  return,  avTi\4yu>  antilego. 

Titus  2.    9  servants,  .obedient,  .not  answering  again 

ANSWER,  for  one's  self,  to  — 

7'o  speak  off  for  himself,  airoXoytofiai  apolcgemai. 
Acts  25.    8  While  he  answered  for  himself,  Neither 

26.    1  Paul  stretched  forth,  .answered  for  him. 

26.    2  because  I  shall  answer  for  myself  this 

ANSWER,  for  one's  self  — 

.4  speaking  off  for  oneself,  airoAoyia  apologia. 
Acts  25.  16  and  have  license  to  answer  for  himself 

ANSWER  of  God  — 

A  divine  oracle,  xp7i/-'aricr^s  chrematismos. 
Rom  11.    4  what  saith  the  answer  of  God  unto 

ANSWER,  to  give  — 

To  answer,  rnj;  anah. 

Gen.  41.  16  God  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  answer  of 
Job   19.  16  my  servant,  and  he  gave  (me)  no  answer 
35.  12  There  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  answer 
Song  5.    6  I  called  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer 
Jer.  44.  20  people  which  had  given  him  (that)  answer 

ANSWER,  to  make  or  cause  to  — 

1.7*0  answer,  rujj  anah. 

Deut2o.  11  it  shall  be,  if  it  make  thee  answer  of  peace 
Job  20.    3  the  spirit,  .causcth  me  to  answer 

2.7*0  cause  to  turn  back,  yt&  shub,  5 

Job  20.    2  do  my  thoughts  cause  me  to  answer 

ANSWER  to,  to  — 

To  be  in  the  same  Une,<Tva,'rot.x^  sv.stoicheo. 
Gal.    4.  25  answereth  to  Jerusalem  which  now  is 

ANSWERABLE  to  — 
Companionship,  ntej;  ummah. 

Exod38.  18  hanging,  .answerable  to  the  hangings  of 


ANSWERED 


43 


ANY 


ANSWERED,  to  be  — 

To  be  answered,  -TJU.  anah,  2. 

2  CIi.   7.  22  it  shall  be  answered,  Because  they 

Job    11.    2  not  the  multitude  of  words  be  answered? 

ANT  — 

Ant,  nh$}  nemalah. 

Prov.  6.    6  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard  :  consider 
30.  25  The  ants  (are)  a  people  not  strong 

ANTI- CHRIST  — 

An  opponent  of  Christ,  'AuTixpiffTos  antichristos. 

1  Jo.   2.  18  antichrist  shall  come,  .are  there  many  a. 

2.  22  He  is  antichrist,  that  denieth  the  Father 
4.    3  this  is  that  (spirit)  of  antichrist,  whereof 

2  Jo.         7  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist 

AN-TI'-OCH,  'Airioxeia'      Meaning  uncertain. 

1.  Antioch  was  founded  by  Selt-ucus  Nicator,  B.C.  300, 
who  named  it  after  his  father.  It  remained  the  capital 
of  the  dynasty  till  Syria  was  conquered  by  Pompey,  and 
made  a  Roman  province,  B.C.  64.  Christianity  was 
planted  in  Antioch  by  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  here  the 
disciples  were  first  called  Christians,  A.D.  42  (Acts  n.  26). 
This  city,  long  known  as  "  the  Queen  of  the  East,"  was 
captured  by  the  Persian  king  Nushirvan,  or  Chosroes, 
A.D.  540.  Chosroes  II.  wrested  it  from  the  empire  in  61 1. 
Heraclius  expelled  the  Persians,  but  it  fell  into  the 
power  of  the  Saracens  in  638,  and  they  degraded  it  to 
the  rank  of  a  proviucid  town.  Nicephorus  Phocas 
recovered  it  in  966 ;  it  was  betrayed  to  the  Turks  in 
10S4.  The  crusaders  laid  siege  to  it  in  1097,  and  cap- 
tured it  1098.  The  citadel  held  out,  but  the  Saracens, 
who  made  an  effort  to  regain  the  prize,  were  defeated 
in  a  great  battle  under  the  walls  of  Antioch,  1098 ;  an  I 
Antioch  became  the  capital  of  a  Christian  principality. 
Bibar3,  sultan  of  Egypt,  captured  it,  destroyed  its 
churches,  and  completely  ruined  it,  1268.  It  was  an- 
nexed to  the  Ottoman  empire  in  1516.  Ibm  Pasharahi 
seized  it  in  1832,  but  it  was  afterwards  restored  to  the 
Porte.  Antioch  has  frequently  suffered  from  earth- 
quakes; the  most  disastrous  occurred  A.D.  115,  340, 
394.  396,  458,  526,  and  588.  Antioch  was  a  patriarchate 
third  after  Rome  and  Alexandria.  Thirty-one  councils 
were  held  at  Antioch,  the  first  in  252,  and  the  last  in 
1x4-1. 

Acts    6.   5  They  chose . .  Nicolas  a  proselyte  of  A. 
11. 19  were  scattered,  .travelled  as  far  as.  .A. 
11.  20  when  they  were  come  to  A.,  spake  unto 
11.  22  Barnabas,  that  he  should  go  as  far  as  A. 
11.  26  had  found  him,  he  brought  him  unto  A. 
11.  26  disciples,  .called  Christians  first  in  A. 

11.  27  in  these  days  came  prophets,  .unto  A. 

13.  1  there  were  in  the  church  that  was  at  A. 

14.  26  And  thence  sailed  to  A.,  from  whence 

15.  22  chosen  men  of  their  own  company  to  A. 
15.  23  brethren  which  are  of  the  Gentiles  in  A. 
15.  30  when  they  were  dismissed,  they  came  to  A. 
15.  35  Paul  also  and  Barnabas  continued  in  A. 
18.  22  saluted  the  church,  he  went  down  to  A. 

Gal.    2.  11  when  Peter  was  come  to  A.,  I  withstood 

2.  A  city  in  Pisidia,  Asia  Minor,  W.  of  Iconium,  now 
called  Galobatch.  Like  the  Syrian  Antioch,  this  city 
was  founded  bySeleucu3  Nicator.  Under  the  Romans 
it  was  called  Ccesarea. 

Acts  13.  14  when  they  departed,  .they  came  to  A. 

14.  19  And  there  came  thither.  .Jews  from  A. 

14.  21  preached.. they  returned  again. .to  A. 
2  Ti.    3.  11  afflictions,  which  came  unto  me  at  A. 

AN-TI'-FAS,  'Avriiras. 

A  martyr  in  Pergamos.     The  name  is  an  abbreviation 

of  Antipater. 

Rev.  2.  13  even  in  those  days  wherein  A.  (was)  my 
AN-TI-PA'-TRIS,  'AvTiwciTpis  belonging  to  Antipater. 
A  city  of  Palestine,  not  far  from  the  Mediterranean, 
now  called  Kefr-Saba.  Josephus  says  that  the  old 
name  was  Ka<pap<Tafia  or  Xa/3«p^a/3a,  and  that  Herod 
when  he  rebuilt  the  city  called  it  Antipatris,  in  honour 
of  his  father  Antipater. 

Acts  23.  31  took  Paul,  and  brought  (him),  .to  A. 
ANTIQUITY  — 
Former  state,  tffilp  Jcadmah. 

Isa.   23.    7  whose  antiquity  (is)  of  ancient  days  ?  her 

AN-TO-THI'-JAH,  fiTtflJH  answers  o/Jak. 
Son  of  Shashak,  a  Benjamite,  B.C.  1340. 

iCh.   S.  24  And  Hananiah,  and  Elam,  and  A. 

AN-TO-THITE,  vin$S7  belonging  to  Anatlwth. 
It  is  sometimes  written  Anethothite. 

iCh.  11.  28  [men  of  the  armies]. .  Ahiezer  the  A. 

12.  3  Berachah,  and  Jehu  the  A. 
A'-NTTB,  m'J  strong  or  high. 

A  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb,  son  of  Hur,  B.C. 
1430. 

1  Ch.   4.    8  And  Coz  begat  A.,  and  Zobedah,  and 

ANYIL  — 

Step,  stroke  nyspaam. 

Isa.   41.    7  (with)thehammerhimthatsmotetheaavil 
ANY  — 
l.One,  "inx  echad. 

Lev.    4/  2  If  a  soul  shall  sin . .  agains*.  any  of 

4.  13  have  done,  .any  of  the  commandments 
4.  22  When  a  ruler  hath.  .done,  .any  of  the 
4.  27  he  doeth.  .any  of  the  commandments 

4.  27  he  doeth.  .any  of  the  commandments 

5.  17  if  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these 

6.  3  in  any  of  all  these  that  a  man  doeth 


Nunii5.  27  if  any  soul  sin  through  ignorance,  then 
36.    3  if  they  be  married  to  any  of  the  sons  of 
Deuti  6.    5  within  any  of  thy  gates,  which  the  Lord 

17.  2  If  there  be  found  among  you,  within  any 

18.  6  if  a  Levite  come  from  any  of  "thy  gates 
28.  55  So  that  he  will  not  give  to  any  of  them 

2  Sa.    2.    1  Shall  I  go  up  into  any  of  the  cities  of 

7.    7  spake  I  a  word  with  any  of  the  tribes  of 
1  Ch.  17.    6  spake  I  a  word  to  any  of  the  judges  of 
Eze.  16.    5  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these 

2.  A  man,  individual,  v^ish, 

Exodio.  23  Theysawnotoneanother, neitherroseanj 
Lev.  21.  9  the  daughter  of  any  priest,  if  she  profane 
Judg2o.    8  We  will  not  any.  .neither  will  we  any 

21.    1  Thereshall  notany  of  us  give  his  daughter 

1  Sa.  30.    2  they  slew  not  any,  either  great  or  small 

2  Sa.   9.    3  (Is)  there  not  yet  any  of  the  house  of  Saul 

1  Ki.   3.  13  there  shall  not  be  any  among  the  kings 

5.  6  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill  to 

2  Ki.  4.  29  if  any  (salute  thee),  answer  him  not  again 

10.    5  we  will  not  make  any  king:  do  thou 
10.  14  took  them  alive,  .neither  left  he  any  of 
10.  24  (If)  any  of  the  men  whom  I  have  brought 
18.  33  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations 
Isa.  36.  18  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations 
Jer.  23.  24  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places 
Eze.    7  13  neither  shall  any  strengthen  himself 
iS.    7  hath  not  oppressed  any.  .hath  restored 
18.  16  Neither  hath  oppressed  any,  hath  not 
46.  16  If  the  prince  give  a  gift  unto  any  of  his 
Zech  13.    3  to  pass,(that)  when  any  shall  yet  prophesy 
B.All,  any,  h'3  kol. 

Deut.  4.  23  a  graven  image,  (or)  the  likeness  of  any 
Ezra  7.  24  touching  any  of  the  priests  and  Levites 
Dan.    2.  10  asked  such  things  at  any  magician,  or 

2.  30  is  not  revealed  to  me.  .more  than  any 

3.  28  that  theymightnotserve  nor  worship  any 

6.  4  neither  was  there  any  error  or  fault  found 
6.    5  We  shall  not  find  any  occasion  against 

6.  12  that  shall  ask ..  of  any  God  or  man  within 

4.  Who  ?  whom  ?  *P  mi. 

Gen.  19. 12  Hast  thou  here  any  besides?  son  in  law 

5.  Soul,  person,  vzi  nephesh. 

Lev.    2.    1  when  any  will  offer  a  meat  offering 

24. 17  he  that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  be 
Numrg.  11  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any  man  shall 
Deut24.    7  If  a  man  be  found  stealing  any  of  his 

Q.One,  etV  heis. 

Acts  4.  32  neither  said  any . .  that  ought  of  the  things 
7.  Not,  fxTj  me. 

Lukeso.  27  Sadducees,  which  deny  that  there  is  any 
S.JVot  one,  no  one,  /xndeis  medeis. 

Acts  25.  17  without  any  delay  on  the  morrow  I  sat 

2  Th.  2.    3  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means 

1  Pe.    3.   6  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement 

9.  Has  any  one  1  p.-f)rts  metis. 

John  7.  48  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees 

10.  Any  thing,  yA\  ti  me  ti. 

John2i.    5  Jesus  saith.  .have  ye  any  meat? 

11.  JYot  even  one,  of/Beis  oudeis. 

Mark  5.    4  broken,  .neither  could  any  (man)  tame 
16.    8  neither  said  they  anything  to  any  (man) 

Luke  8.  43  neither  could  be  healed  of  any 

9.  36  and  told  no  man  in  those  days  any  of 
20.  40  after  that  they  durst  not  ask  him  any 

Acts  4. 12  [Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other] 

1'2.  All,  any,  every,  xas^Jos. 

Matt  18.  19  as  touching  anything  that  they  shall 

2  Co.  1.  4  comfort  them  which  are  in  any  trouble 
Heb.  4.  12  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword 
Rev.    7.    1  not  blow,  .on  the  sea,  nor  on  [any]  tree 

7.  16  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more 
9.    4  neither  any  green  thing,  neither  any  tree 

13. Any  one,  any,  rts  lis. 

Mark  8.  26  nor  tell  (it)  to  any  in  the  town 

it.  25  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  any 
16.  18  [and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing] 

Luke24.  41  he  said.  .Have  ye  here  any  meat?  n.  n. 

John  1.  46  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of 

2.  25  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  7.  43. 
Acts    4.  34  Neither  was  there  any  among  them  that 

9.    2  if  he  found  any  of  this  way,  whetherthey 
25.  16  the  manner  of  the  Romans  to  deliver  any 

27.  42  lest  any  of  them  should  swim  out,  and 

28.  21  neither  any  of  the  brethren .  .spake  any 
Rom.  8.  39  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature 

9.  11  neither  having  done  any  good  or  evil 
15.  18  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of 

1  Co.    1.  15  Lest  any  should  say  that  I  had  baptized 

6.    1  Dare  any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against 

6.  12  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any 

7.  18  Is  any  man  called  being  circumcised? 

2  Co.  11.  21  Howbeit,  whereinsoever  any  is  bold,  (I 

12.  17  Did  I  make  a  gain  of  you  by  any  of  them 
Eph.  5.  27  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing 
Col.    2.  23  not  in  any  honour  to  the  satisfying  of 

3.  13  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any 

1  Th.  2.    9  we  would  not  be  chargeable  unto  any 

5.  15  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto  any 

2  Th.    3.    8  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread 
Heb.   3.  12  Take  heed,  .lest  there  be  in  any  of  you 

3.  13  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the 

4.  1  lest,  a  promise  being  left,  .any  of  you 
12.  J5  Looking  diligently  lest  any  man  fail  of 
12.  16  Lest  there  (be)  any  fornicator,  or  profane 

Jas.     5.  12  swear  not.  .neither  by  any  other  oath 


Jas.     5.  13  Isanyamongyouafflicted?..Isanymerry? 
5.  14  Is  any  sick  among  you  ?  let  him  call  for 
5.  19  Brethren,  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the 
2  Pe.   3.    9  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
{Sec  also  Kin,  longer,  means,  more,  never,  nor, 
not,  thing,  time,  whether,  which,  wise  without.] 
ANY  at  all  — 
1. Pleasure,  }'?n  chaphets. 

Eze.  18.  23  Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the 
2.  To  be  able,  hh;  yakol 

Num  22.  33  have  I  now  any  power  at  all  to  say  any 
ANY  ease,  in  — 
To  bring  back,  3$0  shvb,  5. 

Deut  22.    1  thou  shalt  in  any  case  bring  them  again 
24. 13  In  any  case  thou  shalt  deliver  him  the 

ANY  further  — 

Yet,  further,  en  eti. 

Mark  5.  35  why  troublest  thou  the  Master  any  further 

14.  6s  What  need  we  any  further  witnesses'? 
Luke22.  71  What  need  we  any  further  witness? 

ANY  longer  — 

1.  Vet,  further,  ert  eti. 

Rom  6."  2  How  shall  we.  .live  any  longer  therein  ? 
2. j\to  further,  ^KeVt  m-eketi. 

Acts  25.  24  that  he  ought  not  to  live  any  longer 
ANY  man,  man's,  (not) — 
l.A  man,  individual,  tr'N  ish. 

Gen.  24.  16  (was)  very  fair,  .neither  had  any  man 

Exod34.    3  neither  let  any  man  be  seen  throughout 
34.  24  neither  shall  any  man  desire  thy  land 

Lev.    7.    8  the  priest  that  offereth  any  man's  burnt 

15.  2  When  any  man  hath  a  running  issue 
15.  16  if  any  man's  seed  of  copulation  go  out 
15.  24  if  any  man  lie  with  her  at  all 

Num.  5.  10  whatsoever  any  man  giveth  the  priest 

5.  12  If  any  man's  wife  go  aside,  and  commit  a 
9.  10  If  any  man  of  you  or  of  your  posterity 

21.  9  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when 
Deut  19.  11  if  any  man  hate  his  neighbour,  and  lie  in 

19.  16  If  a  false  witness  rise  up  against  any  man 

22.  13  If  any  man  take  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto 

23.  10  If  there  be  among  you  any  man,  that  is 
Josh.  1.    5  There  shall  not  any  man  be  able  to  stand 

2.  11  remain  any  more  courage  in  any  man 
Judg.  4.  20  when  any  man  doth  come  and  enquire  of 

1  Sa.    2.  13  when  any  man  offered  sacrifice,  the 

2.  16  if  any  man  said  unto  him,  Let  them  not 
12.    4  hast  thou  taken  ought  of  any  man's  hand 

2  Sa.  15.    2  it  was  (so),  that  when  any  man  that  had 

15.  5  it  was  (so),  that  when  any  man  came  nigh 
19.  22  shall  there  any  man  be  put  to  death  this 
21.    4  neither  for  us  shalt  thou  kill  any  man 

2  Ki.  4.  29  if  thou  meet  any  man,  salute  him  not 

2.  Whoso,  *P  mi* 

Exod24.  14  if  any  man  have  any  matters  to  do,  let 

3.  Each  one,  eKacros  hekastos. 

Eph.   6.   8  that  whatsoever  good  thing  any  man 

i.JYot  one,  no  one,  fivSeis  medeis. 

Mark  1.  44  See  thou  say  nothing  to  any  man 

Acts  10.  2S  that  I  should  not  call  any  man  common 

5.2\rot  any  thing,  nothing,  fxy)Tis  metis. 

John  4.  33  Hath  any  man  brought  him  (ought)  to 

6.jSTot  even  one,  ouSeis  oudeis 

Matt 22.  16  neither  carest  thou  for  any.  .for  thou 
Marki6.   8  said  they  any  thing  to  any.  .for  they  were 
John  8.  33  and  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man 

18.  31  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to 
Jas.     1.  13  neither  tempteth  he  any  man :  but  every 

7.  Any,  any  one,  rts  tis. 

Matt  11.  27  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father 

12.  19  neither  shall  any  man  hear  his  voice  in 

21.  3  if  any:. say  ought  unto  you,  ye  shall 

22.  46  neither  durst  any.  .from  that  day  forth 

24.  23  if  any  man  shall  say  unto  you,  Lo,  here 
Mark  9.  30  he  would  not  that  any  man  should  know 

11.    3  if  any  man  say  unto  you,  Why  do  ye 
11. 16  would  not  suffer  that  any  man  should 

13.  5  Take  heed  lest  any.  .deceive  you 
13.  21  then  if  any  man  shall  say  to  you,  Lo 

Lul;ei4.    8  When  thou  art  bidden  of  any  (man)  to  a 

19.  8  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man 

19.  31  if  any  man  ask  you,  Why  do  ye  loose 

20.  28  If  any  man's  brother  die,  having  a  wife 
John  4.  33  Hath  any  man  brought  him  (ought)  to  eat? 

6.  46  Not  that  any  man  hath  seen  the  Father 

6.  51  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall 

7.  17  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall 

7.  37  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me 
9.  22  that  if  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was 
9.  31  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  and 
9.  32  that  any  man  opened  the  eyes  of  one  that 
10.    9  I  am  the  door  :  by  me  if  any  man 

10.  28  neither  shall  any.  .pluck  them  out  of 

11.  9  If  any  man  walk  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth 

11.  57  that,  if  any  man  knew  where  he  were 

12.  26  If  any  man  serve  me.  .if  any  man  serve 
12.  47  if  any  man  hear  my  words,  and  believe 

16.  30  and  needest  not  that  any  man  should 
Acts  10.  47  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these 

19.  38  if  Demetrius,  .have  a  matter  against  any 
24.  12  neither  found  me.  .disputing  with  any 
Rom.  8.    9  Now  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of 
1  Co.  5.  11  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a 
7.  iS  Is  any  man  called  being  circumcised?  let 


ANY 


U 


APOSTLE 


sTh. 
Heb. 


[  Jo. 


Kev. 


2Sa. 

7 

14. 

?Ki 

21. 

T<:h 

17- 

2ch 

11- 

Jer. 

Joel 

2. 

i  Co.    8.  10  For  if  any  man  see  thee  which  hast 
9.  15  than  that  any  man  should  make  my 
10.  28  if  any  man  say  unto  you,  This  is  offered 
14.  27  If  any  man  speak  in  an.  .tongue,  .by  two 
2  Co.  12.    6  lest  any  man  should  think  of  me  above 
Eph.   2.   9  Not  of  works,  lest  auy  man  should  boast 
Col.     2.   4  this  I  say,  lest  any  man  should  beguile 

2.  8  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you 

3.  13  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any 

3.  8  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  jfor 

4.  11  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example 
12.  15  lest  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 

1  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with 
2.  15  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of 

2.  27  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you ;  but 

5.  16  If  any  man  see  his  brother  sin  a  sin.  .not 

3.  20  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the 
22.  18  If  any  man  shall  add  unto  these  things 
22.  19  if  any  man  shall  take  away  from  the 

[See  also  If,  by,  lest,  neither,  not.] 

ANY  manner  — 

A  ny,  *?3  kol. 

Exod22.    9  for  any  manner  of  lost  thing  which 
Lev.    7.  27  soul,  .that  eateth  any  manner  of  blood 
Deut27.  21  he  that  lieth  with  any  manner  of  beast 

ANY  marks  — 
Writing,  rinh?  kethobeth. 

Lev.  19.  28  nor  print  any  marks  upon  you  :  I  (am) 
ANY  more  — 
l.To  add,  *]D;  yasaph. 

Deut.  5.  25  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  .any  more 
2.  To  add,  *]p;  yasaph,  5. 

Exod.  8.  29  not  Pharaoh  deal  deceitfully  any  more 

11.  6  nor  shall  be  like  it  any  more 
Josh.  7.  T2  neither  will  I  be  with  you  any  more 

.  10  neither  shall,  .afflict  them  any  more 
.  10  he  shall  not  touch  thee  any  more 
.    8  Neither  will  I  make.  .Israel,  .any  more 
9  children  of  wickedness  waste,  .any  more 
8  Neither  will  I  any  more  remove  the  foot 
.  T2  they  shall  not  sorrow  any  more"at  all 
.    2  neither  shall  be  any  more  after  it 

o.  Still,  yet,  again,  *riy  od. 

Gen.    8.  12  returned  not  again  unto  him  any  more 

4.  {For  an)  indefinite  time,  nb'ty  olam. 

Eze.  27.  36  and  never  (shalt  be)  any  more 

28.  19  and  never  (shalt)  thou  (be)  any  more 

5 .  Yet,  further,  eri  eti. 

Luke  20.  36  Neither  can  they  die  any  more :  for  they 
Rev.    7.  16  neither  thirst  any  more  ;  neither  shall 

12.  8  neither  was  their  place  found  any  more 

18.  22  no  craftsman,  .shall  he  found  any  more 
21.    4  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain,  for 

6. No  more,  fxrnK^rt  meketi. 

Horn  14.  13  let  us  not.  .judge  one  another  any  more 

7. No  further,  ohniri  ouketi. 

Matt  22.  46  from  that  day  forth  ask  him  any  more 
Mark  9.  8  they  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus 
Luke  22.  16  I  will  not  [any  more]  eat  thereof,  until 
Rev.  18.11  no  man  buyeth.  .merchandise  any  more 

ANY  of  their's  — 

Them,  un  ham. 

Eze.    7.  11  their  multitude,  nor  of  any  of  their's 

ANY  one  — 

All,  any,  every,  was  pas. 

Matt  13.  19  When  any  one  heareth  the  word  of  the 

ANY  person  — 

*Soul,  person,  ty$j  nephesh. 

NUU131.  19  whosoever  hath  killed  any  person,  and 
35.  11  which  kllleth  any  person  at  unawares 
35.  15  everyone  that  killeth  any  person  unawares 
35.  30  "Whoso  killeth  any  person,  the  murderer 
35.  30  one.  .shall  not  testify  against  any  person 

ANY  such  — 

Matter,  word,  nrn  (Lobar. 

Deuti3-  11  shall  do  no  more  any  such  wickedness 

19.  20  henceforth  commit  no  more  any  such 
ANY  thing  — 

l.One,  *inx  echod. 

Deut.  6.    7  it  shall  be  forgiven  him  for  any  thing 
2.  Word,  thing,  "15}  dabar. 

Gen.  18.  14  Is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  LORD? 
Nuni2o.  19  I  will  only,  without,  .any  thing,  .go 
--.  What  and  what,  hcinD  meumah. 

Gen.  22.  12  neither  do  thou  any  tiling  unto  him :  for 

30.  31  Thou  shalt  not  give  me  any  thing :  if  thou 

39.    9  neither  hath  he  kept  back  any  tiling  from 

39.  23  of  the^prison  looked  not  at  any  thing 

Nuni22.  38  have  1..  any  power  at  all  to  say  any  thing? 

Deut  24.  10  thou  dost  lend  thy  brother  any  thing 

1  Sa.  20.  26  Saul  spake  not  any  thing  that  day:  for 

20.  39  the  lad  knew  not  anything:  onlyJonathan 

21.  2  Let  no  man  know  any  thing  of  the 

25.  15  neither  missed  we  any  thing,  as  long  as 
?  Sa.  13.    2  thought  it  hard  for  him  to  do  any  thing 

2  Ch.  9.  20  it  was  (not)  any  thing  accounted  of  in 
Eccl.  9.  s  the  dead  know  not  any  thing,  neither 
Jon.    3.    7  neither,  .herd  nor  flock,  taste  any  thing 

4,  Not  one,  no  one,  finSeis,  medeis. 

Rom. 13.  8  Owe  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love  one 
2  Co.    6.    3  Giving  no  offence  in  any  thing,  that  the 


5, Not  even  one,  ovSeis  oudeis. 

Mark  16.    8  neither  said  they  any  thing  to  any  (man) 

6.A?iy,  anything,  ris  Us,tl  ti. 

Matt 24.  j.y  Let  him.  .come  down  to  take  any  thing 
Markn.  13  came,  if  haply  he  might  find  any  thing 

13.  15  neither  enter,  .to  take  any  thing  out  of 
Lukeig.    S  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man 

22.  35  when  I  sent  you.  .lacked  ye  any  thing? 
John  7.   4  no  man  (that)  doeth  any  thing  in  secret 

14.  14  If  ye  shall  ask  any  thing  in  my  name 
Acts  17.  25  as  though  he  needed  any  thing,  seeing 

19.  39  if  ye  enquire  any  thing  concerning  other 
25.  11  or  have  committed  any  thing  worthy  of 

Romi4.  14  but  to  him  that  esteemeth  any  thing  to 

1  Co.    2.    2  For  I  determined  not  to  know  any  thing 

3.    7  neither  is  he  that  planteth  any  thing 

8.  2  if  any  man  think,  .he  knoweth  any  thing 
10. 19  [say  I  then?  that  the  idol  is  any  thing] 

10.  19  that  which  is  offered,  .idols  is  any  thing? 
14.  35  if  they  will  learn  any  thing,  let  them 

2  Co.    2.  10  To  whom  ye  forgive  any  thing,  I  (forgive) 

3.    5  to  think  any  thing  as  of  ourselves  ;  but 
Gal.    5.    6  neither  circumcision  availeth  any  thing 
6.  15  ;  1  Th.  1.  8 ;  Jas.  1.  7 ;  1  Jo.  5,  14. 
7. One,  eV  hen,  John  I.  3. 

8.  All,  iras  pas,  Acts  10.  14  ;  Rev.  21.  27. 
[See  also  Not,  superfluous,  sweat.] 

ANY  thing  at  all  — 

Any  one,  any  thing,  tis  tis,n  ti. 

Acts  25.    8  Cesar,  have  I  offended  any  thing  at  all 

ANY  whither  — 

Whether,  niw  n^x  aneh  va-anah. 

1  Ki.   2.  36  and  go  not  forth  thence  any  whither 

2. -42  walkest  abroad  any  whither,  that  thou 

ANY  wise,  in  — 
l.Only,  ^]N  ak. 

Psa.  37.    8  fret  not  thyself  in  any  wise  to  do  evil 
2. Only,  surely,  pn  raq. 

Josh.  6.  18  ye,  in  any  wise  keep,  .from  the  accursed 

[See  also  Exod.  22.  23;  Lev.  19.  n;  27.  19;  Deut. 

17.  15 ;  21.  23 ;  22.  7 ;  Josh.  23. 12 ;  1  Sa.  6. 3 ;  1  Ki. 

11.  22.] 

APACE  — 

1 .  To  go  on,  "i\bn  lialak. 

2  Sa.  18.  25  And  he  came  apace,  and  drew  near 
2. Refuge,  flight,  D'up  manos. 

Jer    46.    5  and  are  fled  apace,  and  look  not  hack 
APART  — 
1. Apart,  13  had. 

Zech.12.  12  the  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart 
[This  participle  occurs  eleven  times  in  v.  12, 13,  14.] 
2. By  themselves,  nar   ISlav  hat'  idian. 

Matt  14.  13  he  departed,  .into  a  desert  place  apart 
14.  23  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart  to  pray 
17.    1  bringeth.  .into  an  high  mountain  apart 

17.  19  Then  came  the  disciples  to  Jesus  apart 

20,  17  Jesus,  .took  the  twelve  disciples  apart  in 
Mark  6.  31  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert 

9.  2  andleadeththemup. .  apart  by  themselves 

APART,  to  put  or  set  — 
Separation,  rnj  niddah. 

Lev.  15.  19  she  shall  be  put  apart  seven  days 

18.  19  as  she  is  put  apart  for  her  uncleanness 
Eze.  22.  10  that  was  set  apart  for  pollution 

APE  — 

Ape,  marmoset,  *f\p  qoph. 

1  Ki.  10.  22  silver,  ivory,  and  apes,  and  peacocks 

2  Ch.    9.  21  silver,  ivory,  and  apes,  and  peacocks 

A-PEL'-LES,  'A?re\A^s. 

A  disciple  at  Rome,  to  whom  Paul  sends  salutation 

Rom.  16  10  Salute  A.  approved  in  Christ 
A-PHAR-SA'-CHITES,  s*:?P"i5X.    Meaning  uncertain. 
An  unknown  Assyrian  tribe. 

Ezra   5.    6  Tatnai.. and  his  companions  the  A. 
6.    6  Tatnai.  .and  your  companions  the  A. 

A-PHAR-SATH'-CHITES,    ICJpCTSlS 
Perhaps  the  same  as  the  preceding. 

Ezra   4.    9  Then . .  Rehum  the  chancellor,  and . .  A. 
A-PHAR'-SITES,  x-p")2N.     Meaning  uncertain. 
Perhaps  the  same  as  the  preceding. 

Ezra    4.    9  Then.  .Rehum  the  chancellor,  and.  .A. 
A'-PHEK,  pBK  fortress. 

1.  A  royal  city  of  the  Canaanites,  taken  by  Joshua  and 
assigned  to  Issachar.  Probably  the  same  as  the  Aphe- 
kah  of  Josh.  15.  53. 

Josh.12.  18  [these  are  the  kings].  .The  king  of  A.; 
1  Sa.    4.    1  and  the  Philistines  pitched  in  A. 

29.    1  Philistines  gathered . .  their  armies  to  A. 

2.  A  city  E.  of  Cinneroth,  where  Benhadad  was  de- 
feated by  Ahab. 

iKi.  20.  26  came  to  pass.  .Ben-hadad.  .went  up  to  A 
20.  30  But  the  rest  fled  to  A.,  into  the  city 

2Ki.  13.  17  thou  shalt  smite  the  Syrians  in  A.,  till 
°.  With  the  article  "the  Aphek,"  a  place  where  the 
Philistines  encamped  while  the  Israelites  were  at  Eben- 
ezer.     This  was  N.W.  and  not  far  from  Jerusalem. 

1  Sa.    4.    1  and  the  Philistines  pitched  in  A. 


4.  The  scene  of  a  battle  wherein  Saul  was  defeated  and 
slain. 

1  Sa.  29.    1  Philistines  gathered,  .their  armies  to  A. 
A-PHE'-KAHf  X$m  fortress. 
A  city  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah,  near  Beth-tappuah. 

Josh.15.  53  And  Janum,  and  Beth-tappuah,  and  A. 
A-PHI'-AH,  rrax  stHving. 
One  of  Saul's  ancestors,  B.C.  1225. 

1  Sa.    9.    1  Zeror,  the  son  of  Bechorath,  the  son  of  A    | 
A'-PHLK,  paN  npsx  p'SN  fortress. 

A  city  of  Asher  in  the  N."  of  Canaan.  It  is  the  Aphaka 
on  the  river  Adonis.  The  Canaanites  kept  possession 
of  this  stronghold. 

Josh.  1 3.    4  unto  A.,  to  the  borders  of  the  Amorites 
19.  30  Ummah  also,  and  A.,  and  Rehob,  twenty 

Judg.  1.  31  did  Asher  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  A. 

2  Ki.  13.  17  for  thou  shalt  smite  the  Syrians  in  A. 
APH'-RAH,  rrjcy  hamlet. 

A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Philistia.  It  is  perhaps  the 
same  as  Ophrak,  but  this  is  uncertain,  as  all  the  towns 
named  in  the  context  are  in  the  low  country,  while 
Ophrah  would  seem  to  be  E.  of  Bethel. 

Mic.    1.  10  in  the  house  of  A.  roll  thyself  in  the  dust 
APH'-SES,  I'i'En  the  dispersed. 

A  Levite  chief  of  the  iSth  of  the  24  courses  in  the 
service  of  the  temple,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  24.15  seventeenth  to  Hezir.  .eighteenth  to  A. 
APIECE  — 

1.  The  one  pillar,  inxn  *rtejjn  ha-ammud  ha-echad. 

1  Ki.    7.  15  pillars,  .of  eighteen  cubits  high  apiece 

2.  The  spoon,  ^sn  hakkaph. 

Num.  7.  86  spoons,  .(weighing)  ten  (shekels)  apiece 

3.  Up  to,  up  by,  apiece,  avd  ana. 

Luke   9.    3  journey,  .neither  have  two  coats  [apiece] 
John  2.    6  containing  two  or  three  firkins  apiece 

A-POL  LO-Nl'-A,  ' *  Air  oWwv  la,  place  of  Apollo. 
A  city  of  Macedonia,  in  the  district  of  Mygdonia,  28 
miles  from  Amphipolis,  and    35   from    Thessalonica. 
This  city  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  more  cele- 
brated Apollonia  in  Illyria. 

Acts  17.    1  when  they  had  passed  through,  .and  A, 

A-POL'-LOS,  'A-rroXKcas  a  destroyer. 

An  eloquent  Jew  from  Alexandria,  who  came  to  Ephesus 

during  the  absence  of  Paul  (a.d.  54),  and  was  there  more 

perfectly  taught  in  Christian  doctrine  by  Aquila  and 

Priscilla. 

Acts  18.  24  a  certain  Jew  named  A...  came  to  Ephesus 
19.    1  And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  while  A.  was 
1  Co.    1.  12  every  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of . .  A. 
3.    4  and  another,  I  (am)  of  A. ;  are  ye  not 
3.    5  Who  then  is  Paul,  and  who  (is)  A.,  but 
3.    6  I  have  planted,  A.  watered ;  but  God  gave 

3.  22  Whether  Paul,  or  A.,  or  Cephas,  or  the 

4.  6  I  have,  .transferred  to  myself  and  to  A. 

16.  12  As  touching  (our)  brother  A.,  I  greatly 
Titus  3.  13  Bring,  .and  A.  on  their  journey  diligently 

A-POL-LY'-ON,  'AttoWvojv,  destruction,  destroyer. 

The  Greek  translation  of  the  Hebrew  "Abaddon." 
Rev.   9. 11  in  the  Greek  tongue  hath  (his)  name  A. 

APOSTLE  — 

One  sent  forth,  airdo-roAos,  apostolos. 

Matt  10.    2  Now  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles 

Mark  6.  30  And  the  apostles  gathered  themselves 

Luke  6.  13  chose  twelve,  whom,  .he  named  apostles 

9.  10  the  apostles,  when  they  were  returned 

11.  49  I  will  send  them  prophets  and  apostles 

17.  5  the  apostles  said  unto  the  Lord,  Increase 
22.  14  he  sat  down,  and  the  twelve  apostles 

24.  10  which  told  these  things  unto  the  apostle 
Acts    1.    2  given  commandments  unto  the  apostles 

1.  26  was  numbered  with  the  eleven  apostles 

2.  37  and  said,  .to  the  rest  of  the  apostles 
2.  42  continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles' 
2.  43  many  wonders . .  done  by  the  apostles 
4.  33  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles 
4.  35  laid,  .down  at  the  apostles'  feet:  and 

4.  36  Joses,  who  by  the  apostles  was  surnamed 

4.  37  sold,  .and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles'  feet 

5.  2  part,  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles'  feet ' 
5.  12  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were  many 
5.  18  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles,  and  put 
5.  29  Peter  and  the.  .apostles  answered  and 

5.  34  commanded  to  put  the  [apostles]  forth  a 

5.  40  when  they  had  called  the  apostles,  and 

6.  6  Whom  they  set  before  the  apostles :  and 
8.    1  were  all  scattered . .  except  the  apostles 
8.  14  when  the  apostles  which  were  at  Jerusa. 

8.  18  through  laying  on  of  the  apostles'  hands 

9.  27  took,  .and  brought  (him)  to  the  apostles 
11.    1  the  apostles  and  brethren  that  were  in 
14.    4  with  the  Jews,  and  part  with  the  apostles 

14.  14  (which)  when  the  apostles,  Barnabas  and 

15.  2  go  up  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  apostles 

15.    4  they  were  received . .  (of)  the  apostles  and 
15.    6  the  apostles  and  elders  came  together 

15.  22  Then  pleased  it  the  apostles  and  ciders 
15  23  The  apostles  and  elders  and  brethren 
15-  33  were  let  go  in  peace,  .unto  the  apostles 

16.  4  that  were  ordained  of  the  apostles  and 
Rom.  1.    1  Paul. .called (to  be)an  apostle,  separateu 

ti.  13  inasmuch  as  I  am  the  apostle  of  the 

16.    7  who  are  of  note  among  the  apostles,  who 


APOSTLE 


45 


APPEARANCE 


i  Co.    i.    i  Paul,  called .  .an  apostle  of  Jesus  Ch  ist 
4.    9  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  last 
9.    1  Am  I  not  an  apostle?  am  I  not  free? 
9.    2  If  I  be  not  an  apostle  unto  others,  yet 
9    5  a  wife,  as  well  as  other  apostles,  and 
12.  28  hath  set  some  in  the  church,  first  apostles 
12.  29  (Are)  all  apostles';  (are)  all  prophets? 
15.    7  seen  of  James ;  then  of  all  the  apostles 
15.    9  least,  .apostles,  .to  be  called  an  apostle 
2  Co.    1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the 
•  11.    5  not  a  whit  behind  the  very  cliiefest  apostle 

11. 13  transforming  themselves  into  the  apostles 
12.  11  am  I  behind  the  very  cliiefest  apostles 
12. 12  the  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought 

Gal.     1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle,  (not  of  men,  neither  by 
1.  17  Neither  went,  .them  winch  were  apostles 

1.  19  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none,  save 
Eph.    1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the 

2.  20  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles 

3.  5  now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  and 
4. 11  gave  some  apostles ;  and   ome,  prophets 

Col.     1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the 
1  Th.  2.    6  have  been  burdensome,  as  the  apostles  of 
t  Ti.    1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the 

2.  7  I  am  ordained  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle 
2TL    1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the 

1.  1 1  I  am  appointed  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle 
Titus  1.  1  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  Apostle  of 
Heb.   3.    1  holy  brethren . .  consider  the  apostle  and 

1  Pe.    1.    1  Peter,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  the 

2  Pe.    1.    1  Simon  Peter,  a  servant  and  an  apostle  of 

3.  2  of  the  commandment  of  us  the  apostles 
Jude       17  which  were  spoken  before  of  the  apostles 
Rev.    2.    2  tried  them  which  say  they  are  apostles,and 

i3.  20  Rejoice,  .holy  apostles  and  prophets ;  for 

21. 14  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the 

APOSTLE,  false  — 

False  or  lying  apostle,  il/evBairoa-roKos. 

2  Co.  11.  13  For  such  (are)  false  apostles,  deceitful 

APOSTLESHIP  — 

A  sending  forth,  a-noo-roAr)  apostole. 

Acts    1.  25  part  of  this  ministry  and  apostleship 
Rom.  1.    5  we  have  received  grace  and  apostleship 

1  Co.   9.    2  for  the  seal  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in 
Gal.     2.    8  to  the  apostleship  of  the  circumcision 

APOTHECARIES'    ART,  prepared  by  the  — 
Perfumes,  nn^np  mirqachath. 

2  Ch.  16.  14  (spices)  prepared  by  the  apothecaries'  art 
APOTHECARY  — 

1.7*0  mix,  compound,  perfume,  njTJ  raqach. 

Exod  30.  25  compound  after  the  art  of  the  apothecary 
30.  35  confection  after  the  art  of  the  apothecary 
37.  29  according  to  the  work  of  the  apothecary 

Eccl.io.    1  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apothecary 

2.  Mixture,  spices,  n^n  raqqach. 

Neh.    3.    8  Hananiah.  .son  of  (one  of),  .apothecaries 
AP-PA'-IM,  it »N  face,  presence. 

■Son  of  Nadab,  great-grandson  of  Jerahmeel,   son  of 
Hezron,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   2.  30  And  the  sons  of  Nadab ;  Seled,  and  A. 
2.  31  And  the  sons  of  A. ;  Ishi.     And  the  sons 
APPAREL  — 
1.  Garment,  152  beged. 

Judgi7.  10  I  will  give  thee,  .a  suit  of  apparel,  and 

1  Sa.  27.    9  took  away  the  sheep,  .and  the  apparel 

2  Sa.  14.    2  put  on  now  mourning  apparel,  and 
Zech.14.  14  silver,  and  apparel,  in  great  abundance 

2,Clothing,  (?ia^  lebush. 

2  Sa.    1.  24  on  ornaments  of  gold  upon  your  apparel 
Esth.  6.    8  Let  the  royal  apparel  be  brought  which 
6.    9  let  this  apparel  and  horse  be  delivered  to 
6.  10  Make  haste,  .take  the  apparel  and  the 
6.  11  Then  took  Haman  the  apparel  and  the 

8.  15  Mordecai  went  out.  .in  royal  apparel  of 
Isa.   63.    1  this,  .glorious  in  his  apparel,  travelling 

63.    2  "Wherefore,  .red  in  thine  apparel,  and  thy 
^.Clothing,  mzbn  mcdbush. 

1  Ki.  10.    5  of  his  ministers,  and  their  apparel 

2  Ch.   9.    4  of  his  ministers,  and  their  apparel 

9.  4  his  cup-bearers  also,  and  their  apparel 
Zeph.  1.    8  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel 

4. Raiment,  rh$&  simlah. 

2  Sa.  12.  20  David  arose,  .and  changed  his  apparel 
Isa.     4.    1  We  will . .  wear  our  own  apparel 

o.Robe,  garment,  icrd-qs  esthes. 

Acts  1.  10  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white  apparel 
12.  21  Herod,  arrayed  in  royal  apparel,  sat  upon 

Jas.    2.    2  a  man  with  a  gold  ring,  in  goodly  apparel 
^.Garment,  ifxanov  himation. 

1  Pe.    3.    3  or  of  putting  on  of  apparel 
7. Garment,  ip.aTHTfj.6s,  himatismos. 

Acts  20.  33  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  .or  apparel 
S.Long  robe,  Karao-rcA.^  katastole. 

1  Ti.    2.    9  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel 

APPAREL,  changeable  suits  of  — 

Costly  apparel,  mantle,  niion?  machalatsoth. 

Isa.     3.  22  changeable  suits' of  apparel,  and  the 
APPAREL  in  — 
To  be  clothed,  ^?S  labesh,  4. 

Ezra   3.  10  they  set  the  priests  in  their  apparel  with 


APPAREL,  rich  — 

Rich  apparel,  D'SVi?  beromim. 

Eze.  27.  24  work,  and  in  chests  of  rich  apparel 

APPARELLED  — 

la  apparel,  iv  tfiarto'jjuo  en  himatismo. 

Luke  7.  25  they  which  are  gorgeously  apparelled 

APPARELLED,  to  be  — 
To  be  clothed,  ebb  labesh. 

2Sa.  13.  18  king's  daughters.. virgins  apparelled 
APPARENTLY  — 
{And)  appearance,  nyiD  marek. 

Xumi2.    8  With  him  will  I  speak,  .even  apparently 
APPEAL  to  or  unto,  to  — 
To  call  upon,  iiriKaAeofj.a.1  epikaleomai. 

Acts  25.  1 1  but  if  there  be  none . .  I  appeal  unto  Cesar 
25.  12  Hast  thou  appealed  unto  Cesar .  unto 
25.  21  when  Paul  had  appealed  to  be  reserved 

25.  25  he  himself  hath  appealed  to  Augustus 

26.  32  if  he  had  not  appealed  unto  Cesar 

28.  19  I  was  constrained  to  appeal  unto  Cesar 

APPEAR,  (things  which  do),  to — 
l.To  reveal  (itself),  n^a  galah. 

Pro  v.  27.  25  hay  appeareth,  and  the  tender  grass 

2.  To  be  revealed,  uncovered,  rhz  galah,  2. 

Gen.  35.    7  there  God  appeared  unto  him,  when  he 
1  Sa.    2.  27  Did  I  plainly  appear  unto  the  house  of 

3.  To  lie  down,  be  white,  shine,  ty?a  galosh. 

Song  4.    1  flock  of  goats,  .appear  from  mt.  Gilead 
6.    5  flock  of  goats,  .appear  from  Gilead 

4.  To  go  forth,  tey;  yatsa. 

Neh.   4.  21  of  the  morning  till  the  stars  appeared 
5. To  turn  or  shew  the  face,  front,  rtJ3  panah. 

Exod  14.  27  when  the  morning  appeared,  .the  Egypt. 

6.  To  open,  nns  patach,  3. 

Song    7.  12  the  tender  grape  appear,  .the  pomegrau. 

7. To  be  seen,  run  raah,  2. 

Gen.    1.    9  let  the  dry  (land)  appear :  and  it  was  so 
12.    7  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Abram,  and  said 

12.  7  altar  unto  the  Lord,  who  appeared  unto 

17.  1  Lord  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto 

18.  1  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  the  plains  of 
26.  2  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him,  and  said 
26.  24  Lord  appeared  unto  him  the  same  night 
35.  1  appeared  unto  thee  when  thou  fleddest 
35.  9  God  appeared  unto  Jacob  again,  when  he 
48.  3  Jacob  said . .  God  Almighty  appeared  unto 

Exod.  3.    2  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a  flame  of 

3.  16  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  .appeared  unto 

4.  1  Lord  hath  not  appeared  unto  thee 

4.    5  God  of  Jacob,  hath  appeared  unto  thee 

6.  3  I  appeared  unto  Abraham . .  and  unto  J. 
16.  10  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  the  cloud 
23.  15  and  none  shall  appear  before  me  empty 
23.  17  thy  males  shall  appear  before  the  Lord 
34.  20  And  none  shall  appear  before  me  empty 
34.  23  shall  all  your  men  children  appear 

34.  24  thou  shalt  go  up  to  appear  before  the 
Lev.    9.   4  to-day  the  Lord  will  appear  unto  you 
9.    6  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  appear  unto 
9.  23  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  all 

13.  14  when  raw  flesh  appeareth.  .he  shall  be 
13.  57  if  it  appear  still  in  the  garment,  either 
16.    2  I  will  appear  in  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy 

Xum  14.  10  Lord  appeared  in  the  tabernacle  of  the 
16. 19  Lord  appeared  unto  all  the  congregation 
16.  42  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared 
20.   6  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  them 

Dent  16.  16  shall  all  thy  males  appear  before  the  Lord 
16. 16  they  shall  not  appear  before  the  Lord 
31.  n  Israel  is  come  to  appear  before  the  Lord 
31. 15  the  Lord  appeared  in  the  tabernacle 

Judg.  6.  12  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him 
13.    3  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  the 
13. 10  the  man  hath  appeared  unto  me,  that 
13.  21  Lord  did  no  more  appear  to  Manoah 

1  Sa.    1.  22  I  will  bring  him,  that  he  may  appear 

3.  21  the  Lord  appeared  again  in  Shiloh 

2  Sa.  22.  16  the  channels  of  the  sea  appeared,  the 

1  Ki.  3.    s  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  in  a  dream 

9.    2  LORD  appeared  to  Solomon  the  second 
11.    9  which  had  appeared  unto  him  twice 

2  Ch.    1.    7  that  night  did  God  appear  unto  Solomon 

3.    1  appeared  unto  David  his  father,  in  the 

7.  12  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  by  night 
Psa.  42.    2  when  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God? 

84.    7  (everyone  of  them) . .  appeareth  before  God 

90.  16  Let  thy  work  appear  unto  thy  servants 
102.  16  when. .  he  shall  appear  in  his  glory 
Song  2.  12  The  flowers  appear  on  the  earth ;  the 
Isa.     1.  12  When  ye  come  to  appear  before  me 

66.    5  he  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and  they 
Jer.  13.  26  upon  thy  face,  that,  .shame  may  appear 

31.    3  Lord  hath  appeared  of  old  unto  me 
Eze.  10.    1  appeared  over  them,  .a  sapphire  stone 

10.    8  appeared,  .a  man's  hand  under  their 

19.  11  appeared  in  her  height  with  the  multitude 
2i,  24  in  all  your  doings  your  sins  do  appear 

Dan.    1.  15  their  countenances  appeared  fairer  and 

8.  1  a  vision  appeared  unto  me.  .me  Daniel 
8.    1  which  appeared  unto  me  at  the  first 

Mai.   3.    2  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth? 


8. To  be  seen,  look  out,  fjjsp  shaqaph,  2. 

Jer.     6.    1  evil  appeareth  out  of  the  north,  and 
9. To  shine  again,  ava<paiuo/j.at  anophainomai. 

Luke  19.  11  kingdom,  .should  immediately  appear 
10. To  manifest  (one's  self,  ifupavifa  emphanizo. 

Matt  27.  53  after  his  resurrection,  .appeared  unto 

Heb.   9.  24  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for 

11.  To  shine  upon,  4-KHpa.ivw  epiphaino. 

Acts  27.  20  when  neither  sun  nor  stars,  .appeared 
Titus  2.  11  For  the  grace  of  God.  .hath  ajtpeared  to 
3.    4  that  the  kindness  and  love,  .appealed 

l'2.To  come,  epxofiai  erchomai. 

Acts  22.  30  commanded  the  chief  priests . .  to  [appear] 

IB. To  see,  be  seen,  OTrro/xai  optomai. 

Matt  17.    3  there  appeared  unto  them  Moses  and 
Mark  9.    4  there  appeared  unto  them  Elias  with 
Luke  1.  11  there  appeared  unto  him  an  angel  of  the 
9.  31  who  appeared  in  glory,  and  spake  of  his 

22.  43  [there  appeared  an  angel  unto  him  from) 
24.  34  The  Lord  is  risen .  .and  hath  appeared  to 

Acts    2.    3  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues 
7.    2  The  God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our 
7.  30  when  forty  years  were  expired,  .appeared 
7.  35  the  angel  which  appeared  to  him  in  the 
9.  17  Jesus,  that  appeared  unto  thee  in  the  way 
16.    9  a  vision  appealed  to  Paul  in  the  night 
26.  16  I  have  appeared,  .the  which  I  will  appear 
Heb.   9.  28  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear 
Rev.  12.    1  there  appeared  a  great  wonder  in  heaven 

12.  3  there  appeared  another  wonder  in  heaven 

14.  To  shine,  appear,  be  seen,  <pa,tvo/j.ai  phainomai. 
Matt.  1.  20  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him 

2.    7  enquired,  .what  time  the  star  appeared 
2.  13  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth  to  Joseph 

2.  19  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appearelh  in  a  dream 
6.  16  that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast 

6.  18  That  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast 

13.  26  brought  forth,  .then  appeared  the  tares 

23.  27  which  indeed  appear  beautiful  outward 

23.  28  Even  so  ye  also  outwardly  appear 

24.  30  then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of 
Mark  16.  9  [when  (Jesus)  was  risen .  .appeared  iirst] 
Luke  9.  8  And  of  some,  that  Elias  had  appeared 
Rom.  7.  13  Butsin.thatit  might  appear  sin,  working 
2  Co.  13.  7  not  that  we  should  appear  approved,  but 
Heb.  11.  3  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear 
Jas.  4.  14  It  is  even  a  vapour,  that  appeareth  for  a 
1  Pe.   4.  18  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear? 

15.  To  be  manifest,  iipl  <pavzp6s. 

1  Ti.     4.15  that  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  all 

16.  To  make  manifest,  <pavep6u>  phaneroo. 

Mark  16. 12  [After  that  he  appeared  in  another  form] 
16.  14  [Afterward  he  appeared  unto  the  eleven] 

2  Co.   5.  10  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 

7.  12  that  our  care  for  you . .  might  appear  unto 
Col.  3.  4  Chrtet . .  shall  appear . .  ye  shall  also  appear 
Heb.   9.  26  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 

1  Pe.    5.    4  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  appear,  ye 
1  Jo.    2.  28  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  may  have 

3.  2  it  doth  not  yet  appear,  .he  shall  appear 
Rev.    3.  18  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear 

APPEAR,  made  — 

Making  bare,  ?p.T\D  maeJisoph. 

Gen.  30.  37  and  made  the  white  appear,  .in  the  rod 

APPEARANCE  — 

1.  Appearance,  n$1£  march. 

Num.  9.  15  upon  the  tabernacle,  .the  appearance  of 

q.  16  and  the  appearance  of  Are  by  night' 
Eze.     1.    s  And  this  (was)  their  appearance ;  theyhad 
1.  13  their  appearance,  .like  the  appearance  of 
1.  14"  as  the  appearance  of  a  flash  of  lightning 
1.  16  the  appearance  of  the  wheels  and  their 
1.  16  then-  appearance  and  their  work,  .as  it 
1.  26  as  the  appearance  of  a  sapphire  stone 
1.  26  as  the  appearance  of  a  man  above  upon  it 
1.  27  appearance  of  fire,  .from  the  appearance 
1.  27  from  the  appearance,  .the  appearance  of 
1.  28  as  the  appearance  of  the  bow  that  is 
1.  28  so  (was)  the  appearance  of  the  brightness 
r.  28  This  (was)  the  appearance  of  the  likeness 

8.  2  the  app.  of  fire,  .from  the  app. .  .the  app. 
10.    1  as  the  appearance  of  the  likeness  of  a 
10.    9  the  appearance  of  the  wheels,  .as  the 
10. 10  their  appearances,  they  four  had  one 

10.  22  their  appearances  and  themselves :  they 
40n,  3  whose  appearance,  .like  the  appearance 

41.  21  the  appearance,  .as  the  appearance 

42.  11  the  way.  .(was)  like  the  appearance  of  tlnj 

43.  3  according  to  the  appearance  of  the  vision 
Dan.    8.  15  there  stood .  .the  appearance  of  a  man 

10.    6  his  face  as  the  appearance  of  lightning 
10.  18  like  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  he 
Joel    2.    4  The  appearance,  .as  the  appearance 
Z.Sighf,  elSos  eidos. 

1  Th.  5.  22  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil 
o. Sight.  6$is  opsis. 

John  7.  24  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance 
■i.-Facc,  countenance,  TrpSo-wn-ov  prosopon. 

2  Co.    5.  12  them  which;glory  in  appearance,  and  not 

APPEARANCE,  outward  — 
l.Eye,  \:u  ayin. 

x.  Sa.  16.    7  man  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance 


I! 


APPBARBTH 


46 


APPOINTED 


> 


2,Face,  countenance,  -np6(ToiTrov  prosopon. 

2 Co.  10.    7  on  things  alter  the  outward  appearance? 
APPEARETH  — 
Appearance,  •ifrnp  march. 

Lev.  13.  43  leprosy  appeareth  iu  the  skiu  of  the  fiesh 
APPEARING  — 
1. Uncovering,  air  oKaXuty  is  apokalupsis. 

1  Pe.    1.    7  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ 
2. Manifestation,  iirttfuLveta  epiphaneia. 

1  Ti.    6.  14  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

2  Ti.    1.  10  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 

4.    1  judge,  .at  lus  appearing  and  his  kingdom 
4.    8  untu  all  them  also  that  love  his  appealing 
Titus  2.  13  Looking  for.  .the  glorious  appearing  of 

APPEARING,  not  — 

Not  evident,  &5-o\os  adelos. 

Luke  11.  44  for  ye  are  as  graves  which  appear  not 

APPEASE,  to  — 

l.To  cover,  pacify,  132  kaphar,  3 

Gen.  32.  20  I  will  appease  him  with  the  present 
2,7*o  quiet,  OjS?  shaqat,  5. 

Prov.15.  18  (he  that  is)  slow  to  anger  appeaseth  strife 
3.7*0  let  or  send  down,  KaraareWa}  katastello. 

Acts  19.  35  the  town-clerk  had  appeased  the  people 
APPEASED,  to  be  — 
To  cease,  settle  down,  i)=(p  shahak. 

Esth.  2.    1  wrath  of  king  Ahasuerus  was  appeased 
APPERTAIN,  to  — 
To  be  becoming,  nx;  yaah. 

Jer.    10.    7  6  King,  .to  thee  doth  it  appertain 

APPETITE  — 
I. Life,  *n  chai. 

Job  38,  39  or  fill  the  appetitej>f  the  young  lions 

2. Soul,  &$i  ncphesh. 

Prov.23.    2  if  thou  (be)  a  man  given  to'appetite 
Eccl.  6.    7  and  yet  the  appetite  is  not  filled 

APPETITE,  to  have  — 

To  go  or  run  to  and  fro,  pp£>  shaqaq. 

Isa.    29.    8  faint,  and  his  soul  hath  appetite 

AP-PHI'-A,  'Awfpia. 

A  female  disciple  to  whom,  with  Philemon  and  Archip- 

pus,  Paul  wrote  an  epistle. 

Phm.        2  to  (our)  beloved  A.,  and  Archippus 
AP-PEt  FO'-RTTM,  mar/vet  of  Appius  {Claudius). 
A  well-known  station,  43  miles  from  Rome,  on  the  Ap- 
pian  Way,  the  great  road  from  Rome  to  the  Bay  of 
Naples.  The  site  is  near  Trej>onti,  where  the  forty-third 
mile  stone  is  still  preserved. 

Acts  28.  15  they  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  A.  forum 

APPLE  — 

Apple,  quinces,  rnDPi  taptpuach. 

Prov.23.  11  A  word  fitly  spoken,  .apples  of  gold  in 
Song  2.    5  comfort  me  with  apples  :  for  I  (am)  sick 

7.  8  and  the  smell  of  thy  nose  like  apples 

APPLE  of  the  eye  — 

1. Little  man,  {the  daughter),  (713)  ptrx  ishon  {hath). 
Deut32.  10  he  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  his  eye 
Psa.  17.    8  Keep  me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,  hide 
Prov.  7.    2  Keep,  .my  law  as  the  apple  of  thine  eye 

2.  The  pupil,  or  gate,  nns  babah. 

Zech.  2.    8  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  e. 

3.  Daughter,  r>3  bath. 

Lam.  2.  18  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  eye  cease 

APPLE  TREE  — 
Apple-tree,  rflsn  tappuach. 

Song  2.    3  As  the  apple-tree  among  the  trees  of  the 

8.  5  I  raised  thee  up  under  the  apple-tree 
Joel    1.  12  the  apple-tree,  .is  withered  away 

APPLY,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  go  in,  to  a  bo,  5. 

Psa.  90.  12  we  may  apply  (our)  hearts  unto  wisdom 
Prov  23.  12  Apply  thine  heart  unto  instruction 

2. 7*o  incline,  rim  natah,  5. 

Prov.  2.    2  apply  thine  heart  to  understanding 
3.  To  give,  jro  nathan. 

Eccl.  8.    9  All  this  have  1  seen,  and  applied  my  heart 
8.  16  I  applied  mine  heart  to  know  wisdom 

4.7*0  go  round,  DJtp  sabab. 

Eccl.  7.  25  I  applied  mine  heart  to  know,  .wisdom 
5.  To  set,  place,  put,  T\'p  shith. 

Prov22.  17  apply  thine  heart  unto  my  knowledge 
APPOINT,  to  — 
1.2*0  sag,  T?x  amar. 

1  Ki.   5,    6  according  to  all  that  thou  shalt  appoint 
11.  18  Pharoah.  .appointed  him  victuals  and 

Esth.  2.  15  Ilegai.  .keeper  of  the  women,  appointed 
2.7*0  choose,  "ins  bachar* 

2Sa.  15. 15  whatsoever,  .the  king  shall  appoint 

3.  To  speak,  *i?t  dabar,  3. 

1  Ki.  12.  12  the  third  day,  as  the  king  had  appointed 

4.  To  decree,  engrave,  ppn  chaqaq. 

Prov.  8.  29  he  appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth 


5.  To  cause  to  know,  j/v  yada,  5. 

1  Sa.  21.    2  I  have  appointed  (my)  servants  to  such 
Q.To  decide,  manifest,  n?;  yakach,  5. 

Gen.  24.  14  thou  hast  appointed  for  thy  servant 

24.  44  hath  appointed  out  for  my  master's  son 

7 .To  found,  appoint,  ~ip;  yasad,  3. 

Esth.  1.    8  king  had  appointed  to  all  the  officers 
8.  To  appoint,  "iy;  yaad. 

2  Sa.  20.    5  the  set  time  which  he  had  appointed 
Jer.  47.    7  shore?  there  hath  he  appointed  it 

Mic.    6.    9  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed 
9  To  number,  hjd  manah,  3. 

Job     7.    3  wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me 
Dan.   1.    5  king  appointed  them  a  daily  provision 
1.  10  the  king,  who  hath  appointed  your 

10.  To  point  out,  indicate,  define,  3p}  naqab. 

Gen.  30.  28  Appoint  me  thy  wages,  and  1  will  give  it 

11. 7*1?  give,  jrjj  nathan. 

Exod3o.  16  appoint  it  for  the  service  of  the 
Num  35.    6  six  cities . .  which  ye  shall  appoint  for  the 
Josh. 20.    2  Appoint  out  for  you  cities  of  refuge 
2  Ki.    8.    6  the  king  appointed  unto  her  a  certain 
1  Ch.  16.    4  appointed  (certain)  of  the  Levites  to 
Ezra   8.  20  David,  .had  appointed  for  the  service 
Neh.   9.  17  in  then*  rebellion  appointed  a  captain 
Eze.     4.    6  I  have  appointed  thee  each  day  for  a  year 
36.    5  the  heathen,  .have  appointed  my  land 
45.    6  ye  shall  appoint  the  possession  of  the 

12. 7*0  cause  to  stand,  *13JJ  amad,  5. 

1  Ch.  15. 16  appoint  their  brethren . .  the  singers 

15.  17  Levites  appointed  Hemau  the  son  of  Joel 
2Ch.   8.  14  he  appointed,  according  to  the  order  of 

20.  21  he  appointed  singers  unto  the  Lour,  and 
31.    2  Hezekiah  appointed  the  courses  of  the 
33.    8  I  have  appointed  for  your  fathers 

Ezra   3.    8  Zerubbabel.  .appointed  the  Levites,  from 
Neh.   6.    7  thou  hast  also  appointed  prophets  to 

7.  3  appoint  watches  of  the  inhabitants  of 

12.  31  I.  .appointed  two  great  (companies  of 

13.  30  I .  .appointed  the  wards  of  the  priests 
Esth.  4.    5  Hatach.. whom  he  had  appointed  to 

13. To  do,  make,  ftpy  asah. 

Job    14.    5  thou  hast  appointed  his  bounds  that  he 
Psa.  104.  19  he  appointed  the  moon  for  seasons 

14.  To  inspect,  overlook,  1^  paqad. 

Num.  3.  10  thou  shalt  appoint  Aaron  and  his  sons 

4.  27  ye  shall  appoint  unto  them  in  charge 
Jer.   15.    3  I  will  appoint  over  them  four  kinds 

49.  19  a  chosen  (man,  that)  I  may  appoint  over 

50.  44  a  chosen  (man,  that)  I  may  appoint  over 

51.  27  Ashchenaz;  appoint  a  captain  against 

15.  To  charge,  T|2£  paqad,  5. 

Gen.  41.  34  let  him  appoint  officers  over  the  land 
Lev.  26.  16  I  will  even  appoint  over  you  terror 
Num.  1.  50  thou  shalt  appoint  the  Levites  over  the 

1  Sa.  29.    4  thou  hast  appointed  him,  and  let  him  not 

2  Ki.    7.  17  the  king  appointed  the  lord  on  whose 
Esth.  2.    3  let  the  king  appoint  officers  in  all  the 

16.  To  command,  n$  tsavah,  3. 

1  Sa.  25.  30  the  Lord,  .shall  have  appointed  thee 

2  Sa.    6.  21  to  appoint  me  ruler  over  the  people  of 

17. 14  the  Lord  had  appointed  to  defeat  the 
1  Ki.  1.  35  I  have  appointed  him  to  be  ruler  over 
Neh.  5. 14  I  was  appointed  to  be  their  governor  in 

17.  To  set  apart,  EHp  qadesh,  5. 

Josh  20.    7  they  appointed  Kedesh  in  Galilee  in 
IS.  To  raise  up,  mp  qum,  5. 

Dan.    5.  21  he  appointeth  over  it  whomsoever  he  will 

19.7*0  cause  to  meet,  2?rcpare,  frig  qarah,  5. 

Num  35.  11  ye  shall  appoint  you  cities  to  be  cities  of 

20.  To  set,  ma?  stem. 

Exod,  9.    5  Lord  appointed  a  set  time,  saying 

21.  13  I  will  appoint  thee  a  place  whither  he 
Num.  4.  19  appoint  them  every  one  to  his  service 

1  Sa.    8.  11  He  will,  .appoint,  .for  himself,  for  his 

8.  12  he  will  appoint  him  captains  over 

2  Sa.    7.  10  I  will  appoint  a  place  for  my  people 

2  Ki.  10.  24  Jehu  appointed  fourscore  men  without 
11.  18  the  priest  appointed  officers  over  the 
18.  14  king  of  Assyria  appointed,  .three  hundred 
2  Ch.  23.  18  Jehoiada  appointed  the  officers  of  the 
Psa.  78.    5  he.  .appoiutcd  a  law  in  Israel  which 
Isa.    44.    7  since  I  appointtd  the  ancient  people 
61.    3  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in 
Jer.   33.  25  I  have  not  appointed  the  ordinances  of 
Eze.  21.  19  thou  son  of  man,  appoint  thee  two  ways 
21.  20  Appoint  a  way  that  the  sword  may  come 
21.  22  to  appoint  captains.. to  appoint,  .rams 
Hos.    1.  11  the  children,  .appoint  themselves  one 

21.7*o  set,  place,  pat,  rvu>  shith. 

Job    14.  13  thou  wouldest  appoint  me  a  set  time 
Isa.   26.    1  salvation  will  (God)  appoint,  .walls  and 

22.7*o  send,  nS^  shatach. 

1  Ki.    5.    9  unto  the  place  that  thou  shall  appoint 
23.7*o  shew  again,  point  out,  avab'elievv/j.t. 

Luke  10.    1  After  these  things  the  Lord  appointed 
24.7*o  be  laid  off  or  aside,  a.Tr6K€i/j.at  ajjokeimai. 

Heb.    9.  27  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die 
25.7*o  arrange  throughout,  hiardaffw  diatassd. 

Luke  3.  13  Exact  no  more  than  that.,  appointed  you 


Acts    7.  44  tabernacle,  .as  he  had  appointed 

20.  13  for  so  had  he  appointed,  minding  himself 
Tit.      1.    5  ordain  elders,  .as  I  had  appointed  thee 
26.Toput  throughoxd,  Star/fl^i  diatlthemi. 

Luke  22.  29  I  appoint  unto  you . .  hath  appointed . .  me 
27. 7*o  put,  jilace,  'hrn^i  histemi. 

Acts    1.  23  they  appointed  two,  Joseph  called 

17.  31  Because  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the 
2S.7*o  set  down,  Kadiarv/j-t  kathistenii. 

Acts    6.    3  whom  we  may  appoint  over  this  business  " 
29.7*0  do,  make,  iroiew  poieo. 

Heb.   3.    2  was  faithful  to  him  that  appointed  him 
30.7*0  arrange  together,  gvvt6.uv<o  suntasso. 

Matt  26.  19  the  disciples  did  as  Jesus  had  appointed 

27.  10  the  potter's  field,  as  the  Lord  appointed 
31.7*0  arrange,  set  in  order,  Tao"cr&j  tasso. 

Matt  28.  16  where  Jesus  had  appointed  them 

Acts  22.  10  things  which  are  appointed  for  thee  to  do 

28.  23  when  they  had  appointed  him  a  day 
32. 7*o  put,  place,  rid-n^i  tithemi. 

Matt  24.  51  and  appoint  (him)  his  portion  with  the 
Luke  12.  46  and  will  appoint  him  his  portion  with 

1  Th.   5.    9  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but 

2  Ti.     1.  11  Whereunto  I  am  appointed  a  preacher 
Heb.    1.    2  Son,  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all 
1  Pe.    2.    8  whereunto  also  they  were  appointed 

APPOINT  before,  to  — 

7*o  arrange  before  hand,  ■Kpordo-Q-ofj.ai  protassomaL 
Acts  17.  26  determined  the  times  before  appointed 

APPOINT  a  time,  to  — 

7*o  cause  to  meet,  convene,  ij£  yaad,  5. 

Jer.  49.  19  and  who  will  appoint  me  the  time? 
50.  44  and  who  will  appoint  me  the  time  ? 
APPOINTED  — 
l.Sons  of  death,  nniDrj  \i?  bene  themuthah. 

Psa.  79.  11  preserve  thou  those  that  are  appointed 
2.7*o  be  at  a  set  season,  J£i  zaman,  4. 

Ezra  10.  14  wives  in  our  cities  come  at  appointed 
Neh.  10.  34  at  times  appointed  year  by  year,  to  burn 
13.  31  at  times  appointed,  and  f  or  the  first-fruits 
3.7*0  gird  on,  "lart  chagar. 

Judg  18.  11,  16  six  hundred  men  appointed  with 
18. 17  sLx  hundred  men.  .appointed  with 
^.Statute,  ph  choq. 

Job    23. 14  For  he  performeth.  .appointed  for  me 
5. Statute,  decreed  thing,  nj?n  chug'/  <h. 

Jer.     5.  24  he  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed  weeks 
G.Neio  or  full  moon,  Npa  Icese. 

Prov.  7.  20  will  come  home  at  the  day  appointed 
7  Ajjpointed  place  or  time,  ~ijniD  moed. 

Gen.  18.  14  At  the  time  appointed  I  will  return 
Exod23.  15  in  the  time  appointed  of  the  month  Abib 
Num.  9.    2  keep  the  passover  at  his  appointed  season 
g.   3  ye  shall  keep  it  in  his  appointed  season 
9.    7  iu  his  appointed  season  among  the 
9.  13  in  hisappointed  season,  that  man.. bear 
Josh.  8.  14  all  his  people,  at  a  time  appointed 

1  Sa.  13.  11  earnest  not  within  the  days  appointed 

20.  35  went . .  into  the  field,  at  the . .  appointed 

2  Sa.  24.  15  the  morning  even  to  the  time  appointed 
Job    30.  23  the  house  appointed  for  all  living 

Isa.      1.  14  Your  new  moons  and  your  appointed 
Jer.   46.  17  he  hath  passed  the  time  appointed 
Dan.    8.  19  at  the  time  appointed  the  end  (shall  be) 
ii.  27  the  end.  .at  the  time  appointed 
11.  29  At  the  time  appointed  he  shall  return 

11.  35  because  (it  is)  yet  for  a  time  appointed 
8.  Appointed  places,  n'njriD  moadoth. 

Josh  20.   9  These  were  the  cities  appointed  for  all 
9.7*0  be  set  up,  :m  natsab,  2. 

1  Sa.  19.  20  Samuel  standing  (as)  appointed  over  them 
10.7*0  be  marked  out  or  off,  fSD  soman,  2. 

Isa.    28.  25  cast  iu  the.  .appointed  barley,  .the  rye 
[See  also  Destruction,  season,  time.] 

APPOINTED,  to  be  — 

1.7*o  number,  nirp  manah,  3. 

Job      7.    3  wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me 

2. 7*o  be  numbered,  nift  manah,  4. 

1  Ch.    9.  29  of  them  also  (were)  appointed  to  oversee 

3.7*0  be  ajipointed,  np3  paqad,  2. 

Neh.    7.    1  singers  and  the  Levites  were  appointed 

12.  44  were  some  appointed  over  the  chamber's 
4.7*0  be  laid,  Ktl/xai  kehnai. 

1  Th.  3.   3  yourselves  know  that  we  are  appointed 

APPOINTED  place  — 

Appointed  place,  appointment,  "ii?5»  miphqad. 
Eze.   43.  21  the  appointed  place  of' the  house,  without 

APPOINTED  sign  — 

Apjiointed  sign,  i^id  moed. 

Judg 20.  38  there  was  an  appointed  sign  between 

APPOINTED  time  — 

1. Appointed  time,  lyiD  moed. 

Jer.     8.    7  the  stork,  .knoweth  her  appointed  times 
Heb.   2.    3  the  vision  (is)  yet  for  an  appointed  time 


APPOINTED 


47 


ARBA 


2,Warfare,  xa>"  tsabah. 

Job      7.    i  (Is  there)  not  an  appointed  time  to  man 

14.  14  all  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I 

Dan.  10.    1  true,  but  the  time  appointed  (was)  long 

APPOINTED  unto  him  — 
Saying,  "i^N  emer. 

Job   20/29  heritage  appointed  unto  him  by  God 

APPOINTMENT  — 

X.Saying,  ipK?  memar. 

Ezra    6.   9  according  to  the  appointment  of  the 

Z.Mouth,  nspeh. 

Num.  4.  27  At  the  appointment  of  Aaron  and  his  sons 
2  Sa.  :  3.  32  by  the  appointment  of  Absalom  this  hath 

APPOINTMENT,  to  make  an  — 

To  meet  together  by  appointment,  ")y;  yaad,  2. 

Job     2.  11  they  had  made  an  appointment  together 
APPREHEND,  to  — 
1.7*0  receive  thoroughly \KaTa\a.p.$avwkatalamban6. 

Phil.    3.  12  I  may  apprehend.  .1  am  apprehended 

3.  13  I  count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended 

2.  To  press,  seize,  Trtafa  piazo. 

Acts  12.    4  when  he  had  apprehended  him,  he  put 
2  Co.  11.  32  thegovernor.  .desirous  to  apprehend  me 

APPROACH  — 

l.To  draw  near,  3">,E  qareb. 

Deut  20.    3  ye  approach  this  day  unto  battle  against 
%Near,  3Y1J3  qarob. 

Eze.  42.  13  the  priests  that  approach,  .shall  eat 

43.  19  approach  unto  me,  to  minister  unto  me, 

APPROACH,  to  — 

1.7*0  draw  nigh,  uo3  nagash. 

Num.  4.  19  when  they  approach  unto  the  most  holy 
Jer.   30.  21  engaged  his  heart  to  approach  unto  me  ? 

2.7*0  be  nigh,  k^j  nagash,  2. 

Deut  20.    2  the  priests  shall  approach  and  speak 
Jer.   30.  21  he  shall  approach  unto  me  :  for  who 
3. 7*0  draw  near,  3"ip  qareb. 

Lev.  18.  6  None  of  you  shall  approach  to  any 
18.  14  thou  shalt  not  approach  to  his  wife 
18.  19  thou  shalt  not  approach  unto  a  woman 

20.  16  if  a  woman  approach  unto  any  beast 

21.  17  let  him  not  approach  to  offer  the  bread 
21.  18  that  hath  a  blemish,  .shall  not  approach 

Deut  31.  14  thy  days  approach  that  thou  must  die 
Josh.  8.    5  the  people,  .will  approach  unto  the  city 
2  Ki.  16.  12  the  king  approached  to  the  altar,  and 
Eze.  42.  14  shall  approach  to  (those  tilings)  which 

4.7*0  draw  nigh,  iyyifa  enggizr>. 

Luke  12.  33  where  no  thief  approacheth,  neithermoth 
Heb.  10.  25  the  more,  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching 

APPROACH  nigh,  to  — 

7*0  be  drawn  nigh,  vn  nagash,  2. 

2Sa.  11.  20  Wherefore  approached  ye  so  nigh  unto 

APPROACH,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  draw  near,  :rij3  qareb,  3. 

Psa.  65.   4  thou  choosest,  and  causest  to  approach 

APPROACH,  to  make  to  — 

7*0  cause  to  draw  nigh,  vx  nagash,  5. 

Job   40.  19  can  make  his  sword  to  approach  (unto) 

APPROACH  unto,  which  no  man — 
Unapproached,  airpdo'tTos  ap)rositos. 

1  Ti.    6.  16  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto 
APPROACHING  — 
A  draiving  near,  nrrip  qerabah. 

Isa.  58.   2.  they  take  delight  in  approaching  to  God 
APRON  — 
l*Anything  girded  on,  rnijn  chagorah. 

Gen.    3.    7  sewed  fig  leaves . .  and  made . .  aprons 
2. Handkerchief  or  apron,  0-tfj.tK.ivdiov  simikinthion. 

Acts  19.  12  unto  the  sick  handkerchiefs  or  aprons 
APPROVE,  to  — 
1 .  To  see,  rupr  raah. 

Lam.   3.  36  To  subvert  a  man.  .the  LORD  approveth 
2. 7*o  be  pleased,  nf\  ratsah. 

Psa.  49.  13  yet  their  posterity  approve  their  sayings 
3.7*0  show  off ,  aTToSdKvvfxi  apodeiknumi. 

Acts    2.  22  a  man  approved  of  God  among  you  by 
4.7*0  test,  make  proof  of,  BoKt/xdCw  dokimvzo. 

Rom.  2.  18  knowest  (his)  will,  and  approvest  the 

1  Co.  16.    3  whomsoever  ye  shall  approve  by 
Phil.    1.  10  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are 

5.7*0  place  together,  o-vvi<tto.o>  sunistao. 

2  Co.    6.    4  in  all  (things)  approving  ourselves  as  the 

7. 11  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be  clear 
APPROVED  — 
Tested,  tried,  S6ki/j.os  dolcimos. 

Rom  14.  18  be  that,  .serveth  Christ  (is),  .approved  of 
16.  10  Salute  Apelles  approved  in  Christ 

1  Co.  11.  19  that  they  which  are  approved  may  be 

2  Co.  10.  18  not  he  that  commendeth  .is  approved 

13.    7  not  that  we  should  appear  approved,  but 
2  Ti.    2. 15  Study  to  shew  thyself  approved  unto  God 


APT  — 

7*o  do,  (lit.  doers),  n'y%-  asah. 
2  Ki.    24.  16  all  (that  were)  strong  (and)  apt  for  war 

APT  to  teach  — 

Apt  to  teach,  dt$aKTiic6$  didaktikos. 

1  Ti.    3.    2  A  bishop  then  must  be . .  apt  to  teach 

2  Ti.    2.  24  but  be  gentle  unto  all.  .apt  to  teach 

A-QTJT'-LA,  'hKvKas  eagle. 

A  Jew  whom  Paul  found  at  Corinth  on  his  arrival  from 

Athens. 

Acts    18.    2  And  found  a  certain  Jew  named  A.,  born 

18.  18  sailed  thence,  .with  him  Priscilla  and  A. 

18.  26  whom  when  A.  and  Friscilla  had  heard 

Rom.  16.    3  Greet  Priscilla  and  A.  my  helpers  in  Christ 

1  Co.  16.  19  A.  and  Priscilla  salute  you  much  in  the 

2  Ti.    4.  19  Salute  Prisca  and  A.,  and  the  household 

AR,  i'Jr  city. 

The  capital  of  Moab,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river  Ar- 
non.     It  was  in  Jerome's  time  known  as  Areopolis  and 
Rabbath  Moab.    The  site  is  still  called  Rabba,  between 
Kerek  and  the  Wady  Mojeb,  about  n  miles  from  each. 
Num2i.  15  brook  that  goeth.  .to  the  dwelling  of  A. 
21.  28  it  hath  consumed  A.  of  Moab,  (and)  the 
Deut.  2.    9  because  I  have  given  A.  unto  the  children 
2. 18  Thou  art  to  pass  over  through  A.,  the 
2.  29  As.  the  Moabites  which  dwell  in  A.,  did 
Isa.    15.    1  Because  in  the  night  A.  of  Moab  is  laid 

A'-RA,  k"jx  strong. 

Son  of  Jether,  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  7.  38  And  the  sons  of  Jether.  .Pispah,  and  A. 

A'-RAB,  m.x  a  court. 

A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah,  near  Hebron. 

Josh.  15.  48-52  And  in  the  mountains..  A.,  and  Duniah 

A-RA'-BAH,  naTJ/n  the2^ahi,  wilderness. 
The  valley  on  both  sides  of  the  Jordan  from  the  Sea  of 
Galilee  to  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Salt  Sea.  This 
word  is  translated  "  plain"  in  many  places,  but  seems 
to  denote  a  particular  place  in  Josh,  xviii.  The  descrip- 
tion of  an  arabah  is  beautifully  given  in  Jer.  51.  43. 
Josh. 18.  18  And  passed  along,  .over  against  A. 
18.  18  northward,  and  went  down  unto  A. 
A-RA-BI-A,  3"ij,;n,  3ii'.,  3"T£  wilderness. 
Generally  in  the  Scriptures  this  name  is  applied  to 
Arabia  Petrrea,  or  that  portion  of  the  great  Arabian 
Peninsula  which  consists  of  that  of  Sinai,  Idumea,  and 
the  region  of  Mount  Seir,  being  bounded  by  Egypt  and 
the  upper  part  of  the  Red  Sea,  the  Land  of  Canaan,  and 
Northern  Arabia.  Its  oldest  inhabitants  were  called 
Horim  or  Horites,  because  of  their  living  in  "holes  or 
caves ; "  these  were  supplanted  by  the  Edomites,  and 
the  Ishmaelites,  and  the  Amalekites.  The  first  men- 
tion of  the  name  occurs  in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  B.C. 
1014-975,  when  he  is  represented  as  receiving  gold  from 
"  all  the  kings  of  Arabia,"  but  whether  as  tribute  or  as 
a  present  is  not  mentioned  (1  Ki.  10.  15 ;  2  Ch.  9.  14) ; 
Jehoshaphat,  B.C.  941,  is  also  represented  as  receiving 
from  the  Arabians  1700  rams,  and  7700  he-goats  (2  Ch. 
17.  11);  the  Arabians,  who  are  represented  as  "near 
the  Ethiopians,"  came  up  against  Judah  in  the  days  of 
Jehoram,  B.C.  887,  plundered  his  house,  carried  away 
his  wives  and  his  sons  (whom  they  afterwards  slew) 
except  Jehoahaz  (or  Ahaziah,  or  Azariah),  his  youngest 
son  (2  Ch.  21.  17  ;  22.  1) ;  they  are  said  to  dwell  in  Gur- 
baal,  a  place  unknown,  and  to  have  been  defeated  by 
Vzziah,  B.C.  8io  (2  Ch.  26.  7) ;  Geshem  the  Arabian, 
joined,  with  Sanballat  the  Horonite  and  Tobiah  the 
Ammonite,  to  mock  and  intimidate  Nehemiah  (Neh.  2. 
19;  4.  7;  6.  1);  the  woe  denounced  against  Babylon 
was,  that  "neither  shall  the  Arabian  pitch  tent  there" 
(Isa.  13.  20);  a  woe  was  denounced  against  Arabia 
itself,  against  a  forest  there,  and  against  the  travelling 
companies  of  Dedanim,  the  land  of  Tema,  and  the  glory 
of  Kedar(Isa.  21.  13-17);  lust  for  idolatry  is  represented 
as  that  of  the  Arabian  in  the  wilderness  watching  for 
prey  (Jer. "3.  2);  their  kings,  distinct  from  those  of  De- 
dan,  and  Tema,  and  Buz,  had  to  drink  of  the  cup  of  the 
Lord  from  the  hand  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  25^  24). 

Arabia  and  the  princes  of  Kedar  traded  with  Tyre, 
B.C.  5S8  (Eze.  27.  21);  some  of  its  inhabitants  were 
among  the  hearers  of  the  Apostles  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost (Acts  2.  11);  and  were  perhaps  converted,  and  with 
these  Paul  may  have  associated  himself  when  he  went 
to  Arabia  after  his  conversion  (Gal.  1.  17;  4.  25).  It  is 
sometimes  referred  to  as  "Kedem,"  or  "the  East,"  as 
in  Gen.  10.  30;  25.  6;  29.  1;  Num.  23.  7,  &c.  This 
would  seem  to  have  been  the  name  given  to  it  by  the 
inhabitants  of  Egypt  and  Canaan,  as  being  to  the  East 
of  these  countries,  as  "Arab,"  or  the  "West,"  may 
have  been  given  to  it  by  the  people  of  Babylonia.  The 
principal  tribes  in  Arabia  Fetrrea,  -with  which  the  Bible 
principally  deals,  were  the  Amalekites,  Edomites,  Ge- 
shurites,  Gezerites,  Hagarites,  Horites,  Ishmaelites, 
Kadmonites,  Kenites,  Kenizzites,  Kederenes,  Midian- 
ites,  Nabathwans,  with  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites. 
The  chief  places  mentioned  are  Almon-Diblathaim, 
Alush,  Baal-Zephon,  Bemoth,  Beeroth,  Bene-jaakan 
Beer-lahai-roi,  Bozrah  (in  Edom),  Buz,  Diklah,  Dinha- 
bah,  Dizahab,  Dophkah,  Ebronah,  Elath,  Elim,  En- 
eglaim,  En-mishpat,  Ezion-geber,  Gebal,  &c. 

1  Ki.  10. 15  Beside,  .of  all  the  kings  of  A.,  and  of  the 

2  Ch.  9.  14  And  all  the  kings  of  A.  and  governors 
Isa.    21.  13  burden  upon  A.    In  the  forest  in  A. 
Jer.    25.  24  And  all  the  kings  of  A.,  and  all  the  kings 
Eze.  27.  21  A.,  and  all  the  princes  of  Kedar,  they 


Gal.     1.  17  but  I  went  into  A.,  and  returned  again 
4.  25  For  this  Agar  is  mount  Sinai  in  A.,  and 
A-RA-BI-ANS,  C'N'nny. 
The  Gentile  appellation  of  the  inhabitants  of  Arabia. 

2Ch,i7.  11  and  the  A.  brought  him  flocks,  seven 

21.  16  lonn  stirred  up.  .the  spirit  of  the.  .A. 

22.  1  for  the  baud . .  that  came  with  the  A.  to 
26.    7  And  God  helped  him.  .against  the  A. 

Neh.   2.  19  But  when . .  Geshem  the  A. ,  heard  (it),  they 
4.    7  when  Sanballat,  and  Tobiah,  and  the  A. 
6.    1  Sanballat,  and  Tobiah,  and  Gesham  the  A. 
Isa.    13.  20  neither  shall  the  A.  pitch  tent  there 
Jer.     3.    2  In  the  ways  hast  thou  sat.  .as  the  A.  in 
Acts    2.  n  Cretes  and  A.,  we  do  hear  themspeak 
A'-RAD,  T%  fugitive. 

1.  A  king  who  attacked  the  Israelites  near  Mount  Hor, 
and  was  defeated,  B.C.  1452. 

Nuni  21.  1  And  (when)  king  A.  the  Canaanite,  which 
33.  40  And  king  A.  the  Canaanite,  which  dwelt 

2.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Beriah,  one  of  the  principal  in- 
habitants of  Aijalon,  B.C.  1400. 

*i  Ch.  8.  15  [sons  of  Elpaal].  .Zebadiah,  and  A.,  and 

3.  A  town  or  district  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  N.  of  the 
wilderness. 

Josh.  12.  14  [These  (are)  the  kings],  .the  king  of  A. 

Judg   1.  16  wilderness  of  Judah.  .in  the  south  of  A. 
A'-RAH,  rriN  wayfarer. 
1.  An  Asherite,  and  son  of  L'lla,  B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.  39  And  the  sons  of  Ulla ;  A.  and  Haniel,  and 
"2.  The  father  of  a  family  that  came  up  from  exile,  B.C. 
536. 

Ezr.     2.    5  The  children  of  A. ,  seven  hundred  seventy 

Neh.    7.  10  The  children  of  A.,  sL\  hundred  fifty 
3.  A  Jew  whose  granddaughter  became  the  wife  of 
Tobiah  the  Ammonite,  who  attempted  to  hinder  Nehe- 
miah in  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.   6. 18  son  in  law  of  Shechaniah  the  son  of  A. 
A'-RAM,  d-in;  high,  exalted. 

1.  A  son  of  Shem,  B.C.  2280. 

Gen.  10.  22  children  of  Shem  ;  Elam.  .Lud,  and  A. 

10.  23  And  the  children  of  A. ;  Uz,  and  Hul,  and 
1  Ch.   1.  17  The  sons  of  Shem;  Elam.  .Lud,  and  A. 

2.  Son  of  Kemuel  Abraham's  nephew,  B.C.  1838. 

Gen.  22.  21  Kemuel  the  father  of  A. 

3.  This  term  is  used  to  denote  the  whole  country  of 
Syria,  but  especially  the  hilly  districts.  In  such  cases 
it  is  generally  translated  Syria  or  Mesopotamia,. 

Nuni23.    7  Balak.  .hath  brought  me  from  A. 

4.  A  district  of  the  hill  country  N.  of  Canaan. 

1  Ch.    2.  23  And  he  took  Geshur,  and  A.,  with  the 

5.  Son  of  Shanier,  of  the  tribe  of  Asher. 

1  Ch.    7.  34  And  the  sons  of  Shamer ;  Ahi . .  and  A. 

Matt.  1.    3  Phares  begat  Esrom ;  and  Esrom  begat  A 
1.    4  And  A.  begat  Aminadab ;  and  Aminadab 

Luke  3.  33  Aminadab,  which  was  (the  son)  of  A. 
Aram  is  used  in  the  Hebrew  to  denote  the  nation'  of 
which  Aram,  son  of  Shem,  was  the  founder,  or  that 
dwelt  in  the  country  called  Aram.     In  such  cases  the 
English  version  has  it  always  rendered  Syrians. 

A-RA-MI-TESS,  .TS-ixn  tlie  female  Aramile. 
Manasseh's  concubine/ 

1  Ch.    7.  14  his  concubine  the  A.  bare  Machir  the 
A-RAM  NA-HA-RA'-IM,  cnnj  cnx  Aram  of  two  rivers. 
The  country  between  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates, 
called  in  Greek  Mesopotamia. 

Psa.  60.  title,  when  he  strove  with  A.  Naharaim,  and 
A-RAM  ZO'-BAH,  nate  Dl>:  Aram  of  Tsobah. 
The  land  between  the  Orontes  and  the  Euphrates,  N.E. 
of  Damascus,  and  S.  of  Hamath. 

Psa.  60.  title,  when  he  strove  with.  .A.  Zobah 
A'-RAN,  pN .firmness. 
Son  of  Seir  the  Horite,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  2S  children  of  Dishan  (are)  these;  Uz,  and  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  42  The  sons  of  Dishan ;  Uz,  and  A. 

A-RA'-RAT,  nyix  creation,  holy  land. 

A  district  of  Armenia,  between  the  river  Araxes  and  the 

lakes  Par  and  Urumia. 

Gen.    8.    4  the  ark  rested .  .upon  the  mountains  of  A. 

Jer.  51.  27  call.. against  her  the  kingdoms  of  A. 
A-RATJ'-NAH,  n$nx,  rrrix  Jah  is  firm. 
A  Jebusite  from  whom  David  purchased  the  site  of  an 
altar  to  the  Lord.    (In  1  Ch.  zr.  15,  it  is  Oman.)    B.C. 
1040. 

2  Sa.  24. 16  angel .  .was  by  the  threshing-place  of  A. 

24.  18  an  altar,  .in  the  threshing-floor  of  A. 
24.  20  And  A.  looked,  and  saw  the  king  and  his 
24.  20  and  A.  went  out,  and  bowed  himself 
24.  21  And  A.  said.  Wherefore  is  my  lord  the 
24.  22  And  A.  said  unto  David,  Let  my  lord  the 
24.  23  All  these  (things)  did  A.,  as  a  king,  give 
24.  23  And  A.  said  unto  the  king,  The  Lord  thy 
24.  24  And  the  king  said  unto  A.,  Nay ;  but  I 

AR'-BA,  i?3")N  strength  of  Baal. 

Father  of  the  Anakim  (Hivites)  and  Nephilim  (giants). 
The  name  Arba  occurs  in  the  Hebrew  in  connection 
with  Kirjath  "city"  only,  which  is  left  untranslated 
in  the  English  version,  so  that  "  Kirjath-arba  "  appears 
as  the  name  of  the  city  which  is  elsewhere  called  the 
"  City  of  Arba." 


I 


ARBATHITE 


48 


ARISE 


Gen.  35.  27  And  Jacob  came,  .unto  the  city  of  A. 

Josh  15.  13  unto  Caleb.. he  gave,  .the  city  of  A.  the 
2i.  11  And  they  gave  them  the  city  of  A.  the 
AR-BA-THITE,  To~iy  belonging  to  Arabah. 
The  patronymic  of  Abialbon  and  of  Abiel. 

2Sa.  23.  31  [one  of  the  thirty],  .Abi-albon  the  A. 

iCh.  11.  32  Huraiof  the  brooks  of  Gaash,  Abiel  the  A. 

AR-BITE,  '3-m  a  native  of  Arab. 
Faarai  was  one  of  David's  guard ;  in  the  parallel  list  of 
Chronicles  it  is  given  as  Ben-ezbai,  by  a  change  in  let- 
ters not  unfrequent. 

2  Sa.  23.  35  [One  of  the  thirty] . .  Paarai  the  A. 
ARCHANGEL  — 
Chief  messenger,  apxdyye\os  archanggelos. 

1  Th.  4.  16  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with 
Jude         9  Michael  the  archangel,  when  contending 

AR-CHE-LA'-US,  'Apx^Aoos  people's  chief. 

A  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  who  succeeded  his  father  as 

ruler  of  Idumea,  Judea,  and  Samaria. 

Matt.  2.  22  But  when  he  heard  that  A.  did  reign  in 

ARCHER  — 

1.7V  tread  a  bow,  n^  XV}  darak  qcsheth. 

1  Ch.   8.  40  the  sons  of  Ulani  were  mighty,  .archers 
Jer.   51.    3  let  the  archer  bend  his  bow,  and  against 

2.To  shout,  shoot  arrows,  fan  chatsats,  3. 

Judg.  5. 11  (are  delivered)  from  the  noise  of  archers 

3.  To  shoot,  rrv  yarah. 

1  Ch.  10.    3  the  archers  hit  him,  and  he  was  wounded 

2  Ch.  35.  23  the  archers  shot  at  king  Josiah;  and 

4.  Archer,  an  rah. 

Job    16.  13  His  archers  compass  me  round  about,  he 

5. Bow,  n^(5  qcsheth. 

Isa.   21,  17  the  residue  of  the  number  of  archers 
*2.    3  they  are  bound  by  the  archers :  all  that 

6.  To  shoot,  cast  with  a  bozo,  n^|5  rrv  yarah,  5. 

1  Sti.   31.    3  and  he  was  sore  wounded  of  the  archer 

1  Ch.  10.    3  and  he  was  wounded  of  the  archers 

7.  To  become  an  archer,  nf$  na/i  rabah. 

Gen.  21.  20  and  he  grew  .".and  became  an  archer 

8.  Owner  of  arrows,  ]'n  *?;?3  baal  chets. 

Gen.  49.  23  The  archers  have  sorely  grieved  him 

ARCHES  — 

l.Arclies,  porches,  D'srs:  elammim. 

Eze.  40.  21  the  arches,  .were  after  the  measure  of  the 
40.  22  their  arches,  and  their  palm  trees, 
40.  22,  26  the  arches  thereof  (were)  before  them 
40.  24,  29,  33  arches  thereof,  .according  to  those 
40.  25,  29,  33  in  the  arches  thereof  round  about 
40.  31  the  arches  thereof  (were)  toward  the  utter 
40.  34  the  arches  thereof  (were)  toward  the 
40.  36  the  arches  thereof,  and  the  windows  to  it 

2, Arches,  porches,  rrisSx  elammoth. 

Eze.  40.  16  And.  .narrow  windows,  .to  the  arches 
40.  30  the  arches  round  about  (were)  five 

AR-CHE-VITES,  M^fjtf.     Meaning  uncertain. 
The    inhabitants    of    Orchaj    in  Chaldea  removed   to 
Samaria  to  colonise  the  land  after  the  Israelites  were 
carried  away. 

Ezra    4.   9  Then.  .Rehiun  the  chancellor  and,  .the  A. 

AR'-CHI,  TIKn  the  long. 

A  city  on  the  border  of  Ephraim,  between  Luz  and 

Ataroth. 

Josh.  16.  2  passeth  along  unto  the  borders  of  A.  to  A. 

ARCH-IP'-PUS,  "Apxurnos  chief  groom. 

One  whom  Paul  exhorts  to  fidelity. 

Col.     4.  17  And  say  to  A.,  Take  heed  to  the  ministry 
Phm.         2  to  (our)  beloved  Apphia,  and  A.  our 

AR-CHITE,  *y](J0  the  long.* 

The  patronymic  of  Hushai,  David's  friend,  B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.  15.  32  Hushai  the  A.  came  to  meet  him  with  his 

16.  16  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Hushai  the  A. 

17.  5  Call  now  Hushai  the  A.  also,  and  let  us 
17.  14  The  counsel  of  Hushai  the  A.  (is)  better 

1  Ch.  27.  33  Hushai  the  A.  (was)  the  king's  companion 

ARC-TU'-RUS,  aty,  e>:y  group,  crowd. 

A  constellation  commonly  called  the  Great  Bear,  of 

which  the  principal  star  is  Dubbhe. 

Job     9.   9  Which  maketh  A.,  Orion,  and  Pleiades 
38.  52  canst  thou  guide  A.  with  his  sons? 

ARD,  l"!^  sprout,  descent. 

1.  A  son  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  21  sons  of  Benjamin  (were)  Belah  and  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Bela,  son  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1660. 

Num  26.  40  the  sons  of  Bela  were  A.  and  Naaman 

AR-DITES,  «n*jrj  (he  Ard  He,  belonging  to  Ard. 
Patronymic  of  the  grandsons  of  Bela. 

Num  26.  40  (of  Ard),  the  family  of  the  A. 
AR'-DON,  \M-\H  descendant. 
BOD  <>f  Caleb,  son  of  Hezron,  B.C.  1560. 

iCh.    2.  18  her  sons  (are)  these ;  Jesher..and  A. 
ARE  there  — 
J. Are  there  ?  there  are  or  is,  c'x  ish. 

Mie.    6.  10  Are  there  yet  the  treasures  of  wickedness 


2.  There  is  or  ore,  p;  yesh. 

Jer.    14.  22  Are  there  (any)  among  the  vanities  of 
AR-E'-LI,  'SiON  valiant,  heroic. 
A  son  of  Gad,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  16  And  the  sons  of  Gad;  Zephion.  .and  A. 

Num  so.  17  of  A.  the  family  of  the  Arelites 

AR-E-LITES,  7»n>S  the  patronymic  of  AreW  s  family . 
Num  26.  17  of  Areli  the  family  of  the[A. 

A-RE-O-PA-GITE,  'Apt loiraytrvs  of  the  Areopagus. 
Dionysius,  a  convert,  is  designated  thus. 

Acts  17.  34  among  the  which  (was)  Dionysius  the  A. 

A-RE-O-PA'-GTJS,  "Apeios  Udyos  Mar's  Hill. 
This  institution  is  attributed  to  Cecrops,  the  founder  of 
Athens,  B.C.  1556 ;  Solon,  B.C.  594,  extended  its  jurisdic- 
tion. The  guardianship  of  the  laws  and  the  power  of 
enforcing  them  was  intrusted  by  Solon  to  this  court. 
Religion  and  the  education  of  youth  were  placed  under 
its  control.  Its  constitution  was  preserved  until 
Pericles,  B.C.  461,  caused  himself  to  be  elected  without 
having  previously  received  the  appointment  of  archon. 
Paul  was  brought  before  this  court  a.d.  51  (Acts 
17.  19). 

Acts  17.  19  they  took  him,  and  brought  him  unto  A. 

A-RE'-TAS,  ' Ap4ras  pleasing. 

An  ethnarch  in  N.  Arabia,  whose  deputy  sought  to 

apprehend  Paul  in  Damascus. 

2  Corn.  32  In  Damascus  the  governor  under  A.  the 
AH'-GOB,  a-nx  strong. 

1.  A  district  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan,  after- 
wards called  "  Trachomatis,",  .and  now  El-lejeh ;  it  had 
no  less  than  sixty  cities. 

Deut.  3.    4  all  the  region  of  A.,  the  kingdom  of  Og 
3.  13  all  the  region  of  A.,  with  all  Bashan 
3.  14  all  the  country  of  A.  unto  the  coasts  of  G. 

1  Ki.    4.  13  the  region  of  A.,  which  (is)  in  Bashan 

2.  A  man  of  rank  under  Pekah,  son  of  Remaliah,  B.C. 
761. 

2  Ki.  15.  25  palace  of  the  king's  house,  with  A.  and 
ARGUE,  to  — 

To  reason,  na;  yakach,  5. 

Job     6.  25  but  what  doth  your  arguing  reprove? 
ARGUMENT  — 
Reasoning,  nnain  tokachath. 

Job  23.    4  I  would,  .fill  my  mouth  with  arguments 

A-RI'-DAI,  HHg.      Meaning  uncertain. 

A  son  of  Haman,  hanged  along  with  his  father. 

Esth.  9.    9  Parmashta  and  Arisai,  and  A.,  and  V. 
A-RI'-DA'-THA,   nnyi$. 

Son  of  Haman,  one  of  the  ten  who  were  hanged  along 
with  their  father,  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    8  Poratha,  and  Adalia,  and  A. 

A-RI'-EH,  rrnNH  lion  of  Jah. 
A  companion  of  Argob,  B.C.  761. 

2  Ki.  15.  25  Pekah.  .conspired,  .with  Argob  and  A. 

A-RI'-EL,  Snhn  lion  of  God. 

1.  A  person  whom  Ezra  sent  along  with  others  to  Iddo 
at  Casiphia,  B.C.  457. 

Ezra  S.    16  Then  sent  I  for  Eliezer,  for  A.,  for 

2.  A  symbolic  name  for  Jerusalem. 

Isa.    29.    1  Woe  to  A.,  to  A.,  the  city  (where)  David 
29.    2  yet  I  will  distress  A.,  and  there  shall  lie 
29.    2  and  it  shall  be  unto  me  as  A. 
29.,  7  the  nations  that  fight  against  A. 

ARIGHT  — 

1. Right,  1 3  ken. 

Jer.     8.    6  I  hearkened,  .they  spake  not  aright 
2.  Upright  thing,  d,")V',P  me^harim. 

Prov.23.  31  when  it  is  red.  .it  moveth  itself  alight 
ARIGHT,  to  set  — 
To  prepare,  set  aright,  pa  kun,  5. 

Psa.  78.    8  (that)  set  not  their  heart  might 
ARIGHT,  to  use  — 
To  make  good,  use  well,  29;  yatab,  5. 

Prov.  15.    2  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  aright 

A-RI-MA-THE'-A,  'ApifxaQala  a  height. 
Another  name  for  Ramah,  where  Samuel  dwrelt,  5  miles 
N".  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  borders  of  Ephraim  and  Ben- 
jamin.   The  LXX.  call  it  Armathaun,  and  Josephus 
Armatha.     It  is  now  called  Jiamek. 

Matt.27.  57  there  came  a  rich  man  of  A.,  named 
Markis.  43  Joseph  of  A.,  an  honourable  counsellor 
Luke23-  51  (he  was)  of  A.,  a  city  of  the  Jews :  who 
John  19.  38  And  after  this  Joseph  of  A.,  being  a 

AR  I'-OCH,  Tp-in  lion-like. 

1.  A  king  of  Ellasar  in  Assyria,  B.C.  1926. 

Gen.  14.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of.  .A.  king  of 
14.    9  With.  .A.  king  of  Ellasar;  four  kings  with 

2.  Captain  of  the  guard  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dan.    ?.  14  Daniel  answered  with,  .wisdom  to  A. 
2.  15  He  anwered  and  said  to  A.  the  king's 
2.  15  Then  A.  made  the  thing  known  to  Daniel 
2.  24  Therefore  Daniel  went  in  unto  A.,  whom 
2.  25  Then  A.  brought  iu  Daniel  before  the  king 


A-RI'-SAI,  'p'lx.      Meaning  uncertain. 
A  son  of  Haman  the  Agagite,  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    9  Parmashta,  and  A.,  and  Aridai,  and 
ARISE,  to  — 
l.To  rise,  hirst  forth,  rr\\  zarach. 

Psa.  104.  22  The  sun  ariseth,  they  gather  themselves 
112.    4  I'll  to  the  upright  there  ariseth  light 

Eccl.    1.    5  The  sun  also  ariseth,  and  the  sun  goeth 

1.  5  hasteth  to  his  place  where  he  arose 
Isa.    60.    2  the  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  his 
Jon.    4.    8  when  the  sun  diil  arise,  that  God 

Nah.    3.  17  when  the  sun  ariseth  they  flee  away 
Mai    4.    2  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise 
2.To  lift  up  oneself,  n^j  nasa. 

Psa.  89.    9  when  the  waves  thereof  arise 

3.  To  go  up,  nhy  blah. 

Gen.  rg.  15  A"nd  when  the  morning  arose,  then  the  an. 
2  Sa.  11.  20  if  so  be  that  the  king's  wrath  arise 

1  Ki.  18.  44  there  ariseth  a  little  cloud  out  of  the  sea 

2  Ch.  36.  16  the  Lord  arose  against  his  people 

4.  To  stand  up,  ip£  amad. 

Esth.  4.  14  enlargement  and  deliverance  arise  to  the 
5. To  rise  up,  D*p  qum. 

Gen.  13.  17  Arise,  walk  through  the  land  in  the  length 
19.  15  Arise,  take  thy  wife,  and  thy.  .daughters 
19.  33  when  she  lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose 
19.  35  the  younger  arose,  and  lay  witli  him 
21.  18  Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him 
?4.  10  he  arose,  and  went  to  Mesopotamia 
24.  61  Rebekah  arose,  and  her  damsels,  and 
27.  19  arise,  I  pray  thee,  sit.  .eat  of  my  venison 
27.  31  Xet  my  father  arise,  and  eat  of  his  son's 

27.  43  arise,  iiee  thou  to  Laban  my  brother 

28.  2  Arise,  go  to  Padan-aram,  to  the  house  of 
31.  13  arise,  get  thee  out  from  this  land 

35.    1  Arise,  go  up  to  Beth-el,  and  dwell  there 
35.    3  let  us  arise,  and  go  up  to  Beth-el 

37.  7  my  sheaf  arose,  and  also  stood  upright 

38.  19  she  arose,  and  went  away,  aod  laid  by 
41.  30  there  shall  arise,  .seven  years  of  famine 
43.    8  we  will  arise  and  go;  that  we  may  live 
43.  13  Take,  .your  brother,  and  arise,  go  again 

Exod.  1.    8  there  arose  up  anew  king  over  Egypt 
Deut.  9.  12  Arise,  get  thee  down  quickly  from  hence 
10.  11  Arise,  take(thy)  journey  before  the  people 
13.    1  there  arise  among  you  a  prophet 

17.  8  If  there  arise  a  matter  too  bard  for  thee 
34.  10  there  arose  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel 

Josh.  1.    2  arise,  go  over  this  Jordan,  thou,  and 
8.    1  take  all  the  people  of  war.  .and  arise 
8.    3  Joshua  arose,  and  all  the  people  of  war 
8.  19  the  ambush  arose  quickly  out  of  their 

18.  8  the  men  arose,  and  went  away :  and 
S4.    9  Then  Balak  arose,  .and  warred  against 

Judg.  2.  10  there  arose  anothergeuerationafterthem 

3.  20  And  he  arose  out  of  (his)  seat 

4.  9  Deborah  arose,  and  went  out  with  Barak 

5.  7  until  that  I  Deborah  arose,  that  I  arose 

5.  12  arise,  Barak,  aud  lead  thy  captivity  captive 
7.    g  Arise,  get  thee  down  unto  the  host ;  for  I 

7.  15  Arise;  for  the  Lord  hath  delivered  into 

8.  21  Gideon  arose, andslew  Zebaand  ZalmunHa 
10.    1  there  arose  to  defend  Israel  Tola  the  son 

10.  3  after  him  arose  Jair,  a  Gileadite,  and 
13.  11  Manoah  arose,  and  went  after  his  wife 
16.    3  Samson,  .arose  at  midnight,  and  took  the 

18.  9  Arise,  that  we  may  go  up  against  them 

19.  3  her  husband  arose,  and  went  after  her 

20.  8  all  the  people  arose  as  one  man,  saying 
20.  18  the  children  of  Israel  arose,  and  went  up 

Ruth  1.    6  Then  she  arose  with  her  daughters-in-law 

1  Sa.   3.    6  Samuel  arose  and  went  to  Eli,  and 

3.    8  he  arose  and  went  to  Eli,  and  said 

9.  3  Kish  said  to  Saul . .  arise,  go  seek  the  asses 
9.  26  Saul  arose,  and  they  went  out  both  of  them 

13.  15  Samuel  arose,  and  gat  him  up  from  Gilgal 

16.  12  Arise,  anoint  him  :  for  this  (is)  he 

i7.  35  when  he  arose  against  me,  I  caught  (him) 

17.  52  the  men  of  Israel  and  of  Judah  arose,  ami 

17.  48  the  Philistines  arose,  and  came  and  drew 

18.  27  David  arose  and  went,  he  and  his  men 
20.  25  Jonathan  arose,  and  Abner  sat  by  Saul's 
20.  34  Jonathan  arose  from  the  table  in  fierce 
20.  41  David  arose  out  of  (a  place)  toward  the 

20.  42  he  arose.. and  Jonathan  went  into  the 

21.  10  David  arose  and  fled  that  day  for  fear 
23.    4  Arise,  go  down  to  Keilali ;  for  I  will 

23.  13  David  and  his  men.. arose  and  departed 
23.  16  Saul's  son  arose,  and  went  to  David 

23.  24  they  arose,  and  went  to  Ziph  before  Saul 

24.  4  David  arose,  and  cut  off  the  skirt  of  Sauls 

24.  8  David,  .arose  afterward,  and  went  out  of 

25.  1  David  arose,  and  went  down  to. .  Paran 
25.  41  she  arose,  and  bowed  herself  on  (her)  face 

25.  42  Abigail,  .arose  and  rode  upon  an  ass 

26.  2  Saul  arose,  and  went  down  to.. Ziph 

26.  5  David  arose,  and  came  to  the  place  where 

27.  2  David  arose,  and  he  passed  over  with 

28.  23  he  arose  from  the  earth,  and  sat  upon  the 
31. 12  the  valiant  men  arose,  and  went  all  night 

2  Sa.  2.  14  Let  the  young  men  now  arise,  and  play 

2.  15  there  arose  and  went  over  by  number 
3  21  I  will  arise  and  go,  and  will  gather  all 

6.  2  David  arose,  and  went  with  all  the  people 

11.  2  David  arose  from  off  his  bed,  and  walked 

12.  17  And  the  elders  of  his  house  arose 

12.  20  David  arose  from  the  earth,  and  washed 
iq.  15  Aranon  said  unto  her,  Arise,  be  gone 


ARISE 


z  Sa.  13.  29  all  the  king's  sons  arose,  and  every  man 

13.  31  the  king  arose,  and  tare  his  garments 

14.  23  Joab  arose  and  went  to  Geshur,  and 

14.  31  Joab  arose,  and  came  to  Absalom 

15.  9  he  arose,  and  went  to  Hebron 

15. 14  Arise,  and  let  us  flee ;  for  we  shall 
17.    1  I  will  arise  and  pursue  after  David 
17.  21  Arise,  and  pass  quickly  over  the  water 
17.  22  David  arose,  and  all  the  people  that 
17.  23  he  saddled  (his)  ass,  and  arose,  and  gat 
19.    7  arise,  go  forth,  and  speak  comfortably 
19.    8  the  king  arose,  and  sat  in  the  gate 

22.  39  they  could  not  arise,  .they  are  fallen 

23.  10  He  arose,  and  smote  the  Philistines  until 

1  Ki.    1.  50  arose,  and  went,  and  caught  hold  on  the 

2.  40  Shimei  arose,  and  saddled  his  ass,  and 

3.  12  neither  after  thee  shall  any  arise  like 

3.  20  she  arose  at  midnight,  and  took  my  son' 
8.  54  he  arose  from  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord 

11.  18  they  arose  out  of  Midian,  and  came  to 
11.  40  Jeroboam  arose,  and  fled  into  Egypt,  unto 
14.    2  Arise,  I  pray  thee,  and  disguise  thyself 
14.    4  Jeroboam's  wife,  .arose,  and  went  to 
14.  12  Arise  thou,  .get  thee  to  thine  own  house 
14.  17  Jeroboam's  wife  arose,  and  departed,  and 
17.    9  Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath,  which 
17.  10  So  he  arose  and  went  to  Zarephath 
ig.    3  he  arose  and  went  for  his  life,  and  came 
19.    5  an  angel . .  said  unto  him,  Arise . .  eat 
19.    7  and  said,  Arise . .  eat,  because  the  journey 
19.    8  he  arose,  and  did  eat  and  drink,  and  went 

19.  21  he  arose,  and  went  after  Elijah  and 

21.    7  arise,  (and)  eat  bread,  and  let  thine  heart 

21. 15  Arise,  take  possession  of  the"  vineyard  of 

21.  18  Arise,  go  down  to  meet  Aliab  king  of 

2  KL    1.    3  Arise,  go  up  to  meet  the  messengers  of 

1.  15  he  arose,  and  went  down  with  him  unto 

4.  30  And  he  arose,  and  followed  her 

7.    7  they  arose  and  fled  in  the  twilight,  and 

7.  12  the  king  arose  in  the  night,  and  said  unto 

8.  1  Arise,  and  go  thou  and  thine  household 

8.  2  the  woman  arose,  .and  she  went  with 

9.  6  he  arose,  and  went  into  the  house;  and  he 

20.  12  And  he  arose  and  departed,  and  came  to 

11.  1  she  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal 

12.  20  his  servants  arose,  and  made  a  conspiracy 
23.  25  neither  after  him  arose  there,  .like  him 

25.  26  all.  .arose,  and  came  to  Egypt :  for  they 

1  Ch.  10.  12  They  arose,  all  the  valiant  men,  and  took 

22. 16  Arise,  .and  be  doing,  and  the  Lord  be 

22.  19  arise  therefore,  and  build  ye  the  sanctuary 

2  Ch.    6.  41  arise,  0  Lord  God,  into  thy  resting  place 

22.  10  she  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed 

29.  12  the  Levites  arose,  Mahath,  and  Joel 

30.  14  they  arose  and  took  away  the  altars 

30.  27  the  Levites  arose  and  blessed  the  people 
Ezra  9.    5  I  arose  up  from  my  heaviness ;  and  having 

10.    4  Arise  ;  for  (this)  matter  (belongeth)  unto 
10.    5  Then  arose  Ezra,  and  made  the  chief 
Neh.  2.  12  I  arose  in  the  night,  I  and  some  few  men 

2.  20  we  his  servants  will  arise  and  build :  but 

7.  7  the  king  arising  from  the  banquet  of 

8.  4  Esther  arose,  and  stood  before  the  king 

1.  20  Job  arose,  and  rent  his  mantle,  and 
7.    4  When  shall  I  arise,  and  the  night  be 

9.  18  Yea . .  I  arose,  and  they  spake  against  me 

5.  3  upon  whom  doth  not  his  light  arise  ? 
9.    8  and  the  aged  arose,  .stood  up 

3.  7  Arise,  0  Lord  ;  save  me,  0  my  God :  for 

7.  6  Arise,  O  Lord,  in  thine  anger,  lift  up 
9.  19  Arise,  O  Lord  ;  let  not  man  prevail 

10. 12  Arise,  0  Lord;  O  God,  lift  up  thine  hand 
12.    5  now  will  I  arise,  saith  the  Lord  ;  I  will 
17.  13  Arise,  O  Lord,  disappoint  him,  cast  him 
44.  26  Arise,  for  our  help,  and  redeem  us  for  thy 
68.    1  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  be  scattered 
74.  22  Arise,  O  God,  plead  thine  own  cause 
76.    9  God  arose  to  judgment,  to  save  all  the 
78.    6  should  arise  and  declare .  .to  their 
82.    8  Arise,  O  God,  judge  the  earth  :  for  thou 
88.  10  shall  the  dead  arise  (and)  praise  thee? 
102.  13  Thou  shalt  arise,  (and)  have  mercy  upon 
109.  28  when  they  arise,  let  them  be  ashamed 
132.    8  Arise,  O  Lord,  into  thy  rest;  thou,  and 
Prov.  6.    9  when  wilt  thou  arise  out  of  thy  sleep  ? 
Song  2.  13  Arise,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come 
Isa.     2.  19,  21  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the  earth, 
zi.    5  arise,  ye  princes,  .anoint  the  shield 

23.  12  daughter  of  Zidon :  arise,  pass  over  to 

26.  19  shall  live,  .(with)  my  dead  body,  .arise 

31.  2  he.  .will  arise  against  the  house  of  the 
49.    7  Kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also 
52.    2  arise . .  sit  down,  O  Jerusalem  :  loose 
60.    1  Arise,  shine ;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and 

Jer.     1.  17  arise,  and  speak  unto  them  all  that  I 

2.  27  but.  .they  will  say,  Arise,  and  save  us 

2.  28  let  them  arise,  if  they  can  save  thee  in 

6.  4  arise,  and  let  us  go  up  at  noon.    Woe 
6.    5  Arise,  and  let  us  go  by  night,  and  let  us 

8.  4  Shall  they  fall,  and  not  arise?  shall  he 
4  Take  the  girdle .  .and  arise,  go  to  Euphr. 
6  Arise,  go  to  Euphrates,  and  take  the 
2  Arise,  and  go  down  to  the  potter's  house 
6  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion  unto 
2  Then  arose  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah 

46.  16  Arise,  and  let  us  go  again  to  our  own 
49.  28  Arise  ye,  go  up  to  Kedar,  and  spoil  the  men 
49.  31  Arise,  get  you  up  unto  the  wealthy  nation 
Lam.  2.  19  Arise,  cry  out  in  the  night :  in  the 
Eze.    3.  22  Arise,  go  forth  into  the  plain,  and  I  will 

3.  23  I  arose,  and  went  forth  into  the  plain 
Hos.  10. 14  shall  a  tumult  arise  among  thy  people 


Esth 
Job 


Tsa. 


13- 
*3- 


41. 


49 


Amos  7.    2  by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise?  for  he  (is) 
7.    5  by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise?  for  he  (is) 
Obad.        1  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  rise  up  against  her 
Jon.    1.    2  Arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city 

1.    6  0  sleeper?  arise,  call  upon  thy  God,  if  so 
3.    2  Arise,  go  unto  Nineveh,  that  great  city 
3.    3  So  Jonah  arose,  and  went  unto  Nineveh 

3.  6  he  arose  from  Ids  throne,  and  he  laid 
Mic.    2.  10  Arise  ye,  and  depart,  .this  (is)  not  (your) 

4.  13  Arise  and  thresh,  O  daughter  of  Zion 

6.    1  Arise,  contend  thou  before  the  mountains 
7.8O  mine  enemy :  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise 
6.  To  rise  up,  Dip  qum. 

Dan.    2.  39  after  thee  shall  arise  another  kingdom 

6.  19  the  king  arose  very  early  hi  the  morning 

7.  5  said  thus  unto  it,  Arise,  devour  much  flesh 
7.  17  great  beasts,  .shall  arise  out  of  the  earth 
7.  24  the  ten  horns . .  (are)  ten  kings . .  shall  arise 

'/.To  axoake,  ]"*p  quts,  5. 

Psa.  44.  23  Awake,  .arise,  cast  (us)  not  off  for  ever 
S.To  stir  up,  "iiy  ur. 

Hab.   2.  1 9  Woe  unto  liini  that  saith  to . .  stone . .  Arise 

9.  To  go  or  come  up,  avafSaivw  anabaino. 

Luke  24.  38  said  unto  them . .  why  do  thoughts  arise 
.Rev.    9.   2  there  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit,  as  the 

10.  To  {make)  rise  up,  hvareKKai  anatello. 

2  Pe.    1.  19  and  the  day  star  arise  in  your  hearts 

IX. To  make  to  stand  up,  6.vl<tt7)(xi  anistemi. 
Matt.  9.    9  And  he  arose,  and  followed  him 

26.  62  the  high  priest  arose,  and  said  unto  him 
Mark  2.  14  And  he  arose  and  followed  him 

5.  42  straightway  the  damsel  arose,  and  walked 

7.  24  from  thence  he  arose,  and  went  into  the 
9.  27  But  Jesus,  .lifted  him  up ;  and  he  arose 

10.    1  he  arose  from  thence,  and  cometh  into 

14.  57  there  arose  certain,  and  bare  false  witness 
Luke  1.  39  Mary  arose  in  those  days,  and  went 

4.  38  he  arose  out  of  the  synagogue,  and 
4.  39  immediately  she  arose  and  ministered 

6.  8  And  he  arose  and  stood  forth 

8.  55  her  spirit  came  again,  and  she  arose 

15.  18  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,  and  will 
15.  20  And  he  arose,  and  came  to  his  father 

17.  19  he  said  unto  him,  Arise,  go  thy  way :  thy 

23.  1  the  whole  multitude  of  them  arose,  and 

24.  12  [Then  arose  Peter,  and  ran  uuto  the] 
Acts   5.    6  the  young  men  arose.^vound  him  up,  and 

6.  9  Ihen  there  arose  certain  of  the  synagogue 

7.  18  Till  another  king  arose,  which  knew  not  J. 

8.  26  Arise,  and  go  toward  the  south  unto  the 

8.  27  he  arose  and  went :  and,  behold,  a  man  of 

9.  6  the  Lord  (said)  unto  him,  Arise,  and  go 
9.  11  the  Lord  (said)  unto  him,  Arise,  and  go 
g.  18  he  received  sight  forthwith,  and  arose 
9.  34  arise,  and  make  thy  bed.    And  he  arose 
9.  39  Then  Peter  arose  and  went  with  them 
9.  40  put  them  all  forth,  .said,  Tabitha,  arise 

10,  20  Arise  therefore,  and  get  thee  down,  and 

11.  7  I  heard  a  voice  saying.  .Arise,  Peter;  slay 
20.  30  Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise 
22.  10  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Arise,  and  go  into 

22.  16  And  now  why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise,  and  be 

23.  9  And  there  arose  a  great  cry :  and  the 
Eph.   5.  14  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from 
Heb.  7. 15  after  the  similitude  of.  .there  ariseth 

12.ro  cast,  0riAA«  hallo. 

Acts  27.  14  there  arose  against  it  a  tempestuous 

13.  To  come,  become,  yivo^ai  ginomai. 

Matt.  8.  24  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea 

13.  21  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth 
Mark  4.  17  when  affliction  or  persecution  ariseth  for 

4.  37  there  arose  a  great  storm  of  wind,  and 
Luke  6.  48  when  the  flood  arose,  the  stream  beat 

15.  14  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land 
John  3.  25  Then  there  arose  a  question  between 
Acts    6.    1  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecians 
11.  ig  the  persecution  that  arose  about  Stephen 
ig.  23  the  same  time  there  arose  no  small  stir 
23.    7  when  he  had  so  said,  there  arose  a 
23.    g  there  arose  a  gie.it  cry:  and  the  scribes 

23.  10  when  there  arose  a  great  dissension,  the 

14.  To  wake  up  thoroughly,  Smyeipco  diegeiro. 
Mark  4.  39  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  wind,  and  said 
John  6.  18  the  sea  arose  by  reason  of  a  great  wind 

15.  To  wake  iqi,  iyeipta  egeiro. 

Matt.  2.  13  Arise  and  take  the  young  child  and  his 
2. 14  When  he  arose,  he  took  the  young  child 
2.  20  Arise,  and  take  the  young  child  and  his 
2.  21  he  arose,  and  took  the  young  child  and 
8.  15  he  touched  her  hand,  .and  she  arose,  and 

8.  26  Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds 

9.  s  forgiven  thee;  or  to  say,  [Arise,]  and  walk? 
9.  6  [Arise,  ]  take  up  thybed,  and  go  unto  thine 
9.    7  he  arose,  and  departed  to  his  house 

9.  19  Jesus  arose,  and  followed  him,  and 
9.  25  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  maid  arose 
17.    7  Jesus,  .said,  Arise,  and  be  not  afraid 

24.  24  there  shall  arise  false  Christs,  and  false 

25.  7  all  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed  their 

27.  52  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  arose 
Mark  2.   9  or  to  say,  [Arise,]  and  take  up  thy  bed,  and 

2.  11  I  say  unto  thee,  [Arise,]  and  take  up  thy 
2.  12  immediately  he  arose,  took  up  the  bed 

5.  41  and  said.  .Damsel,  I  say  unto  thee,  [arise] 
Luke  5.  24  I  say  unto  thee,  [Arise,]  and  take  up  thy 

7.  14  said,  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise 


ARK 

Luke  8.  24  Then  he  [arose,]  and  rebuked  the  wind 

8.  54  the  hand,  and  called,  saying,  Maid,  [arise] 
John  7.  52  look  :  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no 

11.  29  As  soon  as  she  heard,  .she  arose  quickly 
14.  31  even  so  I  do.    Arise,  let  us  go  hence 
Acts    9.    8  Saul  arose  from  the  earth  ;  and  when  his 

16.  To  come  into,  clo'cpxoftcLt  eiserchomai. 

Luke  9.  46  there  arose  a  reasoning  among  them 

ARISE  early,  to  — 

To  rise  or  go  early,  C2iy  shakam,  5. 

Judg  6.  28  the  men.  .arose  early  in  the  morning 
19.    5  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning 

19.  8  he  arose  early  in  the  morning  on  the 

1  Sa.    5.    3  they  of  Ashdod  arose  early  on  the  morrow 

5.    4  they  arose  early  on  the  morrow  morning 

9.  26  And  they  arose  early ;  and  it  came  to 

2  Ki.  19.  35  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning 
Isa.    37.  36  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning 

ARISE  up,  to  — 

l.To  go  up,  rtiy  alah. 

Judg  20.  40  the  flame  began  to  arise  up  out  of  the 

l.To  rise  up,  dp  qum. 

Exod.  1.    8  there  arose  up  a  new  king  over  Egypt 
Ezra    9.    5  I  arose  up  from  my  heaviness  ;  and 
Prov. 3 1.  28  Her  children  arise  up,  and  call  her 

3.  To  place  up,  avio-rrifxi  anistemi. 

Acts  12.    7  he  smote  Peter  on  the  side . .  saying,  Arise 
A-RIST'-AR-CHTJS,  'ApiaTapxos  the  best  ruler. 
One  who  accompanied  Paul  on  Ms  third  missionary 
journey  through  Asia  Minor. 

Acts  19.  29  and  having  caught  Gaius  and  A.,  men  of 

20.  4  and  of. . Thessalonians,  A.  and  Secundus 
27.    2  A.,  a  Macedonian  of  Thessalonica,  being 

Col.    4.  10  A.  my  fellow  prisoner  saluteth  you,  and 
Phni.      24  Marcus,  A.,  Demas,  Lucas,  my  fellow 

A-RIST-0'-Brj-LIJS,,Apio-To'i8oi'\os  the  best  counsellor. 
A  person  in  Rome,  whose  household  Paul  saluted. 
Some  say  that  he  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples,  and 
preached  in  Britain. 

Rom  16.  10  Salute  them  which  are  of  A. 's  (household) 
ARK  — 
\.An  ark, 
Exod  25. 

25- 

25- 

25- 

=5- 

25- 

26. 

26. 

3°- 

3°- 

3i- 
35- 
37- 
37- 
39- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 


40. 

Lev.  16. 

Num.  3 

4- 

7- 


14. 
Beutio. 


3i- 

3*- 

.Josh.  3. 

3- 
3- 
3' 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 


Judg  20. 


chest,  coffin,  ]Vix  aron. 

10  they  shall  make  auark(of)shittim  wood 

14  by  the  sides  of  the  ark,  that  the  ark 

15  staves  shall  be  in  the  rings  of  the  ark 

16  thou  shalt  put  into  the  ark  the  testimony 

21  above  upon  the  ark;  and  in  the  ark 

22  two  cherubims.  .upon  the  ark  of  the 

33  bring,  .within  the  vail  the  ark  of  the 

34  put  the  mercy  seat  upon  the  ark  of  the 

6  by  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  before  the 
26  thou  shalt  anoint,  .the  ark  of  the 

7  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  and  the  mercy 
1?  The  ark,  and  the  staves  thereof,  (with) 

1  Bezaleel  made  the  ark  (of)  shittim  wood 
5  into  the  rings  by  the  sides  of  the  ark,  to 

35  The  ark  of  the  testimony,  and  the  staves 
3  put  therein  the  ark.  .and  cover  the  ark 
5  the  incense  before  the  ark  of  the  testimony 

20  took  and  put  the  testimony  into  the  ark 

20  the  staves  on  the  ark,  and  put.  .the  ark 

21  he  brought  the  ark  into  the  tabernacle 
21  covered  the  ark  of  the  testimony  ;  as  the 

2  the  mercy  seat,  which  (is)  upon  the  ark 
31  their  charge  (shall  be)  the  ark,  and  the 

5  cover  the  ark  of  testimony  with  it 
89  off  the  mercy  seat . .  upon  the  ark  of 
33  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  .went  before  them 
35  when  the  ark  set  forward.  .Moses  said 
44  nevertheless  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

1  come  up.  .and  make  thee  an  ark 

2  and  thou  shalt  put  them  in  the  ark 

3  I  made  an  ark  (of)  shittim  wood,  and 

5  put  the  tables  in  the  ark  which  I  had 

8  bear  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
g,  25  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 

26  and  put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  of  the 

3  When  ye  see  the  ark.  .go  after  it 

6  Take  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  pass 

6  they  took  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and 

8  priests  that  bear  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
11  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of 

13  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

14  the  ark  of  the  covenant  before  the  people 

15  they  that  bare  the  ark  were  come  unto 
15,  17  feet  of  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark 

5  Pass  over  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

7  the  waters,  .were  cut  off  before  the  ark 

9  the  feet  of  the  priests  which  bare  the  ark 

10  the  priests  which  bare  the  ark  stood  in 

11  the  ark  of  the  Lord  passed  over,  and  the 

16  Command  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark 
iS  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the 

4  priests  shall  bear  before  the  ark  seven 

6  Take  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  let 
7,  13  pass  on  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

8  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  .followed 

9  and  the  rereward  came  after  the  ark 

11  the  ark  of  the  Lord  compassed  the  city 

12  the  priests  took  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

13  bearing  seven  trumpets,  .before  the  ark 
6  fell,  .upon  his  face  before  the  ark  of  the 

33  the  Levites.  .barethearkof  the  covenant 
33  stood  on  this  side  the  ark  and  on  that 

27  for  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 


ARK 


50 


ARMENIA 


.  Sa.   3.    3  where  tlie  ark  of  God  (was),  ami  Samuel 
4.    3  Let  us  fetch  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 
4  bring  from  thence  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

4  Phiuehas.  .there  with  the  ark 

5  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  .came  into  the 

6  they  understood  that  the  ark.  .was  come 
11  And  the  ark  of  God  was  taken 
13  his  heart  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God 

17  and  the  ark  of  God  is  taken 
1 3  when  he  made  mention  of  the  ark 
19  she  heard  the  tidings  that  the  ark.  .was 

21  because  the  ark  of  God  was  taken 

22  glory  is  departed,  .for  the  ark.  .is  taken 
1,  2  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God 

3  upon  his  face  to  the  earth  before  the  ark 

4  upon  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  ark 

7  The  ark . .  shall  not  abide  with  us :  for 

8  What  shall  we  do  with  the  ark  of  the 
8  Let  the  ark.  .be  carried  about  unto  Gath 

10  Therefore  they  sent  the  ark  of  God  to 
10  as  the  ark  of  God  came  to  Ekron,  that 

10  They  have  brought,  .the  ark.. to  us,  to 

11  Send  away  the  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel 

1  the  ark  of  the  Lord  was  in  the  country 

2  "Whatshallwe  do  to  the  ark  of  the  Lord? 

3  send  away  the  ark.  .send  it  not  empty 

8  take  the  ark.  .and  lay  it  upon  the  cart 
11  Ami  they  laid  the  ark.  .upon  the  cart 
13  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  saw  the  ark 
15  the  Levites  took  down  the  ark  of  the 
10  whereon  they  set  down  the  ark  of  the 
19  because  they  had  looked  into  the  ark 
21  Philistines  have  brought  again  the  ark 

1  And  the  men.  .fetched  up  the  ark  of  the 

1  Eleazar  his  son  to  keep  the  ark  of  the 

2  the  ark  abode  at  Kirjath-jearim 

18  Bring,  .the  ark  of  God.     For  the  ark 

2  bring  up  from  thence  the  ark  of  God 

3  they  set  the  ark  of  God  upon  a  new 

4  the  ark.  .and  Ahio  weut  before  the  ark 

6  Uzzah  put  forth,  .to  the  ark  of  God,  and 

7  and  there  he  died  by  the  ark  of  God 

9  How  shall  the  ark  of  the  Lord  come 

10  So  David  would  not  remove  the  ark  of 

11  the  ark  of  the  Lord  continued  in  the 

12  The  Lord  hath,  .because  of  the  ark  of 

12  David  went  and  brought  up  the  ark  of 

13  when  they  that  bare  the  ark.  .had  gone 

15  all  the  house  of  Israel  brought  up  the  ark 

16  as  the  ark  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  city 

17  they  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

2  the  ark  of  God  dwelleth  within  curtains 

11  The  ark,  and  Israel,  and  Judah,  abide  in 

24  bearing  the  ark.  .set  down  the  ark 

25  Carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city 
zg  Zadok.  .carried  the  ark  of  God  again  to 

26  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God 
15  stood  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

19  to  set  there  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 
1  that  they  might  bring  up  the  ark  of  the 

3  came,  and  the  priests  took  up  the  ark 

4  they  brought  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

5  congregation,  .(were)with.  .before  the  ark 

6  the  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the 

7  the  ark,  ami  the  cherubims  covered  the  a. 
9  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables  of 

21  And  I  have  set  there  a  place  for  the  ark 
31  David  set  over,  .after  that  the  ark  had 
3  let  us  briug  again  the  ark  of  our  God  to 

5  to  bring  the  ark  of  God  from  Kirjath-jear 

6  to  bring  up  thence  the  ark  of  God  the 

7  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  in  a  new  cart 
9  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  ark 

10  because  lie  put  his  hand  to  the  ark :  and 

12  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God.  .tome? 

13  David  brought  not  the  ark.  .to  himself 

14  the  ark  of  God  remained  with  the  family 

1  aud  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God 

2  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark.  .but  the 

2  hath  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry  the  ark 

3  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  unto  his 
12  that  ye  may  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

14  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  of 

15  And  the  children,  .bare  the  ark  of  God 

23  and  Elkanah.  .doorkeepers  for  the  ark 

24  did  blow  with  the  trumpets  before  the  ark 

24  aud  .TehJah  (were)  doorkeepers  for  the  ark 

25  David,  .went  to  bring  up  Hie  ark  of  the 

26  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark  of  the 

27  aud  all  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark.  and 

28  Thus  all  Israel  brought  up  the  ark  of  the 

29  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  came 
1  So  they  brought  the  ark  of  God,  and  set 

4  to  minister  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

6  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 
37  he  left  there  before  the  ark  of  the 
37  to  minister  before  the  ark  continually 

1  but  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  .under 
19  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 

2  to  build  an  house  of  rest  for  the  ark 
.  t8  and  covered  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

i£h,   1.    4  IJut  the  ark  of  God  had  David  brought 

2  to  bring  "Up  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 
4  came ;  and  the  Levites  took  up  the  ark 
.s  And  they  brought  up  the  ark,  and  the 
i)  were  assembled  unto  him  before  the  ark 

7  Ami  the  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the 

8  the  ark,  and  the  cherubjras  covered  the  ark 
.,  Mir  Btayes  were  seen  [mm  the  ark  before 

.  10  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables 
.  11  And  in  it  have  T  put  the  ark.  wherein 
1 1  u|  1    .thou,  and  the  ark  of  thy  strength 


4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
S- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 

7- 

14. 
aSa.  6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 


iCh.  6. 
13- 
13- 
13- 
*3- 
*3- 
13- 
13' 
13 
13- 
15- 
15- 
J5- 
*5- 
15- 
*5- 
*5- 
35- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 


2CI1.  8.  11  whereunto  the  ark  of  the  Lord  hath  come 

35.    3  Put  the  holy  ark  in  the  house  which 
Psa.132.   8  Arise,  .thou,  and  the  ark  of  thy  strength 
Jer.    3.  16  say  no  more,  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

2.A  rk,  ki&q>t6s  kibutos. 

Matt  24.  38  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark 
Luke  17.  27  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark 
Heb.  9.  4  the  ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  round 
11.  7  By  faith  Noah,  .prepared  an  ark  to  the 
1  Pe.  3.  20  while  the  ark  was  a  preparing,  wherein 
Rev.  11.  19  there  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of 
Z.An  ark,  boat,  vessel,  ron  tebah. 

Gen.    6.  14  Make  thee  an  ark  of  gopher  wood 
6.  14  rooms  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark 
6.  15  length  of  the  ark  (shall  be)  three  hundred 
6. 16  window  shalt  thou  make  to  the  ark 
6.  16  the  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  set  in  the 
6.  18  thou  shalt  come  into  the  ark,  thou,  and 

6.  19  every  (sort)  shalt  thou  bring  into  the  ark 

7.  1  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark 
7.  7  Noah  went  .into  the  ark,  because  of  the 
7.  9  There  went  in  two  and  two . .  into  the  ark 
7.  13  wives  of  his  sons,  .into  the  ark 

715  they  went  in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  two 
7  17  the  waters  increased,  and  bare  up  the  ark 
7.  18  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the  waters 

7.  23  and  they  that  (were)  with  him  in  the  ark 

8.  1  all  the  cattle,  .(was)  with  him  in  the  ark 
8.  4  the  ark  rested  iu  the  seventh  month,  on 
8.    6  Noah  opened  the  window  of  the  ark 

8.    9  she  returned  unto  him  into  the  ark,  for 
8.    9  and  pulled  her  in  iinto  him  into  the  ark 
8.  10  he  sent  forth  the  dove  out  of  the  ark 
8.  13  Noah  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark 

8.  16  Go' forth  of  the  ark,  thou,  and  thy  wife 
8. 19  every  beast,  .went  forth  out  of  the  ark 

9.  10  from  all  that  go  out  of  the  ark,  to  every 
9.  18  sons  of  Noah,  that  went  forth  of  the  ark 

Exod.  2.    3  she  took  for  him  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  and 
2.    5  when  she  saw  the  ark  among  the  flags 
AR-KITE,  *p*)y  fugitive,  belonging  to  Arka. 
The  patronymic  of  a  tribe  descended  from  Canaan,  son 
of  Ham,  residing  in  Area,  about  12  miles  N.  of  Tripoli 
in  Syria.     Its  ruins  are  now  called  Tell  Arka. 

Gen.  10.  17  [Canaan  begat],  .the  Hivite,  and  the  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  15  [Canaan  begatj.  .the  Hivite,  and  the  A. 

ARM  — 

l.Arm,  j/niN  ezroa. 

Job   31.  22  let.  .mine  arm  be  broken  from  the  bone 
Jer.  32.  21  with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with 

2.Arm,  jrn  dcra. 

Dan.    2.  32  his  breast  and  his  arms  of  silver,  his 

3. Arm,  jp|  zeroa. 

Gen.  49.  24  the  arms  of  his  hands  were  made  strong 
Exod.  6.    6  redeem  you  with  a  stretched  out  arm 

15.  16  by  the  greatness  of  thine  arm  they  shall 
Deut.  4.  34  by  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  by  great 

5.  15  God  brought,  .by  a  stretched  out  arm 
7.  19  hand,  and  the  stretched  out  arm 
g.  29  broughtest.  .by  thy  stretched  out  arm 
11.    2  hand,  aud  his  stretched  out  arm 
26.    8  brought . .  with  an  outstretched  arm 
33.  20  teareth  the  arm  with  the  crown  of  the 
33.  27  underneath  (are)  the  everlasting  arms 
Judgis.  14  the  cords  that  (were)  upon  his  arms 

16.  12  he  brake  them  from  off  his  arms 

1  Sa.    2.  31 1  will  cut  off  thine  arm,  and  the  arm  of 

2  Sa.    1.  10  the  bracelet  that  (was)  on  his  arm 

22.  35  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  arms 

1  Ki.   8.  42  shall  hear,  .of  thy  stretched  out  arm 

2  Ki.  9.  24  Jehu,  .smote  Jehoram  betweeu  his  arms 

17.  36  with  great  power  and  a  stretched  out  arm 
2  Ch.   6.  32  mighty  hand,  and  thy  stretched  out  arm 

32.  8  With  him  (is)  an  arm  of  flesh ;  but  with 
Job   22.   9  the  arms  of  the  fatherless,  .been  broken 

26.   2  (how)  savest  thou  the  arm  (that  hath)  no 
35.    9  they  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  of  the 
38.  15  and  tlie  high  arm  shall  lie  broken 
40.    9  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God?  or  canst 
Psa.  10.  15  Break  thou  the  arm  of  the  wicked  and 

18.  34  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  arms 
37.  17  the  arms  of  the  wicked  shall  be  broken 
44.    3  neither  did  their  own  arm  save  them 
44.    3  but  thy  right  hand,  and  thine  arm 

77.  15  Thou  hast  with  (thine)  arm  redeemed  thy 
89.  10  thou  hast  scattered,  .with  thy  sti'ong  arm 
89.  13  Thou  has  a  mighty  arm  :  strong  is  thy 
89.  21  mine  arm  also  shall  strengthen  him 
98.    1  his  right  hand,  and  his  holy  arm 
136.  12  strong  hand,  and  with  astretched  out  arm 
Prov.31.  17  girdethherloins.. strengthened herarms 
Song  8.    6  Set  me.  .as  a  seal  upon  thine  arm 
Isa.     g.  20  they  shall  eat.  .the  flesh  of  his  own  arm 
17.    5  and  reapcth  the  ears  with  his  arm 
30.  30  shall  shew  the  lighting  down  of  his  arm 

33.  2  be  thou  their  arm  every  morning 
40.  10  Behold,  .his  arm  shall  rule  for  him 

40.  11  he  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm 
44.  12  workeih  it  with  the  strength  of  his  arms 
48.  14  and  his  arm  (shall  be  on)  the  Chaldeans 
51.    5  and  mine  arms  shall  judge  the  people 

51.  5  and  on  mine  arm  shall  they  trust 

5t.   9  awake,  put  on  strength,  O  arm  of  the  Lord 

52.  10  The  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  arm 

53.  1  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed? 
59.  16  therefore  his  arm  brought  salvation  unto 

62.  8  Tlie  LORD  hath  sworn,  .by  the  arm  of  his 

63.  5  therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  salvation 


Isa.    63.  12  led.  .by .  .Moses  with  his  glorious  arm 
Jer.   17.    5  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose 
21.    5  I  myself  will  fight,  .with  a  strong  arm 
27.    5  great  power  and  by  my  outstretched  arm 
32.  17  thy  great  power  and  stretched  out  arm 
48.  25  Moab  is  cut  otf,  and  his  arm  is  broken 
Eze.    4.    7  and  thine  arm . .  uncovered,  and  thou  shalt 
13.  20  and  I  will  tear  them  from  your  arms 
20.  33  (As)  I  live,  .with  a  stretched  out  arm 
20.  34  gather  you.  .with  a  stretched  out  arm 
30.  21  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh  king 
30.  22  against  Pharaoh . .  and  will  break  his  arms 
30.  24,  25  I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king 
30.  24  I  will  break  Pharaoh's  arms,  and  he 

30.  25  tlie  arms  of  Pharaoh  sTiall  fall  down 

31.  17  (they  that  were)  his  arm,  (that)  dwelt 
Dan.  10.    6  his  arms  and  his  feet  like,  .polished  brass 

11.    6  the  power  of  the  arm.  .nor  his  arm 
11.  15  the  arms  of  the  south  shall  not  withstand 
11.  22  with  the  arms  of  a  flood  shall  they  be 
11.  31  And  arms  shall  stand  on  his  part 

Hos.    7.  15  Though  I  have,  .strengthened  their  arms 
11.    3  taking  them  by  their  arms ;  but  they 

Zech.n.  17  the  sword  (shall  be)  upon  his  arm,  and 
11.  17  his  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his 

■i.Bosom,  lap,  jxb  clwtsen. 

Isa.    49.  22  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  (their)  arms 

5. Shoulder,  t]D$  katheph. 

Job.  31.  22  let.  .mine  arm  fall  from  my  shoulder 

Q.Arm,  fipaxlvv  brachiOn. 

Luke  1.  51  He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his  arm 
John  12.  38  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been 
Acts  13.  17  with  an  high  arm  brought  he  them  out 

ARM,  to  — 

1.  To  clothe,  vih  labesh. 

1  Sa.  17.  38  Saul  armed  David,  .also  he  armed  him 
2. To  draio  out,  pn  ruq,  5. 

Gen.  14.  14  he  armed  his  trained,  .born  in  his 
ARM  self,  to  — 
1.7V  be  drawn  out  or  off,  pr;  chalats,  2. 

Num  31.    3  Arm  some  of  yourselves  unto  the  war 

2.  To  arm  self,  dirxi^o^iat  hoplizamai. 

1  Pe.    4.    1  arm  yourselves  likewise  with  tlie  same 
ARMED  — 
l.To  arm,  y\^  chalats. 

Nuni3i.    5  twelve  thousand  armed  for  war 

32.  21  will  go  all  of  you  armed  over  Jordan 

32.  27  will  pass  over,  every  man  armed  for  war 

33.  29  every  man  armed  to  battle,  before  the 
32.  30  will  not  pass  over  with  you  armed 

32.  32  We  will  pass  over  armed  before  the  Lord 
Deut.  3.  18  ye  shall  pass  over  armed  before  your 
Josh.  6.    7  let  him  that  is  armed  pass  on  before  the 
2.Bu  fifties,  armed,  tr^on  chamushim. 
Josh.  1.  14  pass  before  your  brethren  armed 

4.  12  Mauasseh,  passed  over  armed  before  the 

3.  To  clothe  oneself  e;?^  labesh. 

1.  Sa.  17.    5  he  (was)  armed  with  a  coat  of  mail 
^.Shield,  |JO  magen. 

Prov.  6.  11  and  thy  want  as  an  armed  man 
24.  34  and  thy  want  as  an  armed  man 
5.  To  clasj),  arm  oneself  pvi  nashaq. 

1  Ch.  12.    2  (They  were)armed  with  bows,  and  could 
Psa.  ;78.    9  The  children  of  Ephraim,  (being)  armed 

ARMED,  to  be  — 

7*0  arm  one's  self  Ka8oir\iCo/j.aL  Mthoplizpmai. 
Luke  11.  21  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace 

ARMED,  to  go  — 

To  be  armeilj  drawn  out,  yhy  chalats,  2. 

Num  32.  17  But  we  ourselves  will  go  ready  armed 
32.  20  if  ye  will  go  armed  before  the  Lord  to 

ARMED  man  — 

1. Armed,  drawn  out,  f?r;  chalats. 

Josh.  6.   9  the  armed  men  went  before  the  priests 
6.  13  and  the  armed  men  went  before  them 

2'_Ch.  28.  14  So  the  armed  men  left  the  captives  and 

2.Arm-cd,  fifties,  even  chamushim. 

Judg.  7.  11  Then  went  he.  .outside  of  the  amiednicn 
3.7V  kiss,  clasp,  arm  oneself  ppi  ?iashaq. 

2  Ch.  17.  17  and  with  him  armed  men  with  bow  and 
i. Armour,  pvi  nesheq. 

Job   39.  21  he  goetli  on  to  meet  the  armed  men 
ARMED,  ready  — 
To  be  drawn  out,  armed   |'?n  chalats. 

1  Ch.  12.  23  the  numbers,  .ready  armed  to  the  war 
12.  24  of  Judah.  .ready  armed  to  the  war 

ARMED  soldier  — 

To  arm,  draw  out,  pn  chalats. 

Isa.    15.    4  the  armed  soldiers  of  Moab  shall  cry  out 

AR-MA-GED'-DON,  ■ Kpfia.yeh'hwv  hill  of  Meg  id  do. 
A  symbolic  name  (derived  from  2  Ch.  35.  22)  for  the 
scene  of  some  great  spiritual  contest. 

Rev.  16.  16  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  A. 

AR-ME'-NI-A,  the  Oreckform  of  Ararat. 

Armenia,  according  to  tradition,  was  settled  by  Haik, 

son  of  Togarmah,  and  grandson  of  Japhct  (Gen.  io.  3)  J 


ABM    HOLE 


51 


ARPAD 


it  is  noticed  in  Scripture  under  the  names  Togarmah 
and  Ararat.  The  country,  afterwards  divided  into 
Lesser  and  Greater  Armenia,  was  frequently  invaded 
by  the  Assyrians,  the  Babylonians,  the  Medes  and  Per- 
sians, and  for  many  years  remained  in  subjection  to  one 
or  other  of  these  empires.  The  accounts  given  by 
Greek  and  Roman  writers  are  at  variance  with  those  of 
the  Armenian  historians.  M.  St  Martin  has  investi- 
gated the  subject  with  diligence,  and  upon  his  work  the 
following  chronological  table  is  based  : — 

In  B.C.  2107,  Haik,  fleeing  from  Belus  king  of  Assyria, 
settles  in  Armenia,  and  becomes  its  first  ruler:  1827, 
accession  of  Aram,  who  carries  his  arms  into  Asia 
Minor  and  founds  Mazaca,  i.e.  Cssareia  of  Cappadocia ; 
1725,  Armenia  becomes  subject  to  Assyria;  743,  Baro'ir 
renders  it  independent ;  565,  accession  of  Tigranes,  who 
restores  it  to  its  ancient  position  ;  323,  on  the  death  of 
Alexander  it  falls  under  the  sway  of  Greek  governors  ; 
317,  under  Ardoates  it  throws  off  the  Grecian  yoke  ; 
149,  Valarsaces,  or  Wagharshag  I.,  founds  the  dynasty 
of  the  Arsacida; ;  34,  Antony  leads  its  sovereign  cap- 
tive to  Alexandria  ;  30,  on  the  death  of  Antony,  Artaxes 
expels  the  Romans,  and  is  crowned  king.  In  a^d.  t6, 
Vonones,  king  of  the  Parthians,  seeks  shelter  in  Ar- 
menia, and  is  made  king  ;  18,  Germauicus  makes  Zeuo 
Icing  under  the  name  of  Artaxias  ;  62,  Tiridates  king,  by 
order  of  Nero  ;  115,  invaded  and  conquered  by  Trajan ; 
232,  subjected  by  Ardashir,  king  of  Persia;  276,  Tiri- 
dates is  converted  to  Christianity  by  Gregory  ;  387,  Ar- 
menia divided  between  the  Romans  and  the  Persians: 
428,  end  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Arsacidrc. 

2  Ki.  19.  37  and  they  escaped  into  the  land  of  A. 

Isa.    37.  38  and  they  escaped  into  the  land  0!  A. 
ARM  HOLE  — 
-1  mi-hole,  X  'TIS  atstsil  yad. 

Jer.  38.  12  Put  now  (these),  .under  thine  armholes 

Eze.  13.  18  Woe  to.  .that  sew  pillows  to  all  armholes 

ARMIES  — 

Bare,  open  spaces,  ru"UH?  maaroth. 

1  Sa.  1 7.  23  came  up . .  out  of  the  armies  of  the 
AR-MO'-NI,  ^b-)N  of  the  palace. 
A  son  of  Saul,  by  Rizpah,  B.C.  1050 

2Sa.  21.    8  But  the  king  took..  A.  and  Mephibosheth 

ARMOUR  — 

1.  Pieces  of  armoury  pointed  weapons,  ni:t  zonoth. 

1  Ki.  22.  38  and  they  washed  his  armour 
2.A  thing  to  gird  on,  n"vun  chagorah. 

2  Ki.    3.  21  all  that  were  able  to  put  on  armour 
Z.A  thing  to  draw  on,  -T^n  chalitsah. 

2Sa.    2.  21  young  men,  and  take  thee  his  armour 
4.  Instrument,  vessel,  ~h?  keli. 

1  Sa.  14.    1  unto  the  young  man  that  bare  his  armour 
14.    6  to  the  young  man  that  bare  his  armour 
17.  54  but  he  put  his  armour  in  his  teut 
31.    9  they,  .stripped  off  his  armour 
31.  10  they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  Asht. 

2Sa.  18.  15  ten  young  men  that  bare  Joab's  armour 

zKi.  20.  13  and  (all)  the  house  of  his  armour 

1  Ch.  10.    9  they  took  his  head,  and  his  armour,  and 
10.  10  they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  their 

Isa.  39.    ?  and  all  the  house  of  his  armour 
5. Long  robe,  i?  mad. 

1  Sa.  17.  38  Saul  armed  David  with  his  armour 

17.  39  David  girded  his  sword  upon  his  armour 

6.  Armour,  thing  joined  together,  p&i  nesheq. 

1  Ki.  10.  25  brought  every  man  his  present,  .armour 

2  Ki.  10.    2  with  you . .  a  fenced  city  also,  and  armour 
Isa.  22.   8  thou  didst  look,  .to  the  armour  of  the 

7. Arms,  armour,  oVAa  hopla. 

Rom  13.  12  let  us  put  on  the  [armour]  of  light 
2  Co.   6.    7  by  the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the 

ARMOUR,  (all)  — 

Whole  armour,  iravo-KKia  panoplia. 

Luken.  22  he  taketh  from  him  all  his  armour  wherein 
ARMOUR  (whole)  — 
Whole  armour,  iravoTrhla  imnoplia. 

Eph.   6.  11  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that 
6. 13  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God 

ARMOURBEARER  — 

Bearer  of  weapon,  73  n'v'i  nose  keli. 

Judg.  g.  54  called,  .the  young  man  his  armourbearer 
iSa.  14.    7  his  armourbearer  said  unto  him,  Do  all 
14. 12  answered  Jonathan  andhis  armourbearer 
14.  12  Jonathan  said  unto  his  armour-bearer 
14.  13  climbed  up.  .and  his  armourbearer 
14.  13  and  his  armourbearer  slew  after  him 
14.  14  which  Jonathan  and  his  armourbearer 
14.  17  Jonathan  and  his  armourbearer  (were) 
16.  21  and  he  became  his  armourbearer 
31.   4  Theu  said  Saul  unto  his  armourbearer 
31.   4  his  armourbearer  would  not ;  for  he  was 
31.    5  when  his  armourbearer  saw  that  Saul 
31.   6  So  Saul  died,  .and  his  armourbearer 
2  Sa.  23.  37  Zelek . .  armourbearer  to  Joab  the  son  of 
1  Ch.  10.    4  Then  said  Saul  to  his  armourbearer 

10.    4  his  armourbearer  would  not;  for  he  was 

10.  5  his  armourbearer  saw  that  Saul  was  dead 

11.  39  Zelek.  .the  armourbearer  of  Joab 

ARMOURY  — 

1.  Treasury,  i>-;in  otsar. 

Jer.  50.  25  The  Lord  hath  opened  his  armoury 

2.  Thing  joined  on  or  together,  pyi  nesheq. 

Neh.   3. 19  over  against  the  going  up  to  the  armoury 


3.  Armoury,  heap  of  swords,  nvsT;n  talpiyyoth. 
Song   4.    4  Thy  neck  (is)  like .  .for  an  armoury 

ARMS  — 

Arms  (as  bent  or  crooked),  ayxaXat.  angkalai. 
Luke  2.  28  Then  took  he  him  up  in  his  arms 

ARMS,  to  take  (up)  in  — 

To  make  the  arms  inclose  one,  ivayKa\i(ofj.ai. 
Mark  9.  36  and  when  he  had  taken  him  in  his  arms 

10.  16  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  put  (his)  hands 

ARMY  — 

1.  Troop,  ~in3  gedud. 

2  Ch.  25.    9  I  have  given  to  the  army  of  Israel  ? 
25.  10  the  army  that  was  come  to  him  out  of 
25.  13  the  soldiers  of  the  army  which  Amaziah 
Job  25.    3  Is  there  any  number  of  his  armies 
29.  25  and  dwelt  as  a  king  in  the  army 

%Strength,  might,  force,  h'n  chayil. 

Exodi4.   9  Pharaoh,  and  his  horsemen,  and  his  army 
Deut  11.    4  what  he  did  unto  the  army  of  Egypt 

1  Ki.  20.  19  and  the  army  which  followed  them 

20.  25  number  thee  an  army,  like  the  army  that 

2  Ki.  25.    5  the  army  of  the  Chaldees  pursued  after 

25.    5  all  his  army  were  scattered  from  him 
25. 10  all  the  army  of  the  Chaldees,  that 
25.  23  when  all  the  captains  of  the  armies 

25.  26  all  the  people . .  the  captains  of  the  armies 
iCh.  11.  26  the  valiant  men  of  the  armies.. Asahel 

2  Ch.  13.   3  Abijah . .  with  an  army  of  valiant  men  of 
14.    8  Asa  had  an  army,  .that  bare  targets  and 

16.  4  Ben-haded,  .sent  the  captains  of.  .armies 
24.  24  the  army  of  the  Syrians  came  with  a 

26.  13  under  their  hand  (was)  an  army,  three 
Neh.    2.   9  king  had  sent  captains  of  the  army 

4.    2  he  spake  before,  .the  army  of  Samaria 

Isa.   43.  17  Which  bringeth  forth,  .the  army  and  the 

Jer.   32.    2  the  king  of  Babylon's  army  besieged  Jer. 

34.    1  when  Nebuchadnezzar,  .and  all  his  arm} 

34.    7  king  of  Babylon's  army  fought  against  J. 

34.  21  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon's  army 

35.  11  for  fear  of  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans 
35.  11  for  fear  of  the  army  of  the  Syrians 

37.    5  Pharaoh's  army  was  come  forth  but  of  E. 
37.    7  Pharaoh's  army,  .shall  return  to  Egypt 
37.  10  though  ye  had  smitten  the .  .army  of  the 

37.  11  army,  .for  fear  of  Pharaoh's  army 

38.  3  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon's  army 

39.  1  came  Nebuchadrezzar,  .and  all  his  army 
39.  5  the  Chaldeans'  army  pursued  after  them 
46.  2  against  the  army  of  Pharaoh-necho  king 
46.  22  for  they  shall  march  with  an  army 

52.    4  Nebuchadrezzar,  .he  and  all  his  army 
52.    8  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans  pursued  after 
52.    8  all  his  army  was  scattered  from  him 
52.  14  all  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans 
Eze.  17.  17  shall  Pharaoh  with  (his)  mighty  army 

27.  10  They  of  Persia,  .were  in  thine  army,  thy 

27.  11  The  men  of  Arvad  with  thine  army 
29.  18  Nebuchadrezzar.. caused  his  army  to 
29.  18  yet  had  he  no  wages,  nor  his  army,  for 
29. 19  and  it  shall  be  the  wages  for  his  army 
32.  31  and  all  his  army  slain  by  the  sword 

37.  10  they  lived,  .an  exceeding  great  army 

38.  4  I  will  bring  thee,  .and  all  thine  army 
38. 15  a  great  company,  and  a  mighty  army 

Dan.  11.    7  which  shall  come  with  an  army,  and  shall 

11.  13  shall  certainly  come. .with  a  great  army 
ir.  25  stir  up  his  power,  .with  a  great  army 
11.  25  with  a  very  great  and  mighty  army 

11.  26  destroy  him,  and  his  army  shall  overflow 
Joel    2.  11  shall  utter  his  voice  before  his  army 

2.  25  my  great  army  which  I  sent  among  you 

3. Might,  strength,  force,  b)n  chayil. 

Dan.  3.  20  mighty  men  that  (were)  in  his  army 

4.  35  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  army 

i.Might,  strength,  force,  -z'D  ^hel. 

Isa.   36.    2  uuto  king  Hezekiah  with  a  great  army 

5.  Camp,  ™no  machaneh. 

iSa.  17.    1  Philistinesgatheredtogethertheirarmies 

28.  1  Philistines  gathered  their  armies  together 

29.  1  the  Philistines  gathered .  .all  their  armies 
Song  6. 13  As  it  were  the  company  of  two  armies 

G. Arrangement,  nrj£Q  maarakah. 

1  Sa.    4.    2  they  slew  of  the  army  in  the  field 
4.  12  a  man  of  Benjamin  out  of  the  army 
4.  16  came  out  of  the  army,  .out  of  the  army 

17.  8  he.  .cried  unto  all  the  armies  of  Israel 
17.  10  I  defy  the  armies  of  Israel  this  day ;  give 
17.  21  put  the  battle  in  array,  army  against  army 
17.  22  David  left,  .and  ran  into  the  army,  and 
17.  23  came  up  the  champion .  .out  of  the  armies 
17.  26  should  defy  the  armies  of  the  living  God? 
17.  36  hath  defied  the  armies  of  the  living  God 
17.  45  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou 
17.  48  David  hasted,  and  ran  toward  the  army 
23.    3  if  we  come  to  Keilah  against  the  armies 

7.  Thing  set  iij),  ^V'?  mitstsabah. 

Zech.  9.   8  I  will'encamp  about . .  because  of  the  army 
S.IIost  (as  joined  together),  N3>*  tsaba. 

Gen.  26.  26  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  army 
Exod.  6.  26  Bring  out.  .according  to  their  armies 
7.    4  that  I  may.  .bring  forth  mine  armies 
12. 17  have  I  brought  your  armies  out  of  the 

12.  51  the  Lord  did  bring,  .by  their  armies 
Num.  1.   3  Aaron  shall  number  them  by  their  armies 


Num.  2.    3  shall,  .pitch  throughout  their  armies 
2.    9  of  Judah . .  throughout  their  armies 
2.  10  the  standard .  .according  to  their  armies 
2.  16  of  Reuben,  .throughout  their  armies 
2.  18  the  standard,  .according  to  their  armies 
2.  24  of  Ephraim.  .throughout  their  armies 
2.  25  The  standard,  .by  their  armies 
10.  14,  22  standard,  .according  to  their  armies 

10.  28  journeyingsof.  .according  to  their  armies 
33.    1  which  went  forth  out.  .with  their  armies 

Deut  20.  9  they  shall  make  captains  of  the  armies 
Judg.  4.    7  I  will  draw,  .the  captain  of  Jabin's  army 

8.  6  we  should  give  bread  unto  thine  army? 

9.  29  Increase  thine  army,  and  come  out 

1  Ch.  20.    1  Joab  led  forth  the  power  of  the  army,  and 

27.  34  the  general  of  the  king's  army  (was)  Joab 

2  Ch.  25.    7  O  king,  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with 

26.  13  under  their  hand  (was)  an  army,  three 
Psa.  44.    9  But  thou . .  goest  not  forth  with  our  armies 

60. 10  didst  not  go  out  with  our  armies? 

68.  12  Kings  of  armies  did  flee  apace  :  and  she 
Isa.  34.    2  and.  .fury  upon  all  their  armies  :  he  hath 
d.An  encavipment,  itap€}x&o\T}  parembole. 

Heb.  n.34  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens 
10. Armament,  o"TpaTeu^a  strateuma. 

Matt  22.  7  he  sent  forth  his  armies,  and  destroyed 
Acts  23.  27  then  came  I  with  an  army,  and  rescued 
Rev.   9.  16  the  number  of  the  army  of  the  horsemen 

19.  14  thearmies..inheavenfollowedhimupon 

19.  19  and  their  armies,  .acainst  his  army 
11. J.  camp,  army,  o-rparSTredou  stratojicdon. 
Luke2i.  20  ye  shall  see.  .compassed  with  armies 

AR'-NAN,  }f\)<  strong. 

Patronymic  of  a  family  descended  from  David,  B.C.  500. 
1  Ch.    3.  21  the  sons  of  Rephaiah,  the  sons  of  A.,  the 

AR'-NON,  jiJiN  rushing  stream. 

A  river  and  valley  forming  the  S.  boundarj'  of  Canaan 

towards  Moab.     Rising  in  the  mountains  of  Arabia,  it 

flows  into  the  Salt  Sea,  opposite  Ain-gidy.    Now  Mojeb. 

Nuni2i.  13  pitched  on  the  other  side  of  A.,  which 

21.  13  for  A.  (is)  the  border  of  Moab,  between 

21.  14  and  in  the  brook  of  A. 

21.  24  possessed  his  land  from  A.  unto  Jabbok 

21.  26  taken  all  his  land,  .even  unto  A. 

21.  28  the  lords  of  the  high  places  of  A. 

22.  36  Moab,  which  (is)  in  the  border  of  A. 
Deut.  2.  24  your  journey,  and  pass  over  the  river  A. 

2.  36  Aroer.  .(is)  by  the  brink  of  the  river  of  A. 

3.  8  from  the  river  of  A.  unto  mount  Hermon 
3.  12  from  A.,  which  (is)  by  the  river  A.,  and 

3.  16  from  Gilead  even  unto  the  river  A.  half 

4.  48  Aroer,  which  (is)  by  the  bank  of.  .river  A. 
Josh. 12.    1  from  the  river  A.  unto  mount  Hermon 

12.  2  Aroer.  .upon  the  bank  of  the  river  A. 

13.  9,  16  Aroer.. upon  the  bank  of  the  river  A. 
Judg  11.  13  they  came  up  out  of  Egypt,  from  A.  even 

11. 18  and  pitched  on  the  other  side  of  A.,  but 

11.  18  for  A.  (was)  the  border  of  Moab    ' 

11.  22  from  A.  even  unto  Jabbok  and  from  the 
11.  26  cities  that  (be)  along  by  the  coasts  of  A. 

1  Ki.  10.  33  from  Aroer,  which  (is)  by  the  river  A. 
Isa.    16.    2  Moab  shall  be  at  the  fords  of  A. 

Jer.  4S.  20  tell  ye  it  in  A.,  that  Moab  is  spoiled 

A'-ROD,  ton  descent,  p>°sterity. 

One  of  Gad's'sons,  whence  came  the  Arodi,  B.C.  1700. 

Num  26.  17  Of  A.,  the  family  of  the  Arodites 
A-RO'-DI,  ""nix  my  posterity. 
The  Arodites,  descendants  of  Arod. 

Gen.  46.  16  sons  of  Gad ;  Ziphion.  .and  A.,  and 

A-RO-dites,  niisrr. 

The  same  as  the  preceding  Arodi. 

Num.  26.  17  Of  Arod,  the  family  of  the  A. 

A-RO'-ER,  "UPS.,  "W"1^  enclosed. 

1.  A  city  near  Kabbath'Ammon,  in  the  valley  of  Jabbok, 
now  called  Arieh. 

Nuni32.  34  the  children  of  Gad  built  Dibon..and  A 
Josh  13.  25  land  of  the  children  of  Amnion,  unto  A. 

2  Sa.  24.  5  passed  over  Jordan,  and  pitched  in  A. 
Isa.  17.    2  The  cities  of  A.  (are)  forsaken  :  they  shall 

2.  A  city  of  the  Amorites,  on  the  bank  of  the  Arnon,  and 
now  called  Arair. 

Deut.  2.  36  From  A.,  which  (is)  by  the  brink  of  the 

3.  12  from  A.,  which  (is)  by  the  river  Anion 

4.  48  From  A.,  which  is  by  the  bank  of  the 
Josh  12.    2  Sihon .  .in  Heshbon,  (and)  ruled  from  A. 

13.    9  From  A.,  that  (is)  upon  the  bank  of  the 
13.  16  And  their  coast  was  from  A.,  that  (is)  on 

Jud^n.  26  While  Israel  dwelt  in.  .A.  and  her  towns 
11.  33  And  he  smote  them  from  A.,  even  till 

2  Ki.  10.  33  from  A.,  which  (is)  by  the  river  Arnon 

1  Ch     5     8  Shema,  the  son  of  Joel,  who  dwelt  in  A. 

Jer.    48.  19  O  inhabitant  of  A.,  stand  by  the  way 

3.  A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah.     Now  called  Ararah. 

x  Sa.  30.  28  And  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  A.,  and 

A-RO-E-RITE,  njpa  of  Aroer. 
The  patronymic  of  one  Hothan. 

1  Ch.  11.  44  and  Jehiel  the  sons  of  Hothan  the  A, 

AR'-PAD,  AR'-PHAD,  "!3*bS*  a  couch,  resting  place. 
A  fortified  city  near  Hamath,  perhaps  the  same  as 
Arvad,  now  called  Ruad. 

2K1.  iS.  34Wherc(arc)thegodsofBamath,andof  A.? 


AEPHAXAD 


52 


AS 


2  Ki.  in.  13  the  king  of  Hamath,  and  the  king  of  A. 
Isa.    10.    9  (is)  not  Hamath  as  A  His)  no'  Samaria  as 

36.  1?  Where  (are)  the  gods  of  Hamath  and  A..? 

37.  13  the  king  of  Hamath,  and  the  king  of  A. 
Jer.  49.  23  Hamath  is  confounded,  and  Arpad  :  for 

AR-PHAX'-AD,  -RjbSiN.      Meaning  uncertain. 
A  son  of  Shem,  and' a  tribe  E.  of  the  Tigris  near  Elam 
and  Asshur,  in  the  N.  of  Assyria,  with  Media  ou  the  Ji. 
and  Armenia  on  the  N.     B.C.  2348-1904. 

Gen.  10.  22  The  children  of  Shem  ;  Elam  .and  A 

10.  24  And  A.  begat  Salah ;  and  Salah  begat 

11.  10  an  hundred  years  old,  and  begat  A 

11  11  And  Shem  lived  after  he  begat  A.  five 
11  12  And  A.  lived  five  and  thirty  years,  and 
11   .3  And  A.  lived  after  he  begat  Salah  four 

1  Ch    117  sons  of  Shem ;  Elam,  and  Ashur,  and  A. 

1.  18  And  A.  hegat  Shelah,  and  Shelah  begat 
1.  24  Shem,  A.,  Shelah 
Luke  3.  36  Cainan,  which  was  (the  son)  of  A. 

ARRAY  — 

Clothing,  i.u.aTKruo's  himatismos. 

iTi.    2.    9  not  with  broidered  hair.. or  costly  array 

ARRAY,  to  — 

To  clothe,  v^h  labesh,  5. 

Gen.  41.  42  arrayed  him  in  vestures  of  fine  linen 

2  Ch.  28.  15  all  that  were  naked,  .and  arrayed  them 
Esth.  6.    9  that  they  may  array  the  man.,  whom  the 

6.  11  Then  took  Hainan.,  and  arrayed  Mordecai 

ARRAY,  in  — 

To  set,  place,  n'V  shith. 

Isa.    22.    7  horsemen  shall  set  themselves  in  array 

ARRAY,  put  in  — 
To  array,  IfiSl  arak. 

Jer.  50.  42  (every  one)  put  in  array,  like  a  man 

ARRAY,  to  put  in  — 
To  array,  TIV.  arak. 

2  Sa.  10.   9  and  put.  .in  array  against  the  Syrian 
10.    8  and  put  the  battle  in  array  at  the 
10.  10  that  he  might  put  (them)  in  array  against 
1  Ch.  19.    9  put  the  battle  in  array  before  the  gate  of 
19.  10  and  put.  .in  array  against  the  Syrians 

19.  17  when  David  had  put  the  battle  in  array 

ARRAY,  to  put  selves  in  — 
To  array,  TJl^  arak. 

Judg  20.  20  Israel  put  themselves  in  array  to  fight 

20.  22  where  they  put  themselves  in  array 

20.  30  put  themselves  in  array  against  Gibeah 
20.  33  put  themselves  in  array  at  Baal-tamar 
1  Sa.    4.    2  Philistines  put  themselves  in  array 
Jer.  50.  14  Put  yourselves  in  array  against  Babylon 

ARRAY,  to  put  the  battle  in  — 
To  array,  Till  arak. 

1  Sa.  17.  21  For  Israel,  .had  put  the  battle  in  array 

ARRAY  self,  to  — 
l.To  clothe,  t*37  labesh. 

Job  40.  10  array  thyself  with  glory  and  beauty 
2.  To  cover,  wrap  up,  veil,  naj)  atah. 

Jer.  43. 12  he  shall  array  himself  with  the  land  of 

ARRAY,  set  in  — 

To  array,  TS.  arak. 

Jer.     6.  23  they  ride  upon  horses,  set  in  array 
Joel    2.    5  as  a  strong  people  set  in  battle  array 

ARRAY,  to  set  in  — 

To  array,  T1V,  arak. 

Judg  20.  22  set  their  battle  again  in  array  in  the 
1  Sa.  17.    2  set  the  battle  in  array  against  the 
17.    8  come  out  to  set.  .battle  in  array? 

1  Ch.  19. 11  they  set.  .in  array  against  the  children 

10.  17  and  set.  .in  array  against  them 

2  Ch.  13.    3  Abijah  set  the  battle  in  array  with  an 

14.  10  tliey  set  the  battle  in  array  in  the  valley 

ARRAY,  to  set  selves  in  — 

To  array,  fl»  arak. 

2  sa.  10.  17  the  Syrians  set  themselves  in  array 

Job      6.   4  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves  in  array 

Jer.  50.   9  they  shall  set  themselves  in  array  against 

ARRAY  in,  to  — 

To  cast  around,  7rept#aA\co  periballo. 

Luke  23.  1 1  and  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe,  and 

ARRAYED,  to  be  — 

T.i  !>■'  clothed,  vi)  labesh,  4. 

2  Ch.   5.  12  their  brethren,  .arrayed  in  white  linen 

ARRAYED  in  — 

To  go  into,  pvt  on,  eVSiiw  enduo. 

Acts  12.  21  Herod,  arrayed  in  royal  apparel 
ARRIVE,  to  — 
1.7*0  sail  down,  narair\loi  katapleii. 

Luke  8.  26  they  arrived  at  the  country  of  the  Gad. 
2.  To  cast  alongside,  -rrapafiaWw  paraballo. 

Acts  20.  15  next  (day)  we  arrived  at  Samos,  and 

ARROGANCY  — 

1. Pride,  rising,  excellency,  j'lto  gaon. 

Prov.  8.  13  pride,  and  arroganey.  .do  I  hate 

Isa.  13.  11  cause  the  arroganey  of  the  proud  to  cease 

Jer.  48.  29  the  pride  of  Moab.  .and  his  arroganey 


2.  Stiffness,  insolence,  PVV.  ataq. 

1  Sa.  2.    3  let  (not)  arroganey  come  out  of  your 

ARROW  — 

1. Arrow,  j'n  diets. 

Num  24.    8  pierce . .  through  with  his  arrows 
Deut32.  23  I  will  spend  mine  arrows  upon  them 
32.  42  I  will  make  mine  arrows  drunk  with 

1  Sa.  20.  20  I  will  shoot  three  arrows  on  the  side 

20.  21  find  out  the  arrows,  .the  arrows  (are) 

10.  22  Behold,  the  arrows  (are)  beyond  thee ;  go 

20.  36  find  out  now  the  arrows  which  I  shoot 
20.  38  Jonathan's  lad  gathered  up  the  arrows 

2  Sa.  22.  15  tie  sent  out  arrows,  and  scattered  them 
2  Ki.  13.  15  Elisha  said  unto.  .Take  bow  and  arrows 

13.  15  And  he  took  unto  him  bow  and  arrows 
13.  17  The  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance 
13.  17  the  arrow  of  deliverance  from  Syria 
13.  18  he  said,  Take  the  arrows.    And  he  took 

19.  32  He  shall  not . .  shoot  an  arrow  there 

1  Ch.  12.    2  (hurling)  stones,  and .  .arrows  out  of  a 

2  Ch.  26.  15  to  shoot  arrows  and  great  stones  withal 
Job  6.  4  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  (are)  within 
Psa.     7.  13  he  ordaineth  his  arrows  against  the 

11.  2  they  make  ready  their  arrow  upon  the 
18.  14  he  sent  out  his  arrows,  and  scattered 

38.  2  thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  me,  and  thy 
45.    s  Thine  arrows  (are)  sharp  in  the  heart  of 

57.  4  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  (are),  .arrows 

58.  7  he  bendeth  (his  bow  to  shoot)  his  arrows 
64.  3  bend  (their  bows  to  shoot)  their  arrows 
64.  7  God  shall  shoot  at  them  (with)  an  arrow 
91.  5  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the.  .arrow 

120.   4  Sharp  arrows,  .with  coals  of  juniper 
127.    4  As  arrows  (are)  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty 
144.    6  shoot  out  thine  arrows,  and  destroy  them 
Prov.25.  18  a  maul,  and  a  sword,  and  a  sharp  arrow 

26.  18  As  a  mad  (man)  who  casteth.  .arrows 
Isa.     5.  28  Whose  arrows  (are)  sharp,  and  all  their 
7.  24  With  arrows  and  with  bows  shall  (men) 
37.  33  He  shall  not.  .shoot  an  arrow  there 
Jer.     9.   8  Their  tongue  (is  as)  an  arrow  shot  out 
50.    9  their  arrows,  .as  of  a  mighty  expert  man 

50.  14  shoot  at  her,  spare  no  arrows :  for  she 

51.  11  Make  bright  the  arrows ;  gather  the 
Lam.  3.  12  and  set  me  as  a  mark  for  the  arrow 
Eze.    5.  16  I  shall  send,  .the  evil  arrows  of  famine 

21.  21  he  made  (his)  arrows  bright,  he  consulted 

39.  3  I  will,  .cause  thine  arrows  to  fall  out  of 
39]    9  shall  go  forth.,  and  burn.,  the  arrows, and 

Hab.  3.  11  at  the  light  of  thine  arrows  they  went 
Zech.  9.  14  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning 

'2.  Arrow,  'xn  chetsi. 

1  Sa.  20.  36  he  shot  an  arrow  beyond  him 

20.  37  place  of  the  arrow  which  Jonathan  had 
20.  37  Jonathan  cried..  (Is)  not  the  arrow  beyond 
20.  38  Jonathan's  lad  gathered  up  the  arrows 

2  Ki.   9.  24  the  arrow  went  out  at  his  heart 

3. Arrow  (as piercing,  cutting  in),  f'sn  chatsats. 

Psa.  77. 17  thine  arrows  also  went  abroad 
i.Arrow  (as  flashing,  rushing  forth),  'pi  resheph. 

Psa.  76.    3  There  brake  he  the  arrows  of  the  bow 
5. Son  of  the  bow,  nijjj  |3  ben  qesheth. 

Job  41.  28  The  arrow  cannot  make  him  flee 
ART  — 
l.Work,  rfa-jjp  maaseh. 

Exod3o.  25  an  ointment,  .after  the  art  of  the 

30.  35  confection  after  the  art  of  the  apothecary 

2  Ch.  16. 14  prepared  by  the  apothecaries'  art 
I.Art,  handicraft,  skill,  rex"V  techne- 

Acts  17.  29  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device 

ARTS,  to  use  curious  — 

To  practise  curious  things,  to.  irepUpya  irpaaaoi. 
Acts  19.  19  Many  of  them  also  which  used  curious  arts 

AR-TA-XER'-XES,  NnponrnN  great  king. 

1.  A  Persian  king,  the  Loiigimanus  of  profane  history. 
In  7th  year  of  his  reign  Ezra  went  up  to  Jerusalem, 
B.C.  418. 

Ezra   7.    1  after  these  things,  in  the  reign  of  A.  king 
7.    7  there  went  up.,  in  the  seventh  year  of  A. 
7.  11  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  the  king  A. 
7.  12  A.,  king  of  kings,  unto  Ezra  the  priest,  a 

7.  21  And  I,  (even)  I  A.  the  king,  do  make  a 

8.  1  These,  .went  up  with  me.  .reign  of  A. 
Neh.  2.    1  to  pass.. in  the  t    -ntieth  year  of  A.  the 

5.  14  unto  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  A. 
13.    6  for  in  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  A. 

2.  A  king  of  Persia,  the  Cambyses  of  profane  history, 
B.C.  521. 

Ezra  4.    7  And  in  the  days  of  A.  the  king  wrote 
4.    7  the  rest  of  their  companions,  unto  A. 
4.    8  Rehuiu.  .wrote,  .against  Jerusalem  to  A. 
4.  11  the  copy  of  the  letter,  .unto  A.  the  king 
4.  23  when  the  copy  of  king  A.'s  letter  (was) 

3.  Another  king  of  Persia,  contemporary  with  Darius, 
or  subsequent  to  him. 

Ezra  6.  14  accordi.  „  to  the  commandment  of.  .A. 
AR-TE'-MAS,  'ApTtjuas  whole,  sound. 
A  companion  of  Paul  at  Nicopolis. 

Tit.     3.  12  When  I.  .send  A.  unto  thee,  orTychicus 
ARTIFICER  — 
1. Engraver,  carver,  u:"in  charash. 

1  Ch. 29.    5 -all mannerof work,  .(made) by.. artificers 

2  Ch.34.  11  to  the  artificers  and  builders  gave  they 


2. Engraver,  carver,  EHn  choresh. 

Geu.    4.  22  Tubal-cain.an  instructor  of  every  artificer 

3.  Engraving,  carving,  enn  cheresh. 

Isa.    3.    3  The  couusellor,  and  the  cunning  artificer 

ARTILLERY  — 

Instrument,  'S?  keli. 

1  Sa.  20.  40  Jonathan  gave  his  artillery  unto  his  lad 
A-RTJ -BOTH,  nia -ik  courts. 

The  third  of  Solomon's  commissariat  districts,  includ- 
ing Sochoh ;  it  was  therefore  probably  a  name  for  the 
rich  corn-growing  country  of  the  Shefelah  or  "plain" 
of  Judah. 

1  Ki.  4. 10  son  of  Hesed,  in  A.;  to  him  (pertained) 
A-RU'-MAH,  nenx  height. 

A  place  near  Shech'em,  in  Ephraim,  perhaps  the  same 
as  Kumah  (now  called  El-Ormah,  N.E.  of  >'ablus). 

Judg.  9.  41  And  Abimelech  dwelt  at  A.:  and  Zebul 
AR'-VAD,  -ii"i  8  refuge. 

An  island  near  Zidon,  whence  probablyit  was  colonised 
It  is  now  called  Jiuad,  but  formerly  Antaradus. 

Eze.  27.    8  The  inhabitants  of . .  A.  were  thy  mariners 
27.  11  The  men  of  A.  with  thine  army  (were) 
AR-VAD-ITES,  ni")S  inhabiting  Arvad. 
The  patronymic  of  the  descendants  of  the  9th  son  of 
Canaan,  son  of  Ham. 

Gen.  10.  18  the  A.,  and  the  Zemarite,  and  the 

1  Ch.  1.  16  the  A.,  and  the  Zemarite,  and  the 

AR'-ZA,  tqr\Xfirm. 

A  steward  of  Elah,  king  of  Israel,  B.C.  930. 

1  Ki.  16.   9  in  the  house  of  A.  steward  of  (Ins)  house 
AS  — 

I.  JJ'Ao,  that,  as,  I^K  asher. 

Gen.  22. 14  Jehovah-jireh :  as  it  is  said  (to)  this  day 

2. Even  as,  "iB'NS  kaasher. 

Gen.    7.    9 'the  male  and  the  female,  as  God  had 

Z.Also,  D?  gam. 

Jer.  51.  49  As  Babylon,  .the  slain  of  Israel  to  fall 

i.As  a  sufficiency,  H3  kede. 

Judg.  6.    5  For  they'came  up.  .as  grasshoppers  for 

5.  That,  though,  '3  ki. 

Joh   22.    2  as  he  that  is  wise  may  be  protita 

6. Even  as,  iD3  keTno. 

Exodis.    5  they  sank  into  the  bottom  as  a  stone 

7.  Unto,  ill  ad. 

Judg  20. 48  the  men  of  (every)  city,  as  the  beast,  and 

S.  With,  cy  im. 

Job    9.  26  They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships 
9.  Under,  instead  of,  nnn  tachath. 

Job   34.  26  He  striketh  them  as  wicked  men 

10. Cm,  upon,  in  addition  to,  W  al. 

Job   22.  24  shalt  thou  lay  up  gold  as  dust 

II.  Verily,  then,  for,  yip  gar. 

Matt.  1.  18  When  [as]  his  .mother  Mary  was  espoused 
12.  With  a  view  to,  els  eis. 

Phil.  4.    15  no  church  communicated  with  me  as 
IS.  In,  during,  iv  en. 

Luke  8.    5  and  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  v.  19/etc. 
li.Even,  as,  KaSairep  kalhaper. 

Rom  12.    4  For  as  we  have  many  members  in  one 

1  Co.  12.  12  For  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  many 

2  Co.  3.  13  not  as  Moses,  .put  a  veil  over  his  face 

8.  11  that  as.  .to  will,  so.  .a  performance 
1  Th.  2.  1 1  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted,  and 

3.    6  desiring  greatly  to  see  us,  as  we  also 
Heb.   5'    4  he  that  is  called  of  God,  [as].  .Aaron 
\h.  According  to  which,  KaBd  katha. 

Matt  27.  10  the  potter's  field,  as  the  Lord  appointed 
16. According  to  what,  ko.66  katho. 

Rom.  8.  26  Know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we 
17 .Even  or  according  as,  tcad6ri  kathoti. 

Acts    2.  45  parted  them  to  all.  .as  every  man  had 
IS.  Even  or  according  as,  KaBuis  kathos. 
Matt  21.    6  disciples  went,  and  did  as  Jesus 

26.  24  The  Son  of  mangoeth  as  it  is  written  of 
28.    6  for  he  is  risen,  as  he  said.   Come,  sec  the 
Mark  4.  33  spakehe  the  word  unto  them,  as  they  were 

9.  13  whatsoever  they  listed,  as  it  is  written  of 
14.  16  his  disciples  w  cut  forth,  .and  found  as  he 

14.  21  The  Son  of  man.  .goeth,  as  it  is  written 

15.  8  multitude . .  began  to  desire ..  as  he  had 

16.  7  there  shall  ye  see  him,  as  he  said  unto 
Luke  1.  55  As  he  spake  to  our  fathers,  to  Abraham 

1.  70  As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy 

2.  20  heard  and  seen,  as  it  was  told  unto  them 
2.  23  As  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 

5.  14  according  as  Moses  commanded,  for  a 

6.  31  as  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you 
6.  36  Be  ye  therefore  merciful,  as  your  Father 

11.    1  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  also  taught  his 
11.  30  as  Jonas  was  a  sign  unto  the  Ninevites 

17.  26  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noe,  so  shall  it 
22.  13  they  went,  and  found  as  he  had  said  unto 
22.  29  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  me 
24.  24  found  (it)  even  so  as  the  women  had  said 
24.  39  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  ye  see  me 

Johu  1.  25  Make  straight  the  way.  .as  said  the  pro. 


AS 


53 


AS 


John  3 
5- 

6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

8. 
io. 
io. 

12. 

13- 
13- 
13- 
14. 
14. 
*5- 
15- 
15- 
*7- 
«7- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
19. 


Rom.  1. 


:  Co. 


•  Co. 


Gal.    2. 

5- 
Epn.    3, 


Phil.   2 
3 


Col. 


1  Tli. 


*Th. 


iTi. 
Heb. 


14  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the 

30  as  I  hear,  I  judge  :  and  my  judgment 

31  as  it  is  written.  He  gave  them  bread  from 

57  As  the  living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and 

58  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  manna,  aud 
38  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  scripture 

28  as  my  Father  hath  taught  me,  I  speak 

15  As  the  Father  knoweth  me,  even  so  know 

26  [ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said  nuto  you] 

14  Jesus,  .sat  thereon  ;  as  it  is  written 

15  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you 

33  Ye  shall  seek  me :  and  as  I  said  unto  the 

34  ye  love  one  another;  as  I  have  loved  you 

27  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you 

31  as  the  Father  gave  me  commandment 

4  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself 
9  As  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  1 

12  ye  love  one  auother,  as  I  have  loved  you 

2  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all 
11  keep,  .that  they  may  be  one,  as  we  (are) 
18  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even 
21  That  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou,  Father 

23  hast  loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me 
40  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury 

21  Peace.,  unto  you  :  as.  .Father  hath  sent 

4  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance 

22  midst  of  you,  as  ye  yourselves  also  know 
42  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  prophets 
44  as  he  bad  appointed,  speaking  unto  Moses 

48  most  High  d  welleth . .  in  temples . .  as  saith 
47  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we? 

8  giving  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  as 
15  to  this  agree  the  words,  .as  it  is  written 

3  was  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all  are  this 

13  you  also,  even  as  among  other  Gentiles 

1 7  as  it  is  written,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 

24  name,  .is  blasphemed,  .as  it  is  written 

4  as  it  is  written,  That  thou  mightest  be 

8  as  we  be  slanderously  reported,  and  as 
10  As  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous 
1 7  As  it  is  written,  I  have  made  thee  a  father 
36  As  it  is  written,  For  thy  sake  we  are 

13  As  it  is  written,  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but 

29  And  as  Esaias  said  before,  Except  the 
33  As  it  is  written,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Sion 

15  as  it  is  written,  How  beautiful  are  the 
26  as  it  is  written.  There  shall  "come  out  of 

3  but,  as  it  is  written,  The  reproaches  of 
7  receive  ye  one  another,  as  Christ  also 

9  as  it  is  written,  For  this  cause  I  will 
2i  as  it  is  written,  To  whom  he  was  not 

9  as  it  is  written,  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor 

17  as  I  teach  every  where  in  every  church 

7  maybe  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  unleavened 
2  knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know 

6  we  should  not  lust  after  evil  things,  as  they 

7  Neither  be  ye  idolators,  as . .  some  of  them 

8  Neither,  .commit fornication,  as  some  of 
g  Neither,  .tempt  Christ,  as  some  of  them 

10  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  some  of  them  also 

33  Even  as  I  please  all  (men)  in  all  (chings) 

2  keep  the  ordinances,  as  I  delivered,  .to 

1 1  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will 

18  set.  .in  the  body,  as  it  hath  pleased  him 

34  to  be  under  obedience,  as.  .saith  the  law 

35  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased 

49  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy 

5  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  us 

14  As  also  ye  have  acknowledged  us  in  part 

1  as  we  have  received  mercy,  we  faint  not 

16  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them 

5  and.  .not  as  we  hoped,  but  first  gave  their 

6  Insomuch  that  we  desired  Titus,  that  as 

15  As  it  is  written,  He  that  (had  gathered) 

3  I  sent,  .that,  as  I  said,  ye  may  be  ready 

9  As  it  is  written,  He  hath  dispersed  abroad 

7  as  he  (is)  Christ's,  even  so  (are)  we  Christ's 

12  they  glory,  they  may  be  found  even  as  we 
7  committed  unto  me,  as . .  the  circumcision 

21  as  I  have  also  told,  .in  time  past,  that 

3  mystery ;  as  I  wrote  afore  in  few  words 

4  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your 

17  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other 
21  and  have  been  taught  by  him,  as  the 

32  as  God  for  Christ's  sake,  hath  forgiven 

2  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved 

3  let  it  not  be  once  named,  .as  becometh 

25  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ 
29  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the 

12  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always 
17  mark  them  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us 

6  as . .  in  all  the  world . .  as . .  also  in  you 

7  A3  ye  also  learned  of  Epaphras  our  dear 
7  and  stablisbed  in  the  faith,  as  ye  have 

13  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also.  .3'e 

5  as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  were 

2  and  were  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  know 

4  as  we  were  allowed  of  God  to  be  put  in 

5  as  ye  know,  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness 

13  3'e  received,  .not.  .the  word  of  men,  but  as 

14  countrymen,  even  as  they,  .of  the  Jews 
4  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  ye  know 

1  that  as  ye  have  received  of  us  how  ye 

6  as  we  also  have  forewarned  you  and 

11  with  your  own  hands,  as  we  commanded 
13  not,  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope 

3  We  are  bound  to  thank  God.. as  it  is  meet 
1  and  be  glorified,  even  as.  .with you 

3  As  I  besought  thee  to  abide  still  at  Eph. 

7  Wherefore  as  the  Holy  Ghost  saith 

3  as  he  said  ....  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath 
7  as  it  is  said,  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his 


Heb.  5.    3  by  reason  hereof  he  ought,  as  for  the 

5.  6  As  he  saith  also  in  another  (place),  Thou 

8.  5  as  Moses  was  admonished  of  God  when 

10.  25  Not  forsaking  the  assembling,  .as  the 

11.  12  as  the  stars  of  the  sky  in  multitude 

1  Pe.   4.  10  as  every  man  hath  received  the  gift,  so 

2  Pe.    1.  14  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  shewed  me 

3.  15  even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul  also 

1  Jo.   2.  18  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist 

3.    2  like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is 
3.  12  Not  as  Cain,  (who)  was  of  that  wicked  one 

3.  23  love  one  another,  as  he  gave  us 

4.  17  because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world 

2  Jo.  4  as  we  have  received  a  commandment 

6  This  is  the  commandment,  That,  as  ye 

\§.Even  or  according  to,  Kara,  (ace.)  Biroy. 
Luke  4.  16  as  his  custom  was,  he  went  into  the 
22.  22  truly  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it  was 

22.  39  he  came  out,  and  went,  as  he  was  wont 
Acts  17.    2  Paul,  as  his  manner  was,  went  in  unto 

23.  31  the  soldiers,  as  it  was  commanded  them 
Pom.  1.  15  So,  as  much  as  in  me  is,  I  am  ready 

3.  5  who  taketh  vengeance?  I  speak  as  a  man 
1  Co.   3.    3  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  as  men  ? 

9.  8  Say  I  these  things  as  a  man-;  or  saith  not 
Gal.  4.  28  Now  we,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  the 
Titus  i.  9  Holding  fast  the  faithful  word  as  he  hath 
Heb.    9.  27  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die 

1  Pe.    1.  15  as  he  which  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be 

20.  Of  what  kind  or  sort,  oTos  hoios. 

1  Co.  15.  48  As  (is)  the  earthy,  .as  is  the  heavenly 

21.  How  much,  many,  long,  oaros  hosos. 

Heb.   1.    4  as  he  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a 
10.  25  so  much  the  more,  as  ye  see  the  day  ap. 

22.  Whosoever,  oaris  hostis. 

1  Co.  16.    2  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  (God)  hath 

23.  Thus,  so,  ovtoi  onto. 

2Pe.    3.   4 all  tilings  continue  as.. from  the 

24.  What  manner,   ov  rp6irov  hoii  tropon. 

Luke  13.  34  as  a  hen.  .her  brood  under  (her)  wings 
Acts    7.  28  Wilt  thou  kill  me,  as  thou  diddestthe  E. 

2  Ti.    3.    8  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses 

25.  A  s,  that,  in  order  to,  for,  &s  hos. 

Matt.  1.  24  Joseph,  .did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had 

6.  10  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth,  as  (it  is)  in 

6.  12  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our 

7.  29  as  (one)  having  authority,  and  not  as 

8.  13  Go  thy  way ;  and  as  thou  hast  believed 
10.  16  as  sheep. -wise  as  serpents.. as  doves 
10.  25  be  as  his  master,  .as  his  lord 

13.  43  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as 

14.  5  because  they  counted  him  as  a  prophet 
17.    2  shine  as  the  sun . .  white  as  the  light 

17.  20  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard 

18.  3  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as 
18.    4  whosoever,  .shall  humble  himself  as  this 

18.  33  compassion,  .even  as  I  had  pity  on  thee? 

19.  19  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

20.  14  I  will  give  unto  this  last,  even  as  unto 

21.  26  people ;  for  all  hold  John  as  a  prophet 

22.  30  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven 
22.  39  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
26.  19  the  disciples  did  as  Jesus  had  appointed 
26.  39  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou 

26.  55  Are  ye  come  out  as  against  a  thief  with 

27.  65  go  your  way,  make  (it)  as  sure  as  ye  can 

28.  9  [as  they  went  to  tell  his  disciples,  behold] 
28.  15  So  they  took  the  money,  and  did  as  they 

Mark  1.    2  [As]  it  is  written  in  the  prophets,  Behold 
1.  22  as  one  that  had  authority,  and  not  as 

3.  5  his  hand  was  restored  whole  [as]  the 

4.  26  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the 

6.  15  it  is  a  prophet,  or  as  one  of  the  prophets 

6.  34  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a 

7.  6  as  it  is  written,  This  people  honoureth  me 

8.  24  and  said,  I  see  men  as  trees,  walking 

9.  3  became  shining,  exceeding  white  [as] 
10.    1  as  he  was  wont,  he  taught  them  again 

Whosoever  shall,  .receive,  .kingdom,  .as 
as  touching  the  dead,  that  they  rise 
Thou  shalt  love  tny  neighbour  as  thyself 
and  to  love  (his)  neighbour  as  himself 
For  the  Son  of  man  is)  as  a  man  taking 
Are  ye  come  out,  as  against  a  thief,  with 
it  came  to  pass,  as  the  angels  were  gone 
As  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  words 
Jesus.. being  (as  was  supposed)  the  son 
[his  hand  was  restored  whole  as.  .other] 
cast  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the  Son  of 
every  one  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  his 
[and  consume  them,  even  as  Elias  did?] 
I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  wolves 
I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from 
Thou  shalt  love,  .thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
[Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in] 
as  when  the  bright  shining  of  a  candle 
for  ye  are  as  graves  which  appear  not 
Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  commanded 
make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants 
as  he  came  and  drew  nigh  to  the  house 
If  ye  had  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed 
Likewise  also  [as]  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot 
that  I  am  not.  .even  as  this  publican 
shall  not  receive  the  kingdom .  .as  a 
as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all  them 
let  him  be  as  the  youngor.  .as  he  that 
I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth 


10.  15 

12.  26 

12. 31 

12-  33 

13-34 

14.48 

Luke  2.  15 

3-    4 

3-  23 

6.  10 

6.  22 

6.  40 

9-  54 

10.    3 

10.  18 

10.  27 

11.  2 
11.  36 
11.  44 
14.  22 
15-  19 
15-25 
17.    6 

17.  28 

18.  11 
18.  17 
si-  35 
22.  26 
22.  ej 


Luke  2 


John 


Kom.  : 


2  Co. 


Col. 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Phil. 


31  desired,  .that  he  may  sift,  .as  wheat 

52  Be  ye  come  out,  as  against  a  thief,  with 
14  Ye  have  brought  this  man  unto  me,  as 

26  as  they  led  him  away,  they  laid  hold 

14  and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of 

6  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is 

11  and  as  she  wept,  she  stooped  down 

15  these  are  not  druuken,  as  ye  suppose 

12  why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us,  as  though 
51  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost :  [as] 

32  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter 
36  as  they  went  on . .  way,  they  came  unto 
25  as  Peter  was  coming  in,  Cornelius  met 
17  Forasmuch  then  as  God  gave  them  the 
25  as  John  fulfilled  his  course,  he  said 

33  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second  psalm 

4  as  they  went  through  the  cities,  they 

28  For  in  him  we  live . .  as  certain  also  of  your 

5  As  also,  .high  priest  doth  bear  me  witness 
25  as  they  bound  him  with  thongs,  Paul 

11  Be  of  good  cheer,  Paul:  for  as  thou  hast 
15  as  though  ye  would  inquire  something 

20  as  though  thejf  would  inquire  somewhat 
10  to  the  Jews  have  I  done  no  wrong,  as 
30  as  the  shipmen  were  about  to  liee  out  of 

21  they  glorified  (him)  not  as  God,  neither 

7  why  yet  am  I  also  judged  as  a  sinner? 

17  things  that  be  not  as  though  they  were 

15  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  (is)  the  free 

16  And  not  as . .  by  one  that  sinned . .  the  gift 

18  Therefore,  as  by  the  offence  of  one 

13  Neither  yield  ye  your  members.  ,[as]those 
36  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter 

27  the  number  of  the  children,  .be  as.  .sand 

29  we  had  been  as  Sodoma,  and  been  made 
9  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

13  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day;  not 

15  as  putting  you  in  mind,  because  of.  .grace 

1  as  unto  spiritual.,  as  unto  carnal.,  as  unto 

10  the  grace.,  which  is  given  unto  me,  as  a 
15  he.  .shall  be  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire 

1  Let  a  man  so  account  of  us,  as  of  the 
7  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not 

13  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of  the  world 

14  you,  but  as  my  beloved  sons  I  warn 
18  Now  some  are  puffed  up,  as  though  I 

3  as  absent,  .as  though  I  were  present 

7  I  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I 

8  It  is  good .  .if  they  abide  even  as  I 

1 7  as  God  hath . .  as  the  Lord  hath  called  every 

25  yet  I  give  my  judgment,  as  one  that  hath 

29  they  that  have  wives  be  as . .  they  had  none 

30  as  though  they .  .as  though  they .  .as 

31  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing 
7  some,  .eat  (it)  as  a  thing  offered  unto  an 

20  I  became  as  a  Jew.  .as  under  the  law 

21  To  them  that  are  without  law,  as  without 

22  To  the  weak  became  I  [as]  weak,  that  I 

26  not  as  uncertainly,  .not  as  one.  .beateth 

7  Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  [as]  (were)  some 

15  I  speak  as  to  wise  men  ;  judge  ye  what  I 

11  spake  as.  .understood  as.. thought  as 
33  peace,  as  in  all  churches  of  the  saints 
10  he  worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I 

17  not  as  many,  .as  of  sincerity,  .as  of  God 

1  or  need  we,  as  some,  .epistles  of 

5  to  think  anything  as  of  ourselves ;  but 
20  as  though  God  did  beseech,  .by  us :  we 

4  in  all . .  approving  ourselves  as . .  ministers 

8  evil  report  and  good  report :  as  deceivers 

9  As  unknown.. as  dying.. as  chastened 

10  As  sorrowful,  .as  poor,  .ashavingnothing 

13  I  speak  as  unto,  .children,  be  ye  also 

14  as  we  spake  all  things  to  you  in  truth 

5  as.  .bounty,  aud  not coveteousness 

2  some,  which  think  of  us  as  if  wTe  walked 

14  we  are  come  as  far  as  to  you  also  in.  .the 

3  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  his 

15  if  his  ministers  also  be  transformed  as  the 

16  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me 

2  foretell  you,  as  if  I  were  present,  the 

7  do  that  which  is  honest,  though  we  be  as 
9  As  we  said  before,  so  say  I  now  again 

16  to  seeds,  as  of  many ;  but  as  of  oue 

12  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I  (am) ;  for  I  (am)  as 
14  received  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  (even)  as 

14  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyseli 
10  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us 

3  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as 
5  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  his  holy 

1  Be  ye . .  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children 

8  in  the  Lord  :  walk  as  children  of  light 

15  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise 

22  Wives  submit  yourselves,  .as  unto  the 

23  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church 

28  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their 

5  in  singleness  of  your  heart,  as  unto  Christ 

6  with  eye  service,  as  men  pleasers ;  but  as 

7  With  good  will  doing  service,  [as]  to  the 
20  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ought  to  speak 
20  but  (that)  with  all  boldness,  as  alu  ays 

8  And  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man 
12  ye  have  always  obeyed,  not  as  in  my 
15  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the 
22  that,  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath 

6  As  ye  have  therefore  received  Christ 
20  why,  as  though  living  in  the  world,  are 
12  Put  on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God 

18  Wives,  submit  yourselves,  .as  it  is  fit  in 

22  Servants,  obey.. not  with  eye  service,  as 

23  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  (it)  heartily,  as  to 

4  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought  to 


iTi. 
sTi. 


AS 


[  Th.  2. "  4  not  aspleasing  men,  but  God,  which  tneth 
2.    7  we  were  gentle  among  you,  even  as  a 
2.  ii  and  charged  every  oue  of  you,  as  a  father 
2.  13  (it)  nut  (as)  the  word  of  men,  but  [as]  it 
5.    2  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief 
5.    4  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief 

5.  6  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  (do)  others 
2  Th.  2.    2  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ 

2.    4  so  that  he  [as]  God  sitteth  in  the  temple 
r>.  15  count  not  as  an  enemy,  but.. as  a 

1  as  a  father,  .younger  men  as  brethren 

2  elder  women  as  mothers ;  the  younger  as 

3  Thou  therefore  endure  hardness,  as  a 
9  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble,  as  an  evil  doer 

2.  17  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker 

3.  9  their  folly  shall  be  manifest,  .as  their's 
Titus  1.    5  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  as  I  had 

1.  7  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  as  the 
Phm.        9  I  rather  beseech  (thee),  being,  .as  Paul 

16  Not  now  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  servant 

17  If  thou  count  me.  .receive  him  as  myself 
fleb.    1.  11  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a 

3.    2  as  also  Moses  (was  faithful)  in  all  his 
3.    5  Moses  verily  (was)  faithful,  .as  a  servant 
3.    6  But  Christ  as  a  sou  over  his  own  house 
3.    8  Harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the  prov. 

3.  15  harden  pot  your  hearts,  as  in  the  prov. 

4.  3  As  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath,  if  they 

6.  19  Which  (hope)  we  have  as  an  anchor  of 

7.  9  And  as  I  may  so  say,  Levi  also,  who 

11.    9  Sy  faith  he  sojourned,  .as  (in)  a  strange 
11.  27  he  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible 

11.  29  By  faith  they  passed  through,  .as  by  dry 

12.  5  exhortation  which  speaketh  unto  you  as 
12.    7  God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons 

32.  16  Lest  there  (be),  .any  profane  person,  as 

12.  27  as  of  things  that  are  made,  that  those 

13.  3  as  bound  with  them,  .as  being  yourselves 
13.  17  for  they  watch  for  your  souls,  as  they 

Jas.  J  1.  10  because  as  the  flower  of  the  grass  he  shall 

2.  8  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
2.  9  are  convinced  of  the  law  as  transgressors 
2.  12  So  speak  ye,  and  so  do,  as  they  that 

5.  3  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire 

5.    5  ye  have  nourished  your  hearts,  [as]  in  a 

1  Pe.   1.  14  As  obedient  children,  not  fashioning 

1.  19  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a 

1.  24  all  flesh  (is)  as  grass,  .[as]  the  flower  of 

2.  2  As  new  born  babes,  desire  the  sincere 
2.  5  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up 
2.  11  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  (you)  as  to 

2.  12  that,  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as 
2.  14  Or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them  that  are 
2.  16  As  free,  .but  as  the  servants  of  God 

2.  25  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray ;  but  are 

3.  7  as  unto  the  weaker  vessel,  and  as  being 

3.  16  [whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you,  as  of  evil] 

4. 10  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 

4. 11  as  the  oracles  of  God.  .as  01  the  ability 

4. 12  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened 

4.  15  as  a  murderer,  .or  as  a  busybody 

4.  16  Yet  if  ..asaChristian,  let  him  not  be  ash. 

4.  19  in  well-doing,  [as]  unto  a  faithful  Creator 

5.  3  Neither  as  being  lords  over(God's)  heritage 
5.    8  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring 

5.  12  By  Silvanus,  a  faithful  brother,  .as  I 

2  Pe.    1.  19  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light  that  shineth 

2.    1  as  there  shall  be  false  teachers  among 

2.  12  these,  as  natural  brute  beasts,  made 

3.  8  as  a  thousand  years,  .as  one  day 

3.  9  The  Lord  is  not  slack . .  as  some  men  count- 
3.  10  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in 
3.  16  As  also  in  all.  .as.  .the  other  scriptures 

1  Jo.   i.    7  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the 

2.  27  as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you 

2  Jo.  5  now  I  beseech  thee,  lady,  not  as  though  I 
Jude  10  what  they  know  naturally,  as  brute  beasts 
Rev.   1.  10  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet 

1.  14  white  as  snow.  .eyes,  .as  a  flame  of  fire 
1.  15  as  if  they  burned.. his  voice  as  the  sound 
1.  16  his  countenance  (was)  as  the  sun  shineth 

1.  17  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead 

2.  24  known  the  depths  of  Satan,  as  they  speak 
2.  27  as  the  vessels  of.  .even  as  I  received 

3  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou 
21  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am  set  down 
7  the  third  beast  had  a  face  [as]  a  man 

6  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having 

11  their  brethren,  that  should  be  killed  as 

12  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair,  .as  blood 

13  even  as  a  fig  tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs 

14  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when 

2  there  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit,  as  the 

3  them  was  given  power,  as  the  scorpions  of 
5  torment,  .as  the  torment  of  a  scorpion 

7  their  faces,  .as  the  faces  of  men 
S  hair  as  the  hair  of  women  .  .teeth .  .as 
9  as  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses 

[1 7  heads  of  the  horses . .  as  the  heads  of  lions 
10.    1  and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire 
10.    7  as  he  hath  declared  to  his  servants  the 
io.    9  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  sweet  as  honey 
10.  10  and  it  was  in  my  mouth  sweet  as  honey 

12.  15  the  serpent  cast  out.  .water  as  a  flood 

13.  2  were  as.  .of  a  bear,  and  his  mouth  as 

13.  11  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake  as  a  dragon 

14.  2  as  the  voice  of .  .as  the  voice  of  a  great 
16.    3  it  became  as  the  bloo.l  of  a  dead  (man) 

Behold,  I  nunc  as  a  thief.     Blessed  is  he 
T^   '  ■  receive  potfer  as  kings  one  hour  with  the 

iS.    o  Keuanl  tin-  even  ;m  s]\k  rewarded  you 

10.  (5  as. , the  voice  <>f.  .[as]  the  voice    and  as 


28. 

28. 
Mark  9. 
Luke24. 
Heb. 


2  Co. 


Gal. 
Eph. 
iTh. 
Heb. 


Jas. 


54 


Rev.  19. 12  His  eyes,  .[as]  a  flame  of  fire,  and     - 

20.  8  the  number  of  whom  (is)  as  the  sand  of 

21.  2  new  Jerusalem,  .prepared  as  a  bride 

22.  1  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal 
2Q.As  if,  oxret  hosei. 

Matt.  9.  36  were  scattered  abroad,  [as]  sheep  having 
"     3  and  his  raiment  white  [as]  snow 
4  the  keepers  did  shake,  and  became  [as] 
26  he  was  as  one  dead  ;  insomuch  that 

11  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales 

12  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them  up 
11. 12  and  [as]  the  sand  which  13  by  the  sea 

27. Even  as ,  wo-irephosper. 

Matt.  6.    2  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  synagogues 

6.    5  when  thou  prayest,  thou  shalt  not  be  [as] 
6.    7  use  uot  vain  repetitions,  as  the  heathen 
6. 16  Moreover  when  ye  fast,  be  not,  [as]  the 

12.  40  as  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights 

13.  40  As  therefore  the  tares  are  gathered  and 
18.  17  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man 
24.  27  as  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east 
24.  37  as  the  days  of  Noe.  .so  shall  also  the 

24.  38  [as]  in  the  days  that  were  before  the  flood 

25.  14  For.  .(is)  as  a  man  travelling  into  a  far 
25.  32  he  shall  separate  them,  .as  a  shepherd 

Luke  17.  24  as  the  lightning,  that  lighteneth  out  of 

18.  1 1  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  [as]  other  men 
John  5  21  as  the  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead,  and 

5.  26  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself ;  so  hath 
Acts  2.    2  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven  as  of  a 

3.  17  brethren,  through  ignorance  ye  did  (it,)  as 
11.  15  fell  on  them,  as  on  us  at  the  beginning 

Rom.  5.  12  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the 

5.  19  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were 

5.  21  That  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death 

6.  19  for  as  ye  have  yielded  your  members 

11.  30  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not  believed  God 
1  Co.    8.    5  as  there  be  gods  many,  and  lords  many 
11.  12  as  the  woman  (is)  of  the  man,  even  so 

15.  22  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 

16.  1  as  I  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of 

1.  7  knowing,  that  [as]  ye  are  partakers  of  the 

8.  7  Therefore,  as  ye  abound  in  every,. faith 

9.  5  bounty,  and  not  [as]  (of)  covetousness 

4.  29  But  as  then  he  that  was  born  after  the 

5.  24  Therefore  [as]  the  church  is  subject  unto 
5.  3  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as 
4.  10  also  hath  ceased  from  his . .  works,  as  God 

7.  27  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high  priests 
9.  25  as  the  high  priest  entereth  into  the  holy 

2.  26  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead 
2$.As  if  it  were,  axnrepti  h<~>sperei. 

1  Co.  15.    8  he  was  seen  of  me  also,  as  of  one  born  out 

29. So  that,  wore  teste. 

Matt  15.  33  Whence  should  we  have.,  bread.,  as  to  fill 
[See  also,  According    as,  becometh,  concerning, 
crystal,   even,    forasmuch,  friend,  hurl,   inas- 
much, light,  like,  long  as,  power,  so,  such.] 

AS. ..as  — 

As. ..so,  I?...?  ke...ken. 

£ze.  42.  1 1  as  long  as  they . .  as  broad  as  they :  and  all 

AS  for  — 

l.But,  truly,  yet,  d^in  ulam. 

Job    17.  10  as  for  you  all,  do  ye  return,  and  come 

2.  Unto,  to,  *?n  el. 

2  Ch.  34.  26  as  for  the  king  of  Judah,  who  sent  you 

AS  concerning  — ■ 

Even  or  according  to,  Kara.  kata. 

Rom.  9.    5  and  of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh 
11.  28  As  concerning  the  gospel,  -for  your 

2  Co.  ii.  21  I  speak  as  concerning  reproach,  as 

AS  concerning  that  — 
That  because,  on  hoti. 

Acts  13.  34  And  as  concerning  that  he  raised  him  up 
AS  far  as  (to)  — 

1.  Unto,  even  unto,  &XP1  achri. 

Acts  28.  15  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  Appii  forum 
2  Co.  10.  14  we  are  come  as  far  as  to  you  also 

2.  Unto,  vp  to,  %tas  heos. 

Luke  24.  50  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany 
Acts  11.  19  Now  they,  .travelled  as  far  as  Phenice 
11.  22  that  he  should  go  as  far  as  Antioch 

AS  hast  served  — 
Recompense,  deed,  71D2  gemul. 

Psa.  137.  8  rewardeth  thee  as  thou  hast  served  us 
AS  it  had  been  — 
l.As,  that,  in  order  to,  for,  &s  has. 

Acts  10.  11  a  certain  vessel  descending,  .as  it  had  b. 
11.   5  A  certain  vessel  descend,  as  it  had  been 

2. As  if,  wo~*i  hosei. 

Acts   6.  15  all.  .saw  his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face 
9.  18  there  fell  from  his  eyes  [as  it  had  been] 

AS  it  were  — 

l.Even  as,  ic:?  Irmn, 

Isa.  26.  iS  we  have  as  it  were  brought  forth  wind 

2.  As,  that,  in  order  to,  for,  us  has. 

John  7. 10  not  openly,  but  as  it  were  in  secret 

21.    8  not  far  from  land,  but  as  it  were  two 
Acts  17.  14  brethren  sent  away  Paul  to  go  [as  it  were] 
Rom.  9.  32  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works 
1  Co,   4,   9  the  .apostles  last,  as  it  were  appointed  to 


AS 

2  Co.  11.  17  I  speak  (it),  .as  it  were  foolishly,  in  this  ' 
Phm.       14  thy  benefit  should  not  be  as  it  were  of 
Jas.     5.    3  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire 
Rev.    4.    1  the  first  voice  which  I  heard.. as  it  were 
6.    1  I  heard,  as  it  were  the  noise  of  thunder 
8.    8  the  second  angel  sounded,  and  as  it  were 

8.  10  a  great  star,  .burning  as  it  were  a  lamp 

9.  7  on  their  heads.. as  it  were  crowns  like 

9.  9  they  had  breastplates,  as  it  were 

10.    1  his  face,  .as  it  were  the  sun,  and  his  feet 

13.  3  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were 

14.  3  they  sung  [as  it  were]  a  new  song 

15  2  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled 
19.  6  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great 
21.  21  the  street  of  the  city,  .as  it  were  transp. 

Z.As  if,  wo~si  hosei. 

Luke  22.  44  [his  sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of] 
.Acts.  0.  iS  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been  scales 

AS  large  — 

So  great,  long,  much,  rocovros  tosoutos. 
Rev.  21. 16  the  length  is  [as  large]  as  the  breadth 

AS  long  as  — 

1.  With,  cy  im. 

Psa.  72.    5  They,  .fear  thee  as  long  as  the  sun  and 

2.-1  s  long  as,  etp1  00-ov  eph  hoson. 

Matt.  9.  15  Can  the  children,  .mourn,  as  long  as 
2  Pe.    1.  13  I  think  it  meet,  as  long  as  I  am  in  this 

3.  When,  while,  tyrav  hotan. 

John  9.    5  As  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  I  am  the 

AS  many  as  — 
l.AU,  h'3  kol. 

Exod35-  22  both,  .women,  as  many  as  were  willing 

2.  How  much,  long,  many,  oVos  hosos. 

Matt  14.  36  as  many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly 
22.  10  as  many  as  they  found,  both  bad  andv.o. 
Mark  3.  10  they  pressed  upon  him.  .as  many  as  had 
Luken.   8  will  r  se  and  give  him  asmanyas6.  56. 
John  1.  12  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave 
Acta    3.  24  as  many  as  have  spoken,- have  2.  39! 
4.    6  as  many  as  were  of  the  kindred  of  the 

4.  34  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  lands 

5.  36  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  scattered 

5.  37  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  dispersed 

10.  45  [as  many  as]  came  with  Peter,  because 
13.  48  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life 

Rom.  2.  12  as  many  as  have,  .as  many  as  have  sinned 
8.  14  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
3.  10  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law 
3.  27  as  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized 

6.  12  As  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  shew  in 
6.  16  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule 
3.  15  Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  be  perfect 
2.    1  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in 
6.    1  Let  as  many  servants  as  are  under  the 
2.  24  as  many  as  have  not  this  doc  3.  11,  15-  ' 

18.  17  as  many  as  trade  by  sea,  stood  afar  off 

3. All  who,  iras  us  ptas  ?l0S' 

John  17.    2  he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as 

AS  much  — 

The  equal,  ra  T<ra  ta  isa. 

Luke  6.  34  sinners  also  lend,  .to  receive  as  much 

AS  much  as  (lieth  in  you) — 

How  much,  long,  many,  ocas  hosos. 

John  6.  ii  and  likewise  of  the  fishes  as  much  as 
AS  oft  as  — 
From  the  sufficiency,  *?£  midde. 

2  Ki.   4.    8  it  was . .  as  oft  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned 
AS  oft  or  often  as  — 
How  many  times,  ocraKis  av  or  idv  hosakis. 

1  Co.  11.  25  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  (it,)  in 

11.  26  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
Rev.  11.    6  have  power  over,  .as  often  as  they  will 

As  pertaining  to — 

Down  according  to,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Rom.  4.    1  Abraham,  our  father  as  pertaining  to 
Heb.    g.   9  did  the  service  perfect,  as  pertaining  to 

AS  soon  — 
Also,  D3  gam. 

Isa.    66.   8  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought 

AS  soon  as  — 

l.Even  as,  *ityx3  kaasher. 

Gen.  18.  33  as  soon  as  he  had  left  communing  with 
2. As,  that,  in  order  to,  for,  ws  hds. 

Luke  1.  23  it  came  to  pass,  that,  as  soon  as  the  days 
1.  44  as  soon  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation 
22.  66  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  elders  of  the 
John  11.  20  Then  Martha,  as  soon  as  she  heard  that 
11.  29  As  soon  as  she  heard,  .she  arose  quickly 
18.    6  As  soon  then  as  he  had  said  unto  them 
21.    9  As  soon  then  as  they  were  come  to  land 
riiil.   2.  23  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go 

3.  WhekticHsTj  lirav  hotan. 

John  16.  21  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child 
Rev.  12.   4  for  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was 

4.  When,  Hre  hote. 

Luke  15.  30  But  as  soon  as  this  thy  eon  Re.  10,  10, 
5, Straightway,  tvBews  cut/ieosf  Mark 5.  36;  11,  2, 


Gal. 


Phil. 
Col. 
iTi. 

Rev. 


AS 


55 


ASER 


AS  '.hcush,  not  — 

.15  not,  (6?  keto. 

Obad.      16  shall  be  as  though  they  had  not  been 

AS  though  — 

X.That,  because,  on  hoti. 

Phil.    3.  12  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained 
2.  As  that,  otov  oTi  oion  hoti,  &s  '6tl  hos  hoti. 

2  Co.  11.  21  concerning  reproach,  as  though,Ro.  9.  6. 

AS  touching  — 
X'.Upon,  ini  epi  (clat.) 

Acts    5.  35  what  ye  intend  to  do  as  touching  these 

2.  Down,  according  to,  Kara  kata  {ace.) 

Rom.  11.  23  as  touching  the  election .  .beloved  for  the 
Phil.    3.    5  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee 

3.  About,  concerning,  its  pi  fieri  (gen.) 

Matt  18.  19  if  two  of  you  shall  agree,  .astouchingany 
,    22.  31  as  touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
Mark  12.  26  as  touching  the  dead,  that  they  rise 
Acts  21.  25  As  touching  the  Gentiles  which  believe 

1  Co.  8.    1  ;  16.  12  ;  2  Co.  9.  1 ;  1  Th.  4.  9. 
A3  well  as — 

1.  Even  as  also,  Kad&s  tcai  Jcathos  kai,  Acts  10.  47. 

2.^ 4s  also,  ws  Kat  hos  kai,  1  Co.  9.  5, 

3.  According  as,  even  as,  KaOdwep  kaihaper. 

Heb.   4.    2  the  gospel  preached,  as  well  as  unto  them 

AS  well  as  another  — 
Like  this,  nis  kazeh. 

2  Sa.  n.  25  sword  devoureth  one  as  well  as  another 
AS  when  — 

As  tlie  day,  era  ke-yoin. 

Zech.14.    3  As11*  against  those  nations,  as  when  he 
AS  they  would  — 
According  to  their  pleasure,  D3?S"jS  ki-retsonam. 

Neh.    9.  24  they  might  do  with!  them  as  they  would 

AS  yet  — 

1.  Until  so,  hitherto,  \3-H$  ad-ken. 

Neh.    2.  16  neither  had  I  as  yet  told  (it)  to 

2.  Yet,  still,  Tiy  od. 

2  Ki.  14.    4  as  yet  the  people  did  sacrifice  and  burnt 
Z.Till  now,  nijiy  iy  ad  attah. 

2  Ki.  13.  23  cast  he  them  from  his  presence  as  yet 

A.Xot  yet,  o&iroo  owpo. 

Acts  8.  16  [as  yet]  he  was  fallen  upon  none  of  them 
Rev.  17. 12  which  have  received  no  kingdoms  as  yet 

AS  yet... not  — 

yot  yet,  ovSewa}  oudepo. 

Joliu  20.   9  [as  yet]  they  knew  not  the  scripture,  that 

A'-SA,  riBij!  physician. 

1.  The  great  grandson  of  Solomon,  B.C.  914. 

1  Ki.  15.    8  and  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

15.    9  twentieth  year  of  Jeroboam,  .reigned  A. 
15.  11  And  A.  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the 
15.  13  A.  destroyed  her  idol,  and  burnt  (it)  by 
15.  14  nevertheless  A.'s  heart  was  perfect  with 
15.  16  there  was  war  between  A.  and  Baasha 
15.  17  to  go  out  or  come  into  A.  king  of  Judah 
15.  18  Then  A.  took  all  the  silver  and  the  gold 
15.  18  and  king  A.  sent  them  to  Ben-hadad,  the 
15.  20  Ben-hadad  hearkened  unto  king  A.,  and 
15.  22  Then  king  A.  made  a  proclamation 
15.  22  and  king  A.  built  with  them  Geba  of 
15.  23  The  rest  of  all  the  acts  of  A.,  and  all  his 
15.  24  And  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
15.  25  in  the  second  year  of  A.  king  of  Judah 
15.  28  in  the  third  year  of  A.  king  of  Judah 
15.  32  there  was  war  between  A.  and  Baasha 

15.  33  In  the  third  year  of  A.  king  of  Judah 

16.  8  In  the  twenty  aud  sixth  year  of  A.  king 
16.  10,  15  in  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  A. 
16.  23  In  the  thirty  and  first  year  of  A.  king  of 
16.  29  in  the  thirty  and  eighth  yearof  A.  king  of 
22.  41  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  A.  hegan  to  reign 
22.  43  he  walked  in  all  the  ways  of  A.  his  father 
22.  46  which,  .in  the  days  of  his  father  A. 

1  Ch.    3.  10  Abia,  his  son,  A.  his  son,  Jehoshaphat  his 

2  Ch.  14.    1  and  A.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

14.    2  A.  did  (that  which  was)  good  and  right  in 
14.    8  Aud  A.  had  an  army  (of  men)  that  bare 
14.  10  Then  A.  went  out  against  him,  and  they 
14.  11  And  A.  cried  unto  the  LORD  his  God,  and 
14. 12  the  Lord  smote  the  Ethiopians  before  A. 

14.  13  And  A.  and  the  people  that  (were)  with 

15.  2  he  went  out  to  meet  A.,  and  said  unto 
15.    2  Hear  ye  me,  A.,  aud  all  Judah  and 
15.    8  when  A.  heard  these  words,  and  the 

15.  10  in  the  third  month,  in  the  fifteenth  year 
15.  16  the  mother  of  A.  the  king,  he  removed 

15.  16  and  A.  cut  down  her  idol,  and  stamped 

16.  17  nevertheless  the  heart  of  A.  was  perfectall 

15.  19  there  was  no(more)war  unto,  .reignof  A. 

16.  1  In  the . .  year  of  the  reign  of  A. ,  Baasha 
16.    1  he  might  let  none,  .to  A.  king  of  Judah 
16.    2  Then  A.  brought  out  silver  and  gold  out 
16.   4  Ben-hadad  hearkened  unto  king  A    and 
16.    6  Then  A.  the  king  took  all  Judah  ;  and 
16.    7  Hanani  the  seer  came  to  A.  king  of  Judah 


2CI1.16.  10  Then  A.  was  wroth  with  the  seer,  and 
10.  jo  And  A.  oppressed  (some)  of  the  people  the 
1'.  11  behold,  the  acts  of  A.,  first  and  last,  lo 
16.  is  And  A. .  .was  diseased  in  his  feet,  until 

16.  13  And  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  died 

17.  2  in  the  cities.  .Which  A.  his  father  had 

20.  32  he  walked  in  the  way  of  A^his  father 

21.  12  thou  hast  not  walked  in  the  ways  of.  .A. 
Jer.  41.    9  it  which  A.  the  king  had  made  for  fear 
Matt.  1.    7  Roboam  begat  Abia;  and  Abia  begat  A. 

1.  S  AndA. begat  Josaphat;  and  Josaphat  begat 
2.  A  Levite,  head  of  a  family  in  the  villages  of  the 
Netophathites,  near  Jerusalem. 

1  C'.\   g.  16  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Elkanah,  that 

A-SAH'-:£L,  7ttrip&  God  is  doer. 

LA  son  of  Zeruiah,  David's  sister.     lie  was  slain  by 

Abner  unwillingly,  B.C.  1053. 

2  Sa.   2. 18  and  A. :  and  A.  (was  as)  light  of  foot  as  a 

2.  19  A.  pursued  after  Abner ;  and  in  going  he 
2.  20  and  said  (Art)  thou  A.?  And  he  answered 
2.  21  But  A.  would  not  turn,  .from  following 
2.  22  Abner  said  again  to  A.,  Turn  thee  aside 

2.  23  came  to  the  place  where  A.  fell  down  and 
2.  30  there  lacked  of  David's  servants . .  and  A. 

2.  32  they  took  up  A.,  and  buried  him  in  the 

3.  27  that  he  died,  for  the  blood  of  A.  his 

3.  30  he  had  slain  their  brother  A.  at  Gibeon 
23.  24  A.  the  brother  of  Joab  (was)  one  of  the 
1  Ch.  2.  16  the  sons  of  Zeruiah.  .and  A.,  three 

11.  26  the  valiant  men.  .(were),  A.,  the  brother  of 
27.    7  The  fourth  (captain,  .was)  A.  the  brother 

2.  A  Levite  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the  law  to  the 
people  in  Judah,  B.C.  914. 

2Ch.  17.    S  with  them  (lie  sent).  .A.,  and  Shemi 

3.  A  Levite  employed  under  Hezekiah  as  an  officer  of 
the  offerings  and  tithes  and  dedicated  things,  B.C.  727. 

2CI1.  31. 13  JehieL.and  A. .  .(were)  overseers  under 

4.  Father  of  Jonathan  whom  Ezra  appointed  to  take  a 
census  of  the  Jews  who  had  taken  strange  wives  during 
the  exile,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra  10.  15  Jonathan  the  son  of  A; .  .were  employed 
A-SAH-I'AH,  n;#£  Jah  is  doer. 

An  officer  of  king  Josiah's.sent  with  others  to  inquire  of 
the  Lord  in  consequence  of  the  reading  of  the  book  of 
the  law  found  by  Shaphan,  B.C.  641. 

2  Eli.  22.  12  the  king  commanded . .  A.  a  servant  of  the 
22. 14  So.  .A.,  went  unto  Huldah  the  prophetess 

2  Ch.  34.  20  the  king  commanded . .  A.  a  servant  of  the 

A-SA-I'AE,  n^'j_  Jah  is  doer. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Simeon,  B.C.  Soo. 

1  Ch.   4.  36  and  A.,  and  Adiel,  and  Jesimiel,  and  Ben. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Libni,  grandson  of  Merari. 

1  Ch.    6.  30  Shimei  his  son,  Haggiah  his  son,  A.  his 

3.  A  Shilonite,  dwelling  in  Jerusalem,  B.c.536. 

1  Ch.    9.    5  of  the  Shilonites ;  A.  the  firstborn,  and 

4.  A  descendant  of  Merari,  who  assisted  in  bringing  up 
the  ark  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom  in  the  time  of 
David,  B.C.  1040.     [This  may  be  the  same  as  No.  2.] 

1  Ch.  15.    6  Of  the  sons  of  Merari ;  A.  the  chief,  and 
15. 11  David  called  for  Zadok  and.  .A.,  and  Joel 

A'-SAPH,  f]DK  collector,  gatherer. 

1.  Father  of  Joah  recorder  to  Hezekiah,  B.C.  727. 

2K1. 18. 18  and  Joah  the  son  of  A.  the  recorder 
18.  37  the  scribe,  and  Joah  the  son  of  A.  the 

zCh.  29.  13  of  the  sons  of  A.;  Zechariah,  and  Matta. 

Isa.    36.    3  the  scribe,  and  Joah,  A.'s  son,  the  recor. 
36.  22  the  scribe,  and  Joah,  the  son  of  A.,  the 

2.  One  appointed  by  David  over  the  service  of  song ; 
and  by  Solomon  in  the  temple  service,  B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  6.  39  his  brother  A.,  who  stood  on  his  right 

6.  39  A.  the  son  of  Berachiah,  the  son  of 
15.  17  the  Levites  appointed.  .A.  the  son  of 

15.  19 So  the  singers.. A... (were  appointed)  to 

16.  s  A.  the  chief,  and  next  to  him  Zechariah 
16.  5  with  harps;  but  A.  made  a  sound  with 
16.  7  into  the  hand  of  A.  and  his  brethren 
16.  37  he  left  there.  .A.  and  his  brethren,  to 
25.  1  separated  to  the  service  of  the  sons  of  A. 
25.  2  Of  the  sons  of  A.,  Zaccur,  and  Joseph 
25.  2  the  sons  of  A.;  under  the  hands  of  A. 
25.  6  according  to  the  king's  order  to  A. 

25.    9  the  first  lot  came  forth  for  A.  to  Joseph 

2  Ch.  5.  12  (which  were),  .singers,  all  of  them  of  A. 

20. 14  a  Levite  of  the  sons  of  A.,  came  the  spirit 
29.  13  and  of  the  sons  of  A.;  Zechariah,  and 
29.  30  with  the  words  of  David,  and  of  A.  the 
35.  15  the  singers  the  sons  of  A.  (were)  in  their 
35.  15  according  to  the  commandment  of.  .A. 

Ezra   2.  41  The  singers :  the  children  of  A.,  an 

3.  10  the  Levites  the  sons  of  A.  with  cymbals 

Neh.   7.  44  The  singers:  the  children  of  A.,  an 
11.  17  Mattaniah.  .the  son  of  A.,  (was)  the 

11.  22  Of  the  sons  of  A.,  the  singers  (were)  over 

12.  35  Michaiah,  the  son  of  Zaccur.  .son  of  A. 
12.  46  in  the  days  of  David  and  A.  of  old 

Psa.  50.  title.  A  Psalm  of  A.     The  mighty  God 

73.  A  Psalm  of  A.     Truly  God  (is)  good 

74.  Maschil  of  A.     O  God,  why  hast  thou 

75.  Al-taschith,  A  Psalm  (or)  Song  of  A. 

76.  on  Neginoth,  A  Psalm  (or)  Song  of  A. 

77.  Musician,  to  Jeduthun,  A  Psalm  of  A. 

78.  Maschil  of  A.    Give  car,  O  my  people 


Psa.  70.  A  Psalm  of  A.     O  God,  the  heathen  are 
80.  upon  Shoshauuim-Eduth,  A  Psalm  of  A. 
8r .  the . .  Musician  upon  Gittith,  (A  Psalm)  of  A 

82.  A  Psalm  of  A.     God  standeth  in  the 

83.  A  Song  (or)  Psalm  of  A.    Keep  not  thou 

3.  A  Levite,  whose  posterity  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  after 
the  exile,  B.C.  444. 

1  Ch.  9.  15  Micah,  the  son  of  Zichri,  the  son  of  A. 

4.  A  descendant  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi.  His  descend- 
ants were  porters  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  in 
the  time  of  David. 

1  Ch.26.    1  Meshelemiah.  .of  the  sons  of  A. 

5.  An  officer  (probably  a  Jew)  appointed  by  the  king  of 
Persia  as  keeper  of  the  royal  forests  in  Judah,  B.C.  444. 

Neh.   2.   8  a  letter  unto  A.  the  keeper  of  the  king's 

A-SAR-E'EL,  Stob-x  God  is  joined. 

A  son  of  Jehaleleel,"  a  descendant  of  Judah  through 

Caleb,  son  of  Jephunneh,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   4.  16  the  sons  of  Jehaleleel;  Ziph.  .and  A. 
A-SAR-E'-LAH,  n^N'-ib'x  Jah  is,  joined. 
A  son  of  Asaph,  appointed  by  David  for  the  service  of 
song  in  the  sanctuary,  B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  25.    2  Of  the  sons  of  Asaph  ;  Zaccur.  .and  A. 
[Azareel  in  verse  18  is  perhaps  the  same.] 

ASCEETD,  to  — 

To  go  or  come  up,  ava&atvw  anabaino. 

John  1.  51  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descend. 

20.  17  I  am  not  yet  ascended.  .1  ascend  unto 
Acts    p..  34  For  David  is  not  ascended  into  the 

25.    1  when  Festus  was  come,  .he  ascended  from 
Rom.  ;o.    6  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  1  that  is,  to 
Eph.    4.    g  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but 
Rev.    7.    2  I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the 

11.    7  the  beast  that  ascendeth  out  of  the.  .pit 

17.    8  The  beast,  .shall  ascend  out  of  the 

Jl^CEND,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  up'  rh%  alah,  5. 

Psa.  135.  7  He  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from 

Jer.   10.  13  he  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from 

51.  16  he  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from 

ASCEND  (up),  to  — 

I. To  go  up,  climb,  ppj  nasaq. 

Psa.  139.    8  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  thou  art 

2.  To  cause  to  go  up,  rby  alah. 

Gen.  28. 12  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descend. 
Exod  19.  18  the  smoke  thereof  ascended  as  the  smoke 
Numi3.  22  they  ascended  by  the  south,  and  came 
Josh.  6.    5  people  shall  ascend  up  every  man 

8.  -o  the  smoke  of  the  city  ascended  up  to 
8.  21  the  smoke  of  the  city  ascended,  then 

10.  7  Joshua  ascended  from  Gilgal,  he,  and  all 
15.    3  it  went  out.  .and  ascended  up  on  the 

Judg  13.  20  the  Lord  ascended  in  the  flame  of  the 
20.  40  the  flame  of  the  city  ascended  up  to 

1  Sa.  28.  13  I  saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth 
Psa.  24.    3  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the 

68.  18  Thou  hast  ascended  oh  high,  thou  hast 
Prov.30.  4  Who  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven,  or 
Isa.  14.  13  I  will  ascend  into  heaven,  I  will  exalt 

14.  14  I  will  ascend  above  the  heights  of  the 
Eze.  38.    9  Thou  shalt  ascend  and  come  like  a  storm 

0.T0  go  or  come  Up',  avafiaivti  anabaino. 

Luke  19.  28  he  went  before,  ascending  up  to  Jerus. 
John  3.  13  no  man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  but 

6.  62  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  ascend  up 
Eph.   4.    8  When  he  ascended  up  on  high,  he  led 

4.  10  the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far  above 
Rev.   8.    4  the  smoke .  .ascended  up  before  God  out 

11.  12  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  a  cloud 
14.  11  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up 

ASCENT  — 

l.Going  up,  n?j£D  niaaleh. 

Num  34.    4  from  the  south  to  the  ascent  of  Akrabbim 

2  Sa.  15.  30  David  went  up  by  the  ascent  of.  .Olivet 

2. Going  up,  {burnt)  offering,  n^y  olah. 

1  Ki.  10..  5  his  ascent  by  which  he  went  up  unto  the 

3.  Uppermost  place,  n;^#.  aliyyah. 

2  Ch.   9.    4  his  ascent  by  which  he  went  up  into  the 

ASCRIBE,  to  — 
1.7*0  give,  an;  yahab. 

Deut  32.    3  ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  God 

2. To  give,  jm  nathan. 

1  Sa.  18.    8  They  have  ascribed  unto  David  ten 

18.    8  and  to  me  they  have  ascribed . .  thousands 
Job    36.    3  will  ascribe  righteousness  to  my  Maker 
Psa.  [68.  34  Ascribe  ye  strength  unto  God  :  his 

A-SE'-NATH,  rupx  dedicated  to  Neit. 

Daughter  of  Poti-pherah,  priest  of  On,  and   wife  of 

Joseph,  B.C.  1715. 

Gen.  41.  45  he  gave  him  to  wife  A.  the  daughter  of 
41.  50  which  A.  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah 
46.  20  which  A.  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah 

AS'-ER,  'Ao-i?p. 

The  Greek  form  of  Asher. 

Luke  2.  36  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of  A. 

Rev.    7.  6  Of  the  tribe  of  A.  (were)  sealed  twelve 


ASH 


56 


ASHIMA 


ASH  — 

Ash  orpine,  px  oren. 

Isa.   44.  14  he  planteth  an  ash,  and  the  rain  doth 
ASHAMED  (of),  to  be, 
1. Shame,  n^a  bosheth. 

Jer.     2.  26  As  the  thief  is  ashamed  when  he  is  found 

2.  To  be  ashamed,  become  pale,  ena  bosh. 

Judg  3.  25  they  tarried  till  they  were  ashamed 
2  Ki.    2.  17  they  urged  him  till  he  was  ashamed 

8.  11  stedfastly,  until  he  was  ashamed 
Ezra    8.  22  I  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  king  a 

o    61  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up  my 
Job    19.    3  ye  are  not  ashamed,  .ye  make  yourselves 
Psa.     6.  10  Let  all  mine  enemies  be  ashamed  and 

6.  10  let  them  return  .  .be  ashamed  suddenly 

25.  2  let  me  not  be  ashamed,  let  not  mine 
25'    3  let  none  that  wait  on  thee  be  ashamed 
2='    3  let  them  be  ashamed  which  transgress 
->5  20  let  me  not  be  ashamed ;  for  I  put  my 
31.    1  let  me  never  be  ashamed :  deliver  me  in 
31.  17  Let  me  not  be  ashamed,  O  Lord 

31.  17  let  the  wicked  be  ashamed,  .let  them  be 
35!  26  Let  them  be  ashamed  and  brought  to 
37.  19  They  shall  not  be  ashamed  in  the  evil 

40.  14  Let  them  be  ashamed  and  confounded 

69.  6  Let  not  them  .  .be  ashamed  for  my  sake 

70.  2  Let  them  be  ashamed  and  confounded 
86.  17  they  which  hate  me  may.  .be  ashamed 

109.  28  when  they  arise,  let  them  be  ashamed 
119.    6  Then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when 
119.  46  I  will  speak . .  and  will  not  be  ashamed 
119.  78  Let  the  proud  be  ashamed ;  for  they 
119.  80  heart  be  sound .  .that  I  be  not  ashamed 
127.    5  they  shall  not  be  ashamed,  but  they  shall 
Isa.     1.  29  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  oaks 
20.    5  they  shall  be . .  ashamed  of  Ethiopia 

23.  4  Be  thou  ashamed,  O  Zidon  :  for  the  sea 

24.  23  and  the  sun  ashamed,  when  the  Lord  of 

26.  11  they  shall  see,  and  be  ashamed  for 

29.  22  Jacob  shall  not  now  be  ashamed,  neither 

41.  11  all.  .shall  be  ashamed  and  confounded 

42.  17  they  shall  be  greatly  ashamed,  that  trust 
44.  9  they  see  not .  .that  they  may  be  ashamed 
44.  11  all  his  fellows  shall  be  ashamed 

44.  11  they  shall  fear .  .they  shall  be  ashamed 

45.  16  They  shall  be  ashamed,  and  also 

45.  i7  ye  shall  not  be  ashamed  nor  confounded 
45.  24  all.  .against  him  shall  be  ashamed 

49.  23  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for 

50.  7  I  know  that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed 
54.    4  Fear  not . .  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed 

65.  13  shall  rejoice,  but  ye  shall  be  ashamed 

66.  5  your  joy,  and  they  shall  be  ashamed 
Jer.    2.  36  thou  also  shalt  be  ashamed  of  Egypt 

6.  15  Were  they  ashamed  when  they  had 
6.  15  nay,  they  were  not  at  all  ashamed 
1  8.  12  Were  they  ashamed  when  they  had 
8.  12  nay,  they  were  not  at  all  ashamed 
12.  13  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  your  revenues 
14.    3  they  were  ashamed  and  confounded 

14.  4  the  plowmen  were  ashamed,  they  covered 

15.  9  she  hath  been  ashamed  and  confounded 
17.  13  all  that  forsake  thee  shall  be  ashamed 
20.  11  they  shall  be  greatly  ashamed  ;  for  they 
22.  22  then  shalt  thou  be  ashamed  and 

31.  19  I  was  ashamed,  yea,  even  confounded 
48.  13  the  house  of  Israel  was  ashamed  of 
48. 13  Moab  shall  be  ashamed  of  Chemosh 
Eze.  32.  30  with  their  terror  they  are  ashamed  of 
36.  32  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  your 
Hos.    4.  19  they  shall  be  ashamed  because  of  their 

10.    6  Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  counsel 
Joel    2.  26,  27  my  people  shall  never  be  ashamed 
Mic.    3.    7  Then  shall  the  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the 
Zeph.  3.  11  In  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed 
Zech  1  j.    4  prophets  shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of 

S.TopUt  to  shame,  EJ13  bosh,  5. 

Psa.  119.  116  let  me  not  be  ashamed  of  my  hope 

4.  T>  be  ashamed  of  one* s  self,  »i3  bosh,  la. 

Gen.    2.  25  were  both  naked .  .and  were  not  ashamed 

5.  To  be  ashamed,  become  red,  nsn  chapher. 

Job     6.  20  they  came  thither,  and  were  ashamed 
Psa.  34.    5  and  their  faces  were  not  ashamed 
Jer.  50. 12  she  that  bare  you  shall  be  ashamed 

6.  To  be  dried  up,  v)yt  yabash,  5. 

Isa.  30.    5  They  were  all  ashamed  of  a  people  (that) 
Jer.     2.  26  so  is  the  house  of  Israel  ashamed 

6.  15  Were  they  ashamed  when  they  had 
8.   9  The  wise,  .are  ashamed,  they  are 
8.  12  Were  they  ashamed  when  they  had 
Joel    1.  11  Be  ye  ashamed,  O  ye  husbandmen 
Zech.  9.    5  her  expectation  shall  be  ashamed 

7.  To  be  made  ashamed,  red,  nsri  chapher,  5. 
Isa.    33.    9  Lebanon  is  ashamed,  .hewn  down 

%.To  be  ashamed^  blush,  eta  kalam,  2. 

Numi2.  14  should  she  not  be  ashamed  seven  days? 
2  So,  10.    5  the  men  were  greatly  ashamed  :  and  the 

19.    3  people  being  ashamed  steal  away  when 
1  Ch.  19,    5  for  the  men  were  greatly  ashamed 

ill.  30.  15  Levites  were  ashamed,  and  sanctified 
Psa.  74.  21  let  not  the  oppressed  return  ashamed 
Jer.     3.    3  thou  refusedst  to  be  ashamed 
Eze.  16.  27  daughters,  .are  ashamed  of  thy  lewd  way 
16.  61  shalt  remember  thy  ways,  and  be  ashamed 
43. 10  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  Iniquities 
43.  11  if  they  be  ashamed .  .shew  them  the  form 


9. To  be  ashamed,  ato'xyvofLat  aischunomai. 
Lukei6.    3  I  cannot  dig  ;  to  beg  I  am  ashamed 
2  Co.  10.    8  I  should  boast. .  I  should  not  be  ashamed 
Phil.   1.  20  that  in  nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed,  but 

1  Te.   4.  16  if. .  as  a  Christian,  let  him  not  be  ashamed 
1.  Jo.  2.  28  and  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his 

10.  To  be  ashamed  of,  i-naio-xyvofiai. 

Mark  8.  38  shall  be  ashamed  of.  .shall,  .be  ashamed 
Luke  9.  26  shall  be  ashamed  of.  .shall,  .be  ashamed 
Rom.  1.  16  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ 
6.  21  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed.' 

2  Ti.    1.    8  Be  not  thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the 

1.  12  nevertheless  I  am  not  ashamed :  for  I 
1.  16  and  was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain 
Heb.  2.  11  for  which  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call 
11.  16  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be 

11.  To  be  utterly  ashamed,  Karata-x^o/xai. 

Luke  13.  17  all  his  adversaries  were  ashamed  :  and  all 
Rom.  9.  33  whosoever  believeth.  .shall  not  be  asham. 

10.  11  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  ashamed 
2  Co.    7.  14  if  I  have  boasted.  .1  am  not  ashamed 
9.    4  Lest . .  we . .  should  be  ashamed  in  this 

12.  To  be  turned  in,  ivTpewofiai,2  Th.3. 14;  Tit. 2.8. 
ASHAKED,  to  make  — 

1.  To  make  ashamed,  pale,  KM3  bosh,  5. 
Prov.  12.    4  she  that  maketh  ashamed  (is)  as 

2.  To  cause  to  blush,  dSs  Jcalam,  5. 

Job     11.  3  shall  no  man  make  thee  ashamed? 

3.  To  shame  utterly,  Karaicrx^w  kataischuno.  . 
Rom.  5.    5  And  hope  maketh  not  ashamed  ;  because 

ASHAMED,  needeth  not  to  be  — 
Not  ashamed  of,  aveiraicrxvvTos  anepaischuntos. 
2  Ti.  2.  15  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed 

A'-SHAN,  |;;''J>  smoke. 

A  Levitical  city  in  Judah,  afterwards  given  to  Simeon. 
Josh.  15.  42  Libnah,  and  Ether,  and  A. 

19.  7  Ain.  .and  A. ;  four  cities  and  their 

1  Ch.    4.  32  their  villages  (were),  Etam.  .and  A.,  five 
6.  59  And  A.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Beth 
ASH-BE'-A,  ya^N  man  of  Baal. 

The  patronymic"  of  a  family  that  sprang  from  Shelah 
son  of  Judah,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   4.  21  that  wrought  fine  linen,  of  the  house  of  A. 
ASH'-BEL,  Saif'N  man  of  Baal. 
A  son  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  21  the  sons  of  Benjamin  (were)  Belah..  and  A. 

Num  26.  38  sons  of  Benj.  after  their  families,  .of  A. 

1  Ch.    8.    1  Benjamin  begat.  .A.  the  second,  and  Ah. 

ASH-BE-LITE,  "hiyxn  belonging  to  Ashbel. 
A  family  that  sprang  from  Ashbel. 

Num  26.  38  of  Ashbel,  the  family  of  the  A. :  of  Ahiram 
ASH'-DOD,  ~\itjx  fortress,  castle. 
One  of  the  five  'chief  cities  of  the  Philistines.  It  was 
strongly  fortified,  and  stood  on  the  border  at  the  N. 
extremity  of  what  afterwards  belonged  to  Simeon  to- 
wards Egypt.  It  is  now  called  Asdud,  and  in  the  New 
Testament  and  LXX.  Azotus.  It  is  about  30  miles  from 
the  southern  frontier  of  Canaan,  3  from  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  midway  between  Gaza  and  Joppa. 

Josh.  1 1.  22  in  Gaza,  in  Gath,  and  in  A. .  .remained 
15.  46  all  that  (lay)  near  A.,  with  their  villages 
15.  47  A.  with  her  towns  and  her  villages,  Gaza 

1  Sa.    5.    1  took  the  ark.  .and  brought  it.  .unto  A. 

5.  3  when  they  of  A.  arose  early  on  the  morrow 

5.  5  on  the  threshold  of  Dagon  in  A.  unto  this 

5.  6  was  heavy  upon  them  of  A.,  and  he 

5.  6  and  smote  them  with  emerods,  (even)  A. 

5.  7  when  the  men  of  A.  saw  that  (it  was)  so 

6.  17.  for  A.  one,  for  Gaza  one,  for  Askelonone 

2  Ch.  26.    6  and  brake  down  the  wall  of .  .A.,  and  built 

26.    6  and  built  cities  about  A.,  and  among  the 
Neh.  13.  23  Jews  (that)  had  married  wives  of  A.,  of 

13.  24  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  of  A. 
Isa.  20.    1  In  the  year  that  Tartan  came  unto  A 

20.  1  and  fought  against  A.,  and  took  it 
Jer.  25.20  Azzah,  and  Ekron,  and  the  remnant  of  A. 
Amos  1.    8  I  will  cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  A. 

3.  9  Publish  in  the  palaces  at  A.,  and  in  the 
Zeph.  2.  4  they  shall  drive  out  A.  at  the  noon  day 
Zech.  9.    6  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  A.,  and  I  will 

ASH-DO-DITES,  ASH-DO-THITES,  "l^gS. 

The  inhabitants  of  Ashdod. 

Josh. 13.   3  the  Gazathites.  .the  A.,  the  Eshkalonites 
Neh.   4.    7  when.. the  A.,  heard  that  the  walls  of 

ASH-DOTH  PIS'-GAH,  napsri  rrn^N  s]wings  ofPisgah. 

The  spurs  and  ravines  of  Pisgah,  the  top  of  which  is 

.Mount  Nebo.    Now  Ain  Musa. 

Deut.  3.  17  of-  the  plain,  .the  salt  sea,  under  A.  -p 

4,  49  of  the  plain,  under  the  springs  of  P. 
Josh  12.    3  and  from  the  south,  under  A.-p 

13.  20  Beth-peor,  and  A.-p.  and  Beth-jeshinioth 
A'-SHER,  "K?N  happy. 

1.  Eighth  son  of  Jacob,  and  second  by  Zilpah,  Leah's 
maid.    (See  Aser,  the  N.T.  form.)    B.C.  1730. 
Gen.  30.  13  And  Leah,  .called  his  name  A. 
35.  26  the  sons  of  Zilpah.  .Gad,  and  A. 
46.  17  the  sons  of  A.;  Jimnah,  and  Ishuah,  and 
49.  20  Out  of  A.  his  bread  (shall  be)  fat,  and  he 
Exod.  1.    4  Dan,  and  Naphtali,  Gad,  and  A. 
Num  26.  46  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  A.  (was)Sar. 


Josh.17.  10  they  met  together  in  A.  on  the  north,  and 
17.  11  Manasseh  had  in.  .A.  Beth-shean  and  her 

iCh.    2.   2  Benjamin,  Naphtali,  Gad,  and  A. 

7.  30  sons  of  A.;  Imnah,  and  Isuah,  and  Ishuai 
7.  40  All  these  (were)  the  children  of  A.,  heads 

2.  Asher  is  used  also  as  the  name  of  the  tribe  descended 
from  Asher,  and  of  that  part  of  Canaan  in  which  they 
dwelt. 

Num.  1.  13  Of  A.;  Pagiel  the  son  of  Ocran 

1.  40  Of  the  children  of  A. ,  by  their  generations 

1.  41  that  were  numbered  of .  .the  tribe  of  A. 

2.  27  that  encamp.. (shall  be)  the  tribe  of  A. 

2.  27  the  captain  of  the  children  of  A.  (shall  be) 
7.  72  Pagiel.  .prince  of  the  children  of  A. 
10.  26  And  over,  .the  children  of  A.  (was)  Pagiel 
13.  13  Of  the  tribe  of  A.,  Sethur  the  son  of  M. 
26.  44  (Of)  the  children  of  A.  after  their  families 
26.  47  These  (are)  the  families . .  of  A.  according 
34.  27  the  prince  of  the  tribe,  .of  A.,  Ahihud 

Deut 27.  13  shall  stand,  .to  curse  ;  Reuben.. and  A. 
33.  24  of  A.  he  said,  (Let)  A.  (be)  blessed  with 

Josh  19.  24  fifth  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe,  .of  A. 
19.  31  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe,  .of  A. 
19.  34  the  coast,  .reacheth  to  A.  on  the  west 
21.    6  of  Gershon  (had) . .  out  of  the  tribe  of  A. 
21.  30  out  of  the  tribe  of  A.,  Mishal  with  her 

Judg.  1.  31  Neither  did  A.  drive  out  the  inhabitants 

5.  17  A.  continued  on  the  sea  shore,  and  abode 

6.  35  he  sent  messengers  unto  A.,  and  unto 

7.  23  Israel  gathered  themselves,  .out  of  A. 

1  Ki.    4.  16  Baaiiah  the  son  of  Hushai  (was)  in  A.  and 

1  Ch.   6.  62  to  the  sons  of  Gershom  .  .out  of .  .A. 

6.  74  out  of  the  tribe  of  A.;  Mashal  with  her 

12.  36  of  A.,  such  as  went  forth  to  battle,  .forty 

2  Ch.  30.  1 1  Nevertheless  divers  of  A. . .  humbled 
Eze.  48.    2  by  the  border  of  Dan . .  a  (portion  for)  A. 

48.    3  by  the  border  of  A. . .  a  (portion  for)  N. 
48.  34  one  gate  of  Gad,  one  gate  of  A.,  one  gate 

3.  A  town  E.  of  Shechem,  on  the  road  to  Beth-shean,  in 
Manasseh,  W.  of  the  Jordan.     Now  Asirah. 

Josh.  17.  7  the  coast  of  Manasseh  was  from  A.  to  M. 
[The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of 
Asher:— Abdon,  Accho,  Achshaph,  Achzib, 
Ahlab,  Amad,  Aphek,  Beten,  Beth-Dagon,  Beth- 
Emek,  Beth-Rehob,  Carmel,  Ebron,  Hali,  Hara- 
mon,  Helbah,  Helkath.Hosah,  Hukkok.Jiphtah- 
el,  Kanah,  Mearah,  Mishal,  Neiel,  Sid^n,  Uw- 
mah,  &c.] 

A-SHE-RITE,  n^xrr  the  (one  of)  AsJier. 
Patronymic  of  the  tribe  of  Asher. 

Judg.  1.  32  But  the  A.  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites 

ASHES  — 

I. Dust,  {bruised,  fine),  isn  epher. 
Gen.  18.  27  I.  .(am  but)  dust  and  ashes 
Num  19.    9  a  man.  .shall  gather  up  the  ashes 

19.  10  he  that  gathereth  the  ashes,  .shall  wash 
2  Sa.  19.  9  Tamar  put  ashes  on  her  head,  and  rent 
1  Ki.  20.  38  prophet,  .disguised  himself  with  ashes 

20.  41  he.  .took  the  ashes  away  from  his  face 
Esth.  4.    1  Mordecai.  .put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes 

4.    3  great  mourning . .  many  lay  in . .  ashes 
Job     2.    8  and  he  sat  down  among  the  ashes 

13.  12  Your  remembrances  (are)  like  unto  ashes 
30.  19  and  I  am  become  like  dust  and  ashes 

42.    6  I  abhor,  .and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes 
Psa.  102.    9  For  I  have  eaten  ashes  like  bread 

147.  16  he  scattereth  the  hoar  frost  like  ashes 
Isa.  44.  20  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  deceived  heart 

58.    5  spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  (under  him)? 

61.    3  give  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil 
Jer.     6.  26  sackcloth,  and  wallow  thyself  in  ashes 
Lam.  3.  16  stones,  he  hath  covered  me  with  ashes 
Eze.  27.  30  they  shall  wallow  themselves  in  the  ashes 

28.  18  I  will  bring  thee  to  ashes  upon  the  earth 
Dan.    9.    3  by  prayer.. with  fasting.. and  ashes 
Jon.    3.    6  covered,  .with  sackcloth,  and  satin  ashes 
Mai.   4.    3  they  shall  be  ashes  under  the  soles  of 

2. Ashes  (fat),  ]vy  deshen. 

Lev.    1. 16  the  altar,  .by  the  place  of  the  ashes 

4,  12  ashes  are  poured  out.  .ashes  are  poured 
6.  10  take  up  the  ashes  which  the  fire  hath 
6. 11  carry  forth  the  ashes  without  the  camp 

1  Ki.  13.    3  ashes  that  (are)  upon  it  shall  be  poured 

13.  5  and  the  ashes  poured  out  from  the  altar 
Jer.  31.  40  valley  of  the  dead  bodies,  and  of  the  ashes 

1  3.  Dust,  (bruised,  fine),  "icy  aphar. 

Num  19.  17  take  of  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  heifer 

2  Ki.  23.    4  carried  the  ashes  of  them  unto  Bethel 

4.  Dust,  ashes,  rj'9  piach. 

Exod.  9.    8  Take  to  you  handfuls  of  ashes  of  the 

9.  10  they  took  ashes  of  the  furnace,  and  stood 

5. Ashes,  eynbers,  o-irob'6s  spodos. 

Matt  11.  21  have  repented,  .in  sackcloth  and  ashes 
Luke  10.  13  repented,  sitting  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 
Heb.   9.  13  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean 

ASHES  from,  to  receive  or  take  away  the,  turn  into  — 
To  remove  or  cleanse  from  ashes,  |BH  dashen,  3. 

Exod27.    3  make . .  pans  to  receive  his' ashes,  Nu.  4. 13. 
To  turn  into  ashes,  retppSco  tephroo,  2  Pe.  2.  6. 
A-SHI'-MA,  nctn  heaven 

An  idol  worshipped  by  the  people  of  Haniath,  and  in- 
troduced into  Samaria  by  the  colonists  whom  Shalma- 
nezer  settled  therein. 

2  Ki.  17.  30  and  the  men  of  ITamath  made  A. 


ASHKELON 


57 


ASK 


ASH-KE'-LON",  AS-KE'-LON,  )H?j??8  holm-oak. 
Askalon  is  mentioned  as  a  city  of  the  Philistines,  Josh. 
„  g  and  i  Sam.  6.  17.  The  tribe  of  Judah  captured 
it  rcl  1425  (Judges  1. 18),  but  it  was  retaken  by  the 
Philistines,  and  is  frequently  denounced  by  the  pro- 
phets. It  fell  successively  into  the  hands  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, the  Greeks,  and  the  Romans.  It  became  a 
bishop's  see  in  the  4th  century.  It  was  besieged  by  the 
Crusaders  in  1100,  and  again  in  1148,  without  success. 
Baldwin  III.  captured  it  in  1157.  Saladin  re-took  it  in 
1187,  and  burnt  it  in  1191.  Richard  I.  of  England  ob- 
tained possession  the  same  year,  and  restored  the 
fortifications  in  1 192.  Sultan  Bibars  destroyed  its  forti- 
fications and  filled  up  its  harbour  in  1270.  (Axfadan.) 
Judg.  1.  18  Also  Judah  took.  .A.  with  the  coast 

14.  19  he  went  down  to  A.,  and  slew  thirty  men 

1  Sa.   6.  17  these  (are)  the  golden  emerods.  .for  A. 

2  Sa.   1.  20  publish  (it)  not  in  the  streets  of  A.;  lest 
Jer.  25.  20  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  and  A.,  and 

47.  5  A.  is  cut  off  (with)  the  remnant  of  their 
47.    7  Lord  hath  given  it  a  charge  against  A. 

Amos  1.    8  I  will  cut  off  ..him  that  holdeth.  .from  A. 

Zeph.  2.  4  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken,  and  A.  a  desolation 
2.    7  in  the  houses  of  A.  shall  they  lie  down  in 

Zech.  9.    5  A.  shall  see  (it),  uud  fear,  .and  A.  shall 

ASH-KE'-NAZ,  ASH-CHE'-NAZ,  ^l?jK. 

1.  Son  of  Gomer,  sou  of  Japheth. 

Gen.  10.    3  the  sons  of  Gomer;  A.,  and  Riphath,  and 
1  Ch.  1.    6  the  sons  of  Gomer;  A.,  and  Riphath,  and 

2.  The  people  or  tribe  whose  original  seat  was  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Armenia,  along  with  the  kingdoms 
of  Ararat  and  Minni. 

Jer.  51.  27  call  together,  .the  kingdoms  of.  .A. 

ASH'-NAH,  m^:N  fortification. 

1.  A  town  in  W.  of  Judah,  near  Dan. 

Josh.  15.  33  the  valley,  Eshtaol,  and  Zoreah,  and  A. 

2.  Another  town  in  the  plains  of  Judah. 
Josh.  15.  43  And  Jiphtah,  and  A,,  and  Xezib 

ASH-PE'-NAZ,  u??n.     Meaning  uncertain. 

The  prince  of  the  eunuchs  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  B.C. 

606. 

Dan.    1.    3  the  king  spake  unto  A.  the  master  of  his 

ASH-TAR'-OTH,       ASH-TOR'-ETH,       AS-TAR'-OTH, 
ni-iiT^y,  rnh:^  a  wife. 

1.  Au  idol  of  the  Philistines,  Phoenicians,  and  Zidonians, 
worshipped  by  Israel  soon  after  the  death  of  Joshua, 
and  also  by  Solomon. 

Judg.  2.  13  forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  Baaland  A. 

10.  6  the  children  of  Israel,  .served.  .A.,  and 
1  Sa.    7.    3  put  away.  .A.  from  among  you,  and 

7.    4  the  children  of  Israel  did  put  away.  .A. 

12.  10  forsaken  the  Lord,  and  have  served.  .A. 
31.  10  they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  A. 

1  KX  11.    5  Solomon  went  after  A.  the  goddess  of 

11.  33  and  have  worshipped  A.  the  goddess  of 

2  Ki.  23.  13  high  places . .  Solomon . .  builded  for  A. 

2.  A  city  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  in  Bashan. 

Dent.  1.   4  After  he  had  slain  .  .Og.  .dwelt  at  A. 
Josh.  9.  10  all  that  he  did.  .to  Og. .  which  (was)  at  A. 

12.  4  the  giants,  that  dwelt  at  A.  and  at  Edrei 

13.  12  the  kingdom  of  Og.  .which  reigned  in  A. 

13.  31  A.,  and  Edrei,  cities  of  the  kingdom  of 

3.  A  Levitical  town  of  Manasseh,  beyond  Jordan. 

1  Ch.   6.  71  Unto  the  sons  of  Gershom .  .A.  with 
ASH-TE-RA-THITE,  *n-;n^y  of  Ashteroth. 
Patronymic  of  one  of  David's  worthies. 

1  Ch.  11.  44  TJzza  the  A.,  Shama  and  Jehiel  the  sons 

ASH-TER'-OTH  KAR-NA'-UT.    D;j"jp  n^^-^V- 
A  city  of  the  Rephaim,  in  the  kingdom  of  Og,  in  Man- 
asseh  beyond  Jordan.     It  was  an  abode  of  the  Rephaim 
at  the  time  of  Chedorlaomer,  B.C.  1913.    (Ashterah.) 

Gen.14.    5  and  smote  the  Rephaims  in  A.  K.,  and 
ASH'-TJR,  mn^x  freeman. 
A  son  of  Hezron,  son  of  Pharez,  B.C.  1560. 

iCh.   2.  24  Abiah  Hezron's  wife  bare  him  A.  the 
4.   5  A.  the  father  of  Tekoa  had  two  wives 

ASH-TJR-ITES,  nw*t  brlonging.to  Ashur. 
A  tribe  occupying  the  whole  country  W.  of  the  Jordan 
above  Jezreel,  the  district  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon. 
(Asherite  occurs  in  Judg.  1.  32.) 

2  Sa.    2.    9  made  him  king  over  Gilead.  .over  the  A. 
Eze.  27.   6  the  company  of  the  A.  have  made  thy 

ASH'-VATH,  ni?j7  made,  wrought. 

I  A  son  of  Japhlet,  a  descendant  of  Asher,  B.C.  1660. 
1  Ch.  7.  33  the  sons  of  Japhlet ;  Pasach . .  and  A. 
A-Sf-A,  'Acta. 
This  name  was  first  applied  in  the  4th  century  to  the 
north-western  peninsula  of  the  Asiatic  continent.  It  is 
also  called  Anatolia,  although  the  latter  term  is  more 
correctly  used  for  a  particular  portion.  "  Asia  Minor 
was  the  theatre  of  the  earliest  remarkable  events  re- 
corded in  profane  history ;  as  the  Argonautic  expedition, 
the  Trojan  war,  in  which  the  gods  are  said  to  have  de- 
scended from  Olympus  and  joined  battle  with  mortals  ; 
the  conquests  of  the  Persians,  the  overthrow  of  their 
empire  by  Alexander,  and  the  settlement  in  this  part  of 
Asia  of  his  successors.  It  subsequently  fell  under  the 
Roman  sway,  and  suffered  severely  in  after-ages  in  the 
wars  of  the  Saracens,  Turks,  Tartars,  &c.  It  is  also 
intimately  connected  with  the  early  history  of  Chris- 
* 


tianity,  and  the  first  Christian  churches  were  planted 
here."  Its  chief  political  divisions  in  ancient  times 
were  Bithynia,  Cappadocia,  Caria,  Cilicia,  Galatia, 
Lydia,  Lycaonia  and  Isauria,  Lycia,  Mysia,  Pamphylia, 
Paphlagonia,  Phrygia,  Pisidia,  and  Pontus. 

Acts  2.  9  the  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  in.  .A. 
6.  9  (the  synagogue)  of  the  Libertines,  .of  A. 
16.  6  were  forbidden,  .to  preach  the  word  in  A. 
ig.  10  all  they  which  dwell  in  A.  heard  the  word 
19.  22  but  he  himself  stayed  in  A.  for  a  season 
19.  26  almost  throughout  all  A.,  this  Paul  hath 
19.  27  whom  all  A.  and  the  world  worsh'ippeth 

19.  31  certain  of  the  chief  of  A. .  .sent  unto  him 

20.  4  there  accompanied  him  into  A.  Sopater 
20.    4  and  of  A.,  Tychicus  and  Trophimus. 

20.  16  because  he  would  not  spend  the  time  in  A. 

20.  18  from  the  first  day  that  I  came  into  A. 

21.  27  the  Jews  which  were  of  A.,  when  they 

24.  18  certain  Jews  from  A.  found  me  purified 
27.    2  we  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by.  .A. 

1  Co.  16.  19  The  churches  of  A.  salute  you.     Aquila 

2  Co.  1.  8  have  you  ignorant  of  our  trouble.,  in  A. 
2  Ti.  1.  15  all  they  which  are  in  A.  be  turned  away 
1  Pe.  1.  1  the  strangers  scattered  throughout.  .A. 
Rev.    1.    4  John  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  A 

1.  11  send  (it)  unto  the  seven  churches,  .in  A. 
ASIDE  — 
By  oneself,  tear   iBiav  hat  idian. 

Mark  7.  33  took  him  aside  from  the  multitude 

[See  also  Carry,  go,  gone,  lay,  set,  take,  turn, 
turned.] 

ASIDE,  to  go  or  turn  — 

To  retire,  withdraw,  avaxvpea  anachoreo. 

Matt.  2.  22  he  turned  aside  into  the  parts  of  Galilee 
Acts  23.  19  and  went,  .aside  privately,  and  asked 
26.  31  when  they  were  gone  aside,  they  talked 

A-Sf-EL,  SN'b'ii  God  is  doer. 

A  Simeonite,  grandfather  of  Jehu,  B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.    4.  35  Josibiah,  the  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son  of  A. 

ASK    (earnestly),  to  — 

1.2*6  inquire,  ny3,  vt$$  heah. 

Dan.  6.  7  ask  a  petition  of  any  God  or  man  for 
6.  12  ask.  .of  any  God  or  man  within  thirty 
7. 16  I.  .asked  him  the  truth  of  all  this 

2.  To  seek,  inquire,  trps  baqash,  3. 

Judg.  6.  29  when  they  enquired  and  asked,  they  said 

2  Ch.  20.   4  Judah  gathered . .  to  ask . .  of  the  LORD 

3.  To  seek,  search,  cni  darash. 

1  Ki.  14.    5  the  wife,  .cometh  to  ask  a  thing  of  thee 

4.  To  ask,  hxy  slutcd. 

Gen.  24.  47  I  asked  her,  and  said,  "Whose  daughter 
26.   7  the  men.  .asked.. of  his  wife;  and  he 
32. 17  and  asketh  thee,  saying, Whose  (art)  thou? 
32.  29  Jacob  asked .  .and  said,  Tell  (me) 
32.  29  "Wherefore  (is)  it  (that)  thou  dost  ask 

37.  15  the  man  asked  him.. What seekest  thou? 

38.  21  he  asked  the  men  of  that  place.  .Where 
40.    7  he  asked  Pharaoh's  officers  that  (were) 
43.    7  The  man  asked  us  straitly  of  our  state 

43.  27  he  asked  them  of .  .welfare,  and  said 

44.  19  My  lord  asked  his  servants.  .Have  ye  a 
Exodi3.  14  it  shall  be  when  thy  son  asketh  thee 

18.  7  they  asked  each  other  of.  .welfare 
XUU127.  21  Eleazar.  .shall  ask.  .for  him 

Deut.  4.  32  ask  now  of  the  days  that  are  past,  which 
6.  20  when  thy  son  asketh  thee  in  time  to  come 
13.  14  and  make  search,  and  ask  diligently 
32.    7  ask  thy  father,  and  he  will  shew  thee 
Josh.  4.  6,  21  when  your  children  ask.  .in  time  to 
9.  14  the  men . .  asked  not . .  at  the  mouth 
15.  18  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field 

19.  50  they  gave  him  the  city  which  he  asked 
Judg.  1.    1  the  children  of  Israel  asked  the  Lord 

1.  14  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field 
5.  25  He  asked  water,  .she  gave  (him)  milk 
13.   6  I  asked  him  not  whence  he  (was),  neither 
13.  18  Why  askest  thou  thus  after  my  name 
iSa.    1.  17  thy  petition  that  thou  hast  asked  of  him 
1.  20  Because  I  have  asked  him  of  the  Lord 

1.  27  given  me  my  petition  which  I  asked . .  him 

8. 10  unto  the  people  that  asked  of  him  a  king 
12. 17  which  ye  have  done . .  in  asking  you  a  king 
12.  19  we  have  added,  .evil,  to  ask  us  a  king 
19.  22  asked  and  said,  Where  (are)  Samuel  and 

25.  8  Ask  thy  young  men,  and  they  will  shew 
28. 16  Wherefore  then  dost  thou  ask  of  me 

2  Sa.  14.  18  Hide  not.  .the  thing  that  I  shall  ask  thee 

1  Ki.  2.  16  I  ask  one  petition  of  thee,  deny  me  not 

2.  22  why  dost  thou  ask  Abishag.  .forAdonijah? 

2.  22  ask  for  him  the  kingdom  also ;  for  he  (is) 

3.  5  God  said.  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee 

3.  10  LORD,  that  Solomon  had  asked  this  thing 

3. 11  thou  hast  asked.,  hast  not  asked.,  neither 
3.  13  given  thee  that  which  thou  hast  not  asked 

10.  13  kingSoIomon  gave,  .whatsoever  sheasked 

2  Ki.   2.    9  Ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee,  before  I  be 

2. 10  he  said,  Thou  hast  asked  a  hard  thing 

8.    6  when  the  king  asked  the  woman,  she  told 
2  Ch.  1.    7  said  unto  him.  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee 

1. 11  thou  hast  not  asked  riches,  wealth,  or 
1.  11  hast  asked  long  life ;  but  hast  asked 

9. 12  kingSolomongave.  .whatsoever  she  asked 
!Neh.  1.    2  I  asked  them  concerning  the  Jews  that 
Job   12.    7  ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach 

21.  29  Have  ye  not  asked  them  that  go  by  the 


Psa.    2.    8  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give,  .the  heathen 
21.   4  He  asked  life  of  thee.. thou  gavest  (it) 
78.  18  tempted,  .by  asking  meat  for  their  lust 
105.  40  (The  people)  asked,  and  he  brought  quails 

Isa,     7.  11  Ask  thee  a  sign  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

7.  11  ask  it  either  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  height 
7. 12  Ahaz  said,  I  will  not  ask,  neither  will  I 
30.    2  walk,  .and  have  not  asked  at  my  mouth 
41.  28  no  counsellor,  that,  when  I  asked  of  them 
45. 11  Ask  me  of  things  to  come  concerning  my 
58.    2  they  ask  of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice 
65.    1  I  am  sought  of  (them  that)  asked  not 

Jer.     6.  16  Stand  ye.  .and  ask  for  the  old  paths 

15.  5  who  shall  go  aside  to  ask  how  thou  doest? 
18. 13  Ask  ye  now  among  the  heathen,  who  hath 
23.  33  when  this  people,  .shall  ask  thee,  saying 
30.  6  Ask  ye  now,  and  see  whether  a  man  doth 
36.  17  they  asked  Baruch,  saying,  Tell  us  now 

37. 17  the  king  asked  him  secretly  in  his  house 
38.  14  I  will  ask  thee  a  thing;  hide  nothing  from 
38.  27  Then  came  all  the  princes,  .and  asked 
48.  19  ask  him  that  fleeth,  and  her  that  escapeth 
50.   5  They  shall  ask  the  way  to  Zion  with  their 

Lam.  4.    4  the  young  children  ask  bread,  .no  man 
Mic.    7.    3  the  prince  asketh,  and  the  judge,  .for  a 
Hag.  2.  11  Ask  now  the  priests,  .the  law,  saying 
Zech  10.    1  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  the  time  of  the 

5.  To  ask  {for  oneself),  hxy  skoal,  2. 

1  Sa.  20.  6,  28  say,  David  earnestly  asked . .  of  me 

Q.To  ask  (earnestly),  "?n^;  shacd,  3. 

2  Sa.  20. 18  They  shall  surely  ask.  .at  Abel 

7. To  ask  (earnestly).  7Xy?s7tel,   3. 

Ezra  5.   9  Then  asked  we  those  elders,  (and)  said 

5. 10  We  asked  their  names  also,  to  certify 

Dan.    2.  10  asked  such  things  at  any  magician,  or 

8.Jb  ask,  crave,  air 4 a  aiteo. 

Matt.  5.  42  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee,  and  from 

6.  8  what,  .ye  have  need  of,  before  ye  ask  him 

7.  7  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and 
7.    8  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth ;  and  he 
7.   9  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a 
7.  10  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serpent 
7.  11  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him? 

14.    7  to  give  her  whatsoever  she  would  ask 
18.  19  as  touching  anything  that  they  shall  ask 

20.  22  Jesus  answered.  .Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask 

21.  22  all  things,  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in 
27.  20  that  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  and 

Mark  6.  22  Ask  of  me  whatsoever  thou  wilt,  and  I 
6.  23  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  ask  of  me,  I  will 
6.  24  went  forth,  and  said.  .What  shall  I  ask? 
6.  25  she  came  in.  .with  haste,  .and  asked 

10.  38  Jesus  said.  .Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask 
Luke   1.  63  he  asked  for  a  writing-table,  and  wrote 

6.  30  Give  to  every  man  that  asketh  of  thee 

11.  9  I  say  unto  you,  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given 
11.  10  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth ;  and  he 
11.  11  If  a  son  shall  ask  bread  of  any  of  you  that 
11.  12  Or  if  he  shall  ask  an  egg,  will  be  offer  him 

11.  13  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him? 

12.  48  to  whom  men .  committed,  .they  will  ask 
John  4.    9  How  is  it  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest 

4.  10  thou  wouldest  have  asked  of  him,  and  he 
11.  22  whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  God 
14.  13  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name 

14.  14  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  name 
15-    7  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  aDd  it  shall 

15.  16  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father 

16.  23  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing 

16.  24  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing,  .ask,  and 
16.  26  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name:  and 
Acts    3.    2  to  ask  alms  of  them  that  entered  into 
Eph.    3.  20  to  do.  .above  all  that  we  ask  or  think 
Jas.     1.    5  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask 
1.    6  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering 
4.    2  yet  ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not 

4.  3  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask 
1  Pe.    3.  15  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 

1  Jo.   3.  22  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him 

5.  14  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his 
5.  15  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  knowthat  we  have 
5.  16  he  shall  ask,  and  he  shall  give  him  life 

9.  To  search  out,  ££€Ta,£w  ez&tazo. 

Jo.     21.  12  none  of  the  disciples  durst  ask  him 
10.7*0  inquire,  ask,  eVepoiTaaj  eperotao. 

Matt  12.  10  they  asked  him,  saying.  Is  it  lawful  to  heal 
17. 10  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Why  then 

22.  23  same  day  came.  .Sadducees..and  asked 
22.  35  Then  one  of  them,  .a  lawyer,  asked 

22.  41  the  Pharisees  were.,  together,  Jesus  asked 
22.  46  neither  durst  any  (man),  .ask  him  more 
27.  11  the  governor  asked  him,  saying,  Art 
Mark  5.    9  he  [asked]  him,What(is)thyname?  And 

7.  5  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  asked  him,  Why 

7.  17  his  disciples  asked  him  concerning  the 

8.  5  he  asked  them.  How  many  loaves  have 
8.  23  he  asked  him  if  he  saw  ought 

8.  27  by  the  way  he  asked  his  disciples,  saying 

9.  11  they  asked  him,  saying.  Why  say  the 

9.  16  he  asked  the  scribes,  What  question  ye 
9.  21  he  asked  his  father,  How  long  is  it  ago 
9.  28  his  disciples  asked  him  privately,  Why 
9.  32  understood  not.  .and.  were  afraid  to  ask 
9.  33  he  asked  them,  What  was  it  that  ye 
10.    2  the  Pharisees  came  to  him,  and  asked 
10.  10  in  the  house  his  disciples  asked  him  again 
10.  17  there  came  one  running,  .and  asked  him 

12. 18  the  Sadducees.  .asked  hini,  saying 


ASK 


58 


ASSAULT 


Marki2.  28  one  of  the  scribes,  .asked  him,  Which 

12.  34  no  mau  after  that  durst  ask  him 

13.  3  Peter  and  James. .  Jolm. .  Andrew  asked 

14.  Co  the  high  priest,  .asked  Jesus,  saying 

14.  61  the  high  priest  asked  him,  and  said 

15.  2  Pilate  asked  him.  Ait  thou  the  King  of 

15.  4  Pilate  asked  him  again,  saying 

75.  44  calling,  .the  centurion,  he  asked  him 
Luke  3.  10  the  people  asked  him,  saying,  What  shall 
6.    9  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them,  I  will  ask  you 
8.    9  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  What 

8.  30  Jesus  asked  him,  saying,  What  is  thy 

9.  18  he  asked  them,  saying,  Whom  say  the 
18.  18  a  certain  ruler  asked  him,  saying,  Good 
18.  40  when  he  was  come  near,  he  asked  him 

20.  21  they  asked  him,  saying,  Master,  we  know 
"o  27  certain  of  the  Sadducees..  asked  him 

21!    7  they  asked  him,  saying,  Master,  hut 
-  •  64  they  struck  him  on  the  face,  and  asked 
03     3  Pilate  [asked]  him,  saying.  Art  thou  the 
23.   6  When  Pilate  heard  of  Galilee,  he  asked 
John  18.    7  Then  asked  he  them  again,  Whom  seek 

18.  21  Why[askest]  thou  meV  [ask]  them  which 
Acts    5.  27  and  the  high  priest  asked  them 

23.  34  he  asked  of  what  province  he  was 
1  Co.  14.  35  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  home 

11. 7*0  ask  of,  iptoT&u}  erotao. 

Matt  16.  13  he  a  ked  his  disciples,  saying,  Whom  do 

21.  24  I  also  will  ask  you  one  thing,  which 
Mark  4.  10  they  that  were  about  him.  .asked  of  him 
Luke  9.  45  they  feared  to  [ask]  him  of  that  saying 

19.  31  if  any  man  ask  you,  Why  do  ye  loose 

20.  3  I  will  also  ask  you  one  thing ;  and  answer 

22.  68  if  I  also  ask  (you),  ye  will  not  answer 
John  1.  19  when  the  Jews  sent  priests,  .to  ask  him 

1.  21  they  asked  him,  What  then?    Art  thou 

i.  25  they  asked  him,  and  said  unto  him 

5.  12  Then  asked  they  him,  What  man  is  that 

8.  7  [So  when  they  continued  asking  him] 

9.  2  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Master 
9.  15  Then  again  the  Pharisees  also  asked  him 
9.  19  they  asked  them,  saying,  Is  this  your 

9.  21  ask  him  :  he  shall  speak  for  himself 
9.  23  said  his  parents,  He  is  of  age ;  ask  him 

16.  5  none  of  you  asketh  me,  Whither  goest 
j6.  19  Jesus  knew,  .they  were  desirous  to  ask 
i6.  23  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing 

16.  30  needest  not  that  any  man  should  ask 
18.  19  The  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  his 
Acts    3.   3  who  seeing  Peter  and  John,  .asked  an 

12. 7%  collect,  lay  together,  Spe&fa  Xe^w  lego. 
Acts  25.  20  I  asked  (him)  whether  he  would  go  to 

1-3.  TV  ask  information,  nvvvBdvofiai  punthanomai. 
Lukeis.  26* and  asked  what  these  things  meant 

18.  36  hearing  the  multitude  pass  by,  he  asked 
Jolm  13.  24  [that  lie  should  ask  who  it  should  be] 
Acts    4.    7  they  asked,  By  what  power,  or  by  what 
10.  18  And  called,  and  asked  whether  Simuu 
10.  29  I  ask  therefore  for  what  intent  ye  have 

23.  19  asked..  What  is  that  thou  hast  to  tell  me? 

ASK  after  or  of,  to  — 

To  inquire  of,  ask,  iTrepicraw  cjierotad. 

Markn.  29  I  will  also  ask  of  you  one  question 
Acts    1.    6  they  asked  of  him,  saying,  Lord,  wilt 
Hum  10.  20  mauifest  unto  them  that  asked  not  after 

ASK  again,  to  — 

To  ask  {back,  beside),    airairio)  aptaited. 

Luke  6.  30  of  him  that  taketh  away.  .ask.  .not again 

ASK  counsel,  to  — 
To  ask,  !?§$  sin/at. 

JudgiS.    5  Ask  counsel,  we  pray  thee,  of  God,  that 
20.  18  asked  counsel  of  God,  and  said,  Which  of 
23  Israel,  .asked  counsel  of  the  LORD 
i,  Sa  14.  37  Saul  asked  counsel  of  God,  Shall  I  go 
Pios.   4.  i2  Sly  people  ask  counsel  of  their  stocks 

ASK  questions,  to  — 

l.To  ask  uh'uit,  i-xtpwrao)  eperotao. 

Matt  22.  35  Then  one.  .asked  (him  a  epiestion) 
Luke  2.  46  him  in.  .temple,  .asking,  .questions 

20.  40  they  durst  not  ask  him  any  (question  at 

2.To  examine,  ask  questions,  avaKpivw  anakrino. 
1  Co.  10.  25  asking  no  question  for  conscience  sake 

ASK  on,  to  — 

To  "sk,  y$  shoal. 

1  Ki.    2.  20  thekingsaid  unto  her,  Ask  on, my  mother 

I  SKLNG  — 
Yd  -'sir,  ?x;r  shaal. 

1  Ch.  10.  13,  27  for  asking,  .familiar  Spirit,  to  enquire 

ASLEEP  — 

l.Asle&pj  blkeping,  ]p",  yashen. 

1   Sa  46.  is  in'  man  saw.  .for  they  (were)  all  asleep 
Sung  7.    9  causing  the  lips  of  those  that  are  asleep 

2.7*0  lie  doion  to  sleep.  nadcvSco  katheudo. 

Matt26.  40  the  disciples,  ami  fmdeth  them  asleep 

26.  43  he  came  and  found  them  asleep  again 
Mark  4.  3S  was  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship,  asleep 

14.  40  when  he  returned,  he  found  them  asleep 

ASLEEP,  to  he  — 

1,2*0  //'■  th.u'n  to  sh-r/'y  KaOzvSw  kathcudr,. 

Malt, :',  .■]  the  ship  was  covered ,  .hut  he  was  nsle<  ;• 


2.  To  be  laid  down  in  death,  Koifxdofiai  koimaomai. 
1  Th.  4.  13  concerning  them  which  are  asleep,  that 
4. 15  shall  not  prevent  them  which  are  asleep 

ASLEEP,  to  be  fast  — 

To  be  in  a  dee})  sleep,  uri  radam. 

Judg.  4.  21  for  he  was  fast  asleep  and  weary 

Jon.     1.    5  Jouahwasgouedown..audwasfastasleep 

ASLEEP,  to  fall  — 

l.To  fall  fast  asleep,  a<pvirv6w  aphiqmoo. 

Luke  8.  23  But  as  they  sailed  he  fell  asleep 
2.  To  be  laid  down  (in  death),  Koifj.dofj.aL. 

Acts    7.  60  when  lie  had  said  this,  he  fell  asleep 

1  Co.  15.    6  part  remain,  .but  some  are  fallen  asleep 

15.  iS  they,  .which  are  fallen  asleep  in  Christ 

2  Pe.  3.   4  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things 

AS'-NAH,  n'jpS  dweller  in  the  thornbush. 

A  Nethinim*  whose  descendants  came  up  with  Zerub- 

babel  from  Babylon,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  50  The  children  of  A.,  the  children  of  Meh. 

A- SNAP '-PER,  *i£j?x  A  snap  the  great. 
An  Assyrian  satrap  who  settled  Cuthrcans  in  the  cities 
of  Samaria.     Perhaps  he  wasEsar-haddon,  or  one  of  his 
chief  captains,  B.C.  678. 

Ezra   4.  10  nations  whom  the  great  and  noble  A. 
ASP  — 
I. Asp,  adder,  \n%  pethen. 

Deut32.  33  Their  wine,  .the  cruel  venom  of  asps 

Job   20.  14  (Vet)  his  meat,  .(is)  the  gall  of  asps 
20.  16  He  shall  suck  the  poison  of  asps 

Isa.    11.   8  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp 
2. An  asp,  kindofmper,  aenris  as2ns. 

Rom.  3. 13  the  poison  of  asps,  .under  their  lips 

AS-PA'-THA,  Nratpx  horsc-'jir,,/. 

Third  sou  of  Haman  the  Agagite,  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    7  And  Parshandatha,  and  Dalphon,  and  A. 

AS-PJ'-EL,  ASH-RT-EL,  ^"fr-H  God  is  joined. 

1.  Son  of  Gilead,  grandson  of  Manasseh,  B.C.  1660. 
Nuni26.  31  And  (of)  A.,  the  family  of  the  Asrielites 
Josh  17.    2  There  was  also,  .for  the  children  of  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Manasseh,  B.C.  1660. 

1  Ch.  7. 14  sons  of:  Manasseh ;  A.,  whom  she  hare 

AS-RI-E-LITES,  ;^H'P&q  the  (one  of)  Asriel. 
The  family  or  descendants  of  Asriel. 

Num,26.  31  (of)  Asriel,  the  family  of  the  A.:  and  (of) 
ASS  — 

1.  Ass,  (so  called  from  its  endurance),  pnx  atTwii. 
Gen.  49.  11  Biuding.  .his  ass's  colt,  .he  washed  his 
NtimaS.  21  Balaam  rose  up.  .and  saddled  his  ass 

22.  22  Now  lie  was  riding  upon  his  ass,  and  his 
22.  23,  25,  27  the  ass  saw  the  angel  of  the  LORD 
22.  23  the  ass  turned  aside  out  of  the  way 
22.  23  Balaam  smote  the  ass,  to  turn  her 
22.  27  and  he  smote  the  ass  with  a  staff 
22.  28  the  Lord  opened  the  mouth  of  the  ass 
22.  29  Balaam  said  unto  the  ass,  Because  thou 
22.  30  ass  said  unto  Balaam,  (Am)  not  I  thine  ass 
22.  32  Wherefore  hast  thou  smitten  thine  ass 
22.  33  the  ass  saw  me,  and  turned  from  me 
Judg.  5.  10  Speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses 

1  Sa.   9.    3  the  asses  of  Kish  Saul's  father  were  lost 

9.  3  one  of  the  servants,  .go  seek  the  asses 
9.  5  my  father  leave  (caring)  for  the  asses 
9.  20  thine  asses  that  were  lost  three  days  ago 
10.  2  The  asses  which  thou  wentest  to  seek 
10.  2  thy  father  hath  left  the  care  of  the  asses 
10.  14  Whither  went  ye  ?. .  To  seek  the  asses 
10.  16  told  us  plainly  that  the  asses  were  found 

2  Kl.   4.  22  Send  me,  I  pray  thee . .  one  of  the  asses 

4.  24  she  saddled  an  ass,  and  said  to  her 
1  Ch.  27.  30  over  the  asses. .  JehdeiahtheMeronothite 
Job     1.    4  oxen  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding 
Zech.  9.    9  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass 
2. Ass  (so  called  from  its  ruddy  colour),  lien. 

Gen.  22.    3  Abraham,  .saddled  his  ass,  aud  took  two 
22.    5  Abide  ye  here  with  the  ass  ;  and  I  and 
24.  35  the  Lord,  .hath  given.,  camels,  and  asses 
30.  43  the  man.  .had.  .camels,  and  asses 
32.    5  I  have  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  men 
34.  28  They  took  their  sheep,  .and  their  asses 
36.  24  as  he  fed  the  asses  of  Ziheon  his  father 
42.  26  they  laded  their  asses  with  the  corn 

42.  27  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the  inn 

43.  18  take  us  for  bondmen,  and  our  asses 

43.  24  and  he  gave  their  asses  provender 

44.  3  men  were  sent  away,  they  and  their  asses 

44.  13  laded  every  man  his  ass,  and  returned  to 

45.  23  ten  asses  laden  with  the  good  things  of 
47.  17  Joseph  gave  them  bread,  .for  the  asses 
49.  14  Issachar.  .a  strong  ass  couching  down 

Exod.  4.  20  set  them  upon  an  ass,  and  he  returned 
9.    3  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is.  .upon  the  asses 
13.  13  every  firstling  of  an  ass  thou  shalt 

20.  17  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's,  .ass 

21.  33  if.  .an  ox  or  an  ass  fall  therein 

22.  4  whether  it  be  ox,  or  ass,  or  sheep ;  he  shall 
22.    9  For  all  manner  of  trespass,  .for  ass,  for 

22.  10  If  a  man  deliver,  .an  ass.  .to  keep 

23.  4  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or  his  ass 
"3-   5  If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him  that  hateth 
23.  12  that  thine  ox  and  thine  ass  may  rest 

;  I.  20  the  firstling  of  an  ass  thou  shaft  redeem 


Num  16. 15  I  have  not  taken  one  ass  from  them 
31.  28  levy  a  tribute . .  of  the  asses,  and  of  the 
31.  30  one  portion  of  fifty,  .of  the  asses,  and  of 
31.  34  threescore  aud  one  thousand  asses 
31.  39  the  asses . .  thirty  thousand  and  five 

31.  45  thirty  thousand  asses  and  live  hundred 
Deut.  5.  14  thoushaltnot  do  any  work,  .nor  thine  ass 

5.  21  neither  shalt  thou  covet,  .his  ass,  or  any 
22.  3  In  like  manner  shalt  thou  do  with- his  ass 
22.  4  Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ass  or  his 
22.  10  Thou  shalt  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  an  ass 
28.  31  thine  ass.  .violently  taken  away  from 

Josh  6.  21  they  utterly  destroyed  all.  .sheep,and  ass 

7.  24  Joshua . .  took  A  chen . .  and  his  asses 

9.    4  took  old  sacks  upon  their  asses,  and  wine 

15.  18  she  lighted  olf  (her)  ass;  and  Caleb  said 

Judg.  1.  14  she  lighted  from  off  (her)  ass  ;  and  Caleb 

6.  4  left  no  sustenance.. neither.. ox,  nor  ass 
15.  15  he  found  a  new  jawbone  of  an  ass,  and 
15.  16  With  the  jawbone  of  an  ass,  heaps  upon 
15.  16  with  the  jaw  of  an  ass  have  I  slain 

19.    3  having  his  servant,  .and  a  couple  of  asses 
19.  10  and.  .with  him  two  asses  saddled,  his 
19.  19  Yet  there  is. .  provender  for  our  asses 
19.  21  gave  provender  unto  the  asses  :  and  they 
19.  28  Then  the  man  took  her  (up)  upon  an  ass 

1  Sa.    8.  16  he  will  take. .  your  asses,  and  put.  .to  his 

12.  3  whose  ass  have  I  taken?  or  whom  have  I 

15.  3  slay,  .man  and  woman. .  camel  aud  ass 
io.  20  Jesse  took  au  ass .  ..with  bread,  and 

22.  19  smote  he . .  both  . .  oxen,  and  asses,  and 
25.  18  Abigail,  .took,  .loaves,  .and  laid,  .asses 
25.  20  it  was.  .she  rode  on  the  ass,  that  she 
25.  23  she  hasted,  and  lighted  oft  the  ass,  and 
25.  42  And  Abigail  hasted . .  and  rode  upon  an  ass 
27.    9  David.. took.,  the  oxen,  and  the  asses 

2  Sa.  16.    1  Ziba.  .met  him,  with  a  couple  of  asses 

16.  2  The  asses  (he)  for  the  king's  household 

17.  23  he  saddled  (his)  ass,  and  arose,  and  gat 
19.  26  I  will  saddle  me  an  ass,  that  I  may 

1  Ki.  2.  40  Shimei  arose,  and  saddled  his  ass,  and 

13.  13  said  unto  his  sous,  Saddle  me  the  ass 
13.  13  So  they  saddled  him  the  ass :  and  lie 
13.  23  that  he  saddled  for  him  the  ass 

13.  24  and  the  ass  stood  by  it,  the  lion  also 
13.  27  saying,  Saddle  me  the  ass.    And  they 
13.  28  and  the  ass  and  the  lion  standing  by  the 
13.  28  the  lion  had  not . .  nor  torn  the  ass 
13.  29  and  laid  it  upon  the  ass,  and  brought 

2  Ki.   6.  25  until  an  ass's  head  was.,  for  fourscore 

7.  7  and  left  their  tents . .  and  their  asses 

7.  10  but  horses  tied,  and  asses  tied,  and  the 

1  Ch.   5.  21  they  took  away . .  of  asses  two  thousand 

12.  40  Moreover  they . .  brought  bread  on  asses 

2  Ch.  28.  15  carried  all  the  feeble  of  them  upon  asses 
Ezra    2.  67  asses,  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
Neh.   7.  69  thousand  seven  hundred,  .twenty  asses 

13.  15  bringing  in  sheaves,  and  lading  asses 
Job   24.    3  They  drive  away  the  ass  of  the  fatherless 
Prov.26.    3  A  whip  for  the  horse,  a  bridle  for  the  ass 
Isa.     1.    3  The  ox  kuoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass 

21.    7  And  he  saw.  .a  chariot  of  asses,  .a  chariot 

32.  20  that  send  forth  .  .the  feet  of.. the  ass 
Jer.  22.  19  shall  he  buried  with  the  burial  of  au  ass 
Eze.  23.  20  whose  flesh . .  the  flesh  of  asses,  and  whose 
Zech.  9.    9  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon 

14.  15  so  shall  he  the  plague  of.  .the  ass;  and  of 
Z.Afi  oss,  (mate  or  femede),  tvos  ovos. 

Matt 21.    2  straightway  ye  shall  find  an  ass  tied' 
21.    5  thy  King  cometh.  .sitting  upon  an  ass 
21.    7  brought  the  ass.  .and  put  on  them  their 

Lukei3.  15  doth  not  each  one.. loose  his.. ass 

14.    s  Which  of  you  shall  have  an  [ass]  Jo.  2. 15. 

4.Anass(ofburden),vTroZ,uyiov)'Mt.2i.<;  2  Pe.2.16. 

ASS  colt  — 

A  young  ass,  tj?  ayir. 

Judg  10.    4  thirty  sons  that  rode  on  thirty  ass  colts 
12.  14  thirtynephews,tlu*itrode  on.  .ten  ass  colts 
ASS,  he  — 
An  ass,  (from  its  ruddy  colour),  *vi£n  chamor. 

Gen.  12. 16  he  had  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  he  asses 

ASS,  young1  — 

1.^  young  ass,  *ry  ayir. 

Isa.   30.    6  riches  upon  the  shoulders  of  young  asses 
30.  24  young  asses  that  ear  the  ground  shall 

2. A  little  ass,  a  colt,  bvdpiov  onarion. 

John  12.  14  Jesus,  when  he  had  found  a  young  ass 

ASS,  -wild  — 

1mA  wild  or  free  ass,  N"J£  arad. 

Dan.   5.  21  and  his  dwelling,  .with  the  wild  asses 

2..-1  icild  or  free  ass,  TTIJJ  arod. 

Job  39.    5  hath  loosed  the  bands  of  the  wild  ass? 

3.,-l  free  or  wild  ass,  tos pere. 

Job     6.    5  Doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  hath 
11.  12  though  man  be  born,  .a  wild  ass's  colt 
24.    5  wild  asses  in  the  desert,  go  they  forth 
39.    5  Who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  ass  free? 
rsa.104.  11  the  wild  asses  quench  their  thirst 
Isa.   32.  14  for  dens  for  ever,  a  joy  of  wild  asses 
Jer.     2.  24  A  wild  ass.  .smiffeth  up  the  wind  at  her 

14.    6  the  wild  asses  did  stand  in  the  high 
IIos.    8.    9  a  wild  ass  alone  by  himself :  Ephraim 

ASSAULT  — 

An  assaidt,  pressure,  vpfxi)  J/orme. 

Acts  14.    5  there  was  an  assault  made  both  of  the 


ASSAULT 


50 


ASSYRIA 


ASSAULT,  to  — 
l.To press,  ira  tsur. 

Esth.  8.  n  all  the  power,  .that  would  assault  them 
2. To  place  or  put  oneself  against,  i<pio-T7]/xt. 

Acts  17.    5  But  the  Jews,  .assaulted  the  house  of 

ASSAY,  to  — 

l.To  begin,  be  desirous,  ?n;  yaal,  5. 
iSa.  17.  39  David  girded  his  sword,  .and  lie  assayed  to 

2.7*o  try,  prove,  nD3  nasah,  3. 

Deut.  4.  34  hath  God  assayed  to  go  (and)  take  him  a 

Job     4.    2  (If)  we  assay  to  commune  with  thee,  wilt 
3.7*o  make  trial,  iretpdfa  peirazo. 

Acts  16.   7  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithyuia :  but 
4.  To  try  or  attempt,  vetpdoficCt  peiraomai. 

Acts    9.  26  heassaycd  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples 
ASSAYING  — 
To  make  an  attempt,  irelpav  Xa/xfidveiv. 

Heb.  11.  29  the  Egyptians  assaying  to  do  were 
ASSEMBLE,  to  — 
X. To  gather,  r\ox  asaph. 

1  Ch.  15.   4.  David  assembled  the  children  of  Aaron 
Isa.    11.  12  he . .  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel 
Jer.   12.   9  come  ye,  assemble  all  the  beasts  of  the 

21.    4  I  will  assemble  them  into  the  midst  of 
Eze.  11-  17  I  will,  .assemble  you  out  of  the  countries 
Dau.  11.  10  his  sons,  .shall  assemble  a  multitude  of 
Mic.    2.  12  I  will  surely  assemble,  O  Jacob,  all  of 
4.    6  In  that  day.  .will  I  assemble  her  that 

2.  To  cry,  call,  summon,  pn\  zaaq,  5. 

2  Sa.  20.    4  Assemble  riie  the  men  of  Judah  within 

20.   5  Amasa  went  to  assemble . .  Judah :  but  he 

3.  To  be  in  the  host,  or  to  serve  it,  xii  tsabd. 
Exod3S.   8  assembling,  which  assembled  (at)  the  door 
1  Sa.    2.  22  they  lay  with  the  women  that  assembled 

4.  To  press,  j>3i3  qabats. 

Joel    2.  16  assemble  the  elders,  gather  the  children 
5. To  Depressed',  gathered,  |'3p  qabats,  2. 

Ezra  10.    1  there  assembled  unto  him  out  of  Israel 

6.  To  call  together,  hn^qahal,  5. 

Num.  1.  18  they  assembled  all  the  congregation 

1  Ki.  8.    1  Then  Solomon  assembled  the  elders  of 

12.  21  he  assembled  all  the  house  of  Judah 
i  Ch.  28.    1  David  assembled  all  the  princes  of  Israel 

2  Ch.   5.    2  Then  Solomon  assembled  the  elders  of  Is. 
7. To  meet  tumulluously,  ti'ii  regash,  5. 

Dan.    6.  11  these  men  assembled,  and  found  Daniel 
6. 15  Then  these  men  assembled  unto  the  king 

ASSEMBLE  selves,  to  — 

l.To  be  gathered,  fjdn  asaph,  2. 

Judg  10.  17  children  of  Israel  assembled  themselves 
Jer.     4.    5  Assemble  yourselves,  and  let  us  go  into 

8.  14  assemble  yourselves,  and  let. us  enter  into 
Amos  3.    9  Assemble  yourselves  upon  the  mountains 

2.  To  gather  themselves,  turn  in,  "Da  r/ur,  7a. 
Hos.  7.  14  they  assemble  themselves'for  corn  and 

3.7*0  be  cried,  called,  summoned,  pyt  zaaq,  2. 
,    i  Sa.  14.  20  all  the  people,  .assembled  themselves' 
4.  7>>  be  met  by  appointment,  iy;  yaad,  2. 

Num  10.   3  the  assembly  shall  assemble  themselves 
5.7*0  hasten,  chy  ysh. 

Joel    3.  11  Assemble  yourselves,  and  come,  all  ye 
6.7*0  be  pressed  together,  fnj}  qabats,  2. 

Isa.   45.  20  Assemble  yourselves  and  come  ;  draw 
48. 14  All  ye,  assemble  yourselves,  and  hear 

Eze.  39. 17  Assemble  yourselves,  and  come;  gather 

7.  To  be  called,  invited,  Vnjj  qahal,  2. 

1  Ki.  8.    2  all  the  men  of  Israel  assembled  themselves 

2  Ch.  5.   3  all  the  men  of  Israel  assembled  themselves 

20  26  on  the  fourth  day  they  assembled  themsel. 

8.  7*o  go  or  lead  together,  <ruvdya>  sunago. 
Acts  ii-  26  they  assembled  themselves  with  the 

ASSEMBLE  selves  by  troops,  to  — 

7*o  gather  together  in  troops,  T13  gadad,  7a. 

i  Jer.    5.    7  they.. assembled.. by  troops  in  the  harlot  s 
ASSEMBLE  together,  to  — 
1.7*0  be  called,  invited,  7715  qahal,  2. 

Josh  18.    1  whole  congregation .  .assembled  together 
Esth.  q.  1 8  the  Jews,  .at  Shusan  assembled  together 

2.7*0  meet  tuviidtuously,  v}y~\  regash,  5. 

Dan.  6.    6  these  presidents  and  princes  assembled  t. 

3.  7*o  lead  or  go  together,  o-wdyw  sufyago. 

Matt  26.    3  Then  assembled  together  the  chief  priests 

ASSEMBLED,  to  be  — 

1-  7*o  be  gatliered,  added,  ^px  asaph,  2. 

Ezra  9.    4  Then  were  assembled  unto  me  every  one 
Neh.   9.    1  the  children  of  Israel  were  assembled 
Isa.   43.   9  let  the  people  be  assembled :  who  among 

2.7*0  be  Diet  by  appointment,  ~iy_;  yaad,  2. 

1  Ki.    8.    5  congregation .  .that  were  assembled  unto 

2  Ch.    5.   6  that  were  assembled  unto  him  befpre  the 
Psa.  48.    4  kings  were  assembled,  they  passed  by 

3. 7*o  be  called,  invited,  hn$  qahal,  2. .  . 

E^e.  33,  7  tliy  company  that  are  assembled  unto 


4. 7*o  bring  or  lead  together,  (rvvdyto  sunago. 

Matt  26.  57  the  scribes  and  the  elders  were  assembled 
28.  12  whenthey  were  assembled  with  the  elders 

John  20.  19  the  disciples  [were  assembled]  for  fear  of 
5.7*0  become,  be,  yivofxat  ginomai. 

Acts  15.  25  It  seemed  good  uuto  lis,  being  assembled 

ASSEMBLED  together(with,)to  be  — 

1.7*0  bring  or  lead  together,  cwdyw  sunago. 

Acts    4.  31  where  they  were  assembled  together 
2.7*t>  throng  together^  o~uva\i£o/j.aL  sunalizomai. 

Acts    1.   4  being  assembled  together  with  (them) 
ASSEMBLED  with,  to  be  — 
7*o  come  together,  awepxofxai  sunerchomai. 

Marki4-53  with  him  were  assembled  all  the  chief 
ASSEMBLIES  — 
Gatherings,  nispx  asuppotli'. 

Eccl.  12.  11  fastened  (by)  the  masters  of  assemblies 
ASSEMBLING  together  — 
A  coming  (together,  to,  or)  Upon,  tirio-uvaytof). 

Heb.  id.  25  Not  forsaking  the  assembling. , together 

ASSEMBLY  — 

I. An  apjjointed  gathering,  "ijro  moed. 

Lam.  1.  15  he  hath  called  an  assembly  against  me 
Eze.  44.  24  they  shall  keep.  \m  all  mine  assemblies 

I.Seat,  2!pD  moshab. 

Psa.  107.  32  praise  him  iu  the  assembly  of  the  elders 
3. Convocation,  tqpP  miqra. 

Isa.     1.  13  the  calling  of  assemblies  I  cannot  away 
4.   5  the  Lord  will  create . .  upon  her  assemblies 

4.  Secret  assembly,  lio  sod. 

Psa.  89.    7  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly 

in.    1  in  the  assembly  of  the  upright,  and  (in) 
Jer.    6.  11  I  will  pour  it  out.  .Upon  the  assembly 

15.  17  I  sat  not  in  the  assembly  of  the  mockers 
Eze.  13.    9  they  shall  not  be  in  the  assembly 

5. An  appointed  •meeting,  rny  edafi. 

Lev.     8.   4  the  assembly  was  gathered  together  unto 
Num.  8.    9  the  whole  assembly  of  the  children  of  Is. 
10.    2  use  them  for  the  calling  of  the  assembly 
10.    3  the  assembly  shall  assemble  themselves 

16.  2  fifty  princes  of  the  assembly,  famous 

20.    8  gather  thou  the  assembly  together,  thou 
Psa.  22.  16  the  assembly  of  the  wicked  have  inclosed 

86. 14  the  assemblies  of  violent  (men)  have 
Prov.  5.  14  midst  of  the  congregation  and  assembly 

6.  A  gathering,  rest  mint,  r\~\y'j_.  otscreth. 

Jer.    9.    2  they  (be),  .an  assembly  of  treacherous 

7. Called  or  invited  gathering,  bn$  qahal. 

Gen.  49.    6  unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not 
Exod  12.   6  whole  assembly  of  the  congregation  of 

16.    3  to  kill  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger 
Lev.    4.  13  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  the  assembly 
Num  14.    5  fell  on  their  faces  before  all  the  assembly 

20.  6  went  from  the  presence  of  the  assembly 
Deut.  15.  22  the  Lord  spake  unto  all  your  assembly 

9. 10  the  Lord  spake . .  the  day  of  the  assembly 
10.   4  the  Lord  spake,  .the  day  of  the  assembly 
■   18.  16  thou  desiredst.  .the  day  of  the  assembly 
Judg  20.    2  presented  themselves  in  the  assembly 

21.  8  none,  .from  Jabesh-gileadtotheassembly 

1  Sa.  17.  47  all  this  assembly  shall  know  that  the 

2  Ch.  30.  23  the  whole  assembly  took  counsel  to  keep 
Jer.   26.  17  of  the  elders,  .spake  to  all  the  assembly 

50.    9  I  will  raise,  .up.  .an  assembly  of 
Eze.  23.  24  come  against  thee,  with  an  assembly  of 

8.  Called  or  invited  assembly,  ii?np  qehillah. 

Neh.   5.    7  And  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  them 

9.  What  is  called  out  or  forth,  iKK\naia  ekklesia. 
Acts  19.  32  the  assembly  was  confused ;  and  the 

19.  39  shall  be  determined  in  a  lawful  assembly 
19.  41  had.  .spoken,  he  dismissed  the  assembly 

10.^  coming  together,  (ruvaycayfj  sunagoge. 

Jas.    2.    2  if  there  come  unto  your  assembly  a  man 

ASSEMBLY,  general  — 

-4  whole  assembly,  wavyiyvpis  2^aveguris. 

Heb.  12.  23  To  the  general  assembly  and  church  of 

ASSEMBLY,  places  of  — 

An  appointed  meeting,  lyiD  moed. 

Lam.  2.    6  hath  destroyed  his  places  of.  .assembly 
ASSEMBLY,  solemn  — 
An  appointed  meeting,  nyiD  moed. 

Zepli.  3.  iS  1  will  gather,  .for  the  solemn  assembly 
ASSENT  — 
Mouth,  H§J?eft, 

2  Ch.  18.12  prophets  (declare)  good . .  with  one  assent 
ASSENT,  to  — 
To  put  together,  agree,  <rvvTt8wfAt  suntithemi. 

Acts  24.   9  the  Jews  also  [assented],  saying  that 

AS'-SHUR,  AS'-SUR,  -uirSt  level  plain. 

1.  The  builder    of   Nineveh,   apparently  one   of  the 
descendauts  of  Ham,  or  Assyria  itself. 

Gen.  10.  11  Out  of  that  land  went  forth  A.,  and 

2.  A  son  of  Shem,  and  brother  of  Elam. 

Gen.  10.  22  children  of  Shem ;  Elanu  and  A.,  and 
;  Ch,  i,  J7  sons  of  Shem ;  Elam,  and  A.,  arid 


3.  This  word  is  sometimes  left  untranslated  when  it 
denotes  Assyria,  or  the  Assyrians. 

Num  24.  22  until  A.  shall  carry  thee  away  captive 
24.  24  ships,  .shall  afflict  A.,  and  shall  aitiict 
Ezra  4.    2  Esar-haddon  king  of  A.,  which  brought 
Psa.  83.    8  A.  also  is  joined  with  them :  they  have 
Eze.  27.  23  the  merchants  of  Sheba,  A.,  and  Chilmad 

32.  22  A.  (is)  there  and  all  her  company:  his 
Hos.  14.    3  A.  shall  not  save  us;  wc  will  not  ride 

AS-SHU'-RIM,  C"i-i^;N  mighty  ones. 

A  son  of  Dedan,  or  his  descendants. 

Gen.  25.    3  sons  of  Dedan  were  A.,  aud  Letushim 

ASSIGN,  to  — 

To  give,  {na  nathan. 

Josh  20.    8  other  side  of  Jordan . .  they  assigned  Bezer 
28a.  11. 16  Joab.. assigned  Uriah  unto  a  place  where 

AS'-SLR,  TpN  prisoner. 

1.  A  son  of  Korah,  grandson  of  Kohath,  B.C.  1530. 

Exod.  6.  24  sons  of  Korah ;  A.  and  Elkanah,  and 
1  Ch.  6.  22  Amminadab  his  son,  Korah  his  son,  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Ebiasaph,  grandson  of  Assir,  B.C.  1520. 

1  Ch.   6.  23  Ebiasaph  his  son,  and  A.  his  son 

6.  37  Tahath,  the . .  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Ebiasaph 

3.  A  son  of  Jeconiah,  sou  of  Jehoiakim,  B.C.  5S8. 

1  Ch.  3.  17  sons  of  Jeconiah;  A.,  Salatliiel  his  son 
ASSIST,  to  — 
To  place  alongside  of,  irapio-TVfxi  pa,riste?ni. 

Rom.  16.    2  assist  her  in  whatsoever  business  she 
ASSOCIATE  selves,  to  — 
7*o  rage,  do  evil,  VTi  raa. 

Isa.     8.    9  Associate  yourselves,  0  ye  people,  and  ye 

AS'-SOS,  fatso  called  Apollonia,*'A<T(ros. 

A  seaport  of  Mysia,  in  Asia  Minor,  9  miles  from  Troas, 

on  the  northern  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  Adramyttium,  and 

about  7  miles  from  the  opposite  coast  of  Lesbos,  near 

Methymna. 

Acts  20. 13  And  we.  .sailed  unto  A.,  there  intending 
20. 14  when  he  met  with  us  at  A.,  we  took  him 

ASSURANCE  — 

1.  Confidence,  trust,  na3  betach. 

Isa.   32. 17  tlie  effect  of  righteousness . .  assurance  for 
2. Faith,  trust,  conviction,  tvIgtls  pistis. 

Acts  17.  31  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  (men) 
a. Fall  conviction,  Tr\npo<popia.  plerophoria. 

1  Th.  1.    5  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance 
ASSURANCE,  full  — 
Full  conviction,  Tc\npo<popla  plerophoria. 

Col.     2.    2  unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of 

Heb.   6.  11  shew,  .diligence  to  the  full  assurance  of 
10.  22  Let  us  draw  near,  .in  full  assurance  of 
ASSURANCE,  to  have  — 
7*o  hold  stedfast,  jips  aman,  5. 

Deut  28.  66  thou,  .shalt  have  none  assurance  of.,  life 
ASSURE,  to  — 
7*o  p>ersuade,  Trei8o>  peitho. 

1  Jo.    3.  19  and  sliall  assure  our  hearts  before  him 

ASSURED-  — 

Truth,  n£K  emeth. 

Jer.   14. "13  I  "will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this  place 

ASSURED,  to  be  — 

7*0  rise  up,  stand  firm,  Dip  qum. 

Lev.  27.  19  he  shall  add.  .and  it  sliaUbe  assured  to 
ASSURED  of,  to  be  — 

7*o  be  made  steady,  ■Kto'roop.ai  pistnomai. 

2  Ti.    3. 14  hast  learned  and  hast  been  assured  of 

ASSUREDLY  — 

1. Truth,  n£N  emeth. 

Jer.   32.  41"  I  will  plant  them  in  this  laud  assuredly 

2.7*0  know,  yv  yada. 

1  Sa.  28.    1  Know  thou  assuredly,  that  thou  shalt  go 

3. 7*o  go  forth,  fct£  yatsa. 

Jer.   38. 17  thou  wilt  assuredly  go  forth  untotheking 

4.7*o  drink,  riny  shathah. 

Jer.   49.  12  drink  of  the  cup  have  assuredly  drunken 
5. Safely,  surely,  certainly,  aa-cpaXws  asphalos. 

Acts    2.  36  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly 
6. That,  because,  '3  ki. 

1  K.i.    1.  13  Assuredly  Solomon  thy  son  shaU  reign 
ASSUREDLY    gathering  — 
To  put  firmly  together,  (rvufitpdCa  sumbibazo. 

Acts'  16.  10  assuredly  gathering  that  the  Lord  had 
ASSWAGE,  to  — 
1.7*0  restrain,  hold  back,  dim,  "b*n  chasak. 

Job   16.    5  the  moving  of  my  lips  should  asswage 
2. 7*o  subside,  sink  do\on,  'Hiv  shakak. 

Gen.   8.    1  a  wind  to  pass.,  and  the  waters  asswaged 
ASSWAGED,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  restrained,  Ti^ri  cluisak,  2. 

Job    16.    6  I  speak,  my  grief  is  not  asswaged 
AS-SYR'-IA,  ~\"Jii  plain,  level. 

Assyria  is  the  narrow  tract  of  country  inclosed  bet  ween 
Mesopotamia,  Babylonia,  Armenia,  Susiaua,  and  Media, 


« 


ASSYRIA 


60 


ASTRAY 


called  by  the  ancients  Assyria,  or  Asturia,  and  was  the 
original  seat  of  that  extended  dominion  known  as  the 
Assyrian  empire.  From  the  ioth  chapter  of  Genesis  we 
learn  that  Nimrod,  leaving  Babylon,  which  he  had 
founded,  went  forth  into  Assyria,  where  he  built  Nine- 
veh, Re  hobo  th,  Calah,  and  Resen,  about  B.C.  2218. 
Such  is  the  interpretation  given  in  the  margin  of  the 
Bible,  though  some  authors  prefer  the  reading,  that 
Assur  went  forth  and  built  these  cities.  The  next 
notice  of  this  empire  that  occurs  in  the  Old  Testament 
is  the  invasion  of  Palestine  in  the  reign  of  I'zziah,  by 
Pul  (2  Kings  15.  19),  king  of  Assyria,  B.C.  769.  Mena- 
hem,  king  of  Israel,  induced  him  to  retire  by  a  bribe  of 
1000  talents.  Tiglath-pileser,  successor  of  Pul,  at  the 
solicitation  of  Ahaz,  king  of  Judah,  invaded  Syria,  and 
took  many  of  its  people  away  captive  (2  Kings  16.  5-9), 
B.C.  738.  Shalmanassar  besieged  Samaria  three  years, 
captured  it,  put  an  end  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel  B.C. 
722  (2  Kings  17.  5,  6),  and  carried  away  its  people  into 
captivity.  Another  king,  Sennacherib,  came  up  against 
all  the  fenced  cities  of  Judah,  and  took  them  (2  Kings 
18.  13,  and  2  Chron.  32.),  B.C.  714,  but  failed  in  an 
attack  upon  Jerusalem,  having  185,000  men  slain  in  one 
night,  B.C.  712  (2  Kings  18.  13;  19.  35,  36,  and  2  Chron. 


32 


nil  bi 


On  his  return  to  Nineveh,  Sennacherib  was 
slain  by  two  of  his  own  sons,  and  another  king,  named 
Esarhaddon,  assumed  the  Assyrian  sceptre,  B.C.  711  (2 
Kings  19.  37).  The  last  king  of  Assyria  mentioned  in 
Scripture  is  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  is  supposed  to  have 
ascended  the  throne  B.C.  650.  It  is  evident  that  the 
Assyrian  empire  existed  at  a  very  early  period  in  the 
history  of  the  world ;  that  its  rulers  obtained  extensive 
dominion ;  and  that,  after  a  partial  dismemberment, 
it  continued  to  exist  for  many  years.  The  theory  of  an 
Assyrian  empire  that  terminated  at  the  revolt  of  the 
Medes,  about  B.C.  711,  followed  by  an  Assyrian  mon- 
archy that  continued  till  the  destruction  of  Nineveh, 
B.C.  606,  though  supported  by  high  authorities,  is  now 
generally  rejected.  Clinton  (Fasti  Hellenic!,  i.  268) 
remarks,  witli  reference  to  the  duration  of  the  Assyrian 
monarchy :  The  period  delivered  by  Ctesias  seems  to 
have  been  1306  years.  He  placed  its  commencement 
1000  years  before  the  Trojan  war,  and  its  termination 
at  B.C.  876.  But  in  assigning  the  termination  of  the 
Assyrian  monarchy,  Ctesias,  and  those  that  followed 
him,  confounded  two  events,— the  revolt  of  the  Medes 
and  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  which  they  made 
to  happen  together.  These  two  events,  however, 
were  divided  by  a  considerable  interval  of  time,  and 
the  conclusion  of  the  term  of  1306  years  assigned 
to  that  monarchy  did  not  occur  at  the  Median  revolt, 
but  at  the  final  capture  of  Nineveh.  The  date  of  this 
event  we  are  enabled  to  fix  with  precision,  on  the 
concurrent  authority  of  Scripture  and  Herodotus. 
(B.C.  606.) 

Clinton  gives  the  following  summary: — Jtfinua,  B.C. 
2182 ;  Assyrian  monarchy,  1306  years  before  the  empire, 
675  years,  B.C.  1912  ;  during  the  empire,  24  kings,  526 
years,  B.C.  1237.  Sardanapalxis,  B.C.  876;  after  the 
empire,  6  kings,  105  years,  B.C.  711.  Capture  of  Nine- 
veh, B.C.  606. 

Vaux  (Nineveh  and  Persepolis,  p.  508)  gives,  on  the 
autiiority  of  Rawlinson,  the  following  Hit  of  Assyrian 
monarchs  :— First  Assyrian  empire  :  Belukh,  B.C.  1273; 
Pudil,  1255  ;  Phulukh  I.,  1240  ;  Silima-Rish  I.,  1220  ; 
Sauda-pal-imat,  1200;  Asshur-capal-il,  1185;  Mutaggil- 
Nebo,  1165;  Asshur-Rish-ipan,  1140;  Tiglath-Pileser  I., 
1 1 20;  Asshur-bani-pal  I.,  noo;  Asshur-adan-akhi,  950; 
Asshur-danin-il,  925;  Phulukh  II.,  900;  Tigulti-Sanda, 
880;  Sardanapalus,  850;  Silima-Rish  II.  (Asshur-dauin- 
pal),  815;  Shamasphul,  780 ;  Phulukh  III.  (Pul),  and 
Seiniramis,  760.  Second  Assyrian  empire :  Tiglath- 
Pileser  II.,  B.C.  747;  Shalmaneser,  730 ;  Sargon,  721  ; 
Sennacherib,  702  ;  Esarhaddon,  680  ;  Asshur-bani-pal 
II.,  660;  Asshur-Emit-Ilut,  640;  final  overthrow  of 
Nineveh,  625. 

Gen.    2.  14  it  which  goeth  toward  the  east  of  A. 

25.  18  before  Egypt,  as  thou  goest  toward  A. 
2  Ki.  15.  19  Pul  the  king  of  A.  came  against  the  land 

15.  20  exacted  the  money . .  give  to  the  king  of  A. 

15.  20  the  king  of  A.  turned  back,  and  stayed 

15.  29  came  Tiglath-pileser  king  of  A.,  and 

15.  29  tookljon.  .and  carried  them  captive  to  A. 

16.  7  Ahaz  sent.. to  Tiglath-pileser  king  of  A. 
16.   8  and  sent,  .a  present  to  the  king  of  A. 
16.   9  the  king  of  A.  hearkened  unto  him  :  for 
16.    9  the  king  of  A.  went  up  against  Damascus 
16.  10  went,  .to  meet  Tiglath-pileser  king  of  A. 

16.  18  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  the  king  of  A. 

17.  3  Against  him.  .Shalmaneser  king  of  A. 
17.  4  king  of  A.  found  conspiracy  in  Hoshea 
17.    4  brought  no  present  to  the  king  of  A. 

17.    4  therefore  the  king  of  A.  shut  him  up,  and 
17.    5  the  king  of  A.  came  up  throughout  all 
17.    6  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  the  king  of  A. 
17.    6  carried  Israel  away  into  A.,  and  placed 
17.  23  So  was  Israel  carried  away .  .to  A.  unto 
17.  24  the  king  of  A.  brought,  .from  Babylon 
17.  26  Wherefore  they  spake  to  tlte  king  of  A. 

17.  27  Then  the  king  of  A.  commanded,  saying 

18.  7  he  rebelled  against  the  king  of  A. 

18.    9  Shalmaneser  king  of  A.  came  up  against 

18. 11  the  king  of  A.  did  carry  away .  .unto  A. 

18.  13  did  Sennacherib  king  of  A.  come  up 

18.  14  Hezekiah..of  Judah  sent  to  the  king  of  A. 

18.  14  the  king  of  A.  appointed  unto  Hezekiah 

18.  16  and  gave  it  to  the  king  of  A. 

18.  17  the  king  of  A.  sent  Tartan  and 

18.  19  Thus  saitb  the  great  king,  the  king  of  A 

18.  23  give  pledges  to  my  lord  the  king  of  A 

18.  28  Hear  the  w  »rd  of  the  great  king,  .of  A. 

18.  30  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A 


2  Ki.  18.  31  for  thus  saith  the  king  of  A.,  Make 

18.  33  land  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 

19.  4  whom  the  king  of  A.  his  master  hath 
19.    6  servants  of  the  king  of  A.  have 

19.    8  found  the  king  of  A.  warring  against 
19.  10  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 
19.  11  heard  what  the  kings  of  A.  have  done  to 
19.  17  the  kings  of  A.  have  destroyed  the  nations 
19.  20  against  Sennacherib  king  of  A.  1  have 
19.  32  concerning  the  king  of  A.,  He  shall  not 

19.  36  Sennacherib,  king  of  A.  departed 

20.  6  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 

23.  29  went  up  against  the  king  of  A.  to  the 

1  Ch.   5.    6  whom  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  A.  carried 

5.  26  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Pul  king  of  A. 
5.  26  the  spirit  of  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  A. 

2  Ch.  28.  16  did  king  Ahaz  send  unto  the  kings  of  A. 

28.  20  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  A.  came  unto 
28.  21  gave  (it)unto.  .king  of  A.:  but  he  helped 
30.    6  out  of  the  hand  of  the  kings  of  A. 
32.    1  Sennacherib  king  of  A.  came  and 
32.    4  Why  should  the  kings  of  A.  come,  and 
32.    7  nor  dismayed  for  the  king  of  A.,  nor  for 
32.   9  After  this  did  Sennacherib  king  of  A. 
32.  10  Thus  saith  Sennacherib  king  of  A. 
32.  11  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 
32.  21  cut  off.  .captains  in  the  camp  of.  .A. 

32.  22  the  hand  of  Sennacherib  the  king  of  A. 

33.  11  captains  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  A. 


Ezra 
Neh. 
Isa. 


6.  22  turned  the  heart  of  the  king  of  A.  unto 
9.  32  since  the  time  of  the  kings  of  A.  unto 

7.  17  shall  bring  upon  thee,  .the  king  of  A. 
7.  18  for  the  bee  that  (is)  in  the  land  of  A. 

7.  20  them  beyond  the  river,  by  the  king  of  A. 

8.  4  shall  be  taken  away  before  the  king  of  A. 
8.    7  the  king  of  A.,  and  all  his  glory 

10.  12  punish,  .the  stout  heart  of  the  king  of  A. 

11.  11  which  shall  be  left,  from  A.,  and  from 
11.  16  which  shall  be  left,  from  A.;  like  as 
19.  23  shall,  .be  a  highway  out  of  Egypt  to  A. 
10.  23  and  the  Egyptian  into  A.,  and  the  Egypt. 
19.  24  the  third  with  Egypt  and  with  A. 

19.  25  Blessed  (be)  Egypt  my  people,  and  A. 

20.  1  when  Sargon  the  king  of  A.  sent  him 
20.    4  So  shall  the  king  of  A.  lead  away  the 
20.    6  to  be  delivered  from  the  king  of  A.  :  and 
27.  13  were  ready  to  perish  in  the  land  of  A. 
36.    1  Sennacherib  king  of  A.  came  up  against 
36.    2  the  king  of  A.  sent  Rabshakeh  from 

36.    4  Thus  saith  the  great  king,  the  king  of  A. 
36.   8  I  pray  thee,  to  my  master  the  king  of  A. 
36.  13  words  of  the  great  king,  the  king  of  A. 
36.  15  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 
36.  16  for  thus  saith  the  king  of  A.,  Make 

36.  18  land  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 

37.  4  whom  the  king  of  A.  his  master  hath 
37.    6  servants  of  the  king  of  A.  have 

37.    8  found  the  king  of  A.  warring  against 
37.  10  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the  lung  of  A. 
37. 11  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of  A. 
37.  18  the  kings  of  A.  have  laid  waste  all  the 
37.  21  hast  prayed  to  me  against  . .  the  king  of  A . 
37.  33  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  king  of  A. 

37.  37  Sennacherib  king  of  A.  departed,  and 

38.  6  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. :  and  I 
Jer.     2.  18  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  A. 

2.  36  of  Egypt,  as  thou  wast  ashamed  of  A. 
50.  17  first  the  king  of  A.  hath  devoured  him 
<;o.  18  as  I  have  punished  the  king  of  A. 
7  all  them,  .the  chosen  men  of  A.,  and 
11  they  call  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  A. 
9  For  they  are  gone  up  to  A.,  a  wild  ass 
3  they  shall  eat  unclean  (things)  in  A. 
6  It  shall  be  also  carried  unto  A.  (for)  a 

11  as  a  dove  out  of  the  land  of  A. :  and 
6  they  shall  waste  the  land  of  A.  with 

12  he  shall  come  even  to  thee  from  A. 
1S  Thy  shepherds  slumber,  0  king  of  A. 

13  he  will  stretch  out.  .and  destroy  A.,  and 
^eeh.io.  10  I  will,  .gather  them  out  of  A.,  and  I  will 

10.  11  the  pride  of  A.  shall  be  brought  down 

AS'-SYRIAN,  wx  Ashur, 

The  same  name  is  used  to  denote  both  the  people  and 

the  country  in  which  they  dwell. 

2  Ki.  19.  35  the  angel . .  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  A. 
Isa.    jo.    5  O  A.,  the  rod  of  mine  anger  and  the  staff 

10.  24  O  my  people,  .be  not  afraid  of  the  A.:  he 
14.  25  That  I  will  break  the  A.  in  my  land,  and 
19.  23  the  A.  shall  come,  .shall  serve  with  the  A. 
23.  13  this  people  was  not.  .the  A.  founded  it  in 

30.  31  through  the  voice  of  the  Lord  shall  the  A. 

31.  8  Then  shall  the  A.  fall  with  the  sword,  and 
37.  36  the  angel . .  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  A.  an 
52.    4  and  the  A.  oppressed  them  without  cause 

Lam.  5.    6  We  have  given  the  hand  (to),  .the  A.,  to 
Eze.  16.  28  hast  played  the  whore  also  with  the  A. 
?•?.    5  and  she  doted  on  her  lovers,  on  the  A. 
23.   o  into  the  hand  of  the  A.,  upon  whom  she 
23  12  She  doted  upon  the  A.  (her)  neighbours 
23.  23  Shoa,  and  Koa,  (and)  all  the  A.  with  them 
31.    3  Behold,  the  A.  (was)  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 
IIos.    5.  13  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  A.,  and  sent  to 

11.  5  the  A.  shall  be  his  king,  because  they 

12.  1  they  do  make  a  covenant  with  the  A.,  and 
Mic.    5.    5  when  the  A.  shall  come  into  our  land  :  and 

5.    6  thus  shall  he  deliver  (us)  from  the  A. 

ASTONLED  — 

Tc  be  silent,  astonished,  dq$  shamem, 
Ezra   9.    3  I  rent,  .and  sat  down  astonied 

g.    4  I  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  sacrifice 


Eze. 
Hos 


Mic. 


Nah, 
Zeph 


ASTONIED,  tobe  — 

I. To  remain-  dumb,  cni  daliam,  2. 

Jer.   14.    9  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  man  astonied 
I.To  be  perplexed,  vyy  shebash,  2. 

Dan.    5.    9  Belshazzar.  .and  his  lords  were  astonied 
Z.To  be  silent,  astonished,  C££;  shamem. 

Job   17.    8  Upright  (men)  shall  be  astonied  at  their 

4.  To  remain  silent,  astonished,  Ep£>  shamem,  2. 

Job    18.  20  that  come  after  (him)  shall  be  astonied 
Eze.    4.  17  and  be  astonied  one  with  another 

5.  To  be  silent,  astonished,  DCS?  shemam. 

Dan.    4.  19  Then  Daniel,  .was  astonied  for  one  hour 

6.  To  be  vexed,  ™  tevak. 

Dan.    3.  24  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  was  astonied 
ASTONISHED  — 
To  make  silent,  astonislied,  do#  shamem,  5. 

Eze.    3.  15  remained  there  astonished  among  them 
ASTONISHED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  silent,  astonished,  Dipr  shamem. 

Lev.  26.  32  your  enemies,  .shall  be  astonished  at  it 
1  Ki.    9.    8  one  that  passeth  by  it  shall  be  astonished 
Isa.   52.  14  As  many  were  astonished  at  thee ;  his 
Jer.     2.  12  Be  astonished,  0  ye  heavens,  at  this 

18.  16  that  passeth  thereby  shall  be  astonished 

19.  8  that  passeth  thereby  shall  be  astonished 

49.  17  one  that  goeth  by  it  shall  be  astonished 

50.  13  goeth  by  Babylon  shall  be  astonished 
Eze.  26.  16  and  shall,  .be  astonished  at  thee 

27-  35  the  isles  shall  be  astonished  at  thee 

28.  19  the  people  shall  be  astonished  at  thee 

2.  To  be  silent,  astonished,  c?^  shamem,  2. 

Jer.     4.    9  the  priests  shall  be  astonished,  and  the 

3.  To  be  made  silent,  astonished,  Dp$  shamem,  6. 

Job    21.    5  Mark  me,  and  be  astonished,  and  lay 

4.  To  make  silent  or  astonished,  cop  shamem,  5 
Dan.     8.  27  and  I  was  astonished  ait  the  vision 

j  5.  To  wonder,  marvel,  Ptpn  tamah. 

Job    26.  11  The  pillars . .  are  astonished  at  his  reproof 
G.To  be  greatly  struck,  iKirAyao-ofxat  elqrtessomai. 
Matt.  7.  28  the  people  were  astonished  athisdoctrine 
13.  54  he  taught  them,  .they  were  astonished 
22.  33  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 
Mark  1.  22  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 

6.  2  many  hearing,  .were  astonished,  saying 

7.  37  wewe  beyond  measure  astonished,  saying 

10.  26  they  were  astonished  out  of  measure 

11.  18  the  people  was  astonished  at  his  doctrine 
Luke  4.  32  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine :  for 
Acts  13  12  being  astonished  at  the  doctrine  of  the 

7.  To  be  placed  out  or  away  from,  ^io-r-qfj-i   exist. 

Mark  5.  42  they  were  astunished  with  a  great  aston. 
Luke  2.  47  all  that  heard  him  were  astunished  at  his 

8.  56  her  parents  were  astonished :  but  he 
Acts  10.  45  they,  .which  believed  were  astonished 

12.  16  they  had  opened,  .they  were  astonished 

5.  To  be  astonished,  6a.fj.fl4ofj.cu  thambeomai,6afj.f$€w. 

Mark  10.  24  the  disciples  were  astonished  at  his  words 
Acts    9.    6  [he  trembling  and  astonished  said,  Lord] 

9.  Astonishment  surrounds,  9dfj.@os  TvepUx^- 

Luke  5.    9  he  was  astonished,  and  all  that  were  with 

ASTONISHED,  to  make  — 

To  amaze,  expel,  i^i(TTT}jxi  existemi. 

Luke 24.  22  and  certain  women,  .made  us  astonished 
ASTONISHMENT  — 
1. Astonishment  {cause  of),  ns'^s  meshammah. 

Eze:    5.  15  it  shall  be.  .an  astonishment  unto  the 
2.AstunisIime7it,  nea'  shammah. 

Deut28.  37  thou  shalt  become  an  astonishment 
2CI1.  29.    8  the  Lord,  .delivered  them,  .astonishment 
Jer.     8.  21  astonishment  hath  taken  hold  on  me 
25.    9  and  make  them  an  astonishment 
25.  11  this  whole  land  shall  be.  .auastonishment 
25.  18  a  desolation,  an  astonishment,  an  hissing 

29.  18  to  be  a  curse,  and  an  astonishment 
42.  18  be  an  execration,  and  an  astonishment 
44.  12  be  an  execration,  (and)  an  astonishment 
44.  22  therefore  is  your  land,  .an  astonishment 

51.  37  Babylon  shall  become,  .an  astonishment 
51.  41  how  is  Babylon  become  an  astonishment 

Eze.  23.  33  be  filled,  .with  the  cup  of  astonishment 

3. Astonishment,  desolation,  |1DQI8>  shim/mamon. 
Eze.    4.  16  drink  water  by  measure,  .astonishment 
12.  19  shall,  .drink,  .water  witli  astonishment 

^.Wonder,  priori  timmahon. 

Deut28.  28  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with..astouishm. 

Zechi2.   4  I  will  smite.. horse  with  astonishment 
5.  Trembling,  n^ynri  tarelah. 

Psa.  60.    3  to  drink  the  wine  of  astonishment 
G.A  standing  out  from,  iKcracrts  ekstasis. 

Mark  5.  42  astonished  with  a  great  astonishment 
ASTONISHMENT,  to  be  an  — 
To  be  sile?it,  astonished,  Dpc;  shamem. 

2CI1.   7.21  this  house,  .shall  be  an  astonishment 
ASTRAY,  to  go  — 
l.To  err,  wander,  nj.'n  taah. 

Exod23.   4  If  thou  meet,  .his  ass  going  astray,  thou 


ASTRAY 


61 


AT 


Psa.  58.    3  they  go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  bom 

119.  176  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep 
Prov.  7.  25  to  her  ways,  go  not  astray  in  her  paths 
Isa.   53.    6  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray 
Eze.  14.  11  the  house  of  Israel  may  go  no  more  astray 
44.  10  Israel  went  astray,  which  went  astray 
44.  15  when  the  children  of  Israel  went  astray 
48.  11  went  not  astray.  .Israel  went  astray 

2.  To  go  astray,  7rAavd.0fj.at  planaomai. 

Matt  1 8.  1 2  be  gone  astray . .  which  is  gone  astray  ? 
18.  13  the  ninety  and  nine .  .went  not  astray 
r  Pe.   2.  25  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray ;  but  are 
2  Pe.   2.  15  are  gone  astray,  following  the  way  of 

ASTRAY,  to  cause  to  go  — 

To  cause  to  go  astray,  err,  wander,  nyn  taah,  5. 
Jer.  50.  6  shepherds  have  caused  them  to  go  astray 

ASTROLOGER  — 

Enchanter,  magician,   ^N   askshaph. 

Dan.   2.  10  asked  such  things  at  any . .  astrologer 
2.  27  the  wise  (men),  the  astrologers,  the 

4.  7  came  in  the  magicians,  the  astrologers 

5.  7  king  cried,  .to  bring  in  the  astrologers 
5.  n  thy  father,  made  master  of.  .astrologers 
5.  15  the  wise  (men),  the  astrologers,  have 

ASTROLOGERS  — 

1.  Enchanters,  magicians,  D'csx  askshaphim. 

Dan.    1.  20  ten  times  better  than  all  the.  .astrologers 
2.    2  call  the  magicians,  and.  the  astrologers 

2.  To  view  the  heavens,  woy  l^n  habar  shamayim. 

Isa.   47.  13  Let  now  the  astrologers,  the  stargazers 
ASUNDER  — 
Between,  pa  ben. 

2  Ki.   2. 11  parted  them  both  asunder ;  and  Elijah 
[See  also  Break,  burst,  cleave,  cut,  depart,  divide, 
drive,  pluck,  put,  rend,  saw.] 
A-STTP'-PEM,  D'3p«n  gatherings. 

This  word,  left  untranslated  in  the  English  version, 
denotes  not  a  proper  name,  but  granaries,  storehouses, 
collections. 

1  Cli.  26.  15  and  to  his  sons  the  house  of  A. 

26.  1 7  southward  four  a  day,  and.  toward  A.  two 
A-SYN-CRI'-TUS,  'AavyKpiTos  incomparable. 
One  to  whom  Paul  sends  salutation. 

Rom.16.  14  Salute  A.,  Phlegon,  Hernias,  Patrobas 
AT  (a  certain) — 
l'.After,  behind,  iqn  achar. 

2  Ki.  19.  21  the  daughter,  .hath  shaken  her  head  at 
2.  Unto,  to,  "?«  el. 

Gen.    6.    6  the  LORD . .  and  it  grieved  him  at  his  heart 
Z.Near,  by,  hxx  etsel. 

Prov.  7.  12  and  lieth  in  wait  at  every  corner 

Isa.   19.  19  a  pillar  at  the  border  thereof  to  the  Lord 

^.Between,  J'3  ben. 

Exod.16.  12  At  even  ye  shall  eat  flesh,  and  in  the 
5.Thr&ugh,  "tjja  bead. 

Gen.  26.   8  Abimelech.  .looked  out  at  a  window,  and 

6. Hand,  T  yad. 

Prov.  8.    3  She  crieth  at  the  gates,  at  the  entry  of 

7. To,  far,  with  a  view  to,  is?  lenw. 

Job   29.  21  waited,  and.  kept  silence  at  my  counsel 
8. From,  because  of  jp  min. 

Psa.  104.    7  At  thy  rebuke  they  fled ;  at  the  voice 

9.  Up  to,  till,  i"  ad. 

Neh.   6.    1  at  that  time  I  had  not  set  up  the  doors 
Dan.   4.    8  But  at  the  last  Daniel  came  in  before  me 

10.  On,  upson,  by,  Sy  al. 

Gen.  24.  30  behold,  he  stood  by  the  camels  at  the  well 
11. Over  against,  naj;  ummah. 

2  Sa.  16. 13  Shimei.  !  threw  stones  at  him,  and  cast 
12.From,  away  from,  airo  apo. 

Matt  19.    a  he  which  made  (them)  at  the  beginning 

Luke24-  27  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets 
24.  47  among  all  nations, beginning  at  Jerusalem 

John  8.    9  [they . .  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at] 

Acts  8.  35  Then  Philip . .  began  at  the  same  scripture 
23.  23  two  hundred,  at  the  third  hour  of.  .night 
26.    4  My  manner,  .which  was  at  the  first 

1  Pe.   4.  17  at  the  house  of  God :  and  if.  .at  us 

IZ.Through,  by  means  of  Sta  (gen.  dia.) 

Matt.  7.  13  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate  :  for  wide 
Lukei3.  24  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  :  for 

14.  With  a  view  to,  at,  els  eis. 

Matt  12.  41  because  they  repented  at  the  preaching 
18.  29  his  fellow  servant  fell  down  [at]  his  feet 
Luke  8.  26  they  arrived  at  the  country.  .Gadarenes 
9.  61  farewell,  which  are  at  home  at  my  house 
n.32  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas 
John  11.  32  she  fell  down  at  his  feet,  saying  unto  him 
Acts   4.    6  were  gathered  together  [at]  Jerusalem 
8.  40  Philip  was  found  at  Azotus  :  and  passing 
18.  22  he  had  landed  at  Cesarea,  and  gone  up 
20.  14  And  when  he  met  with  us  at  Assos,  we 
20. 15  and  the  next  (day)  we  arrived  at  Samos 

20.  16  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  Pentecost 
2t.    3  sailed  into  Syria,  and  landed  at  Tyre 

21.  13  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name 
23. 11 10  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Rome 


Acts  25.  15  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem,  the  chief  priests 

27.  3  And  the  next  (day)  we  touched  at  Sidon 

28.  12  lauding  at  Syracuse,  we  tarried  (there) 
Rom.  4.  20  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God 

2.  Ti.  2.  26  who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will 

15.  Out  of  from,  4k  eh. 

J  ohn  16.    4  these . .  I  said  not  unto  you  at  the  beginning 

Jas.     3.  11  Doth  a  fountain  send  forth  at  the  same 

Rev.  19.    2  avenged  the  blood  of  his  servants  at  her 

1G.  In  front  of  e/j.wpoo'deu  emprosthen. 

Rev.  19.  10  And  I  fell  at  his  feet  to  worship  him 
17. In,  among,  eV  en. 

Matt.  8.    6  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the 

ir.  22  It  shall  be  more  tolerable,  .at  the  day  of 

11.  25  At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said 

12.  1  At  that  time  Jesus  went  on  the  sabbath 

13.  49  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world 

14.  1  At  that  time  Herod  the  tetarch  heard  of 

18.  1  At  the  same  time  came  the  disciples  unto 

23.  6  And  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts 

24.  41  Two.  .grinding  at  the  mill ;  the  one  shall 
Mark  6.    3  with  us?  And  they  were  offended  at  him 

12.  39  and  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts 
Luke  4.  18  he  hath  sent  me.  .to  set  at  liberty  them 
9.  31  which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem 
10.  14  it  shall  be  more  tolerable. .atthe  judgment 

12.  46  at  an  hour  when  he  is  not  aware,  and  will 

13.  1  There  were  present  at  that  season  some 

14.  14  thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the 

19.  5  Zaccheus.  .to  day  I  must  abide  at  thy 
20. 10  [at]  the  season  he  sent  a  servant  to  the 

20.  46  which,  .love,  .the  chief  rooms  at  feasts 
23.    7  himself  also  was  at  Jerusalem  at  that  time 
23.  12  before  they  were  at  enmity  between 

John  4.  21  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father 
4.  45  things,  .he  did  at  Jerusalem  at  the  feast 
4.  46  nobleman,  whose  son  was  sick  at  Caper. 
4.  53  the  father  knew  that,  .[at]  the  same  hour 

6.  39  but  should  raise  it  up  again  [at]  the  last 

7.  11  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the  feast,  and  said 

10.  22  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  the 

11.  24  rise  again  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last 

12.  20  Greeks,  .that  came  up  to  worship  at  the 
14.  20  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  in 
16.  26  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name:  and 
18.  39  I  should  release  unto  you  one  at  the 

21.  20  which  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper 
Acts   1.    6  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the 

2.    5  there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  Jews 
7.  13  at  the  second  (time)  Joseph  was  made 

7.  29  Then  fled  Moses  at  this  saying,  and  was 

8.  1  at  that  time  there  was  a  great  persecution 

8.  14  the  apostles  which  were  at  Jerusalem 

g.  10  there  was  a  certain  disciple  at  Damascus 

9.  13  howmuchevilhehathdone.  .at Jerusalem 
9.  19  with,  .disciples  which  were  at  Damascus 
9.  22  confounded  the  Jews  which  dwelt  at  Da. 
9.  27  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  Damascus 
9.  28  he  was  with  them,  .going  out  [at]  Jerus. 
9.  36  there  was  at  Joppa  a  certain  disciple 

11.  15  Holy  Ghost  fell,  .as  on  us  at  the  beginning 

13.  1  there  were  in  the  church  that  was  at  A. 
13.    5  when  they  were  at  Salamis,  they  preached 

13.  27  they  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  and  their 

14.  8  there  sat  a.  .man  at  Lystra,  impotent 
16.    2  the  brethren  that  were  at  Lystra  and 

16.  4  of  the  apostles . .  which  were  at  Jerusalem 

17.  13  the  word  of  God  was  preached  of  Paul  at 
17.  16  Now  while  Paul  waited  for  them  at  Athens 
ig.  1  while  Appollos  was  at  Corinth, Paul  having 
20.  5  These  going  before  tarried  for  us  at  Troas 
20.  14  when  he  met  with  us  at  Assos,  we  took 

20.  15  [tarried  atTrogyllium;]andthenext(day) 

21.  11  So  shall  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  bind  the 

25.  4  that  Paul  should  be  kept  [at]  Cesarea 

25.  24  the  multitude,  .both  at  Jerusalem,  and 

26.  4  among  mine  own  nation  at  Jerusalem 
Rom.  1.  15  to  preach,  .to  you  that  are  at  Rome  also 

8.  34  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
11.    5  Even  so  then  at  this  present  time  also 

15.  26  the  poor  saints  which  are  at  Jerusalem 

16.  1  of  the  church  which  is  at  Cenchrea 

1  Co.    1.    2  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth 

11.  34  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him  eat  at  home 

14.  35  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  home 

15.  23  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his 
15.  32  If .  .1  have  fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesus 

15.  52  In  a  moment,  .at  the  last  trump  :  for  the 

16.  8  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost 

2  Co.    1.    1  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth 

8.  14  now  at  this  time  your  abundance 
Eph.    1.    1  to  the  saints  which  are  [at]  Ephesus.  and 

2.  12  That  [at]  that  time  ye  were  without  Christ 

3.  13  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  tribulations 
Phil.    1.    1  to  all  the  saints,  .which  are  at  Philippi 

2.  10  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee 
Col.     1.    2  To  the  saints,  .which  are  at  Colosse 

2.    1  have  for  you,  and  (for)  them  at  Laodicea 
1  Th.  2.    2  were  shamefully  entreated,  .at  Philippi 

2.  19  the  presence  of  our  Lord,  .at  his  coming? 

3.  1  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens 
3.  13  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1  Ti.    1.    3  I  besought  thee  to  abide  still  at  Ephesus 

2  Ti.    1.  18  things  he  ministered  unto  me  at  Ephesus 

3.  11  at  Antioch,  at  Iconium,  at  Lystra 

4.  8  the  Lord .  .shall  give  me  at  that  day 
4.  13  The  cloak  that  I  left  at  Troas  with 

4. 16  At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with 
4.  20  at  Corinth  :  but  Trophimus  have  I  left  at 
Heb.  12.   2  Jesus,  .set  down  at  the  right  hand  of 


1  Pe.   1.    7  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ 
1. 13  grace,  .at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ 
5.  13  The  (church  that  is)  at  Babylon,  elected 
1  Jo.   2.  28  and  not  be  ashamed.. at  his  coming 
lS.Upo?i,  over,  eVt  (gen.)  epi. 

Luke  20.  37  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  she  wed  atthe 
22.  30  That  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table 
22. 40  And  when  he  was  at  the  place,  he  said 
John  6.  21  immediately  the  ship  was  at  the  land 

21.  1  shewed  himself,  .to  the  disciples  at  the 
Acts  25.  10  Then  said  Paul,  I  stand  at  Cesar's 

19.  Upon,  over,  iiri  (dat.)  epi. 

Matt.  7.  28  people  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 

22.  33  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 
24.  33  know  that  it  is  near,  (even)  at  the  doors 

Mark  1.  22  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 
10.  22  he  was  sad  at  that  saying,  and  went 

10.  24  the  disciples  were  astonished  at  his  words 

11.  18  people  was  astonished  at  his  doctrine 

12.  17  And  they  marvelled  at  him 

13.  29  know  that  it  is  nigh,  (even)  at  the  doors 
Luke  1.  14  many  shall  rejoice  at  his  birth 

1.  29  she  saw  (him),  she  was  troubled  [at]  his 

2.  33  and  his  mother  marvelled  at  those  things 

2.  47  all.  .were  astonished  at  Ids  understanding 
4.  22  witness,  and  wondered  at  the  gracious 

4.  32  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 

5.  5  at  thy  word  I  will  let  down  the  net 

5.    9  he  was  astonished,  .at  the  draught  of 
5.  27  Levi,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom 
9.  43  at  the  mighty  power  of  God . .  at  all  things 
20.  26  and  they  marvelled  at  his  answer 
John  8.    7  [let  him  first  cast  a  stone  at  her] 
Acts    3.  10  at  the  Beautiful,  .at  that  which  had 

3.  12  men  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye  at  this? 

5.   9  behold,  the  feet  of  them . .  (are)  at  the  door 
13.  12  deputy,  .being  astonished  at  the  doctrine 

1  Co.  14.  16  say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of  thanks 
Rev.  21.  12  [at  the  gates  twelve  angels,  and  names] 

20.  Upon,  over,  (ace.)  ivi. 

Matt.  9.    9  Matthew,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom 
Mark  2.  14  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom,  and  said 
Luke  5.  27  a  publican,  named  Levi,  sitting  at  the 

24.  22  women .  .which  were  early  at  the 
John  8.  59  Then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  him 
Acts    3.    1  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer 

10.  25  Cornelius,  .fell  down  at  his  feet 
TCev.   3.  20  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and  knock 
8.    3  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the 

21.  Down,  during,  Kara.,  (ace.)  kata. 

Matt  27.  15  at  (that)  feast  the  governor  was  wont  to 
Marki5.  6  at  (that)  feast  he  released  unto  them  one 
Luke  10.  32  when  he  was  at  the  place,  came  aud 

23. 17  [he  must  release  one  unto  them  at  the] 
John  5.    4  an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  season 
Acts  16.  25  at  midnight  Paul  and  Silas  prayed 
Rom.  9.    9  At  this  time  will  I  come,  and  Sarah  shall 

2  Ti.    4.    1  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his 

22.  Beside,  alongside  of,  napd  (ace.)  para. 

Matt  15.  30  cast  them  down  at  Jesus  feet ;  and  he 
Luke  7.  38  sat  at  meat  in  the  Pharisee's  house 

8.  35  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  clothed,  and 
8.  41  named  Jairus.  .fell  down  [at]  Jesus'  feet 
10.  39  Mary,  .sat  [at]  Jesus'  feet,  and  heard  his 
17.  16  fell  down  on  (his)  face  at  his  feet,  giving 
Acts    4.  35  laid,  .down  at  the  apostles'  feet:  and 

4.  37  sold(it)..andlaid(it)  at  the  apostles'  feet 
5.2  a  certain  part,  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles' 

5.  10  Then  fell  she  down  straightway  [at]  his 
7.  58  laid  down  their  clothes  at  a  young  man's 

22.    3  brought  up  in  this  city  at  the  feet  of  Gam. 

23. Around,  concerning,  irepl  (gen.) peri. 

Luke  2.  18  they  that  heard  (it)  wondered  at  those 
John  6.41  The  Jews  thenmurmuredathim, because 

6.  61  that  his  disciples  murmured  at  it,  he 

24.  Towards,  irp6s  (dat.)  pros. 

Luke  19.  37  at  the  descent  of  the  Mount  of  Olives 
John  18.  16  Peter  stood  at  the  door  without.    Then 
20. 12  one  at  the  head,  and  the  other  at  the 

25.  Towards,  irp6s  (ace.)  pros. 

Matt  26.  18  My  time  is  at  hand  ;  I  will  keep 
Mark  1.  33  the  city  was  gathered  together  at  the 
5.  22  when  he  saw  him,  lie  fell  at  his  feet 

7.  25  of  him,  and  came  and  fell  at  his  feet 

11.  1 ;  14.  54;   Lu.  16.  20 ;   19.  29 ;   Jo.  20.  n  ; 
Acts  3.  2  ;  Rev.  1.  17. 

[See  also  Any,  attendance,  beginning,  charges 
come,  death,  dwell,  dweller,  ease,  fall,  first, 
hand,  home,  last,  law,  least,  length,  liberty, 
look,  marvel,  most,  not,  nought,  once,  one, 
peace,  piety,  set,  sit,  stand,  strain,  stumble, 
time,  wait,  wink,  wonder.] 

AT,  to  be  — 

To  do,  make-,  n^y  asah. 

Isa.   28.  15  with  death,  and  with  hell  are  we  at 
AT   all  — 
1.  Together,  ini  yachad. 

Hos.  11.    7  none  at  all  would  exalt  (hini) 
2.Still,  yet,  again  ity  od. 

Eze.  37.  22  into  two  kingdoms  any  more  at  all 
^.Concerning  the  whole,  ko,66\ov,  Acts  4.  18. 
4.The  whole,  '6\os  holos,  Matt.  5.  34;  1  Co.  5.  29. 
5. No,  not,  ov  pi),  Rev.  18.  14,  21,  22,  22,  23,  23,, 
6.  Altogether,  irdvr as  pantos,  I  Co.  16.  12. 


AT 


62 


ATTEND 


AT  eventiue  — 

At  the  turning  of  the  evening,  3"$  ni?^ 

Gen.  24.  63  went  out.  .in  the  field  at  the  eventide 

AT  least  — 

Only,  Tjg  ah 

1  Sa.  21.    4  have  kept  themselves  atleast  from  women 

AT  once,  at  one — 

l.To'getker,  in:  yachad, 

Psa.  74.    6  break  down  the  carved  work,  .at  once 
Isa.   42.  14  I  will  destroy  and  devour  at  once 

2.To  go  up,  m%  alaji. 

Num.  13.  30  Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess  it 

A'-TAD,  iyx  thornpusji. 

A  spot  "beyond  Jordan"  at  which  Joseph  and  his 
brethren,  in  their  way  from  Egypt  to  Hebron,  made 
their  "seven  days  great  and  very  sore  mourning"  over 
the  body  of  Jacob,  B.C.  1689. 

Uen.  50.  10  they  came  to  the  threshing  floor  of  A. 
50.  11  saw  the  mourning  in  the  floor  of  A.,  they 

A-TA'-HAH,  m,L#:  croion,  ornament. 

One  of  Jerahmeel's  wives.    He  was  grandson  of  Pharez, 

.sun  of  Judah,  B.C.  1520. 

1  Ch.   2.  26  (was)  A. ;  she  (was)  the  mother  of  Onam 
A-TA'-ROTH,  AT'-ROTH,  rnisg,  nn-p^.  crowns. 
1.  A  city  on  the  E.  of  Jordan;  having  been  destroyed  in 
the  war  with  Sihon,  it  was  rebuilt  by  the  Gadites. 

Nuni32.    3  A.,  and  Dibon,  and  Jazer,  and  Nimrah 
32.  34  the  children  of  Gad  built  Dibon,  and  A. 
£.  A  city  in   Ephraim,   perhaps  the  same  as  Ataroth- 
Atlitr,  on  the  W.  border  of  Benjamin. 

Josh.  16.    5  the  border  of  their  inheritance . .  A.  18. 13. 

3 .  Another  city  in  Ephraim,  Josh.  16.  2.  7. 

4.  Ataroth,  the  house  of  Joab,  occurs  in  the  genealogy 
of  Judah. 

1  Ch.   2.  54  sous  of  Salma;  Eeth-lehem,  and.  .A. 

5.  Atroth-Shophan,  a  city  in  Gad.    Now  Attarus. 

Num32.  35  [the  children  of  Gad  built].  .A.  Sh.,  and 

A'-TER,  "iun  bound,  lame. 

1.  The  ancestor  of  an  exiled  family. 

Ezra   2.  16  children  of  A.  of  Hezekiah,  ninety  and 
Neh.    7.  21  children  of  A.  of  Hezekiah,  ninety  and 

2.  Ancestor  of  a  family  of  gatekeepers  which  came  up 
witli  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  42  children  of  the  porters,  .children  of  A. 
Neh.  7.  45  The  porters,  .the  children  of  A. 

3.  A  chief  of  the  people  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the 
covenant,  B.C.  445. 

Neh."  10.  17  [chief  of  the  people]..  A.,  Hizkijah,  Azzur 

A'-THACH,  ~i?Z  lodging,  inn. 

A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah. 

1  Sa.  30.  30  and  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  A. 
A-THA'-IAH,  n;r#s  Jah  is  helper. 

A  Jew  in  Jerusalem  in  Nehemiah's  time,  B.C.  445. 
Neh.  11.    4  Of  the  children  of  Judah ;  A.  the  son  of 

A-THAl'-IAH,  33OT£  tjfyjSi,  ^ali  is  strong. 

1.  Daughter  of  Jezebel  wife  of  Omri  king  of  Israel,  who 
became  the  wife  of  Jehnram,  king  of  Judah,  and  ruled 
in  Judah  after  the  death  of  her  son  Ahaziah,  B.C.  884. 

2  Ki.    8.  26  his  mother's  name  (was)  A.,  the  daughter 

11.  1  when  A.  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw  that 
11.  2  they  hid  him.  .in  the  bedchamber  from  A. 
11.  3  A.  did  reign  over  the  land 
11.  13  And  when  A.  heard  the'noise  of  the  guard 
11.  14  A.  rent  her  clothes,  and  cried,  Treason 
11.  20  they  slew  A.  with  the  sword  (beside)  the 
2  Ch.  22.    2  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  A.  the 

22. 10  when  A.  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw  that 
22.  11  Jehoshabeath..hid  him  from  A.,  so  that 

22.  12  A.  reigned  over  the  land 

23.  12  when  A.  heard  the  noise  of  the  people 
23.  13  A.  rent  her  clothes,  and  said.  Treason 

23.  21  was  quiet,  after  that  they  had  slain  A. 

24.  7  Eor  tlie  sons  of  A.,  that  wicked  woman 

2.  A  son  of  Jeroham,  a  Benjamite. 

1  ch.   S.  26  [The  sons  of  Elpaal].  .Shehariah,  and  A. 

3.  The  father  of  Jeshiah,  a  returned  exile. 

Ezra    8.    7  the  sons  of  Elam ;  Jeshaiah  the  son  of  A. 

A-THE-NT  ANS,  yA9ijva7os  belonging  to  Athens. 
The  dwellers  in  Athens. 

Acts  17.  21  For  all  the  A.s  and  strangers  which  were 

A'-THENS,  'AB?ivai. 

Athens,  capital  of  Attica,  and  the  most  celebrated  city 
of  ancient  Greece,  is  said  to  have  been  first  called 
Cecropia,  from  Cecrops,  an  Egyptian  who  built  the 
original  city  on  the  Acropolis,  according  to  Hales, 
B.C.  1558;  Usher,  B.C.  i5=;6:  and  Clinton,  B.C.  1433.  It 
received  the  name  of  Athens  from  the  worship  of 
Athemo  or  Minerva,  said  to  have  been  established  by 
Ereohtheus,  B.C.  1383.  Theseus  ascended  the  throne, 
according  to  Hales,  e.g.  1216;  Usher,  B.C.  1235 :  and 
Clinton,  B.C.  t  -  v(.  Ke  united  into  one  body  the  twelve 
states  int..  which  (Vemps  had  divided  Attica,  and 
made  Alliens  the  capital.  CodniS  the  last  king  of  the 
dynasty,  sacrificed  himself  for  the  safety  of  Athens, 
B.C.  1070  according  to  Hales,  or  B.C.  1044  according  to 


Clinton.  Seventeen  kings  reigned  during  the  monar 
chical  period,  and  they  were  followed  by  perpetual,  by 
decennial,  and  finnlly  by  annual  arcbons. 

In  B.C.  1069  Jledon  made  the  first  perpetual  archon  ; 
754,  Alcma?on  the  last ;  752,  Charops  first  decennial 
archon  ;  684,  Erixias,  the  seventh  and  last,  dies ;  683, 
nine  annual  archons  appointed,  the  title  being  given 
only  to  the  first— Creon  first  annual  archon  ;  621,  legis- 
lation of  Draco ;  612,  Cylon  attempts  to  make  himself 
master  of  Athens  ;  594,  Solon  remodels  the  constitution  ; 
560,  Pisistratus  usurps  the  government— death  of 
Solon  ;  554,  Pisistratus  expelled  ;  527,  death  of  Pisis- 
tratus ;  514,  assassination  of  Hipparchus  by  Harmodius 
and  Aristogiton;  510,  Ostracism  established  ;  505,  war 
between  Athens  and  Sparta  ;  490,  battle  of  Marathon  ; 
483,  banishment  of  Aristides  ;  481,  fleet  of  200  ships 
built  at  Athens— ascendency  of  Themistocles ;  480, 
Athens  taken  by  Xerxes  ;  479,  Mardonius  burns  Athens; 
47S,  Themistocles  rebuilds  it ;  477,  commencement  of 
Athenian  supremacy;  471,  banishment  of  Themistocles; 
461,  Ostracism  of  Cymon  ;  459,  Athensasserts  supremacy 
over  the  other  states  of  Greece  ;  457,  "  long  walls  "  of 
Athens  commenced  ;  456,  Athenians  defeat  the  The- 
bans  at  ^Enophyta  ;  440,  Athenians  defeat  the  Persians; 
448,  Athenians  assist  the  Phocians  in  the  Sacred  War  ; 
447,  Boeotians  defeat  the  Athenians  at  Chaironea;  445, 
thirty  years'  truce  between  Sparta  and  Athens;  444, 
Pericles  at  the  head  of  affairs  ;  440,  Samos  subdued  by 
Pericles  ;  433,  alliance  betweeu  Athenians  and  the  Cor- 
eyneans  ;  431,  Peloponnesian  war  begins,  and  Attica  is 
invaded;  429,  Pericles  dies  of  the  plague;  415,  first  Athen- 
ian campaign  in  Sicily;  411,  government  of  the  "four 
hundred;""  407,  second  and  last  banishment  of  Alci- 
hiades— Lysander  defeats  Athenians;  404,  end  of  the 
Peloponnesian  war— rule  of  the  "Thirty  Tyrants,"  who 
are  replaced  by  the  "Ten  ;"  403,  Thrasybulus  overthrows 
"the  Ten;"  399,  death  of  Socrates;  394,  Xenophon 
banished  from  Athens;  393,  Conon  rebuilds  the  walls 
of  Athens;  388,  Plato  founds  the  Academy;  378,  the 
Thehans  and  Athenians  allied  against  Sparta;  371, 
general  peace ;  360,  war  between  Athenians  and  Olyn- 
thians  respecting  Amphipolis;  359,  Philip  of  Macedon 
makespeacewithAtheus;  357,  commencement  of  Social 
War;  352,  Philip  takes  Metbone',  and  enters  Thessaly— 
stopped  at  Thermopylae  by  the  Athenians ;  346,  peace 
between  Athens  and  Macedon;  339,  war  between  Philip 
and  the  Athenians;  322,  end  of  Samian  War— submis- 
sion of  Athens  to  Macedon— death  of  Demosthenes; 
317,  Cassander  conquers  Athens;  307,  Demetrius  restores 
its  aucient  constitution ;  287,  it  revolts  from  Demetrius; 
277,  Athens,  Sparta,  and  Egypt  allied;  268,  surrenders 
to  AntigonusGonatus,  king  of  Sparta;  229,  Athens  joins 
the  Achrean  league  ;  215,  Athenians  and  ^Etolians  unite 
against  Macedon ;  211,  a  Roman  fleet  arrives  at  Athens; 
200,  Atheus  and  other  Greek  states  join  Rome  against 
Philip;  196,  Romans  proclaim  Athens  free  from  Mace- 
donian power;  146,  Romans  subdue  Greece;  86,  Athens 
stormed  by  Sylla.  In  A.i>.  267,  Athens  was  besieged  by 
the  Goths;  395,  taken  by  Alaric;  532,  walls  restored  by 
Justinian. 

Acts  17.  15  that  conducted  Paul  brought,  .from  A 
17.  16  Now  while  Paul  waited  for  them  at  A. 

17.  22  Then  Paul.. said,  (Ye)  men  of  A.,  I  perc. 

18.  1  After  these  things  Paul  departed  from  A. 
1  Th.  3.    1  we  though  it  good  to  be  left  at  A.  alone 

ATHIRST,  to  he  — 

1.7*o  be  thirst)/,  KEit  tsame. 

Judgi5.  18  And  he  was  sore  athirst,  and  called 
Ruth  2.    9  when  thou  art  athirst,  go  unto  the  vessels 

2.  To  be  thirsty,  Sn/xxw  dipsao. 

Matt  25.  44  when  s-'w  we  thee  an  hungered,  or  athirst 
Rev.  21.    6  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst 

22.  17  Come.    And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come 

ATH'-LAI,  ^ny  Jah  is  strong. 

One  who  married  a  strange  woman,  B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  28  sous  also  of  Bebai;  Jehohanan..(aud)  A. 
ATONEMENT  — 
1.  Coverings,  D,-]33  kippnrim. 

Exod2g.  36  a  bullock  (for)  a  sin  offering,  .atonement 
30.  10  blood  of  the  sin  offering  of  atonements 
30.  16  thou  shalt  take  the  atonement  money 
30.  16  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls 
Lev.  23.  27  seventh  month,  .a  day  of  atonement 

23.  28  for  it  (is)  a  day  of  atonement,  to  make  an 
25.    g  day  of  atonement,  .make  the  trumpet 

Num.  5.    8  priest ;  beside  the  ram  of  the  atonement 
29.  11  beside  the  sin  offering  of  atonement 

2. Reconciliation,  thorough  change,  KaraWayi]. 

Rom.  5.  11  by  whom  we.  .received  the  atonement 
ATONEMENT,  to  make  — 
To  cover,  15?  fa'phar,  3. 

Exod29.  36  when  thou  hast  made  an  atonement  for 

29.  37  thou  shalt  make  an  atonement  for  the 

30,  10  Aaron  shall  make  an  atonement  upon  the 
30.  10  once  in  the  year  shall  he  make  atonement 
30.  15,  16  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls 
32.  30  I  shall  make  an  atonement  for  your  sin 

Lev.    i.    4  for  him  to  make  atonement  for  him 

4.  20  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 
[So  in  v.  26,  31.  35;  5.  6,  10,  13,  16,  18;  6.  7.] 

7.  7  priest  that  makcth  atonement  therewith 

8.  34  Loud,  .commanded,  .make  an  atonement 

9.  7  and  make  an  atonement  for  thyself 
9.    7  and  make  an  atonement  for  them 

10.  1 7  make  atonement  for  thcm.bef  ore  the  Lord? 
12.   7  "Who  shall,  .make  an  atonement  for  her 


Lev.  i2.    8  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  her 
14.  18  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him 
14.  19,  31  and  make  an  atonement  for  him  that 
14.  20  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 
14.  21,  29  to  make  an  atonement  for  him 

14.  53  and  make  an  atonement  for  the  house 
I5-    '5«  3°  niake  an  atonement  for  him  before 
16.    6,  11,  24  and  make  an  atonement  for  himself 
16.  10  to  make  an  atonement  with  him 

16.  16  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  (place) 
16.  17  to  make  an  atonement  in  the  holy  (place) 
16.  17  and  have  made  an  atonement  for  himself 
16.  18  and  make  an  atonement  for  it;  and  shall 
16.  27  blood,  .brought  in  to  make  atonement  in 
16.  30  shall,  .make  an  atonement  for  you,  to 
16.  32  shall  make  the  atonement,  and  shall  put 
16.  33  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy 
16.  33  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  priests 

16.  34  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  children  of 

17.  11  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls 
17.  11  blood,  .maketh  an  atonement  for  the 
19.  22  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him 
23.  28  for  it  (is),  .to  make  an  atonement  for  you 

Num.  5.    8  whereby  an  atonement  shall  be  made  for 
6.  11  and  make  an  atonement  for  him,  for  that 
8.  12,  19  to  make  an  atonement  for  the 
8.  21  Aaron  made  an  atonement  for  them  to 

15.  25  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  all 
15.  28  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 

15.  28  to  make  an  atonement  for  him  ;  and  it 

16.  46  make  an  atonement  for  them :  for  there 
16.  47  and  made  an  atonement  for  the  people 
25.  13  and  made  an  atonement  for  the  children 

28.  22, 30  to  make  an  atonement  for  you 

29.  5  kid.  .to  make  an  atonement  for  yon 
31.  50  an  atonement  for  our  souls  before  the 

2  Sa.  21.    3  wherewith  shall  I  make  the  atonement 

1  Ch.   6.  49  to  make  an  atonement  for  Israel 

2  Ch.  29.  24  to  make  an  atonement  for  all  Israel 
Neh.  10.  33  to  make  au  atonement  for  Israel 

ATONEMENT,  to  be  made  — 

l.To  cover,  make  a  covering,  "155  Icaphar,  3. 

Num.  5.    8  whereby  an  atonement  shall  be  made  for 
2.  To  be  covered,  ids  Jcaphar,  4. 

Exod2g.  33  thingswherewiththeatonementwasmade 

AT'-TAI,  'nj;,  'F\n  seasonable. 

1.  Grandson  of  Slieshan,  descended  from  Tharez,  B.C. 
1400. 

1  Ch.   2.  35  and  she  bare  him  A. 

2.  36  A.  begat  Nathan,  and  Nathan  begat 

2.  A  Gadite  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag,  B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.  12.  11  A.  the  sixth,  Eliel  the  seventh 

3.  A  sou  of  Rehoboam  son  of  Solomon,  B.C.  974. 

2  Ch.  n.  20  he  took  Jlaachali.  .which  bare  him .  .A. 
ATTAIN  to  or  unto,  to  — 

l.To  come,  f03  bo. 

2  Sa.  23. 19  he  attained  not  unto  the  (first)  three 

23.  23  but  he  attained  not  to  the  (first)  three 
1  Ch.  11.  21  he  attained  not  to  the  (first)  three 

11.  25  but  attained  not  to  the  (first)  three 

2.  To  be  able,  hb]  yahol. 

Hos.    ,8.    5  how  long,  .ere  they  attain  to  innocency? 

3.7*0  reach,  cause  to  reach,  ivi  nasag,  5. 

Gen.  47.    9  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the 
Eze.  46.    7  according  as  his  baud  shall  attain 

4. To  get,  obtain,  riiQqanah. 

Prov.  1.    5  a  man  of  understanding  shall  attain 

5-7*0  come,  arrive,  Karayrdoi  hatantao. 

Acts  27.  12  if  by  any  means,  .might  attain  to  Phenice 

Phil.   3.  ti  I  might  attain  unto  the  resurrection  of 
6.7*0  receive,  talce,  Kafx^dvw  lamband. 

Phil.    3.  12  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained 
7.7*0  comebefore  another,  <pQdvoi  phthano. 

Rom.  9.  31  not  attained  to  the  law  of  righteousness 
8.7*0  go  alongside  of,  -napaKoXovBioj  paralvloutheo. 

1  Ti.    4.    6  doctrine,  whereuuto  thou  hast  attained 
9.  7*o  seize  on,  lay  hold  of,    Kara\ap^dvu>. 

Rom.  9.  30  after  righteousness,  have  attained  to 

ATTAIN  already,  to  — 
To  come  before  {another),  <p6dva}  phthanO. 
Phil.    3.  16  whereto  wc  have  already  attained 

AT-TA'-LI-A  'ATTaActa. 

A  seaport  of  Pamphilia,  near  Terga. 

Acts  14.  25  had  preached,  .they  went  down  into  A. 

ATTEND,  to  — 

1.7*o  understand,  j'3  bin,  7a. 

Job    32. 12  Yea,  I  attended  unto  you,  and,  behold 
l.To  give  attention,  aiyp  qashab,  5. 

Psa.   17.    1  attend  unto  my  cry,  give  car  unto  my 
u;    2  Attend  unto  me,  and  bear  me  :  I  mourn 
61.    1  Hear  my  cry.  .attend  unto  my  prayer 
66.  19  he  hath  attended  to  the  voice  of  my 
86.    6  attend  to  the  voice  of  my  supplications 
142.    6  Attend  unto  my  cry  :  tQt  I  am  brought 
Prov.  4.    t  and  attend  to  know  understanding 

4.  20  attend  to  my  words  ;  incline  thine  ear 

5.  1  attend  unto  my  wisdom .  .bow  thine  ear 
7.  24  attend  to  the  words  oi  my  mouth 


ATTEND 


63 


AVOUCH 


a.  Well-seated  toward,  evirpoa'cSpos  cuproscdros. 
i  Co.   7.  35  that  ye  may  [attend  upon]  the  Lord 

ATTEND  continually  upon,  to  — 
To  be  strong  toward  anything,  irpocKapTepew. 
Horn.  13.  6  attending  continually  upon  this  very 

ATTEND  unto,  to  — 

To  hold  toioard  irpoa^xoi  prosechd. 

Acts  16.  14  she  attended  unto  the  things  which  were 
ATTENDANCE  — 
Standing,  1DJ/.Q  maamad. 

1  Ki.  10.    5  attendance  of  his  ministers,  and  their 

2  Ch.  9.   4  attendance  of  his  ministers,  and  their 

ATTENDANCE  at,  to  give  — 

To  hold  toward,  Trpocrex^  prosechS. 

Heb.    7.  13  no  man  gave  attendance  at  the  altar 
ATTENDANCE  to,  to  give  — 
To  hold  toward,  7rpoo"e'x&>  proseclw. 

1  Ti.    4.  13  Till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  readiug 
ATTENT  — 

Attentive,  2&$  gaslishub. 

2  Ch.  6.  40  (let)  thine  ears  (be)  attent  unto  the  prayer 

7.  15  and  mine  ears  attent  unto  the  prayer 
ATTENTIVE  — 
1. Attentive,  2'4'\2  qashshab. 

Neh.  1.   6  Let  thine  ear  now  be  attentive,  and 

1.  11  let  now  thine  ear  be  attentive  to  the 

^.Attentive,  iv$  qasliskui. 

Psa.  130.  2  hear  my  voice :  let  thine  ears  be  attentive 
ATTENTIVE,  to  be  very  — 
To  hang  on  exceedingly,  iKKpt/jLa/xxt  ekkremamai. 

Luke  19.  48  the  people  were  very  attentive  to  hear 
ATTENTIVELY  — 

To  hear,  hearken,  yips'  shamea. 

Job   37.    2  Hear  attentively  the  noise  of  his  voice 

ATTIRE  — 

1. Things  bound,  on,  Dnafp  qishshurinu 

Jer.     2.  32  her  ornaments,  (or)  a  bride  her  attire  ? 

^.Something  put  on,  TCP  shith. 

Prov.  7.  10  a  woman  (with)  the  attire  of  an  harlot 

ATTIRED,  to  be  — 

To  be  wrapped  round,  *py  tsanaph. 

Lev.  16.   4  with  the  linen  mitre  shall  he  be  attired 

AUDIENCE  — 

l.Ear,  jtm  ozen. 

Gen.  23.  10  in  the  audience  of  the  children  of  Heth 
23.  13  he  spake  unto  Ephron  in  the  audience 
23.  16  in  the  audience  of  the  sons  of  Heth 
EX0424.    7  read  in  the  audience  of  the  people 
1  Sa.  25.  24  I  pray  thee,  speak  in  thine  audience 
1  Ch.  28.    S  and  in  the  audience  of  our  God,  keep 
Neh.  13.    1  On  that  day  they  read,  .in  the  audience 

%Hearing,  ear,  o.kot)  akoe. 

Luke  7.    1  had  ended  all  his  sayings  in  the  audience 
AUDIENCE,  to  give  — 
To  give  ear,  clkovco  akouo. 

Acts  13. 16  and  ye  that  fear  God,  give  audience 

15.  12  multitude  kept  silence,  and  gave  audience 
22.  22  they  gave  him  audience  unto  this  word 
AUDIENCE  of,  in  the  — 
To  give  ear,  afcovv  akouo. 

Luke2o.  45  in  the  audience  of  all  the  people  he  said 
AUGHT  or  OUGHT  — 
l.Not  even  one  (thing),  ouSeis  oudeis. 

Mark  7.  12  suffer  him.  .to  do  ought  for  his  father 
%Any  one  or  thing,  ris  iis. 

Matt.  5.  23  that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against  thee 

2i.    3  if  any.  .say  ought  unto  you,  ye  shall 
Acts    4.  32  neither  said  any.  .that  ought  of.  .things 

28.  19  I  had  ought  to  accuse  my  nation  of 
Phm.       18  If  he.  .oweth.  .ought,  put  that  on  mine 

AUGHT,  if  — 

If  any  (one  or  thing),  e*  rts  ei  tis. 

Mark  8.  23  upon  him,  he  asked  him  if  he  saw  ought 
11.  25  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  any 

Acts  24.  19  have  been  here . .  if  they  had  ought  against 

AUGHT  to  eat  — 

To  eat,  tpayeiv  phagein. 

John  4.  33  Hath  anynianbroughthini(ought)toeat? 
AUGMENT,  to  — 
To  add,  H2D  saphaji. 

Nuni32. 14  to  augment  yet.  .fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 
AU-GUS'-TUS,  Aijyovo-Tos,  Se^ao-To's  sacred,  kingly. 
Augustus  Caesar  became  emperor  of  Rome  after  the 
death  of  his  uncle,  Julius  Caesar.    B.C.  20. 

Luke  2.    1  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cesar  A. 

Acts  25.  21  Paul  had  appealed,  .untothehearingof  A. 
25.  25  that  he  himself  hath  appealed  to  A.,  I 
27.    1  named  Julius,  a  centurion  of  A.'s  band 
AUL  — 
An  awl,  y$"?a  martsea. 

Exod.21.   6  shall  bore  his  ear  through  with  an  aul 

Dcut.15. 17  thou  shalt  take  an  aul,  and  thrust 


AUNT  — 

Father's  sister,  uncle's  wife,  rrrn  doclah. 

Lev.  iS.  14  not  approach  to  his  wife :  she.,  thine  aunt 
AUSTERE  — 
Hough,  harsh,  austere,  avcrnpos  au&teros. 

Luke  19.  21  feared  thee,  because  thou  art  an  austere 
19.  22  Thou  knewest  that  I  was  an  austere  man 
AUTHOR  — 
l.Cause,  occasion,  curios  aitws. 

Heb.   5.    9  he  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation 
I.Bcginner,  chief,  leader,  apxyyds  archegos. 

Heb.  12.    2  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finisher  of 

AUTHORITY  — 

1. Strength,  r$m  toqeph. 

Esth.  9.  29  Mordecai  the  Jew,  wrote  with.,  authority 
2.Privilegc,  authority,  4£ovata  exousia. 

Matt.  7.  29  he  taught  them  as.  .having  authority 

8.  9  For  I  am  a  man  under  authority,  having; 
ax.  23  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things? 
21.  23  aud  who  gave  thee  this- authority  ? 

2i.  24  I .  .will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

21.  27  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 
Mark  i.  22  taught  them  as  one  that  had  authority 

1.  27  for  with  authority  commandeth  he  even 
it.  28  Bywhatauthority  doest  thou  these  things 
11.  28  who  gave  thee  this  authority  to  do 
11.  29  I  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 
11.  33  Neither  do  I  tell  you  by  what  authority 
13.  34  who  left  his  house,  and  gave  authority 
Luke  4.  36  with  authority  and  power  he  commandeth 
7.    8  I  also  am  a  man  set  under  authority 

9.  1  gave  them  power  and  authority  over  all 

19.  17  have  thou  authority  over  ten  cities 

20.  2  by  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things? 
20.  2  who  is  he  that  gave  thee  this  authority? 
20.  8  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 
20.  20  unto  the  power  and  authority  of  the 

John  5.  27  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute 
Acts  9.  14  he  hath  authority  from  the  chief  priests 
26. 10  I  shut  up.  .having  received  authority  from 
26.  12  as  I  went  to  Damascus  with  authority 

1  Co.  15.  24  he  shall  have  put  down  all.. authority 

2  Co.  10.    8  boast  somewhat  more  of  our  authority 

1  Pe.   3.  22  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being 
Rev.  13.    2  gave  him .  .his  seat,  and  great  authority 
3.-4?i.  injunction,  4iriTayr\  epitage. 

Titus  2.  15  things  speak,  .and  rebuke,  .all  authority 

4. A  holding  over,  virepoxv  huperoche. 

1  Ti.    2.    2  For  kings,  and.  .all  that  are  in  authority 

AUTHORITY,  to  be  in  — 

To  be  great,  many,  mighty,  n^"i  rabah. 

Prov. 29.    2  When  the  righteous  are  in  authority,  the 

AUTHORITY  upon,  to  exercise  — 
l.To  use  or  take  privilege,  i^ouaid^co  exousiazo. 
Luke  22.  25  they  that  exercise  authority  upon  them 

2.  To  use  great  privilege,  Kare^ovo'id^w. 

Matt 20.  25  they  that,  .exercise  authority  upon  them 
Markio.  42  their  great  ones  exercise  authority  upon 

AUTHORITY,  of  great  — 
Powerful  one,  bwdarns  dunastes. 

Acts    8.  27  an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  Cand. 

AUTHORITY  over,  to  usurp  — 
To  use  one's  own  armour,  audeurico  authented. 
i  Ti.    2.  12  nor  to  usurp  authority  over  the  man 

A'-VA,  Njy  region. 

A  district  near  Babylon  and  Cuthah,  whose  in- 
habitants were  transported  to  Samaria.  Perhaps  the 
same  as  Iva. 

2KL 17.  24  the  king  of  Assyria  brought,  .from  A. 
AVAIL,  to  — 
l.To  be  equal,  even.  DJp  shavah. 

Esth.  5.  13  Yet  all  this  availeth  me  nothing,  so  long 

2.To  be  strong,  laxvco  ischuv. 

Gal.    5.    6  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything 

6.  15  neither  circumcision  [availeth]  anything 
Jas.    5.  16  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much 

A'-VEN,  px  vanity. 

Egyptian  city  of  On  or  Heliopolis. 

Eze.  30.  17  The  young  men  of  A.  and  of  Pibeseth 
Hos.  10.  8  The  high  places  also  of  A.,  the  sin  of 
Amos  1.   5  the  inhabitant  from  the  plain  of  A. 

AVENGE,  to  — 

l.To  give  ease,  safety,  r^;  yasha,  5. 

1  Sa.  25.  31  or  that  my  lord  hath  avenged  himself 

2.  To  breatlie  out  a  breathing,  ni?$  cpi  neqamah. 

Num3i.    2  Avenge  the  children  of  Israel.  .Midianites 

3.  To  give  out  vengeance,  n^-yi  ]mnatJian. 

Nuni3i.    3  go  against.  .Midianites.  .avenge  the  Lord 

2  Sa.    4.    8  Lord  hath  avenged  my  lord  the  king 

22.  48  It  (is)  God  that  avengeth  me,  and  that 
Psa.  18.  47  God  that  avengeth  me,  and  subdueth 

4. To  breatlie  out,  avenge,  Dpi  naqam. 

Lev.  19.  18  Thou  shalt  not  avenge,  nor  bear. .grudge 

26.  25  I  will  bring  a  sword,  .that  shall  avenge 
Dent  32.  43  he  will  avenge  the  blood  of  his  servants 
1  Sa.  24.  12  the  Lord  avenge  me  of  thee 


5.  To  avenge  (earnestly^,  cpi  naqam,  3. 

2  Ki.  9.    7  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my  servants 

6.  To  look  over  or  after,  "ipp  paqad. 

Hos.    1.    4  a  little  (while),  and  I  will  avenge  the 
7 .To  judge,  adjudicate,  n$v  skaphat. 

2  Sa.  ig.  19  Lord  hath  avenged  him  of  his  enemies 
18.  31  Lord  hath  avenged  thee  this  day  of 
S.To  give  full  justice,  ikBiKea  ekdikeG. 

LukeiS.    3  saying,  Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary 

18.  5  I  will  avenge  her,  lest,  .she  weary  me 
Rom  12.  19  Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves 
Rev.    6.  10  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood 

19.  2  hath  avenged  the  blood' of  Iris  servants 

9.  To  judge  judgment,  Kpivw  Kpifxa  krino  krim". 

Rev.  18.  20  Rejoice,  .for  God  hath  avenged  you  on 

10.  To  do  full  justice,  iroieco  iK^iKnaiv. 

Luke  18,    7  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own  elect 

iS.    8  I  tell  you  that  he  will  avenge,  .speedily 
Acts    7.  24  he  defended  (him),  and  avenged  him  that 

AVENGE  selves,  to  — 

l.To  avenge,  Dpi  naqam. 

Josh  10.  13  until  the  people  had  avenged  themselves 

2. To  be  avenged,  dpi  neiqam,  2. 

Esth.  8.  13  to  avenge  themselves  on  their  enemies 
Isa.     1.  24  and  avenge  me  of  mine  enemies 
Jer.  46.  10  he  may  avenge  him  of  his  adversaries 

AVENGED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  avenged,  cpi  nakam,  2. 

Judgis.    7  yet  will  I  be  avenged  of  you,  and  after 
16.  28  be  at  once  avenged  of  the  Philistines  for 

1  Sa.  14.  24  that  I  may  be  avenged  on  mine  enemies 

18.  25  but.  .to  be  avenged  of  the  king's  enemies 

2.  To  be  avenged,  Cpi  naqam,  6. 

Gen.    4.  24  If  Cain  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold 
3. To  avenge  oneself,  Cpi  naqam,  7. 

Jer.     5.    9,  29  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such 
9.    9  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a 

AVENGER, — 

l.To  loose,  set  free  (from  blood),  hx$  gaol. 
Nuin.35.  12  cities  for  refuge  from  the  avenger 
Deut  19.    6  Lest  the  avenger  of  the  blood  pursue  the 

19.  12  deliver  him  into  the  hand  of  the  avenger 
Josh  20.    3  sjiall  be  your  refuge  from  the  avenger  of 

20.  5  And  if  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  after 
20.    9  and  not  die  by  the  hand  of  the  avenger 

2.  To  avenge  oneself,  cpi  naqam,  7. 

Psa.    8.    2  mightest  still  the  enemy  and  the  avenger 
44.  16  by  reason  of  the  enemy  and  avenger 
3. Doing full  justice,  eicdiKos  ekdikos. 

1  Th.  4.    6  the  Lord  (is)  the  avenger  of  all  such 

AVENGING  — 

1.  To  give  ease,  jzs:;  yasha,  5. 

1  Sa.  25.  26  from  avenging  thyself  with  thine  own 

25.  33  from  avenging  myself  with  mine  own 

2. To  free  the  free,  rnjPT?  JH3  para  pcraoth. 

Judg.  5.    2  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of 
AVERSE  — 
To  turn  back,  l\p  shub. 

Mic.  2.  8  pass  by  securely  as  men  averse  from  war 

AV-HH,  AV-ITES,  ciy  villagers. 

1.  A  tribe  destroyed  before  the  time  of  Moses. 

Deut.  2.  23  the  A.s  which  dwelt  in  Hazerira. 

Josh  13.    3  Gittites,  and  the  Ekronites ;  also  the  A.s 

2.  A  city  of  Benjamin,   near  Beth-el.     (The  definite 
article  is  here  prefixed  in  the  Hebrew).    Now  Ettell. 

Josh  iS.  23  A.,  and  Parah,  and  Ophrah 

3.  A  tribe  transported  to  Samaria,  B.C.  678. 

2  Ki.  17.  31  the  A.s  made  Nibhaz  and  Tartak,  and 

A-VITH,  rnjj.  hut,  village. 

The  capital  of  Hadad,  4th  Edomite  king. 

Gen.  36.  35  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  A. 

1  Ch.    1.  46  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  A. 

AVOID,  to  — 

l.To  go  round  about,  3?p  sabab,  2. 

1  Sa.  18.  11  David  avoided  out  of  his  presence  twice 

2.  To  be  or  keep  free,  jna  para. 

Prov.  4.  15  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it 

3.  Through,  on  account  of,  Sid  dia  (ace.) 

1  Co.  7.    2  (to  avoid)  fornication,  let  every  man  have 
4. To  incline  orbend fromjKK\ip<*>  ekklin~>. 

Rom.  16.  17  doctrine  which  ye  have  learned.,  avoid 
5. To  turn  oft' from,  eKrp€iro/j.ai  ektrepomai. 

1  Ti.    6.  20  avoiding  profane  (and)  vain  babblings 
6.  To  ask  off  from,  irapairiofxai  paraiteomai. 

2  Ti.    2.  23  avoid,  knowing  that  they  do  gender  strifi  i 
7. To  beware  of,  Trepitaryfii  periistem,i. 

Titus  3.    q  avoid  foolish  questions,  and  genealogies 
8.  To  set,  place,  (rreXXw  stello. 

2  Co.    8.  20  Avoiding  this,  that  no  man  should  blame 

AVOUCH,  to  — 

To  say,  tsn  amar,  5. 

Deut26.  17  Thou  hast  avouched  the  Lord  this  day 

26.  18  the  Lord  hath  avouched  thee  this  day 


AWAI' 


64 


AZ  ARIAH 


AWAIT,  laying  — 

Counsel  against,  £irt$ov\4i  epiboule. 

Acts    9.  24  their  laying  a  vait  was  known  of  Saul 
AWAKE  — 
1.7*0  wake,  be  stirring,  j*p;  yaqats. 

Gen.    9.  24  Noah  awoke  from  his  wine,  and  knew 

28.  16  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he 
41.    4  and  fat  kine.     So  Pharaoh  awoke 

41.    7  Pharaoh  awoke,  and,  behold,  .a  dream 
41.  21  as  at  the  beginning.     So  I  awoke 
Judgi6.  14  lie  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  went 

16.  20  he  awoke  out  of  his  sleep,  and  said 

1  Ki.    3.  75  Solomon  awoke  ;  and,  behold,  (it  was)  a 
Psa.  78.  65  the  Lord  awaked  as  one  out  of  sleep 
Hab.    2.    7  Shall  they  not.  .awake  that  shall  vex 

2.7*o  be  stirring,  awake,  Yiy  ur, 

Judg  5.  12  Awake,  awake,  Deborah  :  awake,  awake 
Psa.    7.    6  awake  for  me  (to)  the  judgment  (that) 
44.  23  Awake,  why  sleepest  thou,  O  Lord  ?  arise 
57.    8  Awake  up,  my  glory  ;  awake,  psaltery 
5g.    4  without  (my)  fault :  awake  to  help  me 
io3.    2  Awake,  psaltery  and  harp  :  I  (myself)  will 
Song  4.  16  Awake,  0  north  wind;  and  come,  thou 
Isa.   51.    9  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm 

51.  9  awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the 

52.  1  Awake,  awake ;  put  on  thy  strength,  O 
Zechi3.    7  Awake,  O  sword,  against  my  shepherd 

3.7*0  awake,  stir  up,  "ny  ur,  3a.  ■ 

Song  2.    7  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 
3.    5  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 
8.    4  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 
4.7*0  stir  tip,  awake,  Yiy  ur,  5. 

Job     8.    6  surely  now  he  would  awake  for  thee,  and 
Psa.  57.    8  I  (myself)  will  awake  early 

108.    2  Awake,  psaltery  and  harp:  I.,  will  awake 

5.7*0  stir  oneself  up,  Tiy  vr,  7a.. 

Isa.    51.  17  Awake,  awake,  stand  up,  0  Jerusalem 

6.7*0  awake  (from  sleep)  \"\p  quts,  5. 

1  Sa.  26.  12  no  man  saw  (it),  .neither  awaked 

Job    14.  12  they  shall  not  awake,  nor  be  raised  out 

Psa.    3.    5  I  awaked ;  for  the  Lord  sustained  me 

17.  15  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake 
35.  23  Stir  up.  .and  awake  to  my  judgment 
59.    5  God  of  Israel,  awake  to  visit  all  the 
73.  20  As  a  dream  when  (one)  awaketh 

139.  18  when  I  awake,  I  am  still  with  thee 
Prov.23.  35  when  shall  I  awake?  I  will  seek  it  yet 
Isa.    26.  19  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust 

29.  8  but  he  awaketh . .  but  he  awaketh 

Jer.  31.  26  I  awaked,  and  beheld ;  and  my  sleep  was 
Dan.  12.    2  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake 
Joel    1.    5  Awake,  ye  drunkards,  and  weep;  and 
Hab.  2.  19  to  the  wood,  Awake ;  to  the  dumb  stone 

7.7*0  stir  up,  awake  YJJ. 

Psa.  73.  20  0  Lord,  when  thou  awakest,  thou 

8.7*0  awake  thoroughly,  Sieyeipw  diegeiro. 
Mark  4.  38  they  [awake]  him,  and  say  unto  him 
Luke  8.  24  they  came  to  him,  and  awoke  him 

9.7*0  wake  up,  eye/pw  egeiro. 

Matt.  8.  25  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  save  us :  we 
Rom. 13.  11  (it  is)  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep 
Eph.   5.  14  [Awake]  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise 

10.7*0  be  very  sober,  e/cW^co  eknepho. 

1  Co.  15.  34  Awake  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not 
AWAKE,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  awake,  \>p  quts,  5. 

2  Ki.    4.  31  told  him,  saying.  The  child  is  not  awaked 
2.7*o  wake  thoroughly,  Siaypvyopeo  diagregoreo. 

Luke   9.  32  when  they  were  awake,  they  saw  his  glory 
AWAKE  out  of  sleep,  to  — 
1.7*0  wake  out  of  sleep,  Qwrrvifa  exupnizo. 

John  11.  11  I  go,  that  I  may  awake  him  out  of  sleep 
2.7*0  become  awake  out  of  sleep,  ytuo/xat  e%virvos. 

Acts  16.  27  the  keeper  of  the  prison  awaking  out  of 
AWAKED,  to  be  — 
To  awake,  fp;  yaqats. 

1  Ki.  18.  27  Cry.  .he  sleepeth,  and  must  be  awaked 
AWARE,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  knmo,  yi;  yada. 

Song   6.  12  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me 

Jer.  50.  24  0  Babylon,  and  thou  wast  not  aware 
2.7*0  know,  hare  acquaintance  with,  yivwaKM. 

Luke  12.  46  at  an  hour  when  he  is  not  aware 
3.7*0  see,  know,  o?5a  oida. 

Luke  11.  44  men  that  walk  over,  .are  not  aware 
AWARE  of,  to  be  — 
To  know,  yivu)(TKu>  ginoskd. 

Matt.  24.  50  and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of 
AWAY  — 
1.  Way,  rood,  ~*yi  derek. 

1  Sa.  24.  19  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him  go  well  away  ? 
2.7*o  go  on,  ~S;  yalak. 

"  Exod.19.  24  Away,  gut  thee  down,  and  thou  shalt 
S.ToJlee,  DU  YVU8. 

2  Sa.  18.    3  if  we  Hue  away,  they  will  not  care  for  us 
4.7*0  turn  aside,  Yip  sarar. 

Zech.  7.  11  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled  away  the 


5.  Without,  outside  e£w  exo. 

Matt  13.  48  into  vessels,  but  cast  the  bad  away 

[See  also  Ashes,  break,  bring,  captive,  carried, 
carry,  carrying,  cast,  casting,  catch,  chase, 
chased,  consume,  convey,  departing,  do,  done, 
draw,  drawn,  dried,  drive,  driven,  fade,  fadeth, 
fall,  falling,  far,  flee,  flood,  flow,  fly,  gray,  get, 
go,  gone,  haste,  have,  have  taken,  lay,  lead, 
led,  look,  melt,  move,  pass,  passed,  pine,  pluck, 
plucked,  portion,  purged,  push,  put,  put  far, 
putting,  remove,  roll,  run,  scatter,  sell,  sail, 
send,  sending,  slip,  steal,  stolen,  sweep,  swept, 
take,  taken,  thrust,  turn,  turned,  turning,  un- 
takeu,  utterly,  vanish,  vilely  cast,  violently 
take,  wash,  waste,  wear,  wipe,  wiped,  wither, 
withered.] 

AWAY  far,  to  put  — 

7*o  put  far  off,  prq  rachaq,  5. 

Job  11.  14  If  iniquity,  .put  it  far  away,  and  let  not 

AWAY  from  — 

From  ojter,  '"irixo  meachare. 

Kum  14.  43  ye  are  turned  away  from  the  LORD 
32.  15  if  ye  turn  away  from  after  liim 

AWAY  with,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  able,  fc)j  yakoL 

Isa.     1.  13  calling  of  assemblies,  I  cannot  away  with 

2.   7*o  lift  up,  bear  away,  atpw  airo. 

Luke23.  18  Away  with  this  (man),  and  release  unto 
Johmg.  15  Away  with  (him),  away  with  (him),  crucify 
Acts  21.  36  multitude,  .followed  after,  crying,  Away 
22.  22  Away  with  such  a  (fellow)  from  the  earth 

AWE,  to  stand  in  — 

1.  7*o  shrink,  be  afraid,  "fla 

Psa.  33.   8  inhabitants  of  the  world  stand  in  awe 

2.  To  fear,  TO  pacJiad. 

Psa.119. 161  my  heart  staudethiu  awe  of  thy  word 
3.7*0  be  angry,  n~i  ragaz. 

Psa.     4.    4  Stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not :  commune  with 

AX  or  AXE  — 

X.An  Axe,  jna  garzen. 

Deutig.    5  his  hand  fetcheth  a  stroke  with  the  ax 
20.  19  the  trees  thereof  by  forcing  an  ax  against 

1  Ki.   6.    7  that  there  was  neither  hammer  nor  ax 
Isa.  10.  15  Shall  the  ax  boast  itself  against  him 

%A  destroying  weapon,  sword,  nnn  chercb. 

Eze.  26.    9  with  his  axes  he  shall  break  down  thy 
Z.A  maul,  great  hammer,  Ve'3  kashshil. 

Psa.    74.    6  break  down  the  carved  work,  .with  axes 

4.  A  cutting  or  sawing  instrument,  rrjuo  magzerah. 

2  Sa.  12.  31  under  harrows  of  iron,  and  under  axes  of 

5.  Saw,  axe,  rriJD  mtgerah. 

1  Ch.  20.    3  with  harrows  of  iron,  and  with  axes 
6. Ax,  hatchet,  Y^yp,  maatsad. 

Jer.  10.    3  cutteth.  .out  of  the  forest,  .with  the  ax 
7. Axe,  D"TJj3  qardom. 

Judg. 9.  48  Abimelechtookanaxinhishand,  and  cut 

1  Sa.  13.  20  to  sharpen  every  man.  .his  ax,  and  his 

13.  21  Yet  they  had  a  file,  .for  the  axes,  and  to 
Psa.  74.    5  according  as  he  had  lifted  up  axes 
Jer.  46.  22  come  against  her  with  axes,  as  hewers 

8. A  n  axe,  a£lvw  axine. 

Matt.  3.  10  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root 
Luke  3.    9  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root 

AX  HEAD  — 

Iron,  bpi  barzel, 

2  Ki.   6.  5  the  ax  head  fell  into  the  water :  and 

AXLE  TREE  — 
Iron,  y  yad. 

1  Ki.    7.  32  the  axletrees  of  the  wheels  (were  joined) 

7.  33  their  axletrees,  and  their  naves,  and  their 

A'-ZAX,  Ssx  declivity,  slope. 
A  place  near  Jerusalem. 
Zech.  14.    5  valley  of  the  mountains,  .shall  reach.  .A. 

A-ZAL'-IAH,  5Y^tt  Jah  is  noble. 
Father  of  Shaphan  the  scribe,  B.C.  624. 

2  Ki.  22.    3  the  king  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  A. 

2  Ch.  34.    8  he  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  A.,  and  M. 

A-ZAN'-IAH,  n;?]x  Jah  is  hearer. 

(.Hie  whose  son  signed  the  covenant,  B.C.  470. 

Neh.  10.    9  the  Levites :  both  Jeshua  the  son  of  A. 

A-ZAR'-AEL,  A-ZAR'-EEL,  h^vjSL  God  is  helper. 

1.  An  Aaronite  of  the  family  of '  Korah,  who  joined 
David  at  Ziklag,  B.C.  1058. 

iCh.  12.    6  Elkanah,  and  Jesiah,  and  A.,  and  Joezer 

2.  A  priest  appointed  by  lot  to  minister  in  the  service 
of  song  in  the  sanctuary  in  time  of  David,  B.C.  1015. 
He  seems  to  have  been  the  same  as  Asarelah  the  son  of 
Asaph. 

xCh.25.  18  The  eleventh  to  A.,  (lie,)  his  sons,  and  his 

3.  A  Danite  prince  in  the  time  of  David,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  27.  22  Of  Dan,  A.  the  son  of  Jeroham 

4.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani,  who  took  strange  wives  dur- 
ing the  exile,  B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  41  [Of  the  sons  of  Bani] . .  A.,  and  Shelemiah 


5.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Immer,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  13  Amashai  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Ahasai 
12.  36  his  brethren,  Shemaiah,  and  A.,  Milalai 

A-ZAR'-IAH,  n;iiy:  Jah  is  keeper. 
A  very  common  name  in  Hebrew,  and  especially  in  the 
family  of  Eleazar,  whose  name  has  a  similar  meaning. 
It  is  nearly  identical  with  Ezra,  as  well  as  with  Zera- 
hiah  and  Seraiah. 

1.  A  descendant  of  David's  high  priest,  B.C.  1014. 

iKi.   4.    2  These  (were)  the  princes..  A.  the  son  of  Z. 

2.  Son  of  Nathan,  ruler  of  Solomon's  officers,  B.C.  1014. 

iKi.    4.    5  A.  the  son  of  Nathan.. over  the  officers 

3.  Son  of  Amaziah,  who  was  made  king  of  Judah  after 
his  father,  B.C.  809. 

2  Ki.  14.  21  all  the  people  of  Judah  took  A. 

15.    1  began  A.  son  of  Amaziah  king  of  Judah 
15.    6  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  A.,  and  all  that 
15.    7  So  A.  slept  with  his  fathers ;  and  they 
15.    8  In  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  A.  king  of 
15.  17  In  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  A.  king 
15.  23  In  the  fiftieth  year  of  A.  king  of  Judah 
15.  27  In  the  two  and  fiftieth  year  of  A.  king  of 

1  Ch.   3.  12  Amaziah  his  son,  A.  his  son,  Jotham 

4.  A  descendant  of  Judah,  through  Zerah,  B.C.  1660. 

1  Ch.   2.    8  And  the  sons  of  Ethan ;  A. 

5.  A  descendant  of  Jerahmeel,  grandson  of  Pharez,  B.C. 
133°- 

1  Ch.   2.  38  Obed  begat  Jehu,  and  Jehu  begat  A. 

2.  39  A.  begat  Helez,  and  Helez  begat 

6.  A  son  of  Ahimaz,  and  grandson  of  Zadok,  B.C.  914. 

1  Ch.   6.   9  Ahimaaz  begat  A.,  and  A.  begat  Johanan 

7.  A  grandson  of  the  preceding,  under  Solomon,  B.C. 
840. 

1  Ch.   6.  10  And  Johanan  begat  A. 

6.  11  A.  begat  Amariah,  and  Amariah 
S.  A  son  of  Hilkiah,  the  high-priest  in  the  reign  of 
Josiah,  B.C.  641-610. 

1  Ch.  6.  13  Shallum  begat  Hilkiah .  .Hilkiah  begat  A. 

6.  14  A.  begat  Seraiah,  and  Seraiah  begat 
9.  n  A.  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  the  son  of 
Ezra    7.    1  Ezra  the  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son  of  A. 

9.  A  descendant  of  Kohath,  from  whom  sprang  the  pro- 
phet Samuel,  B.C.  1100. 

iCh.   6.  36  Joel,  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Zephaniah 

10.  A  prophet  sent  to  encourage  Asa  to  destroy  the  idols 
in  Judah,  B.C.  941. 

2  Ch.  15. 1  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  A.  the 

11.  A  sou  of  king  Jehoshaphat,  B.C.  890. 
2CI1.21.    2  he  had  brethren. .A.,  and  Jehiel 

12.  Another  son  of  Jehoshaphat,  B.C.  890. 

2CI1.  21.    2  he  had  brethren.  .A.  and  Michael 

13.  Son  of  Jehoram,  called  also  Ahaziah,  B.C.  885. 
2  Ch.  22.    6  A.  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of 

14.  A  captain  who  aided  in  elevating  Joash  to  the  throne 
of  Judah,  B.C.  878. 

2CI1. 23.    1  Jehoiada.  .took.  .A.  the  son  of 

15.  Another  who  assisted  in  the  same  work. 

2  Ch.  23.    1  Jehoiada . .  took . .  A.  the  son  of  Obed 

16.  The  high  priest  that  hiudered  Uzziah  from  burning 
incense  on  the  altar,  B.C.  765. 

2  Ch.26.  17  A.  the  priest  went  in  after  him 

26.  20  And  A.  the  chief  priesc,  and  all  the 

17.  A  chief  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.  28. 12  A.  the  son  of  Johanan,  Berechiah  the 
IS.  A  Kohathite  and  father  of  Joel,  B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.  29.  12  the  Levites  arose,  .and  Joel  the  son  of  A. 
If).  A  Merarite  who  assisted  in  cleansing  the  temple  in 
the  time  or  Hezekiah,  B.C.  726, 

2  Ch.  29. 12  Then  the  Levites  arose . .  and  A.  the  son 

20.  A  priest  (of  the  family  of  Zadok)  who  became  chief 
priest  in  Hezekiah's  time,  B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.  31.  10  A.  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of  Zadok 
31.  13  and  A.  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 

21.  Great-grandfather  of  Zadok  the  priest,  and  an 
ancestor  of  Ezra. 

Ezra  7.    3  Amariah,  thesonof  A.,thesonof  iMeraioth 

22.  One  of  the  family  of  Ananiah.  He  repaired  a 
portion  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  after  the  exile,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  23  After  him  repaired  A.  the  son  of 

3.  24  from  the  house  of  A.  unto  the  turning 

23.  In  one  passage  this  name  is  given  to  Seraiah  who 
came  up  to  Jerusalem  with  Zerubbabel,  or  perhaps 
Scramh  is  here  omitted,  B.C.  590. 

Neh.    7.    7  Nehemiah,  A,,  Raamiah,  Nahamani 

24.  A  priest  who  explained  the  law  to  the  people  while 
Ezra  was  reading  it,  B.C.  445.  Perhaps  the  same  as 
No.  22. 

Neh.    8.    7  A. ..caused  the  people  to  understand  the 

25.  A  priest  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant, 

B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.    2  [Now  those  that  sealed  (were)].  .A.,  Jer. 
20.  A  prince  of  Judah  who  joined  in  the  procession  with 
Nehemiah,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  33  [after  them  went]. .A.,  Ezra,  and  M. 
27.  A  son  of   Hoshaiah   who  charged  Jeremiah  with 
prophesying  falsely,  B.C.  587. 

Jer.  43.    2  Then  spake  A.  the  sou  of  Hoshaiah,  and 


AZAZ 


65 


BAAL    SHALISHA 


2S.  A  young  man  carried  away  to  Babylon  along  with 
Daniel,  B.C.  560. 

Dan.    1.    6  of  the  children  of  Judah,  Daniel . .  and  A. 
1.    7  and  to  A.,  of  Abed-nego 
1.  11  had  set  over  Daniel,  Hananiah..and  A. 

1.  19  among  them  all  was  found  none  like.  .A. 

2.  17  Daniel.. made  the  thing  known  to..  A.,  his 

A'-ZAZ,  itm  strong. 

Father  of  a' chief  of  Reuben,  in  the  time  of  Jeroboam 

II.,  B.C.  1200. 

1  Ch.    5.    S  Eela  the  son  of  A.,  the  son  of  Shema. 
A-ZAZ-I'AH,  *n;]]&  Jah  is  strong. 
1.  A  Levite  appointed  for  the  musical  service  when  the 
ark  was  brought  up   from  the  house  of  Obed-edom, 

B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  15.  21  Jeiel,  andA.,withharpsontheSheminith 
■2.  Father  of  Hoshea,  prince  of  Ephraim,  in  the  time  of 
David,  B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  27.  20  children  of  Ephraim,  Hoshea  the  son  of  A. 
3.  A  Levite  who  had  the  oversight  of  the  dedicated 
things  in  Hezekiah's  reign,  B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.  31.  13  Jehiel,  and  A. .  .(were)  overseers  under 
AZ'-BTJK,  pi3?2  pardon. 

Father  of  Nehemiah  who  repaired  a  portion  of  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem  after  the  return  from  Babylon,  B.C.  445. 
Neh.    3.  16  After  him  repaired ..  the  son  of  A. 

A-ZE'-KAH,  np.TJi  breach. 

A  town  of  Judah  with  dependant  villages  lying  in  the 
Shephelah  or  low  agricultu  ral  plain.  Near  the  northern 
Shoehoh  and  Beth-horon,  not  far  from  the  modern 
Ain-skems;  or  the  modern  Tel  Zakariya  on  the  Wady 
Sumt,  the  Vale  of  Elah. 

Josh.  10.  10  smote  them  to  A.,  and  unto  Makkedah 
10.  11  stones  from  heaven  upon  them  unto  A. 
15.  35  [in  the  valley].. Socoh,  and  A. 
1  Sa.  17.    1  pitched  between  Shocoh  and  A.,  in 
2Ch.  11.    9  [He  built  even]..Lachish,  and  A. 
Neh.  11.  30  the  fields  thereof,  at  A.,  and  (in)  the 
Jer.  34.    7  king  of  Babylon's  army  fought  against .  .A. 

A'-ZEL,  *?sk  nohle. 

A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Saul,  B.C.  860. 

1  Ch.   8.  37  Kapha  (was)  his  son,  Eleasah  his  son,  A. 
8.  38  A.  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  these 

8.  38  All  these  (were)  the  sons  of  A. 

9.  43  Rephaiah  his  son,  Eleasah  his  son,  A.  his 
9.  44  A.  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  these 
9.  44  Hanau :  these  (were)  the  sons  of  A. 

A'-ZEM,  D'0  fortress. 

A  city  in  the  extreme  S.  of  Judah,  assigned  to  Simeon 

elsewhere  called  Ezem,     (Now  El-Aujeh.) 

Josh.  15.  29  [cities  of  the  tribe] . .  were  Kabzeel . .  and  A. 
19.    3  [in  their  inheritance  Beersheba].  .and  A. 

1  Ch.   4.  29  [they  dwelt  at]..  Bilhah,  and  at  E.;  and  at 

AZ'-GAD,  laiy  worship,  supplication. 

1.  One  whose  posterity  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C. 
536. 

Ezra    2.  12  children  of  A.,  a  thousand  two  hundred 
Neh.    7.  17  children  of  A.,  two  thousand  three 

2.  One  who  came  up  from  exile  with  Ezra,  B.C.  458. 

Ezra    8.  12  of  the  sons  of  A. ;  Johanan  the  son  of 

3.  A  chief,  or  the  name  of  a  family  of  Jews  who,  with 
Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.  10.  15  [chief  of  the  people].  .Bunni,  A.,  Bebai 

A-ZI'-EL,  WVL  God  is  might. 

A  Levite  in  the  choral  service  of  the  tabernacle  at  the 
time  the  ark  was  brought  up  from  the  house  of  Obed- 
edom,  B.C.  T042.     In  v.  18  it  is  Jaaziel. 

1  Ch.  15.  20  Zechariah,  and  A. .  .with  psalteries  on 

A-ZI'-ZA,  \X\"Vi  strong. 

One  of  the  family  of  Zattu  who  had  taken  a  strange 

wife,  B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  27  of  the  sons  of  Zattu.  .Zabad  and  A. 
AZ-MA'-VETH,  niotu  counsel  or  strength  of  death, 

1.  One  of  Davids  thirty  valiant  men,  B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.  23.  31  [one  of  the  thirty]  A.  the  Barhumite 

1  Ch.  11.  33  A.theBaharumite,  EliahbatheShaalbon. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Jonathan,  Saul's  son,  B.C.  940. 

1  Ch.   8.  36  Jehoada  begat  Alemeth,  and  A.,  and 

9.  42  Jarah  begat  Alemeth,  and  A.,  and  Zimri 

3.  One  whose  two  sons  joined  David  at  Ziklag,  B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.  12.    3  Jeziel,  and  Pelet,  the  sons  of  A. ;  and 

4.  A  village  called  also  Betk-azmaveth,  lying  on  the 
confines  of  Judah  and  Benjamin.     (Now  Hizmeh.) 

Ezra    2.  24  children  of  A.,  forty  and  two 

Neh.  12.  29  out  of  the  fields  at  Geba  and  A. :  for  the 
.".  One  of  David's  treasury  officers,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  27.  25  over  the  king's  treasures.  .A.  the  son  of 
AZ'-MON,  ]iovi;  fortress. 

A  place  on  the  S.  of  Canaan,  near  the  torrent  of  Egypt, 
li'ady-el-arisli. 

Num34.    4  your  border  shall,  .pass  on  to  A. 

34.    5  the  border  shall  fetch  a  compass  from  A. 

Josh  15.    4  it  passed  toward  A.,  and  went  out  unto 

AZ-NOTH  TA'-BOR,  ibl?  ni:m  ears  or  peaks  of  Tabor. 
A  pair  of  hills  on  the  border  of  Naphtali. 

Josh.  19.  34  the  coast  turneth  westward  to  A.,  and  \ 

9 


A'-ZOE,  'A££p  helper. 

Great  grandson  of  Zorobabel,  B.C.  400. 

Matt.  1.  13  Abiud  begat  Eliakim.  .Eliakim  begat  A. 
1.  14  And  A.  begat  Sadoc;  aud  Sadoc  begat 

A-ZO'-TUS,  "Afar os  fortress,  castle. 
Another  form  of  Ashdod,  now  called  Esdud. 

Acts    8.  40  Philip  was  found  at  A. :  and  passing 

AZ-RI'-EL,  ^xniy  God  is  helper. 

1.  The  head,  of  a  family  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh, 

E.  of  the  Jordan,  B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  5.  24  these,  .the  heads.. Eltel,  and  A.,  and 
2.Fatber  of  the  ruler  of  Naphtali  in  David's  time,  B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.  27.  19  Of  Naphtali,  Jerimoth  the  son  of  A. 
3.  The  father  of  an  officer  sent  to  take  Baruch,  B.C.  606. 

Jer.  36.  26  king  commanded.  .Seriah  the  son  of  A. 
AZ-RI'-KAM,  CjT"ny  my  help  has  risen, 

1.  Son  of  Neraiah,  of  the  family  of  David,  B.C.  460. 

1  Ch.   3.  23  the  sons  of  Neariah.  .Hezekiah,  and  A. 

2.  A  son  of  Azel,  of  the  family  of  Saul,  B.C.  860. 

1  Ch.   8.  38  Azel  had  six  sons..  A.,  Bocheru,  and 
9.  44  Azel  had  six  sons.  .A.,  Bocheru,  aud 

3.  A  Levite,  a  descendant  of  Merari,  B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  9.  14  of  the  Levites.  .Hasshub,  the  sou  of  A. 
Neh.  11.  15  of  the  Levites.  .A.,  the  son  of  Hashabiah 

4.  Governor  of  the  house  of  king  Ahaz,  B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.  28.   7  Zichri . .  slew . .  A.  the  governor  of  the  house 
A-ZTJ'-BAH,  <"niiy.  forsaken. 

1.  The  mother  of  king  Jehoshaphat,  B.C.  914. 

1  Ki.  22.  42  his  mother's  name  (was)  A.  the  daughter 

2  Ch.  20.  31  his  mother's  name  (was)  A.  the  daughter 

2.  The  wife  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hezron,  B.C.  1540. 

iCh.  2.  18  Caleb.. begat.. of  A.  (his)  wife,  and  of  Jer. 
2. 19  when  A.  was  dead,  Caleb  took  unto  him 

A'-ZTTR,  n»y  helper. 

Father  of  Jaazauiah,  a  prince  seen  in  vision,  B.C.  594. 
Eze.  11.    1  among  whom  I  saw  Jaazauiah .  .son  of  A. 

AZ'-ZAH,  [JSI  fortress. 

A  city  of  the  Philistines  assigned  to  Judah,  and  com- 
monly called  Gaza,  and  now  Ghuzzeh. 

Deut.  2.  23  the  Avims  which  dwelt.. unto  A.,  the 

1  Ki.    4.  24  he  had  dominion.. from  Tiphsah..to  A. 

Jer.   25.  20  And  all  the  mingled  people . .  and  A. 
AZ'-ZAIT,  \]V.  sharp. 

Father  of  Paltiel,  a  prince  of  Issachar,  chosen  to  ap- 
portion the  land  W.  of  the  Jordan,  B.C.  1540. 

Nuni34.  26  prince  of  the  tribe.  .Paltiel  the  son  of  A. 
AZ'-ZTJR,  -my  helper. 

1.  A  man  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant,  B.C. 

445- 

Neh.  10.  17  [chief  of  the  people].  .Ater,  Hizkijah,  A. 

2.  A  Gibeonite,  father  of  Hananiah,  who   withstood 
Jeremiah,  B.C.  596. 

Jer.   28.    1  Hananiah  the  son  of  A.  the  prophet 


BA'-AL,  BA-A'-inff,  V^rt  master,  jiossessor. 

The  chief  male  deity  of  the  Phoenicians  andCanaauites, 

as  Ashtoreth  was  their  chief  female  deity.    Both  these 

names  have  the  peculiarity  of  being  used  in  the  plural, 

and  of  ahvays  having  the  definite  article  prefixed,  e.g. 

the  Baalim. 

1.  An  idol  of  the  Phoenicians  and  Tyrians. 

Nura  22.  41  brought  him  up  into  the  high  places  of  B. 
Judg.  2.  11  And  the  children  of  Israel,  .served  B. 
2.  13  they  forsook  the  LORD,  and  served  B. 
-     3.    7  of  Israel  did  evil,  .and  served  B. 

6.  31  Joash  said.  .Will  ye  plead  for  B.?  will  ye 
6.  32  Let  B.  plead  against  him,  because  he  hath 
8.  33  children  of  Israel,  .went  a  whoring  after  B. 
10.    6  of  Israel  did  evil . .  and  served  B. 
10.  10  have  forsaken  our  God,  and  also  served  B. 
1  Sa.    7.    4  children  of  Israel  did  put  away  B.  and 
12.  10  forsaken  the  Lord,  and  have  served  B. 
1  Ki.  16.  31  went  and  served  B.,  aud  worshipped  him 
16.  32  an  altar  for  B.  in  the  house  of  B. 
iS.  18  and  thou  hast  followed  B. 
18.  19  the  prophets  of  B.  four  hundred  and  fifty 
18.  21  iftheLORD(be)God,  follow  him  :  but  if  B. 
18.  22  B.'s  prophets  (are)  four  hundred  and  fifty 
18.  25  Elijah  said  uutotheprophetsjof  B.,  Choose 
18.  26  the  name  of  B. .  .saying,  0  B.,  hear  us 

18.  40  Elijah  said .  .Take  the  prophets  of  B. 

19.  18  knees  which  have  not  bowed  unto  B. 
22.  53  For  he  served  B  ,  and  worshipped  him 

2.  Ki.  3.    2  he  put  away  the  image  of  B.  that  his 

10.  18  Ahab  served  B.  a  little.  .Jehu  shall  serve 
10.  19  call  unto  me  all  the  prophets  of  B. 
10.  19  for  I  have  a  great  sacrifice.. to  B. 
10.  19  he  might  destroy  the  worshippers  of  B. 
10.  20  Proclaim  a  solemn  assembly  for  B. 
10.  21  worshippers  of  B. .  .into  the  house  of  E. 
10.  21  the  house  of  B.  was  full  from  one  end  to 
10.  22  vestments  for  all  the  worshippers  of  B. 
10.  23  And  Jehu  went,  .into  the  house  of  B. 
10.  23  said  unto  the  worshippers  of  B.,  Search 
10.  23  none,  .but  the  worshippers  of  B.  only 
10.  25  and  went  to  the  city  of  the  house  of  B. 


2  Ki.  10.  26  forth  the  images  out  of  the  house  of  B. 
10.  27  brake,  .the  image  of  B. .  .the  house  of  B. 

10.  28  Thus  Jehu  destroyed  B.  out  of  Israel 

11.  18  the  people,  .went  into  the  house  of  B. 
11.  18  slew  Mattan  the  priest  of  B.  before  the 
17.  16  all. the  host  of  heaven,  and  served  B. 
23.    4  all  the  vessels  that  were  made  for  B. 
23.    5  them  also  that  burned  incense  unto  B. 

2  Ch.  17.    3  because  he . .  sought  not  unto  B. 

23.  17  all  the  people  went  to  the  house  of  B. 

23.  17  slew  Mattan  the  priest  of  B.  before  the 

24.  7  dedicated  things,  .they  bestow  upon  B. 
28.    2  and  made  also  molten  images  for  B. 
34.    4  they  brake  down  the  altars  of  B. 

Jer.     2.    8  the  prophets  prophesied  by  B.,  and 

2.  23  not  polluted,  I  have  not  gone  after  B.? 

7.    9  swear  falsely,  aud  burn  incense  unto  B. 

9.  14  But  have  walked,  .after  B.,  which  their 
11.  13  set  up  altars,  .to  burn  incense  unto  B. 
11.  17  to  provoke  me.,  offering  incense  unto  B. 
12. 16  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  B.;  then 
19.    s  have  built  also  the  high  places  of  B.^  to 
19.    5  their  sons,  .(for)  burnt  offerings  unto  B. 
23.  13  they  prophesied  in  B.,  and  caused  my 
32.  29  they  have  offered  incense  unto  B. 
32.  35  they  built  the  high  places  of  B.,  which 
Hos.    2.    8  silver  and  gold,  .they  prepared  for  B. 

2.  13  I  will  visit  upon  her  the  days  of  B. 

2.  17  F^or  I  will  take  away  the  names  of  B.  out 

11.  2  they  sacrificed  unto  B.,  and  burned  inc. 
13.    1  but  when  he  offended  in  B.,  he  died 

Zeph.  1.    4  I  will  cut  off  the  remnaut  of  B.  from 
Rom.  1 1.   4  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to.  .B. 

2.  A  city  in  the  tribe  of  Simeon. 

1  Ch.  4.  33  And  all  their  villages . .  unto  B. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Reuben,  B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  5.    5  [sons  of  Joel].  .Reaia  his  son,  B.  his  son 

4.  A  descendant  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  11S0. 

1  Ch.  8.  30  his  firstborn  son  Abdou.  .and  B.,  and 
q.  36  his  firstborn  son  Abdon .  .and  B.,  and 

BA-AL  BE'-RITH,  nna  ^03  lord  of  the  covenant. 
An  idol  worshipped  by  Israel,  B.C.  1200. 

Judg.  8.  33  children  of  Israel.,  made  B.  their  god 
9.    4  gave . .  silver  out  of  the  house  of  B. 

BA-AL  GAD,  13  ^'3  lord  of  fortune. 
A  place  near  Hermon,  the  northern  limit  of  Joshua's 
conquests.    Banias  is  probably  on  its  site  now.     This 
place  had  long  a  great  reputation  as  the  sanctuary  of 
Pan.    (Now  Hasbeya.) 

Josh.  1 1. 17  even  unto  B.  in  the  valley  of  Lebanon 

12.  7  from  B.  in  the  valley  of  Lebanon  even 

13.  5  from  B.  under  mount  Hermon  unto  the 

BA-AL  HA'-MON,  |iDn  h%2  lord  of  the  multitude. 
A  place  in  mount  Ephraim,  near  Samaria. 

Song    8.  11  Solomon  had  a  vineyard  at  B.;  he  let  out 

BA-AL  HA'-NAN,  [3n  Sj;3  tlie  lord  is  gracious. 

1.  The  seventh  of  the  kings  of  Edom,  B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  38  Saul  died,  and  B.  the  son  of  Achbor 

36.  39  B.  the  son  of  Achbor  died,  and  Hadar 
1  Ch.   1.  49  when  Shual  was  dead,  B.  the  son  of  A. 
1.  50  when  B.  was  dead,  Hadad  reigned  in  his 

2.  One  of  David's  superintendents,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  27.  28  And  over  the  olive  trees.  .B.  the  Gederite 
BA-AL  EA'-ZOR,  lisn  ^3  lord  of  Ilazor. 

A  place  near  Ephraim  where  Amnon  was  slain,  B.C.  1035. 

2  Sa.  13.  23  Absalom  had  sheepshearers  in  B.,  which 
BA-AL  HER'-MON,  pDnn  ^3  lord  of  Hermon. 

This  name  occurring  alone  denotes  a  town  near  Mount 

Hermon.     When  coupled  with  "mount"  it  seems  to 

denote  the  mountainous  district.  (TSowJebel-es-Skeikh.) 

Judg.  3.    3  from  mount  B.  uuto  the  entering  in  of 

1  Ch.   5.  23  they  increased  from  Bashan  unto  B.  and 

BA-AL  ME'-ON,  fiy?  ^>"S  lord  of  the  habitation, 
A  town  built  by  the  Reubenites.      Supposed  to  be  the 
same  as  the  Betk-baal-meon  of  Josh.  13.  17,  the  Beth- 
meon  of  Jer.  48.  23,  and  the  Beon  of  Num.  32.  3.   {Main.) 
Nura  32. 38  [children  of  Reuben  built] . .  Nebo,  and  B. 

1  Ch.  5.    8  dwelt  in  Aroer,  even  unto  Nebo  and  B. 
Eze.  25.    9  glory  of  the  country,  Beth-jeshimoth,  B. 

BA-AL  PE'-OR,  liy?  ^'3  lord  of  the  opening. 
An  idol  of  Moab  which  Israel,  by  the  counsel  of  Balaam 
to  the  Midianites,  was  enticed  to  worship.    In  several 
passages  it  is  simply  Peor. 

Nuni25.    3  Israel  joined  himself  unto  B.:  and  the 

25.  5  Slay  ye  every  one.  .joined  unto  B.-p. 
Deut.  4.    3  what  the  Lord  did  because  of  B.-p. 

4.  3  for  all  the  men  that  followed -B.-p.,  the 
Psa.106.  28  They  joined  themselves  also  unto  B.,  and 
Hos.   9. 10  they  went  to  B.,  and  separated  themselves 

BA-AL  PE-RA'-ZIM,  D*S"i?  ^3  lord  ofbreacJies. 
A  place  near  the  valley  of  Rephaira. 

2  Sa.    5.  20  David  came  to  B.,  and  David  smote  them 

5.  20  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  B. 

1  Ch.  14.  11  So  they  came  up  to  B.;  and  David  smote 

14. 11  they  called  the  name  of  that  place  B. 

BA-AL  SHA-LI'-SHA,  nw^  *?y3  lord  of  Shaliska. 
A  place  near  Gilgal  in  Ephraim. 

2  Ki.   4.  42  there  came  a  man  from  B.,  and  brought 


BAAL    TAMAR 


C6 


BABYLON 


BA-AL  TA'-MAR,  ioj-1  Syg  lord  of  the  palm. 
A  place  near  Gibeah  o£  Benjamin. 

Judg.20.  33  Israel,  .put  themselves  in  array  at  B. 

BA-AL  ZE-'ETJB,  3U1  ^ya  lord  of  the  fly. 

An  idol  of  the  Philistines  at  Ekron. 

2  Ki.    i.  2  Go,  enquire  of  B.  the  god  of  Ekron 

i.    3  ye  go  to  enquire  of  B.  the  god  of  Ekron  7 
i.    6  (that)  thou  sendest  to  enquire  of  B.  the 
i.  16  thou  hast  sent  messengers  to  enquire  of  B. 

BA-AL  ZE-PHON,  ]'3>'  ^'3  lord  of  Typhon. 
A  place  near  where  Israel  crossed  the  lied  Sea. 

Exodu.    2  between.Migdol  and  the  sea.  .against  Bj 

14.  9  beside  Pi-hahiroth,  before  B. 

Num  33.    7  again  unto  Pi-hahiroth,  which,  .before  B. 

BA-A'-LAH,  n^y.3  mistress,  possesso7\ 

1.  A  city  of  Judah,  sometimes  identical  with  Kvrjath- 
jearim  or  Kirjath-baal. 

Josh.15.   0  the  border  was  drawn  to  B.,  which  (is) 

15.  10  the  border  compassed  from  B.  westward 
1  Ch.  13.   6  Bavid  went  up,  and  all  Israel,  to  B. 

2.  A  hill  on  the  S.  border  of  Judah. 

Josh.15.  11  the  border,  .passed  along  to  mount  B. 

3.  A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  called  Balah  in  Josh.  "19.  3, 
and  in  1  Ch.  4.  29  Bilhah.     In  1  Ch.  4.  33  it  is  Baal. 

Josh.15.  29  [the  uttermost  cities.,  were]..  B.,  and  Iim 

BA-A'-LATH,  rhil.3  belonging  to  Baal. 
A  town  in  Dan.  (Now  Balut.) 

Josh.  19.  44  Eltekeh,  and  Gibbethon,  and  B. 

1  Ki.   9.  18  [Solomon  built] . .  B.,  and  Tadmor  in 

2  Ch.  8.    6  B.,  and  all  the  store  cities  that  Solomon 

BA-A-LATH  BE'-ER,  1X3  n^3  lady  of  the  well. 
A  town,  called  also  Ramath-iiegeb  (or  "heights  of  the 
soutli "),  among  those  in  the  S.   of  Judah  given  to 
Simeon. 

Josh. 19.  8  the  villages,  .about  these  cities  to  B.-b. 

BA-A'-LE  (of  Judah))  *by,3  fwssessors  of  or  in  Jitdah. 
Another  form  of  Baalah,  now  Kuriet  cl-Enab. 

2  Sa.    6.    2  the  people  that  (were)  with  him  from  B. 

BA-A'-LI,  ^£3  my  lord. 

A  title  of  reserve  rejected  by  God. 

Hos.  2.    16  call  melshi,  and  shalt  call  me  no  more  B. 

BA-A'-LIS,  D*^a  lord  of  joy. ' 

King  of  the  Ammonites  when  Jerusalem  was  taken  by 

Nebuchadnezzar,  B.C.  588. 

Jer.  40.  14  Dost  thou  certainly  know  that  B.  the  king 

BA-A'-NA,  BA-A'-NAH,  NJ&3  son  of  grief  patient. 
1.  Solomon's  commissariat  officer  in  Jezreel  and  the  N. 
of  the  Jordan  valley,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  4.  12  B.  the  son  of  Ahliud  ;  (to  him  pertained) 
2.Solomon's  commissariat  officer  in  Asher,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.    4.  16  B.  the  son  of  Hushai.  .in  Asher  and  in 
3. The  father  of  Zadok,  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabcl 
and  helped  to  repair  the  wall,  B.C.  470. 

Neh.    3.    4  next  unto  them  repaired,  .the  son  of  B. 
BA-A'-NAH,  H3j;:3  son  of  grief 
1. Father  of  Heleb,  one  of  David  s  thirty  valiant  men, 

B.C.  1075. 

2  Sa.  23.  29  [one  of  the  thirty].  .Heleb  the  son  of  B. 

1  Ch.  11.  30  Heled  the  son  of  B.  the  Netophathite 
2.A  captain  of  Ishbosheth's  army,  B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.    4.    2  the  name  of  the  one.  .B.,  and  the  name 

4.    5  Rimmon  the  Beerothite,  Kechab  and  B 
4.    6  Rechab  and  B.  his  brother  escaped 
4.    9  David  answered  Rechab  and  B.his  brother 
a.One  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  2  [are  the  children].  .Bigvai,  Rehum,  B. 
Neh.  7.    7  [are  the  children].  .Bigvai,  Nehum,  B. 
10.  27  [chief  of  the  people] . .  Malluch,  Harim,  B. 

BA-A'-RA,  Kins  a  wood,  or  daughter  of  the  fresh. 

Oue  of  Shuharaim's  wives,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.    8.  8  Shaharaim.  .Hnshim  and  B. .  .his  wives 

BA-A-SE'-IAH,  .Tb^:3  Jah  is  bold. 

A  Gershonite,  ancestor  of  Asaph  the  musician,   B.C. 

1 100. 

1  Ch.   6.  40  Michael,  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of 

BA-A'-SHA,  Kp;»3  boldness. 

A  man  of  fssachar,  who  conspired  against  Nadab  son  of 

Jeroboam  I.,  and  slew  all  his  posterity,  B.C.  953. 

x  Ki.  15.  16  there  was  war  between  Asa  and  B.  king 
15. 17  B.  king  of  Israel  went  up  against  Judah 
15.  19  break  thy  league  with  B.  king  of  Israel 
15.21  wheu  B.  heard.. he  left  off  building  of 
15.  22  took  away,  .the  timber,  .wherewith  B. 
15.  27  B.  the  son  of  Ahijah.  .conspired  against 
15  27  and  B.  smote  him  at  Gibbethon,  which 
15.  28  in  the  third  year  of  Asa.  .did  B.  slay  him 
15.  32  there  was  war  between  Asa  and  B.  king 

15.  33  In  the  third  year  of  Asa.. began  B.  ..to 

16.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came.. against  B. 
16.  3  I  will  take  away  the  posterity  of  B..  and 
16.  4  linn  that  dieth  of  B.  in  the  city  shall  the 
16.  5  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  B. .  .(are)  they  not 
16.  6  So  B.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

16.    7  came  the  word  of  the  Loud  against  B. 
26.    8  began  Elah  the  son  of  B.  to  reign  over 


1  Ki.  16.  11  he  slew  all  the  house  of  B.  :  he  left  him 

16.  12  did  Zimri  destroy  all  the  house  of  B. 
16.  12  which  lie  spake  against  B.  by  Jehu  the 
"16.  13  For  all  the  sins  of  B.,  and  the  sins  of  Elah 
21.  22  like  the  house  of  B.  the  son  of  Ahijah,  for 
2K1.   9.    9  like  the  house  of  B.  the  son  of  Ahijah 

2  Ch.16.    1  B.  king  of  Israel  came  up  against  Judah 

16.    3  break  thy  league  with  B.  king  of  Israel 
16.    5  when  B.  heard  (it),  that  he  left,  .building 
16.    6  carried  away. .the  timber,  .wherewith B. 
Jer.  41.    9  which  Asa.. had  made  for  fear  of  B. 

BABBLER  — 

1. Master  of  (the)  tongue,  pc^  S^3  baal  lo.shon. 

Eccl.  10.  11  enchantment ;  and  a  babbler  is  no  better 
2. A  seed-picker,  airepfAoh6yos  spermologos. 

Acts  17.  18  some  said,  "What  will  this  babbler  say? 
BABBLING  — 
1. Meditation,  n'tt1  siach. 

Prov.23.  29  hath  contentions?  who  hath  babbling? 
2.  Empty  sound,  Kevcxpwvia  ken  aphonia. 

1  Ti.    6.  20  avoiding  profane .  .vain  babblings,  and 

2  Ti.    2.  16  shun  prof ane . .  vain  babblings :  for  they 
BABE  — 

I. Boy,  lad,  nyj  naar. 

Exod.  2.    6  saw  the  child :  and,  behold,  the  babe 

2. Suckling,  growing  youth,  hb'w  olel. 

Psa.     8.    2  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
17. 14  leave  the  rest  of  their,  .to  their  babes 

3, Babe  (new  born,  or  unborn),  (5p4<bos  brephos. 
Luke  1.  41  it  came  to  pass,  that,  .the  babe  leaped 

1.  44  the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy 

2.  12  Ye  shall  And  the  babe  wrapped  in 

2.  16  and  found,  .the  babe  lying  in  a  manger 
1  Pe.    2.    2  As  new  born  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk 

A. Babe  (without  sp>eech),  v-fyirtos  nejnos. 

Matt  1 1.  25  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes 

21.  16  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
Lukeio.  21  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes 
Rom.  2.  20  instructor  of.  .foolish,  a  teacher  of  babes 
1  Cor.  3.    1  as  unto  carnal,  .as  unto  babes  in  Christ 
Heb.   5.  13  useth  milk  (is)  unskilful,  .for  he  is  a  babe 

BABES  — 

Persons  causing  turnings,  windings,  tr^Sy.n. 

Isa.     3.    4  children . .  and  babes  shall  rule  over  them 
BA'-BEL,  confusion,  (or  Bab-il,  gate  of  God.) 
A  city  in  the  plain  of  Shinar. 

Gen.  10. 10  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  B.,  and 
11.    9  Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  B. 

BABYLON,  ^33  confusion,  gate  of  Bel,  fiaPvAwv. 
The  Greek  mode  of  spelling  what  in  the  Hebrew  is 
uniformly  Babel.  Perhaps  when  Nimrod  founded  the 
city  he  gave  it  the  name  Bab-il,  "  gate  of  II  "  or  "gate 
of  God."  After  the  "  confusion"  of  tongues,  the  name 
was  connected  by  the  Hebrews  with  the  root balal,  "to 
confound."  It  was  latterly  the  capital  of  the  country 
called  in  Genesis  Shinar,  and  in  the  later  Scriptures 
"Chahlea,"  or  the  "Land  of  the  Chaldeans."  The 
original  city  was  built  about  2230  B.C.  Erech,  Ur,  and 
Ellasar  seem  to  have  been  all  older  than  it,  and  were 
cities  when  Bab-il  was  a  village.  But  about  1700  B.C. 
the  seat  of  government  was  fixed  at  the  latter.  Its 
enormous  walls,  iron  gates,  and  hanging  gardens,  were 
among  the  greatest  artificial  wonders  in  the  world. 
The  modern  Birs-JSitnrud  (anciently  the  temple  of 
Nebo  at  Borsippa),  and  Babil,  near  Hillah,  have  both 
been  taken  for  the  site  of  the  proposed  Tower.  Its 
history  is  naturally  mixed  up  with  that  of  the  state  to 
which  it  gave  its  name.  "The  Babylonian  and  Assy- 
rian empires,"  says  Sir  John  Stoddart,  "in  all  historical 
records,  are  much  blended  together.  These  empires, 
whether  distinct  or  united,  possessed  in  very  early 
times  two  vast  cities — Babylon  on  the  Euphrates,  and 
Nineveh  on  the  Tigris.  The  country  on  the  Tigris  was 
called  Assyria;  that  on  the  Euphrates  Babylonia;  and 
the  large  intervening  space  was  commonly  termed 
Mesopotamia,  or  'between  the  rivers':  and  this,  to- 
gether with  Babylonia,  seems  to  be  meant  in  Scripture 
by  the  land  of  Shinar."  In  B.C.  747Babylon  is  independ- 
ent of  Assyria — Nabonassar  king;  699,  Esarhatldon, 
or  Sennacherib,  king  of  Assyria,  takes  Babylon  ;  677  or 
675,  Asaridinus,  king  of  Babylon,  invades  Judah,  and 
makes  prisoner  its  king,  Manasseh  ;  625,  Nabopolassar 
asserts  his  independence  of  the  king  of  Assyria;  604, 
Nebuchadnezzar  succeeds  his  father  Nabopolassar; 
during  his  reign  the  Babylonian  empire  attains  its 
highest  splendour;  569,  Nebuchadnezzar  sets  up  the 
"golden  image,"  and  becomes  insane  the  same  year; 
558,  Neriglissar,  the  Belshazzar  of  Scripture,  king;  538, 
Babylon  taken,  and  the  kingdom  annexed  to  the  Persian 
empire  by  Cyrus;  518,  Babylon  revolts  from  Darius 
Hystaspes ;  it  is  besieged  and  taken  the  following  year ; 
331,  Babylon  surrenders  to  Alexander  the  Great;  324, 
Alexander  enters  it,  and  commences  the  restoration  of 
its  architectural  greatness ;  323,  Alexander  dies  in 
Babylon  ;  321,  Seleucus  Nicator  is  made  governor;  315, 
Antigonus  expels  Seleucus,  and  establishes  Python,  son 
of  Agenor,  in  his  dignities;  312,  Seleucus  returns  to 
Babylon,  which  he  recovers,  and  founds  the  kingdom 
and  dynasty  of  the  Seleucidse  ;  240,  invaded  by  the 
Gauls  under  Hierax — they  are  repulsed  by  Seleucus  II.; 
64,  on  the  conquest  of  Syria  by  Pompey,  Babylon  falls 
into  the  hands  of  the  Romans ;  62,  Babylon  forms 
part  of  the  Roman  province  of  Syria.  Many  travel- 
lers,  amongst  whom  may  Le   mentioned  Rich,    Ker 


Porter,  Layard,  Frazer,  Chesney,  Botta,  Loftus,  and 
Rawlinson,  have,  by  their  explorations  amongst  the 
ruins  of  the  ancient  city,  thrown  light  upon  the 
history  of  Babylon.  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  has  inter- 
preted many  of  the  inscriptions  found  on  various  relics 
brought  to  this  country.  Babylonian  sovereigns  were: 
B.C.  747,  Nabonassar  ;  733,  Nadius ;  731,  Chiiuirus;  725, 
Jugasus  ;  721,  Mardocempadus ;  709,  Archianus  ;  704 
(interregnum);  702,  Belibus ;  609,  Apronadius ;  693, 
Regibalus  ;  692,  Mesesimordachns  ;  688  (interregnum^ 
680,  Asaridinus  ;  667,  Sausduchinus;  647,  Chinaladanus; 
625,  Nabopolassar ;  604,  Nebuchadnezzar ;  5G1,  Evil 
Merodach  ;  558,  Belshazzar;  553,  Nabonadms;  538, 
Cyrus  takes  Babylon. 

2  Ki.  17.  24  king  of  Assyria  brought,  .from  1*. 

17.  30  the  men  of  B.  made  Succoth-benoth,  and 
20.  12  Baladan,  king  of  B,,  sent  letters  and  a 
20.  14  They,  .come  from  a  far  country,  .from  B. 
20.  17  that. .in  thine  house. .be  carried  into  B. 

20.  18  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of  the  king  of  B. 
24.    1  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  came  up,  and 
24.    7  for  the  king  of  B.  had  taken  from  the  river 
24.  10  servants  of  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B. 
24.  11  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  came  against 
24.  12  Jehoiachin . .  went  out  to  the  king  of  B. 
24.  12  the  king  of  B.  took  him  in  the  eighth 

24.  15  he  carried  away  Jehoaichin  to  B.,  and 
24.  15  (those)  carried  he  into  captivity,  .to  B. 
24.  16  them  the  king  of  B.  brought  captive  to  B. 
24.  17  the  king  of  B.  made  Mattaniah.  .king 

24.  20  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  the  king  of  B. 

25.  1  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  came,  he 
25.    6  brought  him  up  to  the  king  of  B. 

25.    7  eyes  of  Zedekiah.  .and  carried  him  to  B. 
25.    8  the  nineteenth  year  of  king,  .of  B. 
25.    8  came,  .a  servant  of  the  king  of  B.,  unto'J 
25.  11  fugitives  that  fell  away  to  the  king  of  B. 
25.  13  and  carried  the  brass  of  them  to  B. 
25.  20  brought  them  to  the  king  of  B.  to  Riblah 
25.  21  the  king  of  B.  smote  them,  and  slew 
25.  22  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  had 
25.  23  the  captains,  .heard  that  the  king  of  B. 
25.  24  dwell  in  the  land  and  serve  the  king  of  B. 
25.  27  Evil-merodach  king  of  B.  in  the  year  that 
25.  28  of  the  kings  that  (were)  with  him  in  B. 

1  Ch.  9.    1  were  carried  away  to  B.  for  their  trans. 

2  Ch.  32.  31  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes  of  B.,  who 

33.  1 1  bonnd . .  with  fetters,  and  carried  him  to  B. 
36.    6  came  up  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B. 
36.    6  bound  him  in  fetters,  to  carry  him  to  B. 
36.    7  Nebuchadnezzar,  .carried  of  the.  .to  B. 
36.    7  and  put  them  in  his  temple  at  B. 
36.  10  Nebuchadnezzar  sent,  and  brought.  ,toB. 
36.  18  his  princes;  all  (these)  he  brought  to  B. 
36.  20  that  had  escaped,  .carried  he  away  to  B. 
Ezra    1.  11  that  were  brought  up  from  B.  unto  Jer. 

2.    1  the  king  of  B.  had  carried  away  unto  B. 

5.  12  them  into  the  hand  of.  .the  king  of  B. 

5.  12  who.  .carried  the  people  away  into  B. 

5.  13  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king  of  B. 

5.  14  brought  them  into  the  temple  of  B. 

5.  14  did  Cyrus,  .take  out  of  the  temple  of  B. 

5.  17  king's  treasure  house,  whiehO's)  there  at  B. 

6.  1  where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  B.f 

6.  5  which  Nebuchadnezzar,  .brought  unto  B. 

7.  6  This  Ezra  went  up  from  B. ;  and  he  (was) 
7.   9  began  he  to  go  up  from  B.,  and  on  the 

7.  16  all  the  silver,  .in  all  the  province  of  B. 

8.  1  them  that  went  up  with  me  from  B.  in 
Neh.    7.    6  whom,  .the  king  of  B.  had  carried  away 

13.    6  and  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  B. 

Esth.  2.    6  whom,  .the  king  of  B.  had  carried  away 

Psa.  87.    4  I  will  make  mention  of.  .B.  to  them  that 

137-    1  By  the  rivers  of  B.,  there  we  sat  down 

137.    8  O  daughter  of  B.,  who  art  to  be  destroyed 

Isa.  13.    1  The  burden  of  B.,  which  Isaiah  the  son  of 

13.  19  B.,  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty  of 

14.  4  take  up.  .proverb  against. . king  of  B. 
14.  22  cut  off  from  B.  the  name,  and  remnant 

21.  9  he  answered  and  said,  B.  is  fallen,  is 

39.    1  Baladan,  king  of  B.,sent  letters.. to  Hez. 
39.    3  They  are  come  from  a  far  country.  .B. 
39.    6  all.  .shall  be  carried  to  B.  :  nothing  shall 
39.    7  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of  the  king  of  B. 
43.  14  For  your  sake  I  have  sent  to  B.,  and  have 

47.  1  0  virgin  daughter  of  B.,  sit  on  the  ground 

48.  14  he  will  do  his  pleasure  on  B.,  and  his  arm 
48.  20  Go  ye  forth  of  B.,  flee  ye  from  tbeChal. 

Jer.   20.   4  into  the  hand  of  the  Icing  of  B.,  and  he 
20.    4  shall  carry  them  captive  into  B.,  and 
20.    5  and  take  them  and  carry  them  to  B. 

20.  6  thou  shalt  come  to  B..  and  there  thou 

21.  2  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  maketh  war' 
2T.  4  wherewith  ye  fight  against  the  king  of  B 
21.    7  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 

21.  10  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B. 

22.  25  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
24.    1  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  had  carried 

24.  1  Jerusalem,  and  had  Ijrought  them  to  B 

25.  1  first  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
25.    9  Nebuchadrezzar  the  king  of  B.,  my 

25. 11  these  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of  B. 
25.  12  I  will  punish  the  king  of  B.,  and  that 
27.    6  into  the  hand  of.  .the  king  of  B.,  my 
27.    8  which  will  not  serve  the.. king  01  i; 
27.    8  under  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B..  that 
27.  9,  14  Ye  shall  not  serve  the  king  of  B. 
27.  ii,  12  under  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B.,  and 
27.  13  nation  that  will  not  serve  the  king  of  B.? 
27.  16  now  shortly  be  brought  again  from  B. 
27.  17  serve  the  kingof  B..  and  live  :  v.herefore 
27.  18  vessels  which  are  left,  .go  not  to  B, 


BABYLON 


67 


BACKSLIDING 


Jer.  27.  20  Which  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  took 
27.  20  he  carried  away  captive  Jeconiah.  .to  B. 

27.  22  They  shall  be  carried  to  B.,  and  there 

28.  2  I  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B. 
28.    3  that  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  took 
28.    3  took  away,  .and  carried  them  to  B. 

28.    4  the  captives  of  Judah,  that  went  into  B. 
28.    4  I  will  break  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B. 

28.  6  to  bring  again  the  vessels,  .from  B.  into 
28. 11  will  I  break  the  yoke  of.  .king  of  B.  from 

28.  14  may  serve  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B. 

29.  1  had  carried  away,  .from  Jerusalem  to  B. 
29.    3  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  sent  unto  B. 

29.    3  to  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  saying 
29.    4  I  have  caused  to  be  carried  away . .  unto  B. 
29.  10  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished  at  B. 

29. 15  Lord  hath  raised  us  up  prophets  in  B. 
29.  20  whom  I  have  sent  from  Jerusalem  to  B. 
29.  21  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
29.  22  the  captivity  of  Judah  which  (are)  in  B. 
29.  22  like  Ahab,  whom  the  king  of  B.  roasted 

29.  28  therefore  he  sent  unto  us  (in)  B.,  saying 
32.   2  then  the  king  of  B.'s  army  besieged  Jeru. 
32.  3,  4,  36  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B.,  and 
32.    5  he  shall  lead  Zedekiah  to  B.,  and^here 
32.  28  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
34.    1  when  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B. .  .fought 
34.    2  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B.,  and  he 
34.    3  shall  behold  the  eyes  of  the  king  of  B. 
34.    3  speak  with  thee,  .thou  shalt  go  to  B. 

34.    7  When  the  king  of  B.  's  army  fought  against 

34.  21  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B.'s  army,  which 

35.  11  when  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  came  up 

36.  29  The  king  of  B.  shall  certainly  come  and 

37.  1  whom  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  made 
37.  17  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B. 

37.  19  The  king  of  B.  shall  not  come  against  you 

38.  3  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B.'s  army 
38.  17  go  forth  unto  the  king  of  B.'s  princes 
38.  18  go  forth  to  the  king  of  B.'s  princes,  then 
38.  22  brought  forth  to  the  king  of  B.'s  princes 

38.  23  thou,  .shalt  be  taken  by.  .the  king  of  B. 

39.  1  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  and  all  his 
39.    3  all  the  princes  of  the  king  of  B.  came  in 

3  residue  of  the  princes  of  the  king  of  B. 

5  to  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.  to  Riblah 

6  the  king  of  B.  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah 

6  the  king  of  B.  slew  all  the  nobles  of  Jud. 

7  bound  him  with  chains,  to  carry  him  to  B. 
9  Nebuzar-adan . .  carried  away  captive . .  B. 

39.  it  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  gave  charge 
39. 13  Bab-mag,  and  all  the  king  of  B.'s  princes 

40.  1  which  were  carried  away  captive  unto  B. 

4  If.  .good  unto  thee  to  come  with  me.  .B. 

4  if.  .ill  unto  thee  to  come  with  me  into  B. 

5  whom  the  king  of  B.  hath  made  governor 
7  the  captains,  .heard  that  the  king  of  B. 
7  them  that  were  not_carried  away .  .to  B. 
9  serve  the  king  of  B.,  and  it  shall  be  well 

11  heard  that  the  king  of  B.  had  left  a 
2  whom  the  king  of  B.  had  made  governor 
4L  18  whom  the  king  of  B.  made  governor  in 

42.  11  Be  not  afraid  of  the  king  of  B.,  of  whom 

43.  3  might,  .cany  us  away  captives  into  B. 

43.  10  I  will  send  and  take,  .the  king  of  B.,  my 

44.  30  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
46.    2  which  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  smote 
46.  13  how  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  should 
46.  26  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
49.  28  which  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  shall 

49.  30  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  hath  taken 

50.  1  The  word  that  the  Lord  spake  against  B. 
50.    2  say,  B.  is  taken,  Bel  is  confounded 
50.    8  Remove  out  of  the  midst  of  B.,  and  go 
50.    9  I  will . .  cause  to  come  up  against  B.  an 
50.  13  every  one  that  goeth  by  B.  shall  be 

30.  14  Put  yourselves  in  array  against  B.  round 

50. 16  Cut  off  the  sower  from  B.,  and  him  that 

50. 17  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  hath  broken 
50.  18  T  will  punish  the  king  of  B.  and  his  land 
50.  23  how  is  B.  become  a  desolation  among  the 
50.  24  thou  art  also  taken,  0  B.,  and  thou  wast 
50.  28  flee  and  escape  out  of  the  land  of  B.,  to 
50.  29  Call  together  the  arehers  against  B. 
50.  34  may.  .disquiet  the  inhabitants  of  B. 
50.  35  A  sword  (is)  upon,  .the  inhabitants  of  B. 
50.  42  against  thee,  O  daughter  of  B. 
50.  43  The  king  of  B.  hath  heard  the  report  of 
50.  45  the  counsel .  .he  hath  taken  against  B. 

50.  46  At  the  noise  of  the  taking  of  B.  the  earth 

51.  1  Behold,  I  will  raise  up  against  B.  and 
51.    2  will  send  unto  B.  fanners,  that  shall 
51.    6  Flee  out  of  the  midst  of  B.,  and  deliver 
51.    7  B.  (hath  been)  a  golden  cup  in  the  LORD'S 
51.    8  B.  is  suddenly  fallen  and  destroyed 
51.    9  We  would  have  healed  B.,  but  she  is  not 
51.  11  for  his  device  (is)  against  B.,  to  destroyit 
51.  12  the  standard  upon  the  walls  of  B. 
51.  12  spake  against  the  inhabitants  of  B. 
51.  24  I  will  render  unto  B.  and  to  all  the 
51.  29  performed  against  B.,  to  make  the.  .of  B. 
51.  30  The  mighty  men  of  B.  have  forborne  to 
51.  31  to  shew  the  king  of  B.  that  his  city  is 
51.  33  The  daughter  of  B.  (is)  like  a  threshing 
51.  34  Nebuchadrezzar  the  king  of  B.  hath 
51.  35  The  violence  done  to  me.  .(be)  upon  B. 
51.  37  B.  shall  become  heaps,  a  dwelling  place 
51.  41  how  is  B.  become  an  astonishment  among 
51.  42  The  sea  is  come  up  upon  B. :  she  is 
51.  44  I  will  punish  Bel  in  B.,  and  I  will  bring 
51.  44  yea,  the  wall  of  B.  shall  fall 
51.  47  do  judgment  upon  the.,  images  of  B. 


39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 


40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
4*- 


Jer.  51.  48  all  that  (is)  therein,  shall  sing  for  B. 

51.  49  As  B.  (hath  caused)  the  slaiu  of  Israel  to 
51.  49  at  B.  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all  the  earth 
51.  53  Though  B.  should  mount  up  to  heaven 
51.  54  A  sound  of  a  cry.  .from  B.,  and  great 
51.  55  Because  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  B.,  and 
51.  56  Because  the  spoiler  is  come  upon.  .B.,  and 
51.  58  The  broad  walls  of  B.  shall  be  utterly 
51.  59  when  he  went  with  Zedekiah.  .into  B.  in 
51.  60  all  the  evil  that  should  come  upon  B. 
51.  60  these  words  that  are  written  against  B. 
51.  61  When  thou  comest  to  B.,  and  shalt  see 

51.  64  Thus  shall  B.  sink,  and  shall  not  rise  from 

52.  3  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  the  king  of  B. 
52.  4  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.  came,  he  and 
52.  9  carried  him  up  unto  the  king  of  B.  to  Rib. 
5-2.  10  the  king  of  B.  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah 
52.  11  the  king  of  B.  bound  him  in  chains,  and 
52.  11  carried  him  to  B.  and  put  him  in  prison 
52.  12  nineteenth.  .Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
52.  12  served  the  king  of  B.,  into  Jerusalem 

52.  15  that  fell  to  the  king  of  B.,  and  the  rest  of 
52.  17  Chaldeans,  .carried  all  the  brass,  .to  B. 
52.  26  and  brought  them  to  the  king  of  B.  to 
I       52.  27  the  king  of  B.  smote  them,  and  put  them 
,\  vr      52-  31  Evil-merodach  king  of  B.  in  the  (first)  year 
52.  32  above  the  throne  of  the  kings,  .in  B. 
52.  34  a.  .diet  given  him  of  the  king  of  B. 
Eze.  12.  13  I  will  bring  him  to  B.  (to)  the  land  of  the 
17.  12  Behold,  the  king  of  B.  is  come  to  Jerus. 
17.  12  taken,  .and  led  them  with  him  to  B. 
17.  16  with  him  in  the  midst  of  B.  he  shall  die 
17.  20  I  will  bring  him  to  B.,  and  will  plead  with 
19.    9  they,  .brought  him  to  the  king  of  B. 
21.  19  that  the  sword  of  the  king  of  B.  may  come 
21.  21  the  king  of  B.  stood  at  the  parting  of  the 
24.    2  the  king  of  B.  set  himself  against  Jerus. 
26.    7  bring. .Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B.,aking 
29.  iS  Nebuchadrezzar kingofB.causedhisarmy 

29.  19  the  land,  .unto  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 

30.  10  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  B. 
30.  24  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king  of  B. 
30.  25  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king  of  B. 
30.  25  my  sword  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  B. 
32.  11  The  sword  of  the  king  of  B.  shall  come 

Dan.    1.    1  came  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.untoJer. 
2.  12  and .  .to  destroy  all  the  wise  (men)  of  B. 
2.  14  gone  forth  to  slay  the  wise  (men)  of  B. 
2.  18  should  not  perish  with  the.  .(men)  of  B. 
2.  24  ordained  to  destroy  the  wise  (men)  of  B. 
2.  24  Destroy  not  the  wise  (men)  of  B.:  bring  nie 
2.  48  ruler  over  the  whole  province  of  B. 
2.  48  governors  over  all  the  wise  (men)  of  B. 

2.  49  he  set  Shadrach . .  over . .  the  province  of  B. 

3.  1  the  plain  of  Dura,  in  the  province  of  B. 
3. 12  thou  hast  set  over,  .the  province  of  B. 

3.  30  promoted  Shadrach . .  in  the  province  of  B. 

4.  6  bring  in  all  the  wise  (men)  of  B.  before  me 
4.  29  walked  in  the  palace  of  the  kingdom  of  B. 

4.  30  Is  not  this  great  B.,  that  I  have  built  for 

5.  7  spake,  and  said  to  the  wise  (men)  of  B. 
7.    1  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar  king  of  B. 

Mic.    4.  10  thou  shalt  go.  .to  B. ;  there  shalt  thou 
Zech.  2.    7  Zion.  .dwellest  (with)  the  daughter  of  B. 

6.  10  Take  of  (them),  .which  are  come  from  B. 
Matt.  1.  11  the  time  they  were  carried  away  to  B. 

1.  12  after  they  were  brought  to  B.,  Jechonias 
1.  17  David  until  the  carrying  away  into  B. 
1.  17  from  the  carrying  away  into  B.  unto  Christ 
Acts    7.  43  and  I  will  carry  you  away  beyond  B. 

1  Pe.  5.  13  The  (church  that  is)  at  B., elected  together 
Rev.  14.    8  followed  another  angel,  saying,  B.  is  fallen 

16. 19  great  B.  came  in  remembrance  before  God 

17.  5  upon  her  forehead . .  a  name . .  B.  the  Great 

18.  2  he  cried,  .saying,  B.  the  great  is  fallen 
18.  10  Alas,  alas  that  great  city  B.,  that  mighty 
18.  21  with  violence  shall  that  great  city  B. 

BABYLONIANS,  r£?3,  S33  '13  so?is  of  Babel. 
The  inhabitants  of  Babylonia,  a  district  of  country  along 
the  Euphrates. 

Ezra  4.    9  Then  (wrote)  Rehuni.  .the  B.,  the  Susan. 
Eze.  23. 15  after  the  manner  of  the  B.  of  Chaldea 
23.  17  the  B.  came  to  her  into  the  bed  of  love 
23.  23  the  B.,  and  all  the  Chaldeans,  Pekod 

BA-BY-LON  ISH,  Tjfl0  belonging  to  Shinar. 
Anything  pertaining  to  Shinar. 

Josh.  7.  21  IsawamongthespoilsagoodlyB.  garment 
BA'-CA,  K33  weeping. 

A  valley  near  Jerusalem,  and  the' valley  of  Rephaim, 
whose  exact  locality  is  uncertain.  A  valley  of  the  same 
name  may  still  be  found  in  the  Sinaitic  district — the 
Wady-el'Baka.  The  Targum renders  it "  Gehenna,"  that 
is,  the  "  Ge-Hinnom  "  or  ravine  below  Mount  Zion. 
This  locality  accords  well  with  the  mention  of  Bacaim 
"  tears,"  in  2  Sa.  5.  23. 

Psa.  84.    6  passing  through  the  valley  of  B.  make 
BACH-RITE,  ,_]33  belonging  to  Beefier, 
Patronymic  of  the  family  of  Becher,  son  of  Ephraim, 
B.C.  1700. 

Num  26.  35  sons  of  Epliraim.  .the  family  of  the  B. 
BACK  — 
l.Back,  backward,  behind,  ninx  achor. 

2  Sa.    1.  22  the  bow  of  Jonathan  turned  not  back 
Psa.    9.    3  When  mine  enemies  are  turned  back 

35.    4  let  them  be  turned  back  and  brought  to 
44.  10  Thou  makest  us  to  turn  back  from  the 
44.  18  Our  heart  is  not  turned  back,  neither 
56.    9  then  shall  mine  enemies  turn  back 


Psa.  1 14.    3  The  sea.  .fled :  Jordan  was  driven  back 
1 14.    5  thou  Jordan,  (that)  thou  wast  driven  back 
129.    5  them  all  be  confounded  and  turned  back 
Isa.  42.  17  They  shall  be  turned  back,  they 

50.    5  not  rebellious,  neither  turned  away  back 
Jer.  38.  22  mire,  (and)  they  are  turned  away  back 

46.   5  dismayed  (and)  turned  away  back? 
Lam.  1.  13  hath  spread  a  net.  .hath  turned  me  back 

2.    3  he  hath  drawn  back  his  right  hand 
Eze.    8.  16  with  their  backs  toward  the  temple  of 
2.Behind,  "ir?N  achar. 

Zeph.  1.    6  And  them  that  are  turned  back  from  the 
3.  The  back,  33  gab. 

Psa.  129.  3  Theplowers  plowed  upon  myback 
Eze.  10.  12  and  then-  backs,  and  their  hands,  and  then" 
Dan.  7.    6  which  had  upon  the  back  of  it  four  wings 
\.The  back  (of  a  person),  i?  gav. 

1  Ki.14.    9  and  hast  cast  me  behind  thy  back 
Neh.  9.  26  and  cast  thy  law  behind  their  backs 
Prov.io.  13  but  a  rod  (is)  for  the  back  of  him  that  is 

vg.  29  and  stripes  for  the  back  of  fools 

26.    3  for  the  ass,  and  a  rod  for  the  fool's  back 

Isa.   38. 17  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back 
50.    6  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters 

Eze.  23.  35  and  cast  me  behind  thy  back 

5. Hence  1  yonder!  beyond!  hnSi  haiah. 

Gen.  19.    9  And  they  said,  Stand 'back.     And  they 

6.  The  neck,  ^"y;  oreph. 

Exod23.  27  make  all  thine  enemies  turn  (their)  backs 
Josh.  7.    8  when  Israel  turneth  then-  back  before 
7.  12  (but)  turned  (their)  backs  before  their 

2  Ch.29.    6  away  their  faces,  .turned  (their)  backs 
Jer.    2.  27  for  they  have  turned  (their)  back  unto 

18.  17  I  will  shew  them  the  back,  and  not  the 
32.  33  And  they  have  turned  unto  me  the  back 
48.  39  how  hath  Moab  turned  the  back 

7.  The  shoidder,  D3^  shekem. 

1.  Sa.io.    9  when  he  had  turned  his  back  to  go  from 
Psa.  21.  12  shalt  thou  make  them  turn  (their)  back 

8.  The  back  {of  a  person),  v£>tos  notos. 

Rom.  11.  10  and  bow  down  their  back  alway 
9. Back,  backward,  behind,  (els  to)  diriaa)  opiso". 
Matt  24.  18  which  is  in  the  field  return  back  to 
Marki3. 16  let  him  that  is  in  the  field  not  turn  back 
Luke  9.  62  No  man .  .looking  back,  is  fit  for  the 

17.  31  let  him  likewise  not  return  back 
John  6.  66  (time)  many  of  his  disciples  went  back 

20.  14  she  turned  herself  back,  and  saw  Jesus 
[See  also,  Bring,  bringing,  brought,  colt,  carry, 

come,  draw,  drive,  go,  gone,  hold,  horseback, 

keep,  kept,  look,  return,    scroll,   send,  sent, 

slide,  take,  turn,  turned.] 

BACK  again  — 

Backward,  rcrypto  achorannith. 

1  Ki.  18.  37  thou  hast  turned  their  heart  back  again 
BACK  from  — 

From  behind,  '"in^O  meachare. 

Zeph.  1.    6  And  them  that  are  turned  back  from  the 
BACK  part  — 
Back  part,  tin**  achor. 

Exod.33.  23  and  thou  shalt  see  my  back  parts 

BACKBITE,  to  — 

To  use  the  feet  (as  a  talebearer),  *?J"j  ragal. 

Psa.  15.    3  He  (that)  backbiteth  not  with  his  tongue 

BACKBITER  — 

One  who  speaks  dow-n  or  against,  Kard\a\os. 

Rom.  1.  30  Backbiters,  haters  of  God,  despiteful 
BACKBITING  — 
I. A  secret  thing,  vip  sether. 

Prov.25.  23  (doth)  an  angry  countenance  a  backbiting 
%A  talking  doim  or  against,  Kara\a\ia. 

2  Co.  12.  20  lest  (there  be)  debates,  .backbitings 
BACKBONE  — 

Wood,  spine,  firm  part,  nsw  atseh. 

Lev.    3.   9  shall  he  take  off  hard  by  the  backbone 
BACKSIDE  — 
l.Back  part,  *rinx  achor. 

Exod26. 12  shall  hang  over  the  backside  of  the 
I.Behind,  back  part,  inS  achar. 

Exod.  3.    1  he  led  the  flock  to  the  backside  of  the 

BACKSIDE,  on  the  — 

From  the  back,  from  behind,  qitktQzv  opisthen. 
Rev.    5.    1  book  written  within  and  [ou  the  backside] 

BACKSLIDER  — 

To  go  back,  ro  sug. 

Prov.14. 14  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled 

BACKSLIDING-  — 

"LA  turning  back  or  away,  n3ityD  meshvbah. 
Jer,     2.  19  and  thy  backsliding  shall  reprove  thee 
3.    6  Hast  thou  seen  (that)  which  backsliding 
3.    8  whereby  backsliding  Israel  committed 
3.  11  The  backsliding  Israel  ha'h  justified 
3.  12  Return,  thou  backsliding  Israel, saith  the 
3.  22  ve  backsliding.  .1  will  heal .  .baekslidings 
5.    6  (and)  their  baekslidings  are  increased 
8.   5  slidden  back  by  a  perpetual  backsliding?- 


BACKWARD 


68 


BALAK 


Jer.   14.    7  for  our  backslidings  are  many ;  we  have 
Hos.  11.    7  And  my  people  are  bent  to  backsliding 
14.    4  I  will  heal  their  backsliding,  I  will  love 
2. One  turning  back,  33t?  shobeb. 

Jer.     3.  14  Turn,  O  backsliding  children,  saith  the 
3.  2z  Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  (and)  I 
31.  22  How  long  wilt  thou..O  thou  backsliding 
49.    4  O  backsliding  daughter  'i  that  trusted  in 
3.  To  turn  round.,  be  refractory,  Tip  sarar. 

Hos.    4.  16  Israel  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer 

BACKWARD  — 

1. Backward,  ninK  achor. 

Gen.  49.  17  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward 
Job   23.    8  and  backward,  but  I  cannot  perceive  him 
Psa.  40.  14  let  them  be  driven  backward  and  put  to 
70.    2  let  them  be  turned  backward,  and  put  to 
Isa.     1.    4  a  people,  .they  are  gone  away  backward 
28.  13  that  they  might  go,  and  fall  backward 
44.  25  that  turneth  wise  (men)  backward,  and 
59.  14  And  judgment  is  turned  away  backward 
Jer.     7.  24  and  went  backward,  and  not  forward 
15.    6  hast  forsaken  me.  .art  gone  backward 
Lam.  r.    8  yea,  she  sigheth,  and  turneth  backward 

2.  Backward,  rvnhts  achorannith. 

Gen,   9.  23  and  went  backward,  and  covered  the 

9.  23  and  their  faces  (were)  backward,  and  they 

1  Sa.    4.  18  he  fell  from  off  the  seat  backward 

2  Ki.  20.  10  let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten 

20.  11  brought  the  shadow  ten'degrees  backward 
Isa.  38.    8  I  mil  bring  again  the  shadow,  .backward 
0.T0  the  back  parts,  els  ra  biricrw  eis  ta  opiso. 
John  18.    6  I  am  (he),  they  went  backward,and  fell  to 

BAD  — 

l.Base,  bad,  t^N?  Hush. 

Ezra   4.  12  building  the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city 

2.  Evil,  inra. 

Gen.  24.  50  we  cannot  speak  unto  thee  bad  or  good 
31.  24  that  thou  speak  not.  .either  good  or  bad 
31.  29  that  thou  speak  not.  .either  good  or  bad 

Lev.  27. 10  a  good  for  a  bad,  or  a  bad  for  a  good 
27.  12  shall  value  it,  whither  it  be  good  or  bad 
27.  14  estimate  it,  whither  it  be  good  or  bad 
27.  33  shall  not  search  whether  it  be  good  or  bad 

Kumi3.  19  the  laud  (is),  .whether  it  (be)  good  or  bad 
24.  13  to  do  (either)  good  or  bad  of  mine  own 

2  Sa  13.  22  Absalom  spake,  .neither  good  nor  bad 
14.  17  so  (is),  .the  king  to  discern  good  and  bad 

1  Ki.   3.   9  that  I  may  discern  between  good  and  bad 

3.  Bad,  kclk6s  kakos. 

2  Co.  5.  10  according  to  that . .  whether . .  good  or  [bad] 

4. Evil,  irovqpis  poneros. 

Matt  22.  10  as  they  found,  both  bad  and  good  :  and 

5  Rotten,  putrid,  crairp6s  sapros. 

Matt  13.  48  good  into  vessels,  but  cast  the  bad  away 

BAD,  to  be  so  — 

From  badness,  jnp  meroa. 

Jer.  24.    2  could  not  be  eaten,  they  were  so  bad 

BADGER  — 

Badger  or  dark  red  coloured  object,  (S!nn  tachash. 
Exod  25.   5  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 
26.  14  and  a  covering  above  (of)  badgers'  skins 
35.    7  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 
35,  23  and  red  skins  of  rams,  and  badgers'  skins 
36. 19  and  a  covering  (of)  badgers'  skins  above 
39.  34  the  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  and  the 
Num.  4.    6  put  thereou.  .covering  of  badgers'  skins 
4.    8  cover,  .with  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 
4.  10  within  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  and 
4.  11  cover  it  with  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 
4. 12  cover,  .with  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 
4.  14  spread,  .a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 
4.  25  the  covering  of  the  badgers'  skins  that  (is) 
Eze.  16.  10  and  shod  thee  witli  badgers'  skin,  and  I 
BADNESS  — 
Evil,  badness,  yi  roa. 

Gen.  41.  19  such  as  I  never  saw.  .for  badness 
BAG  — 
1. Bag,  purse,  D'PHD  charitim. 

2  Ki.    5.  23  bound  two  talents  of  silver  in  two  bags 
2. Cup,  D'3  his. 

Deut2s.  13  Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  divers 
Prov.16.  11  all  the  weights  of  the  bag  (are)  his  work 
Isa.    46.    6  They  lavish  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and 
Mic.    6.  11  and  with  the  bag  of  deceitful  weights? 

3.  Vessel,  instrument,  ^3  keli. 

1  Sa.  17.  40  and  put  them  in  a  shepherd's  bag  which 
17.  49  And  David  put  his  hand  in  his  bag 

4.  Bundle,  liiv  tseror. 

Job  14.  17  My  transgression  (is)  sealed  up  in  a  bag 
Prov.  7.  20  He  bath  taken  a  bag  of  money  with  him 
Hag.  1.    6  earneth  wages  (to  put  it)  into  a  bag  with 

5.  That  into  which  a  thing  is  cast,  fiaXavriov. 

Lukei2.  33  provide  yourselves  bags  which  wax  not 
G.  Where  tlw  to?iguts  of  wind  instruments  are  put, 
y\u>(ro'6KOfj.ov  glossokomon. 
John  12.    6  because  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the  bag 
13.  29  sonic.  .thought,bccanseJudashadthebag 


BAGS,  to  put  up  in  — 
To  bind  up,  *nif  tsur. 

2  Ki.12.  10  they  put  up  in  bags,  and  told  the  money 

BA-HA-RU-MITE  or  BAR-HTT-MITE,  WriS. 
Patronymic  of  one  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men. 

t  Oil.  11.  33  Azmaveth  the  B.,  Eliahba  the  Sbaalbonite 

BA-HTJ -RIM,  D'!in3  low  grounds. 

A  village  on  the  road  leading  up  from  the  valley  of  the 

Jordan  to  Jerusalem. 

28a.    3.  16  her  husband  went.. behind  her  to  B. 

16.  5  when  king  David  came  to  B.,  behold 

17.  18  they,  .came  to  a  man's  house  in  B., which 
19.  16  a  Benjamite,  which  (was)  of  B.,  hasted 

1  Ki.   2.    8  a  Benjamite  of  B.,  which  cursed  me  with 

BA'-JITH,  rv3n  house. 

This  word  occurs  frequently  in  the  names  of  towns,  but 
is  in  this  one  passage  used  absolutely,  and  left  un- 
translated as  the  name  of  a  place.  In  the  original  text 
it  has  the  article,  "  the  house,"  not  referring  to  a  place 
of  this  name,  but  to  "The  House"  or  temple  of  the 
gods  of  Moab,  as  opposed  to  the  "high  places"  in  the 
same  sentence. 

Isa.   15.    2  He  is  gone  up  to  B.,  and  to  Dibon,  the 

BAK  BAK'-KAR,  ~ij33p3  diligent  searcher. 
A  Levite  who  came  up  from  exile,  B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  15  [of  the  Levites] . .  B. ,  Heresh,  and  Galal 

BAK'-BTJK,  p*3j?3  waste,  hollow. 

Ancestor  of  the  Nethinims  who  returned  from  exile, 

B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  51  children  01  B.,  the  children  of  Hakupha 
Neh.   7.  53  children  of  B.,  the  children  of  Hakupha 

BAK  BTJK'-IAH,  n;p3p3  toasted  by  Jah. 

A  Levite  of  Asaph's  family,  and  second  leader  in  the 

temple  worship  of  the  exile,  B.C.  445. 

Neh,  11.  17  B  the  second  among  his  brethren,  and 
12.    9  B.  and  Unni,  their  brethren,  (were)  over 
12.  25  Mattaniah,  and  B... porters  keeping  the 

BAKE,  to  — 

l.To  bake,  nsx  aphah. 

Gen.  19.    3  and  did  bake  unleavened  bread 
Exodi2.  39  they  baked  unleavened  cakes  of  the  dougli 

16.  23  bake(that)whichyewillbake. .andseethe 
Lev.  24.    5  take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve  cakes 

26.  26  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one 
1  Sa.  28.  24  and  did  bake  unleavened  bread  thereof 
Isa.   44.  15  he  kindleth  (it),  and  baketh  bread  ;  yea 

44.  19  also  I  have  baked  bread  upon  the  coals 
Eze.  46.  20  where  they  shall  bake  the  meat  offering 

2.  To  boil,  cook,  S^3  bashal,  3. 

Nuniu.    8  and  baked  (it)  in  pans,  and  made  cakes  of 
2Sa.  13.   8  and  made  cakes,  .and  did  bake  the  cakes 

3.  To  bake  cakes,  JW  ug. 

Eze.    4. 12  thou  shalt  bake  it  witli  dung  that  cometh 

BAKE  MEATS  — 

Food,  work  of  a  baker,  ."15k  nfe»£0  SpNlp. 

Gen. 40.  17  of  all  manner  of  bakemeacs  for  Plmraoh 

BAKEN  — 

1. Anything  baken,  nsxn  maapheh. 

Lev.  2.    4  an  oblation,  .baken  in  the  oven 
2.  To  mingle,  dip,  th~\  rabak,  6. 

Lev.   6.  21  (when  it  is)  baken,  thou  shalt  bring  it  in 
BAKEN,  to  be  — 
To  be  baken,  hqn  aphah,  2. 

Lev.    6. 1 7  It  shall  not  be  baken  with  leaven.   I  have 
7.    9  all  the  meat  offering  that  is  baken  in  the 
23.  17  they  shall  be  baken  with  leaven . .  the  first 
BAKEN  pieces  — 
Baken  or  dried  pieces,  DTDri  tupkinwi. 

Lev.    6.  21  the  baken  pieces  of  the  meat  offering 

BAKEN  on  the  coals  — 

Burning  coals,  hot  stones,  D'3^"!  retsaphim. 

1  Ki.  19.   6  and,  behold . .  a  cake  baken  on  the  coals 

BAKER  — 

To  bake,  nsx  aphah. 

Gen.  40.    iT(his)  baker  had  offended  their  lord  the 
40.    2  was  wroth . .  against  the  chief  of  the  bakers 
40.    5  the  butler  and  the  baker  of  the  king  of 
40.  16  When  the  chief  baker  saw  that  the 
40.  20  lifted  up  the  head,  .of  the  chief  baker 

40.  22  But  he  hanged  the  chief  baker :  as  Joseph 

41.  10  put  me  in  ward . .  me  and  the  chief  baker 
1  Sa.  8.  13  will  take  your  daughters,  .(to  be)  bakers 
Jer.  37.  21  a  piece  of  bread  out  of  the  bakers'  street 
Hos.    7.    4  as  an  oven  heated  by  the  baker,  (who) 

7.    6  their  baker  sleepeth  all  the  night ;  in  the 

BAL'-AAlff,  D^3  a  pilgrim  or  lord  of  the  people. 
Son  of  Beor,  a  Midianite  prophet.  He  resided  at  Pethor, 
a  city  of  Mesopotamia,  as  he  himself  tells  us,  he  was 
"  broughtlrom  Aram  out  of  the  mountains  of  the  East. " 
B.C.  1452. 

Num  22.   5  He  sent  messengers  therefore  unto  B. 
22.    7  they  came  unto  B.,  and  spake  unto  him 
22.   8  the  princes  of  Moab  abode  with  B. 
22.    9  God  came  unto  B.,  and  said,  What  men 
22.  10  B.  said  unto  God,  Balak  the  son  of 


Num  22.  12  God  said  unto  B.,  Thou  shalt  not  go 
22.  13  B.  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  said 
22.  14  the  princes  of  Moab.  .said,  B.  refuseth  to 
22.  16  they  came  to  B.,  and  said  to  him,  Thus 
22. 18  B.  answered  and  said  unto  the  servants 
22.  20  God  came  unto  B.  at  night,  and  said 
22.  21  B.  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  saddled 
22.  23  B.  smote  the  ass,  to  turn  her  into  the  way 
22. 25  crushed  B.'s  foot  against  the  wall  :  and 
22.  27  she  fell  down  under  B.:  and  B.'s  anger 
22.  28  she  said  unto  B.,  What  have  I  done  unto 
22.  29  B.  said  unto  the  ass,  Because  thou  hast 
22.  30  the  ass  said  unto  B.,  (Am)  not  I  thine  ass 
22.  31  Then  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  B.,  and 
22.  34  And  B.  said  unto  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  I 
22.  35  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  B.,  Go 
22.  35  So  B.  went  with  the  princes  of  Balak 
22.  36  And  when  Balak  heard  that  B.  was  come 
22.  37  And  Balak  said  unto  B.,  Did  I  not 
22.  38  And  B.  said  unto  Balak,  Lo,  I  am  come 
22.  39  And  B.  went  with  Balak,  and  they  came 

22.  40  Balak  offered  oxen .  .and  sent  to  B.,  and 
«2.  41  Balak  took  B.,  and  brought  him  up  into 

23.  1  And  B.  said  unto  Balak,  Build  me  here 
•  23.    2  And  Balak  did  as  B.  had  spoken  ;  and 

23.    3  B.  offered  on  (every)  altar  a  bullock  and 
23.    3  B.  said  unto  Balak,  Stand  by  thy  burnt 
23.    4  God  met  B. :  and  he  said  unto  him,  I  have 
23.    5  And  the  LORD  put  a  word  in  B.'s  mouth 
23.  11  And  Balak  said  unto  B.,What  hast  thou 
23.  16  And  the  Lord  met  B.,  and  put  a  word  in 
23.  2s  And  Balak  said  unto  B.,  Neither  curse 
23.  26  But  B.  answered  and  said  unto  Balak 
23.  27  And  Balak  said  unto  B.,  Come,  I  pray 
23.  28  And  Balak  brought  B.  unto  the  top  of  P. 
23.  29  B.  said  unto  Balak,  Build  me  here  seven 

23.  30  And  Balak  did  as  B.  had  said,  and  oftered 

24.  1  when  B.  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to 
24.    2  B.  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  he  saw  Israel 
24.    3,  15  B.  the  son  of  Beor  hath  said,  and  the 
24.  10  Balak's  anger  was  kindled  against  B. 

24.  10  Balak  said  unto  B.,  I  called  thee  to  curse 
24. 12  B.  said  unto  Balak,  Spake  I  not  also 
24.  25  B.  rose  up,  and  went  and  returned  to  his 
31.    8  B.  also  the  son  of  Beor  they  slew  with 
31.  16  caused.  .Israel,  through  the  counsel  of  B. 
Deut23.    4  because  they  hired  against  thee  B.  the 

23.  5  Lord  thy  God  would  not  hearken  unto  B. 
Jos.  13.  22  B.  also  the  son  of  Beor,  the  soothsayer 

24.  9  Balak.  .sent  and  called  B.  the  son  of 
24.  10  But  I  would  not  hearken  unto  B. ;  there 

Neh.  13.    2  Because  they,  .hired  B.  against  them 
Mic.    6.    5  O  my  people,  remember,  .what  B.  the 
2  Pe.    2.  15  are.  .following  the  way  of  B.  (the  son)  of 
Jude       11  ran  greedily  after  the  error  of  B.  for 
Rev.    2.  14  there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  B. 

BA'-LAC,  PaKdfc,  the  Greek  form  of  pbz. 

Rev.    2.  14  Balaam  who  taught  B.  to  cast  a  stumbling 

BA  LA'-DAN,  J7&73  having  power. 

Father  of  Merodach  (or  Berodach)  Baladan,  king  of 
Babylon  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah. 

2  Ki.  20.  12  Berodach-baladan,  the  sou  of  B.,  king  of 
Isa.    39.    1  Merodach-baladan,  the  son  of  B.,  king  of 

BA-'LAH,  nSs  withered,  old. 

A  city  of  Simeon,  called  Bilhah  in  1  Ch.  4.  29. 

Josh  19.    3  [they  had  in  their  inheritance] . ,  B.,  and 

BA'-LAK,  pbz  void,  empty,  waster. 
King  of  Moab,  and  son  of  Zippor,  at  the  time  Israel 
were  bringing  their  journeyings  to  a  close.     He  hired 
Balaam  to  curse  Israel  when  they  were  in  his  territory. 
b.c,  1452. 

Num  22.    2  B.  the  son  of  Zippor  saw  all  that 

22.    4  B.  the  son  of  Zippor.  .king of  the  Moab. 
22.    7  spake  unto  him  the  words  of  B. 
22.  10  B.  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  Moab,  hath 
22.  13  Balaam,  .said  unto  the  princes  of  B. 
22.  14  the  princes  of  Moab.  .went  unto  B.,  and 
22  15  B.  sent  yet  again  princes,  more,  and 
22.  16  Thus  saith  B.  the  son  of  Zippor,  Let 
22.  18  Balaam  answered,  .unto  the  servants  of  E. 
22.  35  So  Balaam  went  with  the  princes  of  B. 
22.  36  when  B.  heard  that  Balaam  was 
22.  37  B.  said  unto  Balaam,  Did  I  not 
22.  38  Balaam  said  unto  B.,  Lo,  I  am  come 
22.  39  Balaam  went  with  B.,  and  they  came 
22.  40  B.  offered  oxen  and  sheep,  and  sent 

22.  41  B.  took  Balaam,  and  brought  him  up 

23.  1  Balaam  said  unto  B.,  Build  me  here  seven 
23.    2  B.  did  as  Balaam  had  spoken  ;  an 

23.    2  B.  and  Balaam  offered  on  (every)  altar  a 
23.    3  Balaam  said  unto  B.,  Stand  by  thy 
23.    5  Return  unto  B.,  and  thus  thou  shalt 
23.    7  B.  the  king  of  Moab  hath  brought  met 
23.  11  B.  said  unto  Balaam,  What  hast  thou 
23.  13  B.  said  unto  him,  Come,  I  pray  thee 
23.  15  he  said  unto  B.,  Stand  here  by  thy  burnt 
23.  16  Go  again  unto  B.,  and  say  thus 
23. 17  B.  said  unto  him,  What  hath  the  Lord 
23.  18  Rise  up,  B.,  and  hear;  hearkeu  unto  me 
23.  25  B.  said  unto  Balaam,  Neither  cause  them 
23.  26  Balaam  answered  and  said  unto  B. 
23.  27  B.  said  unto  Balaam,  Come,  I  pray  thee 
23.  28  B.  brought  Balaam  unto  the  top  of  Peor 
23.  29  Balaam  said  unto  B.,  Build  me  here 

23.  30  B.  did  as  Balaam  bad  said,  and  offered 

24.  10  B.'s  anger  was  kindled  against  Balaam 
24.  10  B.  said  unto  Balaam,  I  called  thee  to 


BALANCE 


69 


BANQUET 


N1UII24.  12  Balaam  said  unto  B.,  Spake  I  not  also 
24. 13  If  B.  would  give  me  his  house  full  of 
24.  25  to  his  place :  and  B.  also  went  his  way 

Josh. 24.    9  Then  B.  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  Moab 

Judgix.  25  And  now  (art)  thou  any  thing  better  than  B. 

Mic.   6.   5  0  my  people,  remember  now  what  B. 

BALANCE  — 

Stalky  cane,  mg  qaneh. 

Isa.   46.   6  and  weigh  silver  in  the  balance,  (and) 

BALANCES  — 

Pair  of  balances,  D;jtnD  moznayim.    ■ 

Lev    19.  36  Just  balances,  just  weights,  a  just 
Job     6.    2  calamity  laid  in  the  balances  together ! 
31     6  Let  me  be  weighed  in  an  even  balance 
Psa.  62.    9  to  be  laid  in  the  balance,  they  (are) 
Prov-ii.    1  A  false  balance  (is)  abomination  to  the 
16.  11  A  just  weight  and  balance  (are)  the 

20.  23  and  a  false  balance  (is)  not  good 

Isa.  40.  12  weighed  the  mountains . .  in  a  balance  ? 

40.  15  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance 
Jer.  32.  10  weighed . .  the  money  in  the  balances 
Eze.    3     1  then  take  thee  balances  to  weigh,  and 

45.  jo  Ye  shall  have  just  balances,  and  a  just 
Dan.  5.  27  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances;  and 
Hos.  12.  7  the  balances  of  deceit  (are)  in  his  hand 
Amos  8.  5  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  deceit  ? 
Mic.    6. 11  count  (them)  pure  with  the.  .balances 

BALANCES,  pair  of  — 

Yoke,  cross  bar,  Cvy6s  zugos. 

Rev.    6.    5  and  he .  .had  a  pair  of  balances  in  his 
BALANCINGS  — 
Poisings,  balancings,  tnzn  miphlas. 

Job   37. 16  Dost  thou  know  the  balancings  of  the 
BALD  — 
l.Bald  {in  the  back  of  head),  nip  qereach. 

Lev.  13.  40  hair  is  fallen  off  his  head,  he  (is)  bald 

2. Baldness,  riplS  qorchah. 

Jer.  48.  37  every  head  (shall  be)  bald,  and  every 
BALD  forehead  — 
Bald  {in  front  of  head),  nnsa  gabbaxhath. 

Lev.  13.  42  or  bald  forehead,  a  white  reddish  sore 
13.  42  leprosy  sprung  up  in.  .his  bald  forehead 
13.  43  or  in  his  bald  forehead,  as  the  leprosy 

BALD  head  — 

l.Bald  (in  back  of  head),  nip  qereach. 

2  Ki.    2.  23  thou  bald,  head ;  go  up,  thou  bald  head 
2.  Bald  spot,  baldness,  nrnp  qarachath. 

Lev.  13.  42  And  if  there  be  in  the  bald  head,  or 
13.  42  a  leprosy,  sprung  up  in  his  bald  head 
13.  43  (be)  white  reddish  in  his  bald  head 

BALD,  made  — 

To  be  made  bald,  rn;?  qarach,  6. 

Eze.  29.  18  every  head,  .made  bald. .  every  shoulder 

BALD,  to  make  — 

To  make  bald,  rnB  qarach. 

Mic.    1.  16  Make  thee  bald,  and  poll  thee  for  thy 

BALD,  to  make  (one's)  self  — 

l.To  become  bald,  uiq  qarach,  2. 

Jer.  16.    6  nor  make  themselves  bald  for  them 

2.  To  be  made  bald,  rri?  qarach,  6. 

Eze.  27.  31  they  shall  make  themselves  utterly  bald 

BALDNESS  — 

Baldness  (in  brick  of  head),  nrnjj  qorchah. 

Lev.  2i.    5  They  shall  not  make  baldness  upon  their 
Deut  14.    1  nor  make  any  baldness  between  your 
Isa.     3.  24  and  instead  of  well  set  hair  baldness 
15.    2  on  all  their  heads,  .baldness 
22.  12  and  to  baldness,  and  to  girding  with 
Jer.  47.    5  Baldness  is  come  upon  Gaza ;  Ashkelon 
Eze.    7.  18  and  baldness  upon  all  their  heads 
Amos  S.  10  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth .  .baldness 
Mic.    1.  16  enlarge  thy  baldness  as  the  eagle 

BALL  — 

Ball,  any  thing  round,  iw  dur. 

Isa.   22.  iS  violently  turn  and  toss  thee  (like)  a  ball 
BALM  — 
Balsam,  a  medicinal  gum,  ,-i^',  **]?  tsori,  tseri. 

Gen.  37.  25  their  camels  bearing  spicery  and  balm 
43.  11  carry,  .the  man  a  present,  a  little  balm 

Jer.     8.  22  no  balm  in  Gilead  ;  (is  there)  no  physician 
46.  11  Go  up  into  Gilead,  and  take  balm,  0 
51.    8  howl  for  her ;  take  balm  for  her  pain,  if 

Eze.  27.  17  Pannag,  and  honey,  and  oil,  and  balm 
•ra'-tvtatt,  nca  high  place. 

Used  in  Ezekiel  as  the  name  of  the  places  in  which 
Israel  offered  sacrifices  to  idols. 

Eze.  20.  29  the  name  thereof  (is)  called  B.  unto  this 
BA'-MOTH,  niD3  high  places. 

A  city  on  the  N.  side  of  the  Anion,  which  had  belonged 
to  the  Moabites,  but  was  taken  from  them  by  Sihon.  It 
is  thought  to  be  the  Bamoth-baal  of  Josh.  13.  17. 

Num  21.  19  and  from  iNahaliel  to  B. 

21.  20  from  B.  (in)  the  valley,  that  (is)  in  the 

BA-MOTH  BA'-AL,  "?y2  rriD3  high  places  of  Baal. 
A  town  of  Moab  taken  by  Sihon,  but  afterwards  a  city 
cf  Reuben.     It  is  probably  the  Bamoth  of  Num.  21.  19. 
Josh.  1 3.  17  Dibou,  and  B.,  and  Beth-baal-meon 


BAND  — 

l.Band,  bond,  fetter,  -«dn  esur. 

Judg  15.  14  and  his  bands  loosed  from  off  his  hands 
Eccl.    7.  26  heart  (is)  snares,  .her  hands,  .bands 
Dan.    4.  15  even  with  a  band  of  iron  and  brass 
4.  E3  even  with  a  band  of  iron  and  brass 

2.A  troop  (of  men),  "Wia  gedud. 

2  Sa.    4.    2  two  men  (that  were)  captains  of  bands 

1  Ki.  xi.  24  became  captain  over  a  band,  when  David 

2  Ki.   6.  23  So  the  bands  of  Syria  came  no  more  into 

13.  20  And  the  bands  of  the  Moabites  invaded 
13.  21  that,  behold,  they  spied  a  band 
24.    2  And  the  Lord  sent  against  him  bands  of 
24.    2  and  bands  of  the  children  of  Amnion,  and 
1  Ch.  7.   4  And  with  them,  .bands  of  soldiers 
12.  18  and  made  them  captains  of  the  band 
12.  21  they  helped  David  against  the  band 
Z.Cord,  rope,  "?5n  chebel. 

Psa.  119.  61  The  bands  of  the  wicked  have  robbed  me 
4.  Thick  bands,  wreathen  cords,  roy.  aboth. 

Job   39.  10  Canst  thou  bind  the  unicorn  with  his  band 
Eze.    3.  25  But  thou .  .behold,  they  shall  put  bands 
4.    8  And,  behold,  I  will  lay  bands  upon  thee 
Hos.  11.    4  I  drew  them  with  cords,  .with  bands  of 

5. Head,  detachment,  bVt  rosh. 

1  Ch.  12.  23  these,  .the  numbers  of  the  bands 

Job     1.  17  The  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands,  and 

Q.I/ip,  edge,  n$p  saphah. 

Exod  39.  23  a  band  round  about  the  hole 

7. A  band,  body  of  men  at  arms,  o-ire?pa  speira. 
Matt  27.  27  and  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  band 
Markis.  16  and  they  call  together  the  whole  band 
■John  18. 12  Then  the  band  and  the  captain,  .took  J 
Acts  10.    1  centurion  of  the  band  called  the  Italian 

21.  31  came  unto  the  chief  captain  of  the  band 
27.    1  Julius,  a  centurion  of  Augustus'  band 

BAND  of  men  — 

l.A  troop  (of  men),  Tn|  gedud. 

2CI1. 22.    x  for  the  band  of  men.  .had  slain  all  the 
2.  Strength,  might,  force,  h\n  chayil. 

1  Sa.  10.  26  there  went  with  him  a  band  of  men 
3. Band,  body  of  men  at  arms,  o~ir<z7pa  speira. 

John  18.    3  having  received  a  band . .  and  officers 
BAND  of  soldiers  — 
Strength,  might,  force,  rn  chayil. 

Ezra    8.  22  to  require  of  the  king  a  band  of  soldiers 

3AND  together,  to  — 

To  make  a  turning  together,  icoUm  uvarpo^v. 
Acts  23. 12  certain  of  the  Jews  banded  together 

BANDS,  D^nh  chobelim. 

Symbolic  name  given  to  one  of  two  staves  which  sym- 
bolised the  Lord's  covenant  with  the  seed  of  Jacob,  and 
the  brotherhood  of  Israel  and  Judah. 

Zech.11.    7  one  I  called  Beauty,  .the  other  I  called  B. 
11. 14  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff..  B.,  that  I 

BANDS  — 

1.  Wings,  corps,  C'SJjn  agappim. 

Eze.  12.  14  I  will  scatter,  .all  his  bands 

17.  21  all  his  fugitives  with  all  his  bands  shall 
38.    6  Gomer,  and  all  his  bands ;  the  house  of 
38.    6  house  of  Togarmah.  .and  all  his  bands 
38.    9  thou,  and  all  thy  bands,  and  many  people 

38.  22  I  will  rain  upon  him,  and  upon  his  bands 

39.  4  thou,  and  all  thy  bands,  and  the  people 

2. Bands,  pains,  niacin  chartsuhboth. 

Psa.  73.    4  For.  .no  bands  in  their  death :  but  their 
Isa.    58.    6  to  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness,  to  undo 

'Z.Bar,  naiD  motah. 

Lev.  26.  13  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  your  yoke 
Eze.  34.  27  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  their  yoke 

4. Band,  fetter,  "idid  moser. 

J°t>   39-    5  wno  hath  loosed  the  bands  of  the  wild  ase? 
Psa.    2.    3  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and 

107.  14  and  break  their  bands  in  sunder 
Isa.  28.  22  lest  your  bands  be  made  strong :  for  I 

52.    2  loose  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  neck 
Jer.     2.  20  broken  thy  yoke .  .burst  thy  bands 

^.Drawings  together,  TftJpiD  moshechoth. 

Job  38.  31  Canst  thou,  .loose  the  bands  of  Orion? 
Q.Camp,  niriD  machaneh. 

Gem  32.    7  he  divided  the  people,  .into  two  bauds 
32.  10  and  now  I  am  become  two  bands 

7. Band,  fetter,  deafi6s  desmos. 

Luke  8.  29  he  brake  the  bands,  and  was  driven  of 
Acts  16.  26  and  every  one's  bands  were  loosed 

22.  30  he  loosed  him  from  (his)  [bands] 

8.  Band  for  yoking  together,  ^vKrnpia  zeukteria. 
Acts  27.  40  loosed  the  rudder  bands,  and  noised  up 

9.  What  binds  together,  avvdio-^os  sundesmos. 

Col.     2.  19  the* body  by  joints  and  bands  having 

10.  To  halve,  divide,  psp  chat  sals. 

Prov.30.  27  yet  go  they  forth  all  of  them  by  bands 

BA'-NI,  *33  posterity. 

1.  A  Gadite,  and  one  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men,  B.c 

1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  36  B.  the  Gadite 


2.  An  Aaronite,  a  descendant  of  Marari,  B.C.  1440. 

1  Ch.  6.  46  Amzi,  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of  Shamer 

3.  A  descendant  of  Pharez,  son  of  Judah,  B.C.  536. 

iCh.  9.    4  Imri,  the  son  of  B.,  of  the  children  of  P. 

4.  Father  of  some  of  those  who  went  up  from  Babylon 
with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  10  children  of  B.,  six  hundred  forty  and  two 

(In  Neh.  7.  15,  the  name  is  given  as  Binnui.) 
Ezra  10.  29  of  the  sous  of  B.,  Meshullam,  Malluch 

5.  One  whose  descendants  had  taken  strange  wives  dur- 
ing the  exile,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  34  Of  the  sons  of  B  ;  Maadai,  Amram,  and 

6.  A  descendant  of  No.  5,  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  38  And  B.,  Binnui,  Shimei. 

7.  A  Levite  whose  son  repaired  part  of  the  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem, B.C.  445. 

"Neh.  3.  17  After  him  repaired,  .the  son  of  B. 

8.  7  Also  Jeshua,  and  B.,  and  Sherebiah 

9.  4  Then  stood  up  upon  the  stairs.  .B. 

9.    5  the  Levites,  Jeshua,  and  Kadmiel,  B. 
S.  A  Levite  who  regulated  the  devotions  of  the  people 
after  Ezra  had  read  the  book  of  the  law  to  them,  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.  9.    4  of  the  Levites .  Bunni,  Sherebiah,  B  ,  and 
10.  13  [Andtheir brethren]. .Hodijah, B.,Beninu 

9.  A  chief  man  or  family  that,  with  Neheniiah,  sealed 
the  covenant,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  14  The  chief  of  the  people.  .Zatthu,  B. 

10.  A  Levite  whose  son  was  overseer  of  the  Levites  at 
Jerusalem  after  the  exile.  [The  same  perhaps  as  No.  7 
or  8],  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  2?  The  overseer.  .Tzzi  the  son  of  B. 

BANISHED  — 

To  oe  driven  or  forced  away,  rrn  nadach,  2. 

2  Sa.  14.  13  doth  not  fetch  home  again  his  banished 

14. 14  that  his  banished  be  not  expelled  from 

BANISHMENT  — 

Rooting  out,  Wt7&  sheroshu. 

Ezra  7.  26  whether,  .unto  death,  or  to  banishment 

BANISHMENT,  causes  of  — 

Causes  of  being  driven  away,  D-rnii?  madduchim. 
Lam.   2.  14  false  burdens  and  causes  of  banishment 

BANK  — 

I.Banks  or  cuttings  out  by  water,  n*ia  gadah. 
Josh.  3.  15  Jordan  overfloweth  all  his  banks  all  the 

4.  18  and  flowed  over  all  his  banks,  as.  .before 
1  Ch.  12.  15  when  it  had  overflown  all  his  banks 
Isa.     8.    7  channels,  and  go  over  all  his  banks 

2.Banks,  cuttings,  n;na  gidyah. 

1  Ch.  12. 15  when  it  had  overflown  all  his  banks 
3. Any  thing  raised  up  on  high,  .1770  solelah. 

2  Sa.  20.  15  they  cast  up  a  bank  against  the  city 
2  Ki.  19.  32  He  shall  not.  .cast  a  bank  against  it 
Isa.    37.  33  He  shall  not.  .cast  a  bank  against  it 

LLip,  edge,  na"p  saphah. 

Gen.  41.  17  I  stood  upon  the  bank  of  the  river 
Deut.  4.  48  by  the  bank  of  the  river  Arnon 
Josh.  1 2.    2  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  Arnon 

33.    9  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  Arnon 

13.  16  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Arnon 
2  Ki.    2.  13  and  stood  by  the  bank  of  Jordan 
Eze.  47.    7  at  the  bank  of  the  river,  .very  many  trees 

47.  12  by  the  river  upon  the  bank  thereof 
Dan.  12.    5  the  one  on  this  side  of  the  bank 

12.    5  the  other  on  that  side  of  the  bank 

5. Table  (for  dining  or  business),  rpdire^a  trapeza. 
Luke  19.  23  gavest  not  thou  my  money  into  the  bank 

BANNER  — 

I.Banner,  standard,  ?Y\  degel. 

Song  2.   4  and  his  banner  over  me  (was)  love 

2.Sign,  ensign,  01  ?ies. 

Psa.  60.    4  Thou  hast  given  a  banner  to  them  that 
Isa.  13.   2  Lift  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  high 

BANNERS,  to  set  up  — 

To  set  up  a  banner,  hri  dagal. 

Psa.  20.    5  we  will  set'up.  .banners  :  the  Lord 

P  ANNERS,  with  — 

To  have  banners,  hx*  dagal,  2. 

Song  6.  4,  10  terrible  as  (an  army)  with  banners 

BANQUET — 

l.A  shouting  (for  joy  or  sorrow),  Oil?  marzeach. 

Amos  6.   7  the  banquet  of  them  that  stretched 
2.  A  drinking,  nnzfci  mishteh. 

Esth.  5.    4  let  the  king.. come,  .unto  the  banquet 

5.  5  So  the  king . .  came  to  the  banquet  that  E. 
5.    6  king  said  unto  Esther  at  the  banquet  of 
5.    8  let  the  king . .  come  to  the  banquet  that 
5.  12  come  in  with  the  king  unto  the  banquet 

5.  14  then  go  thou  in.,  unto  the  banquet 

6.  14  hasted  to  bring  Ham  an  unto  the  banquet 

7.  2  on  the  second  day  at  the  banquet  of  wine 
7.    7  And  the  king  arising  from  the  banquet 

7.    8  into  the  place  of  the  banquet  of  wine 
Dan.   5.  10  the  queen . .  came  into  the  banquet  house 


BANQUET 


70 


BARKOS 


BANQUET,  to  — 

To  drink,  n\$  shathah. 

Esth.    7.    1  So  the  king. 


came  to  banquet  with  Esther 


BANQUET,  to  make  a  — 

To  diy,  pierce,  prepare,  .-nr  karah. 

Job   41.    6  Shall  thy  companions  makeabanquet  of 

BANQUETING  — 
Wine,  {what  is  pressed  out,  juice),  \\\yayin. 

Song  2.    4  He  brought  me  to  the  banqueting  house 
BANQUETINGS  — 
A  drinking,  tt6tos  potos. 

1  Pe.   4.    3  when  we  walked  in.  .bauquetiugs,  and 

BAPTISM  — 

1. Baptism  (as  a  state),  {$a.irTi<rfxa  baptisma. 

Matt.  3.    7  he  saw.  .Sadducees  come  to  his  baptism 
20.  22  [to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  tliat  I] 
20.  23  [and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  that  I] 
2i,  25  The  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  it  ? 
31ark  1.    4  and  preach  the  baptism  of  repentance 
10.  38  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  that 

10.  39  with  the  baptism  that  I  am  baptized 

11.  30  The  baptism  of  John,  was  (it)  from 
Luke  3.    3  preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance 

7.  29  being  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  John 

12.  50  But  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with 
20,    4  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it  from  heaven 

Acts    1.  22  Beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto 

10.  37  after  the  baptism  which  John  preached 

13.  24  John  had  first  preached.,  the  baptism  of 
t3.  25  knowing  only  the  baptism  of  John 

19.    3  And  they  said,  Unto  John's  baptism 

19.  4  John  verily  baptized  with  the  baptism  of 
Rom.  6.  4  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into 
Eph.   4.    5  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism 

■Col.     2.  12  Buried  with  him  iu  [baptism,]  wherein 
1  Pe.   3.  21  baptism  doth  also  now  save  us,  not  the 

2.  Baptism  (as  an,  act),  f3airTt<rfi6s  bapttismos. 
Beb.   &.    2  Of  the  doctrine  of  baptisms 

BAP'-TIST,  PawTto-T-iis  baptistes. 

Designation  of  the  forerunner  of  Christ;  see  beloio. 

BAPTIST  — 

l.One  that  baptizes,  ^airriaT-qs  baptistes. 

Matt.  3.    1  In  those  days  came  John  the  Baptist 

11.  11  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist 

11.  12  And  from  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist 

14.  2  This  is  John  the  Baptist;  he  is  risen 
14.    8  Give  me  here  John  Baptist's  head 

16.  14  Some .  .John  the  Baptist :  some,  Elias 

17.  13  he  spake  unto  them  of  John  the  Baptist 
Mark  6.  24  she  said,  The  head  of  John  the  [Baptist] 

6.  25  give  me.  .the  head  of  John  the  Baptist 

8.  28  they  answered,  John  the  Baptist 
Luke  7.  20  John  Baptist  hath  sent  us  unto  thee 

7.  28  a  greater  prophet  than  John  [the  Baptist] 

7.  33  John  the  Baptist  came  neither  eating 

9.  19  They  answering  said,  John  the  Baptist 
%To  baptize,  fHaTTTifa  baptizo. 

Mark  6.  14  That  John  the  Baptist  was  risen  from 

BAPTIZE,  to  — 

To  consecrate  (by  pouring  out  on,  or  putting  into), 
fia-irrifa  baptizo. 

Matt.  3.  11  I  indeed  baptize,  .he  shall  baptize  you 

Mark  1.    4  John  did  baptize  in  the  wilderness 

1.    8  I.. have  baptized,  .he  shall  baptize  you 

Luke   3.  16  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water;  but 

3.  16  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

John  1.  25  Why  baptizest  thou  then,  if  thou  be  not 
1.  26  John  answered.  .1  baptize  with  water 
1.  ^  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize  with  water 
1.  33  the  same  is  he  which  baptizeth  with  the 
3.  22  there  he  tarried  witli  them,  and  baptized 

3.  26  behold,  the  same  baptizeth,  and  all  (men) 

4.  1  Jesus  made  and  baptized  more  disciples 
4.    2  Though  Jesus  himself  baptized  not,  but 

10,  40  went,  .where  John  at  first  baptized 
Acts    1.    5  John  truly  baptized  with  water 

8.  38  they  went  down,  .and  he  baptized  him 

11.  16  John  indeed  baptized  with  water;  but 

9.  4  John  verily  baptized  with  the  baptism  of 
1  Co.    1.  14  I  thank  God.  .1  baptized  none  of  you 

1.  15  Lest  any  should  say  that  I  had  baptized 
1.  16  I  baptized  also,  .household  of  Stephanas 
1.  16  I  know  not  whether  I  baptized  any  other 
1.  17  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to 

BAPTIZED,  to  be  — 

iptize,  PatrTtfa  baptizo. 
Matt.  ^.    6  And  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan 
3.  13  Then  cometh  Jesus,  .to  be  baptized  of 
3.  14  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and 
3.  16  Jesus,  when  he  was  baptized,  went  up 

20.  22  and  to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism 

20.  22  that  I  am  baptized  with  ?  They  say  unto 
20.  23  and  bo  baptized  with  the  baptism 
20.  23  that  I  am  baptized  with 
Mark  1.    g  and  were  :ill  baptized  of  him  in  the 
1.   9  and  was  baptized  ol  John  in  Jordan 

10.  38  and  bo  baptized  with  the  baptism 

10.  38  that  1  am  baptized  with  ?    And  they  said 
10.  30  with  tin-  baptism  that  I  am  baptized 
,  .     .  h  Ithal  shall  ye  be  baptized  ;  but  to  Bit 
16.  16  [Ila  that  bclieveth  and  is  baptized  shall] 


Luke  3.    7  said  he  to  the  multitude,  .to  be  baptized 
3.  12  Then  came  also  publicans  to  be  baptized 
3.  21  Now  when  all  the  people  were  baptized 
3.  21  Jesus  also  being  baptized,  and  praying 
7.  29  being  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  John 

7.  30  rejected,  .being  not  baptized  of  him 
12.  50  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with 

John  3.  23  they  came,  and  were  baptized 
Acts    1.    5  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
2.  38  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
2.  41  they  that  gladly  received . .  were  baptized 

8.  12  they  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women 
8. 13  when  he  was  baptized,  he  continued  with 
8.  16  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 

8.  36  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized? 

9.  18  forthwith,  and  arose,  and  was  baptized 
10.  47  that  these  should  not  be  baptized 

10.  48  And  lie  commanded  them  to  be  baptized 

11.  16  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
16.  is  when  she  was  baptized,  and  her  household 
16.  33  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway 

18.  8  hearing  believed,  and  were  baptized 

19.  3  Unto  what  then  were  ye  baptized  ? 

19.    s  they  were  baptized  iu  the  name  of  the 
22.  16  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins 

Rom.  6.    3  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into 
6.   3  were  baptized  into  his  death? 

1  Cor.  1.  13  were  ye  baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul? 
10.    2  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the 

12.  13  For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized 
15.  29  they  do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead 
15.  29  why  are  they  then  baptized  for  the  dead? 

Gal.     3.  27  For  as  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized 

BAPTIZING  — 

To  baptize,  $airTi(w  baptizo. 

Matt. 28.  19  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the 
John  1.  28  were  done,  .where  John  was  baptizing 

1.  31  therefore  am  I  come  baptizing  with  water 

3.  23  John  was  also  baptizing  in  iEnon  near 

BAR  — 

1. Separate  part,  "13  bad. 

Job   17.  16  They  shall  go  down  to  the  bars  of  the  pit 

%Flying  or  piercing  object,  bar,  r_H3  beriach, 
Exod26.  26  thou  shalt  make  bars  (of)  shittim  wood 
26.  27  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  other  side 
26.  27  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  other  side 
26.  28  the  middle  bar  in  the  midst  of  the  boards 
26.  29  make  their  rings,  .places  for  the  bars 

26.  29  thou  shalt  overlay  the  bars  with  gold 

35.  11  The  tabernacle.. and  his  boards,  his  bars 

36.  31  he  made  bars  of  shittim  wood  ;  five  for 
36.  32  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  other  side 
36.  32  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle 
36.  33  the  middle  bar  to  shoot  through  the 

36.  34  made  their  rings,  .places  for  the  bars 
36.  34  and  overlaid  the  bars  with  gold 

39.  33  they  brought  the  tabernacle,  .his  bars 

40.  18  put  in  the  bars  thereof,  and  reared  up 
Num.  3.  36  the  bars  thereof,  and  the  pillars  thereof 

4.  31  the  bars  thereof,  and  the  pillars  thereof 
Deut.  3.  5  cities,  .fenced  with  high  walls,  .and  bars 
Judgi6.    3  went  away  with  them,  bar  and  all 

1  Sa.  23.    7  entering . .  a  town . .  hath  gates  and  bars 

1  Ki.   4.  13  great  cities  with  walls  and  brasen  bars 

2  Ch.   8.    5  Beth-horon. .  with  walls, '-gates,  and  bars 

14.  7  Let  us.  .make  about  (them)  walls,  .bars 
Neh.   3.    3,  6,  13,  14,  15,  and  set  up.  .bars  thereof 
Job    38.  10  brake  up.  .and  set  bars  and  doors 
Psa.107.  16  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron  in  sunder 

147. 13  hath  strengthened  the  bars  of  thy  gates 
Prov  18.  19  contentions,  .like  the  bars  of  a  castle 
Isa.    45.    2  and  cut  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron 
Jer.  49.  31  which  have  neither  gates  nor  bars 

51.  30  they  have  burned  her.  .her  bars  are 
Lam.  2.    9  he  hath  destroyed  and  broken  her  bars 
Eze.  38.  11  without  walls,  .having  neither  bars  nor 
Amos  1.    5  I  will  break  also  the  bar  of  Damascus 
Jon.    2.    6  the  earth  with  her  bars  (was)  about  me 
Nah,   3  13  Behold,  .the  fire  shall  devour  thy  bars 

Z.Bar,  pole,  tti£  net. 

Num.  4.  10,  12  and  shall  put.  .upon  a  bar 

4..]  nything  stretched  out,  VpD  metil. 
Job   40.  iS  his  bones,  .like  bars  of  iron 

BAR,  to  — 

To  holdfast,  inx  achaz. 

Neh.  7.    3  let  them  shut  the  door3,  and  bar  (them) 

EAR-AB'-BAS,  &apa&&as  father's  S07i. 
A  murderer  preferred  to  Christ. 

Matt27.  16  had  then  a  notable  prisoner,  called  B. 

27.  17  B.,  or  Jesus  which  is  called  Christ? 
27.  20  they  should  ask  1'..,  and  destroy  Jesus 
27.  21  release  unto  you?  They  said,  B. 

27.  26  Then  released  he  B.  unto  them:  and  when 
Marki5-    7  there  was  (one)  named  B. .  .bound  with 

15.  11  that  he  should  rather  release  B.  unto 
15.  15  Pilate.. released  B,  unto  them,  and 

Luke23-  iS  Away  with  lids  ..  release  unto  us  B. 
J0I11118.  40  Not  this  man,  but  B.    Now  B.  wasarobber 

BA  RACH'-EL,  ^713  blessed  of  God. 

Father  of  Elihu,  win.  reasoned  with  Job  after  his  three 

friends  were  silent,  lie   1550. 

Job    32.    2  the  wrath  of  Elihu  the  son  of  B,  the 

32.    6  Elihu  the  sou  of  B.  the  Buzite  answered 


BA-RACH'-IAH,  rt;?-i3  blessed  of  Jah. 

Father  of  Zechariah  the  prophet,  B.C.  520. 

Zech.  1.    1  Zechariah,  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of  Iddo 
1.    7  Zechariah,  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of  Iddo 

BAR-AOH-I'AS,  ^apa\ias. 

The  Greek  form  of  Barachiah. 

Matt.  23.  35  the  blood  of  Zacharias  son  of  B.,  whom 

BA'-RAK,  pT3  lightning,  fiapaK. 

A  Naphtalite  who,  with  Deborah,  defeated  Sisera,  the 

leader  of  the  Canaanites,  and  obtained  a  great  victory 

over  him,  B.C.  1296. 

Judg.  4.    6  she  sent  and  called  B.  the  son  of  Abin. 
4.    8  B.  said  unto  her,  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me 
4.    9  Deborah  arose,  .went  with  B.  to  Kedesh 
4.  10  B.  called  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  to 
'4.  12  they  shewed  Sisera  that  B.  the  son  of  A. 
4.  14  Deborah  said  unto  B.,  Up ;  for  this  (is) 
4.  14  So  B.  went  down  from  mount  Tabor,  and 
4.  15  the  Lokii  discomfited  Sisera.  .before  B. 

4.  16  B.  pursued  after  the  chariots,  and  after 
4  22  behold,  as  B.  pursued  Sisera,  Jael  came 

5.  1  Then  sang  Deborah  and  B.  the  son  of  Ab, 
5.  12  arise,  B.,  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive 
5.  15  even  Issachar,  and  also  B.  :  he  was  sent 

Heb.  11.  32  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of .  .B. 

BARBARIAN  — 

Foreigner,  alien,  papfiapos  barbaros. 

Acts  28.    4  And  when  the  barbarians  saw  the 
Rom.  1.  14  I  am  debtor  both .  .to  the  Barbarians 
1  Co.  14.  11  I  shall  be  unto  him.  .a  barbarian,  and  he 

14.  11  he  that  speaketh .  .a  barbarian  unto  me 
Col.     3.  11  there  is  neither  Greek  nor.  .Barbarian 

BARBAROUS  — 

Foreign,  alien,  @dp$apos  barbaros. 

Acts  28.    2  the  barbarous  people  shewed  us  no  little 
BARBED  irons  — 
A  pointed  weapon,  dart,  rtpy  snkkah. 

Job    41.    7  Canst,  .fill  his  skin  with  barbed  irons  ? 
BARBER  — 
A  barber,  3^a  galdb. 

Eze.    5.    1  son  of  man.  .take  thee  a  barber's  razor 
BARE  — 
l.Bare,  uncovered,  nn^  eryah. 

Eze.  16.    7  grown,  whereas  thou  (wast)naked  and 
16.  22  when  thou  wast  naked  and  bare 
16.  39  and  leave  thee  naked  and  bare 
23.  29  and  shall  leave  thee  naked  and  bare:  and 
2.Free,  ir\Bpara. 

Lev.  13.  45  his  clothes  shall  be  rent,  .his  head  bare 
Z. Naked,  yv/xvSs  gumnos. 

1  Co.  15.  37  but  bare  grain,  it  may  chance  of  wheat 
BARE,  to  make  — 

l.To  be  used  with  violence,  D£n  chamas,  2. 

Jer.    13.  22  skirts  discovered,  .thy  heels  made  bare 

2.  To  draw  or  strip  off,  r\VQ  chasaph. 

Isa.  47.    2  uncover  thy  locks,  make  bare  the  leg 

52.  10  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  arm 
Jer.  49.  10  But  I  have  made  Esau  bare,  1  have 
Joel    1.    7  he  hath  made  it  clean  bare,  and  cast  (it) 

3.  To  be  or  become  bare,  Tiu  arar. 

Isa.  32.  11  strip  you,  and  make  you  bare,  and  gird 
BARE,  within  — 
Bald  (behind),  nrpfj  qarachath. 

Lev.  13.  55  fret  inward,  .bare  within  or  withou 
BAREFOOT  — 
To  be  unshod,  >"|n;  yacheph. 

2  Sa.  15.  30  his  head  covered,  and  he  went  barefoot 
Isa.  20.    2  he  did  so,  walking  naked  and  barefoot 

20.    3  Isaiah  hath  walked  naked  and  barefoot 
20.    4  lead.  .theEthiopiaus.  .naked  and  barefoot 

BAR-HTJ'-MITE,  "ern?  belonging  to  young  men. 
Patronymic  of  one  of  David's  worthies,  B.C.  1058. 

2  Sa.  23.  31  [one  of  the  thirty]. .  Azmavcth  the  B. 
In  1  Ch.  11.  33  the  epithet  is  \Bdharumit e,  the  correct 
reading;  denoting  a  person  "of  Bahuriin,  a  town  of 
Benjamin. 

BA-RI'-AH,  nns  fugitive. 

Grandson  of  Shechaniah,  of  the  family  of  David,  B.C.  460. 
1  Ch.   3.  22  the  sons  of  Shechaniah ;  Shemaiah.  ,B. 

BAR  JE'-STJS,  $ap'inaods  son  of  Joshua. 

Otherwise  called  Etj/mas,  a  false  prophet  who  opposed 

Barnabas  and  Paul  at  Paphos, 

Acts  13.    6  they  found,  .a  Jew,  whose  name  (was)  B. 
BAR  JO-NA,  j8ap  *lupa  son  of  Johanan. 
A  surname  of  Simon  Peter. 

Matt  16.  17  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  B.-j. :  for  flesh 
BARK,  to  — 
To  hark,  lift  up  the  voice,  no:  nabach. 

Isa.  56.  10  all  dumb  dogs,  they  cannot  bark;  Bleeping 
BARKEB  — 
Any  thing  cut  or  .stripped  off,  fl^yj?  qctsaphah. 

Joel    1.    7  He  hath  laid. .waste,  and  barked  my 
BAR'-KOS,  Dip-13  party-coloured, 
A  Xctbinim,  wiu.se  defendants  returned  from  exile 
with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2  53  children  of  B.,  the  children  of  Sisera, 

Neh.    7.  55  children  of  B.,  the  children  ol  Sisera 


BARLEY 


71 


BASHAN 


BARLEY  — 

I. Barley  {long  hair),  JTr&&  seorah. 

Exod  a.  31  And  the  flax  and  the  barley  was  smitten 

9.  31  for  the  barley  (was)  in  the  ear,  and  the 
Lev.  27.  16  an  homer  of  barley  seed .  .at  fifty  shekels 
Num.  5.  15  the  tenth,  .of  an  ephah  of  barley  meal 
Deut.  8.    8  A  land  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines 
Judg.  7.  13  a  cake  of  barley  bread  tumbled  into  the 
Ruth  1.  22  to  Beth-lehem  in  the.  .barley  harvest 
2.  17  it  was  about  an  ephah  of  barley 

2.  23  to  glean  unto  the  end  of  barley  harvest 

3.  2  Behold,  he  winuoweth  barley  to  night 
3.  15  he  measured  six.  .of  barley,  and  laid  (it) 

3.  17  these  six.. of  barley  gave  he  me;  for  he 
aSa.  14.  30  Joab's  field,  .hath  barley  there 

17.  28  Brought  beds,  .and  wheat,  and  barley 
2i.    9  in  the  beginning  of  barley  harvest 

1  Ki.   4.  28  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses 

2  Ki.   4.  42  twenty  loaves  of  barley,  and  full  ears  of 

7.    1  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel 
7. 16  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel 
7.  18  Two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel,  and 
j  Ch.  11.  13  was  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of  barley 
2  Ch.   2.  10  twenty  thousand  measures  of  barley 

2.  15  Now  therefore  the  wheat,  and  the  barley 
27-    5  gave  him.  .ten  thousand  of  barley 
Job   31.  40  cockle  instead  of  barley.    The  words  of 
Isa.   28.  25  and  the  appointed  barley  and  the  rye 
Jer.  41.    S  we  have  treasures  in  the  field,  .of  barley 
Eze.    4.    9  Take,  .also  unto  thee  wheat,  and  barley 

4.  12  And  thou  shalt  eat  it  (as)  barley  cakes 
13.  19  And  will  ye.  .for  handfuls  of  barley 
45.  13  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah.  .of  barley 

Hos.    3.    2  homer  of  barley,  and  an  half  homer  of  b. 

Joel    1.  11  for  the  wheat  and  for  the  barley 
2.Barley  {pointed,  piercing),  KpiBr)  krithe. 

Rev.    6.    6  three  measures  of  barley  for  a  penny 
Z.Made  of  barley,  tcpiQivos  krithinos. 

John  6.    9  a  lad  here,  which  hath  five  barley  loaves 
6.  13  the  fragments  of  the  five  barley  loaves 
BARN  — 
l.An  open  threshing  floor,  |na  goren. 

Job    39.  12  thy  seed,  and  gather  (it  into)  thy  barn 
%A  place  for  collecting  anything,  rriup  megurah. 

Hag.   2.  19  Is  the  seed  yet  in  the  barn?  yea,  as  yet 
3.^4  place  for  putting  aicay,  anodT\K-q  apotheke. 

Matt.  6.' 26  neither,  .reap,  nor  gather  into  barns 
13.  30  but  gather  the  v>  heat  into  my  barn 

Luke  12.  18  This  will  I  do:  I  will  pull  down  my  barns 
12.  24  which  neither  have  store  house  nor  barn 

BARN  FLOOR  — 

An  open  threshing  floor,  pa  goren. 

2  Ki.   6.  27  shall  I  help  thee  ?  out  of  the  barnfloor 
BARNS  — 
1. Places  for  heaping  things  together,  D*pp£. 

Prov.  3.  10  So  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with'  plenty 
2.  Places  for  collecting  anything,  rnTJJjH?. 

Joel    1. 17  the  barns  are  broken  down ;  for  the  corn 

BAR  NA'-BAS,  fiapva&as  son  of  consolation. 

A  Levite,  Paul's  companion  in  several  of  his  journeys ; 

otherwise  called  Joses. 

Acts    4.  36  Joses,  who  by  the  apostles,  .surnamed  B. 
9.  27  B.  took  him,  and  brought  (him)  to  the 
11.  22  they  sent  forth  B.,  that  he  should  go  as 
11.  25  Then  departed  B.  to  Tarsus,  for  to  seek 

11.  30  sent  it  to  the  elders  by  the  hands  of  B. 

12.  25  B.  and  Saul  returned  from  Jerusalem 

13.  1  certain  prophets  and  teachers ;  as  B.,  and 
13.    2  Separate  me  B.  and  Saul  for  the  work 
13.    7  who  called  for  B.  and  Saul,  and  desired 
73.  43  many  of  the  Jews,  .followed  Paul  and  B. 
13.  46  Then  Paul  and  B.  waxed  bold,  and  said 

13.  50  the  Jews,  .raised  persecution  against.  .B 

14.  12  they  called  B.,  Jupiter;  and  Paul,  Mer. 
14.  14  when  the  apostles,  B.  and  Paul,  heard 

14.  20  the  next  day  he  departed  with  B.  to  Derbe 

15.  2  when  therefore  Paul  and  B.  had  no  small 
15.    2  they  determined  that  Paul  and  B. 

15.  i2  all  the  multitude,  .gave  audience  to  E. 

15.  22  to  send  chosen  men.  .with  Paul  and  B. 

15.  25  to  send  chosen  men . .  with  our  beloved  B 

15.  35  Paul  also  and  B.  continued  in  Autioch. 

15.  36  And  some  days  after  Paul  said  unto  B. 

15.  37  AndB.  determined  to  take  with  them  John 

15.  39  so  B.  took  Mark,  and  sailed  unto  Cyprus 
1  Co.   9.    6  Or  I  only  and  B.,  have  not  we  power  to 
Gal.    2.    1  I  went  up  again  to  Jerusalem  with  B. 
2.    9  they  gave  to  me  and  B.  the  right  hands 
2.  13  insomuch  that  B.  also  was  carried  away 
Col.     4. 10  Marcus,  sister's  son  to  B.,  touching  whom 

BARREL  — ■ 

An  earthen  jar,  13  lead. 

1  Ki.  17.  12  but  an  handful  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  and 
17.  14  The  barrel  of  meal  shall  not  waste 

17.  16  the  barrel  of  meal  wasted  not,  neither 

18.  33  and  said,  Fill  four  ban-els  with  water 

BARREN  — 

1.  Restraining,  restrained,  "ii'y  otser. 

Prov. 30.  16  The  grave  ;  and  the  barren  womb 
%Rooted,  sterile,  ")p"  aqar. 

Gen.  11.  30  But  Sarai  was  barren ;  she  (had)  no  child 
25.  21  Isaac  intreated.  .because  she  (was)  barren 
29.  31  opened  her  womb :  but  Rachel  (was)  bar. 


Exod 23.  26  There  shall  nothing  cast,  .nor  be  barren 

Deut.  7.  14  there  shall  not  be  male  or  female  barren 

Judg  13.    2  and  his  wife  (was)  barren,  and  bare  uot 

13.    3  Behold  now,  thou  (art)  barren,  and 

1  Sa.  2.  5  so  that  the  barren  hath  born  seven 
Job  24.  21  He  evil  eutreateth  the  barren  (that) 
Isa.  54.    1  Sing,  0  barren,  thou  (that)  didst  not  bear 

Z.Dry,  drought,  -ts  tsiyyah. 

Joel    2.  20  and  will  drive  him  into  a  land  barren 

^.Bereaved,  !»3g'  shakkul. 

Song  4.    2  and  none  (is)  barren  among  them 

6.    6  and  (there  is)  not  one  barren  among  them 

o.To  bereave,  73$  shakol,  3. 

2  Ki.    2.  19  water  (is)  naught,  and  the  grouud  barren 

2.  21  shall  not  be . .  any  more  death  or  barren 

Q.Xot  working,  apy6s. 

2Pe.    1.    8  they,  .neither.. barren  nor  unfruitful 
7. Barren,  without  seed,  aTtipos. 

Luke  1.    7  no  child,  because.  .Elizabeth  was  barren 
1.  36  month  with  her,  who  was  called  barren 
23.  29  Blessed  (are)  the  barren  and  the  wombs 

Gal.    4.  27  Rejoice,  (thou)  barren  that  bearest  not 
BARREN  land  — 
Salt  place,  nbn?  mechelah. 

Job    39.    6 'and  the  barren  land  his  dwellings 
BARREN  woman  — 
Rooted,  sterile,  npj;  aqar. 

Psa.  113.   9  He  maketh  the  barren  woman  to  keep 
BARRENNESS  — 
Salt  place,  nnSp  melechah. 

Psa.  107.  34  A  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  the 
BAR-SA'-BAS,  papcra&as  son  of  Saba. 

1.  One  nominated  with  Matthias  to  succeed  Judas. 

Acts    1.  23  they  appuiuted  two,  Joseph  called  B. 

2.  A  disciple  sent  w*"i  Silas  to  Autioch  wi*h  letters  from 
the  apostles. 

Acts  15.  22  Judas  surnamed  B.,  and  Silas,  chief  men 
BAR-THO-LO'-MEW,  $ap6o\o/Moios  son  of  Tohno.i. 
One  of  the  apostles  of  Christ. 

Matt  10.    3  [apostles  are  these].  .Philip  and  B. 

Mark  3.  iS  Andrew,  and  Philip,  and  B.,and  Matthew 

Luke   6.  14  brother,  James  and  John,  Philip  and  B. 

Acts    1.  13  whereabodeboth..Philip,andThomas,B. 

BAR-TI-BLffi'-TJS,  (Sapriixaios  son  of  Timmis. 
A  beggar  in  Jericho  who  received  sight. 

Markio.  46  blind  B.,  the  son  of  Tinireus,  sat  by  the 
BA'-RTJCH,  V~\}  blessed. 

1.  Son  of  Zabbai  who  helped  to  build  the  wall,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.  20  After  him  B.  the  son  of  Zabbai  earnestly 
10.    6  [those  that  sealed  (were)].  .Ginnethon,  B. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Phares,  a  returned  exile,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.11.    5  Maaseiah  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of 

3.  The  amanuensis  of  Jeremiah  in  prison,  B.C.  590. 

Jer.  32. 12  the  evidence  of  the  purchase  unto  B. 
32.  13  And  I  charged  B.  before  them,  saying 
32.  16  I  had  delivered  the  evidence,  .unto  B. 
36.    4  Then  Jeremiah  called  B.  the  son  of  Ner. 
36.    4  and  B.  wrote  from  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah 
36.    5  Jeremiah  commanded  B.,  saying,  I  (am) 
36.    8  B.  the  son  of  Neriah  did  according  to  all 
36.  10  Then  read  B.  in  the  book  the  words  of  J. 
36. 13  when  B.  read  the  book  in  the  ears  of  the 
36.  14  Therefore  all  the  princes  sent,  .unto  B. 
36.  14  So  B.  the  son  of  Neriah  took  the  roll 
36.  15  So  B.  read  (it)  in  their  ears 
36.  16  they  were  afraid,  .and  said  unto  B.,  We 
36.  17  they  asked  B.,  saying.  Tell  us  now,  How 
36.  18  B.  answered  them,  He  pronounced  all 
36.  19  Then  said  the  princes  unto  B.,  Go,  hide 
36.  26  king  commanded  Jerahnieel.  .to  take  B. 
36.  27  the  words  which  B.  wrote  at  the  mouth 
36.  32  gave  it  to  B.  the  scribe,  the  son  of  Neriah 
43.    3  B.  the  son  of  Neriah  setteth  thee  on 
43.    6  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  and  B.  the  son  of 
45.    1  The  word  that  Jeremiah .  .spake  unto  B. 
45.    2  Thus  saith  the  LORD,  .unto  thee,  0  B. 

BAR-ZLL'-LAI,  *?V}3  strong,  iron. 

1.  A  Gileadite   friend  of    David    in  his    flight    from 
Absalom,  B.C.  1103-1023. 

2  Sa.  17.  27  it  came  to  pass,  .that  Shobi.  .and  B.  the 
19.  31  B.  the  Gileadite  came  down  from 
19.  32  B.  was  a  very  aged  man,  (even)  fourscore 
19.  33  the  king  said  unto  B.,  Come  thou  over 
19.  34  B.  said  unto  the  king,  How  long  have  I 
29.  39  the  king  kissed  B.,  and  blessed  him  ;  and 

1  Ki.  2.  7  shew  kindness  unto  the  sons  of  B.  the 
Ezra  2.  61  childreu  of  the  priests,  .children  of  B. 
Neh.    7.  63  of  the  priests,  .children  of  B. 

2.  Father  of  Adriel,  husband  of  Merab  Saul's  eldest 
daughter,  B.C.  1060. 

2  Sa.  21.    8  she  brought  up  for  Adriel  the  son  of  B. 

3.  A  priest  whose  genealogy  was  lost,  the  father  of 
some  exiles  who  returned  with  Ezra,  B.C.  600. 

Ezra   2.  61  which  took  a  wife  of  the  daughter  of  B. 
Neh.    7.  63  which  took  (one)  of  the  daughters  of  B. 

BASE  — 

1.  Stand,  pedestal,  }3  ken. 

1  Ki.    7.  29  upon  the  ledges,  .a  base  above :  and 

7.  31  the  work  of  the  base,  a  cubit  and  a  half 


2. Base,  place  for  setting  on,  rmst?  mekonah. 

1  Ki.    7.  27  bases.. four  cubits,  .length of  one  base 

7.  28  the  work  of  the  bases  (was)  on  this 

7.  30  every  base  had  four  brasen  wheels,  and 

7.  32  the  axletrees  of  the  wheels,  .to  the  base 

7.  34  to  the  four  corners  of  one  base 

7.  34  the  uudersetters  (were)  of  the  very  base 

7.  35  And  in  the  top  of  the  base,  .a  round 

7.  35  on  the  top  of  the  base  the  ledges  thereof 

7.  37  After  this,  .he  made  the  ten  bases:  all  of 

7.  38  upon  every  oue  of  the  ten  bases  one  laver 

7.  39  he  put  five  bases  on  the  right  side 

7.  43  the  ten  bases,  and  ten  lavers  on  the  bases 

2  Ki.  16. 17  Ahaz  cut  off  the  borders  of  the  bases 

25.  13  and  the  bases,  and  the  brasen  sea 
25.  t6  and  the  bases  which  Solomon  had  made 
2  Ch.   4.  14  bases,  and  lavers  made  he  upon  the  bases 
Ezra    3.    3  And  they  set  the  altar  upon  his  bases 
Jer.   27.  19  concerning  the  bases,  and  concerning  the 
52.  17  and  the  bases,  and  the  brasen  sea  that 
52.  20  twelve  brasen  bulls,  .under  the  bases 

3..-1  base,  place  for  setting  on,  njpp  mekunah. 
Zech.  5.  11  it  shall  be.  .set  there  upon  her  own  base 

4.  T)  be  or  become  light,  rhf)  qalah,  2. 

Isa.     3.    5  and  the  base  against  the  honourable 

5.  Humble,  7sp  shaphal. 

2  Sa.    6.  22  and  will  be  base  in  mine  own  sight 
Eze.  17.  14  That  the  kingdom  might  be  base,  that 

29.  14  and  they  shall  be  there  a  base  kingdom 
Mai.    2.    9  I  also  made  you  contemptible  and  base 

6. Humble,  raireivos  tapeinos. 

2  Co.  10.    1  who  in  presence  (am)  base  among  you 

7.  Without  name,  c&'yi?3,  beli-shem. 

Job    30.   8  children  of  base  men  :  they  were  viler 
B4.SE  things  — 
Ignoble,  aytvris  agenes. 

1  Co.   1.  2S  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things  which 

BASER  sort,  of  the  — 

Belonging  to  tlie  market  place,  ayopcuos  agoraios* 

Acts  17.    5  certain  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort 
BASEST  — 
1.  Humble,  7B&  shaphal. 

Eze.  29.  15  It  shall  be  the  basest  of  the  kingdoms 
2. Humble,  ?c?  shephal. 

Dan.  4. 17  and  setteth  up  over  it  the  basest  of  men 

BA'-SHAN,  iv^n  the  fruitful. 

A  district  on  the  E.  of  Jordan,  almost  always  written 
with  the  definite  article  in  the  original.  It  is  sometimes 
called  "Tlie  land  of  Bashan."  It  was  the  kingdom  of 
Og,  the  Amorite,  and  extended  from  the  "border  of 
Gilead"  on  the  S.  to  mount  Hermou  on  the  N.,  and  from 
the  Arabah  or  Jordan  valley  on  tlie  W.  to  Salchah 
(Sulkhad)  and  the  border  of  the  Geshurites  and  the 
Maacathites  on  the  E.  Bashan  or  "  the  Bashan"  was  the 
lot  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  together  with  "  half  of 
Gilead." 

Nuni2i.  33  theyturnedaud  went  up  by  the  way  of  B. 
21.  33  Og  the  king  of  B.  went  out  against  them. 
32.  33  the  kingdom  of  Og  king  of  B.,  the  land 
Deut.  1.    4  Og  the  king  of  B. .  .dwelt  at  Ashtaroth 
3.    1  we  turned,  and  went  up  the  way  to  B. 
3.    1  Og  the  king  of  B.  came  out  against  us 
3.    3  the  king  of  B.,  and  all  his  people :  and 
3.    4  of  Argob,  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  B. 
3.  10  all  Gilead,  and  all  B.,  unto  Salchah 
3.  10  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  B. 
3.  11  only  Og  king  of  B.  remained  of  the 
3.  13  the  rest  of  Gilead,  and  all  B. .  .the 

3.  13  all  the  region  of  Argob,  with  all  B.,  which 

4.  43  and  Golan  in  B.,  of  the  Manassites. 

4.  47  his  land,  and  the  land  of  Og  king  of  B. 
29.    7  Og  the  king  of  B.,  came  out  against 

32.  14  rams  of  the  breed  of  B.,  and  goats 

33.  22  a  lion's  whelp  :  he  shall  leap  from  B. 
Josh.  9.  10  to  Og  king  of  B.,  which,  .at  Ashtaroth 

12.    4  And  the  coast  of  Og  king  of  B. .  .of  the 

12.  5  inallB.,untotheborderoftheGeshurites 

13.  11  mount  Hermon,  and  all  B.  unto  Salcah 
13.  12  All  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  B.,  which 

13.  30  their  coast  was  from  Mahanaim,  all  B. 

13.  30  all  the  kingdom  of  Og  king  of  B.,  and 

13.  30  the  towns,  .which  (are)  in  B.,  threescore 

13.  31  Edrei,  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  B. 

17.    1  a  man  of  war,  therefore  he  had.  .B. 

17.    5  beside  the  land  of  Gilead  and  B.,  which 

20.  8  Golan  in  B.  out  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh 

21.  6  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  in  B.,  thirteen 

21.  27  Golan  in  B.  with  her  suburbs,  .a  city  of 

22.  7  to.  .Manasseh  Moses  had  given,  .in  B. 

1  Ki.  4.  13  the  region  of  Argob,  which  (is)  in  B. 

4.  19  and  of  Ogkiug  of  B.  ;  and.. the  only 

2  Ki.  10.  13  by  the  river  Arnon,  even  Gilead  and  B. 
1  Ch.  5.  11  dwelt,  .in  the  land  of  B.  unto  Salcah 

5.  12  Joel  the  chief,  .and  Shaphat  in  B. 
5.  16  they  dwelt  in  Gilead  in  B.,  and  in  her 

5.  23  they  increased  from  B.  unto  Baal-hermon 

6.  62  out  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  in  B. 
6.  71  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  Golan  in  B.  with 

Neh.   9.  22  Heshbon,  and  the  land  of  Og  king  of  B. 
Psa.  22.  12  strong  (bulls)  of  B.  have  beset  me  round 

68.  15  the  hill  of  B.. the  hill  of  B. 

68.  22  Lord  said,  I  will  bring  again  from  B. 

135.  11  Og  king  of  B.,  and  all  the  kingdoms 

136.  20  Og  the  king  of  B. :  for  his  mercy,  .fcr 


BASHAN    HAVOTH    JAIR 


72 


BATTLE 


Isa.     2.  13  lifted  up,  and  upon  all  the  oaks  of  B. 

33.    9  and  B.  and  C'armel  shake  otf  (their  fruits) 
Jer.   22.  20  lift  up  thy  voice  in  B.,  and  cry  from  the 

50.  19  he  shall  feed  on  C'armel  and  B.  and  his 
Eze.  27.    6  (Of)  the  oaks  of  B.  have  they  made  thine 

39.  18  of  bullocks,  all  of  them  fatlings  of  B. 
Amos  4.    1  Hear  this  word,  ye  kiue  of  B.,  that  (are) 
Mic.    7.  14  let  them  feed  (in)  B.  and  Gilead,  as  in 
Nah.    1.   4  B.  languisheth,  and  Carmel,  and  the 
Zech.  11.  a  howl.U  ye  oaks  of  B. ;  for  the  forest  of  the 

BASHAN  HA-VOTH  JA'-IR,  Tx;  flirt  ]<?3. 

A  name  given  to  Argob  after  its  conquest  by  Jair,  a 

descendant  of  Mauasseh,  B.C.  1451. 

Deut.  3. 14  called  them  after  his  own  name,  B. 

BA-SHE'-MATH  or  BAS'-MATH,  nc'pa  fragrant. 

1.  One  of  the  wives  of  Esau,  and  daughter  of  Elon  the 
Hittite,  E.  c.  1796. 

Gen.  26.  34  and  B.  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite 

2.  Another  wife  of  Esau  and  daughter  of  Ishmael.  B.C. 
1796. 

Gen.  36.  3  B.  Ismael's  daughter,  sister  of  Nebajoth 
'  36.    4  Adah  bare  to  Esau  Eliphaz ;  and  B.  bare 
36.  10  Reuel  the  son  of  B.  the  wife  of  Esau 
36.  13  these  were  the  sons  of  B.  Esau's  wife 
36.  17  these  (are)  the  sons  of  B.  Esau's  wife 

BASIN,  BASON  — 

1. Bason,  bowl,  cup,  J3N  arjgan. 

Exod  24.    6  half  of  the  blood,  and  put  (it)  iu  basons 
2.Cup,  goblet,  "1133  kephor. 

1  Ch.  28.  1 7  golden  basons . .  every  bason . .  every  bason 

Ezra   1.  10  Thirty  basons  of  gold,  silver"  basons  of  a 
8.  27  twenty  basous  of  gold,  of  a  thousand 
Z.  Large  bowl  for  sprinkling,  p"jjD  mizraq. 

Exod27.    3  thou  shalt  make  his  pans,  .his  basons 
38.    3  he  made  all  the  vessels . .  and  the  basons 

Num.  4.  14  they  shall  put  upon  it.  .the  basons,  all 

1  Ki.   7.  40  Hiram  made  the  lavers.  .and  the  basous 

7.  45  basons.  .Hirara  made,  .(of )  bright  brass 

7.  50  the  basons . .  and  the  censers(of  )  pure  gold 

2  Ki.  12.  13  notmade.  .bowls of  silver,snuffers,  basons 
2  Ch.  4.   8  And  lie  made  an  hundred  basous  of  gold 

4.  11  Hurani  made  the  pots,  .and  the  basons 
4.  22  basons,  .and  the  censers,  (of)  pure  gold 
Neh.  7.  70  The  Tirshatha  gave,  .fifty  basons 

4.  Dish,  bowl,  <\D  saph. 

Exod  1 2.  22  dip  (it)  in  the  blood  that  (is)  in  the  bason 

12.  22  with  the  blood  that  (is)  in  the  bason 
2  Sa.  17.  z8  Brought  beds,  and  basons,  and  earthen 
Jer.  52. 19  the  basons,  and  the  fire  pans,  and  the 

5.  Large  vessel  or  ewer,  vittttip  nipter. 

John  13.    5  After  that  he  poureth  water  into  a  basin 
BASKET  — 
"[.Basket,  pot,  kettle,  ~m  dud. 

2  Ki.  10.    7  slew,  .and  put  their  heads  in  baskets 

"Jer.  24.    2  One  basket  (had)  very  good  figs.. the 
2.  Basket,  pot,  kettle,  nil  dudai. 

Jer.  24.    1  two  baskets  of  figs . .  set  before  the  tempi  e 
3. Basket  of  woven  or  twisted  work,  xju  tene. 

Deut  26.  2  shalt  put  (it)  in  a  basket,  and  shalt  go 
26.  4  the  priest  shall  take  the  basket  out  of 
28.    5  Blessed  (shall  be)  thy  basket  and  thy  store 

28.  17  Cursed  (shall  be)  thy  basket  and  thy  store 

4. Cage,  basket,  2^5  kelub. 

Amos  8.    1  and  behold  a  basket  of  summer  fruit 

8.  2  And  I  said,  A  basket  of  summer  fruit 

5.  Basket  (wicker),  So  sal. 

Gen.  40.  16  (I  had)  three  white  baskets  on  my  head 

40.  1 7  in  the  uppermost  basket . .  of  all  manner  of 
40. 17  birds  did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket 

40.  18  The  three  baskets  (are)  three  days 
Exod29.    3  thou  shalt  put  them  into  one  basket 

29.  3  bring  them  in  the  basket, with  the  bullock 
29.  23  one  wafer  out  of  the  basket  of  the 

29.  32  shall  eat . .  the  bread  that  (is)  in  the  basket 
Lev.    8.    a  rams,  and  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
8.  26  out  of  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
8.  31  with  the  bread  that  (is)  in  the  basket 
Num.  6.  15  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread,  cakes  of 
6.  17  with  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
6.  19  one  unleavened  cake  out  of  the  basket 
Judg.  6.  19  the  flesh  he  put  in  a  basket,  and  lie  put 

6.  Wicker  basket,  <rapyavt)  sargane. 

2  Co.  1 1.  33  in  a  basket  was  I  let  down  by  the  wall 
7.-4  hamper,  o-irvpts  spurts. 

Acts  9.  25  and  let . .  down  by  the  wall  in  a  basket 

BASKETS  — 

l.Wicker  baskets,  niVc^p  salsilloth. 

Jer.     6.    9  turn  back  thine  hand.. into  the  baskets 
2..1  wicker  travelling  basket,  K6tptvos  kopMnos. 

Matt  14.  20  took  up .  .that  remained  twelve  baskets 
16.    9  anil  how  many  baskets  ye  took  up  ? 

Mark  6.  43  And  they  took  up  twelve  baskets  full 
8.  19  how  many  baskets  full  of  fragments 

Luke  0.  17  there,  remained  to  them  twelve  baskets 

John  6.  13  filled  twelve  baskets  witli  the  fragments 

3..1  hamper,  airvpis  spuria,  tr^upi's  sphuris. 

Matt  15.  37  took  up    that  was  left  seven  baskets  full 

16.  10  and  how  many  baskets  ye  took  up? 
Mark  8.   s  took  up.  .that  was  left  seven  [baskets] 
8.20  how  may  baskets  full     took  ye  up  V 


BAS'-HATH,  ne'c>3  fragrant,  spicy. 

Solomon's  daughter,  who  became  wife  of  Ahimaaz,  a 

purveyor  for  Solomon,  B.C.  1014. 

1  Ki.   4.  15  he  also  took  B.  the  daughter  of  Solomon 

BASTAED  — 

1. Mixed,  spurious,  iipp  maimer. 

Deut  23.    2  A  bastard  shall  not  enter  into  the  cong. 

Zech.  9.    6  And  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod 

2.Baslard,  v6dos  nothos. 

Heb.  12.    8  then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons 

BAT  — 

Bat,  night-bird,  <{:&_  atalleph. 

Lev.  11.  19  her  kind!  and  the  lapwing,  and  the  bat 
Deuti4.  18  the  stork,  .and  the  lapwing,  and  the  bat 
Isa.    2.20  shall  cast . .  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats 

BATH  — 

A  measure  for  fluids,  about  8  gallons,  ns  bath. 

1  Ki.  7.  26  of  lilies :  it  contained  two  thousand  baths 

7.  38  lavers  of  brass:  one.  .contained  forty  baths 

2  Ch.  2.  10  thousand  baths  of  wine,  .baths  of  oil 

4.    5  received  and  held  three  thousand  baths 
Ezra  7.  22  baths  of  wine,  .baths  of  oil,  and  salt 
Isa.     5. 10  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath 
Eze.  45.  10  a  just  ephah,  and  a  just  bath 

45.  11  The  ephah  and  the  bath,  .that  the  bath 
45.  14  bath  of  oil.  .tenth  part  of  a  bath 
45.  14  an  homer  of  ten  baths  ;  for  ten  baths 
BATH  EAB'-BIM,  C'Jjn-na  daughter  of  many. 
A  gate  of  the  ancient  city  of  Heshbon,  near  which  were 
two  pools  to  which  the  spouse  compares  the  eyes  of  his 
"beloved." 

Song  7.    4  fishpools  in  Heshbon,  by  the  gate  of  B. 

BATH  SHE'-BA,  SJae'Via  daughter  of  an  oath. 
Daughter  of  Eliam  or  Ammiel,  wife  of  Uriah,  and  mother 
of  Solomon  by  David.  She  is  also  called  Bathshua. 
Jewish  tradition  has  it  that  she  composed  and  recited 
Proverbs  31st  as  an  admonition  to  her  son  Solomon  on 
his  marriage  with  Pharaoh's  daughter,  B.C.  1035. 

2  Sa.  11.    3  (Is)  not  this  B.-Sh.,  the  daughter  of  Eliam 
12.  24  David  comforted  B.  his  wife,  and  went 

1  Ki.  1.  11  Wherefore  Nathan  spake  unto  B.-Sh.  the 

1.  15  B.-Sh.  went  in  unto  the  king  into  the 
1.  16  B.-Sh.  bowed,  and  did  obeisance  unto 
1.  28  David  answered  and  said,  Call  me  B.-Sh. 

1.  31  B.-Sh.  bowed  with  (her)  face  to  the  earth 

2.  13  Adonijah . . came  to  B.-Sh.  the  mother  of 
2.  18  B.-Sh.  said,  Well ;  I  will  speak  for  thee 
2.  19  B.-Sh.  therefore  went  unto  king  Solomon 

Psa.    51.  (title)  A.  .after  he  had  gone  into  B.-Sh. 
BATH  SHTJ'-A,  SW'na  daughter  of  prosperity . 
This  name  is  translated  "daughter  of  Shua"  in  Gen. 
38.    12    and  in  1    Ch.  2.  3  ;  but  in   1   Ch.  3.  5,   it  is 
employed  as  the  name  of  the  mother  of  Solomon,  and 
she  is  called  the  daughter  of  Ammiel  (elsewhere  Eliam). 
In  Gen.  38.  2,   12,  Bathshua  is  really  the  name  of 
Judah's  wife,  B.C.  1035. 
1  Chron  3.    5  these  were  born  unto  him.  .of  B.-Sh.  the 

BATHE,  to  — 

To  wash,  rub,  yrn  rachats. 

Lev.  15.  13  and"  bathe  his  flesh  iu  running  water 
16.  26  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  his  flesh  ill 

16.  28  he  that  burnetii  them  shall,  .bathe  his 

17.  16  But  if  he  wash,  .not,  nor  bathe  his  flesh 
N1111119.    7  Then  the  priest,  .shall  bathe  his  flesh  in 

19.    8  wash  his  clothes  in  water,  and  bathe  his 

BATHE  (self),  to  — 

To  wash,  rub,  yn~i  rachats. 

Lev.  15.    5  shall  wash  his  clothes  and  bathe  (himself) 
15.    6  bathe  (himself)  in  water,  and  be  unclean 
15.    7  he  that  toucheth  the  flesh,  .and  bathe 
15.    8  then  he  shall .  .bathe  (himself)  in  water 
15.  10  and  bathe  (himself)  ill  water,  and  be 
15.  11  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe 
15.  18  they  shall  (both)  bathe  (themselves)  in 
15.  21  bathe  (himself)  in  water,  and  be  unclean 
15.  22  bathe  (himself)  in  water,  and  be  unclean 
15.  27  and  bathe  (himself)  in  water,  .until  the 
17. 15  and  bathe  (himself),  .then  shall  he  be 
Num  19.  19  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  himself  in 

BATHED,  to  be  — 

To  be  satiated,  an  ravah,  3. 

Isa.   34.    5  For  my  sword  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven 

BATTER,  to  — 

To  destroy,  nrjs;  shochath,  5. 

2  Sa.  20.  15  the  people  that  (were)  with  Joab  battered 

BATTLE  — 
l.CircumvallaHon,  "lira  kidor. 

Job  15.  24  prevail,  as  a  king  ready  to  the  battle 

2..  I  camp,  htc  machaneh. 

1  Sa.  28.    1  thou  shalt  go  out  with  nit  to  battle,  thou 

3. Battle,  conflict,  eating  up,  .-Krfc  milehamah. 
lien.  14.    s  joined  battle  with  them  iu  the  vale  of 
Niunai.  33  he,  and  all  his  people,  to  the  battle 

31.  21  the  men  of  war  which  went  to  the  battle 

32.  27  armed  for  war,  before  the  LORD  to  battle 
32.  29  every  man  armed  to  battle,  before  the 

Deut.  2.    9  neither  contend  with  them  in  battle 

2.  24  possess  (it),  and  contend,  him  in  battle 
3     1  he  and  all  his  people,  to  battle  at  Ediei 


Deut  2 


Josh. 


Judg 


[  Sa.  4. 
4- 
7- 
8. 

'3' 

14. 
14. 
"4- 

'7- 
17- 
>7- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
18. 
=5- 
26. 
29. 
29. 
3°' 

2Sa.3i 


23. 

[Ki.    S 


;Ki. 
i  Ch. 


12. 
12. 
14. 

19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
26. 
2  Ch.  13, 
*3- 
'3- 
14. 
18. 
18. 
18. 


?5- 

=  5- 

32- 
Job    39, 

41. 
Psa.   18. 

24. 

76. 

89. 
Prov  2i, 
Eccl.  9, 


1  thou  guest  out  to  battle  against  thine 

2  when  ye  are  come  nigh  unto  the  battle 

3  O  Israel,  ye  approach  this  day  unto  battle 

5  return  to  his  house,  lest  he  die  in . .  battle 

6  lest  he  die  iu  the  battle,  and  another 

7  return,  .lest  he  die  in  the  battle,  and 

7  the  king.,  came  out  against  us  unto  battle 

13  passed  over  before  the  Lord  unto  battle 

14  the  city  went  out  against  Israel  to  battle 

19  theHivites..all(other)they  took  in  battle 

20  they  should  come  agauist  Israel  in  battle 

13  Gideon,  .returned  from  battle  before 

14  go  out  to  battle  against  the  children  of  I. 
18  Which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  the  battle 
20  the  meu  of  Israel  weut  out  to  battle 

22  and  set  their  battle  again  in  array  in  the 

23  Shall  I  go  up  again  to  battle  against  the 
28  Shall  1  yet  again  go  out  to  battle  against 
34  out  of  all  Israel,  and  the  battle  was  sore 

39  the  men  of  Israel  retired  in  the  battle 
42  but  the  battle  overtook  them  ;  and  them 

1  went  out  against  the  Philistines  to  battle 

2  when. .joined  battle,  Israel  was  smitteu 
10  the  Philistines  drew  near  to  battle 

20  go  out  before  us,  and  fight  our  battles 
22  it  came  to  pass  in  the  day  of  battle,  that 
20  Saul  and  all.  .came  to  the  battle 

22  followed  hard  after  them  in  the  battle 

23  the  battle  passed  over  unto  Beth-aven 

1  the  Philistinesgathered.  .armies  to  battle 

2  set  the  battle  in  array  against  the 

8  Why  are  ye  come  out  to  set  (your)  battle 
13  eldest  sons,  .followed  Saul  to  the  battle 
13  of  his  three  sons  that  went  to  the  battle 
20  to  the  fight,  and  shouted  for  the  battle 
28  down  that  thou  migbtest  see  the  battle 
47  for  the  battle  (is)  the  Lord's,  and  he 

17  for  me,  and  fight  the  Lord's  battles 

28  my  lord  tighteth  the  battles  of  the  Lori> 
10  he  shall  descend  into  battle,  and  perish 

4  let  him  not  go  down  with  us  to  battle 

9  He  shall  not  go  up  with  us  to  the  battle 

24  part  (is)  that  goeth  down  to  the  battle 

3  And  the  battle  went  sore  against  Saul 

4  the  people  are  fled  from  the  battle 

25  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  ! 
17  there  was  a  very  sore  battle" that  day 

30  slain  their  brother  Asahel.  .in  the  battle 

8  put  the  battle  in  array  at  the.  .gate 

9  the  front  of  the  battle  was  against  him 

13  And  Joab  drew  nigh. .unto  the  battle 

15  lTriah  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest  battle 

25  make  thy  battle  more  strong  against  the 
6  the  battle  was  in  the  wood  of  Kphraim 

8  For  the  battle  was  there  scattered  over 

3  ashamed  steal  away  when,  .flee  in  battle 

10  And  Absalom.. is  dead  in  battle 

17  Thou  shalt  go  no  more  out.  .to  battle 

18  there  was  again  a  battle  with  the  Phil. 

19  And  there  was  again  a  battle  in  Gob 

20  And  there  was  yet  a  battle  in  Gath 

40  hast  girded  me  with  strength  to  battle 

9  the  Philistines,  .gathered,  .to  battle 

44  thy  people  go  out  to  battle  against  their 

14  he  said,  Who  shall  order  the  battle  ? 

29  in  the  seventh  day  the  battle  was  joined 

39  Thy  servant  went  out  into,  .the  battle 

4  Wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  battle  to  R.-G  'i 

6  I  go  against  Ramoth-gilead  to  battle 

15  we  go  against  Ramoth-gilead  to  battle 

30  disguise  myself,  aud  euter  into  the  battle 

30  the  king  of  Israel,  .went  into  the  battle 
35  And  the  battle  increased  that  day  :  and 

7  wilt  thou  go.  against  Moab  to  battle? 

26  Moab  saw  that  the  battle  was  too  sore 
20  for  they  cried  to  God  in  the  battle 

11  fit  to  go  out  for  war  (and)  battle 

40  that  were  apt  to  the  war  (and)  to  battle 
3  And  the  battle  went  sore  against  Saul 

13  were  gathered  together  to  battle 

8  (and)  men  of  war  (fit)  for  the  battle 

19  with  the  Philistines  against  Saul  to  battle 
37  with  all.  .instruments,  .for  the  battle 
15  then  thou  shalt  go  out  to  battle  :  for 

7  from  their  cities,  and  came  to  battle 

9  put  the  battle  in  array  before  the  gate  of 
10  Joab  saw  that  the  battle  was  set  against 

14  Joab.  .drew  nigh.. unto  the  battle 

17  David  had  put  the  battle  in  array  against 

27  Out  of  the  spoils  won  in  battles  did  they 
3  set  the  battle  in  array  with  an  army  of 
3  set  the  battle  in  array  against  him  with 

14  behold,  the  battle  (was)  before  and 

10  they  set  the  battle  in  array  in  the  valley 

5  Shall  we  go  to  Ramoth-gilead  to  battle 

14  shall  we  go  to  Ramoth-gilead  to  battle 
29  disguise  myself,  and  will  go  to  the  battle 
29  disguised  himself;  and.  .went  to.  .battle 
34  And  the  battle  increased  that  day  :  how 

1  came  against  Jehoshaphat  to  battle 

15  for  the  battle  (is)  not  your's,  but  God's 
S  do  (it),  he  strong  for  the  battle:  Gi  d 

13  they  should  not  go  with  him  to  battle 

8  with  us  (is)  the  LoRD.-tonghf  our  battles 
2;  and  lie  smelleth  the  battle  afar  off 

s  remember  the  battle,  do  no  more 
ig  girded  me  with  strength  unto  the  battle 
8  The  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  in  battle 
3  the  shield,  and  the  Bword,  and  the  battle 
43  hast  not  made  him  to  stand  iu  the  battle 

31  (is)  prepared  against  the  day  of  battle 

11  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong,  neither  yet 


BATTLE   AX 


73 


BE 


I<sa    13.   4  LORD., mustereth  the  host  of  the  battle 
22.    2  slaiD  with  the  sword,  nor  dead  in  battle 

27.  4  set  the . .  thorns  against  me  in  battle 

28.  6  to  thorn  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  gate 

30.  32  in  battles  of  shaking  will  he  fight  with  it 
42.  25  his  anger,  and  the  strength  of  battle 

,Ter.     8.   6  as  the  horse  rusheth  into  the  battle 

18.  21  youngmen(be)slaiubytheswordin battle 
46.    3  and  shield,  and  draw  near  to  battle 

49.  14  come  against  her,  and  rise  up  to.  .battle 

50.  22  A  sound  of  battle  (is)  in  the  land,  and  01 
50.  42  put  hi  array,  like  a  man  to  the  battle 

E:e.    7. 14  none  goeth  to  the  battle :  for  my  wrath 

13.  5  stand  in  the  battle  iu  the  day  of  the  LORD 
Dan.  ti.  20  neither  in  anger,  nor  in  battle 

it.  25  the  south  shall  be  stirred  up  to  battle 
Hos.    1.    7  willnot  save,  .by  bow.  .nor  by  battle 

2.  18  the  sword  aud  the  battle  out  of  the  earth 
10.   g  there  they  stood :  the  battle  in  Gibeah 
10.  14  spoiled  Betharbel  in  the  day  of  battle 
Joel    2.    5  as  a  strong  people  set  in  battle  array 
Amos  1.  14  with  shouting  in  the  day  of  battle,  with 
Obad.       1  Arise ..  let  us  rise  up  against  her  in  battle 
Zech.  9.  10  and  the  battle  bow  shall  be  cut  off  :  and 
10.   3  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in . .  battle 
10.    4  him  the  nail,  .out  of  him  the  battle  bow 
10.    5  in  the  mire  of  the  streets  iu  the  battle 

14.  2  all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to  battle 

i. Armour,  arms,  p&'j  nesheq. 

Psa.  140.    7  covered  my  head  in  the  day  of  battle 

S.Equqiment,  .jisiP  seon. 

Isa.     9.    s  For  every  battle  of  the  warrior  (is)  with 
6.  The  host,  army,  N?y  tsaba. 

Xuni3i.  27  upon  them,  who  went  out  to  battle 

31.  28  men  of  war  which  went  out  to  battle 
Josh  22.  33  intend  to  go  up  against  them  in  battle 
1  Ch.  12.  33  such  as  went  forth  to  battle,  expert 

12.  36  such  as  went  forth  to  battle,  expert 
l.Host  of  the  battle,  mrfert  K2S. 

Num.31. 14  the  officers .'.  which  came  from  the  battle 
8. A  drawing  near,  nnp  qerab. 

2Sa.  17.  11  go  to  battle  in  thine  own  person 
Job   38.  23  reserved  against,  .the  day  of  battle 
Psa.  55.  18  hath  delivered  my  soul .  .from  the  battle 
78     9  Ephraim  -  .turned  back  in  the  day  of  battle 
Zech  14.    3  as  when  he  fought  in  the  day  of  battle 

9.  A  battle,  fight,  ir6\ef*os  polemos. 

1  Co.  14.    8  who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the  battle? 
Rev.    9.    7  like  unto  horses  prepared  unto  battle 

9.   9  sound  of .  .many  horses  running  to  battle 
16.  14  go  forth,  .to  gather  them  to  the  battle 
20.   8  go  out . .  to  gather  them  together  to  battle 

BATHE  AX  — 

Hammer,  battle-axe,  j'25  majipels. 

Jer.  51.  20  Thou  (art)  my  battle  ax  (and)  weapons  of 

BATTLEMENT  — 

A  restraint,  ng".a  maaqeh. 

Deut.22.   8  thou  shalt  make  a  battlement  for  thy  roof 

BATTLEMENTS  — 

Any  things  stretched  out,  nirraj  netishoth. 

Jer.     5.10  take  away  her  battlements ;  for  they  (are) 

BA-'VAI,  '?3  wisher. 

Descendant  of  Henadad  who  helped  to  rebuild  the  wall 

of  Jerusalem,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  3.  18  After  him  repaired  their  brethren,  B. 

BAY  — 

l.The  tongue,  \wi  lashon. 

Josh.  15.    2  from  the  bay  that  looketh  southward 

15.  5  north  quarter  (was)  from  the  bay  of  the 
18. 19  of  the  border  were  at  the  north  bay 

%Slrong,  deep  red,  D'XES?  amutstsim. 

Zech.  6.    3  in  the  fourth  chariot  grisled  and  bay 

6.    7  And  the  bay  went  forth,  aud  sought  to  go 

BAT  TREE  — 

Native  born,  n"irN  ezrach. 

Psa.  37.  35  spreading  himself  like  a  green  hay  tree 

BAZ'-LITH,  BAZ'-LTJTH,  n'Vsa  asking, 

A  Nethinim  whose  posterity  returned  from  exile,  B.C. 

536. 

Ezra    2.  52  children  of  B.,  the  children  of  Mehida 
Neh.    7.  54  children  of  B.,  the  children  of  Mehida 

BDELLIUM  — 

An  oily  gum,  or  a  white  pearl,  nS'i?  bedolach. 
Gen.    2.  12  there  (is)  bdellium  and  the  onyx  stone 
Num  11.    7  the  colour,  .as  the  colour  of  bdellium 

BE,  to  (am,  art,  is,  are,  was,  were,  &c.)  — 
When  this  word  is  printed  in  italics  in  the  common 
English  version,  there  is  no  corresponding  word  in  the 
original  text;  when  it  occurs  in  common  type,  it  is 
generally  the  representative  of  rvrr  ."nil  ton  hayah, 
havah,  hava,  "to  be"  in  Hebrew;  and  of  eifii,  "to  he" 
in  Greek.  Otherwise  it  is  the  translation  of  such  words 
as  the  following  -.— 

l.To  come,  come  in,  xi3  bo. 

2KL24. 10  against  Jerusalem, and.  .city  was  besieged 

23.    2  And  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the 
Jer.  52.   5  So  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the 
Lam.  5.   4  our  wood  is  sold  unto  us 

10 


2.7b  give,  jn;  nathan. 

Job    29.    2  Oh  that  I  were  as  (iu)  mouths  past 
Jer.     9.    1  Oh  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine 

3.  To  do,  serve,  ~nj>  abaci. 

1  Sa.    4.    9  O  ye  Philistines,  that  ye  he  not  servants 

4.  Tliere  is,  there  are,  VI  yesh. 

Gen.  iS.  24  Peradventure  there  he  fifty  righteous 

23.  8  If  it  be  your  mind  that  I  should  bury  my 

24.  23  is  there  room  in  (thy)  father's  house  for 

28.  16  Surely  the  Lord  is  iu  this  place,  and  I 
42.    1  Jacob  saw  that  there  was  corn  in  Egypt 
42.   2  I  have  heard  that  there  is  corn  in  Egypt 
44.  26  if  our  youngest  brother  be  with  us 

Exodiy.   7  saying,  Is  the  Lord  among  us  or  not? 
Num.  9.  20,  21  And  (so)  it  was,  when  the  cloud  was 

13.  20  whether  there  be  wood  therein,  or  not 

22.  29  I  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 
Deut29.  18  Lest  there  should  be  among  you  man  or 

29.  18  lest  there  should  be  among  you  a  root 
Judg.  4.  20  Is  there  any  mau  here?  that  thou  shalt 

.  6. 13  Oh  my  Lord,  if  the  Lord  be  with  us 
18.  14  there  is  in  these  houses  an  ephod,  and 
19. 19  yet  there  is . .  and  there  is  bread  and 
Ruth  3.  12  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than  I 

1  Sa.    9.  11  and  said  unto  them,  Is  the  seer  here  ? 

9.  12  they  answered  them,  and  said,  He  is 

14.  39  though  it  be  in  Jonathan  my  son,  he 
17.  46  may  know  that  thei'e  is  a  God  iu  Israel 

20.  8  if  there  be  in  me  iniquity,  slay  me  thyself 

21.  3  Now  therefore  what  is  under  thine  hand? 
21.  4  but  there  is  hallowed  bread ;  if  the  young 
21.    8  is  there  not  here  under  thine  hand  spear 

23.  23  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  he  be  in  the  laud 

2  Sa.   9.    1  Is  there  yet  any  that  is  left  of  the  house 

14.  32  if  there  be.  .iniquity  in  me,  let  him  kill 

1  Ki.  18.  10  there  is  no  nation  or  kingdom,  whither 

2  Ki.  2. 16  there  be  with  thy  servants  fifty  strong 

3. 12  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  him.    So 
5.    8  shall  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in 
9.  15  Jehu  said,  If  it  be  your  minds,  .let  none 
10.  15  Is  thine  heart  right.  .It  is.    If  it  be,  give 

10.  23  look  that  there  be  here  with  you  none  of 
2  Ch.  15.    7  for  your  work  shall  be  rewarded 

25.  9  Th6  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more 
Ezra  10.    2  there  is  hope  in  Israel  concerning  this 
Neh.   5.    2  For  there  were  that  said,  We,  our  sons 

5.    3  also  there  were  that  said,  "We  have 
5.    4  There  were  also  that  said,  "We  have 

5.  5  of  our  daughters  are  brought  unto 
Esth.  3.    8  There  is  a  certain  people  scattered  abroad 
Job     5.    1  if  there  be  any  that  will  answered  thee . 

6.  6  is  there  (any)  taste  in  the  white  of  an  egg 
6.  30  Is  there  iniquity  in  my  tongue?  cannot 

9.  33  Neither  is  there  any  daysman  betwixt  us 

11.  18  thou  shalt  be  secure,  because  there  is 
14.    7  For  there  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  he  cut 
16.   4  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  stead,  I 
25.    3  Is  there  any  number  of  his  armies?  and 
28.    1  Surely  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  and 
33.  23  If  there  be  a  messenger  with  him,  an 

Psa.     7.    3  if  there  be  iniquity  in  my  hands 

14.    2  if  there  were  any  that  did  understand 
53.    2  if  there  were,  .that  did  understand,  that 
58.  11  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth 
73.  11  is  there  knowledge  in  the  most  high  ? 
135.  17  neither  is  there  (any)  breath  in  their 

Prov.11.  24  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet 

12.  18  There  is  that  speaketh  like  the  piercings 

13.  7  There  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,  yet 

13.  23  but  there  is . .  destroyed  for  want  of 

14. 12  There  is  away  which  seemeth  right  unto  a 
16.  25  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto  a 
18.  24  there  is  a  friend,  .sticketh  closer  than  a 
ig.  18  Chasten  thy  son  while  there  is  hope,  and 
20.  15  There  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  rubies 

23.  18  surely  there  is  an  end  ;  and  thine 

24.  14  then  there  shall  be  a  reward,  and  thy 
Eccl.  1.  10  Is  there  (any)  thing  whereof  it  may  be 

2.  21  there  is  a  man  whose  labour  (is)  in 

4.  8  There  is  one . .  and . .  not  a  second  ;  yea,  he 

5.  13  There  is  a  sore  evil.  .1  have  seen  under 

6.  i  There  is  an  evil  which  I  have  seen  under 

6.  ii  Seeing  there  he  many  things  that  increase 

7.  15  there  is  a  just . .  and  there  is  a  wicked 

8.  6  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  and 
8.  14  There  is  a  vanity,  .that  there  be  just 

8.  14  there  be  wicked,  .to  whom  it  happeneth 

9.  4  joined  to  all  the  living  there  is  hope:  for 

10.  5  There  is  an  evil . .  I  have  seen  under  the 
Isa.  44.  8  Is  there  a  God  beside  me?  yea.  .1  know 
Jer.     5.    1  if  there  be.  .that  executeth  judgment 

14.  22  Are  there,  .among  the  vanities  of  the  G. 

23.  26  How  long  shall  (this)  be  in  the  heart  of 
27.  18  and  if  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  with 

31.   6  there  shall  be  a  day,(that)  the  watchmen 
31.  16  for  thy  work  shall  be  rewarded,  saiththe 
31.  17  there  is  hope  in  thine  end,  saith  the  Lord 
37.  17  Is  there,  .word.  .There  is  :  for,  said  he 
Lam.  1.  12  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my 

3.  29  in  the  dust ;  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope 
Jon.  4.  1 1  wherein  are  more  than  sixscore  thousand 
Mic.    2.    1  because  it  is  in  the  power  of  their  hand 

5.7*0  hold  off,  cnrex<*>  apecho. 

Matt  15.  8  This  people,  .their  heart  is  far  from  me 
Mark  7.  6  This  people,  .their  heart  is  far  from  me 
Luke  7.    6  when  he  was  now  not  far  from  the  house 

15.  20  when  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his 

24.  13  which  was  from  Jerusalem,  .threescore 

6.  To  lead  on  or  away.  #701,  ago. 

Luke24.  21  to  day  is  the  third  day  since  these  things 


7.  To  rub  through,  pass  tlie  time,  Starpifiw. 

Acts  25.  14  when  they  had  been  there  many  days 

B.With  a  vieio  to,  for,  els  eis. 

Acts  13.  22  he  raised  up  unto  them  David  to  be,  v.  4^. 

9.  To  be,  eifii  eimi,  Luke  20.  6;   1  Pe.  4.  11. 

10.  To  have,  i%w- 

'  John  S.  57  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast 

9.  21,  23  he  is  of  age  ;  ask  him;  5.  6 ;  n.  17. 
Acts    7.    1  Then  said  the  high  priest,  Are  th.  Ac.i.  12. 

12.  15  she  constantly  attirmed  that  it  was  even  so 
17.  11  searched,  .whether  those  things  were  so 
24.    9  assented,  saying  that  these  things  were  so 
1  Ti.    5.  25  they  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid 

11.  To  become,  yivofiai  ginomai. 

Matt.  5.  45  That  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your 

6.  16  when  ye  fast,  be  not,  as  the  hypocrites,  of 

8.  26  the  sea  ;  aud  there  was  a  great  cabn 

9.  29  According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you 

10.  16  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents,  and 
10.  25  It  is  enough,  .that  he  be  as  his  master 

12.  45  the  last,  .of  that  man  is  worse  than  the 

14.  15  when  it  was  evening,  his  disciples  came 

15.  28  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt 

16.  2  said  unto  them,  When  it  is  evening,  ye 

17.  2  and  his  raiment  was  white  as  the  light 
iS.  13  if  so  be  that  he  find  it,  verily  I  say  unto 

19.  8  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so 

20.  26  whosoeveF  will  he  great  among  you,  let 

23.  26  the  outside  of  them  may  be  clean  also 

24.  20  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the 
24.  21  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning 
24.  21  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be 
24.  32  When  his  branch  is  yet  tender,  and 
24.  44  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready :  for  in  such 
26.   2  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is.  .the 

26.    5  Not  on  the  feast,  .lest  there  be  an  uproar 
26.   6  Now  when  Jesus  was  in  Bethany,  in  the 

26.  54  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must 

27.  45  there  was  darkness  over  all  tlie  land 

28.  2  there  was  a  great  earthquake  ;  for  the 
Mark  4. 10  when  he  was  alone,  they  that  were  about 

4.  39  the  wind  ceased,  and  there  was  a  great 
6.  14  for  his  name  was  spread  abroad  :  and  he 
6.  26  the  king  was  exceeding  sorry  ;  (yet)  for 
6.  35  when  the  day  was.  .far  spent,  his  disciples 
9.    7  there  was  a  cloud  that  overshadowed 
9.  26  came  out  of  him  :  and  he  was  as  one  dead 
9.  33  being  in  the  house  he  asked  them,  What 

10.  43  but  whosoever  will  he  great  among  you 
10.  44  whosoever  of  you  [will  be]  the  chiefest 

13.  7  for  (such  things)  must  ueeds  be  ;  but  the 
13.  18  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  iu  the 

13.  19  such  as  was  not.  .neither  shall  be 
13.  28  When  her  branch  is  yet  tender,  and 

15.  33  there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  laud 

16.  10  [went  and  told  them  that  had  been  with} 
Luke  1.    2  which  from  the  beginning  were  eyewitness 

1.    5  There  was  in  the  days  of  Herod,  the 

1.  38  be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy  word 

2.  2  was  first  made  when  Cy  renins  was 

2.   6  so  it  was,  that,  while  they  were  there 
2.  13  suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel  a 
2.  42  when  he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went 
4.  25  great  famine  was  throughout  all  the  land 
4.  36  they  were  all  amazed,  and  spake  among? 
4.  42  when  it  was  day,  he  departed  and  went 
6.  13  wheu  it  was  day,  he  called,  .his  disciples 
6.  16  Judas  Iscariot, which  also  was  the  traitor 
6.  36  Ee  ye  therefore  merciful,  as  your  Father 
6.  49  it  fell ;  and  the  ruin  of  that  house  was 

8.  24  and  they  ceased,  and  there  was  a  calm 

9.  29  the  fashion  of  his  countenance  was 
10.  32  likewise  a  Levite,  when  [he  was]  at  the 

10.  36  Which  now  of  these,  .was  neighbour  unto 

11.  26  last  (state)  of  that  mau  is  worse  than  the 

11.  30  as  Jonas  was  a  sign  unto  the  Ninevites,  so 

12.  40  Be  ye  therefore  ready  also  :  for  the  Son 

12.  54  ye  say,  There  cometh  a  shower ;  and  so  it 

13.  2  Suppose  ye  that  these  Galileans  were 
13.    4  think  ye  that  they  were  sinners  above  all 

15.  10  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  uf  the  angels 
16. 11  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the 

16.  12  if  ye  have  not  beeu  faithful  in  that 

17.  26  And  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noe,  so 

17.  28  Likewise  also  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Let 

18.  23  when  he  heard  this,  he  was  very 

18.  24  when  Jesus  saw  that  [he  was]  very 

19.  17  because  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  very 

19.  19  And  he  said.  .Ee  thou  also  over  five 

20.  14  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  [may  be] 
20.  33  in  the  resurrection  whose  wife,  .is  she  2 
22.  24  And  there  was  also  a  strife  among  them 
22.  26  let  him  be  as  the  younger ;  and  he  that 
22.  40  when  he  was  at  the  place,  he  said  unto 
22.  44  [being  in  an  agony,  .his  sweat  was  as  it] 

22.  66  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  elders,  .came 

23.  24  that  it  should  be  as  they  required 

23.  44  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the  earth 

24.  5  And  as  they  were  afraid,  and  bowed 
24.  19  which  was  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and 
24.  22  women. .which  were earlyatthe sepulchre 
24.  37  But  they  were  terrified  and  affrighted 

John  1.  6  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 
1.  15  cometh  after  me  is  preferred  before  me 
1.  27  coming  after  me  is  preferred  before  me 

1.  30  a  man  which  is  preferred  before  me 

2.  1  the  third  day  there  was  a  marriage  in 

3.  9  said  unto  him,  How  can  these  things  be? 

4.  14  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing 
6  17  it  was  now  dark,  and  Jesus  was  not  com- , 


BE 


74 


BEAR 


John  6.  2i  immediately  the  ship  was  at  the  land 

7.  43  So  there  was  a  division  among  the  people 

8.  58  I  say  unto  you,  Before  Abraham  was,  I 

9.  22  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue 
9.  27  wherefore. .will  ye  also  be  his  disciples? 

10. 16  there  shall  be  one  fold  .(and)  one  shepherd 
jo.  19  There  was  a  division  therefore  again 
10.  22  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  the 
12.  36  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  light 
12.  42  lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the 

14.  22  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself 

15.  S  much  fruit  ;  so  shall  ye  be  my  disciples 
20.  27  Then  saith  he.  .be  not  faithless,  but 

lets    1.  16  which  was  guide  to  them  that  took 
1. 19  it  was  known  unto  all  the  dwellers  at 
1.  20  Let  his  habitation  be  desolate,  and  let  no 

4.  4  the  number  of  the  men  was  about  five  th. 

5.  7  it  was  about  the  space  of  three  hours 
7.  29  was  a  stranger  in  the  land  of  Madian 

7.  38  This  is  he,  that  was  in  the  church  in  the 

7.  52  of  whom  ye  have  been  now  the  betrayers 

8.  1  at  that  time  there  was  a  great  persecution 

8.  8  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city 

9.  19  Then  was  Saul  certain  days  with  the 

9.  42  it  was  known  throughout  all  Joppa ;  and 
10.    4  when  he  looked  on  him,  he  was  afraid 

10.  25  Peter  was  coming  in,  Cornelius  met  "him 
12.  18  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  there  was  no  small 

12.  23  he  was  eaten  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the 

13.  s  when  they  were  at  Salamis,  they  preached 
15.    7  when  there  had  been  much  disputing 

15.  39  the  contention  was  so  sharp  between 

16.  26  suddenly  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
16.  35  when  it  was  day,  the  magistrates  sent  the 
19.  17  this  was  known  to  all  the  Jews  and  Greeks 
19.  21  After  I  have  been  there  I  must  also  see 

19.  28  they  were  full  of  wrath,  and  cried  out 
so.  16  hasted,  if  it  were  possible  for  him,  to  be  at 

20.  18  I  have  been  with  you  at  all  seasons 

22.   9  with  me  saw.  .the  light,  and  were  afraid 

22.  17  I  prayed  in  the  temple,:I  [was]  in  a  trance 

23.  12  it  was  day,  certain  of  the  Jews  banded 

25.  15  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem,  the  chiefpriests 

26.  4  which  was  at  the  first  among  mine  own 
26.  19  I  was  not  disobedient  unto  the  heavenly 
26.  28  almost  thou  persuadest  me  [to  be]  a  Chris. 

26.  29  were  both  almost  and  altogether  such  as 

27.  36  Then  were  they  all  of  good  cheer,  and 
27.  39  when  it  was  day,  they  knew  not  the  land 
27.  42  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the 

Rom.  3.   4  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar 

6.  5  if  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the 
9.  29  we  had  been  as  Sodoma,  and  been  made 

xi.    5  there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the 

11.  6  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.  But 
xi.  34  or  who  hath  been  his  counsellor? 

12.  16  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits 

15.  8  Jesus  Christ  was  a  minister  of  the  circum. 
15.  16  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might  be 

15.  31  my  service . .  may  be  accepted  of  the  saints 

16.  2  for  she  hath  been  a  suceourer  of  many 
16.    7  who  also  were  in  Christ  before  me 

1  Co.   2.    3  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear 

3.  18  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be 

4.  16  I  beseech  you,  be  ye  followers  of  me 

7.  23  with  a  price  ;  be  not  ye  the  servants  of 
9.  23  that  I  might  be  partaker  thereof  with 
9.  27  lest.  .1  myself  should  be  a  castaway 

10.    6  Now  these  things  were  our  examples,  to 

10.  7  Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  as . .  some  of  them 

11.  1  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also,  .of 
14.20  be  not  children  in  understanding,  .be  men 
15.  10  which  (was  bestowed)  upon  me  was  not  in 
15.  37  thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be 

15.  58  Therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye 

16.  2  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come 
16.  10  see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear 

2C0.    1.  18  our  word  toward  you[was]notyeaandnay 

1.  19  was  not  yea  and  nay,  but  in  him  was  yea 

3.  7  the  ministration  of  death,  .was  glorious 

4.  14  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with 

8.  14  abundance  also  may  be.  .that  there  may 
Gal.     3.  17  I  lu-  law,  which  was  four  hundred  and 

3.  24  Wherefore  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster 

4.  12  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I .  .for  I 

5.  26  Let  us  Dot  Ik.-  desirous  of  vain  glory 
Eph.   4.  32  be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tenderhearted 

5.    1  Be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear 

5.  7  Be  ye  not  therefore  partakers  with  them 
5. 17  Wherefore  be  ye  not  unwise, but  underst. 

6.  3  That  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou 
Phil.  1.  1  j  So  Unit  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest 

2.  15  That  [ye  may  be]  blameless  and  harmless 

3.  17  Brethren,  be  followers  together  of  me 

3.  21  [that  it  may  lie  fashioned  like  unto  his] 
Col.     3.  15  called  in  one  body  ;  and  be  ye  thankful 

4.  11  which  have  bee mifurt  unto  me 

1  Tii.   i.   5  what  manner  of  men  we  were  among  you 

1.  7  So  that,  yo  were  cnsamples  to  all  that 

2.  1  know  our  entrance,  .that  it  was  not  in 
2.   7  Bui  n .  were  gentle  among  von.  even  as 

2.  8  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto 

3-  5  have  tempted  you,  and  our  labour  be  in 

ill.     2.  i(  th.    v.  ..linn  n,.jii-  deceived  was  in  the 

4-  "  bur  be  thou  an  example  of  the  believers 

5.  9  a  widow,  .having  been  the  wife  of  one 
2li-    '    '    '■  ■'    «  1  m  ne  was  in  Rome,  he  sought  me 

3.  9  manifest  unto  all.. as  their's  also  was 

Heb.  2.  2  U the iword  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast 
2.  17  that  he  mlghl  be  a  merciful  and  faithful 
5.  11  hard  to  be  uttered,  seeing  ye  are  dull  of 
6. 12  That  ye  bo  not  slothful,  but  followers  of 


Jas. 


:  Pe. 


>Pe. 


1  Jo. 
3  Jo. 
Rev. 


Heb.  7.  18  For  there  is  verily  a  disannulling  of  v.  23 
9.  22  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 

11.  6  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently 

12.  8  all  are  partakers,  then  are  ye  bastards 
1.  12  for  when  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the 
1.  22  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 

1.  25  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a 

2.  10  and  yet  offend  in  one  (point),  he  is  guilty 

3.  1  My  brethren,  be  not  many  masters 
3.  10  bretliren,  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be 
5.    2  and  your  garments  are  moth  eaten 
1.  15  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation 
1.  16  Because  it  is  written,  [Be  ye]  holy  ;  for  I 
3.    6  whose  daughters  ye  are,  as  long  as  ye  do 

3.  13  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ? 

4.  12  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 

5.  3  but  being  ensamples  to  the  flock 
1.   4  by  these  ye  might  be  pax-takers  of  the 
1.  16  but  were  eyewitnesses  of  his  majesty 

1.  20  no  prophecy  of  the  scripture  is  of  any 

2.  1  there  were  false  prophets  also  among 
2.  20  the  latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than 
2.  18  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists 

8  that  we  might  be  fellowhelpers  to  the 
1.    9  was  in  the  isle  that  is  called  Patmos,  for 
1.  10  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day 
1.  18  I  (am)  he  that  liveth,  and  was  dead ;  and 

1,  19  and  the  things  which  shall  be  hereafter 

2.  8  the  first  and  the  last,  which  was  dead 

2.  10  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will 

3.  2  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things 

4.  1  will  shew  thee  things  which  must  be 
4.    2  And  immediately  I  was  in  the  spirit 

6.  12  and,  lo,  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
8.    1  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the 

8.    5  there  were  voices,  and  thunderings,  and 
11.  13  same  hour  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
11. 13  and  the  remnant  were  affrighted,  and 
11.  15  there  were  great  voices  in  heaven,  saying 

11.  19  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and 

12.  7  And  there  was  war  in  heaven  :  Michael 
16.  10  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  darkness 
16.  18  there  were  voices,  and  thunders,  and 
16.  18  [there  was]  a  great  earthquake,  such  as 
16.  18  not  since  men  were  upon  the  earth,  so 

12.  To  place  down,  or  fast,  Kotiivrrgu  kathistemi. 
Jas.    3.    6  so  is  the  tongue  among  our  members 

4.4  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God 

13.  To  lie,  be  laid,  uelfiat  keimai. 

2  Co.   3.  15  Moses  is  read,  the  vail  is  upon  their 
14. To  be  about  to  fi4\\co  niello. 

Matt  11.  14  This  is  Elias,  which  was  for  to  come 
Lukeig.    4  to  see  him,  for  he  was  to  pass  that  (way) 
Acts  21.  37  when  the  seven  days  were  almost  ended 
Rev.  12.    5  who  was  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of 

15.  To  do,  spend,  Troieta  poieo. 

2  Co.  11.  25  a  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the 

16.  To  go  iq)  with,  av^aivca  sumbaino. 

Acts  21.  3s  so  it  was,  that  he  was  borne  of  the 

17.  To  hit,  chance,  rvyxavw  lugchano. 

1  Co.  14.  10  There  are,  it  may  be,  so  many  kinds  of 
16.    6  And  it  may  be  that  I  will  abide,  yea,  and 
IS.  To  begin  gradually,  be,  v-n-dpxu  huparcho. 

Luke  8.  41  he  was  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue  :  and  he 
9.  48  he  that  is  least  among  you  all,  the  same 
11.  13  If  ye.. being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good 
16.  14  And  the  Pharisees  also,whowerecovetous 
16.  23  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments 
Acts  2.  30  being  a  prophet,  and  knowing  that  God 
4.  34  Neither  [was  there]  any  among  them  that 

4.  34  for  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  lands 

5.  4  Whiles  it  remained,  was  it  not  thine  own? 

7.  55  But  he,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

8.  16  only  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of 
10. 12  Wherein  were  all  manner  of  four  footed 
14.    8  [being]  a  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb 
16.    3  for  they  knew  all  that  his  father  was  a 
16.  20  These  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly 

16.  37  being  Romans,  and  have  cast  (us)  into 

17.  24  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and 
17.  27  though  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of 
17.  29  Forasmuch  then  as  we  are  the  offspring 
ig.  36  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing 
19.  40  there  being  no  cause  whereby  we  may 

21.  20  believe  ;  and  they  are  all  zealous  of  the 

22.  3  was  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all  are 
27.  12  the  haveu  was  not  commodious  to  winter 

27.  34  for  this  is  for  your  health  :  for  there 

28.  7  In  the  same  quarters  were  possessions  of 
28.  18  because  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in 

Rom.  4.  19  when  he  was  about  an  hundred  years  old 

1  Go.    7.  26  I  suppose  therefore  that  this  is  good  for 

ii.    7  forasmuch  as  he  is  the  image  and  glory 

11.  18  I  hear  taat  there  be  divisions  anion"- you 

12.  22  the  body,  which  seem  to  be  more  feeble 

2  Co.   8. 17  being  more  forward,  of  his  own  accord 

12.  16  being  crafty,  I  caught  you  with  guile 
Gal.  1.  14  ;  2.  14;  Phil.  2.  6  ;  3.  20;  Jas. 
1.  8  ;  2.  19 ;  3.  11. 

19.70  be  a  sojourner,  eViS^e'o.,  Acts 
20.ro  remain,  ^eVw  mend,  Act-*  5.  4. 
21.2*0  bear,  rpepw  phera,  Heb.  9.  16. 
BE  SO,  to  -To  will,  e4\w  thelo,  I  Pe, 
BE,  to  be  ordained  to  — 
To  become,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Acts    1.  22  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness 


2.  15  ;  2  Pe. 
17.  21. 


3-  '7' 


EE  -with,  to  — 

1  To  remain  toward  {a  thing),  wpoo-^iva). 

Mark  8.    2  because  they  have  now  been  with  me 
2. To  be  with  (a  thing),  vvveLfjLL  suneimi. 

Luke  9.  18  he  was.  .praying,  his  disciples  were  with 

Acts  22.  11  led  by  the  hand  of  them  that  were  with 
BEACON  — 
-4  signal,  pole,  mast,  ]y\  toren. 

Isa.   30.  17  as  a  beacon  upon  the  top  of  a  mountain 

BE-AL'-IAH,  rr;Vj?2  Jah  is  lord. 
A  man  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag,  B.C.  1058. 
1  Ch.  12.    5  Eluzai,  and  Jerimoth,  and  B.,  and 

BE-A'-LOTH.,  rn^f3  ladies,  mistirsscs. 

A  city  in  the  S.E.'  of  Judah,  near  Salem.     It  is  now 

called  Kitnutb,  and  is  S.  W.  of  Dhvllam. 

Josh. 15.  24  [uttermost  cities.. were].. Telem,  and  B. 
BEAM  — 
1.-4  w.eaver*s  beam,  J"in  ereg. 

Judg  16. 14  went  away  with  the  pin  of  the  beam 
2.^4  board,  33  gcb. 

1  Ki.   6.    9  and  covered  the  house  with  beams 
S.Cross  beam,  splinter,  DlD3  kaphis. 

Hab.  2.  11  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer 
4. A  weaver's  beam,  yoke,  *ma  manor. 

1  Sa.  17.    7  his  spear  (was)  like  a  weaver's  beam 

2  Sa.  21.  19  whose  spear  (was)  like  a  weaver's  beam 

1  Ch.  11.  23  hand  (was)  a  spear  like  a  weaver's  beam 

20.    5  spear-staff  (was)  like  a  weaver's  beam 
5.^1  rib,  yb?  tsela. 

iKi.  7.    3  covered  with  cedar  above  upon.. beams 
6.  A  cross  beam,  rrv\p  qurah. 

2  Ki.   6.    2  and  take  thence  every  man  a  beam 

6.  5  as  one  was  felling  a  beam,  the  ax  head 
2CI1.  3.    7  the  beams,  the  posts,  and  the  walls 
Song   1.  17  The  beams  of  our  house  (are)  cedar,  .our 

7. A  beam,  rafter,  Bokos  dolcos. 

Matt.  7.    3  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ? 

7.  4  behold,  a  beam  (is)  in  thine  own  eye? 

7.    5  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 
Luke  6.  41  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye? 
6.  42  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ? 

6.  42  first  the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye 
BEAM,  thick  — 

-4  thick  beam,  Tjr  ah. 

1  Ki.   7.    6  the  (other)  pillars  and  the  thick  beam 
BEAMS  — 
Hewed  beams,  rnrna  keruthoih. 

1  Ki.   6.  36  hewed  stone,  and  a  row  of  cedar  beams 

7.  2  with  cedar  beams  upon  the  pillars 

7.  12  hewed  stones,  and  a  row  of  cedar  beams 

BEAMS,  to  lay  — 

To  cause  {beams)  to  meet,  <"np  qarah,  3. 

Psa.104.    3  Who  layeth  the  beams  of  his  chambers 
Neh.    3.    3  who.  .laid  the  beams  thereof,  and  set 

3.  6  they  laid  the  beams  thereof,  and  set  up 
BEAMS,  to  make  — 

To  cause  (beams)  to  meet,  TT$  qarah,  3. 

Neh.   2.    8  he  may  give  me  timber  to  make  beams 
BEANS  — 
Bean,  pea,  Ws  pol. 

2  Sa.  17.  2S  and  flour,  and  parched  (corn),  and  beans 
Eze.    4.    9  Take . .  wheat,-  and  barley,  and  beans 

BEAR  — 

1..4  hear  (hairy,  shaggy  animal);  2%  3i*=l  dob. 
■  1  Sa.  17.  34  there  came  a  lion,  and  a  bear,  and  took 
17.  36  Thy  servant  slew  both,  .lion  and. .bear 
17.  37  delivered  me.  .out  of  the  paw  of  the  bear 
2  Sa.  17.    8  as  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  in  the 
Prov.17.  12  Let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a 

28.  15  (As)  a  roaring  lion,  and  a  ranging  bear 
Isa.   11.    7  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed 

59.  11  We  roar  all  like  bears,  and  mourn  sore 
Lam.  3.  10  He  (was)  unto  me  (as)  a  bear  lying  in 
Dan.    7.    s  another  beast,  a  second,  like  to  a  bear 
Hos.  13.    8  as  a  bear,  .bereaved,  .and  will  rend  the 
Amos  5.  19  As  if  a  man  did  flee . .  and  a  bear  met 
2. -I  bear,  frptcros  arktos. 

Rev.  13.    2  his  feet  were  as.  .of  a  bear,  and  his 

BEARS,  she  — 
A  bear,  ai*i  dob. 

2  Ki.   2.  24  there  came  forth  two  she  bears  out  of  the 
BEAR,  to  — 

1.7*ii  conceive,  rrin  harah. 

1  Ch.   4.  17  she  bare  Miriam,  and  Shammai,  and 
2.7*0  sow,  VI}  zara. 

Gen.    1.  29  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed 
3. To  be  pained,  H\T\  chul,  Sa. 

Isa.    51.    2  Abraham,  .and  unto  Sarah  (that)  bare 
±,To  bear,  yield,  bring  forth,  beget,  "i1?;  yalad. 

Gen.   4.    1  she  conceived,  and  bare  Cain,  and  said 

4.  2  she  again  bare  his  brother  Abel.    And 
4.  17  she  conceived,  and  bare  Enoch :  and  he 
4.  20  Adah  bare  Jabal :  he  was  the  father  of 
4.  22  Zillah,  she  also  bare  Tubal-cain,  an 

4  25  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth 


BEAR 


75 


BEAR 


Gen.   6.    4  they  bare,  .to  them,  the  same .  .mighty 
16.    i  Sarai  Abram's  wife  bare  him  no  children 
16.    2  the  Lord,  .restrained  me  from  bearing 
16.  ii  thou  (art)  with  child,  and  shalt  bear  a 
16.  15  Hagar  bare  Abram  a  son  :  and  Abram 
16.  15  his  son's  name,  which  Hagar  bare,  Ishm. 

16.  16  when  Hagar  bare  Ishmael  to  Abram 

17.  19  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  sou 

17.  21  which  Sarah  shall  bear  unto  thee  at  this 

18.  13  Shall  I  of  a  surety  bear  a  child,  which 

19.  37  the  firstborn  bare  a  sou,  and  called  his 

19.  38  she  also  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name 

20.  17  wife,  and . .  maidservants ;  and  they  bare 
si.  2  Sarah  conceived,  and  bare  Abraham  a  son 

21.  3  untohiiu,  whom  Sarah  bare  to  him,  Isaac 

21.  7  for  I  have  born,  .a  son  iu  his  old  age 
si.    9  she  had  born  unto  Abraham,  mocking 

22.  20  she  hath  also  born  children  unto  thy 
22.  23  these  eight  Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor 
22. 24  his  coucubiue .  .bare  also  Tebah,  and 

24  son  of  Milcah,  which  she  bare  unto 
36  my  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my 
47  Manor's  sou,  whom  Milcah  bare  unto 

2  And  she  bare  him  Ziiurau,  and  Jokshan 
12  Sarah's  handmaid,  bare  unto  Abraham 

26  threescore  years  old  when  she  bare  them 
32  And  Leah  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 
33,  34,  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son 

34  because  I  have  born  him  three  sons 

35  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son 
S3  called  his  name  Judah  ;  and  left  bearing 

1  Rachel  saw  that  she  bare  Jacob  no 

3  and  she  shall  bear  upon  my  knees,  that  I 
5  Bilhah  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  a  son 

7  Rachel's  maid  conceived  again,  and  bare 
9  Leah  saw  that  she  had  left  bearing 

10  Zilpah  Leah's  maid  bare  Jacob  a  son 
12  Zilpah  Leah's  maid  bare  Jacob  a  second 

17  she  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  the  fifth 

19  Leah  conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob 

20  because  I  have  born  him  six  sons :  and 

21  afterwards  she  bare  a  daughter,  and 

23  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son ;  and  said 

25  it  came  to  pass,  when  Rachel  had  born  J. 

3  then  all  the  cattle  bare  speckled 

8  then  bare  all  the  cattle  ringstraked 
43  their  children  which  they  have  born  ? 

1  Dinah,  .which  she  bare  unto  Jacob 

4  Adah  bare  to  Esau.  .Bashemath  bare  Reuel 

5  Aholibamah  bare  Jeush.and  Jaalam,  anil 
12  Timna.  .she  bare  to  Eliphaz  Amalek 

14  she  bare  to  Esau  Jeush,  and  Jaalam 

3  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son ;  and  he 

4  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son 

5  she  yet  again  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 
5  he  was  at  Chezib,  when  she  bare  him 

50  two  sons,  .which  Asenath.  .bare  unto 

27  Ye  know  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  (sons) 

15  These  (be)  the  sons  of  Leah,  which  she  bare 

18  these  she  bare  unto  Jacob,  (even)  sixteen 
20  daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest  of  On  bare 
25  and  she  bare  these  unto  Jacob,  .seven 

2  the  woman  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 

22  she  bare,  .a  son,  and  he  called  his  name 
6.  20  and  she  bare  him  Aaron  and  Moses 
6.  23  she  bare  him  Nadab,  and  Abihu,  Eleazar 

6.  25  she  bare  him  Phinehas  :  these  (are)  the 
21.   4  she  have  born  him  sons  or  daughters 

2  conceived  seed,  and  born  a  man  child 

5  But  if  she  bear  a  maid  child,  then  she 

7  that  hath  born  a  male  or  a  female 
sg  bare  to  Levi  in  Egypt :  and  she  bare 
15  they  have  born  him  children,  .the 

6  the  first-born  which  she  beareth  shall 
57  toward  her  children  which  she  shall  bear 

31  she  also  bare  him  a  son,  whose  name  he 
2  Gilead's  wife  bare  him  sons  ;  and  his 

2  Manoah.  .his  wife  (was)  barren,  and  bare 

3  now,  thou  (art)  barren,  and  bearest  not 
3,  5,  7  thou  shalt  conceive,  and  bear  a  son 

24  the  woman  bare  a  son,  and  called  his 
12  also  to  night,  and  should  also  bear  sons 

12  Pharez,  whom  Tamar  bare  unto  Judah 

13  the  Lord  gave,  .conception,  and  she  bare 
15  thy  daughter  in  law.  .hath  born  him 

20  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name 

5  so  that  the  barren  hath  born  seven 

21  that  she  conceived,  and  bare  three  sons 

20  Fear  not ;  for  thou  hast  born  a  son 
27  she  became  his  wife,  aud  bare  him  a  son 
15  struck  the  child  that  Uriah's  wife  bare 
24  she  bare  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  S. 

8  the  daughter  of  Aiah,  whom  she  bare 

6  and  (his  mother)  bare  him  after  Absalom 

21  it  was  not  my  son,  which  I  did  bear 
20  the  sister  of  Tahpenes  bare  him  Genubath 
17  the  woman  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 

32  she  bare  Zimram,  aud  Jokshan,  and 
2.   4  Tamar  his  daughter  in  law  bare  him 
2.  17  And  Abigail  bare  Amasa  :  and  the 
2.  19  Caleb  took  unto  him  Ephrath,  which  bare 
2.  21  Hezron.  .and  she  bare  him  Segub 
2.  24  Abiah  ;  Hezrou's  wife  bare  him  Ashur  the 
2.  29  and  she  bare  him  Ahban,  and  Molid 
2.  35  gave  his  daughter,  .she  bare  him  Attai 
2.  46  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Haran,  and 
2.  48  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Sheber,  and 
2.  49  She  bare  also  Shaaph  the  father  of 
4.    6  And  Naarah  bare  him  Ahuzam,  aud 
4.    9  saying,  Because  I  bare  him  with  sorrow 
4.  18  his  wife  Jehudi  jah  bare  Jered  the  father 

7.  14  sons  of  Maaasseh  ;  Ashriel.  .she  bare 


24. 
24. 
24. 
25. 
35. 
25- 

ZQ. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30- 
30. 
30. 
30. 
3°- 

30- 
30. 
3°- 
3o. 
30. 
3o- 
3°- 
3°- 
31- 
31- 
3i- 
34- 
3& 
36- 
36. 
36. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
41. 
44. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46 


Exod. 


Lev.  : 


Nam  26 
Dent  21. 

25- 

28. 
Judg.  3. 


13' 
13- 
13- 
13 
Ruth  1. 
4- 
4- 
4- 
1  Sa-  i. 


2Sa. 


iKi, 


2K1.  . 
iCh. 


1  Ch.  7.  14  his  concubine  the  Aramitess  bare  Machir 

7.  16  Maachah  the  wife  of  Machir  bare  a  son 
7. 18  his  sister  Hammoleketh  barelshod,  and 

7.  23  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and  he 

2  Ch.  11.  19  Which  bare  him  children  ;  Jeush  and 

11.  20  the  daughter  of  Absalom,  .bare  him 
Job  24.  21  He  evil  eutreateth . .  barren  (that)  beareth 
Prov.  17.  25  and  bitterness  to  her  that  bare  him 

23.  25  and  she  that  bare  thee  shall  rejoice 
Eccl.  3.  2  A  time  to  be  born,  and  a  time  to  die 
Song  6.    9  she  (is)  the  choice  (one)  of  her  that  bare 

8.  5  she  brought  thee  forth  (that)  bare  thee 
Isa.      7.  14  a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son 

8.    3  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 
54.    1  Sing,  O  barren,  thou  (that)  didst  not  bear 
Jer.   15.    9  She  that  hath  borne  seven  languisheth 

15.  10  thou  hast  borne  me  a  man  of  strife 

16.  3  their  mothers  that  bare  them 

20. 14  the  day  wherein  my  mother  bare  me 

22.  26  thee  out,  and  thy  mother  that  bare  thee 

29.  6  that  they  may  bear  sons  and  daughters 
50.  12  she  that  bare  you  shall  be  ashamed 

Eze.  16.  20  thy  daughters,  whom  thou  hast  borne 

23.  4  and  they  were  mine,  and  they  bare  sons 
23.  37  caused  their  sons,  whom  they  bare  unto 

Hos.    1.    3  which  conceived,  and  bare  him  a  son 

1.   6  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  daughter 
1.   8  Lo  ruhamah,  she  conceived,  and  bare  a 

5. To  cause  to  go,  ?fe  yalak,  5. 

Zech.  5.  10  Whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah  ? 

6.T0  contain,  b*3  kid,  5. 

Amos  7.  10  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  words 

7.  To  lift  up,  bv;  noted. 

Lam.  3.  28  because  he  hath  borne  (it)  upon  him 

8.  To  lift  tip,  Vbi  natal,  3. 

Isa.   ( j.    9  he  bare  them,  and  carried  them  all  the 

9.7*0  lift  vp,  bear,  bear  away,  N'^'i  nasa. 

Gen.  4-  13  My  punishment  (is)  greater  than  I  cau  b. 
7.  17  the  waters  increased,  aud  bare  up  the  ark 
13.    6  the  land  was  not  able  to  bear  them,  that 

36.  7  could  not  bear  them  because  of  their 
Exod  18.  22  be  easier  for  thyself,  and  they  shall  bear 

19.    4  I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings,  and  brought 
25.  14  that  the  ark  may  be  borne  with  them 
25.  27  places  of  the  staves  to  bear  the  table 
25.  28  that  the  table  may  be  borne  with  them 

27.  7  and  the  staves  shall  be.  .to  bear  it 

28.  12  Aaron  shall  bear  their  names  before  the 
28.  29  Aaron  shall  bear  the  names  of  the  child. 
28.  30  Aaron  shall  bear  the  judgment  of  the 
28.  38  Aaron  may  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  holy 
28.  43  that  they  bare  not  iniquity,  and  die 

30.  4  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  it  withal 

37.  5  he  put  the  staves,  .to  bear  the  ark 
37.  14  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  the  table 
37.  15  he  made  the  staves,  .to  bear  the  table 

37.  27  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  it  withal 

38.  7  he  put  the  staves . .  to  bear  it  withal 
Lev.    5.    1  if  he  do  not  utter  (it),  then  he  shall  bear 

5.  17  yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his 

7,  iS  the  soul  that  eateth  of  it  shall  bear  his 

10.  17  hath  given  it  to  you  to  bear  the  iniquity 

11.  25  whosoever  beareth.  .of  the  carcase  of 
11.  28  he  that  beareth  the  carcase  of  them  shall 
11.  40  he  also  that  beareth  the  carcase  of  it 

15.  10  he  that  beareth  (any  of)  those  things 

16.  22  And  the  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all 

17.  16  nor  bathe,  .then  he  shall  bear  his  iniquity 

19.  8  that  eateth  it  shall  bear  his  iniquity 

20.  17  a  wicked  thing.,  he  shall  bear  his  iniquity 
20. 19  near  kin  :  they  shall  bear  their  iniquity 
20.  20  they  shall  bear  their  sin  ;  they  shall  die 
22.   9  lest  they  bear  sin  for  it,  and  die  therefore 
22.  16  Or  suffer  them  to  bear  the  iniquity  of 

24. 15  Whosoever  curseth  his  God  shall  bear  his 
>Tnm.  1.  50  they  shall  bear  the  tabernacle,  and  all 

4. 15  the  sons  of  Kohath  shall  come  to  bear  (it) 

4.  25  they  shall  bear  the  curtains  of  the 

5.  31  and  this  woman  shall  bear  her  iniquity 
7.  9  they  should  bear  upon  their  shoulders 
9. 13  that  man  shali  bear  his  sin 

11.  12  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  the  sucking 
11. 14  I  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this  people 
11.  17  they  shall  bear  the  burden  of  the  people 
11.  17  that  thou  bear  (it)  not  thyself  alone 

13.  23  they  bare  it  between  two  upon  a  staff 

14.  33  bear  your  whoredoms,  until  your  carcases 
14.  34  each  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear  your 

18.  1  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  sanctuary 
18.    1  thy  sons  with  thee  shall  bear  the  iniquity 
18.  22  Neither  must,  .lest  they  bear  sin,  and 
18.  23  they  shall  bear  their  iniquity:  (it  shall  be) 
18.  32  ye  shall  bear  no  sin  by  reason  of  it,  when 

30.  15  then  he  shall  bear  her  iniquity 

Deut.  1.  9  saying,  I  am  not  able  to  bear  you  myself 
1.  12  How  can  I  myself  alone  bear  your 
1.  31  how  that  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee,  as 
1.  31  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in  all  the  way 
10.    8  to  bear  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 

31.  9,  25  which  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

32.  11  As  an  eagle,  .beareth  them  on  her  wings 
Josh.  3.   8  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the 

3.  13  of  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark  of  the 
3.  15  as  they  that  bare  the  ark  were  come  unto 
3.  15  the  feet  of  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark 

3.  17  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the 

4.  9  the  feet  of  the  priests  which  bare  the  ark 
4.  10  For  the  priests  which  bare  the  ark  stood 


Josh.  4.  16  Command  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark 

4.  18  when  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the 
6.    4  seven  priests  shall  bear  before  the  ark 

6.  6  let  seven  priests  bear  seven  trumpets  of 
8.  33  which  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

Judg.  3.  18  he  sent  away  the  people  that  bare  the 

1  Sa.  14.    1  said  unto  the  young  man  that  bare  his 

14.    6  said  to  the  young  man  that  bare  his 

17.  41  the  man  that  bare  the  shield  (went) before 

2  Sa.    6.  13  when  they  that  bare  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

iS.  15  ten  young  men  that  bare  Joab's  armour 

1  Ki.    2.  26  because  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  LORD 

5.  15  ten  thousand  that  bare  burdens,  and 
10.    2  she  came . .  with  camels  that  bare  spices 

14.  28  that  the  guard  bare  them,  and  brought 

2  Ki.   5.  23  servants :  and  they  bare  (them)  before  him 

i3.  14  that  which  thou  puttest  on  me  will  I  bear 

1  Ch.  5.  18  men  able  to  bear  buckler  and  sword,  and 

12.  24  children  of  Judah  that  bare  shield  and 
15. 15  children  of  the  Levites  bare  the  ark  of 

15.  26  God  helped  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark 

15.  27  and  all  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark 

2  Ch.  9.    1  and  camels  that  bare  spices,  and  gold  in 

14.    8  an  army  (of  men)  that  bare  targets  and 
14.   8  that  bare  shields  and  drewbo^s,  two 
Neh.    4.  17  aud  they  that  bare  burdens,  with  those 
Job   34.  31  I  have  borne  (chastisement),  I  will  not 
Psa.  55.  12  then  I  could  have  borne  (it) :  neither  (was) 
69.    7  for  thy  sake  I  have  borne  reproach ;  shame 
89.  50  I  do  bear  in  my  bosom  (the  reproach  of) 
91.  12  They  shall  bear  thee  up  in  (their)  hands 
Prov.  9.  12  (if)  thou  scornest,  thou  alone  shalt  bare 
18. 14  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear? 

30.  21  and  for  four  (which)  it  cannot  bear 
Isa.      1.  14  a  trouble  unto  me  ;  I  am  weary  to  bear 

22.  6  Elam  bare  the  quiver  with  chariots  of 
46.   4  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear ;  even  I  will 
46.    7  They  bear  him  upon  the  shoulder,  they 

52.  11  be  ye  clean,  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 

53.  4  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
53.  12  and  he  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made 

Jer.   10.    5  they  must  needs  be  borne,  because  they 

10.  19  Truly  this  (is)  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it 
17.  21  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  day,  nor 
17.  27  not  to  bear  a  burden,-  even  entering  in  at 

31.  19  I  did  bear  the  reproach  of  my  youth 
44.  22  the  Lord  could  no  longer  bear,  because 

Lam.  3.  27  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in 
Eze.     4.    4  that  thou  shalt  lie  upon  it  thou  shalt  bear 
4.    s  so  shalt  thou  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
4.   6  and  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
12.   6  shalt  thou  bear  (it)  upon  (thy)  shoulders 
12.    7  I  bare  (it)  upon  (my)  shoulder  in  their 
12. 12  the  prince  that  (is)  among  them  shall  bear 

14.  10  they  shall  bear  the  punishment  of  their 

16.  52  bear  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins  that 
16.  52  yea,  be  thou  confounded  also,  and  bear 
16.  54  That  thou  mayest  bear  thine  own  shame 

16.  58  Thou  bast  borne  thy  lewdness  and  thine 

17.  8  that  it  might  bear  fruit,  that  it  might  be 
iS.  19  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

18.  20  The  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
18.  20  shall  the  father  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

23.  35  therefore  bear  thou  also  thy  lewdness 
23.  49  ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  idols :  and 

32.  24  yet  have  they  borne  their  shame  with 
32.  25  yet  have  they  borne  their  shame  with 
22.  30  and  bear  their  shame  with  them  that  go 
34.  29  neither  bare  the  shame  of  the  heatl'en 
36.    6  ye  have  borne  the  shame  of  the  heathen 
36.    7  about  you,  they  shall  bear  their  shame 
36.  15  neither  shalt  thou  bear  the  reproach  of 
39.  26  that  they  have  borne  their  shame,  and  all 
44.  10  they  shall  even  bear  their  iniquity 

44.  12  and  they  shall  bear  their  iniquity 
44.  13  they  shall  bear  their  shame,  and  their 
Joel    2.  22  the  tree  beareth  her  fruit,  the  fig  tree 
Amos  5.  26  ye  have  borae  the  tabernacle  of  your 
Mic.    6.  16  ye  shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  people 

7.  9  I  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord 
Kag.  2.  12  If  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his 
Zech.  6.  13  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and 

10.7*0  bear,  carry  away,  SriD  sabal. 

Gen.  49.  15  and  bowed  his  shoulder  to  bear,  and 
Isa.   53.  11  many  ;  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities 
Lam.  5.    7  and  we  have  borne  their  iniquities 

11.  7*0  do,  make,  n?y  asah. 

2  Ki.  19.  30  take  root  downward,  and  bear  fruit 
Isa.   37.  31  take  root  downward,  and  bear  fruit 
Eze.  17.  23  shall  bring  forth  boughs,  and  bear  fruit 
Hos.    9.  16  yea,  though  they  bring  forth,  yet  will  I 

12.  To  be  fruitful,  rria  par  ah. 

Deut  29.  18  a  root  that  beareth  gall  and  wormwood 
13. 7*0  cause  to  sprout,  ncs  isamach,  5. 

Deut  29.  23  burning . .  it  is  not  sown,  nor  beareth 
lLTo  lift  up,  bear-  on,  or  away,  atpco  airo. 

Matt  27.  32  him  they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross 

Mark  2.    3  sick  of  the  palsy,which  was  borne  of  four 

15.  21  the  father  of  Alexander,  .to  bear  his  cross 

15.  To  bear  upward,  avaipepco  dnaph&ro. 

Heb.   9.  28  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins 
1  Pe.   2.  24  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own 

16.  To  bear,  take  up,  carry,  fiaarafa  bastazo. 
Matt.  3.  11  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear 

8.  17  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare 
20.  12  which  have  borae  the  burden . .  of  the  day 

Luke  7.  14  and  they  that  hare  (him)  stood  still 

11.  27  Blessed  (is)  the  womb  that  bare  thee 


BEAR 


76 


BEAST 


Lukei4.  27  whosoever  doth  not  bear  his  cross.,  cannot 
John  12.    6  and  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put 
16.  12  but  ye  cannot  hear  them  now 
20.  15  if  thou  have  borne  him  hence,  tell  me 
Acts   q.  15  to  bear  my  name  before  the  Gentiles 
i  c  io  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  bear  ? 
2i.  35  was  borne  of  the  soldiers  for  the  violence 
Rom  ii.  18  thou  bearest  not  the  root,  but  the  root 
i5     i  We  then  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear 
Gal.    5.  io  he  that  troubleth  you  shall  bear  his 
6.    2  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens 
6    5  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden 
6  I?  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Rev.    2.    2  thou  canst  not  bear  them  which  are  evil 
2.    3  And  hast  borne,  and  hast  patience,  and 
I7.ro  bear  or  beget  (children),  y^vvdoi  gennao. 
Luke  i.  n  thy  wife  Elisabeth  shall  bear  thee  a  son 
23.  29  Blessed  (are)  the . .  wombs  that  never  bare 

13.7*0  bear  out,  €K<p€pcc  ekphero. 

Heb.  6.    8  But  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers 

19.7*0  do,  make,  ttoUw  poieo. 

Luke  S.    S  and  sprang  up,  and  bare  fruit  an  hundred 
13.   9  And  if  it  bear  fruit,  (well) :  and  if  not 

Jas.     3.  12  Can  the  fig  tree,  my  brethren,  bear  o.  b. 

Rev.  22.    2  the  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve 
20.7*0  cover  closely,  endure,  <Tr4yu  stego. 

1  Co.  13.    7  Beareth  all  things,  believeth  all  things 

21.7*0  beget,  bring  forth,  tiktoj  tikto. 

Gal.     4.  27  Rejoice,  (thou)  barren  that  bearest  not 
22.7*0  bear,  carry,  <p£pu>  pherv. 

Luke  23.  26  that  he  might  bare  (it)  after  Jesus 
John  2.    8  Draw  out  now,  and  bear.  .And  they  bare 
15.    2  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not 
15.    2  every  (branch)  that  beareth  fruit,  he 
15.   4  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself 
15.    8  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear 

23.7*0  hear  habitually,  wear,  (popew phoreo. 
Rom  13.    4  for  he  bearetli  not  the  sword  in  vain 
1  Co.  15.  49  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy 
15.  49  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the 

24.7*0  bear  up  under,  vTro<pepa>  hupqpTiero. 

1  Co.  10.  13  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  (it) 

BEAR,  to  be  able  to  — 

7*"  lift  up,  bear,  endure,  tips  nasa. 

Gen.    4. 13  punishment  (is)  greater  than  I  can  bear 

13.    6  the  land  was  not  able  to  bear  them 
Psa.  55. 12  an  enemy,  .then  I  could  have  borne  (it) 

BEAR,  to  suffer  to  — 

To  cause  to  lift  up,  ttY'}  nasa,  5. 

Lev.  22. 16  surfer  them  to  bear  the  iniquity  of 
BEAR  long,  to  — 
'/'<>  surfer  long,  /xaKpo6vfx4w  makrothumeo. 

Luke  18.    7  unto  him,  though  he  bear  long  with 
BEAR  out,  to  — 
To  c  tuse  to  go  forth,  xx;  yatsa,  5. 

Eze.  46.  20  they  bear  (them)  not  out  into  the  utter 
BEAR,  that  — 
To  lift  up,  S-lm  ntitil. 

Zeph.  1.  n  Howl.,  all  they  that  hear  silver  are  cut 
BEAR  up,  to  — 
1 . To  lift  up,  x'y)  nasa. 

1 1<  0,    7.  17  the  waters  increased,  and  bare  up  the 
2.2*0  rectify,  fix,  establish,  }2n  takan,  3. 

Psa    75.    3  are  dissolved  ;  I  bear  up  the  pillars  of  it 
3.  To  lift  up,  aXpw  airo. 

Matt.  4.   6  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up 

Luke    |.  11  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up 

BEAR  up  into,  to  — 
To  I  ">':  1  ye  I"  eye,  avro(p9a\p.€co  antophthohned. 

A.  ta  27,  1-  could  not  bear  up  into  the  wind 
BEAR  with,  to  — 

,  avdxofiai  anechomai. 
lets  1     14  reason  would  that  I  should  bear -with  you 

2  Co.  11.    1  Would  to  God  ye  could  bear  with  me 

11.    1  In  (my)  folly  :  and  indeed  bear  with  me 
1 1.    4  accepted,  ye  might  well  bear  with  (him) 
BEAR  witness,  to  — 
To  ansvs  <■.  1  -  spond,  rrju  anah. 

Job    16.    8  leanness  rising  up  in  me. heareth  witness 
BEARD  — 
l.The  beard,  (RJ  zaqan. 

Lev.  13.  29  a  plague  upon  the  head  or  the  beard 

13.  30  (even)  a  leprosy  upon  the  head  or  beard 

14.  9  his  hair  on  Ids  head  and  his  beard 

19.  27  shalt  thou  mar  the  corners  of  thy  beard 
ax.   5  they  shave  off  the  corner  of  their  beard 

I  Sa.  17,  js  I  caught     by  his  heard,  and  smote  him 

ax.  13  let  his  Bpittle  fall  down  upon  his  beard 
ne  hall  of  their  beards 
io.   5  Tarry  at  Jericho  until  your  beards  be 
■'■  '■'''  took  Vmasa  by  the  heard  with  the 

I I  •  n.i       ,1  irn  al  J,  pjcho  until  your  beards  be 

I  plucked  off  the  hair  of. .my  beard 
"■  1    ■      the  hi  ad,  that  ran  down  upon  the  bi  ard 

■  Uron's  beard  ■  thai  weni  down  to    his 
»m      :  -■'•  M  Btaall  als nsume  the  beard 

15.  2  on.  .their  heads,  .baldness,  .every  beard 
•'<■'"■  n  iTin  haw  n,  and  their 


Jer    48.  37  For  every  head,  .bald,  and  every  beard 
Eze.    5.    1  upon  thine  head  and  upon  thy  beard 
2.  The  chin  or  upper  Up,  Dfl^  saptham, 

2  Sa.  19.  24  dressed  his  feet,  nor  trimmed  his  beard 

BEARING  — 

1.7*0  lift  up,  bare,  cany  away,  N^i  nasa. 

Gen.  37.  25  their  camels  bearing  spicery  and  balm 
Ts'um  10.  17  sons  of  Merari  set  forward,  bearing  the 

10.  21  Kohathites  set  forward,  bearing  the 
Josh.  3.    3  the  priests  the  Levites  bearing  it,  then 

3.  14  priests  bearing  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
6.    8  seven  priests  bearing  the  seven  trumpets 

6.  13  seven  priests  bearing  seven  trumpets  of 

1  Sa.  17.    7  and  one  bearing  a  shield  went  before 

2  Sa.  15.  24  bearing  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 

2.7*0  carry,  fZa<na£<j>}  bastazo. 

Marki4.  13  a  man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water 
Luke  22.  10  a  man  meet  you,  bearing  a  pitcher  of 
John  19.  17  he  bearing  his  cross  went  forth  into  a 

3.7*0  bear,  <p4poo  phero. 

Heb.  13. 13  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach 

BEARING  about  — 

7*o  bear  about,  irepupepa}  peripTtero. 

2  Co.   4. 10  Always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the 
[See  also  Armour,    blame,    burdens,    children, 
fruit,  grudge,   loss,  record,  rule,   take,  testi- 
mony, tidings,  twins,  witness.] 

BEAST  — 

1.  Cattle,  quadruped,  fion?  behemo.h. 

Gen.   6.    7  both  man,  and  beast,  and  the  creeping 

7.  2  every  clean  beast  thou  shalt  take  to  thee 
7.    2  and  of  beasts  that  (are)  not  clean  by  two 

7.  8  clean  beasts,  and  of  beasts  that  (are)  not 

8.  20  took  of  every  clean  beast,  and  of  every 
34.  23  their  substance  and  every  beast  of  their's 

36.  6  his  cattle,  and  all  Ins  beasts,  and  all 
Exod.  8.  17  it  became  lice  in  man,  and  in  beast ;  all 

8.  18  there  were  lice  upon  man,  and  upon 

9.  9  a  boil .  .blains  upon  man,  and  upon  beast 
9. 10  (with)  blains  upon  man,  and  upon  beast 
9.  19  every  man  and  beast  which  shall  be  found 
9.  22  upon  man,  and  upon  beast,  and  upon 

9.  25  all.  .in  the  field,  both  man  and  beast 

11.  5  shall  die.  .and  all  the  firstborn  of  beasts 
11.    7  move  his  tongue,  against  man  or  beast 

1    12.  12  smite  all  the  firstborn,  .man  and  beast 
13.    2  firstborn,  .of  man  and  of  beast :  it  (is) 

13.  12  every  firstling  that  cometh  of  a  beast 
13. 15  of  man,  and  the  firstborn  of  beast 

19.  13  shot  through;  whether  (it  be)  beast  or 
22.  10  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  or  any  beast  to  keep 
22. 19  Whosoever  lieth  with  a  beast  shall 

Lev.    7.  21  uncleanness  of  man,  or  (any)  unclean 

7.  25  For  whosoever  eateth  the  fat  of  the  beast 
7.  26  blood,  .of  fowl  or  of  beast,  in  any  of  your 
1 1.    2  among  all  the  beasts  that  (are)  on 
11.   3  (and)  cheweth  the  cud,  among  the  beasts 
11.  26  (The  carcases)  of  every  beast  which 
11.  39  And  if  any  beast,  of  which  ye  may  eat 
ii.  46  Tins  (is)  the  law  of  the  beasts,  and  of  the 
18.  23  Neither  shalt  thou  lie  with  any  beast 
18.  23  shall  any  woman  stand  before  a  beast 

20.  15  lie  with  a  beast,  .ye  shall  slay  the  beast 
20.  16  And  if  a  woman  approach  unto  any  beast 
20.  16  thou  shalt  kill  the  woman,  and  the  beast 
20.  25  therefore  put  difference  between,  .beasts 
20.  25  not  make  your  souls  abominable  by  beast 
24.  21  And  he  that  killeth  a  beast,  he  shall 

27.    9  if  (it  be)  a  beast,  whereof  men  bring 

37.  10  he  shall  at  all  change  beast  for  beast 

27.  11  And  if.  .any  unclean  beast,  of  which  they 
27. 11  he  shall  present  the  beast  before  the 
27.  26  Only  the  firstling  of  the  beasts,  which 
27.  27  And  if .  .of  an  unclean  beast,  then  he 
27.  28  all  that  he  hath,  (both)  of  man  and  beast 
Num.  3.  13  the  firstborn  in  Israel, both  man  and  beast 
'8.  17  of  Israel  (are)  mine,  .man  and  beast :  on 
18.  15  of  men  or  beasts,  shall  be  thine 
18.  15  the  firstling  of  unclean  beasts  shalt  thou 
31.  11  all  the  prey,  (both)  of  men  and  of  beasts 
31.  26  that  was  taken,  (both)  of  man  and  of  beast 
31.  30  take . .  of  the  flocks,  of  all  manner  of  beasts 

31.  47  one  portion,  .(both)  of  man  and  of  beast 
Deut.  4.  17  The  likeness  of  any  beast  that  (is)  on  the 

14.  4  These  (are)  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat 
14.    6  And  every  beast  that  parteth  the  hoof 
14.    6  cheweth  the  cud  among  the  beasts,  that 

27.  21  he  that  lieth  with  any  manner  of  beast 

28.  26  be  meat,  .unto  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and 

32.  24  I.  .send  the  teeth  of  beasts  upon  them 
Judg2o.  48  as  the  beast,  and  all  that  came  to  baud 
1  Sa.  17.  44  I  will  give  thy  flesh,  .to  the  beasts 

1  Ki.    4.  33  lie  spake  also  of  beasts,  and  of  fowl 
18.    5  find  grass,  .that  we  loose  not  all  the  beasts 

2  Ki.    3.  17  ye,  and  your  cattle,  and  your  beasts 
2  Ch.  32.  28  and  stalls  for  all  manner  of  beasts 
Ezra  1.  4,  6  with  gold,  and  with  goods.. with  beasts 
Nuh.   2.  12  neither  (was  (here  any)  beast  with  me 

2.  14  for  the  beast  (that  was)  under  me  to  pass 
Job    12.    7  But  ask  now  the  beasts,  and  (bey  shall 
18.    3  Wherefore  are  we  counted  as  beasl  9 
35. 11  "Who  teacheth  us  more  than  the  beasts 
Psa.     8.    7  oxen,  yea.  and  the  beasts  of  the  field 
36.   6  0  LORD,  tnou  preservest  man  and  beast 
49.  12,  20  man  .  .he  is  like  the  beasts  (that) 
73.  2a  ignorant  :  1  was  (as)  a  beast  before  thee 
135.    8  firstborn  of  Egypt,  both  of  man  aud  beast 


Psa.147.    9  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  (and)  to 

Prov.12.  10  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast:  but  the 
30.  30  A  lion,  .strongest  among  beasts,  and 

Eccl.  3.  18  might  see  that  they  themselves  are  beasts 
3.  19  befalleth  the  sons  of  men  befalleth  beasts 
3.  19  man  hath  no  preeminence  above  a  beast 
3.  21  and  the  spirit  of  the  beast  that  goeth 

Isa.    18.    6  beasts  of  the  earth  . .  beasts  of  the  earth 

30.  6  The  burden  of  the  beasts  of  the  south . 
63.  14  As  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the  valley 

Jer.     7.  20  this  place,  upon  man,  and  upon  beast 
7.  33  shall  be  meat . .  for  the  beasts  of  the 
9.  10  of  the  heavens  and  the  beast  are  fled 
12.    4  the  beasts  are  consumed,  and  the  birds 

15.  3  of  the  heaven,  and  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

16.  4  shall  be  meat . .  for  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

19.  7  to  be  meat,  .for  the  beasts  of  the  earth 
21.    6  will  smite.,  this  city,  both  man  and  beast 
27.    5  the  beast  that  (are)  upon  the  ground 

31.  27  seed  of  man,  and  with  the  seed  of  beast 

32.  43  (It  is)  desolate  without  man  or  beast 

33.  10  desolate  without  man  and  without  beast 
33.  10  without  inhabitant,  aud  without  beast 

33.  12  desolate  without  man  and  without  beast 

34.  20  be  for  meat,  .to  the  beasts  of  the  earth 
36.  29  to  cease  from  thence  man  and  beast? 

50.  3  they  shall  depart,  both  man  and  beast 

51.  62  shall  remain  in  it,  neither  man  nor  beast 
Eze.    8.  10  every  form  of  creeping  things,  and . .  beasts 

14.  13,  17  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it 
14.  19,  21  to  cut  off  from  it  man  and  beast 
25.  13  I.  .will  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it 
29.    8  cut  off  man  and  beast  out  of  thee 
29.  11  nor  foot  of  beast  shall  pass  through  it 
32. 13  the  beasts  thereof,  .the  hoofs  of  beasts 

36.  11  I  will  multiply  upon  you  man  and  beast 
44.  31  that  is  dead  of  itself,  .fowl  or  beast 

Joel     1.  18  How  do  the  beasts  groan  !  the  herds 

x.  20  The  beasts  of  the  field  cry  also  unto  thee 

2.  22  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field 
Jon.    3.   7  Let  neither  man  nor  beast,  herd  nor  flock 

3.  8  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with 
Mic.   5.    8  as  a  lion  among  the  beasts  of  the  forest 
Hab.   2.  17  shall  cover  tl.ee,  and  the  spoil  of  beasts 
Zeph.  1.    3  I  will  consume  man  and  beast ;  I  will 
Zech.  8.  10  hire  for  man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast 

14. 15  of  all  the  beasts  that  shall  be  in  these 
2.  Beast,  brute,  Tpa  beir. 

Gen.  45.  17  This  do  ye  ;  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,  get 
Exod22.    5  shall  put  in  his  beast,  and  shall  feed 
Nuni2o.    8  give,  .congregation  and  their  beasts  drink 

20.  11  the  congregation  drank,  and  their  beasts 
3.-4  living  creature,  "r\  chait 

Gen.     1.  24  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind 

1,  25  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after 

1.  30  to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  to  every 

2.  19  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field,  and 

2.  20  to  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  but  for  Adam 

3.  1  serpent  was  more  subtile  than  any  beast 
3.  14  above  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  upon  thy 
7. 14  They,  and  every  beast  after  his  kind,  and 

7.  21  both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  beast 

8.  19  Every  beast,  every  creeping  thing,  and 

9.  2  of  you  shall  be  upon  every  beast  of  the 
9.    5  at  the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I  require 
9. 10  and  of  every  beast  of  the  earth  with  you 
9. 10  all  that  go  out  of  the  ark,  to  every  beast 

37.  20  Some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him :  and 
37.  33  an  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him;  Joseph 

Exod  23.  11  what  they  leave  the  beasts  of  the  field 
23.  29  the  beast  of  the  field  multiply  against 

Lev.     5.    2  whether,  .a  carcase  of  an  unclean  beast 
11.    2  These  (are)  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat 
11.  27  all  manner  of  beasts  that  go  on  (all)  four 
11.  47  between  the  beast  that  may  he  eaten 
11.  47  and  the  beast  that  may  not  be  eaten 
17. 13  which  hunteth  and  catcheth  any  beast 

25.  7  for  the  beast  that  (are)  iu  thy  land,  shall 

26.  6  I  will  rid  evil  beasts  out  of  the  land 

26.  22  I  will  also  send  wild  beasts  among  you 
NUIU35.  3  for  their  goods,  and  for  all  their  beasts 
Deut.  7.  22  lest  the  beasts  of  the  field  increase  upon 

1  Sa.  17.  46  and  to  the  wild  beasts  of  the  earth 

2  Sa.  21.  10  nor  the  beasts  of  the  field  by  night 
2  Ki.  14.    9  and  there  passed  by  a  wild  beast 

2  Ch.  25.  iS  and  there  passed  by  a  wild  beast 
Job     5.  22  shalt  thou  he  afraid  of  the  beasts 

5.  23  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace 
37.    8  Then  the  beasts  go  into  dens,  and  remain 

39.  15  crush  them,  .the  wild  beast  may  break 

40.  20  where  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  play 
Psa    ^o.  10  For  every  beast  of  the  forest  (is)  mine 

79.    2  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  unto  the  beasts 
104  11  Thev  give  drink  to  every  beast  of  the 
104.  20  all  the  beasts  of  the  forest  do  creep 
104.  25  wherein  (are). .  small  and  great  beasts 
148.  10  Beasts,  and  all  cattle.. and  flying  fowl 

Isa.    35.    9  No.  .ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  thereon 
40.  16  beasts  thereof  sufficient  for  a  burnt-off. 
43.  20  The  beast  of  the  field  shall  honour  me 
46.    1  idols  were  upon  the  beasts,  and  upon  the 
56.    9  beasts  of  the  field . .  beasts  in  the  forest 

•Trr.   i2.    9  come  ye.  assemble  all  the  beasts  of  the 

27.  6  the  be'asts  of  the  field  have  I  given  him 

28.  14  I  have  given  him  the  beasts  of  the  field 
Eze.    5.  17  will  I  send  upon  you  famine,  .evil  beasts 

14.  15  I  cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through 
14. 15  may  pass  through  because  of  the  beasts 
14.  21  the  famine,  and  the  noisome  beast,  and 
20.  5  I  have  given  thee  for  meat  to  the  beasts 
31.    6  the  beasts  of  the  field  bring  forth  their 


BEAST 


77 


BEAUTIFUL 


Eze.  31. 13  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  upoii  his 

32.  4  I  will  till  the  beasts  of  the  whole  earth 

33.  27  will  I  give  to  the  beasts  to  be  devoured 

34.  5  they  became  meat  to  all  the  beasts  of  the 
3+,  8  my  flock  became  meat  to  every  beast  of 
34.  25  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of  the 
34.  28  shall  the  beasts  of  the  land  devour  them 

38.  20  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  all  creeping 

39.  4  (to)  the  beasts  of  the  field  to  be  devoured 
39.  17  Speak  unto,  .every  beast  of  the  field 

Dan.     2.  38  the  beasts  of  the  field .  .hath  he  given 

4.  1-2  the  beasts  of  the  field  had  shadow  under 
4.  14  let  the  beasts  get  away  from  under  it 
4.  15  and  (let)  his  portion  (be)  with  the  beasts 
4.  16  let  a  beast's  heart  be  given  unto  him 
4.  21  under  which  the  beasts  of  the  field  dwelt 
4.  23  (let)  his  portion  (be)  with  the  beasts  of 
4.  25  thy  dwelling  shall  be  with  the  beasts 

4.  32  thy  dwelling . .  with  the  beasts  of  the  field 

5.  21  his  heart  was  made  like  the  beasts,  and 
7.    3  four  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  sea 
7.    5  auother  beast,  a  second,  like  to  a  bear 
7.    6  the  beast  had  also  four  heads ;  and 

7.    7  behold  a  fourth  beast,  dreadful  and 
7.    7  it  (was)  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that 
7.  11  I  beheld. .till  the  beast  was  slain,  and 
7.  12  As  concerning  the  rest  of  the  beasts  they 
7. 17  These  great  beasts .  .shall  arise  out  of  the 
7.  19  I  would  kuow  the  truth  of .  .fourth  beast 

7.  23  The  fourth  beast  shall  be  the  fourth 

8.  4  no  beasts  might  staud  before  him 
Eos.    2.  12  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat  them 

2.  18  a  covenant  for  them  with  the  beasts  of 
4,    3  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the 

13.  8  the  wild  beast  shall  tear  them 

Zeph.  2,  14  all  the  beasts  of  the  nations  :  both  the 
2.  15  a  place  for  beasts  to  lie  down  in  • 

4. Soul,  breathing  creature,  (nora)  v$}  nephesh. 
lev.  24.  18  a  beast  shall  make  it  good;  beast  for  b. 

5  Slaughtered  animal,  "5a  tebach. 

Prov.  9.    2  She  hath  killed  her  beasts  ;  she  hath 

6. A  living  creature,  faov  zoon. 

Heb.  13.  11  the  bodies  of  those  beasts,  .are  burned 
2Pe.    2.  12  But  these,  as  natural  brute  beasts 
Jude       10  what  they  kuow  naturally,  as.. beasts 
Rev.    4.    6  round  about  the  throne,  .four  beasts 

4.  7  beast  (was)  Uke  a  lion,  and . .  second  beast 
4.  7  third  beast  had  a  face .  .the  fourth  beast 
4.    8  the  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six 

4.  9  when  those  beasts  give  glory  and  honour 

5.  6  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four  beasts 
5.    S  the  four  beasts,  .fell  down  before  the 

5.  11  round  about  the  throne  and  the  beasts 

5.  14  And  the  four  beasts  said,  Amen.    And 

6.  1  one  of  the  four  beasts  saying,  Come 

6.  3  I  heard  the  second  beast  say.  Come  and 

6.  5  I  heard  the  third  beast  say,  Come  and 

6.  6  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four  beasts 

6.  7  I  heard  the.. fourth  beast  say,  Come  and 

7  11  the  elders  and  the  four  beasts,  and  fell 

14.  3  before  the  four  beasts  and  the  elders 

15.  7  And  one  of  the  four  beasts  gave  unto 
19.   4  the  four  beasts  fell  down  and  worshipped 

7.  A  wild  beast,  Onpiov  therion. 

Acts  28.   5  And  he  shook  off  the  beast  into  the  fire 
Titus  1. 12  The  Cretiaus  (are)  alway  liars  evil  beasts 
Heb.  12.  20  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain 
Jas.     3.    7  For  every  kiud  of  beasts,  and  of  birds 
Rev.    6.    S  to  kill,  .with  the  beasts  of  the  earth 
11.    7  the  beast  that  ascendeth  out  of  the 
13.    1  I.  .saw  a  beast  rise  up  out  of  the  sea 
13.    2  And  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like 
13.    3  all  the  world  wondered  after  the  beast 
13.    4  beast,  .worshipped  the  beast,  .the  beast 
13.  11  I  beheld  another  beast  coming  up 
13.  12  the  power  of  the  first  beast  before  him 
13.  12  the  first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was 
13. 14  he  had  power,  .in  the  sight  of  the  beast 
13.  14  they  should  make  an  image  to  the  beast 

13.  15  give  life  unto  the  image  of  the  beast 
!3  15  image  of  the  beast,  .image  of  the  beast 
j3-  17  the  name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of 
13  18  Let  him.  .count  the  number  ofthe  beast 

14.  9  If  auy  man  worship  the  beast  and  his 

14.  it  who  worship  the  beast  and  his  image 

15.  2  that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast 

16.  2  men  which  had  the  mark  of  the  beast 
16. 10  poured .  .upon  the  seat  of  the  beast 
16. 13  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and  out 

17.  3  I  saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a.  .beast 

17.    7  mystery  of  the  woman  and  of  the  beast 
17.    8  The  beast  that  thou  sawest  was  and  is 
17.    8  wheu  they  behold  the  beast  that  was 
17.  11  And  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not 
17. 12  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the  beast 
17.  13  their  power  and  strength  unto  the  beast 
17.  16  horns  which  thou  sawest  upon  the  beast 
17.  17  give  their  kingdom  uuto  the  beast 
19.  19  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the 
19.  20  And  the  beast  was  taken,  and  with  him 

19.  20  had  received  the  mark  of  the  beast 

20.  4  which  had  not  worshipped  the  beast 
20. 10  where  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet 

S. Beast  of  burden,  or  for  fond,  kttjvos  ktenos.       — 
Lukeio.  34  set  him  on  his  own  beast,  and  brought 
Acts  23.  24  provide  (them)  beasts,  that  they  may  set 
1  Co.  15  39  another  flesh  of  beasts,  another  of  fishes 
Rev.  18.  13  and  fine  flour,  and  wheat,  and  beasts 


BEAST,  wild  or  venomous  — 
l.A  living  creature,  *n  chai. 

1  Sa.  17.  46  I  will  give,  .to  the  wild  beasts  of  the 
2. A  wild  animal,  Qnpiov,  therion. 

Mark  1   13  in  the  wilderness,  .with  the  wild  beasts 
Acts  10.  12  [wild  beasts],  and  creeping  things,  and 
11.    6  wild  beasts,  and  creeping  things,  and 
28.    4  the  barbarians  saw  the  venomous  beast 
BEAST,  swift  — 
-4  dromedary,  nns~i2  kirkaroth. 

Isa.   66.  20  upon  mules,  and  upou  swift  beasts 

[See  ateo  Desert,  fat,  fed,  fight  with,  fourfooted, 
slain,  torn  of,  wild.] 

BEAST  that  dieth  of  itself  — 
Carcase,  rV^2\  nebelah. 

Lev.    7.  24  the  fat  of  the  beast  that  dieth  of  itself 
BEAT,  to  — 

1.  To  pound  in  a  mortar,  Tpi  duk. 

Num.  1 1.    8  ground  (it)  in  mills,  or  beat,  .in  a  mortar 

2.  To  knock,  p£n  daphaq,  7. 

Judg.  19.  22  beat  at  the  door,  and  spake  to  the  master 
3. To  smite  (as  with  a  hammer),  Dirt  halam. 

Prov. 23.  35  they  have  beaten  me,  (and)  I  felt  (it)  not 

4.  To  beat  out  or  off,  D?n  chabat. 

Deut.24.  20  When  thou  beatest  thine  olive  tree 
5. To  crush,  bruise,  nrj3  kathath. 

Joel    3.  10  Beat  your  plowshares  into  swords,  and 
Q.To  beat  down  or  out,  nns  kathath,  3. 

2  Ch.  34.  7  had  beaten  the  graven  images  into  powder 
Isa.  2.  4  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plowsh. 
Mic.    4.   3  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plowsh. 

7. To  smite,  cause  to  smite,  nrn  nakah,  5. 

Deut  25.    3  beat  him  above  these  with  many  stripes 
2  Ki.  13.  25  Three  times  did  Joash  beat  him  and 
Prov.23.  13  (if)  thou  beatest  him  with  the  rod,  he 
23.  14  Thou  shalt  beat  him  with  the  rod,  and 
Jon.  »  4.    8  the  sun  beat  upon  the  head  of  Jonah 

5.  To  stamp,  beat  out,  jJja"J  raqa,  3. 

Exod  39.    3  they  did  beat  the  gold  into  thin  plates 

9.  To  beat,  wear  away,  POt?  shachaq. 

Exod3o.  36  thou  shalt  beat  (some)  of  it  very  small 

28a.  22.  43  I  beat  them  as  small  as  the  dust 

Psa.  18.  42  Then  did  I  beat  them  small  as  the  dust 

10.  To  ski?i,  flay,  thrash,  Se'pw  dero. 

Matt  21.  35  beat  one,  and  killed  auother,  and  stoned 

Marki2.    3  they  caught,  .and  beat  him,  and  sent 

Luke  20.  10  the  husbandmen  beat  him,  and  sent  (him) 

20.  11  they  beat  him  also,  and  entreated  (him) 

Acts    5,  40  when  they  had  called,  .and beaten.. they 

16.  37  They  have  beaten  us  openly  uncondemned 

22.  19  beat  in  every  synagogue  them  that 

1  Co.   9.  26  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air 

11. To  beat  icith  a  rod,  paBfiifa  rhabdizo. 

Acts  16.  22  the  magistrates,  .commanded  to  beat 

12.  7*0  strike,  smite,  rirmw  tupto. 

Luke  12.  45  begin  to  beat  the  men  servants  and 
Acts  18.  17  took,  .and  beat,  .before  the  judgment 

BEAT  into,  to  — 

To  cast  or  throw  upon,  eit  t&dWu  epiballo. 

Mark  4.  37  the  waves  beat  into  the  ship,  so  that  it 

BEAT  upon,  to  — 

1.  To  strike  toward,  Trpoo-Kiwroj  proskopto. 

Matt.  7  27  [beat  upon]  that  house ;  and  it  fell :  and 

2.  To  fall  toward,  ttpoo-tti-Krw  prospipto. 

Matt.  7.  25  [beat  upon]  that  house  ;  and  it  fell  not 

BEAT  vehemently  against  or  upon,  to  — 
To  break  or  burst  toward,  Trpoapriyvvfju. 

Luke  6.  48  the  stream  beat  vehemently  upon  that 
6.  49  against  which  the  stream  did  beat  vehem. 

BEAT  with  rods,  to  — 

To  beat  with  rods,  paBSi^ai  rhabdizo, 

2  Co.  11.  25  Thrice  was  I  beaten  with  rods,  once  was 

BEAT  down,  to  — 

1.7*0  smite  (as  with  a  hammer),  zbn  halam. 

1  Sa.  14.  16  the  multitude,  .went  on  beatiDg  down 

2.  To  break  down  or  through,  D"irr  haras. 

2Ki.   3.  25  they  beat  down  the  cities,  and  on  every 

3.  To  crush,  bruise,  nns  kathath. 

Psa.  89.  23  I  will  beat  down  his  foes  before  his  face 

4.  To  break  down,  J*nj  nathats. 

Judg.  8.  17  he  beat  down  the  tower  of  Penuel,  and 
9.  45  beat  down  the  city,  and  sowed  it  with  salt 

2  Ki.  23.  12  did  the  king  beat  down,  and  brake 

BEAT  in  pieces  — 

To  beat  small,  ppi  daqaq,  5. 

Mic.    4. 13  thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  many  people 

BEAT  off,  to  — 

To  beat  out  0?*  off,  onn  chabat. 

Isa.   27. 12  the  Lord*  shall  beat  off  from  the  channel 
BEAT  out,  to  — 
To  beat  out  or  off,  bin  chabat. 

Ruth  2.  17  beat  out  that  she  had  gleaned :  and  it 


BEAT  to  pieces,  to  — 
To  bruise,  N;n  daka,  3. 

Isa.      3.  15  What  mean  ye.  .ye  beat  my  people  to  p. 
EEATEN  — 
1. Beaten  down  or  out,  JVtfa  kathith. 

Exod  27.  20  pure  oil  olive  beaten  for  the  light,  to 
29.  40  with  the  fourth  part  of  an  bin  of  beaten 

Lev.  24.    2  pure  oil  olive  beaten  for  the  light,  to 

Num  28.    5  with  the  fourth,  .of  an  Inn  of  beaten  oil 

2. Beaten  out  work,  m?pft  miqshah. 

Num.  S.    4  the  candlestick,  .beaten  gold,  unto  the 
3.7*0  slaughter,  beat  out,  on^  shachat. 

1  Ki.  10.  16  Solomon  made,  .targets  (of)  beaten  gold 

10. 17  And.  .three  hundred  shields  (of)  beaten 

2  Ch.  9.  15  two  hundred  targets  (of)  beaten  gold  :  six 

9.  15  hundred  (shekels)  of  beaten  gold  went  to 
9.  16  And  three  hundred  shields,  .beaten  gold 
BEATEN,  to  be  — 
1.7*o  be  come  xipon,  plagued,  V3J  naga,  2. 

Josh.  8.  15  as  if  they  were  beaten  before  them  and 
2. To  be  smitten,  plagued,  *\}}  nagaph,  2. 

2  Sa.    2.  17  sore  battle  that  day. .  Abuer  was  beaten 

3.  To  smite,  np3  nakah,  5. 

Deut.  25.    2  worthy  to  be  beaten,  .to  be  beaten 

4.  To  be  smitten,   npj  nakah,  6. 

Exod.  5.  14  theofficers.  .were beaten, (and)demanded 
5.  16  Make  brick  :  and,  behold,  .(are)  beateu 
5. To  skin,  flay,  thrash,  §4pw  dero. 

Markij.    9  in  the  synagogues  ye  shall  be  beaten 

Luke  12.  47  that  servant,  .shall  be  beateu  with  many 
12.  48  But  he.,  shall  be  beaten  with  few  (stripes) 
BEATEN  corn  — 
Beaten  out  com,  ir*]3  geres. 

Lev.    2.  14  corn  dried,  .corn  beaten  out  of  full  ears 
BEATEN  down,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  cast  down,  affrighted,  nnn  chathath,  2. 

Isa.  30.  31  shall  the  Assyrian  be  beaten  down 
2.  To  be  beaten  down  or  out,  nns  kathath,  6. 

Jer.   46.    5  their  mighty  ones  are  beaten  down,  and 
BEATEN  in  sunder,  to  be  — 
To  be  dashed  to  pieces,  j'93  naphats,  4. 

Isa.   27.   9  as  chalk  stones  that  are  beaten  in  sunder 
BEATEN  out,  to  be  — 
To  be  beaten  out  or  off,  Bjrj  chabat,  2. 

Isa.   28.  27  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  staff 
BEATEN  out  of  one  piece  — 
Beaten  out  work,  n^fip  miqshah. 

Exod  37.    7  beaten  out  of  one  piece  made  he  them 
BEATEN  to  pieces,  to  be  — 
To  be  beaten  down  or  out,  nns  kathath,  6.  ■ 

Mic.     1.    7  graven  images,  .shall  be  beaten  to  pieces 
BEATEN  work  — 
Beaten  out  work,  rupgo  miqshah. 

Exod25.  18  (of)  beaten  work  shalt  thou  make  them 
25.  31  (of)  beaten  work  shall  the  candlestick  be 
25.  36  all  of  it.  .one  beaten  work  of  pure  gold 
37.  17  (of)  beaten  work  made  he  the  candlestick 
37.  22  all  of  it  (was)  one  beaten  work 

Num.  8.    4  And  this  work,  .(was)  beaten  work 
BEATING  — 
l.To  skin,  flay,  thrash,  Sepa  dero. 

Mark  i2.    5  beating  some,  and  killing  some 
2.7*0  strike,  tvittco  tupto. 

Acts  21.  32  the  soldiers,  they  left  beating  of  Paul 
BEAUTIFUL  — 
l.Good  of  form,  ntoip  mnia  tobath  march. 

2  Sa.  11.    2  the  woman  (was)  very  beautiful  to  look 

Esth.  2.    7  the  maid  (was)  fair  and  beautiful ;  whom 

2.Beauty,  desire,  roe  buck,  *2^  tsebi. 

Isa.     4.    2  the  branch  of  the  Lord  be  beautiful  and 

3. Beauty,  glory,  ri*iK?ri  <"nx?n  tipharah,  tiphereth. 
Isa.    52.    1  0  Zion ;  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments 

64.  11  Our  holy  and  our  beautiful  house,  where 
Jer.  13.  20  (that)was  given  thee,  thy  beautiful  flock? 

48.  17  the  strong  staff  broken,  .the  beautiful 
Eze.  16.  12  I  put.  .a  beautiful  crown  upon  thine  head 
23  42  put . . beautiful  crowns  upon  their  heads 

4. Fairness,  beauty,  na;  yapheh. 

1  Sa.  25.    3  of  good  understanding,  and  of  a  beautiful 
Psa.  48.   2  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the 
Eccl.   3. 11  He  hath  made  every  (thing)  beautiful  in 
Song  6.    4  Thou  (art)  beautiful,  O  my  love,  as 

5.Fair  of  form,  ix"n  ns?  yephath  toar. 

Gen.  29.  17  Rachel  was  beautiful  and  well  favoured 
Deut  21.  11  seest  among  the  captives  a  beautiful 

G.Fair  (of  eyes),n&T  yaplieh. 

1  Sa.  16. 12  a  beautiful  countenance,  and  goodly  to 

7 '  .Opportune,  ripe,  fit,  wpatos  h<>raios. 

Matt23-  27  which  indeed  appear  beautiful  outward 
Acts    3.    2  the  gate  of  the  temple,  .called  Beautiful 

3.  10  he  which  sat  for  alms  at  the  Beautiful 
Rom  10. 15  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach 

BEATTTIFTJL,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  fair,  beautiful,  na;  yaphah. 

Song  7.    1  How  beautiful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes 
Eze.  16.  13  thou  wast  exceeding  beautiful,  and  thou 


BEAUTIFY 


78 


BECAUSE 


2.  To  be  comeli/,  nsi  naah,  3. 

Isa.    52.    7  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are 

BEATTTIFY,  to  — 

To  make  beautiful,  y&paar,  3. 

Ezra  7.  27  to' beautify  the  house  of  the  LORD  which 
Psa.  149.  4  he  will  beautify  the  meek  with  salvation 
Isa.   60.  13  to  beautify  the  place  of  my  sanctuary 

BEAUTY  — 

1. Honour,  beauty,  Tiri  hadar. 

Job   40.  10  array  thyself  with  glory  and  beauty 
Psa.  1 10.  3  thy  power,  in  the  beauties  of  holiness 
Prov.20.  29  the  beauty  of  old  men  (is)  the  grey  head 
Lam.    1.    6  all  her  beauty  is  departed  :  her  princes 

2.1/onour,  beavly,  rrrm  hadarah. 

1  Ch,  16.  29  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of 

2  Ch.  20.  21  that  should  praise  the  beauty  of  holiness 
Psa.  29.    2  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of 

96.   9  O  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of 

3. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  "nil  hod. 

Hos.  14.    6  his  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and 

4. T<>  desire,  "1D£  chamad. 

Psa.  39. 1 1  thou  makest  his  beauty  to  consume  away 

5.F".irness,  beauty,  ns;  yapheh. 

2  Sa.  14.  25  so  much  praised  as  Absalom  for.  .beauty 
G.F'imess,  beauty,  'fl*  yephi. 

Eze.  28.    7  draw  their  swords  against  the  beauty  of 
7. Fairness,  beauty,  "2;  yqphi. 

Esth.  1.  11  shewthe  people  and  the  princes,  .beauty 

Psa.  45.  11  So  shall,  .king  greatly  desire  thy  beauty 
50.    2  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God  hath 

Prov.  6.  25  Lust  not  after  her  beauty  in  thine  heart 
31.  30  Favour  (is)  deceitful,  and  beauty  (is)  vain 

Isa.     3.  24  come  to  pass,  .burning  instead  of  beauty 
33.  17  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  king  in.  .beauty 

Lam.  2.  15  (Is)  this  the  city,  .perfection  of  beauty 

Eze.  16.  14  went  forth  among,  .heathen  for.  .beauty 
16.  15  thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  beauty 
16.  25  Thou,  .hast  made  thy  beauty,  .abhorred 
27.    3  thou  hast  said,  I  (am)  of  perfect  beauty 
27.   4  thy  builders  have  perfected  thy  beauty 

27.  11  they  have  made  thy  beauty  perfect 

28.  12  full  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in  beauty 
28.  17  was  lifted  up  because  of  thy  beauty 
31.    8  tree,  .was  like  unto  him  in  his  beauty 

Zech.  9.  17  how  great  (is)  his  beauty  !  corn  shall 

8.  Appearance,  sight,  n$n&  march. 

Isa.    53.    2  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  him 

9. Pleasantness,  Dj/j  110am. 

Psa.  27.    4  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord 

90.  17  let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be 
Zech  11.    7  one  I  called  Beauty,  .the  other  I  called 

11.  10  I  took  my  staff,  (even)  Beauty,  and  cut 

10.  Beauty,  ornament,  head-dress,  1X3  peer. 
Isa.   61.    3  to  give  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes 

11.  Beauty,  desire,  roebuck,  '2?  tsebi. 

2  Sa.    1  19  The  beauty  of  Israel  is  slain  upon  thy 
Eze.    7  20  As  for  the  beauty  of  Ins  ornament 
l'Z.Form,  TX,  "ns  tsur,  tsir. 

Psa.  49.  14  their  beauty  shall  consume  in  the  grave  \ 
IS. Beauty,  rnxrn,  .tin?*  tipharah,  tiphereth. 

ExodsS.    2  Aaron  thy  brother  for  glory  and.  .beauty 
28.  40  make  for  them,  for  glory  and  for  beauty 
2  Ch.   3.    6  house  with  precious  stones  for  beauty 
Psa.  96.    6  strength  and  beauty  (are),  .his  sanctuary 
Isa.   13.  19  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees'  excellency 
28.    1  whose  glorious  beauty  (is)  a  fading  flower 
28.    4  the  glorious  beauty,  which  (is)  on  the 
28.    5  of  glory,  and  for  a  diadem  of  beauty 
44.  13  according  to  the  beauty  of  a  man  ;  that 
Lam.  2.    1  cast  down  from  heaven,  .the  beauty  of 

BEAUTY,  to  pass  in  — 
To      pleasant,  ay  3  naem. 

Eze.  32.  19  Whom  dost  thou  pass  in  beauty?  go 
BE'BAI,  W/htherly. 

1.  A  man   whose   descendants  came  up   with    Zerub- 
babel,  B.C.  445 

Ezra  2.  it  children  of  B.,  six  hundred  twenty  and 
Nell.  7.  16  children  of  B.,  six  hundred  twenty  and 

2.  One  whose  posterity  came  up  with  Ezra  in  the  time 
of  Artaxerxes  [perhaps  the  same  as  Xo   1],  B.C.  445. 

Ezra    8.  1 1  of  the  sons  of  B.  ;  Zechariah  the  sou  of  B 
10.  28  Of  the  sons  also  of  B.  ;  Jehohanan 
3  One  that  sealed  the  covenant,  B.C.  445. 

Hen.  10.  1 5  [chief  of  the  people] . .  Bunni,  Azgad,  B. 
BECAUSE  — 
1.2  ■  Ito,1?^  el. 

1  S;i.    «.  si  because  the  ark  of  God  was  taken,  and 

2.77'"/,   -";:   ,• 

(it'n   ^- '  I      w  e  given  my  maiden  to  my 

3.7h  U 

Geo.  39,    9  Erora  me  but  thee,  because  thou  (art)  his 
1 

1  >:ii  ■     '  '  Because  thou  obeyedst  not  tne  voice  of 
B./3  ■  '  ~  ■*  ;•"  yaan  asher. 

1      nasi  done  this  thine 
Deut.  1  30  because,  .hath  wholly  followed  the  Lord 


6.  Because  that,  if'M  b]t  al  asher. 

Exod32.  35  plagued  the  people,  because  they  made 

7. Because  that,  ">b>«  n^y  eqeb  asher. 

Gen.  22. 18  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice 

2  Sa.  12.    6  fourfold,  because  he  did  this  thing,  and 

8.  From  the  face  that,  T&x  *3?p  rnippene  asher. 

Exodig.  iS  because  the  Lord  descended  upon  it  in 
Jer.  44.  23  Because  ye  have  burned  incense,  and 

9.  Under  that,  "]»£  rim  iachath  aslier. 

Num.25.  13  because  he  was  zealous  for  his  God,  and 
Deut  21. 14  because  thou  hast  humbled  her 

10.  Concerning  the  matter  that,  la's  "0"1  Sy. 

Deut 22.  24  because  she  cried  not..because  he  hath 

11. Tn  ansiver  to,  because,  jy:  yaan. 

Lev.  26.  43  because,  even  because  they  despised  my 
>funi  11.  20  because  that  ye  have  despised  the  LORD 
Eze.  25.    8  Because  that  Moab  and  Seir  do  say 

12. In  answer  that,  "3  ]y_]  yaan  Jci. 

1  Ki.  2i.  2g  because  he  humbleth  himself  before  me 
Isa.     3.  16  Because  the  daughters  of  Zion  are 

lo.The  heel,  end,  consequence,  3i2H  eqeb. 

Num  14-  24  because  he  had  another  spirit  with  him 
Dent  8.  20  because  ye  would  not  be  obedient  unto 

14.  The  consequence  that,  '3  D|5jj  eqeb  Tci. 

2Sa.  12.10  because  thou  hast  despised  me,  and  hast 
Amos4.  12  because  1  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare 

15.  Wholly  over-against  this,  ^  ??p  ^3  hoi  qebel  di. 
Ezra   4.  14  because  we  have  maintenance  from 
Dan.    2.    8  because  ye  see  the  thing  is  gone  from  me 

3.  29  because  there  is  no  other  God  that  can 

6.  3  because  an  excellent  spirit  (was)  in  him 

16.0^  so,  over  so,  J3  Sy  al  ken. 

Judg.  6.  22  because  I  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
17.  From  that,  TIP  min  di. 

Dan.    3.  22  because  the  king's  commandment  was 
IS. From  the  face  of,  \j5a  rnippene. 

Jer.  44.  23  Because  ye  have  burned  incense.,  because 
Id. For,  wherefore,  ydp  gar. 
"     John  3.  19  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil 

10.  26  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said 
Rom.  4,  15  Because  the  law  worketh  wrath  :  for 

20.  Th  return  for  which  things,  av^  &v  anth'  hon. 
Luke  1.  20  because  thou  believest  not  my  words 

19.  44  because  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy 
Acts  12.  23  because  he  gave  not  God  the  glory  :  and 
2  Th.  2.  10  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the 

21.  Through,  on  account  of,  did  (ace.)  dia. 

Matt  13-  5  because  they  had  no  deepness  of  earth 

13.  6  because  they  had  no  root,  they  withered 
24.  12  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love 

Mark  4.  5  because  it  had  no  depth  of  earth 

4  6  because  it  had  no  root,  it  withered  away 

Luke  2.  4  because  he  was  of  the  house,  .of  David 

8.  6  it  withered  away,  because  it  lacked  mois 

11.  8  because  he  is  his  friend,  .he  will  rise 

r8.    5  because  this  widow  troubleth  me,  I  will 

19.  11  spake  aparable,  because  he  was  nigh  to  J. 

23.    8  because  he  had  heard  many  things  of  him 

John  2.  24  Jesus,  .because  he  kuew  all  (men) 

Acts  12.  20  because  their  country  was  nourished  by 

18.  3  because  he  was  of  the  same  craft,  he 

27.    4  Cyprus,  because  the  winds  were  contrary 

27.  9  because  the  fast  was  now  already  past 

28.  18  because  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in 
Phil.  1.  7  Even,  .because  I  have  you  in  my  heart 
Heb.  7.  23  because  they  were  not  suffered  to  continue 

7.  24  because  he  continueth  ever,  hath  an 
Jas.     4.    2  yet  ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not 

22. For  this  reason,  Zi6n  dioti. 

Luke  2.    7  because  there  was  no  room  for  them  in 
Acts  17.  31  [Because]  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in 
Rom.  8.    7  Because  the  carnal  mind  (is)  enmity  1.  19 
1  Co.  15.    9  because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God 
1  Th.  2.    8  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto 
Heb. 11.    5  becauseGod..  translated  him:  for  before 
11.   23because  they  saw  (lie  was)  a  proper  child 
Jas.     4.    3  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss 
1  Pe.   1.  16  Because  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I 

2Z. Since,  after  that,  iirel  epei. 

AfattiS.  32  all  that  debt,  because  thou  desiredst  me 
27.    6  treasury,  because  it  is  the  price  of  blood 
Marki5.  42  because  it  was  the  preparation,  that  is 
Johni3.  29  some.,  thought,  because  Judas  had  the 

19.  31  The  Jews  therefore,  because  it  was  the 
Heb.  6.  13  because  he  could  sware  by  no  greater 

11.  11  because  she  judged  him  faithful  who  had 

2  [.Since  truly,  eireiS-q  epeide. 

Mattai.  46  [because]  they  took  him  for  a  prophet 

Acts  14.  12  because  he  was  the  chief  speaker 
25. On  account  of  which,  ol  evexev  hou  heneken. 

Luke  4.  18  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach 
26.7m  order  that,  %va  hina. 

Matfeo.  31  because  they  should  hold  their  peace 

27.  Tn  as  much  as,  ko.&6ti  kathoti. 

Acts  2.  24  because  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should 

28.  That,  seeing  that,  '6ti  hoti. 

Matt.  2.  18  Rachel.,  would  not  be  comforted,because 
5.  36  Neither  shalt  thou  swear,  .because  thou 
7.  14  [Because]  strait  (is)  the  gate,  and  narrow 


Matt.  9.  36  he  was  moved  with  compassion .  .because 
21.  20  Then  began  he  to  upbraid.,  because  they 

12.  41  The  men.  .shall  rise,  .because  they  rep. 

13.  11  Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the 

13.  13  speak  I  to  them  in  parables :  because  they 

14.  5  he  feared  the  multitude,  because  they 

15.  32  Ihavecompassion.  because  they  continue 

16.  7  (It  is)  because  we  have  takeu  no  bread 
16.    8  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves,  because 
20.    7  They  say  unto  him.  Because  no  man 

20.  15  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good? 
23.  29  "Woe  unto  you.. because  ye  build.. tombs 
Mark  1.  34  suffered  not  the  devils  to  speak,  because 

3.  30  Because  they  said,  He  hath  an  unclean 

4.  29  he  putteth  in  the  sickle,  because  the  bar. 

6.  34  Jesus,  .moved  with  compassion.. because 

7.  19  Because  it  entereth  not  iDto  his  heart 

8.  2  I  have  compassion .  .because  they  have 
8.  16  saying,  (It  is)  because  we  have  no  bread 

8.  17  "Why  reason  ye,  because  ye  have  no  bread? 

9.  38  and.  .forbad  him,  [because  he  followeth] 
9.  41  whosoever  shall  give  you.  .because  ye 

16. 14  [because  they  believed  not  them  which] 
Luke  8.  30  because  many  devils  were  entered  into 
9.  49  we  forbad  him,  because  lie  followeth  not 
9.  53  because  his  face  was  as  though  he  would 

10.  20  because  your  names  are  written  in  heav. 

ti.  18  because  ye  say . .  I  cast  out  devils  through 

12.  17  What  shall  I  do,  because  I  have  uoroom 

13.  q  these.. were  sinners  above  all.  .because 
15.  27  thy  father  hath  killed .  .because  he  hath 
19.    3  and  could  not  for  the  press,  because  he 
19.  17  because  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  very 
ig.  21  For  I  feared  thee,  because  thou  art  an 

John   1.  50  Becausel  said  unto  thee, Isawthee under 
3  18  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath 
3.  23  John  also  was  baptizing.. because  there 

5.  16  sought  to  slay  him,  because  he  had  doue 
5.  iS  sought,  .to  kill  him,  because  he  not  only 
5.  27  hath  given  him  authority,  .because  he  is 

5.  30  because  I  seek  not  mine  own  will,  but  the 

6.  2  a  great  multitude  followed  him,  because 
6.  26  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  mir. 
6.  26  Ye  seek  me.  .because  ye  did  eat  of  the 

6.  41  Jews  then  murmured  at  him,  because  he 

7.  1  he  would  not  walk,  .because  the  Jews 
7.    7  but  me  it  hateth,  because  I  testify  of  it 
7.  22  not  because  it  is  of  M.,  but  of  the  fathers 

7.  30  no  man  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his 

8.  22  because  lie  saith.  Whither  I  go,  ye 

8.  37  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  because  my  word  hath 

8.  43  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word 

8.  44  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is 

8.  47  ye.  .hear  (them)  not,  because  ye  are  not 

9.  16  because  he  keepeth  not  the  sabbath  day 
9.  22  These  (words)  spake  his  parents,  because 

10.  13  The  hireling  fleeth,  because  he  is  an 
10.  17  Therefore,  .my  Father  love  me,  because 

10.  36  because  I  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God? 

11.  9  he  stumbleth  not,  because  he  seeth 

11.  10  he  stumbleth,  because  there  is  no  light 

12.  6  but  because  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the 
14. 12  greater,  .than  these  shall  he  do  because 

14.  17  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because 
14. 19  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also 

15.  19  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world 

15.  21  because  they  know  not  him  that  sent  me 
T5-  27'ye  also  shall  bear  witness,  because  ye 

16.  3  because  they  have  not  known  the  Father 
16.  4  these  things  I  said  not  unto  you.  .because 
16.  6  But  becausel  have  said  these  things  unto 
16.  9  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me 
16.  10  Of  righteousness,  because  I  go  to  my  Fa. 
16.  11  Of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this 
16.  16  [ye  shall  see  me,  because  I  go  to  the] 

16.  21  A  woman.. hath  sorrow,  because  her 
16.  27  For  the  Father,  .loveth  yon,  because  ye 

16.  32  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is* 

17.  14  because  they  are  not  of  the  world 

19.  7  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God 

20.  13  Because  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord 
20.  29  Thomas,  because  thou  hast  seen  me 

Acts    2.  27  Because  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in 
6.    1  because  their  widows  were  neglected 
8.  20  because  thou  hast  thought  that  the  gift 
17.  iS  [because  he  preached  unto  them  Jesus] 

Rom  5.    5  because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
6.  15  because  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but 

8.  27  because  lie  maketh  intercession  for  the 

9,  7  Neither,  because  they  are  the  seed  of  A. 
9.  28  [because  a  short  work  will  the  Lord  make] 
9.  32  Because .  .not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were 

1  Co.    1.  25  Because  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser 

2.  14  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned 

3.  13  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire;  and 
12.  15  Jf  the  foot  shall  say,  Because  lam  not  the 
12.  16  if  the  ear  shall  say,  Because  I  am  not  the 
15.  15  because  we  have  testified  of  God  that  he 

2 Co.  11.  11  Wherefore?  because  I  love  you  not?  God 
Gal.    2. 11  I  withstood  him.  .because  he  was  to  be 

4.  6  And  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent 
Eph.  5,  16  Redeeming  the  time,  because  the  days 
Phil.    2.  30  Because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  was 

4.  17  Not  because  I  desire  a  gift:  but  I  desire 

2  Th.  1.  10  because  our  testimony  among  you  was 

3.  9  Not  because  we  have  not  power,  but  to 
1  Ti.    1.  13  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  (it) 

4.  10  we  both  labour. .  because  we  trust  in 

5.  12  Having  damnation,  because  they  have 

6.  2  because  they  are  brethren,  .because  they 
Phm.        7  we  have  great  joy.  .because  the  bowels 
Heb.  8.    9  because  they  continued  not  in  my  coven. 


BECAUSE 


79 


BECOME 


Jas. 
iPe. 


i  Jo. 


Rev. 


.  10  because  as  the  flower  of  the  grass  he  shall 
.  21  because Christalsosufferedforus, leaving 
.  8  he  vigilant ;  [because  your  adversary  the] 
.  8  which  thing  is  true . .  because  the  darkness 
.  12  I  write,  .because  your  sins  are  forgiven 
.  13  because  ye . .  because  ye . .  because  ye  have 
.  14  because  ye  have ..  because  ye  are  strong 
.  21  because  ye  know,  .but  because  ye  know 

1  the  world  kuoweth  us  not,  because  it 
.    9  he  caunot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God 
.  12  Because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and 
.  14  We  know  that  we  have  passed,  .because 
,  22  we  receive  of  him,  because  we  keep  his 
1  because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out 
4  Ye  are  of  God . .  because  greater  is  he  that 
,  18  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear :  because  fear 
.  19  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us 
.  10  hath  made  him  a  liar;  because  he  belie  veth 
,  10  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my 
,  16  So  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and 
.  17  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich,  and  incr. 
,    4  I  wept  much,  because  no  man  was  found 
.  11  men  died  of  the  waters,  because  they  were 
11.  10  shall  rejoice  over  them,  .because  these 
14.    8  Babylon  is  fallen . .  [because]  she  made  all 
16.    5  which  art,  and  wast,  .because  thou  hast 
29. As  a  demonstrative,  on  hoti. 

Matt  11.  25  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from 
Luken.  18  because  ye  say  that  I  cast  out  devils 

13.  14  because  that  Jesus  had  healed  on  the 

16.  8  because  he  had  done  wisely  :  for  tbe 

17.  9  because  he  did  the  things  that  were 

19. 11  because  they  thought  that  the  kingdom 

19.  31  Because  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 
John  7.  23  because  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit 

8.  45  because  I  tell  (you)  the  truth,  ye  believe 

14.  28  because  I  said,  I  go  unto  the  Father :  for 
16.  17  he  saith.  .Because  I  go  to  the  Father? 
ai.  17  because  he  said  unto  him  the  third  time 

Acts    2.    6  because  that  every  man  heard  them 

22.  29  a  Roman,  and  because  he  had  bound 
Horn.  8.  21  Because  the  creature  itself  also  shall  be 

14.  23  because  (lie  eateth)  not  of  faith  :  for 

1  Co.    6.    7  because  ye  go  to  law  one  with  another 

2  Co.    7.  13  because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you 

11.    7  because  I  have  preached  to  you  the 

1  Th.  2.  13  because,  when  ye  received  the  word  of 

2  Th.  2.  13  because  God  hath  from  the  beginning 

1  Jo.   3.  16  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us  :  and 
4.  13  because  he  hath  fj,iven  us  of  the  Spirit 

4.  17  because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world 

5.  6  beareth  witness,  because  the  Spirit  is 
Rev.    2.    4  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love 

2.  14  [because]  thou  hast  there  them  that  hold 
2.  20  because  thou  sufferest  that  woman  Jezeb. 
11.  17  because  thou  hast  taken  to  thee  thy 
ZO.In  order  that,  oVais  hopos. 

Acts  20.  16  because  he  would  not  spend  the  tim 
BECAUSE  of  — 

l.On  account  of  the  causes  of,  rffw  ?y  al  odotk. 
Gen.  21.  11  thing  was  very  grievous,  .because  of  his 
21.  25  Abraham  reproved  Abimelech  because  of 
Nuin  12.    1  Aaron  spake  against  Moses  because .  .the 

13.  24  because  of  the  cluster  of  grapes  which 
Judg.  6.    7  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord  because  of  the 

^.Turning,  circumstance,  opportunity,  hi*  galal. 
Gen.  12.  13  and  my  soul  shall  live  because  of  thee 
Deut  18.  12  because  of  these  abominations  the  Lord 
1  Ki.  14.  16  because  of  the  sins  of  Jeroboam,  who 
Jer.  15.    4  because  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah 

Z.From  the  way,  ^"no  midderek. 

Psa.107.  17  Fools  because  of  their  transgression,  and 
4.A  word,  matter,  131  dabar. 

Gen.  72.  17  with  great  plagues  because  of  Sarai 

20.  18  the  house  of  Abimelech,  because  of 
Exod.8.  12  because  of  the  frogs  which  he  had  brought 
Psa.  45.    4  because  of  truth  and  meekness  (and) 

5.  By  tJie  hand  of,  1*3  be-yad. 

Jer.  41.    9  whom  he  had  slain  because  of  Gedaliah 
Q.To  answer  to,  jyo^  lemaan. 

2KL  13.  23  because  of  his  covenant  with  Abraham 
7.  In  going  over,  nu^3  baabur. 

Exodi3.    8  because  of  that  (which)  the  Lord  did 
S.O?i,  upon,  7ii  al. 

Gen.  27.  41  because  of  the  blessing  wherewith  his 
9. From,  Jip  min. 

Gen.   5.  29  because  of  the  ground  which  the  Lord 
IO.-FVoto,  }D  min. 

Dan.    7.  11  because  of  the  voice  of  the  great  words 
11.  From  the  face  of,  "J?J?  mippene. 

Gen.    7.    7  1  ent  in.  .because  of  the  waters  of  the 
27.  46  because  of  the  daughters  of  Heth:  if  Jac. 
36.    7  could  not  bear  them  because  of  their 

Exod.  1.  12  grieved  because  of  the  children  of  Israel 

9.  11  could  not  stand  before  Moses  because  of 
!Num32.  17  because  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
Deut.  2.  25  and  be  in  anguish  because  of  thee 

20.    3  neither  be  ye  terrified  because  of  them 
Josh.  6.    1  because  of  the  children  of  Israel :  none 
9.  24  were  sore  afraid  of  our  lives  because  of 
ir.    6  Be  not  afraid  because  of  them  :  for 

23.  3  unto  all  these  nations  because  of  you 
Judg.  2.  18  because  of  their  groanings  by  reason  of 

6.  2  because  of  the  Midianites  the  children  of 
6.    6  greatly  impoverished  because  of  the 


1  Sa.    8.  18  because  of  your  king  which  ye  shall 

1  Ki.   1.  50  Adonijah  feared  because  of  Solomon 

2.    7  I  fled  because  of  Absalom  thy  brother 
8.  11  priests  could  not.  .minister  because  of 

2  Eli.  9. 14  Joram  had  kept,  .because  of  Hazael  king 

2  Ch.  12.    5  princes . .  were  gathered . .  because  of 
Neh.   4.    9  set  a  watch  against  them,  .because  of 

5.  15  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God 
Job    35.  12  none  giveth  answer,  because  of  ..evil  men 
Psa.  38.    3  no  soundness.. because  of  thine  anger 

38.    3  neither ..  rest  iu  my  bones  because  of  my 
38.    5  My  wounds  stink,  .because  of  my 
60.    4  it  may  be  displayed  because  of  the  truth 
102.  10  Because  of  thiue  indignation  and  thy 

Isa.  10.  27  the  yoke  shall  be  destroyed  because  of 
17.  9  which  theyleft  because  of  the  children  of 
19.  16  it  shall  be  afraid .  .because  of  the  shaking 
19.  17  because  of  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  of 
19.  20  they  shall  cry  unto  the  Lord  because  of 

Jer.    4.    4  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

14.  16  the  people,  .shall  be  cast  out.  .because  of 

15.  17  I  sat  alone  because  of  thy  hand :  for  thou 
2i.  12  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

23.    9  I  am  like  a  drunken  man.  .because  of 
23.  10  because  of  swearing  the  land  mourn eth 
25.  16  And  they  shall  drink,  .because  of  the 
25.  27  Drink  ye.  .because  of  the  sword  which 
25.  37  the.  .habitations  are  cutdownbecauseof 

25.  38  their  land  is  desolate  because  of.  .the 

26.  3  which  I  purpose,  .because  of  the  evil  of 
32.  24  and  the  city  is  given,  .because  of  the 

41. 18  Because  of  the  Chaldeans  :  for  they  were 
44.  3  Because  of  their  wickedness  which  they 
44.  22  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

Lam.  5.    9  We  gat  our  bread,  .because  of  the  sword 

5. 10  Our  skin  was  black,  .because  of  the 
Eze.  16.  63  never  open  thy  mouth,  .because  of  thy 
Hos.  10.  15  So  shall  Beth-el  do  unto  you  because  of 
12.  From,  air6  apo. 

Matt  18.   7  Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  offences  ! 
Id. Through,  on  account  of,  5/a  {ace.)  dia. 

Matt.13.  21  when  tribulation .  .ariseth  because  of  the 
13.  58  did  not  many  mighty  works,  .because  of 

17.  20  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Because  of  your 

27. 19  I  have  suffered,  .iu  a  dream  because  of 
Mark.3.    9  small  ship  should  wait  on  him  because  of 

6.  6  And  he  marvelled  because  of  their 
Luke  5.  19  they  might  bring  him  in  because  of  the 

11.   8  yet  because  of  his  importunity  he  will 
John  3.  29  the  friend,  .rejoiceth  greatly  because  of 
4. 41  And  many  more  believed  because  of  his 

4.  42  Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying 

7.  43  there  was  a  division,  .because  of  him 

11.  42  because  of  the  people  which  stand  by 

12.  30  This  voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but 
12. 42  because  of  the  Pharisees  they  did  not 
19.  42  There  laid  they  Jesus,  .because  of  the 

Acts   4.  21  they  let  them  go.  .because  of  the  people 

16.  3  took  and  circumcised  him  because  of  the 
28.    2  for  they,  .received  us.  .because  of  the 

Rom.  6.  19  I  speak,  .because  of  the  infirmity  of  your 

8.  10  the  body  (is)  dead  because  of  sin ;  but 
8. 10  Spirit  (is)  life  because  of  righteousness 

15.  15  because  of  the  grace  that  is  given 

1  Co.  11.  10  to  have  power  on  (her)  head  because  of 
Gal.     2.    4  And  that  because  of  false  brethren 
Eph.   4.  18  because  of  the  blindness  of  their  heart 

5.  6  because  of  these  things  cometh  the 
Heb.   3.  19  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of 

4.    6  they,  .entered  not  in  because  of  unbelief 
14.  Out  of t  €«  eh. 

Rev.  16.  11  because  of  their  pains  and  their  sores 

16.  21  men  blasphemed  God  because  of  the 

15. In,  with,  £v  en. 

Matt  26.  31  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me 
26.  33  (men)  shall  be  offended  because  of  thee 
Marki4.  27  All  ye  shall  be  offended  [because  of]  me 

16. On,  upon,  itri  (ace.)  epi. 

Rev.    1.    7  all  kindreds,  .shall  wail  because  of  him 
17 .Towards,  irp6s  [ace.)  pros. 

Matt  19.    8  Moses  because  of  the  hardness  of  your 
IS. For  or  on  account  of,  %6.piv  charin. 

Gal.    3. 19  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions 

Jude       16  persons  in  admiration  because  of 
BECAUSE  that  — 
1. Because,  jyi  yaan. 

Eze.   25.    8  Because  that  Moab  and  Seir  do  gay 
^.Because,  '?  ki. 

Gen.    2.    3  because  that  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all 
Z.For,  verily,  then,  yap  gar. 

Acts  28.  20  because  that  for  the  hope  of  Israel  I  am 

3  Jo.         7  Because  that  for  his  name's  sake  they 

4. Through,  on  account  of,  Bla  (ace.)  dia(with  inf.) 
Mark  5.    4  Because  that  he  had  been  often  bound 
Luke  9.    7  because  that  it  was  said  of  some,  that  J. 
Acts  8.  11  because  that  of  long  time  he  had  - 

18.  2  because  that  Claudius  had  commanded 

5. For  this  reason,  StoVi  dioti. 

Rom.  1.  21  Because  that,  when  they  knew  God,  they 
Phil.  2.  26  because  that  ye  had  heard  that  he  had 
1  Th.  4.   6  because  that  the  Lord  (is)  the  avenger  of 

Q.That,  seeing  that,  oVi  hoti. 

John  7.  39  because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified 
10.  33  and  because  that  thou,  being  a  man 


John  12.  11  Because  that  by  reason  of  him  many  of 

12.  39  they  could  not  believe,  because . .  Esaias 
Acts  10.  45  And  they,  .were  astonished,  .because  th. 
2  Th.  1.    3  as  it  is  meet,  because  that  your  faith 

1  Jo.   2.  11  because  that  darkness  hath  blinded  his 
4.    g  because  that  God  sent  his  only  begotten 
7. In  as  much  as,  KaQort  hathoti. 

Luke  1.    7  they  had  no  child,  because  that  Elisabeth 
BECAUSE  un(satiable)  — 
From  want  of,  "Ph^Q  mibbilti. 

Eze.  16.  28  because  thou  wast  uusatiable  ;  yea,  thou 
BECAUSE . .  .-would  — 
Toward,  in  order  to,  irp6s  (acc.)^jros  (icith  i?if.) 

1  Th.  2.    9  because  we  would  not  be  chargeable 
BECAUSE  he  would  not  — 
That  it  might  not  happen  to  him,  ottws  /xt}  y4vr\Tat 

Acts  20. 16  determined  to  sail,  .because  he  would  not 
BECAUSE... yet  — 
Yet,  still,  while,  iiy  od. 

Gen.  46.  30  Now  let  me  die.  .because  thou  (art)  yet 
BE'-CHER,"  15?  youth,  first-born. 

1.  A  son  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  21  the  sons  of  Benjamin . .  Belah,  and  B.,  and 
1  Ch.  7.    6  of  Benjamin ;  Bela,  and  B.,  and  Jediael 
7.    8  sons  of  B. .  .All  these  (are)  the  sons  of  B. 

2.  A  son  of  Ephraim  (called  Berad  in  1  Ch.  7.  20),  B.C. 
1680. 

Num  26.  35  of  B.,  the  family  of  the  Bachrites  :  of 

BE-CHO'-RATH,  JTyo?  first  birth. 
Son  of  Aphiah  or  Abiah,  and  grandson  of  Becher  son 
of  Benjamin,  also  an  ancestor  of  Saul  the  first  king  of 
Israel,  B.C.  1225. 

1  Sa.  9.    1  Zeror,  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of  Aphiah 
BECKON  to  or  unto,  to  — 

1.7*0  nod  through,  Siavevw  dianeuo. 

Luke  1.  22  he  beckoned  unto  them,  and  remained 
2.7*0  nod  downward,  Karauevaj  kataneuo.         .   - 

Luke  5.    7  they  beckoned  unto,  .partners,  which 

3.  To  wave  dovmward,  Karao-etw  kataseio. 

Acts  19.  33~Alexander  beckoned  with  the  hand  and 
21.  40  Paul,  .beckoned  with  the  hand  unto  the 
4.2*0  nod,  make  signs,  yevcj  neuo. 

John  13.  24  Simon  Peter  therefore  beckoned  to  him 

Acts  24.  10  Paul,  after,  .the  governor  had  beckoned 
BECKONING  — 
To  tvave  doionward,  Karao-dcc  kataseio. 

Acts  12.  17  But  ne  beckoning  unto  them  with  the 

13.  16  Paul  stood  up,  and  beckoning  with  (his) 
BECOME,  to  - 

l.To  be,  exist,  nin,  Kiq  hava,  havah. 

Dan.    2.  35  Then,  .the  iron,  .became  like  the  chaff 
2.7*0  be,  exist,  n^n  hayah. 

2  Sa.    7.  24  and  thou,  Lord,  art  become  their  God 
3.7*0  be  comely,  HN3  naah,  Za. 

Psa.  93.    5  holiness  becometh  thine  house,  0  Lord 
4. 7*o  do,  rtyy  asah,  2. 

Esth.  2.  11  how  Esther  did,  and  what  should  become 
5. To  be,  become,  n;rr  hayah,  2. 

Deut  27.    9  thou  art  become  the  people  of  the  Lord 
6. To  be  turned,  ^r\  haphak,  2. 

Job  30.  21  Thou  art  become  cruel  to  me :  with  thy 
7. To  become,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Matt  13.  22  He  also  that  received  seed,  .becometh 
13.  32  when  it  is  grown,  it.  .becometh  a  tree 
18.    3  Except  ye.  .become  as  little  children,  ye 
28.    4  the  keepers  did  shake,  and  became  as 
Mark  1.  17  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of 

4. 19  cares,  .choke  the  word,  and  it  becometh 
4.  32  it  groweth  up,  and  becometh  greater 
9.    3  And  his  raiment  became  shining,  .white 
John  1.  12  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the 
Acts    7.  40  Moses,  .we  wot  not  what  is  become  of 
10.  10  he  became  very  hungry,  and  would  have 

12.  18  stir  among  the  soldiers,  what  was  become 
Rom.  3.  19  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before 

4.  18  that  he  might  become  the  father  of  many 

7.  13  that  sin.  .might  become  exceeding  sinful 
3.  18  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be 

8.  9  lest,  .this  liberty  of  yours  become  a 

9.  20  unto  the  Jews  I  became  as  a  Jew,  that  I 
9.  22  To  the  weak  became  I  as  weak,  that  I 

33.    1  I  am  become  (as)  sounding  brass,  or 

13.  11  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish 
.  20  now  is  Christ,  .[become]  the  firstfruits  of 

5.  17  behold,  all  things  are  become  new 
12.  11  I  am  become  a  fool  in  glorying ;  ye  have 

Gal.    4.  16  Am  I  therefore  become  your  enemy 
Phil.   2.    8  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient 
1  Th.  1.   6  And  ye  became  followers  of  us,  and  of 

2.  14  For  ye.  .became  followers  of  the  churches 
Phm.  6  communication  of  thy  faith  may  become 
Heb.  5.    9  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation 

5. 12  and  are  become  such  as  have  need  of 

10.  33  and  partly,  whilst  ye  became  companions 

11.  7  by  the  which  he.  .became  heir  of  the 
Jas.     2.    4  and  are  become  judges  of  evil  thoughts  ? 

2.  11  thou  art  become  a  transgressor  of  the 


tCo. 


2  Co. 


BECOME 


80 


BEETLE 


Rev.   0.  12  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of 
6.  12  and,  lo.. the  moon  became  as  blood 
8.    8  the  third  part  of  the  sea  became  blood 
ii.  15  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become 
16.    3  the  sea  ;  and  it  became  as  the  blood  of  a 
16.    4  rivers  and  fountains  of  waters,  .became 
18.    2  Babylon.. is  become  the  habitation  of 
8.  To  become  foi'  or  into,  yti/o/xai  eis  glnomai  eis. 
Matt  21.  42  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the 
M  arki2.  10  The  stone . .  is  become  the  head  of  the 
Luke2o.  17  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the 
leta    4  n  which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner 
i;  v.    B.  11  third  part  of  the  waters  became  worcnwd. 

BECOME  surety,  to  — 
/'.  mix,  traffic,  ti?  arab. 

Gen  44.  32  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad 
Prov.17.  18  becometh  surety  ill  the  presence  of  his 
[Sec  also  Brutish,  dead,  destitute,  dim,  dry, 
effect,  fat,  fool,  full,  glorious,  great,  great 
estate,  guilty,  Jews,  lame,  like,  loathsome, 
long,  mighty,  old,  poor,  ready,  rich,  servant, 
stranger,  strong,  surety,  uncircumcised,  un- 
profitable, vain,  weak.] 

BECOiffE,  to  — 

1.  Worthily^  k^iws  axios. 

Rom  16.    2  That  ye  receive  her.  .as  hecometh  saints 
Phil.    1.  27  let  your  conversation  be  as  it  becometh 

2.  //  is  proper,  irpen-ci  prepei,  irpitra  prejpo. 
Matt.  3.  15  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all 
Eph.  5.    3  let  it  not  be  once  named,  .as  becometh 
1  Ti.    2.  10  which  becometh  women  professing 
Titus  2.    1  Speak  thou  the  things  which  become 
Heb.    2.  10  For  it  became  him,  for  whom  (are)  all 

7.  26  For  such  an  high  priest  became  us.  .holy 

'  ( 'omely,  comeliness,  niNJ  naveh. 
Prov.17.   7  Excellent  speech  becometh  uot  a  fool 

B2C0METH  holiness,  as  — 

Proper  to  a  sacred  person  or  thing,  hpoirpe-n-f)s. 
Titus  2.    3  (they  be)  in  behaviour  as  becometh  h. 

BED  — 

I, An//  thing  spread  out,  jfls;  (enjj  eres)  yatsua. 
i  Ch.    5.    1  forasmuch  as  he  defiled  his  father's  bed 
Job   17.  13  I  have  made  my  bed  in  the  darkness 
Psa.  63.    6  When  I  remember  thee  upon  my  bed 
132.    3  I  will  not  come .  .nor  go  up  into  my  bed 

2.  IV 'ace  of  reclining,  nan  mittah. 

Gen.  47.  31  Israel  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's 

48.  2  Israel  strengthened  himself,  .upon,  .bed 

49.  33  he  gathered  up  his  feet  into  the  bed,  and 
Exod.  8.    3  into  thy  bedchamber,  and  upon  thy  bed 

1  Sa.  19.  13  took  an  image,  and  laid  (it)  in  the  bed 
19.  15  Bring  him  up  to  me  in  the  bed,  that  I 
19.  16  an  image  in  the  bed,  with  a  pillow  of 
28.  23  arose  from  the  earth,  and  sat  upon  the  bed 
Sa.    4.    7  he  lay  on  his  bed  in  his  bedchamber 

1  Ki.  17.  19  he  abode,  and  laid  him  upon  his  own  bed 

2i,    4  And  he  laid  him  down  upon  his  bed 

2  Ki.    1.   4  Thou  shalt  not  come  down  from  that  bed 

1.    6  thou  shalt  not  come  down  from  that  bed 
1.  16  thou  shalt  not  come  down  off  that  bed 
4.  10  and  let  us  set  for  him  there  a  bed 
4.  21  and  laid  him  on  the  bed  of  the  man  of  God 
4.  32  child  was  dead .  .laid  upon  his  bed 
2  Ch.24.  25  and  slew  him  on  his  bed,  and  he  died 
Esth.  1.    6  tiie  beds,  .gold  and  silver,  upon  a 

7.    8  and  Hainan  was  fallen  upon  the  bed 
Psa.    6.    6  all  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  swim 
Prov.26.  14  hinges,  so  (doth)the  slothful  upon  his  bed 
Song  3.    7  Behold  his  bed,  which  (is)  Solomon's 
Eze.  23.  41  And  satest  upon  a  stately  bed,  and  a 
Amos  3.  12  dwell  in  Samaria  in  the  corner  of  a  bed 
6.    4  That  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch 
%, Anything  spread  out,  yip  matstsa. 

Isa.   28.  20  For  the  bed  is  shorter  than  that  (man) 
I.  Place  for  lying  dovm,  2^0  mishkab. 

Gen.  49.    4  because  thou  wentest  up  to  thy .  .bed 
Bxodax.    18  fist,  and  he  die  not,  but  keepeth  (his)  bed 
Lev.  15.    4  Every  bed,  whereon  he  lieth  that  hath 
15.    5  whosoever  toucheth  his  bed  shall  wash 
15.  21  whosoever  toucheth  her  bed  shall  wash 
15.  23  And  if  it  (lie)  on  (her)  bed. or  on  any  thing 
15.  24  all  the  bed  whereon  he  lieth  shall  be 
15.  26  Every  bed  whereon  she  lieth  all  the  days 
15.  26  shall  be  unto  her  as  the  bed  of  her  separ 
8a.    4.    5  [sh-bosheth,  who  lay  on  a  bed  at  noon 
4.  11  have  slain  a  righteous  person  .  .upon,  .bed 
11.    2  David  arose  from  <>tf  his  bed,  and  walked 
11.  13  he  went  out  to  lie  on  his  bed  with  the 
13.    5  Jonadab  said,  .Lay  thee  down  on  thy  bed 
17.  28  Brought  beds,  and  basons,  and  earthen 
1  Ki.   1.  ,17  And  the  king  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed 
Ch.  16. 14  they,  .laid  him  in  the  bed  which  was 
Job   33.  15  sleep  falieth.  .in  slumberings  upon     bid 

33.  19  chastened  also  with  pain  upon  his  bed 
Psn     (■    \  commune  with  your,  .heart  upon  your  bed 
■\  Se  deviseth  mischief  upon  his  bed 
4t.    3  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness 
t  1  1     5  let  them  Bing  aloud  upon  their  beds 
Prov.  ?  1?  1  have  perfumed  my  bed  with  myrrh 

11.  ?7  why  should  he  take  away  thv  bed 
Song  3.    1  By  night  on  my  bed  I  sought  him 
Isa.  57.    2  they  shall  rest  in  their  beds,  (each  ouc) 
57.    7  Upon  a.  .mountain  hast  thou  set  thy  bed 
57.   8  thou  hast  enlarged  thy  bed,  and  made 
57.    8  thou  lovedat  their  bed  where  thou 


Eze.  23.  17  came  to  her  into  the  bed  of  love 

32  25  They  have  set  her  a  bed  in  the  midst  of 

Dan.   2.  28  the  visions  of  thy  head  upon  thy  bed 

2.  29  thy  thoughts  came,  .upon  thy  bed,  what 
4.    5  the  thoughts  upon  my  bed  and  the 
4.  10  the  visions  of  mine  head  in  my  bed 

4.  13  in  the  visions  of  my  head  upon  my  bed 
7.    1  and  visions  of  his  head  upon  his  bed 

Hos.    7.  14  when  they  howled  upon  their  beds 
Mic.    2.    1  and  work  evil  upon  their  beds  ! 

S.Furrow,  n$n!L  arugah. 

Song  5.  13  His  cheeks  (are)as  a  bed  of  spices.,  sweet 

6.  2  gone  down  into  his  garden,  to  the  beds  of 

G.Couch,  bnj;  eres. 

Job     7. 13  When  I  say,  My  bed  shall  comfort  me 
Psa.  41.    3  The  Lord  will  strengthen  him  upon,  .bed 
Prov.  7.  16  I  have  decked  my  bed  with  coverings 
Song  1.  16  yea,  pleasant :  also  our  bed  (is)  green 

7.  Place  for  reclining,  n\ivn  Mine. 

Matt.  9.    2  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying  on  a  bed 

9.    6  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thine 
Mark  4.  21  put  under  a  bushel,  or  under  a  bed? 

7.  30  and  her  daughter  laid  upon  the  bed 
Luke  5.  18  men  brought  in  a  bed  a  man  which  was 

8.  16  with  a  vessel,  or  putteth (it) under  abed 
17.  34  there  shall  be  two  (men)  in  one  bed  ;  the 

Acts    5.  15  laid,  .on  [beds]  and  couches,  that  at  the 
Rev.    2.  22  I  will  cast  her  into  a  bed,  and  them  that 

8. A  lying,  bed,  koittj  koite. 

Luke  11.    7  my  children  are  with  me  in  bed  ;  I 
Heb.  13.    4  honourable  in  all,  and  the  bed  undefiled 

9.A  matrass,  KpdfifiaTos  hrabb'atos  Kpaparros. 

Mark  2.   4  they  let  down  the  bed  wherein  the  sick 
2.    9  Arise,  and  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk  ? 
2.  11  Arise,  and  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  thy 
2.  12  he  arose,  took  up  the  bed,  and  went 
6.  5s  to  carry  about  iu  beds  those  that  were 

John  5.    8  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk 

5.    9  the  man.  .took  up  his  bed,  and  walked 
5.  10  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  carry  (thy) bed 
5. 11  the  same  said.  .Take  up  thy  bed,  and 

5.  12  What  man.,  said..  Take  up  thy  [bed,]  and 
Acts    9.  33  JEneas,  which  had  kept  his  bed  eight 

BED,  to  make  — 

l.To  strew  (a  place  for  reposing  in),  VV,  yatsa,  5. 

Psa  139.    8  If  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  thou 
2.To  streio  (a  place  for  resting  on),  o~Tpwvvvu>. 

Acts   9.  34  maketh  thee  whole :  arise . .  make  thy  bed 

BED  CHAMBER  — 

\.Inner  reclining  place,  33^n  Tin  cheder  mishkab. 
Exod.  8.    3  into  thy  bedchamber,  and  upon  thy  bed 
2  Sa.    4.    7  he  lay  on  his  bed  in  his  bedchamber 
2  Ki.  6. 12  words .  .thou  speakest  in  thy  bedchamber 
Eccl.io.  20  curse  not  the  rich  iu  thy  bedchamber 

2.  Inner  bed  room,  ntsp  Tip  cheder  mittah. 

2Ki.  11.    2  hid.  .him  aud  his  nurse,  in.  .bedchamber 
2  Ch.  22.  11  put  him  aud  his  nurse  in  a  bedchamber 

BE'-DAD,  *ns  son  of  A  dad. 

Father  of  the   fourth  king  of   Edom,    "Hadad-ben- 

Bedad,"  B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  35  Hadad  the  son  of  B.,  who  smote  Midian 
1  Ch.    1.  46  Hadad  the  son  of  B.,  which  smote  Midian 

BE'-DAN,  |7?  son  of  judgment. 

1.  A  judge  of  Israel  between  Jerubbaal  {i.e.  Gideon) 
aud  Jephthah.  His  name  is  omitted  iu  th3  history  of 
the  Book  of  Judges.  The  LXX.,  Syriac  aud  Arabic, 
have  Barak.  His  name  may  be  compared  with  that  of 
Jael  in  Judg.  5.  6,  who  was  probably  also  a  judge, 
though  we  know  nothing  of  him  except  from  Deborah's 
song,  B.C.  1112. 

1  Sa.  12. 11  Lord  sent  Jerubbaal,  aud  B.,  and 

2.  Descendant  of  Machir  sou  of  Manasseh,  B.C.  1369. 

1  Ch.  7.  17  the  sons  of  Ulam ;  B.    These  (were)  the 

BE-DE'-IAH,  nns  servant  of  Jah. 

One  of  the  family  of  Baui  who  had  married  a  strange 

wife,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  35  [Of.  .sons  of  Baui  ;  Maadai].  .B.,  Chelluh 

BED  STEAD  — 

An  arched  bed,  bnj;  eres, 

Deut.  3.  11  behold*  his  bedstead  (was)  a  bedstead  of 

BEE  — 

A  bee,  rrfa^  deborafi. 

Deut.  1.  44  the  Amorites.  .chased  you,  as  bees  do 
.Tudgi4.    8  behold,  .a  swarm  of  bees  and  honey  iu 
Psan8.  12  They  compassed  me  about  like  bees  ;  they 
Isa.     7.  18  for  the  bee  that  (is)  iu  the  laud  of  Assyria 

EE-EL-IA'-DA,  yvj?%3,  the  lord  knows. 

A  son  of  David,  calied  Eliada  in  2  Sa.  v.  and  1  Ch.  iii., 

B.  C.  1020. 

1  Ch.'i4.    7  And  Elishama,  and  B.,  and  Eliphalet 

BE-EL-ZE'-BTIB,  fceX^frovK  lord  of  the  fly. 

A  heathen  deity  to  whom  the  Jews  ascribed  supremacy 

among  evil  spirits.     The  correct  orthography  is  Beet- 

zebvl. 

Matt  10.  25  they  have  called  the  masterofthe  house  B. 
12.  24  but  by  B.  the  prince  of  the  devils 
12.  27  if  I  by  B.  cast  out  devils,  by  whom  do 
Mark  3.  22  He  hath  B.,  and  by  the  prince  of  the 


Luken.  15  He  casteth  out  devils  through  B.  the 
11.  18  ye  say  that  I  cast  out  devils  through  B. 
11.  19  if  I  by  B.  cast  out  devils,  by  whom  do 
BE'-ER,  1x3  a  well  (artificial). 

1.  A  station  of  the  Israelites  beyond  the  Arnon,  and  so 
called  because  of  the  "well"  dug  by  the  princes  and 
nobles  of  the  people.  This  is  probably  the  Beer-Elim 
("  well  of  heroes")  of  Isa.  15.  8. 

Kuni2i.  16  from  thence.. to  B.:  that  (is)  the  well 

2.  A  place  to  which  Jotham  son  of  Gideon  fled  for  fear 
of  his  brother  Abimelech,  8  miles  W.  of  Hebron. 

Judg.  9.  21  Jotham  ran  away,  and  fled,  .to  B.,  and 
BE-E'-RA,  nitX3  expounder. 
Son  of  Zophah  of  the  tribe  of  Asber,  B.C.  1570. 

1  Ch.    7.  37  [sons  of  Zophah,]  Suah.  .and  B. 
BE-E'  RAH,  rnx3  expounder . 

A  prince  of  the  Reubenites,  carried  captive  to  Assyria 
by  Tilgath-pilueser,  B.C.  740. 

1  Ch.   5.    6  [sons  of  Joel] . .  B.  his  son,  whom  Tilgath. 
BE-ER  E'-LIM,  D^K  1N3  well  of  Elhn. 

In  the  S.  confines  of  Moab,  Eglaim  being  at  the  N.  of 
the  Salt  Sea.  The  name  points  to  the  well  dug  by  the 
chiefs  (Elim)  of  Israel  on  their  nearing  the  promised 
land. 

Isa.    15.    8  and  the  howling  thereof  unto  B.-e. 
BE-E'-RI,  nxa  expounder. 

1.  A  Hittite,  lather  of  Judith,  wife  of  Esau,  B.C.  1810. 
Gen.  26.  34  took  to  wife  Judith  the  daughter  of  B. 

2.  Father  of  Hosea  the  prophet,  B.C.  800. 

Hos.    1.    1  The  word,  .came  unto,  .the  son  of  B. 
BE-ER  LA-HAI'-ROI,  "HTi   'ij1?  IN?  well  of  the  living 

07ie  that  beholds  me. 
Between  Kadesh  and  Bered,  "  in  the  way  to  Sliur,"  aud 
therefore  in  the  S. 

Gen.  16.  14  Wherefore  the  well  was  called  B.-l.-r. 

24.  62  Isaac  came  from  the  way  of  the  well  L,-r. 

25.  11  and  Isaac  dwelt  by  the  well  L.-r. 

EE-E'-ROTH,  nhN3  wells. 

1.  A  station  of  Israel  belonging  to  Jaaken. 

Deut  10,    6  children  of  Israel  took,  .journey  from  B. 

2.  One  of  the  four  cities  of  the  Hivites  that  drew  Joshua 
into  a  treaty  of  peace.  It  is  7  miles  from  Jerusalem  on 
the  way  to  Nicopolis.     Now  El-Bireh. 

Josh.  9.  17  their  cities  (were)  Gibeon..aud  B.,  aud 

18.  25  Gibeon,  Ramah,  and  B. 

2  Sa.   4.    2  for  B.  also  was  reckoned  to  Benjamin 
Ezra  2.  25  children  of  Kirjath-arim..  and  B.,  seven 
Neh.  7.  29  men  of  Kirjath-jearini.  .and  B.,  seven 

BE-ER-0-THITE,  'rnN?  belonging  to  Beeroth. 

Au  inhabitant  of  Beeroth  in  Benjamin. 

2  Sa.    4.    2  Rechab,  the  sons  of  Rimmon  a  B. 
4.    3  the  B.s  fled  to  Gittaim,  aud  were 
4.    5  the  sons  of  Rimmon  the  B.,  Rechab  and 
4.    9  David  answered . .  sons  of  Rimmon  the  B. 

23.  37  Naharai  the  B.,  armourbearer  to  Joab 
1  Ch.  11.  39  Naharai  the  B. .  .armourbearer  of  Joab 

BE-ER  SHE'-BA,  J?3^  in?  well  of  the  oath. 
One  of  the  oldest  places  in  Canaan  at  the  extreme  south. 
Geu.  21.  14  Hagar.  .wandered  iu  the  wilderness  of  B. 

21.  31  Wherefore  he  called  that  place  B. 

21.  32  Thus  they  made  a  covenant  at  B.  :  then 

21.  33  And.  .planted  a  grove  iu  B.,  and  called 

22.  19  they  rose  up  and  went  together  to  B. 

22.  19  and  Abraham  dwelt  at  B. 

26.  23  Aud  he  went  up  from  thence  to  B. 

26.  33  the  name  of  the  city  (is)  B.  unto  this  day 
28.  10  Jacob  went  out  from  B.,  and  went 
46.    1  Israel  took  his  journey,  .and  came  toB. 
46.    5  Jacob  rose  up  from  B.  :  and  the  sons  of 
Josh. 15.  28  Hazar-shual,  and  B.,  and  Bizjothjah 

19.  2  they  had  in  their  inheritance  B.,  and 
Judg  20.    1  congregation  was  gathered,  .from  Dan 

1  Sa.    3.  20  all  Israel  from  Dan  even  to  B.  knew  that 

8.    2  Joel. .Abiah. .judges  in  Eeer-sheba 

2  Sa.   3.  10  throne  of  David,  .from  Dan  even  to  B. 

17.  11  Israel,  .gathered,  .from  Dan  even  to  B. 

24.  2  Go  now.  .from  Dan  even  to  B.,  and 
24.    7  they  went  out  to  the  south  of  Judah 
24.  15  died  of  the  people  from  Dan  even  to  B. 

1  Ki.    4.  25  Israeldwelt  safely,  .from  Dan  even  to  B. 

19.    3  when  he  saw.  .he.  .came  to  B. 

2  Ki.  12.    1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Zibiah  of  B. 

23.  8  defiled  the  high  places,  .from  Geba  to  B 

1  Ch.   4.  28  they  dwelt  at  B.,  and  Moladah,  and 

21.  2  Go,  number  Israel  from  B.  even  to  Dan 

2  Ch.  19.  4  he  went  out  again,  .from  B.  to  mount 

24.  1  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Zibiah  of  B. 
30.  5  to  make  proclamation,  .from  B.  even  to 

Neh.  11.  27  at  Hazar-shual,  and  at  B.,  aud  (in)  the 
11.  30  they  dwelt  from  B.  unto  the  valley  of 

Amos  5.    5  seek  not  Beth-el. .  and  pass  not  to  B. :  for 
8.  14  and,  The  manner  of  B.  liveth  ;  even  they 

BE-ESH-TE'-RAH,  rPTTO;2  house  of  Ashterah. 
A  Levitieal  city  in  Ma'nassch,  W.  of  the  Jordan.    It  was 
allotted  to  the  Gershomites,  and  is  identical  with  ^U7t- 
tarvth  or  Ashterah. 

Josh. 21.  27  tribe  of  Manasseh.  .B.  with  her  suburbs 

BEETLE  — 

.  I  beetle,  *?i~»n  chargol. 

Lev.  11.  22  the  beetle  after  his  kind,  and  the 


BEEVES 


81 


BEFORE 


BEEVES  — 

Herd,  ox,  heifer,  ">p3  baqar. 

Lev.  22.  19  a  male  without  blemish,  of  the  beeves 

22.  21  a  freewill  offering  in  beeves  or  sheep 
N1XIII3X.  28  of  the  persons,  and  of  the  beeves,  and  of 
31.  30  of  the  persons,  of  the  beeves,  of  the  asses 
31.  33  threescore  and  twelve  thousand  beeves 
31.  38  the  beeves,  .thirty  and  six  thousand  ;  of 
31.  44  And  thirty  and  sis  thousand  beeves 

BEFALL,  to  — 

l.To  meet,  hjn  anah,  4. 

Psa.  9T.  10  There  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither 

2.  To  come,  tiis  bo. 

2  Sa.  19.    7  worse  unto  thee  than  all  the  evil,  .befell 

3.  To  find,  **yo  matsa. 

Xuni2o.  14  all  the  travail  that  hath  befallen  us 
Deut  31.  17  many  evils  and  troubles  shall  befall  them 

31.  21  when  many  evils,  .are  befallen  them 
Josh.  2.  23  told  him  all  (things)  that  befell  them 
Judg.  6. 13  why  then  is  all  this  befallen  us?  and 

4.  To  meet.,  chance,  N"ip  qara. 

Gen.  42.    4  Lest  peradventure  mischief  befall  him 
42.  38  if  mischief  befall  him  by  the  way  in  the 
49.    1  which  shall  befall  you  in  the  last  days 
Lev.  10.  T9  and  such  things  have  befallen  me 
Deut  31,  29  evil  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  days 

5.7h  meet,  change,  rrjjj  qarah. 

Gen.  42.  29  told  him  all  that  befell  unto  them 

44.  29  if  ye  take . .  from  me,  and  mischief  befall 
Esth.  6.  13  Hamaan  told.. every  (thing),  .befallen 
Dan.  10.  14  what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter 

6.  To  become,  come  into  being,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Mark  5.  16  they,  .told  them  how  it  befell  to  him 

7.  To  come  together,  {rv/j.^aivoi  sumbaino. 

Acts  20. 19  temptations,  which  befell  me  by  the  lying 

5.  To  meet  together,  (rwaurdw  sunantao. 

Acts  20.  22  knowing  the  things  that  shall  befall  me 

9.  The  things  of,  to,  ra>v  ta  ton. 

Matt.  8.  33  what  was  befallen  to  the  possessed  of  the 

10.  Chance,  occurrence,  >"npp  miqreh. 

"1  Sa.  20.  26  Something  hath  befallen  him,  he  (is)  not 

Eccl.  3.  19  that  which  befalleth  the  sons  of  men 

3.  19  befalleth  beasts  ;  even  one  thing  befall,  th 
BEFORE  (the  presence  of) — 
I.  Unto,  to,  ^x  el. 

Gen.  12.  15  saw  her,  and  commended  her  before  Pha. 
2.N~ose,  *\x  aph. 

Deut  33.  10  theyjshall  put  incense  before  thee,  and 
3.  With,  nx  eth. 

Gen.  ig.  13  is  waxen  great  before  the  face  of  the  Lord 
4. Expectation,  aiitp  terom. 

Ruth.  3.  14  she  rose  up  before  one  could  know 
5. Expectation,  Dna  terem. 

Gen.    2.    5  before  it  was  in  the  earth .  .before  it  grew 
ti.In  or  with  expectation,  onua  beterem. 

Gen.  27.    4  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die 

Jer.     1 .    5  Before  I  formed  thee . .  before  thou  came. 

T.In  not,  without,  k*?5  belo. 

Job    15.  32  It  shall  be  accomplished  before  his  time 

S.Orer  against,  71a  mul. 

Exod.34.    3  flocks  nor  herds  feed  before  that  mount 
Josh.  19.  46  and  Rakkon,  with  the  border  before  J. 

9. Over  against  tlie  face,  d'js  ?id. 

Exod28.  25  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the  ephod,  before 
39.  18  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the  ephod,  before 

10. Ascent,  up-going,  rnilp  maaleh. 

Judg.  8.  13  returned  from  battle  before  the  sun 

11.  The  front,  T3J  neged. 

Gen.  31.  32  before  our  brethren  discern  thou  what 
12. .1^  the  front,  "Ui?  leneged. 

1  Ki.  1.  13  came  and  fell  on  his  knees  before  Elijah 
lZ.From  the  front,  "t3|a  minneged. 

Deut  28.  66  thy  life  shall  hang  in  doubt  before  thee 

14.  The  front,  over-against,  r\2i  nokach. 

Gen.  30.  38  the  rods  which  he  had  pilled  before  the 
Josh.  15.    7  that  (is)  before  the  going  up  to  Adummim 
Judg  18.   6  Go  in  peace :  before  the  LORD  (is)  your 
Prov.  5.  21  the  ways  of  man  (are)  before  the  eyes  of 
Lam.  2.  19  like  water  before  the  face  of  the  Lord 
Eze.  14.    3  stumbling  block  of  their  iniquity  before 
14.    4  stumbling  block  of  his  iniquity  before  his 
14.    7  stumbling  block  of  his  iniquity  before  his 

15.  The  front,  nrii  nekach. 

Exodi4.    2  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the  sea 

16.  Until,  "iy  ad. 

Gen.  48.   5  born,  .before  I  came  unto  thee  into  E. 
17.1ft  the  eye  of,  py?  beayin. 

iSa.  21.  13  he  changed  Ms  behaviour  before  them 
18.  With,  Dy  im. 

1  Sa.    2.  21  the  child  Samuel  grew  before  the  Lord 
19. Faces,  countenance,  crispanim. 

Gen.    6.  11  The  earth  also  was  corrupt  before  God 

6.  13  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me 

7.  1  for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me 

11 


Gen.  10.   9  He  was  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord 
10.    9  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  LORD 

13.  9  (Is)  not  the  whole  land  before  thee? 

13.  10  well  watered  every  where,  before  the  Lord 
17.    1  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect 

17.  18  O  that  Ishmael  might  live  before  thee  ! 
i3.    8  which  he  had  dressed,  and  set  (it)  before 

18.  22  Abraham  stood  yet  before  the  Lord 

19.  27  place  where  he  stood  before  the  Lord 

20.  15  Behold,  my  land  (is)  before  thee :  dwell 
20.On  the  face,  D*aa  *?y  al  panim. 

Gen.  11.  28  Haran  died  before  his  father  Terah  in  the 
21.0ver-aguinst,  Snp  qobal. 

2  Ki.  15.  10  smote  him  before  the  people,  and  slew 
22. Over-against,.  ??g  qebel. 

Dan.  2.  31  brightness  (was)  excellent,  stood  before 

3.  3  they  stood  before  the  image  that  N. 
5.    1  Belshazzar.  .drank  wine  before  the 

23.TJic  east,  what  is  before,  D^g  qedem. 

Psa.  139.  5  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before 
Prov.  8.  22  of  his  wray,  before  his  works  of  old 

.    Isa.     g.  12  The  Syrians  before,  and  the  Philistines 

24.  The  east,  wJiat  is  before,  Dij?.  qodam.     ■ 

Ezra    4.  18  The  letter . .  hath  been  plainly  read  before 

4.  23  Now  when  the  copy,  .(was)  read  before 
7. 19  (those)  deliver  thou  before  the  God  of 

Dan.    2.    9  speak  before  me,  till  the  time  be  changed 
2.  10  The  Chaldeans  answered  before  the  king 

2. 11  none  other  that  can  show  it  before  the 
2.  24  bring  me  in  before  the  king,  and  I  will 
2.  25  Arioch  brought  in  Daniel  before  the  king 
2.  36  the  interpretation  thereof  before  the  king 
3. 13  they  brought  these  men  before  the  king 
4.    6  the  wise  (men)  of  Babylon  before  me 

4.    7  and  I  told  the  dream  before  them ;  but 
4.    8  at  the  last  Daniel  came  in  before  me 

4.  8  and  before  him  I  told  the  dream,  (saying) 

5.  13  Then  was  Daniel  brought  in  before  the 
5.  15  astrologers,  have  been  brought  in  before 
5.  17  Then  Daniel  answered,  .before  the  king 

5.  23  they  have  brought  the  vessels,  .before 

6.  10  he  kneeled,  .gave  thanks  before  his  God 
6.  11  foundDaniel..makingsupplicationbefore 

6. 12  they,  .spake  before  the  king  concerning 

6. 13  Then  answered  they,  and  said  before  the 
6. 18  instruments  of  musick  brought  before 

6.  22  and  also  before  thee,  O  king,  have  I  done 

6.  26  men  tremble  and  fear  before  the  God  of 

7.  7  all  the  beasts  that  (were)  before  it 

7.    8  before  whom  there  were  three  of  the  first 
7.  10  A  fiery  stream,  .came  forth  from  before 
7.  10  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand .  .before 
7. 13  and  they  brought  him  near  before  him 

25.  The  heart,  inner  part,  3~tj3  qereb. 

Exodio.    1  that  I  might  shew  these  my  signs  before 

26. First,  former,  pi?N*n  rishon. 

Num.  6.  12  but  the  days  that  were  before  shall  be 
Josh.  8.  23  as  Moses,  .had  commanded,  before 
1  Ki.  13.   6  the  king's  hand,  .became  as.  .before 

27. From  the  east,  Dijj  p. 

Dan.   5.  19  all  people,  .feared  before  him 

6.  26  tremble  and  fear  before  the  God  of  Daniel 

7.  S  before  whom  there  were  three  of  the  first 
7.  20  and  (of)  the  other . .  before  whom  three  fell 

28.  Yesterday,  third  day,  Dit^tf  Vid^i  temol  shilshom 

Gen.  31.    2  behold,  it  (wras)  not  toward  him  as  before 

31.    5  that  it  (is)  not  towrard  me  as  before ;  but 

Josh.  4. 18  the  waters.. flowed.. as  (they  did)  before 

29. From,  air6  apo. 

Acts    7.  45  whom  Goddrave  out  before  the  face  of 

1  Jo.    2.  28  we  may.  .not  be  ashamed  before  him 

30.  If...  not  first,  ia.vfj.ri  ■jrp6repov  ean  me  proteron. 
John  7.  51  Doth  our lawjudge.  .man before  it  hear 

31.ro,  towards,  els  eis. 

Acts  22.  30  brought  Paul,  .and  set  him  before  them 
Jas.    2.    6  rich  men . .  draw  you  before  the  judgment 

32.  To  the  face,  els  irpoo-cewov  eis  prosopon. 

2  Co.   8.  24  Wherefore  shew  ye  to  them,  and  before 
32, From  over-against,  airevavn  apenantz. 

Matt 27.  24  Pilate,  .washed  (his)  hands  [before]  the 
Rom.  3.  18  There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes 

•j Lin  front  of,  efxirpoa-Qev  emprosthen. 

Matt.  5.  16  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men 

5.  24  Leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar 

6.  1  that  ye  do  not  your  alms  before  men 

6.  2  do  not  sound  a  trumpet  before  thee 

7.  6  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine 
10.  32  Whosoever,  .shall  confess  me  before  men 
10.  32  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father 
10.  33  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men 

10.  33  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father 

11.  10  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face 
17.    2  was  transfigured  before  them  :  and  his 

25.  32  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations 

26.  70  he  denied  before  (them)  all,  saying,  I 
27. 11  Jesus  stood  before  the  governor :  and  the 

27.  29  they  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  and 
Mark  1.    2  I  send  my  messenger  [before]  thy  face 

9.    2  and  he  was  transfigured  before  them 
Luke  5.  19  they,  .let  him  down,  .before  Jesus 

7.  27  which  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee 

12.  8  Whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men 
12.    S  him  shall  the  Son.  .confess  before  the 

14.  2  there  was  a  certain  man  before  him 


ih. 


1  Jo, 
Rev. 


Luke  19.    4  he  ran  before,  and  climbed  up  into  a 

19.  27  bring  hither,  and  slay  (them)  before  mo 
19.  28  hewentbefore,ascendiugupto  Jeiusalem 

21.  36  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  man 
John  1.  15  preferred  before  me  :  for  he  was  before 

1.  27  coming  after  me  is  preferred  before  me 

1.  30  cometh  a  man .  .preferred  before  me 
3.  28  not  the  Christ,  but  that  I  am  sent  before 

10.  4  he  putteth  forth,  .he  goeth  before  thtm 
12.  37  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  before 

Acts  18.  17  Greeks,  .beat  him  before  the  judgment 
2  Co.  5.  10  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
Gal.     2.  14  I  said  unto  Peter  before  (them)  all,  If 
Phil.  3.  13  unto  those  things  which  are  before 

3.    9  we  joy  for  your  sakes  before  our  God 
3.  13  unblameable  in  holiness  before  God 

3.  19  we.  .shall  assure  our  hearts  before  him 

4.  6  And  before  the  throne,  .a  sea  of  glass 

22.  8  I  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  ol 

35. In  the  midst,  ev  (r<p  fj.eaw)  en  to  meso. 

Matt  14.    6  the  daughter  of  Herodias  danced  before 
Acts    5.  27  they  set.  .before  the  council :  and  the 

36.  In  before,  evavri  enanti. 

Luke  1.    8  he  executed  the  priest's  office  [before]  God 

37. In  before,  evavriov  enantion. 

Mark  2.  12  went  forth  before  them  all ;  insomuch 
Luke2o.  26  could  not  take  hold,  .before  the  people 

24.  19  mighty  in  deed  and  word  before  God  and 
Acts   8.  32  and  like  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearer 

38. In  the  face,  ev&inov  enopion. 

Luke  1.    6  And  they  were  both  righteous  [before] 
1.  17  he  shall  go  before  him  in  the  spirit  and 
1.  75  In  holiness  and  righteousness  before 
5.  18  to  bring  him  in,  and  to  lay  (him)  before 

5.  25  he  rose  up  before  them,  and  took  up 

8.  47  and  falling  down  before  him,  she 

12.    6  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God 
12.    9  denieth  me  [before],  .be  denied  before 

15.  18  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  before 

16.  15  which  justify  yourselves  before  men 

23.  14  I,  having  examined  (him)  before  you 

24.  43  And  he  took  (it),  and  did  eat  before  them 
Acts    2.  25  I  foresaw  the  Lord  always  before  my  face 

4,  10  doth  this  man  stand  here  before  you 

6.  6  they  set  before  the  apostles  :  and  when 

7.  46  found  favour  before  God,  and  desired  to 

9.  15  to  bear  my  name  before  the  Gentiles 

10.    4  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  [before]  God 
10.  30  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright  clothing 
10.  33  are  we  all  here  present  before  God,  to 
19.    9  but  spake  evil  of  that  way  before  the 
19.  19  and  burned  them  before  all  (men) :  and 
Bom  14.  22  Hast  thou  faith?  have  (it)  to  thyself  before 
Gal.     1.  20  I  write  unto  you,  behold,  before  God,  I ' 

1  Ti.    5.    4  that  is  good  and  acceptable  before  God 

5.  20  Them  that  sin  rebuke  before  all,  that 

5.  21  I  charge  (thee)  before  God,  and  the  Lord 

6.  12  professed  a  good  profession  before 

2  Ti.    2.  14  charging  (them)  before  the  Lord  that 

4.    1  I  charge  (thee)  therefore  before  God 
3.  Jo.        6  borne  witness  of  thy  charity  before 
Rev.    1.    4  Spirits  which  are  before  his  throne 

2.  14  to  cast  a  stumbling  block  before  the 

3     2  have  not  found  thy  works  perfect  before 

3.  5  I  will  confess  his  name  before  my  Father 
3.    8  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and 

3.  9  to  come  and  worship  before  thy  feet 

4.  5  lamps  of  fire  burning  before  the  throve 
4.    6  And  before  the  throne  (there  was)  a  sea 

4.  10  down  before  him .  .before  the  throne 

5.  8  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down  before 

7.  9  stood  before  the  throne,  and  before  the 

7.  11  and  fell  before  the  throne  on  their  faces 
7. 15  are  they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and 

8.  2  seven  angels  which  stood  before  God 

8.   3  golden  altar  which  was  before  the  throne 

8.  4  ascended  up  before  God  out  of  the 

9.  13  of  the  golden  altar  which  is  before  God 

11.  4  standing  before  the  God  of  the  earth 

11.  16  elders,  which  sat  before  God  on  their 

12.  4  and  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman 
12. 10  accused  them  before  our  God  day  and 

13.  12  the  power  of  the  first  beast  before  him 

14.  3  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and  before 

14.  5  [without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God] 

15.  4  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee 

16.  19  in  remembrance  before  God,  to  give 

19.  20  wrought  miracles  before  him,  with 

20.  12  small  and  great,  stand  before  God  :  and 

39.  In  presence  of,  eVt  (gen.)  epi. 

Marki3.    9  ye  snail  be  brought  before  rulers  and 
Acts  23.  30  say  before  thee  what  (they  had)  against 
24.  19  Who  ought  to  have  been  here  before  thee 

24.  20  in  me,  while  I  stood  before  the  council 

25.  q  there  be  judged  of  these  things  before 

25.  26  brought  him  forth  before  you.  .before 

26.  2  I  shall  answer  for  myself  this  day  before 

1  Co.   6.    1  go  to  law  before  the  unjust,  .not  before 

2  Co.   7.  14  our  boasting,  which  (I  made)  before 

1  Ti.     5.  19  accusation,  but  before  two  or  three  wit. 

6.  13  Christ  Jesus,  who  before  Pontius  Pilate 
40. On,  itpon,  over,  eiri  (dat.)  epi. 

Rev.  10.  11  Thou  must  prophesy  again  before  many 
41. In  presence  of,  M  (ace.)  epi. 

Matt  10.  18  And  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governors 
Luke2i.  12  brought  before  kings  and  rulers  for  my 
Acts  10.  17  men  which  were  sent,  .stood  before  tie 


BEFORE 


8:2 


BEGET 


42. Down   toward,  Kara,  (ace.)  kata. 

Luke  2.  31  Which  thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face 
Gal.    3-    1  O  foolish  Galatians.. before  whos;  eyes 

Ao.Dawti    over  agonist,  Ka-ivwri  katenanti. 

Bom.  4.  17  before  him  whom  he  believed,  (even)  God 

M.Down  in  face  of,  Karevwirtov  katenojnon. 

a  Co.  12.  19  think,  .we  speak  [before]  God  in  Christ 
Eph.   1.    4  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love 
Jude       24  to  present  (you)  faultless  before  the 

45. Alongside,  irapd  (dat.) para. 

Horn.  2.  13  the  hearers  of  the  law  (are)  just  before 
Jas  1.  27  Pure  religion  and  undetiled  before  God 
2  Pe.   2.  11  accusation  against  them,  .[before]  the 

46.  Before,  in  front  of,  irp6  pro. 

Matt.  5.  12  they  the  prophets  which  were  before  you 
S.  29  art  thou  come.. to  torment  us  before  the 
11.  10  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face 
24.  38  For  as  in  the  days  that  were  [before]  the 
Mark  r.  2  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face 
Luke  1.  76  for  thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the 
7.  27  Behold,  .my  messenger  before  thy  face 
9.  52  And  sent  messengers  before  his  face 

10.  i  sent  them  two  and  two  before  his  face 

11.  38  he  had  not  first  washed  before  dinner 
21. 12  But  before  all  these,  they  shall  lay  their 

John  5.    7  am  comiug,  another  steppeth  down  before 

10.  8  All  that  ever  came  before  me  are  thieves 

11.  55  and  many  went  out.  .before  the  passover 
13.  1  Jesus,  six  days  before  the  passover,  came 
13.    1  Now  before  the  feast  of  the  passover 

17.    5  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world 
17.  24  for  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation 
Acts    5.  23  the  keepers  stan  ling  without  [before]  the 
5.  36  before  these  days  rose  up  Theudas 

12.  6  the  keepers  before  the  door  kept  the 

12.  14  she.  .told  how  Peter  stood  before  the 

13.  24  When  John  had  first  preached  before  his 

14.  13  Then  the  priest,  .which  was  before  their 

21.  38  which  before  these  days  madest  an 
Rom.16.    7  who  also  were  in  Christ  before  me 

1  Co.   2.    7  which  God  ordained  before  the  world 

4.    5  Therefore  judge  nothing  before  the  time 
Gal.    1.  17  them  which  were  apostles  before  me 
Eph.  1.   4  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the 
Col.     1.  17  And  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him 

2  Ti.    4.  21  Do  thy  diligeuce  to  come  before  winter 
Heb.  11.    5  for  before  his  translation  he  had  this 
Jas-     5.    9  behold,  the  Judge  standeth  before  the 

1  Pe.  i.  20  Who  verily  was  foreordained  before  the 

{%, Before,  trp6  (adv.)  -pro. 

Matt.  6.    8  your  Father  knoweth .  .before  ye  ask  him 
Luke  2.  21  named  of  the  angel  before  he  was 

22.  15  I  have  desired  to  eat.  .before  I  suffer 
John  1.  48  Jesus,  .said  unto  him,  Before  that  Philip 

13.  19  Now  I  tell  you  before  it  come,  that 
GaL    2. 12  For  before  that  certain  came  from  James 
3.  23  But  before  faith  came,  we  were  kept 

2  Ti.    1.   9  which  was  given.,  before  the  world  began 
Titus  1.   2  which  God.. promised  before  the  world 

'^.Towards,  irp6s  (ace.)  pros. 

A.ct8  26.  26  before  whom  also  I  spake  freely 
Rom.  4.    2  he  hath .  .to  glory  ;  but  not  before  God 

.Jjicfhre  the  face  of  wp6  Trpoacairou. 

Acta  13.  24  When  John  had  first  preached  before  his 
$$.Formerly,  before,  irpoTepov  (adv.)  proteron. 
John  6.  62  Son  it  man  ascend  up  where  he  was  before? 

9.    8  auu  they  which  before  had  seen  him 
2  Co.   1.  15  I  was  minded  to  come  unto  you  before 
1  Ti.   1.  13  Who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a 

61. Formerly,  erst,  before,  irptv  prin. 

Matt  26.  34  That  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow 
26.  75  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny 
Mark  14,  72  Before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt 
T.nl;i'  ■-'.  '1   i'   ''  ••■■-  Hi.;  cock  rrmv,  thou  shalt  deny 
John  8.  58  I  say  unto  you,  Before  Abraham,  14.  29. 
if  not  first,  idv  p.y  7rpoVepoj/,  John  7.  51. 

53. Be/or«  thai,  irp\u  -1)  prin  P. 

Watt   1.  r8  before  they  came  together,  she  was  found 
Marki4.  30  before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt 
Luke  2.  26  befo      he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ 
Vcta    i.9o  [before]  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the 
7.   2  God..appearedunto..Abrahambef:orehe 

$l.&ir$t,  foremost,  vpuros  protos. 
John  1.  15,  30  for  he  was  before  me. 

■' 'J  >./'V( '.',v,  before,  irparov  {adv.)  proton. 

John  15.  18  ye  know  that  it  hated  me  before.. you 
BEFORE,  to  be  — 
''''  '     '    <'■■"   ■'■'■  TTpovTrdpxo)  proiiparchu. 

Luke  .  ,.  ia  for  before  they  were  at  enmity  between 

BEFORE  that  — 

/.'  ifbre  (hat,  trp\v  •?)  prin  c. 

'■"]  1  Ibffmv  that]  thou  shalt  thrice  deny  that 

Acts  25.  10  before  that  he  which  is  accused  have  the 

BEFORE  that  time  — 

YesU.  ";"  '■  ***** ''"''.  cW^  too™  cthmolshiUhom. 

1  Ha,  1 1  3]  were  with  the  Philistines  before  that 
BEFORE,  that  wore  - 
The  former,  D*jWMr$  ha-rtahonim. 

Num.  6  1  a  the  daya  that  were  before  shall  be  lost 


BEFORE,  they  that  went  — 
The  former,  'jiDIp  qadmoni. 

Job  18.  20  as  they  that  went  before  were  affrighted. 
[See  also  Appoint,  begin,  brought,  choose,  con- 
firm, day,  determine,  fall,  go,  gospel,  hear, 
instruct,  know,  meditate,  never,  notice,  ordain, 
preach,  preferring,  presence,  prove,  run,  sab- 
bath, say,  see,  set,  show,  speak,  spoken,  stand, 
suffer,  take,  tell,  world.] 

BEFOREHAND  — 

[See  Make,  manifest,  open,  testify,  thought.] 
BEFORETIME  — 

1.  Formerly,  0^37  lephanim. 

Deut.  2.  12  Horims  also  dwelt  in  Seir  beforetime 
%hi  former,  njlfcna  barishonah. 

2  Sa.  7.  10  children  of  wickedness,  .as  beforetime 

3.  Yesterday  third  clay,  dw?b>  Ticnx  ethmol  shilshom. 

1  Sa.  10.  11  when  all  that  knew  him  beforetime  saw 

4.  Yesterday  third  day,  zxwffl  ^lDE  temol  shilshom. 
J0SI120.    5  neighbour,  .hated  him  not  beforetime 

2  Ki.13.    5  children  of  Israel  dwelt,  .as  beforetime 

5.To  be  before,  irpovvdpxa  prouparchdt 

Acts    8.    9  Simon,  which  beforetime  in  the  same  city 

BEG,  to  — 

l.To  seek,  inquire,  trps  baqash,  3. 

Psa.  37.  25  have  I  not  seen,  .his  seed  begging  bread 

2.  To  ask,  demand,  *?N^  shaal. 

Prov.20.    4  shall  he  beg  in  harvest,  and  (have) 

3.  To  ask  earnestly,  bi<&  shaal,  3. 

Psa.  109.  10  Let  his  children  be.  .vagabonds,  and  beg 

4.  To  ask,  entreat,  supplicate,  alrew  aiteo. 

Matt  27.  58  He  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body 
Luke  23.  52  This  (man)  went  unto  Pilate,  and  begged 

5.  To  ask  more,  or  beside,  iiraLreco  epaiteo. 

Luke  16.    3  I  cannot  dig ;  to  beg  I  am  ashamed 

6.  To  ask  at,  irpoo-aiTcai  prosaiteo. 

Mark  to.  46  Bartemeus.  .bythehighwayside  [begging] 
LukeiS.  35  blind  man  sat  by  the  wayside  [begging] 
John  9.    8  Is  not  this  he  that  sat  and  begged  ? 
BEGAN  — 
Foundation,  "iD?  yesud. 

Ezra  7.    9  upon  the  first  (day),  .began  he  to  go  up 
BEGAN,  men  — 
To  be  begun,  SSn  chalal,  6. 

Gen.   4.  26  then  began  men  to  call  upon  the  name  of 
BEGET,  to  — 
l.To  beget,  bring  forth,  ~h)  yalad. 

Gen.   4.  18  Irad  begat  M. .  .M.  begat  M. .  .M.  begat 
10.    8  Cush  begat  Nimrod :  he  began  to-be  a 
10.  13  Mizraim  begat  Ludim,  and  Anatnim 
10.  15  Canaan  begat  Sidon  his  firstborn,  and 
10.  24  Arphaxad  begat  Salah,  and  Salah  begat 
10.  26  Joktan  begat  Almodad,  and  Sheleph 

22.  23  Bethuel  begat  Rebekah  :  these  eight 
25.    3  JoUshan  begat  Sheba  and  Dedan 

Numii.  12  all  this  people?  have  I  begotten  them 
Deut32.  18  Of  the  rock  (that)  begat  thee  thou  art 
1  €h;  1.  10  Cush  begat  Nimrod  :  he  began  to  be 
1.  11  Muzraim  begat  Ludim,  and  Anamim 
1.  13  Canaan  begat  Zidou  his  firstborn,  and 
1.  18  Arphaxad  begat  Shelah,  and  Shelah  begat 

I.  20  Joktan  begat  Almodad,  and  Shelaph 
Psa.     2.    7  Thou  (art)  my  son.  .have  I  begotten  thee 
Prov.17.  21  He  that  begetteth  a  fool  (doeth  it)  to  his 

23.  22  Hearken  unto  thy  father  that  begat  thee 
23.  24  he  that  begetteth  a  wise  (child)  shall  have 

Isa.  49.  21  Who  hath  begotten  me  these,  seeing  I 
Dan.  11.    6  and  he  that  begat  her,  and  he  that 
Hos.    5.    7  for  they  have  begotten  strange  children 
Zech  13.    3  his  mother  that  begat  him.  .that  begat 

ZTo  cause  to  yield  or  bring  forth,  "h)  yalad,  5. 
Gen.    5.    3  and  begat  (a  sou)  in  bis  own  likeness 
5.    4  after  he  had  begotten .  .and  he  begat 
5.    6  an  hundred  and  five  years,  and  begat 
5.    7  after  he  begat  Enos.  .begat  sous  and 
5.    9  Enos  lived  ninety  years,  and  begat 
5.  10  after  he  begat  Cainan.  .begat  sons  and 
5.  12  Cainan  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat 
5.  13  after  he  begat  Mahalaleel.  begat  sons 
5.  15  Mahalaleel  lived,  .and  begat  Jared 
5.  16  after  he  begat  Jared.  .begat  sons  and 
5. 18  Jared  lived  an.  .and  he  begat  Enoch 
5.  19  after  he  begat  Enoch,  .begat  sons  and 

5.21  Enoch  lived  sixty.,  and  begat  Methuselah 

5.22  after  he  begat  Methuselah.. begat  sons 
5.  25  Methuselah  lived.. and  begat  Lantech 

5.  26  Methuselah  lived  after  he  begat  Lamech 
5.  28  Lamech  lived  an  hundred  .  .and  begat  a 
5.  30  after  he  begat  Noah.,  begat  sons  and 
5.  32  Noah  begat  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth 
6. 10  Noah  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and 

II.  10  and  begat  Arphaxad  two  years  after  the 
11.  11  Shem  lived  after  he  begat  Arphaxad 

11.  12  Arphaxad  lived  five,  .and  begat  Salah 
11. 13  after  be  begat  Sal ah.. begat  sons  and 
11.  14  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  fiber 
11.  15  after  he  begat  Eber.  .begat  sons  and 
11.  16  Eber  lived  four  and., and  begat  Peleg 
n.  17  after  be  begat  Pelcg.. begat  sons  and 
11.  iS  Peleg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Reu 
11.  19  after  he  begat  Reu.. and  begat  sons  and 
1 1.  20  Reu  lived  two  and .  .and  begat  Scrug 


Gen.  11.  21  after  he  begat  Serug.  .begat  sons  and 

11.  22  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Nahor 
11.  23  after  he  begat  Nahor.  .begat  sons  and 
11.  24  Nahor  lived  nine  and.  .and  begat  Terah 
11.  25  after  he  begat  Terah.  .begat  sons  and 
11.  26  Terah  lived .  .begat  Abram,  Nahor,  and 
11.  27  Terah  begat  Abram.  .and  Haran  begat 
17.  20  twelve  princes  shall  he  beget,  and  I  will 
48.    6  which  thou  begettest  after  them,  shall 
Lev.  25.  45  which  they  begat  in  your  land  :  and  they 
Num26.  29  and  Machir  begat  Gilead :  of  Gilead 
26.  58  the  Korathites.     And  Kohath  begat 
Deut.  4.  25  thou  shalt  beget  children,  aDd  children's 

28.  41  Thou  shalt  beget  sons  and  daughters 
Judgn.    1  son  of  an  harlot :  and  Gilead  begat 
Buth  4.  18  the  generations  of  I'harez :  Pharez  begat 
4.  19  Hezron  begat  Bam,  and  Bam  begat 
4,  20  Amminadab  begat  Nahshon,  andN.  begat 
4.  21  Salmon  begat  Boaz,  andEoaz  begat Obed 
4.  22  Obed  begat  Jesse,  and  Jesse  begat  David 
2  Ki.  20.  18  of  thy  sons . .  which  thou  shalt  beget 
1  Ch.   1.  34  Abraham  begat  Isaac.    The  sons  of  Isaac 
2.  10  Ram  begat  Amminadab ;  and  A.  begat 
2.  11  Nahshon  begat  Salma..SalmabegatBoag 
2,  12  Boaz  begat  Obed,  and  Obed  begat  Jesse 
2.  13  Jesse  begat  his  firstborn  Eliab,  and 
2.  18  Caleb,  .begat  (children)  of  Azubah  (his) 
2.  20  Hur  begat  Uri,  and  thi  begat  Bezaleel 
2.  22  Segub  begat  Jair,  who  had  three  and 
2.  36  Attai  begat  Nathan,  and  Nathan  begat 
2.  37  Zabad  begat  Ephlal,  and  Ephlal  begat 
2.  38  Obed  begat  Jehu,  and  Jehu  begat  Azariah 
2.  39  Azariah  begat  Helez,  and  Helez  begat 
2.  40  Eleasah  begat  Sisamai,  and  Sisamai  begat 
2.  41  Shallum  begat  Jekanriah,  and  J. ..begat 
2.  44  Shema  begat  Baham.  .Bekem  begat 
2.  46  Ephah.  .bare  Haran  .  .Haran  begat 
4.   2  Beaiah.  .begat  Jabath ;  and  Jahathbegat 
4.    8  Coz  begat  Anub,  and  Zobebah,  and  the 
4.  11  Chelub  the  brother  of  Shuah  begat  Mehir 
4.  12  Eshton  begat  Beth-rapha,  and  Paseah 
4,  14  Meonothai  begat  Ophrah.  .Seraiah  begat 
6.    4  Eleazar  begat  Phinehas,  Phinehas  begat 
6.    5  Abishua  begat  Bukki,  and  Eukki  begat 
6.    6  Uzzi  begat  Zerahiah,  and  Zerahiah  begat 
6.    7  Meraioth  begat  Amariah,  and  A.  begat 
6.    8  Ahitub  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  begat 
6.   9  Ahimaaz  begat  Azariah,  and  A.  begat 
6. 10  Johanau  begat  Azariah,  he  (it  is)  that 
6.  11  Azariah  begat  Amariah,  and  A.  begat 
6.  12  Ahitub  begat  Zadok.. Zadok  begat  Shall. 
6.  13  Shallum  begat  HilI<iah..Hi]kiah  begat 

6.  14  Azariah  begat  Seraiah.  .Seraiah  begat 

7.  32  Heber  begat  Japhlet,  and  Shomer,  and 

8.  1  Benjamin  begat  Bela  his  firstborn,  Ashbel 
8.    7  he  removed  them,  and  begat  Uzza  and 

8.  8Shaharaim  begat  (cbildren)in  the  country 
8.  9  he  begat  of  Hodesh  his  wife,  Jobab,  and 
8.  11  of  Hushini  he  begat  Ahitub,  and  Elpaal 
8.  32  Mikloth  begat  Shimeab.  And  these  also 
8.  33  Ner  begat  Kish..Kish  begat  Saul.  .Saulb. 
8.  34  Merib-baal ;  and  Merib-baal  begat  Micah 
8.  36  Ahaz  begat  J. . .  Jehoadah  begat  A. . .  Z.  b. 

8.  37  Moza  begat  Binea  :  Bapha  (was)  his  soil 

9.  38  Mikloth  begat  Shimeam.  And  they  also 
9.  39  Ner  begat Kish..Kish  begat  Saul.  .Saul 
9.  40  Merib-baal ;  and  Merib-baal  begat  Micah 
9.  42  Ahaz  begat  J. . .  Jarah  begat  Alemeth . .  Z. 
9.  43  Moza  begat  Binea ;  and  Bephaiah  his  son 

14.    3  David  begat  more  sons  and  daughters 
2  Ch.  11.  21  Rehoboam .  .begat  twenty  and  eight  sons 

13.  21  Abijah.  .begat  twenty  and  two  sons 

24.    3  Jehoiada.  .begat  sons  and  daughters 
Neb.  12.  10  Jeshua  begat  J. . .  J. .  .begat  E. .  .E.  begat 

12.  11  Joiada begat  Jonathan.  .Jonathan  begat 
Job  38.  28  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew? 
Eccl.  5.  14  and  he  begetteth  a  son,  and  (there  is) 
6.    3  If  a  man  beget  an  hundred  (children) 
Isa.   39.   7  of  thy  sons,  .which  thou  shalt  beget 

45.  10  What  begettest  thou? or  to  the  woman 
Jer.   16.    3  concerning  their  fathers  that  begat  them 

29.    6  Take  ye  wives,  and  beget  sons  and 
Eze.  18.  10  If  he  beget  a  son  .  .a  robber,  a  shedder 

18.  14  Now,  lo,  (if)  he  beyet  a  son,  that  seeth  all 

47.  22  which  shall  beget  children  among  you 

3.  To  beget,  bring  forth,  cnroKveco  apokueo. 

Jas.     1. 18  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word 

4.  To  beget,  bring  forth,  yevvd<a  gennao. 

Matt.  1.  2  Abraham  begat  Isaac;  and  Isaac  begat 
Jacob;  and  Jacob  begat  Judas  and  his 
brethren:  3  And  Judas  begat  I'hares 
and  Zara  of  Thamar  ;  and  Pbares  begat 
Esrom  ;  and  Esrora  begat  Aram ;  4  And 
Aram  begat  Aminadab ;  and  Aminadab 
begat  Naasson ;  and  Naasson  begat 
Salmon  ;  5  And  Salmon  begat  Booz  of 
Bachab :  and  Booz  begat  Obed  of  Buth ; 
and  Obed  begat  Jesse ;  6  And  Jesse  be- 
gat David  the  king  ;  and  David  the  king 
begat  Solomon  of  her . .  of  Trias ;  7  And 
Solomon  begat  Boboam ;  and  Boboam 
begat  Abia;  and  Abia  begat  Asa;  8 
And  Asa  begat  Josfiphat ;  and  Josaphat 
begat  Jorain ;  and  Joram  begat  Ozias ;  9 
And  Ozias  begat  Joatham ;  and  Joathamj 
begat  Achaz;  andAchaabegatEzekias; 
10  And  Ezekias  begat  Manasses  ;  and, 
Manasses  begat  Anion  ;  and  Anion  begat 
Josias;  n  And  Josias  begat  Jechonias' 
and  his  brethren. 
1.  12  Jechonias  begat  Salathiel :  ancLSalathiel 


BEGET 


83 


BEGOTTEN 


ilatt.  i.  12     begat  Zorobabel ;  13  And  Zorobabel  be- 
gat Abiud  ;  and  Abiud  begat  Eliakira  ; 
and  Eliakira  begat  Azor;  14  And  Azor 
begat  Sadoc ;  aud  Sadoc  begat  Achini ; 
and  Achim  begat  Eliud ;  15  Aud  Eliud 
begat  Eleazar;  and  Eleazar  begat  Mat- 
than ;  aud  Mattban  begat  Jacob ;  16  And 
Jacob  begat  Joseph 
Acts    7.    8  so  (Abraham)  begat  Isaac,  aud  circumc. 
7.  29  Moses. .was.  .in.  .Madian,  where  he  begat 
13.  33  Thou  art  my  Sou,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
1  Co.   4.  15  I  have  begotteu  you  tlu-ough  the  gospel 
Phra.       10  whom  I  have  begotteu  in  my  bonds 
Heb.  1.    5  Thou  art  ray  Sou,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
5.    5  Thou  art  my  Son,  to  day  have  I  begotten 
1  Jo.   5.    1  him  that  begat  loveth  him.  .is  begotten 
5.  18  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  him. 

BEGET  again,  to  — 

To  beget  again  or  aneu\  avayevvda>  anagennao. 

1  Pe.    1.    3  God  and  Father,  .hath  begotten  us  again 
BEGGAR  — 
l.yeedy,  desirous,  ji^N  ehyon. 

1  Sa.    2.   8  He.  .lifteth  up  the  beggar  from  the 
2.Crouching,  cringing,  tttcoxo^ ptochos. 

Luke  16.  20  there  was  a  certaiu  beggar  named  Lazarus 
16.  22  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  beggar  died 

BEGGARLY  — 

Crouching,  cringing,  tttcox^s  ptochos. 

Gal.    4.   9  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly 
BEGIN  — 
Beginning,  commencement,  nWiei  techillah. 

Neh.  11. 17  Mattauiah.  .(was)' the  principal  to  begin 
BEGIN,  to  — 
I.  To  begin,  hh^chalal,  5. 

Gen.    6.    1  when  men  began  to  multiply  on  the  face 
9.  20  And  Noah  began,  .an  husbandman,  aud 

10.  8  he  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the  earth 

11.  6  And  the  Lord  said . .  this  they  begin  to  do 
41  54  the  seven  years  of  dearth  began  to  come 
44.  12  And  he  searched,  (and)  began  at  the 

Nura  16.  46  Take  a  ceuser. . the  plague  is  begun 

16.  47  behold  the  plague  was  begun  among  the 
25.    1  the  people  began  to  commit  whoredom 

Deut.  2.  24  begin  to  possess  (it),  and  contend  with 

2.  25  This  day  will  I  begin  to  put  the  dread  of 

2.  31  I  have  begun  to  give,  .begin  to  possess 

3.  24  thou  hast  begun  to  show  thy  servant  thy 
16.    9  begin  to  number  the  seven  weeks  from 

Josh.  3.  7  This  day  will  I  begin  to  maguify  thee 
Judg  10.  18  What  man  (is  he)  that  will  begin  to  fight 
13.  5  and  he  shall  begin  to  deliver  Israel  out  of 
13.  25  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  move  him 
16.  19  she  began  to  afflict  him,  and  his  strength 
16.  22  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  again 
20.  31  they  began  to  smite  of  the  people,  (aud) 
20.  39  Benjamin  began  to  smite  (and)  kill  of  the 
20.  40  But  when  the  flame  began  to  arise  up 

1  Sa.    3.    2  his  eyes  began  to  wax  dim,  (that)  he 

3. 12  when  I  begin,  I  will  also  make  an  eud 
22.  15  Did  I  then  begin  to  enquire  of  God  for 

2  Ki.  10.  32  In  those  days  the  Lord  began  to  cut 

15.  37  In  those  days  the  Lord  began  to  send 
1  Ch.  1.  10  he  began  to  be  mighty  upon  the  earth 

27.  24  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  began  to  number 
2'Ch.  3.    1  Then  Solomon  began  to  build  the  house 

3.  2  And  he  began  to  build  in  the  second 
20.  22  And  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to 
29.  17  Now  they  began  on  the  first  (day)  of  the 
29.  27  the  burnt  offering  began,  the  song.,  began 
31.    7  In  the  third  month  they  begau  to  lay 
31.  10  Since  (the  people)  began  to  bring  the 

21  And  in  every  work  that  he  began  in  the 
3  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  David 

6  From  the  first  day.  .began  they  to  offer 
8  Now  in.. second  year,  .begau  Zerubbabel 

7  that  the  breaches  began  to  be  stopped 
Esth.  6.  13  before  whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall 

9.  23  the  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they.,  begun 
Jer.  25.  29  I  begin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  which  is 
Eze.  9.  6  begin  at  my  sanctuary.  Then  they  began 
Jon.    3,    4  And  Jonah  began  to  enter  into  the  city 

2. To  be  begun,  SSrj  clwlal,  6. 

Gen.   4.  26  then  began  (men)  to  call  upon  the  name 

3.  To  begin,  be  pleased,  ^x;  yaal,  5. 

Deut.  i.    5  On  this  side  Jordan,  .began  iloses  to 

4.  To  begin,  solve,  loose,  x"K?  shere,  3. 

Ezra   5.    2  Zerubbabel .  .and  begau  to  build  the 
5.7b  begin,  commence,  &pxofiai  archomau 
JVIatt.  4.  17  Jesus  began  to  preach,  and  to  say 

11.  7  Jesus  began  to  say  unto  the  multitudes 
xi.  20  Then  began  he  to  upbraid  the  cities 

12.  1  his  disciples.. began  to  pluck  the  ears  of 
14.  30  beginning  to  sink,  he  cried.  .Lord,  save 

16.  21  From  that  time  forth  began  Jesus  to 
16.  22  Peter  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke 
18.  24  when  he  had  begun  to  reckon,  one  was 
20.   8  Call  the  labourers,  .beginning  from  the 
24. 49  And  shall  begin  to  smite  (his)  fellow 
26.  22  they .  .begau  every  one  of  them  to  say 
26.  37  he.  .began  to  be  sorrowful  and  very 
26.  74  Then  began  he  to  curse  and  to  swear 

Mark  1.  45  he  went  out,  and  began  to  publish  (it) 
2.  23  his  disciples  begau,  as  they  went,  to 

4.  1  he  began  again  to  teach  by  the  seaside 

5.  17  they  begau  to  prav  him  to  depart  out 


31- 

34- 

3- 

Neh.  4.' 


Ezra 


Luke 


John  8. 

13- 

Acts    1, 


20  he  departed,  and  began  to  publish  in 
2  he  began  to  teach  in  the  synagogue 
7  he.  .began  to  send  them  forth  by  two|and 

34  he  began  to  teach  them  many  things' 
55  began  to  carry  about  in  beds  those  that 

11  the  Pharisees,  .began  to  question  with 

31  he  began  to  teach  them,  that  the  Son  of 

32  Peter  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke 

28  Then  Peter  began  to  say  unto  him,  Lo 

32  he.  .began  to  tell  them  what  things 
41  they  began  to  be  much  displeased  with 
47  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  say,  Jesus 
15  Jesus,  .began  to  cast  out  them  that  sold 

1  lie  begau  to  speak  unto  them  by  parables 
5  Jesus  answering  them  began  to  say,  Take 
19  they  begau  to  be  sorrowful,  and  to  say 

33  he.. began  to  be  sore  amazed,  and 
65  some  begau  to  spit  on  him,  and  to  cover 
69  a  maid. .  began  to  say  to  them  that  stood 
71  he  began  to  curse  and  to  swear.  .1  know 

S  the  multitude,  crying  aloud,  began  to 
18  began  to  salute  him.  Hail,  King  of..  Jews 
S  begin  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  v.  23. 

21  he  begau  to  say  unto  them,  This  day  is 

21  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to 
15  he  that  was  dead  sat  up,  and  begau  to 

24  he  began  to  speak  unto  the  people 
38  began  to  wash  his  feet  with  tears,  and 
49  they  that  sat.  .began  to  say  within 

12  when  the  day  began  to  wear  away,  then 

29  he  begau  to  say,  This  is  an  evil  generation 
53  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to 

1  he  began  to  say  unto  his  disciples  first  of 
45  shall  begin  to  beat  the  men  servants  and 

25  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  aud  to  knock 

26  Then  shall  ye  begin  to  say,  We  have 
9  thou  begiu  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest 

iS  all  with  one  (consent)  begau  to  make 

29  Lest,  .all  that  behold  (it)  begin  to  mock 

30  This  man  began  to  build,  aud  was  not 

14  when  he  had  spent,  .he  began  to  be  hi 
24  lost.  .And  they  began  to  be  merry 
37  the  whole  multitude,  .began  to  rejoice 
45  began  to  cast  out  them  that  sold  therein 

9  Then  began  he  to  speak  to  the  people 
28  when  these  things  begin  to  come  to  pass 
23  they  began  to  enquire  among  themselves 

2  they  begau  to  accuse  him,  saying,  We 
5  begiuning  from  Galilee  to  this  place 

30  Then  shall  they  begin  to  say  to  the 

27  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  Prophets 
47  among  all  nations,  beginning.  .Jerusalem 

9  [they,  .went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at] 

5  he.  .began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet 

1  of  all  that .  .began  both  to  do  and  teach 

22  Beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John 
4  they .  .began  to  speak  with  other  tongues 

35  Philip,  .began  at  the  same  scripture,  and 
37  That  word,  .began  from  Galilee,  after  the 

15  as  I  began  to  speak,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell 
26  he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue 

2  Tertullus  began  to  accuse  (him),  saying 
35  when  he  had  broken  (it),  he  began  to  eat 

1  Do  we  begin  again  to  commend  ourselves? 
17  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God 

in,  iva.pxofj.ai  enarchomai. 

3  Are  ye  so  foolish  ?  having  begun  in  the 

6  he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you 
be/ore,  wpoevdpxofxat  pTOenarchomai. 
6  that  as  he  had  begun,  so  he  would  also 

8.  To  be  about  to,  /leAAw  niello. 

Rev.  10.    7  when  he  shall  begin  to  sound,  the 

BEGIN  at  the  first,  to  — 

To  receive  a  beginning,  XafifHavct)  apxw- 

Heb.  2.    3  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by 

BEGIN  before,  to  — 

To  begin  be/ore,  Trpoeva.pxofj.ai  proenarcliomai. 
2  Co.   8. 10  who  have  begun  before,  not  only  to  do 

BEGIN  to  be,  to  — 

Was  beginning,  ijv  apxofj-^vos  en  archomenos. 
Luke  3  23  Jesus  himself  begau  to  be  about  thirty 
[See  also  Amend,  build,  dark,  dawn,  reign,  sink 
spring,  wanton,  world.] 

BEGINNING  — 
l.Then,  IX  az. 

Isa.   48.    3  declared  the  former  things  from  the  b. 
48.    5  I  have  even  from  the  beginning  declared 

2.  Bead,  &vh  rosk. 

Exodi2.    2  This  month,  .unto  you  the  beginning  of 
Nuniio.  10  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months,  ye 

28. 11  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months  ye  shall 
Deut  32.  42  from  the  beginning  of  revenges  upon  the 
Judg.  7.  19  came  unto,  .in  the  beginning  of  the 
Psa  119.  160  Thy  word  (is)  true  (from)  the  beginning 
Prov.  8.  23  I  was  set  up  from,  .from  the  beginning 
Eccl;  3.  11  that  God  raaketh  from  the  beginning  to 
Isa.    40.  21  hath  it  not  been  told  you  from  the  beg. 

41.    4  calling  the  generations  from  the  beg. 

41.  26  Who  hath  declared  from  the  beginning 

48.  16  not  spoken  in  secret  from  the  beginning 
Lam.  2. 19  in  the  beginning  of  the  watches  pour  out 
Eze.  40.    1  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  in  the  tenth 

Z.IIcad,  npftl  rishah. 

Eze.  36. 11  do  better  (unto  you)  than  at  your  begin. 


18. 
24. 

=7. 

2  Co. 

iPe. 

4 

6.7*o  begin 

GaL 

3. 

Phil. 

X. 

7.  To  begiu 

2  Co. 

8. 

4. Fast,  former,  jic'Xl  rishon. 

Ruth  3.  10  more  kindness,  .than  at  the  beginning 

1  Ch.  17.  9  waste  them  any  more,  as  at  the  beginning 
Prov.20.  21  inheritance,  .gotten  hastily  at  the  begin. 
Jer.  17. 12  A  glorious  higli  throne  from  the  beginning 

5. First,  former,  nvx"i  reshith. 

Gen.    1.    1  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven 

10.  10  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  -was  Babel 

49.    3  my  might,  and  the  beginning  of  my 
Deut  11.  12  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  even  unto 

21.  17  for  he  (is)  the  beginning  of  his  strength 
Joh      8.    7  Though  thy  beginning  was  small,  yet  thy 

42.  12  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  his  beg. 
Psa. in.  10  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  beginning 
PiK>v.  1.    7  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  beginning 
S.  22  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning 

17.  14  The  beginning  of  strife  (is  as)  when  one 
Eccl.  7.    8  Better  (is)  the  end.  .than  the  beginning 
Isa.  46.  10  Declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning 
Jer.  26.    1  In  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim 

27.  1  Lu  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim 

28.  1  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  ot  Zedekiah 
49.  34  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah 

Mic.    1.  13  she  (is)  the  beginning  of  the  sin  to  the 

6. Beginning,  commencement,  n^ru?  techillah. 

Gen.  13.    3  where  his  tent  had  been  at  the  beginning 
41.  21  they(were)stillilliavoured,asatthebeg. 
Ruth  1.  22  came  to  B.  in  the  beginning  of  barley 

2  Sa.  21.   9  the  first  (days)  iu  the  beginning  of  barley 

ax.  10  from  the  beginning  of  harvest  until  water 
2  Ki.  17.  25  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  their  dwelling 
Ezra  4,  6  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  wrote  they 
Neb.  11.  17  the  principal  to  begin  the  thanksgiving 
Prov.  9.  10  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  beginning  ol 
Eccl.  10.  13  The  begiuning  of  the  words  of  his  mouth 
Isa.  1.  26  restore,  .thy  counsellors  as  at  the  beg. 
Dan.   9.  21  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  beg 

9.  23  At  the  beginning  of  thy  supplications  the 
Hos.    1.    2  The  beginning  of  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Araos  7.    1  in  the  beginning  of  the  shooting  up  of  the 

7.Beginni 
Matt  19 

19. 

24. 

24. 

Mark  1. 


Luke 
John 


Acts  1 

Phil. 

Col. 

2TI1. 

Heb. 


zPe. 
1  Jo. 


n9i  &PXV  orche. 
4  he  which  made,  .at  the  beginning  mad-3 
8  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so 
8  All  these  (are)  the  beginning  of  sorrows 
1  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginn-i'g  of 

1  The  beginning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
6  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  God 

13.    8  These  (are)  the  beginnings  of  sorrows 
13.  19  such  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of 

2  which  from  the  beginning  were  eye  witn. 

1  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the 

2  The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God 
11  This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus 
64  Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning  who  they 
25  that  I  said  unto  you  from  the  beginning 
44  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning 
27  ye  have  been  with  me  from  the  beginning 

4  these  things  I  said  not.  .at  the  beginning 
15  fell  on  them,  as  on  us  at  the  beginning 
15  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  when 
iS  who  is  the  beginning,  the  firstborn  from 

13  because  God  hath  from  the  beginning 
10  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid 

14  if  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence 

3  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor 

4  continue  as.  .from  the  beginning  of  the 
1  which  was  from  the  beginning,  which  we 

2.  7  old  commandment,  .from  the  beginning 
2.  7  word,  .have  heard  from  the  [beginning] 
2.  13,  14  ye  have  known  him.  .from  the  beg. 

2.  24  heard  from  the  beginning,  .from  the  beg. 

3.  8  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning 
3.  11  message  that  ye  heard  from  thebeginuing 

2  Jo.         5  that  which  we  had  from  the  beginning 

6  That,  as  ye  have  heard  from  the  beg. 
Rev.    1.    8  1  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  [the  beginning] 
3.  14  true  witness,  the  beginning  of  the 

21.  6  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning 

22.  13  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the 

S. First,  former,  Trpwros  protos. 

2  Pe.   2.  20  the  latter  end  is  worse,  .than  the  beg. 

BEGINNING,  at  the  — 

First,  former,  7rpwrov  proton. 

John  2. 10  Every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set 

BEGINNING,  from  the  — 
From  above,  avwBtv  anothen. 

Acts  26.    5  Which  knew  me  from  the  beginning,  if 
[See  also  Rehearse,  world.] 

BEGOTTEN  — 

1. Birth,  rn^iD  moledeth. 

Lev.  18. 11  begotten  of  thy  father,  she  (is)  thy  sister 

2.To  go  out,  xy;  yatsa. 

Judg.  8.  30  Gideon  had . .  sons  of  his  body  begotten 

BEGOTTEN  (Son),  only 

Only-born,  chief,  /xovoyevi)?  monogenes. 

John  1.  14  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  F. 

1. 18  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the 

3.  16  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 

3.  18  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of 

1  Jo.    4.    9  that  God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into 

Heb.  n.  17  and  he. .offered  up  his  only  begotten(son) 


BEGOTTEN 


84 


BEHOLD 


BEGOTTEN,  first  — 

First-born,  irptororoKoi  prvtotokos.  . 

n, I,  ,  6whenliebruigethintheflrstbegotteninto 
Re*.    ■'.    5  the  flrat  begotten  of  the  dead,  and  the 

BEGOTTEN,  to  be  — 

To  he  born,  tV  yalad,  2. 

Deut  23.   s  The  children  that  are  begotten  of  them 

BEGUILE,  to  — 

1  To  deceive,  ^3  nakal,  3. 

Nmii2S.  -8  wherewith  they  have  beguiled  you  in  the 

2  ZV)  &em«'fe,  Zi/2  «p,  *Vi  nasha<  5-         ,  .  ,.,,  „, 
Gen.   3.  .3  The  serpent  beguiled  rue,  and  I  did  eat 

3  To  throw,  cast  dou-n,  nip,  ramah,  3. 

Gen   20.  25  wherefore  then  hast  thou  beguiled  me? 
Josh.  9.  =2  Wherefore  have  ye  beguiled  us,  saying 

4  7o  entrap,  5s\€a(,a>  deleazo. 

2  re.   2.  m  eannotcease  from  sin ;  beguiling  unstable 

5.  To  deceive  greatly,  e^awarda  exapatao. 

2  Co.  n.    3  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  Ins 

0.  To  reason  wrongly,  ■*apaKoyi£oiuu. 

Col.     2.   4  this  I  say,  lest  auy  man  should  beguile  you 

BEGUILE  of  one's  reward,  to  —  ( 

To  award  the  palm  against  me,  KarafrpaPevo). 
Col.    21 B  Let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your  reward 

BEHALF  — 

Part,  share,  portion,  uc'pos  ineros.         ........ 

2C0.  9.  ,  boasting.. should  be  in  vain  in  this  behalf 
1 1'o.    4. 16  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  this  [behalf] 

BEHALF  of,  in  the  — 

On  behalf  of,  for,  Wp  (gen.)  huper. 

Phil.   1.  29  unto  you  it  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Clmst 

BEHALF,  on  —  . 

\./„  addition  to,  on  account  of,  eiri  (Oat.)  epi. 
Rom.  16.  19  I  am  glad  therefore  on  your  behalf :  but 

^.Concerning,  about,  irepf  (gen.)  peri. 

1  Co.    1.    4  I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf 

3. On  behalf  of,  for,  inrib  (gen.)  huper. 

2  Co.    1 .  1 1  thanks  may  be  given ..  on  our  behalf 

5. 12  giveiyou  occasion  to  glory  on  ourb.  8  24. 
i.Vpon,  to  iiri  to  epi,  Rom.  16.  19. 
BEHAVE,  to  — 
To  compare,  equal,  m;*'  shavah,  3. 

Psa.  131.  2  I  have  behaved  and  quieted  myself,  as  a 

BEHAVE  self,  (seemly,  uncomely),  to — 
l.To  go  on  for  one's  self,  yhn  halak,  7. 

Psa.  35.  14  I  behaved  myself  as  though,  .my  friend 

■l.Tn  turn  round  again,  avao-Tp(^>a  anastrepho. 
1  Ti.    3.  15  know  iiow  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself 

S.To  become,  •yiVouoi  ginomai. 

1  Th.   2.  10  behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  believe 

[See  Disorderly,  ill.  proudly,  strangely,  valiantly, 
uncomely,  unseemly,  wisely  ] 

BEHAVIOUR  — 

1.  Taste,  reason,  ojd  laam. 

1  Sa.  21.  13  he  changed  his  behaviour  before  them 
Psa.  34.  title,  when  he  changed  his  behaviour  before 

2.  Constitution,  Kaiio-Tima  katastema. 

Titus  2.    3  that,  .in  behaviour  as  becometh  holiness 

BEHAVIOUK,  of  good  — 
Orderly^  iciiiruio;  kosmios. 

1  Ti.    3.    2  A  bishop  then  must  be.  .good  behaviour 

BEHEAD,  to  — 

1,2*0  turn  aside  the  head,  eini  "An  sur  rosh,  5. 

28a.    4.    7  beheaded  him,  and  took  his  head,  and  gat 

2.7b  behead,  take  the  head  off,  airoKKpaXlCoi. 

Matt  14.  10  he  sent,  and  beheaded  John  in  the  prison 

Mark  6.  i€  It  is  John,  whom  1  beheaded :  he  is  risen 
6.  27  he  went  and  beheaded  him  in  the  prison 

Luke  0.    <j  Herod  said,  .Tohu  have  I  beheaded:  but 
:  To  cut  away  with  an  axe,  irt\eK((a  pelekizo. 

ReV.ao.    4  (I  saw)  the  souls  of  them,  .were  beheaded 

BEHEADED,  that  is  — 
To   cause  to)  drop,  break  down,  *\TJ  araph 
Deut  .1.   6  over  the  heifer  that  is  beheaded  in  tin- 

BEHELD  — 

1  <'.<  wt  run   /: 
Dan     7     1  [  beheld  till  the  wings  thereof  were  pi. 
7    6  Alter  this  I  beheld,  and  lo  another,  like 
7.    9  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  east  down 
7. 11 1  beheld,  .because  of, .  I  beheld,  .till 
7.  21  I  beheld,  and  the  same  horn  made  war 

be-HE'-MOTH,  r,'^2  ,,  ;„,■,„■  beast. 

It  is  uncertain  whether  this  is  the  elephant  or  the 

hippopotamus;  bul  the  weight  of  argument  seems  on 

tile  side  "f  the  kilter. 

Job    1  >.  i.  Behold  BOW  B.,  which  I  made  with  thee 


BEHIND  - 

'[.Behind, 

2  Sa.  10. 

1  Ch.  19. 

2CI1.  13. 

Psa.  139. 

Isa.     9. 

Z.lichind, 

Gen.  18. 

19. 

19. 

22. 

32. 

Exodi4. 
Deut  25. 
Josh.  8. 
8. 
JudgiS. 

20. 
1  Sa.  21. 

24. 


n 

1  Ki 

■4 

2  Ki 

6. 

9 

9- 

1  T 

2CI1 

13- 

13- 

Nell 

4- 

9 

Psa. 

SO. 

Song 

2. 

Isa. 

30. 

38 

57- 

hti. 

Eze. 

=3- 

Joel 

2. 

Zech 

.  1 

"iinx  achor. 

o  battle  was  against  him  before  and  behind 
10  battle  was.  .against  him  before  and 
14  the  battle  (was)  before  and  behind  :  and 
=  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before 

12  Syrians  before,  and  the  Philistines  behind 

-inN  achat. 

io'iu  the  tent  door,  which  (was)  behind  him 
17  Escape  for  thy  life  ;  look  not  behind  thee 
06  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind  him 

13  behold,  behind  (him)  a  ram  caught  iu  a 
iS  and,  behold,  also  he  (is)  behind  us 
o0  Behold,  thy  servant  Jacob  (is)  behind  us 
in  the  angel  of  God.  .went  behind  them 
iS  smote.. all.- feeble  behind  thee,  when 

14  liers  in  ambush  against  him  behind  the 
20  when  the  men  of  Ai  looked  behind  them 
1-  behold,  (it  is)  behind  Kirjath-jearim 
40  the  Benjamites  looked  behind  them,  and 

q  wrapped  in  a  cloth  behind  the  ephod  :  if 
3  when  Saul  looked  behind  him,  David 

7  when  he  looked  behind  him,  he  saw  me 

20  Abner  looked  behind  him,  and  said 
23  that  the  spear  came  out  behind  him 

16  herhusbaud  went,  .along  weeping behiud 
23  fetch  a  compass  behind  them,  and  come 

34  behold,  there  came  much  people ..  behind 
9  thou,  .hast  cast  me  behind  thy  back 

x>  the  sound  of  his  master's  feet  behind 
iS  turn  thee  behiud  me.    And  the  watchman 
in  What  hast  thou  to  do.  .turn  thee  behind 
6  a  third  part  at  the  gate  behind  the  guard 
13  ambushineut  to  come  about  behind  them 

13  and  the  ambushment  (was)  behind  them 
id  the  rulers  (were)  behind  all  the  house  of 
26  and  cast  thy  law  behind  their  backs,  and 

17  Seeing  thou.,  castest  my  words  behind 
9  he  standeth  behind  our  wall,  he  looketh 

21  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee 
17  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy 

S  Behind  the  doors  also  and  the  posts 
17  purify  themselves  in  the  gardens  behind 
12  I  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  a  great 

35  Because  thou  hast,  .cast  me  behind  thy 

15  the  separate  place  which  (was)  behind 
3  behind  them  a  rlame.  .behind  them  a 

14  repent,  and  leave  a  blessing  behind  him 

8  behind  hira.  .red  horses,  speckled,  aad 

3. Behind,  backward,  batata  opiso. 

Matt  16.  23  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  :  thou  art 
Mark  8.  33  saying,  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  ;  for 
Luke  4.    8  Get  thee  [behind]  me,  Satan  :  for  it  is 
7.  38  stood  at  his  feet  behind  (him)  weeping 
Rev.    1.  10  heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a 

4. From  behind,  owKrdev  opisihen. 

Matt.  g.  20  behold,  a  womau.  .came  behind,  .and 
Mark  5.  27  came  in  the  press  behind,  and  touched 
Luke  8.  44  Came  behind,  .and  touched  the  border  of 
Rev.    4.   6  four  beasts,  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind 

BEHIND,  to  be  — 

T<>  be  behind,  vffrepea)  hvstereo. 

2  Co.  1 1.    5  I  suppose  I  was  not  a  whit  behind  the 
12  11  in  nothing  am  I  behind  the  very  chiefest 

BEHIND,  to  come  — 
To  be  behind,  va,repiw  hustereo. 
1.  Co.    1.    7  So  that  ye  come  behind  iu  no  gift 

BEHIND,  those  things  that  are  — 

The  things  behind,  ret  oiriaw  ta  ojnso. 

Phil.  3.  13  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind 

BEHIND,  which  is  — 
What  is  behind,  v(TTzpT)p.a  husterema. 

Col.    1.  24  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the 
[See  also  Abide,  left,  tarry.] 

BEHOLD  — 

l.Lo,  l^B  aln. 

Dan.  2.  31  Thou,  0  king,  sawest,  and  behold,  a  great 
4.  10  I  saw,  and  behold  a  tree  in  the  midst  of 
4.  13  behold,  a  watcher  and  an  holy  one  came 
7.    8  I  considered  the  horns,  and,  behold 
7.    8  behold,  iu  this  horn  (were)  eyes  like  the 

2.£o,  see!  n«  aru. 

Dan.   7.    2  behold,  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven 
7.    5  behold  another  beast,  a  second,  like  to 
7.    7  behold  a  fourth  beast,  dreadful  and 
7.  13  behold,  (one)  like  the  Sou  of  man  came 

2.Lo,  he!  Nn  he. 

Ezra  16.  43  behold,  therefore  I  also  will  recompense 
i.Lo,  |n  hen. 

Geu.   3.  22  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us 
iJ.Lo,  riin  hinneh. 

Geu.    1.  29  Behold,  I  have  given  you  every  herb 
$.See!  IfSe  ide. 

Matt  25.  20  behold,  I  have  gained  beside  them  five 

25.  22  behold,  I  have  gained  two  other  talents 

26.  65  behold,  now  ye  have  heard  his  blasphemy 
Mark  2.  24  Behold,  why  do  they  on  the  sabbath  day 

3.  34  said,  [Behold]mymotherandmybrethreu 
11.  21  behold,  the  flg  tree,  .is  withered  away 

15.  4  behold  how  many  things  they  witness 

16.  6  behold  the  place  where  they  laid  him 


John  1.  29  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
1.  36  looking,  .he  saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of 
1.  47  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is 

3.  26  behold,  the  same  baptizeth,  and  all.,  come 
5.  14  Behold,  thou  art  made  whole  :  sin  no 

11.    3  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick 
11.  36  Then  said  the  Jews,  Behold  how  he 
12. 19  behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  him 

18.  21  ask.  .behold,  they  know  what  I  said 

19.  4  Behold,  I  bring  him  forth  to  you,  that  ye 

19.  5  And  (Pilate)  saith  unto  them,  [Behold] 
iy.  14  he  saith  unto  the  Jews,  Behold  your 

20.  27  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my 
Rom.  2.  17  [Behold,]  thou  art  called  a  Jew,  and 
Gal.    5.    2  [Behold,]  I  Paul  say  unto  you,  that  if  ye 

7. See/  lo!  l$ov  idou. 

Matt.  1.  20  behold,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared 

1.  23  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child 

2.  1  behold,  there  came  wise  men  from  the 
2.  13  behold,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth 

2.  19  behold,  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth 

4.  11  behold,  angels  came  and  ministered  unto 

7.  4  and,  behold,  abeam..iu  thine  own  eye? 

8.  2  behold,  there  came  a  leper  and  worshipped 
8.  24  behold,  there  arose  a  great  tempest  iu 

8.  29  behold,  they  cried  out,  saying,  What 
8.  32  behold,  the  whole  herd  of  swine  ran 

8.  34  behold,  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet 

9.  2  behold,  they  brought  to  him  a  man  sick  of 

0.  3  behold,  certaiu  of  the  scribes  said  within 
9.  10  behold,  many  publicans,  .came  and  sat 
9.  18  behold,  there  came  a  certain  ruler,  and 
9.  20  behold,  a  woman .  .came  behind,  .and 

9.  32  behold,  they  brought  to  him  a  dumb  man 

10.  16  Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the 

11.  8  Behold,  they  that  wear  soft  (clothing)  are 

11.  10  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy 
ii.  19  Behold  a  man  gluttonous,  .a  wine  bibber 

12.  2  Behold,  thy  disciples  do  that  which  is 
12.  10  behold,  there  was  a  man  which  had  his 
12.  18  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  have  chosen 
12.41  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas(is)  here 
12.  42  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomou  (is) 
12.  46  behold,  (his)  mother  and  his  brethren 
12.  47  Behold,  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren 

12.  49  he.  .said.  Behold  my  mother  and  my 

J3-    3  saying,  Behold,  a  sower  went  forth  to  sew 
15.  22  behold,  a  womau  of  Canaan  came  out  of 
17.    3  behold,  there  appeared  unto  them  Moses 
17.    5  behold,  a  bright  cloud,  .and  behold  a 
ig.  16  behold,  oue  came  and  said  unto  him 

19.  27  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and 

20.  18  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  the 

20.  30  behold,  two  blind  men  sitting  by  the  way 

21.  5  Behold,  thy  king  cometh  unto  thee,  meek 

22.  4  Behold,  I  have  prepared  my  dinner  :  my 

23.  34  behold,  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and 

23.  38  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you 

24.  25  Behold,  I  have  told  you  before 

24.  26  Behold,  he  is  iu  the  desert,  .behold, (he  is) 

25.  6  Behold  the  bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye 

26.  45  behold,  the  hour  is  at  hand,  and  the  Son 
26.  46  behold,  he  is  at  hand  that  doth  betray  me 

26.  51  behold,  one  of  them  .  .stretched  out  (his) 

27.  51  behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent 

28.  2  behold,  therejwas  a  great  earthquake  :  for 
28.  7  behold,  he  goeth  before  you  into  Galilee 
28.  9  behold..  Jesus  met  them,  saying.  All  hail  ! 
28.  11  behold,  some  of  the  watch  came  into  the 

Mark  1.    2  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy 

3.  32  Behold,  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren 

4.  3  Hearken;  Behold,  there  went  out  a  sower 

5.  22  [behold,]  there  cometh  one  of  the  rulei-s 

10.  33  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  the 
■13  23  [behold,]  I  have  foretold  you  all  things 

14.  41  behold,  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into 

15.  35  some  of  them.  .said.  [Behold,]  he  calleth 
Luke  1.  20  behold,  thou  shalt  be  dumb,  and  not  able 

1.  31  behold,  thou  shalt  conceive  in  thy  womb 
1.  36  behold,  thy  cousin  Elisabeth,  she  hath 

1.  38  Mary  said,  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the 

1.  48  behold,  from  henceforth  all  generations 

2.  10  behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great 
2.  25  behold,  there  was  a  man  in  Jerusalem 

2.  34  Behold,  this,  .is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising 
2.  48  behold,  thy  father  and  I  have  sought  thee 
5.  12  behold  a  man  full  of  leprosy  ;  who,  seeiug 

5.  18  behold,  men  brought  in  a  bed  a  man 

6.  23  for,  behold,  your  reward  (is)  great  in 

7.  12  behold,  there  was  a  dead  man  carried  out 
7.  25  Behold,  they  whieh  are  georgeously 

7.  27  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy 
7.  34  Behold  a  gluttonous  man,  and  a  wine  b. 

7.  37  behold,  a  womau  in  the  city,  which  was 

8.  41  behold,  there  came  a  man  named  Jairus 

9.  30  behold,  there  talked  with  him  two  men 
9.  38  behold,  a  man  of  the  company  cried  out 

10.  3  behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among 
10.  19  Behold,  I  give  unto  you  power  to  tread 

10.  25  behold,  a  certaiu  lawyer  stood  up,  and 
ir.  31  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomou  (is)  here 

1 1.  32  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas  (is)  here 

11.  41  and,  behold  all  things  are  clean  unto  yon 

13.  7  Behold,  these  three  years  I  come  seeking 
13.  11  behold,  there  was  a  woman  which  had  a 
13.  30  behold,  there  are  last  which  shall  be  first 
13.  32  Behold,  I  cast  out  devils,  and  I  do  cures 

13.  35  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  des. 

14.  2  Behold,  there  was  a  certain  man  before 

17.  21  behold,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you 

18.  31  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  all 


BEHOLD 


85 


BEING 


Luke  19.  2  behold/there  was)  a  man  named  Zaccheus 
19.  8  Behold,  Lord,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give 
19.  20  Lord,  behold.,  thy  pound,  which  I  have 
22.  10  Behold,  when  ye  are  entered  into  the  city 
22.  2i  behold,  the  hand  of  him  that  betrayeth 
22.  31  behold,  Satan  hath  desired,  .you,  that  he 
22.  38  they  said,  Lord,  behold,  here  (are)  two 

22.  47  And  while  he  yet  spake,  behold  a 

23.  14  behold,  I.  .have  found  no  fault  iu  this 
23.  29  For,  behold,  the  days  are  comiug,  in  the 

23.  50  behold,  .a  man  named  Joseph,  a 

24.  4  behold,  two  men  stood  by  them  in 

24.  13  behold,  two  of  them  went  that  same  day 
24.  49  behold,  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father 
John  4.  35  behold,  I  say  unto  you,  Lift  up  your  eyes 
12.  15  behold,  thy  King  cometh,  sitting  on  an 
16.  32  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now 
19.  26  he  saithuuto  his  mother,  Woman, [behold] 

19.  27  Thensaithhe  to  the  disciple,  [Behold]  thy 
Acts    1.  10  behold,  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white 

2.  7  Behold,  are  not  all  these  which  speak 
5.   9  Behold,  the  feet  of  them  which  have 
5.  25  Behold,  the  men.  .are  standing  iu  the 
5.  28  behold,  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem  with 
7.  56  And  said,  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens 

5.  27  he.  .went :  and,  behold,  a  man  of 

9.  10  And  he  said,  Behold,  I  (am  here)  Lord 

9.  11  enquire. .for(one)  called  Saul.. for, behold 

10.  17  behold,  the  men.  .had  made  enquiry  for 

10.'  19  the  Spirit  said  unto  him,  Behold,  three 

jo.  21  and  said,  Behold,  I  am  he  whom  ye  seek 

10.  30  behold,  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright 

11.  11  behold,  immediately  there  were  three 

12.  7  behold,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon 

13.  11  behold,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon 
13.  25  behold,  there  cometh  one  after  me, whose 
16.    1  behold,  a  certain  disciple  was  there 

20.  22  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto 

20.  25  behold,  I  know  that  ye  all.  .shall  see  my 
■Rom.  9.  33  Behold,  I  lay  in  Siou  a  stumbling-block 
a  Co.  15.  5r  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery;  We  shall 
2  Co.    5.  17  behold,  all  things  are  become  new 

6.  2  behold,  now(is)the  accepted  time;  behold 

6.  9  as  dying,  and,  behold,  we  live ;  as 

7.  11  behold  this  selfsame  thing,  that  ye 

1  >.  14  Behold,  the  third  time  I  am  ready  to 
Gal.     1.  20  behold,  before  God,  I  lie  not 
Heb.  2.  13  Behold  I  and  the  children  which  God 

8.  8  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 
Jas.    3.    3  [Behold,]  we  put  bits  iu  the  horses'  mouths 

3.    4  Behold  also  the  ships. .  yet  are  they  turned 

3.  5  Behold  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire 

5.    4  Behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers,  .crieth 

5.    7  Behold,  the  husbaudmau  waiteth  for  the 

5.    9  behold,  the  Judge  standeth  before  the 

5.  11  Behold,  we  count  them  happy  which 

1  Pe.  2.    6  Behold,  I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner  stone 

-Jude       14  Behold.  .Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousand 

-Rev.    1.    7  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds;  and  every 

1.  iS  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore 

2.  10  behold,  the  devil  shall  cast,  .you  into 
2. 22  Behold,  I  will  cast  her  into  a  bed,  and 

3.  8  behold,  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open 
3.  9  Behold,  I  will  make  them  of  the  syna. 
3.  9  behold,  I  will  make  them  to  come  and 
3.  n  [Behold,]  I  come  quickly  :  hold  that  fast 

3.  20  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock 

4.  1  behold,  a  door  (was)  opened  in  heaven 

4.  2  behold,  a  throne  was  set  in  heaven,  and 

5.  5  behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda 

6.  2  And  I  saw,  and  behold  a  white  horse 
6.   8  And  I  looked,  and  behold  a  pale  horse 
9. 12  behold,  there  come  two  wfoes  more  here. 

zia  14  behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  quickly 
12.    3  behold  a  great  red  dragon,  having  seven 

14.  14  I  looked,  and  behold  a  white  cloud,  and 

15.  5  [behold,]  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of 

16.  15  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief.  Blessed  (is)  he 
19.  11  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white 
21.  3  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  (is)  with 

21.  5  he.  .said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new 

22.  7  Behold,  I  come  quickly  :  blessed  (is)  he 
22. 12  behold,  I  come  quickly  ;  and  my  reward 

3EH0LD,  to  — 

1.  To  view,  see,  njn  chazah. 

Job  23.   9  where  he  doth  work, hut  I  cannot  behold 
Psa.  11.   4  his  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the 

11.    7  his  countenance  doth  behold  the  upright 

17.  2  let  thine  eyes  behold  the  things  that  are 
17.  15  As  for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in 

27.   4  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  and 
46.    8  Come,  behold  the  works  of  the  Lord 
2.7b  (cause  to)  behold  attentively,  B33  nabat,  5. 
]Sunii2.    8  similitude  of  the  Xord  shall  he  behold 
2t.    9  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he 

23.  21  He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob 
Job   36.  25  Every  man  may  see  it ;  man  may  behold 

39.  29  From  thence,  .her  eyes  behold  afar  off 
Psa.  10.  14  for  thou  beholdest  mischief  aud  spite,  to 
91.    S  Only  with  thiue  eyes  shalt  thou  behold 
102.  19  from  heaven  did  the  Lord  behold  the 
119.  18  that  T  may  behold  wondrous  things  out 
Isa.   3S.  11  I  shall  behold  man  no  more  with  the 
Lam.  1.  12  behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow 
3.  63  Behold  their  sitting  down,  and  their 

3.  To  face,  front,  n:s  panah. 

Job  24.  iS  he  beholdeth  not  the  way  of  the  vineyds. 

4.  To  look  out,  watch,  nay  tsaphah. 

Psa.  66.    7  his  eyes  behold  the  nations  :  let  not  the 
Provig.    3  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good 


5.2Jo  see,  look,  consider,  nN"i  raah. 

Gen.  12.  14  the  Egyptians  beheld  the  woman,  that  she 
13.  10  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the 
19.  28  and  beheld,  and,  lo,  the  smoke  of  the 

31.  2  Jacob  beheld  the  countenance  of  Labau 

48.  8  Israel  beheld  Joseph's  sous,  and  said 
Deut.  1.    8  Behold,  I  have  set  the  land  before  you 

1.  21  Behold,  the  Lord,  .hath  set  the  land 

2.  24  behold,  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Sih. 

2.  31  Behold,  I  have  begun  to  give  Sihon  aud 

3.  27  Get  thee  up  into  the  top  of.  .and  behold 

4.  5  Behold,  I  have  taught  you  statutes  aud 
11.  26  Behold,  I  set  before  you  this  day  a 

32.  49  behold  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  I  give 
Josh.  8.    4  Behold,  ye  shall  lie  iu  wait  against  the 

22.  28  Behold  the  pattern  of  the  altar  of  the 

23.  4  Behold,  I  have  divided  unto  you  by  lot 
Judg  16.  27  men  aud  women,  that  beheld  while 

1  Sa.  26.    5  David  beheld  the  place  where  Saul  lay 

2  Sa.  24.  22  behold,  .oxen  for  burnt  sacrifice,  and 

1  Ch.  21.  15  as  he  was  destroying,  the  Lord  beheld 
-Job    19.  27  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another 

22.  12  behold  the  height  of  the  stars,  how  high 
31.  26  If  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or 

40.  11  behold  every  one.  .proud,  and  abase  him 

41.  34  He  beholdeth  all.,  he  (is)  a  king  over  all 
Psa.  33.  13  The  Lord  . .  beholdeth  all  the  sous  of  men 

37.  37  Mark  the  perfect.. and  behold  the 
59.    4  awake  to  help  me,  and  behold 
80.  14  look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold 
84.    9  Behold,  0  God  our  shield,  and  look  upon 
1 13.    6  Who  humbleth . .  to  behold . .  in  heaven 
119.  37  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding 
119. 158  I  beheld  the  transgressors,  and  was 
142.    4  I  looked  on  (my)  right  hand,  and  beheld 
Prov.  7.    7  And  beheld  among  the  simple  ones,  I 

23.  33  Thine  eyes  shall  behold  strange  women 
Eccl.  2.  11  behold,  all.  .vanity  and  vexation  of 

7.  27  Behold,  this  have  I  found,  saith  the 

8.  17  Then  I  beheld  all  the  work  of  God,  that 
11.    7  pleasant,  .for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun 

Song   3.  11  behold  king  Solomon  with  the  crown 
Isa.    26.  10  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  the  Lord 

33.  17  they  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  very 

40.  26  and  behold  who  hath  created  these 

41.  23  that  we  may  be  dismayed,  and  behold 
41.  28  For  I  beheld,  and.  .no  man  ;  even  among 

49.  18  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  heho. 
63.  15  Look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from 

Jer.     4.  23  I  beheld  the  earth,  and,  lo . .  without  form 
4.  24  I  beheld  the  mountains,  and,  lo,  they 
4.  25  I  beheld,  and,  lo.  .no  man,  and  all  the 

4.  26  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  the  fruitful  place  (was) 
13.  20  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  behold  them  that 
20.  4  thine  eyes  shall  behold  (it):  and  I  will  give 
29.  32  Behold,  I  will  punish  Shemaiah  the 

31.  26  Upon  this  I  awaked,  and  beheld ;  and  my 

32.  4  aud  his  eyes  shall  behold  his  eyes 

34.  3  thine  eyes  shall  behold  the  eyes  of  the 
40.    4  behold,  all  the  land  (is)  before  thee 

Lam.  1.   9  O  Lord,  behold  my  affliction ;  for  the 

1.  18  hear,  I  pray  you,  all  people,  and  behold 

1.  20  Behold,  0  Lord,  for  I  (am)  in  distress 

2.  20  Behold,  0  Lord,  and  consider  to  whom 

3.  50  the  Lord  look  down,  and  behold  from 

5.  1  0  Lord,  .consider,  and  behold  our 
Eze.     1.  15  as  I  beheld  the  living  creatures,  behold 

8.    2  Then  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  likeness  as  the 
8.    9  Go  in,  and  behold  the  wicked  abomin. 
28.  17  I  mil  lay  thee,  .that  they  may  behold 
28.  18  in  the  sight  of  all  them  that  behold  thee 
37.    8  And  when  I  beheld,  lo,  the  sinews  and 
44.    4  I  looked,  and,  behold,  the  glory  of  the 
44.    5  Son  of  man.  .behold  with  thine  eyes,  and 
Dan.    9.  18  open  thine  eyes,  and  behold  our  desola. 
Amos  3.    9  behold  the  great  tumults  iu  the  midst 
Mic.    7.    9  Lord.. I  shall  behold  his  righteousness 
7.  10  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God?  mine  eyes 
Hah.   1.    5  Behold  ye  among  the  heathen,  and  regard 
1.  13  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and 
3.    6  he  beheld,  and  drove  asunder  the  nations 
Zech.  3.    4  Behold,  I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to 

6.  8  Behold,  these,  .have  quieted  my  spirit  in 

6. To  behold,  look,  "flEf  shur. 

Num23.    9  from  the  hills  I  behold  him  :  lo,  the 

24.  17  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  nigh:  there 
Job    20.    9  neither  shall  his  place  any  more  behold 

34.  29  he  hideth  (his)  face,  who  then  can  behold 

35.  5  and  behold  the  clouds,  .are  higher  than 

7.  To  look  upon,  Ta"  shir,  Sa. 

Job   36.  24  magnify  his  work,  which  men  behold 

S.To  vieio  again,  avaQf-taptw  analheoreo. 

Acts  17.  23  For  as  I  passed  by,  and  beheld  your 

9.  To  behold,  see,  look,  $\eirw  blepo. 

Matt.  7.    3  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in 

18.  10  their  angels  do  always  behold  the  face  of 
Luke  6.  41  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in 
6.  42  when  thou  thyself  beholdest  not  the 
24.  12  [he  beheld  the  linen  clothes  laid  by] 
Acts    1.    9  while  they  beheld,  he  was  taken  up ;  and 
1  Co.  10.  18  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh :  are  not 
Kev  17.    8  when  they  behold  the  beast  that  was,  and 

10.  To  see,  eioe'o>,  eldou  eided,  eidon. 

Mark  9.  15  the  people,  when  they  beheld  him,  were 
Luke  19.  41  he  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it 

21.  29  Behold  the  fig  tree,  and  all  the  trees 

22.  <;6  a  certain  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by 


Luke  24.  39  Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is 
John  20.  27  Beach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my 
Acts  13.  41  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and 
Bom  11.  22  Behold  therefore  the  goodness  and 
1  Jo.    3.    1  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
Rev.    5.    6  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the 

5.  11  I  beheld,  and  I  heard  the  voice  of  many 

6.  5  I  beheld,  and  lo  a  black  horse  :  and  he 

6.  12  I  beheld  when  he  had  opened  the  sixth 

7.  9  After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great 

8.  13  I  beheld,  and  heard  an  angel  flying 

13. 11 1  beheld  another  beast  coming  up  out  of 

11.  To  look  on  or  upon,  £p.f3\eTruj  emblepo. 

Matt  19.  26  But  Jesus  beheld,  .and  said  unto  6.  26. 
Luke2o.  17  he  beheld  them,  and  said,  What  is  this 
John  1.  42  when  Jesus  beheld  him,  he  said,  Thou 

12.  To  look  over,  or  upon,  iiro7TTzvw  ep>opteud. 

1  Pe.   2.  12  good  works,  which  they  shall  behold 

3.    2  AVhile  they  behold  your  chaste  conversa. 
IB.  To  look  upon,  €<popda>,  eVe?5o^  eirl  ephorao. 

Acts    4.  29  now,  Lord,  [behold]  their  threatenings 
11.  To  view,  6ea.ofj.at  theaomai. 

Luke 23.  55  the  women  also,  .beheld  the  sepulchre 
John  1.  I4  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the 
15. To  vieio,  Oeeopeoj  theoreo. 

JUarki2.  41  beheld  how  the  people  cast  money  into 
15.  47  Mary  Magdalene,  .beheld  where  he  was 
Luke  10.  iS  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from 
14.  29  Lest,  .all  that  behold  (it)  begin  to  mock 
21.   6  these  things  which  ye  behold,  the  day 
John  17.  24  they  may  behold  my  glory,  which  thou 
Bev  21.  12  ascended. .and  their  enemies  beheld  them 
16.  To  observe  fully,  KaTavoeia  katanoeo. 

Acts    7.  31  as  he  drew  near  to  behold  (it),  the  voice 

7.  32  Moses  trembled,  and  durst  not  behold 
Jas.     1.  24  he  beholdeth  himself,  and  goeth  his  way 

EEHOLD  as  in  a  glass,  to  — 

To  see  one's  self  in  a  mirror,  KaroTTTpiCo/J-aL. 

2  Co.   3.  18  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the 
BEHOLD,  to  cause  to  — 

To  [cause  to)  look  attentively,  a?3  nabat,  5. 

Hab.  1.    3  Why  dost  thou.,  cause  (me)  to  behold 
BEHOLDING  — 
1.2*o  see,  n$ri  raah. 

Psang.  37  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  heholdiug 
2.Seeing,  sight,  rtftq  reuth. 

Eccl.  5.  11  saving  the  beholding.. with  their  eyes? 
3,7b  vieio,  de&pico  theoreo. 

Matt27.  55  many  women  were  there  beholding  afar 

Luke  23.  35  the  people  stood  beholding.     And  the 
23.  48  all  the  people,  .beholding  the  things 

Acts   8.  13  beholding  the  miracles  and  signs  which 
4.  To  behold,  ^AeVoj  blepo. 

Acts   4.  14  beholding  the  man  which  was  healed 

Col.     2.    5  joying  and  beholding  your  order,  and  the 
5.1*0  behold  intensely,  4/j,^\4ttqj  emblepo. 

Markio.  21  Then  Jesus  beholding  him,  loved  him 

6.  To  observe  fully,  tcaravoeio  katanoeo. 

Jas.     t.  23  like  unto  a  man  beholding  his  natural 

7.  To  see,  6pdca  horad. 

Luke23.  49  his  acquaintance,  .stood  afar,  .beholding 
[See  also  Earnestly,  steadily.] 

BEHOVE,  to  — 

To  be  binding  on,  Set  (ace.),  dei. 

Luke  24.  46  thus  [it  behoved]  Christ  to  suffer,  and  to 

BEHOVETH  one,  it  — 
To  owe,  d<pti\a>  ojjhcito. 

Heb.  2.  17  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  like  unto  (his) 

BEING,  while  I  have  — 
In  my  being,  >"iii'3.  beodi, 

Psa  104.  33  I  will  sing  praise,  .while  I  have  my  being 
BEING  — 
1.  To  be,  eifj.1  ehni. 

Matt.  1.  19  Then  Joseph  her  husband,  being  a  just 
7.  11  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 

12.  34  how  can  ye,  being  evil,  speak  good 
Mark  S     1  In  those  days  the  multitude  being  very 

14.    3  being  in  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon 

Luke  2.    5  To  be  taxed  with  Mary,  .being  great  with 

3.  23  being  (as  was  supposed)  the  sou  of  Joseph 

13.  16  ought  not  this  woman,  being  a  daughter 
20.  36  the  children  of  God,  being  the  children 
22.    3  Judas,  .being  of  the  number  of  the  twelve 

John  4.    9  How  is  it  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest 
5-  13  conveyed  himself  away,  a  multitude  being 

6.  71  that  should  betray  him,  [being]  one  of  the 

7.  50  he  that  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  being  one 

10.  33  that  thou,  being  a  man,  makest  thyself 

11.  49  one  of  them,  .being  the  high  priest  that; 
11.  51  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prophesied 
iS.  26  One  of  the  servants  of.  .high  priest,  being 
19.  38  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  being  a  disciple  of 

Acts  15.  32  Judas  aud  Silas,  being  prophets  also 

i5.  21  teach  customs.. not  lawful  for  us.. being 
27.    j  (one)  Aristarchus,  a  Macedonian,  .being 
Rom  11.  17  thou,  being  a  wild  olive  tree,  wert  grafted 
1  Co.    8.    7  and  their  conscience  being  weak  is 

0.  21  being  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under 
12. 12  all  the  members  of  that  one  body,  being 


BEING 


86 


BELIEVE 


Gal.     2.    3  neither  Titus,  who  was  with  me,  being  a 
Eph.   2.  20  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief 

4.  18  being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God 
Col     2.  13  you,  being  dead  in  your  sins,  .hath  he 
1  Ti     3  10  use  the  omce  of  a  deacon,  being.. blameless 
Titus  1    16  in  works  they  deny,  .being  abominable 

3  11  and  sinueth,  being  condemned  of  himself 
"Phm         9  being  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged,  and 
Heb    1     3  Who  being  the  brightness  of  (his)  glory 
'  13!   3  as  being  yourselves  also  in  the  body 

2.  To  beeom,  yivopai  ginomai. 

Mark  o  «  being  in  the  house,  he  asked  them,  What 
Luke 22.  4+  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed,  .earnestly 
Jas       1.  25  he  being  nut  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a 
1  Te.    5.    3  Neither  as  being  lords  over ..  heritage 

Z.To  be,  exist,  virdpx^  huparcho. 

Luke  11.  13  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 

16  2^  being  in  torments,  and  seeth  Abraham 
Acts    7.  55  But  he,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

14.    8  [being]  a  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb 
16.  20  These  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly 
16.  37  being  Romans,  and  have  east  (us)  into 
19.  40  there  beingno  cause  whereby  we  may  give 
2C0.  8.  17  but  being  more  forward,  .he  went  unto 

12.  16  being  crafty,  I  caught  you  with  guile 
Gal.     1.  14  being  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the 

2. 14  If  thou,  beingfa  Jew,  li  vest  after,  Ph.  2.  6. 
4.Uj)on,  Zitl  {gen.)  epi,  Luke  3.  2. 
BEING,  we  have  our  — 
We  tire,  iff/x4v  esmen. 

Acts  17.  28  we  live   and  move,  and  have  our  being 

BEKAH  — 

A  bekah,  ppn  beqa. 

Exod38.  26  A  bekah  for  every  man.  .half  a  shekel 

BEL,  Sa  lord. 

The  Babylonian  name  of  Baal,   though  some  critics 

doubt  their  identity. 

Isa.   46.    1  B.  boweth  down,  Nebo  stoopeth  ;  their 
Jer.  50.    2  Babylon  is  taken,  B.  is  confounded 

51.  44  I  will  punish  B.  in  Babylon,  and  I  will 

BE'-LA,  BE'-LAH,  J773  consumption. 

1.  A  place  near  the  S.  of  the  vale  of  Siddim,  called  also 
Zoar. 

Gen.  14.    2  made  war  with,  .the  king  of  B.,  which 
14.    8  there  went  out.  .the  king  of  B.,  the  same 

2.  The  first  king  of  Edom  mentioned  in  scripture,  B.C. 
3600. 

Gen.  36.  32  B.  the  son  of  Beor  reigned  in  Edom  :  and 

36.  33  B.  died,  and  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of 
3  Ch.   1.  43  these . .  the  kings  that  reigned . .  B.  the  son 

1.  44  when  B.  was  dead,  Jobab  the  son  of 

3.  Eldest  son  of  Benjamin,  and  head  of  the  Belaites,  of 
whom  the  house  of  Ehud  was  most  remarkable.  He 
was  one  of  the  left-handed  heroes,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  21  the  sons  of  Benjamin. .B.,  and  Becher 
Num.26.  38  of  B.,  the  family  of  the  Belaites  :  of  Ash. 

26.  40  the  sons  of  B.  were  Ard  and  Naaman 
1  Ch.   7.    6  of  Benjamin  ;  B.  and  Becher,  and  Jediael 

7.  7  the  sons  of  Bela  ;  Ezbon,  and  Uzzi,  and 

8.  1  Benjamin  begat  B.  his  firstborn,  Ashbel 
8.    3  the  sons  of  B.  were,  Addar,  and  Gera  and 

A.  A  son  of  Azaz  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben. 

1  Ch.   5.   8  Bela  the  son  of  Azaz,  the  son  of  Shema 

BE-LA-ITES,  *j^a  belonging  to  Bela. 
Descendants  of  the  preceding  Bela. 

Num26.  38  of  Bela,  the  family  of  the  Belaites  :  of 
BELCH  out,  to  — 
To  cause  tojlow,  idler,  send  forth,  yni  naba,  5. 

Tsa.  59,    7  Behold,  they  belch  out  with  their  mouth 

BE-LI'-AL,  7J2:?a  worthless,  reckless,  lawless. 
TMs  Should  not  be  regarded  as  a  proper  name.  It  is 
generally  associated  with  the  words  "man,"  "son," 
"daughter,"  or  "chilren."  Hence  "son"  or  "man" 
of  Belial,  simply  means  "a  worthless  person."  In  the 
New  Testament  the  form  of  the  word  is  Beliar  (@€\iap 
not  /JeAiaA  as  given  in  the  common  version). 

Deut  13.  13  men,  the  children  of  B.,  are  gone  out 
Judg  i).  aa  certain  sons  of  B.,  be*et  the  house  round 
20.  13  deliver  (us)  the  men,  the  children  of  B- 

1  Sa.    1.  t'6  Count.  Dot  thine  bondmaid  for  a  dau.  of  B. 

2.  12  Now  the  sons  of  Eli  (were)  sons  of  B. 
10.  27  the  children  of  IV  said,  How  shall  this 
25.  17  for  he  (is  aUCh)  a  son  of  IV,  that  (a  111:10] 
25.  25  Let  not  my  Lord  .  regard  this  man  of  B. 
30. 22  Then  answered  all  tin.'  wicked  men. ..of  B. 

2  Sa,  16.    7  Come  out,  come  out.  .thou  man  of  B. 

20.  1  there  happened  to  be  there  a  man  of  B. 
23.   6  But  (the  sons)  of  B. .  .all  of  them  as  thorns 

1  El,  ?i.  10  set  two  men,  sons  Of  B.,  before  him,  to 

31.  13  there  came  in  two  men,  children  of  B. 

21.  1  i  the  men  of  B.  witnessed  against  him 
aCh.  t  1.    7  there  ■■•w  gathered  unto  him.,  child,  of  B. 

;  or      .    wha!  concord  hath  Christ  with  B.  ? 
BELIE,  to  — 
To  lie  to,  be  false,  v~?  Tcachash,  3. 

Jer.     5.  12  They  have  belied  the  LORD,  and  said 
BELIEF  — 
Confidence,  tmwt,  wltrrts  pistis, 

2TI1.  ?.  tj  the.  ugh   anctiflcation  of  the  Spirit,  and 


BELIEVE,  to  — 

\,To  remain  stedfast,  fox  aman,  5. 

Gen   15.    6  he  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  he  counted 

45  26  Jacob's  heart  fainted,  for  he  believed 
Exod  4.    1  they  will  not  believe  me,  Dor  hearken 

4.    5  That  they  may  believe  that  the  Lord  God 
4.   8  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  not  be. 
4.    8  they  will  believe  the  voice  of  the  latter 
4!    q  if  they  will  not  believe  also  these  two 
4.  31  the  people  believed:  and  when  they  heard 

14.  31  believed  the  Lord,  and  his  servant  Moses 

19.  9  that  the  people  may  hear,  .and  believe 
Num  14.  11  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  me 

20.  12  Because  ye  believed  me  not,  to  sanctify 
Deut.  1.  32  in  this  thing  ye  did  not  believe  the  Loud 

9.  23  ye  believed  him  not,  nor  hearkened  to  his 
1  Sa.  27.  12  Achish  believed  David,  saying,  He  hath 

1  Ki.  10.    7  Howbeit  I  believed  not  the  words,  until 

2  Ki.  17.  14  that  did  not  believe  in  the  Lord  their  God 
2  Ch.  9.    6  Howbeit  I  believed  not  their  words,  until 

20.  20  Believe  in  the  Lord  . .  believe  his  prophets 
32.  15  nor  persuade  you.  .neither  yet  believe 

Job.    9.  16  would  I  not  believe  that  he.  .hearkened 

15.  22  He  believeth  not  that  he  shall  return  out 
29.  24  (If)  I  laughed  on  them,  they  believed  (it) 
39.  12  wilt  thou  believe  him,  that  he  will  bring 

39.  24  neither  believeth  he  that  (it  is)  the  sound 
Psa.  27.  13  unless  I  had  believed  to  see  the  goodness 

78.  22  Because  they  believed  not  in  God,  and 
78.  32  and  believed  not  for  his  wondrous  works 
106.  12  Then  believed  they  his  words  ;  they  sang 
106.  24  they  despised  the  pleasant  land;  they  be. 
116.  10  I  believed,  therefore  have  I  spoken :  I 
119.  66  for  I  have  believed  thy  commandments 
Prov.14.  15  The  simple  believeth  every  word  :  but  the 

26.  25  When  he  speaketh  fair,  believe  him  not 
Isa.     7.    9  If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not 

28.  16  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste 
43.  10  that  ye  may  know  and  believe  me,  and 
53.    1  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to 
Jer.   12.    6  believe  them  not,  though  they  speak  fair 

40.  14  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam  believed,  .not 
Lam.  4. 12  The  kings,  .would  not  have  believed  that 
Dan.  6.  23  taken  up  out.  .because  he  believed  in  his 
Jon.    3.    5  So  the  people  of  Nineveh  believed  God 
Hab.   1.    5  ye  will  not  believe,  though  it  be  told 

2.7b  be  persuaded,  Trddo/xai  peithomai. 

Acts  17.    4  some  of  them  believed,  and  consorted 

27.  11  Nevertheless  the  centurion  believed  the 

28.  24  some  believed  the  tilings  which  were 

3.  To  adliere  to,  trust,  rely  on,  triffTtvco  pisteuo. 
Matt.  8.  13  as  thou  hast  believed,  (so)  be  itdone  unto 
9.  28  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this? 
18.    6  one  of  these  little  ones  which  believe  in 

21.  22  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believ. 
21.  25  Why  did  ye  not  then  believe  him? 

21.  32  believed  him  not.  .believed  him.. might b. 
24.  23  Lo,  here  (is)  Christ,  or  there ;  believe  (it) 
24.  26  (he  is)  in  the  secret  chambers  ;  believe  (it) 
27.  42  let  him . .  come  down . .  and  we  will  believe 

Mark  5.  36  unto  the  ruler.  .Be  not  afraid,  only  believe 
9.  23  If  thou  canst  [believe].. him  that  believeth 
9.  24  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief 
9.  42  offend,  one  of.  .little  ones  that  [believe]  in 
11.  23  shall  believe  that  those  things  which  he 
11.  24  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive 
11.  31  will  say,  Why  then  did  ye  not  believe  him? 
13.  21  or,  lo,  (he  is)  there  ;  believe  (him)  not 

15.  32  descend,  .that  we  may  see  and  believe 

16.  13  [they  went  and  told,  .neither  believed] 
16.  14  [because  they  believed  not  them  which  ] 
16.  16  [He  that  believeth.  .shall  be  saved  ;  but] 
16.  17  [these  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe] 

Luke  1.  20  because  thou  believest  not  my  words 

1.  45  blessed  (is)  she  that  believed  :  for  there 
8.  12  lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved 
8.  13  have  no  root,  which  for  a  while  believe 
8.  50  believe  only,  and  she  shall  be  made  whole 
20.    5  he  will  say,  Why  then  believed  ye  him 

22,  67  he  said.  .If  I  tell  you,  ye  will  not  believe 
John  1.    7  that  all  (men)  through  him  might  believe 

1.  12  power,  .to  them  that  believe  on  his  name 

1.  50  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig  tree,  believest 

2.  11  miracles,  .and  his  disciples  believed  on 
2.  22  they  believed  the  Scripture,  and  the  word 

2.  23  many  believed  in  bis  name,  when  they  saw 

3.  12  and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe 
3.  15  That  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
3.  16  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
3.  18  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemn. 
3.  18  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  al. 

3.  18  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name 

3.  36  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  man  hath 

4.  21  Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour  cometh 

4.  39  many  of  the  Samaritans,  .believed  on  him 
4.  41  many  more  believed  because  of  his  own 
4.  42  Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying 
4.  48  Except  ye  see  signs.,  ye  will  not  believe 
4.  50  the  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus 

4.  53  and  himself  believed,  and  his  whole  house 

5.  24  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  ever. 
5.  38  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  believe  not 
5.  44  Howcauye  believe,  which  receive  honour 
5.  46  had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would  have  b. 
5.  47  if  ye  believe  not  his  writings 

5.  47  how  shall  ye  believe  my  words? 

6.  29  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  lie  hath 
6.  30  that  we  may  see,  and  believe  thee?  what 
6.  35  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst 
6.  36  That  ye  also  have  seen  me,  and  believe 


John  6.  40  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on 

6.  47  He  that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting 
6.  64  some  of  you  that  believe  not.  .believed 

6.  69  we  believe  and  are  sure  that  thou  art  that 

7.  5  For  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in 

7.  31  many  of  the  people  believed  on  him,  and 
7.  38  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  Scripture 
7.  39  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should 

7.  48  Have  any  of  the  rulers,  .believed  on  him? 

8.  24  if  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  (he),  ye  shall 
8.  30  As  he  spake  these  words  many  believed 
8.  31  said. .to  those  Jews  which  believed  on 
8.  45  because  I  tell.,  the  truth,  ye  believe  me 

8.  46  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe 

9.  18  the  Jews  did  not  believe  concerning  him 
9.  35  Dost  thou  believe  on  the.Son  of  God? 

9.  36  Who  is  he.  .that  I  might  believe  on  him? 

9.  38  he  said,  Lord,  [I  believe.]    And  he 
10.  25  I  told  you,  and  ye  believed  not 

10.  26  ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my 
10.  37  If  I  do  not  the  works .  .believe  me  not 
10.  38  though  ye  believe  not  me,  believe  the 
10.  38  that  ye  may  know  and  [believe,]  that  the 

10.  42  And  many  believed  on  him  there 

11.  15  to  the  intent  ye  may  believe;  nevertheless 
11.  25  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were 
11.  26  whosoever,  .believeth  in  me  shall  ...Be. 
11.  27  "Believest  thou  this?  I  believe  that  thou 
n.  40  if  thou  wouldest  believe,  thou  shouldest 
11.  42  that  they  may  believe  that  thou  bast  sent 
11.  45  Then  many  of  the  Jews,  .believed  on  him 

11.  48  If  we  let  him  thus  alone,  all.,  will  believe 

12.  11  of  the  Jews  went  away,  and  believed  on  J. 
12.  36  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the  light 
r2.  37  done,  .many  miracles,  .yet  they  believed 
12.  38  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  report?  and 
12.  39  Therefore  they  could  not  believe,  because 
12.  42  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed; 
12.  44  He  that  believeth  on  me,  believeth  not 
12.  46  whosoever  believeth  on  me  should  not 

12.  47  if  any  man  hear  my  words,  and  [believe] 

13.  19  that,  .ye  may  believe  that  I  am  (he) 

14.  1  ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me 

14.  10  Believest  thou  notthatl  am  in  the  Father 
14.  11  Believe  me  that  I  (am)  in  the  Father,  and 
14.  11  or  else  believe  me  for  the  very  works' 
14.  12  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth  on  me 
14.  29  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  might  believe 
16.    9  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me 
16.  27  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from 
16.  30  by  this  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth 

16.  31  Jesus  answered  them,  Do  ye  now  believe? 

17.  8  they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  send 
17.  20  which  shall  believe  on  me  through  their 
17.  21  that  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast 

19.  35  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might  believe 

20.  8  went  in  also  that  other,  .and  believed 
20.  25  thrust,  .into  his  side,  I  will  not  believe 
20.  29  thou  hast  believed,  .and.  .have  believed 

20.  31  that  ye  might  believe . .  and  that  believing 
Acts    2.  44  all  that  believed  were  together,  and  had 

4.  4  many  of  them,  .heard  the  word  believed 
4.  32  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were 
8.  12  when  they  believed  Philip  preaching  the 
8.  13  Simon  himself  believed  also  :  and  when 

8.  37  [If  thou  believest.  .1  believe] 

9.  26  and  believed  not  that  he  was  a  disciple 
q.  42  it  was  known,  .and  many  believed  in  the 

10.  43  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive 

11.  17  unto  us,  who  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
11.  21  agreat  number  believed,  and  turned  unto 
13.  12  when  he  saw  what  was  done,  believed 
13.  39  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from 
13.  41  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe 

13.  48  as.  .were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed 

14.  1  a.  .multitude  both  of  the  Jews,  .believed 

14.  23  to  the  Lord,  on  whom  they  believed 

15.  5  there  rose  up  certain  of.  .which  believed 
15.    7  Gentiles . .  word  of  the  gospel,  and  believe 

15.  11  we  believe  that  through  the  grace  of  the 
:6.  31  they  said,  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 

16.  34  believing  in  God  with  all  his  house 

17.  12  Therefore  many  of  them  believed  ;  also 

17.  34  men  clave  unto  him,  and  believed 

iS.    8  believed  on  the  Lord .  .hearing believed 

18.  27  helped  them  much  which  had  believed 

19.  2  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  believed? 
19.  4  they  should  believe  on  him  which  should 
19.  18  many  that  believed  came,  and  confessed 

21.  20  thousands  of  Jews  there  are  which  believe 

21.  25  As  touching  the  Gentiles  which  believe 

22.  19  beat  in  every  synagogue,  .that  believed 
24.  14  believing  all  things  which  are  written 

26.  27  believest  thou. . I  know.. thou  believest 

27.  25  be  of  good  cheer :  for  I  believe  God 
Rom.  1.  16  power  of  God.  .every  one  that  believeth 

3.  22  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe 

4.  3  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was 
4.    5  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the 

4.  11  he  might  be  the  father  otallthem  that  be. 
4.  17  before  him  whom  he  believed,  (even)  God 
4.  18  Who  against  hope  believed  in  hope,  that 
4.  24  if  we  believe  on  him  that  raised  up  Jesus 
6.    8  we  believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with 
9.  33  whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  lie 
10.   4  for  righteousness  to.  .one  that  believeth 
10.    9  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  hath 
10.  10  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto 
10.  11  Whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 
10.  14  theyhavenotbelieved.  .shall  tbeybelievo 
10.  16  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  report? 
13.  11  now  (is)  our  salvation.,  when  we  believed 


BELIEVE 


87 


BELOVED 


Rom  14.    2  one  believeth  that  he  may  eat  all  things 

1  Co.    1.  21  it  pleased  God.,  to  save  them  that  believe 

3.    5  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed 
11.  iS  be  divisions  among  you.  .partly  believeit 

13.  7  Beareth  all  things,  believeth  all  things 

14.  22  not  to  them  that  believe,  .that  believe 

15.  2  are  saved,  .unless  ye  have  believed  iu 
15.  11  they,  so  we  preach,  and  so  ye  believed 

2  Co.  4.  13  I  believed .  .we  also  believe,  and  therefore 
Gal.     2.  16  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ 

3.    6  Even  as  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it 

3.  22  promise,  .be  given  to  them  that  believe 
Eph.    1.  13  in  whom  also,  after  that  ye  believed,  ye 

1. 19  who  believe,  according  to.  .his  mighty 
Phil.    1.  29  not  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  also  to 

1  Th.  1.    7  to  all  that  believe  in  Macedonia  and 

2.  10  behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  believe 
2. 13  effectually  worketh.  .in  you  that  believe 

4.  14  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose 

2  Th.  1.  10 that  believe.. our  testimony.. believed 

2.  11  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie 

2.  12  might  be  damned  who  believed  not  the 

1  Ti.    1.  16  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him 

3.  16  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up 

2  Ti.    1.  12  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am 
Titus  3.    8  they  which  have  believed  in  God  might 
Heb.  4.    3  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest 

11.    6  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that 
Jas.     2.  19  Thou  believest.  .the  devils  also  believe 

2.  23  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was 
1  Pe.  1.   8  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 

1.  21  Who  by  him  do  [believe]  in  God,  that 

2.  6  he  that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 

2.    7  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  (he  is) 
1  Jo.   3.  23  That  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of 

4.  1  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits 

4.  16  we  have  known  and  believed  the  love 

5.  1  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the 

5.    5  he  that  believeth  that  .Jesus  is  the  «  v.  10 
Jude        5  afterward  destroyed  them  that  believed 

4. To  remain  stedfast  in  regard  to,  Trio-Teiuj  els. 

1  Jo.  5.  to  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God 

5. 10  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God 
5.  13  [that  believe  on.,  that  ye  may  believe  on] 

b.To  remain  stedfast  in,  7no-T€uw  eV 

Mark  1.  15  saying,  .repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gospel 

6.  To  remain  stedfast  on,  iriffrevoj  iivi. 

Luke  24.  25  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all 
BELIEVE  not,  to  — 
1.7V)  be  unpersuadedj  airetOta)  apeiiheo. 

John  3.  36  he  that  believeth  notthe  Son  shall  not  see 
Acts  17.    5  the  Jews  [which  believed  not,]  moved 

19.    9  when  divers  were  hardeued,  and  beli.  not 

Rom  11.  30  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not  believed  God 

11.  31  Even  so  have  these  also  now  not  believed 

15.  31  from  them  that  do  not  believe  in  Judea 
Heb.  3.  18  sware  he.  .to  them  that  believed  not? 

11.  31  Rahab  perished  not  with  them  that  bel. 

'2.To  be  without  trust,  airio~T€co  apisteo. 

Marki6. 11  [they,  when  they  had  heard,  .believeduot] 

16.  16  [he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned] 
Luke24.  11  as  idle  tales,  and  they  believed  them  not 

24.  41  while  they  yet  believed  not  for  joy,  and 
Acts  2S.  24  which  were  spoken,  and  some  believedn. 
Rom.  3.    3  what  if  some  did  not  believe?  shall  their 

2  TL    2.  13  If  we  believe  not .  .he  abideth  faithful 
BELIEVE,  them  that  — 

To  be  of  faith,  slvai  vioretos  einai  pisteds. 

Heb.  10.  33  but  of  them  that  believe  to  the  saving  of 

BELIEVED,  most  snrely  — 

To  bear,  carry  fully,  irA-npo<pop4w  plerophoreo. 

Luke  1.    1  which  are  most  surely  believed  among  us 
BELIEVED,  which  — 
Trusting,  trusty,  ttlgtos  pistos. 

Acts  10.  45  they  of  the  circumcision  which  believed 
16.    1  woman, which  was  a  Jewess,  and  believed 
BELIEVER  — 
l.To  trust,  rely  on,  Tvurrevoj  pisteuo. 

Acts   5.  14  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the 
"2. Trusting,  trusty,  tthtt 6s  pistos. 

1  TL    4.  T2  be  thou  an  example  of  the  believers,  in 
BELIEVETH,  he  that  — 

IVIto  is  of  the  faith  of,  6  4k  wI(Ttgq>s. 

Rom.  3.  26  the  justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  J. 
BELIEVETH,  that  or  which  — 
Trusting,  trusty,  ttkttos  pistos. 

2  Co.   6. 15  what  part  hath  he  that  believeth  with  an 
1  Ti.    4.    3  of  them  which  believe  and  know  the 

4. 10  the  Saviour.,  specially  of  those  that  believe 
5. 16  If  any  man  or  woman  that  [believeth] 

BELIEVETH  not,  that  — 
Untrusting,  &ttio-tos  apzstos. 

1  Co.  7. 12  If  any  brother  hath  a  wife  that  beli,  not 

7.  13  woman,  .hath  an  husband  that  beli,  not 
10.  27  If  any  of  them  that  believe  not  bid  you 
14.  22  are  for  a  sign,  .to  them  that  believe  not 
14.  22  not  for  them  that  believe  not,  but  for 
14.  24  there  come  iu  one  that  believeth  not,  or 

2  Co.  4.   4  blinded  the  minds  of  them  which  bel.  not 
BELIEVING  — 

I.Tn  trust,  rely  on,  ttuttWu  pisteuo. 

Rom  15.  13  God  of  hope  fill  you  with.,  joy.  .believing 


2.  Trusting,  Trtor6s  pistos. 

Johnso.  27  saith  he.  .be  not  faithless,  but  believing 
i  Ti.   6.    2  they  that  have  believing  masters,  let 

BELL  — 

1.A  Utile  bell,n^D  metsilioth. 

Zechi4.  20  In  that  day  shall  there  be  upon  the  bells 

2. .-I  clock,  bell,  |iDS£j5  paamon. 

Exod  28.  33  bells  of  gold  between  them  round  about 
28.  34  A.. bell  and  a  pomegranate,  .a.. bell 
3g.  25  they  made  bells.,  and  put  the  bells 

39.  26  A  bell  and  a  pomegranate,  a  bell  and  a 

BELLOW,  to  — 

To  sound,  *?ny  tsahal. 

Jer.  50.  11  ye  are  growhfat.  .and  bellow  as  bulls 

BELLOWS  — 

Bellows,  ns?  mappuach. 

Jer.     6.  29  the  bellows  are  burnt,  the  lead  is 

BELLY  — 

1. Belly,  JU2  beten. 

Kum.  5.'  21  the  Lord  doth  make,  .thy  belly  to  swell 
5.  22  make  (thy)  belly  to  swell,  .(thy)  thigh  to 
5.  27  her  belly  shall  swell,  .her  thigh  shall  rot 
Judg.  3.  21  Ehud.. thrust  it  into  his  belly 

3.  22  could  not  draw  the  dagger  out  of  his  belly 
1  Ki.    7.  20  over  against  the  belly  which  (was)  by  the 
Job     3.  11  give  up.  .when  I  came  out  of  the  belly? 
15.    2  and  fill  his  belly  with  the  east  wind? 
15.  35  vanity,  and  their  belly  prepareth  deceit 
20. 15  God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  belly 
20.  20  he  shall  not  feel  quietness  in  his  belly 
20.  23  he  is  about  to  fill  his  belly,  (God)  shall 
32.  19  Behold,  my  belly  (is)  as  wine  (which)  hath 

40.  16  his  force  (is)  in  the  navel  of  his  belly 
Psa.  17.  14  whose  belly  thou  fillest  with  thy  hid 

22.  10  thou  (art)  my  God  from  my  mother's  belly 
31.    9  is  consumed,  .my  soul  and  my  belly 
44.  25  our  belly  cleave  th  unto  the  earth 
Prov.13.  25  the  belly  of  the  wicked  shall  want 

18.    8  go.  .into  the  innermost  parts  of  the  belly 
38.  20  A  man's  belly  shall  be  satisfied  with  the 
20.  27  searching  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly 
20.  30  (do)  stripes  the  inward  parts  of  the  bely 
26.  22  go.. into  the  innermost  parts  of  the  belly 
Song  7.    2  thy  belly  (is  like)  an  heap  of  wheat  set 
Isa.  46.    3  Israel,  which  are  borne  (by  me)  from  the 
Jer.     1.    5  Before  I  formed  thee  iu  the  belly,  I  knew 
Eze.    3.    3  Son  of  man,  cause  thy  belly  to  eat,  and 
Jou.    2.    2  out  of  the  belly  of  hell  cried  I.  .thou 
Hab.  3.  16  When  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled  ;  my 

2. Belly  (of  reptiles),  Jina  gachon. 

Gen.    3.  14  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust 
Lev.  11.  42  "Whatsoever  goeth  upon  the  belly,  .ye 

3. Paunch,  fans  Iceres. 

Jer.    51.  34  be  hath  filled  his  belly  with  my  delicates 

4. Bowels,  D'yp  mehn. 

Song  5.  14  his  belly  (is  as)  bright  ivory  overlaid 
Dan.   2.  32  his  belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass 
Jon.     1.  17  Jonah  was  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  three 
2.    1  Jonah  prayed  uuto  the  LORD,  .out  of  the 

5.  Hollow  place,  n-'p  qobah. 

NUHI25.    8  thrust,  .the  woman  through  her  belly 

6. Belly,  yaovhp  gaster. 

Titus  1.  12  Cretians  (are)  alway  liars,  .slow  bellies 

7.  Belly,  inward  parts,  KotXia  boilia. 

Matt  12  40  as  Jonas  was  three  days,  .whale's  belly 

15.  17  enteieth  in  at  the  mouth,  .into  the  belly 
Mark  7.  19  not  into  his  heart,  but  into  the  belly 
Luke  15.  16  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with 
John  7.  38  out  of  bis  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 
Rom  16.  18  they  that  are  such  serve,  .their own  belly 
1  Co.   6.  13  Meats  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for 
Phil.    3.  19  Whose  end  (is)  destruction,  whose .  .belly 
Rev.  10.  9  it  shall  make  thy  belly  bitter,  but  it  shall 

10.  10  as  soon  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  belly  was 

BELONG  to  cr  unto,  to  — 

To  be,  elfii  cimi. 

Mark  9.  41  because  ye  belong  to  Christ,  verily  I  say 
Luke23.  7  as  soon  as  he  knew  that  he  belonged  unto 
Heb.  5.  14  strong  meat  belongeth  to  them  that  are 

BELONG  to,  things  that  — 
1.  Portion,  njD  manah, 

Esth.  2.    9  with  such  things  as  belonged  to  her,  and 

2. The  things  of  ra  or  ttpoj,  also  gen. 

Luke  9.  10  a  desert  place  belonging  to  the  city  19.  42 

1  Co.  7.  32  He.  .careth  for  the  things  that  belong  to 

[■See  also  Gen.  40.  8 ;  Lev.  27.  24 ;  Deut.  29.  29 ; 

32.  35  ;  Judg.  19.  14;  20.  4 ;  1  Ki.  1.  8  ;  Ezra  10  4 : 

Psa.  3.  8 ;  47.  9 ;  62.  n,  12 ;  68.  20 ;  Prov.  24.  33  ; 

Dan.  9.  7,  8,  9;  Heb.  10.  30.] 

EELOVED  — 

1  To  love,  nnx  aheb. 

Deut2i.  15  If  a  man  have  two  wives,  one  beloved,  and 
2i.  15  have  born  him  children.,  the  beloved  and 
21.  16  he  may  not  make  the  son  of  the  beloved 
Neb.  13.  26  who  was  beloved  of  his  God,  and  God 
Song  1.  14  My  beloved  (is)  uuto  me  (as)  a  cluster  of 
Hos.  3.  1  Go  yet,  love  a  womau  beloved  of  (her) 
Song  1.  16  thou  (art)  fair,  my  beloved,  yea,  pleasant 


2.Loved,  "m  dod. 

Seng  2.   3  so  (is)  my  beloved  among  the  sons 

2.    8  The  voice  of  my  beloved  l  behold,  he 
2.    9  My  beloved  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 
2.  10  My  beloved  spake,  and  said  unto  me.  Rise 
2.  16  My  beloved  (is)  mine,  and  I  (am)  his ;  he 
2.  17  turn,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe 

4.  16  Let  my  beloved  come  into  his  garden 

5.  1  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  O  beloved 
5.    2  the  voice  of  my  beloved  that  knocketh 
5.    4  My  beloved  put  in  his  baud  by  the  hole 
5.    5  I  rose  up  to  open  to  my  beloved  ;  and  my 
5.    6  I  opened  to  my  beloved  ;  but  my  beloved 
5.    8  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  .my  beloved 
5.    9  What . .  thy  beloved  more  than  (another) b. 
5.    9  what,  .thy beloved  more  than(another)br 
5.  10  My  beloved  (is)  white  and  ruddy,  the 

5.  16  This  (is)  my  beloved,  and  this  (is)  my 

6.  1  is  thy  beloved  gone,  .thy  beloved  turned 
6.    2  My  beloved  is  gone  down  into  his  garden 

6.  3  I  (am)  my  beloved's,  and  my  beloved  (is' 

7.  9  like  the  best  wine  for  my  beloved,  that 
7.  10  I  (am)  my  beloved's,  and  his  desire  (is) 
7. 11  Come,  my  beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into 

7.  13  (which)  I  have  laid  up  for  thee,  .beloved 

8.  5  Who  (is)  this,  .leaning  upon  her  beloved? 
8. 14  Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou 

Isa.  5.1a  song  of  my  beloved  touching  his  viney. 
3.  Beloved,  ~\'y.  yedid, 

Deut  33.  12  The  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in 

Psa.  60.  5  That  thy  beloved  may  be  delivered,  save 
108.  6  That  thy  beloved  may  be  delivered  ■  save 
127.    2  (for)  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep 

Jer.  11. 15  What  hath  my  beloved  to  do  in  mine 

4. Desire,  "!£??  machmad. 

Hos.    9.  i6yet  will  I  slay,. the  beloved.. of  their 

5.  To  love  dearly,  ayairdto  agapao. 

Ron:.  9.  25  call,  .her  beloved,  which  was  not  beloved 
Eph.  1.  6  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved 
Col.     3.  12  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved 

1  Th.   1.    4  Knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  election 

2  Th.  2.  13  brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord,  because 
Rev.  20.    9  camp  of  the  saiuts  about,  .beloved  city 

6.  Dearly  beloved,  aya-n-nros  agapetos. 

Matt.  3.  17  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 
12.  18  my  beloved,  in  whom  my  soul  is  well 
17.    5  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 

Mask  1.  11  Thou  art  my  beloved  Sou,  in  whom  I  am 

9.  7  saying,  This  is  my  beloved  Son  :  hear  him 
Luke  3.  22  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son ;  in  thee  I  am 

9.  35  saying,This  is  my  [beloved]  Son  :  hear  him 
20.  13  What  shall  I  do?  I  will  send  my  beloved 
Acts  15.  25  to  send  chosen  men.  .with  our  beloved 
Rom.  1.   7  To  all  that  be  iu  Rome,  beloved  of  God 
1 1.  28  the  election . .  beloved  for  the  fathers' 
16.    8  Greet  Amplias  my  beloved  in  the  Lord 
16.    9  Salute  Urbane .  .and  Stachys  my  beloved 
16.  12  [Salute  the.beloved  Persis,whichlaboured} 
1  Co.  4.  14  but,  as  my  beloved  sons,  I  warn  (you) 
4.  17  Timotheus,  who  is  my  beloved  son 
15.  58  Therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye 
Eph.    6.  21  a  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister 
Phil.   2.  12  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed 
Col.     4.    7  Tychicus.  .beloved  brother,  and  a 

4.   9  Onesimus,  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother 
4.  14  Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  and  Demas 
1  Ti.    6.    2  because  they  are  faithful  and  beloved 
Phm.        2  to  (our)  [beloved]  Apphia,  and  Archippus 

16  but  above  a  servant,  a  brother  beloved 
Heb.  6.    9  But,  beloved,  we  are  persuaded,  .of  you 
Jas.     1.  16  Do  not  err,  my  beloved  brethren 

1.  19  my  beloved  brethren,  let  every  man  be 

2.  5  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren,  Hathnot 

1  Pe.   4.  12  Beloved,  think  it  not  strange  concerning 

2  Pe.   t.  17  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 

3.  1  This  second  epistle,  beloved,  I  now  write 
3.  8  beloved,  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing 
3.  14  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  such 

3.  15  even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul  also 
3.  17  beloved,  seeing  ye  know,  .before,  beware 
1  Jo.    3.    2  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  cf  God 

3.  21  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not 

4.  1  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try 
4.  7  Beloved,  let  us  love  oneauother :  for  love 
4.  11  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also 

3  Jo.         2  Beloved,  I  wish,  .thou  mayest  prosper 

5  Beloved,  thou  doest  faithfully  whatsoever 
11  Beloved,  follow  not  that  which  is  evil 
Jude         3  Beloved,  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to 

17  beloved,  remember  ye  the  words,  .of  the 
20  beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your 

BELOVED,  dearly  — 

1.  Dearly  beloved,  nnr  yediduth. 

Jer.  12.  7  dearly  beloved  of  my  soul  into  the  band 
2.Dearly  beloved,  ayain]r6s  agapetos. 

Rom  12.  10  Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves 

1  Co.  10.  14  Wherefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from 

2  Co.   7.    1  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves 

12.  19  but.  .all  things,  dearly  beloved,  for  your 
Phil.  4.    1  my  brethren  dearly  beloved  and  longed 

4.    1  stand  fast  in  the  Lord, (my)  dearly  beloved 
2TL    1.    2  To  Timothy,  (my)  dearly  beloved  son 
Phm.        1  Philemon  our  dearly  beloved,  and  fellow* 
1  Pe.   2.  11  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  (you)  as 

BELOVED,  well  — 

Dearly  beloved,  ayaTrrjrSs  agapetos. 

Mark  12.    6  Having  yet .  .one  son,  his  well  beloved 


BELOVED 


83 


BENJAMIN 


limn  1 6.    5  Salute  my  well  beloved  Epcnetus,  who  is 
3  Jo.  i  The  elder  unto  the  well  beloved  Gaius 

BELOVED,  greatly  — 
Very  desirable,  n'mon  chamitdoth. 

Dan.  9.  23  for  thou  (art)  greatly  beloved  :  therefore 
10.  11  0  Daniel,  a  man  greatly  beloved 
10.  iq  And  said,  O  man  greatly  beloved,  fear  not 

BEL  SHAZ'-ZAR,  1SK^?3  the  lortfs  leader. 

Son  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  last  of  the  kings  of  Babylon, 

slain  11. c.  550. 

Dan.    s.    1  B.  the  king  made  a  great  feast  to  a 

5     2  B., whiles  he  tasted  the  wine,  commanded 
5    o  Then  was  king  B.  greatly  troubled,  aud 
5.  22  thou  his  son,  O  B.,  hast  not  humbled 
5.  20  Then  commanded  B.,  and  they  clothed 
c  30  In  that  night  was  B.  the  king  of  the  Chal. 

7.  1  In  the  first  year  of  B.  king  of  Babylon 

8.  1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  king  B. 

BEL-TE-SHAZ'  ZAR,  15TK$?^3  the  lord's  leader. 
The  name  given  to  Daniel  by  the  prince  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's eunuchs,  B.C.  550. 

Dan.  1.  7  for  he  gave  unto  Daniel  (the  name)  of  B. 
2.  26  said  to  Daniel  whose  name  (was)  B.,  Art 
4.  8  at  the  last  Dauiel.  .whose  name  (was)  B. 
4.  9  O  B.,  master  of  the  magicians,  because  I 
4.  18  Now  thou,  O  B.  declare  the  interpretation 
4.  19  Then  Dauiel,  whose  name  (was)  B.,  was 
4.  19  The  king  spake,  aud  said,  B.,  let  not  the 

4.  19  B.  answered  aud  said,  My  Lord,  the  dream 

5.  12  Daniel,  whom  the  king  named  B.  :  now 

10.  1  revealed  unto  Daniel,  whose  name  was  B. 

BEMOAN,  to  — 

To  nod,  move,  iu  mid. 

Job   42.  11  they  bemoaned  him,  and  comforted  him 
J  er.   15.    5  O  Jerusalem  ?  or  who  shall  bemoan  thee  ? 
16.    5  neither  go  to  lament  nor  bemoan  them 

22.  10  Weep  ye  uot  for  the  dead,  neither  bemoan 
4S.  17  All  ye  that  are  about  him,  bemoan  him 

Nah.  3.    7  Nineveh  is  laid  waste  :  who  will  bemoan 

BEMOAN  self,  to  — 

To  Hud  or  move  oneself,  iu  nud,  la. 

Jer.  31.  18  I  have.. heard  Ephraira  bemoaning  h. 

BEN,  |3  son,  intelligent. 

A  Levite  set  over  the  service  of  song  in  the  time  of 

David,  B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.15. 18  with  them  their  brethren..  B.,  and  3  aaziel 

BE-NA'-IAH,  in;i3,  n;:?  Jah  is  intelligent. 

\  Son  of  Jehoiadah,  one  of  David's  officers,  B.C.  1042. 

2  Sa.   8. 18  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (was  over)  both 

20.  23  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (was)  over  the 

23.  20  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of  a 

23.  22  These  (things)  did  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
1  Ki.  1.  8  Zadok  the  priest,  and  B.  the  son  of  Jehoia. 
1.  10  Nathan  the  prophet,  and  B.,  and  the 
1.  26  Zadok  the  priest,  aud  B.  the  son  of  Jeh. 
1.32  David  said,  Call  me  Zadok  the  priest.  .&  B. 
1.  36  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  answered  the  king 
1.  38  So  Zadok  the  priest,  .and  B.  the  son  of 

1.  44  the  king  hath  sent. .  B. ,  the  son  of  Jehoiada 

2.  25  king  Solomon  sent  by  the  hand  of  B.  the 
2.  29  Then  Solomon  sent  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
2.  30  B.  came  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 

2.  30  B.  brought  the  king  word  again,  saying 
2.  34  So  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  went  up,  and 
2.  35  the  king  put  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
2.  46  So  the  king  commanded  B.  the  sou  of 
1  Ki.   4.    4  B.  the  sou  of  Jehoiada  (was)  over  the 
i  Ch.  11,  22  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of  a 

11.  24  These  (things)  did  B.  the  sou  of  Jehoiada 
18.  17  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (was)  over  the 

27.    5  The  third  captain  of  the  host.. (was)  B.  the 

27.    6  This  (is  that)  B. ,( who  was)  mighty  (among) 

?..  One  of  David's  valiant  men  from  Pirathon,  B.C.  1042. 

a  Sa,  23.  30  [one  of  the  thirty].  .B.  the  Pirathonite 

1  Ch.  1 1.  .51  children  ol  Benjamin,  B.  the  Pirathonite 

27, 14  The  eleventh  (captain.. was)  B.  the  Pira. 

3.  Head  ol  a  family  of  Simeon,  b.o.  1050. 

1  Ch,   4.  36  Asalah,  and  Adiel,  and  Jesimiel,  aud  B. 
■1.  One  of  David's  priests  in  Jerusalem,  B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.15. lS  wit"  them  their  brethren.  .B.,  and  Maas. 
15.  20  Maaselah,  and  P..,  with  psalteries  on 

15.  24  B.,  and  Eliezer,  the  priests,  did  blow  with 

16.  5  Mattithiah,  and  Eliab,  and  !'..,  and  Obed. 
16.   6  B.  also  and  Jahaziel  the  priests  with 

il  her  Of  one  Of  David's  counsellors,  B.C.  1040. 
1  Ch,  27.  ,)  Ahithophel  (wast  Jehoiada  the  son  of  B. 
C.  The  grandfather  of  Jchazicl,  B.O.  896. 

1  !i   io,  14  Then  upon  Jahaziel.  .the  son  of  B.,  the 

1    rtte  overseer  of  the  temple  and  the  offerings  in 

Lab  ■ b  0 

Ch.  jx.  13  Mahath,  and  Il...overseersundcrthe hand 
B.  One  of  the  family  of  Parosh,  B.o.  456. 

l! I  Parosh.. Malchijah,  and  B. 

D    \  ton  ol  Pahath-moab,  B.o.  456. 

I    P8  10.  30  sons  of  Pahath-moab  ;  Adna.  .('la-lal,  B. 

10.  A  son  of  Bani,  B.C.  456. 

Ezra  to.  35  [Of  the  sons  of  Bant;  Maadai]  .  B  ,  Bi  di  ill 

11.  A  son  of  Nebo,  n.c  456. 

Ezra  10.  43  Of  the  sons  of  Nebo;  Jeiel.  .and  Joel,  B 


12.  Father  of  Pelatiah,  a  prince  of  Judah,  B.C.  594. 
Eze    11.    1  among  whom.  .Pelatiah  the  sou  of  B. 
11.  13  that  Pelatiah  the  son  of  B.  died.    Then 

BEN  AM'-MI,  V?H  I?  son  of  my  people. 

The  son  whom  Lot's  younger  daughter  bore  to  him. 

He  was  father  of  the  Ammonites,  B.C.  1819. 

Gen.  19.  38  also  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  B. 

BENCH  — 

Board,  bench,  bHjj  qeresh. 
Eze.  27. 


6  the  Ashurites  have  made  thy  benches 


Isa. 
Jer. 


Lam. 


BEND,  to  — 

l.Tfc  tread,  Tpn  darak. 

Psa.    7. 12  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  aud  made  it  ready 
11.    2  For,  lo,  the  wicked  bend,  .bow,  they  make 

37.  14  The  wicked,  .have beut their  bow,  to  cast 
58.    7  he  bendeth.  .his  arrows,  let  them  be  as 
64.    3  bend,  .their  arrows,  .bitter  words 

5.  28  tbeir  bows  bent,  their  horses'  hoofs  shall 
21. 15  they  fled,  .from  the  beut  bow,  aud  from 
46.    q  Lydians,  that  handle  (and)  bend  the  bow 
50.  14  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow,  shoot  at  her 

50.  29  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow,  camp  against  it 

51.  3  Against  (him  that)  bend,  let  the  archer  b. 

2.  4  He  hath  bent  his  bow  like  au  euemy 

3.  12  He  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  set  me  as  a 
Zech.  9.  13  When  I  have  bent  Judah  for  me 

2.  To  cause  to  tread.,  t\T\  darak,  5. 

Jer.     9.    3  they  beud  their  tongues  (like)  their  bow 

3.  To  bend,  bow,  }£3  kajihan. 

Eze.  17.    7  this  vine  did  bend  her  roots  toward  him 

BENDING  — 

To  bow  down,  nnz>  shacharh. 

Isa.  60.  14  sons  also,  .shall  come  bending  unto  thee 

BENEATH  — 

I. Beneath,  bow,  hk?  mattah. 

Exod26.  24  they  shall  be  coupled  together  beneath 
27.    5  thou  shalt  put  it  under . .  the  altar  beneath 
36.  29  they  were  coupled  beneath,  and  coupled 

38.  4  under  the  compass  thereof  beneath  unto 
Deut28.  13  thou  shalt  not  be  beneath  ;  if  that  thou 
Prov.15.  24  that  he  may  depart  from  hell  beneath 
Jer.  31.  37  the  foundations,  .searched  out  beneath 

2.  Under,  nrui  tachath. 

Exod32.  19  and  brake  them  beneath  the  mount 
Deut33-  13  Blessed,  .for  the  deep  that  coucheth  be. 

S.Fro?n  under,  nnn?  mittachath. 

Exod2o.    4  heaven  above,  or.  .in  the  earth  beneath 
Deut.  4.  18  fish  that  (is)  in  the  waters  beneath  the 

4.  39  heaven  above,  and  upon  the  earth  beneath 

5.  8  heaven  above,  or.  .in  the  earth  beneath 
Job   18. 16  His  roots  shall  be  dried  up  beneath 

4.  Downwards,  down,  Karoi  kato. 

Mark  14.  66  as  Peter  was  beneath  in  the  palace,  there 
John  8.  23  Ye  are  from  beneath  ;  I  am  from  above 
Acts    2.  19  I  will  show,  .sigus  in  the  earth  beneath 

BE-NE  BE'-RAK,  P"i3"\i3  sons  of  lightning. 

A  city  in  Dan,  near  Ashdod. 

Josh.  19.  45  [coast  of  their  inheritance].  ,Jehud..B. 

BENEFACTOR  — 

Well-doer,  zvspy4rr\s  cuergetes. 

Luke22.  25  exercise  authority .  .are  called  benefactors 

BENEFIT  — 

l.Deed,  ^4D|  geniul. 

2  Ch.  32.  25  according  to  the  benefit  (done)  unto  him 
Psa,  103/  2  Bless  the  Lord-  . .  forget  not  all  his  benefits 

2.  Deed,  boafl  tagmul. 

Psa.  116. 12  I  render  unto  the  LORD,  .all  his  benefits 
Z.Good,  ayaQos  agathos. 

Phm.  14  that  thy  benefit  should  not  be  as  it  were 
i.Good  work,  well-doing,  ei/epyecrla  euergesia. 

1  Ti.  6.  2  because  they  are . .  partakers  of  the  benefit 
S.Grace,  x&P1?  eharis. 

2  Co.    1.  15  that  ye  might  have  a  second  benefit 
BENEFIT,  to  — 

To  do  good,  aa;  yatab,  5. 

Jer.  18.  10  wherewith  I  said  I  would  benefit  them 

BE-NE  JA-A'-KAN,  jjjjy  *n  sons  of  intelligence. 
A  tribe  that  gave  its  name  to  several  wells  around  the 
27th  statiou  of  the  Israelites,  aud  16th  from  Sinai.     It 
lay  between  Moseroth  and  Horagidgad. 

Num.  33.  31  they  departed  from  Moseroth,  aud  B. 
33.  32  they  removed  from  B.,  and  encamped  at 
BENEVOLENCE  — 
Good  mind,  e&voia  eimoia. 

1  Co.    7.    3  render  unto  the  wife  due  benevolence 
BEN  HA'-DAD,  inn  |3  son  of  Ifadad. 

1.  A  king  of  Syria,  son  of  Tabrimon.    He  made  a  league 
with  Asa,  king  of  Judah,  and  invaded  Israel,  B.C.  951. 

1  Ki.  15.  18  king  Asa  sent  them  to  B.,  the  son  of 

15.  20  So  B.  hearkened  unto  king  Asa,  and  sent 

2  Ch.io.    2  scut  to  B.  king  of  Syria,  that  dwell  at 

16.  4  B.  hearkened  unto  king  Asa,  and  sent 

2,  Another  king  of  Syria,  who  reigned  in  the  time  of 
I  Allah  king  of  Israel,  B.o.  901. 


1  Ki.  20.    1  B.  the  king  of  Syria  gathered  all  his 

20.    2  said  unto  him,  Thus  said  B.,  thy  silver 
20.    5  Thus  speaketh  B.,  saying,  Although  I 
20.    9  lie  said  unto  the  messengers  of  B.,  Tell 
20.  10  B.  sent  unto  him,  and  said,  The  gods 
20.  16  B.  (was)  drinking  himself  drunk  in 
20.  17  B.  sent  out,  aud  they  told  him,  saying 
20.  20  B.  the  king  of  Syria  escaped  on  an 
20.  26  it  came  to  pass,  .that  B.  numbered 
20.  30  B.  fled,  and  came  into  the  city,  into 
20.  32  Thy  servant  B.  saith,  I  pray  thee,  let  me 
20.  33  they  said,  Thy  brother  B.     Then  he  said 
26.  33  Then  B.  came  forth  to  him  ;  and  he 

2  Ki.   6.  24  it  came  to  pass  after  this,  that  B.  king  of 

8.    7  B.  the  king  of  Syria  was  sick  :  and 
8.    9  Thy  son  B.  king  of  Syria  hath  sent  me 

3.  Son  of  Hazael,  who  succeeded  him,  B.C.  842. 

2  Ki.  13.    3  into  the  hand  of  B.  the  son  of  Hazael 
13.  24  and  B.  his  sou  reigned  in  his  stead 
13.  25  Jehoash.  .again  out  of  the  hand  of  B. 
Amos    1.    4  which  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  B. 

4.  A  general  title  of  the  kings  of  Damascus. 

Jer.   49.  27  it  shall  consume  the  palaces  of  B. 

BEN  HA'-IL,  ^:0"H  strong,  valiant. 

A  prince  of  Judah  under  Jehoshaphat,  B.C.  912. 

2  Ch.  17.    7  he  ?ent  to  his  princes,  .to  B.,  and  to  0. 
BENHA'-NAN,  Jan-fa  very  gracious. 
A  son  of  Shimon,  descended  from  Jephunneh.B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  20  the  sons  of  Shimon.  .B.,  and  Tilon 
EE-NI'-NU,  13\]3  posterity. 
A  Levite  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant. 

Neh.  10.  13  [And  their  brethren].  .Hodijah,  Bani,  B. 
BEN-JA-'MTN,  ppJJ?  son  of  the  right  hand. 

1.  The  youngest  sou  of  Jacob,  and  the  only  one  born  in 
Canaan.  His  birth  occurred  a  short  distance  from 
Bethlehem,  and  where  his  mother  Rachel  died,  naming 
him  with  her  last  breath  Benoni  "son  of  my  sorrow." 
This  name  was  changed  by  Jacob  into  Benjamin  or 
Binyamin,  B.C.  1732. 

Gen.  35.  18  but  his  father  called  him  B. 

35.  24  The  sous  of  Rachel ;  Joseph  and  B. 

42.    4  B.,  Joseph's  brother,  Jacob  seut  not  with 

42.  36  Simeon  (is)  not,  and  ye  will  take  B. 

43.  14  may  send  away  your  other  brother,  aud  B. 
43.  15  took  double  money  in  their  baud,  and  B. 
43.  16  when  Joseph  saw  B.  with  them,  he  said 
43.  29  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw.  .B. 

43.  34  B.'s  mess  was  five  times  so  much  as  any 

44.  12  and  the  cup  was  found  in  B.'s  sack 

45.  12  youreyessee,  andtheeyesofmy brother B. 
45.  14  he  fell  upon  his  In-other  B.'s  neck,  and 
45.  14  and  B.  wept  upon  his  neck 

45.  22  but  to  B.  he  gave  three  hundred  (pieces) 

46.  19  of  Rachel,  Jacob's  wife  ;  Joseph  aud  B. 
46.  21  the  sons  of  B.  (were)  Belah,  and  Becher 
49.  27  B.  shall  ravin  as  a*wolf :  iu  the  morning 

Exod.  1.    3  [children  of  Israel],  .Issachar,Zebulun..l; 
Deut  33.  12  of  B.  he  said,  The  beloved  of  the  Lord 
1  Ch.  2.    2  [sons  of  Israel]. .  Dau,  Joseph,  and  B. 
7.    6  of  B.  ;  Bela,  and  Becher,  and  Jediael 

2.  The  tribe  springing  from  Benjamin  as  well  as  the 
district  occupied  by  it  are  frequently  spoken  of  by  this 
name. 

Num.  1.  11  of  B.  ;  Abidan  the  son  of  Gideoni. 

1.  36  Of  the  children  of  B.,  by  their  generations 

1.  37  of  the  tribe  of  B. . .  thirty  and  five  thons. 

2.  22  the  tribe  of  B.  :  and  the  captain  of  the 
2.  22  sons  of  B.  (shall  be)  Abidan  the  sou  of 
7.  60  Abidan.  .prince  of  the  children  of  B. 

10.  24  over  the  host  of  the  tribe  of.  .B.  (was) 
13.    9  of  the  tribe  of  B.,  Palti  the  son  of  Raphu 
26.  38  The  sons  of  B.  after  their  families  :  of 
26.  41  These,  .the  sons  of  B.  after  their  families 
34.  21  of  the  tribe  of  B.,  Elidad  the  son  of  Cliis. 

Deut 27.  12  These  shall  stand.. Joseph,  and  B. 

Josh.iS.  11  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  B. 
18.  20  This,  .the  inheritenceof  the  children  of  B. 
18.  21  the  cities  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  B. 

18.  28  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  B. 
2i.    4  out  of  the  tribe  of  B.,  thirteen  cities 
21. 17  out  of  the  tribe  of  B.,  Gibeon  with  her 

Judg.  1.  21  the  children  of  B.  did  not  drive  out 

1.  21  Jebusites  dwell  with  the  children  of  B. 
5.  14  after  thee,  B.,  among  thy  people  :  out  of 
10.    9  Amnion  passed .  .to  fight  also  against. .  B. 

19.  14  them.  .byGibeah,  which (belongeth) to  B. 

20.  3  Now  the  children  of  B.  heard  that  the 
20.   4  I  came  intoGibcah  that  (belongeth)  to  P. 
20.  10  may  do,  when  they  come  to  Gibeah  of  B. 
20.  12  seut  men  through  all  the  tribe  of  B. 

20.  13  the  children  of  B.  would  not  hearken 
20.  14  the  children  of  B.  gathered  themselves 
20.  15  the  children  of  B.  were  numbered  at 

20. 17  the  men  of  Israel,  besides  B.,  were 

20. 18  to  the  battle  against  the  children  of  B.  ? 
20.  20  men  of  Israel  went  out  to  battle  against  B. 
20.  21  the  children  of  B.  came  forth  out  of 

20.  23  shall  I  go . .  against  the  children  of  B. 
20.  24  came  near  against  the  childreu  of  B. 
20.  25  B.  went  forth  against  them  out  of  Gibeah 
20.  28  shall  I.  .go  out  to  battle  against.  .B. 
20.  30  Israel  went  up  against  the  children  of  R 
20.  31  the  childreu  of  B.  went  out  against  the 
20.  32  the  children  of  B.  said,  They  (are)  smitten 
20.  35  the  Lord  smote  IJ.  before  Israel:  and 
20.  36  the  children  of  B.  saw  that  they  were 
20.  39  B  began  tu  smite  (and)  kill  of  the  men 


BENJAMIN 


89 


BEROTHAH 


J  udg  20.  4 1  the  men  of  B.  were  amazed  :  for  they  saw 
20.  44  there  fell  of  B.  eighteen  thousand  men 
20.  46  So  that  all  which  fell  that  day  of  B. 

20.  48  turned  again  upon  the  children  of  B. 

21.  1  There  shall  not  any  of  us  give,  .unto  B. 
si.    6  Israel  repented  them  for  B.  then-  brother 
21.  13  to  speak  to  the  children  of  B.  that  (were) 
2i.  14  B.  came  again  at  that  time  ;  and 

21.  15  the  people  repented  them  for  B  ,  because 
21.  16  seeing  the  women  are  destroyed  out  of  B..' 
21.  17  inheritauce  for  them  that  be  escaped  of  B. 
21.  18  Cursed  (be)  he  that  giveth  a  wife  to  B. 
21.  20  they  commanded  the  children  of  B. 
21.  21  daughters  of  Shiloh, and  go  to.  .land  of  B. 
21.  23  the  children  of  B.  did  so,  and  took 

1  Sa.  4.  12  there  ran  a  man  of  B.  out  of  the  army 

9.    1  there  was  a  man  of  B.,  whose  name 
9.  16  send  thee  a  man  out  of  the  land  of  B. 
9.  21  least  of  all  the  families  of  the  tribe  of  B.  ? 
10.    2  Rachel's  sepulchre,  in  the  border  of  B.  at 
10.  20  Israel  to  come  near,  the  tribe  of  B.  was 

10.  21  When  he  had  caused  the  tribe  of  B.  to 
13.    2  were  with  Jonathan  iu  Gibeah  of  B. 

13-  15  gat  him  up  from  Gilgal  unto  Gibeah  of  B. 

13.  r6  Saul,  and  Jonathan. .abode  in  Gibeah  of  B. 

14.  16  the  watchmen  of  Saul  in  Gibeah  of  B. 

2  Sa.   2.    9  made  him  king  over  Gilead.  .and  over  B. 

2.  15  there,  .went  over  by  number  twelve  of  B. 

2.  25  the  children  of  B.  gathered  themselves 
2  31  the  servants  of  David  had  smitten  of  B. 

3.  19  Abner  also  spake  in  the  ears  of  B. 

3.  19  that  seemed  good  to  the  whole  house  of  B. 

4.  2  Rimmon  a  Beerothite,of  the  children  of  B. 
4.    2  for  Beeroth  also  was  reckoned  to  B. 

19. 17  And.  .a  thousand  men  of  B.  with  him 
21.  14  buried  they  in  the  country  of  B.  in  Zelah 
23.  29  Ribai  out  of  Gibeah  of  the  children  of  B. 

1  Ki.   4.  1 8  Shimei  the  son  of  Elah  in  B. 

12.  21  Rehoboam.  .assembled  all.. with.  .B. 
12.  23  Speak.. unto  all  the  house  of  Judah  and  B. 

15.  22  king  Asa  built  with  them  Geba  of  B. 
i  Ch.  6.  60  out  of  the  tribe  of  B. ;  Geba  with  her 

6.  65  they  gave,  .out  of  the  tribe,  .of  B.,  these 
8.    1  B.  begat  Bela  his  first  born,  Ashbel  the 

8.  40  All  these  (are)  of  the  sons  of  B. 

9*.    3  in  Jerusalem  dwelt . .  of  the  children  of  B. 

9.  7  of  the  sons  of  B.  ;  Sallu  the  son  of  Mes. 

11.  31  of  Gibeah.  .to  the  children  of  B.,  Benaiah 

12.  2  armed  with  bows . .  of  Saul's  brethren  of  B. 
12.  16  there  came  of  the  children  of  B. .  .unto 
12.  29  of  the  children  of  B. .  .three  thousand 
21.   6  Levi  and  B.  counted  he  not  among  them 
27.  21  of  B.;  Jaasiel  the  son  of  Abner 

2  Ch.  11.    1  Rehoboam.  .gathered  of  the  house  of.  .B. 

11.    3  Speak,  .to  all  Israel  in  Judah  and  B. 
11.  10  which  (are)  in  Judah  and  hi  B.  fenced 
ai.  12  made  them,  .strong,  having.  .B.  ou  his 
11.  23  dispersed,  .his  children  throughout.  .B. 

14.  8  out  of  B. .  .two  hundred  and  fourscore  th. 

15.  2  Hear  ye  me,  Asa,  and  all  Judah  and  B. 
15.    8  put  away  the.. idols  out  of .  .Judah  and  B. 
15.    9  he  gathered  all  Judah  and  B.,  and  the 
17.  17  of  B. ;  Eliada  a  mighty  man  of  valour 
25.    5  captains  over  thousands . .  throughout . .  B. 

31.  1  threw  down,  .the  altars  out  of  all.  .B. 
34.  9  the  Levites.  .had  gathered,  .of  all.  .B. 
34.  32  he  caused  all  that  were.  .in.  .B.  to  stand 

Ezra  1.  5  Then  rose  up . .  chief  of  the  fathers  of . .  B. 
4.    1  when  the  adversaries  of  Judah  and  B. 

10.  9  the  men  of .  ,B.  gathered  themselves 
Nell.  11.    4  at  Jerusalem  dwelt,  .of .  .children  of  B. 

11.  7  these  (are)  the  sons  of  B.  ;  Sallu  the  son 
ir.  31  The  children  also  of  B. .  .at  Michmash 
11.  36  And  of  the  Levites  (were)  divisions.,  in  B. 

Psa.  68.  27  There(is)littleB...theirruler,  theprinces 
80.    2  Before  Ephraim  and  B. .  .stir  up  thy 

Jer.  1.  1  of  the  priests  that  (were) .  .in  the  land  of  B. 
6.  iO  ye  children  of  B.,  gather  yourselves  to 
17.  26  they  shall  come,  .from  the  land  of  B. 

32.  8  Buy  my  field . .  which  (is)  in . .  B.  :  for  the 

32.  44  and  take  witnesses  in  the  land  of  B. 

33.  13  in  the  land  of  B. .  .shall  the  flocks  pass 
37. 12  Jeremiah  went,  .into  the  land  of  B. 

Eze.  48.  22  the  border  of  Judah  and  the  border  of  B. 
48.  23  from  the  east  side  unto  the  west  side,  B. 
48.  24  by  the  border  of  B. . .  Simeon  (shall  have) 
48.  32-one  gate  of  B.,  one  gate  of  Dan 

Kos.    5.    8  cry  aloud  (at)  Beth-aven,  after  thee,  O  B. 

Obad.      19  of  Samaria ;  and  B.  (shall  possess)  Gilead 

Acts  13.  21  S.  the  son  of  C,  a  man  of  the  tribe  of  B. 

Rom.  11.    1  I  also  am  an  Israelite,  .(of)  the  tribe  of  B. 

Vhil.    3.    5  Circumcised  the  eighth  day.  .tribe  of  B. 

Rev.    7.    8  of  the  tribe  of  B.  (were)  sealed  twelve 

The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of  Benja- 
min:—Ai,  Aja,  Aiath,  Ajalon,  Alemeth,  Allon-bachuth, 
Almon,  Ammah,  Anauiah,  Anathoth,  Aphrah,  Avim, 
Baaltamar,  Baburim,  Beeroth,  Beth-Axabah,  Beth- 
Aven,  Beth-el,  Beth-Haccerem,  Beth-Hoglah,  Beth- 
Horou  (the  lower),  Beth-Phage,  Bethany,  Charashim, 
Chepar  Haamonai,  Chephirah,  Eleph,  En-rogel,  En- 
shemesh,  Emmaus,  Ephraim,  Gaba,  Gallim,  Gareb, 
Gebim,  Giah,  Gibeah,  Gibeon,  Gidom,  Gihon,  Gilgal, 
Gittaim,  Goath,  Hadid,  Hazor,  lielkath-hazzurim, 
Jebus,  Jericho,  Jerusalem,  Keziz,  Kirioth,  Luz,  Mad- 
men, Maktesh,  "Michmas,  Migron,  Millo,  Mizpah,  Moza, 
Naioth,  Neballat,  Nephtoah,  Nob,  Ono,  Ophel,  Ophni, 
Ophrah,  Parah,  Ramah,  Rekem,  Sechu,  Shaveh.  Shen, 
Shual,  Silla,  Taralah,  Zalmon,  Zeboim,  Zelah,  Zelzah, 
Zemaraim,  &c. 
3.  Great  grandson  of  Benjamin. 

1  Ch.   7.  to  The  sons  also  of. . Jeush,  and  B.,  and 

12 


4.  A  descendant  of  Harim. 

Ezra  10.  32  B.,  Malluch,  (and)  Shemariah 

5.  One  who  took  part  in  repairing  the  wall,  B.C.  550.- 

Neh.    3.  23  After  him  repaired  B.  and  Hashub 

6.  One  who  took  part  in  purifying  the  wall.  B.C.  550. 

Neh.  12.  34  Judah,  and  B.,  and  Shemaiah,  and  Jer. 

7.  One  of  the  gates  of  Jerusalem. 

Jer.  20.    2  the  stocks  that  (were)  in  the.  .gate  of  B. 

37.  13  And  when  he  was  in  the  gate  of  B.,  a 

38.  7  the  king  then  sitting  in  the  gate  of  B. 
Zech.14.  10  from  B's.  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first 

BEN-JA-MITE,  TErjrrja  belonging  to  Benjamin. 
Patronymic  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin. 

Judg.  3.  15  Ehud  the  son  of  Gera,  a  B.,  a  man  left 

19.  16  but  the  men  of  the  place  (were)  B. 

20.  35  the  children  of  Israel  destroyed  of  the  B. 
20.  36  the  men  of  Israel  gave  place  to  the  B. 
20.  40  the  B.  looked  behind  them,  and,  behold 
20.  43  (Thus)  they  inclosed  the  B.  round  about 

1  Sa.   9.    1  a  B.,  a  mighty  man  of  power 

9.    4  he  passed  through  the  land  of  the  B. 

9.  21  (Am)  not  I  a  B.,  of  the  smallest  of  the 

22.    7  Hear  now,  ye  B.  ;  will  the  son  of  Jesse 

2  Sa.  16.  11  how  much  more  now  (may  this)  B.  (doit)? 

19.  16  Shimei  the  son  of  Gera,  a  B. .  .came  down 

20.  1  Sheba,  the  son  of  Bichri,  a  B.  ;  and  he 

]  Ki.  2.    8  Shimei  the  son  of  Gera,  a  B.  of  Bahurim 
1  Ch.27.  12  ninth.  .Abiezer  the  Anetothite,  of  the  B. 
Esth.  2.    5  Shiniei,  the  son  of  Kish,  a  B. 
Psa.     7.   title,  concerning  the  words  of  Cash  the  B 

BE-NO,  '133  Ms  son. 

A  descendant  of  Merari,  son  of  Levi,  B.C.  1000. 
1  C'h.24.  26  the  sons  of  Jaaziah;  B. 

24.  27  The  sons  of  Merari  by  Jaaziah  ;  B.,  and 

BEN  O'-NI,  *3lM"I2  son.  of  my  sorrow. 

The  name  given  by  Rachel  to  her  second  son,  B.C.  1732. 

Gen.  35. 18  it  came  to  pass,  .she  called  his  name  B. 
BENT,  to  be  — 
To,  xb?  tola. 

Hos.  11.    7  my  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  from 

BEN  ZO'-HETH,  nnii  }3  corpulent,  strong. 

A  sou  of  Ishi,  a  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb 

the  son  of  Jephunneh,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  20  the  sons  of  Ishi  (were)  Zoheth,  and  B. 

BE'-ON,  [ya  lord  or  Jioitse  of  On. 

A  place  E.'of  the  Jordan,  doubtless  a  contraction  of 

Baal-meon.     Compare  verse  38.     Now  Main. 

N1UII32.    3  Elealeh,  and  Shebam,  and  Nebo,  and  B. 

BE'-OR,  "nya  shepherd. 

1.  Father  of  Bela  the  first  king  of  Edom,  B.C.  1600. 

Gen.  36.  32  Bela  the  son  of  B.  reigned  in  Edom 
1  Ch.   1.  43  Bela  the  son  of  B.:  and  the  name  of  his 

2.  Father  of  Balaam  the  prophet,  B.C.  1510. 

Xum22.  5  messengers .  .unto  Balaam  the  son  of  B. 
24.  3  Balaam  the  son  of  B.  hath  said,  and  the 
24.  15  Balaam  the  son  of  B.  hath  said,  and  the 
31.    8  Balaam  also  the  son  of  B.  they  slew  with 

Deut  23.    4  hired  against  thee  Balaam  the  son  of  B. 

Josh. 13.  22  Balaam  also  the  son  of  B.,the  soothsayer 
24.    9  called  Balaam  the  son  of  B.  to  curse  you 

Mic,    6.    5  remember  now . .  what  Balaam . .  son  of  B. 
BE'-RA,  IH2  gift. 
A  king  of  Sodom  in  the  time  of  Abram,  B.C.  1917. 

Gen.  14.    2  made  war  with  B.  king  of  Sodom,  and 

BE-RA'-CHAH,  niqs  blessing. 

1.  One  who  joined'  David  at  Ziklag,  B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  12.    3  The  chief  (was)  Ahiezer,  then  Joash..B. 

2.  A  valley  near  Tekoah,  in  the  S.  of  Judah  (in  2  Ch. 
20.  26  the  origin  of  the  name  "valley  of  blessing"  is 
given).  The  name  BercikiU  still  survives  in  a  valley 
between  Tekua  and  the  main  road  from  Bethlehem  to 
Hebron. 

2  Ch.  20.  26  they  assembled,  .in  the  valley  of  B. 

20.  26  the  same  place  was  called,  The  valley  of  B. 

BE-RA'-IAH,  h;k"J2  Jah  is  maker. 
A  son  of  Shimhi,  a  Benjamite,  B.C.  1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  21  B.,  and  Shimrath,  the  sons  of  Shimhi 
BE-RE'-A,  fiepota. 

A  city  in  the  S.  of  Macedonia,  now  called  Yerria  or 
Kara-verria,  and  situated  on  the  E.  slope  of  the  Olym- 
pian range. 

Acts  17.  10  brethren . .  sent  away . .  Silas  by  night . .  B. 
17.  13  thewordofGodwaspreachedof  Paul  at  B. 
20.    4  accompanied  him  into  Asia,  Sopaterof  B. 
BEREAVE,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  lack,  "ipn  chaser,  3. 

Eccl.   4.    8  I  labour,  and  bereave  my  soul  of  good 
l.To  enfeebU,  cause  to  stumble,  bws  kashal,  3. 

Eze.  36.  14  neither  bereave  thy  nations  any  more 
3. To  bereave,  moke  childless,  Vyj  shakol,  3. 
Gen.  42.  36  Me  have  ye  bereaved.  .Joseph  (is)  not 
Lam.    1.  20  abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home 
Eze.     5.  17  evil  beasts,  and  they  shall  bereave  thee 
36.  12  thou  shalt  no  more  henceforth  bereave 
36.  13  thou,  .hast  bereaved  thy  nations 
36.  14  neither  bereave  thy  nations  any  more 
Hos.   9. 12  they  bring  up.  .yet' will  I  bereave 


BEREAVE  of  children,  to  — 

To  bereave,  make  childless,  hoy  shakol,  3. 

Jer.   15.    7  I  will  bereave,  .of  children,  I  will  destroy 

BEREAVED,  to  be  — 

To  be  bereaved,  Via  shakol. 

Gen.  43. 14  If  I  be  bereaved.  .1  am  bereaved 

BEREAVED  (of  children)  — 
Bereavedj  713S'  shakkvh 

Jer.  18.  21  let  their  wives  be  bereaved  of  their  child. 

Hos.  13.    8  abear  (that  is)  bereaved. .and  will  rend 

BE-RECH'-IAH,  n;3"ia,  ^rrriz,  Jah  is  blessing. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah,  B.C.  520. 

1  Ch.  3.  20  And  Hashubah,  and  Ohel,  and  B. 

2.  Father  of  Asaph  the  chief  singer,  B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  6.  39  (even)  A.  the  son  of  B.,  the  son  of  Shimea 
15.  17  of  his  brethren,  A.  the  son  of  B. ;  and  of 

3.  A  Levite  who  lived  near  Jerusalem,  B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  16  B.  the  son  of  Asa,  the  son  of  Elkanah 

4.  A  Levite,  one  of  the  tabernacle  doorkeepers. 

1  Ch.15.  23  B.  and  Elkanah  (were)  doorkeepers  for 

5.  An  Ephraimite  in  the  time  of  Pekah,  B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.28.  12  certain  of  the  heads.  .B.  the  son  of  Mes. 

6.  Father  of  Meshullam  who  assisted  in  repairing  the 
wall  of  Jerusalem,  B.C.  520. 

Neh    3.    4  next,  .repaired  Meshullam  the  son  of  B. 
3.  30  After,  .repaired  Meshullam  the  son  of  B. 

6.  18  the  daughter  of  Meshullam  the  son  of  B. 
BE'-RED,  Ti3  seed  place. 

1.  A  place  in  S.  of  Canaan,  between  which  and  Kadesh 
lay  the  well  La-hai-roi.  The  Peshito  gives  Gadar= 
Gerar  (.');  the  Arabic,  Yarad ;  Onkelos,  Chagra.  It  is 
perhaps  el-Khiilasah,  12  miles  S.  of  Beersheba. 

Gen.  16.  14  behold,  (it  is)  between  Kadesh  and  B. 

2.  An  Ephraimite,  perhaps  the  same  as  Becher,  B.C.  1680. 

1  Ch.  7.  20  the  sons  of  Ephrairn  ;  Shuthelah,  and  B. 
BE'-RI,  n3  ezepounder. 
A  son  of  Zophah,  an  Asherite,  B.C.  1570. 

1  Ch.   7.  36  sons  of  Zophah ;  Suah . .  and  B. ,  and  Imrah 

BE-RI'-AH,  njr-i?  unfortunate. 

1.  A  son  of  Asher,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  17  Jimnah,  and  Ishuah,  and  Isui,  and  B. 

46.  17  the  sons  of  B.  ;  Heber,  and  Malchiel 
N1U1126.  44  of  B.,  the  family  of  the  Beriites. 

26.  45  Of  the  sons  of  B.  :  of  Heber,  the  family 
1  Ch.  7.  30  Imnah,  and  Isuah,  and  Ishuai,  and  B. 

7.  31  the  sons  of  B.  ;  Heber,  and  Malchiel 

2.  A  son  of  Ephraim,  B.C.  1670. 

1  Ch.  7.  23  he  called  his  name  B.,  because 

3.  A  son  of  Elpaal,  a  Benjamite,  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   8.  13  B.  also,  and  Shema.. heads  of  the  fathers 

8.  16  Michael . .  Ispah,  and  Joha  the  sons  of  B. 

4.  A  Levite,  a  Gershomite,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  23.  10  the  sons  of  Shimei.  .Jahath,  Zina.  .andB. 

23. 11  but  Jeush  and  B.  had  not  many  sons 

BE-RI-ITE,  'jr-ia  unfortunate. 

A  family  of  Asherites  sprung  from  Beriah. 

Num  26.  44  children  of.  .Beriah,  the  family  of  the  B. 
BE-RITES,  D'-ti!  belonging  to  Bert. 
Descendants  of  Beri  in  the  N.  of  Canaan,  visited  by 
Joab  in  his  pursuit  after  Sheba. 

2  Sa.  20.  14  And  he  went  through  all.  .the  B. 
BE'-RTTH,  n,-)3  a  covenant. 

An  idol  (Baal-berith)  worshipped  in  Shechem. 

Judg.  8.  33  children  of  Israel  made  B.  B.  their  god 

9.  46  they  entered  into . .  the  house  of  the  god  B. 

BER-NI'-CE,  Qepi/iKT}. 

A  daughter  of  Herod  Agrippa,  grandson  of  Herod  the 

Great,  and  sister  of  Agrippa  II.,  A.D.  50. 

Acts  25.  13  B.  came  unto  Cesarea  to  salute  Festus 

25.  23  B. .  .was  entered  into  the  place  of  hearing 

26.  30  king  rose  up,  and  the  governor,  and  B. 

BE-RO-DACH  BAL-A'-DAN,  JiN^a  3"}02  bold. 

A  king    of   Babylon,   B.C.   713."    The    name  is  more 

accurately  written  Merodach  Baladan. 

2  Ki.  20.  12  At  that  time B.  B. .  .sent  letters,  .unto  H 
Isa.   39.    1  At  that  time  M.  B. . .  sent  letters . .  to  Hez. 
BE-RO'-THAH,  nn'i?  food. 

A  city  near  Hamath  on  N.  of  Canaan,  and  considered 
by  some  as  the  same  as  Berothai.  Ezekiel  places 
Berothah  between  Hamath  and  Damascus;  hence  it 
cannot  be  Beirut  (the  classical  Berytus) ;  nor  can  it  be 
Beir&t  in  the  form  Berothai,  for  David's  war  with  the 
king  of  Zobah  led  him  from  the  sea  coast  towards  the 
Euphrates.  Besides,  in  the  latter  case,  the  Hebrew 
text  reads  Chun  (instead  of  Berothai)  in  1  Ch.  18.  8. 
Fiirst  regards  Berothah  and  Berothai  as  distinct  places, 
but  identifies  the  former  with  Berytus.  Mislin  derives 
the  name  from  the  "wells"  (Beeroth)  which  may  still 
be  seen  bored  in  the  solid  rock  at  Beiriit. 

Bayrout,  the  ancient  Berytus,  was  the  seat  of  a  famous 
school  of  jurisprudence  from  the  third  to  the  middle 
of  the  6th  century.  The  city  having  been  destroyed  by 
an  earthquake  551  A.D.,  the  school  was  removed  to 
Sidon.  Beyrout  suffered  severely  during  the  crusades, 
and  having  been  taken  bv  the  Saracens,  was  wTested 
from  them  by  Baldwin  in  ino.    The  Saracens,  however, 


BEROTHAI 


90 


BESIEGED 


regained  possession  in  T187.  Ibrahim  Pasha  seized  it 
in  183-  •  and  it  was  bombarded  by  the  combined  fleets 
of  England  and  Turkey,  1840,  and  being  captured,  was 
ri  d  to  the  Porte.  Beyrout  was  made  a  bishopric 
byTheodusius  the  Younger,  and  after  its  capture  by 
Baldwin  I.  it  became  the  seal  Of  a  Latin  bishop  about 
1136. 

Ezc.  47.  16  B.,  Sibraim,  which  (is)  between  the  border 

BE-KO'-THAI,  -nn:  1        -         o/Jah. 

A  city  belonging  to  Hadadezer  king  of  Zobah.    See 

Bcrothah. 

2  Sa.    8.    8  from  B. .  .king  David  took  exceeding 

BE-RO-THITE,  'rm  hr?o,i>/im/  to  Beroth. 
\  patronymic  of  Naharai  JoaVs  armourbearer.    Per- 
haps it  ought  to  be  Ba  rathite,  as  in  2  Sa.  23.  37. 

1  Ch  11.  jg  NahavaitheB.,  the  armour  bearer  of  Joab 
BERRIES  — 
Berry.  lana  gargar. 

laa,    17.    6  two  (or)  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the 

BERRIES,  olive  — 

\r  fruity  iKala  elaia. 

Jas.     3.  12  Can  the  fig  tree,  .bear  olive  berries  ? 
BERYL  — 
1. Beryl,  chrysolite,  topaz,  wyin  tarshish. 

Exod  28.  20  the  fourth  row  a  beryl,  and  an  onyx,  and 

39.  13  the  fourth  row,  a  beryl,  an  onyx,  and  a 
Bong  5.  14  His  hands,  .gold  rings  set  with  the  beryl 
Eze.    1.  16  their  work.. like  unto  the  colour  of  a  beryl 
10.   9  appearance,  .as  the  colour  of  a  beryl 
28.  13  precious  stone,  .thy  covering,  .the  beryl 
Dan.  10.    6  His  body  also  (was)  like  the  beryl,  and 
2.-4  jewel  of  sea  green  colour,  fiypvWos  berullos. 
Rev.  21.  20  the  eighth,  beryl ;  the  ninth,  a  topaz ;  the 

BE'-SAI,  *D2  treading  down. 

A  Nethinim  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  550. 

Ezra   2.  49  the  children  of  Pascah,  the  children  of  B. 

Neh.    7.  52  children  of  B.,  the  children  of  Meunim 

BESEECH,  to  — 

1.7*0  seek,  inquire,  v$$  baqash,  3. 

2  Sa.  12.  16  David  therefore  besought  God  for  the 
Ezra    8.  23  So  we  fasted,  and  besought  our  God  for 

2. To  smooth,  rrbg  chalah,  3. 

Exod  32.  11  Moses  besought  the  Lord  his  God,  and 

1  Ki.  13.    6  the  man  of  God  besought  the  Lord,  and 

2  Ki.  13.    4  Jehoahaz  besought  the  Lord,  and  the 

2  Ch.  33.  12  when,  .in  affliction,  he  besought  the  Lord 
Jer.  26. 19  fear  the  Lord,  and  besought  the  Lord 
Mai.  1.   9  beseech  God  that  he  will  be  gracious  unto 

3.  To  incline,  be  gracious,  ]i!)  chanan,  7. 

Gen.  42.  21  when  he  besought  us,  and  we  would  not 
Deut.  3.  23  I  besought  the  Lord  at  that  time,  saying 
2  Ki.  1.  13  besought  him,  and  said  unto  him,  O  man 
Esth.  8.    3  besought  him  with  tears  to  put  away  the 

i.To  be  in  want,  S^oiiai  deomai. 

Luke  5.  12  seeing  Jesus,  fell  on.  .face,  and  besought 
8.  28  Jesus.  .1  beseech  thee,  torment  me  not 

8.  38  the  man.  .besought  him  that  he  might 

9.  38  Master,  I  beseech  thee,  look  upon  my  son 
9. 40  I  besought  thy  disciples  to  cast  him  out 

Acts  21.  39  I  beseech  thee,  suffer  me  to  speak  unto 

26.    3  I  beseech  thee  to  hear  me  patiently 
2  Co.  10.    2  I  beseech  (you),  that  I  may  not  be  bold 
Gal.    4.  12  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I.  .for  I 

5.7*0  question,  ask  about,  epan-aw  erdtad. 

Matt  15.  23  his  disciples  came  and  besought  him 
Mark  7.  26  she  besought  him  that  he  would  cast 
Luke  4.  38  wife's  mother,  .they  besought  him  for  her 

7.  3  sent,  .the  elders  of  the  Jews,  beseeching 

8.  37  whole  multitude,  .besought  him  to  depart 
it.  37  a  certain  Pharisee  besought  him  to  dine 

John  4.  40  besought  him  that  he  would  tarry  with 

4.  47  besought  him  that  he  would  come  down 
19.  31  besought  Pilate  that  their  legs  might  be 
19.  38  besought  Pilate  that  he  might  take  away 

iTh.   4.    1  Furthermore  then  we  beseech  you 

5.  12  we  i><  seech  you,  brethren,  to  know  them 
2'l'ii.   2.    1  we  i"  seech  you,  brethren,  by  the  coming 

5  now  I  beseech  thei   lady,  not  as  though 
6.7'"  side,  TrapaKa\4w  parakaleo. 

Matt.  8.  s  theie  came,  a  centurion,  beseeching  .him 
8. 31  So  thr  devils  besoughl  him, saying,  ffthou 
8.  34  they  besought  thai  he  would  depart  out 
14.  36  besought  him  that  they  might  only  touch 
18.  2?  his  fellow  servant,  .besought  him,  saying 
Mark  1.  40  there  came  a  leper  to  him,  beseech  ■ 

5. 10  be  besought  him  much  that  he  would  not 
5. 12  all  the  devils  besought  him,  saying,  send 
5. 23  besoughl  him  greatly,  Baying,  Sly  little 
6. 56  the]  laid  the  sick,  and  besought  him 

7.  32  they  beseech  him  to  put  his  hand  upon 

8,  m  n  blind,  and  besought  him  to  touch  him 
Luke  7.   .1  they  besoughl  him  Instantly,  saying 

8.  31,  v,  .11  they  besought  him  that  he 

1    ■  Mies  besoughl  that  these  words 
1    ■     ■ 
16.  and  besought  them,  and 

we    besought  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jem 
25.   2  informed  him  against  Paul,  a  db< 
37.33  Paul  besoughl    all  to  tak<  m 
Rom.  i-"-    1  I  beseech  you  therefore,  dp  thren 
15.30  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  for  the  Lord 
16.  17  1  beseech  you,  brethren,  mark  them 


1  Co.    1.  10  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  name  of 

4.  16  I  beseech  you,  be  ye  followers  of  me 
16.  15  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  ye  know  the 

2  Co.  2.    8  1  beseech  you  that  ye  would  confirm . .  love 

5.  20  as  though  God  did  beseech . .  by  us 

6.  1  We  then,  (as)  workers  together,  .beseech 
10.    1  I  Paul  myself  beseech  you  by  the  meek. 

12.  8  For  this  thing  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice 
Eph.   4.    1  I  therefore.. beseech  you  that  ye  walk 
Phil.    4.    2  I  beseech  Euodias,  and  beseech  Syntyche 
1  Th.  4.  10  we  beseech  you,  bretlu-en,  that  ye 

1  Ti.    1.  3  As  I  besought  thee  to  abide  still  at  Eph. 
Phm.        9  Vet  for  love*s  sake  1  rather  beseech 
10  I  beseech  thee  for  my  sou  Onesimus 
Heb.  13.  19  I  beseech,  .the  rather  to  do  this,   that  I 

13.  22  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  suffer  the  word 

1  Pe.   2.  11  I  beseech  (y°u)  as  strangers  and  pilgrims 

BESEECH  (I)  thee  — 

l.Pray,  hsn,  n?n  anna,annah. 

2  Ki.  20.    3  I  beseech  thee,  0  _£>RP,  remember  now 
Neh.    1.    5  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord  God  of  heaven 

1 .  1 1  0  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  let  now  thine  ear 
Psa.  116.  4  0  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul 

118.  25  1  beseech  thee,  0  Lord  :  0  Lord,  I  b. 
Isa.  38.    3  Remember  now,  O  Lord,  I  beseech  thee 
Jon.    1.  14  We  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  we  beseech  th. 
2.Pray,  k}  na. 

Exod  33.  18  he  said,  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory 

BESET,  to  — 

I. To  go  round  about,  3?D  sabab. 

Judg  20.    5  beset  the  house  round  about  upon  me  by 
2.7*0  bind,  straiten,  "lis  tsur. 

Psa.  139.  5  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before 
BESET  about,  to  — 
To  go  round  about,  35D  sabab. 

Hos.    7.    2  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about 

BESET  round  about,  to  — 

To  be  round  about,  3?p  sabab,  2. 

Judg  19.  22  sons  of  Belial,  beset  the  house  round  a. 

BESET  round,  to  — 

To  surround,  nn^  kathar,  3. 

Psa.  22.  12  (bulls)  of  Bashan  have  beset  me  round 

BESET,  which  doth  so  easily  — 
Standing  well  around,  evTreptararos. 

Heb.  12.    1  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  (us) 
BESIDE  — 
1. Behind,  after,  "inN  abhor. 

Neh.    5.  15  bread  and  wine,  besides  forty  shekels  of 
■l.l'nto,  to,  %  el 

Exod29.  12  pour  all  the  blood  beside  the  bottom  of 
Z.Near,  ^n  etsel. 

Lev.  1.  16  cast  it  beside  the  altar  on  the  east  part 
6.  10  and  he  shall  put  them  beside  the  altar 
10.  12  eat  it  without  leaven  beside  the  altar :  for 

Deut  11.  30  other  side . .  beside  the  plains  of  Moreh  '! 

1  Ki.    3.  20  took  my  son  from  beside  me,  while  thine 

10.  19  and  two  lions  stood  beside  the  stays 
13.  31  buried ;  lay  my  bones  beside  his  bones 

2  Ki.  12.    9  set  it  beside  the  altar,  on  the  right  side 
Neb.  8.    4  beside  him  stood  Mattithiah,  and  Shema 
Eze.    9.    2  they  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  brasen 

"    10.   6  he  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  wheels 
io.  16  same  wheels  also  turned  not  from  beside 

\. Apart  from,  fp  137  lebad  min. 

Exodi2„37  six  hundred  thousand,  .men,  beside 

2  Ki.  21. 16  beside  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Judah 

§,  Apart Jtotii,  1371?  mUbad. 

Gen.  26.    1  beside  the  first  famine,  .in  the  days  of 
Lev.  ;  9. 17  beside  the  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  morning 
23.  38  Beside  the  sabbaths,  .beside  your  gifts 
23.  38  beside  all  your  vows,  and  beside  all 
Num.  6.  21  beside  (that)  that  his  hand  shall  get 

28.  23  Ye  shall  offer  these  beside  the  burnt 
2,9.    6  Beside  the  burnt  offering  of  the  month 

Deut.  4.  35  the  Lord  he  (is)  God.  .none  else  beside 

29.  1  words  of  the  covenant,  beside  the  cov. 
Josh. 22.  29  beside  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our  God 

1  Ki.  10.  13  whatsoever  she  asked,  beside  that  which 

&. Apart  from,  ^JLT?  bilude. 

Num.  5.  20  some'man  have  lain  with  thee  beside 
Josh.22.  19  an  altar  beside  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our 
Isa.   43.  n  I.  .1.  the  Lord  ;  andbesidemc.no 

44.    6  I  (am)  the  last ;  and  beside  me.  .no  God 

44.  8  Is  there  a  God  beside  me  ?  yea.  .no  God 

45.  6  that .  .none  beside  me,  I  (am)  the  Lord 
45.  21  aud.  .no  God  else  beside  me.  .none beside 

f.Without,  *P^3  bilH, 

Num  11.    6  nothing  at  all,  beside  this  manna, (before) 
1  Sa,    2.    2  none  holy  as  the  Lord.,  none  beside  thee 
Hos.  13..  4  DO  god  but  me ;  for.  .no  saviour  beside 
8  Save,  except,  beside,  only,  rh>\  mdah. 

Ruth  4.  4  none  t"  redeem  (it)  beside  thee  ;  and  I 
a  Sa.  7.  as  neither.  .God  beside  thee,  according  to 
1  Ch.  17.  20  neither.  God  beside  thee,  aecordiug  to 
Isa.    26.  13  lords  beside  thee  have  had  dMiuuion 

45.    5  no  God  beside  me  ;  I  girded  thee,  though 
45.  21  and     H"  God  else  beside  me  ;  a  just  God 
64.    4  neither  bath  the  eye  seen,  O  God,  beside 
Q.At  the  hand  of,  tj  leyad. 

1  Sa.  19.    3  I  will  go  out  and  staud  beside  my  father 


2  Sa.  15.    2  Absalom .  .stood  beside  the  way  of  the 

15. 18  all  his  servants  passed  on  beside  him 
HKYet,  still,  iiy  od. 

Gen.  19.  12  Hast  thou  here  any  besides?  son  in  law 

1  Ki.  22.    7  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  besides 

2  Ch.  18.    6  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  besides 

11. On,  upon,  above,  75J  at. 

Gen.  31.  50  if  thou  shalt  take,  .wives  beside  my 
Lev.  18.  18  to  uncover  her  nakedness,  beside  the 
Psa.  23.    2  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters 
Song   t.    8  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents 
Isa.  32.  20  Blessed  (are)  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters 

lm2.From  on,  *?£p  meal. 

Jer.  36.  21  the  princes  which  stood  beside  the  king 
Eze.  32.  13  the  beasts  thereof  from  beside  the  great 

13.  With,  C>'  i,n. 

Josh.  7.    2  Ai,  which  (is)  beside  Beth-aven,  on  the 

14.  Over,  against,  near,  just  as,  nsy  umniah. 

Eze.   10.  19  the  wheels  also  (were)* beside  them ;  and 

11.  22  and  the  wheels  beside  them  ;  and  the 

15. From,  the  side  of  iffi?  mitsstad. 

Josh.  3.  16  the  city  Adam,  that  (is)  beside  Zaretau 

12.  9  the  kin,'  of  Ai,  which  (is)  beside  Beth-el 
Ruth  2.  14  And  she  sat  beside  the  reapers  ;  and  he 

16.0?;,  U2)on,  4irl  (dat.)  epi. 

Matt  25.  20  I  have  gained  beside  them  five  talents 

25.  ?2  I  have  gained  two  other  talents  [beside] 
Luke  16.  26  [beside]  all  this,  between  us  and  you 

17.  117//*,  avv  sun. 

Luke  24.  21  beside  all  this,  to  day  is  the  third  day 

18.  Apart  from,  xwpls  clwris. 

Matt  14.  21  they  that  had  eaten,  .beside  women  and 

15.  38  they  that  did  eat.  .beside  women  and 
2  Co.  21.  28  Beside  those  things  that  are  without 

IS.The  rest,  that  left,  Xonr6v  loi})on. 

1  Co.    i.  16  besides,  I  know  not  whether  I  baptized 

BESIDE,  and  — 

Jiut  with,  awd  ye  uvv  alia  ge  sun. 

Luke  24.  21  and  beside  all  this,  to-day  is  the  third 

BESIDE  the  rest  of — 
On,  upon,  above,  ^j?  al. 

jfum  31.    8  beside  the  rest  of  them  that  were  slain 

BESIDE  one  self,  to  be  — 

1.  To  place  out,  it'iarri/Mi  existemi. 

Mark  3.  21  for  they  said,  He  is  beside  himself 

2.  To  be  eager,  mad,  fxaivopat  mainomai. 

2  Co.  5.  13  whether  we  be  beside  ourselves,  (it  is) 
Acts  26.  24  Paul,  thou  art  beside  thyself  ;  much 

BESIDE  this  — 

Also  this  very  thing,  avrb  rovro  Se. 

2  Pe.    1.    5  beside  this,  giving  all  diligence,  add  to 

BESIDES,  to  owe  — 

To  owe  in  adition,  irpoo-o(pziAce  prosopheild. 

Phm.      19  owest  unto  me  even  thine  own  self  besides 

BESIEGE,  to  — 

l.To  go  7ound,  22c  sabab. 

Eccl.  9.  14  there  came  a  great  king,  .and  besieged  it 
2.  To  press,  straiten,  *RJf  tsur. 

Deut  20.  12  against  thee,  then  thou  shalt  besiege  it 

20. 19  When  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city  a  long 

1  Sa.  23.    8  to  Keilah,  to  besiege  David  and  his  men 

2  Sa.  11.    1  they  destroyed  the  children,  .besieged 

20.  15  they  came  and  besieged  him  in  Abel  of  B. 

1  Ki.  16.  17  Israel  with  him, and  theybeseiged  Tirzah 

20.  1  Ben-hadad.  .went  up.  .besieged  Samaria 

2  Ki.    6.  24  Ben-hadad.  .went  up.  .besieged  Samaria 

6.  25  behold,  they  besieged  it,  until  an  ass's 

16.  5  they  besieged  Ahaz,  but  could  not  over. 

17.  5  went  up  to  Samaria,  and  besieged  it 

18.  9  came  up  against  Samaria,  and  besieged  it 

24.  11  the  city,  and  his  servants  did  besiege  it 
1  Ch.  20.  1  came  and  besieged  Kabbah.     But  David 
Isa.    21.  2  Goup,OElam  :  besiege,  0  Media  :  allthe 
Jer.   21.  4  which  besiege  you  without  the  walls 

21.  9  falleth  to  the  Chaldeans  that  besiege  you 
32.  2  king  of  Babylon's  army  besieged  Jerus. 
37.  5  the  Chaldeans  that  besieged  Jerusalem 
39.  1  against  Jerusalem,  and  they  besieged  it 

Dan.    1.    1  came  Nebuchadnezzar,  .and  besieged  it 

Z.To  straiten,  yyf  tsarar,  5. 

Deut  28.  52  he  shall  besiege  thee  in  all  thy  gates 

28.  52  besiege  thee  in  all  thy  gates,  throughout 

1  Ki.   8.  37  if  their  enemy  besiege  them  in  the  laud 

2  Ch.    6.  28  if  their  enemies  besiege  them  in  the  cities 

BESIEGED  — 

l.Struiiness,  iixia  matsor. 

Eze.    4.    3  thy  face  against  it,  and  it  shall  be  besieged 

2.  To  l-ecp,  watch,  besiege,  "■;?;  natsar. 

Isa.      1.    S  daughter  of  Zion  is  left,  .as  a  besieged 
Eze.     6.  12  he  that,  .is  besieged  shall  die  by  the 

BESIEGED,  to  be  — 

To  go  in'"  siege,  "TISEQ  .v'12  ho  bammatsor. 

2  Ki.  24.  10  against  Jerusalem,  and  the  city  was  be. 

25.  2  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the,  .year 
Jer.  52.    5  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the.  .year 


BESIEGED 


91 


BETH  HACCEREM 


BESIEGED  place  — 
Straitened  place,  "lis!?  matsor. 

2K1.  19.  24  I  dried  up  all.  .besieged  places 

Isa.   37.  25  I  dried  up  all.  .the  besieged  places 
BE-SO-DE'-IAH,  nniDS  given  to  trust  in  Jah. 
One  of  the  repairers  of  the  old  gate,  B.C.  470. 

Neb..   3.    6  the  old  gate  repaired,  .the  son  of  B. 
BESOM  — 
Besom,  broom,  Naxpn  viatate. 

Isa.   14.  23  I  will  sweep  it  with  the  besom  of  destr. 

BE'-SOR,  nib'2  cool  brodk. 

A  brook  which  falls  into  the  sea  near  S.  of  Gaza.    It  is 

now  called  el-Sheria,  and  rises  at  Debir. 

1  Sa.  30.    9  David  went . .  and  came  to  the  brook  B. 
30.  10  they  could  not  go  over  the  brook  B. 
30.  21  they  had.  .to  abide  at  the  brook  B.  :  and 

BEST  — 

I. Good,  nita  tob. 

>"uni36,    6  Let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  best 
Deut23-  16  in  that  place,  .where  it  liketh  him  best 

1  Sa.   8. 14  And  he  will  take  your  fields,  .the  best 

2  Ki.  10.    3  best  and  meetest  of  your  master's  sons 
Esth.  2.    9  he  preferred  her.  .unto  the  best,  .of  the 
Song    7.    9  the  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  best  wine 
Eze.  31.  16  the  choice  and  best  of  Lebanon,  all  that 
llic.    7.    4  The  best  of  them  (is)  as  a  brier;  the  most 

2.  Good,  good  part,  UQ'-p  metab. 

Gen.  47.    6  iu  the  best  of  the  land  make  thy  father 

47.  11  in  the  best  of  the  land,  in  the  laud  of  R. 
EX01I22.    5  best  of  his  own  field,  .best  of  his  own 
1  Sa.  15.    9  the  best  of  the  sheep,  and  of  the  oxen 

15.  15  the  people  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep 

S.Fat,  3^n  cheleb. 

Num  iS.  12  All  the  best  of  the  oil,  and  all  the  best  of 
18.  29  of  all  the  best  thereof,  .the  hallowed 
18.  30  When  ye  have  heaved  the  best  thereof 
18.  32  when  ye  have  heaved  from  it  the  best  of 

^.Stronger,  more  powerful,  Kptirrov  kreitton. 

1  Co.  12.  31  covet  earnestly  the  [best]  gifts  :  and  yet 

5.  First,  foremost^  Tvpwro%2}r^os' 

Luke  15.  22  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  (it)  on 
BEST  fruits — - 
Praised  thing,  n*pi  zimrah. 

Gen.  43. 1 1  take  of  the  best  fruits  in  the  land  in  your 
BEST  (gold)  — 
Refined  (gold),  nspazaz,  6. 

1  Ki.  10.  18  of  ivory,  and  overlaid  it  with  the  best  g. 

BEST,  to  seem  — 

To  be  good,  na;  yatab. 

2 Sa.  18.    4  said.  .What  seemeth  you  best  I  will  do 

BEST,  to  think  — 

To  be  good  in  the  eyes,  y,y$  nia  tob  beayin. 

Nuni  36.  6  Let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  best 
BEST  state  — 
To  be  set  up,  3*J  natsab,  2. 

Psa.  39.   5  every  man  at  his  best  state  (is).. vanity 

BESTIR  oneself,  to  — 

To  move  sharply,  jnn  charats. 

2  Sa.   5.  24  that  then  thou  shalt  bestir  thyself  :  for 
BESTOW,  to  — 

1.  To  put,  ru;  yanach,  5. 

2  Ch.  9.  25  whom  he  bestowed  in  the  chariot  cities 

2.  To  put,  nri:  nacheih,  5. 

1  Ki.  10.  26  whom  he  bestowed  in  the  cities  for 
3  To  give,  jrjj  nathan. 

Exod32.  29  that  he  may  bestow  upon  you  a  blessing 
Deut  14.  26  thou  shalt  bestow  that  money  for 

2  Ki.  12.  15  the  money  to  be  bestowed  on  workmen 
iCh.  29.  25  bestowed  upon  him.,  royal  majesty  as  had 
Ezra    7.  20  which  thou  shalt  have  occasion  to  bestow 

7.  20  bestow . .  out  of  the  king's  treasure  house 

4.  To  do,  n$Jl  asah. 

2  Ch.  24.    7  of  the  Lord  did  they  bestow  upon  B. 

5.  To  lay  up,  i$$paqad. 

2KL    5.  24  bestowed,  .in  the  house  :  and  he  let  the 

6.  To  give,  dlSoifit  didomi. 

2  Co.  8.    1  the  grace.  .God  bestowed  on  the  churches 
1  Jo.    3.    1  what  manner  of  love,  .hath  bestowed 
7. To  bring  together,  <rwdya)  sunago. 

Luke  12.  17  I  have  no  room  where  to  bestow  my 

12.  18  there  will  I  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  my 

BESTOW  labour  (on),  to  — 

To  toil,  Koirtdo}  kopiao. 

John  4.  38  reap  that  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  labour 
Bom.  16.    6  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour  on  us 
Gal.     4.  11 1  have  bestowed  upon  you  labour  in  vain 
.  BESTOW  to  feed,  to  — 

To  give  morsels,  fatten,  $cafAl£a>  psdmizo. 

1  Co.  13.    3  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  teed 

BESTOW  on  or  upon,  to  — 

J. To  do, perform,  7.3a  gamed. 

Isa.  63.    7  according  to  all  that,  .hath  bestowed  on 
63.    7  he  hath  bestowed  on  them  according  to 

2. Toptd  around,  7reptrt6T)p.L  peritithemi. 

i  Co.  12.  33  upon  these  we  bestow  more  abundant 


BE'-TAH,  na?  confidence. 
A  city  of  Hadadezer. 

2  Sa.   8.    8  from  B. .  .kins  David  took  exceeding 
BE'-TEN,  jas  height. 
A  city  of  Asher,  8  miles  E.  of  Ptolemais. 

Josh.19.  25  border  was  Helkath,  aud  Hali,  and  B. 
BETH  A-BA'-RA,  B-qSa^apd  place  of  passage. 
A  place  E.  of  the  Jordan,  perhaps  Bethbarah,  or  rather 
Bethany. 

John   1.  2S  These  things  were  done  in  B.  beyond  Jor. 
BETH  A'-NATH,  ruj,':  n?3  house  of  echo. 
A  city  of  Xaphtali,  15' miles  from  Diaca:sarcea.  (Anata.) 

Josh.19.  38  Irou,  and  Migdal-el,  Horem,  and  B. 

Judg.  1.  33  did  Naphtali  drive  out.,  inhabitants  of  B. 
1.  33  the  inhabitants  of . .  B.  became  tributaries 
BETHA'-NOTH,  ni:£rr3  hoitse  of  echo. 
A  city  of  Judah,  4  miles  from  Hebron,  near  Maaroth. 
The  modern  Beit-ainun,  near  Ilalhul  and  Beit-Sur,  the 
ancient  Halhul  and  Bethzur. 

Josh.  1 5.  59  Maarath,  and  B.,  and  Eltekon 
BETH'-ANY,  pwdavia  house  of  dates  or  figs. 
A  village  at  the  Mount  of  Olives.     Its  modern  name 
el-Azariyeh,  or  Lazarieh,  is  derived  from  Lazarus.     It 
is  about  2  miles  E.  of  Jerusalem,  near  the  road  from 
Jericho  to  the  city. 

Matt  21.  17  went  out  of  the  city  into  B. ;  aud  he 
26.    6  when  Jesus  was  in  B.,  in  the  house  of 

Markn.    1  they  came  nigh  to..Bethphage  aud  B. 
11.  11  he  went  out  unto  B.  with  the  twelve 
11.  12  when  they  were  come  from  B.,  he  was 

14.  3  being  in  B., in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper 
Luke  19.  29  he  was  come  nigh  to  Bethphage  and  B. 

24.  50  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  B.;  and  he 
John  11.    1  a  certain  (man)  was  sick.  .Lazarus,  of  B. 

11.  18  B.  was  nigh  unto  Jerusalem,  about  fifteen 

12.  1  Jesus,  .came  to  B.,  where  Lazarus  was 

BETH  A-RA'-3AH,  n^rr  n-z  house  of  the  desert. 
One  of  the  six  cities  of  Judah  that  were  in  the  Arabah 
or  sunk  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  Salt  Sea,  the  "  wilder- 
ness" on  the  N.  border  of  the  tribe,  and  between  Beth- 
hoglah  and  the  high  land  on  the  W.  of  the  Jordan.  It 
is  also  included  among  the  towns  of  Benjamin. 

Josh. 15.    6  passed  along  by  the  north  of  B.  ;  and  the 

15.  61  the  wilderness,  B.,  Middin,  and  Secacah 
18.  22  B.,  aud  Zemaraim,  and  Beth-el 

BETH  A'-RAM,  ottj  n'2  house  or  place  of  the  height 
A  city  of  Gad,  E.  of  the  Jordan,  between  Succoth  and 
Debir,  the  same  as  Beth-haran,  and  now  called  Beit- 
cl-ramah. 

Josh. 13.  27  B. .  .and  Zaphon.  .of.. kingdom  of  Sihon 
BETH  AR'-BEX,  Sn^n  rra  house  of  God's  court. 
A  city  destroyed  by  the  king  of  AssjTia,  and  supposed 
to  be  the  A  rbela  of  the  Maccabees  and  Josephus.    Now 
Irbid. 

Hos.  10.  14  Shalman  spoiled  B.  hi  the  day  of  battle 
BETH  A'-VEM",  pj;  r?2  house  of  iniquity. 
A  town  in  Benjamin  near  Bethel. 

Josh.  7.    2  Joshua sentmen.  .to  Ai,  which,  .beside B. 
iS.  12  goings  out.. were  at  the  wilderness  of  B. 

1  Sa.  13.    5  they,  .pitched.  .Michmash,  eastward.  .B. 
14.  23  the  battle  passed  over  unto  B. 

Hos.    4.  15  neither  go  ye  up  to  B.,  nor  swear.  The 

5.    8  cry  aloud  (at)  B.,  after  thee,  0  Benjamin 

10.    5  Samaria  shall . .  because  of  the  calves  of  B. 

BETH  AZ-MA'-VETH,  niDrw  rpg  house  of  Azmaveth. 

A  village  of  Judah  or  Benjamin.    La  Ezra  2.  24  it  is 

called  Azmaveth. 

Neh.    7.  28  The  men  of  B.,  forty  and  two 
BETH  BA-AL  ELE'-ON,  pjfl?  753  n'2. 
A  town  of  Moab,  given  to  Reuben ;  it  was  on  the  W. 
of  the  Arnou,  uot  far  from  Jahaza. 

Josh. 13.  17  Dibon,  and  Bamoth-baal,  and  B. 
EETH  BA'-RAH,  n"j5  rr?  fording  place. 
A  place  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  in  Gad. 

Judg.  7.  24  take  before  them  the  waters  unto  B. 
7.  24  took  the  waters  unto  B.  and  Jordan 

BETH  BXR'-EI,  *K"i3  rra  place  of  the  city. 
A  town  of  Simeon,  same  as  Beth-lebaoth. 

1  Ch.  4.  31  Hazar-susim,  and  at  B.,  and  at  Shaaraim 
BETH  CAR, 15  n'2  place  ofjyasture. 
A  stronghold  of  the  Philistines  in  Judah  near  Mizpeh. 

1  Sa.   7.  11  Israel,  .smote  them,  until,  .under  Beth-c. 

BETH  DA'-GON,  jirrrr?  house  of  Dagon. 

1.  A  town  of  Judah  near  Gederoth.     Now  B.  Dejan. 

Josh. 15.  41  Gederoth,  B.,  and  Naamah,  and  Mak. 

2.  A  town  in  the  tribe  of  Asher,  on  the  coast. 

Josh.19.  27  And  turneth  toward  the  sun  rising  to  B. 

BETH  DLB-LA-THA'-IM,  D?0^  n?. 
A  Moabite  town,  elsewhere  called  Almon-Diblathaim. 
The  "  circles"  here  likely  means  "  cakes"  (of  figs). 
Jer.  48.  22  [judgment  is  come]  upon  Nebo,  aud.  .B. 

BETH'-EL,  ^N-n^  house  of  God. 

A  well-known  holy  place  of  Central  Canaan.  Two 
accounts  are  given  of  the  origin  of  the  name  :  1.  It  was 
bestowed  on  the  spot  by  Jacob  under  the  awe  inspired 
by  the  vision  of  God  (Gen.  28.  19) ;  2.  It  received  its 


name  on  the  occasion  of  a  blessing  bestowed  by  God 
upon  Jacob  after  bis  return  from  Padau-aram,  at 
which  time  his  name  was  changed  to  Israel  (Gen.  35. 
14,  15).  Luz  was  the  ancient  name.  Bethel  was  in  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin.  It  is  12  miles  X.  of  Jerusalem  on 
the  way  to  Shechem,  aud  was  the  seat  of  one  of  Jero- 
boam's golden  calves.  It  is  now  called  Beitin.  Luz 
was  perhaps  the  citv,  and  Bethel  the  holy  place  close 
by  it. 

Gen.  12.    8  unto  a  mountain  on  the  east  of  B. 

12.  8  pitched  his  teut.  .B.  on  the  west 

13.  3  on  his  journeys  from  the  south  even  to  B. 
13.    3  his  tent  had  been.. between  B.  and  Hai 
28.  19  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  B. 

31.  13  I  (am)  the  God  of  B.,  where  thou 
35.    1  God  said  unto  Jacob,  Arise,  go  up  to  B. 
35.    3  let  us  arise,  and  go  up  to  B.  ;  and  I  will 
35.    6  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  that  (is),  B. 
35.    8  she  was  buried  beneath  B.  under  an  oak 
35.  15  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place.  ,B. 
35.  16  they  journeyed  from  B.  ;  and  there 
Josh.  7.    2  Joshua  sent . .  to  Ai . .  on  the  east  side  of  B. 
8.    9  went  to  he  in  ambush,  and  abode  between 

8. 12  to  lie  in  ambush  between  B.  and  Ai,  on 
8.  17  And  there  was  not  a  man  left  in  Ai  or  B. 

12.  9  the  king  of  Ai,  which  (is)  beside  B.,  one 
12. 16  king  of  Makkedah,  one  ;  the  king  of  B. 
16.    1  up  from  Jericho,  throughout  mount  B. 

16.  2  goeth  out  from  B.  to  Luz,  and  passeth 
18.  13  border  went. .  toward  Luz.  .which  (is)  B. 
:8.  22  [cities  of  the  tribe].  .Zemaraim,  and  B. 

Judg.  1.  22  house  of  Joseph,  .went  up  against  B. 

1.  23  the  house  of  Joseph  sent  to  descry  B. 
4.    5  she  dwelt,  .between  Ramah  and  B.  in 

21.  19  Shiloh . .  which  (is)  on  the  north  of  B. 
21, 19  the  highway  that  goeth  up  from  B.  to 
1  Sa.    7.  16  he  went  from  year  to  year  in  circuit  to  B. 
10.    3  three  men  going  up  to  God  to  B.,  one 

13.  2  with  Saul  in  Michmash  aud  in  mount  B. 
30.  27  which  (were)  in  B.,  and  to  (them)  which 

1  Ki.  12.  29  he  set  the  one  in  B.,  aud  the  other 

12.  32  So  did  he  in  B.,  sacrificing  unto  the 

12.  32  he  placed  in  B.  the  priests  of  the  highpL 

12.  33  offered  upon  the  altar  which  he  had 

13.  1  out  of  Judah  by  the  word  of  the  Lord 
13.  4  which  had  cried  against  the  altar  iu  B. 
13.  10  returned  not  by  the  way  he  came  to  B. 
13.  11  there  dwelt  an  old  prophet  in  B. ;  and 
13.  11  that  the  man  of  God  had  done  that  day 
13.  32  For  the  saying,  .against  the  altar  in  B. 

2  Ki.   2.    2  sent  me  to  B. .  .they  went  down  to  B. 

2.  3  the  sons  of  the  prophets  that  (were)  at  B. 
2.  23  he  went  up  from  thence  unto  B. 

10.  29  the  golden  calves  that  (were)  in  B. 

17.  28  one  of  the  priests,  .came  and  dwelt  in  B. 
23.    4  carried  the  ashes  of  them  unto  B. 

23.  15  moreover  the  altar  that  (was)  at  B.,  (and) 
23.  17  that  thou  hast  done  against  the  altar  of  B. 
23.  19  according  to  all.  .that  he  had  done  in  B. 

1  Ch.  7,  28  their  possessions . .  (were)  B.  and  the 

2  Ch.  13.  19  Abi jah . .  took  cities  from  him ;  B.  with  the 
Ezra  2.  28  The  men  of  B. . .  Ai,  two  hundred  twenty 
Neh.  7.  32  The  men  of  B.  andAi,  an  hundred  twenty 

ir.  31  Children  also  of  Benjamin,  .(dwelt)  at 
Jer.  48.  13  as  the  house  of  Israel  was  ashamed  of  B. 
Hos.  10.  15  So  shall  B.  do  unto  you  because  of  your 

12.    4  he  found  him  (in)  B.,  and  there  he  spake 
Amos  3.  14  I  will  also  visit  the  altars  of  B.  ;  and  the 

4.  4  Come  to  B.,  and  transgress  ;  at  Gilgal 

5.  s  seek  not  B.,  nor  enter  into  Gilgal 
5.    5  B.  shall  come  to  nought 

5.    6  devour  (it),  .none  to  quench  (it)  in  B. 
7.  id  Amaziah  the  priest  of  B.  sent  to 

7. 13  But  prophesy  not  again  any  more  at  B. 

BETH-EL-ITE,  *7Nn  ma  belonging  to  Bethel. 
The  patronymic  of  Hiel  who  rebuilt  Jericho. 

1  Ki.  16.  34  In  his  days  did  Hiel  the  B.  build  Jericho 
BETH  E'-BLEK,  pvyn  rr?  house  of  the  valley. 
A  town  in  Asher  oh  or  near  the  border,  on  the  K  side 
of  which  was  the  ravine  of  Jiphthah-el.     It  is  now 
called  AmUah,  in  a  plaiu  at  the  foot  of  the  hills. 

Josh.19.  27  toward  the  north -side  of  B.,  and  Xeiel 
BE'-THER,  1^3  depth,  separation. 
Perhaps  a  poetical  form  of  Bithron  iu  Gad,  E.  of  the 
Jordan.     Now  Bittir. 

Song   2.  17  be. .like  a  roe. .upon  the  mountains  of  B. 

BETH  ES'-DA,  fi-qQeaZd.  house  of  mercy. 
A  pool  in  Jerusalem  near  the  sheep  market  gate.  The 
large  reservoir  called  the  Birket-Israil,  within  the 
walls  of  the  city,  close  by  the  St  Stephen's  gate,  and 
under  the  N.E.  wall  of  the  Haram  area,  is  generally 
considered  the  modern  representative  of  "Bethesda.'' 

John  5.    2  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  B, 
BETHEZ'-EL,  7XV&yTX*3. place  of  declivity. 
A  city  near  Zanadu  in  the  N.  of  Judah. 

Mic.    1.  11  came  not  forth  in  the  mourning  of  B. 
BETH  GA'-DER,  T13  n*5  walled  pi 'ace. 
A  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  2.  51  Hareph  the  father  of  B.  G. 

BETH  GA'-MTTL,  ^crrvs  place  of  the  camel. 
A  town  of  Moab  in  the  mishor  or  downs.  Now  Jemal. 
Jer.  48.  23  upon  Kiriathairo,  and  uponB.,  and  upon 
BETH  HAC-CE'-REM,  C"irn  noplace  of  the  vineyard. 
A  town  of  Judah  S.E.  from  Jerusalem,  between  it  and 
Tekcah.    Now  Fureideis. 


BETH   HARAN 


92 


BBTONIM 


Neh.  3.  14  the  son  of  Rechab,  the  ruler  of  part  of  B. 

Jer.     6.    1  Gather,  .and  set  up  a  sign  of  fire  in  B. 
BETH  HA'-RAN,  }~>n  n'2  high  or  strong  place. 
A  city  of  Gad  in  the  region  of  Gilead.     Perhaps  the  same 
.-all.-'il  in  Josh.  13.37  Betharam;  in  the  original  "Betn- 
h  train." 

Num3z.  36  And  Beth-nimrah,  and  B.,  fenced  cities 

rjETH  HOG'-LAH,  nhx)  n'3  place  of  magpies. 
A  city  of  Benjamin  3'miles  from  Jericho.Now   Ilajlah. 
Josh.  15.    6  And  the  border  went  up  to  B.,  and 

iS  19  the  border  passed  along  to  the  side  of  B. 

18.  21  the  cities. .were  Jericho,  and  B.,  and  the 
BETH  HO'-RON,  piin_n*3  place  of  hollows. 

Pwo  places  (Upper  and  Lower)  in  Ephraim  near  Ben- 
jamin.   The  Lower  was  the  more  important. 

Josh  10.  10  the  Lord.. chased  them  along.. to B. 

10.  11  as  they .  .were  in  the  going  down  to  B. 
iS.  14  border  was  drawn,  .from.  .hill,  .before  B. 
21.  22  Kibzaim  with  her  suburbs,  and  B.  with 

1  Sa.  13.  18  another  company  turned  the  way  (to)  B. 

1  Ch.  6.  68  Jokmeam  with  her  suburbs,  and  B.  with 

2  C'h.25.  13  fell  upon.,  cities.,  from  Samaria.,  unto  B. 

Bethhoron  the  Upper. 
Josh. 16.    s  the  border,  .was.  .unto  B.  the  upper 
-  Ch.  8.    5  he  built  B.  the  upper,  and  B.  the  nether 

Bethhoron  the  Nether. 
Josh  16.    3  goeth  down.. unto.  .B.  the  nether 

18  13  border  descended  to.. south  side  of..B. 

1  Ki.   9.  17  Solomon  built  Gezer,  and  B.  the  nether 

2  Ch.  8.    5  he  built  B.  the  upper,  and  B.  the  nether 

BETHINK  themselves,  to  — 

To  turn  back  to  the  heart,  iS-^N  Tyn  Jieshib  el  Icb. 
r  Ki.  8.  47  if  they  shall  bethink  themselves  in  the 
2  Ch.  6.  37  Yet  (if)  they  bethink  themselves  in  the 

BETIMES,  to  rise  — 

\.T<>  be  with  the  dawn,  iny  shachar,  3. 

Job  24.    5  wild  asses,  .rising  betimes  for  a  prey:  the 

'2.  To  take  on  one's  shoulder*  uyy  shakam,  5. 

Gen.  26.  31  they  rose  up  betimes  in  the  morning,  and 
2  Ch.  36. 15  God.. sent.,  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending 

BETIMES  — 

To  be  with  the  dawn,  TV:  shachar,  3. 

Job     S.    5  If  thou  wouldest  seek  unto  God  betimes 
Prov.13.  24  that  loveth  him  chasteueth  him  betimes 

BETH  JE-SHI'-MOTH,  niDp'n  W2  place  of  desolations. 

A  city  of  Moab,  near  where  the  Jordan  falls  into  the 

.Salt  Sea.     Now  Itanuih, 

Num33.  49  they  pitched  by  Jordan,  from  B. .  .unto 
Josh.  1 2.    3  the  salt  sea  on  the  east,  the  way  to  B. 
13.  20  Beth-peor,  and  Ashdoth-pisgah,  and  B. 
Eze.  25.    9  the  glory  of  the  country,  B.,  Baal-meon 

BETH  LE-BA'-OTH,  riia^-n^  place  of  lionesses. 
A  town  in  Simeon. 

Josh  19.    6  B.,  and  Sharuhen  ;  thirteen  cities  and 

BETH  LE'-HEM,  C~>  n'3  place  of  food. 
I.  This  town,  about  6  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  is 
celebrated  as  the  birthplace  of  the  Saviour.  It  was 
called  Ephrath,  and  is  mentioned  as  the  place  at 
which  Rachel  died  and  was  buried,  B.C.  1729.  Reho- 
boam  fortified  or  rebuilt  it,  B.C.  973.  David  was  born 
here  (circ.  B.C.  1085),  and  hence  it  was  called  the  city 
of  David.  Helena,  the  mother  of  Constantine,  A.D. 
325,  erected  a  church,  which  remains  to  this  day,  on 
the  place  of  the  Nativity.  It  was  ceded,  with  other 
towns,  to  Frederick  II.  by  the  sultan  of  Egypt  in  1229. 
It  was  called  Bethlchem-Judah  to  distinguish  it  from 
Bethlehem  in  Zebulon  (Josh.  19.  15,  16).  Bethlehem 
was  made  a  bishopric  in  mo. 

Gen.  35.  19  buried  in  the  wayto  Ephrath,  which  ffs)B. 
4S.    7  the  way  of  Ephrath  ;  the  same  (is)  B. 

Judg  17.    7  there  was  a  young  man  out  of  B. 

17.    8  And  the  man  departed  out  of..B.  to 
17.   9  he  said.  .1  (am)  a  Levite  of  B.,  and  [  g  » 

19,  1  a  . Levite.. took.. a  concubine  out  of  B. 
iq.    2  hisconcubine..  went  away  froiuhim.  .toB. 
19.  18  We  (are)  passing  from  B.  toward.  .111. unit 
19.  iS  I  went  £0  B.,  but  I  (am  now)  going  to  the 

Ruth  1.    1  a  certain  man  of  B.  went  to  sojourn  in 
1     2  Mahlou  and  Chilion,  Ephrathites  of  B. 
1.  19  they  two  went  until  they  came  to  B. 
1.  19  when  they  w.tc  come  to  B.  ..they  said 

1.  _■_■  tlit'v  e:nne  tn  I'..  in  the  beginning  of     bar 

2.  4  Boaz  c  ime  from  1;..  and  said  unto  the 
4.  n  worthily  inEphratah.  ,be  famous  in  B. 

I  Sa.  16.   4  Samuel    came  to  B      Ind  the  elders  of 

17.  i.-  David  .son  of  thai  EphratnSte  ol  B, 
i:    1     David  went     t,.  feed  his.. sheep  at  B. 
20    6 David    asked   .that  he  might  run  to  B. 
20. 28  David  earnestly  asked  (leave..to  pro)  to  B, 
aSa    2-  3aDJj™d  him  in  the  sepulchre,  .(in)  B. 

23-  14  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines  (was.. in)  B. 
1    the  water  o1  the  well  -1'  B... by  the  gate  I 
23. 10  and  dri  u  water  out  of  the  weu  of  B, 
23.  24  Klhanan  the  son  of  Undo  of  B. 

I I  n.n,  16  the  Philistines'  garrison  (was)  then  af  B. 

11.  iZ  the  water  oi  the  well  of  B.  .at  the  gate 
".  1-.  and  drew  water  out  olthe  well  of  B 

1. lit. Ml  Ml   Hi.'    .,,tl  ,,(    |)ndn  ,,f  !-. 

1   '  "        He  bum  1  reu  1:.,  and  Etam,  and  Tekon 
i./ra   2.  -1  children  of  b.,  an  hundred  twenty  and 
.<■!).    j,  26  "t  1;  and  Netophah,  an  hundred  fourscore 
J^r.   4i.  17  Chimham,  which  is  by  B  ,  togoto..Egyp, 


Mic.    5.    2  But  thou,  B. . .  (though)  thou  be  little 

Matt.  2.    1  Jesus  was  born  in  B.  of  Judea,  in  the 
2.    5  they  said  unto  him,  In  B.  of  Judea 
2.    6  And  thou,  B...art  not  the  least  among  the 
2.    8  he  sent  them  to  B.,  and  said,  Go  and 
2.  16  Then  Herod . .  slew  all  the  children . .  in  B. 

Luke  2.    4  Joseph.,  went.,  unto  the  city.,  called  B. 
2.  15  the  shepherds  said . .  Let  us  now  go  even 

John  7.  42  Christ  cometh.  .out  of  the  town  of  B. 

2.  A  town  in  Zebulon.     Now  Beit-lahm. 

Josh.19.  15  Nahallal,  and  Shimron,  and  Idalah.  .B. 

3.  The  following  passages  refer  to  Nos.  1  or  2. 

Judg  12.  8  And  after  him  Ibzan  of  B.  judged  Israel 
12.  10  Then  died  Ibzan,  and  was  buried  at  B. 

4.  A  descendant  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  2.  51  Salma  the  father  of  B.,  Hareph  the  father 
2.  54  sons  of  Salma  ;  B.,  and  the  >i'etophathites 
4.    4  the  firstborn  of  Ephratah,  the  father  of  B. 

BETH-LE-HE-MITE,  vpr^rj  n*3  belonging  to  Bethle- 
hem. 
Patronymic  of  an  inhabitant  of  Bethlehem. 

1  -Sa.  16.    1  I  will  send  thee  to  Jesse  the  B.  :  for  I 

16.  18  I  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  the  B.,  (that  is) 

17.  58  (I  am)  the  son  of.  .Jesse  the  B. 

2  Sa.  21.  19  Elhanan  the  sou  of  Jaare-oregim,  a  B. 

BETH  MA-A'-CHAH,  npsip  rra  place  of  oppression. 
A  city  of  Manasseh  at  the  foot  of  Hermon,  near  Dan,  E. 
of  the    Jordan.      It    sometimes  occurs  as  Abel-beth- 
maachah,  and  occasionally  as  Abel. 

2  Sa.  20.  14  he  went  through  all.  .Israel,  .to  B. 
20.  15  And  they,  .besieged  him  in  Abel  of  Bi 
20.  18  They  shall  surely  ask.  .at  Abel :  and  so 
2  Ki.  15.  29  Tiglath-pileser  king  of  Assyria,  .took.  .A. 

BETH  MAR-CA'-BOTH,  nirnsri  n'3  jrface  of  chariots. 

A  city  of  Simeon  at  the  extreme  S.  of  Judah,  with  Ziklag 

and  Hormah. 

Josh.  19.    5  Ziklag,  and  B.,  and  Hazar-susah 

1  Ch.  4.  31  at  B.,  and  Hazar-susim,  and  at  Beth-birei 

BETH  BLE'-ON,  jiyp  n\2  place  of  habitation. 

A  city  of  Moab,  near  Beth-gamul  [See  Betk-baal-meon, 

the  fidl  form]. 

Jer.  48.  23  Kiriathaim,  and  upon  Beth-gamul,  and 
BETH  NLM'-EAH,  .Tipj  n'3  place  of  fioxoing  water. 
A  city  of  Gad,  the  same  as  Niiwraji  (Num.  32.  3),  and 
Nimrim  (Isa.  15.  6). 

Num.32.  36  B.,  and  Beth-haran,  fenced  cities  :  and 
Josh.13.  27  in  the  valley,  Beth-aram,  and  B.,  and 

BETH  PA'-LET  or  BETH  PHE  'LET,  6^3  rra. 
A  town  in  the  S.  of  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  27  Hazar-gaddah,  and  Heshmon,  and  B. 

Neh.  11.  26  at  Jeshua,  and  at  Moladah,  and  at  B. 

BETH  PAZ'-ZEZ,  f»a  n'3  a  place  of  destruction. 
A  town  of  Issachar. 

Josh.  19.  21  and  En-gannim,  and  En-haddah,  and  B. 
BETH  PE'-OR,  -iiy?  n'3  house  of  the  opening. 
A  city  of  Moab,  near  mount  :Peor,  E.  of  the  Jordan,  j 
opposite  Jericho,  and  6  miles  above  Libias  or  Beth- 
haran.     It  was  in  the  allotment  of  Reuben. 

Deut.  3.  29  we  abode  in  the  valley  over  against  B. 

4.  46  this  side  Jordan,  in.  .valley  over  against  B. 
34.    6  he  buried  him  in  a  valley . .  over  against  B. 

Josh  13.  20  And  B.  and  Ashdoth-pisgah,  and  Beth. 

BETH  PHA'-GE,  $7}d<pay7i  house  of  figs. 

A  village  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  near  Bethany,  on  the 

road  between  Jericho  and  Jerusalem. 

Matt2i.    1  when. .drew  nigh. .and  were  come  to  B. 

Markn.    1  when  they  came  nigh  to  Jerusalem.  .B. 

Luke  19.  29  when  he  was  come  nigh  to  B.  and  Beth. 
BETH  RA'-PHA,  Npr  n'2  place  of  fear. 
A  name  which  occurs  in  the  genealogy  of  Judah  as  the 
sou  of  Eshton  and  grandson  of  Chelub  through  Caleb 
son  of  Hur.  There  is  a  Kapha  in  the  line  of  Benjamin 
and  elsewhere,  but  no  connection  can  be  traced  between 
those  and  this  Beth-rapha,  B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  4.  12  Eshton  begat  B.,  and  Paseah,  and  Tehin. 
BETH  RE-HOB,  3"in*i  n*2  roomy  place. 

A  place  in  the  N.  of  Canaan  near  the  valley  in  which 
lay  the  town  of  Laish  or  Dan  ;  the  place  is  now  repre- 
sented by  Hunin,  a  fortress  commanding  the  plain  of 
Huleh,  in  which  lay  the  city  of  Dan  or  Tell-el-Kady. 
JudgiS.  28  it  was  in  the  valley  that  (lieth)  by  B. 

2  Sa.  10.    6  children  of  Amnion,  .hired.  .Syrians  of  B. 

BETHSAI'-DA,  /^flrrcuSa  place  of  nets. 

1.  "Bethsaida  of  Galilee"  (the  native  city  of  Andrew, 
Peter,  and  Philip)  in  the  land  of  Genuesareth,  on  the 
west  side  of  the  lake. 

Matt  n.  21  Woe.  .thee,  Chorazin!  woe  unto  thee,  B. ! 
Mark  6.  43  to  go  to  the  other  side  before  unto  B. 
Luke  jo.  1  ;  unto  titer-.  Chorazin  !  woe  unto  tbec,  B.  ! 
John    1.  44  Philip  was  of  B.,  the  city  of  Andrew  mid 
12.  21  same.  .came,  .to  Philip,  which  was  of  B. 

2.  Bethsaida  at  which  the  5000  were  fed,  a  place  on 
the  cast  of  the  Lake  of  Genuesareth.  Such  a  place 
there  was  at  the  N.E.  extremity,  formerly  a  village, 
but  rebuilt  and  adorned  by  Philip  the  Tetrareh,  and 
r:iis<d  to  the  dignity  of  a  town  under  the  name  Julius, 
after  the  daughter  of  the  emperor. 

Mark  8.  22  he  cometh  to  B.  ;  and  they  bring  a  blind 
Luke  9. 10  a  desert  place  belonging  to . .  city  called  B. 


BETH  SHAN,  ,c;  n\2  house  of  security. 
A  city  of  Manasseh  W.of  Jordan.    Perhaps  the  same  as 
Bethshean.     It  was  the  S.  border  town  in  Galilee  and 
belonged  to  Decapolis. 

1  Sa.  31.  10  they  fastened  his  body  to  the  wall  of  B. 

31.  12  took  the  body  of  Saul,  .from the  wall  of  B. 

2  Sa.  21.  12  had  stolen  them  from  the  street  of  B. 

BETH  SHE'-AN,  \y$  rT3  house  of  security. 
Probably  the  same  as  Bethshan.  The  Canaanites  were 
not  driven  out  from  this  town.  In  the  time  of  Solomon 
it  formed  a  commissariat  district  extending  from  the 
town  itself  to  Abel-meholah  (1  Ki.  4.  12).  Its  modern 
name  is  Beimn,  It  lies  in  the  Ghor  or  Jordan  valley, 
about  12  miles  S.  of  the  sea  of  Galilee  and  4  W.  of  the 
Jordan. 

Josh.17.  11  Manasseh  had  in  Issachar  and  in  Asher.B. 
17.  16  who  (are)  of  B.  and  her  towns,  and  (they) 
Judg.  1.  27  Neither  did  Manasseh  drive  out.  .B.  and 
1  Ki.   4.  12  Taanach.  .all  B.,  which  (is)  by  Zartanah 

4.  12  from  B.  to  Abel-meholah,  (even)  unto 
1  Ch.   7.  29  by  the  borders  of.  .Manasseh,  B.  and  her 

BETH  SHE'-MESH,  0c£  n'3  house  of  the  sun. 

1.  One  of  the  towns  marking  the  N.  border  of  Judah, 
though  uot  named  among  the  cities  of  that  tribe.  It  is 
now  called  Ain-sheuis,  which  is  on  the  N.W.  slope  of 
the  mountains  of  Judah,  a  low  plateau  at  the  junction 
of  two  plains,  about  2  miles  from  the  great  Philistine 
plain,  and  7  from  Ekron. 

Josh.15.  10  went  down  to  B.,  and  passed  on  to  Tim. 

21.  16  Juttah  with  her  suburbs,  (and)B.  with 
Judg.  1.  33  did  Kaphtali  drive  out.  .inhabitants  of  B. 

1.  33  nevertheless,  .inhabitants  of  B. .  .became 
1  Sa.    6.    9  goeth  up  by . .  way  of  his  own  coast  to  B. 
6.  12  kine  took,  .straight  way  to  the  way  of  B. 
6.  12  went  after  them  unto  the  border  of  B. 
6.  13  (they  of)  Beth-shemesh  (were)  reaping 
6.  15  the  men  of  B.  offered  burnt  offerings  and 
6.  19  he  smote  the  men  of  B.,  because  they 
6.  20  the  men  of  B.  said,  Who  is  able  to  staud 

1  Ki.  4.    9  The  son  of  Dekar.  .in  Shaalbim,  and  B. 

2  Ki.  14.  11  he  and  Amaziah.  .looked one  another  in 

14.  13  Jehoash  king  of  Israel.  .Amaziah.  .at  B. 

1  Ch.  6.  59  Ashan  with  her  suburbs,  and  B.  with  her 

2  Ch.25.  21  J  oash..  saw  .'.Amaziah  king  of  Judah,atB. 

25.  23  Joash.  .took  Amaziah.  .of  Judah.  .at  B. 
28.  18  The  Philistines,  .had  taken  B.,  and  Ajalon 

2.  A  city  on  the  border  of  Issachar. 

Josh.  19. 22  the  coast  reacheth  to  Tabor . .  and  B.,  and 

3.  A  fenced  city  of  Naphtali. 

Josh.  19.38  Iron,  and  Migdal-el,  Horem,  and  B. 

4.  An  idolatrous  temple  in  Egypt,  supposed  to  be  On  or 
Heliopolis,  which  in  the  middle  ages  was  still  called 
Ain-Shems. 

Jer.  43.  13  break  also  the  images  of  B.,that(is)in.  .Eg. 
BETH  SHEM-ITE,  *p;pu*n  n'3. 
An  inhabitant  of  Bethshemish,  B.C.  1140. 

1  Sa.    6.  14  the  cart  came  into . .  field  of  Joshua,  a  B. 
6.  18  stone  remaineth. .  in.,  field  of  Josh,  the  B. 

BETH  SHTT'-TAH,  -wn  noplace  of  acacia. 
The  narrative  and  the  name  both  require  this  place  to 
be  near  the  Jordan  where  Zererath  and  Abel-meholah 
also  lay.     The  Shuttah  of  Robinson  is  too  far  to  the  W. 

Judg.  7.  22  and  the  host  fled  to  B.  in  Zererath,  (and)  to 
BETH  TAP-PU'-AH,  mEJVJT?  place  of  fruit  trees. 
A  city  in  the  mountainous  district  of  Judah,  near 
Hebron.  This  is  a  different  place  from  Tappuah. 
The  modern  name  is  Teffuh,  5  miles  W.  of  Hebron,  on 
a  ridge  of  high  table  land. 

Josh.  15.  53  And  Janum,  and  B.,  and  Aphekah 

BE-THTJ'-EL,  Vtona  dweller  in  God. 

1.  A  son  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother,  B.C.  1872. 

Gen.  22.  22  Hazo,  and  Pildash,  and  Jidlaph,  and  B. 

22.  23  B.  begat  Rebekah.  .eightMilcah  did  bear 
24.  15  Rebekah  came  out,  who  was  born  to  B. 
24.  24  I  (am)  the  daughter  of  B. . .  son  of  Milcah 
24.  47  The  daughter  of  B.,  Nahor's  son,  whom 

24.  50  Then  Laban  and  B.  answered  and  said 

25.  20  Rebekah.  .the  daughter  of  B.  the  Syrian 
28.  2  Arise,  go  to  Tadan-aram,  to.  .house  of  B. 
28.    5  hewenttoPadan-aram.  .Laban,  son  of  B. 

2.  A  town  in  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  (the  Eethul  of  Josh. 
19.  4.) 

1  Ch.    4.  30  And  at  B.,  and  at  Hormah,  aud  at  Ziklag 

BE'-THTJL,  '■"n?  dweller  in  God. 

A  city  in  Simeon,  the  same  as  Bethuel. 

Josh.  19.  4  And  Eltolad,  and  B.,  and  Hormal 
BETH  ZBR,  "imTi'3  place  of  rock. 

1.  A  city  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  towards  Idumea. 
It  was  founded  by  the  people  of  Maon,  which  had 
derived  its  origin  from  Hebron.  Bethzur  was  fortified 
by  Rehoboam  for  the  defence  of  his  new  kingdom  It 
is  now  called  Bcit-sur. 

Josh.15.  58  nalhul.  B..  and  Gedor 

-  Ch.  11.    7  B.,  and  Shoco,  and  Adullam. 

Neh.    3.  16  Azbuk,  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  B- 

2.  Patronymic  of  the  son  of  Maon,  a  descendant"1  of 
Hebronj  one  of  the  posterity  of  Caleb,  brother  of  Jerah- 
meel. 

1  Ch.  2.  45  and  Maon.  .the  father  of  B 
BE-TO'-NIM,  D»ifa3  Heights. 
A  town  in  the  N.  of  Gad,  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan. 

Josh.  13. 26  from  Heshbon.  .Ramath-mizpeh,  and  B. 


BETRAY 


93 


BEWRAY 


14 

Luke2 1 


John  6. 
6. 
12. 
*3- 
13- 
13- 
18. 
iS. 


BETRAY,  to  — 

l.To  cast,  throw,  ntn  ramah,  3. 

1  Ch.  12.  17  but  if .  .to  betray  me  to  mine  enemies 
2.  To  give  up  over  to  another,  irapadiSwui. 

Matt  10.    4  Judas  Iscariot,  who  also  betrayed  him 
17.  22  The  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  into 

20.  18  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  unto  the 

24.  10  shall  betray  one  another,  and  shall  hate 
26-  2  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified 
26.  16  he  sought  opportunity  to  betray  him 

26.  21  "Verily  I  say. .  That  one  of  you  shall  betray 
26.  23  He  that  dippeth.  .the  same  shall  betray 
26.  24  by  whom  the  Sou  of  man  is  betrayed 
26.  25  Then  Judas,  which  betrayed  him 
26.  45  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 
26.  46  he  is  at  hand  that  doth  betray  me 

26.  48  he  that  betrayed  him  gave  them  a  sign 

27.  3  Then  Judas,  which  had  betrayed  him 

27.  4  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood 
Mark  3.  19  Judas  Iscariot,  which  also  betrayed  him 

13.  12  the  brother  shall  betray  the  brother  to 

14.  10  Iscariot.  .went,  .to  betray  him  unto  them 
14.  11  he  sought  how  he  might,  .betray  him 
14.  iS  One.  .which  eateth  with  me  shall  betray 
14.  21  by  whom  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed 

14.  41  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 
ia.  42  lo,  he  that  betrayeth  me  is  at  hand 

44  he  that  betrayed  him  had  given  them  a 
16  ye  shall  be  betrayed  both  by  parents 
4  liow  he  might  betray  him  unto  them 
6  sought  opportunity  to  betray  him  unto 

21  the  hand  of  him  that  betrayeth  me  (is) 

22  unto  that  man  by  whom  he  is  betrayed 
48  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a 
64  For  Jesus  knew,  .who  should  betray  him 
71  for  he  it  was  that  should  betray  him 

4  Judas  Iscariot.  .which  should  betray  him 
2  the  devil  having  now  put.  .to  betray  him 

11  For  he  knew  who  should  betray  him 
21  verily,  I  say.  .one  of  you  shall  betray  me 
2  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew 

5  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  stood 
20  Lord,  which  is  he  that  betrayeth  thee? 

1  Co.  11.  23  the.  .night  in  which  he  was  betrayed 

BETRAYERS  — 

One  betraying,  irpodJTns  2rrodotes. 

Acts   7.  52  of  whom  ye  have  been  now  the  betrayers 
BETROTH,  to  — 
l.To  betroth,  espouse,  enA  aras,  3. 

Deut2o.    7  what  man.  .that  hath  betrothed  a  wife 

28.  30  Thou  shalt  betroth  a  wife,  and  another 
Hos.    2.  19  I  will  betroth  thee,  .yea,  I  will  betroth 

2.  20 1  will  even  betroth  thee  unto  me  in 

2.  To  appoint,  *iy;  yaad. 

Exod2i.    8  master,  who  hath  betrothed  her  tohimself 

21.  g  if  he  have  betrothed  her  unto  his  son,  lie 

BETROTHED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  betrothed,  espoused,  irix  aras,  4. 

Xev.  19.  20  a  bondmaid,  betrothed  to  an  husband 

2.  To  be  prepared,  exposed,  fpn  charaph,  2. 

Exod22.  16  a  man  entice  a  maid  that  is  not  betrothed 
Deut22.  23  If  a  damsel,  .a  virgin  be  betrothed  unto 

22.  25  if  a  mau  find  a  betrothed  damsel  in  the 
22.  27  the  betrothed  damsel  cried,  and . .  none 
22.  28  which  is  not  betrothed,  and  lay  hold  on 

BETTER  — 

l.Good,  aia  tob. 

Gen.  29.  19  better  that  I  give  her  to  thee,  than  that 
Exodi4.  12  better  for  us  to  serve  the  Egyptians 
NuniT4.    3  AVere  it  not  better  for  us  to  return  into 
Judg  8.    2  (Is)  not  the  gleaning  of.  .better  than  the 
9.    2  Speak,  I  pray  you.  .Whether  (is)  better 

11.  25  now  (art)  thou  anything  better  than 
Ruth  4.  15  which  is  better  to  thee  than  seven  sons 

1  Sa.   1.    8  (am)  not  I  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons  ? 

15.  22  Behold,  to  obey  (is)  better  than  sacrifice 
15.  28  a  neighbour  of  thine,  .better  than  thou 
27.    1  nothing  better  for  me  than  that  I  should 

2  Sa.  17.  14  The  counsel  of  Hushai.  .(is)  better  than 

18.  3  better  that  thou  succour  us  out  of  the 

1  Ki.  2.  3!  two  men  more  righteous  and  better  than 

19.  a  for  I  (am)  not  better  than  my  fathers 
21.    2  I  will  give  thee  for  it  a  better  vineyard 

2  Ki.  5.  12  better  than  all  the  waters  of  Israel? 
2  Ch. 21.  13  hast  slain  thy  brethren.,  better  than 
Esth.  1.  19  give,  .unto  another  that  is  better  than 
Psa.  63.    3  thy  loving  kindness  (is)  better  than  life 

119.  72  The  law  of  thy  mouth  (is)  better  unto  me 

Prov.  3.  14  the  merchandise  of  it  (is)  better  than  the 

8. 11  wisdom  (is)  better  than  rubies;  and  all  the 

8.  19  My  fruit  (is)  better  than  gold,  yea,  than 

12.  9  better  than  he  that  honoureth  himself 
15.  16  Better  (is)  little  with  the  fear  of  the 

15.  17  Better  (is)  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love 

16.  32  slow  to  anger  (is)  better  than  the  mighty 

17.  1  Better  (is)  a  dry  morsel,  and  quietness 
19.  1  Better  (is)  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his 
19.  22  a  poor  man  (is)  better  than  a  liar 

25.    7  better,  .that  it  be  said  unto  thee,  Come 

25.  24  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner  of  the  house 

27.  5  Open  rebuke  (is)  better  than  secret  love 
27. 10  better  (is)  a  neighbour,  .near,  than  a 

28.  6  Better  (is)  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his 
Eccl.  2.  24  nothing  better  for  a  man,  (than)  that  lie 

3.  22  I  perceive  that,  .nothing  better,  than 

4.  3  Yea,  better,  .than  both  they,  which  hath 


Eccl.  4.    6  Better  (is)  an  handful  (with)  quietness 
4.    9  Two  (are)  better  than  one  ;  because  they 

4.  13  Better  (is)  a  poor  and  a  wise  child  than 

5.  5  Better,  .that  thou  shouldest  not  vow 

6.  3  I  say.  .an  untimely  birth  (is)  better  than 

6.  9  Better  (is)  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the 

7.  1  A  (good)  name  (is)  better  than  precious 
7.    2  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning 
7.    3  Sorrow  (is)  better  than  laughter  :  for  by 
7.    5  better  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  wise 

7.    8  Better  (is)  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the 
7.    8  the  patient  in  spirit  (is)  better  than  the 

7.  zo  the  former  days  were  better  than  these ''. 

8.  15  a  man  hath  no  better  thing  under  the 

9.  4  for  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion 
9.  16  Then  said  I,  Wisdom  (is)  better  than 

9.  18  Wisdom  (is)  better  than  weapons  of  war 
Song  1.    2  for  thy  love  (is)  better  than  wine 
Isa.    56.    5  name  better  than  of  sons  and . .  daughters 
Lara.  4.    9  slain  with  the  sword  are  better  than' 
Hos.    2.    7  for  then  (was  it)  better  with  me  than  now 
Amos  6.    2  better  than  these  kingdoms  ?  or  their 
Jon.    4.  3,  8  (it  is)  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live 

2. More,  "WV  yother. 

Eccl.  6.  11  increase  vanity,  what  (is)  man  the  better  ? 
3. Advantage,  abundance,  pTJT  yithron. 

Eccl.  10.  11  enchantment  >  and  a  babbler  is  no  better 
A. Beautiful,  honourable,  koKos  kalos. 

Matt  18.    8,  9  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life 
Mark  9.  43,  45,  47  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into 
5. Good... than,  KaK6v...fxa\Kov  kalon...mallon. 
Mark  g.  42  it  is  better  for  him  that  a  millstone 
1  Co.  9.  15  better  for  me  to  die,  than  that  any  man 
6. Stronger,  more  poioerful,  Kpelcratcu  kreisson. 
1  Co.   7.    9  for  it  is  better  to  marry  than  to  burn 
7.  38  he  that  giveth  (her)  not.  .doeth  better 
11.  17  ye  come  together  not  for  the  better,  but 
Phil.   1.  23  to  be  with  Christ ;  which  is  far  better 
Heb.   1.    4  Being  made  so  much  better  than  the 
7.    7  the  less  is  blessed  of  the  better 
7.  19  but  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope,  .by 

7.  22  Jesus  made  a  surety  of  a  better  testament 

8.  6  a  better  covenant . .  upon  better  promises 

9.  23  heavenly  things,  .with  better  sacrifices 
to.  34  ye  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  an  endur. 
11.  35  they  might  obtain  a  better  resurrection 

1  Pe.  3.  17  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  so,  2  Pe.  2.  21. 
7.  To  be  above,  higher,  u7reoe'xo>  huperecho  Phil.  2.  3. 
8. Better,  kindlier,  xpyvrtirepos  chrestoteros. 

Luke  5.  39  desireth  new.  .he  saith,  The  old  is  better 
BETTER,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  good,  tiu  tob. 

Song  4. 10  how  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine  ! 

2.  To  do  good,  or  well,  2u;  yatab,  5. 

Nah.  3.    8  Art  thou  better  than  populous  No,  that 

3.  To  be  different,  bear  diversely,  StcMpepo)  diaphero. 

Matt.  6.  26  Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they? 

12. 12  How  much,  .isaman  better  than  asheep? 
Luke  12.  24  how  much  more  are  ye  better  than  the 
4. To  be  advantageous,  KvffiTeXeai  lusiteleo. 

Luke  17.    2  It  were  better,  .that  a  millstone  were 

5.  To  be  profitable,  o-vfj.<pepw  sumphero. 

Matt  18.    6  it  were  better,  .that  a  millstone  were 

6.  To  hold  forward,  orbefore,  wpoixo/u.at2yroechomai. 

Rom.  3.    9  What  then?  are  we  better.  .No,  in  no 
BETTER,  to  do  — 
To  do  good,  Tia  tob,  5. 

Eze.  36.  11  will  do  better,  .than  at  your  beginnings 

BETTER,  to  make  — 

To  do  or  make  good,  29;  yatab,  5. 

1  Ki.  1.  47  make  the  name  of  Solomon  better  than 

BETTER,  to  be  made  — 
To  be  good  na;  yatab. 

Eccl.  7.    3  by  the  saduess.  .the  heart  is  made  better 
BETTER,  to  be  the  — 
To  be  over  and  above,  Treptacrevco  perisseuo, 

1  Co.  8.    8  for  neither,  if  we  eat,  are  we  the  better 

BETTER  (country  or)  thing  — 
Stronger,  more  powerful ,  Kpsiaaoiv  kreisson. 
Heb.  6.    9  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you 
11.  16  now  they  desire  a  better  (country),  that 

11.  40  God  having  provided  some  better  thing 

12.  24  that  speaketh  better  things  than.  .Abel 

BETTERED,  to  be  — 

To  profit,  a><pe\4w  opheleo. 

Mark  5.  26  had  spent  all.  .and  was  nothing  bettered 

BETWEEN  — 

1. Between,  }-2  ben. 

Gen.  15.  17  a  burning  lamp  that  passed  between 
2.  Between,  rnT3  henoth. 

Eze.  10.    2  Go  in  between  the  wheels,  .under  the 
3.0h,  upon,  7"  al. 

1  Ki.  18.  21  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions 

4. Middle,  midst,  T)l]ji  tavek. 

Exod28.  33  bells  of  gold  between  them  round  about 
39.  25  put  the  bells  between  the  pomegranates 
39.  25  round  about  between  the  pomegranates 


5.  In  the  midst,  ava.  p.i<rov  ana,  meson. 

1  Co.    6.    5  not  one.  .able  to  judge  between  his  br.  ? 

6.  In,  among,  iv  en. 

Rom.  1.  24  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between 
7. In  between,   fitra^v  metaxu. 

Matt  18.  15  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him 

23.  35  whom  ye  slew  between  the  temple  and 
Luke  11.  51  which  perished  between  the  altar  and 

16.  26  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf 
Acts  12.    6  Peter  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers 

15.    9  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them 

S.Toioard,  irpos  {ace.)  pros. 

Luke  23.  12  they  were  at  enmity  between  themselves 
Acts  26.  31  they  talked  between  themselves,  saying 

BETWEEN,  to  differ  — 

To  make  a  parting,  division,  p-spifa  merizo. 

1  Co.   7.  34  There  is  difference  (also)  between  a  wife 

BETWEEN  (some)  of... and  — 

From    the.. .with,  iKTu>v...fX€Ta  ek  ton...meta. 

John  3.  25  between  (some)  of  John's  disciples  and 
BETWTXT  — 
l.Between,  pa  ben. 

Gen.  31.  37  that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  both 
2.0ut  of  tft  ek. 

Phil.   1.  23  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  des. 
BETWTXT,  to  come  — 
To  strike  on,  y±$  paga,  5. 

Job.  36.  32  by  (the  cloud)  that  cometh  betwixt 

BE-TT'-LAH,  n^ya  married. 

A  symbolic  name  which  the  land  of  Israel  is  to  bear 

in  its  future  prosperity. 

Isa.    62.   4  thou  shalt  be  called,  .and  thy  land  B. 

BEWAIL  self,  to  — 

To  breathe  one's  self  out,  rip;  yaphach,  7. 

Jer.    4.  31  the  daughter  of  Zion.  .bewaileth  herself 

BEWAIL,  to  — 

l.To  weep,  rna  bakah. 

Lev.  10.  6bewail  the  burning  which  the  Lord  hath 
Deut2i.  13  bewail  her  father  and  her  mother  a  full 
Judg  11.  37  I  may.  .bewail  my  virginity,  I  and  my 

11.  38  bewailed  her  virginity  upon  the  mount. 
Isa.    16.    9  I  will  bewail  with  the  weeping  of  Jazer 

2.  To  wail,  K\alw  klaio. 

'  Rev.  18.   9  kings  of  the  earth . .  shall  bewail  her 

3.  To  strike  {the  breast),  koVtw  kopito. 

Luke  8.  52  all  wept,  and  bewailed  her :  but  he  said 
23.  27  which  also  bewailed  and  lamented  him 

4.  To  lament,  mourn,  7rei/0ew  pentheo. 

1  Co  12.  21  I  shall  bewail  many  which  have  sinned 
BEWARE,  to  — 

l.To  become  subtile,  cny  aram,  5. 

Prov.  19.  25  Smite,  .and  the  simple  will  beware 

2.  To  watch,  ~fow  sJictmar. 

2Sa.  18.  12  Beware  that  none,  .the  young  man  Ah. 

S.To  be  watchfid,  TD^  shamar,  2. 

Gen.  24.   6  Beware  thou  that,  .bring  not  my  son 
Exod23.  21  Beware  of  him,  and  obey  his  voice 
Deut.  6.  12  beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,  whieh 
8.  11  Beware  that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord  thy 

15.  9  Beware  that  there  be  not  a  thought  in 
Judg  13.    4  beware,  I  pray  thee,  and  drink  not  wine 

13.  13  that  I  said  unto  the  woman  let  her  beware 

2  Ki.    6.    9  Beware  that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place 

4.  To  behold,  jSAeVw  btepo. 

Mark  8.  15  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 

12.  38  Beware  of  the  scribes,  which  love  to  go 
Acts  13.  40  Beware  therefore,  lest  that  come  upon 
Col.     2.    8  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through 

5.  To  guard,  (pvXaao-oo  phidasso. 

Luke  12.  15  beware  of  covetousness  :  for  a  man's  life 
2  Pe.    3.  17  seeing  ye  know,  .beware  lest  ye  also 

BEWARE  of,  to  — 

l.To  behold,  jSAeVoj  blepo. 

Phil.   3.    2  Beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil  workers 
3.    2  beware  of  the  concision 

2. To  hold  toward  oneself,  -rrpoo-ex^  prosecho. 

Matt.  7.  15  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to 
10.  17  beware  of  men  ;  for  they  will  deliver  you 

16.  6  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 
16.  11  ye  should  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
16.  12  not  beware  of  the  leaven  of  bread,  but  of 

Luke  12.    1  Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 
20.  46  Beware  of  the  scribes,  which  desire  to 

•3.  To  guard,  (puXdao-w  j^dasso. 

2  Ti.    4.  15  Of  whom  be  thou  ware  also  ;  for  lie  hath 
BEWITCH,  to  — 
1.2*0  smite  with  the  eye,  jSao-fcatVw  baskain~>. 

Gal    3.    1  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched  you,  that 
2.  To  cause  to  stand  out,  i^lo-rnfj-i  eoiisterai. 

Acts    8.    9  bewitched  the  people  of  Samaria,  giving 
8.  11  he  had  bewitched  them  with  sorceries 
BEWRAY,  to  — 
l.To  reveal,  uncover,  n?3  galah,  3. 

Isa.  16.    3  outcasts;  bewray  not  him  that  wander*  Lh 


BEYOND 


94 


BIMHAL 


2. To  set  before,  i:j   nagad,  5. 

Prov.29.  24  he  hcarcth  cursing,  and  bewrayeth  (it) 

%.To  call,  khj;  qara. 

Pro  v.  27. 16  ointment  of  his  right.,  bewrayeth 

4.  TV  make  evident,  iroi^co  Bij\os  poieS  delos. 

Matt. 26.  73  of  them  ;  fur  thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee 

BEYOND  — 

1.  Yonder,  beyond,  henceforth,  nyhn  halah. 

Gen.  35.  21  spread  his  tent  beyond  the  tower  of  Edar 
1  Sa.  20.  22  Behold,  the  tfrrows  (are)  beyond  thee  ;  go 

20.  37  said,  (Is)  not  the  arrow  beyond  thee? 
Jer.  22.  19  east  forth  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 
Amos  5.  27  I  cause  you  to  go  into  captivity  beyond 

2.7*0  cause  to  pass  over,  131?  obar,  5. 

1  Sa.  20.  36  as  the  lad  ran,  he  shot  an  arrow  beyond 

3.  Over,  *ny  eber. 

Gen.  50.  10  which  (is)  beyond  Jordan,  and  there  they 

50  11  Abel-mizraim,  which  (is)  beyond  Jordan 

Deut.  3.  20  land..  God  hath  given  them  beyond  Jord. 

3.  25  see  the  good  land  that  (is)  beyond  Jordan 
30.  13  Neither  (is)  it  beyond  the  sea,  that  thou 

Josh.  9.  10  that  he  did  to  the  two  kings,  .beyond 

13.  8  which  Moses  gave  them,  beyond  Jordan 

18.  7  received  their  inheritance  beyond  Jordan 
Judg.  5.  17  Gilead  abode  beyond  Jordan  ;  and  why 

2  Sa.  10.  16  the  Syrians  that  (were)  beyond  the  river 
1  Ki.   4.  12  Abel-meholah.  .unto,  .beyond  Jokneam 

14.  15  shall  scatter  them  beyond  the  river 

1  Ch.  19.  16  the  Syrians  that  (were)  beyond  the  river 

2  Ch.  20.    2  from  beyond  the  sea  on  this  side  Syria 
Neh.    2.    7  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river,  that 

2.  9  I  came  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river 
Isa.     7.  20  by  them  beyond  the  river,  by  the  king  of 

9.    1  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  in 
iS.    1  which  (is)  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia 
Jer.  25.  22  kings  of  the  isles  which  (are)  beyond  the 
Zeph.  3.  10  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia  my 

4. Over,  beyond,  ~Q'£.  obar. 

Ezra   4.  17  and  (unto)  the  rest  beyond  the  river 

4.  20  have  ruled  over  all . .  beyond  the  river 

6.    6  Now.  .Tatnai,  governor  beyond  the  river 
6.    6  Apharsachites,  which  (are)  beyond  the 

6.  8  of  the  tribute  beyond  the  river,  forthwith 

7.  21  the  treasurers  which  (are)  beyond  the 

7.  25  all  thepeople  that  (are)  beyond  the  river 

■  6.0n  yonder  side  of,  eweKtiva  epekeina. 

Acts   7.  43  I  will  carry  you  away  beyond  Babylon 
6.  Oyer,  beyond,  irepau  peran. 

Matt.  4.  15  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond,  Jordan 
4.  25  multitudes  of  people,  .(from)  beyond 

19.  1  into  the  coasts  of  Judea  beyond  Jordan 
Mark  3.    8  from  Jerusalem,  and.  .beyond  Jordan 
John  1.  28  were  done  in  Bethabara  beyond  Jordan 

3.  26  he  that  was  with  thee  beyond  Jor.,  10.  40. 
1 .  The  places  beyond,  ra  vTreptKeiva,  2  Co.  10.  16. 
8. Over,  virip  [ace.)  huper. 

2C0.   8.   3  [beyoudjj  (their)  power: .willing of  thems. 
[See  also  Go,  measure,  pass,  regions,  stretch.] 
BEYOND  the  time  — 
Over,  7%  at. 

Lev.  15  25  if  it  run  beyond  the  time  of  her  separation 

BE'-ZAI,  *^3  shining, high. 

1.  One  whose  posterity  to  the  number  of  323  returned 
from  exile  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  17  children  of  B.,  three  hundred  twenty  and 
Neh.  7.  23  children  of  B.,  three  hundred  twenty  and 

2.  A  family  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant, 

B.C.,  445- 

Neh.  10.  18  Hodijah,  Hashum,  B. 

BE-ZAL'-EEL,  h^zi  God  is  protection. 
l.The  artificer  to  whom  was  confided  the  design  and 
execution  of  the  works  of  art  required  for  the  taber- 
nacle in  the  wilderness.  His  charge  was  chiefly  in  all 
works  <>f  metal,  wood,  and  stone,  Aholiab  having  eharge 
of  the  textile  fabrics.  Bezaleel,  however,  was  chief  In 
both  departments,  B.C.  1491. 

Exod3i.    2  See,  I  have  called  by  name  B.  the  son  of 

35.  30  the  Lord  hath  called  by  name  B.  the  son 

36.  1  Then  wrought  B.  and  Aholiab,  and  every 

36.  2  Moses  called  B. .  .unto  the  work  to  do  it 

37.  1  B.  made  the  ark  of  shit  Mm  wood 

38.  22  B...made  all. .Lord  commanded  Moses 

1  Ch.  2.  20  Hur  begat  1'ri,  and  Uri  begat  B. 

2  Ch.   1.    5  Moreover  the  braseu  altar.  .B.  ..had 

2.  Son  of  Pahath-moab,  and  one  of  those  who  had  taken 
a  strauge  wife,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  30  of .  .sons  of  Pahath-moab.  .B.,  and  Binu. 
BE'-ZEK,  p-z  t 

1    V     lv-i,lrl|i'11  "''    \'l<>nibezck  ("lord  of  Bezck  ")  in 
rud  ih,  inhabited  by  Canaanites  and  Perizzites. 

Judg.  1.    4  and  they  slew.. in  B.  ten  thousand  men 

1.    5  And  they  found  Adoni-bezek  in  B. 

2. The  place  where  Saul  numbered  hi*  forces  before 

going  to  the  relief  -if  Jabesh  Gilead,  somewhere  in  the 

centre  of  the  countrynear  the  Jordan  valley,  a  day's 

march  fr Jab<  ih,    There  were  two  places  of  this 

name  .7  miles  from  Heapolis  (Shechetn),  on.  theroad  to 
Bethsli      1 

1  Sa.    11.  8  And  when  he  numbered  then  in  B. 


BE'-ZER,  "W|  strong. 

1,  A  city  ofv  Reuben,  in  the  downs,  or  mishor,  one  of 
the  three  cities  of  refuge  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  and 
allotted  to  the  Merarites.     Now  Desheir. 

Deut.  4.  43  B.  in  the  wilderness,  in  thj  plain  country 

Josh. 20.    8  they  assigned  B.  in  the  wilderness  upon 

2i.  36  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben,B.  with  her  suburbs 

1  Ch.  6.  78  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  B. . .  with  her  sub. 

2.  A  son  of  Liph,  one  of  the  heads  of  Asher,  B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  7.  37  B.,  and  Hod,  and  Shamma,  and  Shilshah 

BICH'-RI,  naa  youth,  first  born. 

Ancestor  of  Sheba  who  rose  against  David,  B.C.  1022. 

2  Sa.  20.    1  Sheba,  the  son  of  B.,  a  Benjamite 

20.    2  every  man  of  Israel,  .followed,  .son  of  B. 
20.   6  Now  shall . .  the  sou  of  B.  do  us  more  harm 
20.    7,  13  to  pursue  after  Sheba  the  son  of  B. 
20.  10  Joab . .  pursued  after  Sheba  the  son  of  B. 
20.  21  the  son  of  B. .  .hath  lifted  up  his  hand 
20.  22  they  cut  off  the  head  of.  .the  son  of  B. 
BID,  to  — 
l.To  say,  "i£N  amar. 

Gen.  43. 17  the  man  did  as  Joseph  bade ;  and  the 
Wunii4.  10  the  congregation  bade  stone  them  with 

15.  38  bid  them  that  they  make  them  fringes 
Josh.  6.  10  until  the  day  I  bid  you  shout ;  then  shall 

11.    9  did  unto  them  as  the  Lord  bade  him 

1  Sa.    9.  27  Bid  the  servant  pass  on  before  us 

24.  10  and . .  bade . .  kill  thee  ;  but . .  spared  thee 

2  Sa.    1.  18  he  bade  them  teach  the  children  of  Judah 

2.  26  how  long . .  ere  thou  bid  the  people  return 

16.  11  let . .  curse ;  for  the  Lord  hath  bidden  him 
2  Ki.   4.  24  slack  not  (thy)  riding,  .except  I  bid  thee 

10.    5  we.  .will  do  all  that  thou  shalt  bid  us 
Esth.  4.  15  Esther  bade,  .return  Mordecai  (this  ans.) 

2.  To  speak,  "131  dabar. 

Jon.    3.    2  preach,  .the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee 

Z.To  speak,  ~)2i  dabar,  3. 

Gen.  27. 19  I  have  done  according  as  thou  badest  me 
2  Ki.    5.  13  the  prophet  had  bid  thee.. great  thing 
2  Ch.  10.  12  came,  .as  the  king  bade,  saying,  Come 

4.  To  set  up,  command,  niy  tsavak,  3. 

Exodi6.  24  laid  it  up  till  the  morning,  as  Moses  bade 
Ruth  3.  6  according  to  all.  .her  mother-in-law  bade 
2  Sa.  14.  19  thy  servant  Joab,  he  bade  me,  and  he  put 

5.  To  separate,  sanctify,  ssnp  qadash,  5. 

Zeph.  1.    7  prepared  a  sacrifice,  he  hath  bid  hia 

6.  To  say,  eiirov  eipon. 

Matt  16.  12  Then  understood  they  how  that  he  bade 

23.    3  All.  .whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe 
Luke  10.  40  sister . .  bid  her  therefore  that  she  help  me 
Acts  11.  12  the  Spirit  bade  me  go  with  them,  nothing 
22.  24  bade  that  he  should  be  examined  by 

7.  To  call,  Ka\eca  haled. 

Matt  22.    3  call  them  that  were  bidden  to  the  wedding 
22.    4  Tell  them  which  are  bidden,  Behold,  I 
22.    8  they  which  were  bidden  were  not  worthy 
22.    9  as  many  as  ye  shall  find,  bid  to  the  mar. 

Luke  7.  39  the  Pharisee  which  had  bidden  him  saw 
14.    7  put  forth  a  parable  to  those . .  were  bidden 
14.    8  When  thou  art  bidden  of  any .  .to  a  wed. 
14.    8  honourable  man  than  thou  be  bidden  of 
14.    9  he  that  bade  thee  and  him  come  and  say 
14.  10  when  thou  art  bidden,  go  and  sit  down 
14.  10  when  he  that  bade  thee  cometh,  he  may 
14. 12  Then  said  he  also  to  him  that  bade  him 
14.  16  A.  .man  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade 
14.  17  to  say  to  them  that  were  bidden,  Come 
14.  24  none  of  those  men  which  were  bidden 

1  Co.  10.  27  If  any  of  them  that  believe  not  bid  you 

8.  To  command,  K<z\evea  keleud. 

Matt  14.  28  bid  me  come  unto  thee  on  the  water 

9.  To  say,  Aeyw  lego. 

2  Jo.        10  receive,  .not.  .neither  bid  him  God  speed 

11  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is 

10.  To  put  toward,  irpoardoaia  prostasso. 
Matt.  1.  24  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had  bidden  him 

BID  again,  to  — 

To  ccdl  in  return,  avriKaXew  antikaled. 

Luke  14. 12  lest  they  also  bid  thee  again,  and  a 

BID  farewell,  to  — 

To  arrange  off  from,  airordo-o-ofxai  apotassomai. 
Luke  0.  61  let  me  first  go  bid  them  farewell  which 
Acts  18.  21  bade  them  farewell,  saying,  I  must  by  all 

BIDDEN,  that  are  — 

To  call,  invite,  N"ip  qara. 

1  Sa.    9.  13  afterwards  they  eat  that  be  bidden 
9.  22  place  among  them  that  were  bidden 
BIDDING  — 
Hearing,  hearkening,  ny£t?p  mishmaath. 

1  Sa.  22.  14  who  (is  so)  faithful,  .goeth  at  thy  bidding 
BLD'-KAR,  -ipi2  servant  of  Kar. 

A  captain  of  Jehu,  originally  his  fellow-officer,  who 
executed  the  sentence  on  Jehoram,  son  of  Ahab,  B  C 
884. 

2  Ki.   9.  25  Then  said(Jehu)to  B.his  captain,  Take  up 
BIER  — 

1, Bier y  na»  mittah. 

2*Sa.    3.  31  And  king  David  (himself)  followed  the  bier 


2. Bier,  aop6s  soros. 

Luke  7.  14  he  came  and  touched  the  bier  ;  and  they 

BIG-THA,  xn^2  given  by  fortune. 

One  of  the  chamberlains  of  Ahasuerus,  B.C.  519. 

Esth.  1. 10  B. .  .served  in  the  presence  of  Ahasuerus 

BIG'-THAN,  BIG-THA'-NA,  |ma,i«m2. 

A  chamberlain  who  conspired  against  Ahasuerus,  B.C. 

519- 

Esth.  2.  21  B. . .  sought  to  lay  hands  on . .  Ahasuerus 

6.  2  B. .  .sought  to  lay  hand  on.  .Ahasuerus 
BIG'-VAI,  fl?a  happy,  or  of  the  people. 

1.  A  chief  who  came  up  with.  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536.' 

Ezra    2.    2  "Which  came  with  Zerubbabel . .  B.  ,Rehu. 
Neh.    7.    7  Who  came  with  Zerubbabel. .  B.,  !Nehum 

2.  One  whose  posterity  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  B.  c 
536- 

Ezra    2.  14  children  of  B.,  two  thousaud  fifty  and  six 
Neh.   7.  19  children  of  B.,  two  thousand  threescore 

3.  One  whose  descendants  came  up  with  Ezra,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra   8.  14  Of  the  sons  also  of  B. ;  If  thai,  and  Zabbud 

4.  Patronymic  of  a  family  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed 
the  covenant,  B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  16  Adonijah,  B.,  Adin 
BIL'-DAD,  ~n?a  lord  Aclad,  or  son  of  contention. 
One  of  Job's  three  friends,  a  Shuhite,  descended  from 
Shuah,  Abraham's  sou  by  Keturah,  and  dwelling.in  the 
E.  of  Arabia,  B.C.  1520. 

Job     2.  11  they  came  every  one..B.  the  Shuhite 

8.     1  Then  answered  B.  the  Shuhite,  and  said 

iS.    1  Then  answered  B.  the  Shuhite,  and  said 

25.    1  Then  answered  B.  the  Shuhite,  and  said 

42.   9  B.  the  Shuhite.  .Zophar  the  Naamathite 

BLL'-EAM,  Dj/1??  place  of  conquest. 

Levitical  city  ih  Manasseli,  W.  of  Jordan.     (Belameh.) 

1  Ch.   6.  70  out  of..Manasseh..B.  with  her  suburbs 

BLL'-GAH,  na^a  bursting  forth,  i.e.,  firstborn. 

1.  A  priest  in  David's  time,  the  head  of  the  15th  course 
in  the  tabernacle  service,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch  24.  14  The  fifteenth  to  B. .  .sixteenth  to  Immer 

2.  A  priest  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.    5  Miamin,  Maadiah,  B. 

12.  18  Of  B  ,  Shammua  ;  of  Shemaiah,Jehonath. 
BLL'-GAI,  "ita  bursting  forth. 
Perhaps  the  same  as  Bilgah,  No.  2. 

Neh.  10.    8  Maaziah,  B.,  Shemaiah  :  these  (were)  the 
BLL'-HAH,  nrr^a  tender. 

1.  The  handmaid  of  Laban's  younger  daughter  Rachel, 
and  mother  of  Dan  and  Naphtali,  B.C.  1753. 

Gen.  29.  29  Laban  gave  to  Rachel . .  B . .  to  be  Tier  maid 
30.    3  Behold  my  maid  B.,  go  in  unto  her 
30.    4  she  gave  him  B.  her  handmaid  to  wife 
30.    5  B.  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  a  son 
30.    7  B.,  Rachel's  maid,  conceived  again,  and 
35.  22  Reuben,  .lay. .  B.  his  father's  concubine 
35.  25  sous  of  B.,  Rachel's  handmaid  ;  Dan,  and 
37.    2  the  lad  (was)  with  the  sons  of  B.,  and 
46.  25  These  (are)  the  sons  of  B.,  which  Laban 

1  Ch.    7.  13  Gezer,  and  Shallum,  the  sons  of  B. 

2.  A  town  in  Simeon,  apparently  that  called  Balah  in 
Josh.  19.  3. 

1  Ch.  4.  29  And  at  B.,  and  at  Ezem,  and  at 
BLL'-HAN,  |n^a   tender. 

Erom  the  same  root  as  Bilhah.  The  final  n  is  a  Horite 
termination,  as  in  Akau,  Alvan,  Aran,  Dishau,  Eshban, 
Hemdan,  &c.  Compare  these  with  the  Etruscan  ena, 
Gr.  a  (y)s,  a,  v,  &c. 

1.  A  son  of  Ezer,  son  of  Seir  the  Horite,  B.C.  1680. 

Gen.  36.  27  children  of  Ezer  (are)  these  ;  B. . .  Zaavan 
1  Ch.   1.  42  sons  of  Ezer  ;  B.,  and  Zavan 

2.  A  son  of  Jediael,  son  of  Benjamin,  B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.   7.  10  sons  also  of  .lediael ;  B. :  and 

7.  10  the  sons  of  B.  ;  Jeush,  aud  Benjamin 

BILL  — 

l.Book,  writing,  npp  sepher. 

Deut  24.    1  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  divorcement 

24.    3  write  her  a  bill  of  divorcement,  and 
Isa.    50.    i  Where  (is)  the  bill  of  your  mother's  div. 
Jer.     3.    8  I  had.  .given  her  a  bill  of  divorce;  yet 

2.-4  little  book  or  scroll,  BifiAiov  biblion. 

Markio.    4  Moses  suffered  to  write  a  bill  of  divorce 

3.  Writing,  ypd/j.^.a  gramma. 

Luke  16.    6  Take  thy  bill,  and  sit  down  quickly,  and 
16.    7  he  said.  .Take  thy  bill,  and  write foursco. 

BILLOW  — 

1.^1  heap,  73  gal. 

Psa.  42.    7  thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are  gone  over 
2. A  breaker,  nsipp  mishbar. 

Jon.   2.    3  thy  billows  and  thy  waves  passed  over 
BLL'-SHAN,    |V:^3  searcher. 

A  prince  of  the  Jews  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabel, 
B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.    2  came  with  Zerubbabel.  .Mordecai,  B. 

Neh.    7.    7  Who  came . .  Zerubbabel . .  Mordecai,  B. 

BIM'-HAX,  7npa  circumcised. 

A  son  of  Japhlet,  in  the  line  of  Asher,  B  C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  33  sons  of  Japhlet;  Pasach.  .B...Ashvath 


BIND 


95 


BIRZAVXTH 


.binding  sheaves  in  the  field,  and,  lo 


BIND,  to  —  , 

l.To  bind,  d?%  alam,  3 

Gen.  37.    7  we 
2. To  bind,  gird,  "i?x  aswp. 

Gen.  42.  24  Simeon,  and  bound  him  before  their  eyes 

49.  11  Binding  his  foai  unto  the  vine,  and  his 
Xum  30.    2  swear . .  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bond 
30.   3  bind . .  by  a  bond . .  in  her  father's  house 
30.    4,  5  bond  wherewith  she  hath  bound  her 
30.    6,  S  of  her  lips,  wherewith  she  bound  her 
30.    7,  11  her  bonds  wherewith  she  bound  her 
30.   9  vow.  .wherewith  they  have  bound  their 
30.  10  or  bound  her  soul  by  a  bond  -with  an  oath 
Judgis-  10  To  bind  Samson  are  we  come  up,  to  do  to 

15. 12  We  are  come  down  to  bind  thee,  that  we 
15.  13  we  will  biud  thee  fast,  and  deliver  thee 

15.  13  they  bound  him  with  two  new  cords 

16.  5  that  we  may  biud  him  to  afflict  him 

16.    7  If  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  withs 
16.    8  withstand  she  bound  him  with  them 
16.  11  If  they  biud  me  fast  with  new  ropes 
16.  12  Delilah,  .bound  him  therewith,  and  said 
16.  21  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass  ;  and  he 

2  Ki.  17.    4  king  of  Assyria . .  bound  him  in  prison 
25.    7  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass,  and 

2  Ch.  33.  11  bound  him  with  fetters,  and  carried  him 
36.    6  bound  him . .  fetters,  to  carry  him  to  Bab. 

Job    36.  13  wrath ;  they  cry  not  when  he  bindeth 

Psa  105.  22  To  bind  his  princes  at  his  pleasure,  and 
118.  27  bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  .unto  the 
149.    8  To  bind  their  kings  with  chains,  and 

Jer.  39.  7  bound  him  with  chains,  to  carry  him  to 
52.  11  king  of  Babylon  bound  him  in  chaius 

Eze.    3.  25  shall  bind  thee  with  them,  and  thou 

Hos.  10.  10  when  they  shall  bind  themselves  in  their 

3.  To  gird,  "ijx  aphad. 

Lev.    8.    7  the  ephod,  and  bound  (it)  unto  him 

4.  To  wrap  round,  b\?}  chabash. 

Job   40.  13  Hide  them,  .bind  their  faces  in  secret 
Eze.  24.  17  biud  the  tire  of  thine  head  upon  thee 
30.  21  to  put  a  roller  to  bind  it,  to  make  it 

5.  To  wrap  round,  boh  chabash,  3. 

Job  28.  11  He  bindeth  the  floods  from  overflowing 
6. To  gird,  "ip;  yasar,  3. 

Hos.    7. 15  I  have  bound  (and)  strengthened  their 
7.7b  bind,  fetter,  res  kephalh,  3. 

Dan.    3.  20  most  mighty  men.  .to  bind  Shadrach 
3. 21  these  men  W'.-re  bound  in  their  coats 
3.  23  these  three  men.  .fell  down  bound  into 
3.  24  Did  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  into 

8.  To  tie,  bind,  "fojj  anad. 

Job   31.  36  Surely  I  would,  .bind  it.  .a  crown  to  me 

9.  To  bind,  ~ij3^  aqad. 

Gen.  22.    9  bound  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the 

1 0 .  To  press,  compress,  lis  tsur. 

2  Ki.  5.  23  bound  two  talents  of  silver  in  two  bags 
-  Eze.    5.    3  Thou  shalt  also,  .bind  them  in  thy  skirts 

11.  To  convpress,  press,  "n*  tsarar. 

Prov  26.    8  As  he  that  bindeth  a  stone  in  a  string,  so 
30.    4  who  hath  bound  the  waters  in  a  garment '( 

12.  To  bind  {as  a  conspirator),  Tpjj  qashar. 
Deut.  6.    8  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  thine  hand 

11.  18  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  your  hand 
Josh.  2. 18  biud  this  line  of  scarlet  thread  in  the 

2.  21  she  bound  the  scarlet  line  in  the  window 
Job   39.  10  Canst  thou  biud  the  unicorn  with,  .band 

41.    5  or  wilt  thou  bind  him  for  thy  maidens  ? 
Prov.  3.    3  bind  them  about  thy  neck ;  write  them 

6.  21  Biud  them  continually  upon  thine  heart 

7.  3  Bind  them  upon  thy  fingers,  write  them 
Jer.  51.  63  thou  shalt  biud  a  stone  to  it,  and  cast  it 

IS. To  bind,  yjp.  qashar,  3. 

Job   38.  31  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of 
Isa.   49.  18  thou  shalt  surely .  .bind  them  (on  thee) 

14.  To  entangle,  bind,  cri  rakas. 

Exod28.  28  they  shall  bind  the  breastplate  by  the 
39.  21  they  did  bind  the  breastplate  by  his 

15.  To  yoke,  bind,  nrn  ratham. 

Mic.  1.  13  bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast :  she 
IQ.To  fetter,  Beo-fievco  desmeud. 

Matt 23.    4  they  bind  heavy  burdens  and  grievous  to 

Acts  22.  4  binding  and  delivering  into  prisons  both 
17.  To  fetter,  dec/ieia  desmeo. 

Luke  S.  29  was  kept  bound  with  chains  and.  .fetters 
IS. To  bind,  fasten,  tie,  Sew   deo. 

Matt  12.  29  except  he  first  bind  the  strong  man  ? 

13.  30  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them  ;  but 

14.  3  Herod  had  laid  hold  on  John,  and  bound 
16.  19  thou  shalt  biud  on  earth  shall  be  bound 
18.  18  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in 

32. 13  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him 
27.    2  when  they  had  bound  him,  they  led 

Mark  3.  27  except  he  will  first  bind  the  strong  man 
5.   3  no  man  could  bind  him,  no,  not  with 

5.  4  he  had  been  often  bound  with  fetters 

6.  17  bound  him  in  prison  for  Herodias'  sake 

15.  1  bound  Jesus,  and  carried.. away,  and 
15.    7  bound  with  them  that  had  made  insur. 

Lukei3_  16  whom  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these .  .years 
Johnn.  44  bound  hand  and  fout  with  grave  clothes 
18.  12  Then  the  band . .  took  Jesus,  and  bound 
iS.  24  Annas  had  sent  him  bound  unto  Caiaphas 


Acts   9.    2  might  bring  them  bound  unto  Jerusalem 
9.  14  authority,  .to  biud  all  that  call  on  thy 
9.  21  might  bring  them  bound  unto  the  chief 
12.    6  Peter  was  sleeping. .bound  with  two 

20.  22  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusalem 

21.  11  bound  his  own  hands  and  feet,  and  said 
21.  11  So  shall  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  bind  the 
21.  13  I  am  ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also 

21.  33  commanded  ..to  be  bound  with  ..chains 

22.  5  to  bring  them  ..bound  unto  Jerusalem 
22.  29  was  afraid.. because  he  had  bound  him 
24.  27  Felix,  willing  to  show . .  a . .  left  Paul  bound 

Rom.  7.    2the  woman.. is  bound  by  the  lawto.-hus. 

1  Co.    7.  27  Art  thou  bound  unto  a  wife?  seek  not  to 

7.  39  The  wife  is  bound  by  the  law  as  long  as 

2  Ti.    2.    9  bonds ;  but  the  word  of  God  is  not  bound 
Rev.    9.  14  are  bouud  in  the  great  river  Euphrates 

20.    2  Satau,  and  bound  him  a  thousand  years 
19.  To  stretch  out  before,  irporsivto  proteino.   ' 

Acts  22.  25  as  they  bound  him  with  thongs,  Paul 
BIND  about,  to  — 
l.Tb  gird,  ")]N  azar. 

Job    30.  18  it  bindeth  me  about  as  the  collar  of  my 
2. To  bind  around,  irepiSew  ptrideo. 

Johnn.  44  his  face  was  bound  about  with  a  napkin 
BIND  on,  to  — 
To  bind  under,  vwoSeai  hupodeo. 

Acts  12.    8  Gird  thyself,  and  bind  on  thy  sandals 
BIND  sheaves,  to  — 
To  bind,  "ipj/  amar,  3. 

Psa.129.    7  nor  he  that  bindeth  sheaves  his  bosom 
BIND  up,  to  — 

1 .  To  bind  up,  gird,  cbn  chabash. 

Job     5.  18  For  he  maketh  sore,  and  bindeth  up  ;  he 
Isa.   30.  26  Lord  bindeth  up  the  breach  of  his  people 

61.    1  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken  hearted 
Eze.  34.    4  have  ye  bouud  up(thatwhichwas)broken 

34.  16  will  bind  up  (that  which  was)  broken 
Hos.   4.  19  The  wind . .  bound  her  up  in  her  wings 

2.  To  bind  up,  gird,  cbri  chabash,  3. 

Psa.  147.    3  He  healeth . .  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds 
Z.To  straiten,  compress,  Tis  tsur. 

Deut  14.  25  Then  shalt  thou  ..biud  up  the  money  in 

4.  To  straiten,  compress,  ~nx  tsarar. 

Job   26.    8  He  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick 
Isa.     8.  16  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  thelaw  among 

5.  To  bind  fast,  KaraB4a>  katadeo. 

Lukeio.  34  went ..  and  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring 
BIND  with,  to  — 
To  bind  along  with,  awSsw  sundeo. 

Heb.  13.    3  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound  with 
BINDING  — 
1. Binding,  obliging,  "sp^  1SN  issar,  esar. 

Xum5o.  13  every  binding  oath  to  afflict  the  soul,  her 
2. Lip,  edge,  rra"(p  saphah. 

Exod28.  32  it  shall  have  a  binding  of  woven  work 
[See  also  Curse,  execration,  oath.] 
BI'-NEA,  n>??3,  NV.-2  wanderer. 
A  son  of  Moza,  a  descendant  of  Saul,  B.C.  900. 

1  Ch.  8.  37  Moza  begat  B. :  Kapha  (was)  his  son 

9.  43  Moza  begat  B. ;  and  Rephaiah  his  son 

BLN-NTJ'-I,  '«?  family  ship. 

1.  A  Levite  appointed  to  the  oversight  of  the  weighing 
of  the  gold  and  silver  vessels  that  Ezra  brought  up 
from  Babylon,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    8.  33  with  them  (was).  .Noadiah  the  son  of  B. 

2.  One  of  the  family  of  Pahath-moab,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  30  of  thesons  of  Pahath-moab;  Eezaleel.-B. 

3.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  38  And  Bani,  and  B.,  Shimei. 

4.  One  of  the  family  of  Henadad,  B.C.  460. 

Neh.    3.  24  After  him  repaired  B. .  .another  piece 
id.    9  B.  of  the  sons  of  Henadad,  Kadmiel 

5.  One  whose  descendants  came  up  with  Zerubbabel. 
He  is  called  Bani  in  Ezra  2.  io,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.    7.  15  ThechildrenofB. .six  hundred  forty  and 

6.  A  Levite  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.    8  Moreover  the  Levites  :  Jeshua,  B. 
BIRD  — 
l.Foid,  bird,  r»iy  oph. 

Gen.  40.  17  the  birds  did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket 
40. 19  the  birds  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  thee 

2  Sa.  21. 10  neither  the  birds  of  the  air  to  rest  on 
Eccl.io.  20  a  bird  of  the  air  shall  carry  the  voice,  and 
Isa.    16.    2  as  a  wandering  bird  cast  out  of  the  nest 
Jer.     4.  25  all  the  birds  of  the  heavens  were  fled 

5.  27  As  a  cage  is  full  of  birds,  so  (are)  their 
12.    4  the  beasts  are  consumed,  and  the  birds 
Hos.    9.  ii  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  bird 

2.A  ravenous  bird,  b;u  ayit. 

Jer.  12.    9  heritage.. the  birds  round  about  (are) 
B.A  sparrow,  Tias  teippor. 

Gen.    7.  14  every  fowl  after  his  kind,  every  bird  of 
15.  10  divided  them,  .the  birds  divided  he  not 
Lev.  14.    4  that  is  to  be  cleansed  two  birds  alive 
14.    5  one  of  the  birds  be  killed  in  an . .  vessel 
14.   6  As  for  the  living  bird,  he  shall  take  it 


Lev.  14.    6  dip.  .the  living  bird  in  the  blood  of  the 
14.    7  shall  let  the  living  bird  loose  into  the 
14.  49  shall  take  to  cleanse  the  house  two  buds 
14.  50  he  shall  kill  the  one  of  the  birds  in  an 
14.  51  living  bird,  .in  the  blood  of  the  slain  bird 
14.  52  shall  cleanse,  .with  the  blood  of  the  bird 
14.  52  running  water,  and  with  the  living  bird 
14.  53  shall  let  go  the  living  bird  out  of  the  city  . 

Deut  14.  11  (Of)  all  clean  birds  ye  shall  eat 

22.    6  If  a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be.  .in  any  tree 

Job   41.    5  Wilt  thou  play  with  him  as.  .a  bird? 

Psa.  1?:.    1  say  ye.  .Flee  (as)  a  bird  to  your  mountain? 
104.  17  Where  the  birds  make  their  nests 
124.    7  Our  soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the 

Prov.  6.    5  as  a  bird  from  the  hand  of  the  fowler 
7.  23  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the  snare,  and 

26.  2  As  the  bird  by  wandering,  as  the  swallow 

27.  8  As  a  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest 
Eccl.    9.  12  as  the  birds  that  are  caught  in  the  snare 

12.  4  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  the  bird 
Isa.   31.    5  As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts 
Lam.   3.  52  Mine  enemies  chased  me  sore,  like  a  bird 
Eze.  39.    4  I  will  give  thee  unto  the  ravenous  birds 
Hos.  11.  11  They  shall  tremble  as  a  bird  out  of 
Amos  3.    5  Can  a  bud  fall  in  a  snare  upon  the  earth 

4.  Bird,  19S  tsephar. 

Dan.    4.  33  and  his  nails  like  birds'  (claws) 

o.Owner  of  a  vring,  *)j3  ■?$;?  baal  kanoiph. 

Prov.  1.  17  the  net  is  spread  in  the  sight  of  any  bird 

6.  Bird  {domestic  or  wild),  tipveov  orneon. 

Rev.  18.    2  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird 

7. Flying,  winged  animal,  irtrstvov  ptttcinon. 

Matt.  S.  20  the  birds  of  the  ah-,  .nests  ;  but  the  Son 

13.  32  that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge 
Luke  9.  58  birds  of  the  air.  .nests  ;  but  the  Son  of 
Rom.  1.  23  to  birds,  and  fourfooted  beasts,  and 
Jas.     3.    7  every  kind  of  beasts,  and  of  birds,  and 

S.Feathered,  vnnged  animal,  -nri\vov ptenmi. 

1  Co.  15.  39  one.  .flesh  of  men.  .another  of  birds 

BIRD,  speckled  or  ravenous  — 

A  ravenous  bird,  ("liB*)  tt*£  ayit  tsippor. 

Isa.   46.  11  Calling  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  east 
Jer.    12.    9  Mine .  .(is)  unto  me  (as)  a  speckled  bird 
Eze.  39.    4  I  will  give  thee  unto  the  ravenous  birds 

BIR'-SHA,  V&13  thick,  strong. 
A  king  of  Gomorrah  in  the  time  of  Abram,  B.C.  1917. 
Ge.    14.    2  made  war  with . .  B.  king  of  Gomorrah 

BIRTH  — 

l.To  bear,  bring  forth,  yield,  *vp;  yalad. 

Hos.    9.  11  glory  shall  fly  away,  .from  the  birth 
2.Cutting  out,  rnipp  mehurah. 

Eze.  16.    3  Thy  birth  and  thy  nativity  (is)  of  the 
3. Breaking  forth,  T2IKD  mashber. 

2  Ki.  19.    3  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth 
Isa.   37.    3  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth 

4.  Generations,  nvipin  toledoth. 

Exod28.  10  their  names,  .according  to  their  birth 

5.  Birth,  a  bei?ig  born,  yevtr-t]  genele. 

John  9.    1  he  saw  a  man  which  was  blind,  .birth 

6. Birth,  nativity,  yevi>7]a-ts  gennesis. 

Matt..  1.  iS  the  [birth]  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  wise 
Luke  1. 14  and  many  shall  rejoice  at  his  [birth] 

BIRTH,  bring  to  the  — 

To  break  forth,  12^'  sliabar,  5. 

Isa.   66.    9  Shall  I  bring  to  the  birth,  and  not  cause 

BIRTH,  one's  — 

To  be  born,  brought  forth,  ~h*  yalad,  2. 

Eccl.  7.    1  the  day  of  death  than,  .of  one's  birth 

BIRTH,  untimely  — 

Fallen  thing,  hsi  nepliel. 

Job     3.  16  Or  as  an  hidden  untimely  birth  I  had  not 
Psa.  58.    8  the  untimely  birth  of  a  woman,  .may 
Eccl.   6.    3  an  untimely  birth  (is)  better  than  he 

BIRTH  DAT  — 

I.Day  of  the  birth,  n~Vrt  dv  yoni  hulledeth. 

Gen.  40.  20  third  day.  .Pharaoh's  birthday,  that  he 

2.Natal  festivities,  yzviata.  genesia. 

Matt  1*4.    6  when  Herod's  birth  day  was  kept,  the 
Mark  6.  21  Herod,  on  his  birth  day,  made  a  supper  to 

BIRTH  RIGHT  — 

1. Status  of  a  first  born,  rriisa  bekorah. 

Gen.  25.  31  said,  Sell  me  this  day  thy  birthright 
25.  32  what  profit  shall  this  birthright  do  to 
25.  33  and  he  sold  his  birthright  unto  Jacob 
25.  34  thus  Esau  despised  (his)  birthright 
27.  36  said .  .he  took  away  my  birthright ;  and 
43-  33  firstborn  according  to  his  birthright 
1  Ch.  5.    1  his  birthright  was  given  unto  the  sons 
5.    1  not  to  be  reckoned  after  the  birthright 
5.    2  but  the  birthright  (was)  Joseph's 

2. Rights  of  a  first  born,  Trpcoror6Kia  prototohia. 
Heb.  12. 16  who  for.  .meat  sold  his  birthright 

BIR-ZA'-VITH,  nina  olive  well. 
A  grandson  of  Beriah  son  of  Asher. 

1  Ch.  7.  31  Heber,  and  Malchiel.  .the  father  of  B 


BISHLAM 


9C 


BLAMED 


BISH'-LAM,  c^a1?  in  peace. 

A  commissioner  of  Artaxerxes  in  Canaan  at  the  time 

of  Zerubbabel's  return  from  exile.     He  wrote  against 

the  rebuilders  of  tlie  temple,  B.C.  536. 

Ezra   4.    7  in  the  days  of  A.  wrote  B.,  Mithredath 

BISHOP  — 

Overseer,  superintendent,  iirtcrKoiros  episkopos. 
Phil.   1.    1  Paul.  .to.  .the  bishops  and  deacons 
1  Ti.    3.    2  A  bishop  then  must  be  blameless,  the 
Titus  1.    7  For  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  as  the 
1  Pe.  2.  25  are  now  returned  unto  the.  .Bishop  of 

BISHOP,  office  of  a  — 
Oversight,  etthtkottt)  episkope. 

1  Ti.    3.    1  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop,  he 
BISHOPRIC  — 
Oversight,  eVto-KOTTTj  epishope. 

Acts    1.  20  and,  His  bishopric  let  another  take 

BIT  — 

l.Bridle,  curb,  irja  metheej. 

Psa.  32.   9  whose . .  be  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle 

2.  The  bit  of  a  bridle,  curb,  xa^tvSs  cholines. 

Jas.     3.    3  Behold,  we  put  bits  in  the  horses'  mouths 

BITE,  to  — 

l.To  bite,  T|»;i  nashak. 

Gen.  49.  17  Ban.  .a  serpent,  .that  biteth  the  horse 
Num.21.  9  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when 
Prov.23.  32  At  the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and 
Eccl.  10.  8  breaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite 
10. 11  serpent  will  bite  without  enchantment 
Amos  5. 19  if  a  man  did  flee,  .and  a  serpent  bit  him 
9.  3  I  command  the  serpent,  and  he  shall  bite 
Mic.   3.   5  my  people  err,  that  bite  with  their  teeth 

2.  To  bite  (violently),  Ttpi  nashak,  3. 

Nuni2i.    6  fiery  serpents,  .they  bit  the  people 
Jer.     8.  17  and  they  shall  bite  you,  saith  the  LORD 

3. To  bile,  irritate,  SaKvai  dakno. 

Gal.    5.  15  But  if  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another 
BITH'-IAH,  n;p?  daughter  o/Jah,  worshipper. 
Daughter  of  Pharaoh  and  wife  of  Mered,  a  descendant 
of  Judah,  about  the  time  of  the  Exodus.     Her  name 
seems  to  imply  her  conversion,  as  Mered  s  other  wife 
is  called  "the  Jewess,"  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  18  these  (are)  the  sons  of  B. .  .which  Mered 

BITH'-RON,  p-unan  (the)  broken  or  divided  place. 
A  district  in  the  Arabah  or  Jordan  valley  on  the  E  side. 
It  was  in  Gad  between  Mahanaim  and  the  Jordan. 

2  Sa.    2.  29  Abner  and  his  men.  .went  through  all  B. 
BI-THYN'-IA,  friBvvia. 

The  original  inhabitants  of  this  ancient  province  were, 
according  to  the  traditional  account,  expelled  by  some 
Thracian  tribes,  of  which  the  Bithyni  were  the  most 
numerous.  The  Megarians  formed  a  colony  at  Astacus, 
B.C.  712,  which  became  a  flourishing  city.  Bithynia 
was  incorporated  with  the  Lydian  empire  by  Croesus 
about  B.C.  560.  (Bithynia  is  included  in  the  modern 
Anatolia.)  In  541  B.C.  it  succumbs  with  Lydia  to 
Persia ;  431  or  436,  Dydalsus,  or  Daedalsus,  chief  of  the 
Bithynia,  seizes  Astacus,  and  founds  the  kingdom  of 
Bithynia ;  409,  the  Bithynians  deliver  to  Alcibiades  the 
property  of  the  Chalcedonians  intrusted  to  their  safe 
keeping:  401,  they  vigorously  oppose  the  retreat  of 
the  Ten  Thousand  :  333,  they  defeat  Calas,  one  of  the 
generals  of  Alexander  the  Great;  315,  Zipoetes  wars 
with  Astacus  and  Chalcedon;  81,  Lysimachus,  the 
Thracian,  sends  an  army  to  subdue  Bithynia,  but  his 
troops  are  defeated  and  his  generals  slain;  278,  Nico- 
medes,  king  of  Bithynia,  invites  the  Gauls  into  Asia, 
and  assigns  Galatia  as  their  teritory,  264,  Nicomedes 
I.  founds  Nicomedia;  228,  Zielas  having  planned  the 
massacre  of  the  chiefs  of  Galatia,  is  detected  and  slain 
oy  them;  216,  Prusias  I.  defeats  the  Gauls;  167 
Prusias  II.  visits  Rome;  156,  war  between  the  kinn-s 
ot  Bithynia  and  Pergamus;  88,  war  between  Nico- 
medes III.,  of  Bithynia,  and  Mithridates,  king  of  Pon- 
tus;  74,  death  of  Nicomedes  III.,  who  bequeaths  Bi- 
thynia to  the  Komau  people.  In  AD.  63.  Bithynia  and 
I'untus  are  united ;  103,  Pliny  becomes  governor  •  104 
complains  of  the  Christians  in  his  province-  260 
ravaged  by  the  Goths;  1074,  seized  by  the  Seljukiaii 
lurks;  1231,  first  settlement  of  the  Tartars  in  Bithy- 
11  12.,:;,  11. >■  1  >t tomans  found  a  new  empire  in  Bithy- 
nia; 1J39,  Orchan  conquers  Nicomedia,  and  subdues 
tlie  whole  of  Bithynia. 

lets  hi.    7  they  assayed  to  go  into  B. 

.  Pe,   1.    i  to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout.  .B. 
BITTEN,  is  — 

,  -c'i  nashah 

N'uiiisi.   8  evory  one  that  is  bitten,  .shall  live 
BITTEN,  hunger  — 
Hun  rry,  =r?  raeb. 

Job    18.  12  His  strength  shall  lie  hunger  bitten 
BITTER  — 

1.  Bitti . .  ig  mar. 

'     '  ,   '     1  '"  I  « weeding  bitter  cry 

0  the  waters.,  lor  they  (were)  bitter 

-Num.  5.  18  shall  have  in  hishandthe  bitter  water 

b'  '>'""  free  from  this  bitter  water 

5. 23  shaU  blot  (them)  out  with  the  bitter  water 

5.  24  cause  tin-  woman  to  drink  the  bitter 

5. 27  skull  enter  into  her,  (and  become)  bitter 


Esth.  4.    1  and  cried  with  a  loud  and  a  bitter  cry 
Job     3.  20  misery,  and  life  unto  the  bitter  (in)  soul 
Psa.  64.    3  to  shoot)  their  arrows,  (even)  bitter  words 
Prov.  5.    4  But  her  end  is  bitter  as  wormwood 

27.    7  to  the  hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing  is 
Eccl.  7.  26  And  I  find  more  bitter  than  death  the 
Isa.     5.  20  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter! 
Jer.     2.  19  see  that  (it  is)  an  evil,  .and  bitter,  that 

4. 18  this  (is)  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is 
Eze.  27.  31  bitterness  of  heart  (and)  bitter  wailing 
Amos  8.  10  and  the  end  thereof  as  a  bitter  day 
Hab.  1.    6  the  Chaldeans,  (that)  bitter  and  hasty 

2.  To  be  bitter,  Tip  marah. 

2Ki.  14.  26  the  Lord  saw.  .(that  it  was)  very  bitter 
3. Bitterness,  >"!P  meri. 

Job   23.    2  Even  to-day  (is)  my  complaint  bitter  :  my 

4.  Very  bitter,  'TIP  meriri. 

Deut  32.  24  with  burning  heat,  and  with  bitter 

5.  Bitterness,  .Trip  merorah. 

Deut  32.  32  grapes  of  gall,  their  clusters  (are)  bitter 

6. Bitternesses,  D'Tip  merorim. 

Exodi2.    8  with  bitter  (herbs)  they  shall  eat  it 
Num.  9.  11  with  unleavened  bread  and  bitter  (herbs) 

".Pointed,  sharp,  iriKp6s  pikros. 

Jas.     3.  11  at  the  same  place  sweet  (water)  and  bitter 
3. 14  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  strife 

BITTER,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  bitter,  Tip  marar. 

Isa.  24.   9  strong  drink  shall  be  bitter  to  them 

2.  To  make  sharp,  pointed,  iriKpaivw  pihraino. 
Col.  3.  19  love  (your)  wives,  and  be  not  bitter 
Rev.  10.  10  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  belly  was  bitter 

BITTER,  to  make  — 

1.7b  embitter,  Tip  marar,  3. 

Exod.  1.  14  they  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard 
2.  To  make  sharp,  pointed,  irMpaivm  pikraino. 

Rev.   8.  11  waters,  because  they  were  made  bitter 
10.   9  it  shall  make  thy  belly  bitter,  but  it 

BITTER,  most  — 

Bitternesses,  Dnnpn  tamrurim. 

Jer.    6.  26  for)  an  only  son,  most  bitter  lamentation 

BITTER  things  — 
Bitterness,  .Trip  merorah. 

Job   13'  26  For  thou  writest  bitter  things  against  me 

BITTERLY  — 

1.7b  curse,  tin  arar. 

Judg.  5.  23  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof 

2.  Bitter,  id  mar. 

Isa.    33.    7  ambassadors,  .shall  weep  bitterly 
Eze.  27.  30  shall  cry  bitterly,  and  shall  cast  up 

3. 7b  embitter,  Tip  marar,  3. 

Isa.   22.   4  Look  away  from  me  ;  I  will  weep  bitterly 

4. Pointedly,  sharply,  iriKpais  jrikros. 

Matt26.  75  And  he  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 
Luke22.  62  And  Peter  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 

BITTERLY,  to  deal  — 

To  embitter,  make  bitter,  Tip  marar,  5. 

Ruth  1.  20  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly 

BITTERLY,  most  — 

Bitternesses,  onnpn  tamrurim. 

Hos.  12.  14  Ephraim  provoked ..  anger  most  bitterly 

BITTERN  — 

Hedgehog,  porcupine,  "lisp  qippod. 

Isa.  14.  23  make  it  a  possession  for  the  bittern 
34.  11  the  cormorant  and  the  bittern  shall 

Zeph.  2.  14  the  bitterns  shall  lodge  in  the  upper 

BITTERNESS  — 
l.BiUerness,  TDD  memer. 

Prov.17.  25  and  bitterness  to  her  that  bare  him 
2. Bitternesses,  Q'Tipp  mammcrorim. 

Job     9.  iS  but  filleth  me  with  bitterness 
3. Bitter,  ID  mar. 

1  Sa.    1. 10  And  she  (was)  in  bitterness  of  soul,  and 

15.  32  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  passed 

2  Sa.    2.  26  it  will  be  bitterness  in  the  latter  end  ? 
Job     7.  11 1  will  complain  in  the  bitterness  of  my 

10.    1  I  will  speak  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 
21.  25  another  dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  his 
Isa.  38.  15  all  my  years  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 
Eze.    3. 14  I  went  in  bitterness,  in  the  heat  of  my 
27.  31  they  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitterness 

i. Bitterness,  .Tip  marah. 

Prov.  14. 10  The  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness 

5. Bitterness,  nivip  meriruth. 

Eze.  at.    6  with  bitterness  sigh  before  their  eyes 

6. Bitternesses,  D'Tip  merorim. 

Lam.  3.  iS  He  hath  filled  me  with  bitterness,  he 

7. Sharpness,  bitterness,  mnpia pikria. 

Acts    8.  23  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
It. .111.  ;.  1  1  mouth  (is)  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness 
Eph.   4.  31  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger 
lieb.  12. 15  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up 


BITTERNESS,  to  be  in  — 
1. 7b  be  bitter,  "np  marar. 

Lam.  1.   4  her  virgins  are  afflicted ..  (is)  iu  bitterness 
2.7'o  make  bitter,  Tip  marar,  5. 

Zech  12.  10  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one 

BITTERNESS,  to  have  — 

7b  become  bitter,  Tip  marar,  5. 

Isa.  38. 17  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness 

BIZ-JOTH'-JAH,  Tni  -is  place  of  Jah's  olives. 
A  town  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  near  Beer-sheba. 

Josh.  15.  28  Hazar-shual,  and  Beer-sheba,  and  B. 
BIZ'-THA,  xn|3  eunuch. 
The  second  of  the  seven  eunuchs  of  Ahasuerus,  B.C.  51  . 

Esth.  1.  10  B. .  .that  served  in  the  presence  of.  .kin^ 
BLACK  — 
I. Middle,  jitrN  is]iQ,i. 

Prov.  7.    9  in  the  evening,  in  the  black  and  dark 
2. Black,  swarthy,  "int?  shachor. 

Lev.  13.  31  and.  .no  black  hair  in  it ;  then  the  priest 

13.  37  (that)  there  is  black  hair  grown  up  therein 
Song   1.    5  I  (am)  black,  but  comely,  0  ye  daughters 

5. 11  his  locks  (are)  bushy,  .black  as  a  raven 
Zech.  6.    2  in  the  second  chariot  black  horses 

6.    6  The  black  horses  which  (are)  therein 
3.  Very  brown,  blackish,  rnrnnt!'  shecharchoreth. 

Song  1.    6  Look  not  upon'  nie.'because  I  (am)  black 
4. Black,  jue'Acts  melas. 

Matt.  5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair,  .black 
Rev.    6.    5  I  beheld,  and  lo  a  black  horse  :  and  he 
6.  12  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair 
BLACK,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  dark,  3.E»n  chashak. 

Lam.  4.    8  Their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  coal ;  they 
2. 7b  be  contracted,  dark,  "ip|  kamar,  2. 

Lam.  5.  10  Our  skin  was  black  like  an  oven  because 

3.  To  be  covered,  dark,  tjp  gadar. 

Jer.     4.28  For  this  shall . .  the  heavens . .  be  black 
8.  21  I  am  black  ;  astonishment  hath  taken 

14.  2  they  are  black  unto  the  ground ;  and  the 

4.  To  become  dark,  covered,  Tip  qadar,  7. 

1  Ki.  18.  45  the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and 
5. 7*0  burn,  be  brown,  Insi  shachar. 

Job   30.  30  My  skin  is  black  upon  me,  and  my  bones 

BLACK  marble  — 

Glowing  substance,  rnnb  sochereth. 

Esth.  1.    6  upon  a  pavement  of  red.  .black  marble 

BLACKISH,  to  be  — 

To  be  covered,  dark,  Tip  qadar. 

Job     6.  16  Which  are  blackish  by  reason  of  the  ice 

BLACKNESS  — 

1 .  Obsairations,  bitternesses,  D'TIP?  kimririm. 
Job     3.    5  let  the  blackness  of  the  day  terrify  it 

2. Redness,  flame,  tins  parur. 

Joel    2.    6  all  faces  shall  gather  blackness 

Nan.  2.  10  the  faces  of  them  all  gather  blackness 
3.  Darkness,  niTip  qadruth. 

Isa.  50.    3  I  clothe  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and 
i.A  thick  cloud,  yv6<pos  gnophos. 

Heb.  12.  18  that  burned  with  fire,  nor  unto  blackness 
5. Thick  darkness,  £6<pos  xophos. 

Jude      13  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of 
BLADE  — 
1. Flaming  weapon,  an1?  lahab. 

Judg.  3.  22  the  haft  also  went  in  after  the  blade;  and 
3.  22  the  fat  closed  upon  the  blade,  so  that  he 

2.  Blade,  stalk,  x^pToi  chortos. 

Matt  13.  26  But  when  the  blade  was  sprung  up,  and 
Mark  4.  28  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear  after  that 

BLADE,  shoulder  — 

Shoulder,  no??>  shikmah. 

Job  31.  22  let  mine  arm  fall  from  my  shoulder  blade 

BLATNS  — 

A  swelling,  n"3y;tt  ababuoth. 

Exod.  9.    9, 10  a  boil  breaking  forth  (with)  blains 

BLAME,  without  — 
Blameless,  &fxup.os  amomos. 

Eph.  1.  4  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame 
BLAME,  to  — 
To  blame,  fuc/xdofiai  momaomai,  uwue'ojUai. 

2  Co.   8.  20  no  man  should  blame  us  in  this  abund. 

BLAME,  to  bear  the  — 

To  miss  the  mark,  err,  sin,  Hpn  chata. 

Gen.  43.    9  then  let  me  bear  the  blame  for  ever 
44.  32  I  shall  bear  the  blame  to  my  father  for 

BLAMED,  to  be  — 

l.To  know  (something)  against  cue,  KaraytvccaKic. 

Gal.    2. 11  withstood  him.  .because  he  was  to  be  bl. 
2.  To  blame.  /j.a/.iao/j.ai  momaomai,  neo^eojuai. 

2  Co-   6.    3  no  offence . .  that  tlie  ministry  be  not  bl 


BLAMELESS 


97 


BLESS 


BLAMELESS  — 

I. Innocent,  free,  "pj  naqi. 

Gen.  44.  10  my  servant ;  ana  yo  shall  be  blameless 
Josh.  2. 17  We  (will  be)  blameless  of  this  thine  oath 

2.  Blameless,  a/ie/i71"™"  amemplos. 

Luke  1.    6  walking  in  all . .  the  ordinances . .  blameless 

Phil.  2.  15  That  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harmless 

3.   6  the  righteousness . .  in  the  law,  blameless 

3.  Blamelessly,  a,ueu.7rTior  amemplos. 

1  Th.  5.  23  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blanieicss 
i.Blameless,  a/j.cipiiTos  amSmetos. 

2  Pe.   3. 14  that  ye  may  be  found  of  him .  .blameless 
5.  Causeless,  guiltless,  avainos  anaitios. 

Mattia.    5  profane  the  sabbath,  and  are  blameless  ? 
S.Not  accused  or  called  in,  aveyK\i\Tos  anegkletos. 

1  Co.    1.    8  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 

1  Ti.    3.  10  the  office  of  a  deacon,  being,  .blameless 

Tit.     1.   6  If  any  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one 
1.    7  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  as  the 
7  Xot  laid  hold  on,  avuriXnirTos  anepileptos. 

1  Ti.    3.    2  A  bishop  then  must  be  blameless,  the 

5.  7  give  in  charge,  that  they  may  be  blameless 

BLAMELESS,  to  be  — 

To  be  innocent,  free,  njj  naqah,  2. 

Judgis-    3  Now  shall  I  be  more  blameless  than  the 
BLASPHEME,  to  — 
X.To  bless,  declare  blessed,  tjtp  barak,  3. 

1  Ki.  21. 10  Thou  didst  blaspheme  God  and  the  king 

21. 13  Naboth  did  blaspheme  God  and  the  king 

2. To  revile,  cut  into,  ^i?  gadaph,  3. 

2  Ki.  19.   6  which  the  servants,  .have  blasphemed 

19.  22  Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and  bias. 
Psa.  44. 16  him  that  reproacheth  andblasphemeth 
Isa.  37.    6  wherewith  the  servants,  .blasphemed 
37.  23  Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and  bias. 
Eze.  20.  27  in  this  your  fathers  have  blasphemed 
-3.  To  cut  into,  expose,  *]"I7  charaph,  3. 

Isa.   65.   7  and  blasphemed  me  upon  the  hills 

4.  To  pierce,  25;  naqab. 

Lev.  24. 11  Israelitish  woman's  son  blasphemed  the 
24. 16  that  blasphemeth  the  name  of  the  Lord 
24.  16  when  he  blasphemeth  the  name ..  shall  be 

5. To  speak  injuriously,  fi\a<T(p7)ix£o>  blasphemes. 
Matt.  9.   3  the  scribes  said . .  This  (man)  blasphemeth 
Mark.  3.  28  wherewith  soever  they  shall  blaspheme 

3.  29  he  that  shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy 
Luke  1 2.  10  unto  him  that  [blasphemeth]  against  the 
Johnio.  36  Sayyeofhim..Thou  blasphemest;  because 
Acts  13.  45  by  Paul,  contradicting  and  blaspheming 
18.  6  they  opposed  themselves, and  blasphemed 
26.  11  punished,  .and  compelled,  .to  blaspheme 
Horn.  2.  24  for  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among 
1  Ti.    1.  20  that  they  may  learn  not  to  blaspheme 

6.  1  that  the  name  of  God ..  be  not  blasphemed 
Titus  2.  5  that  the  word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed 
Jas.  2.  7  Do  not  they  blaspheme  that  worthy  name 
Rev.  13.   6  he  opened  his  mouth,  .to  blaspheme  his 

16.   9  men  were  scorched . .  and  blasphemed  the 
16. 11  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven  because 
16.  21  men  blasphemed  God  because  of  the 

BLASPHEME,  (to  give  occasion)  to  — 

To  pierce,  sting,  ^N3  naats,  3. 

2Sa.  12. 14  thou  hast  given. .occasion  ..to  blaspheme 

Psa.  74. 10  shall  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  name  for 

74.  i3  the  foolish  people  have  blasphemed  thy 

BLASPHEMED  — 

To  pierce,  sting,  ;'N3  naats,  7. 

Isa.  52.    5  myname.. every  day  (is)  blasphemed 
BLASPHEMER  — 
l.Z*o  speak  injuriously,  ftAao-tynixia  blasphemed. 

Acts  19.  37  nor  yet  blasphemers  of  your  goddess 
2.  One  speaking  injuriously,  $\&(T<p-niios. 

1  Ti.    1. 13  Who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a 
2TL    3.   2  lovers  of  their  own  selves.. blasphemers 

3LASPHEMIE8  — 
Piercings,  nissu  neatsoth. 

Eze.  35.  12  I  have  heard  all  thy  blasphemies 
BLASPHEMOUS  — 
Speaking  injuriously,  fi\aaQr,iios  blasphemos. 

Acts   6. 11  We..heardhimspeakblasphemouswords 
6. 13  This  man  ..to  speak  [blasphemous]  words 
3LASPHEH0TJSLT  — 
To  speak  injuriously,  [ZAaa<pw,ueo  blasphemes. 

Luke  22.  65  many  ether  things  blasphemously  spake 
3T.ASPHEMY  — 
\. Piercing,  n>'x3  nealsah. 

2  Ki.  19.    3  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trouble ..  and  bias. 
Isa.  37.   3  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trouble. .and  of  bl. 

2. Injurious  speaking,  tSkactpn^ia.  blasphemia. 
Matti2.  31  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall 
12.  31  the  blasphemy  (against)  the  (Holy)  Ghost 
15. 19  out  of  the  heart  proceed.. blasphemies 
26.  65  now  ye  have  heard  his  blasphemy 
Hark  2.    7  Why  doth  this(man)  thus  speak  [blasph.]? 
3.  28  blasphemies.. they  shall  blaspheme 

7.  22  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness 
14.  64  Ye  have  heard  the  blasphemy:  whatthiuk 

13 


Luke  5.  21  Who  is  this  which  speaketh  blasphemies? 
Johnio.  33  we  stone  thee  not ;  but  for  blasphemy 
Col.    3.   S  anger,  wrath,  malice,  blasphemy,  filthy 
Rev.   2.   9  the  blasphemy  of  them,  which  say  they 
13.    1  upon  his  heads  the  name  of  blasphemy 
13.    s  speaking  great  things  and  [blasphemies] 

13.  6  he  opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy 

17.    3  a  woman  ..full  of  names  of  blasphemy 

BLASPHEMY,  to  speak  — 

To  speak  injuriously,  &kao-(j>nfxeu  blasphemed. 
Matt2G.  65  He  hath  spoken  blasphemy ;  what  further 

BLAST  — 

1. Breath,  blast,  nippj  neshamah. 

2  Sa.  22.  16  at  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  nostrils 
Job  4.  9  By  the  blast  of  God  they  perish,  and  by 
Psa.  18. 15  at  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  thy  nostrils 

2.  Wind,  spirit,  nil  ruach. 

Exodi5.    8  with  the  blast  of  thy  nostrils  the  waters 

2  Ki.  19.    7  Behold,  I  will  send  a  blast  upon  him,  aud 

Isa.   25.    4  when  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones  (is)  as 
37.   7  I  will  send  a  blast  upon  him,  and  he 
BLASTED  — 
1. Grain,  young  seed,  non^  shedemah. 

Isa.   37.  27  and.. blasted  before  it  be  grown  up 
2.  To  blight,  blast,  *n^  shadaph. 

Gen.  41.   6  seven  thin  ears  and  blasted  with  the  east 
41.  23  seven  ears,  .blasted  with  the  east  wind 
41.  27  the  seven  empty  ears,  blasted  with  the 
^.Blighted,  blasted,  nsi-f  shedephah. 

2  Ki.  19.  26  and.  .blasted  before  it  be  grown  up 
BLASTING  — 
Blight,  blasting,  fi3n$  shiddaphon. 

Deut  28.  22  with  the  sword,  aud  with  blasting,  and 

1  Ki.    S.  37  if  there  be  pestilence,  blasting,  mildew 

2  Ch.    6.  28  if  there  be  pestilence,  if  there  be  blasting 
Amos  4.    9  I  have  smitten  you  with  blasting  and 
Hag.   2.  17  I  smote  you  with  blasting  and  with 

BLAS'-TTJS,  fiKdrrros  a  bud. 

A  chamberlain  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  A.P.  35. 

Acts  12.  20  having  made  B.  the  king's  chamberlain 
BLAZE  abroad,  to  — 
To  speak  throughout,  Sia<p-q/xi^w  diaphemizd. 

Mark  1.  45  he  went  out.  .to  blaze  abroad  the  matter 
BLEATING  — 
Voice,  sound,  Tip  qol. 

1  Sa.  15.  14  What,  .then  this  bleating  of  the  sheep 
BLEATLNGS  — 

Shriekings,  pipings,  nip1")^  sheriqoth. 

Judg.  5. 16  Whyabodest  thou ..  to  hear  the  bleatings 
BLEMISH  — 
\.Spot,  dind  mum. 

Dan.    1.    4  Children  in  whom  (was)  no  blemish,  but 
'Z.Sjyot,  c>3  mum. 

Lev.  21. 17  Whosoever  (lie  be),  .that  hath,  .blemish 
21.  18  whatsoever  man.  .that  hath  a  blemish 

21.  21  that  hath  a  blemish,  .he  hath  a  blemish 
21.23  nor  come  nigh . .  because  he  hath  a  blemish 

22.  20  whatsoever  hath  a  blemish . .  shall  ye 
22.  21  perfect,  .there  shall  be  no  blemish 

22.  25  their  corruption  (is)  in  them .  .blemishes 
24.  19  if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbour 
24.  20  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a  man,  so 

Nuniig.    2  heifer  without  spot,  wherein.,  no  blemish 

Deut  15.  21  if  there  be.. blemish  therein,  .ill blemish 

1   17.    1  wherein  is  blemish, (or)  any  evil  favoured. 

2  Sa.  14.  25  from  the  sole  of  his  foot,  .no  blemish  in 

S.White  sjx'ts,  ??3?i  teballul. 

Lev.  21.  20  that  hath  a  blemish  in  his  eye,  or  be 
4. Spot,  blemish,  /iq>/j.o<>  mdmos. 

2  Pe.    2.  13  Spots,  .and  blemishes,  sporting  themsel. 
BLEISUSH,  without  — 
1. Perfect,  complete,  D'cn  tamivi. 

Exodi:?.    5  Your  lamb  shall  be  without  blemish,  a 
29.    1  Takeoneyoungbullock..withoutblemish 

Lev.    1.    3  let  him  offer  a  male  without  blemish 

1.  10  he  shall  bring  it  a  male  without  blemish 

3.  1,  6  he  shall  offer  it  without  blemish 

4.  3  bring. .ayoung  bullock  without  blemish 
4.  23  kid  of  the  goats,  a  male  without  blemish 
4.  2S  kid  of  the  goats,  a  female  without  blemish 

4.  32  he  shall  bring  it  a  female  without  blemish 

5.  15,  18  shall  bring,  .a  ram  without  blemish 

6.  6  he  shall  bring,  .a  ram  without  blemish 
9.    2  Take  thee  a  young  calf . .  withoutblemish 
9.   3  a  calf  and  a  lamb,  .without  blemish 

14. 10  shall  take  two  he  lambs  without  blemish 

14.  10  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 
22. 19  at  your  own  will  a  male  withoutblemish 

23.  12  offer.. an  he  lamb  without  blemish 
23. 18  offer,  .seven  lambs  without  blemish 

Num.  6.  14  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 
6.  14  ram  without  blemish,  .without  blemish 
28. 19,  31  they  shall  be.  .you  without  blemish 
29.   2  seven  lambs  of  the  first . .  without  blemish 
29.    8  they  shall  be  unto  you  without  blemish 
29. 13  lambs,  .they  shall  be  without  blemish 
29.  20,  23,  29,  32,  36  first  year,  without  blemish 

Eze.  43.  22  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid.  .without  blemish 
43.  23  offer  a  young  bullock  without  blemish 
43-  23,  2s  a  ram  out  of  the  flock  withoutblemish 
45.  i3  take  ayoung  bullock  without  blemish 


Eze.  45.  23  seven  bullocks,  .rams  without  blemish 
46.  4  lambs  without  blemish,  .ram  without  W 
46.    6  without  blemish,  .be  without  blemish 

46.  13  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 
2.Sp>otless,  blameless,  &/j.a/j.os  amdmos. 

Eph.    5.  27  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish 
1  Pe.    1. 19  a  lamb  without  blemish  aud  without 

BLESS,  to  — 

l.To  declare  happy,  "d^  ashar,  3. 

Job    29.  11  When  the  ear  heard  (me,),  .it  blessed  me 
Song  6.    9  The  daughters  saw  her  and  blessed  her 

2.To  declare  blessed,Tl1  barak,  3. 

Gen.    1.  22  God  blessed  them,  saying,  Be  fruitful 

1.  28  God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto 

2.  3  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,   and 

5.  2  blessed  them,  and  called  their  name 

g.    1  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said 
12.    2  I  will  bless  thee,  aud  make  thy  name 
12.    3  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and 
14.  19  And  he  blessed  him,  and  said 
17. 16  I  will  bless  her.  .yea,  I  will  bless  her 
17.  20  I  have  blessed  him,  aud  will  make  him 

22.  17  That  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  in 
24.    1  the  Lord  had  blessed  Abraham  in  all 
24.  35  the  Lord  hath  blessed  my  master  greatly 
24.  48  blessed  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abr. 
24.  60  they  blessed  Rehekah,  and  said  unto  her 
25. 11  after  the  death  of  A.,  that  God  blessed 
26.   3  I  will  be  with  thee,  aud  will  bless  thee 
26.  12  Isaac  sowed,  .and  the  Lord  blessed  him 

26.  24  fear  not,  for  I  (am)  with  thee,  aud.  .bless 

27.  4  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die 
27.    7  that  I  may  eat,  and  bless  thee  before  the 
27.  10  that  he  may  bless  thee  before  his  death 
27.  19  eat  of  my  veuison,  that  thy  soul,  .bless 
27.  23  Aud  he  discerned  him  uot.  .so  he  blessed 
27.  25  I  will  eat.  .that  my  soul  may  bless  thee 
27.  27  blessed  him.. which  the  Lord.. blessed 
27.  29  that  curseth  thee,  .that  blesseth  thee 
27.  30  Isaac  had  made  an  end  of  blessing  Jacob 
27.  31  eat  of.  .venison,  that  thy  soul  may  bless 
27.  33  before  thcu  earnest,  and  have  blessed 
27-  34>  3s  Bless  me,  (eveu)me  also,  O  my  father! 

27.  41  blessing  wherewith  his  father  blessed 

28.  1  blessed  him,  and  charged  him,  and  said 
28.    3  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  make  thee 
28.    6  When  Esau  saw  that  Isaac  had  blessed 
30.  27  learned,  .that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me 

30.  30  the  Lord  hath  blessed  thee  since  my 

31.  55  his  sous  and  his  daughters,  and  blessed 

32.  26  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless 

32.  29  And  he  blessed  him  there 

35.  9  God  appeared  unto  Jacob,  .and  blessed 
39.    5  the  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian's  house 

47.  7  brought  in  Jacob,  .and  Jacob  blessed 

47.  10  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh,  and  went  out 

48.  3  God  Almighty  appeared . .  and  blessed  me 
48.    g  Bring  them . .  unto  me,  and  I  will  bless 

48.  15  he  blessed  Joseph,  and  said,  God,  before 
48. 16  The  Angel  which  redeemed  me.  .bless 
4S.  20  blessed  them . .  In  thee  shall  Israel  bless 

49.  25  the  Almighty  who  shall  bless  thee  with 
49.  28  their  father  spake  unto  them,  .blessed 

Exodi2.  32  as  ye  have  said,  and  be  gone  ;  and  bless 

20. 11  wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath 

20.  24  I  will  come  uuto  thee,  and  I  will  bless 

23.  25  he  shall  bless  thy  bread,  aud  thy  water 
39.  43  so  had  they  doue  it :  and  Moses  blessed 

Lev.    9.  22  Aaron  lifted  up  bis  hand,  .and  blessed 

9.  23  Aaron .  .came  out,  aud  blessed  the  people 
Num.  6.  23  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless  the  children 

6.  24  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee 

6.  27  children  of  Israel ;  and  I  will  bless  them 

22.  6  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou  blessest 

23.  11  behold,  thou  hast  blessed  (them)  altog. 
23.  20  I  have  received,  .to  bless :  and.  .blessed 

23.  25  Neither  curse  them  at  all,  nor  bless  them 

24.  1  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bless  Isr. 
24.  9  he  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed  (is)  he 
24.  10  thou  hast  altogether  blessed.,  these  threo 

Deut.  1.  11  the  Lord,  .bless  you,  as  he  hath  promised 
2.   7  For  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee 

7.  13  he  will,  .bless  thee,  .he  will  also  bless 
8. 10  thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God  for 

10.  8  and  to  bless  in  his  name,  unto  this  day 
12.  7  wherein  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed 
14.  24  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed 

14.  29  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  bless  thee  in 

15.  4  for  the  LORD  shall  greatly  bless  thee  in 
iS-   6  the  Lord  thy  God  blesseth  thee,  as  he 

15. 10  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all 

15. 14  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee  thou 

15.  iS  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all 

16.  10  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee 

16. 15  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all 

21.  5  chosen,  .to  bless  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

23.  20  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  bless  thee  in 

24.  13  sleep  in  his  own  raiment,  and  bless  thee 
24.  19  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  bless  thee  in 

26.  15  Look  down.. and  bless  thy  people  Israel 

27.  12  stand  upon  mount  Gerizim  to  bless  the 

28.  8  he  shall  bless  thee  in  the  land  which  the 

28. 12  and  to  bless  ail  the  work  of  thine  hand 

30. 16  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  the 

33.  1  wherewith  Moses,  .blessed  the  children 

33. 11  Bless,  Lord,  his  substance,  and  accept 
Jcsh.  8.  33  that  they  should  bless  the  people  of  Isr. 

14.  13  Joshua  blessed  him,  and  gave  unto  Caleb 

17.  14  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me 

22.  6  Joshua  blessed  them,  and  sent  them 


BLESS 


98 


BLESSED 


Josh  22.   7  when  Joshua  sent  them  away.,  he  blessed 

22.  33  the  children  of  Israel  Messed  God,  aud 
24.  10  therefore  he  blessed  you  still :  so  I 

Jiulg.  5.   9  among  the  people.    Bless  ye  the  Lord 

13.  24  the  child  grew,  aud  the  Lord  blessed 
Kuth  a.   4  they  answered  him,  The  Lord  bless  thee 
1  Sa.   2.  20  Eli  blessed  Blkanah  and  his  wife,  and 

9.  13  because  he  d"th  bless  the  sacrifice 
2Sa.   6,  11  LORD  blessed  Obed-edom,  and  all  his 

6. 12  Lord  hath  blessed,  .house  of  Obed-edom 
6.  18  he  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 
6  20  David  returned  to  bless  his  household 
I  7.  29  let  it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy 
8.  10  to  salute  him,  and  to  bless  him,  because 
13.  25  howbeit  he  would  not  go,  but  blessed  him 

19.  39  the  king  kissed  Barzillai,  and  blessed 
21.    3  that  ye  may  bless  the  inheritance  of  the 

t  Ki.    1.  47  the  king's  servants  came  to  bless  our  lord 
8.  14,  55  blessed  all  the  congregation  of  Israel 

8.  66  they  blessed  the  king,  and  went  unto 

1  Ch.  4.  10  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed 

13.  14  the  Lord  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom 

16.  2  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 

17.  27  to  bless  the  house  ..for  thou  blessest 

23.  13  separated,  .to  bless  in  his  name  for  ever 
26.  5  Peulthai  the  eighth  :  for  God  blessed  him 
29. 10  David  blessed  the  Lord  before  all  the 

29.  20  And  all  the  congregation  blessed  the  LORD 

2  Ch.   6.   3  aud  blessed  the  whole  congregation  of 

20.  26  for  there  they  blessed  the  Lord  :  therefore 

30.  27  priests  the  Levites  arose  and  blessed  the 

31.  8  they  blessed  the  Lord,  and  his  people 

31. 10  for  the  Lord  hath  blessed  his  people ;  and 
Neh.    8.   6  And  Ezra  blessed  the  Lord,  the  great 

9.  5  Stand  up . .  bless  the  Lord  your  God  for 
9.    5  and  blessed  be  thy  glorious  name 

xi.  2  And  the  people  blessed  all  the  men,  that 
Job  1.  10  Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands 
31.  20  If  his  loins  have  not  blessed  me,  and  (if) 
42.  12  So  the  Lord  blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job 
Psa.  5.  12  For  thou,  Lord,  wilt  bless  the  righteous 
10.  3  blesseth  the  covetous,  (whom)  the  Lord 
16.    7  I  will  bless  the  Lord,  who  hath  given  me 

26.  12  in  the  congregations  will  I  bless  the  Lord 
28.   9  Save  thy  people,  and  bless  thine  inherit. 

29. 11  the  Lord  will  bless  his  people  with  peace 
34.    1  I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times  :  his 
45.   2  therefore  God  hath  blessed  thee  for  ever 
49.  iS  Though  while  he  lived  he  blessed  his  soul 

62.  4  they  bless  with  their  mouth,  but  they 

63.  4  Thus  will  I  bless  thee  while  I  live  :  I  will 

65. 10  thou  blessest  the  springing  thereof 

66.  8  0  bless  our  God,  ye  people,  and  make  the 

67.  1  God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless  us 
,   67.   6  God. .our  owu  God,  shall  bless  us 

67.  7  God  shall  bless  us  ;  and  all  the  ends  of 

68.  26  Bless  ye  God  in  the  congregations,  .the 
96.    2  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  bless  his  name ;  shew 

100.    4  be  thankful  unto  him,  (and)  bless  his 
103. 1,  2,  22  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul 
103.  20  Bless  the  Lord,  ye  his  angels,  that  excel 
103.  21  Bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  (ye)  his  hosts  ;  (ye) 

103.  22  Bless  the  Lord,  all  his  works  in  all  places 

104.  1  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul.  0  Lord  my 
104.  35  Bless  thou  the  Lord,  O  my  soul 

107.  3S  He  blesseth  them  also,  so  that  they  are 
109.  28  Let  them  curse,  but  bless  thou  :  when 
115.  12  he  will  bless  (us);  he  will  bless,  .he  will 
115. 13  He  will  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord 
115.  iS  we  will  bless  the  Lord  from  this  time 
118.  26  we  have  blessed  you  out  of  the  house  of 

128.  5  The  Lord  shall  bless  thee  out  of  Zion 

129.  8  we  bless  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
132. 15  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  provision 
134.    1  bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  (ye)  servants  of  the 
134.   2  Lift  up  your  hands,  .and  bless  the  Lord 
134.   3  The  Lord  ..  bless  thee  out  of  Zion 

*35- 19,  20  bless  the  Lord,  .bless  the  Lord 
145.    1  I  will  bless  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 
145-    2  Every  day  will  I  bless  thee  ;  and  I  will 
145.  10  and  thy  saints  shall  bless  thee 
145-  21  let  all  flesh  bless  his  holy  name  for  ever 
1 17-  13  be  hath  blessed  thy  children  within  thee 
Frov.  3.  33  but  he  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just 

27.  14  He  that  blesseth  his  friend  with  a  loud 

30. 1 1  and  doth  not  bless  their  mother 
Isa.  19.  25  Whom  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  bles3 

51,   2  I  called  him  alone,  and  blessed  him 
61.   9  the  seed  (which)  the  Lord  hath  blessed 
66.   3  he  that  burnetii . .  (as  if)  he  blessed  an  idol 
Jcr.  31.  23  The  LOBS  bless  thee,  0  habitation  of 
Hag.  2. 19  brought  forth  :  from  this  day  will  I  bless 
3.T:i  declare  blessed,  "IT?  bernk,  3. 

Dan.   2. 19  Then  Daniel  blessed  the  God  of  heaven 

2.  20  Blessed  be  the  name  of  God  for  ever  and 
4.  34  I  blessed  the  most  high,  and  I  praised 

i.To  speak  well  qf,  di\0yia  eulogeo. 

Matt.  5. .,  1  Love  your  enemies,  (bless]  them  that 

14.  19  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed,  and 

,  3°-  -(>  ft™  tooS  bread,  and  [blessed]  (it),  and 
Mark  6,  41  blessed,  and  brake  tho  loaves,  and  gave 

3.  7  he  blessed,  and  commanded  to  set  them 


10.16DUI  (his)  hands  npon  them,  and  [blessed] 
r„t  '*  :V.':,','3"\t""k  teead.and  blessed,  and  brake 
Luke  2.  20  Il.cn  took  he  him  up.. and  blessed  <:„d 

{•  34 1« ';M'""d  them,  and  said  onto  Mary 

6.  28  1,1.  jn  them  that  curse  you,  and  pray  for 
9. 16  looking  an  to  heaven,  ho  blessed  them 
24.  30  took   ..vad,  and  blessed  (it),  and  brake 
24.  50 he  lifted  ophiahand      ,,,  1  1.1  sed  them 
24.  51  it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  them 


Gal. 

3- 

Eph. 

i. 

Heb. 

6. 

7- 

7- 

7- 

zi. 

TT. 

Jas. 

1  Be. 

3- 

Luk624.  53  [continually,  .praising  and  blessing  ©od] 
Acts    3.  26  his  Son  Jesus,  sent  him  to  bless  you,  in 
Rom  12.  14  Bless  them  which  persecute  you  :  bless 
1  Co.  4.  12  being  reviled,  we  bless ;  being  persecuted 
10.  16  The  cup.  .which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the 
14.  16  Else,  when  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  spirit 
g  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with 
3  Father  of  our  Lord,  .who  hath  blessed  us 
14  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  multiplying 
1  met  Abraham  returning,  .and  blessed 

6  and  blessed  him  that  had  the  promises 

7  the  less  is  blessed  of  the  better 

20  By  faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau 

21  By  faith  Jacob,  .blessed  both  the  sons  of 
9  Therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the  Father 
9  but  contrariwise  blessing ;  knowing  that 

BLESS  self,  to  — 

To  bless  oneselj\  think  oneself  blessed,  XQ  barak,  7. 
Deut29.  19  that  he  bless  himself  in  his  heart,  saying 
Isa.  65.  16  who  blesseth  himself . .  shall  bless  himself 
Jer.    4.    2  the  nations  shall  bless  themselves  in  him 

BLESSED,  (most)  — 

1, Happy,  very  hap>py,  T^N  ctshre. 

Psa.  1.  1  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  walketh  not  in 
2.  12  Blessed  (are)  all  they  that  put  their  trust 
32.  1  Blessed  (is  he  whose)  transgression  (is) 
32.  2  Blessed  (is)  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord 
33. 12  Blessed  (is)  the  nation  whose  God  (is)  the 
34.    8  blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  trusteth  in  him 

40.  4  Blessed  (is)  that  man  that  maketh  the 

41.  1  Blessed  (is)  he  that  considereth  the  poor 
65.  4  Blessed  (is  the  man  whom)  thou  choosest 
84.  4  Blessed  (are)  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house 
84.  5  Blessed  (is)  the  man  whose  strength  (is) 
84.  12  blessed  (is)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  thee 
89. 15  Blessed  (is)  the  people  that  know  the 

94.  12  Blessed  (is)  the  man  whom  thou  chasten. 
106.    3  Blessed  (are)  they  that  keep  judgment 
ii2,    1  Blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  feareth  the 
119.    1  Blessed  (are)  the  undented  in  the  way 
1 19.   2  Blessed  (are)  they  that  keep  his  testimon. 
128.    1  Blessed  (is)  every  one  that  feareth  the 
Prov.  8.  32  blessed  (are  they  that)  keep  my  ways 
8.  34  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  heaveth  me 
20.   7  The  just,  .his  children  (are)  blessed  after 
Eccl.  10. 17  Blessed  (art)  thou,  0  land,  when  thy  king 
Isa.   30. 18  blessed  fare}  all  they  that  wait  for  him 

32.  20  Blessed  (are)  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters 
56.    2  Blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  doeth  this 

Dan.  12. 12  Blessed  (is)  he  that  waiteth,  and  cometh 

2.To  bless,  5H3  barak. 

Gen.   9.  26  Blessed  (lie)  the  Lord  God  of  Shern ;  and 
14.  19  Blessed  (be)  Abram  of  the  most  high  God 
14.  20  blessed  (be)  the  most  high  God,  which 
24.  27  Blessed  (be)  the  LORD  God  of  my  master 
24.  31  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord 

26.  29  thou  (art)  now  the  blessed  of  the  LORD 

27.  29  and  blessed  (be)  he  that  blesseth  thee 

27.  33  I  have  eaten,  .yea.  .he  shall  be  blessed 
Exodi8.  10  Jethro  said,  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  who 
NU11122.  12  thou  shalt  not  curse,  .they  (are)  blessed 

24.  9  Blessed  (is)  he  that,  .and  cursed  (is)  the 
Deut.  7.  14  Thou  shalt  be  blessed  above  all  people 

28.  3  Blessed  (shalt)  thou  (be),  .blessed  (shalt) 
28.    4  Blessed  (shall  be)  the  fruit  of  thy  body 
28.    5  Blessed  (shall  be)  thy  basket  and  thy 

28.  6  Blessed  (shalt)  thou  (be),  .blessed  (shalt) 

33.  20  Blessed  (be)  he  that  enlargeth  Gad  :  he 
33.  24  (Let)  Asher  (be)  blessed  with  children ;  let 

.Tudgi7.    2  said,  Blessed  (be  thou)  of  the  Lord,  my 
Kuth  2. 19  blessed  be  he  that  did  take  knowledge  of 

2.  20  Blessed  (be)  he  of  the  Lord,  who  hath 

3.  10  Blessed  (be)  thou  of  the  Lord,  my 

4.  14  the  women  said.  .Blessed  (be)  the  LORD 

1  Sa.  15.  13  Saul  said  unto  him,  Blessed  (lie)  thou  of 

23.  21  Saul  said,  Blessed  (be)  ye  of  the  Lord 

25.  32  Blessed  (be)  the  LORD  God  of  Israel 

25.  33  blessed  (be)  thy  advice,  and  blessed  (be) 

25.  39  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  that  hath  pleaded 

26.  25  Blessed  (be)  thou,  my  son  David  ;  thou 

2  Sa.    2.    5  Blessed  (be)  ye  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  have 

18.  28  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 
22.  47  The  LORD  liveth  ;  and  blessed  (be)  my 
1  Ki.  1.  48  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

2.  45  king  Solomon  (shall  be)  blessed,  and  the 

5.  7  rejoiced  greatly,  and  said,  Blessed  (be) 
8.  15  Blessed  (be)  the  LORD  God  of  Israel 

8.  56  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  that  hath  given 
10.   9  Blessed  be  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 

1  Ch.  16.  36  Blessed  Hie)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  for 

29.  10  Blessed  (be)  thou,  LORD  God  of  Israel 

2  Ch.   2. 12  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  that 

6.  4  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  who 

9.  8  Blessed  be  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 
Ezra  7.  27  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers 
Psa.  18.  46  The  Lord  liveth  ;  and  blessed  (be)  my 

28.   6  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  because  he  hath 
31.  21  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  ;  for  he  hath 
41.  13  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  from 
'■■'■■  ■'■■  ('■lr^M'.l  (ln-Ximl,  which  hatli  imt  turned 
68.  19  Blessed  (be)the  Lord,  (who)  daily  loadeth 
68.  35  unto  Otis)  people.     Blessed  (be)  God 
72.  iS  Blessed  (he)  the  LORD  God,  the  God 
72.  19  blessed  (lie)  his  glorious  name  for  ever 
89.  52  Blessed  Qie)  the  Lord  for  evermore 
106.  48  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  from 
115.  15  Y<-  (are)  blessed  of  the  Lord  which  made 
118.  26  Blessed  (be)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
119. 12  Blessed  fart)  thou,  O  Lord  :  teach  me 
124.   6  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  who  hath  not 


Psa.  135.  21  Blessed  be  the  Lord  out  of  Zion,  which 

144.  1  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  my  strength,  which 
Prov.  5.  18  Let  thy  fountain  be  blessed  :  and  rejoice 
Isa.    19.  25  Blessed  (be)  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyr. 

65.  23  they  (are),  .of  the  blessed  of  the  Lord 
Jer.  17.    7  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  the 

20.  14  was  born:  let  not  the  day.  .be  blessed 
Eze.    3.  12  Blessed  (be)  the  glory  of  *the  LORD  from 
Zech  11.    5  they  that  sell  them  say,  Blessed  (be)  the 
S.To  bless,  7]-]2  ber.it. 

Dan.    3.  28  Blessed  (be)  the  God  of  Shadrach 
i.To  spteak  well  of,  svAoyw  eulogeo. 

Matt  21.    9  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 

23.  39  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 

25.  34  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
Markn.    9  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 

11.  10  Blessed  (be)  the  kingdom  of  our  father 

Luke  1.  28,  42  with  thee :  [blessed  (art)  thou  among] 

1.  42  Blessed  (art)  thou  among  women,  and  hi. 

13.  35  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 

19.  38  Blessed  (be)  the  King  that  cometh  in  the 

John  12.  13  Blessed  (is). .  King  of  Israel  that  cometh 

5.  WeU-spoken  of,  ev\oyj]T6s  eulogetos. 

Marki4.  6i  Art  thou  the  Christ.  .Son  of  the  Blessed? 
Luke  1.  68  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  for 
Rom.  1.  25  than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever 

9.    5  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever 
2  Co.    1.    3  Blessed  (be)  God,  even  the  Father  of  our 

11.  31  The  God  and  Father,  .which  is  blessed 
Eph.    1.    3  Blessed  (be)  the  God  and  Father  of  our 

1  Pe.    1.    3  Blessed  (lie)  the  God  and  Father  of  our 

6.  Happy,  fxa.Ka.pios  makarios. 

Matt.  5.    3  Blessed  (are)  the  poor  in  spirit :  for 

5.    4  Blessed  (are)  they  that  mourn  ;  for  they 
5.    5  Blessed  (are)  the  meek  :  for  they  shall 
5.    6  Blessed  (are)  they  which  do  hunger  and 
5.    7  Blessed  (are)  the  merciful :  for  they  shall 
5.    8  Blessed  (are)  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they 
5.    9  Blessed  (are)  the  peacemakers :  for  they 
5.  10  Blessed  (are)  they  which  are  persecuted 

5.  11  Blessed  are  ye  when  (men)  shall  revile 
11.   6  blessed  is  (he),  whosoever  shall  not  be 

13.  16  blessed  (are)  your  eyes,  for  they  see  ;  and 
16.  17  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona  :  for 

24.  46  Blessed  (is)  that  servant  whom  his  lord 
Luke  1.  45  And  blessed  (is)  she  that  believed  :  for 

6.  20  Blessed  (be  ye)  poor :  for  yours  is  the 

6.  21  Blessed  (are  ye)  that  hunger  now :  for  ye 
6.  21  Blessed  (are  ye)  that  weep  now  :  for  ye 

6.  22  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you 

7.  23  blessed  is  (he),  whosoever  shall  not  be 

10.  23  Blessed  (are)  the  eyes  which  see  the 

11.  27  Blessed  (is)  the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and 

11.  28  blessed  (are)  they  that  hear  the  word  of 

12.  37  Blessed  (are)  those  servants,  whom  the 
12.  38  and  find  (them)  so,  blessed  are  those 
12.  43  Blessed  (is)  that  servant,  whom  his  lord 

14.  14  thou  shalt  be  blessed  ;  for  they  cannot 
14.  15  Blessed  (is)  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the 
23.  29  Blessed  (are)  the  barren,  and  the  wombs 

John  20.  29  blessed  (are)  they  that  have  not  seen 
Acts  20.  35  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive 
Bom.  4.    7  Blessed  (are)  they  whuse  iniquities  are 

4.  8  Blessed  (is)  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord 
iTi.    1. 11  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God 

6.  15  (who  is)  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate 
Titus  2.  13  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the 
Jas.     1.  12  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  endureth 

1.  25  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed 
Rev.    1.    3  Blessed  (is)  he  that  readeth,  and  they 
14.  13  Blessed  (are)  the  dead  which  die  in  the 
16.  15  Blessed  (is)  he  that  watcheth, 'and  keepeth 

19.  g  Blessed  (are)  they  which  are  called  unto 

20.  6  Blessed  and  holy  (is)  he  that  hath  part  in 
22.    7  blessed  (is)  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings 
22. 14  Blessed  (are)  they  that  do  his  command. 

7.  A  blessing,  nrria  berachah. 

Psa.  21.    6  hast  made  him  most  blessed  for  ever 
37.  26  and  lendeth  ;  and  his  seed  (is)  blessed 
Prov  10.    7  memory  of  the  just  (is)  blessed  :  but  the 

BLESSED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  hcqyyy,  1^^  ashar,  4. 

Psa.  41.    2  he  shall  be  blessed  upon  the  earth  :  and 
2.To  be  blessed,  *na  barak,  2. 

Gen.  12.   3  in  thee  shall  all  families,  .be  blessed 
18.  18  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  in 
28.  14  in  thy  seed  shall  all . .  families .  .be  blessed 

S.To  be  (declared)  blessed,  ^"]3  barak,  4. 

Kum  22.   6  I  wot . .  he  whom  thou  blessest  (is)  blessed 
Deut  33  13  Blessed  of  the  Lord  (lie)  his  land,  for 
Judg  5.  24  Blessedabovewomen..blessedshallshebe 

2  Sa.  7.  29  let  the  house  of  thy  servant  be  blessed 
1  Ch.  17.  27  Lord,  and  (it  shall  be)  blessed  for  ever 
Job     1.  21  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord 

Psa.  37.  22  blessed  of  him  shall  inherit  the  earth 

112.  2  generation  of  the  upright  shall  be  blessed 

113.  2  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  LORD  from 
128.    4  thus  shall  the  man  be  blessed  that  feareth 

Prov.20.  21  but  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be  blessed 
22.    g  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye  shall  be  blessed 

4.  To  bless  oneself,  TO  barak,  7. 

Gen.  22.  18  in  thy  seed  shall  all.  .lie  blessed 

26.  4  in  thy  seed  shall  all.  .lie  blessed 
Psa.  72.  17  shall  be  blessed  in  him  :  all  nations 

5.To  be  well  spoken  of  in  or  by,  tvcv\oy4ofxa.i  eneulo. 
Acts    3.  25  shall  all  the  kindreds,  .be  blessed 
Gal.    3.   S  In  thee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed 


BLESSED 


99 


BLOOD 


BLESSED,  to  call  — 

l.To  declare  Tiappy,  irN  ashar,  3. 

Gen.  30.  13  for  the  daughters  will  call  me  blessed 
Psa.  72.  17  all  nations  shall  call  him  blessed 
Prov.31.  2S  children  arise  up,  and  call  her  blessed 
ATal.    3.  12  all  nations  shall  call  you  blessed  :  for  ye 

2. To  make  or  declare  happy,  iia.Ka.oifa  mdkeerizo, 
Luke  1.  48  all  generations  shall  call  me  blessed 

BLESSEDNESS  — 

ffappiness,  fAa.Ka.piiTfj.6s  makariswios. 

Rom.  4.    6  David  also  describeth  the  blessedness  of 

4.  9  (Cometh)  this  blessedness  then  upon  the 
Gal.    4. 15  Where  is  then  the  blessedness  ye  spake 

BLESSING  — 

1.  Blessing,  nyi?  beralcah. 

Gen.  i2.    2  name  great ;  and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing 
27.  12  bring  a  curse  upon  me,  and  not  a  blessing 
27.  35  brother,  .hath  taken  away  thy  blessing 
•  27.  36  now  he  hath  taken  away  my  blessing 

27.  36  Hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing  for  me  ? 
£7.  38  Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,  my  father? 
27. 41  Esau  hated  Jacob  because  of  the  blessing 

28.  4  give  thee  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  to 
33.  11  Take,  I  pray  thee,  my  blessing  that  is 
39.  5  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  upon  all 
49.  25  shall  bless  thee  with  blessings  of  heaven 
49.  25  blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  under 
49.  25  blessings  of  the  breasts,  and  of  the  womb 
49.  26  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed 
49.  26  above  the  blessings  of  my  progenitors 
49.  28  every  one  according  to  his  blessing  he 

Exod  32.  29  that  he  may  bestow  upon  you  a  blessing 

Lev.  25.  21 1  will  command  my  blessing  upon  you  in 

Deut  11.  26  I  set  before  you  this  day  a  blessing  and  a 

11.  27  A  blessing,  if  ye  obey  the  commandments 

11.  29  thou  shalt  put  the  blessing  upon  mount 

12.  15  according  to  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  thy 
16. 17  according  to  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  thy 
=3-    5  thy  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing 
28.    2  all  these  blessings  shall  come  on  thee 
28.    8  Lord  shall  command  the  blessing  upon 
30.    1  come  upon  thee,  the  blessing  and  the 
30.  19  set  before  you.  .blessing  and  cursing 

33.    1  And  this  (is)  the  blessing,  wherewith 
33.  23  and  full  with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 

Josh.  8.  34  all  the  words  of  the  law,  the  blessings 
15. 19  Who  answered,  Give  me  a  blessing  ;  for 

Judg.  1.  15  she  said  unto  Mm,  Give  me  a  blessing 

1  Sa.  25.  27  this  blessing,  .let  it  even  be  given  unto 

2  Sa.    7.  29  with  thy  blessing  let  the  house  of  thy 

2  Ki.    5. 15  therefore ..  take  a  blessing  of  thy  servant 
Neh.   9.    s  is  exalted  above  all  blessing  and  praise 

13.  2  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing 
Job  29.  13  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish 
Psa.    3.    8  the  Lord  :  thy  blessing  (is)  upon  thy 

21.    3  thou  preventest  him  with  the  blessings 
24.    5  He  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the 
109.  17  as  he  delighted  not  in  blessing,  so  let  it 
129.    8  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  (be)  upon  you 
133.    3  there  the  Lord  commanded  the  blessing 
Prov.io.    6  Blessings  (are)  upon  the  head  of  the  just 

10.  22  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich 

11.  11  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city 
11.  26  blessing  (shall  be)  upon  the  head*of  him 
24.  25  and  a  good  blessing  shall  come  upon 

28.  20  faithful,  .shall  abound  with  blessings 
Isa.    19.  24  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  laud 

44.    3  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring 

65.    8  Destroy  it  not ;  for  a  blessing  (is)  in  it :  so 
Eze.  34.  26  a  blessing,  .shall  be  showers  of  blessing 

44.  30  that  he  may  cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in 
Joel    2.  14  repent,  aud  leave  a  blessing  behind  him 
Zech.  8. 13  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing 
Mai.    2.   2  I  will  curse  your  blessings  ;  yea,  I  have 
3. 10  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing 

2. Good  speech  or  utterance,  evXoyta  eidogia, 
Rom  15.  29  I.  .come  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing 
1  Co.  10. 16  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it 
GaL     3.  14  That  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might 
Eph.    1.    3  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly 
Heb.   6.    7  the  earth,  .receiveth  blessing  from  God 

12. 17  he  would  have  inherited  the  blessing 
Jas.     3.  10  Out  of  the  same,  .proceedeth  blessing 

1  Pe.  3.   9  that  ye  should  inherit  a  blessing 

Rev.    5.  12  receive,  .honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing 

5.  13  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying,  Blessing 
7.  12  Amen  :  Blessing,  and  glory,  and  wisdom 

BUND  — 

7,  contracted,  "v*y  ivver. 
E  sod.  4.  1 1  who  maketh  the  dumb . .  or  the  blind ? 
Lev.  19.  14  put  a  stumbling  block  before  the  blind 

21. 18  a  blind  man,  or  a  lame,  or  he  that  hath 
Deut.  15.  21  lame,  or  blind,  (or  have)  any  ill  blemish 

27. 18  Cursed  (be)  he  that  maketh  the  blind  to 
28.  29  as  the  blind  gropeth  in  darkness,  and 

2  Sa.   5.    6  Except  thou  take  away  the  blind  and 

5.   8  smiteth  the  Jebusites.  .and  the  blind 
5.    8  The  blind  and  the  lame  shall  not  come 
Job  29. 15  I  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (was)  I 
Psa.  146.    8  The  Lord  openeth  (the  eyes  of)  the  blind 
Isa.  29. 18  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of 

35.  s  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and 
42.  7  To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the 
42. 16  I  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  (that)  they 

42. 18  ye  deaf,  .look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see 

42. 19  Who  (is)  blind,  but  my  servant?  or  deaf 
42.  19  who  (is)  blind  as .  .perfect,  and  blind  as 
56. 10  His  watchmen  (are)  blind :  they  are  all 


Isa. 
Jer. 


59.  10  We  grope  for  the  wall  like  the  blind,  and 
8  with  them  the  blind  and  the  lame,  the 


14. 
John  5. 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 


Lam.  4.  14  They  have  wandered  (as)  blind  (men)  in 
Mai.   1.   8  if  ye  offer  the  blind  for  sacrifice.,  not  evil 
2.  Blindness,  TTWSl  avvereth. 

Lev.  22.  22  Blind,  or  broken,  or  maimed,  or  having  a 

3. Blind,  rv<px6s  tuphlos. 

Matt  1 1.    5  The  blind  receive  their  sight,  and  the 
12.  22  one  possessed  with  a  devil,  blind  and 
12.  22  the  [blind]  and  dumb  both  spake  and  saw 
15.  14  they  be  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.     And 
15.  14  if  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall 
15.  30  having  with  them,  .lame,  blind,  dumb 
15.  31  the  lame  to  walk,  and  the  blind  to  see 
21.  14  the  blind  and  the  lame  came  to  him  in 
23.  16  Woe  unto  you,  (ye)  blind  guides,  which 
23. 17  fools,  and  blind  !  for  whether  is  greater 
23.  19  fools,  and  blind !  for  whether  (is)  greater 
23.  24  blind  guides,  which  strain  at  a  gnat,  and 
23.  20  blind  Pharisee,  cleanse  first  that,  .within 
Markio.  46  blind  Bartimeus.  .sat  by  the  highway 
Luke  4.  18  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at 

6.  39  Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind?  shall  they 

7.  21  and  unto  many,  .blind  he  gave  sight 

7.  22  how  that  the  blind  see,  the  lame  walk 
14.  13  call  the  poor,  the  manned,  .the  blind 

:i  bring  in  hither  the  poor,  .and  the  blind 
3  In  these  lay  a  great  multitude,  .of  blind 

1  he  saw  a  man  which  was  blind  from 

2  or  his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  ? 

3  which .  .bad  seen  him  that  he  was  [blind] 
:8  that  he  had  been  blind,  and  received  his 

9.  19  Is  this  your  son,  who.  .was  born  blind  ? 
9.  20  is  our  son,  and  that  he  was  bora  blind 
9.  24  Then,  .called  they  the  man  that  was  blind 
9.  25  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I 
9.  32  opened  the  eyes  of  one.  .bora  blind 
9.  39  that  they  which  see  might  be  made  blind 
9.  40  and  said  unto  him,  Are  we  blind  also  ? 
9.  41  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin 

10.  21  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ? 

11.  37  man,  which  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
Acts  13.  11  thou  shalt  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun 
Rom.  2.  19  thou  thyself  art  a  guide  of  the  blind,  a 

2  Pe.  1.    9  But  he  that  lacketh  these  things  is  blind 
Rev.   3. 17  knowest  not  that  thou  art.  .blind,  and 

BLIND,  to  — 

l.To  blind,  close,  iy;  avar,  3. 

Exod23.    8  the  gift  blindeth  the  wise,  and  perverteth 
Deut  16.  19  for  a  gift  doth  blind  the  eyes  of  the  vise 

2.  To  veil,  conceal,  zhv,  alam,  5. 

1  Sa.  1 2.    3  have  I  received . .  bribe  to  blind  mine  eyes 

3.  To  blind,  rv<p\6a)  tuphloo. 

John  12.  40  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and  hardened 

2  Co.  4.    4  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the 

1  Jo.   2.  11  because,  .darkness  hath  blinded  his  eyes 

4. To  harden,  irwpSco  poroo. 

Rom. 11.    7  obtained  it,  and  the  rest  were  blinded 

2  Co.   3.  14  But  their  minds  were  blinded  :  for  until 
BLIND  man  — 

Blind,  Tu<p\6s  tuphlos. 

Matt.  9.  27  two  blind  men  followed  him,  crying,  and 
9.  28  the  blind  men  came  to  him  :  and  Jesus 
20.  30  two  blind  men  sitting  by  the  way  side 
Mark  8.  22  and  they  bring  a  blind  man  unto  him 

8.  23  And  he  took  the  blind  man  by  the  hand 
10.  49  they  call  the  blind  man,  saying  unto  him 
10.  51  The  blind  man  said  unto  him,  Lord,  that 

LukeiS.  35  a  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  way  side 
John  9.    6  he  anointed  the  eyes  of  the  [blind]  man 

9.  17  They  say  unto  the  blind  man  again 

BLIND  men  — 
Blind,  i.n y  ivver. 

Zeph.  1.  17  that  they  shall  walk  like  blind  men 
BLIND  people  — 
Blind,  "vy  ivver. 

Isa.  43.   8  Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have 

BLIND,  he  that  was  — 

The  blind  one,  6  rv<p\6s  ho  tuphlos. 

John  9. 13  They  brought . .  him  that . .  was  blind 
BLINDFOLD,  to  — 
To  cover  round  about,  wcpiKaXvwTw  perikalupto. 

Luke22.  64  when  they  had  blindfolded  him,  they 

BLINDNESS  — 

l.Govervngs,  veilings,  Diyo  sanverim.    • 

Gen.  19. 11  that  (were)  at  the  door,  .with  blindness 
2  Ki.   6.  iS  Smite  this  people,  .with  blindness 

6. 18  And  he  smote  them  with  blindness  ace. 

2.  Closing,  piy;  iwaron. 

Deut2S.  28  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with,  .blindness 
Zech  12.    4  will  smite  every  horse ..  with  blindness 

3. Hardness,  Troopaxrts  porosis. 

Rom  11.  25  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel 
Eph.  4. 18  because  of  the  blindness  of  their  heart 

BLOOD  — 

1.  Blood,  cy  dam. 

Gen    4.  10  the  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth 
4.  11  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thy 
9.    4  the  life  thereof,  (which  is)  the  blood 
9.    5  surely  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I 
9.   6  sheddeth  man's  blood . .  shall  his  blood  be 


49. 

Exod.  4 

7- 

7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


22  Iteuben  said  unto  them,  Shed  no  blood 

26  if  we  slay,  .and  conceal  his  blood? 

31  goats,  and  dipped  the  coat  in  the  blood 

22  behold,  also  his  blood  is  required 

11  and  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes 

9  the  water,  .shall  become  blood  upon  the 
17  waters,  .and  they  shall  be  turned  to  blood 
19  waters,  .that  they  may  become  blood 

19  there  may  be  blood  throughout  all  the 

23  all  the  waters,  .were  turned  to  blood 

"i  there  was  blood  throughout  ail  the  land 

7  they  shall  take  of  the  blood,  and  strike 
13  the  blood  shall  be  to  you  for  a  token  upon 
13  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  your 
22  dip  (it)  in  the  blood  that  (is)  in  the  basin 
22  strike  the  lintel,  .with  the  Hood  that 

73  when  he  seeth  the  blood  upon  the  lintel 

2  smitten  that  he  die .  .no  blood . .  for  him 

3  blood,  .for  him ;  (for)  he  should  make 
iS  Thou  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my 

6  And  Moses  took  half  of  the  blood,  and 
6  half  of  the  blood  he  sprinkled  on  the  altar 

8  Moses  took  the  blood,  and  sprinkled  (it) 
8  and  said,  Behold  the  blood  of  the  coven. 

12  thou  shalt  take  ..the  blood  of  the  bullock 

12  pour  all  the  blood  beside  the  bottom  of 

16  thou  shalt  take  his  blood,  and  sprinkle. 

20  take  of  his  blood . .  sprinkle  the  blood 

21  thou  shalt  take  of  the  blood  that 

10  with  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  of 
25  Thou  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my 

5  bring  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  the  blood 

11  Aaron's  sons,  shall  sprinkle  his  blood 

15  the  blood  thereof  shall  be  wrung  out  at 
2  the  priests  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upon 
8  Aaron's  sons  shall  sprinkle  the  blood 

13  sons  of  Aaron  shall  sprinkle  the  blood: 

17  that  ye  eat  neither  fat  nor  blood 

5  priest,  .shall  take  of  the  bullock's  blood 

6  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood 

6  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  t'mes  before 

7  the  priest  shall  put.  .of  the  blood  upon 
7  pour  all  the  blood  of  the  bullock  at  the 

16  priest,  .shall  bring  of  the  bullock's  blood 

17  shall  dip  his  finger  (in  some)  of  the  blood 

18  he  shall  put.,  of  the  blood  upon  the  horns  - 
18  pour  out  all  the  blocd  at  the  bottom  of 


Lev. 


■  25,  30,  34  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood 
.  25  shall  pour  out  his  blood  at  the  bottom  of 
30,  34  shall  pour  out  all  the  blood  thereof 
9  he  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  of  the  sin 
9  the  rest  of  the  blood  shall  be  wrung  out 
27  when  there  is  sprinkled  of  the  blood 
30  whereof  (any)  of  the  blood  is  brought 
2  the  blood  thereof  shall  he  sprinkle 

14  that  sprinkleth  the  blood  of  the  peace 

26  Moreover  ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  blood 

27  that  eateth  any  manner  of  blood,  even 
33  that  offereth  the  blood  of  the  peace  off. 

15  he  slew  fit);  and  Moses  took  the  blood 
15  poured  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  alt. 
19,  24  Moses  sprinkled,  .blood  upon  the  altar 

23  he  slew  (it) ;  and  Moses  took  of  the  blooriL 

24  Moses  put  of  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of 
30  of  the  blood  which  (was)  upon  the  altar- 

9  sons  of  Aaron  brought  the  blood  unto 
9  he  dipped  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  put 
9  poured  out  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the 
12, 18  Aaron's  sons  presented .  .the  blood 

18  the  blood  of  it  was  not  brought  in  within 

4  she  shall  then  continue  in  the  blood  of 

5  she  shall  continue  in  the  blood  of  her 
7  cleansed  from  the  issue  of  her  blood 

6  shall  dip.  .the  living  bird  in  the  blood" 
14,  25  the  priest  shall  take,  .of  the  blood 

17  upon  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering 

28  upon  the  place  of  the  blood  of  the 

51  dip  them  in  the  blood  of  the  slain  bird 

52  cleanse  the  house  with  the  blood  of  the 

19  her  issue  in  her  flesh  be  blood,  she  shall 

25  if  a  woman  have  an  issue  of  her  blood 
14, 18  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  bullock 

14  mercy  seat  shall  he  sprinkle  of  the  blood 

15  bring  his  blood  within  the  veil,  and 

15  do  with  that  blood  as.  .with  the  blood 

18  of  the  blood  of  the  goat,  and  put  (it)  upon 

19  he  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  upon  it 
27  whose  blood  was  brought  in  to  make 

4  blood  shall  be  imputed  unto  that  man 
4  he  hath  shed  blood ;  and  that  man  shall. 
6  the  priest  shall  sprinkle  the  blood. 
10  that  eateth  any  manner  of  bloodr 

10  against  that  soul  that  eateth  blood 

11  the  life  of  the  flesh  (is)  in  the  blood 

11  it  (is)  the  blood  (that)  maketh.. atonement 

12  No  soul  of  you  shall  eat  blood 

12  neither  shall  any  stranger,  .eat  blood 

13  shall  even  pour  out  the  blood  thereof 

14  the  blood  of  it  (is)  for  the  life  thereof 
14  Ye  shall  eat  the  blood  of  no  manner  of 
14  the  life  of  all  flesh  (is)  the  blood  thereof 

16  neither  shalt  thou  stand  against  the  blood 

26  Ye  shall  not  eat  (any  thing)  with  the  blood 
20.   9  his  blood  (shall  be)  upon  him 

20. 11, 12, 13, 16,27  their  blood  (shall  be)  upon 
20.  iS  hath  uncovered  the  fountain  of  her  blood 
Num  18.  17  thou  shalt  sprinkle  their  blood  upon  the 
19.   4  take  of  her  blood.. and  sprinkle  of  her 
19.    5  her  blood,  with  her  dung,  shall  he  burn 
23.  24  eat.  .and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain 
35. 19  the  revenger  of  blood  himself  shall  slay 
35,  21  the  revenger  of  blood  shall  slay  the  mur.. 


BLOOD 


100 


BLOOM 


Zaun 35.  24 between.. slayerand  the  revenger  of blood 

35.  25  out  of  the  hand  of  the  revenger  of  blood 
35.  27  the  revenger  of  blood  find  him  without 
35.  27  and  the  revenger  of  blood  kill  the  slayer 
35.  27  he  shall  not  be  guilty  of  blood 

35.  33  for  bl 1  it  deflleth  the  laud  :  and 

35-  33  the  hind  cannot  be  cleansed  of  the  blood 
35.  33  but  by  the  blood  of  him  that  shed  it 
Deuti2. 16  Only  yc  shall  not  eat  the  blood 

12.  23  be  sure  that  thou  eat  not  the  blood 
12.  2^  for  the  blood  (is)  the  life 
12.  27  the  flesh  and  the  blood,  upon  the  altar  of 
12.  27  the  blood  of  thy  sacrifices  shall  he 
15.  23  thou  shalt  not  eat  the  blood  thereof 
17.    8  between  blood  and  blood,  between  plea 
iq     6  Lest  the  avenger  of  the  blood  pursue  the 
19. 10  That  innocent  blood  be  not  shed  in  thy 
to.  10  an  inheritance,  and  (so)  blood  be  upon 
iq.  12  into  the  baud  of  the  avenger  of  blood 
iq.  13  thou  shalt  put  away .  .innocent  blood 
21.    7  say,  Our  hands  have  not  shed  this  blood 
2i.    8  lay  not  innocent  blood  unto  thy  people 
2i.    8  An  I  the  blood  shall  be  forgiven  them 

21.  9  shalt  thou  put  away  the . .  innocent  blood 

22.  8  that  thou  bring  not  blood  upon  thine 
32.  14  didst  drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  grape 
32.  42  I  will  mike  mine  arrows  drunk  with  blood 
32.  42  with  the  blood  of  the  slain  and  of  the 
32.  43  he  will  avenge  the  blood  of  his  servants 

Josh.  2.  19  his  blood  (shall  be)  upon  his  head,  and 

2.  19  his  blood  (shall  be)  on  our  head,  if  (any) 
20.    3  your  refu^o  from  the  avenger  of  blood 
20.   5  if  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  after  him 
20.    9  die  by  the  hand  of  the  avenger  of  blood 

Judg.  9.  24  their  blood  be  laid  upon  Abimelech  their 
1  Sa.  14.  32  the  people  did  eat  (them)  with  the  blood 
14.  33  the  LORD,  in  that  they  eat  with  the  blood 
14.  31  sin  not.  .in  eating  with  the  blood.  And 
19.  5  wilt  thou  sin  against  innocent  blood,  to 
25.  26  withholden  thee  from  coming  to.. blood 
25.  31  either  that  th  )u  hast  shed  blood  causeless 

25.  33  kept  me.  .from  coming  to.  .blood,  and 

26.  23  let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the  earth  before 
cGa.    1.  16  David  said.  .Thy blood  (be)  upon  thy 

1.  22  From  the  blood  of  the  slain,  from  the 

3.  27  died,  for  the  blood  of  Asahel  his  brother 
3.  28  ever  from  the  blood  of  Abner  the  son  of 
4. 11  shall  I  not.,  now  require  his  blood  of 

/,.  11  the  reveng.-rs  of  blood  to  destroj  any 
16.  8  hath  returned  upon  thee  all  the  blood 
so.  12  Amasa  wallowed  in  blood  in  the  midstof 

23.  17  blood  of  the  men  that  went  in  jeopardy 
je  Li.  2.    5  and  shed  the  blood  of  war  in  peace,  and 

2.  5  and  put  the  blood  of  war  upon  his  girdle 
2.  9  bring  thou  down  to  the  grave  with  blood 
2.  31  mayest  take  away  the  innocent  blood 

2.  33  Lord  shall  return  his  blood  upon  his  own 
2.  33  Their  blood  shall  therefore  return  upon 
2.  37  thy  blood  shall  be  upon  thine  own  head 
18.  28  till  the  blood  gushed  out  upon  them 
21. 19  the  blood,  .shall  dogs  lick  thy  blood 
22.  35  the  blood  ran  out  of  the  wound  into  the 
22.  33  the  dogs  licked  up  his  blood  ;  and  they 
s  Ei.  3.  22  Moabites  saw  the  water,  .red  as  blood 
3. 23  they  said,  This  (is)  blood  :  the  kings  are 
9.    7  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my  servants 
9.    7  the  blood  of  all  the  servants  of  the  Lord 
9  26  I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  Naboth 
9.  26  the  blood  of  his  son3,  saith  the  Lord 
9.  33  of  her  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  wall 
16.  13  sprinkled  the  blood  of  his  peace  offerings 
16.  15  sprinkle  upon  it  all  the  blood  of  the 
16.  15  and  all  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  :  and 

21. 16  Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood  very  much 
2|.    4  the  innocent  bl  >  td  -  .with  innocent  blood 

1  Ch.  i  r.  10  shall  1  drink  the  blood  of  these  men  that 

22.    8  Thou  hast  shed  blood  abundantly,  and 
22.    3  because  thou  hast  shed  much  blood  upon 
2  3.    3  thou,  .a  man  of  war,  and  hast  shed  blood 

2  Ch.  1 .;.  10  between  blood  and  blood,  between  law 

24.  25  for  the  blood  of  the  sous  of  Jehoiada 
29.  22  the  priests  received  the  blood,  and 

2>  22  sprinkled  the  blood,  .sprinkled  the  blood 

29.  24  made  reconciliation  with  their  blood 

30.  i(3  the  priests  sprinkled  the  blood,  .of  the 
Job    16.  i3  0  earth,  cover  not  thou  my  blood,  and  let 

39.  30  Her  young  ones  also  suck  up  blood  :  and 
Psa.    9.  12  When  he  maketh  inquisition  for  blood 
16.   4  their  drink  offerings  of  blood  will  I  not 
30.   9  What  protlt.  .in  my  blood,  when  I  go.  .to 

50. 13  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  the  bl I  of  goats? 

58. 10  wash  his  feet  in  the  bl 1  of  the  w    :l 

68.  23  That  thy  foot  maybe  dipped  in  the  blood 

72. 14  precious  Bhall  their  bl  od  bo  in  his  sight 
78. 41  had  1  orned  their  rivers  into  blood  ;  and 
79-   3  Their  blood  have  they  shed  like  wat  r 

;  l  1  I  kg  Of  the  Mo.  .it  of  thy  servants 
9.;.  21  They,  .condemn  the  Innocent  bl l 

1  >  He  lurm-il  their  wale)'-  into  blood 

106. 3S  shed  Innocent  blood.,  blood  of  their  sons 
106.  38  and  the  land  was  p.-ltuti'd  with  blood 
1'rov.  1.  ,1  let  ua  lay  wait  for  blood,  let  us  lurk 

'     l6  their  fee!  .  .make  haste  I  >  shed  blood 

1.  iS  tboy  lay  wait  for  their  (own)  blood 
6.  17  and  hands  that  shed  innocent  blood 
i».  6  The  words. .(are)  to  li  1  in  wait  for  blood 

28. 17  a  m  io  that  doeth  violence  to  the  blood 
30.  33  wrin  ring  0!  the  nose  bringeth  forth  bl 1 

Isa,     1. 11  I  delight  not  in  the  id 1  of  bullocks 

1. 15  will  not  hear:  your  hands  are  full  of  blood 
4.  4  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  Jerusalem 
9.    5  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood  ;  but 


Isa. 


15.    9  waters  of  Dimon  shall  be  full  of  blood 
26.  21  the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  blood 

33.  15  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood 

34.  3  mountains  shall  be  melted  with  their  bl. 
34.    6  sword  of  the  LORD  is  tilled  with  blood 
34.    6  with  the  blood  of  lambs  and  goats,  with 
34.    7  their  land  shall  be  soaked  with  blood 
49.  26  shall  be  drunken  with  their  own  blood 
59- 


59- 
t6. 


7- 
19. 


Lam 
Eze. 


3  For  your  hands  are  defiled  with  blood 
7  they  make  haste  to  shed  innocent  blood 

3  (as  if  he  offered)  swine's  blood ;  he  that 
;4  Also  hi  thy  skirts  is  found  the  blood  of 
6  shed  not  innocent  blood  in  this  place 

4  have  filled  this  place  with  the  blood  of 
3  neither  shed  innocent  blood  in  this  place 

22.  17  for  to  shed  innocent  blood,  and  for 
26.  15  shall  surely  bring  innocent  blood  upon 
46.  10  made  drunk  with  their  blood  :  for  the 
4S.  10  that  keepeth  back  his  sword  from  blood 
51.  35  blood  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Chaldea 
4.  13  that  have  shed  the  blood  of  the  just  in 
4.  14  have  polluted  themselves  with  blood,  so 
3.  18,  20  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand 
5. 17  pestilence  and  blood  shall  pass  through 
9.    g  the  land  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city  full 
14.  19  pour  out  my  fury  upon  it  in  blocd,  to  cut 
16.   6  saw  thee  polluted  in  thine  own  blood,  I 
16.    6  in  thy  blood,  Live,  .in  thy  blood 
16.    9  I  throughly  washed  away  thy  blood  from 
16.  22  when  thou,  .wast  polluted  in  thy  blood 
16.  36  by  the  blood  of  thy  children,  which  thou 
16.  38  women  that  break  wedlock  and  shed  bl. 
16.  38  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and  jealousy 
18.  10  If  he  beget  a  son.  .a  shedder  of  blood 
18.  13  surely  die;  his  blood  shall  be  upon  him 
19. 10  Thy  mother  (is)  like  a  vine  in  thy  blood 

21.  32  thy  blood  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the 

22.  3  The  city  sheddetli  blood  in  the  midst  of 
22.    4  Thou  art  become  guilty  in  thy  blood  that 
22.   6  every  one  were  in  thee,  .to  shed  blood 
22.    9  are  men  that  carry  tales  to  shed  blood 
22. 12  have  they  taken  gifts  to  shed  blood ;  thou 
22.  13  at  thy  blood  which  hath  been  in  the  midst 

22.  27  wolves  ravening  the  prey,  to  shed  blood 

23.  37  blood  (is)  in  their  hands,  and  with  their 
23.  45  after  the  manner  of  women  that  shed  bl. 
23.45  adulteresses,  and  blood  (is)  in  their  hands 


24. 

24. 
28. 

32- 

33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 

33- 
35- 

35- 


7  her  blood  is  in  the  midst  of  her ;  she  set 

8  have  set  her  blood  upon  the  top  of  a  rock 
.  23  I  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and  blood 

6  I  will  also  water  with  thy  blood  the  land 

4  his  blood  shall  be  upon  his  own  head 

5  not  warning ;  his  blood  shall  be  upon  him 

6  his  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchman's 

3  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand 
.  25  Ye  eat  with  the  blood,  .and  shed  blood 

6  prepare  thee  unto  blood,  and  blood  shall 

6  sith  thou  hast  not  hated  blood,  even  bl. 

36.  18  poured  my  fury  upon  them  for  the  blood 

38.  22  I  will  plead  against  him.  .with  blood 

39.  17  that  ye  may  eat  flesh,  and  drink  blood 
39.  18  drink  the  blood  of  the  princes  of  the 
39. 19  drink  blood  till  ye  be  drunken,  of  my 
43.  iS  make  it.  .to  sprinkle  blood  thereon 

43.  20  thou  shalt  take  of  the  blood  thereof,  and 

44.  7  offer  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the  blood,  and 
44. 15  to  offer  unto  me  the  fat  and  the  blood 
45. 19  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the 

4  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon 
2  they  break  out,  and  blood  toucheth  blood 

6.  8  Gilead  (is)  a  city,  .polluted  with  blood 
12. 14  therefore  shall  he  leave  his  blood  upon 

2.  30  in  the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars 

2.  31  the  moon  into  blood,  before  the  great  and 

3.  19  they  have  shed  innocent  blood  in  their 
3.  21  I  will  cleanse  their  blood  (that)  I  have 

1.  14  and  lay  not  upon  us  innocent  blood :  for 
3.  10  build  up  Zion  with  blood,  and  Jerusalem 

7.  2  they  all  lie  in  wait  for  blood  ;  they  hunt 
8  because  of  men's  blood,  and  (for)  the 

2.  12  Woe  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with  bl. 
2. 17  made  them  afraid,  because  of  men's  blood 

Zepb.  1.  17  their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust 
Zech.  9.    7  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth 
9. 11  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant 

.Strength,  nxi  netsach. 

Isa.  63.    3  their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my 
.Blood,  atfj.a  kaima. 
Alatt  16. 17  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  (it) 
23.  30  not  have  been  partakers,  .in  the  blood 
23-  35  upon  you  may  come  all  the  righteous  bl. 
23-  35  blood  of  righteous  Abel  unto  the  blood 

26.  28  For  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament 

27.  4  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood.  And 
27.    6  to  put.  .because  it  is  the  price  of  blood 
27.    8  called,  The  field  of  blood,  unto  this  day 
27.  24  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just 
27.  25  His  blood  (be)  on  us,  and  on  our  children 

Mark  5.  25  which  had  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  years 

5.  29  the  fountain  of  her  blood  was  dried  up 
14.  24  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament 

Luke  8.  43  a  woman,  having  an  issue  of  blood  twelve 

8.  44  immediately  her  issue  of  blood  stanched 
11.  50  That  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets,  .may 
11.  51  From  the  blood  of  Abel,  unto  the  blood 
13.    1  whose  blood  Pilate  had  mingled  with 
22.  20  cup  (is)  the  new  testament  in  my  blood 
22.  44  [his  sweat  was  as  it  were,  .blood] 

John  1.  13  Which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 

6.  53  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  yon 
6.  54  ruteth  my  flesh,  .and  driuketh  my  blood 


Hos. 


Joel 


Jon. 
Mic. 


Hah. 


John  6. 

6. 

19. 

Acts   i, 


Rom.  3, 

3- 
1  Co.  10. 


Gal. 
Eph. 


Col. 
Heb. 


1  Te. 
1  Jo. 

Rev. 


16. 

16. 

.16. 

17- 
18. 
19. 
19. 


55  For.  .my  blood  is  drink  indeed 

56  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blocd 
34  forthwith  came  there  out  blood  and 

19  that  is  to  say,  The  field  of  blood 

19  blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke 

20  the  moon  into  blood,  before  that  great. 

28  intend  to  bring  this  man's  blood  upon  us 
20  (from)  things  strangled,  and  (from)  blood 

29  from  meats  offered  to  idols,  and  from  bl. 
26  And  hath  made  of  one  [blood]  all  nations 

6  Your  blood  (be)  upon  your  own  heads 

26  that  I  (am)  pure  from  the  blood  of  all 

28  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood 
25  from  blood,  and  from  strangled,  and  frcm 
20  when  the  blood  of  thy  martyr  Stephen 

15  Their  feet  (are)  swift  to  shed  blood 

?5  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood 
9  being  now  justified  by  his  blood 

16  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  cf 
25  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood 

27  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood 
50  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit 
16  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood 

7  we  have  redemption  through  his  blcod 

13  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ 
12  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood 

14  [we  have  redemption  through  his  blood 
20  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross 
14  children  aie  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood 

7  high  priest,  .not  without  blood,  which 

12  blood  of  goats,  .by  his  own  blood 

13  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the 

14  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ 

18  the  first,  .was  dedicated  without  blood 

19  he  took  the  blcod  of  calves  and  of  goats 

20  Tliis  (is)  the  blood  of  the  testament  which 

21  he  sprinkled,  .with  blocd  both  the  taber. 

22  things  are  by  the  law  purged  with  blood 
25  high  priest  entereth.  .with  blood  of 

4  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goat3 

19  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of 

29  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
2$  passover,  and  the  sprinkling  of  blood 

4  Ve  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood 
24  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh 

11  whose  blocd  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary 

12  sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  bloid 

20  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  cov. 

2  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
19  with  the  precicus  blood  of  Christ,  as  of 

7  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  .cleanseth  us 

6  by  water  and  blood .  .by  water  and  blood 

8  the  spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood 

5  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood 
0  bast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blocd 

10  dost  thou  not.  .avenge  our  blcod  en 

12  and  the  moon  became  as  blood 

14  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the 

7  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood,  and 

8  the  third  part  of  the  sea  became  blood 

6  have  power,  .to  turn  them  to  blood 

it  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
20  blood  came  out  of  the  ■winepress,  even 

3  and  it  became  as  the  blood  of  a  dead 

4  upon  the  rivers,  .and  they  became  1  lood 
6  they  have  shed  the  blood,  .blood  to  drink 
6  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with  the  blood 

24  in  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets 
2  bath  avenged  the  blood  of  his  servants 

13  clothed  with  a  vesture  dirped  m  blood 


BLOOD,  diseased  with  en  issue  cf  — 

To  run  with  blood,  aifiop[)ocw  haimoTrkoej. 

Matt.  9.  20  which  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood 

BLOOD,  shedding  of  — 

Outpouring  of  blood, at /xar  skx^o ia  hawiatelcchusia. 

Heb.   9.  2*2  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 
BLOOD  guiltiness  — 
Blood,,  ni  dam. 

Psa.  5*1.  14  Deliver  me  from  blood  guiltiness  0  God 

BLOOD  thirsty  — 

Man  of  blond,,  ui  K;i3«  cnosh  dam. 

Prov.29. 10  The'blood  thirsty  hate  the  upright 

BLOODY  — 

Bloody  Di  dam. 

Exod.  4.  25  a  bloody  husband  (art)  thou  to  me 

4.  26  then  she  said,  A  bloody  husband(thou  art) 
2  Sa.  16.    8  because  thou  (art)  a  bloody  man 

21.  1  for  Saul,  and  for  (bis)  bloody  house 
Psa.    5.    6  Lokd  mil  abhor  the  bloody  and  deceitful 

26.    9  Gather  not.  .my  life  with  bloody  men 
55.  23  bloody  and  deceitful  men  shall  not  live 
59,    3  and  save  me  from  bloody  men 
139.  19  depart  from  me  therefore,  ye  bloody 
Eze.     7.  23  the  land  is  full  of  bloody  crimes,  and 

22,  2  wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody  city?  yea 

2',.    6  Woe  to  the  bloody  city,  to  the  pot  whose 

24.    9  saith  the  LOSS  God  :  Woe  to  the  bloody 

Nab.    3.    1  Woe  to  the  bloody  city  !  it  (is)  all  full  of 

BLOODY  flux  — 

Dysentery,  Sva-evrepia  dj/scnteria. 

Acts  23.    8  lay  sick  of  a  fever  and  of  a  bloody  flux 

BLOOM,  to  — 

To  shine,  sprout,  ps  tsids,  5. 

Kum  17.    8  bloomed  blossoms,  find  yielded  almcnds 


BLOSSOM 


101 


BOAST 


BLOSSOM  — 

\.  Blossom,  flower,  \'i  nets. 

Gen.  40. 10  blossoms  shot  forth ;  aud  the  clusters 
"Z.Sprout,  blossom,  rn?  perach. 
'    Isa.     5.  24  their  blossom  shall  go  up  as  dust 
Z.Shining,  sprouting,  yx  tsils. 

Num.  1 7.    S  brought  forth  buds,and  bloomed  blossoms 

BLOSSOM,  to  — 

1.  To  break  forth,  rris parach. 

Nam  17.   5  man's  rod,  whom  I.,  choose,  shall  blossom 
Isa,    35.    1  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom  as  the 
35.    2  It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and  rejoice 
Hab.   3.  17  Although  the  fig  tree  shall  uot  blossom 

2.  To  shine,  sprout,  ps  tsuts. 

Eze.    7. 10  the  rod  hath  blossomed,  pride  hath  bud. 
3.7*o  cause  to  sprout,  ps  tsuts,  5. 

Isa.    27.    6  Israel  shall  blossom  aud  bud,  and  fill 
BLOT  — 

l.Spot,  caetD  mum. 

Job  31.    7  if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  mine  hands 

'2. Spot,  did  mum. 

Prov.  9.    7  rebuketh  a  wicked  (man  getteth).  .a  blot 
BLOT  out,  to  — 
1.7*0  rub  or  wipe  off,  nns  machah. 

Exod32.'  32  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  thy 

32.  33  him  will  I  blot  out  of  my  book 
Num.  5.  23  he  shall  blot  (them)  out  with  the  bitter 
Deut.  9.  14  blut  out  their  name  from  under  heaven 

25.  19  shaltblot  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek 

29.  20  shall  blot  out  Ins  name  from  under 
2  Ki.  14.  27  said  not  that  he  would  blot  out  the  name 
Psa.  51.    1  multitude.. blot  out  my  transgressions 

51.    9  and  blot  out  all  mine  iniquities 
Isa.  43.  25  I,  (even)  I,  (am)  he  that  blotteth  out  thy 

44.  22  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy 

2.7*0  cause  to  he  wiped  away,  nnz  m'ichah,  5. 

Jer.  iS.  23  neither  blot  out  their  sin  from  thy  sight 

Z.To  smear  out,  €|crAet<£cu  exaleipho. 

Acts    3. 19  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out 

Col.    2.  14  Blotting  out.  .handwriting  of  ordinances 

Rev.   3.   5  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name  out  of  the 

BLOTTED  out,  to  be  — 

To  be  wiped  axcay,  nr.D  macluih,  2. 

Neh.  4.    5  let  not  their  sin  be  blotted  out  from 
Psa.  69.  28  Let  them  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of 
109.  13  posterity,  .let  their  name  be  blotted  out 
109. 14  not  the  sin  of  his  mother  be  blotted  out 

BLOW  — 

1. Smiting,  nso  makkaJi. 

Jer.  14. 1 7  broken . .  with  a  very  grievous  blow 
2.  Strife,  rn?ri  tigrah. 

Psa.  39.  10  I  am  consumed  by  the  blow  of  thine 
BLOW,  to  — 
shouting,  nj^Tp  teruah. 

ZS"uni3i.    6  and  the  trumpets  to  blew  in  his  hand 
BLOW,  to  — 

1.7b  sound  shrill,  nsrr  chatsar,  5;  or  "firan  chat- 
sotser,  Sa. 

1  Cli.  15.  24  did  blow  with  the  trumpets  before  the 
2.  To  Mow  or  breathe,  n?j  naphach. 

Isa.    54. 16  the  smith  that  bloweth  the  coals  in  the 

Eze.  22.  20  to  blow  the  fire  upon  it,  to  melt  (it) 
22.  21  blow  upon  you  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath 

Hag.  1.   9  brought  (it)  home,  I  did  blow  upon  it 

3.7*0  breathe,  blow,  ntrj  nashab. 

Isa.   40.    7  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it 

4.7*0  breathe,  blow,  v\&3  nashaph. 

Exod  15.  10  Thou  didst  blow  with  thy  wind,  the  sea 
Isa.    40.  24  he  shall  also  blow  upon  them,  and  they 

5. 7*o  breathe,  btoui,  ma  puachJ  5. 

Eze.  21.  31 1  will  blow  against  thee  in  the  fire  of  my 
0.7*o  come  upon,  4Triyivo/j.at  epiginomai. 

Acts  28. 13  after  one  day  the  south  wind  blew,  and 
7.7*o  blow,  breathe,  -Kvim  pneo. 

Matt.  7.  25  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew 

7.  27  the  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon  that  house 

Lukei2. 55  when  (ye  see)  the  south  wind  blow 

John  3.    8  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth 

6.  18  arose,  by  reason  of  a  great  wind  that  blew 

Hev.    7.    1  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  earth 

BLOW  an  alarm,  to  — 

To  cry  out,  make  a  noise,  va*l  rua,  5. 

Nuni  10.    9  ye  shall  blow  an  alann  with  the  trumpets 
BLOW,  to  cause  to  — 

1.  To  journey,  ycu  nasa,  5. 

Psa.  78.  26  He  causeth  an  east  wind  to  blow  in  the 

2.  T<>  cause  to  Nov:,  -vi  nashab,  5. 

Psa,  147. 18  he  causeth  his  wind  to  blew,  .the  waters 
BLOW  (a  trumpet),  to  — 
To  strike,  strike  up,  J'j2?  taqa. 

Nuni  10.    3  when  they  shall  blow  with  them,  all  the 
10.   4  if  they  blow  (but)  with  one  (trumpet) 
10.   5  When  ye  blow  an  alarm,  then  the  camps 
10.    6  When  ye  blow  an  alarm,  then  the  camps 


Nuni  10.    6  shall  blow  an  alarm  for  their  journeys 
10.    7  ye  shall  blow,  but  ye  shall  not  sound  an 
10.    8  sons  of  Aaron . .  shall  blow  with  the  trum. 
10. 10  ye  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets  over 
Josh.  6.    4  the  priests  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets 
6-    S  passed  on.  .and  blew  with  the  trumpets 
6.   9  before  the  priests  that  blew  with  the  tr. 
6.  13  went  ou  continually,  and  blew  with  the  tr. 
6. 16  when  the  priests  blew  with  the  trumpets 

6.  20  when  (the  priests)  blew  with  the  trumpets 
Judg.  3.  27  he  blew  a  trumpet  in  the  muuntaiu  of  E. 

6. 34  came  upon  Gideon,  and  he  blew  a  trumpet 

7. 18  When  I  blow.,  then  blow  ye.,  also  on  every 

7. 19  they  blew  the  trumpets,  and  brake  the 

7.  20  the  three  companies  blew  the  trumpets 
7.  22  the  three  hundred  blew  the  trumpets 

1  Sa.  13.   3  Saul  blew  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the 

2  Sa.    2.  28  Joab  blew  a  trumpet,  and  all  the  people 

18.  16  Joab  blew  the  trumpet,  .and  the  people 
20.  1  he  blew  a  trumpet,  and  said,  We  have  ' 
20.  22  he  blew  a  trumpet,  and  they  retired  from 

1  Ki.  1.  34  and  blow  ye  with  the  trumpet,  and  say 
1.  39  they  blew  the  trumpet  ;  and  all  the 

;Ki,  q.  13  blew  with  trumpets,  saying,  Jehu  is  king 
11. 14  the  people  of  the  land,  .blew  with  trum. 

Psa.  81.    3  Blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  moon 

Isa.   18.    3  when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet,  hear  ye 

Jer.     4.    5  say,  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  the  land 

6.  1  blow  the  trumpet  in  Tekoa,  and  set  up  a 
51.  27  blow  the  trumpet  among  the  nations 

Eze.  7. 14  They  have  blown  the  trumpet,  even  to 
33.  3  blow  the  trumpet,  and  warn  the  people 
33.    6  and  blow  not  the  trumpet,  and  the  people 

Hos.    5.    8  Blow  ye  the  cornet  in  Gibeah.  .the  trum. 

Joel    2.    1  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  and 

2  15  Blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  sanctify  a  fast 

Zech.  9. 14  the  Lord  GOD  shall  blow  the  trumpet 

BLOW  softly,  to  — 

To  blow  by  degrees,  viroirvio)  hupopneo. 

Acts  27. 13  the  south  wind  blew  softly,  supposing 
BLOW  upon,  to  — 
To  cause  to  breathe,  blow,  ni&puach,  5. 

Song   4.  16  come,  thou  south  ;  blow  upon  my  garden 
BLOWING  — 
To  strike,  strike  vp,  ypj-i  taqa. 

Josh.  6.    9,  13  going  on,  and  blowing  with  the  trum. 

BLOWING  of  trumpets  — 
Shouting,  rrjjnji  teruah. 

Lev.  23.  24  a  memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets,  an 

BLOWING  the  trumpets  — 
Shouting,  ryvi?  teruah. 

Num.  29.  1  it  is  a  day  of  blowing  the  trumpets  unto 
BLOWN  — 
7*o  be  breathed  on,  n33  n'iphach,  4. 

Job    20.  26  a  fire  not  blown  shall  consume  him 
BLOWN,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  struck,  ypj-i  taqa,  2. 

Isa.    27.  13  the  great  trumpet  shall  be  blown 

Amos  3.    6  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  city 
BLUE  — 
Blue  or  violet,  n735  tekeleth. 

Exod25.    4  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine 
26.    1  (of)  fine  twined  lineu,  and  blue,  and 
26.   4  thou  shalt  make  loops  of  blue  upon  the 

26.  31  thou  shalt  make  a  veil  (of)  blue.and  purple 
26. 36  thou  shalt  make  an  hanging  .  .(of)  blue 

27.  16  an  hanging  of  twenty  cubits,  (of)  blue,  and 

28.  s  they  shall  take  gold,  and  blue,  and  purple 
28.    6  shall  make  the  ephod  (of)  gold,  (of)  blue 
28.    8  of  gold,  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
28.  15  gold,  (of)  blue,  and  (of)  purple,  and  (of) 
28.  28  bind  the  breastplate . .  with  a  lace  of  blue 
28.  31  make  the  robe  of  the  ephod  all  (of)  blue 
28.  33  thou  shalt  make  pomegranates  (of)  blue 
28.  37  thou  shalt  put  it  on  a  blue  lace,  that  it 
35.    6  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine 
35.  23  with  whom  was  found  blue,  and  purple 
35.  25  of  blue,  and  of  purple,  (and)  of  scarlet 

35.  35  of  the  embroiderer,  in  blue,  and  in  purple 

36.  8  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  and  blue,  and 

36.  11  he  made  loops  of  blue  on  the  edge  of  one 
36.  35  he  made  a  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and 
36.  37  an  hanging  for  the  tabernacle,  .(of)  blue 
3S.  iS  the  hanging,  .(was)  needlework, (of)  blue 

38.  23  an  embroiderer  in  blue,  and  in  purple 

39.  1  of  the  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
39.    2  he  made  the  ephod  (of)  gold,  blue,  and 
39.    3  to  work  (it)  in  the  blue,  and  in  the  purple 
39-    5»  8  (of)  gold,  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
39.  21  bind  the  breastplate,  .with  a  lace  of  blue 
39.  22  made  the  robe  of  the  ephod.  .all (of) blue 
39.  24  made.. pomegranates  (of) blue,  and  purple 
39.  29  a  girdle  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  and  blue 
39.  31  they  tied  unto  it  a  lace  of  blue,  to  fasten 

Num.  4.    6  spread  over  (it)  a  cloth  wholly  of  blue 
4.    7  table,  .they  shall  spread  a  cloth  of  blue 
4.    9  they  shall  take  a  cloth  of  blue,  and  cover 
4.  11  altar  they  shall  spread  a  cloth  of  blue 
4.  12  put  (them)  in  a  cloth  of  blue,  and  cover 
J5-  38  put  upon  the  fringe  .  .a  ribband  of  blue 

zCh.   2.    7  iron,  and  in  purple,  and  crimson, and  blue 

2.  14  in  blue,  and  in  fine  linen,  and  in  crimson 

3.  14  he  made  the  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple 
Esth.  1.    6  white,  green,  and  blue  (hangings),  fasten. 

8.  15  iu  royal  apparel  of  blue  and  white,  and 


Jer.    10.    g  blue  and  purple  (is)  their  clothing :  they 
Eze.  23.    6  clothed  with  blue,  captains  and  rulers 
27.    7  blue  and  purple  from  the  isles  of  Elishah 
27.  24  in  blue  cluthes,  and  broidered  work,  and 
BLUE  (marble)  — 
White  {marble),  wv  shesh. 

Esth.  1.    6  pavement  of .  .blue,  and  white,  aud  black 
ELUENESS  — 
Stripe,  wound,  ">"i'rn,  n*Tsn  chaburah. 

Prov.20.  30  the  blueuess  of  a  wound  cieanseth  away 
BLUNT,  to  he  — 
To  be  weak,  blunt,  nnjj  qahah,  3. 

Eccl.  10. 10  If  the  iron  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet 
I  LUSH,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  cut  into,  caused  to  blush,  D??   kalam,  2. 
Ezra   9.    6  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up  my 
Jer.     8. 12  at  all  ashamed,  neither  could  they  blush 

2.7*0  cut  in,  cause  to  blush,  chi  kalam,  5. 

Jer.    6. 15  at  all  ashamed,  neither  could  they  blush 

1 0  AN-ER'-GES,  gozvtpyh  sons  of  rage,  soon  angry. 
Surname  of  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  James  and 
John.  It  had  reference  to  their  fiery  zeal,  signs  of 
which  may  be  seen  in  Luke  9.  54,  and  Mark  9.  38. 

Mark    3. 17  he  surnamed  them  B.,  which  is,  The  sons 
BOAR  — 
Boar,  swine,  Tin  chaz'r. 

Tsa.  80. 13  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it,  and 
BOARD  — 
1. Board,  n>b  luach. 

Exod27.    8  Hollow  with  boards  shalt  thou  make  it 
38.    7  he  made  the  altar  hollow  with  boards 

Song  8.    9  we  will  enclose  her  with  boards  of  cedar 

Eze.  27.    5  They  have  made  all  thy  (ship)  boards  or 

2.  Rib,  side,  slope,  ub$  tsela. 

1  Eli.  6. 15  he  built  the  walls,  .with  boards  of  cedar 
6.  16  both  the  floor  snd  the  walls  with  boards 
3. Board,  plank,  E>"ij3  qeresh. 

Exod  26.  15  thou  shalt  make  boards  for  the  tabernacle 
26.  16  length  of  a  board . .  breadth  of  one  board 
26.  17  in  one  board .  .for  all  the  boards  of  the 
26.  18  make  the  boards  .  .twenty  boards  on  the 
26.  19  sockets  of  silver  under  the  twenty  boards- 
26.  19  under  one  board,  .under  another  board 
26.  20  on  the  north  side . .  twenty  boards 
26.  21  under  one  board,  .under  another  board 
26.  22  for  the  sides . .  thou  shalt  make  six  boards- 
26.  23  two  boards  shalt  thou  make  for  the 
26.  25  eight  boards . .  cue  board .  .another  board 
26.  26  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 
20.  27  bars  for  the  boards,  .bars  for  the  boards 
26.  28  the  middl  e  bar  in  the  midst  of  the  boards- 
26.  29  thou  shalt  overlay  the  boards  with  gold 
35. 11  his  boards,  his  br.rs,  his  pillars,  and  his 
36.  20  he  made  beards  for  the  tabernacle 
36.  21  length  of  a  board .  .breadth  of  a  board 
36.  22  One  board  had  . .  make  for  all  the  boards 
36.  23  he  made  boards . .  twenty  boards  for  the 
36.  24  twenty  boards. .  one  board,  .anotherboard 
36.  25  the  other  side  he  made  twenty  boards 
36.  26  sockets  under  one  board .  .another  board 
36.  27  for  the  sides . .  he  made  six  boards 
36.  28  two  boards  made  he  for  the  corners  of 
36.  30  there  were  eight  boards,  .every  board 
36.  31  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 
36.  32  five  bars  for  the  boards,  .for  the  boards 
36.  33  middle  bar  to  shoot  through  the  boards 
36.  34  he  overlaid  the  boards  with  gold,  and 

39.  33  his  taches,  his  boards,  his  bars,  and  his 

40.  18  set  up  the  boards  thereof,  and  put  in 
Num. .  3.  36  custody  and  charge . .  (shall  be)  the  boards 

4.  31  boards  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  bars 

4.  A  roxo,  rrcj?  sederah. 

1  Ki.  6.   9  covered  the  house  with  beams  and  boards 
5. Board,  plank,  travis  sanis. 

Acts  27.  44  And  the  rest,  some  on  boards,  and  some 
EOAST  — 
To  make  great,  ?ia  gadal,  5. 

Eze.  35.  13  Thus  with  your  mcuth  ye  have  boasted 

BOAST  (against),  to  — 

1.7*o  praise  greatly,  r?ri  halal,  3. 

Psa.  10.    3  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  heart's  desire 
44.    8  In  God  we  boast  all  the  day  long,  and 

2.To praise  oneself,  ^Si  halal,  7. 

1  Ki.  20.  11  Let  not  him.  .boast  himself  as  he  that 
Psa.  49.    6  boast  themselves  in  the  multitude  of 

52.    1  Why  boasteth  thou  thyself  in  mischief 
TTov.20. 14  he  is  gone  his  way,  then  he  boasteth 

3.  7*0  make  heavy,  or  honourable,  "D3  kabad,  5. 

2  Cb.  25.  19  thine  heart  lifteth  thee  up  to  boast 

4.  To  boast  against,  kuTaKavxdofiatkatakauch.aomai. 

Rom. 11.  iS  Boast  not  against,  .if  thou  boast,  thou 
5.7*0  boast,  Kavxa.ou.at  kauchaomai. 

2  Co.    7.  14  if  I  have  boasted  any  thing  to  him  of  you 
9.    2  for  which  I  boast  of  you  to  them  of  M. 
10.   8  though  I  should  boast  somewhat  more 
10.  13  we  will  not  [boast]  of  things  without  (our) 
10.  15  Not  boasting  of  things  without  (our) 
10. 16  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  line  of 
Eph.  ?.    9  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast 


BOAST 

G.T'i  say,  lay  out,  allege,  \4yw  lego. 

Acts    5.  36  Theudas,  boasting  him  self.,  somebody 

BOAST  great  things,  to  — 

To  b  "'■■/  gn  at  things,  _u.^ya\avx^  megala/ut  ht  '. 
Jas.     3.    5  is  a  little  member,  and  boasteth  great  th. 

BOA§T,  to  make  — 

v.  "-  halal,  7. 
I'sa.  34.    2  My  soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord 
BOAST  self,  to  — 
1.  To  soy  or  speak  of  oneself,  "vpN  amar,  7. 

1  '-.i-  94.    4  the  workers  of  iniquity  boast  themselves? 
2.To praise  oneself  T>n  halal,  7. 

Paa.  4g.    6  boast  themselves  in  the  multitude  of 
52,    1  Why  boastest  thou  thyself  in  mischief 
97.    7  Confounded  be  all.  .that  boast  theniselv. 
Prov25-  14  Whoso  boasteth  himself  of  a  false  gift 
27.    1  Boast  not  thyself  of  tomorrow 
3.To  speak  of  oneself  lift  oneself up,  Tg£  yamar,  7. 

Isa.  61.    6  in  their  glory  shall  ye  boast  yourselves 
4.7*0  beautify  oneself  1N3  paar,  7. 

Isa.   10.  15  Shall  the  ax  boast  itself  against  him 
■  h.To  boast,  /cau,x^'5Mat  hwuchaomai. 

2  Co.  11.  16  that  I  may  boast  myself  a  little 
BOAST,  to  make  one's  — 
To  b  <ast,  Ka.vxo.oy.ai  kauchaomai. 

Rom.  2.  17  in  the  law,  and  makest  thy  boast  of  God 
2.  23  Thou  that  makest  thy  boast  of  the  law 

BOASTER  — 

Taking  on  great  airs,  b.\a(wv  alazon. 

Rom.  1.  30  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of  evil  things 
2  Ti.    3.    2  lovers  of  their  own  selves,  .boasters 

BOASTING  — 

X.A  taking  on  of  great  airs,  a\a£oveia  alazoneia. 

Jas.    4.  16  ye  rejoice  in  your  boastings  :  all  such 
^.Boosting,  KavxvM-a  ka/uchema. 

2  Co.   9.    3  lest  our  boasting  of  you  should  be  in 
B   isting  (act  of),  «ayx7?(Tiy  kauchesis. 

Rom.  3.  27  Where  (is)  boasting  then  1  Itis  excluded 

2  Co.   7.  14  even  so  our  boasting,  which 

8.  24  show,  .the  proof,  .of  our  boasting  on 

9.  4  ashamed  in  this  same  confident  [boasting] 
11.  10  no  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  boasting 
11.  17  foolishly,  in  this  confidence  of  boasting 

BOAT  — 

1..1  (little)  boat,  irKotdpLov ploiarion, 

Juhu  6.  22  saw  that  there  was  none  other  boat  there 
6.  22  went  not  with  his  disciples  into  the  [boat] 
6.  23  there  came  other  [boats]  from  Tiberias 

%A  skiff",  <TKa<pri  skaphe. 

Acts  27.  16  we  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  boat 
27.  30  when  they  had  let  down  the  boat  into 
27.  32  cut  off  the  ropes  of  the  boat 

BOAT,  ferry  — 

Ferry  boat,  rTT^fi.  abarah. 

2  Sa.  19. 18  there  went  over  a  ferry  boat  to  carry 
BO'-AZ,  H#  fUetltess,  strength. 
I,   \   Bethlehemite,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  who  became 
i       husband  of  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  and  was  an  ances- 
tor 0!  David,  B.C.  1312.    In  the  N.T.  he  is  called  Booz. 
llutb  2.    1  Naomi,  .kinsman,  .and  his  name  (was) B. 
2.    3  part  of  the  field  (belonging)  unto  JB.,  who 
-2.    4  behold,  B.  came  from  Beth-lehem,  and 
2.    5  Then  said  B.  .Whose  damsel  (is)  this? 
2.    8  Then  said  B.  .abide  here,  .by  my  maidens 
2.  11  B..saiduntoher,Itbathfuliybeenshowed 
2.  14  B.  said,  .come  thou.,  and  eat  of  the  bread 
■2.  15  B.  commanded  his  young  men,  saying 
2.  19  man's  name  with  whom  I  wrought.  .(is)B. 

2.  23  she  kept  fast  by  the  maidens  of  B. 

3.  2  now  (is).  .B.  of  our  kindred,  with  whose 

3.  7  when  B.  had  eaten  and  drunk.. he  went 

4.  r  Then  went  B.  up  to  the  gate,  and  sat 

4.    1  the  kinsman  of  whom  B.  spake  came  by 
4.    5  Then  said  B.. -thou  buyest  the  field  of  the 
4,    S  the  kinsman  said  unto  B.,  Buy  (it)  for  thee 
4.   9  B.  b aid.  I  have  bought  all  that  (was) 
4.  1  j  B,  took  Ruth,  and  sin.-  was  his  wife 
4.21  Salmon  beg  it  B.,  and  B.  begat  Obed 
1  Ch.   2.  ii  ETashon  begat  Salma,  and  Salma begat B. 
a.  12  B.  begat  Obed,  and  (Hied  begat  Jesse 

M:itt,  1.     s  Salnmn  ln-,'at  B.  of  Rachab 

Luke  3.  3a  B.,  which  was  .of  Salmon,  which  was.. of 

2  '  toe  "f  Soloni'Hi'?  bra  sen  pillars  erected  at  the  temple 

porch,     it  al I  on  the  left  side,  and  was   17J  cubits 

high. 

1  KJ.    ;■  ii  Bi  t  up  the     pillar,  and.  .the  name,    B. 
1  li     .i.  17  In-  .called  the  name  of  that  on.,  left  B. 
BO-CHE -RTT,  njS  \/ 

1  ■  ■    unite  of  the  family  of  Saul  the  son 
1      h     The  1  \\.  renderifc  ttoutotokos,  firstborn, 
in  both  passages.    B.o.  36o. 

1  rlL       ;    l»l  had  six  sons.. Azrikam,  andB.,  and 
q.  44  A/,  1  had  -i\  sons    Azrikam,  R,  and 
BO'-CHTM,  c-2h?  /■'■ 

■  w.  of  the  Jordan,  above  1 
Judg.  2.   1  an  angel    came  up  from  g  rural  to  B. 

2,    s  they  called  the  name  of  thai  place  B. 


102 

30DLLY  — 
l.Body,  au!{j.a  soma. 

2  Co.  10.  10  bodily  presence  (is)  weak,  and  (his) 

l.Bodily,  (ToifxariK6s  sdruatikos. 

Luke  3.  22  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily 
1  Ti.   4.    8  bodily  exercise  pronteth  little ;  but 

S.Bodily,  ffa>{iaTtKws  somattkos. 

Col.    2.   9  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily 

BODY  — 

1. Belly,  1^2  beten. 

Deut23.'  "4  Blessed  (shall  be)  the  fruit  of  thy  body 
28.  11  plenteous,  .in  the  fruit  of  thy  body 
28.  18  Cursed  (shall  be)  the  fruit  of  thy  body 
28.  53  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thine,  .body 

30.  9  fruit  of  thy  body,  and  in  the  fruit  of  thy 
Job   19.  17  the  children's  (sake)  of  mine  own  body 
Psa.132.  11  Of  the  fruit  of  thy  body  will  I  set 

Mic.    6.    7  fruit  of  my  body  (for)  the  sin  of  my  soul? 

2.Flesh,  Tf|  basar. 

Isa.    10.  18  of  bis  fruitful  field,  both  soul  and  body 
Eze.  10.  12  their  whole  body,  and  their  backs,  and 

Z.Back,  23  gab. 

Job   13.  12  ashes,  your  bodies  to  bodies  of  clay 
A. Back,  13  gev. 

Isa.  51.  23  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  ground 

5. Back,  nia  gevah. 

Job  20.25  It  is  drawn,  and  cometh  out  of  the  body 

Q.Back,  n;ia  geviyyah. 

Gen.  47.  18  there  is  not  ought  left,  .but  our  bodies 
1  Sa.  31.  10  they  fastened  his  body  to  the  wall 

31. 12  went  all  night,  and  took  the  body  of  Saul 

31.  12  the  bodies  of  his  sons  from  the  wall 
Xeb.   9.  37  also  they  have  dominion  over  our  bodies 
Eze.    1.  ii  their  wings,  .two  covered  their  bodies 

I.  23  which  covered,  on  that  side,  their  bodies 
Dan.  10.    6  His  body  also  (was)  like  the  beryl 

7. Back,  R9M  guphah. 

1  Ch.  10.12  They,  .the  body  of  Saul,  .the  bodies  of  his 

S.Uliat  is  palpable,  material,  D^a  geshem. 

Dan    3.  27  upon  whose  bodies  the  fire  had  no  power 

3.  28  the  king's  word,  and  yielded  their  bodies 

4.  33  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 

5.  21  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 
7.  11  his  body  destroyed,  and  given  to  the 

9.  Carcase,  fallen  object,  rtjaa  nebelah. 

Deut2i.  23  His  body  shall' not  remain  all  night 

10. Soul,  breathing  creature,  E;DJ  nephesh. 

Lev.  21.  11  Neither  shall  he  go  in  to  any  dead  body 
Num.  6.    6  he  shall  come  at  no  dead  body 

19.  13  Whosoever  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any 
Hag.  2.  13  If  (one  that  is)  uncleau  by  a  dead  body 

11. Bone,  substance,  dsu  etseni. 

Exod  24.  10  as  it  were  the  body  of  heaven  in  (his) 
Lam.   4.    7  they  were  more  ruddy  in  body  than 

12.  Flesh,  that  which  is  thick,  ixyj  she-er. 

Prov.  5.  11  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  consumed 

IZ.Thigh,  trv  yarek. 

Judg.  8.  30  threescore  and  ten  sons  of  his  body 
1 4.  Sheath,  nru  nidneh. 

Dan.    7. 15" in  my  spirit  in  the  midst  of  (my)  body 

15. Body,  o-cS/xa  soma. 

Matt.  5.  29,  30  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  into 

6.  22  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye 

6.  22  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light 
6.  23  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  darkness 
6.  25  nor  yet  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put 
6.  25  and  the  body  than  raiment? 
10.  28  fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body 

10.  28  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell 

14.  12  his  disciples  came,  and  took  up  the  [body] 
26.  12  hath  poured  tliis  ointment  on  my  body 

26.  26  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body 

27.  52  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept 
27.  58  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body  of 
27.  58  Pilate  commanded  the  [body]  to  lie  deliv. 
27.  59  when  Joseph  had  taken  the  body,  lie 

Mark  5.  29  felt  in  (her)  body  that  she  was  healed 
14.   8  she  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body 

14.  22  Jesus,  .said,  Take,  eat :  this  is  my  body 

15.  43  Joseph,  .craved  the  body  of  Jesus 

15.  45  centurion,  he  gave  the  [body]  to  Joseph 
Luke  11.  34  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye 

II.  34  thy  whole  body  also  is  full  of  light 

11.  34  thy  body  also  (is)  full  of  darkness 

11.  36  If  thy  whole  body,  .(be)  full  of  light 

12.  4  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body 
12.  22  neither  for  the  body,  what  ye  shall  put 
12.  23  and  the  body  (is  more)  than  raiment 
17.  37  Wheresover  the  body  (is),  thither  will  the 

22.  19  This  is  my  body,  which  is  given  for  you 

23.  52  This  (man),  .begged  the  body  of  Jesus 

23.  5s  beheld  the  sepulchre,  and  lmw  Ins  bndy 

24.  3  found  not  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
24.  23  when  they  ftmnd  not  his  body 

John  2.  21  he  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body 

19.  31  that  the  bodies  should  not  remain  upon 
19.  3S  that  he  might  take  away  the  body  of 
19.  38  and  took  the  body  of  Jesus 

19.  40  Then  took  they  the  bndy  of  Jesus 

20.  12  feet,  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  lain 
Acts    9.  40  turning  (him)  to  the  body  said,  Tabitha 


BODY 


Bom.  1.  24  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between 
4.  19  considered  not  his  own  body  now  dead 
6.    6  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed 

6.  12  Let  not  sin .  .reign  in  your  mortal  body 

7.  4  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body 

7.  24  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 

8.  10  the  body  (is)  dead  because  of  sin;  but  the 
8.  11  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies 

8.  13  if  ye.  .mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body 

8.  23  adoption,  .the  redemption  of  our  body 
12.    1  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living 
12.    4  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  body 
12.    5  we,  (being)  many,  are  one  body  in  Christ 

1  Co.    5.    3  I.  .as  absent  in  body,  hut  present  in 

6.  13  the  body  (is)  not  for  fornication,  hut  for 

6.  13  and  the  Lord  for  the  body 

6.  15  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the 

6.  16  know  ye  not  that  he . .  is  one  body  ? 

6.  18  Every  sin. .  is  without  the  body :  but  he 

6. 18  sinneth  against  his  own  body 

6. 19  know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple 

6.  20  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your 

7.  4  The  wife  hath  not  power  of  her  own  body 
7.  4  husband  hath  not  power  of  his  own  body 
7.  34  that  she  may  he  holy  both  in  body  and  in 

9.  27  I  keep  under  my  body,  and  bring  (it) into 

10. 16  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of 

10. 17  For  we.  .are  one  bread,  (and)  one  body 
11.  24  Take,  eat :  this  is  my  body,  which  is 

11.  27  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of 

11.  29  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's  body 

12.  12  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  manymemb. 
12.  12  members  of  that  one  body,  .are  one  body 
12.  13  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one  body 
12.  14  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many 
12.  15  I  am  not  the  hand,  I  am  not  of  the  body 

12. 15  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  body? 

12.  16  I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am  not  of  the  body 

12. 16  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  body? 

i2.  17  If  the  whole  body  (were)  an  eye,  where 
12.  18  set.  .every  one  of  them  in  the  body 
12.  19  all  one  member,  where  (were)  the  body  ? 
12.  20  many  members,  yet  but  one  body 
12.  22  much  more  those  members  of  the  body 
12.  23  those  (members)  of  the  body,  which  we 
12.  24  God  hath  tempered  the  body  together 
12.  25  there  should  be  no  schism  in  the  body 

12.  27  Now  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and 

13.  3  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned 
15.  35  and  with  what  body  do  they  come? 

15.  37  thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be 
15.  38  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased 
15.  38  and  to  every  seed  his  own  body 
15.  40  celestial  bodies,  and  bodies  terrestrial 
15.  44,  44  natural  body,  .spiritual  body 

2  Co.    4.  10  Always  bearing  about  in  the  body 

4.  10  might  be  made  manifest  in  our  body 

5.  6  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body 

5.   8  willing,  .to  be  absent  from  the  body,  and 
5.  10  may  receive  the  things,  .in  (his)  body 
12.   2  whether  in  the  body.,  or.,  out  of  the  body 

12.  3  whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body 
Gal.  6.  17  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Eph.    1.  23  Which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him 

2.  16  reconcile  b  »th  unto  God  in  one  body  by 
4.    4  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye  are 

4.  12  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ 
4. 16  body  fitly  joined,  .increase  of  the  body 

5.  23  Christ,  .he  is  the  saviour  of  the  body 
5.  28  to  love  their  wives  as  their  own  bodies 
5.  30  For  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his 

Phil.     1.  20  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body 

3.  21  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that 
3.  21  like  unto  his  glorious  body 

Col.  1.  18  he  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  church 
1.  22  In  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death 

1.  24  afflictions  of  Christ,  .for  his  body's  sake 

2.  11  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of 
2.  17  a  shadow",  .but  the  body  (is)  of  Christ 
2. 19  from  which  all  the  body  by  joints  and 

2.  23  humility,  and  neglecting  of  the  body 

3.  15  to  the  which,  .ye  are  called  in  one  body 
1  Th.  5.  23  (I  pray  Gcd)  your  whole.. body  be  preserd. 
Heb.  10.    5  but  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  me 

10.  10  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus 
to.  22  having,  .our  bodies  washed  with  pure 

13.  3  as  being  yourselves  also  in  the  body 
13.  11  the  bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood 

Jas.     2. 16  things  which  are  needful  to  the  body 

2.  26  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead 

3.  2  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body 

3.    3  and  we  turn  about  their  whole  body 

3.    6  the  tongue,  .defileth  the  whole  body 

1  Pe.    2.  24  Who.  .bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body 

Jude        9  he  disputed  about  the  body  of  Moses 

IG. Surface  of  a  body,  frame,  person,  XP^S  ^ros. 
Acts  19.  12  So  that  from  his  body  were  brought  unto 

BODY,  dead  — 
l.C'arcase,  rrrn  nebelah. 

Psa.  79.    2  The  dead  bodies  of  thy  servants  have 
Isa.  26.  m  (together  with)  my  dead  body  shall  they 
Jer.   26.  23  east  his  dead  body  into  the  graves 
34.  20  their  dead  bodies  shall  be  for  meat 
36.  30  his  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out 

2.Fallcw  thing,  carcase,  irrwfia  ptama. 

Kev.  11.    8  And  their  dead  bodies. .  in  the  street 
it.    o  they,  .shall  see  their  dead  bodies 

11.  9  they,  .shall  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies 


BODY 


103 


BOND    WOMAN 


BODY,  of  the  same  — 

Joined  in  one  body,  crvo-o'itifios  sussomos. 

Eph.    3.    6  Gentiles  should  be.  .of  the  same  body 

BO'-HAN,  jnia  stumpy. 

A  Reubenite,  after  whom  a  stone  was  named  which 
formed  part  of  the  boundary  between  Judah  and  Ben- 
jamin, B.C.  1714. 

Josh,  15.    6  the  border  went  up  to  the  stone  of  B. 
iS.  17  and  descended  to  the  stone  of  B. 

boll  — 

Burning,  inflammation,  yxv$  shechin. 

Exod.  9.    9  it.  .shall  be  a  boil  breaking  forth 

9.  10  it  became  a  boil  breaking  forth  (with) 
9.  11  could  not  stand,  .because  of  the  boils 
9. 11  the  boil  was  upon  the  magicians 
Lev.  13.  18  The  flesh  also,  in  which,  .was  a  boil 
13. 19  in  the  place  of  the  boil  there  be  a 
13.  20  plague  of  leprosy  broken  out  of  the  boil 
13.  23  if  the  bright  spot  stay . .  it  (is)  a . .  boil 
2  KI.  20.    7  they  toook  and  laid  (it)  on  the  boil 
Job     2.    7  Satan,  .smote  Job  with  sore  boils 
Isa.  38.  21  lay  (it)  for  a  plaister  upon  the  boil 

botx,  to  — 

l. To  boil,  ^3  bashal,  3. 

Lev.    8.  31  Boil  the  fleshfat)  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 

1  Ki.  19.  21  boiled  their  flesh  with  the  instruments 

2  Ki.   6.  29  we  boiled  my  son,  and  did  eat  him 
Eze.  46.  20  the  place  where  the  priests  shall  boil 

46.  24  These  (are)  the  places  of  them  that  boil 
46.  24  the  ministers  of  the  house  shall  boil 

2.  To  bubble  up,nrn  rathach,  4. 

Job  30.  27  My  bowels  boiled,  and  rested  not 
BOLL,  to  make  to  — 
l.To  (cause  to)  bubble  up,  nrn  ratlmch,  3. 

Eze.  24.    5  Take  the  choice,  .make  it  boil  well 
2.To  cause  to  buhble  up,  nrn  rathach,  5. 

Job  41.  31  Be  maketh  the  deep  to  boil  like  a  pot 
BOILING  places  — 
Cooking  hearths,  niS'^af?  mebashshetoth. 

Eze.  46.  23  (it  was)  made  with  boiling  places  under 
BOISTEROUS  — 
Strong,  Ivxvpo's  ischuros. 

Matt.14.  30  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous 

BOLD,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  confident,  nu3  batach. 

Prov.28.    1  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion 
2. To  be  warm,  zealous,  daring,  Oafipeco  tharrheo. 

2  Co.  10.    1  being  absent  am  bold  toward  you 

10.  2  that  I  may  not  be  bold  when  I  am  present 

3-  To  use  free  utterance,  7ra.p£>wo-id£ofj.at. 

1  Th.  2.    2  we  were  bold  in  our  God  to  speak 
4.To  be  bold,  ro\fj,d<jj  tolmao. 

2  Co.  10.    2  wherewith  I  think  to  be  bold  against  some 

11.  21  whereinsoever  any  is  bold.  .1  am  bold 
Phil.    1. 14  many,  .are  much  more  bold  to  speak 

BOLD,  to  be  much  — 

Tohave muchfreeutierance,ix^  TroKhy}VKa$$i}v{a.v. 
Phm.        8  I  might  be  much  bold  in  Christ  to  enjoin 

BOLD,  to  be  very  — 

To  be  very  bold,  awuToAixda}  apotolmad. 

Rom  10.  20  Esaias  is  very  bold,  and  saith,  I  was  found 
BOLD,  to  wax  — 
Toitsefreeutterance,7rappnaid£ofiaLparrhesiazoniai. 

Acts  13.  46  Paul  and  Barnabas  waxed  bold,  and  said 
BOLDLY  — 
1.  Confidence,  naa  hetach. 

Gen.  34.  25  Simeon.  .Levi,  .came  upon  the  city  boldly 
2.To  be  warm,  zealous,  daring,  dappecc  tharrlieo. 

Heb.  13.    6  So  that  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  (is) 
Z.Free  utterance,  Tra/^Tjm'a  parrhesia. 

John  7.  26  he  speaketh  boldly,  and  they  say  nothing 

Eph.   6.  19  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly 

Heb.  4.  16  Let  us  therefore  come  boldly  unto  the 

4.To  be  bold,  roXfxdw  tolmao. 

Markis.  43  Joseph. .came,  and  went  in  boldly  unto 
BOLDLY,  to  preach  — 
Toiisefreeutterccnce,^ap^7](TidCo}j.ai2^cirrhesiazmnai. 

Acts    g.  27  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  Damascus 
BOLDLY,  to  speak  — 
Tousefree  utterance,  'Kap^ncid^oy.a.iparrrhesiazomai. 

Acts    9.  29  he  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
14.    3  abode  they  speaking  boldly  in  the  Lord 

18.  26  he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue 

19.  8  spake  boldly  for  the  space  of  three  months 
Eph.  6.  20  that  therein  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ought 

BOLDLY,  the  more  — 

The  more  boldly,  roA/xvp^repov  tohneroteron. 

Rom  15.  15  I  have  written  the  more  boldly  unto  you 
BOLDNESS  — 
1.  Strength,  ijj  oz. 

Eccl.  8.    1  the  boldness  of  his  face  shall  be  changed 
2.Free  utterance,  wafiftya-ia  parrhesia.         * 

Acts   4.  13  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and 
4.  29  with  all  boldness  they  speak,  .thy  word 


Acts   4.  31  they  spake  the  word  of  God  with  boldness 
Eph.  3.  12  In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access 
Phil.    1.  20  (that)  with  all  boldness,  as  always 
1  Ti.    3.  13  great  boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  in 
Heb.  10.  19  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to 

1  Jo.    4.  17  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 

BOLDNESS  of  speech  — 

Free  utterance,  Tra^vcria  parrhesia. 

2  Co.    7.    4  Great  (is)  my  boldness  of  speech  toward 

BOLLED  — 

TJie  calix  of  flowers,  Vijn?  gibol. 

Exod. 9.  31  barley,  .in  the  ear.  .the  flax,  .boiled 
BOLSTER  — 
X. Place  oftlie  head,  n^xn^  meraashoth. 

iSa.  19.  13  put  a  pillow  of  goats'  (hair)  for  his  bolster 
19.  16  a  pillow  of  goats'  (hair)  for  his  bolster 
26.    7  Saul  lay.  .and  his  spear,  .at  his  bolster 

26.  11  take  thou  now  the  spear,  .at  his  bolster 
26. 16  cruse  of  water  that  (was)  at  his  bolster 

2. Place  of  the  head,  nV^x-i  raashoth. 

1  Sa.  26. 12  took  the  spear,  .from  Saul's  bolster 

BOLT,  to  — 

To  bind  u&9?£j  naal. 

2Sa.  13. 17  Put  now  this.. out.. and  bolt  the  door 
13. 18  Then  his  servant.,  bolted  the  door  after 

BOND  — 

X.Bond,  tck,  ipy  issar,  esar. 

Nuni3o.    2  If  a  man.  .bind  his  soul  with  a  bond 
30.   3  If  a  woman,  .bind  (herself)  by  a  bond 
39.    4  her  father  hear,  .her  bond,  .every  bond 
30.   s  not  any  of  her  vows,  or  of  her  bonds 
30.    7  her  vows  shall  stand,  and  her  bonds 
30. 10  if  she.  .bound  her  soul  by  a  bond 
30.  11  all  her  vows  shall  stand,  and  every  bond 
30.  12  or  concerning  the  bond  of  her  soul 
30.  14  then  he  establisheth  all  her.  .bonds 

2i.Bond,  19*0  musar. 

Job    12.  18  He  looseth  the  bond  of  kings,  and  girdeth 

S.Bond,  "ipiD  moser. 

Psa.n6.  16  thy  servant,  .thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds 
Jer.     5.    5  these  have  altogether,  .burst  the  bonds 

27.  2  Make  thee  bonds  and  yokes,  and  put 
30.    8  I  will,  .burst  thy  bonds,  and  strangers 

Natl.    1.  13  now  will  I.  .burst  thy  bonds  in  sunder 

4.  Tradition,  nnb;"?  masoreth. 

Eze.  20.  37  I  will  bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the 

5.  What  is  unloosed,  a  chain,  'd\v<ris  halusis. 
Eph.   6.  20  For  which  I  am  an  ambassador  in  bonds 

Q.Band,  bond,  fetter,  Seo-fios  desmos. 

Lukei3.  16  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the 

Acts  20.  23  saying  that  bonds  and  afflictions  abide 

23.  29  to  have  nothing  laid,  .worthy,  .of  bonds 

26.  29  altogether,  .as  I  am,  except  these  bonds 

26.  31  This  man  doeth  nothing  worthy.. of  bonds 

Phil.    1.    7  as  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the  defence 

1.  13  So  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest 

1.  14  many,  .waxing  confident  by  my  bonds 
1. 16  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds 

Col.    4. 18  Remember  my  bonds.  Grace  (be)  with  you 

2  Ti.    2.    9  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble,  .unto  bonds 
Phm.       10  whom  I  have  begotten  in  my  bonds 

13  have  ministered  unto  me  in  the  bonds 
Heb.  10.  34  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  [bonds] 

11.  36  others  had  trial,  .of  bonds  and  imprison. 

7 '.Joint  bond,  avvBeirfios  sundesmos. 

Acts  8.  23  I  perceive,  .thou  art.  .(in)  the  bond  of 
Eph.  4.  3  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace 
Col.     3. 14  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness 

8. Slave,  servant,  SovAos  dotdos. 

1  Co.  12.  13  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether,  .bond  or  free 
Gal.     3.  28  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free,  there 
Eph.   6.    8  receive  of  the  Lord,  whether  (he  be)  bond 
Col.     3.  11  Barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  (nor)  free 
Rev.  13.  16  he  caused  all,  both,  .free  and  bond 

19.  iS  flesh  of  all.  .free  and  bond,  both  small 

BONDS,  to  be  in  — 

l.To  bind,  5ea>  deo. 

Col.    4.    3  Christ,  for  which  I  am  also  in  bonds 

2. One  bound,  SeVu-tos  desmios. 

Acts  25.  14  There  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by 
Heb.  13.    3  Remember  them  that  are  in  bonds 

BONDAGE  — 

1.  Servitude,  rvnrij;  abduth. 

Ezra   9.    8  give  us  a  little  reviving  in  our  bondage 

9,  9  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our  bondage 
Neh.  9.  17  a  captain  to  return  to  their  bondage 

2,Service,  <"nb#:  abodah. 

Exod.  1.  14  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard  bondage 

2.  23  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of  the  bondage 
2.  23  came,  .unto  God  by  reason  of  the  bondage 
6.    6  I  will  rid  you  out  of  their  bondage 

6.    9  they  hearkened  not.  .for  cruel  bondage 
Deut26.    6  Egyptians,  .laid  upon  us  hard  bondage 
Neh.   5.  18  the  bondage  was  heavy  upon  this  people 
Isa.    14.    3  give  thee  rest .  .  from  the  hard  bondage 

3.  Servant,  inj£  ebed. 

Exodi3.    3  ye  came. .  out  of  the  house  of  bondage 
13.  14  brought  us . .  from  the  house  of  bondage 
20.    2  brought . .  out  of  the  house  of  bondage 


Deut.  5.    6  brought  thec.from  the  house  of  bondage 

6.  12  brought  thee.. from  the  house  of  bondage 
8. 14  brought  thee. .from  the  house  of  bondage 

13.    5, 10  brought  you.  .of  the  house  of  bondage 
Josh  24.  17  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 
Judg.  6.    8  brought  you.. out  of  the  house  of  bondage 
4. Slavery,  service,  bondage,  SovAeta.  douleia. 

Rom.  8.  15  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage 

S.  21  creature,  .be  delivered  from  the  bondage 
Gal.     4.  24  gendereth  to  bondage,  which  is  Agar 

5.    1  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage 
Eeb.   2.  15  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage 
BONDAGE,  to  be  in  — 
To  be  in  slavery,  SovKevco  douleud. 

John  8.  33  We. .  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man 
Acts    7.    7  to  whom  they  shall  be  in  bondage 
Gal.    4.   9  ye  desire  again  to  be  in  bondage? 
4.  25  and  is  in  bondage  with  her  children 

BONDAGE,  to  be  under  — 
To  enslave,  8ovA6w  douloo. 

1  Co.   7. 15  A  brother  or  a  sister  is  not  under  bondage 

BONDAGE,  to  bring  into  — 
l.To  tread  down,  V23  kabash. 

Neh.   5.    5  we  bring  into  bondage  our  sons  and  our 
2.To  enslave,  8ov\6w  douloo. 

Acts    7.    6  that  they  should  bring  them  into  bondage 

2  Pe.   2.  19  of  the  same  is  he  brought  in  bondage 
3. To  enslave  thoroughly,  Kara8ov\6w  kaiadouloo. 

2  Co.  ir.  20  if  a  man  bring  you  into  bondage,  if  a 
Gal.    2.   4  that  [they  might  bring  us  into  bondage] 

BONDAGE,  to  be  brought  unto  — 

To  be  trodden  down,  cgs  kabash,  2. 

Neh.    5.    5  daughters  are  brought  unto  bondage 
BONDAGE,  in  — 
To  enslave,  SovAow  douloo. 

Gal.    4.    3  Even  so  we . .  were  in  bondage  under  the 

PONDAGE,  to  keep  in  — 
To  enslave,  ~i3#  abad,  5. 

Exod.  6.    5  whom  the  Egyptians  keep  in  bondage 
BOND  MAID  — 
l.Hcmdmaid,  nipx  amah. 

Lev.  25.  44  Both  thy  bond  men  and  thy  bond  maids 
25.  44  ye  buy  bond  men  and  bond  maids 
2.  Maid-servant,  nrt3?;  shiphchah. 

Lev.  19.  20  whosoever  lieth .  .with . .  a  bond  maid 
3.--1  young  female  slave,  iraih~i(rK-n  paidiske. 

Gal.    4.  22  A.  had  two  sons ;  the  one  by  a  bond  maid 
BOND  MAN  — 
1. Slave,  servant,  *i?j;  ebed. 

Gen.  43. 18  take  us  for  bond  men,  and  our  asses 

44.    9  ^"e  also  will  be  my  lord's  bond  men 

44.  33  let  thy  servant  abide,  .a  bond  man 

Lev.  25.  42  they  shall  not  be  sold  as  bond  men 

25.  44  thy  bond  men  and  thy  bond  maids 

25.  44  shall  ye  buy  bond  men  and  bond  maids 

26.  13  that  ye  should  not  be  their  bond  men 
Deut.  6.  21  We  were  Pharaoh's  bond  men  in  Egypt 

7.  S  redeemed . .  out  of  the  house  of  bond  men 

15.  15  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bond  man 

16.  12  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bond  man 
24.  18  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bond  man 
24.  22  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bond  man 
28.  68  sold,  .for  bond  men  and  bond  women 

Josh.  9.  23  none  of  you.  .freed  from  being  bond  men 

1  Ki.   9.  22  of  Israel  did  Solomon  make  110  bond  men. 

2  Ki.  4.    1  to  take,  .my  two  sons  to  be  bond  men 

2  Ch.  28.  10  to  keep .  .for  bond  men  and  bond  women 
Ezra   9.    9  For  we  (were)  bond  men  ;  yet  our  God 
Esth.  7.    4  But  if  we  had  been  sold  for  bond  men 
Jer.  34.  13  forth . .  out  of  the  house  of  bond  men 
2. Slave,  servant,  SovAos  dotdos. 

Rev.    6.  15  every  bond  man,  and  every  free  man 

BOND  MEN,  to  be  — 

To  be  a  slave,  serve,  "Qy  abad. 

Lev.  25.  46  they  shall  be  your  bond  men  for  ever 
BOND  SERVANT  — 
Service  of  a  servant,  ~qv„  rnb£  abodath  ebed. 

Lev.  25.  39  compel  him  to  serve  as  a  bond  servant 

BOND  SERVICE  — 

To  be  a  slave,  serve,  ~\nyr  abad. 

1  Ki.   9.  21  did.  .levy  a'  tribute  of  bond  service 
BOND  WOMAN  — 

X.Jfanchnaid,  n£N  amah. 

Gen.  21.  10  Cast 'out  this  bond  woman  and  her  son 
21. 10  the  son  of  this  bond  woman  shall  not  be 
21.  12  grievous,  .because  of  thy  bond  woman 
21.  13  And  also  of  the  son  of  the  bond  woman 

2.Maid  servant,  nn??>  shiphchah. 

Deut 28.  68  sold  .for  bond  men  and  bond  women 

2  Ch.  2S.  10  to  keep,  .bond  men  and  bond  women 
Esth.  7.    4  been  sold  for  bond  men  and  bond  women 

Z.A  young  female  slave,  vacfiiirjH?  paidiske. 
Gal.    4.  23  he  (who  was)  of  the  bond  woman  was 
4.  30  Cast  out  the  bond  woman  and  her  son 
4.  30  son  of  the  bond  woman  shall  not  be  heir 
4.  31  we  are  not  children  of  the  bond  woman 


BONE 


BONE  — 

I. Skin,  horn,  body,  substance,  trjj  r/erem. 

Job  40.  18  His  bones  (are  as)  strong  pieces  of  brass 
I'rov.17.  22  a  broken  spirit  dricth  the  bones 
25.  is  a  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  bone 
Dan.   6.  24  and  the  lions,  .brake  all  their  bones 

2.  Bone,  substance,  mil  ctsem. 

Gen.   2.  23  This  (is)  now  bone  of  my  bones 

2Q.  14  Surely  thou  (art)  my  bone  and  my  flesh 

50.  25  ye  shall  carry  up  my  bones  from  hence 
Exodi2.  46  neither  shall  ye  break  a  bone  thereof 

13.  10  Moses  took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with 
13. 19  ye  shall  carry  up  my  bones  away  hence 
Num.  o.  12  leave  none,  .nor  break  any  bone  of  it 
19.  16  whosoever  toucheth . .  a  bone  of  a  man 
19. 18  upon  him  that  touched  a  bone,  or  one 
24.    8  shall  break  their  bones,  and  pierce 
Josll.24.  32 the  bones  of  Joseph,  which.. Israel 
Judg.  9.    2  remember  also  that  I  (am)  your  bone 
19.  29 h,-... divided  herewith  her  bones  into 

1  Sa  31  13  they  took  their  bones,  and  buried  (them) 

2  Sa.   5.    1  we  (are)  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh 

19  12  ye  (are)  my  bones  and  my  flesh 

19.  13  (Art)  thou  not  of  my  bone,  and  of  my 

21. 12  the  bones  of  Saul  and  the  bones  of  Jona. 

21. 13  the  bones  of  Saul,  and  the  bones  of  Jona. 

21. 13  the  bones  of  them  that  were  hanged 

21. 14  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan 

1  Ki.  13.    2  men's  bones  shall  lie  burnt  upon  thee 

13.  31  lay  my  bones  beside  his  bones 

2  Ki.  13.  21  the  man.  .touched  the  bones  of  Elisha 

23.  14  filled  their  places  with  the  bones  of  men 
23.  16  took  the  bones  out  of  the  sepulchres 
23.  18  Let  him  alone,  let  no  man  move  his  bones 

13.  18  they  let  his  bones  alone,  with  the  bones 
23.  20  he.  .burned  men's  bones  upon  them 

1  Ch.io.  12  They,  .buried  their  bones  under  the  oak 

11.  1  Behold,  we  (are)  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh 

2  f'h.  1 1.   5  he  burnt  the  bones  of  the  priests  upon 
Job     2.    5  touch  his  bone  and  his  flesh,  and  he 

4.  14  which  made  all  my  bones  to  shake 
10. 1 1  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  sinews 

19.  20  My  bone  cleaveth  to  my  skin  and  to  my 
20. 11  His  bones  are  full  (of  the  sin)  of  his 

21.  24  his  bones  are  moistened  with  marrow 

30. 17  My  bones  are  pierced  in  me  in  the  night 
30.  30  my  bones  are  burnt  with  heat 

33.  19  the  multitude  of  his  bones  with  strong 

33.  21  his  bones  (that)  were  not  seen  stick  out 

40. 18  His  bones  (are  as)  strong  pieces  of  brass 
Psa.    6.    2  O  Lord,  heal  me  ;  for  my  bones  are 

22. 14  all  my  bones  are  out  of  joint :  my 
22. 17  I  may  tell  all  my  bones  :  they  look 
31. 10  iniquity,  and  my  bones  are  consumed 
32.    3  my  bones  waxed  old  through  my  roaring 

34.  20  He  keepetli  all  his  bones  :  not  one  of 
35. 10  All  my  bones  shall  say,  Lord,  who  (is) 
38.   3  neither  (is  there  any)  rest  in  ray  bones 
42. 10  (As)  with  a  sword  in  my  bones,  mine 

51.  8  the  bones,  .thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice 
53.    5  God  hath  scattered  the  bones  of  him 

02.    3  my  bones  are  burned  as  an  hearth 
102.    5  By  reason . .  my  bones  cleave  to  my  skin 
109. 18  so  let  it  com 2 .  .like  oil  into  his  boneB 
141.    7  Our  bones  are  scattered  at  the  grave's 
rrov.  3.   8  It  shall  be.  .marrow  to  thy  bones 

12.  4  she.  .(is)  as  rottenness  in  his  bones 

14.  30  but  envy  the  rottenness  of  the  bones 
1  s.  30  a  good  report  maketh  the  bones  fat 

11.  24  Pleasant  words  (are),  .health  to  the  bones 
Eccl.  11.    5  thou  knowest  not.  .how  the  bones 
Isa.   38.  13  so  will  he  break  all  my  bones 

58.  11  the  Lord  shall,  .make  fat  thy  boues 
66. 14  your  bones  shall  flourish  like  an  herb 
Jer.     S.    1  bring  out  the  bones  of  the  kings 

8.    1  bring  out.  .the  bones  of  his  princes 
8.    1  bring  out.  .the  bones  of  the  priests 
8.    1  bring  out    the  bones  of  the  prophets 
:;.    1  and  tli,'  1  ■  ■  ■  1 1 . ■  s  mi  tli"  inhabitants 

20.  9  burning  Hi.  shut  up  in  my  bones 

23.  9  my  bones  shake  :  I  am  like  a  drunken  man 
Lam,    1.  1;  From  above    he  sent  fire  into  my  bones 

3.  4  111 1'lc  old  ;  he  hath  broken  my  bones 

4.  8  their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  bones 
Eze.    6.    5  1  will  scatter  your  bones  round  about 

?.|.   .!  ti'i  (it)with  the  choice  hones 

24.  g  burn  also  the  boues  under  it 

24.    5  let  them  seethe  the  hones  of  it  therein 
24. 10  flesh    and  I  ;t  the  bones  lie  burnt 
32.  27  their  iniquities  shall  lie  upon  their  bones 
37.   1  midst  of  the  valley    (was)  full  of.  bones 
37.    3  s.ci  of  man,  can  these  bones  live? 
37.   4  Prophesy  upon  these  bones,  and  say 
37.  411  ye  dry  bones,  hem-  the  word  of  the 
37.  5  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  these  hones 
37.   7  til.  hen  is  came  together,  bone  tohisbone 
1  hese  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel 

1  1  1  ''ir  1 1  s  me  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost 

when  1  inj  1  seeth  a  man's  bone,  then 
Am  1  ■       1  in    hi   ■     i  burned  the  bones  of  the  ting 

6. 10  t"  briii:  1  :    i.t  ■  bones  out  n't*  the  hoot  e 
M'  in  1  'ii  n'  ii'   h  from  nil  their  bones 

3.   3  they  break  their  bones,  and  chop  them  in 
Hab.   -,.  1 1  rottenness  entered  into  raj  bones 

.    .    .  -:-  qaneh. 
Job  31.  23  and  mine  arm  he  broken  from  the  bone 
I.  Bo       Soti  iv 

Matt  1 ;.  ?7  are  within  full  of  dead  (men's)  bones 
Lllkc'4   J9  for  a  spirit  hath  lint  ltcbh  and  bones 


104 

Johmq.  36  A  bone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken 
Eph.   5.  30  [For  we  are  members  of.  .his  bones] 
Heb.  11.  22  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones 

BONE,  ancle  — 

Ancle-bone,  vfyvpov  sphuron. 

Acts    3.    7  his  feet  and  ancle  bones  received  strength 
[See  also  Cheek,  gnaw,  break.] 
BONES,  to  break  — 
To  break  the  bone,  cyy  atsam,  3. 

Jer.   50. 17  king  of  Babylon  hath  broken  his  bones 

BONNET  — 

l.Turbans,  hilt-shaped,  rnyap  migbaoth. 

Exod28.  40  thou  shalt  make  for  them  girdles,  and  b. 
29.    9  and  put  the  bonnets  on  them 
39.  28  and  goodly  bonnets  (of)  fine  linen 

Lev.    8.  13  Moses,  .put  bonnets  upon  them ;  as  the 

2.  Tires,  ornaments,  "in?  peer. 

Isa.     3.  20  The  bonnets,  and  the  ornaments  of  the 
Eze.  44.  iS  They  shall  have  linen  bonnets  upon  their 

BOOK  — 

Books  must  have  been  co-eval  with  the  commencement 
of  writing,  and  the  "  Preacher  "  complained  that,  in  his 
day,  of  making  many  books  there  was  no  end.  Among 
those  mentioned  in  Scripture,  but  which  have  not  been 
preserved,  are  :— The  Wars  of  the  Lord,  Jasher  or  the 
Upright,  Samuel  on  the  Kingdom,  Chronicles  of  David, 
Acts  of  Solomon,  Solomon's  Natural  History,  History 
of  the  Kings,  Samuel  the  Seer,  Nathan  the  Seer,  Shema- 
iah  the  Seer,  Gad  the  Seer,  Ahijah  the  Shilonite,  Visions 
of  Iddo,  Jehu  the  Son  of  Hanani,  Sayings  of  the  Seers, 
and  doubtless  many  others,  which  were  genuine  and 
authentic  works,  though  not  perhaps  inspired. 

l.Word,  "n?  dahar. 

iCh.  29.  29  book  of  Samuel,  .book of  Nathan.. book 
2  Ch.    9.  29  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  N. 
12.  15  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  S. 
20.  34  they  (are)  written  iu  the  book  of  Jehu 
33.  iS  they  (are  written)  in  the  book  of  the  kings 

2.  Book,  writing,  iDd  sepher. 

Gen.    5.    1  This  (is)  the  book  of  the  generations  of 

Exodi7.  14  Write  this  (for)  a  memorial  in  a  book 
24.    7  took  the  book  of  the  covenant,  and  read 
32.  32  blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  thy  book 
32.  33  him  will  I  bloc  out  of  my  book 

Num.  5.  23  priest  shall  write  these  curses  in  a  book 
21. 14  it  is  said  in  the  book  of  the  wars  of  the 

Dent  17.  18  write  him  a  copy  of  this  law  in  a  book 
28.  58  all  the  words  of  this  law.  .in  this  book 

28.  61  which  (is)  not  written  in  the  book  of  this 

29.  20  the  curses  that  are  written  in  this  book 
29.  21  that  are  written  in  this  book  of  the  law 

29.  27  the  curses  that  are  written  in  this  book 

30.  10  written  in  this  book  of  the  law 

31.  24  made  an  end  of  writing,  .in  a  book 
31.  26  Take  this  book  of  the  law,  and  put  it 

Josh.  1.    8  This  book  of  the  law  shall  not  depart 

8.  31  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of 
8.  34  all  that  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law 
10.  13  (Is)  not  this  written  in  the  book  of  Jasher 
iS.  9  described  it.  .into  seven  parts  in  a  book 
23  6  to  do  all  that  is  written  in  the  book  of  the 
24.  26  Joshua  wrote  these  words  in  the  book 

1  Sa.  10.  25  Then  Samuel . .  wrote  (it)  in  a  book,  and 

2Sa.    1.  18  behold,  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  J. 

1  Ki.  11.  41  written  in  the  book  of  the  acts  of  Solomon 
14.  19,  29  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles 
I5-  7.  23t  31  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of 
t6.  5, 14,  20,  27  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chro. 
22.  39,  45  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles 

2Ki.  1.  18  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
8.  23  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
10.  34  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 

12.  19  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 

13.  8, 12  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles 

14.  6  which  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law 

14.  13,  iS,  28  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chroni. 

15.  6,  31  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  of 

10.  19  (are)they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 

20.  20  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 

21.  17,  25  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of 

22.  8  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the 
22.   S  Hilkiah  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  and 
22.  10  the  priest  hath  delivered  me  a  book 
2 j.  11  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of  the  book 
22.  13  enquire,  .concerningthe  wurds  of .  .book 
22.  13  hearkened  uuto  the  words  of  this  book 

22.  16  nil  the  words  of  the  book  which  the  king 

23.  2  he  read,  .the  words  of  the  book  of  the 
23.    3  the  words,  .that  were  written  in  this  book 
23.  21  (it  is)  written  in  the  bonk  of  this  covenant 
23  24  (which  were)  written  in  the  book  that 

23.  28  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 

24.  5  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
1  Ch.  9.  1  written  111  the  bi.uk  of  the  kings  of  Israel 
;  Ch.  10.  11  they  (are)  written  in  the  book  of  the 

17.   9  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lour*  with 
20.  34  mentioned  in  the  book  of  the  kings 

24.  27  they  (::re)  written  in  the  story  of.~~.hook 

25.  4  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  in  the  book 
25.  26  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of 

27.  7  they  fare)  written  in  the  book  of  the 

28.  26  they  (are)  written  in  the  book  of  the 

32  32  in  the  I k  of  the  kings  of  Jiulah  and 

34.  14  the  priest  found  a  book  <>f  the  law  of  the 

34.  i-,  I  have  found  the  l k  of  the  law  in  the 

34.  1^  Hilkiah  delivered  the  book  to  .shaphan 


BOOK 


2  Ch.  34.  16  Shaphan  carried  the  book  to  the  king 
34.  iS  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  given . .  a  book 
34.  21  enquire,  .concerning  the  words  of.  .book 
34.  21  after  all  that  is  written  in  this  book 
34.  24  the  curses  mat  are  written  in  the  book 
34.  30  he  read,  .all  the  words  of  the  book 

34.  31  words,  .which  are  written  in  this  book 

35.  12  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  Moses 

35.  27  they  (are)  written  in  the  book  of  the 

36.  8  they  (are)  written  in  the  book  of  the 
Neh.   8.    1  they  spake .  .to  bring  the  book  of  the  law 

8.  3  the  people  (were  attentive)  unto  the  boob 
8.  5  Ezra  opened  the  book,  in  the  sight  of  all 
8.    8  So  they  read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of 

8.  18  he  read  iu  the  book  of  the  law  of  God 

9.  3  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord 

12.  23  The  sons  of  Levi,  .(were)  written  in.  .book 

13.  1  read  in  the  book  of  Moses  in.  .audience 
Esth.  2.  23  it  was  written  in  the  book  of  the 

6.    1  he  commanded  to  bring  the  book  of 

9.  32  confirmed,  .and  it  was  written  in.  .book 
10.    2  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 

Job   19.  23  oh  that  the.)  were  printed  in  a  book  ! 

31.  35  (that)  mine  adversary  had  written  a  book 
Psa.  40.    7  in  the  volume  of  the  book  (it  is)  written. 

69.  28  Let  them  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of 

139.  16  in  thy  book  all  (my  members),  .written 

Ecc.  12.  12  of  making  many  books  (there  is)  no  end 

Isa.   29.  11  is  become  unto  you  as.  .words  of  a  book 

29.  12  the  book  is  delivered  to  him  that 

29.  18  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words  of  the  book 

30.  8  note  it  in  a  book,  that  it  may  be  for  the 
34.  16  Seek  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the  Lord 

Jer.  25.  13  all  that  is  written  in  this  book,  which 
30.   2  Write  thee  all  the  words,  .in  a  book 
32. 12  the  witnesses  that  subscribed  the  hook 
36.    2  Take  thee  a  roll  of  a  book,  and  write 
36.    4  Baruch  wrote .  .upon  a  roll  of  a  book 
36.   8  reading  in  the  book  the  words  of  the 
36.  10  Then  read  Baruch  in  the  book  the  words 
36.  11  When  ilicbaiah.  .had  heard  out.. book 
36.  13  Baruch  read  the  book  in  the  ears  of  the 

36. 18  I  wrote  (them)  with  ink  in  the  book 

36.  32  wrote  therein,  .all  the  words  of  the  book: 
45.    1  he  had  written  these  words  in  a  book 
51.  60  Jeremiah  wrote  in  a  book  all  the  evil 
51.  63  hast  made  an  end  of  reading  this  book 

Eze.     2.    9  and,  lo,  a  roll  of  a  book  (was)  therein 

Dan.    9.    2  I  Daniel  understood  by  books  the  number 
12.    1  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book 
12.    4  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book 

Nah.    1.    1  The  book  of  the  vision  of  Nahum  the  E. 

Mai.   3.  16  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written 

'3. Book,  writing,  13P  sepha.r. 

Ezra  4.  15  That  search  may  be  made  in  the  book 
4.  15  so  shalt  thou  find  in  the  book  of  the 
6.  18  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Moses 

Dan.    7.  10  was  set,  and  the  books  were  opened 

■i.Book,  toriting,  i"nrp  siphrah. 

Tsa.  56.    8  wanderings .  .(are  they)  not  in  thy  book  ? 
5..-1  {little)  book,  roll,  scroll,  f$i$\iov  biblion. 

Luke  4.  17  there  was  delivered  unto  him  the  book 
4.  17  when  he  had  opened  the  book,  he 

4.  20  he  closed  the  book,  and  he  gave  (it)  again 
John  20.  30  which  are  not  written  in  this  book 

21.  25  world,  .could  not  contain  the  books 
Gal.    3.  10  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
2  Ti.    4.  13  bring  (with  thee),  .the  books,  (but) 
Heb.   9.  19  sprinkled  both  the  book,  and . .  the  people 

10.  7  (in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written 
Rev.    1.  11  What  thou  seest,  write  in  a  book,  and 

5.  1  I  saw.  .a  book  written  within  and  on  the 
5.    2  Who  is  worthy  to  open  the  book,  and  to 
5.    3  no  man.  .was  able  to  open  the  book 

5.  4  no  man  was  found,  .to  open.,  the  book 
5.  5  Lion,  .hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book 
5.  7  he  came  and  took  the  [book]  out  of  the 
5.  8  when  he  had  taken  the  book,  the  four 
5.  9  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  to 
17.  8  whose  names  were  not  written  iuthebook 
20.  12  books  were  opened  ;  and  another  beck 

20.  12  which  were  written  in  the  books 

21.  27  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  bonk 

22.  7  that  keepeth  the  sayings,  .of  this  book 
22.    9  which  keep  the  sayings  of  this  book 
22.  10  Seal  not  the  sayings,  .of  this  book 

22.  iS  that  heareth  the  words,  .of  this  book 
22.  18  plagnes  that  are  written  in  this  book 

22. 19  things  which  are  written  in  this  book, 
G.Book,  roll,  fil&Kos  biblos. 

Matt.  1.    1  The  book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus 
Marki».  26  have  ye  not  read  in  the  book  of  Moses 
Luke   3.    4  As  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  words 
20.  42  David  himself  saith  in  the  book  of  Psalms 
Acts    1.  20  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Psalms,  Let 
7.  42  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  Prophets 
19.  19  which  used  curious  arts  brought,  .books 
Phil.  4.   3  whose  names  (are)  in  the  book  of  life 
Rev.    3.    5  not  blot  out  his  name  out  of  the  book 

13.  8  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  [book] 
2c.  15  who.  .was  not  found  written  in  the  hook 
22.  19  man  shall  take  away  from,  .the  [book]  of 
22.  19  take  away  his  part  out  of  the  [book]  of 

BOOK,  little  — 

.1  little  book,  pLpKapiSioy  biblaridion, 

BeVjio.    2  he  had  in  his  hand  a  [little  book]  open 
*io.    8  Go.  .take  the  [little  book]  which  is  open 
10.   9  I.  .said.  .Give  me  the  little  book 
10. 10  1  took  the  little  book  out  of  the  angel's 


BOOTH 


105 


BORN 


BOOTH  — 

Booth,  nap  sukfcah. 

Gen.  33. 17  Jacob,  .made  booths  for  his  cattle 
Lev.  23.  42  Ye  shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  days 

23.  42  all.  .Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in  booths 

23.  43  I  made  the  children,  .to  dwell  in  booths 

Seh.  3.  14  children  of  Israel  should  dwell  in  booths 

8. 15  Go  forth  unto  the  mount . .  make  booths 

8. 16  So  the  people  went  forth,  .made,  .booths 

8. 17  made  booths,  and  sat  under  the  booths 
Job  27. 1S  as  a  booth  (that)  the  keeper  maketh 
Jon.    4.    5  Jonah,  .there  made  him  a  booth,  and  sat 

BOOTY  — 

l.Prey,  spoil,  T3,  13  baz. 

Jer.  49.  32  their  camels  shall  be  a  booty,  and  the 
2.  Prey,  nipSa  mcdqoach. 

Mum 31.  32  the  booty,  .the  rest  of  the  prey  which 
3.Sp>oil,  nrp;p  meshissdh. 

Hab.  2.    7  thou  shalt  be  for  booties  unto  them? 

Zeph.  1. 13  their  goods  shall  become  a  booty,  and 

BO'-OZ,  &o6£ 

The  Greek  mode  of  writing  Boaz. 

Matt.  1.    5  Salmon  begat  B.  of  Rachab,  and  B. 
Luke  3.  22  Obed,  which  was  (the  son)  of  B.,  which 
BOEDER  — 
1.  Enclosure,  enclosed  place,  7*33  gebul. 

Gen.  10.  19  the  border  of  the  Cahaanites  was  from 
23.  17  the  borders  round  about,  were  made 
47.  21  the  borders  of  Egypt  even  to  the  (other) 
Exod.  8.    2  I  will  smite  all  thy  borders  with  frogs 
34.  24  and  enlarge  thy  borders  :  neither  shall 
Numso.  16  a  city  in  the  uttermost  of  thy  border 
20. 17  left,  until  we  have  passed  thy  borders 

20.  21  passage  through  his  border :  wherefore 

21.  13  the  border  of  Moab,  between  Moab  and 
21.  15  of  Ar,  and  lieth  down  upon  the  border  of 
2i.  22  (high)  way,  until  we  be  past  thy  borders 
21.  23  to  pass  through  his  border ;  but  Sihon 

21.  24  the  border  of  the  children  of  Ammon 

22.  36  border  of  Arnon,  which  (is)  in  the  utmost 

33.  44  in  Ije-abarim,  in  the  border  of  Moab 

34.  3  south  border  shall  be  the  outmost  coast 
34.  4  your  border  shall  turn  from  the  south  to 
34.  5  the  border  shall  fetch  a  compass  from 
34.  6  western  border.. foraborder.. west  border 
34.  7,  9  this  shall  be  your  north  border 

34.   8  goings  forth  of  the  border  shall  be  to 
34.    9  the  border  shall  go  on  to  Ziphron,  and 
34.  10  east  border  frornHazar-enan  to  Shepham 
34.  11  the  border  shall  descend,  and  shall  reach 

34.  12  the  border  shall  go  down  to  Jordan,  and 

35.  26  the  border  of  the  city  of  his  refuge 

35.  27  the  borders  of  the  city  of  his  refuge,  and 
Deut.  3.  16  the  border  even  unto,  .(is)  the  border 

12.  20  God  shall  enlarge  thy  border,  as  he  hath 
Josh  12.    2  (is)  the  border  of  the  children  of  Ammon 

12.  5  the  border  of  the.  .the  border  of  Sihou 

13.  3  unto  the  borders  of  Ekron  northward 
13.    4  unto  Aphek,  to  the  borders  of  the  Am.'s 
13. 10  unto  the  border  of  the  children  of  Am. 
13.  11  Gilead,  and  the  border  of  the  Geshurites 
13.  23  border  of  the.  .and  the  border  (thereof) 
13.  26  from  Mahanaim  unto  the  border  of  Debir 
13.  27  Jordan  and  (his)  border,  (even)  unto  the 
15..  1  to  the  border  ofiEdom  the  wilderness 
15.    2  And  their  south  border  was  from  the 
15.    5  east  border  (wasl.  .(their)  border  in  the 
15.    6  the  border  went  up.  .the  border  went  up 
15.    7  tie  border  went  up.  .the  border  passed 
15.    3  the  border  went  up.  .the  border  went  up 
15.    9  the  border  was  drawn . .  the  border  wTas 
15.  10  the  border  compassed  from  Baalah  west. 
15.  11  the  border  went  out.  .the  border  was 

15.  11  the  goings  out  of  the  border  were  at  the 
15. 12  the  west  border  (was)  to  the  great  sea 

15.  47  and  the  great  sea,  and  the  border  (thereof) 

16.  2  along  unto  the  borders  of  Archi  to  Atar. 
16.    5  the  border  of  the.  .even  the  border  of 
16.    6  the  border  went  out.  .the  border  went 

16.  S  The  border  went  out  from  Tappuah 

17.  7  and  the  border  went  along  on  the  right 
17.    8  but  Tappuah  on  the  border  of  Manasseh 

17.  10  and  the  sea  is  his  border  ;  and  they  met 

18.  12  their  border  on  the.  .and  the  border  went 
18.  13  the  border  went,  .the  border  descended 

18.  14  the  border  was  drawn  (thence),  and 

iS.  15  and  the  borderwent  out  on  the  west,  and 
iS.  16  the  border  came  down  to  the  end  of  the 
iS.  19  the  border  passed,  .the  border  were  at 
19. 10  and  the  border  of  their  inheritance  was 

19.  11  their  border  went  up  toward  the  sea 
19.  12  unto  the  border  of  Chisloth-tabor,  and 
19.  14  the  border  conrpasseth  it  on  the  north 
19.  18  their  border  was  toward  Jezreel,  and 

19.  22  outgoings  of  their  border  were  at  Jordan 
19.  25  their  border  was  Helkath,  and  Hali,  and 
19.  46  and  Kakkon,  with  the  border  before 
"22.  25  made  Jordan  a  border  between  us  and 
24.  30  they  buried  him  in  the  border  of  his 

Judg.  2.    9  they  buried  him  in  the  border  of  his 

it.  18  the  border  of  Moab.  .the  border  of  Moab 

1  Sa.  6. 12  after  them  unto  the  border  of  Beth-she.  , 
10.  2  in  the  border  of  Benjamin,  at  Zelzah;  and 
13.  18  the  way  of  the  border  that  looketh  to 

1  Ki.  4.  21  and  unto  the  border  of  Egypt :  they 

2  Ki.  3.  21  armour,  .upward,  and  stood  in  the  border 

18.    8  Gaza,  and  the  borders  thereof,  from  the 
2  Ch.  9.  26  Philistines,  and  to  the  border  of  Egypt 

14 


Psa.  78.  54  them  to  the  border  of  his  sanctuary 
147. 14  peace  (in)  thy  borders,  (and)  filleth  thee 

Prov.15.  25  will  establish  the  border  of  the  widow 

Isa.  15.   8  gone  round  about  the  borders  of  Moab 
19. 19  pillar  at  the  border  thereof  to  the  Lord 
54.  12  and  all  thy  borders  of  pleasant  stones 
60.  iS  within  thy  borders:  but  thou  shalt 

Jer.  15.  13  for  all  thy  sins,  even  in  all  thy  borders 
17.    3  for  sin,  throughout  all  thy  borders 
31.  17  shall  come  again  to  their  own  border 

Eze.  11.  10  judge  you  in  the  border  of  Israel ;  and 
11.  11  I  will  judge  you  in  the  border  of  Israel 
27.    4  Thy  borders  (are)  in  the  midst  of  the 
29. 10  Syene  even  unto  the  border  of  Ethiopia 
43.  13  a  cubit,  .and  the  border  thereof  by  the 
43.  17  thereof ;  and  the  border  about  it  (shall  be) 
43.  20  and  upon  the  border  round  about :  thus 
45.    1  in  all  the  borders  thereof  round  about 
45.   7  from  the  west  border  unto,  .east  border 
47. 13  This  (shall  be)  the  border  whereby  ye 
47. 15  this  (shall  be)  the  border  of  the  land 
47.  16  the  border  of  Damascus  and  the  border 
47. 17  the  border  from  the  sea.  .the  border  of 
47.  17  northward,  and  the  border  of  Hamath 
47.  18  Jordan,  from  the  border  unto  the  east 

47.  20  sea  from  the  border,  till  a  man  come  over 

48.  1  the  border  of  Damascus  northward,  to 
48.    2  the  border  of  Dan,  from  the  east  side  unto 
48.    3  the  border  of  Asher,  from  the  east  side 
48.   4  the  border  of  Naphtali,  from  the  east  side 
4S.    5  the  borderof  Manasseh,  from  the  east  side 
4S.    6  the  border  of  Ephraim,  from  the  east  side 
48.    7  the  border  of  Reuben,  from  the  east  side 
48.    8  the  border  of  Jndah,  from  the  east  side 
43. 12  most  holy  by  the  border  of  the  Levites 
48.  13  the  border  of  the  priests  the  Levites 

4S.  21  the  east  border,  .toward  the  westborder 
4S.  22  the  border  of  Judah,  and  the  border 
4S.  24  the  border  of  Benjamin,  from  the  east  side 
4S.  25  the  border  of  Simeon,  from  the  east  side 
43.  26  the  border  of  Issachar,  from  the  east  side 
4S.  27  the  border  of  Zebulun,  from  the  east  side 
48.  28  And  by  the  border  of  Gad,  at . .  the  border 
Joel  3.  6  might  remove  them  far  from  their  border 
Amos  1.  13  that  they  might  enlarge  their  border 

6.  2  their  border  greater  than  your  border? 
Obad.        7  thee  (even)  to  the  border  :  the  men  that 
Mic.    5.    6  and  when  he  treadeth  within  our  borders 
Zeph.  2.    8  (themselves)  against  their  border 

Mai.    1.    4  The  borderof  wickedness,  aud,  The  people 
t.    5  be  magnified  from  the  border  of  Israel 

2. Enclosed pilace,  Tvft'l  gebulah. 

Psa.  74. 17  Thou  hast  set  all  the  borders  of  the  earth 
o.Circle,  circuit,  nVSa  gelilah. 

Josh.  13.   2  all  the  borders  of  the  Philistines,  and 
22.  10  they  came  unto  the  borders  of  Jordan 
22.  11  land  of  Canaan,  in  the  borders  of  Jordan 
4r.Hand3  space,  poiccr,  v  yad. 

2  Sa.    8.    3  went  to  recover  his  border  at  the  river 
1  Ch.  7.  29  by  the  borders  of  the  children  of  Man. 

0.  Thigh,  rcrv  yarkah. 

Gen.  49. 13  and  his  border  (shall  be)  unto  Zidon 
Q.Wing,  *]:3  Jcanaph. 

Num.15.  38  make  them  fringes  in  the  border  of  their 
15.  38  upon  the  fringe  of  the  borders 

7. Enclosing,  n^spp  misgereth. 

Exod25.  25  thou  shalt  make  unto  it  a  border  of 

25.  25  shalt  make  a  golden  crown  to  the  border 
25.  27  Over  against  the  border  shall  the  rings 
37.  12  he  made  thereunto  a  border  of  an 
37. 12  a  crown  of  gold  for  the  border  thereof 
37  14  Over  against  the  border  were  the  rings 

1  Ki.  7.  2S  the  work  of  the  bases,  .had  borders 

7.  28  the  borders  (were)  between  the  ledges 
7.  29  on  the  borders  that  (were)  between  the 
7.  31  upon  themoutb  of  it  (were),  .borders 
7.  32  under  the  borders  (were)  four  wheels 

7.  35  the  ledges  thereof  and  the  borders 
7.  36  on  the  borders  thereof  ?  be  graved  cherub. 
2KL  16.  17  king  Ahaz  cut  off  the  borders  of  the 

S.Ilcight,  hill,  nag  nophah. 

Josh  11.    2  in  the  borders  of  Dor  on  the  west 
9. End,  extremity,  j'p  qets. 

2  Ki.  19.  23  enter  into  the  lodgings  of  his  borders 
Isa.  37.  24  I  will  enter  into  the  height  of  his  border 
Jer.  50.  26  Come  against  her  from  the  utmost  border 

10. End,  extremity,  nyn  qatseh. 

Exodi6.  35  they  came  unto  the  borders  of  the  land 

ig.  12  into  the  m  >unt,  or  touch  the  border 
Josh.  4.  19  in  Gilgal,  in  the  east  border  of  Jericho 
\l.Lip,  edge,  rrs\p  saphah. 

Exod28.  26  thou  shalt  put  them.. in  the  border 

39.  19  and  put  (them),  .upon  the  border  of  it 
.Tudg.  7.  22  the  host  fled,  .to  the  border  of  Abel-M. 

V2.0ut(joings,  niNyin  totsaoth. 

1  Ch.  5. 16  they  dwelt  in  Gilead.  .upon  their  borders 
13...*]  row,  in  tor. 

Song  1. 11  We  will  make  thee  borders  of  gold 
lLFrontier,  marches,  borders,  fitBopiov  mcthorion. 

Mark  7.  24  went  into  the  [borders]  of  Tyre  and  Sidon 

15. Tassel,  fringe,  extremity,  Kpdo-n-eBov  hraspedon. 
Matt23>    5  they,  .enlarge  the  borders  of  their  garm. 
Mark  6.  56  that  they  might  touch,  .but  the  border 
Luke  S.  44  came  behind,  .and  touched  the  border 


16. Goal,  boundary,  border,  limit,  optov  horion. 

Matt  4.  13  which  is.  .in  the  borders  of  Zabulou  and 
BORDER,  utmost  — 
End,  extremity,  j*g  qets. 

Jer.  50.  26  Come  against  her  from  the  utmost  border 
BORDER,  to  (be)  — 
To  be  an  enclosure,  73a  gdbal. 

Josh  18.  20  Jordan  was  the  border  of  it  on  the  east 

Zech.  9.    2  Hamath  also  shall  border  thereby 
BORE,  to  — 
l.To  bore,  pierce,  3,33  naqab. 

2  Ki.  12.   9  the  priest  took  a  chest,  and  bored  a  hole 

Job    41.    2  or  bore  his  jaw  through  with  a  thorn  ? 
2.To  perforate,  V$~i  ratsa. 

Exod2i.    6  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear  through  with 
BORN  — 
l.To  beget,  bear,  bring  forth,  "i?;  yalad. 

Job  14.    1  Man  (that  is)  born  of  a  woman  (is)  of  few 
15.  14  and  (he  which  is)  born  of  a  woman,  that 

25.  4  can  he  be  clean  (that  is)  born  of  a  woman.' 

2.0ne  born,  Tji  yelid. 

Gen.  14.  14  trained  (servants),  born  in  his  own  house 
17.  12  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or  bought 
17.  13  He  that  is  born  in  thy  house,  and  he 
17.  23  Abraham  took,  .all  that  were  born  in  his 
17.  27  the  men  of  his  house,  born  in  the  house 

Lev.  22. 11  and  he  that  is  born  in  his  house 

3.  One  born,  ~rh\  yillod. 

Exod.  1.  22  Every  son  that  is  born  ye  shall  cast 
Josh.  5.    5  the  people  (that  were)  born  in  the  wild. 
2  Sa.   5.  14  that  were  born  unto  him  in  Jerusalem 

12.  14  the  child  also  (that  is) born.. shall  surely 
Jer.  16.   3  concerning  the  daughters  that  are  bom 

4.Birth,  nnViD  moledeth. 

Lev.  18.   9  bom  at  home,  or  bom  abroad .  .their 

BORN  at  or  in  — 

By  birth,  t£  yeVei  to  genei. 

Acts  18.    2  found  a  certain  Jevr.  .born  in  Poutus 
18. 24  a  certain  Jew.  .born  at  Alexandria 
[See  also  Country,  firstborn,  land,  new,  servant.! 

BORN,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  bom,  begotten,  brought  forth,  "6;  yalad,  2. 
Gen.  21.    5  when  his  son  Isaac  was  born  unto  him 
Kum26.  60  unto  Aaron  was  born  Nadab  and  Abil.u 
2.  Sa.  3.    2  unto  David  were  sons  born  in  Hebron 

5.  13  there  were,  .sons  and  daughters  born 

14.  27  unto  Absalom  there  were  born  three  sons 
1  Ki.  13.    2  a  child  shall  be  born  unto  the  house  of 

1  Ch.  2.    3  three  were  born  unto  him  of  the  daughter 

2.  9  The  sons  also  of  Hezrou,  that  were  born 

3.  1  which  were  born  unto  him  in  Hebron 
3.    4  six  w^ere  born  unto  him  in  Hebron 

3.  5  these  were  born  unto  him  in  Jerusalem 
7.  21  whom  the  men  of  Gath  (that  were)  born 

20.  8  These  were  born  unto  the  giant  in  Gath 
22.  9  Behold,  a  son  shall  be  born  to  thee 

26.  6  unto  Shemaiah  his  son  were  sons  born 
Ezra  10.  3  the  wives,  and  such  as  are  born  of  them 
Job      1.  2  there  were  born  unto  him  seven  sons 

3.    3  Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  born 
11. 12  though  man  be  born  (like)  a  wild  ass's 

15.  7  thou  the  first  man  (that)  was  born  ? 

38.  21  Knowest  thou,  .because  thou  wast,  .born 
Psa.  22.  31  They  shall  come,  .that  shall  be  born 

78.    6  the  children  (which)  should  be  bom 
Prov.17.  17  and  a  brother  is  born  for  advei'sity 
Eccl.  4.  14  also  (he  that  is)  born,  .becometh  poor 
Isa.   66.    8  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once  ? 
Hos.    2.    3  set  her  as  in  the  day  that  she  was  born 

l.To  be  bom  or  begotten,  ~h)  yalad,  4. 

Gen.    4.  26  to  Seth,  to  him  also  there  was  born  a  son 

6.  1  daughters  were  born  unto  them 

10.  21  elder,  even  to  him  were  (children)  born 
10.  25  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons :  the  name 
24.  15  Rebekah  came  out,  who  was  born  to  B. 

35.  26  which  were  bom  to  him  in  Padan-aram 

36.  5  were  born  unto  him  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
41.  50  unto  Joseph  were  bom  two  sons  before  the 
46.  22  which  were  born  to  Jacob :  all  the  souls 
46.  27  which  were  born  him  in  Egypt. .  two  souls 

Judg  18.  29  Dan  their  father,  who  was  born  unto  Is. 
Ruth  4.  17  There  is  a  son  born  to  Naomi;  and  they 

2  Sa.   3.    2  unto  David  were  sons  born  in  Hebron 

3.    5  There  were  born  to  David  in  Hebron 

21.  20  and  he  also  wTas  born  to  the  giant 

21.  22  These  four  were  born  to  the  giant  in  Gath 
1  Ch.    1.  19  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons:  the  name 
Job     5.    7  man  is  born  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks 
Psa.  87.   4  behold  Philistia.  .this,  .was  born  there 

S7.    5  This  and  that  man  was  born  in  her :  and 
87.    6  (that)  tin's  (man)  was  born  there 
Isa.     o.    6  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son 
Jer.   20.  14  Cursed  (be)  the  day  wherein  I  was  born 
20. 15  saying,  A  man  child  is  born  unto  thee 

22.  26  I  will  cast  thee,  .where  ye  were  not  born 
%.To  be  brought  forth,  "hr  yalad,  6. 

Eze.  16.   4  in  the  day  thou  wast  born  thy  navel 
16.    5  person,  in  the  day  that  thou  wast  born 

i.  To  beget,  bring  forth,  ya/vaa>  gennao. 

Matt.  1.  16  of  whom  was  born  Jesus ..  called  Christ 
2.    1  when  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem  of 


BORN 

Matt.  2.    4  of  them  where  Christ  should  be  horn 

jo.  12  were  so  horn  from  (their)  mother's  womb 
26  24  been  good,  .if  he  had  not  been  born 
Mark  14  21  good  were  it.  .if  he  had  never  been  born 
Luke  1.  35  that  holy  tiling  which  shall  be  horn  of 
Jolin  1.  13  Which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
3.    3  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot 

3.  4  can  a  man  be  born,  .and  be  born? 

3    5  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and 
1    6  is  bom  of  the  Hesh . .  born  of  the  spirit 
3    7  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  he  born  again 
3     8  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit 
8  41  We  be  not  born  of  fornication  ;  we  have 
0     2  who  did  sin . .  that  he  was  born  blind  ? 
o  in  Is  this  your  son,  who  ye  say  was  horn 
0  ->o  We  know,  .that  he  was  born  blind 
o.  32  opened  the  eyes  of  one  that  was  born 
o  34  Thou  wast  altogether  bom  in  sins,  and 
16  21  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world 
18  37  To  this  end  was  I  bom,  and  for  this  cause 
Acts   2    8  inourowu  tongue,  wherein  we  were  born? 
7  20  In  which  time  Moses  was  born,  and  was 
22.   3  I  am  verily  a  man . .  a  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus 
1  2-  "8  And  Paul  said,  But  I  was  (free)  born 
Eom  0.  11  (the  children)  being  not  yet  born,  neither 
Gal     423  he . .  was  born  after  the  flesh ;  but  he  of 

4.  29  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted 
Heb.n.  23  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  born 

1  Jo.    2.  29  every  one  thatdoethrighteousnessisborn 

3.  9  is  born  of  God.. because  he  is  born 

4.  7  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and 

5.  1  Whosoever  believeth..  is  born  of  God:  and 
5.    4  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh 

5. 18  whosoever  is  bora  of  Gcd  sinneth  not 

5. To  bring  forth  children,  tIktui  tikto. 

Matt.  2.    2  Where  is  he  that  is  born  king  of  the  Jews  ? 
Luke  2.  11  unto  you  is  born  this  day,  in  the  city  of 
Rev.  12.   4  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born 

BORN  again,  to  be  — ■ 

To  beget  anew,  avayevvdw  anagennao. 

1  Pe.    1.  23  Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed 

BORN  out  of  due  time,  one  — 
Abortion,  an  untimely  birth,  e/cTpaj^ua  cktroma. 
1  Co.  15.   8  as  of  one  born  out  of  due  time 

BORN,  that  is  — 

Begotten,  born,  yzvvnrSs  gennetos. 

Matt  11. 11  Among  them  that  are  born  of  women 
Luke  7.  28  Among  those  that  are  born  of  women 

BORN,  as  they  he  — 

From  the  belly,  )B33  mibbeten. 

Psa.  58.   3  they' go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  born 

BORN  (in  the  land)  — 

An  aboriginal,  inborn,  native,  rrnx  ezrach. 

Exodi2. 19  whether,  .a  stranger,  or  bora  in  the  land 

12.  48  shall  be  as  one  that  is  born  in  the  land 
Lev.  23.  42  Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in  booths 

24. 16  stranger,  as  he  that  is  bora  in  the  land 
Num.  9.  14  for  him  that  was  born  in  the  land 

15.  30  born  in  the  land,  or  a  stranger,  the  same 

BORN  of  or  in  the  country  — 

An  aboriginal,  inborn,  native,  nnix  ezrach. 

Numi5. 13  All  that  are  born  of  the  country  shall  do 
Eze.  47.  22  shall  be  unto  you  as  born  in  the  country 

BORN  among  you  or  home  born  — 
Aboriginal,  inborn,  native,  rn?N  ezrach. 

Exod  1 2.  49  One  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  homeborn 
Lev.  19.  34  be  unto  you  as  one  born  among  you 
Num  15.  29  him  that  is  born  among  the  children  of 
Josh.  8.  33  stranger,  as  he  that  was  bora  among  them 

BORN  (one)  — 

A  son,  j?  ben. 

Gen.  15.   3  lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  heir 
Eccl.  2.  7  and  had  servants  born  in  my  house 

BORNE,  to  be  — 

To  be  lifted  up.  borne,  N'y;  nasa,  2. 

Exod  25. 14  that  the  ark  may  be  borne  with  them 

25.  28  that  the  table  may  be  borne  with  them 
Isa.    66.  12  ye  shall  be  borne  upon  (her)  sides 
Jer.  10.   s  they  must  needs  be  home,  because  they 

BORNE,  are  — 

To  bear,  carry,  DO"  amas. 

Isa.  46.    3  which  are  borne  (by  me)  from  the  belly 

BORNE,  grievous  to  be  — 

Um-ii  t,)  be  borne,  Sua-pdirTaKTos  dusbastaMos. 
MattiT.    .,  heavy  burdens  and  [grievous  to  be  borne] 
Luken.  46  lade.. with  burdens  grievous  to  be  borno 

BORNE  up,  to  he  — 

To  he  supported,  sppj  samak,  2. 

Judgi6.  29  and  on  which  it  was  home  up 

BORROW,  to  — 

1.2V)  be  joined  [to  another),  Jth  In-oh. 

Deut  28. 12  thou  shall  lend  .thou  ■halt  not  borrow 
P<cll.    ^.    .,  «  ,■  have  born. wed  money  for  the  king's 
Psa.  37.  21  Ihe  wicked  borrowcth,  and  payeth  not 

2.  To  interweave,  ejj;  ahat. 

Deut  15.    6  thou  shalt  lend,  .thou  shnlt  not  borrow 


106 

3.  To  ask,  VNy»  shoal. 

Exod.  3.  22  every  woman  shall  borrow  of  her 

11.  2  let  every  man  borrow  of  Ms  neighbour 
12.35  they  borrowed  of  the  Egyptians  jewels 

22. 14  if  a  man  borrow  (ought)  of  his  neighbour 
2  Ki.   4.   3  said,  Go,  borrow  thee  vessels  abroad 

4.  To  put  out  at  usury,  Saye'lm  daneizo. 
Matt,  5.  42  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  thee 

BORROW  a  few,  to  — 

To  make  few,  BEO  maat,  5. 

2  Ki.    4.   3  empty  vessels  ;  borrow  not  a  few 

BORROWED,  to  be  — 

To  ask,  ^n^  shoal. 

2  Ki.   6.   5  Alas,  master  !  for  it  was  borrowed 

BORROWER  — 

To  be  joined,  nib  lavah. 

Prov.22.    7  the*  borrower  (is)  servant  to  the  lender 
Isa.    24.   2  as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the  borrower 

BOSOM  — 

1. Ridden  place,  3h  chob. 

Job   31.  33  hiding  mine  iniquity  in  my  bosom 

l.lnlet,  pin  choq. 

Psa.  74. 11  pluck  (it)  out  of  thy  bosom 
3. Inlet,  p'n  cheq. 

Gen.  16.   5  I  have  given  my  maid  into  thy  bosom 
Exod.  4.    6  Put  now  thine  hand  into  thy  bosom 
4.   6  he  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom 
4.    7  Put  thine  hand  into  thy  bosom  again 
4.    7  he  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom  again 
4.    7  plucked  it  out  of  his  bosom,  and,  behold 
Numn.  12  Carry  them  in  thy  bosom,  as  a.  .father 
Deut  13.   6  the  wife  of  thy  bosom,  or  thy  friend 
2S.  54  be  evil  toward,  .the  wife  of  his  bosom 
28.  56  evil  toward  the  husband  of  her  bosom 
Ruth  4.16  Naomi  took  the  child . .  in  her  bosom 
2  Sa.  12.   3  one  little  ewe  lamb . .  lay  in  his  bosom 

12.  8  thy  master's  wives  into  thy  bosom 

1  Ki.  1.    2  let  her  lie  in  thy  bosom,  that  my  lord 

3.  20  and  laid  it  in  her  bosom 
3.  20  laid  her  dead  child  in  my  bosom 
17. 19  he  took  him  out  of  her  bosom . .  and  laid 
Psa.  35. 13  my  prayer  returned  into  mine  own  bosom 
79.  12  unto  our  neighbours,  .into  their  bosom 
89.  50  I  do  bear  in  my  bosom . .  all  the  mighty 
Prov.  5.  20  and  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  stranger  ? 
6.  27  Can  a  man  take  fire  in  his  bosom,  and 
17.  23  wicked,  .taketh  a  gift  out  of  the  bosom 
21.  14  a  reward  in  the  bosom  strong  wrath 
Eccl.  7.   9  anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools 
Isa.   40.  it  he  shall,  .carry,  .in  his  bosom,  .shall 
65.   6  but.  .even  recompense  into  their  bosom 
65.    7  will  I  measure,  .work  into  their  bosom 
Jer.  32. 18  Thou,  .recompensest.  .into  the  bosom  of 
Lam.  2. 12  poured  out  into  their  mothers'  bosom 
Mic.    7.   5  keep.. from  her  that  lieth  in  thy  bosom 

i.Lajy,  [SO  chetsen. 

Psa.  129.  7  nor  he  that  bindeth  sheaves  his  bosom 

5. Lap,  hollow  thing,  nn'rs  tsallachath. 

Prov.  19.  24  slothful ..  hideth  his  hand  in.  .bosom 

26. 15  slothful  hideth  his  hand  in ..  bosom 

6. Bosom,  holloio  thing,  ko\ttos  kolpos. 

Luke  6.  38  good,  .shall  men  give  into  your  bosom 
16.  22  beggar.. carried,  .into  Abraham's  bosom 
16.  23  seeth  Abraham.,  and  Lazarusin  his  bosom 

John  1.  18  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he 

13.  23  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom  one  of 

BO'-SOR,  $oo-6p  the  father  of  Balaam. 
The  Greek  form  of  writing  Beor. 

2  Pe.   2. 15  Balaam  (the  son)  of  B.,  v.  ho  loved 

BOSS  — 

Arch,  protuberance,  33  gab. 

Job   15.  26  He  runneth .  .upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his 
BOTCH  — 
Inflammation,  pro  shechin. 

Deut28.  27  The  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  botch 
28.  35  Lord  shall  smite . .  with  a  sore  botch 
BOTH  — 
1.  Together,  in;  yachad. 

Psa.    4.   8  I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace 
2.2*100,  B',)y  shenayim. 

Gen.  2.  25  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his 
3.  7  the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and 
9.  23  laid  (it)  upon  both  their  shoulders 

19.  36  Thus  were  both  the  daughters  of  Lot 
21.  27  and  both  of  them  made  a  covenant 

21.  31  because  there  they  sware  both  of  them 

22.  6  and  they  went  both  of  them  together 
22.    8  so  they  went  both  of  them  together 

27.  45  why  should  I  be  deprived  . .  of  you  both 

31.  37  that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  both 
40.  5  they  dreamed  a  dream  both  of  them 
48.  13  Joseph  took  them  both,  Ephraim 

Exoda2.  11  oath  of  the  Lord  be  between  them  both 
26.  24  thus  shall  it  be  for  them  both ;  they 

32.  15  tables  (were)  written  on  both  their  sides 
36.  29  thus  he  did  to  both  of  them  iu  both  the 

Lev.  16.  21  Aaron  shall  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the 

20.  11,  ra  both  of  them  shall  surely  be  put  to 
20.  13  both  of  them  have  committed  an  aboni. 
20.  iS  both  of  them  shall  be  cut  off  from 


BOTH 

Num.  7. 13  of  them,  .full  of  fine  flour  mingled 
7.  19,  25  both  of  them  full  of  fine  flour 
So  m  v.  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 

12.  5  Loud,  .called,  .and  they  both  came  forth 
25.    8  thrust  both  of  them  through,  the  man  of 

Deut  19.  17  Then  both  the  men,  between  whom  the 
22.  22  then  they  shall  both  of  them  die 

22.  24  ye  shall  bring  them  both  out  unto  the 

23.  18  both  these  (are)  abomination  unto  the 
Judg  19.    6  did  eat  and  drink  both  of  them  together 

19.  8  afternoon,  and  they  did  eat  both  of  them 
Ruth  1.    5  Mahlon  and  Chilion  died  also  both  of 

1  Sa.    2.  34  in  one  day  they  shall  die  both  of  them 
3.  11  both  the  ears  of  every  one  that  heareth 
5.    4  both  the  palms  of  his  hands  (were)  cut  off 
9.  26  they  went,  .both  of  them,  he  and  Samuel 
14.  11  both  of  them  discovered  themselves  unto 

20.  11  they  went  out  both  of  them  into  the  field 

20.  42  forasmuch  as  we  have  sworn  both  of  us 
25.  43  they  were  also  both  of  them  his  wives 

2Sa.    9.  13  Mephibosheth.  .was  lame  on  both  his  feet 
17.  18  they  went  both  of  them  away  quickly 

1  Ki.   6.  25  both  the  cherubim  (were)  of  one  measure 

2  Ki.   2.  11  parted  them  both  asunder ;  and  Elijah 

21.  12  whosoever  heareth  of  it,  both  his  ears 
Esth.  2.  23  they  were  both  hanged  on  a  tree  :  and  it 
Job     9.  33  daysman.,  might  lay  his  hand  upon  us  both 
Prov.  17.  15  they  both  (are)  abonination  to  the  LORD 

20.  10  both  of  them  (are)  alike  abomination  to 

20.  12  Lord  hath  mado  even  both  of  them 

24.  22  who  knoweth  the  ruin  of  them  both? 
27.    3  fool's  wrath  (is)  heavier  than  them  both 
29.  13  the  Lord  lighteneth  both  then-  eyes 

Eccl.  4.    3  better  (is  he)  than  both  they,  which  hath 

11.  6  whether  they  both  (shall  be)  alike  good 
Isa.     1.  31  they  shall  both  burn  together,  and  none 

7.  16  shall  be  forsaken  of  both  her  kings 

8.  14  a  rock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of 
Jer.  46. 12  mighty,  .they  are  fallen  both  together 
Eze.  15.    4  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  ends  of  it 

23.  13  I  saw  that,  .they  (took)  both  one  away 
Dan.  11.  27  both  these  kings'  hearts,  .to  do  mischief 
Zech.  6.  13  the  coi.ns.jl  of  peace,  .between them  both 

Z.Both  {of  two),  afj.(p6repoi  aviphoteroi. 

Matt.  9.  17  into  new  bottles,  and  both  are  preserved 

13.  30  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest 
15. 14  if  the  blind  lead,  .both  shall  fall  into  the 

Luke  1.    6  they  were  both  righteous  before  God 

1.  7  they  both  were,  .well  stricken  in  years 
5.    7  filled  both  the  ships,  so  that  they  began 

5.  38  into  new  bottles;  and  [both]  are  preserved 

6.  39  shall  they  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch? 

7.  42  to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them  both 
Acts   7.  38  they  went  down  both  into  the  water 

23.    8  spirit ;  but  the  Pharisees  confess  both 
Eph.  2.  14  he  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one 

2.  16  that  he  might  reconcile  both  unto  God 
2.  18  through  him  we  both  have  access  by  one 

i.Two,  Svo  diio. 

John  20.    4  they  ran  both  together  :  and  the  other 

Rev.  19.  20  both  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of  fire 
5. Each  of  the,  eicaaTos  twc  hekastos  ton. 

Heb.  n.  21  Jacob,  .blessed  both  the  sons  of  Joseph 
BOTH... and,  (also)  — 
l.Unto,  Sn  el. 

Jer.  36.  16  they  were  afraid,  both  one  and  other 
2. Also... also,  03.. .03  gam.. .gam. 

Gen.  24.  25  We  have  both  straw  and  provender 

44. 16  both  we,  and  (lie)  also  with  whom  the  cup 

3. And... anal,  }...),  ve...ve. 

Num.  9. 14  one  ordinance,  both  for  the  stranger,  and 
Psa.  76.    6  both  the  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into 

i.On,  upon,  Sj;  at. 

Exod  35.  22  they  came,  both  men  and  women,  as  many 
5.And..,and,  Kat...Kal  hai...kai. 

Matt  10.  28  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in 

12.  22  blind  and  dumb  both  spake  and  saw 
Mark  6.  30  |both]  what  they  have  dune,  and  what  they 

7.  37  he  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear,  and 
Luke  2.  46  both  hearing  them,  and  asking  them 

5.  36  then  both  the  new  maketh  a  rent,  and 

21.  16  Shall  be  betrayed  both  by  parents,  and 

22.  33  with  thee,  both  into  prison,  and  to  death 
John  2.    2  And  both  Jesus  was  called,  and  his 

4.  36  both  he  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth 
7.  28  Ye  both  know  me,  and  ye  know  whence 

9.  37  Thou  hast  both  seen  him,  and  it  is  he 
11.  48  take  away  both  our  place  and  nation 

11.  57  Now  [both]  the  chief  priests  and  the  Ph. 

12.  2S  I  have  both  glorified  (it),  and  will  glorify 
15.  24  they  both  seen  and  hated  both  me  and 

Acts    2.  29  that  he  is  both  dead  and  buried,  and 

26.  29  were  both  almost,  and  altogether  such  as 
Rom  11.  33  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God! 

14.  9  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose 
14.    9  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living 

x  Co.   4.  11  unto,  .present  hour  we  both  hunger  and 

6.  13  God  shall  destroy  both  it  and  them 

7.  29  that  both  they  that  have  wives,  .and  they 
7.  34  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  in  spirit 

Phil.  2.  13  which  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and 
4.  9  things,  which  ye  have  both  learned  and 
4.  12  I  am  instructed  [both]  to  be  full  and  to  he 

4.  12  both  to  abound  and  to  suitVr  need 

1  Til.  2.  15  Who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus  and 

5.  15  good,  [both]  among  yourselves,  and  to  all 

2  Th.  3.    4  that  ye  both  do  aud  will  do  the  things 


BOTH 


107 


BOUNTIFULLY 


i  Ti.  4.  to  For..we[both]labourandsufferreproaeh 
4. 16  in  doing  this  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself 
Titus  1.  9  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  and  to 
Phm.  16  both  in  the  flesh,  and  in  the  Lord? 
2  Pe.  3.  18  To  him  (be)  glory  both  now  and  for  ever 
2  Jo.  9  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son 
Rev.  13. 15  the  image  of  the  beast  should  both  speak 

6. And.,  and,  rc.Kai  te...kai. 

Matt22  10  as  many  as  they  found,  both  bad  and 
Acts    1.    1  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  teach 
1.   8  \  e  witnesses  unto  me  both  in  Jer.  and 
1. 13  where  abode  both  Peter  and  James,  and 

4.  27  both  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with 

8. 12  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women 

8.  38  into  the  water,  both  Philip  and  the 

10.  30  he  did  both  in  the  land  of  the  Jews  and 
14.  1  both  of  the  Jews  and  also  of  the  Greeks 
14.    s  both  of  the  Gentiles,  and  also  of  the 

19.  10  word  of  the  Lord,  .both  Jews  and  Greeks 

20.  21  Testifying  both  to  the  Jews,  and  also  to 
21. 12  both  we,  and  they  of  that  place,  besought 
22.    4  delivering  into  prisons  both  men  and 

24.  15  resurrection,  .both  of  the  just  and  unjust 

25.  24  both  at  Jerusalem,  and.  .here,  crying 

26.  22  witnessing  both  to  small  and  great 

28.  23  both  out  of  the  law  of  Moses,  and.  .the 
Rom.  1.  12  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me 
1.  14  I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and 
1.  14  both  to  the  wise,  and  to  the  unwise 
3.   9  we  have  before  proved  both  Jews  and 
1  Co.   1.   2  Christ  our  Lord,  both  theirs  and  our's 

1.  24  them  which  are  called,  both  Jews  and 
Eph.  1. 10  [both]  which  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are 
Phil.  1.    7  both  in  my  bonds,  and  iu  the  defence 
Heb.  2.   4  both  with  signs  and  wonders,  and  with 

2.  11  both  he  that  sanctifieth  and  they  who 

5.  1  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices  for 
5.  14  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 
6. 19  Which,  .we have,  .both sure  and stedfast 

9.  9  in  which  were  offered  both  gifts  and 
9.  19  sprinkled  both  the  book,  and  all  the 

10.  33  both  by  reproaches  and  afflictions 
7. And. ..and,  re..-Te  te...te. 

Acts  26. 16  minister  and  a  witness  both  of  these 
S. And. ..and,  re...Se  tc.de. 

Acts    5.  14  multitudes  both  of  men  and  women 

BOTH  ths  hands  — 

The  two  fists,  CM-rn  chophnayim. 

EccL  4.    6  than  both  the  hands  full  (with)  travail 

BOTH  parties  — 
Two,  d*j#  shenayim. 

Exod22.   9  the  cause  of  both  parties  shall  come 

BOTH  twain  — 
Ttoo,  CPJy'  slienayim. 

Eze.  21. 19  both  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  one 

BOTTLE  — 

l.IToHoio  thing,  bottle,  nix  ob. 

Job   32.  19  it  is  ready  to  burst  like  new  bottles 

2.  Hollow  thing,  bottle,  pi3j?2  baqbuq. 

Jer.  19.    1  Go  and  get  a  potter's  earthen  bottle,  and 
ig.  10  Then  shalt  thou  break  the  bottle  in 

Z.Heat,  npn  chemah. 

Hos.    7.    5  have  made  (him)  sick  with  bottles  of 
4. Bottle,  thing  shut  up,  rvpn  chemeth. 

Gen.  21.  14  took  bread  and  a  bottle  of  water,  and 

21.  15  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and 
21. 19  she  went,  and  filled  the  bottle  with 

Hab.  2.  15  Woe  unto  him.  .that  puttest  thy  bottle 

5.  Bottle,  1X3  nod. 

Josh.  9.    4  wine  bottles,  old,  and  rent,  and  bound 

9. 13  these  bottles  of  wine  which  we  filled 
Judg.  4.  19  she  opened  a  bottle  of  milk,  and  gave 
1  Sa.  16.  20  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  a  kid,  and  sent 
Psa.  56.    8  put  thou  my  tears  into  thy  bottle 

119.  83  I  am  become  like  a  bottle  in  the  smoke 

6.  Bottle,  hqi  nebel 

1  Sa.   1.  24  one  ephah  of  flour,  and  a  bottle  of  wine 

10.    3  and  another  carrying  a  bottle  of  wine 
25.  18  two  hundred  loaves,  and  two  bottles  of 

2  Sa.  16.    1  summer  fruits,  and  a  bottle  of  wine 
Job   38.  37  who  can  stay  the  bottles  of  heaven 

Jer.  13.  12,  12  Every  bottle  shall  be  filled  with  wine 
48. 12  I  will  send,  .and  break  their  bottles 
7. Bottle  of  skin,  a<TK.6s  askos. 

Matt.  9.  17  new  wine  into  old  bottles:  else  the  bottles 

9.  17  bottles  perish,  .new  wine  into  new  bottles 
Mark  2.  22  old  bottles,  .wine  doth  burst  the  bottles 

2.  22  bottles  will  be  marred,  .[new  bottles] 
Luke  5.  37  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles 

5.  37  burst  the  bottles,  .the  bottles  shall  perish 

5.  38  new  wine  must  be  put  into  new  bottles 

BOTTOM  — 

1.  Lower  part,  rvjriK  arith. 

Dan.   6.  24  or  ever  they  came  at  the  bottom  of  the 
2.Lap,  hollow  part,  p^n  cheq. 

Eze.  43. 13  even  the  bottom,  .a  cubit,  and.  .breadth 
43. 14  from  the  bottom  (upon)  the  ground. .  to 
43.  17  the  bottom  thereof,  .a  cubit  about ;  and 
3.  Foundation,  tid^  yesod. 

Exod2Q.  12  pour  all  the  blood  beside  the  bottom  of 


Lev.    4.    7  the  blood  of  the  bullock  at  the  bottom  of 
4.  iS,  25  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of 

4.  30,  34  blood  thereof  at  the  bottom  of  the  al. 

5.  9  the  rest  of  the  blood,  .at  the  bottom  of 

8.  15  poured  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the 

9.  9  poured  out  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of 

^.Depth,  place  of  sJiadoius,  n?isp  metsolah. 

Exodi5.   5  they  sank  into  the  bottom  as  a  stone 
5. Depth,  shadoxoy  place,  n^-p  metsullah. 

Zech.  1.    8  the  myrtle  trees  that  (were)  in  the  bottom 

6.  Glutting,  extremity,  2xp_  qetseb. 

Jon.    2.6I  went  down  to  the  bottoms  of  the 

7.  Soil,  pavement,  yp~\p  qarqa. 

Amos  9.    3  though  they  be.  .in  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
8  Couch  covering,  rrrET]  rephidah. 

Song   3.  10  He  made,  .the  bottom  thereof  (of)  gold 
9.  Hoot,  ti~i&  shoresh. 

Job    36.  30  and  covereth  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
10. Doionward,  beneath,  Kara  kato. 

Matt  27.  51  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom 

Markis.  38  from  the  top  to  the  bottom 

BOTTOMLESS  — 

Very  dee2>,  &$va<ros  abussos. 

Rev.    9.    1  was  given  the  key  of  the  bottomless 

g.   2  [he  opened  the  bottomless  pit ;  and  there] 

BOTTOMLESS  pit  — 

Very  deep  place,  &0va,cros  abussos. 

Rev.   9.  11  a  king,  .the  a  gel  of  the  bottomless  pit 
11.    7  that  ascendeth  out  of  the  bottomless  pit 
17.    S  shall  ascend  out  of  the  bottomless  pit 
20.    1  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit  and 
20.    3  cast  him  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  shut 

BO  UGH  — 

1. Summit,  Tpx  amir. 

Isa.    17.    6  berries  in  the  top  of  the  uppermost  bough 

2.  Son,  ]3.  ben. 

Gen.  49.  22  (is)  a  fruitful  bough,  .a  fruitful  bough 

3.  Thicket,  forest,  e;"jn  choresh. 

Isa.    17.    9  strong  cities  be  as  a  forsaken  bough 

4.  Twig,  shoot,  -isy?  seappah. 

Eze.  31.    6  fowls,  .made  their  nests  in  Ins  boughs 
31.    8  fir  trees  were  not  like  his  boughs,  and  the 

5.  Twig,  shoot,  nsjpp  sarapjpah. 

Eze.  31.    5  his  boughs  were  multiplied,  and  his 

Q.Branch,  *\iy  anaph. 

Lev.  23.  40  and  the  boughs  of  thick  trees 
Psa.  80.  10  the  boughs  thereof  (were  like)  the  goodly 
Eze.  17.  23  it  shall  bring  forth  boughs,  and  bear 
Dan.    4. 12  fowls  of  the  heaven  dwelt  in  the  boughs 

7. Branch,  ornament,  vr^porah. 

Eze.  31. 12  his  bough3  are  broken  by  all  the  rivers 

8. Branch,  orna/ment,  -"HNS  purah. 

Isa.   10.  33  the  Lokd  . .  shall  lop  the  bough  with  terror 

9.Fruit,  ,-i?  peri. 

Lev.  23.  40  ye  shall  take,  .the  boughs  of  goodly  trees 

10.. 4  cutting,  branch,  yxp  qatsir. 

Job   14.    9  bud,  and  bring  forth  boughs  like  a  plant 
Psa.  80.  11  She  sent  out  her  boughs  unto  the  sea 
Isa.   27.  11  When  the  boughs  thereof  are  withered 

11. Interwoven,  twig,  t(\isf  sok. 

Judg.  9.  49  people.. cut  down  every  man  his  bough 
12. Interwoven  twig,  npib'  sokah. 

Judg.  9.  48  cut  down  a  bough  from  the  trees,  and 
BOUGH,  thick  — 
1.  Thick,  dense  object,  n2j£  aboth. 

Eze.  31.  3  and  his  top  was  among  the  thick  boughs 
31.  10  shot  up  his  top  among  the  thick  boughs 
31. 14  shoot  up  their  top  amongthethickboughs 

I.Outspread,  entangled,  bough,  ^'v  sobek. 

2  Sa.  iS.   9  the  mule  went  under  the  thick  boughs 
BOUGHS  — 
Pointed  twigs,  D"3pjp  sansinnim. 

Song  7.    8  I  will  take  hold  of  the  boughs  thereof 
BOUGHS,  to  go  over  tie  — 
To  glean  thoroughly,  1N2  paar,  3. 

Deut  24.  20  thou  shalt  not  go  over  the  boughs 
BOUGHT  — 
A  purchase,  acquisition,  nipp  miqnah. 

Gen.  17. 12  or  bought  with  money  of  any  stranger 
17.  27  bought  with  money  of  the  stranger,  were 

Lev.  25.  51  out  of  the  money  that  he  was  bought  for 
27.  22  a  field  which  he  hath  bought,  which 
BOUGHT,  to  be  — 
To  be  gained,  acquired,  n:p  qanah,  2. 

Jer.  32.  43  fields  shall  be  bought  in  this  land,  whereof 
BOUGHT,  he  that  is  — 
A  purchase,  acquisition,  rupp  miqnah. 

Gen.  17.  13  he  that  is  bought  with  thy  money,  must 
17.  23  all  that  were  bought  with  his  money 

Exod  12.  44  every  man's  servant  that  is  bought  for 

BOUND  — 

1.  Bound,  girded,  Tpi<  asir. 

Psa.  107.  10  Such  as  sit.  .bound  in  affliction  and  iron 


^..Enclosed  place,  h\2*i  gebul. 

Exod  23.  31  I  will  set  thy  bounds  from  the  Red  sea 
Job    38.  20  thoushouldesttakeittothe  bound  thereof 
Psa.  104.    9  hast  set  a  bound  that  they  may  not  pass 
Jer.     5.  22  have  placed  the  sand  (for)  the  bound  of 
Hos.    5.  10  were  like  them  that  remove  the  bound 

Z. Enclosed  p>lctce,  roaa  gebulah. 

Deut  32.    8  he  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according 
Isa.    10.  13  I  have  removed  the  bounds  of  the  people 

4.  Statute,  limit,  ph  choq. 

Job   14.   5  thou  hast  appointed  his  bounds  that  he 
26.  10  He.  .compassed  the  waters  with  bounds 

5. Bent,  bending,  bowed  down,  ri3?  kephath,  3. 
Dan.    3.  23  fell  down  bound  into  the  midst .  .burning 
3.  24  Did  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  into 

6.  Thread,  cord;  bound  to,  TJ)B pathil. 

Num  19.  15  which  hath  no  covering  bound  upon  it 

7.  To  bind,  tie,  y&$  qashar. 

Prov.22.  15  Foolishness  (is)  bound  in  the  heart  of  a 

BOUND,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  bound,  ~)pN  asar,  2. 

Gen.  42.  19  let  one  of  your  brethren  be  bound  in  the 
Judg  16.    6  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  bound  to 
16. 10,  13  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  bound 

2.  To  be  bound,  ~idn  asar,  4. 

Isa.   22.   3  thy  rulers.,  are  bound  by  the  archers 

3.  To  be  bound,  bent,  nsp  kephath. 

Dan.  3.  21  these  men  were  bound  in  their  coats,  and 

4.  To  fetter,  prnrathaq,  4. 

Nah.  3.  10  all  her  great  men  were  bound  in  chains 

5.  To  press,  tvx  tsarar. 

1  Sa.  25.  29  the  soul  of  my  lord  shall  be  bound  in  the 
6.T0  be  twisted  together,  ipb'  saqad,  2. 

Lam.  1. 14  The  yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  bound 

7. To  owe,  btysiXio  opheilo. 

2  Th.  1.    3  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for 

2. 13  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to 

BOUND,  to  be  kept  — 
To  bind,  Beo-pec*  desnieo. 

Luke  8.  29  he  was  kept  bound  with  chains  and  in 

BOUND,  those  which  are  — 
One  bound,  tdn  asir. 

Psa.  68.   6  he'bringeth  out  those  which  are  bound 
BOUND  up  — 
l.To  be  straitened,  pii'essed  together,  t$  tsarar,  4. 

Josh.  9.   4  wine  bottles,  old,  and  rent,  and  bound  up 
2.  To  bind,  tie,  "rc?p  qashar. 

Gen.  44.  30  his  life  is  bound  up  in  the  lad's  life 

BOUND  up,  be  — 

Because  of  the  wound,  or  for  binding  up,  "vnDp. 
Jer.  30. 13  that  thou  mayest  be  bound  up  :  thoii  hast 

BOUND  up,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  wrapped  around,  t^n  chabash,  4. 

Isa.     1.    6  have  not  been  closed,  neither  bound  up 
Eze.  30.  21  it  shall  not  be  bound  up  to  be  healed,  to 

2. To  press,  TV$  tsarar. 

Exodi2.  34  their  kneading  troughs  being  bound  up 
Hos.  13.  12  The  iniquity  of  Ephrairn  (is)  bound  up 

BOUND  about,  to  be  — 

To  bind  around,  -jreptSew  perid,eo. 

John  11.  44  his  face  was  bound  about  with  a  napkin 

EOUND  with,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  laid  round  about,  7repiKeiua: perikeimoA. 

Acts  28.  20  for  the  hope  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with 
2.  To  be  bound  with,  avv$€o/j.ai  sundeomai. 

Heb.  13.    3  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound  with  them 

BOUND,  utmost  — 
Mark,  limit,  nixj-i  taavah. 

Gen.  49.  26  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills 
BOUNDS  — 
Set  limit,  6po8eala  horothesia. 

Acts  17.  26  determined,  .the  bounds  of  their  habita. 

BOUNDS  (about),  to  set  — 

To  make  an  enclosure,  S25  gabal,  5. 

Exod  19.  12  set  bounds  unto  the  people  round  about 
Exod  19.  23  Set  bounds  about  the  mount,  and  sanctify 

BOUNTIFUL  — 
l.Good,  aiD  tob. 

Prov.22.    9  He  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye  shall  be 

2.Rich,  easy,  free,  ]irJ  shoa. 

Isa.  32.    5  nor  the  churl  said  (to  be)  bountiful 
BOUNTIFULLY  — 
Good  or  fair  speech,  blessing,  evXoyia  eulogia. 

2  Co.  9.    6  soweth  bountif ullyshallreap .  .bountifully 
BOUNTLFULLT,  to  deal  — 
To  deed  (with  any  one),  ?£§  gamal. 

Psa.  13.    6  he  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  "me 
116.    7  Lokd  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  thee 
119.  17  Deal  bountifully  with  thy  servant 
142.    7  thou  shalt  deal  bountifully  with  me 


BOUNTIFUL  NESS 


10S 


BOWL 


BOUNTLETTLNESS  — 
Simplicity,  kw\6rr)s  ftaplotSs. 

2  Co.   9.  ji  enriched.. every  thing  to  all  bountifulness 

BOUNTY  — 

l.lland,  power,  1;  yaeU 

1  Ki.  10. 13  Solomon  gave  her  of  his  royal  bounty 

2.Good  speech,  blessing,  ebKoyla  eulogia. 

2  Co.    9.    s  make  up  beforehand  your  bounty 

BOUNTY  (matter  of)  - 

Goo  I  speech)  Messing,  euXoyla  eulogia. 

2  Co.   9     5  might  be  ready,  as  (a  matter  of)  bounty 

EOW  — 

l.Bow,  n^fj  gesheth. 

Gen.   9. 13  I  do  set  my  bow  in  the  cloud,  and  it 
9.  14  that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud 
9. 16  the  bow  shall  be  in  the  cloud ;  and  I 
27.   3  take,  .thy  quiver  and  thy  bow 

48.  22  with  my  sword  and  with  my  bow 

49.  24  his  bow  abode  in  strength,  and  the  arms 
Josh  24.  12  not  with  thy  sword,  nor  with  thy  bow 

1  Sa.    2.    4  The  bows  of  the  mighty  men  (are)  broken 

18.    4  even  to  his  sword,  and  to  his  bow 

2  Sa.    1. 18  teach  the  children  of  Judah.  .the  bow 

1.  22  the  bow  of  Jonathan  turned  not  back 
22.  35  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  arms 

1  Ki.  22.  34  a. .  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  and 

2  Ki.  6.  22  wouldest  thou  smite . .  with  thy  bow  ? 

9.  24  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with  bis  full  strength 
13.  15  Elisha  said  untohim.Takebowaiid  arrows 
13.  15  and  he  took  unto  him  bow  and  arrows 
13.  16  Put  thine  hand  upon  the  bow ;  and  he 

1  Ch.  5. 18  to  shoot  with  bow,  and  skilful  in  war 

12.    2  armed  with  bows,  and  could  use  both 

12.  2  stones  and  (shooting)  arrows  out  of  a  bow 

2  Ch.  14.    8  that  bare  shield  and  drew  bows,  two 

17.  17  with  him  armed  men  with  bow  and  shield 

18.  33  a  .  .man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  and 
26.  14  Uzziah  prepared,  .bows,  and  slings  (to) 

Keh.  4.  13  I  even  set  the  people,  .with,  .their  bows 
4. 16  the  other  half  of  them  held,  .the  bows 

Job    20.  24  the  bow  of  steel  shall  strike  him  through 
29.  20  my  bow  was  renewed  in  my  hand 

Psa.    7.  12  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready 
ir.    2  the  wicked  bend  (their)  bow,  they  make 
18.  34  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  arms 
37.  14  The  wicked  have,  .bent  their  bow,  to  cast 
37.  15  heart,  and  their  bows  shall  be  broken 
4)..   6  1  will  not  trust  in  my  bow,  neither 
46.   9  breaketh  the  bow,  and  cutteth  the  spear 
73.    3  There  brake  he  the  arrows  of  the  bow 
78.   9  armed .  .carrying  bows,  turned  back  in 
78.  57  were  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow 

Isa.     5.  28  Whose  arrows,  .sharp,  and  all  their  bows 
7.  24  With  arrows  and  with  bows  shall  (men) 

13.  18  bows  also  shall  dash  the  young  men  to 
21.  15  drawn  sword,  and  from  the  bent  bow 
41.    2  he  gave.,  as  driven  stubble  to  his  bow 
66.  19  that  draw  the  bow,  (to)  Tubal,  and  Javan 

Jer.     6.  23  They  shall  lay  hold  on  bow  and  spear 

9.    3  they  bend  their  tongues  (like)  their  bow 
46.   9  Lydians,  that  handle  (and)  bend  the  bow 

49.  35  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Elam,  the  chief 
50. 14  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow,  shoot  at  her 

50.  29  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow,  camp  against 

50.  42  They  shall  hold  the  bow  and  the  lance 

51.  3  let  the  archer  bend  his  bow,  and  agaiust 
51.  56  every  one  of  their  bows  is  broken  :  for 

Lam.  2.   4  He  hath  bent  his  bow  like  an  enemy 

3.  12  He  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  set  me  as  a 
Eze.     t.  28  the  bow  that  is  in  the  cloud  in  the  day  of 
39.   3  I  will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand 
39.   9  the  shields,  .the  bows  and  the  arrows 
Hos.    1.    5  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the 

1.    7  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword 
2. 18  I  will  break  the  bow  and  the  sword  and 
7.  16  they  are  like  a  deceitful  bow  :  their 
Amos  2.  15  shall  he  stand  that  handleth  the  bow 
Hab.  3.   g  Thy  bow  was  made  quite  naked.. to  the 
Zech.  9.  10  and  the  battle  bow  shall  be  cut  off  :  the 
9.  13  filled  the  bow  with  Ephraim,  and  raised 
10.    4  Out  of  him  came  forth,  .the  battle  bow 
2. .1  bow,  t6%ov  toxin. 

Rev.   6.    2  he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  bow ;  and  a 
BOW,  to  — 
1.7V)  bend,  H|  ham. 

Judg.  5.  27  he  bowed.. he  bowed .  .where  he  bowed 

1  K-.  ig.  18  the  knees  which  have  not  bowed  unto 
£sth.  3.    2  the  king's  servants,  .bowed,  Mordecai 

3.   5  Haman  saw  that  Mordecai  bowed  not 
Paa.  32.  29  they  that  go  down  to  the  dust  shall  bow 
72.   9  They  that  dwell.. shall  bow  before  him 
Tsa.  45.  23  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every 

2, '/'  1  incline,  -::]  1  atah  . 

Gen.  49. 15  bowed  hi*  Bhoulder  to  bear,  and  became 
Judgt6.  30  be  bowed  himself  with  (all  his)  might 
■Sa.  33. 10 He  bowed  the  heavens  also,  and  came 
Psa.  18.  oil.'  bowi  1  the  heavens  also,  and  came 

Z.  To  cause  to  incline,  ■%■:  natah,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.  i4  he  bowed  the  heart  of  all  the  men  of 
lsa.  144.  5  Ui.w  thy  h>  ■;■,,',.  in  ni:,i  ainl  erne 
Prov.  5.    1  bow  thine  ear  to  my  understanding 

!- To  0  ■/■■  !'.   i  ■  ■  /.  inq  qadad, 

1  Ki.    1   16  Bath  sheba  bowed,  and  did  obeisance 
1.  31  Bath-sheba  bowed  with  (her)  face  to  the 


5.  To  boio  down,  nn£!  shacho.ch. 

Prov.  14.  19  The  evil  bow  before  the  good ;  and  the 
Hab.   3.    6  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow :  his  ways 

G.  To  bendy  KafiTrrw  kampto. 

Horn  11.    4  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to.  .Baal 
14.  1 1  it  is  written . .  every  knee  shall  bow  to  me 

Eph.   3.  14  I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  Father  of  our 

Phil.   2.  10  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow 
7.  To  incline,  rKlvw  klino. 

Johmg.  30  he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost 
S.To  put,  place,  set,  ridnui  tithemi. 

Markis.  19  and  bowing,  .knees  worshipped  Mm 
BOW  down,  to  — 
l.To  bend,  double,  ^£3  kaphaph. 

Isa.   58.    5  to  bow  down  his  head  as  a  bulrush 
2. To  bend  down,  y~i3  kara. 

Judg.  7.    5  every  one  that  boweth  down  upon  his 
7.    6  the  rest  of  the  people  bowed  down  upon 

Job   31. 10  and  let  others  bow  down  upon  her 

Psa.  95.   6  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down 

Isa.    10.    4  Without  me  they  shall  bow  down  under 
46.    1  Berboweth  down,  Nebo  stoopeth,  their 

46.  2  They  stoop,  they  bow  down  together 
65. 12  ye  shall  all  bow  down  to  the  slaughter 

3.  To  cause  to  incline,  naj  natch,  5. 

2  Ki.  19. 16  Lord,  bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear 
Psa.  31.   2  Bow  dowu  thine  ear  to  me  ;  deliver  me 

86.    1  Bow  down  thine  ear,  0  Lord,  hear  me 
Prov.22. 17  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the  words 

4.  To  bow  down,  nny  shachah. 

Isa.  51.  23  Bow  down,  that  we  may  go  over :  and 
5. To  boio  oneself  down  (to  God  or  man),  nrj^,  7. 
Gen.  27.  29  Let  people  serve,  .nations  bow  down  to 
27.  29  let  thy  mother's  sous  bow  down  to  thee 
49.    S  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down 
Exod23.  24  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  to  their  gods 
Lev.  26.    1  neither.,  set  up.  .image.,  bow  down  unto 
Num2  5.    2  the  people  did  eat,  and  bowed  down  to 
Deut.  5.    9  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  unto 
Judg.  2.  19  to  bow  down  unto  them;  they  ceased 
Psa.  95.    6  0  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down 
Isa.  49.  23  they  shall  bow  down  to  thee  with  (their) 

6.  To  boio  down,  iro  shachach. 

Psa.  35. 14  I  bowed  down  heavily,  as  one  that 

7.  To  be  bowed  down,  nn^  shachach,  2. 

Isa.     2.    g  the  mean  man  boweth  down,  and  the 

8.  To  incline,  k\Ivu>  klino. 

Luke  24.    5  bowed  down  (their)  faces  to  the  earth 

9.  To  bend  together,  ffuyKdixwrcc  suykampto. 
Rom  11.  10  and  bow  down  their  back  alway 

BOW  down  the  head,  to  — 
To  stoop  down,  ~np  qadad. 

Gen.  24.  26  the  man  bowed  down  his  head,  and 

24.  48  I  bowed  down  my  head,  and  worshipped 
43.  28  they  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  made 
NU11122.  31  he  bowed  down  his  head,  and  fell  flat 

1  Ch.  29.  20  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  worshipped 
BOW  down  self,  to  — 

To  bow  oneself  (to  God  or  man),  nny  shachah,  7. 
Gen.  23. 12  Abraham  bowed  down  himself  before  the 
27. 10  come  to  bow  down  ourselves  to  the 

42.  6  bowed  down  themselves  before  him 
Exod  11.    8  bow  down  themselves  unto  me,  saying 

20.    5  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them 

2  Ki.   5.  18  I  bow  down  myself  in  the  house  of  Rim. 
2  Ch.  25.  14  bowed  down  himself  before  them,  and 
Isa.   60.  14  despised  thee  shall  bow  themselves  down 

BOW  self,  to  — 

l.To  be  bent  double,  >~?3  kaphaph,  2. 

Mic.    6.    6  bow  myself  before  the  high  God?  shall  I 

2.  To  boio  down,  m?  kara. 

1  Sa.    4. 19  bowedherself  and  ti*availed;  forherpains 

2  Ch.   7.   3  bowed  themselves  with  their  faces  to  the 

29.  29  all.  .present  with  him  bowed  themselves 
Job  39.   3  bow  themselves,  .they  cast  out  their  sor. 

3.  To  bend  or  curve  oneself,  r\yj  avath,  7. 

Eccl.  12.   3  strong  men  shall  bow  themselves,  and 
LTo  bow  oneself  (to  God  or  man),  nny  shachah,  7. 
Gen.  18.   2  and  bowed  himself  toward  the  ground 
19.    1  bowed  himself  with  his  face  toward  the 

13.  7  Abraham  stood  up,  and  bowed  himself  to 
33.   3  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times 
33.    6  theirchildren.and  they  bowed  themselves 
33.    7  Leah,  .with  her  children,  .bowed  them. 
33.    7  came . .  near . .  and  they  bowed  themselves 

43.  26  bowed  themselves  to  him  to  the  earth 

47.  31  Israel  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's 

48.  12  bowed  himself  with  his  face  to  the  earth 
Josh 23.    7  serve.. nor  bow  yourselves  unto  them 

23.  16  served  other  gods,  and  bowed  yourselves 
Judg.  2.  12,  17  and  bowed  themselves  unto  them 
Ruth  2.  10  she.  .bowed  herself  to  the  ground,  and 

1  Sa.  20.  41  bowed  himself  three  times  :  and  they 

24.  8  David  stooped,  .and  bowed  himself 

25.  23  fell,  .and  bowed  herself  to  the  ground 
25.  41  bowed  herself  on  (her)  face  to  the  earth 
2S.  14  stooped  with  (his)  face.. and  bowed  him. 

2Sa.    9.    She  bowed  himself,  and  said,  Wliat  (is)  thy 

14.  22  Joab  fell.. on  his  face,  and  bowed  himself 
14.  33  bowed  himself  on  his  face  to  the  ground 
18.  21  Cushi  bowed  himself  unto  Joab,  and  ran 


2  Sa.  24.  20  bowed  himself  before  the  king  on  his 

1  Ki.   1.  23  bowed  himself  before  the  king  with  his 

1.  47  the  king  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed 

1.  53  came  and  bowed  himself  to  king  Solomon 

2.  19  king  rose,  .and  bowed  himself  unto  her 

2  Ki.    2.  15  bowed  themselves  to  the  ground  before 

4.  37  bowed  herself  to  the  ground,  and  took 

5.  18  I  bow  myself  in  the  house  of  Rimmon 
17.  35  nor  bow  yourselves  to  them,  nor  serve 

1  Ch.  21.  21  bowed  himself  to  David  with  (his)  face 
BOW  t  :e  head,  to  — 
To  stoop  down,  bow  the  head  Tip  qadad. 

Exod.4.  31  they  bowed  their  heads  and  worshipped 
12.  27  people  bowed  the  head  and  worshipped 
34.    8  bowed  his  head  toward  the  earth,  and 

1  Ch.  20.  iS  Jehoshaphat  bowed  his  head,  .to  the 

29.  30  they  bowed  their  heads  and  worshipped 
2*  en.  8.   6  bowed  then- heads,  and  worshipped  the 

BOW  the  knee,  to  — 

1. Salute!  give  a  blessing /  -|*i3X  abrck. 

Gen.  41.  43  they  cried  before  him,  Bow  the  knee 
2. To  fall  on  the  knees,  yovvirercoi  gonupeteo. 

Matt  27.  29  they  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  an 
BOWED  down,  to  he  — 

1.  To  he  bent  double,  *]£3  kaphaph. 

Psa,  57.    6  my  soul  is  bowed  down  :  they  have 

145.  14  and  raiseth  up  all .  .bowed  down 

146.  8  Lori»  raiseth  (them  that  are)  bowed  down 

2.  To  be  bent,  ny/  avah,  2. 

Isa.  21.    3  I  was  bowed  down  at  the  hearing.  .1  was 

3.  To  be  bowed  down,  nw  shuach. 

Psa.  44.  25  our  soul  is  bowed  down  to  the  dust 
i.To  boio  down,  nnt?  shachach. 

Psa.  38.    6  I  am  troubled  ;  I  am  bowed  down  greatly 

Isa.     2. 11  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  bowed  down 
2. 17  loftiness  of  man  shall  be  bowed  down 
BOWED  together,  to  be  — 
To  bow  together,  o-vyKu-n-Tca  suykupto. 

Luke  13. 11  there  was  a  woman,  .bowed  together 
BOWELS  — 
\. Bowels,  D*ys  meim. 

Gen.  15.    4  shall  come  forth  out  of  thine  own  bowels 
25.  23  people  shall  be  separated  from  thy  bowels 

Num.  5.  22  this  water,  .shall  go  into  thy  bowels 

2  Sa.    7.  12  which  shall  proceed  out  of  thy  bowels 

16.  11  my  son,  which  came  forth  of  my  bowels 

20.  10  shed  out  his  bowels  to  the  ground,  and 
2  Ch.21.  15  of  thy  bowels,  until  thy  bowels  fall  out 

21. 18  Lord  smote  him  in  his  bowels  with  an 

21.  19  his  bowels  fell  out  by  reason  of  his 

32.  21  they  that  came  forth  of  his  own  bowels 
Job    20.  14  his  meat  in  his  bowels  is  turned 

30.  27  My  bowels  boiled,  and  rested  not :  the 
Psa.  22.  14  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels 

71.  6  took  me  out  of  my  mother's  bowels 
Song  5.  4  and  my  bowels  were  moved  for  him 
Isa.   16.  11  my  bowels  shall  sound  like  an  harp 

48. 19  the  offspring  of  thy  bowels  like  the  gravel 
49.    1  from  the  bowels  of  my  mother  hath  he 
63.  15  the  sounding  of  thy  bowels  and  of  thy 

Jer.     4. 19  My  bowels,  my  bowels  !  I  am  pained 

31.  20  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for  him 
Lam.  1.  20  my  bowels  are  troubled  ;  mine  heart 

2.  11  my  bowels  are  troubled,  my  liver  is 
Eze.    3.    3  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  roll  that  I  give 
7.  19  they  shall  not.  .fill  their  bowels 

2,  Heart,  rng  qereb. 

Psa.  109.  18  let  it  come  into  his  bowels  like  water 

3.  Womb,  feelings  of  pity,  D'crn  rachamim. 

Gen.  43.  30  his  bowels  did  yearn  upon  his  brother 

1  Ki.   3.  26  her  bowels  yearned  upon  her  son,  and 

i.Boivels,  <rtr\ayxva  splagchna. 

Acts    1.  18  he  burst,  .and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out 

2  Cor.  6.  12  ye  are  straitened  in  your  own  bowels 
Phil.    1.    8  1  long  after  you  all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 

2.    1  of  the  Spirit,  if  any  bowels  and  mercies 
Col.     3.  12  Put  on  therefore .  .bowels  of  mercies 
Plim.       7  the  bowels  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by 
12  receive  him  that  is  mine  own  bowels 
20  the  Lord  :  refresh  my  bowels  in  the  Lord 

BOWELS  (of  compassion)  — 
Bowels,  <nr\dyxva  splagchna. 

1  Jo.    3.  17  shutteth  up  his  bowels  (of  compassion) 

SOWING  — 

To  incline,  na:  uatah. 

Psa.  62.    3  as  a  bowing  wall.,  a  tottering  fence 

BOWING  down  — 

To  incline,  hb:  natah. 

Psa.  17. 11  set  their  eyes  bowing  down  to  the  earth 

BOWL  — 

l.Bowl,  calix,  Spaa  gdbia. 

Exod25.  31  his  bowls,  his  knops.  .shall  be  of  the 
23.  33  Three  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds 
23.  34  in  the  candlestick,  .four  bowls  made  like 
27.  17  his  bowls,  hi;  knops.  .were  of  the  same 
27.  19  Three  bowls  made  after  the  fashion  of 
27.  19  and  three  bowls  made  like  almonds 
37.  20  in  the  candlestick.,  four  bowls  made  like 

2.  Cruise,  b'a  gol. 

Zech.  4.    2  with  a  bowl  upon  the  top  of  it,  and  his 


BOWLS 


100 


BRASEN 


S.Cruise,  n^  gallah. 

i  Ki.   7.  41  bowls  of  the  cliapiter3  that  (were)  on  the 

7.  42  to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 
Eccl,  12.    6  or  the  golden  bowl  he  broken,  or  the 
Zech.  4.    3  oue  upon,  the  right,  .of  the  bowl,  ami  the 

4.Sprinkli7ig  pan,  p"u?  mizraq. 

Num.  7.  13  oue  silver  bowl  of  seventy  shekels,  after 
So  in  v.  19,  25,  31,  37,  43,  40,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 
7.  84  twelve  silver  bowb,  twelve  spoous  of 
7.  85  each  bowl  seventy :  all  the  silrer  vessels 
2  Ki.  25.  15  fire  pans,  ami  the  bowls,  .such  things  as 
1  Ch.  28.  17  the  bowls,  and  the  cups  ;  and  for  the 
Jer.   52.  18  the  bowls,  aud  the  spoous,  aud  all  the 

52.  19  the  bowls,  and  the  caldrons,  aud  the 
Amos  6.    6  That  drink  wine  in  bowls,  and  anoint 
Zech.  9.  15  they  shall  be  filled  like  howls,  .as  the 
14.  20  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the  altar 
5. Basin,  dish,  *]D  saph. 

1  Ki.   7.  50  the  bowls,  aud  the  snuffers,  and  the 

2  Ki.  12. 13  for  the  house  of  the  Lord  bowls  of  silver 

6.  .4  little  cap  or  bowl,  bso  sephel. 

Judg.6.  38  it  was  so.  .a  bowl  full  of  water 

BOWLS  — 

Sacrificial  bowls,1 'iiviPjD  menaqqiyyoth. 
Exod.  25.  29  thou  shalt  make  the.  .bowls  thereof,  to 

37.  16  his  bowls,  and  his  covers  to  cover  withal 
Num.  4.    7  .the  bowls,  and  covers  to  cover  withal 

BOWMAN  — 

To  cast  {with)  the  bote,  ns'js  ."C"i   ramah  qesheth. 
Jer.     4.  29  noise  of  the  horsemen  and  bowmen 

BOW  SHOT  — 

Stretchings  of  a  bow,  JY^ji  *irra?  metachave  qesheth. 

Gen.  21.  16  as  it  were  a  bow  shot;  for  she  said,  Let 
BOX  — 
Cruet,  flash,  ^3  pah. 

2  Ki.  9.    1  take  this  box  of  oil  in  thine  hand 

9.    3  take  the  box  of  oil,  and  pour  (it)  on  his 
BOX  (tree)  — 
The  sherbin  cedar,  tb'X?  teashshur. 

Isa.    41. 19  I  will  set  in  the  desert,  .the  box  tree 
6c.  13  the  pine  tree,  and  the  box  together,  to 

BOX,  (alabaster)  — 

A  labaster  box,  aAa&ao~Tpov  alahastron. 

Matt2&.    7  a  woman  having  an  alabaster  box  of  very 
SIavki4.   3  a  woman  having  an  alabaster  box  of 

14.    3  she  brake  the  box,  and  poured  (it) 
Luke  7.  37  brought  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment 

BOY  — 

l.One  born,  ij>  yeled. 

Joel    3.   3  have  given  a  boy  for  an  harlot,  and  sold 
Zech   8.    5  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  boys 

"2.A  youth,  "iyj  naar. 

Gen.  25.  27  the  boy3  grew  :  aud  Esau,  was  a  cunning 

BO'-ZEZ,  fs'ia  height,  shining. 

A  rock  near  the  ravine  of  Michmash,  not  far  from 
Gibeah  of  Benjamin.  It  was  oue  of  the  two  sharp 
rocks  ("teeth  of  the  cliff")  between  which  Jonathan 
entered  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines.  It  lay  on  the 
N.  side,  and  may  be  the  hills  at  the  bottom  of  the  Wady 
Siveinit  just  below  Mufcmas. 

1  Sa.  14.   4  and  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  B. 

BOZ'-KATH,  n^3  height. 

A  city  of  Judah,  in  the  Shephelah  or  plain.     In  2  Ki. 

22.  1  it  is  spelt  Boscatk. 

Josh.  15.  39  Lachish,  and  B.,  and  Eglon 

2  Ki.  22.    1  mother,  .the  daughter  of  Adaiah  of  B. 

BOZ'-RAH,  H"iy3  fortification,  restraint,  sheepfold. 

1.  The  city  of  Jobab,  sou  of  Zerah,  oue  of  the  early  kings 
of  Edom,    Now  called  el-Basaireh. 

Gen.  36.  33  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of  B.  reigned 

1  Ch.  1.  44  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of  B.  reigned 
Isa.   34.    6  for  the  LORD  hath  a  sacrifice  in  B. 

63.    1  cometh  from  Edom,  with . .  garments . .  B.  ? 
Jer.  49.  13  B.  shall  become  a  desolation,  .and  acurse 

49.  22  Behold,  he  shall . .  spread  his  wings  over  B. 
Amos  1.  12  a  fire,  .shall  devour  the  palaces  of  B. 
Mic.    2. 12  I  mil  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of  B. 

2.  Bozrah,  in  the  plain  country  of  Moab. 

Jer.  48.  24  upon  Kerioth,  and  upon  B.,  and  upon 
BRACELET  — 
l.Arm  band,  nijzx,  etsadah. 

2  Sa.    1.  10  the  bracelet  that  (was)  on  his  arm,  and 
%Hooh,  ring,  nri  chach. 

Exod  33.  22  brought  bracelets,  and  ear  rings 
S.TJiread,  cord,  Viys  paihM. 

Gen.  38. 18  Thy  signet,  and  thy  bracelets,  and  thy 

38.  25  these,  the  signet,  and  bracelets,  and  staff 
^..Bracelet,  Tfiy  tsamid. 

Gen.  24.  22  two  bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten 

24.  30  saw  the . .  bracelets  upon  his  sister's  hands 
24.  47  I  put .  .the  bracelets  upon  her  hands 

Niim3i,  50  jewels  of  gold,  chains,  and  bracelets 

Eze.   16. 11  I  put  bracelets  upon  thy  hands 

23.  42  which  put  bracelets  upon  her  hands 
5 .Twisted  ornaments,  rfn$  sherotk. 

Isa.    3.    19  The  chains,  and  the  bracelets,  and  the 


BRAMBLE  — 

l.Buck  thorn,  lyx  atad. 

Judg.  9.  14  Then  said  all  the  trees  unto  the  bramble 
g.  15  the  bramble  said  unto  the  trees,  If  in 
9. 15  let  fire  come  out  of  the  bramble,  and 

2.  Thistle,  thorn  bush,  nin  choach. 

Isa.   34.  13  nettles  and  brambles  in  the  fortresses 

BRAMBLE  bush  — 

The  bramble  bush,  7/  0d.Tos  he  batos. 

Luke  6.  44  nor  of  a  bramble  bush  gather  they  grapes 

BRANCH  — 

1. Summit,  ten  amir. 

Isa.    17.   9  an  uppermost  branch,  which  they  left 

'?..  Branch,  "13  bad. 

Eze.  17.    6  brought  forth  branches,  and  shot  forth 

19.  14  fire  is  gone  out  of  a  rod  of  her  branches 

Hos.  11.    6  shall  consume  his  branches,  and  devour 

S.Son,  j3  ben. 

Psa.  80. 15  the  branch,  .thou  madest  strong  for  thy 
4. Daughter,  n3  'bath. 

Gen.  49.  22  (whose)  branches  run  over  the  wall 

5.  Twig,  shoot,  .*h;sj  zemorah. 

Num.13.  23  a  branch  with  one  cluster  of  grapes 

Eze.     8.  17  lo,  they  put  the  branch  to  their  nose 

15.    2  a  brauch  which  is  among  the  trees  of 

6.  Twig,  shoot,  test  zemir. 

Isa.  25.   5  the  branch  of  the  terrible  ones  shall  be 

7. Suckling,  rtj^V  yoneketh. 

Job     S.  16  his  branch  shooteth  forth  in  his  garden 

15.  30  the  flame  shall  dry  up  bis  branches 
Psa.  So.  11  She  sent  out.. her  branches  unto  the 
Hos.  14.    6  His  branches  shall  spread,  and  his 

%.  Bending  branch,  *]3  kaph. 

Lev.  23.  40  ye  shall  take,  .branches  of  palm  trees 

9.  Bending  branch,  n53  kippah. 

Job    15.  32  and  his  branch  shall  not  be  green 
Isa.     9. 14  head  and  tail,  branch  and  rush 

19.  15  which  the  head  or  tail,  brauch  or  rush 

10.  Shoot,  tsj  netser. 

Isa.  11.  1  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots 
14.  19  cast  out.  .like  au  abominable  branch 
60.  21  the  branch  of  my  planting,  the  work 

Dan.  11.    7  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  (one) 

11.  Twig,  *yy?  seiph. 

Isa.   27. 10  shall  he.  .consume  the  branches  thereof 
12. Leaf,  ascending  sprout,  nyy  aleh. 

Neh.   8. 15  fetch  olive  branches,  and  pine  branches, 

and     myrtle,    branches,    and    palm 

branches,  aud  branches 
Prov.11.  28  righteous  shall  flourish  as  a  branch 

13.  Bough,  branch,  *];]?,  *\$L  anaph. 

Eze.  17.   S  that  it  might  bring  forth  branches 

31.    3  the  Assyrian,  .a  cedar,  .-with,  .branches 
35.    8  ye  shall  shoot  forth  your  branches,  and 
Mai.   4.    1  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor  branch 
"Dan.   4.  14  Hew  down,  .and  cut  off  his  branches 
4. 14  aud  the  fowls  from  his  branches 
4.  21  upon  whose  branches  the' fowls.. had 

14.^1  Leafy  sapling,  rnNS^jora^. 

Eze.  31.   5  his  branches  became  long,  because  of 
31.   6  under  his  branches  did  all  the  beasts  of 
31.    8  chesnut  trees  were  not  like  his  branches 
31. 13  all  the  beasts.,  shall  be  upon  his  branches 
15. A  sprout,  no*  tsemach. 

Isa.     4.    2  In  that  day  shall  the  branch  of  the  LORD 
Jer.  23.    5  I  will  raise  unto .  .a  righteous  Branch 

33. 15  will  I  cause  the  Branch  of  righteousness 
Zech.  3.    8  I  will  bring  forth  my  servant  the  Branch 
6.  12  Behold,  .whose  name  (is)  The  Branch 

16.^1  reed,  cane,  ni$  qaneh.- 

Exod2j.  31  his  branches,  his  bowls,  his  knops,  and 
25.  32  six  branches  shall  come  out  of  the  sides 
25.  32  three  branches .  .and  three  branches 
25.  33  a  knop  and  a  flower  in  one  branch 
2S-  33  three  bowls,  .in  the  other  branch 
25-  33  so  ™  the  six  branches  that  come  out  of 
25.  35  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the  same 
25.  35  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the  same 
25.  35  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the  same 
25.  35  according  to  the  six  branches  that 
25.  36  Their  knops  and  their  branches  shall  be 
37.  17  his  branch,  his  bowls,  his  knops,  and  his 
37.  18  six  branches  going  out  of  the  sides 
37.  18  three  branches,  .out  of  the  one  side 
37.  18  three  branches,  .out  of  the  other  side 
37.  19  Three  bowls  made,  .in  one  branch 
37.  19  three  bowls  made,  .in  another  branch 
37. 19  so  throughout  the  six  branches  going  out 
37.  21  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the  same 
37.  21  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the  same 
37.  21  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the  same 
37.  21  according  to  the  six  branches  going  out 
37.  22  Their  knops  and  their  branches  were  of 

17.-4  cutting,  branch,  YSjj  qatsir. 

Job  18.  16  and  above  shall  his  branch  be  cut  off 
29. 19  dew  lay  all  night  upon  my  branch 

18.^-1  twig,  rh'iy  shibboleth. 

Zech.  4.  12  \vhat.. two  olive  branches  which  through 


19..-1  branch  of  a  palm  tree,  (Hztov  baton. 

John  12.  13  Took  branches  of  palm  trees,  and  went 
20.^1  young  slip  or  shoot,  kXclSos  Jclados. 

Matt  13.  32  birds,  .come  and  lodge  in  the  branches 
21.    8  others  cut  down  brauches  from  the  trees 

24.  32  When  his  branch  is  yet  tender,  and 
Mark  4.  32  shooteth  out  great  branches,  so  that  the 

13.  28  When  her  branch  is  yet  tender,  and 
Lukei3.  19  the  fowls,  .lodged  in  the  branches  of  it 
Rom.  1 1.  16  if  the  root  (be)  holy,  so  (are)  the  branches 

11.  17  if  some  of  the  branches  be  broken  off,  and 
11.  18  Boast  not  against  the  brant-hes.     But  if 
11.  19  Thou  wilt  say  then,  The  branches  were 
11.  21  if  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches 
21. .,1  cutting,  stip>,  K\rj(xa  Idemxi. 

John  15.    2  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not 

15.    4  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself 
15.    5  I  am  the  vine,  ye  (are)  the  branches 

15.  6  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  u  ithered 

22.  Branch,  leaves,  cTot&ds  sfoibas. 

Markn.    S  others  cut  down  [brauches]  off  the  trees 

BRANCH,  highest  — 

A  high  branch,  rn£s  tsammcreth. 

Eze.  17.   3  and  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar 
17.  22  I  will  also  take  of  the  highest  branch  of 
ERANCK,  vine  — 
Twig,  shoot,  iTTDT  zemorah. 

Nah.  2.    2  and  marred  their  vine  branches 

BRANCH,  outmost  — 

A  branch,  sprout,  ^'j/?  seiph. 

Isa.   17.    6  iu  the  outmost  fruitful  branches  thereof 

BRANCH,  tender  — 
Suckling,  Dj3iV  yoneqeth. 

Job   14.    7  the  tender  branch  thereof  will  not  cease 

BRANCH,  thick  — 

Thick  branches,  ni3j;.  aboth. 

Eze.  19. 11  her  stature  was.  .among,  .thick  branches 

BRANCHES  — 

1.  Waving  branches,  ni'Tj  daliyyoth. 

Jer.  11. 16  olive  tree.,  the  branches  oi  It  are  broken 

Eze.  17.    6  whose  branches  turned  toward  him,  anil 

17.    7  shot  forth  her  branches  toward  him,  tlu.fc 

17.  23  in  the  shadow  of  the  branches  thereof 

19. 11  the  multitude  of  her  branches 

31.    7  fair,  .in  the  length  of  his  branches 
31.    9  I  have  made  him  fair  by.  .his  branches 
31.  12  in  all  the  valleys  his  branches  are  fallen 
2. Tendrils,  twigs,  n'^'a^  netishoth. 

Isa.   18.    5  and  take  away,  .cut  down  branches 

3.  Twigs,  branches,  shoots,  □,xiiy.  ophayim. 

Psa  104.  12  the  fowls,  .sing  among  the  branches 

4.  Shoots  of  a  vine,  tpyrfip  sarigim. 

Gen.  40.  10  And  in  the  vine  (were)  three  branches 

40. 12  The  three  branches  (are)  three  days 
Joel    1.    7  the  branches  thereof  are  made  white 

5. Stretching  out,  sending  forth,  nwhy  shelvchoth. 
Isa.   16.   8  her  branches  are  stretchVd  out,  they  are 

BRANCHES,  full  of  — 

To  abound  in  branches,  t\y$  aneph. 

Eze.  19.  10  she  was  fruitful  aud  full  of  branches 
BRAND  — 

1.  Burning  brand,  "nN  ud. 

Zech.  3.    2  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ? 

2.  Burning  torch,  ts?  lappid. 

Judg  15.    5  when  he  had  set  the  brands  on  fire,  he 

BRANDISH,  to  — 

To  cause  to  fly  or  move  swiftly,  ^y  uph,  3«. 

Eze.    32.  10  when  I  shall  brandish  my  sword  before 

BRASEN  — 

Brass,  copper,  ntvrq  nechosheth. 

Exod27.    4  make  four  brasen  rings  in  the  four  corners 
35.  16  The  altar,  .with  his  brasen  grates,  his 
38.    4  he  made  for  the  altar  a  brasen  grate  of 
38.  10  their  brasen  sockets  twenty  :  the  hooks 

38.  30  the  brasen  altar,  and  the  brasen  grate  for 

39.  39  The  brasen  altar,  and  his  grate  of  brass 
Lev.    6.  28  if  it  be  sodden  in  a  brasen  pot,  it  shall 
Nunii6.  39  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  brasen  censers 

1  Ki.  4.  13  great  cities  with  walls  and  brasen  bars 

7.  30  every  base  bad  four  brasen  wheels,  and 

8.  64  thebrasenaltartbat(was)beforetheLuKL> 

14.  27  made  in  their  stead  brasen  shields,  and 

2  Ki.  16.  14  he  brought  also  the  brasen  altar,  which 

16.  15  the  brasen  altar  shall  be  for  me  to  enquire 
16.  17  took  down  the  sea  from  off  the  brasen 

18.  4  brake  in  pieces  the  brasen  serpent  that 

25.  13  the  brasen  sea  (that  was)  in  the  house  of 

1  Ch.  18.    8  Solomon  made  the  brasen  sea,  and  the 

2  Ch.  1.    5  the  brasen  altar,  that  Bezaleet  the  son  of 

1.    6  went  up  thither  to  the  brasen  altar 

6.  13  Solomon  had  made  a  brasen  scaffold,  of 

7.  7  the  brasen  altar . .  was  not  able  to  receive 
Jer.    1.  iS  brasen  walls  against  the  whole  land 

15.  20  I  will  make  thee,  .a  fenced  brasen  wall 
52. 17  the  brasen  sea  that  (was)  in  the  house  of 
52.  20  twelve  brasen  bulls  that  (were)  uniler  the 
Eze.    9.   2  went  in,  and  stood  beside,  .brasen  altar 


BRASEN 


110 


BREAD 


BRASEN  vessel  — 

Copper  or  bronze  vessel,  xoKk(ov  ckalkwn. 
Mark  7.    4  cups  and  pots,  brasen  vessels,  and  of 

EEASS  — 

Brass  was  much  used  by  the  aucient  Hebrews,  and  made 
into  altars,  bars,  fetters,  gates,  greaves,  helmets,  house- 
hold vessels,  idols,  instruments  of  music,  lavers,  mirrors, 
pillars,  sacred  vessels,  shields,  sockets  for  pillars,  &c. 
l.Bmss,  copper,  B>?na  nachush. 

Job     6.  12  (Is)  my  strength .  .(is)  my  flesh  of  brass 

2.  Brass,  copper,  ruprn  nechushah. 

Lev.  26.  19  heaven  as  iron,  and  your  earth  as  brass 
Job.  28.    2  and  brass  (is)  molten  (out  of)  the  stone 

40.  18  His  loins  (are  as)  strong  pieces  of  brass 

41.  27  He  esteemeth . .  brass  as  rotten  wood 
Isa.  45.    2  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass 

48.    4  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  brow  brass 
Mic.    4.  13  I  will  make  thy  hoofs  bras3  ;  and 

3.  Brass,  copper,  vni  nechash. 

Dan.  2.  32  his  belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass 

2.  35  Then  was.  .the  brass,  .broken  to  pieces 
2  39  another  third  kingdom  of  brass,  which 
2.  45  It  brake  in  pieces  the  iron,  the  brass,  the 

4.  15,  23  with  a  baud  of  iron  and  brass,  in  the 

5.  4  gods,  .of  brass,  of  irou,  of  wood,  and  of 
5.  23  gods  of  silver,  and  gold,  of  brass,  iron 

7. 19  whose  teeth.,  iron,  and  his  nails  (of)  brass 

4.  Brass,  copper,  n^n;  nechosheth. 

Gen.   4.  22  an  instructor  of  every  artificer  in  brass 
Exod2  3-    3  take  of  them  ;  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass 
26.  11  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  brass,  and 

26.  37  thou  shalt  cast  five  sockets  of  brass  for 

27.  2  and  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  brass 
27.    3  the  vessels.. thou  shalt  make  (of)  brass 
27,    4  make  for  it  a  grate  of  network  (of)  brass 
27.   6  make  staves.,  overlay  them  with  brass 
27.  10,  11  and  their  twenty  sockets  (of)  brass 
27.  17  hooks,  .of  silver,  and  their  sockets  of  brass 
27.  18  twined  linen,  and  their  sockets  (of)  brass 
27.  19  all  the  pins  of  the  court,  (shall  be  of)  brass 
30.  18  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  laver  (of)  brass 

30.  18  his  foot  (also  of)  brass,  to  wash  (withal) 

31.  4  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass 
35.  5  let  him  bring,  .gold,  and  silver,  and  brass 
35.  24  did  offer  an  offering  of  silver  and  brass 

35.  32  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass 

36.  18  he  made  fifty  taches  (of)  brass  to  couple 
36.  38  but  their  Ave  sockets  (were  of)  brass 

38.   2  and  he  overlaid  it  with  brass 
38.    3  the  vessels  thereof  made  he  (of)  brass 
38.    5  for  the  four  ends  of  the  grate  of  brass 
38.    6  and  overlaid  them  with  brass 
38.    8  And  he  made  the  laver  (of)  brass 
38.   8  and  the  foot  of  it  (of)  brass 
38. 11  their  sockets  of  brass  twenty  ;  the  hooks 
38.  17  the  sockets  for  the  pillars  (were  of)  brass 
38.  19  their  sockets  (of)  brass  four ;  their  hooks 
38.  2c  all  the  pins  of  the  tabernacle .  .brass 
38.  29  the  brass  of  the  offering  (was)  seventy 
Num.21.    9  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put 

21.  9  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass 
31.  22  Only  the  gold,  and  the  silver,  the  brass 

Deut.  8.    9  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  brass 
28. 23  heaven . .  over  thy  head  shall  be  brass 
33.  25  Thy  shoes,  .iron  and  brass  ;  and  as  thy 

Josh.  6.  19  vessels  of  brass  and  iron,  (are)  consecrated 

6.  24  the  vessels  of  brass  and  of  iron,  they  put 

22.  8  with  silver,  and  with  gold,  and  with  brass 

1  Sa.  17.   5  an  helmet  of  brass  upon  his  head,  and 

17.   5  coat  (was)  five  thousand  shekels  of  brass 

17.    6  greaves  of  brass  upon  his  legs 

17.   6  a  target  of  brass  between  his  shoulders, 

17.  38  put  an  helmet  of  brass  upon  his  head 

2  Sa    8.    8  king  David  took  exceeding  much  brasd 

8. 10  vessels  of  gold,  and  vessels  of  brass 
31.  16  three  hundred  (shekels)  of  brass  in  weight 

1  Ki.   7.  14  worker  in  brass,  .to  work. .iu  brass 

7.  15  he  cast  two  pillars  of  brass,  of  eighteen 
7.  16  he  made  two  chapiters  (of)  molten  brass 
7.  27  he  made  ten  bases  of  brass ;  four  cubits 
7.  30  every  base  had.  .wheels,  .plates  of  brass 
7.  38  Then  made  ho  teu  lavers  of  brass 

7.  45  vessels . .  for  the  house  of  the  Lord  . .  brass 
7.  47  neither  was  the  weight  of  the  brass  found 

2  Ki.25.  13  the  pillars  of  brass  (that  were)  iu  the 

25. 13  earned  the  brass  of  them  to  Babylou 
25.  14  and  all  the  vessels  of  brass  wherewith 
25.  16  the  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without 
25.  17  the  chapiter  upon  it  (was)  brass ;  and  the 
25.  17  tho  chapiter  round  about,  all  of  brass 

1  Ch.  15.  19  the  singers . .  to  sound . .  cymbals  of  brass 

i3.    8  brought  David  very  much  braes 

18.  8  and  the  pillars,  and  the  vessels  of  brass 
1 8.  10  of  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  and  brass 
22.    3  and  brass  iu  abundance  without  weight 
22.  14  brass  and  iron  without  weight;  for  it  is 
22.  16  Of  the  gold,  the  silver,  and  the  brass,  and 
29.    2  and  the  brass  for  (things)  of  brass,  the 
29.    7  of  brass  eighteen  thousand  talents,  and 

2  Ch.  2.    7  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass 

2.  14  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  iu  brass,  in  iron 
4.    1  he  made  an  altar  of  brass,  twenty 
4.    9  overlaid  the  doors  of  them  with  brass 
4.  16  for  the  house  of  the  Loan,  of  bright  brass 
4.  18  weight  of  tho  brass  could  not  be  found 
12.  10  king  Rehoboam  made  shields  of  brass 
24.  12  brass  to  mend  the  house  of  the  Loud 
Psa.  107.  16  he  hath  broken  the  gates  of  brass,  and 
Isa.    60.  17  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold,  and  for 


Isa. 

60. 

Jer. 

6. 

52- 

52- 

52- 

52- 

52- 

V- 

Eze. 

I. 

22. 

22. 

24. 

27. 

40. 

Dan 

IO. 

Zech 

.  6. 

5.Copper, 

Mat 

IO) 

1  Co 

1=1- 

Rev. 

iS. 

17  and  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones  iron 
.  28  brass  and  iron  ;  they  (are)  all  corrupters 
17  pillars  of  brass  that  (were)  in  the  house 

17  carried  all  the  brass  of  them  to  Babylou 
,  18  the  spoons,  and  all  the  vessels  of  brass 

20  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without 
22  a  chapiter  of  brass  (was)  upon  it ;  and  the 
22  the  chapiters  round  about,  all  (of)  brass 
7  sparkled  like  the  colour  of  burnished  brass 

18  all  they  (are)  brass,  and  tin,  and  iron 
20  they  gather  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron 

11  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  hot,  and  may 
13  aud  vessels  of  brass  in  thy  market 

3  man.  .like  the  appearance  of  brass 

6  his  feet  like  in  colour  to  polished  brass 

1  the  mountains  (were)  mountains  of  brass 

bronze,  xa*-x6s  chalkos, 
9  Provide  neither  gold,  .silver,  nor  brass 
1  I  am  become  (as)  sounding  brass,  or  a 

12  vessels  of.  .precious  wood,  and  of  brass 

BRASS,  fine  — 

White  copper,  xa.\fcc-Xi&avov  chalkolibanon. 
Rev.    1. 15  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  the 
2.  18  and  his  feet  (are)  like  fine  brass 

ERASS,  of  — 

Of  copper,  %a\«€o$  challceos,  xa^K°vs- 

Rev.    9.  20  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass 

BRASS,  fetters  of  — 

Brass,  copper,  n^ru  nechosheth. 

Judg  16.  21  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass  ;  and 
2  Ki.  25.   7  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass,  and 

BRAVERY  — 

Beauty,  rnxrn  m.xrR  tipharah,  tipheretli. 

Isa.     3. 18  take  away  the  bravery  of .  .tinkling  orn. 

BRAWLER,  not  a  — 

Not  fighting,  not  striving,  fa/xaxos  aniachos. 

1  Ti.    3.    3  patient,  not  a  brawler,  not  covetous 
Titus  [3.    2  sneak  evil  of  no  man,  to  be  no  brawlers 

BRAWLING  — 

Contention,  strife,  fnD  madon,  D^IP  midyanim. 
Prov.21.  9  than  with  a  brawling  woman  in  a  wide 
25.  24  than  with  a  brawling  woman  and  in  a 

BRAT,  to  — 

To  bray,  pni  nahaq. 

Job     6.    5  Doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  hath 
30.    7  Among  the  bushes  they  brayed ;  under 

BRAY  (in  a  mortar),  to  — 
To  butt,  pound,  tyris  kathash. 

Prov.  27. 22  Though  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  m. 

BREACH  — 

1.  Breach,  rent,  leak,  pis  bedeq. 

2  Ki.12.    5  let  them  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house 

12.    5  wheresoever  any  breach  shall  be  found 
12.    6  the  priests  had  not  repaired  the  breaches 
12.    7  Why  repair  ye  not  the  breaches  of  the 
12.    7  deliver  it  for  the  breaches  of  the  house 
12.    8  neither  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the 
12.  12  hewed  stone  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the 
22.   5  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house 

2. Cleft,  valley,  STP3  beqia. 

Isa.    22.   9  the  breaches  of  the  city  of  David 

3.  Gidf,  incision,  p,?p  miphrats. 

Judg.  5.  17  Asher.  .abode  in  his  breaches 

4.  To  break  forth,  ps  parats. 

1  Ch.  15.  13  Lord  our  God  made  a  breach  upon  us 
Neh.   4.    7  that  the  breaches  began  to  be  stopped 

5.  A  breaking  forth,  y-$  perets. 

Gen.  38.  29  hast  thou  broken  forth?  (this)  breach 
Judg  21.  15  the  LoRDhad  made  a  breach  in  the  tribes 

2  Sa.    5.  20  upon  mine  enemies,  .as  the  breach  of 

6.    8  Lord  had  made  a  breach  upon  Uzzah 
1  Ki.  11.  27  Solomon,  .repaired  the  breaches  of  the 
1  Ch.  13.  11  Lord  had  made  a  breach  upon  Uzzah 
Neh.    6.    1  there  was  no  breach  left  therein 
Job    16.  14  breaketh  me  with  breach  upon  breach 
Psa.  106.  23  stood  before  him  in  the  breach,  to 
Isa.    30. 13  this  iniquity  shall  be  to  you  as  a  breach 

58. 12  be  called,  The  repairer  of  the  breach 
Amos  4.  3  ye  shall  go  out  at  the  breaches,  every 

9. 11  close  up  the  breaches  thereof ;  and  I  will 

Q.Breach,  "tew  sheber. 

Lev.  24.  20  Breach  for  breach,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for 
Psa.  60.  2  heal  the  breaches  thereof ;  f  or  it  shaketh 
Prov.15.  4  perverseness  therein  (is)  a  breach  in  the 
Isa.  30.  26  Lord  bindeth  up  the  breach  of  his  people 
Jer.  14.  17  great  breach,  with  a  very  grievous  blow 
Lam.  2. 13  for  thy  breach  (is)  great  like  the  sea 

BREACH,  to  be  made  a  — 
To  be  cleft,  ypa  baqa,  4. 

Eze.  26.  10  into  a  city  wherein  is  made  a  breach 

BREACH,  to  make  a  — 

T<>  rh-trce  (hroiifih,  i'p3  baqa,  5. 

Isa.     7.    6  let  us  make  a  breach  therein  for  us 
BREACH  of  promise  — 
Removal,  alienation,  njojpi  tenuah. 

Num  14.  34  ye  shall  know  my  breach  of  promise 


BREACHES—  t 
Dropinngs,  Cp'tp"]  resisim. 

Amos  6. 11  will  smite  the  great  house  with  breaches 
BliEAD  — 
I. Food)  bread,  sustenance,  nnV  lechem. 

Gen.    3. 19  sweat  of  thy  face'shalt  thou  eat  bread 
14. 18  Melchizedek. . brought  forth  bread  and 
:8.    5  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of  bread,  and 
1. 14  took  bread,  and  a  bottle  of  water,  and 

25.  34  Jacob  gave  Ksau  bread  and  pottage  of 

27.  17  she  gave  the  savoury  meat  and  the  bread 

28.  20  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put 
31.  54  and  called  his  brethren  to  eat  bread 

31.  54  they  did  eat  bread,  and  tarried  all  night 
37.  25  they  sat  down  to  eat  bread  :  and  the} 
30.    6  ought,  .save  the  bread  which  he  did  eat 
41.  54  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  there  was  bread 
41.  55  people  cried  to  Fharoah  for  bread :  and 
43.  25  heard  that  they  should  eat  bread  there 
43.  31  refrained  himself,  and  said,  Set  on  bread 
43.  32  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  bread  with 
45.  23  laden  with  corn  and  bread  and  meat 
47. 12  all  his  father's  household,  with  bread 
47.  13  no  bread  in  all  the  land ;  for  the  famine 
47.  15  Give  us  bread  :  for  why  should  we  die 
47.  17  Joseph  gave  them  bread  (in  exchange) 
47.  17  he  fed  them  with  bread  for  all  their 
47.  19  buy  us  and  our  land  for  bread,  and  we 
49.  20  Out  of  Asher  his  bread  (shall  be)  fat,  and 
Exod.  2.  20  call  him,  that  he  may  eat  bread 
16.   3  when  we  did  eat  bread  to  the  full  1 
16.    4  I  will  rain  bread  from  heaven  for  you 
16.    8  in  the  morning  bread  to  the  full ;  for 
16. 12  the  morning  ye  shall  be  filled  with  bread 
16.  15  This  (is)  the  bread  which  the  Lord  hath 
16.  22  they  gathered  twice  as  much  bread 
16.  29  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  days 
16.  32  they  may  see  the  bread  wherewith  I 
18. 12  to  eat  bread  with  Moses'  father-in-law 
23.  15  he  shall  bless  thy  bread,  and  thy  water 

29.  2  unleavened  bread,  and  cakes  unleavened 
29.  23  loaf  of  bread,  and  one  cake  of  oiled  bread 
29.  32  the  bread  that  (is)  in  the  basket,  (by)  the 
29.  34  if  ought,  .of  the  bread,  remain  unto  the 
34.  28  he  did  neither  eat  bread,  nor  drink 

40.  23  he  set  the  bread  in  order  upon  it  before 
Lev.    7. 13  heshall  offer,  .his  offering  leavened  bread 
8.  26  out  of  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
8.  31  there  eat  it  with  the  bread  that  (is)  in 
8.  32  that  which  remaineth.  .of  the  bread  shall 
21.    6  the  bread  of  their  God,  they  do  offer 
21.    8  he  off  ereth  the  bread  of  thy  God  :  he  shall 
21.  17  approach  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God 
21.  21  come  nigh  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God 

21.  22  He  shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God . .  of  the 

22.  25  shall  ye  offer  the  bread  of  your  God  of 

23.  14  ye  shall  eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched 
23.  18  ye  shall  offer  with  the  bread  seven  lambs 

23.  20  with  the  bread  of  the  firstfruits.  .a  wave 

24.  7  it  may  be  on  the  bread  for  a  memorial 

26.  5  ye  shall  eat  your  bread  to  the  full,  aud 
26.  26  I  have  broken  the  staff  of  your  bread 
26.  26  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one 
26.  26  they  shall  deliver  (you)  your  bread  again 

Num.  4.    7  and  the  continual  bread  shall  be  thereon 

14.  9  they  (are)  bread  for  us  :  their  defence  is 

15.  19  when  ye  eat  of  the  bread  of  the  land,  ye 
21.    5  no  bread,  neither  (is  there  any)  water 
21.    5  and  our  soul  loatheth  this  light  bread 

28.  2  my  bread  for  my  sacrifices  made  by  fire 
Deut.  8.    3  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only,  but  by 

8.  9  thou  shalt  eat  bread  without  scarceness 

9.  18  I  did  neither  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 

16.  3  Thou  shalt  eat  no  leavened  bread  with  it 
23.    4  Because  they  met  you  not  with  bread 

29.  6  Ye  have  not  eaten  bread,  neither  have 
Josh.  9.    5  all  the  bread  of  their  provision  was  dry 

9. 12  our  bread  we  took  hot  (for)  our  provision 
Judg.  7. 13  a  cake  of  barley  bread  tumbled  into  the 
8.    5  Give,  I  pray  you,  loaves  of  bread  unto 
8.    6  we  should  give  bread  unto  thine  army? 

8.  15  give  bread  unto  thy  men  (that  are)  weary  ? 
13. 16  I  will  not  eat  of  thy  bread  :  and  if  thou 
19.    s  Comfort  thine  heart  with  a  morsel  of  b. 
19.  19  there  is  bread  and  wine  also  for  me,  aud 

Ruth  1.    6  had  visited  his  people  in  giving  them  b. 

2. 14  come  thou  hither,  and  eat  of  the  bread 
i  Sa.    2.  s  full  have  hired  out  themselves  for  bread 

2.  36  a  piece  of  silver  and  a  morsel  of  bread 

2.  36  that  I  may  eat  a  piece  of  bread 

9.  7  for  the  bread  is  spent  in  our  vessels 
10.  3  another  carrying  three  loaves  of  bread 
10.  4  give  thee  two  (loaves)  of  bread ;  which 
16.  20  an  ass  (laden)  with  bread,  and  a  bottle 
21.  3  give  (me)  five  (loaves  of)  bread  in  mine 
21.  4  common  bread,  .there  is  hallowed  bread 
21.   6  was  no  bread  there  but  the  shewbread 

21.  6  to  put  hot  bread  in  the  day  when  it 

22.  13  thou  bast  given  him  bread,  and  a  sword 

25.  11  Shall  I  then  take  my  bread,  and  my  water 
28.  20  he  had  eaten  no  bread  all  the  day,  nor  all 
28.  22  let  me  set  a  morsel  of  bread  before  thee 

30.  11  gave  him  bread,  and  he  did  eat ;  and 
30.  12  for  he  had  eaten  no  bread,  nor  drunk 

2  Sa.    3.  29  falleth  on  the  sword,  or  that  lacketh  b. 

3.  35  if  I  taste  bread,  or  ought  else,  till  the 

6.  19  a  cake  of  bread,  and  a  good  piece  (of  flesh) 
g.    7  thou  shalt  eat  bread  at  my  table  contiu. 
9.  10  thy  master's  son  shall  eat  bread,  .at  my 
12.  17  neither  did  he  eat  bread  with  them 
12.  20  they  set  bread  before  him,  and  he  did 


BREAD 


111 


BREADTH 


2  Sa.  12 
16. 
1 6, 

i  Ki.i3. 


2  KJ.  4. 
4- 
4- 

6. 
iS, 

25' 
25- 

1  Cll.I2. 

r6. 

2  Cll.l8. 

Ezra  10, 


Neh. 


Job 


Psa 


5- 
S- 
5- 
9* 
13- 

15- 
22. 
27. 

28: 

33- 

42. 
14. 

37- 
41. 

53- 
78. 
80. 

102. 

102. 

104. 


127. 

132. 

Prov.  4. 

6. 

9- 


31- 

Eccl.  9. 
9- 


28, 
3°- 
3* 
33- 

36. 
44. 
44. 
5T- 
55- 
55- 
58. 
Jer.    5. 

37' 
37> 
38. 
41. 
42. 
52. 
52. 

Lam.  1, 

4 
5' 
5' 


21  was  dead,  thou  didst  rise  and  eat  bread 

1  upon  them  two  hundred  (loaves)  of  bread 

2  bread  and  summer  fruit  for  the  young 

5  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 
9  Eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water,  nor  turn 

15  Come  home  with  me,  and  eat  bread 

16  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 

17  Thou  shalt  eat  no  bread  nor  drink  water 
iS  that  he  may  eat  bread  and  drink  water 

19  he  went  back,  .and  did  eat  bread 

22  hast  eaten  bread  and  drunk  water  in 

22  Eat  no  bread,  and  drink  no  water  ;  thy 

23  to  pass,  after  he  had  eaten  bread,  and 

6  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  flesh 

6  bread  and  flesh  in  the  evening ;  and  he 
11  Bring  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  morsel  of  bread 

4,  13  fed  them  with  bread  and  water 

4  turned  away,  .aud  would  eat  no  bread 

5  so  sad,  that  thou  eatest  no  bread? 

7  Arise,  .eat  bread,  and  let  thine  heart  be 
27  feed  him  with  bread  of  affliction,  and 

5  she  constrained  him -to  eat  bread 

8  he  turned  in  thither  to  eat  bread 

42  brought  the  man  of  God  bread  of  the 

22  Set  bread  and  water  before  them,  that 

32  a  land  of  bread  and  vineyards,  a  land  of 

3  there  was  no  bread  for  the  people  of  the 
29  he  did  eat  bread  continually  before  him 
40  brought  bread  on  asses,  and  on  camels 

3  to  every  one  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  a  good 
26  feed  him  with  bread  of  affliction  and 

6  he  came  thither,  he  did  eat  no  bread,  nor 

14  my  brethren  have  not  eaten  the  bread  of 

15  had  taken  of  them  bread  and  wine 

18  for  all  this  required  not  I  the  bread 
15  gavest  them  bread  from  heaven  for 

2  they  met  not.  .with  bread  and  with  water 

23  He  wandereth  abroad  for  bread,  (saying) 

7  thou  hast  withholden  bread  from  the 

14  offspring  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  bread 
5  the  earth,  out  of  it  cometh  bread ;  and 

20  So  that  his  life  abhorreth  bread,  and 
11  did  eat  bread  with  him  in  his  house 

4  who  eat  up  my  people,  .they  eat  bread 

25  have  I  not  seen,  .his  seed  begging  bread 

9  familiar  friend,  .did  eat  of  my  bread 

4  who  eat  up  my  people,  .they  eat  bread 

20  can  he  give  bread  also?  can  he  provide 

5  Thou  feedest  them  with  the  bread  of 

4  grass  ;  so  that  I  forget  to  eat  my  bread 
g  I  have  eaten  ashes  like  bread,  and 

15  bread. . strengthened  man's  heart 

16  land  :  he  brake  the  whole  staff  of  bread 
40  satisfied  them  with  the  bread  of  heaven 

2  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows 

15  I  will  satisfy  her  poor  with  bread 

17  they  eat  the  bread  of  wickedness,  and 

26  (a  man  is  brought)  to  a  piece  of  bread 

5  Come,  eat  of  my  bread,  and  drink  of  the 
17  and  bread,  .in  secret  is  pleasant 

9  honoureth  himself,  and  lacketh  bread 
11  his  land  shall  be  satisfied  witli  bread 

13  thou  shalt  be  satisfied  with  bread 

17  Bread  of  deceit  (is)  sweet  to  a  man  ;  but 
9  for  he  giveth  of  his  bread  to  the  poor 

6  Eat  thou  not  the  bread  of .  .an  evil  eye 

21  If.  .enemy  be  hungry,  give  him  bread 

19  He  that  tilleth.  .land  shall  have,  .bread 
21  for  a  piece  of  bread . .  man  will 

27  and  eateth  not  the  bread  of  idleness 

7  Go  thy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with  joy 
11  neither  yet  bread  to  the  wise 

1  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters  :  for  thou 

1  the  staff,  the  whole  stay  of  bread 

7  in .  .house  (is)  neither  bread  nor  clothing 

1  We  will  eat  our  own  bread,  and  wear 

14  prevented  with  their  bread  him  that  fled 

28  Bread .  -is  bruised  ;  because  he  will  not 

20  Lord  give  you  the  bread  of  adversity 
23  bread  of  the  increase  of  the  earth,  and 

16  bread  shall  be  given  him,  his  waters 

17  to  a  land,  .of  bread  and  vineyards 

15  he  kindleth  (it),  and  baketh  bread  ;  yea 
19  I  have  baked  bread  upon  the  coals 

14  not  die.  .nor  that  his  bread  should  fail 

2  do  ye  spend  money  for.  .not  bread? 

10  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater 
7  (Is  it)  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry 

17  eat  up  thine  harvest,  and  thy  bread 

21  should  give  him  daily  a  piece  of  bread 
21  uutil  all  the  bread,  .were  spent 

9  for  (there  is)  no  more  bread  in  the  city 
1  they  did  eat  bread  together  in  Mizpah 

14  see  no  war.  .nor  have  hunger  of  bread 
6  there  was  no  bread  for  the  people  of 

33  he  did  continually  eat  bread  before  him 

1 1  All  her  people  sigh,  they  seek  bread 
4  young  children  ask  bread,  .no  man 

6  the  Assyrians,  to  be  satisfied  with  bread 
9  We  gat  our  bread  with . .  our  lives 
9  vessel,  and  make  thee  bread  thereof 
13  eat  their  defiled  bread  among  the  Gentiles 

15  thou  shalt  prepare  thy  bread  therewith 

16  I  will  break  the  staff  of  bread  in  Jerus. 

16  they  shall  eat  bread  by  weight,  and  with 

17  That  they  may  want  bread  and  water 
16  and  will  break  your  staff  of  bread 

18  Son  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking 

19  shall  eat  their  bread  with  carefulness 
19  handfuls  of  barley  and  for.  .bread 

13  will  break  the  staff  of  the  bread  thereof 
49  fulness  of  bread,  and  abundance  of  idle. 


Eze.  18.  7,  16  hath  given  his  bread  to  the  hungry 
24.  17  Forbear,  .eat  not  the  bread  of  men 
24.  22  cover,  .lips,  nor  eat  the  bread  of  men 
44.    3  the  prince,  he  shall  sit  in  it  to  eat  bread 
44.    7  ye  offer  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the  blood 
Dan.  10.    3  I  ate  no  pleasant  bread,  neither  came 
Hos.    2.    5  that  give  (me)  my  bread  and  my  water 
9.    4  unto  them  as  the  bread  of  mourners 
9.    4  their  bread  for  their  soul  shall  not  come 
Amos  4.    6  want  of  bread  in  all  your  places :  yet 
7. 12  there  eat  bread,  and  prophesy  there 
8.  11  in  the  land,  not  a  famine  of  bread 
Obad.       7  (they  that  eat)  thy  bread  have  laid  a 
Hag.   2. 12  with  his  skirt  do  touch  bread,  or  pottage 
Mai.   1.    7  Ye  offer  polluted  bread  upou  mine  altar 

2.  Bread,  loaf  {of  wheat),  &pros  artos. 

Matt.  4.   3  command  that,  .stones  be  made  bread 
4.   4  Mau  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone ;  6.  n 
7.    9  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  stone? 
15.    2  wash  not.  .hands  when  they  eat  bread 

15.  26  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread 
I5-  33  Whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread 

16.  5  his  disciples,  .had  forgotten  to  take  bread 
16.    7  (It  is)  because  we  have  taken  no  bread 
16.    8  because  ye  have  brought  no  bread? 

16. 11  I  spake  (it)  not  to  you  concerning  bread 
16.  12  he  bade.  .not.. of  the  leaven  of  [bread] 

26.  26  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  (it),  and 
Mark  3.  20  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  eat  bread 

6.    8  no  scrip,  no  bread,  no  money  in.  .purse 
6.  36  the  villages,  and  buy  themselves  [bread] 

6.  37  buy  two  hundred  pennyworth  of  bread 

7.  2  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eat  bread  with 
7.   5  but  eat  bread  with  unwashen  hands? 

7.  27  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread 

8.  4  with  bread  here  in  the  wilderness? 
8.  14  had  forgotten  to  take  bread 

8. 16  saying,  (It  is)  because  we  have  no  bread 

8.  17  reason  ye  because  ye  have  no  bread 

14.  22  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake 
Luke  4.    3  command  this  stone  that  it  be.  .bread 
4.   4  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but 
7-  33  John,  .came  neither  eating  [bread]  nor 

9.  3  nor  scrip,  neither  bread,  neither  money 
11.    3  Give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread 

11.  11  If  a  son  shall  ask  bread  of  any  of  you 

14.  1  to  eat  bread  on  the  sabbath  day,  that 

14. 15  Blessed  (is)  he  that  shall  eat  [bread]  in 

15.  17  servants  of  my  father's  have  bread 

22. 19  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake 
24.  30  he  took  bread,  and  blessed  (it),  and  brake 
24.  35  known  of  them  in  breaking  of  bread 
John  6.   5  Whence  shall  we  buy  bread,  that  these 
6.    7  Two  hundred  penny  worth  of  bread  is 
6.  23  the  place  where  they  did  eat  bread 
6.  31  He  gave  them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat 
6.  32  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread  from 
6.  32  giveth  you  the  true  bread  from  heaven 
6.  33  the  bread  of  God  is  he  which  cometh  down 
6.  34  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread 
6.  35  Jesus  said  unto  them,  I  am  the  bread  of 
6.  41  I  am  the  bread  which  came  down  from 
6.  43  I  am  that  bread  of  life 
6.  50  This  is  the  bread  which  cometh  down 
6.  51  I  am  the  living  bread .  .this  bread 
6.  51  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh 
6.  58  This  is  that  bread  which  came  down 
6.  58  he  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for 
13. 18  He  that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath 
2i.   9  they>aw.  .fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread 
21. 13  Jesus  then  cometh,  and  taketh  bread 
Acts    2.  42  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers 

2. 46  and  breaking  bread  from  house  to  house 
20.    7  disciples  came  together  to  break  bread 
20.  11  When  he.  .had  broken  bread,  and  eaten 

27.  35  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks  to  God 

1  Co.  10.  16  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the 

10.  17  For  we.  .many  are  one  bread.,  one  body 

10.  17  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread 

11.  23  night  in  which,  .betrayed  took  bread 
11.  26  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
11.  27  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
11.  28  so  let  him  eat  of  (that)  bread,  and  drink 

2  Co.    9.  10  the  sower,  both  minister  bread  for.  .food 
2  Til.  3.    8  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread 

3. 12  withquietness  they  work,  and  eat .  .bread 

BREAD,  leavened  — 

l.Any  thing  pungent,  leavened,  fen  cliainets. 
Exodi2. 15  whosoever  eateth  leavened  bread  from 
13.   3  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  eaten 
13,   7  no  leavened  bread  be  seen  with  thee 
23. 18  of  my  sacrifice  with  leavened  bread 
Deut  16.    3  Thou  shalt  eat  no  leavened  bread  with  it 
l.Any  thing  leavened,  nxi?  seor. 

Deut  16.    4  there  shall  be  no  leavened  bread  seen 
BREAD,  shew  — 

1. Bread  set  in  array,  ns-iyD  nrrj  lecham  niaareketh. 
x  Ch.  9.  32  the  shewbread",  to  prepare  (it)  every 
23.  29  for  the  shewbread  and  for  the  fine  flour 

28. 16  gold  for  the  tables  of  shewbread,  for 
2Ch.  2.   4  for  the  continual  shewbread,  and  for 

13. 11  the  shewbread  also.,  upon  the  pure  table 

29.  iS  vessels  thereof,  and  the  shewbread  table 

Neh.  10.  33  For  the  shewbread,  and  for  the  continual 

2.Bread  set  before  (God),  D*33  err?  lechem  panim. 

Exod25.  30  thou  shalt  set  upon  the  table  shewbread 
25. 13  table . .  all  his  vessels,  and  the  shewbread, 
39.  3b  the  vessels  thereof,  and  the  shewbread 

1  Sa.  si.    6  was  no  bread  there  but  the  shewbread 


1  Ki.  7.  48  table  of  gold,  whereupon  the  shewbread 

2  Ch.  4.  19  and  the  tables  whereon  the  shewbread 
Z.Face,  presence,  D"j3  panim. 

Niun  4.    7  upon  the  table  of  shewbread  they 
■i.  Loaves  of  the  Presence,  &pTot  ttjs  7rpo#eo"ea>s. 
Matt  12.    4  entered,  .and  did  eat  the  shewbread 
Mark  2.  26  went,  .aud  did  eat  the  shewbread 
Luke   6.    4  did  take  aud  eat  the  shewbread,  and 

5. Setting  forth  of  the  loaves,  TrpSdeo-Ls  rwv  &prcov. 
Heb.    9.    2  wherein,  .the  table,  and  the  shewbread 

BREAD,  unleavened  — 

l.Any  thing  squeezed  together,  ns!?  matstsah. 

Gen.  19.    3  bake  unleavened  bread,  and  they  did  eat 

Exod  12.    8  flesh  in  that  night,  .and  unleavened  bread 

12.  15  Seven  days,  .eat  unleavened  bread 

12.  17  ye  shall  observe,  .unleavened  bread 

r2.  18  at  even,  ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread 

12.  20  habitations  shall  ye  eat  unleavened  bread 

13.  6  Seven  days,  .eat  unleavened  bread 

13.  7  Unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten  seven 
23.  15  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread 

23.  15  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread  seven 

29.  23  unleavened  bread  that  (is)  before.  .Lord 
34.  18  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  .keep 

34.  18  seven  days,  .eat  unleavened  bread 
Lev.    6.  16  with  unleavened  bread  shall  it  be  eaten 

8.    2  Take .  .a  basket  of  unleavened  bread 

8.  26  out  of  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
23.   6  feast  of  unleavened  bread  unto  the  Lord 
23.    6  Seven  days  ye.  .eat  unleavened  bread 

Num.  6.  15  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread,  cakes 
6.  15  wafers  of  unleavened  bread  anointed 
6.  17  with  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread 

9.  11  eat  it  with  unleavened  bread  and 

28.  17  seven  days  shall  unleavened  bread  be 
Deut  16.    3  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened  bread 

16.    8  Six  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread 
16.  16  in  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  and  in 

1  Sa.  28.  24  and  did  bake  unleavened  bread  thereof 

2  Ki.  23.    9  they  did  eat  of  the  unleavened  bread 

2  Ch.  8.  13  in  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  and  in 

30.  13  to  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread 
30  21  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 

35.  17  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven  days 
Ezra  6.  22  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 
Eze.  45.  21  days ;  unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten 

'l.Any  thing  unleavened,  &Cvfxos  azumos. 

Matt  26.  17  Now  the  first . .  of  the . .  unleavened  bread 
Mark  14.    1  two  days  was.  .of  unleaveued  bread 

14.  12  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread,  when 
Luke  22.    1  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  drew  nigh 

22.    7  Then  came  the  day  of  unleavened  bread 
Acts  12.    3  Then  were  the  days  of  unleavened  bread 

20.   6  after  the  days  of  unleavened  bread 
1  Co.  5.    8  with  the  unleavened  (bread)  of  sincerity 
BREAD,  daily  — 

Xecessary  or  sufficient  food,  &pros  iniov<Tios 
Matt.  6. 11  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread 

BREADTH  — 

1.  Breadth,  31^0  merchab. 

Hab.  1.    6  march  through  the  breadth  of  the  land 

^.Openness,  *n$  pethai. 

Ezra   6.    3  the  breadth  thereof  threescore  cubits 
Dan.   3.    1  the  breadth  thereof  six  cubits :  he  set 

3.  Breadth,  broad  place,  3rn  rachab. 

Job.  38.  18  Hast  ihou  perceived  the  breadth  of  the 

4.  Width, 

Gen.    6. 

13- 
Exod  25. 

25- 

26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
30- 
36. 
36. 
36. 

37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 

38. 

^      J9' 
Deut.  3. 

1  Ki.    6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

7- 

7- 

2Ch.    3. 

3- 
3- 


breadth,  ln~\  rochab. 

15  the  breadth  of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the 

17  walk  through  the  land.,  the  breadth  of  it 
10,  17  a  cubit  aud  a  half  the  breadth  thereof 
23  a  cubit  the  breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit 

2,  8  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 

16  a  cubit  and  a  half,  .the  breadth  of  one 

12  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  west  side 

13  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  east  side 

18  the  breadth  fifty  everywhere,  and  the 
16  and  a  span,  .the  breadth  thereof 

2  a  cubit  the  breadth  thereof;  foursquare 
9  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 
15  four  cubits,  .the  breadth  of  one  curtain 
21  breadth  of  a  board  one  cubit  and  a  half 
1,  6  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  of  it 

10  a  cubit  the  breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit 
25  the  breadth  of  it  a  cubit,  .foursquare 

1  five  cubits . .  breadth  thereof. .  foursquare 
18  the  height  in  the  breadth,  .five  cubits 

9  a  span  the  breadth  thereof .  .doubled 

11  four  cubits  the  breadth  of  it,  after  the 

2  the  breadth  thereof  twenty,  .and  the 

3  according  to  the  breadth  of  the  house 
3  ten  cubits,  .the  breadth  thereof  before 

20  twenty  cubits  in  breadth,  and  twenty 

2  the  breadth  thereof  fifty  cubits,  and  the 
6  the  breadth  thereof  thirty  cubits:  and  the 

27  four  cubits  the  breadth  thereof,  and  three 

3  cubits,  and  the  breadth  twenty  cubits 
4,  8  the  breadth  of  thehouse,  twentycubits 
8  the  breadth  thereof  twenty  cubits;  and 

4.    1  twenty  cubits  the  breadth  thereof,  and 
Job    37. 10  the  breadth  of  the  waters  is  straitened 
Isa.     8.    8  fill  the  breadth  of  thy  land,  O  Immanuel 
Eze.  40.    5,  11  he  measured  the  breadth  of  the 

40.  13  the  breadth  (was)  five  and  twentycubits 
40. 19  hemeasured.  .breadth, from  the  forefront 
40.  20  length  thereof,  and  the  breadth  thereof 


BREADTH 


112 


BREAK 


41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
4*- 
42. 
42. 
43- 


4S. 
48. 
43. 
48. 
48. 
48. 
48. 


Zech. 

5- 

6.  Breadth 

Eph.   3. 


Eze.  40.  21,  25,  36  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  48  the  breadth  of  the  gate  (was)  three  cub.ts 

40.  49  and  the  breadth  eleven  cubits;  and 

41.  1  the  breadth  of  the  tabernacle 
41.    2  the  breadth  of  the  door  (was)  ten  cubits 
41.    2  and  he  measured^  .the  breadth,  twenty 
41.    3  the  breadth  of  the  door  seven  cubits 

4  and  the  breadth  twenty  cubits,  before 

5  the  breadth  of  (every)  side  chamber  four 

7  the  breadth  of  the  house,  .upward 

1  the  breadth  of  the  place  that  was  left 
4  the  breadth  of  the  face  of  the  house,  and 

2  and  the  breadth  (was)  fifty  cubits 

4  a  walk  of  ten  cubits  breadth  inward 

13  the  breadth  a  cubit,and  the  border  thereof 

14  the  breadth.. the  breadth  (one)  cubit 
1  an  oblation. .the  breadth. .ten  thousand 

3  the  breadth  of  ten  thousand  :  and  in  it 

5  the  ten  thousand  ot  breadth,  shall  also 

8  five  ami  twenty  thousand,  .breadth 

9  The  oblation.. ten  thousand  in  breadth 
10  toward  the  west  ten  thousand  in'breadth 
10  toward  the  east  ten  thousand  in  breadth 
13  and  ten  thousand  in  breadth  :  all  the 
13  and  the  breadth  ten  thousand 
15  thousand  (that  are  left)  in  the  breadth 

2  to  see  what  (is)  the  breadth  thereof 
2  and  the  breadth  thereof  ten  cubits 

width,  -kKoltos  jilatos. 
i3  what  (is)  the  breadth,  and  length,  and 
Kev.  20.    9  they  went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth 
21.  16  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth 
21.  16  The  length,  and  the  breadth,  and  the 

BREADTH,  hanil  — 

LFtat,  spread  out  hand,  nra  tephach. 

1  Ki.    7.  26  it  (was)  an  handbrea  1th  thick,  and  the 

2  Ch    4.    5  the  thickness  of  it  (was)  an  handbreadth 
Psa.   39.   5  hast  made  my  days  (as)  an  handbreadth 

2. Flat,  spread  out  hand,  r\%b  tophack. 

Exodus.  25  make  unto  it  a  border  of  an  handbreadth 

37. 12  he  made,  .a  border  of  an  handbreadth 
Eze.  40.   5  by  the  cubit  and  an  handbreadth :  so  he 

43,  13  (is)  a  cubit  and  an  handbreadth 

3READTH,  foot  — 

Treading  of  the  sole  of  the  foot,  h}~\  *]3  3T!P. 
Deut.  2.   5  no,  not  so  much  as  a  foot  breadth 

BREAK,  to  — 

1.7*0  break  the  bone  or  substance,  d*ii  garam,  3. 
NUIII24.    8  shall  break  their  bones,  and  pierce 
Eze.  23.  34  thou  shalt  break  the  sherds  thereof,  and 

2.  To  crush,  Dia  garas. 

Psn.  119.  20  My  soul  breaketh  for  the  longing  (that) 

3.7*0  crush,  D~>a  garas,  5. 

Lam.  3.  16  He  hath  also  broken  my  teeth  with  gravel 
4.  To  dash  by  treading,  fc»n  dush. 

Job.  39. 15  that  the  wild  beast  may  break  them 
Z.To  beat  thin,  Mjn  daka,  3. 

Psa.  89.  10  Thou  hast  broken  Rahab  in  pieces 
r.  To  beat  thin,  njrj  dakah,  3. 

Psa.  51.   8  bones,  .thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice 
7.  To  be,  happen,  rrrr  hayah,  2. 

Dan.    2.    1  spirit  was  troubled,  and  his  sleep  brake 

8.7V)  more  tmnultuously,  D£n  hamam. 

Isa.   28.  28  nor  break  (it  with)  the  wheel  of  his  cart 
■ '.  To  destroy,  pull  down,  D"in  haras. 

Psa.  53.   6  Break  their  teeth,  0  God,  in  their  mouth 
1  '.  To  put  down,  nrn  chathath,  5. 

Isa.     9.   4  thou  hast  broken  the  yoke  of  his  burden 
11.7V)  disallow,  Nij  no,  5. 

Psa.  141.    5  shall  not  break  my  head  :  for  yet  my 
V2.T<>  dash,  m\  naphats. 

Judg.  7.  19  brake  the  pitchers  that  (were)  in  their 
13.7*o  dash,  p§j  naphats,  3. 

Jer.  48.  12  empty  his  vessels,  .break  their  bottles 
1  l.To  draw  asunder,  pm  nathaq,  3. 

Judg  16.   g  And  he  brake  the  withs  as  a  thread 

16.  12  lie  brake  them  from  off  his  arms  like  a 

Psa.     2.    3  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder 

Isa.   58.   0  ami  that  ye  break  every  yoke  ? 

15.7*0  terrify,  p;  avals. 

Job   13.  25  Wilt  thou  break  a  leaf  driven  to  and  fro? 

'  6.  To  breathe,  flow,  tySpuach. 

'-<  Dg    2.  17  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows 
4.   6  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows 

17.7*o  break,  violate,  i\5pur,  5. 

Eze.  17  iy  my  covenant  that  he  hath  broken,  even 

18.7*0  break  in  pieces*  c%$  patsam. 

Psa.  60.   2  thou  hast  broken  it :  heal  the  breaches 

lO.Tb  break  1  1  pieces,  n'^palsach,  3. 

Mte.    3.    3  they  break  their  bones,  and  chop  them 

20.7*0  break  forth,  y^parats* 

2  Cn,  20.  37  the  Lord  hath  broken  thy  works 

■'"1-    i".  u  M.-bivakL-th  me  with  breach  upon  breach 

Lccl.  10.   8  whoso  breaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall 


21.  To  break,  $np  paraq. 

Gen.  27.  40  thou  shalt  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy 

22.  To  break  of,  T£  parar,  5. 

Gen.  17. 14  that  soul .  .hath  broken  my  covenant 
Lev.  26.  15  (but)  that  ye  break  my  covenant 

26.  44  to  break  my  covenant  with  them :  for 
Is'um  15.  31  and  hath  broken  his  commandment 
Deut  31.  16  break  my  covenant  which  I  have  made 

31.  20  then  will  they.,  break  my  covenant 
Judg.  2.    1  I  will  never  break  my  covenant  with  you 

1  Ki.  15.  19  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of 

2  Ch.  16.    3  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of 
Isa.    24.    5  have.. broken  the  everlasting  covenant 

33.    8  he  hath  broken  the  covenant :  he  hath 
Jer.    11.  10  house  of  Judah  have  broken  my  covenant 
14.  21  remember,  break  not  thy  covenant  with 
31.  32  which  my  covenant  they  brake,  although 
33.  20  If  ye  can  break  my  covenant  of  the  day 
Eze.  16.  59  despised  the  oath  in  breaking  the  coven. 
17.  15  shall  he  break  the  covenant,  and  be 
17.  16  whose  covenant  he  brake,  (even)  with  him 
17. 18  despised  the  oath  by  breaking  the  coven. 
44.    7  they  have  broken  my  covenant  because 
Zech  11.  10  I  might  break  my  covenant  which  I 
11.  14  that  I  might  break  the  brotherhood 

23.7*o  spread  out,  ens  paras. 

Lam.  4.   4  no  man  breaketh  (it)  unto  them 

24.7*0  do  evil,  violence  to,  yy~l  raa. 

Psa.    2.    9  Thou  shalt  break  them  witli  a  rod  of  iron 
Jer.   15. 12  Shall  iron  break  the  northern  iron 

25.7*0  do  evil,  yiTi  rea. 

Dan.  2.  40  as  iron  that  breaketh  all  these,  shall  it 

26.  To  be  broken  in  pieces,  {'O  ratsats,  2. 

Eze.  29.    7  thou  didst  break,  and  rend  all  their 

27.7*o  deish  in  pieces,  fx*n  ratsats,  5. 

Judg.  9.  53  millstone .  .and  all  to  brake  his  skull 

28. 7*o  break,  shiver,  12$  shabar. 

Gen.  19.    9  and  came  near  to  break  the  door 
Exodi2.  46  neither  shall  ye  brake  a  bone  thereof 
Lev.  11.  33  shall  be  unclean ;  and  ye  shall  break  it 
26.  13  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  your  yoke 
26.  19  I  will  brake  the  pride  of  your  power 

26.  26  I  have  broken  the  staff  of  your  bread 
Num.  9.  12  leave  none,  .nor  break  any  bone  of  it 
Judg.  7.  20  blew  the  trumpets,  and  brake,  .pitchers 
Psa.  10.  15  Break  thou  the  arm  of  the  wicked 

29.  5  The  voice  of  the  Lop  d  breaketh  the  cedars 
69.  20  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart 

105.  16  he  brake  the  whole  staff  of  bread 
Prov.  6.  13  suddenly  shall  he  be  broken  without 

25.  15  a  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  bone 
Isa.    14.    5  Lord  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked 
14.  25  That  I  will  break  the  Assyrian 
30. 14  he  shall  break  it  as  the  breaking 
42.   3  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and 
Jer.     2.  20  I  have  broken  thy  yoke,  .burst  thy  bands 
5.    5  these  have  altogether  broken  the  yoke 
19. 10  Then  shalt  thou  break  the  bottle 
19.  11  will  I  break,  .as  (one)  breaketh 
28.   2  I  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  king  of 
28.   4  for  I  will  break  the  yoke  of  the  king  of 
28.  10  the  prophet  took  the  yoke,  .and  brake  it 

28.  11  Even  so  will  I  break  the  yoke  of  N. 

28. 12  the  prophet  had  broken  the  yoke  from  off 

28. 13  Thou  hast  broken  the  yokes  of  wood ;  but 

30.  8  I  will  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck 

48.  38  I  have  broken  Moab  like  a  vessel 

49.  35  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Elam,  the  chief 
Eze.    4.  16  I  will  break  the  staff  of  bread  in  Jerusa. 

5. 16  and  will  break  your  staff  of  bread 
14.  13  will  break  the  staff  of  the  bread  thereof 

27.  26  the  east  wind  hath  broken  thee  in  the 
30. 18  I  shall  break  there  the  yokes  of  Egypt 
30.  21 1  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh  king 
30.  22  I.  .will  break  his  arms,  the  strong 

30.  24  I  mil  break  Pharoah's  arms,  and  he 
34.  27  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  their  yoke 
Hos.    1.   5  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley 

2.  18  I  will  break  the  bow  and  the  sword 
Amos  1.   5  I  will  break  also  the  bar  of  Damascus 
Nail.    1.  13  now  will  I  break  his  yoke  from  off  thee 

29.7*0  be  broken,  shivered,  "X$  shabar,  2. 

Eze.  29.    7  thou  brakest,  and  madest  all  their  loins 

30.  To  break,  shiver,  12$  shabar,  3. 

Exod.  9.  25  and  brake  every  tree  of  the  field 

32.  19  cast  the  tables . .  and  brake  them  beneath 
34.    1  the  first  tables,  which  thou  brakest 
34-  13  break  their  images,  and  cut  down  their 
Deut.  9.  17  and  brake  them  before  your  eyes 

10.    2  in  the  first  tables  which  thou  brakest 
T2.    3  overthrow  their  altars,  and  break  their 
2  Ki.  18.    4  He  removed  the  high  places,  and  brake 
Job    29.  17  I  brake  the  jaws  of  the  wicked,  and 
Psa.     3.    7  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly 

29.  5  Loud  breaketh  the  cedars  of  Lebanon 
46.   9  he  breaketh  the  bow,  and  cutteth.  .spear 
48.    7  Thou  brakest  the  ships  of  Tarshish  with  an 
74.  13  thou  brakest  the  heads  of  the  dragons  in 
76.    3  There  brake  he  the  arrows  of  the  bow 

105.  33  and  brake  the  trees  of  their  coasts 
107.  16  For  he  hath  broken  the  gates  of  brass 
Isa.  2r.    9  her  gods  he  hath  broken  unto  the  ground 

38.  13  so  will  he  break  all  my  bones 
Jer.  43.  13  shall  break  also  the  imagesof  Beth-shem. 
52.  17  the  Chaldeans  brake,  and  carried  all  the 


Lam.  2.    g  he  hath  destroyed  and  broken  her  bars 

3.    4  made  old  ;  he  hath  broken  my  bones 
Dan.    8.    7  smote  the  ram,  and  brake  his  two  horns 

31.7*0  bruise,  v\i&  shuph. 

Job     9.  17  For  he  breaketh  me  with  a  tempest 

Z2.  To  pierce,  profane,  bhn  eluded,  3. 
Psa.  55.  20  he  hath  broken  his  covenant 

89.  31  If  they  break  my  statutes,  and  keep  not 
89.  34  My  covenant  will  I  not  break,  nor 

33.7*0 pierce,  profane,  V?r\  chedal,  5.* 

Nuni3o.    2  he  shall  not  break  his  word,  he  shall 
34.7*o  do  evil,  feed  on,  nj/-n  raah. 

Jer.     2.  16  children,  .have  broken  the  crown  of  thy 
35. 7*0  break  throughout,  8tappr)yi/vjj.t  diarrheqnumi. 
Luke  5.    6  multitude  of  fishes:  and  their  net  brake 
8.  29  fetters ;  and  he  brake  the  bands,  and 
36.7*0  break  down,  Kardyvvfit  katagnumi. 
Matt  12.  20  A  bim'sed  reed  shall  he  not  brake 
John  19.  31  that  their  legs  might  be  broken 

ig.  32  the  soldiers,  .brake  the  legs  of  the  first 
T9.  33  when  they  came  to  Jesus . .  they  brake  not 

37.7*0  break  down,  KaraKXaoi  kataklad,  KXaCcc. 
Mark  6.  41  blessed,  and  brake  the  loaves,  and  gave 
Luke  9.  16  he  blessed  them,  and  brake,  and  gave  to 

38.  7*o  break,  texdw  klao. 

Matt  14.  19  he  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  the 

*5-  36  gave  thanks,  and  brake  (them),  and  gave 

26.  26  Jesus  took  bread.. blessed  (it),  and  brake 
Mark  8.    6  seven  loaves,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake 

8.  19  when  I  brake  the  five  loaves  among 
14.  22  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  and~brake 
Luke  22. 19  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake 

24.  30  took  bread,  and  blessed  (it),  and  brake 
Acts    2.  46  breaking  bread  from  house  to  house 

20.    7  disciples  came  together  to  brake  bread 
20.  11  he.  .had  broken  bread,  and  eaten,  and 

27.  35  when  he  had  broken  (it),  he  began  to  eat 
1  Co.  10.  16  The  bread  which  we  break,  Is  it ;  n.  24. 

39.7*0  loose,  Xvw  hid. 

Matt.  5. 19  Whosoever,  .shall  break  one  of  these 
John  5.  18  ;  7.  23.  10.  35;  Acts  27.  41 ;  Eph.  2.  14. 

40.7*0  break  or  burst,  f)i\yvv{xi  rhegnumi. 

Matt  9. 17  old  bottles  ;  else  the  bottles  break 
41.7*0  break  together,  <rvv6pvTZT<*>  sunthrupio. 

Acts  21.  13  "What  mean  ye  to  weep  and  to  break 
42.7*0  rub  together,  awrpifSw  suntribo. 

Marki4.    3  she  brake  the  box,  and  poured  (it)  on  his 
[See  also  Bones,  covenant,  neck,  pieces,  truce, 
wedlock.] 

BREAK  again,  to  — 

7*o  turn  back  to  break,  "£n?  3*e>  shub  lehapher. 
Ezra   9. 14  Should  we  again  break  thy  commandm. 

BREAK  asunder,  to  — 

7*0  break,  violate,  ~n3  parar,  3. 

Job    16.  12  ease,  but  he  hath  broken  me  asunder 

BREAK  away,  to  — 

7*0  break  forth  of,  or  for  oneself,  f]3  ^ara/s,  7. 

1  Sa.  25.  10  many  servants,  .that  break  away 

BREAK  clods,  to  — 

To  harrow,  break  up,  *nb*  so  dad,  3  a, 

Isa.  28.  24  doth  he.  .break  the  clods  of  his  ground  ? 

Hos.  10.  11  Jacob  shall  break  his  clods 

BREAK  down,  to  — 

1.7*0  beat,  smite,  D?n  halam. 

Psa.  74.   6  now  they  break  down  the  carved  work 
Isa.   16.    8  the  heathen  have  broken  down  the 

2.7*0  crash,  D*]n  haras. 

Job     12.  14  he  breaketh  down,  and  it  cannot  be  built 
Jer.   45.   4  that  which  I.. built.. will  I  break  down 
Eze.  13.  14  So  will  I  break  down  the  wall 

26.    4  they  shall,  .break  down  her  towers 
20".  12  they  shall  break  down  thy  walls,  and 

3.  7*o  break  down,  fru  nathats. 

Lev.  14.  45  he  shall  break  down  the  house,  the 
Judg.  8.    9  he  spake.  .1  will  break  down  this  tower 

2  Ki.  10.  27  they  brake  down  the  image  of  Baal 

10.  27  brake  down  the  house  of  Baal,  and 

11.  18  the  house  of  Baal,  and  brake  it  down 
23.    7  he  brake  down  the  houses  of  the 

23.  8  brake  down  the  high  places  of  the  gates 
23.  15  altar  and  the  high  place  he  brake  down 

25.  10  brake  down  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  round 
2  Ch.  23.  17  house  of  Baal,  and  brake  it  down 

Isa.    22.  10  houses  have  ye  broken  down  to  fortify 
Jer.   31.  28  to  break  down,  and  to  throw  down,  and 
39.    8  and  brake  down  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
52.  14  brake  down  all  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
Eze.  26.    9  with  his  axes  he  shall  break  down  thy 

4.7*0  break  down,  prjj  nathats,  3. 

2  Ch.  33.    3  his  father  had  broken  down 

34.  4  they  brake  down  the  altars  of  Baalim  in 
34.  7  when  he  had  broken  down  the  altars  and 
36.  19  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and 

Ezra  16.  39  and  shall  break  down  thy  high  places 

5.7*0  behead,  cause  to  drop,  FpjJ  araph. 

Hos.  10.    2  he  shall  break  down  their  altars,  he  shrll 


BREAK 


113 


BREASTPLATE 


G.To  break  forth  or  down,  ps  parats. 

2  Ki.  14. 13  U-ake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  from 
2  Ch.  25  23  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  from 

26.  6  brake  down  the  -wall  of  Gath,  and  the 
Neh.  4.  3  he  shall  even  break  down  their  stone 
Psa.  So.  12  Why  hast  thou  (then)  broken  down  her 

89.  40  Thou  hast  broken  down  all  his  hedges 
Eccl.  3.    3  a  time  to  brea"k  down,  and  a  time  to 
Isa.     5.    5  break  down  the  wall  thereof,  and  it  shall 

7. To  run,  cause  to  run,  pi  ruts. 

2  Ki.  23.  12  brake  (them)  down  from  thence,  and 

S.To  break,  shiver,  "ny>  shabar,  3. 

Exod  23.  24  thou  shalt.  .quite  break  down  their 
Deut.  7.    5  their  altars,  and  break  down  their 
■2  Ch.  14.    3  brake  down  the  images,  and  cut  down 

DREAK  fort'',  to  — 

1.  To  be  broken  up,  cleft,  let  go,  ypa  baqa,  2. 

Isa.    58.    8  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning 

2.  To  come  forth  (with  force),  n»  guach. 

Job    38.    8  the  sea  with  doors,  when  it  brake  forth 

S.To  break  forth,  nss  patsach. 

Isa.  14.  7  is  quiet :' they  break  forth  into  singing 
44.  23  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  mountains 
49.  13  break  forth  into  singing,  0  mountains 
54.    1  break  forth  into  singing,  and  cry  aloud 

55. 12  the  hills  shall  break  forth  before  you  into 

4.  To  break  forth,  flourish,  ms  pa.rach. 

Exod.  9.  '0  a  boi'l  breaking  forth  (with)  blains  upon 
9. 10  it  became  a  boil  breaking  forth  (with) 

5.  To  break  forth  in,  p?  parats. 

Gen.  38.  29  she  said,  How  hast  thou  broken  forth? 
Exod  19.  22  lest  the  Lord  break  forth  upon  them 
19.  24  Lord,  lest  he  break  forth  upon  them 
2  Sa.    5.  20  Lord  hath  broken  forth  upon  mine 
Isa.    54.    3  thou  shalt  break  forth  on  the  right  hand 

6.7*0  be  opened  tip,  nns  pathach,  2. 

Jer.     1.  14  an  evil  shall  break  forth  upon  all  the 
7.  To  break,  burst,  fii)yvv)U  rhegnumi. 

Gal.     4.  27  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that 

BKEAK  forth  into  joy  — 

To  break  forth,  ms  patsach. 

Isa.    52.    9  Break  forth  into  joy,  sing  together,  ye 

BREAK  in,  to  — 

To  break  forth,  in,  ]~i3  parats. 

1  Ch.  14.  n  God  hath  broken  in  upon  mine  enemies 
Psa.  106.  29  the  plague  brake  in  upon  them 

BREAK"  in  pieces,  to  — 
l.To  bruise,  n:h  daka,  3. 

Job   iq.    2  anil  break  me  in  pieces  with  words  ? 

Psa.  72.    4  and  shall  break  in  pieces  the  oppressor 
94.    5  They  break  in  pieces  thy  people,  0  Lord 

2.  To  beat  small,  pm  deqaq,  5. 

Dan.    2.  34  of  iron  and  clay,  and  brake  them  to  pieces 
2.  40  iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  subdueth 
2.  40  shall  it  break  in  pieces  and  bruise 
2.  44  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  consume 
2  45  that  it  brake  in  pieces  the  iron,  the 

6.  24  brake  all  then"  bones  in  pieces  or  ever 

7.  7  it  devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and 

7. 19  devoured,  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped 
7.  23  shall  tread  it  down,  and  break  it  in  pieces 

3  To  beat  down  or  out,  rra  kathath,  3- 

2  Ki.  18.   4  brake  in  pieces  the  brasen  serpent  that 

•i.  7b  dash  in  pieces,  j'SJ  naphats,  3. 

Jer.  51. 20  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  nations 
51.21  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  horse 
51.  21  with  thee  will  Ibreak  in  pieces  the  chariot 
51.  22  "With  thee  also  will  I  break  in  pieces  man 
51.  22  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  old  and 
51.  22  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  young 
51.  23  I  will  also  break  in  pieces  with  thee  the 
51.  23  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  husb. 
51.  23  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  captains 

5.  To  break  in  pieces,  ps  puts,  Sa. 

Jer.  23.  29  hammer  (that)  breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces 

6.  To  break,  afflict,  !>SP3  raa. 

Job    34.  24  He  shall  break  in  pieces  mighty  men 

7.  To  break,  shiver,  12$  shabar,  3. 

t  Ki.  19.  11  brake  in  pieces  the  rocks,  before  the  LORD 
2  Ki.  it.  18  and  his  images  brake  they  in  pieces 
23.  14  he  brake  in  pieces  the  images,  and  cut 

25. 13  Chaldees  break  in  pieces,  and  carried  the 
2  Ch.  23.  17  brake  his  altars  and  images  in  pieces 

31.    1  and  brake  the  images  in  pieces,  and  cut 
34.   4  he  brake  in  pieces,  and  made  dust 

Psa.  74.  14  Thou  brakest  the  heads  of  leviathan  in  p. 

Isa.    45.    2  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass 

8.  To  rub  together,  o~vi>Tpl[ia>  suntribo. 

Hark  5.    4  the  fetters  broken  in  pieces  :  neither 

BREAK  into,  to  — 
To  cleave,  ups  baqa. 

2  Ch.  21.  17  came  up  into  Judah,  and  brake  into 

BREAK  of  day,  at  — 

l.To  become  light,  "»H  or,  2. 

2  Sa.   2.  32  they  came  to  Hebron  at  break  of  day 

15 


2. Shining,  avyq  auge. 

Acts  20. 11  a  long  while,  even  till  break  of  day 

BREAK  off,  to— 

l.To  break  off,  rend,  pis  paraq,  3. 

Exod  32.    2  Break  off  the  golden  earrings  which 

2.  To  break  off  of  themselves,  p"i3  paraq,  7. 

Exod32.    3  the  people  brake  off  the  golden  earrings 

32.  24  hath  any  gold,  let  them  break  (it)  off 
Dan.  4.  27  break  off  thy  sins  by  righteousness 

S.To  break  off  from,  itacAdco  ckklao. 

Rom  11.  17  if  some  of  the  branches  be  broken  off 
11.  19  The  branches  were  broken  off,  that  I 
11.  20  because  of  unbelief  they  were  broken  off 

BREAK  out,  to  — 

l.To  be  broken  up,  yp?  baqa,  2. 

Isa.    35.    6  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out 
59.    5  that  which  is  crushed  breaketh  out  into 

2.  To  go  forth,  N£  yatsa. 

Exod  22.    6  If  fire  break  out,  and  catch  in  thorns 
3. To  break  down  or  out,  f'ru  naihais. 

.Psa.  58.   6  break  out  the  great  teeth  of  the  young 

4.  To  break  forth,  flourish,  rns. 

Lev.  13.  12  if  a  leprosy  break  out  abroad  in  the  skin 
14.  43  if  the  plague  come  again,  and  break  out 

5.  To  prosper,  rh~$  tsaleach. 

Amos  5.    6  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  in  the  house 

BREAK  ranks,  to  — 

To  break,  embarrass,  uny  abat,  3. 

Joel    2.    7  and  they  shall  not  break  their  ranks 

BREAK  sore,  to  — 

To  bruise,  nin  dakah,  3. 

Psa.  44.  19'  Though  thou  hast  sore  broken  us 

BREAK  (the  day),  to  — 

To  go  up,  ascend,  H7JJ  alah. 

Gen.  32.  26  said,  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh 

BREAK  through,  to  — 

1.  To  cleave,  rend,  yp3  baqa. 

2  Sa.  23.  16  the  three  mighty  men  brake  through  the 

1  Ch.11. 18  the  three  brake  through  the  host  of  the 
2. To  cleave  through,  yp3  baqa,  5. 

2  Ki.  3.  26  break  through,  .unto  the  king  of  Edom 

3.  To  break  or  throxo  down,  cnn  haras. 

Exod  19.  21  lest  they  break  through  unto  the  Loud 
19.  24  the  priests  and  the  people  break  through 

4.  To  dig  through,  Btopvo-o-co  diorusso. 

Matt.  6.  19  where  thieves  break  through  and  steal 

6.  20  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor 
Luke  12.  39  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  through 

BREAK  to  shivers,  to  — 

To  rub  together,  avvrpi&to  suntribo. 

Rev.    2.  27  vessels,  .shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers 

BREAK  up,  to  — 

l.To  till,  break  up,  T2  nir. 

Jer.     4.    3  Break  up  your  fallow  ground,  and  sow 
Hos.  10.  12  break  up  your  fallow  ground :  for  (it  is) 

2.To  break  forth,  jns  parats. 

2  Ch.  24.  7  that  wicked  woman,  had  broken  up  the 

Mic.  2. 13  they  have  broken  up,  and  have  passed 
S.To  break,  shiver,  13^  shabar. 

Job.  38.  10  brake  up  for  it  my  decreed  (place),  and 
■L.To  dig  through,  Biopixraco  diorusso. 

Matt.24.  43  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  up 

5.  To  dig  out,  Qopv<r<ro3  exorusso. 

Mark  2.  4  when  they  had  broken  (it)  up,  they  let 
G.To  loose,  \v<a  luo. 

Acts  13.  43  when  the  congregation  was  broken  up 
EREAKER  — 
l.To  break  forth,  p3  parats. 

Mic.    2.  13  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them 
2.Going  beyond,  trespasser,  -rrapaBdrvs  ptarabates, 

Rom.  2.  25  if  thou  be  a  breaker  of  the  law,  thy 

BREAKER,  covenant  — 

Not  put  together,  faithless,  ao-v'ifOeros  assunthetos. 
Rom.  1.  31  Without  understanding,  covenant  break. 

BREAKER,  truce  — 

Not  offering  libation,  &o-irovh'os  asp)ondos. 

2  Ti.    3.    3  Without  natural  affection,  truce  breakers 
BREAKING  — 
1.7*0  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

Gen.  32.  2-4  &  man  with  him  until  tlie  breaking  of  the 

2.  To  break,  violate,  "H?  parar,  5. 

Eze.  16.  59  despised  the  oath  in  breaking  the  coven. 
17.  18  despised  the  oath  by  breaking  the  coven. 

3. Breaking,  ~\yg  sheber. 

Job   41.  25  by  reason  of  breakings  they  purify  them. 
Isa.   30.  13  whose  breaking  cometh  suddenly  at  an 
30.  14  as  the  breaking  of  the  potter's  vessel 

4. Breaking,  jiiSB'  shihbaron. 

Eze.  21.    6  Sigh,  .with  the  breaking  of  (thy)  lcins 


5. Breaking,  KKaais  klasis. 

Luke  24.  35  was  known  of  them  in  breaking  of  bread 

Acts    2.  42  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers 
6. Going  beyond,  trespass,  -jrapoLBaTis  parabasis. 

Rom.  2.  ?3  through  breaking  the  law  dishououreth 
BREAKING  down  — 
To  dig  down,  *v-p  qui;  3a. 

Isa.    22.    5  breaking  down  the  walls,  and  of  crying 

BREAKING  forth  — 

1. Breaking  forth,  "15^0  mashber. 

Hos.  13.  13  stay  long  In.  .the  breaking  forth  of  child, 
2. Breaking  forth,  fna  perets. 

1  Ch.  14.  11  like  the  breaking  forth  of  waters 
BREAKING  in  — 
Breaking  forth,  jns  perets. 

Job    30.  14  (upon  ine)  as  a  wide  breaking  in 

Pro.  144.  14  no  breaking  in,  nor  going  out ;  that 

BREAKING  up  — 

Digging  through,  rnnn£  machtereth. 

Exod22.    2  If  a  thief  be  found  breaking  up,  an 

BREAST  — 

1. Br  east,  "n  dad. 

Prov.  5.  19  let  her  breasts  satisfy  thee  at  all  times 
Eze   23.   8  they  bruised  the  breasts  of  her  virginity 

2. Breasts,  pin  chadin. 

Dan.  2.  32  his  breast  aud  his  arms  of  silver 
3. Breast,  nin  chazeh. 

Exod2g.  26  thou  shalt  take  the  breast  of  the  ram  of 

29.  27  thou  shalt  sanctify  the  breast  of  the  wave 

Lev.    7.  30  the  fat  with  the  breast,  it  shall  he  brina; 

7.  30  that  the  breast  may  be  waved  (for)  a 

7.  31  the  breast  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  son's 

7.  34  the  wave  breast  and  the  heave  shoulder 

8.  29  Moses  took  the  breast,  and  waved  it 

9.  20  they  put  the  fat  upon  the  breasts,  and  he 
9.  21  the  breasts  and  the  right  shoulder 

10.  14  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder  shall 
10.  15  The  heave  shoulder  aud  the  wave  breast 
Num.  6.  20  with  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder 
18.  18  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right 

i.IIeart,  22b  lebab. 

Nah.  2.    7  doves,  tabering  upoo  their  breasts 

5.  Veins,  sinews,  j't?y,  atin. 

Job  21. [24  His  breasts  are  full  of  aiilk  and  his  bones 

6.  Breast,  "i^  shad. 

Gen.  49.  25  blessings  of  the  breasts  and  of  the  womb 

Job     3.  12  why  the  breasts  that  I  should  suck? 

Psa.  22.    9  make  me  hope,  .upon  my  mother's  breasts 

Song   1.  13  he  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt  my  breasts 

4.    5  Thy  two  breasts  (are)  like  two  young  roes 

7.    3  Thy  two  breasts  (are)  like  two  young  roes 

7.    7  and  thy  breasts  to  clusters  (of  grapes) 

7.  8  thy  breasts  shall  be  as  clusters  of  the 

8.  1  my  brother,  that  sucked  the  breasts  of 
8.    8  We  have  a.,  sister,  and  she  hath  no  breasts 

8.  10  I  (am)  a  wall,  and  my  breasts  like  towers 
Isa.    28.    9  from  the  milk,  .drawn  from  the  breasts 
Lam.  4.    3  Even  the  sea  monsters  draw  out  the  b. 
Eze.  16.    7  breasts  are  fashioned,  and  thine  hair  is 

23.    3  there  were  their  breasts  pressed,  and 
23.  34  shalt.  .pluck  off  thine  own  breasts 
Hos.    2.    2  her  adulteries  from  between  her  breasts 

9.  14  give.,  a  miscarrying  womb  and  dry  breasts 
Joel    2.  16  and  those  that  suck  the  breasts;  Jet  the 

7. Breast,  "its'  shod. 

Job  24.    9  They  pluck  the  fatherless  from  the  breast 
Tsa.  60.  16  thou,  .shalt  suck  the  breast  of  kings 
66. 11  satisfied  with-the  breasts  of  her 

8. Breast,  firm  part,  tttjQos  siethos. 

Luke  18.  13  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be 

23.  48  all.  .smote  their  breasts,  and  returned 
Johni3.  25  He  then  lying  on  Jesus'  breast  saith  unto 

21.  20  which  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper 
Rev.  15.    6  having  their  breasts  girded  with  golden 

BREASTPLATE  — 

l.Bag,  covering  on  the  breast,  |^n  choshen. 
Exod25.    7  stones  to  be  set.  .in  the  breastplate 

28.    4  a  breastplate,  and  an  ephod,  and  a  robe 
28.  15  make  the  breastplate  of  judgment  with 
28.  22,  23  thou  shalt  make  upon  the  breastplate 
28.  23  rings  on  the  two  ends  of  the  breastplate 
28.  24  two  rings . .  on  the  ends  of  the  breastplate 
28.  26  upon  the  two  ends  of  the  breastplate 
28.  28  shall  bind  the  breastplate  by  the  rings 
28.  2S  breastplate  be  not  loosed  from  the  ephcd 
28.  29  breastplate  of  judgment  upon  his  heait 

28.  30  in  the  breastplate  of  judgment  the  Urim 

29.  5  the  ephod,  and  the  breastplate,  and  gild 
35.  9,  27  for  the  ephod,  and  for  the  breastplate 
39.  8  he  made  the  breastplate  (of)  cunning  work 
39.  9  they  made  the  breastplate  double 

39.  15  they  made  upon  the  breastplate  chains 
39.  16  rings  in  the  two  ends  of  the  breastplate 
39.  17  two  rings  on  the  ends  of  the  breastplate 
39.  19  on  the  two  ends  of  the  breastplate 
39.  21  they  did  bind  the  breastplate  by  his 
39.  21  that  the  breastplate  might  not  be  lecsed 

Lev.    S.   8  he  put  the  breastplate  upon  him 

8.    8  he  put  in  the  breastplate  the  Urim  and 
2.Coat  of  mail,  ]11V  shiryan. 

Isa.   59.  17  put  on  righteousness  as  a  breastplate 


BREATH 


114 


BRETHREN 


Z.Breastplate,  i  dross,  0<£pa|  thorax. 

Eph.    c.  14  ti;i\  ing  "ti   .breastplate  of  righteousness 
1  Til    5.    S  on  the  breastplate  <>f  faith  and  love 
Rev.    9.   9  they  had  breastplates.. breastplates  of 
9.  17  breastplates  of  tire,  and  of  iacinth,  ami 

BREATH  — 

l.Breath,  soul,  w$i  nephesh, 

Job    11. 21  His  breath  kindleth  coals,  and  a  flame 
^.Breath,  Kpft,  ns?}  neshamdh,  nishma. 

Gen.    2.    7  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath 
7.  22  in  whose  nostrils,  .the  breath  of  life 
r  Ki.  17.  17  that  there  was  no  breath  left  in  him 
Job   27.    3  All  the  while  my  breath  (is)  in  me 

33.  4  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life 

34.  14  gather,  .his  spirit  and  his  breath 
37  10  By  the  breath  of  God  frost  is  given 

Isa.     a.  22  man,  whose  breath  (is)  in  his  nostrils 
30.  33  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  .doth  kindle  it 
42.    5  he  that  giveth  breath  unto  the  people 
Dan.   5.  23  the  God  to  whose  hand  thy  breath  (is) 
10.  17  neither  is  there  breath  left  ill  me 
3.  B-    ith,  air,  wind,  spirit,  rjn  ruach. 

Gen.    6. 17  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the  breath  of  life 
7.  15  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the  breath  of  life 
7.  22  in  whose  nostrils  (was)  the  breath  of  life 
a  Sa.  22.  16  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  nostrils 
Job     4.    9  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  are  they 
9. 18  He  will  not  suffer  me  to  take  my  breath 
12. 10  In  whose  hand  (is),  .the  breath  of  all 
15.  30  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  he  go 
17.    1  My  breath  is  corrupt,  my  days  are  extinct 
1  ,.  17  My  breath  is  strange  to  my  wife,  though 
Rsa.  18.  15  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  thy  nostrils 
33.    6  all  the  host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  his 
104.  29  thou  takest  away  their  breath,  they  die 
135.  17  neither  is  there  (any)  breath  in  their 
146.   4  His  breath  goetn  forth,  he  returneth  to 
Eccl.  3.  19  they  have  all  one  breath  ;  sa  that  a  man 
Isa.    11.    4  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay 
30.  28  his  breath,  as  an  overflowing  stream 
1.  11  your  breath,  (as)  tire  shall  devour  you 
Jer.  10.  14  falsehood,  and  (there  is)  no  breath  in 

51.  17  falsehood,  .(there  is)  no  breath  in  them 
Lam.  4.  lo  The  breath  of  our  nostrils,  the  anointed 
J.     .  37.    5  I  will  cause  breath  to  enter  into  you,  and 
37.    6  put  breath  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live ;  and 
37.    8  above  :  but  (there  was)  no  breath  in  them 
37.   9  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath 
37.  10  the  breath  came  into  them,  and  they 
Hab.  2. 19  no  breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  it 

i.Wind,  breath,  irj/07\  pnoe. 

Acts  17.  25  he  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all 

BREATH,  that  hath  — 
;'.  .!■:;;•:  nashamah, 

1  "sa.  150.    6  Let  every  thing  that  hath  breath  praise 
BREATHE,  to  — 
l.To  breathe  out,  nsta  naphach. 

Gen.    2.    7  breathed  Into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of 

Eze.  37.   9  Come . .  0  breath,  aud  breathe  upon  these 
S.Breath,  nip?)  neshamah. 

Josh. 1 1.  11  there  was  not  any  left  to  breathe 
11. 14  neither  left  they  any  to  breathe 

T/^EATHE  on,  to  — 

Into,  cfxcfivffdu}  emphusao, 
John  20.  22  when  he  had  said  this,  he  breathed  on 

3REATHE  out,  to  — 

"t  ■  blow  in  or  will,  itxTTviw  empneo,  ivirvew 

Acts   <j.    j  breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughter 

BREATHE  out,  such  as  — 
Breathing  out,  nr  yapheach. 

Psa.  27.  12  risen,  .and  such  as  breathe  out  cruelty 
BREATHED,  that— 

iamaJi. 

Josh.xo.  40  utterly  destroyed  all  that  breathed,  ns 

1  Ki.  15.  29  be  left  not.. any  that  breathed,  until 
DREATHETH,  that  — 

imah. 

Deut  20.  16  thou  shalt  save,  .nothing  that  breatheth 

BREATHING  — 

/.'    athing,  nrjrrj  revachah. 

Lam,   3.  y\  hide  not  thine  ear  at  my  breathing 
BREECHES  — 

'  ■  ,  1     1   ers,  cca?*?  nihnesayUn. 
Exoda8. 4?  linen  breeches  to  cover  their  nakedness 

3  j.  98  linen  breeches  (of)  line  twined  linen 
Lev.    6.  10  linen  breeches  shall  he  put  upmi  his  nY  h 
16.    4  he  shall  have  the  linen  breeches  upOT! 

1  ;■  1    dial]  have  linen  breeches  up  m  the&loina 
BREED  — 
[9  hen. 

Deal  3  ■.  ,  1  rams  of  the  breed  of  Eaashan,  and  goats 
BREED  worms,  to  — 
T   becoiM  high,  grow  wp,  cm  rum, 

Bxod  [6.  w  it  hied  worms,  and  stank:  and  Moses 
BREED  abundantly,  to  — 
T       ■  '-■.«,  cr  ■;.,  p;;  sharats. 

Gen.    B,  17  that  they  may  breed  abundantly  lu  tho 


BREEDING  — 

Overrunning,  possession,  p'fpp  mimshaq. 

Zeph.  2.    9  the  breeding  of  nettles,  and  salt  pits 
BRETHREN  — 
1. Brethren,  D'HN  achim. 

Gen.  9.  22  and  told  his  two  brethren  without 

9.  25  servant,  .shall  he  be  unto  his  brethren 
13.  8  and  thy  herdmen  ;  for  we  (be)  brethren 
6.  i2  dwell  in  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren 

9.  7  I  pray  you,  brethren,  do  not  so  wickedly 

24.  27  me  to  the  house  of  my  master's  brethren 

25.  18  died  in  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren 
27.  29  bow  down  to  thee  :  be  lord  over  thy  bre. 
27.  37  all  bis  brethren  have  I  given  to  him  for 
29.    4  Jacob  said . .  My  brethren,  whence  (be)  ye  ? 
u.  23  he  took  his  brethren  with  him,  and 

31.  25  his  brethren  pitched  in  the  mount  of 
31.  32  let  him  not  live :  before  our  brethren 
31.  37  before  my  brethren  and  thy  brethren 
31.  46  Jacob  said  unto  his  brethren,  Gather 
31.  54  and  called  his  brethren  to  eat  bread 
34.  11  said  unto  her  father  aud  unto  her  breth. 
25  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each  man  his 
2  was  feeding  the  flock  with  his  brethren 
4  his  brethren  saw  that  their  father  loved 

4  mure  than  all  his  brethren,  they  hated 

5  and  he  told  (it)  his  brethren  :  and  they 

8  his  brethren  said.  .Shalt  thou  indeed  reign 

9  another  dream,  and  told  it  his  brethren 
10  told  (it)  to  his  father,  and  to  his  brethren 

10  Shall  I,  and  thy  mother,  and  thy  brethren 

11  And  his  brethren  envied  him;  but  his 
37.  12  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  father's 
37.  13  Do  not  thy  brethren  feed  (the  flock)  in 
37.  14  see  whether  it  be  well  with  thy  brethren 
37.  16  he  said,  I  seek  my  brethren  :  tell  me 

37.  17  Joseph  went  after  his  brethren,  and  found 
37.  23  when  Joseph  was  come  unto  his  brethren 
37.  26  Judah  said  unto  his  brethren,  What 
37.  27  our  flesh.    And  his  brethren  were  content 

37.  30  be  returned  unto  his  brethren,  and  said 

38.  1  Judah  went  down  from  his  brethren,  and 
38.  11  Lest,  .he  die  also,  as  bis  brethren  (did) 
42.    3  Joseph's  ten  brethren  went,  .to  buy  corn 
42.   4  Jacob  sent  not  with  his  brethren 

42.    6  Joseph's  brethren,  .bowed  down 
42.    7  Joseph  saw  his  brethren,  and  he  knew 
42.    8  Joseph  knew  his  brethren,  but  they  knew 
42.  13  they  said,  Thy  servants  (are)  twelve  bret. 
42.  19  let  one  of  your  brethren  be  bound  in  tho 
42.  28  be  said  unto  his  brethren,  My  money  is 
42,  32  We  (be)  twelve  brethren,  sons  of  our  father 
42.  33  leave  one  of  your  brethren  (here)  with  me 
44.  14  Judah  and  his  brethren  came  to  Joseph's 

44.  33  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his  brethren 

45.  1  made  himself  known  unto  his  brethren 
45.    3  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  (am) 
45.    3  his  brethren  could  not  answer  him 

45.    4  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  Come 
45.  15  he  kissed  all  his  brethren,  and  wept 
45.  15  after  that  his  brethren  talked  with  him 
45.  16  Joseph's  brethren  are  come  :  and  it 
45.  17  Say  unto  thy  brethren,  This  do  ye  ;  lade 

45.  24  So  he  sent  his  brethren  away,  and  they 

46.  31  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  and 

46.  31  My  brethren,  and  my  father's  house 

47.  1  My  father  and  my  brethren,  and  their 
47.    2  he  took  some  of  his  brethren,  .five 

47.  3  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  brethren,  What 
47.  5  Thy  father  and  thy  brethren  are  come 
47.    6  make  thy  father  and  brethren  to  dwell 

47.  11  Joseph  placed  his  father  and  his  brethren 
(.7.  12  Joseph  nourished  his  father,  aud  his 

48.  6  the  name  of  their  brethren  in  their 

48.  22  given  to . .  one  portion  above  thy  brethren 

49.  5  Simeon  and  Levi  (are)  brethren 

49.    8  thou  (art  he)  whom  thy  brethren  shall 

49.  26  him  that  was  separate  from  his  brethren 

50.  8  all  the  house  of  Joseph,  and  his  brethren 
50. 14  be,  and  his  brethren,  and  all  that  went 
50.  15  Joseph's  brethren  saw  that  their  father 
50. 17  the  trespass  of  thy  brethren,  and  their 
50.  18  his  brethren  also  went  and  fell  down 

50.  24  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  die :  and 
Exod.  1.    6  Joseph  died,  and  all  his  brethren,  and 
2.  11  he  went  out  unto  his  brethren,  and  looked 
2.  11  an  Hebrew,  one  of  his  brethren 
.  18  Let  me  go.  .unto  my  brethren  which 
,    4  Come  near,  carry  your  brethren.. from 

10.  6  let  your  brethren,  .bewail  the  burning 
ax.  10  the  high  priest  among  his  brethren,  upon 
25.  46  over  your  brethren  the  children  of  Israel 
25.  48  one  of  his  brethren  may  redeem  him 

Num.  8.  26  shall  minister  with  their  brethren,  in 
16.  10  all  thy  brethren  the  sons  of  Levi  with 
18.  2  thy  brethren  also  of  the  tribe  of  Levi 
18.   6  I  have  taken  your  brethren  the  Levitea 

20.  3  when  our  brethren  died  before  the  LORD  ! 
25.    6  brought  unto  his  brethren . .  a. .  woman 
27.    4  a  possession  among  the  brethren  of  our 
27.    7  inheritance  among  their  father's  brethren 
27.    9  give  his  inheritance  unto  his  brethren 
27.  10  his  inheritance  unto  his  father's  brethren 
ax.  10  if  he  have  no  brethren,  then  ye  shall 

21.  11  if  his  father  have  no  brethren,  then  ye 
6  Shall  your  brethren  go  to  war 

.  16  Hear  (the  causes)  between  your  brethren 

1.  28  our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  heart 

2.  4  to  pass  through  the  coast  of  vour  brethren 
2.    8  when  we  passed  by  from  our  brethren 
3. 18  pass  over  armed  before  your  brethren 


Lev. 


20. 


24. 

24. 

25- 

33- 
33- 

Josh.    1. 


Jildg.  8, 
9< 
9> 
9' 
9< 
9- 
9- 
9' 
9- 


18. 

19. 

20. 
21. 

Ruth  4. 

1  Sa.  16. 

17- 


Deut." 


32- 


Deut.  3.  20  LOBS  have  given  rest  unto  your  brethren 
10.    9  Levi  hath  no  part,  .with  his  brethren 
15.    7  one  of  thy  brethren  within  any  of  thy 
17.  15  from  among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set 

17.  20  be  not  lifted  up  above  his  brethreu 

18.  2  have  no  inheritance  among  their  brethren 
18.    7  as  all  his  brethren  the  Levitea  (do) 

iS.  15  "Prophet  from  the  midst  of. .  thy  brethren 

18.  18  a  Prophet  from  among  their  brethren 

8  return  unto  his  house,  lest  bis  brethren's 

7  be  found  stealing  any  of  his  brethren 
14  of  thy  brethren,  or  of  thy  strangers 

5  If  brethren  dwell  together,  and  one  of 

9  neither  did  he  acknowledge  his  brethren 

16  him  (that  was)separated  from  his  brethren 
24  let  him  be  acceptable  to  his  brethren 

14  ye  shall  pass  before  your  brethren  armed 

15  Until  the  Lord  have  given  your  brethren 

13  father,  .my  mother,  and  my  brethren 

18  bring  thy  father.,  mother,  and.  .brethren 

23  father,  and.  .mother,  and.  .brethren 

8  my  brethren  that  went  up  with  me 
4  an  inheritance  among  our  brethren 
4  au  inheritance  among  the  brethren 

3  Ye  have  not  left  your  brethreu  these 

4  God  hath  given  rest  unto  your  brethren 

7  the  (other)  half,  .among  their  brethren 

8  the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with . .  brethreu 

19  he  said,  They  (were)  my  brethren,  .the 
1  his  mother's  brethren,  and  communed 
3  his  mother's  brethren  spake  of  him  in  the 

5  he  went,  .and  slew  bis  brethren  the 

24  aided  him  in  the  killing  of  his  brethren 
26  the  son  of  Ebed  came  with  his  brethren 
31  the  son  of  Ebed, and  bis  brethren,  become 
41  Zebul  thrust  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren 
56  wickedness,  .in  slaying  his.  .brethren 

3  Jephthah  fled  from  his  brethren,  and 
3  among  the  daughters  of  thy  brethren 
31  his  brethren  and  all  the  bouse,  .came 
S  they  came  unto  their  brethren  to  Zorah 
8  their  brethren  said  unto  them,  What  (say) 

14  the  five  men.  .said  unto  their  brethren 
23  Nay,  my  brethreu,  (nay),  I  pray  you 
13  hearken  to  the  voice  of  their  brethren 
22  their  brethren  come  unto  us  to  complain 

10  dead  be  not  cut  off.  .among  his  brethren 
13  anointed  him  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren 

17  Take  now  for  thy  brethren  an  ephah  of 
17.  17  and  run  to  the  camp  to  thy  brethren 
17.  18  look  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  take 
17.  22  and  came  and  saluted  his  brethren 

20.  29  let  me  get  away,  .and  see  my  brethren 

22.  1  his  brethren  and  all  bis  father's  house 
30.  23  Ye  shall  not  do  so,  my  brethren 

2  Sa.   2.  26  return  from  following  their  brethren  ? 

3.  8  to  his  brethren,  and  to  bis  friends 

15.  20  take  back  thy  brethren  :  mercy  and  truth 

19.  12  Ye  (are)  my  brethren,  ye  (are)  my  bones 
19.  41  Why  have  our  brethren,  stolen  thee 

1  Ki.  1.   g  called  all  his  brethren  the  king's  sons 

12.  24  Ye  shall  not.  .fight  against  your  brethren 

2  Ki.   9.   2  make  him.  .arise  up  from  among  his  bret. 

10.  13  Jehu  met  with  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah 
10.  13  We  (are)  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah 

23.  9  eat  of  the.  .bread  among  their  brethreu 

1  Ch.   4.    9  Jabez  was  more  honourable . .  bis  brethren 

4.  27  his  brethren  had  not  many  children 

5.  2  Judah  prevailed  above  his  brethren 
5.    7  his  brethren  by  their  families,  when 

5.  13  their  brethren,  of  the  house  of  their 

6.  44  their  brethren  the  sons  of  Merari  (stood) 

6.  48  Their  brethren  also  the  Levites  (were) 

7.  5  their  brethreu  among  all  the  families  of 

7.  22  and-  his  brethreu  came  to  comfort  him 

8.  32  these  also  dwelt  with  their  brethren  in 

9.  6  their  brethren,  six  hundred  and  ninety 
9.    9  brethren,  according  to  their  generations 
9.  13  their  brethren,  heads  of  the  house  of 

9.  17  Talmon,  and  Ahiman,  and  their  brethren 
9.  19  the  son  of  Korah,  and  bis  brethren,  of 
9.  25  their  brethren  (which  were)  in  their 
9. 32  of  their  brethren,  of  the  sons  of  the 
9.  38  they  also  dwelt  with  their  brethren 
9.  38  at  Jerusalem,  over  against  their  brethren 
12.   2  (even)  of  Saul's  brethreu  of  Benjamin 
12.  32  all  their  brethren  (were).at  their 

12.  39  their  brethren  had  prepared  for  them 

13.  2  let  us  send  abroad  unto  our  brethren 
15.   5  bis  brethren  an  hundred  and  twenty 
15.    6  Ins  brethren  two  hundred  and  twenty 
15.   7  his  brethren  an  hundred  and  thirty 
15.    8  and  his  brethren  two  hundred 

15.    9  Eliel  the  chief,  and  his  brethren  foursc. 
15.  10  the  chief,  and  his  brethren  an  hundred 
IS.  12  ye  and  your  brethren,  that  ye  may 
15. 16  chief  of  the  Levites  to  appoint  their  bre. 
15.  17  of  his  brethren,  Asaph  the  son  of 

15.  17  of  the  sons  of  Merari  their  brethreu 
15. 18  with  them  their  brethren  of  the  second 

16.  7  into  the  hand  of  Asaph  and  his  brethren 
16.  37  he  left  there . .  Asaph  and  his  brethren 
16.  38  Obed-edom  with  their  brethren,  three 
16.  39  the  priest,  and  his  brethren  the  priests 
23.  22  their  brethren  the  sons  of  Kish  took 

23.  32  charge  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  their  brethren 

24.  31  cast  lots  over  against  their  brethren 

24.  31  over  against  their  younger  brethren 

25.  7  the  number  of  them,  with  their  brethren 
25.    9  who  with  his  brethren  and  sons  (were) 

So  in  v.  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  iS,  19, 
20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31. 


BRETHREN 


115 


BRETHREN 


i  Ch.  25.  10  his  sons,  and  his  brethren,  (were)  twelve 
26.    7  Obed,  Elzabad,  whose  brethren  (were) 
26.    8  they,  and  their  sous,  and  their  brethren 
26.    9  Meshelemiah  had  sons  and  brethren 
26.  11  the  sons  and  brethren  of  Hosah  (were) 
26.  25  his  brethren  by  Eliezer ;  Rehabiah 
26.  26  Shelomith  and  his  brethren  (were)  overall 
26.  28  hand  of  Shelomith,  and  of  his  brethren 
26.  30  Hashabiah  and  his  brethren,  men  of 

26.  32  his  brethren,  men  of  valour,  (were)  two 

27.  iS  Elihu,  (one)  of  the  brethren  of  David 

28.  2  Hear  me,  my  brethren,  and  my  people 
Ch.   5.  12  their  brethren,  (being)  arrayed  in  white 

11.    4  shall  not.  .fight  against  your  brethren 

11.  22  the  chief,  (to  be)  ruler  among  his  brethren 
19.  10  to  you  of  your  brethren  that  dwell  in 
19.  10  upon  you,  and  upon  your  brethren 

21.  2  he  had  brethren  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat 
ai.  4  slew  all  his  brethren  with  the  sword,  and 
2i.  13  hast  slain  thy  brethren  of  thy  father's 

22.  8  the  sons  of  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah 
28.    8  carried  away  captive  of  their  brethren 

28. 11  ye  have  taken  captive  of  your  brethren 

28.  15  their  brethren  :  then  they  returned  to 
29. 15  they  gathered  their  brethren,  and  sanct. 

29.  34  their  brethren  the  Levites  did  help  them 

30.  7  your  brethren,  which  trespassed  against 
30.    9  your  brethren  (shall  find)  compassion 

31. 15  to  give  to  their  brethren  by  courses 
35.    5  the  fathers  of  your  brethren  the  people 
35.    6  sanctify  yourselves,  .prepare  your  breth. 
35.    9  Shemaiah  aud  Nethaneel,  his  brethren 
35.  15  their  brethren  the  Levites  prepared  for 

Ezra    3.   2  the  son  of  Jozadak,  and  his  brethren 
3.    2  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  his  brethren 
3.    8  the  remnaut  of  their  brethren  the  priests 
3.   g  Jeshua  (with)  his  sons  and  his  brethren 
3.    9  their  sons  and  their  brethren  the  Levites 

6.  20  for  their  brethren  the  priests,  and  for 

8. 17  to  his  brethren  the  Xethininis,  at  the 
8.  iS  Sherebiah,  with  his  sons  and  his  brethren 
8.  19  Merari,  his  brethren,  and  their  sons 
8.  24  ten  of  their  brethren  with  them 

10. 18  the  son  of  Jozadak,  and  his  brethren 
Neh.   1.    2  Hanani,  one  of  my  brethren,  came 

3.  1  high  priest  rose  up,  with  his  brethren 

3. 18  After  him  repaired  their  brethren 
4    2  he  spake  before  his  brethren  and  the 

4.  14  fight  for  your  brethren,  your  sons,  and 

4.  23  neither  I,  nor  my  brethren,  nor  my  serv. 

5.  1  a  great  cry.  .f.gainst  their  brethren  the 
5.    5  our  flesh  (is)  as  the  flesh  of  our  brethren 
5.    8  "We.  .have  redeemed  our  brethren  the 
5.   8  "will  ye  even  sell  your  brethren? 
5.  10 1  likewise.,  my  brethren,  and  my  servants 
5.  14  my  brethren  have  not  eaten  the  bread 

10.  10  their  brethren,  Shebaniah,  Hodijah 

10.  29  They  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles 

11. 12  their  brethren  that  did  the  work  of  the 

11. 13  his  brethren,  chief  of  the  fathers,  two 

11. 14  their  brethren,  mighty  men  of  valour 
11. 17  Bakbukiah.  .second  among  his  brethren 

11. 19  porters:  Akkub,  Talmon. . their  brethren 

12.  7  of  the  priests  and  of  their  brethren 
12.   8  J  udah . .  Mattaniah . .  he  and  his  brethren 
12.   9  their  brethren,  (were)  over  against  them 
12.  24  with  their  brethren  over  against  them 
12.  36  his  brethren,  Shemaiah,  and  Azarael 
13. 13  office  (was)  to  distribute  unto  their  bret. 

Esth.  10.    3  accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren 
Job     6. 15  My  brethren  have  dealt  deceitfully  as  a 
19.  13  He  hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me 
42.  11  Then  came  there,  .all  his  brethren 
42.  15  them  inheritance  among  their  brethren 
Psa.  22.  22  I  will  declare  thy  name- unto  my  brethren 
69.    8  become  a  stranger  unto  my  brethren 
8  -For  my  brethren,  .sakes,  I  will  now  say 

1  how  pleasant  (it  is)  for  brethren  to  dwell 
19  he  that  soweth  discord  among  brethren 

2  shall  have  part,  .among  the  brethren 
7  the  brethren  of  the  poor  do  hate  him 
5  Your  brethren  that  hated  you.  .shall  be 

66.  20  .they  shall  bring  all  your  brethren  (for) 

7.  15  I  have  cast  out  all  your  brethren 
12.   6  thy  brethren,  and  the  house  of  thy  father 

29. 16  your  brethren  that  are  not  gone  forth 
35.    3  I  took  Jaazaniah.  .and  his  brethren 

41.    S  he . .  slew  them  not  among  their  brethren 
49. 10  his  seed  is  spoiled,  and  his  brethren 
Eze.  11. 15  Son  of  man,  thy  brethren 

11. 15  thy  brethren,  the  men  of  thy  kindred 
Hos.  [2.    1  Say  ye  unto  your  brethren,  Amini ;  and 

13. 15  Though  he  be  fruitful  among  (Ins)  breth. 
llic.    5.   3  remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  return 

2. Brethren,  }*nx  achin. 

Ezra   7.18  what . .  shall  seem  good . .  to  thy  brethren 

3. Brethren,  hfieKtpol  adelphoi. 

Matt.  1.    2"Jacob  begat  Judas  and  his  brethren 

1.  11  Josias  begat  Jechonias  and  his  brethren 
4.  18  Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea.,  saw  two  bret. 

4.  21  going.,  thence,  he  saw  other  two  brethren 

5.  47  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only 
12.  46  mother  and  his  brethren  stood 

12.  47  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand 

12.  48  my  mother?  and  who  are  my  brethren? 

12.  49  Behold  my  mother  and  my  brethren ! 

13.  55  his  brethren,  James,  and  Joses,  and  Simon 

19.  29  that  hath  forsaken  houses,  or  brethren 

20.  24  with  indignation  against  the.  .brethren 
22.  25  there  were  with  us  seven  brethren 


122. 

Prov.  6. 

if- 

19. 
Isa.  66. 


Jer. 


Matt  23.    8  Master.  .Christ ;  and  all  ye  are  brethren 
25.  40  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren 
28.  10  Be  not  afraid  :  go  tell  my  brethren  that 
Mark  3.  31  There  came  then  his  brethren  and  his 
3.  32  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  without 
3.  33  Who  is  my  mother,  or  my  brethren  ? 
3.  34  Behold  my  mother  and  my  brethren  ! 
10.  29  man  chat  hath  left  house,  or  brethren 
10.  30  houses,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  and 
12.  20  Now  there  were  seven  brethren :  and  the 
Luke  S.  19  Then  came  to  him.  .his  brethren 

8.  20  Thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand 
8.  21  My  mother  and  my  brethren  are  these 
14.  12  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren 
14.  26  hate  not  his  father,  .and  brethren 
16.  28  For  I  have  five  brethren ;  that  he 
18.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left.. brethren 

20.  29  There  were  therefore  seven  brethren:  and 

21.  16  betrayed  both  by  parents,  and  brethren 

22.  32  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  breth. 
John  2.  12  he,  and  his  mother,  and  his  brethren 

7.    3  His  brethren . .  said  unto  him,  Depart 
7.    5  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in  him 

7. 10  when  his  brethren  were  gone  up,  then 

20.  17  Touch  me  not.  .but  go  to  my  brethren 

21.  23  Then  went  this . .  abroad  among  the  bret. 
Acts    1.  14  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  .with  his  bret. 

1. 16  brethren,  this  scripture  must  needs  have 
2.  29  Men  (and)  brethren,  let  me  freely  speak 

2.  37  Men  (and)  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? 

3.  17  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance 
3.  22  A  prophet,  .unto  you  of  your  brethren 

6.  3  brethren,  look  ye  out  among  you  seven 

7.  2  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hearken 

7.  13  Joseph  was  made  known  to  his  brethren 
7.  23  came  into  his  heart  to  visit  his  brethren 
7.  25  he  supposed  his  brethren  would  have 
7.  26  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren  ;  why  do  ye  wrong 
7.  37  God  raise  up  unto  you  of  your  brethren 
9.  30] when  the  brethren  knew,  they  brought 

10.  23*certain  brethren  from  Joppa  accompanied 

11.  1  brethren  that  were  in  Judea  heard 
11.  12  these  six  brethren  accompanied  me 

11.  29  send,  .the  brethren  which  dwelt  in  Judea 

12.  17  show  these  things  unto,  .the  brethren 

13.  15  brethren,  if  ye  have  any  word,  .say  on 
13.  26  brethren,  children . .  stock  of  Abraham 

13.  38  Be  it  known  unto  you.  .brethren,  that 

14.  2  minds  evil  affected  against  the  brethren 

15.  1  certain  men.  .taught  the  brethren 

15.    3  caused  great  joy  unto  all  the  brethren 
15.    7  Peter  rose  up,  and  said.. Men.  .brethren 
15.  13  Men  (and)  brethren,  hearken  unto  me 
15.  22  and  Silas,  chief  men  among  the  brethren 
15.  23  The  apostles  and  elders  and  brethren 
15.  23  greeting  unto  the  brethren  which  are  of 
15.  32  exhorted  the  brethren  with  many  words 
15.  33  were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  brethren 
15.  36  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren 

15.  40  recommended  by  the  bretlvren  unto  the 

16.  2  was  well  reported  of  by  the  brethren 

16.  40  when  they  had  seen  the  brethren,  they 

17.  6  they  drew,  .brethren  unto  the  rulers 

1 7.  10  the  brethren  immediately  sent  away  Paul 

17.  14  immediately  the  brethren  sent  away  Paul 

18.  18  Paul . .  then  took  his  leave  of  the  brethren 
18.  27  the  brethren  wrote .  .the  disciples  to 

20.  32  And  now,  brethren,  I  commend  you  to 

21.  7  we.,  saluted  the  brethren,  and  abode  with 

21.  17  when  we  were  come . .  brethren  received 

22.  1  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hear  ye  my 

22.  5  I  received  letters  unto  the  brethren,  and 

23.  1  brethren,  I  have . .  in  all  good  conscience 
23.    5  I  wist  not,  brethren,  that  he  was  the 

23.    6  Men  (and)  brethren,  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the 
28. 14  we  found  brethren,  and  were  desired  to 
28.  15  when  the  brethren  heard  of  us,  they 
28. 17  bretlvren.. I  have  committed  nothing 
28.  21  neither  any  of  the  bretlvren.  .spake  any 
Bom.  1.  13  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant,  brethren 
7.    1  Know  ye  not,  brethren,  for  I  speak  to 

7.  4  my  brethren,  ye  also  are  become  dead  to 
8. 12  brethren,  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh 

8.  29  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren 

9.  3  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren 

10.  1  Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to 

11.  25  I  would  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should  be 

12.  1 1  beseech,  .brethren,  by  the  mercies  of 
15.  14  also  am  persuaded  of  you,  my  brethren 
15.  15  brethren,  I  have  written  the  more  boldly 
15.  30  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  for  the  Lord 
16. 14  Salute,  .the  brethren  which  are  with 

16. 17  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  mark  them  wh. 
1  Co.   1. 10 1  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  name  of 

1. 11  hath  been  declared  unto  me  of  you,  my  b. 

1.  26  For  ye  see  your  calling,  bretlvren,  how 

2.  1 1,  brethren,  when  I  came  to  you,  came 

3.  1  I,  brethren,  could  not  speak  unto  you  as 

4.  6  brethren,  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred 
6.    5  be  able  to  judge  between  his  brethren  ? 

6.  8  wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that,  .brethren 

7.  24  Brethren,  let  every  man.. therein  abide 

7.  29  this  I  say,  brethren,  the  time  (is)  short 

8.  12  when  ye  sin  so  against  the  brethren,  and 
g.    s  the  bretlvren  of  the  Lord,  and  Cephas? 

10.  1  Moreover,  brethren,  I  would  not  that  ye 

11.  2  Now  I  praise  you,  brethren,  that  ye 

11.  33  brethren,  when  ye  come  together  to  eat 

12.  1  brethren,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant 
14.    6  brethren,  if  I  come  unto  you  speaking 
14.  20  Brethren,  be  not  children  in  understand. 
14.  26  brethren?  when  ye  come  together,  every 


Gal 


Eph. 
Phil. 


Col. 
iTh. 


1  Co.  14.  39  bretlvren . .  forbid  not  to  speak  with  tong. 

15.  1  brethren,  I  declare  unto  you  the  gospel 
15.  6  was  seen  of  above  five  hundred  brethren 
15.  50  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot 

15.  58  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  stedfast 

16.  11  for  I  look  for  him  with  the  brethren 
16.  12  to  come  unto  you  with  the  brethren 
16.  15  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  (ye  know  the) 
16.  20  All  the  brethren  greet  you.  Greet  ye  one 

2  Co.   1.    8  we  would  not,  brethren,  have,  .ignorant 

8.  1  brethren,  we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace 
S.  23  Whether  (any  do  enquire),  .our  brethren 

9.  3  Yet  have  I  sent  the  brethren,  lest  our 

9.    5  thought  it  necessary  to  exhort,  .brethren 
11.   9  brethren  which  came  from  Macedonia 
iq.  11  brethren,  farewell.   Be  perfect,  be  of  good 
2  all  the  brethren  which  are  with  me,  unto 

11  brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was 
15  Brethren,  I  speak  after  the  manner  of 

12  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I  (am) 
28  we,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  the  child. 
31  brethren,  we  are  not  children  of  the 
n  brethren.,  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution 

13  brethren,  ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty 
1  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a 

18  Brethren,  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
.  10  Finally,  my  brethren,  be'strongin.  .Lord 

23  Peace  (be)  to  the  brethren,  and  love 

12  I  would  ye  should  understand,  brethren 

14  many  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord 
1  Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord 

13  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to  have 
17  Brethren,  be  followers  together  of  me 

1  Therefore,  my  brethren  dearly  beloved 

8  Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever  things  are 
2 1  brethren  which  are  with  me  greet  yon 

2  To  the.  .faithful  brethren  in  Christ,  .at 

15  Salute  the  brethren  which  are  in  Laodicea 
4  Knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  election 
1  yourselves,  brethren,  know  our  entrance 

9  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and 

14  ye,  brethren,  became  followers  of  the 
17  we,  brethren,  being  taken  from  you  for  a 

7  brethren,  we  were  comforted  over  you  in 
1  webeseechyou,  brethren,  and  exhort  (you) 
10  toward  all  the  brethren  which  are  in  all 

10  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  thatyejnerease 

13  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren 
1  of  the  time,  and  the  seasons,  bretlvren 

4  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that 

12  brethren,  to  know  them  which  labour 

14  brethren,  warn  them  that  are  unruly 

25  Brethren,  pray  for  us 

26  Greet  all  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss 

27  epistle  be  read  unto  all  the  holy  brethren 

3  to  thank  God  always  for  you,  brethren 
1  we  beseech  you,  brethren, *by  the  coming 

13  thanks  alway  to  God  for  you,  brethren 

15  brethren,  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  tradi. 
1  brethren,  pray  for  us,  that  the  word  of 
6  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name 

13  ye,  brethren,  be  not  weary  in  well  doing 

6  If  thou  put  the  brethren  in  remembrance 

1  entreat,  .the  younger  men  as  brethren 

2  not  despise,  .because  they  are  brethren 

21  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  bretlvren 

11  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren 

12  I.  .declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren 
17  behoved,  .to  be  made  like,  .(his) brethren 

1  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly 
12  Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any 

5  according,  .law,  that  is,  of  their  brethren 

19  Having,  .brethren,  boldness  to  enterinto 

22  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  suffer  the  word 

2  My  brethren,  count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall 

16  Do  not  err,  my  beloved  brethren 
19  my  beloved  brethren,  let  every  man  be 

1  My  brethren,  have  not  the  faith  of  our 
5  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren,  Hath  not 

14  My  brethren,  though  a  man  say  he  hath 
1  My  bretlvren,  be  not  many  masters 

10  my  bretlvren,  these  things  ought  not  so 
12  Can  the  fig  tree,  my  brethren,  bear  olive 

11  Speak  not  evil  one  of  another,  brethren 

7  Be  patient,  .brethren,  unto  the  coming 
9  Grudge  not  one  against  another,  brethren 

10  Take,  my  brethren,  the  prophets,  who 

12  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  not 
19  Brethren,  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the 
10  brethren . .  make  your  calling  and  election 

7  Bretlvren,  I  write  no  new  commandment 

13  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world 

14  death.. life  because  we  love  the  brethren 
16  to  lay  down  (our)  lives  for  the  brethren 

3  I  rejoiced,  .when  the  brethren  came 
5  whatever  thou  doest  to  the  brethren,  and 

to  neither  doth  he . .  receive  the  bretlvren 
11 ;  12.  10  ;  19.  10 ;  22.  9. 


2Th. 


[Ti. 


2T1. 
Heb. 


Jas. 


aPe. 
t  Jo. 


3  Jo. 
Hev. 


4. Brotherhood,  aS€\(p6r7js  adelphotes. 

1  Pe.  5.    9  your  brethren  that  are  in  the  world 

BRETHREN,  false  — 

False  or  lying  brother,  iptvSdSeXfpos  pseudadelphos. 

2  Co.  11.  26  perils  in  the  sea.  .among  false  brethren 
Gal.    2.  4  because  of  false  brethren  unawares 

BRETHREN,  love  as  — 
Loiinff  a  brother,  <pi\d8€\<pos  philadelphos. 
1  Pe.  3.   8  love  as  brethren,  (be)  pitiful,  (he) 


BRETHREN 


110 


BRING 


BRETHREN,  love  of  — 
Love  of  brethren,  <*>i\a5t\(p<a  Philadelphia. 
i  Pe.    i.  22  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren 

BRIBE  — 

1..1  covt  ring,  "-  hopher. 

i  Sa.  12.    3  of  whose  hand  have  I,received  (any)  bribe 
Amos  s    i2  they  afflict  the  just,  they  take  a  bribe 
2,Bribe,  reward,  ~irs&  shochad. 

i  Sa.    S.    3  took  bribes,  and  perverted  judgment 

PSa.  2*.  io  their  right  hand  is  full  of  bribes 

Isa.    33.  15  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  of  bribes 

BRIBERY  — 
Bribe,  "i?i?  shochad. 

Job   15.  34  cousume  the  tabernacles  of  bribery 

BRICK  — 

Biic\  [from  its  whiteness))  rca?  lebcnah. 
Gj:i.  11.    3  Go  to,  let  us  make  brick,  and  burn 

11.    3  they  had  brick  for  stune,  and  slime  had 
Exod.  1.  14  with  hard  bondage,  in  mortar,  and  in  br. 
5.    7  Ye  shall .  .give .  .straw  to  make  brick 
5.    S  the  tale  of  the  bricks,  which  they  did 
5.  16  and  they  say  to  us,  Make  brick  :  and 

5. 18  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  of  bricks 
5.  ig  Ye  shall  not  niinish.  .from  your  bricks 

Isa.     9.  10  bricks  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will  build 

BRICK,  altars  of  — 

Anything  made  of  brick,  r\\y?  lebenah. 

Isa.    65.    3  burnetii  incense  upon  altars  of  brick 

BRICK,  making  — 

To  make  bricks,  p7  laban. 

Exod. 5.  14  not  fulfilled,  .task  in  making  brick 

BRICK  KILN  — 

Place  for  making  bricks  faSn  malben. 

2  Sa.  12.  31  made  them  pass  through  the  brick  kiln 
Jer.  43.  9  hide  them  in  the  clay  in  the  brick  kiln 
Nan,  3.  14  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  brick  k. 

BRIDE  — 

1.  The  complete  or  perfect  one,  rta  kallah, 

Isa.   49. 18  bind  them  (on  thee),  as  a  bride  (doeth) 
61. 10  as  a  bride  adorneth  (herself)  with  her 
62.    5  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride 

Jer.  2,  32  Can  a  maid  forget . .  (or)  a  bride  her  attire  ? 
7.  34  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
16.  9  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
25.  10  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
33.  11  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 

Joel    2. 16  go  forth .  .and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet 
'2. Bride,  vv/x(p-n  numphe. 

John  3.  29  He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom 

Rev.  18.  23  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom  and  of  the  b. 
21.    2  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband 
21.   9  I  will  show  thee  [the  bride],  the  Lamb's 
22. 17  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come 

BRIBE  CHAMBER  — 

Bride  chamber,  vv\x.§u>v  numph'ni. 

Matt.  y.  15  tin-  children  of  the  bride  chamber  mourn 
Mark  2.  19  the  children  of  the  bride  chamber  fast 
Luke  5.  34  ye  make  the  children  of  the  bride  cham. 
BRIDEGROOM  — 
I. One  who  contracts  affinity,  |nrr  chathan. 

Psa.  19.    5  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber 
Isa.  61. 10  as  a  bridegroom  decketh  (himself)  with 
62.    5  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride 
Jer.     7.  34  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
16.    9  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
25.  10  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
33.  11  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride 
Joel    2.  16  let.. bridegroom  go  forth.. and  the  bride 

2.  Bridegroom,  vv/xtpios  numphios. 

Matt.  9.  15  as  long  as  the  bridegroom  is  with  them  ? 
g.  15  when  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  from 
25.    1  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom 
25-    5  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all 
25.    6  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye 
25.  10  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  came 

Mark  2.  19  [fast  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them?] 

2. 19  as  long  as  they  have  the  bridegroom  with 

2.  -o  when  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away 
Luke  5.  34  fast  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them? 

5.  35  when  the  bridegroom  shall  betaken  away 
John  2.    9  the  governor,  .called  the  bridegroom 

3.  29  He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom 
3.  29  but  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  which 
3.  29 rejoiceth.. because  of  the  bridegroom's 

Rev,  i3.  23  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom.. shall  be 
BRIDLE  — 
l.Mnzzle,  dSdto  machsom. 

IVi.   jq.    ,  1  will  keep  my  mouth  with  abridge,  while 
l.B\    ".''',  :rn  metlieg. 

2Ki.  19.  38  I  will  put.. my  bridle  in  thy  lips 
"l,,v-     ■    I  1"1'  "»e  horte,  a  bridle  for  the  ass,  and  a 
l    -     ;;•  29  will  I  put. .my  bridle  in  thy  lips 

,  \;i  resen, 
Job    io.  11  thoyhavc  also  let  loose  the  bridle 

41.  13  c<;nio  (to  him)  with  his  double  bridle? 
isa.  32.    owhosemnuthmustbeheldin..with    brid 
'.  98  and.,  a  bridle  in  the  jaws  of  the  people 
4.  lit  of  a  bridle,  vaXi^-I?  chalinos. 

Kl  v    l  1-  -  »W Icamcout..  unto  the  horse  bridles 


BRIDLE,  to  — 

To  lead  with  a  bit,  xaAira-yoryew  chalinagdgeo. 
Jas.     1.  26  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  deceiveth 

3.  2  (and)  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body 

BRIEFLY  — 

Through  a  few  (words),  St  bhtyoiv  di-oligOn. 

1  Pe.  c.  1?  I  suppose,  I  have  written  briefly,  exhorting 

ERLEFLY  comprehended,  to  be  — 
To  be  brought  up  into  a  head,  a.va.Kz<pa.\ai6o}ia,i. 
Rom  13.    9  it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  saying 

BRIER  — 

1. Brier,  P>7  chedeq. 

Mic.    7.    4  The  best  of  them  (is)  as  a  brier  j  the  most 
2.Brier,  thorn,  fbp  sillon. 

Eze.  28.  24  there  shall  be  no  more  a  pricking  brier 

3. Thorn,  nettle,  ns"ip  sirpad. 

Isa.    55. 13  instead  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the 
A. Brier,  diamond  point,  adamant,  Tp^  shamir. 
Isa.     5.    6  there  shall  come  up  briers  and  thorns 
7.  23  it  shall  (even)  be  for  briers  and  thorns 
7.  24  the  land  shall  become  briers  and  thorns 
7.  25  shall  not  come  thither  the  fear  of  briers 
9.  18  it  shall  devour  the  briers  and  thorns,  and 
10.  17  burn  and  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers 
27.    4  who  would  set  the  briers,  .against  me  in 
32.  13  Upon  the  land . .  shall  come  up . .  briers  ; 
5.-1  triple-pointed  plant,  Tpi$o\os  tribolos. 

Heb.   6.    8  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers 
BRIERS  — 
1. Threshing  instrument?,  □,.ji?13  barqanim. 

Judg.8.  7, 16  thorns  of  the  wilderness  and  with  briers 
2.  Briers,  n*:np  sarabim. 

Eze.     2.   6  though  briers  and  thorns  (be)  with  thee 

BRIGANDLNE  — 

Coat  of  meal,  brigandine,  jv*ip  sirion. 

Jer.  46.    4  furbish,  .(and)  put  on  the  brigandines 
51.    3  lifteth  himself  up  in  his  brigandine 
BRIGHT— 
l.Light,  bright,  llK  or. 

Job    37.  11  he  scattereth  his  bright  cloud 
2.  Bright,  -rrra  bahir. 

Job  37.  21  see  not  the  bright  light  which  (is)  in  the 

3. Lightning,  brightness,  p"]2  baraq. 

Eze.  21.  15  made  bright,  (it  is)  wrapped  up  for  the 

4. Flame,  blade,  irjh  lahab. 

Neh.    3.    3  The  horsemen  lifteth  up  both  the  bright 
5. Light-giver,  light-giving,  tind  maor. 

Eze.  32.  8  All  the  bright  lights  of  heaven  will  I  make 

6.  To  })olish,  a*!?  marat,  4. 

1  Ki,  7.  45  and  all  these  vessels,  .(were  of)  bright 

7.  To  scour,  2>olish,  pi?  maraq. 

2  Ch.  4. 16  for  the  house  of  the  Lord,  of  bright  brass 
S. Shining,  P»J  nogah. 

Eze.    1.  13  the  fixe  was  bright,  and  out  of  the  fire 
9. Prepared,  bright,  shining,  niiWJ  ashotlu 

Eze.  27. 19  bright  iron,  cassia,  and  calamus,  were  in 
10.  Prepared,  shining,  rw]i  esJieth. 

Song  5.  14  his  belly  (is  as)bright  ivory  overlaid  (with) 
11. Bright,  shilling,  Xa/xTTp6s  lampros. 

Acts  10.  30  behold,  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright 

Rev.  22.  16  (aud)  the  bright  and  morning  star 

12.  Shining,  (ptoTztv6$  photeinos. 

Matt.17.    5  While  he.,  spake,  behold,  a  [bright]  cloud 

BRIGHT  cloud  — 

Brightness,  lightness,  T'lrr  chaziz. 

Zech.  10.    1  (so)  the  Lord  shall  make  bright  clouds 

BRIGHT  spot  — 

Freckled  spot,  n"jri3  bahereth. 

Lev.  13.    2  a  scab,  or  bright  spot,  and  it  be  in  the 
13.    4  If  the  bright  spot  (be)  white  in  the  skin 
13. 19  the  place  of  the  boil  there  be.  .a  bright  s. 
13.  23,  28  if  the  bright  spot  stay  in  his  place 
13.  24  (flesh)  that  burnetii  have  a  white  bright  s. 
13.  25  the  hair  in  the  bright  spot  be  turned 
13.  26  (there  be)  no  white  hair  in  the  bright  spot 
1 3.  38  skin  of  their  flesh  bright  spots . .  bright  s. 

13.  39  (if)  the  bright  spots  in  the  skin  of  their 

14.  56  a  rising,  and  for  a  scab,  and  for  a  bright  s. 

BRIGHT,  to  make  — 

I, To  cleanse,  T12  barar,  5. 

Jer.    51. 11  Make  bright  the  arrows ;  gather  the 

2.To  meike  bright  or  sharp,  ?*>n  qalal,  Sa. 

Eze.  21.  21  he  made  (his)  arrows  bright,  he  consulted 
BRIGHTNESS  — 
1. Brightness,  shining,  nni  zohar. 

Eze.    8.    2  as  the  appearance  of  brightness,  as  the 

Dan.  12.   3  they.. shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the 
2.  Clearness,  appearance,  vi  ziv. 

Dan.   2.  31  This  great  image,  whose  brightness  (was) 

4.  36  mine  honour  and  brightness  returned 


Z.Shining  (as  of  a  city),  nj/5?  yiphah. 

Eze.  28.    7  and  they  shall  defile  thy  brightness 

eS.  17  thy  wisdom  by  reason  of  thy  brightness 
4.  Precious,  rare,  ip;  yaqar. 

Job    31.  ?6  or  the  moon  walking  (in)  brightness 
5. Shining  (of fire,  sun,  moon,  spear),  nrinogah. 
2  Sa.  22.  13  Through  the  brightness  before  him  were 
Psa.  18.  12  At  the  brightness.,  his  thick  clouds  passed 
Isa.  60.    3  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising 
60. 19  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give  light 
62.    1  righteousness  .  .go  forth  as  brightness 
Eze.    1.    4  abrightness(was)about  it,  and  out  of  the 
1.  27  fire,  and  it  had  brightness  round  about 

1.  2S  so  (was)  the  appearance  of  the  brightness 
10.    4  full  of  the  brightness  of  the  Lord's  glory 

Amos  5.  20  even  very  dark,  and  no  brightness  in  it? 

Hab.   3.    4  And  (his)  brightness  was  as  the  light :  he 
G.Shinings,  brightnesses,  ninh  negohoth. 

Isa,    59.   9  tor  brightness,  (but)  we  walk  in  darkness 
7.  Reflexion,  airavyacrfia  apaugasma. 

Heb.    1.    3  Who  being  the  brightness  of  (hi?)  glory 
8. Manifestation,  eirupaveia  epiphaneia. 

2  Th.  2.   8  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coming 
9. Shining,  brilliancy,  \a/j.TrpoT7js  lamprotes. 

Acts  26.  13  light  .above  the  brightness  of  the  sun 

BRIM  — 

I.  End,  edge,  border,  rrx$  qatseh. 

Josh.  3.  15  were  dipped  in  the  brim  of  the  water 
2.Lip,  715}?  saphah. 

1  Ki.  7.  23  ten  cubits  from  the  one  brim  to  theother 

7.  24  And  under  the  brim  of  it  round  about 
7.  26  and  the  brim  thereof  was  wrought 
7.  26  like  the  brim  of  a  cup,  with  flowers  of 

2  Ch.  4.    2  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits  from  brim  to  b. 

4.    5  (was)  an  handbreadth,  aud  the  brim  of 

4.  5  like  the  work  of  the  brim  of  a  cup,  with 

BRIM,  up  to  the  — 

Up  unto  the  upper  part,  eois  &vo>  heos  and. 
John  2.    7  And  they. filled  them  up  to  the  brim 

BRIMSTONE  — 

1.  Bitumen,  pitch,  D^sa  gophrith. 

Gen.  19.  24  Then  the  Lord  rained,  .brimstone  and 
Deut2g.  23  (that)  the  whole  land  thereof  (is)  brimst. 
Job   18.  15  brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his 
Psa.  11.    6  Upon  the  wicked  he  shall  rain,  .brimstone 
Isa.  30.  33  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brim. 

34.    9  and  the  dust  thereof  into  brimstone 
Eze.  38.  22  and  great  hailstones  tire  and  brimstone 

2. Divine  flre,  or  sulphur,  dz'tov  theion. 

Lukei7.  29  it  rained  fire  andbrimstoue  from  heaven 
Rev.   9.  17  out  of  theirmouths  issued  fire.,  and  brim. 
9.  18  by  the  smoke,  and  by  the  brimstone 
14.  10  he  shall  be  tormented  with,  .brimstone 

19.  20  into  a  lake,  .burning  with  brimstone 

20.  10  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone  ■ 
si.    8  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone 

BRIMSTONE  (of)  — 

Like  as  of  sxdphur,  deicbdvs  theiodes. 

Rev.   9. 17  having  breastplates  of  fire  .andbrimstoue 

BRING,  to  — 

1,To  add,  gather,  *]pN  asctph. 

Deut  22.    2  thou  shalt  bring  it  unto  thine  own  house 
Josh.  2  18  thou  shalt  bring  thy  father,  and  thy 

2.2^0  cause  to  come,  KrjN,  npx  athah,  5. 

Isa.    21.  14  The  inhabitants,  .brought  water  to  him 
Dan.    3.  13  Nebuchadnezzar.. commanded  to  bring 

3.  13  Then  they  brought  these  men  before 

•5.   2  commanded  to  bring  the  golden.. vessels 

5.  3  Then  they  brought  the  golden  vessels 

5. 13  the  kingmy  father  brought  out  of  Jewry? 

5.  23  they  have  brought  the  vessels  of  his 

6.  16  the  king  commanded,  and  they  brought 
6.  24  brought  those  men  which  had  accused 

3.  To  cause  to  come  in,  toa  bo,  5. 

Gen.   2.  19  brought  (them)  unto  Adam  to  see  what 

2.  22  made  he  a  woman,  and  brought  her  unto 

4.  3  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground 
4.    4  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his 

6.  17  I.dobringafloodof  watersupon  theearth 

6. 19  of  every  living  thing,  .shalt  thou  bring 

18.  19  the  Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham  that 

20.    9  thou  hast  brought,  .and  on  my  kingdom 

24.  67  And  Isaac  brought  her  into  his  mother's 

26.  10  thou  shouldest  have  brought  guiltiness 

27.  4  make  me  savoury  meat,  .and  bring  (it) 
27.    s  to  hunt  (for)  venison,  (and)  to  bring  (it) 
27.    7  Bring  me  venison,  and  make  me.  .meat 
27.  10  And  thou  shalt  bring  (it)  to  thy  father 
27.  12  I  shall  bring  a  curse  upon  me,  and  not  a 
27.  14  he  went,  .and  brought  (them)  to  his 

27.  25  and  he  brought  him  wine,  and  he  drank 
27.  31  and  brought  it  unto  his  father,  and  said 
27.  33  he  that  hath  taken  venison,  and  brought 
29.  13  and  kissed  him,  and  brought  him  to  his 

29.  23  he  took  Leah  bis  daughter,  and  brought 

30.  14  and  brought  them  unto  his  mother  Leah 

31.  39  was  torn  (of  beasts)  I  brought  not  unto 
37.    2  ami  Joseph  brought  unto  his  father  their 
37.  28  sold  Joseph . .  and  they  brought  Joseph 
37.  32  they  sent  the  coat . .  and . .  brought  (it)  to 
39.  17  The  Hebrew  servant,  which  thou  hast  h 


BRING 


117 


BRING 


Gea.  42 

42. 
42. 

43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44- 
46. 
46. 
47- 
47- 
EXOtl    2. 

6. 


16. 
16. 

*7- 
'7- 
17. 
17- 
18. 
19. 
20. 
23* 
23. 
=3- 
2  3- 
24. 
26. 
26. 

Num.  5. 

5- 

6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 
14. 
14. 
14- 
14. 


3i- 

31- 

32. 

Deut.  6. 

6. 

1- 

7- 


20  But  bring  your  youngest  brother  uuto 
34  And  bring  your  youngest  brother  uuto 
37  Slay  my  two  sons,  if  I  bring  him  not  to 
2  which  they  had  brought  out  of  Egypt 
9  if  I  bring  him  not  unto  thee,  and  set 

16  Bring  (these)  men  home,  and  slay,  aud 

17  the  man  brought  the  men  into  Joseph's 

24  the  man  brought  the  meu  into  Joseph's 
26  they  brought  him  the  present  which  (was) 
32  If  I  bring  him  not  uuto  thee,  then  I  shall 

7  aud  all  his  seed,  brought  he  with  him  into 

32  and  they  have  brought  their  flocks,  and 
14  aud  Joseph  brought  the  money  iuto 

17  And  they  brought  their  cattle  unto 

10  and  she  brought  him  uuto  Pharaoh's 

8  And  I  will  bring  you  in  unto  the  laud 

4  to-morrow  will  I  bring  the  locusts  into 

1  Yet  will  I  bring  one  plague  (more)  upon 

5  when  the  Lord  shall  bring  thee  into  the 

11  Aud  it  shall  be,  when  the  Lord  shall 
19  that  thou  mayest  briug  the  causes  unto 
22  (that)  every  great  matter  they  shall  bring 
26  the  hard  causes  they  brought  unto  Moses 

4  (how)  I  bare  you.  .and  brought  you  unto 

13  (then)  let  him  bring  it  (for)  witness 

19  thou  shalt  bring  into  the  house  of. .  Lord 

20  to  bring  thee  into  the  place  which  I  have 

2  Break  oft"  the  golden  earrings,  .and  bring 

3  brake  off  the  golden  earrings ..  and  bro. 
2 1, thou  hast  brought  so  great  a  sin  upon 

26  thou  shalt  bring  unto  the  house  of  the 

5  whosoever  (is)  of  a  willing  heart,  let  him 

25  and  brought  that  which  they  had  spun 

21  they  brought  the  Lord's  offering  to  the 

22  brought  bracelets,  aud  earrings,  and 

23  every  man.  .whom  was  found  .  .brought 

24  Every  one  that  did  offer,  .brought  the 

24  every  man  with  whom  was.  .brought  (it) 

27  And' the  rulers  brought  onyx  stoues.  and 
29  The  children,  .brought  a  willing  offering 

3  the  children,  .had  brought  for  the  work 

3  And  they  brought  yet  uuto  him  free  offer. 

5  The  people  bring  much  more  than  enough 

6  the  people  were  restrained  from  bringing 

33  And  they  brought  the  tabernacle  unto 
21  And  he  brought  the  ark  into  the  tabernacle 

2  And  he  shall  bring  it  to  Aaron's  sous  the 
8  And  thou  shalt  bring  the  meat  offering 

4  Aud  he  shall  bring  the  bullock  unto  the 

5  and  briug  it  to  the  tabernacle  of  the 

14  and  bring  him  before  the  tabernacle  of 

16  the  priest. .shall  bring  of  the  bullock's 
23  he  shall  bring  his  offering,  a  kid  of  the 

25  then  he  shall  bring  his  offering,  a  kid  of 
32  if  he  bring  a  lamb,  .he  shall  bring  it 

6  he  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering  unto 

7  theu  lie  shall  bring  for  his  trespass,  which 

8  And  he  shall  bring  them  unto  the  priest 

11  But  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  two  turtle 

12  Then  shall  he  bring  it  to  the  priest 

15  then  he  shall  bring  for  his  trespass  unto 

18  And  he  shall  bring  a  ram  without  blemish 
6  And  he  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering 

29  He.  .shall  bring  his  oblation  unto  the 

30  His  own  hands  shall  bring  the  offerings 
30  the  fat  with  the  breast,  it  shall  he  bring 
15  shall  they  bring  with  the  offerings  made 

6  she  shall  bring  a  Iamb  of  the  first  year 

23  And  he  shall  bring  them  on  the  eighth 
29  and  bring  them  unto  the  priest,  to  the 

12  sweet  incense,. and  bring  (it)  within  the 
15  shall  he  kill  the  goat,  .and  bring  his  blood 

4  And  brlngeth  it  not  unto  the  door  of  the 

5  maybring  their  sacrifices,  which  they  offer 
5  even  that  tney  may  bring  them  unto 

9  And  bringeth  it  not  unto  the  door  of  the 

3  whither  I  bring  you,  shall  ye  not  do* 

21  And  he  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering 

22  whither  I  bring  you  to  dwell  therein 
10  then  ye  shall  bring  a  sheaf  of  the  first 

14  that  ye  have  brought  an  offering  unto 

15  ye  brought  the  sheaf  of  the  wave  offering 

17  Ye  shall  bring  out  of  your  habitations 
it  And  they  brought  him  unto  Moses 

25  And  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you,  that 
41  and  have  brought  them  into  the  laud  of 
15  Then  shall  the  man  bring  his  wife  unto 

15  and  he  shall  bring  her  offering  for  her 
10  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  bring  two 

13  he  shall  be  brought  unto  the  door  of  the 

12  and  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the  first  year 
3  brought  their  offering  before  the  Lord 

3  hath  the  Loud  brought  us  into  this  land 
8  then  he  will  bring  us  unto  this  land,  aud 

16  the  Lord  was  not  able  to  firing  this 

24  him  will  I  bring  into  the  land  whereunto 
iS  When  ye  come  into  the  land  whither  I 

25  and  they  shall  bring  their  offering,  a  sac. 

14  Moreover  thou  hast  not  brought  us  iuto 

13  which  they  shall  bring  unto  the  Lord 

4  have  ye  brought  up  the  congregation 

5  to  bring  us  in  unto  this  evil  place? 

12  ye  shall  not  bring  this  congregation  into 
12  And  they  brought  the  captives,  and  the 
54  and  brought  it  into  the  tabernacle  of  the 

17  until  we  have  brought  them  unto  their 
10  when  the  Lord,  .shall  have  brought  thee 

23  that  he  might  bring  us  in,  to  give  us  the 
1  thy  God  shall  bring  thee  into  the  land 

26  Neither  shalt  thou  bring  an  abomination 

7  the  Lord  thy  God  bringeth  thee  into  a 
2S  to  bring  them  into  the  laud  which  he 


31- 
31- 

Josh.  7 

18. 
23- 


7 
iS 
19 
19 
21, 

:  Sa.  1. 


Ki. 


2  Ki,   4 


:Ch, 


>Ch. 


6  thitherye  shall  bring  your  burnt  offerings 

11  thither  shall  ye  bring  all  that  I  command 

12  Theu  thou  shalt  bring  her  home  to  thine 
iS  Thou  shalt  not  bring  the  hire  of  a  whore 

2  which  thou  shalt  briug  of  thy  laud  that 
9  And  he  hath  brought  us  iuto  this  place 

10  behold,  I  have  brought  the  first  fruits  of 
27  to  briug  upon  it  all  the  curses  that  are 

5  Aud  the  Lord  thy  God  will  bring  thee 

20  For  when  I  shall  have  brought  them 

21  before  I  have  brought  them  into  the  land 
23  for  thou  shalt  bring . .  Israel  into  the  land 

7  and  bring  him  unto  his  people  :  let  his 

23  they  took  them  out.. aud  brought  them 

6  and  bring,  .hither  to  me,  that  I  may  cast 
15  so  shall  the  Lord  bring  upon  you  all  evil 

7  brought  the  sea  upon  them,  and  covered 

8  I  brought  you  into  the  laud  of  the  Amor. 
7  And  they  brought  him  to  Jerusalem 

1  and  have  brought  you  uuto  the  land 
25  aud  brought  the  heads  of  Oreb  and  Zeeb 

3  and  said  unto  him,  "Who  brought  thee 
3  and  she  brought  him  iuto  her  fathers 

21  So  he  brought  him  into  his  house 

12  aud  they  brought  them  unto  the  camp  to 

22  and  (then)  I  will  bring  him,  that  he  may 

24  brought  him  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord 

25  they  slew  a  bullock,  and  brought  the 

1  brought  it  from  Eben-ezer  unto  Ashdod 

2  they  brought  it  into  the  house  of  Dagon 
1  brought  it  iuto  the  house  of  Abinadab 

7  behold,  (if)  we  go,  what  shall  we  bring 
7  not  a  present  to  bring  to  the  man  of  God 

22  and  brought  them  into  the  parlour 

27  they  despised  him,  aud  brought  him  no 
15  They  have  brought  them  from  the  Amal 

20  and  have  brought  Agag  the  king  of  Ama 

17  Provide  me  now  a  man.. and  bring.. to 
54  And  David  took  the  head  .and  brought 
57  brought  him  before  Saul,  with  the  head 
27  David  brought  their  foreskins,  and  they 

7  And  Jonathan  brought  David  to  Saul 

8  for  thou  hast  brought  thy  servant  into  a 

8  for  why  shouldest  thou  bring  me  to  thy 

14  wherefore  (then)  have  ye  brought  him  to 

15  that  ye  have  brought  this,  .to  play  the 

27  which  thine  handmaid  hath  brought  unto 
35  David  received.. which  she  had  brought 

11  David  saved  neither  mau .  .to  bring 

jo  have  brought  them  hither  unto  my  lord 

13  except  thou  first  bring  Michal,  Saul  s 

5  And  they  brought  the  head  of  Ish  bosheth 
iS  what  (is)  my  house,  .thou  hast  brought 

7  took  the  shields-  .aud  brought  them 

10  Whosoever  saith  (ought)  unto  thee,  bring 

23  and  brought  Absalom  to  Jerusalem 

14  that  the  Lord  might  bring  evil  upon  Ab. 

16  and  took  (it),  and  brought  (it)  to  David 

3  Abishag.  .and  brought  her  to  the  king 
40  and  Shimei  went,  and  brought  his 

1  aud  brought  her  iuto  the  city  of  David 

24  And  the  king  said,  Bring  me  a  sword 

25  Barley  also  and  straw,  .brought  they  unto 

9  The  Lord  brought  upon  them. all  this  evil 

28  fetched,  .gold,  .and  brought  (it)  to  king 
25  And  they  brought  every  man  his  present 
10  I  will  bring  evil  upon  the  house  of  Jerob. 

6  the  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  flesh 

39  a  man  turned  aside,  and  brought  a  man 

21  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  thee 

29  I  will  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  days 

29  in  his  son's  days  will  I  bring  the  evil 
20  when  he  had  taken  him,  and  brought 
42  and  brought  the  man  of  God  bread  of 

6  he  brought  the  letter  to  the  king  of  Israel 
20  receiving  at  his  hands  that  which  he 

S  They  have  brought  the  heads  of  the  king's 
24  (If)  any. .whom  I  have  brought  into  yours 

4  and  brought  them  to  him  into  the  house 

24  the  king,  .brought  (meu)  from  Babylon 

25  have  I  brought  it  to  pass,  that  thou 

20  he  made  a  pool,  .and  brought  water  into 
T2  I  (am)  bringing  (such),  .upon  Jerusalem 
16  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place 

30  evil  which  I  will  bring  upon  this  place 

8  he  brought  all  the  priests  out  of  the 
30  his  servants  carried  him .  and  brought 
16  even  them  the  kiug  of  Babylon  brought 

26  and  brought  them  unto  Halah . .  Habor 

12  and  brought  them  to  Jabesh,  and  buried 

2  he  that  leddest  out  and  broughtest  in  Is. 

18  and  took  (it),  and  brought  (it)  to  David 

19  (the  jeopardy  of)  their  lives  they  brought 

40  Moreover  they.. brought  bread  on  asses 

5  bring  the  ark  of  God  from  Kirjath-jearim 
12  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God  (home) 

1  they  brought  the  ark  of  God,  and  set 
16  what  (is)  mine  house,  that  thou  hast 

7  David  took  the  shields.. and  brought 

2  bring  the  number  of  them  to  me,  that  I 
4  they  of  Tyre,  brought  much  cedar  wood 

19  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 
16  and  we  will  bring  it  to  thee  in  floats  by 

22  hath  he  brought  all  this  evil  upou  them 
18  took .  .talents  of  gold,  and  brought  (them) 
10  the  servants  of  Solomon,  which  brought 

10  And  the  servants .  .brought  algum  trees 
12  besides  (that)  which  she  had  brought 

14  Besides  (that  which)  chapmen,  .brought 
14  all  the  kings  of  Arabia,  .brought  gold  and 
24  Aud  they  brought  every  man  his  present 

11  they  offered.. of  the  spoil  (which)  they 


>Ch. 


28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29, 
29. 
29. 
3*- 
32- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
36. 

Ezra   3, 

8. 


Xeh. 


Esth.  1 

6. 
6 
Job 

M 

42 
Tsa.  43 

66. 

78. 

78. 

105, 

Prov.21 

31 
Feci.  3 


Song  1. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


6. 


e8  he  brought  into  the  house  of  God  the 
11  (some)  of  the  Philistines  brought  Jehosh. 
11  and  the  Arabians  brought  him  flocks 
9  they  caught  him .  .and  brought  him  to 
11  the  chest  was  brought  unto  the  king's 
14  they  brought  the  rest  of  the  money  before 
i2  and  brought^them  unto  the  top  of  the 

14  that  he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children 
25  and  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  and  brake 

5  a  great  multitude,  .and  brought  (them) 

8  and  brought  the  spoil  to  Samaria 

13  Ye  shall  not  bring  in  the  captives  hither 

15  brought  them  to  Jericho,  the  city  of. 
27  but  they  brought  him  not  into  the? 

21  they  brought  seven  bullocks,  and  seven 

31  come  near  and  bring  sacrifices  and 

32  number. . which  the;congregation brought 

10  Since  (the  people)  began  to  bring  the 

23  And  many  brought  gifts  unto  the  Lord 

11  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  thecaptains 

24  Behold  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place 

25  all  the  evil  that  I  will  bring  upon  this 

10  Nebuchadnezzar,  .brought  him  to 
1 8  all  (these)  he  brought  to  Babylon 

7  to  bring  cedar  trees  from  Lebanon  to  the 

17  that  they  should  bring  unto  us  ministers 

18  they  brought  us  a  mau  of  understanding 

30  to  bring  (them)  to  Jerusalem  unto  the 

9  bring  them  unto  the  place  that  I  have 

1  to  bring  the  book  of  the  law  of  Moses 

2  And  Ezra  the  priest  brought  the  law 

16  the  people  went  forth,  and  brought 

23  children  also,  .broughtest  them  into  the 

31  And  (if)  the  people  of  the  laud  bring 

34  to  bring  (it)  into  the  house  of  our  God 

35  And  to  bring  the  first  fruits  of  our 

36  the  firstborn  of  our  sons,  .to  bring  to  the 

37  we  should  bring  the  first  fruits  of  our 

39  the  children  of  Israel,  .shall  bring  the 

1  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem 
27  they  sought  the  Levites . .  to  bring  them  to 

12  Then  brought  all  Judah  the  tithe  of  the 

15  which  they  brought  into  Jerusalem  on 

16  which  brought  fish . .  and  all  manner  of 

18  and  did  not  our  God  bring  all  this  evil 

19  there  should  no  burden  be  brought  in  on 
n  To  bring  Vashti  the  queen  before  the 

9  to  bring  (it)  into  the  king's  treasuries 

1  to  bring  the  book  of  records  of  the  Chron. 
.  14  to  bring  Ham  an  unto  the  banquet  that 

6  whose  hand  God  bringeth  (abundantly) 

3  bringest  me  into  judgment  with  thee? 

11  all  the  evil  that  the  Lord  had  brought 

3  let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  hill 
11  Thou  broughtest  us  into  the  net 
54  And  he  brought  them  to  the  border  of  his 
71  he  brought  him  to  feed  Jacob  his  people 

40  (The  people)  asked  and  he  brought  quails 
27  (when)  he  bringeth  it  with  a  wicked  mind? 

14  she  bringeth  her  food  from  afar 

22  for  who  shall  bring  him  to  see  what  shall 
9  for  all  these  (things)  God  will  bring  thee 

14  God  shall  bring  every  workinto  judgment 

4  The  King  hatli  brought  me  into  his 
4  He  brought  me  to  the  banqueting  house 

4  until  I  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's 

2  (and)  bring  thee  into  my  mother's  house 
11  every,  .was  to  bring  a  thousand  (pieces) 

13  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations  ;  inceDse  is 

17  The  Lord  shall  bring,  .upon  thy  people 
2  the  people  shall  take  them,  and  bring 

2  Yet  he  also  (is)  wise,  and  will  bring  evilT 

26  have  I  brought  it  to  pass,  .thou  shouldest 

5  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east,  and 

6  bring  my  sons  from  far,  aud  my  daughters 

23  Thou  hast  not  brought  me  the  small 

11  I  have  spoken  (it),  I  will  also  bring  it  to 

15  I  have  brought  him,  and  he  shall  make 

22  they  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  (their)  arms 

7  Even  them  will  I  bring  to  my  holy 

7  that  thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  cast 
9  the  ships  of  Tarshish  first,  to  bring  thy 
11  (men)  may  bring  uuto  thee  the  forces  of 

17  For  brass  I  will  bring. .  I  will  bring 

4  and  will  bring  their  fears  upon  them 

20  And  they  shall  bring  all  your  brethren 
20  as  the  children  of  Israel  bring  an  offering 

7  And  I  brought  you  into  a  plentiful 

14  and  two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you 
6  I  will  bring  evil  from  the  north,  and  a 

15  Lo,  I  will  bring  a  nation  upon  you  from 
19  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  people 

5  I  will  bring  upon  them  all  the  words  of 

11  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  them 

23  for  I  will  bring  evil  upon  the  men  of 

8  I  have  brought  upon  them  against  the 

18  bring  upon  them  the  day  of  evil,  and 
26  bringing  burnt  offerings,  and  sacrifices 
26  bringing  sacrifices  of  praise,  unto  the 

22  thou  shalt  bring  a  troop  suddenly  upon 

3  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place 
15  Behold,  I  will  bring  upon  this  city,  .all 

12  for  I  will  bring  evilupon  them,  (even) the 
1  and  had  brought  them  to  Babylon 

o  ami  will  bring  them  against  this  land 

13  And  I  will  bring  upon  that  hind  all  my 

23  and  brought  him  unto  Jeboiakim  the 

11  the  nations  that  bring  their  neck  under 

12  Bring  your  necks  under  the  yoke  of  the 
8  I  will  bring  them  from  the  north  country 

42  Like  as  I  have  brought  all  this  great  evil 
42  so  will  I  bring  upon  them  all  the  good 


BRING 


118 


BRING 


Jer.  33.  n  (and)  of  them  that  shall  bring  the 

35.  2  and  bring  them  into  the  house  of  the 

35. 17  Behold,!  will  bring  upon  Judah  and  upon 

36.  31  I  will  bring  upou  them,  and  upon  the 

37.  14  so  Irijah  took  Jeremiah,  and  brought  him 

39.  16  Behold,  I  will  bring  my  words  upou  this 

40.  3  Now  the  l.'  ran  hath  brought  (it),  and 

41.  5  to  bring  (them)  to  the  house  of  the  LORD 

42.  17  from  the  evil  that  I  will  bringupon  them 
44  2  all  the  evil  that  1  have  brought  upon  Jer. 
45.    5  for,  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  all 

48.  44  for  I  will  bring  upon  it,  (even)  upon 

49.  5  Behold,  I  will  bring  a  fear  upou  thee 

49.    8  for  I  will  bring  tin- calamity  of  Esau  upon 
49.  32  I  will  bring  their  calamity  from  all  sides 
49  36  And  upon  fclam  will  I  bring  the  four 
49.  37  I  will  briug  evil  upon  them,  (even)  my 
51.  64  from  the  evil  that  I  will  bring  upon  her 
Lam    1.  21  thuii  wilt  bring  the  day  (that)  thou  hast 
Eze.    5.  17  and  I  will  bring  the  sword  upon  thee 

6.  3  I,  (even)  I,  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you 

7.  24  I  will  bring  the  worst  of  the  heathen 

8.  3  and  brought  me  iu  the  visions  of  God  to 
8.    7  And  lie  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the 

8.  14  Then  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the 
8. 16  And  he  brought  me  into  the  inner  court 

it.    1  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  brought  me 
it.    8  1  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you,  saith  the 

11.  24  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me 

12.  13  I  will  bring  him  to  Babylon  (to)  the  land 
14.  17  Or  (if)  I  bring  a  sword  upon  that  laud 
14.  22  concerning  the  evil  that  I  have  brought 
14.  22  (even)  concerning  all  that  I  have  brought 
17.  20  he  shall  be  taken,  .and  I  will  bring  him 
19.   4  they  brought  him  with  chains  unto  the 
19.    9  and  brought  him  to  the  king  of  Babylon 

19.  9  they  brought  him  into  holds,  that  his 

20.  10  1  caused  them  to  go  forth,  .and  brought 
20.  15  that  I  would  not  bring  them  into  the 
20.  28  (Fur)  when  I  had  brought  them  into  the 
20.  35  I  will  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the 
20.  37  I  will  bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the 

20.  42  when  I  shall  bring  yon  into  the  land  of 
23.  22  and  I  will  bring  them  against  thee  on 

26.  7  I  will  bring  upon  Tyrus  .Nebuchadrezzar 

27.  26  Thy  rowers  have  brought  thee  into  great 

28.  7  Behold.  .1  will  briug  strangers  upon  thee 

29.  8  Behold,  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  thee 

32.  9  I  shall  bring  thy  destruction  among  the 

33.  2  When  I  bring  the  sword  upon  a  land 
34. 13  and  will  tiring  them  to  their  own  land 

36.  24  and  will  bring  you  into  your  own  land 

37.  12  and  bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel 
37.  21  and  bring  them  into  their  own  land 

38. 16  and  I  will  bring  thee  against  my  laud 

38. 17  which  prophesied,  .that  I  would  bring 

39.  2  and  will  bring  thee  upon  the  mountains  of 

40.  1  the  hand,  .was  upon  me,  and  brought  me 
40.  2  In  the  visions  of  God  brought  he  me  into 
40.  3  And  he  brought  me  thither,  and,  behold 
40.  17  Then  brought  he  me  into  the  outward 
40.  28  And  he  brought  me  to  the  inner  court 
40.  32  And  lie  brought  me  into  the  inner  court 
40.  35  And  he  brought  me  to  the  north  gate 

40.  48  And  he  brought  me  to  the  porch  of  the 

41.  1  he  brought  me  to  the  temple,  and 

42.  1  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court 

43.  5  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me 

44.  4  Then  brought  he  me  the  way  of  the  north 
44.  7  In  that  ye.  .brought  (into  my  sanctuary) 
46  19  After  he  brought  me  through  the  entry 

Dan.    1.    2  he  brought  the  vessels  into  the  treasure 
t.   3  that  he  sliould  briug  (certain)  of  the 
1. 18  then  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  brought 

9.  12  he  hath  confirmed  his  words,  .by  bringing 
9.  14  hath  the  Lord  watched,  .and  brought  it 

9.  24  and  to  bring  iu  everlasting  righteousness 
11.   6  and  they  that  brought  her,  and  he  that 

Amos  4.    1  which  say.  .Bring,  and  let  us  drink 

4.    4  and  bring  your  sacrifices  every  morning 
Mic.    1.  15  Vet  will  I  bring  an  heir  unto  thee,  O 
Zeph.  3.  20  At  that  time  will  I  bring  you  (again) 
Hag.    1.    S  <•■<  up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood 

1.    9  when  ye  brought  (it)  home,  I  did  blow 
Zech.  8.   8  I  will  bring  them,  and  they  shall  dwell 

10.  10  and  I  will  bring  them  into' the  land  of 
13.    <j  I  will  bring  the  third  part  tlimu-h  the 

Mai.    1.  13  and  ye  brought  (that  which  was)  torn,  and 
1.  13  tlm  ;  ye  brought  an  offering:  should  I 
3.  10  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse 
■1.  To  cut  off,  Wing  over,  w  guz. 

Num  11.  31  and  brought  quails  from  the  sea,  and  let 
5.7*0  1  /  captive,  nVa  gala?i,  5. 

2K1. 17.  27  Carry,  .one  of  the  prints  whom  ye  bro. 
<;.  T  1  1    ■'  n  to  flow  or  go,  ^3;  yaoal,  5. 

Psa.  60.   9  Who  will  bring  me  (Iuto)  the  strong  city? 

68.29  Because  of  thy  temple,  .shall  kings  bring 

76.  11  let  all  that  be  round  about  him  bring 

108.  10  who  will  bring  me  into  the  strong  city! 

/-cpii  3,  10  the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  Bhall  bring 

Em  5. 14  and  brought  them  Into  the'templeof 
"id  brought  unto  Babylon,  be  restored 
give,  ap;  yahdb. 

';:|,l!l    ;  '  ■  gflM  me  the  veil  that  (thou  hast)  upon 
*'■'  '     "■  -  '  ,'"1  '    ay,  Brln    an  0  mi  '  or,  Give  a 
[>-T"  '  -L"  yaldkt  5. 

1,,;!'.t  '       I  ''       '  ill  bring  thee,  and  thy  king 

1  Ki.  1.  38 and  caused  Solomon,  and  brought  him 


2  Ki    6.  19  and  I  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom 

'25  20  and  brought  them  to  the  king  of  Babylon 
2  Ch  '35  24  and  they  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  and 
Isa    '42  16  I  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  (that) 
.Jer    52  26  and  brought  them  to  tne  king  of  Babylon 
Lam.  3!    2  He  hath  led  me,  and  brought  (me  into) 
Eze.  40  24  After  that  he  brought  me  toward  the 
43.    1  Afterward  he  brought  me  to  the  gate 
47.    6  Then  he  brought  me,  and  caused  me  to 
Hos.    2".  14  I  will  allure  her,  and  bring  her  into  the 
10.  To  take,  receive,  npp  laqcu  h. 

Gen.  4S  9  Bring  them,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me,  and  I 
Exodzs.    2  that  they  may  bring  me  an  offering 

27. 20  that  they  bring  thee  pure  oil  olive  beaten 
Lev     9.    5  brought  (that)  which  Moses  commanded 

12.  8  then  she  shall  bring  two  turtles,  or  two 
24.    2  that  they  bring  unto  thee  pure  oil  olive 

Num  11   16  and  bring  them  unto  the  tabernacle 

13.  20  be  ye  of  good  courage,  and  bring  of  the 

19.  2  that  they  briug  thee  a  red  heifer  without 
23.  14  he  brought  him  iuto  the  field  of  Zophim 
23.  27  I  pray  thee.  I  will  bringthee  unto  another 
23.  28  And  Balak  brought  Balaam  unto  the  top 

Deut  30.  12  and  briug  it  unto  us,  that  we  may  hear  it 
30.  13  and  bring  it  unto  us,  that  we  may  hear  it 
Judg  14.  11  that  they  brought  thirty  companions  to 
1  Sa.  21.    8  for  I  have  neither  brought  my  sword  nor 
30.  11  they  found  an  Egyptian,  .and  brought 

1  Ki.  3.  24  the  king  said,  Bring  me  a  sword.     And 

17.  11  Bring  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  morsel  of  bread 

20.  33  Then  he  said,  Go  ye,  bring  him.     Then 

2  Ki.  2.  20  Bring  me  a  new  cruse,  .and  they  brought 

3.  15  But  now  bring  me  a  minstrel.     And  it 

4.  41  But  he  said,  Then  bring  meal :  and  he 

1  Ch.18.    8  Likewise  from  Tibhath. .brought  David 
XL.Tojmd,  k^d  matsa. 

Lev^  12.   8  Ami  if  she  be  not  able  to  briug  a  lamb 
12.7*0  touch,  reach  to,  yj3  naga,  5. 

Lev.    5,    7  And  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb 

Isa.  25.  12  lay  low,  (and)  bring  to  the  ground,  (even) 
26.    5  he  briugeth  it  (even)  to  the  dust 

13.  To  draw  nigh,  vii  nagash,  5. 

Exodzi.    6  Then  his  master  shall  bring  him  unto 

21.  6  he  shall  also  bring  him  to  the  door 
Lev.    2.    8  he  shall  briug  it  unto  the  altar 

8.  14  And  he  brought  the  bullock  for  the  sin 

1  Sa.  14.  34  And  all  the  people  brought  every  man 

28.  25  And  she  brought  (it)  before  Saul 

2  Sa.  13.  11  when  she  had  brought  (them)  unto  him 

17.  28  Brought  beds,  and  basins  and  eartheu 

1  Ki.   4.  21  they  brought  presents,  and  served  Solo. 

2  Ki.  4.    5  upou  her  sons,  whobrought(the  vessels) 

4.    6  she  said  unto  her  son,  briug  me  yet  a 
Isa.    45.  21  Tell  ye,  and  bring  (them)  near;  yea  let 

ILTo  thrust,  rm  nadach,  5. 

2  Sa  15.  14  briug  evil  upon  us,  and  smite  the  city 

15.  To  lead  on,  an3  nahag,  3. 

Exod  10.  it  and  the  LOUD  brought  an  east  wind 
Psa.  78.  26  by  his  power  he  brought  iu  the  south 

16.  To  lead,  nru  nachah,  5. 

Num  23.   7  Balak  the  king  of  Moah  hath  brought  me 
1  Sa.  22.    4  And  he  brought  them  before  the  king 
Psa  107.  30  he  bringeth  them  unto  their  desired 
Prov.18.  16  and  bringeth  him  before  great  men 

17.7*0  cause  to  journey,  j?p3  naea,  5. 

Exodis-  22  So  .Moses  brought  Israel  from  the  Red 
1  Ki.  5.  17  and  they  brought  great  stones  costly 
Psa    80.    8  Thou  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  Egypt 

18.7*0  lift  up,  N'pj  nasa. 

Geu.  45.  19  take  you  wagons,  .and  bring  your  father 
Exodio.  13  when.. the  east  wind  brought  the  locusts 
Deut  28.  49  The  Loud  shall  briug  a  nation  against 

1  Sa.    4.    4  that  they  might  bring  from  thence  the 

2  Sa.   6.  3  and  brought  it  out  of  "the  house  of  Abiu. 

6.   4  they  brought  it  out  of  the  house  of  Abiu. 

8.    2  (so)  the  Moabites . . brought  gifts 

8.   6  Syrians  became  servants,  .(and)  brought 

1  Ki.  10. 11  the  navy. .brought  in  from  Ophir  great 

10.  22  bringing  gold,  ami  silver,  ivory,  and  apes 

2  Ki.  11.  20  And  they  brought  him  on  horses;  and  he 

1  Ch.  16.  29  bring  an  offering,  and  come  before  him 

18.    2  Moabites.. servants  (and)  brought  gifts 
18.    6  the  Syrians,  .servants,  (and)  brought  gifts 
18.  11  that  he  brought  from  all  (these)  nations 

2  Ch.  9.  21  the  ships  of  Tarshish,  bringing  gold,  and 

25.  28  And  they  brought  him  upon  horses,  and 
Job    40.  20  Surely  the  mountains  bring  him  forth 
Psa.  72.    3  The  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the 
Psa.  96.    8  bring  an  offering,  and  come  in  to  bis  courts 

126.   6  He    doubtless  come  again. -bringing his 
Isa.    Co.    6  all  they,  shall  come  :  they  shall  bring 

19.  T<>  came  to  bear,  yfyrs  nasa,  5. 

Sa.  17.  13  then  shall  all  Israel  bring  ropes  to  that 

20.  To  give,  im  nathan. 

1  Sa.    9.  23  Bring  the  portion  which  I  gave  thee 

it.  12  bring  the  men.  that  we  may  put  them  to 
1  Ki     S.  ?;  condemning  the  wicked,  to  bring  his  way 
iCh.  14  17  the  Lord  brought  the  fear  of  him  upon 
Job   14.   4  Who  can  brine  a  clean  (thing)  out  of  an 
Psa.     1     3  that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season 
Prov.ag  23  The  fear  of  num  bringeth  n  snare:  but 
Isa.  40.  23  That  bringeth  the  princes  to  nothing 
Jer.  23.  40  I  will  bring  an  everlasting  reproach 
26. 15  ye  shall  surely  bring  innocent  blood 
Eze.  21  .-;,  tobring-theeupon  thenecksof(them) 
28.  18  and  I  will  bring  thee  to  ashes  npon  the 


Dan.    1.    9  Now  God  had  brought  Daniel  into  favour 
Zeph.  3.    5  every  morning  doth,  .bring  his  judgment 

21.  To  cause  to  turn  aside,  I'D  but,  5. 

1  Ch.  13  13  So  David  brought  not  the  ark  (home) 

22.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  T3#  abar,  5. 

2  Sa,   19.  41  and  have  brought  the  king  and  his 

23.  To  cause  to  go  up,  n^j;  ctlah,  5. 

Geu.  50.  24  and  bring  you  out  of  this  land  unto  the 
Exod.32.    7  thy  people,  which  thou  broughtest  out  of 
Deut.28.  61  them  will  the  LORD  briug  upon  thee 
Josh.  7.  24  and  they  brought  them  unto  the  valley  of 
Judg  16.  iS  the  lords,  .came  up  unto  her  and  brought 

1  Sa.    2.  19  and  brought  (it)  to  him  from  year  to 

2  Ki.  17.    4  brought  no  present  to  the  king  of  Assyria 
aCh.  36.  17  Therefore  he  brought  upon  them  the 
Psa.  81.  10  the  Loud  thy  God,  which  brought  thee 
Jer.    33.    6  I  will  uring  it  health  and  cure,  and  1  will 
Hos.  12  13  Anduy  a  prophet  the  Lord  brought  Israel 

24.  To  cause  to  step,  *iyif  tsaad,  5. 

Job    18  14  and  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  kingof  terrors 

25.  To  cause  to  draw  near,  rnp  qarab,  5. 

Exod^g.   3  bring  them  iu  the  basket,  with  the  bullock 
29.   4  thou  shalt  bring  unto  the  door  of  the 
?g.    8  thou  shalt  briug  his  sons,  and  put  coats 
29.  10  thou  shalt  cause  a  bullock  to  be  brought 
40.  12  thou  shalt  bring  Aaron  and  his  sons 
40.  14  thoLishaUbi'inghissons.and  clothe  them 
Lev.    1     2  If  any  man  of  you  bring  an  offering 

1.    2  ye  shall  bring  your  offering  of  the  cattle 
1.    5  and  the  priests.. shall  bring  the  blood 
1.  10  he  shall  bring  it  a  male  without  blemish 
r.  13  and  the  priests  shall  bring  (it)  all,  and 

1.  14  then  he  shall  bring  his  ottering  of  turtle 
1. 15  the  priest  shall  bring  it  unto  the  altar 

2.  4  if  thou  bringan  oblation  of  ameatofferiug 
2. 11  No  meat  offering,  which  ye  shall  bring 

4.  3  then  let  him  bring  for  his  sin.. a  young 
8.    6  Moses  brought  Aaron  and  his  sons 

8.  13  Moses-brought  Aaron's  sons,  and  put  coats 
8.  18  And  he  brought  the  ram  for  the  burnt 
8.  22  he  brought  the  other  ram,  the  ram  of 

8.  24  he  brought  Aaron's  sons,  audMosesputof 

9.  9  And  the  sons  of  Aaron  brought  the  blood 
9.  15  And  he  brought  the  people's  offering 

9.  16  And  he  brought  the  burnt  offering 
9.  17  And  he  brought  the  meat  offering,  and 
16.    9  And  Aaron  shall  bring  the  goat 
16.  11  Aaron  shall  bring  the  bullock  of  the  sin 
16.  20  when  he  hath  made  an  end.  .he  shall  bring 
27.    9  whereof  men  bring  an  offering  unto  the 
Num.  5.    9  every  offering . .  which  they  bring  unto  the 

5.  16  And  the  priest  shall  bring  her  Dear 

6.  16  the  priest  shall  briug  (them)  before  the 

7.  3  they  brought  them  before  the  tabernacle 

8.  9  thou  shalt  bring  the  Levites  before  the 

8.  10  And  thou  shalt  bring  the  Levites  before 

9.  13  because  he  brought  not  the  offering  of  the 
15.   4  bring  a  meat  offering  of  a  tenth  deal 

15.  9  Then  shall  he  bring  with  a  bullock  a  meat 
15.  27  theu  he  shall  bring  a  she  goat  of  the  first 
15.  10  thou  shalt  briug  for  a  drink  offering  half 

15.  33  they,  .brought  himuntoMosesand  Aaron 

16.  17  and  briug  ye  before  the  Lord  every  man 
18.    2  bring  thou  with  thee,  that  they  may  be 
18.  15  Every  thing,  .which  they  bring  unto  the 
25.    6  and  brought  unto  his.  .a  Midianitish 

27.  5  Aud  Moses  brought  their  cause  before  the 

28.  26  when  ye  briug  a  new  meat  offering  unto 
31.  50  We  have  therefore  brought  an  oblation 

Deut.  1.  17  bring  (it)  unto  me,  and  I  will  hear  it 
Josh.  7. 16  and  brought  Israel  by  their  tribes 

7.  17  Aud  he  brought,  .ami  he  brought  the 

7.  18  And  he  brought  his  householdmauhyman 

8.  23  the  kiug  of  Ai  they  took  alive,  and  brought 
Judg.  3.  17  And  he  brought  the  present  unto  Eglon 
2K1. 16.  14  Aud  he  brought  also  the  brasen  altar 

26.7*0  cause  to  meet,  .Tijg  qarah,  5. 

Gen.  27.  20  Because  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  (it)  to 
27. To  cause  to  ride,  D3"i  rakab,  5. 

Esth.  6     9  bring  him  on  horseback  through  the 

28.  To  put,  place,  set,  cnfe>  sum, 

Exod  8.  12  frogs  which  he  had  brought  against 

J5.  26  which  1  have  brought  upon  the  Egyptians 
Deut  22.    8  that  thou  bring  not  blood  upon  thine 
Psa.  89.  40  thou  liast  brought  his  strongholds  to  ruin 

29.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  2'v  sh\d>,  5. 

Deut28.  60  he  will  bring  upon  thee  all  the  diseases  of 

1  Sa.   6.    7  and  bring  their  calves  home  from  tfieni 

2  Ki.20.  11  and  he  brought  the  shadow  ten  degrees 
2  C'h.34.  16  aud  brought  the  king  word  back  again 
Job   -o  23  For  I  know  (that)  thou  wilt  bring  me  (to) 
Psa.  72. 10  The  kings  of  Tarshish .. shall  bring  pres. 

94.  23  And  he  shall  bring  upon  them  their 
Prov.20.  26  aud  bringeth  the  wheel  over  them 
Jon.    1.  13  the  men  rowed  hard  to  bring  (it)  to  .laud 

30.  To  put,  place,  set,  nv  shith, 

Isa.    15.    9  for  I  will  bring  more  upon  Dimon,  lions 

31.7V)  send  forth  or  away,T&Q  shalach,  3. 

Chad.       7  All  the  men.  .have  brought  thee,  .to  the 
^2.  To  put,  place,  set,  nap  shagthafli. 

Psa.  22.  15  and  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust 

[See  also  Desolation,  distress,  evil,  fruit    hastily, 

hither,   horseback.    low,   more,    near,    nought, 

pass,  remembrance,  reproach,  safe,   salvation, 

straight,  tidings.] 


BRING 


119 


BRING 


33.1b  I 

2  0 

Matt 

21 

2 

21. 

7 

Mnrku 

I :. 

7 

Luke 

4- 

9 

4- 

4  -■ 

IO. 

34 

ig. 

27 

19. 

30 

ig. 

35 

John 

1. 

42 

7- 

43 

8. 

3 

9- 

13 

0 

16 

19. 

4 

19. 

13 

Acts 

5- 

26 

5 

27 

6. 

12 

9- 

2 

9 

21 

9 

27 

11 

26 

17 

5 

17 

15 

17 

19 

18 

12 

19 

37 

20. 

12 

21 

16 

22. 

5 

23 

10 

23 

18 

23 

18 

23 

31 

iTh 

4 

14 

uTi. 

4- 

11 

Heb. 

2. 

10 

n,   ay<a  ago. 

loose  (them),  and  briug  (them)  uuto  me 
Aud  brought  the  ass,  and  the  colt,  and 
ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  .[bring]  (him) 
they  [brought]  the  colt  to  Jesus,  and  cast 
he  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  and  set 
all  they  that  had.  .brought  them  unto 
brought  him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care 
But  those  mine  enemies,  .bring  hither 
loose  him,  and  bring  (him  hither) 
Aud  they  brought  him  to  Jesus 
he  brought  him  to  Jesus.     And  when 
they  said  unto  them,  Why  have  ye  not 
[the  scribes,  .brought  unto  him  a  woman] 
They  brought  to  the  Pharisees  him  that 
them  also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall 
Behold,  I  bring  him  forth  to  you,  that 
he  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat  down  in 
Theu  went  the  captain,  .and  brought 
when  they  had  brought  them,  they  set 
and  caught  him,  and  brought  (him)  to 
he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  Jerusa. 
he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  the 
Barnabas  took  him,  and  brought  (liini) 
when  he  had  found  him,  he  brought  him 
and  sought  to  [bring]  them  out. to  the 
they  that  conducted  Paul  brought  him 
took  him  and  brought  him  uuto  Areop. 
and  brought  him  to  the  judgment  seat 
'For  ye  have  brought  hither  these  men 
And  they  brought  the  young  man  alive 
and  brought  with  them  one  Muason 
to  bring  them  which  were  there  bound 
to  take  him  by  force,  .and  to  bring  (him) 
he  took  him,  aud  brought  (him)  to  the 
to  bring  this  young  man  unto  thee 
took  Paul,  aud  brought  (him)  by  night 
even  so  them  also.. will  God  bring  with 
Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee 
in  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,  to 

34.7*0  lead  up,  avdyco  anago. 

Luke  2.  22  they  brought,  .to  Jerusalem,  to  present 
Acts    9. 39  When  he  was  come,  they  brought  him 
16.  34  And  when  he  had  brought  them  iuto  his 

35.  To  lead  away,  iirdyaj  apagd. 

Acts  23.  17  Bring  this  young  niau  unto  the  chief 

36.  To  bear  away,  htro(p4pco  apopkero. 

1  Co.  16.    3  to  bring  your  liberality  ttuto  Jerusalem 

37. To  bear  upon  or  unto,  4iri<p4pa>  epipherv. 
Acts  19.  12  from  his  body  [were  brought]  uuto  the 
25. 18  they  [brought]  none  accusation  of  such 

38.  To  lead  or  bring  down,  Kardya  katagd. 
Luke  5.  11  And  when  they  had  brought  then-  ships 

39.  To  take  care  of,  provide,  bring,  xofxifa  komizo. 
Luke  7.  37  a  woman,  .brought  an  alabaster  box  of 

40.  To  take,  receive,  Aa/xBdi/ca  lamhano. 

Matt  16.    8  reason  ye.. because  ye  have  [brought]  no 

41.ro  hold  near,  afford;  wap€x<o  parccho. 

Acts  16.  16  which  brought  her  masters  much  gain 
19. 24  brought  no  small  gain  unto  the  crafts. 

42.  To  lead  toward,  Trpoadyw  prosago. 

Luke  9.  41  and  suffer  you?  Bring  thy  son  hither 
Acts  16.  20  And  brought  them  to  the  magistrates 
1  Pe.   3. 18  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  briug 

43.  To  bear  toward,  7rpocr<p4pa}  prosphero. 

Matt  25.  20  he.  .came  and  brought  other  five  talents 
Mark  10.  13  disciples  rebuked  those  that  brought 


44.  To  bea 

Matt  14. 

14. 

14. 

I7- 

ATark  1. 
2. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
8. 
9- 
9- 
9- 


Luke  5. 

15. 

24, 

John  4, 

18 

19 

21 

Acts   4. 

A 

5 

5 

14 

2  Ti.    4 

2  Pe.  2 


r,  carry,  <p€poo  phero. 
11  Aud  his  head  was  brought  in  a  charger 
11  and  she  brought  (it)  to  her  mother 
i3  He  said,  Bring  them  hither  to  me 
17  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you  !  Bring  him 
32  they  brought  unto  him  all  that  were 
3  bringing  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  which 

27  and  commanded  his  head  to  be  brought 

28  And  brought  his  head  hi  a  charger 

32  Aud  they  bring  unto  him  one  that  was 
22  aud  they  bring  a  blind  man  unto  him 
17  Master,  I  have  brought  unto  thee  my 

19  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you?    Briug  him 

20  And  they  brought  him  unto  him  :  and 

15  Why  tempt  ye  me  ?  bring  me  a  penny 

16  And  they  brought  (it).    And  he  saith 

22  And  they  bring  him  unto  the  place 
i3  And,  behold,  men  brought  in  a  bed  a 

23  briug  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  (it) 

1  bringing  the  spices  which  they  had 

33  Hath  auy  man  brought,  .(ought)  to  eat? 

29  What  accusation  bring  ye  against  this 
39  Nicodemus.. brought  a  mixture  of  myrrh 
10  Briug  of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  caught 

34  as  many  as  were  possessors,  .brought 
37  Having,  .brought the  money,  and  laid  (it) 

2  his  wife. .brought  a  certain  part,  and  laid 
16  There  came  also  a  multitude,  .bringing 
13  the  priest,  .brought  oxen  and  garlands 
13  when  thou  contest,  bring  (with  thee).,  the 
11 ;  2  Jo.  10  ;  Rev.  21.  24 ;  21.  26. 

45.ro  do,  tcoUw  poieo. 

Acts  24.  17  I  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation,  and 


BRING  on  horseback,  to  — 

To  cause  to  ride,  271  rakab,  5. 

Esth.  6.  11  brought  him  on  horseback  through 

ERQTG  (a,  cloud),  to  — 

To  cloud,  darken,  \i%  anan,  3. 

Gen.   9.  14  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  a  cloud 

BRING  ab.ut,  to  — 

To  bring  round  about,  359  sabab,  5. 

1  Sa.   5.  10  They  have  brought  about  the  ark  of .  .God 

2  Sa.  3.  12  to  bring  about  all  Israel  uuto  thee 

BRING  again,  to  — 
I. To  go,  ?pn  huk. 

Ezra   6.    5  be  restored,  and  brought  again  unto 

2.  To  bring  round  about,  235  sabab,  5. 

1  Ch  13.    3  let  us  bring  again  the  ark  of  our  God 

3.  To  turn  back,  3*2?  shub. 

Isa.   52.    8  when  the  Lord  shall  bring  again  Zion 
Jer.  30.    3  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  my 
30.  18  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob 

48.  47  Vet  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity 

49.  39  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Elatn 
16.  53  I  shall  bring  again  their  captivity 
29.  14  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Egypt 

3.    1 1  shall  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah 


Eze. 


Joel 

4.7\>  bring  back,  3*2*  shub,  3«. 

Isa.  49.  5  his  servant,  to  briug  Jacob  again  to  him 
Jer.  50.  19  I  will  bring  Israel  again  to  his  habitation 
Eze.  39  27  I  have  brought  them  again  from  the 

5.  To  bring  back,  DMi  shub,  5. 

Gen.  14.  16  brought  again  bis  brother  Lot,  and  his 
24.    5  I  needs  bring  thy  son  again  unto 
24.    6  thou  bring  not  my  son  thither  agaiu 

24.  S  only  bring  not  my  son  thither  again 
28.  15  I.  .will  bring  thee  agaiu  iuto  this  land 
37.  14  Go,  I  pray  thee,  .and  bring  me  word  ag. 

42.  37  I  will  bring  him  to  thee  again 

43.  21  we  have  brought  it  again  in  our  hand 

44.  8  we  brought  again  uuto  thee  out  of  the 

48.  21  God  shall,  .bring  you  again  uuto  the  land 
KxoHte_  in  fcbe  T^;;D  brroijht  ag^in  the  waters 
>ium  17,  10  Bring  Aaron's  rod  again  before  ific  Ccsti. 

22.    8  Lodge  here.  .T  will  bring  you  word  again 
Deut  1.  22  bring  us  word  again  by  what  way  we 
1.  25  And  they,  .brought  us  word  agaiu 
22.    1  in  any  case  bring  them  again  unto 

25.  68  shall  bring  thee  iuto  Egypt  again 
Josh  14.   7  I  brought  him  word  again  as  (it  was) 

22.  32  returned.. and  brought  them  word  agaiu 
Judg  10.   3  to  speak  friendly  ..(aud)  to  bring  her  again 
1  Sa.    6.  21  The  Philistines  have  brought  again  the 
2.  Sa.  3.  26  messengers . .  brought  him  agaiu  from 

14.  2r  bring  the  young  man  Absalom  again 

15.  S  the  Loud  shall  bring  me  again  indeed 
15.  25  he  will  bring  me  again,  and  show  me.  .it 

1  Ki    ?.  30  BeDaiah  brought  the  king  word  again 

3.  34  bring  them  agaiu  uuto  the  land 
z?.  ?i  briug  the  kingdom  again  to  Rehoboam 
20.   9  departed   aud  brought  him  word  again 

2  Ki  22.    o  the  scribe,  .brought  the  king  word  again 

22.  20  And  they  brought  the  king  word  again 

1  Ch.  21.  12  I  shall  bring  again  to  him  that 

2  Ch.  0".  25  bring  them  again  unto  the  land  which 

11.    i  he  might  bring  the  kingdom  again 

12  ;t  the  guard. .brought  them  again  into  the 

24.  jg  he  sent  prophets.. to  bring  them  again 

33.  T3  brought  him  again  to  Jerusalem  into  his 

34.  28  So  they  brought  the  king  word  again 
Nell    9.  ?g  thou  mightest  bring  them  agaiu  unto 

T3.    9  thither  brought  I  again  the  vessels  of  the 
Job    jo.    9  and  wilt  thou  briug  me  into  dust  again? 
Psa   68.  22  1  will  bring  again  from  Eashau  ;  I  will 
Prov  iq,  24  so  much  as  bring  it  to  his  mouth  again 

26.  15  it  grieveth  him  to  bring  it  again  to  his 
Isa    38.    8  1  will  bring  again  the  shadows  of  the 

46.  3  bring  (it)  again  to  mind,  0  ye  trausg 

49     3  formed  me.  .to  bring  Jacob  again  to  him 
Jer.   12.  15  and  will  bring  them  again   every  man 

15,  19  return,  then  will  I  bring  thee  again 

16.  13  1  will  bring  them  again  into  their  land 
23     3  I.. will  bring  them  agaiu  to  their  folds 
2j.    6  I  will  bring  them  again  to  this  land 
28.    3  will  I  bring  agaiu  into  this  place  all 

28.   4  1  will  bring  again  to  this  place . .  Jeconiah 

23.  6  bring  agaiu  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's 
29. 14  I  will  bring  you  again  unto  the  place 
32.  37  I  will  bring  them  again  into  this 

41.  16  the  eunuchs,  .he  had  brought  again 

49.  6  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of .  .Amnion 
49.  39  I  will  briug  again  the  captivity  of  Elam 

Eze.  34.    4  have  ye  brought  again  that  which  was 
34.  16  I  will,  .bring  again  that  which  was 
39.  25  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob 

47.  1  he  brought  me  again  unto  the  door 
Joel   3     1  shall  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah 
Zech  10.  10  I  will  bring  them  agaiu  also  out  of  the 

6.7o  lead  up,  back,  or  again,  avdyw  anago. 
Heb.  13.  20  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  our 

7.2'o  turn  away  from,  airoaTpecpa  apostrejjhd. 
Matt. 27.    3  brought  [again]  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver 

BRING  against,  ta  --- 

To  bring  or  bear  upon,  itiKpipta  epiphero. 

Jude        9  he .  -durst  not  bring  agaiust  him  a  railing 


BRING  away,  to  — 

l.To  consume  away,  i"2  baar,  3. 

Deut  26.  13  I  have  brought  away  the  hallowed  things 
2.To  lead  away,  Jru  nahag. 

iSa.  23.    5  brougbtawaytheircattle,andsmotethems 
ERING  away  captive,  to  — 
To  carry  captive,  rny  shabak. 

2X1.   5.    2  Syrians.. had  brought  away  captive.. a- 
ERING  back,  to  — 
l.To  turn  back  to,  2-v  shub. 

Psa.  14.    7  the  Lord  briugeth  back  the  captivity  of 
53.    6  When  God  briugeth  back  the  captivity  of: 
85.    1  thou  hast  brought  back  the  captivity  of 

2.To  bring  back,  sip  shub,  5. 

Gen.  14.  16  he  brought  hack  all  the  goods,  and  also 
Exnd23.    4  thou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  him 
^umi3.  26  and  brought  back  word  unto  them 
2  Sa.  17-    3  I  will  bring  back  all  the  people 
19.  11  the  last  to  bring  the  king  back 
19.  12  are  ye  the  last  to  bring  back  the  king? 

1  Ki.  13.  iS  Briug  him  back  with  thee  into  thine 

13.  20  unto  the  prophet  that  brought  him  back. 
13.  23  the  prophet  whom  he  had  brought  back 
13.  26  the  prophet  that  bi ought  him  back  from 

13.  29  laid  it  upon  the  ass  and  brought  it  back 

14.  28  the  guard .  brought  them  back  into 

2  Ch.  19.    4  brought  them  back  unto  the  Lor  D  God 
Job    33.  30  To  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit 
Eze.  44.    1  he  brought  me  back  the  way  of  the  gate 

BRING  down,  to  — 

l.To  bring  down,  TV  yarad,  5. 

Gen.  39.    1  Ishmeelites,  which  had  brought  him  down 

42.  38  ye  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow 

43.  7  he  would  say,  Briug  your  brother  down  1 

43.  22  other  money  have  we  brought  down  in 

44.  21  Bring  him  down  uuto  me,  that  I  may  set 
44.  ay  ye  shall  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with 
44.  31  thy  servants  shall  bring  down  the  grey 
45-  *3  >e  shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father - 

Deut.  i.  25  and  brought  (it)  down  unto  us,  and 

21.  4  briug  down  the  heifer  unto  a  rough 
Judg.  7.    4  bring  them  down  unto  the  water,  and  I 

7.  5  he  brought  down  the  people  unto  the 

16.  2i  the  Philistines.. brought  him  down 
1  S«.    %.   6  he  briugeth  down  to  the  R-r.ive,  and 

30. 13  CssvMi.  .bring  me.  .lOwu  to  this  company  c 
30.  15  1  will  bih.g  thee  down  to  this  company 
30. 16  when  he  liad  brought  him  down,  behold 
28a   22.  48  It(is)God.. that bringethdownthe people 

1  Ki.    1.  33  ride  upon  mine,  .and  briug  him  dowu 

1.  53  they  brought  him  down  from  the  altar 

2.  9  his  hoar  head  briug  thou  down  to  the- 
5.    9  My  servants  shall  bring  (them)  down 

17.  23  Elijah,  brought  him  down  out  of 

18.  40  Elijah  brought  them  down  to  the  Lrook 
2Ki    11.  19  they  brought  dowu  the  king  from 

2  Ch.  23.  20  he.  .brought  down  the  king  from 
Psa.  55,  23  thou.  0  God,  shalt  bring  them  down 

59.  11  scatter  them  by  thy  power;  and  bring.  .d»- 
Isa.    43.14  I  have,  .brought  dowu  all  their  nobles 

63     6  1  will  bring  down  their  strength  to  the 
Jer.  49  16  I  will  bring  thee  clown  from  thence 

51.  40  I  will  tiring  them  down  like  lambs 
Eze.  26.  20  I  shall  bring  thee  down  with  them 

28.    8  They  shall  briug  thee  down  to  the  pit 
Hos.    7.  12  I  will  bring  them  down  as  the  fowls  of 
Amos  3  11  he  shall  bring  down  thy  strength  from 

9.    2  thence  will  I  briug  them  down 
Obad        3  Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground! 
4  will  I  bring  thee  down,  saith  the  LORD 

2. To  cause  to  bend,  1^3  Jcana,  5. 

Bent.  9.    3  he  shall  bring  them  dowu  before  thy  face 
Psa.  107.  12  Therefore  he  brought  dowu  their  heart 
Isa.    25,   5  Thou  shalt  bring  down  the  noise  of 

3.7*0  cause  to  touch,  J?::  naga,  5. 

Eze.  13.  14  bring  it  down  to  the  ground,  so  that  the 

4.  To  cause  to  bow,  nnc>  shachach,  5. 

Isa.    25.  12  high  fort  of  thy  walls  shall  he  bring  down 
26.    5  he  briugeth  down  them  that  dwell  on 

5.  7*o  humble,  hsy  shaphel,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  28  (that)  thoumayest  briug  (them)  down 
Psa.   iS.  27  For  thou  wilt.. bring  down  high  looks 
Isa.    25.  11  and  he  shall  bring  down  their  pride 
Eze.  17.  24  I  the  LOKD  have  brought  down  the  high 
Q.To  lead  down,  Kardyu  katagd. 

Acts    9.  30  they  brought  him  down  to  Cesarea,  and 

22.  30  the  chief  priests,  .brought  Paul  down 
03.  15  that  he  bring  him  down  unto  you 

23.  20  that  thou  wouldest  bringdown  Paul 
Rom  10.    6  that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down  (from  above) 

BRING  forth,  to  — 

1.7b  cause  to  come  in,  Mis  bo,  5. 

Zech.  3    S  will  bring  forth  my  servant  The  Branch 

2.7*0  ripen,  make  ready,  hw%  bashal,  5. 

Gen.  40.  10  the  clusters,  .brought  forth  ripe  grape3 

3.7*0  cause  to  yield  tender  giass,  HZ"?  dosha,  5. 
Gen.    1.  11  God  said,  Let  the  earth  briug  forth  grass 

4.7b  bepained,  travail  in  birth,  730  chabal,  3. 
Song  ?.   5  there  thy  mother  brought  thee  forth 

8.  5  there  she  brought  thee  forth  (that)  bare 


BRING 


120 


BRING 


5.7V>  he  pained,  travail  in  birth.  L-.n  chid. 
Isa.  45. 10  What  hast  thou  brought  forth; 

G.  To  beget,  hear.,  "17;  yalad. 


19. 


Gen. 

2KI 
Job 

Psa.    7. 

I'l'riV  27 

Isa.   26. 


16  iii  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth  children 
39  tlie  flocks  conceived,  ami  brought  forth 
3  (there  is)  not  strength  to  bring  forth 
35  They  conceive  mischief,  and  bring  forth 

1  when  the  wild  goats  of  the  rock  bringf. 

2  knowest  thou  the  time  when  they  bringf. 
14  he.. hath  conceived.. and  brought  forth 

1  thou  kuowest  not  what  a  daymaybringf. 
...  t8  we  have  as  it  were  brought  forth  wind 
33.  11  Ye  shall  conceive  chart';  ye  shall  bring 
37.   3  (there  is)  not  strength  to  bring  forth 
51. 18  all  the  sons(that)she  hath  brought  forth 

65.  23  They  shall  not.  .bring  forth  for  trouble 

66.  7  Before  she  travailed,  she  brought  forth 
66.    8  she  brought  forth  her  children 

Jer.    2.  27  Thou  hast  brought  me  forth :  for  they 
JIos.   9.  16  shall  bear  no  fruit;  yea,  though,  .bringf. 
Mic.    5.    3  she  winch  travaileth  hath  brought  forth 
Zeph.  2.   2  Before  the  decree  bring  forth,  (before) 

7.  To  cause  to  bear  or  bring  forth  .?;  yalad,  5. 
Isa.  59.    4  they  conceive  mischief,  and  bring  forth 

8.  To  let  go  out,  sty;  yatsa. 

Deut  14.  22  the  field  bringeth  forth  year  by  year 

9.  To  cause  to  go  out,  Kfl  yatsa,  5. 

Gen.  1. 12  the  earth  brought  forth  grass,  (and) 
1.  24  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living 
8.  17  Bring  forth  with  thee  every  living  thing 

14.  i3  Melehizedek..  brought  forth  bread  and 

15.  5  he  brought  him  forth  abroad,  and  said 

19. 16  they  brought  him  forth,  and  set  him 

19. 17  they  had  brought  them  forth  abroad 
24.  53  the  servant  brought  forth  jewels  of 
38.  24  Bring  her  forth,  and  let  her  be  burnt 

Exod.  3. 10  thou  inayest  bring  forth  my  people 

3. 11  I  should  bring  forth  the  children  of 

3.  12  When  thou  hast  brought  forth,  .people 

7.  4  bring  forth  mine  armies,  (and)  my  people 

8.  18  to  bring  forth  lice,  but  they  could  not 
12.  39  dough  which  they  brought  forth  out  of 
13. 16  the  Lord  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt 

16.  3  ye  have  brought  us  forth  into  this 
16.  32  I  brought  you  forth  from  the  laud  of 

19.  17  Moses  brought  forth  the  people  out  of .  - 
__2"^46  I  (?,'.TV)  the  Lord,  .that  brought  tiiehif. 
32. 11  which  than  hast  brojjgjri  forth  out  of  the 
Lev.  24.  14  Bring  forth  trim  that  hath  cursed 

24.  23  they  should  bring  forth  him  that  had 

25.  38  I  (am)  the  Lord,  .which  brought  you  f. 
25.  42  they  (are)  my  servants,  which  I  brought  f . 

25.  55  they  (are)  my  servants  whom  I  brought  f. 

26.  10  tiring  forth  the  old  because  of  the  new 
26. 13  I  (am)  the  Lord,  .which  brought  you  f. 
26.  45  their  ancestors,  whom  I  brought  forth 

Numi7.    8  house  of  Levi  was  budded . .  brought  forth 

19.  3  bring  her  forth  without  the  camp 

20.  8  thou  shalt  bring  forth  to  them  water 
20.  16  an  angel,  .hath  brought  us  forth  out  of 
24.    8  God  brought  him  forth  out  of  Egypt 

Deut.  1.  27  he  hath  brought  us  forth  out  of  the  land 

4.  20  tile  LORD.. brought  you  forth  out  of  the 
6.  12  the  Lord,  which  brought  thee  forth  out 

9. 12  people,  .thou  hast  brought  forth,  .have 

9.  26  thou  hast  brought  forth  out  of  Egypt 
14.  28  thou  shalt  bring  forth  all  the  tithe  of 

16.  1  thy  God  brought  thee  forth  out  of  Egypt 

17.  5  shalt  thou  bring  forth  that  man  or  that 
22.  15  bring  forth  (the  tokens  of)  the  damsel's 
26.  8  the  Lord  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt 
29.  25  he  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land 

.Tosh  10.  23  they,  .brought  forth  those  five  kings 
Judg.  6.    8  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  house  of 
6. 18  I  come  unto  thee,  and  bring  forth  my 
19.  22  Bring  forth  the  man  that  came  into 
19.  25  brought  her  forth  unto  them  ;  and  they 
--.    8  .Moses  and  Aaron,  which  brought  forth 
.  30  he  brought  forth  the  spoil  of  the  city 
.  31  he  brought  forth  the  people  that  (were) 

22.  20  He  brought  me  forth  also  into  a  large 
_  22.  49  bringeth  me  forth,  .from  mine  enemies 

1  Ki.  S.  16  I  brought  forth  my  people .  .out  of  Egypt 

8.  51  (be)  thy  people,  .which  thou  broughtest  f. 

9.  9  the  Lord  their  God,  who  brought  forth 

2  Kl.io.  22  Bring  forth  vestments  for  all  the 

10.  22  And  he  brought  them  forth  vestments 

10.  26  they  brought  forth  the  images  out  of  the 

11.  12  he  brought  forth  the  king's  son,  ami  put 

23.  4  bring  forth  out  of  the  temple,  .all  the 
2  C'h.  1. 17  Ami  they,  .brought  forth  out  of  Egypt 

6.  5  I  brought  forth  my  people  out  of  the 

7.  22  the  Lord,  .which  brought  them  forth 
7  the  king  brought  forth  the  vessels  of  the 
7  which  Nebuchadnezzar  bad  brought  f. 
s  Even  th  ise  did  Cyrus,  .bring  forth  by 

9.    7  the  Loud.,  win,.,  broughtest  him  forth  out 

10.  is  thn,  haat  thou  brought  me  forth  out  of 
28. 11  (the  thing  that  is)  hid  bringeth  he  forth  to 

""•   '     '  !  He  brought  me  forth  also  into  a  large 
37-   6  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteousness 
'   :■  'i  ■■■inn  bring  forth  food  out  of  the  earth 
105.  37  He  brought  them  forth  also  with  silver 
.  13.43  And  he  brought  forth  his  people  with 
>"'v  10.  ::  Surelj  thechurningof  milk  bringeth  forth 
30.  33  and  the  wringing  of  the  nose  bringeth  f 
30.  33  so  the  forcing  of  wrath  bringeth  forth 
Isa.   42.    1  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to 


1  Sa. 
^Sa. 


Ezra 


Neh. 
Job 


Eze.  11 


Dan. 
Hos. 
Mic. 
Hag. 
Zech 


3  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth 
,    8  Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have 
.  17  Which  bringeth  forth  the  chariot  and 
.  11  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  bud 
.    9  I  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of  Jacob 
,  13  he.  .bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of 

4  I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land 

3  Pashur  brought  forth  .1  eremiah  out  of 

21  And  hast  brought  forth  thy  people  Israel 
13  I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land 
25  The  Lord,  .hath  brought  forth  the 
10  The  Lord  hath  brought  forth  our  right. 
16  he.  .bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of  his 
44  I  will  bring  forth  out  of  his  mouth 
31  Jehoiaehin.. brought  him  forth  out 

7  I  will  bring  you  forth  out  of  the  midst 

4  shalt  thou  bring  forth  thy  stuff  by  day 
7  I  brought  forth  my  stuff  by  day 
7  I  brought  (it)  forth  in  the  twilight 

6  bring  them  forth  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

0  made  myself  known,  .in  bringing  them  f. 

22  In  whose  sight  I  brought  them  forth 
iS  I  bring fortll  a  fire  from  the  midst  of  thee 

4  I  will  bring  thee  forth,  and  all  thine 

1  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court 
15  he  brought  me  forth  toward  the  gate 
21  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court 
15  God.  .hast  brought  thy  people  forth  out 
13  Ephraim  shall  bring  forth  his  children 

9  he  will  bring  me  forth  to  the  light 
11  (that)  which  the  ground  bringeth  forth 

7  he  shall  bring  forth  the  head  stone 
4  I  will  bring  it  forth,  saith  the  Lord  of 

10.  To  cause  to  draw  nigh,  fc!3j  nagash,  5. 

2  Ch.29.  23  they  brought  forth  the  he  goats  (for)  the 
Isa.  41.  21  bring  forth  your  strong  (reasons),  saith 
41.  22  Let  them  bring  (them)  forth,  and  show  us 

11.  To  sprout,  bring  forth,  2»  nub. 

Prov  10.  31  The  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth  forth 

12.  To  lift  up,  bear,  N'f  J  nasa. 

Eze.  17.  23  it  shall  bring  forth  boughs,  and  bearfruit 
Hag.  2.  19  and  the  olive  tree,  hath  not  brought  forth 
13  To  give,  |m  nathan. 

Isa.  43.    9  let  them  bring  forth  their  witnesses 

\ir?G  do,  make,  yield,  n'jjj;  asah. 

Gen.  41.  47  plenteous  years  the  earth  brought  forth 

1  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  three  years 
9  it  will  bud,  and  bring  forth  boughs  like 

2  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes 
4  brought  it  forth  wild  grapes 1 
2  they  grow,  yea,  they  bring  forth  fruit 
6  it  became  a  vine,  and  brought  forth 

8  It  was  planted,  .that  it  might  bring  forth 

15.  To  cleave  through,  nhs  paJach,  3. 

Job   39.    3  They  bow  themselves,  they  bring  forth 

16.  To  bear  fruit,  rns  parah. 

Isa.  45.    8  let  them  bring  forth  salvation,  and  let 

1 7.  To  spring  up,  rny  tsamach. 

Eccl.  2.    6  to  water,  .the  wood  that  bringeth  forth 

IS.  To  cause  to  spring;  up,  rrpy  tsamach,  5. 

Gen.   3.  18  Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  f. 

19. 7*o  cause  to  draw  near,  yn  qarab,  5. 

Judg.  5.  25  she  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish 

20.  To  set,  make  even,  rnsji  shavah,  3. 

Hos.  10.    1  he  bringeth  forth  fruit  unto  himself 

21 .  To  lead,  lead  on,  &y&  ago. 

Acts  25.  17  commanded  the  man  to  be  brought  forth 
25.  23  Festus'  command.  Paul  was  brought  forth 

22.  To  lead  tip  or  again,  amya  anago. 

Acts  12.    4  intending  after  Easter  to  bring  him  forth 
23.ro  bear  forth  young,  airoxveu  apokueo. 

Jas.    1.  15  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  f. 

24.  To  bud,  sprout,  /3Aao-rdVw  blastano. 
Jas.    5.  18  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit 

25.  To  give,  SlSafii  didomi. 

Matt  13.    8  into  good  ground,  and  brought  forth  fruit 

26.  jTo  cast  forth,  eKfiaWu  ehballo. 

Matti2.  35  good  treasure  of  the  heart,  bringeth  forth 

12.  35  the  evil  treasure,  bringeth  forth  evil 

13.  52  bringeth  fortll.  .outofhistreasure(things) 

27.  To  beget,  bear,  yevvaio  gennao. 

Luke  1.  57  should  be  delivered;  and  she  brought  f. 

28.  To  bear  or  bring  firth,  cKipepa  ekphero. 
Luke. 5.  22  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  (it)  on 
Acts    5.  15  they  brought  fortll  the  sick  into  the  streets 

29.  To  lead  out,  efa-yw  exago. 

Acts  s.  19  opened  the  prison  doors,  and  brought  f. 

30.  To  lead  down,  nariya  katagd. 

Acts  23.  28  I  brought  them  forth  into  their  council 
Zl.Todo,  make,  woiea poieo. 

Matt.  3.    8  Bring  forth,  .fruits  meet  for  repentance 
3.  10  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good 
7.  17  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit 
7.  17  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth  fortll  evil  fruit 
7.  18  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 
7.  18  neither  (can)  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth 


Lev. 
Job 
Isa. 

25- 
14. 

S 

Jer. 
Eze. 

5 
12. 

17 

r7 

Matt.  7.  19  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 
13.  23  (it). . also beareth  fruit  and  bringeth  forth 
13.  26  the  blade  was  sprung  up.  and  brought  f. 
?i.  43  a  nation  bringeth  forth  the  fruits  thereof 
Luke  3.    8  Bring  forth,  .fruits  worthy  of  repentance 
3.  9  every  tree,  .which  bringeth  not  fortll 
6.  43  a  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt 
6.  43  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good 
32.  To  lead  forward,  irpoaya  proago. 

Acts  12.    6  Herod  would  have  brought  him  forth 

25.  26  I  have  brought  him  forth  before  you 
33.7*0  bear  forward,  irpotpipto  prophero. 

Luke  6.  45  his  heart  bringeth  forth  that  which  is 
6.  45  his  heart  bringeth  fortll  that  which  is 
Si.To  bring  forth,  ti'ktcu  tikto. 

Matt.  1.  21  And  she  shall  bring  forth  a  son 

1.  23  Behold,  a  virgin,  .shall  bring  forth  a  son 

1.  25  And  knew  her  not  till  she  had  brought  f. 
Luke  1.  31  behold,  thou  shalt.  .bring  fortll  a  son 

2.  7  she  brought  forth  her  first  born  son 
Heb.   6.    7  the  earth,  .bringeth  fortll  herbs  meet  for 
Jas.     1.  15  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  fortll 
Rev.  12.    5  And  she  brought  forth  a  man  child 

12.  13  persecuted  the  woman  which  brought  f. 
35.  To  bear,  <p;pa  phero. 

Mark  4.    8  And  other  fell,  .and  brought  forth 
John  12.  24  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit 

15.    2  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit 

15.  5  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit 
15.  16  I  have  chosen  you.  .go  and  bring  fortll 

[See  also  First  child,  fruit,  new  fruit,  thousands. 
BEING  forth  abundantly  — 
To  swarm,  frii  sharals. 

Gen.    1.  20  Let  the  waters  bring  forth  abundantly 
1.  21  the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly 
9.    7  briug  forth  abundantly  in  the  earth 
Exod.  8.    3  the  river  shall  bring  forth  frogs  abund. 

BEING  forth  children,  to  — 
To  beget,  bear,  17;  yalad. 

Isa.    23.    4  I  travail  not,  nor  bring  forth  children 
BEING  forth  fruit,  to  — 
To  burst  forth,  au  nub. 

Psa.  92. 14  They  shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old 
IL-  MCr  forth  in  abundance,  to  — 
To  swarm,  fly1  sharats. 

Psa.105.  30  Their  land  brought  forth  frogs  in  abund. 
BEING  forth  plentifully,  to  — 
To  bear  well,  tvtpopew  evphoreo. 

Luke  12.  16  of  a  rich  man  brought  forth  plentifully 

BRING  forth,  to  labour  to  — 
To  break  forth,  nw  guach. 

Mic.    4.  10  Be  in  pain,  and  labour  to  bring  forth 

BRING  forth,  to  be  made  to  — 

To  be  pained,  or  in.  travail,  ^'n  chid,  6. 

Isa.   66.    8  Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth 
BEING  forth,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  bear,   ■?;  yalad,  5. 

Isa.  55.  10  the  rain,  .maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud 

BEING  forth,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cans'  to  bear,  "I?;  yalad,  5. 

Isa.   66.    9  to  the  birth,  and  not  cause  to  bringforth? 
66.    9  shall  I  cause  to  bring  forth,  and  shut 
BEING  forth  young,  to  — 
To  beget,  bear,  "17;  yalad. 

Eze.  31.    6  all  the  beasts.. bring  forth  their  young 
BEING  hither,  to  — 
To  give,  jrji  nathan. 

Psa.  81.    2  Take  a  psalm,  aud  bring  hither  thetimb. 
BEING  home  (again),  to  — 
To  turn  back,  2'v  snub,  5. 

Ruth  1.  21  Lord  hath  brought  me  home  again  empty 

Judg  11.    9  If  ye  bring  me  home  again  to  fight 

Job    39-  t2  Wilt  thou  believe.. he  will  bring  home 
BRING  forward  en  one's  journey,  to  — 
To  send  forward,  ■wpo7r^irw  propempo. 

3  John      6  bring  forward  on  their  journey  after  a 
BRING  in,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  go  or  come  in,  Kia  bo,  5. 

Gen.  39.  14  he  hath  brought  in  an  Hebrew  unto  us 
47.    7  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob  bis  father 

Exodis.  17  Thou  shalt  bring  them  in,  and  plant 

16.  5  shall  prepare  (that)  which  they  Ining  in 
23  23  Angel  shall  go  before  thee,  and  bring  in 

26.  33  thou  mayest  bring  in  thither  within  the 
40.  4  thou  shalt  bring  in  the  table,  and  set  iu 
40.    4  thou  shalt  bring  in  the  candlestick 

Lev.    6.  21  (when  it  is)  baken,  thou  shalt  bring  it  in 
Sura  14.  31  little  ones,  .them  will  I  bring  in,  and 

27.  17  which  may  bring  them  in  ;  that  the 
Deut.  4.  3S  bring  thee  in,  to  give  thee  their  land 

9.    4  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  in  to  possess 
11.  29  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  brought  thee  in  to 

1  Sa.  16.  ta  be  sent  and  brought  him  in.     Now  be 

2  Sa.    3.  22  Joab  came,  .and  brought  in  a  great  spoil 

5.  2  be  that  leddest  out  and  broughtest  in 

6.  17  they  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  LORD,  and 
o.  10  thou  shalt  bring  iu  (the  fruits),  that  thy 


BRING 


121 


BRING 


i  Ki,  7  51  Solomon  broughtm  the  things.,  his  father 

8.  6  the  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the 

io.  ii  the  navy.. brought  infromOphir..almug 
15  15  he  brought  in  the  things  which  his  father 

1  Ch.  o  2S  they  should  bring  them  in  ami  out  by 

2  Ch.  5     1  Solomon  brought  in  (all)  the  things  that 

5     7  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
15.  18  he  brought  into  the  house  of  God  the 
24.    6  hast  thou  not  required . .  Lev.  to  bring  in 
24     9  to  bring  in  to  the  Lord  the  collection 
24.  10  the  people.,  brought  io,  and  cast  into 
29     4  he  brought  in  the  priests  and  the  Levites 
29  31  the  congregation  brought  in  sacrifices  and 
30.  15  Levites.. brought  in  the  burnt  offerings 
31     5  the  children.. brought  in.  .the  first  fruits 
3r.    0  they  also  brought  in  the  tithe  of  oxen 
31    12  brought  in  the  offerings  and  the  tithes 

.Neh  13  15  bringing  in  sheaves,  and  lading  asses;  as 
1 }  15  which  they  brought  into  Jerusalem  on 

Jer.  17.  21  bring  (it)  in  by  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 
17.  24  bring  in  no  burden  through  the  gates 
35-    4  I  brought  them  into  the  house  of  the 

Dan.    1   18  the  king  had  said  he  should  bring  them  in 

9.  24  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness 
Hag.   1.    6  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  little 

2.  To  cause  to  come  up  or  in,  hh>L  a.lal,  5. 

Dan     2   24  bring  me  in  before  the  king,  and  I  will 
2  25  Arioch  brought  in  Dauiel  before  the  king 

4.  6  to  bring  in  all  the  wise  (men)  of  Babylon 

5  7  The  king  cried  aloud  to  bring  in.  .astrolo. 

3.  To  had  to  or  into,  zladyw  eisago. 

Luke  2  27  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus 
r4.  21  bring  in  hither.. poor,  and  the  maimed 
John  1 3  16  Then,  .that  other  disciple.. brought  in 
Acts    7.  45  also  our  fathers. .brought  in  with  Jesus 
Heb.    1.    6  again,  when  he  bringeth  in  the  first  beg. 

4. To  bear  to  or  into,  el<r<pepw  eispkero. 

Luke  5  18  they  sought  (means)  to  bring  him  in 

5.  19  find  by  what,  .they  might  bring  him  iu 

BRING  in  privily,  to  — 

To  lead  in  sideways,  Trapziadyo)  pareisago. 

2  Pe.  2.    1  false  teachers. .privilyshall  bringin  dam. 

SUING  in  upon,  to  — 

To  had  upon,  iirdyas  epago. 

2  Pe.   2     5  a  preacher,  bringing  in  the  flood  upon 
nRING  into,  to  — 
l.To  lead  in,  toivard,  ettrdyu  eisago. 

Luke?2.  54  they,  .brought  him  into  the  high  priest's 
Acts  9.    8  led.  .and  brought  (him)  into  Damascus 
2r.  28  and  further  brought  Greeks  also  into 
21  29  that  Paul  had  brought  into  the  temple 

%To  bear  in,  toward,  el<r<p€p(o  eispkero. 

1  Ti.    6.    7  For  we  brought  nothing  into  (this)  world 
LTeb   13.  11  blood  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary  by 

[Sec  also  Bondage,  contempt,  sware,  subjection.] 

BRING  low,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  bend,  yj2  Tcana,  5. 

2  Ch  28  19  For  the  Lord  brought  Judah  low  because 
Job    40.  12  Look  on  every  one.  .(and)  bring  him  low 

2.  To  cause  to  fiend  or  beno,  JT)5  Kara,  5. 
Judgn.  35  Alas.. thou  hast  brought  me  very  low 

3.  To  make  humble,  hsy  shapkel,  5. 

i  Sa     2.    7  The  LORD.. bringeth  low  and  lifteth  up 
Prov  29  23  A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low :  but 

BRING  near  to  — 

1.7*o  bring  near,  3^7  qarab,  3. 

Isa    46.  13  I  bring  near  my  righteousness  ;  it  shall 
2.  To  cause  to  draw  near,  :np  qarab,  5. 
Nura  3     6  Bring  the  tribe  of  Levi  near,  and 
16    9  bring  you  near  to  himself,  to  do  the 
16.  10  he  hath  brought  thee  near  (to  him),  and 

3.7*0  cause  to  draw  near,  3"ij?  qereb,  5. 

Dan.    7.  13  and  they  brought  him  near  before  him 

BRING  on  the  way,  to  — 

1.  To  send  on,  rhy  shalach,  3. 

Geu.  18.  16  Abraham  went,  .to  bring  them  on  the  way 
2.7*0  send  forward,  irpo-Kt  jj.it  oj  propempo. 

Acts  15.    3  being  brought  on  their  way  by  the  church 
21     5  they  all  brought  us  on  our  way,  with 

Rom  15.  24  for  I  trust,  .to  be  brought  on  my  way 

2  Co.    1.  16  to  be  brought  on  my  way  toward  Judea 

BRING  on  the  journey,  to  — 

To  send  forward,  ttpott^-koj  propempo. 

1  Co.  16.    6  that  ye  may  bring  me  on  my  journey 
Titus  3  13  Bring  Zenas  the  lawyer.. on  their  journey 
BRING  out,  to  — 
1.7*o  cause  to  come  forth,  ns;  yatsa,  5. 

Gen.  15.    7  I  (am)  the  Lord  that  brought  thee  out 
19.    5  bring  them  out  unto  us,  that  we  may 
19.    8  let  me.  I  pray  you,  bring  them  out  unto 
19,  12  bring  (them)  out  of  this  place 
40.  14  make  mention  of  me.. and  bring  me  out 
43.  23  And  he  brought  Simeon  out  unto  them 
48.  i?  Joseph  brought  them  out  from  between 
Exod.6.    6  I  will  bring  you  out  from  under  the 

6.  7  which  bringeth  you  out  from  under  the 

6  ij  bring  the  children.. out  of  the  land 

6.  27  to  bring  out  the  children.. from  Egypt 

7.  5  bring  out  the  children,  .from  among 

1G 


Exodi2.  42  the  LORD.. bringing  them  out  from  the 

12.  51  Lord  did  bring  the  children  of  Israel  out 

13.  3  the  Lord  brought  you  out  from  this 
13.  9  the  Lord  brought  thee  out  of  Egypt 
13.  14  the  Lord  brought  us  out  from  Egypt 

16.  6  the  Lord  hath  brought  you  out  from  the 
18.    1  the  Lord  had  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt 

20.  2  I  (am)  the  Lord,  .which. .brought  theeout 
32.  12  For  mischief  did  he  bring  them  out 

Lev.  19.  36  I  (am)  the  Lord,  .which  brought  you  out 

23.  43  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

Numi5.  41  I  (am)  the  Lord. .which  brought  you  out 

17.  9  And  Moses  brought  out  all  the  rods 

23.  22  God  brought  them  out  of  Egypt ;  he  hath 
Deut.  4.  37  he. .brought  thee  out  iu  his  sight 

5.    6  I  (am)  the  Lord.,  which  brought  theeout 

5.  13  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out 

6.  23  he  brought  us  out  from  thence,  that  he 

6.  21  and  the  Lord  broug'ht  us  out  of  Egypt 

7.  8  the  Lord  brought  you  out  with  a  mighty 
7. 19  whereby  the  L.  thy  God  brought  thee  out 
9.  2S  the  land  whence  thou  broughtest  us  out 
9.  28  he  hath  brought  them  out  to  slay  them 

13.  5  the  Lord,  .which  brought  you  out  of 
13. 10  the  Lord.. which  brought  thee  out  of 

21.  19  shall  his  father,  .bring  him  out  to  the 

22.  21  Then  they  shall  bring  out  the  damsel 

22.  24  bring  them  both  out  unto  the  gate 

24.  11  the  man.. thou  dost  lend  shall  bring  out 
Josh.  6.  22  Go.  .and  bring  out  thence  the  woman 

6.  23  brought  out  Rahab,  and  her  father,  and 
10.  22  bring  out  those  five  kings  unto  me  out 
10.  24  they  brought  out  those  kings  unto  Joshua 
24.    5  them  :  and  afterward  I  brought  you  out 
24.    6  I  brought  your  fathers  out  of  Egypt 
Judg.  2.  12  forsook  the  Lord,  .which  brought  out 

6.  19  and  brought  (it)  out  unto  him  under  the 

6.  30  Bring  out  thy  son,  that  he  may  die 

2  Sa.  10.  16  Hadarezer  sent,  and  brought  out  the 
13.  18  his  servant  brought  her  out,  and  bolted 

1  Ki.  8.  21  he  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

8  53  thou  broughtest  our  fathers  out  of  Egypt 
10.  29  did  they  bring  (them)  out  by  their  means 

2  Ki.23.    6  he  brought  out  the  grove  from  the  house 

1  Ch.   9.  28  they  should  bring  in  and  out  by  tale 

20.    2  he  brought,  .much  spoil  out  of  the  city 
2o.    3  he  brought  out  the  people  that  (were)  in 

2  Ch.  1.  17  so  brought  they  out  (horses)  for  all  the 

9.  28  they  brought  unto  Solomon  horses  out 
16.    2  Then  Asa  brought  out  silver  and  gold  out 

23.  11  Then  they  brought  out  the  king's  son,  and 
23.  14  the  priest  brought  out  the  captains  of 
29.  16  priests.. brought  out  all  the  uncleanness 
34.  14  when  they  brought  out  the  mouey  that 

Job   12.  22  He.  .bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of 
Psa.  25.  17  O  bring  thou  me  out  of  my  distresses 
66.  12  thou  broughtest  us  out  into  a  wealthy 
68.    6  he  bringeth  out  those  which  are  bound 
78.  16  He  brought  streams  also  out  of  the  rock 
107.  14  He  brought  them  out  of  darkness  and 
107  2S  he  bringeth  them  out  of  their  distresses 

135.  7  he  bringeth  the  wind  out  of  his  treasuries 

136.  11  brought  out  Israel  from  among  them  for 
143.  11  Quicken  me.  .bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble 

Isa.   40.  26  these  (things),  that  bringeth  out  their  host 

42.    7  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison 
Jer.     7  22  I  brought  them  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt 

8.  1  they  shall  bring  out  the  bones  of  the 
31.  32  to  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
38.  23  So  they  shall  bring  out  all  thy  wives  and 

Eze    11     9  I  will  bring  you  out  of  the  midst  thereof 
20.  14  in  whose  sight  I  brought  them  out 
20.  34  I  will  bring  you  out  from  the  people,  and 
20.  41  when  I  bring  you  out  from  the  people 
34.  13  I  will  bring  them  out  from  the  people 
47.    2  Then  brought  he  me  out  of  the  way  of  the 

Amos  6  10  bring  out  the  bones  out  of  the  house 

2.7b  had  out,  i^dyw  ezago. 

Acts    7,  36  He  brought  them  out,  after  that  he  had 

7.  40  Moses  which  brought  us  out  of  the  land 
12   17  the  Lord  had  brought  them  out  of 

13.  17  with  an  high  arm  brought  he  them  out 

16.  39  they  came,  .and  brought  (them)  out,  and 

3.7*0  lead  forward,  -npodyu  proago. 

Acts  16  30  brought  them  out,  and  said,  Sirs,  what 

BRING  over,  to  — 

1.7*o  carry  into  exile,  n?3  gelah,  5. 

Ezra  4.  10  whom  the  great.. Asnapper  brought  over 

2. 7*0  cause  to  pass  over,  ~oy  abar,  5. 

>'uni32.  5  if  we  have  found  grace,  .bring  us  not  over 
Josh.  7.  7  hast  thou  at  all  brought  this  people  over 
2  Sa.    2     8  brought  him  over  to  Mahanaim 

BRING  through,  to  — 

7*o  cause  to  pass  over,  ~\2'Jt  abar,  5. 

Eze.  47.    3,  4  he  brought  me  through  the  waters  ;  the 
47     4  brought  me  through  ;  the  waters  (were) 

BRING  to,  to  — 

1.7*0  bear  in  to,  eifftptpu  eispkero. 

Acts  17.  20  thou  bringest  certain  strange  things  to 

2.To  bear  toward,  Trpoo<p*p?jj  prosphe.ro. 

Matt.  5.  23  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  [to]  the  altar,  and 

9  2  they  brought  to  him  a  man  sick  of  the 

9.  32  brought  to  him  a  dumb  man  possessed 

17.  16  I  brought  him  to  thy  disciples,  and  they 
Markio.  13  they  brought  young  children  to  him,  that 
[See  also  Birth,  honour,  nothing,  nought,  shame  ] 


ERING  to  pass,  to  — 
7*o  do,  n^*j;  asah. 

Gen.  41.  32  God  will  shortly  bring  it  to  pass 

50.  20  God  meant  it  unto  good,  to  bring  to  pass 
Psa.  37.    5  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  (it)to  pass 

37.    7  man  who  bringeth  wicked  devices  to  pass 

BRING  together,  to  — 

1. 7*o  gather,  *t'5i3  qabats,  3. 

Isa.  62.   9  they  that  have  brought  it  together  shall 
2.7*0  bear  together,  crvfx<pipu>  sumph:ro. 

Acts  19.  19  Many  of  them,  .brought  their  books  tog. 

BRING  unto,  to  — 

To  bear  toward,  -jrpootyepj)  iirosjjhero. 

Matt.  4.  24  they  brought  unto  him  all  sick  people 

5.  16  they  brought  unto  him  many  that  were 
12.  22  Then  was  brought  unto  him  one  possessed 
14.  35  brought  unto  him  all  that  were 

18.  24  one  was  [brought  unto]  him  which  owed 

19.  13  then  were  there  brought  unto  him  little 

22.  19  they  brought  unto  him  a  penny 
Lukei2  11  whenthey[bringyou]untothesynagogu«3 

18.  15  they  brought  unto  him  also  infants,  that 

23.  14  Ye  have  brought  this  mau  unto  me,  as 

BRING  up,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  faithful,  steady,  a  nurse,  |SN  avian. 

2  Ki.io.    1  them  that  brought  up  Ahab's  (children) 
Esth.  2.    7  he  brought  up  Hadassah,  that  (is),  Esther 

2.7*0  make  great,  nourish,  ^"3  gada1,  ?. 

2  Ki  10.    6  the  great  men.,  which  brought  them  up 
Isa.  49.  2i  who  hath  brought  up  these  ?    Behold,  I 

51.  18  of  all  the  sons  (that)  she  hath  brought  up 
Hos.    g  12  Though  they  bring  up  their  children 

3.7*0  bear,  "lb;  yalad. 

2  Sa  21.    8  two  sons,  .whom  she  brought  up  for 
4.7*0  cause  to  come  out,  nyi  yatsa,  5. 

Numi3.  32  they  brought  up  an  evil  report  of  the 
14.  36  by  bringing  up  a  slander  upon  the  land 

14.  37  men  that  did  bring  up  the  evil  report 
Deut  22.  14  bring  up  an  evil  name  upon  her.  and 

22.  19  he  hath  brought  up  an  evil  name  upon  a 

5.7*0  go  up,  nbij  alah,  (1),  5. 

Gen.  46.    4  I  will  also  surely  bring  thee  up  (again) 
6.7*0  cause  to  go  up,  rr?j;  alah,  5. 

Exod  3.    8  I  am  come  down,  .to  bring  them  up 

3.  17  I  will  bring  you  up  out  of  the  affliction 
8.    7  brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 

3  thou  hast  brought  us  up  out  of  Egypt,  to 

1  the  man  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the 

4  which  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of 
8  These,  .have  brought  thee  up  out  of  the 

32.  23  this  Moses,  the  man  that  brought  us  up 

33.  12  thou  sayest  unto  me.  Bring  up  this  people 
33.    1  the  people  which  thou  hast  brought  up 

Kumi4-  13  thou  broughtest  up  this  people  in  thy 
16.  T3  thou  hast  brought  us  up  out  of  a  land 

20.  25  Take  Aaron . .  and  bring  them  up  unto 

21.  5  Wherefore  have  ye  brought  us  up  out 

22.  41  Balak.. brought  him  up  into  the  high 
1  God  (is)  with  thee,  which  brought  thee  up 
6  she  had  brought  them  up  to  the  roof  of 

17  he  (it  is)  that  brought  us  up  and  our 
32  the  children  of  Israel  brought  up  out  of 
8  I  brought  you  up  from  Egypt,  .out  of  the 

6.  13  Did  not  the  Lord  bring  us  up  from  Egypt? 

15.  13  they,  .brought  him  up  from  the  rock 

16.  8  the  lords,  .brought  up  to  her  seven  green 
2.    6  he  bringeth  down.. and  bringeth  up 
2.  14.  all  that  the  flesh  hook  brought  up  the 
8.    8  I  brought  them  up  out  of  Egypt  even 

10.  18  I  brought  up  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  and 

12.  6  the  Lord.. that  brought  your  fathers  up 

19.  15  Bring  him  up  to  me  in  the  bed,  that  I 
28.  8  bring  me  (him)  up  whom  I  shall  name 
eS.  11  "Whom  shall  I  bring  up  unto  thee? 

11  And  he  said.  Bring  me  up  Samuel 
15  Why  hast  thou  disquieted.,  to  bring  me  up 
3  David  bring  up,  every  man  with  his 

2  to  bring  up  from  thence  the  ark  of  God 
6.  12  So  David,  .brought  up  the  ark  of  God 

6.  15  So  David,  .brought  up  the  ark  of  the 

7.  6  1  brought  up  the  children  of  Israel  out 
21.  13  he  brought  up  from  thence  the  bones  of 

1  Ki.  8.    1  they  might  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  cove. 

8.  4  they  brought  up  the  ark  of  the  LORD 
8.    4  even  those  did.. the  Levites  bring  up 

i2.  28  thy  gods . .  brought  thee  up  out  of  the 

2  Ki.  17.    7  the  Lord.. had  brought  them  up  out  of 

17.  36  the  Lord,  who  brought  you  up  out  of  the 
25.    6  took  the  king,  and  brought  him  up  to 

1  Ch.13.    6  David  went. .to  bring  up  thence  the  ark 

13.  3  David  gathered  all  Israel,  .to  bring  up 
15. 12  ye  may  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord 
15.  14  the  priests.,  bring  up  the  ark  of  theLofiD 
15.  25  David,  .went  to  bring  up  the  ark  ot  the 
15.  2S  all  Israel  brought  up  the  ark  of  the 
17.    5  I  brought  up  Israel  unto  this  day 

2  Ch.   1.    4  the  ark.. had  David  brought  up 
5.    2  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
5.    5  and  they  brought  up  the  ark  and  the  tab. 
5.    5  these  did  the  priests,  .bring  up 
8.  11  Solomon  brought  up  the  daughter  of 


32- 
32- 
32- 


Deut  20 
Josh    2. 


Judg 


28. 


>Sa. 


BRING 


122 


BROKEN 


Ezra 


4- 

rieh 

•  g 

10. 

12. 

Psa 

3°- 

40. 

7i- 

Isa. 

8. 

63. 

Jer. 

2. 

11 

16. 

2.1- 

=3- 

27. 

39- 

Eze. 

16. 

'9- 

23- 

26. 

29. 

32. 

37- 

37- 

Amos  2. 

3- 

8. 

Jon. 

y. 
2. 

Mic. 

6 

7.  To  make 

Lam 

.   2. 

11  bring  np  with  (them  of)  the  captivity 

2  king  of  Assur,  which  brought  us  up 

18  This  (is)  thy  god  that  brought  thee  up 
38  bring  up  the  tithe  of  the  tithes  unto 
31  I  brought  up  the  princes  of  Judah  upon 

3  thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from 

2  He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible 
20  bring  me  up  agaiu  from  the  depths 

7  the  LORD  bringeth  up  upon  them  the 
ii  Where  (is)  he  that  brought  them  up 

6  Where  (is)  the  Lord  that  brought  us  up 

7  I  brought  them  up  out  of  the  land    ■ 
14   15  The  LORD  liveth,  that  brought  up 

7  The  Lord  liveth,  which  brought  up 

8  the  Lord  liveth,  which  brought  up 
22  I  bring  them  up,  and  restore  them 

5  they  brought  him  up  to  Nebuchadnezzar 
40  They  shall  also  bring  up  a  company 

3  And  she  brought  up  oue  of  her  whelps 
46  I  will  bring  up  a  company  upon 

19  I  shall  bring  up  the  deep  upon  thee 

4  I  will  bring  thee  up  out  of  the  midst 

3  they  shall  bring  thee  up  in  my  net 

6  I  will,  .bring  up  flesh  upon  you 
13  I  have..broughtyouupoutof  yourgraves 
10  I  brought  you  up  from  the  laud  of  Egypt 

1  I  brought  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt 
10  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth  upon  all 

7  Have  not  I  brought  up  Israel  out 
6  yet  hast  thou  brought  up  my  life 

4  I  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Eg. 

great,  nourish,  njn  rabah,  3. 

22  brought  up  hath  mine  enemy  consumed 

8. To  make  high,  on  rum,  3a, 

Isa.    1.    2  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up 
23.   4  neither  do  I  nourish .  .(nor)  bring  up 
9.  To  feed  or  nourish  up,  cLvarpetyai  anatrepho. 

Acts 22.    3  I  am.  .brought  up  in  this  city 
10.ro  bear  tip,  avatylpui  anaphero. 

Matt  17.    1  J  esus . .  bringeth  them  up  into  an  high 

11.  To  nourish  fully,  e/n-pe^u;  eklrepho. 

Eph.    6.   4  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admo. 

12.  To  feed  or  nourish,  rpeipcc  trepho. 

Luke  4. 16  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been  brought  up 

BRING  up  again,  to  — 

To  lead  up,  back,  again,  avdya  anago. 

Rom. 10.    7  Who.  -is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again  from 

BRING  up  delicately,  to  — 
To  fondle,  pJS  pauaq,  3. 

Prov.29.  21  He  that  delicately  bringeth  up  his  serva. 

BRING  upon,  to  — 

To  lead  upon,  i-irdya  epago. 

Acts   5.  28  intend  to  bring  this  man's  blood  upon  us 
2  Pe.   2.    1  the  Lord,  .bring  upon  themselves  swift 

BRINGER  up  — 

To  be  steady,  faithful,  a  nurse,  |5¥  aman. 

2  Ki.  10.  5  the  bringers  up  (of  the  children),  sent  to 

BRINGING  — 

1.7V)  bear,  tt'yj  nasa. 

2  Ch.  9.  21  once  came  the  ships . .  bringing  gold,  and 
Psa. 126.    6  come  again,  .bringing  his  sheaves 

2.To  lead,  fiyco  ago. 

Heb.   2. 10  it  became  him .  .in  bringing  many  sons 

3.7V)  bear,  carry,  cpepw  phero. 

Mark  2.    3  bringing  oue  sick  of  the  palsy,  which  was 
Luke24.    1  briugingthe  spices  which  they  had 
Acts    5. 16  There  came  also  a  multitude,  .bringing 

BRINGING  in  — 

A  leading  in  upon,  eVenrayojyTJ  epeisagoge. 

Heb.    7.  19  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope  (did):  by 
[See  also  Birth,  bondage,  captivity,  child,  contempt, 
desolation,  honour,  light,  low,  nothing,  nought,  per- 
fection, power,  remembrance,  safe,  salvation,  shame, 
snare,  subjection,  tidings,  word.] 

BRINK  — 

l.JEnd,  border,  nsn  qalseh. 

J  osh.  3.   8  ye  are  come  to  the  brink  of  the  water  of 

'J.  Lip,  edge,  ~fy  saphah. 

Gen.  41.   3  aild  stood  by.  .upon  the  brink  of  the 
Exod.  2,    3  laid  (it)  in  the  lings  by  the  river's  brink 

7.  15  thou  shnlt  stand  by  the  river's  brink 
Peut.  2.  36  by  the  brink  of  the  river  of  Anion,  and 
Eze.  47.   6  caused  me  to  return  to  the  brink  of  the 

BROAD  — 

1.  Broad,  wide,  arri  rachab. 

'"  ''■         'the}  fortified  Jerusalem  unto  the  broad 

12. 3S  tower  of  the  furnaces  even  unto  the  broad 

Job   11.   9  The  measure. .(Is),  .broader  than  the  sea 

''    ■  "  '  o6thj  , 1 hnml  (is)  exceeding  broad 

Jer.  si.  58  The  broad  walls  oi  Babylon  shall  be 

tdth,  width,  3rp  rochab. 
Exod27.   1  five  cubits  long,  and  live  cubits  broad 

1  ki.   6    6  five  .'libit;  broad,  .five  oubits  broad 

6.    6  the  third  (was)  seven  cubits  broad 

2  Ch.  6. 13  of  five  cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  br 1 

Eze.  40.  6  the  gate,  (which  was;  one  reed  broad,  and 


Eze  40.    6  other.,  (gate,  which  was)  one  reed  broad 
40    7  (every)  little  chamber,  .one  reed  broad 
40.  29,  33  and  five  and  twenty  cubits  broad 
40  30  arches  round,  .(were),  .five  cubits  broad 
40.  42  a  cubit  and  an  half  broad,  and  one  cubit 

40.  47  cubits  long,  and  an  hundred  cubits  broad 

41.  1  the  posts,  six  cubits  broad  ou  the  one 

41.  1  six  cubits  broad  on  the  other  side,  (which) 
41. 12  toward,  .west  (was)  seventy  cubits  broad 

42.  1 1  as  long  as  they,  (and)  as  broad  as  they 

42.  20  hundred  (reeds)  long,  .five  hundred  broad 
43. 16  the  altar  (shall  be)  twelve  (cubits),  .broad 

43.  17  fourteen  (cubits)  long  and  fourteen  broad 

45.  6  five  thousand  broad,  and  five  and  twenty 

46.  22  joined  of  forty  (cubits),  .and  thirty  broad 

3.  Beat  out  plates,  D'ynn  riqquim. 

Numi6.  38  let  them  make  them  broad  plates  (for)  a 

4.  Broad  on  both  hands,  a\T,  'on-i  rachabe  yadayirn. 

Isa.   33.  21  (will  be)  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers 

5. Easy,  wide,  evpvxcopos  euruchoros. 

Matt.  7.  13  broad  (is)  the  way,  that  leadeth  to 

BROAD,  to  be  made  — 

TV)  beat  out,  expand,  Hii")  raqa,  3. 

>'umi6.  39  they  were  made  broad  (plates  for)  a 

BROAD,  to  make  — 

To  make  broad,  wide,  spacious,  irKarvvw  platuno. 
Matt  23     5  they  make  broad  their  phylacteries,  and 

BROAD  place  — 

1.  Broad  or  wide  place,  ann  rachab. 

Job  36.  16  out  of  the  strait  (into)  a  broad  place 

2.  Broad  or  wide  place,  aim  rechob. 

Jer.    5.    1  seek  in  the  broad  places  thereof,  if  ye 

BROAD  way  — 

Broad  or  wide  place,  Tirn  rechob. 

Song  3.    2  in  the  streets,  and  in  the  broad  ways  I 
Bah.   2.    4  they  shall  justle  one.. in  the  broad  ways 

BROIDERED  — 

1.  Variegated,  npnn  riqmah. 

Eze.  16. 18  tookest  thy  broidered  garments,  and 
26. 16  put  off  their  broidered  garments  :  they 

2. Chequer  work,  tesselaled  stuff,  'wn  tashbets. 
Exod28.    4  a  broidered  coat,  a  mitre,  and  a  girdle 

BROIDERED  hair  — 

Twined  or  plaited  work,  irAejfia  plegma. 
1  Ti.    2.    9  not  with  broidered  hair,  or  gold,  or 

BROIDERED  work  — 
Variegated  work,  nopn  riqmah. 

Eze.  16. 10  I  clothed  thee  also  with  broidered  work 

16.  13  (of)  fine  linen,  and  silk,  and  broidered  w. 
27.  7  Fine  linen  with  broidered  work  from  Eg. 
27. 16  with  emeralds,  purple,  and  broidered  w. 
27.  24  in  blue  clothes,  and  broidered  work,  and 

BROILED  — 

Prepared  by  fire,  ottt6s  optos. 

Luke24.  42  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  broiled  fish 

BROKEN  — 

1. Brought  down,  nn  chath. 

1  Sa.  2.    4  The  bows  of  the  mighty  men  (are)  broken 

2.7*0  be  weak,  pained,  nx|  kaah,  2. 

Psa.  109.  16  he  might  even  slay  the  broken  in  heart 

3.  Broken,  bruised,  itTv?  maroach. 

Lev.  21  20  or  scabbed,  or  hath  his  stones  broken 

4. Smitten,  &OJ  nake. 

Prov  15.  13  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  broken 

17.  22  but  a  broken  spirit  drieth  the  bones 

5. 7V>  snap  asunder,  ;'5)  naphals. 

Jer.  22.  28  (Is)  tiiis  man  Coniah  a  despised  broken 

6.7*0  draw  or  pull  asunder,  pra  nathaq. 

Lev.  22.  24  Ye  shall  not  offer.,  that  which  is.  .brokeu 

7.  To  break  through,  ]ns  j>arals. 

2  Ch.32.    5  he.  -built  up  all  the  wall  that  was  broken 

8. Breakage,  njn  roah. 

Prov  25.  19  in  time  of  trouble  (is  like)  a  broken  tooth 

9.7*o  dash  in  pieces,  rsn  ratsats. 

Isa.  36.   6  in  the  staff  of  this  broken  reed,  on  Egypt 
Hos.    5.  ii  Ephraim  (is)  oppressed  (and)  broken  in 

10.7*0  shiver,  shatter,  "Qif>  shabar. 

Lev.  22.  22  Blind,  or  broken,  or  maimed,  or  having 
Psa  147.    3  He  healeth  the  brokeu  in  heart,  and 

11.7*0  be  shivered,  shattered,  iiy  shabar,  2. 

Tsa.  34,  iS  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto,  .a  broken  heart 
51.  17  a  broken  spirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
Jer.    2.  13  hewed  them  out  cisterns,  brokeu  cisterns 
Eze.  27.  34  Iu  the  time  (wheu)  thou  Shalt  be  brokeu 
30.  22  the  strong,  and  that  which  was  broken 
34.   4  have  ye  bound  up  (that  which  was)  Droken 
34.  ifi  I.  .will  bind  up  (that  which  was)  broken 
Dan.   S.  22  that  being  broken,  whereas  four  stood 
Zechit.  16  nor  heal  that  that  is  broken,  nor  feed 
l'2.7*o  shiver,  shatter,  n;n  lebar. 

Dan.   2.  42  (so)  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly,  .broken 


BROKEN  (meat)  — 

Fragment,  K\d<Tfj.a  klasma. 

Matt  15.  37  and  they  took  up  of  the  broken  (meat) 
Mark  8.    8  they  took  up  of  the  broken  (meat) 

BROKEN,  to  be  — 

1.7V)  be  lost,  destroyed,  "ijx  abad. 

Psa.  31. 12  out  of  mind ;  I  am  like  a  broken  vessel 

2.7*0  be  bruised,  Njn  daka,  4. 

Job  22.  9  arms  of  the  fatherless  have  been  broken 
Isa.    19.  10  they  shall  be  brokeu  in  the  purposes 

3. To  smite,  strike,  oSn  halam. 

Judg  5  22  the  horse  hoofs  broken  by  the  means  of 
4.7*0  be  brought  down,  nnn  chathath,  2. 

Isa.     7.    8  five  years  shall  Ephraim  be  broken 
5.7V>  bring  down,  nnn  chathath,  3. 

Jer.  51  56  every  one  of  their  bows  is  broken 
6.7*0  bring  down,  nm  naehath,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.  35  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  arms 

Psa.  18.  34  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  arms 
7.7V)  strike  out,  I'm  natha,  2. 

Job     4. 10  the  teeth  of  the  young  lions  are  broken 
8.  To  draw  or  pull  asunder,  pni  nathaq,  2. 

Judgi6.    9  as  a  thread  of  tow  is  broken 

Eccl.  4.  12  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken 

Isa.  5    27  nor  the  latchet  of  their  shoes  be  broken 
33.  20  neither  shall  any  of  the  cords.,  be  broken 

Jer.  10.  20  and  all  my  cords  are  broken :  my  children 
9. 7V)  become  bare,  exposed,  nnu  arar,  la. 

Jer    51  58  The  broad  walls,  .shall  be.  .broken 
10.  To  break  off,  pns  paraq,  7. 

Eze.  19.  12  her  strong  rods  were  broken  and  withered 
11.7V)  be  broken,  violated,  "nsparar,  6. 

Jer    33.  21  (Then)  may  also  my  covenant  be  broken 

Zech  11.  11  And  it  was  broken  in  that  day 
12.7b  be  excited,  snn  raga. 

Job     7.   5  my  skin  is  broken,  and  become  loathsome 
13. 7*0  break,  be  broken,  yyj  raa. 

Jer.  11. 16  and  the  branches  of  it  are  broken 

14.  7*o  dash  in  pieces,  y%~!  ratsats. 

Eccl.  12.    6  or  the  golden  bowl  be  broken 
15.7V)  be  dashed  in  pieces,  fj"i  ratsats,  2. 
Eccl.  12.    6  or  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern 

16.  To  be  shivered,  shattered,  iiy  shabar,  2. 
Lev.    6.  28  But  the.. vessel,  .shall  be  broken 

15.  12  the  vessel  of  earth,  .shall  be  broken 
1  Sa.  4.  18  and  his  neck  brake,  and  he  died 

1  Ki.22.  48  for  the  ships  were  broken  at  Ezion-geber. 

2  Ch.20.  37  And  the  ships  were  broken,  that  they  were 
Job.  24.  20  wickedness  shall  be  broken  as  a  tree 

31.  22  mine  arm  le  broken  from  the  bone 
38.  15  and  the  high  arm  shall  be  broken 
Psa.  34.  20  Kekeepeth  all  his  bones:  not  one.  .broken 
37. 15  aud  their  bows  shall  be  broken 
37.  17  the  arms  of  the  wicked  shall  be  broken 
124.    7  the  snare  is  brokeu,  and  we  are  escaped 
Prov  6.  15  suddenly  shall  he  be  broken  without 
Eccl.12.    6  or  the  pitcher  be  brokeu  at  the 
Isa.     8.  15  many  among  them  shall .  .be  broken 

14.  2q  the  rod  of  him  that  smote  thee  is  broken 
28. 13  and  fall  backward,  and  be  broken 
Jer.  14.  17  virgin  daughter  of  my  people  is  broken 
23.   9  Mine  heart  within  me  is  brokeu 
48.  17  How  is  the  strong  staff  broken 
48.  25  and  his  arm  is  broken,  saith  the  Lord 

50.  23  How  is  the  hammer. .  broken  !  how  is  B. 

51.  30  her  dwelling-places ;  her  bars  are  broken 
Eze.    6.   4  and  your  images  shall  be  brokeu 

6.    6  and  your  idols  may  be  broken 
6.   9 ;  26.  2  ;  31.  12  ;  32.  2S  ;  Dan.  8.  8;  8.  25  ; 
11.   4  ;  11.  22  ;  Jon.  1.  4. 

17.  TV)  be  broken,  tcAdopat  klaomai. 

1  Co.  11.  24  this  is  my  body  which  is  broken  for  you 

15.  To  be  wholly  broken,  (rvvrpi^oixai  suntribomai. 
John  19.  36  A  hone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken 

19.  7*o  be  rent,  crx^C0^1  schizomai. 

Johnai.  11  for  all.  .yet  was  not  the  net  broken 

20. 7*0  be  crushed  together,  owShdoixai  snnthlaomai. 
Matt 21.  44  [shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken] 
Luke2o  18  shall  fall  upon  that  stoue  shall  be  broken 

BROKEN  down  — 

l.A  removing,  keeping  off,  nBE  viassach. 

2  Ki.  11.    6  of  the  house,  that  it  be  not  broken  down 

2. 7*o  break  through,  ps  parats. 

Neb.  2.  13  walls  of  Jerusalem,  .were  broken  down 
ProV25.  2S  spirit  (is  like)  a  city  (that  is)  broken  down 

BROKEN  down,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  broken  or  torn  down,  enrt  haras,  2. 

Prov  24.  31  the  stone  wall  thereof  was  broken  down 
Eze  30.  4  and  her  foundations  shall  be  broken  down 
Joel    117  the  barns  are  broken  down  ;  for  the  corn 

2.  To  be  brought  down,  nnn  chathath. 

Jer.    48  20  Moali  is  confounded;  foritisbrokendown 
48.  39  shall  howl, (saying),Howisitbrokendown 

3.7*o  be  torn  down,  j'nj  nathats,  2. 

Jer.    4.  26  all  the  cities  thereof  were  broken  down 
4.7*0  be  torn  down,  ]'nj  nathats,  6. 

Lev  11.  35  Aud  every  (thing),  .shall  be  broken  down 


BROKEN 


123 


BROTHER 


5. To  be  broken  through,  fTgpwats,  4. 

Nell.  i.  3  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  also  (is)  broken  d. 
6.  To  break  oneself  to  irieces,  yy-iraa,  7a. 

Isa.  24.  19  The  earth  is  utterly  broken  down,  the 
BROKEN  in  pieces  — 
l.To  be  cleaved  through,  yps  baqa,  2. 

2  Ch.25.  12  that  they  all  were  broken  in  pieces 
2.To  be  brought  down,  nnri  chathath. 

Isa,     8.    9  O  ye  people,  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  p. 
8.   9  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  p. 

Jer.   50.    2  Merodach  is  broken  in  pieces  ;  her  idols 
50.    2  her  images  are  broken  in  pieces 
3.  To  be  beaten  dozen,  nri3  kathalh. 

Isa.  30  14  the  potter's  vessel  that  is  broken  in  pieces 
4. Small  fragments,  D*339  shebabim. 

Hos.    8.   6  the  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be  broken  in  p. 
BROKEN  off,  to  be  — 
1.7b  be  drawn  asunder,  pm  nathaq,  2. 

Job  17.  11  days  are  past,  my  purposes  are  broken  off 
2.7b  be  broken,  shattered,  "vy  shabar,  2. 

Isa.  27. 1 1  boughs . .  withered . .  shall  be  broken  off 
BROKEN  out,  to  be  — 
To  break  out,  n~\3parach. 

Lev.  13.  20  a  plague  of  leprosy  broken  out  of  the 
13.  25  it(is)a  leprosy  broken  out  of  the  burning 

BROKEN,  to  be  sore  — 

To  be  bruised,  n:fl  dakah,  2. 

Psa  38,    8  I  am1  feeble  and  sore  broken  :  I  have 
BROKEN  to  pieces,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  bruised  small,  prt  or  ppi  deqaq. 

Dan.  2.  35  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  broken  to  pieces 
2.7b  be  brought  down,  nnn  chathath,  2. 

1  Sa.    2.  ioTheadversaries-.shallbebrokentopieces 

BROKEN  up  or  through,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  cleft  through,  ypp  baqa,  2. 

Gen.    7.  11  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  broken  up 

2  Ki.  25.  4  the  city  was  broken  up,  and  all  the  men 
Prov,  3.  20  his  knowledge  the  depths  are  broken  up 
Jer.  52.    7  Then  the  city  was  broken  up,  and  all  the 

2.  To  be  cleft  through,  yp3  baqa,  6. 

Jer  39.'  2  the  ninth  (day). .the  city  was  broken  up 
3. 7b  be  gone  up,  nby  alah,  2. 

Jer  37-  n  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans  was  broken  up 
i.To  break  through,  Stopfer <r&>  diorusso. 

Matt 24.  43  not..sutfered  his  house  to  be  broken  up 

Luke  1?.  39  not.  .suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  thr. 

BROKEN  FOOTED  or  handed  — 

1. A  breach  of  the  foot,  Sa~}  i^  sheber  regel. 

Lev.  21.  19  Or  a  man  that  is  broken  footed,  or  a  man 
2.A  breach  of  the  hand,  i;  *ni?  sheber  yad. 

Lev.  21.  19  Or  a  man  that  is.. broken  handed 
BROKEN  HEARTED  — 
1. Broken  of  heart,  27  15v;j  uishbar  leb 

Isa.    61.    1  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken  hearted 

2. Rubbed  together  as  to  the  heart,  avvTerpifxf.Uyos 

rr\v  fcapSiav  suntetrunmenos  ten  kardian. 

Luke  4.  iS  [hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken  hearted] 
BROOD  — 
Nest,  brood,  voa'aid  nossia. 

Luke  1 3.  24  as  a  hen .  .her  [brood]  under  (her)  wings 
BROOK  — 

Brooks  were  abundant  in  Canaan  The  chief  of  those 
mentioned  are :  Arnon,  Besor,  Gaash  Cherith,  Eshcol. 
Kidron  Kishon  Zered.  the  Willows;— which  see. 

1  A  breaking  forth,  p'2N  aphiq. 

Psa.  42.  1  the  hart  pauteth  after  the  water  brooks 
2. A  shining  brook,  "fix*  yeor. 

Isa.    19,   6  the  brooks  o!  defence  shall  be  emptied 
19.    7  The  paper  reeds  by.  -brooks,  .the  brooks 
19.    7  every  thing  sown  by  the  brooks,  shall 
19.   8  they  that  cast  angle  into  the  brooks  shall 

3..I  small  brook,  httinikal. 

2  Sa.  17.  20  They  be  gone  over  the  brook  of  water 
4.A  stream  (in  a  valley),  b~2  nachal. 

Gen.  32.  23  he  took  them  and  sent  them  over,  .brook 
Lev.  23.  40  of  thick  trees  and  willows  of  the  brook 
Num  13.  23  they  came  unto  the  brook  of  Eshcol  and 
13. 24  The  plnce  was  called  the  brook  Eshcol 
21.  14  What  he  did .  .in  the  brooks  of  Anion 
21.  15  at  the  stream  of  the  brooks  that  goeth 
Deut.  2. 13  up,  (said  I),  and  get  yon  over  the  brook 
2.  13  and  we  went  over  the  brook  Zered 
2.  14  until  we  were  come  over  the  brook  Zered 

8.  7  a  good  land ;  a  laud  of  brooks  of  water 

9.  21 1  carl  the  dust  thereof  into  the  brook 

a    .'..  17.  40  five  smooth  stones  out  of  the  brook,  and 
30.    9  So  David  went . .  and  came  to  the  brook  B. 
30. 10  they  could  not  go  over  the  brook  Eesor 
30.  21  whom  they  had  made,  .abide  at  the  brook 

2  Sa.  15.  23  the  king. .passed  over  the  brook  Kidron 
_  23.  30  Eenaiah.  .Hiddai  of  the  brooks  of  Gaash 

1  Kj.  2.  37  thou  goest  out,  and  passest  over,  .brook 
15. 13  her  idol,  and  burnt  (it)  by  the  brook  Kid. 
17.    3  hide  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith,  that 
17.    }  l.e,  (that)  thou  shalt  drink  of  the  brook 


1  Ki.  17.    5  he  went  and  dwelt  by  the  brook  Cherith 

17.    6  bread  and  flesh,  .and  he  drank  of  the  br. 

17.  7  it  came  to  pass,  .that  the  brook  dried  up 

18.  5  Go  into  the  land .  .and  unto  all  brooks 
18.  40  Elijah  brought  them  down  to  the  brook 

2  Ki.  23.    6  without  Jerusalem,  unto  the  brook  Kid. 

23.    6  burnt  it  at  the  brook  Kidron.. stamped 

23.  12  cast  the  dust  of  them  into  the  brook  Ki. 

1  Ch.11.  32  Hurai  of  the  brooks  of  Gaash,  Abiel  the 

2  Ch.15.  16  and  burnt  (it)  at  the  brook  Kiur<  n 

20  16  shall  find  them  at  the  end  of  the  brook 

29.  16  to  carry  (it)  out  abroad  into  the  brook  K. 

30.  14  and  cast  (them)  into  the  brook  Kidron 
32.    4  the  brook  that  ran  through  the  midst 

Neh.  2.  15  Then  went  I  up  in  the  night  by  the  brook 
Job     6.  15  brethren.. dealt  deceitfully  as  a  brook 
6. 15  as  the  stream  of  brooks  they  pass  away 
20. 17  He  shall  not  see.. the  brooks  of  houev 
22.  24  (gold)  of  Ophir  as.  .stones  of  the  brooks 
40.  22  the  willows  of  the  brook  compass  him 
Psa.  83.    g  as  (to)  Sisera,  as  (to)  Jabin,  at  the  brook 

no.    7  He  shall  driuk  of  the  brook  in  the  way 
Prov.18.   4  well  spring  of  wisdom  (as)  a  flowing  br. 
Isa.    15-    7  shall  they  carry  away  to  the  brook  of 
Jer.  31.  40  all  the  fields  unto  the  brook  of  Kidron 

5.  Winter  flowing,  x€'l^o-^pos  chetviarrhos. 

JohmS.    1  forth  with  his  disciples  over  the  brook 
BROTH  — 
1. Broth,  soup,  p*13  maraq. 

Judg.  6.  19  he  put  the  broth  in  a  pot,  and  brought 
6.  20  Take  the  flesh,  .and  pour  out  the  broth 
2.  Broth,  soup,  bits,  pi?,  P~l$  paraq,  maraq. 

Isa.   6$.    4  broth  of  abominable  (things  is  in)  their 
BROTHER  — 
1.  Brother,  nx  ach. 

Gen    4.    2  she  again  bare  his  brother  Abel.    Aud 
8  Cain  talked  with  Abel  his  brother :  aud 

8  Cain  rose  up  against  Abel  his  brother 

9  Lord  said.  .Where  (is)  Abel  thy  brother? 
9  I  know  not :  (Am)  I  my  brother's  keeper? 

4-  10  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto 

4.  n  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thy 

4.  21  his  brother's  name  (was)  Jubal :  he  was 

5  at  the  hand  of  every  man's  brother  will 

21  Unto  Shem  also,  .the  brother  of  Japheth 

25  and  his  brother's  name  (was)  Joktan 
5  Abram  took . .  Lot  his  brother's  son,  and 

12  they  took  Lot,  Abram's  brother's  son 

13  brother  of  Eshcol,  and  brother  of  Aner 

14  Abram  heard  that  his  brother  was  taken 
16  brought  again  his  brother  Lot,  and  his 

5  even  she  herself  said,  He  (is)  my  brother 
13  that  1  said  unto  her.  .He  (is)  my  brother 
16  I  have  given  thy  brother  a  thousand 

20  hath  also  born  children  unto  thy  brother 

21  Huz  his  first  born,  and  Buz  his  brother 
23  Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor,  Abraham's  br 

24.  15  Milcah,  the  wife  of  bailor,  Abraham's  br 
24.  29  Rebekah  had  a  brother,  and  his  name 
24.  4S  to  take  my  master's  brother's  daughter 
24.  53  he  gave  also  to  her  brother  and  to  her 

24  55  her  brother  and  her  mother  said,  Let  the 

26  after  that  came  his  brother  out,  and  his 

6  thy  father  speak  unto  Esau  thy  brother 
27  11  Behold.  Esau  my  brother  (is)  a  hairy  man 
27.  23  his  hands  were  hairy,  as  his  brother 
27  30  Esau  Ins  brother  came  in  from  his 
27.  35  he  said.  Thy  brother  came  with  subtilty 
27.  40  thy  sword  shalt  thou .  .serve  thy  brother 
27.  41  then  will  I  slay  my  brother  Jacob 
27.  42  Behold,  thy  brother  Esau,  as  touching 

27.  43  flee  thou  to  Laban  my  brother  to  Harau 
27  44  until  thy  brother's  fury  turn  away 
27  45  Until  thy  brother's  anger  turn  away  from 

28.  2  daughters  of  Laban  thy  mother's  bVother 

25  5  brother  of  Rebekah,  Jacob's  and  Esau's 
29  to  Rachel,  .daughter,  his  mother's  brother 
29  10  the  sheep  of  Laban  his  mothers  brother 
29  to  the  flock  of  Laban  his  mother's  brother 

29.  12  Jacob  told .  .he  (was)  her  father's  brother 
29.  15  Laban  said.  .Because,  .(art)  my  brother 
32.    3  to  Esau  his  brother,  unto  the  land  of  Seir 
32.    6  saying.  We  came  to  thy  brother  Esau 
32  11  Deliver  me.  .from  the  hand  of  my  brother 

32  13  to  his  hand  a  present  for  Esau  his  brother 

32.  17  When  Esau  my  brother  meeteth  thee 

33.  3  bowed,  .until  he  came  near  to  his  brother 

33  9  Esau  said,  I  have  enough  my  brother 
33.  1  fleddest  from  the  face  of  Esau  thy  brother 
33  7  when  he  fled  from  the  face  of  his  brother 
36-  6  went,  .from  the  face  oi  his  brother  Jacob 

37  26  What  profit  (is  it)  if  we  slay  out  brother 

37.  27  for  he  (is)  our  brother  (and)  our  flesl) 

38.  8  Go  iu  unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry 

38  8  and  raise  up  seed  to  thy  brother 
38    9  when  he  went  in  unto  his  brother's  wife 
38.  9  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  brother 
38  29  as  he  drew  back  his  haud.  his  brother 
38.  30  And  afterward  came  out  his  brother 
42.    4  But  Benjamin,  Josephs  brother,  Jacob 
42.  15  except  your  youngest  brother  come 
42.  16  Send.. and  let  him  fetch  your  brother 
42  20  But  bring  your  youngest  brother  unto  me 
42  21  We  (are)  verily  guilty  concerning  out  br. 
42.  34  And  bring  your  youngest  brother  unto  me 

42.  34  will  I  deliver  you  your  brother  and  ye 
42  38  son  shall  not  go.  .for  his  brother  is  dead 

43.  3,5  except  vow  brother  (be)  with  you 
43.    4  if  thou  wilt  send  our  brother  with  us,  v.e 


G^n.  43.  6  tell,  .man  whether  ye  had  yet  a  brother? 
43.  7  (Is)  your  father,  .have  ye  (anot.) brother? 
43.  7  that  he  would  say,  Bring  your  brother 
43. 13  Take  also  your  brother,  and  arise,  go  again 
43.  14  he  may  send  away  your  other  brother 
43.  29  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  his  brother  B. 
43.  29  and  said,  (Is)  this  your  younger  brother 

43.  30  for  his  bowels  did  yearn  upon  his  brother 

44.  19  Have  ye  a  father,  or  a  brother? 

44.  20  aud  his  brother  is  dead,  aud  he  alone  is 
44.  23  Except  your  youngest  brother  come  down 
44.  26  if  our  youngest  brother  be  with  us 

44.  26  except  our  youngest  brother  (be)  with  us 

45.  4  And  he  said,  I  (am)  Joseph  your  brother 
45.  12  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Benjamin 
45.  14  he  fell  upon  his  brother  Benjamin's  neck 
48.  19  but  truly  his  younger  brother  shall  be 

Exod.  4.  14  (Is)  not  Aaron  the  Levite  thy  brother? 
7.    1  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet 
7.    2  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  speak  unto 
28.    1  take  thou  unto  thee  Aaron  thy  brother 
28.    2  makeholygarmentsfor  Aaronthy  brother 
28.   4  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron  thy  brother 
28.  4r  thou  shalt  put  them  upon,  .thy  brother 
32.  27  in  and  out.  .and  slay  every  man  his  bro. 
32.  29  even  every  man  upon . .  his  brother ;  that 

Lev.  16.    2  Lord  said.  .Speak  unto  Aaron  thy  broth. 
18.  14  shalt  not  uncover,  .thy  father's  brother 
iS.  16  Thou  shalt  not  uncover,  .thybrother'swife 

18.  16  it  (is)  thy  brother's  nakedness 

19.  17  Thou  shall  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine 

20.  21  And  if  a  man  shall  take  his  brother's  wife 

20.  21  hath  uncovered  his  brother's  nakedness 

21.  2  But  for  his  kin.  .and  for  his  brother 
25.  25  If  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor,  and  hath 
25.  25  shall  he  redeem  that  which  his  brother 
25.  35  And  if  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor,  and 
25.  36  fear  thy  God,  that  thy  brother  may  live 

25.  39  And  if  thy  brother  (that  dwelleth)by  thee 
47  and  thy  brother  (that  dwelleth)  by  him 

7  He  shall  not  make  himself,  .for  his  bro. 

8  gather.,  together,  thou  and  Aaron  thy  br. 

14  saith  thy  brother  Israel,  Thou  knowest 
13  as  Aaron  thy  brother  was  gathered 

2  of  Zelophehad  our  brother  unto  his 

16  judge  righteously  between .  .his  brother 

6  If  thy  brother,  the  son  of  thy  mother,  or 

2  he  shall  not  exact  (it),  .of  his  brother 

3  but  (that)  which  is  thine  with  thy  brother 

7  nor  shut  thine  hand  from  thy  poor  brother 

9  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy.  .brother 

11  open  thine  hand  wide  uuto  thy  brother 

12  (And)  if  thy  brother,  an  Hebrew  man,  or 

15  a  stranger,  .which  (is)  not  thy  brother 
iS  hath  testified  falsely  against  his  brother 
19  had  thought . .  have  done  unto  his  brother 

1  Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox.  .go 

1  thou  shalt  in  any  case  bring.,  unto  thy  br. 

2  And  if  thy  brother  (be)  not  nigh  unto  thee 

2  it  shall  be  with  thee  until  thy  brother 

3  and  with  all  lost  thing  of  thy  brother's 

4  Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ass  or 
7  shalt  not  abhor,  .for  he  (is)  thy  brother 

19  shalt  not  lend  upon  usury  to  thy  brother 

23  unto  thy  brother  thou  shalt  not  lend  upon 
3  then  thy  brother  should  seem  vile  unto 

6  succeed  in  the  name  of  his  brother 

7  if  the  man  like  not  to  take  his  brother's 
9  Then  shall  his  brother's  wife  come  unto 

54  his  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  his  brother 
50  as  Aaron  thy  brother  died  in  mount  Hor 

17  And  Othniel .  .the  brother  of  Caleb,  took 
3  And  Judah  said  unto  Simeon  his  brother 

13  And  Othniel . .  Caleb's  younger  brother 
17  And  Judah  went  with  Simeon  his  brother 

9  (even)  Othniel . .  Caleb's  younger  brother 
3  for  they  said . .  He  (is)  our  brother 

iS  made  A. .  .king,  .because  he(is)yourbrot. 

21  for  fear  of  Abiiuelech  his  brother 

24  be  laid  upon  Abimelech  their  brother 
23,  28  the  children  of  Benjamin  my  brother  ? 

6  repented  them  for  Benjamin  their  bro. 
3  which  (was)  our  brother  Elimelech's 

8  the  son  of  Ahitub,  I-chabod's  brother 
23  Eliab  his  eldest  brother  heard  when  he 
29  my  brother  he  hath  commanded  me  (to) 

26.  6  Abishaitheson.  .Zeruiah.  .brothertoJoab 
>  Sa.    1.  26  I  am  distressed  for  thee  my  brother  Jon. 

2.  22  I  hold  up  my  face  to  Joab  thy  brother 

2.  27  every  one  from  following  his  brother 

3.  27  died  for  the  blood  of  Asahel  his  brother 
3.  30  So  Joab.  .Abishai  his  brother  slew  Abuer 

3.  30  because  he  had  slain  their  brother  Asahel 

4.  6  Rechab  and  Baanah  his  brother  escaped 
4.    9  David  answered  Rechab .  .his  brother 

10.  10  he  delivered  unto  the  hand  of.  .his  brother 
13.    3,  32  the  son  of  Shimeah,  David's  brother 
13.    4  I  love  Tamar  my  brother  Absalom's 
13.    7  Go  now  to  thy  brother  Amnon's  house 
13.    8  So  Tamar  went  to  her  brother  Amnon's 
13.  10  brought  (them),  .to  Am  11  on  her  brother 
13. 12  Nay,  my  brother,  do  not  force  me  ;  for  no 
13.  20  And  Absalom  her  brother  said  unto  her 
13  20  Hath  Amnou  thy  brother  been  with  thee 
13.  20  he  (is)  thy  brother ;  regard  not  this  thing 
13.  20  Tamar  remained. .in  her  brother  A.'s 

13.  26  I  pi'ay  thee,  .let  my  brother  Amnon  go 

14.  7  Deliver  him  that  smote  his  brother 

14.    7  for  the  life  of  his  brother  whom  he  slew 
18.   2  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah  Joab's  brother 
20.    9  Joab  said,  (Art)  thou  in  health,  my  bro. 
20.  10  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brother  pursued 


Num.  6 


27. 

36. 
Deut.  1. 


Josh.  15. 
Judg.  1. 


Ruth  4. 

1  Sa.  14. 

17- 


BROTHER 


124 


BROUGHT 


2  Sa.  21.  2i  Jonathan,  .the  brother  of  David,  slew 
23.  iS  And  Abishai  the  brother  of  Joab,  the  son 
23.  24  Asahel,  the  brother  of  Joab  (was)  one  of 
1  Ki.    1.  10  and  Solomon  his  brother,  lie  called  not 
2.    7  I  tied  because  of  Absalom  thy  brother 
2. 15  the  kingdom.,  is  become  my  brother's:  for 
2.  21  Let  Abishag..  be  given  to  Adonijah  thybr. 
2.  22  for  he  (is)  mine  elder  brother  ;  even  for 
9.  13  What  cities,  .thou  hast  given  me.  my  br. 
13.  30  they  mourned,  .(saying),  Alas,  my  brother! 
20.  32  he  said,  (Is)  he  yet  alive?  he  (is)  my  broth 
20.  33  and  they  said.  Thy  brother  Ben-hadad 
1  Ch.  1.  19  Peleg..his  brothers  name  (was)  Joktan 
2.  32  the  sons  of  Jada  the  brother  of  Shammai 
2.  42  the  sons  of  Caleb  the  brother  of  Jerahmeel 
4  11  Chelub  the  brother  of  Shuah  begat  Mehir 

6.  39  his  brother  Asaph,  who  stood  on  his  right 

7.  16  the  name  of  his  brother  (was)  Sheresh 

7  35  And  tiie  sons  of  his  brother  Helem;  Zop. 

8.  39  And  the  sons  of  Kshek  his  brother  (were) 
11.  20  And  Abishai  the  brother  of  Joab,  he  was 
11.  26  Asahel  the  brother  of  Joab,  Elhanan  the 
11.  38  Joel  the  brother  of  Nathan,  Mibhar  the 
11.  45  the  son  of  Sliimri,  and  Joha  his  brother 
19.  11  unto  the  hand  of  Abishai  his  brother,  and 

19.  15  likewise  tied  before  Abishai  his  brother 

20.  5  Elhanau.  .slew  Lahmi  the  brother  of 

20.  7  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shimea,  David's  bro. 
24.  25  The  brother  of  Michah  (was)  Isshiah  :  of 

26.  22  of  Jehieli ;  Zetham,  and  Joel  his  brother 

27.  7  fourth  (captain).. (was)Asahel  the  brother 
2CI1.  31. 12  anil  Shimei  his  brother  (was)  the  next 

31.  13  hand  of  Conuniah  and  -Shimei  his  brother 
36.    4  made  Eliakim  his  brother  king  over  Judah 
36.    4  Necho  took  Jehoahaz  his  brother,  and 
36.  10  and  made  Zedekiah  bis  brother  king 

Nell.  5.    7  Ye  exact  usury,  every  one  of  his  brother 
7.    2  That  I  gave  my  brother  Hanani,  and 

Job     1.  13,  iS  wine'  in  their  eldest  brother's  house 
22.    6  For. .  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  brother 

30.  29  I  am  a  brother  to  dragons,  and  a.  .to  owls 
Psa.  35.  14  behaved,  .as.  .(he  had  been)  my.  .brother 

49.    7  None,  .can  by  any  means  redeem  his  br. 
53.  20  Thou  sifetest(aud)  speakest  against  thy  br. 
rrov.17.  17  and  a  brother  is  born  for  adversity 
18.    9  He.  .is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great 

18.  19  A  brother  offended  (is  harder  to  be  won) 
18  24  there  is  a  friend,  .closer  than  a  brother 
27.  10  neither  go  into  thy  brother's  house  in  the 
27.  10  better  (is)  a  neighbour,  .than  a  brother 

Eccl    4.    8  yea.  be  hath  neither  child  nor  brother 
Song  8.    1  Oh  that  thou  (wert)as  my  brother,  that 
Isa.    3.    6  When  a  man  shall  take  bold  of  his  brother 
9. 19  no  man  shall  spare  his  brother 

19.  2  fight  every  one  against  his  brother 

41.    6  and  (every  one)  said  to  his  brother,  Be  of 
Jer.     9.    4  and  trust  ye  not  in  any  brother:  for  every 

9.  4  brother  will  utterly  supplant,  and  every 

22.  18  Ah  my  brother  !  or,  Ah  my  sister  !  they 

23.  35  shall  ye  say.  .every  one  to  his  brother 

31.  34  teach,  .every  man  his  brother,  saying 
34.   9  none  should  serve  himself  of.,  his  brother 
34.  14  let  ye  go  every  man  his  brother  an  Heb. 
34.  17  every  one  to  his  brother,  and  every  man 

Eze.   18.  18  spoiled  his  brother  by  violence,  and  did 
33.  30  and  speak  .everyone  to  his  brother,saying 
38.  21  every  mans  sword,  .against  his  brother" 
44.  25  for  brother,  or  for  sister  that  hath  had 
Hos  12.   3  Me  took  his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the 
Amos  1.  11  because  he  did  pursue  his  brother  with 
Ubad.      10  For  (thy)  violence  against  thy  brother 

12  shouldest  not  have  looked  on.  .thy  brother 
Mic.    7.    2  they  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a 
Hag.    2.  22  every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  brother 
Zech.  7.    9  and  show  mercy,  .every  man  to  his  brother 
7.  10  none  of  you  Imagine . .  against  his  brother 
Mai.    1.    2  (Was)not  Esau  Jacob's  brother?  saith  the 

2.  10  why.  .every  man  agaiust  his  brother 
2.Frieni,  j,n  rea. 

Deut24.  10  When  thou  dost  lend  thy  brother  any 

$.Qf  the  same  i'-<u,il>,  a  brother,  relative,  aSeAtyos. 

Matt.  4.  18  Andrew  his  brother,  casting  a  net  into 

4.  21  .lames,  .and  John  bis  brother,  in  a  ship 

5.  22  That  whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother 
5.  22  whosoever  shall  say  to  bis  brother,  Raca' 
5.  23  that  thy  brother  bath  ought  against  thee 

5.  24  first  be  reconciled  to  thv  brother,  and 

7.  3  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye,  but 
7.  4  Or  how  wilt  thou  say  to  thy  brother,  Let 
7.  5  to  east  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's 
10.  2  Peter,  and  Andrew  his  brother 
10.  2  James,  .of  Zebedee,  and  John  his  brother 
10.  21  the  hrotlier  shall  deliver  up  the  brother 
12.  50  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,  and 
14.    3  for  Hcroilias  sake,  bis  brother  Philip's 

17.  1  JtollS  taketh  .  ..lames.   John  his  brother 

18.  15  Moreover,  if  thy  brother  shall  trespass 
18. 15  If  he.  .hear,  .thouhastgained  thybrother 
18. 21  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me 
18.  35  if  ye  .forgive  not  every  one  his  brother 
22.24  If  a'man  die. his  brother  shall  marrvbis 
72.  24  and  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother 

?2.  -.>-,  having  no  issue,  left.,  wife  unto.,  brother 
Marie  1.  16  he  saw  Simon,  ami  Andrew  his  brother 
1. 19  he  saw.) nines,  and  John  his  brother,  who 

3.  17  And  .lames  .and  John  the  brother  of  .'a 
3.  35  the  same  i<  my  brother,  !ini|  my  pistl.r 

5-  37  fetor,  and  James,  ami  John  the  brother 

6.  3  the  brother  of  .lames,  and  Joses,  and  of 
6.  17  for  Merodias'  sake,  his  brother  Philip's 
6.  10  lawful  for  thee  to  have  thy  brother's  wife 


Marki2.  19  If  a  man's  brother  die,  and  leave  (his) 
12.  19  that  his  brother  should  take  bis  wife 
12.  19  and  raise  up  seed  unto  bis  brother 
13. 12  Now  the  brother  shall  betray  the  brother 

Luke  3.    1  and  his  brother  Philip  tetrarch  of  Iturea 

3.  19  being  reproved,  .for  Herodias  his  brother 
6.  14  Simon,  .and  Andrew  bis  brother,  James 
6.  41  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye 

6.  42  how  canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother,  Brot. 

6.42  pull  out  the  mote,  .in  thy  brother's  eye 
12.  13  Master,  speak  to  my  brother,  that  lie 
15.  27  And  he  said  unto  him,  Thy  brother  is 

15.  32  for  this  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is 
17.    3  If  thy  brother  trespass  against  thee 
20.  28  If  any  man's  brother  die,  having  a  wife 
20.  28  that  his  brother  should  take  his  wife 

20.  28  and  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother 
John  1.  40  One.  .wasAndrew.SimonPeter'sbrother 

1.  41  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon 
6.    8  Andrew,  Simon  Peter's  brother,  saith 

11.  2  It  was  (that)  Mary.. whose  brother  Laz. 
1 1.  19  to  comfort  them  concerning  their  brother 
11.  21,  32  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  mybr. 

11.  23  Jesus  saith  unto  her.  Thy  brother  shall 
Acts    9.  17  putting  his  hands  on  him,  said,  Brother 

12.  2  be  killed  .Tames  the  brother  of  John  with 

21.  20  Thou  seest,  brother,  how  many  thousands 

22.  13  said  unto  me,  Brother  Saul,  receive  thy 
Rom  14.  10  But  why  dost  thou  judge  thy  brother? 

14.  10  or  whydostthousetatuought  thy  brother 
14.  13  or  an  occasion  to  fall,  in  (his)  brother's 
14.  15  if  thy  brother  be  grieved  with  (thy)  meat 
14.  21  nor  (any  thing)  whereby  thy  brother 

16.  23  chamberlain,  .saluteth.  .Quartusabroth. 

1  Co.   1.    1  Paul.,  an  apostle,  .and  Sostheues.  .broth. 

5. 11  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a 

6.  6  But  brother  goetb  to  law  with  brother 

7.  12  If  any  brother  bath  a  wife  that  believetb 

7.  15  A  brother  or  a  sister  is  not  under  bondage 

8.  11  shall  the  weak  brother  perish,  for  whom 
8. 13  Wherefore,  if  meat  make  my  brother  to 
8.  13  lest  I  make  my  brother  to  offend 

16. 12  As  touching  (our)  brother  Apollos,  I 

2  Co.    1.    1  and  Timothy  (our)  brother,  unto  the 

2.  13  because  I  found  not  Titus  my  brother 
8.  18  And  we  have  sent  with  him  the  brother 
8.  22  we  have  sent  with  them  our  brother 

12.  18  I  desired  Titus,  .(him)  I  sent  a  brother 
Gal.     1.  19  saw  I  none,  save  James  the  Lord's  brother 
Eph.    6.  21  a  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister 
Phil.   2.  25  Epaphroditns.mybrother.and  companion 
Col.     1.    1  Paul,  .and  Timotheus  (our)  brother 

4.  7  Tychicus.  .(who  is)  a  beloved  brother 

4.    9  Onesimus,  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother 

1  Th.  3.    2  And  sent  Timotheus,  our  brother,  and 

4.   6  no(man)go  beyond  and  defraud  his  brother 

2  Th.  3.    6  withdraw  yourselves  from  every  brother 

3.  15  but  admonish  (him)  as  a  brother 
Plim.         1  Paul,  .and  Timothy  (our)  brother,  unto 

7  the  bowels,  .refreshed  by  thee,  brother 

16  a  brother  beloved,  specially  to  me,  but 

20  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the 

Heb.    8.  11  they  shall  not  teach,  .man  his  brother 

13  23  Know  ye  that  (our)  brother  Timothy  is 

Jas.     r.    9  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  rejoice  in 

2.  15  If  a  brother  or  sister  be  naked,  and 

4.  11  He  that  speaketh  evil  of  (his)  brother 

4.  11  and  judgeth  his  brother,  speaketh  evil  of 

1  Pe.   5. 12  By  Silvanus,  a  faithful  brother  unto  you 

2  Pe.   3.  15  even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul  also 

1  Jo.   2.    9  He  that,  .hateth  his  brother,  is  in  dark. 
2.  10  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the 

2.  11  he  that  hateth  bis  brother  is  in  darkness 

3.  10  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother 
3.  12  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother 

3. 12  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother's  right. 
3.  14  He  that  loveth  not  (his)  [brother]  abideth 
3.  15  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murd. 

3.  17  But  whoso,  .seetb  his  brother  have  need 

4.  20  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother 
4.  20  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom 

4.  21  be  who  loveth  God  love  bis  brother  also 

5.  16  If  any  man  see  his  brother  sin  a  sin 
Jude         1  Jude,  the  servant.. and  brother  of  James 
Rev.   1.    9  I  John,  who  also  am  your  brother,  and 

[See  also  Father's  brother,  husband's  brother.] 

BROTHER'S  -wife  — 

Deceased  brother's  widow,  T\tt.  yebemefh, 

Deut25.  7  man  like  not  to  take  his  brother's  wife 
25.  7  then  let  bis  brother's  wife  go  up  to  the 
25.    9  Then  shall  his  brother's  wife  come  unto 

BROTHERHOOD  — 

1. Unity,  huin  achavah. 

Zech  11.  14  that  I  might  break  the  brotherhood 

^.Brotherly  relation,  oScX^ot^s  adelphotes. 
1  Pe.  2.  17  Honour  all.  .Love  the  brotherhood 

BROTHERLY  — 

Brother,  nx  ach. 

Amos  1.    9  remembered  not  the  brotherly  covenant 

BROTHERLY  kindness  or  love  — 

Brotherly  lore,  (ptKaStAfpia.  Philadelphia. 

Rom  12.  10  kindly  affectloned,  .with  brotherly  love 
1  Th.  4.    9  as  touching  brotherly  love  ye  need  not 
Heb.  13.    1  Let  brotherly  love  continue 
a  Pe.    1.    7  And  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness 
1.    7  and  to  brotherly  kindness  charity 


BROUGHT,  to  be  — 

I. To  be  gathered,  *]CN  asaph,  2. 

Exod.  9.  19  shall  not  be  brought  home,  the  hail  shall 
2.  To  be  caused  to  come,  nrw  atha,  6. 

Dan.    6.  17  a  stone  was  brought,  and  laid  upon  the 
Z.To  come  in,  Ni3  b'o. 

Ken.  9.  33  thou  (art)  just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon 

4.  To  be  caused  to  come  in,  «ia  bo,  6. 

Gen.  33.  11  Take,  .my  blessing  that  is  brought  to 
Lev.    6.  30  whereof  (any)  of  the  blood  is  brought 
10.  18  the  blood  of  it  was  not  brought  in  within 
13.    2  he  shall  be  brought  unto  Aaron  the 

13.  9  then  be  shall  be  brought  unto  the  priest 

14.  2  He  shall  be  brought  unto  the  priest 
Psa.  45.  14  that  follow  her  shall  be  brought  uuto 
Jer.   10.    9  Silver  spread  into  plates  is  brought  from 
Eze.  23.  42  with  the  men.  .(were)  brought  Sabeans 

30.  11  the  nations,  shall  be  brought  to  destroy 
40.    4  show  (them)  unto  thee  (art)  thou  brought 

5.  To  be  caused  to  flow  or  go,  "?n;  yabal,  6. 

Job  2i.  32  Yet  shall  he  be  brought  to  the  grave,  and 
Psa.  45.  14;  45.  15;  Isa.  18.  7;  53.  7;  Jer.  n.  19. 

6. To  be  led,  ayo/j.ai  agomai. 

Matt.  10.  1 3  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governors  and 
Luke  18.  40 ;  Acts  5.  21  ;  22.  24  ;  25.  6. 

7.  To  be  taken,  received,  npS  laqach,  2. 

Esth.  2.    S  Esther  was  brought  also  unto  the  king's 

8.  To  lead  on,  Jrij  nahag. 

Isa.   60.  11  and  (that)  their  kings  (may  be)  brought 

9.  To  cause  to  go  up  or  in,  7?%.  cdal,  5. 

Dan.    6.  18  neither  were  instruments,  .brought 

10.  To  be  drawn  near,  tijj  qarab,  2. 

Exod  22,    8  the  master  of  the  house  shall  be  brought 
Josh.  7.  14  therefore  ye  shall  be  brought  according 

11.  To  become,  ytvopai  ginomai. 

Acts    5.  36  and  all.  .were  scattered,  and  brought  to 

12.  To  come,  epxopai  erchomai. 

Mark  4.  21  Is  a  candle  brought  to  be  put  under  a 
13. To  set  or  place,  rio-r7jfxi  histemi. 

Marki3.   9  ye  shall  be  brought  before  rulers  and 
[See  also  Low,  nought,  secretly,  silence.] 

BROUGHT  again  or  back,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  caused  to  turn  bach,  3*b>  shub,  6. 

Gen.  43.  12  the  money  that  was  brought  again  in  the 
Exod  10.    8  Moses  and  Aaron  were  brought  again 
Jer.  27. 16  vessels . .  shall  now  shortly  be  brought  aga. 

2.  To  be  brought  back,  3*t?  shub,  Zb. 

Eze.  38.    8  the  land  (that  is)  brought  back  from  the 

BROUGHT,  before  it  was  — 
A  removing,  ypo  massa. 

1  Ki.  6.    7  made  ready  before  it  was  brought  thither 

EROUGHT,  to  cause  to  be  — 

To  cause  to  come  near,  znp  qarab,  5. 

Exodaq.  10  thou  Shalt  cause  a  bullock  to  be  brought 

BROUGHT  down,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  caused  to  come  down,  tv  yarad,  6. 

Gen.  39.    1  Joseph  was  brought  down  to  Egypt ;  and 
Isa.    14.  11  Thy  pomp  is  brought  down  to  the  grave 
14.  15  Yet  thou  shalt  be  brought  down  to  hell 
Eze.  31.  18  yet  shalt  thou  be  brought  down  with  the 
Zech  10.  11  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought  down 
2.To  be  bent,  m?  kara. 

Psa.  20.    8  They  are  brought  down  and  fallen  ;  but 

3.  To  become  law,  nny  shaehach,  2. 

Isa.     5.  15  the  mean  man  shall  be  brought  down 

4.  To  be  humbled,  hsxj?  shaphel. 

Isa.   29.  -4  thou  shalt  be  brought  down,  (and)  shalt 

5.  To  cause  to  come  down,  KaTafHifidfa  katabibazd. 

Matt  11.  23  And  thou,  .shalt  be  [brought  down]  to 
BROUGHT  before,  to  be  — 
To  set  or  place  alongside  of,  Trapio~T7}fxt. 

Acts  27.  24  Taul ;  thou  must  be  brought  before  Cesar 

BROUGHT  to  b? ,  to  be  — 
To  bear,  tpipea  jphero, 

1  Pe.    1.  13  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto 

EROUGHT  forth,  to  be  — 

1  To  be  pained,  be  in  travail,  ^in  chid,  V). 

Ptov.  8.  24  When.. no  depths,  I  was  brought  forth 
8. 25  before  the  hills  was  I  brought  forth 

2.  To  be  caused  to  flow  or  go,  73;  yabal,  6. 

Job  21.  30  they  shall  be  brought  forth  to  the  day  of 

3.  To  be  begotten,  born,  ~r?*T  yalad,  2. 

Lev.  22.  37  a  bullock,  or  a  sheep,  .is  brought  forth 

4.  To  be  begotte-n,  bom,  "h)  yalad,  4. 

Tsa.  90.    2  Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth 

5.  To  be  caused  to  come  forth,  n>"  yatsa,  6. 

Gen.  38.  25  When  she  (was)  brought  forth,  she  sent 
Jer.  38.  2    all  the  women .  .(shall  be)  brought  forth 
Eze.  14.  22  a  remnant  that  shall  be  brought  forth 
38.    8  but  it  is  brought  forth  out  of  the  nations 
47.    S  (which  being)  brought  forth  into  the  sea 


BROUGHT 


123 


BUILD 


6. To  give  along  or  over,  irapaBi8w/j.L  paradidomi. 
Mark  4.  29  But  when  the  fruit  is  brought  forth 

BROUGHT  in,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  gathered,  *]pijl  asaph,  2. 

Numiz.  15  journeyed  not  till  Miriam  was  brought  in 

2.  To  be  caused  to  come  in,  Nia  bo,  6. 

Gen  43.  18  at  the  first  time  are  we  brought  in 
Lev.  16.  27  whose  blood  was  brought  in  to  make 

3.  To  be  caused  to  go  up,  ??j£  alal,  6. 

Dan.   5.  13  Then  was  Daniel  brought  in  before,  .king 
5. 15  the  astrologers,  have  been  brought  in 

BROUGHT  in  unawares  — 
Led  in  sideways,  Trap&iaaKTos  pareisafctos. 
Gal.    2.   4  of  false  brethren  unawares  brought  in 

BROUGHT  into,  to  be  — 

To  be  caused  to  come  in,  N'13  bo,  6. 

Gen.  43  18  they  were  brought  into  Joseph's  house 
2  Ki.12.    4  All  the  money,  .that  is  brought  into  the 
12.    9  all  the  money  (that  was)  brought  into  the 
12.  13  the  money  (that  was)  brought  into  the 
12. 16  money,  .was  not  brought  into  the  house 
22.   4  the  silver  which  is  brought  into  the  house 
2  Ch  34.   9  the  money  that  was  brought  into  the 
34. 14  the  money  that  was  brought  into  the 

BROUGHT  into  subjection,  to  be  — 
To  be  bent,  "J3  kana,  2. 

Psa  106.  42  they  were  brought  into  subjection  under 

BROUGHT  low,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  or  become  low,  njy  anah. 

Isa.  25.    5  the  branch . .  shall  be  brought  low 
2,To  be  little,  small,  nyy  tsaar. 

Job  14.  21  His  sons  come . .  and  they  axe  brought  low 
3.  To  become  low,  nrrc>  shachach,  1,  2. 

Psa  107.  39  they  are  minished  and  brought  low 

Eccl  12.    4  all  the  daughters,  .shall  be  brought  low 

4.7*o  be  low,  humble,  73$  shapheL 

Isa.     2. 12  lifted  up,  and  he  shall  be  brought  low 

5. To  make  low,  raireiv6w  tapeinoo. 

Luke  3.    5  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  brought  low 

BROUGHT  out  — 

Outgoing,  produce,  ireiD  inotsa. 

1  Ki  10  28  Solomon  had  horses  brought  outof  Egypt 

2  Ch.  1  16  Solomon  had  horses  brought  outof  Egypt 

BROUGHT  to  pass,  to  be  — 
l.To  be,  become,  n;rr  hayah,  2. 

Eze   2i.   7  it  cometh,  and  shall  be  brought  to  pass 
2.  To  become,  yivofiai  ginomai, 

1  Co  15  54  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying 

BROUGHT  to,  to  be  — 

Change  of  house,  fieroiKeaia  metoikesia. 

Matt  i  12  And  after  they  were  brought  to  Babylon 

BROUGHT  together,  to  be  — 
To  be  gathered,  fjcx  asaph,  2. 

Eze  29    5  thou  shalt  not  be  brought  together,  nor 

BROUGHT  under,  to  be  — 

To  be  bent,  bowed  down,  y:3  kana,  2, 

2  Ch  13  18  the  children  of  Israel  were  brought  under 

BROUGHT  up  to  be  — 
l.Sourisked,  rupx  omnah. 

Esth   2  2c  as  when  she  was  brought  up  with  him 

2.To  be  or  become  great,  ?i3  gadal. 

2  Ch  10.   8  the  young  men  that  were  brought  up 
10  10  the  young  men  that  were  brought  up 
Job  31   18  For  from  my  youth  he  was  brought  up 

S.To  be  bom,  *fj;  yalad,  4. 

Gen  50  23  the  children,  .were  brought  up  upon 

4.7*0  be  brought  up,  rhy  alah,  2. 

Ezra.  1.  11  that  were'  brought  up  from  Babylon 

5. To  be  brought  up,  rh'j,  alah,  6. 

IN  ah.  2.    7  And  Huzzab.  .shall  be  brought  up 
BROUGHT  up,  one  — 
Nourished,  a  workman,  jiDs  anion. 

Prov.  8  30  by  him,  (as)  one'brought  up  (with  him) 

BROUGHT  up  with  — 

Nourished  with,  avvrpotyos  suntropJws. 

Acts  13     1  which  had  been  brought  up  with  Herod 

BROW  — 

1. Forehead,  nsp  metsach. 

Isa.  4S.   4  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  brow  brass 

2. Brow,  eyebrow,  6<ppvs  ophrus. 

Luke  4  29  and  led  him  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill 
BROWN  — 
Brown,  dusky,  Din  chum. 

Gen.  30.  32  and  all  the  brown  cattle  among  the  sheep 
30.  33  every  one  that  (is)  not.  .brown  among  the 
30.  35  and  all  the  brown  among  the  sheep 
30.  40  and  all  the  brown  in  the  flock  of  Laban 


BRUISE  — 

1. Stripe,  (n-von),  rp'sn  chabburah. 

Isa.     1 .    6  (but)  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrifying 
2. Breach,  "C^  sheber. 

Jer.  30.  12  Thy  bruise  (is)  incurable,  (and)  thy  wound 

Nan.  3.  19  (There  is)  no  healing  of  thy  bruise 
BRUISE,  to  — 
l.To  bruise,  so?  daka,  3. 

Isa.  53. 10  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him 
l.To  bruise  small  or  thin,  pjy?  claqaq. 

Isa.  28.  28  nor  bruise  it  (with)  his  horsemen 

3.  To  do,  make,  n'p#  asah,  3. 

Eze.  23.    3  there  they  bruised  the  teats  of  their 
23.    8  they  bruised  the  breasts  of  her  virginity 

4.  To  break,  VT\rca. 

Dan.  2.  40  shall  it  break  hi  pieces  and  bruise 

5. To  bruise,  f\w  shuph. 

Gen.   3.  15  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise 

6.  To  break,  break  in  pieces,  Opavw  thrauO. 

Luke  4.  iS  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised 

7.7*0  rub  together,  (rwTpt&a  suntribo. 

Matt  12.  20  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and 
Luke  9.  39  and,  bruising  him,  hardly  departeth  from 
Rom.  16.  20  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 

BRUISED  — 

l.To  press,  squeeze,  crush,  ~i'£  maak. 

Lev.  22.  24  Ye  shall  not  offer,  .that  which  is  bruised 
2.  To  break  in  pieces,  fin  ralsais. 

2  Ki.  18.  2i  trustest  upon  the  staff  of  this  bruised 

BRUISED,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  bruised,  jo?  daka,  4. 

Isa.  53    5  (he  was)  bruised  for  our  iniquities ;  the 
2.  To  be  made  thin,  pp?  daqaq,  6. 

Isa.  28.  28  Bread  (corn)  is  bruised  ;  because  he  will 
BRUISING  — 
7*o  do,  make,  n'-sy  asah. 

Eze.  23.  21  in  bruising  thy  teats  by  the  Egyptians 
BRUIT  — 
1. Hearing,  report,  nj^Dg*  shemuah. 

J  er.    10.  22  Behold,  the  noise  of  the  bruit  is  come,  and 
2.Report,  yce?  shema. 

Nan.  3. 19  all  that  hear  the  bruit  of  thee  shall  clap 

BRUTE  — 

Speechless,  irrational,  &\oyos  alogos. 

2  Pe.   2.  12  But  these,  as  natural  brute  beasts,  made 
Jude       10  what  they  know  naturally,  as  brute  beasts 

BRUTISH,  to  be,  or  become  — 

1.7*0  consume  (or  act  like  a  brute),  "ii$  baar. 

Psa.  94.   8  Understand,  ye  brutish  among  the  people 
Jer.   10.    8  they  are  altogether  brutish  and  foolish 
Eze.  2i.  31  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  brutish 

2.  7*o  become  like  a  brute,  iy,a  baar,  2. 

Isa.   ig  11  the  wise  counsellors,  .is  become  brutish 

Jer.  10  14  Every  man  is  brutish  in  (his)  knowledge 

10  2i  For  the  pastors  are  become  brutish,  and 

51  17  Every  man  is  brutish  by  (his)  knowledge 

BRUTISH  person  — 

7*o  consume  or  act  like  a  brute,  i"?  baar. 

Psa.  49.  jo  likewise  the  fool  and  the  brutish  person 

92.  6  A  brutish  man  kuoweth  not;  neither 
Prov.  1 2.    1  but  he  that  hateth  reproof  (is)  brutish 
30.    2  Surely  I  (am)  more  brutish  than  (any) 

BUCKET  — 

Bucket,  pail,  71  *)\  deli,  doli. 

Nuni  24.    7  He' shall  pour  the  water  out  of  his  buckets 
Isa.   40.  15  the  nations  (are)  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket 

BUCKLER  — 

1. Shield,  \yo  tnagen. 

2  Sa.  22.  31  he  (is)  a  buckler  to  all  them  that  trust 

1  Ch.   5. 18  men  able  to  bear  buckler  and  sword,  and 

2  Ch.  23.  9  bucklers,  and  shields,  that  (had  been) 
Job  15.  26  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his  bucklers 
Psa.  18.    2  my  buckler,  and  the  horn  of  my  salvation 

18.  30  he  (is)  a  buckler  to  all  those  that  trust  in 
Prov.  2.    7  (lie  is)  a  buckler  to  them  that  walk 
Song  4.    4  whereon  there  hang  a  thousand  bucklers 
Jer.  46.   3  Order  ye  the  buckler  and  shield,  and 

2. Buckler,  target,  rnnb  socherah. 

Psa.  91.   4  his  truth  (shall  be  thy)  shield  and  buckler 

3. Shield  (of  a  larger  size),  nax  tsinnah. 

Psa.  35.    2  Take  hold  of  shield  and  buckler,  and 
Eze.  23.  24  (which)  shall  set  against  thee  buckler  and 
26.    8  and  lift  up  the  buckler  against  thee 

38.  4  (even)  a  great  company  (with)  bucklers 

39.  9  both  the  shields  and  the  bucklers,  the 
4.  Javelin,  noh  romach. 

1  Ch.12.   8  that  could  handle  shield  and  buckler 
BUD  — 
1.  Outgoing,  outcome,  N>'b  mot  set. 

Job  38.  27  to  cause  the  bud  of  the  tender  herb 
2.Blossom,  flower,  r^sperach. 

Nam  1 7.    8  brought  forth  buds,  and  bloomed  blossoms 

Isa.   iS.    5  For  afore  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is 


3. Sprout,  shoot,  rc*  tsemach. 

Isa.  61.  11  For  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  bud 
Eze.  16.    7  I  have  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  the  bud 
Hos.    8.    7  it  hath  no  stalk ;  the  bud  shall  yield  no 

BUD,  to  — 

1.7*0  cause  to  shine,  send  out  buds,  pa  nuts,  5. 
Song  6.  11  to  see  whether.,  the  pomegranates  budded 

2.7*0  break  forth,  sprout,  blossom,  rns  parach. 
Gen.  40.  10  it  (was)  as  though  it  budded,  (and)  her 
Isa.  27.    6  Israel  shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  nil  the 
Eze.    7.  10  the  rod.  .blossomed,,  pride  hath  budded 

3.7*o  cause  to  sprout  or  break  forth,  nysparach,  0. 
Job  14.    q  through  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud 

4.7*0  cause  to  sprout,  n^s  tsamach,  5. 

Isa.   55.  10  maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it 

5.7*0  bud,  sprout,  ^Xarrrdyoj  blasiano. 

Heb.  9.    4  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  the  tables 

BUD  forth,  to  — 

To  cause  to  shine,  send  end  buds,  pa  nuts,  5. 

Song  7.  12  Let  us  see  if  ..the  pomegranates  bud  forth 

BUD  (forth),  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

7*o  cause  to  sprout,  rvy$  tsamach,  5. 

Eze.  29.  21  will  I  cause  the  horn,  .to  bud  forth,  and 
Psa.132.  17  will  I  make  the  horn  of  David  to  bud 

BUDDED,  to  be  — 

7*o  break  forth,  sprout,  or  blossom,  vrgparach. 
Num  17.    S  the  rod  of  Aaron  for.  .Levi  was  budded 

BUFFET,  to  — 

7*o  buffet  with  thefst,  KoXaepl^w  lotaphizo. 
Matt  26.  67  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffeted  liim 
Mark  14.  65  to  cover  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  and 

1  Co.  4. 11  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain 

2  Co.  12.    7  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  me,  lest 
1  Pe.  2.  20  if,  when  ye  be  buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye 

BUILD,  to  — 

1.7*0  build  up,  n:*  banah. 

Gen.  4.  17  he  builded  a  city,  and  called  the  name  of 
8.  20  Noah  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lorn;  and 
10. 11  Out  of  that  land  went,  .and  builded  Nih- 
il 4  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city,  aud  a  tower 
11.   5  tower,  which  the  children  of  men  builded 

11.  S  and  they  left  off  to  build  the  city 

12.  7,  8  there  builded  he  an  altar  unto  the  LOED 
13. 18  and  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lorn 
22.   9  Abraham  built  an  altar  there,  and  laid 

26.  25  he  builded  an  altar  there,  and  called 

33. 17  and  built  him  an  house,  and  made  booths 
35.    7  he  built  there  an  altar,  and  called  the 
Exod.  1.  11  they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure  cities 

17.  15  Moses  built  an  altar,  and .  .the  name  of  it 
20.  25  thou  shalt  not  build  it  of  hewn  stone 

24.  4  builded  an  altar  under  the  hill,  and 
32.    5  when  Aaron  saw  (it),  he  built  an  altar 

Num  23. 1.  29  Balaam  said . .  Build  me  here  seven 
23. 14  he  brought  him .  .and  built  seven  altars 
32. 16  We  will  build  sheep  folds  here  for  our 
32.  24  Build  you  cities  for  your  little  ones,  ami 
32.  34  the  children  of  Gad  built  Dibon,  and  At. 
32.  37  the  children  of  Reuben  built  Heshl.cn 
32.  38  gave  other  names.. which  they  builded 

Deut  6.  10  to  give  thee,  .cities,  which  thou  buildedst 
8.  12  and  hast  built  goodly  houses,  and  dwelt 
20.    5  "What  man  (is  there)  that  hath  built  a 
20.  20  thou  shalt  build  bulwarks  against  the 
22.    8  "When  thou  buildest  a  new  house,  then 

25.  9  that  will  not  build  up  his  brother's  house 

27.  5  there  shalt  thou  build  an  altar  unto  tl  e 

27.  6  Thou  shalt  build  the  altar  of  the  LOBD 

28.  30  thou  shalt  build  an  house,  and  thou  shalt 
Josh.  6  26  that  riseth  up  and  buildeth  this  city 

8.  30  Then  Joshua  built  an  altar  unto  the 
19.  50  and  he  built  the  city  and  dwelt  therein 
22. 10  built  there  an  altar  by  Jordan,  a  great 
22.  11  have  built  an  altar  over  against  the  land 
22.  16  in  that  ye  have  builded  you  an  altar,  that 
22.  19  in  building  you  an  altar  besides  the  altar 
22.  23  we  have  built  us  an  altar  to  turn  from 
22.  26  Let  us  now  prepare  to  build  us  an  altar 
22.  29  to  build  an  altar  for  burnt  offerings,  for 
24.  13  I  have  given  you.  .cities  which  ye  built 
Judg.  1.  26  and  built  a  city,  and  called  the  name 
6.  24  Gideon  built  an  altar  thereunto  the 
6.  26  build  an  altar  unto  the  Loed  thy  God 
iS.  28  And  they  built  a  city,  and  dwelt  therein     . 
si.    4  the  people  rose  early,  and  built  there  an 
Ruth  4.  11  which  two  did  build  the  house  of  Israel 


i  Sa. 


35  I  will  build  him  a  sure  house  ;  and  he 


7.  17  and  there  he  built  an  altar  unto  the  LORD 
14.  35  And  Saul  built  an  altar  unto  the  LOF.D 
14.  35  the  same  was  the  first  altar  that  he  built 
2  Sa.    5.    9  David  built  round  about  from  Mil  Jo  and 
5.  11  and  they  built  David  an  house 
7.    5  Shalt  thou  build  me  an  house  for  me  to 
7.    7  "Why  build  ye  not  me  an  house  of  cedar? 
7.  13  He  shall  build  an  house  for  my  name 
7.  27  I  will  build  thee  an  house  :  therefore 
24.  21  to  build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  that 
24.  25  David  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Loed 
1  Ki.  2.  36  Build  thee  an  house  in  Jerusalem,  aud 
3.    1  he  had  made  an  end  of  building  his  own 
5.   3  David,  .could  not  build  an  house  unto 
5.    5  I  purpose  to  build  an  house  unto  the 
5.    5  he  shall  build  an  house  unto  my  name 


BUILD 


126 


BUILDED 


i  Ki.   5.  iS  they  prepared  timber.. atones  to  build 
6.    2  the  house  which  king  Solomon  built  for 
6.    s  he  built  chambers  round  about,  (against) 
6    o  So  he  built  the  house,  and  finished  it 
6.  io  (then)  he  built  chambers  against  all  the 
6  12  this  house  which  thou  art  in  building 
6  M  Solomon  built  the  house,  and  finished  it 
6.  15  he  built  the  walls  of  the  house  within 
6  16  he  built  twenty  cubits  on  the  sides  of  the 
6  r6  he  even  built  (them)  for  it  within,  (even) 

6  36  he  built  the  inner  court  with  three  rows 

6.  38  So  was  he  seven  years  in  building  it 

7  1  But  Solomou  was  building  his  own  house 

7  2  He  built  also  the  house  of  the  forest  of 

8  13  I  have  surely  built  thee  an  house  to 

8.  16  I  chose  no  city  out  of. .  Israel  to  build  an 
8  17  David  my  father  to  build  an  house  for 
8  18  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build  an  house 

8  19  Nevertheless  thou  shalt  not  build  the 
8.  19  he  shall  build  the  house  unto  my  name 
8.  2c  and  have  built  an  house  for  the  name  of 
8.  27  much  less  this  house  that  I  have  budded  ! 
8.  43  this  house,  which  I  have  builded,  is 

8.  44  the  house  that  I  have  built  for  thy  name 

8.  48  the  house  which  I  have  built  for  thy 

9.  3  hallowed  this  house  which  thou  hast  built 
9.  10  when  Solomon  had  built  the  two  houses 
9.  15  for  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
9.  17  Solomon  built  Gezer,  and  Eeth-horon  the 

9  19  that  which  Solomon  desired  to  build  in 
9.  24  had  built  for  her :  then  did  he  build  11. 
9  25  upon  the  altar  which  he  built  unto  the 

10.  4  aud  the  house  that  he  had  built 

11.  7  Then  did  Solomon  build  au  high  place 
11.  27  Solomon  built  llillo,  (and)  repaired  the 
11  38  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  build  thee  a  sure 

11.  38  as  I  built  for  David,  and  will  give  Israel 

12.  25  Jeroboam  built  Shechem .  .and built  Pen 

14.  23  For  they  also  built  them  high  places 

15.  17  And  Baasha..wentup.  .and  built  Ramah 
15.  21  he  left  off  building  of  Ramah,  and  dwelt 
15.  22  timber.. wherewith  Baasha  had  builded 
15.  22  and  king  Asa  built  with  them  Geba  of 

15.  23  and  the  cities  which  he  built 

16  24  Aud  he  bought,  .and  built  on  the  hill 
16  24  called  the  name  of  the  city  which  he  built 
16. 32  which  he  had  built  in  Samaria 

16.  34  In  his  days  did  Hiel.  .build  Jericho 
18.  32  Aud  with  the  stones  he  built  au  altar 

22.  39  and  all  the  cities  that  he  built 

2  Ki.14,  22  He  built  Elath,  and  restored  it  to  Judah 

15.  35  He  built  the  higher  gate  of  the  house  of 

16.  11  And  Urijah  the  priest  built  au  altar 

16.  18  covert  for  the  sabbath  that  they  had  built 

17.  9  they  built  them  high  places  in  all  their 
21.   3  For  he  built  up  again  the  high  places 
21.   4  he  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
21.    5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 

23.  13  which  Solomon,  .had  builded  for  Ashtor. 
25.    1  they  built  forts  against  it  round  about 

6  10  in  the  temple  that  Solomon  built  in  .Ter. 
6  32  until  Solomon  had  built  the  house  of  the 

7.  24  Sherah,  who  built  Beth-horon  the  nether 
8  12  aud  Shamed,  who  built  Ouo  and  Lod 

11.   8  And  he  built  the  city  round  about 
14     1  masons  and  carpenters,  to  build  him 
17.    4  Thou  shalt  not  build  me  an  house  to  dwell 
17.    6  Why  have  ye  not  built  me  an  house  of 
17.  10  I  tell  thee  that  the  Lord  will  build  thee 
17.  12  He  shall  build  me  an  house,  and  I  will 
17.  25  that  thou  wilt  build  him  an  house 

21.  22  that  1  may  build  an  altar  therein  unto 
21  26  David  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 

22.  2  he  set  masons,  .to  build  the  house  of  God 
22.    6  charged  him  to  build  an  house  for  the 

,    22.    7  it  was  in  my  mind  to  build  an  house  unto 
22.    8  thou  shalt  not  build  an  house  unto  my 
22.  ic  He  shall  build  au  house  for  my  name 
22. 11  aud  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
22.  19  build  ye  the  sanctuary  of  the  LORD  God 
28.   2  I  (had)  in  mine  heart  to  build  an  house 
28.    2  and  had  made  ready  for  the  building 
28.    3  Thou  shalt  not  build  an  house  for  my 

28.  6  he  shall  build  my  house  and  my  courts 
28. 10  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  build  an 

29.  16  all  this  store,  .we  have  prepared  to  build 
29  19  and  to  do  all.  .and  to  build  the  palace 

2  Ch.    2.    1  Solomon  determined  to  build  an  house 
2.    3  and  didst  send  him  cedars  to  build 
2.   4  I  build  an  house  to  the  name  of  the  Lord 
2.   5  And  the  house  which  I  build  (is)  great 
2.    6  But  who  is  able  to  build  him  an  house 
2.    6  that  I  should  build  him  an  house 
2. 12  that  might  build  an  house  for  the  Lord 

1  Solomou  began  to  build  the  house  of  the 

2  And  he  begun  to  build  in  the  second  (day) 
2  1  have  built  an  huuse  of  habitation  for 
5  I  chose  no  city,  .of  Israel  to  build  an 

7  to  build  an  house  for  the  name  of  the 

8  as  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build  an  house 

9  tlnui  shalt  nut  build.. he  shall  build 
6.  10  and  have  built  the  house  for  the  name  of 
6. 18  much  less  this  house  wluch  I  have  built  1 
6.  33  this  house,  which  I  have  built,  is  called 
6.  34  the  house  which  I  have  built  for  thy  name 
6.  33  toward  the  house  which  I  have  built 
8.    1  wherein  Solomon  had  built  the  house  of 
8.   2  the  cities .  .Solomon  built  them,  and 
8.    4  And  he  built  Tudnmr..he  built  in  Ham. 
S.    5  Also  hL>  built  Beth-horou  the  upper 
3.    0  Solomon  desired  to  build  in  Jerusalem 
8.  11  unto  the  house  that  he  had  built  for  her 


Ezra 


34. 
14. 
16. 
16. 

16. 
16. 

J  7- 
20. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
32* 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33. 
35- 
36. 


Neh. 


Job 


27. 
Psa.  28. 


127. 

127. 

147. 

Prov.  9. 

14. 

24. 

Eccl.  2. 

3- 

9- 

Song  8. 

Isa.     5. 

9- 

45. 

58. 

60. 


Jer. 


24. 
29. 
31- 

3i- 
32- 
32. 
33> 
35- 
35' 
42. 

45 

Lam.  3, 

Eze.    4. 

11 


12  which  he  had  built  before  the  porch 
3  and  the  house  that  he  had  built 

5  Rehoboam.  .built  cities  for  defence  in  J. 

6  He  built  even  Beth-lehem,  and  Etam 

6  And  he  built  fenced  cities  in  Judah 

7  Let  us  build .  .So  they  built  and  prospered 

1  Baasha. .came  up. .and  built  Ramah 

5  Baasha  heard,  .he  left  off  building  of  R. 

6  timber,  .wherewith Baashawasa-building 
6  he  built  therewith  Geba  and  llizpah 

12  he  built  in  Judah  castles,  aud  cities  of 

8  have  built  thee  a  sanctuary  therein  for 

2  He  built  Eloth,  and  restored  it  to  Judah 
6  built  cities  about  Ashod,  and  among  the 

9  t'zziah  built  towers  in  Jerusalem  at  the 
10  Also  he  built  towers  iu  the  desert,  and 

3  He  built  the  high  gate  of  the  house  of 

3  and  on  the  wall  of  Ophel  he  built  much 

4  he  built  cities  in  the  mountains  of  Judah 

4  in  the  forests  he  built  castles  and  towers 

5  built  up  all  the  wall  that  was  broken 

4  Also  he  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the 

5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 

14  after  this  he  built  a  wall  without  the 

15  all  the  altars  that  he  had  built  in  the 

19  the  places  wherein  he  built  high  places 
3  the  son  of  David  king  of  Israel  did  build 

23  he  hath  charged  me  to  build  him 

2  he  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an 

3  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
5  to  go  up  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord 

2  his  brethren .  .builded  the  altar  of  the 

1  the  children,  .builded  the  temple  unto 

2  Let  us  build  with  you  :  for  we  seek  your 

3  Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  to  build  an 

3  but  we  ourselves  together  will  build  unto 

4  the  people,  .troubled  them  in  building 

5  send  me  unto  Judah.  .that  I  may  build  it 
17  let  us  build  up  the  wall  of  Jerusalem 

iS  And  they  said,  Let  us  rise  up  and  build 

20  we  his  servants  will  arise  and  build:  but 

1  his  brethren.. builded  the  sheep  gate 

2  next  unto  him  builded  the  men 

2  next  to  them  builded  Zaccur  the  son  of 

3  But  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons,  .build,  who 

13  they  built  it,  and  set  up  the  doors 

14  he  built  it,  and  set  up  the  doors 

15  he  built  it,  and  covered  it,  and  set  up  the 
1  Sanballat  heard  that  we  builded  the  wall 

3  Even  that  which  they  build,  if  a  fox  go  up 

6  So  built  we  the  wall ;  and  all  the  wall 
10  we  are  not  able  to  build  the  wall 

17  They  which  builded  on  the  wall 

18  sword  girded  by  his  side,  and  (so)  builded 
1  our  enemies,  heard  that  I  had  builded 

6  for  which  cause  thou  buildest  the  wall 
29  for  the  singers  had  builded  them  villages 
14  "With  kings,  .■which  built  desolate  places 

19  he  hath,  .taken  away,  .which  he  builded 
18  He  buildeth  his  house  as  a  moth 

5  he  shall  destroy  them,  and  not  build  them 
18  build  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
35  For  God  will  save  Zion,  and  will  build  the 
69  And  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high 

4  build  up  thy  throne  to  all  generations 

16  When  the  Lord  shall  build  up  Zion 
1  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house 

1  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it 

2  The  Lord  doth  build  up  Jerusalem 

1  Wisdom  hath  builded  her  house,  she  hath 

1  Every  wise  woman  buildeth  her  house 

27  in  the  field  ;  and  afterwards  build  thiue 
4  I  builded  me  houses  ;  I  planted  me  vine. 

3  to  break  down,  and  a  time  to  build  up 
14  besieged  it,  and  built  great  bulwarks 

9  we  will  build  upon  her  a  palace  of  sliver 

2  and  built  a  tower  in  the  midst  of  it 
10  but  we  will  build  with  hewn  stones 

1 3  he  shall  build  my  city,  and  he  shall  let  go 

12  (they  that).. shall  build  the  old  waste 
10  And  the  sons,  .shall  build  up  thy  walls 

4  And  they  shall  build  the  old  wrastes 

21  And  they  shall  build  houses,  and  inhabit 

22  They  shall  not  build,  and  another  inhabit 

1  where  (is)  the  house  that  ye  build  unto 
10  to  throw  down,  to  build,  and  to  plant 
31  And  they  have  built  the  high  places 

9  a  kingdom,  to  build  and  to  plant  (it) 

5  They  have  built  also  the  high  places  of 

13  Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house 

14  1  will  build  me  a  wide  house 

6  1  will  build  them,  and  not  pull 

5,  28  Build  ye  houses,  and  dwell.,  aud  plant 
4  Again  I  will  build  thee,  and  thou  shalt 

28  so  will  I  watch  over  them,  to  build,  and 
31  from  the  day  that  they  built  it  even  unto 
35  they  built  the  high  places  of  Baal 

7  and  will  build  them,  as  at  the  first 

7  Neither'-shall  ye  build  house,  nor  sow  seed 
9  Nor  to  build  houses  for  us  to  dwell  in 

10  abide  in  the  land,  then  will  I  build  you 

4  (that)  which  I  have  built  will  I  break 

.    4  and  built  forts  against  it  round  about 

5  He  hath  builded  against  me,  and 

2  lay  siege  against  it,  and  build  a  fort  against 
.  3  (It  is)  not  near  ;  let  us  build  houses  :  this 
.  10  one  built  up  a  wall,  and,  lo,  others  daubed 
.  24  thou  hast  also  built  unto  thee  an  eminent 
.  25  Thou  hast  built  thy  high  place  at  every 

.  31  thou  buildest  thine  eminent  place  in  the 
.  17  building  forts,  to  cut  off  many  persons 
.  22  to  cast  a  mount,  (and)  to  build  a  fort 


Eze.  2S.  26  they,  .shall  build  houses,  and  plant  vine. 

36.  36  I  the  Lord  build  the  ruined  (places) 
Dan.   9.  25  the  commandment  to.  .build  Jerusalem 
Hos.    8.  14  Israel  hath  forgotten ..  and  buildeth 
Amos  5.  11  ye  have  built  houses  of  hewn  stone 

9.    6  (It  is)  be  that  buildeth  his  stories  in  the 
9.  11  I  will  build  it  as  in  the  days  of  old 
9.  14  aud  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities 
Mie.    3.  10  They  build  up  Zion  with  blood 
Hab.    2.  12  Woe  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with 
Zeph.  1.  13  they  shall  also  build  houses,  but.  .inhabit 
Hag.  1.    8  bring  wood,  and  build  the  house  ;  and 
Zech.  5.  11  To  build  it  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar 
6.  12  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
6.  13  Even  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the 
6.  15  and  build  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
9.    3  Tyros  did  build  herself  a  stronghold 
Mai.    1.    4  we  will  return  and  build  the  desolate 

1.    4  They  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down 

l.To  build  up,  .133  benah. 

Ezra  4.  12  building  the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city 
5.    2  and  began  to  build  the  house  of  God 
5.    3  Who  hath  commanded  you  to  build  this 
5.    9  Who  commanded  you  to  build  this  house 
5.  11  which  a  great  king  of  Israel  builded  and 
5.  13  Cyrus  made  a  decree  to  build  this  house 

5.  17  of  Cyrus  the  king  to  build  this  house  of 

6.  7  build  this  house  of  God  in  his  place 
6.    8  for  the  building  of  this  house  of  God 

6.  14  And  the  elders  of  the  Jews  builded,  and 

6.  14  and  they  builded,  and  finished  (it) 
Dan.    4.  30  that  I  have  built  for  the  house  of  the 

9.  25  to  build  Jerusalem  unto  the  Messiah 

3.7b  thoroughly  prepare    or   make   ready,  Kara- 
(TKevdfa  kata-skeuazo. 
Heb.  3.    3  inasmuch  as  he  who  hath  builded  the 

3.    4  For  every  house  is  builded  by  some  (man) 
3.    4  but  he  that  built  all  things  (is)  God 

i.To  build  a  house,  oIkoZo^w  oikodomeo. 
Matt.  7.  24  which  built  his  house  upon  a  rock 

7,  26  which  built  his  house  upon  the  sand 
16. 18  upon  tins  rock  I  will  build  my  church 
21.  33  digged  a  winepress  in  it,  and  built  a 
23.  29  because  ye  build  the  tombs  of  the 

26.  61  I  am  able  to.  .build  it  in  three  days 

27.  40  Thou  that,  .buildest  (it)  in  three  days 
Marki2.    1  digged,  .the  winefat,  and  built  a  tower 

14.  58  within  three  days  I  will  build  another 

15.  29  Ah!  thou  that.,  buildest  (it)  in  three  days 
Luke  4.  29  of  the  bill  whereon  their  city  was  built 

6.  48  He  is  like  a  man  which  built  an  house 

6.  49  built  an  house  upon  the  earth  ;  against 

7.  s  and  he  hath  built  us  a  synagogue 

1 1.  47  for  ye  build  the  sepulchres  of  the  prophets 
11.48  they.. killed.. and  ye  build  their  sepulch. 

12.  18 1  will  pull  down  my  barns,  and  build 
14.  28  For  which  of  you,  intending  to  build  a 
14.  30  Saying,  This  man  began  to  build,  and  was 
17.  28  they  sold,  they  planted,  they  builded 

Acts    7.  47  But  Solomon  built  him  an  house 

7.  49  what  house  will  ye  build  me?  saith  the 
Romi5.  20  I  should  build  upon  another.. foundation 
Gal.    2. 18  For  if  I  build  again  the  things  wrhich  I 

BUILD  or  be  built  again,  to  — 

l.To  return  and  build,  .1331  31E>  shub  ubanah. 
2  Ch.33.    3  For  he  built  again  the  high  places 
Dan.  9.  25  the  street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the 

l.To  build  again,  a.voitcodofj.eci)  anoikodomeo. 

Acts  15.  16  will  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David 
15. 16  and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof 

BUILD,  to  begin  to  — 

To  build  up,  133  banah. 

1  Ki.  6.    1  that  he  began  to  build  the  house  of  the 

BUILD  thereon  or  thereupon,  to  — 

To  build  a,  house  up>on,  i-jroiKodofiew  ejioikodomeo. 
1  Co.  3.  10  Ihavelaid.  .andanother  buildeth  thereon 
3.  10  take  heed  how  he  buildeth  thereupon 
3. 14  which  he  hath  built  thereupon 

BUILD  together,  to  — 

To  build  a  house  together,  ffvvoiKodoixiw. 

Eph.  2.  22  In  whom  ye  also  are  builded  together 

BUILD  up,  to  — 

l.To  build  upon,  e7nn/co5o,uea>  cpoikodomeo. 
Acts  20.  32  which  is  able  to  [build  you  up] 
Col.     2.    7  Rooted  and  built  up  in  him 

2.To  build  a  house,  oiKoSofxew  oikodomeo. 

1  Pe.  2.    5  Ye  also.. are  built  up  a  spiritual  house 

BUILD  up  on  or  upon,  to  — 

l.To  build  upon,  iiroiKoBo/j.€w  cpoikodomeo. 

1  Co.  3.  12  Now  if  any  man  build  upon,  .foundation 
Eph.   2.  20  And  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 

2. To  build  upon,  eVoi/<o5ojuea>  ejmkodovied. 
Jude       20  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most 

BUILD,  to  be  about  to  — 
To  build  up,  H33  banah. 

2  Ch    2.    9  for  the  house  which  I  am  about  to  build 

BUILDED,  to  be  — 

To  be  builded,  X33  bena,  2. 

Ezra  4.  13  Be  it  known  now.  .if  this  city  be  builded 


BUILDED 


127 


BURDEN 


Ezra  4.  16  We  certify  that,  if  this  city  be  builded 

4.  21  and  that  this  city  be  not  builded 

5.  8  which  is  builded  with  great  stones 

5.  ii  build  the  house  that  was  builded  these 

5.  15  let  the  house  of  God  be  builded  in  liis 

6.  3  Let  the  house  be  builded,  the  place 

BUILDED  or  built,  to  he  — 

1.7*0  build,  rn|  banah. 

Judg  6.  28  was  offered  upon  the  altar  (that  was)  b. 
!N"eh.  7.    4  few  therein,  and  the  houses,  .not  builded 
Psa  122.    3  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  that  is 
Song  4.    4  the  tower  of  David  builded  for  an  armoury 

2.7*0  be  built,  ms  banah,  2. 

]Nunii3.  22  Now  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before 

21. 17  let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  built  and  prepared 

Deut  13.  16  it  shall  be  an  heap .  .it  shall  not  be  built 

1  Ki.  3.    2  there  was  no  house  built  unto  the . .  Lord 

6.    7  was  built  of  stone  made  ready  before  it 

1  Ch.  2.    9  into  the  house  that  is  to  be  built  to  the 

22.    5  the  house  (that  is)  to  be  builded  for  the 

22. 19  that  is  to  be  built  to  the  name  of  the  Lord 

Neh.  7.    1  Now  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  wall  was  b 

Job   12.  14  he  breaketh  down,  and  it  cannot  be  built 

22.  23  If  thou  return,  .thou  shalt  be  built  up 
Psa.  89.    2  Mercy  shall  be  built  up  for  ever :  thy 
Prov  24.    3  Through  wisdom  is  an  house  builded 
Isa.  25    2  a  palace,  .it  shall  never  be  built 

44.  26  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  Ye  shall  be  built 
44.  2S  saying  to  Jerusalem,  Thou  shalt  be  built 
Jer.  12.  16  then  shall  they  be  built  in  the  midst  of 

30.  18  the  city  shall  be  builded  upon  her  own 

31.  4  and  thou  shalt  be  built,  O  virgin  of  Israel 
31.  3S  that  the  city  shall  be  built  to  the  Lord 

Eze.  26  14  thou  shalt  be  built  no  more 

36.  10  inhabited,  and . .  water  shall  be  builded 
36.  33  the  cities,  and  the  wastes  shall  be  builded 
Hag.   1.   2  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built 
Zecli.  1. 16  my  house  shall  be  built  in  it 
8.    9  that  the  temple  might  be  built 

BUILDER  — 

1.2*0  build  up,  ma  banah. 

1  Ki.  5.  iS  Solomon's  builders  and  Hiram's 

2  Ki.12,  11  and  they  laid  it  out  to.  .the  builders 

22     6  Unto  the  carpenters,  and  builders,  and 
2  Ch.34.  11  Even  to  the.  .builders  gave  they  (it) 
Ezra    3.  10  when  the  builders  laid  the  foundation  of 
Neh    4.    5  have  provoked,  .to  anger  before  the  b. 

4.  18  For  the  builders,  every  one  had  his  sword 
Psa  1  iS.  22  The  stone . .  the  builders  refused  is 
Eze.  27.    4  thy  builders  have  perfected  thy  beauty 

2. To  build  a  house,  oiKodo/^eof  oikodomeo. 

Matt  21.  42  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected 
Mark  12,  10  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected 
Luke2o.  17  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected 
Acts    4.  11  the  stone.,  set  at  nought  of  you  [builders] 
1  Pe.  2     7  the  stone  which  the  builders  disallowed 

^.Artificer,  rex^irvs  technites. 

Heb,  it.  10  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God 


BUILDING  — 

J. Building,  <i;i3  binyah. 

Eze.  41  13  and  the  building,  with  the  walls  thereof 

2. Building,  ps  binyan. 

Ezra   5.   4  uames  of  the  men  that  made  this  building 
Eze  40.    5  he  measured  the  breadth  of  the  building 

41.12  the  building  that  (was)  before,  .separate 
41.  12  ;  41.  15  ;  42.  1 ;  42.  5  ;  42.  10. 

3. Building,  olKoBofiJ}  oikodome. 

Matt.24. 1.  to  show  him  the  buildings  of  the  temple 
\fark13.  1,  2  ;  1  Co.  3.  9 ;  2  Co.  5.  1 ;  Eph.  2.  21. 

4, Beam  work,  n"i|33  meqareh. 

Eccl  10  t8  By  much  slothfulness.. building  decayeth 
5. Thing  built  in,  ei/Bo/j.ncrt'i  endomesis. 

Rev.  21.  iS  the  building  of  the  wall  of  it  was  (of) 

6.  Making,  creation,  /t-ricm  ktisis. 

Heb    9,  11  that  is  to  say  not  of  this  building 

BUILDING,  to  be  in  — 
1.7*0  be  built,  ms  banah,  2. 

1  Ki.  6.    7  when  it  was  in  building . .  while  it  was  in  b. 

2  7*o  build  up,  njs  bena,  7. 

Ezra  5.  16  and  since  that,  .hath  it  been  in  building 

3.7*0  build  a  liouse,  ot/coSo^eoi  oikodomeo. 

John  2.  20  Forty  and  six  years  was.  .in  building 

BUK'-KI,  M>3  mouth  of  J  ah. 

1.  Son  of  Abishua  and  father  of  Uzzi,  the  fifth  from 
Aarou  in  the  line  of  the  high  priests,  B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch    6.    5  Abishua  begat  B.,  and  B.  begat  Uzzi 
6.  51  B.  his  son,  Uzzi  his  son,  Zerahiahhis 
Ezra    7.    4  the  son  of  Uzzi,  the  son  of  B. 

2.  A  prince  of  Dan,  and  one  of  the  teu  chosen  to  appor- 
tion the  land  among  the  tribes,  B.C.  1451. 

Num34.  22  the  prince  of  the  tribe  of.  .Dan,  B. 
BUK-KT-AH,  m;j33  mouth  of  Jah. 
A  Kohathite  Levite,  son  of  Heman  and  a  musician  in 
the  temple,   the  leader  of  the  sixth  course  in    the 
service,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch  25.    4  sons  of  Heman ;  B..  MattaBiah,  Uzziel 

25. 13  The  sixth  to  B.,  (he),  his  sons,  .brethren 


Jer. 


2.  Bullock 

Exod2o 


BUL,  ^3  rain-god. 

The  month  from  the  first  new  moou  of  November  till 

the  first  one  of  December. 

1  Ki.   6.  38  in  the  month  B. . .  was  the  house  finished 
BULL  — 
\. Mighty  one,  V3X  abbir. 

Psa.  50.  13  Will  I  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  the 
68.  30  the  multitude  of  the  bulls,  with  the  calves 

Isa.     34.  7  and  the  bullocks  with  the  bulls 

Jer.  50.  11  ye  are  grown  fat,  and  bellow  as  bulls 
2.  Son  of  the  herd,  ip3-j3  ben  baqar. 

Jer.   52.  20  twelve  brasen  bulls  that  (were)  under  the 
S.Bullock,  bull,  12,  izpar. 

Gen.  32.  15  ten  bulls,  twenty  she  asses,  and  ten  foals, 

Psa.  22.  12  Many  bulls  have  compassed  me 
4.  Ox,  liz>  shor. 

Job  21.  10  Their  bull  gendereth,  and  faileth  not 
5. Bull,  beeve,  ravpos  tauros. 

Heb.  9.  13  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 

10.    4  the  blood  of  bulls,  .should  take  away  sins 

BULL,  wild  — 

Bull,  gazelle,  wild  goat,  am  to  (toe). 
Isa.  51.  20  as  a  wild  bull  in  a  net 

BULLOCK  — 

1.  Steer,  young  bullock,  ?ay  egel. 

18  aud  I  was  chastised,  as  a  bullock 

21  in  the  midst  of  her  like  fatted  bullocks 

bull,  13,  13.  par. 

3  with  the  bullock  and  the  two  rams 
10  thou  shalt  cause  a  bullock  to  be  brought 

23.  10  put  their  hands  upon  the.  .bullock 

29.  11  kill  the  bullock  before  the  LORD 

29. 12  thou  shalt  take  the  blood  of  the  bullock 

29.  14  But  the  flesh  of  the  bullock 

29.  36  thou  shalt  offer  every  day  a  bullock 

4  he  shall  bring  the  bullock  unto  the  door 

4  the  bullock's  head,  and  kill  the  bullock 

5  take  of  the  bullock's  blood 

7  pour  all  the  blood  of  the  bullock 

8  take  off.  .the  fat  of  the  bullock 
1  And  the  skin  of  the  bullock 

12  the  whole  bullock  shall  he  carry  forth 
15  lay  their  hands  upon  the  bullock 

15  the  bullock  shall  be  killed  before 

16  the  priest  shall  bring  the  bullock's 
20  he  shall  do  with  the  bullock  as  he  did 

20  with  the  bullock  for  a  sin  offering 

21  he  shall  carry  forth  the  bullock 

1  burn  him  as  he  did  the  first  bullock 

2  aud  a  bullock  for  the  sin  offering 
8.  14  he  brought  the  bullock  for.. sin  offering 
8.  14  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  bullock 
8  17  the  bullock,  his  hide,  and  his  flesh 

16.    6  And  Aaron  shall  offer  his  bullock 
16.  ti  And  Aaron  shall  bring  the  bullock 
16.  11  shall  kill  the  bullock  for  a  sin  offering 
16.  14  he  shall  take  the  blood  of  the  bullock 
16.  15  he  did  with  the  blood  of  the  bullock 
i5  iS  take  the  blood  of  the  bullock 
16  27  the  bullock  for  the  sin  offering,  .was 
Num.  7.  87  the  burnt  offering  (were)  twelve  bullocks 
7  88  the  peace  offerings . .  twenty  and  four  bull 
S.  12  lay  then*  hands  upon  the. .bullocks 
2-j.    2  Balaam  offered  on  (every)  altar  a  bullock 
23.    4  I  have  offered  upon  every  altar  a  bullock 
23  14  he.  .offered  a  bullock  and  a  ram 
23.  29  prepare  me  here  seven  bullocks 
23.  30  Balak.  .offered  a  bullock  and  one  ram 
2S  12  mingled  with  oil.  for  one  bullock 
28. 14  half  an  hin  of  wine  unto  a  bullock 

28.  20  three  tenth  deals,  .offer  for  a  bullock 

28  28  three  tenth  deals  unto  one  bullock 

29.  3  three  tenth  deals  for  a  bullock 

29  9  three  tenth  deals  to  a  bullock 
29  14  every  bullock  of  the  thirteen  bullocks 


Lev. 


29. 
29. 
29 
29. 
29 
29 
29. 
29, 
Judg.  6 

6 
6 

iSa. 

2  Ki.  iS 
iS 
18 
1 8. 

18. 
iS. 

iCh. 

29. 
2  Ch.29. 

3° 

3+ 
Ezra  8. 

Job   42. 

Psa.  50 

51 

,        69, 


18,  21,  24,  27  30,  33  for  the  bullocks.,  and  for 

20  eleven  bullocks,  .fourteen  lambs 

23  on  the  fourth  day  ten  bullocks 
26  on  the  fifth  day  nine  bullocks 
29  on  the  sixth  day  eight  bullocks 

32  on  the  seventh  day  seven  bullocks 

36  one  bullock,  one  ram,  seven  lambs 

37  for  the  bullock,  .and  for  the  lambs 

25  Take  thy  father's,  .the  second  bullock 

26  take  the  second  bullock,  and  offer 
2S  and  the  second  bullock  was  offered 

24  with  three  bullocks,  and  one  ephah 

25  they  slew  a  bullock,  and  brought 

23  Let  them  therefore  give  us  two  bullocks 
23  choose  one  bullock  for  themselves 

23  I  will  dress  the  other  bullock 

25  Choose  you  one  bullock  for  yourselves 

26  they  took  the  bullock  which  was  given 

33  he.  .cut  the  bullock  in  pieces 

26  they  offered  seven  bullocks  and  seven 

21  after  that  day,  even  a  thousand  bullocks 
21  And  they  brought  seven  bullocks 

24  to  the  congregation  .  thousand  bullocks 
24  to  the  congregation  a  thousand  bullocks 
S5  twelve  bullocks  for  all  Israel,  ninety 

S  Take  unto  you  now  seven  bullocks  and 
9  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house 
19  then  shall  they  offer  bullocks  upon  thine 
31  better  than  an  ox  (or)  bullock  that  hath 
11  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks 
7  the  bullocks  and  the  bulls,  .shall  be 


Jer.   50.  27  Slay  all  her  bullocks ;  let  them  go  down 
Eze.  39.  iS  Ye  shall  eat  the  flesh,  .goats,  of  bullocks 
43.  21  take  the  bullock  also  of  the  siu  offering 
43.  22  they  did  cleanse  (it)  with  the  bullock  ° 
45. 22  shall  (the)  prince  prepare  a  bullock 
45.  23  seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams  without 

45.  24  he  shall  prepare,  .an  ephah  for  a  bullock 

46.  7  he  shall  prepare,  .an  ephah  for  a  bullock 
46.  11  the  meat  offering  shall  be.. a  bullock 

3.  Ox,  iic;  shor. 

Lev.    4. 10  it  was  taken  off  from  the  bullock 
9.    4  Also  a  bullock,  .for  peace  offerings 
9.  18  He  slew  also  the  bullock  and  the" ram 
9. 19  the  fat  of  the  bullock  and  of  the  ram 
22.  23  Either  a  bullock  or  a  lamb  that  hath 

22.  27  When  a  bullock,  or  a  sheep,  .is  brought 
Numis.  11  for  one  bullock,  or  for  one  ram 

Deut  15.  19  no  work  with  the  firstling  of  thy  bullock 
17.    1  Thou  shalt  not  sacrifice,  .(any)  bullock 
33.  17  His  glory .  .the  firstling  of  his*  bullock 
Judg.  6.  25  Take  thy  father's  young  bullock 
Hos.  12. 11  they  sacrifice  bullocks  in  Gilgal 

4.  Ox,  Tin  tor. 

Ezra  6.   9Tjot.l1  young  bullocks,  and  rams,  and 
6. 17  and  offered,  .an  hundred  bullocks 
7.  17  thou  mayest  buy  bullocks,  rams,  lambs 

BULLOCK,  young  — 

Bullock,  son  of  the  herd,  i^3-|3  13  par  ben  baqar. 

Exod2g.    1  Take  one  young  bullock  and  two  rams 

Lev.    4.    3  let  him  bring,  .a  young  bullock  without 

4.  14  congregation  shall  offer  a  young  bullock 

16.    3  shall  Aaron  come  with  a  young  bullock 

23.  iS  the  first  year,  .one  young  bullock  aud 
Num.  7. 15,  21,  27,  33, 39, 45  One  young  bullock,  one 

7.  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81  One  young  bullock,  one 

8.  8  another  young  bullock  shalt  thou  take 
8.    8  let  them  take  a  young  bullock  with  his 

28. 11, 19,  27  two  young  bullocks,  aud  one  ram 
29.  2,  8  one  young  bullock,  one  ram,  and  seven 
29.  13  thirteen  young  bullocks,  .(and)  fourteen 
29. 17  twelve  young  bullocks,  .fourteen  lambs 
2  Ch.  13.    9  consecrate  himself  with  a  young  bullock 
Eze.  43.  19  give,  .a  young  bullock  for  a  sin  offering 
43.  23  offer  a  young  bullock  without  blemish 
43.  25  they  shall  also  prepare  a  young  bullock 
45.  iS  thou  shalt  take  a  young  bullock  without 
4.6.    6  (it  shall  be)  a  young  buHock  without 

BULRUSH  — 

1. Bulrush,  rush,  |iD3N  agmon. 

Isa.  58.   5  (is  it)  to  bow  down  his  head  as  a  bulrush 

2.  Papyrus,  rush,  N?3  gome. 

Exod.  2.    3  she  took  for  him  an  ark  of  bulrushes 
Isa.   18.    2  even  in  vessels  of  bulrushes  upon  the 

BULWABK  — 

1.  Strong  object,  hr\  chel. 

Isa.  26.    1  (God)  appoint  (for)  walls  and  bulwarks 

2.  Strong  object,  n^-n  chelah. 

Psa.  48. 13  Mark'  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her 

^.Fortress,  lisB  matsod. 

Eccl.  9. 14  and  built  great  bulwarks  against  it 
4.  Fortress,  lisa  matsor. 

Deut  20.  20  thou  shalt  build  bulwarks  against 
5. Comer,  .133 pinnah. 

2  Ch.26. 15  be  on  the  towers  and  upon  the  bulwarks 

BUNCH  — 

1. Bundle,  .tux  aguddah. 

Exodi2.  22  Aid  ye  shall  take  a  bunch  of  hyssop 

2.Bunch,  riffiii  dabbesheth. 

Isa.  30.   6  "carry.,  their  treasures  upon  the  bunches 

BUNDLE  — 

1. Thing  compressed,,  ill?  tseror. 

Gen.  42.  35  behold,  every  man's  bundle  of  money 

42.  35  and  their  father  saw  the  bundles  of 
1  Sa.  25.  29  bound  in  the  bundle  of  life 
Song   1.  13  A  bundle  of  myrrh  (is)  my  well  beloved 

2. Bundle,  deo-fxrj  desme. 

Slatti3.  30  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them 
3. Fulness,  multitude,  irkrjdos  plWios. 

Acts  28.    3  when  Paul  had  gathered  a  bundle  of 

BU'-NAH,  .1333  understanding. 
Son  of  Jerahmeel  of  the  family  of  Pharez,  B.C.  1540. 
1  Ch.  2. 25  sons  of  Jerahmeel . .  were . .  B.,  and  Oren 

BUN'-NI,  '33  my  understanding. 

1.  A  Levite  who  helped  Ezra  in  teaching  the  people  the 
law  of  3Ioses,  B.C.  536. 

Neh.   9.   4Thenstoodup..Shebaniah,  B.,  Sherebiah 

2.  Another  Levite,  ancestor  of  Shemaiah,  B.C.  445. 

Neh  11.  15  of  the  Levites.  .Hashabiah,  the  son  of  B. 
3  .A  family  of  the  Jews  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the 
covenant,  B.C.  445. 

2s'eh.  10.  15  [The  chief  of  the  people].  .B.,  Azgad 
BUBBEN  — 
1. Bundle,  niasj  aguddah. 

Isa.   58.   6  to  undo  the  heavy  burdens 
2.Burden,  load,  thing  lifted  up,  x»3  massa. 

Exod23-    5  the  ass  of  him .  .lying  under  his  burden 


BURDEN 


128 


BURN 


Num.  4. 15  These  (things  are)  the  burden  of  the  sons 
4  19  every  one  to  his  service,  and  to  his  burden 
4.  24  the  service  of  the  families,  .for  burdens 
4  o7  in  all  their  burdens,  and  in  all  their 
4  27  appoint  unto  them  in  charge  all .  .burdens 
4  «  And  this  (is)  the  charge  of  their  burden 
1  32  instruments  of  the  charge  of  their  burden 

4.  47  the  service  of  the  burden  in  the  taber. 

1  40  his  service,  and  according  to  his  burden 
ii  11  thou  layest  the  burden  of  all  this  people 
11*  17  they  shall  bear  the  burden  of  the  people 

3  iout.  1.  12  can  I  myself  alone  bear  your,  .burden 
2  s  1   15.  33  then  thou  shalt  be  a  burden  unto  me 

iq  35  thy  servant  be  yet  a  burden  unto  my  lord 
2K1    5  17  be  given  to  thy  servant  two  mules'  burden 
8    0  forty  camels'  burden . .  came  and  stood 
o  2?  the  Lord  laid  this  burden  upon  him 
2CI1  24.  27  the  greatness  of  the  burdens  (laid)  upon 

35.    3  (it  shall)  not  (be)  a  burden  upon  (your) 
Hen.  13  15  and  all  (manner  of)  burdens 

13  19  there  should  uo  burden  be  brought  in 
Job     7.  20  so  that  I  am  a  burden  to  myself? 

Psa    38    4  an  heavy  burden  they  are  too  heavy  for  me 
Isa    13     1  The  burden  of  Babylon  which  Isaiah  the 

14.  28  In  the  year. .  Ahaz  died  was  this  burden 

15.  1  The  burden  of  Moab 

17.    1  The  burden  of  Damascus 

19.    1  The  burden  of  Egypt 

2i.    i  The  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea 

2i.  11  The  burden  of  Dumah 

21.  13  The  burden  upon  Arabia 

2->.    1  The  burden  of  the  valley  of  vision 

22.  25  the  burden  that  (was)  upon  it  shall  be  cut 

23.  1  The  burden  of  Tyre 

30.   6  The  burden  of  the  beasts  of  the  south 
46.    1  (they  are)  a  burden  to  the  weary  (beast) 
46.    2  they  could  not  deliver  the  burden 
Jer.  17.  21  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  day 
17.  22  Neither  carry  forth  a  burden  out 
17.  24  bring  in  no  burden  through  the  gates 
17.  27  the  sabbath  day,  and  not  to  bear  a  burden 
23.  33  What  is  the  burden  of  the  Lord? 
23.  33  "What  burden?  I  will  even  forsake  you 
23-  34  Tlw  burden  of  the  Lord,  I  will  even  punish 
23.  36  the  burden  of  the  Lord  shall  ye  mention 
23.  36  every  man's  word  shall  be  his  burden 
23.  38  since  ye  say.  The  burden  of  the  LORD 
23.  38  The  burden  of  the  Lord.  .1  have  sent 
23-  38  Ye  shall  not  say,  The  burden  of  the  Lord 
Eze.  12. 10  This  burden  (coneerneth)  the  prince 
Hos.    8.  10  a  little  for  the  burden  of  the  king  of 
Nah.   1.    1  The  burden  of  Neneveh.    The  book  of 
Hab.   1.    1  The  burden  which  Ilabakkuk.  .did  see 
Zech.  9.    1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  LORD  in 

12.    1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  for 
Hal.    1.    i  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  LORD 
3. Burden,  lifting  up,  hn^i?  massaah. 

Isa.   30.  27  audthe  burden  (thereof  is)  heavy 
4. Burden,  lifting  up,  nfttQ  maseth. 

Lam.  2.  14  Thy  prophets,  .have  seen,  .false  burdens 
Amos  5.  1  r  ye  take  from  him  burdens  of  wheat 
Zeph,  3  18  (to  whom)  the  reproach  of  it  (was)  a  burd. 
5.  Burden  bearer,  b'no,  73D  sebel,  sabbai. 

1  Ki.  5.  15  threescore  and  ten  th.  that  bare  burdens 
Neh.    4.  17  and  they  that  bare  burdens,  with  those 
Fsa    81.    6  I  removed  his  shoulder  from  the  burden 
a.  Burden  bearer,  bib  sobel. 

Isa      9.    4  thou  hast  broken  the  yoke  of  his  burden 
10.  27  his  burden  shall  be  taken  away  from  off 

14  25  then  shall .  .his  burden  depart  from 

7.  Burden,  n"?30  sebalah. 

Exod  1.  11  to  afflict  them  with  their  burdens 

2  11  his  brethren,  and  looked  ou  their  burdens 

5.  4  Wherefore,  .get  you  unto  your  burdens 

5.  5  ye  make  them  rest  from  their  burdens 

6.  6  I  will  bring  you  out.  .under  the  burdens 

6.  7  bring  you  out  from  under  the  burdens 

8.  To  give,  3n;  yahab. 

Psa.  55.  22  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord 

9.  Weight,  fidpo$  baros. 

Matt 20.  12  to  us,  which  have  borne  the  burden  and 
Acts  15,  28  the  Holy  Ghost,  .lay.. no  greater  burden 
Gal.     6.    2  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so 
Rev.    2  24  I  will  put  upon  you  none  other  burden 

10. Freight  {of  a  ship),  y6fj.os  gomos. 

Acts  21.    3  there  the  ship  was  to  unlade  her  burden 
11. Load  (to  be  borne),  (poprlov  phoriion. 

Matt  11.  30  my  yoke  (is)  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light 

23.   4  For  they  bind  heavy  burdens  and  griev. 
Luke r  1.  46  for  ye  lade  men  with  burdens  grievous 

11.  46  and  ye  yourselves  touch  not  the  burdens 
Gal.    6.   5  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden 
B  URDEN,  to  — 
To  weigh  down,  KaTa&aptw  katabareo. 

2  Co.  12.  i&  be  it  so,  I  did  not  burden  you:  nevertheless 

BURDEN,  to  be  a  — 

To  become  a  burden,  ^n  sabal,  7. 

Eccl.12.    5  the  grasshopper  shall  be  a  burden,  and 
BURDEN  selves,  to  — 
To  burden,  load,  D^y  conns. 

Zech  17.    3  all  that  burden  themselves  with  it  shall 
BURDENED  — 

Pressure,  B\tyi$  thlipsis. 

2  Co.  8. 13  not  that  other  men  be  eased,  and  ye  b. 


BURDENED,  to  be  — 

To  be  burdened,  $apeo}iai  bareomai. 

2 Co.  5.   4  we.. in  (this) tabernacle.. being  burdened 

BURDENS,  two  — 

Double  burdens,  D*W#?  mishpethayim. 

Gen.  49. 14  a  strong  ass  crouching  between  two  burd. 

BURDENS,  to  bear  — 
Burden  bearer,  "??P  sabbai. 

2  Ch.    2.   2  ten  thousand  men  to  bear  burdens 

BURDENS,  bearer  of  — 
Burden-  bearer,  bzc  sabbai. 

2  Ch.    2.  18  ten  thousand,  .(to  be)  bearers  of  burdens 

34.  13  (they  were)  over  the  bearers  of  burdens 
Neh.  4.  10  The  strength  Of  the  bearers  of  burdens 

BURDENSOME  — 

A  burden,  weight,  noe&o  maamasah. 

Zech  12.    3  I  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone 

BURDENSOME,  to  be  — 

l.To  become  a  burden,  iv  fidpei  eluai  en  barei  einai. 

1  Th.  2.    6  when  we  might  have  been  burdensome 
2. To  lie  torpid  against,  Ka.ravapKc.oi  katanarhad. 

2  Co.  12.  13  I  myself  was  not  burdensome  to  you  ? 

12.  14  and  I  will  not  be  burdensome  to  you 

3.  Without  weight,  a/3ap^s  abares. 

2  Co.  11.   9  kept  myself  from  being  burdensome 

BURIAL  — 

I.  Burial,  grave,  rrjup  qeburah, 

2  Ch.  26.  23  the  burial  which  (belonged)  to  the  kings 
Eccl.  6.    3  and  also  (that)  he  have  no  burial 
Isa.    14.  20  shalt  not  be  joined  with  them  in  burial 
Jer.  22.  19  He  shall  be  buried  with  the  burial  of  an 

2.7*0  entomb,  to  zvrafi&crai  to  entaphiasai. 
Matt  26.  12  she  did  (it)  for  my  burial 

BURIED  — 

To  bury,  i3i?  qabar. 

1  KL13.  31  it  came  to  pass,  after  he  had  buried  him 
Eccl.  8.  10  And  so  I  saw  the  wicked  bulled 

BURIED  (with),  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  buried,  13  j?  qabar,  2. 

Gen.  15. 15  thou  shalt  be  buried  in  a  good  old  age 

35.  8  and  she  was  buried  beneath  Betb-el  under 
35.  19  and  was  buried  in  the  way  to  Ephrath 

Nuni2o.    1  Miriam  died  there,  and  was  buried  there 
Deut  10.    6  Aaron  died,  and  there  he  was  buried 
Judg.  8.  32  and  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre 
10.   2  and  died,  and  was  buried  in  Shamir 

10.  5  Jair  died,  and  was  buried  in  Camon 
12.    7  and  was  buried  in  (one  of)  the  cities 

i2. 10  Then  died  Ibzan,  and  was  buried  at  Beth. 
12.  12  aud  was  buried  in  Aijalon  in.  .Zebulun 

12. 15  And  Abdon.  .died,  and  was  buried 
Ruth  1.  17  AVhere  thou  diest,  will  I  die.  .be  buried 

2  Sa.  17.  23  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  father 

1  TCi.   2  10  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David 

2.  34  aud  he  was  buried  in  his  own  house 

11.  43  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David  his  father 

14.  31  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the 

15.  24  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the 

16.  6  So  Baasha  slept,  .and  was  buried  in  Tir. 
16.  28  So  Omri  slept,  .and  was  buried  in  Samaria 
22.  50  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

2  Ki.  8.  24  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

13. 13  and  Joash  was  buried  in  Samaria 

14. 16  was  buried  in  Samaria  with  the  kings  of 

14.  20  he  was  buried  at  Jerusalem  with  his 

15.  38  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

16.  20  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the 
21. 18  and  was  buried  in  the  garden  of  his  own 

2  Ch.   9.  31  he  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David 
12  16  and  was  buried  in  the  citj  of  David 
2i.    1  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the 
35.  24  and  was  buried  in  (one  of)  the  sepulchres 
Job   27.  15  Those  that  remain . .  shall  be  buried  in 
Jer.     8.    2  they  shall  not  be  gathered,  nor  be  buried 
16.   4  they  shall  not.  .neither  shall  they  be  bur. 
16.   6  ;  20.  6 ;  22.  19  ;  25.  33. 

2.  7*0  be  entombed,  Bdirro/xai  thaptomai. 

Acts    2.  29  David  .  .that  he  is  both  dead  and  buried 

3.  7*0  be  buried,  ~\2%  qabar,  4. 

Gen.  25. 10  there  was  Abraham  buried,  and  Sarah 
4.7*0  bury,  "1312  qabar. 

2  Ki.21.  26  he  was  buried  in  his  sepulchre 
5.7*0  be  buri-ed  with,  o-ui/8d7rrofxat  sunthaptomai. 

Rom.  6.    4  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into 

Col.     2.  12  Buried  with  him  in  baptism,  wherein 
BURLER  — 
7*o  bury,  njp  qabar,  3. 

Eze.  39. 15  till  the  buriers  have  buried  it  in  the 
BURN,  to  — 
1.7*o  consume,  be  consumed,  iya  baar. 

Exod.  3.    2  and,  behold,  the  bush  burned  with  lire 

Num.  11.    1  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them 
11.    3  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them 

Dcut.  4.  11  and  the  mountain  burned  with  fire 
5.  23  for  the  mountain  did  burn  with  fire 
9.  15  and  the  mount  burned  with  fire 

Esth,  1. 12  Vashti  refused,  .and  his  anger  burned  in 

Job     1.  16  and  hath  burned  up  the  sheep,  and  the 


Psa.  39.    3  while  I  was  musing  the  fire  burned 
79.    5  shall  thy  jealousy  burn  like  fire? 
83.  14  As  the  lire  burnetii  a  wood,  and  as  the 
89.  46  How  long,  .shall  thy  wrath  burn  like 
Isa.     1.  31  and  they  shall  both  burn  together 

9.  18  For  wickedness  burnetii  as  the  fire  :  it 
10.  17  and  it  shall  burn  and  devour  his  thorns 
30.  27  the  name  of  the  Lord,  .burning  (with) 
34.    9  the  land .  .shall  become  burning  pitch 
42.  25  yet  he  knew  not ;  and  it  burned  him 
62.    1  the  salvation . .  as  a  lamp  (that)  burnetii 
Jer.     4.    4  and  burn  that  none  can  quench  (it) 
7.  20  it  shall  burn,  and  not  be  quenched 

20.  9  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones 

21.  12  and  burn  that  none  can  quench  (it) 
Lam.  2.    3  he  burned  against  Jacob  like  a  flaming 
Eze.    1.  13  their  appearance  (was)  like  burning  coals 
Hos.    7.    6  in  the  morning  it  burnetii  as  a  flaming 
Mai.    4.    1  the  day.  .that  shall  burn  as  an  oven 

2.7*0  consume,  nj;3  baar,  3. 

Lev.    6. 12  the  priest  shall  burn  wood  ou  it  every 
2  Ch.  4.  20  they  should  burn  after  the  mam  er 

13.  11  lamps  thereof,  to  burn  every  evening 
Neh.  10.  34  to  burn  up  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our  God 
Isa.     4.    4  of  judgment,  and  the  spirit  of  burning 

40.  16  Lebanon  (is)  not  sufficient  to  burn 

44.  15  Then  shall  it  be  for  a  man  to  burn 
Eze.  39.  9   and  they  shall  burn  them  with  fire 

39.  10  for  they  shall  burn  the  weapons  with  fire 

3.7*o  be  consumed,  "iya  baar,  4. 

Jer.   36.  22  (there  was  a  fire)  on  the  hearth  burning 

4.7*o  cause  to  consume,  nya  baar,  5. 

2  Ch.  28.    3  and  burnt  his  children  in  the  fire 
Eze.    5.    2  Thou  shalt  burn  with  fire  a  third  part 
Nah.   2. 13  and  I  will  burn  her  chariots  in  the  smoke 

5. 7*o  be  hot,  heated,  nnn  charah. 

Gen.  44. 18  ami  let  not  thine  anger  burn  against 

6.7*o  be  hot,  T]~i  charar. 

Eze.  24. 11  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  hot.  may  burn 

7.7*0  burn  up,  ns;  yatsath,  5. 

Jer.  51.  30  they  have  burned  her  dwelling  places 

8.7*o  burn  steadily,  "ijv  yakad. 

Deut  32.  22  and  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell 
Isa.  65.    5  in  my  nose,  a  fire  that  burnetii  all  the 

9.7*o  be  made  steadily  to  burn,  ip;  yakad,  6. 

Lev.    6.   9  the  fire  of  the  altar  shall  be  burning  in 

6.  12  the  fire  upon  the  altar  shall  be  burning 

6. 13  The  fire  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the 

Jer.  15.  14  for  a  fire  is  kindled,  .(which)  shall  burn 

17.    4  for  ye  have  kindled  a  fire,  .shall  burn  for 

10.7*o  set  inflame,  flame,  unS  lahat,  3. 

Joel    1.  19  and  the  flame  hath  burnt  all  the  trees 
2.    3  and  behind  them  a  flame  burnetii 

11.2*0  lift  up,  ay;  nasa. 

2  Sa.  5.  21  and  David  and  his  men  burnt  them 
12.7*0  set  on  fire,  pbu  nasaq,  5. 

Eze  39.    9  and  shall  set  on  fire  and  burn  the 
i3.7*o  burn,  rj-ip  saraph,  3. 

Amos  6.  10  and  he  that  burnetii  him,  to  bring  out 
11.7*0  set  on  fire,  nw  tsuth,  5. 

Isa.  27.   4  I  would  go  through  them,  I  would  burn 
15.7*o  be  kindled,  rnp  qadach. 

Isa.   64.    2  As  (when)  the  melting  fire  burnetii,  the 
16,7*0  burn  (as)  incense,  it?[?  qatar,  3. 

1  Sa.   2,  16  Let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the  fat  presently 

Jer.  44  21  The  incense  that  ye  burnt  in  the  cities 

17.7*o  cause  to  burn  (as)  incense,  T&$  qatar,  5. 
Exodsg.  13  the  fat  that  (is)  upon  them,  aud  burn 
29.  18  And  thou  shalt  burn  the  whole  ram 

29.  25  burn  (them)  upon  the  altar  for  a  burnt 

30.  7  And  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  sweet 
30.  20  to  burn  offering  made  by  fire  unto  the 
40.  27  Aud  he  burned  sweet  incense  thereon 

Lev.  1.  9  and  the  priest  shall  burn  all  on  the  altar 
1.  13  the  priest  shall  bring  (it)  all,  and  burn  (it) 
1.  15  and  wring  oft  his  head,  and  burn  (it) 

1.  17  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar 

2.  2  the  priest  shall  burn  the  memorial  of  it 
2.  9  shall  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar,  .an  offering 
2  11  for  ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor  any 

2.  16  the  priest  shall  burn  the  memorial  of  it 

3.  5  Aaron's  sons  shall  burn  it  on  the  altar 

3.  11  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar 

3. 16  the  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

4.  10  the  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 
4  19  he  shall  take  all  his  fat.  .and  burn  (it) 
4.  26  he  shall  burn  all  his  fat  upon  the  altar 
4.  31  the  priest  shall  burn  fit)  upon  the  altar 

4.  35  the  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

5.  12  a  memorial,  .and  burn  (it)  on  the  altar 

6.  12  and  he  shall  burn  thereon  the  fat 

6.  15  and  shall  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar 

7.  5  the  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

7.  31  the  priest  shall  burn  the  fat  upon  the 

8.  16  and  Moses  burned  (it)  upon  the  r.lt.'.r 
8.  20  and  Moses  burnt  the  head,  and  the  pieces 
8.  21  and  Moses  burnt  the  whole  ram 

8.  28  aud  burnt  (them)  on  the  altar  upon  the 

9.  10  But  the  fat.  .he  burnt  upon  the  altar 
9.  13  and  he  burnt  (them)  upon  the  altar 
9.  14  and  burnt  (them)  upon  the  burnt  offering 

9. 17  burnt  (it)  upon  the  altar,  beside  the  bun  ''-. 


BURN 


129 


BURNING 


Lev.    g.  20  and  be  burnt  the  fat  upon  the  altar 
16. 25  the  fat.  .shall  he  burn  upon  the  altar 
17.    6  burn  the  fat  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 

Vnm.  5.  26  (even)  the  memorial,  .and  burn  (it) 

iS.  17  and  slialt  burn  their  fat  (for)  an  ottering 

1  Sa.    2.  15  before  they  burnt  the  fat,  the  priest's 

2. 16  Let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the  fat  present. 
2!  28  to  burn  incense,  to  wear  an  ephod  before 

2  Ki.  16.  13  he  burnt  his  burnt  ottering  and  his 

16.  15  Upon  the  great  altar  burn  the  morning 
2  Ch.  2.   4  (and)  to  burn  before  him  sweet  incense 
13.  11  And  they  burn  unto  the  Lord  every 
2g.    7  have  not  burnt  incense  nor  offered 


18.7b  bum 
Gen.  11. 
Exodiz. 

29. 

29. 

3=- 
Lev.    4. 


9- 
13- 

*3- 
I3- 
16. 

16. 

Xunug. 

ig. 

19. 

31- 
Dcut.  7. 

7- 

9- 


Josh.  6. 
7- 


Judg 


Ki 


■Ki.  1 


18. 

9- 
15- 

16. 
10. 
*7- 
23- 
23. 

23- 

23- 
23- 
23- 


2  Ch.15. 
34- 
36- 
36. 

Psi.  46. 

Isa.  44. 
44. 
47- 

Jer.  7. 
19. 

21. 
32. 

34- 

34- 

34- 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

37- 

37-  J 

38.  J 

39- 

43-  ] 

43-  1 

52.  J 
52.  i 
Eze.    5. 


Amos  2. 


heat,  Fji'y  saraph. 

let  us  make  brick,  and  burn  them  throu. 
that  which  remaineth.  .ye  shall  burn  with 
shalt  thou  burn  with  fire  without  the 
thou  shalt  burn  the  remainder  with  fire 
and  burnt  (it)  in  the  fire,  and  ground  (it) 
and  burn  him  on  the  wood  with  fire 
aud  burn  him  as  he  burned  the  first  bull, 
he  burnt  with  fire  without  the  camp 
that  which  remaineth .  .shall  ye  burn  with 
the  flesh  aud  the  hide  he  burnt  with  fire 
He  shall  therefore  burn  that  garment 
it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire 
thou  shalt  burn  it  in  the  fire  ;  it  (is)  fret 
aud  they  shall  burn  in  the  fire  their  skins 
he  that  burnetii  them  shall  wash  his 
(one)  shall  burn  the  heifer  in  his  sight 
her  dung,  shall  he  burn 
he  that  burnetii  her  shall  wash  his  clothes 
they  burnt  all  their  cities  wherein  they 
and  burn  their  graven  images  with  fire 
The  graven  images  of  their  gods  shall  ye  b. 
the  calf  which  ye  had  made,  aud  burnt  it 
and  burn  their  groves  with  lire  ;  aud  ye 
they  have  burnt  in  the  fire  to  their  gods 
and  shalt  burn  with  fire  the  city 
And  they  burnt  the  city  with  fire 
aud  burned  them  with  fire,  after  they 
Joshua  burnt  Ai,  and  made  it  an  heap  for 
and  burn  their  chariots  with  fire 
aud  burnt  their  chariots  with  fire 
aud  he  burnt  Hazor  with  fire 
Israel  burnt  none  of  them,  save  Hazor  only 
save  Hazor  ouly ;  (that)  did  Joshua  burn 
and  went  hard  unto  the  door,  .to  burn  it 
we  will  burn  thine  house  upon  thee  with 
we  burn  thee  and  thy  fathers  house  with 
and  burnt  her  aud  her  father  with  fire 
smote  them,  .and  burnt  the  city  with  fire 
the  Amalekites.  .burnt  it  with  fire 
and  we  burnt  Ziklag  with  fire 
and  came  to  Jabesh,  and  burnt  them 
and  taken  Gezer,  aud  burnt  it  with  fire 
idol,  aud  burnt  (it)  by  the  brook  Kidron 
and  burnt  the  king's  house  over  him  with 
the  images,  .of  Baal,  and  burned  them 
and  the  .Sepharvites  burnt  their  children 
and  he  burned  them  without  Jerusalem 
and  burned  it  at  the  brook  Kidron 
and  burned  the  chariots  of  the  sun  with 
burned  the  high  place,  (and),  .burned  the 
and  burued  (them)  upon  the  altar,  and 
and  burned  men's  bones  upon  them 
And  he  burnt  the  house  of  the  Lord 
every  great  (mau's)  house  burnt  he  with 
aud  burnt  (it)  at  the  brook  Kidron 
And  he  burnt  the  bones  of  the  priests 
And  they  burnt  the  house  of  God,  and 
and  burnt  all  the  palaces  thereof  with  tire 
he  burnetii  the  chariot  in  the  fire 
He  burnetii  part  thereof  in  the  fire 
I  have  burnt  part  of  it  in  the  fire 
Behold,  .the  fire  shall  burn  them 
to  burn  their  sons  and  their  daughters 
to  burn  their  sous  with  fire  (for)  burnt 
and  he  shall  burn  it  with  fire 
and  burn  it  with  the  houses  upon  whose 
Babylon,  aud  he  shall  burn  it  with  fire 
so  shall  they  burn  (odours)  for  thee ;  and 
and  take  it,  and  burn  it  with  fire 
that  he  would  not  burn  the  roll ;  but  he 
after  that  the  king  had  burnt  the  roll 
which,  .the  kiug  of  Judah  hath  burnt 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  Thou  hast  burnt 
king  of  Judah  had  burnt  in  the  fire 
and  take  it,  and  burn  it  with  fire 
they  rise  up.  .and  burn  this  city  with  fire 
and  they  shall  bum  it  with  fire,  and  thou 
And  the  Chaldeans  burned  the  king's 
he  shall  burn  them,  and  carry  them  away 
the  houses  of  the  gods,  .shall  he  burn 
the  reeds  they  have  burned  with  fire 
And  burned  the  house  of  the  Lord 
and  all  the  houses,  .burned  he  with  fire 
and  burn  them  in  the  fire,  .thereof 
they  shall  burn  thine  houses  with  fire 
and  he  shall  burn  it  in  the  appointed 
because  he  burned  the  bones  of  the  king 


19.  To  bum  forth,  flame  up,  eV/coio)  ekkaid,-o/j.at. 
Rom.  1.  27  the  men  burned  in  their  lust  one 

20.  To  bum,  Kaio/xat  kaiomai. 

Luke  12.  35  your  loins. .  and  (your)  lights  burning 

24.  32  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us,  while 
John  5.  35  He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light 
Heh.  12.  18  the  mount,  .that  burned  with  fire 
Rev.   4.   5  (there  were)  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning 

17 


Rev.  8.  8  a  great  mountain  burning  with  fire  was 
8. 10  a  great  star  from  heaven,  buruiug  as  it 
19.  20  both  were  cast,  .into  a  lake  of  fire  burning 

21.  S  part  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire 

'21.  To  burn  down,  KaraKaico  katakaio. 

Mattis.  30  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them ;  but 

13.  40  the  tares  are  gathered  and  [burned] 
Luke  3.  17  the  chaff  he  will  burn  with  fire 

Acts  19.  19  brought  their  books  together,  and  burned 
1  Co.   3.  15  If  any  man  s  work,  .be  burnt,  he  shall 
Heb.13.  11  those  beasts,  .are  burnt  without  the 
Rev.  17.  16  and  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her 

22.  To  be  on  fire,  irvpoofxai  puroomai. 

1  Co.   7.    9  for  it  is  better  to  marry  than  to  bum 

2  Co.  11.  2g  who  is  offended,  aud  I  burn  not? 

Rev.    1.  15  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace 

BURN,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  up,  rh%  alo.h,  5. 

Exod?7.  20  to  cause'the  lamp  to  burn  always 
Lev.  24.    2  to  cause  the  lamps  to  burn  continually 

BURN  incense  (upon)  to  — 

1.2b  bum  (as)  incense,  "I£i2  qatar,  3. 

1  Ki.22.  43  and  burn  inceuse  yet  in  the  high  places 

2  Ki.12.    3  aud  burnt  incense  in  the  high  places 

14.  4  and  burnt  incense  on  the  high  places 

15.  4  aud  burnt  inceuse  still  on  the  high  places 

15.  35  and  burnt  iuceuse  still  iu  the  high  places 

16.  4  aud  burnt  inceuse  in  the  high  places 

17.  11  they  burnt  iuceuse  in  all  the  high  places 
iS.    4  the  children  of  Israel  did  burn  inceuse 

22.  17  andhave  burned  inceuse  uuto  other  gods 

23.  5  to  burn  incense  in  the  high  places  in  the 
23.  5  them  also  that  burned  incense  unto  Baal 
23.    8  where  the  priests  had  burned  inceuse 

2  Ch.25.  14  bowed  down,  .and  burned  inceuse  uuto 
28.    4  and  burnt  incense  iu  the  high  places 
28.  25  he  made  high  places  to  burn  iuceuse  uuto 

Isa.  65.    3  aud  burnetii  incense  upon  altars  of  brick 
65.    7  which  have  burnt  inceuse  upon  the 

Jer.     1.  16  and  have  burned  incense  unto  other  gods 

7.  9  and  burnt  incense  uuto  Baal,  and  walk 
11.  13  ye  set  up  altars.,  to  burn  incense  untoB 

18.  15  they  have  burned  incense  to  vanity 

19.  4  aud  have  burued  incense  in  it  unto  other 
19.  13  they  have  burned  incense  unto  all  the 
44.    3  to  anger,  in  that  they  went  to  burn  inceuse 
44.    5  to  burn  no  incense  uuto  other  gods 

44.    8  buruiug  incense  unto  other  gods  in  the 
44.  15  their  wives  had  burned  iDceuse  uuto 
44.  17  burn  iuceuse  unto  the  queen  of  heaven 
44.  18  we  left  off  to  burn  inceuse  to  the  queen 
44.  19  we  burned  incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven 
44.  21  The  incense  that  ye  burned  in  the  cities 
44.  23  Because  ye  have  burned  incense,  and 
44.  25  we  have  vowed,  to  burn  incense  to  the 

Hos.   4.    1  burn  incense  upon  the  hills,  under  oaks 
11.    2  they  went,  .aud  burued  inceuse 

Hab.   1.  16  they  sacrifice,  .aud  burn  inceuse 

2.7b  cause  to  burn,  (as)  incense,  "it?i?  qatar,  5. 
Exodso.    7  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  sweet  incense 

30.   8  at  even,  he  shall  burn  incense  upon  it 
1  Ki.   3.    3  he  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense 

9.  25  he  burnt  License  upon  the  altar  that 

11.  8  all  his  strauge  wives,  which  burnt  incense 

12.  33  he  offered  upon  the  altar,  and  burnt  inc. 

13.  1  Jeroboam  stood  by  the  altar  to  burn  inc. 
15.    2  priests  of  the  high  places  that  burn  inc. 

1  Ch.  23.  13  he  and  his  sons  for  ever,  to  burn  iuceuse 

2  Ch.  26.  16  burn  incense  upon  the  altar  of  incense 

26.  iS  priests,  .are  consecrated  to  burn  incense 

26. 18  Uzziah.  .burn  incense  unto  the  Lord 

26. 19  aud  (had)  a  censer  in'his  hand  to  burn  in 

28.  3  he  burnt  iucense  in  the  valley  of  the  son 

29.  11  that  ye  should  minister,  .and  burn  inc. 
32.  12  worship  before  one  altar,  and  burn  incense 
34.  23  they  have  burned  incense  unto  other  gods 

Jer.  48.  35  and  him  that  burneth  incense  to  his  gods 

Hos.    2.  13  visit  upon  her  the  days.,  she  burned  inc. 
3.  To  offer  incense,  Bvfitda  thumiao. 
'     Luke  1.   9  his  lot  was  to  burn  incense  when  he 
4.7b  cause  to  remember,  ~£]  zakar,  5. 

Isa.  66.    3  he  that  burneth  incense,  (as  if)  he  blessed 
BURN  sacrifice,  to  — 
To  causz  to  burn  (as)  incense,  "ia|3  qatar,  5. 

2CI1.  2.    6  save  only  to  bum  sacrifice  before  him  ? 

BTJRN  up,  to  — 

l.To  eat,  consume,  ^3x  akal. 

2  Ki.    1.  14  and  burnt  up  the  two  captains  Of  the 

2.To  cause  to  flame,  037  lahat,  3. 

Psa.  97.    3  and  burnetii  up  his  enemies  round  ab. 

106. 18  the  flame  burned  up  the  wicked 
Mai.   4.    1  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up 

3.  To  burn,  rfijp  saraph. 

Psa.   74.    8  burned  up  all  the  synagogues 
Eze.  23.  47  and  burn  up  their  houses  with  fire 

4.7b  blow  in,  bum,  ifiirpTjOo}  empretho. 

]\Iatt22.    7  the  king  heard,  .and  burned  up  their  city 

5.  To  burn  down,  KaraKaioi  katakaio. 

Matt.  3.  12  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with 

2  Pe.    3.  10  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up 

Rev.    8.    7  the  third  part  of  trees  was  burnt  up 

8.  7  and  all  green  grass  was  burnt  up 


BTJRN  upon,  to  — 

A  place  for  burning  incense  on,  Taga  miqtar. 

Exod3o.    1  make  an  altar  to  burn  incense  upon 
BTJRN  utterly,  to  — 
To  bum  doion,  KaraKaiv  katakaio. 

Rev.  18.    8  she  shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire 

BURNED  or  burnt,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  consumed,  iy*i  baar. 

Exod  3.  3  I  will.  .see.  .why  the  bush  is  not  burnt 
Judgis.  14  his  arms  became  as  flax  that  was'' burnt 
Isa.  43.    2  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burned 

2.7b  be  hot,  heated,  "iin  charar. 

Job  30.  30  my  bones  are  burned  with  heat 

Isa.  24.  6  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  burned 

3.  To  become  hot,  heated,  TV)  charar,  2. 

rsa.102.    3  my  bones  are  burned  as  an  hearth 
Jer.     6.  29  The  bellows  are  burnt,  the  lead 
Eze.  15.    4  the  ends,  .the  midst  of  it  is  burnt 

15.    5  fiie  hath  devoured  it,  and  it  is  burned? 

24.  10  spice  it  well,  aud  let  the  bones  be  burnt 

4.7b  burn,  nx;  yatsath. 

Isa.  33.  12  (as)  thorns  cut  up  shall  they  be  burned 

Jer.  49.    2  her  daughters  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

51.  58  her  high  gates  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

5.  To  be  burnt,  ns;  yatsath,  2. 

Neh.    1.    3  and  the  gates,  .are  burnt  with  fire 

2.  17  and  the  gates,  .are  burnt  with  fire 
Jer.     2.  15  cities  are  burned  without  inhabitant 

6.7b  be  marked,  rna  kavoh,  2. 

Prov.  6.  28  hot  coals,  and  his  feet  not  be  burnt? 

Isa.   43.    2  when  thou  walkest.  .shalt  not  be  burned 
7.  To  lift  up,  n£j  nasa. 

Nah.   1.   5  and  the  earth  is  burned  at  his  presence 
S.Tb  go  up>,  n?%  alah. 

Lev.    2.  12  but  they  shall, not  be  burnt  on  the  altar 

9.  To  scorch,  ny  tsarab,  2. 

Eze.  20.  47  all  faces  from  the  south . .  shall  be  burned 

10.  To  be  made  to  bum  (as)  incense,  *ibj3  qatar,  6. 
Lev.    6.  22  a  statute,  .it  shall  be  wholly  burnt 

11.  To  burn,  be  burned,  ?{%?  saraph. 

Lev.  20. 14  they  shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  both  he  and 
1  Sa.  30.   3  came  to  the  city,  and,  behold,  .burnt 

1  Ki.  13.    2  and  men's  bones  shall  be  burnt  upon  thee 
Neh.   4.    2  the  heaps  of.  .rubbish  which  are  burnt? 
Psa.  So.  16  burnt  with  fire,  .cut  down  :  they  perish 
Isa.      1.    7  desolate,  your  cities  (are)  burnt  with 

12.To  be  burnt,  rpV  saraph,  2. 

Gen.  3S.  24  Bring  her  forth,  aud  let  her  be  burnt 
Lev.    4. 12  ashes  are  poured  out  shall  he  be  burnt 

6.  30  sin  offering,  .it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire 

7.  17  thejremainder  of  the  flesh,  .shall  be  burnt 
7. 19  the  flesh,  .it  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

13.  52  leprosy  ;  it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire 
19.    6  if  ought  remain.,  it  shall  be  burnt  in  the 
21.    9  profane th.  .she  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
Josh.  7.  15  he.  .shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  he  and  all 

2  Sa.  23.    7  they  shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire  in 
1  Ch.14.  12  commandment,  and  they  were  burned 
Prov.  6.  27  take  fire,  .and  his  clothes  not  be  burnt? 
Jer.   38.  17  this  city  shall  not  be  burnt  with  fire 
Mic.    1.    7  all  the  hires  thereof  shall  be  burnt  with 

13. 7b  be  burned,  fpijp  saraph,  4. 

Lev.  10. 16  Moses,  .sought,  .and,  behold.it was  burnt 

14.  To  bum,  Kaico  kaio. 

John  15.    6  cast  (them)  into.  .fire,  .they  are  burned 
1  Co  13.    3  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned 

15. A  burning,  Kav<ris  kausis. 

Heb.  6.  8  beareth  thorns.,  whose  end(is)to  be  burned 

BURNED,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  burn,  ipjjp  saraph. 

Jer.   38.  23  thou  shalt  cause  this  city  to  be  burnt 

BURNED  up,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  burned,  n^;  yatsath,  2. 

Jer.    9.  10  they  are  burnt  up,  so  that  none  can 
9. 12  the  land  perisheth  (and)  is  burnt  up 

2. A  burning,  naife'  serephah. 

Isa.  64.  11  Our  holy,  .house,  .is  burnt  up  with  fire 

BURNETH,  that  — 

A  marked  place,  rr\3Q  mikvah. 

Lev.  13.  24.the  quick  (flesh)  that  burneth  bavea 

BURNING  — 
l.Fire,  c>N  esh. 

Gen.  15. 17  and  a  burning  lamp  that  passed  between 

2.  To  pursue,  burn  after,  pbi  dalaq. 

Prov.  26.  23  Burning  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  Care) 
Dan.    7.   9  his  wheels  (as)  burning  fire 

3.  To  bum  steadily,  "ip*  yeqad. 

Dan.  3.    6  cast  into  the  midst  of  a  burning  fiery 

3.  n  cast  into  the  midst  of  a  burning  fiery 
3.  15  cast.,  into  the  midst  of  a  burning  fiery 

3. 17  God.. is  able  to  deliver  us  from,  .burning 
3.  20  cast  (them)  into  the  burning  fiery  furn. 
3.:2T  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  burning  fiery 
3,  23  into  the  midst  of  the  burning  fiery  turn. 
3.  26  to  the  mouth  otthe  burning  fiery  furnace 


BURNING 


130 


BURNT    OFFERING 


,  wound  for  wound 


A.Steadily  burning,  nip:  yeqedah. 

Dan.    7. 11  his  body  destroyed. .  given  to.  .burning  fi. 

5.-4  burning,  "rip?  yeqod. 

Isa.   10. 16  shall  kindle  a  burning  like  the  burning 

^.Marking,  n;i3  kcviyyah. 

Exod2i.  25  Burning  for  burning 

7.Marfc,  marking,  yz  hi. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead.,  well  set  hair  baldness.,  burning 

^.Steadily  burning,  l$D  moqed. 

Isa.  33. 14  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  ? 

9.  Steadily  burning,  *1pn  moqedah. 

Lev.    6.   9  because  of  the  burning  upon  the  altar  all 

10.  Mark,  m3D  inikvah. 

Lev  13.  24  flesh,  in  the  skin  whereof,  .a  hot  burning 
13-  25  it  (is)  a  leprosy  broken  out  of  the  burning 
13!  28  burning.,  an  inflammation  of  the  burning 

11. Scorching,  m~£  tsarebetk. 

Lev.  13.  23  (and)  spread  not,  it  (is)  a  burning  boil 
Prov.16.  27  in  his  lips  (there  is)  as  a  burning  fire 

12. Burning,  naiip  serephah. 

Lev.  10.   6  let  your  brethren,  .bewail  the  burning 
;Nunii6.  37  take  up  the  censers  out  of  the  burning 
19.    6  cast  (it)  into  the  midst  of  the  burning 
Dent29-  23  whole  land,  .brimstone,  .(and)  burning 
2  Ch.16.  14  they  made  a  very  great  burning  for  him 

21.  19  made  no  burning  for  him 

21. 19  like  the  burning  of  his  fathers 
Isa.     9.    5  shall  be  with  burning  (and)  fuel  of  fire 
Amos  4.  11  a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  burning 

13. Burning,  irvpaxrts 2mro~$is. 

Kev.  18.  9  when . .  shall  see  the  smoke  of  her  burning 
18. 18  cried  when.  .saw.  .smoke  of  her  burning 

BTTRNrN'G  ague  — 

Burning  ague  or  fever,  nrnp  qaddachatli. 

Lev.  26.  16  I  wiil  even  appoint,  .the  burning  ague 

BURNING  coal  — 

l.Buming  coal,  n?na  gaclideth. 

Prov.26.  21  (As)  coals  (are)  to  burning  coals,  and 
2. Flame,  burning  heat,  *]tgh  resheph. 

Hab.  3.    5  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet 

BURNING,  extreme  — 

Extreme  burning,  irnn  charchur. 

Deut28.  22  Lord  shall  smite,  .an  extreme  burning 

BTTRNLNG  heat  — 

Flame,  burning  heat,  r\v?i  resheph. 

Deut  32.  24  devoured  with  burning  heat,  and  with 

BURNING  lamp  — 
Lamp,  flame,  TS7  lappid. 

Job   41. 19  Out  of  his  mouth  go  burning  lamps 

BURNINGS  — 

Burnings,  rt'isn'V'P  misraphoth. 

Isa.   33. 12  the  people  shall  be  (as)  the  burnings  of 
Jcr.  34.    5  shalt  die  in  peace  ;  and  with,  .burnings 

BURNISHED  — 
Polished,  ^jj  qalal. 

Eze.    1,    7  they  sparkled  like  the  colour  of  burnished 
BURNT  — 
\.Emaciated,  dried  up,  mip  mazeh. 

Deut  32.  24  (They  shall  be)  burnt  with  hunger 
2.  Burning,  naTft/  serephah. 

Num  19.  17  they  shall  take  of  the  ashes  of  the  burnt 

Jer.   51.  25  will  make  thee  a  burnt  mountain 

BURNT,  that  were  — 
To  burn,  *]"£'  saraph. 

Numi6.  39  wherewith  they  that  were  burnt  had 
BURNT  OFFERING  — 

Burnt  offerings  as  well  as  "  meat  offerings,"  and  "peace 
offerings,"  were  mere  voluntary  offerings  (unlike  "  sin  " 
and  "trespass"  offerings,  which  were  compulsory), 
which,  however,  were  to  be  presented  in  a  uniform 
systematic  manner,  as  laid  down  in  Lev  i  -in  The 
first  three  express  generally  the  idea  of  "  homage  self- 
dedication,  and  thanksgiving,"  the  latter  two  that  of 
"propitiation."  The  animals  that  might  be  used  for 
burnt  offerings  might  bp  from  the  flock  or  herd,  or  from 
the  fowls,  and  were  to  be  entirely  burnt,  their  blood 
sprinkled  on  the  altar,  and  their  skins  given  to  the 
priest  for  clothing.  They  were  to  be  offered  every 
morning  and  evening,  every  sabbath  day,  the  first  day 
of  every  month,  the  seven  days  of  unleavened  bread, 
and  the  da3  of  Atonement.  They  were  offered  at  the 
consecration  nf  thepnests,  Levites,  kings,  sacred  places, 
the ^purification  of  women,  Nazarites,  lepers,  after- 
beforewar,  and  with  sounding  of  trumpets  at 

l.Thal  Which  goes  up,  ffy^  n'^y  olah,  alah. 

den.    8.  20  and  offered  burnt' offerines  on  the  altar 

22.  2  and  offer  him  there  for  a  burnt  offering 
22.    3  and  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt  offering 
22..  6  Abraham  took  the  wood  of  theburnt  oft 
22*   I  lmVvl,i',r  C18)  the  ,;ini1'  fl,r  a  burnt  offer. 
=3.   8  God  will  provide.,  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  off 


Gen.  22. 

Exodio. 
18. 
20. 
24. 
29, 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
3* 
32 
35- 
38. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
46. 

Lev.    1. 


14. 
14. 
14. 

14. 

I5- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
22. 

23- 

23- 

23- 

Num.  6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 


28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
Deut  12. 


13  and  offered  him  up  for  a  burnt  offering 
25  give  us  also  sacrifices  and  burnt  off  erings 
12  Jethro..took  a  burnt  offering.. sacrifices 

24  and  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  burnt  offer. 

5  sent  young  men . .  which  offered  burnt  off. 
18  it  (is)  a  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord 

25  burn(them)upon  the  altar  for  aburntoff. 
42  a  continual  burnt  offering  throughout 

28  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  all  his 
9  And  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  all 

6  they  rose,  .and  offered  burnt  offerings 
16  The  altar  of  burnt  offering,  with  his 

1  he  made  the  altar  of  burnt  offering 

6  thou  shalt  set  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offer. 
10  anoint  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 

29  he  put  the  altar  of  burnt  offering 

29  and  offered  upon  it  the  burnt  ottering 

4  put.  .hand  upon  the  head  of  theburnt  off. 

6  And  he  shall  flay  the  burnt  offering 

7  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of .  .burnt  off. 
10  burn  them  upon  the  altar  of.  .burnt  off. 

18  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of.  .burnt  off. 

24  where  they  kill  the  burnt  offering  before 

25  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  off. 
25  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of  the  burnt  off. 

29  slay,  .sin offering,  .place  of  the  burnt  off. 

30  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  off. 

33  in  the  place  where  they  kill  theburnt  off. 

34  upou  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  off. 

7  and  the  other  for  a  burnt  offering 

10  shall  offer  the  second  (for)  a  burnt  offering 
9  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering 

9  It  (is)  the  burnt  offering,  because  of  the 

10  the  fire  hath  consumed  with  the  burnt  off. 
12  and  lay  the  burnt  offering  in  order  upon 
25  In  the  place  where  the  burnt  offering  is 

2  In  the  place  where  they  kill  the  burnt  off. 

8  the  priest  that  off  ere  th  any .  .burnt  offer. 
8  the  priest  shall  have,  .skin  of.  .burnt off. 

37  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering 
iS  he  brought  the  ram  for  the  burnt  offering 
28  burnt,  .on  the  altar  upou  the  burnt  offer. 

2  Take  thee,  .a  ram  for  a  burnt  offering 

3  a  lamb .  .without  blemish,  for  a  burnt  off 

7  Go.  .and  offer,  .thy  burnt  offering 

12  And  he  slew  the  burnt  offering ;  and  A. 

13  And  they  presented  the  burnt  offering 

14  and  burnt  (them)upon  the  burnt  offering 
16  he  brought  the  burnt  offering,  and  offered 

22  from  offering  of.  .the  burnt  offering 

24  consumed  upon  the  altar  the  burnt  offer. 

19  Behold,  .they  offered,  .their  burnt  offer. 
6  she  shall  bring  a  lamb.,  for  a  burnt  offer. 

8  the  one  for  the  burnt  offering,  and  the 

13  where  he  shall  kill  the.  .burnt  offering 

19  afterward  he  shall  kill  the  burnt  offering 

20  the  priest  shall  offer  the  burnt  offering 
22,  31  one.  .sin  offering,  .other  a  burnt  off. 
15,  30  one.  .sin  offering,  .other,  .a  burnt  off. 

3  offering,  and  a  ram  for  a  burnt  offering 

5  offering,  and  one  ram  for  a  burnt  offering 
24  come  forth,  and  offer  his  burnt  offering 
24  and  the  burnt  offering  of  the  people 

8  that  offereth  a  burnt  offering  or  sacrifice 
18  which  they  will  offer,  .for  a  burnt  offer. 

12  for  a  burnt  offering  unto  the  LORD 

18  they  shall  be  (for)  a  burnt  offering  unto 
37  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  meat  offering 

11  one.,  a  sin  offering.,  other.,  a  burnt  offer. 

14  one  he  lamb,  .for  a  burnt  offering 

16  his  sin  offering,  and  his  burnt  offering 
15,  21  one  lamb,  .for  a  burnt  offering 

[So  in  v.  27,  33,  39, 45,  51,  57,  63(  69,  75, 81.] 
87  All  the  oxen  for  the  burnt  offering  (were) 

12  and  the  other  (for)  a  burnt  offering,  unto 

10  with  the  trumpets  over  your  burnt  offer. 
3  will  make  an  offering  by  fire,  .aburntoff. 

5  shalt  thou  prepare  with  the  burnt  offer. 
8  when  thou  preparest.  .(for)  a  burnt  offer. 

24  the  congregation  shall  offer,  .a  burnt  off. 
3  Stand  by  thy  burnt  offering,  and  1  will 

15  Stand  here  by  thy  burnt  offering,  while 

17  he  stood  by  his  burnt  offering,  and  the 

3  two  lambs,  .(for)  a  continual  burnt  offer. 

6  a  continual  burnt  offering,  which  was 

10  (This  is)  the  burnt  offering  of  every  sabfo. 

10  beside  the  continual  burnt  offering,  and 

11  yc  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering  unto  the 

13  (for)  a  burnt  offering  of  a  sweet  savour 

14  this  (is)  the  burnt  offering  of  every  mouth 

15  beside  the  continual  burnt  offering,  and 

19  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire  (for)  a  burnt  offer. 

23  Ye  shall  offer  these  beside  the  burnt  off. 

23  which  (is)  for  a  continual  burnt  offering 

24  it  shall  be  offered  beside  the.. burnt  off. 
27  ye  shall  offer  the  burnt  offering  for  a 

31  Ye  shall  offer  (them)  beside,  .burnt  off. 

2  ve  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering  for  a  sweet 
6  Beside  the  burnt  offering  of  the  month 
6  and  the  daily  burnt  offering 
8  But  ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering  unto 
11  and  the  continual  burnt  offering 

13  ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering,  a  sacrifice 

16  beside  the  continual  burnt  offering,  his 
19,  22,  25,  28  beside  the  continual  burnt  off. 
31,  34,  38  beside  the  continual  burnt  offering 
36  ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering,  a  sacrifice 
39  for  your  burnt  offerings,  and  for  your 

6  thither  ye  shall  bring  your  burnt  offerings 
11  your  burnt  offerings,  and  your  sacrifices 

13  Take  heed,  .thou  offer  not  thy  burnt  off. 

14  there  thou  shalt  offer  thy  burnt  offerings 


iSa. 


2Sa. 


iKi. 


aKi. 


1  Ch. 


2  Ch. 


Deut  12.  27  And  thou  shalt  offer  thy  burnt  offerings 
27.    6  thou  shalt  offer  burnt  offerings  thereon 

Josh.  8.  31  and  they  offered  thereon  burnt  offerings 
22.  23  or  if  to  offer  thereon  burnt  offering  or 
22.  26  not  for  burnt  offering,  nor  for  sacrifice 
22.  27  before  him  with  our  burnt  offerings 
22.  28jwhich  our  fathers  made, not  for  burnt  off. 
22.  29  to  build  an  altar  for  burnt  offerings 

Judgn.  31  and  I  will  offer  it  up  for  a  burnt  offering 
13.  16  and  if  thou  wilt  offer  a  burnt  offering 
13.  23  he  would  not  have  received  a  burnt  off. 
zo.  26  and  offered  burnt  eff erings.  .before  the 
21.    4  and  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace 
6.  14  and  offered  the  kine  a  burnt  offering 

6.  15  and  the  men  . .  offered  burnt  offerings 

7.  9  and  offered  ..  a  burnt  offering  wholly  unto 
7.  10  Samuel  was  offering  up  the  burnt  offering 

10.    8  I  will  come. .  to  offer  burnt  offerings 
13.    g  Bring  hither  a  burnt  offering  to  me,  and 
13.    9  And  he  offered  the  burnt  offering 
13.  10  made  an  end  of  offering  the  burnt  offering 
13.  12  I  forced  myself .  .andofteredaburntoffer. 

15.  22  Bath  the  Lord,  .delight  in  burnt  offerings 
6.  17  and  David  offered  burnt  offerings  and 
6.  18  made  an  end  of  offering  burnt  offerings 

24.  24  neither  will  I  offer  burnt  offerings  unto 
24.  25  and  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace 
3.    4  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  did  Solomon 
3.  15  offered  up  burnt  offerings,  and  offered 
8.  64  for  there  he  offered  burnt  offerings 

8.  64  altar,  .(was) too  little  to  receive  the  bt.off. 

9.  25  in  a  year  did  Solomon  offer  burnt  offering 
3.  27  and  offered  him.  .a  burnt -offering  upon 

5.  17  thy  servant  will,  .offer  neither  burnt  off. 
10.  24  when  they  went  in  to  offer,  .burnt  offer. 
10.  25  made  an  end  of  offering  the  burnt  offer. 
16.  13  And  he  burnt  bis  burnt  offering  and  his 
16.  15  burn  the  morning  burnt  offering,  and  the 
16.  15  with  the  burnt  offering  of  all  the  people 
16.  15  upon  it  all  the  blond  of  the  burnt  offering 

6.  49  offered  upon  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offer. 
16.    2  made  an  end  of  offering,  .burnt  offering 

16.  40  To  offer  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord 
16.  40  upon  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 
2i.  23  I  give,  .the  oxen,  .for  burnt  offerings 
21.  24  nor  offer  burnt  offerings  without  cost 
21.  26  and  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace 
21.  26  by  fire  upon  the  altar  of  burnt  offering 

21.  29  and  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 

22.  1  this  (is)  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering  of 
29.  21  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord 

6  and  offered  a  thousand  burnt  offerings 
4  and  for  the  burnt  offerings  morning  and 

6  things  as  they  offered  for  the  burnt  offer, 
and  consumed  the  burnt  offering  and  the 

7  for  there  he  offered  burnt  offerings 
7  was.uot  able  to  receive  the  burnt  offerings 

12  Then  Solomon  offered  burnt  offerings 
1 8  to  offer  the  burnt  offerings  of  the  Lord 
,  14  they  offered  burnt  offerings  in  the  house 
7  not  burned  incense  nor  offered  burnt  off. 
29.  18  We  have  cleansed,  .the  altar  of  burnt  off. 
29.  24  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sin  offering 
29.  27  to  offer  the  burnt  offering  upon  the  altar 
29.  27  And  when  the  burnt  offering  began,  the 
29.  28  (this  continued)  until  the  burnt  offering 
29.  31  as  many  as  were  of  a  free  heart,  burnt  off. 
29.  32  And  the  number  of  the  burnt  offerings 
29.  32  all  these,  .for  a  burnt  offering 
29.  34  so  that  could  not  flay  all  the  burnt  offer. 
29.  35  And  also  the  burnt  offerings  (were)  in 

29.  35  the  drink  offerings  for.  .burnt  offerings 

30.  15  brought  in  the  burnt  offerings  into  the 

2  priests  and  the  Levites  for  burnt  offerings 

3  the  king's  portion,  .for  the  burnt  offer. 
3  the  morning  and  evening  burnt  offerings 
3  and  the  burnt  offering  for  the  sabbaths 

12  And  they  removed  the  burnt  offerings 
.  14  priests,  .in  offering  of  burnt  offerings 
.  16  to  offer  burnt  offerings  upon  the  altar  of 

2  buildedthe  altar,  .to  offer  burnt  offerings 

3  they  offered  burnt  offerings  thereon  unto 

3  (even)  burnt  offerings  morning,  .evening 

4  and.  .the  laily  burnt  offerings  by  number 
;  afterward,  .the  continual  burnt  offering 
6  began  they  to  offer  burnt  offerings  unto 
9  for  the  burnt  offerings  of  the  God  of 

.  35  the  children,  .offered  burnt  offerings 
.  35  all  {this  was)  a  burnt  offering  unto  the 
.  10.  33  for  the  continual  burnt  offering  of  the 
1.    5  offered  burnt  offerings,  .the  number  of 

42.  8  offer  up  for  yourselves  a  burnt  offering 
40.   6  burnt  offering  and  sin  offering  hast  thou 

50.  8  I  will  not  reprove  thee  for . .  thy  burnt  off. 

51.  16  thou  delightest  not  in  burnt  offering 
51.  19  burnt  offering  and  whole  burnt  offering 
56.  13  go  into  thy  house  with  burnt  offerings 

1.  11  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams 
40. 16  the  beasts  thereof,  .for  a  burnt  offering 

43.  23  Thou  hast  not  brought.,  thy  burnt  offering 
56.  7  their  burnt  offerings  and  their  sacrifices 
61.    8  I  hate  robbery  for  burnt  offering  ;  and  I 

.  20  your  burnt  offerings  (are)  not  acceptable 
.  21  Put  your  burnt  offerings  unto  yoursacri. 
.  22  I  spake  not.  .concerning  burnt  offerings 
.  12  and  when  they  offer  burnt  offering  and 
26  And  they  shall  come,  bringing  burnt  off. 

5  to  burn  their  sons  with  fire  (for)  burnt  off. 
18  want  a  man  before  me  to  offer  burnt  off. 

40.  38  where  they  washed  the  burnt  offering 
40.  39  to  slay  thereon  the  burnt  offering  and 
40.  42  the  four  tables,  .for  the  burnt  offering 


4- 

7- 

7- 
7- 
8. 

23. 

24. 

29. 


3*- 
31- 
31- 
31- 

35- 

35- 

„        35- 

Ezra   3. 

3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 

3- 
6. 


Neh. 
Job 


Tsa. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Eze. 


BURNT    t?pBRING 


131 


BUT 


-Eae.  40.  42  wherewith  I    ,       .,  '  ,        t    „    . 
43- 18  to  otter  burL816™  H»*imit  offering 

43-  =4  they  shaUo?'terinSs  hereon,  and  to 
«.  4  priests  shall*?6"1  "Py  a  burnt  ottering 

44-  «  they  shall  "  ,, e  {our  ™™t  offerings 
45.  15  for  a  meaty  the  l"'™t  offering  and 

45-  17  the  prince  "l",?'  a,?d  &rabFni  offer 
45-i7heshallpral't(t< 


45-2 
45 


the  burnt  offering 


3  seven  days'0,'  1      """"  <"»""S. 

shall  he  I  >    snail  prepare  a  burnt  o 
2  the  m.je-i5ccording  to  the  burnt  offt 


46.    2  the  priests"",^"* 

46.   4  And  the  b1?11  Pre.Pale  his  burnt  offer. 

46. 12  tbeprinc?*,oiIermB- -six  lambs 

46.  .2  he  shall  p  all  prepare  a    burnt  offering 
46.  13  Thou  shaYm;e  hls  burnt  °"e™S„    . 
46  it  every  nioi,aiIy  PvePare  a  ln,rnt  offering 
Hos.    6.   6thekuovvn8>(for)aco"timlalbm'"ton 


Amos  5.  22  Though 


,lge.  .more  than  burnt  offer. 


6    6  come  befoner  me  Durnt  offerings  and 
,     '  1  him  with  burnt  offerings 

-.11  hale  burnt  otlerin  .,         /  r.  7  7      ,- 

Heb.  io.   6  Iu'burntv'5*-.0Ka,'TQf,a  ^okauioma. 
10.   8  SacriHee  '"  '""s  and  CfacnflcesJ if  or  sin 

■„_,„ d  offering  and  burnt  offerings 

BURNT  OFFERING,  to,    _ 

I.  Whole,  complete,  ^T  ,7 

Psa.  si.  i9  withbun  „".•  ,     .    ,    ,        .    „ 

n  tt.j    j    7  -        offering,  and  whole  burnt  off. 

J..s\  Iwle  burnt  offeni,   ,.         ,  777,- 

JIarki2.  7,  is  iuore  '  oAoKavroifia.  holokautoma. 


12.  33  is  more 


lau  all  whole  burnt  offerings 


BTTRNT  SACRIFICE 

That  which  noes  upju,    7   , 

Ex-od3o.    g \-e  sha)1^  ola]\  ,        .         .„ 

Lev.    1     ?  if  ],js  (  offer  no  strange.. burnt  sacrifice 
1.   o  on  the  eriig(ue) a burnt  sacrifice  of  the 
1.'  10  if  his  cMal'»  (t0  be)  a  burnt  sacrifice,  an 
j  j,  |(.  /js\  a*ring  (be),  .for  a  burnt  sacrifice 
1!  14  if  the  br1™*  sa9^ilic?'  an  offering  made 
1.  17  it  Cis)  a  1      sacnnce  for  bis  offering 
"'    s  upon  tl  UIU^  sacrince»  au  offering  made 
3"  2i  a  buru^  Durnt  sacrifice,  which  (is)  upon 
9.  17  beside  sacl'ince  f°r  a  sweet  savour 
Num  23'    6  lo  he  ;ne  DUrnt  sacrifice  of  the  morning 
Judg.  6]  26  offer  3tood  by  his  burnt  sacrifice,  he 
2  Sa%4  2'  behole'uunlt  sacrifice  with  the  wood  of 
1 IU.  18  3"  with  T-  -oxe11  f°l"  burnt  sacrifice,  and 

18  38  the  firater'  aua  Pour  (it)  on.. burnt  sac. 
2  Ki.  16  iz  the  Ki"'-  .consumed  the  burnt  sacrifice 
1  Ch!  16    1  thev  clg  3  hurnt  sacrifice,  and  his  meat 

'23 '  31  to  offe^ered  ,jurut  sacrifices,  .peace  offer. 
2Ch.i^  11  thev  !■'  atl  burnt  sacrifices  unto  the  Lord 
Psa. '  20     3  Herat"11"11-  -uurut  sacrifices  and  sweet 
6(5,' 1  ■  X  wiUmuer-  au0-  accept  thy  burnt  sac. 
**  offer  unto  thee  burnt  sacrifices  of 

BURNT  SACRIFIC      ,.  , 
Whole,  perfect,  VlI  T^'f  ~ 

Deut  33.101/,    i?l««rt?t 
T>Tmi.m  /  '*e  burnt  sacrifice  upon  thine  altar 

BURST,  to — kid 

i.To  draw  «i'..a  ,.        „ 

Jer.    2.  20  I  haTr>  POJ  nathaq,  3. 

5    5  theave  broken  thy  yoke,  .burst  thy  bands 
30.    8  I  wfe  have  altogether.  .burst  the  bonds 
Nah.   1.  13  and^1  break,  .and  will  burst  thy  bonds 
o  77T„         7*1         I  will  burst  thy  bouds  in  sunder 
A 10  rend,  burst,   ,,  ,  _ 

.Mark  2.  22  else'  P1T""7"  rhegnumi. 

Luke  5.  37  else'  tbe  new  wine  doth  burst  the  bottles 

„ '  j  the  new  wine  will  burst  the  bottles 

BURST  asunder,  b_ 

To  sound,  ring,  if  , 

Acts    1.  18  fal    break;  Kacncaj  Lasko. 

_TT^ '  nling  headlong,  he  burst  asunder  in  the 

BURST  out,  to  -1, 
To  burst  thrnuir, 

Prov.  3  lotliV*'  \~<3  l>ai-ats. 

"K  presses  shall  burst  out  with  uew  wine 
BURST,  to  be  reail 
To  be  cU ft,  rentf*  to  7~      n 
Job  32.  to  it  i'i  W?  oaqa,  2. 

_m rs  ready  to  burst  like  new  bottles 

BURSTING—    .u 

A  breaking,  ftn 

Isa.  30.  14  tlil  9?  rnekiltah. 
__  ,.et"e  shall  not  be  found  in  the  bursting 

BLIKY,  to —       ~i 

l.Tobunj,  -uf  U 

Cen.2j.   4ti,  5  qaoar. 

23.    6  i.v  -iat  I  nKiy  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight 
23.    6  bi-n  the  choice  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy 
23.    8  th"  lt  ^a*  tnnu  inayest  bury  thy  dead 
23.  n  giir.at  I  should  bury  my  dead  out  of  my 
23.  13  ta    ve  I  ^  tnet :  bury  thy  dead 
23,  i5  avj  jike  (it)  of  me,  and  I  will  bury  my  dead 
23,  19  a  l  hat  (is)  that.. bury  therefore  thy  dead 
25.    n  y  ^'fter  this,  Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife 
35!  2y  lnt*is  sons  Isaac  and  Ishmael  buried  him 
47"  ?9  Ift  )is  sons  ^sau  Sod  Jacob  buried  him 

47-  3°  aidHiry  me  not'  J  p''ay  tI,ee'  iu  E"yPfc 

48.  7  alu,lKl  bury  me  in  their  burying  rjl»ce 

49.  29  b     ,Kl  I  buried  her  there  iu  the  way  of 
49.  31  1  Dj'ury  me  with  my  fathers  iu  the  cave 

49.  31  ttca,here  tlieY  buried  Abraham  and  Sarah 

50.  s  i'     ^ere  they  buried  Isaac,  .there  I  buried 
so>    5  j  m^w  my  grave,  .there  shalt  thou  bury  me  • 
50.    6  J      e*  *ue  go  up,  I  pray  thee,  and  bury  my 
50.    7  ^-w^haroah  said,  Go  up  and  bury  thy  father 
50.  13  l.y  l\ud  Joseph  went  up  to  bury  his  father 
50.  14  c  7  "nied  him  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of 

Num  1 1  3.  vrt  Joseph  returned,  .after  he  hadburied  his 


Deut2r.  23  t3  t^ecause  there  they  buried  the  people 
34.    6  vyJlihou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that 

he  buried  him  iu  a  valley  in  the  land  of 


Josh  24.  30  they  buried  him  in  the  border  of  bis 

24.  32  bones  of  Joseph,  .burled  they  in  Shechem 
24.  33  buried  him  iu  a  hill  (that  pertained  to) 

Judg.  2.    9  they  buried  him  in  the  border  of  his 

16.  31  buried  him  between  Zorah  and  Eshtaol 

1  Sa.  25.    1  buried  him  in  his  house  at  Ram  ah 

28.   3  Israel  had  lamented  him,  and  buried  him 

31.  13  buried  (them)  under  a  tree  at  Jabesh 

2  Sa.   2.    4  the  men  of  Jabesh-gilead.  buried  Saul 

2.    5  kindness.. unto  Saul,  and  have  buried  him 

2.  32  buried  ,him  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  father 

3.  32  And  they  buried  Abner  iu  Hebron 

4.  12  took  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth,  and  buried 

21.  14  the  bones,  .buried  they  in  the  country  of 

1  Ki.  2.  31  Do  as  he  hath  said,  .and  bury  him 

13.  29.  the  old  prophet  came,  .to  bury  him 
13.  31  it  came  to  pass,  after  he  had  buried  him 

13.  31  bury  me  in  the  sepulchre  wherein  the 

14.  13  Israel  shall  mourn  for  him,  and  bury  him 

14.  18  they  buried  him  ;  and  all  Israel  mourned 

15.  8  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 

22.  37  and  they  buried  the  king  in  Samaria 

2  Ki.  9.  10  dogs  shall  eat  J.  ..and.. none  to  bury  (her) 

9.  28  buried  him  in  his  sepulchre  with  his 
9.  34  see  now  this  cursed  (woman),  and  bury 
9.  35  they  went  to  bury  her ;  but  they  found 
10.  35  and  they  buried  him  iu  Samaria 

12.  21  they  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the 

13.  9  and  they  buried  him  in  Samaria  :  and 
13.  20  And  -Elisha  died,  and  thej  buried  him 

13.  21  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  were  burying  a 

15.  7  they  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the 
21.  26  he  was  buried  in  his  sepulchre  in  the 

23.  30  and  buried  him  in  his  own  sepulchre 

1  Ch.io.  12  buried'theirboues  undertheoak  in  Jabesh 

2  Ch.  9.  31  he  was  buried  iu  the  city  of  David  his 

14.  1  and  they.buried  him  iu  the  city  of  David 

16.  14  they  buried  him  iu  his  owu  sepulchres 

21.  20  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 

22.  9  when  they  had  slain  him,  they  buried 

24.  16,  25  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 

24.  25  buried  him  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the 

25.  28  buried  him  with  his  fathers  iu  the  city  of 

26.  23  they  buried  him  with  his  fathers 

27.  9  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 

28.  27  buried  him  in  the  city,  .in  Jerusalem 

32.  33  they  buried  him  in  the  chiefest  of  the 

33.  20  and  they  buried  him  in  his  own  house 
Psa.   79.  3  and  (there  was)  none  to  bury  (them) 
Jer.     7.  32  they  shall  bury  in  Tophet,  till  there  be 

19.  11  am?  they  shall  bury  (them)  iu  Tophet 
19.  11  till  (there  be)  no  place  to  bury 
Eze.  39.  11  there  shall  they  bury  Gog,  and  all  his 
39.  12  shall  the  house  of  Israel  be  burying  of 
39.  13  all  the  people  of  the  land  shall  bury 
3g.  15  till  the  buriers  have  buried  it  in  the 
2.  To  bury,  -nr?  qabar,  3. 

Num33.    4  For  the  Egyptians  buried  all .  .first-born 
i  Ki.ii.  15  Joab.  .was  gone  up  to  bury  the  slain 
Jer.  14.  16  and  they  shall  have  noue  to  bury  them 
Eze.  39.  14  passing  through  the  land,  to  bury  with 
Hos.   9.    6  gather  them  up,  Memphis  shall  bury 

3. To  entomb,  evraipidfa  entapJuazu. 

Johmg.  40  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury 
i.To  bury,  Bd-nroi  thaptn. 

Matt.  8.  21  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 

8.  22  Follow  me  ;  and  let  the  dead  bury  their 
14. 12  disciples,  .took  up  the  body,  and  buried 

Luke  9.  59  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 

9.  60  Jesus  said.  .Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead 
16.  22  the  rich  man  also  died,  and  was  buried 

Acts    5.    6  and  carried  (him)  out,  and  buried  2.  29. 
5.    9  the  feet  of  them  which  have  buried  thy 

5.  10  carrying,  .forth,  buried  (her)  by  her  hus. 
i  Co.  15.    4  that  he  was  buried,  and  that  he  rose 

BURY  in,  to  — 
Burial,  Ttxpr)  taplie. 

Matt27.    7  the  potter's  field,  to  bury  strangers  in 
BURYING  — 

All  nations  that  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
have  been  careful  to  preserve  the  remains  of  the  de- 
ceased as  long  as  possible,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ancient 
Egyptians  and  Jews,  Christians  and  Muhammedaus ; 
while  the  Hindoos  bum  them,  aud  the  Parsees  expose 
them  to  be  devoured  by  birds  of  prey. 

Entombment,  £pTa<piao[x6s  entaphiasmos. 

Marki4.   8  come,  to  anoint  my  body  to  the  burying 

John  12    7  against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath  she 
BURYING  place  — 
l.Burial,  grace,  fTV!2jp  qeburah. 

Gen.  47.  30  and  bury  me  in  their  burying  place 
2.Burial  place,  13J3  cpber. 

Gen.  23.   4  give  me  a  possession  of  a  burying  place 

23.  9,  20  for  a  possession  of  a  burying  place 
50.  13  for  a  possession  of  a  burying  place  of  E. 

Judgi6.  31  Zorah  and  Eshtaol,  iu  the  burying  place 
BUSK  — 
l.Thorny  bush,  rup  seneh. 

Exod.  3.    2  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush 
3.    2  the  bush  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush 
3.    3  I  will.  sec.  .why  the  bush  is  not  burnt 
3.    4  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the.  .bush 
Deut  33.  16  good  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush 
2.  Plant,  shrub,  rri?  siach. 

Job  30.   4  Who  cut  up  mallows  by  the  bushes 
30.    7  Among  the  bushes  they  brayed 


o.<  'oininmdable pastures^  Q'V^ru  naJmloliin. 

Isa.     7.  19  and  upon  all  thorns,  and  upon  all  bushes 

^.Bramble  bush,  fiaros  bates. 

Markj2.  26  how  in  the  bush  God  spake  uuto  him 
Luke2o.  37  even  Moses  showed  at  the  bush,  when  he 
Acts    7.  30  of  the  Lord  in  a  flame  of  fire  in  a  bush 

7.  35  Angel  which  appeared  to  him  in  the  bush 

BUSH,  bramble  — 

Bramble  bush,  pdros  balos. 

Luke  6.  44  nor  of  a  bramble  bush  gather  they  grapes 

BUSHEL  — 

A  [dry)  measure,  fj.6dt.Qs  modios. 

Matt.  5.  15  a  caudle,  and  put  it  under  a  bushel 
Mark  4.  21  Is  a  candle  brought,  .put  under  a  bushel 
Luke  11.  33  No  man.  .puttetli  (it),  .under  a  bushel 

EUSHY"  — 

Hanging,  flowing,  D'Wi^ri  tattaUim. 

Song  5.  11  his  locks  (are)  bushy,  (and)  black  as  a 

BUSINESS  — 

l.Word,  matter,  1^  ddbar, 

Deut  24.   5  neither,  .be  charged  with  any  business 
Josh.  2.  14  Our  life.,  if  ye  utter/ not  this  our  business 
2.  20  And  if  thou  utter  this  our  business,  then 
Judgi8.  7,  28  had  no  business  with  (any)  man 
1  Sa.  21.    2  The  king  hath  commanded  me  a  business 
21.    2  Let  no  man  know,  .of  the  business 
21.    8  becausetheking'sbusinessrequired haste 

2.Wm%  n^o  melal-ah. 

Gen.  39.  n'went  into  the  house  to  do  his  business 

1  Ch.26.  30  on  this  side  Jordan.. in  all  the  business 

2  Ch.13.  10  and  the  Levites.  .upon  (their)  business 

17.  13  he  had  much  business  in  the  cities  of  Ju. 

Neh.  11.  16  the  oversight  of  the  outward  business  of 
11.  22  the  singers,  .over  the  business  of  the 
13.  30  the  priests,  .every  one  in  his  business 

Esth.  3.   9  those  that  have  the  charge  of.  .business 

Psa.  107.  23  that  do  business  iu  great  waters 

Prov.22.  29  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business  ? 

Dan.   8.  27  I  rose  up,  and  did  the  king's  business 
3.  Work,  deed,  nc'j>;9  maaseh. 

1  Sa.  20. 19  when  the  business  was.,  and  shaltremain 
4. Travail,  ]",$)  inyan. 

Eccl.  5.    3  cometh  through,  .multitude  of  business 

8.  16  the  business  that  is  done  upon  the  earth 
5.  The  things  of,  Ta  ta. 

Luke  2.  49  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business? 
6. Deed,  business,  Trpuy/xa  ^J/'<7#??ia. 

Rom  16.    2  assist  her  in  whatsoever  business  she 
7. Speed,  drovS-fi  sjwude. 

Rom.12.  11  Not  slothful  in  business ;  fervent  in 
8. Use,  need,  necessity,  xpeia  chrric. 

Acts    6.    3  whom  we  may  appoint  over  this  business 
BUSINESS,  one's  own  — 
One's  ozon  things,  to.  YZia.  ta  idia. 

1  Th.  4. 11  that  ye  study .  .to  do  your  owu  business 
BUSY,  to  be  — 
To  do,  n)p%  asah. 

1  Ki  20.  40  as  thy  servant  was  busy  here  and  there 
BUSY  body  — 
Working  around,  over -working,  irepUpyos  pcrier. 

1  Ti.    s  13  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers,  .busy  bodies 

BUSY  body,  to  be  a  — 

To  work  all  around,  ireptepyti(ofidiperiergazo7}iai. 

2  Th.  3  n  working  not  at  all,  but  are  busy  bodies 

BUSY  body  in  other  men's  matters  — 
Overseer  of  another,  aXXorpiozTriaKOTTos. 

1  Te.   4  15  or  (as)  a  busy  body  mother  men's  matters 
BUT  — 

\.But,  "?pn  abal. 

2  Ch.  1 "  4  But  the  ark  of  God  had  David  brought 
Ezra  10.  13  But  the  people  (are)  many,  and  (it  is)  a 
Dan.  10.    7  but  a  great  quaking  fell  upon  them 

10.  21  But  I  will  shew  thee  that  which  is  notec 

2.  Yet,  nevertheless,  dS^n  idam. 

Gen  28.  19  but  the  name  of  that  city  (was).  .Luz 
1  Ki.20.  23  but'let  us  fight  against  them  in  the  plaii 
Job      1.  11  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  tone' 
2.    5  But  put  forth  thine  hand  .touch  his  bon 

11.  5  But  oh  that  God  would  speak,  aud  opei 

12.  7  But  ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall 

13.  4  But  ye  (are)  forgers  of  lies,  ye  (are)  all 

Z.Ouly,  Tjx  ah. 

Geu.  9.  4  But  flesh  with  the  life,  .the  blood  there( 
Judg.  7  19  aud  they  had  but  newly  set  the  watch 

A.Surely,  }?x  aken . 

Job.  32.  8  But  (there  is)  a  spirit  in  man:  and  th- 
Psa.  82.  7  But  ye  shall  die  like  men,  and  fall  like 
Zeph  3     7  but  they  rose  early,  (and)  corrupted  ali 

5.-4  ho,  f]X  aph. 

Psa.  44.   9  But  thou  hast  cast  off,  and  put  us  to 
Q.Only,  n*>x  eplies. 

Nuni23.'  13  thou  shalt  see  but  the  utmost  part  of 

7.  Except,  without,  ^3.  bilti. 

Gen.  21.  26  neither  yet  heard  I  (of  it),  but  to-day 


BUT 


^.Nevertheless,  D"]5  beram. 

Ezra  s.  13  But  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king 
Dan.    2.  2S  But  there.  .God  in  heaven  that  revealeth 

9.  Even,  also,  D3  gam. 

Job.  12.    3  But  I  have  understanding  as  well  as  you 

1 0.  That  which,  ^  di. 

Dan.   2.   9  But  if  ye  will  not  make  known  unto  me 

11.  Except,  ."All  zulah. 

1  Ki.  12.  20  there  was  none  that  followed .  .but  the 
Hos.[i3.    4  and  thou  shalt  know  no  god  but  me 

12.  For,  '?  ki. 

Gen.  17.  15  but  Sarah  (shall)  her  name  (be) 

13.  Therefore,  \nh  lahen. 

Ezra   5.  12  But'after  that  our  fathers  had  provoked 
Dan.   2.  30  But  for  (their)  sakes  that  shall 

11.  Y-',  ~':ll,   nil  oa. 

(-'Jen.  35.  16  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  come  to  Eph. 

1 5.  Only,  pi  ran. 

Exod  8.  29  but  let  not  Pharaoh  deal  deceitfully  any 
16.// not,  nVdn  imlo. 

Gen,  24.  38  But  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  father's  house 
1 7.  Now,  out,  further,  Se  etc. 

Matt.  1.  20  but  while  he  thought  on  these  things 
2.  19  But  when  Herod  was  dead,  behold,  an 

2.  22  But  when  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did 

3.  7  but  when  he  saw  many  of  the  Pharisees 
[This  particle  occurs  about  2700  times  in  N.  '£.] 

IS. But,  ctAAa  alia. 

Matt.  4.    4  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth. 

[This  particle  occurs  about  630  times  in  the  N".  T.] 
19.  For,  ydp  gar. 

1  Pe.   4.  15  But  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer 

2  Pe.    1.    9  But  he  that  laeketh  these  things  is  blind 
20. But,  tut  now,  Se  de. 

Matt.  5.  22  But  I  say  unto  you,  That  whosoever  is  an. 
{See also  10. 17, 33  ;  12.28,36;  13.16;  23.5;  26.  56;  etc.] 

21.  If  not,  ew  \ii\  can  me. 

Markio.  30  But  he  shall  receive  an  hundredfold  now 
John  5.  19  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but 
Gal.    2. 16  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith 

22.  If  not,  el  fxr]  ei  me. 

Matt.  5.  13  good  for  nothing,  but  to  be  cast  out 

11.  27  no  man  kuoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father 

12.  4  neither  for  them,  .but'  only  forthe  priests? 
12.  24  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  the  devils 

12.  39  but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas 

14.  17  We  have  here  but  five  loaves,  and  two 

15.  24  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep 

16.  4  there  shall  no  sign  be  given . .  but  the  sign 

17.  21  [this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer] 

19. 17  [there  is  none  good  but  one,  (that  is,)  God] 
21.  19  and  found  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves 
24.  36  angels  of  heaven,  but  my  Father  only 

Mark  2.    7  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only? 

2.  26  which  is  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the  pr. 
6.  4  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  but  in 
9.  29  This  kind  can  come  forth  by  nothing  but 

10. 18  (there  is)  none  good  but  one,  (that  is)  God 
11.  13  when  he  came  to  it,  he  found  nothing  but 

13.  32  Knoweth.  .neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father 
Luke  5.  21  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  alone? 

6.  4  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the 
11.  29  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  it,  but  the 

John  3.  13  but  he  that  came  down  from  heaven 

10.  10  The  thief  cometh  not,  but  for  to  steal 

14.  6  no  man  oometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by 
17.  12  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of 
19.  15  answered,  We  have  no  king  but  Cesar 

Acts  11.  19  preaching  the  word  to  none  but  unto  the 
Rom.  7.    7  Nay,  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law 

11.  15  what  (shall)  the  receiving,  .but  life  from 
13.    1  For  there  is  no  power  but  of  God  :  the 

13.  8  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one 
14. 14  but  to  him  that  esteemeth  any  tiling  to 

1  Co.    1.  14  that  I  baptized  none  of  you  but  Crispus 
2. 11  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  but 

7.  17  But  as  God  hath  distributed  to  every  man 

8.  4  and  that  (there  is)  none  other  God  but 
10.  13  but  such  as  is  common  to  man 

12.  3  no  man  can  say.,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
2C0.    2.    2  but  the  same  which  is  made  sorry  byme? 

12.    5  of  myself  I  will  not  glory,  but  in  mine 
Gal.    1.    7  but  there  be  some  that  trouble  you  and 
Eph.   4.    9  what  is  it  but  that  he  also  descended  first 
Phil.   4.  15  no  church  communicated  with  me    but 
Heb.   3.  18  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest,  but  to 
1  Jo.   2.  22  Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that 
5.    5  hut  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the 
•Kev.   9.    4  but  only  those  men  which  have  not  the 

14.  3  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the 
19-  12  a  name,  .no  man  knew  but  he  himself 
21=7  but  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's 

I.  Without,  if  not,  eKThs  ei  ^  ehtos  ei  me. 

1  11.    5.  19  but  before  two  or  threa  witnesses 
.8.  But  (rather  aAA'),  ij  all'  S. 

1  Co.  3.    s  Unit]  ministers  by  whom  ye  bel.;  Lu  g  ,, 
•A.And,  Ktdkai. 

John  1.  20  but  confessed,  I  am  not  the  Christ 

lei  1 16.    7  but  the  Spirit  suffered  then,  not 

1  Jo.  2.27  But  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received 

>.Indeed,  yet,  iievrot  mentoi. 

J0I11121.   4  but  the  disciples  knew  not  that  it  was  Je 


132 

2Q.Only,  [±6vov  monon. 

Matt. 9.  21  If  I  may  but  touch  his  garment,  I  shall 
27. Not,  ji4i  me. 

Acts   4.  20  For  we  cannot  but  speak  the  things 
20.  20  but  have  showed  you,  and  have  taught 
28. Then,  therefore,  ouv  oun. 

Luke2i.    7  Master,  but  when  shall  these  things  be  ? 
J  ohn  8.    5  [such  should  be  stoned  :  but  what  sayest] 
9.  18  But  the  Jews  did  not  believe  concerning 
Acts  23.  21  But  do  not  thou  yield  unto  them  ;  for 
23.   4  But  Festus  answered,  that  Paul  should 
29. But,  -kAtjv  plen. 

Matti  1.  22  But  I  say  unto  you,  it  shall  be  more 

11.  24  But  I  say  unto  you,  That  it  shallibe  more 

18.  7  but  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence 
Marki2.  32  and  there  is  none  other  but  he 

Luke  6.  24  But  woe  unto  you  that  are  rich 

6.  35  But  love  ye  your  enemies,  and  do  good 
10.  14  But  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre 

19.  27  But  those  mine  enemies,  .bring  hither 
22.  21  But,  behold,  the  hand  of  him  that 

22.  22  but  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  he  is 

23.  28  but  weep  for  yourselves,  and  for  your 
John  S.  10  [and  saw  none  but  the  woman,  he  said] 
Acts  27.  22  shall  be  no  loss  of.  .life,  .but  of  the  ship 
.Rev.   2.  25  But  that  which  ye  have,  .hold  fast 

BUT  and  if  — 

l.Now  or  but  if,  ear  Se  ean  de. 

Matt. 24  48  But  and  if  that  evil  servant  shall  say 
Lukei2.  45  But  and  if  that  servant  say  in  his  heart 

20.  6  But  and  if  we  say,  Of  men ;  all  the  people 
2.But  even  if,  aAA'  el  Kai  all'  ei  kai. 

1  Pe.  3.  14  But  and  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness' sake 
BTJT  either  — 
Or,  f,  e. 

Acts  17.  21  but  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new 
BUT  if  — 
1.7/,  iVx  illu. 

Esth.  7.    4  But  if  we  had  been  sold  for  bond  men 
2.But  even  if,  aAA'  el  ho!  all'  ei  kai. 

1  Co.  7.  21  but  if  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  used  (it) 
S.Now  even  if,  el  Se  Kai  ei  de  kai. 

2  Co.  4.    3  But  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them 
BUT  now  — 

Now,  Tavvv  tanun. 

Acts  17.  30  but  now  commandeth  all  men  every 

BUT  only  — 
Nevertheless,  ogf<  ephes. 

Nuni22.  35  but'only  the  word  that  I  shall  speak  unto 
BUT  rather  — 
l.But  rather,  aAA'  7)  all'  e. 

Lukei2.  51 1  tell  you,  Nay;  but  rather  division 
2. But,  irX'hv  plen. 

Luken.  41  But  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye 

12.  31  But  rather  seek  ye  the  kingdom  of  God 
BUT  that  — 

Not,  /J.J}  me. 

Lukei7.    1  It  is  impossible  but  that  offences  will 
BUT,  if — 
Even  if,  k&v  k'an. 

Mark  5.  28  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes,  I  shall  be 
6.  56  they  might  touch  if  it  were  but  the  border 
BUT,  nay  — 
Indeed  then,  [levovvye  menounge. 

Rom.  9.  20  [Nay  but,]  O  man,  who  art  thou  that 
BUT,  no  more  — 
No  more  than,  ov  irXeiov  7)  ou  pleion  e. 

Luke  9.  13  We  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two 
BUT,  though  — 
Yet,  nevertheless,  '6/j.us  homos. 

Gal.    3.  15  Though,  .but  a  man's  covenant,  yet 
BUT,  yet  — 
No  more  than,  ov  TrXetovs  ij  ou pleious  e. 

Acts  24. 11  that  there  are  yet  but  twelve  days  since  I 
BUTLER  — 
To  give  to  drink,  np$i  shaqah,  5. 

Gen.  40.  1  the  butler,  .and  (his)  baker  had  offended 
40.  2  wroth,  .against  the  chief  of  the  butlers 
40.  5  the  butler  and  the  baker  of  the  king  of 
40.  9  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph 
40. 13  the  former  manner  when  thou  wast  his  b. 
40.  20  he  lifted  up  the  head  of  the  chief  butler 
40.  21  he  restored  the  chief  butler  unto  his 

40.  23  Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember 

41.  9  Then  spake  the  chief  butler  unto  Pharaoh 

BUTLERSHIP  — 

Butlership,  iijjipn  mashqeh. 

Gen.  40.  21  restored.,  chief  butler  unto  his  butlership 

BUTTER  — 

1. Curdled  milk,  cream,  cheese,  nxpri  chemah. 
Gen.  18.    8  he  took  butter,  and  milk,  and  the  calf 
Deut32.  14  Butter  of  kine,  and  milk  of  sheep,  with 
Judg.  5.  25  she  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish 
2  Sa.  17.  29  honey,  mid  butter,  and  sheep,  and  cheese 


BD' 


Job  20.  17  He  shall  not  s' the  ■  brooks  of.  .butter 
Prov.30.  33  the  churning  cnilkbringeth  forth  butter 
Isa.     7.  15  Butter  and  luey  s"aU  be  eat,  that  he 
7.  22  he  shall  eat  biter :  Ior  butter  and  honey 

2.  Curdled  milk,  cream,  che't  n?0  chemah. 

Job    29.   6  When  I  washecnv  stePs  with  butter 

3.  Buttered  pieces,  nxenn  nfihamaoth. 

Psa.  55.  21  of  his  mouth  wre  smoother  than  butter 

BUTTOCKS  — 

I. Hip,  nsityZD  miphsacch. 

1  Ch.  19.    4  cut  off  their  garlents  •  ■  by  their  buttocks 

2.  Seat,  bottom,  TW  sheth. 

2  Sa.  10.    4  cut  off  their  ganents-  -to  their  buttocks 
Isa.   20.    4  even  with . .  butt';ks  uncovered,  to  the 

BUY,  to  — 

1.  To  prepare,  provide,  ms  fc.ra!i. 

Deut.  2.    6  ye  shall  also  buyaterof  tbem  for  money 
Hos.    3.    2  So  I  bought  her  tc'ie  for  fifteen.,  of  silver 

2.  To  take,  receive,  rip1?  laqaeh 

Neh.   5.    3  That  we'might  b'v  co™'  because  of  the 

10.  31  (that)  we  would  iot  buy  it  of  them  on 
Prov.31. 16  She  considereth  i.fleld>  and  buyeth  it 

3.  To  obtain,  acquire,  Njp  qeno 

Ezra  7.  17  That  thou  mayestbuy  speedily  with  this 

4.  To  acquire,  obtain,  rrjp  qanA- 

Gen.  33.  i9  he  bought  a  pare, iof  a  fleld.  f  "e^e  hf 
39.    1  Potiphar . . bough,K>m  of  the  hands  of 
47-  19  buy  us  and  our  l,.l  '°,r  bread,  and  we 
47-  20  Joseph  bought  a^tJe  land  °,f  Egypt 'or 
47.  22  Only  the  land  of  5»  Pnests  b?uSnt  he  , 
47-  23  I  have  bought  you  ""8  day  and5'our, ,    1 

49.  3°  which  Abraham  b.'»>Sht  with  the  field  of 

50.  13  which  Abraham  bouSht  wlth  tbe  ?eld  for 
Exod2i.  2  If  thou  buy  an  Htl)'™  servant,  six  years 
Lev.  22.  n  But  if  the  priest  buV  (auy)  s0"1  w™ lns 

25.  14  or  buyest.  .of  thy  neighbour's  hand,  ye 
25.  15  According  to.  .thou  sha1'  buy  of  thX  -, 
25.  28  in  the  hand  of  him  lllat  hath  bought  it 
25.  30  him  that  bought  it,  throughout  bis  gener 
25.  44  of  them  shall  ye  buy  bond  men  and  bond 
25.  45  of  them  shall  ye  buy,  ando£  their  families 
25.  50  that  bought  him  froil11  t,le  J'?ar  tllat  ne.  t 
27.  24  field  shall  return . .  ofl whom  l4  wa!  bought 

Deut  28.  68  there  ye  shall  be  sol-V  -no  man  shall  buy 
32.  6  (is)  not  he  thy  father]  Cfat)  hath  bought 

Josh.24.  32  in  a  parcel  of  ground  which  Jacob  bought 

4  Buy  (it)  before  the  ii'K,"'11"1,5;  a?l„ 

5  What  day  thou  buyes-'  ««;  A^,0'  *henl, 
5  thou  must  buy  (it)  also!1  of  Ruth  the  Moab 

8  the  kinsman  skid  unflftBoaz  Buy  (it)  for 

9  that  I  have  bought  ai'iii11!1'  (wasJ  Eilm' 
2  aa.  12.    3  which  he  had  bought  c  t  'd  «°!msbed  "P 

=4.  21  David  said,  To  buy  Oil  V  threshing  floor  of 
24.  24  but  I  will  surely  buy  (i  V>°f  th«e  at  K£! 
24.  4  David  bought  the  t]m..shlPS  "^  andtn0 

1  Ki.  16.  24  he  bought  the  hill  San  ,ian?  of  Shemer 

2  Ki.  12.  12  to  buy  timber  and  hev  ^ n  sJone  *°  repa.lr 

22.    6  to  buy  timber  and  hev  '?  s'°,ueft01,reP?'r 

1  CIl.21.  24  but  I  will  verily  buy  it  1  for  th.e  ful1  ?"?« 

2  CI1.34.  11  buy  hewn  stone,  and  ti  ,mber  ?°,r  C0VP  "K 
Neh.  5.  ,6  I  continued  in  the  woi  i,k;-,nelther  1)0Ught 
Prov  23.  23  Buy  the  truth,  and  sel  r1  llt>  n0: 

Isa.   43.  24  Thou  hast  bought  me  ite10.  sNwee*  can,f„tl, 

Jer.   32.    7  Buy  thee  my  field  Oiat\o(.ls)  m^?ath°S,v 

32.    7  for  the  right  of  redempilr10"-  ■  "'J™  £  ^ 

32.    8  Buy  my  field,  I  pray  OieLe. that  <$"; An' 

32.    8  the  redemption  (is)  thin   e  •  Du/  lk  '°„r„lo.Q 

32.    9lboughtthcliel,lofHaniral'leclmyun?les 

32.  25  Buy  thee  the  field  for  n  f'V?e-y' «"=  S 

32.  43  And  fields  shall  be  bour  «nt  m  th,s  Hnd 

32.  44  Men  shall  buy  fields  foilr*,1"0™*'  and 

Amos  8.    6  That  we  may  buy  the  it  " 

.  To  break,  buy  corn,  ~\2f  1 ' 

Gen.  41.  57  all  countries  came  into  ' 

42.    2  get  you  down  thither,  <E;nd ^  foLuf„lv 
42.    3  Joseph's  ten  brethren  wT-'1*  dov™  to  hu* 
42.    5  the  sons  of  Israel  came 
42.    7  From  the  land  of  Canaa  } 
42.  10  Nay,  my  lord,  but  to  bu  .' 


Ruth  4. 
4' 
4- 
4- 


poor  for  silver 
b  Egypt.. to  buy 


nto  buy.  .among 
niu  to  buy  food 
my  food  are  thy 


2  Go  again,  buy  us  a  Iittle*E,V2°d„  f„ 
4  we  will  go  down  and  bu/,"- thee  food 


43.  20  came  indeed  down  at  the,f  flrf ,tln^  *obuy 

43.  22  other  money  have  we  bfflfS&J? .^le 

44.  25  our  father  said,  Go agaiift  V  'b",>,tus 
47.  14  for  the  corn  which  they  L    L,ouknt 

Deut.  2.    6  Ye  shall  buy  meat  of  thef'm  '°r  ™°?fy 
Isa.  55.    1  he  that  hath  no  money ;  V,i '    ■ .,  I   \     l„ 
55.    1  come,  .buy  wine  and  milk  E  wlthou*  money 
6.  To  use  the  marketplace,  ayopdCu  lui«:7«™~''- 

Matt  13.  44  selleth  &  tha't  hlU,  fe,S» 

13.  46  wentand  sold  all  that  he  E^themBelve. 
14. 15  go  into  the  villages  and   ™',Jht  in  the 
21.  12  cast  out  all  them  that..  1   a     "S,   „„j  i„lv 
25.    9  go  ye  rather  to  them  tha  »«« \Vme„room 
25.  10  while  they  went  to  buy,    > d  V,p,'s  field  to 
27.    7  bought  with  them  the  p<  *'7i,lSs 

Mark  6.  36  that  they  may  go.  .and  b  re)uy  aemseli es 
6.  37  Shall  we  go  and  buy  two 
11.  15  to  cast  out  them  that  solf  -  -  , 

15.  46  he  bought  fine  linen,  anal"?  to°kt  h,m  do"n 

16.  1  Mary  Magdalene,  .had  b(|'"  '  ;u-llt  BW?V 
Luke  9.  13  except  we  should  go  andl  hnbuy  meat  tor 

14.  18  I  have  bought  a  piece  of  !  *'•  «/?""''•  aI,     :f 
14. 19  another  said,  I  have  bouJ;  ':,:ht  hve  y0Ke  0I 

ie  bt 


■si hundred  penny 
Id  and  bought  in 


BUY 


133 


BY 


i  Co. 


2  Pe. 
llev. 


Luke  17.  28  the}'  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  bought 
19.  45  [to  cast  out  them  that  sold . .  aud . .  bought] 
22.  36  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  one 

John  4.    8  were  gone  away  unto  the  city  to  buy  meat 
6.   5  Whence  shall  we  buy  bread,  that  these 
13.  29  Buy.  .that  we  have  need  of  against  the 

6.  20  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  :  therefore 

7.  23  bought  with  a  vjrice  ;  be  not  ye  the 
7.  30  they  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed 

2.  1  even  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them 

3.  18  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in 
13. 17  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he 
18.  11  for  no  man  buyeth  their  merchandise 

7.  To  buy,  purchase,  wvio^iai  oneoinai. 

Acts    7.  16  the  sepulchre  that  Abraham  bought  for 
3TJY  and  sell,  to  — 
To  go  on  in,  efj.Tropevojj.ai  emporeuomai. 

Jas.     4.  13  continue  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell 

BUYER  — 

To  acquire,  obtain,  rtjp  qanah. 

ProV2o.  14  (Itis)naught,(ltis)naught,saith the  buyer 
Isa.  24.    2  as  with  the  buyer,  so  with  the  seller 
Eze.    7. 12  let  not  the  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  seller 

BTJZ,  na  contempt. 

1.  Second  son  of  Milcah  and  Nahor  the  brother  of  Abra- 
ham. His  family  probably  settled  in  Arabia  Petrsea 
B.C.  1880. 

Gen.  22.  21  Huz  his  first  born,  and  P>.  his  brother,  and 

2.  A  man  of  the  tribe  of  Gad. 

1  Ch.    5.  14  Jeshishai,  the  son  of  Jahdo,  the  son  of  B. 
BTJ'-ZI,  »pa  contemned  of  Jah. 
An  Aaronite,  father  of  Ezekiel  the  prophet,  B.C.  595. 

Eze.     1.    3  The  word . .  came . .  unto  Ezekiel . .  son  of  B. 

BTJZ'-ITE,  ^zn  tlie  one  belonging  to  Buz. 
An  inhabitant  of  a  region  called  Buz,  Jer.  25.  23. 
Job    32.    2  wrath  of.  .the  son  of  Barachel  the  B. 

32.  6  Elihu  the  son  of  Barachel  the  B.  answered 

BY  — 

1.  Behind,  tnx  achar. 

Deut  11.  30  by  the  way  where  the  sun  goeth  down 

2.  Unto,  to,  at,  •%  el. 

Gen.  24.  11  to  kneel  down  without  the  city  by  a  well 

Z.jYear,  Six  etsel. 

Gen.  39.  10  that  he  hearkened  not  unto  her,  to  lie  by 

39.  16  And  she  laid  up  his  garment  by  her 
Judg  19.  14  by  Gibeah,  which  (belongeth)  to  Benjamin 
1  Sa.    s-    2  brought  it  into  the  house,  .and  set  it  by 

20. 19  and  shalt  remain  by  the  stone  Ezel 

1  Ki.    1.    9  which  (is)  by  En-rogel,  and  called  all 

2.  29  and,  behold,  (he  is)  by  the  altar.     Then 
4. 12  which  (is)  by  Zartanah  beneath  Jezreel 

13.  24  the  ass  stood  by  it,  the  lion  also  stood  by 
13.  25  the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase  :  and  they 
13.  28  and  the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase 

2  Ch.   9.  18  and  two  lions  standing  by  the  stays 
Neh.    2.    6  king  said  unto  me . .  queen  also  sitting  by 

3.  23  of  Maaseiah  the  son  of  Ananiah  by  his 

4.  3  Now  Tobiah  the  Ammonite  (was)  by  him 
4.  12  when  the  Jews  which  dwelt  by  them  came 
4.  18  he  that  sounded  the. trumpet  (was)  by  me 

Prov.  8.  30  Then  I  was  by  him,  (as)  one  brought  up 
Jer.   35.    4  which  (was)  by  the  chamber  of  the  princes 

41.  17  the  habitation  of  Chimham,  which  is  by 
Eze.     1.  15  one  wheel  upon  the  earth  by  the  living 
1.  19  living  creatures  went,  the  wheels  went  by 
10.    9  behold,  the  four  wheels  by  the  cherubim 
10.   9  one  wheel  by  one  cherub,  and  another . .  by 
10.  16  the  cherubim  went,  the  wheels  went  by 

33.  30  children . .  still  are  talking  against  thee  by 

39.  15  then  shall  he  set  up  a  sign  by  it,  till  the 

40.  7  by  the  porch  of  the  gate  within 

43.    6  I  heard  (him)  speaking . .  the  man  stood  by 
43.    8  their  post  by  my  posts,  and  the  wall 
Amos  2.    8  upon  clothes  laid  to  pledge  by  every 

4.  With,  riN  eth. 

Gen.  49.  25  and  by  the  Almighty,  who  shall  bless  thee 

5.  Through,  at,  11*2  bead. 

1  Sa.    4.  18  he  fell  from  off  the  seat  backward  by  the 
Q.From,  out  of,  fS  min. 

Song  5.    4  My  beloved  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole 

7.  Over,  *i?y  eber. 

1  Ki.    7.  20  over  against  the  belly  which  (was)  by  the 

8.  Vnto,  ijj  ad. 

1  Sa.  25.  22  if  I  leave  of  all  that  (pertain)  to  him,  by 

9.  Oh.,  against,  Sy  at. 

Gen.  14.    6  unto  El-paran,  which  (is)  by  the  'wilderness 

10.  With,  ay  im. 

Gen.  25.  11  and  Isaac  dwelt  by  the  well  Lahai-roi 
Dan.    7.    2  Daniel . .  said,  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night 

11. From  with,  nyp  meim. 

Gen.  41.  32  because  the  thing  (is)  established  by  God 
12.With,  "isy  immad. 

Deut.  5.  31  But  as  for  thee,  stand  thou  here  by  me 
IZ.Heel,  consequence,  10,  eqeb. 

Prov  22.    4  By  humility,  (and)  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
li.By  the  hand  of,  t?  beyad. 

Ex°d  9.  35  as  the  Lord  had  spoken  by  Moses 

Judg.  3  15  by  him  the  children  of  Israelsenta  present 


1  Sa.  16.  20  and  sent,  .by  David  his  son  unto  Saul 
28.  15  answered,  .neither  by  prophets,  nor  by 
28. 17  the  Lord  hath  done  to  him  as  he  spake  by 

iKi.  12. 15  which  the  Lord  spake  by  Ahijah  the 
29  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Ahijah 

12  which  he  spake  against  Baasha  by  Jehu 
34  which  he  spake  by  Joshua  the  son 

16  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  spake  by 
36  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Elijah 
10  Lord  hath  done  (that)  which  he  spake  by 

13  the  Lord  testified  against  Israel, .  .by  all 

13  which  I  sent  to  you  by  my  servants  the 

23  as  he  had  said  by  all  his  servants 

10  the  Lord  spake  by  his  servants  the  pro. 

2  which  he  spake  by  his  servants  the  pro. 

3  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by 
18  Jehoiada  appointed  the  offices,  .by  the 
25  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  by  iris  pro. 

14  the  priest  fouud  a  book,  .(given)  by  Moses 

15  the  Lord  God.. sent  to  them  by  his 

11  "Which  thou  hast  commanded  by  thy 

14  which.  .Lord  had  commanded  by  Moses 
29  which  was  given  by  Moses  the  servant  of 

12  at  the  king's  commaudment  by  (his) 

15  the  commandment,  .bythechamberlains? 

13  the  letters  were  sent  by  posts  into  all  the 
10  and  sent  letters  by  posts  on  horseback 
10  They  shall  fall  by  the  sword  ;  they  shall 

2  At  the  same  time  spake  the  Lord  by  Isa. 

24  By  thy  servauts  hast  thou  reproached  the 

2  which  he  spake  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah 

6  fall  toward  the  north  by  the  river  Euph. 
1  The  word  that  the  Lord  spake,  .by  Jere. 

17  of  whom  I  have  spoken  in  old  time  by 
10  which  he  set  before  us  by  his  servants 

3  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai 
i,  10  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by . .  prophet 

7  the  Lord  hath  cried  by.  .former  proph. 
12  the  Lord,  .hath  sent,  .by  the  former  pro. 

1  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Israel  by  Malac. 


15- 
16. 
16. 

*7- 
2  Ki.  9. 
10. 
*7- 
17- 
17- 


i  Ch.  11. 

2Ch.2^. 

29. 

34- 
.,  ^- 
Ezra  9. 
Neh.   8. 

10. 
Esth.  1. 


Psa.  63. 
Isa.   20. 

T  37' 

Jer.  37. 
46. 

Eze.  3S. 
Dan.  9. 
Hag.    1. 

Zech.  7. 

Mai.    1! 


16.  With  a 

Matt 

■;■ 

Acts 

7- 

17.  Out 

of. 

Matt 

12. 

12. 

12. 

Mark 

■5- 
7- 

Luke 

6 

John 

3- 

Acts 

IQ. 

Rom. 

I. 

I. 

2. 

3- 

3- 

4- 

5- 

5- 

9- 

9- 

9- 

15.From,  aw6  apo. 

Matt.  7. 16  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits 

7.  20  Wherefore  [by]  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
Acts    9.  13  Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man 
i2.  20  then-  country  was  nourished  by  the  king's 
2  Co.   3.  18  from  glory  to  glory,  .as  by  the  Spirit  of 
7.  13  because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you 
Heb.   5.    8  yet  learned  he  obedieuce  by  the  things 
Jude       23  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the 
llev.  18.  15  merchants,  .which  were  made  rich  by 

regard  to,  els  eis. 

35  neither  by  Jerusalem  ;  for  it  is  the  city 
53  Who  have  received  the  law  by  the 

4k  eh. 

33  for  the  tree  is  known  by  (his)  fruit 
37  For  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified 
37  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned 

5  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be.  .by  me 
11  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be.  .by  mej 
44  Eor  every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit 

34  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure 

25  Sirs,  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have 
4  according  to  the  Spirit,  .by  the  resurrect. 

17  as  it  is  written,  The  just  shall  live  by 
27  shall  not  uncircumcision  which  is  by 

20  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no 
30  which  shall  justify  the  circumcision  by 

2  For  if  Abraham  were  justified  by  works 

1  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 

16  the  judgment  (was)  by.  .to  condemnation 

10  when  Rebecca  also  had  conceived  by  one 
32  Wherefore?  Because  (they  sought  it)  not  by 
32  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law 

17  So  then  faith  (cometh)  by  hearing,  and 

2  but  the  same  which  is  made  sorry  by  me  ? 
9  that  ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  in 

14  by  an  equality .  .now  at  this  time  your 

26  perils  of  robbers,  (in)  perils  by.,  country. 

26  perils  by  the  heathen,  (in)  perils  in  the 
4  yet  he  llveth  by  the  power  of  God 

4  we  shall  live  with  him  by  the  power  of 
16  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of 
16  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the 
16  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hear. 

2  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hear. 

5  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing 

11  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 

21  verily  righteousness  should  have  been  by 

22  that  the  promise  by  faith,  .might  be 
24  that  we  might  be  justified  by  faith 
22  one  by  a  boud  maid,  the  other  by  a  free 

5  through  the  Spirit  wait  for  the  hope .  .by 
5  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we 
3S  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith  :  but  if 

1 8  I  will  show  thee  my  faith  by  my  works 

21  Was  not  Abraham  our  father  justified  by 

22  and  by  works  was  faith  made  perfect? 

24  by  works  a  man  is  justified,  and  not  by 

25  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by 

12  they  may  by.  .good  works,  .glorify  God 
24  hereby  we  know,  .by  the  Spirit  which  he 
18  [by]  the  lire,  and  [by]  the  smoke,  and  [by] 

with,  iv  en. 

34  Swear  not  at  all :  neither  by  heaven 

35  Nor  by  the  earth  ;  for  it  is  his  footstool 

36  Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head 
24  This  (fellow)  doth  not  cast  out  devils .  .by 

27  If  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils,  by 

28  But  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of 


Gal. 


3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 

Titus  3. 
Heb.  10. 
Jas.     2. 

2. 

2. 

2. 
1  Pe.  2. 
1  Jo.  3. 
Rev.    9. 

IS.In,  by, 

Matt.  5. 

5- 

5- 


Rom. 


Co. 


Matt  14.  13  he  departed  thence  by  ship  into  a  desert 

17.  21  [this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer] 
21.  23  By  what  authority  doest.  .these  things? 
21.  24  I.  .will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

21.  27  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I 

22.  1  Jesus  answered,  .them  again  by  parables 

23.  16  swear  by  the  temple,  .swear  by  the  gold; 
23.  18  swear  by  the  altar. .  sweareth  by  the  gift 
23.  20  swear  by  the  altar,  sweareth  by  it,  and  by 
23.  21  swear  by  the  temple,  sweareth  by.  .and  by 

23.  22  swear  by  heaven,  sweareth  by.  .and  by 
Mark  3.  22  by  the  prince  of  the  devils  casteth  he  out 

4.  2  he  taught  them  many  things  by  parables 

5.  21  when  Jesus  was  passed  oyer  again  by 

8.    3  if  I  send  them  away,  .they  will  faint  by 

8.  27  by  the  way  he  asked  his  disciples,  saying 

9.  29  Thiskindcancomeforthbynothingbutby 
9-  33  W'hatwasitthatyedisputed.  .by  the  way? 
9-  34  [by]  the  way  they  had  disputed  among 

11.  2S  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these 
11.  29  I  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

11.  33  Neither  do  I  tell  you  by  what  authority 

12.  1  he  began  to  speak  unto  them  by  parables 

12.  36  David  himself  said  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
14.    1  scribes  sought  how  they  might  take,  .by 

Luke   1.  77  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation,  .by  the 

2.  27  he  came  by  the  Spirit  into  the  temple 

4.    1  was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness 

11.  19  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils,  by  whom 
20.  2  bywhat  authoritydoestthouthesethings? 
20.    8  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

24.  32  while  he  talked  to  us  by  the  way,  and 
John  13.  35  By  this  shall  all.  .know  that  ye  are  my 

16.  30  by  this  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth 
Acts    1.    3  after  his  fashion  by  many  infallible  proofs 

4.    7  By  what  power,  or  by  what  name,  have 

4. 10  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  .(even)  by 

4.  30  By  stretching  forth  thine  hand  to  heal 
7-  35  [by]  the  hand  of  the  Angel  which  appeared 

13.  39  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified 

13.  39  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by 

17.  31  by  (that)  man  whom  he  hath  ordained 
19  which  befell  me  by  the  lying  in  wait  of 
10  by  the  will  of  God  to  come  UDto  you 

9  bting  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall 
10  we  shall  he  saved  by  his  life 

15  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by 
5  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by 

14  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord 

16  the  offering,  .being  sanctified  by  the  Holy 
19  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 

4  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  you  by 

5  Thatin  everythingye  are  enriched  by  him 

3.  13  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire 

6.  2  if  the  world  shall  be  judged  by  you,  are 
6.  11  ye  are  justified,  .by  the  Spirit  of  our  God 
7. 14  sanctified  by  the  wife,  .sanctified  by  the 

12.  3  no  man  speakiug  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
12.    3  no  man  can  say..  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by 
12.    9  faith  by  the  same,  .healing  by  the  same 
12.  13  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one 

14.  6  except  I  shall  speak  to  you  either  by 
14.    6  or  by  knowledge,  or  by  prophesying,  or  by 
16.   7  For  I  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  way 

1.  12  not  with  fleshly  wisdom,  but  by  the  grace 
6.  6  By  pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long-suff. 
6.    6  by  kindness,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  love 

6.  7  By  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of 

7.  6  God.  .comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  T. 
7.    7  by  the  consolation  wherewith  he  was 

to.  12  they  measuring  themselves  by  themselves 
ro.  15  we  shall  he  enlarged  by  you  according  to 

2.  17  while  ye  seek  to  be  justified  by  Christ 
2.  20  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God 

3. 11  But  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law 

5.  4  whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the 
2.  13  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ 

2.  18  we  both  have  access  by  one  Spirit 

3.  5  as  it  is  now  revealed,  .by  the  Spirit 

3.  21  I'nto  him  (be)  glory  in  the  church  by 

4.  14  by  the  sleight  of  men,  (and)  cunning  craft 

4.  21  ye  have  heard  him,  and.  .been  taught  by 

5.  26  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word 
4.  19  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ 
1.  16  For  by  him  were  all  things  created,  that 
1. 17  and  by  him  all  things  consist 

1.  21  and  enemies  in.  .mind  by  wicked  wrorks 

2.  11  puttiug  off",  .by  the  circumcision  of  Christ 

1  Th.  3.    3  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these  afflict. 

4.    1  we  beseech  you . .  and  exhort  (you)  by  the 

4.  15  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the 

2  Th.  3.  1 6  the  Lord . .  give  you  peace  always  by  all 
1  Ti.    1.  18  that  thou  by  them  mightest  war  a  good 
Titus  1.    9  that  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine 
Phm.        6  by  the  acknowledging  of  every  good  thing 
Heb.    1.    1  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the 

1.    2  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  (his) 
10.  10  By  the  which  will  we  are  sanctified 

10.  19  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of 

11.  2  For  by  it  the  elders  obtained  a  good 
1  Pe.   1.    5  Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God 

3.  19  By  which  also  he  went  and  preached 

5.  10  hath  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory  by 

1.  13  to  stir  you  up  by  putting  (you)  in  rememb. 

5.    2  Bythisweknow  that  we  love  the  children 

5.    6  This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood 

5.    6  came  bywater..not  by  water  only,  but  by 

Jude         1  to  them  that  are  sanctified  by  God  the 
Rev.   5.    9  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood 

9.  20  the  rest,  .which  were  not  killed  by  these 
10.    6  And  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever 

18.  23  for  by  thy  sorceries  were  all  nations 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Phil. 
Col. 


•Pe. 
:  JO. 


BY 


134 


C  AGE 


19. Upon,  eiri  (da/.)  cpi. 

Matt.  4.  4  Man  shall  uot  live  by  bread  alone,  but  [by] 
Luke  4.  4  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  [by] 
John  5.  2  there  13  at  Jems.,  by  the  sheep  (market) 
Rom  10.  19  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  (them 
10.  ig  (and)  by  a  foolish  nation  will  I  anger  you 
Phil.  3.    q  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith 

20.Through,  by  means  of,  Sid  {gen.)  diet. 

Matt.  1.  22  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the 
2.  5  for  thus  it  is  written  by  the  prophet 
2.  15  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the 

2.  23  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by.  .prophets 
4.  14  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 
8.  17  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 
8.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 

12. 17  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 
13.  35  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet 
18.    7  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence 
2i.    4  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet 
24.  15  desolation,  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the 

26.  24  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of 

27.  9  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  the  prophet 
Mark  6.  2;  10.  [1];  14.  21 ;  Luke  1.  70;  5.  [19];  8.  4;  18. 

31 ;  22.  22 ;  John  1.  3,  10,  17,  17 ;  10.  1,  2,  9 ;  T4.  t ; 
Acts  1.  16;  2.  16,  22,  23,  43;  3.  16,  1 8,  21;  4.  16,  25, 
30;  5.  12,  19;  7.  25 ;  9.  25;  10.  36;  11.  28,  30;  12.  [9] ; 
14*  3  i  J5-  7)  I2>  23»  27 !  I7-  10 »  J^"  9»  2^ '  I0,  Ir  >  2I- 
*9  \  23-  31 1  24-  2)  2  !  28-  25  i  Bom.  1.  2,  5,  12 ;  2.  12,  16, 
27;  3.  20,  22,  27,  27;  5.  2,  5,  10,  11,  12,  12,  16,  17,  T7, 
18, 18,  19,  19,  21 ;  6.  4,  4 ;  7.  4,  5,  7,  8,  11,  11,  13,  13 ; 
10.  17;  12.  1;  15.  18,  28,  32;  16.  18,  26;  1  Co.  1.  9,  10, 
21,  21 ;  2.  10 ;  3.  5,  15  ;  6.  14 ;  8.  6,  6  ;  10.  1 ;  n.  12  ; 
12.  8 ;  14.  9 ;  15.  2,  2i,  21 ;  16.  3 ;  2  Co.  1.  1,  4,  5,  11, 
16,  19,  19,  20;  a.  14;  4.  [14];  5.  7,  7>  18,  20;  6.  7,  8,  8; 
8.  5  ;  9. 12, 13 ;  10.  1,  9,  11 ;  11.  33  ;  12.  17 ;  Gal.  1.  1,  r, 

12,  15 ;  2.  16,  21 ;  3.  18,  19,  26 ;  4.  23 ;  5.  6,  13 ;  6.  [14] ; 
Eph.  1.  1,  5 ;  2.  16;  3.  6,  [9],  10, 12,  16,  17 ;  4.  16 ;  6.  18; 
Phil.  1.  11,  20,  20,  26;  Col.  1.  1,  16,  20,  [20];  2.  19;  3. 
17 ;  1  Th.  3.  7  ;  4.  2 ;  5.  9 ;  2  Th.  2.  2,  2,  2,  14,  15 ;  3. 
[12],  14;  1  Ti.  4.  5,  14 ;  2  Ti.  1.  1,  6,  10,  14;  4.  17; 
Titus  3.  5 ;  Phm.  7 ;  Heb.  1.  2,  [3] ;  2.  2,  3,  10  53.  16 ;  6. 
18;  7.  11,  10,  21,  25 ;  9.  11,  12,  12,  26 ;  11.  4,  4,  7,  29 ; 

13.  11,  15 ;  Jas.  2.  12 ;  1  Pe.  1.  3,  12,  21,  23 ;  2.  5,  14 ; 
3.  i,  20,  21;  5.  12 ;  2  Pe.  1.  4 ;  1  Jo.  5.  6 ;  Rev.  1.  1. 

21.  Through,  on  account  of,  Bid  (ace.)  dia. 
Matti5.    3  Why  do  ye  also  transgress,  .by  your 

15.    6  of  God  of  none  effect  by  your  tradition 
John  6.  57  I  live  by  the  Father,  .he  shall  live  by  me 
Horn.  8.  11  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you 
Heb.   6.    7  meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed 
Rev.  12.  11  overcame  him  by  the  blood,  and  by  the 

13.  14  And  deceiveth  them.  .by.  .those  miracles 

22.Doum  through,  over  against,  Kara  (gen.)  kaia. 
Matt  26.  63  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that 
Heb.   6.  13  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by 
6.  16  For  men  verily  swear  by  the  greater ;  and 

2S.Doivn  through,  according  to,  Kara  (ace.)  Jcota. 
Luke  10.   4  and  salute  no  man  by  the  way 

10.  31  by  chance  there  came  down  a  certain 
Johnio.    3  and  he  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name 

19.    7  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought 
Acts  27.    2  we  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by  the 

28.  16  Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself 
Rom.  2.    7  To  them  who  by  patient  continuance  in 

4.  16  (it  is)  of  faith,  that  (it  might  be)  by  grace 

11.  24  the  olive  tree,  which  is  wild  by  nature 
t  Co.  7.    6  by  permission,  .not  of  commandment 

12.  8  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the  same  Spirit 

14.  27  (let  it  be)  by  two,  or  at  the  most,  .three 
14.  31  For  ye  may  all  prophesy  one  by  one 

s  Co.   8.    8  1  speak  not  by  commandment,  but  by 
Gal.     2.    2  I  went  up  by  revelation,  .communicated 
Eph    3.    3  by  revelation  he  made  known  unto  me 
3.    7  giveu  unto  me  by  the  effectual  working 

2  Th.  2.    3  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means 

i  Ti.    1.    1  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by.  .command. 

5.  21  without  preferring,  .doing  nothing  by 
Heb.   7.  «  By  so  much  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of 

9.  22  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged 

10.  8  which  are  offered  by  th?  law 

11.  7  heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is  by 

3  John    14  Greet  the  frien<l-  by  name 

24. Alongside  of,  -rapd  (dal.)  p<~.  ... 

Luke  o.  47  Jl.-i.i.. took  a  child,  and  set  him  by 
Johmq.  25  there  stood  1  y  the  cross  <.  f  Jesus  his 

1  Co.  16.    2  let  every  0110  of  ym  1  /  1/  him  in  store 

25. Alongside  of,  irapd  (ace.)  para. 

Matt.  4. 18  Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  saw 
Mark  1.  16  as  be  walked  by  the  sea  of  Galilee 
Luke  5.    1  it  came  to  pass,  that,  .lie  stood  by  the 

5.    2  And  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the  lake 
Heb.  11. 12  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  shore 

■■  '.  to,  at,  irpds  [ace)  pros. 
Mark  .j.    1  multitude  was  by  the  sea  on  the  land 

11.   4  found  the  colt  tied  by  tbe  door  without 
buk'    !       ci  rtain  maid  beheld  nim  as  be  sat  by 
Acts   5.  10  carrying.. forth,  buried  (her) by  her' 

27.Qver,fer  t  .  fiirep  [gt  n.)  hupi  r, 

2  Th.  2.    1  by  the  entiling  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
28.  Under,  vir6  (gen.)  hup  >. 

Matt.  2. 17  Then  wn  1    that  which  was  spoken  [by] 

3.  3  this  is  ho  that  was  spoken  of  [by]  the 
22.  31  that  which  was  spoken  unto  you  by  God 

;    I  that  it  might  bo.  .which  was  spoken  by] 


Mark  5.    4  the  chains  had  been  plucked  asunder  by 
13.  14  [abomination  of  desolation,  spoken  of  by] 
Luke  2.  18  things  which  were  told  them  by  the 

2.  26  it  was  revealed  unto  him  by  the  Holy 

3.  19  being  reproved  by  him  for  Herodias  his 
5. 15  to  be  healed  [by]  him  of  their  infirmities 
9.    7  Herod,  .heard  of  all  that  was  done  [by] 

13.  17  all  the  glorious  things  that  were  done  by 
16.  22  was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's 
21.  16  ye  shall  be  betrayed  both  by  parents 

23.  8  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done  by 
John  8.   9  [being  convicted  by.  .conscience] 

Acts  4.  36  Joses,  who  by  the  apostles  was  surnamed 
10.  22  was  warned  from  God  by  an  holy  angel 
13.   4  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
13.  45  spake  against  those  things,  .spoken  by 
15.    3  being  brought  on  their  way  by  the  church 

15.  40  being  recommended  by  the  brethren  unto 

16.  2  Which  was  well  reported  of  by  the  bre. 

24.  21  I  am  called  in  question  [by]  you  this  day 

25.  14  There  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by 
27.  11  those  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul 

Rom.  3.  21  being  witnessed  by  the  Law  and  the 

15.  24  to  be  brought  on  my  way  thitherward  [by] 

1  Co.  1.  11  by  them,  .of  Chloe,  that  there  are 

2  Co.  3.    3  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by 

8.  19  which  is  administered  by  us  to  the  glory 

8.  20  this  abundance  which  is  administered  by 
Eph.  2.  11  by  that  which  is  called  the  circumcision 

5.  13  all.  .made  manifest  by  the  light 
Phil.   1.  2S  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries 
Col.     2.  18  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind 
2  Tim  2.  26  who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will 
Heb,   2.    3  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that  heard 

3.    4  For  every  house  is  builded  by  some  (man) 
2  Pe.  1.  21  (as  they  were)  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost 

3.  2  which  were  spoken  before  by  the  holy 
Rev.   9.  18  [By]  these  three  was  the  third  part  of 

BY  and  by  — 

1. At  once,  e^avrris  exautes. 

Mark  6.  25  thou  give  me  by  and  by.  .the  head  of 

2.  Straightway,  evd4o>s  eutheos. 

Luke  17    7  which  of  you.  .say  unto  him  by  and  by 
21.    9  but  the  end  (is)  not  by  and  by 

3.  Straightway,  evQvs  culhus. 

Matti3-  21  when  tribulation,  .ariseth.  .by  and  by  he 

BY  selves  — 
l.Sejyarately,  "13?  lebad. 

2  Sa.  10.   8  the  Syrians,  .by  themselves  in  the  field 

2.  Apart,  %WP^S  ehoris. 

John2o.    7  wrapped  together  in  a  place  by  itself 

3. Alone,  p6vos  monos. 

Mark  9.    2  leadeth  them  up.  .apart  by  themselves 
Luke24.  12  beheld,  .linen  clothes  laid  [by  themselves] 

BY...  side  — 

Alongside  of,  irupd  (ace.) para. 

Matt  1 3.    1  Jesus  out  of  the  house,  and  sat  by.  .sea  si. 

13.    4  when  he  sowed,  some,  .fell  by  the  way  si. 

13.  19  This  is  he  which  received  seed  by.  .way  si. 

20.  30  behold,  two  blind  men  sitting  by . .  way  si. 
Mark  2.  13  he  went  forth  again  by  the  sea  side 

4.  1  he  began  again  to  teach  by  the  sea  side 
4.  4  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 
4.  15  And  these  are  they  by  the  way  side 

10.  46  blind  Bartimeus.  .sat  by  the  highway  side 
Luke  8.    5  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 
8. 12  Those  by  the  way  side  are  they  that  hear 

18.  35  a  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  way  side 
Acts.  10.   6  whose  house  is  by  the  sea  side 

10.  32  in  the  house  of  (one)  Simon,  .by  the  sea  si. 

16.  13  we  went  out  of  the  city  by  a  river  side 

BY  reason  of  — 
l.Unto,  *?N  cl. 

Eze.  21.  12  terrors  by  reason  of  the  sword  shall  be 

2.  On,  upon,  "?y.  at. 

Eze.  28.  17  hast  corrupted  thy  wisdom  by  reason  of 

3.  Through,  on  account  of,  Bid  (ace.)  dia. 

John  12.  11  Because  that  by  reason  of  him  many  of 
Rom.  8.  20 ;  Heb.  5.  14  ;  2  Pe.  2.  2. 

BY  this  time  — 

Already,  j/o?'/  h,$d§. 

John  11.  39  Lord,  by  this  iimo  he  stiuketh 
Till,  during,  iy  ad,. 

Exod22.  26  thou  shalt  deliver  it  unto  him  by  that 

BY  way  of  — 

In,  by,  with,  kv  en. 

2  Pe,   3.    1  I  stir  Up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of 

BY  ways  — 

Crooked  ways,  rnVjSTptt,  rnrrjN  orachotJi  aaalqalloth. 

Judg.  5.   6  the  travellers  walked  through  by  ways 
BY  word  — 
1.  Word,  rh%  mfflah. 

Job  30.    9  am  I  their  song;  yea,  I  am  their  by  word 
2. Similitude,  V?  niashal. 

I'sa.  44,  14  Thou  makest  us  a  by  word  among  the 
3. Similitude,  bev  iticshol. 

Job    17.    6  He  bath  made  me  also  a  by  word  of  the 

i.JSJiasp  saying,  'yi'i'  sheninah. 

Deuts8.  37  an  astonishment.. and  a  by  word 


1  Ki.  9.    7  Israel  shafll  be  a  proverb  and  a  by  word 

2  Ch.  7.  20  and  will  nf.iake  it  (to  be),  .a  by  word 
[See  also  Called,  charg^.  close,  come,  company,  con- 
straint, course,  divide1,,  fifties,  force,  fraud,  go,  hand, 
hard,  heel,  thereof,  highway,  hold,  hundreds,  inherit- 
ance, interpretation,  '  know,  lay,  lest,  means,  one, 
order,  pass,  protest,  zi-eason,  roots,  sail,  set,  sevens^ 
side,  sit,  soothsaying,  s,pace,  stand,  take,  trade,  way, 
year.] 


1C 
CAE  —  j, 

Measure  containing  above  three  pints,  3j2  qab. 
2  Ki.    6.  25  the  fourth  pi  art  of  a  cab  of  dove's  dung 

CAB'-BON,  |i3l,  Xa&pd,  Xla&pd  circle,  hamlet,  hilly 
A  town  in  the  low  countrysfof  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  40  And  C,  and  PLahmam,  and  Kithlish 
CABIN  — 
Cell,  dwigeon,  vault,  nuri  chanuth. 

Jer.   37.  16  Jeremiah  was  entered,  .into  the  cabins 

CA'-BTJX,  ^n?,  Xa£tiA  dry\,  sandy. 

1.  A  border  city  of  Asher,  N..E.  of  Canaan.  Its  modern 
name  is  Kabul,  9  miles  E.  olf  Akka,  and  8  from  Jefat. 
It  is  on  the  borders  of  Galile|e. 

Josh.  19.  27  and  goeth  out  ;to  C.  on  the  left  hand. 

2.  Name  given  by  Hiram  ki  ng  of  Tyre  to  the  twenty 
cities  in  the  land  of  Galilee  which  Solomon  gave  him, 

B.C.  1000.  \ 

1  Ki.    9.  13  And  he  called  them  the  land  of  C. 
CEl'-SAR,  Kcuo-ap. 

Always  in  theNewTestament,  the  Roman  emperor.  To 
him  the  Jews  paid  tribute,  ami  to  him  those  Jews  that 
were  "Roman  citizens"  had  the  right  of  appeal. 

Matt.  22.  17  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  unto  C,  or  not? 
22.  21  They  say  unto  h  im  C.'s.     Then  saith  he 

22.  21  Render.  .untoC.  the  things  which  are  C.'s 
Marki2.  14  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  C.,  or  not? 

12.  16  And  they  said  unto  him,  C.'s     ' 
12. 17  Render  to  C.  the  things  that  are  C's.,  and 
Luke  2.    1  there  went  out  a  decree  from  C.  Augustus 
3.    1  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  C. 
20.  22  Is  it  lawful,  .to  give  tribute  unto  C,  or 
20.  24  Whose  image . .  hayh  it  ?  They  answ. . .  C.  's 

20.  25  Render,  .unto  C.tlie  thingswhich  be  C.'s 

23.  2  found  this,  .forbidding  to  give,  .to  C. 
Johnig.  12  the  Jews  cried,  .thou  art  not  C.'s  friend 

19. 12  maketh  himself  a.  .speaketh  against  C. 
19.  15  priests  answered,  We  have  no  king  butC. 
Acts  11.  28  great  dearth,  .in  the  days  of  Claudius  [C] 

17.  7  these  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  C. 
25.    8  nor  yet  against  C,  have  I  offended  any 
25.  10  Then  said  Paul,  I  stand  at  C.'s  judgment 
25.  11  if  there  be  none.  .1  appeal  unto  C. 

25.  12  Festus.  .answered,  Hast  thou  ap.  unto  C. 

25.  21  to  be  kept  till  I.. send  him  to  C. 

26.  32  if  he  had  not  appealed  unto  C. 

27.  24  thou  must  be  brought  before  C.  :  and,  lo 

28.  19  I  was  constrained  to  appeal  unto  C. 
Phil.   4.  22  saints  salute  you.  .they,  .of  C.'s  household 

Offi-SAR-E'-A,  Kaurdpeia. 

A  seaport  on  the  Mediterranean,  70  miles  N.W.  of  Jeru- 
salem, on  the  line  of  the  great  road  from  Tyre  to  Egypt, 
and  midway  between  Joppa  and  Dora.  Now  entirely 
desolate.  Caesarea  was  founded  by  Herod  the  Great 
B.C.  10,  and  named  in  honour  of  Caisar  Augustus.  Paul 
appeared  before  Felix,  and  was  imprisoned  at  Ca?sarea 
A.D.  58.  It  was  made  a  metropolitan  see  at  an  early 
period.  Councils  were  held  here  in  334  and  _,=,$.  It 
must  not,  however,  be  confounded  with  Crcsarea 
Vhilippi,  another  town  in  Palestine. 

Acts    8.  40  preached  in  all  the  cities,  till  he  came  toC. 
9.  30  they  brought  him  down  to  C.and  sent  him 

10.    1  There  was  a  certain  mau  in  C.  called  Cor. 

10.  24  And  the  morrow  after  they  entered  into  C. 

11. 11  there  were  three  men.  .sent  from  C. 

12.  19  And  he  went  down  from  Judea  to  C. 

18.  22  And  when  he  had  landed  at  C,  and 
si.    8  company  departed,  and  came  unto  C. 

21.  16  There  went,  .of  the  disciples  of  C. 

23.  23  ready  two  hundred  soldiers  to  go  to  C. 
23.  33  they  came  to  C,  and.  .presented  Paul 
25.    1  after  three  days  he  ascended  from  C.  to 
25.    4  Paul  should  be  kept  at  C,  and  that  he 
25.    6  tarried,  .ten  days,  he  went,  unto  C. 
25.  13  Bernice  came  unto  C.  to  salute  Festus 

CJE-SAR-E-A  PHIL-IP'-PI,  Kaiad^ta  y  tov  tyiA'nr- 

7rou  Caesarea  of  Philip. 
A  town  near  the  source  of  the  Jordan,  in  the  extreme 
N.  of  Canaan,  and  the  most  northerly  point  of  Christ's 
journeys.  It  stands  at  the  easternmost  and  most  im- 
portant of  tbe  two  main  sources  of  the  Jordan — the 
other  being  Tell-cl-Kadi.  It  is  now  called  Eanias,  from 
the  medieval  Pancas,  and  is  about  30  miles  from  Tyie. 
50  from  Damascus,  and  120  from  Jerusalem. 

Matt  16.  13  Jesus  came  into  tbe  coasts  of  C.  P. 

Mark  8.  27  Jesus  went,  .into  the  towns  of  C.  P- 

CAGE  — 

l.Cagc,  basket,  :nV?  Icslvb. 

Jer.     5.  27  As  a  cage  is  full  of  birds,  so  (arc)  their 
2.  Watch,  guard,  ward,  $vKwk  jpfa\f-lake. 

Rev.  18.    2  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird 


CAIAPHAS 


135 


CALL 


CAI-A'-PHAS,  Ka'idtpas  digression. 

The  high  priest  of  the  Jews  who  presided  at  the  trial 

of  Jesus. 

Matted.  3  assembled . .  priests . .  unto  the  palace  of  C. 
26.  57  they.. led  (him)  away  to  C.  the  high  priest 
Luke  3.  2  Annas  and  0.  being  the  high  priests,  the 
John  it.  49  one  of  them  ..0  .  -said  unto  them,  Ye 
18.  13  Annas.. was  father-in-law  to  0.,  which 
18.  14  C.  was  he  which  gave  counsel  to  the  Jews 
18.  24  Annas.,  sent  him  bound  unto  C.  the  high 

18.  28  Then  led  they  Jesus  from  G.  unto  the 
Acts    4.    6  C,  and  John,  and  Alexander,  and  as 

CA'-IN,  }'p,  KaiV  acquisition. 

1.  Eldest  sou  of  Adam  and  Eve. 

Gen.   4.    1  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  C,  and  said 
4.    2  but  C.  was  a  tiller  of  the  ground 
4.   3  C.  brought.. an  offering  unto  the  Lord 
4.    5  unto  C.  and  to  his  offering  he  had  not 
4.    5  C.  was  very  wroth,  and  his  countenance 
4.   6  the  Lord  said  unto  C,  Why  art  thou 
4.   8  And  C.  talked  with  Abel  his  brother 
4.    8  C.  rose  up  against  Abel  his . .  and  slew 
4.    9  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Where  (is) 
4.  13  C.  said..  My  punishment  (is)  greater  than 
4.  15  whosoever  slayeth  C,  vengeance  shall  be 
4.  15  the  Lord  set  a  mark  upon  C,  lest  any 
4.  16  C.  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
4.  17  C.  knew  his  wife  ;  and  she  conceived,  and 
4.  24  If  C.  shall  be  aveuged  sevenfold,  truly 

4.  25  instead  of  Abel,  whom  C.  slew 

Ileb.  11.    4  offered,  .a  more.. sacrifice  than  C.  by 
1  Jo.   3.  12  Not  as  C,  (who). .  slew  his  brother 
Jude       11  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  C. 

2.  A  town  in  the  S.  of  Judah  (properly  "  the  Cain  "),  of 
which  no  one  has  traced  the  site. 

Josh. 15.  57  C,  Gibeah,  and  Timnah  ;  ten  cities  with 
S.  The  people  mentioned  in  Balaam's  prophecy  as  Kenite 
is  in  Hebrew  called  Kain  (]'p),  identical  with  Cain. 
Num24.  22  Nevertheless  the  K.  shall  be  wasted 
Judg.  4.  11  Heber  the  K. .  .severed  himself  from  the 

CAI'-NAN,  KE'-NAN,  frp  acquisition,  Ka'ivav. 

1.  A  son  of  Enos,  son  of  Seth,  B.C.  3679. 

Gen.    5.    9  And  Enos  lived  ninety  years,  and  begat  C. 

5.  10  Enos  lived  after  he  begat  C.  eight  hundred 
5.  12  And  C.  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat 

5.  13  C.  lived  after  he  begat  Mahalaleel  eight 
5.  14  the  days  of  C.  were  nine  hundred  and 

1  Oh.  1.    2  K.,  Mahalaleel,  Jered 

Luke  3.  37  Maleleel,  which. was  (the  son)  of  C. 

2.  A  son  of  Arphaxad,  B.C.  2000. 

Luke  3.  36  Which  was.  .of  C,  which  was.  .of  Arph. 
CAKE  — 
\,A  perforated  cake,  n^n  challah. 

Exod  29.    2  cakes  unleavened  tempered  with  oil,  and 

29.  23  one  loaf  of  bread,  and  one  cake  of  oiled 
Lev.    2.    4  (it  shall  be)  unleavened  cakes  of  fine  flour 

7.  12  he  shall  offer,  .unleavened  cakes  mingled 
7.  12  cakes  mingled  with  oil,  of  fine  flour,  fried 

7.  13  Besides  the  cakes,  he  shall  offer  (for)  his 

8.  26  he  took  one  unleavened  cake,  and  a  cake 
24.    5  take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve  cakes 
24.    5  two  tenth  deals  shall  be  in  one  cake 

Num.6.  15  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil.  and 
6. 19  one  unleavened  cake  out  of  the  basket 
15.  20  Ye  shall  offer  up  a  cake  of  the  first  of 

2  Sa.   6. 19  to  every  one  a  cake  of  bread,  and  a  good 

2.  Cake  baked  on  hot  stones,  Jiya  maog. 

1  Ki  17. 12  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  I  have  not  a  cake 

Z.Cake  baked  on  hot  stones,  .~nj?,  naj|  ugah,  uggah. 
Exodi2.  39  they  baked  unleavened  cakes  of  the 
Num  11.    8  baked  (it)  in  pans,  and  made  cakes  of  it 
iKi.  17.  13  but  make  me  thereof  a  little  cake  first,  and 

19.  6  and,  behold,  .a  cake  baken  on  the  coats 
Eze.  4.  12  thou  shalt  eat  it  (as)  barley  cakes,  and 
Hos.    7.    8  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned 

4.  Round  cake,  t?,1?¥,  hty  tselul,  tselil. 

Judg.  7.  13  a  cake  of  barley  bread  tumbled  into  the 

5.  Cake  of  the  unleavened  dough,  nmn  p'p-i  reqiq. 

1  Ch.  23.  29  for  the  unleavened  cakes,  and  for  (that) 
CAKE  of  figs  — 
Lump  of  dry  figs,  fipivn  debelah. 

1  Sa.  25.  iS  two  hundred  cakes  of  figs,  and  laid  (them) 

30.  i2  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  cake  of  figs 
iCh.  12  40  (ami)  meat,  meal,  cakes  of  figs,  and  bnn. 

DAKE  upon  the  hearth  — 

Cake  baked  on  hot  stones,  rnj;  ugah. 

Gen.  18.    6  knead,  .and  make  cakes  upon  the  hearth 
CAKES  — 

1.  Cakes  {with  marks  on  them),  D'3J3  kawanim. 

Jer.     7.  18  the  women  knead,  .dough,  to  make  cakes 
44.  19  did  we  make  her  cakes  to  worship  her 

2.  Cakes  {of  the  shape  of  a  heart),  roaab  lebiboth. 

2  Sa.13.    6  make  me  a  couple  of  cakes  in  my  sight 

13.    8  she  took  flour,  .and  did  bake  the  cakes 
13. 10  Tamar  took  the  cakes  which  she  had 
CAKES,  to  make  — 

To  maize  cakes  in  t/ie  shape  of  a  heart,  237  labah,  3. 
2  Sa.  13.    8  and  made  cakes  in  his  sight,  and  did  bake 
CAKES,  unleavened  — 
Cake  pressed  out,  nso  matslsah. 

Josh.  5  11  uuleaveued  cakes,  and  parched  (corn)  in 


Judg.  6.  19  unleavened  cakes  of  an  ephah  of  flour 
-6.  20  Take  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes 
6.  21  touched  the  flesh  and  the  uuleavenedcakes 
6.  21  consumed  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  ca. 

CA'-LAH,  rkzfirm. 

One  of  the  most  ancient  cities  of  Assyria.  It  was 
founded  by  Asshur.  The  site  is  marked  by  the  Nimrud 
ruins,  which  have  furnished  a  large  proportion  of  the 
Assyrian  remains  now  iu  Britain.  It  was  the  capital 
of  the  Assyrian  empire  (B.C.  930-720),  and  was  the  resi- 
dence of  Sardauapalus  and  his  successors  down  to  the 
time  of  Sargon,  who  built  a  new  capital,  which  he  called 
by  his  own  name,  on  the  site  of  the  modern  Khorsabad. 
Gen.  10.  11  Asshur. .builded. .the  city..C. 

10.  12  And  Resen  between  Nineveh  and  C. 

CALAMITY  — 

1. Calamity,  mist,  vapour,  TN  ed. 

Deut.  32.  35  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  (is)  at  hand 

2  Sa.  22.  19  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my  calamity 

Psa.   18. 18  They  prevented  me  in.. day  of  my  calam. 

Prov.  1.  26  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity ;  I  will 
6.  15  Therefore  shall  his  calamity  come  sud. 
17.    5  he  that  is  glad  at  calamities  shall  not 
24.  22  For  their  calamity  shall  rise  suddenly 
27.  io  neither  go.  .in  the  day  of  thy  calamity 

Jer.   18.  17  I  will  show  them,  .day  of  their  calamity 
46.  21  the  day  of  their  calamity  was  come  upon 
43.  16  The  calamity  of  Moab  (is)  near  to  come 
49.   8  I  will  bring  the  calamity  of  Esau  upon 
49.  32  I  will  bring  their  calamity  from  all  sides 

Eze.  35.    5  shed  (the  blood),  .in  the  time  of  their cal. 

Obad.      13,  i3Thoushouldestnot..in.  .theircalamity 
^.Accident,  misfortune,  n^ri,  nyi  hav-vah,  hayyah. 

Job     6.    2  my  calamity  laid  in  the  balances  together 
30. 13  They  mar  my  path,  .set  forward  my  cal. 

Psa.  57.    1  make  my  refuge,  until  (these)  calamities 

Prov  19. 13  A  foolish  sou  (is)  the  calamity  of  his 

3.£vil,  bad,  m  ra. 

Psa.  141.    5  my  prayer  also,  .in  their  calamities 

CALAMUS  — 

A  reed,  cane,  rap  qaneh. 

Exod.30.  23  sweet  calamus  two  hundred  and  flfty 
Song  4.  14  Spikenard  and  saffron ;  calamus  and  cin. 
Eze.  27. 19  cassia,  and  calamus,  were  iu  thy  market 

CAL'-COL,  'ri)??  sustaining. 

A  son  of  Zerah,  the  son  of  Judah  by  his  daughter-in-law 
Tamar,  B.C.  1680.  See  Chalcol,  which  in  Hebrew  is 
identical  with  Calcol, 

1  Ch.  2.    6  sons  of  Zerah ..  Heraan,  and  C,  and  Dara 
CALDRON  — 

1.  Caldron,  flD3B  agmon. 

Job   41.  20  (out)  of  a  seething  pot  or  caldron 

2.  Kettle,  basket,  W  dud. 

2  Ch.  35.  13  in  caldrons,  and  in  pans,  and  divided 

3.  Pot,  Tp  sir. 

Jer.  52.  18  The  caldrons  also,  and  the  shovels,  and 

52.  19  fire  pans,  and  the  bowls,  and  the  caldrons 
Eze.  11.    3  this  (city  is)  the  caldron,  and  we  (be)  the 

11.  7  they  (are)  the  flesh,  .(city  is)  the  caldron 
11.  11  This  (city)  shall  not  be  your  caldron 

4.  Caldron,  nn|pp  qallctchath. 

1  Sa.   2.  14  And  he  struck  (it)  into  the . .  caldron 
Mic.    3.    3  for  the  pot,  and  as  flesh  within  the  cald. 

CA'-LEB,  2*?3  bold,  impetuous. 

1.  A  son  of  Jephunneh,  by  which  patronymic  he  is 
usually  designated.  He  is  mentioned  among  the  chiefs 
sent  to  spy  out  Canaan,  and  with  Joshua  brought  back 
a  favourable  report  (B.C.  1650).  He  was  a  prince  of 
Judah,  as  chief  of  the  Hezronites,  while  Nahshon  was 
Prince  of  the  whole  tribe.  When  85  years  of  age  be 
claimed  possession  of  the  land  of  the  Auakims,  Kirjath- 
arba  or  Hebron  and  the  neighbouring  hill-country, 
which  was  granted,  and  he  courageously  took  possession 
of  it,  driving  out  the  three  sons  of  Auak,  B.C.  1600. 
Num  13.    6  Of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  C.  the  son  of  Jeph. 

13.  30  And  C.  stilled  the  people  before  Closes 

14.  6  Joshua,  .and  0. .  .rent  their  clothes 

14.  24  my  servant  C. .  .him  will  I  bring  into  the 
14.  30  ye  shall  not  come  into  the  land,  .save  C. 
14.  38  and  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh.  .lived  (still) 
26.  65  there  was  not  left  a  man.  .save  C.  the 
32.  12  Save  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh  the  Kene. 
34.  19  Of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  C.  the  son  of  Jeph. 
Deut.  1.  36  Save  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh  ;  he  shall 
Josh.14.    6  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh  the  Kenezite 
14. 13  gave  unto  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh  Heb. 

14.  14  Hebron,  .became  the  inheritance  of  C. 

15.  13  unto  C.  the  sou  of  Jephunneh  he  gave  a 
15.  14  C.  drove  thence  the  thrpe  sons  of  Anak 
15.  16  And  C.  said,  He  that  sniiteth  Kirjath, 
15.  17  the  son  of  Kenez,  the  brother  of  C,  took 
15.  iS  and  O.  said  unto  her,  What  wouldest 

21.  12  gave  they  to  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh 

Judg.  1.  12  And  C.  said,  He  that  smiteth  Kirjath. 

1.  13  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz,  C.'s  younger 

1.  14  and  C.  said  unto  her,  What  wilt  thou? 

1.  15  C.  gave  her  the  upper  springs  and  the 

1.  20  they  gave  Hebron  unto  C,  as  Moses 

3.    9  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz,  C.'s  younger 
1  Sa  25.    3  (was)  churlish,  .and  he.  .of.  .house  of  C. 
30.  14  made  an  invasion  (upon),  .the  south  of  0. 
i  Ch.  2.  46  Ephah,  C.'s  concubine,  bare  Harau,  and 

2.  48  Maachah,  C.'s  concubine,  bare  Sheber 


1  Ch.  2.  49  and  the  daughter  of  C.  (was)  Achsa 
4.  15  sons  of  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh  ;  Iru 
6.  56  they  gave  to  C.  the  son  of  Jephunneh 

2.  Son  of  Hezron  son  of  Pharez  son  of  Jhdah,  and  father 
of  Hur  by  Ephrath  or  Ephratah,  and  so  grandfather  of 
Caleb  the  spy  (No.  1.)  There  is  some  confusion  about 
this  Caleb.    B.C.  1530-1430. 

1  Ch.  2.  18  And  C.  the  son  of  Hezron  begat,  .of  Azu. 
2. 19  C.  took  unto  him  Ephrath,  which  bare 
2.  42  the  sons  of  C.  the  brother  of  Jerahmeel 

3.  Son  of  Hur  son  of  Caleb  (No.  2.)    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  2.  50  These  were  the  sons  of  C.  the  son  of  Hur 

CA-LEB  EPH-RA'-TAH,  nrnEN  nSs. 

A  place  near  Bethlehem-Judah,  sup'posed  to  have  been 

named  after  Caleb  and  his  wife  Ephratah. 

1  Ch.  2.  24  after  that  Hezron  was  dead  in  C.-e. 
CALF  — 

Calf,  the  young  of  theherd,  fed  ou  milk  and  the  branches 
of  trees,  fattened  in  stalls,  offered  in  sacrifice  when  a 
year  old,  and  considered  a  delicacy.  It  was  worshipped 
in  Egypt,  which  induced  the  impatient  Israelites  to 
demand  that  Aaron  should  make  one  that  should  go 
before  them.  This  he  did  of  the  women's  ornaments, 
It  was  molten  in  the  fire,  fashioned  with  a  graving  tool, 
an  altar  built  to  it,  and  worshipped  with  revelry. 
Jeroboam  (B.C.  970)  made  two  of  gold,  which  he  placed 
in  Bethel  and  Dan,  the  extreme  limits  of  his  kingdom, 
appointed  priests,  built  altars,  and  offered  sacrifices. 
This,  though  denounced  byaprophet,  was  carried  on  by 
every  succeeding  king  of  Israel,  and  became  the  great 
sin  of  Israel,  for  which  they  were  punished,  carried 
into  Assyria,  and  finally  perished  iu  oblivion. 

l.Son  of  tlie  herd,  ii5?*|?  ben  baqar. 

Gen.  18.    7  fetched  a  calf  tender  and  good,  and  gave 
18.    8  the  calf  which  he  had  dressed,  and  set  (it) 
1  Sa.  14.  32  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  calves,  and 

2.  Calf,  heifer,  hi%  egel. 

EXOCI32.    4  after  he  had  made  it  a  molten  calf 

32.    8  they  have  made  them  a  molten  calf,  and 
32.  19  as  soon  as  he  came  nigh,  .he  saw  the  calf 
32.  20  took  the  calf  which  they  had  made,  and 
32.  24  I  cast  it.  .and  there  came  out  this  calf 
32.  35  because  they  made  the  calf  which  Aaron 

Lev.    9.    3  a  calf  and  a  lamb,  (both)  of  the  first  year 
9.    8  slew  the  calf  of  the  sin-offering  which 

Deut.  9.  16  (and)  had  made  you  a  molten  calf 

9.  21  I  took  your  sin,  the  calf  which  ye  had 

1  Sa.  28.  24  the  women  had  a  fat  calf  in  the  house 

1  Ki.12.  28  made  two  calves  (of)  gold,  and  said  unto 

12.  32  sacrificing  unto  the  calves  that  he  had 

2  Ki.io.  29  (to  wit),  the  golden  calves  that  (were)  in 

17.  16  made  them  molten  images,  .two  calves 
2  Ch.11.  15  and  for  the  calves  which  he  had  made 

13.  8  (there  are)  with  you  golden  calves,  which 
Neh.  9.  18  when  they  had  made  them  a  molten  calf 
Psa.  29.    6  He  maketh  them  also  to  skip  like  a  calf 

6S.  30  the  multitude  of  the  bulls,  with  the  calves 
ic6.  19  They  made  a  calf  in  Horeb.  .worshipped 
Isa.   11.    6  the  calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the 

27.  10  there  shall  the  calf  feed,  and  there  shall 
Jer.  34.  18  when  they  cut  the  calf  iu  twain,  and 

34.  19  which  passed  between,  .parts  of  the  calf 
Eze.    1.    7  their  feet  (was)  like  the  sole  of  a  calf's 
Hos.   8.    5  Thy  calf,  O  Samaria,  hath  cast  (thee)  off 
8.    6  the  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be  broken  in 

13.    2  Let  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the  calves 
Amos  6.    4  the  calves  .out  of  the  midst  of  the  stall 
Mic.    6.    6  shall  I  come  before  him.  .with  calves  of 
Mai.    4.   2  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall 

3.  Calf,  rhty  eglah. 

Hos.  10.   5  inhabitants,  .shallfearbecauseof.  .calves 
4:.  A  young  Indl,  produce,  1?,  13  par. 

Hos.  14.    2  so  will  we  render^the  calves  of  our  lips 
5.-4  young  calf,  /xSc^xos  7noschos. 

Lukeis.  23  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  (it) 
15. "27  and  thy  father  hath  killed  the  fatted  calf 
15.  30  thou  hast  killed  for  him  the  fatted  calf 
Heb.  9. 12  Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves 
9. 19  he  took  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  goats 
Rev.   4.    7  and  the  second  beast  like  a  calf 

CALF,  to  make  a  — 

To  make  a  calf,  fiooxowoUco  moschopoieo. 
Acts  7.  41  And  they  made  a  calf  in  those  days 

CALF,  young  — 

A  Jieifcr,son  of  the  herd,  1j3?")3  bi_%  cgel  ben  baqar. 
Lev.    9.    2  Take  thee  a  young  calf"  for  a  sin  offering 

CALKER  — 

Repairers  of  a  breach,  P~3  'p'inD  machadqe  bedeq. 
Eze.  27.    9  wise  (men)  thereof  were  in  thee,  .calkers 
27.  27  calkers,  and  the  occupiers  of  thy  merch 

CALL,  to  — 

1.7*0  say,  "DN  amar. 

Isa.     5.  20*Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and 
Lam.  2.  15  that  (men)  call  The  perfection  of  beauty 

2.  To  cause  to  come  in,  Ni3  bo,  5. 

Esth.  5. 10  he  sent  and  called  for  his  friends,  and 

3.  To  cry  {for  help),  pjJj  zctaq. 

Judg  12.    2  when  I  called  you,  ye  delivered  me  not 
4. To  cause  to  cry  {for  help),  pi']  zaaq,  5. 

Judg  4.  10  Barak  called  Zebulun  and  Napbtali  to 


CALL 


13G 


CALL 


5.  To  call,  name,  K"JE  qara. 

Gen.   i.    5  called  the  light  Day.  .darkness  he  called 
i.    8  And  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven 
i.  io  And  God  called  the  dry  (land)  Earth 
i.  io  gathering,  .of  the  waters  called  he  seas 
2.  19  brought  (them) . .  to  see  what  he  would  call 

2.  10  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living 

3.  9  the  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and 

3.  20  Adam  called  his  wife's  name  Eve 

4.  17  he  builded  a  city,  and  called  the  name 
4.  25  she  baro  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth 
4.  26  and  he  called  his  name  Euos 

4.  26  then  begau  men  to  call  upon  the  name  of 

5.  2  and  blessed  them,  and  called  their  name 
■;.  3  begat  (a  son),  .and  called  his  name  Seth 
5.  29  called  his  name  Noah,  saying,  This  (same) 

it.    9  Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babel 
12.    8  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 

12.  18  Pharoah  called  Abram,  and  said,  What 

13.  4  there  Abram  called  on  the  name  of  the 
16. 11  bear  a  son.  .shalt  call  his  name  Ishmael 
16.  13  she  called  the  name  of  the  Lord  that 

16.  15  and  Abram  called  his  son's  name.  .Ish. 

17.  15  thou  shalt  not  call  her  name  Sarai,  but 
17.  19  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Isaac  :  and  I  will 
19.    5  they  called  unto  Lot,  and  said  uuto  him 
19.  37  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab 

19.  38  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Ben-ammi 

20.  8  called  all  his  servants,  and  told  all 

20.  9  Abimelech  called  Abraham,  and  said 

2i.    3  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his  son.  .Is. 

21.  17  the  angel  of  God  called  to  Hagar  out  of 
21.  31  Wherefore  he  called  thatplaceBeer-sheba 

21.  33  and  called  there  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 
22. 11  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  uuto  him 

22.  14  Abraham  called.,  that  place  Jehovah -ji. 
22.  15  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  uuto  Abra. 
24.  57  they  said,  We  will  call  the  damsel,  and 

24.  58  they  called  Rebekah,  and  said  unto  her 

25.  25  and  they  called  his  name  Esau 

26.  9  Abimelech  called  Isaac,  and  said,  Behold 
26.  18  and  he  called  their  names  after  the 

26.  18  by  which  his  father  had  called  them 
26.  20  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  well  Esek 
26.  21  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  Sitnah 
26.  22  aud  he  called  the  name  of  it  Rehoboth 
26.  25  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 

26.  33  he  called  it  Shebah.  .the  name  of  the 

27.  1  he  called  Esau  his  eldest  sou,  aud  said 

27.  42  and  she.  .called  Jacob  her  younger  son 

28.  1  Isaac  called  Jacob,  and  blessed  him 

28.  19  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Beth-el 

29.  32  bare  a  son,  and  she  called  his  name  Reu. 
29-  33  hare  a  son.  .and  she  called  his  name  Sim. 

29.  35  therefore  she  called  his  name  Judah 

30.  6  God.  .given  me  a  son  :  therefore  called 
30.    8  aud  she  called  his  name  Naphtali 

30.  11  A  troop  cometh  :  and  she  called  his 

30.  13  and  she  called  his  name  Asher 

30.  18  and  she  called  his  name  Issachar 

30.  20  aud  she  called  his  name  Zebulun 

30.  21  she  bare  a  daughter,  aud  called  her  name 

30.  24  she  called  his  name  Joseph  ;  and  said 

31.  4  Jacob  sent  and  called  Rachel  aud  Leah 
31.  47  Lahau  called  it  Jegar-sahadutha 

31.  47  but  Jacob  called  it  Galeed 

31.  54  Then  Jacob,  .called  his  brethren  to  eat 

32.  2  aud  he  called  the  name.  .  Mahanaim 

32.  30  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel 

33.  20  an  altar,  and  called  it  El-elohe-Israel 
35.  7  he  built  there  an  altar,  and  called  the 
35.  10  and  he  called  his  name  Israel 

35.  15  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place 
35.  18  as  her  soul  was  in  departing,  .she  called 
35.  18  but  his  father  called  him  Benjamin 
38.   3  and  he  called  his  name  Er 
38.    4  and  she  called  his  name  Onan 

38.  5  bare  a  son  ;  and  called  his  name  Shelah 

39.  14  That  she  called  unto  the  men  of  her  house 
41.    8  he  sent  and  called  for  all  the  magicians 
41.  14  Then  Pharaoh  sent  and  called  Joseph 
41.  45  And.  .called  Joseph's  name  Zaphnath. 
41.  51  And  Joseph  called  the  name  of  the  first 
41.  52  the  name  of  the  second  called  he  Ephr. 

46.  33  when  Pharaoh  shall  call  you,  and  shall 

47.  29  he  called  his  son  Joseph,  and  said  unto 
49.    1  Jacob  called  unto  his  sons,  and  said 

Exod.  r.  18  the  king  of  Egypt  called' for.  .midwives 
2.    7  Shall  I  go  aud  call  to  thee  a  nurse  of 
2.    8  the  maid  weut  and  called  the  child's 
2.  10  she  called  his  name  Moses  :  and  she 
2.  20  call  him,  that  he  may  eat  bread 

2.  22  she  bare  (him)  a  sou,  and  he  called  his 

3.  4  God  called  uuto'hiin  out  of  the  midst  of 

7.  11  Pharaoh  also  called  the  wise  men  and 

8.  8  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron 

8.  25  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  aud  for  Aaron 

9.  =7  Pharaoh  sent,  and  called  for  Moses  and 
10.  16  Then  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  aud  Aaron 
10.  24  Pharaoh  called  unto  Moses,  and  said 

12.  21  Moses  called  for  all  the  elders  of  Israel 
12.  31  he  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron  by  night 

16.  31  Israel  called  the  name  thereof  Manna 

17.  7  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Massah 
17.  15  Moses  built  au  altar,  and  called  the 

T9.    3  the  Lord  called  unto  him  out  of  the 
19.    7  Moses  came  aud  called  for  the  ciders  of 
19.  20  the  Loud  called  Moses  (up)  to  the  top  of 
24.  16  the  seventh  day  lie  called  unto  Moses 
31.    2  I  have  railed  byname  Bezabeelthe  son  of 
3i.    7  and  called  it  the  Taberuacle  of  the  Con. 


24. 

25- 

32. 

32- 
Deut.  2. 

3- 

3' 

3- 

4- 

5' 

25- 

29. 

3*- 

3r- 

33- 

Josh.  4. 

6. 

9- 

10. 

19. 

22. 

22. 

23- 
24. 
24. 


Exod  34.  15  aud  do  sacrifice  unto  their  gods,  and . .  call 

34.  31  Moses  called  unto  them  ;  and  Aaron  and 

35.  30  the  Lord  hath  called  by  name  Bezaleel 

36.  2  Moses  called  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  and 
Lev.    1.    1  the  LORD  called  unto  Moses,  and  spake 

9.    1  (that)  Moses  called  Aaron  and  his  sons 

10.  4  Moses  called  Misbael  aud  Elzaphan,  the 
Num  11.    3  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Taberah 

11.  34  he  called,  .that  place  Kibrothdiattaavah 

12.  5  called  Aaron  and  Miriam.. both  came 

13.  16  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son.  of  Nun,  Jeh. 
16.  12  Moses  sent  to  call  Dathan  and  Abiram 

21.  3  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Uormah 

22.  5  He  sent  messengers . .  to  call  him 

22.  20  If  the  men  come  to  call  thee,  rise  up 
22.  37  Did  I  not  earnestly  send  unto  thee  to  call 

10  Balak  said . .  I  called  thee  to  curse  mine 
2  they  called  the  people  unto  the  sacrifices 

41  Jair.  .took,  .and  called  them  Havoth-jair 

42  aud  called  it  Nobah,  after  his  own  name 

11  but  the  Moabites  call  them  Emims 
20  the  Ammonites  call  them  Zamzummims 

9  (Which)  Hermon  the  Sidonians  call  Sirion 
9  and  the  Amorites  call  it  Sheuir 
14  and  called  them  after  his  own  name 

7  in  all  (things  that)  we  call  upon  him  (for)? 
1  Moses  called  all  Israel,  and  said  uuto 

8  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  call  him,  and 
2  Moses  called  unto  all  Israel,  and  said 

7  Moses  called  unto  Joshua,  and  said  unto 
14  call  Joshua,  and  present  yourselves  in 
19  They  shall  call  the  people  unto  the  mount. 

4  Joshua  called  the  twelve  men,  whom  he 

6  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  called  the  priests 

22  Joshua  called  for  them,  and  he  spake  unto 

24  Joshua  called  for  all  the  men  of  Israel 

47  aud  called  Leshem,  Dau,  after  the  name 

1  Joshua  called  the  Reubenites,  and  the 
34  the  children  of  Reuben . .  called  the  altar 

2  Joshua  called  for  all  Israel,  (and)  for 

1  Joshua,  .called  for  the  elders  of  Israel 

9  sent  and  called  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor 
juag.  1.  26  and  built  a  city,  and  called  the  name 

2.    5  they  called  the  name  of  that  place  Boch. 
4.    6  she  sent  and  called  Barak  the  son  of  A. 
6.  24  Gideon  built  an  altar,  .and  called  it  Jeh. 
6.  32  on  that  day  he  called  him  Jerubbaal 

8.  1  Why.  .served  us  thus,  that  thou  calledst 

9.  54  he  called  hastily  unto  the  young  man  his 

12.  1  and  didst  not  call  us  to  go  with  thee  ? 

13.  24  the  woman  bare  a  son,  aud  called  his 

14.  15  have  ye  called  us  to  take  that  we  have  ? 

15.  17  and  called  that  place  Ramathdehi 
15. 18  he  was  sore  athirst,  and  called  on  the 

15.  19  wherefore  he  called,  name.. En-hakkore 

16.  18  she  sent  aud  called  for  the  lords  of  the 
16.  19  she  called  for  a  man,  and  she  caused  him 
16.  25  came  to  pass,  .they  said,  Call  for  Samson 
16.  25  they  called  for  Samson  out  of  the  prisou 
16.  28  Samson  called  unto  the  Lord,  and  said 
18.  12  they  called  that  place  Mahaneh-dau  uuto 
18.  29  they  called  the  name  of  the  city  Dan 

21.  13  and  to  call  peaceably  unto  them 
Ruth  1.  20  she  said  unto  them,  Call  me  not  Naomi 

1.  21  why  (then)  call  ye  me  Naomi,  seeing  the 

4.  17  There  is  a  son  born.. and  they  called  his 
1  Sa.    1.  20  that  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name 

4  the  Lord  called  Samuel:  and  he  answered 

5  and  said,  Here  (am)  I  ;  for  thou  calledst 

5  And  he  said,  I  called  not,  lie  down  again 

6  Here  (am)  I ;  for  thou  didst  call  me 
6  he  answered,  I  called  not,  my  son  ;  lie 

8  the  Lord  called  Samuel  again  the  third 
S  Eli  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  called 
q  if  he  call  thee,  that  thou  shalt  say,  Speak 

10  the  Loud  came,  .and  called  as  at  other 
16  Then  Eli  called  Samuel,  and  said,  Samuel 

2  the  Philistines  called  for  the  priests  and 
12  aud  called  the  name  of  it  Eben-ezer,  saying 
26  that  Samuel  called  Saul  to  the  top  of  the 

12. 17  I  will  call  uuto  the  Lord,  aud  he  shall 
12.  18  So  Samuel  called  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  the 
16.    3  call  Jesse  to  the  sacrifice,  and  I  will 
16.    5  he  sanctified,  .and  called  them  to  the 

16.  8  Jesse  called  Abinadab,  and  made  him 
T9.    7  Jonathan  called  David,  and  Jonathan 

22.  11  the  king  sent  to  call  Ahimelech  the  priest 

28.  15  I  have  called  thee,  that  thou  mayest 

29.  6  Achish  called  David,  and  said  unto  him 
:  Sa.    i.    7  he  saw  me,  and  called  unto  me :  and  I 

1. 15  David  called  one  of  the  young  men,  and 

2.  26  Then  Abner  called  to  Joab,  and  said 

5.  9  David  dwelt  in  the  fort,  aud  called  it,  The 

5.  20  Therefore  he  called  the  name  of  that 

6.  8  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Per. 
9.    2  when  they  had  called  him  unto  David 

9.    9  Then  the  king  called  to  Ziba,  Saul's 

11.  13  when  David  had  called  him,  he  did  eat 

12.  24  she  bare  a  sou,  and  he  called  his  name 

12.  25  he  called  his  name  Jedidiah,  because 

13.  17  he  called  his  servant  that  ministered 

14.  33  when  he  had  called  for  Absalom,  he  came 

15.  2  then  Absalom  called  unto  him,  and  said 

17.  5  Then  said  Absalom,  Call  now  Hushai 

18.  18  he  called  the  pillar  after  his  own  name 
18.  26  the  watchmau  called  unto  the  porter 
18.  28  Ahimaaz  called,  aud  said  unto  the  king 

21.  2  the  king  called  the  Gibeonites,  and  said 

22.  4  I  will  call  on  the  Lord,  (who  is) 

22.    7  In  my  distress  I  called  upon  the  Lord 
i  Ki.    1.    9  called  all  his  brethren  the  king's  sons 
1.  10  But  Nathan  the  prophet.. he  called  uot 


:Ki.   3 

3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
6. 

1- 
7- 


1  Ch. 


2CI1. 


18. 

18. 

24. 
Neh.  5. 
Esth.  4. 

9- 
Job     1. 

5- 
9- 


91. 

99. 

99. 
102. 
105. 
105. 
116. 
116. 
116. 
116. 
118. 
M5- 
145- 
147. 


19  hath  called  all  the  sons  of  the  king,  and 

19  Solomon  thy  servant  hath  he  not  called 

25  hath  called  all  the  king's  sons,  and  the 

26  But  me,  (even)  me.. hath  he  not  called 
28  king  David,  .said,  Call  me  Eath-sheba 

32  Call  me  Zadok  the  priest,  and  Nathan 
36  the  king  sent  and  called  for  Shimei,  and 

42  And  the  king  sent  aud  called  for  Shimei 
21  he  set  up  the  right  pillar,  and  called  the 

21  he  set  up  the  left  pillar,  and  called  the 

43  according  to  all  that  the  stranger  calleth 
52  to  hearken  unto  them  in  all  that  they  call 
13  he  called  them  the  land  of  Cabul  unto 

3  That  they  sent  and  called  him 

20  sentaudcalledhimunto  the  congregation 
24  and  called  the  name  of  the  city  which  he 

10  he  called  to  her,  and  said,  Fetch  me,  I 

11  as  she  was  going  to  fetch  (it),  he  called  to 

3  And  Ahab  called  Obadiah,  which  (was) 
24  call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods 

24  aud  I  will  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 

25  call  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  but  put  no 

26  called  on  the  name  of  Baal  from  morning 
7  the  king  of  Israel  called  all  the  elders 

9  Then  the  king  of  Israel  called  an  officer 
13  the  messenger  that  was  gone  to  callMic. 
,  10  that  the  Lord  hath  called  these  three 

13  for  the  Lord  hath  called  these  three  kings 

12  he  said  to  Gehazi.  .Call  this  Shunammite 
12  when  he  had  called  her,  she  stood  before 

15  said,  Call  her.    And  when  he  had  called 

22  she  called  unto  her  husbaud,  and  said 
36  he  called  Gehazi,  and  said,  Call  this  Shu. 
36  Call  this  Shunammite.     So  he  called  her 
1 1  and  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God 
11  he  called  his  servants,  and  said  unto 

10  So  they  came  and  called  unto  the  porter 

11  he  called  the  porters ;  and  they  told  (it) 
1  for  the  Lord  hath  called  for  a  famine 

1  Elisha  the  prophet  called  one  of  the 
19  therefore  call  unto  me  all  the  jirophets 
7  Then  king  Jehoash  called  for  Jehoiada 
7  and  called  the  name  of  it  Joktheel  unto 

4  and  he  called  it  Nehushtan 

18  when  they  had  called  to  the  king,  there 
9  his  mother  called  his  name  Jabez,  saying 

10  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying 

16  Maachah.  .bare  a  son,  and  she  called  his 

23  he  called  his  name  Beriah,  because  it 

7  therefore  they  called  it  the  city  of  David 

11  called  the  name  of  that  place  Baal-pera. 

11  David  called  for  Zadok  and  Abiathar  the 

8  Give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  call  upou  his 
26  David ibuilt^there  an  altar.. and  called 

6  lie  called  for  Solomon  his  son,  and 

17  called  the  name  of  that  on  the  right  hand 

33  all  that  the  stranger  calleth  to  thee  for 

3  And  they  sent  and  called  him 

5  the  king  of  Israel  called  for  one 

12  the  messenger  that  went  to  call  Micaiah 

6  the  king  called  for  Jehoiada  the  chief 

12  I  called  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath  of 

5  Then  called  Esther  for  Hatach,  (one)  of 
26  Wherefore  they  called  these  days  Purim 

4  sent  and  called  for  their  three  sisters,  to 
1  Call  now,  if  there  be  any  that  will  answer 

16  If  I  had  called,  and  he  had  answered  me 
4  who  calleth  upon  God,  and  he  answereth 
22  Then  call  thou,  and  I  will  answer 

15  Thou  shalt  call,  and  I  will  answer  thee 

16  I  called  my  servant,  and  lie  gave  (me)no 

10  will  he  always  call  upon  God? 

14  he  called  the  name  of  the  first,  Jemima 

1  Hear  me  when  I  call,  0  God  of  my  right. 

3  the  Lord  will  hear  when  I  call  unto  him 

4  and  call  not  upon  the  LORD 

6  I  have  called  upon  thee,  for  thou  wilt 

3  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,  (who  is)  worthy 

6  In  my  distress  I  called  upon  the  Lord 

9  let  the  King  hear  us  when  we  call 

17  for  I  have  called  upon  thee  :  let  the 

7  Deep  calleth  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of 

11  they  call  (their)  lands  after  their  own 

1  and  called  the  earth,  from  the  rising  of 

4  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  from  above 

15  And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble 

4  they  have  not  called  upon  God 

16  As  for  me,  I  will  call  upon  God  ;  and 

6  that  have  not  called  upon  thy  name 

18  quicken  us,  aud  we  will  call  upon  thy 

7  Thou  calledst  in  trouble,  and  I  delivered 

5  plenteous  in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  call 
7  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  will  call  upon 
9  Lord,  I  have  called  daily  upon  thee 

is  He  shall  call  upon  me,  and  I  will  answer 

6  and  Samuel  among  them  that  call  upon. 
6  they  called  upon  the  Loud,  and  he  answ 

2  in  the  day  (when)  I  call  answer  me 

1  call  upon  his  name  :  make  known  his 

16  he  called  for  a  famine  upon  the  land 

2  will  I  call  upou  (him)  as  long  as  I  live 

4  Then  called  I  upon  the  name  of  the  LORD 

13  aud  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 

17  and  will  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lohd 

5  I  called  upon  the  Lord  in  distress 

18  The  Lord  (is)  nigh  unto  all  them  that  call 
18  to  all  that  call  upon  him  in  truth 

4  he  calleth  them  by  all  (their)  names 

24  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused;  J 

28  Then  shall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will 

4  and  call  understanding  (thy)  kinswoman 

4  Uuto  you,  O  men,  I  call ;  and  my  voice 


CALL 


137 


CALL 


Frov.  9. 

iS 

Song  5. 

Isa.     7 


29. 
3=>- 
33- 
35- 
3^- 
42. 
Lam.    1. 


Eze.    9. 
36. 

33- 

39- 

Dau.    2 


llos. 


Joel 


Amos  5 

5' 

9' 
Jon.  1, 
Zeph.  3. 
Hag.  1. 
Zech.  3. 


15  To  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their 
6  and  his  mouth  calleth  for  strokes 

6  I  called  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer 

14  hear  a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Im. 
.    3  Call  his  name  Mahar-shalal  hash-baz. 

.    4  say,  Praise  the  Lord,  call  upon  his  name 
.    3  I  have  also  called  my  mighty  ones  for 
.  11  He  calleth  to  me  out  of  Seir,  Watchman 
.  12  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call 
.  20  I  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  the  son 
.  12  They  shall  call  the  nobles,  .the  kingdom 
.  26  he  calleth  them  all  by  names  by  the 
.    2  called  him  to  his  foot,  gave  the  nations 
.    4  calling  the  generations  from  the  begin. 
.    9  and  called  thee  from  the  chief  men 
.  25  from  the  rising  of  the  bun  shall  he  call 
.    6  1.  .have  called  thee  in  righteousness 

1  I  have  called  (thee)  by  thy  name ;  thou 
22  But  thou  hast  not  called  upon  me,  0  Ja. 

5  another  shall  call  (himself)  by  the  name 

7  And  who,  as  I,  shall  call,  and  shall 

3  I.  .which  call  (thee)  by  thy  name,  (am) 

4  I  have  even  called  thee  by  thy  name 

11  Calling  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  east 
13  (when)  I  call  unto  them,  they  stand  up 

15  I,  (even)  I,  have  spoken;  yea,  I  have  called 

1  The  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the 

2  when  I  called,  (was  there)  noue  to 

2  for  I  called  him  alone,  and  blessed  him 
.  6  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  as  a  woman 

5  thou  shalt  call  a  nation,  .thou  knowest 

6  call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near 

5  wilt  thou  call  this,  .an  acceptable  day 

9  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall  answer 

13  and  call  the  sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy 
4  None  calleth  for  justice, nor  (any)  pleadeth 

14  they  shall  call  thee,  The  city  of  the  Lord 

18  but  thou  shalt  call  thy  walls  Salvation 

6  (men)  shall  call  you  the  Ministers  of  our 

12  And  they  shall  call  them.  The  holy 

7  And  (there  is)  none  that  calleth  upon  thy 

12  because  when  I  called,  j'edidnot  answer 

15  and  call  his  servauts  by  another  name 

24  that  before  they  call,  I  will  answer;  and 
4  "because  when  I  called,  none  did  answer 

15  I  will  call  all  the  families  of  the  kingdoms 
17  they  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  throne  of 

19  and  I  said,  Thou  shalt  call  me,  My  father 
30  Reprobate  silver  shall  (men)  call  them 

13  and  I  called  you,  but  ye  answered  not 
27  thou  shalo  also  call  unto  them  ;  but  they 
17  Cousider  ye,  and  call  for  the  mourning 

25  upon  the  families  that  call  not  on  thy 

16  The  Lord  called  thy  name,  A  green  olive 
6  yea,  they  have  called  a  multitude  after 

3  Lord  hath  not  called  thy  name  Pashur 
12  Then  shall  ye  call  upon  me,  and  ye  shall 

17  because  they  called  thee  an  Outcast 

3  Call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee 
17  I  have  called.. but  they  have.,  answered 

4  Then  Jeremiah  called  Baruch  the  son  of 

8  Then  called  he  Johauan.  .sou  of  Kareah 

15  he  hath  called  an  assembly  against  me 
19  I  called  for  my  lovers,  (but)  they  deceived 

21  wilt  bring  the  day  (that)  thou  hast  called 

22  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my 
55  I  called  upon  thy  name,  0  Lord,  out  of 
57  I  called  upon  thee :  thou  saidst,  Fear 

3  he  called  to  the  man  clothed  with  linen 
29  I  will  call  for  the  corn,  and  will  increase 
21  I  will  call  for  a  sword  against  him 
11  they  shall  call  (it),  The  valley  of  Hamon. 

2  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  magiciaus 

16  I  heard  a  man's  voice,  .which  called,  and 

4  the  Lord  said.  .Call  his  name  Jezreel 

6  (God)  said.  .Call  her  name  Lo-ruhamah 

9  Then  said  (God),  Call  his  name  Lo-ammi 
16  it  shall  be.  .(that)  thou  shalt  call  me  Ishi 
16  and  shalt  call  me  no  more  Baali 

7  (there  is)  none  among  them  that  calleth 
11  they  call  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Assyria 

1  and  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt 

2  (As)  they  called  them,  so  they  went  from 

7  though  they  called  them  to  the  Most 

14  Sanctify  ye  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 

15  sanctify  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 
32  whosoever  shall  call  on.  .name  of  the 
32  in  the  remnant  whom  the  Lord  shall  call 

8  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea 

16  they  shall  call  the  husbandman 
4  behold,  the  Lord  God  called  to  contend 
6  he  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea 

6  O  sleeper?  arise,  call  upon  thy  God,  if  so 

9  that  they  may  all  call  upon  the  name  of 
11  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  the  land,  and 
10  shall  ye  call  every  man  his  neighbour 

7  I  took  unto  me  two  staves,  .one  I  called 
7  the  other  I  called  Bands ;  and  I  fed  the 
9  they  shall  call  on  my  name,  and  I  will 

4  shall  call  them,  The  border  of  wickedness 

speak,  elirov  eipon. 

35  If  he  called  them  gods  unto  whom  the 


0.  To  say, 
John  10. 

7.  To  call  upon,  4irtKa\eu)  epikalcd. 

1.  23  Moreover  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon 


2  Co. 

S.  To  say, 
John  15 

9.  To  call, 

Matt.  1, 

i, 

] 


speak,    epw  cro. 
.  15  but  I  nave  called  you  friends  ;  for  all 

name,  KaXecii  kaleo. 

21  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus  ;  for  he 
,  23  and  they  shall  call  his  name  Emmanuel 
8 


2C.  8 
22.  3 
22-43 

22-  45 

23-  9 
25.  14 

Mark  1.  20 
2.  1; 
Luke  1.  1 


5- 
6. 
14. 

19. 

20. 
John  10 
Acts    4, 

I* 
Bom.  4 


1  Co. 
Gal. 


2Th. 
-Ti. 
Heb. 
1  Pe. 


i  Pe. 


her  first  born  son  :  and  he  called  hi3 
when  he  had  privily  called  the  wise  men 
Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  my  son 
he  saw  other  two  brethren,  .and  he  called 
for  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous 
If  they  have  called  the  master  of  the 
Call  the  labourers,  and  give  them  (their) 
sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  that 
How  then  doth  David  in  spirit  call  him 
If  David  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he 
call  no  (man)  your  father  upon  the  earth 
(who)  called  his  own  servauts,  and 
straightway  he  called  them  :  and  they 
I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  John 
bring  forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name 
they  called  him  Zach arias,  after,  .his 
I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not 
call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the 
he  called  his  ten  servants,  and  delivered 
David  therefore  calleth  him  Lord,  how  is 
he  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and 
they  called  them,  and  commanded  them 
they  called  Barnabas,  Jupiter  ;  and  Paul 
who  quicken eth  the  dead,  and  calleth 
whom  he  did.  .them  he  also  called 
whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified 
not  of  works,  but  of  him  that  calleth 
Even  us,  whom  he  hath  called,  not  of 
I  will  call  them  my  people,  which  were 
but  God  hath  called  us  to  peace 
as  the  Lord  hath  called  every  one,  so  let 
soon  removed  from  him  that  called  you 
it  pleased  God.  .and  called  (me)  by  his 
persiiasion(cometh)  not  of  him  that  call  eth 
God,  who  hath  called  you  unto  his  king. 
God  hath  not  called  us  unto  uncleanness 
Faithful  (is)  he  that  calleth  you,  who 
Whereunto  he  called  you  by  our  gospel 
Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  (us)  with 
he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren 
he  which  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be 
of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  dark, 
as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him 
who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory 
him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and 


10.  To  lay  out  in  order,  collect,  say,  \iyw  lego. 
Mattig.  17  he  said  unto  him,  Why  callest  thou  me 
Markio.  18  Jesus  said.  -Why  callest  thou  me  good  ? 

12.  37  David  therefore  himself  calleth  him  Lord 

15.  12  (unto  him)  whom  ye  call  the  King  of  the 
LukeiS.  19  Jesus  said.  .Why  callest  thou  me  good? 

20.  37  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of  Abraham 
Johms.  15  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants 
Acts  10.  28  that  I  should  not  call  any  man  common 

24.  14  after  the  way  which  they  call  heresy,  so 
JR.ev.  2.  20  Jezebel,  which  calleth  herself  a  prophet. 

11.  To  call  after  to  oneself,  fj.€raKa\€co. 

Acts  20. 17  and  called  the  elders  of  the  church 

12.7*o  use  a  name,  bvopafa  onomazo. 

Acts  19.  13  to  call  over  them  which  had  evil  spirits 

13.7b  call  toward,  ■Kpoa-naK^co  2iroskaleo. 

Matti5.  10  he  called  the  multitude,  and  said  unto 

18.  32  his  lord,  after  that  he  had  called  him 
Lukeis.  26  he  called  one  of  the  servants,  and  asked 
Acts   2.  39  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call 
5.  40  when  they  had  called  the  apostles,  and 

16.  10  the  Lord  had  called  us  for  to  preach  the 

14.  To  sound,  cry,  <pwv4o)  phoneo. 

Matt  20.  32  Jesus  stood  still,  and  called  them,  and 
Mark  3.  31  hisbrethren.  .seutuntohim,  [calliughim] 
9.  35  he  sat  down,  and  called  the  twelve,  and 

10.  49  they  call  the  blind  man.  .he  calleth  thee 

15.  35  they  heard  (it),  said,  Behold,  he  calleth 
Luke  8.  54  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  called,  saying 

14.  12  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren 

16.  2  And  he  called  him,  and  said.  .1  hear  this 
John  1.  4S  Before  that  Philip  called  thee.. I  saw 

2.    9  the  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  bride. 
4.  16  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  come  hither 
9.  18  they  called  the  parents  of  him  that  had 
9.  24  Then  again  called  they  the  man  that  was 

11.  28  she  went  her  way,  and  called  Mary  her 

12.  17  when  he  called  Lazarus  out  of  his  grave 

13.  13  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord:  and  ye  say 
18.  33  Then  Pilate  entered.. and  called  Jesus 

Acts    9.  41  when  he  had  called  the  saints  and 

10.    7  he  called  two  of  his  household  servants 
10.  iS  And  called,  and  asked  whether  Simon 
[See  also  Blessed,  happj',  record,  remembrance, 
witness.] 

CALL  (a  name),  to — 
To  put,  place,  D^b"  sum. 

Judg.  8.  31  a  son,  whose  name  he  called  Abimelech 

CAXL  back,  to  — 

To  cause  to  turn  aside,  *uD  sur,  5. 

Isa.  31.    2  he . .  will  not  call  back  his  words ;  but  will 

CALL  for,  to  — 

1.7b  call,  cry,  x~jp  qara. 

1  Ki.  8.  52  iu  all  that  they  call  for  unto  thee 

2. To  ask,  alreco  aiteo. 

Acts  16.  29  Then  he  called  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in 


3.  To  call  after  to  oneself,  fteraKaXeai  metakaleo. 

Acts.24.  25  I  have  a  convenient  season  I  will  call  for 
4.7b  send  after,  fUTcnretiirto  metapempo. 

Acts  10.    5  call  for  (one)  Simon,  whose  surname  is  P. 

11.  13  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  Simon 

5.7b  call  alongside,  irapaKa.\ew  parakaleo. 
Acts  28.  20  For  this  cause,  .have  I  called  for  you 

6.7b  call  toward,  wpocrKa\iio  proskaleo. 

Acts  13.    7  aprudent  man;  who  called  for  Barnabas 
Jas.     5.  14  let  him  call  for  the  elders  of  the  church 

7.7b  sound,  cry,  (pwviw phoned. 

j\latt27.  47  Some,  .said,  This  (man)  calleth  for  Elias 
Johnn.  28  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee 

CALL  hither,  to  — 

7b  call  after  to  oneself,  jueTa/caAea;  metakaleo. 
Acts  10.  32  Send,  .to  Joppa,  and  call  hither  Simon 

CALL  in,  to  — 

7b  call  in,  e'cncaXeoi  eiskale5. 

Acts  10.  23  Then  called  he  them  in,  and  lodged 

CALL  in  question,  to  — 

1,7b  call  in,  accuse,  eyfcaXew  eykaleo. 

Acts  19.  40  we  are  in  danger  to  be  called  in  question 
2.7b  judge,  Kplvco  krino. 

Acts  23.    6  I  am  a  Pharisee.  .1  am  called  in  question 
24.  21  I  am  called  in  question  by  you  this  day 
CAXL  on,  to  — 
To  call  upon,  twiKaXew  epikaleo. 

Acts    2.  21  whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the 
9.  14  to  bind  all  that  call  on  thy  name 
9.  21  which  called  on  this  name  in  Jerusalem 

22.  16  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name 
Rom  10.  14  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have  not 
2  Ti.    2.  22  peace,  with  them  that  call  on  the  Lord 

1  Pe.   1.  17  if  ye  call  on  the  Father,  who  without 

CALL  selves,  to  — 

To  be  called,  tr$  qara,  2. 

Isa.   48.    2  Fbr  they  call  themselves  of  the  holy  city 
CALL  (to  mina),  to  — 
7b  cause  to  turn  back,  2>v  shub,  5. 

Deut3o.    1  and  thou  shalt  call  (them)  to  mind  among 

CALL  to,  to  — 

1.7*0  receive,  take,  Xanfidvai  lambano. 

2  Ti.   1.    5  I  call  to  remembrance  the  unfeigned  faith 
2. To  sound  toward,  Trpoo-cpcvvtco  jirosphoneo. 

Luke  7.  32  calling  one  to  another.  .We  have  piped 
CALL  to  (one),  to  — 
1.7*0  call  after  to  oneself  /i€raKa\4w  metakaleo. 

Acts    7.  14  Joseph,  .called  his  father  Jacob  to  (him) 
2.7b  ccdl  toward,  irpoa'KaKew  2>roskaleo. 

Markio.  42  But  Jesus  called  them  (to  him),  andsaith 
3.7b  sound  toward,  irpoo-<pu>veu}  2>rosphdneo. 

Lukei3.  12  when  Jesus  saw  her,  he  called  (her  to  him) 
CALL  together,  to  — 
1.7b  cause  to  cry  out,  py>"  tsaaq,  5. 

1  Sa.  10.  17  Samuel  called  the  people  together  unto 
2.7*0  make  to  hear,  yisp  shama,  3. 

1  Sa.  23.    8  Saul  called  all  the  people  together  to  war 
3.7b  cause  to  hear,  y»p^  shama,  5. 

Jer.   50.  29  Call  together  the  archers  against  Babylon 
51.  27  call  together  against  her  the  kingdoms  of 
4. To  ccdl  together,  auyKa\4w  sugkaleo. 

Marki5.  16  and  they  call  together  the  whole  band 

Luke  9.    1  he  called  his  twelve  disciples  together 
15.    6  when  he  cometh  home,  he  calleth  together 
15.    9  when  she  hath  found  (it),  she  calleth  to 

23.  13  he  had  called  together  the  chief  priests 
Acts    5.  21  the  high  priest . .  called  the  council  toget. 

10.  24  Cornelius  waited.. and.. called  together 
28. 17  Paul  called  the  chief  of  the  Jews  together 

5.7*0  crowd  together,  avvaQpoifa  sunathroizo. 
Acts  19.  25  Whom  he  called  together  with  the  work. 

CALL  unto,  to  — 

7b  sound  toward,  itpoatpocvea)  prosphoneo. 

Matt  1 1.  16  like  unto  children  sitting,  .calling  unto 

CALL  unto  (one),  to  — 

1.7b  call  toward,  TrpoaKaAecv  2r''oskaleo. 

Mattio.    1  when  he  had  called  unto  (him)  his  twelve 
15.  32  Then  Jesus  called  his  disciples  (unto him) 
18.    2  Jesus  called  a  little  child  unto  him 
20.  25  But  Jesus  called  them  (unto  him),  and 
Mark  3.  13  goeth.  .intoamountain.and  calleth(unto) 
3.  23  he  called  them  (unto  him),  and  said 

6.  7  he  called  (unto  him)  the  twelve,  and 

7.  14  when  he  had  called  all  the  people  (unto) 

8.  1  Jesus  called  his  disciples  (unto  him) 

8.  34  he  had  called  the  people  (unto  him),  with 

12.  43  he  called  (uuto  him)  his  disciples,  and 

15.  44  Pilate,  .calling  (unto  him)  the  centurion 
Luke  7.  19  John  calling  (unto  him) two.  .sent  (them) 

16.  5  called  everyone  of.  .lord's  debtors  (unto) 
18.  16  But  Jesus  called  them  (unto  him),  and 

Acts  6.  2  the  twelve  called  the  multitude,  .(unto) 
20.  1  Paul  called  unto  (him)  the  disciples,  and 
23. 17  Paul  called  one  of  the  centurions  unto 


CALL 


138 


CALM 


Acts  23.  10  Paul  the  prisoner  called  me  unto  (him) 
23.  23  he  called  unto  (him)  two  centurions 
2.To  sound  toward,  Trpoacpoivew  prosphaneo. 

Luke  6. 13  when  it  was  day,  he  called  (uuto  him)  his 

CALL  upon,  to  — 
l.To  call,  N"jp  qara. 

Psa.  31.  17  Let  me  not  he  ashamed..  I  have  called  up. 

50.  15  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  I  will 

55.  16  As  for  me,  I  will  call  upon  Cod ;  and  the 

86.    7  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  will  call  upon 

88.    9  Lord,  I  have  called  daily  upon  thee,  I 

91.  15  He  shall  call  upon  me,  and  1  will  answer 

145.  18  Lord  (is)  nigh  unto  all  them  that  call  upon 

Prov.  1.  28  Then  shall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will 

Lam.  3.  57  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day . .  I  called  up. 

'l.To  call  upon,  sirncaktco  cpikaleo. 

Acts    7.  59  they  stoned  Stephen,  calling  upon  (God) 

Roni  10.  12  the  same  Lord,  .unto  all  that  call  upon 

■    10. 13  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of 

1  Co.    1.    2  with  all  that  in  every  place  call  upoD  the 

CALL  whereunto,  to  — 

To  call  toward,  rrpoo-KaXtw  proskedeo. 

Acts  13.   2  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called 

CALLED  — 

1. Called,  invited,  k\t}t6s  klMtos. 

Mattao.  16  [for  many  be  called,  but  few  chosen] 

22.  14  For  many  are  called,  but  few  (are)  chosen 
Kom.  1.    1  Taul,  a  servant,  .called (to  be)  an  apostle 
1.    6  Among  whom  are  ye  also  the  called  of 
1.    7  To  all  that  be  in  Rome,  .called  (to  be) 

8.  28  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to 

1  Co.  i.    1  Paul,  [called]  (to  be)  an  apostle  of  Jesus 

1.    2  that  are  sanctified,  .called  (to  be)  saints 
1.  24  But  unto  them  which  are  called,  both 
Jude         1  to  them  that  are  sanctified,  .(and)  called 
Fvev.  17. 14  they  that  are  with  him  (are)  called,  and 

'2.  That  is,  6  etrrt  ho  esti. 

Mark  15. 16  soldiers  led  him  away  into  the  hall  called 

Z.Xame,  ovofia  ononia. 

Luke  24.  13  two  of  them  went,  .to  a  village  called 
Acts    8.   9  there  was  a  certain  man  called  Simon 

9.  11  enquire,  .for  (one)  called  Saul,  of  Tarsus 
10.    1  There  was  a  certain  man  .called  Cornelius 

CALLED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  said,  Tax  amar,  2. 

Gen.  32.  28  Thy  name  shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob 
Isa.     4.    3  (lie  that)  remaineth.  .shall  be  called  holy 

19. 18  one  shall  be  called,  The  city  of  destruc. 
Jer.     7.  32  that  it  shall  no  more  be  called  Tophet 

2.To  call,  tr$  qara. 

Gen.  16. 14  the  well  was  called  Beer-lahai-roi 
19.  22  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Zoar 
25.  26  and  his  name  was  called  Jacob 
25.  30  (am)  faint :  therefore  was  his  name  called 
29.  34  therefore  was  his  name  called  Levi 
31.  48  Thereforewas  thenameof  itcalledGaleed 
33.  17  the  name  of  the  place  is  called  Succoth 
35.    8  the  name  of  it  was  called  Allon-bachuth 
38.  29  therefore  his  name  was  called  Pharez 
38.  30  and  his  name  was  called  Zarah 
50.  11  the  name  of  it  was  called  Abel-mizraim 
Exodis.  23  therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called 
Num  13.  24  The  place  was  called  the  brook  Eshcol 
Deut.15.    2  because  it  is  called  the  Lord's  release 
Josh.  5.    9  the  name  of  the  place  is  called  Gilgal 

7.  26  the  name  of  that  place  was  called,  The 
Judg.  1.  17  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Hormah 
10.    4  they  had  thirty  cities,  which  are  called 

2  Sa.  15.  11  two  hundred  men .  .(that  were)  called 
iCh.  13.  11  that  place  is  called  Perez-uzza  to  this 
2Ch.  20.  26  the  same  place  was  called,  The  valley  of 
Prov 24.   S  He  that  deviseth.  .evil  shall  be  called 
Isa.  47.    1  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender 

47.  5  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  The 
Jer.  23.    6  he  shall  he  called,  The  Lord  our  Kight. 

33.  16  she  shall  be  called,  The  Lord  our  Right. 

;}.  To  be  called,  trjjj  qara,  2. 

Gen.    2.  23  she  shall  be  called  Woman,  because  she 
17.    5  Neithershall  thy  nameany  more  be  called 
21.  12  for  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called 
35.  10  thy  name  shall  not  be  called  any  more  J. 

48.  6  shall  be  called  after  the  name  of  their 
Dent.  3.  13  all  Bashan,  which  was  called  the  land 

25.  10  Ami  his  name  shall  be  called  in  Isr;ul 
28. 10  thou  art  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord 
1  Sa.    9.    9  a  Prophet  was  beforetimc  called  a  Se< .  r 
j  Sa.    6.    2  whose  name  is  called  by  the  name  of  The 
12.  28  I  take  tin-  city,  and  it  be  called  after  my 
iS.  18  it  is  called  unto  this  day,  Absalom's 
1  Ki.    8.  43  that  this  house,  .is  called  by  thy  name 

1  eh.  13.   6  (between) the  cherubim,  whose  name  isc. 

2  I  h.    6.  33  this  house,  which  I  have  built,  is  called 

7.  14  If  my  people,  which  are  called  by  my  name 
i:/r,L  2.  61  Barziliai.  .was  called  after  their  name 
Neb.    7.  63  Barziliai,  .was  called  after  their  name 
Esth.  2.  14  the  king  delighted     that  she  were  called 

3.  12  tli.'  kin-'-  Bcribea  called  on  the  thirteenth 

4.  11  come  unto  tin  king,  .who  is  not  called 
4, 11  I  have  not  been  called  to  come  in  unto 

8.  9  the  king's  scribes  railed  at  that  time  in 
I'roVKi.  21  The  wise  in  In  Strl  Shall  be  called  prudent 
Isa.     1.  26  thou  shall  be  called,  The  city  of  right. 

4.    1  only  let  us  be  called  by  thy  name,  to  take 
2.    5  The  vile  person  shall  be  no  more  called 


Isa.  35.    8  highway  shall  be.  .and  it  shall  be  called 
43.    7  every  one  that  is  called  by  my  name 
48.    1  Hear  ye  this,  .which  are  ealled  by  the 
54.    5  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called 
56.    7  mine  house  shall  be  called  an  house 
62.    4  but  thou  shalt  be  called  Hephzi-bah 

62.  12  thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city 

63.  19  they  were  not  called  by  thy  name 
Jer.    7.  io,  ii,  14,  30  house,  which  is  called  by  my 

14.  9  we  are  called  by  thy  name ;  leave  us  not 

15.  16  for  I  am  called  by  thy  name,  O  Lord 

19.    6  this  place  shall  no  more  be  called  Tophet 
25.  29  on  the  city  which  is  called  by  my  name 
32.  34  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  my  name 
34.  15  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  my  name 
Eze.  20.  29  the  name  thereof  is  ealled  Bam  ah  unto 
Dan.    9.  18  the  city  which  is  called  by  thy  name 
9.  19  and  thy  people  are  called  by  thy  name 
10.    1  unto  Daniel,  whose  name  was  called 
Amos  9.  12  all  the  heathen,  which  are  called  by  my 
Zech.  8.    3  Jerusalem  shall  be  called,  A  city  of  truth 

4.  To  be  called,  u~§  qara,  4. 

Isa.  48.  8  wast  called  a  transgressor  from  the  womb 
48.  12  O  Jacob  and  Israel,  my  called ;  I  (am)  he 
58.  12  thou  shalt  be  called,  The  repairer  of  the 

61.  3  they  might  be  called  Trees  of  riyhteous. 

62.  2  thou  shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name 

65.    1  Behold  me.  .nation  (that)  was  not  called 

b.To  be  called,  K"}i?  qara,  2. 

Dan.    5.  12  now  let  Daniel  be  called,  and  he  "will 

6.  To  be  called,  Ka\eo/j.ai  kaleoniai. 

Matt.  2,  23  He  shall  be  called  a  Kazarene 

5.    9  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God 
5.  19  he  shall  be  called.. least  in  the  kingdom 

5.  19  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of 
21.  13  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of 
23.   7  and  to  be  called  of  men,  Rabbi,  Rabbi 
23.    8  But  be  not  ye  ealled  Rabbi :  for  one  is 
23.  10  Neither  be  ye  ealled  masters  :  for  one  is 
27.    8  that  field  was  called,  The  field  of  blood 

Markn.  17  My  house  shall  be  called  of  all  nations 
Luke  1.  32  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest 

1.  35  that  holy  thing,  .shall  be  called  the  Son  of 
i.  36  sixth  month  with  her,  who  was  called 
1.  60  said,  Not  (so) ;  but  he  shall  be  called  John 
1.  61  none  of  thy  kindred  that  is  called  by 

1.  62  made  signs,  .he  would  have  him  called 
1. 76  thou,  child,  shalt  be  called  the  Prophet 

2.  4  city  of  David,  which  is  called  Bethlehem 
2.  21  his  name  was  called  Jesus,  which  w»3  so 
2.  23  Every  male,  .shall  be  called  holy  to  the 

6.  15  (son)of  Alpheus,*aud  Simon  called  Zelotes 

7.  11  that  he  went  into  a  city  called  Nain ;  and 

8.  2  Mary  called  Magdalene,  out  of  whom 

9.  10  belouging  to  the  city  called  Bethsaida 
10.  39  she  had  a  sister  called  Mary,  which 

15.  19,  21  am  no  more  worthy  to  he  called  thy 
19.  29  the  mount  called  (the  mount)  of  Olives 

21.  37  mount  that  is  called  (the  mount)  of  Olives 

22.  25  they  that  eiercise.  .are  called  benefactors 

23.  33  the  place  which  is  called  Calvary 
John  1.  42  thou  shalt  be  called  Cephas,  which 

2.  2  both  Jesus  was  called,  and  his  disciples 
Acts    1.  12  from  the  mount  called  Olivet,  which 

I.  19  that  field  is  ealled  in  their  proper  tongue 
i.  23  Joseph  ealled  Barsabas,  who  was 

3.  11  in  the  porch  that  is  called  Solomon's 

9.  :i  the  street  which  is  called  Straight,  and 
10.    1  a  centurion  of  the  band  called  the  Italian 

13.  1  Simeon  that  was  called  Niger,  and 

14.  12  they  called  Barnabas.  Jupiter  ;  and 

27.  8  a  place  which  is  called  the  Fair  Havens 
27.  14  a  tempestuous  wind,  called  Euroclydon 
27.  16  a  certain  island  which  is  called  Clauda 
23.  1  knew  that  the  island  was  called  Melita 
Rom.  9.    7  but,  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called 

9.  26  there  shall  they  be  called  the  children  of 
1  Co.    1.    9  by  whom  ye  were  called  unto  the  fellow. 
7.  18  Is  any  man  called  being  circumcised? 
7.  18  Is  any  called  in  uncircumcision?  let 
7.  20  the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called 
7.  21  Art  thou  called  (being)  a  servant?  care 
7.  22  For  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  (being) 
7.  22  likewise  also  he  that  is  called,  (being) 
7.  24  wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide 

15.  9  that  am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle 
Gal,    5.  13  ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty  ;  only 
Eph.    4.    1  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  called 

4.  4  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your 
Col     3.  15  to  the  which  also  ye  arc  called  in  one 

1  Ti.    6.  12  whereunto  thou  art  also  called,  and 
Hob.   3.  13  exhort,  .while  it  is  called  To  day  ;  lest 

5.  4  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  (was)  Aaron 
9.  15  they  which  are  called  might  receive  the 

II.  8  Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to  go  out 
11.  18  That  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called 

Jas      2.  23  and  he  was  called  the  Friend  of  God 
1  Pe.   2.  21  For.  .hereunto  were  ye  called  ;  because 

3.  9  knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto  called 
1  Jo.  3.  1  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God  ! 
Rev.    1.    9  was  in  the  isle  that  is  called  Patmos,  for 

11.  8  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and 

12.  9  that  old  serpent,  called  the  Devil,  and 

16.  16  a  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue 

19.    9  Blessed  (are)  they  which  are  called  unto 
19.  11  he  that  sat  upon  him  (was)  called 
19.  13  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God 

7. To  lay  out,  colled,   sen;,   \4yit)  legQ. 

Matt.  1.  16  was  born  Jesus,  who  is  called  Christ 


Matt.  2.  23  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  Nazareth 
4.  18  Simon  called  Peter,  and  Andrew  his 

10.  2  The  first,  Simon,  who  is  called  Peter 
*3-  55  is  not  his  mother  ealled  Mary?  and  his 
26.    3  the  high  priest,  who  was  called  Caiaphas 
26.  14  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Judas  Iscariot 

26.  36  unto  a  place  called  Gethsemaue,  and 

27.  16  a  notable  prisoner,  ealled  Barabbas 

27.  17  Barabbas,  or  Jesus  which  is  called  Christ 
27.  22  I  do  then  with  Jesus  which  is  called 
27.  33  were  come  uuto  a  place  called  Golgotha 
Luke22.    1  the  feast,  .which  is  called  the  Passover 

22.  47  he  that  was  called  Judas,  one  of  the 
John  4.    5  a  city  of  Samaria,  which  is  called  Sychar 
4.  25  Messias  cometh,  which  is  called  Christ 
9.  11  A  man  that  is  called  Jesus  made  clay 

11.  16  said  Thomas,  which  is  called  Didymus 
11.  54  into  a  city  called  Ephraim,  and  there 
19.  13  in  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pavement 
19.  17  into  a  place  called  (the  place)  of  a  skull 
19.  17  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew,  Golgotha 
21.    2  Thomas  called  Didymus,  aud  Nathanael 

Acts    3.    2  of  the  temple  which  is  called  Beautiful 
6.    9  which  is  called  (the  synagogue)  of  the 
9.  36  which  by  interpretation  is  called  Dorcas 
1  Co.   8.    5  For  though  there  be  that  are  called  gods 
Eph.    2.  11  who  are  called  Uncircumcision  by  that 

2.  11  which  is  called  the  Circumcision  in 
Col.     4.  11  Jesus,  which  is  called  Justus,  who  are  of. 
2TI1.  2.    4  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God 
neb.   7.  11  not  be  called  after  the  order  of  Aaron? 
9.    2;  9.  3;  11.  24  ;  Hev.  8.  11. 

8.  To  be  laid  out  besides,  eViAeyo^uai  epilecjomai. 
John  5.    2  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Be. 

9.  To  call  upon,  iw.KaXzio  epikaleo. 

Heb.  11.  16  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their 
10. T(nt$ea7iame  on,  e tt ovo/j. d fa  eponomazd. 

Rom.  2.  17  Behold,  thou  art  called  a  Jew,  andrestest 

11.7b  -use  a  name,  ovo}i6.fa  onomazo. 

1  Co.  5.  11  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be 

12.  To  address  publicly,  irpoaayopevoj  jirosafforeuo. 
Heb.  5.  10  Called  of  God  an  High  Priest  after  the 

IS.  To  sound,  cry,  <piav£&  phoned. 

Mark  10.  49  and  commanded  him  to  be  called 

Luke  19.  15  he  commanded  these  servants  to  be  called 

CALLED  (a  eluiEtian,  an  adulteress),  to  be  — 
To  declare  by  an  oracle,  xpVt-i-aTifa  cfaremalizo. 
Acts  11.  26  the  disciples  were  called  Christians 
Rom.  7.    3  she  shall  be  called  an  adulteress 

CALLED,  falsely  so  — 

Falsely  named,  tyevSwvviJ.os  psetidvriUinos. 

1  Ti.    6.  20  oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  called 

CALLED  by,  to  be  — 

To  call  upon,  eVifcaAea)  ejukoleO. 

Jas.     2.   7  worthy  name  by  the  which  ye  arc  called  ? 

CALLED  upon,  to  be  — 

To  call  upon,  kiriKaAeo)  epikaleo. 

Acts  15.  17  upon  whom  my  name  is  called,  saith  the 

CALLED  forth,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  called,  VT\Q  qara,  2. 

Isa.  31.    4  a  multitude  of  shepherds  is  called  forth 

%To  be  called,  Ka\4op.ai  kaleomai. 

Acts  24.    2  when  he  was  called  forth,  Tcrtullus  began 

CALLED  together,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  cried  to  for  help,  pJJ]  zaaq,  2. 

Josh.  8.  16  all  the  people. .in  Ai  were  called  togeth. 
2.  To  be  cried  to  for  help,  pj#  tsaaq,  2. 

1  Sa.  13.    4  the  people  were  called  together  after  Saul 

CAILIM*  — 

l.ColUwi,  vr$B  miqra. 

Nunno.    2  thounuiyestmx  them iorthecallii:~or the 

2.  To  ccdl,  n~][?  qara. 

Isa.    1. 13  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  calling  <  f 

Z.Calling,  KAijffis  klesis. 

Rom  11.  29  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  (are)  without 

1  Cor.  1.  26  For  ye  see  your  calling,  brethren 

7.  20  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 
Eph.    1.  iS  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling 

4.    4  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling 
Phil.    3.  14  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus 

2  Th.  1.  11  God  would  count,  worthy  of  (this)  calling 
2  Ti.  1.  q  aud  called  (\\6)  with  an  lady  calling,  not 
Heb.   3.    1  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling 

2  Pe.  1.  10  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure 

CALM  — 

1. Dumbness,  silence,  ncc^  denumah. 

Psa  107.  29  He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm  so  that  the 

Z.Stt'lhicss,  yaXijvn  galene. 

Matt.  8.  26  he.,  rebuked.. and  there  was  a  great  calm 
Mark  4.  39  Peace,  be  still,  .there  was  a  great  calm 
Luke.  S.  24  they  ceased,  and  there  was  a  great  calm 

CALM,  to  be  — 

To  cease,  be  qui'/,  calm,  P0#  shathaq. 

Jon.     1.  11  that  the  sea  may  bo  calm  unto  us?  for 
1.  12  so  shall  the  sea  be  calN  uuto  you  :  for  I 


CALNEH 


139 


CAN 


CAL'-NEH,  nfafort  of  Ana  or  Ami. 
Ana  or  Aim  was  one  of  the  chief  objects  of  Babylonian 
worship.  The  site  is  probably  the  modern  Niffer,  which 
is  in  the  Talmud  Nopher.  It  is  about  to  miles  S.E  E. 
of  Bibylon,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates.  The 
LXX.  speak  of  Calneh  or  Calno  as  the  place  where  the 
tower  was  built  (Isa.  10.  o).  In  the  8th  century  it  was 
taken  by  one  of  the  Assyrian  kings,  and  never  recovered 
its  prosperity. 

Gen.  10.  10  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was.  .C. 

Amos  6.    2  Pass  ye  uuto  C.  and  see ;  and  from  thence 

CAL'-NO,  i:^ 

Perhaps  ideht.  ^al  with  Calneh. 

Isa.    io.    9  \  s)  not  C.  as  Carchemish  ?  (is)  not  Ham. 
CAL'-VA-R-Y,  Kpaviov  a  skull. 

This  name  occurs  only  in  Luke  23.  33,  and  is  not  a 
proper  name,  but  arises  from  the  translators  having 
literally  adopted  the  word  Calvaria  (i.e.  "a  bare  skull"), 
the  Latin  word  by  which  the  Greek  word  is  rendered  in 
the  Vulgate.  This  Kranion  is  simply  the  Greek  trans- 
lation ot  the  Chaldee  Golgotha.  The  place  of  crucifixion 
is  by  each  of  the  four  evangelists  called  Kranion,  and 
is  in  every  case  translated  by  Calvaria  in  the  Vulgate, 
and  in  every  place  but  that  in  Luke  the  English  version 
translates  the  word  by  "scull."  There  is  no  sanction 
for  the  expression  "Mount  Calvary,"for  it  is  only  iS  feet 
high. 

Luke  23.  33  they  were  come  to  the  place,  .called  C. 

CALVE,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  in  pain,  travail,  Sin  chid,  Zo. 

Job  39.    1  canst  thou  mark  when  the  hinds  do  calve  ? 
2.7*o  yield,  bring  forth,  bear,  "it  yalad. 

Jer.    14.  5  Yea,  the  hind  also  calved  in  the  field 
3.  To  let  escape,  aSs  palat,  3. 

Job  21  10  their  cow  calveth,  and  casteth  not  her  calf 
CALVE,  to  make  to  — 
To  pain,  cause  to  travail,  ^n  chid,  3a. 

Psa   29.   9  the  Lord  maketh  the  hinds  to  calve,  and 
CAMS  — 
To  come,  arrive,  nhn  atha. 

Dan    7.  13  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 
CAME,  by  which  — 
Entrance,  nuo  mabo. 

2  K-i  11  16  by  the  way  by  the  which  the  horses  came 
CAME  out,  that  which  — 
Outlet,  produce,  M^iD  motsa. 

Jer    17.  16  that  which  came  out  of  my  lips  was  (right) 
CAME,  that  — 
To  draw  near,  ang  qareb. 

1  Ki  4.  27  for  all  that  came  unto  king  Solomon's 

CAME  up  in  — 
S:m,  fa  ben. 

Jon.    4.  10  which  came  up  in  a  night,  and  perished 
CAMEL  — 

An  unclean  animal  among  the  Jews,  but  very  docile, 
with  bunches  on  its  back  ;  abounding  in  the  East,  and 
used  for  riding,  drawing  chariots,  carrying  burdens, 
conveying  messengers,  and  in  war.  It  was  often 
adorned  with  chains,  treated  with  great  care,  esteemed 
a  valuable  prize,  yet  liable  to  plagues.  A  coarse  cloth 
was  made  of  its  hair  and  used  by  the  poor. 

\. Camel,  ?Da  ganial. 

Gen.  12.  16  maid  servants,  and  she  asses,  and  camels 
24.  10  the  servant  took  ten  camels  of  the  camels 
24.  11  made  his  camels  to  kneel  down  without 
24.  14  and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink  also 
24.  19  I  will  draw  (water)  for  thy  camels  also 
24.  20  she  hasted,  .and  drew  for  all  his  camels 
24.  22  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  camels  had 
24.  30  behold,  he  stood  by  the  camels  at  the 
24.  31  prepared,  .room  for  the  camels 
24.  32  man  came,  .and  he  ungirded  his  camels 
24.  32  gave  straw  and  provender  for  the  camels 
24.  35  and  maid  servants,  and  camels,  and 
24.  44  and  I  will  also  draw  for  thy  camels 
24.  46  and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink  also 
24. .46  and  she  made  the  camels  driuk  also 
24.  61  they  rode  upon  the  camels,  and  followed 
24.  63  and,  behold,  the  camels  (were)  coming 
24.  64  when  she  saw.  .she  lighted  off  the  camel 

30.  43  men  servants,  and  camels,  and  asses 

31.  17  and  set  his.  .wives  upon  camels 

31.  34  Rachel,  .putthemin  the  camel's  furniture 

32.  7  and  the  flocks,  and  herds,  and  the  camels 
32.  15  Thirty  milch  camels  with  their  colts 

37.  25  with  their  camels  bearing  spicery 
Exod.g.    3  horses,  upon  the  asses,  upon  the*  camels 
Lev.  11.    4  the  camel,  because  he  cheweth  the  cud 
Deuti4.    7  the  camel,  and  the  hare,  and  the  coney 
Judg.  6.    5  they  and  their  camels  were  without  num. 

7.  12  their  camels  (were)  without  number 

8.  21  ornaments  that  (were)  on  their  camel's 
8.  26  chains  that  (were)  about  their  camel's 

1  Sa.15.    3  suckling,  ox  and  sheep,  camel  and  ass 
27.    9  took  away  the  sheep . .  and  the  camels 
t  30.  17  hundred  young  men,  which  rode,  .camels 

1  Ki.  10.    2  camels  that  bare  spices,  and  very  much 

2  Ki.  8.    9  forty  camels'  burden .  .stood  before  him 
1  CI15.    21  they  took  away  their,  .camels  fifty  thou. 

12.  40  brought  bread  on  asses,  and  on  camels 
27.  30  Over  the  camels  also  (was)  Obil  the  Ish. 


2  Ch.  9.    1  camels  that  bare  spices,  and  gold  in 

14.  15  They.. carried  away  sheep  and  camels 
Ezra   2  67  Their  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  aud 
Neh.  7.  69  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  rive 
Job     1.    3  substance. .was.  .three  thousand  camels 

1.  17  The  Chaldeans.,  fell  upon  the  camels,  and 
42.  12  he  had.  .sheep,  and  six  thousand  camels 

Isa.  2i.    7  chariot  of  asses,  (and)  a  chariot  of  camels 

30.  6  carry,  .their  treasures  upon,  .camels 

60.    6  The  multitude  of  camels  shall  cover  thee 
Jer.  49.  29  all  their  vessels,  and  their  camels 

49.  32  And  their  camels  shall  be  a  booty,  and 
Eze.    25    5  I  will  make  Kabbah  a  stable  for  camels 
Zechi4.  15  the  plague  of  the.. camel.. shall  be  iu 

I.C'amel,  ko/xtjAos  kamelos. 

Matt.  3.    4  John  had  his  raiment  of  camel's  hair 

19.  24  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle 

23.  24  strain  at  a  knat,  and  swallow  a  camel 
Mark  1,    6  John  was  clothed  with  camel's  hair,  and 

10.  25  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle 
Lukei8.  25  for  a  camel  to  go  through  a  needle's  eye 

CAMELS  — 

Dromedary,  D'rwB'nN  achashteranim. 

Esth.  8.  10  on  mules,  camels,  .young  dromedaries 
8.  14  (So)  the  post3  that  rode  upon,  .camels 

CA'-MON,  pDjj  standing  place. 

A  town  in  Gilead. 

Judg  10.   s  And  Jair  died,  and  was  buried  in  C. 

CAMP  — 

l.Camp,  encampment,  rans  machaneh. 

Exodi4. 19  angel,  .which  went  before  the  camp 

14.  20  camp  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  camp  of 
16.  13  the  quails  came  up,  aud  covered  the  camp 
19.  16  all  the  people  that  (was)  iu  the  camp 
19.  17  brought  forth  the  people  out  of  the  camp 
29.  14  shaltthou burnwithrirewithoutthecamp 
32.  17  (There  is)  a  noise  of  war  in  the  camp 
32.  19  as  soon  as  he  came  nigh  unto  the  camp 
32.  26  Then  Hoses  stood  in  the  gate  of  the  camp 

32.  27  go  in  and  out.  .throughout  the  camp,  and 
22,-    7  took,  .and  pitched  it  without  the  camp 

33.  7  off  from  the  camp,  .without  the  camp 
33.  11  And  he  turned  again  into  the  camp  :  but 
36.    6  proclaimed  throughout  the  camp,  saying 

Lev.    4. 12  shall  he  carry  forth  without  the  camp 

4.  21  carry  forth  the  bullock  'without  the  camp 
6  11  carry  forth  the  ashes  without  the  camp 

8.  17  he  burnt  with  fire  without  the  camp  ;  as 

9.  it  he  burnt  with  fire  without  the  camp 

10.  4  from  before  the  sanctuary  out  of.  .camp 
10.    5  and  carried  them,  .out  of  the  camp.;  as 

13.  46  without  the  camp  (shall)  his  habitation 

14.  3  the  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp 
14.    8  after  that  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
16.  26  and  afterward  come  into  the  camp 

16.  27  shall  (one)  carry  forth  without  the  camp 

16.  28  afterward  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 

17.  3  in  the  camp,  .out  of  the  camp 

24.  10  and  a  man  of  Israel  strove,  .in  the  camp 
24  14  him  that  hath  cursed  without  the  camp 
24.  23  him  that  had  cursed  out  of  the  camp 

Num.  1.  52  their  tents,  every  man  by  his  own  camp 

2.  3  the  camp  of  Judah  pitch,  throughout 

2.    9  All . .  were  numbered  in  the  camp  of  Judah 

2.  10  the  south  side,  .the  standard  of  the  camp 

2.  16  All.  .were  numbered  inthecamp  of  Reub. 

2.  17  set  forward  with  the  camp 

2.  17  the  Levites  in  the  midst  of  the  camp  :  as 

2.  18  the  west  side,  .the  standard  of  the  camp 

2.  24  All.  .were  numbered  of  the  camp  of  Eph. 

2.  25  The  standard  of  the  camp  of  Dan 

2.  31- they  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp  of 

2.  32  those  that  were  numbered  of  the  camps 

4.    5  when  the  camp  setteth  forward,  Aaron 

4.  15  as  the  camp  is  to  set  forward  ;  after  that 

5.  2  that  they  put  out  of  the  camp  every  leper 
5.    3  without  the  camp  shall  ye  put  them 

5.    3  that  they  defile  not  their  camps,  in  the 
5.    4  and  put  them  out  without  the  camp  :  as 
10.    2  trumpets . .  for  the  journeyingof  the  camps 
10.    5  the  camps  that  lie  on  the  east  parts  shall 
10.    6  then  the  camps  that  lie  on  the  south  side 
10.  14  the  first. .  wentthe  standard  of  the  camp 
10.  18  standard  of  the  camp  of  Reuben  set  for. 
10.  22  camp  of  the  children  of  Ephraim  set  for. 
10.  25  camp  of  the  children  of  Dan  set  forward 
10.  25  all  the  camps  throughout  their  hosts 

10.  34  when  they  went  out  of  the  camp 

11.  1  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  camp 
11.    9  dew  fell  upon  the  camp  in  the  night 
11.  26  there  remained  two.  .men  in  the  camp 
11.  26  and  they  prophesied  iu  the  camp 

11.  27  EldadandMedaddoprophesy  in  thecamp 
11.  30  Moses  gat  him  into  the  camp,  he  and  the 
11  31  and  let  (them)  fall  by  the  camp,  as  it 
11.  31  the  other  side,  round  about  the  camp 

11.  32  they  spread  (them)  all.  .about  the  camp 

12.  14  let  her  he  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 
12.  15  Miriam  was  shut  out  from  the  camp 

14.  44  and  Moses,  departed  not  out  of  the  camp 

15.  35  stone  him  with  stones  without  the  camp 
15.  36  congregation  brought . .  without  the  camp 
19.    3  he  may  bring  her  forth  without  the  camp 
19.    7  afterward  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
19.    9  lay  (them)  up  without  the  camp  iu  a 

31.  12  unto  the  camp  at  the  plains  of  Moab 
31.  13  forth  to  meet  them  without  the  camp 
31.  19  do  ye  abide  without  the  camp  seven  days 
31,  24  afterward  ye  shall  come  into  the  camp 


Deut  23.  io  then  shall  he  go  abroad  out  of  the  camp 
23  10  he  shall  not  come  within  the  camp 
23.  11  he  shall  come  into  the  camp  (again) 

23.  12  Thou shalt have  a  place.. without.. camp 
23. 14  God  walketh  in  the  midst  of  thy  camp 
23.  14  therefore  shall  thy  camp  be  holy 

29.  11  and  thy  stranger  that  (is)  in  thy  camp 
Josh.  5.    8  they  abode  in  their  places  in  the  camp 
6.  11  came  into  the  camp,  and  lodged,  .camp 
6.  14  returned  into  the  camp  :  so  they  did  six 
6.  18  make  the  camp  of  Israel  a  curse,  and 

6.  23  and  left  them  without  the  camp  of  Israel 
9.   6  they  went  to  Joshua  unto  the  camp  at 

10.    6  the  men.  .sent  unto  Joshua  to  the  camp 
io.  15,43  Joshua  returned.. unto  the  camp  to 
10.  21  all  the  people  returned  to  the  camp  to 
Judg.  7.  17  when  I  come  to  the  outside  of  the  camp 

7.  18  on  every  side  of  all  the  camp,  and  say 

7.  19  came  unto  the  outside  of  the  camp  in  the 

7.  21  every  man  in  his  place,  .about  the  camp 
13.  25  began  to  move  him  at  times  in  the  camp 
21.  8  behold,  there  came  none  to  the  camp  from 
21.  12  they  brought  them  unto  the  camp  toS. 

1  Sa.    4.    3  when  the  people  were  come  into  the  camp 

4.  5  the  ark.  .of  the  Lord  came  into  the  camp 
4.  6  What(meaneth).  .greatshoutin  thecamp 
4.  6  ark  of  the  Lokd  was  come  into  the  camp 
4.    7  for  they  said,  God  is  come  into  the  camr> 

13.  17  the  spoilers  came  out  of  the  camp  of  the 

14.  21  went  up  with  them  into  the  camp  (from) 
17.  4  there  went  out  a  champion  out  of.  .camp 
17.  17  and  run  to  the  camp  to  thy  brethren 

26.    6  "Who  will  go  down  with  me.  .to  the  camp? 

2  Sa.     1.    2  a  man  came  out  of  the  camp  from  Saul 

1.    3  Out  of  the  camp  of  Israel  am  I  escaped 

1  Ki.  16.  16  all.. made  Omri..king.  .in  thecamp 

2  Ki.    3.  24  when  they  came  to  the  camp  of  Israel 

7.  5  they  rose  up..togo  unto  the  camp  of  the 
7.  5  come  to  the  uttermost  part  of  the  camp 
7.  7  left  their  tents,  and.  .the  camp  as  it  (was) 
7.  10  We  came  to  the  camp  of  the  Syrians,  and 
7.  12  are  they  gone  cut  of  the  camp  to  hide 
19.  35  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  an  hundred 
2  Ch.22.    1  the  Arabians  to  the  camp  had  slain  all 

32.  21  in  the  camp  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

Fsa.  78.  28  he  let  (it)  fall  in  the  midst  of  tlieir  camp 

106. 16  They  envied  Moses  also  in  the  camp 
Isa.  37.  36  angel  of  the  Loud,  .smote  in  the  camp 
Eze.     4.    2  set  the  camp  aleo  against  it,  and  set 
Joel    2.  11  his  camp(is)  very  great  :  for  (he  is)strong 
Amos  4.  10  made  the  stink  of  your  camps  to  come  up 
2. Place  of  encampment,  nirifi  tahanolh. 

2  Ki.    6.    8  In  such  and  such  a  place,  .my  camp 
Z.A   camp,  a  putting  in  alongside,  TrapcfjL&oX'f}. 
Heb.  13.  11  the  bodies,  .are  burnt  without  the  camp 

^3-  13  g°  forth,  .unto  him  without  the  camp 
Rev.  20.    9  compassed  the  camp  of  the  saints  about 

CAMP,   to  — 

7*o  incline,  recline,  settle  dcicn,  n:;n  chanah. 

Exodig.    2  there  Israel  camped  before  the  mount 
Isa.   29.   3  I  will  camp  against  thee  round  about 
Jer.   50.  29  camp  against  it  round  about ;  let  none 
Nan.   3.  17  grasshoppers,  which  camp  in  the  hedges 

CAMPHERE  — 

Camphire,  a  shrub  like  privet,  "153  7cop>her. 

Song    1.  14  My  beloved  (is).,  (as)  a  cluster  of  camphire 
4. 13  pleasant  fruits  ;  camphire.  .spikenard 

CAN,  CANNOT  — 

1.  There  is  not  that,  ^  'jvx  ab  la  itkai  di. 

Dan.    4.  35  none  can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him 

%Not  to  be  able,  ^b;  vih  lo  yahol. 

Gen.    13.  16  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of  the  earth 
19. 19  I  cannot  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest 
19.  22  I  cannot  do  any  thing  till  thou  be  come 
24.  50  we  cannot  speak  unto  thee  bad  or  good 
29.   8  We  cannot,  until  all  the  flqcfcs  be  gathered 
31-  35  my  lord.  .1  cannot  rise  up  before  thee 
34.  14  they  said.  .We  cannot  do  this  thing,  to 
44.    1  food,  as  much  as  they  can  carry,  end  put 
44.  22  The  lad  cannot  leave  his  father :  for 
44.  26  And  we  said,  We  cannot  go  down  :  if  our 
Exodio.    5  that  oue  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  earth 
19.  23  The  people  cauuot  come  up.  .Sinai 

33.  20  he  said,  Thou  canst  not  see  my  fate  :  for 
Kums2.  18  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lofd 

24.  13  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  ci  mmandmeut  of 
Deut.V  17  Thesenatious-.howcan  I  dispossess  them? 

"8  27  the  itch,  whereof  thou  canst  not  be  healed 
28.  35  with  a  sore  botch  that  cannot  be  healed 
31.   2  I  can  no  more  go  out  and  come  in'- 
Josh.   7.  13  thou  canst  not  stand  before  thine  enemies 
24.  19  Joshua  said.  .Ye  cannot  serve  the  LcBD 
Judg  11.  35  I  have  opened  my  mouth.. aud  I  cauuot 

14.  13  But  if  ye  cannot  declare  (it)  me,  then 
Ruth  4.    6  I  cannot  redeem  (it)  for  myself,  lest  I 

4.    6  redeem  thou  my  right,  .for  I  cannot 
1  Sa.  17.  39  David  said  unto  Saul,  I  cauuot  go  with 
2Sa.  12.  23  should  I  fast?  can  I  bring  him  back  again 
Neb.   6.    3  so  that  I  cannot  come  down :  why  should 
Esth.  8.    6  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  evil  that 

8.  6  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction 
Job     4.    2  who  can  withhold  himself  from  speaking? 

33     s  If  thou  canst  answer  me,  set  (thy  words) 
42     2  I  know  that  thou  canst  do  every  (thing) 
Psa.  78.  19  CauGodfurnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness? 
78.  20  can  he  give  bread . .  for  his  people  ? 
139.    6  it  is  high,  I  canuot  (attain)  unto  it 


CAN 


HO 


CANAAN 


Prov.30.  21  and  for  four  (which)  it  cannot  bear 
Keel,    1.    8  tilings  (are)  full  of  labour,  man  cannot 
1. 15  (which  is)crooked  canuot  he  made  straight 

1.  15  that  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  numbered 

7.  13  who  can  make  (that)  straight  which  he 

8.  17  a  man  cannot  find  out  the  work  that  is 
Song  8.    7  Mauy  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither 
Isa.   29.  11  an  I  he  saith,  I  cannot ;  for  it  (is)  sealed 

56.  10  they  (are)  all  dumb  dogs,  they  canuot 

57.  20  like  tiie  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest 
59.  14  truth  is  fallen,  .and  equity  cannot  enter 

Jcr.     6.  10  unciroumeised,  and  they  cauuot  hearken 

14.  9  as  a  mighty  maiuthat)  cannot  save?  yet 

18.  6  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter?  saith 

19.  11  a  putter's  vessel,  that  cannot  be  made 
36.    5  I  cannot  go  into  the  house  of  the  Loud 
38.    5  not  (he  that)  can  do  (auy)  thing  against 
49.  23  sorrow  on  the  sea ;  it  cannot  be  quiet 

Dan.  10.  17  how  cau  the  servant  of  this  my  lord  talk 
Hab.   1. 13  (Thou  art)  of  purer  eye3.  .and  canst  no; 

\.To  be  able,  hy.  yekil. 

Dan.    2.  10  There  is  not  a  man.  .that  can  show  the 

2.  27  cannot  the  wise  (men),  .show  unto  the 

3.  29  no  other  God.  .can  deliver  after  this  sort 
5.  16  now  if  thou  canst  read  the  writing,  and 
5.  16  that  thou  canst  make  interpretations 

L  To  leant  to  know,  yiuctxTfcco  ginosko. 

Matt  16.    3  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky ;  hut 
Acts  zi.  37  Who  said,  Canst  thou  speak  Greek? 

o.Tj  be  able,  have  powdr,  dvvx/j.cu  dunamai. 

Matt.  5.  14  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid 

5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or 

6.  24  No  man  cau  serve  two  masters  :  for  either 
6.  24  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 

6.  27  Which  of  you,  by  taking  thought,  cau  add 

7.  i3  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 

8.  2  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 

9.  15  Can  tile  children  of  the  bride  chamber 
12.  29  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strong  man's 
12.  34  how  can  ye,  being  evil,  speak  good  thing;1' 

16.  3  can  ye  not(discem)the  signs  of  the  times? 

17.  16  I  brought  him.  .and  they  could  not  cure 
17.  19  and  said,  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  ? 
19.  25  amazed,  saying,  Who  then  can  be  saved.? 
26. 53  that  I  canuot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and 
27.  42  He  saved  others  ;  himself  he  cannot  save 

M  irk  1.  40  If  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  cleau 

1.  45  Jesus  could  no  more  openly  enter  iuto 

2.  4  they  could  not  come  nigh  unto  him  for 
2.    7  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only? 

2.  19  Cau  the  children  of  the  bride  chamber 
a.  19  [the  bridegroom  with  them,  they  cannot] 

3.  20  they  could  not  so  much  as  eat  bread 
3.  23  How  can  Satan  cast  out  Satan? 

3.  24  if  a  kingdom  be  divided,  .cannot  staud 
3.  25  if  a  house  be  divided,  .that  house  cannot 
3.  26  if  Satan,  .be  divided,  he  cannot  stand 
3.  27  No  man  can  enter  into  a  strong  man's 

5.  3  no  man  could  bind  him,  no,  not  with 

6.  5  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  save 

6.  19  would  have  killed  him  ;  but  she  could 

7.  15  that  entering  into  him  can  defile  him 

7.  18  entereth  into  the  man,  (it)  cannot  defile 

7.  24  no  man  know  (it):  but  he  could  not  be 

8.  4  whence  can  a  man  satisfy  these  (men) 

9.  3  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 
9.  23  Jesus  said  unto  him.  If  thou  canst  believe 
9.  28  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  ? 

9.  29  This  kind  can  come  forth  by  nothing  but 
9.  39  no  man.  .can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me 
10.  26  saying  among  themselves,  Who  then  can 
10.  38  can  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of? 

10.  ^9  they  say  unto  him,  We  can.     And  Jesus 

15.  31  Ho  saved  others;  himself  hecannotsave 
Luke   1.  22  when  he  came  out,  he  could  not  speak 

5.  12  if  thou  wilt,  thou  eamt  make  me  clean 

5.  21  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  alone? 
5.34  Cau  ye  make  the  children,  .fast  while  the 

6.  39  Cau  the  blind  lead  the  blind?  shall  they 
6  42  how  canstthousaytothybrother,  Brother 

8.  19  his  brethren,  .could  not  come  at  him  for 

9.  40  to  cast  him  out ;  and  they  could  not 

11.  7  in  bed  ;  I  cauuot  rise  and  give  thee 

12.  25  which  of  you.  .can  add  to  his  stature 

13.  11  and  could  in  no  wise  lift  up  (herself) 

14.  20  I  have  married  a  wife,  and.  .cannot  come 
14.  26  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple 
14.  27  whosoever  doth.. come  after  me,  cannot 
14.  ^  all  that  he  hath,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple 
16.  13  No  servant  cau  serve  two  masters  :  for 
16.  13  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 

16.  26  that  they  which  would.. to  you  cannot 

18.  26  they,  .said,  Who  then  can  be  saved  ? 

19.  3  he  sought  to  see  Jesus.. and  could  not 
..•o.  36  Neither  can  they  die  any  more  :  for  they 

Jo. in  1.  46  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of 
3.    2  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou 
3.    3  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
3.   4  How  can  a  man  be  born.. can  he  enter 
3.    5  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
3.    9  said  unto  him,  How  cau  these  things  be? 
3.  27  A  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be 
5.  19  1'he  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but 
5.  30  I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing  :  as  I 

5.  44  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  honour  one 
6.44  NO  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the 

6.  52  How  can  this  man  give  us  (his)  flesh  to 
6.60  This  is  an  hard  saying;  who  cau  hear  it? 

6.  65  no  man  cau  come  unto  me,  except  it 

7.  7  The  world  cannot  hate  you  ;  but  me  it 


John  7.  34,36  where  I  am,  (thither)  ye  cannot  come 
8.  21  i  go.  .whither  I  go,  ye  caunot  come 
8.  22  because  he  saith,  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot 

8.  43  (even)  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word 

9.  4  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can 

9.  16  How  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such 

9.  33  man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do  nothing 
10.  21  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind? 

10.  35  and  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken 

11.  37  Could  not  this  man,  which  opened  the 

12.  39  they  could  not  believe,  because.  .Ksaias 

13.  33  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come  ;  so  now  I 
13.  36  Whither  I  go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me 

13.  37  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  thee  now? 

14.  5  and  how  [can]  we  know  the  way? 

14.  17  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth 

15.  4  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself 

15.  5  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing 

16.  12  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now 

Acts    4.  16  dwell  in  Jerusalem  ;  and  we  cannot  deny 

4.  20  v  e  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  we 

5.  39  Eut  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow 
8.  31  How  can  I,  except  some  man  should 

10.  47  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these 
13.  39  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by 
15.    1  Except  ye  be  circumcised,  .ye  cannot  be 
21.  34  when  he  could  not  know  the  certainty 
24.  13  Neither  can  they  prove . .  things  whereof 
27.  15  the  ship,  .could  not  bear  up  into  the 
27.  31  Except  these  abide  hi  the  ship,  ye  cannot 
27.  43  they  which  could  swim  should  cast 
Rom.  S.    7  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be 

8.  8  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please 

1  Co.   2.  14  neither  can  he  know  (them),  because  they 

3.    1  I.. could  not  speak  uuto  you  as  unto 
3.  11  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay 
10.  21  Ye  cannot  drink,  .ye  cannot  be  partakers 
12.    3  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord 
12.  21  the  eye  cannot  say  uuto  the  hand,  I  have 
15.  50  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  king. 
2  Co.   3.    7  Israel  could  not  stedfastly  behold  the 
Gal.     3.  21  a  law  given  which  could  have  given  life 
1  Th.  3.    9  what  thanks  cau  we  render  to  God 
1  Ti.    5.  25  and  they  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid 

6.  7  (it  is)  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out 
6.  16  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see 

2  TL    2.  13  he  abideth  faithful  :  he  cannot  deny 
Heb.   3.  19  So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in 

4. 15  an  high  priest  which  cannot  be  touched 
5.    2  Who  can  have  compassion  on.. ignorant 

9.  9  that  could  not  make  him  that  did  the 

10.  1  can  never  with  those  sacrifices  which 
10.  11  sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  away 

Jas.     2.  14  and  have  not  works?  cau  faith  save  him? 
3.    8  But  the  tongue  can  no  man  tame ;  (it  is) 

3.  12  Can  the  fig  tree,  my  brethren,  bear  olive 

4.  2  ye  kill,  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot 

1  Jo.   3.    9  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God 

4.  20  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not 
Hev.   2.    2  thou  canst  not  bear  them  which  are  evil 
3.    8  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it 
7.    9  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could 
g.  20  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor 
14..    3  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the 

6.  It  is  not,  ovie  irrr'i. 

Heb.    9.    5  the  mercy  seat ;  of  which  we  cannot  now 

7. To  have,  €x&  echo. 

Marki4.    S  She  hath  done  what  she  could  :  she  is 
Luke  14.  14  for  they  cannot  recompense  thee 
Acts    4.  14  beholding,  .man.  .they  could  say  nothing 
Heb.    6.  13  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he 

8.  To  have  strength,  jVx^w  iscluua. 

Matt 26.  40  What!  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one 

Mark  5.    4  neither  could  auy  (man)  tame  him 

9.  18  should  cast  him  out ;  and  they  could  not 
14.  37  Simon,  sleepest  thou?  couldest  not  thou 

Luke  6.  43  the  stream  beat,  .and  could  not  shake  it 
8-  43  physicians.neither  could  be  healed  of  any 
14.    6  they  could  not  answer  him  again  to  these 
16.    3  I  cannot  dig ;  to  beg  I  am  ashamed 
20.  26  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  words 

Acts  25.    7  grievous  complaints,  .they  could  nut 

9.  To  know,  see,  o!5a  oida. 

Matt  27.  65  go  your  way,  make  (it)  as  sure  as  ye  can 
Luke  12.  56  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  and  of 

CAN  away  with  — 
To  be  able,  Sb;  ydkol 

Isa,     1.  13  I  cannot  away  with  ;  (it  is)  iniquity,  even 
CAN  (NOT)  be,  it  — 
To  receive  in,  admit,  ivBexoftai  endechomai. 

Luke  13.  33  it  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of 
CAN  do  — 
l.To  be  able,  have  jpoufer,  Bvvafxat  dunamai, 

Mark  9.  22  if  thou  canst  do  anything,  have  compas. 

2  Co.  13.    8  For  we  can  do  nothing  against  the  truth 
2.  To  have  strength,  be  strong,  i(rx&&  ischuo. 

Phil.   4.  13  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 
CAN  have  — 
l.To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  in;  yada. 

Isa.   56.  11  greedy  dogs  (which)  can  never  have 
2. To  have,  e^oi  echo. 

John  19.  11  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  (at  all) 
CAN  skill  — 
To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  jn;  yada. 

1  Ki.  5.    6  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill  to  hew 


2  Ch.  2.    7  that  can  skill  to  grave  with  the  cunning 
2.    8  that  thy  servants  can  skill  to  cut  timber 

CAN  tell  — 

1.  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  j'~;  yada. 

Gen.  43.  22  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in 
iSa.  17.  55  thy  soul  liveth,  0  king,  I  cannot  tell 
2Sa.  12.  22  can  tell  (whether)  GOD  will  be  gracious 
Prov  30.    4  what  (is)  his  sou's  name,  if  thou  canst  t. 
Eccl.io.  14  a  man  cannot  tell  what  shall  be 
Jon.    3.    9  Who  cau  tell  (if)  God  will  turn  and  re. 

l.To  put  before,   iaj  nagad,  5. 

Eccl.  6.  12  who  can  tell  a  man  what  shall  be  after 
8.    7  for  who  can  tell  him  when  it  shall  be? 

3.  To  know,   see,  o~ib~a  oida. 

Matt  21.  27  they  answered.,  and  said,  We  cannot  tell 
Markn.  33  they  answered  and  said.. We  cannot  tell 
Luke  20.  7  they  answered,  That  they  could  not  tell 
John    3.    8  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh 

8.  14  ye  cannot  tell  whence  I  come,  and  whit. 
16.  18  A  little  while?  we  cannot  tell  what  he 

2  Co.    12.    2  whether  in  the  body,  I  cannot  tell 

12.    2  or  whether  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell 

12.    3  [whether,  .out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell] 

[See  also  Approach,  cease,  condemn,  contain,  could, 

do,  escape,  find,  forbear,  Greek,  have,  lie,  move,  pass, 

receive,  remove,  see,  speak,  spoken,  tempt,  utter,  wish.] 

CA'-NA,  Kava. 

Can  a  of  Galilee  (once  Can  a  hi  Galilee),  a  village 
memorable  as  the  scene  of  Christ's  first  miracle,  and  of 
a  subsequent  one  (John  4.  46,  54).  It  was  also  the 
native  place  of  Nathanael.  The"  nr-me  occurs  in  the 
Gospel  of  John  only,  and  in  these  four  instances  no 
clue  is  furnished  as  to  its  situation.  All  we  can  make 
out  is  that  it  was  not  far  from  Capernaum,  and  on  a 
more  elevated  situation.  The  traditional  site  is  at 
Kefr  Kenna,  a  small  village  4^  miles  N.E.  of  Nazareth. 
A  rival  site  is  further  N.,  a  village  about  5  miles  N. 
of  Svffuriek  (Sepphoris)  and  9  from  Nazareth,  near  the 
present  Jefat,  the  Jot  a  pa  ta  of  the  Jewish  wars.  This 
village  still  bears  the  name  of  Kana-el-jcUl,  which  is 
the  exact  representative  of  the  Hebrew  original— as  is 
Kemm  widely  different  from  it— and  it  is  in  this  fact 
that  the  superiority  of  the  northern  Kana  Eetms  to 
1  est. 

John     2.    1  there  was  a  marriage  in  C.  of  Galilee 

2.  11  did  Jesus  in  C.  of  Galilee,  and  manifested 
4.  46  So  Jesus  came  again  into  C.  of  Galilee 
91.    2  Nathanael  of  C.  in  Galilee,  and  the  (sens) 

CA-NA'-AN,  |"3?  low,  fiat,  Xavaav. 

1.  A  son  of  Ham  and  grandson  of  Noah,  B.C.  2300. 

Gen.    9.  18  Japheth  :  and  Ham  (is)  the  father  of  C. 

9.  22  And  Ham,  the  father  of  C,  saw  the  nak. 
9.  25  Cursed  (be)  C;  a  servant  of  servants 

9.  26  And  he  said.  .C.  shall  be  his  servant 
9.  27  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth.  .and  C.  shall 

10.    6  sons  of  Ham;  Cush,  andMizraim.  .andC. 

10.  15  And  C.  begat  Sidon  his  first  born,  and  H. 
i  Ch.  1.    8  The  sons  of  Ham;  Cush.. Put,  and  C. 

1.  13  And  C.  begat  Zidon  his  first  born,  aud  H. 

2.  The  name  denotes  both  the  people  who  sprang  from 
Canaan  and  the  country  in  which  they  dwelt,  which  lay 
chiefly  in  the  low  districts  along  the  E.  coast  of  the 
Mediterranean,  N.  of  the  Philistines. 

Canaan,  lit.  the  "low"  country,  was  originally  applied 
to  that  small  stripe  of  flat  land  lying  on  the  eastern 
shore  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  extending  from  Egypt 
northward  even  to  Sidon,  but  eventually  it  came  to  be 
applied  to  the  possessions  of  the  Hebrews  on  both  sides 
of  the  Jordan,  having  Phoenicia,  Lebanon,  and  Syria 
on  the  N. ;  Syria,  Ammon,  aud  Moab  on  the  E. ; 
Idumea  and  the  Arabian  desert  on  the  S. ;  and  the 
Mediterranean  Sea  on  the  W.  Its  extreme  length  was 
about  1S0  miles,  and  its  breadth  varied  from  20  to  120 
miles,  containing  in  all  about  1 1  000  square  miles-  a 
little  less  than  Belgium,  a  little  more  than  A\  ales,  or 
one-third  the  size  of  Scotland.  Its  coast  line,  from 
Carmel  to  the  S.  of  Gaza,  is  little  more  than  100  miles. 
Its  population  never  exceeded  5,000,000. 

The  earliest  inhabitants  were  a  race  of  giants  called 
Anafcim,  A  vim,  Emien,  Horim,  Jiephaiw,  Svzim  or 
Zamzummim,  remnants  of  whom  continued  till  at  least 
the  time  of  David,  A.D.  1000.  But  they  had  much 
earlier  been  supplanted  by  the  Amorites  (between 
Hebron  and  the  Salt  Sea),  the  Arkites  (at  Arka,  opposite 
the  northern  extremity  of  Lebanon),  the  Arvadites 
(around  Arad),  the  Girgashites (near the  sea  of  Tiberias), 
the  Hamathites  (around  Hamath),  the  Hittites  (around 
Hebron),  the  Hivites  (around  Hermon),  the  Jebusites 
(at  Jebus  or  Jerusalem),  the  Perizzites  (in  Samaria),  the 
Sinites  (south  of  Arka),  the  Sidonians  (at  Sidon),  and 
the  Zerarites  (south  of  Arad).  These  tribes  were  all 
confined  to  the  W.  of  the  Jordan,  save  the  Amorites 
who  possessed  two  kingdoms  on  the  E.  of  it— that  of 
Sihon,  between  the  Anion  and  the  Jabbok,  and  that 
of  Og  in  Bashan,  now  called  the  Hauran. 

The  moral  state  of  these  tribes  gradually  became  so 
had  that  the  land  is  representedas  "  spuemg  "  them  out 
Under  Joshua  they  were  gradually  subdued,  but  were 
never  wholly  exterminated,  so  that  even  at  the  present 
day  there  are  relics  of  them  to  be  found  in  the  hill 
country.  The  land,  being  repeatedly  promised  to 
Abraham,  received  among  his  descendants  such  names 
as  the  Laud  of  the  Hebrews,  of  Israel,  of  Judah,  of 
Canaan,  of  Promise,  the  Holy  Land,  and  Palestine, 
which  latter  was  derived  from  the  Philistines  who 
dwelt  in  the  S.W.  at  the  sea  shore.  Joshua  divided  it 
by  lot  to  tke  twelve  tribes,  arranged  in  four  divisions ; 


CANAAN 


141 


CANKER  WORM 


the  northern  part  was  assigned  to  Asher,  Naphtali, 
Zebuluu,  and  Issachar;  the  middle  part  to  Ephraim 
and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh;  the  southern  part  to 
Benjamin,  Dan,  Judah,  and  Simeon;  and  the  eastern 
part,  beyond  the  Jordan,  to  Reubeu.  Gad,  and  the 
half  tribe  of  Manasseh.  Solomon's  division  into  twelve 
sections  for  governmental  purposes  may  be  seen  in  i  Ki. 
4.  7-1Q.  After  the  secession  of  the  ten  tribes  under 
Rehoboam,  the  territory  of  the  tribes  of  Judah  and 
Benjamin  (with  the  intermixed  cities  of  Ban  and 
Simeon)  were  called  'Judah,"  and  the  others  "Israel," 
till  the  captivity  of  the  latter,  B.C.  728,  after  a  separate 
existeuce  of  250  years. 

After  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  B.C.  330, 
Greek  colonists  settled  in  Ptulemais  (Acre),  Pella,  and 
Gerasa,  while  the  Nabataeans  (an  Arab  tribe)  settled 
at  Petra,  and  gradually  conquered  Moab  and  Amnion 
in  the  north. 

In  New  Testament  times  Canaan  was  divided  into 
a  variety  of  provinces.  East  of  the  Jordan  were:  — 
Iturea  now  Jedur;  Gaulanitis,  now  Jolan;  Trachonitis, 
now  Leja;  Batanaea,  now  Nukra  (all  in  the  north); 
Auranitis  (now  Hauran,  on  the  east),  and  Perae  now 
Belka  (in  the  south).  West  of  the  Jordan  wt  <j  : — 
Galilee  (Upper  and  Lower),  on  the  north  ;  Samaria}  in 
the  centre,  aud  Judea,  in  the  south. 

In  later  times  it  was  divided  into  four  parts  :— Pales- 
TINA  I.,  Philistin  which  included  Judea  and  Samaria, 
with  Czesarea  for  its  capital;  Palestina  II.  Urdun 
(Jordan),  including  Galilee  and  Gilead,  with  Scythopolis 
for  its  capital;  Palestina  III.,  Jibalod Sherat,  includ- 
ing the  ancient  Nabataea,  and  Aila  eastward  to  the 
Anion,  with  Petra  for  its  capital ;  Arabia,  to  the  N.E. 
of  Palestina  III.,  including  the  Hauran,  with  Bostra 
for  its  capital. 

Palestine  successively  fell  under  Persian,  Greek, 
Roman  and  Turkish  rule,  under  the  last  of  which  it 
still  lies.  It  is  now  divided  into  two  pachalics,  that 
of  Sidon,  including  the  whole  country  on  the  W.  of  the 
Jordan,  and  that  of  Damascus,  including  the  land  on 
the  E.     The  present  population  is  only  about  650,000. 

Among  its  wild  auimals  are  the  bear  (in  Lebanon), 
the  wild  boar,  fallow  deer,  fox,  gazelle,  hyena,  jackal, 
panther,  wolf,  ifcc,  but  no  lions.  The  domestic  auimals 
are  the  ass,  buffalo,  (Arabian)  camel,  horse,  mule,  ox, 
broad  tailed  sheep,  &c.  Its  birds  are  the  crow,  cuckoo, 
eagle,  heron,  jay,  kingfisher,  kite,  nightingale,  owl, 
partridge,  raven,  sparrow,  stork,  vulture,  &c.  Bats 
and  lizards  abound ;  fish  swarm  in  the  sea  of  Galilee, 
but  none  in  the  Salt  Sea.  On  the  sea-bound  plain,  and 
lower  hill  sides,  the  banana,  orange,  palm,  and  sugar 
cane  grow.  The  maple,  oak,  pine,  and  willow  flourish 
at  from  1000  to  4000  feet  above  the  sea;  also  the 
mulberry  and  olive.  Barley,  wheat,  and  the  vine 
abound. 

There  are  two  great  ranges  of  mountains,  running 
parallel  on  both  sides  of  the  Jordau  from  north  to 
south,  the  one  terminating  in  the  mountains  of  Sinai 
and  the  other  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea.  The 
mountains  of  Samaria  (the  centre  part  of  the  range  on 
the  W.  of  the  Jordau)  average  2000  feet  above  the  sea, 
and  the  highest  summits  of  these  are  Ebal  and  Gerizim, 
about  2750  feet  high.  The  mountains  of  Judea  are 
highest  near  Hebron,  which  is  3030  feet  above  the 
Great,  and  4342  above  the  Salt  Sea.  Jerusalem  is  2550 
feet  above  the  former,  and  3826  above  the  latterj  Tabor 
is  1890,  Little  Hermon  1700,  the  Carmel  range  1740,  and 
the  Promontory  600  feet  high,  while  Lebanon  rises  even 
to  io,ooo,  aud  Anti-Lebanon  to  9003  feet  above  the 
Mediterranean. 

The  Jordau  is  the  only  great  river  in  Palestine,  and 
springs  from  the  foot  of  Anti-Lebanon  1847  feet  above 
the  sea.  Passiug  through  the  waters  of  Merom  and  the 
Sea  of  Galilee,  it  falls  into  the  Salt  Sea,  where  it  is 
lost  by  evaporation.  It  is  fed  on  the  east  side  by  the 
waters  of  the  Jarmuk  and  the  Jabbok.  The  Arnou 
falls  into  the  Salt  Sea,  which  is  about  46  miles  long, 
with  an  average  breadth  of  7  miles,  and  is  thus  nearly 
the  size  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  or  three  times  the  size 
of  Lough  Neagh.  For  furtherparticulars  see  the  articles 
Palestine,  Judea,  Galilee,  Samaria,  Perea,  tfce. 

Gen.  11.  31  they  went  forth,  .to  go  into  the  land  of  C. 
12.    5  they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  C. 

12.  5  and  into  the  land  of  C.  they  came 

13.  12  Abrani  dwelt  in  the  land  of  C.,  and 

16.  3  Abram . .  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  land  of  C. 

17.  8  I  will  give  uuto  thee,  .all  the  land  of  C. 
23.    2  the  same  (is)  Hebron  in  the  land  of  C. 
23.  19  the  same  (is)  Hebron  in  the  land  of  C. 
28.    1  shalt  not  take  a  wife,  .daughters  of  C. 
28.   6  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of.  .daughters  of  C. 
28.    8  Esau  seeing  that  the  daughters  of  C. 

31.  18  to  go  to  Isaac  his  father  in  the  land  of  C. 
33.  18  which  (is)  in  the  land  of  C.,  when  he 

35.  6  Jacob  came  to  Luz,  which  (is)  in.  .C. 

36.  2  Esau  took  his  wives  of  the  daughters  of  C. 
36.   s  which  were  born  unto  himin..laud  of  0. 

36.  6  which  he  had  got  in  the  land  of  C.;  and 

37.  1  Aud  Jacob  dwelt .  .in  the  land  of  C. 
42.  5  for  the  famine  was  in  the  land  of  C. 
42.    7  From  the  land  of  C.  to  buy  food 

42.  13  the  sons  of  one  man  in  the  land  of  C. 
42.  29  came  unto  Jacob .  .unto  the  land  of  C. 
42.  32  the  youngest  (is)  this  day.  .in.  .land  of  C. 

44.  8  we  brought  again  unto  thee,  .land  of  C. 

45.  17  go,  get  you  unto  the  land  of  C. 

45.  25  and  came  into  the  land  of  C.  unto 

46.  6  which  they  had  gotten  in  the  land  of  C. 
46.  12  Er  and  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  C. 

46.  31  which  (were)  in  the  laud  of  C,  are  come 

47.  1  are  come  out'of  the  land  of  C. ;  and, behold 
47.    4  the  famine  (is)  sore  in  the  land  of  C, 


Gen.  47  13  the  land  of  C.  fainted  by  reason  of  the 
47.  14  the  money,  .was  found,  .in  the  land  of  C 

47.  15  when  money  failed,  .in  the  land  of  C. 

48.  3  appeared  unto  me  at  Luz  in  the  laud  of  C. 

48.  7  Rachel  died  by  me  in  the  land  of  C. 

49.  30  which  (is)  before  Mamre.  in  the  land  of  C 

50.  5  I  have  digged  for  me  iu  the  land  of  C. 
50.  13  his  sous  carried  him  into  the  land  of  C. 

Exod.  6.    4  to  give  them  the  land  of  C.   the  land  of 

15.  15  all  the  inhabitants  of  C.  shall  melt  away 

16.  35  came  unto  the  borders  of  the  land  of  C. 
Lev.  14.  34  "When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  C. 

18.    3  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of  C. ,  whither 

25.  38  to  give,  .the  land  of  -O.,  (and)  to  be  your 
Num  13.  2  that  they  may  search  the  land  of  C,  which 

13.  17  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  out  the  land  of  C. 

26.  19  Er  and  Onan  died  iu  the  land  of  C. 
32.  30  have  possessions  among  you  in  the.  .of  C. 

32.  32  We  will  pass  over,  .into  the  land  of  C. 

33.  40  which  dwelt  in  the  south  in  the  land  of  C. 

33.  51  ye  are  passed  over  Jordan  into  the.  .of  C. 

34.  2  When  ye  come  into  the  land  of  C,  this 
34.    2  the  land  of  C,  with  the  coasts  thereof 

34.  29  unto  the  children  of  Israel  in  the.  .of  C. 

35.  10  ye  be  comeover  Jordan  into  the  land  of  C. 
35.  14  three  cities  shall  ye  give  in  the  land  of  C. 

Deut32.  49  behold  the  land  of  C,  which  I  give  unto 
Josh.  5.  12  they  did  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  laud  of  C. 

14.  1  children  of  Israel  inherited  in  the.  .of  C. 

21.  2  they  spake  unto  them .  .in  the  laud  of  C. 

22.  9  which  (is)  in  the  laud  of  C,  to  go  unto 
22.  10  that  (are)  iu  the  land  of  C,  the  children 
22.  n  built  an  altar  over  against  the  land  of  C. 
22.  32  Phinehas.  .returned,  .unto  the  land  of  C. 
24.    3  and  led  him  throughout  all  the  laud  of  C. 

Judg  3.    1  as  had  not  known  all  the  wars  of  C. 

4.    2  into  the  hand  of  Jabin  king  of  C„  that 
4.  23  God  subdued  on  that  day.  .the  king  of  C. 
4.  24  prevailed  against  Jabin  the  king  of  C. 

4.  24  they  had  destroyed  Jabin  king  of  C. 

5.  19  then  fought  the  kings  of  C.  in  Taauach 
21.  12  to  Shiloh,  which  (is)  iu  the  land  of  O. 

1  C'h.  16.  18  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  land  of  C,  the 
Psa  105.  11  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  land  of  C.,  the 

106.  38  whom  they  sacrificed  unto  the  idols  of  C. 

135.  11  Bashan,  aud  all  the  kingdoms  of  C. 
Isa.    19.  18  five  cities,  .speak  the  language  of  C. 
Eze.  16.    3  thy  nativity  (is)  of  the  land  of  C. ;  thy 
16.  29  thy  fornication  in  the  land  of  C.  unto 
Zeph.  2.    5  O  0.,  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  I  will 
Matt  15.  22  a  woman  of  C.  came  out  of.  .same  coasts 

CA-NA-AN-ITE,  CA-NA-AN-IT-ISH,  'jsyj  etc. 
Patronymic  of  the  descendants  of  Canaan,  afterwards 
restricted  to  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan. 

Gen.  10.  18  afterward  were  the  families  of    '"  spread 

10.  19  the  border  of  the  C.  was  fc^m  Sidon,  as 

12.  6  And  the  C.  (was)  then  in  the  laud 

13.  7  Aud  the  C. dwelt  then  in  the  land 

15.  21  the  Amorites,  and  the  C,  aud  the 
24.    3  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife,  .of  the  C. 
24.  37  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife . .  of  the  C. 
34.  30  to  make  me  to  stink,  .among  the  C.  and 
38.    2  daughter  of  a  certain  C,  whose  name  (was) 
46.  10  and  Shaul  the  son  of  a  C.  woman 

50.  11  when,  .the  C,  saw  the  mourning  in  the 
Exod.  3.    S  to  bringthem.  .unto  the  place  of  the  C. 
3.  17  I  will  bring  you.  .unto  the  land  of  the  C. 

6.  15  and  Shaul  the  son  of  a  C.  woman  :  these 

13.  5  shall  bring  thee  into  the  land  of  the  C. 
13  ti  shall  bring  thee  into  the  land  of  the  C. 
23.  23  and  bring  thee  in  unto.,  the  C,  the  Hivites 

23.  28  which  shall  drive,  .the  Hivite,  the  C.,and 
33.  2  I  will  drive  out  the  C,  the  Amorite,  and 
34. 11  I  drive  out  before. ,  the  Amorite,  and  the  C. 

.Num  13.  29  the  C.  dwell  by  the  sea,  and  by  the  coast 

14.  25  Now  the.  .C.  dwelt  in  the  valley.     To 
14. 43  For  the.  .C.  (are)  there  before  you,  aud 
14.  45  and  the  C.  which  dwelt  in  that  hill 

21.    1  (when)  king  Arad  the  C,  which  dwelt  in 
2i.    3  and  delivered  up  the  C.  ;  and  they  utterly 
33.  40  And  king  A.  the  C,  which  dwelt  in 
Deut.  1.    7  and  go.. to  the  laud  of  the  C,  and  unto 

7.  1  and  hath  cast  out.  .the  C,  and  the 

11.  30  (Are)  they  not.  .in  the  land  of  the  C. 
20.  17  But  thou  shalt  utterly  destroy,  .the  C. 

Josh.  3.  10  he  will,  .drive  out  from  before  you  the  C. 
5.    1  all  the  kings  of  theC,  which  (we  re)  by  the 
7.    9  For  the  C. .  .shall  hear  (of  it),  and  shall 
9.    1  when.  .Amorite,  the  C.  .heard  (thereof) 

11.  3  the  C.  on  the  east  and  on  the  west 

12.  8  the  Hittites,  the  Amorites,  and  the  C. 
*3-    3  (which)  is  counted  to  the  C.:  five  lords 

13.  4  From  the  south,  all  the  land  of  the  C. 

16.  10  they  drave  not  out  the  C.  that  dwelt  in 

16.  10  but  the  C.  dwell  among  the  Ephraimites 

17.  12  but  the  C.  would  dwell  iu  that  land 

17.  13  they  put  the  C.  to  tribute  ;  but  did  not 

17.  16  all  the  C.  that  dwell  in  the  laud  of 

17.  18  thou  shalt  drive  out  the  C,  though  they 

24.  11  the  Amorites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the 
Judg.  1.    1  Who  shall  go  up  for  usagainst  the  C.  first 

1.    3  that  we  may  fight  against  the  C. ;  and  I 
1.    4  the  Lord  delivered  the  C.  and  the  Peri. 
1.    5  they  slew  the  C.  and  the  Perizzites 
1.    9  to  fight  against  the  C,  that  dwelt  in  the 
1.  10  Judah  went  against  the  C.  that  dwelt 
1.  17  they  slew  the  C.  that  inhabited  Zephath 
1.  27  but  the  C.  would  dwell  in  that  land 
1.  28  they  put  the  C.  to  tribute,  and  did  not 
1.  29  Neither  did  Ephraim  drive  out  the  C.  that 
1.  29  but  the  C.  dwelt  in  Gezer  among  them 


Judg.  1 


3 
„  3- 
2  Sa.  24. 
1  Ki.  9. 
1  Ch.  2. 
Ezra  9. 
Neh.   9. 

9- 

Obad. 
Zecln4. 
Mattio. 
Mark  3. 


30  the  C  dwelt  among  them,  and  became 

32  the  Asherites  dwelt  amobg  the  C. .  the 

33  buthe  dwelt  among  theC,  the  inhabitants 
3  all  the  C,  and  the  Sidonians  and  the 
5  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the 

7  to  all  the  cities  of  the.  C  :  and  they  went 
16  and  slain  the  C.  that  dwelt  in  the  city 

3  the  daughter  of  Shua  the  C:      And  Er 
1  abominations,  (even)  of  theC   the  Hittites 

8  to  give  the  laud  of  the  C.  the  Hittites 
24  aud  thou  subduedst  before  them,  the  C. 

20  that  of  the  C. .  .unto  Zarephath  ;  and 

21  there  shall  be  no  more  the  C.  in  the  house 

4  Simon  the  C,  and  Judas  Iseariot,  who 
18  and  Thaddeus.  and  Simon  the  C. 

CAN-DA'-CE,  KavUKt). 

A  queen  of  Ethiopia.     The  name  is  not  a  proper  name 

of  an  individual,  but  of  a  dynasty  of  Ethiopian  queens. 

Acts    8.  27  an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  C. 
CANDLE  — 
l.A  light,  "U  ner. 

Job    18.    6  his  candle  shall  be  put  out  with  him 

21.  17  How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the  wicked  put 

29.  3  When  his  candle  sinned  upon  my  head 
Psa.   18.  28  For  thou  wilt  light  my  candle  :  the  Lord 
Prov.20.  27  The  spirit  of  man  (is)  the  caudle  of  the 

24.  20  the  caudle  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 
31.  18  her  caudle  goeth  not  out  by  night 

Jer.    25.  10  take  from  them,  .the  light  of  the  candle 
Zeph.  1.  12  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles 

2.A  lavqj,  \vxvos  luchnos. 

Matt  5.  15  Neither  do  men  light  a  candle,  and  put 
Mark  4.  21  Is  a  candle  brought  to  be  put  under  a 
Luke  8.  16  No  man,  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle 
11.  33  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle,  putteth 
11.  36  the  bright  shining  of  a  caudle  doth  give 
15.    8  doth  not  light  a  candle,  and  sweep  the 
Rev.  18.  23  the  light  of  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more 

22.  5  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the 

CANDLESTICK  — 

X. Place  0/ light,  candlestick,  rrjup  menorah. 
Exod.  25.  31  thou  shalt  make  a  caudlestick  (of)  pure 

25.  31  beaten  work  shall  the  candlestick  be  made 
.25.  32  three  branches  of  the  caudlestick  out  of 

25.  32  three  branches  of  the  candlestick  out  of 
25-  33  tne  S1X  branches.. out  of  the  candlestick 

25.  34  iu  the  candlestick,  .four  bowls  made  like 
25-  35  the  six  branches,  .out  of  the  caudlestick 

26.  35  the  candlestick  over  against  the  table 

30.  27  and  thr  candlestick  and  his  vessels 

31.  8  the  pure  candlestick  with  alibis  furniture 
35.  14  The  candlestick  also  for  the  light  and 
37.  17  he  made  the  candlestick  (of)  pure  gold 
37.  17  beaten  work  made  he  the  caudlestick 
37.  iS,  18  three  branches  of  the  candlestick  out 
37.  19  six  branches  going  out  of  the  candlestick 
37.  20  in  the  candlestick,  (were)  four  bowls 

39.  37  The  pure  candlestick,  (with)  the  lamps 

40.  4  thou  shalt  bring  in  the  candlestick,  and 
40.  24  lie  put  the  candlestick  in  the  tent  of  the 

Lev.  24.    4  He  shall  order  the.  .pure  candlestick 
Num.  3.  31  the  candlestick,  and  the  altars,  and  the 
4.    9  take  a  cloth,  .and  cover  the  candlestick 
8.    2  seven  lamps,  .over  against  the  candlestick 
8.    3  the  lamps,  .over  against  the  candlestick 
8.    4  this  work  of  the  candlestick  (was of),  .gold 
8.    4  so  he  made  the  can*1*  jstick 

1  Ki.    7.  49  the  candlesticks  ordure  gold,  five  011  the 

2  Ki.  4.  10  a  table,  and  a  stool,  and  a  caudlestick 
1CI1.  28.  15  the  weight  for  the  candlesticks  of  gold 

28.  15  by  weight  for  every  candlestick,  and  for 
28.  15  aud  for  the  candlesticks  of  silver  by 
2S.  15  for  the  candlestick,  of  every  candlestick 
2  Ch.   4.    7  Aud  he  made  ten  candlesticks  of  gold 
4.  20  the  candlesticks  with  their  lamps,  that 
13.  11  the  candlestick  of  gold  with  the  lamps 
Jer.   52.  19  the  caldrons,  and  the  candlesticks,  and 
Zech.  4.    2  I  have  looked,  and,  behold,  a  candlestick 
4.  11  upon  the  right  (side)  of  the  candlestick 

I.Candlesiick,  n?^"]:?:  nebrashta. 

Dan.    5.    5  wrote  over  against  the  candlestick  upon 

3. Lamp  stand,  Xvxvia  luchnia. 

Matt  5.  15  a  caudle,  and  put  it.  .011  a  candlestick 
Mark  4.  21  Is  a  candle,  .not.. set  on  a  candlestick 
Luke   8.  16  a  candle. . but  setteth  (it)  on  a  candlestick 

11.  33  a  candle.,  but  on  a  candlestick 
Heb.    9.    2  tabernacle.. wherein,  .the  candlestick 
Rev.    1.  12  turned  I  saw  seven  golden  candlesticks 
1.  13  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks 
1.  20  and  the  seven  golden  candlesticks 

1.  20  the  seven  candlesticks  which  thou  sawest 

2.  1  whowalketh  inthemidstjof .  .candlesticks 
2.    5  will  come.  .and.  .remove  thy  candlestick 

11.    4  two  olive  trees,  and  the  two  candlesticks 

CANE  — 

Cane,  reed,  niQ  qaneh. 

Isa.   43.  24  Thou  hast  brought  me  no  sweet  cane 
Jer.     6.  20  and  the  sweet  cane  from  a  far  country? 

CANKER  — 

A  consumption,  gangrene,  ydyypatva  gaygraina. 
2  Ti.      2.  17  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker :  of 

CANKER  WORM  — 

Hedge  chafer,  a  kind  of  locust,  phi  yeleq. 

Joel    i.    4  locust  hath  left  hath  the  canker  worm 
1.    4  that  which  the  canker  worm  hath  left 


CANKERED 


142 


CAPTIVE 


Joel   2.  25  the  canker  worm,  .the  caterpillar,  and 
Kali.  3.  15  it  shall  eat  thee  up  like  the  canker  worm 
3.  15  make  thyself  many  as  the  canker  worm 
3.  16  the  canker  worm  spoileth,  and  fleeth 

CANKERED,  to  be  — 

'/'■  be  rusted,  KariSofxcu  katioojnai 

Jas.     5.    3  Your  gold  and  silver  is  cankered  ;  and 

CAN'-NEH,  H33  set  up,  distinguished. 

In  the  S.  coast  of  Arahia,   now  called  Canne. 

Eze.    27.  23  Harau,  and  C,  and  Eden,  the  merchants 

CA-PKR-NA'-USI,  Kane pvaov/j.  village  of  Nahum. 
On  the  western  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  near  the 
northern  end.  It  was  in  the  land  of  Gennesaret,  on  the 
rich  busy  plain.  The  doom  pronounced  against  it  and 
the  other  cities  has  been  singularly  fulfilled,  and  in 
sacred  topography  there  is  no  more  difficult  task  than 
to  discover  the  site.  The  spots  in  dispute  are  Khan- 
Minyeh  and  Tell-IIum;  the  latter  ,is  3  miles  N.  of 
the  former,  and  about  3  miles  from  the  entrance  of 
the  Jordan  into  the  lake. 

Matt.  4.  13  he  came  and  dwelt  in  C,  which  is  upon 

8.  5  when  Jesus  was  entered  into  C,  there 
11.  23  thou,  C,  which  art  exalted  unto  heaven 
17.  24  when  they  were  come  to  C,  they  that 

Mark  1.  21  they  went  into  C;  and  straightway 
2.    1  he  entered  into  C.  after  (some)  days 

9.  33  he  came  to  C. ;  and,  being  in  the  house 
Luke  4.  2  j  whatsoever  we  have  heard  done  in  C. 

4.  31  And  came  down  to  C,  a  city  of  Galilee 
7.    1  when  he  had  ended . .  he  entered  into  C. 
10.  15  thou,  C.,  which  art  exalted  to  heaven 
John  2.  12  After  this  he  went  down  to  C.,  he,  and 
4.  46  a  certain  nobleman . .  son  was  sick  at  C. 
6. 17  and  went  over  the  sea  toward  C.    And  it 
6.  24  and  came  to  C,  seeking  for  Jesus 
6. 59  These  things  said  he . .  as  he  taught  in  C. 

CAPfl'-TOR,  TH33  cup. 

The  principal  seat  of  the  Philistines,  who  are  once  called 
Caphtorim,  as  being  of  the  same  race  as  the  Mizraite 
people  of  that  name.  The  position  of  Caphtor  may 
have  been  in  Egypt,  or  near  it.  From  Jer.  47.  4  some 
think  it  was  an  island,  but  "isle  "  means,  in  its  wider 
application,  a  maritime  land  whether  on  the  coast  or 
an  island. 

Deut.  2. 23  Caphtorims,  which  came  forth  out  of  C. 

Jer.  47.   4  Philistines,  .remnant  of  the  country  of  C. 

Amos  9.   7  and  the  Philistines  from  C,  and  the 

CAPH-TO'-RIM,  onh?3. 

The  people  of  Caphtor.  The  name  seems  to  be  preserved 

in  that  of  the  old  Egyptian  city  Coptus. 

Gen.  10.  14  of  whom  came  Philistim,  and  C. 

Deut.  2.  23  the  C,  which  came  forth  out  of  C,  destr. 

1  Ch.  1.  12   of  whom  came  the  Philistines,   and  C. 

CAP-PA-DD-CI'-A,  KzirwaSoKid. ' 

An  elevated  table  land,  intersected  by  mountain  chains 
iu  the  eastern  part  of  Asia  Minor,  bounded  on  the  N. 
by  Pontus,  W.  by  Lveaonia,  S.  by  Cilicia,  and  E.  by 
Syria  and  Armenia  Minor.  It  was  always  deficient  in 
wood.  Its  interest  for  students  of  scripture  arises 
chiefly  from  the  mention  of  its  Jewish  residents  among 
the  hearers  of  Peter's  first  sermon,  and  its  Christian 
residents  among  the  readers  of  his  first  epistle. 
Acts  2.  9  dwellers  in,  .C,  in  Pontus,  and  Asia 
1  Pe.    1.    1  strangers  scattered  throughout.  ,C,  Asia 

CAPTAIN  — 

1.  First,  leader,  chiefs  ^x  alluph. 

Jer.    13.  21  for  thou  ha?t  taught  them  (to  be)  captains 

2. Lord,  owner,  possessor,  ^3  baal. 

Jer.  37. 13  a  captain  of  the  ward  (was)  there,  whose 
S.Tlphsar,  (a  title  of  honour),  "igro  tiphsar. 

Jer.  51,  27  appoint  a  captain  against  her  ;  cause  the 

Nah.    3.  17  and  thy  captains  as.  .great  grasshoppers 
1..  I  ram,  I  \a  1  \r,  ~n  har. 

Eze.  21.  22  appoint  captains,  to  open  the  mouth  in 
:>.!.   '  1  r,  one  before,  tjj  nagid. 

1  Sa.    9.  16  thou  shalt  anoint  him . .  captain  over  my 

10.    1  the  Lord  hath  anointed  theccaptaiu 
13. 14  Lokd  hath  commanded  him   .captain 

2  Si.    g.    2  and  Mum  shalt  be  a  caotain  over  Israel 

j  Ki,  zo.    5  tell  Hezekiah  the  captain  of  my  people 
■  Ch.n.  it  stnmg  holds,  and  put  captains  in  them 
ii.  Emlted,  lifted  up  one,  m1^  nasi. 

N  um.  2.    3  the  son  of  Amminadab . .  captain  of  the 
2.   5  Zuaf.. captain  of  the  children  of  Issachar 
2.    7  Helen. . captain ofthe  children  of  Zebulun 
2.  10  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Reuben 
2.  12  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Simeon 
2. 14  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Gad.  .Bliasaph 
z.  i3  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Ephraim 
2.  20  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Manasseh 
2.  22  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Benjamin 
2.  25  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Dun.. AW 
2.  27  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Ashcr..P. 
2.  29  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Naphfcali 
{.Governor,  nr)$  pechah. 

1  K  i  20.  24  and  put  captains  in  their  rooms 
,-  Ki.  iS.  24  wilt  thou  turn.. the  face  of  one  captain 
[SB     j6.    9  wi It  thou  turn .  .the  face  of  one  captain 
Jer.  5r.  23  Willi  break  in  pieces  captains  and  rulers 
51.  2S  tlu-  feings  of  the  Medes,  the  captains 
51.57  her  Wise  (men),  her  captains,  and  her 


Eze.  23.  6  clothed  with  blue,  captains  and  rulers 
23.  12  captains  and  rulers  clothed  most  gorge. 
23.  23  desirable  young  men,  captains  and  rulers 

Dan.    3.  2,3,27  princes,  the  governors,  and.  .captains 
6.    7  princes,  the  counsellors,  and  the  captains 

S. Ruler,  judge,  J'Xp  qaisin. 

Josh.  10.  24  the  captains  of  the  men  of  war  which 
Judgn.    6  they  said.  .Come,  and  be  our  captain 
11.  11  the  people  made  him  head  and  captain 

9. Head,  E^KI  rosh. 

Num  14.    4  Let  us  make  a  captain,  and  let  us  return 
Deut 29.  10  your  captains  of  your; tribes,  your  elders 

1  Ch.  4.  42  having  for  their  captains  Pelatiah,  and 

11.  15  three  of  the  thirty  captains  went  down 

11.  42  a  captain  of  the  Reubenites,  and  thirty 

12.  14  the  sous  of  Gad,  captains  of  the  host 
12.  18  and  made  them  captains  of  the  band 
12.  20  captains  of  the  thousands  that  (were)  of 
27.    3  Perez  (was)  the  chief  of  all  the  captains 

2  Ch.13,  12  God  himself  (is)  with  us  for  (our)  captain 

10. Great  one,  3*3  rob. 

2  Ki.  25.    8, 10, 11, 12, 15, 18, 20  Nebuzar-adan,  captain 
Jer.  39.    9,  10,  11,  13  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain 

40.  1,  2,  5  the  captain  of  the  guard 

41.  10  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain  of  the  guard 
43.    6  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain  of  the  guard 
52.  12  nineteenth. .came  Nebuzar-adan,  captain 
52.  14  all  the  army,  .with  the  captain  of  the 
52.  15,  16,  19,  24,  26,  30  the  captain  of  the  guard 

Dan.    2.  14  Arioch  the  captain  of  the  king's  guard 


U.ITead, 
Gen.  37. 

39- 
40. 
40. 
4i- 
41, 

Num  3 1 
31- 
3i- 
31- 

Deut.  1. 


Josh.  5 

5- 

Judg.  4. 

4- 

iSa.    8 


2Sa. 


[Ki. 


-Ki. 


iCh. 


"ip  sar. 

36  an  officer  of  Pharaoh's . .  captain  of . .  guard 

1  an  officer  of  Pharoah,  captain  of.  .guard 

3  he  put  them .  .in  the  house  of  the  captain 

4  the  captain  of  the  guard  charged  Joseph 
10  ward  in  the  captain  of  the  guard's  house 

12  an  Hebrew,  servant  to  the  captain  of  the 

14  Moses  was  wroth  with,  .the  captains 
48  captains  of  thousands,  and  captains  of 
52  captains  of  thousands,  and  of.  .captains 

54  the  captains  of  thousands,  .of  hundreds 

15  captains  over  thousands,  and  captains 
15  captains  over  fifties,  and  captains  over 

9  make  captains  of  the  armies  to  lead  the 

14  but  (as)  captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord 

15  the  captain  of  the  Lord's  host  said  unto 

2  the  captain  of  whose  host  (was)  Sisera 

7  I  will  draw  unto  thee.  .Sisera,  the  captain 

12  he  will  appoint  him  captains  over  thous. 
g  sold  them  into  the  hand.  .Sisera,  captain 

50  name  of  the  captain  of  his  host.  .Abner 
18  carry  these  ten  cheeses  unto  the  captain 

55  Saul .  .said  unto  Abner,  the  captain  of  the 

13  Saul,  .made  him  his  captain  over  a  thous. 
2  and  he  became  a  captain  over  them 

7  will  the  son  of  Jesse,  .make,  .captains 

5  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  the  captain  of  his 

8  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  Saul's 
2  Saul's  son  had  two  men.  .captains  of  ba. 

16  Shobach  the  captain  of  the  host,  .(went) 

18  the  Syrians.. smote  Shobach  the  captain 

1  set  captains  of  thousands  and  captains 
5  the  king  gave  all  the  captains  charge 

13  if  thou  be  not  captains  of  the  host 

19  he  was  their  captain.. he  attained  not 

2  Joab  the  captain  of  the  host,  which  (was) 
4  and  against  the  captains  of  the  hosts 

4  Joab  and  the  captains  of  the  host  went 

19  hath  called . .  Joab  the  captain  of  the  host 

25  hath  called  all  the.. captains  of  the  host 

5  to  the  two  captains  of  the  hosts  of  Israel 
32  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  the  host 
32  Amasa  the  son  of  Jether,  captain  of  the 

15,  21  Joab  the  captain  of  the  host  was 

24  he  gathered  men.. and  became  captain 

20  So  Ben-hadad . .  sent  the  captains  of  the 

9  servant  Zimri,  captain  of  half,  .chariots 
16  all  Israel  made  Omri,  the  captain  of  the 

32  captains  of  the  chariots  saw  Jehoshaphat 

33  the  captains  of  the  chariots  perceived 

9  Then  the  king  sent  unto  him  a  captain  of 

10  and  said  to  the  captain  of  fifty,  If  I  (be)  a 

11  he  sent  unto  him  another  captain  of  fifty 
13  he  sent  again  a  captain  of  the  third  fifty 

13  the  third  captain  of  fifty  went  up,  and 

14  and  burnt  up  the  two  captains  of  the 

13  be  spoken  for  to.  .the  captain  of  the  host? 
1  Naaman,  captain  of  the  host  of  the  king 

21  the  captains,  .and  the  people  fled  into 

5  behold,  the  captains  of  the  host,  .sitting 
5  I  have  an  errand  to  thee,  0  captain 

5  And  he  said,  To  thee,  O  captain 

9  the  captains  over  'he  hundreds  did.. all 
10  the  captaius  over  hundreds,  .that  (were) 

15  the  priest  commanded  the  captains  of 

23  the  captains  of  the  armies,  they  and  their 

26  all  the  people,  .and  the  captains  of  the 

6  Jcbusites  first  shall  be  chief  and  captain 
21  Of  the  three,  .he  was  their  captain 

21  they  helped  David,  .and  were  captains  in 

25  of  his  father's,  .twenty  and  two  captains 

34  of  Naphtali  a  thousand  captains,  and 

1  And  David  consulted  with  the  captainsof 

25  the  captains,  .went  to  bring  up  the  ark  of 

16,  18  Shophach  the  captain  of  tin-  host 

1  the  captains  of  the  host  separated  to  the 

26  the  captains  over  thousands  and  bund. 
26  the  captains  of  the  host,  had  dedicated 

1  and  captains  of  thousands  and  hundreds  I 


1  Ch.27.    3  of  all  the  captains  of  the  host  for  the  first 

27.  5  The  third  captain  of  the  host  for  the  third 

28.  1  tribes,  and  the  captains  of  the  companies 

28.  1  captains  over  the  thousands  and  captains 

29.  6  the  captains  of  thousands,  .of  hundreds 
2CI1.    1.    2  to  the  captains  of  thousands,  .hundreds 

8.    9  chief  of  his  captains,  and  captains  of  his 

16.  4  Een-haclad  hearkened,  .sent  the  captains 

17.  14  of  Judah,  the  captains  of  thousands 
17.  15  next  to  him. .  Jehohanan  the  captain 
t8.  30,  31,  32  the  king  of  Syria,  .com.  the  capt. 
21.    9  compassed  him  in,  and  the  captaius  of 
23.    1,  14,  20  took  the  captains  of  hundreds 
23.    9  Jehoiada.  .delivered  to  the  captains  of 
25.    5  captains  over  thousands,  and  cap.  over 
?6.  11  under  the  hand,  .(one)of  the  king's  capt. 
32.    6  he  set  captains  of  war  over  the  people 
3-2.  21  the  leaders  and  captains  in  the  camp 

1 1  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  the  captains 
14  put  captainsof  war  in  all  tbe  fenced  cities 


33> 

.Tub  2')- 
Isa.  3. 
Jer.  40. 


25  the  thunder  of  the  captains,  and  the 
3  The  captain  of  fifty,  and  t 


28a. 
iKi. 
2K1. 


3  The  captain  of  fifty,  and  the  honourable 
7,  13  the  captains  of  the  forces,  .in  the 

41.  11,  13,  16  captains  of  the  forces  that  (were) 

42.  1,  8  all  the  captains  of  the  forces.. came 

43.  4,  5  the  captains  of  the  forces,  and  all  the 

12. Ruler,  powerful  one,  fi'VaJ  shallit. 

Dan.    2.  15  lie  answered.  .Arioch  the  king's  captain 
IS. Third,  one  of  or  over  three,  v'lv  shalish. 

Exodi4.    7  he  took,  .captains  over  every  one  of  them 
15.    4  his  chosen  captains  also  are  drowned 
23.    8  The  Tachmonite.  .chief  among  the  cap. 
9.  22  servants,  and  his  princes, and  his  captains 
9.  25  Then  said  (Jehu)  to  Bidkar  his  captain 
10.  25  Jehu  said  to  the  guard  and  to  the  capta. 

10.  25  the  guard  and  the  captains  cast  (them) 
15.  25  the  son  of  llemaliah,  a  captain  of  his 

1  Ch.  11.  11  Jashobeam.  .the  chief  of  the  captains 

12.  18  came  upon  Amasai.  chief  of  the  captains 
2C'h.    8.    9  and  captains  01  his  chariots  and  horsemen 

14.  Chief  leader,  apxTyo^  archeges. 

Heb.  2.  10  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation 

15.  Leader  of  an  army,  arpar-nySs  slenirgos. 
Luke22.    4  communed  with  the  chief  priest  and  cap. 

22.  52  chief  priests,  and  captains  of  the  temple 
Acts    4.    1  the  captain  of  the  temple,  .came  upon 
5.  24  the  captain  of  the  temple,  .heard  these 
5.  26  Then  went  the  captain  with  the  officers 

16. Leader  of  a  thousand,  xi*-'iaPX0S  chilidrchos. 
JohniS.  12  and  the  captain  and  officers.. took  Tesus 
Rev.  19.  18  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of.  .captains 

CAPTAIN,  chief  (or  high)  — 
l.Head,  "Vp  sar. 

Gen.  21.  22,  32  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  host 
26.  26  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  army 

2. Leader  of  a  thousand,  xi^aPX0S  chilio.rchos. 
Mark  6.  21  his  lords,  high  captains,  and  chief 
Acts  21.  31  tidings  came  unto  the  chief  captain 

21.  32  they  saw  the  chief  captain  and  the  soldiers 
21.  33  the  chief  captain  came  near,  and  took  him 

21.  37  he  said  unto  the  chief  captain,  May  I 

22.  24  The  chief  captain  commanded  him  to  lie 
22.  26  he  went  and  told  the  chief  captain 

22.  27  Then  the  chief  captain  came,  and  said 
22.  28  the  chief  captain  answered,  With  a  great 

22.  29  and  the  chief  captain  also  was  afraid 
23. 10  the  chief  captain,  .commanded  the  sold. 
23. 15  signify  to  the  chief  captain  that  he  bring 

23.  17  Bring  this  young  man  unto  the  chief  cap. 
23.  18  So  he.  .brought  (him)  to  the  chief  captain 
23. 19  Then  the  chief  captain  took  him  by  the  h. 

23.  22  the  chief  captain,  .let  the  young  man  dep. 

24.  7  [the  chief  captain  Lysias  came  (upon  us)] 

24.  22  Lysias  the  chief  captain  shall  come  down 

25.  23  place  of  hearing,  with  the  chief  captains 
Rev.   6.  15  the  rich  men,  and  the  chief  captains 

CAPTAIN  of  the  guard  - 

Chief  of  the  encampment,  arparoTreBdpxVS' 

Acts  28.  16  [delivered,  .to  the  captain  of  the  guard] 

CAPTAIN  that  had  rule  — 
Head,  lb'  sar. 

1  Ki.22.  31  captains  that  had  rule  over  his  chariots 
CAPTAINS  — 

l.One  ready, prepared,  "H|  kari. 

2  Ki.n.    4  rulers  over  hundreds,  with  the  captains 

11.  19  rulers  over  hundreds,  and  the  captains 
2.Thirty,  c-n^  shdoshim,  D'^^  shaHshim. 

1  Ch.  11.  11  Jashobeam.. the  chief  of  the  captains 

12.  18  came  upon  Amasai.  .chief  of  the  captains 

CAPTIVE  — 

\. Exile,  one  removed  or  removing,  Jipia  golah. 

2  Ki.24.  16  the  king  of  Babylon  brought  captive  to  B. 
Eze.    1.    1  I  (was)  among  the  captives  by  the  river 

•2.  To  remove  into  e.eil<\  r^3  gahth. 

2  Ki  24.  14  men  of  valour,  ten  thousand  captives 
Isa.  49.  21  lost  my  children,  and  am.. a  captive 

o.f-'rile,  removal,  n^a  gal  nth. 

Isa.  20.    4  lead,  .the  Ethiopians  captives,  young 
45.  13  and  he  shall  let  go  my  captives 

Jer.  28.    4  with  all  the  captives  of  Judah,  that  went 
4. Son  of  exile  or  removal  NruSj-j3  f)Cll  gafaUha. 

Dan.  2.  25  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  captives  of 


CAPTIVE 


143 


CARCASE 


5.T-Q  take  away  captive,  Ti2&  shabah. 

Gen.  31.  26  earned  away  my  daughters,  as  captives 
Isa.  61.    1  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and 

Q.One  taken  away  captive,  '2¥  sh-:bi. 

Exodi2.  29  the  first  born  of  the  captive  that  (was) 
Nunrji.  12  they  brought  the  captives,  and  the  prey 

31.  19  purify  (both)  yourselves  and  your  cap. 
2  CI1.2S.  17  the  Edomites.  .carried  away  captives 
Isa.  49.  24  Shall  the  prey . .  or  the  lawful  captive 

49.  25  Even  the  captives  of  the  mighty  shall 
52.    2  bauds  of  thy  neck,  0  captive  daughter 
Jer.  48.  46  for  thy  sons  are  taken  captives,  and  thy 
Dan.  11.    S  shall  also  carry  captives  into  Egypt 
7  .Company  of  captives,  •tzb'  shibyah. 

Deut.21.  11  And  seest  among  the  captives  a.  .woman 

32.  42  the  blood  of  the  slain  and  of  the  captives 
2  Ch.28.    5  carried,  .a.  .multitude  of  them  captives 

28.  11  hear  me,  therefore,  and  deliver  the  capt. 
28.  13  Ye  shall  not  bring  in  the  captives  hither 
28.  14  So  the  armed  men  left  the  captives 
28.  15  the  men.  .rose  up,  and  took  the  captives 
Jer.  48.  46  sons  are  taken .  .thy  daughters  captives 

$. Captivity,  n'2y  shebith. 

Eze.  16.  53  the  captivity  of  thy  captives  in  the  midst 
9.  One  taken  by  tlie  spear,  arvjLiaAojTos'  aichmalotos. 

Luke  4.  iS  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and 
[See  also  Carried  away,  carry  away,  lead,  led  away.] 

CAPTIVE,  to  go  — 

To  remove  into  exile,  rr?a  galah. 

Amos  6.    7  go  captive  with  the  first  that  go  captive 
CAPTIVE,  to  bring  away  — 
To  take  away  captive,  n^^  shabah. 

2  Ki.  5.    2  Syrians,  .brought  away  captive,  .a  little 

CAPTIVE,  to  be  carried  — 

To  be  taken  away  captive,  rny  shabah,  2. 

1  Ki.  8.  47  the  land  whither  they  were  carried  capt. 

2  Ch.  6.  37  the  land  whither  they  were  carried  cap. 
Eze.    6.    9  nations  whither  they  shall  be  carried  cap. 

CAPTIVE,  to  be  carried  away  — 
1.3*0  be  exiled,  npa  galah,  6. 

Jer.  40.    1  which  were  carried  away  captive  unto 
2.  To  be  taken  away  captive,  ~^^  shabah,  2. 

Jer.  13.  17  the  Lord's  flock  is  carried  away  captive 
CAPTIVE,  to  carry  — 
l.To  take  away  captive,  r\2'S'  shabah. 

1  Eli.  8.  47  land  of  them  that  carried  them  captives 

8.  50  before  them  who  carried  them  captive 

2  Ch.  6.  3S  whither  they  have  carried  them  captives 
Psa  106.  46  of  all  those  that  carried  them  captives 

2.  To  remove  into  exile,  rpa  galah,  5. 

2  Ki.15.  29  and  carried  them  captive  to  Assyria 

j6.    9  carried  (the  people  uf)  it  captive  to  Kir 

Jer.  20.    4  he  shall  carry  them  captive  into  Babylon 
CAPTIVE,  to  carry  away  — 
l.To  take  away  captive,  njxy  shabah. 

NUIU24.  22  Asshur  shall  carry  thee  away  captive 

1  Ki.  8.  46  so  that  they  carry  them  away  captives 

2  Ch.  6.  36  carry  them  away  captives  unto  a  laud 

25.  12  did  the  children,  .carry  away  captive 
28.    8  carried  away  captive  of  their  brethren 
28.  17  smitten  Judah,  aud  carried  away  captives 

Psa  137.    3  they  that  carried  us  away  captive 

Jer.  41.  10  Ishmael  carried  away  captive  all  the 
41. 10  son  of  Nethaniah  carried,  .away  captive 
41. 14  Ishmael  had  carried  away  captive  from 
43.  12  shall  burn,  .aud  carry  them  away  captives 

Obad.     11.  the  strangers  carried  away  captive  his 
2.  To  remove  into  exile,  rhi  galah,  5. 

Jer.  24.    1  king  of  Babylon  had  carried  away  captive 
27.  20  carried  away  captive  Jeconiah  the  son 
39.   9  carried  away  captive  into  Babylon  the 
43.    3  carry  us  away  captives  into  Babylon 
52.  15  guard  carried  away  captive  (certain)  of 
52.  28  Nebuchadrezzar  carried  away  captive 
52.  29  he  carried  away  captive  from  Jerusalem 
52.  30  the  guard  carried  away  captive  of  the  Jews 

Amos  1.    6  carried  away  captive  the  whole  captivity 

CAPTIVE,  to  cause  to  be  carried  away  — 
To  remove  into  exile,  rh*  galah,  5. 

Jer.  29.    7  I  have  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  capt. 
29. 14  I  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captive 

CAPTIVE  exile  — 

To  be  bent,  bowed,  iTjra  tsaah. 

Isa.  51.  14  The  captive  exile  hasteneth  that  he  may 

CAPTIVE,  to  lead  — 

1.3b  take  away  captive,  nap  shabah. 

Judg.  5.  12  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  thou  son  of 
2  Ch  30.  9  before  them  that  lead  them  captive,  so 
Psa.  68.  18  thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  :  thou 

2. 3b  remove  into  exile,  rr?a  galah,  5. 

Jer.  22.  12  place  whithef'they  have  led  him  captive 

3.3b  take  by  the  spear,  alxp.a\uT€va>  aichmaloteuo. 
Eph.  4.    8  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts 
2  it    3.  6  [lead  captive]  silly  women  laden  with 

CAPTIVE,  to  lead  away  — 

1.3b  take  away  captive,  hiy  shabah. 

1  Ki.  8.  43  then-  enemies  which  led  them  away  cap. 


2.3b  be  exiled,  nhi  galah,  4. 

Nah.   2.    7  Huzzab  shall  be  led  away  captive,  she 
3.  To  take  by  the  spear,  alxpa>\a}Ti£w  aichmalGlizo. 

Luke2i.  24  shall  be  led  away  captive  into  all  nations 

CAPTIVE,  to  take  — 

To  take  away  captive,  "ay1  sliabah. 

Gen.  34.  29  little  oues . .  their  wives  took  they  captive 
31.    9  Israel  took . .  the  women  of  Midiau  captives 

Deut  21.  10  and  thou  hast  taken  them  captive 

1  Sa.  30.    2  had  taken  the  women  captives  that  (were) 

2  Ki.    6.  22  thou  hast  taken  captive  with  thy  sword 
2  Ch.28.  11  captives,  .which  ye  have  taken  captive 
Isa.    14.    2  and  they  shall  take  them  captives,  whose 
Jer.    50.  33  all  that  took  them  captives  held  them 

CAPTIVE,  to  be  taken  — 

l.To  be  taken  away  captive,  n^p  shabah,  2. 

Gen.  14.  14  heard  that  bis  brother  was  taken  captive 

1  Sa.  30.    3  and  their  daughters,  were  taken  captives 

30.    s  David's  two  wives  were  taken  captives 

2. 7b  catch  alive,  fa-ypiw  zdgreo. 

2  Ti.    2.  26  who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will 
CAPTIVITY  — 

1. Exile,  removal,  rnia  golah. 

2  Ki. 24.  15  (those)carried he  into  captivity  from  Jer. 

1  Ch.  5.  22  dwelt  in  their  steads  until  the  captivity 
Ezra    1.  11  bring  up  with,  .the  captivity  that  were 

2.  1  children . .  went  up  out  of  the  captivity 
4.    1  the  children  of  the  captivity  builded  the 
6.  19  the  children  of  the  captivity  kept  the 

6.  20  for  all  the  children  of  the  captivity 
6.  21  which  were  come  again  out  of  captivity 
10.    7  all  the  children  of  the  captivity,  that 

10.  16  And  the  children  of  the  captivity  did  so 
Esth.  2.  6  Who.  .carried  away,  .with  the  captivity 
Jer.   29.  16  are  not  gone  forth  y  ith  you  into  captivity 

29.  20  Hear . .  the  word . .  all  ye  of  the  captivity 

29.  31  Send  to  all  them  of  the  captivity,  saying 
46.  19  furnish  thyself  to  go  into  captivity  :  for 
48.    7  Chemosh  shall  go  forth  into  captivity 

48.  11  neither  bath  he  gone  into  captivity 

49.  3  for  their  king  shall  go  into  captivity 
Eze.     3.  ii  go,  get  thee  to  them  of  the  captivity 

3.  15  came  to  them  of  the  captivity  at  Tel-abib 

11.  24  in  a  vision,  .to  them  of  the  captivity 

11.  25  Then  I  spake  unto  them  of  the  captivity 

12.  4  they  that  go  forth  into  captivity 

12.    7  I  brought  forth  my  stuff,  .for  captivity 
12.  11  they  shall  remove,  (and)  go  into  captivity 
25.    3  Judah,  when  they  went  into  captivity 
Amos  1.  15  And  their  king  shall  go  into  captivity 
Zech.  6.  10  Take  of .  .the  captivity,  .of  Heldai 

14.    2  half  of.. city  shall  go  forth  into  captivity 

2.  To  remove  into  exile,  nSa  galah. 

JudgiS.  30  until  the  day  of  the  captivity  of  the  land 
o. Exile,  removal,  ftlV|  galuth. 

2  Ki.  25.  27  seven  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  captivity 
Ezra    6.  16  the  children  of  the  captivity,  kept  the 
Jer.  29.  22  a  curse  by  all  the  captivity  of  Judah 

52.  31  in . .  seven  and  thirtieth  year  of . .  captivity 
Eze.    1.    2  fifth  year  of  king  Jehoiacbin's  captivity 

33.  21  in  the  twelfth  year  of  our  captivity 
40.    1  the  five . .  twentieth  year  of  our  captivity 
Dan.    5.  13  (Art)  thou . .  of  the  children  of.  .captivity 
6.  13  Daniel,  which  (is)  of .  .children,  .captivity 
Amos  1.    6  they  carried,  .captive,  .whole  captivity 

1.    9  they  delivered  up  the  whole  captivity 
Obad.      20  And  the  captivity  of  this  host  of  the 
20  and  the  captivity  of  Jerusalem,  which 

■i.A  casting  away,  or  up  and  down,  n?»79  taltelah. 
Isa.   22.  17  will  carry,  .away  with  a  mighty  captivity 

h.Captivity,  rm^  shebuth. 

Deut  30.    3  the  Lord  thy  God  will  turn . .  captivity 
Job  42.  10  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job 
Psa.  14.    7  the  Lord  bringeth  back  the  captivity 

53.  6  God  bringeth  back  the  captivity  of  his 
85.    1  thou  hast  brought  back  the  captivity  of 

126.    4  Turn  again  our  captivity,  0  Lord 
Jer.   2g.  14  I  will  turn  away  your  captivity 

30.  3,  iS  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  my 

31.  23  when  I  shall  bring  again  their  captivity 

32.  44  I  will  cause  their  captivity  to  return 

33.  7  I  will  cause  the  captivity  of.  .Israel,  to 
33.  11  I  will  cause  to  return  the  captivity  of 
33.  26  I  will  cause  their  captivity  to  return 

48.  47  Yet  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  M. 

49.  6 1  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  the 
49.  39  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Elam 

Lam.  2.  14  iniquity,  to  turn  away  thy  captivity 
Eze.  29.  14  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Egypt 
Hos.    6.  11  when  I  returned  the  captivity  of  my 
Joel    3.    1  I  shall  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah 
Amns  9.  14  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  my 
Zeph.  2-    7  visit  them,  and  turn  away  their  captivity 
3.  20  I  turn  hack  your  captivity  before  your 

G. Captivity,  captive,  '2w  shebi. 

Deut  21.  13  put  the  raiment  of  her  captivity  from  off 

28.  41  for  they  shall  go  into  captivity 
Judg.  5.  12  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  thou  son  of  A. 
2  Ch.  6.  37  pray  unto  thee,  .land  of  then-  captivity 

2q.    9  our  wives  (are)  in  captivity  for  this 
Ezra    2.    1  children .  .that  went  up  oiit  of.  .captivity 
3.    8  they  that  were  come  out  of  the  captivity 

8.  35  children,  .were  come  out  of  the  captivity 

9.  7  to  the  sword,  to  captivity,  and  to  a  spoil 
Neh.  1.   2  the  Jews . .  which  were  left  of  the  captivity 


N eh.    1.    3  The  remnant  that  are  left  of  the  captivity 

7.  6  children,  .went  up  out  of  the  captivity 

8.  17  that  were  come  again  out  of  the  captivity 
Psa.  6S.  18  thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  :  thou 

7S.  61  And  delivered  his  strength  into  captivity 
Isa.   46.    2  but  themselves  are  gone  into  captivity 
Jer.    15.    2  as  (are)  for  the  captivity,  to  the  captivity 
20.    6  all  that  dwell,  .shall  go  into  captivity 
22.  22  and  thy  lovers  shall  go  into  captivity 
30.  10  I  will  save  thee,  .land  of  their  captivity 
30.  16  every  one  of  them,  shall  go  into  captivity 
43.  11  such  (as  are)  for  captivity  to  captivity 
46.  27  save  thee,  .from  the  land  of  their  capt. 
Lam.  1 .   5  her  children  are  gone  into  captivity  before 
1.  18  and  my  young  men  are  gone  into  captivity 
Eze.  12.  11  they  shall  remove,  (and)  go  into  captivity 
30.  17  and  these  (cities)  shall  go  into  captivity 
30. 18  and  her  daughters  shall  go  into  captivity 
Dan.  11.  33  by  flame,  by  captivity,  aud  by  spoil 
Amos  9.    4  they  go  into  captivity  before  their  enemies 
Nah.   3.  10  she  carried  away,  she  went  into  captivity 
Hab.  1.   9  they  shall  gather  the  captivity  as  the 
7 .Captivity,  (captive),  f^P  shibyah. 

Neh.  4.   4  for  a  prey  in  the  laud  of  captivity 
S.Captivity,  rT3#  shebith. 

Num.21.  29  into  captivity  unto  Sihon  king  of  the 
Joh    42.  10  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job 
Psa.  85.    1  thou  hast  brought  back  the  captivityof 
126.  4  Turn  again  our  captivity,  O  Lokd,  as  the 
Jer.   29. 14  I  will  turn  away  your  captivity,  and  I 

49.  39  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Elam 
Lam.  2.  14  not  discovered,  .turn  away  thy  captivity 
Eze.  16.  53  When  I  shall  bring  again  their  captivity 
16.  53  the  captivity  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters 
16  53  captivity  of  Samaria  aud  her  daughters 
16.  53  then  (will  I  hring  again)  the  captivity  of 
Zeph.  2.    7  God  shall,  .turn  away  their  captivity 

^.Captivity,  return,  ruv  shibah. 

Psa.  126. 1  Lord  turned  again  the  captivity  of  Ziou 
10. A  taking  by  thespear,alxi^^><^a'ia  aichmalosia. 

Eph.   4.    8  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  Re.  13. 10, 10. 

CAPTIVITY,  to  bring  into  — 

To  take  by  the  sjjear,  alxpa-^wrifa  aichmaloHzo. 
Horn.  7.  23  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of 
2  Co.  10.    5  bringing  into  captivity  every  thought  to 

CAPTIVITY,  to  cause  to  go  into  — 
3b  remove  into  exile,  nSa  galah,  5. 

Amos  5.  27  will  I  cause  you  to  go  into  captivity 

CAPTIVITY,  to  cause  to  be  led  into  — 
To  remove  into  exile,  "73  galah,  5. 

Eze.  39.  28  God. .  caused  them  to  be  led  into  captivity 

CAPTIVITY,  to  carry  away  into  — 
To  remove  into  exile,  ripa  galah,  5. 

Lam.  4.  22  no  more  carry  thee  away,  .into  captivity 

CAPTIVITY,  to  go  into  — 

3b  remove  into  exile,  n^a  galah. 

Isa.     5. 13  my  people  are  gone  into  captivity.because 
Lam.  1.    3  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  because  of 
Eze.  39.  23  the  house  of  Israel  went  into  captivity 
Amos  1.    5  Syria  shall  go  into  captivity  unto  Kir 
5.    5  for  Gilgal  shall  surely  go  into  captivity 
7. 17  Israel  shall  surely  go  into  captivity  forth 
Mic.    1.  16  they  are  gone  into  captivity  from  thee 

CARBUNCLE  — 

I.Stone  of  brightness,  rnpx  jnx  eben  eqdach. 

Isa.   54.  12  I  will  make'.'. thy  gates  of  carbuncles 
2.Glittering  stone,  emerald,  ^12  bareqath. 

Eze.  28. 13  the  sapphire,  theenierald.. the  carbuncle 

^.Glittering  stone,  npns  barcqeth. 

Exod28.  17  a  sardius,  a  topaz,  and  a  carbuncle 
39. 10  a  sardius,  a  topaz,  and  a  carbuncle 

CAR'-CAS,  D313  severe. 

The  seventh  chamberlain  of  Ahasucrus. 

Esth.  1.  10  he  commanded  Hehuman.  .and  C,  the 

CARCASE  — 

l.Body,  rtjiS  g'eviyyah. 

Judgi4."  8  bees  aud  honey  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion 
14.    9  had  taken  the  honey  out  of  the  carcase 

I.Fallen  thing,  carcase,  hb§h  mappeleth. 

Judgi4.    8  turned  aside  to  see  the  carcase  of  the  lion 
3. Faded  thina,  carcase,  rr?33  nebelah. 

Lev.     5.    2  whether,  .a  carcase  of  an  unclean  beast 
5.    2  a  carcase  of  unclean  cattle,  or  the  carcase 
n.    8  their  carcaseshall  ye  not  touch;  they  (are) 
11.  11  ye  shall  have  their  carcases  in  abomina. 
11— -4  whosoever  toucheth  the  carcase  of  them 
1 1  o5  whosoever  beareth . .  the  carcase  of  them 
11.  27  whoso  toucheth  their  carcase  shall  be 
11  28  he  that  beareth  the  carcase  of  them  shall 
11.  35  whereupon  (any  part)  of  their  carcase 
11.  36  that  which  toucheth  their  carcase  shall 
11.  37,  3S  if  (any  part)  of  their  carcase  fall,  .it 
ii.  39  he  that  toucheth  the  carcase . . shall  be 
1 1.  40  he  that  eateth  of  the  carcase . .  shall  wash 
11.  40  he  also  that  beareth  the  carcaseshall 
Deut  28.  26  thy  carcase-shall  be  meat  unto  all  fowls 
Josh.  8.  29  they  should  take  his  Carcase  down  from 
1  Ki  13  2-  thy  carcase  shall  not  come  unto  the  sep. 
13.  24  his  carcase  (was)  cast  in  the  way,  and  tho 


CARCASE 


144 


CARRIED 


i  Ki.  13.  24  the  lion  also  stood  by  the  carcase 
13.  25  men  passed  by,  and  saw  the  carcase 
13.  25  and  the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase 
13.  28  he  went,  and  found  his  carcase  cast  in 
13.  28  and  the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase 
13.  28  the  lion  had  not  eaten  the  carcase,  nor 
13.  29  And  the  prophet  took  up  the  carcase  of 

13.  30  he  laid  his  carcase  in  his  own  grave 

2  Ki.  9.  37  the  carcase  of  Jezebel  shall  be  as  dung 
Isa.  5.  25  their  carcases,  .torn  in  the  midst  of  the 
Jer.  7.  33  the  carcases  of  this  people  shall  be  meat 
9.  22  the  carcases  of  men  shall  fall  as  dung 
16.  4  their  carcases  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls 
16.  18  filled  mine  inheritance  with  the  carcase 
19.    7  their  carcases  will  I  give  to  be  meat  for 

4.Carcase,  faint,  exhausted  object,  *u£  peger. 

Gen.  15.  11  the  fowls  came  down  upon  the  carcases 
Lev.  26.  30  cast  your  carcases  upon  the  carcases  of 
Numi4.  29  Your  carcases  shall  fall  in  this  wilderness 
*4-  32  your  carcases,  they  shall  fall  in  this  wil. 

14.  33  until  your  carcases  be  wasted  in  the  wil. 
iSa.  17.  46  I  will  give  the  carcases,  .unto  the  fowls  of 
Isa.   14.  19  as  a  carcase  trodden  under  feet 

34.    3  their  stink  shall  come  up  out  of  their  car. 

66.  24  look  upon  the  carcases  of  the  men  that 
Eze.  43.    7  the  carcases  of  their  kings  in  their  high 

43.  9  let  them  put  away,  .the  carcases  of  their 
Nah.   3.    3  and  a  great  number  of  carcases  ;  and 

5. Limb,  ku>\ov  kolon. 

Heb.   3. 17  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness? 

6. Fallen  thing,  wrafia  ptoma. 

Matt  24.  28  wheresoever  the  carcase  is,  there  will  the 

CARCASE,  dead  — 

I. Carcase,  faded  object,  n?34  nebelah. 

Deut  14.    8  ye  shall  not.  .touch  their  dead  carcase 
2. Faint,  exhausted,  il$  peger. 

Eze.    6.    5  I  will  lay  the  dead  carcases  of  the  child. 

CAR-CHE'-MISH,  W"D313  citadel  of  Chemosh. 
A  city  on  the  Euphrates  occupying  nearly  the  site  of 
Maboy  or  llierapolis  in  later  times,  but  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  classical    Circesium,   which    stood 
much  further  down  the  river. 

2  Ch.35.  20  Necho . .  came  up  to  fight  against  C.  by 
Isa.    10.    9  (Is)  not  Calno  as  C?  (is)  not  Hamath 
Jer.  46.    2  which  was  by  the  river  Euphrates  in  C. 
CARE  — 
1. Anxious  care,  njio  deagah, 

Eze.    4.  16  bread  by  weight,  and  with  care 

2.  Word,  matter,  "in"i  dabar. 

1  Sa.  10.    2  thy  father  hath  left  the  care  of  the  asses 

3.  Trembling,  fear,  rrrnq  charadah. 

aKi.    4.  13  been  careful  for  us  with  all  this  care 
A.  Division,  distraction,  fxepifxva  inerimna. 

Matt  13.  22  is  he  that  heareth  the  word  ;  and  the  care 
Mark  4.  19  the  cares  of  this,  .and  the  deceitfulness 
Luke.  8.  14  are  choked  with  cares  and  riches 

21.  34  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with,  .cares 

2  Co.  11.  28  Besides  those,  .care  of  all  the  churches 

1  Pe.    5.    7  Casting  all  your  care  upon,  .for  he  careth 

5.  Haste,  speed,  enrovh-f]  spoude. 

2  Co.    7.  12  our  care  for  you  iu  the  sight  of  God  might 
C.  To  be  mindful,  typoveco  })hroned. 

Phil.    4.  10  at.,  last  your  care  for  me  hath  flourished 

CARE,  earnest  — ■ 

Haste,  speed,  airovBrj  spoude. 

2  Co.  8    16  put  the  same  earnest  care  into  the  heart 
CARE,  to  — 
1.7*0  set  the  heart,  nS  n>£'  sum  leb. 

2  Sa.  18.    3  if  we  flee  away,  they  will  not  care  for  us 
18.    3  neither  if  half  of  us  die,  will  they  care  for 

2.  To  be  an  object  of  care,  {i4ku>  melo. 

Matt  22.  16  neither  carest  thou  for  any  (man) ;  for 
Mark  4.  38  Master,  carest  thou  not  that  we  perish? 

12.  14  Master,  we  know  that  thou,  .carest  for 
Luke  10.  40  dost  thou  not  care  that  my  sister  hath 
John  10.  13  he  is  an  hireling,  and  careth  not  for  the 

12.    6  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor;  but  because 
Acts  18.  17  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  those  things 
1  Co.    7.  21  Art  thou  called  (being)  a  servant?  care 
1  Pe.    5.    7  all  your  care  upon  him  ;  for  he  careth 

3.  To  become  distracted,  careful, fapifxvdw  merimnao. 

1  Co.  7.  32,  33  He  that  is  unmarried  careth  for  the 
7.  34  The  unmarried  woman  careth  for  the 
7.  34  but  she  that  is  married  careth  for  the 

Phil.   2.  20  who  will  naturally  care  for  your  state 

CARE,  to  have  — 

To  become  distracted,  careful,  fi€pi/j.fdco  merimnao. 

1  Co.  12.  25  the  members  should  have  the  same  care 
CARE,  to  take  — 
To  be  Mu  object  of  care,  fj.4\w  melo. 

1  Co.    9.    9  Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen? 
CARE  for,  to  — 
To  seek,  search,  bHj  darash. 

Deut  1 1.  u  A  land'  .the  LORD  thy  God  careth  for 

Psa.142.    4  I  looked.. uo  man  cared  for  my  soul 

CARE  of,  to  take  — 

To  be  careful  about,  ^irifj.^\4o/j.at  cpimeleomai. 
Luke  10.  34  brought  him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of 


Lukeio.  35  Take  care  of  him.  .1  will  repay  thee 

1  Ti.    3.    5  how.  .he  take  care  of  the  church  of  God? 

CARE,  without  — 

Trustfully,  confidently,  nt?3^  labctach. 

Jer.  49.  31  wealthy  nation,  thatdwelleth  without  care 
CA-RE'-AH,  rnp  bald  head. 

Father  of  Johanan,  governor  of  Judah  in  the  time  of 
Gedaliah.  Elsewhere  in  the  English  version  it  is  spelt 
Kareah.     B.C.  630. 

2  Ki.25.  23  came  to  Gedaliah.  .Johanan  the  son  of  C. 
CAREFUL,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  anxiously  careful,  lin  dctag. 

Jer.  17.    8  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  year  of  drought 
2.  To  tremble,  fear,  inn  charad. 

2  Ki.    4.  13  Behold,  thou  hast  been  careful  for  us 
3. To  be  or  think  necessary,  JX'n  ehashach. 

Dan.    3.  16  we  (are)  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in 
4. To  become  distracted,  fiepifivdw  merimnao. 

Luke  10.  41  thou  art  careful  and  troubled  about 

Phil.    4.    6  Be  careful  for  nothing;  but  in  every  thing 

b.To  be  mindful,  <ppov4co  phroneu. 

Phil.    4.  10  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked 
Q.To  be  thoughtful  or  mindful,  (ppovTifa  phrontizij. 

Titus  3.    8  which,  .believed  in  Ood  might  be  careful 

CAREFULLY  — 

To  hear,  hearken,  yr£  shama. 

Deut  15.    5  Only  if  thou  carefully  hearken  unto  the 

CAREFULLY,  the  more  — 

More  hastily,  airovBaioTepus  spoudaioterds. 

Phil.   2.  28  I  sent  him  therefore  the  more  carefully 

CAREFULNESS  — 

1. Anxious  care,  njxn  deagah. 

Eze.  12.  18  driukth'y  water,  .with  carefulness 

12.  19  They  shall  eat  their  bread  with  careful. 
2.  Haste,  o-7rov$-)i  spoude. 

2  Co.  7.  11  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you 
CAREFULNESS,  -without  — 
Without  distraction,  a^pifxvos  avierimnos. 

1  Co.  7.  32  But  I  would  have  you  without  carefulness 
CARELESS  — 
l.To  trust,  be  confident,  na|  batach. 

Isa.    32.    9  ye  careless  daughters;  give  ear  unto  my 
2.  Trust,  confidence,  rma.  betach. 

JudgiS.    7  the  people,  .dwelt  careless,  after  the 

Eze.  30.    9  to  make  the  careless  Ethiopians  afraid 

CARELESS  one  or  -woman  — 

To  trust,  be  confident,  nt?3  batach. 

Isa.   32.  10  shall  ye  be  troubled,  ye  careless  women 
32.  11  ye  women,  .be  troubled,  ye  careless  ones 

CAR'-MEL,  Srris  fruitful  place. 

l.It  is  nearly  always  witl^ the  article— "  the  park,"  the 
well- wooded  place.  A  mountain  which  forms  a  striking 
and  characteristic  feature  of  Canaan.  It  projects  into 
the  Mediterranean,  and  stands  as  a  wall  between  the 
maritime  plain  of  Sharon  on  the  S.  and  the  more  iulaud 
expanse  of  Esdraelon  on  the  N.  It  is  about  12  miles 
long  from  the  sea  till  it  terminates  abruptly  in  the  hills 
of  Janin  and  Samaria,  which  form  at  that  part  the 
central  mass  of  the  country.  Its  highest  point  is  about 
4  miles  from  the  E.  end,  at  the  village  of  Es-fieh,  and 
measures  in  English  feet  1728  above  the  sea  level. 

Josh  12.  22  the  king  of  Jokneam  of  C,  one 

19.  26  reacheth  to  C.  westward,  and  to  Shihor. 

1  Sa.15.  12  Saul  came  to  C,  and,  behold,  he  set  him 

1  Ki.18.  19  gather  to  me  all  Israel  unto  mount  C. 

18.  20  gathered  the  prophets,  .unto  mount  C. 

18.  42  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  C;  and  he 

2  Ki.  2.  25  he  went  from  thence  to  mount  C. 

4.  25  came  uuto  the  man  of  God  to  mount  C. 

19.  23  I  will  enter  into,  .the  forest  of  bis  C. 

2  Ch.26.  10  vine  dressers  in  the  mountains,  and  in  C. 
Song  7.    5  Thine  head  upon  thee  (is)  like  C,  and  the 
Isa.  23-    9  Bashan  and  C.  shake  off  (their  fruits) 
35.    2  the  excellency  of  C.  and  Sharon  ;  they 
37.  24  I  will  enter  into.. the  forest  of  his  C. 
Jer.   46.  iS  as  C.  by  the  sea,  (so)  shall  he  come 

50.  19  he  shall  feed  on  C.  and  Bashan,  and  his 
Amos  1.    2  The  Loirn  will  roar,  .and  the  top  of  C. 

9.  3  though  theyhide themselves  in.  .top  of  C. 
Mic.  7.  14  which  dwell  solitarily,  .in  the  midst  of  C. 
Nah.  1.  4  Bashan  lauguisheth,  and  C,  and 
2.  A  town  in  the  mountainous  part  of  Judah,  where 
Nabal  resided  with  his  wife  Abigail.  Here,  no  doubt, 
was  the  site  of  Uzziah's  vineyards.  The  ruins  of  the 
town,  now  called  Kunnul,  still  remain  at  10  miles 
below  Hebron  in  a  slightly  S.  E.  direction,  close  to  those 
of  Main,  Zif,  (Maon  and  Ziph),  and  other  places  named 
with  Carmel  in  Josh.  15.  55. 

Josh  15.  55  Alaon,  C,  and  Ziph,  and  Juttah 
1  Sa.  15.    2  in  Maon,  whose  possessions  (were)  in  C. 
25.    2  and  be  was  shearing  his  sheep  in  C. 
25.    5  Get  you  up  to  C,  and  go  to  Nabal 
25.    7  all  the  while  they  were  in  C. 
25.  40  the  servants  of  David  were  come .  .to  C. 

CAR-MEL-ITE,  CAR-MEL-IT  ESS  n^i?"]3,  ^P")2. 
An  inhabitant  of  Carmel. 

1  Sa.  27.    3  and  Abigail  the  C,  Nabal's  wife 
30.    5  and  Abigail  the  wife  of  Nabal  the  C. 


2  Sa.    2.    2  and  Abigail.  Xabal's  wife,  the  C. 

3.  3  Chileab,  of  Abigail  the  wife  of  Nabal. .C. 
23.  35  Hezrai  the  C,  Paarai  the  Arbite 

1  Ch.  3.    1  the  second,  Daniel,  of  Abigail  the  C. 
11.  37  Hezro  the  C,  Naarai  the  son  of  Ezbai 
CAR'-lttLT,  -nil  fruitful,  noble. 

1.  Father  of  Achan  "who  troubled  Israel."  In  1  Ch. 
4.  1  the  name  is  given  as  a  son  of  Judah,  but  the  same 
person  is  probably  intended,  as  no  such  son  of  Judah 
iselsewhere  mentioned,  and  of  the  five  names  mentioned 
only  one  is  really  his  son,  Pharez,  though  the  other  four 
are  called  "sons."  Hezron  is  of  the  2d  generation, 
Hur  of  the  4th,  and  Shobal  of  the  6th.    b.  C.  1480. 

Josh.  7.    1  for  Achan,  the  son  of  C,  the  son  of  Zabdi 

7.  18  and  Achan,  the  son  of  C. .  .was  taken 
1  Ch.  2.    7  the  sons  of  C.  ;  Achar  the  troubler  of  Is. 

4.  1  sons  of  Judah ;  Pharez,  Hezron,  and  C. 

2.  One  of  the  sons  of  Reuben,  B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.    9  sons  of  Reuben  ;  Hanoch.  .Hezron,  and  C. 
Exod.6.  14  Hezron,  and  C. :  these  (be)  the  families  of 
Nuni26.    6  of  C,  the  family  of  the  Carmites 
1  Ch.  5.    3  sons . .  of  Reuben . .  Pallu,  Hezron,  and  C. 

CARMITES,  'plan, 

Family  descended  from  the  preceding,  No.  2. 
Num  26.    6  of  Carnii,  the  family  of  the  C. 

CARNAL  — 

1. Fleshly,  uapKtKo's  savkikos. 

Rom.  7.  14  but  I  am  [carnal],  sold  under  sin 

1  Co.  3.    1  I.  .could  not  speak,  .but  as  unto  [carnal] 

3.    3  ye  are  yet  [carnal]. .are  ye  not  carnal? 
3.    4  I  (am)  of  Apollos  ;  are  ye  not  [carnal]  ? 

2  Co.  10.    4  weapons  of  our  warfare  (are)  not  carnal 
Heb.   7.  16  not  after  the  law  of  a  [carnal]  command. 

2. Flesh,  cap£  sarx. 

Rom.  S.    7  the  carnal  mind  (is)  enmity  against  God 
Heb.   9.  10  drinks,  and  divers  washings,  and  carnal 

CARNAL  things  — 

The  fleshly  (things),  tA  crap/axa  to.  sarkika. 

Rom  15.  21  to  minister  unto  them  iu  carnal  things 
i  Co.  9.  11  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal  things? 

CARNALLY  — 

1.  Laying  of  seed,  cojmlation,  VI]  nn?^  or  ^5^. 

Lev.  18.  20  Moreover  thou  shalt  not  lie  carnally  with 

19.  20  whosoever  lieth  carnally  with  a  woman 
Num.  5.  13  a  mail  lie  with  her  carnally,  and  it  be  hid 

2.  Flesh,  <ra.pl  sarx. 

Rom.  8.    6  For  to  be  carnally  minded  (is)  death ;  but 
CARPENTER  — 
1. Artificer,  t;"in  charash. 

2  Ki.22.    6  Unto  carpenters,  and  builders,  and  mas. 

2  Ch.24.  12  hired  masons  and  carpenters  to  repair 

Ezra    3.    7  They  gave  money  also  unto,  .the  carpen. 

Isa.  41.    7  So  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsm. 

Jer.  24.    1  the  carpenters  and  smiths,  from  Jerusal. 
29.    2  the  carpenters,  and  the  smiths,  were  de. 

Zech  1.  20  the  Lord  showed  me  four  carpenters 

2. Artificer  in  wood,  fj?  EHQ  charash  ets. 

2  Sa.  5.  11  cedar  trees,  and  carpenters,  and  masons 
2  Ki.12.  11  they  laid  it  out  to  the  carpenters  and 

1  Ch.14.    1  masons  and  carpenters,  to  build  him 
Isa.   44.  13  The  carpenter  stretcheth  out  (his)  rule 

3. Artificer,  t€Kto>v  tekton. 

Matt  1 3.  55  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son  ?  is  not 
Mark  6.    3  Is  not  this  the  carpenter,  the  son  of  Mary 

CAR -PUS,  ndpiros  fruit. 

A  person  at  Troas  in  Mysia,  with  whom  Paul  left  a 

cloak. 

2  Ti.    4.  13  The  cloak  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  C.  . 

CARRIAGE  — 

1. Heaviness,  veight,  rnns  kebuddah. 

Judgi3.  21  and  put.  .the  carriage  before  them 
2.  Vessel,  instrument,  '73  keli. 

1  Sa.  17.  22  left  his  carriage,  .keeper  of  the  carriage 
Isa.   10.  28  at  Michmash  he  hath  laid  up  his  carriages 

Z.Thing  lifted  up  or  borne,  nw'c^  nesuah. 

Isa.  46.    1  carriages  (were)  heavy  loaden  :  (they) 
CARRIAGE,  to  take  up  one's  — 
To  make  ready  for  leaving,  a.Tro(n<evd£op.at. 

Acts  21.  15  after  those  days  we  took  up  our  carriages 
CARRIED  — 
To  lift  up,  bear,  carry,  xfc'J  7iasa. 

Isa.  46.    3  (by  me),  .(which  are)  carried  from  the 

CARRIED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  caused  to  go  in,  t03  bo,  6. 

Jer.  27.  22  They  shall  be  carried  to  Babylon,  and 
2.  To  be  caused  to  flow  or  go,  Vs;  yabal,  6. 

Job   10.  iq  I  should  have  been  carried  from  the 

Hos.  10.    6  It  shall  be  also  carried  unto  Assyria  (for) 
12.    1  and  oil  is  carried  into  Egypt 
Z.To  move,  be  moved,  uio  mot. 

Psa.  46.    2  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into 
4. To  be  lifted  up,  borne,  carried,  aim  nasa,  2. 

2  Ki.20.  17  all.  .in  thine  house.,  shall  be  carried  into 
Isa.   39.    6  all. in  thine  house.. shall  be  carried  to 

49.  22  daughters  shall  be  carried  upon  (their) 

CARRIED  about,  to  be  — 

To  be  carried  round,  33.D  sabab,  2. 

1  Sa.  5.    8  Let  the  ark .  .be  carried  about  unto  Gath 


CARRIED 


145 


CARRYING 


CARRIED  away,  to  be  — 
l.Ecilc,  rfoSz  golah. 

Nah.  3.10  Yet  (was)  she  carried  away,  she  went 

'2.  To  remove  into  exile,  ir?3  galah. 

2  KL17.  23  So  was  Israel  carried  away  out  of  their 
25.  21  So  Judah  was  carried  away  out  of  their 

B.To  be  caused  to  go  into  ensile,  nSa  galah,  6. 

i  Ch.  9.    1  Israel  and  Judah . .  were  carried  away  to 
Esth.  2.    6  Who  had  beeu  carried  away  from  Jerus. 
2.    6  captivity  which  had  beeu  carried  away 

4,  A  change  of  dwelling,  fj.eToiK<-<rla  metoikesia. 
JIatt.  1.  ii'the  time  they  were  carried  away  to  Bab. 

CARRIED  away  with,  to  be  — 

To  lead  away  with,  a-waKayw  sunapago. 

Gal.     2.  13  Barnabas,  .was  carried  away  with  their 

CARRIED  away  captive  — 
Exile,  removed  one,  n?i3  golah. 

Jer.  28.    6  all  that  is  carried  away  captive,  from  B. 

29.    1  the  elders  which  were  carried  away  cap. 

29.    4  all  that  are  carried  away  captives,  whom 

CARRIED  away  captive,  to  be  — 
l.To  go  into  exile,  n^a  galah. 

Jer,  52.  27  Thus  Judah  was  carried  away  captive 

2.To  be  removed  into  exile,  npa  galah,  6. 

Jer.   13.  ig  Judah  shall  be  carried  away  captive  all 
40.    1  which  were  carried  away  captive  unto  B. 
40.    7  the  poor,  .were  not  carried  away  captive 

CARRIED  away  captive,  to  be  wholly  — 

To  be  caused  to  go  into  exile,  n?z  galah,  6. 

Jer.   13.  ig  it  shall  be  wholly  carried  away  captive 

CARRIED  away  captive,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  cause  to  go  into  exile,  nSa  galah,  5. 

Jer.   29.    7  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captives 
29. 14  I  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captive 

CARRIED  away  captive,  they  that  are  — 
Exile,  state  of  exile,  ni?a  galuth. 

Jer.   24.    5  them  that  are  carried  away  captive 

40.    1  all  that  were  carried  away  captive  of  J. 
CARRIED  away,  those  that  had  been  — 
An  exile,  removed  one,  npia  golah. 

Ezra  8.  35  children  of  those  that  had  been  carried  a. 
9.   4  of  those  that  had  beeu  carried  away 

10.  6,  8  of  those  that  had  been  carried  away 
Neh.    7.    6  captivity,  .those  that  had  been  carried  a. 

CARRIED  headlong,  to  be  — 
To  be  hastened,  yto  mahar,  2. 

Job    5. 13  counsel  of  the  fro  ward  is  carried  headlong 
CARRY,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  come  or  go  in,  Ki3  bo,  5. 

Gen.  42.  19  cany  corn  for  the  famiue  of  your  houses 

1  Sa.  17.  18  carry  these  ten  cheeses  unto  the  captain 

20.  40  said  unto  him,  Go,  carry  (them)  to  the 

2  Ki.   9.    2  make  him  arise,  .aud  carry  him  to  an 

25.    7  bound  him  with  fetters,  .and  carried  him 
2  Ch.  34.  16  Shaphan  carried  the  book  to  the  king 
36.    4  Necho  took  Jehoahaz.  .and  carried  him 
36.    7  Nebuchadnezzar,  .carried  of  the  vessels 
Jer.   20.    5  take  them,  aud  carry  them  to  Babylon 
28.    3  iNebuchadnezzarkiug  of  Babylon,  .carried 
39.   7  bound  him  with  chaius,  to  earry  him  to 
52.  11  bound  him  in  chains,  aud  carried  him  to 
Eze.  17.   4  He  cropped  off  the  top.  .and  carried  it 
Dan.    1.   2  the  vessels,  .which  he  carried  into  the 

11.  8  shall  also  carry  captives  into  Egypt  their 
Joel    3.    5  ye.  .have  carried  into  your  temples  my 

2.  To  cause  to  flow  or  go,  ^3;  yahal,  5. 

Isa.   23.    7  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to 

3.  To  cause  to  go  or  flow,  byx  yebal,  5. 

Ezra   7. 15  to  carry  the  silver  and  gold,  which  the 

4.  to  cause  to  go  on,  ?fcn,  or  tjS;  yalak  5. 

2  Ki.17.  27  Carry  thither  one  of  the  priests  whom  ye 

24.  15  he  carried  away  Jehoiachin  to  Babylon 

2  Ch.33.  11  bound  him  with  fetters,  aud  carried  him 

36.    6  bound  him  in  fetters,  to  carry  him  to  B. 

Eccl.  10.  20  a  bird  of  the  air  shall  carry  the  voice,  and 

5.  To  lead  (as  a  flock),  bni  nahal,  3. 

2  Ch.28.  15  anointed  them,  and  carried  all  the  feeble 
6. To  cause  to  come  down,  nna  nechatli,  5. 

Ezra  5.  15  carry  them  into  the  temple  that  (is)  in 
7.7*0  lift  up,  carry,  N'^a  nasa. 

Gen.  44.    1  (with)  food,  as  much  as  they  can  carry 

45.  27  the  wagous.  .Joseph  had  sent  to  carry 

46.  s  the  sous  of  Israel  carried  Jacob  their 

46.  5  which  Pharaoh  had  sent  to  carry  him 

47.  30  thou  shalt  carry  me  out  of  Egypt,  and 
50.  13  For  his  sous  carried  him  into  the  land 

Lev.  10.   4  carry  your  brethren  from  before  the 

10.    5  So  they  went  near,  and  carried  them  in 
Numn.  12  Carry  them  in  thy  bosom,  as  a  nursing 
Deut  14.  24  so  that  thou  art  not  able  to  carry  it 
2  Ki.  4. 19  he  said  to  a  lad,  Carry  him  to  his  mother 
7.    8  these  lepers  came,  .and  carried  thence 
7.    8  carried  thence  (also),  aud  went  and  hid  (it) 
23.   4  carried  the  ashes  of  them  unto  Beth -el 

25.  13  and  carried  the  brass  of  them  to  Babylon 

19 


i  Ch.15.    2  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark  of  God  but 
15.    2  for  them  hath  the  LORD  chosen  to  carry 

Isa.   30.    6  carry  their  riches  upon  the  shoulders  of 
40. 11  carry  (them)  in  his  bosom,  (and)  shall  geu. 

Jer.   52. 17  and  carried  all  the  brass  of  them  to  B. 
S.To  lift  up,  carry,  tit's  nasa,  3. 

Isa.   63.    9  he  bare,  .and  carried  them  all  the  days 
9.70  bear,  support,  b%c  sabal. 

Isa.  46.   4  (eveu)  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  (you) 
46.   4  eveu  I  will  carry,  aud  will  deliver  (you) 
46.   7  they  carry  him,  and  set  him  in  his  place 
53.    4  carried  our  sorrows    yet  we  did  esteem 

10.  To  cause  to  ride,  put  on  horseback,  D3i  rakab,  5. 
2  Ki.  9.  28  his  servants  carried  him  in  a  chariot 

1  Ch.13.    7  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  in  a  new  cart 

11.  To  throw  or  shoot  {with  a  bow),  ncn  ramah. 
Psa.  78.    9  The  children . .  armed, (and)  carrying  bows 

12.  To  lead,  &yw  ago. 

Acts  21.  34  he  commanded  him  to  be  carried  into  the 

13. To  liffup,  carry,  atpw  airo. 

John  5.  10  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  carry  (thy) bed 

14.70  bear  off,  cWo<£epia  apophero. 

Luke  16.  22  the  beggar,  .was  carried  by  the  augels 

15.  To  support,  carry,  Pao-rdfa  bastazo. 

Luke  10.  4  Carry  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes 
Acts  3.  2  a  certain  nan  lame,  .was  carried,  whom 
Rev.  17.    7  the  mystery,  .of  the  beast  that  carrietu 

lQ.To  drive,  set  in  motion,  iKavpcv  elav.no,  £\dco. 

2  Pe.  2. 17  These  are.  .clouds  that  are  carried  with 

17.  To  bear  together,  trvyicofitCu  suykomizo. 

Acts   S.   2  devout  men  carried  Stephen,  .and  made 

18.  To  bear,  carry,  <£epa>  phero. 

John2i.  18  and  another  shall  gird  thee,  aud  carry 
[See  also  Captives,  tales,  tidings.] 
CARRY  about,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  go  round,  22c  sabab,  5. 

1  Sa.   5.    8  carried  the  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel  about 

5.    9  it  was.  .after  they  had  carried  it  about 
2.7*0  carry  or  bear  round,  irepupepw periphe.ro. 
Mark  6.  55  and  began  to  carry  about  in  beds  those 
Eph.    4.  14  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  carried  about  with 
Heb.  13.    g  Be  uot  carried  about  with  divers  aud 
Jude       12  without  water,  [carried  about]  of  winds 

CARRY  again,  to  — 

To  cause  to  turn  back,  31B?  sJ'.ub,  5. 

Geu.  43.  12  the  mouth  of  your  sacks,  carry  (it)  again 

2  Ch.  24. 11  took  it,  and  carried  it  to  his  place  again 

CARRY  aside,  to  — 

To  cause  to  incline,  nai  natdh,  5. 

2  Sam6. 10  David  carried  it  aside  into  the  house  of 

CARRY  away  — 

A  burden,  thing  lifted  up,  kbO  massa. 

2  Ch.  20.  25  jewels,  .more  than  they  could  carry  away 

CARRY  away,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  into  exile,  nSa  galah,  5. 

2  Ki.  17.  6  aud  carried  Israel  away  into  Assyria,  and 
17.  11  the  heathen  whom  the  LoKT)  carried  away 
17.  28  thepriests,  whom  they  had  carried  away 
17-  33  the  nations  whom  they  carried  a  way  from 
iS.  11  the  king  of  Assyria  did  carry  away  Israel 
24.  14  And  he  carried  away  all  Jerusalem,  and 

24.  15  he  carried  away  Jehoiachiu  to  Babylon 

25.  11  did  Nebuzar-adan  .captain,  .carry  away 
iCh.    5.    6  whom  Tilgath-pilneser.. carried  away 

5.  26  he  carried  them  away,  .uuto  Ha] ah,  and 
6. 15  wheu  the  Lord  carried  away  Judah  and 
2CI1.  36.  20  that  had  escaped.. carried  he  away  to  B. 
Ezra   2.    1  king  of  Babylon  had  carried  away  uuto 
Neh.  7.    6  the  king  of  Babylou  had  carried  away 
Esth.  2.    6  the  king  of  Babylou  had  carried  away 
Jer.  29.    1  Nebuchadnezzar  had  carried  away  captive 

2. To  cause  to  go  into  exile,  nb-i  gelah,  5. 

Ezra   5. 12  and  carriedthepeople  away  into  Babylon 
B.To  steal,  333  ganab. 

Job    21.  18  as  chaff  that  the  storm  carrieth  away 
4.7*o  cast  out  or  away,  Sia  iul,  3a. 

Isa.  22. 17  will  earry  thee  away  with  a  mighty  cap. 
5.  To  cause  to  go,  ^7;  yalak,  5. 

Eccl.  5.  15  which  he  may  carry  away  in  his  hand 
6. To  receive,  take,  ns?  laqach. 

1  Sa.  30. 18  all  that  the  Amalekites  had  carried  away 

2  Ch.  12.    9  lie  carried  away  also  the  shields  of  gold 
Job     1.  17  the  camels,  and  have  carried  them  away 

15.  12  Why  doth  thine  heart  carry  thee  away? 
Psa.  49.  17  when  he  dieth  he  shall  carry  nothing  away 

7. To  lead,  am  nahag. 

Gen.  31. 18.  And  lie  carried  away  all  his  cattle,  and 

1  Sa.  30.   2  carried  (them)  away,  and  went  on  their 
S.To  lead,  ana  nahag,  3. 

Geu.  31.  26  thou  hast,  .carried  away  my  daughters,  as 
9.7*o  lift  up,  bear,  carry,  Niva  nasa. 

2Ch.  14.  13  and  they  carried  away  very  much  spoil 

16.  6  they  carried  away  the  stones  of  Ramah 
Isa.  15.    7  they  have  laid  up,  shall  they  carry  away 

41.  16  and  the  wind  shall  carry  them  away 
57.  13  the  wind  shall  carry  them  all  away 


10.  To  lift  up,  bear,  carry,  N^a  nasa. 

Dau.   2.  35  and  the  wind  carried  them  away,  that  no 

11.  To  lead  away,  andyou  apago. 

1  C0.12.    2  Ye  know  that  ye  were  Gentiles,  carried  a. 
12.70  bear  off,  a7ro<£epw  apophero. 

\terkx5.    1  and  bound  Jesus,  and  carried  (him) away 
Rev.  17.    3  So  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit 
21.  10  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit 

13.  To  cause  a  change  of  dwelling,  fieroiKt^a. 

Acts    7.  43  I  will  carry  you  away  beyond  Babylon 
CARRY  away  as  with  a  flood,  to  — 
To  inundate,  D*tt  zarain. 

Psa.  90.   5  Thou  earnest  tliem  away  as  with  a  flood 
CARRY  away  (captive^,  to  — 
To  take  away  captive,  -"o^  shabah. 

1  Ki.  8.  46  deliver  them,  .carry  them  away  captives 

2  Ch.  6.  36  they  carry  them  away  captives  unto 

14. 15  and  carried  away  sheep  and  camels 
21.  17  and  carried  away  all  the  substance 
28.   s  carried  away  a  great  multitude . .  captives 
CARRY  away  safe,  to  — 
To  cause  to  escape,  vhs  palat,  5. 

Isa.     5.  29  aud  shall  carry  (it)  away  safe,  and  none 
CARRY  back,  to  — 
To  cause  to  turn  back,  2\v  shub,  5. 

2  Sa.15.  25  Carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city 

1  Ki.22.  26  carry  him  back  unto  Anion  the  governor 

2  Ch.18.  25  carry  him  back  to  Anion  the  governor 

CARRY  captive,  to  — 

To  muse  to  go  into  exile,  rhi  galah,  5. 

2  Ki.  15.  29  and  carried  them  captive  to  Assyria 

16.    9  and  carried  (the  people  of)  it  captive  to 
Jer.  20.   4  he  shall  carry  them  captive  into  Babylon 
CI- JRRY  down,  to  — 
To  cause  to  go  dotvn,  *tt  yarad,  5. 

Gen.  37.  25  Ishmaelites.  .going  to  carry  (it)  down  to 
43.  11  carry  down  the  man  a  present,  a  little 

CARRY  forth,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  forth,  n>*:  yatsa,  5. 

Exod  12.  46  thou  shall  not  carry  forth  ought  of  the 
14.  11  hast  thou  dealt  thus,  .to  carry  us  forth 
Lev.    4.  21  he  shall  carry  forth  the  bullock  without 
6.  11  And  he  shall,  .carry  forth  the  ashes 
14.  45  he  shall  carry,  .forth  out  of  the  city 
16.  27  shall  (one)  carry  forth  without  the  camp 
1  Ki.  2i.  13  Then  they  carried,  .forth  out  of  the  city 
2Ch.  29.    5  carry  forth  the  ftlthiness  out  of  the  holy 
Jer.   17.  22  Neither  carry  forth  a  burden  out  of  your 
2.To  bear  out,  iicipcpw  ekphero. 

Acts   5.  10  and  the  young  men ..  carrying  (her)  forth 
CARRY  out,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  go  forth,  tfy*  yatsa,  5. 

Deut  28.  38  Thou  shalt  carry  much  seed  out  into  the 
1  Ki.  2i.  10  And  then  carry  him  out,  and  stone  him 

22.  34  Turn  thine  hand,  and  carry  me  out  of  the 
2K1.  24.  13  he  carried  out  thence  all  the  treasures 
Eze.  12.    5  Digthou  through  the  wall,  .and  carry  out 
12.  12  theyshalldigthrough  the  wall  to  carry  out 
37.    1  The  hand,  .carried  me  out  in  the  Spirit 

2.7*0  carry  out,  iKKoixifa  ekkomizo. 

Luke  7.  12  there  was  a  dead  man  carried  out,  the 
3.  7*0  bear  oat,  4ic<pepa  ekphero. 

Acts  5.  6  And  the  young  men.,  carried  (him)  out 
5.    9  which  have  buried,  .shall  carry  thee  out 

1  Ti.  6.  7  (it  is)  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out 
CARRY  over,  to  — 

1.7*o  cause  to  pass  over,  15^  abar,  5. 

Josh.  4.    3  ye  shall  carry  them  over  with  you 

4.    8  carried  them  over  with  them  unto  the  pi. 

2  Sa.  19. 18  there  went  over  a  ferry  boat  to  carry  over 
l.To  put  in  another  place,  neTaridvp-t  inetatitliemi. 

Acts    7. 16  And  were  carried  over  into  Sychem,  and 
CARRY  through,  to  — 
7*o  bear  through,  §ia<p4p<a  diaphero. 

Maikn.  16  thatanymanshouldcarry(any)vesselthr. 
CARRY  up,  to  — 
1.7*0  cause  to  go  up,  nby  alah,  5.    „ 

Gen.  50.  25  and  ye  shall  carry  up  my  bonesfromhence 

Exodi3.  19  shall  carry  up  my  bones  away  hence  with 
33. 15  If  thy  presence  go  not.  .carry  us  not  up 

2.7*0  bear  up,  avcxpepco  anaphero. 

Luke  24.  51  [he  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up] 

CARRYING  — 

7*o  lift  up,  N'^'a  nasa. 

1  Sa.  10.   3  three  men.  .one  carrying  three  kids 
10.    3  and  another  carrying  three  loaves  of 
10.   3  and  another  carrying  a  bottle  of  wine 

CARRYING  away  into  — 

Change  of  dwelling,  fieTotKeala  metoikesia. 

Matt.  1.  17  from  David  until  tbe  carrying  away  into 
1. 17  from  the  carrying  away  into  Babylon 

CARRYING  away  eaptive  — 
7*0  go  into  exile,  n^a  galah. 

Jer.    1.   3  the  carrying  away  of  Jerus«leni  captive 


CARSHBNA 


146 


CAST 


CAR-SHE'-NA,  KJifhS  lean,  slender. 

One  of  the  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  Media  in  the 

time  of  Ahasuerus,  B.C.  519. 

Esth.  1.  14  And  the  next  unto  him  (was)  C,  Shethar 
CART  — 
Wagon  (for  threshing),  rr)iV_  agalah. 

1  Sa.    6.    7"make  a  new  cart,  .tie  the  kine  to  the  cart 
6.    8 'take  the  ark.  .aud  lay  it  upon  the  cart 
6.  10  tied  them  to  the  cart,  and  shut  up  their 
6.  11  they  laid  the  ark.  .upon  the  cart,  aud 
6.  14  the  cart  came  into  the  field  of  Joshua 
6.  14  they  clave  the  wood  of  the  cart,  aud 
-2  Sa.    6.    3  they  set  the  ark.  .upon  a  new  cart,  and 

6.    3  Fzzah  and  Ahio . .  drave  the  new  cart 
1  Ch.  13.   7  they  carried  the  ark . .  in  a  new  cart 

13.    7  TJzzah  and  Ahio  drave  the  cart 
Isa.     5.  18  and  sin  as  it  were  with  a  cart  rope 
28.  27  neither  is  a  cart  wheel  turned  about 
28.  28  break  (it  with)  the  wheel  of  his  cart 
Amos  2.  13  as  a  cart  is  pressed  (that  is)  full  of  sheaves 

CARVE,  to  — 

To  cut  in,  )hd  qala. 

1  Ki.    6.  29  And  he  carved  all  the  walls  of  the  house 
6.  32  he  carved  upon  them  carvings  of  cheru. 
6.  35  Aud  he  carved.,  cherubim  and  palm  trees 
CARVED  (figure)  — 
l.Hewn,  rrnaq  chatuboth. 

Prov.  7.  i6*i  have  decked  .  .bed.,  with  carved  (works) 
.2. Cut  in  work,  sculpture,  n"7j?2  miqlaath. 

1  Ki.   6. 18  the  cedar  of  the  house  within  (was)  carved 
3. Opened,  an  engraving,  rnn3  jjiltuach. 

1  Ki,    6.  29  carved  figures  of  cherubim  and  palm 
CARVED  image  — 

1. Graven  object,  hc2  pesel. 

Judg  18.  iS  these  went,  .and  fetched  the  carved  im. 

2  Ch.  33.    7  he  set  a  carved  image,  the  idol  which 
2,Graven  objects,  n'Tp?  pesilim. 

aCh.  33.  22  Anion  sacrificed  unto  all.  .carved  images 
34.    3  began  to  purge,  .from  the  carved  images 

34.  4  the  groves,  and  the  carved  images,  and 

CARVED  work  — 

l.To  engrave,  n^rt  chaqah,  i. 

1  Ki.    6.  35  with  gold  fitted  upon  the  carved  work 
%Engraving,  opened  thing,  mns  pittuach. 

Psa.  74.    6  now  they  break  down  the  carved  work 
CARVING  — 
l.Artifircr  work,  nshq  charosheth. 

Exod3i.    5  in  carviug  of  timber,  to  work  in  all 

35.  33  in  carviug  of  wood,  to  make  auy  manner 
2. Sculptured  work,  njrppD  miqlaath. 

1  Ki.    6.  32  carved  upon  them  carvings  of  cherubim 
CASE  — 
1.  Word,  matter,  "\^\  dabar. 

Deut.  19.    4  this  (is)  the  case  of  the  slayer  which  shall 
2.Caus°,  case,  atria  aitia. 

Matt  19.  10  If  the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  (his) 
CASE,  in  any  — 
To  cause  to  turn  back,  2M2  shub,  5. 

Deut. 22.    1  thou  shalt  in  any  case  bring  them  again 
24.  13  In  any  case  thou  shalt  deliver  him  the 

CASE,  in  such  a  — 
•Thus,  as  thus,  nps  kakah. 

Psa  144.  15  people  that  is  in  such  a  case ;  (yea)happy 
CASE,  in  no  — 
No  not,  ov  fi-ij  ou  me. 

Matt  5.  20  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom 
CASEMENT  — 
Lattice  windoiv,  33tyt<  eshnab. 

Prov.  7.   6  For.. I  looked  through  my  casement 
CA-SIPH'-IA,   K;cp3  white,  shim',/./. 
A  place  on  the  road  between  Babylon  and  Jerusalem. 
Neither  the  city  of  Kastoin,  nor  the'Ca^ice  Pylm,  which 
some  writers  have  attempted  to  identify  it"  with,  are 
situated  upon  this  route. 

Ezra    8.  17  unto  Iddo  the  chief  at  the  place  C. 

8.  17  what  they  should  say.  .at  the  place  C. 
CAS-LTT-'HTM,  D'n^3,  Xcur/twi/ie^u. 
A  tribe  descended  from  Mizraim,  son  of  Ham.  In  both 
texts  in  which  this  word  occurs  it  appears  as  if  the 
Philistines  came  forth  from  the  Casluhim,  and  uot  from 
the  Caphtorim  as  is  elsewhere  expressly  stated.  Here, 
then,  there  would  seem  to  be  a  transposition.  The  only 
clue  wo  have  to  their  position  is  their  place  among  the 
sons  of  Mizraim  between  the  Caphtorim  and  the  Path- 
rusim.  Probably  their  seat  was  iu  Upper  Egypt.  The 
LXX.  seems  to  identify  them  with  the  Hashmannim 
(which  sec).  In  Psa.  68.  31  this  word  is  rendered 
"  princes,"  but  some  take  it  as  a  proper  name. 

Gen.  10.  14  And  Pathmsim,  and  C. ..and  Caphtorim 
1  Ch.  1.  12  And  Pathrusim,  and  C. .  .and  Caphtorim 
CASSIA  — 
1. Cassia,  amher,  or  stacte,  rrjp  qiddah. 

Exod. 30  24  of  cassia  five  hundred,  .after  the  shekel 
Eze.  27  19  bright  iron,  cassia,  aud  calamus,  were 
2.Ctaifl  {a  bark  like  cinnamon),  rtjT^p  qctsioth, 
Psa.  45.    8  garments.. of  myrrh,  and  aloes.. cassia 


CAST  — 

A  throxoing,  casting,  &o\ti  bole. 

Luke 22.  41  he  was  withdrawn,  .about  a  stone's  cast 
CAST  — 
l.Topov/r  out,  cast  (metal),  ps;  yatsaq. 

1  Ki.   7.  24  the  knops  (were)  cast  in  two  rows,  when 

2  Ch.  4.    3  two  rows  of  oxen  (were)  cast,  when  it  was 

2.  To  wrap  up,  cover,  c^1?  lut. 

Isa.   25.  27  he  will  destroy,  .the  covering  cast  over 
3. To  be  caused  to  go  out,  nbty  shalak,  6. 

1  Ki.  13.  24  and  his  carcase  (was)  cast  in  the  way 
13.  25  and  saw  the  carcase  cast  in  the  way 
13.  28  he  went  aud  fouud  his  carcase  cast  in  the 

CAST,  to  — 

l.To  cast,  ^0  tul,  5. 

1  Sa.  18.  11  Saul  cast  the  javelin ;  for  he  said,  I  will 
20.  33  Saul  cast  a  javelin  at  him  to  smite  him 

2.To  throw  or  cast  (lots),  ~n;  yadad. 

Joel     3.    3  And  they  have  cast  lots  for  my  people   ' 
Obad.      11  cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem,  even  thou 
Nah.    3. 10  they  cast  lots  for  her  honourable  men 

3.  To  cast,  throw,  nn;  yadah,  3. 

Lam.  3.  53  They  have,  .cast  a  stone  upon  me 

4.  To  pour  out,  cast  (metal),  ps;  yatsaq. 

Exod25-  12  And  thou  shalt  cast  four  rings  of  gold 
26.  37  thou  shalt  cast  five  sockets  of  brass  for 

36.  36  and  he  cast  for  them  four  sockets  of  silver 
37-  3>  *3  And  he  cast  for  it  four  rings  of  gold 
38.    5  he  cast  four  rings  for  the  four  ends 

38.  27  of  the  hundred  talents  of  silver  were  cast 

1  Ki.    7.  46  In  the  plain. .  did  the  kiug  cast  them 

s  Ch.  4.  17  plain  of  Jordan  did  the  king  oast  them 

5.  To  cast,  throw,  rrr  yarah. 

Gen.  31.  51  which  I  have  cast  betwixt  me  and  thee 
Exodis.    4  and  his  host  hath  he  cast  into  the  sea 
Josh.  18.    6  that  I  may  cast  lots  for  you  here  before 

6.  To  cause  to  cast  or  throw,  .TV  yarah,  5. 

Job    30.  19  He  hath  cast  me  into  the  mire,  aud  I  am 

7.  To  cause  to  move,  Bin  mot,  5. 

Psa.  55.    3  they  cast  iniquity  upon  me,  and  in  wrath 
S.To  cause  to  be  nigh,  yy}  naga,  5. 

Exod.  4.  25  cast  (it)  at  his  feet,  aud  said,  Surely  a 

9.  To  cause  to  fall,  *?g$  naphal,  5. 

Num35.  23  and  cast  (it)  upon  him,  that  he  die 
Prov.  19. 15  Slothfuluess  casteth  into  a  deep  sleep 

10.  To  lift  up,  N'^i  nasa. 

Gen.  39.    7  his  master's  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  Jos. 

11.7V)  draw  off  or  out,  hw\  nashal. 

Deut  28.  40  not  anoint,  .for  thine  olive  shall  cast 

12.  To  give,  \ni  nathan. 

Lev.  16.    8  Aaron  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goats 
26.  30  I  will,  .cast  your  carcases  upon  the  car. 

2  Ki.  19.  18  And  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire 
Isa.   37. 19  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire  :  for 

13.  To  scatter,  ^  puts,  5. 

Isa.   28.  25  doth  he  not  cast  abroad  the  fitches 
li.To  form,  frame,  iw  tsur. 

1  Ki.  7. 15  he  cast  two  pillars  of  brass,  of  eighteen 
15.71?  melt,  fuse,  *py  tsaraph. 

Isa.  40.  19  the  goldsmith  spreadeth . .  and  casteth 
16.7*0  cast,  rflp"!  reniah,  ND~)  rema. 

Dan.    3.  20  to  cast .  .into  the  burning  fiery  furnace 

3.  24  Did  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  into 

6.  16  they  brought  Daniel,  aud  cast  (him)  into 

6.  24  they  cast  (them)  into  the  den  of  lions 

17.7*0  send,  riSy  shalach,  3. 

Job  20.  23  (God)  shall  cast  the  fury  of  his  wrath  upon 
Psa.  74.    7  They  have  cast  fire  into  thy  sanctuary 

78.  49  He  cast  upon  them  the  fierceness  of  his 
Eccl.  11.    1  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters  :  for  thou 
Jer.   28. 16  I  will  cast  thee  from  off  the  face  of  the 

IS. To  cause  to  go,  r\by  shalak,  5. 

Gen.  21.  15  she  cast  the  child  nnderoneof  the  shrubs 

37.  20  Come  now.  .and  cast  him  into  some  pit 
37.  22  Shed  no  blood . .  cast  him  into  this  pit  that 
37  24  they  took  him,  and  cast  him  into  a  pit 

Exod.  1.  22  Every  son.  .ye  shall  cast  into  the  river 

4.  3  Cast  it  on  the  ground.     And  he  cast  it  on 

7.  9  Take  thy  rod,  and  cast  (it)  before  Pharaoh 
15.  25  (which)  when  he  had  cast  into  the  waters 
22.  31  torn  of  beasts . .  ye  shall  cast  it  to  the  dogs 
32.  19  he  cast  the  tables  out  of  his  bauds,  and 
32.  24  then  I  cast  it  into  the  fire,  and  there  came 

Lev.    1.  16  and  cast  it  beside  the  altar  on  the  east  part 
14.  40  they  shall  cast  them  into  an  unclean  place 

Num  19.  6  And  the  priest  shall . .  cast  (it)  into  the 
35.  22  But  if  he .  .have  cast  upon  him  anything 

Deut.  9.  17  I  took  the  two  tables,  and  cast  them  out 
9.  21  and  I  cast  the  dust  thereof  into  the  brook 
29.  28  and  cast  them  into  another  land,  as 

Josh.  8.  29  and  cast  it  at  the  entering  of  the  gate 
10. 27  they,  .cast  them  into  the  cave  wherein 
18.    8  that  I  may  here  cast  lots  for  you  before 
18.  10  And  Joshua  cast  lots  for  them  in  Shiloh 

Judg.  8.  25  And  they,  .did  cast  therein  every  mau 

9.  53  And  a  certain  woman  cast  a  piece  of  mill. 

2  Sa.  11.  21  did  not  a  woman  cast  a  piece  of  amillst. 

18.  17  they  took  Absalom,  aud  cast  him  into  a 
20.  i2  he  removed  Amasa..  aud  cast  a  cloth  upon 


2  Sa.  20.  22  they  cut  off  the  head . .  and  cast  (it)  out  to 
i  Ki.14.    9  aud  hast  cast  me  behind  thy  back 

19.  19  Elijah  passed  by  him,  and  cast  his  mantle 
2  Ki.  2.  16  the  Spirit  of  the  LORD  hath . .  cast  him 

2.  21  he  went  forth . .  and  cast  the  salt  in  there 

3.  25  on  every  good  piece  of  land  cast  every 

4.  41  Then  bring  meal  ;  and  he  cast  (it)  into 

6.    6  he  cut  down  a  stick,  and  cast  (it)  thither 
13.  21  they  cast.. into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha 
13.  23  neither  cast  he  them  from  his  presence 
23.   6  cast  the  powder  thereof  upon  the  graves 
23.  12  cast  the  dust  of  them  into  the  brook  Kid. 
2  Ch.  24.  10  the  princes . .  cast  into  the  chest,  until 

30. 14  and  cast  (them)  into  the  brook  Klaxon 

33. 15  And  he.  .cast  (them)  out  of  the  city 
Neh.    9.  26  they . .  cast  thy  law  behind  their  backs 
Job   27.  22  For  (God)  shall  cast  upon  him,  and  not 
Psa.    50.  17  Seeing  thou,  .castest  my  words  behind 

55.  22  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and  he 
to.    8  over  Edom . .  cast  out  my  shoe :  Philistia 
Isa.      2.  20  that  day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  sil. 
19.    8  all  they  that  cast  angle  into  the  brooks 
38. 17  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thyba. 
Jer.    26.  23  who.  .cast  his  dead  body  into  the  graves 
36.  23  he  cut  it.  .and  cast  (it)  into  the  fire  that 
38.    6  Theu  took  they  Jeremiah,  and  cast  him 
38.    9  whom  they  have  cast  into  the  dungeon 
41.    g  wherein  Ishmael  had  cast  all  the  dead 
51.  63  shalt.  .cast  it  into  the  midst  of  Euphrates 
Eze.      5.    4  take  of  them  again,  and  cast  them  into 
7.  19  They  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the  streets 
23.  35  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  cast  me 
28.  17  I  will  cast  thee  to  the  ground,  I  will  lay 
43.  24  the  priests  shall  cast  salt  upon  them,  and 
Joel    1.    7  he  hath  made  it  clean  bare,  and  cast  (it) 
Amos  4.    3  and  ye  shall  cast  (them)  into  the  palace 
Jon.    2.    3  For  thou  hadst  cast  me  into  the  deep,  in 
Mic.    2.    5  thou  shalt  have  none  that  shalt  cast  a 

7.  19  thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths 
Nah.  3.    6  I  will  cast  abominable  filth  upon  thee 
Zech.  5.    8  And  he  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah 
5.    8  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth 
11.  13  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the 
11. 13  And  I.  .cast  them  to  the  potter  in  the 

19.  To  shed,  povr  out,  ~££;  shaphak. 

2  Sa.  20.  15  they  cast  up  a  bank  against  the  city,  and 
2  Ki.  19.  32  He  shall  not.  .cast  a  bank  against  it 
Isa.    37.  33  He  shall  not.  .cast  a  bank  against  it 
Jer.     6.    6  Hew  ye  down  trees,  and  cast  a  mount 
Eze.    4.    2  build  a  fort,  .and  cast  a  mount  against 
21.  22  to  cast  a  mount,  (and)  to  build  a  fort 
26.    8  he  shall . .  cast  a  mount  against  thee,  and 
Dan. 11.  15  the  king.,  shall  come,  and  cast  up  a  mount 

20.7b  strike  (down),  yp)?  taqa. 

Exod.  10.  19  And  the  Lord  . .  cast  them  into  the  Red  sea 

21.ro  cast,  fi6.\\a)  hallo. 

Matt.    3.  10  therefore  every  tree.  .is.  .cast  into  the 
4.    6  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself 

4.  18  Jesus,  .saw  two  brethren,  .casting  a  net 

5.  13  it  is  thenceforth .  .to  be  cast  out,  and 

5.  25  lest  at  any  time,  .thou  be  cast  into  prison 
5.  29  pluck  it  out,  and  cast  (it)  from  thee:  for 
5.  29  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  into  hell 
5,  30  cut  it  off,  and  cast  (it)  from  thee :  for  it  is 

5.  30  thy  whole  body  [should  be  cast]  into  hell 

6.  30  aud  tomorrow  is  cast  into  the  oven 

7.  6  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine 
7. 19  Every  tree.  .is.  .cast  into  the  fire 

13.  42  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire 
13.  47  a  net,  that  was  cast  into  the  sea,  and 
13.  48  and  gathered  the  good .  .but  cast  the  bad 
13.  50  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire 
15.  26  It  is  not  meet . .  to  cast  (it)  to  dogs 

17.  27  go  thou  to  the  sea,  and  cast  an  hook,  and 

18.  8  cut  them  off,  and  cast  (them)  from  thee 
18.  8  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  everlasting  fire 
j 8.  9  pluck  it  out,  and  cast  (it)  from  thee  ;  it 
18.  9  rather  than  to  be  cast  iuto  hell  fire 

18.  30  but  went  and  cast  him  into  prison 
21.  21  and  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea  ;  it  shall  be 
27.  35  and  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots 
27.  35  [aud  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots] 
Mark  1.  16  saw  Simon,  and  Andrew,  .[casting] a  net 
4.  26  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  ground 
7.  27  it  is  not  meet,  .to  cast  (it)  unto  the  dogs 
9.  22  And  ofttimes  it  hath  cast  him  into  the 
9.  42  and  he  were  cast  into  the  sea 
9.  45  having  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  hell 
9.  47  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell 

11.  23  and  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea 

12.  41  and  beheld  how  the  people  cast  money 
12.  41  many  that  were  rich  cast  in  much 

12.  43  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  more  m 
12.  43  than  all  they  which  have  cast  into  the 
12.  44  (they)  did  cast  in  of  their  abundance 
12.  44  of  her  want  did  cast  in  all  that  she  had 
15.  24  they  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots 
Luke  3.    9  every  tree.  .is.  .cast  into  the  fire 

4.    9  If  thou  be  the  Sou  of  God,  cast  thyself 
12.  28  which,  .to  morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven 

12.  58  aud  the  officer  cast  thee  into  prison 

13.  19  which  a  man  took,  and  cast  into  his  gar. 
T4.  35  nor  yet  for  the  dunghill ;  (but)  men  cast 
zi.  1  looked  up,  and  saw  the  rich  men  casting 
21.  2  he  saw  also  a  certain  poor  widow  casting 
21.  3  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  in  more  than 
2i,    4  these  have  of  their  abundance  cast  in 

2i.    4  she  of  her  penury  hath  cast  in  all  the 
23.  19  Who  for.  .murder,  was  cast  into  prison 
23.  25  released  unto  them  him  that,  .was  cast 


CAST 

Luke23.  34  thev  parted  his  raiment,  ami  cast  lots 
John  3.  24  For' John  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison 
8.    7  [let  him  first  cast  a  stone  at  her] 
8  59  Then  took  they  up  sto-es  to  cast  at  him 
15.    6  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is 

15.  6  and  men  gather  them,  and  cast  (them) 
iq.  24  for  my  vestures  they  did  cast  lots 

21.    6  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship 
21.    6  They  cast  therefore,  and  now  they  were 

21.  7  Peter,  .did  cast  himself  into  the  sea 
Acts  16.  23  they  cast  (them)  into  prison,  charging 

16.  37  and  have  cast  (us)  into  prison  ;  and  now 
Bev.    2.  10  the  devil  shall  cast  (some)  of  you  into 

2.  14  who  taught  Balac  to  cast  a  stumbling  bl. 
z.  22  Behold,  I  will  cast  her  into  a  bed,  and 

4.  10  and  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne 
6.  13  even  as  a  flg  tree  casteth  her  untimely 
8.  5  And  the  angel,  .cast  (it)  into  the  earth 
8.  7  and  they  were  cast  upon  the  earth  :  and 
8.  8  a  great  mountain ..  was  cast  into  the  sea 
12.  4  and  did  cast  them  to  the  earth :  and  the 
12.  13  when  the  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast 

12. 15  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water 

12. 16  which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth 
14. 19  and  cast  (it)  into  the  great  wine  press 
18.  19  And  they  cast  dust  on  their  heads 

18.  21  a  mighty  angel . .  cast  (it)  into  the  sea 

19.  20  These  both  w-ere  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of 

20.  3  And  cast  him  into  the  bottomless  pit 
20. 10  And  the  devil. .  was  cast  into  the  lake  of 
20.  14  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake 
20.  15  whosoever  was  not  fouud.  .was  cast  into 

22.ro  cast  out,  iK0a\\a  clballo. 

Matt  21.  39  caught  him,  and  cast  (him)  out  of  the 

22.  13  ,  25.  30;  Mark  16.  9  ;  Luke  20.  15. 

23.  To  hurl  off,  awo^plirTa  aporhriplo. 

Acts  27.  43  should  cast  (themselves)  first  (into  the  s.) 

24. To  hurl,  p'nrru>  rhipto. 

Luke  17.    2  and  he  cast  into  the  sea,  than  that  he 
Acts  27.  29  they  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  stern 

CAST,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  cast  away,  ?sa  tul,  6. 

Prov  16.  33  The' lot  is  cast  into  the  lap ;  but  the 

2.  To  cause  to  fall,  Ssj  naphal. 

Psa.140. 10  let  them  be  cast  into  the  fire  ;  into 

S.To  be  given,  |nj  nathan,  2. 

Eze.  15.    4  Behold,  it  is  cast  into  the  fire  for  fuel 

4.  To  cast,  NBrj  rema,  tot  remah. 

Dan.   3.  21  were  cast  into  the  midst  of  the.  .furnace 

5. To  be  cast,  x?">  rema,  riffi  remah,  2. 

Dan.    3.    6  shall  the  same  hour  be  cast  into  the 

3.  11  (that)  he  should  be  cast  into  the . .  furnace 
3.  15  ye  shall  be  cast  the  same  hour  into  the 
6.    7  he  shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions 

6.  12  shall  be  cast  into  the  deu  of  lions? 

6.  To  be  sent,  rhy  shalach,  4. 

Job    18.   8  he  is  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own  feet 

7.  To  be  sent,  cast  away,  ^s"  shalak,  6. 

Psa.  22.  10  I  was  cast  upon  thee  from  the  womb 
Isa.    14. 19  But  thou  art  cast  out  of  thy  grave  like 
Jer.   22.  28  and  are  cast  into  a  land  which  they 

S.To  fall  off,  eKirl-KTu  ekpipto. 

Acts  27.  26  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain  island 

CAST  about,  to  — 

1.  To  go  round,  32D  sabab. 

Jer.  41.  14  So  all  the  people .  .cast  about  and  return. 

2.7*0  cast  around,  Trepi&dWu  periballo. 

Lukeig.  43  thine  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench  about 
Acts  12.    8  Cast  thy  garment  about  thee,  and  follow 

CAST  about,  to  have  — 

To  cast  around,  ireptBaWw  periballo. 

Marki4.  51  having  a  linen  cloth  cast  about  (his) 

CAST  abroad,  to  — 

To  scatter,  ps  puts,  5. 

Job   40.  11  Cast  abroad  the  rage  of  thy  wrath 

CAST  away,  to  — 

l.To  thrust  away,  expel,  *nn  hadaph. 

Prov  10.   3  casteth  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked 

2.7*0  cast  away,  abandon,  nil  zanach,  5. 

2  Ch.  29.  19  which  king  Ahaz . .  did  cast  away  in  his 

3. 7*0  scatter,  nil  zarah. 

Isa.    30.  22  thou  shalt  cast  them  away  as  a.  .cloth 

4.7*0  refuse,  reject,  Dio  maas. 

Lev.  26.  44  I  will  not  cast  them  away,  neither  mil  I 
Job     8.  20  God  will  not  cast  away  a  perfect  (man) 
Isa.    31.    7  every  man  shall  cast  away  his  idols  of 

41.    9  have  chosen  thee,  and  not  cast  thee  away 
Jer.   33.  26  Then  will  I  east  away  the  seed  of  Jacob 
Hos.    9.  17  My  God  will  cast  them  away,  because 

5.7*0  send  away,  rfa$  shalach,  3. 

Job     8.   4  and  he  have  cast  them  away  for  their 

6.7*0  send,  cause  to  go,  ?&  shalak,  5. 

Judgi5.  17  that  he  cast  away  the  jawbone  out  of  his 
2  Ki.  7. 15  which  the  Syrians  had  cast  away  in  their 


147 


Psa.     2.    3  Let  us.  .cast  away  their  cords  from  us 
51.  11  Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  presence 

EecL   3     5  A  time  to  cast  away  stoues,  and  a  time  to 
3.    6  a  time  to  keep,  and  a  time  to  cast  away 

Jer.     7.  29  Cut  off  thine  hair,  .and  cast  (it)  away 

Eze  18.  31  Cast  away  from  you  all  yourtransgressions 
20.  7  Cast  ye  away  every  man  the  ahominatious 
20.   8  they  did  uot  every  man  cast  away  the 

l.To  cast  off  or  away,  aTro&dWv  apoballo. 

Markio.  50  And  lie,  casting  away  his  garmeut,  rose 
Heb  10  35  Cast  not  away  therefore  your  confidence 

S.To  thrust  off  from  (one^s  se{f),  airwdeo)  apotheo. 
Rom  11.    1  I  say  then,  Hath  God  cast  away  his 

2  God  hath  not  cast  away  Ms  people  which 


CAST  away,  to  be  — 


To  cairse  to  suffer  loss,  ^fxiow  zemioo. 

Luke  9.  25  if  he.  .lose  himself,  or  be  cast  away  ? 

CAST  calf,  to  — 

To  bereave,  lose  their  young,  ?by  shakol,  3. 

Job    21. 10  their  cow  calveth,  and  casteth  not  her  calf 

CAST  clouts  — 

Hags,  tatters,  rvonp  sechaboth. 

Jer.  38. 11  took  thence  old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten 
38. 12  Put  now(these)old  cast  clouts  and  rotten 

CAST  down  — 

Lotr,  humble,  depressed,  Ttnr€iv6s  tapeinos. 

2  Co.    7.   6  that  comforteth  those  that  are  cast  down 

CAST  down,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  down,  place,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Isa.  28.    2  which,  .shall  cast  down  to  the  earth  with 

2.To  cause  to  go  dotvn,  TV  yai-ad,  5. 

Prov2i.  22  A  wise  (man),  .casteth  down  the  strength 
"Eze.  31.  16  when  I  cast  him  down  to  hell  with  them 
32. 18  Son  of  man,  wail,  .and  cast  them  down 

-3.7V)  cause  to  bow  down,  i'"]3  hara,  5. 

Psa.  17.  13  O  Lord,  disappoint  him,  cast  him  down 

4.  To  cause  to  stu?nble,  TJ2  kashal,  5. 

2  Ch.25.    8  God  hath  power  to  help  to  cast  down,  and 

5.  To  thrust  down,  ~ui?  magar,  3. 

Psa.  ,89.  44  Thou  hast,  .cast  his  throne  down  to  the 

6. To  separate,  cast  down,  rni  nadaeh,  5. 

Psa.  62.    4  They  only  consult  to  cast  (him)  down 

7.  To  cause  to  fall,  75J  naphal,  5. 

Job    29.  24  light  of.my  countenance  they  cast  not  do. 
Psa.  37.  14  The  wicked  have,  .cast  down  the  poor 

73.  18  thou  castedst  them  down  into  destruction 
Prov.  7.  26  For  she  hath  cast  down  many  wounded 
Eze.     6.    4  I  will  cast  down  your  slain  (men)  before 
Dan.   8.  10  and  it  cast  down  (some)  of  the  host 

11.  12  he  shall  cast  down  (many)  ten  thousands 

S.To  tear  dotvn,  j'm  nathats. 

Judg.  6.  30  because  he  hath  cast  down  the  altar 

6.  31  because  (one)  hath  cast  down  his  altar 

9. To  send,  cause  to  go,  t^it  shalak,  5. 

Exod.  7.  10  Aaron  cast  down  his  rod  before  Pha. 

7.  12  For  they  cat „  down  every  man  his  rod 
Josh  10.  11  the  Lord  cast  down  great  stoues  from 
2  Ch.25.  I2  cas*  them  down  from  the  top  of  the 
Job   18.    7  his  own  counsel  shall  cast  him  down 
Psa  102.  10  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  cast  me  down 
Lam.  2.    1  cast  down  from  heaven  unto  the  earth 
Dan.  8.    7  but  he  cast  him  down  to  the  ground 

8.  12  it  cast  down  the  truth  to  the  ground 

10.  To  cause  to  be  low,  ??c;  shaphel,  5. 

Psa.  147.    6  he  casteth  the '  -icked  down  to  the  ground 

11.  To  put  or  lift  down,  KaSa^  =cu  kathmred. 

2  Co.  10.    5  Casting  down  imagu    tions,  and  every 

12.  To  cast  down,  Kara^aWto  katahallo. 
2  Co.  4.    9  cast  down,  but  not  destroyed 

Rev.  12. 10  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  [down] 

l%.To  cast,  hurl,  piivrw  rhipto. 

Matt  1 5.  30  and  cast  them  down  at  Jesus'  feet 
27.    5  And  he  cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver 

CAST  down  headlong,  to  — 

To  throw  dozen  a  precipice,  KaraKp7)fj.v(^w. 

Luke  4.  29.  that  they  might  cast  him  down  headlong 

CAST  down,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  thrust  douii,  nrn  dachah,  4. 

Psa.  36.  12  they  are  cast  down,  and  shall  not  be  able 

2.  To  be  cast  down,  out,  forth,  7^  tul,  6. 

Job  41.   9  shall  not  (one)  be  cast  down  even  at  the 

3.  To  be  stumbled,  hp3  kashal,  2. 

Jer.    6. 15  they  shall  be  cast  down,  saith  the  Lord 
8. 12  they  shall  be  cast  down,  saith  the  Lord 

4.  To  fall,  722  naphal. 

Neh.   6. 16  they  were  much  cast  down  in  their  own 

5. To  fear  down,  ywr  nathats,  4. 

Judg.  6.  28  the  altar  of  Baal  was  cast  down,  and  the 

6.7V'  cast,  throw  down.  T1&]  remah. 

Dan.   7.    9  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  cast  down 


CAST 

7.  To  bow  oneself  down,  nna'  sketch ach,  7a. 
Psa.  42.    5  "Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul? 

42.    6  my  soul  is  cast  down  within  me  :  therefo. 

42.  11  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ? 

43.  s  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul? 

S.To  send,  1\hi?  shalak,  5. 

Eze.  19.  12  she  was  cast  down  to  the  ground,  and  the 
Dan.   8.  n  the  place  of  his  sanctuary  was  cast  down 

9.  To  cause  to  be  low,  ?2?;  shaphel,  5. 

Job  22.  29  When  (men)  are  cast  down,  then  thou 

CAST  down,  to  be  utterly  — 

To  be  cast  down,  out,  forth,  75t3  tul,  6. 

Psa.  37.  24  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down;  for  the 

CAST  down  to  hell,  to  be  — 

To  put  in  tartarus,  TapTap6ca  tartaroo. 

2  Pe.  2.   4  but  cast(them)downtohell,anddelivered 

CAST  dust,  to  — 

To  dust,  throw  dust,  ~i$y  aphar,  3. 

2  Sa.16  13  and  threw  stones  at  him,  and  cast  dust 

CAST  far  off,  to  be  — 

To  be  far  off,  Npn  hala,  2. 

Mic.    4.    7  hef  that  was  cast  far  off  a  strong  nation 

CAST  forth,  to  — 

l.To  shine,  cast  forth  (glances),  pi?  baraq. 

Psa. 144.    6  Cast  forth  lightning,  and  scatter  them 
2. To  cause  to  cast  down,  out,  forth,  7IB  tul,  5. 
Eze.  32.   4  I  will  cast  thee  forth  upon  the  open  field 
Jon.    1.    5  cast  forth  the  wares  that  (were)  in  the 
1.  12  Take  me  up,  and  cast  me  forth  into  the 
1.  15  So  they,  .cast  him  forth  into  the  sea 

S.To  cause  to  strike  deep,  npa  nakah,  5. 

Hos.  14.    5  he  shall,  .cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon 

4. To  send,  y$  shalak,  5. 

Neh.  13.   8  therefore  I  cast  forth  all  the  household 
Psa.147.  17  He'casteth  forth  his  ice  like  morsels :  who 
Jer.  22.  19  drawn  and  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates 
Amos  8.    3  they  shall  cast  (them)  forth  with  silence 

5. To  cast  out,  €K$d\\w  ekballo. 

Mark  7.  26  she  besought  him  that  he  would  cast  forth 

CAST  fruit  before  the  time,  to  — 
To  bereave,  ioip  shakol,  3. 

Mai.    3. 11  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the  time 

CAST  in,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  fall,  753  naphal,  5. 

Prov.  1. 14  Cast  in  thy  lot  among  us;  let  us  all  have 
2.  To  put,  place,  D-sb-1  sum. 

Isa.   28.  35  and  cast  in  the  principal  wheat,  and  the 

CAST  in  one's  mind,  to  — 

To  reckon  thoroughly,  reason  out,  Bia\oyl£ofj.at. 
Luke  1.  29  when  she  saw  (liim) . .  she  cast  in  her  miud 

CAST  in  one's  teeth,  to  — 

To  defame,  rail  at,  dveiBlfa  ojieidizo. 

Matt  2  7.  44  The  thieves. .cast  the  same  in  his  teeth 

CAST  into,  to  be  — 

To  cast  into,  kjj,fZa\Aw  emhallo. 

Lukei2.    5  Fear  him,  which,  .hath  power  to  cast  into 

CAST  into  prison,  to  — 

To  give  up,  over,  betray,  irapaSiSafit  paradidomi. 
Matt.  4.  12  heard  that  John  was  cast  into  prison,  he 

CAST  (lots),  to  — 

To  cause  to  fall,  731  naphal,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  42  Cast  (lots)  between  me  and  Jonathan  my 
1  Ch.24.  31  These  likewise  cast  lots  over  against 
25.    8  And  they  cast  lots,  ward  against  (ward) 

26. 13  they  cast  lots,  as  well  the  small  as  the 

26. 14  they  cast  lots ;  and  his  lot  came  out 
Keh.  10.  34  And  we  cast  the  lots  among  the  priests 

11.    1  the  rest  of  the  people  also  cast  lots,  to 
Esth.  3.    7  they  cast  Pur,  that  (is),  the  lot  before  H. 
9.  24  had  cast  Pur,  that  (is),  the  lot,  to  cousume 
Psa.  22.  18  and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture 
Isa.    34.  17  And  he  hath  cast  the  lot  for  them 
Jon.    1.    7  let  us  cast  lots  :  so  they  cast  lots 

CAST  off,  to  — 

1.  To  cast  off,  aba7ido7i,nj\  zanach. 

Psa.  43.    2  why  dost  thou  cast  me  off  ?  why  go  I 

44.  9  thou  hast  cast  off,  and  put  us  to  shame 
44.  23  arise,  cast  (us)  not  off  for  ever 

60.    1  O  God,  thou  hast  cast  us  off,  thou  hast 
60.  10  thou,  O  God,  (which)  hadst  cast  us  off? 
74.    1  0  God,  why  hast  thou  cast  (us)  off  for 
77-    7  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever?  and  will 
S8. 14  Lord,  why  castest  thou  off  my  soul? 
89.  38  But  thou  hast  cast  off  and  abhorred 
108.  11  (Wilt)  not  (thou),  O  God  (who)  hast  c.  off 
Lam.  2.    7  The  Lord  hath  cast  off  his  altar,  he  hath 

3.  31  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever 
Hos.    8.    3  Israel  hath  cast  off  (the  thing  that  is) 

8.    5  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast  (thee)  off 
Zech.io.   6  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them  off 

2.  To  cast  off,  m)  zanach,  5. 

1  CI1.28.   g  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  off  for 

2  Ch.n.  14  Jeroboam  and  his  sons  had  cast  them  off 


CAST 


148 


CATCH 


3.  To  refuse,  DX2  maas. 

2  Ki!  23.  27  will .  .cast  off  this  city  Jerusalem  which 
Jer.   31.  37  I  will  also  cast  off  all  the  seed  of  Israel 
33.  24  he  hath  even  cast  them  off  V  then  they 

4. To  cast  off,  reject,  leave,  traj  natash. 

Psa.  94. 14  For  the  Loud  will  not  cast  off  his  people 
5.To  break  off,  r&parar,  5. 

Job    15.   4  Yea,  thou  easiest  off  fear,  and  restrainest 

6.  To  corrupt,  violate,  mar,  nn^  shaehath,  3. 

Amos  1.  11  because  he.  .did  cast  off  all  pity 

7.  To  send  off,  *]ty  sMlak,  5. 

Job   15.  33  and  shall  cast  off  his  flower  as  the  olive 
Psa.  71.    9  Cast  me  not  off  in  the  time  of  old  age 

8.  To  put  aside,  off,  displace,  adereoj  atheteo. 

1  Ti.    5.  12  because  they  have  cast  off  their  first 
9.70  put  off,  atroTiOefxai  apotithemai. 

Rom.  13.  12  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of 
10.  To  keep  on  throwing,  hurl,  purreco  rhiptco. 

Acts  22.  23  as  they  cried  out,  and  cast  off  (their) 
CAST  on,  t)  — 
To  cast  upon,  cTn$d\\co  epihallo. 

Markn.    7  And  they,  .cast  their  garments  on  him 
CAST  out  — 
1. Produce,  what  is  cast  forth,  bh?3  migrash. 

Eze.  36.    s  with  despiteful  minds,  to  cast  it  out  for 
2. Expulsion,  1110  marud. 

Isa.    58.    7  that  thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  cast  out 

3.  To  be  outcast,  ni:  nadach,  2. 

Neh.   1.    9  though  there  were  of  you  cast  out  unto 

4.  To  be  sent  away,  nhy  shalach,  4. 

Isa.   16.   2  as  a  wandering  bird  cast  out  of  the  nest 

CAST  out,  tj  — 

I. To  cast  out.  Bha  garash,  3. 

Gen.  21. 10  Cast  out  this  bond  woman  and  her  son 

2  Ch.20. 11  to  come  to  cast  us  out  of  thy  possession 
Psa.  7S.  55  He  cast  out  the  heathen  also  before  them 

80.  8  thou  hast  cast  out  the  heathen,  and 
Prov  22.  10  Cast  out  the  scorner,  and  contention 
Hie.    2.    9  The  women  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out 

2.  To  force  or  drive  out,  on  duaeh,  5. 

Jer.  51. 34  Nebuchadnezzar .  .hath  cast  me  out 

3.  To  thrust  away,  f\"in  Imdaph. 

Deut.  6. 19  To  cast  out  all  thine  enemies  from  before 
9.   4  after  that  the  Lord  .  .hath  cast  them  out 

4. To  cast  away,  bw  tul,  5. 

Jer.  16. 13  Therefore  will  I  cast  you  out  of  this  land 
22.  26  I  will  cast  thee  out,  and  thy  mother 
5. To  cast  or  throw,  rn;  yadah,  3. 

Zech.  1.  21  come  to  fray  them,  to  cast  out  the  horns 
6.  To  drive  away,  vx  yarash,  5. 

Exod34.  24  For  I  will  cast  out  the  nations  before 

Josh. 13. 12  these  did  Moses  smite,  and  cast  them  out 

1  Ki.  14.  24  which  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  chil. 

21.  26  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  chil. 

2  Ki.  16.    3  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  from  before  the 

17.    8  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  from  before  the 
2i.   2  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  chil. 
2  Ch.28.    3  whom  the  Lord  had  cast  out  before  the 
33.   2  whom  the  Lord  had  cast  out  before  the 
Job    20. 15  God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  belly 
Zech.  9.    4  Behold,  the  Lord  will  cast  her  out,  and 

7. To  separate,  drive  away  {as  filthy),  rfij  nadah,  3. 
Isa.  66.    5  that  cast  you  out  for  my  name's  sake 

8.  To  cause  to  drive  out,  rnj  nadach,  5. 

2  Ch.13.    9  Have  ye  not  cast  out  the  priests  of  the 
Psa.     5. 10  cast  them  out  in  the  multitude  of  their 

9.  To  cause  to  fall,  b$i  naphal,  5. 

Isa.   26. 19  aud  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead 

10.  To  draw  off,  b$i  vashal. 

Deut.  7.    1  hath  cast  out  many  nations  before  thee 

11.  To  face,  turn  the  face,  riippanah,  3. 

Zeph.  3.  15  he  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy :  the  king 

12.  To  dig,  mate  deep,  *wp  qur,  5. 

Jer.     6.    7  As  a  fountain  casteth  out  her  waters 
6.    7  so  she  casteth  out  her  wickedness 
13.7*0  empty,  pour  out,  pn  ruq,  5. 

Psa.  18.  42  I  did  cast  them  out  as  the  dirt  in  the 
1  i.To  send,  n^  shalach,  5. 

Lev.  18.  24  the  nations,  .which  I  cast  out  before  you 
#  20.  23  the  nation  which  I  cast  out  before  you 

1  Ki.   9.    7  tins  house.. will  I  cast  out  of  my  sight 
Job  39.    3  They  bow.  .they  cast  out  their  sorrows 
Psa.  44.    2  afflict  the  people,  and  cast  them  out 
Jer.  15.    1  cast  (them)  out  of  my  sight,  aud  let  them 

Id. To  cast,  cause  to  go,  *($  shalak,  5. 

2  Ki.  10.  25  the  guard  and  the  captains  cast,  .out 

17.  20  until  he  had  cast  them  out  of  his  sight 
24.  20  until  he  had  cast  them  out  from  bis 
2  Ch.  7.  20  this  house.. will  I  cast  out  of  my  sight 
Psa.  60.    8  over  Edom  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe 
108.    9  over  Edom  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe 
Jer.     7   15  I  will  cast  you  out.  .as  I  have  cast  out 
9. 19  because  our  duellings  have  cast  (us)  out 
52.    g  till  ho  had  cast  them  out  from  his  pres. 


16.ro  cast,  @d\\u)  hallo. 

1  Jo.  4.  18  but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear :  because 
Rev.  12.   9  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out 
12.    9  he  was  cast  out.  .angels  were  cast  out 

17. To  cast  out,  iicfidKAto  ekbzUo. 

Matt.  7.    5  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  owu 
7.    5  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out 

7.  22  and  in  thy  name  have  cast  out  devils? 

8.  12  the  children,  .shall  be  cast  out  into  outer 
8.  16  and  he  cast  out  the  spirits  with  (his)  word 

8.  31  If  thou  cast  us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  away 

9.  33  Aud  when  the  devil  was  cast  out,  the 

9.  34  He  casteth  out  devils  through  the  prince 
10.    1  he  gave  them  power,  .to  cast  them  out 

10.  8  raise  the  dead,  cast  out  devils  :  freely  ye 
12.  24  This  (fellow)  dotli  not  cast  out  devils 

12. 26  And  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  is 
12.  27  And  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils 
12.  27  by  whom  do  your  children  cast  (them )out? 
12.  28  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of  God 

15.  17  and  is  cast  out  into  the  draught? 
17.  19  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  ? 

21. 12  Jesus,  .cast  out  all  them  that  sold  and 
Mark  1.  34  he  healed  many,  .and  cast  out  mauy 
1. 39  And  he  preached,  .and  cast  out  devils 
3.  15  And  to  have  power,  .to  cast  out  devils 
3.  22  by  the  prince  of  the  devils  casteth  he  out 
3.  23  How  can  Satan  cast  out  Satan  ? 
6.  13  And  they  cast  out  many  devils,  and 
9.  18  that  they  should  cast  him  out ;  and 
9.  28  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out? 
9.  38  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 

11.  15  Jesus,  .began  to  cast  out  them  that  sold 

12.  8  and  cast  (him)  out  of  the  vineyard 

16.  17  [In  my  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils] 
Luke  6.  22  and  cast  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the 

6.  42  cast  out  first  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 
9.  40  I  besought  thy  disciples  to  cast  him  out 
9.  49  we  saw  one  castiug  out  devils  in  thy 
11.  14  And  he  was  casting  out  a  devil,  and  it 
11. 15  He  casteth  out  devils  through  Beelzebub 
11.  18  that  I  cast  out  devils  through  Beelzebub 
11.  19  And  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils 
11.  19  by  whom  do  your  sons  cast  (them)  out? 

11.  20  I  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils 

13.  32  tell  that  fox,  Behold,  I  cast  out  devils 

19.  45  and  began  to  cast  out  them  that  sold 

20.  12  wounded  him  also,  and  cast  (him)  out 
John  6.  37  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out 

9.  34  thou  teach  us?  And  they  cast  (him)  out 
9.  35  Jesus  heard  that  they  had  cast  him  out 

12.  31  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out 
Acts    7.  58  And  cast  (him)  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned 

27.  38  and  cast  out  the  wheat  into  the  sea 
Gal.     4.  30  Cast  out  the  bondwoman  and  her  sou 
3  Jo.       10  and  casteth  (them)  out  of  the  church 

18.  To  extend,  send  forth,  eWTefr/oj  ekteino. 

Acts  27.  30  they  would  have  cast  anchors  out  of  the 

19.  To  put  out  or  forth,  kKTiBtjfit  ektithemi. 
Acts    7.  21  And  when  he  was  cast  out,  Pharaoh's 

20.777  make  exposed,  Trotew  HkBctov  poieo  ektheton. 

A  cts    7.  19  so  that  they  cast  out  their  young  children 
21. To  hurl,  f>iirrw  rhipto. 

Acts  27.  19  we  cast  out  with  our  own  hands  the  tac. 

CAST  out,  to  he  — 

l.To  be  cast  out,  eh3  garash,  2. 

Amos  8.    8  and  it  shall  be  cast  out  and  drowned 
Jon.   2.    4  I  am  cast  out  of  thy  sight ;  yet  I  will 

2.  To  be  cast  down,  out,  forth,  bm  tul,  6. 

Jer.  22.  28  wherefore  are  they  cast  out,  he  and  his 

Z.To  be  sent,  cast  away,  rfy?  shalak,  6. 
Isa.  34.    3  Their  slain  also  shall  be  cast  out 
Jer.  14.  16  the  people. .shall  be  cast  out  in  the  street 

36.  30  his  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  the 
Eze.  16.    5  thou  wast  cast  out  in  the  open  field 

CAST  self  down,  to  — 

l.To  kneel  and  bow  down,  "ina  gahar. 

1  Ki.  18.  42  he  cast  himself  down  upon  the  earth 
l.To  cause  oneself  to  fall,  b^}  naphal,  7.  ■ 

Ezra  10.    1  confessed,  weeping  and  casting  himself  d. 
CAST  stones,  to  — 
To  stone,  b$Q  saqal,  3. 

2  Sa.  16.   6  he  cast  stones  at  David,  and  at  all  the 
CAST  up,  to  — 

l.To  cast  out,  or  forth,  cna  garash. 

Isa.  57.  20  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt 

2.  To  heap  up,  ^Vp  salal. 

Isa.  57. 14  And  shall  say,  Cast  ye  up,  cast  ye  up 

62.  10  cast  up,  cast  up  the  highway ;  gather 
Jer.  18.  15  to  walk  in  paths,  (in)  a  way  not  cast  up 

50.  26  cast  her  up  as  heaps,  and  destroy  her 

S.To  cause  to  go  up,  rtby  alah,  5. 

Lam.  2. 10  they  have  cast  up  dust  upon  their  heads 
Eze.  27.  30  and  shall  cast  up  dust  upon  their  heads 

CAST,  when  — 

A  casting,  N$$  shalleketh. 

Isa.     6.  13  whose  substance  (is)  in  them,  when  they  c. 

CAST,  when  it  was  — 

l.A  easting,  n^  yctsukah. 

1  Ki.    7.  24  the  knops.  .in  two  rows,  when  it  was  cast 


2.A  casting,  fusion,  ngx;s  mutseqeth. 

2Ch.  4.   3  Two  rows  of  oxen  (were).,  when  it  was  cast 

CAST  young,  to  — 

To  bereave,  biy  shakol,  3. 

Geu.  31.  38  thy  she  goats  have  not  cast  their  young 
Exod23.  26  There  shall  nothing  cast  their  young 

CAST  upon,  to  — 

l.To  cast  upon,  kirtfidww  epihallo. 

1  Co-    7-  35  not  that  I  may  cast  a  snare  upon  you 

2.  To  hurl  upon,  iiriffiirTio  epvrrhipto. 

Luke  19.  35  they  cast  their  garments  upon  the  colt 
1  Pe.    5.    7  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him  ;  for  he 

CASTAWAY  — 

ATot  approved,  a5<J/a,uos  adokirnos. 

1  Co.    9.  27  I  myself  should  be  a  castaway 

CASTING  — 

Something  fused,  pfte  mutsaq. 

1  Ki.   7.  37  all  of  them  had  one  casting,  one  measure 

CASTING  away  — 

A  casting  off.  airo&o\-r}  apobole. 

Rom  11.  15  For  if  the  casting  away  of  them  (be)  the 

CASTING  down  — 

1.^4  casting  down,  nnn  chathath. 

Job     6.  21  ye  see  (my)  casting  down,  and  are  afraid 
^.Depression,  ntf*  yeshach. 

Mia     6.  14  and  thy  casting  down  (shall  be)  in  the 
3.7*0  cause  to  lie  down,  35^  shakdb,  5. 

2  Sa.    8.   2  casting  them  down  to  the  ground  ;  even 

CASTING  up  — 

To  pour  out,  ^iSy'  shaphak. 

Eze.  17. 17  by  casting  up  mounts,  and  building  forts 

CASTLE  — 

1.  High  place,  palace,  ficnx  armon. 

Prov  18.  19  contentions  (are)  like  the  bars  of  a  castle 

2.  Tower,  rrvta  tirah. 

Gen.  25.  16  these  (are)  their  names,  .by  their  castles 
1  Ch.   6.  54  dwelling  places  throughout  their  castles 

Z.Great  or  high  tower,  byte  migdal. 

1  Ch.  27.  25  and  in  the  villages,  and  in  the  castles 
4. Fortress,  iyp  metsrid. 

1  Ch.  11.    7  And  David  dwelt  in  the  castle  ;  therefore 
5. Fortress,  mia?  metsudah. 

1  Ch.  11.    5  Nevertheless  David  took,  .castle  of  Zion 
6. An  interlining,  irapefifioXr}  parembole. 

Acts  21.  34  commanded  him  to  be  carried  into  the  c. 
ei.  37  And  as  Paul  was  to  be  led  into  the  castle 
22. 24  to  be  brought  into  the  castle,  and  bade 
23.  10  to  take,  .aud  to  bring  (him)  into  the  cas. 
23.  16  he  went  and  entered  into  the  castle,  and 
23.  32  On  the  morrow  they .  .returned  to  the  cas. 

CASTLE,  goodly  — 
.4  tower,  rrvg  tirah. 

Nuni3i.  10  they  burnt,  .all  their  goodly  castles,  with 

CASTLES  — 

Citadels,  palaces,  riVrv?  biraniyyoth. 

2  Ch.17.  12  he  built  in  Judah  castles,  and  cities  of 

27.   4  in  the  forests  he  built  castles  and  towers 

CASTOR  and  POLLUX,  Ai6<n<ovpoi  sons  of  Jupiter. 
Instead  of  translating  or  retaining  the  term  At6(TKovpot 
as  it  stands  in  the  Greek  text,  the  common  version 
gives  the  two  names  "Castor  and  Pollux,"  who  were 
reckoned  sons  of  Jupiter  by  Leda,  aud  regarded  by 
sailors  as  their  tutelary  divinities,  appearing  in  the 
heavens  as  the  constellation  of  the  Gemini  or  Twins. 
On  shipboard  they  were  recognised  in  the  phosphoric 
lights  which  play  about  the  masts  and  sails.  Hence 
Roman  poets  so  often  allude  to  these  divinities  in  rela- 
tion to  navigation. 

Acts  28. 11  a  ship,  .whose  sign  was  C.  and  P. 

CATCH,  to  — 

1.7b  lay  or  keep  hold  on,  tnx  achaz. 

Judg.  1.    6  they  pursued  after  him,  and  caught  him 

2.  To  take  as  spoil,  113  bazaz. 

Num  31.  32  prey  which  the  men  of  war  had  caught 

3.  To  take  by  violence,  bw  gazal. 

Judg 2i.  23  took  (them)  wives,  .whom  they  caught 
4. To  draw  or  sweep  away,  *na  garar. 

Hab.    1.  15  they  catch  them  in  their  net,  and  gather 

5.7V)  make  strong  or  hard,  pin  chazak,  5. 

Exod.  4.    4  he  put  forth  his  baud,  and  caught  it 

1  Sa.  17.  37  aud  when  he  arose.  .1  caught  him 

2  Sa,  2.  16  they  caught  every  one  his  fellow  by  the 
2  Ki.  4.  27  when  she  came,  .she  caught  him  by  the 
Prov.  7.  13  So  she  caught  him,  and  kissed  him 

6*.  7*0  snatch  away,  *)»p  cha/aph. 

Judg 21.  21  catch  you  every  man  his  wife,  .daughters 
Psa.  10.    9  he  lieth  in  wait  to  catch  the  poor 

10.   9  he  doth  catch  the  poor,  when  he  draweth 

7. To  draw  out,  Bjij  chalat. 

1  Ki.  20.  32  N"ow  the  men.  .did  hastily  catch  (it) 


CATCH 


149 


CAUSE 


8.  To  tear,  rend,  *\T-?  taraph. 

Eze.  19.   3  it  learned  to  catch  the  prey ;  it  devoured 
ig.    6  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  (and)  devoured 

$.To  capture,  catch,  lib  lakad. 

Judg.  S.  14  caught  a  young  man  of  thenienof  Succoth 
°  15.    4  Samson  went  and  caught  three  hundred 
2  Ch.22.   9  he  sought  Ahaziah :  and  they  caught  him 
Jer.     5.  26  they  set  a  trap,  they  catch  men 

10. 7b  find,  x?v  matsa. 

Exod22.   6  If  me  break  out,  and  catch,  .thorns 

ll.Toexfort,  ensnare,  trpa  naqash,  3. 

Psa.  109.  11  Let  the  extortioner  catch  all  that  he  hath 

12.Hunting,  ts  tsayid. 

Lev.  17.  13  which  hunteth  and  catcheth  any  beast  or 

13.ro  lay  Jwld  of  (by  the  hand),  i:*?!?  taphas. 
Gen.  39.  12  And  she  caught  him  by  his  garment 

1  Ki.11.  30  And  Abijah  caught  the  new  garment  that 

2  Ki.  7.  12  we  shall  catch  them  alive,  and  get  into 
li.To  catch,  Mint  (in  tJie  field),  aypevw  agreud. 

Marki2.  13  they  send,  .to  catch  him  in  (his)  words 
15.ro  snatch  at,  or  away,  apird^w  harpazo. 

Johnio.  12  the  wolf  catcheth  them,  and  scattereth 
16. To  take  (hold)  upon,  e-rr  t\a,u^di/cc  epilambano. 

Matt  14.  31  Jesus  stretched  forth  (his)  hand,  .caught 

Acts  16.  19  they  caught  Paul  and  Silas,  and  drew 

17.ro  hunt  (a  wild  beast),  dypevto  thereuo. 

Luke  11.  54  seeking  to  catch  something  out  of  his 

IS. To  take,  \ap$dvca  lambano. 

Matt  2i.  39  they  caught  him,  and  cast  (him)  out  of 
Marki2.    3  they  caught  (tum)>  and  beat  him,  and 
2  Co.  12.  16  nevertheless,  being  crafty,  I  caught  you 

19. To  catch  alive,  {ooypecu  zdgreo. 

Luke  5.  10  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men 

20.  To  seize,  iriafa  piazo. 

John  21.   3  and  that  night  they  caught  nothing 
21.  10  Bring  of  the  fish,  .ye  have  now  caught 

21.  To  take  together,  avK\a)x&avw  sullambano. 
Acts  26.  21  For  these  causes  the  Jews  caught  me  in 

22.  To  snatch  away  together,  avvapvaQa  sunarpazo. 

Luke  8.  29  For  oftentimes  it  had  caught  him  :  and 
Acts    6.  12  and  came  upon  (him),  and  caught  him 

19.  29  and  having  caught  Gains  and  Aristarchus 
27. 15  when  the  ship  was  caught,  and  could  not 

CATCH  away  — 

To  snatch  away,  apirdfa  harpazo. 

Matti3.  19  catcheth  away  that  which  was  sown 
Acts    8.  39  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip 

CATCH  hold,  to  — 

l.To  lay  or  keep  hold,  tnx  aclutz. 

1  Ki.  1.  50,51  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 

2.  28  Joab.  .caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the 

"2.  To  become  strong,  or  fast,  pin  chazaq. 

2  Sa.  18.   9  and  his  head  caught  hold  of  the  oak 

CATCH  self,  to  — 

To  capture,  catch,  "157  lakad. 

Psa.  35.    8  let  his  net.  .he  hath  hid  catch  himself 

CATCH  up,  to  -  - 

To  snatch  away,  apwd£o3  harpazo. 

2  Co.  12.    2  such  an  one  caught  up  to  the  third 

12.    4  How  that  he  was  caught  up  into  paradise 
1  Th.  4.  17  Then  we.  .shall  be  caught  up  together 
Rev.  12.    5  and  her  child  was  caught  up  unto  God 

CATERPILLAR  — 

1..4  devourer  (a  kind  of  locust),  "?"pn  chasil. 

1  Ki.  8.  37  If  there  be  in  the  land,  .caterpillar 

2  Ch.  6.  28  If  there  be  dearth,  .or  caterpillars 

Psa.  78.  46  He  gave,  .their  increase  unto  the  caterp. 
Isa.   33.    4  shall  be  gathered  (like).. the  caterpillar 
Joel.   1.    4  that  which . .  hath  left  hath  the  caterpillar 
2.  25  the  cankerworm,  and  the  caterpillar 

2.  A  cojnkerwonn,  fhlyeleq. 

Psa.  105.  34  He  spa.'ce.  .locusts  came,  and  caterpillars 
Jer.   51.  14  I  will  fill  thee,  .as  with  caterpillars 
51.  27  horses  to  come  up  as  the  rough  cater. 

CATTLE — ■ 

1. Cattle,  beast,  nvriz  oehemah. 

Gen.    1.  24  cattle,  and  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of 
1.  25  God  made  the.  .cattle  after  their  kind 

1.  26  let  them  have  dominion  over,  .the  cattle 

2.  20  And  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,  and 
3. 14  thou  (art)  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and 

6.  20  cattle  after  their  kind,  of  every  creeping 

7.  14  and  all  the  cattle  after  then-  kind,  and 

7.  21  all  flesh  died .  .both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle 

7.  23  both  man,  and  cattle,  and  the  creeping 

8.  1  and  all  the  cattle  (that)  was  with  him  in 
8.  17  and  of  cattle,  and  of  every  creepingthing 
9. 10  of  the  fowl,  of  the  cattle,  and  of  every  be. 

47.  18  my  lord  also  hath  our  herds  of  cattle 
Exodi2.  29  Lord  smote .  .all  the  first  born  of  cattle 

20.  10  nor  thy  maid  servant,  nor  thy  cattle 
Xev.    1.    2  shall  bring  your  offering  of  the  cattle 

5.  2  whether  (it  be)  a  carcase . .  of  unclean  cat. 
19.  19  Thou  shalt  not  let  thy  cattle  gender  with 
25.    7  Aud  for  thy  cattle,  and  for  the  beast 


Lev.  26.  22  shall  rob  you.  .and  destroy  your  cattle 
JSTum.  3.  41  and  the  cattle  of  the  Levites  instead  of 
3.  41  firstlings  among  the  cattle  of .  .Israel 
3.  45  and  the  cattle  of  the  Levites  instead  of 

31.  9  and  took  the  spoil  of  all  their  cattle 

32.  26  our  wives,  our  flocks,  and  all  our  cattle 

35.  3  suburbs  of  them  shall  be  for  their  cattle 
Deut.  2.  35  Only  the  cattle  we  took  for  a  prey 

3.  7  all  the  cattle,  and  the  spoil  of  the  cities 
5.  14  nor  thine  ass,  nor  any  of  thy  cattle 

7.  14  there  shall  not  be.  .among  your  cattle 
11.  15  And  I  will  send  grass,  .for  thy  cattle 
13.  15  and  the  cattle  thereof,  with  the  edge  of 

20.  14  and  the  little  ones,  aud  the  cattle,  and 
28.  4  and  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  the  increase 
28. 11  in  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and  iu  the 

28.  51  And  he  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle 
30.   9  in  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and  in  the  fruit 

Josh.  3.    2  only  the  spoil  thereof,  and  the  cattle 

8.  27  Only  the  cattle  and  the  spoil  of  that  city 

11.  14  all  the  spoil  of  these  cities,  aud  the  cattle 

21.  2  with  the  suburbs  thereof  for  our  cattle 
2  Ki.  3.    9  and  for  the  cattle  that  lullowed  them 
Neh.  9.  37  over  our  bodies,  and  over  our  cattle 

10.  36  the  first  born  of  our  sons,  and  of  our  cattle 
Psa.  50.  10  (and)  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills 
104. 14  causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle 
107.  38  suffereth  not  their  cattle  to  decrease 
148. 10  Beasts,  and  all  cattle  ;  creeping  things 
Isa.   46.    1  their  idols  were  upon.. the  cattle 
Jon.    4.  11  ^Nineveh,  .wherein  are.  .(also)  much  cat. 
Hag.   1.  11  upon  men  and  upon  cattle,  and  upon  all 
Zech.  2.    4  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle  therein 

2.Beast,  Tj;3  bcir. 

Nuni2o.    4  that  we  and  our  cattle  should  die  there? 
Psa.  78.  4S  He  gave  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  hail 
3.  A  possession,  thing  purchased,  njjpp  miqneh. 
Gen.   4.  20  he  was  the  father,  .(of  such  as  have)  catt. 
13.    2  Aud  Abram  (was)  very  rich  in  cattle 
13.    7  between  the  herdmen  of  Abram's  cafie 

13.  7  and  the  herdmen  of  Lot's  cattle  :  And 

29.  7  neither  (is  it)  time  that  the  cattle  should 

30.  29  Thou  knowest.  .how  thy  cattle  was  with 

31.  9  Thus  God  hath  taken  away  the  cattle 
31. 18  And  he  carried  away  all  his  cattle,  and 

31. 18  the  cattle  of  his  getting,  which  he  had 

33.  17  And  Jacob,  .made  booths  for  his  cattle 

34.  5  now  his  sons  were  with  his  cattle  in  the 
34.  23  (Shall)  not  then*  cattle  and  their  substan. 

36.  6  and  his  cattle,  and  all  his  beasts 
36.    7  could  not.  .because  of  their  cattle 

46.  6  they  took  their  cattle,  and  their  goods 
46.  32  their  trade  hath  been  to  feed  cattle 

46.  34  Thy  servants'  trade  hath  been  about  catt. 

47.  6  then  make  them  rulers  over  my  cattle 

47. 16  And  Joseph  said,  Give  your  cattle  ;  aud 
47.  16  I  will  give  you  for  your  cattle,  if  money 
47.  17  they  brought  their  cattle  unto  Joseph 

47. 17  for  the  cattle  of  the  herds,  and.. the  asses 
47. 17  for  all  their  cattle  for  that  year 

Exod.  9.  3  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thy  cattle 

9.  4  the  Lord  shall  sever  between  the  cattle 
9.  4  and  the  cattle  of  Egypt ;  aud  there  shall 
9.  6  and  all  the  cattle  of  Egypt  died 

9.  6  but  of  the  cattle  of  the  children  of  Is.  died 
9.  7  there  was  not  one  of  the  cattle  of  the  Is. 
9.  19  Send  therefore  now,  (and)  gather  thy  catt. 
9.  20  made  his  servants  and  his  cattle  flee  into 
9.  21  left  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  the  field 
10.  26  Our  cattle  also  shall  go  with  us  ;  there 

12.  38  flocks  and  herds,  (even)  very  much  cattle 

17.  3  thou  hast  brought  us.  .to  kill,  .our  cattle 

34. 19  and  every  firstling  among  thy  cattle 
Xuni2o,  19  if  I  and  my  cattle  drink  of  thy  water 

32.  1  had  a  very  great  multitude  of  cattle 

32.    1  behold,  the  place  (was)  a  place  for  cattle 

32.    4  the  country,  .(is)  a  land  for  cattle 

32.    4  and  thy  servants  have  cattle 

32.  16  AVe  will  build  sheep  folds,  .for  our  cattle 

Deut.  3.  19  your  little  ones,  ami . .  cattle . .  shall  abid  5 
3.  19  (for)  I  know  that  ye  have  much  cattle 

Josh.  1.  14  Your  wives,  your  little  ones,  .your  cattle 

14.  4  with  their  suburbs  for  their  cattle  aud 

22.  8  Return,  .with  very  much  cattle,  with 
Judg.  6.    5  they  came  up  with  their  cattle,  and  their 

18.  21  put  the  little  ones  and  the  cattle,  .before 

1  Sa.  23.    5  brought  away  then*  cattle,  and  smote 

30.  20  they  drave  before  those  (other)  cattle 

2  Ki.  3.  17  both  ye,  and  your  cattle,  and  your  beasts 
1  Ch.  5.   9  because  their  cattle  were  multiplied  in 

5.  21  they  took  away  their  cattle  ;  of  their 
7.  21  they  came  down  to  take  away  their  cattle 
2CI1.  14.  15  They  smote  also  the  tents  of  cattle,  and 

26.  10  he  had  much  cattle,  both  in  the  low 
Job  36.  33  the  cattle  also  concerning  the  vapour 
Isa.  30.  23  in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  large 
Jer.     9.  10  can  (men)  hear  the  voice  of  the  cattle 

49.  32  and  the  multitude  of  their  cattle  a  spoil 
Eze.  38.  12  people,  .which  have  gotten  cattle  and 

38. 13  to  take  away  cattle  and  goods,  to  take 

L Small  cattle,  sheep  and  goats,  |ns  tson. 

Gen.  30.  39  brought  forth  cattle  ringstraked,  speck. 
30.  40  and  put  them  not  unto  Laban's  cattle 
30.  41  whensoever  the  stronger  cattle  did  con. 
30.  41  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before,  .the  cattle 
30.  42  But  when  the  cattle  were  feeble,  he  put 

30.  43  and  had  much  cattle,  and  maid  servants 

31.  8  then  all  the  cattle  bare  speckled :  and  if 
1.    S  then  bare  all  the  cattle  ringstraked 

1. 10  came  to  pass  at  the  time  that  the  cattle 


Gen.  31.  10  the  cattle  (were)  ringstraked,  speckled    j 
31.  12  all  the  rams  which  leap  upon  the  cattle 
31.  4 r  I  served  thee,  .six  years  for  thy  cattle 
31.  43  and  (these)  cattle  (are)  my  cattle,  and  all 

5. A  sheep  or  goat,  n^  seh. 

Gen.  30.  32  removing,  .the  speckled  and  spotted  cat. 

30.  32  all  the  brown  cattle  among  the  sheep 
Eze.  34.  17  Behold,  I  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle 

34.  20 1,  (even)  I.  .judge  between  the  fat  cattle 

34.  20  and  between  the  lean  cattle 

34.  22  I  will  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle 

6. Work,  n-xh?  rnelakah. 

Gen.  33. 14  according  as  the  cattle  that  goeth  before 
7.  What  is  fed  or  nourished,  Bpe/ifia  thremma. 

John  4.  12  drank  thereof,  .his  children,  and  his  cat. 

CATTLE,  fat  — 
Failings,  N,")P  meri. 

1  Ki.    1.   9  slew  sheep  and  oxen  and  fat  cattle  "by 

19.  25  hath  slain  oxen  and  fat  cattle  and  sheep 

CATTLE,  lesser  — 
Sheep  or  goats,  ni?  seh. 

Isa.     7.  25  and  for  the  treading  of  lesser  cattle 

CATTLE,  small  — 

1. Small  cattle,  sheep>  and  goats,  Jns  tson. 

Eccl.  2.    7  great  possessions  of  great  and  small  cattle 
2. Sheep  or  goat,  n'ty  seh. 

Isa.  43.  23  Thou  hast  not  brought  me  the  small  cattle 

CATTLE,  to  feed  — 

To  shepherd,  tend,  iroifxaivo}  poirnaino. 

Lukei7.    7  a  servant  plowing  or  feeding  cattle 

CAUGHT,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  laid  hold  of,  lnx  achaz,  2. 

Gen.  22.  13  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  horns 
2. To  be  laid  hold  of  (by  the  hand),  t'zn  taphas,  2. 

Jer.  50.  24  thou  art  found,  and  also  caught,  because 

CAUL  — 

1. Diaphragm  or  midriff,  rr\jv  yothereth. 

Exod 29.  13  thou  shalt  take.  !the  caul  (that  is)  above 

29.  22  thou  shalt  take,  .the  caul  (above)  the 
Lev.    3.    4,  10,  15  the  caul  above  the  hver,  with  the 

4.   9  the  caul  above  the  liver,  with  the  kidneys 

7.  4  the  caul  (that  is)  above  the  hver,  with  the 

8.  16  the  caul  (above)  the  hver,  and  the  two 

8.  25  And  he  took,  .the  caul  (above)  the  liver 

9.  10  the  caul  above  the  liver  of  the  sin  offering 
9.  19  and  the  kidneys,  and  the  caul  (above)  the 

2.CoAd,  pericardium,  "rop  segor. 

Hos.  13.   8  I.  .will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and 

S.Cauls,  netted  caps,  D,p'?*f  shebisim. 

Isa.    3.  18  the  Lord  will  take  away,  .(their)  cauls 

CAUSE  — 

1.  Causes,  reasons,  niix  odoth. 

2  Sa.  13. 16  she  said  unto  him,  (There  is)  no  cause 
Jer.    3.    8  I  saw,  when  for  all  the  causes  whereby 

2.  Word,  matter,  "lyj  dabar. 

Exod  18.  19  that  thou  mayest  bring  the  causes  unto 
18.  26  the  hard  causes  they  brought  unto  Moses 
22.   9  the  cause  of  both  parties  shall  come  before 
Beut.  1.  17  the  cause  that  is  too  hard  for  you,  bring 
Josh.  5.    4  this  (is)  the  cause  why  Joshua  did  cir. 

20.  4  shall  declare  his  cause  in  the  ears  of  the 
1  Sa.  17.  29  What  have  I.,  done?  (Is  there)  not  a  cause 

1  Ki.  11.  27  this  (was)  the  cause  that  he  lifted  up  (his) 

3. Word,  matter,  rn:n  dibrah. 

Job     5.    8  and  unto  God  would  I  commit  my  cause 

4.  Plea,  judgment,  fn  din. 

Psa.     9.    4  thou  hast  maintained,  .my  cause  ;  thou 

140.  12  the  Lord  will  maintain  the  cause  of  the 

Prov  29.    7  The  righteous  considereth  the  cause  of 

31.  8  Open  thymouth.  .in  the  cause  of  all  such 
Jer.     5.  28  they  judge  not  the  cause,  the  cause  of 

22.  16  He  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  and 

30.  13  (There  Is)  none  to  plead  thy  cause,  that 

§. Judgment,  E5"fQ  mishpat. 

2  Sa.  15.    4  every  man  which  hath  any.  .cause  might 

1  Ki.  8.  45,  49  hear  thou,  .and  maintain  their  cause 

8.  59  the  cause  of  his  servant,  and  the  cause  of 
2Ch.  6.  35,  39  hear  thousand  maintain  their  cause 
Job   13.  iS  Behold  now,  I  have  ordered  (my)  cause 

23.  4  I  would  order  (my)  cause  before  him 

31.  13  If  I  did  despise  the  cause,  .man  servant 
Lam.  3.  59  Lord,  thou  hast  seen,  .judge,  .my  cause 

Q.Turn  (of  events),  n?p3  ncsibbah. 

2  Ch.  10!  15  the  cause  was  of  God,  that  the  LORD  might 

7. Turn  (of  events),  n^p  sibbah. 

1  Ki.  iz.  15  unto  the  people ;  for  the  cause  was  from 

S. Strife,  controversy,  an  rib. 

Exod23.    2  neither  shalt  thou  speak  in  a  cause  to 
23.    3  countenance  a  poor  man  in  his  cause 
23.    6  the  judgment  of  thy  poor  in  his  cause 

1  Sa.  24.  15  plead  my  cause,  and  deliver  me  out  of 
25.  39  hath  pleaded-  the  cause  of  my  reproach 

2CI1. 19.  10  what  cause  soever  shall  come  to  you 

Job  29.  16  the  cause  (which)  I  knew  not  I  searched 


CAUSE 


150 


CEASE 


Psa.  35.  23  (even)  unto  my  cause . .  God  and  my  Lord 
43.    1  Judge  me,  O  God,  and  plead  my  cause 
74.  22  Arise,  O  God,  plead  thine  own  cause 
119.  154  Plead  my  cause,  and  deliver  me:  quicken 

Prov.18.  17  (He  that  is)  first  in  his  own  cause 

22.  23  the  Lord  will  plead  their  cause,  and  spoil 

23.  11  he  shall  plead  their  cause  with  thee 

25.    9  Debate  thy  cause  with  thy  neigh bour(him.) 
Isa.     1.  23  neither  doth  the  cause  of  the  widow 

41  21  Produce  your  cause,  saith  the  Lord 
Jer.   11.  20  for  unto  thee  have  I  revealed  my  cause 

20.  12  for  unto  thee  have  I  opened  my  cause 

50.  34  he  shall  throughly  plead  their  cause 

51.  36  Behold,  I  will  plead  thy  cause,  and  take 
Lam.  3.  36  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause,  the  Lord 

3.  58  thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my  soul 
Mic.    7.    9  I  have  sinned,  .until  he  plead  my  cause 

9.  Because  of  whom,  'p^3  beshellemi. 

Jon.    1.    7  for  whose  cause  this  evil  (is)  upon  us 

10.  Cause,  accusation,  alrta  aitia. 

Matt  19.    3.~a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  every'cause? 
Luke  8.  47  for  what  cause  she  had  touched  him,  and 
Acts  10.  21  whatfis)  the  cause  wherefore  ye  are  come? 
13.  28  though  they  found  no  cause  of  death 
23.  28  And  when  I  would  have  known  the  cause 
28.  18  because  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in 
28.  20  For  this  cause  therefore  have  I  called  for 
2  Ti.    1.  12  For  the  which  cause  I  also  suffer  these 
Heb.   2,  11  for  which  cause  he  is  uot  ashamed  to  call 
ll.Causative  of,  causing,  asking,  atrtov  aition. 
Luke  23.  22  I* have  found  no  cause  of  death  in  him 
Acts  19.  40  there  being  no  cause  whereby  we  may 
12.  Word,  matter,  \6yos  logos. 

Matt.  5.  32  saving  for.  .cause  of  fornication,  causeth 

CAUSE,  for  the  same  — 
The  same,  rb  auro  to  auto. 

Phil.   2.  iS  For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy  and 

CAUSE,  for  this  (or  your)  — 

1.  Wholly  over  against  this,  flp  ^9**9  kol  qebeldenah. 
Dan.    2. 12  For  this  cause  the  king  was  angry  and 

%Over  against  this,  avr\  rovrov  anti  toutou. 

Eph.    5.  31  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his 
$.On  account  of  this,  dta  tovto  dia  touto. 

Johni2.  18  For  this  cause  the  people  also  met  him 

12.  27  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour 
Horn.  1.  26  For  this  cause  God  gave  them  up  unto  vile 

13.  6  For,  for  this  cause  pay  ye  tribute  also 
15.    9  For  this  cause  I  will  confess  to  thee  among 

1  Co.   4.  17  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  unto  you 

11.  10  For  this  cause  ought  the  woman  to  have 
11.  30  For  this  cause  many  (are)  weak  and  sickly 

Col.     1.    9  For  this  cause  we  also,  .do  not  cease  to 

1  Th.  2.  13  For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without 

3.    5  For  this  cause,  when  I  could  no  longer 

2  Th.  2.  1 1  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong 
1  Ti.  1. 16  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy 
Heb.  9.  15  And  for  tin's  cause  he  is  the  Mediator  of 

4.  With  «  view  to  this,  els  touto  eis  touto. 

JohniS.  37  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that 

1  Pe.   4.   6  for  this  cause  was  the  Gospel  preached 
b.Fortlie  sakeofthis,  zvsksv  rovrovheneken  toutou. 

Matt.  19.  5  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  fath. 
Mark  10.  7  ;  Acts  26.  21  ;  2  Co.  7.  12. 
6.  To  you,  vfx?v  humin. 

2  Co.  5. 13  whether  we  be  sober,  .for  your  cause 
CAUSE,  for  which  — 

1.  Therefore,  J3"?2  al  ken. 

Neh.   6.    6  for  which  cause  thou  buildest  the  wall 
2.0n  account  of  which,  816  dio. 

Rom  15.  22  For  which  cause  also  I  have  been  much 
2  Co.   4.  16  For  which  cause  we  faint  not ;  but  though 

CAUSE,  without  (a)  — 

1. Oralis,  gratuitously,  Djn  chinnam. 

1  Sa.  19.   5  wherefore,  .slay  David  without  a  cause? 
Job     2.    3  movedst  me.  .destroy  him  without  cause 
9.  17  and  multiplieth.  .wounds  without  cause 
Psa.  35.    7  For  without  cause  have  they  hid  for  me 
35.    7  without  cause  they  have  digged  for  my 
35.  19  let.  .wink,  .that  hate  me  without  a  cause 
69.    4  They  that  hate  me  without  a  cause  are 
109.    3  they,  .fought  against  me  without  a  cause 
119.  161  have  persecuted  me  without  a  cause 
Prov.  1.  it  lurk  privily  for.  .innocent  without  cause 
3.  30  Strive  not  with  a  man  without  cause 

23.  29  who  hath  wounds  without  cause?  who 

24.  28  Be  not  a  witness,  .without  cause ;  and 
Lam.  3.  52  chased  me  sore,  like  a  bird,  without  cause 
Eze.  14.  23  I  have  not  done  without  causeall  that  I 

2.  \rainly,  DjjH  reqam. 

Psa.     7.    4  delivered  him  that  without  cause  is 

25.  3  ashamed  which  transgress  without  cause 
S.Falsehood,  ")%&  sheqer. 

Psa.  119.  78  dealt  perversely  with  me  without  a  cause 
^.Gratuitously,  dwpedv  dorean, 

John  15.  25  They  hated  me  without  a  cause 
^.Yieldingly,  heedlessly,  eUrj  e&jfce". 

Matt.  5.  22  angry  with  his  brother  without  a  cause 
CAUSE,  Paul's  — 
The  things  against  PmUt  ra  KaTct.  rbv  Uav\ov. 

Acts  25.  14  Festus  declared  Paul's  cause  uuto  the  king 


CAUSE  (to  be),  to  — 

1.  To  be,  n;n  hayah. 

Kuni3i.  16  Behold,  these  caused  the  children  of 

2.  To  give,  }m  nathan. 

Lev.  24.  19  And  if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his 

24.  20  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a  man 
Deut  28.    7  the  Lord  shall  cause  thine  enemies 

28.  25  the  Lord  shall  cause  thee  to  be  smitten 
Prov  10. 10  He  that  winketh  with  the  eye  causeth 
Jer.   15.    4  And  I  will  cause  them  to  be  removed 
Eze.  16.    7  I  have  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  the 
26.  17  which  cause  their  terror  (to  be)  on  all 
32.  23  which  caused  terror  in  the  land  of  the 
32.  24,  26  caused  their  terror  in  the  land  of  the 
32.  32  For  I  have  caused  my  terror  in  the  land 

3.7b  do,  make,  iroiiw  poieo. 

Matt.  5.  32  for  the  cause  of  fornication,  causeth  her 
John  11.  37  Could  not  this  man.  .have  caused  that 
Acts  15.    3  caused  great  joy  unto  all  the  brethren 
Kom  16.  17  mark  them  which  cause  divisions  and  off. 
Col.     4.  16  cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  church 
Rev.  12.  15  that  he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried 
13.  12  causeth  the  earth  and  them  which  dwell 
13.  15  cause  that  as  many  as  would  not  worship 

13. 16  And  he  causeth  all,  both  small  and  great 
4.  To  work  thoroughly,  KaTepyd&fxcu  katergazomai. 

2  Co.  9.  11  which  causeth  through  us  thanksgiving 

CAUSED,  to  be  — 

To  be  given,  }r§  natlian,  2. 

Eze.  32.  25  though  their  terror  was  caused  in  the  land 

CAUSELESS  — 

Gratuitously,  n^n  chinnam. 

1  Sa.  25.  31  either  that  thou  hast  shed  blood  causeless 
Prov  26.    2  so  the  curse  causeless  shall  not  come 

CAUSEWAY  — 

Way  cast  up,  n?p^  mesillah. 

1  Ch.26.  16  by  the  causeway  of  the  going  up,  ward 
26.  18  four  at  the  causeway,  (and)  twoatParbar 

CAVE  — 

l.A  hole,  "iin  chor. 

Job   30.    6  To  dwell . .  (in)  caves  of  the  earth,  and  (in) 

2.  Exposed  place,  open  cave,  iT$£  mearah. 

Gen.  ig.  30  and  he  dwelt  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two 
23.    9  That  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  Machp. 
23.  11  the  field  give  I  thee,  and  the  cave  that 
23.  17  the  field,  and  the  cave  which  (was)  therein 
23. 19  buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  cave  of  the 

23.  20  the  field,  and  the  cave  that  (is)  therein 

25.  9  his  sons,  .buried  him  in  the  cave  of  Mac. 
49.  29  bury  me  with  my  fathers  in  the  cave 

49.  30  In  the  cave  that  (is)  in  the  field  of  Mach. 

49.  32  The  purchase  of  the  field  and  of  the  cave 

50.  13  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of  M. 
Josh. 10.  16  hid  themselves  in  a  cave  at  Makkedah 

10. 17  The  five  kings  are  found  hid  in  a  cave  at 

10. 18  Roll,  .stones  upon  the  mouth  of  the  cave 
10.  22  said  Joshua,  Open  the  mouth  of  the  cave 
10.  22  bring  out  those  five  kings . .  out  of  the  cave 
10.  23  brought . .  those. five  kings . .  out  of  the  cave 
10.  27  and  cast  them  into  the  cave,  wherein 

10.  27  and  laid  great  stones  in  the  cave's  mouth 
Judg.  6.    2  dens  which  (are) in  the  mountains,  .caves 

1  Sa.  13.    6  the  people  did  hide  themselves  in  caves 

22.    1  David,  .escaped  to  the  cave  Adullam 

24.  3  came  to  the  sheep  cotes,  .where  (was)  ac. 
24.    3  his  men  remained  in  the  sides  of  the  cave 
24.    7  Saul  rose  up  out  of  the  cave,  and  went 
24.    8  David  also  arose,  .weut  out  of  the  cave 
24. 10  had  delivered  thee  to  day.  .in  the  cave 

2  Sa  23. 13  came  to  David .  .unto  the  cave  of  Adullam 
1  Ki.  18.    4  hid  them  by  fifty  in  a  cave,  and  fed  them 

18.  13  I  hid  an  hundred  men.  .by  fifty  in  a  cave 

19.  9  he  came  thither  unto  a  cave,  and  lodged 
19.  13  and  stood  in  the  entering  in  of  the  cave 

1  Ch.11.  15  went  down,  .into  the  cave  of  Adullam 
Psa.  57.  title,  when  he  fled  from  Saul  in  the  cave 
142.  title.  A  Prayer  when  he  was  in  the  cave 
Eze.  33.  27  they  that  (be)  in  the  forts  and  in  the  caves 

3.  Opening,  hole,  ottt}  ope. 

Heb.  11.  38  wandered,  .(in)  dens  and  caves  of  the 

4.  Cave,  grotto,  o-rr-fthaiop  sjMaion. 

Johnii.  38  It  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  lay  upon  it 
CAVES  — 
Holes,  caves,  nWno  mechilloth. 

Isa.     2. 19  they  shall  go  .'.into  the  caves  of  the  earth 
CEASE,  to  — 
1.7b  cease  (from  labour),  Si?a  hotel. 

Eccl.  12.    3  the  grinders  cease,  because  they  are  few 
2.  To  cease,  hvi  betel. 

Ezra  4.  24  Then  ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  Gcd 
3.7V)  come  to  an  end,,  "tt?a  gamar. 

Psa.  12.    1  Help,  LORD  ;'  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth 
A. To  be  dumb,  silent,  nlpT  damah. 

Jer.    14.  17  Let  mine  eyes  run.  .let  them  not  cease 

Lam.  3.  49  Mine  eye  trickleth  down,  and  ceaseth 

5. To  be  dumb,  silent,  □£?  domam. 

Psa.  35.  15  they  did  tear  (me),  and  ceased  not 
Lam.  2.  18  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  eye  cease 

6.  To  cease,  leave  off,  "rin  chadal. 

Gen.  18.  11  it  ceased  to  be  with  Sarah  after  the 


Exod.  9.  29  the  thunder  shall  cease,  neither  shall 
9.  33  the  thunders  and  hail  ceased,  and  the 
9.  34  the  hail  and  the  thunders  were  ceased 

Deut  15.  11  For  the  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the 

Judg.  5.  7  the  villages  ceased,  they  ceased  in  Israel 
15.  7  avenged  of  you,  and  after  that  I  will  cease 
20.  28  Shall,  .go  out  to  battle,  .or  shall  I  cease? 

1  Sa.   2.    5  and  (they  that  were)  hungry  ceased  :  so 
12.  23  I  should  sin.  .in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you 

Job  3.  17  There  the  wicked  cease  (from)  troubling 
10.  20  (Are)  not  my  days  few?  cease  (then,  and) 
14.    7  the  tender  branch  thereof  will  not  cease 

Psa.  49.    8  redemption  of  their  soul.. ceaseth  for 

Prov.  19.  27  Cease,  my  son,  to  hear  the  instruction 

23.  4  Labour  not  to  be  rich ;  cease  from  thine 
Isa.      1.  16  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings,  .cease 

2.  22  Cease  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  (is)  in 
Amos  7.    5  Then  said  I,  O  Lord  God,  cease,  I  beseech 

7. To  be  silent,  win  charash,  5. 

1  Sa.   7.   8  Cease  not  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  our  God 
8. TV)  add,  *]D;  yasaph. 

Numn.  25  they  prophesied,  and  did  not  cease 
9.  To  be  completed,  n^3  kalah. 

Isa.    16.    4  the  spoiler  ceaseth,  the  oppressors  are 
10.7V)  remove,  t^D  mush,  5. 

Jer.  17.    8  neither  shall  cease  from  yielding  fruit 
11. To  rest,  r\)i  nuach. 

1  Sa.  25.   9  David's  young  men  came,  they,  .ceased 

12.  To  cause  to  fall,  h$i  naphal,  5. 

Judg.  2.  19  they  ceased  not  from  their  own  doings 

13.  To  stand,  11?%  amad. 

Jon.    1. 15  and  the  sea  ceased  from  her  raging 
14.7V)  be  languid,  3=i3  pug. 

Psa.  77.   2  my  sore  ran  in  the  night,  and  ceased  not 
15.7V>  let  fall,  rrfln  raphah,  5. 

Psa.  37.    8  Cease  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath:  fret 

16.  To  cease,  keep  sabbath,  nzy  shabath. 

Gen.    8.  22  and  summer  and  winter,  .shall  not  cease 
Josh.  5.  12  And  the  manna  ceased  on  the  morrow 
Neh.  6.   3  why  should  the  work  cease,  whilst  I 
Job   32.    1  So  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  Job 
Prov  22.  10  yea,  strife  and  reproach  shall  cease 
Isa.   14,   4  oppressor  ceased  !  the  golden  city  ceased  1 

24.  8  The  mirth  of  tabrets  ceaseth,  the  noise 
24.   8  the  joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth 

33.    8  the  wayfaring  man  ceaseth :  he  hath 
Jer.    31.  36  the  seed  of  Israel  also  shall  cease  from 
Lam.   5.  14  The  elders  have  ceased  from  the  gate 

5.  15  The  joy  of  our  heart  is  ceased ;  our  dance 
Hos.    7.   4  ceaseth  from  raising  after  he  hath 

17.  To  cease,  keep  sabbath,  nn^  shabath,  2. 

Isa.    17.    3  The  fortress,  .shall  cease  from  Ephraim 
Eze.    6.    6  and  your  idols  may  be  broken  and  cease 
30.  18  and  the  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  cease 
33.  28  and  the  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  cease 

18.  Cessation,  fina*  shebeth. 

Prov.20.    3  (It' is)  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from 

19.  7V>  turn  back,  mp  shub. 

Num.  8.  25  they  shall  cease  waiting  upon  the  service 

20.  To  cease,  rest,  be  still,  prjyj  shathaq. 

Prov.  26.  20  where  (there  is)  no  tale  bearer,  the  strife  c. 

21.  To  perfect,  complete,  □$?  tamam,  5. 

Isa.   33.    1  when  thou  shalt  cease  to  spoil,  thou  shalt 

22.  To  leave  throughout,  intermit,  SiaXeiirw  dialeipo. 
Luke  7.  45  this  woman,  .hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my 

23.  To  become  still,  quiet,  silent,  r,o-vxd(o)  hisuchazo. 
Acts  21. 14  we  ceased,  saying,  The  will  of  the  Lord 

24.7V)  cease  thoroughly,  Karawavw  katapauo. 
Heb.  4. 10  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  works 

25.  To  make  thoroughly  idle,  Karapyeoi  kotargeo. 
Gal.    5.  11  then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross  ceased 

26.  To  cease,  abate,  Koirdfa  kopazo. 

Matti4.  32  when  they  were  come,  .the  wind  ceased 
Mark  4.  39  wind  ceased,  and  there  was  a  great  cairn 

6.  51  the  wind  ceased :  and  they  were  sore 

27.  To  2'>ctuse,  cease,  iravofiat  pauomai. 

Luke  8.  24  and  they  ceased,  and  there  was  a  calm 
11!    1  when  he  ceased,  one  of  his  disciples  said 

Acts    5".  42  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach 

6  13  This  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphem. 
i-i  10  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right 
20     1  after  the  uproar  was  ceased,  Paul  called 
20'  31  I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and 


.Co. 


*3- 


whether,  .tongues,  they  shall  cease 


Eph     1.  16  Cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  making 
Col      i     g  For  this  cause  we  also,  .do  not  cease  to 
Heb  10     2  then  would  they  not  have  ceased  to  be 

1  Pel  4.    1  he  that  hath  suffered,  .hath  ceased  from 

CEASE,  that  cannot  — - 

Not  ceasing  tlwroughl  u^hKOLTd-rravo'Tos  akafa2)austos. 

2  Pe.   2. 14  Having  eyes .  [that  cannot  cease]  from 

CEASE,  to  cause  to  — 

1.7V)  cause  to  cease  or  leave  off,  L»3  betel. 

Ezra  4.  21  Give  ye.  .to  cnuse  these  men  to  cease 

5.    5  that  they  could  not  cause  them  to  cease 

2.7V)  break  asunder,  disannul,  *n2  payor,  5. 

Psa.  S^.    s  and  cause  thine  anger  toward  us  to  cease 


CEASE 


151 


CERTAIN 


B.To  cause  to  cease,  keep  sabbath,  rgy  shabath,  5. 
Xeh    4  ii  slay  them,  and  cause  tho  work  to  cease 
Fror.xE  iS  The  lot  causeth  contentions  to  cease,  and 
Isa.  Wn'causethearrogancyof  the  proud  to  cease 

J>'.  ii  cause  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  cease 
Ter      7  34  Then  will  I  cause  to  cease  from  the  cities 
*  16.   q  I  will  cause  to  cease  out  of  this  place  in 
36.  29  and  shall  cause  to  cease  from  thence 
48*  35  I  will  cause  to  cease  in  Moab,  saith  the 
Eze.  16.  41  I  will  cause  thee  to  cease  from  playing 
23.  48  Thus  will  I  cause  lewdness  to  cease  out 
26. 13  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  songs  to  cease 
30. 13  I  will  cause  (their)  images  to  cease  out  of 
34.  10  cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the 
34.  25  will  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  case  out  of 
Dan.  o.  27  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to    e. 
*  11  18  a  prince.,  shallcause  the  reproach,  .to  ce. 
Ho?.    1.    4  will  caase  to  ;ease  the  kindoni  of  the 
2.  1 1 1  will  also  cause  all  her  mirth  to  cease 

3EASE,  to  let  — 

To  ..(.use  or  let  cease,  ray  sliabath,  5. 

a  Ch.16.   s  he  left.off  building,  .and  let  his  work  ce. 
CJEASE,  to  make  to  — 
l.i'o  cause  to  cease,  V93  betel, 

Ezra  4  23  made  them  to  cease  by  fcrce  and  power 
'2.  Toccmsg  to  cease,  keep  sabbath,  113?  shabath  5. 
Deut32.  2r>  make  the  remembrance  of  ihem  to  cease 
Josh  22.  25  make  our  children  cease  from  fearing  the 
Psa.  46.   9  He  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  end  of 

89.  44  Thou  hast  made  his  glory  to  cease 
Isa.   16.  10  have  made  (their  vintage)  shouting  to  ce. 
si.    2  the  sighing  thereof  have  1  made  to  cease 
Eze   .  7.  24  make  the  pomp  of  the  strong  to  cease 
12.  23  I  will  make  this  proverb  to  cease,  and 
23.  27  Thus  "will  I  make  thy  lewuaesa  to  cease 
30.  ic  make  the  multitude  of  Egypt  to  cease 

3. To  cause  to  settle  down,  "3?>  shakak,  5. 

XUJH17.    5  I  will  make  to  cease  from  me  the  niurm. 

CEASED  — 

There  was  a  cessation,  n^?2  mq  havath  batela. 
Ezra   4.  24  So  it  ceased  unto  the  second  year  ;f 

CEASING,  without  — 

X.Xot  thoroughly  left,unintermitting,  aZiahenrros. 
2  Ti.    z,    3  that  without  ceasing  I  have  remembrance 
2.  Utiintermittingly,  aBtakelirTois  xdialeiptos. 
Rom.  1.    9  that  without  ceasing  I  make  mention  of 
1  Th.  x.    3  Remembering  without  ceasing  your  work 
2. 13  cause  also  thank  we  God  without  ceasing 
5.  17  Pray  without  ceasing 

3. Extended,  outstretched,  Iktsv-^s  ektenes. 

Acts    12.  5  prayer  was  made  [without  ceasing]  of  the 

CEDAR — 

Cedar  (so 

Lev.  14. 

14. 
14. 


iKi 


called  from  its  firmness),  T*in  erez. 
4  and  cedar  wood,  aud  scarlet,  and  hyssop 

6  he  shall  take  it,  and  the  cedar  wood 
49  he  shall  take,  .two  birds,  and  cedar  wood 

51  he  shall  take  the  cedar  wood,  and  the 

52  shall  cleanse  the  house,  .with  the  cedar 
6the  priest  shall  take  cedar  wood,  aud 

15  let  fire  come  out.  .and  devour  the  cedars 
11  Aud  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent,  .cedar  trees 
2  See  now,  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedar 

7  WK  build  ye  not  me  an  house  of  cedar  ? 
8 1  will  do  all  thy  desire  concerning,  .cedar 

10  So  Hiram  gave  Solomon  cedar  trees  a*id 
9  covered  the  house  with,  .boards  of  cedar 

10  rested  on  the  house  with  timber  of  cedar 

15  he  built  the  walls,  .with  boards  of  cedar 

16  he  built,  .the  walls  with  boards  of  cedar 
iS  And  the  cedar  of  the  house  within  (was) 
18  all  (was)  ceaar;  there  was  no  stone  seen 
20  covered  the  altar  (which  was  of)  cedar 
36  the  inner  court  with.. cedar  beams 

2  four  rows  of  cedar  pillars,  with  cedar 

3  covered  with  cedar  above  upon  the  beams 

7  covered  -with  cedar  from  one  side  of  the 

11  after  the  measures  of  hewed  stones,  .ced. 

12  a  row  of  cedar  beams,  both  for  the  inuer 

11  king,  .furnished  Solomon  with  cedar  tr. 
27  cedars  made  he  (to  be)  as  the  sycamore  tr. 

9  The  thistle . .  in  Lebanon  sent  to  the  cedar 
1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent,  .timber  of  ced. 
1  Lo,  I  dwell  iu  an  house  of  cedars 

6  ye  not  built  me  an  house  of  cedars  ? 

4  Also  cedar  trees  in  abundance  ;  for  the 

4  they  of  Tyre  brought  much  cedar  wood 
3  and  didst  seud  him  cedars  to  build  him 

8  Send  me  also  cedar  trees,  fir  trees,  and 
18  The  thistle .  .in  Lebanon  sent  to  the  cedar 

7  to  bring  cedar  trees  from  Lebanon  to  the 

17  He  moveth  his  tail  like  a  cedar  :  the 

5  The  voice  of  the  Lord  breaketh  the  ce. 
5  yea,  the  Lord  breaketh  the  cedars  of 

10  boughs  thereof  (were  like)  the  goodly  ce. 

12  he  shall  grow  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 

16  cedars  of  Lebanon,  which  he  hath  planted 

9  all  hills ;  fruitful  trees,  and  all  cedars 

17  The  beams  of  rur  house  (are)  cedar,  (and) 
5.  15  hiscountenancc(is). .  excellent  as  the  cedar 
3.    9  we  will  enclose  her  with  boards  of  cedar 

Isa.     2l  i3  And  upon  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon 
9.  10  but  wj  will  change  (them  into)  cedars 
14.   8  the  fir  trees  rejoice  at  thee,  (and)  the  ce. 
37.  24  cut  down  the  tall  cedars  thereof 


14. 

Xumi9- 

Judg.  9 

2Sa.  5- 

7- 

7- 

5- 

5- 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

9- 

10. 

2  Ki.14. 

I  Ch.14. 

17- 

17- 

22. 

22. 

r.  Ch.  2. 


^       25' 
Ezra   3. 

Job  40. 

Psa.  29. 


sg. 
80. 
92, 
104. 


Song 


Eze. 


31- 

Amos  2. 
Zech  11. 


Isa.  41.  19  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  cedar 
s  r  14  He  heweth  him  down  cedars,  and  taketh 

Jer    22.    *  they  shall  cut  down  thy  choice  cedars 
22.  14  c  iled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with  ver. 
22. 15  because  thou  closest  (thyself)  iu  cedar? 

22.  23  that  makest  thy  nest  in  the  cedars 
17.    3  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar 
17.  22  of  the  highest  branch  of  the  high  cedars 
17.  23  bring  forth  boughs,  .and  oe  a  goodly  ce. 
27.    5  they  have  taken  cedars  from  Lebanon  to 

3  the  Assyrian  (was)  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 

8  The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could 

9  height  (was)  like  the  height  of  the  cedars 

1  that  the  fire  may  devour  thy  cedars 

2  Howl,  fir  tree ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen 
CEDAR,  made  of  — 

Made  of  cedar,  cnx  aruzim. 

Eze.  27.  24  bound  with  cords,  and  made  of  cedar 
CEDAR  tree  — 
i-l  cedar  tree,  fix  erez. 

Nuni24.   6  (and)  as  cedar  trees  beside  the  waters 

1  K_i.  4.  33  from  the  cedar  tree  that  (is)  in  Lebanon 

5.    6  that  they  hew  me  cedar  trees  out  of  Leb. 

2  Ki.  19.  23  will  cut  down  the  tall  cedar  trees  thereof 
2  Ch.  1.  15  cedar  trees  made  he  as  the  sycamore 

9.  27  cedar  trees  made  he  as  the  sycamore 

CEDAR  work  — 

Cedar  work,  nr)X  arzah. 

Zeph.  2.  14  for  he  shall  uncover  the  cedar  work 
CED'-RON,  KeSpwv,  Ke'Spos  torrent. 
The  name  of  the  flahal  Eidrcn  or  "black  torrent,' 
which  flows  down  the  ravine  below  the  E.  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  beyond  it  was  the  Garden  of  Gethsemaue 
It  has  no  connection  with  "Cedar;"  hence  the  riuv  Kt- 
Spojj/,  i.e.,  "brook  of  cedars/'  of  some  texts,  as  well 
as  the  LXX.  in  2  Sa.  15.  23,  is  a  gloss.    Now  Wady  Nar 

JohmS.    1  he  went,  .with  his  disciples  over.  .C. 
CELEBRATE,  to  — 
1.  To  praise,  hhn  halal,  3. 

Isa.   38.  18  grave  cannot,  .death  can  (not)  celebrate 
2.7b  keep  a  festival,  Jjrt  chagag. 

Lev.  23.  41  ye  shall  celebrate  it  in  the  seventh  month 
3. To  keep  a  sabbath,  res'  shabath. 

Lev.  23.  32  even,  shall  ye  celebrate  your  sabbath 
CELESTIAL  — 
Upon,  over  or  above  the  heaven,  £irovp<ivios. 

1  Co.  15.  40  also  celestial  bodies,  and  bodies  terrestr. 

15.  40  but  the  glory  of  the  celestial  (is)  one 
CELLAR  — 

Treasure,  treasury,  iyiN  otsar. 

1  Ch.27.  27  over  the  increase,  .for  the  wine  cellars 
27.  28  and  over  the  cellars  of  oil  (was)  Joash 

CEN-CHRE'-A,  Kei/xp««. 

It  ought  to  be  written  Cenchrece ;  the  eastern  harbour 

of  Corinth  (9  miles  off)  on  the  Saronic  Gulf,  and  the 

emporium  of  its  trade  with  Asia. 

Acts  18.  18  having  shorn  (his)  head  in  C. :  for  he  had 
Rom  16.    1  a  servant  of  the  church  which  is  at  C. 

CENSER  — 

I. A  Censer,  nms  machtah. 

Lev.  10.    1  took  either  of  them  his  censer,  and  put 
16. 12  he  shall  take  a  censer  full  of  burning 

Num.  4.  14  they  minister  about  it,  (even)  the  censers 

16.  6  Take  you  censers,  Koran,  and  all  his 
16.  17  take  every  man  his  censer,  aud  put 
16. 17  and  bring  ye.  .every  man  his  censer 
16. 17  two  hundred  and  fifty  censers 

16.  17  thou  also,  and  Aaron,  each,  .his  censer 
16.  18  they  took  every  man  his  censer,  and  put 
16.  37  that  he  take  up  the  censers  out  of  the 
16.  38  The  censers  of  these  sinners  against  their 
16.  39  Eleazar  the  priest  took,  .brasen  censers 
16.  46  Take  a  censer,  and  put  fire  therein  from 

1  Ki.  7.  50  the  spoons,  and  the  censers  (of)  pure  gold 

2  Ch.  4.  22  the  spoons,  and  the  censers,  (of)  pure  gold 

2.A?i  incense  censer,  nnispO  miqtereth. 

2  Ch.26.  ig  a  censer  in  his  hand  to  burn  incense 
Eze.    8. 11  with  every  man  his  censer  in  his  hand 

3. Incense  censer,  dufxiarr}piov  thumiaterion. 

Heb.   9.   4  Which  had  the  golden  censer 
4. Frankincense  censer,  XifSai/arSs  libanotos. 

Rev.   8.    3  stood  at  the  altar,  having  a  golden  censer 
8.    5  the  angel  took  the  censer,  and  filled  it 

CENTURION  — 

1.  Leader  of  a  hundred  men,  tfeaTovTapxys- 

Acts  10.    1  a  centurion  of  the  band  called  the  Italian 
10.  22  Cornelius  the  centurion,  .was  warned 
24.  23  he  commanded  a  centurion  to  keep  Paul 
27.    1  named  Julius,  a  centurion  of  Augustus' 
27.  31  Paul  said  to  the  centurion  and  to  the 
2.Leader  of  a  hundred  men,  kKar6vrapxos. 

ilatt.  8.   5  there  came  uuto  him  acenturion,  beseech. 
8.    8  The  centurion  answered  and  said,  Lord 
8. 13  Jesus  said  unto  the  [centurion],  Go  thy 
27.  54  Now  when  the  centurion.,  saw  the  earth. 
Luke  7.    2  a  certain  centurion's  servant,  .was  sick 
7.    6  the  centurion  sent  friends  to  him,  saT"'ng 

23.  47  when  the  [centurion]  saw  whj  +  was  •.•-■ne 
Acts  21.  32  Who.  .took  soldiers  air-  nturions] 

22.  25  Paul  said  unto  the  ceu.  ..ion  that  stood 


Acts  22.  26  When  the  [centurion]  heard  (that),  he 
23.  17  Paul  called  one  of  the  centurions  unto 
23.  23  he  called  unto  (him)  two  centurions 
27.    6  the  [ceuturion]fouud  a  ship  of  Alexandria 
27.  11  Nevertheless  the  [centurion]  believed  the 
27.  43  But  the  ..centurion] .  .kept  them  from 
28. 16  [the  centurion  delivered  the  prisoners  toj 
SX'enturian;  in  Greek  letters,  ksvtucAwv  keniurwn. 

&larki5.  39  when  the  centurion,  .saw  that  he  so  cried 
15.  44  calling  (unto  him)thecentuiion,  he  asked. 
15  45  when  he  knew  (it)  of  the  centurion,  he 

CE-PHAS,  K-p<pas  rock  man. 

A  surname  given  to  Simon  Peter 

John  1  42  thou  shalt  be  called  C,  which  is..  A  stone- 

1  Co.    1.  12  I  of  Apollos ;  and  I  of  C;  and  I  of  Christ 

3.  22  Whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  C. .  .all  are 

9.  5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead . .  as  well  as . .  C? 

15.  5  he  was  seen  of  C,  then  of  the  twelve 
Gal.     2.   9  when  James,  [V.J,  and  John,  .perceived. 

CEREMONIES  — 

Judgment,  a»^p  mishpai. 

Num.  9.   3  according  to  all  the  ceremonies  thereof 
CERTAIN  [men]  — 
l.A  man,  cn:y  enosh. 

Num.  9.    fi  there  were  certain  men,  who  were  defiled 

16.  2  with  certain  of  the  children  of  Israel 
Judg  ig.  22  men  of  the  city,  certain  sons  of  Belial 

1  Ki.  11.  17  Hadad  fled,  he  and  certain  Edomites 

2  Ch.  28.  12  certain  of  the  heads  of  the  children 
Ezra  10.  16  the  priest,  (with)  certain  chief  of  the 
Neh  13.  25  I.. smote  certain  )i  them,  and  plucked 
Jer.   26.  17  Then  rose  up  certain  of  the  elders  of  the 

41.    5  there  came  certain  from  Shechem,  from 
Eze.    14.    1  Ihen  came  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel 
20.    1  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to 

2.  Mighty  01  strong  man,  "Ol  gebar. 

Dan.   3.    8  certain  Chaldearis^cameiiear,  and  accused 
3. 12  certain  Jews  whom  thou  hast  set  over 

3. Set  up,  fixed,  2*ym  yatstsib. 

Dan.   2.  45  the  dream  is  certain,  and. . interpretatiou 
4.  To  be  established,  right,  pa  kun,  2. 

Deuti3,  14  behold,  (if  it  be)  truth,  .the  thing  certain 

17.  4  behold,  (it  be)  true,  (and)  the  tiling  certain 

5. Such  a  one,  "tizbs  palmoni. 

Dan.    8. 13  another  saint  said  unto  that  certain 
6.  Times,  D"Piy  ittim- 

Dan.  11.  13  come  after  certain  years  with  a  great 
7. Any   one,  any  thing,  ris,  rt,  tis,  ti. 

Matt.  g.    3  behold,  certain  of  the  scribes  said  within 
12.  38  certain  of  the  scribes  and  of  the  Pharisees 
Jlcrk  2.    6  there  were  certain  of  the  scribes  sitting 

7.  1  certain  of  the  scribes,  which  came  frtnx 

11.  5  certain  of  thtm  that  stood  there  said 

12.  13  they  send  unto  him  certain  of  the  Thar. 

14.  57  there  arose  certain,  .bare  false  witness 
Luke  6.    2  certain  of  the  Pharisees  said  unto  thtm 

8.  2  certain  women,  which  had  been  healed  of 

13.  31  same  day  there  came  certain  of  the  Phar. 
iS.  9  he  spake  this  parable  unto  certain  which 
20.  27  Ihen  came  to  (him)  certain  of  the  Sadd. 

20.  39  Then  certain  of  the  scribes  answering 

21.  2  he  saw  also  a  certain  poor  widow 

24.  22  certain,  .of  our  company  made  us  aston. 

24.  24  certain  of  them  which  were  with  us  went 
-John  12. 10  there  were  certain  Greeks  among  thtm 
Acts    6.   9  Then  there  arose  certain  of  the  synagogue 

9.  19  Then  was  Paul  certain  days  with  tie 

10.  23  Peter  went  away  with  thtm,  and  certain 
10.  48  Then  prayed  they  him  to  tarry  certain 

12.  1  hands  to  vex  certain  of  the  church 

13.  1  there  were  in.,  church,  .[certain]  prophets 

15.  1  certain  men..crme  dewn  from  Judea 
15.  2  Barnabas,  and  certain  other  of  them 
15.  5  there  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of  the 

15.  24  certain  which  went  out  from  us  have 

16.  12  we  were  in  that  city  abiding  certain  days 

17.  5  the  Jews.. took  unto  them  certain  lewd 
17.    6  they  drew  Jason  and  certain  brethren 

17.  18  certain  philosophers  of  the  Epicureans      f 
17.  20  thou  bringest  certain  strange  things  to 
17.  28  as  certain  also  of  your  own  poets  have 
17.  34  Hovbeit  certain  men  clave  unto  him 
19.    1  Faul..crme..and£ndin£certaindisciples 
19.  13  Then  certain  of  the  vagabond  Jews 
19.  31  certain  of  the  chief  of  Asia,  .sent  unto 

23.  12  lvhen  it  was  day,  [certain]  of  the  Jews 

24.  18  Whereupon  certain  Jews  frcm  Asia  found 

24.  24  after  certain  days,  .he  sent  for  Paul,  and 

25.  13  after  certain  days  king  Agrippa  and  B> 
25.  19  certain  q  estions  against  him  of  theirr 
27.    1  they  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other 

Gal.      2.  12  For  before  that  certa     came  frcm  James 

S.Untripped  up,  certain,   a.<r<pa\7\s  asphalts. 

Acts  25.  26  Of  whom  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  writ? 

9.  Evident,  Bt]\os  delos. 

1  Ti.   6.    7  [certain]  we  can  carry  notlLag  oui 
CERTAIN,  a  — 
\.0ne,  inx  cchad. 

Judg.  9.  53  a  certain  woman  cast  a  piece  of  a  mill. 
13.    2  And  there  was  a  certain  man  of  Zorah 

1  Ka.    1.    1  was  a  certain  man  of  Ramathaim-zo]  Km 

2  Sa.  i8.  10  a  certain  man  saw  (it),  and  told  Joab 

1  Ki.20.  35  a  certain  man  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets 

2  Ki.  4.    1  there  cried  a  certain  woman  of  the  wives 


CERTAIN 


152 


CHALDEANS 


2  Ki.  8.  6  king  appointed  unto  her  a  certain  officer 
Esth.  3.  8  There  is  a  certain  people  scattered  abroad 
Dan.  10.    5  behold  «  certain  man  clothed  in  linen 

2.  A  man,  b^n  ish. 

Gen.  38.    1  and  turned  in  to  a  certain  Adullamite 

38.    2  Judah  saw  there  a  daughter  of  a  certain 
Judg  iy.    1  there  was  a  certain  Levite  sojourning  on 
Esth.  2.    5  there  was  a  certain  Jew,  whose  name  (was) 
Z.A  man,  human  being,   &vdpa)Tro$  antkropos. 

Matt  18;  23  likened  unto  a  certain  king,  which  would 

21.  33  There  was  a  certain  householder,  which 

22.  2  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  cer. 

i.One,  ets  fieis. 

Matt.  8.  19  a  certain  scribe  came  and  said  unto  him 
Marki2.  42  there  came  a  certain  poor  widow,  and  she 
Luke  5.  12  came  to  pass,  wheu  he  was  in  a  certain 
5.  17  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  as  he 
8.  22  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  that  he 

5. Any  one,  any  thing,  tis,  ti,  tis,  ti. 

Matt2i.  33  There  was  a  [certain]  householder,  which 
Mark  5.  25  [a  certain]  woman,  which  had  an  issue 

14.  51  there  followed  him  a  certain  young  man 
Luke  1.   5  a  certain  priest  named  Zacharias,  of  the 
7.   2  a  certain  centurion's  servant,  who  was 

7.  41  There  was  a  certain  creditor  which  had 

8.  27  there  met  him  out  of  the  city  a  certain 
10.  25  a  certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted 
10.  31  by  chance  there  came  down  a  certain 

10.  33  a  certain  Samaritan,  .came  where  he  was 

10.  38  he  entered  into  a  certain  village:  and  a  c. 
11. '  1  as  he  was  praying  in  a  certain  place 

11.  27  a  certain  woman  of  the  company  lifted 

11.  37  [a  certain]  Pharisee  besought  him  to  dine 

12.  16  The  grouud  of  a  certain  rich  man  brought 
14.  2  there  was  a  certain  man  before  him  which 
14.  16  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper,  and 
15. 11  And  he  said,  A  certain  man  had  two  sons 
16. 1, 10  There  was  a  certain  rich  man  which 

16.  20  there  wasacertaiu  beggar  named  Lazarus 

17.  12  as  he  entered  into  a  certaiu  village 

18.  18  And  a  certain  ruler  asked  him,  saying 

18.  35  a  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  way  side 

19.  12  A  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far  co. 

20.  9  [A  certain]  man  planted  a  vineyard 

21.  2  a  certain  poor  widow  casting  in.  .mites 

22.  56  a  certain  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by 
23. 19  "Who  for  a  certain  sedition  made  in  the 

John  4.  46  there  was  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son 
5.   5  a  certain  man  was  there,  which  had  an 

Acts    3.    2  a  certain  man  lame  from  his  mother's 
5.    1  a  certain  man  named  Ananias,  .sold  a 
5.    2  a  certain  part,  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles' 
8.   9  there  was  a  certain  man  called  Simon 

8.  36  they  came  unto  a  certain  water :  and  the 

9.  10  there  was  a  certain  disciple  at  Damascus 
9.  33  found  a  certain  man  named  Eneas,  which 

9.  36  there  was  at  Joppa  a  certain  disciple 
10.    1  a  certain  man  in  Cesarea  called  Cornelius 

10.  11  a  certain  vessel  descending  unto  him 

11.  5  I  saw  a  vision,  A  certain  vessel  descend 

13.  6  they  found  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  pr. 

14.  8  there  sat  a  certain  man  at  Lystra 
16.    1  behold,  a  certain  disciple  was  there 
16.    1  [a  certain]  woman,  which  was  a  Jewess 
16.  14  And  a  certain  woman  named  Lydia 

16.  16  a  certaiu  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit 
18.  2  And  found  a  certaiu  Jew  named  Aquila 
18.  24  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos.  .came  to  E. 

20.  9  there  sat  in  a  window  a  certain  young 

21.  10  there  came  down,  .a  certain  prophet 

24.  1  a  certain  orator  (named)  Tertullas,  who 

25.  14  There  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by 
27.  16  under  a  certain  island  which  is  called 
27.  26  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain  island 
27.  39  they  discovered  a  certain  creek  with  a 

Rom  15.  26  to  make  a  certain  contribution  for  the 
lleb.  4.    7  Again,  he  limiteth  a  certain  day,  sayiug 
10.  27  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 

CERTAIN  portion  — 

A  stated  thing,  nvas  amanak. 

Keh.  11.  23  certain  portion  should  be  for  the  singers 

CERTAIN  rate  — 

Wordt  matter,  ~i:n  dab  vr, 

Exodi6.    4  the  people  shall .. gather  a  certain  rate 
2  Ch.  8.  13  after  a  certain  rate  every  day,  offering 

CERTAIN  (man,  ot'ier,  thing),  place,  a  — 

Any  cue,  any  thing,  tis,  ti,  tis,  ti. 

Matt  20.  20  and  desiring  a  certain  thing  of  him 
Luke   9.  57  as  they  were  in  the  way,  a  certain  (man) 

10.  30  A  certain  (man)  went  down  from  Jer. 
13.    6  A  certain  (man)  had  a  fig  tree  planted 

2  \.    1  [came  unto  the  sepulchre . .  and  certain  0.] 
John  11.    1  Now  a  certain  (man)  was  sick,  (named) 
Acts  18.    7  ;  19,  24;  23.  17  ;  Jude  4. 

2.Somcichere,  irav  pou. 

Heb.  2.    6  But  one  in  a  certain  place  testified  ;  4.  4. 
CERTAINLY  — 
l.But,  m  ak. 

Lam.  2.  16  certainly  this  (is)  the  day  that  we  looked 
2. But,  surely,  |?n  aJcen. 

Jer.    8.    8  Lo,  certainly  in  vain  made  lie  (it) 

3.  T->  know,  in;  yada. 

Gen.  43.    7  could  we  certainly  know  that  he  would 
1  Sa,  20.    3  Thy  father  certainlj  knoweth  that  1  have 
20.   9  if  1  knew  certainly  that  evil  were  fli  ti 


Jer.    13.  12  Do  we  not  certainly  know  that  every 

40.  14  And  said.  .Dost  thou  certainly  know 
42.  19  know  certainly  that  I  have  admonished 
42.  22  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die  by  the 

■i.That,  because,  \3  M. 

Exod.  3.  12  And  he  said,  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee 
5. Being,  actually,  really,  ovras  ontos. 

Luke23.  47  glorified  God,  saying,  Certainly  this  was 
CERTAINTY,  for  (a)  certain  — 
1.2*0  know,  be  acquainted  with,  $n;  yada. 

Josh  23.  13  Know  for  a  certainty  that  the  Lord  your 

1  Ki.   2.  37  thou  shalt  know  for  certain  that  thou 
2.  42  Know  for  a  certain,  on  the  day  thou 
26.  15  But  know  ye  for  certain,  that  if  ye  put 
I.Set  up,  fixed)  2'T.  yatstsib. 

Dan.    2.    8  I  know  of  certainty  that  ye  would  gain 
3.7*0  be  established,  right,  p3  kun,  2. 

1  Sa.  23.  23  come  ye  again  to  me  with  the  certainty 

4.  Untripped  up,  certain,  a<r<pa\T)$  asp/tales. 
Acts  21.  34  when  he  could  not  know  the  certainty 

22.  30  because  he  would  have  known  the  certainty 
o.C'crtainty,  aacp&Asia  asphaleia. 

Luke  1.    4  That  thou  inightest  know  the  certainty 
CERTIFY,  to  — 
I. To  say,  i?n  amar. 

Esth.  2.  22TEsther  certified  the  king,  .in  Mordecai's 

2.  To  cause  to  know,  D~\\  yeda,  5. 

Ezra   4.  14  therefore  have  we  sent  and  certified  the 

4.  16  We  certify  the  king,  that  if  this  city  be 
5. 10  We  asked  their  names  also,  to  certify  th.ee 
7. 24  Also  we  certify  you,  that,  touching  any 

3.  To  2nd  befwe,  *uj  nagad,  5. 

2  Sa.  15.  28  until  there  come  word  from  you  to  certify 

1.  To  make  known,  com-se  to  know,  yi/wpifa  gnorizo. 

Gal.     1.  11  I  certify  you,  brethren,  that  the  gospel 
CHAPED    — 
Bitter,  T?  mar. 

2  Sa.  17.    8  they  (be)  chafed  in  their  minds,  as  a  bear 
CHAFF  — 
X.FIay,   dry  grass,  wwn  chashash. 

Isa.       5.  24  and  the  flame  consumeth  the  chaff 

33. 11  Ye  shall  conceive  chaff ;  ye  shall  bring 

2.  Chaff,  x o  mots. 

Job  21. 18  as  chaff  that  the  storm  carrieth  away 
Psa.     1.    4  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth 

35.  5  Let  them  be  as  chaff  before  the  wind 
Isa.    17.  13  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the  mountains 

29.    5  and  the  multitude,  .as  chaff  that  passeth 

41.  15  and  shalt  make  the  hills  as  chaff 
Hos.  13.    3  as  the  chaff  (that)  is  driven  with  the 
Zeph.  2.    2  (before)  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before 

o.Skin,  chaff,  *nj?  ur. 

Dan.   2.  35  became  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer 

i.Straio,  j?n  teben. 

Jer.  23.  28  What  (is)  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  saith 

S.Chaff,  so  called  from  its  loose  state,  &xvpov. 

Matt.  3.  12  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable 
Luke  3.  17  chaff  he  wrill  buru  with  fire  unquenchable 

CHAIN  — 

1.  Bracelet,  clasp  (/or  the  arm),  o"i»?$  etsadah. 

NUIU31.  50  man  hath  gotten,  of  jewels  of  gold,  chains 
9,.  Chain  (for   arm.  or  neck),  3TJDn  hamnik. 

Dan.   5.     7  and  (have)  &  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck 
5. 16  and  (have)  a  chain  of  gold  about  thy  neck 

5.  29  and  (put)  a  chain  of  gold  about  Ins  neck 

o.Ifook,  ring  (in  the  nose),  nn  chach. 

Eze.  19.    4  brought  him  with  chains  unto  the  land  of 
19.   9  they  put  him  in  ward  iu  chains,  and 

£.  Brass,  riE-m  nechosheth. 

Jer.  39.  '  7  bound  him  with  chains,  to  carry  him  to 

52.  11  the  king  of  Babylon  bound  him  in  chains 
Lam.  3.    7  he  hath  made  my  chain  heavy 

5.  Necklace,  p:y.  anaq. 

Judg.  8.  26  besides  the  chains  that  (were)  about  their 
Prov.  1.  9  an  ornament  of  grace,  .and  chains  about 
Song  4.    9  with  one  of  thine  eyes,  with  one  chain  of 

Q.Collar  (for  the  neck),  Tn-j  rabid. 

Gen.  41.  42  and  put  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck 

Eze.  16.  11  bracelets  upon  thy  hands,  and  a  chain  on 
7.  A  chain,  pirn  rattoq. 

Eze.    7.  23  Make  a  chain  ;  for  the  land  is  full  of  bio. 
8.-4  chain,  rr;uri  rattuqah. 

1  Ki.  6.  21  lie  made  a  partition  by  the  chains  of  gold 
9. A  little  chain  or  bracelet,  Trfyff  sharshah. 

Exod28.  22  make  upon  the  breastplate  chains  at  the 
VO.A  little  chain  or  bracelet,  rnshcJ  skarsherah. 

Exod28.  14  two  chains  (of)  pure  gold  at  the  ends 

28. 14  fasten  the  wreathen  chains  to  the  ouches 
39.  15  they  made  upon  the  breastplate  chains 

1  Ki.  7.  17  wreaths  of  chain  work,  for  the  chapiters 

2  Ch.  3.    5  and  set  thereon  palm  trees  and  chains 

3. 16  And  he  made  chains,  (as)  in  the  oracle 
3. 16  pomegranates,  and  put.  .on  the  chains 

11.  Bond,  rope,  chain,  ahvais  halusis. 

Acts  28.  20  hope  of  Israel  1  am  bound  with  this  chain 

aTi,    1.  16  he.  .was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain 

Rev.  20     1  I  saw  an  angel,  .having,  .a  great  chain  in 


CHAINS  — 

1.  Manacles,  D'pTN  aziqqim. 

Jer.  40.    1  being  bound  in  chains  among  all  that  were 
40.    4  I  loose  thee  this  day  from  the  chains 

2.  Manacles,  D'gl  ziqqim. 

Psa.  149.    8  To  bind  their  kings  with  chains,  and 
Isa.  45.  14  in  chains  they  shall  come  over,  and  they 
Kah.  3.  10  all  her  great  men  were  bound  in  chains 

3. String  of  ornaments,  irmn  charuzim. 
Song   1.  10  thy  neck  with  chains  (of  gold) 

i.Ear  drops  or  pendants,  rbvtsi  netiphoth. 

Isa.     3.  ig  The  chains,  and  the  bracelets,  and  the 

5.  Chain,  npVjn  rattiqah. 

1  Ki.    6.  21  by  the  chains  of  gold  before  the  oracle 
Q.Cliain,  niprn  retuqoth. 

Isa.  40.  19  over  with  gold,  and  casteth  silver  chains 
7. Bonds,  bands,  nVlgftS  kosharoth. 

Psa.  68.    6  he  bringeth  out  those . .  bound  with  chains 

S. (Unloosed)  chain,  a\v(ris  alusis. 

Mark  5.    3  could  bind  him,  no,  not  with  cl  ains 

5.    4  been  often  bound  with  fetters  and  chains 
5.    4  the  chains  had  been  plucked  asunder 
Luke  8.  29  and  he  was  kept  bound  with  chains 
Acts  12.    6  between  two  soldiers,  bound  with,  .chains 
12.    7  And  his  chains  fell  off  from  (Ins)  hands 
21.  33  commanded,  .to  be  bound  with  two  chains 

9. Band,  bond,  Secrp.6s  desmos. 

Jude         6  hath  reserved  in  e\erlasting  chains,  under 
10.  Cord,  rope,  treipd  seira. 

2  Pe.    2.   4  delivered  (them)  into  [chains]  of  darlness 

[See  Compass  about  as  a  chain]. 
CHAINS,  wreathen  — 
Thick  bands,  irni»:  abothoth. 

Exod3g.  17  put  the  two  wreathen  chains  of  gold  in 
39. 18  the  two  ends  of  the  two  wreathen  chains 

CHALCEDONY  — 

A  gem  (like  a  carnelian),  xa^K^^v  chalkedon. 

Rev.  2i.  19  the  third,  [a  chalcedony] ;  the  fourth,  an 
CHAL'-COL,  CAL'-COL,  h'y?^  sustaining. 
A  son  of  Mahol  whose  offspring  were  noted  for  their 
wisdom,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  he  was  wiser  than.  .Heman,  and  C,  and 

1  Ch.  2.    6  the  sons  of  Zerah.  .Heman,  and  C,  and 

CEAL-DE'-A,  □'■::•?,  XaKdatwu. 

The  southern  portion  of  Babylonia.  In  the  commi  n 
version  it  is  used,  however,  for  the  Hebrew  Kasdim  or 
Chaldeans,  the  teinuwhich  designates  the  inhabitants 
of  the  entire  country.  Hie  native  teim  is  Ealdi  or 
Kaldai,  hot  Casdim.  Hence  the  name  Chaldea  has 
been  connected  with  the  city  Kahvadha,  the  Chilmad 
of  Eze.  27.  23. 

Jer.  50.  10  And  C.  shall  be  a  spoil. .saith  the  Lord 

51.  24  I  will  render.,  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  C. 

51.  35  My  blood  upon  the  inhabitants  of  C. 
Eze.   11.  24  brought  me  in  a  vision,  .into  C. 

16.  29  hast,  .multiplied.. fornication.. unto  C. 

23.  15  after  the  manner  of  the  Babylonians  of  C. 

23.  16  she.  .sent  messengers  unto  them  into  C. 

CHAL-DE-ANS,  (HAL'  DIES,  c-/f?,  XahSaubv. 
In  Scripture  this  people  appears  till  the  captivity  as 
the  inhabitants  of  the  country  which  had  Babylon  for 
its  capital,  and  is  itself  called  Shinar.  While  this 
meaning  is  still  found  in  the  book  of  Daniel  (5.  30  and 
o.  1),  anew  acceptation  shows  itself.  They  are  classed 
with  astronomers  and  magicians,  and  foim  a  class  who 
have  a  peculiar  "tongue"  and  "learning,"  and  are 
consulted  by  the  king  on  difficult  subjects.  Eerosus, 
the  native  historian,  himself  a  Chaldean  in  the  narrower 
sense,  uses  the  teim  in  the  wider  one  only;  while 
Herodotus,  Diodorus,  Strabo  and  later  writers  almost 
universally  employ  it  to  signify  a  sect,  regarding  them 
chiefly  as  priests  or  philosophers.  Hence  the  Chaldeans 
were  regarded  as  the  inhabitants  of  a  particular  part 
of  Babylonia,  the  country  bordering  on  the  Persian 
Gulf  and  en  Arabia.  1  he  Ealdi  or  Kaldai  were  merely 
one  of  the  Cushite  tribes  that  lived  on  the  great  alluvial 
plain  known  as  Babylonia  or  Chaldsea.  Their  seat  was 
most  likely  the  southern  portion  of  the  country  which 
has  so  late  retained  the  name  of  Chaldea.  Here  was 
"  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"  the  modern  Mvgheir,  which  lies 
S.  of  the  Euphrates,  near  its  junction  with  the  Shal-el- 
hie.  That  they  were  a  Cushite  race  is  proved  by  the 
remains  of  their  language,  which  closely  resembles  the 
Galla  or  ancient  language  of  Ethiopia,  the  learned 
language  for  scientific  and  religious  literature. 
Gen.    „.  28  And  Haran  died .  .in  Ur  of  the  C 

11   11  went  forth  with  tlum  from  Ur  of  the  C. 

is'    7  I.  brought  thee  out  of  Uf  of  the  C. 

2  Ki.  24    a  the  LOM>  sent  against  him  bands  of  the  C. 

si     4  the  C  (were)  against  the  city  round 
2='    s  tlie  army  of  the-  C.  pursued  after  the 
2V  ro  all  the  army  of  the  C... brake  down  the 
25  13  and  the  brasen  sea.  .did  the  C.  break  in 
25  24  Fear  not  to  be  the  servants  of  the  C. 
25  25  Ishmael .. smote  Gedalinh..and  the  C. 
25.  26  Egypt ;  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  C. 

9  Ch.36.  17  brought  upon  them  the  king  of  the  C. 

EzTa    5.  1?  Nebiu-badnezzar  . .  king  of  Bnbyh  n.  the  C. 

Neh.   9.    7  broughtest  him  forth  out  of  Ur  of  the  C. 

Job     1.  17  The  C.  made  out  three  bands,  and  fell 

Isa.   13.  in  And  Babylon. .the  beauty  of  the  C. 

23.  13  Behold  the  bind  of  the  C.  ;  ibis  pe.  pie 
43. 14  I  have  sent.,  and.,  brought  down. . the  C. 
47.    1  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the  C.  :  for 


CHALK    STONE 


153 


CHANGE 


Isa.  47.    5  Sit  thou  silent.  .0  daughter  of  the  C. 

48.  14  and  his  arm  (shall  be  on)  the  C. 

48.  20  Go  ye  forth,  .flee  ye  from  the  C. 
Jer.  21.   4  weapons.. wherewith  ye  fight  against..  C. 

21.  9  he  that  goeth  out,  and  falleth  to  the  C. 

22.  25  will  give  thee  into  the  hand  of.  .the  C. 
24.    5  whom  I  have  sent,  .into  the  land  of  the  C. 
25- 12  I  will  punish . .  the  land  of  the  C. 

32.  4  shall  not  escape  out  of  the  hand  of  the  C. 
32.    5  though  ye  fight  with  the  C,  ye  shall  not 
■32.  24,  25,  43  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  C. 
32.  28  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of  the  C. 

32.  29  the  C. .  .shall  come  and  set  fire  on  this 

33.  5  They  come  to  fight  with  the  C,  but  (it  is) 
35.  n  let  us  go.  .for  fear  of  the  army  of  the  C. 
37.    5  when  the  C. .  .heard  tidings  of  them,  they 
37.   8  the  C.  shall  come  again,  and  fight  against 
37.   9  The  C.  shall  surely  depart  from  us 

37.  10  had  smitten  the  whole  army  of  the  C. 
37.  11  when  the  army  of  the  C.  was  broken  up 
37.  13  saying,  Thou  fallest  away  to  the  C. 

37.  14  (It  is)  false  ;  I  fall  not  away  to  the  C. 

38.  2  he  that  goeth  forth  to  the  C.  shall  live 
38.  18  this  city  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the  C. 
38.  19  the  Jews  that  are  fallen  to  the  C. 

38.  23  they  shall  bring,  .thy  children  to  the  C. 

39.  5  But  the  C.'s  army  pursued  after  them,  and 

39.  8  And  the  C.  burned  the  king's  house,  and 

40.  9  saying,  Fear  not  to  serve  the  C. 

40.  10  I  will  dwell  at  ifizpah,  to  serve  the  C. 

41.  3  Ishmael.. slew.. the  C.  that  were  found 
41.  18  Because  of  the  C;  for  they  were  afraid 
43.    3  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  C. 
50.    1  Lord  spake,  .against  the  land  of  the  C. 
50.  8  go  forth  out  of  the  land  of  the  C. 

50.  25  work  of.  .God.  .in  the  land  of  the  C. 

50.  35  A  sword  (is)  upon  the  C,  saith  the  LORD 

50.  45  purposed  against  the  laud  of  the  C. 

51.  4  slain  shall  fall  in  the  land  of  the  C. 

51.  54  destruction  from  the  land  of  the  C. 

52.  7  the  G.  (were)  by  the  city  round  about 

52.    8  the  army  of  the  C.  pursued  after  the  king 
52. 14  the  army  of  the  C. . .  brake  down . .  walls 
52.  17  and  the  brasen  sea.  .the  C.  brake,  and 
Eze.    1.    3  in  the  land  of  the  C.,  by  the  river  Chebar 

12.  13  will  bring  him  to.. the  land  of  the  C. 

23.  14  images  of  the  C.  pourtrayed  with  verniil. 

23.  23  The  Babylonians,  and  all  the  C,  Pekod 
Dan.    1.   4  they  might  teach,  .the  tongue  of  the  C. 

2.    2  the  king  commanded  to  call,  .the  C.,  for 
2.    4  Then  spake  the  C.  to  the  king  in  Syriac 

2.  5  The  king  answered  aud  said  to  the  C. 
2. 10  The  C.  answered  before  the  king,  and 

2. 10  no  king,  .asked  such  things  at  any..C. 

3.  8  at  that  time  certain  C.  came  near,  and 

4.  7  Then  came  in  the  magicians,  .the  C,  and 

5.  7  The  king  cried  aloud  to  bring. .  the  C. 

5. 11  master  of  the  magicians.  .C.,  (and)  sooth. 

5.  30  that  night  was.  .the  king  of  the  C.  slain 
9.    1  Darius,  .was  made  king  over,  .the  C. 

Hab.    1.    6  For,  lo,  I  raise  up  the  C.,  (that)  bitter  and 
Acts    7.    4  came  he  out  of  the  laud  of  the  C. 

CHALK  STOKE  — 

Lime  stone,  "13  |3N  eben  gir. 

Isa.  27.    9  all  the  stones  of  the  altar  as  chalk-stones 
CHALLENGE,  to  — 
To  say,  "^x  amar. 

Exoda2.  '9  which  (another)  challengeth  to  be  his 
CHAMBER  — 
1.  Inner  chamber,  enclosed  place,  "nrj  clieder. 

Gen.  43.  30  he  entered  into  (his)  chamber,  an?,  wept 

Judg.  3.  24  coveretli  his  feet  in  his  summer  chamber 

15.  1  I  will  go  in  to  my  wife  into  the  chamber 

16.  9  abiding  with  her  in  the  chamber 
16. 12  Hers  in  wait  abiding  in  the  chamber 

2  Sa.  13.  10  Bring  the  meat  into  the  chamber,  that 

13. 10  and  brought  (them)  into  the  chamber 
1  Ki.   1.  15  went  in  unto  the  king  into  the  chamber 
Job     9.    9  Which  maketh.  .the  chambers  of  the  south 
Psa.  105.  30  forth  frogs . .  in  the  chambers . .  their  kings 
Prov.  7.  27  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death 

24.  4  by  knowledge  shall  the  chambers  be  filled 
Song   1.    4  King  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers 

3.    4  the  chamber  of  her  that  conceived  me 
Isa.  26.  20  Come,  .enter  thou  into  thy  chambers 
Eze.    8. 12  every  man  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery 
Joel    2.  16  the  bridegroom  go  forth  of  his  chamber 

2. A  covering,  bridal  canopy,  n»n  chuppah. 

Psa.   19.    5  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber 

3.  Chamber,  y$],  Sfls;  yatsua,  yatsia. 

1  Ki.    6.    5  against  the  wall,  .he  built  chambers 

6.  6  The  nethermost  chamber  (was)  five  cubits 
6. 10  he  built  chambers  against  all  the  house 

A.  Lodging  place,  r&yb  lishkah. 

2  Ki.  23.  11  by  the  chamber  of  Nathan-melech 

1  Ch.  9.  26  these  Levites. .  .were  over  the  chambers 

9.  33  Levites,  (who  remaining)  in  the  chambers 
23.  28  in  the  courts,  and  in  the  chambez'S 
28.  12  of  all  the  chambers  round  about 

2  Ch.  31.  11  Hezekiah  commanded  to  prepare  chamb. 
Ezra   8.  29  the  chambers  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

10.   6  Ezra  rose,  .and  went  into  the  chamber 
Neh.  10.  37  the  chambers  of  the  house  of  our  God 
10.  38  to  the  chambers,  into  the  treasure  house 
10.  39  bring,  .the  oil,  unto  the  chambers,  where 

13.  4  the  chamber  of  the  house  of  oizr  God 

13.   5  he  had  prepared  for  him  a  great  chamber 
13-    8  1  cast  forth  all.  .out  of  the  chamber 

20 


Xeh.  13.    9  they  cleansed  the  chambers;  and  thither 
Jer.  35.   2  bring  them .  .into  one  of  the  chambers 
35.    4  into  the  chamber  of  the  sons  of  Hanan 
35.   4  which  (was)  the  chamber  of  the  princes 

35.  4  which  (was)  above  the  chamb.  of  Maaseiah 

36.  10  chamber  of  Gemariah  the  son  of  Shaphan 
36.  12  Then  he  went.,  into  the  scribe's  chamber 
36.  20  they  laid  up  the  roll  in  the  chamber  of 
36.  21  he  took  it  out  of.  .the  scribe's  chamber 

Eze.  40. 17  lo,  (there  were) chambers,  and  a  pavement 
40.  17  thirty  chaznbers(were)upon  the  pavement 
40.  38  the  chambers  and  the  entries  thereof 
40.  44  without  the  inner  gate(were)the  chambers 
40.  45  This  chamber,  .(is)  for  the  priests,  the 

40.  46  the  chamber,  .toward  the  north  (is)  for 

41.  10  between  the  chambers  (was)  the  wideness 

42.  1  he  brought  me  into  the  chamber  that 
42.    4  before  the  chambers  (was)  a  walk  of  ten 
42^  5  Now  the  upper  chambers  (were)  shorter 
42T  7  the  waU . .  over  against  the  chambers 

42.   7  toward  the  outer  court . .  of  the  chambers 
42.    8  the  chambers  that  (were)  in  the  outer 
42.   9  under  these  chambers  (was)  the  entry  on 
42.  10  The  chambers  (were)  in  the  thickness  of 
42.  11  like  the  appearance  of  the  chambers 
42.  12  according  to  the  doors  of  the  chambers 
42. 13  north  chambers  (and)  the  south  chambers 
42. 13  before  the. .  place,  they  (be)  holy  chambers 

44.  19  and  lay  them  in  the  holy  chambers,  and 

45.  5  for  a  possession  for  twenty  chambers 

46.  19  he  brought  me.  .into  the  holy  chambers 

5. Lodging  pla.ee,  ns&i  nishkah'. 

Neh.   3.  30  son  of  Berechiah  over  against  his  chamber 

12.  44  some  appointed  over  the  chambers  for 

13.  7  in  preparing  him  a  chamber  in  the  courts 

6.  Loft,  upper  room,  n*?J£  aliyyah. 

2  Sa.  18.  33  And  the  king,  .went  up  to  the  chamber 

1  Ki.  17.  23  Elijah.. brought  him.,  out of  the  chamber 

2  Ki.  4.  10  Let  us  make  a  little  chamber,  I  pray  thee 

4.  11  and  he  turned  into  the  chamber,  and  lay 
Psa.  104.    3  Who  layeth  the  beazns  of  his  chambers 

104.  13  He  watereth  the  hills  from  his  chambers 
Jer.  22.  13  Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth.. chambers 
22.  14  I  will  build  me.  .largevchambers,  and 

7 -Lofty  upper  room,  n1?]*  illith. 

Dan.   6.  10  his  windows  being  open  in  his  chamber 

8.  Side  chamber,  rib,  yb?  tsela. 

1  Ki.  6.    5  And.. he  made  chambers  round  about 
6.    8  The  door  for  the  middle  chamber  (was) 

9.  Marked  off  place,  xn  (a. 

1  Ki.  14.  28  brought  them  back  into,  .guard  chamber 

2  Ch.12. 11  brought  them  again  into.. guard  chamber 

CHAMBER,  inner  — 

Surrounded  or  enclosed  2)lace,  inn  cheder. 

1  Ki.  20.  30  Ben-hadad.  .came.. in  to  an  inner  chamber 

22.  25  thou  shalt  go  into  an  inner  chamber  to 

2  Ki.  9.    2  Jehu,  .carry  him  into  an  inner  chamber 
2  Ch.18.  24  thou  shalt  go  into  an  inner  chamber  to 

CHAMBER,  Httle  — 

Place  marked  off,  an  ta. 

Eze.  40.    7  (every)  little  chamber  (was)  one  reed 
40.    7  between  the  little  chambers  (were)  five 
40.  10  the  little  chambers  of  the  gate  eastward 
40.  12  the  little  chambers  (was)  one  cubit 
40.  12  the  little  chambers  (were)  six  cubits  on 
40.  13  roof  of  (one)  Httle  chamber  to  the  roof  of 
40.  16  narrow  windows  to  the  Httle  chaznbers 

40.  21  the  little  chambers,  .(were)  three  on  this 
29.  33,  36  the  Httle  chambers,  .and  the  posts 

CH  A  TUBER,  secret  — 

Place  cut  off,  store  roam,  rafxe?ov  iameion. 

Matt 24.  26  behold,  .(lie  is)  in  the  secret  chambers 
CHAMBER,  side  — 
Side  chamber,  rib,  jAx  tsela. 

Eze.  41.    5  the  breadth  of  (every)  side  chamber  four 

41.  6  And  the  side  chambers  (were)  three,  one 
41.    6  the  house  for  the  side  chambers  round 
41.    7  a  winding  about,  .to  the  side  chambers 
41.    8  the  foundations  of  the  side  chambers 
41.    9  wall,  which  (was)  for  the  side  chamber 
41.    9  the  place  of  the  side  chambers  that  (were) 
41.  11  the  doors  of  the  side  chambers  (were) 
41.  26  (upon)  the  side  chambers  of  the  house 

CHAMBER,  upper  — 

l.Loft,  upper  chamber,  n^li  aliyyah. 

2  Ki.   1.    2  through  a  lattice  in  his  upper  chamber 

23.  12  altars,  .on  the  top  of  the  upper  chamber 
t  Ch.  28.  11  and  of  the  upper  chambers  thereof,  aud 
2  Ch.  3.   9  be  overlaid  the  upper  chambers  with 

2. Upper  chamber,  virepcoov  huperoon. 

Acts   9.  37  they  laid  (her)  in  an  upper  chamber 

9.  39  they  brought  him  into  the  upper  chamber 
20.    8  there  were  many  Hghts.  .upper  chamber 

CHAMBERING  — 

Place  for  lying,  couch,  koItu  koite. 

Rom  13. 13  Let  us  walk  honestly,  .not  in  chambering 
CHAMBERLAIN  — 
1. Eunuch,  officer,  Chd  saris. 

2  Ki.  23.  11  by  the  chamber  of.  .the  chamberlain 
Esth.  1.  10  the  seven  chamberlains  that  served  in 
1.  12  commandment  by  (his)  ehambez'lains 
1. 15  the  king  Ahasuerus  by  the  chamberlains? 


Esth.  2.  3  the  custody  of  Hege  the  king's  chamber. 
2.  14  to  the  custody  of .  .the  king's  chamber. 
2.  15  what. .the king'schamberlain. .appointed 
2.  21  two  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  Bigthau 
4.  4  Esther's  maids  and  her  chamberlains 
4.  5  Hatach,  (one)  of  the  king's  chamberlains 
6.    2  Bigthana.  .two  of  the  king's  chamberlains 

6.  14  came  the  king's  chamberlains,  and  hasted 

7.  9  Harbonah,  one  of  the  chamberlains,  said 

2.  One  over  tlie  couch,  ewi  kolt&vos  ejn  koitonos. 
Acts  12.  20  having  made  Blastus.  .king's  chamberlain 

3. House  ruler,  steward,  oIkovS/aos  oikonomos. 

Rom  16.  23  Erastus  the  chamberlain  of  the  city 
CHAMELEON  — 
Chameleon,  a  kind  of  lizard,  na  koach. 

Lev.  11.  30  the  chameleon,  aud  the  Hzard,  and  the 
CHAMOIS  — 
Giraffe  {the prunnca,)  "iDj  zemer. 

Deut  14.   5  pygarg,  and  the  wild  ox . .  and  the  chamois 
CHAMPAIGN  — 
Plain,  waste,  desert,  "?"$.  ardbdh. 

Deut  11.  30  dwell  in  the  champaign  over  against 
CHAMPION  — 
1. Mighty  one,  "112a  gibbor. 

1  Sa.  17.  51  when  the  Philistines  saw  their  champion 
2. A  mam  of  tlie  two,  a  champion,  DMzn-y'N. 

1  Sa.  17.    4  there  went  out  a  champion  out  of.  .camp 
17.  23  there  came  up  the  champion,  .out  of  the 
CHA-NA'-AN,  Xavadu,     See  Canaan. 

Acts    7. 11  came  a  dearth  over,  .the  land  of.  .C. 

13.  19  he.  .destroyed  seven  nations  in.  .C. 
CHANCE  — 

1. Chance,  accident,  rrrp"^  miqreh. 

1  Sa.    6.   9  it  (was)  a  chance  (that)  happened  to  us 
2.0ecurrence,  y??  pega. 

Eccl.  9.  11  but  time  and  chance  happeneth  to  them 

3.  Concurrence,  <rvyKvpla  suykuria. 

Lukeio.  31  by  chance  there  came  dowu  a  certain 
CHANCE,  to  — 
To  meet,  happen,  x~$  qara,  2. 

Deut  22.    6  If  a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be  before  thee 
CHANCE,  by  — 
To  meet,  N~»R  qara,  2. 

2  Sa.    1.    6  As  I  happened  by  chance  upon  mount 
CHANCE,  it  may  — 

If  it  may  be  so,  el  tu%o*  ei  tuchoi. 

1  Co.  15.  37  it  may  chance  of  wheat,  or  of  some  other 
CHANCELLOR  — 

Master  of  counsel,  taste,  reason,  cya  "?JJ2  beel  teem. 

Ezra  4.    8  Rehum  the  chancellor  and  Shimshai  the 

4.    9  Then  (wrote)  Rehum  the  chancellor,  and 

4.  17  sent.  .king,  .unto  Rehum  the  chancellor 
CHANGE  — 

l.A  change,  ri^ba  clialiphah. 

Gen.  45.  22  To  all.  .he  gave  each,  .changes  of  raiment 

45.  22  to  Benjamin  he  gave .  .five  changes  of 
Judgi4.  T2  I  will  give  you.  .thirty  change  of  garment 

14.  13  then  shall  ye  give  me.  .thirty  change  of 
14.  19  took  their  spoil,  and  gave  change  of  gar. 

2  Ki.   5.    5  and  took  with  him .  .ten  changes  of  raizn. 

5.  22  a  talent  of  silver,  and  two  changes  of 

5.  23  two  bags,  with  two  changes  of  garments 
Job    10.  17  changes  and  war  (are)  against  me 

14.  14  will  I  wait,  till  my  change  come 
Psa.  55. 19  Because  they  have  no  changes,  therefore 

2.Change,  exchange,  rniciji  temurah. 

Lev.  27.  33  it  and  the  change  thereof  shall  be  holy 
Z.A  change,  putting  after,  nerdOea-ts  metathesis. 

Heb.   7. 12  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  change  also 
CHANGE,  to  — 
l.To  change,  turn,  =150  haphak. 

Jer.    13.  23  Can  tlie  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or 
2.To  change,  ^n  chalaph. 

Isa.    24.    5  because  they . .  changed  the  ordinance 

Hab.   1.  11  Then  shall  (his)  znind  change,  andhe  shall 

3.  To  change,  13713  chalaph,  3. 

Gen.  41.  14  changed  his  raiment,  and  came  in  unto 
2  Sa.  12.  20  changed  his  apparel,  and  came  into  the 

4. 2*0  change,  ffy)  chalaph,  5. 

Gen.  31.    7  your  father  hath,  .changed  my  wages  ten 
31.  41  thou  hast  changed  my  wages  ten  times 
35.    2  be  clean,  and  change  your  garments 
Psa.102.  26  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  change  them,  and 
Isa.     9.  10  but  we  will  change  (them  into)  cedars 
5. To  change,  exchange,  no;  yamar,  5. 

Jer.    2. 11  hath  a  nation  changed  (their)  gods,  which 
6. To  change,  exchange,  "RD  mury  5. 

Lev.  27.  10  He  shall  not  alter  it,  nor  change  it,  a 
27.  10  if  he  shall  at  all  change  beast  for  beast 
27.  33  good  or  bad,  neither  shall  he  change  it 
27.  33  if  he  change  it  at  all,  then  both  it  aud 
Psa.  15.    4  (He  that)  sweareth..and  changeth  not 
106.  20  changed  their  glory  into  the  similitude 
Jer.     2.  11  my  people  have  changed  their  glory  for 
Hos.    4.    7  (therefore)  will  I  change  their  glory  into 
llic.    2.   4  he  hath  changed  the  portion  of  my  people 


CHANGE 


15-t 


CHARGE 


7.  To  change,  rebel,  rrj§  march,  5. 

Eze.     5.    6  she  hath  changed  my  judgments  into 

8.  To  put  round,  339  sabab,  5. 

2  Ki  24.  17  the  king  of  Babylon,  .changed  his  name 

9.  To  put,  place,  set,  □ifc'  sum. 

Job    17.  12  They  change  the  uightinto  day  :  the  light 

10.  To  double,  alter,  ttiy  shana,  3. 

2  Ki  25  29  And  changed  his  prison  garments 
ll.To  double,  alter,  hi?  shena,  5. 

Dau.   2  21  he  chaugeth  the  times  and  the  seasons 
7  25  and  think  to  change  times  and  laws 

12.  To  double,  alter,  HiV  shena,  3. 

Dau.    3  28  trusted  in  him,  aud  have  changed  the 
13.7^  be  changed,  n;y  shena,  4. 

Dan.    7  28  aud  my  countenance  changed  in  me 
I&.T0  change,  alter,  niw  shanah. 

Hal     3.    6  For  I  (am)  the  Loud,  I  change  not 

15.  To  change,  alter,  niy  shanah,  3. 

1  Sa  21  13  he  changed  his  behaviour  before  them 
Job    14.  20  thou  chaugest  his  countenance,  and 
Psa  34     1  title.  David,  when  he  changed  his 
Jer      2  36  Why  gaddest .  about  so  much  to  change 
52  33  changed  his  prison  garments  :  and  he 

16.  To  make  other,  alter,  aWarTuj  allattd. 

Acts    6  14  and  shall  change  the  customs  which  Mo. 
Rom    1  23  changed  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible 
1  Co.  15  si  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed 

15  52  In  a  moment,  .and  we  shall  be  changed 
Gal.     4  20  I  desire  to  be  present . .  and  to  change  my 
Heb    1  a  And  as  a  vesture .  .they  shall  be  changed 

17.  7*0  alter  afterward,  p-erawdrrw  metallatto. 
Rom.  r.  25  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 

1,  26  for  even  their  women  did  change  the 

IS.  To  make  of  another  form,  /ieTao'xv/J-a'r'l(w- 
Phil.   3.  21  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it 

19.  To  put  or  place  afterward,  p^rart97f/u. 

Heb.   7  12  the  priesthood  being  changed,  there  is 
CHANGE  one's  mind,  to  — 
To  cast  over,  turn  about,  fj.€Tafid\\u)  metaballo. 

Acts  28     6  they  changed  their  minds,  aud  said  that 
CHANGE,  to  be  gi?en  to  — 
To  alter,  change,  n$  shanah. 

Pro  v  24  21  meddle  not  with  them,  .given  to  change 
CHANGED,  to  be  — 
l.To  bz  turned,  Tjsn  haphak,  2. 

Lev.  13.  16  raw  flesh  turn  again,  and  be  changed 
2. 7*0  change,  be  changed,  f]Sn  chalaph,  1,  5. 

Psa  102.  26  change  them,  and  they  shall  be  changed 

3.  To  disguise  oneself,  bjn  chaphas,  7. 

Job  30.  i8  By .  .(my  disease)  is  my  garment  changed 

4.  To  be  changed,  "fin  mur. 

Jer.  48.  11  his  taste .  .and  his  scent  is  not  changed 
5  To  be  caused  to  turn  round,  anp  sabab,  6. 

Nuni32.  38  Baal-meon,  their  names  being  changed 

6.  To  be  changed,  altered,  n$  shana. 

Lam.  4.    1  (how)  is  the  most  fine  gold  changed  !  the 

7.  To  be  changed,  altered,  tt$  shana,  4. 

Eccl,  8.    1  the  boldness  of  his  face  shall  be  changed 

8.  To  be  changed,  altered,  xiy  shena. 

Dau.   3.  27  neither  were  their  coats  changed,  nor  the 
5     6  the  king's  countenance  was  changed 

5.  9  his  countenance  was  changed  in  him 

6.  17  that  the  purpose  might  not  be  changed 
9. To  be  changed,  altered,  tt$  shena,  3. 

Dan.   4  16  Let  his  heart  be*  changed  from  man  s 

10.  To  be  changed,  altered,  xw  shena. 

Dau    2.   9  before  me,  till  the  time  be  changed 
3.  19  the  form  of  his  visage  was  changed 

5.  10  nor  let  thy  countenance  be  changed 

11.  To  change,  alter,  ttiy  shena,  5. 

Dan.    6.    8  sign  the  writing,  that  it  be  not  changed 

6.  15  no  decree  nor  statute.. may  be  changed 

12.  To  change  one's  form,  fi€Tafxoprf>6oiJ.at. 

2  Co.  3.  18  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory 
CHANGER  (of  money],  »hanging  — 
A  small  coin  dealer,  KoWoQiarys  kollubistes. 

John  2.  15  poured  out  the  changers' money,  and  over. 
Money-changer, KepfiartaT-fis kerniatistes,  Jo.  2. 14. 
.1  change,  exchange,  .T^DB  temurah. 

Ruth  4.    7  concerning  redeeming,  and.. changing 
CHANNEL  — 
l.Caviiy,  p'sx  aphiq. 

2  Sa.  22. 16  And  the  channels  of  the  sea  appeared 

Psa.  18.  15  Then  the  channels  of  waters  were  seen 

Isa.     8.    7  he  shall  come  up  over  all  his  channels 
%Flood,  stream,  rtya$  shibboleth. 

Isa.   27.  12  the  Lord  shall  beat  off  from  the  channel 
CHANT,  to  — 
To  part,  separate,  sing  aloud,  tt"i9  parat. 

Amos  6.    5  That  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol 
CHAPEL— 
Sanctuary,  Jioly place,  r^p  miqdash. 

Amos  7   ij  at  Bethel    for  it  (15)  the  king's  chapel 


CHAPITER  — 

I. Crown,  rrvo  kothereth. 

1  Ki.  7.  16  he  made  two  chapiters  (of)  molten  brass 

7.  16  the  height  of  the  one  chapiter  (was)  five 
7.  16  the  height  of  the  other  chapiter  (was)  five 
7.  17  the  chapiters  which  (were)  upon  the  top 
7  17  the  one  chapiter,  .for  the  other  chapiter 
7.  18  one  net  work,  to  cover  the  chapiters  that 
7.  18  and  so  did  he  for  the  other  chapiter 
7.  19  the  chapiters  that  (were)  upon  the  top 
7  20  And  the  chapiters  upon  the  two  pillars 
7  20  rows  round  about  upon  the.  .chapiter 
7.  21  the  mouth  of  it  within  the  chapiter 
7.  41  aud  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 
7.  41  to  cover  the  (two)  bowls  of  the  chapiters 
7.  42  to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 

2  Ki.25  17  and  the  chapiter  upon  it  (was)  brass 

25.  17  the  height  of  the  chapiter  three  cubits 
25  17  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiter 
2  Ch.  4  12  the  chapiters  (which  were)  on  the  top  of 
4  12  cover  the  two  pommels  of  the  chapiters 
4. 13  cover  the  two  pommels  of  the  chapiters 
Jer.  52  22  a  chapiter  of  brass  (was)  upou  it ;  and 
52  22  the  height  of  one  chapiter  (was)  five  cub. 
52.  22  aud  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiters 
I.Capital,  ns*  isepheth. 

2  Ch.  3.  15  the  chapiter  that  (was)  on  the  top  of  each 
Z.Head,  top,  vuh  rosh. 

Exod36.  38  he  overlaid  their  chapiters,  .with  gold 
38.  17  the  overlaying  of  their  chapiters  (of)  ail. 
38.  19  the  overlaying  of  their  chapiters,  .(of)  sil. 
38.  28  overlaid  their  chapiters,  aud  filleted 
CHAPMAN  — 
A  travelling  merchant,  T§  aha*  enosh  tar. 

2  Ch.  9. 14  Besides  (that  which)  chapmen  aud  nierch. 
CHAPT,  to  be  — 
To  be  brought  dozen,  nnn  chathath. 

Jer.  14.   4  the  ground  is  chapt,  for  there  was  no  rain 

CHA-RA'-SHIM,  D'-tfhn  craftsmen. 
A  place  founded  by  Joab,  a  man  of  Judah  and  of  the 
family  of  Othniel,  and  reinhabited  by  Benjamites  after 
the  exile.  It  was  at  the  back  of  the  plain  of  Sharon, 
E.  of  Jaffa.  The  valley  of  Charashim  consisted  of  Lod 
and  Ono. 

1  Ch.  4.  14  Joab,  the  father  of  the  valley  of  C. 

Neh.  11.  35  Lod,  and  Ono,  the  valley  of  Craftsmen 

CHARGE  — 
X.Hand,  t  yad. 

Num3i.  49  men  of  war  which  (are)  under  our  charge 
2.  Charge,  thing  to  be  watched,  niipys  mishmercth. 
Gen.  26.    5  obeyed  my  voice,  and  kept  my  dharge 
Lev.    8.  35  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  die 
Num.  1.  53  keep  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  test. 
3.    7  shall  keep  his  charge,  and  the  charge  of 
3.    8  they  shall  keep . .  the  charge  ofthe  children 
3.  25  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  Gershon  in  the 
3.  28  keeping  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 
3.  31  their  charge  (shall  be)  the  ark,  and  the 
3.  32  that  keep  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 
3.  36  (under)  the  custody  and  charge  of  the  sons 
3.  38  Aaron  and  his  sons,  keeping  the  charge 

3.  38  for  the  charge  of  the  children  of  Israel 

4.  27  appoint  unto  them  in  charge  all  their 

4.  28  their  charge  (shall  be)  under  the  hand  of 
4.  31  And  this  (is)  the  charge  of  their  burden 
4.  32  reckon  the  instruments  of  the  charge  of 
8.  26  to  keep  the  charge,  and  shall  do  no  serv. 
8.  26  do  unto  the  Levites  touching  their  charge 


9- 
9- 

18. 

18. 


31 
3i- 

Deut  11. 

Josh.  22. 

1  Ki.    2. 

iCh.  9. 
=3- 


19  the  children  of  Israel  kept  the  chart 
23  they  kept  the  charge  of  the  LORD,  at  the 

3  they  shall  keep  thy  charge,  and  the  charge 

4  keep  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

5  keep  the  charge  of.  .and  the  charge  of 
8  I  also  have'given  thee  the  charge  of 

30  which  keep  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle 
47  which  kept  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle 
1  keep  his  charge,  and  his  statutes,  and 
3  have  kept,  .charge  of  the  commandment 
3  And  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
7  because  the  charge  (was)  upon  them,  and 
32  And  that  they  should  keep  the  charge  of 
23.  32  and  the  charge  of. .  aud  the  charge  of 
2  Ch.    8.  14  he  appointed . .  Levites  to  their  charges 
13. 11  for  we  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  our 
31.  16  iu  their  charges  according  to  their  courses 
31.  17  in  their  charges  by  their  courses 
35.   2  And  he  set  the  priests  in  their  charges 
Eze.  40.  45  the  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  house 
40.  46  the  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  altar 
44.    8  ye  have  not  kept  the  charge  of  mine  holy 
44.    8  ye  have  set  keepers  of  my  charge  iu 
44.  14  I  will  make  them  keepers  of  the  charge  of 
44.  15  kept  the  charge  of  my  sanctuary  when 
44.  16  and  they  shall  keep  my  charge 
48.  n  which  have  kept  my  charge,  which  went 
Zech.  3.    7  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  my  charge,  then 

3.  Judgment,  us:?'-'?  mishpat. 

1  Ki,    4.  28  every  man  according  to  his  charge 

4.  Burden,  *?30  sebel. 

1  Ki.  11.  28  he  made  him  ruler  over  all  the  charge  of 
5. Oversight,  iisra  pequddah. 

Eze.  44.  11  (having)  charge  at  the  gates  of  the  house 
6.  Provision!  supplies,  btyvviov  opsdnion. 

1  Cor.  9.    7  Whogoeth  a  warfare   athis  own  charges 


7. Private  or  extra  message,  7rapayye\la para<Jgelia. 
Acts  16.  24  Who,  having  received  such  a  charge 

1  Ti.    1.  i3  This  charge  I  commit  unto  thee,  sou  Tim 
CHARGE,  to  — 

l.To  say,  nox  amar. 

Neh.  13.  19  and  charged  that  they  should  not  be 

2.  To  give,  ]0j  nathan. 

Neh.  10.  32  to  charge  ourselves  yearly  with  the  third 
Job     1.  22  Job  siuued  not,  nor  charged  God  foolishly 

3.  To  give  a  testimony,  "uy  ud,  5. 

Exodig.  21  Lord  said.  .Go  down,  charge  the  people 
19.  23  thou_chargedst  us,  saying,  Set  bounds 

4.  To  give  an  oversight,  nps  paqad. 

Gen.  40.    4  And  the  captain  of  the  guard  charged 

2  Sa.  3.  8  that  thou  chargest  me  to-day  with  a  fault 
2  Ch.  36.  23  he  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house 
Ezra    1.    2  he  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  au  house 

5.  To  command,  charge,  nvs  tsavah,  3. 

Gen.  26.  n  Abimelech  charged  all  (his)  people,  saying 
28.    1  blessed  him,  and  charged  him,  and  said 
49.  29  he  charged  them,  and  said  unto  them 
Exod  1.  22  Pharaoh  charged  all  his  people,  saying 
Deut.  1.  16  I  charged  your  judges  at  that  time,  say. 

3.  28  But  charge  Joshua,  and  encourage  him 
27. 11  Moses  charged  the  people  the  same  day 

Josh  iS.  8  Joshua  charged  them.. went  to  describe 
Ruth  2.  9  have  I  not  charged  the  young  men  that 
2  Sa.  11.  19  And  charged  the  messenger,  saying 

18.  12  for  iu  our  hearing  the  king  charged  thee 

1  Ki    2.    1  aud  he  charged  Solomon  his  son,  saying 

2.  43  the  commandment  that  I  have  charged 
13.    9  so  was  it  charged  me  by  the  word  of  the 

2  Ki.  17.  15  (concerning)  whom  the  Lord  had  charged 

1  Ch.  22.    6  charged  him  to  build  an  house  for  the 

22. 13  which  the  Lord  charged  Moses  with 

2  Ch.  19.  9  he  charged  them,  saying,  Thus  shall  ye' 
Esth.  2.  10  Mordecaihad  charged  her  that  shesbould 

2.  20  her  kindred,  .as  Mordecai  had  charged 

4.  8  to  charge  her  that  she  should  go  in  unto 
Jer.  32.  13  Aud  I  charged  Baruch  before  them,  say. 

35.    8  all  that  he  hath  charged  us,  to  drink  no 

6 .To put,  place,  die*  sum. 

Job     4,  18  and  his  angels  he  charged  with  folly 

7.  To  cause  to  swear,  yiy  shaba,  5. 

Song    2.    7  I  charge  you,  O  ye  daughters  of  Jerusa. 

3.  S  I  charge  you,  0  ye  daughters  of  .Jerusa. 

5.  8  I  charge  you,  0  daughters  of  Jerusalem 

5.  9  thy  beloved,  .that  thou  dost  so  charge  us? 
8.   4  I  charge  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem 

8.  To  testify  thoroughly,  Btafxaprvpo  pat  diamartvro. 

1  Ti.    5.  21  I  charge  (thee)  before  God,  and  the  Lord 

2  Ti.    2.  14  charging  (them)  before  the  Lord  that  they 

4.  1  I  charge  (thee),  .before  God,  and  the  Lord 

9. To  charge  thoroughly,  SiacrcWouai  diastellomai. 
Matt  16.  20  Then  [charged]  he  his  disciples  that  they 
Mark  5.  43  he  charged  them  straitly  that  no  man 

7.  36  he  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no 

7.  36  the  more  he  charged  them,  so  much  the 

8.  15  he  charged  them,  saying,  Take  heed 

9.  9  he  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no 

10.  To  charge,  arrange  about,  iirtrdo-o-cc  epitasso. 
Mark  9.  25  I  charge  thee,  come  out  of  him,  and 

11.  To  put  weight  upon,  ifrtripdu)  epitimao. 

Matt  12. 16  charged  them  that  they  should  not  make 
Mark  3.  12  charged  them  that  they  should  not  make 
8.  30  he  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  uo 
10.  48  charged" him  that  he  should  hold  his 
12. To  give  in  charge,  €vr4\\o/j.at  entellomai. 
Matt  17.    9  Jesus  charged  them,  saying,  Tell  the 

13.  To  testify,  paprvpeopai  martvreomai. 

1    Th.  2.  11  comforted  and  [charged]  every  one  of  yon 

14.  To  adjure,  bpttlfa  horkizo. 

1  Th.  5.  27  I  [charge],  .by  the  Lord  that  this  epistle 

15.  To  tell  apart,  beside,  irapayy  4  Wa>  pa  ray  gelid, 
Luke    5. 14  he  charged  him  to  tell  no  man :  but  go 

8.  56  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no 
Acts  16.  23  charging  the  jailor  to  keep  them  safely 

23.  22  aud  charged,  .tell  no  man  that  than  hast 
1  Ti.    1.    3  that  thou  mightest  charge  some  that  they 

6.  17  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world 

CHARGE  straitly,  to  — 

l.To  charge  strictly,  cfi$piudouai  embm'maomai. 
Matt.  9.  30  aud  Jesus  straitly  charged  them,  saying 
Mark  1.  43  he  straitly  charged  him,  aud  forthwith 

2. To  put  a  weight  upon,  iiriripdw  epitimao. 

Luke  9.  21  straitly  charged  them,  and  commanded 

CHARGE,  without,  to  be  at  — 

1.  Without  expense,  aSdiravos  adapanos. 

1  Co.   9. 18  I  may  make  the  gospel,  .without  charge 

2.  To  spend,  Bairat/du)  dapanao. 

Acts  21.  24  be  at  charges  with  them,  that  they  may 

CHARGE,  to  appoint  to  have  the  — 
To  give  the  oversight,  ~p?  par/ad,  5. 

9  K  i.  7.17  appointed  the  lord . .  to  have  the  charge  of 

CHARGE,  to  give  (a)  — 

l.To  give  an  oversight,  ~p?  paqad. 

Job    34.  13  Who  hath  given  him  a  charge  over  the 


CHARGE 


155 


CHARMER 


2.7*o  command,  rrj¥  tsavah,  3. 

Gen.  28.  6  as  "he  blessed  him,  he  gave  him  a  charge 
Exod.  6.  13  gave  them  a  charge  unto  the  children  of 
Kum27.  19  and  gave  him  a  charge  in  their  sight 

27.  23  gave  him  a  charge  ;  as  the  Lord  command. 
Deut3i.i4  call  Joshua.,  that  I  may  give  him  a  charge 

31.23  he  gave  Joshua  the  son  of  Xun  a  charge 

1  Ch.22. 12  and  give  the  charge  concerning  Israel 

2  Sa.  14.    8  Go  to  thine  house,  and  I  will  give  charge 

18.  5  when  the  kinggave  all  the  captains  charge 
Keh.  7:  2  gave  my  brother,  .charge  over  Jerusalem 
Psa.  91.  11  For  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over 
Isa.  10.  6  against  the  people.. I  give  him  a  charge 
Jer.  39.  11  Nebuchadrezzar.. gave  charge  concern. 
47.  7  the  Lord  hath  given  it  a  charge  against 
3. To  give  charge,  eVTeAAo,ucu  entellomai. 

Matt.  4.  6  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concern. 
Luke  4.  10  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee 

4.  To  tell  apart,  beside,  irapayyeWa  paraggelld. 
i  Ti.   6. 13  I  give  thee  charge  in  the  sight  of  God 

CHARGE,  to  give  in  — 

To  tell  beside,  announce,  wapzyy  tWco  paraggelld. 

1  Ti.    5     7  And  these  things  give  iu  charge,  that 
CHARGE  of  or  over,  to  have  the  — 
l.To  be  over,  eiul  kwi  einii  epi. 

Acts    8  27  who  had  the  charge  of  all  her  treasure 
2.0n,  upon;  over,  Sy  al. 

1  Ch,  9  23  And  (certain)  of  them  had  the  charge  of 
S.Insjjectors,  rrni??  pequddoth. 

Eze.    9    1  Cause  them  that  have  charge  over  the 
LInsptector,  overseer,  i-pBpaqid. 

Jer    52.  25  which  had  the  charge  of  the  men  of  war 
CHARGE,  (to)  lay  to  one's  — 
l.To  give  in  the  heart  of,  3"ij23  \ni  nathan  beqereb. 

Deut  2i,    8  lay  nut . ,  unto  thy  people  of  Israel's  charge 

2.  To  ask,  demand,  ^ns*  shaal. 

Psa.    35.  ii  they  laid  to  my  charge,  .that  I  knew  not 

3.  To  call  in  against,  4yKa\4<a  Kara  egkaleo  kata. 
Rom    8  33  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of 

i.A  calling  in  {to  court),  charge,  eynKwfxa  egklema. 

Acts  23.  29  to  have  nothing  laid  .to  Iris  charge  worthy 
5. To  set,  2A0.ce,  r{<jT7}/j.i  histemi. 

Acts  7.  60  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge 
6.7*0  reckon,  Koyi^ofiat  logizomai. 

?.  Ti     4.  16  it  may  not  be  laid  to  their  charge 
CHARGE  by  or  with  an  oath,  to  — 
To  cause  to  swear,  y^p?  shaba,  5. 

Num.  5.  19  the  priest  shall  charge  her  by  an  oath 

5.  21  priest  shall  charge  the  woman  with  an  c. 

1  Sa  i*  27  father  charged  the  people  with  the  oath 

14,  28  straitly  charged  the  people  with  an  oath 

CHARGEABLE  (to),  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  heavy,  ina  kdbed\ 

2  Sa  13.  25  lest  we  be  chargeable  unto  thee 
2.7*0  make  heavy,  152  kabed,  5. 

Neh.   5  15  the  former  governors.. were  chargeable 
3.7*o  put  a  burden  upon,  4-nt&ap€n>  epibared. 

2  Til.  3     8  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any 
4.7*0  become  torpid  or  heavy  against,  K0.T0.vapK6.ai. 

2  Co- 11     9  when  I  was  present.  .1  was  chargeable  to 
CHARGEABLE  unto,  to  be  - 
To  put  a  burden  or  weight  upon,  i-Ki&apio). 

1  Th.  2.    9  we  would  not  be  chargeable  unto  any  of 
CHARGED,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  command,  nvf  tsavah,  3. 

1  Ki.  13.    9  For  so  was  it  charged  me  by  the  word  of 
2. To  be  weighed  down,  burdened,  {Sapionai. 

1  Ti.    5.  16  let  not  the  church  be  charged  ;  that  it 
CHARGER  — 
l.Dtsk,  irji'j?  qearah. 

Num.  7.  13  And  his  offering  (was)  one  silver  charger 
So  in  v.  19  25,  31,  37,  43.  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 
7.  84  twelve  chargers  of  silver,  twelve  silver 
7.  85  Each  charger  of  silver  (weighing)  an 
%WbotZen  trencher,  iriva£ pinaXi 

Matt  14.    8  Give.  .John  Baptist's  head  in  a  charger 
14.  11  his  head  was  brought  in  a  charger,  and 

Mark  6.  25  I  will  that  thou  give  me.  .iu  a  charger 

6.  28  brought  his  head  in  a  charger,  and  gave 
CHARGERS  — 

Bason,  bowl,  ^?"]3R  agartal. 

Ezra    1.    9  thirty  chargers  of  gold,  a  thousand  char. 
CHARIOT  — 
\. Couch,  sofa,  i'visn  appiryon. 

Song  3.    9  King  Solomon  made  himself  a  chariot  of 
2.  War  chariot,  \\n.  hotsen. 

Eze.  23.  24  shall  come  against  thee  with  chariots 
3. Riding  chariot,  3310  merkob. 

1  Ki.  4.  26  thousaud  "stalls  of  horses  for  his  chariots 

4.  Ruling  chariot,  i"03"i?  merkabah. 

Gen.  41.  43  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  chariot 

46.  29  Joseph  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  went 

Exod.14.  25  took  off  their  chariot  wheels,  that  they 


Exod  15    4  Pharaoh's  chariots,  .hath  he  cast  into  the 
Josh. ii     6  thou  shalt.  .bum  their  chariots  with  hie 

11     9  and  burnt  their  chariots  with  lire 
Judg.  4.  15  Sisera  lighted  down  off  (his;  chariot 
5.  28  why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  chariots? 

1  Sa.   8  11  appoint  (them)  for  himself,  for.  .chariots 

8.  11  and  (some)  shall  run  before  his  chariots 

2  Sa  15    1  Absalom  prepared  him  chariots  and 

1  Ki    7.  33  like  the  work  of  a  chariot  wheel 

10  29  a  chariot  came  up  and  went  out  of  Egypt 
12. 18  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to  his  chariot 
20.  33  he  caused  hiai  to  come  up  into.. chariot 

22.  35  the  king  was  stayed  up  in  his  chariot 

2  Ki.   5  21  he  lighted  down  from  the  chariot  to 

5.  26  the  man  turned  again  from  his  chariot  to 

9.  27  Jehu,  .said,  Smite  him  also  in  the  chariot 
10.  15  he  took  him  up  to  him  into  the  chariot 

23.  11  burned  the  chariots  of  the  sun  with  fire 

1  Ch. 28  18  gold  for  the  pattern  of  the  chariot  of  the 

2  Ch.  1.  17  brought  forth  out  of  Egypt  a  chariot 

9.  25  thousaud  stalls  for  horses  and  chariots 
10.  18  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to  (his)  chariot 
14.    9  with  an  host  of .  .three  hundred  chariots 
18.  34  king,  .stayed  (himself)  up  in  (his)  chariot 
35.  24  servants,  .took  him  out  of  that  chariot 
Song  6.  12  my  soul  made  me  (like)  the  chariots  of  A. 
Isa.     2.    7  neither  (is  there  any),  .of  their  chariots 
22.  iS  the  chariots  of  thy  glory  (shall  be)  the 
66.  15  and  with  his  chariots  like  a  whirlwind 
Jer.     4  13  his  chariots  (shall  be)  as  a  whirlwind 
Joel    2.    5  Like  the  noise  of  chariots  on  the  tops  of 
Mic.    1.  13  bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast 

5. 10  I  will  cut  off..  I  will  destroy  thy  chariots 
Nah.  3.  2  rjraucing  horses,  and.  .jumping  chariots 
Hab.  3.  8  ride  upon  thine  horses  (and)  thy  chariots 
Hag.  2.  22  I  will  overthrow  the  chariots,  and  those 
Zech.  6.    1  therecamefourchariotsoutfrombetweeu 

6.  2  In  the  first  chariot  (were)  red  horses 

6.  2  and  iu  the  second  chariot  black  horses 
6.  3  And  in  the  third  chariot  white  horses 
6.  3  and  In  the  fourth  chariot  grisled  aud  bay 

5.  Waggon,  cart,  rhp_agalah. 

Psa.  46.   9  he  burnetii  the  chariot  in  the  Are 

^.Chariot,  22~\  rekeb. 

Gen.  50.    9"  there  went  up  with  him  both  chariots 
Exod.14.  6  he  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  took  his 
14.    7  he  took  six  hundred  chosen  chariots 
14.    7  all  the  chariots  of  Egypt,  and  captaius 
14.    9  all  the  horses  (and)  chariots  of  Pharaoh 
14.  17  upon  all  his  host,  upon  his  chariots,  and 

14. 18  upon  his  chariots,  and  upon  his  horsemen 
14.  23  Pharaoh's  horses,  his  chariots,  and  his 
14.  26  their  chariots,  and  upon  their  horsemen 
14.  28  covered  the  chariots,  and  the  horsemen 

15. 19  horse  of  Pharaoh  went  in  with  his  chariots 
Deut  11.    4  unto  their  horses,  and  to  their  chariots 

20.    1  and  seest  horses  and  chariots,  (aud)  a 
Josh.  11.    4  much  people,  .with  horses  and  chariots 
17.  16  the  Cauaanites.  .have  chariots  of  iron 
17.  iS  though  they  have  iron  chariots,  (and) 

24.  6  pursued  after  your  fathers  with  chariots 
Judg.  1.  19  because  they  had  chariots  of  iron 

4.    3  he  had  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron 
4.    7  with  his  chariots,  and  his  multitude 
4.  13  Sisera  gathered  together  all  his  chariots 

4.  13  nine  huudred  chariots  of  iron,  and  all 

4. 15  discomfited  Sisera,  and  all  (his)  chariots 

4. 16  Barak  pursued  after  the  chariots,  and 

5.  28  Why  is  his  chariot  (so)  long  in  coming? 

1  Sa.    8.  12  to  make,  .instruments  of  his  chariots 

13.    5  thirty  thousand  chariots,  and  six  thous. 

2  Sa.    1.   6  chariots  and  horsemen  followed  hard 

8.   4  and  David  houghed  all  the  chariot  (horses) 

8.  4  reserved  of  them  (for)  an  hundred  chariots 
10. 18  slew  (the  men  of)  seven  hundred  chariots 

1  Ki.    1.    5  he  prepared  him  chariots  and  horsemen 

9.  19  cities  for  his  chariots,  and  cities  for  his 
9.  22  his  captains,  and  rulers  of  his  chariots 

10.  26  Solomon  gathered  together  chariots 
10.  26  a  thousaud  and  four  hundred  chariots 
10.  26  he  bestowed  in  the  cities  for  chariots 
16.   9  servant  Zimri,  captain  of.  .(his)  chariots 
20.    1  and. .with  him.  .horses  and  chariots 
20.  21  smote  the  horses  and  chariots,  and  slew 
20.  25  horse  for  horse,  and  chariot  for  chariot 
22.  31  captains,  that  had  rule  over  his  chariots 
22.  32  captains  of  the  chariot  saw  Jehoshapliat 
22.  33  the  captains  of  the  chariots  perceived 
22.  35  and  the  king  was  stayed  in  his  chariot 
22.  38  washed  the  chariot  in  the  pool  of  Samar. 

2  Ki.  2. 11  a  chariot  of  fire,  and  horses  of  fire,  parted 

2. 12  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen 

5.  9  Naaman  came  with,  .his  chariot,  and 

6.  14  Therefore  sent  he.  .horses,  and  chariots 

6.  15  host  compassed  the  city.. with,  .chariots 

6. 17  mountain  (was)  full  of  horses  and  chariots 

7.  6  a  noise  of  chariots,  and  a  noise  of  horses 

7.  14  They  took  therefore  two  chariot  horses 

8.  21  Joram  went  over,  .and  all  the  chariots 

8.  21  compassed,  the  captains  of  the  chariots 

9.  21  And  his  chariot  was  made  ready.    And 
9.  21  each  iu  his  chariot,  and  they  went  out 

9.  24  Jehoram.  .and  he  sunk  down  in  his  chariot 
10.    2  (there  are)  with  you  chariots  and  horses 
10.  16  So  they  made  him  ride  in  his  chariot 
13.    7  ten  chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen 
13.  14  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen 
iS.  24  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for  chariots  and 
iq.  23  With  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  I  am 
1  Ch  i3.   *  David  took  from  him  a  thousaud  chariots 


1  Ch.  18.    4  David  also  houghed  all  the  <.  hariot  (horses) 

18.  4  but  reserved  of  them  an  hundred  chariots 

19.  6  to  hire  them  chariots  and  horsemen  out 
19.  7  hired  thirty  and  two  thousand  chariots 
19.  ifi.seveu  thousand  tmen  w hich  fought  hi) cha. 

2  Ch.  1.  14  Solomon  gathtrtd  chariots  and  horsemen 

1.  14  a  thousaud  and  four  hundred  chariots 

1.  14  which  he  placed  in  the  chariot  cities,  and 
8.    6  all  the  chariot  cities,  and  the  cities  of  the 

8.  9  captains  of  his  chariots  and  horsemen 

9.  25  he  bestowed  in  the  chariot  cities,  and 

12.  3  With  twelve  hundred  chariots,  and  three. 
16.    8  a  huge  host,  with  very  many  chariots  and 
18.  30  commanded  the  captains  of  the  chariots 
18.  31  the  captains  of  the  chariot  saw  Jehosh. 
18.  32  when  the  captains  of  the  chariots  per. 
21.    9  Jehoram  went  forth,  .and  all  his  chariots 
21.   9  whichcompassed . .  captains  of  the  chariots 

35.  24  and  put  him  in  the  second  chariot  that 
Psa.  20.    7  Some  (trust)  in  chariots,  and  some  in  ho. 

68.  17  The  chariots  of  God  (are)  twenty  thousand 

76.    6  the  chariot  and  the  horse  are  cast  into 

Song  1.9  a  company  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's  chariots 

Isa.   21.    7  saw  a  chariot  (with)  a  couple  of  horsemen 

21.    7  a  chariot  of  asses,  (and)  a  chariot  of  cam. 

21.  9  behold,  here  ccmeth  a  chariot  of  men 

22.  6  Elam  bare  the  quiver  with  chariots  of 
22.    7  choicest  valleys  shall  be  full  of  chariots 
31.    1  and  stay  on  horses,  and  trust  in  chariots 

36.  9  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for  chariots  and 

37.  24  By  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  am  I 
43. 17  bringeth  forth  the  chariot  aud  horse 
66.  20  in  chariots,  and  in  litters,  and  upon 

Jer.     17.  25  riding  in  chariots,  and  on  horses,  they 
22.    4  kings.. riding  iu  chariots  and  on  horses 

46.  9  Come  up,  ye  horses ;  and  rage,  ye  chariots 

47.  3  at  the  rushing  of  his  chariots,  .the  rumb. 

50.  37  A  sword  (is)  upon,  .their  chariots,  and 

51.  21  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  chariot  and  his 
Eze.    26.    7  with  horses,  and  with  chariots,  ar.d  with 

26.  10  and  of  the  wheels,  and  of  the  chariots 
39.  20  Thus  ye  shall  be  filled,  .with,  .chariots 
Dan.  11.  40  like  a  whirlwind,  with  chariots,  and 
Kah.    2.    3  chariots  (shall  be)  with  flaming  torches 

2.  4  The  chariots  shall  rage  in  the  streets 
2.  13  I  will  burn  her  chariots  in  the  smoke 

Zech.   9.  10  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  freni  Ephraini 

7. Riding,  driving,  n2?i  rikbah. 

Eze.  27.  20  Dedan  (was)  thy  merchant,  .for  chariots 
S.CJiariot,  2W"i  rehab. 

Psa  104.    3  who  maketh  the  clouds  his  chariot :  who 

9.  War  chariot  (with  two  wheels),  ap^a  Karma. 

Acts  8.  28  sitting  in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  pro. 
8.  2g  Go  near,  and  join  thyself  to  this  chariot 
8.  38  he  commanded  the  chariot  to  stand  still 

Rev.    9.    9  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses 

10.  Travelling  waggon  (with f our  iclieels),  ficdarheda. 
Rev.  18.  13  sheep,  and  horses,  And  chariots,  and  slaves 

CHARIOT  (man),  driver  of  — 
Rider,  driver,  23~i  rakkab. 

1  Ki.22.  34  he  said  unto  the  driver  of  his  chariot 

2  Ch.18.  33  he  said  to  the  chariot  man,  Turn  thine 

CHARITABLY  — 

According  to  love,  Kara,  ayd-mjy  kata  agapen. 

Rom  14. 15  now  walkest  thou  not  charitably 
CHARITY  — 
Love,  aydirr}  agape. 

1  Co.  8.    1  Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edi. 
13.    1  the  tongues  of  men . .  and  have  not  charity 

13.  2  I  have  all  faith,  .and  have  not  charity 
13.  3  though  I  give  my  body,  .and  have  not  ch. 
13.  4  Charity  suffereth .  .(and  is)  kind  ;  charity 
13.  4  charity  envieth  not :  charity  vaunteth  not 
13.  S  Charity  never  faileth:  but  whether  (there) 
13.  13  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity 

13.  13  but  the  greatest  of  these  (is)  charity 

14.  1  Follow  after  charity,  and  desire  spiritual 
16.  14  Let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity 

Col.    3. 14  above  all  these  things  (put  ou)  charity 

1  Th.  3.    6  good  tidings  of  your  faith  and  charity 

2  Th,  1.    3  and  the  charity  of  every  one  of  you  all 

1  Ti.    1.    5  the  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity 

2. 15  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  charity  and 
4. 12  in  word,  in  conversation,  in  charity,  in 

2  Ti.   2.  22  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace 

3.  10  purpose,  faith,  loDg-suffering,  charity 
Titus  2.    2  sound  in  faith,  in  charity,  in  patience 

1  Pe.  4.    8  And  above  all  things  have  fervent  charity 

4.  8  for  charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of 

5.  14  Greet  ye  one.  .with  a  kiss  of  charity 

2  Pe.   1.    7  and  to  brotherly  kindness  charity 

3  Jo.         6  Which  have  borne  witness  of  thy  charity 
Rev.    2.  19  I  know  thy  works,  and  charity,  amlserv. 

CHARITY,  feast  of  — 
Love,  ayd-TTT}  agape. 

Jude       12  These  are  spots  in  your  feasts  of  charity 
CHARMED  — 
A  charm,  &t?  laehash. 

Jer.     8. 17  which  (will)  not  (be)  charmed,  and  they 
CHARMER  — 

1.  Gentle  ones,  jugglers,  cbn  iitim. 

Isa.   19.    3  seek  to  the  idols,  and  to  the  charmers 

2.  To  join  a  joining,  fascinateymqr,  i^n  chabar  cheber. 
Deut  18.  11  Ora  charmer,  or  a  consulter  with  familiar 


CHARMING 


156 


CHERAN 


Z.To  charm,  i^nS  lachash,  3. 

Psa.  58.    5  will  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  charmers 

CHARMING  — 

To  join  a  joining,  lin  1311  chabar  cheber. 

Psa.  58.    s  the  voice  of  charmers,  charming  never  so 

CHAR'-RAN,  Xapp'dv.     See  Haran. 

Acts    7.    2  uuto.  .Abraham,  .before  he  dwelt  in  C. 

7.  4  Then  came  he  out.  .and  dwelt  iu  C. 

CHASE,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  flee,  rn2  barach,  5. 

Neh.  13.  28  therefore  I  chased  him  from  me 

2.  To  drive  away,  nm  daehah. 

P3a   35    5  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Loud  chase  (them) 

3.  To  burn,  2^'sue,  p^  dalaq. 

1  Sa  17  53  children  of  Israel  returned  from  chasing 

4.  To  hunt,  T«  tsud. 

Lam    3  52  Miue  enemies  chased  me  sore,  like  a  bird 

S.To  pursue,  follow  after,  fp-j  radaph. 

Lev  26.    7  ye  shall  chase  your  enemies,  and  they 
26.    8  live  of  you  shall  chase  an  hundred,  and 
26.  36  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase  them 

Deut  1 .  44  Amorites . .  came  out  against  you . .  chased 
3->.  30  How  should  one  chase  a  thousand,  and 

Josh.  7.    s  they  chased  them  (from)  before  the  gate 

8.  24  in  the  wilderness  wherein  they  chased 
10  10  chased  them  along  the  way  that  goeth  up 

11.  8  and  chased  them  unto  great  Zidon.  ami 
23.  10  One  man  of  you  shall  chase  a  thousand 

Judg  9.  40  Abimeleeh  chased  him, aud  he  fled  before 

6. 7*-;  (cause  to)  pursue,  *\t\  radaph,  5. 

Judg  20,  43  inclosed  ths  Benjamites. .  chased  them 
CHA.SE  away,  to  — 
To  cause  to  /fee,  n-ii  b%rach,  5. 

Prov  19.  25  wasteth  (his)  father,  (aud)  chaseth  away 
CHASED  — 
To  bs  forced  away,  rni  nadach,   6. 

Isa.   13  14  it  shall  be  as  the  chased  roe,  and  as  a  sheep 
■CHASED,  to  be  — 
l.To  cause  to  move  away,  ~m  nadad,  5. 

Job    iS.  18  He  shall  be.  .chased  out  of  the  world 
2.  To  be  pursu  ■'/,  rrj-i  radaph,  4. 

Is;.    17.  13  shall  be  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the  moun. 
C-HAS3D  away,  to  be  — 
To  be  caused  to  move  away,  13}  nadad,  6. 

Job    20.    8  he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  of  the 
CHASTE  — 
Consxrated,  kyvos  hagnos. 

2  Co  11.    2  that  I  may  present  (you  as)  a  chaste  virgin 
Titus  2,    5  discreet,  "chaste,  keepers  at  home,  good 

1  Pe    3.    2  your  chaste  couversation  (coupled)  with 

CHASTEN,  to  — 

l.Tb  convict,  mike  manifest,  rn;  yakach,  5. 

2  Sa.   7141  will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  men 
%To  instruct,  id;  yasar,  3. 

Deut.  8.    5  that,  as  a  man  chasteneth  his  son.  (so)  the 
8     5  (so)  the  LORD  thy  God  chasteneth  thee 
21.  18  aud  (that),  when  they  have  chastened  him 
Psa     6.    1  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure 
3S.   1  neither  chasten  me  hi  thy  hot  displeasure 
94.  12  Blessed,  .the  man  whom  thou  chastened 
118.  18  The  Lord  hath  chastened  me  sore  :  but 
Prov  19  18  Chasten  thy  sou  while  there  is  hope,  and 
S.Tn  instruct,  train  up,  7rai5eua>  paideuo. 

x  Co.  11  32  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
2  Co.  6.  9  we  live;  as  chastened,  and  not  killed 
Heb- 12.    6  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth 

12.  7  whatson  is hewhom  the father'chasteneth 
12  10  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened  (us) 

Rev.    3.  19  As  mauy  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  aud  chasten 
CHASTEN  self,  to — 
To  humble  oneself,  nyjr  anih,  7. 

Dan.  10  12  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  thy  God 
CHASTENED  — 
Reproof,  conviction,  nrjain  tokachath. 

Psa    73.  14  have  I  been  plagued,  and  chastened  every 
CHASTENED,  to  be  — 
To  be  convicted,  ro;  yakach,  6. 

Job  33.  19  He  is  chastened  also  with  pain  upon  his 
CHASTENETH  — 
///  itruction,  13112  tnus  tr. 

Prov  13.  24  he  that  loveth  him  chasteneth  him 
CHASTENING  — 
X.Insbruction,  ~oin  musar. 

Job     $.  17  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the 

Prov.   \.  11  despise  not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord 

Ha,    26.  16  (when)  thy  chastening  (was)  upon  them 
^.Instruction,  training,  -n-atSe/a  jmideia. 

Heb.  12.    s  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  L. 
12.    7  if  ynmdure  chastening,  God  dealeth  with 
12. 11  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to 
CHASTISE,  to  — 
I.  To  instruct^  chastise,  ip;  yasar. 

Psa.  01.  10  Ho  that  chastiaeth  the  heathen,  shaU'not 

.'Ijs.  10.  10  (It  is)  iu  my  desire  that  I  should  chastise 


2. To  instruct,  chastise,  ")p;  yasar,  3. 

Lev.  26.  28  will  chastise  you  seven  times  for  your  sins 
Deut22.  18  the  elders,  .shall  take,  .and  chastise  him 

1  Ki.  12.  11  my  father  hath  chastised  you  with  whips 

12.  11,  14  but  I  will  chastise  you  with  scorpions 
12.  14  my  father  (also)  chastised  you  with  whips 

2  Ch.  10.  11,- 14  my  father  chastised  you  with  whips 
Jer.  31.  18  Thou  hast  chastised  me,  and  I  was 

3.  To  cause  to  instruct,  np;  yasar,  5. 

nos. :  7.  12  I  will  chastise  them,  as  their  congregation 

4.  To  instruct,  chastise,  iratbevw  paideuo. 

Luke  23.  16  I  will  therefore  chastise  him,  and  release 
23  22  I  will  therefore  chastise  him,  aud  let.  .go 
CHASTISED,  to  be  — 
To  be  instructed,  chastised,  "ip;  yasar,  2. 

Jer.  31.  18  Thou  hast  chastised  me,  and  I  was  chas. 
CHASTISEMENT  — 

1.  Instruction ,  chastisement,  ipiD  musar. 

Deut  11.  2  which  have  not  seen  the  chastisement  of 
Isa.  53.  5  the  chastisemeut  of  our  peace  (was)  upon 
Jer.  30.  14  with  the  chastisement  of  a  cruel  one,  for 

2.  Instruction,  chastisement,  iraibeia  paideia. 

Heb.  12.    8  But  if  ye  be  without  chastisemeut,  where. 
CHATTER,  to  — 
To  chirp  (as  a  bird),  fjsy  tsaphaph,  3  a. 

Isa.  38.  14  Like  a.,  swallow,  so  did  I  chatter 

CHE'-BAR,  "03  joining. 

A  river  rising  near  the  Nisibis,  an  affluent  of  the 
Euphrates  entering  it  at  Carchemosh,  the  Aborras  of 
Strabo,  or  Chaboras  of  Ptolemy,  where  Ezekiel  saw  his 
earlier  visious.  It  is  considered  as  identical  with  the 
Habor  or  River  of  Gozau  to  which  a  portion  of  Israel 
was  removed  by  the  Assyrians  (2  Ki.  17.  6).  But  the 
Nahr  Malcha,  or  Royal  Canal  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  fixe 
greatest  of  all  the  cuttings  of  Mesopotamia,  best 
deserves  acceptance  as  the  Chebar. 

Eze.     1.    1  among  the  captives  by  the  river  of  C. 

1.    3  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  by  the  river  C. 
3.  15  came  to  them,  .dwelt  by  the  river  of  C. 
3.  23  the  glory  which  I  saw  by  the  river  of  C. 
10. 15  creature  that  I  saw  by  the  river  of  C. 
10.  20  creature  that  I  saw.  .by  the  river  of  C. 
10.  22  faces  which  I  saw  by  the  river  of  C. 
43.    3  visions  that  I  saw  by  the  river  C. 
CHECK  — 
Instruction,  chastisement,  ipiD  musar. 

Job    20.    3  I  have  heard  the  check  of  my  reproach 
CHECKER  — 
Lattice  work,  nrn'^  sebakah. 

1  Ki.    7.  17  nets  of  checker  work,  and  wreaths  of 
CHE-DOR-LA-O'-BTER,  "lpjAll?  sheaf  band. 
A  king  of  Elam  in  the  time'of  Abram,  B.C.  1917. 

Gen.  14.    1  Arioch  king  of  Ellasar,  C.  king  of  Elam 
14.    4  Twelve  years  they  served  C,  and  iu  the 
14.    5  And  in  the  fourteenth  year  came  C,  and 
14.    9  With  C.  the  king  of  Elam,  aud  with  Tidal 
14.  17  his  return  from  the  slaughter  of  C,  and 

CHEEK  — 

1.  Cheek,  jaw,  *ry?  lechi. 

1  Ki.  22  24  went  near,  and  smote  Micaiah  on  the  ch. 
2CIX.  18.  23  came  near,  .smote  Micaiah  upon  thech. 
Job  16. 10  they  have  smitten  me  upon  the  cheek 
Song    1.  10  Thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  (of  jew. 

5.  13  His  cheeks  (are)  as  a  bed  of  spices,  (as) 
Isa.  50     6  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off 
Lam.  1.    2  and  her  tears  (are)  on  her  cheeks :  among 

3.  30  He  giveth  (his)  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth 
Mic.    5.    1  shall  smite.. with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek 

2.  The  clieek,  jaw,  aayiov  siagon. 

Matt.  5.  39  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek 
Luke  6.  29  him  that  smiteth  thee  on  the  (one)  cheek 

CHEEK  bone  — 

Tfie  cheek,  jaw,  *rh  lechi. 

Psa.     3.    7  smitten  all  mine  enemies,  .the  cheek  b. 
CHEEK  teeth  — 
Great  teeth,  grinders,  rny^np  methallaoth. 

Joel     1.    6  he  hath  the  cheek  teeth  of  a  great  lion 
CHEEKS,  two  — 
Two  cheeks,  n?!07  lechayayim. 

Deut  iS.    3  the  shoulder,  and  the  two  cheeks,  and  the 
CHEER,  to  — 
To  do  or  make  good  or  glad,  nio  tob,  5. 

Eccl.  11.    9  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  t!xe  days  of 
CHEER  (up),  to  — 
To  rejoice,  np'p  sameach,  3. 

Deut  24.    s  and  shall  cheer  up  his  wife  whicl  he 

Judg.  9.  13  which  cheereth  God  and  man,  am'  go  to 

CHEER,  of  good  — 

Well  minded  or  disposed,  cS&vfios  euthwnos. 

Acts  27.  36  Then  were  they  all  of  good  cheer,  and 
CHEER,  to  be  of  good  — 
l.To  be  well  minded,  cheerful,  evdv/xeco  euthumco. 

Acts  27.  22  now  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  cheer:  for 
27.  25  Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer :  for  I 

l.To  take  courage,  Baptreca  tharseo. 

Matt.  9.    2  Son,  be  of  good  cheer;  thy  sins  be  f(  rgiv. 
14.  27  saying,  Be  of  good  cheer :  it  is  I;  be  not 


Mark  6.  50  saith  unto  them,  Be  of  good  cheer:  it  is 

John  16.  33  but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome 

Acts  23.  11  stood  by  him,  and  said,  Be  of  good  cheer 
CHEERTUL  — 
I. Good,  glad,  iria  tob. 

Zech.  8.  19  to  the  house  of  Judah.  .cheerful  feasts 
%Cheerful,  I\ap6s  hilaros. 

2  Co.   9.    7  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver 
CHEERFUL,  to  make  — 
l.To  make  good  or  glad,  3a;  yatab,  5. 

Prov  15.  13  A  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  counte. 
•2.  To  grow,  be  fruitful  {in  words),  iMnnb,  Sa. 

Zech.  9.  17  Corn  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful 
CHEERFULLY,  more  — 
More  cheerfully,  evdv/Aorepov  euthumoteron. 

Acts  24.  10  I  do  the  [more  cheerfully]  answer  for 
CHEERFULNESS  — 
Hilarity,  cheerfulness,  iKaporvs  hilarotes. 

Rom  12.    8  he  that  showeth  mercy,  with  cheerfulness 
CHEESE  — 
1. Curdled  milk,  rivsa  geb/nah. 

Job   10  10  Hast  thou  not.. curdled  me  like  cheese? 
'I.Cheese  ofkine,  ns^  shaphah. 

2  Sa.  17.  29  and  sheep,  and  cheese  of  kine,  for  David 
'3. Cuttings  or  slices  of  cheese,  ^Snn  T")n  charitse  hech, 

1  Sa.  17.  18  carry  these  teu  cheeses  uiito  the  captain 
CHE'-LAL,  ?73  completeness. 

One  of  the  family  of  Pahath  Moab  that  had  a  strange 
wife,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  30  sons  of  Pahath-moab ;  Adna,  and  C,  B. 
CKEL'-LUH,5n^3  robust. 

One  <f  the  family  of  Bani  that  had  married  a  strange 
wife,  B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  35  Benaiah,  Bedeiah,  C. 
CHE'-LUB,  311??  bohlness. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur,  B.C.  1451. 

1  Ch.    4.  11  And  C.  the  brother  of  Shuah  begat  Mehir 

2.  Father  of  Ezri,  sup erinten dent  of  the  tillers  of  the 
ground  in  the  time  of  David,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  27.  26  over  them,  .(was)  Ezri  the  son  of  C. 
CHE-LU'-BAI,  \?6|,  XaXeQ. 
Son  of  Hezron,  elsewhere  called  Caleb,  B.C.  1451. 

1  Ch.    2.   9  sons  also  of  Hezrou.  .Jerahmeel,  and.  .C. 
CHE-MA'-RIMS,  D*")??  servants,  priests. 

Zeph.  1.  4    I  will  cut  off .  .the  name  of  the  C. 
CHE'-MOSH,  v^flre,  hearth.    . 

The  national  idolof  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  but 
not  identical  with  Molech.  By  Jerome  Chemosh  is 
identified  with  Baal-peor ;  by  others  with  Baal-zebub  ; 
others,  Mars,  aud  others  Saturn,  as  the  star  of  ill-omen. 
Dibon  was  the  chief  seat  of  its  worship. 

Num  21.  29  thou  art  undone,  O  people  of  C. 

Judg  1 1.  24  Wilt  not  thou  possess  that  which  C. 

1  Ki.  11.    7  Solomon  build  au  high  place  for  C. 

11.  33  they,  .have  worshipped.  .C.  the  god  of 

2  Ki.  23.  13  high  places.  .Solomon,  .builded  for  C. 
Jer.  48.    7  C.  shall  go  forth  into  captivity  (with)  his 

48.  13  And  Moab  shall  be  ashamed  of  C. 
48.  46  tlxe  people  of  C.  perisheth  :  for  thy  sons 
CHE-NA-A'-NAH,  H3"J?  flat,  low. 

1.  Father  of  the  false  prophet  Zedekiah  that  smote 
Micaiah  wlien  he  foretold  the  fall  of  Ahab  at  Ranioth- 
Gilead,  B.C.  930. 

1  Ki.  22.  11  Zedekiah  the  son  of  C.  made  him  horns 

22.  24  Zedekiah  the  son  of  C.  went  near,  and 

2  Ch.  18.  10  Zedekiah  the  son  of  C.  had  made  him 

18.  23  Zedekiah  the  son  of  C.  came  near,  and 

2.  Brother  of  Ehud,  son  of  Bilhan  a  Benjamite,  B.C. 
1650. 

1  Ch.  7.  10  the  sons  of  Bilhan.  .Ehud,  aud  C,  and 

CHE-NA'-NT,  M32,  Xvvevl  Jah,  creator. 

A   Levite  that  conducted  the  devotion  of  the  people 

atter  Ezra  had  read  to  them  the  book  of  the  law,  B.C. 

445- 

Neh.   9.   4  Then  stood  up . .  of  the  Levites . .  Bani . .  C. 

CHE-NAN'-IAH,  n;^3,  Xccvevias,  Xeyevias. 

1.  A  chief  Levite  when  David  brought  up  the  ark,  b.c 
1042. 

1  Ch.  15.  22  And  C,  chief  of  the  Levites.  .for  song 
15.  27  C.  the  master  of  the  song  with  the  sing. 

2.  An  Izharite,  an  officer  of  David's,  B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.  26.  29  Of  the  Izharites,  C.  and  his  sens,  .for 
CHE-PHAR  HA-AM-MO'-NAI,  ^SJM  155. 
A  town  of  Benjamin,  once  a  "village  of  the  Ammo- 
nites." 

Josh.  18.  24  And  C,  and  Ophni,  aud  Gaba ;  twelve 
CHE-PHI'-RAH,  m/£J3,  village,  hamlet. 
Hivite  village  nearGibeon  iu  Benjamin  ;  now  Kefir, 

Josh.  9.  17  their  cities  (were)  Gibeon,  and  C,  and 
18.  26  And  Mizpeh,  and  C,  and  Mozah 

Ezra   2.  25  The  children  of  Kirjath-arim,  C,  and  B. 

Neh.    7.  29ThemenofKirjath-jearim,C.,andBeeroth 

CHE'-RAN,  I3|  union. 

Sun  of  Dishoii,  son  of  Seir  the  Hoxitc,  n.  c.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  26  of  Dishon.-Eshban,  and  Ithrau,  and  C. 

1  Ch.  1.  41  of  Dishon.  .Eshbau,  and  Ithran,  and  C. 


CHBRBTHITES 


157 


CHIEF 


CHE-RE '-THITES,  DTH?  executioners. 

1.  A  Philistine  tribe  in  the  S.  of  Canaan,  emigrants  from 
Crete. 

i  Sa,3o.  14  We  made  an  invasion  (upon),  .the  C,  anil 
Eze  25.  16  I  will  cut  off  theC,  and  destroy  the  rem. 
Zeph.  2.    5  Woe  unto,  .the  nation  of  the  C.  ! 

2.  Officers  who,  along  with  the  Pelethites,  formed  David's 
life-guards,    b.  c.  1050. 

2  Sa.  8.  18  Benaiah .  .(was  over)  both  the  C.  and  the 
15.  18  all  the  C. .  .passed  on  before  the  king 
20.    7  there  went  out  after  him .  .the  C,  and  the 
20.  23  Benaiah.  .(was)  over  the  C.  and  over  the 

1  Ki.   1.  38  Benaiah  the  son' of  Jehoiada,  and  the  C. 
1.  44  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  and  the  C. 

1  Ch.  18.  17  Benaiah.  .(was)  over  the  C.  and  the  Pel. 

CHERISH,  to  — 

l.Tobe  useful,  profitable,  J3D  sakan. 

1  Ki.    1.    2  let  her  cherish  him,  and  let  her  lie  in  thy 
1.    4  (was)  very  fair,  and  cherished  the  king 

2. To  heat,  soften,  cherish,  BaX-rroo  thalpo. 

Eph.  5.  29  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the 
1  Th.   2.    7  as  a  nurse  cherisheth.  her  children 

CHE'-EITH,  JV"i3  trench. 

A  brook  or  wady  E.  of  the  Jordan  in  Gilead,  near  Jericho, 

now  called  Wady  Kelt. 

1  Ki  17.    3  Get  thee  hence,  .hide,  .by  the  brook  C. 

17.    s  he  went  and  dwelt  by  the  brook  C. 

CHEKTJB  — 

1.  One  grasped,  held  fast,  ana  kerub. 

Exod25.  19  make  one  cherub  on  the  one  end 

25.  19  and  the  other  cherub  on  the  other  end 
37.    8  One  cherub  on  the  end  on  this  side,  and 
37.   8  another  cherub  on  the  (other)  end  on 

2  Sa.  22.  11  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly 

1  Ki.  6.  24  cubits  (was)  the  one  wing  of  the  cherub 

6.  24  five  cubits  the  other  wing  of  the  cherub 
6.  25  And  the  other  cherub  (was)  ten  cubits 
6.  26  The  height  of  the  one  cherub  (was)  ten 
6.  26  and  so  (was  it)  of  the  other  cherub 
6.  27  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub  touched  the 

2  Ch.  3.  11  reaching  to  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub 

3.  12  And  (one)  wing  of  the  other  cherub  (was) 

3. 12  joining  to  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub 
Psa.  18.  10  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fiy 
Eze.    9.    3  glory,  .was  gone  up  from  the  cherub 

10.  2  between,  .wheels,  (even)  under  the  cherub 
10.  4  glory  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the  cherub 
10.  7  And  (one)  cherub  stretched  forth  his  hand 
10.  9  one  wheel  by . .  cherub . .  by  another  cherub 
10.  14  the  first  face  (was)  the  face  of  a  cherub 
2S.  14  Thou  (art)  the  anointed  cherub  that  cover. 
28.  16  and  1  will  destroy  thee,  O  covering  cherub 
41.  18  tree  (was)  between  a  cherub  and  a  cherub 
41.  18  and  (every)  cherub  had  two  faces 

2. An  Israelite  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel. 
Ezra  2.  59  Tel-harsa,  Ch.,  Addan,  (and)  Imraer 
Neh.   7.  61  Tel-haresha,  Ch.,  Addon,  and  Imnier 

CHERUBIM  — 

1. Those  grasped,  held  fast,  D*3n3)  keruhim. 

Gen.   3.  24  placed  at  the  east,  .of  Eden  cherubims 

Exod25.  18  thou  shalt  make  two  cherubims  (of)  gold 

25. 19  mercy  seat  shall  ye  make  the  cherubims 

25.  20  the  cherubims  shall  stretch  forth  (their) 

25.  20  mercy  seat  shall  the  faces  of  the  cherubims 

25.  22  from  between  the  two  cherubims  which 

26.  1  cherubims  of  cunning  work  shalt  thou 
26.  31  with  cherubims  shall  it  be  made 

36.    8  cherubims  of  cunning  work  made  he 

36.  35  he  made  a  veil,  .(with)  cherubims  made 

37.  7  he  made  two  cherubims  (of)  gold,  beaten 
37.  8  the  mercy  seat  made  he  the  cherubims  on 
37.  9  the  cherubims  spread  out  (their)  wings  on 
37.  9  were  the  faces  of  the  cherubims 

Num.  7.  89  voice .  .from  between  the  two  cherubims 

1  Sa.  4.   4  which  dwelleth  (between)  the  cherubims 

2  Sa.   6.    2  that  dwelleth  (between)  the  cherubims 

1  Ki.   6.  23  within  the  oracle  he  made  two  cherubims 

6.  25  both  the  cherubims  (were)  of  one  measure 
6.  27  he  set  the  cherubims  within  the  inner  h. 
6.  27  stretched  forth  the  wings  of  the  cherubims 
6.  28  he  overlaid  the  cherubims  with  gold 
6.  29  carved  figures  of  cherubims  and  palm 
6.  32  carved  upon  them  carvings  of  cherubims 
6.  32  and  spread  gold  upon  the  cherubims,  and 

6.  35  carved  (thereon)  cherubims  and  palm  trees 

7.  29  on  the  borders,  .lions,  oxen,  and  cheru. 

7.  36  he  engraved  cherubims,  lions,  and.  .trees 

8.  6  (even)  under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims 
8.    7  For  the  cherubims  spread  forth  (their) 
8.    7  the  cherubims  covered  the  ark  and  the 

2  Ki.  19.  15  God .  .which  dwellest  (between)  the  cher. 

1  Ch.13.  6  that  dwelleth  (between)  the  cherubims 

28.  18  the  pattern  of  the  chariot  of  the  cherubims 

2  Ch.  3.    7  and  graved  cherubims  on  the  walls 

3. 10  he  made  two  cherubims  of  image  work 

3. 11  wings  of  the  cherubims  (were)  twenty  c. 

3. 13  the  wings  of  these  cherubims  spread 

3.  14  fine  linen,  and  wrought  cherubims  thereon 
5.    7  (even)  under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims 
5.    8  the  cherubims  spread  forth  (their)  wings 
5.    8  and  the  cherubims  covered  the  ark  and 
Psa.  80.    1  thou  that  dwellest  (between)  the  cherubi. 

99.    1  he  sitteth  (between)  the  cherubims  let 
Isa.   37.  16  that  dwellest  (between)  the  cherubims 
Eze.  10.    1  that(was)abovetheheadof  the  cherubims 
10.    2  coals  of  fire  from  between  the  cherubims 
10.    3  Nowthecherubimsstoodontherightsidc 


Eze.  10.    5  sound  of  the  cherubim's  wings  was  heard 
10.    6  Take  fire,  .from  between  the  cherubims 
10.    7  his  hand  from  between  the  cherubims  unto 
10.    7  the  fire  that  (was)  between  the  cherubims 
10.    8  there  appeared  in  the  cherubims  the  form 
10.    9  behold  the  four  wheels  by  the  cherubims 
10.  15  And  the  cherubims  were  lifted  up 
10. 16  And  when  the  cherubims  went,  the  wheels 
10.  16  when  the  cherubims  lifted  up  their  wings 
10.  iS  and  stood  over  the  cherubims 
10.  19  And  the  cherubims  lifted  up  their  wings 

10.  20  and  I  knew  that  they  (were)  the  cherubims 

11.  22  Then  did  the  cherubims  lift  up  their  wings 
41.  18  And  (it  was)  made  with  cherubims  and  p. 
41.  20  above  the  door  (were)  cherubims  and  p. 
41.  25  on  the  doors  of  the  temple,  cherubims  and 

2.,Those  grasped  &>•  seized,  x€Pov^'1^  clieroubim. 

Heb.    9.    5  And  over  it  the  cherubims  of  glory 
CHE-SA'-LON,  \h^  fortress. 

A  place  on  the  W.  part  of  the  N.  border  of  Judah,  on 
the  shoulder  of  Mount  Jearim. 

Josh  15.  10  the  border,  .passed  along  unto.  .C,  on 
CHE'-SED,  "ife'3. 

Fourth  son  of  Nahor,  and  nephew  of  Abraham,  B.C. 
1870. 

Gen.  22.  22  And  C,  and  Hazo,  and  Pildash,  and 
CHE'-SEL,  Vpa  fleshy,  fat. 

A  town  in  the  extreme  S.  of  Canaan.  This  was  an  early 
variation  of  Bethul,  now  Ehclasa. 

Josh.  15.  30  And  Eltolad,  and  C,  and  Hormah 
CHESNUT  tree  — 
Plane  tree,  ffCnjl  armon. 

Gen.  30.  37  of  the  hazel  and  chesnut  tree ;  and  pilled 

Eze.  31.    8  the  chesnut  trees  were  not  like  his  bran. 
CHEST  — 
I.AtJIs,  chest,  }Vin  aron. 

2  Ki.  12.    9  But  Jehoiada  the  priest  took  a  chest,  and 

12.  10  saw  that  (there  was)  much  money  in  the  c. 
2  Ch.  24.    8  they  made  a  chest,  and  set  it  without  at 

24.  10  cast  into  the  chest,  until  they  had  made 
24.  11  that  at  what  time  the  chest  was  brought 
*    24.  11  priest's  officer  came,  .emptied  the  chest 
^.Coverings,  wva  genazhn. 

Eze.  27.  24  in  chests  of  rich  apparel,  bound  with 
CHE-SUI/-LOTH,  niVpa  fatness,  the  loins. 
The  word  suggests  that  the  town  derived  its  name  from 
its  situation  on  the  slope  of  a  mountain  (Josh.  19.  iS). 
It  seems  to  have  been  between   Jezreel  and  Shuneni 
(Solam).     Now  Tksal. 

Josh  19.  18  their  border  was  toward  Jezreel,  and  C. 
CHEW,  to  — 
l.To  ruminate,  "na  garar,  2. 

Lev.  11.    7  yet  he  cheweth  not  the  cud  ;  he  (is) 
2.  To  cause  (the  cud)  to  come  up,  n?j/  alah,  5. 

Lev.  11.  3  and  is  cloven  footed,  (and)  cheweth  the  c. 
11.  4  shall  ye  not  eat  of  them  that  chew  the  c. 
11.  4,  s,  6  because  he  cheweth  the  cud,  but  divi. 
11.  26  (is)  not  cloven  footed,  nor  cheweth  the  c. 

Deut  14.    6  cheweth  the  cud  among  the  beasts,  that 
14.    7  shall  not  eat  of  them  that  chew  the  cud 
14.    7  for  they  chew  the  cud,  but  divide  not  the 
CHEWED,  to  be  — 
To  be  cut  off,  ma  karath,  2. 

Numn.  33  ere  it  was  chewed,  the  wrath  of  the  Lord 
CHE'-ZIB,  3M3  deceitful. 

Probably  identical  with  Achzib  or  Chozeba,  a  town  of 
the  Cauaanites,  afterwards  belonging  to  Judah,  Now 
called  Achzib. 

Gen.  38.   5  and  he  was  at  C.  when  she  bare  him 
CHICKEN  — 
A  nestling,  vovgIov  nossion. 

Matt  23.  37  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens 
CHIDE,  to  — 
To  strive,  contend,  an  rib. 

Gen.  31.  36  was  wroth,  and  chode  with  Laban  :  and 

Exodi7.  2  Wherefore  the  people  did  chide  with  Mo. 
17.    2  Why  chide  ye  with  me?  wherefore  do  ye 

Nuni2o.    3  And  the  people  chode  with  Moses,  and 

Judg.  8.    1  And  they  did  chide  with  him  sharply 

Psa.  103.    9  He  will  not  always  chide ;  neither  will 
CHIDING  — 
Strife,  contention,  3n  rib. 

Exod  17.    7  because  of  the  chiding  of  the  children  of 
CHI'-DON,  }T3  destruction,  a  javelin. 
The  scene  where  the  accident  to  the  ark  and  the  death 
of  Lzzah  occurred.    In  2  Sa.  6.  6,  the  name  is  Nachon. 

1  Ch.  13.    9  came  unto  the  threshing  floor  of  C. 
CHEEP  — 
1. Father,  3X  ab. 

Num  25. 14  a  prince  of  a  chief  house"among  the  Sim. 
25. 15  he  (was)  head.,  of  a  chief  house  in  Midian 

Josh. 22. 14  of  each  chief  house  a  prince  throughout 
2. Mighty  one,  1133  gibbor. 

1  Ch.  9.  26  For  these  Levites,  the  four  chief  porters 
3.  Leader,  one  in  tlie  front,  TJ3.  nagid. 

1  Ch.  5.    2  and  of  him  (came)  the  chief  ruler  ;  but 
29.  22  the  chief  governor,  and  Zadok  (to  be) 

Jer.   20.    1  who  (was)  also  chief  governor  in  the 


4. One  lifted  up,  exalted,  n^j  nasi. 

Num.  3.  24,  30,  35  the  chief  of  the  house  of  the  father 

3.  32  chief  over  the  chief  of  the  Levites 

4.  34  And  Moses  and  Aaron  and  the  chief  of 

4.  46  Moses  and  Aaron  and  the  chief  of  Israel 

1  Ki.  8.    1  Solomon  assembled.. the  chief  of  the 

2  Ch.  5.    2  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  children  of 

5.A  corner  (stone),  <i$$pinnah. 

Judg2o.    2  the  chief  of  all  the  people,  (even)  of  all 

1  Sa.  14.  38  all  the  chief  of  the  people  ;  and  know  and 

6. Head,  vto  rosh. 

Nuni3i.  26  and  the  chief  fathers  of  the  congregation 
32.  28  and  the  chief  fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the 
36.    1  And  the  chief  fathers  of  the  families  of 
36.    1  the  chief  fathers  of  the  children  of  Israel 
Deut.  1.  15  So  I  took  the  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise 

2  Ki.25.  18  the  captain,  .took  Seraiah  the  chief  priest 

1  Ch.   5.    7  (were)  the  chief,  Jeiel,  and  Zechariah 

5. 12  Joel  the  chief,  and  Shapham  the  next 

5.  15  chief  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

8.  28  These  (were)  heads  of  the  fathers,  .chief 

9.  17  Shallum  (was)  the  chief 

9.  33  singers,  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  Levites 
9.  34  chief  fathers  of  the  Levites  (were)  chief 
11.    6  smiteth  the  Jebusites  first  shall  be  chief 
11.    6  So  Joab.  .went  first  up,  and  was  chief 
.  11.  10  These  also  (are)  the  chief  of  the  mighty  men 
"  11.  11  an  Hachmonite,  the  chief  of  the  captains 

11.  20  brother  of  Joab,  he  was  chief  of  the  three 

12.  3  The  chief  (was)  Ahiezer,  then  Joash,  the 
12.  18  (who  was)  chief  of  the  captains,  (and  he) 

15.  12  Ye  (are)  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the 

16.  s  Asaph  the  chief,  and  next  to  him  Zechariah 
23.   8  the  chief  (was)  Jehiel,  and  Zetbam,  and 
23.    9  These  (were)  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of 
23.  11  And  Jahath  was  the  chief,  and  Zizah 

23.  16  Of  the  sons  of .  .Shebuel  (was)  the  chief 
23.  17  sons  of  Eliezer  (were)  Rehabiah  the  chief 
23.  18  Of  the  sons  of  Izhar ;  Shelomith  the  chief 

23.  24  the  chief  of  the  fathers,  as  they  were 

24.  4  there  were  more  chief  men  found  of  the 
24.  6,  31  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  priests 
26.  10  the  chief,  .his  father  made  him  the  chief 
26.  12  among  the  chief .  .men,  (having)  wards  one 
26.  21  chief fathers,(even)of LaadantheGerslion 
26.  26  which.,  the  chief  fathers,  .had  dedicated 
26.  31  Jerijah  the  chief,  (even)  among  the  Hebr. 

26.  32  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred  chief 

27.  1  chief  fathers  and  captains  of  thousands 
27.    5  The  third  captain.  .Benaiah.  .a  chief  pr. 

2  Ch.  1.    2  to  every  governor  in  all  Israel,  the  chief 

11.  22  made  Abijah  the  son  of  Maacbahthe  chief 

19.    8  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel 

19.  11  Amariah  the  chief  priest  (is)  over  you  in 

23.  2  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel,  and  they 

24.  6  the  king  called  for  Jehoiada  the  chief 
26. 12  The  whole  number  of  the  chief  of  the 
26.  20  Azariah  the  chief  priest,  and  all  the 
31.  10  Azariah  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of 

Ezra    1.    5  Then  rose  up  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
2.  68  And  (some)  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
3. 12  the  priests,  .and  chief  of  the  fathers 
4.  2,  3  to  Zerubbabel,  and  to  the  chief  of  the 

7.  5  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the  chief  priest 

8.  1  These  (are)  now  the  chief  of  their  fathers 
8. 17  Iddo  the  chief  at  the  place  Casiphia 

10. 16  Ezra  the  priest,  (with)  certain  chief  of  the 
Neh.  7.  70,  71  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave 
8.  13  gathered  together  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
10. 14  The  chief  of  the  people  ;  Parosh,  Pahath 
11.    3  these  (are)  the  chief  of  the  province  that 

11.  13  And  his  brethren,  chief  of  the  fathers 
11. 16  Shabbethai  and  Jozabad,  of  the  chief  of 

12.  7  These  (were)  the  chief  of  the  priests  and 
12.  12  the  chief  of  the  fathers  :  of  Seraiah 

12.  22  The  Levites.  .(were) recorded  chief  of  the 
12.  23  The  sons  of  Levi,  the  chief  of  their  fathers 
12.  24  the  chief  of  the  Levites  :  Hashabiah 
12.  46  in  the  days  of  David .  .(there  were)  chief 
Job   12.  24  He  taketh  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of 

2g.  25  I  chose  out  their  way,  and  sat  chief 
Psa.137.    6  if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief 
Jer.  52.  24  the  captain,  .took  Seraiah  the  chief  priest 
Lam.  1.    5  Her  adversaries  are  the  chief,  her  enemies 
Eze.  27.  22  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  chief  of  all 

38.  2  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal 

39.  1  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal 

7. Head.  ti'N'l  resh. 

Ezra    5. 10  the  names  of  the  men  that  (were)  the  chief 

8. Beginning,  rrt?N"i  reshith. 

1  Sa.  15.  21  the  chief  of  the  things  which  should  have 
Job    40.  19  He  (is)  the  chief  of  the  ways  of  God 
Psa.  78.  51  the  chief  of  (their)  strength  in  the 

105.  36  the  first  born  in  their  land,  the  chief  of 
Jer.  49.  35  the  bow  of  Elam,  the  chief  of  their  might 
Dan.  11.  41  and  the  chief  of  the  children  of  Amnion 
Amos  6.    1  (which  are)  named  chief  of  the  nations 

6.  6  and  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief 

9.  Great  one,  31  rab. 

Dan.    2.  48  chief  of  the  governors  over  all  the  wise 

10.  Prince,  Jiead,  "W  sar. 

Gen.  40.    2  was  wroth . .  against  the  chief  of  the  butlers 

40.  2  and  against  the  chief  of  the  bakers 

40.  9  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph 
40.  16  the  chief  baker  saw  that  the  interpretation 
40.  20  he  lifted  up  the  head  of  the  chief  butler 
40.  20  and  of  the  chief  baker  qmong  his  servants 
40.  21  And  he  restored  the  chief  butler  unto  his 


CHIEF 


15S 


CHILD 


Gen.  40.  22  But  lie  hanged  the  chief  baker 

40.  23  Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember 

41.  9  Then  spake  the  chief  butler  unto  Pharaoh 
41.  10  put  me  in  ward,  .me  and  the  chief  baker 

1  Ki.  5.  16  Beside  the  chief  of  Solomon's  officers 
9.  23  These  (were)  the  chief  of  the  officers 

14.  27  committed . .  unto  the  hands  of  the  chief 

1  Ch.15.    5  Of  the  sons  of  Kohath  ;  Uriel  the  chief 

15.  6  the  sons  of  Merari  ;  Asaiah  the  chief 
15.    7  the  sons  of  Gershom  ;  Joel  the  chief 

15.    8  the  sons  of  Elizaphan  ;  Shemaiah  the  chief 
15.    9  the  sons  of  Hebron  ;  Eliel  the  chief 
15.  10  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  Amminadab  the  chief 
15.  16  David  spake  to  the  chief  of  the  Levites 
15.  22  And  Chenaniah,  chief  of  the  Levites 

2  Ch.  8.    9  chief  of  his  captains,  and  captains  of  his 

8.  10  these  were  the  chief  of  king  Solomon's 
12.  10  committed  them  to  the  hands  of  the  chief 
17.  14  Adnah  the  chief,  and  with  him  mighty 

35.  9  Jeiel  and  Jozabad,  chief  of  the  Levites 

36.  14  Moreover  all  the  chief  of  the  priests,  and 
Ezra    8.  24  Then  I  separated  twelve  of  the  chief 

8.  29  until  ye  weigh  (them)  before  the  chief  of 
8.  29  and  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel,  at  Jer. 
10.    s  Then  arose  Ezra,  and  made  the  chief  pr. 

11. Prince,  the  first,  chief,  &pxu>v  archon. 

Luken.  15  He  castethout  devils  through,  .the  chief 
14.  1  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees 
12.  To  lead,  go  before,  7\yio^at  hegeomai. 

Acts  15.  22  Barsabas,  and  Silas,  chief  men  14.  2. 

13. First,  foremost,  irpwros  2}rotos. 

Matt  20.  27  And  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you 
Luke  19.  47  and  the  chief  of  the  people  sought  to 
Acts  16.  12  which  is  the  chief  city  of  that  part  of 
17.    4  and  of  the  chief  women  not  a  few 
25.    2  Then  the  high  priest  and  the  chief  of  the 
28.  17  after  three  days  Paul  called  the  chief  of 
1  Ti.    1.  15  to  save  sinners  ;  of  whom  I  am  chief 

CHIEF  (estate)  — 

First,  foremost,  irpujros  protos. 

Mark  6.  21  high  captains,  .chief  (estates)  of  Galilee 

CHIEF  friend — 

First,  chief  leader,  familiar,  *p?x  aUuph. 

Prov.16.  28  a  whisperer  separateth  chief  friends 
CHIEF  man  — 
I. Lord,  owner,  jJossessor,  Sya  baal. 

Lev.  31.   4  (being)  a  chief  man  among  his  people,  to 
'2. Head,  v)nh  rosh. 

1  Ch.    7.    3  Joel,  Ishiah,  five  :  all  of  them  chief  men 

24.    4  sixteen  chief  men  of  the  house  of  (their) 
Ezra   7.  28  gathered  together  out  of  Israel  chief  men 
8. 16  Then  sent  I  for  Eliezer.  .chief  men  ;  also 
3. First,  foremost,  n par os  protos. 

Acts  13.  50  Jews  stirred  up . .  the  chief  men  of  the  city 
28.    7  were  possessions  of  the  chief  man  of  the 
CHIEF  men  — 

Xohles,  those  near  {the  throne),  D'tsn  atsilim. 
Isa.    41.   9  called  thee  from  the  chief  men  thereof 

CHIEF  of  Asia  — 

Asiarch  (high  official),  'Atnapx"?  asiarches. 

Acts  19. 31  certain  of  the  chief  of  Asia,  .sent  unto 
CHIEF  one  — 
He  goat,  leader,  ~nny  attud. 

Isa.    14.    9  (even)  all  the  chief  ones  of  the  earth  ;  it 
CHIEF  ruler  — 
Priest,  prince,  jnb  kolien. 

2  Sa.    8. 18  and  David's  sons  were  chief  rulers 

20.  26  Ira  also  the  Jairite  was  a  chief  ruler  about 
CHIEF  things  — 
Head,  B>*0  rosh. 

Deut.  33. 15  And  for  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient 
CHIEF,  to  be  — 
To  lead,  go  before,  Tjy4ofj.ai  hegeomai. 

Luke  22.  26  and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that  doth  serve 
CHIEFEST  — 
\. Mighty,  T3X  abbir. 

1  Sa.  21.    7  chiefest  of  the  herdmen  that  (belonged) 
2.  To  be  a  standard  bearer,  hxi  dagal. 

Song   5.  10  My  beloved  (is),  .the  chiefest  among  ten 
Z. Ascent,  rhv_$  maaleh. 

2  Ch.  32.  33  they  buried  him  in  the  chiefest  of  the 

4.  Beginning,  n-irjn  reshith. 

1  Sa.    2.  29  to  make  yourselves  fat  with  the  chiefest 

5.  First,  foremost,  Trpwros  2)rotb~s. 

Markio.  44  And  whosoever  of  you  will  be  the  chiefest 
CHIEFEST  place  — 
Ilnnl,  t?Nh  rosh. 

1  Sa.    9.  22  made  them  sit  in  the  chiefest  place 
CHIEFEST,  very  — 

Vrrii  much,  oirep\lav  hupcrllan. 

2C0. 11.    5  I  wasiiota  whit  behind  the  very  chiefest 

12-  "  m  nothing  am  I  behind  the  very  chiefest 

CHIEFLY  — 

\.Most  of  all,  fidKttrra  malista. 

Phil     4-  22  chiefly  they  that  are  of  Cesar's  household 

2  Pet.  2.  10  But  chiefly  them  that  walk  after  the  flesh 


2.  First,  foremost,  -KpSarov  proton. 

Bom.  3.    2  chiefly,  because  unto  them  were  commit,  t. 
[See  also  Captain,  corner,  governor  musician,  priest, 
publican,  room,  ruler,  seat,  shepherd,  speaker  syn- 
agogue.] 

CHILD  — 
I.  Son,  ]3ben. 

2  Ki.  4.  14  Verily  she  hath  no  child,  and  her  husband 
2. Him,  (tnx>/t)  him,  1*^3  alav. 

2  Ki.  4.  34  and  he  stretched  himself  upon  the  child 
S.Child,  iSi  valad. 

Gen.  11.  "30  But  Sarai  was  barren  ;  she  (had)  no  child 
i.  Child,  (ij;)  -ih  veled. 

2  Sa.    6.  23  Miehal  the  daughter  of  Saul  had  no  child 
5.  Seed,  in>  zera. 

Lev.  22.  13  be  a  widow,  or  divorced,  and  have  no  child 

1  Sa.    1.  11  wiltgive  unto  thine  handmaid  a  man  child 
6. Child,  nS;  yeled. 

Gen.  1.  8  And  the  child  grew,  and  was  weaned  :  and 
2i.  14  and  gave  (it)  unto  Hagar.  .and  the  child 
21.  15  she  cast  the  child  under  one  of  the  shrubs 

21.  16  said,  Let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the  child 
37.  30  The  child  (is)  not ;  and  I,  whither  shall  I 
42.  22  saying,  Do  not  sin  against  the  child  ;  and 
44.  20  and  a  child  of  his  old  age,  a  little  one;  and 

Exod  2.  3  daubed  it . .  and  put  the  child  therein ;  and 
4.  6  when  she  had  opened  (it),  she  saw  the  chi. 
4.  7  that  she  may  nurse  the  child  for  thee  ? 
4.  8  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child's  mo. 
4.  9  Take  this  child  away,  and  nurse  it  for  me 
4.  9  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  nursed  it 
4.  10  the  child  grew,  and  she  brought  him  unto 

Ruth  4.  16  Naomi  took  the  child,  and  laid  it  in  her 

2  Sa.  12.  15  Lord  struck  thechild  that  Uriah's  wife 

12.  18  And  it  came  to  pass . .  that  the  child  died 
12.  18  feared  to  tell  him  that  the  child  was  dead 
12.  18  Behold,  while  the  child  was  yet  alive,  we 
12.  18  if  we  tell  him  that  the  child  is  dead  ? 
12.  19  David  perceived  that  the  child  was  dead 
12.  19  David  said.  .Is  the  child  dead  ?  And 
12. 21  Thou  didst  fastand  weep  for  the  child .  .but 
12.  21  when  the  child  was  dead,  thou  didst  rise 
12.  22  While  the  child  was  yet  alive,  I  fasted 

12.  22  God  will  be  gracious,  .the  child  may  live 
iKi.  3.  25  the  king  said,  Divide  the  living  child  in 

14.  12  when  thy  feet  enter,  .the  child  shall  die 
17.  21  he  stretched  himself  upon  the  child  three 
17.  21  let  this  child's  soul  come  into  him  again 
17.  22  the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again 
17.  23  Elijah  took  the  child,  and  brought  him 
2  Ki.    4.  18  when  the  child  was  grown,  it  fell  on  a 
4.  26  (is  it)  well  with  the  child  ?    And  she  an. 
4  34  And  he  went  up,  and  lay  upon  the  child 
4.  34  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  waxed  warm 
Eccl.  4.  13  Better  (is)  a  poor  and  a  wise  child  than  an 
4.  15  with  the  second  child  that  shall  stand  up 
Isa.     9.    6  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is 
Jer.    31.  20  Ephraira  my  dear  son.  .a  pleasant  child? 

7.  Lad,  "iuj  naar. 

Judg  13.    5,  7  for  the  child  shall  be  a  Nazarite 

13.  8  what  we  shall  do  unto  the  child  that 
13.  12  How  shall  we  order  the  child,  and  (how) 

13.  24  the  child  grew,  and  the  Lord  blessed  him 

1  Sa.   1.  22  (I  will  not  go  up)  until  the  child  be 

1.  24  she  took  him  up.  .and  the  child  (was) 
1.  25  they  slew  a  bullock,  and  brought  thechild 

1.  27  For  this  child  I  prayed;  and  the  Lord 

2.  n  child  did  minister  unto  the  Lord  before 
2.  18  ministered .  .(being)  a  child,  girded  with  a 
2.  21  And  the  child  Samuel  grew  before  the 

2.  26  the  child  Samuel  grew  on,  and  was  in 

3.  1  the  child  Samuel  ministered  unto  the 

3.  8  perceived,  .the  Lord  had  called  the  child 

4.  21  And  she  named  the  child  I-chabod,  saying 

2  Sa.  12.  16  David,  .besought  God  for  the  child  ;  and 

1  Ki.  3.    7  I  (am  but)  a  little  child:  I  know  not  (how) 

11.  17  Hadad  fled,  he.  .(being)  yet  a  little  child 

14.  3  tell  thee  what  shall  become  of  the  child 
14.  17  when  she  came  to  the  threshold,  .thechild 

2  Ki.  4.  29  lay  my  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  child 

4.  30  the  mother  of  the  child  said,  (As)  the 
4.  31  laid  the  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  child 
4.  31  told  him,  saying,  The  child  is  not  awaked 
4.  32  behold,  the  child  was  dead,  (and)  laid 

4.  35  the  child  sneezed,  .and  the  child  opened 

5.  14  Ins  flesh  came  again  like.. a  little  child 
Prov  20.  1 1  a  child  is  known  by  his  doings,  wdiether 

22.  6  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go 

22.  1 5  Foolishness  (is)  bound  in  the  heart  of  a  c. 

23.  13  Withold  not  correction  from  the  child 
29.  15  but  a  child  left  to  (himself)  bringeth  his 

Eccl.  10.  16  Woe  to  thee,  .when  thy  king  (is)  a  child 
Isa.     3.    5  the  child  shall  behave  himself  proudly 

7.  16  before  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the 

8.  4  before  the  child  shall  have  knowledge  to 

10.  19  the  rest,  .shall  be  few,  that  a  child  may 

11.  6  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them 

65.  20  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old 
Jer.     1.    6  behold,  I  cannot  speak ,  for  I  (am)  a  child 
1.    7  the  Lord  said..  Say  not,  I  (am)  a  child:  for 
Hos.  11.    1  When  Israel(was)achild,  then I loved him 

8.  Youth,  lad,  ijri  noar. 

Job  33.  25  His  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  a  child's 
Prov  29.  21  bringeth  up  his  servant  from  a  child 

9.  Suckling,  tyy  old. 

Jer.  44.   7  to  cut  off  from  you.,  child  and  suckling 


10.  Babe  (newly  born  or  unborn),  $p£<pos  brephos. 
2  Ti.    3.  15  that  from  a  child  thou  hast  known  the 

11.  Babe  (without  full  power  of  speech),  v-fjirios. 
1  Co  13. 11  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child 

13.  11  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  ch. 
Gal.    4.    1  the  heir,  as  long  as  he  is  a  child,  differeth 

12.  A  little  or  young  lad,  waio'lov  paklion. 

Mark  9.  24  straightway  the  father  of  the  child  cried 
9.  36  he  took  a  child,  and  set  him  in  the  midst 

Luke  1.  59  they  came  to  circumcise  the  child ;  and 
1.  66  What  manner  of  child  shall  this  be  !  And 
1.  76  thou,  child,  shalt  be  called  the  Prophet 

1.  80  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  spirit 
e.  17  which  was  told  them  concerning  this  ch. 

2.  21  days.. for  the  circumcising  of  [the  child] 
2.  27  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus 

2.  40  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  spirit 
9.  47  And  Jesus . .  took  a  child,  and  set  him  1  iy 
9.  48  Whosover  shall  receive  this  child  in  my 
John  4.  49  saith .  .Sir,  come  down  ere  my  child  die 
16.  21  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child 
Heb  11.  23  because  they  saw  (he  was)  a  proper  child 
13.. 4  lad,  boy,  child,  scrwint,  ivcus  pais. 

Matt  17.  18  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  hour 
Luke  2.  43  the  child  Jesus  tarried  behind  in  Jerus. 

9.  42  healed  the  child,  and  delivered  him  again 
Acts    4.  27  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  Jesus 
4.  30  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  child  Jesus 
14.  One  born,  a  child,  t4kvov  teknon. 

Matt  10.  21  to  death,  and  the  father  the  child :  and  the 
Luke  1.    7  they  had  no  child,  because  that  Elizabeth 
Acts    7.    5  to  his  seed . .  wheu  (as  yet)  he  had  no  child 
Rev.  12.    4  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born 
12.    5  her  child  was  caught  up  unto  God,  and 
15.51m,  vl6s  huios. 

Matt  23.  15  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell 
Acts  13.  10  (thou)  child  of  the  devil,  (thou)  enemy  of 
Rev  12.  5  And  she  brought  forth  a  man  child,  who 
[See  also  Fatherless,  first,  maid,  man  child,  suckling, 
weaned,  young.] 

CHILD,  to  be  a  — 

To  act  as  a  speechless  babe,  vqirtdCco  nejnazo. 

1  Co  14.  20  howbeit  in  malice  be  ye  children,  but  in 
CHILD  bearing  — 
Bearing  of  children,  reKvoyovia  tehnogonia. 

1  Tim  2.  15  she  shall  be  saved  in  child  bearing,  if 
CHILD,  to  be  delivered  of  a  — 
1.2*0  bear,  bring  forth,  "tp;  yalad. 

1  Ki.  3.  17  I  was  delivered  of  a  child  with  her  in  the 
2.  To  bear  a  child,  ti'/ctch  tikto. 

Heb.  11.  11  [was  delivered  of  a  child]  when  she  was 
CHILD,  great  with  — 
Pregnant,  holding  in,  conceiving,  cynvos  cyfaios. 

Luke  2.    5  Mary  his. .  wife,  being  great  with  child 
CHILD,  of  a  — 
From  boyhood,  •xaih'L6&$v  paid&oihen, 

Mark  9.  21  How  long  is  it  ago  .'.And  he  said,  Of  ach. 
CHILD  or  children,  little  — 
1. Little  one,  *$  taph. 

Num.  16.  27  and  their  sons,  and  their  little  children 

Esth.  3. 13  both  young  and  old,  little  children  and 

Eze.     9.    6  Slay . .  both  maids,  and  little  children 

2.  Little  or  young  child,  •rratBiov  paidion. 

Matt.  iS.  2  Jesus  called  a  little  child  unto  him,  and 
18.    3  Except  ye  be  converted . .  as  little  children 
18.    4  shall  humble  himself  as  this  little  child 

18.  5  whoso  shall  receive  one  such  little  child 

19.  13  Then  were  there  brought,  .little  children 
19.  14  Suffer  little  children,  and  forbid  them  not 

Markio.  14  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me 
10.  is  receive  the  kingdom,  .as  a  little  child 

Luke  1 8.  16  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me 
18.  17  receive  the  kingdom,  .as  a  little  child  shall 

1  Jo.    2.  13  I  write  unto  you,  little  children,  because 
2.  18  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time  :  and  as 

3. Little  or  young  child,  tckv{ov  teknion. 

John  13.  33  Little  children,  yet  a  little  while  I  am 
Gal      4.  19  My  [little  children],  of  whom  I  travail  in 
1  Jo.    2.    1  My  little  children,  these  things  write  I 
2.  12  little  children,  .your  sins  are  forgiven  you 

2.  28  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  him 

3.  7  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you 

3.  18  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word 

4.  4  Ye  are  of  God,  little  children,  and  have 

5.  21  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols 

CHILD,  only  — 

1.  Only  one,  Tn;  yachid. 

Judg  11  34  daughter  came,  .she  (was  his)  only  child 

2.  Only  bom,  fxovoyevns  monogenes. 

Luke  9.  38  I  beseech  thee,  .for  he  is  mine  only  child 
CHILD,  sucking  — 
Suckling,  Sly  ul. 

Isa.  49. 15  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child 

CHILD,  young  — 

LittU  OT  yung  lad,  iraiS'iov paidion. 

Matt.  2.    8  Go  and  search,  .for  the  young  child 

2.  9  it.  .stood  over  where  the  young  child  was 
2.  11  they  saw  the  young  child  with  Mary  bis 
2. 13,  20  Arise,  and  take  the  young  child  and 


CHILD 


159 


CHILDREN 


Matt.  2.  13  Herod  will  seek  the  young  child  to  destroy 
2.  14  he  took  the  young  child  and  his  mother 
2.  20  they  are  dead  which  sought  the  young  chi. 
2.  21  he  arose,  and  took  the  young  child  and 

CHILD,  she  that  is  with  — 
Full,  HH^P  meleah. 

Eccl.11.    5  in  the  womb  of  her  that  is  with  child 
CHILD,  with  — 
To  conceive,  rnn  harah. 

Gen.  16.  11  Behold,  thou  (art)  with  child  and  shalt 
38.  24  behold,  she  (is)  with  child  by  whoredom 
38.  25  By  the  man  whose  these  (are  am)  I  with  c. 

Exod  2i.  22  hurt  a  woman  with  child,  so  that  her 

2  Sa,  11.    5  and  told  David,  and  said,  I  (am)  with  chi. 

CHILD,  to  be  with  — 

X.To  conceive,  rnn  harah  (nnn  hariyyah). 

Gen.  ig.  36  Thus  were  both.. with  child  by  their  father 
Isa.    26. 18  "We  have  been  with  child,  we  have  been 

2.  To  have  in  the  womb,  ix°>  &  yaarpl  echo  en  gas. 
Matt.  1.  iS  she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Gho. 
1.  23  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and 
24.  19  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and 
Marki3.  17  But  woe  to  them  that  are  with  child 
Luke  21.  23  But  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child 

1  Th.   5.    3  upon  them,  as.  .upon  a  woman  with  chi. 
Rev.  12.    2  And  she  being  with  child  cried,  travailing 

CHILD,  to  travail  with  — 

l.To  be  painted  {In  travail),  ^n  chul. 

Isa.  54.    1  thou  (that)  didst  not  travail  with  child 
"l.To  bring  forth,  "17;  yalad. 

Jer.  30.  6  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail  with  chi. 
31.    8  her  that  travaileth  with  child  together 

CHILD,  woman  with  — 

To  conceive,  rnn  harah  (■"inn  hariyyah). 

2  Ki    8.  12  thou  wilt,  .rip  up  their  women  with  child 

15.  16  women .  .that  were  with  child  he  ripped 
Isa.   26.  17  Like  as  a  woman  with  child, (that)  draweth 
Jer.  31.    8  the  woman  with  child  and  her  that 
Hos.  13  16  their  women  with  child  shall  be  ripped 
Amos  1.  13  they  have  ripped  up  the  women  with  chi. 
CHILDHOOD  — 

1.  Youth,  nrfe  yalduth. 

Eccl.  11.  10  Therefore  remove  sorrow.,  for  childhood 

2.  Boyhood,  D*"WJja  neuri?n. 

1  Sa.  12.    2  I  have  walked,  .from  my  childhood  unto 
CHILDISH  — 
Babyish,  vt}wlos  nepios. 

1  Co.  13.  11  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  child. 
CHILDLESS  — 
1. Barren 3  'TTK  ariri. 

Gen.  15.    2  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  go  childless 

Lev.  20.  20  bear  their  sin  ;  they  shall  die  childless 
20-  21  his  brother's  nakedness:  they  shall  be  ch. 

Jer.   22.  30  "Write  ye  this  man  childless,  a  man  (that) 
2.  Childless 3  without  a  child,  Iztckvos  ateknos. 

Luke  20.  30  the  second  took  her  to  wife,  and  died  ch. 
CHILDLESS,  to  he  — 
To  OS  bereaved,  Vi'j  shakol. 

1  Sa.  15.  33  so  shall  thy  mother  be  childless  among 
CHILDLESS,  to  make  — 
To  bereave,  Viy  shakol,  3. 

1  Sa.  15.  33  As  thy  sword  hath  made  women  childless 
CHILDREN  — 
1. Son  (produce),  \zben. 

Gen.  3.  16  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth  children 
10.  21  also,  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  Eber 
10.  22  The  children  of  ShemJ;  Elam,  and  Asshur 

10.  23  And  the  children  of  Aram  ;  Uz  and  Hul 

11.  5  tower,  which  the  children  of  men  builded 
iS.  19  that  he  will  command  his  children  and 
19.  38  the  same  (is)  the  father  of  the  children  of 
zi.    7  Sarah  should  have  given  children  suck  ? 

22.  20  she  hath  also  born  children  unto  thy  bro. 

23.  5  the  children  of  Heth  answered  Abraham 
23.    7  Abraham,  .bowed.. to  the  children  of  Heth 
23.  10  Ephron  dwelt  among  the  children  of  Heth 
23.  10  in  the  audience  of  the  children  of  Heth 
23.  iS  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  Heth 
25.    4  All  these  (were)  the  children  of  Keturah 
25.  22  the  children  struggled  together  within 

30.  1  said.  .Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die 

31.  16  that  (is)  our's,  and  our  children's  :  now 
31.  43  and  (these)  children  (are)  my  children 

31.  43  unto  their  children  which  they  have  born? 
32. 1 1  smite  me,(and)  the  mother  with  the  child. 

32.  32  Therefore  the  children  of  Israel  eat  not 

33.  19  hi*  tent,  at  the  hand  of  the  children  of  H. 
36.  2 1  these  (are)  the  dukes . .  the  children  of  Seir 
36.  22  children  of  Lotan  were  Hori  and  Heman 
36.  23  the  children  of  Shobal  (were)  these;  Alvan 
56.  24  these  (are)  the  children  of  Zibeon;  both 
36.  25  the  children  of  Anah  (were)  these ;  Dishon 
36.  26  these  (are)  the  children  of  Dishon ;  Hem. 
36.  27  The  children  of  Ezer  (are)  these  ;  Bilhan 
36.  28  the  children  of  Dishan  (are)  these ;  I'z 

36.  31  there  reigned  any  king  over  the  children 

37.  3  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his  children 
45.  10  thy  children,  and  thy  children's  children 

45.  21  the  children  of  Israel  did  sl  :  and  Joseph 

46.  8  these  1,  .re)  the  names  of  the  children  of  Is. 
49.    8  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down 

49.  32  The  purchase .  .(was)  from  the  children  of 


Geu.    50. 


Exod. 


14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 


15- 
16. 

16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
37- 

17- 
*7- 
19. 
19. 
19. 


3i- 
3i- 
3i- 
3=- 
32. 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 


23  And  Joseph  saw  Ephraini's  children  of  the 
23  the  children  also  of  Machir  the  son  of 
25  And  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children 

1  Now  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  children 

7  the  children . .  were  fruitful,  and  increased 
9  the  people  of  the  children  of  Israel  (are) 

12  were  grieved  because  of  the  children  of 

13  the  Egyptians  made  the  children  of  Israel 
23  the  children  of  Israel  sighed  by  reason 

25  God  looked  upon  the  children  of  Israel 
9  the  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  come 

10  mayest  bring  forth  mypeople  the  children 

11  should  bring  forth  the  children  of  Israel 
13  (when)  I  come  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
14,  15  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children 
29  Moses,  .gathered. .  elders  of  the  children 
31  that  the  Lord  had  visited  the  children  of 
14, 15, 19  the  officers  of  the  children  of  Israel 

5  also  heard  the  groaning  of  the  children 

6  say  uuto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  (am)  the 
9  Moses  spake  so  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

11  that  he  let  the  children  of  Israel  go  out 

12  the  children  of  Israel  have  not  hearkened 

13  gave  them  a  charge  unto  the  children  of 
13  to  bring  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the 

26  Bring  out  the  children  of  Israel  from  the 

27  to  bring  out  the  children  of  Israel  from 

2  that  he  send  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 

4  I  may . .  bring  forth . .  the  children  of  Israel 

5  bring  out  the  children  of  Israel  from 

4  nothing  die  of  all  (that  is)  the  children's 

6  but  of  the  cattle  of  the  children  of  Israel 
26  where  the  children  of  Israel  (were)  was 
35  neither  would  he  let  the  children  of  Israel 
20  so  that  he  would  not  let  the  children  of 

23  but  all  the  children  of  Israel  had  light 

26  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  your  children 

27  who  passed  over  the  houses  of  the  children 
2S  the  children  of  Israel  went  away,  and 

31  both  ye  and  the  children  of  Israel;  and  go 
35  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to  the 

37  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed  from 
40  the  sojourning  of  the  children  of  Israel 

42  be  observed  of  all  the  children  of  Israel 

50  Thus  did  all  the  children  of  Israel;  as  the 

51  the  Lord  did  bring  the  children  of  Israel 

2  openeth  the  womb  among  the  children 
13  first  born  of  man  among  thy  children 

15  but  all  the  first  born  of  my  children  I 

18  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  harnessed 

19  for  he  bad  straitly  sworn  the  children  of 
2,  15  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that 

3  Pharaoh  will  say  of  the  children  of  Israel 

8  he  pursued  after  the  children  of  Israel 
8  and  the  children  of  Israel  went  out  with 

10  when  Pharaoh  drew  nigh,  the  children  of 
10  the  children  of  Israel  cried  out  unto  the 

16  and  the  children  of  Israel  shall  go  on  dry 
22  the  children  of  Israel  went  into  the 

29  the  children  of  Israel  walked  upon  dry 

1  Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of  Is. 

19  but  the  children  of  Israel  went  on  dry 
1,  2,  9,  10  congregation  of  the  children  of  Is. 

3  And  the  children  of  Israel  said  unto 
12  have  heard  the  raurmuiings  of  the  children 

15  when  the  children  of  Israel  saw  (it),  they 

17  the  children  of  Israel  did  so,  and  gathered 
35  the  children  of  Israel  did  eat  manna  forty 

1  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel 
3  to  kill  us  and  our  children  aud  our  cattle 

7  because  of  the  chiding  of  the  children  of 

1  when  the  children  of  Israel  were  gone 
3  Thus  shalt  thou . .  tell  the  children  of;Is. 
6  which  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children 

5  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children 
22  Thus  thou  shalt  say  unto  the  children  of 

5  I  love  my  master,  my  wife,  and  my  child. 

24  be  widows,  and  your  children  fatherless 
5  he  sent  young  men  of  the  children  of  Isr. 

n  upon  the  nobles  of  the  children  of  Israel 
17  sight,  .(was),  .in  the  eyes  of  the  children 

2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that 
22  commandment  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

20  thou  shalt  command  the  children  of  Israel 

21  a  statute,  .on  the  behalf  of  the  children 
1  And  take  thou . .  from  among  the  children 

9, 11,  21,  29  the  names  of  the  children  of  Isr. 
12  stones  of  memorial  unto  the  children  of 
'21,  29,  30  shall  bear  the  judgment  of  the  ch. 

38  which  the  children  of  Israel  shall  hallow 

28  by  a  statute  for  ever  from  the  children  of 

25  heave  offering  from  the  children  of  Israel 

43  there  I  will  meet  with  the  children  of  Is. 
45  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel 

12  When  thou  takest  the  sum  of  the  children 

16  take  the  atonement  money  of  the  children 
16  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

31  thou  shaltspeak  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

13  Speak  thou  also  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

16  children  of  Israel  shall  keep  the  sabbath 

17  It  (is)  a  sign  between  me  and  the  children 
20  and  made  the  children  of  Israel  drink 

28  And  the  children  of  Levi  did  according  to 

5  Say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  Ye  (are)  a 

6  the  children  of  Israel  stripped  themselves 

7  and  upon  the  children's  children  unto 

30  when  Aaron  and  all  the  children  of  Israel 

32  afterward  all  the  children  of  Israel  came 

34  he  came  out  and  spake  unto  the  children 

35  the  children  of  Israel  saw  the  face  of  Mos. 
1 ,  4,  20  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Is. 

29  The  children  of  Israel  brought  a  willing 


Exod.  35.  30  Moses  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

36.   3  which  the  children  of  Israel  had  brought 
39.    6,  14  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel 
39.    7  for  a  memorial  to  the  children  of  Israel 
39.  32  and  the  children  of  Israel  did  according 

39.  42  so  the  children  of  Israel  made  all  the 

40.  36  the  children  of  Israel  went  onward  in  all 
Lev.       1.    2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 

4.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying 

6.  18  All  the  males  among  the  children  of  Aaron 

7.  23,  29  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

7.  34  shoulder  have  I  taken  of  the  children  of 
7.  34  for  ever  from  among  the  children  of  Israel 
7.  36  to  be  given  then)  of  the  children  of  Israel 
7.  3S  he  commanded  the  cliildren  of  Israel  to 
9.    3  And  unto  the  children  of  Israel  thou 
10.  11  And  that  ye  may  teach  the  children  of  Is. 

10.  14  out  of  the  sacrifices,  .of  the  children  of 

11.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying 

12.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying 
15.    2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say 

15.  31  Thus  shall  ye  separate  the  children  of  Is. 

16.  5  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Isr. 
16.  19  from  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of 
16.  21  confess,  .all  the  iniquities  of  the  children 

16.  34  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  children 

17.  2  Speak . .  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
17.    5  To  the  end  that  the  children  of  Israel 
17.  12,  14  Therefore  I  said  unto  the  children  of 

17.  13  whatsoever  man  (there  be)  of  the  children 

18.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 

19.  2  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of 

19.  18  nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children 

20.  2  thou  shalt  say  to  the  children  of  Israel 

21.  24  to  his  sons,  and  unto  all  the  children  of 

22.  2, 15  from  the  holy  things  of  the  children  of 
22.  3  which  the  children  of  Israel  hallow  unto 
22.  18  to  his  sons,  and  unto  all  the  children  of 

22.  32  I  will  be  hallowed  among  the  cliildren  of 

23.  2, 10,  24,  34  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
23,  43  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to 

23.  44  declared  unto  the  children  of  Israel  the 

24.  2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they 
24.    8  (being  taken)  from  the  children  of  Israel 
24.  10  went  out  among  the  cliildren  of  Israel 
24.  15  And  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children 
24.  23  And  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  Is. 

24.  23  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  as  the 

25.  2  Speak  uuto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
25. 33  their  possession  among  the  children  of  Is 
25-  41.  54  (both)  he  and  his  children  with  him 
25.  45  Moreover  of  the  children  of  the  strangers 
25.  46  as  an  inheritance  for  your  children  after 
25.  46  but  over  your  brethren  the  children  of  Is. 

25.  55  unto  me  the  children  of  Israel  (are)  serv. 

26.  46  Lord  made  between  him  and  the  children 

27.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
27.  34  for  the  children  of  Israel  in  mount  Sinai 

Num.    1.  2,  53  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel 
t.  10  Of  the  children  of  Joseph  :  of  Ephraim 
1.  20  And  the  children  of  Reuben,  Israel's  eldest 
1.  22  Of  the  children  of  Simeon,  by  their  genera. 
1.  24  Of  the  cliildren  of  Gad,  by  their  genera. 
1.  26  Of  the  children  of  Judah,  by  their  genera. 
1.  28  Of  the  children  of  Issachar,  by  their  gen. 
1.  30  Of  the  children  of  Zebulun,  by  their 
1.  32  Of  the  children  of  Joseph . .  of  the  children 
1.  34  Of  the  children  of  Manasseh,  by  their  gen. 
1.  36  Of  the  children  of  Benjamin,  by  their  gen. 
1.  38  Of  the  cliildren  of  Dan,  by  their  genera. 
1.  40  Of  the  children  of  Asher,  by  their  genera. 
x.  42  Of  the  children  of  Naphtali,  throughout 
1.  45  were  numbered  of  the  children  of  Israel 
1.  49  the  sum  of  them  among  the  children  of 
1.  52  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  their 

1.  54  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to 

2.  2  Every  man  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall 
2.  3  Nahshon . .  captain  of  the  children  of  Judah 
2.  5  Nathaneel . .  captain  of  the  children  of  Iss. 
2.  7  Eliab . .  captain  of  the  children  of  Zebulun 
2.  10,  12,  20, 25,  27,  29  captain  of  the  children  of 
2.  32  numbered  of  the  children  of  Israel 

2.  33  were  not  numbered  among  the  children 

2.  34  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  according 

3.  4  died,  .and  they  had  no  cliildren  :  and  E. 
3.  8  and  the  charge  of  the  children  of  Israel 
3.  9  given  unto  him  out  of  the  cliildren  of  Is. 
3.  12  the  Levites  from  among  the  children  of 
3.  12  openeth  the  matrix  among  the  children 
3. 15  Number  the  children  of  Levi  after  the 

3.  38  for  the  charge  of  the  children  of  Israel 
3.  40  first  born  of  the  males  of  the  children 
3,  41,  42,  45  first  born  among  the  children  of 
3.  41  among  the  cattle  of  the  cliildren  of  Israel 
3.  46,  50  of  the  first  born  of  the  children  of  Isr. 

5.  2  Command  the  cliildren  of  Israel,  that 

4  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  so,  and 

4  spake  unto  Moses,  so  did  the  children 

6,  12  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 

9  of  all  the  holy  things  of  the  children 

2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  and 

23  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless  the  children 

6.  27  shall  put  my  name  upon  the  children 
7. 24  Eliab.  .prince  of  the  children  of  Zebu. 

7.  30  Elizurof .  .prince,  .children  of  Reuben 
7.  36  Sheluiuiel.  .prince  of  the  children  of  S 
7.  42  Eliasaph.  .prince  of  the  children  of  G. 
7. 48  Elishama.  .prince  of  the  children  of  ' 
7.  54  Gamaliel,  .prince  of  the  children  of 
7.  60  Abidan.  .prince  of  the  children  of  B. 
7.  66  Ahiezer.  .prince  of  the  children  of  D. 
7.  72  Pagiel.  .prince  of  the  cliildren  of  As. 


5- 
5- 
5- 
5. 
6. 
6. 


CHILDREN 


160 


CHILDREN 


Num.    7.  78  Ahira.  .prince  of  the  children  of  N. 

8.  6,  14  Take  the  Levites  from  among  the  chi. 
8.    9  the  whole  assembly  of  the  children  of  Is. 
8. 10  the  children  of  Israel  shall  put  their 
8.  ji  an  offering  of  the  children  of  Israel 
8.  16  given  unto  me  from  among  the  children 
8.  16  the  first  born  of  all  the  children  of  Israel 
8.  17,  18  all  the  first  born  of  the  children  of  Is. 
8.  ig  to  his  sons  from  among  the  children  of  I. 
8.  19  to  do  the  service  of  the  children  of  Israel 
8.  19  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  children 
8.  19  there  be  no  plague  among  the  children 
8.  19  when  the  children  of  Israel  come  nigh 
8.  20  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of 

8.  20  so  did  the  children  of  Israel  unto  them 
2  Let  the  children  of  Israel  also  keep-the  pa. 

4  And  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

5  according  to.  .so  did  the  children  of  Isr. 
7  we  may  not  offer,  .among  the  children 

10  Speak  uuto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying 
^.  17  then  after  that  the  children  of  Israel 

9.  17  there  the  children  of  Israel  pitched  their 
9.  18  At  the  commandment,  .the  children  of  Isr. 
9.  19  then  the  children  of  Israel  kept  the  charge 
9.  22  the  children  of  Israel  abode  in  their  tents 

jo.  12  And  the  children  of  Israel  took  their 
10. 14  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  the  children 
10.  15  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Iss. 
10. 16,  19,  20  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  child. 
10.  22  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  the  children 
30.  23,  24  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 
10.  25  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  the  children 
10.  26,  27  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 

10.  28  (were)  the  journeyings  of  the  children 

11.  4  and  the  children  of  Israel  also  wept  again 
13.    2  which  I  give  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
23.   3  all  those  men  (were)  heads  of  the  children 
13.  24  which  the  children  of  Israel  cut  down 
23.  26  to  all  the  congregation  of  the  children 

13.  32  they  had  searched  unto  the  children 

14.  2  And  all  the  children  of  Israel  murmured 
14.   s  of  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Is. 
14.    7  uuto  all  the  company  of  the  children 

14. 10  appeared.. before  all  the  children  of  Israel 
14. 18  visiting  the  iniquity,  .upon  the  children 
14.  27  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of 

34.  33  your  children  shall  wander  in  the  wilder. 

14.  39  told  these  sayings  unto  all  the  children 

35.  2,  18,  38  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
35.  25,  26  all  the  congregation  of  the  children 

15.  29  him  that  is  born  among  the  children 

15.  32  while  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  the 

16.  2  with  certain  of  the  children  of  Israel 
16.  3S  they  shall  be  a  sign  unto  the  children 
16.  40  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
16.  41  all  the  congregation  of  the  children 
37.   2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  take 
37.    5  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  Israel 
37.   6  And  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  Is. 

37.  9  before  the  Lord  uuto  all  the  children 

37. 12  And  the  children  of  Israel  spake  unto  M. 

38.  5  no  wrath  any  more  upon  the  children 
18.    6  the  Levites  from  among  the  children 
38.    8  all  the  hallowed  things  of  the  children 
38.  11  all  the  wave  offerings  of  the  children  of 
18.  19  which  the  children  of  Israel  offer  unto 
38.  20  thine  inheritance  among  the  children  of 
38.  21 1  have  given  the  children  of  Levi  all  the 
j8.  22  Neither  must  the  children  of  Israel 
38.  23  among  the  children  of  Israel  they  have 
28.  24  But  the  tithes  of  the  children  of  Israel 
38.  24  Among  the  children  of  Israel  they  shall 
18.  26  When  ye  take  of  the  children  of  Israel 
18.  28  which  ye  receive  of  the  children  of  Israel 

38.  32  pollute  the  holy  things  of  the  children 

39.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that 
39.    9  for  the  congregation  of  the  childreu  of  Is. 
39.  30  and  it  shall  be  uuto  the  children  of  Israel 
20.   1  Then  came  the  children  of  Israel,  (even) 
20.  12  to  sanctify  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children 

20. 13  because  the  children  of  Israel  strove 
20. 39  And  the  children  of  Israel  said  unto  him 
20.  22  And  the  children  of  Israel,  .journeyed 

20.  24  which  I  have  given  unto  the  children  of 
2i.  10  And  the  children  of  Israel  set  forward 

21.  24  even  unto  the  children  of  Amnion 

21.  24  the  border  of  the  children  of  Ammon 

22.  1  And  the  children  of  Israel  set  forward 
22.   3  Moab  was  distressed  because  of  the  civil. 
22.   5  the  river,  .of  the  children  of  his  people 

24. 17  and  destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth 
25.    6  one  of  the  children  of  Israel  came  and 
25.    6  of  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of 

25.  8  the  plague  was  stayed  from  the  children 

25. 11  turned  my  wrath  away  from  the  children 
25. 11  that  I  consumed  not  the  children  of 
25. 13  made  an  atonement  for  the  children 

26.  2  of  all  the  congregation  of  the  children 
26.    4  commanded  Moses  and  the  children 
26.    5  the  eldest  son.  .the  children  of  Reuben 
26.  11  Notwithstanding  the  children  of  Korah 
26. 15  The  children  of  Gad  after  their  families 

26. 18  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  children 
26.  44  (Of)  the  children  of  Asher  after  their 
26.  51  These  (were)  the  numbered  of  the  child. 
26.  62  not  numbered  among  the  children 
26.  62  given  them  among  the  children  of  Israel 

26.  63,  64  numbered  the  children  of  Israel  in 

27.  8  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  Is. 
27.  11  it  shall  be  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
27.  12  which  I  have  given  unto  the  children 
27.  20  all  the  congregation  of  the  children 


Num.  27, 
28. 
29. 
30- 


Dent. 


21  and  all  the  children  of  Israel  with  him 

2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say 
40  And  Moses  told  the  children  of  Israel 

1  Moses  spake.. concerning  the  children 

2  Avenge  the  children  of  Israel  of  the  Mid. 
9  And  the  children  of  Israel  took  (all)  the 

12  unto  the  congregation  of  the  children 

16  Behold,  these  caused  the  children  of  Isr. 
30,  42,  47  of  the  children  of  Israel's  half 

54  (for)  a  memorial  for  the  children  of  Israel 
1  children  of  Reuben  and  the  children  of  G. 
2,  25  The  children  of  Gad  and  the  children 
29,  31  the  children  of  Gad  and  the  children 
6  And  Moses  said  unto  the  children  of  Gad 

6  And  Moses  said,  .to  the  children  of  Reu. 
7,  9  discourage  ye.  .the  childreu  of  Israel 

17  will  go  ready  armed  before  the  children 

18  until  the  children  Israel  have  inherited 

28  fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Is. 
33  gave  unto  them,  (even)  to  the  children  of 

33  and  to  the  children  of  Reuben,  and  unto 

34  And  the  children  of  Gad  built  Dibon 

37  And  the  children  ofReubenbuiltHeshbon 

39  And  the  children  of  Machir.  .went  to  Gil. 

1  These  (are)  the  journeys  of  the  children 

3  on  the  morrow,  .the  children  of  Israel 

5  And  the  children  of  Israel  removed  from 

38  after  the  children  of  Israel  were  come  out 

40  heard  of  the  coming  of  the  children  of  Is. 
"51  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 

2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say 

13  Moses  commanded  the  children 

14  For  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Reuben 

14  and  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Gad 

20  Andof  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Simeon 

22  the  prince  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 

23  The  prince  of  the  children  of  Joseph 

23  for  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Manasseh 
24,  25,  26,  27,  28  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 

29  divide  the  inheritance  unto  the  children 
2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they 
8  the  possession  of  the  children  of  Israel 

10  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and 

15  for  the  children  of  Israel,  and  for  the 

34  for  I  the  Lord  dwell  among  the  children 
1  of  the  families  of  the  children  of  Gilead 

1  the  chief  fathers  of  the  children  of  Israel 

2  for  an  inheritance  by  lot  to  the  childreu 

3  of  the  (other)  tribes  of  the  children  of  Isr. 

4  when  the  jubilee  of  the  children  of  Israel 

5  Moses  commanded  the  children  of  Israel 

7  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  Israel 

7  every  one  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall 

8  in  any  tribe  of  the  children  of  Israel 

8  that  the  children  of  Israel  may  enjoy 

9  every  one  of  the  tribes  of  the  children 
13  Moses  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

3  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
36  I  give  the  land . .  and  to  his  children 

39  and  your  childreu, .  .they  shall  go  in 

4  coast  of  your  brethren  the  children  of  E. 

8  from  our  brethren  the  children  of  Esau 
9, 19  I  have  given  Ar  unto  the  children  of  L. 
32  but  the  children  of  Esau  succeeded  them 

19  comest  nigh  over  against  the  children 
19,  37  the  land  of  the  children  of  Ammon 
22  As  he  did  to  the  children  of  Esau 

29  As  the  children  of  Esau  which  dwelt  in  S. 
3 1  (is)  it  not  in  Rabbath  of  the  children  of  A. 

16  (which  is)  the  border  of  the  children  of  A. 

18  before  your  brethren  the  children  of  Isr. 
10  and  (that)  they  may  teach  their  children 
25  thou  shalt  beget  children,  and  children's 

40  with  thee,  and  with  thy  children  after 

44  which  Moses  set  before  the  children  of  I. 

45  which  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of 

46  whom  Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel 

9  visiting  the  iniquity .  .upon  the  childreu 
29  with  them,  and  with  their  children  for 

7  thou  shalt  teach  them . .  unto  thy  children 
2  A  people  great  and  tall,  the  children  of 

2  Who  can  stand  before  the  children  of  A. 

6  And  the  children  of  Israel  took  their 

6  from  Beeroth  of  the  children  of  Jaakan 
2  for  (I  speak)  not  with  your  children 

19  Aud  ye  shall  teach  them  your  children 

21  and  the  days  of  your  children,  in  the 
25  with  thee,  and  with  thy  children  after 

28  and  with  thy  children  after  thee  for  ever 
13  the  children  of  Belial,  are  gone  out  from 

1  Ye  (are)  the  children  of  the  LORD  your 

20  may  prolong  (his)  days,  .and  his  children 

15  and  they  have  born  him  children 

8  The  children  that  are  begotten  of  them 

7  stealing  any  of  his  brethren  of  the  children 

16  for  the  childreu,  neither  shall  the  children 

54  and  toward  the  remnant  of  his  children 

55  to  any.  .of  the  flesh  of  his  childreu 

57  toward  her  children  which  she  shall  bear 

1  to  make  with  the  children  of  Israel  in  the 

22  of  your  children  that  shall  rise  up  after 

29  unto  us  and  to  our -children  for  ever 

2  thou  and  thy  children,  with  all  thine 

13  And  (that)  their  children,  .may  hear,  and 
19  and  teach  it  the  children  of  Israel 

19  a  witness  for  me  against  the  children  of 

22  and  taught  it  the  children  of  Israel  I 

23  for  thou  shalt  bring  the  children  of  Isr. 

5  their  spot  (is)  not  (the  spot)  of  his  children 

8  according  to  the  number  of  the  children 

20  a  very  fro  ward  generation,  children  in 
46  which  ye  shall  command  your  children 


Deut.  32 
32 
32 
32 
33' 
33' 
33 
34 
34> 


Josh. 


49  which  I  gjve  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
51  against  me  among  the  children  of  Israel 

51  not  in  the  midst  of  the  childrenof 

52  unto  the  land  which  I  give  the  children 

1  Moses  the  man  of  God  blessed  the  child. 

9  nor  knev.  his  own  children  :  for  they  have 
24  (Let)  Asher  (be)  blessed  with  children 

8  And  the  children  of  Israel  wept  for  Moses 

9  and  the  children  of  Israel  hearkened  unto 

2  I  do  give  to  them . .  to  the  children  of  Isr. 
2  there  came  men . .  of  the  children  of  Israel 
1  to  Jordan,  he  and  all  the  children  of  Israel 

9  And  Joshua  said  unto  the  children  of  Is. 
4  whom  he  had  prepared  of  the  children 

5,  8  according  unto  the  number  of  the . .  ch. 

6  when  your  children  ask  (their  fathers)  in 

7  for  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

8  the  children  of  Israel  did  so  as  Joshua 
12  the  children  of  Reuben,  and  the  children 
12  passed  over  armed  before  the  children  of 
21  And  he  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

21  When  your  children  shall  ask  their 

22  Then  ye  shall  let  your  children  know 

1  dried  up  the  waters . .  from  before  the  ch. 

1  neitherwas  there  spirit .  .because  of  the  ch. 

2  and  circumcise  again  the  children  of  Isr. 

3  and  circumcised  the  children  of  Israel 

6  For  the  children  of  Israel  walked  forty 

7  And  their  children . .  them  Joshua 

10  And  the  children  of  Israel  encamped  in 
12  neither  had  the  children  of  Israel  manna 

1  because  of  the  children  of  Israel :  none 

2  the  children  of  Israel  committed  a 

1  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  ag.  the  c. 
12  Therefore  the  children  of  Israel  could  not 

23  unto  Joshua,  aud  unto  all  the  childrenof 

31  Moses,  .commanded  the  children  of  Israel 

32  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  Israel 

17  And  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed 

18  And  the  children  of  Israel  smote  them 
26  out  of  the  hand  of  the  children  of  Israel 

4  with  Joshua  and  with  the  children  of  Is. 

11  whom  the  children  of  Israel  slew  with 

12  up  the  Amorites  before  the  children  of  I. 

20  Joshua  and  the  children  of  Israel  had 

21  his  tongue  against  any  of  the  children 

14  the  children  of  Israel  took  for  a  prey 

19  that  made  peace  with  the  children  of  Is. 

22  none,  .left  in  the  land  of  the  children  of 

1  which  the  children  of  Israel  smote 

2  (which  is)  the  border  of  the  children  of  A. 

6  Them  did  Moses,  .aud  the  children  of  I. 

7  Joshua  and  the  children  of  Israel  smote 
6  drive  out  from  before  the  children  of  Isra. 

10  unto  the  border  of  the  children  of  Ammon 

13  Nevertheless  the  children  of  Israel  expe. 

15  Moses  gave  unto.,  the  children  of  Reuben 

22  Balaam,  .did  the  children  of  Israel  slay 

23  the  border  of  the  children  of  Reuben 

23  This  (was)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

24  unto  the  children  of  Gad  according  to 

25  half  the  land  of  the  children  of  Ammon 

28  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

29  of  the  children  of  Manasseh  by  their 

31  (pertaining)  unto  the  children  of  Machir 

31  to  the  one  half  of  the  children  of  Machir 

1  which  the  children  of  Israel  inherited  in 

1  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the.  .children 

4  For  thejchildren  of  Joseph  were  two  tribes 

5  so  the  children  of  Israel  did,  and  they 

6  Then  the  children  of  Judah  came  unto  J. 

9  thine  inheritance,  and  thy  children's  for 
1  of  the  children  of  Judah  by  their  families 

12  This  (is)  the  coast  of  the  children  of  J. 
23  he  gave  a  part  among  the  children  of  J. 
20,  21  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Judah 
63  the  children  of  Judah  could  not  drive  them 
63  the  Jebusites  dwell  with  the  children  of  J. 

1  the  lot  of  the  children  of  Joseph  fell  from 

4  So  the  children  of  Joseph,  .took  their 

5  the  border  of  the  children  of  Ephraim . . 

8  This  (is)  the  inheritance .  .of  the  children 

9  the  separate  cities  for  the  children  of  E. 
9  among  the  inheritance  of  the  cldldren  of 

2  for  the  rest  of  the  children  of  Manasseh 
2  for  the  children  of  Abiezer.  .the  children 
2  the  children  of  Asriel.  .the  children  of  S. 
2  the  children  of  Hepher.  .the  children  of 
2  these  were  the  male  children  of  Manasseh 

8  Tappuah.  .(belonged)  to  the  childrenof  E. 

12  the  children  of  Manasseh  could  not  drive 

13  when  the  children  of  Israel  were  waxen 

14  And  the  children  of  Joseph  spake  unto  J. 

16  And  the  children  of  Joseph  said,  The  hill 

1  the  whole  congregation  of  the  children 

2  remained  among  the  children  of  Israel 

3  Aud  Joshua  said  unto  the  children  of  I. 

10  Joshua  divided  the  land  unto  the  children 

11  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  B. 

1 1  children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of  J. 
14  Kirjath-jearim,  a  city  of  the  cliildren  of 

20  This  (was)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

21  Now  the  cities,  .of  the  children  of  Benja. 
28  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

1,  8  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Simeon 
1  within  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of 

9  Out  of  the  portion  of  the  children  of  Jud. 
9  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  Simecn 
9  the  part  of  the  children  of  Judah  was  too 
9  therefore  the  children,  .had  their  inheri. 

10  the  third  lot  came  up  for  the  children 
16  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 


L 


CHILDREN 


161 


CHILDREN 


Josh.ig.  17  for  the  children,  .according  to  their  fam 
bo.  23  This  (is)  the  inheritance,  .of  the  children 
19.  24,  31  for  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Asher 
19.  32  The  sixth  lot  came  out  to  the  children  of 
19.  32  for  the  children  of  Naphtaii  according  to 
sg.  39  This  is  the  inheritance .  .of  the  children  of 
10.  40,  48  tribe  of  the  children  of  Dan  according 
jo.  47  And  the  coast  of  the  children  of  Dan  went 
19.  47  therefore  the  children  of  Dan  went  up  to 

19.  49  the  children  of  Israel  gave  an  inheritance 
ig.  51  the  heads  of  the  fathers . .  of  the  children 
■20.    2  Speak  to  the  children  of  Israel,  saying 

20.  9  appointed  for  all  the  children  of  Israel 
-21.    1  heads  of  the  fathers . .  of  the  children  of  I. 
ai.   3  And  the  children  of  Israel  gave  unto  the 
■21.   4  and  the  children  of  Aaron .  .had  by  lot 
•21.    5  And  the  rest  of  the  children  of  Kohath 
sx.    6  the  children  of  Gershon  (had)  by  lot  out 
■21.    7  The  children  of  Merari  by  their  families 
31.    8  the  children  of  Israel  gave  by  lot  unto 
■21.   9  they  gave  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 
■ax.    9  and  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  S. 

21.  10  Which  the  children  of  Aaron,  .had 

31.  to  of  the  Kohathites . .  of  the  children  of  1. 

21.  13  Thus  they  gave  to  the  children  of  Aaron 
31. 19  All  the  cities  of  the  children  of  Aaron 
2i.  20  the  families  of  the  children  of  Kohath 
31.  20  Levites  which  remained  of  the  children 
2i.  26  for  the  families  of  the  children  of  Kohath 

31.  27  unto  the  children  of  Gershon,  of  the  fam. 
■  21.  34  unto  the  families  of  the  children  of  Merari 

si.  40  So  all  the  cities  for  the  children  of  Merari 
3i.  41  within  the  possession  of  the  children 

32.  9  the  children  of  Reuben,  and  the  children 

22.  9  and  departed  from  the  children  of  Israel 
22.  10,  11,  21,  30,  34  children  of  Reuben,  and  the 
22.  11  the  children  of  Israel  heard  say,  Behold 

22. 11  at  the  passage  of  the  children  of  Israel 
22. 13  And  when  the  children  of  Israel  heard 

22. 12  the  whole  congregation  of  the  children 

22. 13  children  of  Israel  sent  unto  the  children 
22.  15  children  of  Reuben,  and  to  the  children 
22.  24  your  children  might  speak  unto  our  chil. 
22.  25  ye  children  of  Reuben  and  children  of  G. 
22.  25  your  children  make  our  children  cease 
22.  27  your  children  may  not  say  to  our  children 
22.  30  the  children  of  Gad,  and  the  children 
22.  31  Phinehas.  .said  unto  the  children  of  R. 
22.  31  the  children  of  Gad,  and  to  the  children 
22.  32  Phinehas.  .returned  from  the  children  of 
32.  32  from  the  children  of  Gad . .  to  the  children 
22.  33  And  the  thing  pleased  the  children  of  Is. 
22.  33  and  the  children  of  Israel  blessed  God 
22.  33  wherein  the  children  of  Reuben  and  Gad 
24.    4  Jacob  and  his  children  went  down  into  E. 
24.  32  which  the  children  of  Israel  brought  up 
24.  32  it  became  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

Judg.  1.  1  that  the  children  of  Israel  asked  the  Lord 
1.  S  the  children  of  Judah  had  fought  against 
1.  9  afterward  the  children  of  Judah  went 
1.  16  the  children .  .Kenite,  Moses'  father-in-law 
1. 16  with  the  children  of  Judah  into  the  wilder. 
1.  21  the  children  of  Benjamin  did  not  drive 

1.  21  but  the  Jebusites  dwell  with  the  children 
t.  34  the  Amorites  forced  the  children  of  Dan 

2.  4  when  the  angel,  .spake.,  unto  all  the  chil. 

2.  6  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  every  man 

2. 11  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 

3.  2  generations  ofthe  children  of  Israel  might 
3.  5  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the  C. 
3.  7  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
3.  8,  14  the  children  of  Israel  served  Chushan 
3.  9,  15  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the 
3.   9  the  Loud  raised  up  a  deliverer  to  the  chi. 

3. 12  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again 
3.  13  he  gathered  unto  him  the  children 
3.  15  by  him  the  childreu  of  Israel  sent 

3.  27  the  children  of  Israel  went  down  with  him 

4.  1  the  children  of  Israel  again  did  evil  iu 

4.    3  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord 
4.   3  he  mightily  oppressed  the  children  of  Is. 
4.    5  the  children  of  Israel  came  up  to  her  for 
4.    6  take,  .ten  thousand  men  of  the  children 
4.  11  Now  Heber.  .of  the  children  of  Hobab 
4.  23  God  subdued.  .Jabin..  before  the  children 

4.  24  hand  of  the  children  of  Israel  prospered 
6.  1  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
6.  2  the  children  of  Israel  made  them  the  dens 
6«   3»  33  the  children  of  the  east,  even  they 

6.    6,  7  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the 
6.    8  the  Lord  sent  a  prophet  unto  the  children 
7. 12  all  the  children  of  the  east  lay  along  in  the 

5.  10  all  the  hosts  of  the  children  of  the  east 
8.  18  each  one  resembled  the  children  of  a  king 
8.  28  Thus  was  Midian  subdued  before  the  chi. 
8.  33  that  the  children  of  Israel  turned  again 
8.  34  the  children  of  Israel  remembered  not 

10.    6  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again 
xo.    6  the  gods  of  Mo  ah,  and .  .of  the  children 
jo.    7  into  the  hands  of  the  children  of  Ammou 
10.    8  they  vexed  and  oppressed  the  children 
10.   8  eighteen  years,  all  the  children  of  Israel 
10.    9  the  children  of  Amnion  passed  over  Jor. 

10. 10  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord 

10. 11  the  Lord  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
xo.  11  (Did)  not  (I  deliver  you),  .from  the  chil. 

10.  15  the  children  of  Israel  said  unto  the  Lord 
xo.  17  the  children  of  Ammon  were  gathered 
io.  17  the  children  of  Israel  assembled  themse. 
10. 18  will  begin  to  fight  against  the  children 

11.  4,  5  the  children  of  Ammon  made  war  aga. 
11.    6  that  we  may  fight  with  the  children  of  A. 

21 


Judg.  11.    8,  9  fight  against  the  children  of  Ammon  and 
11.  12,  13,  14,  28  the  king  of  the  children  of  A. 
11.  15  nor  the  land  of  the  children  of  Ammon 
11.  27  the  children  of  Israel  and  the  children 
11.  29,  30  he  passed  over  (unto)  the  children  of 
11.  31  when  I  return  in  peace  from  the  children 
11.  32  Jephthah  passed  over  unto  the  children 
11.  33  the  children ..  were  subdued  before  the 

11.  36  of  thine  enemies,  (even)  of  the  children  of 

12.  1  over  to  fight  against  the  children  of  A. 
12.    2  at  great  stiife  with  the  children  of  Amm. 

12.  3  and  passed  over  against  the  children 

13.  1  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the 
14. 16  thou  hast  put  forth  a  riddle  unto  the  chi. 

14.  17  she  told  the  riddle  to  the  children  of  her 
18.  2  the  children  of  Dan  sent  of  then-  family 
18.  16  six  hundred  men.  .which  (were)  of  the  c. 
18.  22  gathered  together,  and  overtook  the  ch. 
18.  23  And  they  cried  unto  the  children  of  Dan 
18.  25  And  the  children  of  Dan  said  unto  him 
18.  26  And  the  children  of  Dan  went  their  way 

18.  30  And  the  children  of  Dan  set  up  the  graven 

19.  12  that  (is)  not  of  the  children  of  Israel 

19.  30  the  day  that  the  children  of  Israel  came 
eo.    1  Then  all  the  children  of  Israel  went  out 

20.  3  Now  the  children  of  Benjamin  heard  that 
20.  3  the  children  of  Israel  were  gone  up  to  M, 
20.    7  Behold,  ye  (are)  all  children  of  Israel 

20.  13  Now  therefore  deliver  (us),  .the  children 
20.  13  the  children  of  Benjamin  would  not 
20.  13  to  the  voice  of  their  brethren  the  children 
20.  14  the  children  of  Benjamin  gathered  them. 
20.  14  to  go  out  to  battle  against  the  children 
20.  15  And  the  children  of  Benjamin  were  num. 
20.  18  the  children  of  Israel  arose,  and  went  up 
20. 18,  23,  28  against  the  children  of  Benjamin 
20.  19  the  children  of  Israel  rose  up  in  the 
20  21  the  children  of  Benjamin  came  forth 
20.  23  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  and  wept 
20.  24  the  children  of  Israel  came  near  against 
20.  25  destroyed  down  to  the  ground  of  the  chil. 
20.  26  Then  all  the  children  of  Israel . .  went  up 
20. 27  the  children  of  Israel  enquired  ofthe  Lord 
20.  30  the  childreu  of  Israel  went  up  against 
20.  31  the  children  of  Benjamin  went  out 
20.  32  the  children  of  Benjamin  said,  They  (are) 
20.  32  the  children  Israel  said,  Let  us  flee 
20.  35  the  children  of  Israel  destroyed  of  the 
20.  36  the  children  of  Benjamin  saw  that  they 

20.  48  turned  again  upon  the  children  of  Benja. 

21.  s  the  children  of  Israel  said,  "Who  (is  there) 
21.    6  the  children  of  Israel  repented  them  for 

21. 13  sent  (some)  to  speak  to  the  children  of  B. 
21.  18  for  the  children  of  Israel  have  sworn 

21.  20  they  commanded  the  children  of  Benja. 
21.  23  And  the  children  of  Benjamin  did  so 
21.  24  And  the  children  of  Israel  departed  thence 

1  Sa.     2.    5  she  that  hath  many  children  is  waxed 

2.  28  offerings  made  by  fire  of  the  children 
7.   4  Then  the  children  of  Israel  did  put  away 
7.    6  Samuel  judged  the  children  of  Israel  in 
7.    7  the  children  of  Israel  were  gathered 
7.    7  And  when  the  children  of  Israelheard(it) 
7.   8  And  the  children  of  Israel  said  to  Samuel 
9.    2  (there  was)  not  among  the  children  of  Is. 
10.  18  And  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

10.  27  the  children  of  Belial  said,  How  shall  this 

11.  8  the  children  of  Israel  were  three  hundred 
12. 12  the  king  of  the  children  of  Ammon  came 

14. 18  ark.  .was  at  that  time  with  the  children 

14.  47  against  the  children  of  Ammon,  and 

15.  6  ye  showed  kindness  to  all  the  children 
26.  ig  if  (they  be)  the  children  of  men,  cursed 
30.  22  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  children 

2  Sa.     1. 18  Also  he  bade  them  teach  the  children 

7.  6  I  brought  up  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 
7.  7  I  have  walked  with  all  the  children  of  Isr. 
7. 10  neither  shall  the  children  of  wickedness 

7.  14  with  the  stripes  of  the  children  of  men 

8.  12  of  the  children  of  Amnion,  and  of  the 
10.   1  the  king  of  the  children  of  Ammon  died 
10.    2  came  into  the  land  of  the  children  of  A. 
10.   3  the  princes  of  the  children  of  Ammon  said 
10.    6  And  when  the  children  of  Ammon  saw 
10.   6  the  children  of  Amnion  sent  and  hired 
10.    8  And  the  children  of  Ammon  came  out 
10. 10  put  (them)  in  array  against  the  children 
10.  11  if  the  children  of  Ammon  be  too  strong 

10.  14  And  when  the  children  of  Amnion  saw 

10. 14  So  Joab  returned  from  the  children  of  A. 

10. 19  So  the  Syrians  feared  to  help  the  children 

11.  1  and  they  destroyed  the  children  of  Am. 

12.  3  it  grew  up  with  him  and  with  his  children 
12.  9  slain  him  with  the  sword  of  the  children 
12.  26  against  Rabbah  of  the  children  of  Amnion 
12.  31  unto  all  the  cities  of  the  children  of  Am. 
17. 27  Nahash  of  Rabbah  of  the  children  of  A. 
21.  2  the  Gibeonites  (were)  not  of  the  children 
21.  2  the  children  of  Israel  had  sworn  unto  them 
21.   2  in  his  zeal  to  the  children  of  Israel  and  J. 

1  Ki.  2.  4  If  thy  children  take- heed  to  their  way 
4.  30  excelled  the  wisdom  of  all  the  children 
6.  x  after  the  children  of  Israel  were  come  out 
6.  13  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel 
8.  1  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  children  of  Is. 
8.  9  the  Lord  made  (a  covenant)  with  the  chil. 
8.  25  so  that  thy  children  take  heed  to  their 

8.  39  thou,  .knowest  the  hearts  of  all  the  chil. 
8. 63  all  the  children  of  Israel  dedicated  the 

9.  6  from  following  me,  ye  or  your  children 
9.  20  which  (were)  not  of  the  children  of  Israel 
9. 21  Their  children  that  were  left  after  them 


1  Ki.     9.  21  whom  the  children  of  Israel  also  were  not 

9.  22  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  Solomon  make 
11.    2  the  Lord  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

11.  7  al  omiuation  of  the  children  of  Ammon 
11.33  Milcom  the  god  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

12.  17  But  (as  for)  the  children  of  Israel  which 
12.  24  against  your  brethren  the  children  of  Is. 

12.  33  ordained  a  feast  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

18.  20  So  Ahab  sent  unto  all  the  children  of  Isr. 

19.  10,  14  the  children  of  Israel  have  forsaken 

20.  3  thy  wives  also  and  thy  children,  (even)  ttie 
20.    5  gold,  and  thy  wives,  and  thy  children 
20.    7  he  sent  unto  me.  .for  my  children 

20. 15  all  the  children  of  Israel,  (beir|g)seven  th. 
20.  27  And  the  children  of  Israel  were  numbered 

20.  29  and  the  children  of  Israel  slew  of  the  Syr. 

21.  13  there  came  in  two  men,  children  of  Behal 
21.  26  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  child. 

2  Ki.     4.    7  and  live  thou  and  thy  children  of  the  rest 

8.  12  that  thou  wilt  do  unto  the  children  of  Is. 

8.  19  togive.  .alway  alight,  (and)  to  his  childreu 

9.  1  Elisha.  .called  one  of  the  children  of 

10.  13  we  go  down  to  salute  the  children  of  the 

10.  30  thy  children . .  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  Is. 

13.  5  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  tents 

14.  6  the  children  of  the  murderers  he  slew  not 
14.    6  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for  the  children 

16.  3  the  Lord  cast  out  from  before  the  children 

17.  7  that  the  children  of  Israel  had  sinned 
17.    8  the  LoKD  cast  out  from  before  the  child. 
17.    9  the  children  of  Israel  did  secretly  (those) 
17.  22  the  children  of  Israel  walked  in  all  the 
17.  24  placed,  .instead  of  the  children  of  Israel 
17.  31  Sepharvites  burnt  their  children 

17.  34  the  Lord  commanded  the  children  of  J. 

17.  41  children,  and  their  children's  children:  as 

18.  4  the  children  of  Israel  did  burn  incense  to 

19.  3  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth,  and 

19. 12  children  of  Eden  which  (were)  in  T.? 
21.    2,  9  before  the  children  of  Israel 

23.    6  upon  the  graves  of  the  children  of  the 

23.  10  (is)  in  the  valley  of  the  children  of  H. 

23. 13  Milcom  the  abomination  of  the  children 

24.  2  sent,  .bands  of  the  children  of  Ammon 
1  Ch.      1.  43  before  (any)  king  reigned  over  the  chil. 

4.  27  but  his  brethren  had  not  many  children 

4.  27  neither,  .multiply,  like  to  the  children  of 

5.  11  the  children  of  Gad  dwelt  over  against 
5.  14  These  (are)  the  children  of  Abihail  the  son 

5.  23  the  children  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 

6.  3  And  the  children  of  Amram  ;  Aaron,  and 
6.  33  they  that  waited  with  their  children  :  of 
6.  64  the  children  of  Israel  gave  to  the  Levites 
6.  65,  65  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of 

6.  65  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Benja. 

7.  12  Shuppim  also,  and  Huppim,  the  children 
7.  29  by  the  borders  of  the  children  of  Manas. 
7.  29  In  these  dwelt  the  children  of  Joseph  the 
7.  33  These  (are)  the  children  of  Japhlet 

7.  40  All  these  (were)  the  children  of  Asher 
9.    3  in  Jerusalem  dw7elt  of  the  children  of  J. 
9.    3  children  of  Benjamin,  and  of  the  children 
9.   4  the  children  of  Iharez  the  son  of  Judah 
9.  18  in  the  companies  of  the  children  of  Levi 
9.  23  they  and  their  children  (had)  the  oversight 

11.  31  (that  pertained)  to  the  children  of  Beuj. 

12.  16  there  came  of  the  children  of  Benjamin 
12.  24  the  children  of  Judah  that  bare  shield 
12.  25  the  children  of  Simeon,  mighty  men  of 
12.  26  Of  the  children  of  Levi,  four  thousand 
12.  29  of  the  children  of  Benjamin,  the  kindred 
12.  30  of  the  children  of  Ephraim  twenty 

12.  32  of  the  children  of  Issachar,  (which  were) 

16.  13  ye  children  of  Jacob,  his  chosen  ones 

17.  9  neither  shall  the  children  of  wickedness 

18.  11  from  the  children  of  Amnion,  and  from 
xg.    1  Nahash  the  king  of  the  children  of  A. 

19.  2  came  into  fhe  land  of  the  children  of  A. 
19.  3  the  princes  of  the  children  of  Ammon  said 
19.  6  when  the  children  of  Amnion  saw  that 
19.  6  Hanun  and  the  children  of  Ammon  sent 
19.  7  the  children  of  Ammon  gathered  them. 
19.  9  the  children  of  Ammon  came  out,  and  put 
19.  11  they  set.  .in  array  against  the  children  of 
19.  12  if  the  children  of  Ammon  be  too  strong  a 
19.  15  And  when  the  children  of  Amnion  saw 

19.  19  neither  would.. help  the  children  of  Am. 

20.  1  wasted  the  country  of  the  children  of  A. 
20.  3  with  all  the  cities  of  the  children  of  Am. 
24.  2  Nadab  and  Abihu  died,  .and  had  no  chil. 
27.  1  the  children  of  Israel  after  their  number 
27.    3  Of  the  children  of  Perez  (was)  the  chief 

27.  10,  14,  20  of  the  children  of  Ephraim 

28.  8  an  inheritance  for  your  children  after  you 
2  Ch.     5.    2  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  children  of 

5.  10  Lord  made  (a  covenant)  with  the  child. 

6.  11  that  he  made  with  the  children  of  Israel 
6.  16  yet  so  that  thy  children  take  heed  to 

6.  30  for  thou  only  knowest.  .the  children  of 

7.  3  when  all  the  children  of  Israel  saw  how 

8.  2  caused  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell 

8.    8  of  their  children,  .whom  the  children  of 
8.    9  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  Solomon 
10.  17  (as  for)  the  children  of  Israel  that  dwelt 

10.  18  children  of  Israel  stoned  him  with  stones 

11.  19  Which  bare  him  children  ;  Jeush,  and 
11.  23  dispersed  of  all  his  children  throughout 
13-    7  gathered  unto  him  vain  men,  the  children 
13.  12  O  children  of  Israel,  fight  ye  not  against 
13.  16  the  children  of  Israel  fled  before  Judah 
13.  18  the  children  of  Israel  were  brought  under 
13.  18  the  children  of  Judah  prevailed,  because 


CHILDREN 


1G2 


CHILDREN 


2  Ch.  20.    1  children  of  Moab,  and  the  children  of  A. 
20.  10,  23  the  children  of  Amnion  and  Moab 
20.  13  with  their  little  ones,  .and  their  children 
20.  19  children  of  the  Kohathites,  and  of  the  ch. 
20.  22  LORD  set  ambushments  against  the  chil. 
2i.  14  thy  children,  and  thy  wives,  and  all  thy 
25.    4  he  slew  not  their  children,  but  (did)  as  (it 
25.    4  The  fathers  shall  not  die  for  the  children 
25.    4  neither  shall  the  children  die  for  the 
25.    7  (to  wit,  with)  all  the  children  of  Ephraim 
25.  11  smote  of  the  children  of  Seir  ten  thous. 
25.  12  did  the  children  of  Judah  carry  away 
25.  14  that  he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children 
27.    s  the  children  of  Amnion  gave  him  the 

27.  5  So  much  did  the  children  of  Ainmon  pay 

28.  3  burnt  his  children  in  the  fire,  after  the 
28.  3  the  Lord  had  cast  out  before  the  children 
28.  8  the  children  of  Israel  carried  away  captive 
28.  10  ye  purpose  to  keep  under  the  children  of 
28.  12  certain  of  the  heads  of  the  children  of  K. 
30.  6  Ye  children  of  Israel,  turn  again  unto  the 
30.  9  your  brethren  and  your  children  (shall) 
30.  21  the  children  of  Israel .  .kept  the  feast  of 

1  Then  all  the  children  of  Israel  returned 

5  the  children  of  Israel  brought  iu 

6  (concerning)  the  children  of  Israel  and  J. 

2  whom  the  Lord  had . .  before  the  children 
6  he  caused hischildreu  to  pass  through  the 
9  whom  the  Lord  had . .  before  the  children 

34  33  that  (pertained)  to  the  children  of  Israel 
35.  17  the  children  of  Israel . .  kept  the  passover 
Ezra     2.    1  these  (are)  the  children  of  the  province 
2.    3  The  children  of  Parosh,  two  thousand  an 
2.    4  The  children  of  Shephatiah,  three  hundred 
2.    5  The  children  of  Arah,  seven  hundred 
2.    6  children  of  Pahath-moab,  of  the  children 
2.    7  The  children  of  Elam,  a  thousand  two  h. 
2.    8  The  children  of  Zuttu,  nine  hundred  forty 
2.   9  The  children  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and 
2. 10  The  children  of  Bani,  six  hundred  forty 
2  11  The  children  of  Bebai,  sixhundredtwenty 

2. 12  The  children  of  Azgad,  a  thousand  two 

2. 13  The  children  of  Adonikam,  six  hundred 
2.  14  The  children  of  Bigvai,  two  thousand  fifty 
2.  15  The  children  of  Adiu,  four  hundred  fifty 
2.  16  The  children  of  Ater  of  Hezekiah,  ninety 
2. 17  The  children  of  Bezai,  three  hundred 

2.  18  The  children  of  Jorah,  an  hundred  and 
2.  19  The  children  of  Hashum,  two  hundred 
2.  20  The  children  of  Gibbar,  ninety  and  five 
2.  21  The  children  of  Beth-lehem,  an  hundred 
2.  24  The  children  of  Azmaveth,  forty  and  two 
2.  25  The  children  of  Kirjath-ariiu,  Chephirah 
2.  26  The  children  of  Ramah  and  Gaba,  six  h. 
2.  26  The  children  of  Nebo,  fifty  and  two 
2.  30  The  childreu  of  Magbish,  an  hundred  fifty 
2.  31  The  children  of.  .Elam,  a  thousand  two 
2.  32  The  children  of  Harim,  three  hundred 
2.  33  The  childreu  of  Lod,  Hadid,  and  Ono 
2.  34  The  children  of  Jericho,  three  hundred 
2.  35  The  childrenof  Senaah,  three  thousand 
2. 36  the  children  of  Jedaiah,  of  the  house  of 
2.  37  The  childreu  of  Immer,  a  thousand  fifty 
2.  38  The  childreu  of  Pashur,  a  thousand  two 
2.  39  The  children  of  Harim,  a  thousand  aud 
2. 40  the  children  of  Jeshua,  and  Kadmiel 
2,  40  of  the  children  of  Hodaviah,  seventy  and 
2.  41  the  children  of  Asaph,  an  hundred  twenty 
2.  42  The  children  of  the  porters  :  the  children 
2.  42  children  of  Talmon,  the  children  of  Ak. 
2. 42  the  children  of  Hatita,  the  children  of 
2.  43  The  Nethinima :  the  children  of  Ziha 

childreu  of  Ha3upha,  the  ch.  of  Tabbaoth 
2.  44  The  children  of  Keros.  .children  of  Siaha 

the  childreu  of  Padon 
2.  45  The  children  of  Lebauah,  the  children  of 

Hagabah,  the  children  of  Akkub 
2.  46  The  children  of  Hagab,  the  children  of 

Shalmai,  the  children  of  Hanan 
2.  47  The  children  of  Giddel,  the  children  of 

Gahar,  the  children  of  Reaiah 
2.  4$  The  children  of  Rezin,  the  children  of 

Nekoda,  the  children  of  Gazzam 
2.  49  The  childreu  of  Uzzah,  the  children  of 

Paseah,  the  children  of  Besai 
2. 50  The  children  of  Asnah,  the  children  of 

Mehuuim,  the  children  of  Nephusim 
a.  51  The  children  of  Bakbuk,  the  children 

of  Hakupha,  the  childreu  of  Harhur 
2.  52  The  children  of  Bazluth,  the  children 

of  Mehida,  the  children  of  Harsha 
2.  53  The  children  of  Barkos,  the  children  of 

Sisera,  the  children  of  Thamah 
2.  54  The  children  or  Neziah .  .chil.  of  Hatipha 
2. 55  The  childreu  of  Solomon's  servants 

the  children  of  Sotai,  the  cliildren  of 

Sophereth,  the  children  of  Peruda 
2.  56  The  children  of  Jaalah,  the  children  of 

Darkon,  the  children  of  Giddel 
2.  57  The  ch.  of  Shephatiah,  the  ch.  of  Hattil 

ch.  of  Pochereth  of  Zcbaim,  the  ch.of  Ami 
2.  58  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants,  (were) 
2.  60  The  cliildren  of  Delaiah,  the  cliildren  of 
2.  60  the  children  of  Nekoda,  six  hundred  fifty 
2.  61  tlu-  cliildren  of  the  priests  :  the  childreu 

2.  61  the  cliildren  of  ICoz,  the  children  of 

3.  1  aud  the  children  of  Israel  (were)  in  the 

4.  1  the  childreu  of  the  captivity  builded  the 
6.  16  the  children  of  Israel,  the  priests,  and  the 
6.  16  rest  of  the  children  <>f  the  captivity,  kept 
6,  19,  20  the  children  of  the  captivity 

6.  21  the  childreu  of  Israel,  .did  eat 


Ezra 


Nvh. 


7  there  went  up  (some)  of  the  childreu 

35  the  children  of  those  that  had  been  carried 
12  leave  (it)  for  an  inheritance  to  your  chil. 

7  unto  all  the  children  of  the  captivity 
16  the  children  of  the  captivity  did  so 

44  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  children 

6  for  the  children  of  Israel  thy  servants,  and 
6  confess  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel 

10  seek  the  -welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel 

5  ourchildren  astheir  children  ;  and,  lo,  we 

6  These  (are)  the  children  of  the  province 

8  The  children  of  Parosh,  two  thousand  an 

9  The  children  of  Shephatiah,  three  nun. 

10  The  children  of  Arah,  six  hundred  fifty 

11  of  the  children  of  Jeshua  and  Joab,  two 

12  The  children  of  Elam,  a  thousand  two  h. 

13  The  children  of  Zattu,  eight  hundred 

14  The  children  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred 

15  The  children  of  Binnui,  six  hundred  forty 

16  The  children  of  Bebai,  six  hundred 

17  The  children  of  Azgad,  two  thousand 
iS  The  children  of  Adonikam,  six  hundred 

19  The  children  of  Bigvai,  two  thousand 

20  The  children  of  Adin,  six  hundred  fifty 

21  The  children  of  Ater  of  Hezekiah,  ninety 

22  The  children  of  Hashum,  three  hundred 

23  The  children  of  Bezai,  three  hundred 

24  The  childreu  of  Hariph,  an  hundred  and 

25  The  children  of  Gibeon,  ninety  and  five 
34  The  children  of  the  other  Elam,  a  thou. 
35,  42  The  children  of  Harim,  three  hundred 

36  The  children  of  Jericho,  three  hundred 

37  The  children  of  Lod,  Hadid,  and  Ono 

38  The  children  of  Senaah,  three  thousand 

39  the  children  of  Jedaiah,  of  the  house  of 

40  The  children  of  Immer,  a  thousand  fifty 

41  The  children  of  Pashur,  a  thousand  two 

43  the  children  of  Jeshua.  .of  the  children  of 

44  the  children  of  Asaph,  an  hundred  forty 

45  the  children  of  Shallum,  the  children  of 
45  the  children  of  Talmon,  the  childreu  of 

45  the  children  of  Hatita,  the  childreu  of 

46  The  Nethinims  :  the  children  of  Ziha 

46  the  children  of  Hashupha,  the  children  of 

47  The  children  of  Keros,  the  children  of  Sia, 
the  children  of  Padon 

48  The  children  of  Lebana,  the  children  of 
JHagaba,  the  children  of  Shalmai 

49  The  children  of  Hanan,  the  children  of 
Giddel,  the  children  of  Gahar 

50  The  children  of  Reaiah,  the  children  of 
Rezin,  the  children  of  Nekoda 

51  The  children  of  Gazzam,  the  children  of 
Uzza,  the  children  of  Phaseah 

52  The  childreu  of  Bezai,  the  children  of 
Meunini,  the  children  of  Nephishesim 

53  The  childreu  of  Bakbuk,  the  children  of 
Hakupha,  the  children  of  Harhur 

54  The  children  of  Bazlith,  the  children  of 
Mehida,  the  cliildren  of  Harsha 

55  The  children  of  Barkos,  the  children  of 
Sisera,  the  children  of  Tamah 

56  The  children  of  Neziah,  the  ch.  of  Hatipha 

57  The  children  of  Solomon's  servants 
the  children  of  Sotai,  the  children  of 
Sophereth,  the  children  of  Perida 

58  The  children  of  Jaala,  the  children  of 
Darkon,  the  children  of  Giddel 

59  The  children  of  Shephatiah,  the  ch.  of  H. 
the  children  of  rochereth .  .the  ch.  of  A. 

60  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants,  (were) 

62  The  children  of  Delaiah,  the  children  of 
Tobiah,  the  children  of  Nekoda 

63  And  of  the  priests  :  the  children  of  Hab. 
63  the  children  of  Koz,  the  children  of  Bar. 
73  the  children  of  Israel  (were)  in  their  cities 
14  that  the  children  of  Israel  should  dwell 
17  unto  that  day  had  not  the  children  of  Is. 

1  the  children  of  Israel  were  assembled  with 

23  Their  children  also  multipliedst  thou  as 

24  So  the  children  went  in  and  possessed 
39  For  the  children  of  Israel  and  the  chil. 

3  and  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 

4  at  Jerusalem  dwelt  (certain)  of  the  chil. 
4  dwelt(certain)..of  the  children  of  Beuja. 
4  Of  the  children  of  Judah.  .of  the  children 

25  (some)  of  the  children  of  Judah  dwelt  at 
31  The  children  also  of  Benjamin  from  Geba 
47  Levites  sanctified(them)  unto  the  children 

2  they  met  not  the  children  of  Israel  with 

16  and  sold,  .unto  the  children  of  Judah 

24  their  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  of 
4  His  children  are  far  from  safety,  and  they 

4  If  thy  children  have  sinned  against  him 

5  even  the  eyes  of  his  children  shall  fail 

17  I  entreated  for  the  children's  (sake)  of 

10  His  children  shall  seek  to  please  the  poor 
19  God  layeth  uphis  iniquity  for  his  children 
14  If  his  children  be  multiplied,  (it  is)  for 

8  (They  were)  children  of  fools,  yea,  chil. 
34  he  (is)  a  king  over  all  the  children  of 

4  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the  children  of 

1  the  faithful  fail  from  among  the  children 

2  The  Lord  looked.. upon  the  children  of 
14  they  are  full  of  children,  and  leave  the 

10  their  seed  from  among  the  children  of 

11  Come,  ye  children,  hearken  unto  me 

7  therefore  the  children  of  men  put  their 

2  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  children  of  men 
16  Instead  of  thy  fathers  shall  be.  .children 
2  God  looked  down,  .upon  the  children  of 

5  terrible  (in  his)  doing  toward  the  children 


Psa.     69.    8  an  alien  unto  my  mother's  children 

72.  4  he  shall  save  the  children  of  the  needy 

73.  15  I  should  offend  (against),  .thy  children 
78.    4  We  will  not  liide  (them)  from  their  chil. 
78.    5  they  should  make,  .known  to  their  chil. 
78.    6  (even)  the  children  (which)  should 

78.    6  (who)  should,  .declare,  .to  their  children 
78.    9  The  children  of  Ephraim,  (being)  armed 

82.  6  all  of  you  (are)  children  of  the  Most  High 

83.  8  they  have  holpen  the  children  of  Lot 

89.  30  If  his  children  forsake  my  law,  and  walk 

90.  3  and  sayest,  Return,  ye  children  of  men 
90. 16  thy  glory  uuto  their  children 

102.  28  The  children  of  thy  servants  shall 

103.  7  He  made  known  his  ways,  .unto  the  chil. 
103. 13  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  (his)  children,  (so) 
103.  17  his  righteousness  unto  children's  children 
105.    6  0  ye  seed  of  Abraham,  .ye  children  of  J. 
107.    8,  15,  21,  31  his  wonderful  works  to.  .chil. 
109.    9  Let  his  children  be  fatherless,  and  his 
109.  10  Let  his  children  he  continually  vagabonds 
113.    9  the  barren  woman,  .(be)  a.  .mother  of  ch. 
115.  14  The  Lord  shall  increase,  .your  children 
115.  16  the  earth  hath  he  given  to  the  children 
127.    3  Lo,  children  (are)  an  heritage  of  the  Lord 

127.  4  As  arrows,  .so  (are)  children  of  the  youth 

128.  3  thy  children  like  olive  plants  round  about 
12S.    6  Yea,  thou  shalt  see  thy  children's  chil. 
132.  12  If  thy  children  will  keep  my  covenant 
132.  12  their  children  shall  also  sit  upon  thy 
137.    7  Remember,  .the  children  of  Edom  in  the 
144.    7,  11  deliver  me.  .from,  .strange  children 

147.  13  he  hath  blessed  thy  children  within  thee 

148.  14  He  also  exalteth  the.  .children  of  Israel 

149.  2  let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their 
Prov.    4.    1  Hear,  ye  children,  the  instruction  of  a 

5.    7  Hear  me  now  therefore,  O  ye  children 

7.  24  Hearken  unto  me  now.  .0  ye  children 

8.  32  Now  therefore  hearken.  .0  ye  children 

13.  22  an  inheritance  to  his  children's  children 

14.  26  his  children  shall  have  a  place  of  refuge 

15.  11  how  much  more,  .the  hearts  of  the  chil. 
17.    6  Children's  children  (are)  the  crown  of  old 
17.    6  the  glory  of  children  (are)  their  fathers 

20.  7  his  children  (are)  blessed  after  him 
31.  28  Her  children  arise  up,  and  call  her 

Song     1.    6  my  mother's  children  were  angry  with 
Isa.        1.    2  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children 

1.  4  a  seed  of  evil-doers,  children  that  are 
11.  14  the  children  of  Amnion  shall  obey  them 
14.  21  Prepare  slaughter  for  his  children  for  the 
17.    3  they  shall  be  as  the  glory  of  the  children 
17.    9  winch  they  left  because  of  the  children 

21.  17  the  mighty  men  of  the  childrenof  Kedar 
27.  12  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one,  0  ye  chil. 
30.    1  Woe  to  the  rebellious  children,  saith  the 

30.  9  lying  children,  children  (that)  will  not 

31.  6  (from)  whom  the  children  of  Israel 

37.  3  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth 
37. 12  and  the  children  of  Eden  which  (were)  in 

38.  19  the  father  to  the  children  shall  make 
49.  17  Thy  children  shall  make  haste;  thy 

49.  20  The  children  which  thou  shalt  have,  after 
49.  25  I  will  contend. .  I  will  save  thy  children 
54.    1  for  more  (are)  the  children  of  the  desolate 
54.    1  than  the  children  o1!  the  married  wife 
54.  13  all  thy  children  (shUl  be)  taught  of  the  L. 
54.  13  great  (shall  be)  the  peace  of  thy  children 
63.    8  (are)  my  people,  children  (that)  will  not  lie 
66.    8  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth . .  chil. 
66.  20  as  the  childreu  of  Israel  bring  an  offering 
Jer.       2.    9  with  your  children's  children  will  I  plead 
2. 16  the  children  of  Noph  and  Tahapanes  have 

2.  30  In  vain  have  I  smitten  your  children ;  they 

3.  14  Turn,  O  backsliding  children,  saith  the  L. 
3. 19  How  shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children 
3.  21  weeping(and)supplicationsofthechildren 

3.  22  Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  (and)  I 

4.  22  they  (are)  sottish  children,  and  they  have 

5.  7  thy  children  have  forsaken  me,  and  sworn 

6.  1  ye  childreu  of  Benjamin,  gather  your. 

7.  18  The  children  gather  wood,  and  the  fathers 
7.  30  the  children  of  Judah  have  done  evil 

9.  26  and  Edom,  and  the  children  of  Amnion 
10.  20  my  children  are  gone  forth  of  me,  and 
16. 14,  15  Lord  liveth,  that  brought  up  the  chil. 
17.    2  their  children  remember  their  altars 

17.  19  stand  in  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the 
38.  21  deliver  up  their  children  to  the  famiue 
23.    7  The  Lord  liveth, w  Inch  bn  light  up  the  chi. 
1  Edom,  and  Moab,  and  the  children  of  A. 
o  Their  children  also  shall  be  as  aforetime 
.5  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children 
15  refused  to  be  comforted  for  her  children 
,,..17  (thy)  children  shall  come  again  to  their 

31.  29  and  the  cluldren's  teeth  are  set  on  edge 

32.  iS  the  iniquity .  .into,  .their  children  after 
32.  30  the  children  of  Israel  and  the  children  of 
32.  30  the  children  of  Israel  have  oulyprovoked 
32.  32  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  of  the  child. 
3".  39  for  the  good  of.,  their  children  after  them 
38.  23  So  they  shall  bring  out  all.  .thy  children 
47.    3  fathers  shall  not  look,  .to  (their)  children 

49.  6  bring  again  the  captivity  of  the  children 

50.  4  the  children  of  Israel  shall  come 
50.    4  they  and  the  children  of  Judah  together 
50.  33  The  children  of  Israel  and  the  children  of 

2.    3  I  send  thee  to  the  children  of  Israel,  to  a 

2.  4  For  (they  are)  impudeut  children,  and 

3.  11  go,  get  thee,  .unto  the  children  of  thy 

4.  13  thus  shall  the  children  of  Israel  eat  their 
6.   s  I  will  lay  the . .  carcases  of  the  children 


25- 

3°- 


3i- 
3*- 


CHILDREN 


1G3 


CHILION 


Eze.    16.  21  thou  hast  slain  mychildren,  and  delivered 
16.  36  the  blood  of  thy  children,  which  thou  didst 
16.  45  mother's  daughter . .  loatheth  her . .  childr, 
16.  45  thy  sisters/which  loathed  their . .  children 
18.    2  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge  ? 
20.  18  I  said  unto  their  children  in  the  wilder. 
20.  21  the  children  rebelled  against  me :  they 
23.  39  had  slain  their  children  to  their  idols 
31. 14  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  men,  with 
33.  12  son  of  man,  say  unto  the  children  of  thy 
33.  17  Yet  the  children  of  thy  people  say 
33.  30  the  children  of  thy  people  still  are  talking 
35.    5  thou . .  hast  shed  (the  blood  of)  the  childr. 
37.  16  For  Judah,  and  for  the  children  of  Israel 
37.  iS  the  children  of  thy  people  shall  speak 
37.  21 1  will  take  the  children  of  Israel  from 
37.  25  their  children,  and  their  children's  chil. 

43.  7  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of 

44.  9  of  any  stranger  that  (is)  among  the  chil. 
44.  15  when  the  children  of  Israel  went  astray 
47.  22  the  strangers,  .which  shall  beget  children 

47.  22  as  born  in  the  countryamong  the  children 

48.  11  the  children  of  Israel  went  astray,  as  the 
"Dan.   1.    3  he  should  bring  (certain)  of  the  children  of 

1.  6  Now  among  these  were,  of  the  children 

2.  38  And  wheresoever  the  children  of  men 

5. 13  which  (art)  of  the  children  of  the  captiv. 
6. 13  which  (is)  of  the  children  of  the  captivity 
6.  24  they  cast,  .their  children,  and  their  wives 

11.  41  andthe  chief  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

12.  1  prince  which  standeth  for  the  children  of 
Hos.    1.  10  the  number  of  the  children,  .shall  be  as 

1.  11  the  children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of 

2.  4  I  will  not  have  mercy  upon  her  children 

2.  4  for  they  (be)  the  children  of  whoredoms 

3.  1  love  of  the  Lord  toward  the  children  of 
3.   4  the  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many 

3.  5  Afterward  shall  the  children  of  Israel 

4.  1  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children'of 

4.  6  I  will  also  forget  thy  children 

5.  7  for  they  have  begotten  strange  children 
9.  12  Though  they  bring  up  their  children,  yet 
9. 13  Ephraim  shall  bring  forth  his  children  to 

10.   9  battle  in  Gibeah  against  the  children  of 
10.  14  the  mother  was  dashed,  .upon  (her)  chil. 
11. 10  then  the  children  shall  tremble  from  the 
*3-  13  (the  place  of)  the  breaking  forth  of  chil. 
Joel    1.    3  Tell  ye  your  children  of  it,  and  (let)  your 
"  1.    3  children  (tell)their  children,  and  their  ch. 

2.  23  Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Zion,  and 

3.  6  children  also  of  J  udah  and  the  children  of 
3.  8  I  will  sell . .  into  the  hand  of  the  children 
3.  16  and  the  strength  of  the  children  of  Israel 
3.  19  for  the  violence  (against)  the  children  of 

Amos  1. 13  For  three  transgressions  of  the  children  of 

2. 11  0  ye  children  of  Israel?  saith  the  Lord 

3.  1  Lord  hath  spoken  against'you,  0  children 

3. 12  so  shall  the  children  of  Israel  be  taken 

4.  5  O  ye  children  of  Israel,  saith.  .Lord  God 
9.  7  (Are)  ye  not  as  children  of  the  Ethiopians 
9.    7  unto  me,  0  children  of  Israel?  saith  the 

Obad.     12  neither,  .have  rejoiced  over  the  children 

20  captivity  of  this  host  of  the  children  of 
Mic.    1.  16  and  poll  thee  for  thy  delicate  children 

5.  3  shall  return  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
Zeph.  1.    8  I  will  punish,  .the  king's  children,  and 

2.  8  have  heard,  .the  revilingsof  the  children 
2.    9  and  the  children  of  Amnion  as  Gomorrah 

Zech.io.  7  their  children  shall  see  (it),  and  be  glad 
10.   9  and  they  shall  live  with  their  children 

Mai.    4.    6  children,  and  the  heart  of  the  children  to 

I.Little  one,  *ja  taph, 

Exodi2.  37  six  hundred,  .men,  besides  children 

Numi4.    3  our  wives  and  our  children  should  be  a 
31.  iS  all  the  women  children,  that  have  not 

Deut.  3.    6  destroying  the  men,hvomen,|and  children 
31.  12  Gather  the  people  together,  men . .  and  ch. 

Judg2i.  10  with  the  women  and  the  children 

Jer.  40.    7  and  had  committed,  .women,  and  children 
41. 16  the' women,  and  the  children,  and  the 
43.   6  (Even)  men,  and  women,  and  children 
3.  To  beget,  t?;  yalad. 

1  Ch.  14.   4  Now  these  (are)  the  names  of  (his)  chil. 
4.  Lad,  boy,  *Aj  yeled. 

Gen.  30.  26  Give  (me)  my  wives  and  my  children,  for 
33.    1  he  divided  the  children  unto  Leah,  and 
33.   2  he  put  the  handmaids  and  their  children 
33.    2  and  Leah  and  her  children  after,  and 
33.    5  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw.  .the  chil. 
33.    5  The  children  which  God  hath  graciously 
33.    6  the  handmaidens,  .they  and  their  chil. 
33.    7  Leah  also  with  her  children  came  near 
33.  13  My  lord  knoweth  that  the  children  (are) 
33.  14  according  as  the  cattle,  .and  the  child. 

Exod  [.17  the  mid  wives,  .saved  the  men  chil.  alive 
1. 18  "Why  have  ye.  .saved  the  men  chil.  alive? 
2.   6  said,  This  (is  one)  of  the  Hebrew's  chil. 
21.    4  the  wife  and  her  children  shall  be  her 

1  Sa.    1.    2  had  children,  but  Hannah  had  no  children 

2  Hi.    2.  24  and  tare  forty  and  two  children  of  them 
Ezra  10,    1  a  very  great  congregation  of . .  children 
Neh.12.  43  the  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced 
Job  2i.  11  like  a  flock,  and  their  children  dance 
Isa.    2.    6  they  please  themselves  in  the  children  of 

8. 18  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given 

29.  23  But  when  he  seeth  his  children,  the  work 

57.    4  (are)  ye  not  children  of  transgression,  a 

57.    5  slaying  the  children  in  the  valleys  under 

Lam.  4.  10  women  have  sodden  their  own  children 

Dan.  1.   4  Children  in  whom  (was)  no  blemish  but 


Dan.    1.  10  worse  liking  than  the  children,  .(are)  of 
1.  13  the  countenance  of  the  children  that  eat 
1.  15  and  fatter  in  flesh  than  all  the  children 

1.  17  As  for  these  four  childreu,  God  gave  them 
Hos.    1.   2  a  wife  of  whoredoms  and  cliildren  of 

5. Lad,  boy,  t1?;  yalid. 

Num  13.  22  Sheshai,  and  Talmai,  the  children  of  A. 
13.  28  moreover  we  saw  the  children  of  Anak 
1  Ch.20.    4  Sippai,  (that  was)  of  the  cliildren  of  the 

6.  Youth,  young  man,  -\yi  naar. 

1  Sa.  16.  11  Samuel  said.  .Are  here  all  (thy)  children? 

2  Ki.  2.  23  there  came  forth  little  children  out  of  the 
Job   24.    5  wilderness  (yieldeth)  food  for.  .children 

29.    5  (when)  my  cliildren  (were)  about  me 
Psa.148.  12  Both  young  men  and  maidens,  .children 
Isa.     3.    4  I  will  give  children  (to  be)  their  princes 
Lam.  5.  13  and  the  children  fell  under  the  wood 

7.  To  roll  about,  encircle,  ??#  alal,  3  a. 

Isa.     3.  12  my  people,  children  (are)  their  oppres. 

8.  Suckling,  hhty  olel. 

1  Sa.  22. 19  both  men  and  women,  cliildren  and  suck. 

2  Ki.  8.  12  wilt  dash  their  children,  and  rip  up  their 
Isa.   13.  16  Their  cliildren  also  shall  be  dashed  to 
Jer.     6.  11  I  will  pour  it  out  upon  the  children 

9.  21  to  cut  off  the  children  from  without 
Lam.  1.   5  her  children  are  gone  into  captivity 

2. 11  the  children,  .swoon  in  the  streets  of  the 
2. 19  for  the  life  of  thy  young  children,  that 

2.  20  Shall,  .women  eat.  .children  of  a  span 
Joel.  2.  16  assemble  the  elders,  gather  the  children 
Mic.    2.    9  from  their  children  have  ye  taken  away 

9. Babe,  newly  born  or  unborn,  &pe<pos  brephos. 
Acts    7.  19  they  cast  out  their  young  children 

lO.Babe,  without  full  power  of  speech,  v^ttlos  nepios. 
Gal.  4.  3  Even  so  we,  when  we  were  children,  were 
Eph.  4.  14  That  wTe  (henceforth)  be  no  more  children 

11.^1  little  or  young  lad,  ivaiZi6v  paidion. 

Matt  14.  21  five  thousand  men,  besides,  .children 
15.  38  four  thousand  men,  besides,  .children 
Mark  7.  28  yet  the  dogs . .  eat  of  the  children's  crumbs 
9.  37  receive  one  of  such  children  in  my  name 

10.  13  they  brought  young  childreu  to  him,  that 
Luke  7.  32  They  are  like  unto  children  sitting  in  the 

11.  7  and  my  children  are  with  me  in  bed 
John  21.    5  Jesus  saith.  .Children,  have  ye  any  meat? 
1  Co.  14.  20  Brethren,  be  not  children  in  understand. 
Heb.  2.  13  I  and  the  children  which  God  hath  given 

2.  14  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  part. 
12.  ..4  lad,  boy,  servant,  ira?s  2mis. 

Matt.  2.  16  slew  all  the  children  that  were  in  Beth. 

21.  15  children  crying  in  the  temple,  and  saying 

13.0?*e  bom,  a  child,  tzkvov  teknon. 

Matt.  2.  18  Rachel  weeping  (for)  her  children,  and 

3.  9  God  is  able . .  to  raise  up  children  unto  A. 
7.  11  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children 

10.  21  children  shall  rise  up  against,  .parents 
11. 19  But  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children 
15.  26  It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread 

18.  25  his  wife  and  children,  and  all  that  he  had 

19.  29  every  one  that  hath  forsaken,  .children 

22.  24  If  a  man  die,  having  no  children,  his 

23.  37  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children 
27.  25  His  blood  (be)  on  us,  and  on  our  childreu 

Mark  7.  27  Let  the  children  first  be  filled :  for  it 

7.  27  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread 
10.  24  Children,  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that 
10.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left,  .childreu 

10.  30  he  shall  receive,  .children,  and  lands 

12.  19  If  a  man's  brother,  .leave  no  children 

13.  12  children  shall  rise|up'against(their)parents 
Luke  1.  17  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  ch. 

3.  8  God  is  able,  .to  raise  up  children  unto  A. 

7.  35  But  Wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children 

11.  13  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children 

13.  34  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children 

14.  26  hate  not  his  father,  .and  children',  and 

18.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left,  .children 

19.  44  shall  lay.  .thy  children  within  thee;  and 

20.  31  and  they  left  no  children,  and  died 

23.  28  weep  for  yourselves,  and  for  Jour  children 
John  8.  39  If  ye  were  Abraham's  children,  ye  would 

11.  52  the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered 
Acts    2.  39  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children 

13.  33  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their  children 

21.  5  brought  us  on  our  way,  with  wives  and  c. 
21.  21  ought  not  to  circumcise  (their)  children 

Roni.  S.  16  beareth  witness,  .that  we  are  the  child. 
8. 17  if  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and 

8.  21  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children 

9.  7  they  are  the  seed,  .(are  they)  all  children 
9.  8  They  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh 
9.   8  (are)  not  the  cliildren  of  God  :  but  the  ch. 

1  Co.  7.  14  else  were  your  children  unclean  ;  but 

2  Co.  6.  13  I  speak  as  uuto  (my)  children,  be  ye  also 

12.  14  for  the  children  ought  not  to  lay  up  for 
12.  14  but  the  parents  for  the  children 

Gal.    4.  25  which,  .is  in  bondage  with  her  children 

4.  27  the  desolate  hath  many  more  children 
4,  28  Now  we.  .as  Isaac  was,  are  the  children 

4.  31  we  are  not  children  of  the  bond  woman 
Eph.   2.    3  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath 

5.  1  Be.  .followers  of  God,  as  dear  children 

5.  8  but  now.  .walk  as  children  of  light 

6.  1  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord 
6.   4  ye  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to 

Col.    3.  20  Cliildren,  obey  (your)  parents  in  all  tilings 


Col.     3.  21  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children,  .lest 
1  Th.  2.    7  even  as  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  children 

2.  11  we  exhorted.,  as  a  father  (doth)  his  chil. 
1  Tim. 3.    4  having  his  children  in  subjection  with 

3.  12  ruling  their  children  and  their  own  houses 
5.   4  if  any  widow  have  children  or  nephews- 

Tit.      1.    6  having  faithful  children,  not  accused  ot. 

1  Pe.   1.  14  As  obedient  children,  not  fashiouing 

2  Pe.  2.  14  having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  .cursed  chil: 

1  Jo.   3.  10  In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest 

3.  10  and  the  children  of  the  devil :  whosoever 
5.    2  By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children 

2  Jo.  1  unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  children 

4  that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in 
13  The,children  of  thy  elect  sister  greet  thee 

3  Jo.         4  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth 
Rev.    2.  23  I  will  kill  her  children  with  death;  and 

14.  Son,  vl6s  huios. 

Matt.  5.    9  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of 
5.  45  That  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your 
8. 12  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast 
9.  15  Can  the  children  of  the  bride  chamber 

12.  27  by  whomdoyourchildrencast(them)out? 

13.  38  the  good  seed  are  the  cliildren  of  the 
13.  38  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked 
17.  25  of  their  own  children,  or  of  strangers? 
17.  26  Jesus  saith.  .Then  are  the  children  free 
20.  20  Then  came .  .the  mother  of  Zebedee's  chil. 
23.  31  children  of  them  'which  killed  the  prophets 
27.  9  whom  they  of  the  children  of  Israel  did 
27.  56  and  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children 

Mark  2.  19  Can  the  children  of  the  bride  chamber 
Luke    1.  16  many  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  te . 

5.  34  Can  ye  make  the  children  of  the  bride. . 

6.  35  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  Highest 
16.    8  children  of  this  world.,  wiser  than  the  cb. 
20.  34  The  children  of  this  world  marry,  and     3 
20.  36  are  the  children  of  God,  being  the  ch:W. 

John    4.  12  drank  thereof  himself,  and  his  children 

12.  36  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  light 
Acts     3.  25  Ye  are  the  children  of  the  prophets,  and 

5.  21  all  the  senate  of  the  children  of  Israel 

7.  23  to  visit  his  brethren  the  children  of  Israel 
7.  37  which  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

9. 15  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel 
10.  36  which  (God)  sent  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

13.  26  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and 
Horn.  9.  26  there  shall  they  be  called  the  children  of 

9.  27  Though  the  number  of  the  children  of 
2  Co.  3.    7  so  that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not 

3.  13  children  of  Israel  could  not  stedfastly 
Gal.     3. "  7  the  same  are  the  children  of  Abraham 

3.  26  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith 
Eph.   2.    2  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience 

5.    6  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children  of 
Col.     3.    6  cometh  on  the  children  of  disobedience 
1  Th.  5. .  5  children  of  light,  and  the  children  of  day 
Heb.  1 1.  22  of  the  departing  of  the  children  of  Israel 
12.    5  which  speaketh untoyouasuntochildren 
Rev.    2. 14  cast  a  stumblingblock  before  the  children 

7.    4  all  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel 
21. 12  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel 

15.-4  very  little  lad  or  boy,  Traiddpiov  paidarion. 
Matt.  11.  16  It  is  like  unto  [children]  sitting  in  the 

CHILDREN,  adoption  of  — 

Placing  as  a  son,  vtodecia  huiothesia. 

Eph.   1.    5  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ 

CHILDREN,  to  bear  — 

To  bear  children,  reKvoyovew  teknogoneo. 

1  Ti.    5. 14  the  younger  women  many,  bear  children. 

CHILDREN,  to  bring  up  — 

To  nourish  children,  reKvorpocpew  tefoiotropheo. 

1  Ti.    5. 10  if  she  have  brought  up  cliildren,  if  she 
CHILDREN,  loving  one's  — 

Loving  children,  <pi\6rtKvo$  philoteknos. 

Titus  2.   4  teach  the.  .women,  .to  love  their  child. 
CHILDREN,  to  obtain  or  have  — 
To  be  built  up,  rns  banah,  % 

Gen.  16.    2  it  may  be  that  I  may  obtain  children  by 
30.    3  that  I  may  also  have  children  by  her 

CHILDREN,  without] — 
Childless,  &t^kvos  ateknos. 

Luke  20.  28  having  a  wife,  and  he  die  without  child. 
20.  29  took  a  wife,  and  died  without  cliildren 

CHILDREN  or  People  of  the  East,  cni2**J2  bene  qedem. 
People  dwelling  between  Canaan  and  the  Euphrates. 

Gen.  29.    1  came  into  the  laud  of  the  people  of  the  e. 

Judg.  6.    3  the  children  of  the  east,  even  they  came 

6.  33  and  the  children  of  the  east  were  gathered 

7.  12  the  cliildren  of  the  east  lay  along  in  the 
CHILDREN  of  Eden,  |TP"'33  bene  eden. 

The  inhabitants  of  Adiabeue  in  Mesopotamia,  near 
Gozan,  Haren,  and  Reseph. 

2  Ki.  19.  12  children  of  E.  which  (were)  in  Thelasar? 
Isa.   37.  12  children  of  E.  which  (were)  in  Telassar? 

CHIL'-EAB,   3*^3,  AaXov'ia. 

Second  sou  of  David,  called  Daniel  in  1  Ch.  3.  1. 

2  Sa.  3.    3  his  second,  C,  of  Abigail  the  wife  of 
CHIL'-ION,  ji^3  tuning. 
A  son  of  Elimelech  and  Naomi,  B.C.  1322. 

Ruth  1.    2  name  of  his  two  sons  Mahlon  and  C. 
1.    5  Mahlon  and  C.  died  also  both  of  them 
4.    9  lhave bought. .allthat(was)C.'sandM.'s 


CHILMAD 


164 


CHOEASHAN 


CHTL'-MAD,  n?^3,  Xappdv. 

A  region  supposed  to  be  between  Assyria  and  Arabia, 

trading  with  Tyre. 

Eze.  27.  23  the  merchants  ot  Sheba,  Asshur,  (and)  C. 

CHIH'-HAM,  Dnpa,  longing,  inning. 
A  man  recommended  to  David  by  Barzillai,  B.C.  1020. 
2  Sa.  jq.  37  hut  behold  thy  servant  C;  let  him  go 
jo  38  the  king  answered,  C.  shall  go  over  with 
10.  40  the  king  went,  .to  Gilgal,  and  C.  went 
Jer.  41.  17  And  they,  .dwelt  in  the  habitation  ol  C. 

CHIMNEY  — 

Outlet  ofchecquered  work,  nanx  aruhbah. 

Hos.  13.    3  shall  be  as  the . .  smoke  out  of  the  chim. 
CKDJ-NER'-ETH,    CHTN-NER'-OTH,    CIN-NE'-ROTH, 

rrua  circuit. 
A  district,  30  stadia  long  and  20  broad,  around  the  sea 
of  Galilee. 

Num  34.  11  border,  .shall  reach  unto .  .the  sea  of  C. 
Deut.  3.  17  from  C.,  even  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain 
Josh.  1 1 .   2  to  the  kings . .  of  the  plains  south  of  C. 

12.  3  from  the  plain  to  the  sea  of  C.  on  the 

13.  27  unto  the  edge  of  the  sea  of  C.  on  the 

19.  35  fenced  cities..  Hammath,  Rakkath,  and  C. 
1  Ki.  15. 20  Ben-hadad . .  the  captains . .  against . .  C. 

CHI'-OS,  Xi'os. 

An  island  in  the  Grecian  Archipelago,  12  miles  west 

of  Smyrna.    Now  Scio. 

Acts  20. 15  we.  .came  the  next  (day)  over  against  C. 

CHIS'-LETJ,  l'jpa  Orion,  Mars,  hunter. 

The  9th  month  of  the  Jews,  which  began  with  the  new 

moon  of  December. 

Neh.  1.    1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  month  C. 

Zech.  7.    1  in  the  fourth,  .of  the  niDth  month.  .0. 

CHIS'-LON,  li1^?  strong. 

Father  of  Elidad,  the  prince  of  Benjamin,  who  assisted 
in  the  division  of  the  land  W.  of  Jordan,  B.C.  1490. 
Nuni34.  21  of  Benjamin,  Elidad  the  son  of  C. 

CHIS-LOTH  TA'-BOR,  "OB  rf7ja  loins  of  Tabor. 
A  city  of  Zebulon  at  the  foot  of  Tabor ;   perhaps  the 
same  as  Cessulloth  in  Josh.  19.  18,  or  Tabor  in  19.  22. 
Now  llcsal. 

Josh.19. 12  turned  from  Sarid..  unto  the  border  of  C. 

CHIT'-TIM,  D'P?  terrible,  giants;  Citium,  Cyprus. 
A  family  or  race  descended  from  Javau,  closely  related 
to  the  Dodanim.  Chittim  is  often  noticed  in  Scripture. 
Balaam  predicted  that  a  fleet  should  thence  proceed 
for  the  destruction  of  Assyria.  In  Isa.  1.  12,  it  appears 
as  the  resort  of  the  fleets  of  Tyre.  In  Jer.  2.  10,  the 
Isles  of  Chittim  are  to  the  far  W.,  as  Kedar  is  to  the  E. 
of  Canaan. 

Num  24.  24  And  ships,  .from  the  coast  of  C. 

Isa.   23.    1  from  the  land  of  C.  it  is  revealed  to  them 
23. 12  0  thou  oppressed  virgin,  .pass  over  to  C. 

Jer.    2. 10  For  pass  over  the  isles  of  C,  and  see 

Eze.  27.    6  ivory,  (brought)  out  of  the  isles  of  C. 

Dan.  11.  30  For  the  ships  of  C.  shall  come  over  against 

CHf-TJN,  p'3,  'Paupav. 
The  god  Saturn  or  Kemphan.    See  Acts  7.  43- 
Amos  5.  26  ye  have  borne  the  tabernacle . .  of  C. 

CHIO'-E,  XAcSt).  „     ,        ,  ... 

\  female  disciple  at  the  place  whence  Paul  sent  his 
first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  ;  perhaps  Fhihppi. 

1  Co.  1. 11  by  them,  .of  C,  that  there  are  contentious 
CHOICE,  choicest  — 

1.  To  choose  (after  testing),  "ins  bachar. 

2  Sa.  10.   9  he  chose  of  all  the  choice  (men)  of  Israel 

1  Ch.  19.  10  he  chose  out  of  all  the  choice  of  Israel 

2  Ch.25.    5  found .  .three  hundred  thousand  choice 

2.  To  be  chosen  (after  testing),  "ina  bachar,  2. 

Prov.  8.  10  Receive,  .knowledge  rather  than  choice 
8. 19  aud  my  revenue  than  choice  silver 
10.  20  The  tongue  of  the  just  (is  as)  choice  sil. 

3.  Pure,  na  bar. 

Song  6.  9  she  (is)  the  choice  (one)  of  her  that  hare 
i.  To  purify,  na  barar. 

1  Ch.  7.  40  these  (were) . .  choice  (and)  mighty  men  of 
Neh.  5.  iS  prepared  (for  me)  daily,  .six  choice  sheep 

5.  Choice,  "rinn?  mibchor. 

2  Ki.  3. 19  ye  shall  smite  every  fenced . .  choice  city 

19.  23  I . .  will  cut  down  the . .  choice  fir  trees 

G.CJwice,  "map  mibchar. 

Gen.  23.  6  in  the  choice  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy 
Deut  12.  11  all  your  choice  vows  which  ye  vow  unto 
Isa.   22.   7  thy  choicest  valleys  shall  be  full  of  char. 

37.  24 1  will  cut  down  the . .  choice  fir  trees 
Jer.  22.    7  they  shall  cut  down  thy  choice  cedars 
Eze.  24.   4  Gather  the  pieces.. fill  (it)  with  the  choice 
24.   5  Take  the  choice  of  the  flock,  and  burn  also 
31. 16  the  trees.,  the  choice  and  best  of  Lebanon 

CHOICE  young  man  — 
I  Ttoice  one,  "una  bachur. 

1  Sa.   9.    2  Saul,  a  choice  young  man,  aud  a  goodly 
CHOICE,  to  make  — 
To  lay  out  for  oneself,  tKAeyopai  eklegomai. 

Acts  15.    7  a  good  while  ago  Gud  made  choice  among 


CHOKE,  to  — 

1.  To  choke  off  or  utterly,  aTroirviya  apopnigo. 

Matti3.    7  the  thorns  sprung  up  and  choked  them 

Luke  8.    7  thorns  sprang  up  with  it,  and  choked  it 
8.  33  herd  ran.  .into  the  lake,  and  were  choked 
2. To  choke,  Ttviyw  pnigo. 

Mark  5.  13  herd  ran.  .into  the  sea.  .and  were  choked 
Z.To  choke  together,  avpirviyw  sumpnigo. 

Watt  13.  22  choke  the  word,  and  he  hecometh  unrfru. 

Mark.  4.    7  and  the  thorns  grew  up,  and  choked  it 
4.  19  choke  the  word,  and  it  becometh  unfru. 

Luke  8.  14  choked  with  cares  and  riches  and  pleas. 

CHOLER,  to  be  moved  with  — 
To  become  or  show  oneself  bitter,  itd  marar,  7. 
Dan    8.    7  aud  he  was  moved  with  choler  against 
11. 11  And  the  king,  .shall be  moved  with  choler 

CHOOSE  — 

1. Choice  one,  Tna  bachir. 

2  Sa.  21.    6  Let  seven  men . .  (whom)  the  LORD  did  cho. 

2.  To  choose  (after  testing),  ina  bachar. 

-  Gen.    6.   2  they  took  them  wives . .  which  they  chose 
13. 11  Then  Lot  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jor. 
Exodi7.    9  Choose  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with 
18.  25  And  Moses  chose  able  men  out  of  all  Is. 
16.    5  (him)  whom  he  hath  chosen  will  he  cause 
16.   7  the  man  whom  the  Lord  doth  choose,  he 
Num.  17.    5  the  man's  rod,  whom  I  shall  choose,  shall 
Deut.   4.  37  he  loved  thy  fathers,  therefore  he  chose 
7.    6  the  LORD  thy  God  hath  chosen  thee  to  be 
7.    7  The  Lord  did  not  set  hisjlove.  .nor  choose 
10.  is  Only  the  Lord  . .  chose  their  seed  after 
12.    5  the  Lord,  .shall  choose  out  of  all  your 
12. 11  God  shall  choose  to  cause  his  name  to 
12.  14,  26  the  place  which  the  LORD  shall  choose 
12.  18  in  the  place  which  the  Lord.,  shall  choose 
12.  21  God  hath  chosen  to  put  his  name  there 
14.   2  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  pecu. 
14.  23  in  theplace  which  he  shall  choose  to  place 
14.  24  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose  to  set  his 

14.  25  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  cho. 

15.  20  the  Lord  shall  choose,  thou  aud  thy  ho. 

16.  2  the  Lord  shall  choose  to  place  his  name 
16.    6  thy  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name 
16.    7  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  ch. 
16. 11  thy  God  hath  chosen  to  place  his  name 
16.  15  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose 

16.  16  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose 

17.  8  the  place  which  the  Lord,  .shall  choose 

17. 10  which  the  Lord  shall  choose  shall  show 

17.  15  whom  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 

18.  5  God  hath  chosen  him  out  of  all  thy  tribes 
18.  6  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose 
21.  5  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen  to  minister 
23. 16  iu  that  place  which  he  shall  choose  in  one 
26.  2  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 
30.  19  therefore  choose  life,  that  both  thou  and 

31. 11  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose,  thou 
Josh.  8.    3  Joshua  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty 

9.  27  iu  the  place  which  he  should  choose 
24. 15  choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve 
24.  22  ye  have  chosen  you  the  Lord,  to  serve  him 
Judg.    5.   8  They  chose  new  gods  ;  then  (was)  war  in 
10.  14  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  have  chosen 

1  Sa   2.  28  did  I  choose  him  out  of  all  the  tribes 

8. 18  your  king  which  ye  shall  have  chosen  you 
10.  24  See  ye  him  whom  the  Lord  hath  chosen 
12. 13  behold  the  king  whom  ye  have  chosen 

13.  2  Saul  chose  him  three  thousand  (men)  of 

16.  8,  9  he  said,  Neither  hath  the  Lord  chosen 
16. 10  said.  .The  Lord  hath  not  chosen  these 

17.  40  he.  .chose  him  five  smooth  stones  out  of 3 

20.  30  I  know  that  thou  hast  chosen  the  son  of 

2  Sa.    6.  21  the  Lord,  which  chose  me  before  thy 

10.  9  he  chose  of  all  the  choice  (men)  of  Israel 

16.  18  whom,  .all  the  men  of  Israel,  choose,  his 

17.  1  Let  me  uow  choose  out  twelve  thousand 

24. 12  choose  thee  one  of  them,  that  I  may  (do  it) 

1  Ki.  3.    8  midst  of  thy  people  which  thou  hast  chos. 

8. 16  I  chose  no  city,  .but  I  chose  David 

8. -44  toward  the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen 

8.  48  the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen,  and  the 

1 1. 13  for  Jerusalem's  sake,  which  I  have  chosen 

11.  32  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Isr. 
11.  34  for  David  my>ervant's  sake.iwhoni  I  cho. 
11.  36  I  have  chosen  me  to  put  my  name  there 

14.  21  the  Lord  did  choose  out  of  all  the  tribes 

18.  23  let  them  choose  one  bullock  for  themselv. 

18.  25  Choose  you  one  bullock  for  yourselves 

2  Ki.  21.    7  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  tribes  of  Israel 

23.  27  cast  off  this  city,  .which  I  have  chosen 

1  Ch  15.    2  them  hath  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry  the 

19.  10  he  chose  out  of  all  the  choice  of  Israel 

21.  10  choose  thee  oue  of  them,  that  I  may  do  (it) 
28.   4  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  chose  me  before 
28.    4  for  he  hath  chosen  Jud  ah  (to  be)  the  ruler 
28.    5  he  hath  choseu  Solomon  my  sou  to  sit 

28.  6  for  I  have  choseu  him  (to  be)  my  sou,  and 
28. 10  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  build  an  h. 

29.  1  Solomon,  .whom  alone  God  hath  chosen 

2  Ch.  6.    s  I  chose  no  city  among  all  the  tribes  of 

6.    5  neither  chose  I  any  man  to  be  a  ruler  over 
6.   6  But  I  have  chosen  Jerusalem,  that  my 
6.   6  and  have  chosen  David  to  be  over  my  p. 

6.  34  toward  this  city  which  thou  hast  chosen 
C.  38  (toward)  the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen 

7.  12  have  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  au 
7.  16  uow  have  I  chosen  and  sanctified  this  h. 

12.  13  the  Lord  ha.',  chosen  out  of  all  the  tribes 


2  Ch.29.  11  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  stand  before 

33.  7  I  have  chosen  before  all  the  tribes  of  Is. 
Neh.  1.    9  the  place  that  I  have  chosen  to  set  my 

9.    7  the  Lord  the  God,  who  didst  choose  Ah. 
Joh     7. 15  So  that  my  soul  chooseth  strangling 

9.  14  choose  out  my  words  (to  reason)withhim? 
15.    s  thou  choosest  the  tongue  of  the  crafty 
29.  25  I  chose  out  their  wa^,  and  sat  chief,  and 

34.  4  Let  us  choose  to  us  judgment :  let  us 
34.  33  whether  thou  refuse,  or.  -thou  choose 
36.  21  this  hast  thou  chosen  rather  than  afflict. 

Psa.  25.  12  he  teach  in  the  way  (that)  he  shall  choose 
33. 12  the  people  (whom)  he  hath  chosen  for  his 
47.   4  He  shall  choose  our  inheritance  for  us 
65.    4  Blessed  (is  the  man  whom)  thou  choosest 
78.  67  and  chose  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim 
78.  68  But  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  mount 
78.  70  He  chose  David  also  his  servant,  and 
105.  26  Moses  his  servant,  (and)  Aaron  whom  he 
119.  30  I  have  chosen  the  way  of  truth ;  thy  judg. 
119. 173  Let  thine  hand  help  me:  for  I  have  chosen 
132. 13  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Zion  ;  he  hath 
135.   4  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Jacob  unto  himself 
Prov.  1.  29  they,  .did  not  choose  the  fearof  the  Lord 
3.  31  Envy  thou  not .  .choose  none  of  his  ways 
Isa.      1.  29  for  tile  gardens  that  ye  have  chosen 

7. 15  to  refuse  the  evil,  aud  choose  the  good 

7. 16  the  child  shall  knowto.  .choose  the  good 
14.    i  For  the  Lord  ..  will  yet  choose  Israel,  and 

40.  20  He  that,  .chooseth  a  tree  (that)  will  not 

41.  8  my  servant,  Jacob  whom  I  have  choseu 
41.    9  I  have  choseu  thee,  and  not  cast  thee 
41.  24  au  abomination  (is  he  that)  chooseth  you 
43. 10  and  my  servant  whom  I  have  chosen 

44.    1  Yet  now  hear,  O  Jacob . .  whom  I  have  cho. 
44.    2  thou,  Jeshusun,  whom  I  have  chosen 

48.  10  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of 

49.  7  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  he  shall  cho. 
56.  4  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  choose  (the  things) 
58.  5  Is  it  such  afast  that  I  have  chosen?  a  day 
58.  6  (Ts)  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen? 
63.  12  ye . .  did  choose  (that)  w  herein  I  delighted 
66.  3  Yea,  they  have  chosen  their  own  ways 
66.  4  I  also  will  choose  their  delusions,  and 
66.    4  they . .  chose  (that)  in  which  I  delighted 

Jer.  33.  24  two  families  which  the  Lord  hath  chosen 
Eze.  30.    5  In  the  day  when  I  chose  Israel,  and 
Hag.  2.  23  for  I  have  chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord 
Zech.  1. 17  and  the  Lord.. shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem 
2. 12  the  Lord  shall,  .choose  Jerusalem  again 
3.    2  even  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jeru. 

3.  To  appoint,  N")a  bara,  3. 

Eze.  21. 19  choose  thou  a  place,  choose  (it)  at  the 

4.  To  appoint,  rna  barah. 

1  Sa.  17.  8  choose  you  a  man  for  you,  aud  let  him 

5.  To  receive,  Vai;  qabal,  S. 

1  Ch.21.  11  Thus  saith  the  LORD,  Choose  thee 

6.7*0  take,  lift  vp  for  oneself,  a'ipioixal  aireomai. 
Phil.    1.  22  Yet  what  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not 

2  Th.  2. 13  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you 
Heb.  11.  25  Choosing  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with 

7.  To  take,  choose,    aiperifr  havretizo. 

Matt  12.  18  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  have  chosen 

S.To  lay  out,  eK\4ya  eklego. 

Marki3.  20  for  the  elect's  sake,  whom  he  hath  chosen 
Luke  6.  13  of  them  he  chose  twelve,  whom  also  he 
10.  42  Mary  hath  chosen  that  good  part,  which 

14.  7  he  remarked  how  they  chose  out  the  chief 
John  6.  70  Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one 

13.  18  I  know  whom  I  have  chosen :  but,  that 

15.  16  Yehave  not  chosen  me,  but  Ihavechoseu 
15.  19  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world 

Acts    1.    2  unto  the  apostles  whom  he  had  chosen 
1.  24  show  whether  of  these  two  thou  hast  cho. 
6.    5  they  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of  faith 
13. 17  The  God  of  this  people . .  chose  our  fathers 

i  Co.   1.  27  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of 
1.  27  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
1.  28  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  cho. 

Eph.    1.   4  According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him 

Jas.     2.    s  Hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this 

9.  To  lay  upon,  lin\(yoi  epilego. 

Acts  15.  40  Paul  chose  Silas,  aud  departed,  being 

10.  To  hand  out,  prepare  beforehand,  irpoxeipi'i.V""- 
Acts  22.  14  The  God  of  our  fathers  hath  choseu  thee 

11.  To  extend  the  hand  {in  voting),  x^'poroveai. 

2  Co.   8. 19  who  was  also  choseu  of  the  churches  to 

CHOOSE  tefore,  to  — 

To  extend  the  hand  beforehand,  vpoxeiporovea. 
Acts  10.  41  hut  unto  witnesses  chosen  before  of  God 

CHOOSE  to  he  a  soldier,  to  — 

To  levy  an  army,  enlist,  arpaToXoyiui  slratologeO. 
2  Ti.    2.    4  him  who  hath  chosen  him  to  he  a  soldier 

CHOP  in  pieces,  to  — 

To  spread  out,  fcns paras. 

Mic.    3.    3  chop  them  in  pieces,  as  for  the  pot,  and  as 

CHO-RA'-SHAN,  Jc/'o  -jia  smoking  furnace. 

A  town  in  Judah,  perhaps  the  same  as  Asltan  (Josh.  15. 

42),  which  was  given  to  Simeon. 

1  Sa.  30.  30  and  to  them  which  (were)  in  C,  aud  to 


CHORAZIN 


165 


CHRIST 


CBO-RAZ'-IN,  Xopa^iv. 

A  c.ty  in  which  some  of  the  mighty  works  of  Christ 
were  doue.  It  was  on  the  shore  of  the  lake  of  Tiberias, 
2  miles  from  Capernaum.  Its  modern  name  is  likely 
Tell  Hum,  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  or  Kerazah. 

Matt  ii  21  Woe  unto  thee,  C!  woe  unto  thee,  Beth. ! 

Lukeio  13  Woe  unto  thee  C. !  woe  unto  thee,  Beth. ' 
CHOSEN  — 
1  Choice,  chosen,  tried,  "An?  hachur. 

Tsa.  7S  31  and  smote  down  the  chosen  (men)  of  Isr 
2.To  choose  (after  testing),  TTJ|  bachar. 

Exodi4-    7  lie  took  six  hundred  chosen  chariots,  and 
Judg.  20.  15,  16  seven  hundred  chosen  men 

20.  34  ten  thousand  chosen  men  out  of  all  Israel 

1  Sa.  24    2  Saul  took  three  thousand  chosen  men  out 

26.    2  having  three  thousand  chosen  men  of  Is. 

2  Sa.    6.    1  David  gathered  together  all  (the)  chosen 

1  Ki.12.  21  four  score  thousand  chosen  men,  which 

2  Ch.ix.    1  four  score  thousand  chosen  (men),  which 

I3.    3  (even)  four  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 
13-    3  with,  eight  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 
33. 17  there  fell,  .five  hundred  thousand  chosen 
Psa  83. 19  I  have  exalted  (one)  chosen  out  of  the 
Jer.  49. 19  who  (is)  a  chosen  (man,  that)  I  may 
50.  44  who  (is)  a  chosen  (man,  that)  I  may 
3.  To  purify,  Tia  barar. 

1  Ch.  9  22  All  these  (which  were)  chosen  to  he 
16.  41  the  rest  that  were  chosen,  who  were 
i.Choice,  irjna  mibchar. 

Exod  15.  4  hischosen  captains  were  also  drowned  in 
Jer.  4S.  15  his  chosen  young  men  are  gone  down  to 
Eze.  23.  7  with  all  them  (that  were)  the  chosen  men 
Dan.  11.  15  neither  his  chosen  people,  neither 

5.  To  lay  out  for  oneself,  €K\4yo(j.at  ekUgomai. 
Acts  15.  22  to  send  chosen  men  of  their  own  com. 

15.  25  to  send  chosen  men  unto  you  with  our 

$.Laid  out,  choice,  chosen,  enKeKTo?  eklektos. 
Matt2o.  16  [for  many  be  called,  but  few  chosen] 

22.  14  For  many  are  called,  but  few  (are)  chosen 
Luke23.  35  save  himself,  if  he  be  Christ,  the  chosen 
Rom  16.  13  Salute  Rufus  chosen  in  the  Lord,  and  his 
1  Pe.  2.    4  disallowed,  .of  men,  but  chosen  of  God 

2.   9  But  ye  (are)  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
Rev.  17. 14  that  are  with  him  (are)  called,  and  chosen 
7. A  choice,  selection,  IrnXoyh  ekloge. 

Acts   9. 15  for  he  is  a  choser.  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear 
CHOSEN  (one)  — 
Choice,  chosen,  tried  one,  vn3  bachir. 

t  CI1.16. 13  ye  children  of  Jacob,  his  chosen  ones 

3  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  my  chosen 
6  ye  children  of  Jacob  his  chosen 
43  brought  forth,  .his  chosen  with  gladness 
5  That  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen 
23  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  stood  before 
20  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  chosen 
15  leave  your  name  for  a  curse  unto  my  cho. 
CHOSEN,  to  be  — 
To  be  chosen  [after  testing),  tn^  bachar,  2. 

Prov  22.    1  A  good  name  (is)  rather  to  be  chosen  than 
Jer.     8.   3  death  shall  be  chosen  rather  than  life  by 
CHO-ZE'-BA,  KM  deceitful. 

A  city  of  Judah,  the  same  as  Chezib  (Gen.  3S.  5),  and 
Aehzib  (Josh.  15.  44). 

1  Ch.  4.  22  And  Jokim,  and  the  men  of  C,  and  Joash 
CHRIST,  Xptcrros  anointed. 

The  official  appellation  of  the  long  promised  and  long 
expected  Saviour,  denoting  his  kingly  authority  and 
mediatorial  position  as  the  "Servant  of  the  Lord." 
Jescs  was  his  common  name  among  men  during  his 
lifetime,  and  he  is  generally  so  called  in  the  Gospels, 
while  the  Christ  or  Jesus  Christ  is  generally  used 
in  the  Epistles. 

Matt.  1.  17  from  the  carrying  away,  .unto  C  (are) 

2.  4  he  demanded  of  them  where  C  should  be 

11.  2  had  heard  in  the  prison  the  works  of  C. 

16.  16  Thou  art  the  C,  the  Son  of  the  living  God 
16.  20  should  tell  no  man.  .he  was  Jesus  the  C. 
22. 42  Saying,  What  think  ye  of  C?  whose  son 

23.  8,  10  for  one  is  your  Master,  (even)  C. 

24.  5  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am  C. 
24.  23  if  any  mau.  .say  unto  you,  Lo, liere  (is^  C. 

26.  63  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the  C,  the  Son 
25.63  Prophesy  unto  us,  thou  CL,  Who  is  he  that 
27. 17  Barabbas,  or  Jesus  which  is  called  C? 

27.  22  What  shall  I  do.  .with  Jesus,  .called  C.9 
Mark  S.  29  And  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Thou  arf  the  1 '. 

9.41  drinkinmyuame,  because  ye  belong  to  C. 

12.  35  How  say  the  scribes  that  C.  is  the  son  of 

13.  21  if  auy  manshall  say  to  you,  Lo,  here  (is)  C. 

14.  61  said.  .Art  thou  the  C,  the  Sou  of  the 

15.  32  Let  C.  the  King  of  Israel  descent'  now 
Luke  2.  1 1  in  the  city  of  David,  a  Savionr,  which  is  C. 

1.  26  not  see  death,  before  he  had  seen.  .C. 

3.  15  all  men  mused . .  whether  he  were  the  C. 

4.  41  Thou  art  C.  .for  they  knew  that  he  was  C. 
9.  20  say  ye . .  Peter  answering  said,  The  C. 

23. 41  said. .  How  say  they  that  C.  is  David  s  son  ? 
22. 67  Saying,  Art  thou  the  C.  ?  tell  us.    And  he 
23.    2  We  found.. saying  that  he  himseH  iv.  C. 
23.  35  let  him  save  himself,  if  he  be  C,  the 

23.  39  saying.  If  thou  be  C,  save  thyself  an. I  us 

24.  26  Ought  not  C.  to  have  suffered  these  things 
24. 45  thus  it  behoved  C.  to  surfer,  and  to  ris^ 

John  1.  20  denied  not;  but  confessed,  I  am  not  the  C. 
1.  25  if  thou  be  not  that  C,  ncr  Elias  neither 


Psa.  85. 
105. 


Isa. 


106. 

io5. 
43- 
°5- 


John  1. 
3- 

4- 
4- 


Rom. 


:Co. 


We  have  found  the  Messias,  which  is . .  C. 
me  witness, 'that  I  said,  I  am  not  the  C. 
know..  Messias  cometh,  which  is  called  C. 
Come,  see  a  man.  .is  not  this  the  C? 
know  that  this  is  indeed  the  C,  the  S. 
believe  and  are  sure  that  thou  art  that  C. 
rulers  know  indeed  that  this  is  the  very  C.  ? 
when  C.  cometh,  no  man  knoweth  whence 
When  C.  cometh,  will  he  do  more  miracles 
This  is  the  C. .  Shall  C.  come  out  of  Galilee? 
That  C.  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and 
if  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was  the  C. 
said  unto  him.  .If  thou  be  the  C,  tell  us 
Yea,  Lord :  I  believe  that  thou  art  the  C. 
heard  out  of  the  law  that  C.  abideth  for 
that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  C. 
God  had  sworn .  .he  would  raise  up  C.  to 
He.  .spake  of  the  resurrection  of  C.,  that 
made  that  same  Jesus,  .both  Lord  and  C. 
God  before  had  shewed,  .that  C.  should 
rulers  were  gathered  together  against.  .C. 
Philip  went  down.,  and  preached  C.  unto 
straightway  he  preached  C.  in  the  syna. 
conf.  the  Jews . .  proving  that  this  is . .  C. 
alleging  that  C.  must  needs  have  suffered 
this  Jesus,  whom  I  preach  unto  you,  is  C. 
Paul . .  testified . .  (that)  Jesus  (was)  C. 
showing  by  the  Scriptures.  .Jesus  (was)C. 
and  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in  C. 
ThatC.  should  suffer,  (and)  thathe  should 
I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  C:  for 
For.. in  due  time  C.  died  for  the  ungodly 
in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  C.  died, 
like  as  C.  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by 
Now  if  we  be  dead  with  C.f  we  believe 
Knowing  that  C.  being  raised  from  the 
become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  C. 
Now  if  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  C. 
if  C.  (be)  in  you,  the  body  (is)  dead  because 
he  that  raised  up  C.  from  the  dead  shall 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  «  ith  C. ;  if  so 
(It  is)  C.  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is 
Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  C.  ? 
I  say  the  truth  in  C. ,  I  lie  not,  my  consci. 
I . .  wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  C. 
C.  (came),  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for 
C.  (is)  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness 
Who  shall  ascend . .  to  bring  C.  down  (from) 
Who  shall  descend .  .to  bring  up  C.  again 
we,  (being)  many,  are  one  body  in  C,  and 
to  this  end  C.  both  died,  and  rose,  and 
we  shall  all  stand  before  the.  .seat  of  C. 
Destroy  not  him .  .for  whom  C.  died 
he  that  in  these  things  serveth  C.  (is) 
even  C.  pleased  not  himself ;  but  as  it  is 
as  C.  also  received  us,  to  the  glory  of  God 
those  things  which  C.  hath  not  wrought 
I  have  fully  preached  the  gospel  of  C. 
I  strived  to  preach  ..not  where  C.  was 
of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  C. 
who  is  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia  unto  C. 
among  the  apostles,  who  also  were  in  C. 
Salute  Lrbane  our  helper  in  C  ,  and  Stac. 
Salute  Apelles  approved  in  C.  Salute  them 
The  churches  of  C.  salute  you 
the  testimony  of  C.  was  confirmed  in  you 
I  of  Apollos ;  and  I  of  Cephas ;  and  I  of  C. 
Is  C.  divided  ?  was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ? 
C.  sent  me  aoi  to  baptize,  but  to  preach 
the  cross  of  C.  should  be  made  of  none 
we  preach  C.  crucified,  unto  the  Jews  a 
C.  the  power  of  God,  aud  the  wisdom  of  G. 
But  we  have  the  mind  of  C. 
as  unto  carnal,  (even)  as  unto  babes  in  C. 
And  ye  are  C.'s ;  aud  C.  (is)  God's 
the  ministers  of  C.  and  stewards  of  the 
for  C.'s  sake,  but  ye  (are)  wise  in  C. 
ye  have  ten  thousa.  d  instructors  in  C. 
remembrance . .  my    ays  which  be  in  C. 
even  C.  our  passovei  is  sacrificed,  for  us 
that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of  C.  ? 
shall  I  then  take  the  members  of  C,  and 
also  he  that  is  called,  .is  C.'s  servant 
shall  the  weak . .  perish,  for  whom  C.  died  ? 
when  ye  sin  so .  .ye  sin  against  C. 
lest  we  should  hinder  the  gospel  of  C. 
I  may  make  the  gospel  of  C.  without 
without  law  to  God,  but  under  .law  to  C. 
drank  of  that . .  Rock . .  that  Rock  was  C. 
Xeither  let  us  tempt  C,  as  some  of  them 
is  it  not.  .communion  of  the  blood  of  C? 
is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of  C. 
Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I. .  of  C. 
know,  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  C. 
and  the  head  of  C.  (is)  God 
For  as  the  body  is  one.  .so  also  (is)  C. 
Now  ye  are  the  body  of  C,  and  members 
that  C  died  for  our  sins  according 
if  C.  be  preached  that  he  rose  from  the  d. 
no  resurrection.. then  is  C.  not  risen 
if  C.  be  not  risen,  then  (is)  our  preaching 
we  have  testified . .  that  he  raised  up  C. 
if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  C.  raised 
if  C.  be  not  raised,  your  faith  (is)  vaiu  ;  ye 
they  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in  C. 
If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  C. 
now  is  C.  risen  from  the  dead,  (aud) 
even  so  in  C.  shall  all  be  made  alive 
every  man  in  his  own  order :  C.  the  first 
afterward  they  that  are  C.'s  at  his  coming 
as  the  sufferings  of  C.  abound  in  us 
so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  by  C. 


:Co.    1.  21  he  which  stablisheth  us  with  you  in  C. 
2.  10  (forgave  I  it)  in  the  person  of  C. 
2.  12  I  came  to  Troas  to  (preach)  C.'s  gospel 
2. 14  God,  which,  .causeth  us  to  triumph  in  C 
2.  15  For  we  are  unto  Gcd  a  sweet  savour  of  C 

2.  17  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  we  in  C. 

3.  3  (ye  are),  .declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  C. 

3.  4  such  trust  have  we  through  C.  to  God-wa. 
3. 14  which  (veil)  is  done  away  in  C. 

4.  4  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  C,  who 

5.  10  we  must  all  appear  before  the.  .seat  of  C. 
5.  14  the  love  of  C.  constraiueth  us  ;  because 
5.  i5  though  we  have  known  C.  after  the  flesh 
5.  17  ifanyman  (be)  in  C,  (he  is)  a  new  creature 

19  To  wit,  that  God  was  in  C,  reconciling 

20  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for  C,  as 
20  we  pray  (yon)  in  C.'s  stead,  be  yereconcil. 
15  what  concord  hath  C.  with  Belial?  or  what 

23  the  churches,  (and)  the  glory  of  C. 
13  your,  .subjection  unto  the  gospel  of  C. 

10.    1  by  themeekness  and  gentleness  of  C,  who 
10.   5  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  C. 
10.    7  If  any  maif  trust  to  himself  that  he  is  C.'s 
10.    7  that,  as  he  (is)  C.'s,  even  so  (are)  we  C.'s 

10.  14  to  you  also  in  (preaching)  the  gospel  of  C. 

11.  2  may  present  (you  as)a  chaste  -virgin  to  C. 
11.    3  corrupted  from  the  simplicity.. in  C. 

11.  10  As  the  truth  of  C.  is  in  me,  no  man  shall 
11. 13  transforming,  .into  the  apostles  of  C. 

11.  23  Are  they  ministers  of  C.  ?.  .1  (am)  more 

12.  2  I  knew  a  man  in  C.  above  fourteen  years 
12.    9  that  the  power  of  C.  may  rest  upon  me 
12. 10  I  take  pleasure.. in  distresses.forC.'ssake 
12. 19  we  speak  before  God  in  C. :  but  (we  do)  all 
13-    3  5"e  seek  a  prcof  of  C.  speaking  in  me 

Gal.     1.    6  him  that  called  yon  into  the  grace  of  C. 
1.    7  and  would  pervert  the  gospel  of  C. 
1. 10 1  should  not  be  the  servant  of  C. 

1.  22  churches  of  Jndea  which  were  in  C. 

2. 16  we  might  be  justified  by  the  faith  of  C. 

2.  17  if,  while  we  seek  to  be  justified  by  C,  we 
2.  17  (is)  therefore  C.  the  minister  of  sin?  Gcd 
2.  20  I  am  crucified  with  C. :  nevertheless  I  live 
2.  20  yet  not  I,  but  C.  liveth  in  me  :  and  the 
2.  21  if  righteousness  (come)  by  the  law.  ,C.  is 

.  13  C.  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of 
.  16  but  as  of  one,  And  to  thy  seed,  which  is  C. 
17  covenant,  that  was  confirmed,  .in  C. 

24  law . .  schoolmaster  (to  bring  us)  unto  C. 
27  as  many,  .as  have  been  baptized  into  C. 

.  29  if  ye  (be)  C.'s,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed 

7  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  C. 

19  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth  again  until  C. 
.    1  Stand  fast,  .in  the  liberty  wherewith  C. 

2  if  ye  be  circumcised,  C.  shall  profit  you 

4  C.  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you,  who. 
.  24  they  that  are  C.'s  have  crucified  the  flesh 

2  Bear,  .burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  C. 
12  lest  they,  .suffer,  .for  the  cross  of  C. 

3  who  hath  blessed  ns  with,  .blessings,  .in  C. 
10  he  might  gather,  .in  one  all  things  in  C. 
12  praise  of  his  glory,  who.  .trusted  in  C. 

20  Which  he  wrought  in  C,  when  he  raised 

5  hath  quickened  ns  together  with  C. 

12  at  that  time  ye  were  without  C,  being 

13  ye. -are  made  nigh  bythe  blood  of  C. 

4  understand  my  knowledge,  .mystery  of  C. 

6  partakers  of  his  premise  in  C.  by  the  Gos. 

8  should  preach.. unsearchable  riches  of  C. 
17  That  C.  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith 
19  to  know  the  love  of  C,  which  passeth 

7  according  to'the  measure  of  the  gift  of  C. 
4.  12  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  C. 

4.  13  unto  the  measure,  .of  the  fulness  of  C. 
4.  15  growup  into  him.  .which  is  the  head  .  .C. 
4.  20  Bnt  ye  have  not  so  learned  C. 

4.  32  as  God  for  C.'s  sake  hath  forgiven  you 

5.  2  walk  in  love,  as  C.  also  hath  loved  us,  and 
5.  5  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  C. 
5.  14  arise  from  the  dead,  and  C.  shall  give  thee 
5.  23  even  as  C.  is  the  head  of  the  church 

5.  24  as  the  church  is  subject  unto  C,  so  (let) 
5.  25  even  as  C.  also  loved  the  church,  and  gave 

5.  32  but  I  speak  concerning  C.  and  the  church 

6.  5  in  singleness  of  your  heart,  as  unto  C. 

6.  6  but  as  the  servants  of  C.;  doing  the  will  of 
Phil.  1.  10  that  ye  maybe  sincere.,  till  the  day  of  C. 
1.  13  my  bonds  in  C.  are  manifest  in  all  the 
1.  15  Some  indeed  preach  C.  even  of  envy  and 
1.  16  The  oue  preach  C.  of  contention,  not 
1.  18  notwithstanding,  every  way..  C.  is  preach. 
1.  20  now  also  C.  shall  be  magnified  in  my  bedy 
1.  21  For  to  me  to  live  (is)  C,  and  to  die  (is)gain 
1.  23  adesire  to  depart,  and  tobe  withC;  which 
1.  27  let  your  conversation  be  as.. gospel  of  C. 

1.  29  unto  you  it  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  C. 

2.  1  If  (there  be)  therefore  ..consolation  in  C. 
2.  16  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  C,  that 

2.  30  Because  for  the  work  of  C.  he  was  nigh 

3.  7  what,  .were  gain.. I  counted  loss  for  C. 
3.    8  count  them  (b"t)  dung,  that  I  may  win  C. 
3.    9  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  C. 

3.  iS  (that  they  are),  .euemies  of  the  cross  of  C. 

4.  13 1  can  do  all  things  through  C.  which  str 
Col.      1.  2  To  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren  in  C. 

1.    7  who  is  for  you  a  faithful  minister  of  C. 
1.  24  which  is  behind  of  the  aftiietiuns  of  C. 

1.  27  which  is  C.  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory 

2.  2  mystery  of  God.  .the  Father,  and  of  C 
2.    5  and  the  stedfastness  of  your  faith  in  C. 
2.    8  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not  after  ('. 
2. 11  sins  of  the  flesh  by  the  circumcision  of  G 


3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4- 
4 
5 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6. 
Eph.    1. 


CHRIST 


166 


CIRCUIT 


Col.     2.  17  are  a  shadow,  .but  the  body  (is)  of  C. 

2.  so  if  ye  be  dead  with  C.  from  the  rudiments 
i  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  C,  seek  those 
i  where  C.  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

3  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  C. 

4  When  C,  (who  is)  our  life,  shall  appear 
ii  bond  (nor)  free  :  but  C.  (is)  all,  and  in  all 
13  even  as  C.  forgave  you,  so  also  (do)  ye 
16  Let  the  word  of  C.  dwell  in  you  richly  in 

3  to  speak  the  mystery  of  C,  for  which  I 
12  a  servant  of  C.,  saluteth  you,  always  lab. 

6  when,  .burdensome,  as  the  apostles  of  C. 

2  our  fellow  labourer  in  the  gospel  of  C. 
16  and  the  dead  in  C.  shall  rise  first 
2  Th.  2.    2  as  that  the  day  of  C.  is  at  hand 

3.  5  and  into  the  patient  waiting  for  C. 

i  Ti.    2.    7  I  speak  the  truth  inC,  (and)  he  not 

5.  11  when  they,  .wax  wanton  against  C,  they 

2  Ti.    2. 19  let  everyone  that  nameth  the  name  of  C. 

Thru.         S  though  I  might  be  much  bold  in  C.  to 

II -o.    3.    6  But  C.  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house 

3.  14  we  are  made  partakers  of  C,  if  we  hold 

5.  5  So  also  C.  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made 

6.  1  leaving,  .principles  of  the  doctrine  of  C. 
9. 11  C.  beiug  come  an  High  Priest  of  good 

9.  14  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  C. 
■9.  24  C.  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places  made 
9  28  C  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of 
11.  26  Esteeming  the  reproach  of  C.  greater 
x  Pe.  1.  11  the  Spirit  of  C.  which  was  in  them  did 

1.  ri  when  it  testified,  .the  sufferings  of  C,  and 
1. 19  But  with  the  precious  blood  of  C,  as  of  a 

-2.  21  because  C.  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving 
3. "16  that,  .accuse  your  good  conversation  in  C. 

3.  i3  For  C.  also  hath  ouce  suffered  for  sins 

4.  1  Forasmuch  theu  as  C.  hath  suffered  for 
4.  13  as  ye  are  partakers  of  C.'s  sufferings 

4.  14  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  C. 

5.  1  and  a  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  C. 

1  Jo.   2.  22  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  C.  ? 

5.    1  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  C. 

2  Jo.        9  Whosoever,  .not  in  the  doctrine  of  C. 

9  He  that  abide  th  in  the  doctrine  of  C,  he 

Rev.  11.  15  (the  kingdoms)  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  C. 

i2.  10  Now  is  come,  .the  power  of  his  C  :  for  ths 

20.   4  they  lived  and  reigned  with  C.  a  thousan  1 

20.   6  but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  C 

CHRIST  JESUS  — 

The  Anointed  Saviour,  6  Xpio-rbs  'Incrovs. 

Acts  19.    4  that  they  should  believe  on  him  .C.  Je. 

Rom.  3.  24  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  C.  Je. 

3.  2  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  C.  Jesus 
&  39  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  C.  Jesus 

16.    3  Greet  Priscllla.  .my  helpers  in  C.  Jesus 
2  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in  C.  Jesus 

4.  5  For  we  preach  not  ourselves,  butC.  Jesus 

2.  4  spy.,  our  liberty  which  we  ha  vein  C.  Jesus 

3.  26  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  C.  Jesus 

4.  14  received  me  as  an  angel,  .(even)  as  C.  Je. 

6  sit.  .in  heavenly  (places)  in  C.  Jesus 

7  (his)  kindness  toward  us  through  C.  Jesus 
.2.  10  we  are  his  workmauship,  created  in  C.  .1 
■2.  13  But  now  in  C.  Jesus  ye  who  sometimes 

3.  11  eternal  purpose,  .he  purposed  in  C.  Je. 

3.  21  Unto  him  (be)  glory.,  by  C.Jesus  through. 

3.    3  which  worship  God .  .and  rejoice  in  C.  Je. 

3.    8  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  C.  Jesus 

3.  12  for  which .  .1  am  apprehended  of  C.  Jesus 

3.  14  of  the  high  calling  of  God  iu  C.  Jesus 

4.  7  shall  keep  your  hearts,  .through  C.  Jesus 
4.  19  according  to.  .riches  in  glory  by  C.  Jesus 

4.  21  Salute  every  saint  iu  C.  Jesus 
1.    4  Since  we  heard  of  your  faith  iu  C.  Jesus 

1.  28  may  present  every  mau  perfect  in  C.  Je. 

2.  6  As  ye  have  therefore  received  C.  Jesus 
t  Th.  2.  14  the  churches  of  God  which,  .are  iuC.  J. 

5.  18  for  this  is  the  will  of  God  iu  C.  Jesus 
1  Ti.    1. 12  I  thank  C.  Jesus  our  Lord,  who  hath 

1.  14  with  faith  and  love  which  is  in  C.  Jesus 

1.  15  that  C.  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save 

2.  5  one  mediator  between  God.  .themau  C.  J. 
3. 13  boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  iu  C.  Jesus 

6.  13  I  give  thee  charge .  .(before)  C.  Jesus,  who 
1.    1  the  promise  of  life  which  is  iu  C.  Jesus 
1.    2  Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from..C.  Je. 

1.  9  which  was  given  us  in  C.  Jesus  before  the 
1. 13  in  faith  and  love  which  is  in  C.  Jesus 

2.  1  be  strong  iu  tile  grace  that  is  iu  C.  Jesus 

2.  10  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  iu  C.  Jesu; 

3.  12  all  that  will  live  godly  iu  C.  Jesus  shall 
3.  15  through  faith  which  is  in  C.  Jesu3 

6  every  good,  .which  is  in  you  iu  C.  Jesus 
23  salute,  .my  fellow  prisoner  in  C.  Jesus 
3.    1  consider  the . .  H  igh  Priest . .  C.  Jesus 
5.  10  called  us  unto . .  eternal  glory  by  C.  Jesus 
5.  14  Peace  (be)  with  you  all  that  are  iu  C.  Je. 
CHRISTS,  false  — 

I^yi'ij  Christ*  <>r  anointed  ones,  tyev$6xpwroi. 
Matt  24.  24  there  shall  arise  false  C.s,  and  false  prop, 
Marki  3.  8a  For  false  C.s  and  false  prophets  shall  rise 
CHRISTIAN  — 
Belonging  to  Christ,  Xpi<rTiai'6s. 

Acta  11.  26  the  disciples  were  called  C.  first  in  Antioch 

26.  28  Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  I  f. 
1  Te.  4.  16  yet  if  (any  mau  suffer)  as  a  C.  let  him  not 
CHRONICLES  — 

Matters  of  the  days,  nv?;rr  h^  dibre  Hayyamim. 
t  Ki.14.  19  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings 


r  Co. 
2  Co. 
Gal. 


-Eph. 


Phil, 


Col. 


rTi. 


Phm. 


Ileb. 

1  Pe. 


So  in  chap.  15.  7,  23,  31 ;  16.  5,  14,  20,  27;  22.  39.  45 ; 
2  Ki.  1.  18;  8.  23;  10.34;  12  19;  13.  8,  12;  14.  15, 
18,  -j8  ;  15.  6,  11,  15.21,  26,  31,  36;  16.  19;  20  20;  21. 
17,  25 ;  23.  28 ;  24.  5 ;  Esth.  10.  2  . 
1  Ch.  27.  24  in  the  account  of  the  Chronicles  of  king  D 
Esth.  2.  23  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  before  the  k. 

6.  1  bring  the  book  of  records  of  the  Chronic 

CHRYSOLITE  — 

A  golden  stone,  a  topaz,  xpV(TO>\tdos  chrusolithos. 
Rev.  21.  20  the  sixth,  sardius ;  the  seventh,  chrysolite 

CHRYSOPRASUS  — 

A  golden  leek,  a  beryl,  xpucroVpcccros  chrusoprasos. 
Rev.  21.  20  the  ninth,  a  topaz ;  the  tenth  a  chrysopr. 

CHUB,  313; 

Xame  of  a  people  in  alliance  with  Egypt  iu  the  time  of 

Nebuchadnezzar  B  c.  610.    Probably  Nub. 

Eze.  30.    5  and  aU  the  mingled  people,  and  C. 

CHUN,  ps  founding. 

A  city  iu  Aram-zobah  on  the  highway  to  the  Euphrates, 

and  plundered  by  David. 

1  Ch.18.    8  Likewise  from  Tibhath,  aud  from  C. 

CHURCH — 

That  which  is  ccdled  out,  kKKKncrla  ekklesia. 

Matt  16.  18  upon  this  rocklwill  build  mychurch;and 
18.  17  if  he.  .neglect,  .tell  (it)  uuto  the  church 
18. 17  but  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let 
Acts    2.  47  the  Lord  added  [to  the  church]  daily  such 

5.  11  And  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  church 

7.  38  that  was  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness 

8.  1  great  persecution  against  the  church 

8.  3  As  for  Saul,  he  made  havoc  of  the  church 

9.  31  Then  had  the  churches  rest  throughout 
11.  22  things  came  uuto  the  ears  of  the  church 

11.  26  they  assembled  themselves  with  the  ch. 

1 2.  1  Herod . .  stretched  forth . .  to  vex . .  the  ch. 

12.  5  without  ceasing  of  the  church  unto  God 

13.  1  in  the  church  that  was  at  Antioch  certain 

14.  23  had  ordained  them  elders  iu  every  church 

14.  27  they  were  come,  and  had  gathered,  the  ch. 

15.  3  beiug  brought  on  their  way  by  the  church 
15.   4  they  were  received  of  the  church,  and 
15.  22  apostles  and  elders,  with  the  whole  ch. 

15.  41  went  through  Syria. .  confirming  the  chs. 

16.  s  so  were  the  churches  established  in  the 
18.  22  when  he  had.  .saluted  the  church,  he 
20.  17  sent,  .and  called  the  elders  of  the  church 
20.  28  overseers,  to  feed  the  church  of  God, 

Rom.  16.    1  which  is  a  servant  of  the  church  which  is 
16.    4  but  also  all  the  churches  of  the  Gentiles 
16.    5  Likewise  (greet)  the  church  that  is  in  '" 
16. 16  The  churches  of  Christ  salute  you 
16.  23  Gaiiis  mine  host,  aud  of  the  whole  church 

1  Co.  1.    2  Vnto  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  Cor. 

4.  17  as  I  teach  everywhere  in  every  church 

6.  4  who  are  least  esteemed  in  the  church 

7.  17  And  so  ordain  I  in  all  churches 

10.  32  Give noue  offence,  neither,  .to  the  church 
it.  16  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  churches 

11.  i&  when  ye  come  together  in  the  church,  I 

11.  22  demise  ye  the  church  of  God,  and  shame 

12.  28  God  hptti  set  some  in  the  church,  first 
14.    4  he  that  prophesieth  edifieth  the  church 
14.    5  that  the  ciitirch  may  receive  edifying 

14.  12  ye  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  church 
14.  19  Yet  in  the  church  I  had  rather  speak  five 
14.  23  If  therefore  the  whole  church  be  come 
14.  28  let  him  keep  silence  in  the  church ;  and 
14.  33  but  of  peace,  as  iu  all  churches  of  the 
14.  34  Let  your  women  keep  sileuce  iu  the  chs. 

14.  35  a  shame  for  womeu  to  speak  in  the  church 

15.  9  because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God 

16.  1  as  I  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of 
16.  19  The  churches  of  Asia  salute  you.  Aquila 
16.  19  with  the  church  that  is  in  their  house 

2  Co.  1.    1  unto  the  church  of  God  which  isat  Corinth 

8.  1  thegraceof  God  bestowed  on  the  churches 
8.  18  in  the  Gospel  throughout  all  the  churches 
8.  19  who  was  also  chosen  of  the  churches  to 
8.  23  the  messengers  of  the  churches,  (aud)  the 
8.  24  show  ye  to  them,  and  before  the  churches 

n.    8  1  robbed  other  churches,  taking  wages 

11.  28  Besides,  .the  care  of  all  the  churches 

12.  13  wherein  ye  were  inferior  to  other  churches 
Gal.    1 .    2  all . .  with  me,  uuto  the  churches  of  Galatia 

1.  13  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God,  and 
1.  22  And  was  unknown  by  face  uuto  the  chs. 
Eph.    1.  22  the  head  over  all  (things)  to  the  church 
3.  10  by  the  church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God 

3.  21  Unto  him  (be)  glory  in  the  church  by  C. 

5.  23  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church 
5.  24  as  the  church  is  subject  unto  Christ,  so 
5.  25  even  as  Christ  also  loved  the  church,  and 
5-  27  a  glorious  church,  not  haviug  spot,  or 
5.  29  but  uourisheth.  even  as  the  Lord  the  ch. 
5.  32  I  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  church 

Phil.    3.    6  Concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  church 
4. 15  no  church  communicated  with  me  as  con. 
Col.     1.  18  he  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  church 

1.  24  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church 
4. 15  Salute,  .the  church  which  is  in  his  house 

4.  16  cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  church 

1  Th.  1.    1  the  church  of  the  Thessalonians  (which  is) 

2.  14  became  followers  of  the  churches  of  God 

2  Th.  1.  1  the  church  of  the  Thessalonians  in  God 
1.    4  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  iu  the  churches 

1  Ti.  3.    s  how  shall  he  take  care  of  the  church  of 

3.  15  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  God,  the 


1  Ti.    5.  16  and  let  not  the  church  be  charged 
Phm.       2  and  to  the  church  in  thy  house 
Heb.  2.  13  in  the  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing 

12.  23  the  general  assembly  and  church 
Jas.     5.  14  let  him  call  for  the  elders  of  the  church 
3  Jo.        6  wituess  of  thy  charity  before  the  church 
9  I  wrote  unto  the  church 
10  and  casteth  (them)  out  of  the  church   ; 
Rev.    1.    4  John  to  the  seven  churches  which 
1.  11  send  (it)  unto  the  seven  churches 
1.  20  seven  stars  are  the  angels  of  the . .  churches 

1.  20  seven  candlesticks,  .the  seven  churches 

2.  1  T.'nto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesus 
2.  7  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  chs. 
2.    8  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Smyrna 

2.  1 1  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  churches 
2. 12  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Pergamos 
2.  17,  2q  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  thech. 
2.  18  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Thyatira 

2.  23  all  the  churches  shall  know  that  I  v.  29. 

3.  1  uuto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Sardis 
3.    6,  13.  22  hear  what,  .spirit  saith  unto.  .ch. 
3.   7  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Philadelphia 
3.  14  uuto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  the  Laod. 

22  16  testify  unto  you  these  things  in  the  chur. 

CHURCHES,  robber  of  — 

A  robber  of  temples,  Up6<rv\os  hierosulos. 

Acts  19.  37  which  are  neither  robbers  of  churches 
CHURL  — 
I. Churl,  avaricious,  7?   kilai, 

Isa.     32.  5  called  liberal,  nor  the  churl  said  (to  be) 

2.Churl,  avaricious,  "bp  kelai. 

Isa.   32.    7  The  instruments  also  of  the  churl  (are) 
CHURLISH  — 
Hard,  harsh,  sharp,  .1^5  qasheh. 

1  Sa.  25.    3  the  man  (was)  churlish  and  evil  in  his 
CHURNING  — 

Pressure,  churning,  y*Q  mite, 

Prov.30.  33  Surely  the  churning  of  milkbringeth 

CHU-SHAN  RISH-A-THA'-IM,   Djn^n  |fta, 
A  king  of  Mesopotamia,  defeated  by  Othniel,  B  C.  1 394. 
Judg.  3     8  into  the  haud  of  C.  king  of  Mesopotamia 
3.    8  children  of  Israel  served  C.  eight  years 
3. 10  the  Lord  delivered  C. .  .into  his  hand 
3. 10  aud  his  hand  prevailed  against  C. 

CHU'-ZA,  Xov£as. 

Steward  of  Herod  Autipas  son  of  Herod  the  Great. 

Luke  8    3  Joauna  the  wife  of  C  Herod's  steward 
CIEL,  to  — 
To  cover,  overlay,  del,  nzn  chaphah,  3. 

2  Ch.  3    5  the  greater  house  he  cieled  with  fir  tree 

CLELED  — 

To  cover  over,  del,  1??  saphan. 

Jer.  22.  14  (it  is)  cieled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with 
Hag.   1.    4(Isit)time..todwellinyourcieledhouses 

CIELED  with  — 

Thin  board,  I'DP  shechip>h. 

Eze.  41.  16  cieled  with  wood  round  about,  and  from 
CLELING  — 
.4  deling,  }5p  sippun. 

1  Ki.  6.  15  both  the  floor.,  and  the  walls  of  the  deling 

CI-LI-CI'-A,  KikiKia. 

A  province  of  Asia  Minor,  bounded  on  the  N.  by  Cappa- 
docia,  Lycaouia,  and  Isauria ;  S.  by  the  Mediterranean  ; 
E.  by  Syria  ;  and  W.  by  Pamphylia. 

Acts  6.   9  (the  synagogue).,  of  them  of  C  andof  Asia 

15.  23  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch  and  Syria  aud  C. 

15.  41  And  he  went  through  Syria  and  C, 

21.  39  I  am.. a  Jew  of  Tarsus,  (a  city)  in  C. 

22.  3  I  am.  a  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus,  (a  city)  in  C. 

23.  34  when  he  understood  that  (he  was)  of  C. 
27.    5  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  C. 

Gal.      1.  21  I  came  into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  C. 

CINNAMON  — 

1.  Bark  of  the  cinnamon  tree,  jicsp  qinnamon, 

Exod3o.  23  Take  thou  also,  .of  sweet  cinnamon  half 
Frov.  7  17  I  have  perfumed  my  bed  with,  .cinnamon 
Song  4.  14  calamus  and  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of 

2.  Cinnamon,  K.i/dp.^/^ov  kuunndmon,  Kivvdp.ap.ov. 

Rev.  18.  13  cinnamon,  aud  odours,  and  ointments 
CTN-NE-'ROTH,  niT|3     See  Chinuereth. 
1  Ki.  15.  20  Ben-hadad.. sent.. agaiust.. all  C, 

CIRCLE  — 

Circle,  arch,  vault,  compass,  Jin  chug. 

Isa.   40.  22  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  the  earth 

CIRCUIT  — 

1. Circle,  arch,  vault,  compass,  Xm  chug. 

Job    22.  14  and  he  walketh  in  the  circuit  of  heaven 
^.Circuit,  surrounding  country,  T2p  sabdh 

Eccl.  1.    6  the  wind  returncth  again.. to  his  circuits 
3. Ite  volution,  circuit,  nsipn  kquphah. 

Fsa.  19.   6  and  his  circuit  unto  the  ends  of  it ;  and 

CIRCUIT,  in  — 

To  go  round  about,  3^p  sahab. 

1  Sa.   7.  16  And  he  went  from  year  to  year  in  circuit , 


CIRCUMCISE 


167 


CITIES 


CIRCUMCISE,  to  — 

1.  To  cut  off,  away,  around,  circumcise,  h>&  muh 
Gen.  17.  23  circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  foreskin  in 
2i.    4  Abraham  circumcised  his  son  Isaac  being 
Exod  12.  44  when  thou  hast  circumcised  him,  then 
Deutio.  16  Circumcise  therefore  the  foreskin  of  your 

30.  6  the  Lord,  .mil  circumcise  thiue  heart 
Josh.  5.  2'circumcise  again  the  children  of  Israel 
5.  3  circumcised  the  children  of  Israel  at  the 
5.  4  (is)  the  cause  why  Joshua  did  circumcise 
5.  5  all  the  people .  .they  had  not  circumcised 
5.  7  their  children .  .them  Joshua  circumcised 
5.    7  because  they  had  not  circumcised  them 

2.To  cut  around,  circumcise,  5©}  namal,  or  77D. 
Geo.   17. 11  And  ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your 

3.  To  cut  around,  circumcise,  ir e p it 4 fxvoi  peritemno. 
Luke  1.  59  on  the  eighth  day  they  came  to  circumcise 
John  7.  22  and  ye  on  the  sabbath  day  circumcise  a 
Acts    7.    8  so  (Abraham)  begat  Isaae.and  circumcised 

15.  5  That  it  was  needful  to  circumcise  them 

16.  3  took  and  circumcised  him  becauseof  the  J. 
21.  21  they  ought  not  to  circumcise  (their)  chil. 

CIRCUMCISE  selves,  to  — 

To  be  cut  around,  circumcised,  ^D  mill,  2. 

Jer.     4.    4  Circumcise  yourselves  to  the  LORD,  and 
CIRCUMCISED  — 
1,  Circumcision,  irepiTOfA-fi  peritoms  (dat.) 

Phil.   3.    5  Circumcised  the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock 
2.To  cut  around,  circumcise,  ^o  mul. 

Josh.  5.    5  all.  .that  came  out  were  circumcised 

Jer.     9.  25  circumcised  with  the  uncircumcised 

CIRCUMCISED,  to  be  or  have  — 

1.  To  be  cut  around,  circumcised,  !flO  mul,  2. 

Gen.  17.  10  Every  man  child,  .shall  be  circumcised 

17.  12  he  that  is  eight,  .shall  be  circumcised 
17. 13  he  that  is  bought,  .must,  .be  circumcised 
17.  14  the  uncircumcised  mau  child . .  is  uot  cir. 
17.  24,  25  when  he  was  circumcised  in  the  flesh 
17.  26  the  selfsame  day  was  Abraham  circum. 
17.  27  all  the  men  of  his  house . .  were  circumcised 
34.  15  that  every  male  of  you  be  circumcised 
34.  17  ye  will  not  hearken,  .to  be  circumcised 
34.  22  be  circumcised,  as  they  (are)  circumcised 
34.  24  every  male  was  circumcised,  all  that  went 

Exodia.  48  let  all  his  males  be  circumcised,  and  then 
Lev.  12.   3  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin  shall  be  circum. 

%To  circumcise,  irepiT4fxv&  peritemno. 

Acts  15.    1  Except  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  man. 
15.  24  [(Ye  must)  be  circumcised,  and  keep  the] 
1  Co.  7.  18  Is  any  man  called  being  circumcised? 

7.  18  let  him  not  be  circumcised 
Gal.    2.    3  was  compelled  to  be  circumcised 

5.    2  if  ye  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit 

5.  3  testify,  .to  every  man  that  is  circumcised 

6.  12  they  constrain  you  to  be  circumcised 

6.  13  they  themselves  who  are  circumcised  keep 

6.  13  but  desire  to  have  you  circumcised,  that 
Col.     2. 11  In  whom  also  ye  are  circumcised  with 

CIRCUMCISED,  though  not  — 

Through  uncircumcision,  Bl  atcpofivo-rias  di  akrobu. 

Rom  4. 11  that  believe,  though  they  be  not  circum. 
CIRCUMCISING  — 
l.To  be  cut  off,  circumcised,  71D  mul,  2. 

Josh.   5   8  when  they  had  done  circumcising  all 

2.To  circumcise,  cut  around,  •xepiTijj.vu peritemno. 

Luke  2.  21  were  accomplished  for  the  circumcising 
CIRCUMCISION  — 
l.Circumcision,  riTtD  muloth, 

Exod  4.  26  A  bloody  husb. .  .because  of  the  circumci. 

2.  A  cutting  round,  circumcision,  irepi.Tofj.-fi  peritome. 

John  7.  22  Moses,  .gave  unto  you  circumcision 

7.  23  If  a  man.  .receive  circumcision,  that 
Acts   7.    8  he  gave  him  the  covenant  of  circumcision 

10.  45  they  of  the  circumcision  which  believed 

11.  2  they  that  were  of  the  circumcision  con. 
Rom.  2.  25  circumcision  verily  proftteth,  if  thou  keep 

2.  25  thy  circumcision  is  made  uncircumcision 
2.  26  uncircumcision  be  counted  for  circum.? 
2.  27  by  the  letter  and  circumcision  dost  trans. 
2.  28  neither  (is  that)  circumcision  which  is  out. 

2.  29  and  circumcision  (is  that)  of  the  heart,  in 

3.  1  or  what  profit  (is  there)  of  circumcision  ? 

3.  30  which  shall  justify  the  circumcision  by  fa. 

4.  9  (Cometh)  this  blessedness . .  upon  the  cir. 
4.  10  in  circumcision,  or  iu  uncircumcision? 

4.  10  Not  in  circumcision,  but  in  uncircumcision 

4. 11  And  he  received  the  sign  of  circumcision 

4. 12  the  father  of  circumcision  to  them  who 

4.  12  are  not  of  the  circumcision  only,  hut 

15.   8  Christ  was  a  minister  of  the  circumcision 

1  Co.  7. 19  Circumcision  is  nothing,  and  uncircuni. 

Gal.     2.    7  as  (the  gospel)  of  the  circumcision  (was) 

2.    8  to  the  apostleship  of  the  circumcision,  the 

2.    9  that  we  (should  go) . .  unto  the  circumci. 

2.  12  fearing  them  which  were  of  the  circum. 

5.  6  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything 
5.  11 1,  brethren,  if  I  yet  preach  circumcision 
6. 15  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything 

Eph.  2.  11  by  that  which  is  called  the  Circumcision 
Phil.  3.  3  For  we  are  the  circumcision,  which  wor. 
Col.     2.  11  with  the  circumcision  made  without  ha. 

2.  11  in  putting  off  the  body,  .by  the  circum. 

3. 11  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision 


Col.    4.  11  And  Jesus,  .who  are  of  the  circumcision 
Titus  1.  10  many,  .specially  they  of  the  circumcision 

CIRCUMSPECT,  to  be   — 

To  be  watchful,  "lCjp  shamar,  2. 

Exod23  13  I  have  said  unto  you  be  circumspect 

CIRCUMSPECTLY  — 

Accurately,  pointedly,  aKpip&s  ahribos. 

Eph.   5. 15  See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly 
CIS,  Kfc. 
Father  of  Saul,  B.C.  1120.     The  Greek  form  of  Kish. 

Acts  13.  21  God  gave  them  Saul,  the  son  of  Cis. 
CISTERN  — 

1.  Cistern,  well,  pit,  ixa  bor. 

Jer.     2. 13  (and)  hewed .  .cisterns,  broken  cisterns 

2.  Cistern,  well,  pit,  list  bor. 

2  Ki.  18.  31  drinkye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  cistern 
Prov   5.  15  Drink  waters  out  of  thine  own  cistern 
Eccl.12.    6  or  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern 
Isa.  36.  16  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his.  .cis. 

CITIES  — 

l.A  city  {of  busy  concourse),  enclosed  place,  *vy  ir. 
Gen.    13. 12  Lot  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and 
19.  25  he  overthrew  those  cities,  and  all  the  p. 
19.  25  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities,  and 
19.  29  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the  plain 
19.  29  when  he  overthrew  the  cities  in  the 
35.   5  the  terror  of  God  was  upon  the  cities  that 
41. 35  and  let  them  keep  food  in  the  cities 
41.  48  and  laid  up  the  food  in  the  cities 
47.  21  he  removed  them  to  cities  from  (one)  end 
Exod.  1. 11  they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure  cities 
Lev.    25.  32  Notwithstanding  the  cities  of  the  Levites 
25.  32  houses  of  the  cities  of  their  possession 
25.  33  the  houses  of  the  cities  of  the  Levites 

25.  34  the  field  of  the  suburbs  of  their  cities 
26. 25  when  ye  are  gathered,  .within  your  cities 

26.  31  I  will  make  your  cities  waste,  and  bring 
26.  33  land  shall  be  desolate,  and.  .cities  waste 

Num.  13.  19  what  cities  (they  be)  that  they  dwell  in 
13.  28  and  the  cities  (are)  walled,  and  very  great 
21.    2  then  I  will  utterly  destroy  their  cities 
2i.    3  they,  .destroyed  them  and.  their  cities 
21.  25  Israel  took  all  these  cities :  and  Israel 
21.  25  Israel  dwelt  in  all  the  cities  of  the 

31.  10  they  burnt  all  their  cities  wherein  they 

32.  16  We  will  build . .  cities  for  our  little  ones 
32. 17  our  little  ones  shall  dwell  in  the.  .cities 
32.  24  Build  you  cities  for  your  little  ones,  and 
32.  26  little  ones.. shall  be  there  in  the  cities 
32.  33  the  land,  with  the  cities  thereof  in  the 
32.  33  (even)  the  cities  of  the  country  round 
32.  36  Beth-nimrah,  ami  Beth-haran,  fenced  c. 
32.  3S  gave  other  names  unto  the  cities  which 
32.  38  that  they  gave  unto  the  Levites.  .cities 
35.    2  and  ye  shall  give . .  suburbs  for  the  cities 
35.    3  the  cities  shall  they  have  to  dwell  hi 
35.   4  the  suburbs  of  the  cities,  which  ye  shall 
35.    5  shall  be  to  them . .  suburbs  of  the  cities 
35.    6  among  the  cities  which  ye  shall  give  unto 
35.    6  unto  the  Levites  there  shall  be  six  cities 
35.   6  to  them  ye  shall  add  forty  and  two  cities 
35.    7  cities,  .(shall  be)  forty  and  eight  cities 
35.    8  the  cities . .  shall  be  of  the  possession 

35.    8  every  one  shall  give  of  his  cities  unto 
35.  11  ye  shall  appoint  you  cities  to  be  cities 
35. 12  they  shall  be  unto  you  cities  for  refuge 
35.  13  of  these  cities . .  six  cities  shall  ye  have 
35.  14  Ye  shall  give  three  cities  on  this  side 
35. 14  three  cities  shall  ye  give  in  the  land 
35.  14  (which)  shall  be  cities  of  refuge 
35.  15  These  six  cities  shall  be  a  refuge  (both) 
Deut.    1.  22  and  into  what  cities  we  shall  come 

1.  28  the  cities  (are)  great  and  walled  up  to  h. 

2.  34  we  took  all  his  cities  at  that  time,  and 

2.  35  and  the  spoil  of  the  cities  which  we  took 

2.  37  (nor)  unto  any  place,  .nor  unto  the  cities 

3.  4  we  took  all  his  cities  at  that  time,  there 
3.  4  threescore  cities,  all  the  region  of  Argob 
3.  5  All  these  ci  ties  (were)  fenced  with  high  w. 
3.  7  the  spoil  of  the  cities,  we  took  for  a  prey 
3.  to  All  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  all  Gilead 
3. 10  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan 

3. 12  half  mount  Gilead,  and  the  cities  thereof 

3.  19  But  your  wives . .  shall  ai  ide  in  your  cities 

4.  41  Moses  severed  three  cities  on  this  side 
4.  42  that  fleeing  unto  one  of  these  cities  he 

6.  10  to  give  thee  great  and  goodly  cities,  which 
9.    1  cities  great,  and  fenced  up  to  heaven 
13.  12  If  thou  shalt  hear.  .111  one  of  thy  cities 
19.    1  dwellest  in  their  cities,  and  in  their 
19.    2,  7  Thou  shalt  separate  three  cities  for  the 
19.    5  he  shall  flee  unto  one  of  those  cities 
19.   q  then  shalt  thou  add  three  cities  more  for 

19.  11  and  fleeth  into  one  of  these  cities 

20.  15  Thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  all  the  cities 
20.  15  which  (are)  not  of  the  cities  of  these  na. 

20.  16  But  of  the  cities  of  these  people,  which 

21.  2  they  shall  measure  unto  the  cities  which 
Josh.    9.  17  came  unto  their  cities  on  the  third  day 

9.  17  Now  their  cities  (were)  Gibeon,  Chepliirah 
10.    2  Gibeon  (was),  as  one  of  the  royal  cities 
10.  19  suffer  them  not  to  enter  into  their  cities 

10.  20  that  the  rest,  .entered  into  fenced  cities 
IO-  37i  39  king  thereof,  and  all  the  cities  thereof 

11.  12  all  the  cities  of  those  kings,  and  all  the 

■    11.  13  (as  for)  the  cities  that  stood  still  in  their 
11. 14  And  all  the  spoil  of  these  cities,  and  the 


Josh. 11.  21  Joshua  destroyed  them .  .with  their  cities 
13.  10  all  the  cities  of  Sihonkingof  theAmorites 
13.  17  Heshbon,  and  all  her  cities  that  (are)  in 
13.  21  all  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  all  the 
13.  23  the  cities  and  the  villages  thereof 
13.  25  their  coast  was  Jazer,  and  all  the  cities 
13.  28 This  (is)  the  inheritance,  .the  cities,  and 
13.  30  which  (are)  in  Bashan,  threescore  cities 

13.  31  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan 

14.  4  they  gave  no  part . .  save  cities  to  dwell 

14.  12  (that)  the  cities  (were)  great  and  fenced 

15.  9  went  out  to  the  cities  of  mount  Ephron 
15.  21  the  uttermost  cities  of  the  tribe  of  the 
15.  32  all  the  cities  (are)  twenty  and  nine,  with. 
15.  36  fourteen  cities  with  their  villages 

15.  41  sixteen  cities  with  their  villages 
15.  44,  54  nine  cities  with  their  villages 
15.  51  eleven  cities  with  their  villages 
15.  57  ten  cities  with  their  villages 
15.  59,  62  six  cities  with  their  villages 

15.  60  two  cities  with  their  villages 

16.  9  the  separate  cities  for  the  children  of 

16.  9  all  the  cities  with  their  villages 

17.  9  thesecities  of  Ephraim  (are)  r.mong  thee 

17.  12  drive  out  (the  inhabitants)  of  those  cities 

18.  9  described  it  by  cities  into  seven  parts  ji> . 
18.  21  now  the  cities  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 
18.  24  twelve  cities  with  their  villages 

18.  28  fourteen  cities  with  their  villages 

19.  6  thirteen  cities  and  their  villages 
10.    7  four  cities  and  their  villages 

19.    8  the  villages,  .round  about  these  cities 
19.  15  twelve  cities  with  their  villages 
19. 16  these  cities  with  their  villages 
19.  22  sixteen  cities  with  their  villages 
19.  23,  39  This  (is)  the  inheritance.,  the  cities  and 
19.  30  twenty  and  two  cities  with  their  villages 
19.  31,  48  This  (is)  the  inheritance,  .these  cities 
19.  35  the  fenced  cities  (are)  Ziddim,  Zer,  and 

19.  38  nineteen  cities  with  their  villages 

20.  2  Appoint  cut  for  you  cities  of  refuge 
20.    4  that  doth  flee  unto  one  of  these  cities 

20.  9  These  were  tie  cities  appointed  for  all 

21.  2  to  give  us  cities  to  dwell  in,  with  the 
21.    3  the  children  of  Israel  gave,  .these  cities 
21.    4  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  thirteen  cities 
21.    5  of  the  half  tribe  of  Msnasseh,  ten  cities 
21.    6  half  tribe  of  Mauasseh . .  thirteen  cities 
21.    7  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebuhin,  twelve  cities 
21.    8  the  children  of  Israel  gave,  .these  cities 
21.    9  these  cities  which  are  (here)  mentioned 
21. 16  nine  cities  out  of  those  two  tribes 

21.  18  and  Almcn  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 
ai.  19  All  the  cities  of  the  children  of  Aaron 
2i.  19  All  the  cities. . v  ere  thirteen  cities  with 
21. 20  even  they  had  the  cities  of  their  lot  cu 
21.  22  Feth-hort  n  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 
21.  24  Gath-rin  n;on  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  c. 
21.  25  Gath-rin  mon  with  her  suburbs  ;  two  c. 
21.  26  All  the  cities  (wcjre)tenwiththeirsubinbs 
21.  27  Beeshterah  with  her  suburbs  ;  two  cities 
21.  29  Engannim  with  ler  suburbs;  four  cities 
21.  31  and  Rehob  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 
21.  32  and  Kartau  with  her  suburbs  ;  three  c. 
21.  33  AH  the  cities,  were  thirteen  cities  with 
21.  35  Nahalal  with  her  suburbs  ;  fcur  cities 
2i.  39  Jazer  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities  in  alL 
21.  40  the  cities ..  were  (by).,  lot  twelve  cities 
21.  41  All  the  cities  of  the  Levites  within  the 
21.  41  the  cities,  .(were)  forty  and  eight  cities 
21. 42  These  cities  were  eveiy  one  with  their 
21.  42  thus  (were)  all  these  cities 
24.  13  cities  which  ye  built  not,  and  ye  dwell  in 
Juclg.  10.    4  they  had  thirty  cities,  whith  are  tailed 
11.  26  in  all  the  cities  that  (be)  along  by  the 

11.  33  smote  them  trim  Aroer.. (even) twenty  c. 

12.  7  was  buried  in  (one  of)  the  cities  of  Gilead 
20.  15  at  that  time  out  of  the  cities  twenty  and 
20.  42  and  them  w  hich  (trnie)  out  of  the  cities 

20.  48  also  they  set  en  f  re  all  the  cities  that  they 

21.  23  and  repaired  the  cities,  anddwclt  in  them. 

1  Sa.     6.  18  (according  to)  the  ntimter  of  all  the  c. 

6.  18  to  the  five  lords,  (Hth)  of  fenced  cities 

7.  14  And  the  cities.. were  restcred  to  Israel 
18.    6  that  the  women  came  out  of  all  cities  of  T, 
30.  29  to  (them),  .in  the  cities  of  the  Jerahmeel. 

30.  29  and  to  them . .  in  the  cities  of  the  Keuites 

31.  7  they  forsook  the  cities,  and  fled  ;  and 

2  Sa.    2.    1  Shall  I  go  up  into  any  of  the  cities  of  cur 

2.    3  and  they  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Ilebrtn 

8.  8  and  from  Betah,  and  frtm  Ferotbai,  c. 
10. 12  let  us  play  the  men.  .for  the  cities  of  <  ur 
12.  31  thus  did  he  unto  all  the  cities  of  tl  e  clrL 
20.    6  lest  he  get  him  fenced  cities,  and  csirpe 
24.    7  to  all  the  cities  of  the  Uivites,  and  of 

1  KL   4.  13  threescore  great  cities  with  walls  and 

9.  11  king  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  cities 
9.  12  Hiram  came  out  from  Tyre  to  see  the  c. 
9.  13  What  cities  (are)  these  which  thcu  Last 
9,  19  all  the  cities  of  store  that  Solomon  l.cd 
g.  19  cities  for  his  chariots,  and  cities  for 

10.  26  whom  he  bestowed  in  the  cities  for 

12.  17  the  children . .  which  dwelt  in  the  cit'es 

13.  32  places  which  (are)  in  the  cities  of  Siimar. 
15.  20  which  he  had  against  the  cities  of  Israel 
15.  23  and  the  cities  which  he  built,  (are)  they 
20.  34  The  cities  which  my  father  took  fi  tin  thy 
22.  39  all  that  he  did.  .and all  the  cities  that  ha 

2  Hi.  3.  25  And  they  beat  down  the  cities,  and  on 

13.  25  Jehoash  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  took,  .the  c. 
13.  25  and  recovered  the  cities  of  Israel 
17.    6  andiu  the  cities  of  the  Alcdcs 


CITIES 


168 


CITY 


2  Ki.  17.    9  built,  .high  places  in  all  their  cities 

17.  24  and  place  (them)  in  the  cities  of  Samaria 
17.  24  they  possessed .  .and  dwelt  in  the  citie3 
17.  26  and  placed  in  the  cities  of  Samaria 

17.  29  every  nation  in  their  cities  wherein  they 
18. 1 1  and  put  them.. in  the  cities  of  the  Medes 

18.  13  against  all  the  fenced  cities  of  Judah 

19.  25  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste  fenced  cities 
23.    5  in  the  high  places  in  the  cities  of  Judah 
23    8  brought  all  the  priests  out  of  the  cities 
23.  in  the  high  places  that  (were)  in  the  cities 

Ch.  2.  22  who  had  three  aud  twenty  cities  in  the 
2  23  the  towns  thereof,  (even)  threescore  cities 
4  31  These  (were)  their  cities  unto  the  reign  of 
4.  32  Rimmon,  and  Toehen,  and  Ashan,  five  c. 
4  33  villages  that  (were)  round .  .the  same  c. 
6.  57  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave  the  cities 
6.  60  All  their  cities,  .(were)  thirteen  cities 
6.  61  half  (tribe)  of  Manasseh,  by  lot,  ten  cities 
6.  62  out  of.  .Manasseh  in  Bashan,  thirteen  c. 
6.  63  Unto  the  sons  of  Merari.  .twelve  cities 
6.  64  Israel  gave  to  the  Levites  (these)  cities 
6.  65  they  gave  by  lot.  .these  cities  which  are 
6.  66  (the  residue)  of  the  families,  .had  cities 

6.  67  And  they  gave  unto  them,  (of)  the  cities 
9.    2  in  their  possessions  in  their  cities 

10.    7  then  they  forsook  their  cities,  and  fled 
13.    2  the  priests,  .(which  are)  in  their  cities 
1 3.    8  Likewise  from  Tibhath . .  cities  of  Hader. 
19.    7  gathered  themselves,  .from  their  cities 

19.  13  for  our  people,  and  for  the  cities  of  our 

20.  3  Even  so  dealt  David  with  all  the  cities 
27.  25  storehouses  in  the  fields,  in  the  cities 

2  Ch.  1.  14  which  he  placed  in  the  chariot  cities 

8.   2  the  cities  which  Huram  had  restored  to 
8.    4  all  the  store  cities,  which  he  built  in 
8.    5  fenced  cities,  with  walls,  gates,  aud  bars 
8.    6  all  the  store  cities  that  Solo:non  had,  and 

8.  6  the  chariot  cities,  aud  the  cities  of  the 

9.  25  whom  he  bestowed  in  the  chariot  cities 
10.  17  that  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Judah 

1  it    5  and  built  cities  for  defence  in  Judah 

13.  19  Abijah  pursued . .  and  took  cities  from  him 

14.  5  he  took  away  out  of  all  the  cities  of 

14.    7  Let  us  build  these  cities,  and  make  about 
14.  14  they  smote  all  the  cities  round  about 

14.  14  they  spoiled  all  the  cities  ;  for  there  was 

15.  8  out  of  the  cities  which  he  had  taken  from 

16.  4  sent  the  captains,  .against  the  cities  of 
io.    4  and  all  the  store  cities  of  Naphtali 

17.  2  he  placed  forces  in  all  the  fenced  cities 
17.  2  in  the  cities  of  Ephraim,  which  Asa  his 
17.    7  to  teach  in  the  cities  of  Judah 

17.    9  went  about  throughout  all  the  cities  of 
17.  12  he  built  in  Judah  castles,  and  cities  of 
17.  13  he  had  much  business  in  the  cities  of 
17.  19  (those)  whom  the  king  put  in  the  cities 
19.   5  throughout  all  the  fenced  cities  of  Judah 
19.  io  your  brethren  that  dwell  in  their  cities 

23.  2  gathered  the  Levites  out  of  all  the  cities 

24.  5  said  unto  them,  Go  out  uuto  the  cities  of 

25.  13  soldiers  of  the  army,  .fell  upon  the  cities 

26.  6  built  cities  about  Ashdod,  and  among 

27.  4  he  built  cities  in  the  mountains  of  Judah 

28.  18  Philistines  also  hail  invaded  the  cities 
31.    1  all  Israel,  .present  went  out  to  the  cities 
31.    1  every  man.  .into  their  own  cities 

31.    6  that  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Judah 

31.  15  in  the  cities  of  the  priests,  in  (their)  set 

31.  19  the  fields  of  the  suburbs  of  their  cities 

32.  1  encamped  against  the  fenced  cities,  and 

32.  29  Moreover  he  provided  him  cities 

33.  14  put  captains,  .in  all  the  fenced  cities 

34.  6  (so  did  he)  in  the  cities  of  Manasseh,  and 
Ezra      2.  70  the  Nethinims,  dwelt  in  their  cities 

2.  70  and  all  Israel  in  their  cities 

3.  1  the  children  of  Israel  (were)  in  the  cities 

10.  14  have  taken  strange  wives  in  our  cities 
Neb.     7.  73  and  all  Israel,  dwelt  in  their  cities 

7.  73  the  children  of  Israel  (were)  in  their  cities 

8.  15  publish  aud  proclaim  in  all  their  cities 

9.  25  they  took  strong  cities,  and  a  flat  land 
jo.  37  might  have  the  tithes  in  all  the  cities 

11.  1  aud  nine  parts  (to  dwell)  in  (other)  cities 
11.    3  but  in  the  cities  of  Judah  dwelt  every 
11.    3  in  his  possession  in  their  cities,  (to  wit) 

11.  20  residue  of  Israel.. were  in  all  the  cities 

12.  44  gather,  .out  of  the  fields  of  the  cities 
Esth.  9.    2  Jews  gathered,  .together  in  their  cities 
Job    15.  2S  he  dwelleth  in  desohite  cities,  and  in 

I's  1.  iii>.  ■:;  God  will  save  Zion,  and.  .build  the  cities 
Isa.    1.    7  Ymir  country  (is)  desolate,  your  cities  (are) 
6.  11  Until  the  cities  be  wasted  without  inhab. 
14.  17  made  the  world .  .and  destroyed  the  cities 
17.    2  The  cities  of  Aroer  (are)  forsaken  ;  they 
1 7.    g  3haU  bis  strong  cities  be  as  a  forsaken 
1  >.  i  ■;  In  tb  it  day  shall  live  cities  in  the  land 
33.    8  he  hath  despised  the  cities,  lie  regardeth 
36.    1  came  up  against  all  the  defenced  cities 
thou  Bhouldest  be  to  lay  waste,  .cities 
-  say  unto  the  cities  or  Judah,  Behold  your 
42.  11  Let  the  wilderness  and  the  cities  thereof 
44-  26  and  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  Ye  shall  be 
5 1.    1  make  the  desolate  cities  to  be  inhabited 
61.    4  they  shall  repair  the  waste  cities,  the 
64.  10  thy  holy  cities  are  a  wilderness,  Zion  is 
Jer.     1.  15  and  against  all  the  cities  of  Judah 

2.  1  s  his  cities  are  burned  without  inhabitant 
2.  38  (according) to  thenumberof  thycitiesare 

4.  5  and  let  us  go  into  the  defenced  cities 
4.    7  thy  citus  -kill  he  laid  w.i>tr,  without 
4.  16  give  out  their  voice  against  the  cities 


Jev.     4.  26  all  the  cities  thereof  were  broken  dowu 
5.    6  a  leopard  shall_  watch  over  their  cities 
5. 17  they  shall  impoverish  thy  fenced  cities 
7.  17  Seest  thou  not  what  they  do  in  the  cities 

7.  34  Then  will  I  cause  to  cease  from  the  cities 

8.  14  let  us  euter  into  the  defenced  cities 

9.  11  I  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  desolate 

10.  22  to  make  the  cities  of  J  udah  desolate  (and) 

11.  6  Proclaim  all  these  words  in  the  cities 
11.  12  Then  shall  the  cities  of  Judah  aud  inhab. 
11.  13  (according  to)  the  number  of  thy  cities 
13.  19  The  cities  of  the  south  shall  be  shut  up 
17.  26  they  shall  come  from  the  cities  of  Judah 
20.  16  let  that  man  be  as  the  cities  which  the 
22.    6  (and)  cities  (which)  are  not  inhabited 

25.  18  (To  wit),  Jerusalem,  and  the  cities  of  Jud. 

26.  2  and  speak  unto  all  the  cities  of  Judah 
31.  21  0  virgin,  .turn  again  to  these  thy  cities 
31.  23  in  the  land  of  Judah,  and  in  the  cities 

31.  24  and  in  all  the  cities  thereof  together 

32.  44  in  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  cities 
32.  44  and  in  the  cities  of  the  valley 

32.  44  and  in  the  cities  of  the  south 

33.  10  in  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets 
33.  12  in  all  the  cities  thereof,  shall  be  an 

33.  13  In  the  cities  of  the  mountains,  in  the  cities 

33.  13  in  the  cities  of  the  south,  .the  cities  of  J. 

34.  1  and  against  all  the  cities  thereof 

34.    7  against  all  the  cities  of  Judah  that  were 
34.    7  defeuced  cities  remained  of  the  cities 

34.  22  I  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  a  desola. 
36.    6  all  Judah  that  come  out  of  their  cities 
36.    9  that  came  from  the  cities  of  Judah  unto 
40.    5  king,  .hath  made  governor  over  the  cities 
40.  10  dwell  in  your  cities  that  ye  have  taken 
44.    2  I  have  brought . .  upon  all  the  cities  of 

44.  6,  17,  21  in  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the 

45.  9  for  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  desolate 
48.  15  Moab  is.  .gone  up  (out  of)  her  cities,  and 
48.  24  upon  all  the  cities  of  the  land  of  Mbab 

48.  28  0  ye  that  dwell  in  Moab,  leave  the  cities 

49.  1  and  his  people  dwell  in  his  cities 

49.  13  all  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  perpetual 

50.  32  I  will  kindle  a  Are  in  his  cities,  and  it 

51.  43  Her  cities  are  a  desolation,  a  dry  land 
Lam.  5.  11   They  ravished,  .the  maids  in  the  cities 
Eze.     6.    6  in  all  your  dwelling  places  the  cities 

12.  20  the  cities  that  (are)  inhabited  shall  be 
19.    7  he  laid  waste  their  cities ;  and  the  land 

25.  9  from  the  cities,  from  his  cities  (which  are 

26.  19  like  the  cities  that  are  not  inhabited 

29.  12  her  cities  among  the  cities  (that  are) 

30.  7  cities  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  cities 

35.  4  I  will  lay  thy  cities  waste,  and  thou 

35.  9  aud  thy  cities  shall  not  return 

36.  4  to  the  desolate  wastes,  and  to  the  cities 
36.  10  the  cities  shall  be  inhabited,  and  the 

36.  33  will  also  cause  (you)  to  dwell  in  the  cities 
36.  35  ruined  cities  (are  become)  fenced,  and 
36.  38  so  shall  the  waste  cities  be  filled  with 
39.    9  they  that  dwell  in  the  cities  of  Israel 
Dan.  11.  15  king,  .shall,  .take  the  most  fenced  cities 
Kos.    8.  14  aud  Judah  hath  multiplied  fenced  cities 

8.  14  but  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  his  cities 
11.    6  the  sword  shall  abide  on  his  cities,  and 

13.  10  where  (is  any  other),  .in  all  thy  cities  ? 
Amos  4.    6  have  given  you  cleanness . .  in  all  your  cities 

4.    8  So  two  (or)  three  cities  wandered  unto  one 

9.  14  and  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities 
Chad.      20  the  captivity,  .shall  possess  the  cities 
Mic.    7.  12  he  shall  come,  .(from)  the  fortified  cities 
Zeph.  1.  16  A  day  of  alarm  against  the  fenced  cities 

3.    6  their  cities  are  destroyed,  so  that  there 
Zech.  1.  12  on  Jerusalem  and  on  the  cities  of  Judah 
1.  17  My  cities  through  prosperity  shall  yet  be 

7.  7  and  the  cities  thereof  round  about  her 
3.  20  and  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities 

2.-4  city  {of  busy  concourse),  enclosed  place,  1*4  ar. 
Psa.    9.   6  and  thou  hast  destroyed  cities 
Isa.   14.  21  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  cities 
Mic.    5.  11  And  I  will  cut  off  the  cities  of  thy  land 
5. 14  so  will  I  destroy  thy  cities 

3.  A  city  {with  walls),  n^p  qiryah. 

Ezra  4.  10  brought  over,  aud  set  in  the  cities  of  Sam. 
4.^-1  gate,  (those  assembling  at  it),  fy?!  shaar. 

1  Ki.   8.  37  besiege  them  in  the  land  of  their  cities 

2  Ch.  6.  28  if  their  enemies  besiege  them  iu  the  cities 
5.  City  (walled),  ttSAis  polis. 

Matt.  9.  35  Jesus  went  about  all  the  cities  and 

10.  23  Ye  shall  not  have  gone  over  tVe  cities 

11.  1  departed  thence,  to  teach,  .in  their  cities 
11.  20  Then  began  lie  to  upbraid  the  cities  where. 

14.  13  followed  him  on  foot  out  of  the  cities 
Mark  6.  33  ran  afoot  thither  out  of  all  cities,  and 

6.  56  into  villages,  or  cities,  or  country,  they 
Luke   4.  43  I  must  preach,  .to  other  cities  also 

13.  22  he  went  through  the  cities  and  villages 
19.  17  have  thou  authority  over  ten  cities 

19.  19  Be  thou  also  over  five  cities 
Acts    5.  16  came  also  a  multitude  (out)  of  the  cities 

8.  40  he  preached  in  all  the  cities  till  he  came 

14.  6  fled  unto  Lystra  and  Derbe,  cities  of 
16.    4  they  went  through  cities  they  delivered 
26.  11  persecuted(tliem)evonuntostrange  cities 

2  Pe.   2.   6  turning  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha 
Jude  7  cities  about  them,  in  like  manner  giving 

Rev.  16.  19  aud  the  cities  of  the  nations  fell 

CITIES,  separate  — 

Separate  places,  niSnnp  inibdaloth. 

Josh. 16.    9  And  the  separate  cities  for  the  children 


CITIZEN  — 

Citizen,  iroAtrns  palites, 

Luke  15.  15  he  went  aud  joined  himself  to  a  citizen 
19.  14  his  citizens  hated  him,  and  sent  a  message 

Acts  zi.  39  a  Jew  of  Tarsus,  .a  citizen  of  no  mean  c. 
CITIZEN,  fellow  — 
Joint  citizen,  MfxiroAir-qs  sumpolites. 

Eph.   2.  19  but  fellow  citizens  with  the  saints 
CITY— 
l.A  city  {of  busy  concourse),  enclosed  place,  Til  ir* 

Geu.    4.  17  he  builded  a  city .  .the  name  of  the  city 
io.  11  builded  Nineveh,  and  the  city  Rehoboth 

10.  12  between  Nineveh,  .the  same  (is)agreatc. 

11.  4  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city,  and  a  tower 
11.    5  the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city 

11.    8  and  they  left  off  to  build  the  city 

18.  24  Peradventure  there  be  fifty,  .within  thee. 

18.  26  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty,  .within  the  city 

18.  28  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  city  for  (lack  of> 

19.  4  the  meu  of  the  city . .  compassed  the  house 
19.  12  and  whatsoever  thou  hast  in  the  city 

19. 14  for  the  Lord  will  destroy  this  city 

19.  15  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of  the  city 

19.  16  they  brought  him.  .without  the  city 

19.  20  now,  this  city  (is)  near  to  flee  unto 

ig.  21  I  will  not  overthrow  this  city,  for  the 

19.  22  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Zoar 

23. 10,  18  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city 

24.  10  and  went,  .unto  the  city  of  Nahor 

24.  11  to  kneel  down  without  the  city  by  a  well 

24.  13  the  daughters  of  the  men  of  the  city  come 
26.  33  therefore  the  name  of  the  city  (is)  Beer-sh. 
28.  19  but  the  name  of  that  city  (was  called)  Luz 

33.  18  Jacob  came  to  Shalem  a  city  of  Shechent 
33. 18  and  pitched  his  tent  before  the  city 

34.  20  his  son  came  unto  the  gate  of  their  city 
34;  20  and  communed  with  the  men  of  their  city 
34.  24,  24  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  his  city 
34.  25  came  upon  the  city  boldly,  and  slew  all 
34.  27  spoiled  the  city,  because  they  had  defiled 

34.  28  that  which  (was)  in  the  city,  and  that 
36.  32  and^he  name  of  his  city  (was)  Dinhabah 
36.  3s  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Avith 

36.  39  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Pau 
41.  48  field,  which  (was)  round  about  every  city* 
44.    4  when  they  were  gone  out  of  the  city,  (and)^ 
44.  13  laded  every  man.  .and  returned  to  the  c~ 

Eiod.   9.  29  As  soon  as  I  am  gone  out  of  the  city,  I 
9.  33  Moses  went  out  of  the  city  from  Pharaoh 

Lev.    14.  40  they  shall  cast  them,  .without  the  city 

14.  41  shall  pour  out  the  dust,  .without  the  city 
14.  45  he  shall  carry  (them)  forth  out  of  the  city 
14.  53  let  go  the  liviug  bird  out  of  the  city 

25.  29  sell  a  dwelling  house  in  a  walled  city 

25.  30  the  house  that  (is)  iu  the  walled  city  shall 
25-  33  the  house  that  was  sold,  and  the  city  of 
Num.  2c.  16  a  city  in  the  uttermost  of  thy  border 

21.  26  Heshbou  (was)  the  city  of  Sihon  the  king 

21.  27  let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  built  and  prepared 

22.  36  he  went  out  to  meet  him  unto  a  city  of 
24.  19  destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  the  city 

35.  4  from  the  wall  of  the  city  and  outward 
35.    5  measure  from  without  the  city  on  the  east 
35.    5  and  the  city  (shall  be)  in  the  midst 

35.  25  congregation  shall  restore  him  to  the  city 
35.  26  without  the  border  of  the  city  of  his 
35.  27  without  the  borders  of  the  city  of  his 
35.  28  he  should  have  remained  in  the  city  of 
35.  32  for  him  that  is  fled  to  the  city  of  his 
Deut.  2.  34  the  little  ones,  of  every  city,  we  left  none 

2.  36  (from)  the  city  that  (is)  by  the  river,  even 

3.  6  utterly  destroying  the  men.,  of  every  city 
13.  13  withdrawn  the  inhabitants  of  their  city 
13.  15  smite  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  with 
13. 16  shalt  burn  with  fire  the  city,  and  all  the 

19.  12  Then  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  send 

20.  10  When  thou  comest  nigh  unto  a  city  to 
20.  14  cattle,  and  all  that  is  in  the  city,  (even) 
20.  19  When  thou  ahalt  besiege  a  city  a  longtime 

20.  20  shalt  build  bulwarks  against  the  city 

21.  3  the  city  (which  is)  next  unto  the  slain 
21.    3  even  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  take 
21.   4  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  bring  down 
21.    6  all  the  elders  of  that  city,  .shall  wash 
21.  19  bring  him  out  unto  the  elders  of  his  city 
21.  20  they  shall  say  unto  the  elders  of  his  city 

21.  21  all  the  men  of  his  city  shall  stone  him 

22.  15  bring,  .(tokens),  .unto  the  elders  of  the  c. 
22.  17  spread,  .before  the  elders  of  the  city 

22. 18  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  that 
22.  21  the  men  of  her  city  shall  stone  her  with 
22.  23  and  a  man  find  her  in  the  city,  and  lie 
22.  24  bring,  .both.,  unto  the  gate  of  that  city 
22.  24  because  she  cried  not,  (being)  in  the  city 
28.    3  Blessed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  in  the  city,  and 
28.  16  Cursed  (shalt)  thou  (he)  in  the  city,  ami 
34.    3  Jericho,  the  city  of  palm  trees,  unto  Zorr 
Josh.     3. 16  upon  an  heap,  .far  from  the  city  Adam 
6.    3  ye  shall  compass  the  city,  all  (ye)  meu  of 
6.    3  (and)  go  round  about  the  city  once 
6.    4  the  seventh  day  ye  shall  compass  the  city 
6.    s  the  wall  of  the  city  shall  fall  down  flat 
6.    7  Pass  on,  and  compass  the  city,  and  let 
6.  11  the  ark  of  the  Loud  compassed  the  city 
6.  14  the  second  day  they  compassed  the  city 
6.  15  compassed  the  city  afterthe  same  manner 
6.  15  on  that  day  they  compassed  the  city  seven 
6.  16  for  the  Loud  hath  given  you  the  city 
6.  17  the  city  shall  be  accursed,  (even)  it,  and 
6.  20  went  up  into  the  city .  .and.  .took  the  c. 


CITY 


1G9 


CITY 


Josh.  6. 
6 
6, 


Judg 


Ruth 


[Sa. 


21  they  utterly  destroyed  all.  .in  the  city 
24  they  burned  the  city  with  fire,  and  all 
20  that  riseth  up  and  huildeth  this  city 

.    i  and  his  people,  and  his  city,  and  his  land 
.    2  lay  thee  au  ambush  for  the  city  behind  it 
.   4  against  the  city,  (even)  behind  the  city 
.    4  go  not  very  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ye 
.    5  the  people . .  will  approach  unto  the  city 
.    6  till  we  have  drawn  them  from  the  city 
.    7  Then  ye  shall . .  seize  upon  the  city 
.    8  taken  the  city,  (that)  ye  shall  set  the  city 
.  ii  came  before  the  city,  and  pitched  on  the 
.  12  set  them,  .on  the  west  side  of  the  city 
.  i}  all  the  host,  .on  the  north  of  the  city 
.  13  liers  in  wait  on  the  west  of  the  city 
.  14  the  men  of  the  city  went  out  against  Isr 
.  14  that  (there  were)  liers.  .behind  the  city 
.  16  and  were  drawn  away  from  the  city 
.  17  they  left  the  city  open,  and  pursued  after 
.  iS  that  (he  had)  in  his  hand  toward  the  city 
.  jg  they  entered  into  the  city,  ami  took  it 
.  19  and  hasted  and  set  the  city  on  fire 
.  20  the  smoke  of  the  city  ascended  up  to 
.  2i  saw  that  the  ambush  had  taken  the  city 
.  21  that  the  smoke  of  the  city  ascended,  then 
.  22  the  other  issued  out  of  the  city  against 
.  27  Only  the  cattle*  and  the  spoil  of  that  city 
.  20  and  cast  it  at  the  entering  of  the.  .city 
.    2  they  feared.  .Gibeon  (was)  a  great  city 
.  19  There  was  not  a  city  that  made  peace 
.   9,  16  the  city  that  (is)  in  the  midst  of  the 
.  62  Xibshan,  and  the  c.  of  Salt,  and  En-ged 
.  14  which  (is)  Kirjath-jeavim,  a  city  of  the 
.  29  the  coast  turneth..  to  the  strong  city  Tyre 
.  50  they  gave  him  the  city  which  he  asked 
.  50  and  he  built  the  city,  and  dwelt  therein 
.    4  gate  of  the  city,  .the  elders  of  that  city 
.    4  they  shall  take  him  into  the  city  unto  them 
.    6  And  he  shall  dwell  in  that  city,  until  he 
.    6  come  unto  his  own  city,  .unto  the  city 
.  13,  2i,  27,  32,  38  a  city  of  refuge  for  the  sla. 
,    8  and  smitten  it.  .and  set  the  city  on 
.  16  the  children .  .went  up  out  of  the  city  of 
.  17  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Hormah 
.  23  now  the  name  of  the  city  before  (was)  Luz 
.  24  spies  saw  a  man  come  forth  out  of  the  c. 
.  24  Show  us.  .the  entrance  into  the  city,  and 
.  25  when  he  showed  them .  .into  the  city,  they 
.  25  smote  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

26  built  a  city,  and  called  the  name.  .Luz 
.  13  and  possessed  the  city  of  palm  trees 

27  because  he  feared,  .the  men  of  the  city 

28  when  the  men  of  the  city  arose  early  in 
30  Then  the  men  of  the  city  said  unto  Joash 

16  he  took  the  elders  of  the  city,  and  thorns 
.  17  he  beat  down,  .and  slew  the  men  of  the  c. 

27  and  put  it  iu  his  city,  (even)  in  Ophrah 

30  when  Zebul  the  ruler  of  the  city  heard 

31  and,  behold,  they  fortify  the  city  against 
^  thou  shalt  rise  early,  and  set  upon  the  city 
35,  44  and  stood  in  the  entering,  .of  the  city 
43  the  people  (were)  come  forth  out  of  the  c. 
45  Abimelech  fought  against  the  city  all  that 
45  he  took  the  city,  .and  beat  down  the  city 
51  there  was  a  strong  tower  within  the  city 
51  men  and  women,  and  all  they  of  the  city 
iS  And  the  men  of  the  city  said  unto  him  on 

2  laid  wait  for  him  all  night  in.  .the  city 

3  and  took  the  doors  of  the  gate  of  the  city 

8  the  man  departed  out  of  the  city  from 

27  they  smote  them . .  and  burnt  the  city  with 

28  And  they  built  a  city,  and  dwelt  therein 

29  Aud  they  called  the  name  of  the  city  Dan  j 
29  howbeit  the  name  of  the  city  (was)  Laish 

11  let  us  turn  in  into  this  city  of  the  Jehu. 

12  We  will  not  turn  aside  hither  into  the  c. 
15  he  sat  him  down  in  a  street  of  the  city 

17  a  wayfaring  man  iu  the  street  of  the  city 

22  the  men  of  the  city . .  beset  the  house  round 
11  So  all  the  men. .gathered  against  the  city 

31  were  drawn  away  from  the  city;  and  they 

32  draw  them  from  the  city  unto  the  highw. 

37  smote  all  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  s. 

38  a  great  flame,  .to  rise  up  out  of  the  city 
40  flame  began  to  arise  up  out  of  the  city 
40  flame  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  heaven 
48  as  well  the  men  of  (every)  city,  as  the  b. 
19  that  all  the  city  was  moved  about  them 

18  she  took  (it)  up,  and  went  into  the  city 
15  laid  (it)  on  her :  aud  she  went  into  the  c. 

2  he  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 

3  this  man  went  up  out  of  his  city  yearly 

13  Aud  when  the  man  came  into  the  city 
13  and  told  (it),  all  the  city  cried  out 

9  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  the  c. 
9  and  he  smote  the  men  of  the  city,  both 

11  was.  .destruction  throughout  all  the  city 

12  aud  the  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  heaven 
22  Samuel  said . .  Go  ye  every  man  unto  his  c. 

6  Behold  now,  (there  is)  in  this  city  a  man 

10  they  went  unto  the  city  where  the  man 

11  as  they  went  up  the  hill  to  the  city,  they 

12  haste  now,  for  he  came  to  day  to  the  city 

13  As  soon  as  ye  be  come  into  the  city,  ye 

14  And  they  went  up  into  the  city 

14  (and)  when  they  were  come  into  the  city 
25  when  they  were  come  down . .  into  the  city 
27  were  going  down  to  the  end  of  the  city 
5  when  thou  art  come  thither  to  the  city 

5  Saul  came  to  a  city  of  Amalek,  and  laid 

6  that  he  might  run  to  Beth-lehem  his  city 
29  our  family  hath  a  sacrifice  in  the  city 


40  said  unto  him,  Go,  carry  (them)  to  the  c. 
42  he  arose,  .and  Jonathan  went  into  the  c. 

19  And  Nob,  the  city  of  the  priests,  smote  he 
10  that  Saul  seeketh .  .to  destroy  the  city  foi 

5  should  thy  servant  dwell  in  the  royal  city 
3  buried  him  in  Kamah,  even  in  his  own  c. 
3  So  David  and  his  men  came  to  the  city 

7  of  Zion  :  the  same  (is)  the  city  of  David 
9  the  fort,  and  called  it,  The  city  of  David 

10  would  not  remove  the  ark.  .into  the  city 
12  David,  .brought  up  the  ark.  .into  the  city 
16  as  the  ark  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  city 

3  to  search  the  city,  and  to  spy  it  out,  and 
14  then  fled  they,  .and  entered  into  the  city 

16  came  to  pass,  when  Joab  observed  the  c. 

17  the  men  of  the  city  went  out  and  fought 

20  approached  ye  so  nigh  unto  the  city  when 

25  thy  battle  more  strong  against  the  city 

1  were  two  men  in  one  city ;  the  one  rich 

26  And  Joab  fought . .  and  took  the  royal  city 

27  I  have  fought,  .and  have  taken  the  city 

28  encamp  agaiust  the  city.. take  the  city 

30  he  brought  forth  the  spoil  of  the  city  in 

2  then  Absalom,  .said.  Of  what  city  (art) 

12  Absalom  sent  for  Ahithophel.. from  his  c. 

14  smite  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

24  people  had  done  passing  out  of  the  city 

25  Carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city 
27  return  into  the  city  in  peace,  and  your 
34  But  if  thou  return  to  the  city,  and  say 
37  Hushai,  David's  friend,  came  into  the  city 

13  Moreover  if  he  be  gotten  into  a  city,  then 
13  shall  all  Israel  bring  ropes  to  that  city 

17  might  not  be  seen  to  come  into  the  city 

23  and  gat  him  home  to  his  house,  to  his  city 

3  that  thou  succour  us  out  of  the  city 

3  And  the  people  gat  them,  .into  the  city 
37  that  I  may  die  in  mine  own  city,  (and  be 

15  they  cast  up  u  bank  against  the  city,  and 
20.  16  Then  cried  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  city 
20.  19  thou  seekest  to  destroy  a  city  and  a  mother 
20.  21  deliver  him. . I  will  depart  from  the  city 
20.  22  they  retired  from  the  city,  every  man  to 
24.    5  011  the  right  side  of  the  city  that  (lieth) 

:  'Ii.     2.  10  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David 

3.    1  brought  her  into  the  city  of  David,  until 
8.    1  that  they  might  bring  up . .  out  of  the  city 
8.  16  I  chose  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of 
8.  44  shall  pray  unto  the  Lord  toward  the  city 

8.  48  the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen,  and  the 

9.  16  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  the  city 

9.  24  Pharoah's  daughter  came  up  out  of  the  c. 
11.  27  repaired  the  breaches  of  the  city  of  David 
11.  32  the  city  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  all 
11.  36  the  city  which  I  have  chosen  me  to  put 
11.  43  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David  his  father 
25  they  came  and  told  (it)  in  the  city  where 

29  the  old  prophet  came  to  the  city,  to  mourn 

11  Him  that  dieth  of  Jeroboam  in  the  city 

12  when  thy  feet  enter  into  the  city,  the  ch. 
21.  the  city  which  the  Lord  did  choose  out 

31  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

8  and  they  buried  him  iu  the  city  of  David 

24  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

4  Him  that  dieth  of  Baasha  in  the  city  shall 

18  when  Zimri  saw  that  the  city  was  taken 
24  called  the  name  of  the  city  which  he  built 
10  when  he  came  to  the  gate  of  the  city, 

20.  2  he  sent  messengers  to  Ahab.  .into  the  c. 
20.  12  set  (themselves  in  array)  against  the  city 
20.  19  So  these  young  men . .  came  out  of  the  city 
20.  30  But  the  rest  fled  to  Aphek,  into  the  city 

20.  30  Beu-hadad  fled,  and  came  into  the  city 

21.  8  unto  the  elders,  .that  (were)  in  his  city 
21.  11  the  men  of  his  city,  .in  his  city  did  as 
21.  13  they  earned  him  forth  out  of  the  city 

21.  24  Him  that  dieth  of  Ahab  in  the  city  the 

22,  26  carry  him.  .uuto.  .governor  of  the  city 
22.  36  Every  man  to  his  city,  and  every  man  to 
22.  50  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

2.  19  the  meu  of  the  city  said  unto  Elisha 

p..  19  the  situation  of  this  city  (is)  pleasant,  as 

2.  23  came,  .little  childreu  out  of  the  city 

3.  19  every  fenced  city,  and  every  choice  city 
6.  14  they  came  by  night,  and  compassed  the  c. 
6.  15  an  host  compassed  the  city  both  with 

6.  19  not  the  way,  neither  (is)  this  the  city 

7.  4  If  we  say,  We  will  enter  into  the  city 
7.   4  then  the  famine  (is)  in  the  city,  and  we 
7.  10  they,  .called  unto  the  porter  of  the  city 
7.  12  When  they  come  out  of  the  city 
7.  12  we  shall  catch  them . .  and  get  into  the  city 
S.  24  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 
9. 15  let  none  go  forth . .  out  of  the  city  to  go 
9.  28  buried  him  in  his  sepulchre,  .in  the  city 

10.    2  (there  are)  with  you .  .a  fenced  city  also 
10.   5  he  that  (was)  over  the  city,  the  elders  also 
10.   6  with  the  great  men  of  the  city,  which 

10.  25  went  to  the  city  of  the  house  of  Baal 

11.  20  the  people,  .rejoiced,  and  the  city  was  in 

12.  21  buried  him  with  his  fathers  iu  the  city 
24.  20  he  was  buried,  .in  the  city  of  David 
^5-    7>  38  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

16.  20  was  buried  with  his  fathers  iu  the  city 

17.  9  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the  fenced  city 
i3.  8  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the  fenced  city 
iS.  30  this  city  shall  not  be  delivered  into  the 
19.  13  the  king  of  the  city  of  Sepharvaim,  of  H. 
19.  32  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  norshoot 
19.  33  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  saith  the 

19.  34  I  will  defend  this  city,  to  save  it,  for 

20.  6  I  will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out  of 


2  Ki.   20.    6  I  will  defend  this  city  for  mine  own  sal"e 
20.  20  and  brought  water  into  the  city 
23.    8  gate  of  Joshua  the  governor  of  the  city 
23.    8  on  a  man's  left  baud  at  the  gate  of  the  c. 
23.  17  the  men  of  the  city  told  him,  (It  is)  the 

23.  27  cast  off  this  city . .  which  I  have  chosen 

24.  10  servants.,  came  up.,  the  city  was  besieged 

24.  11  Nebuchadnezzar,  .came  agaiust  the  city 

25.  2  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh 
25.    3  the  famine  prevailed  in  the  city,  and  the;  o 
25.   4  the  city  was  broken  up,  and  all  the  men 
25.    4  now  the  Chaldees  (were)  agaiust  the  city 
25.  11  the  people  (that  were)  left  in  the  city,  and 
25.  19  out  of  the  city  he  took  an  officer  that 

25.  19  rive  men : .  which  were  found  in  the  city 
25.  19  the  people,  .(that  were)  found  in  the  city 

1  Ch.     1.  43  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Dinhabah 

1.  46  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Avith 

1.  50  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Pai 

11.  5  castle  of  Zion,  which  (is)  the  city  of  David 
11.  7  therefore  they  called  it  the  city  of  David 
11.  8  he  built  the  city  round  about,  even  from 
13.  13  David  brought  not  the  ark.,  to  the  city  el 
15.    1  (David)  made  him  houses  in  the  city  of 

15.  29  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  .came  to  the  city 

19.  9  battle  in  array  before  the  gate  of  the  city 
19  15  they  likewise  fled. .and  entered. .thecity 

20.  2  he  brought.. much  spoil  out  of  the  city 

2  Ch..     5.    2  to  bring  up  the  ark.  .out  of  the  city  of 

6.    5  I  chese  no  city  among  all  the  tribes  of 
6.  34  they  pray  unto  thee  toward  this  city 

6.  38  (toward)  the  city  which  thou  hast  chosen 
8. 11  Solomou  brought  up.  .out  of  the  city  of 
9.  31  he  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David  his 

11.  23  all  his  children,  .unto  every  fenced  city 

12.  13  the  city  which  the  Lord  had  chosen  out 
12.  16  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David 

■     14.    z  aud  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 

16.  14  which  he  had  made  for  himself  in  the  city 

18.  25  carry  him  back  to.  .governor  of  the  city 

19.  5  he  set  judges  in  the  laud,  .city  by  city 

21.  1  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of 
21.  20  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David,  but 

23.  21  all  the  people,  .rejoiced:  and  thecity  was. 

24.  16,  25  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 

25.  28  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 

27.  9  and  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  David 
28. 15  the  city  of  palm  trees,  to  their  brethren 

28.  27  buried  him  in thecity,(even)in  Jerusalem 

29.  20  gathered  the  rulers  of  the  city,  and  went 

30.  10  So  the  posts  passed  from  city  to  city 
32.   3  fountains  which  (were)  without  the  city 
32.    5  repaired  Millo  (in)  the  city  of  David,  and 
32.    6  in  the  street  of  the  gate  of  the  city 

32.  t8  that  they  might  take  the  city 

32.  30  brought  it  straight  down  to.  .the  city 

33.  14  after,  .he  built  a  wall  without  the  city 

33.  15  took  away,  .and  cast  (them)  out  of  the  c. 

34.  8  and  ilaaseiah  the  governor  of  the  city,  and 
Ezra     2.    1  and  came  again . .  every  one  unto  his  city 

10.  14  with  them  the  elders  of  every  city,  and 
Keh.     2.    3  when  the  city.,  (lieth)  waste,  and  the  gates 

2.  5  unto  the  city  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres 

2     8  for  the  wall  of  the  city,  and  for  the  house 

3.  15  the  stairs  that  go  down  from  the  city  of 

7.  4  the  city  (was)  large  and  great ;  but  the 

7     6  and  came  again .  .every  one  unto  his  city 

11.  1  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem  the  holy  city 
ir.   9  and  Judah . .  (was)  second  over  the  city 
ir.  18  All  the  Levites  in  the  holy  city  (were)  two 

12.  37  they  went  up  by  the  stairs  of  the  city 

13.  18  did  notour  God  bring  all.  upon  this  city ": 
Esth.     3.  15  but  the  city  Shushan  was  perplexed 

4.  1  went  out  into  the  midst  of  the  city,  and 
4.    6  Hatach  went,  .unto  the  street  uf  the  city 
6.    9  bring  him . .  through  the  street  of  the  city 
6.  11  brought  him.,  through  the  street  of.,  city 

8.  11  granted  the  Jews  which  (were)  in  every  c_ 
8.  15  thecity  of  Shushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad 

8.  17  And  in  every  province,  and  in  every  city 

9.  28  every  famil) ,  every  province. .  every  city 
Job  24.  12  Men  groau  from  out  of  the  city,  and  the 
Psa.    31.  21  showed  me .  .kindness  in  a  strong  city 

46.    4  the  streams,  .make  glad  the  city  of  God 
48.    1  greatly  to  be  praised  in  the  city  of  our 
48.    8  so  have  we  seen  in  the  city,  the  city  01 
55.    o  for  I  have  seen  violence,  in  the  city 

59.  6,  14  make  a  noise,  .go  roundabout  the  city 

60.  9  Who  will  bring  me  (into)  the  strong  city  I 
72.  16  (they)  of  the  city  shall  flourish  like  grass, 
87.    3  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city 

101.    8  cut  off  all  wicked  doers  from  the  city 

107.    4  they  found  no  city  to  dwell  iu 

107.    7  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habitation 

107.  36  that  they  may  prepare  a  city  for  habita. 

108.  10  Who  will  bring  me  into  the  strong  city? 
122.    3  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  that  is 
127.    1  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watch. 

Prov.    1.  21  in  the  city  she  uttereth  her  words,  (saying) 
16.  32  he  that  ruleth  .he  that  taketh  a  city 
21.  22  A  wise  (man)  scaleth  the  city  of  themighty 
25.  28  He.. (is  like)  a  city  (tiiat  is)  broken  down 

Eccl.     7.  19  teu  mighty  (men)  which  ai  e  in  the  city 

8.  10  they  were  forgotten  in  thecity  where  they 
9. 14  (There  was)  a  little  city,  aud  few.  .within 

9.  15  and  he  by  his  wisdom  delivered  the  city 
10.  15  he  knoweth  not  how  to  go  to  the  city 

Song    3.    2  I  will  rise  now,  and  go  about  the  city  in 
3.    3  The  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city 
5.    7  The  watchmen  that  went  about  the  city 

Tsa.       1.    8  as  a  lodge  in  a  garden .  .as  a  besieged  city 
1.  26  shalt  be  called,  The  city  of  righteousness 


CITY 


Isa.     14.  31  Howl,  0  gate  ;  cry,  0  city ;  thou,  whole  P. 
17.    1  Damascus  Is  taken  away  from  (beiug)  a  c. 
19.    2  city  against  city,  (and)  kingdom  against 
10.  iS  one  shallbe  called,  The  city  of  destruction 
22.    2  that  art  full  of  stirs,  a  tumultuous  city 

22.  9  have  seen  also  the  breaches  of  the  city 

23.  16  Take  an  harp,  go  about  the  city,  thou  h. 

24  12  In  the  city  is  left  desolation,  and  the  gate 
25.  2  thou  hast  made . .  (of)  a  defenced  city  a 

25.  2  a  palace  of  strangers  to  he  no  city ;  it 

26.  1  We  have  a  strong  city  ;  salvation  will  (G  ) 
27  10  Yet  the  defenced  city  (shall  be)  desolate 
,2  14  the  multitude  of  the  city  shall  be  left 

52  10  and  the  city  shall  be  low  in  a  low  place 

36  15  this  city  shall  not  be  delivered  into  the 
37. 13  the  king  of  the  city  of  Sepharvaim,  Hena 

37  33  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  nor 
37  34  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  saith  the 

37  35  I  will  defend  this  city  to  save  it,  for 
38.   6  I  will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out  of 
38.   6  and  I  will  defend  this  city 

45.  13  he  shall  build  my  city,  and  he  shall  let 
48.  2  For  they  call  themselves  of  the  holy  city 
52  1  puton..garments,0  Jerusalem, theholyc. 
6d.  14  they  shall  call  thee.  The  city  of  the  Loud 
62.  12  thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city 
66.    6  A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a  voice 

Jer.      1  18  I  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  city 
3  14  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of 
4.  29  The  whole  city  shall  flee  for  the  noise 
4.  29  every  city  (shall  be)  forsaken,  and  not  a 
6.    6  this  (is)  the  city  to  be  visited  ;  she  (is) 
8.  16  the  city,  and  those  that  dwell  therein 

14  18  if  I  enter  into  the  city,  then  behold  them 

15  8  caused,  .to  fall,  .terrors  upon  the  city 
17.  24  no  burden  through  the  gates  of  this  city 
17  25  shall  .enter  into  the  gates  of  this  city 
17  25  and  this  city  shall  remain  for  ever  ■ 

19.  8  I  will  make  this  city  desolate,  and  an 

19. 11  so  will  I  break  this  people,  and  this  city 

19. 12  and  (even)  make  this  city  as  Tophet 
19. 15  upon  this  city  and  upon  all  her  towns 

20.  5  I  will  deliver,  .the  strength  of  this  city 

21.  4  and  I  will  assemble  them  into.. this  city 
si.   6  will  smite  the  inhabitants  of  this  city 

21.  7  and  (such  as  are)  left  hi  this  city  from  the 
si.  9  He  that  abideth  in  this  city  shall  die 

si.  10  I  have  set  my  face  against  this  city 

22.  8  many  nations  shall  pass  by  this  city,  and 

22.  8  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this .  .city; 

23.  39  the  city  that  I  gave  you  and  your  fathers 

25.  29  I  begin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  which 

26.  6  will  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  the 
26.  9  this  city  shall  be  desolate  without  an 
25. 11  he  hath  prophesied  against  this  city,  as 

25  12  sent  me  to  prophesy  .  .against  this  city 

26.  15  bring  innocent  blood,  .upon  this  city 
25.  20  who  prophesied  against  this  city  and 

27.  17  wherefore  should  this  city  be  laid  waste? 
27.  19  the  residue,  .that  remain  in  this  city 

29.    7  seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have 

29.  16  all  the  people  that  dwelleth  in  this  city 

30.  18  the  city  shall  lie  huihled  upon  her  own 

31.  38  the  city  shall  be  built  to  the  Lord,  from 

32.  3  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of 
32.-24  they  are  come  unto  the  city  to  take  it 
32.  24,  25  the  city  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the 
32.  28  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of 

32  29  Chaldeans,  that  light  against  this  city 
32.  29  Chaldeans,  .shall,  .set  fire  on  this  city 
32.  31  this  city  hath  been  to  me  (as)  a  provoca. 

32.  36  concerning  this  city,  whereof  ye  say,  It 

33,  4  concerning  the  houses  of  this  city,  and 

33.  5  I  have  hid  my  face  from  this  city 

34,  2  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of 
34.  22  and  cause  them  to  return  to  this  city 
37.    8  tight  against  this  city,  and  take  it,  and 
37.  10  (yet)  should  they  rise .  and  bum  this  city 

37.  21  until  all  the  bread  in  the  city  were  spent 

38.  2  He  that  reniaineth  in  this  city  shall  die 
38.    3  This  city  shall  surely  be  given  into  the 

38  4  hands  of.  .men.  .that  remain  in  this  city 
38.   9  for  (there  is)  no  more  bread  in  the  city 
38. 17  this  city  shall  not  lie  burnt  with  fire 

38.  18  then  shall  this  city  be  given  into  the 

38.  23  thou  shalt  cause  this  city  to  be  burnt 

39.  2  the  ninth  (day),  .the  city  was  broken  up 

39  4  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  night,  by 
39,    9  the  people  that  remained  in  the  city,  anil 
39.  16  I  will  bring  my  words  upon  this  city  for 
41.    7  when  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  c 

46.  8  I  will  destroy  the  city  and  the  inhabitants 

47.  2  the  city,  and  them  that  dwell  therein 

48.  8  the  spoiler  shall  come  upon  every  city 

49.  25  How  is  .not  left,  the  city  of  my  joy 

51.  31  to  show  the  king  of  Babylon  that  his  city 

52.  5  Sothecity  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh 
52.    6  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  city,  so  that 
52.    7  Then  the  city  was  broken  up   and  all  the 
52.    7  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  night,  by 
52.    7  now  the  Chaldeans  (were)  by  the  city 

52.  15  residue  of.  .people .  .remained  in  the  city 
52.  25  He  took  also  out  of  the  city  an  eunuch 
52.  25  seven  men.,  which  were  found  in  the  city 
52.  25  (that  were)  found  in  the  midst  of  the  c. 
Lam.    1.    1  How  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  (that  was) 

1.  ig  mine  elders  gave  up  the  ghost  in  the  city 

2.  12  as  tin?  wounded  in  the  streets  of  the  city 

2.  15  (Is)  this  the  city  that  (men)  call  the  Perl. 

3.  51  because  of  all  the  daughters  of  my  city 
Ezo.      4.    1  pourtray  upon  it  the  city,  (even) 

4.  3  (for)  a  wall. .between  thee  and  the  city 


170 


Eze.       5.    2  a  third  part  in  the  midst  of  the  city 
7. 15  he  that  (is)  in  the  city,  famine . .  shall 
7.  23  and  the  city  is  full  of  violence 
9.    1  Cause  them  that  have  charge  over  the  c. 
9.   4  Lord  said . .  Go  through  the  midst  of . .  c. 
9.    5  Go  ye  after  him  through  the  city,  and  • 
9.   7  And  they  went  forth,  and  slew  in  the  city 
9.    9  the  land  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city  full 

10.  2  fill  thine  hand . .  scatter  (them)  over . .  city 

11.  2  and  give  wicked  counsel  in  this  city 
11.    6  have  multiplied  your  slain  iu  this  city 
11.  23  glory,  .went  up  from  the  midst  of  the  city 
11.  23  which  (is)  on  the  east  side  of  the  city 

17.  4  he  set  it  in  a  city  of  merchants 
21.19  choose  (it)  at  the  head  of  the  way  to . .  city 
22.  2  wiltthou  judge  the  bloody  city?  yea,  thou 
22.  3  The  city  sheddeth  blood  in  the  midst  of 
24.  6,  9  saith  the  Lord  .  .Woe  to.  .bloody  city! 
26.  10  as  men  enter  into  a  city  wherein  is  made 
26.  17  the  renowned  city,  which  wast  strong  in 
26. 19  When  I  shall  make  thee  a  desolate  city 
33.  21  (that)  one.,  came.,  saying,  The  city  is  sm. 

39.  16  the  name  of  the  city  (shall  be)  Hamonah 

40.  1  the  fourteenth  year  after  that  the  city 
40.    2  which  (was)  as  the  frame  of  a  city  on  the 
43.    3  I  saw  when  I  came  to  destroy  the  city 
45.    6  shall  appoint  the  possession  of  the  city 
45.    7  andofthepossessionof  the  city,  before  the 
45.    7  before  the  possession  of  the  city,  from 
48.  15  shall  be  a  profane  (place)  for  the  city,  for 
48.  15  the  city  shall  be  in  the  midst  thereof 

48.  17  the  suburbs  of  the  city  shall  be  toward 
48.  18  for  food  unto  them  that  serve  the  city 
48.  19  they  that  serve  the  city  shall  serve  it 
4S.  20  offer,  .with  the  possession  of  the  city 
48.  21  of  the  possession  of  the  city,  over  against 
48.  22  from  the  possession  of  the  city,  (being)  in 
48.  30  these  (are)  the  goings  out  of  the  city  on 
48.  3T  the  gates  of  the  city  (shall  be)  after  the 
48.  35  the  name  of  the  city.. The  Lord  (is)  there 
Dan.     9.  16  let  thine  anger  .be  turned  .from  thy  city 
9.  18  and  the  city  which  is  called  by  thy  name 
9.  19  for  thy  city  and  thy  people  are  called 
9.  24  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  holy  city 
9.  26  the  people .  .shall  destroy  the  city  and 
Hos.  11.    9  and  I  will  not  enter  into  the  city 
Joel     2.    9  They  shall  run  to  and  fro  in  the  city ;  they 
Amos  3.    6  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  city,  and 

3.  6  shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord 

4.  7  I  caused  it  to  rain  upon  one  city 

4.  7  caused  it  not  to  rain  upon  another  city 

5.  3  The  city  that  went  out  (by)  a  thousand 

6.  8  will  I  deliver  up  the  city,  with  all  that 

7.  17  Thy  wife  shall  be  an  harlot  in  the  city 
Jon.     1.    2  Arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city,  and 

3.    2  Arise,  go  unto  Nineveh,  that  great  city 
3.    3  Now  Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  city 

3.  4  Jonah  began  to  enter  into  the  city  a  day's 

4.  5  So  Jonah  went  out  of  the  city 

4.    5  and  sat  on  the  east  side  of  the  city 
4    5  might  see  what  should  become  of  the  city 
4  11  And  should  not  I  spare,  .that  great  city 
Jlie.      6.    9  The  Lord's  voice  crieth  unto  the  city,  and 
Nah.     3.    1  Woe  to  the  bloody  city  I  it  (is)  all  full 
Zeph.    2   15  This  (is)  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt 

3     1  Woe  to  her.  to  the  oppressing  city  I 
Zech.     8    3  Jerusalem  shall  be  called,  A  city  of  truth 

8.  5  the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of 
14     2  the  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses 
14.    2  and  half  of  the  city  shall  go  forth  into 
14.   2  people  shall  not  be  cut  off  from  the  city 

2..1  city  (with  loalls),  n;-ip  qiryah. 
Num  21  28  there  is.  a  flame  from  the  city  of  Sihon 
Deut.  2.  36  there  was  not  one  city  too  strong  for  us 
3    4  there  was  not  a  city  which  we  took  not 
1  Ki.     1.  41  Wherefore  (is  this) noise  of  the  city  being 
1  45  are  come  up .  rejoicing,  so  that  the  city 
Job    39.    7  He  scorneth  the  multitude  of  the  city 
Psa,    48     2  (on)  the  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of  the 
Prov.  10  15  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 
11   10  When  it  goeth  well-  the  city  rejoiceth 
18. 11  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 
18.  19  (is  harder  to  he  won)  than  a  strong  city 
29.    8  Scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare 
Isa       1  21  How  istlie  faithful  city  become  an  harlot ! 
1  26  thou  shalt  be  called.  The  faithful  city 
22    2  Thou  that  art  full  of  stirs,  joyous  city 

24  10  The  city  of  confusion  is  broken  down 

25  2  For  thou  hast  made  of  a  city  an  heap ;  (of) 
25  3  the  city  of  the  terrible  nations  shall  fear 
-6  5  the  lofty  city,  he  layeth  it  low  ;  helayeth 
29  1  Woe  to  Ariel    the  city  (where)  David 

32.  13  upon  all  the  houses  .(in)  the  joyous  city 
33  20  Look  upon  Zion,  the  city  of  our  solemui. 
Jer     49  25  How  is  the  city  of  praise  not  left,  the 
Lam.    2.  11  sucklings  swoon  in  the  streets  of  the  city 
Hos.     6     8  Gilead  (is)  a  city  of  them  that  work  1111. 
51  ic      4.  10  now  shalt  thou  go  forth  out  of  the  city 
Hah      2  8,  17' of  the  city,  and  of  allthat  dwelltherein 
2. 12  Woe  to  him  that . .  stablisheth  a  city  by 

3. A  city  (with  valts),  sop  qirya. 

Ezra  4.  12  building  the  rebellious  and  the  had  city 
4.  13  if  this  city  be  builded,  and  the  walls  set 
4.  iS  know,  that  this  city  (is)  a  rebellious  city 
4.  15  for  which  cause  was  this  city  destroyed 
4.  16  if  this  city  be  builded  (again),  and  the  w. 
4.  10  it  is  found  that  this  city,  hath  made  ins. 
4.  2,  that  tins  city  be  not  builded,  until  (ano.) 

LA  city  (with  walls),  mp  qeretk. 

Job   25.    7  I  went  out  to  the  gate  through  the  c.ty 


CITY 


Prov.  8.    3  She  crieth  at  the  gates . .  of  the  city,  at 

9.  3  crieth  upon  the  highest  places  of  the  city 

9.  14  on  a  seat  in  the  high  places  of  the  city 

11.  11  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city 

5. A  gate,  t!iepcoj)le  assembling  there,  lug"  shaar. 
Ruth  3.  11  for  all  the  city  of  my  people  doth  know 

6. A  city  (with  walls),  ttoXis  polls. 

Matt.  2.  23  he  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  Naz. 

4.  5  the  devil  taketh  him.  .into  the  holy  city 

5.  14  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be 
5.  35  for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great  King 

8.  33  went  their  ways  into  the  city,  and  told 

8.  34  behold,  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet 

9.  1  passed  over,  and  came  into  his  own  city 
10.  5  into  (any)  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye 
10.  11  into  whatsoever  city  or  town  ye  shall 

10  14  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house  or  city 

10.  15  be  more  tolerable .  .than  for  that  city 

10.  23  when  they  persecute  you  in  this  city,  flee 

12.  25  every  city,  .divided  against  itself  shall 
21. 10  all  the  city  was  moved,  saying,  Who  is 

21.  17  he  left  them,  and  went  out  of  the  city 
21. 18  Now.  .as  he  returned  into  the  city,  he 

22.  7  he  sent  forth,  .and  burned  up  their  city 

23.  34  and  persecute  (them)  from  city  to  city 

26.  18  he  said,  Go  into  the  city  to  such  a  man 

27.  53  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  appeared 

28.  11  some  of  the  watch  came  into  the  city,  and 
Mark  1.  33  all  the  city  was  gathered  together  at 

1.  45  Jesus  could  no  more,  .enter  into  the  city 

5.  14  told  (it)  in  the  city,  and  in  the  country 

6.  11  [be  more  tolerable,  .than  for  that  city] 

11.  19  when  even  was  come,  he  went  out  of .  .c. 
14.  13  and  saith  unto  them,  Go  ye  into  the  city 
14.  16  his  disciples,  .came  into  the  city,  and 

Luke  1.  26  the  angel .  .was  sent  from  God  unto  a  city 

1.  39  Wary  arose.. and  went.. into  a  city  of  J. 

2.  3  all  went,  .every  one  into  his  own  city 
2.    4  Joseph  also  went  up . .  out  of  the  city  of 
2.    4  unto  the  city  of  David,  which  is  called 
2.  11  unto  you  is  born  this  day,  in  the  city  of 
2.  39  they  returned  into,  .their  own  city  Naz. 
4.  29  rose  up,  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  city 
4.  29  of  the  hill  whereon  their  city  was  built 
4.  31  came  down  to  Capernaum,  a  city  of  G. 
5. 12  when  he  was  in  a  certain  city,  behold  a 

7.  11  that  he  went  into  a  city  called  Nain 
7.  12  when  he  came  nigh  to  the  gate  of  the  city 
7. 12  and  much  people  of  the  city  was  with 

7.  37  a  woman  in  the  city,  .brought  au  alaba. 

8.  27  there  met  him  out  of  the  city  a  certain 
8.  34  went  and  told  (it)  in  the  city  and  hi  the 

8.  39  published  throughout  the  whole  city  how 

9.  5  when  ye  go  out  of  that  city,  shake  off  the 
9.  10  into  a  desert  place  belonging  to  the  city 

10.  1  before  his  face  into  every  city  and  place 
10.    8,  10  into  whatsoever  city  ye  enter,  and 
10.  1 1  Even  the  very  dust  of  your  city,  which 

10.  12  he  more  tolerable,  .than  for  that  city 
14.  21  Go  out  quickly  into,  lanes  of  the  city 
18.    2  There  was  in  a  city  a  judge,  which  feared 

18.  3  And  there  was  a  widow  in  that  city  ;  and 

19.  41  he  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it 

22.  10  Behold,  when  ye  are  entered  into  the  c. 

23.  19  Who  for  a  certain  sedition    in  the  city 

23.  51  (he  was)  of  Arimathea,  a  city  of  the  Jews 

24.  49  tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  until  ye 
John  1.  44  Philip  was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  A. 

4.    5  Then  cometh  he  to  a  city  of  Samaria 
4.    8  his  disciples  were  gone  away  unto  the  e. 
4.  28  went  her  way  into  the  city,  and  saith  to 
4.  30  they  went  out  of  the  city,  and  came 
4.  39  mauy  of  the  Samaritans  of  that  city 

11.  54  but  went  thence,  .into  a  city  called  E. 
19  20  place  where  Jesus  was.  nigh  to  the  city 

Acts    7.  58  cast(him)out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  (him) 
8.    5  Philip  went  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria 
8     8  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city 
8.    9  which  beforetime  in  the  same  city  used 
g.    6  Arise,  and  go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall 
10    9  they  went. .  and  drew  nigh  unto  the  city 
11.    5  I  was  in  the  city  of  Joppa  praying  :  and 
12. 10  the  iron  gate  that  leadeth  unto  the  city 

13.  44  came  almost  the  whole  city  together  to 

13  50  Jews  stirred  up.  .chief  men  of  the  city 

14.  4  But  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided 
1413  the  priest  of  J . ,  which  was  before  their  c. 
14.  19  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  (him)  out  of . .  c. 

14  20  he  rose  up,  and  came  into  the  city 
14  21  they  had  preached  the  Gospel  to  that  city 
15!  36  Let  us.  .visit  our  brethren  in  every  city 
16.  12  which  is  the  chief  city  of  that  part  of 
16  12  we  were  in  that  city  abiding  certain  days 
16  13  onttoe  sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  [city]  by 
16.  14  a  certain  woman  named  Lydia.  .of  the  c. 
16.  20  These  men ..  do  exceedingly  trouble  our  c. 

16.  39  and  desired  (them)  to  depart  out  of  the  c. 

17.  5  and  set  all  the  city  011  an  uproar 

17.  16  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  to 

18.  10  for  I  have  much  people  in  this  city 

19.  29  the  whole  city  was  tilled  with  confusion 
19.  35  how  that  the  city  of  the  Ephesians  is  a 
21.    5  brought  us.,  till  (we  were)  out  of  the  city 
21  29  they  had  seen  before  with  him  in  the  city 
21.  30  all  the  city  was  moved,  and  the  people  ran 

21.  39  (which  am)  a  Jew  of  Tarsus,  (a  city)  iu  C. 
21  39  a  citizen  of  no  mean  city 

22.  3  brought  up  in  this  city  at  the  feet  of 
24.  12  neither  in  the  synagogues,  nor  iu  the  city 


CITY 


171 


CLEAN 


Acts  25.  23  with  the.  .principal  men  of  the  city 

27.    8  nigh  whereunto  was  the  city  (of)  Lasea 
Rom  16.  23  the  chamberlain  of  the  city  saluteth  you 
2  Co.  ir.  26  (in)  perils  in  the  city,  (iu)  perils  in  the 

ii.  32  the  governor.. kept  the  city  of  the  Dam. 
Titus  r.   5  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  as  I  had 
Heb.n.  10  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations 

11.  16  for  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city 

12.  22  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 

13.  14  For  here  have  we  110  continuing  city,  hut 
Jas.  4.  13  To  day.,  we  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and 
Rev.   3.  12  the  name  of  the  city  of  my  God,  (which  is) 

11.  2  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot 
11.  8  (shall  lie)  in  the  street  of  the  great  city 
11.  13  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  fell,  aud  in 

14.  8  Babylon  is  fallen . .  that  great  Tcity],  becau. 
14. 28  wine  press  was  trodden  without  the  city 

16.  19  And  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three 

17.  iS  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  that,  .city 
18  10  alas,  that  great  city . .  that  mighty  city ! 

18.  16  alas,  that  great  city,  that  was  clothed  in 
18.  18  What  (city  is)  like  unto  this  great  city  ! 
18.  19  weeping,  .saying,  Alas,  alas,  that  great  c 
18.  21  with  violence  shall  that  great  city  Baby. 

20.  g  compassed  the  camp .  .and  the  beloved  c. 

21.  2  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem 
21.  10  and  showed  me  that  great  city,  the  holy 
21.  14  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundations 
21.  15  had  a  golden  reed  to  measure  the  city 

21  16  the  city  lieth  foursquare,  and  the  length 
21  16  he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  tw. 
21.  18  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear 
21.  ig  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city 

21.  2i  the  street  of  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  as 
21. 23  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  suu,  neither 

22.  14  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city 
22. 19  take  away  his  part. .  out  of  the  holy  city 

CITY  of  confusion,  inn'n^p  qiryath-tohu. 
A  symbolic  name  for  Jerusalem. 

Isa.  24.  10  The  city  of  confusion  is  broken  down 

CITY  of  David,  in  Yy  ir  David. 
That  part  of  Jerusalem  built  on  Mount  Zion. 
2  Sa.    5.    7  Zion  :  the  same  (is)  the  city  of  D. 

5.    9  dwelt  iu  the  fort.,  called  it  The  city  of  D. 

6. 10  not  remove  the  ark .  .into  the  city  of  D, 

1  Ki.    2.  10  David,  .was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 

8.  1  might  bring . .  ark . .  out  of  the  city  of  D. 

9.  24  Pharaoh's  daughter . .  out  of  the  city  of  D. 

11.  43  Solomon,  .was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 

15.  8  aud  they  burie  1  him  iu  the  city  of  D. 

2  Ki.   8.  24  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  D. 

12.  21  buried  him.  .in  the  city  of  D. 

1  Ch.  11.    7  therefore  they  called  it  the  city  of  D. 

13.  13  brought  not  the  ark.  .to  the  city  of  D. 

15.  1  (David)  made  him  houses  in  the  city  of  D. 
15-  29  the  ark.  .came  to  the  city  of  D. 

2  Ch.  5.    2  to  bring  up  the  ark . .  out  of  the  city  of  D. 

8.  11  out  of  the  city  of  D.  uuto  the  house  that 

9.  31  Solomon. .  was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 
12.  16  R-ehoboam. .  was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 

14.  1  aud  they  buried  him  iu  the  city  of  D. 

16.  14  And  they  buried  him.  .in  the  city  of  D. 
21.    1  buried  with  His  fathers  iu  the  city  of  D. 
21.  20  howbeit  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 
24. 16  Aud  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 
24.  25  and  they  burie  I  him  in  the  city  of  D. 
27.   9  aud  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 
32.    5  and  repaired  Millo  (iu)  the  city  of  D. 

32.  30  brought  it.  .th.3  wast  side  of  the  city  of  D. 
jTeh.   3.  15  stairs  that  g )  down  from  the  city  of  D. 

12.  37  they  weut  up  iy.  .stairs  of  the  city  of  D. 
Isa.  22.    9  Ye  have  seen.,  breaches  of  the  city  of  D. 

CITY  of  destruction,  Diin  Ty  c'ty  of  (he  sun. 

A  prophetic  name  given  to  one   of  the  five  cities  of 

Egypt  inhabited  by  Israelites. 

Isa.   19.  i3  one  shall  be  called,  The  city  of  destruction 
CITY,  fenaei  — 
Fenced,  fortified  place,  ni*xa  metsurah. 

2  Ch.  11.  10  which  (are)  in  Judah.  .fenced  cities 

11.  23  and  dispersed,  .uuto  every  fenced  city 

12.  4  he  took  the  fenced  cities  which  (pertained) 
14.    6  he  built  fenced  cities  in  Judah :  for  the 
21.    3  of  precious  things,  with  fenced  cities  in 

OITr,  golden  — 

Golden  one,  nnrn?  madhebah. 

Isa.  14.   4  hath  the  oppressor  ceased  !  the  golden  city 
CITY  of  palm  trees  — 
A  name  sometimes  given  to  Jericho,  Ciafiii  1*1?. 

Deut  34.   3  Jericho,  the  city  of  palm  trees,  unto  Zoar 

Judg.  3.  13  smote  Israel.. possessedthecityofpalmt. 

2  Ch.23.  15  brought  them  to  Jericho,  the  city  of  palm  t. 

CITY,  royal,  np^n  vy  city  of  the  kingdom. 
Another  name  of  Rabbah  of  the  children  of  Ammon, 
and  apparently  the  same  as  the  "  City  of  Waters." 

2  Sa.  12.  26  Joab  fought .  .and  took  the  royal  city 
CITY,  ruler  of  the  — 
Cliiefofthe  city,  iro\iT<£pxys  p>olito;rclies. 

Acts  17.    6  drew  Jason . .  unto  the  rulers  of  the  city 

17.  8  they  troubled . .  the  rulers  of  the  city,  when 

CITY  of  salt,  nSen  *vy. 

A  city  of  Judahi  near  the  Salt  Sea. 

Josh.15.  62  And  Xibshan,  and  the  city  of  Salt,  and 


CITY,  seveial  — 

City  and  city,  V$n  Tj?  ir  va-ir. 

2  Ch.  11.  i2  in  every  several  city  (he  put)  shields  and 
28.  25  in  every  several  city  of  Judah  he  made 
31.  19  in  every  several  city,  the  men  that  were 

CITY  of  waters,  D'en  T#  ir  Tiammayim. 

The  name  given  by  Joab  to  part  of  Rabbah,  the  chief 

city  of  the  Ammonites. 

2Sa.  12.  27  I  have  fought.,  and  have  taken  the  c.of  w. 
CLAD  oneself,  to  — 
To  cover  oneself,  .ids  kasah,  7. 

1  Ki.  11  29  he  had  clad  himself  with  a  new  garment 

CLAD,  to  be  — 

To  lorap  oneself  up,  ?i$%  atah. 

Isa.   59.  17  and  was  clad  with  zeal  as  a  cloak 

CLAMOROUS  — 

To  hum,  make  a  noise,  narr  hamah. 

Prov.  9.  13  A  foolish  woman  (is)  clamorous  ;  (she  is) 

CLAMOUR  — 

Cry,  outcry,  ttpawyh  krauge. 

Eph.  4.  31  and  anger,  and  clamour,  and  evil  speaking 

CLAP,  to  — 

l.To  smite  {(lie)  hands  together,  una  madia. 

Psa.  98.    8  Let  the  floods  clap  (their)  hands  :  let  the 
Isa.  55. 12  all  the  trees  of  the  held  shall  clap  (their) 

2.  To  smite  (the)  hands  together,  una  machat  3. 

Eze  25.    6  Because  thou  hast  clapped  (thine)  hands 

3.  To  {cause  to)  smite,  n?i7iakah,  5. 

2  Ki.11.  i2theyclappedtheirhands,andsaid,Godsave 

4.  To  clap  {the  hands)  together,  psD  saphaq. 

Job  34.  37  he  clappeth  (his  hands)  among  us,  and 
Lam.  2.  15  All  that  pass  by  clap  (their)  hands  at  thee 

5.  To  clap>  (the  hand)  together,  pS^  sapliaq. 

Job  27.  23  ^Men)  shall  clap  their  hands  at  him,  and 

6.  To  strike  {the  hands)  together,  ypn  taqa. 

Psa.  47.    1  0  clap  your  hands,  all  ye  people  ;  shout 
Nah.  3.  19  all  that  hear  the  bruit  of  thee  shall  clap 

CLAU'-DA,  KXavSrj. 

A  small  island  S.W.  of  Crete.  Mela  and  Pliny  call  it 
Gaudos,  and  Ptolemy  calls  it  Klaudos.  It  is  still 
called  Clauda-nesa  or  Guadonesi  by  the  Greeks,  which 
the  Italians  have  corrup+ed  into  Gozzo. 

Acts  27.  16  a  certain  island  which  is  called  C. 

CLAU-Dt-A,  KXavUa. 

A  female  disciple  at  Pome,  supposed  to  be  a  British 
maiden  and  daughter  of  king  Cogidubnus,  who  took 
the  name  of  his  imperial  patron  Tiberius  Claudius. 
Her  husband  seems  to  have  been  Pederis,  who  ij  men- 
tioned in  the  same  verse. 

2  Ti.  4.  21  Eubulus  greeteth  thee .  .audC,  and  ail  the 

CLAU-DI'-US,  KAauStos. 

1.  The  successor  of  Caligula  as  emperor,  A.D.  41-54. 

Acts  11.  28  which  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  C. 
18.    2  C.  had  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart 

2.  A  Roman  officer,  chief  captain  in  Jerusalem,  A.D.  CX 

Acts  23.  26  C.  Lysias unto.  .Felix  (sendeth)  greeting 
CLAW  — 
Cloven  or  parted  hoof,  nc-\2  parsah. 

Deut.  14.   6  and  cleaveth  the  cleft  into  two  claws,  (and; 

Zech.11.  16  but  he  shall,  .tear  their  claws  in  pieces 

CI-iY  — 

I.Clay,  {from  its  red  colour),  mortar,  iah  chomcr. 

Job     4. 19  less  (in)  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of  elry 
10.   9  that  thou  hast  made  me  as  the  clay 
13. 12  your  bodies  to  bodies  of  clay 
27.  16  Though  he.  .prepare  raiment  as  the  clay 
33.    6  I  also  am  formed  out  of  the  elf  7 
38.  14  It  is  turned  as  clay  (to)  the  seal ;  and  they 

Isa.   29.  16  shall  be  esteemed  as  the  potter's  clay 

45.    9  Shall  the  clay  say  to  him  that  fashioneth 
64.   8  we  (are)  the  clay,  and  thou  our  potter 

Jer.   18.   4  the  vessel  that  he  made  of  clay  was  marred 
18.   6  as  the  clay  (is)  in  the  potter's  hand,  so  (are) 

2.  Burnt  clay  of  the  potter,  ^cn  chesaph. 

Dan.   2.  33  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay 

2.  34  his  feet  (that  were)  of  iron  and  clay,  aud 
2.  35  Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the 
2.  41  part  of  potter's  clay,  and  part  of  iron 
2.  41,  43  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry  clay 
2.  42  the  toes,  .part  of  iron,  and  part  of  clay 
2.  43  even  as  iron  is  uoL  mixed  with  clay 
2.  45  the  iron,  the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver 

3.  Mire,  mud,  E'a  tit. 

Psa.  40.  2  Ee  brought  me  up.  .out  of  the  miry  clay 

Isa.    41.  25  and  as  the  potter  treadeth  clay 

Nah.   3.  14  go  into  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar,  make 

4. Mortar,  (from  its  softness),  fc^a  melet. 

Jer.  43.   9  hidf  them  in  the  clay  in  the  brick  kiln 

5.  Thick  clayey  place,  rnya  maabeh. 

1  Ki.  7.  46  in  the  clay  ground  between  Succoth  and 

6.  Thick  clayey  soil,  2'jt  oh. 

2  Ch.  4.  17  in  the  clay  ground  between  Succoth  and 


7.  Clay,  mortar,  irr)\6s  pelos. 

John  9.  6  he  spat  on  the  ground,  and  made  clay  of 
9.  6  and  he  anointed  the  eyes,  .with  the  clay 
9.  11  A  man  that  is  called  Jesus  made  clay,  and 
9.  14  it  was  the  sabbath.  .Jesus  made  the  clay 
9.  15  He  put  clay  upon  mine  eyes,  and  I  washed 

Rom.  9.  21  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay 

CLAY,  thick  — 

Thick  mire,  heavy  pledge,  fc*B?y  aotit. 

Hab.  2.   6  Mm  that  ladeth  himself  with  thick  clay  I 

CLEAN  — 

3.  Clean,  empty,  ia  bar. 

Job    11.    4  My  doctrine  (is)  pure,  and  I  am  cleau  iu 
Psa.  73.    1  (even)  to  such  as  are  of  a  clean  heart 
Prov.  14.  4  Where  no  oxen  (are),  the  crib  (is)  clean 

'2.Pure,  pious,  T$,  "]  zak. 

Job    33.   9  I  am  clean  without  transgression,  I  (am) 
Prov.  16.   2  All  the  ways  of  a  man  (are)  clean  in 

3.  Leavened,  jpan  chamits. 

Isa.  30.  24  The  oxen  likewise,  .shall  eat  clean  prov. 

4.  To  make  bare,  ^n  chasaph. 

Joel  1.  7  he  hath  made  it  clean  bare,  and  cast  (it) 
5. Pure,  clean,  lirnp  tahor. 

Gen.    7.    2  Of  every  clean  beast  thou  shalt  take  to 
7.   2  and  of  beasts  that  (are)  not  clean  by  two 

7.  8  Of  clean  beasts  aud  of  beasts,  .not  cleau 

8.  20  every  clean  beast,  and  of  every  cleau  fowl 
Lev.    4.  12  without  the  camp  unto  a  clean  place 

6.  11  carry  forth  the  ashes .  .unto  a  clean  place 

7.  19  as  for  the  flesh,  all  that  be  clean  shall 

10.  10  and  between  unclean  and  clean 

10. 14  heave  shoulder. .  eat  in  a  clean  place 

11.  36  a  fountain  or  pit.  .shall  be  clean 

1 1.  37  And  if  (any  part) . .  fall . .  it  shall  be  clean 
11.47  between  the  unclean.and  the  clean,  and 
13.  13  (if)  the  leprosy  have  covered,  .he  (is)  clean 
13.  17  (if)  the  plague  be  turned,  .he  (is)  clean 
13.  37  the  scall  is  healed,  he  (is)  clean 

13.  39  it  (is)  a  freckled  spot,  .he  (is)  clean 
31.  40  he  (is)  bald  ;  (yet  is)  he  clean 

13. 41  he  (is)  forehead  bald  :  (yet  is)  he  clean 

14.  4  take  for  him . .  two  birds  alive  (and)  clean 

14.  57  when  (it  is)  unclean,  and  when  (it  is)  cl. 

15.  8  And  if  he . .  spit  upon  him  that  is  cleaji 
20.  25  put  difference  between  clean  beasts  and 
20.  25  and  between  unclean  fowls  and  clean 

Num.  5.  28  if  the  woman  be  not  defiled,  but  be  clean 
9. 13  the  man  that  (is)  clean,  aud  is  not  in  a 

18.  11,  13  every  one  that  is  clean  in  thy  house 

19.  9  a  man  (that  is)  clean  shall  gather  up  the 
ig.  9  lay  (them)  up  without  the  camp  in  a  clean 
19.  18  a  clean  person  shall  take  hyssop,  and  dip 
19.  19  the  clean  (person)  shall  sprinkle  upon  the 

Deut  1 2.  15  the  unclean  and  the  clean  may  eat  thereof 

12.  22  the  unclean  and  the  clean,  shall  eat  (of) 
14. 11  (Of)  all  clean  birds  ye  shall  eat 

14.  20  (But  of)  all  clean  fowls  ye  may  eat 

15.  22  the  unclean  and  the  clean  (person  shall) 
23.  10  any  man  that  is  not  clean,  by  reason  of 

1  Sa.  20.  26  he  (is)  not  clean ;  surely  he  (is)  not  clean 

2  Ch.30.  17  passovers  for.  .one  (that  was)  not  clean 
Job    14.    4  Whocau  bring  a  cleau  (thing)  out  of  anun. 
Psa.  19.   9  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  cleau,  enduring 

51.  10  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God  ;  and 
Eccl.  9.    2  to  the  good  and  to  the  cleau,  and  to  the 
Isa.   66.  20  bring  an  offering  in  a  clean  vessel  into 
Eze.  22.  26  between  the  unclean  and  the  clean 

36.  25  Then  will  I  sprinkle  cleau  water  upon  you 
44.  23  discern  between  the  unclean  aud  the  cl. 

6.  Clean,  the  tahor. 

Job   17.    9  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  be  stronger 

7. To  be  or  become  dry,  eh;  yabesh. 

Zech.11. 17  his  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his 
S. Innocent,  'pj  naqi. 

Psa.  24.  4  He  that  hath  clean  hauds,  and  a  pure  h. 
9.  To  break,  "ns  parar. 

Isa.   24. 19  the  earth  is  clean  dissolved,  the  earth  is 

lO.Clean,  clear,  teadapSs  kotharos. 

ilatt  23.  26  that  the  outside  of  them  may  be  clean 

27.  59  he  wrapped  it  in  a  clean  liueu  cloth 
Luken.  41  and,  behold,  all  things  are  clean  unto  you 
John  13.  10  He  that  is  washed,  .is  clean  every  whit 

13.  10  aud  ye  are  cleau,  but  not  all 

13.  11  therefore  said  he,  Ye  are  not  all  clean 
15.    3  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which 
Acts  18.    6  (he)  upon  your  own  heads  ;  I  (am)  clean 
.Rev  19.    8  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  cleau  aud  white 
19.  14  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean 

11. Actually,  really,  ovrws  ontOs. 

2  Pe.  2. 18  those  that  were  [clean]  escaped  from  them 

CLEAN,  to  be  — 

l.To  bepurified,  1*13  barar,  2. 

Isa.  52. 11  be  ye  clean,  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 

2.  To  be  or  become  pure,  npj  zakak. 

Job   15.  14  What  (is)  man,  that  he  should  be  clean? 
25.    4  how  can  he  be  clean  (that  is)  born  of  a 

3.  To  be  pure,  ^ri  zakak. 

Job   15.  15  the'heaveus  are  not  cleau  in  his  sight 

4.  To  be  clean,  cleansed,  in?  to.her. 

Lev.  12     8  atonement  for  her,  and  she  shall  be  clean 
13.   6,  74  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  clean 


CLEAN 


172 


CLEAVE 


Lev.  13.  58  it  shall  be  washed,  .and  shall  he  clean 
14.    8  and  wash  himself,  .that  he  may  be  clean 
14.    9  he  shall  wash,  .and  lie  shall  be  clean 
14.  20  atonement  for  him,  and  he  shall  he  clean 

14.  53  for  the  house  :  and  it  shall  be  clean 

15.  13  and  wash  his  clothes,  .and  shall  be  clean 

15.  28  and  after  that  she  shall  be  clean 

17.  15  he  shall  both  wash,  .then  shall  he  he  clean 

16.  30  (that)  ye  may  he  clean  from  all  your  sins 
22.    4  he  shall  not  eat . .  until  he  be  clean 

22.    7  when  the  sun  is  down,  he  shall  be  clean 
Num  19.  12  and  on  the  seventh  day  he  shall  he  clean 
19  12  then  theseventh  day  he  shall  not  be  cleau 
19.  19  and  bathe  himself . .  and  shall  be  clean 
31.  23  ye  shall  make  (it). .  and  it  shall  he  clean 
31.  24  and  ye  shall  he  clean,  and  afterward 
2  Ki.   5.  10  Go  and  wash.. and  thou  shalt  be  clean 
-  5.  12  may  I  not  wash  in  them,  and  be  clean? 
5. 13  wheuhesaith  to  thee,  Wash,  and  be  clean? 
5.  14  his  flesh  came  again . .  and  he  was  clean 
P^a.  51.    7  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  he  clean 
Eze  36.  25  I  springle  clean  water,  .ye  shall  be  clean 

5.  To  become  or  be  made  dean,  ina  taker,  7. 

Gen.  35.    2  and  he  clean,  and  change  your  garments 

6.  To  be  made  dean,  clear,  naQ apt £0 fiat  katharizom. 
Matt.  8.  3  touched  him,  saying,  I  will  ;  be  thou  clean 
Mark  1.  41  and  saith  unto  him,  I  will  ;  he  thou  clean 
Luke  5.  13  touched  him,  saying,  I  will :  be  thou  clean 

CLEAN  gone,  to  be  — 

To  be  ended,  ceased,  DDN  aphes. 

Psa.  77.   8  Is  his  mercy  cleau  gone  for  ever? 
CLEAN,  to  be  made  — 
1.7*0  become  clean,  "ina  taker. 

Jer,  13.  27  0  Jerusalem  !  wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean? 
2.  To  be  made  pure,  "via  taker,  7. 

Lev.  14.  1 1  present  the  raau  that  is  to  he  made  clean 
CLEAN,  to  make  — 

1.  To  make  pure,  np]  zakah,  3. 

Prov.20    9  Who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean 

2.  To  shore  oneself  pure,  npj  zakah,  7. 

Isa.     1.  16  Wash  you,  make  you  clean  ;  put  away  the 

3.  To  make  pure,  ^\zakak,  5. 

Job    9.  30  and  make  my  hands  never  so  clean 

4.  To  make  or  declare,  clean,  nna  taker,  3. 

Lev.    4.  11  the  priest  that  maketh  (him)  clean  shall 
Num  S.    7  and  (so)  make  themselves  clean 

5.  To  make  clean,  clear,  KaBapiCw  katharizo. 
Matt  8.    2  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean 

23-  25  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and 
Mark  1.  40  If  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean 
Luke  5.  12  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean 

11.  39  Now  do  ye  Pharisees  make  clean  the  out. 

CLEAN  passed,  to  be  — 

To  be  complete',  finished,  ended,  Ds;n  tamam. 

Josh.  3.  17  the  people  were  passed  clean  over  Jordan 
4.    1  when  all  the  people  were  clean  passed  over 
4.  11  whenallthepeople  were  clean passedover 
CLEAN,  to  pronounce  — 
To  declare  clean,  "ina  taker,  3. 

Lev.  13.    6  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  clean 

13.  13  he  shall  pronounce  (him)  clean  (that  hath) 
13.  iy,  23,  28,  34,  37  shall  pronounce  (him)  clean 

13.  59  to  pronounce  it  clean,  or  to  pronounce  it 

14.  7  shall  pronounce  him  clean,  and  shall  let 
14.  48  priest  shall  pronounce  the  house  clean 

CLEANNESS  — 

1  .Cleanness,  clearness,  emptiness,  lb  bor. 

2  Sa.  22.  21  according  to  the  cleanness  of  my  hands 

22.  25  according  to  my  cleanness  in  his  eye 
Psa.  18.  20  according  to  the  cleanness  of  my  bauds 
2.1 'nnocency,  freedom,  cleanness,  frpi  niqqayon. 

Amos  4.    6  I  also  have  given  you  cleanness  of  teeth 
CLEANSE  — 
Cleansing,  scoirrin.f/,  p^DF\  tamriq,  pno?  tamruq. 

Prov.20.  30  blueness  of  a  wound  cleanseth  away  evil 
CLEANSE,  to  — 
1 .  To  make  clear  or  clean,  Ti|  barar,  5. 

Jer.    4.  11  A  dry  wind.. not  to  fan,  nor  to  cleanse 
2.7*o  purify,  rn?  zakah,  3. 

Psa.  73.  13  Verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  (in)  vain 
119.    9  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse 
3.7*0  remove  sin  or  defect,  npn  chata,  3. 

Exodsg.  36  thou  shalt  cleanse  the  altar,  when  thou 
Lev.  14.  49  he  shall  take  to  cleanse  the  house  two 

14.  52  he  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  blood 
Eze.  43. 20  thus  shalt  thou  cleanse  and  purge  it 

43.  22  cleanse  the  altar,  as  they  did  cleanse  (if.) 
43-  23  When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  cleansing 
45-  18  take  a  young  bullock,  .cleanse  the  sanct. 
4.  To  cleanse,  declare  clean,  nnt?  taker,  3. 
Lev.  16.  19  and  cleanse  it,  and  hallow  it  from 

16,  30  make  an  atonement  for  you,  to  cleanseyou 
Num.  8.    6  Take  the  Levites..and  cleanse  them 
8.    7  thus  shalt  thou  do.  .to  cleanse  them 
8.  15  thou  shalt  cleanse  them,  and  offer  them 
8.  21  made  an  atonement  for  them  to  cleanse 
2CI1.29. 15  came.. to  cleanse  the  bouse  of  the  Lord 
29.16  went  into  the  inner  part,  .to  cleanse  (it) 
29. 18  We  have  cleansed  all  the  house  of.  Lord 


2  Ch.  34.    5  and  cleansed  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
Neh.  13.    9  they  cleansed  the  chambers  ;  and  thither 

13.  30  Thus  cleansed  I  them  from  all  strangers 
Job   37.  21  the  wind  passeth,  and  cleanseth  them 
Psa.  51.    2  Wash  me.  .and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin 
Jer.  33.  8  I  will  cleanse  them  from  all  their  iniquity 
Eze.  36.  25  and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I  cleanse  you 

36.  33  that  I  shall  have  cleansed  you  from  all 

37.  23  wherein  they  have  sinned,  and  will  cleanse 
39.  12  seven  months,  .that  they  may  cleanse  the 
39.  14  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  to  cleanse  it 
39.  16  Thus  shall  they  cleanse  the  land 

5.7*0  make  or  declare  free,  or  innocent,  npinaqah,  3. 
Psa.  19  12  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  (faults) 
Joel   3  21  I  will  cleanse.. I  have  not  cleansed 

6.  7*o  make  clean,  clear,  Ka6api^o>  katharizo. 
Matt  8.    3  immediately  his  leprosy  was  cleansed 

10.  8  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise 

11.  5  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed 

23.  26  cleanse  first  that  (which  is)  within  the  cup 
Mark  1.  42  the  leprosy  departed,  .andhewascleaused 
Luke  4.  27  none  of  them  was  cleansed,  saving  Naam. 

7.  22  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed 
17.  14  it  came  to  pass,  that,  they  were  cleansed 
17.  17  Were  there  not  ten  cleansed  1  but  where 
Acts  10.  15  What  God  hath  cleansed,  (that)  call  not 

11.  9  What  God  hath  cleansed,  (that)  call  not 
2  Co.  7.    1  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness 
Eph.    5.  26  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with 
Jas.     4.    8  Cleanse  (your)  hands,  (ye)  sinners  ;  and 

1  Jo.    1.    7  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.. cleanseth  us 

1.    9  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness 

CLEANSE  selves,  to  — 

7*o  cleanse  oneself,  nnu  tether,  7. 
2  Ch.  30  18  a  multitude.,  had  not  cleansed  themselves 
Neh.   13.  22  that  they  should  cleause  themselves,  and 

CLEANSED,  to  be  — 

1. 7*o  be  clean,  cleansed,  ina  taker. 

Lev.  11.  32  he  put  into  water,  so  it  shall  be  cleansed 

12.  7  she  shall  be  cleansed  from  the  issue  of 
15.  13  when  he  that  hath  an  issue  is  cleansed  of 
15.  28  But  if  she  be  cleansed  of  her  issue,  then 

2.  To  be  clean,  cleansed,  ~nt)  taher,  4. 

Eze.  22.  24  Thou  (art)  the  land  that  is'not  cleansed 
3.7*0  cleanse  oneself,  be  cleansed,  -ntp  taker,  7. 

Lev.  14.    4  to  take  for  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed 

14.  7  sprinkle  upon  him  that  is  to  he  cleansed 
14.    8  he  that  is  to  he  cleansed  shall  wash  his 
14.  17,  25,  28  right  ear  of  him  that  is  to  be  clea. 
14.  18, 29  upon  the  head  of  him  that  is  to  be  clea. 
14.  19,  31  atonement  for  him  that  is  to  be  clea. 

Josh  22. 17  from  which  we  are  not  cleansed  until  this 
4.  To  be  covered,  155  kaphar,  4. 

Nuni35.  ^1  the  land  cannot  be  cleansed  of  the  blood 
5.7*0  become,  be  counted  righteous,  piy  tsadaq,  2. 

Dan.  8.  14  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be  cleansed 
CLEANSED,  is — 
Cleansing,  rnna  tohorah. 

Eze  44  26  And  after  heis  cleansed,  they  shall  reckon 
CLEANSING— 

1.  Cleansing,  rrjjja  toJwrah. 

Lev.  13.  7  that  he  hath  been  seen,  .for  his  cleansing 
13-  35  if  the  scall  spread,  .after  his  cleansing 
14.    2  the  law.  .in  the  day  of  his  cleansing 
14.  23  he  shall  bring  them,  .for  his  cleansing 

14.  32  (that  which  pertaineth)  to  his  cleansing 

15.  13  then  he  shall  number.. for  his  cleansing 
Num.  6.    9  his  head  in  the  day  of  his  cleansing 

2.  Cleansing,  KaQo.pia-fj.6s  katharismos. 

Mark  1.  44  offer  for  thy  cleansing  those  things  which 

Luke  5. 14  but  go.  .and  offer  for  thy  cleansing 
CLEAR  — 
1. Light,  TN  or. 

Amos  8.   9  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  day 
2.  Clear,  13  bar. 

Song  6.  10  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  (and) 
Z.Rare,  precious,  "ip;  yaqar. 

Zech  14.    6  the  light  shall  not  he  clear,  (nor)  dark 
i.Innocent,  "pi  naqi. 

Gen.  24.  41  thou  shalt  he  clear  from  my  oath 
5. Shining,  white,  ns  tsach. 

Isa.    18.    4  I  will  consider.  .like  a  clear  heat  upon 
6. Pure,  ayv6s  agnos. 

2  Co.  7.  11  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be  clear 

7.  Clean,  KadapSs  katharos. 

Rev.  21. 18  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear 
8. Shining,  bright,  kafnrpds  lampros. 

Rev.  22.    1  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  cry. 

CLEAR,  to  — 

7*o  declare  innocent,  free,  npi  naqah,  3. 

Eze.  34.    7  that  will  by  no  means  clear  (the  guilty) 
CLEAR,  to  be  — 
I. To  be  pure,  npj  zakah. 

Psa.  51.    4  (and)  be  clear  when  thou  judgest 
2.7*0  be  innocent,  free,  npi  naqah,  2. 

Gen.  24.    8  then  thou  shalt  be  clear  from  this  my 

24.  41  Then  shalt  thou  be  clear  from  (this)  my 


CLEAR  selves,  to  — 

7*o  justify  oneself )  p~ra  tsadaq,  7. 

Gen  44  16  what.. or  how  shall  we  clear  ourselves  ? 
CLEARER,  to  be  — 
7*o  rise  up,  nip  qum. 

Job  11.  7  (thine)  age  shall  be  dearer  than  the  noon. 
CLEARING  — 
7'o  declare  innocent,  free,  npi  naqah,  3. 

Num  14.  18  and  by  no  means'clearing  (the  guilty) 
CLEARING  of  one's  self — 
A  speaking  off  {for  oneself),  anoAoyia  apologia. 

2  Co.    7  11  yea,  (what)  clearing  of  yourselves,  yea 
CLEARLY  — 
1.7*o  be  clear,  "na  barar. 

Job  33.   3  and  my  lips  shall  utter  knowledge  clearly 
2.Far  shining,  brilliantly,  -ryXavyas  telaugds. 

Mark  8,  25  was  restored,  and  saw  every  mau  clearly 

CLEARNESS  — 
Clearness,  "inb  tohar. 

Exod24  10  as. , the  body  of  heaven  in  (his)  clearness 
CLEAVE  — 
Cleaving,  adhering  to,  p:n  dabeq. 

Dent  4.   4  But  ye  that  did  cleave  unto  the  Lord 
CLEAVE,  to  — 
1.7*0  cleave  asunder,  ypa  baqa. 

Judgi5  19  But  God  clave  an  hollow  place  that  (was) 

Psa.  74.  15  Thou  didst  cleave  the  fountain  and  the 
14L    7  as  when  one  cutteth  and  cleaveth  (wood) 

Eccl.io.  -9  he  that  cleaveth  wood  shall  be  endangered 

Isa.  48.  21  he  clave  the  rock  also,  and  the  waters 
2.7*o  be  cleft  asunder,  j/pa  baqa,  2. 

Zech.  14.    4  the  mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the 
3.7*o  cleave  asunder,  ypa  baqa,  3. 

Gen.  22.    3  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt  offering 

1  Sa.  6.  14  and  they  clave  the  wood  of  the  cart,  and 
Psa.  78.  15  He  clave  the  rocks  in  the  wilderness,  and 
Hab.  3.    9  Thou  didst  cleave  the  earth  with  rivers 

4. 7*0  cleave,  adhere  to,  p^n  dabaq. 

Gen.    2.  24  and  shall cleave'untd  his  wife  :  and  they 
34.    3  his  soul  clave  unto  Dinah  the  daughter  of 
Deut  10.  20  to  him  shalt  thou  cleave,  and  swear  by 
11.  22  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  cleave  unto 
13.    4  ye  shall  serve  him,  and  cleave  unto  him 
13.  17  there  shall  cleave  nought  of  the  cursed 
28.  60  and  they  shall.cleave  unto  thee 

30.  20  and  that  thou  mayest  cleave  unto  him 
Josh  22.    5  to  cleave  unto  him,  and  to  serve  him  with 

23.    8  But  cleave  unto  the  Lorp  your  God,  as  ye 

23,  12  cleave  unto  the  remnant  of  these  nations 

Ruth  1.  14  Orpahkissedhermother.  .but  Ruth'clave 

2  Sa.  20.    2  the  men  of  Judah  clave  unto  their  king 

23.  10  and  his  hand  clave  unto  the  sword 

1  Ki.  11.    2  Solomon  clave  unto  these  in  love 

2  Ki.  3.    3  he  cleaved  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the 

5.  27  The  leprosy  therefore,  .shall  cleave  unto 
18.    6  For  he  clave  to  the  Loud,  (and)  departed 
Job    19.  20  My  bone  cleaveth  to  my  skin  and  to  my 
29  10  their  tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their 

31.  7  if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  mine  hands 
Psa.  44.  25  our  belly  cleaveth  unto  the  earth 

101.  3  hate  the  work  of  them,  .(it)  shall  not  c. 

102.  5  By  reason,  .my  bones  cleave  to  my  skin 
ng.  25  My  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust :  quicken 
137.   6  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my 

Jer.    13.  11  as  the  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of  a 

Lam.  4.    4  The  tongue . .  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  his 
5.  7*o  be  made  to  adhere,  pa^  dabaq,  6. 

Psa.  22.  15  and  my  tongue  cleaveth  to  my  jaws 
6.7*0  cleave,  adhere  to,  pyi  debaq. 

Dan.  2.  43  hut  they  shall  "not  cleave  one  to  another 
7. To  strengthen,  holdfast  to,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

Neh.io.  29  They  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles 
3.7*0  be  joined  to,  nib  lavak,  2. 

Dan.  11.  34  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with  flatteries 
9.7*j  adhere,  stick  on,  nsp  saphach,  2. 

Isa.    14.    1  they  shall  cleave  to  the  house  of  Jacob 
10. 7*o  split,  till,  nhs  palach,  3. 

Job-  16. 13  he  cleaveth  my  reins  asunder,  and  doth 
11.7*0  stick  fast,  ~\$$  tsaphad. 

Lam.  4.    8  their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  bones ;  it  is 
12.7*o  cleave,  rend,  VW  shasa. 

Deut  14.    6  cleaveth  the  cleft  into  two  claws,  (and) 
Id.  To  cleave,  rend,  V^' shasa,  3. 

Lam.  1. 17  he  shall  cleave  it  with  the  wings  thereof 
1 1. 7*o  glue,  join,  adhere,  KoWaco  kollad,  irpoaKaW 

Matt  19.    5  For  this  cause  shall  a  man.  .cleave  to  his 

Mark  10.    7  For  this  cause  shall  a  man.  .cleave  to  his 

Lukeio.  11  Even  the  very  dust  .which  cleaveth  on 

Acts  17.  34  Howbeit  certain  men  clave  unto  him 

Rom  12.   9  cleave  to  that  which  is  good 
CLEAVE  unto,  to  — 
7*o  remain  toward,  irpocrixtva)  prosmeno. 

Aces  11.  23  that,  .they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord 
CLEAVE  asunder,  to  — 
7*o  be  cleft  asunder,  J'pa  baqa,  2. 

Num  16.  31  the  ground  clave  asunderthat(was)under 


CLEAVE 


173 


CLOTHED 


CLEAVE,  to  cause  to  — 

To  make  to  adhere,  p3?  dabaq.  5. 

Jer.    13. 11  so  have  I  caused  to  cleave  unto  rae  the 
CLEAVE  fast,  to  — 
To  pour  out  (a  metal),  pK  yatsaq. 

Psa.  41.   8  An  evil  disease,  (say  they),  cleaveth  fast 
CLEAVE  fast  together,  to  — 
To  be  firmly  joined  together,  p2i  dabaq,  4. 

Job  38.  38  and  the  clods  cleave  fast  together 
CLEAVE,  to  make  — 
To  cause  to  adhere,  p3"n  dabaq,  5. 

Deut2fi.  21  The  Lord  shall  make  the  pestilence  cleave 

Eze.    3.  26  1  will  make  thy  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof 

CLEFT  — 

l.A  cleft  or  rent,  yp3  beqia. 

Amos  6.  11  will  smite,  .the  little  house  with  clefts 
2.  A  hollow  place,  rr$i  neqarah. 

fea.     2.  21  To  go  into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and 

3.-4  fissure,  ypK>  shesa. 

Deut  14.    6  cleaveth  the  cleft  into  two  ciaws,  vand) 

CLEFT,  to  be  — 

To  become  cleft,  i'pa  baqa,  7. 

Mic.    1.   4 'the  valleys  shall  be  cleft,  as  wax  before 
CLEFTS  — 
Clefts,  recesses,  Clin  chagavim. 

Song  2.  14  0  iny  dove,  (that  art)  in  the  clefts  of  the 

Jer.  49.  16  O  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the 

Obad.       3  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the 
CLEMENCY  — 
A  yieldingnzss,  pliability,  4irieiKeta  epieikeza. 

Acts  24.    4  that  thou  wouklost  hear  us  of  thy  clem. 
CLE'-MENT,  Katies. 
A  fellow  labourer  with  Paul  at  Philippi. 

Phil.   4.   3  those  women  which  laboured,  .with  C. 
CLE-O'-PAS,  KAeoVccs. 

One  of  the  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus  when  Jesus 
appeared  to  them. 

Luke  24.  18  C.  answering  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  only 
CLEO'-PHAS,  KKavas. 

Husband  of  one  of  the  Marys ;  half-sister  of  the  Virgin 
Mary. 

John  19.  25  Mary  the  (wife)  of  0.,  and  Mary  Magdal. 
CLERK,  town  — 
Writer,  scribe,  ypap-p-arevs  grammctteus. 

Acts  19.  35  when  the  town  clerk  had  appeased  the 

CLIFF  — 

1. -Ascent,  nbilJP  maaleh. 

2  Ch.20.  16  behold,  they  come  up  by  the  cliff  of  Ziz 
2.  Rugged,  terrible,  p"ijJ  aruls. 

Job  30.    6  To  dwell  in  the  cliffs  of  the  valleys,  (in) 

CLLFT  — 

l.C'left,  bored  outplace,  iTtjjj  neqarah. 

Exod  33.  22  I  will  put  thee  in  a  clift  of  the  rock 
2.A  cleft,  branch,  *pyp  seiph.    - 

Isa.   57.    5  children  in  the  valleys  under  the  clifts 

CLIMB,  to  — 

To  go  up,  nSj;  alah. 

Joel    2.    7  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  men  of  war 

CLIMB  up,  to  — 

l.To  go  up,  n?jg  alah. 

1  Sa.  14. 13  Jonathan  climbed  up  upon  his  hands  and 
Jer.    4.  29  they  shall,  .climb  up  upon  the  rocks 
Joel    2.   9  they  shall  climb  up  upon  the  houses 
Amos  9.    2  though  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  thence 

2.  To  go  up,  ai/a$alfco  anabainb. 

Luke  19.    4  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore  tree  to  see 
John  10.  1  but  clim.be th up  some  other  way,  the  same 

CLIP,  to  — 

To  diminish,  ina  gara. 

Jer.  48.  37  every  head,  .bald,  and  every  beard  clipped 
CLOAK  — 
1.-4  71  over  covering,  veil  for  hiding,  siuKaXviifxa. 

1  Pe.  2.  16  not  using  (your)  liberty  for  a  cloak  of 
2. Raiment,  outer  garment,  ifxariov  himation. 

Matt  5.  40  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak 

Luke  6.  29  him  that  taketh  away  thy  cloak  forbid 

3.  What  is  shown  before,  pretext,  irpdcpatris  proph. 
Johms.  22  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their 

1  Th.  2.    5  neither,  .used  we.  .cloak  of  covetousness 
4. A  tunic,  vest  or  inner  garment,  <patv6\ns.<pe\6v7]s 

2  Ti.    4. 13  The  [cloak]  that  I  left  at  Trope  with  Carp. 

CLOD  — 

l.A  clod  (of  earth),  w%  sy'ia  gush,  gish. 

Job     7.    5  My  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods 
2. Furrow,  <1S"JJD  megraphah. 

Joel    1.  17  The  seed  is  rotten  under  their  clods,  the 
Z.Soft  clod,  nan  regeb. 

Job  21.  33  The  clods  of  the  valley  shall  be  sweet 
38.  38  and  the  clods  cleave  fast  together? 


CLOKE  — 

Robe  (upper),  yjnp  meil. 

Isa.  59.  17  and  was  clad  with  zeal  as  a  cloke 
CLOSE  — 
Strait,  compressed,  "is  tsar. 

Job  41. 15  shut  up  together  (as  with)  a  close  seal 
CLOSE  by  — 
Very  near,   nearer,  ao-cov  asson. 

Acts  27.  13  loosing  (thence),  they  sailed  close  by 
[See  also  Follow,  keep,  kept,  round  about.] 

CLOSE,  to  — 

1.  To  fret  oneself,  nnn  charah,  5a. 

Jer.  22. 15  Shalt  thou  reign,  because  thou  closest 

2.  To  cover,  np3  kasah,  3. 

Kum  16.  33  and  the  earth  closed  upon  them 

3.  To  shut,  iJD  sagar. 

Judg.  3.  22  The  fat  closed  upon  the  blade,  so  that  he 

4.  To  strengthen,  harden,  nxy  aisam,  3. 

Isa.  29. 10  For  the  Lord,  .hath  closed  your  eyes 

5.  To  move  down,  close,  shut,  tcapfivw  Icammuo. 
Matt  13. 15  and  their  eyes  they  have  closed 

Acts  28.  27  and  their  eyes  have  they  closed  ;  lest  they 

6.  To  fold  up  (a  roll),  tttvo'o'co  ptusso. 

Luke  4.  20  he  closed  the  book,  and  he  gave  (it)  again 
CLOSE,  to  keep  — 
To  keep  silent,  still,  aiyda  sigao. 

Luke  9.  36  they  kept  (it)  close,  aud  told  no  man  in 

CLOSE  place  — 

Shut  up  place,  rnapp  misgereth. 

2  Sa.  22.  46  they  shall  be  afraid  out  of  their  close  pi. 

Psa.  iS.  45  and  be  afraid  out  of  their  close  places 

CLOSE  up,  to  — 

l.To  liedge  or  wall  up,  ~na  gadar. 

Amos  9.  11  aud  close  up  the  breaches  thereof 

2.  To  shut  up,  "i3D  sagar. 

Gen.   2.  21  closed  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof 

3.  To  restrain,  "ijfjj  atsar. 

Gen.  20.  18  the  Lord  had  fast  closed  up  all  the  wombs 
CLOSES,  to  be  — 
To  close,  be  closed,  ~m  zur. 

Isa.     1.    6  they  have  not  been  closed,  neither  bound 
CLOSED  up  — 
To  stop  up>,  Drip  satham. 

Dan.  12.  9  the  words  (are)  closed  up  and  sealed  till 
CLOSET  — 

1.  Covert,  chamber,  n*n  chuppah. 

Joel    2. 16  and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet 

2.  Store  or  inner  chamber,  rafieTov  tameion. 

Matt.  6.    6  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet 
Lukei2.    3  which  ye  have  spoken  in  the  ear  in  closets 

CLOTH  — 

1.  Garment,  ia|  beged. 

Exod3i.  10  trie  cloths  of  service,  and  the  holy  garni. 
35. 19  The  cloths  of  service,  to  do  service  in  the 
39.    1  they  made  cloths  of  service,  to  do  service 
39.  41  The  cloths  of  service  to  do  service  (in) 
Num.  4.    6  shall  spread  over  (it)  a  cloth  wholly  of 
4.    7,  11  they  shall  spread  a  cloth  of  blue,  and 
4.    8  they  shall  spread  upon  them  a  cloth  of 
4.    9  they  shall  take  a  cloth  of  blue,  and  cover 
4.  12  put  (them)  in  a  cloth  of  blue,  and  cover 
4. 13  and.  spread  a  purple  cloth  thereon 

1  Sa.19.  13  putapillow.  .and  covered  (it)  with  a  cloth 

2  Sa.20. 12  he  removed  Amasa..  and  cast  a  cloth  upon 
2.Raiment,  a  cloth,  nb$e/  simlah. 

Deut22. 17  they  shall'spread  the  cloth  before  the 

1  Sa.21.  9  it  (is  here),  wrapped  in  a  cloth  behind  the 
3. Rags,  tatter,  fr&tcos  rhakos. 

Matt.  9. 16  No  man  putteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  unto 
Mark  2.  21  No  man  also  seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth 

CLOTH  or  clothes,  linen  — 

l.A  bandage,  bd6viov  oihonion. 

Luke24.  12  [he  beheld  the  linen  clothes  laid  by  them] 

Johnig.  40  wound  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the  spices 

20.    5  he  stooping  down .  .saw  the  linen  clothes 

20.    6  Peter  following . .  seeth  the  linen  clothes 

20.    7  not  lying  with  the  linen  clothes,  but 

2. Fine  linen  cloth,  o-iv§&v  sindon-. 

Matt27.  59  he  wrapped  it  in  a  clean  linen  cloth 
Marki4.  51  having  a  linen  cloth  cast  about  his  naked 
14.  52  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from 

CLOTH,  thick  — 

A  heavy  or  thick  cloth,  "i333  makber. 

2  Eli.  8. 15  he  took  a  thick  cloth,  and  dipped  (it)  in 

CLOTHE,  to  — 

l.To  clothe,  put  on  (anything),  vj}  labash. 

Isa.  49. 18  thou  shalt  surely  clothe'  thee  with  them 
Eze.  34.    3  Ye  eat  the  fat,  and  ye  clothe  you  with  the 
Hag.    1.    6  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  none  warm 

2,  To  put  on  or  give  clothing,  Bb7  labash,  5. 

Gen.    3.  21  did  the  LORD  God  make  coats,  .and  clothe 
Exod4o.  14  thou  shalt  bring  his  sons,  and  clothe 
Lev.    8.    7  clothed  him  with  the  robe,  and  put  the 
2  Sa.   1.  24  who  clothed  you  in  scarlet  with  (other) 


2  Ch.28.  15  with  the  spoil  clothed  all  that  were  naked 
Esth.  4.    4  she  sent  raiment  to  clothe  Mordecai,  and 
Job  10.  11  Thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin  and  flesh 
39.  19  hast  thou  clothed  his  neck  with  thunder 
Psa.  132.  16  I  will  also  clothe  her  priests  with 

132.  18  His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame 
Prov23.  21  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags 
Isa.    22.  21  I  will  clothe  him  with  thy  robe,  and 

50.    3  I  clothe  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and 
61.  10  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of 
Eze.  16.  10  I  clothed  thee  also  with  broidered  work 
Zech.  3.    4  1  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  raiment 
3.   5  and  clothed  him  with  garments 

3.  To  clothe,  #3?  lebasli,  5. 

Dan.   5.  29  they  clothed  Daniel  with  scarlet,  and  put 

i.Toencircle,clotheround,afA<pi€vvvp.iam23kiennumi. 
Matt.  6.  30  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field 

11.  8  A  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment? 
Luke  7.  35  A  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment? 

12.  28  If  then  God  so  clothe  the  grass,  which  is 

iy.To  use  raiment,  or  a  garment,  tp.aTi£co  himalizo. 
Mark  5.  15  sitting,  and  clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind 
Luke  8.  35  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  clothed,  and 

6.  To  cast  around,  7repi/3aAAo>  periballd. 

Matt25.  36  Naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  :  I  was  sick 

25.  38  When  saw  we  thee,  .naked,  and  clothed 

26.  43  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not:  sick,  and 

CLOTHE  self,  to  — 

To  put  on  clothing,  #37  labash. 

Psa. 109.  iS  As  he  clotned  himself  with  cursing  like 
Jer.    4.  30  Though  thou  clothest  thyself  with  crims. 
Eze.  26.  16  they  shall  clothe  themselves  with  tremb. 

CLOTHE  -with,  to  — 

To  go  in,  get  into  (clothes),  ivBvai  enduo. 

Mark  15.  17  [clotned]  him  with  purple,  and  platted 

CLOTHED  — 

l.To  be  girded,  75-13  kirbel. 

1  Ch.15.  27  David  (was)  clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine 
2.  To  be  covered,  ?1D3  kasah,  4. 

1  Ch.21. 16  the  elders  (of  Israel,  who  were)  clothed 
CLOTHED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  clothed,  v^h  labash. 

2  Ch.   6.  41  let  thy* priests,  be  clothed  with  salvation 
J  ob     7.    5  My  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods 

8.  22  They  that  hate  thee  shall  be  clothed  with 
29.  14  I  put  on  righteousness,  and  it  clothed  me 

Psa.  35.  26  let  them  be  clothed  with  shame  and 
65. 13  The  pastures  are  clothed  with  flocks 
93.    1  The  Lord  reigneth  ;  he  is  clothed  with 
93.    1  the  Lord  is  clothed  with  strength,  (where 
104,    1  thou  art  clothed  with  honour  and  majesty 
109.  29  Let  mine  adversaries  be  clothed  with 
132.    9  Let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  righteous. 
Prov3i.  21  all  her  household  (are)  clothed  with 
Eze.    7.  27  the  prince  shall  be  clothed  with  desolation 

9.  2  one  man  among  them  (was)  clothed  with 
9.   3  he  called  to  the  man  clothed  with  linen 
9. 11  behold,  the  man  clothed  with  linen 

10.  2  he  spake  unto  the  man  clothed  with  linen 
10.  6  he  had  commanded  the  man  clothed  with 
10.  7  hands  of  (him  that  was) clothed  with  linen 
10.  6  (Which,  were)  clothed  with  blue,  captains 
23.  12  captains  and  rulers  clothed  most  gorgeous 
38.  4  horses  and  horsemen,  all  of  them  clothed 
44.  17  they  shall  be  clothed  with  linen  garments 
Zeph.  1.  8  such  as  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel 
Zech.  3.    3  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments 

2.  To  be  clothed,  vj?  labash,  4. 

2  Ch.  18.   g  clothed  in  their  robes,  and  they  sat  in  a 

Z.To  be  clothed,  vj?  lebash. 

Dan.    5.    7.  shall  be  clothed  with  scarlet,  and  have  a 
5. 16  thou  shalt  be  clothed  with  scarlet,  aud 
10.    5  behold  a  certain  man  clothed  in  linen 
12.    6  And  (one)  said  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen 
12.   7  And  1  heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen 

4.  To  go  into,    4Mw  enduo. 

2  Co.   5.   3  [being  clothed],  .shall  not  be  found  naked 

5.  To  ca,st  around,  irepifidWoo  periballd. 

Rev.    3.    5  the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment 

3.  18  white  raiment  that  thoumayest  be  clothed 

4.  4  twenty  elders  sitting,  clothed  in  white 

CLOTHED  in,  to  he  — 

l.To  go  into  (clothes),  £vZ&vo-kw  endidusko. 
Lukei6.  19  a  certain  rich  man  who  was  clothed  in 

2.  To  go  into  (clothes),  iuSvco  enduo. 

Eev.  15.    6  clothed  in  pure  and  white  linen,  having 
19.  14  f  olio  wed  him.,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white 

3.  To  cast  around,  -n-epipdWo)  periballd. 

Mark  16.  5  sitting  on  the  right  side,  clothed  in  a  long 
Rev.  11.    3  they  shall  prophesy.,  clothed  in  sackcloth 
18.  16  that  great  city  that  was  clothed  in  fine 

CLOTHED  with,  to  be  — 
1.  Clothing,  Bta^  lebush. 

Esth.  4.    2  into  the  king's  gate  clothed  with  sackcloth 

2.To  bind  on  self,  4yK0fj.p6ofji.ai.  egkomboomai. 

1  Pe.  5.    5  subject  one  to  another,  and  be  clothed  w. 

3.  To  go  into  (clothes),  eVSuw  enduo. 

Mark  1.    6  John  was  clothed  with  camel's  hair,  and 
Rev.    1. 13  the  Son  of  man,  clothed  with  a  garment 


CLOTHED 


174 


CLOUTED 


4.  To  cast  around,  Treptfi&Wa)  periballo. 

Rev.    7.    9  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in 

10.  1  another  mighty  angel.,  clothed  with  a  clo. 

12.  1  a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the 
19. 13  he  (was)  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in 

CLOTHED  upon,  to  be  — - 

To  bs  (/one  in  upon,  hare  put  on  over,  iirevBvo/juu. 
2  Co.  5.   2  earnestly  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with 
5;    4  we  would  be_unclothed,  but  clothed  upon 

CLOTHED  wherewithal,  to  be  — 

To  cast  around,  Trtpifidkhw  periballo. 

Matt.  6.  31  Wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed? 

CLOTHES  — 

\j-  <rments,  113  oeged. 

Gen.  37.  29  Reuben  returned . .  and  he  rent  his  clothes 
Lev.  10.   6  neither  rend  your  clothes,  lest  ye  die,  and 

11.  25,  28,  40,  40  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  be 

13.  6,  34  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  clean 

13.  45  his  clothes  shall  be  rent,  and  his  head 

14.  8  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  shave  off  all 
14.    g  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  also  he  shall 
14.  47  he  that  lieth.  .shall  wash  his  clothes 
14.  47  he  that  eateth ..  shall  wash  his  clothes 
*5-  5>  6,  7,  8,  10,  11,  21,  22,  27  wash  his  clothes 
16.  26,  28  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  his 

16.  32  put  on  the  linen  clothes,  (even)  the  holy 

17.  15  he  shall  both  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe 
2i.  10  not  uncover  his  head,  nor  rend  his  clothes 

Num.    8.    7  let  them  wash  their  clothes, and  (so)  make 
8.  21  and  they  washed  their  clothes ;  and  Aaron 
14.   6  them  that  searched .  .rent  their  clothes 
19.    7  the  priest  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  he 
19.    8  he  that  burnetii  her  shall  wash  his  clothes 
19.  10  shall  wash  his  clothes;  and  be  unclean 
19.  19  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  himself  in 
19.  2 1  he  that  sprinkleth . .  shall  wash  his  clothes 
31.  24  ye  shall  wash  your  clothes  on  the  seventh 
Judg  11.  35  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  said,  Alas,  my 

1  Sa.  19.  24  he  stripped  off  his  clothes  also,  and  pro. 

2  Sa.    x.    2  a  man  came  out.  .with  his  clothes  rent 

1. 11  David  took  hold  on  his  clothes,  and  rent 
3.  31  Rend,  your  clothes.and  gird  you  with  sack. 
13.  31  his  servants  stood  by  with  their  clothes 
19.  24  uor  washed  his  clothes,  from  the  day  the 

1  Ki.  1.    1  they  covered  him  with  clothes,  but  he  gat 

21. 27  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  sackcloth  upon 

2  Ki.  5.    7  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  said,  (Am)  I  God 

5.    8  the  king  of  Israel  had  rent  his  clothes 

5.  8  Wherefore  hast  thou  rent  thy  clothes? 

6.  30  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  he  passed  by  upon 
11. 14  Athaliah  rent  her  clothes,  and  cried 

18.  37  with  (their)  clothes  rent,  and  told  him  the 

19.  1  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered  himself 
22. 11  had  heard  the  words .  .he  rent  his  clothes 

22.  19  hast  rent  thy  clothes,  and  wept  before 

2  Ch.23.  13  Athaliah  rent  her  clothes,  and  said,  Trea. 
34.  19  had  heard  the  words .  .he  rent  his  clothes 
34.  27  didst  rend  thy  clothes,  and  weep  before 

Neh.  4.  23  none  of  us  put  off  our  clothes,  (saving  that) 

Esth.  4.    1  Mordecai  rent  his  clothes, and  put  on  sac. 

Prov.  6.  27  take  fire,  .and  his  clothes  not  be  burnt  ? 

Isa.  36.  22  with  (their)  clothes  rent,  and  told  him  the 
37.    1  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered  himself 

Jer.  41.    5  their  beards  shaven,  and  their  clothes 

Eze.  16.  39  they  shall  strip  thee  also  of  thy  clothes 

23.  26  shall  also  strip  thee  out  of  thy  clothes 
27.  20  Dedan  (was)  thy  merchant  in  precious  cl. 

Amos  2.    8  they  lay  (themselves)  down  upon  clothes 

2.  Wrappings,  clothes,  DiSa  gelom. 

Eze.  27.  24  in  blue  clothes,  and  broidered  work,  and 

3. Measure,  long  robe,  113  mad. 

1  Sa.  4. 12  with  his  clothes  rent,  and  with  earth  upon 
^.Covering,  rnD  suth. 

Gen.  49.  ii  and  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes 
5.  Outer  garment,  raiment,  hdW  salmah. 

Deut2g.    s  your  clothes  are  not  waxen  old  upon  you 
Neh.    9.  21  their  clothes  waxed  not  old,  and  their  feet 
Job     9.  31  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me 
6.0 titer  garment,  raiment,  rnp'v  simlah. 

Gen.  37.  34  Jacob  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  sackcloth 
44.  13  they  rent  their  clothes,  and  laded  every 
Exodi2.  34  troughs  being  bound  up  in  their  clothes 
19.  10  and  let  them  wash  their  clothes 
19.  14  and  they  washed  their  clothes 
Josh.  7.    6  Jo3hua  rent  his  clothes,  and  fell  to  the 
7. Raiment,  garment,  ifxariov  himation. 

Matt2i.    7  the  ass.  .and  put  on  them  their  clothes 
24. 18  Neither  let  him.  .return.,  to  take  his  [c] 
26.  65  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes 
Mark  5.  28  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes,  I  shall  be 
5.  30  Jesus,  .said.  Who  touched  my  clothes? 
15. 20  put  his  own  clothes  on  him,  and  led  him 
Luke  8.  27  a  certain  man . .  ware  no  clothes,  neither 
19.  36  as  he  went,  they  spread  their  clothes  in 
Acts    7.  5S  the  witnesses  laid  down  their  clothes  at 
14   1 4  they  lent  their  clothes,  and  ran  in  among 
16.  22  and  the  magistrates  rent  off  their  clothes 
22.  23  they  cried  out,  and  cast  off  (their)  clothes 
8.< '  ""■,  x'Ta-e  chitSn, 

Marki4.  63  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  and 
CLOTHES,  grave  — 
Band  iffest  uetpiai  Jeeiriai. 

Johnn,  4 ,  bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave  clothes 


CLOTHING  — 

l.Oarment,  "ua  oeged. 

Job    22.    6  and  stripped  the  naked  of  their  clothing 

%Clothing,  ip-D?  lebush. 

Job  24.    7  cause  the  naked  to  lodge  without  clothing 
24.  10  cause  (him)  to  go  naked  without  clothing 
31.  19  have  seen  any  perish  for  want  of  clothing 
Psa.  35.  13  when  they  were  sick,  my  clothing  (was) 
45.  13  all  glorious  within  ;  her  clothing  (is)  of 
Pro.  27.  26  The  lambs  (are)  for  thy  clothing,  and  the 
31.  22  coverings  of  tapestry  ;  her  clothing  (is)silk 
31.  25  strength  and  honour  (are)  her  clothing 
Jer.  10.   9  blue  and  purple  (is)  their  clothing :  they 
Z.A  covering,  .1539  mekasseh. 

Isa.    23.  18  eat  sufficiently,  and  for  durable  clothing 
4. Raiment,  a  cloth,  rh^'y  simlah. 

Isa.     3.    6  Thou  hast  clothing,  be  thou  ourruler,  and 
3.    7  in  my  house  (is)  neither  bread  nor  clothing 

^.Clothing,  n^3^  tilbosheth. 

Isa.   59.  17  the  garments  of  vengeance  (for)  clothing 
6. Clothing,  €vhu/u.a  enduma. 

Matt.  7.  15  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing 
7. Robe,  iad-ffs  csthes. 

Acts  10.  30  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright  clothing 

Jas.     2.   3  to  him  that  weareth  the  gay  clothing,  and 
CLOTHING,  long  — 
Robe,  vestment,  ctoXt]  stole. 

Marki2. 3S  the  scribes,  .love  to  go  in  long  clothing 

CLOTHING,  soft  — 

The  soft  things,  ret  /xaXaKa  ta  malaka. 
Matt.  11.   8  they  that  wear  soft  (clothing)  are  in  king's 

CLOUD  — 

1. Something  lifted  up  and  exalted,  K*tyi  nasi. 

Prov.25.  14  a  false  gift  (is  like)  clouds  and  wind 
2.A  thickness,  thick  cloud,  sj;  ab. 

Judg.  5.    4  the  heavens  dropped,  the  clouds  also 
2  Sa.  23.   4  as  the  light  of  the  morning,  .without  c. 
1  Ki.  iS.  44  there  ariseth  a  litle  cloud  out  of  the  sea 

18.  45  the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and 
Job    20.    6  and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds 
30. 15  and  my  welfare  passeth  away  as  a  cloud 

36.  29  understand  the  spreading  of  the  clouds 

37.  16  know  the  balancings  of  the  clouds,  the 

38.  34  Canst  thou  lift  up  thy  voice  to  the  clouds 
Psa.  77.  17  The  clouds  poured  out  water,  the  skies 

104.    3  who  maketh  the  clouds  his  chariot ;  who 
147.    8  Who  covereth  the  heaven  with  clouds 
Prov  16.  15  his  favour  (is)  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter 
Eccl.11.    3  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 

11.  4  he  that  regardeth  the  clouds  shall  not 

12.  2  nor  the  clouds  return  after  the  rain 
Isa.     5.    6  command  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no 

14.  14  ascend  above  the  heights  of  the  clouds 

18.  4  like  a  cloud  of  dew  iu  the  heat  of  harvest 

19.  1  the  Lord  rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud 

25.    5  (even)  the  heat  with  the  shadow  of  a  cloud 
60.    8  Who  (are)  these  (that)  fly  as  a  cloud,  and 

3. A  cloud,  J3"  anan. 

Gen.    9. 13*  I  do  set  my  bow  in  the  cloud,  arid  it  shall 
9.  14  when  I  bring  a  cloud  over  the  earth,  that 
9.  14  that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud 
9.  16  the  bow  shall  be  iu  the  cloud  ;  and  I  will 

Exodi3.  21  by  day  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud  to  lead  them 

13.  22  He  took  not  away  the  pillar  of  the  cloud 

14.  19  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  went  from  before 
14.  20  it  was  a  cloud  and  darkness  (to  them),  but 
14.  24  through  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  the  cloud 
16.  10  the  glory  of  the  LorIi  appeared  in  the  clo. 
19.    g  I  come  unto  thee  in  a  thick  cloud 

19.  16  lightnings,  and  a  thick  cloud  upon  the 
24. 15  Moses  went  up . .  and  a  cloud  covered  the 
24.  16  and  the  cloud  covered  it  six  days 
24.  16  he  called  unto  Moses  out  of  the.  .cloud 
24.  18  Moses  went  unto  the  midst  of  the  cloud 
34.    5  the  Lord  descended  in  the  cloud,  and 
40.  34  a  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the  congre. 
40.  35  because  the  cloud  abode  thereon,  and 
40.  36  when  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  over 
40.  37  if  the  cloud  were  not  taken  up,  then  they 
40.  38  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  (was)  upon  the 

Lev.  16.    2  I  will  appear  in  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy 
16.  13  the  cloud  of  the  incense  may  cover  the 

Num.  9.  15  the  cloud  covered  the  tabernacle 

9. 16  the  cloud  covered  it  (by  day),  and  the 

9. 17  when  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  the 
9.  17  and  in  the  place  where  the  cloud  abode 
9.  18  the  cloud  abode  upon  the  tabernacle 

9. 19  the  cloud  tarried  long  upon  the  tsberna. 
9.  20  the  cloud  was  a  few  days  upon  the  taber. 
9.  21  the  cloud  abode  from  even  unto  the 
9.  21  the  cloud  was  taken  up  in  the  morning 
9.  21  or  by  night  that  the  cloud  was  taken  up 
9.  22  the  cloud  tarried  upon  the  tabernacle 

10.  11  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  off  the  taber. 

10.  12  the  cloud  rested  iu  the  wilderness  of  P. 

10.  34  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  (was)  upon  them 

11.  25  Lord  came  down  in  a  cloud,  and  spake 

12.  5  came  down  in  the  pillar  of  the  cloud 
12.  10  the  cloud  departed  from  off  the  taber. 
14.  14  (that)  thy  cloud  standcth  over  them 

14.  14  by  day  time  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  and  in 
16.  42  behold  the  cloud  covered  it,  and  the 
Deilt.  1.  33  went  in  the  way  before  you.  .in  a  cloud 
4.  11  with  darkness,  clouds  and  thick  darkn. 


Deut.  5.  22  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  of  the  cloud 
31.  15  in  the  tabernacle  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud 
_  31.  15  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  stood  over  the 

1  Ki.  8. 10  the  cloud  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord 

8.  11  could  not.  .minister  because  of  the  cloud 

2  Ch.  5.  13  the  house  was  filled  with  a  cloud 

5.  14  to  minister  by  reason  of  the  cloud 
Neh.  9.  19  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  departed  not  from 
Job     7.    9  the  cloud  is  consumed  and  vanisheth 
26.    8  And  the  cloud  is  not  rent  under  them 
26.    9  He  holdeth.  .(and)  spreadeth  his  cloud 
37.  11  he  scattereth  his  bright  cloud 

37.  15  God.  .caused  the  light  of  his  cloud  to 

38.  9  When  I  made  the  cloud  the  garment 
Psa.  78.  14  he  led  them  with  a  cloud,  and  all  the 

97.    2  Clouds  and  darkness  (are)  round  about 
105.  39  He  spread  a  cloud  for  a  covering,  and  fire 
Isa.     4.    5  upon  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and  smoke 
44.  22  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a.  .cloud  thy  sins 
Jer.     4.  13  he  shall  come  up  as  clouds,  and  his 
Lam.  3.  44  Thou  hast  covered  thyself  with  a  cloud 
Eze.  [i.    4  a  great  cloud,  and  a  fire  infolding  itself 
1.  28  that  is  in  the  cloud  in  the  day  of  rain 
8.  11  and  a  thick  cloud  of  incense  went  up 
10.    3  and  the  cloud  filled  the  inner  court 
10.    4  the  house  was  filled  with  the  cloud,  and 
30.  18  as  for  her,  a  cloud  shall  cover  her,  and 
32.    7  I  will  cover  the  sun  with  a  cloud,  and  the 
38.    9  thou  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  to  cover  the 
38.  16  thou  shalt  come,  .as  a  cloud  to  cover  the 
Hos.    6.    4  your  goodness  (is)  as  a  morning  cloud 

13.    3  they  shall  be  as  the  morning  cloud,  and 
Joel    2.    2  a  day  of  clouds  and  of  thick  darkness 
Nah.   1.    3  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  his  feet 
Zeph.  1.  15  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness 
4. A  cloud,  ]m  anan. 

Dan.   7. 13  Son  of  man  came  with  the  clouds 
5.-4  {heavy)  cloud,  m3j>  ananah. 

Job     3.    5  let  a  cloud  dwell  upon  it;  let  the  black. 
6.  A  (thin)  cloud,  pw  shachaq. 

J°h  35.    5  behold  the  clouds,  (which)  are  higher 

36.  28  Which  the  clouds  do  drop  (and)  distil 

37.  21  bright  light  which  (is)  in  the  clouds 

38.  37  Who  can  number  the  clouds  in  wisdom 
Psa.  36.    5  thy  faithfulness,  .unto  the  clouds 

57.  10  heavens,  and  thy  truth  unto  the  clouds 
68.  34  and  his  strength  (is)  in  the  clouds 
78.  23  he  had  commanded  the  clouds  from 
10S.    4  and  thy  truth  reacheth  unto  the  clouds 
Prov.  3.  20  and  the  clouds  drop  down  the  dew 

8.  28  When  he  established  the  clouds  above 

7.A  small  or  thin  cloud,  pecpehrj  ncphele. 
Matt  17.    5  While  he  yet  spake,  .a  bright  cloud 

17.  5  behold  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  which 
24.  30  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of 
26.  64  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 

Mark  9.    7  there  was  a  cloud  that  overshadowed 

9.  7  a  voiee  came  out  of  the  cloud,  saying 

j  3.  26  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  with 
14.  62  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
Luke  9.  34  there  came  a  cloud,  and  overshadowed 
9.  34  they  feared  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud 
9.  35  there  came  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  saying* 
12.  54  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  west 
21.  27  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  a  cloud 
Acts    1.    9  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight 
1  Co.  10.    1  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud 

10.    2  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud 

1  Th.  4.  17  caught  up.  .with  them  in  the  clouds 

2  Pe.  2.  17  [clouds]  that  are  carried  with  a  tempest 
Jude  12  clouds  (they  are)  without  water,  carried 
Rev.    1.    7  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds  ;  and 

10.  1  another  mighty  angel,  .clothed  with  a  cl. 

11.  12  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  a  cloud 
14.  14  behold  a  white  cloud,  and  upon  the  cloud 
14.  15  crying,  .to  him  that  sat  on  the  cloud 

14.  16  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  in  his 

8.-4  cloud,  v4<pos  ncphos. 

Heb.  12.    1  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses 
CLOUD,  to  cover  with  a  — 
To  send  a  thichiess,  aiy  ub,  5. 

Lam.  2.    1  covered  the  daughter  of  Sion  with  a  cloud 
CLOUD,  dark  — 
Cloud  (dark,  thick  or  high),  ^plH  araphel. 

Job   22.  13  Can  he  judge  through'  the  dark  cloud 
CLOUD,  thick  — 
Thick  cloud,  3JJ  ab. 

2  Sa.  22.  12  dark  waters,  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the 

Job  22.  14  Thick  clouds  (are)  a  covering  to  him,  that 
26.  8  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  cloud 
37.  11  watering  he  wearieth  the  thick  cloud 

Psa.  18.  11  dark  waters  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the 

18.  12  before  him  his  thick  clouds  passed 

Isa.   44.  22  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy 

CLOUDY  — 

A  cloud,  ]i%  anan. 

EX01I33.   9  the  cloudy  pillar  descended,  and  stood 

33. 10  all  the  people  saw  the  cloudy  pillar  stand 

Neh.   9.  12  thou  leddest  them  iu  the  day  by  a  cloudy 

Psa.  09.    7  He  spake  unto  them  in  the  cloudy  pillar 

Eze.  30.    3  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  a  cloudy  day 

34.  12  they  have  been  scattered  in  the  cloudy 

CLOUTED  — 

To  be  spotted,  patched,  N^a  tala,  4. 

Josh.  9.  -5  old  shoes  aud'clouted  upon  their  feet,  and 


CLOVEN 


175 


COLD 


CLOVEN  — 

1.  To  cleave  or  split,  WJ  shasa. 

Detit  14.    7  or  of  them  that  divide  the  cloven  hoof 
2  To  divide  throughout,  5ia.uep/fw  diainerizo. 

Acts    2.    3  there  appeared  imto  them  cloveu  tongues 

CLOVEN  FOOTED  — 

1  A  cloven  pointed  hoof  \  ncns  yp£  ygtf  shesa  parsah. 

Lev  it     3  parteth  the  hoof,  and  is  cloven  footed 
'  11.    7  divide  the  hoof;  and  be  cloven  footed 

2  A  cloven  cleft,  yo'a>  i/pa*  s/iesa  s/wsa. 

Lev  11  26  every  beast  which.. (is) not  cloven  footed 

CLUSTER  — 

l.Stem,  stalk,  cluster,  Vis^.x  eshkol. 

Gen  40  10  the  clusters  thereof  brought  forth  ripe 
Kum  13  23  cut.  .a  branch  with  one  cluster  of  grapes 
Deut  32  32  grapes  of  gall,  their  clusters  (are)  bitter 
Song   1.  14  My  beloved  (is)  uuto  me  (as)  a  cluster  of  g 
7.    7  a  palm  tree.and  thy  breasts  to  clusters  (of) 
7.    8  thy  breasts  shall  be  as  clusters  of  the  v. 
Isa.   65.    8  As  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster 
Hie    7.    1  of  the  vintage.,  (there  is)  no  cluster  to  eat 

^.Cluster,  Borpus  botrus. 

Rev.  14.  18  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vineof  the  earth 

CLUSTER  of  grapes  — 
Cluster,  V'is^n  eshkol. 

Kumi3  24  the  cluster  of  grapes  which  the  children 

CLUSTERS  of  raisins  — 

Pressed  cakes  of  raisins,  n'p'sx  tsimmukim. 

1  Sa  25  iS  and  an  hundred  clusters  of  raisins,  and 

30.  12  a  cake  of  figs,  and  two  clusters  of  raisins 

CNI'-DUS,  KviSos. 

A  city  on  a  promontory  of  C'aria  (or  Doris),  at  the  S.W. 

of  Asia  Minor. 

Acts  27-    7  we.  .scarce  were  come  over  against  C. 
COAL  — 
1,  Burning  coal,  rnna  gacheleth. 

Lev  16  12  he  shall  take  a  ceuser  full  of  burning-coals 

2  Sa  14     7  they  shall  quench  my  coal  which  is  left 

22.   9  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured  :  coals 

22.  13  the  brightness  before  him  were  coals  of 
Job    41. 21  His  breath  kiudleth  coals,  and  a  flame 
Psa    18.    8  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured  :  coals 

18  i2f  13  clouds  passed,  hail  (stones)  and  coals 

120.    4  Sharp  arrows  of  the  mighty,  with  coals  of 

140  10  Let  burning  coals  fall  upon  them:  let  them 

Prov.  6.  28  Can  one  go  upon  hot  coals  and  his  feet 

25.  22  thoushaltheapcoalsof  fire  upon  his  head 
Isa.   44-  19  I  have  baked  bread  upon  the  coals  thereof 

47.  14  (there  shall)  not  (be)  a  coal  to  warm  at 
Eze      1.  13  their  appearance  (was)  like  burning  coals 

10     2  fill  thine  hand  with  coals  of  fire  from 

24   11  Then  set  it  empty  upon  the  coals  thereof 
2>Charcoal  coal,  on^  pecham. 

Prov  26  2.  (As)  coals  (are)  to  burning  coals,and  wood 
Isa.   44  12  The  smith,  .both  worketh  in  the  coals} 

54.  16  the  smith  that  bloweth  the  coals  in  the  fire 

Z.Hot  or  burning  stone,  ^sh  resheph. 

Song   8.    6  the  coals  thereof  (are)  coals  of  fire,  which 
Hab.    3.  ^5  and  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet 

4.  Black,  blackness,  nin^  shechor. 

Lam.  4.    8  Their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  coal ;  they 
5..4  live  coal,  &v8pat  anthrax. 

Rom  12.  20  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head 

COALS,  a  fire  of  — 

-4  heap  of  live  coal,  auOpaKia  anthrakia. 

Johni8. 18  the  servants.. who  had  made  a  fire  of  co. 

21.  9  they  saw  a  fire  of  coals  there,  and  fish 

COALS,  baken  on  the  — 

Hot  or  burning  stone,  *\T}  relseph. 

1  Ki.19.    6  (there  was)a  cakebaken  on  the  coals,  and 

COALS,  live  — 

Hot  or  burning  stone,  ns^"i  ritspah. 

Isa      6.  6  Then  flew  one.. having  a  live  coal  in  his 
COAST  — 
1.  Border,  'aaa  gebul. 

Exodio.    4  will  I  bring  the  locusts  into  thy  coast 
10.  14  and  rested  in  all  the  coasts  of  Egypt 

10.  19  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  the  coasts 
Nuni2o.  23  by  the  coast  of  the  land  of  Edom,  saying 

2i.  13  wilderness  that  cometh  outof  thecoasts 

22.  36  border  of  Anion,,  .in  the  utmost  coast 
34.  11  the  coast  shall  go  down  from  Shepham  to 

Deut.  2.    4  Ye  (are)  to  pass  through  the  coast  of  your 

2.  18  pass  over  through  Ar,  the  coast  of  Moab 

3.  14  the  county  of  Argob  unto  the  coasts  of  G. 
3.  17  The  plain  also,  and  Jordan,  and  the  coast 

11.  24  unto  the  uttermost  sea,  shall  your  coast 
16,  4  seen  witli  thee  in  all  thy  coasts  seven  days 
19.  3  and  divide  the  coasts  of  thy  land,  which 
19.  8  if  the  Lord  thy  God  enlarge  thy  coast,  as 
28.  40  have  olive  trees  throughout  all  thy  coasts 

Josh,  1.    4  going  down  of  the  sun,  shall  be  yourcoast 

12.  4  And  the  coast  of  Og  king  of  Bashan 
13. 16  their  coast  was  from  Aroer,  that  (is)  on 
33  25  their  coast  was  Jazer,  and  all  the  cities 

13.  30  And  their  coast  was  from  Mahauaim,  all 
15.  4  the  goings  out  of  that  coast  were  at  the  sea 
15.   4  this  shall  be  your  south  coast 


Jush.ij.  12  the  great  sea,  and  the  coast  (thereof) 
15.  12  This  (is)  the  coast  of  the  children  of  J. 

15.  21  toward  the  coast  of  Edom  southward 

16.  3  goeth  down  westward  to  the  coast  of  J. 

17.  7  the  coast  of  Manasseh  was  from  Asher  to 
17.    9  the  coast  descended  unto  the  river  Kanah 

17.  9  the  coast  of  Manasseh  also  (was)  on  the 

18.  5  Judah  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the 

18.  5  Joseph  shall  abide  in  their  coasts  on  the 
iS.  11  the  coast  of  their  lot  came  forth  between 
18  19  end  of  Jordan  :  this  (was)  the  south  coast 

19.  22.  the  coast  reacheth  to  Tabor,  and  Shahaz. 
19.  29  the  coast  turueth  to  Ramah,  and  to  the 
19.  29  and  the  coast  turneth  to   Hosah 

19.  33  their  coast  was  from  Heleph,  from  Alton 
19.  34  the  coast  turneth  westward  to  Azuoth-ta 
19.  41  the  coast  of  their  inheritance  was  Zorah 
19.  47  the  coast  of  the  children  of  Dan  went 
Judg.  1.  18  Judah  took  Gaza  with  the  coast  thereof 
1.  18  and  Askelun  with  the  coast  thereof 
i.  iS  and  Ekron  with  the  coast  thereof 

1.  36  the  coast  of  the  Amorites  (was)  from  the 
11.  20  trusted  not  Israel  to  pass,  .his  coast 

11.  22  possessed  all  the  coasts  of  the  Amorites 
19.  29  and  sent  her  into  all  the  coasts  of  Israel 

1  Sa.    5.    6  (even)  Ashdod  and  the  coasts  thereof 

6.  9  goeth  up  by  the  way  of  his  own  coast 

7. 13  they  came  no  more  into  the  coast  of  Israel 

7.  14  the  coasts  thereof  did  Israel  deliver  out 
11.    3  may  send  messengers  unto  all  the  coasts 
1 1.    7  (them)  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Isr. 
27.    1  to  seek  me  any  more  in  any  coast  of  Isr. 

2  Sa.  21.    5  from  remaining  in  any  of  the  coasts 

1  Ki.    1.    3  they  sought,  .throughout  all  the  coasts 

2  Ki.  10.  32  Hazael  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  of  I. 

14.  25  He  restored  the  coast  of  Israel  from  the 

15.  16  and  the  coasts  thereof  from  Tirzah 

1  Ch.  4.  10  bless  me  indeed,  and  enlarge  my  coast 

6.  54  throughout  their  castles  in  their  coasts 

6.  66  sous  of  Kohath  had  cities  of  their  coasts 
2t,  12  destroying  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  I. 

2  Ch.n.  13  resorted  to  him  out  of  all  their  coasts 
Psa. 105.  31  of  flies,  (and)  lice  in  all  their  coasts 

io5-  33  He.  -brake  the  trees  of  their  coasts 
Eze.  47.  16  Hazar-hatticon,  which  (is)  by  the  coast  of 
^.Circuit,  n^na  gebulah. 

.Num32.  33  with  the  cities  thereof  in  the  coasts 
34.    2  the  land  of  Canaan,  with  the  coasts 
34.  i2  with  the  coasts  thereof  round  about 
Josh  18.  20  by  the  coasts  thereof  round  about,  accor. 
19.  49  the  laud  for  inheritance  by  their  coasts 

3.  Border,  nS'?3  gelilah. 

Joel    3.    4  and  Zidon,  and  all  the  coasts  of  Palestine 

4. Cord,  ripe,  b^n  chebel. 

Josh.  19  29  at  the  sea  from  the  coast  to  Achzib 
Zeph.  2.    5  Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  coa. 

2.  6  the  sea  coast  shall  be  dwellings  (and)  cot. 
2.    7  the  coast  shall  be  for  the  remnant  of  the 

5. Shore,  haven,  *]in  choph. 

Josh  9.    t  in  all  the  coasts  of  the  great  sea  over 

Eze.  25.  16  I  will,  .destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea  c. 
Q.Hand,  t  yad. 

J\rumi3.  29  the  Canaanites  dwell,  .by  the  coast  of  J. 
34.    3  south  quarter  shall  be.  .along  by  the  c. 

Judgii  26  the  cities  that  (be)  along  by  the  coasts  of 

7.  Thigh,  n|rp  yarkah. 

Jer.  25.  32" shall  be  raised  up  from  the  coasts  of  the 
31.  8  gather  them  from  the  coasts  of  the  earth 
50.  41  kings  shall  be  raised  up  from  the  coasts 

8.  Elevated  place,  nflj  naphah. 

Josh.  12.  23  The  king  of  Dor  in  the  coast  of  Dor,  one 

9.  End,  extremity,  rr>'[?  qatsah.     . 

JudgiS.    2  of  their  family  five  men  from  their  coasts 
Eze.  33.    2  the  people,  .take  a  man  of  their  coasts 

COAST,  (outmost)  — 

1.  End,  extremity,  nxjj  qatseh. 

NuiU34.    3  the  outmost  coast  of, the  salt  sea  eastward 

2.  Division,  part,  /ue'pos  meros. 

Matt  15.  21  departed  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  S. 

16.  13  came  into  the  coasts  of  Cesarea  Philippi 
Acts  19.    1  having  passed  through  the  upper  coasts 

3.  Boundary,  '6ptov  horion. 

Matt.  2.  16  in  Bethlehem,  and  in  all  the  coasts 

8.  34  that  he  would  depart  out  of  their  coasts 
15.  22  a  woman.. came  out  of  the  same  coasts 
15.  39  he.. came  into  the  coasts  of  Magdala 

19.    1  came  into  the  coasts  of  Judea  beyond  J. 
Mark  5.  17  to  pray  him  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts 

7.  31  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  S. 
7.  31  through  the  midst  of  the  c.  of  Decapolis 

10.    1  cometh  into  the  coasts  of  Judea  by  the 
Acts  13.  50  and  expelled  them  out  of  their  coasts 

A.  Place,  spot,  toVos  iopos. 

Acts  27.    2  meaning  to  sail  by  the  coasts  of  Asia 
5.  Space,  region,  x^pa.  chord. 

Acts  26.  20  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Judea,  and 

COAST,  sea  — 

Coast  along  the  sea,  TrapaXios  paralios. 

Luke  6.  17  from  the  sea  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon 

COAT  — 

\.A  tunic,  long  coat,  runs,  rnris  kethoneth. 

Gen.    3.  21  did  the  Lobd  God  make  coats  of  skins 


Gen.  37.    3  he  made  him  a  coat  of  (many)  colours 
37.  23  out  of  his  coat,  (his)  coat  of  (many)  col. 
37.  31  took  Joseph's  coat.. and  dipped  the  coat 
37.  32  they  sent  the  coat  of  (many)  colours,  and 
37.  32  know  now  whether  it  (be)  thy  son's  coat 
37.  33  he  knew  it,  and  said,  (It  is)  my  sou's  coat 

Exod28.    4  a  broidered  coat,  a  mitre,  and  a  girdle 

28.  39  thou  shalt  embroider  the  coat  of  fine  liu. 
28  40  for  Aaron's  sous  thou  shalt  make  coats 

29.  5  put  upou  Aaron  the  coat,  and  the  robe  of 
29.    8  thou  shalt  bring  bis  sons,  and  put  coats 

39.  27  they  made  coats  (of)  fine  linen,  (of)  woven 

40.  i4  bring  his  sons,and  clothe  them  with  coats 
Lev,    8.    7  he  put  upon  him  the  coat,  and  girded  him 

8.  13  Mosesbrought  Aaron'ssons,  andputcoats 
10.    5  carried  them  in  their  coats  out  of  the 
16.    4  He  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  coat,  and 

2  Sa.  15.  32  came  to  meet  him  with  his  coat  rent 
Job  30.  18  bindeth  me  about  as  the  collar  of  my  c. 
Song  s-    3I  have  put  off  my  coat ;  how  shall  I  put 

2.  Upper  robe,  T$Q  me-il. 

2  Sa.  2.  19  Moreover  his  mother  made  him  a  little  c. 

3.  Tunic,  long  robe,  xiTf*>v  chiton. 

Siatt.  5.  40  if  any  man  will .  .take  away  thy  coat 

10. 10  Nor  scrip  for.  .journey,  neither  two  coats 
Mark  6.    9  But  (be)  shod,  .and  not  put  on  two  coats 
Luke  3.  11  He  that  hath  two  coats,  let  him  impart  to 
6.  29  forbid  not  (to  take  thy)  coat  also 

9.  3  neither  have  two  coats  apiece 
John  1 9.  23  and  also  (his)  coat :  now  the  coat  was 
Acts    9.  39  showing  the  coats  and  garments  which 

COAT,  fisher's  — 

Upper  clothing,  ewtvBvTTjs  ependutes. 

Johuji,    7.  he  girt  (his)  fisher's  coat  (unto  him) 

COAT  (of  mail)  — 

Coat  of  mail,  breast  plate,  ]'vy&  shir  yon. 

1  Sa.17.    5  And  he  was  armed  with  a  coat  of  mail 

17.  5  the  weight  of  the  coat  (was)  five  thousand 
17. 38  also  he  armed  him  with  a  coat  of  mail 

COATS  — 

Mantles,  upper  garments,  fSa-ip  sarbalin. 

Dan.   3.  21  these  men  were  bound  in  their  coats 

3.  27  neither  were  their  coats  changed,  nor  the 

COCK  — 

House  cock,  aAe/CTwp  alektor. 

Matts6.  34,  75  before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shall  deny 
26.  74  And  immediately  the  cock  crew 

Mark  14.  30,  72  before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt 
14.  68  he  went  out  into  the  porch;  and  [thecock] 
14.  72  And  the  second  time  the  cock  crew 

Luke22.  34  the  cock  shall  not  crow  this  day,  before 
22.  60  immediately,  while  he  yet  spake,  the  cock 
22.  61  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deuy  me 

J0I1D13.  38  The  cock  shall  uot  crow,  till  thou  hast 

18.  27  and  immediately  the  cock  crew 

COCK  crowing  — 

Sounding  of  the  cock,  third  watch,  a\€KTopo<puvla. 
Jlarki3.  35  or  at  the  cock  crowing,  or  in  the  morning 

COCKATRICE  — 

l.Cockatrice,  basilisk,  adder,  viper,  *yM  tsepha. 

Isa.   14.  29  serpent's.,  shall  come  forth  a  cockatrice 
%Adder,  cockatrice,  *iiy?V  isiphoni. 

Isa.  11.  8  child,  .put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  d. 
59.    5  They  hatch  cockatrice'  eggs,  and  weave 

Jer.    8  17  I  will  send  serpents,  cockatrices,  among 

COCKLE  — 

Useless  weed,  hemlock,  darnel,  Hfftsa  boshah. 
Job  31,  40  thistles  grow  instead  of  wheat,  and  cockle 

COFFER  — 

Coffer,  box,  chest,  13-]N  argaz. 

1  Sa.   6.   8  put  the  jewels,  .in  a  coffer  by  the  side 

6.  11  and  the  coffer  with  the  mice  of  gold,  and 
6. 15  and  the  coffer  that  (was)  with  it,  wherein 

COFFIN  — 

Ark,  coffin,  chest,  p"W  aron. 

Gen.  50.  26, and  he  was  put  in  a  coffin  in  Egypt 

COGITATION  — 

Thought,  sadness,  |Vyn  rayon. 

Dan.   7.  28  As  for  me  Daniel,  my  cogitations  much 

COLD  — 

1.  Cold i  pot,  H|¥  tsinnah. 

Prov  25.  13  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest 

2.CoUl,  cool,  excellent,  ip  qar. 

Prov  25.  25  (As)  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  (is) 
Jer.  18.  14  shall  the  cold  flowing  waters,  .be  forsak. 

B.Cold,i'p  qor. 

Gen.   8.  22  cold  and  heat,  and  summer  and  winter 

4. Cold,  n-13  qarah. 

Job    24.    7  that  (they  have)  no  covering  in  the  cold 
37.    9  cometh  the  whirlwind;  and  cold  out  of  the 
Psa  147.  17  who  can  stand  before  his  cold? 
Prov  25  20  that  takethaway  a  garment  in  cold  weat. 
Kah.   3.  17  which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day 

5. Coldness,  ipvx°s  psuchos. 

JohmS.  18  had  made  a  fire  of  coals;  for  it  was  cold 
Acts  28     2  the  present  rain,  and  because  of  the  cold 

2  Co.  11.  27  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  aud  nakedness 


COLD 


176 


COME 


G.Cold,  cool,  ipvxpds  psuchros. 

Mattio.  42  whosoever  shall  give.,  a  cup  of  cold  (wat) 
Rev.    315  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot 
3.  15  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot 
3.  16  thou  art  luke  warm,  and  neither  cold  nor 

COLD,  to  wax  - 

To  breathe,  blow,  cool^ix"  psiicTio. 

Matt  24. 12  because,  .the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold 

COLHO'-ZEH,  nih-'JS  wholly  a  seer. 

1.  (He  whose  son  helped  to  repair  the  wall,  B.C.  470. 

Neb..  3.  15  the  fountain  repaired  Shallum.. son  of  C. 
l>.  Hue  whom  some  think  the  same  as  No.  1.    B.C.  470. 

Neh.  n.    5  Maaseiah  the  son  of  liaruch,  the  son  of  C. 
COLLAR  — 
Month,  H3 pell. 

Job  30!  18  biudeth  me  about  as  the  collar  of  my  coat 

COLLARS  — 

Drops,  droppings,  n'iB'pi  netiphoth. 

Judg.    8.  26  besides  ornaments,  and  collars,  and 

COLLECTION  — 

1.  Burden,  thing  lifted  up  or  borne,  nN'»»e>  maselh. 

2  C'h.24.    6  to  bring  in,  out  of  Judah.  .the  collection 
24.   9  to  bring  in  to  the  Lord  the  collection 

2. Collection,  gathering,  Aoyia  logic. 

1  Co  16.    1  Now  concerning  the  collection  for  the 
COLLEGE  — 

Second  part,  place  of  repetition,  college,  npa. 

2  Ki.22.  14  now  she  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  the  college 
2  Ch  34  22  now  she  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  the  college 

COLLOPS  — 

Fat,  fatness,  fflS'B  pimah. 

Job    15  27  and  maketh  collops  of  fat  on  (his)  flauks 
COLONY  — 
Colony  {of  Romans),  KoXwvia  kolonia  {Lat.)-eia. 

Acts  16. 12  which  is  the  chief  city,  .(and)  a  colony 
CO-LOS'-SE,  Ko\otraal. 

A  city  of  Phrygia  Pactiana,  on  the  confines  of  Caria  in 
Asia  Minor,  near  the  conflux  of  the  Lycus  and  the 
Marauder. 

Col.     1.    2  brethren  in  Christ  which  are  at  C. 
COLOUR  — 
I. Eye,  aspect,  \\yayin. 

Lev.  13.  55  (if)  the  plague  have  not  changed  his  colour 

Numix.    7  the  colour  thereof  as  the  colour  of  bdel. 

ProV23.  31  when  it  giveth  his  colour  in  the  cup 

Eze.  1.  4  out  of  the  midst  thereof  as  the  colour  of 
1.  7  they  sparkled  like  the  colour  of  burnished 
1.  16  The  appearance,  .(was)  like  unto  the  col. 
1.  22  the  likeness,  .(was)  as  the  colour  of  the 

I.  27  And  I  saw  as  the  colour  of  amber,  as  the 
8.    2  appearance  of  brightness,  as  the  colour 

10.  9  the  appearance .  .(was)  as  the  colour  of  a 
Dan.  10.    6  his  arms  and  his  feet  like  in  colour  to 

'2.  What  isshoim forth, pretence,Trp6<pao-Lsprophasis. 
Acts  27.  30  under  colour  as  though  they  would  have 
COLOURS,  (divers  or  many)  — 
Pieces,  ends  (of  anything),  extremities,  D'DS  passim. 
Gen  37.    3  and  he  made  him  a  coat  of  (many)  colours 
37.  23  (his)  coat  of  (many)  colours  that  (was)  on 
37.  32  And  they  sent  the  coat  of  (many)  colours 
2  Sa.  13.  18  (she  had)  a  garment  of  divers  colours 
13. 19  and  rent  her  garment  of  divers  colours 
COLOURS,  fair  — 
Paint,  ^13  puk. 

Isa.  54.  11  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours 
COLOURS,  -with  divers  — 
To  spot,  patch,  nSs  tola. 

Eze.  16.  16  deck'edst  thy.  .places  with  divers  colours 
COLT  — 
l.Son,  produce,  }2  ben. 

Gen.  32.  15  Thirty  milch  camels  with  their  colts 
49.  11  and  his  ass's  colt  unto  the  choice  vine 

2.  .1  ss  colt,  {from  its  restiveness, )  "vy  ayir. 

Judg.  10.  4  thirty  sons  that  rode  on  thirty  ass  colts 
12. 14  rode  on  threescore  and  ten  ass  colts 

Job  11.  12  man  be  born  (like)  a  wild  ass's  colt 

Zee.    9.   9  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass 
\.Foal,  iruXos  polos. 

Matt 2 1.  2  ye  shall  find  an  ass  tied,  and  a  colt  with 
21.  5  sittting  upon  an  ass,  and  a  colt  the  foal 
21.   7  brought  the  ass,  and  the  colt,  and  put  on 

Ml irk  1 1     2  ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never 

11.  4  found  the  colt  tied  by  the  door  without 

II.  5  certain,  .said..  What  do  ye,  loosingthe  c. 
1  r.    7  they  brought  the  colt  to  Jesus,  and  cast 

Lukei9.  3°  ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  yet 
19.  33  as  they  were  loosing  the  colt,  the  owners 
19.  33  said  unto  them,  Why  loose  ye  the  colt? 
19.  35  they  cast  their  garments  upon  the  colt 
Johni2.  15  thy  King  cometh,  sitting  on  an  ass's  colt 
COME,  to  — 
l.The  hitler,  |i-irj(j  loliaron. 

Dent  29.  22  So  that  the  generation  to  come  of  your 
l'sa.  78.    4  showing  to  the  generations  to  come  the 
78.    6  That  the  generation  to  come  might  know 
102.  18  lie  wrltte-.i  for  the  generation  to  come 


Trov  31.  25  and  she  shall  rejoice  in  time  to  come 
Keel.  1.  11  remembrance  of  (things)  that  are  to  come 
Isa.   30.    8  that  it  may  be  for  the  time  to  come  for 

2.  To  come,  arrive,  nrix  athah,  snx  atha. 

Deut33.    2  And  he  said,  The  Lord  came  from  Sinai 

33.  21  and  he  came  with  the  heads  of  the  people 
Job   16.  22  When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall 

30. 14  They  came  (upon  me)  as  a  wide  breaking 

&>.,:..  „.....^i,n,.  ...*.„.-ai,   .-.,.*■  r.t  n,„  ,.~.,..i> 


37- 
Psa.  68. 
Pro  v. 


41. 


Dau. 


Fair  weather  cometh  out  of  the  north 
31  Princes  shall  come  out  of  Egypt;  Ethiop. 
27  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind 
Isa,  21. 12  The  morning  cometh,  aud  also  the  night 
12  if  ye  will  enquire,  enquire  ye  :  return,  co. 
5  the  ends,  .were  afraid,  drew  near,  and  ca. 
15  I  have  raised  up  (one),  .and  he  shall  come 
56.    9  All  ye  beasts  of  the  field,  come  to  devour 
56.  12  Come  ye,  (say  they,)  I  will  fetch  wine 
Jer.    3.  22  Behold,  we  come  unto  thee  ;  for  thou 
Mic.  4.   8  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even  the  first 

3.  To  cause  to  come  or  arrive,  nriN  athah,  5. 

Jer.   12.    9  assemble  all  the  beasts,  .come  to  devour 

4.  To  come,  arrive,  tins*  atha. 

Ezra  5.    3  At  the  same  time  came  to  them  Tatnai 

5.  16  Then  came  the  same  Sheshbazzar,  (and) 

3.    2  to  come  to  the  dedication  of  the  image 

3.  26  and  come  (hither).   Then  Shadrach,  Mes. 

7.  13  (one)  like  the  Son  of  man  came  with  the 

7.  22  Until  the  Ancient  of  days  came  and 

5.  To  come  in,  «i3  bo. 

Gen.    6.  18  and  thou  shalt  come  into  the  ark,  thou 

6.  20  two  of  every  (sort)  shall  come  unto  thee 

7.  1  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark 

10.  19  as  thou  comest  to  Gerar,  unto  Gaza  ;  as 

11.  31  aud  they  came  unto  Haran,  and  dwelt 

12.  5  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  they  came 

13.  10  like  the  land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  comest 

13.  18  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre 

14.  5  in  the  fourteenth  year  came  Chedorlao. 
14.    7  they  returned,  and  came  to  Enmishpat 

14. 13  there  came  oue  that  had  escaped,  and  told 
16.   8  whence  earnest  thou?  and  whither  wilt 

18.  21  according  to  the  cry  of  it,  which  is  come 

19.  1  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  even 

19.  8  therefore  came  they  under  the  shadow  of 

20.  3  But  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream 
20.  13  at  every  place  whither  we  shall  come, 

22.  9  they  came  to  the  place  which  God  had 

23.  2  Abraham  came  to  mourn  for  Sarah 

24.  30  that  he  came  unto  the  man;  and,  behold 
24.  32  And  the  man  came  into  the  house  :  and 
24.  41  when  thou  comest  to  my  kindred 

24.  42  I  came  this  day  unto  the  well,  and  said 
24.  62  Isaac  came  from  the  way  of  the  well 

24.  63  and,  behold,  the  camels  (were)  coming 

25.  29  Esau  came  from  the  field,  and  he  (was) 

26.  27  Wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate 

26.  32  that  Isaac's  servants  came,  aud  told  him 

27.  18  he  came  unto  his  father,  and  said 

27.  33  have  eaten  of  all  before  thou  earnest,  and 
27.  35  he  said,  Thy  brother  came  with  subtilty 
29.    6  Rachel  his  daughter  cometh  with  the 

29.  9  Rachel  came  with  her  father's  sheep  ;  for 

30.  11  Leah  said,  A  troop  cometh:  and  she  called 
30.  16  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  evening 
30.  33  my  righteousness  answer,  .in  time  to  c. 
30.  33  when  it  shall  come  for  my  hire  before  thy 

30.  38  they  should  conceive  when  they  came 

31.  24  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a  dream 

32.  6  We  came  to  thy  brother  Esau,  and  also  he 
32.    8  If  Esau  come  to  the  one  company,  and 
32.  11  I  fear  him,  lest  he  will  come  and  smite 

32.  13  and  took  of  that  which  came  to  his  hand 

33.  1  and  looked,  and,  behold,  Esau  came,  and 
33.  14  until  I  come  unto  my  lord  unto  Seir 

33. 18  Jacob  came  to  Shalem  a  city  of  Shechem 

33.  18  when  he  came  from  Padan-aram  ;  and 

34.  7  the  sons  of  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field 
34.  2q,And  Hamor.  .cameunto  the  gate  of  their 
34.  25  came  upon  the  city  boldly,  and  slew  all 

34.  27  The  sons  of  Jacob  came  upon  the  slain 

35.  6  Jacob  came  to  Luz,  which  (is)  in  the  land 
35.    9  when  he  came  out  of  Padan-aram,  and 
35.  16  and  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  come  to 
35.  27  Jacob  came  unto  Isaac  his  father  unto 
37.  10  indeed  come  to  bow  down  ourselves  to 

37. 14  he  sent  him  out.  .and he  came  to  Shechem 
37.  19  they  said . .  Behold,  this  dreamer  cometh 
37.  23  when  Joseph  was  come  unto  his  brethren 
37.  25  a  company  of  Ishmeelites  came  from  Gil. 
39.  16  laid  up  his  garment . .  until  his  lord  came 
41.  29  there  come  seven  years  of  great  plenty 
41.  35  all  the  food  of  those  good  years  that  come 
41.  50  two  sons  before  the  years  of  famine  came 
41.  54  the  seven  years  of  dearth  began  to  come 

41.  57  all  countries  came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph 

42.  5  came  to  buy  (corn)  among  those  that  came 
42.  6  and  Joseph's  brethren  came,  and  bowed 
42.  7  and  he  said  unto  them,  Whence  come  ye? 
42.  9  to  see  the  nakedness  of  the  land  ye  are  c. 
42.  10  but  to  buy  food  are  thy  servants  come 
42.  12  to  see  the  nakedness  of  the  land  ye  arec. 
42.  15  except yonryoungest brother comehither 
42.  21  therefore  is  this  distress  come  upon  us 

42.  29  And  they  came  unto  Jacob  their  father 

43.  21  it  came  to  pass,  when  we  came  to  the  inu 
43.  25  the  present  against  Joseph  came  at  noon 

43.  26  when  Joseph  came  home,  they  brought 

44.  14  aud  his  brethren  came  to  Joseph's  house 
44.  30  when  I  come  to  thy  servant  my  father 


Gen.  45.  16  saying,  Joseph's  brethren  are  come 

45. 18  take  your  father.,  and  come  unto  me:  and 
45.  19  and  bring  your  father,  and  come 

45.  25  came  into  the  land  of  Canaan  unto  Jacob 

46.  1  came  to  Beersheba,  and  offered  sacrifices 
46.    6  they  took  their  cattle.. and  came  into 
46.    8  the  children  of  Israel  which  came  into 
46.  26  All  the  souls  that  came  with  Jacob  into 
46.  26  which  came  out  of  his  loins,  besides 

46.  27  all  the  souls. .  which  came  into  Egypt 
46.  28  and  they  came  into  the  land  of  Goshen 

46.  31  My  brethren,  .are  come  unto  me 

47.  1  Joseph  came  and  told  Pharaoh,  and  said 
47.    1  My  father  ami  my  brethren,  .are  come 
47.    4  to  sojourn  in  the  land  are  we  come 

47.    5  Thy  father  and  thy  brethren  are  come 
47.  15  all  the  Egyptians  came  unto  Joseph,  and 

47.  18  they  came  unto  him  the  second  year 

48.  2  Behold,  thy  son  Joseph  cometh  unto  thee 
48.    5  before  I  came  unto  thee  into  Egypt 

48.    7  for  me,  when  I  came  from  Padan,  Rachel 

48.  7  but  a  little  way  to  come  unto  Ephrath 

49.  6  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret 

49.  10  nor  a  lawgiver,  until  Shiloh  come 

50.  10  they  came  to  the  threshing  floor  of  Atad 
Exod.  1.    1  children  of  Israel,  which  came  into  Egypt 

1.  1  every  man  ami  his  household  came  with 

2.  16  they  came  and  drew  (water),  and  filled 
2.  17  the  shepherds  came  and  drove  them  aw. 
2.  18  when  they  came  to  Reuel  their  father 

2.  18  How  (is  it  that)  yearecomeso  soon  today 

1  came  to  the  mountain  of  God .  .to  Horeb 

9  the  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  come 

13  (when)  I  come  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

18  thou  shalt  come,  thou  and  the  elders  of  I. 

.  15  officers  of  the  children  of  Israel  came 

23  since  I  came  to  Pharaoh  to  speak  in  thy 
3  which  shall  go  up  and  come  into  thine 

24  there  came  agrievous  swarm  (of  fiies)into 

26  we  must  serve  the  LoRI>  until  we  come 
23  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in 

25  when  ye  be  come  to  the  land  which  the 
20  it  came  between  the  camp  of  the  Egypt. 
20  the  one  came  not  near  the  other  all  the 
28  all  the  host,  .that  came  into  the  sea  after 
23  when  they  came  to  Marah,  they  could 

27  they  came  to  Elim,  where  (were)  twelve 
1  all  the  congregation,  .came  unto  the  wild. 

22  all  the  rulers  of  the  congregation  came 
35  until  they  came  to  a  laud  inhabited 
35  they  came  unto  the  borders  of  the  land 

8  Then  came  Amalek,  aud  fought  with  Is. 

5  Jethro.  .came  with  his  sons  and  his  wife 

6  I  thy  father  in  law  Jethro  am  come  unto 

7  Moses  went  out. .  and  they  came  into 
12  Aaron  came,  and  all  the  elders  of  Israel 

15  people  come  unto  me  to  enquire  of  God 

16  When  they  have  a  matter,  they  come  unto 

1  the  same  day  came  they  (into)  the  wilder. 

2  and  were  come  (to)  the  desert  of  Sinai 
7  Moses  came  and  called  for  the  elders  of 

9  Lo,  I  come  unto  thee  in  a  thick  cloud 

20  Fear  not :  for  God  is  come  to  prove  you 
.  24  1  will  come  unto  thee,  and  I  will  bless 
.    9  the  cause  of  both  parties  shall  come  before 
.  15  if  it  (be)  an  hired  (thiug),  it  came  for  his 

27  all  the  people  to  whom  thou  shalt  c<  me 

3  Moses  came  and  told  the  people  all  the 
30  when  he  cometh  into  the  tabernacle  of 
10  every  wise  hearted  among  you  shall  ccrae 

21  they  came,  every  one  whose  heart  stirred 

22  And  they  came,  both  men  and  women 

4  And  all  the  wise  men.  .came  every  man 
34  (that)  on  which  (such)  water  cometh  shall 

12.  4  nor  come  into  the  sanctuary,  until  the 

13.  16  he  shall  come  unto  the  priest 

14.  8  after  that  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
14.  35  he  that  ovvneth  the  house  shall  come  aud 

14.  44  priest  shall  come  and  look,  and,  behold 

15.  14  come  before  the  Lord  unto  the  door  of 

16.  2  that  he  come  not  at  all  times  into  the 
16.    3  Thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  holy(place) 
16.  23  Aaron  shall  come  into  the  tabernacle  of 
16.  26  and  afterward  come  into  the  camp 

16.  28  and  afterward  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
19.  23  And  when  ye  shall  come  into  the  laud 
25.    2  When  ye  come  into  the  land  which  I  give 
25.  25  if  any  of  his  kin  come  to  redeem  it,  then 
Num.  4.    5  Aaron  shall  come,  and  his  sons,  aud  they 
4.  15  the  sons  of  Kohath  shall  come  to  bear  (it) 
4.  47  every  one  that  came  to  do  the  service  of 
6.    6  All  the  days,  .he  shall  come  at  no  dead 
10.  21  set  up  the  tabernacle  against  they  came 
13.  21  So  they  went  up.  .as men  cometoHamath 
13.  22  they  ascended  by  the  south,  and  came 
13.  23  they  came  unto  the  brook  of  Eshcol,  and 
13.  26  they  went  and  came  to  Moses,  and  to  A. 

13.  27  We  came  unto  the  land  whither  thou 

14.  30  Doubtless  ye  shall  not  come  into  the  land 

15.  18  When  ye  come  into  the  land  whither  I 

16.  43  Moses  and  Aaron  came  before  the  taber. 

19.  7  afterward  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
19. 14  all  that  come  into  the  tent,  and  all  that 

20.  1  came  the  children  of  Israel,  (even)  the 

20.  22  journeyed  from  Kadesh,  and  came  unto 

21.  1  that  Israel  came  by  the  way  of  the  spies 
21.  7  the  people  came  to  Moses,  and  said,  We 
2i.  23*came  to  Jahaz,  and  fought  against  Israel 

21.  27  Come  into  Heshbou,  let  the  city  of  Sihon 

22.  7  they  came  unto  Balaam,  and  spake  unto 
22.  9  God  came  unto  Balaam,  and  said.  What 
22.  16  they  came  to  Balaam,  and  said  to  him 


Lev 


COMB 


177 


COMB 


XUIU22. 
22. 


33 

34' 

Deut.  i 


Josh. 


24- 

24. 
Judg.  1. 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


20  And  God  came  uuto  Balaam  at  night 
20  It"  the  men  come  to  call  thee,  rise  up,  (and) 

39  and  they  came  unto  Kirjath-huzoth 

17  when  he  came  to  him,  behold,  he  stood  by 

6  one  of  the  children  of  Israel  came  and 

14  captains  over  hundreds,  which  came  from 
24  afterward  ye  shall  come  into  the  camp 

2  the  children  of  Reuben  came  and  spake 
9  they  removed  from  Marah,  and  came  unto 

40  heard  of  the  coming  of  the  children  of  I 
2  When  ye  come  into  the  land  of  Canaan 

19  we  departed  from  Horeb.  .and  we  came 
22  ye  came  near  unto  me  every  one  of  you 
22  and  into  what  cities  we  shall  come 
24  came  unto  the  valley  of  Eshcol,  and 
31  in  all  the  way.  .until  ye  came  into  this 

7  from  the  day .  .until  ye  came  unto  this 
5  until  ye  came  into  this  place 

5  (even)  uuto  his  habitation . .  thou  shalt  cr . 
9  ye  are  not  as  yet  come  to  the  rest  and  to 

29  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  .shall  come 
9  thou  shalt  come  unto  the  priests  the  Lev. 

6  if  a  Levite  come  from  any  of  thy  gates 

6  come  with  all  the  desire  of  his  mind  unto 

10  he  shall  not  come  within  the  camp 

11  he  shall  come  into  the  camp  (again) 

24  when  thou  comest  into  thy  neighbour's 

25  When  thou  comest  into  the  standing 

1  wheuthou  (art)  come  into  the  laud  which 

2  And  all  these  blessings  shall  come  on 
15.  45  all  these  curses  shall  come  upon  thee 

7  when  ye  came  unto  this  place,  Sihon  the 
22  So  that  the  generation  to  come  of  your 
22  the  stranger  that  shall  come  from  a  far 

1  when  all  these  thiugs  are  come  upon  thee 
44  Moses  came  and  spake  all  the  words  of 

2  The  Lord  came  from  Sinai,  and  rose  up 
2  and  he  came  with  ten  thousands  of  saints 

16  let  (the  blessing)  come  upon  the  head  of 
1  they  went,  and  came  into  an  harlot's  house 

4  There  came  men  unto  me,  but  I  wist  not 
iS  (when)  we  come  into  the  land,  thou  shalt 

22  they  went,  and  came  unto  the  mouutaiu 

23  passed  over,  and  came  to  Joshua  the  son 

1  they  removed  from  Shittim,  and  came  to  J. 
11  they  came  into  the  camp,  and  lodged  in 

19  they  shall  come  into  the  treasury  of  the 
n  drew  nigh,  and  came  before  the  city,  aud 

5  Who  (are)  ye?  and  from  whence  come  ye? 

17  came  uuto  their  cities  on  the  third  day 
9  Joshua  therefore  came  uuto  them  sud. 

5  they  came  and  pitched  together  at  the 

7  So  Joshua  came  and  all  the  people  of 
2t  And  at  that  time  came  Joshua,  and  cut 
iS  she  came  (unto  him),  that  she  moved  him 

4  and  they  shall  come  (again)  to  me 

9  came  (again)  to  Joshua  to  the  host  at  S. 

6  then  shall  the  slayer  return,  and  come 

10  when  they  came  unto  the  borders  of  Jor. 

15  they  came  unto  the  children  of  Reuben 

7  That  ye  come  not  among  these  Dations 
6  I  brought  your  fathers.,  and  ye  came 

11  ye  went  over  Jordan,  and  came  uuto  Jer. 

14  wheu  she  came  (to  him),  that  she  moved 

20  Ehud  came  unto  him  ;  and  he  was  sitting 

24  Wheu  he  was  gone  out,  his  servants  came 
20  when  any  man  doth  come  and  enquire  of 

22  when  he  came  into  her  (tent),  behold,  Sis. 
19  The  kings  came  (and)  fought,  then  fought 

23  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord 
28  Why  is  his  chariot  (so)  long  in  coming? 

4  till  thou  come  unto  Gaza,  and  left  no 

5  they  came  as  grasshoppers  for  multitude 
it  And  there  came  an  angel  of  the  Lord 

1 5  Depart  not  hence . .  until  I  come  unto  thee 

13  came  unto  a  tent,  and  smote  it  that  it 

17  when  I  come  to  the  outside  of  the  camp 
19  came  unto  the  outside  of  the  camp  in  the 

4  Gideon  came  to  Jordan,  (and)  passed  over 
15  he  came  unto  the  men  of  Succoth,  and 

15  (then)  come  (and)  put  your  trust  in  my 

24  That  the  cruelty  (done) . .  might  come,  and 

26  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed  came  with  his  bre. 
31  Gaal . .  and  his  brethren,  be  come  to  Shech. 
37  Seethere  comepeopledownbythe  middle 
37  another  company  come  along  by  the  plain 
52  Abimelech  come  unto  the  tower,  and 

57  upon  them  came  the  curse  of  Jotham 

16  unto  the  Red  sea,  and  came  to  Kadesh 

18  came  by  the  east  side  of  the  land  of  Moab 
18  but  came  not  within  the  border  of  Moab 

33  from  Aroer  eveu  till  thou  come  to  Minnith 

34  Jephthah  came  to  Mizpeh  unto  his  house 

6  the  women  came  and  told  her  husband 

6  A  man  of  God  came  unto  me,  and  his 

8  let  the  man  of  God.  .come  again  unto  us 

9  the  angel  of  God  came  again  unto  the  w^o. 

10  Behold,  the  man.,  that  came  unto  me  the 

11  Manoah  arose,  .and  came  to  the  man 

5  Samson,  .came  to  the  vineyards  of  Tim. 

14  when  he  came  unto  Lehi,  the  Philistines 

14  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily 

8  the  man  departed,  .and  he  came  to  mount 

9  Micahsaid  uuto  him,  Whence  comest  thou? 

2  who  when  they  came  to  mount  E.,  to  the 

7  the  five  men  departed,  and  came  to  Laish 

8  they  came  unto  their  brethren  to  Zorah 
10  When  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  unto  a  people 
13  they  passed,  and  came  unto  the  house  of 

15  they  turned,  .and  came  to  the  house  of 

27  they  took  (the  things),  .and  cameunto  L. 
10  he  rose  up.  .and  came  over  against  Jebus 

23 


Judgig.  16  there  came  an  old  man  from  his  work  out 
19.  17  Whither  goest  thou  ?  and  whence  comest 
19.  22  Bring  forth  the  man  that  came  into  thine 

19.  26  Then  came  the  -women  in  the  dawning  of 

20.  4  I  came  into  Gibeah  that  (belongeth)  to 
20. 10  when  they  come  to  Gibeah  of  Benjamin 
20.  26  all  the  children  of  Israel,  .came  unto  the 

20.  34  there  came  against  Gibeah  ten  thousand 

21.  2  the  people  came  to  the  house  of  God,  and 
21.  8  behold,  therecamenone  to  the  camp  from 
21.  22  when  their  fathers  or  their  brethren  come 

Ruth  1.    2  they  came  into  the  country  of  Moab,  aud 
1.  19  two  went  until  they  came  to  Beth-lehem 

1.  22  they  came  to  Beth-lehem  in  the  beginning 

2.  3  she.  .came,  and  gleaned  in  the  field  after 
2.   4  Boaz  came  from  Bethlehem,  aud  said  unto 

2.  7  she  came,  and  hath  continued  even  from 

3.  7  she  came  softly,  and  uncovered  his  feet 
3.  14  Let  it  not  be  known  that  a  woman  came 
3.  16  when  she  came  to  her  mother  in  law,  she 

1  Sa.  1.  19  they  rose  up.  .and  came  to  their  house  to 
2.  13  the  priest's  servant  came,  while  the  flesh 
2.  14  unto  all  the  Israelites  that  came  thither 
2.  15  they  burnt  the  fat,  the.,  servant  came 
2.  27  there  came  a  man  of  God  unto  Eli,  aud 
2.  31  the  days  come,  that  I  will  cut  off  thine 
2.  34  this  (shall  be)  a  sign,  .that  shall  come 
2.  36  that  is  left  in  thine  house  shall  come 
10  the  Lord  came,  and  stood,  and  called  as  at 

3  Let  us  fetch  the  ark.  .when  it  cometh 
5  the  ark  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  camp 

12  there  ran  a  man.. and  came  to  Shiloh 

13  whentheman  came  into  the  city,  andtold 
16  I  (am)  he  that  came  out  of  the  army  and 

5  nor  any  that  come  into  Dagon's  house 
10  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  ark  of  God  came 

14  the  cart  came  into  the  field  of  Joshua 
1  the  men.  of  ELirjath-jearim  came,  and 

13  the  Philistines,  .came  no  more  into  the 

4  all  the  elders,  .came  to  Samuel  unto  R. 

12  haste  now,  for  he  came  to  day  to  the  city 

13  for  the  people  will  not  eat  until  he  come 

15  Lord  had  told  Samuel.,  before  Saul  came 

3  thon  shalt  come  to  the  plain  of  Tabor 

5  thou  shalt  come  to  the  hill  of  God,  where 
5  when  thou  art  come  thither  to  the  city 

8  till  I  come  to  thee,  and  show  thee  what 

10  when  they  camethitherto  the  hill,  behold 

13  he  had  made  an  end  of  prophesying,  he 

14  that  (they  were)  nowhere,  we  came  to  S. 
22  enquired,  .if  the  man  should  yet  come 

4  Then  came  the  messengers  to  Gibeah  of 

5  Saul  came  after  the  herd  out  of  the  field 

9  they  said  unto  the  messengers  that  came 
9  the  messengers  came  and  showed  (it)  to 

11  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  host  in 

12  the  king  of  the  children  of  Amnion  came 

8  but  Samuel  came  not  to  Gilgal ;  and  the 

10  as  soon  as  he  had  made.  .Samuel  came 

1 1  thou  earnest  not  within  the  days  appoint. 

20  Saul  and  all  the  people,  .came  to  the  bat. 

25  all  (they  of)  the  land  came  to  a  wood 
5  Saul  came  to  a  city  of  Amalek,  and  laid 

7  (until)  thou  comest  to  Shur,  that  (is)  over 

12  Saul  came  to  Carmel.  and.  .he  set  him 

13  Samuel  came  to  Saul :  and  Saul  said 
4  And  Samuel  came  to  Beth-lehem 

4  the  elders . .  said,  Comest  thou  peaceably  ? 

5  and  come  with  me  to  the  sacrifice 
11  we  will  not  sit  down  till  he  come  hither 

21  David  came  to  Saul,  aud  stood  before  him 

20  he  came  to  the  trench,  as  the  host  was 

22  And  David,  .came  and  saluted  his  breth. 
34  there  came  a  lion .  .and  took  a  lamb  out  of 
43  (Am)  I  a  dog,  that  thou  comest  to  me  with 
45  Thou  comest  to  me  with  a  sword,  and 
45  I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
52  until  thou  come  to  the  valley,  and  to 

6  as  they  came . .  women  came  out  of  all  the 
iS  So  David,  .came  to  Samuel  to  Ramah 

22  and  came  to  a  great  well  that  (is)  in  S. 

23  he.  .prophesied  until  he  came  to  Kaioth 
1  David,  .came  and  said  before  Jonathan 

9  evil  were  determined  by  my  father  to 
19  come  to  the  plaoe  where  thou  didst  hide 

21  come  thou :  for  (there  is)  peace  to  thee 
21  cometh  not  the  son  of  Jesse  to  meat 
29  he  cometh  not  unto  the  king's  table 
38  gathered  up  the  arrows,  and  came  to  his 

1  Thencame'DavidtoNob  to  Ahimelechthe 

15  shall  this  (fellow)  come  into  my  house  ? 
5  David  departed,  and  came  into  the  forest 

11  and  they  came  all  of  them  to  the  king 
9  I  saw  the  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  Nob;  to 

10  come  to  Keilah,  to  destroy  the  city  for 
27  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Saul,  saying" 
3  he  came  to  the  sheep  cotes  by  the  way 

8  for  we  come  in  a  good  day :  give,  I  pray 

8  whatsoever  cometh  to  thine  hand  unto 

9  when  David's  young  men  came,  they  spake 

12  David's  young  men.  .cameandtoldhim  all 
19  Go  on  before  me;  behold.  .1  come  after 

26  the  Lord  hath  withholden  thee  from  com. 

33  which  hast  kept  me  this  day  from  coming 

34  except  thou  hadst  hasted  and  come  to 
36  Abigail  came  to  Mahal :  and,  behold,  he 

1  the  Ziphites  came  unto  Saul  to  Gibeah 
3  he  saw  that  Saul  came  after  him  into  the 
5  David  arose,  and  came  to  the  place  where 

7  So  David  and  Abishai  came  to  the  people 
10  or  his  day  shall  come  to  die ;  or  he  shall 
15  for  there  came  one  of  the  people  in  to 


16. 
16. 
e6. 
16. 
16. 
*7- 
17- 
17- 
*7- 
17- 
*7- 
*7- 
t8. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


3°' 
3i- 
3i' 
31- 

2  Sa.  1.' 


1  Sa.  27.    9  David,  .returned,  and  came  to  Achish 
28.    4  the  Philistines,  .came  and  pitched  in  Sh. 
28.   8  and  they  came  to  the  woman  by  night 

28.  21  the  woman  came  unto  Saul,  and  saw  that 

29.  6  I  have  not  found . .  since  the  day  of  thy  co. 

30.  3  So  David  and  his  men  came  to  the  city 
30.    9  So  David,  .came  to  the  brook  Besor 
30.  21  David  came  to  the  two  hundred  men 
30.  23  the  company  that  came  against  us  into 

26  when  David  came  to  Ziklag,  he  sent  of 
4  come  and  thrust  me  through,  and  abuse 

7  the  Philistines  came  and  dwelt  in  them 

8  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the 

12  All  the  valiant  men  arose,  .and  came  to 
2  behold  a  man  came  out  of  the  camp 

2  (so)  it  was,  when  he  came  to  David,  that 

3  David  said  unto  him.  .whence  comest 

4  the  men  of  Judah  came,  and  there  they 
23  as  many  as  came  to  the  place  where  Asa 
29  and  they  came  to  Mahanaim 

13  when  thou  comest  to  see  my  face 
20  Abner  came  to  David  to  Hebron,  and 

22  servants  of  David,  .came  from  (pursuing) 

23  Abner  the  son  of  Ner  came  to  the  king 

24  Then  Joab  came  to  the  king,  and  said 

24  Whathast  thoudoue?  behold,  Abnercame 

25  Abner  the  son  of  Ner.  .he  came  to  deceive 
35  the  people  came  to  cause  David  to  eat 

4  was  five  years  old  when  the  tidings  came 

5  sons  of  Rirnmon.  .came  about  the  heat  of 

6  they  came  thither  into  the  midst  of  the 

7  when  they  came  into  the  house,  he  lay  on 

1  Then  came'all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  David 
3  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to  the  king  to 

8  The  blind  and  the  lame  shall  not  come 
.  18  The  Philistines  also  came  and  spread 

20  David  came  to  Baal-perazim,  and  David 

23  come  upon  them  over  against  the  niulb. 
25  from  Geba  until  thou  come  to  Gazer 

6  when  they  came  to  "Nachon's  threshing 

9  How  shall  the  ark  of  the  Lord  come  to  me  ? 

16  as  the  ark  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  city 
8.  5  the  Syrians  of  Damascus  came  to  succour 
o.    2  And  David's  servants  came  into  the  land 

0.  14  So  Joab  returned . .  and  came  to  Jerusalem 

10. 16  Syrians  that  (were) beyond,  .came  to  Hel. 

10. 17  all  Israel,  .passed  over  Jordan,  and  came 
ti.  10  Camest  thounot  from  (thy)  journey  ?  why 

11.  22  messenger  went,  and  came  and  snowed 

12.  1  he  came  unto  him,  and  said  unto  him 
12.    4  there  came  a  traveller  unto  the  rich  man 
12.  20  David  arose,  .and  came  into  the  house  of 

12.  20  then  he  came  to  his  own  house  ;  and  when 

13.  5  whenthyfathercometh.  .let.  .Tamarcome 
13.  6  I  pray  thee,  let  Tamar  my  sister  come 
13.  11  said  unto  her,  Come  lie  with  me,  my  sister 
13.  24  And  Absalom  came  to  the  king,  and  said 
13-  30  while  they  were  in  the  way.,  tidings  came 
*3-  35  Behold,  the  king's  sons  come :  as  thy 

13.  36  as  soon  as  he  had.  .the  king'ssons  came 

14.  3  come  to  the  king,  and  speak  on  this 
14.  29  would  not  come,  .he  would  not  come 
14.  31  T,hen  Joab  arose,  and  came  to  Absalom 
14.  32  Come  hither,  that  I  may  send  thee  to  the 
14.  33  So  Joab  came  to  the  king,  and  told  him 

14.  33  he  came  to  the  king,  and  bowed  himself 

15.  2  any  man  that  had  a  controversy  came 
15.   4  every  man  whichhath..  cause  might  come 
15.    6  to  all  Israel  that  came  to  the  king  for 
15.  13  thore  came  a  messenger  to  David,  saying 
15.  18  six  hundred  men.. came  after  him  from  G. 
15.  20  Whereas  thou  comest  (but)  yesterday 
15.  28  I  will  tarry,  .until there  come  wrord  from 
15.  37  Hushai,  David's  friend,  came  into  the 

37  and  Absalom  came  into  Jerusalem 
5  when  king  David  came  to  Bahurim 

14  the  people  that  (were)  with  him,  came 

15  and  all  the  people,  .came  to  Jerusalem 

2  I  will  come  upon  him  while  he  (is)  weary 
12  shall  we  come  upon  Irim  in  some  place 

17  they  might  not  be  seen  to  come  into  the 
iS  and  came  to  a  man's  house  in  Buhurim 
20  Absalom's  servants  came  to  the  woman  to 

24  Then  David  came  to  Mahanaim.   AndAb. 

27  a  good  man.  .cometh  with  good  tidings 
31  And,  behold,  Cushi  came ;  and  Cushi  said 

5  Joab  came  into  the  house  to  the  king,  and 
8  And  all  the  people  came  before  the  king 
15  the  king  returned,  and  came  to  Jordan 
15  Judah  came  to  Gilgal,  to  go  to  meet  the 
24  until  the  day  he  come  (again)  in  peace 
41  all  the  men  of  Israel  came  to  the  king 
20.    3  David  came  to  his  house  at  Jerusalem 
20.  12  every  one  that  came  by  him  stood  still 
20, 15  they  came  and  besieged  him  in  Abel  of 

23.  13  three  of  the  thirty.,  came  to  David  in 

24.  6  they  came  to  Gilead .  .they  came  to  Dau-j. 
24.    7  And  came  to  the  stronghold  of  Tyre,  and 
24.   8  they  came  to  Jerusalem  at  the  end  of  nine 
24.  13  Gad  came  to  David,  and  told  him,  and 
24.  13  Shall  seven  years  of  famine  come  unto 
24.  iS  And  Gad  came  that  day  to  David,  and 

:  Tvi.  1.  28  And  she  came  into  the  king's  presence 

1.  32  And  they  came  before  the  king 

1.  35  that  he  may  come  and  sit  upon  mythrone 
1.  42  the  son  of  Abiathar  the  priest  came 
1.  47  the  king's  servants  came  to  bless  our 

1.  53  he  came  and  bowed  himself  to  king  Solo. 

2.  13  And  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith  came 
2. 13  And  she  said,  Comest  thou  peaceably? 

2.  28  Then  tidings  came  to  Joab,  for  Joab  had 
2.  30  Benaiah  came  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  L. 


COMB 


178 


COME 


■Ki. 


S 


sKi. 


15  he  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  stood  before 
.  16  Then  came  there  two  women,  .harlots 

34  there  came  of  all  people  to  hear  the  wisdom 
,  14  he  came  to  king  Solomon,  and  wrought 
,    3  all  the  elders  of  Israel  came,  and . .  took  up 
,  31  the  oath  come  before  thine  altar  iu  this 
,  41  cometh  out  of  a  far  country  for  thy  name's 
,  42  he  shall  come  and  pray  toward  this  house 

28  And  they  came  to  Ophir,  and  fetched,  .gold 
,  1  she  came  to  prove  him  with  hard  questions 
,    2  she  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  very  great 

,    7  I  believed  not  the  words,  until  I  came 
,  10  tbere  came  no  more  such  abundance  of 

i2  there  came  no  such  ahnug  trees,  nor  were 
,  14  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  Solomon 

22  once  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of  Thar. 
.  18  they  arose  out  of  Midian,  and  came  to  P. 
,  18  they  came  to  Egypt  unto  Pharaoh,  king 

3  and  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  came 
12  the  people  came  to  Rehoboam  the  third 

t  there  came  a  man  of  God  out  of  Judah 
7  Come  home  with  me,  and  refresh  thyself 

10  he.  .returned  not  by  the  way  that  he  came 

11  his  sons  came  and  told  him  all  the  works 

12  what  way  the  man  of  God.  .which  came 

14  the  man  of  God  that  earnest  from  Judah  ? 

21  unto  the  man  of  God  that  came  from  J. 

22  thy  carcase  shall  not  come  unto  the  sep. 
25  they  came  and  told  (it)  iu  the  city  where 

29  theold  prophet  came  to  the  city,  to  mourn 

4  Jeroboam's  wife,  .came  to  the  house  of 

5  the  wife  of  Jeroboam  cometh  to  ask  a 

13  for  he  only,  .shall  com?  to  the  grave 

17  Jeroboam  s  wife  arose,  .and  came  to  Tirz. 
10  when  he  came  to  the  gate  of  the  city 

12  when  I  come  and  tell  Ahab,  and  he  cannot 

3  he  arose,  .and  came  to  Beer-sheba,  which 

4  he.  .came  and  sat  down  under  a  juniper 
g  he  came  thither  unto  a  cave,  and  lodged 

15  when  thou  comest,  anoint  Hazael  (to  be) 

30  Ben-hadad  fled,  and  came  into  the  city 
^2  So  they,  .came  to  the  king  of  Israel,  and 
43  the  king  of  Israel,  .came  to  Samaria 

4  Ahab  came  into  his  house  heavy  and 

5  Jezebel  his  wife  came  to  him,  and  said 
15  So  he  came  to  the  king.  And  the  king 
27  with  water  of  affliction,  until  I  come  in 

13  came  and  fell  on  his  knees  before  Elijah 

4  So  they  came  to  Jericho 

15  they  came  to  meet  him,  and  bowed  them. 
20  behold,  there  came  water  by  the  way  of 

24  when  they  came  to  the  camp  of  Israel 

1  the  creditor  is  come  to  take . .  my  two  sons 

7  Then  she  came  and  told  the  man  of  God 

10  it  shall  be,  when  he  cometh  to  us,  that  he 

11  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  he  came  thither,  and 

25  she  went,  and  came  unto  the  man  of  God 
27  she  came  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  hill 
39  came  and  shred  (them)  into  the  pot  of 

42  there  came  a  man  from  Baal-shalisha 

5  let  him  come  now  to  me,  and  he  shall  kno. 

9  Naaman  came  with  his  horses  and  with 
15  he  and  all  his  company,  .came  and  stood 
24  when  he  came  to  the  tower,  he  took  (them) 

4  when  they  came  to  Jordan,  they  cut 

14  they  came  by  night,  and  compassed  the 

23  So  the  bands  of  Syria  came  no  more  into 
32  ere  the  messenger  came  to  him,  he  said 
32  when  the  messenger  cometh,  shut  the 

6  the  kings  of  the  Egyptians,  .come upon 

8  these  lepers  came  to  the  uttermost  part 

8  came  again,  and  entered  into  another 
10  they  came  and  called  unto  the  porter  of 

10  We  came  to  the  camp  of  the  Syrians,  and 

1  it  shall,  .come  upon  the  land  seven  years 

7  Elisha  came  to  Damascus  ;  and  Ben-hadad 

9  forty  camels' burden,  and  came  and  stood 
14  he  departed  from  Elisha,  and  came  to  his 

2  when  thou  comest  thither,  look  out  there 

5  when  he  came,  .the  captains  of  the  host 
17  spied  the  company  of  Jehu,  as  he  came 

17  he  came,  and  said,  I  see  a  company 

18  The  messenger  came  to  them,  but  he 

19  he  sent  out  a  second,  .which  came  to  them 

20  came  even  unto  them,  and  cometh  not 

2  Now  as  soon  as  this  letter  cometh  to  you 

6  come  to  me.  .by  to  morrow  this  time 

7  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  letter  came  to 

8  there  came  a  messenger,  and  told  him 
17  when  he  came  to  Samaria,  he  slew  all 

21  there  was  not  a  mnn  left  that  came  not 
21  all  the  worshippers  of  Baal  came,  so  that 

8  he  that  cometh  withiu  the  ranges,  let  him 

9  aud  came  to  Jehoiada  the  priest 

13  she  came  to  the  people  into  the  temple  of 
19  he . .  came  by  the  way  of  the  gate  of  the 
9  as  one  cometh  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 

13  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  brake  down  the 

14  Meuahem.  .came  to  Samaria,  and  smote 
19  the  king  of  Assyria  came  against  the  land 
--■  In  the  days  of  Pekah.  .came  Tiglath-pile. 

6  the  Syrians  came  to  Elath.and  dwelt  there 

11  against  king  Ahaz  came  from  Damascus 
.  28  one  of  the  priests,  .came  and  dwelt  in 

17  and  they  went  up,  and  came  to  Jerusalem 
1 7  ib-y  came  and  stood  by  the  conduit  of 
32  Until  I  come  and  take  yon  away  to  a 
37  Then  came  Eliakim  the  sou  of  Hilkiah 

iwtaot  king  Hezekiah  came  to  Isaiah 
32  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  nor 
39  nor  ooroe  before  it  with  shield,  nor  cast 
; ;  the  way  that  he  came,  by  the  same  shall 


iCh, 


2  Ki.19.  33  and  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  saith 
20.    1  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  came  to  him,  aud 
20.  14  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king 

20. 14  and  from  whence  came  they  uuto  thee  ? 
20.  17  days  come,  that  all  that  (is)  in  thine  house 

9  Shaphan  the  scribe  came  to  the  king,  aud 

17  of  the  man  of  God,  which  came  from  Ju. 

18  the  bones  of  the  prophet  that  came  out 
34  and  he  came  to  Egypt,  and  died  there 
11  king  of  Babylon  came  against  the  city 

1  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon  came 
S  in  the  fifth  month,  .came  Nebuzar-adan 
23  there  came  to  Gedaliah  to  Mizpah 

25  came,  aud  ten  men  with  him,  and  smote 

26  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great . .  came 
55  These  (are)  the  Kenites  that  came  of 
4t  these  written  by  name  came  in  the  days 
22  and  his  brethren  came  to  comfort  him 
25  their  brethren,  .(were)  to  come  after 

4  let  these  uncircumcised  come  aud  abuse 

7  and  the  Philistines  came  and  dwelt  in 

8  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the 
3  Therefore  came  all  the  elders  of  Israel  to 

5  Thou  shalt  not  come  hither.    Nevertheless 

1  Now  these  (are)  they  that  came  to  David 
16  there  came  of  the  children  of  Benjamin 

19  when  he  came  with  the  Philistines  against 

22  day  by  day  there  came  to  David  to  help 

23  came  to  David  to  Hebron,  to  turn  the 
31  which  were  expressed  by  name,  to  come 
38  All  these  men  of  war.  .came  with  a  perfect 

9  when  they  came  unto  the  threshing  floor 
9  the  Philistines  came  and  spread  them 

14  comeupou  themoveragaiustthe mulberry 
29  (as)  the  ark.  .came  to  the  city  of  David 
29  bring  an  offering,  and  come  before  him 
33  because  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth 

16  David  the  king  came  and  sat  before  the 
5  when  the  Syrians  of  Damascus  came  to 

2  so  the  servants  of  David  came  into  the 
7  his  people ;  who  came  and  pitched  before 
7  gathered  themselves,  .and  came  to  battle 

15  Then  Joab  came  to  Jerusalem 

17  he.. passed  over  Jordan,  and  came  upon 

20.  1  and  came  and  besieged  Kabbah.    But 

21.  4  Joab  departed,  .and  came  to  Jerusalem 
21.  11  So  Gad  came  to  David,  and  said  unto  him 

21.  2j  as  David  came  to  Oman,  Oman  looked 
24. 19  to  come  into  the  house  of  the  LORD 

2  Ch.  1.  13  Solomon  came(from  his  journey)  to  the 

5.  4  the  elders  of  Israel  came  ;  and  the  Levites 

6.  22  the  oath  come  before  thine  altar  in  this 
6.  32  if  they  come  and  pray  in  this  house 

7. 11  aud  all  that  came  into  Solomon's  heart 

8.  11  the  ark  of  the  Lord  hath  come 

9.  1  she  came  to  prove  Solomou  with  hard 

9.   6  I  believed  not  their  words,  until  I  came 
9.  13  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  Solomon 
9.21  every  three  years  once  came  the  ships  of 
10.    3  all  Israel  came  and  spake  to  Rehoboam 
10.  12  Jeroboam  and  all  the  people  came  to  R. 

11. 16  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  .came  to  Jerusalem 
12.  3  without  number  that  came  with  him  out 
12.    4  he  took  the  fenced  cities  ...and  came  to 

12.  5  Then  came  Shemaiah  the  prophet  to  R. 

22.  11  the  guard  came  and  fetched  them,  and 

13.  9  whosoever  cometh  to  consecrate  himself 

14.  9  Zelah  the  Ethiopian,  .came  uuto  Maresh. 
16.    7  the  seer  came  to  Asa  king  of  Judah,  and 
19. 10  what,  .shall  come  to  you  of  yourbretlu-en 
20.    1  came  against  Jehoshaphat  to  battle 

20.    2  there  came  some  that  told  Jehoshaphat 
20.   2  There  cometh  a  great  multitude  agaiust 
20.   4  even  out  of  all . .  cities  of  Judah  they  came 
20.    9  ( wheu)  evil  cometh  upon  us,  (as)  the 
20. 10  when  they  came  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
20.  11  to  come  to  cast  us  out  of  thy  possession 
20. 12  this  great  company  that  cometh  against 
20.  24  Judah  came  toward  the  watch  tower  in 
20.  25  his  people  came  to  take  away  the  spoil 

20.  28  they  came  to  Jerusalem  with  psalteries 

21.  12  there  came  a  writing  to  him  from  Elijah 

22.  1  the  baud  of  men  that  came  with  the  Ar. 

22.  7  the  destruction . .  was  of  God,  by  coming 

23.  2  they  went  about,  .and  they  came  toJeru. 
23.  6  let  none  come  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
23.  12  she  came  to  the  people  into  the  house  of 

23.  20  they  came  through  the  high  gate  into  the 

24,  11  the  high  priest's  officer  came  and  emptied 

24. 17  after  the  death  of  Jehoiada  came  the  pr. 

24.  23  they  came  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and 
24. 24  the  Syrians  came  with  a  small  company 

25.  7  But  there  camea  man  of  God  to  him,  say. 
28.    9  he  went  out  before  the  host  that  came  to 
28.  12  stood  up  against  them  that  came  from 
28. 17  theEdomiteshadcomeand  smitten  Judah 

28.  20  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  Assyria  came 

29. 15  they  gathered  their  brethren,  .and  came 

29.  17  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  month  came  they 

30.  1  they  should  come  to  the  house  of  the  L. 
30.    5  they  should  come  to  keep  the  passover 
30.  11  divers,  .humbled  themselves,  and  came 
30.  25  all  the  congregatiou  that  came  out  of  Is. 
30.  25  the  strangers  that  came  out  of  the  land 

30.  27  their  prayer  came  (up)  to  his  holy  dwell. 

31.  8  and  the  princes  came  and  saw  the  heaps 

32.  1  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  came,  and 
32.  4  Why  should  the  kings  of  Assyria  come 
32.  26  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  came  not  upon 

34.  9  when  they  came  to  Hilkiah  the  high  pri. 

35.  22  and  came  to  fight  in  the  valley  of  Megiddo 
Ezra   2.    2  Which  came  with  Zerubbabel :  Jeshua 


Ezra  3. 

7- 
7- 


Neh. 


4- 

4- 

4- 

5- 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

7. 

13- 

13- 

13- 

13- 

*3- 

Esth.  1 


Job 


3- 
3< 
3- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
9- 
T3- 
14. 

17- 
19. 
21. 
23- 
27. 
28. 
29. 
SO- 
Se- 
s' 
38. 
41. 
41, 

42' 

Psa.  5. 
18. 
22. 

35- 
37- 
40. 
41. 
42. 
So- 
5i- 
52- 
54- 
6S. 
69. 
7i- 
79- 
86. 
88. 
95- 
96. 


too. 

IOI. 

102. 

105. 
105. 
105. 
105. 

109. 

118. 
119. 

121. 
132. 

Prov.  1. 

1. 


8  the  second  year  of  their  coming  unto  the 

8  he  came  to  Jerusalem  in  the  fifth  month 

9  on  the  first  (day)  of  the  fifth  month  came 
32  we  came  to  Jerusalam,  and  abode  there 

8  whosoever  would  not  come  within  three 
14  Let.  .our  rulers,  .come  at  appointed 
2  Hanaui,  one  of  my  brethren,  came,  he 

7  convey  me  over  till  I  come  into  Judah 

9 1  came  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river 
11 1  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  was  there  three 

8  to  come  (and)  to  fight  against  Jerusalem 

11  They  shall  not  know,  .till  we  come  in  the 

12  when  the  Jews  which  dwelt  by  them  came 
17  those  that  came  unto  us  from  among  the 

10  I  came  unto  the  house  of  Shemaiah  the 
10  for  they  will  come  to  slay  thee 

10  in  the  night  will  they  come  to  slay  thee 
17  and  (the  letters)  of  Tobiah  came  unto 

7  who  came  with  Zerubbabel,  Jeshua,  N. 

1  the  Moabite  should  not  come  into  the 

6  came  I  unto  the  king,  and  after  certain 

7  I  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  understood  of 

21  From  that  time  forth  came  they  no  (more) 

22  I  commanded,  .(that)  they  should  come 

12  queen  Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king's 
17  to  be  brought  iu.  .but  she  came  not 

19  That  Vashti  come  no  more  before  king  A. 

13  Then  thus  came  (every)  maiden  unto  the 

2  And  came  even  before  the  king's  gate 

4  Esther's  maids  and  her  chamberlains  came 

9  Hatach  came  and  told  Esther  the  words 

1 1  whosoever,  whether  man  or  woman, shall  c. 

4  let  the  king  and  Haman  come  this  day 

5  So  the  king  and  Haman  came  to  the  ban. 

8  let  the  king  and  Haman  come  to  the  ban. 

10  when  he  came  home,  he  sent  and  called 
1  the  king  and  Haman  came  to  banquet 

1  and  Mordecai  came  before  the  king 

25  But  wheu  (Esther)  came  before  the  king 

6  there  was  a  day.  .the  sons  of  God  came 

6  and  Satan  came  also  among  them 

7  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Whence  comest 

14  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Job,  and 
16,  17,  18  While  he  (was).,  speaking,  .came 

19  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the  wilder. 
1  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present  them. 

1  Satan  came  also  among  them,  to  present 

2  the  Lord  said.  .From  whence  comest  thou? 

11  had  made  an  appointment  together  to  c. 

6  let  it  not  come  into  the  number  of  the 

7  let  no  joyful  voice  come  therein 

24  For  my  sighing  cometh  before  I  eat,  and 

26  neither  was  I  quiet ;  yet  trouble  came 
21  be  afraid  of  destruction  when  it  cometh 
26  shalt  come  to  (thy)  grave  in  a  full  age 

20  they  came  thither,  and  were  ashamed 
32  (aud)  we  should  come  together  in  judg. 

16  for  an  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  him 
14  will  I  wait,  till  my  change  come 

10  as  for  you  all,  do  ye  return,  and  come  now 

12  His  troops  come  together,  and  raise  up 

17  (how  oft)  cometh  their  destruction  upon 

3  (that)  I  might  come  (even)  to  his  seat 

9  Will  God  hear,  .cry  when  trouble  cometh 
20  "Whence  then  cometh  wisdom  ?  and  where 

13  The  blessing  of  him.  .came  upon  me 

26  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  came  (unto  me) 

26  when  I  waited  for  light,  there  came  dark. 
9  out  of  the  south  cometh  the  whirlwind 

11  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further 
1 3  (or)  who  cau  come  (to  him)  with  his 

16  that  no  air  can  come  between  them 

1 1  Then  came  there  unto  him  all  his  brethren 

7  I  will  come  (into)  thy  house  in  the  multi. 

6  my  cry  came  before  him,  (even)  into  his 
31  They  shall  come,  and  shall  declare  his 

8  Let  destruction  come  upon  him  at  una. 
13  for  he  seeth  that  his  day  is  coming 

7  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume 
6  if  he  come  to  see  (me),  he  speaketh  vanity 

2  wdien  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God  ? 

3  Our  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep 
title,  wdien  Nathan  the  prophet  came  unto 
title,  when  Doeg  the  Edomite  came  and 
title,  when  the  Ziphims  came  and  said  to  S. 

2  unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come 

27  let  them  not  come  into  thy  righteousness 

18  thy  power  to  every  oue  (that  is)  to  come 
11  Let  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner  come 

9  nations  whom  thou  hast  made  shall  come 
2  Let  my  prayer  come  before  thee  :  incline 
6  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down  ;  let 

8  bring  an  offering,  and  come  into  his  courts 
13  for  he  cometh,  for  he  cometh  to  judge  the 

9  for  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth  :  with 
2  come  before  his  presence  with  singing 

2  O  when  wilt  thou  come  uuto  me  ?  I  will 
1  O  Lord,  .let  my  cry  come  unto  thee 

19  Until  the  time  that  his  word  came  :  the 

23  Israel  also  came  into  Egypt ;  and  Jacob 
31  He  spake,  and  there  came  divers  sorts  of 
34  He  spake,  and  the  locusts  came,  and 

18  let  it  come  into  his  bowels  like  water 
26  Blessed  (be)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
170  Let  my  supplication  come  before  thee 
1  uuto  the  hills,  from  whence  cometh  my 

3  Surely  I  will  not  come  into  the  tabernacle 

26  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh 

27  When  your  fear  cometh  as  desolation,  and 
27  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind 
27  when  distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon 

25  Be  not  afraid  of .  .fear,  .when  it  cometh 


COMB 


179 


COMB 


Prov.  6. 

6. 
7 


24. 
24. 
26. 

Eccl.  1. 


Song  2. 
4- 
4- 


Isa. 


Jer. 


27. 
27. 
27. 
3°. 
30. 
30- 
32- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36- 
36. 

37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
41. 
41. 
44. 
45- 
45. 

47- 

47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
49. 

49 
5o- 
5*- 
52- 
56. 
S9- 
60. 
60. 
60. 
60. 
60, 
62. 
63. 
66. 
66. 
66. 
66. 
66. 


11  So  shall  thy  poverty  come  as  one  that 

15  Therefore  shall . .  calamity  come  suddenly 
20  He . .  will  come  home  at  the  day  appointed 

2  (When)  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  shame 
8  and  the  wicked  cometh  in  his  stead 

12  (when)  the  desire  cometh,  (it  is)  a  tree  of 

3  when  the  wicked  cometh,  (then)  cometh 
17  his  neighbour  cometh  and  searcheth  him 

25  a  good  blessing  shall  come  upon  them 
34  So  shall  thy  poverty  come  (as)  one  that 

2  so  the  curse  causeless  shall  uot  come 

4  generation  passeth  away,  .(another),  .c. 
12  what  (can)  the  man  (do)  that  cometh  a-fter 

16  the  days  to  come  shall  all  be  forgotten 

3  a  dream  cometh  through  the  multitude 
15  As  he  came  forth  of  his  mother's  womb 

15  naked  shall  he  return  to  go  as  he  came 

16  in  all  points  as  he  came,  so  shall  he  go 

10  who  had  come  and  gone  from  the  place 

14  and  there  came  a  great  king  against  it 
8  All  that  cometh  (is)  vanity 
1  while  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  years 

5  behold,  he  cometh,  leaping  upon  the 

8  Come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  (my)  spouse 

16  come,  thou  south. .  Let  my  beloved  come 
12  When  yeicome  to  appear  before  me,  who 

23  neither  doth  the  cause  of  the  widow  come 
19  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  draw  nigh  and  c. 

26  behold,  they  shall  come  with  speed 

17  shall  bring.,. days  that  have  not  come 

19  they  shall  come,  and  shall  rest  all  of  them 

24  With  arrows  and  with  bows  shall  (men)  c. 

25  there  shall  not  come  thither  the  fear  of 

3  the  desolation  (which)  shall  come  from  far 

5  They  come  from  a  far  couutry,  from  the 

6  it  shall  come  as  a  destruction  from  the 

9  Behold,  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  cruei 

22  her  time  (is)  near  to  come,  and  her  days 
9  moved  for  thee  to  meet  (thee)  at  thy  com. 

31  there  shall  come  from  the  north  a  smoke 

12  that  he  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  to  pray 
1  the  Lord  rideth.  .shall  come  into  Egypt 

23  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  Egypt,  and 
1  In  the  year  that  Tartan  came  unto  Ashdod 
1  it  cometh  from  the  desert,  from  a  terrible 
9  And,  behold,  here  cometh  a  chariot  of 
6  cause  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take 

11  the  women  come,  (and)  set  them  on  fire 

13  they  shall  come  which  were  ready  to  perish 
13  whose  breaking  cometh  suddenly  at  an 

27  the  name  of  the  Lord  cometh  from  far 
29  to  come  into  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 
10  shall  fail,  the  gathering  shall  uot  come 

4  behold,  your  God  will  come,  .he  will  come 
10  the  ransomed,  .shall  return,  and  come  to 

17  Until  I  come  and  take  you  away  to  a  land 
22  Then  came  EUakini  the  sou  of  Hilkiah 

5  the  servants  of  king  Hezekiah  came  to  I. 
29  back  by  the  way  by  which  thou  earnest 
33  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city/nor  shoot 

33  nor  come  before  it  with  shields,  nor  cast 

34  By  the  way  that  he  came,  by  the  same 
34  and  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  saith 

1  the  son  of  Amoz,  came  unto  him,  and  said 
3  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king 

3  and  from  whence  came  they  unto  thee 

6  the  days  come,  that  all  that  (is)  in  thine 

10  the  Lord  God  will  come  with  a  strong 

22  or  declare  us  things  for  to  come 

25  I  have  raised  up.  .and  he  shall  come 

7  and  shall  come,  let  them  show  unto  thorn 

20  Assemble  yourselves  and  come;  draw 

24  (even)  to  him  shall  (men)  come ;  and  all 

9  these  two  (things)  shall  come  to  thee  in 
9  they  shall  come  upon  thee  in  their  perfe. 

11  Therefore  shall  evil  come  upon  thee;  thou 

11  desolation  shall  come  upon  thee  suddenly 
13  (these  things)  that  shall  come  upon  thee 

12  Behold,  these  shall  come  from  afar ;  and 

18  all  these  gather  themselves,  .(and)  come 

2  Wherefore,  when  I  came,  (was  there)  no 
11  come  with  singing  unto  Zion ;  and  ever. 

1  there  shall  no  more  come  into  thee  the 

1  for  my  salvation  (is)  near  to  come,  and 

20  And  the  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion 

4  they  gather  themselves  together,  they  c. 

4  thy  sons  shall  come  from  far,  and  thy 

5  forces  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  unto  thee 

6  all  they  from  Sheba  shall  come :  they 

13  The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come  unto  thee 

1 1  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh ;  behold,  his 
1  Who  (is)  this  that  cometh  from  Edom 

7  she  brought  forth ;  before  her  pain  came 

15  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire,  and 
18  it  shall  come,  that  I  will  gather  all  nations 
;8  and  they  shall  come,  and  see  my  glory 

23  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before  me 

15  For,  lo,  I  will  call . .  and  they  shall  come 

3  evil  shall  come  upon  them,  saith  the  L. 

31  "We  are  lords  ;  we  will  come  no  more  unto 
18  they  shall  come  together  out  of  the  laud 

12  a  full  wind . .  shall  come  unto  me 

16  watchers  come  from  a  far  country,  and 
12  (It  is)  not  he  ;  neither  shall  evil  come 

3  shepherds  with  their  flocks  shall  come 
20  To  what  purpose  cometh  there  to  me 
22  Behold,  a  people  cometh  from  the  north 

26  the  spoiler  shall  suddenly  come  upon  us 

10  come  and  stand  before  me  in  this  house 

32  behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

•  7  observe  the  time  of  their  coming ;  but 

•  17  Consider  ye .  .that  they  may  come ;  and 


Jer.     g.  17  send  for.  .(women),  that  they  may  come 
9.  25  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

13.  20  and  behold  them  that  come  from  the  north 

14.  3  they  came  to  the  pits,  (and)  found  no 

16. 14  Therefore,  behold,  the  days  come,  saith 

16.  19  Gentiles  shall  come  unto  thee  from  the 

17.  6  he.  .shall  not  see  when  good  cometh 

17.    8  he.  .shall  not  see  when  heat  cometh,  but 

17. 15  the  word  of  the  Lord?  Ietitcomenow 
17.  26  they  shall  come  from  the  cities  of  Judah 
iq.   6  behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

19.  14  Then  came  Jeremiah  from  Tophet 

20.  6  thou  shalt  come  to  Babylon,  aud  there 

22.  23  how.  .shalt  thou  be  when  pangs  come 

23.  5,  7  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 
23. 17  JS'o  evil  shall  come  upon  you 

25.  31  A  noise  shall  come  (even)  to  the  ends  of 

26.  2  speak  unto  all . .  which  come  to  worship  iu 

27.  3  the  hand  of  the  messengers  which  come 
27.    7  until  the  very  time  of  his  laud  come 

30.  3  For,  lo,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

31.  9  They  shall  come  with  weeping,  and  with 
31.  12  they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of 

31.  27,  31,  38  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the 

32.  7  Behold,  Hanameel.  .shall  come  unto  thee 
32.    8  mine  uncle's  son,  came  to  me  into  the 

32.  29  the  Chaldeans,  .shall  come  and  set  Are 

33.  5  They  come  to  fight  with  the  Chaldeans 
33.  14  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

35. 11  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  Jerusalem  forfear 
36.  6  of  all  Judah  that  come  out  of  their  cities 
36.  9  to  all  the  people  that  came  from  the  cities 
36. 14  took  the  roll  in  his  hand,  and  came  unto 
36. 29  The  kiug  of  Babylon  shall  certainly  come 
37. 19  The  king  of  Babylon  shall  not  come  agaiust 
38.  25  if  the  princes  hear,  .and  they  come  unto 

38.  27  Then  came  all  the  princes  unto  Jeremiah 

39.  1  In  the  ninth  year,  .came  Nebuchadrezzar 

40.  4  If  it  seem  good  unto  thee  to  come  with 
40.  4  come,  and  I  will  look  well  unto  thee ;  but 
40.  4  if  it  seem  ill  unto  thee  to  come  with  me 
40.  8  Then  they  came  to  Gedaliah  to  Mizpah 
40. 10  to  serve  the  Chaldeans,  which  will  come 
40.  12  all  the  Jews,  .came  to  the  land  of  Judah 

40.  13  all  the  captains,  .came  to  Gedaliah  to  M", 

41.  1  even  ten  men  with  him,  came  unto  Geda. 
41.  5  there  came  certain  from  Sheehem,  from 
41.    6  Come  to  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam 

41 .  7  when  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  city 
43.  7  So  they  came  into  the  land  of  Egypt :  for 
43.  7  Thus  came  they  (even)  to  Tahpanhes 
43.  11  when  he  cometh,  he  shall  smite  the  land 
46.  13  Nebuchadnezzar,  .should  come(and)smite 
46.  18  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  King,  .shall  he  come 
46.  20  Egypt  (is  like),  .(but)  destruction  cometh 
46.  20  it  cometh  out  of  the  north 

46.  22  come  against  her  with  axes,  as  hewers  of 

47.  4  the  day  that  cometh  to  spoil  all  the  Ph. 

48.  8  the  spoiler  shall  come  upon  every  city 

48. 12  behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

48. 16  The  calamity  of  Moab  (is)  near  to  come 

49.  2  behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 
49.    4  (saying),  Who  shall  come  unto  me? 

49.  9  If  grape-gatherers  come  to  thee,  would 
49.  14  Gather  ye  together,  and  come  against 

49.  36  the  outcasts  of  Elam  shall  not  come 

50.  4  the  children  of  Israel  shall  come,  they  and 
50.   5  Come,  and  let  us  join  ourselves  to  the 
50.  26  Come  against  her  from  the  utmost  border 

50.  41  Behold,  a  people  shall  come  from  the 

51.  10  come,  and  let  us  declare  in  Zion  the  work 
51.  13  abuudant  in  treasures,  thine  end  is  come 
51.  33  and  the  time  of  her  harvest  shall  come 
51.  46  a  rumour  shall  both  come  (one)  year 

51.  47  the  days  come,  that  I  will  do  judgment 
51.  48  the  spoilers  shall  come  uuto  her  from 
51.  52  behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 
51.  53  shall  spoilers  come  unto  her,  saith  the 
51.  60  all  the  evil  that  should  come  upon  Baby. 

51.  61  When  thou  comest  to  Babylon .  .read  all 

52.  4  Nebuchadrezzar  kiug  of  Babylon  came 
52.  12  in  the  tenth  (day)  of  the  month . .  came  N. 

Lam.  1.    4  because  none  come  to  the  solemn  feasts 
1.  22  Let  all  their  wickedness  come  before  thee 

Eze.  1.  4  behold,  a  whirlwind  came  out  of  the  north 
3. 15  I  came  to  them  of  the  captivity  at  Tel-a. 
4.  14  neither  came  there  abominable  flesh  into 
7.  25  Destruction  cometh ;  and  they  shall  seek 
7.  26  Mischief  shall  come  upon  mischief,  and 
9.  2  six  men  came  from  the  way  of  the  higher 
11.  16  in  the  countries  where  they  shall  come 

11.  18  they  shall  come  thither,  and  they  shall 

12.  16  among  the  heathen  whither  they  come 
14.    1  Then  came  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel 
14.    4,  7  his  iniquity  before  his  face,  and  cometh 
14.    4,  the  Lord  will  answer  him  that  cometh 

16.  16  (the  like  things)  shall  not  come,  neither 
16. 33  that  they  may  come  unto  thee  on  every 

17.  3  A  great  eagle,  .came  unto  Lebanon,  and 

20.  1  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to 

21.  7  For  the  tidings,  because  it  cometh  :  and 
21.  7  behold,  it  cometh,  and  shall  be  brought 
21.  19  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  may  come 
21.  20  Appoint  a  way,  that  the  sword  may  come 

21.  27  it  shall  be  no  (more),  until  he  come  whose 

22.  3  in  the  midst  of  it,  that  her  time  may  come 

23.  17  the  Babylonians  came  to  her  into  the  bed 
23.  24  they  shall  come  against  thee  with  chariots 
23.  39  they  came  the  same  day  into  my  sanctuary 
23.  40  that  ye  have  sent  for  men  to  come  from 

23,  40  they  came  :  for  "whom  thou  didst  wash 

24.  24  when  this  cometh,  ye  shall  know  that  I 


Eze. 


Dan. 


Hos.  4. 
6. 
9- 
10. 
r3- 
13- 
Joel    1. 


3- 

3- 

Amos  4. 
4^ 

5< 
6. 


Obad. 

Jon.    1. 

Mic.   1. 

3- 

4- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
7- 
7- 

Hab.  1. 
1. 
2. 

3- 

Zeph.  2. 

2. 
Hag.    1. 

2. 

2. 

2. 
Zech.  1. 

2. 

6. 

6. 


9- 

12. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 
Mai.  3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 


26  he  that'escapeth  in  that  day  shall  come 
4  And  the  sword  shall  come  upon  Egypt 
9  as  in  the  day  of  Egypt :  for,  lo,  it  cometTi 

3  when  he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the 

4  if  the  sword  come  and  take  him  away,  his 
6  But  if  the  watchman  see  the  sword  come 
6  if  the  sword  come  and  take  (any)  person 

21  one  that  had  escaped  out  of  Jerusalem  c. 

22  afore  he  that  was  escaped  came,  and  had 
22  until  he"came  to  me  iu  the  morning;  and 

30  Come,  .and  hear,  .the  word  that  cometh 

31  they  come  unto  thee  as  the  people  cometh 
33  lo  it  will  come,  then  shall  they  know 

8  for  they  are  at  hand  to  come 

9  Come  from  the  four  winds,  O  breath,  and 
10  and  the  breath  came  into  them,  and  they 

8  in  the  latter  years  thou  shalt  come  into 

9  Thou  shalt  ascend  and  come  like  a  storm 
13  Art  thou  come  to  take  a  spoil  ?  hast  thou 
15  thou  shalt  come  from  thy  place  out  of  the 
18  Gog  shall  come  against  the  land  of  Israel 
17  Assemble  yourselves,  and  come;  gather 

6  Then  came  he  unto  the  gate  which  look. 

2  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  came  from. 

3  that  I  saw  when  I  came  to  destroy  the  c. 

4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  house 

25  they  shall  come  at  no  dead  person  to 

9  the  people  of  the  land  shall  come  before 
9  whithersoever  the  rivers  shall  come,  shall 
9  because  these  waters  shall  come  thither 
9  shall  live  whither  the  river  cometh 
20  till  a  man  come  over  against  Hamath 

1  In  thethird  year,  .came  Nebuchadnezzar/ 

2  So  they  came  and  stood  before  the  king 

5  behold,  an  he  goat  came  from  the  west 

6  he  came  to  the  ram  that  had  (two)  horns 

17  So  he  came  near.. and  when  he  came 

26  the  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come 

3  neither  came  flesh  nor  wine  in  my  moiitti 
13  one  of  the  chief  princes,  came  to  help  me 
20  Knowestthou  wherefore  I  come  unto  thee? 

20  lo,  the  prince  of  Grecia  shall  corae 

6  king's  daughter  of  the  south  shall  come 

7  which  shall  come  with  an  army,  and  shall 
9  the  king  of  the  south  shall  come 

10  (one)  shall  certainly  come,  and  overflow 
13  shall  certainly  come  after  certain  years 

15  So  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come 

16  he  that  cometh . .  shall  do  according 

29  he  shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  so. 

30  the  ships  of  Chittim  shall  come  against 
45  yet  he  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  none 
15  come  not  ye  unto  Gilgal,  neither  go  ye  up 

3  he  shall  come  unto  us  as  the  rain,  as  the 

4  their  bread  for  their  soul  shall  not  come 

12  till  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon. 

13  The  sorrows  of  a.  .woman  shall  come 

15  an  east  wind  shall  come,  the  wind  of  the 
13  come,  lie  all  night  in  sackcloth,  ye  minis. 
15  destruction  from  the  Almighty  shall,  .co. 

1  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  for  (it  is) 

31  before  the  great,  .day  of  the  Lord  come 

1 1  come,  all  ye  heathen . .  gather  yourselves 
11  cause  thy  mighty  ones  to  come  down,  0 
13  come,  get  ye  down  ;  for  the  press  is  full 

2  lo,  the  days  shall  come  upon  you,  that 

4  Come  to  Beth-el, and  transgress ;  at  Gilgal 
9  the  spoiled  shall  come  against  the  fortress 

1  nations,  to  whom  the  house  of  Israel  came  ! 
11  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that 

13  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

5  If  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  by 
5  if  the  grape-gatherers  came  to  thee 

8  What,  .thine  occupa?  and  whence  comest 

15  he  shall  come  unto  Adullam  the  glory  of 

11  none  evil  can  come  upon  us 

8  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even  the  first  do. 
8  the  kingdom  shall  come  to  the  daughter 

5  when  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  our 

6  when  he  cometh  into  our  laud,  and  when 

4  the  day  of  thy  watchmen . .  cometh 

12  (In)  that  day  (also)  he  shall  come  even  to 

8  and  their  horsemen  shall  come  from  far 

9  They  shall  come  all  for  violence  :  their 

3  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry 

3  God  came  from  Teman,  and  the  Holy 

2  the  fierce  auger  of  the  Lord  come  upon 
2  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  come  upon 

14  they  came  and  did  work  in  the  house 

7  and  the  desire  of  all  nations  shall  come 

16  (one)  came  to  an  heap  of  twenty  {"measures) 
16  (one)  came  to  the  press  fat  for  to  draw 

21  Then  said  I,  Wrhat  come  these  to  do? 
10  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
10  come  thou  the  same  clay,  aud  go  into  the 

15  they  (that  are)  far  off  shall  come  and  build 

20  that  there  shall  come  people,  and  the 

22  strong  nations  shall  come  to  seek  the  L. 
9  behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee 

9  all  the  nations  that  come  against  Jerusa, 
1  Behold,  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  and 

5  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come,  (and)  all  the 

16  the  nations  which  came  against  Jerusalem 

18  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  and  come 
18  the  Lord  will  smite  the  heathen  that  come 

21  all  they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take 
1  the  Lord  .  .ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come 

1  behold,  he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of 

2  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming? 
1  the  day  cometh .  .the  day  that  cometh 

5  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day 
fi  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse 


COMB 


180 


COMB 


6.  To  tread,  proceed,  Ifin  darah. 

Nuni24,  17  there  shall  come  a  star  out  of  Jacob,  and 

7.  To  come  hastily,  jpn  huk. 

Ezra    5.    5  to  cease,  till  the  matter  came  to  Darius 

8.7*0  be,  .i;n  hayah. 

Gen.  15.  *i  the  word  of  the  LORD  came  unto  Abram 

9.  To  go,  proceed,  go  on,  Tpn  halah. 

Gen.  32.    6  also  he  cometh  to  meet  thee,  and  four  h. 
NUHI22.  14  and  said,  Baalam  refuseth  to  come  with 

22.  16  Let  nothing,  .hinder  thee  from  coming 

22.  37  wherefore  earnest  thou  not  unto  me? 
Deut.  2.  14  the  space  in  which  we  came .  .(was)  thirty 
Josh.  6.    9  and  the  rereward  came  after  the  ark 

6.  13  the  rereward  came  after  the  ark  of  the 
2  Sa.  13.  34  there  came  much  people  by  the  way  of 
1  Ki.13.    9  by  the  same  way  that  thou  earnest 

13.  17  again  to  go  by  the  way  that  thou  earnest 
Job    20.  25  the  glittering  sword  cometh  out  of  his 
Eccl.  1.    7  the  place  from  whence  the  risers  come 
Isa.    60.    3  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and 

60.  14  sons  also  of  them.. shall  come  bending 
Mic.    4.    2  And  many  nations  shall  come,  and  say 

10.  To  be  turned,  yzy  haphaJc,  2. 

1  Sa.    4. 19  she.. travailed;  *or  her  pains  came  upon 

11.  To  be  begotten,  born,  "17;  yalad,  2. 

Deut  15.  19  All.. that  come  of  thy  herd  and  of  thy 

12.  To  go,  proceed,  Tjr  yalah. 

Gen.  19.  32  Come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine 
29.    1  Theu  Jacob,  .came  into  the  land  of  the 
31.  44  come  thou,  let  11s  make  a  covenant,  I  and 
37.  13  come,  aud  I  will  send  thee  unto  them 
37.  20  Come  now  therefore,  and  let  us  slay  him 
37.  27  Come,  and  let  us  sell  him  to  the  Ishmeel. 
Exod.  3.  10  Come  now.  .1  will  send  thee  unto  Phara 
JS'umro.  29  come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee 
22.   6  Come  now.  .1  pray  thee,  curse  me  tins 

22.  11  come  now,  curse  me  them  ;  peradventure 
22. 17  come  therefore  I  pray  thee,  curse  me 

23.  7  Come,  curse  me  Jacob,  and  come,  defy  I 
23. 13  Come,  I  pray  thee,  with  me  unto  another 

23.  27  Come.  .1  will  bring  thee  unto  another 

24.  14  come  (therefore,  and)  I  will  advertise 
Judg.  4/22  Come,  and  I  will  show  thee  the  man  whom 

9. 10,  12,  14  Come  thou  (and)  reign  over  us 
11.    6  Come,  and  be  our  captaia,  that  we  may 

19.  11  Come.. let  us  turn  iu  into  this  city  of  the 

19. 13  Come  and  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these 
1  Sa.   g.    5  Saul  said  to  his  servant.  .Come,  and  let  us 

9.  9  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  the  seer :  for  (he 
9.  10  Saul  said  to  his  servant,  .come,  let  us  go 
11.  14  said  Samuel  to  the  people,  Come,  and  let 
14.  1  Come.audletusgooverto  the  Philistines' 
14.  6  Come.aml  let  us  go  over  uutothegarrison 
17.  41  the  Philistine  came  on  and  drew  near  unto 
17.  44  Come  tome,  and  I  will  give  thy  flesh  unto 

17.  48  the  Philistine  arose,  and  came  aud  drew 

20.  11  Come,  and  let  us  go  out  into  the  field 

23.    3  how  much  more  then  if  we  come  to  Keilah 

23.  27  Haste  thee  and  come;  for  the  Philistines 

1  Ki.  1.  12  come,  let  me.  I  pray  thee,  give  thee 

13  15  Come  home  with  me,  and  eat  bread 
15. 19  come  and  break  thy  league  with  Baasha 

2  Ki.   7.    4  come,  and  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the 

7.    9  now  therefore  come,  that  we  may  go  and 
10.  16  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  L. 
14.    8  Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face 
2  Ch.11. 14  left  their  suburbs,  .and  came  to  Judah 
25. 17  Come,  let  us  see  one  another  in  the  face 
Ezra  10.    6  (when)  he  came  thither,  he  did  eat  no  br 
Neh.  2.  17  come, 'and  let  us  build  up  the  wall  of  Jer. 
6.    2  Come,  let  us  meet  together,  .in  theplain 
6.    7  Come  now.  .and  let  us  take  counsel 
Psa.  34. 11  Come,  ye  children,  hearken  unto  me  ;  I 
46.    8  Come,  behold  the  works  of  the  Loud 
66.   5  Come  and  see  the  works  of  God  :  (he  is) 
66.  16  Come  (and)  hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God 
80.    2  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  come  (and)  save 
83.    4  Come,  and  let  us  cut  them  offfrom(being) 
95.    1  O  Come,  let  us  slug  unto  the  Lord  ;  let 
Prov.  1.  11  Come  with  us,  let  us  lay  wait  for  blood 
7. 18  Come,  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until  the 
9.    5  Come,  eat  of  my  bread,  and  drink  of  the 
Song   7.  11  Come,  my  beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into 
Isa.     1.  18  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together 

2.    3  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mount. 

2.   5  come  ye,  aud  let  us  walk  in  the  light  of 

26.  20  Come,  mypeople,  enter,  .into  thy  chamb. 

45. 14  they  shall  be  thine  :  they  shall  come  after 
55.  1  come  ye.. come  ye,  buy  and  eat ;  yea,  c. 
55.    3  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me  :  hear 

Jer.  12.   9  come  ye,  assemble  all  the  beasts  of  the 

18.  iS  Then  said  they,  Come,  and  let  us  devise 
18.  18  come,  and  let  us  smite  him  with  the 
36.  14  Take  in  thine  hand  the  roll,  .and  come 
48     2  come,  and  let  us  cut  it  off  from  (being)  a 

H03.  6.  1  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord 
■Ion.  1.  7  Come,  and  let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may 
Mil-.    4.    2  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain 

13.  To  go  or  come  out,  N$;  yatsa, 

Gen.  10.  14  out  of  whom  came  Philistim  and  Caph. 

24.  5  unto  the  land  from  whence  thou  earnest 
1     1.    7  the  king  of  Egypt  came  not  again  any 

■  I  'ji.   1.  12  Ami  Pathrusim.  .of  whom  came  the  P. 
1  C.i.    2.  53  of  them  came  the  Zareathitcs,  and  the 
1     1    26.    4  and  whose  spirit  came  from  thee? 
fcicul.    4.  14  For  out  of  prison  he  cometh  to  reign 


14.7b  arrive,  reach,  Nap  meta,  nap  mctah. 

Dan.    4.  24  the  decree  of  the  Most  High,  which  is  c. 
4.  28  All  this  came  upon  the  king  Nebuchad. 

6.  24  or  ever  they  came  at  the  bottom  of  the 

7.  13  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and 

7.  22  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed 

15.  To  come  upon,  touch,  »3J  naga. 

Judg2o.  41  for  they  saw  that  evil  was  come  upon 
Ezra  3.  1  when  the  seventh  mouth  was  come,  and 
Neh.  7.  73  when  the  seventh  mouth  came,  the  chil. 
Esth.  9.  26  and  (of  that),  .which  had  come  unto  them 
Isa.  16.  8  they  are  come  (even)  unto  Jazer,  they 
Jon.  3.  6  For  word  came  unto  the  king  of  Nineveh 
Mic.    1.    9  her  wound  (is)  incurable  ;  for  it  is  come 

16.  To  come  upon,  totich,  jnj  naga,  5. 

1  Sa  14.    9  Tarry  until  we  come  to  you ;  then  we  will 
Esth.  2.  12  every  maid's  turn  was  come  to  go  in  to 
2.  15  his  daughter  was  come  to  go  in  unto  the 
4.    3  king'sfcommandment  andJiis  decree  came 

4.  14  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to 
6.  14  with  him,  came  the  king's  chamberlains 

8.  17  king's  commandment  aud  his  decree  came 
Song.  2.  12  the  time  of  the  singing  (of  birds)  is  come 
Dan.   8.    7  I  saw  him  come  close  unto  the  ram,  and 

12.  12  Blessed  (is)  he  that  waiteth,  and  cometh 

17. To  draw  nigh,  B03  nagash. 

Exodig.  15  the  third  day :  come  not  at  your  wives 

24.  14  let  him  come  unto  them 

Josh  14.  6  the  children  of  Judah  came  unto  Joshua 
Ruth,  2.  14  At  meal  time  come  thou  hither,  and  eat 

1  Ki.  18.  21  Elijah  came  untoall  the  people,  and  said 

20.  22  the  prophets  came  to  the  king  of  Israel 
20.  28  there  came  a  man  of  God,  and  spake  unto 

2  Ki.  2.    5   sons  of  the  prophets,  .at  Jericho  came 
Ezra  4.    2  they  came  to  Zerubbabel,  and  to  the  chief 

18.  To  be  drawn  nigh,  v?n  nagash,  2, 

Deut  25.    1  If  there  be  a  controversy.. aud  they  come 

25.  9  shall  his  brother's  wife  come  unto  him 

1  Ki.20.  13  there  came  a  prophet  unto  Ahab  king  of 
Ezra  9.    1  these  things  were  done,  the  princes  came 

19. To  give,  jm  nathan. 

Prov  13. 10  Only  by  pride  cometh  contention  :  but 

20.  To  ascend,  come  up,  pho  selaq. 

Dan.    2.  29  thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  mind  upon 

21. To  come  over,  ~\iy  abar. 

Gen.  18.  5  for  therefore  are  ye  come  to  your  servant 
Num.  5.  14,  14  the  spirit  of  jealousy  come  upon  him 

5.  30  the  spirit  of  jealousy  cometh  upon  him 

6.  5  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head 
Deut  29.  16  we  came  through  the  nations  which  ye 
Judg  9  25  they  robbed  all  that  came  along  that  way 

22.  TV  go  up,  nS»  alah. 

Lev.  19.  19  neither  shall  a  garment,  .come  upon  thee 
Mum  19  2  no  blemish,  (and)  upon  which  never  came 
Judgi3.    5  no  razor  shall  come  on  his  head  :  for 

1  Sa.    1.  11  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head 

6.  7  on  which  there  hath  come  no  yoke,  and 

2  Ki.  12     4  all  the  money  that  cometh  into  any 
Job     5.  26  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  its  season 
Song    3.   6  Who  (is)  this  that  cometh  out  of  the  wil 
Isa.   65.  17  former  shall  not  heremembered,  nor  come 
Jer.     7.  31  I  commanded  (them)  not,  neither  came 

19.  5  nor  spake  (it),  neither  came  (it)  into  my 
32.  35  I  commanded  them  not,  neither  came  it 
51.  50  and  let  Jerusalem  come  into  your  mind 
Eze.  20.  32  that  which  cometh  into  your  miud  shall 
38.  to  at  the  same  time  shall  things  come  into 
44.  17  no  wool  shall  come  upon  them  whiles 

2Z.  To  go  up,  hhii  dial. 

Dan.   5. 10  the  "queen,  by  reason,  .came into  the  ban. 

24.  To  come  up  or  against,  VJS  paga. 

Josh.  16.    7  And  it  went  down.. and  came  to  Jericho 

25.  To  p>rosper,  go  on  successfully,  n*7V  tsaleach. 
Judg  14.  19  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him 
1  Sa.  10.    6  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon 

10. 10  and  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  and 
11.    6  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul  when 
16. 13  And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon 
18.  10  that  the  evil  spirit  from  God  came  upon 

26.7*0  come  near,  anjj  qarab. 

Exod36.  2  whose  heart  stirred  him  up  to  come  unto 
Num  9.    6  they  came  before  Moses,  and  before  A. 

27.    1  Then  came  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 
Deut  2,  37  Only  unto  the  laud,  .thou  earnest  not 

22.  14  when  I  came  to  her  I  found  her  not  a  m. 
Josh  7.  14  tribe  which  the  Lord  taketh  shall  come 
7  14. 14  which  the  Lord  shall  take  shall  come 
1  Ki.  2.  7  for  so  they  came  to  me  when  I  fled 
Tsa.  27.  2  my'foes  came  upon  me  to  eat  up  my  llesh 
Jon.     1.    6  So  the  shipmaster  came  to  him,  and  said 

27.  To  com*  near,  3*ip  qerab. 

Dan.    6.  20  when  he  came  to  the  d*en,  he  cried 

28.7*0  meet,  .Tip  qarah,  2. 

Nuni23.    3  peradventure  the  Lord  will  come  to  meet 

29.  To  go  up,  avafralvw  anabaind. 

Acts   7.  23  it  came  into  his  heart  to  visit  his  brethren 
21.  31  tidings  came  unto  the  chief  captaiu  of  the 

30.  To  come  avxty,  a7repxo/tcu  apcrchomai. 

Mark  3.  13  calleth.  .whom  he  would :  and  they  came 

7.  30  when  she  was  come  to  her  house,  she 


Luke23.  33  they  were  [come]  to  the  place,  .called 
Kom  15.  28  I  will  come  by  you  into  Spain 

31.  To  go  away,  airofiaivw  apobaino. 

Johii2i.    9  As  soon  then  as  they  were  come  to  land 

32.  To  become,  ylvofxai  ginomai. 

Matt.  8.  16  the  even  was  come,  .and  he  cast  out  the 

14.  23  when  the  evening  was  comet  he  was  there 

20.  8  So  when  even  was  come,  the  lord  of  the 

26.  20  Now  when  the  even  was  come,  he  sat 

27.  1  When  the  morning  was  come,  all  the  chief 
27,  57  When  the  even  was  come,  there  came  a 

Mark  1.  n  And  there  came  a  voice  from  heaven 

4.  35  the  same  day,  when  the  even  was  come 
6.    2  when  the  sabbath  day  wascome,  he  began 
6.  21  And  when  a  convenient  day  was  come 

6.  47  when  eveu  was  come,  the  ship  was  in  the 
9.  21  How  long  is  it  ago  siuce  this  came  unto 

11.  19  when  eveu  was  come,  he  went  out  of  the 
I5-  33  when  the  sixth  hour  was  come,  there  was 

15.  42  when  the  even  was  come,  .before  the  sab. 
Luke  1.  65  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  about 

3.    2  the  word  of  God  came  unto  John  the  son 
3.  22  and  a  voice  came  fromheaven,  which  said 
q.  34  While  he  thus  spake,  there  came  a  cloud 
9.  35  there  came  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  saying 
19.    9  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house 
22.  14  when  the  hour  was  come,  he  sat  down 
John  1.  17  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ 

5.  14  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto 

6.  16  when  even  was  (now)  come,  his  disciples 

6.  25  said. .Rabbi,  when  earnest  thou  hither? 
10.  35  unto  whom  the  word  of  God  came,  and 

12.  30  This  voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but 

13.  19  Now  I  tell  you  before  it  come,  that,  when 

21.  4  when  the  morning  was  now  come,  Jesus 
Acts    2.    2  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  fromheaven 

2.  43  And  fear  came  upou  every  soul :  and 
5.   5  great  fear  came  on  all  them  that  heard 

5.  11  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  church,  and 

7.  31  the  voice  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him 

9.    3  as  he  journeyed,  he  came  near  Damascus 
10.  13  there  came  a  voice  to  him,  Rise,  Peter 
12.  11  when  Peter  was  come  to  himseTf^he  said 

16.  29  came  trembling,  aud  fell  down  before  Pa. 
21. 17  when  we  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  the 
21.  35  when  he  came  upon  the  stairs ;  so  it  was 

26.  22  Prophets  and  Moses  did  say  should  come 

27.  7  we . .  scarce  were  come  over  against  Cnidus. 
27.  16  we  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  boat 

27.  27  when  the  fourteenth  night  was  [come,]  as 

28.  6  after  they  had  looked,  .saw  no  harm  come 
2  Co.    1.    8  of  our  trouble  which  came  to  us  in  Asia 
Gal.     3.  14  That  the  blessing,  .might  come  on  the 

1  Th.  1.    5  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word 

1  Ti.    6.    4  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  evil 

2  Ti.  3  11  Persecutions,  afflictions,  which  came  unto 
Heb.  11.  24  Moses,  when  he  was  come  to  years,  refused 
Rev.  12.  10  Now  is  come  salvation,  and  strength,  and 

33. Hither,  here,  cornel  devpo  deuro. 

Matt.19.  21  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  .come  (and)  follow 
Markio  21  come,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  me 
Lukei8.  22  Yet  lackest  thou  one  thing.  .come,follow 
John  11.  43  he  cried  with  aloud  voice,  Lazarus,  come 
Acts    7.    3  come  into  the  land  which  I  shall  show 
7.  34  And  now  come  I  will  send  thee  iuto  Eg. 

34. Hither,  here,  come!  SeOre  deute. 

Matt  11.  28  Come  unto  me,  all  (ye)  that  labour  and 

21.  38  This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him 

22.  4  all  things  (are)  ready  :  come  unto  the  m. 
25.  34  Come,  ye  blessed,  .inherit  the  kingdom 
28.    6  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 

Mark  1.  17  Jesus  said  unto  them.  Come  ye  after  me 

6.  31  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert 
12.    7  This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  aud 

Luke2o.  14  This  is  the  heir  :  [come,]  let  us  kill  him 
John  4.  29  Come,  see  a  man  which  told  me  all  things 

21.  12  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Come  (and)  dine 
Rev.  19.  17  Come  and  gather  yourselves  together  unto 

35.7*0  come  through,  ZUpxo^ai  dicrchomai. 

Acts   g.  38  that  he  would  not  delay  to  come  to  them 

36.  To  be,  dpi  eimi. 

Matt.  5.  37  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of 
Markn.  11  and  now  the  eventide  was  come,  he  went 
John  1.  46  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of  N.t 
Acts  24.  25  temperance,  aud  judgment  to  come 
2  Ti.    4.    3  time  will  come  when  they  will  not  endure 

37.  To  come  in  or  into,  elaepxofxai  ciscrchomai. 
Matt  8.    8  that  thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof 
Lukei7-    7  by  and  by,  when  he  is  come  from  the  field 

38. To  set  in,  arrive,  lvlarrgj.1  cnistemi. 

2  Ti.    3.    1  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come 

39.  To  come  upon,  £w4pxop.at  eperchomai. 

Acts  14.  19  there  came  thither  (certain)  Jews  from  A. 
Eph.    2.    7  That  in  the  ages  to  come  he  might  show 

40.  To  go  out  of,  forth,  eKiropsvo/j.a.1  ekporeuomai, 
Mark  7.  23  All  these  evil  things  come  froruMt.  15. 11. 

41.  To  co?ne  out  of,  forth,  ££epxofiai  exerchomai. 
Matt  2.    6  for  out  of  thee  shall  come  a  Governor,  that 
Markn.  12  when  they  were  come  from  Bethany,  he 
John  13.    3  he  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God 

19.    5  Then  came  Jesus  forth.wearingthe  crown 
Acts  28.  15  they  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  Appii  For. 

42.  To  come,  epxofiat  erchomai. 

Matt  2.   2  we  have  seen  his  star,  .and  are  como  to 


COMB 


181 


COME 


Matt.  2.    8  Go  and  search. -that  I  may  come  and  wo. 
2.    9  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the  young 
2.  ii  when  they  were  come,  .they  saw  the 
■2.  2i  he  arose.. and  [came]  into  the  land  of  Is. 

2  23  he  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  Naza. 

3  7  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  come  to  his  ba. 
3!  14  saying,  I  have  need,  .and  comest  thou  to 

13  leaving  Nazareth,  he  came  and  dwelt  in 
17  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the 

17  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil 

24  first  be  reconciled . .  then  come  and  offer 
10  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
15  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to 
25,  27  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  came 

2  there  [came]  a  leper  and  worshipped  him 
7  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I  will  come  and  heal 
9  and  to  another,  Come,  and  he  cometh 

14  when  Jesus  was  come  into  Peter's  house 

25  when  he  was  come  to  the  other  side 
29  art  thou  come  hitherto  tormeut  us  before 

1  passed  over,  and  came  into  his  own  city 
10  sinners  came  and  sat  down  with  him  and 
13  for  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous 

15  the  days  will  come,  when  the  bridegroom 

18  there  [camel  a.  certain  ruler,  and  worship. 
18  come  and  lay  thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she 
23  when  Jesus  came  into  the  ruler's  house 
23  when  he  was  come  into  the  house,  the  bl. 

10.  13  let  your  peace  come  upon  it  :  but  if  it  be 
10. 23  have  gone.  ,till  the  Son  of  man  be  come 
jo.  34  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth 
ao.  34  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword 

10.  35  For  I  am  come  to  set  a  man  at  variance 

11.  14  this  is  Elias,  which  was  for  to  come 

11.  18  John  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking 
ti.  19  The  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  drinking 
i2.  42  she  came  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 

12.  44  and  when  he  is  come,  he  findeth  (it)  empty 

13.  4  the  fowls  came  and  devoured  them  up 
13,  19  then  cometh  the  wicked  (oue),  and  catch. 

13.  25  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares  among 
C3.  32  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge  in  the  br. 
T3.  54  when  he  was  come  into  his  own  country 
34.  28  hid  me  come  unto  thee  on  the  water 

34. 29  And  he  said,  Come.   And  when  Peter  was 

14.  33  came  and  worshipped  him,  saying,  Of  a 

34.  34  they  came  into  the  land  of  Gennesaret 

15.  25  Then  came  she  and  worshipped  him,  say. 

15.  29  Jesus  departed,  .and  came  nigh  unto  the 

35.  39  and  came  into  the  coasts  of  Magdala 

16.  5  wheu  his  disciples  were  come  to  the  other 

36.  13  When  Jesus  came  into  the  coasts  of  Ces. 

16.  24  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let  him 
36. 27  For  the  Sou  of  mau  shall  come  in  the 
t6.  28  see  the  Son  of  mau  coming  in  his  kingdom 

37. 10  Why  then  say.  .that  Eliasmust  first  come 

37.  11  Elias  truly  shall  first  come,  and  restore  all 

37.  12  I  say  unto  you,  That  Elias  is  come  already 
37. 14  when  they  were  come  to  the  multitude 

17.  24  wheu  they  were  come  to  Capernaum,  they 

38.  7  for  it  must  needs  be  that  offences  come 

18.  7  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence  co 
18.  1 1  [For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that] 

18.  31  came  and  told  uuto  their  lord  all  that  was 

19.  1  came  into  the  coasts  of  Judea  beyond  J 
39. 14  Jesus  said.. forbid  them  not,  to  come 

20.  9  when  they  came  that  (were  hired)  about 
20.  10  the  first  came.  .and.  .received  every  man 

20.  28  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered 

21.  1  when  they,  .were  come  to  Bethphage 

21.   5  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee,  meek 
21. 19  he  came  to  it,  and  found  nothing  thereon 
ai.  23  when  he  was  come  into  the  temple,  the 
si.  32  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness 

21.  40  When  the  Lord .  .cometh,  what  will  he 

22.  3  them  that  were  bidden . .  would  not  come 

23.  35  upon  you  may  come  all  the  righteous  bio. 

24.  5  For  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying 
24.  30  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  mau  coming  in 
24.  39  knew  not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took 
-24.  42  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  c. 
24.  43  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  would  c. 
24.  44  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  cometh 

24.  46  his  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so 

25.  6  Behold,  the  bridegroom  [cometh]  ;  go  ye 
25.  10  while  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom 

25. 11  Afterward  came  also  the  other  virgins 
25  13  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  man  [c  ] 
25,  19  After  a  long  time  the  lord,  .cometh,  and 
^25.  31  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory 

25.  36  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me 
25-  39  when  saw  we  thee .  in  prison,  and  came 

26.  36  Then  cometh  Jesus  with  them  unto  a  place 
^z6.  40  he  cometh  uuto  the  disciples,  and  findeth 
26.  43  he  came  and  found  them  asleep  again:  for 
26.  45  Then  cometh  he  to  his  disciples,  and  saith 
26.  47  lo,  Judas,  .came,  and  with  him  a  great 

26.  64  ye  see  the  Son  of  mau . .  coming  in  the  cl 

27.  33  wheu  they  were  come  unto  a  place  called 
27.  49  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save 
27.  57  When  the  even  was.,  there  came  a  rich  m. 

27.  64  lest  his  disciples  come  by  night,  and  steal 

28.  1  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  came  Mary  M. 
28.  11  some  of  the  watch  came  into  the  city 
28.  13  His  disciples  came  by  night,  and  stole 

Hark  1.    7  There  cometh  one  mightier  than  I  after 
x.    9  that  Jesus  came  from  Nazareth  of  Galilee 
i.  14  Jesus  came  into  Galilee,  preaching  the 
1.  24  art  thou  come  to  destroy  us?  I  know  thee 
1.  40  there  came  a  leper  to  him, beseeching  him 

1.  45  and  they  came  to  him  from  every  quarter 

2.  3  they  come  unto  him,  bringing  one  sick  of 


Mark  2.  17  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sin. 
2. 18  the  Pharisees  used  to  fast :  and  they  come 
2.  20  the  days  will  come,  when  the  bridegroom 

8  when  they  had  heard,  .came  unto  him 
31  There  came  then  his  brethren  and  his  m. 

4  the  fowls  of  the  air  came  aud  devoured  it 
15  but,  wheu  they  have  heard,  Satan  cometh 
22  but  that  it  should  come  abroad 

1  And  they  came  over  unto  the  other  side 
15  they  come  to  Jesus,  and  see  him  that  was 

22  behold,  there  cometh  one  of  the  rulers  of 

23  come  and  lay  thy  hands  on  her,  that  she 
27  came  in  the  press  behind,  and  touched  his 

33  the  woman,  .came  and  fell  down  before 

35  While  he  yet  spake,  there  came  from  the 
38  he  cometh  to  the  house  of  the  ruler  of 

1  he  went,  .and  came  into  his  own  country 

29  they  came  and  took  up  his  corpse,  and 
31  for  there  were  many  coming  and  going 

48  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  he  cometh 
53  they  came  into  the  land  of  Gennesaret 

1  and  certain  of  the  scribes,  which  came 

25  a  (certain)  woman .  .came  and  fell  at  his 

31  he  came  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee,  through 

10  he.. came  into  the  parts  of  Dalmanutha 

22  he  cometh  to  Bethsaida ;  and  they  bring 

34  Whosoever  will  [come]  after  me,  let  him 
38  when  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Father 

1  they  have  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  come 
7  and  a  voice  came  out  of  the  cloud,  saying 

11  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first  co. 

12  he.  .told  them,  Elias  verily  cometh  first 

13  I  say  unto  you,  That  Elias  is  indeed  come 

14  when  he  came  to  (his)  disciples,  he  saw 
33  he  came  to  Capernaum  :  aud,  being  in 

1  he  arose  from  thence,  and  cometh  into 

14  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto 

30  aud  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life 

45  the  Sou  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered 

46  they  came  to  Jericho  :  and  as  he  went 

50  casting  away  his  garm  ents,  rose,  and  came 

9  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
10  Blessed  (be)  the  kingdom,  .that  cometh 

13  he  came,  .and  when  he  came  to  it, he  fou. 

15  they  come  to  Jerusalem  :  and  Jesus  went 
27  they  come  again  to  Jerusalem :  aud  as  he 
27  there  come  to  him  the  chief  priests,  and 

9  Hewill  come  and  destroy  the  husbandmen 

14  when  they  were  come,  they  say  unto  him 
18  Then  come  unto  him  the  Sadducees 

42  there  came  a  certain  poor  widow,  and 

6  For  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying 

26  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  man  com. 

35  when  the  master  of  the  house  cometh 

36  Lest,  comiug  suddenly,  he  find  you  sleep. 
3  there  came  a  woman  having  an  alabaster 

16  his  disciples  went  forth,  and  came  into 

17  in  the  eveuiug  he  cometh  with  the  twelve 

32  they  came  to  a  place  which  was  named  G. 

37  And  he  cometh,  and  findeth  them  sleep. 
41  he  cometh  the  third  time, and  saith.  .Sleep 

41  it  is  enough,  the  hour  is  come  ;  behold 
45  as  soon  as  lie  was  come,  he.  .kissed  him 
62  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man .  .coming  in 
66  there  cometh  one  of  the  maids  of  the 
21  Simon,  .who  passed  by.  coming  out  of  the 

36  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  take 

43  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  .came,  and  went 

1  that  they  might  come  and  anoint  him 

2  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the 
43  the  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to 
59  they  came  to  circumcise  the  child  ;  and 
16  they  came  with  haste,  and  found  Mary 

27  he  came  by  the  spirit  into  the  temple 

51  he  went  down  . .  and  [came]  to  Nazareth 

3  he  came  into  all  the  country  about  Jor. 
12  Then  came  also  publicans  to  be  baptized 
16  one  mightier  than  I  cometh,  the  latchet 

16  he  came  to  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been 
^4  art  thou  come  to  destroy  us?  I  know  thee 

42  the  people  sought  him,  and  came  unto 

7  they  beckoned,  .that  they  should  come 
7  they  came,  and  filled  both  the  ships,  so 

17  which  were  [come]  out.  .every  town  of  G. 

32  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sin. 
35  days  will  come,  when  the  bridegroom 
17  which  came  to  hear  him,  and  to  be  healed 

47  Whosoever  cometh  to  me,  and  heareth 
3  beseeching  him  that  he  would  come  and 

7  neither  thought  I  myself  worthy  to  come 

8  and  to  another,  Come,  and  he  cometh 

33  John,  .came  neither  eating  bread  nor  dr. 

34  The  Son  of  man  is  come  eating  and  drink. 
12  then  cometh  the  devil,  and  taketh  away 
17  that  shall  not  be  known  and  come  abroad 

35  Then  they  went  out.  .and  came  to  Jesus 
41  there  came  a  man  named  J  aims,  and  he 
47  she  came  trembling,  and  falling  down 

49  While  he  yet  spake,  there  cometh  one 

23  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let  him 
26  he  shall  come  in  his  own  glory,  and  (in) 
56  the  Son  of  man  is  not  [come]  to  destroy 

1  every  city. .  whither  hehimself  wouhlfco.] 

32  likewise  a  Levite.  .[came]  aud  looked  (on 

33  a  certain  Samaritan,  .came where  he  was 

2  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done,  as 
25  when  he  cometh,  he  findeth  (it)  swept 

31  she  came  from  the  utmost  parts  of  the 

36  when  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they  may 

37  the  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  watch. 

38  shall  [come]  in  the  second  watch,  or  come 

39  known  what  hour  ih.e  thief  would  come 


Luke 


Luke  12. 40  the  Son  of  man  cometh  at  an  hour  when 
12.  43  his  lord  wheu  he  cometh  shall  find  so 
12.  49  I  am  come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth ;  and 

12.  54  There  cometh  a  shower ;  and  so  it  is 

13.  6  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  and 
13.    7  I  come  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig  tree,  aud 
13.  14  m  them  therefore  come  and  be  healed 

13.  35  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 

14.  9  he  that  bade  thee  and  him  come  and  say 
14. 10  when  he  that  bade  thee  cometh,  he  may 
14.  17  Come ;  for  all  things  are  now  ready 

14.  20  I  have  married .  .therefore  I  cannot  come 
14.  26  any  (man)  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his 
14.  27  whosoever  doth  not  bear,  .cross,  and  come 

14.  31  with  ten  thousand  to  meethimthat  cometh 

15.  6  when  he  cometh  home,  he  calleth.  .(Iris) 

15. 17  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said,  How 
15.  20  he  arose,  and  came  to  his  father.  But 
15.  25  as  he  came  and  drew  nigh  to  the  house 

15.  30  as  soon  as  this  thy  son  was  come,  which 

16.  21  moreover  the  dogs  came  and  licked  his 

16.  28  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  torment 

17.  1  is;impossible  but  that  offenceswill  come 
17.    1  woe  (unto  him)  through  whom  they  come! 
17.  20  when  the  kingdom  of  God  should  come 
17.  20  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  oh. 
17.  22  The  days  will  come,  when  ye  shall  desire 

17.  27  the  flood  came,  and  destroyed  them  all 

18.  3  was  a  widow  in  that  city;  and  she  came" 
18.  8  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find 
iS.  16  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me 

18.  30  and  in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting 

19.  5  when  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  he  looked 
19. 10  For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and 
19.  13  and  said  unto  them,  Occupy  till  I  come 

19. 18  the  second  came,  saying,  Lord,  thy  pound 

19.  20  another  came,  saying,  Lord,  behold,  (here) 

20.  16  He  shall  come  aud  destroy  these  husband. 

21.  6  (As  for)  these  things,  .the  days  will  come 

21.  8  for  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying 
21. 27  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  mau  coming  in  a 

22.  7  Then  came  the  day  of  unleavened  bread 
22.  18  until  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  come 

22.  45  when  he.  .was  come  to  his  disciples,  he 

23.  26  a  CyreniaD,  coming  out  of  the  country 

23.  42  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy 

24.  1  in  the  morning,  they  came  unto  the  sep. 
24.  23  they  came,  saying,  that  they  had  also 

John  1.    7  The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear  wit. 
1.    9  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world 
1. 11  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  rece 
1.  29  next  day  John  seeth  Jesus  coming  unto 
1.  30  After  me  cometh  a  man  which  is  prefer. 
1.  31  therefore  am  I  come  baptizing  with  watei 
1.  39  Come  and  see.   They  came  and  saw  where 
1.  46  Philip  saith  unto  him,  Come  and  see 
1.  47  Jesus  saw  Nathanael  coming  to  him,  and 
3.   2  The  same  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  said 
3.    2  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God 
3.   8  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and 
3. 19  that  light  is  come  into  the  world 
3.  20  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds 
3.  21  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light 
3.  22  After  these  things  came  Jesus  and  his 
3.  26  they  came  unto  John,  and  said.  .Rabbi 

3.  26  the  same  baptizeth,  and  all  (men)  come 

4.  5  Then  cometh  he  to  a  city  of  Samaria 
4.    7  There  cometh  a  woman  of  Samaria  to 

4.  15  I  thirst  not,  neither  come  hither  to  draw 
4.  16  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  come  hither 
4.  21  Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour  cometh 
4.  23  But  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when 
4.  25  I  know  that  Messias  cometh,  which  is 
4.  25  when  he  is  come,  he  will  tell  us  all  things 
4.  27  upon  this  came  his  disciples,  and  marv. 
4.  30  they  went  out  of  the  city,  and  came  unto 
4.  35  yet  four  months,  and  (then)  cometh  har. 
4.  40  when  the  Samaritans  were  come  unto  him 
4.  45  when  he  was  come  into  Galilee,  the  Gal. 
4.  46  So  Jesus  came  again  into  Cana  of  Galilee 

4.  54  when  he  was  come  out  of  Judea  into  G. 

5.  24  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 
5.  40  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  might 

5.  43  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name,  and  ye 

5.  43  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name,  him 

6.  5  Jesus,  .saw  a  great  company  come  unto 
6.  15  they  would  come  and  take  him  by  force 
6.  17  and  Jesus  was  not  come  to  them 

6.  23  there  came  other  boats  from  Tiberias 
6.  24  his  disciples . .  came  to  Capernaum,  seeking 
6.  35  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger 
6.  37  him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise 
6.  44  No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Fa. 
6.  45  Every  man  therefore ..  cometh  uuto  me 

6.  65  no  man  can  come  unto  me,  except  it  were 

7.  27  when  Christ  cometh,  no  mau  knoweth  w. 
7.  28  I  am  not  come  of  myself,  but  he  that  sent 
7.  30  because  his  hour  was  not  yet  come 

7.  31  When  Christ  cometh,  will  he  do  more  mi. 
7.  34,  36  and  where  I  am,  (thither)  ye  cannot  c. 
7.  37  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me 
7.  41  Shall  Christ  come  out  of  Galilee  ? 
7.  42  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and 
7.  45  Then  came  the  officers  to  the  chief  priests 

7.  50  he  that  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  being  one 

8.  2  allthepeople[came]unto  him;  andhesat 
8.  14  whence  I  came.,  ye  cannot  tell  whence  I  c. 
8.  20  for  his  hour  was  not  yet  come 

8.  21,  22  whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come 

8.  42  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  he  sent  me 
9. .  4  the  night  cometh,  when  uo  man  can  work 

9.  7  He  went  his  way  therefore.,  and  came  see. 


COME 


182 


COME 


i4. 

14- 

14 
14. 
15- 


John  9.  jg  For  judgment  I  am  come  into  this  world 
jo.  8  All  that  ever  came  before  me  are  thieves 
io  10  The  thief  cometh  not.. I  am  come  that 

10  12  But  he  that,  .seeth  the  wolf  coming,  and 
ti.  17  when  Jesus  came,  he  fouud  that  he  had 
11.  19  many  of  the  Jews  came  to  Martha  andM. 
11.  29  she  arose  quickly,  and  came  unto  him 
11.  30  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into  the  town 
ti.  32  when  Mary  was  come  where  Jesus  was 
11,  34  They  said  unto  him,  Lord,  come  and  see 

11  3S  Jesus  therefore .  .cometh  to  the  grave 

11.  45  Then  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  M. 
1.  48  the  Roman?  shall  come  and  take  away 

1,  56  that  he  will  not  come  to  the  feast? 

12.  1  Jesus.. came  to  Bethany,  where  Lazarus 
12.    9  they  came  not  for  Jesus'  sake  only,  hut 
12.  12  much  people  that  were  come  to  the  feast 
12.  15  behold,  thy  Kins  cometh,  sitting  on  au 
12.  22  Philip  cometh  and  telleth  Andrew 

12.  23  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  man 
12.  27  but  for  this  cause  came  I  uuto  this  hour 
12.  28  Then  came  there  a  voice  from  heaven 
12.  46  I  am  come  a  light  into  the  world,  that 

12.  47  for  I  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to 

13.  1  when  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come 
13.    6  Then  cometh  he  to  Simon  Peter  :  and  P. 

13.  33  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come  ;  so  now 

14.  3  I  will  come  again,  aud  receive  you  uuto 
6  no  mau  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by 

1 3  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will  come 
23  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our 
"  I  go  away,  aud  come  (again)  unto  you 
30  for  the  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and 
22  If  I  had  not  come  aud  spoken  unto  them 

15.  26  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I  will 

16.  2  the  time  cometh;  that  whosoever  killeth 
16.    4  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye  may  remem. 
16.    7  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  yon 
16.    8  when  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the 
16.  13  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  conn,  he 
16.  13  and  he  will  show  you  things  to  come 
16.  21  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come 
16.  25  the  time  cometh,  when  I  shall  no  more 
16.  28  and  am  come  into  the  world :  again,  I 

16.  32  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now  come,  that 

17.  1  Father,  the  hour  is  come  ;  glorify  thy  Sou 

17.  11  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I  come  to  thee 

17. 13  now  come  I  to  thee  ;  and  these  things 

18.  3  cometh  thither  with  lanterns  and  torches 
18.    4  knowingall  things  that  should  come  upon 

18.  37  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that 

19.  32  Then  came  the  soldiers,  and  brake  the 
19.  33  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  .he  was  dead 
19.  38  He  came,  .and  took  the  body  of  Jesus 
19.  39  And  there  came  also  Nicodemus,  which 

19.  39  at  the  first  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and 

20.  1  The  first  (day)  of  the  week  cometh  Mary 
20.    2  Then  she  runneth,  and  cometh  to  Simon 
20.    3  Peter  therefore,  .came  to  the  sepulchre 
20.    4  did  outrun  Peter,  and  came  first  to  the 
20.    6  Then  cometh  Simon  Peter  following  him 
20.    8  other  disciple  which  came  first  to  the 
20.  18  Mary  Magdalene  came  and  told  the  dis. 
20.  19  the  same  day  at  evening,  .came  Jesus 

20.  24  Thomas . .  was  not  with  them, when  Jesus  c 
20  26  (Then)  cams  Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut 

21.  8  the  other  disciples  came  in  a  little  ship 
21.  13  Jesus  then  cometh  and  taketh  bread,  and 
ax.  22,  23  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come 

1.  11  this  same  Jesus,  .shall  so  come  in  like 
2  20  before  that  great,  .day  of  the  Lord  corns 
3.  19  when  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come 

7.  it  there  came  a  dearth  over  all  the  land  of 

8.  27  the  Ethiopians,  .had  come  to  Jerusalem 
8.  36  as  they  went  ou  (their)  way,  they  came 

8.  40  in  all  the  cities,  till  he  came  to  Cesarea 

9.  17  Jesus  that  appeared  .as  thou  earnest 
q.  21  Is  not  this  he  that  came  hither  for  that 

to.  ?  1  Therefore  came  I  (unto  you)  without 

11.  5  a  great  sheet  .and  it  came  even  to  me 

12.  10  they  came  unto  the  ironjgate  that  leadeth 

12.  12  he  came  tu  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother 

13.  13  Now. .they  came  to  Perga  in  Pamphylia 

13.  25  But,  behold,  there  cometh  one  after  me 
13  si  they  shook  off  the  dust  .and  came  unto 

14.  24  after  they  bad  parsed  .they  came  to  P 

15.  30  when  they  were  dismissed,  they  [came]  to 

16.  7  After  they  were  come  to  Mysia,  they 
16.  37  let  them  come  themselves  and  fetch  us 

16.  39  they  came  and  besought  them,  and 

17.  1  when  they  had  passed,  .they  came  to  Th. 
17.  13  they  came  thither  also,  and  stirred  up 

17.  15  a  commandment,  .to  come  to  him  with 

18.  1  after  these  things  Paul  departed .  .and  ca. 
18.    2  found  a  certain  Jew.  .lately  come  from 

18.  21  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  that  [cometh] 

19.  1  came  to  Ephesus  :  and  finding  certain 
19.    6  the  Holy  Ghost  came  ou  them  ;  and  they 

19.  18  many  that  believed  came,  and  confessed 

20.  2  when  he  had  gone  over,  .he  came  into  G. 
20.   6  we.  .came  unto  them  to  Troas  in  five  days 

20. 14  we  took  him  in,  and  came  to  Mitylene 

20.  15  and  the  next  (day)  we  came  to  Miletus 

21.  1  we  came  with  a  straight  course  unto  C. 
21.    8  And  the  next  (day)  we.  .came  unto  Ceearen 
21. 11  when  be  was  come  unto  us,  he  took  rani's 

21.  22  for  they  will  hear  that  thou  art  come 

22.  11  whou  I  could  not  see.. I  came  unto  Dam. 
22.  13  Came  uuto  me,  and  stood,  aud  said  unto 

24,  8  Commanding  bis  accusers  to  [come]  unto 

25.  23  on  the  morrow,  when  Agrippa  was  come 
27.   8  came  uuto  a  place  which  iscalledthe  Fair 


>Co. 


Gal. 


3 

3 

3> 

Eph.   2 
Phil,  1.' 


Acts  28. 13  and  we  came  the  next  day  to  Puteoli 

28.  16  when  [we  came]  to  Rome,  the  centurion 
Rom   1.  10  by  the  will  of  God  to  come  unto  you 

1.  13  often  times  I  purposed  to  come  unto  you 

3.  8  say,  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come.' 
7.  9  when  the  commaudmeut  came,  siu  revived 
9.    9  At  this  time  will  I  come,  and  Sara  shall 

1 5.  23  having  a  .  desire  these  many  years  to  c. 
15.  24  I  will  come  to  you  :  for  I  trust  to  see  you 
15.  29  1  am  sure  that,  when  [I  come]  uuto  you 
15  29  I  shall  come  in  the  fuluess  of  the  blessing 
15.  32  That  I  may  come  unto  you  with  joy  by 
1  Co.  2.    1  I,  brethren,  when  I  came  to  you,  came 

4.  5  judge  nothing,  .until  the  Lord  come,  who 
4.  18  as  though  I  would  not  come  to  you 

4.  19  But  I  will  come  to  you  shortly,  if  the 
4  21  shall  I  come  uuto  you  with  a  rod,  or  iu 
ix.  26  ye  do  show  the  Lords  death  till  he  come 
11.  34  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  come 

13.  10  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come,  then 

14.  6  if  I  come  uuto  you  speaking  with  tongues 
is,  35  aud  with  what  body  do  they  come? 

2  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come 
5  I  will  come  unto  you,  when  I  shall  pass 

10  if  Timotheus  come,  see  that  he  may  be 

11  couduct  him.  .that  he  may  come  unto  me 

12  I  greatly  desired  him  to  come  unto  you 
12  will  was  not.  .to  come.. but  he  will  come 

.  15  I  was  minded  to  come  unto  you  before 

16  to  come  again  out  of  Macedouia  unto  you 
23  to  spare  you  I  came  as  not  yet  uuto  Cor. 

.    1  I  would  not  come  again  to  you  iu  heavi. 

3  lest,  when  I  came,  I  should  have  sorrow 
12  wheu  I  came  to  Troas  to  (preaeh)  Christ's 

5  when  we  were  come  into  Macedonia,  our 

4  if  they  of  Macedonia  come  with  me,  aud 
,    4  if  he  that  cometh  preacheth  another  Je. 
,    9  the  brethren  which  came  from  Macedonia 
,    1  I  will  come  to  visions  and  revelatious 
.  14  the  third  time  I  am  ready  to  come  to  you 

20  lest,  when  I  come,  I  shall  not  find  you 

21  when  I  come  again,  my  God  will  humble 
2  if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  spare 

.  21  Afterwards  I  came  into  the  regions  of  S 

11  But  when  Peter  was  come  to  Autioch,  I 

12  For  before  that  certain  came  from  James 

12  but  when  they  were  come,  he  withdrew 
19  the  seed  should  come  to  whom  the  prom. 

23  before  faith  came,  we  were  kept  under 
25  after  that  faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer 

4  wheu  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come 

17  came  and  preached  peace  to  you  which 

6  because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath 
27  whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be 

24  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I.  .shall  come 
6  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children 

10  if  he  come  unto  you,  receive  him 

10  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  come 

18  Wherefore  we  would  have  come  unto  you 

6  when  Timotheus  came  from  you  unto  us 

2  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief 
10  When  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his 

3  except  there  come  a  falling  away  first 
15  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners 

4  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 
14  hoping  to  come  unto  thee  shortly 

13  Till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  reading 

7  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
9  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me 

13  The  cloak,  .when  thou  comest,  bring  with 
21  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter 

12  be  diligent  to  come  unto  me  to  Nicopolis 

7  in  the  rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  it 

8  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 
23  with  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I  will  see 

3  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers 
18  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist  shall  come- 

2  3  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh 

3  [ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come] 
7  who  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 

10  If  there  come  any  unto  you.  and  bring 
T2  but  I  trust  [to  come]  uuto  you,  and  speak 
3  I  rejoiced  greatly  when  the  brethren  came 
10  it  [come.  I  will  rem  ember  his  deeds  which 

14  the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousandof  his 
7  Behold,  he  cometh  wit  li  clouds;  and  every 

5  16  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly 

10  tiie  hour. of  temptation,  which  shall  come 

11  Behold,  I  come  quickly  :  hold  that  fast 
7  he  came  and  took  the  book  out  of  the 
1  heard . .  one  of  the  four  beasts  saying,  Co. 
3  I  heard  the  second  beast  say,  Come  and 
5  I  heard  the  third  beast  say,  Come  and  see 
7  the  fourth  beast  say.  Come  and  see 

17  For  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come 

13  What  are  these,  .and  whence  came  they? 

14  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation 
3  another  augel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar 

12  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  here 

14  (and), behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  quic, 
10  nations  were  angry,  and  thy  wrath  is  co. 

7  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come  :  and 

15  for  the  time  is  come  for  thee  to  reap 
15  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief 

1  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  which 
10  when  he  cometh, he  mnstcontinuea  short 
10  and  one  is,  (and)  theotherisnotyct  come 
10  for  in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come 

7  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and 

9  there  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven  an. 
7  Behold,  I  come  quickly  :  blessed  (is)  he 

12  behold,  I  come  quickly  ;  and  my  reward 


t  Th. 


»Th. 


2Ti. 


Titus  3, 
Heb.   6. 

8. 

2  Pe    3. 

1  Jo.   2. 

4- 
4- 

2  John 


3  John 

Jude 
Rev.     [ 


Rev.  22. 17  Aud  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come 
22.  17  And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come 
22  17  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come 

22.  20  Surely  I  come  quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  c. 

43.  To  set  on  or  against,  40taT-q/xt  epkistemi. 
Acts  23  27  then  came  I  with  an  army,  and  rescued 

44.  To  have  come,  be  here,  tficcv  keko. 

Matt.  8.  11  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west 

23.  36  AU  these  thiugs  shall  come  upon  this 

24.  14  aud  theu  shall  the  end  come 

24.  5°  The  lord  of  that  servant  shall  come  in  a 
Mark  8.    3  for  clivers  of  them  [came]  from  far 
Lukei2.  46  The  lord  of  that  servant  will  come  iu  a 

13.  29  they  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  (from) 

13.  35  until  (the  time)  come  when  ye  shall  say 
15.  27  he  said  unto  him,  Thy  brother  is  come 
19  43  the  days  shall  come  upon  thee,  that  thine 

John  2.    4  Womau .  .mine  hour  is  not  yet  come 

4.  47  he  heard  that  Jesus  was  come  out  of  Ju. 
6.  37  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come 

8.  42  for  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from 
Acts  28.  23  there  [came]  many  to  him  into  (his)lodg. 
Rom.  11.  26  There  shall  come  ou t  of  Sion  the  Deliverer 
Heb,  10.    7,  9  Lo,  I  come,  .to  do  thy  will,  0  God 

10.  37  he  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will 
2  Pe.   3. 10  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief 
1  Jo.   5.  20  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come 
Rev.    2.  25  that  which  ye  have,  .hold  fast  till  I  come 
3.   3  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and 
3.    3  shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come 
3.    9  I  will  make  them  to  come  and  worship 
15.   4  all  nations  shall  come  and  worship  before 
18.    8  Therefore  shall  her  plagues  come  iu  one 

45.  To  come  down  on  or  agai?ist,Karaj/Ta,co  katantao. 
Acts  16.    1  Theu  came  he  to  Derbe  and  Lystra 

18.  19  he  came  to  Ephesus,  and  left  them  there 
18.  24  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos..came  to 

20.  15  we.  .came,  .next  (day)  over  against  Chios 

21.  7  when  we  had  finished  (our)  course,  .we  c. 
25. 3 3  after  certain  days.  .Beruiee  came  unto  C. 

26.  7  t'nto  which,  .twelve tribes,  .hope to  come 
28.  13  thence  we  fetched  a  compass,  aud  came 

1  Co.  10.  11  upou  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  co. 

14.  36  or  came  it  unto  you  ouly  ?i 

Eph.   4.  13  Till  we  al!  come  iu  the  unity  of  the  faith 

46.  To  come  down,  K-aTe'pxo/mi  kaierchomai. 

Acts  11.  27  in  these  days  came  prophets  from  Jerusa. 

18.  5  when  Silas  aud  Timotheus  were  come 

27.  5  we  came  to  Myra,  (a  city)  of  Lycia 

47.  To  be  about  to  be,  MeAAw  viello. 

Matt.  3.    7  who.  .warned  you.  .from,  .wrath to  come? 
12.  32  iu  this  world,  neither  in.. (world)  to  come 
Luke  3.  "7  who.,  warned  you.  .from.,  wrath  to  come? 
Acts  24.  25  as  he  reasoned  of.  .judgment  to  come 
Heb.   2.    5  the  world  to  come,  whereof  we  speak 

6.  5  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come 

9.  n  an  High  Priest  of  good  things  [to  come] 

10.  1  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come 
13. 14  have  we  no.,  city,  but  we  seek  one  to  come 

48.  To  come  alongside  of  ,  irapa-yivofxai paraginomai. 
Matt.  2.    1  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  J. 

3,    1  Iu  those  days  came  John  the  Baptist 
3.  13  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  J. 
Marki4-  43  while  he  yet  spake,  cometh  Judas,  one  of 
Luke  7    4  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  they  besought 

7.  20  When  themen  were  come  unto  him,  they 
8. 19  Then  came  to  him  (his)  mother  and  his 

11.  6  a  friend  of  mine  iu  his  journey  is  come 

12.  51  Suppose  ye.  .1  am  come  to  give  peace  on 
14  21  that  servant  came,  and  showed  his  lord 

19.  16  Then  came  the  first,  saying.  Lord,  thy 

22.  52  and  the  elders,  which  were  come  to  him 
John  3.  23  aud  they  came,  and  were  baptized 

8.  2  [in  the  morning  he  came  again  into  the] 
Acts    5.  21  But  the  high  priest  came,  and  they  that 

5.  22  the  officers  came,  and  found  them  not  in 
5.  25  Then  came  one  and  told  them,  saying 

9.  26  when  Saul  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he 
9,  39  Wheu  he  was  come,  they  brought  him 

10.  32  [who,  when  he  cometh,  shall  speak  uuto] 

10.  33  thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art  come 

11.  23  Who,  when  he  came:  and  had  seen  the 

13.  14  they  came  to  Autioch  in  Pisidia,  and 

14  27  when  they  were  come,  and  had  gathered 

15.  4  when  they  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  they 

17.  10  who  coming  (thither)  wt-ntintu  the  syna. 

18.  27  who,  when  he  was  come,  helped  them 

20.  iS  wheu  they  were  come  to  him,  he  said 
23. 35  wheu  thine  accusers  are  also  come 

24. 17  after  many  years,  I  came  to  bring  alms  to 

24.  24  after  certain  days  when  Felix  came  with 

25.  7  when  he  was  come,  the  Jews,  .stood 

28.  21  neither  any  of  the  brethren  that  came 

1  Co.  16.   3  when  I  come,  whomsoever  ye  shall  appr. 

Heb.   9.  11  Christ  being  come  an  High  Priest  of  good 
49.ro  be  alongside  of,  Trapet/u  parcimi. 

Matt26.  50  Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come? 

John  7.    6  My  time  is  not  yet  come  :  but  your  time 
11.  28  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee! 

Acts  10.  21  what(is)the  cause  wherefore  ye  are  come? 
i2.  30  but  they  came  with  one  accord  to  him 
17.    6  These  that  have  turned  . .  are  come  hither 

Col.     1.   6  Which  is  come  uuto  you,  as  (it  is)  iu  all 

50. To  come  alongside  <>i\  trap(pxo/.Lai  parerchomem 
Acts  24.    7  [the  chief  captain  Lysiascame  (upon  us)] 

51.  To  place  alongside  of,  irapio-Tnf.ii  paristemi. 
Mark  4.  29  putteth  in  the  sickle.,  the  har  vest  is  come 


COMB 


183 


COME 


52.  7*0  come  toward,  irpoa-epxo/J.at  proserchomai. 
Matt  4.11  behold,  angels  caiue  and  ministered  unto 

S  ig  a  certain  scribe  came,  and  said  unto  him 
g.  20  a  woman,  which  was  diseased . .  came  beh. 
13.  10  the  disciples  came,  and  said  imto  him 

13.  27  the  servauts  of  the  householder  came 

14.  i2  his  disciples  came,  and  took  up  the  body 

15.  12  Theu  came  his  disciples,  and  said  unto 
15!  23  his  disciples  cameTand  besought  him,  say. 
16     1  Pharisees  also  with  the  Saddueees  came 
17.    7  Jesus  came  aud  touched  them,  and  said 
ig.  16  one  came  aud  said  unto  him,Xjood  Master 

25.  20  he  that  had  received  five  talents  came 
25  22  Lie  also  that,  .received  two  talents  came 

25  24  he  which,  .received  the  one  talent  came 

26  50  Theu  came  they,  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus 

26.  60  [yea,  though  many  false  witnesses  came] 
26  60  At  the  last  came  two  false  witnesses 

28    2  the  angel,  .came  aud  rolled  back  the  stone 
28.   9  they  came  and  held  him  by  the  feet,  aud 
28  18  Jesus  came  aud  spake  unto  them,  saying 
Mark  1  31  he  came  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  aud 

12.  28  one  of  the  scribes  came,  and  hav.  14.  45. 
Luke  7    14  And  he  came  aud  touched  the  bier 

8.  44  Came  behind  (him),  aud  touched  the.  -gar. 

9.  12  then  came  the  twelve,  aud  said  unto  him 

13.  31  The  same  day  there  came  certain  of  the 
Johui2.  21  The  same  came  therefore  to  Philip,  which 
Acts  12.  13  a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named  Rhoda 

22.  27  the  chief  captain  came,  and  said  unto  him 
28.   9  others  also,  which  had  diseases .  .came 

1  Pe.  2.   4  To  whom  coming,  (as  uuto)  a  living  stone 

5-3.  To  bear ;  be  borne,  <pepa>  phero. 

2  Pe.   1.  17  wheu  there  came  such  a  voice  to  him  from 

1.  18  this  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we 
1.  21  the  prophecy  came  not  iu  old  time  by  the 

54.  To  come  or  be  beforehand,  <p6duw  pkthano. 
Matt  12.  28  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto 
Luken.  20  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  you 
2  Co.  10.  14  for  we  are  come  as  far  as  to  you  also 

2  Th.  2.  16  the  wrath  is  come  upon  them  to  the 

55.  To  fill  up  together,  (TVfxn\y]p6w  sumpleroo. 
Luke  g.  51  when  the  time  was  come  that  he  should 

56. To  come  together,  <xvv4pxo/J.at  sxinerchomai. 
Acts   5.  16  There  came  also  a  multitude  (out)  of  the 
25.  17  Therefore,  when  they  were  come  hither 

57.  To  make  or  have  space,  xvpto  choreo. 

2  Pe.   3.   9  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance 

53.  To  go  in  upon,  eVi/Wew  epibaino. 

Acts  20.  18  from  the  first  day  that  I  came  into  25.  1. 

59.ro  go  upon,  or  in  saccessioyi,  4irtTrop€vop.ai. 
Luke  8.  4  and  were  come  to  him  out  of  every  city 
[See  also  Come— again,  against,  another  place,  be- 
hind, ears,  end,  full,  hither,  morning,  near,  nearly, 
nigh,  nought,  pass,  presumptuously,  remembrance, 
round,  round  about,  run,  short,  straight,  tid- 
ings, time,  time  to,  while,  wTath.] 

COME  (in  unto,  or  upon),  to  be  — 
1.7*0  come,  arrive,  .trus:  athah. 

Job     3.  25  thing  which  I  greatly  feared  is  come  upon 

16.  22  When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall 

2.7*0  come,  arrive,  nhn  atha, 

Ezra  4. 12  the  Jews,  .are  come  unto  Jerusalem 

3.  To  go  in,  n'i3  bo. 

Gen.   6.  13  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me 
12.  14  when  Abram  was  come  into  Egypt,  the 
19.  22  for  I  cannot  do  anything  till  thou  be  come 
34.    5  Jacob  held  his  peace  until  they  were  come 

Lev.  14.  34  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  Canaan 

23.  10  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  which  I 
Nuni  15.    2  WHien  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  your 

22.  36  when  Balak  heard  that  Balaam  was  come 

22.  38  Lo,  I  am  come  unto  thee:  have  I  now  any 
Deut.  1.  20  Ye  are  come  unto  the  mountain  of  the  A. 

17.  14  When  thou  art  come  unto  the  land  which 

18.  9  When  thou  art  come  into  the  land  which 
26.    3  I  am  come  unto  the  country  which  the  L. 

31. 11  When  all  Israel  is  come  to  appear  before 
Josh.  2.    3  Bring  forth  the  men  that  are  come  to 

2.  3  they  be  come  to  search  out  the.  .country 

3.  8  When  ye  are  come  to  the  brink  of  the 

3. 15  as  they  that  bare  the  ark  were  come  unto 
5.  14  but  (as)  captain  of  the  host,  .am  I.  .come 
9.    6  Wre  be  come  from  a  far  country  :  now 
9.   9  thy  servants  are  come  because  of  the  name 

23.  15  as  all  good  things  are  come  upon  you 
Judg  7.  13  when  Gideon  was  come,  behold,  (there 

11.    7  why  are  ye  come  unto  me  now  when  ye 

11. 12  that  thou  art  come  against  me  to  fight 
16.    2  Samson  is  come  hither.     And  they  com. 

19.  29  when  he  was  come  into  his  house,  he  took 
Ruth  1. 19  when  they  were  come  to  Beth-lehem.  .all 

2.  12  under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to 

4.  11  The  Lori>  make  the  woman  that  is  come 
1  Sa.   4.    3  when  the  people  were  come  into  the 

4.    6  they  understood  that  the  ark.  .was  come 
4.    7  for  they  said,  God  is  come  into  the  camp 
9.   5  when  they  were  come  to  the  land  of  Zuph 
9.  13  As  soon  as  ye  be  come  into  the  city,  ye 
9.  14  when  they  were  come  into  the  city 
9.  16  because  their  cry  is  come  unto  me 
10.    5  when  thou  art  come  thither  to  the  city 
10.    7  when  these  signs  are  come  uuto  thee 


iSa.  12. 
14. 

16. 

16. 
19. 


23- 

=5- 
26. 
29. 
30- 

►  Sa.   2. 
3- 

5- 
9- 


i3< 
14. 
14, 

17- 
19. 
19. 

19. 
19, 

1  Ki.  ,1. 


:Ki 


17- 

4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
7- 
8. 
9- 
9- 

16. 

19. 

20. 

1  Ch.12. 

19. 
19. 

2  Ch.  6. 

9 


23- 

=5- 

V- 

Ezra   3. 

8. 

Neh 

.  2. 

Esth.  6. 

Job 

2. 

3- 

4- 

Psa 

12- 

SI- 

6q. 

69. 

79- 

[02. 

Pro 

!.  6. 

Song  5. 

Isa. 

10. 

37- 

39- 

44. 

i>3- 

Jer. 

10. 

12. 

32. 

46. 

47- 

4S. 

50. 

50. 

51 

SI- 

Larr. 

Eze. 

7- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

i£>. 

17- 

20. 

21. 

22. 

39- 

Dan 

8. 

Amos  J 
Mic.  1 
Hag.    ] 


S  When  Jacob  was  come  into  Egypt,  and 

26  when  the  people  were  come  into  the  wood 
2  and  say,  I  am  come  to  sacrifice  to  the  L. 

5  I  am  come  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord 
16  wheu  the  messengers  were  come  in 

37  when  the  lad  was  come  to  the  place  of 
7  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was  come  to 

40  when  the  servants  of  David  were  come  to 
4  understood  that  Saul  was  come  in  very 

10  master's  servants  that  are  come  with  thee 

1  whenDavid and  his  men  were  come  to Zik. 

24  the  sun  went  down  wheu  they  were  come 
23  When  Joab  and  all  the  host,  .were  conle 

13  David  took,  .wives,  .after  he  was  come 

6  when  Mephibosheth.  .was  come  unto  D. 

7  when  Uriah  was  come  unto  him,  David 
4  the  wayfaring  man  that  was  come  unto 
4  dressed  it  for  the  mau  that  was  come  to 
6  aud  wheu  the  king  was  come  to  see  him 

15  Now.  .that  I  am  come  to  speak  of  this 
32  to  say,  Wherefore  am  I  come  from  Geshur? 

27  when  David  was  come  to  Mahanaim,  that 

11  the  speech  of  all  Israel  is  come  to  the 

20  I  am  come  the  first  this  day  of  all  the 

25  when  he  was  come  to  Jerusalem  to  meet 
30  forasmuch  as.  .the  king  is  come  again  in 

21  Wherefore  is  my  lord  the  king  come  to 

23  when  he  was  come  iu  before  the  king,  he 

2  when  she  was  come  to  Solomon,  she 

1  all  Israel  were  come  to  Shechem  to  make 

21  when  Rehoboam  was  come  to  Jerusalem 
18  art  thou  come  unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to 

4  when  thou  art  come  in,  thou  shalt  shut 
32  when  Elisha  was  come  into  the  house 
36  when  she  was  come  in  uuto  him,  he  said 

6  when  this  letter  is  come  unto  thee 

22  even  now  there  be  come  to  me  from 

5  when  they  were  come  to  the  uttermost 

7  it  was  told  him.  .The  man  of  God  is  come 

30  when  Jehu  was  come  to  Jezreel,  Jezebel 

34  when  he  was  come  in,  he  did  eat  and 

12  when  the  king  was  come  from  Damascus 

3  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth 

14  Hezekiah  said,  They  are  come  from  a  far 
17  If  ye  be  come  peaceably  unto  me  to  help 

3  are  not  his  servants  come  unto  thee  for 
9  the  kings  that  were  come  (were)  by  them. 

32  but  is  come  from  a  far  country  for  thy 
1  when  she  was  come  to  Solomon,  she 
1  for  to  Shechem  were  all  Israel  come  to 
1  when  Rehoboam  was  come  to  Jerusalem 

14  when  he  was  come  to  the  king,  the  king 
22  children  of  Amnion,  .which  were  come 

7  when  he  was  come,  he  went  out  with  J. 

15  when  she  was  come  to  the  entering  of 
.  10  (to  wit),  the  army  that  was  come  to  him 

21  when  he  was  come  into  the  house  of  his 
S  all  they  that  were  come  out  of  the  capti. 

35  which  were  come  out  of  the  captivity 

13  after  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our 

10  there  was  come  a  man  to  seek  the  welfare 

4  Now  Hainan  was  come  into  the  outward 

11  all  this  evil  that  was  come  upon  him 
25  that  which  I  was  afraid  of  is  come  unto 

5  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou  faintest 
title.  David  is  come  to  the  house  of  Ahimel 

5  Fearf  nlness  and  trembling  are  come  upon 

1  for  the  waters  are  come  in  unto(my)soul 

2  I  am  come  into  deep  waters,  where  the 
1  heathen  are  come  into  thine  inheritance 

13  time  to  favour  her .  .the  set  time,  is  come 

3  when  thou  art  come  into  the  hand  of 

1  I  am  come  into  my  garden,  my  sister 

28  He  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  to  M. 
3  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth 

3  They  are  come  from  a  far  country  unto 
7  and  the  things  that  are  coming,  and  shall 

4  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come 

22  the  noise  of  the  bruit  is  come,  and  a; 

12  The  spoilers  are  come  upon  all  high' 

24  they  are  come  unto  the  city  to  take  it 
21  the  day  of  their  calamity  was  come  upon 

5  Baldness  is  come  upon  Gaza ;  Ashkelon 
21  judgment  is  come  upon  the  plain  country 
27  woe  unto  them  !  for  their  day  is  come 

31  for  thy  day  is  come,  the  time  (that)  I 
5 1  strangers  are  come  into  the  sanctuaries  of 
56  Because  the  spoiler  is  come  upon  her 
18  our  days  are  fulfilled  ;  for  our  eud  is  come 

2  the  end  is  come  upon  the  four  corners  of 

5  An  evil,  an  only  evil,  behold,  is  come 

6  end  is  come,  the  end  is  come,  .it  is  come 

7  The  morning  is  come,  .the  time  is  come 
10  Behold  the  day,  behold,  it  is  come  ;  the 
12  The  time  is  come,  the  day  draweth  near 

7  and  thou  art  come  to  excellent  ornaments 

12  the  king  of  Babylon  is  come  to  Jerusalem 

3  Are  ye  come  to  inquire  of  me  ?    (As)  I 
25,  29  whose  day  is  come,  when  their  iniquity 

4  art  come  (even)  unto  thyyears ;  therefore 

8  Behold,  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  saith 

23  when  the  transgressors  are  come  to  the 

13  all  this  evil  is  come  upon  us  :  yet  made 
12  thy  words  were  heard,  and  I  am  come 

14  I  am  come  to  make  thee  understand 

7  The  days . .  are  come,  the  days . .  are  come 
2  The  end  is  come  upon  my  people  of  Israel 

9  incurable  ;  for  it  is  come  unto  Judah 

2  This  people  say,  The  time  is  not  come 


Judg 


Ruth  4. 
1  Sa.  23. 

1  Ki. 


4.  To  meet,  xi$  qara. 

Isa.  51.  19  These  two  (things)  are  come  unto  thee 


COME  about  — 

A  revolution,  circuit,  nsipfl  tequphah. 

1  Sa.    1.  20  when  the  time  was  come  about  after  H. 

COME  about,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  around,  izd  sabab,  5. 

2  Ch.13. 13  caused  an  ambushment  to  come  about 

COME  abroad,  to  — 

I.  To  go  forth,  Kf]  yatsa. 

Esth.  "1.17  (this)  deed  of  the  queen  shall  come  abroad 

2.7*0  break  forth,  ps  parats. 

2  Ch.31 .    5  as  soon  as  the  commandment  came  abroad 
3.7*0  be  come  or  arrived,  cupiKveofxai  aphikueomai. 

Rom. 16  19  your  obedience  is  come  abroad  uuto  all 

COME  aforehand,  to  — 

2*o  take  beforehand,  TrpoXan&dvw  prolambano* 
Marki4.    8  she  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body 

COME  after,  to  — 

1. Hinder,  later,  f'nnN  acharon. 

Job    18.  20  They  that  come  after  (him)  shall  be 
EccL  4. 16  they  also  that  come  after  shall  not  rejoice 

2. 7*o  receive  in  succession,  SfaSexoncu  diadechomaL 
Acts    7.  45  Which  also  our  fathers  that  came  after 

COME  again,  to  — 

1. 7*o  turn  back,  iw  shub. 

Gen.  13. 16  they  shall  come  hither  again;  for  the~ 
22.    5  and  I  and  the  lad  will,  .come  again  to 
28.  21  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in 
50.    5  let  me  go  up.  and  I  will  come  again 

Exodi4.  26  that  the  waters  may  come  again  upon  the 
24.  14  Tarry  ye.  .until  we  come  again  unto  you 

Lev.  14.  3g  the  priest  shall  come  again  the  seventh 
14.  43  if  the  plague  come  agaiu,  aud  break  out 

Nuni35.  32  that  he  should  come  again  to  dwell  in 

Josh.  18.    8  describe  it,  and  come  agaiu  to  me,  that  I 

18  I  will  tarry  until  thou  come  again 
9  When  I  come  again  in  peace,  I  will  break 

19  his  spirit  came  again,  and  he  revived 
14  And  Benjamin  came  agaiu  at  that  time 

3  Naomi,  that  is  come  again  out  of  the 
23  come  ye  again  to  me  with  the  certainty 
30.  12  when  he  had  eateu,  his  spirit  came  again 
41  that  Shimei  had  gone,  .and  was  come  a. 
12    s  Depart  yet  (for)  three  days,  then  come  a. 
12.  12  saying,  Come  to  me  agaiu  the  third  day 
12.  20  Israel  heard  that  Jeroboam  was  come  a. 
17  21  let  this  child's  soul  come  into  him  again 
17.  22  the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again  . 
39.    7  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  again  the 
20.    5  the  messengers  came  agaiu,  and  said 
when  they  came  again  to  him.  .he  said 
22  I  may  ruu  to  the  man  of  God,  aud  cornea. 
38  Elisha  came  again  to  GUgal :  and  (there 
10  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  to  thee,  and 
14  his  flesh  came  again  like,  .a  little  child 
S  came  again,  and  entered  into  another 
18  The  messenger,  .cometh  not  again 

20  He  came,  .unto  them,  and  cometh  not  a. 
36  Wherefore  they  came  again,  and  told  him 

Ch.io.    s  Come  again  unto  me  after  three  days 
10.  12  Come  again  to  me  on  the  third  day 
30.    9  that  they  shall  come  agaiu  into  this 
2.    1  came  again  unto  Jerusalem  aud  Judah 
6.  21  which  were  come  again  out  of  captivity 
Neh.   7.    6  came  agaiu  to  Jerusalem  and  to  Judah 

8.  17  that  were  come  again  out  of  the  captivity 
Esth.  6. 12  And  Mordecai  came  again  to  the  king's 
Psa.  78.  39  that  passeth  away,  and  cometh  not  again 
Prov.  3  28  Go,  and  come  again,  aud  to  morrow  I  will 
Jer.   31.  16  they  shall  come  again  from  the  land  of 
31. 17  (thy)  children  shall  come  again  to  their 
37.   8  the  Chaldeans  shall  come  again 
Zech,  4.    1  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  came  again 

2.7*0  come  back  upon,  i-xa.vipxoiJ.aj.  epanerchomai* 
Lukeio.  35  when  I  come  again,  I  will  repay  thee 

3.7*0  turn  upon,  emarpe^w  epistrepho. 

Luke  S.  55  And  her  spirit  came  again,  and  she  arose 

4.7*0  turn  back,  or  secretly,  viroarpetpw  hujxistrejiho* 
Acts  22.  17  when  I  was  come  again  to  Jerusalem 

COME  against,  to  — 
To  some  in,  Kia  bo. 

Psa.  36.  11  Let  not  the  foot  of  pride  come  against 

COME  at,  to  — 

7*o  come  together,  meet  with,  a-uvrvyxdvcc  suntugch* 
Luke  8.  19  and  could  uot  come  at  him  for  the  press 

COME  away,  to  — 

7*o  go  or  come  on,  *|S;  yalak. 

Song  2.  10,  13  Rise  up,  my  love  .and  come  away 

COME  back,  to  — 

7*o  turn  back,  3*B»  shub. 

Ruth  2.   6  the  Moabitish  damsel  that  came  back 

COME  before,  to  — 

7*o  come  befwe,  DTf?  qadatn. 

2  Ivi.19.  32  nor  come  before  it  with  shield,  nor  cast 
Psa.  95.    2  Let  us  come  before  his  presence  ■with 
Isa.   37,  33  nor  come  before  it  with  shields,  nor  cast 
Mic.    6.    6  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  LoRI> 
6.   6  shall  I  come  before  him  with  burnt 


Ki. 


Ezra 


COMB 


184 


COME 


COME  betwixt,  to  — 

To  touch  or  strike  upon,  "53  paga,  5- 

Job  36.  32  (not  to  shine)  by  tthe  cloud) .  .couieth  b. 

COME  by,  to  — 

To  become  strong  around,  wepiKpar-ns  yivofxai. 
Acts  27.  16  we  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  boat 

COME,  to  cause  to  — 

I. To  cause  to  come  in,  102  ho,  5. 

Job   34.  28  cause  the  cry  of  the  poor  to  come  unto 

2.  To  cause  to  find,,  N"f?  matsa,  5. 

Job   37.  13  He  causeth  it  to  come,  whether  for  cor. 

3.  To  cause  to  meet,  Krjjj  qara,  5. 

Jer.  32.  23  thou  hast  caused  all  this  evil  to  come 

COME  down  — 

Coming  down,  nm  nacheth. 

2  Ki.   6.   9  for  thither  the  Syrians  are  come  down 

COME  down,  to  — 

l,To  come  down,  TV  yarad. 

Gen.  ir.    5  the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and 
15.  n  when  the  fowls  came  dowu  upon  the  car. 

43.  20  we  came  indeed  down  at  the  first  time 

44.  23  Except  your  youngest  brother  come  down 

45.  9  come  down  unto  me,  tarry  not 

xod.  2.    5  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  came  down  to 
3.   8  And  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them  out 
g.  19  the  hail  shall  come  down  upon  them,  and 
11.    8  thy  servants  shall  come  down  unto  me 
19.  ir  the  third  day  the  LORD  will  come  down 

19.  20  the  Lord  came  down  upon  mount  Sinai 
32.    1  saw  that  Moses  delayed  to  come  down 
34.  29  when  Moses  came  down  from  mount  S. 
34.  29  when  he  came  down  from  the  mount 

Lev.    9.  22  came  down  from  offering  of  the  sin  offer. 
Xum  11. 17 1  will  come  down  and  talk  with  thee  there 

11.  25  the  Lord  came  down  in  a  cloud,  and 

12.  5  the  Lord  came  down  in  the  pillar  of  the 

14.  45  the  Amalekites  carrie  down,  and  the  C. 

20.  28  Moses  and  Eleazar  came  down  from  the 
Deut.  9.  15  So  I  turned,  and  came  down  from  the  m. 

10.    5  I  turned  myself,  and  came  down  from  the 
28.  24  from  heaven  shall  it  come  down  upon 
28.  43*and  thou  shalt  come  down  very  low 
28,  52  until  thy  high  and  fenced  walls  come  d. 
Josh.  3.  13  (from)  the  waters  that  come  down  from 
3.  16  the  waters  which  came  down  from  above 
3.  16  those  that  came  down  toward  the  sea  of 

18.  16  the  border  came  down  to  the  end  of  the 
Judg.  1.  34  they  would  not  suffer  them  to  come  down 

5.  14  out  of  Machircame  down  governors,  and 
7.  24  Come  down  against  the  Midianites,  and 
9  36  there  come  people  down  from  the.  .moun. 
9.  37  See  there  come  people  down  by  the 

15.  12  We  are  come  down  to  bind  thee,  that 

16.  31  all  the  house  of  his  father  came  down 

6.  21  come  ye  down  (and)  fetch  it  up  to  you 
9.  25  when  they  were  come  down  from  the 

10.  s  thou  shalt  meet  a  company . .  coming  down 
10.    8  I  will  come  down  unto  thee,  to  offer 

13.  12  The  Philistines  will  come  down  now  upon 

17.  8  choose  you  a  man.  .and  let  him  come  d. 
17.  28  Why  earnest  thou  down  hither?  and  with 

17.  28  thou  art  come  down  that  thou  mightest 
23.    6  he  came  down  (with)  an  ephod  in  his 
23.  11  will  Saul  come  down,  as  thy  servant  hath 
23.  11  and  the  Lord  said,  He  will  come  dowu 
23.  20  0  king,  come  down,  according  to  all 
23.  20  the  desire  of  thy  soul  to  come  down 
23.  25  wherefore  he  came  down  into  a  rock 
25.  20  she  came  down  by  the  covert  of  the  hill 
25.  20  David  and  his  men  came  down  against 

19.  16  He  came  down  with  the  men  of  Judah  to 
19.  31  And  Barzillai . .  came  down  from  Rogelim 
22.  10  He  bowed  the  heavens  also,  and  came  do. 

8  he  came  down  to  meet  me  at  Jordan,  and 
22.    2  Jehoshaphat.  .came  down  to  the  king  of 
1.  4,  6, 16  Thou  shalt  not  come  down  from  th. 
1.   9  man  of  God,  the  king  hath  said,  Come  d. 
1.  io,  12  let  fire  come  down  from  heaven,  and 
1.  10  there  came  down  fire  from  heaven,  and 
1.  11  thus  hath  the  king  said,  Come  down 
1.  12  the  fire  of  God  came  down  from  heaven 
1.  14  there  came  fire  down  from  heaven, and 
C.  18  when  they  came  down  to  him,  Elisha 

6.  33  behold,  the  messenger  came  down  unto 

7.  17  who  spake  when  the  king  came  down  to 
9.  16  And  Ahaziah.  .was  come  down  to  see  J. 

1 3.  14  Joash  the  king  of  Israel  came  dowu  unto 
7.  21  because  they  came  down  to  take  away 
7.    1  the  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and 
7.    3  Israel  saw  how  the  fire  came  down 
6.    3  a  great  work,  so  that  I  cannot  come  down 

6.  3  whilst  I  leave  it,  and  come  down  to  you? 
9.  13  Thou  earnest  down  also  upon  mount  Sinai 

7.  16  his  violent  dealing  shall  come  down  upon 

18.  9  He  bowed  the  heavens  also,  and  came  d. 
72.    6  He  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the 

144.    5  Bow  thy  heavens,  O  Lord,  and  come  d, 
Isa.    31.    4  so  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts,  come  down  to 
32.  19  When  it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on  the 
34.   5  it  shall  come  down  upon  Idumea,  and 
34.    7  the  unicorns  shall  come  down  with  them 
47.    1  Come  down,  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin 
55. 10  as  the  rain  cometh  down . .  from  heaven 
64.    1  Oh . .  that  thou  wouldest  come  down 
64.    3  when  thou  didst  terrible,  .thou  earnest  d. 
Jer.    13.  18  for  your  principalities  shall  come  down 


:  Sa. 


2  Sa 

iKi. 
2K1. 


1  Ch. 

2Ch. 


Neh. 


Psa. 


Jer.  48.  iS  Thou  daughter,  .come  down  from  thy 
Lam.  1.    9  therefore  she  came  dowu  wonderfully 
Eze.  26.  16  the  princes,  .shall  come  down  from  their 
27.  29  pilots,  .shall  come  down  from  then*  ships 
30.    6  the  pride  of  her  power  shall  come  down 
47.    1  and  the  waters  came  down  from  under 
Alic.    1.    3  and  will  come  down,  and  tread  upon  the 
1.  12  but  evil  came  down  from  the  Lord  unto 
Hag.   2.  22  horses  and  their  riders  shall  come  down 
Zech.11.    2  the  forest  of  the  vintage  is  come  down 

2.  To  come  down,  nru  nachath. 

Jer.  21. 13  which  say,  Who  shall  come  down  against 

3. To  coyne  doxon,  nri?  necko.Hi. 

Dan.   4.  13  an  holy  one  came  down  from  heaven 
4.  23  an  holy  one  coming  down  from  heaven 

4.  To  come  dovm,  Karafiaivw  katabaino. 

Matt.  8.    1  When  he  was  come  down  from  the  mount 

14.  29  when  Peter  was  come  down  out  of  the 
17.  9  as  they  came  down  from  the  mountain 
24.  17  Let  him.  .on  the  house  top  not  come  down 
27.  40  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down 
27.  42  let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross 

Mark  3.  22  scribes  which  came  down  from  Jerusal. 
9.    9  as  they  came  down  from  the  mountain 

15.  30  Save  thyself,  and  come  down  from  the 
Luke  6.  17  he  came  down  with  them,  and  stood  in 

8.  23  there  came  down  a  storm  of  wind  on  the 

9.  54  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down  from 
10.  31  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that 

17.  31  let  him  not  come  down  to  take  it  away 
19.    5  Zaccheus,  make  haste,  and  come  down 

19.  6  he  made  haste,  and  came  down,  and 
John  3.  13  he  that  came  down  from  heaven,  (even) 

4.  47  besought  him  that  he  would  come  down 

4.  49  Sir,  come  down  ere  my  child  die 

6.  33  is  he  which  cometh  down  from  heaven 
6.38  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  mine 
6.  41  I  am  the  bread  which  came  down  from 
6.  42  how  is  it  that  he  saith,  I  came  down 
6.  50  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from  hea. 
6.  51  I  am  the  living  bread  which  came  down 
6  58  that  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven 
Acts    7.  34  and  am  come  down  to  deliver  them 

8.  15  Who,  when  they  were  come  down,  prayed 

14.  it  The  gods  are  come  dowu  to  us  in  the 

16.  8  they  passing  by  Mysia  came  down  to  T. 

24.  22  When  Lysias  the.  .captain  shall  come  d. 

25.  7  the  Jews  which  came  down  from  Jem. 
Jas.  1.  17  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of 
Rev.    3.  12  which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven 

10.  1  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  come  down 

12.  12  the  devil  is  come  down  unto  you,  having 

13.  13  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven 

18.  1  I  saw  another  angel  come  down  from  heav. 

20.  1  I  saw  an  angel  come  dowu  from  heaven 

20.  9  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  heaven 

21.  2  coming  dowrn  from  God  out  of  heaven 

5. To  come  down,  ko.t4pxoij.cu  katerchomai. 

Luke  4.  31  came  down  to  Capernaum,  a  city  of  Gal. 

9.  37  when  they  were  come  down  from  the 
Acts  9.  32  he  came  down  also  to  the  saints  which 

15.  1  certain  men  which  came  down  from  J. 
21.  10  there  came  down  from  Judea  a  certain 

COME  down,  to  cause  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  come  down,  tv  yarad,  5. 

Eze.  34.  26  I  will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in 
Joel    2.  23  he  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you  the 

2.  To  cause  to  come  down,  nru  naclmth,  5. 

Joel.    3.  11  cause  thy  mighty  ones  to  come  down,  0 

COME  forth,  to — 

l.To  come  forth,  burst  forth,  n^a  guack. 

Eze.  32.    2  and  thou  earnest  forth  with  thy  rivers 

2.  To  (cause  to)  come  or  burst  forth,  rna  guach,  5. 

Judg2o.  33  the  liers  in  wait  of  Israel  came  forth  out 

3.  To  go  forth  or  out,  ny;  yatsa. 

Gen.  15.  4  he  that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thine  own 
24.  43  that  when  thevirgincomethforthto  draw 
24.  45  Rebekah  came  forth  with  her  pitcher  on 

Exod.  4.  14  behold,  he  cometh  forth  to  meet  thee 

5.  20  met  Moses  aud  Aaron . .  as  they  came  forth 

8.  20  lo,  he  cometh  forth  to  the  water ;  and  say 

13.  8  did  unto  me  when  I  came  forth  out  of  E. 

16.  24  come  forth,  and  offer  his  burnt  offering 
Nura  11.  20  saying,  Why  came  ye  forth  out  of  Egypt 

12.    5  called  Aaron  and  M.  :  and.  .both  came  f. 
Deut.  2.  23  which  came  forth  out  of  Caphtor 

4.  45  which  Moses  spake . .  after  they  came  forth 
4.  46  after  they  were  come  forth  out  of  Egypt 

16.  3,  3  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

16.   6  season  that  thou  comest  forth  out  of  E. 

21.    2  elders  and  thy  judges  shall  come  forth 

23.  4  when  ye  came  forth  out  of  Egypt;  and 

24.  9  afterthat  ye  were  come  forth  out  of  Egypt 

25.  17  when  ye  were  come  forth  out  of  Egypt 
Josh.  5.    5  by  the  way  as  they  came  forth  out  of  E. 

9.  12  on  the  day  we  came  forth  to  go  unto  you 

18.  11  the  coast  of  their  lot  came  forth  between 

19.  1  And  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  Simeon 
Judg.  1.  24  spies  saw  a  man  come  forth  out  of  the  c. 

9.  43  the  people  (were)  come  forth  out  of  the 

11.  31  whatsoever  cometh  forth  of  the  doors  of 

14.  14  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and  out 
14.  14  of  the  strong  came  forth  sweetness.    And 

20.  21  children  of  Benjamin  came  forth  out  of  G. 


1  Sa 

11 

7 

H 

11 

22. 

3 

2Sa. 

16 

16 

IT 

1  Ki 

2, 

3° 

8. 

19 

20. 

33 

2K1 

2 

3 

2. 

=3 

1CI1 

24 

7 

25- 

9 

2Ch 

.  6. 

9 

Job 

5- 

6 

14- 

2 

Psa. 

17- 

2 

88. 

8 

Prcn 

•7- 

IS' 

z5- 

4 

EccI 

•  S- 

15 

7- 

18 

Isx 

11 

X 

14. 

29 

22. 

29 

36. 

3 

37- 

9 

48. 

1 

Jer. 

1. 

5 

4- 

4 

7- 

25 

20. 

18 

37- 

5 

37- 

7 

46. 

9 

48. 

45 

Eze. 

S- 

4 

14. 

22 

21. 

19 

33- 

30 

Dan 

8. 

9 

9- 

22 

9- 

23 

11. 

11 

Joel 

3, 

18 

Mic. 

1. 

3 

1. 

11 

5- 

2 

Zech 

.10. 

4 

4.  Outconii 

»<?, 

2  Ch 

.32. 

21 

Whosoever  cometh  not  forth  after  Saul 
the  Hebrews  come  forth  out  of  the  holes 
Let  my  father  and  mother  .come  forth 
he  came  forth,  and  cursed  still  as  he 
Behold,  my  son.  which  came  forth  of  my 
said  unto  him.  Thus  saith  the  king, Come  f. 
that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thy  loins,  he 
Then  Ben-hadad  came  forth  to  him  ;  and 
there  came  forth  a  spirit,  and  stood  before 
sons  of  the  prophets . .  came  forth  to  E. 
there  came  forth  little  children  out  of  the 
there  came  forth  two  she  bears  out  of  the 
Jehu  came  forth  to  the  servants  of  his 
Go  in  (and)slay  them ;  let  none  come  forth 
since  the  day  then- fathers  came  forth  out 
the  first  lot  came  forth  to  Jehoiarib,  the 
the  first  lot  came  forth  for  Asaph  to  Jos. 
which  shall  come  forth  out  of  thy  loins 
although  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of 
He  cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut 
Let  my  sentence  come  forth  from  thy 
I  (am)  shut  up,  and  I  cannot  come  forth 
Therefore  came  I  forth  to  meet  thee,  dil. 
there  shall  come  forth  a  vessel  for  the 
As  he  came  forth  of  his  mother's  womb 
he  that  feareth  God  shall  come  forth  of 
there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the 
out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall  come  forth 
This  also  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord  of 
Then  came  forth  unto  him  Eliakim,  Hil. 
He  is  come  forth  to  make  war  with  thee 
are  come  forth  out  of  the  waters  of  Judah 
before  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  womb 
lest  my  fury  come  forth  like  fire,  and  burn 
Since  the  day  that  your  fathers  came  forth 
Wherefore  came  I  forth  out  of  the  womb 
Pharaoh's  army  was  come  forth  out  of 
Pharaoh's  army,  which  is  come  forth  to 
and  let  the  mighty  men  come  forth  ;  the 
but  a  fire  shall  come  forth  out  of  Heshbon 
thereof  shall  a  fire  come  forth  into  all  the 
behold,  they  shall  come  f<  rth  unto  you 
both  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  one 
the  word  that  cometh  forth  from  the  L. 
out  of  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  horn 
I  am  now  come  forth  to  give  thee  skill  and 
the  commandment  came  forth,  and  I  am 
and  shall  come  forth  and  fight  with  him 
a  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the  house 
the  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of  his  place 
the  inhabitant  of  Zaauan  came  not  forth 
out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me 
Out  of  him  came  forth  the  corner,  out  of 

,  offspring,  issxie,  n1*;  yatsi. 

they  that  came  forth  of  his  own  bowels 

5.  To  come  forth,  ps?  nephaq. 

Dan.  3.  26  servants  of  themosthighGod,  come  forth 
3.  26  Then .  .came  forth  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 
5.    5  In  the  same  hour  came  forth  fingers  of  a 

7.  10  A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth 

Q.To  come  out  of,  forth,  cKiropfvofx.at  ekporev&mai. 
Luke  3.    7  to  the  multitude  that  came  forth  to  be 
John  5.  29  And  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done 

7.  To  come  out  of  forth,  i^pxofxat  excrchomai. 
Matti3.  49  the  angels  shall  come  forth,  and  sever  the 

15.  18  things,  .out  of  the  mouth  comeforth  from 
Mark  1.  38  Let  us  go.  .for  therefore  [came  I  forth] 

8.  11  the  Pharisees  came  forth,  and  began  to 

9.  29  This  kind  can  come  forth  by  nothing  but 
John  1 1.  44  And  he  that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound 

16.  28  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  co. 
16.  30  by  this  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth 

Acts    7.    7  afterthat  shall  they  come  forth,  and  serve 

S.To  come  alongside  of,  irapepxo/j.at  parerchomai. 

Luke  12.  37  and  will  come  forth  and  serve  them 
COME  forth  or  out,  that  — 

Outcoming,  offspring,  issue,  n'N^xv  tse-etsaim. 
Isa.   34.    1  world,  and  all  things  that  come  forth  of 
42.    5  and  that  which  cometh  out  of  it ;  he  that 
COME  hither — 
Hither,  here,  come  /  hevpo  deuro. 

Rev.  17.    1  saying  unto  me,  Come  hither:  I  will  show 
21.   9  and  talked  with  me,  saying,  Come  hither 
COME  ia,  into,  or  unto,  to  — 
l.To  come  in,  xi3  bo. 

Gen.    S.  11  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  evening 
19.   5  Where  (are)  the  men  which  came  in  to 
19.    9  This  one  (fellow)  came  in  to  sojourn,  and 
19.  31  not  a  man  in  the  earth  to  come  in  unto 

24.  31  he  said,  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of  the  L. 

27.  30  Esau  his  brother  came  in  from  bis  hunt. 
30.  16  Thou  must  come  in  unto  me  ;  for  surely  I 

38.  16  Go  to,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  come  in  unto 
3S.  16  What.. that  thou  mayestcomeinuntome? 
3S.  18  he  gave  (it)  hei\  and  came  in  unto  her 

39.  14  he  came  in  unto  me  to  lie  with  me,  and  I 

39.  17  The  Hebrew  servant,  .came  in  unto  me 

40.  6  Joseph  came  in  unto  them  in  the  morn. 

41.  14  changed  his  raiment,  and  came  in  unto 
Exod.  1.  19  are  delivered  ere  the  midwives  come  in 

10.    3  Moses  and  Aaron  came  in  unto  Pharoah 
21.    3  If  he  came  in  by  himself,  he  shall  go  out 

28.  43  when  they  come  in  unto  the  tabernacle 
Lev.  14.  48  if  the  priest  shall  come  in,  and  look 

25.  22  until  her  fruits  come  in  ye  shall  eat  fof) 
Xuniz;.  21  at  his  word  they  shall  come  in,  (both)  he 


COMB 


185 


COME 


Deut28.    6  Blessed  (shalt) thou  (be) when,  .comest  in 

28.  19  Cursed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  when,  .comest  in 
31.    2  I  cau  no  more  go  out  and  come  in 

J  osh.  2.  2  Behold,  there  came  men  in  hither  to  night 
14.  11  for  war,  both  to  go  out,  and  come  in 

Judg  18.  17  the  five  men  ..came  in,  (and)  took  thither 
19.  22  Bring  forth  the  man  that  came  into  thine 

i  Sa.   4.  14  And  the  man  came  in  hastily,  and  told  E. 

18.  13  he  went  out  and  came  in  before  the  peo. 

29.  6  thy  coming  in  with  me  in  the  host  (is)good 
-\  Sa.    5.    6  thou  shalt  not  come  in  hither:  thinking 

5.    6  David  cannot  come  in  hither 
11.   4  she  came  in  unto  him,  and  he  lay  with 

1  Ki.  1.  14  I  also  will  come  in  after  thee,  and  confirm 

1.  22  Nathan  the  prophet  also  came  in 

1.  42  Come  in;  for  thou  (art)  a  valiant  man,  and 

3.  7  I  know  not  (how)  to  go  out  or  come  in 
14.    5  it  shall  be,  when  she  cometh  in,  that  she 
14.    6  as  she  came  in  at  the  door,  that  he  said 

14.  6  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam  ;  why 
15. 17  might  not  suffer  any  to  go  out  or  come  in 
21.  13  there  came  in  two  men,  children  of  Belial 

2  Ki.11.   8  and  be  ye  with  the  king,  .as  he  cometh  in 

11.    9  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath 

13.  20  invaded  the  land  at  the  coming  in  of  the 

19.  27  I  know . .  thy  going  out,  and  thy  coming  in 

1  Ch.27.    1  which  came  in  and  went  out  month  by 

2  Ch.  1.  10  that  I  may  go  out  and  come  in  before 

15.  5  that  went  out,  nor  to  him  that  came  in 

16.  1  that  he  might  let  none  go  out  or  come  in 
23.   7  whosoever  (else)  cometh  into  the  house 
23.    7  be  ye  with  the  king  when  he  cometh  in 
23.    8  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath 

Esth.  2.  14  she  came  in  unto  the  king  no  more,  except 

4.  11  I  have  not  been  called  to  come  in  unto 
6.    5  And  the  king  said,  Let  him  come  in 

6.    6  So  Hainan  came  in.     And  the  kiug  said 
Job  22.  21  thereby  good  shall  come  unto  thee 
Psa.  24.    7  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in 

109.  17  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  come  unto  him 
119.  41  Let  thy  mercies  come  also  unto  me,  O  L. 
119.  77  Let  thy  tender  mercies  come  unto  me 
121.    8  The  Lord  shall  preserve. .  thy  coming  in 
Provn.  27  that  seeketh  mischief,  it  shall  come  unto 
Eccl.  6.    4  he  cometh  in  with  vanity,  and  departeth 
Isa.   24.  10  every  house  is  shut . .  no  man  may  come  in 
28.  15  it  shall  not  come  unto  us :  for  we  have 
37.  28  I  know . .  thy  going  out  and  thy  coming  in 
59.  19  When  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood 
Jer.  17.  19  whereby  the  kings  of  Judah  come  in,  and 
37.    4  Jeremiah  came  in  and  went  out  among  the 
39.    3  all  the  princes  of  the  king,  .came  in,  and 
Eze.  46.    9  shall  not  return  by  the  way.  .he  came  in 
Dan.  11.  21  he  shall  come  in  peaceably,  and  obtain 
Hos.   7.    1  the  thief  cometh  in,  (aud)  the  troop  of 
Jon.    2.    7  my  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  into  thine 
Zech.  8.  10  to  him  that  went  out  or  came  in  because 

2.  To  come  up  or  in,  ^b'ii  alal. 

Dan.   4.    7  Then  came  in  the  magicians,  the  astrolo. 

5.  8  Then  came  in  all  the  king's  wise  (meu) 

3.  To  come  in  or  toward,  el<r4pxoy.ai  eiserchomai. 

Matt  22.  11  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests 

22. 12  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 
Mark  5.  39  when  he  was  come  in,  he  saith  unto  them 

6.  22  the  daughter  of  the  said  Herodias  came  in 
.6.  25  And  she  came  in  straightway  with  haste 

Luke  1.  28  And  the  angel  came  in  unto  her,  and  said 
7. 45  but  this  woman  since  the  tim-e  I  came  in 

14.  23  and  compel  (them)  to  come  in,  that  my 
Acts  1.  13  when  they  were  come  in,  they  went  up 

5.    7  wife,  not  knowing  what  was  done,  came  in 
5.  10  the  young  men  came  in,  and  found  her 
9.  12  a  man  named  Ananias  coming  in,  and 
10.    3  an  angel  of  God  coming  in  to  him,  and 
10.  25  as  Peter  was  coming  in,  Cornelius  met 
Rom  11.  25  ;  1  Co.  14.  23,  24  ;  Heb.  10.  5  ;  Jas.  2.  2  ; 
Rev.  3.  20;  Matt.  10.  12;  17.  15;  21.  10;  Mark  9.  28; 
Luke  8.  41,  51 ;  Acts ;  n.  20  ;  23.  33;  14.  20;  16.  15. 

4. To  go  or  come  into,  i/x^aivo)  embaino. 

Matt.  14.  32  when  they  were  come  into  the  ;  Mark  5. 18. 
6.T0  come  in  or  toward,  el(nropEvofJ.at  eisporeuomai. 

Luken.  33  that  they  which  come  in  may  see  the  light 

Acts  9.  28  he  was  with  them  coming  in  and  going  out 
28.  30  and  received  all  that  came  in  unto  him 
G.To  set  oneself  upon  or  over,  €<pio,T7]fxt  ephistemi. 

Luke  2.  38  Andshe  coming  in  that  instantgave  thanks 
COME  in,  to  let  — 
To  cause  to  come  in,  n>2  bo,  5. 

Esth.  5. 12  the  queen  did  let  no  man  come  in  with 
COME  in  privily,  to  — 
To  come  in  alongside  of,  or  privily,  ■Ka.ptio-epxou.ai. 

Gal.     2.    4  who  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty 
COME  into  one's  room,  to  — 
To  receive  a  successor,  \ap.Qdvai  Stddoxov  lambano. 

Acts  24.  27  Porcius  Festus  came  into  Felix'room:  and 
COME  like  a  whirlwind,  to  — 
To  shoio  oneself  tempestuous,  i$y  soar,  7. 

Dan.  11.  40  the  king,  .shall  come,  .like  a  whirlwind 
COME  mightily,  to  — 
To  prosper,  come  successfully,  n|?it  tsaleach. 

Judg  1 4.  6  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon 
15. 14  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon 
COME  no  more,  to  — 
To  add,  f]p;  yasaph. 

1  Sa.  15.  35  And  Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  Saul 
24 


COME  near,  to  — 

l.To  comenifjh,  b*ji  nagash. 

Gen.  19.   9  and  came  near  to  break  the  door 

27.  21  Come  near,  I  pray  thee,  that  I  may  feel 
27.  26  Come  near  now,  and  kiss  me,  my  son 
27.  27  And  he  came  near,  and  kissed  him  :  and 
33.    3  bowed  himself.,  until  he  came  near  to  his 
33.    6  Then  the  handmaidens  came  near,  they 
33.    7  Leali  also  with  her  children  came  near 

33.  7  after  came  Joseph  near  and  Rachel,  and 

43.  19  they  came  nearto  the  steward  of  Josephs 
44. 18  Then  Judah  came  near  unto  him,  and  said 
45.    4  Come  near  to  me.  .And  they  came  near 

Exod28.  43  or  when  they  come  near  unto  the  altar  to 

30.  20  or  when  they  come  near  to  the  altar  to 
Num32.  16  And  they  came  near  unto  him,  and  said 
Josh. 21.    1  Then  came  near  the  heads  of  the  fathers 
1  Sa.  30.  21  and  when  David  came  near  to  the  people 

1  Ki.18.  30  Elijah  said  unto  all  the  people,  Come  near 

18.  30  all  the  people  came  near  unto  him:  and 
18.  36  Elijah  the  prophet  came  near,  and  said 

2  Ki.  4.  27  but  Gehazi  came  near  to  thrust  her  away 

5.  13  his  servants  came  near,  and  spake  unto 
2  Ch.18.  23  Then  Zedekiah.  .camenear,  andsmoteM. 
29.  31  come  near  and  bring  sacrifices  and  thank 
Isa.  41.    1  let  them  come  near,  then  let  them  speak 
50.    8  who  (is)  mine  adversary?  let  him  come  near 
65.    5  Stand  by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me 
Jer.  42.    1  least  even  unto  the  greatest,  came  near 
Eze.    9.    6  come  not  near  any  man  upon  whom 

44.  13  they  shall  not  come  near  unto  me,  to  do 
44.  13  to  come  near  to  any  of  my  holy  things,  in 

2.  To  come  nigh,  vii  nagash,  2. 

Exodig.  22  let  the  priests  also,  which  come  near  to 
Deut2i.    5  priests  the  sons  of  Levi  shall  come  near 

3. To  come  near,  ang  qarab. 

Gen.  20.   4  But  Abimelech  had  not  come  near  her 

37.  18  before  he  came  near  unto  them,  they 
Exodi2.  48  let  him  come  near  and  keep  it ;  and  he 

14.  20  the  one  came  not  near  the  other  all  the 

16.  9  Come  near  before  the  Lord  :  for  he  hath 

40.  32  when  they  came  near  unto  the  altar, 
Lev.  10.  4  Come  near,  carry  your  brethren  from 
Numi6.  40  come  near  to  offer  incense  before  the  L. 

31.  48  And  the  officers,  .came  near  unto  Moses 
36.    1  came  near,  and  spake  before  Moses,  and 

Deut.  1.  22  ye  came  uear  unto  me  every  one  of  you 

4.  11  ye  came  near  and  stood  under  the  moun. 

5.  23  that  ye  came  near  unto  me-. .  (even)  all  the 
Josh.  3.    4  come  not  near  unto  it,  that  ye  may  know 

10.  24  Come  near,  put  your  feet  upon  the  necks 
10.  24  they  came  near,  aud  put  their  feet  upon 

17.  4  they  came  near  before  Eleazar  the  priest 
Judg2o.  24  the  children  of  Israel  came  near  against 
2  Sa.  20.  16  Come  near  hither,  that  I  may  speak  with 

20.  17  when  he  was  come  near  unto  her,  the 
Psa.  32.    9  lest  they  come  near  unto  thee 

119.  169  Let  my  cry  come  near  before  thee,  O  LORD 
Isa.   34.    1  Come  near,  ye  nations,  to  hear ;  and 

41.  1  let  us  come  near  together  to  judgment 
48.  16  Come  ye  near  uuto  me,  hear  ye  this  ;  I 
54. 14;  Eze.  18.  6;  44.  15  ;  44.  16 ;  Mai.  3.  5. 

4.  To  be  or  come  nigh,  iyyifa  eygizo. 

Luke. 18.  40  when  he  was  come  near,  he  asked  him 
{See  also  19.  41  ;  Acts  9.  3;  21.  33;  23.  15.] 

5. To  come  near,  n~i-p  qereb. 

Dan.   3.    8  at  that  time  certain  Chaldeans  camenear 
3.  26  Nebuchadnezzar  came  nearto  the  mouth 

6.  12  they  came  near,  and  spake  before  the  k. 

7.  16  I  came  near  unto  one  of  them  that  stood 

COME  near,  to  be  (or  cause  to)  — 
To  bring  or  cause  to  come  near,  31|?  qarab,  5. 
Gen.  12.  11  when  he  was  come  near  to  enter  into  E. 
Nunn6.    5  will  cause  (him)  to  come  near  unto  him 
16.    5  (hi'11)-  .will  he  cause  to  come  near  unto 
1  Sa.  10.  20  had  caused  all  the  tribes,  .to  come  near 
10.  21  caused  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  to  come  near 

COME  near,  which  — 
year,  3*1J5  qrrreb. 

Eze.  40.  46  which  come  near  to  the  Lord  to  minister 
45.    4  which  shall  come  near  to  minister  unto 

COME  nigh,  to  — 

l.To  (cause  to)  touch,  5732  naga,  5. 

Psa.  32.    6  in  the  floods,  .they  shall  not  come  nigh 

2.  To  come  nigh,  mi  nagash. 

Exod24.    2  they  shall  not  come  nigh,  neither  shall 

34.  30  and  they  were  afraid  to  come  nigh  him 
Lev.  21.  21  the  priest  shall  come  nigh  to  offer  the 

21.  21  he  shall  not  come  nigh  to  offer  the  bread 
21.  23  nor  come  nigh  unto  the  altar  because  he 
Num.  8.  19  when  the  children  of  Israel  come  nigh 
Psa.  91.    7  (but)  it  shall  not  come  nigh  thee 

3.  To  come  near,  3*35  qarab. 

Exod32.  19  as  soon  as  he  came  nigh  unto  the  camp 
XumiS.    3  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  vessels  of 
18.    4  a  stranger  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  you 
18.  22  come  nigh  the  tabernacle  of  the  congre. 
Deut.  2.  19  (when)  thou  comest  nigh  over  against 
20.    2  when  ye  are  come  nigh  unto  the  battle 
20.  10  When  thou  comest  nigh  unto  a  city  to 
2.  Sa.15.    5  when  any  man  came  nigh  (to  him)  to  do 
Psa.  91.  10  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy 
Pro.    5.    8  and  come  not  nigh  the  door  of  her  house 


4.iVe«?',  D"i|3  qareb. 

Kum.i.  51 ;  3. 10,  38    the  stranger  that  cometh  nigh 
18.    7  the  stranger  that  cometh  nigh  shall  he 

5.  To  come  nigh,  iyytfa  eygizo. 

Markn.    1  When  they  came  nigh  to  Jerusalem,  unto 
Luke  7.  12  when  he  came  nigh  to  the  gate  of  the  city 

10.  9,  11  The  kingdom  of  Gud  is  come  nigh  untu 

18.  35  as  he  was  come  nigh  uuto  Jericho 

19.  29  when  he  was  come  nigh  to  Bcthphage 

19.  37  when  he  was  come  nigh,  even  now  at  the 
Acts  22.    6  was  come  nigh  unto  Damascus  about 

COME  nigh,  them  that  — 

Near,  n'njj  qarob. 

Lev.  10.    3  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me 

COME  nigh  unto,  to  — 

To  come  nigh  toward,  irpocreyyifa  proseygizu. 
Mark.  2.   4  when  they  could  not  come  nigh  uuto  him 

COME  on  — 

To  give  (help  or  counsel),  art;  yahdb. 

Exod.  1.  10  Come  on,  let  us  deal  wisely  with  them 

COME  on  (or  upon),  to  — 

l.Tofmd,  meet,  xyn  matsa. 

Gen.  44.  34  lest.  .1  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  on 
Deut3i.  17  Are  not  these  evils  come  upon  us,  because 
JSeh.  9.  32  that  hath  come  upon  us,  on  our  kings,  on 

2.  To  face,  turn  the  face,  n:a  panah. 
Deut23.  11  when  evening  cometh  on,  he  shall 

3.  To  come  upon,  iwepxop.at  eperchomai, 

Luke2i.  35  as  a  snare  [shall  it  come  on]  all  them  that 
i.To  receive,  take,  \afxfidva  lambano. 

Luke  7.  16  there  came  a  fear  on  all :  and  they  glori. 
COME  out,  to  — 
l.To  come  forth,  out  of,  n^;  yatsa. 

Gen.  15.  14  afterward  shall  they  come  out  with  great 
17.    6  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  the 
24.  13  daughters  of  the  men  of  the  city  come  out 

24.  15  R.ebekah  came  out,  who  was  born  to  B. 

25.  25  the  first  came  out  red,  all  over  like  an   . 
25.  26  after  that  came  his  brother  out,  and  his 
35.  11  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thy  loins 
38.  28  scarlet  thread,  saying,  This  came  out  first 
3S.  29  behold,  his  brother  came  out :  and  she 
46.  26  All  the  souls . .  which  came  out  of  his  loins 

Exod.  1.  5  all  the  souls  that  came  out  of  the  loins 
13.  3  Remember  this  day,  in  which  ye  came  out 
13.  4  This  day  came  ye  out,  in  the  month  Abib 
17.  6  there  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  the 
23.  15  for  in  it  thou  earnest  out  from  Egypt 
25.  32  six  branches  shall  come  out  of  the  sides 
25.  33  branches  that  come  out  of  the  candlestick 
28.  35  and  when  he  cometh  out,  that  lie  die  not 

32.  24  cast  it  into  the  fire,  and  there  came  out 
34.  18  in  the  month  Abib  thou  earnest  out  from 
34.  34  he  took  the  veil  off,  until  he  came  out 
34.  34  he  came  out,  and  spake  unto  the  children 

Lev.    9.  23  and  came  out,  and  blessed  the  people 
9.  24  there  came  a  fire  out  from  before  the  L. 
16.  17  until  he  come  out,  and  have  made  an 

Num.  1.    1  the  second  year  after  they  were  come  out 
9.    1  the  second  year  after  they  were  come  out 

11.  20  until  it  come  out  at  your  nostrils,  and 

12.  4  Come  out  ye  three.  .And.  .three  came  out 
12.  12  when  he  cometh  out  of  his  mother's  womb 
16.  27  Dathauand  Abiraru  came  out, and  stoodin 
16.  35  there  came  out  a  fire  from  the  Lord,  and 

20.  11  the  water  came  out  abundantly,  and  the 
20.  18  lest  I  come  out  against  thee  with  the 

20.  20  Edom  came  out  against  him  with  much 
21.13  the  wilderness  that  cometh  out  of  the 
22.    5  there  is  a  people  come  out  from  Epypt 
22.  11  (there  is)  a  people  come  out  of  Egypt 

33.  38  the  children  of  Israel  were  come  out  of 
Deut.  1.  44  the  Amorites.  .came  out  against  you,  and 

2.  32  Sihon  came  out  against  us,  he  and  all  his 

3.  1  Og  the  king  of  Bashan  came  out  against 
ir.  10  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  whence  ye  cameo. 
28.    7  they  shall  come  out  against  thee  one  way 

28.  57  her  young  one  that  cometh  out  from 

29.  7  came  out  against  us  unto  battle,  and  we 
Josh.  2.  10  for  you,  when  ye  came  out  of  Egypt 

5.    4  All  the  people  that  came  out  of  Egypt 
5.    5  all  the  people  that  came  out  were  circu. 
5.    6  menof  war,which  cameoutof  Egypt, were 
8.    5  when  they  came  out  against  us,  as  at  the 

8.  6  For  they  will  come  out  after  us,  till  we 
19.  17  the  fourth  lot  came  out  to  Issachar,  for 
19.  24  the  fifth  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of 

19.  32  The  sixth  lot  came  out  to  the  children  r  f 
19.  40  the  seventh  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  <.  i 

21.  4  the  lot  came  out  for  the  families  of  the 
Judg.  3.  22  and  the  dirt  came  out 

4.  22  Jael  came  out  to  meet  him,  aud  said  unto 

9.  15  let  fire  come  out  of  the  bramble,  and 
9.  20  let  fire  come  out  from  Abimelech,  and 
9.  20  let  fire  come  out  from  the  men  of  Shcth 
9.  29  Increase  thine  army,  and  come  out 

9.  33  the  people  that  (is)  with  him  come  out 
11.  34  his  daughter  came  out  to  meet  him  with 
2t.  21  if  the  daughters  of  Shiloh  come  out  to 
21.  21  come  ye  out  of  the  vineyards,  and  catch 
t  Sa.    2.    3  let  (not)  arrogancy  come  out  of  your 

9.  14  Samuel  came  out  against  them,  for  to  go 
11.    3  and  then,  .we  will  come  out  to  thee 
11.    7  and  they  came  out  with  one  consent 
13.  17  the  spoilers  came  out  of  the  camp  of  the 


COMB 


1S6 


COMB 


i  Sa.  17.    8  Why  are  ye  come  out  to  set  (your)  battle 
iS.    6  the  women  came  out  of  all  cities  of  Israel 

21.  5  about  these  three  days,  since  I  came  out 

23.  15  David  saw  that  Saul  was  come  out  to 

24.  14  After  whom  is  the  king  of  Israel  come  out 
26.  20  the  king  of  Israel  is  come  out  to  seek  a 

2  8a    -.  23  that  the  spear  came  out  behind  him 

3.  26  when  Joab  was  come  out  from  David,  he 

6.  20  Michal-.came  out  to  meet  David,  and 

10.  8  the  children  of  Amnion  came  out,  and 

11.  23  came  out  unto  us  into  the  field,  and  we 
16.    5  thence  came  out  a  man  of  the  family  of 

16  7  Come  out,  come  out,  thou  bloody  man,  and 
18     4  all  the  people  came  out  by  hundreds,  and 

1  Ki    8     0  when  they  came  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

8  10  when  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the 
q  12  Hiram  came  out  from  Tyre  to  see  the  ci. 
20.  17  saying.There  are  men  come  out  of  Samaria 
20  18  Whetherjthey  be  come  out  for  peace,  take 
20.  iS  whether  they  be  come  out  for  war,  take 
20. 19  these  young  men.  .came  out  of  the  city 

2  Ki.   5  ii  He  will  surely  come  out  to  me,  and  stand 

7.  12  When  they  come  out  of  the  city,  we  shall 
iS.  iS  there  came  out  to  them  Eliakim  the  son 

18.  31  Make  (au  agreement),  .and  come  out  to 

19.  g  he  is  come  out  to  fight  against  thee 

1  Ch.  19.   9  the  children  of  Amnion  came  out,  and 

26.  14  they  cast  lots ;  and  his  lot  came  out  north 

2  Ch.  5. 10  the  children,  .when  they  came  out  of  Eg. 

5.  11  when  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the 
14    9  there  came  out  against  them  Zerah  the 

18.  20  Then  there  came  out  a  spirit,  and  stood 
Job     1.  21  Naked  came  1  out  of  my  mother's  womb 

3.  ti  give  up  the  ghost  when  I  came  ontof  the 
38.  29  Out  of  whose  womb  came  the  ice  ?  and  the 

Psa.  19.    5  as  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chain. 
Prov.12  13  but  the  just  shall  come  out  of  trouble 
Isa.    26.21  the  Lord  conieth  out  of  his  place  to  pun. 
36.  16  Make  (an  agreement),  .and  come  out  to 
Mic.  7.  13  According  to  the  days  of  thy  coming  out 
Nah  1.  it  There  is  (one)  come  out  of  thee,  that 
Hag.   2.    5  I  covenanted  with  you  when  ye  came  out 
Zecn  5.    9  behold,  there  came  out  two  women,  and 

6.  1  there  came  four  chariots  out  from 

2.  To  co />ie  forth,  out  of,  t£4pxojAai  exerclwnud. 
Matt  5.  26  Thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out  thence 

8.  28  coming  out  of  the  tombs,  exceeding  fierce 

8.  32  And  when  they  were  come  out,  they  went 
8  34  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet  Jesus 

12.  44  into  my  house  from  whence  I  came  out 
15.  22  a  woman  ofCauaan  came  out  of  the  same 
24.  27  as  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east 

26.  55  Are  ye  come  out  as  against  a  thief  with 

27.  32  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a  man  of 
27.  53  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrec. 

Mark  6.  34  Jesus,  when  he  came  out,  saw  much  peo. 

9.  26  Aud.  .cried,  .and  came  out  of  him  :  and 
Luke  1.  22  when  he  came  out,  he  could  not  speak 

4,  36  commandeth  the.. spirits,  and  they  come 0. 
11.  24  return  unto  my  house  whence  I  came  out 
15.  23  therefore  came  his  father  out,  aud  entre. 

22.  39  he  came  out,  and  weut,  as  he  was  wont 
Johm6  27  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from  God 

17  8  have  known,  .that  I  came  out  from  thee 
Acts  16  iS  to  come  out  of  her.   And  he  came  out  the 

1  Co.  14.  36  What !  came  the  word  of  God  out  from 

2  Co.  6  17  come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
Heb.11.  15  that  (country)  from  whence  they  came  out 
Rev. 14  18  another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar 

COME  over,  to  (be)  — 
1.7*0  come  over,  "t?y  abar. 
Num  3^.  10  When  ye  be  come  over  Jordan  into  the 
Deut.  2.  14  until  we  were  come  over  the  brook  Zered 

27.  12  when  ye  are  come  over  Jordan 
Josh  4  22  Israel  came  over  this  Jordan  on  dryland 
2  Sa.  ig.  18  before  the  king,  as  he  was  come  over  Jor 

19.  33  Come  thou  over  with  me,  and  I  will  feed 
19.  30  when  the  king  was  come  over,  the  king 

Isa.   45.  14  Sabeans,  men  of  stature,  shall  come  over 

2. To  come  through,  SiajSaiVw  diabaino. 

Acts  16.    9  Come  over  into  Macedonia   and  help  us 

COME  round,  to  — 

To  encompass,  kvk\6co  hikloo. 

John  10  24  Then  came  the  Jews  round  about  him 
COME  running  together,  to  — 
To  run  together  to,  iirtavvrpex0*  episuntrecho. 

Mark  9.  25  saw  that  the  people  eame running  toget. 
COME  thereout,  to  — 

1.  To  come  forth,  nfl  yatsa. 

Judg  15.  19  and  there  came  water  thereout 

2,  To  come  forth,  out  of ,  f^p^Ofxai  exerchomai, 
John  19.  34  forthwith  came  thereout  blood  and  water 

COME  thither,  to  — 

7*0  come  upon,  eVepxojuai  epcrchomai. 

Acts  14  iq  there  came  thither  (certain)  Jews  from  A. 
COME,  things  to  — 
l.To  come,  arrive   nrix  athah, 

Isa.  41.  23  Showthettnngsthatareto  come  hereafter 

44.  7  things  that  are  coining  and  shall  come 

45.  i'  Ask  me  of  th>ings  to  come  concerning  my 
2.To  come  in,  103  bo 

Isa    41-  22  or  declare  us  things  for  tc  come 
:"i.  T<>  be  about  /<<  be.  ^eWw  mello. 

Rom.  8.  3S  nor  things  present ;  nor  things  to  come 


1  Co.    3.  22  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come 
Col.     2.  17  Which  are  a  shadow  of  thiugs  to  come 
Heb.  11.  20  Jacob  aud  Esau  concerning  things  to  come 

COME,  things  that  — 

A  going  up,  n^D  maalah. 

Eze.  11.    5  i  know  the  things  that  come  into  your 

COME,  things  that  shall  — 
Ready,  prepared,  Tnj;  athid. 

Deut.  32.  35  things  that  shall  come  upon  them  make 

COME,  time  to  — 

1.7*0  morrozo,  hereafter,  "inn  machar. 

Gen.  30.  33  answer  for  me  in  time  to  come,  when  it 
Exod  13.  14  when  thy  sou  asketh  thee  in  time  to  come 
Deut.  6.  20  when  thy  son  asketh  thee  iu  time  to  come 
Josh,  4.  6  ask  (their  fathers)  in  time  to  come,  saying 

4.  21  your  children  shall  ask.  .in  time  to  come 
22.  24  In  time  to  come  your  children  might 
22.  27  children  may  not  say .  .in  time  to  come 
22.  2$  say  to.  .our  generations  in  time  to  come 

2.7*0  be  about  to  he,  fxiWw. 

1  Ti.    6  19  good  foundation  against  the  time  to  come 

COME  to  (or  unto),  to  — 

1.  To  find,  NV?  viatsa. 

1  Sa.  25.    8  whatsoever  cometh  to  thine  hand  unto 
Esth.  S.    6  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my  people? 

2.7*o  be  found,  nss  matsa,  2, 

Judg  20  48  set  on  fire  all  the  cities,  .they  came  to 
3.7*0  come  toward,  irpoadpxofxaL  jiroserchomai. 
Matt. 4     3  when  the  tempter  came  to  him,  he  said 

8.  25  his  disciples  came  to  (him),  and  awoke 

9.  14  Then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  John 
9.  28  the  blind  men  came  to  him  :  and  Jesus 

14. 15  his  disciples  came  to  him,  saying.  This 

15.  1  Then  came  to  Jesus  scribes  aud  Pharisees 
17. 14  there  came  to  him  a  (certain)  man,  kneel. 
17.  19  Then  came  the  disciples  to  Jesus  apart 

17.  24  came  to  Peter,  and  said,  Doth  not  your 

18.  21  Then  came  Peter  to  him-  and  said,  Lord 

20.  20  Then  came  to  him  the  mother  of  Zeb. 

21.  14  the  blind  and  the  lame  came  to  him  in 
21. 28  he  came  to  the  first,  and  said,  Son,  go 

21.  30  he  came  to  the  second,  aud  said  likewise 

22.  23  The  same  day  came  to  him  theSadducees 
24.    1  his  disciples  came  to  (him)  for  to  show 
26.  17  the  disciples  came  to  Jesus,  saying  unto 
26.  49  forthwith  he  came  to  Jesus,  and  said 

Markio.    2  the  Pharisees  came  to  him,  and  asked 
Luke  8.  24  they  came  to  him,  aud  awoke  him,  saying 
20.  27  Then  came  to  (him)  certain  of  the  Sadd. 

23.  36  coming  to  him,  and  offering  him  vinegar 
Acts  23.  14  they  came  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders 
Heb.  11.    6  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that 

4.  7*o  place  upon,  or  before,  £<pl<TT7}/J.i  ephistemi. 

Luke  10.  40  came  to  him,  aud  said,  Lord,  dost  thou 

COME  to  an  end,  to  — 

To  perfect,  fail,  be  complete,  TM  gamar. 

Psa,    7.    9  wickedness  of  the  v.  icked  come  to  an  end 

COME  to  hand,  to  — 

To  be  found,  xyc  matsa,  2. 

Judg2o.  48  thebeast.  and  all  that  came  to  hand 

COME  to  nought,  to  — 

7*0  loose  down,  KaraXvw  kataluo. 

Acts    s  38  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  come  to  nou. 
COME  to  pass,  to  — 
1. 7*o  come  in,  *tia  bo. 

Deuti3-    2  the  sign  or  the  wonder  come  to  pass 

18.  22  if  the  thing  follow  not.  nor  come  to  pass 
Josh  21.  45  There  failed  not  ought,  .all  came  to  pass 
23.  14  all  are  come  to  pass  unto  you,  (aud)  not 
Judg  3.  27  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  was  come,  that 
13. 12  said.  Now  let  thy  words  come  to  pass 
13. 17  when  thy  sayings  come  to  pass  we  may  do 

1  Sa.    9.   6  all  that  he  saith  cometh  surely  to  pass 

10.    9  all  those  signs  came  to  pass  that  day 
t6.    6  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  were  come 

2  Sa.  15.  32  it  came  to  pass,  that  (when)  David  was 

16.  6  it  came  to  pass,  when  Hushai  the  Archite 
2  Ki.  6.  20  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  were  come  into 
Isa    42.    9  the  former  thi  gs  are  come  to  pass,  and 

48.    3  did  (them)  suddenly,  and  they  came  to  p. 

48     5  before  it  came  to  pass  I  showed  (it)  thee 
Jer    28.   9  when  the  word  of  .shall  come  to  pass 
Eze  24.  14  it  shall  come  to  pass,  and  I  will  do  (it) 

33  33  when  this  conieth  to  pass,  lo  it  will  come 
2  To  be,  n;n  hayah. 

Gen.    4.  m  it  shall  come  to  pass,  (that)every  ouethat 

6.  1  it  came  to  pass,  when  men  began  to  multi 

7.  10  it  came  to  pass  after  seven  days,  that  the 

8.  6  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  forty  days 

5.  13  it  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth  hundredth 
[This  verb  occurs  many  thousands  of  times  ] 

3.7*0  be,  K)H  hava. 

Dan.    2  "29  what  should  come  to  pass  hereafter 

2  29  maketh  known  .  what  shall  come  to  pass 
2  45  what  shall  come  to  pass  hereafter 

4.7V'  meet,  TiB  qarah. 

N'um  11.  23  whether  my  word  shall  come  to  pass  unto 

5.  T<>  be  come,  to  come  to  be,  ■yiiop.ai  ginomai. 
Matt  7  28  it  came  to  pass  when  Jesus  had  ended 


Matt.  9.  10  it  came  to  pass,  as  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in 
11.    1  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jesus  had  made 
13.  53  it  came  to  pass,  .when  Jesus  had  finished 
19.    1  it  came  to  pass.,  when  Jesus  had  finished 
24.   6  for  all.  .must  come  to  pass,  but  the  end 
26.    1  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jesus  had  finished 
Hark  1.    9  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  Jesus 
2. 15  it  came  to  pass,  .as  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in 
2.  23  it  came  to  pass,  .lie  went  through  the 

4.  4  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by 
xi.  23  things  which  he  saith  shall  come  to  pass 

13.  29  ye  shall  see  these  things  come  to  pass 
Luke  1.   8  it  came  to  pass,  that,  while  he  executed 

1.  23  it  came  to  pass,  that,  as  soon  as  the  days 

I.  41  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when  Elisabeth 

1.  59  it  came  to  pass,  that  on  the  eighth  day 

2.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  there 
2.  15  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  angels  were  gone 
2.  15  see  this  thing  which  is  come  to  pass 

2.  46  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  three  days 

3.  21  it  came  to  pass,  that  Jesus  also  being  bap. 

5.  1  it  cametopass,  that,  asthepeople  pressed 
5.  12  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  was  in  a  certain 

5.  17  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  as  he 

6.  1  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  second  sabbath 
6.    6  it  came  to  pass  also  on  another  sabbath 
6.  12  it  came  to  pass  in  those  clays,  that  he  went 
7. 11  it  came  to  pass  the  day  after,  that  lie 

8.  1  it  came  to  pass  afterward,  that  he  went 
8.  22  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  that  he 

8.  40  it  came  to  pass,  .when  Jesus  was  retur. 

9.  18  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  was  alone  praying 
9.  28  it  came  to  pass,  about  an  eight  clays  after 
9.  33  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  departed  from 
9.37  it  came  to  pass,  that  on  the  next  day 

9.  51  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  time  was  come 
9.  57  [it  cametopass].  .as  they  weut  in  the  way 

10.  38  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  went,  that  he 

II.  1  it  came  to  pass,  .as  he  was  praying  in  a 

11.  14  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  devil  was  gone 

11.  27  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  spake  these  tilings 

12.  55  There  will  be  heat;  and  it  cometh  to  pass 

14.  1  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  weut  into  the  house 

16.  22  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  beggar  died,  and 
17  11  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  went  to  Jerusalem 

17.  14  it  came  to  pass,  that,  as  they  went,  they 

18.  35  it  came  to  pass.,  as  he  was  come  nigh  unto 

19.  15  it  came  to  pass, that, when  he  was  returned 

19.  29  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  was  come  nigh 

20.  2  it  came  to  pass,  (that)  on  one  of  those  days 

21.  7  when  these  things  shall  come  to  pass? 
21.    9  these  things  must  first  come  to  pass ;  but 
21.  28  when  these  things  begin  to  come  to  pass 
21.  31  when  ye  see  these  things  come  to  pass 
21.  36  all  these  things  that  shall  come  to  pass 
24.    4  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  were  much  per. 
24.  12  [wondering,  .atthat  which  was  come  to  p.  I 
24.  15  itcame  to  pass,  that,  while  theycommun. 
24.  iS  the  things  which  are  come  to  pass  there 
24.  30  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  sat  at  meat  with 
24.  51  it  came  to  pas's,  while  he  blessed  them,  lie 

John  13.  19  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  believe 
14.  29  I  have  told  you  before  it  come  to  pass 
14.  29  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  might  believe 
Acts    4.    5  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  their 
9.  32  it  came  to  pass,  as  Peter  passed  through. 
9  37  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  she 
9.  43  it  came  to  pass,  that  he  tarried  many  days 
11.  2(5  it  came  to  pass,  that  a  whole  year  they 
11.  28  which  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Claud. 

14.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  Iconium,  that  they  went 
16.  16  it  came  to  pass,  as  we  went  to  prayer,  a 

19.  1  it  came  to  pass,  .while  Apollos  was  at  C. 

21.  1  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  we  were  gotten 

22.  6  it  came  to  pass,  .as  I  made  my  journey 
22.  17  it  came  to  pass,  .when  I  was  come  again 
27-  44  it  came  to  pass,  that  they  escaped  all  safe 
28.    8  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  father  of  Publius 
28  17  it  came  to  pass,  that  after  three  days 

1  Th.  3.    4  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  ye  know 
Rev.    1.    1  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass 
6.7*o  be  ;  it  shall  be,  tlpi,  tarai  cinil,  estai. 
Acts    2.  17  it  shall  come  to  pass  iu  the  last  days 

2.  21  it  shall  come  to  pass,  (that)  whosoever 

3.  23  it  shall  come  to  pass,  (that)  every  soul 
Rom  9.  26  it  shall  come  to  pass,  (that)  in  the  place 

COME  to  (understanding),  to  — 

To  know  understanding,  nra  $?n;  yada  bvnah. 

Isa.  29.  24  They  also  .shall  come  to  understanding 
COME  together,  to  — 
1.7*0  come  near,  3"lj3  qarab. 

Eze.  37.    7  the  bones  came  together,  bone  to  his  bone 
2.  7*o  come  alongside  together,  crv/nrapaytyo/j.ai  sum. 

Luke23-  48  all  the  people  that  came  together  to  that 
3.7*0  come  together,  o-vydya  sunago. 

Matt 27.  62  chief  priests,  .came  together  unto  Pilate 

Mark  7.    1  Then  came  together  unto  him  the  Pharis. 

Luke  22.  66  chief  priests,  and  the  scribes,  came  toget. 

Acts  13.  44  And. .came  almost  the  whole  city  toget. 

15.  6  the  apostles  and  elders  came  togetherfor 

20.  7  when  the  disciplescame  togetherto break 
1.7*0  come  together,  <rvv4pxofiat  sitnerchomai. 

Matt.  1. 18  before  they  came  together,  she  was  found 
Stark  3.  20  the  multitude  cometh  together  again,  so 

6.  33  [many  knew  him.  .came  together  unto] 
Luke  5.  15  great  multitudes  came  together  to  hear 
Acts    1.    6  When  they  therefore  were  come  together 

2.   6  the  multitude  came  together,  and  were 


COME 


is; 


COME 


:=  hj,  27  and  found  many  that  were  come  together 
£i:f  n'X  tL     ■  ^ere  come  tog. 

::-:"--  :  -  "  -    ' 

ley  were  come  together,  fa 

-     s  ;r>e  yourselves  I  andlcometo.] 

::   :-  : ..-_:  .  r  .  _n  =■  ::?:-:  1  :  :  :  t-ir 
; :    : 

11.  20  Whenyecome  together  therefore  int 

::  '«:•"      -"  -  -■-'-  -  '■'-'.  - ■"■  "    --:-- 

-   .      _  "       1    ...... : 

Iff.  .the  vhole  church  [be  come  together] 
:_       Ek     ia  ii  then.. when  ye  come  together 

:rSZ    _-.::    :     - 

1  II    J  .*/we  wjwn    0r  ©rcr,  e^urrmu  ephistimu 

.-."-_:  '  -■■  -  ■    "         v      ....  . 

2. 7*.  crane  toi&ird,  -rpo<j4pxoujai  proserchomai. 

Mr.:  ^    1  when  he  was  set,  his  disciples  came  onto 
8.  5  there  came  unto  him  a  centnTion,beseech. 
13  36  his  flrefipifts  came  unto  him,  saying 
15     :  great  multitudes  came  onto  him,  having 
z\.   j  a:  She  same  time  came  the  disciples  tmto 
Use  Pharisees  also  came  onto  him,  tempt. 
21,  23  the  elders  of  the  people  came  un : 
24.    3  the  disciples  came  unto  him  privately 
26.   7  There  came  onto  him  a  wjnna  having  an 
26  69  a  damsel  cams  unto  him,  saying.  Thoa 
z:   -:  1::-:  ..  -....-.  ::.:-;   ;i"     lim   :  _f;   t    .: 

Mark  1  3-  his  disciples  came  unco  him.  and  said 

Acts  xo-  2S  or  corns  onto  one  of  another  nation 
18.  2  a  certain.  Jew.. and  came  onto  them 
24. 23  Earned  none   .  to  minister  or  [come  unto] 

Heb.  i.  16  Let  ns  therefore  come  boldly  nnto  the 
7.  25  to  save  them-  .that  come  tmto  God  by 
zz  -_i  -  r  ire  not  come  onto  the  mount  that 
K  22  Ve  are  conie  unto  m>unt  Sion,  and  unto 

3.  T    pants  or  enter  Una        -     -ropeCouac  prosper. 
KsriEDQ   -5  tie  s;nsof  Zebedee.  come  unto  him 

COXE  np  (or  atwn;,  fc)  — 

:  Tot  .  >■  ^  bo. 

Deaths.  17  tonsw(gods  that)came  newly  up,  whom 
Job   15-  21  the  destroyer  shall  come  upon  him 

20.  Er  :"  the  wicked  shall  come  upon 

Psa.  ±4.  17  All  this  is  ranie  upon  us ;  yet  have  —  2  a  1 
Provx:>.  2i  fear  of  the  wiesedl  it  sIiH  come  upon 

sS.  22  considerethn  I  -nail  come  upon 

Eze  3a  ::  Ehe  -    :rd  of  the  king  ..shall  come  upon 

2.  To  come  up.  p^t?  seiaq. 

Dan    7.  3  four  great  beast3  came  up  from  the  sea 
7.   8  there  cvns  up  among  them  another  II"  e 
7.  20  and  (of)  the  other  which  came  up,  and 

3  ft  Grans  :.r.  "~  s?&z£.  3a. 

Ezra   4  12  the  Jews  which  came  up  from  thee  to  us 

-7  -~.    tab. 

Gee     .  Hied  her  pitcher,  and  came  up 

^:.    z  there  came  up    1:    ttfaei 
.i,:.    j  seven    tier  kine  came  up 
42.  5  seven  ears  of  corn  came  op  epos  me 
4X.  zS  there  came  up  out  of  the  ri  a 
_ :         -  ■':■■::' 

41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and 
_  r   2  -  the.  .kine  that  came  up  after  them  (are) 
.  _  23  ^"hen  we  came  up  unto  thy  servant  my 
Ex:-!.  2.  2;  their  cry  cam ;  op  nnto  Go  1  by  reason  01 
.  the  frogs  shall  thee,  ani 

■-'-■'-■.. 
a   ::  En :.:  they  nay  come  up  upon  the  land  of 
I-.  :    it  even  the  quails  came  up.  and  covered 
I3JI  come  up  to  the  mount 

11.  ::   - 1  =  '.        ;     :  '   -".  - 

_  thoa  shalt  come  up.  thou,  and  A 
::.  24  break  tir  "_ 
24.    1  '. 
24. 12  Come  up  to  me  into  the  mount  and  be 

33.  5  I  will  come  ~:       "  V    :  thee  in 
54.   2  come  up  in  the  morning  unto  mount  Sin. 

34.  3  no  man  shall  come  up  with  thee  neither 
Vji":t   :::::i:i    -.    hsaid   We  win  not  come  up 

1  ;  .      1 :     we  will  not  come  up 

32  .IT  nOQE  .Mr  Up  OOt  Or  E. 

7  ■    -  z  : ■:  n  r  10  unto  me  into  the  mount,  and 

Josh  2.   S  she  fam^  up  unto  them  upon  the  roof 
.    -  '-"lit  xhej  come  up  out  of  J. 

4  :-  sa^nr .  Ci-me  ye  up  out  of  Jordan 

ihe  priests .  were  come  up  out  of 
_   :  :  p!e  came  up  out  of  Jordan  on  the 

xo,    I  Come  up  unto  me,  and  help  me;  that  we 
::  -     1=  quickly,  and  saTe  us.  and 

:  r?  eame  up  to  help  L 
; : .  f  Benjamin  came  up  accor 

: :  tae  third  lot  came  up  for  the  children  of 
Judg  x    3  Come  np  with  me  iato  my  lot.  that  we 
2.    x  an  angel  :  -  the  1   :  I   came  up  from  GiL 
_     g  :':.    '  r'raoi  Israelcame  up.  for  judgment 
6.    3 1"  fcesea        m         "  the  Amalek. 

_:r    :--.      '--.:.      r.i- 
5  fine  "  cum  iq  ittle  and  their 

rT  came  up  to  meet  them 
rx   :V  Israel-.whe^  :'  -  ;      .:    -  BfejpS 

1 :    : :  "  ■■ : 

:i      : 

:_      z.  '.  '-r.z'.'.  -li  -         -: 

:=     ;  ..::  Philistines  came  up,  and  her 
15   so  -Tudah  said,  Why  are  ye  come  up  against 
15  -_  _  To  bind  Samson  are  we  come  tr.    I 
;:     ;  Qk  I  rds  of  the  Philistines  came  up  unto 


■    -       ; ' 

::'.  18  Then  the  lords  .came  up  untc-  L 

i>  30  the  children  of  Israel  came  up 

5  aU  the  tribes  of  Israel  that  came  not  up 

z-.    5  him  that  came  not  up  to  the  Loejj  to  31. 

: :     I  tine  tribes  of  Israel  that  came  not  up  w 
Si      l-  r  *  when  gh<=*  came  ur>  with  her  Hw^^twI  to 

xx.    x  Then  >"  abash  the  Ammonite  eame  np 

13.  5  they  came  up,  and  pitched  in  Michmash 
i_.  eq  U  :im;  iiy  thus,  Come  up  unto  us 

14.  zz.  -  I  we  win  show  yon  a 
14-  X2  said  unto  his  armour  bearer,  Come  up 

1  in  the  way,  when  he  came  up  from.  Egypt 

If.      f   -     1t_   11;.      ._l_r  I'     :.  ~t      f  l_.p: 

:-  ;j  t    r.r r  .-  ::t  :i_i;     1:1 :  :■ ; ..;;■;; 

:  -    -5  Have  ye  seen  this  man  that  is  come  up ' 
17.  25  surti  Ea  iel  is  he  come  up 

Z3   :;.  -  hen  ;ame  up  the  Z ._ ... .' ..  -  I     -inlto 
_  1   :  _  An  old  man  cometh  up:  andheus^covered 
2  Sn.    5.  it-  aU  the  Philistines  came  up  so  seek  David 
5. 22  the  Philisxines  came  up  yet  agafn^  and 
_    17. 21  they  came  up  out  of  the  weD,  and  went 

1  Ei  i.  35  ye  shall  come  up  after  him,  that  he  may 

x.  40  aU  the  people  came  up  after  him ;  and 
;  45  they  _r7  .;:ne  up  from  thence  1 
9. 24  Pharaoh's  daughter  came  up  out ": :"  in  e 
.    a  chario*  came  up  and  went  our  : :  Egypf 

:_    _;    -      -  .  -  - 

20. 22  the  king  of  Syria  will  come  up  *g^"*=fc 

2  £L   1.   6  There  eame  a  man  Hp  to  meet  us,  and 

:.    -  What  .  was  he)  which  came  up  to  meet 

1    _-  "  ;    '      ■_-....- 

tz.  zz  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest  came  up 


-  z\:  z3a£r&  anabaino. 
Matt  17.  27  and  take  up  the  fish  that  first  cometh  np 

. .  -:i  :    :  _  i~: :•-  . _       _:        :..-.:    7 

John  12-  20  them  that  came  up  so  worship  at  the 
---. ti    :    : :  ' . ...:  -. -  ~ -;i.  . 

1  ::''---  :lir7~-7-  .  -ZL-  11    .11    :■_:.--     --■- 
-  -  ny  prayers  and  thine  alwt^  see  come  np 
z  when  Peter  -^as  come  up  to  Jerusalem 
EeT.   4.    1  Come  up  hither,  and  I  wfll  show  thee 
tz.  12  saying  nnto  them.  Come  np  hither 
13.  xx  I  beheld  another  beast  tvmnirt^  np  ant  ox 


: 


eS 


l53- 


5  Pekah.  .came  up  to  Jerusalem  to  war 
7  come  up,  and  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of 

._.    ;  '.  1    7    '.  " '    ^  ..     -rTil.. 

5  the  king  of  Assyria  came  up  throughout 
I  .11.:  -.'-     ii:.-:-._.r:         .!"—.---.    : 
__   13  king  :i  Assyria  come  up  against  an  the 
zl.z-  And  when  they  were  come  up,  they 
1: .  z=  Am  I  now  cc-me  npwithoot  tie  Z  :  ~ 

z-z  I  am  come  up  to  the  height  of  the  morm. 
t  .  li  '-.[  frnirtrt  -:  cone  ~z-  -~-~~  nrine  ens 
23.    9  the  priests ..  came  not  up  to  the  altar 
:_     1  >  ebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon  came  up 

x  Ch  t^.  rx  So  they  came  up  to  Baat-perazim 

:    . "..  ; z.     2  Shishak  trng-  of  Egvp  * 

12.    ;  5-3  Shishak  king  of'Egypt  came  up  aga. 
t&    1  Baasha  Vtn^  oflsraeTcame  up  against 
20.  xo  behold,  they  come  up  by  the  clin  of  Zxz 
z : .  1  -  they  came  up  into  Judah.  and  brake  into 

• 
3>  20  ^echo  fctr^  of  Egypt  came  up  to  fight  a. 
36,    z  Against  him  came  up  Nel  nchadneazar 
>"eh.   -.    3  Ehem  whieh  came  up^  at  the  nrst,  and 
Job     7.    9  goeth  down  to  the  grave  *fr»T\  come  np 
Psa.  78.  21  and  anger  also  came  up  against  Israel 
ProT.23.   7  that  it  be  said  unto  thee.  Come  up  hither 
Song  4.   2  a  Sock,  .which  came  up  from  the  washing 
i     5  Who  (is)  this  that  cometh  up  frc -  it 
5.       but  there  shancomeup  briers  and  thorns 
8-   7  he  shaU  come  up  over  an  his  chaz- els 
rx.  ::  that  Ze  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
:  _        1)  feHer  is  come  up  against  ns 

I  te  that  cometh  np  out  of  the  midst  : 
32. 13  Vponthe  land  of  mypeopleshan  come  up 
i_    :  theh  -;::    -:  f.ZR  come  np  out  of  t    .-.. 
]^  z~  thorns  shall  come  jrp  m  her  palaces 
3e  ana  :Z  -~.   . .  came  up  against  an  the 
nln  wet  m  ;  1-  with :  1:  the  Loss  aga. 
37.24.aml  _        [theme  sb. 

:-  29  and  €  ue^iri 

55   ;-  last  1  1    :  tie  thorn  shan  ctme  up  the 
55  13  instea  I  ::  t.ie  brier  shall  cone  it  One 

nee  on 
_     -      .7  ._  n  is  come  up  from  Ms  thicket,  and 

■    .        - 
:  2x  ^eathiscomc  _:  int 

the  ZLnz  5  a 
35.  ;:  whence  ucha  . :  7  izar. .  came  up  into  the 
".        -  --:.:-;- 

E  :-me  up,  ye  horses:  and  rage,  ye  chariots 
2  snail  come  up  like  a  lion  from  the 
^"^iii  come  up  and  fly  as  : 
g :     3  there  cometh  up  a  nation  against  hex 

_f_    ^_i  .Ir  5-tlLL   .  :~r  "11    111  "7 

~:z.  _-  T^^  sei  :s  ;  :zie  :i  :;.    :  : 
a.  x.  14  they  are  wreathed,  (and)  come  up  upon 
Ene.  :  -     :  the  sinews  and  the  flesh  came  up  upon 

]:  z-'  -.:■_  1  =:..".:  _ 

5 1,  :H  uiy  fury  *haT1  come  up  in  my  face 
San    S.   3  one  (was)  higher.,  andthe  higher  came  np 
B     3  :  :  -t  Entne  ~p  four  notaLIe  ones,  toward 
r:.  1:  heshaUcomeup.  andshanbeco!: 
Hoe.    1.  xi  andthrT  s&nTJ      -.- 

2  15  when  she  came  up  out  of  the  land  rf  Eg 
10    3  the  thistle  shaU  come  up  on.  their  altars 
:r.  :  5  the  wind  of  the  LORD  shan  come  up  from 
"    .".     ■;      ■  -  ;  ".:.:..:   si:.  11 

2.  20  and  bfg  giinV  shall  come  up  and 

savour  shan  come  up,  because  he 
.1  the  men  of  war.  let  I 
z :  md  come  up  to  the  vaHey  of  Jehoshaphat 
Ooad.     21  saviours  shafl  come  up  on  mount  Son  to 
1.    z  Ear  their  wickedness  15  come  up  before 
z.  z  •   1  _  ■  '  : :  ^  1-: .  r  is  :    i_ ;  "  :      : :   :     :    -.-.- 
:.    iHfc  that  dasheth  in  pieces  is  come  np  be- 
r  r.  ;     ..  :     '- -  7  ;     ; \ -   \ .. 

Zeeh  14.  17  it  shall  be .  whoso  wiU  not  come  ~: 

-—  ■ '  ■    _  "    ■  ^Z  '-'■■-■ 

:_    r         -  -  ........  1    :_•      . 


'- 


.7   _i__-     ;. 
To  come  up.  awaBair*  anahaimo. 

Acts  20.  xx  When  he  therefore  was  come  up  again 

COSE  up  with,  to  — 

To  come  up  together,  irvrara&cdwta  runan.abair.5. 
Markzf.  41  other  women  which  came  up  with  him 
Acts  X3. 3J  which  came  up  with  him  from  Galilee  to 

COKE  up.  to  cause  to  — 

-se  to  goer  come  up,  rh%  cuak.  5. 

-  :-ause  frogs  to  come  up  upon  the  land  of 
t  Ki.  20.  33  i. 

Jer.  5:     :  ^-_5r  to  cornewpagamst  Babyi:_ 
Eze.  24.    a  -  bad  it  might  cause  fury  to  come  up  to 
z       -.  vH]  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  ag_ 
z  f    j  as  the  sea  causeth  his  waves  to  come  np 
-.-   .z  t-ause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves 
35     1  ~—  :^isr : -7- toc-i-meupiroirithenorth 

CCXE  rp.  to  z^ke  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  or  come  up,  rrr'j  alak.  5. 

>  uni2o.   5  ye  made  ns  to  come  up  out  of  Egypt 
Amos  4.  id  made  the  stink  of  your  camps  to  come  np 

COSE  upen,  to  — 

l.T    *       11.  sac  achaz. 

2  Sa.    i.    5  slay  me :  for  iz-zzi^h  is  come  upon  me 

Job     3  25  the  thing.  .1.  .feared  is  come  upon  me 

~    70  or  come  t>,  nrz  I 

Job   15.  ax  the  destroyer  shaU  come  upon  hfm 

20.  22  hand  of  the  wicked  shaU  come  upon  irim 

Psa.  3s    3  It      structioncoinetnponhniiatunaw. 

44. 17  JZZ  this  is  :   1       .  -  _    . 

Provio.  24  fear  of  the  wicked,  it  shah  come  upon 

28-22  zZy.z  poverty  shan  come  upon  hint 

zzze.  --..;-..- 

I  r    ;'-'-  .  r;:  " 

:-"■-"." 
:   "_-::.  :-:i:; 

2Ch.r_    :.-:".  .  sj  :.z  ::'  .-  :L  .-ZienpciiZechariiL.  tie 

"   .~    ~nd,  jq?  matsa. 

: ;      :   .1  -'.  -  -z~.-  II  tlit  1:  I  :   i_7  1-    1  :I_7i^ 
Deut.  4. 3c  and  an  these  thfngg  are  come  upon  thee 

:Ki   7.  ~z  some  mischief  win  come  uponns 

-.  »r^  gara. 
Job     4.  TiFearcameuponin^andtFeEi.Ii^^  ~liiii 

F    ::me  upon,  cwipxouai  eperehomaC 

L^ke   -.  ;f  He  H:Ip     l:st  sl^II  :  :^i s  p:i  tlee 

xx.  22  a  strci  _  ~ZaH  come  upon  him 

Acts    •   ;_  tl_:  i  :~e  ::'  tles-e  : 

zj.  _:  Beware  thexefbre,  lest  that  come  upon 
Jas.    5.   s  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon 

:  T   _"".:::  upon  or  over.  £pu — _.  -:phisiem,C 
l_^>e    z.    z  tie  upel    :  \Z-  Z  r  . .:.-:".■:    :;    ~  tlezi 
zz.    x  cMel  priests  and  Ote  scribes  eame  upon 
z-    :_!"-   e  :   ill:  117 :  :n:e  _p  ;  1 ;      ;  :    1      :  i 
Acts    4-  x  and  tl    -  -    lame  upon  them 

: :  iame  upon  (him>.  and  caught  him,  and 
::     •  11  tag  rdeaxsenpon 

1  -i.  5    3  s  - 1 1  :i  destrnetioQ  cometh  upon  them, 

1.  7     ~    '  ~  .-■:-!     1     -       - 

'     ~.z       lest  larkness  come  upon  you  :  for  he 
::zzz  —.-.  ::  — 

To  come  together,  G^?r£pxQfw-  suncrckemai. 
L^fe^S-  53  t^6  women  also,  which  eame  with  him 
tie  Jews  also  weeping  which  can. 
: :   ia  astonished,  as  many  as  came  with  Peter 

I.™  — iiLz.z.    ::  — 
To  eame  out.  XT.  yatsa. 

yom55.  20  if  the  slayer  shall.. come  withoct  Che 

COSE,  tobefaHy  — 

-    .-    ■  -    -_  yjmpierwK 

:"  Pentecost  was  fully  come 

Z'.'.ZZ.   ::  ':-;  ::  — 

- 

- 

:.  -:  "  1:  .1  1  is  to  come 

1  TX  4.    £  t :  life,  .which  is  to  come 

:::~  ■-  *---  g'--"  —  =--  -  — 

is  coming,  the  Coming  One.  o  io%6iLewos. 
n  he  that  should  come : 
like-.  :i  2:  Art  - 
John  6  £t  that  prophet  that  should  come  into  the 

::   z-     Iris:. .which  should  come  into  the 

■  -  -       _  •  ; 

.   .     .      :-le  tin:  si— I  :.z_e  'II  :.  —  -    —I"— 


COMB 


188 


COMPORTED 


COME,  he  that  is  to  — 

He  who  is  coining,  the  Coming  One,  6  ipxd/j.evos. 
Rev.  i.    4  him.  .which  was,  and  which  is  to  come 
i.    8  the  Lord,  .which  was,  and  which  is  to  co. 
4.    8  the  Lord.,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  toco. 
11   17  which  art  and  wast,  and  art  to  come 

COME,  he  that  was  for  to  — 
He  who  is  about  to  come,  u  fieWwv  epxeodai. 
Matt  11   14  this  is  Elias,  which  was  for  to  come 

COMETH,  he  that  — 

He  who  is  coming,  the  Coming  One,  &  epxdl^evos. 
Matt  3.  1 1  he  that  coineth  after  me  is  mightier  than 
2i.   g  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
23.  3Q  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
Lnkeuj.  3S  the  King  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
John  1,  1^  He  that  cometh  after  me  is  preferred 

3.  31  He  that  cometh  from  above  is  above  all 
-'3.  3t  he  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  above  all 
12.  1  j  Blessed  (is)  the  King  of  Israel  that  cometh 

COMETH  upon,  that  which  — 

The  crowd  1 11 'j,  standing  together  upon,  7}  inta-vara- 

ats  he  episastasis. 

2Cc.11  -2'i  that  which  [cometh  upon]  me  daily,  the 
COMETH  any  thing  near  — 
Near,  3!j3  gareb. 

Nnm  17  13  Whosoever  cometh  any  thing  near  unto 
COMETH,  as  — 
Coming  in,  entrance,  nud  mabo. 

Eze  33  31  they  come  unto  thee  as  the  people  cometh 
COMETH  from  or  out,  that  which  — 
Excrement,  nxy  tseah. 

Deutaj  j  3  and  cover  that  which  cometh  from  thee 

Eze.   4.  12  bake  it  with  dung  that  cometh  out  of  man 
COMETH  nigh,  that  — 
Near,  yip  qareb. 

Num.  1  51  the  stranger  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be 
3  10  38  the  strauger  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be 

18  7  the  stranger  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be 
COMETH  of,  that  — 

Young  one,  offspring,  "IMS'  sheger. 

Exod  13  (2  every  firstling  that  cometh  of  a  beast 
COMETH  oat,  that  which  — 
Offspring,  D'W*  tseetsaim. 

Isa.   42    5  the  earth,  and  that  which  cometh  out  of 
COMING  — 
1   To  meet,  «~Jp  nova. 

1  Sa  1 6    4  elders  of  the  towu  trembled  at  his  coming 

2.  Foot  *?r>  regel 

Gen  30  30  Loud  hath  blessed  thee  since  my  coming 

3.  Uncovering,  revelation,  anoKdhv^i.';  apokalupsis, 

1  Co.   1     7  waiting  fur  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

4.  Wag  in,  entrance,  eftroSu?  eisodos. 

Acts  1}  24  John  had  tirst  preached  before  his  coming 
5..'1  coming,  eAei  ov?  eleusis. 

Acts   7  52  whichshowed.  the comingof the JustOne 
6.7*o  com'1,  tpxofxa'  erchomai. 

Matt  24  48  shall  say    My  lord  delayeth  [his  coming! 
25  27  (then)  at  my  coming  I  should  have  receiv. 
Lukc'12.  45  My  lord  delayeth  his  coming  ;  and  shall 
18.    5  lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  weary 

19  23  that  at  my  coming  I  might  have  required 
Rom  15.  22  I  have  been  much  hindered  from  coming 

7. A  being  alongside,  presence,  irapovo-ta  parousia. 
Matt  24     3  what  (shall  be)  the  sign  of  thy  coming 
24  27.  37.  39  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son 

1  Co  is  23  they  that  are  Christ  s  at  his  coming 

16  17  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  Stephanas 

2  Co    7     6  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  Titus 

7     7  not  by  hiscoming  oidy,  but  by  the  couso. 
Phil     1  26  for  me  by  my  coming  to  you  again 

1  Th    2   19  (Are)  not  even  ye.  at  his  coming  ? 

3  13  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

4  15  (ami)  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 

5  23  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

2  Til    2     1  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

2.  8  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  hiscoming 

2  9  whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Ra 
Jas      5     7  Ba  patient,  unto  the  coining  of  the  Lord 

5     8  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh 
2  Pe.    1 ,  16  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ch 

3.  4  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?  for 

3  12  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  otG 

1  .To.   1.  28  nut  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  coming 
COMING  down  — 
To  c  mie  or  go  down,  ~n'  yarad. 

Isa.   3.-  19  When  it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on  the 
COMING  in-- 
-I  coining  in,  entrance,  n*to  moba. 

?  S 1.    3.  25  to  know  thy  going  out  and  thy  coming  in 

1  13"  the  goings  out  thereof,  and  the  comings  in 
COMING- on  — 

To  c  1  "•■  over,  "13V  abar, 

2  s  1.  24.  20  saw  the  king  and  his  servants  coming  on 
C0MIN3,  to  he  — 

To  come,  ep^oucct  erchomai. 

Luke  ",.  19  the  days  an-  coming,  in  the  which  they 
John  5.   7  while  I  am  coming,  another  Bteppeth 


John  5.  25  The  hour  is  coining,  and  now  is,  when  the 

5.  28  Marvel  not  at  this:  for  the  hour  is  coming 

11.  20  as  soon  as  she  heard  that  Jesus  was  com. 

12.  12  when  they  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming 
3  Co.  13.    1  This  (is)  the  third  (time)  I  am  coming  to 

COMING,  to  be  a  — 

To  come  toward,  Trpoaepxop.at  proserchomai. 

Luke  9.  42  as  he  was  yet  a  coming,  the  devil  threw 

COMING,  who  — 

He  w)w  is  coming,  the  Coming  One,  6  epxo^vos. 
John  1.  27  who  coming  after  me,  is  preferred  before 

COMING  on,  to  be  — 

To  be  about  to  be,  yaeWw  yivfaOat  niello  ginesthai. 
Acts  27.  33  while  the  day  was  coming  on,  Paul 

COMING  on,  those  things  which  are  — 
The  things  coming  on,  ra.iir^pxop.4va  ta  eperchome. 
Luke2i.  26  those  things  which  are  coming  on  the 

COMELINESS  — 

1. Honour,  Yin  hadar 

Isa.  53     2  he  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness;  and  when 
Eze.  16.  i4for  it  (was)  perfect  through  my  comeliness 
27.  10  in  thee  ;  they  set  forth  thy  comeliness 

'2. Beauty,  lirr  hod. 

Dan.  10.    8  for  my  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into 

3. Elegance,  ^vaxv^oavvn  euschenwsune. 

1  Co.  12.  23  our  uncomely  (parts)  have  more,  .comeli. 

COMELY  — 

1.  Grace,  graceful,  \-n  chin. 

Job  41. 12  I  will  not  conceal  his.,  comely  proportion 

2.  Fair,  ns;  yapheh. 

Eccl.  5.  18 ;  (it  is)  good  and  comely.. to  eat  and  to 

3. Becoming,  nrai  naveh. 

Psa.  33.    1  Rejoice,  .praise  is  comely  for  the  upright 

147.    i  for  (it  is)  pleasant;  (and)  praise  is  comely 

Song    1.    5  I  (am)  black,  but  comely,  O  ye  daughters 

2.  14  0  my  dove,  .thy  countenance  (is)  comely 

4.    3  thy  speech  (is)  comely:  thy  temples  (are) 

6.  4  comely  [as  Jerusalem,  terrible  as(an  army) 
Jer.     6.    2  likened  the  daughter  of  Zion  to  a  comely 

4.  Form,  ~>Nn  toar. 

1  Sa.  16. 18  a  comely  person,  and  the  Lord  (is)  with 

5. Beauty,  rrjxcri   tiphereth. 

Isa.     4.    2  the  fruit  of  the  earth  (shall  be) . .  comely 
6.  Well  fashioned,  ei>aLx'htJ-(t'V  euschemon. 

1  Co.  12  24  our  comely  (parts)  have  no  need  :  but  God 

COMELY,  to  be  — 

1.2*0  do  good,  act  well,  iu;  yatab,  5. 

Prov3o.  29  yea,  four  are  comely  in  going 
2.  To  be  becoming,  nxi  naah,  Sa. 

Song  1  10  Thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  (of  je  ) 
2.  To  be  becoming,  befitting,  irpiirta prjspd. 

1  Co  ii.  13  is  it  comely  that  a  woman  pray  unto  God 
COMELY,  that  which  is  — 
Well  fashioned,  elegant,  elax'Ot*®1'  euschemon. 

1  Co.  7  35  for  that  which  is  comely,  and  that  ye  may 

COMER  thereunto  — 

To  come  toward,  -jrpoaepxofAai  proserchomai. 
Meb  10.    1  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect 

COMPORT  — 

1.7*0  comfort,  give  forth  sighs,  era  nacham,  3. 
Psa  119  76  thy  merciful  kindness  be  for  my  comfort 

2  Comfort,  consolation,  ^013  nechamah. 

Job     6  10  Then  should  I  yet  have  comfort;  yea,  I 
Psa  119  50  This  (is)  my  comfort  in  my  alllietion 

3.--1  calling  alongside,  helping,  Trapa.K\riot.$  p>arok. 
Acts    9.  31  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  were 
Rom  15.    4  comfort  of  the  scriptures  might  have  hope 

2  Co.    1.    3  Father  of  mercies,  anil  the  God  of  all  com. 

1.    4  by  the  comfort  wherewith  we  ourselves 

7.  4  I  am  tilled  with  comfort,  I  am  exceeding 
713  we  were  comforted  in  your  comfort:  yea 

4.^-i  consolation,  a  solace,  a  comfort,  irapap-vOia. 

1  Co.  14.    3  edification,  and  exhortation,  and  comfort 
5. Consolation,  solace,  comfort,  irapap.vSiov. 

Phil.   2.    1  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if  any  fellowship 
6.yl  soothing,  irapvyopta  paregoria.. 

Col.     4.  11  which  have  been  a  comfort  unto  me 

COMPORT,  to  be  a  — 

To  comfort,  give  forth  sighs,  crti  nacham,  3. 
Eze.  w6.  54  in  that  thou  art  a  comfort  unto  them 

COMFORT,  to  be  of  good  — 

1 , To  be  refreshed,  braced  up,  go^ox*®  eupsu> •.!<■  ■"• 
Phil.    2.  19  that  I  also  may  be  of  good  comfort  when 

2.7*0  be  courageous,  hearty,  dapaeto  tharseS. 

Matt  0,  22  Daughter,  be  of  good  comfort ;  thy  faith 
Mark  10.  49  Be  of  good  comfort  rise  ;  he  calleth  flirt,- 
Luke  8.  48  Daughter,  [be  of  good  comfort]  :  thy  faith 

3.7*0  call  alongside  of,  help,  -jrapaKaXtw  parakaleo. 

2  Co.  13.  11  Be  perfect,  [be  of  good  comfort],  be  of  one 


COMFORT,  to  — 

1.7*0  brighten  up,  encourage,  ihz  balag,  5. 

Job   9.  27  I  will  leave  off  my  heaviness,  and  comic 1  x. 
2.  To  comfoi't,  give  forth  sighs,  Dnj  nacham,  3. 

Gen.    5.  29  This  (same)  shall  comfort  us  concerning 
37.  35  all  his  sous,  .rose  up  to  comftrt  him 

50.  21  he  comforted  them.aud  spake  kindly  unto 
Ruth  2.  13  for  that  thou  hast  comforted  me,  and  for 
2  Sa.  10.    2  David  sent  to  comfort  him  by  the  hand 

10.    3  that  he  hath  sent  comforters  unto  thee? 

12.  24  David  comforted  Bath-sheba  his  wife,  and 
iCh.    7.  22  and  his  brethren  came  to  cemfort  him 

ig.    2  David  sent  messengers  to  comfort  hhn 

19.    2  the  servants  of  David  came,  .to  comfort 
Job      2.  11  to  mourn  with  him  and  to  comfort  him 
7. 13  When  I  say,  My  bedsball  comfort  me,  my 

21.  34  How  then  comfort  ye  me  in  vain,  seeing 
29.  25  as  one  (that)  comforteth  the  mourners 
42.  11  they  bemoaned  him,  and  comforted  him 

Psa.  23.    4  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me 
71.  21  Thou  shalt.  .comfort  me  on  every  side 
86.  17  thou,  Lord,  hast  holpen  me,  and.ccmfor. 
119.  82  saying,  "When  wilt  thou  comfort  me? 

Isa.   12.    1  I  will  praise  thee,  .thou  comfortedst  me 

22.  4  labour  not  to  comfort  me,  because  of  the 
40.  1  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith 
49.  13  the  Lord  hath  comforted  Ins  people,  and 

51.  3  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion  :  he  will  comfort 
51.  12  I,  (even)  I,  (am)  he  that  comforteth  you 

51.  19  and  the  sword  :  by  whom  shall  I  comfoi  t 

52.  9  for  the  LORD  hath  comforted  his  people 
61.  2  To  proclaim,  .to  comfort  all  that  mourn 
66.  13  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort  you 

Jer.    16.    7  Neither  shall  (men),  .comfort  them  for 

31. 13  will  comfort  them,  and  make  them  rejoice 

Lam.    1.    2  among  all.  .she  hath  none  to  comfort  (her) 

1. 17  (there  is)  none  to  comfort  her  :  the  Lord 

1.  21  (there  is)  none  to  comfort  me  :  all  mine 

2.  13  that  I  may  comfort  thee,  O  virgin  daugh. 
Eze.  14.  23  they  shall  comfort  you,  when  ye  see  their 
Zech.    1.  17  the  Lord  shall  yet  comfort  Zion,  and 

10.  2  have  told  false  dreams  ;  they  comfort  in 

3.7*y  support,  refresh,  ~ij;d  saad. 

Gen.  18.    5  comfort  ye  your  hearts  ;  after  that  ye 

Judgig.    5  Comfort  thine  heart  with  a  morsel  of 

19,    8  Comfort  thine  heart,  I  pray  thee 

4.7*o  support,  "i3"i  raphad,  3. 

Song  2.    5  Stay  me  with  flagons,  comfort  me  with 

5.  To  call  alongside,  help,  7rapaKa\tco  j'arakolco. 

Acts    16.  40  they  comforted  them,  and  departed 
2  Co.    1.    4  Who  comforteth  us.  .that  we  may.  .comf. 

2.  7  (ought)  rather  to  forgive,  .and  comfort 
7.    6  that  comforteth  those  that  are  cast 

7     6  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  Titus 
Eph.   6  22  and  (that)  he  might  comfort  your  hearts 
Col      4    8  that  he  might. .comfort  your  hearts 

1  Th.  2.11  comforted  and  charged  every  one  of  you; 

3.  2  and  to  comfort  you  concerning  your  faith 

4.  18  comfort  one  another  with  these  words 

5.  11  comfort  yourselves  together,  and  edify 
2TI1.   2.  17  Comfortyour  hearts,  and  stablish  you  in 

6.  To*  speak  kindly  to  one,  Trapa/Ji'84o/j.ai  paramuthe. 
John  1 1.  19  to  comfort  them  concerning  their  brother 

11.  31  The  Jews  then  which,  comforted  her 

1  Th.  2.  11  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  comf. 
5.  14  comfort  the  feeble  minded,  support  the 

COMFORT,  to  receive  — 

7*0  be  sighed  mth,  comforted,  cru  nacham,  2. 
Isa.   57.   6  Should  I  receive  comfoi't  in  these? 

COMFORT,  to  take  — 

7*0  brighten  up,  J72  balag,  5. 

Job    10.  20  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  take  comfort  a 

COMFORT  self,  to  — 

l.yl  brightening  up,  n*J'/3C  mabligith. 

Jer.    8.  18  I  would  comfort  myself  against  sorrow 

2.  To  comfort  self,  give  vent  to  sighs,  cri  nacham,'!. 
Gen.  27.42  Ksau.. doth  comfort  himself .  .to  kill  thee 
Psa.  119  52  I  remembered.,  and  have  comforted  my 

COMFORTABLE  — 

l.Best,  quietness,  nrn^p  menuchah. 

2  Sa.  14.  17  The  word . ,  shall  now  be  comfortable 
2.  Comforts,  sighs,  DVMru  nichumim. 

Zech    1.  13  (with)  good  words  (and)  comfortable  wc  r. 

COMFORTABLY  — 

1.  Upon  or  unto  the  heort,  ^ySy  al-leb. 

2  Sa.  19.  7  go  forth,  and  speak  comfortably  unto  thy 
2  Ch  30.  22  Ilezekiah  spake  comfortably  unto  all  the 
Isa.  40.  2  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and 
Hos.    2.  14  I  will,  .speak  comfortably  unto  her 

2.Vjion  or  unto  the  hart,  ^nVS;  al-h  bah. 

2  Ch.  33.    6  and  spake  comfortably  to  them,  saying 

COMFORTED,  to  be  — 

1.7*o  be  sighed  with,  comforted,  C~i  va<hom,  2. 
Gen.  24.  67  Isaac  was  comforted  after  his  mother's 

3S.  12  Judah  was  comforted,  and  went  up  unto 
2  Sa.  13.  39  he  was  comforted  concerning  Amnon 
Pea.    77.    2  my  soul  refused  to  be  comforted 
Jer.   31.  15  refused  to  he  comforted  for  her  children 
Eze.   14.  22  ye  shall  be  comforted  concerning  the 

31.  16  shall  be  comforted  in  the  nether  parts  of 

32.  31  shall  he  comforted  overall  his  multitude 


COMFORTED 


189 


COMMAND 


2.  To  be  sighed  with,  comforted,  cm  nacham,  4. 

Isa.   54.  ii  O  thou  afflicted,  .(and)  not  comforted  ! 
66.  13  and  ye  shall  be  comforted  in  Jerusalem 
3. To  give  vent  to  one*s  sighs,  cm  nacham,  7. 

Gen.  37.  35  but  he  refused  to  be  comforted :  and  he 

Eze.    5.  13  I  will  be  comforted  :  aud  they  shall  know 
4.  To  call  to  one's  side,  or  near,  help,  Trapa.Ka\eu>. 

Matt  2.  18  Rachel .  .would not  be  comforted, because 
5.   4  that  mourn  :  for  they  shall  be  comforted 

Lukeio  25  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  arttorme. 

Acts  20.  12  and  were  not  a  little  comforted 

1  Co.  14.  31  all  may  learn,  aud  all  may  be  comforted 

2  Co.  1.    4  we  ourselves  are  comforted  of  God 

1.    6  whether  we  be  comforted,  (it  is)  for  your 
7.    7  consolation  wherewith  he  was  comforted 
7. 13  we  were  comforted  in  your  comfort 
Col.     2.    2  That  their  hearts  might  be  comforted 

1  Th.  3.    7  we  were  comforted  over  you  iu  all  our 

COMPORTED  together,  to  be-  — 

To  comfort  or  lielp  together,  trvp-irapaKaXew  sumpa. 

Rom.  1.  12  that  I  may  be  comforted  together  with 
COMFORTER  — 

1.  Comforter,  Dru  nacham,  3. 

2  Sa.io.  3  that  he  hath  sent  comforters  unto  thee  ? 
1  Ch.  19.  3  that  he  hath  sent  comforters  unto  thee  ? 
Job  16.    2  miserable  comforters  (are)  ye  all 

Psa.  69.  20  Hooked,  .for  comforters,  but  I  found  none 
Eccl.  4.    1  oppressed,  and  they  had  no  comforter 
Lam.  1.    9  she  came  down,  .she  hath  no  comforter 

1.  16  because  the  comforter  that  should  relie. 
Nah.  3.    7  whence  shall  I  seek  comforters  for  thee  ? 

2.  One  called  alongside  of  for  kelp,  irapaKX^ros. 

John  1 4. 16  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 

14.  26  But  the  Comforter,  .the  Holy  Ghost 

15.  26  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I  will 

16.  7  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you 

COMFORTLESS  — 

An  orphan,  bereaved,  optpavSs    orphanos. 

John  14.  iS  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless:  I  will 
COMFORTS  — 
1. Comforts,  IVWra  nichumim. 

Isa.  57. 18  restore  comforts  unto  him,  and  to  his 

2.  Comforts,  □'Dirnn  tanchumim. 

Psa.  94. 19  within  me  thy  comforts  delight  my  soul 

COMMAND  — 

The  month,  na  peh. 

Job  39.  27  Doth  the  er.gle  mount  up  at  thy  command 

COMMAND,  to  — 

l.To  say,  lift  up  the  voice,  "ON  T?x  amar. 

Exod.  8.  27  sacrifice  to.  .God,  as  he  shall  command  us 
1  Sa.'i6.  16  Let  our  lord  now  command  thy  servants 

1  Ch.21.  17  (Is  it)  not  I  (that)  commanded  the  people 

21. 18  the  angel  of  the  Lord  commanded  Gad 

21.  27  the  Lord  commanded  the  angel,  and  he 

22.  2  David  commanded  to  gather  together  the 

2  Ch.14.   4  commanded  Judah  to  seek  the  Lord  God 

29.  21  he  commanded  the  priests  the  sons  of  A. 
29. 24  the  king  commanded  (that)  the  burnt 
29.  27  Hezekiah  commanded  to  offer  the  burnt 
29  30  the  king  and  the  princes  commanded  the 
31.   4  he  commanded  the  people  that  dwelt  in 

31. 11  Hezekiah  commanded  to  prepare  cham. 

32. 12  commauded  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  sayiug 
33. 16  commanded  Judah  to  serve  the  Lord 

35.  21  for  God  commanded  me  to  make  haste 
Neh.  13.    9  I  commanded,  and  they  cleansed  the 

13. 19  I  commanded  that  the  gates  should  be 
13.  22  I  commanded  the  Levites  that  they 

Esth.  1. 10  commanded  Mehuman,  Biztha,  Harbona 

1.  17  Ahasuerus  commanded  Vashti  the  queen 

4. 13  Mordecai  commanded  to  answer  Esther 
6.    1  commanded  to  bring  the  book  of  records 

9. 14  the  king  commanded  it  so  to  be  done 

9. 25  he  commanded  by  letters,  that  his  wicked 
Job     9.    7  Which  commandeth  the  sun,  and  it 

36.  10  commandeth  that  they  return  from  iniq. 
Psa.  io5.  34  concerning  whom  the  LORD  commanded 

107.  25  he  commandeth,  and  raiseth  the  stormy 
Dan.   2.    2  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  magici. 

2,  12  and  commanded  to  destroy-all  the  wise 

2.  46  commanded  that  they  should  offer  an 

3.  13  Nebuchadnezzar,  .commanded  to  bring 
3.  19  commanded  that  they  should  heat  the 

3.  20  he  commanded  the  most  mighty  men 

4.  26  they  commanded  to  leave  the  stump  of 

5.  2  Belshazzar.  .commanded  to  bring  the 

5.  29  Then  commanded  Belshazzar,  and  they 

6. 16  the  king  commanded,  and  they  brought 

6.  23  commauded  that  they  should  take  Daniel 
6  24  the  king  commanded,  and  they  brought 

Z.  To  speak,  lead  forth  words,  13X  dabar,  3. 
Num.16.  47  Aaron  took  as  Moses  commanded,  and 
27.  23  as  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of 
Job  42.    9  went  and  did  according  as  the  Lord  com. 

3.  To  set  up  (a  precept  or  command),  nix  tsavah,  3. 
Gen    2.  16  the  Lord  God  commanded  the  man,  say. 

3.  11  I  commanded  thee  that  thou  shouldest 

3. 17  the  tree,  of  which  I  commauded  thee 

6.  22  according  to  all  that  God  commanded 

7.  5  according  unto  all  that  the  Lord  com. 

7.    9  went.. into  the  ark.  .as  God  had  comman, 
7.  16  went  in .  .as  God  had  commanded  him 
is.  20  Pharaoh  commanded  (his)  men  concern. 


Gen. 18. 


32' 

42 
44 
47> 

5° 

50 

50, 

Exod.  4 

5' 

7 

7 

7 

7 


16. 
16. 
16. 
18. 
19. 
23. 
27. 
29. 
3i- 
31- 
32- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35* 
36. 
36. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
Lev.  6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


27 
sum.  1 


19  he  will  command  his  children  and  his 
4  circumcised,  .as  God  had  commanded  . 

,   8  according  to  that  which  I  command  thee 
4  he  commanded  them,  saying,  Thus  shall 

17  he  commanded  the  foremost,  saying 
'19  so  commanded  he  the  second,  aud  the 
.  25  Joseph  commanded  to  fill  their  sacks 

1  he  commanded  the  steward  of  his  house 
11  Joseph,  .gave,  .as  Pharaoh  had  comman. 

,    2  Joseph  commanded  his  servants  the 
.  12  did.  .according  as  he  commanded  them 
16  Thy  father  did  command  before  he  died 

28  told,  .the  signs  which  he  had  commanded 

6  Pharaoh  commanded  the  same  day  the 

2  Thou  shalt  speak  all  that  I  command  thee 
.  6  Moses  and  Aaron  did  as  the  Lord  comm. 
.  10  they  did  so  as  the  Lord  had  commanded 

20  and  Aaron  did  so,  as  the  Lord  command. 
.  2S  did  as  the  Lord  had  commanded  Moses 

,  50  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  and 
16  thing  which  the  Lord  hath  commanded 
32  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  comm. 

34  As  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  Aaron 
23  If  thou,  .do  this  thing,  and  God  comm. 

7  these  words  which  the  Lord  commanded 

15  shalt  keep  the  feast,  .as  I  commanded 

20  thou  shalt  command  the  children  of  I. 

35  according  to  all.  .which  I  have  command. 
6  they  may  make  all  that  I  have  command. 

11  according  to  all  that  I  have  commanded 

8  out  of  the  way  which  I  commanded  them 
4  weut  up .  .as  the  Lord  had  commanded 

11  Observe  thou  that  which  I  command  thee 

iS  as  I  commanded  thee,  in  the  time  of  the 

1  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath  comm. 

4  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  comm. 

10  and  make  all  that  the  Lord  hath  comm. 

29  which  the  Lord  had  commanded  to  be 
1  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  had  com. 

5  for.  .the  work  which  the  Lord  command. 

22  made  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  M. 
x,  5,  7,  21,  26,  29,  31  as  the  Lord  command. 

32  42,  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  com. 
43  they  had  done  it  as  the  Lord  had  comm. 

16  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  command. 
19,  21,  25,  27,  29,  32  as  the  Lord  commanded 

23  he  set .  .as  the  Lord  had  commanded  M. 

9  Command  Aaron  and  his  sons,  saying 

36  Which  the  Lord  commauded  to  be  given 
38  Which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  iu 
38  in  the  day  that  he  commanded  the  chil. 

4  And  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded 

5  This  (is)  the  thing  whiclrthe  LORD  comm. 
9,  13, 17,  21,  29  as  the  Lord"  commanded  M. 

31  and  there  eat  it.  .as  I  commanded,  saying 
34  the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  do,  to  make 
36  which  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand 

5  they  brought  (that)  which  Moses  comm. 

6  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  comm. 

7  make  an  atonement,  .as  the  Lord  comm. 
*o  he  burnt,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  M. 

21  wave  offering,  .as  Moses  commanded 

1  fire,  .which  he  commanded  them  not 

15  shall  be  thine,  .as  the  Lord  hath  comm. 

18  should  indeed  have  eaten .  .as  I  comman. 
54  the  priest  shall  command  that  they  wash 

4  Then  shall  the  priest  command  to  take 
S,  36,  40  the  priest  shall  command  that  one 
34  And  he  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  M. 

2  the  thing  which  the  Lord  hath  comman. 
2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  that 

23  children  of  Israel  did  as  the  Lord  com. 

21  I  will  command  my  blessing  upon  you  in 
34  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  for 

19  As  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  he 
54  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  comman. 

33  not  numbered,  .as  the  Lord  commanded 

34  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  command. 
42  Moses  numbered,  as  the  Lord  command. 
51  Moses  gave,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  M 
49  were  numbered .  .as  the  Lord  commanded 

2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they 

3  Aaron  did  so.  .as  the  Lord  commanded 

20  according  unto  all  that  the  Lord  com. 

22  as  the  Lord  had  commanded  Moses  con. 

5  according  to  all  that  the  LORD  command. 
S  I  will  hear  what  the  Lord  will  command 

23  all  that  the  Lord  hath  commanded  you 
23  from  the  day  that  the  Lord  commanded 
36  stoned  him.. as  the  Lord  commanded  M. 

11  Moses  did  (so) :  as  the  Lord  commanded 
2  ordinance,  .which  the  Lord  hath  com. 

9  Moses  took  the  rod.  .as  he  commanded 

27  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded 

4  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  and  the 
11  a  statute,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  Mo. 
22  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him 

2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say 
40  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  command. 

1  the  thing  which  the  Lord  hath  command. 

16  statutes  which  the  Lord  commanded  M. 
7,  31,  41,  47  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses 

21  ordinance. .which  the  LORD  commanded 
25  Thy  servants  will  do  as  my  lord  command 

28  concerning  them  Moses  commanded  Ele. 
38  went  up.  .at  the  commandment  of  the  L 

2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say 
13  Moses  commanded  the  children  of  Isr. 
13  the  land,  .which  the  Lord  commanded 

29  These  (are  they)  whom  the  Lord  com. 

2  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they 
2  The  Lord  commanded  my  lord  to  give  the 


Nuni36.  5  Moses  commanded  the  children  of  Israel 
36.  6  the  Lord  doth  command  concerning  the 
36.  ioas  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  did  the 
36. 13  which  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand 

Deut,  1.  18  I  commanded  you  at  that  time  all  the 

1.  19  we  went.,  as  the  Lord  our  God  command. 

1.  41  to  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  commanded 

2.  4  command  thou  the  people,  saying,  Ye 
3. 18  I  commanded  you  at  that  time,  saying 

3.  21  I  commanded  Joshua  at  that  time,  saying 

4.  2  not  add  unto  the  word  which  I  command 
4.    2  the  commandments,  .which  I  command 
4.    5  even  as  the  Lord  my  God  commanded  me 
4.  13  his  covenant,  which  he  commanded  you 
4. 14  the  Lord  commanded  me  at  that  time  to 

4.  40  his  commandments,  which  I  command 
5. 12,  16  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  commanded 

5.  15  the  Lord  thy  God  commanded  thee  to 
5.  32  as  the  Lord  your  God  hath  commanded 

5.  33  which  the  Lord,  .hath  commauded  you 

6.  1  which  the  Lord  your  God  commanded  to 
6.  2  which  I  command  thee,  thou,  and  thy  son 
6.    6  these  words,  which  I  command  thee  this 

6. 17  his  statutes,  which  he  hath  commanded 
6.  20  which  the  LoRDourGod  hath  commanded 
6.  24  the  Lord  commanded  us  to  do  all  these 

6.  25  we  observe  to  do.,  as  he  hath  commanded 
7. 11  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  to  do 

8.    1  the  commandments  which  I  command 

8.  11  his  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this 

9.  12  out  of  the  way  which  I  commanded  them 
9. 16  the  way  which  the  Lord  had  commanded 

10.    5  there  they  be,  as  the  Lord  commanded 

10.  13  which  I  command  thee  this  day  for  thy 
it.    8  keepall  the  commandments  which  I  com. 

11.  13  which  I  command  you  this  day,  to  love 
11.  22  these  commandments  which  1  command 
11.  27  A  blessing,  .which  I  command  you  this 

11.  28  out  of  the  way  which  I  command  you  this 

12.  11  thither  shall  ye  bring  all  that  I  command 
12.  14  there  thou  shalt  do  all  that  I  command 
12.  21  thou  shalt  kill,  .as  I  have  commanded 
12.  28  hear  all  these  words  which  I  command 

12.  32  What  thing  soever!  command  you,  obse. 

13.  s  which  the  Lord  thy  God  commanded  thee 
13.  18  his  commandments  which  I  command 
15.    s  these  commandments  which  I  command 
15.  11  therefore  I  command  thee,  saying,  Thou 
15.  15  therefore  I  command  thee  this  thing  to. 

17.  3  served,  .gods,  .which  I  have  not  com. 

18.  iS  he  shall  speak,  .all  that  I  shall  command 

18.  20  which  I  have  not  commanded  him  to 

19.  7  Wherefore  I  command  thee,  saying,  Thou 
19.    9  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  to  love 

20. 17  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  commanded 
24.    8  as  I  commanded  them,  (so)  ye  shall 

24. 18  22  therefore  I  command  thee  to  do  this 
26. 13,  14  according  to  all.  .thou  hast  command. 

26.  16  This  day  the  LORD  thy  God  hath  com. 

27.  1  Moses  with  the  elders  of  Israel  com. 
27.    1  the  commandments  which  I  command 
27.    4  which  I  command  you  this  day,  in  mount 

27.  10  his  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this 

28.  1  his  commandments  which  I  command 
28.   8/The  Lord  shall  command  the  blessing 
28.  13  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  toobser. 
28  14  from  any  of  the  words  which  I  command 

28.  15  his  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this 
28  45  and  his  statutes  which  he  commanded 

29.  1  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  to 

30.  2  according  to  all  that  I  command  thee  this 

30.  8  his  commandments,  which  I  command 
30. 11  For  this  commandment  which  I  com. 
30. 16  I  command  thee  this  day  to  love  the  LORD 

31.  5  according  unto  all.  .1  have  commanded 
31.  10  Moses  commanded  them,  saying,  At  the 
31.  25  Moses  commanded  the  Levites,  which 

31.  29  from  the  way  which  I  have  commanded 

32.  46  ye  shall  command  your  children  to  observe 

33.  4  Moses  commanded  us  a  law,  (even)  the 

34.  9  and  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses 
Josh.    1.    7  which  Moses  my  servant  commanded 

1.   9  Have  not  I  commanded  thee?    Be  strong 
1.  10  Then  Joshua  commanded  the  officers  of 
1.  11  Pass  through  the  host,  and  command  the 
1.  13  Mosestheservantof  theLoRD commanded 
1. 16  All  that  thou  commandest  us  we  will  do 

1. 18  thy  words  in  all  that  thou  commandest 
3  they  commanded  the  people,  saying 
8  thou  shalt  command  the  priests  that  bear 
3  And  command  ye  them,  saying,  Take  you 
8  Israel  did  so  as  Joshua  commanded,  and 

10  every  thing,  .that  the  Lord  commanded 
10  according  to  all  that  Moses  commanded 

16  Command  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark  of 

17  Joshua  therefore  commanded  the  priests 
6. 10  Joshua  had  commanded  thepeople, saying 

7.  11  my  covenant  which  I  commanded  them 

8.  4  he  commanded  them,  saying,  Behold,  ye 
S.    8  See,  I  have  commanded  you 
8.  27  unto  the  word. .which  he  commanded  .7 

8.  29  Joshua  commanded  thatthey  should  take 
S.  31  As  Moses  the  servant  of  the  LORD  com. 
S.  33  the  servant  of  the  Iord  had  commanded 
S.  35  not  a  word  of  all  that  Moses  commanded 

9.  24  how  that  the  LORD  thy  God  commanded 

10.  27  Joshua  commanded,  and  they  took  them 
ro.  40  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  commanded 

11.  12  as  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  com. 
11.  15  As  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  his  ser. 
11,  15  so  did  Moses  command  Joshua,  and  so 
11.  15  of  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  Moses 


COMMAND 


190 


COMMANDMENT 


Josh.  1 1 

13- 

14. 
14. 

17- 


Ruth  2, 
iSa.  2. 

13' 
I3< 
*7- 


2Sa. 


20  destroy  them,  as  the  Lord  commanded 
6  for  an  inheritance,  as  I  have  commanded 
2  as  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of 
5  As  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  the 

4  The  Lord  commanded  Moses  to  give  us 

21.  2,  8  The  Lord  commanded  by  the  haud  of 

22.  2  Moses  the  servant  of  theLoRDcommanded 

22.  2  obeyed  my  voice  in  all  that  I  commanded 

23.  16  which  he  commanded  you,  and  have  gone 
Judg.  2.  20  covenant  which  I  commanded  their  father 

3.  4  which  he  commanded  their  fathers  by  the 

4.  6  Hath  not  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  com. 
13.  14  all  that  I  commanded  her  let  her  observe 
21.  10  thousand  men.  .commanded  them,  saying 
21.  20  Therefore  they  commanded  the  children 

15  Boaz  commanded  his  young  men,  saying 
29  which  I  have  commanded  (in  my)  habita. 

13  which  he  commanded  thee  :  for  now 

14  and  the  Lord  hath  commanded  him  (to 
14  kept  (that)  which  the  Lord  commanded 

20  and  went,  as  Jesse  had  commanded  him 
22  Saul  commanded  his  servants,  (saying) 
29  and  my  brother,  he  hath  commanded  me 

2  The  king  hath  commanded  me  a  business 

2  and  what  I  have  commanded  thee:  and  I 
12  And  David  commanded  his  young  men 
25  did  so,  as  the  Lord  had  commanded  him 

/  whom  I  commanded  to  feed  my  people 
11  I  commanded  judges  (to  be)  over  my  peo. 
11  my  lord  the  king  hath  commanded  his 
28  Now  Absalom  had  commanded  his  serv. 

28  fear  not :  have  not  I  commanded  yon?  bo 

29  did  unto  Amnon  as  Absalom  had  com. 

5  the  king  commanded  Joab  and  Abi«hai 

14  they  performed  all  that  the  king  com. 
19  David .  .went  up,  as  the  Lord  commanded 
46  So  the  king  commanded  Benaiah  the  son 

6  Now  therefore  command  thou  that  they 
17  the  king  commanded,  and  they  brought 
58  judgments,  which  he  commanded  our  fa. 

4  according  to  all  that  I  have  commanded 
10  had  commanded  him  concerning  this 

10  he  kept  not  that  which  the  Lord  com. 

11  ray  statutes,  which  I  have  commanded 
38  hearken  unto  all  that  I  command  thee 

21  which  the  Lord  thy  God  commanded  thee 

5  from  any  (thing)  that  he  commanded  him 
4  I  have  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed  thee 
9  I  have  commanded  a  widow  woman  there 

31  the  king  of  Syria  commanded  his  thirty 

3  he  commanded  them,  saying,  This  (is) 
9  (things)  that  Jehoiada  the  priest  com. 

15  Jehoiada  the  priest  commanded  the  cap. 

6  the  law  of  Moses,  wherein  the  Lord  com. 

15  king  Ahaz  commanded  Urijah  the  priest 

16  according  to  all  that  king  Ahaz  command. 
13  according  to  all  the  law  which  I  comnian. 
27  Then  the  king  of  Assyria  commanded 
34  which  the  Lord  commanded  the  children 

6  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses 

12  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  command. 
8  accordiug  to  all  that  I  have  commanded 
8  the  law  that  my  servant  Moses  command. 

12  the  king  commanded  Hitkiah  the  priest 

4  the  king  commanded  Hilkiah  the  high 
21  the  king  commanded  all  the  people.saying 
49  according  to  all  that  Moses,  .had  com. 

16  David  therefore  did  as  God  commanded 
15  as  Moses  commanded  according  to  the 
15  the  word  (which)  he  commanded  to  a 
40  law  of  the  Loud,  which  he  commanded 

6  the  judges  of  Israel,  whom  I  commauded 

10  I  commanded  judges  (to  be)  over  my  peo. 

17  David  also  commanded  all  the  princes  of 

19  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  commanded 

13  if  I  command  the  locusts  to  devour  the 
17  according  to  all  that  I  have  commanded 

30  the  king  of  Syria  had  commanded  the 

5  all  things  that  Jehoiada.  .had  commanded 

4  book  of  Moses,  where  the  LORD  command. 
3  I  have  commauded  them,  according  to 

20  the  king  commanded  Hilkiah,  and  Ahik. 
3  Cyrus  the  king  of  Persia  hath  command. 

11  thou  hast  commanded  by  thy  servants 

7  which  thou  commandedst  thy  servant  Mo. 

5  the  word  that  thou  commandedst  thy  ser. 
a.  t,  14  which  the  Lord  had  commanded  to  I. 
9.  14  commandedst  them  precepts, statutes.and 

Esth.  3.    2  the  king  had  so  commanded  concerning 

3.  12  according  to  all  that  Haman  had  com. 

4.  17  according  to  all  that  Esther  had  com. 

8.    9  according  to  all  that  Monlecai  command. 
A  32  he.  .commandeth  it  (not  to  shine)  by  (the) 

37.  12  he  commandeth  them  upon  the  face  of 

38.  12  Hast  thou  commanded  the  morning  since 
Psn.    7.    6  the  judgment  (that)  thou  hast  command. 

33.    >i  he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast 

42.    8  the  LORD  will  command  his  loving  kind. 

44.  4  O  God  :  command  deliverances  for  Jacob 
6S.  28  Thy  «ind  hath  commanded  thy  strength 
78.    5  which  he  commanded  our  fathers,  that 
78.  23  Though  he  had  commanded  the  clouds 

105.   8  the  word  (which)  he  commanded  to  a 
in.    9  he  hath  commanded  his  covenant  forever 
no.    4  Thou  hast  commanded  (us)  to  keep  thy 
119. 13S  Thy  testimonies  (that)  thou  hast  com. 
133.    3  for  there  the  Lord  commanded  the  bless. 
T48.    5  tor  ne  commanded,  ami  they  were  created 
Isa.     5.    6  I  will  also  command  the  clouds  that  they 
13,   3  1  have  commanded  my  Banctified  ones 
34  rfi  my  mouth  it  bath  commanded,  and  his 

45.  11  concerning  the  work  of  my  hands  com. 


1  Ki.  2. 

5- 
5- 
8. 


13' 
*S- 
17- 
17- 
22. 
2  Ki  rr, 


21. 
22. 

23- 

23. 
1  Ch.  6. 
14. 
15- 
16. 
16. 
*7- 
17- 
22. 
24. 

7- 
18. 

23- 

25. 
33- 

. 

9- 
Xch.    1. 


13- 
13- 


45.  12  and  all  their  host  have  I  commanded 

48.    5  and  my  molten  image,  hath  commanded 

1.    7  whatsoever  I  command  thee  thou  shalt 

1.  17  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  command  thee 

7.  22  nor  commanded  them  in  the  day  that  I 

7.  23  But  this  thing  commanded  I  them,  say. 

7.  23  in  all  the  ways  that  I  have  commanded 

7.  31  I  commanded  (them)  not,  neither  came 

11.   4  Which  I  commanded  your  fathers  in  the 

11.    4  according  to  all  which  I  command  you 

11.    8  I  commanded  (them)  to  do,  but  they  did 

5  So  I  went,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  me 

6  which  I  commanded  thee  to  hide  there 
14. 14  neither  have  I  commanded  them,  neither 
17  22  hallow  ye  the  sabbath  day,  as  I  command. 
19.   5  which  I  commanded  not,  nor  spake  (it) 
23. 32  yet  I  sent  them  not,  nor  commanded 

26.   2  all  the  words  that  I  command  thee  to 

26.  8  all  that  the  Lord  had  commanded  (him) 

27.  4  command  them  to  say  unto  their  masters 
29. 23  which  I  have  not  commanded  them 

32.  23  nothing  of  all  that  thou  commandedst 
32.  35  unto  Molech  ;  which  I  commanded  them 

34.  22  Behold,  I  will  command,  saith  the  Lord 

35.  6  the  son  of  Rechab  our  father  commanded 
35.  10  all  that  Jonadab  our  father  commanded 
35. 14  he  commanded  his  sons  not  to  drink  wine 

35.  16  which  he  commanded  them  ;  but  this 
35. 18  unto  all  that  he  hath  commanded  you 

36.  5  Jeremiah  commanded  Baruch,  saying,  I 
36.    8  all  that  Jeremiah  the  prophet  command. 

36.  26  the  king  commanded  Jerahmeel  the  son 

37.  21  Zedekiah  the  king  commanded  that  they 

38.  10  the  king  commanded  Ebedmelech  the  E. 
38.  27  these  words  that  the  king  had  command 

50.  21  accordiug  to  all  that  I  have  commanded 

51.  59  which  Jeremiah  the  prophet  commanded 
Lam.  1.  10  thou  didst  command  (that)  they  should 

1.  17  the  Lord  hath  commanded  concerning 
2. 17  his  word  that  he  had  commanded  in  the 


Eze. 


3.  37  (when)  the  Lord  commandeth  (it)  not? 
9.  n  II 


19. 

28. 

Mark  10. 


have  done  as  thou  hast  commanded  me 

6  he  had  commanded  the  man  clothed  with 
37.  10  I  prophesied,  as  he  commanded  me,  and 

Amos  2.  12  But  ye.  .commanded  the  prophets,  saying 
6.  11  For,  behold,  the  Lord  commandeth,  and 
9.  3  I  command  the  serpent,  and  he  shall  bite 
9.  4  thence  will  I  command  the  sword,  and  it 
9.  9  I  will  command,  and  I  will  sift  the  house 
Zech.  1.  6  I  commanded  my  servants  the  prophets 
Mai.    4.    4  which  I  commanded  unto  him  in  Horeb 

4.7Ta  arrange  thoroughly,  SiaTairtrw    diatassd. 
Luke  8.  55  and  he  commanded  to  give  her  meat 

17.    9  he  did  the  things  that  were  commanded 
17.  10  all  those  things  wdiich  are  commanded 
Acta  18.    2  Claudius  had  commanded  all  Jews  to 

23.  31  the  soldiers,  as  it  was  commanded  them 

24.  23  he  commanded  a  centurion  to  keep  Paul 

I).  To  say,  sp>eak,  zlitov  eipon. 

Matt.  4.    3  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that 
Mark  5.  43  commanded  that  something  should  be 

8.  7  commanded  to  set  them  also  before  (them) 
to.  49  Jesus  stood  still,  and  commanded  him  to 

Luke  4.    3  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command 

9.  54  wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come 
19.  15  he  commanded  these  servants  to  be 

2  Co.   4.    6  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out 
To  'jive  in  cJiarge,  evreWofiat  entellomai. 
Matt  15.    4  God  [commanded,]  saying,  Honour  thy 

7  Why  did  Moses  then  command  to  give  a 
:o  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded 
3  and  said . .  What  did  Moses  command  y<  <u ". 
6  they  said . .  even  as  Jesus  [had  commanded] 

13.  34  and  commanded  the  porter  to  watch 
John  8.    5  [Moses  in  the  law  commanded  us,  that] 

15.  14  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you 

15.  17  These  things  I  commaud  you,  that  ye 
Acts  13.  47  For  so  hath  the  Lord  commanded  us 

7. To  put  upon,  or  over,  e7rn-a<r<r«  cpitasso. 

Mark  j.  27  with  authority  commandeth  he  even  the 
6.  27  and  commanded  his  head  to  be  brought 
6.  39  he  commanded  them  to  make  all  sit  down 

Luke  4.  36  with  authority,  .he  commandeth  the 
8.  25  he  commandeth  even  the  winds  and 
8.  31  he  would  not  command  them  to  go  out 

14.  22  Lord,  it  is  doue  as  thou  hast  commanded 
Acts  23.    2  the  high  priest  Ananias  commanded  them 

8.  To  caU  to,  urge  on,  command,  Ke\sva>  keleud. 
Matt  14.    9  nevertheless,  .he  commanded  (it)  to  be 
14.  19  he  commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down 
*5-  35  [commauded]  themultitutle  to  sit  down 
iS.  25  his  lord  commanded  him  to  be  sold,  and 
27.  58  Pilate  commanded  the  body  to  be  deliver. 
27.  64  Command  therefore  that  the  sepulchre  be 
Luke  iS.  40  and  commanded  him  to  be  brought  unto 
Acts    4.  15  when  they  had  commanded  them  to  go 
5.  34  commanded  to  put  the  apostles  forth  a 
8.  38  he  commanded  the  chariot  to  stand  still 
12.  19  commanded  that  (they)  should  be  put  to 

16.  22  and  the  magistrates,  .commanded  to  beat 
2i.  33  commanded  (him)  to  be  bound  with  two 

21.  34  he  commanded  him  to  be  carried  into  the 

22.  24  The  chief  captain  commanded  him  to  be 

22.  30  commanded  the  chief  priests  and  all  their 

23.  3  commandest  me  to  be  smitten  contrary 
23.  10  commanded  the  soldiers  to  go  down,  and 
23.  35  he  commanded  him  to  be  kept  in  Herod's 

25.  6  and  the  next  day.  .commanded  Paul  to 
25. 17  and  commanded  the  man  to  be  brought 


Acts  25 
27. 

.T<>  anno 

Matt  10. 

Mark  6, 

8. 

Luke  8. 

«• 
Acts    1. 


[Co. 

Th 
•Th 


iTi. 


21  I  commanded  him  to  be  kept  till  I  might 
43  commanded  that  they  which  could  swim 

unce  alongside  of ,  wapayyeWta  pa  ray  gel. 

5  Jesus  sent  forth,  and  commanded  them 
8  commanded  them  that  they  should  take 

6  he  commanded  the  people  to  sit  down  on 

29  he  had  commanded  the  unclean  spirit  to 
21  commanded  (them)  to  tell  no  man  that 

4  commauded  them  that  they  should  not 
18  commanded  them  not  to  speak  at  all  nor 
2S  Did  not  we  straitly  command  you,  that  ye 
40  they  commanded  that  they  should  not 
42  he  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the 

5  to  command  (them)  to  keep  the  law  of  M. 
18  I  command  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus  C. 

30  but  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere 

10  And  unto  the  married  I  command,  (yet) 

11  work  with  your  own  hands,  as  we  com. 

4  and  will  do  the  things  which  we  command 

6  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name 

10  this  v/e  commanded  you,  that  if  any 

12  Now  them  that  are  such  we  command 

11  These  things  command  and  teach 


10.  To  arrange,  set  in  order,  irpoo-Tacrcrcojjroslasso. 
Matt.  8.    4  offerthe  gift  that  Moses  commanded,  for 

21.    6  the  disciples  went,  and  did  as  Jesus  com. 
Mark  1.  44  which  Moses  commanded,  for  a  testimony 
Luke  5.  14  according  as  Moses  commanded,  for  a 
Acts  10.  33  to  hear  all  things  that  are  commanded 

10.  48  he  commanded  them  to  be  baptized  in 

11.  To  say,  announce,  fiew  rJieo. 

Rev.    9.   4  it  was  commanded  them  that  they  should 

12.  To  set  or  give  a  reason,  or  law,  Ci;a  e>b»  sum  teem. 
Ezra  4.  19  I  commanded,  and  search  hath  been  made 

5.    3  Who  hath  commanded  you  to  build  this 
5.    9  Who  commanded  you  to  build  this  house 

COMMANDED  — 

Precept,  thing  set  up,  fiisp  mitsvah. 

2  Ch.  8.  14  so  had  David  the  man  of  God  commanded 

COMMANDED,  to  be  — 
l.To  say,  *V?x  amar. 

Dan.   3.    4  To  you  it  is  commanded,  0  people 
2.  To  be  set  tip,  receive  a  precept,  nys  tsavah,  4. 

Gen.  45.  19  thou  art  commanded,  this  do  ye ;  take 

Exod34.  34  and  spake,  .(that)  which  he  was  comnian. 

Lev.    8.  35  that  ye  die  not :  for  so  I  am  commanded 
10.  13  And  ye  shall  eat.  .for  so  I  am  commanded 

Num.  3.  16  the  word  of  the  Lord,  as  he  was  comnian. 

36.  2  my  lord  was  commanded  by  the  Lord  to 
Eze.  i2.    7  I  did  so  as  I  was  commanded  :  I  brought 

24. 18  I  did  in  the  morning  as  I  was  commauded 

37.  7  I  prophesied  as  I  was  commanded  :  and 
3. Taste,  reason,  law,  Cj;:?  taara. 

Ezra  7.    23  Whatsoever  is  commanded  by  the  God  of 
A.To  set  throughout,  Stao-TcWw  diastello. 

fieb.  12.  20  could  not  endure  that  which  was  comnian. 

COMMANDED,  which  was  — 
Precept,  thing  set  up,  nisD  mitsvah. 

Neh.  13.    5  which  was  commanded  (to  be  given)  to 

COMMANDER  — 

One  who  sets  up,  gives  precepts,  niy  tsavah,  3. 
Isa.   55.   4  I  have  given  him  (for).,  a.  .commander  to 

COMMANDING  — 

l.To  set  up,  give  precepts,  ni$t  tsavah,  3. 

Gen.  49.  33  when  Jacob  had  made  an  end  of  com. 

2.  To  arrange  thoroughly,  Btardao-oj  diatassd. 
Matt  11.    1  when  Jesus  had  made  an  end  of  com. 

3.  To  call  to,  urge  on,  KeAeuoj  keleuo. 

Acts  24.   8  Commanding  his  accusers  to  come  unto 

COMMANDMENT  — 

l.A  saying,  Tj^Tj!  imrah. 

rsa.147.  15  He  sendeth  forth  his  commandment 

2.A  word,  "15^  ddbar. 

Exod34.  28  wrote  upon  the  tables,  thetencomman. 
Deut.  4.  13  ten  commandments  ;  and  he  wrote  them 

10.    4  wrote  on  the  tables,  .the  ten  command. 
Josh.  8.    8  according  to  the  commandment  of  the  L. 

1  Sa.  15.  11  for  he.  .hath  not  performed  my  com. 

15.  13  I  have  performed  the  commandment  of 

2  Sa.  12.  9  Wherefore  hast  thou  despised  the  com. 
1  Ch  28.  21  the  people  (will  be)  wholly  at  thy  com. 
2CI1. 31.  5  as  soon  as  the  commandment  came  abr. 
Esth.  1.  12  Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king's  co. 

1.  19  let  there  go  a  royal  commandment  from 
2!    8  when  the  kind's  commandment  and  his 

3.  15  being  hastened  by  the  king's  command. 

4.  3  whithersoever  the  king's  commandment 
8  14  pressed  on  by  the  king's  commandment 

8.  17  whithersoever  the  king's  commandment 
o.    1  when  the  king's  commandment  and  his 

Psa.103.  20  that  do  his  commandments,  hearkening 
Dan    9.  23  the  commandment  came  forth,  and  I  am 

9.  25  from  the  going  forth  of  the  command. 
o.Thinq  qiven,  a  law,  judgment,  rn  dath. 

Esth.  3.  14  for  a  commandment  to  be  given  in  every 
8.  13  The  copy  of  the  writing  for  a  command. 

i.St'iti'te,  ph  choq. 

Amos  2.   4  they  have  not  kept  his  commandments 


COMMANDMEN 


191 


COMMANDMENT 


7    -  .  .  -IT?  - 

fin   4.  21  until  (another}  commandment  shall  be 
6.14  they  brnlded.-aceork-7- n   :"_;  .ornman 

:   7vv.   -:"-•    .   "     \  -'~  '  ■"  "- 
En    +.  21  Give  ye  now  comma] 

c.  14  according  to  the  cninmandmen:  0 :  Cyne 

~  ." 
_  -  ..         ;  - 

:    :2  Jietk.t  .'..  .  :'..;  ■  .  r..r -.._...     : 

5.  TT       \    ~" 

Dan.    3.  2;  because  tie  king's  commandment  was 

r.  ."":     -    ■.  .-  "    -~:r 

2  Ch_  32.  13  at  the  commandment  0 -  Hezekiah  the 

-     P      k?*>  rT?:?  ^ 

Gen.  afi.    5  Because  that  Abraham.. kept.. my  com. 
Esodi^  2f  H  Sboa  _        mr  to  his  command. 

Kc  -  ".  -  _  refasE  ye  fa  keep  my  commas. 
an.   6  them  that  love  me.  and  keep  my  coobl 

-  _   ::i  will  give  thee .  -  commandments  which  I 
lev.   4.    z.  13  aa,  .-  the commandmentsoftheLo&D 

5.  : -  :; rt  idden  to  be  done  by  the  command. 
22..  ;:  IbefcAaie  shall  ye  keep  my  command. 

3  If  ye . .  keep  my  commandments,  and  do 
1:.  z-  if  ye  will  not  ..do  all  these  commandme. 
9     1 5  s_  that  7:  -mi  not  do  all  :. 
-  :._  Ixese  are  tkr  commandment  1 
Xiraii:  22  an.:  -    :      s-: 

::  Because  he  hath .. broken  his  command. 
■  that  ye  may.  .remember  all  the  roamm 
.  .  do  all  my  commandments 

:-    :;  Tk.s-    .r:    :k:  : n re man  In  lents  and  the 
~    -     .  .-1  commands. e    ts 

_   _■  En  a  si  .".:  -:..-     his     anmandments 
5.  ::  :'~e~  :"".:.';  !  -     -  . 
-_  r:  Chat  tkey  would .. keep  all  my  connnamL 

5.  ::  I  vffl  sneak  onto  thee  all  the  con 

6.  1  EheSE    m.-.    :k         :  .maniments    fi 

1  to  keep  all  fess  sta  m  i  bis  comma. 

6.  17  Ye  shall  dilig  :  he  command. 

6 .  :=  a :~ K  ifcaezvefa  1    all  these  command. 
-.    ;  tkmt  I  we  him,  and  keep  his  command. 
-.  :;  Ehon  skt'.t  therefore  keep  the  co 
B     :  - .-. U  me  commandments  which  I 
S.   2  whether  thou  woaldest  keep  his 
;     :  Fhetefore  tho«  shatt  keep  the  command. 
ELrxio  d  c  his  co  mmaxi        _  its       _ 

bex  13  To  beep  i  mts  of  the  Lo£i> 

21.  z  thou  shalt.  .keep.. bis  i^mmwdmewte 

; :     S  Therefore  shall  ye  keep  all  the  command. 
ix.  13  ye  shall  hearten . .  unto  my  command. 
: :.  :.  if  ye  shall.. keep  ail  these" commandme, 
::-  :-.  2=  :Vf  .77  Vments  : :  the  _    r.r 

::  .  Ye  shall. .keep  bis  co nimandments.  and 
13  18  CokeepaB  lis  c  immandments  which  loo. 
25  absenefai  :k  .-    commandments 

r-  sc  he  tntm  not  aside  from  :ke  commandme. 
.If  thou  shalt  keep  all  these  command. 

2  2.  23  :  ." 

I  have  not  transgressed  thy  command. 
2:.  r-  : ■:■  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  command. 
2c- 13  that  -  -  -    .     -    . 

2-.  :  KeepaHthe  commandments  which  I  com. 
2-.  co  t;  ins  :  I  his  statutes 

2.:-  as  mi)  to  do  all  his  command. 

:•        if  tb    ;  ;"  alt  kee] ■:/..-  :  ~:n;  e^^ir~:? 
a8. 13  the  command. 

6e  obserTe  to  do  all  his  comman  . 

-.;■■■ 

:=      '..    '   '. 

::.::"  •  = 

30. 11  this  commindmrn  *  which  I  ( 

j  _•   1    :    k :  rp  his  eomman  ■  5 

31.    5 do.. *t  .  ■  -land. 

Josh  a  ^hazge  : :  the  command. 

22.  5  take  33%ent  hee  .  :         :  itimand. 

--     =  :h.irg:-l  :  ;  lis  .     i::.:~ .'.:  .;•  :? 

Judg.  2. 17 obeying  1  hnenta  .::'._ 

(.  f  w :  uld  hearken  unto  tiie  command. 
1  9a>  ::  mwhaal  mI  kept  the  commandment  of 
1  KL  2,  3  bo  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  cemmand. 

-  _5  -'_:ecounn. 
3-  ii  :;■  kee j                      -                   ;- 

;    :;  if  :"~  "".:  '     _" 

:.  f :  :-~    ".     .  ' 

;    :  :  :    k  :  r~ 

9.   6ifye..~' B  cbmaai 

--.-  :_  " lecnse  he  k ..: :  nj  i  iiiiiiimiiiTiw  1 1 
::  38  fco  k:rj  my  ?:.:_:;-  tat  I  nty  command. 

23.  22  :"::"  k:.=: . .-  ::  kri : 

:_    ;  —-  sei  ■  ■       --_r_ :-.. 

_    ;:-  :£  ve  l;-f  :    ?;_;>-   :'.'.-  :   -  ;.- 

x  So.  17-  13  and  keep  my  commandments  (and)  my 
--.  : : 

■  comman-ime:    - 

:-    :_ 

2--  3-  :'.  77  .; 

v-_-  his  comman  dm  f: 
:.'_...  .._  -  i 

-3-    j  "."  "  ::.zl:     :     kr  "   "  > 

1  CI1.2S.    -  if  he  v  e  -  7  command. 

2;-    9  keep  and  seek  for  all  the  commandments 
29.  : :  to  keep  thy  commandme~:-   "    rtesl 
:  u    - .-2  if  ye.  .forsake,  .my  commandments 
: .  :_;     ::;_i:  :  .        : 

:"         lepart  ::and. 

:_.    ^  an  I  ::  do  the  law  an  mandment 

2  -     %  But . .  walked  in  his  commandments,  and 
re  '.et  ween  law  and  commandment,  statutes 


-     -        the  commands 
2-  n  stoned  Imn  with  stones  as  the  command, 
so.  15  came,  accenting  to  the  commaz  1 

:=  according  to  the  commandment  of  Pa vli 

ag  >so  was^  the  commandment  of  tk. 
30.   6  according  to  the  commandment  of  the 

;-.  :2     ~  r  .  .  trt  :      :     ;k-:    .  .  :.._..  : 

21  L-  fche  law,  and  in  the  commandments 
54. 31  to  keep  Eis  commandments  and  his  testL 
33.  :; 

-,z  aoLwdiagtothe  commandment  of  kmg  J. 

Hzzs.  -.  12  a  scribe  of  the  words  of  the  command, 
c.  io  for  we  "nave  forsaken  thy  commandments 

'    ■-  "  '.--.:::  - 

-.  at  these  that  tremble  at  the  command. 
>  eh.  1.    5  for  them  that. .  observe  his  command. 

:.     -  "  .- .    k..~-:-  1    " 

-     ;   --"  ye  tu;       ■.  -    .   e  ani  keepmi 

^  13  g:.T;s:    g.    i  statutes  as  I  t  a -.-. 

z.  2: 'they,  .hearkened  not  to  thy  command. 

a-  29  they,  .hearkened  net  unto  thy  command. 

2-  3-  tt:r  k 

...... 

22. 25   it  was  "      -.".'  2  - 
_       :2.  2_.  ^=  according  to  the  commandment  oiD. 
1  J^ssressest  thoo  the  king's  com. 
S3    :_  have  I  gone  back  fr: tt:  the  ;  -.-i.tni. 
Psa.  :  s  pure 

-  thai  they  might.  _keep  his  command. 

::    5:  I:  ..: 

ba,    ;  delighteth  greatly  in  his  commandments 
:  when  I  have  respect  unto  all  thy  com. 
let  me  not  wander  from  thy  command. 

2 : :    : 

izg.  2:  whvdh  I:  en  from  : 

:::  32  ^  ^ikl  run  the  way  of  thy  commandments 
.    in  the  path*  of  thy  commandments 
..  - 1  will  delight  myself  in  thy  command. 
;::  _■  *ill  I  lift  up  tint    Ihy  _   nm 
r : :   60 1     "tlayed  not  to  keep  thy  command. 

n 

z-:   -;-     :  krstanding.  that  I  may  learn 
thy  commandments  (are)  fai 

:::.:■  "  '       -     . 

no>  ;£  Thou  through  diy  commandntet:  - 
119. 115  I  wulkeep  the  cc^amandments 
no.  127  I  love  thy  commandments  abo-  =  _ 

.    1  for  thy  commandments 
t::   :.:  wmandtaenfe 

: :      -.}  ■:.'.:  .  .:'.'.  ""  :..-..   :   '.:. 

119. 16c  I  ha^  1  e  thy  command. 

22  . ;-; 

12:.  2-2  :   t  I  _  :      _       "  - 

.  1 .  ~   2_    i  My  son .  .hide  my  HimmnmliiH  11  i    1 
3.    z  ":nt  let  tk 

ne  heart.. keep nny  commandment 
2.  22  My  sn.  kee7  ihy  t.tkrt  s    ^min  andment 
2.  23  the  command] 
-.    ;  and  lay  up  my  commandments  with  thee 

".      2    V  :-nt; 

::.    B  .      wfee  m  heart  "^tll receive  command. 

13    :; 

2;.  :f  He  that  kef;  _mandment 

_ ; .:  *. 

12.  23  Fear  God.  and  keep  his  commandments 
Isa.  3  -ommandmen: 

:  0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  n 
r    7      _   ;t.to  this  day,  bnt  obey  their  others  . 

.5 .  .have  performed  ihe  command. 
33.  iS  Beeanse  7:  have       sjedtibe  c  tmnand. 
Dan.  "  scon 

Mah    2.    fOyefriesfe  t has  :  ::nt-nin:;n:   :s   :  7 
2     _  k:      "  Baat  I  have  sens  :kis  command. 

3 1.  The  swxriJfc,  rz 

.22  gave  them  wagons  according  to  the  eom. 
-i-    ..-     :  .    :   n_tn:m-:nt    ttkrl 

3 7  22  a:;   riing  t;  tne  ; .  mm;.: 

:2  Aarcn  numbered  at  the  comman ." 
-  _  '    tks  ;  ~^ 

■  ■    • 

:     m    t. net    :k?  commandment    t'tkt 
xo.  13 :.      rdi    gt    -  ramandment    I 

::.    ';  .- 1 .  ;es  by  the  comTnandment    :": 
-.    _-  :  -:    .  -1- 

2_.  1 :  I  :;  z :    -  .'.  the  commandment 

a;   z^  ye  rebelled  .._  mroandment 

33     2  3f  oses  wrote  u    rg 
7:    ::  a.:  :.     west     ..'  :  ht       mmandraent  of 
Dent.  1.  26,  43  rebelled  ^.g  mmandment 

;  S3  ye  rebelled  ag      •  7.tmandment  of 

Josh.  2-  2:  that  doth  rel  st  i 

5  13  Accord   . .  tnmandmen: 

z  -.    4  according  to  the  comman 
zi.    j  .  "■.  ^m:::t     :  :/.:  I    :  : 

1 3a.  -2  2-.    -  ^  ■      commandment  ;f 

15. 24 1]  -cressed  the  comman  " 

a  SI  2  . 

2--    3  -  ■    ■  :  -  .:  "_   " 

umand. 
Ptot.  S.  29  the  watets  sh  at  I  not  passms 

I  have  rebelled  against  his  cx>mmand. 

'  -     '  --  • 
1 

.".-""    .7  ikoTQvghly  arr:        \  "2-2-  .2 

14.  Thing  ffiten  in  c".  -  a  \u«  cn&z/avx. 

alattis.   9  teaching  (for  and. 


-  ;-'■-  "      ~  -    "   kir.2    :"   :     '    :trln:^  ■  ■         mm :.:.  ".. 
:i      z.  zz  atten  the  :  cm m       :s    nil. .mines 

-"    T      :  ■    -;■_•.-     ■'-  -    -       ■■ 

::.-.::  =  V-  •;■■    -     ,   •  -    ---  -    -       -■     -  -  -  -- 

;  ^vby  d-  ye  also  transcrese  the  command. 

~  -  tlm-nt" 

m    ::  ~"k:;k     -    "    .  2-     '  m  ".ment  in  the 

::   :;  _kts  is  ;ke  Tmst  7  ;  7   -t  :  mrt^niment 
Ob  these  twt  t :  mn_>andments  hang  aU 

.    7  7  -     «k   :t:  777  ' 

7nll  well  ye  reject  the  commandm.  ;n:  ; : 

j  - 

12.  2£    VTli^  is  -7;    ^-;-    -  ;— ^  177.;  -"    C  !   Tkl  ~ 

iz    2:  ;^nr  Tnst  ::   .  .    :  r    .- 

tlWs  ramandment] 

:  -     7.    ~.:7c:7     l.i       '      .7         :     7     27    .12;  7. t  mTf7_. 

Luke  :       walkhagi  nomandments  and 

i~.  29  neither  transeressed  I ..  div  command. 

=2'  and  rested,  .according  to  the  command. 

j  ohn  so.  1  £  ]  Ids  -" :  mmandment  have  I  received  of 

---  }~  '  '     '.       -  ~  ■    -  "        2.-  ■  :  7  7  .7  ; 

::    _•  _    ■      -  --'-..-  I 

:2   :     .  -  >  it  is  lit 

yt  X  new  commandment  I  giv;  ~n:    v;u 
::I:vr  Irveme.  keen  my  ceanmancm --- 
"      -  -  -  -   -..-    ml 

:_-    :;  .:  mi-nts.  ys  shall 

23.  .2  :      -  r.tin:    Tk  7 

A.ts  :-.  :;  ::  7 :  men:  r 

£oel.  -  taking  occasion  by  the  command. 

ksnt.m  :  mm  ..7  intent :  mne.  sin  revived 
ke  ccTRraandment.  which  (was  ordained) 

-  ; :  T :  7  sin.  taking  occasi 

-  -  . 

-.  : :  "         -  ■       ■ .    ■ 

r  e  be)  any  other  commandm 
-.'.--  m    .      ■  " 

i_    :-  tin:?  that  I  write. .are  [the  command.] 
Eph.   a.  -  of  commaBdments 

r     2  which  :?  tk;  rtsI  mmmandment  with 
ding  wh  m  ye  receired  command. 
2  Tl        -_       .--  :7;ukeep(tiHs)comnmndmentwith. 
_ttn=  :.  14  >   t  gtvtng heed  to.. commandme. 

-  16  not  aft  7  carnal  command. 

-  .:  :    7      -  .s Annulling  of:. 

itnandment 
3.  2  he  mindful,  .of  the  cornmandnaent  of  us 
1  Jo.  ~z_    3  we  do  know.. if  we  keep  his  command. 
a.  4  and  keepeth  not  his  commandme-.  : 
2.-7-'. 
2.    -  Ehe    It  commandnt- 

:  :-mmandmtnt  I  wm : 

-  :;  ''  ■  -  .     7      7t-        7   ". 

7  s 3  -.k?  e  ms 

3. 27  hwe  3bg  ,m:tk~7  as  ke  g7.^e  us  command. 

3-  2_  ke  that  keepeth  his  commandmenis 

::  :ki~  ;   7..r  v 
5-    2  ~77n   "  . 

~     ^  ~      77tnand. 

.  mdments  are  not  gri 

4  as  we  have  received  a  commandmen-  &  a  m 

5  as  though  I  wrote  a  new  ^'■"^mandment 
that  we  walk  aft  nts 

:  mis  is  C  as  ye 

BcT.   222"" 

m  "  ' 

2a.14.Hess  fe  do  his  command. 

:         i7  2    tke  commandkn;nt    i  gGod 

7::::: ---•"  ', 

-   2-  [  .        pnsZl 

: 
2.    1  an  aposn 
-  2.   3  accordi;  e  maadmexd 

17 -Announcement  (open  erpvtli:\  raptcy,  e 
1  Tb_  4.   2  7  s  we  g 

1  Ti.    :     5  ..  commandmen:  is  . 

:::     •'rzzziz~  -  tk-:  — 

1  To  say.  "  r  . 

■    .  - 

_  f      -ye  on,  comstam'.  _       EeweL 

'■:■■-■■ 

rri^kimrrrr.  -.:  g.rs   i  — 

-    ■  ■ 
■    gave  him  a  commandment  to  ilordecsi 
Psa.  7i.~3thonh7s    _ 

Isa.    ;:.  :":  :  -  nn  ;m:nt 

bs  hath,  given  a  commandment 

2.7:        ::  :      — e         .  - 

me  comman  k 
7:  mmnts  m 
ti  22  and  gav^conimandment  concemi:  _ 

-_  .  itrge  on.  cmnwumd,  reAe**?  bdexo. 

ifart.  S  iS  he  gave  commandm  m: 


COMMANDMENT 


192 


COMMUNE 


COMMANDMENT,  to  give  in  — 

To  set  up,  give  a  precept,  nvf  tsavah,  3. 

EXOCI25.  22  which  I  will  give  thee  in  commandment 
34.  32  he  gave  them  in  commandment  all  that 

Dent   1.    3  the  Lord  had  given  him  in  command. 
COMMANDMENT,  to  send  with  — 
To  cause  to  (jo  forth,  n?;  yatsd,  5. 

Ezra  S.  17  I  sent  them  with  commandment  unto  Id. 

COMMANDMENTS  — 

Things  committed  to  one's  care,  Dnip?  piqqudim. 
Psa  103.  18  to  those  that  remember  his  command, 
in.    7  all  his  commandments  (are)  sure 

COMMEND,  to  — 

1.  To  praise,  hhn  halal,  3. 

Gen.  12.  15  The  princes  also  of  Pharaoh,  .commend. 

2.  To  glorify,  nyf  shabach,  3. 

Eccl.  8. 15  I  commended  mirth,  because  a  man  hath 

3.  To  give  praise  to,  diraivew  epaineo. 

Luke  1 6.    8  the  lord  commended  the  unjust  steward 

4.  To  put  along  or  over  to,  trapaTtdri/j.1  paratithMmi. 
Luke23-  46  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my 
Acts  14.  23  they  commended  them  to  the  Lord,  on 

20.  32  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the  word 

5.  To  set  (one  thing)  beside  {another),  ■trapia'rvfj.t. 

1  Co.  8.   8  But  meat  commeudeth  us  not  to  God 
6. To  set  together,  awiffryifii  sunistemi. 

Rom.  3.  5  But  if  our  righteousness  commend  the 

5.  8  But  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us 
16.  1  I  commend  unto  you  Phebe  our  sister 

2  Co.  3.  1  Do  we  begin  again  to  commeud  ourselves 

4.    z  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  commeud. 

5. 12  we  commend  not  ourselves  again  unto 
10.  12  compare  ourselves  with  some  that  com. 
10.  18  not  he  that  commendeth  himself  is  appr. 
10.  18  but  when  the  Lord  commendeth 

12. 11  for  I  ought  to  have  been  commended  of 

COMMENDATION,  of  — 

Setting  together,  commendatory,  <rvffrariK6s  sast. 
2  Co.   3,    1  need  we.  .epistles  of  commendation  to 
3.    1  or  (letters)  of  commendation  from  you  ? 

COMMENDED,  to  be  — 

To  be  praised,  hhn  halal,  4. 

Prov  12.    8  A  man  shall  he  commended  according  to 
COMMISSION  — 
1. Law,  judgment,  nn  dath. 

Ezra    8.  36  they  delivered  the  kiug*s  commissions 
2.  What  is  turned  over  upon  one,  iwiTpoirT)  epitrope. 

Acts  26.  12  with  authority  and  commission  from  the 

COMMIT,  to  — 

1.  To  roll,  bbi  galal. 

Psa.  37.    5  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  LORD  ;  trust 
Prov.  16.    3  Commit  thy  works  uuto  the  Lord,  and 

2.2*0  be  in,  3  n;rr  hayah  be. 

Dent  21.  22  if  a'  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of 

3.7*0  deliver,  give  occasion,  npD  masar. 

Nuni3i.  16  caused  the  children  of  Israel.,  to  commit 

4.7To  give,  ]T\}nathan. 

Gen.  39.    8  he  hath  committed  all  that  he  hath  to 
39.  22  the  keeper  of  the  prison  committed  to 
Isa.   22.  21  I  will  commit  thy  government  into  his 
Jer.  39.  14  committed  him  unto  Gedaliah  the  son  of 
Eze.  23.    7  Thus  she  committed  her  whoredoms 

5. 7*0  do,  tff%  asah. 

Lev.    5. 17  if  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these 
18.  26  Ye  shall,  .not  commit  (any)  of  these 
18.  29  whosoe'ver  shall  commit  any  of  these 
18.  29  the  souls  that  commit  (them)  shall  be  cut 
18.  30  commit  not  (any  one)  of  these  abomina. 
20.  13  both  of  them  have  committed  an  abomi. 
20,  23  for  they  committed  all  these  things,  and 

Num.  5.    6  When  a  man  or  a  woman  shall  commit 

Deuti7-    5  which  have  committed  that  wicked  thing 
19. 20  shall  henceforth  commit  no  more  any  such 

Judg  20.   6  they  have  committed  lewdness  and  folly 

Prov  16.  12  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wicked. 

J  er.     2.  13  For  my  people  have  committed  two  evils 
6. 15  Were  they  ashamed  when  they  had  com. 
8.  12  when  they  had  committed  abomination 
29.  23  they  have  committed  villany  in  Israel 
44.    3  their  wickedness  which  they  have  com. 
44.    9  which  they  have  committed  in  the  land 
44.  22  the  abominations  which  ye  have  com. 
44.    7  Wherefore  commit  ye  (this)  great  evil 

Eze.    3.  20  When  a  righteous  (man)  doth . .  commit 

6.  9  for  the  evils  which  they  have  commit. 
8.    6  abominations,  .house  of  Israel  commit. 
8.  17  the  abominations  which  they  commit 

16.  43  thou  shalt  not  commit  the  lewdness 
16.  50  and  committed  abomination  before  me 

18. 12  and  hath,  .committed  abomination 

18.  2i  from  all  his  sins  that  he  hath  committed 
18.  22  his  transgressions  that  he  hath  commit 
18.  24  comtnittcth  iniquity,  (and)  doeth  accor. 
18.  26  and  committeth  iniquity,  and  dieth  in 
iS.  27  that  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth  that 
18.  28  his  transgressions  that  he  hath  committed 
20.  43  for  all  your  evils  that  ye  have  committed 
22.    9  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  commit  lewd. 
22.  11  one  hath  committed  abomination  with 
33.  13  trust  to  his  own  righteousness,  and  com. 


Eze.  33.13  but  for  his  iniquity  that  he  hath  commit. 
33.  15  walk  in  his  statutes,  .without  committing 
33.  18  and  committeth  iniquity,  he  shall  eveu 
33.  29  abominations  which  they  have  commit. 

43.  8  their  abominations  that  they  have  com. 

44.  13  their  abominations  which  they  have  com. 
Hos.    6.    9  by  consent :  for  they  commit  lewdness 

6.  To  work,  Syp  paal. 

Hos.    7.    1  they  commit  falsehood ;  and  the  thief 

7.  To  give  in  charge  or  trust,  "ips  paqad,  5. 

1  Ki.  14.  27  committed  (them)  unto  the  hands  of  the 

2  Ch  12. 10  committed  (them)  to  the  hands  of  the 
Psa.  31.    5  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit 
Jer.  37.  21  that  they  should  commit  Jeremiah  into 

40.    7  had  committed  unto  him  men,  and 

41. 10  whom  Nebuzar-adan .  .had  committed  to 

8.  To  put,  place,W'v  sim. 

Job     5.   8  and  unto  God  would  I  commit  my  cause 
9. To  give,  5lSco/j.t  didomi. 

John  5.  22  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the 
10.7b  let,  let  be,  idea  eao. 

Acts  27.  40  they  committed  (themselves)  unto  the 
11.  To  work,  practise,  €pyd£o/j.at  ergazomai. 

Jas.    2.    9  ye  commit  sin,  and  are  convinced  of  the 
1'2.  To  gvoe  over,  irapab"iZwfAL  paradidomi. 

Acts    8.    3  haling  men  and  women,  committed  (them 
1  Pe.2.  23  but  committed  (himself)  to  him  that  judg. 

IB.  To  put  alongside  of,  irapartdijfiL  paratithemi. 
Lukei2.  48  to  whom  men  have  committed  much  of 

1  Ti.    1. 18  This  charge  I  commit  unto  thee,  son  T. 

2  Ti.    2.    2  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men 

li.To  do,  TToiea   poieo. 

Markis.  7  who  had  committed  murder  in  the  insur. 
Lukei2.  48  he  that  knew  not,  and  did  commit  things 
John  8.  34  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant 
Acts  28.  17  though  I  have  committed  nothing  against 
2  Co.  1 1.  7  Have  I  committed  au  offence  in  abasing 
Jas.     5. 15  ;  1  Jo.  3.  4  ;  3.  8  ;  3.  9. 

15.7*0  commit  fornication,  iropvevw  porneuo. 

1  Co.  10.    8  as  some  of  them  committed,  and  fell  in 

16.  To  practise,  do,  irpdao-w  prasso. 

Acts  25.  11  if  I  be  an  offender,  or  have  committed 
25.  25  when  I  found  that  he  had  committed 
Rom.  1. 32  they  which  commit  such  things  are 

2.    2  against  them  which  commit  such  things 

2  Co  12.  21  lasciviousness,  which  they  have  commit. 

17.  To  place,  put,  set,  rldrj/xt  tithemi. 

2  Co.   5.  19  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  rec. 
[See  also  Abominable,  adultery,  fornication,  iniquity, 
sacrilege,  trust,  ungodly,  whoredom,  wickedness.] 

COMMIT  self,  to  — 
To  leave,  itj;  azab. 

Psa.  10. 14  the  poor  committeth  himself  unto  thee 
COMMIT  (sin),  to  — 
To  sin,  miss  the  mark,  fall  short,  xan  chata. 

Lev.     4.  35  for  his  sin  that  he  hath  committed,  and 

5.  7  which  he  hath  committed,  two  turtle  do. 
1  Ki.14.  22  with  their  sins  which  they  had  commit. 
Jer.   16.  10  what  (is)  our  sin  that  we  "have  committed 
Eze.  16.  51  Neither  hath  Samaria  committed  half  of 

33.  16  None  of  his  sins  that  he  hath  committed 
COMMIT  trespass  or  transgression,  to  — 
To  lres2)ccss,  go  beyond,  SyD  maal. 

Lev.    5.  15  If  a  soul  commit  a  trespass,  and  sin 

6.  2  If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  a  trespass 
Num   5.  12  If  any  man's  wife,  .commit  a  trespass 
Josh.  7.    1  the  children  of  Israel  committed  a  tres. 

22. 16  What  trespass  (is)  this  that  ye  have  com. 

22.  20  Did  not  Achan.  .commit  a  trespass  in  the 

22.  31  because  ye  have  not  committed  this  tres. 
1  Ch.  10.  13  for  his  transgression  which  he  committed 
Eze.  15.    8  because  they  have  committed  a  trespass 

20.  27  in  that  they  have  committed  a  trespass 

COMMIT  the  keeping  of  — 

To  put  alongside,  irapariOrj/.ti  paratithemi. 

1  Pe.   4. 19  let  them,  .commit  the  keeping  of  their 

COMMIT  to  one's  trust,  to  — 

To  trust,  confide,  iri<rre6a>  pisteuo. 

Luke  16. 11  who  will  commit  to  your  trust  the  true 

COKMIT  unto,  to  — 

7'"  trust,  confide,  icio-revo)  pisteuo. 

Horn.  3.    2  unto  them  were  committed  the  Jo.  2.  24. 

t  Co.  9.  17  a  dispensation  (of  the  gospel)  is  com.  un. 

Gal.    2.    7  gospel  of  theuncircumcisionwascom.  un. 

COMMIT  (whoredom"),  to  — 
To  go  a  whoring,  njj  zanah. 

Eze.  23.  43  Will  they  now  commit  whoredoms  with 

COMMITTED,  to  be  — 

1.7Vi  be,  happen,  come  to  pass,  n;n  hayah,  2. 

Jer.     -5.  30  A  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  is  com. 
2.To  be  given,  jra  nathan,  2. 

2  Ch.  34.  16  All  that  was  committed  to  thy  servants 
3.  To  be  done,  n'pj;  asah,  2. 

Lev.  18.  30  abominable  customs  which  were  com. 
Num.  15.  24  it  shall  be,  if  (ought)  be  committed  by 
Mai.    2.  11  nn  abomination  is  committed  in  Israel 


4.  To  be  trusted,  entrusted  with,  irioTetofiai  pisteu. 

Titus  1.    3  which  is  committed  unto  me  according 

COMMITTED  to  or  unto,  that  -which  is  — 

What  is  pat  down  to  one,  irapaKaTaO-fjKr),  2>araka. 

1  Ti.    6.  20  keep  [that  which  is  committed  to]  thy 

2  Ti.    1.  14  [good  thing  which  was  committed  untol 

COMMITTED  unto  him,  that  which  is  — 
What  is  put  alongside  of  any  one,  -rrapaQ-^KT} para. 
2  Ti.    1.  12  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him 

COMMODIOUS,  not  — 

Not  well  placed,  avevderos  aneuthetos. 

Acts  27. 12  because  the  haven  was  not  commodious 

COMMON  — 

1.  Profane,  common,  h'n  chol. 

1  Sa.  21.   4  no  common  bread  under  mine  hand,  but 
21.    5  (the  bread  is)  in  a  manner  common,  yea 

'2. Land,  earth,  j^x  erets. 

Lev.  4.  27  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin 
3. A  son,  |3  ben. 

Jer.  26.  23  cast,  .into  the  graves  of  the  common 
4. Multitude   of  men,  din  3i  rob  adam. 

Eze.  23.  42  with  the  men  of  the  common  sort  (were) 

5,  Many,  numerous,  2*1  rob. 

Eccl.  6.  1  There  is  an  evil,  .and  it  (is)  common 
6. Belonging  to  the  public,  Brj/xSaios  demosios. 

Acts  5.  18  and  put  them  in  the  common  prison 
'(.Common,  koiv6s  koinos. 

Acts    2.  44  all  that  believed .  .had  all  things  common 
4.  32  but  they  had  all  things  common 
10.  14  I  have  never  eaten  anything  that  is  com. 

10.  28  that  I  should  not  call  any  man  common 

11.  8  nothingcommon  or  unclean  hath.. entered 
Titus  1.  4  Titus,  (mine)  own  son  after  the  common 
Jude         3  to  write  unto  you  of  the  common  salva. 

8.  Much,  many,  great,  iroXvs  polus. 

Marki2.  37  And  the  common  people  heard  him 

COMMON,  to  call  — 

Tc  make  (or  regard  cts)  common,  koivow  koinoo. 
Acts  10. 15  What  God  hath  cleansed,  .call  not  thouc. 
11.    9  What  God  hath  cleansed.,  call  not  thouc. 

COMMON  death  — 
Death,  m_£  maveth. 

Kum.i6l  29  If  these  men  die  the  common  death  of 

COMMON  things,  to  eat  as  — ' 
To  make  common,  bbn  chalal,  3. 

Jer.  31.    5  Thou  shalt . .  eat  (them)  as  common  thin gs 

COMMONLY  — 

IHiolly,  fully,  oAws  Jwlos. 

1  Co.  5.    1  It  is  reported  commonly  (that  there  is) 

COMMONLY  reported,  to  be  — 
To  rumour  throughout,  5(a<f)77jut£a>  diaphemizo. 
Matt.28. 15  this*saying  is  commonly  reported  among: 

COMMONWEALTH  — 

Polity,  community,  Trohtrela politeia. 

Eph.   2.  12  being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 

COMMOTION  — 

1. Shaking,  trembling,  tfjfi  raash. 

Jer.    10.  22  a  great  commotion  out  of  the  north 

2.  In  stability, unsettled  state  of things,  a/car  a  trr  curia. 

Luke  21.   9  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  commo. 

COMMUNE,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  *v?N  amar. 

Psa.     4.    4  commune  with  your  own  heart  upon  your 

2.  To  speak,  "13*1  dabar. 

Zech.  1. 14  the  augel  that  communed  with  me  said 

3. To  speak,  "i:n  dabar,  3. 

Gen.  18.  33  as  soon  as  he  hadleft  communing  with  A . 
23.    8  he  communed  with  them,  saying,  If  it 
34.    6  Hamor.  .went  out  unto  Jacob  to  com. 
34.    8  Hamor  communed  with  them,  saying 
34.  20  communed  with  the  men  of  their  city 

42.  24  returned  to  them  again,  and  communed 

43.  19  they  communed  with  him  at  the  door  of 
Exod2s.  22  I  will  commune  with  thee  from  above 

31.  18  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  communing" 
Judg.  9.    1  Abimelech. . went,  .and  communed  with 
1  Sa.    9  "5  (Samuel)  communed  with  Saul  upon  the 
18.  22  Commune  with  David  secretly,  and  say 
10     3  and  I  will  commune  with  my  father  oi 
2?  -o  David  sent  and  communed  with  Abigail 

1  Ki  10  2  when  she  was  come  to  Solomon,  she  com. 
-  KL22]  14  she  dwelt  in  Jerusalem,  and  they  com. 

2  Ch  q  1  when  she  was  come  to  Solomon ,  she  com 
Eccl.  1.  16  I  communed  with  mine  own  heart,  saym- 
Dan.    1.  19  the  king  commuued  with  them  ;  and 

4.  To  count,  rehearse,  "150  saphar,  3. 

Psa.  64.   5  they  commune  of  laying  snares  privily 

5.  To  meditate,  tall;  QV  sirrch. 

Psa.  77.    6  I  commune  with  mine  own  henrt  ;  and 
6. To  talk  thoroughly  or  diversely,  Sia\a\€cc  dial. 
Luke  6.  11  communed  one  with  another  what  they 


COMMUNE 


193 


COMPARISON 


7.-4  word,  151  dabar. 

Job     4.   2(if)  we  assay  to  commune  with  thee 

COMMUNE  (together)  or  with,  to  — 
l.To  be  in  a  crowd  together,  d/iiXsco  homileo. 
Luke24.  15  while  they  communed  (together)  and 
Acts  24.  26  he  sent  for  him.  .and  communed  with 
l.To  talk  together,  o-v\\a\4a>  sullaleo. 

Luke22.   4  he  went  his  way,  and  communed  with 

COMMUNICATE,  to  — 

1.  To  place  up  again,  avari9e/iai  anatithemai. 
Gal.    2.    2  And.  I.  .communicated  unto  them  that 

2.7*0  make  or  use  as  common,  Kowwvew  koinoned. 
Gal.  6.  6  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  com. 
Phil.    4.  15  no  church  communicated  with  me  as 

0.77-  act  of  using  a  thing  as  common,  KOivuvia. 
Heb.  13.  16  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget 

COMMUNICATE,  -willing  to  — 

Inclined  to  use  things  in  common,  koivuviko's  koin. 

1  Ti.    6.  iS  that  they  be.  .willing  to  communicate 

COMMUNICATE  -with,  to  — 

To  use  as  common  along  with  others,  GvyKoivwvica. 
Phil.   4. 14  that  ye  did  communicate  with  myafflic. 
COMMUNICATION  — 
1.-4  word,  "i;n  dabar. 

2  Sa.    3. 17*  Abner  had  communication  with  the 
2. Meditation,  talking,  n'i?  siach. 

2  Ki.  9.  11  Ye  know  the  man,  and  his  communication 

3.  Act  of  using  a  thing  as  common,  Koivcavia. 

Phm.        6  That  the  communication  of  thy  faith 

4.  A  word,  \6yos. 

Matt.  5.  37  let  your  communication  be.  Yea,  yea 
Luke  24. 17  What  manner  of  communications  (are) 
Eph.   4.  39  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed 

5. A  being  crowded  together,  bpixia  homilia. 

1  Co.  15.  33  Be  not  deceived  :  evil  communications 

COMMUNION  — 

Act  of  using  a  thing  in  common,  Koivwvia  koinonia,. 

1  Co.  10.  16  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of 

10.  16  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of 

2  Co.  6.  14  what  communion  hath  light  with  darknes. 

13.  14  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of 

COMPACT,  to  he  — 

To  be  joined,  130  chahar,  4. 

Psa.  122.  3  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  that  is  com. 
COMPACTED,  to  be  — 
To  raise  up  together,  avfifiLfidfa  sumbibazo. 

Eph.   4.  16  From  whom  the  whole  body  fitly,  .conip. 

COMPANIES,  by  — 

A  drinhing  together,  party,  o-vfxir6(riov  sumposion. 

Mark  6.  39  sit  down  by  companies  upon  the  green 
COMPANION  — 
1. Companion,  "on  chdber. 

Psa.  119.  63  I  (am)  a  companion  of  all  (them)  that 

Prov.28.  24  the  same  (is)  the  companion  of  a  destroy. 

Song    1.  7  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  thy  com. 
8.  13  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice 

Isa.     1.  23  Thy  princes  (are)  rebellious,  and  com. 

Eze.  37.  16  for  the  children  of  Israel  his  companions 
37.  16  (for)  all  the  house  of  Israel  his  compan. 

^.Companion,  isn  chabbar. 

Job    41.    6  Shall  thy  companions  make  a  banquet 
^.Companion,  "i?n  chabar. 

Dan.    2.  17  Mishael,  and  Azariah,  his  companions 
^.Companion  {female),  rnnn  chabereth. 

Mai.    2. 14  yet  (is)  she  thy  companion,  and  the  wife 
5. An  intimate,  ma  kenath. 

Ezra   4.    7  Tabeel,  and  the  rest  of  their  companions 
4.    q  and  the  rest  of  their  companions 
4.  17  (to)  the  rest  of  their  companions  that 

4.  23  Shimshai  the  scribe,  and  their  compan. 

5.  3  Shethar-boznai,  and  their  companions 

5.  6  his  companions  the  Apharsachites,  which 

6.  6  your  companions  the  Apharsachites 
6.  13  their  companions,  according  to  that 

G.A  friend,  yia  merea. 

Judgi4.  11  they  brought  thirty  companions  to  be 

14.  20  Samson's  wife  was  (given)  to  his  compan. 

15.  2  therefore  I  gave  her  to  thy  companion 
15.    6  because  he  had . .  given  her  to  his  compan. 

7.  A  friend,  yi  rea. 

Exod.32  27  every  man  his  companion,  and  every 
1  Ch.27.  33  Hushai  the  Archite  (was)  the  king's  com. 
Job   30.  29  I  am  a  brother  to  dragons,  and  a  compa. 
35.    4  I  will  answer  thee,  and  thy  companions 
Psa. 122.    S  For  my  brethren  and  my  companions' 

8.  To  feed,  enjoy,  have  delight,  n^i  raah. 

Prov.13.  20  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed 
28.    7  he  that  is  a  companion  of  riotous  (men) 

9.-4  friend,  r\y~).reah. 

Judg.11.  38  she  went  with  her  companions,  and 
Psa.    45.  14  her  companions  that  follow  her  shall  be 

10.  One  who  has  something  in  common,  koivu>v6s; 
LTeb.  10.  33  whilst  ye  became  companions  of  them 

25 


11. A  joint  companion,  crvyKoivwvos  sugkoinonos. 

Rev.    1.    9  who  also  am  your  brother,  and  [compau.] 
COMPANION  in  labour  — 
Fellow  worker,  <rvvepy6s  sunergos. 

Phil.   2.  25  compamon  in  labour,  and  fellow  soldier 

COMPANION  in  travel  — 

Out  from  one 's  people  with  others,  avveK^nfios. 
Acts  •&.  29  having  caught . .  Paul's  companions  intra. 

COMPANY  — 

l.To  travel,  be  a  wanderer,  wayfarer,rr\\$  arach. 
Gen.  37.  25  a  company  of  Ishmeelites  came  from  G. 

2.  Daughter,  n?  bath. 

'Eze.  27.   6  the  company  of  the  Ashurites  have  made 

3.-4  troop,  "1113  gedud. 

1  Sa.  30.  15  Canst  thou  bring  me  down  to  this  com.  ? 

30. 15  I  will  bring  thee  down  to  this  company 
30.  23  the  LORD,  .delivered  the  company  that 

2  Ki.    5.    2  the  Syrians  had  gone  out  by  companies 

4. A  going,  way,  comptany,  nybu  halikah. 

Job     6. 19  the  companies  of  Sheba  waited  for  them 

5.-1  multitude,  fisn  liamon. 

2  Ch.20. 12  this  great  company  that  cometh  against 

6.A  cord,  company,  S^Q  chebel. 

1  Sa.  10.    s  thou  shalt  meet  a  company  of  prophets 

10.  10  behold,  a  company  of  prophets  met  him 

7. A  company,  nan  cJieber. 

Hos.  6.   9  the  company  of  psiests  murder  in  the 

8.-4  company,  ■Tpn  chebrah. 

Job.  34.    8  "Which,  goeth  in  company  with  the  work. 

9.  What  is  alive,  living,  active,  rvn  chayyah. 
Psa.   68.  30  Rebuke  the  company  of  spearmen,  the 

10.  Strength,  force,  b\n  chayil. 

2  Ch.  9.    1  a  very  great  company,  and  camels  that 
11.-4  congregation,  what  is  called  together,  npn?. 

1  Sa.  19.  20  when  they  saw  the  company  of  the  prop. 
12.^1  chorus,  dance,  nbinp  mecholah. 

Song  6.  13  As  it  were' the  company  of  two  armies 
13. A  course,  division,  portion,  nj^qo  machaloqeth. 

1  Ch.28.    1  the  captains  of  the  companies  that 
14.^4  camp,  ."una  machaneh. 

Gen.  32.   8  If  Esau  come  to  the  one  company,  and 
32.    8  then  the  other  company  which  is  left 
32.  21  himself  lodged  that  night  in  the  company 
50.    9  horsemen  :  and  it  was  a  very  great  com. 

2  Ki.  5.  15  he  and  all  his  company,  .came  and  stood 
1  Ch.  9.  18  they  (were)  porters  in  the  companies  of 

15.-4  company  met  by  appointment,  rn$>  edah. 
Nunii4.  7  they  spake  unto  all  the  company  of  the 
16.  5  spake  unto  Korah,  and  unto  all  his  com. 
16.  6  Take  you  censers,  Korah,  and  all  his  c. 
16. 11  For  which  cause  (both)  thou  and.  .thy  c. 
16.  16  Be  thou  and  all  thy  company  before  the 

16.  40  be  not  as  Korah,  and  as  his  company 
26.    9  against  Aaron  in  the  company  of  Kovah 

26.  10  with  Korah,  when  that  company  died 

27.  3  he  was  not  in  the  company  of  them  that 
27.    3  against  the  Lord  in  the  company  of  Ko. 

Job   16.    7  thou  hast  made  desolate  all  my  company 
Psa.  106.  17  and  covered  the  company  of  Abiram 

106.  18  And  a  fire  was  kindled  in  their  company 

1Q.A  host,  Niy  tsaba. 

Psa.  68. 11  great  (was)  the  company  of  those  that 

17.  What  is  pressed  or  gathered  together,  pap  qibb. 
Isa.    57. 13  When  thou  criest,  let  thy  companies 

18.-4  congregation,  what  is  called  together,  Snp. 
Gen.  35.  11  a  company  of  nations,  shall  be  of  thee 
Num22.    4  Now  shall  this  company  lick  up  all  (that) 
Jer.   31.    8  a  great  company  shall  return  thither 
Eze.  16.  40  They  shall  also  bring  up  a  company  aga. 

17.  17  with  (his)  mighty  army  and  great  com. 
23.  46  I  will  bring  up  a  company  upon  them 
23.  47  the  company  shall  stone  them  with  stones 

26.  7  with  horsemen,  and  companies,  and 

27.  27  all  thy  compauy  which  (is)  in  the  midst 
27.  34  all  thy  company  in  the  midst  of  thee 

32.  3  spread,  out  my  net  over  thee  with  a  com. 
32.  22  Asshur(is)  there,  and  all  her  company 
32.  23  her  company  is  round  about  her  grave 
38.  4  a  great  company  (with)  bucklers  and  sh. 
38.  7  all  thy  company  that  are  assembled  unto 
38.  13  hast  thou  gathered  thy  company  to  take 
38.  15  a  great  company,  and  a  mighty  army 

19.-4  head,  detachment,  v?vh  rosh. 

Judg.  7.  16  he  divided  the .  .men  (into)  three  com. 
7.  20  the  three  companies  blew  the  trumpets 
9.  34  laid  wait  against  Shechem  in . .  companies 
g.  37  another  company  come  along  by  the  pi. 
9.  43  divided  them  into  three  companies,  and 
9.  44  the  company  that  (was)  with  him,  rushed 
9.  44  the  two  (other)  companies  ran  upon  all 

1  Sa.  11.  11  Saul  put  the  people  in  three  companies 
13.  17  the  spoilers  came  out.  .in  three  compan. 

13. 17  one  company  turned  unto  the  way  (that 

13. 18  another  company  turned  the  way  (to)  B. 
13. 18  another  company  turned  (to)  the  way  of 

20.-4  tumidtuous  crowd,  wr}  regesh, 

Psa.  55. 14  walked  unto  the  house  of  God  in  com. 


21. Abundance,  multitude,  hj;e^  ship>hah. 

2  Ki.   9. 17  spied  the  company,  .and  said, I  see  a  com. 
22.-4  crowding  together,  a  throng,  r6fxt\os  homilos. 

Rev.  18. 17  [every  ship  master,  and  all  the  company] 
23.-4  crowd,  ox^os  ochlos. 

Luke  5.  29  there  was  a  great  company  of  publicans 
6.  17  he  came  down  with,  .the  company  of  his 

9.  38  a  man  of  the  company  cried  out,  saying 

11.  27  a  certain  wnmau  of  the  company  lifted 

12.  13  one  of  the  company  said  unto  him,  Mas. 
John  6.  5  Jesus,  .saw  a  great  company  come  unto 
Acts   6.   7  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obed. 

24. Fulness,  ir\r\Bos  pleihos. 

Luke23.  27  there  followed  him  a  great  company  of 
25.-4  journeying  together,  awobla  svnodia. 

Luke  2.  44  supposing  him  to  have  been  in  the  com. 

COMPANY,  an  innumerable  — 

-4  myriad,  ten  thousand,  fivpids  murias. 

Heb.  12.  22  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angete 

COMPANY,  travelling  — 

To  travel,  be  a  wanderer,  rrix  arach. 

Isa.   21.  13  O  ye  travelling  companies  of  Dedanim 

COMPANY,  to  gather  a  — 

To  make  a  crowd,  bx^oiroUw  ochlopoieo. 

Actsij.   5  gathered  a  company,  and  set  all  the  city 

COMPANY,  in  a  — 

A  company  reclining  at  meals,  KKiaia  klisia. 
Luke  9.  14  Make  them  sit  down  by  fiftfes  in  a  com. 

COMPANY,  one's  own  — 
Oneys  own,  XSios   idios. 

Acts  4.  23  they  went  to  their  own  company,  and 

COMPANY,  our  — 

Out  of  us,  e|  7]/j.a>i>  ex  hemon. 

Luke24.  22  certain  women  also  of  our  company  made 

COMPANY,  Paul  and  his  — 

Those  around  Paid,  01  -jrspl  top  TlavAbv. 

Actsi3.  13  when  Paul  and  his  company  loosed  from 

COMPANY,  we  that  were  of  Paul's  — 
TJwse  around  Paul,  ol  -rrepl  tov  TlavKhu. 

ActS2i.   8  [we  that  were  of  Paul's  company  departed] 

COMPANY,  to  come  with  such  a  — 
To  be  called  together,  pyr  zaaq,  2. 

Judg.18.  23  that  thou  comest  with  such  a  company? 

COMPANY  with,  to  keep  — 

1.  To  feed)  enjoy,  have  delight,  n»"i  raah. 
Prov.29.    3  but  he  that  keepeth  company  with  harlots 

2.  To  glue  or  cement  together,  KoWaoj  kollao. 
Actsio.  28  for  a  man  that  is  a  Jew  to  keep  company  w. 

3.  To  mix  up  together,  o-vvavaixiyvvfjn  sunanamign. 

1  Co.  5.  11 1  have  written,  .not  to  keep  company  w. 

COMPANY  with,  to  (have)  — 

1.  To  mix  up  together,  aui'ava^iyvv/j.i  sunanamignu. 

1  Co.   5.   9  I  wrote.. not  to  company  with  fornicators 

2  Th.  3. 14  note.that  man.'and  have  no  company  with 

%To  come  or  go  with,  o-vv4pxo^ai  snnerchomai. 
Acts    1.  21  these  men  which  have  companied  with  us 

COMPARABLE  — 

To  be  weiglied;  ahz  sala,  4. 

Lam.  4.    2  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine 

COMPARE,  to  — 

l.To  be  like,  ncn  damah,  3. 

Song  1.    9  I  have  compared  thee,  O  my  love,  to  a 
2.To  compare,  used irroverb,  b&D  mashal,  5. 

Isa.   46.    5  To  whom  will  ye.  .compare  me,  that  we 
%.To  set  in  array,  compare,  T1'4  ardk. 

Isa.   40.  18  or  what  likeness  will  ye  compare  unto 

4.  To  cast  alongside,  7rapaj3aAAw  paraballo. 

Mark  4.  30  with  what  comparison  shall  we  [comp.] 
COMPARE  among  or  with,  to  — 
To  judge  or  sift  together,  o-vyfcptvw  suykrind. 

1  Co.   2.  13  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual 

2  Co.  10.  12  compare  ourselves  with  some  that  com. 

10.  12  comparing  themselves  among  themselves 

COMPARED,  to  be  — 

l.To  set  in  array,  compare,  T$  arak. 

Psa.  89.   6  who  in  the  heaven  can  be  compared  unto 

2.  To  equal,  rip  shavah. 

Prov.  3. 15  all  the  things,  .are  not  to  he  compared 
8. 11  all  the  things.,  are  not  to  be  compared 

COMPARISON  — 

.4  placing  alongside,  parable,  irapa&oX-n  parabole. 
Mark  4.  30  with  what  comparison  shall  we  compare 

COMPARISON  of,  in  — 

As,  even,  as,  3,  iD?  ke,  kemo. 

Judg.  8.    2  What  have  I  done  now  in  comparison  of 
8.    3  what  was  I  able  to  do  in  comparison  of 

lUg.   2.    3  in  your  eyes  in  conipar.  of  it  as  nothing  ? 


COMPASS 


194 


CONCEAL 


COMPASS  — 

l.A  circle,  sphere,  «n  chug. 

Prov.  8.  4 set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of  the  depth 
2  Compass,  circuit,  margin,  33-g  karkob. 

E*§27     5  thou  Shalt  put  it  under  the  compass  of 
38.   4  brazen  grate  of  network  under  the  com. 
%  A  cirahit,  circle,  compass,  rnint|  mechugah. 

iL Z.  13  *  ™^keth " out  with  the  compass' 

4  irfioi  is  round  about,  3'3Q  saii'6. 

x  Ki    7  35  a  round  compass  of  half  a  cubit  high 

coarPASS,  to  — 

Psa    if    4  The    0  tows  of  death  compassed  me  and 
io  I2  innumerable  evils  have  compassed  me 
xto'    ,  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and 
Jon.    I'.   5  The  waters  compassed  me  about,(even)  to 

2-^anr!TThonu'lomptsest  my  path  and  my  lying 

3.  To  encircle,  Jin  chug. 

Job.  26. 10  He  hath  compassed  the  waters  with 
4  To  no  round,  compass,  1PJ  naqaph,  5. 

1  Ki    7  24  round  about  (there  were)  knops  compas 

,  21  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 

2  Ki.  11.   8  ye  shall  compass  the  king  round  about 
.a    ,     ,  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 

' 2,'   7  the  Levites  shall  compass  the  king  round 
Job   19!   6  God.. hath  compassed  me  with  his  net 
Lam  3.    5  He  hath . .  compassed  (me)  with  gall  and 
5.  To  be  or  go  round  about,  339  sabab 

Gen     211  which  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Hav. 

2  1,  the  same  (is)  it  that  compasseth  the 
Num  21!    4  journeyed  from  mount  Hor.  .to  compass 
Deut  "2    1  and  we  compassed  mount  Sen-  many  days 

■,'  3  Ye  have  compassed  this  mountain  long 
Josh  i.  3  ye  shall  compass  the  city,  all  (ye)  men  of 
6  4  the  seventh  day  ye  shall  compass  the  city 
6.'  7  said  uuto  the  people,  Pass  on.  and  com 
6  i4  the  second  day  they  compassed  the  city 
6  A  compassed,  .city  after  the  same  manner 

6  15  that  day  they  compassed  the  city  seven 
Judgir.  18  they  went  along,  .and  compassed  the 

16     -  they  compassed  (him)  in,  and  laid  wait 

1  Ki   7.  is  a  liue  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass 

'  7  -3  a  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it 

7  24  underthe  brim.,  (there  were)  knops  com. 

2  Ki    6  1  s  an  host  compassed  the  city  both  with 

8  21  smote  the  Edornites  which  compassed 
2  Ch    42a  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it 

4     3  which  did  compass  it  rouud  about,;  ten 
is'  31  they  compassed  about  him  to  fight 
21'    o  smote  the  Edomites  which  compassed 
33'  14  compassed  about  Ophel.  and  raised  it  up 
Psa    17   11  They  have  now  compassed  us  in  our  steps 
'  22   12  Many  bulls  have  compassed  me  :  strong 
22  16  dogs  have  compassed  me  :  the  assembly 
100     3  They  compassed  me  about  also  with 
Jer.  52.  2I  a  fillet  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  it 
6  To  be  or  go  round  about,  339  sabab,  2. 

Josh  is   10  the  border  compassed  from  Baalah  west 
'18   14  the  border  was  drawn  (thence),  and  com. 
19.  14  the  border  compasseth  it  on  the  north 
7. To  go  round  about,  339  sabab,  3a. 

Psa   26    6  So  will  I  compass  thine  altar,  O  Lord 
Jer.  31.  22  a  new  thing.  A  womau  shall  compass  a 
8.T0  go  round  about,  339  sabab,  5. 

Josh  6  11  So  the  ark  of  the  Lord  compassed  the  c. 

9.  To  compass,^]!  alar. 

1  Sa  23  26  Saul  and  his  men  compassed  David  and 
Psa.'   5  12  with  favour  wilt  thou  compass  him  as 

10  To  compass,  encircle,  kvk\6u>  kukloo. 
Luke2i.  20  when  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed 

11  To  110  round,  irepiiya  periago. 
Matt  =3  15  ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one 

COMPASS  about,  to  — 

1.  To  gird,  iix  azar,  3. 
Isa.   50  11  that  compass  (yourselves)  about  with 

2.  To  compass,  in?  kathar,  3 

Psa  142    7  the  righteous  shall  compass  me  about 
Hal);   1.    4  the  wicked  doth  compass  about  the 

3.  To  set  round,  r\®  naqaph,  5. 

-  Ki    6  14  by  night,  and  compassed  the  city  about 

Psa  'n'.-  a  my.  .enemies,  (who)  compass  me  about 

88.  17  They  came,  .they  compassed  me  about 

4.  To  be  or  go  round  about,  33D  sabab. 

2  Sa.  18. 15  ten  young  men . .  compassed  about  and 

22.    6  sorrows  of  hell  compassed  me  about 
Job   40.  22  willows  of  the  brook  compass  him  about 
Psa.  18.    5  The  sorrows  of  bell  compassed  me  about 
49.    5  iniquity  of  my  heels  shall  compass  me  ab. 
118.  io  All  nations  compassed  me  about :  but 
118. 11  They  compassed  me  about,  yea,  they  com. 
118.  12  They  compassed  me  about  like  bees 
Hos.  11. 12  Ephraim  compasseth  me  about  with  lies 
5.  T"  be  or  go  round  about,  339  saljab,  2. 

1  rr.  31.  39  the  measuring  line . .  shall  compass  about 
G.To  go  round  about,  335  snbnh,  Za. 

Psa.     7.    7  So  shall  the. people  compass  thee  about 
52.    7  thou  shalt  compass  me  about  with  songs 


Psa   32. 10  mercy  shall  compass  him  about 
Jon'.    2.    3  the  floods  compassed  me  about :  all  thy 
7.  To  compass,  encircle,  kvk\6oi  kukloo. 

Heb.  11.  30  after  they  were  compassed  about  seven 
Rev.  20.   9  [compassed]  the  camp  of  the  saints  about 

COMPASS  about  as  a  chain,  to  — 

To  encircle  as  with  a  chain,  pm,  anaq. 

Psa.  73.    6  pride  compasseth  them  about  as  a  chain 

COMPASS  about,  that  — 

Set  round  about  one,  3DD  meseb. 

Psa  140.   9  the  head  of  those  that  compass  me  about 

COMPASS,  to  fetch  a  — 

1.  To  be  or  go  round  about,  339  sabab. 
2  Ki    3    9  they  fetched  a  compass  of  seven  days' 

2.  To  be  or  go  round  about,  339  sabab,  2. 
N 111034.    s  the  border  shall  fetch  a  compass  from  A. 
Josh  15.    3  went  up  to  Adar,  and  fetched  a  compass 

3.  To  set  or  go  round  about,  339  sabab,  5. 
2  Sa     5.  23  Thou  shalt  not  go  up  ;  (but)  fetch  a  com 

4.  To  come  round  about,  irepiepxauai  perierchomai. 
Acts  28. 13  from  thence  we  fetched  a  compass  and  ca 

COMPASS  round,  to  — 

l.To  go  round  about,  359  sabab. 

Job    16.  13  His  archers  compass  me  round  about 
2.7*o  be  round  about,  339  sabab,  2. 

Gen  19.   4  men  of  the  city.,  compassed  the  house  r. 
3.To  circle  round  about,  vipiK\iK\6a  jJerikukloo. 

Luke  19.  43  compass  thee  round,  and  keep  thee  in 

COMPASSED  (about)  with,  to  be  — 
To  be  laid  round  about,  TrepU eiiiai  perikeimai. 
Heb.    5.   2  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  inflr. 
12.    1  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with 

COMPASSION  — 

Mercies,  lender  compassion,  O'Ptn  rachamim. 

1  Ki.  8  50  give  them  compassion  before  them  who 

2  Ch  30. "  9  your  children  (shall  find)  compassion 
Lam    3  22  we  are  not  consumed,  .because  his  comp. 
Zech.  7.    9  show  mercy  and  compassions  every  man 

COMPASSION,  fun  of  — 

Merciful,  compassionate,  mni  racltum. 

Psa    78  38  he,  (being)  full  of  compassion,  forgave 
86.  15  thou,  0  Lord,  (art)  a  God  full  of  compas. 
111.'  4  Lord  (is)  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion 
112.    4  (he  is)  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion 
145.   8  Lord  (is)  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion 

COMPASSION,  to  be  moved  with  — 

To  have  the  bowels  yearning,  oTrXayx»K°^al  sPla- 

Matt  9  36  he  was  moved  with  compassion  on  them 

14  14  and  was  moved  with  compassion  toward 

18.  27  the  lord,  .was  moved  with  compassion 

Mark  1.  41  Jesus,  moved  with  compassion,  put  forth 

6.  34  and  was  moved  with  compassion  toward 

COMPASSION,  to  have  — 
l.To  pity,  spare,  "ran  chamal. 

Exod  2    6  she  had  compassion  on  him,  and  said 

1  Sa  23.  21  Blessed  (be)  ye.  .for  ye  have  compassion 

2  Ch  36. 15  because  he  had  compassion  on  his  people 
36. 17  had  no  compassion  upon  young  man  or 

Eze    16.   5  Noneeyepitied.-tohaveconipassiouupon 

2  To  lore,  pity,  be  merciful,  nn-j  racham,  3. 

Lam    3.  32  yet  will  he  have  compassion  according  to 
Mic    7.  19  will  turn  again,  he  will  have  compassion 
3.7*0  have  the  bowels  yearning,  oir\ayxvtC0uai. 
Matt  15  32  I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude 
20.  34  Jesus  had  compassion  on  them,  aud 
Mark  8.    2  I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude 

o  2->  any  thing,  have  compassion  on  us,  and 
Luke  7.  13  when  the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had  compas. 
10.  33  when  he  saw  him,  he  had  compassion 
15.  20  his  father  saw  him,  aud  had  compassion 

COMPASSION  of,  to  have  — 

l.To  show  mildness,  kindness,  eAie'oj  eleeo. 

Jude      22  [of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  di] 
2  To  sufcr  with  (another),  avp.waeea  sumpatheo. 

Heb.'io.  34  ye  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  bonds 

COMPASSION  on,  to  have  — 

1.  To  love,  pity,  be  merciful,  nrn  racham,  3. 

1  Ki    8.  50  that  thev  may  have  compassion  on  them 

2  Ki  13.  23  the  Lord,  .had  compassion  on  them,  and 
Isa.  49.  15  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on 
Jer.    12.  15  I  will  return,  and  have  compassionon 

2.  To  show  mildness,  kindness,  e\eew  eleeo. 
Matt  18.  33  thou  also  have  had  compassion  on  thy 
Mark  5.  19  the  Lord,  .hath  had  compassion  on  thee 

3.7*0  suffer  with  moderation,  iierpioiraSiai  metreop. 
Heb.  5.    2  Who  can  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant 

4.7*0  have  pity  or  mercy,  owcreipw  oikteiro. 
Rom    9.  1 5  and  I  will  have  compassion  on 

9.  15  on  whom  I  will  have  compassion 

COMPASSION  upon,  to  have  — 

7*0  love,  pity,  be  merciful,  orn  racham,  3. 

Deutn  17  show  thee  mercy,  and  have  compassion  u. 
30    3  the  LORD . .  will . .  have  compassion  upon 


COMPASSION  one  of  another,  having  — 
Suffering  with  [another),  cv^-wad-iis  sumpathes. 

1  Pe.  3.    8  having  compassion  one  of  another,  love  as 

COMPEL,  to  — 

l.To  press,  compel,  0}x  anas. 

Esth.  1.    S  none  did  compel :  for  so  the  king  had 

2.  To  drive,  force,  rm  nadach,  5. 

2  Ch.21.  11  caused. .and  compelled  Judah  (thereto) 

3.7*0  serve,  331?  abad. 

Lev.  25.  39  not  compel  him  to  serve  as  a  bond  servant 

4. 7*o  break  forth  upon,  urge,  yiB  parats. 

1  Sa.  28.  23  But  his  servants,  .compelled  him 
5.  7*o  impress  (as  on  public  service),  ayyapeiw  aijg. 

Matt  27.  32  Simon  by  name,  him  they  compelled  to 
Markis.  21  they  compel  one  Simon  a  Cyrenian,  who 
6.7*0  necessitate,  compel^  avayKafa  anagkazo. 

Lukei4.  23  compel  (them)  to  come  in,  that  my  house 
Acts  26  11  I  punished  them.. and  compelled  (them) 

2  Co  12.  11  I  am  become  a  fool,  .ye  have  compelled 
Gal     2    3  a  Greek,  was  compelled  to  be  circumcised 

2. 14  why  compellest  thon  the  Gentiles  to  live 

COMPEL  to  go,  to  — 

To  impress  (as  on  public  service),  kyyapeia  agga. 

Matt.  5.   41  whosoever  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile 
COMPLAIN,  to  — 
1.  To  sigh  habitually,  Jjx  anan,  la. 

Numn.    1  (when)the  people  complained,  it  displeas. 

Lam.  3.  39  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain 

2.To  weep,  n-J3  bakah. 

Job  31.  38  the  furrows  likewise  thereof  complain 

3.7*0  contend,  strive,  3'1  rib. 

Judg2i.  22  their  brethren  come  unto  us  to  complain: 

i.To  meditate,  talk,  ni5>  siach. 

Job     7  11 1  will  complain  in  the  bitterness  of  my 
Psa.  77.   3  I  complained,  and  my  spirit  was  overwh. 

COMPLATNER  — 

Finding  fault  with  one's  lot,  ututyinoipos  memps. 
Jude      16  These  are  murmurers,  complainers,  walk. 

COMPLAINING— 

Cry,  outcry,  nnis  tsevacha. 

Psa.  144.  14  (there  be)  no  complaining  in  our  streets 

COMPLAINT  — 

1. Meditation,  talk,  n'P  siach. 

1  Sa     116  out  of  the  abundance  of  my  complaint 
Job     7  13  my  couch  shall  ease  my  complaint 

9  27  I  will  forget  my  complaint,  I  will  leave 
10    1  I  will  leave  my  complaint  upon  myself 
21    4  As  for  me,  (is)  my  complaint  to  man  ?  and 
23    2  Even  to  day  (is)  my  complaint  bitter:  my 
Psa    ■;<;    -  I  mourn  in  my  complaint,  and  make  a 
'102    title  poureth  out  his  complaint  before  the 
142.  2  I  poured  out  my  complaint  before  him 
2  Caicse  of  complaint,  alria/xa  aitiama. 

Acts  25    7  [laid  many  grievous  complaints  against] 

COMPLETE  — 

Perfect,  complete,  o'?J3  tamim. 

Lev.  23.  15  seven  sabbaths  shall  be  complete 

COMPLETE,  to  — 

7*0  fill  up,  f  II  full,  Tt\T)p6u  pleroo.    „,_....      . 

Col     2.  10  ye  are  complete  in  him,  which  is  the  head 

4  12  that  ye  may  stand  perfect  and  [complete] 

COMPOSITION  — 

Measure,  proper  quan  tity,  state  or  conddi  on,  msna. 
Exod3o  32  neither  shall  ye  make,  .after  the  comp. 
30  37  not  make,  .according  to  the  composition 

COMPOUND  — 

Perfume,  season,  spice,  nn|5lP  mirqachath. 

Exod3o.  25  an  ointment  compound  after  the  art  of 

COMPOUND,  to  — 

7*0  perfume,  season,  spice,  npi  raqach. 

Exo'd.30.    33  Whosoever  compoundeth  (any)  like  it 

COMPREHEND,  to  — 

1  7*o  know,  be  acquainted  with,  in;  yada. 
"job    37.    5  great  things.,  which  we  cannot  compre. 

2  7*o  contain,  comprehend,  S?3  kid.  . 
Isa.    40.  12  comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a 

3.  To  receive  down,  or  f idly,  KaTa\auP&vukatala. 
John   1.    5  and  the  darkness  comprehended  it  not 
Eph.   3.  18  May  be  able  to  comprehend  withall  saints 

COMPREHENDED,  to  be  briefly  — 

To  sum  up  under  one  head,  avaice<paAai6u. 

Rom.  1 3    9  if. . any  other . . is  briefly  comprehended 

CO  NAN'-IAH,  l.i.'H?  Jah  is  founding. 

A  chief  Levite  in  the' time  of  Josiah,  B.C.  610. 

2  CI1.35.    9C.  also,  and  Shemaiah  and.. his  brethren 

CONCEAL,  to  — 

1  To  keep  sileyice  regarding  anything,  trm  charash. 
'  Job  41.  12  I  will  not  conceal  his  parts,  nor  his  pow. 
2.7*0  hide,  cut  of,  ir^  kachad. 

Job      6.  10  I  have  not  concealed  the  words  of  the 
27.  11  (is)  with  the  Almighty  will  I  not  conceal 


CONCEIT 


195 


CONDEMN 


Psa  40  10  I  have  not  concealed  thy  loving  kindness 
Jer.   50.   2  Declare  ye.. publish,  (and)  conceal  not 

3.  To  cover,  ids  kasah. 

Prov.12  23  A  prudent  man  concealeth  knowledge 

4.To  cover,  nD3  kasah,  3. 

Gen.  37.  26  if  we  slay  our  brother,  and  conceal  his 
Dent  13.  3  spare,  neither  shalt  thou  conceal  him 
Pro v.i  1. 13  he  that  is  of  a  faithful  spirit  concealeth 

5. To  hide,  ino  sathar,  5. 

Prov.25.    2  (It  is)  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a 

CONCEIT  — 

1. Imagery,  imagination,  n*3ipB  maskitk. 

Prov  18.  11  and  as  an  high  wall  in  his  own  conceit 

2.Eye,  ]"]l  ayin. 

Prov  26.    5  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own  conceit 

26.  12  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit  ? 
26  16  The  sluggard  (is)  wiser  in  his  own  conceit 

28.  11  The  rich  man  (is)  wise  in  his  own  conceit 

CONCEITS,  in  your  own  — 

Beside,  or  alongside  of  yourselves,  Trap   %avrots. 
Rom  11.  25  lest  ye  should  be  wise  [in]  your  own  cone. 
12. 16  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits 
CONCEIVE,  to  — 

1.  Pregnant,  «Tjn  harah, 

Judg  13     5  lo,  thou  shalt  conceive,  and  bear  a  son 
13"   7  Behold;  thou  shalt  conceive,  and  bear  a 
Isa.     7.  14  a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son 

2.  To  conceive,  become  pregnant,  rrjfj  harah. 

Gen.  4.  1  she  couceived..  .and  said,  I  have  gotten  a 
4.  17  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  Enoch 
16.  4  he  went  in  unto  Hagar,  and  she  conceived 
16.  4  when  she  saw  that  she  had  conceived,  her 
16.  5  when  she  saw  that  she  had  couceived 
2i.  2  Sarah  conceived,  aud  bare  Abraham  a  son 
25,  21  and  Rebekah  his  wife  conceived 

29.  32  Leah  conceived,  and  bare  a  sou,  and  she 

29.  33,  34,  35  she  couceived  again, and  bare  a  son 

30.  5  Bilhah  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  a  son 
30.  7  Bilhah,  Rachel's  maid,  conceived  again 
30.  17  she  couceived,  and  bare  Jacob  the  fifth 
30.  19  Leah  conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob 
30.  23  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son  ;  and  said 
38.  3,  4  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  sou ;  aud  he 
38.  18  came  in  unto  her ;    and  she  conceived  by 

Exod.2-  2  And  the  woman  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 
Nunin.  12  Have  1  conceived  all  this  people?  have  I 
Judg.  13.    3  but  thou  shalt  conceive,  and  bear  a  son 

1  Sa.    1.  20  was  come  about  after  Hannah  had  con. 

2.  21  she  conceived,  aud  bare  three  sons  and 

2  Sa.  ir.  5  the  woman  conceived,  and  sent  and  told 
2  Ki.  4.  17  the  woman  conceived,  and  bare  a  son  at 
1  Ch.  7  23  she  conceived  and  bare  a  sou,  aud  he 
Job  15.  35  They  conceive  mischief,  and  bring  forth 
Psa.  7.  14  he  travaileth..and  hath  conceived  misc. 
Isa.     8.   3  went  uuto  the  prophetess  ;  and  she  con. 

33. 11  Ye  shall  conceive  chaff ;  ye  shall  bring 

59.    4  they  conceive  mischief,  and  bring  forth 

59. 13  conceiving  and  uttering  from  the  heart 

Hos.    1.  3  Gomer.  .which  conceived,  and  bare  him 

1.    6  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  daughter 

1.   8  when  she  had  weaned  Loruhamah,  she  co 

3. To  conceive,  become  pregnant,  nin  harah. 

Song  3.   4  into  the  chamber  of  her  that  couceived 
Hos.    2.    5  shethatconceivedthemhathdoneshame. 

4.  To  he  sown,  receive  seed,  jnj  zara,    2. 

Num.  5.  28  she  shall  be  free,  and  shall  conceiveseed 
5. To  think,  devise,  reckon,  aa?n  chashab. 

Jer.   49.  30  Nebuchadrezzar,  .hath  conceived  a  pur. 
Q.To  be  or  become  warm,  to  conceive,  crt;  yacham. 

Gen.  30.  38  that  they  should  conceive  when  they 
30.  39  the  flocks  conceived  before  the  rods,  and 

7. To  become  warm,  conceive,  on;  yacham,  3. 

Gen.  30.  41  whensoever  the  stronger  cattle  did  conce. 
30.  41  that  they  might  conceive  among  the  rods 
31. 10  at  the  time  that  the  cattle  couceived 

Psa.  51.    5  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me 

S.To  beget,  conceive,  yevvdo)  gennao. 

Matt.  1  20  that  which  is  couceived  in  her  is  of  the 
9.  For  a  casting  down  {of  seed),  els  Kara&o\i}v. 

Heb.  ir.  n  Sara  herself  received  strength  to  conceive 
10. To  have  a  lying,  e'xw  koittjv  echo  koiten. 

Rom.  y.  10  when  Rebecca  also  had  conceived  by  one 

11.  To  receive  {seed)  together,  avWaix&avco  sullamba. 
Luke  1.  24  after  those  days.  .Elisabeth  conceived 

1  31  thou  shalt  conceive  in  thy  womb,  and 

1. 36  she  hath  also  conceived  a  son  in  her  old 

2  21  named  of  the  angel  before  he  was  con. 
Jas.     1.  15  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringetli 

12.  To  place,  put,  set,  riQ-qfj-i  tithemi. 

Acts    5.   4  why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in 
CONCEIVE  ajain,  to  — 
To  add,  f]p;  yasaph,  5. 

Gen.  38.   5  she  yet  again  conceived,  and  bare  a  son 
CONCEIVE  seed,  to  — 
To  cause  to  sno,  let  sow,  "*v  zara,  5. 

Lev.  12.    2  If  a  woman  have  conceived  seed,  and 
CONCEIVED,  to  he  — " 
To  be  conceived,  rnrr  harah,  4. 

J°h     3.    3  There  is  a  man  child  conceived 


CONCEPTION  — 

1.  Conception,  pin  heron. 

Gen.    3. 16  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy.  .conception 

2. Conception,  jinn  her  ay  on. 

Ruth  4.  13  the  Lord  gave  her  conception,  and  she 
Hos.    9.  11  from  the  womb,  and  from  the  conception 

CONCERN,  (those)  things  which  — 
The  things  about,  ra.  {irepl)  taperi. 

Acts  28.  31  those  things  which  concern  the  Lord  J. 

2  Co.  11.  30  I  will  glory  of  the  things  which  concern 

CONCERNING  — 

l.Unto,  with  reference  to,  *?N  el. 

1  Sa.  3. 12  all  (things)  which  I  have  spoken  concern. 

2.Conceming,  Vy  al. 

Gen.  24.    9  the  servant,  .sware  to  him  coucerning 
Ezra  5.    5  they  returned  answer  by  letter  coucerning 
5.  17  send  his  pleasure  to  us  concerning  this 
7.  14  his  seven  counsellors,  to  enquire  coucern. 
Dan.    2.  iS  would  desire  mercies  of  the  God.  .concer. 

5.  29  and  made  a  proclamation  concerning  him 

6.  12  spake  before  the  king  concerning  the 

^.Concerning,  on  account  of  Frfifc~7j7  al  odoth. 
Gen.  26.  32  servants  came,  and  told  him  concerning 
Josh  14.   6  said  unto  Moses  the  man  of  God  concern. 

^.Concerning,  on  the  side  of,  is  tsad. 

Dan.   6.    4  against  Daniel  concerning  the  kingdom 

5.  With  a  view  or  regard  to,  els  eis. 

Acts    2.  25  David  speaketh  concerning  him,  I  fore. 
Rom  16.  19  I  would  have  you.  .simple  concerning  evil 

2  Co.  8.  23  my  partner  and  fellow  helper  concern. 
Eph.  5.  32  speak  [concerning]  Christ  and  the  church 
1  Th.  5.  18  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concern. 

Q.Doum  or  over  against,  as  to,  Kara  {aec.)  kata. 
Eph.   4.  22  concerning  the  former  conversation,  the 
Phil.   3.    6  Concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  church 

1. About,  concerning,  for,  rrepi  {gen.)  peri. 

Matt.  4.   6  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concern. 

11.    7  began  to  say  unto  the  multitudes  concer. 

16.  11  I  spake  (it)  not  to  you  concerning  bread 
Mark.  5.  16  they,  .told  them,  .concerning  the  swine 

7.  17  disciples  asked  him  [concerning!  the 
Luke  2.  17  the  saying  which  was  told  them  concern. 

7.  24  began  to  speak  unto  the  people  concern 

24.  19  they  said  unto  him,  Concerning  Jesus  of 

24.  44  written,  .(in)  the  Prophets,  .concerning 

John  7.  12  there  was  much  murmuring,  .concerning 

7.  32  the  people  murmured  such  things  concer 

9.  18  the  Jews  did  not  believe  concerning  him 

11.  19  to  comfort  them  concerning  their  brother 
Acts    1. 16  the  Holy  Ghost,  .spake  before  coucerning 

19.  39  if  ye  enquire  anything  [concerning]  other 

21.  24  whereof  they  were  informed  concerning 

22.  18  will  not  receive  thy  testimony  concern. 

23.  15  as  though  ye  would  enquire,  .concerning 

24.  24  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in  Christ 

25.  16  licence  to  answer  for  himself  coucerning 
28.  21  We  neither  received  letters,  .concerning 
28.  23  persuading  them  concerning  Jesus,  both 

Rom.  1,    3  Coucerning  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
1  Co.    7.  25  conceruiug  virgins  I  have  no  command. 

12.  1  concerning  spiritual  (gifts),  brethren,  I 
16.    1  couceruing  the  collection  for  the  saints 

3  Th.  3.    2  to  comfort  you  [concerning]  your  faith 

4.  33  concerning  them  which  are  asleep,  that 
Heb.   7.  14  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake  nothing  cou. 
11.  20  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau  concerning 
11.  22  Joseph. .gave  commandment  concerning 

1  Jo.   2,  26  These,  .have  I  written  unto  you  concern. 

8. About,  concerning,  rrepi  {ace.) peri. 

1  Ti.  1. 19  which  some  having  put  away,  concerning 
6.  21  Which  some  professing  have  erred  con. 

2  Ti.    2.  18  Who  concerning  the  truth  have  erred 

3.    8  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concer. 

9.  In  behalf  of,  virep  {gen.)  huper. 

Rom  9.  27  Esaias  also  crieth  concerning  Israel 

lO.Concerning  the  matter  of,  13T7JJ  al  debar. 
2  Sa.  18.   5  when  the  king  gave.icharge  concerning 
Jer.     7.  22  I  spake  not.  .concerning  burnt  offerings 
14.    1  The  word,  .that  came  to  Jeremiah  con. 

CONCERNING,  as  — 

1.  With  a  view  to  the  matter  of,  els  A.070V  eis  logon. 

Phil.  4. 15  no  church  communicated  with  me'as  con. 

2.  Down  through,  as  to,  Kara  {ace.)  kata. 

Rom.  9.   5  of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ 

11.  28  As  concerning  the  Gospel,  (they  are) 
2  Co.  1 1.  2i  I  speak  as  concerning  reproach,  as  though 

3. About,  concerning,  for,  irepi  {gen.) pen. 

Acts  28.  22  as  concerning  this  sect,  we  know  that 
1  Co.  8.   4  As  concerning  therefore  the  eating  of 

CONCERNING  that,  as  — 
Because  that,  on    hoti. 

Acts  13  34  as  concerning  that  he  raised  him  up  from 

CONCERNING,  the  things  — 
The  things  about  or  concerning,  ra,  trepl  ta  peri. 
Luke22,  37  for  the  things  concerning  me  have  an  end 

24.  27  he  expounded,  .the  things  couceruing 
Acts   8.  12  Philip  preaching  the  things  concerning 
ig.    8  disputing  and  persuading  the  things  con. 


CONCISION  — 

A  cutting  down,  KaraTOjj.7}  katatome. 

Phil.   3.   2  beware  of  evil  workers,  beware  of  the  co. 

CONCLTJDE,  to  — 

l.To  reckon,  account,  Koyifyfxai  logizomai. 

Rom.  3  28  we  conclude  that  a  man  is  justified  by 
2.  To  judge,  decide,  Kpivoi  krino. 

Acts  21.  25  we  have  written  (aud)  concluded  that 
S.To  shut  or  close  up  together,  o-uyfcAetoi  sugkleio. 

Rom  11.  32  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unbelief 

Gal.    3.  22  the  Scripture  hath  concluded  all  under 

CONCLUSION  — 
End,  I'D  suph. 

Eccl.i2. 13  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole 

CONCORD  — 

A  sounding  togetlier,  harmony,  avfj.<pu>UTjais  sum2>~ 
2  Co.  6.  15  what  concord  hath  Christ  with  Belial ; 

CONCOURSE  — 

1.7b  hum,  sound,  make  a  noise,  ncrt  hamah. 

Prov.   1.  21  She  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of  concourse 
2.A  turning  round  together,  gathering,  o-vcTpoQ-f). 

Aits  19.  40  we  may  give  an  account  of  this  concourse 

CONCUBINE  — 

1.  Concubine,  singing  damsel,  -ijn?  Uclienah. 

Dan.  5.    2  his  wives,  and  his  concubines,  might 
5.    3  his  wives,  and  his  coucubines,  drank  in 

5.  23  thy  wives,  and  thy  concubines,have  drunk: 

2.  ConciCbine,  a  half  wife,  c>3?'?  pilegesh. 

Gen.  22.  24  his  concubine,  whose  name  (was)  Reumah 
25.    6  unto  the  sons  of  the  concubines,  which 

35.  22  Reuben,  .lay  with,  .his  father's  concubine 

36.  12  Timna  was  concubine  to  Eliphaz,  Esau's 
Judg   S.  31  his  concubine  that  (was)  in  Shechem,  she 

ig.    1  who  took  to  him  a  concubine  out  of  Be- 
19.    2  his  concubine  played  the  whore  against 
19.    9  when  the  man  rose  up.  .he,  and  his  con.- 
19.  10  (there  were)  with  him.  .his  concubine 
19.  24  my  daughter,  a  maiden,  and  his  concu. 
19.  25  the  man  took  his  concubine,  and  brought 
19.  27  the  woman  his  concubine  was  fallen  down 

19.  29  laid  hold  on  his  concubine,  and  divided 

20.  4  I  came  into  Gibeah.  .1  and  my  concubine 
20.   5  my  concubine  have  they  forced,  that  she 

20.  6  I  took  my  concubine,  and  cut  her  in 

2  Sa.  3.  7  Saul  had  a  concubine,  whose  name  (was) 
3.  7  hast  thougoneiuuntomyfather'sconcu.? 
5. 13  David  took  (him)  more  concubines  and 

15.  16  the  king  left  ten  women,  which  (were)  con. 

16.  21  Go  in  unto  thy  father's  concubines,  which. 
16.  22  Absalom  went  in  unto  his  father's  concu.- 
19.    5  the  lives  of  thy  wives,  and.  .thy  concu. 
20    3  the  king  took  the  ten  women  (his)  concu. 

21.  11  it  was  told  David  what.,  the  concubine  of 
1  Ki.n.    3  And  he  had.  .three  hundred  concubines 

1  Ch.  1.  32  the  sons  of  Keturah,  Abraham's  concu. 

2.  46  Ephah,  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Haran 

2.  48  Maachah,  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Sheber 

3.  9  besides  the  sous  of  the  concubines,  and 
7.  14  his  concubine  the  Aramitess  bare  Machir 

2  Ch.11.  21  above  all  his  wives  and  his  concubines 

11.  21  eighteen  wives,  aud  three  score  concu. 
Esth   2.  14  chamberlain,  which  kept  the  coucubines 
Song  6.    8  threescore  queens,  and  fourscore  concu. 

6.  9  the  queens  aud  the  concubines,  aud  they 
CONCUPISCENCE  — 

Over  desire,  i-mdvfxia  epithumia. 

Rom    7.    8  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  concupis. 
Col.     3.    5  inordinate  affection,  evil  concupiscence 

1  Th.  4.   5  Not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence,  even 
CONDEMN,  to  — 

1.  To  make  or  declare  wro?ig  {in  lata),  yah  rasha,  5. 

Exod22.    9  whom  the  judges  shall  condemn,  he  shall 

Deut25.    1  shall  justify  the  righteous,  aud  condemn 

Job     9.  20  justify  myself,  mine  own  mouth  shall  con. 

10.    2  I  will  say  unto  God,  Do  not  condemn  me 

15.    6  Thine  own  mouth  condemneth  thee,  and 

32.    3  had  found  no  answer,  and  (yet)  had  con. 

34. 17  wilt  thou  condemn  him  that  is  most  just? 
40.    8  wilt  thou  condemn  me,  that  thou  mayest 

Psa.  37.  33  The  Lord  will  not.  .condemn  him  when 
94.  21  They  gather  themselves,  .and  condemn 

Prov  12.    2  a  man  of  wicked  devices  will  he  condemn 
17. 15  he  that  condemneth  the  just,  even  they 

Isa.  50.    9  who  (is)  he  (that)  shall  condemn  me  ? 

54.  17  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  con. 

2.Tofne,  oppress,  trij;  anash. 

2  Ch.36.    3  condemned  the  land  in  an  hundred 
Z.To  know  something  against  one,  Karayiv^ffKw. 

1  Jo.    3.  20  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater 
3.  21  if  our  heart  coudemu  us  not,  (then)  have 

k.To  pronounce  judg  ment  against  one,  Karah*\KaQw. 
Matt  12.    7  would  not  have  condemned  the  guiltless. 

12.  37  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned 
Luke  6.  37  condemu  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be  con. 
Jas.     5.    6  Ye  have  condemned  (and)  killed  the  just 

5.  To  judge  one  down,  condemn,  KaraKpiuw  katakr. 

Matt  12.  41  with  this  generation,  and  shall  condemn 

12.  42  The  queen  of  the  south,  .shall  condemn 

20. 18  aud  they  shall  condemn  him  to  death 
27.    3  Judas,  .when  he  saw  that  he  was  con. 


CONDEMN 


19G 


CONFIRM 


Markio.  33  and  tliey  slial]  condemn  him  to  death 

14.  64  they  all  condemned  him  to  be  guilty  of 
Luken.  32  The  men  of  Nineve.  .shall  condemn  it 

11.  31  The  queen  of  the  south  shall,  .condemn 
John  S.  10  [Woman .  .hath  no  man  condemned  thee?) 
8.  11  [Neither  do  I  condemn  thee;  go,  and  sin] 
Horn.  2.    1  thou  judgest  another,  thou  condemuest 
8.    3  and  for  sin,  coudemued  sin  in  the  flesh 
8.  34  Who  (is)  he  that  condemneth  ?  (It  is)  C. 

1  Co.11.  32  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the 
Heb.  11.  7  by  the  which  he  condemned  the  would 
Jas.     5.    9  Grudge  not.. brethren,  lest  ye  be  [cond.] 

2  Pe.   2    6  condemned  (them)  with  an  overthrow 

6.  To  judge,  pronounce  judgment,  xplva  Torino. 
John  3.  17  God  sent  not  his  Son .  .to  condemu  the 

3.  18  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condem. 
3.  18  he  that  believeth  not  is  condem.Ac.13. 27. 
Rom  14.  22  Happy  (is)  he  that  condemneth  not 

7.  Toward  a  judging  down,  irpos  Karanpiaiv  pros  k. 

2  Co.    7.   3  I  speak  not  (this)  to  condemn  (you) :  for 

CONDEMN,  that  — 

To  judge  or  act  as  a  magistrate,  t:s»  shaphat. 
Psa.  109.  31  save  (him)  from  those  that  condemn  his 

CONDEMNED  — 

To  fine,  oppress,  v>l'),  anash. 

Amos2.    8  they  drink  the  wine  of  the  condemned 

CONDEMNED  of  one's  self — 
One  judged  down  by  himself,  auTOKaraKpiTos. 
Titus  3.  11  and  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  himself 

•CONDEMNED,  to  he  — 

1,  To  go  out  (declared)  wrong,  yy~<  n)j;  yatsa  rasha. 

Psa.109.   7  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  be  condemned 

2.  With  a  view  to  a  judgment,  ch  Kpip.a  eis  krima. 

Luke24.  20  our  rulers  deliveredhim  to  be  condemned 

CONDEMNED,  that  cannot  be  — 
One  against  whom  nothing  is  known,  aKara.yvoxTTO'; 
Titus  2.    8  Sound  speech,  that  cannot  be  condemned 

CONDEMNATION  — 

I. The  judgment  against  (any  one),  Kardicpi^a. 

Rom.  5.  16  the  judgment  (was)  by  oue  tocondemua. 
<  5.  18  (come)  upon  all  men  to  condemnation 

8.    1  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  C. 

2.  Tiie  process  of  condemnation,  KardxpLins  katakr. 

2  Co.   3.    9  if  the  ministration  of  condemnation 

3.  The  judgment  (pronounced),  Kplp.a  krima. 

Luke23-  40  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  condemnation 
1  Co  11.  34  ye  come  not  together  unto  condemnation 
1  Ti.  3.  6  lest,  .he  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the 
Jas.  3.  1  we  shall  receive  the  greater  condemnation 
Jude        4  who  were. .ordained  to  this  condemnation 

4.  The  process  of  judgment,  tcplds  krisis. 

John  3.  19  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is 
5.  24  He.. shall  not  come  into  condemnation 

5..  I  judging  under  a  false  pretence,  bir6Hpiais. 
Jas.    5.  12  swear  not.  .lest  ye  fall  into  [condemnat.] 

CONDEMNING  — 

To  make  or  declare  wrong  (in  law)  van  rasha,  5. 

1  Ki.   8.  32  judge  thy  servants,  condemning  the 

CONDESCEND,  to  — 

To  be  led  aioay  loilh,  olivairayopuxi  sunapagomai. 
Rom  12.  16  but  condescend  to  men  of  low  estate 

CONDITIONS  of  — 

The  things  toward  or  touching  (anything),  to;  npbs. 

Lukei4.  32  he  sendeth.  .and  desireth  conditions  of 
CONDUCT,  to  — 
\.To  cause  to  go  (or  lead)  over,  ~\3'J,  abar,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.  40  the  people  of  Judah  conducted  the  king 
2.  To  send  away  or  forth,  rhf  shalach,  3. 

2  Sa.  19.  31  with  the  king,  to  conduct  him  over  Jor. 
3.2*0  set  down  throughout  or  fully,  KadtV-rnui. 

Acts  17.  15  they  that  conducted  Paul  brought  him 
CONDUCT  forth,  to  — 
To  send  forward,  ■npoircp.iTia  propempo. 

1  Co.  16.  11  conduct  him  forth  iu  peace,  that  he  may 

CONDUCT  over,  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  (or  lead)  over,  13."  abar,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.  15  to  meet  the  king,  to  conduct  the  king  o. 
CONDUIT  — 

Aqueduct,  nb'jn  tealah. 

2  Ki.  18.  17' stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool 

20.  20  made  a  pool  and  a  conduit,  and  brought 
Isa.    7.   3  at  the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  upper 
36.    2  he  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upper 

CONEY  — 

A  hare,  hedgehog,  or  rabbit,  J92V  shaphan. 

Lev.  11.    5  the  coney,  because' he  cheweth  the  cud 
Deut  14.    7  (as)  the  camel,  and  the  hare,  and  the  coney 
PBa.104. 18  wild  goats;  (and) the  rocks  for  the  conies 
1'i'ov  30.  26  The  conies  (are  but)  a  feeble  folk,  yet 

CONFECTION  — 

Perfume,  spice,  npn  roqach. 

Exod3o.  35  a  confection  after  the  art  of  the  apothec. 


CONFECTIONARY  — 
Perfumer,  nniri  raqqachah. 

1  Sa.   8.  13  take  your  daughters  (to  be)  confectionar. 

CONFEDERACY  — 

1..1  covenant,  agreement,  rr~!3  berith. 

Obad.       7  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought 
1.A  conspiracy,  "lE/p  qesher. 

Isa.      8.  12  Say  ye  hot,  A  confederacy,  to  all  (them  to 
8.  12  this  people  shall  say,  A  confederacy 

CONFEDERATE  — 

Master  or  owner  of  a  covenant,  an  ally,  rr"i3  Sjjs. 
Gen.  14.  13  and  these  (were)  confederate  with  Abram 

CONFEDERATE,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  rest,  nn  nuach. 

Isa.     7.    2  saying,  Syria  is  confederate  with  Ephraim 

2.  To  cut  (or  prepare)  a  covenant,  n'"!3  m|  k.  berith. 

Psa.  83.   5  they  are  confederate  against  thee 

CONFER,  to  — 

l.(JJis)  word  was,  n;rt  "13}  dabar  hayah. 

1  Ki.  1.    7  he  conferred  with  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah 
2.  To  put  (anything)  up  toward  one,  irpoaavaTiBrifii. 

Gal.    1. 16  immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh 
3. To  talk  together,  o-vWaAiu  sullaleo. 

Acts  25.  12  when  he  had  conferred  with  the  council 
4.  To  cast  (words)  together,  n^SjUu  sumballo. 

Acts    4.  15  they  conferred  among  themselves 

CONFERENCE,  add  in  — 

To  put  (anything)  tip  toward  one,  irpoaai'ariBrip.i. 
Gal.    2.    6  iu  conference  added  nothing  to  me 

CONFESS,  to  — 

1.  To  confess  (by  throwing  out  the  hand),  .it  yadah,5. 

1  Ki.   8.  33  shall  turn  again  to  thee,  and  confess  thy 

8.  35  confess  thy  name,  and  turn  from  their 

2  Ch.  6.  24  shall  return  and  confess  thy  name,  and 

6.  26  confess  thy  name,  and  turn  from  their 
Job  40. 14  Then  will  I  also  confess  unto  thee  that 
Psa.  32.     5  Iwill  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the 
Prov.28.  13  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  (them) 

2.  To  confess  (for  oneself),  rn;  yadah,  7. 

Lev.    5.   5  he  shall  confess  that  he  hath  sinned  in 
16.  21  confess  over  him  all  the  iniquities  of 
26.  40  If  they  shall  confess  their  iniquity,  and 
Num.  5.    7  they  shall  confess  their  sin  which  they 
Ezra  10.    1  when  he  had  confessed,  weeping  and 
Neh.  1.    6  confess  the  sius  of  the  children  of  Israel 

9.  2  stood  and  confessed  their  sins,  and  the 
9.    3  (another)  fourth  part  they  confessed,  and 

Dan.  9.  20  confgssingmysiu  and  the  sin  of  my  people 

3.  To  speak  out  the  same  things,  i^o^oXoyia  exom. 

Matt.  3.   6  were  baptised  ofhimin  Jordan,  confessing 
.Mark  1.    5  were  all  baptised  of  him.,  confessing  their 
Acts  19.  18  and  confessed,  and  showed  their  deeds 
Romi4.  11  and  every  tongue  shall  confess  to  God 

15.   9  For  this  cause  I  will  confess  to  thee 
Phil.    2.  11  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus 
James5.  16  Confess  (your)  faults  one  to  another,  and 
Rev.    3.    5  will_[confess]  his  name  before  my  Father 

4.  To  speak  the  same  thing  (as  another),  6p.o\oyca. 

Jlattio.  32  Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me 

10.  32  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father 
Lukei2.    8  Whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men 

12.    8  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  also  confess 
John  1.  20  he  confessed,  and  denied  not ;  but  con. 
9.  22  if  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was  Christ 

12.  42  because  of  the  Pharisees  they  did  not  con. 
Acts  23.    8  but  the  Pharisees  confess  both 

24.  14  this  I  confess  unto  thee,  that  after  the 
Rom.  10.    9  if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the 
Heb.  11.  13  confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and 

1  Jo.   1.   9  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and 

4.    2  that  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 
4.    3  every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  J. 
4.  15  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the 

2  Jo.         7  who  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is 

CONFESSION,  to  make  — 

To  confess  (for  oneself),  nv  yadah,  7. 

2  Ch.  30.  22  making  confession  to  the  Lord  God  of 
Dan.    9.   4  made  my  confession,  and  said,  O  Lord 

CONFESSION  — 

1 .  Confession  (by  casting  out  the  hand),  nn'lB  todah. 
Jos.  7.  19  make  confession'unto  him ;  ami  tell  me 
Ezra  10.  11  make  confession  unto  the  Lord  God  of 

2./1  saying  the  same  thing  as  another,  bpioXoyia. 

1  Ti.   6. 13  who  before . .  Pilate  witnessed  a  good  con. 
CONFESSION  is  made  — 

To  speak  the  same  tiling,  bixoXoyev  homologeo. 

Rom.  10.  10  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto 
CONFIDENCE  — 

1.  Confidence,  trust,  rras  bctach. 

Eze.  28.  26  they  shall  dwell  with  confidence,  when  I 

2.  Confidence,  trust,  ."inij3  bitchah. 

Isa.  30. 15  in  quietness  and  iu  confidence  shall  be 

3.  Confidence,  trust,  JinBS  bitlachon. 

2  Ki.18.  19  What  confidence  (is)  this  wherein  thou 
Isa.   36.   4  What  confidence  (is)  this  wherein  thou 


4. Firmness,  stoutness,  Sdj  kesel. 

Prov.  3.  26  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  confidence,  and 
5.  Firmness,  stoutness,  nSp3  kislah. 

Job     4.    6  (Is)  not  (this)  thy  fear,  thy  confidence 
6. Confidence,  trust,  nana  mibtach. 

Job    18. 14  His  confidence  shall  be  rooted  out  of  his 

31.  24  said  to  the.,  gold,  (Thou  art)my  confidence 

Psa.  65.   5  the  confidence  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 

Prov  14.  26  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  strong  confiden. 

21.  22  casteth  down  the  strength  of  the  eonfid. 

25.  19  Confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man.  .(is  like) 

Jer.    2.  37  the  Lord  hath  rejected  thy  confidences 

48.  13  house  of  Israel  wasashamed'of.  .their  con. 
Eze.  29.  16  it  shall  he  no  more  the  confidence  of  the 

7 '.Free-spokenness,  boldness,  trapp-nda  parrhesia. 
Acts  28.  31  with  all  confidence,  no  man  forbidding 
Heb.  3.    6  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence  and  the 
10.  35  Cast  not  away  therefore  your  confidence 

1  Jo.   2.  28  when  he  shall  appear,  we  may  have  con. 

3.  21  (then)  have  we  confidence  toward  God 
5.  14  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him 

^■.Confident persuasion,  TreirolB-niris  pepoithesis. 

2  Co.  1.  15  in  this  confidence  I  was  minded  to  come 

8.  22  upon  the  great  confidence  which  (I  have) 
10.    2  when  I  am  present  with  that  confidence 

Eph.  3.  12  In  whom  we  have,  .access  with  confidence 
Phil.  3.    4  Though  I  might  also  have  confidence  in 

9.  What  stands  under  one,  substratum,  vir6(rrao-is. 
2  Co.  11.  17  as  it  were  foolishly,  in  this  confidence 
Heb.  3.  14  if  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence 

CONFIDENCE,  to  have  — 

l.To  have  good  courage,  Bapbtoi  tharrheo. 

2  Co.  7.  16  I  rejoice  therefore  that  I  have  confidence 

2.  To  persuade,  nt'iBa  peithS. 

2  Co.   2.    3  having  confidence  in  you  all,  that  my 
Gal.     5.  10  I  have  confidence  in  you  through  the  L. 
Phil.    1.  25  having  this  confidence,  I  know  that  I 

.  3.    3  and  have  no  confidence  iu  the  flesh 
2  Th.  3.    4  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  touching 
Phm.      21  Having  confidence  in  thy  obedience  I 

CONFIDENCE,  to  put  — 

To  be  confident,  have  trust,  nca  batach. 

Judg.  9.  26  the  men  of  Shechem  put  their  confidence 
Psa. 118. 8,  9  (It  is)better.  .than  to  put  confidence  in 
Mic.    7.    5  put  ye  not  confidence  iu  a  guide 

CONFIDENT  — 

1.  To  have  good  courage,  Bapbew  tharrheo. 

2  Co.   5.   6  (we  are)  always  confident,  knowing  that 

2.  What  stands  under  one,  substratum,  inrStrTairis 
2  Co.   9.   4  ashamed  in  this  same  confident  boasting 

CONFIDENT,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  confident,  have  trust,  nt?3  batach. 

Psa.  27.  3  against  me,  in  this  (will)  I  (be)  confident 
Prov  14.  16  but  the  fool  rageth,  and  is  confident 

2.  To  have  good  courage,  Bapbeu>  tharreo. 

2  Co.   5.    8  We  are  confident,  (I  say),  and  willing 

3.  To  persuade,  nelBu  peitho. 

Rom.  2.  19  And  art  confident  that  thou  thyself  art 
Phil.  1.    6  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that 

CONFIDENT,  to  wax  — 

To  persuade,  irtidcii  peiiho. 

Phil.  1.  14  many  of  the  brethren ..  waxing  confident 

CONFIRM,  to  — 

1.2*o  harden,  ;'?N  amats,  3. 

Isa.   35.   3  Strengthen.,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees 

l.To  strengthen,  "133  gabar,  5. 

Dan.   q.  27  he  shall.confirm  the  covenant  with  many 

3.  To  keep  hold  on,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

2  Ki.  15.  19  his  hand  might  be  with  him  to  confirm 
Dan.  11.    1  I,  stood  to  confirm  and  to  strengthen  him 

4.2*0  establish,  make  ready,  ps  Jam,  3a. 

2  Sa.  7.  24  thou  hast  confirmed  to  thyself  thy  people 
Psa.  68.   9  whereby  thou  didst  confirm  thine  inner. 

5.2*0  establish,  ;«  hurl,  5. 

1  Ch.  14.   2  that  the  Lord  had  comfirmed  him  king 

6.7*0  fill  up  or  out,  t6a  male,  3. 

1  Ki.   1.  14  I  also  will  come  in.  .and  confirm  thy 

7.2*0  cause  to  stand,  set  up,  settle,  i?"  amad,  5. 
1  Ch.  16.  17  hath  confirmed  the  same  to  Jacob  for  a 
Psa.105.  10  confirmed  the  same  unto  Jacob  for  a  law 

8.2*0  establish,  confirm,  Dip  gym,  3. 

Ruth  4.    7  concerning  changing,  for  to  confirm  all 
Esth.  9.  29  to  confirm  this  second  letter  of  Purim 

9.  31  To  confirm  these  days  of  Purim  in  their 
9.  32  the  decree  of  Esther  confirmed  these 

Eze.  13.    6  to  hope  that  they  would  confirm  the  word 

9.2*0  establish,  confirm,  n?P  gym,  5. 

Nuni3o.  14  he  confirmeth  them,  because  he  held  his 
Deut27.  26  Cursed  (be)  he  that  confirmeth  not  (all) 
Isa.    44.  26  That  confirmeth  the  word  of  his  servant 
Dan.    9.  12  he  hath  confirmed  his  worts,  which  ha 

10. 2*o  make  firm,  strong  or  sure,  fteQc.du  bebaioo. 
Marki6.  20  [confirming  the  word  with  signs  follow.] 
Rom  15.    8  to  confirm  the  promises  (made) uuto  the 


CONFIRM 


197 


CONGREGATION 


i  Co.  i.    6  as  the  testimony  of  Christ  was  confirmed 
i.    3  Who  shall  also  confirm  you  unto  the  end 
Heb.   2.    3  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that 

11.  To  confirm  J 'idly,  iirio-r-nptC^  episterizo. 

Acts  14.  22  Confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples,  (and) 
15-  32  exhorted  the  brethren,  .and  coufirmed 

15.  41  he  went  through  Syria,  .confirming  the 

12.  To  give  poioer  or  validity,  fcvp6a  hu/roo. 

2  Co.  2.    8  that  ye  would  confirm  (your)  love  toward 
Gal.    3. 15  (if  it  be)  confirmed,  no  man  disannulled 

13.  To  be  or  act  as  a  mediator,  u,e<rn-ei5w  mesiteuo. 
Heb.   6.  17  Wherein  God.  .confirmed  (it)  by  an  oath 

CONITRM  before,  to  — 

To  give  power  or  validity  beforehand,  TvpoKvp6co. 
Gal.     3.  17  that  was  confirmed  before  of  Godin  Christ 

CONFIRMATION  -=■ 

Steadfast  or  firm  establishment,  fiefialaxris  bebaiosis. 

Phil.   1.    7  in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the 

Heb.   6. 16  an  oath  for  confirmation  (is)  to  them  an 
CONFIRMED,  to  be  — 
To  be  strong,  held  fast,  pin  chazak. 

2  Ki.14.    5  as  soon  as  the  kingdom  was  confirmed  in 
CONFISCATION  — 
Fine,  oppression,  e;j£  anash. 

Ezra    7.  26  to  banishment,  or  to  confiscation  of  goods 
CONFLICT  — 
Contest,  struggle,  aycov  agon. 

Phil.    1.  30  Having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw 

Col.     2.    1  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict 
CONFORMABLE  unto,  to  make  — 
To  make  of  the  same  form,  (rvjAiuop<p6ct}  summorphoo. 

Phil.   3.  10  being  made  conformable  unto  his  death 
CONFORMED  to  — 
Having  the  same  form,  avfxfj.op<pos  summorphos. 

Rom.  8.  29  did  predestinate  (to  be)  conformed  to  the 
CONFORMED,  to  be  — 
Tofashionin  same  way,  ffuffxypwifa  suschematizo. 

Rom  12.    2  be  not  conformed  to  this  world  ;  but  be 
CONFOUND,  to  — 

1.  To  mix,  mingle,  773  baled. 

Gen.  11.    7  let  us  go*  down,  and -here  confound  their 
11.    g  the  Lord  did  there  confound  the  langu. 

2.  To  bring  or  put  down,  nrn  chathath,  5. 

Jer.     1.  17  be  not  dismayed .  .lest  I  confound  thee 

3.  To  put  to  shame  utterly,  Ka.rai<rx^v^  kataischuno. 

1  Co.    1.  27  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
1.  27  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confou. 

1  Pe.   2.    6  he  that  believeth.  .shall  not  be  confoun. 

4.  To  confuse,  pour  out  together,  crvyxvvca  sugchuno. 

Acts    2.    6  the  multitude  came,  .and  were  confoun. 
9.  22  confounded  the  Jews  which  dwelt  at  D. 

CONFOUNDED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  ashamed,  become  pale,  »>ia  bush. 

2  Ki.  19.  26  they  were  dismayed  and  confounded 
Job     6.  20  They  were  confounded  because  they  had 
Psa.  22.    5  trusted  in  thee,  and  were  not  confounded 

35.  4  Let  them  be  confounded  and  put  to  shame 
71. 13  Let  them  be  confounded  (and)  consumed 
71.  24  they  are  confounded,  for  they  are  brought 
83.  17  Let  them  be  confounded  and  troubled  for 
97.  7  Confounded  be  all  they  that  serve  graven 
129.    5  Let  them  all  be  confounded  and  turned 

Isa.  19.  9  that  weave  net  works,  shall  be  confoun. 
37.  27  they  were  dismayed  and  confounded 

Jer.  9.  ig  we  are  greatly  confounded,  because  we 
17. 18  Let  them  be  confounded  that  persecute 
17. 18  let  not  me  be  confounded ;  let  them  be 

49.  23  Hamath  is  confounded,  and  Arpad  ;  for 

50.  12  Your  mother  shall  be  sore  confounded 

51.  47  her  whole  land  shall  be  confounded,  and 
51.  51  We  are  confounded,  because  we  have 

£ze.  16.  52  be  thou  confotiuded  also,  and  bear  thy 

16.  63  thou  mayest  remember,  and  be  confoun. 
Mic.    7.  16  The  nations  shall  see,  and  be  confound. 

2.  To  be  ashamed,  become  red,  nan  ehapher. 

Psa.  35     4  Let  them  be  confounded  and  put  to 
40.  14  Let  them  be  ashamed  and  confounded 
70.    2  Let  them  be  ashamed  aud  confounded 

Isa.  1.  29  ye  shall  be  confounded  for  the  gardens 
24.  23  the  moon  shall  be  confounded,  and  the 

Jer.  15.    g  she  hath  been  ashamed  aud  confounded 

Uric.   3.    7  and  the  diviners  confounded ;  yea,  they 

3.  To  be  ashamed,  dried  up,  e'a;  yabash,  5. 

Jer.  10.  14  every  founder  is  confounded  by  the  gray. 
46.  24  The  daughter  of  Egypt  shall  be  confoun. 
48.    1  Kiriathaim  is  confounded  (and)  taken 
4S.    1  Misgab  is  confounded  aud  dismayed 
48.  20  Moab  is  confounded  ;  for  it  is  broken 
50.    2  Bel  is  confounded,  Merodach  is  broken 

50.  2  her  idols  are  confounded,  her  images  are 

51.  17  every  founder  is  confounded  by  the  gra. 
Zech.io.    5  the  riders  on  horses  shall  be  confounded 

4.  To  be  put  to  shame,  blush,  D^a  kalam,  2. 

Psa.  69.    6  let  not  those  that  seek  thee  be  confoun. 

Isa.  41. 11  all  they,  .shall  be  ashamed  and  confoun. 
45.  16  They  shall  be  ashamed,  and  also  confou. 
45. 17  ye  shall  not  be  ashamed  nor  confounded 
50.    7  therefore  shall  I  not  be  confounded 
54.   4  not  be  ashamed  :  neither  be  thou  confo. 


Jer.  22.  22  then  shalt  thou  be  ashamed  and  confou. 

31.  19  I  was  ashamed,  yea,  even  confounded 
Eze.  16.  54  and  mayest  be  confounded  in  all  that 

36.  32  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  your 

5.  To  be  made  or  caused  to  blush,  D?a  kalam,  6. 

Jer.  14.    3  they  were  ashamed  and  confounded,  and 
CONFUSE,  to  — 
To  pour  out  together,  confuse,  o-vyxvvw  sugchuno. 

Acts  19.  32  for  the  assembly  was  confused  ;  and  the 
CONFUSED  noise  — 
Shaking,  trembling,  u?m  raash. 

Isa.     9.    5  For  every  battle . .  (is)  with  confused  noise 

CONFUSION  ;— 

1. Shame,  pxdeness,  n'^a  bosheth. 

1  Sa.  20.  30  thou  hast  chosen,  .to  thine  own  confusion 

20.  30  and  unto  the  confusion  of  thy  mother's 
Ezra  9.  7  to  a  spoil,  and  to  confusion  of  face,  as  (it 
Psa.  109.  29  cover  themselves  with  their  own  confus. 
Jer.  7.  19  not  (provoke)  themselves  to  the  confusion 
Dan.  9.  7  unto  us  confusion  of  faces,  as  at  this  day 
9.    8  0  Lord,  to  us  (belongeth)  confusion  of 

2.ShameJ  blushing,  .11373  kelimmah. 

Psa.  44.  15  My  confusion  (is)  continually  before  me 
Isa.    30.   3  trust  in  the  shadow,  .(your)  confusion 
45.  16  they  shall  go  to  confusion  together  (that) 
61.    7  (for)  confusion  they  shall  rejoice  in  their 
Jer.     3.  25  We  lie  down  in  our  shame,  aud  our  conf. 
20.  11  (their)  everlasting  confusion  shall  never 

3. Lightness,  contempt,  p7j2  qalon. 

Job  10. 15  (I  am)  full  of  confusion ;  therefore  see 

i.Confusion,  ?an  tebel. 

Lev.  18.  23  neither,  .stand  before  a  beast.,  it  (is)  conf. 
20. 12  they  have  wrought  confusion;  their  blood 

5. Emptiness,  wasteness,  *nft  tohu. 

Isa.   24.  10  The  city  of  confusion  is  broken  down 
34.  11  stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  confusion 
41.  29  their  molten  images  (are)  wind  and  conf. 

6.  Instability,  aKaracrrao-ia  akatastasia. 

1  C0.14.  33  God  is  not  (the  author)  of  confusion,  but 

Jas.     3. 16  there  (is)  confusion  and  every  evil  work 
I.Confusion,  a  pouring  out  together,  avyxv<ris. 

Acts  iq.  29  the  whole  city  was  filled  with  confusion 
CONFUSION,  to  be  brought  to  — 
To  be  ashamed,  become  red,  ~>Dn  ehapher. 

Psa.  35.    4,  26  Let  them  be.  .brought  to  confusion 
CONFUSION,  to  be  put  to  — 

1.  To  be  ashamed,  pale,  una  bush. 

Psa.  71.    1  let  me  never  be  put  to  confusion 

2.  To  be  made  to  blush,  nbs  kalam,  2. 

Psa.  70.    2  Let  them  be.  .put  to  confusion,  that  des. 

CONGEALED,  to  be  — 

To  be  congealed,  hardened.  a?pT  gapha. 

Exodis.   8  the  depths  were  congealed  in  the  heart 

CONGRATULATE,  to  — 

To  declare  blessed,  =n?  becrak,  3. 

1  Ch.18. 10  enquire  of  his  welfare,  and  to  congratu. 

CONGREGATION  — 

l.One  dumb  or  bound,  n?x  elem. 

Psa.  58.    1  Do  ye.  .speak  righteousness,  0  congrega. 

2.  One  living,  or  alive,  "n  chai. 

Psa.  68.  10  Thy  congregation  hath  dwelt  therein 
74.  19  forget  not  the  congregation  of  thy  poor 

3.^4  meeting  place  ;  tlie  meeting  itself,  "ijriD  moed. 
Exod27.  21  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation 

So  in  28.  43  ;  29.  4,  10,  n,  30,  32,  42,  44 ;  30.  16,  18,  20, 
26,  36  ;  31.  7  ;  33.  7,  7 ;  35-  21 ;  38.  8,  30 ;  39.  32,  40  ;  40. 
12  ;  Lev.  1.  1,  3,  5  ;  3.  2,  8,  13  ;  4.  4,  5>  7>  7>  14.  I6,  18,  18  ; 
6.  16,  26,  30 ;  8.  3,  4,  31,  33,  35  ;  9-  5-  23  !  *°-  7>  9  1  12.  6 ; 
14.  11,  23  ;  15.  14,  29  ;  16.  7.  16,  17  ;  17.  4,  5,  6,  9  ;  19.  21 ; 
24.  3 ;  Num.  1.  1 ;  2.  2,  17 ;  3.  7,  8,  25,  25,  38  ;  4.  3,  4,  15, 
23*  25,  25,  28,  30,  31,  33,  35,  37,  39,  41.  43.  47  J  6.  10,  13, 
18  >"  7-  5.  89  ;  8. 9,  15,  19,  22,  24,  26  ;  10.  3  ;  11.  16 ;  12.  4  ; 
16.  18,  19,  42,  43,  50 ;  17.  4 ;  18.  4,  6,  21,  22,  23,  31 ;  19.  4; 
20.  6;  25.  6 ;  27.  2;  31.  5  ;  Dent.  31.  14,  14  ;  Josh.  iS.  1  ; 
19.  51  ;  1  Sa.  2.  22 ;  1  Ki.  8.  4 ;  1  Ch.  6.  . 

Ch.  1.  3,  6,  13  ;  5.  5. 


■  3Z',9- 


23-  3=  I 


Exod4o.    2  the  tent  of  the  congregation 
[So  in  verses  6,  7,   22,  24,  26,  29,  30,  32,  34,  36.] 

Numi4.  10  the  congregation  bade  stone  them  with 
16.    2  famous  in  the  congregation,  men  of  ren. 

Psa.  74.   4  roar  in  the  midst  of  thy  congregations 
75.    2  When  I  shall  receive  the  congregation  I 

Isa.    14.  13  also  upon  the  mount  of  the  congregation 
i. An  appointed  meeting,  nijj  edah. 

Exodi2.    3  Speak  ye  unto  all  the  congregation  of  Is. 
12.    6  the  whole  assembly  of  the  congregation 
12. 19  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  congregation 
12.  47  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  keep  it 
16.    1  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel 
16.   2  the  whole  congregation  of  the  children 
16.   9  Say  unto  all  the  congregation  of  the  chil. 
16.  10  Aaron  spake  unto  the  whole  congregation 

16.  22  the  rulers  of  the  congregation  came  and 

17.  1  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

34.  31  the  rulers  of  the  congregation  returned 

35.  1  gathered  all  the  congregation  of  the  chil. 
35.  4,  20  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 
38.  2.s  that  were  numbered  of  the  congregation 


Lev.     4.  13  if  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  sin 
4.  15  the  elders  of  the  congregation  shall  lay 
8.    3  gather  thou  all  the  congregation  together 

8.  5  Moses  said  unto  the  congregation,  This 

9.  s  all  the  congregation  drew  near  and  stood 
10.  17  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  congregation 
16.    5  he  shall  take  of  the  congregation  of  the 
19.    2  Speak  unto  all  the  congregation  of  the 
24. 14  and  let  all  the  congregation  stone  him 
24.  16  the  congregation  shall  certainly  stone  him 

Num.  1.  2  Take  ye  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation 
1.  16  These  (were)  the  renowned  of  the  congre. 
1.  18  they  assembled  all  the  congregation  tog. 
1.  53  there  be  no  wrath  upon  the  congregation 

3.  7  and  the  charge  of  the  whole  congregation 

4.  34  the  chief  of  the  congregation  numbered 
8.  20  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel 

13.  26  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel 

14.  1  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  voice 
14.   2  and  the  whole  congregation  said  unto 
14.    5  all  the  assembly  of  the  congregation 
14.  10  all  the  congregation  bade  stone  them 
14.  27  (shall  I  bear  with)  this  evil  congregation 
14.  35  do  it  unto  all  this  evil  congregation 

14.  36  made  all  the  congregation  to  murmur 

15.  24  without  the  knowledge  of  the  congrega. 
15.  24  the  congregation  shall  offer  one  young 
15.  25  an  atonement  for  all  the  congregation 
15.  26  it  shall  be  forgiven  all  the  congregation 
15.  33  brought  him.  .unto  all  the  congregation 
15.  35  the  congregation  shall  stone  him  with 

15.  36  the  congregation  brought  him  without 

16.  3  all  the  congregation  (are)  holy,  every  one 
16.  9  hath  separated  you  from  the  congregation 
16.  9  to  stand  before  the  congregation  to  min. 
16.  19  Korah  gathered  all  the  congregation 

16.  21  Separate,  .from  among  this  congregation 
16.  22  wilt  thou  be  wroth  with,  .the  congrega.? 
16.  24  Speak  unto  the  congregation,  saying,  Get 
16.  26  he  spake  unto  the  congregation,  saying 
16.  41  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel 
16.  42  when  the  congregation  was  gathered 
16.  45  Get  you  up  from  among  this  congregation 
16.  46  go  quickly  unto  the  congregation,  and 

19.  9  it  shall  be  kept  for  the  congregation  of 

20.  1  Then  came .  .the  whole  congregation,  into 
20.  2  there  was  no  water  for  the  congregation 
20.    8  thou  shalt  give  the  congregation  and 

20.  11  the  congregation  drank,  and  their  beasts 
20.  22  the  whole  congregation,  jourueyed^from 
20.  27  went  up . .  in  the  sight  of  all  the  congrega. 
20.  29  all  the  congregation  saw  that  Aaron  was 
25.    6  in  the  sight  of  all  the  congregation  of  the 

25.  7  rose  up  from  among  the  congregation 

26.  2  Take  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation  of 

26.  9  (which  were)  famous  in  the  congregation 

27.  2  before  the  princes  and  all  the  congrega. 
27.  14  rebelled,  .in  the  strife  of  the  congregation 
27.  16  the  Lord,  .set  a  man  over  the  congrega. 
27.  17  that  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  be  not 
27.  19  And  he  set  him.  .before  all  the  congrega. 
27.  20  all  the  congregation  of  the  children . .  may 
27.  21  Israel  with  him,  even  all  the  congrega. 
27.  22  and  set  him.  .before  all  the  congregation 
31.  12  unto  the  congregation  of  the  children  of 
31. 13  all  the  princes  of  the  congregation,  went 
31.  16  there  was  a  plague  among  the  congrega. 
31.  26  and  the  chief  fathers  of  the  congregation 
31.  27  between  them.  .and.,  all  the  congregation 

31.  43  half  (that  pertained  unto)  the  congrega. 

32.  2  unto  the  princes  of  the  congregation 
32.    4  the  Lord  smote  before  the  congregation 
35.  12  until  he  stand  before  the  congregation 
35.  24  the  congregation  shall  judge  between  the 
35.  25  the  congregation  shall  deliver  the  slayer 
35.  25  the  congregation  shall  restore  him  to  the 

Josh.  9.  15  the  princes  of  the  congregation  sware 
9. 18  the  princes  of  the  congregation  had 
9.  18  the  congregation  murmured  against  the 
9.  19  princes  said  unto  all  the  congregation 
9.  21  drawers  of  water  unto  all  the  congrega. 
9.  27  and  drawers  of  water  for  the  congrega. 

iS.    1  the  whole  congregation,  .assembled  toge. 

20.    6  until  he  stand  before  the  congregation  for 

20.  9  until  he  stood  before  the  congregation 
22.  12  the  whole  congregation,  .gathered  thera. 
22.  16  Thus  saith  the  whole  congregation  of  the 
22.  17  there  was  a  plague  in  the  congregation 
22.  18  will  be  wroth  with  the  whole  congrega. 
22.  20  wrath  fell  on  all  the  congregation  of  Isr. 
22.  30  the  princes  of  the  congregation,  and  heads 

Judg.20.    1  the  congregation  was  gathered  together 

21.  10  the  congregation  sent  thither  twelve  tho. 
21.  13  the  whole  congregation  sent  (some)  to 
21.  16  Then  the  elders  of  the  congregation  said 

1  Ki.  8.    5  king  Solomon,  aud  all  the  congregation 

12.  20  sent  and  called  him  unto  the  congrega. 

2  Ch.  5.   6  king  Solomon,  and  all  the  congregation 
Job    15.  34  the  congregation  of  hypocrites  (shall  be) 
Psa.     1.    5  nor  sinners  in  the  congregation  of  the 

7.    7  So  shall  the  congregation .  .compass  thee 
74.    2  Remember  thy  congregation,  (which) 
82.    1  God  staudeth  in  the  congregation  of  the 
in.    1  in  the  assembly,  .and  (in)  the  congrega. 
Jer.     6.  18  hear,  ye  nations,  and  know,  O  congrega. 

30.  20  their  congregation  shall  be  established 
Hos.    7.  12  will  chastise  them,  as  their  congregation 

5. An  assembly  called  together,  bn^  qahal. 

Lev.  4.  14  then  the  congregation  shall  offer  a  young 
4.  21  it  (is)  a  sin  offering  for  the  congregation 
16.  17  and  for  all  the  congregation  of  Israel 


CONGREGATIONS 


198 


CONSIDER 


Lev.  16.  33  for  all  the  people  of  the  congregation 
N  urn  io.    7  when  the  congregation  is  to  be  gathered 

15.  15  One  ordinance  (shall  he).,  for.,  the  congre. 

16.  3  yourselves  above  the  congregation  of  the 
16.  33  they  perished  from  among  the  congrega. 
16.  47  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation 

19.  20  shall  be  cut  o(f  from,  .the  congregation 

20.  4  why  have  ye  brought  up  the  congregation 
20.  10  Muses  and  Aaron  gathered  the  congrega. 
20.  12  ye  shall  not  bring  this  congregation  into 

Deut.23.    1,  2,  2,  3,  3,  8  not  enter  into  the  congrega, 
31.  30  spake  in  the  ears  of  all  the  congregation 

Josh.  8.  35  Joshua  read  not  before  all  the  congrega. 

Judg.21.    5  that  came  not  up  with  the  congregation 

1  Ki.  8.  14  blessed  all  the  congregation  of  Israel 
8. 14  and  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  stood 
8.  22  in  the  presence  of  all  the  congregation 
8.  55  he  stood,  and  blessed  all  the  congregation 
8.  65  all  Israel  with  him,  a  great  congregation 

12.  3  Jeroboam  and  all  the  congregation  of  Is. 
3  Oh.13.    2  David  said  unto  all  the  congregation  of 

13.  4  all  the  congregation  said  that  they  would 

28.  8  the  sight  of  all  Israel  the  congregation 

29.  1  the  king  said  unto  all  the  congregation 
29.  10  blessed  the  Loud  before  all  the  congrega. 
29.  20  And  David  said  to  all  the  congregation 
29.  20  the  congregation  blessed  the  Lord  God 

■2  Oh.  1.  3  So  Solomon,  and  all  the  congregation 
1.  5  Solomon  and  the  congregation  sought 
6.    3  blessed  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel 

6.  3  and  all  the  congregation  df  Israel  stood 
6.  12  in  the  presence  of  all  the  congregation 
6.  13  kneeled  down .  .before  all  the  congrega. 

-7.    8  Israel  with  him,  a  very  great  congrega. 
20.    5  Jehoshaphat  stood  in  the  congregation  of 
20.  14  Spirit  of  the  Lord  in  the.. congregation 

23.  3  all  the  congregation  made  a  covenant 

24.  6  servant  of.  .the  congregation  of  Israel 

28.  14  before  the  princes  and  all  the  congrega. 

29.  23  before  the  king  and  the  congregation 

29.  28  all  the  congregation  worshipped,  and  the 
■29.  31  the  congregation  brought  in  sacrifices 

29.  32  offerings,  which  the  congregation  brought 

30.  2  all  the  congregation  in  Jerusalem,  to  keep 
30.    4  the  thing  pleased,  .all  the  congregation 
30.  13  there  assembled,  .a  very  great  congrega. 

30. 17  For  (there  were)  many  in  the  congregation 
30.  24  Hezekiah.  .did  give  to  the  congregation 
30.  24  the  princes  gave  to  the  congregation 

30.  25  all  the  congregation  of  Judah,  with  the 

30.  25  all  the  congregation  that  came  out  of  Is. 

31. 18  their  daughters,  through  all  the  congre. 
Ezra  2.  64  The  whole  congregation  together  (was) 

10.    1  assembled  unto  him.  .a  very  great  congre. 
10.    8  and  himself  sepai'ated  from  the  congre. 
10.  12  all  the  congregation  answered  and  said 
10.  14  Let  now  our  rulers  of  all  the  congregation 
Neh.   5.  13  all  the  congregation  said,  Amen,  and 

7.  66  The  whole  congregation  together  (was) 

8.  2  Ezra,  .brought  the  law  before  the  cougre. 
8.  17  Aud  all  the  congregation,  .made  booths 

13.    1  Moabite  should  not  come  into  the  congre. 

Job    30.  28  I  stood  up,  (and)  I  cried  in  the  congrega. 

Psa.  22.  22  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  will  I 
22.  25  My  praise . .  of  thee  in  the  great  congrega. 
26.    5  I  have  hated  the  congregation  of  evil 
35.  18  I  will  give  thee  thanks  in  the  great  con. 
40.   9  preached  righteousness  in  the  great  con. 
40.  10  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation 
89.    5  thy  faithfulness  also  in  the  congregation 
107.  32  Let  them  exalt  him  also  in  the  congrega. 
149.    1  his  praise  in  the  congregation  of  saints 

Prov.  5.  14  in  all  evil  in  the  midst  of  the  congrega. 
21. 16  shall  remain  in  the  congregation  of  the 
26.  26  shall  he  showed  before  the  (whole)  con. 

Lam.   1.  10  they  should  not  enter  into  thy  congrega. 

Joel    2. 16  Gather  the  people,  sanctify  the  congrega. 

Mic.    2.    5  cast  a  cord  by  lot  in  the  congregation 

6.  A  a  assembly  called  together,  nWijD  qehillah. 

Deut  33.   4  the  inheritance  of  the  congregation  of  J. 

7. J. 1  assembly  led  together,  (Tvvaycoyrj  sunagnge. 
Acts  13.  43  when  the  congregation  was  broken  up 

CONGREGATIONS  — 

1. Assemblies  called  together,  nV?rrpD  maqheioth. 
Psa.  68.  26  Bless  ye  God  in  the  congregations,  (even) 

%  Assemblies  called  together,  D^rrp^  maqhdir/i. 
Pda.  26.  12  in  the  congregations  will  I  bless  the  Lord 

CON'-IAH,  W}j$  Jah  is  creating. 

A  name  given  to  Jehoiachin,  king  of  Judah,  who  was 

carried  captive  by  Nebuchadnezzar.     B.C.  599. 

ler,    22.  24  C.  the  sou  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 

22.  28  (Is)  this  man  C.  a  despised  broken  idol  ? 

37.    1  Josiah  reigned  instead  of  C.  the  son  of  J. 

CO-NON'-IAH,  m;M|  Jnh  is  creating. 
A  L<-vite  overseer  111  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  B.C.  726. 
2  Ch.  31.  12  over  which  C.  the  Lcvite  (was)  ruler,  and 

31.  13  Mahath.  .Benaiah.  .under  the  hand  of  C. 

CONQTTER,  to  — 

To  have  the  victory,  vucaw  nikao. 

Rev.    6.    2  he  went  forth  conquering,  and  to  conquer 

CONO.TJEROR.  to  be  more  than  — 
TO  have  more  than  victory,  irrrepviicdci)  Jntpcr/iil:"r>. 
Rom.  8.  37  In  all  those . .  wc  are  more  than  conquerors 


CONSCIENCE  — 

A  knowing  with  oneself,  o-vveiS^CLS  5 

John  8.    9  being  convicted  by  (their  own)  conscience 

Acts  23.    1  I  have  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before 

24.  16  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence 

Rom.  2.  15  their  conscience  also  bearing  witness,  and 

9.    1  my  conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in 

13.    s  notouly  for  wrath,  but  also  for  conscience' 

1  Co.    8.    7  for  some  with  couscience  of  the  idol  unto 

8.    7  their  conscience  being  weak  is  denied 
8.  10  shall  not  the  conscience  of  him  which  is 

8.  12  when  ye. .  wound  their  weak  conscience 
10.  25,  27  asking  no  question  for  conscience' sake 
10.  28  not  for  his  sake,  .and  for  conscience' sake 
10.  29  Conscience,  I  say,  not  thine. .another  c. 

2  Co.    1. 12  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our  conscience 

4.  2  commendingourselvesto  every,  .consci. 

5.  11  also  are  made  manifest  in  your  consciences 

1  Ti.    1.    5  a  good  conscience,  and  (of)  faith  unfeig. 

1,  19  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience 

3.  9  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience 

4.  2  having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot 

2  Ti  1 .  3  God,  whom  I  serve . .  with  pure  conscience 
Titus  1.  15  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled 
Heb.   9.    9  perfect,  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience 

9.  14  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works 
10.    2  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of 
10.  22  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  couscience 
13.  18  we  trust  we  have  a  good  conscience, in  all 

1  Pe.  2.  19  if  amanfor conscience  towardGod  endure 
3.  16  Having  a  good  conscience  ;  that,  whereas 
3.  21  the  answer  of  a  gooA  conscience  toward 

CONSECRATE,  to  — 

l.To  devote,  Dnn  charam.,  5. 

Mic.    4.  13  I  will  consecrate  their  gain  unto  the  Lord 

2.7*o  separate,  in  nazar,  5. 

Num.  6. 12  he  shall  consecrate  unto  the  Lord  the  days 

3.  To  set  apart,  ahp  qadesh,  3. 

Exod28.    3  make  Aaron's  garments  to  consecrate  him 

30.  30  anoint  Aaron  aud  his  sons,  and  consecrate 

4.  To  fill  the  hand,  X  **/$  mala  yad,  3. 

Exod28.  41  shalt  anoint  them,  aud  consecrate  them 
29.  9  thou  shalt  consecrate  Aaron  and  his  sons 
29.  29  to  he  anointed  therein,  aud  to  be  consec. 
29.  33  made  to  consecrate  (and)  to  sanctify  them 
29.  35  seven  days  shalt  thou  consecrate  them 
32.  29  Consecrate  yourselves  to-day  to  the  Lord 

Lev.  8.  33  until  the  days  of  your  consecration  be  at 
8.  33  for  seven  days  shall  he  consecrate  you 

16.  32  whom  he  shall  consecrate  to  minister  in 
21. 10  and  that  is  consecrated  to  put  on  the 

Num.  3.    3  whom  he  consecrated  to  minister  in  the 
Judgi7.    5  consecrated  one  of  his  sons,  who  became 

17.  12  And  Micah  consecrated  the  Levite ;  and 
1  Ki.  13.  33  whosoever  would,  he  consecrated  him 

1  Ch.  29.    5  who  (then)  is  willing  to  consecrate  his 

2  Ch.  13.    9  whosoever  cometh  to  consecrate  himself 

29.  31  ye  have  consecrated  yourselves  unto  the 
Eze.  43.  26  and  they  shall  consecrate  themselves 

5.  To  dedicate,  make  new,  4yKaivifa  eykainizo. 

Heb.  10.  20  and  living  way,  which  he  hath  consecrated 

6.  To  make  perfect,  re\€i6(a  teleioo. 

Heb.  7.  28  the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  evermore 

CONSECRATED  things  — 

Thing  set  apart,  en))  qodesh. 

Josh.  6.  19  vessels'of..iron,(are)consecrated  things 
2  Ch.  29.  33  the  consecrated  things(were)  six  hundred 

CONSECRATED,  to  be  — 

To  be  set  apart,  ihR  qadesh,  4. 

2  Ch.  26. 18  that  are  consecrated  to  burn  incense 

31.  6  of  holy  things  which  were  consecrated 
Ezra  3.    5  feasts  of  the  Lord  that  were  consecrated 

CONSECRATION  — 

1.  Fillings  in  or  up,  D'xVp  milluim. 

Exod2Q.  22  for  it  (is)  a  ram  of  consecration 

29.  26  breast  of  the  ram  of  Aaron's  consecration 
29.  27  heaved  up,  of  the  ram  of  the  consecration 
29.  31  shalt  take  the  ram  of  the  consecration 
29.  34  if  ought  of  the  flesh  of  the  consecrations 
Lev.  7.  37  trespass  offering,  and  of  the  consecrations 
8.  22  brought  the  other  ram,  the  ram  of  conse. 
8.  28  they  (were)  consecrations  for  a  sweet  sav. 
8.  29  of  the  ram  of  consecration  it  was  Moses' 
8.  31  that  (is)  in  the  basket  of  consecrations 
8.  33  until  the  days  of  your  consecration  be  at 

2.  Separation,  "\u  nezer. 

Num.  6.  7  the  consecration  of  his  God  (is)  upon  his 
6.    9  hath  defiled  the  head  of  his  consecration 

CONSENT  — 

I. Heart,  31?  leb. 

Psa.  83.    5  have  consulted  together  with  one  consent 

2.  A  man,  b'K  ish. 

1  Sa.  11.    7  and  they  came  out  with  one  consent 

S.Shoulder,  cap  shekem. 

Hos.    6.    o  priests  murder  in  the  way  by  consent 
Zeph.  3.   9  to  serve  him  with  one  consent 

CONSENT,  with  — 

From  united  voice,  Ik  rrvfj.(pwPov  ek  swnpft&nou. 
1  Co.    7.  5  except  (it  be)  with  consent  for  a  time 


CONSENT,  to  — 

1  To  be  willing,  rrax  abah. 

Deut  13.   8  Thou  shalt  not  consent  unto  him,  nor 

1  Ki.  20.    8  Hearken  not  (unto  him),  nor  consent 
Prov.  1. 10  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent 

2.  To  be  vticlined  to,  nix  oth,  2. 

Gen.  34.  15  But  in  this  will  we  consent  unto  you 
34.  22  herein  will  the  men  consent  unto  us  for 
34.  23  let  us  consent  unto  them,  and  they  will 

2  Ki.  12.    8  the  priests  consented  to  receive  no  (more) 

Z.To  hearken,  Vfey  shama. 

Dan.    1.  14  he  consented  to  them  in  this  matter,  and 

4,  To  nod  over  [a  thing),  assent,  iirtveviA)  epineuo. 
Acts  18.  20  When  they  desired.. he  consented  not 

CONSENT  to,  to  — 

l.To  come  toward,  vpoatpxofiai  firoserchomai. 

1  Ti.     6.    3  If  any  man.  .consent  not  to  wholesome 
2.7*0 put  down  [a  vote)  with,  o-vyKaTaridv/xi. 

Luke23.  51  The  same  had  not  consented  to  the  cou. 

CONSENT  unto,  to  — 

l.To  say  with,  av/xtpv/J-i  sump)hemi. 

Rom.  7.  16  I  consent  unto  the  law  that  (it  is)  good 
2.2*o  think  well  {of  a  thing)  with,  o-vvevSotttto. 

Acts    8.    1  And  Saul  was  consenting  unto  his  death 

22.  20  I.  .was  standing  by,  and  consenting  unto 

CONSENT  with,  to  — 

To  be  pleased  with,  nyi  ratsah. 

Psa.  50. 18  thou  consentedst  with  him,  and  hast 
CONSIDER,  to  — 
1.7*0  say,  *u?n  amar. 

Hos.    7.    2Tthey  consider  not  in  their  hearts  (that) 
2.To  consider,  understand,  p?  bin. 

Deut  32.    7  consider  the  years  of  many  generations 
32.  29  (that)  they  would  consider  their  latter 
Psa.     5.    1  0  Lord  ;  consider  my  meditation 

50.  22  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I 
Prov  23.    1  consider  diligently  what  (is)  before  thee 
24.  12  doth  not  he  that  pondereth..  consider  (it) 

3. To  (cause  to)  consider,  distinguish,  pa  bin,  5. 
Psa.  33.  15  He  fashioneth  their  hearts,  .he  consid. 
Isa.   57.    1  none  considering  that  the  righteous  is 
Dan.    8.    5  as  I  was  considering,  behold,  an  he  goat 
9.  23  understand  the  matter,  and  consider  the 

4. To  consider  (for  oneself), distinguish,  pa  bin,  7a. 

1  Ki.    3.  21  when  I  had  considered  it  in  the  morning 
Job    11.  11  will  he  not  then  consider  (it)? 

23.  15 -when  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  him 

37.  14  and  consider  the  wondrous  works  of  God 
Psa. 119.  95  (but)  I  will  consider  thy  testimonies 
Isa.      1.    3  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  not  con. 
14.  16  They  that  see  thee  shall,  .consider  thee 
43.  18  Remember  ye  not.  .neither  consider  the 
52.  15  they  had  not  heard  shall  they  consider 
Jer.     2.  10  send  unto  Kedar,  and  consider  diligently 
9.  17  Consider  ye,  and  call  for  the  mourning 
23.  20  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it 
30.  24  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it 
5.7*0  devise,  design,  propose,  ddi  zamam. 

Prov. 31.  16  She  considereth  a  field,  and  buyeth  it 
6.  To  think,  devise,  reckon,  3&J)  chashab,  3. 
Psa.  77.   5  I  have  considered  the  days  of  old,  the 

7.7*0  know,  jn;  yada. 

Deut.  8.    5  Thou  shalt  also  consider  in  thine  heart 
Judg.i8.  14  now  therefore  consider  what  ye  have  to 

2  Ki.    5.    7  wherefore  consider,  I  pray  you,  and  see 
Prov.28.  22  considereth  not  that  poverty  shall  come 

29.   7  The  righteous  considereth  the  cause  of 
Eccl.  5.    1  for  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil 
8.7*0  look,  regard,  tt23  nabat,  5. 

Psa.  13.    3  Consider  (and)  hear  me,  0  Lord  my  God 

lea.    18.    4  I  will  consider  in  my  dwelling  place  like 

Lam.  1.  11  see,  O  LORD,  and  consider ;  for  I  am  bee. 

2,  20  Behold,  0  Lord,  and  consider  to  whom 

5.    1  0  Lord,  .consider,  and  behold  our  repr. 

9.  7*o  give,  }T\i  nathan. 

Eccl.   9.    /all  this  I  considered  in  my  heart,  even 
10.7*0  cut  up  and  divide,  consider,  3ps pasag,  3. 

Psa.  48.  13  Mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her 
11.7*o  see,  behold,  nx-}  raah. 

Exod33.  13  consider  that  this  nation  (is)  thy  people 
Lev.  13.  13  the  priest  shall  consider:  and,  behold 
1  Sa.  12.  24  consider  how  great  (things)  he  hath  done 

25.  17  know  and  consider  what  thou  wilt  do 
Tsa.     8.    3  When  I  consider  thy  heavens,  the  work 
9.  13  consider  my  trouble  (which  I  suffer)  of 
25.  19  Considermiue  enemies,  for  they  are  many 
31.    7  thou  hast  considered  my  trouble;  thou 
45.  10  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider,  and 
119. 153  Consider  mine  affliction,  and  deliver  me 
119.  159  Consider  how  I  love  thy  precepts 
Prov.  6.    6  Go.  .consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise 
Eccl.  4.    1  considered  all  the  oppressions  that  are 
4.    4  I  considered  all  travail,  and  every  right 
4.  15  I  considered  all  the  living  which  walk 
7. 13  Consider  the  work  of  God:  for  who  can 
7.  14  hut  in  the  day  of  adversity  consider 
Isa.     5.  12  neither  consider  the  operation  of  bis 
Jer.  23-  24  Considerest  thou  not  what  this  people 


CONSIDER 


199 


CONSUME 


Eze.  12.    3  they  will  consider,  though  they  (be)  a 
18. 14  seeth  all  Ms  father's  sins,  .and  consider. 
iS.  28  Because  he  considereth,  and  turneth  away 
Yl.To  place,  put,  set,  Dii?  sum. 

Judg  19. 30  consider  of  it,  take  advice,  and  speak 
Job     1.    S  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job 
2.    3  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job 
Isa.   41.  20  That  they  may  see,  and  know,  and  consi. 

41.  22  we  may  consider  them,  and  know  the 
Hag.   1.    5,  7  thus  saith  the  Lord..  Consider  your 
2.  is  I  pray  you,  consider  from  this  day  and 
2.  iS  Consider  now  from  this  day  and  upward 
2.  18  day  that  the  foundation,  .was  laid,  con. 
13.7b  consider  or  act  wisely,  ^"p  sakal,  5. 

Job  34.  27  they,  .would  not  consider  any  of  his  ways 
Psa.  41.    1  Blessed  (is)  he  that  considereth  the  poor 

64.   9  they  shall  wisely  consider  of  his  doing 
Prov.21.  12  The  righteous  (man)  wisely  considereth 
14.7*0  covisider  wisely,  Sr"t?  sekal,  2. 

Dan.   7.    8  I  considered  the  horns,  and,  behold,  there 

15.  To  set,  place,  put,  n?B>   shith. 

Prov  24.  32  I  saw,  (and)  considered  (it)  well ;  I  looked 

16.  To  liearicen,  yo'^  shama. 

1  Ki.  5.    8  I  have  considered  the  things  which  thou 

17.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  av  shub,  5. 

Deut.  4.  39  consider  (it)  in  thine  heart,  that  the  LORD 
Isa.    44.  19  none  considereth  in  his  heart,  neither 

18.  To  view  tlwroughly,  looking  up  to,  ayaOewpeaj. 
Heb.  13.    7  considering  the  end  of  (their)  conversa. 

19.  To  reckon  up  or  thoroughly,  ava\oyi(o/j.at. 
Heb.  12.   3  consider  him  that  endured  such  contra. 

20.  To  reckon  thoroughly,  ^ia\oyi^oy.aidiahgizomai. 
Johnn.  50  consider  that  it  is  expedient  for  us,  that 

21.  To  see,  ei^ov  eiclon. 

Acts  15.    6  and  elders  came  together  for  to  consider 

22.  To  view,  look,  9etop4ca  theoreo. 

Heb.    7.    4  consider  how  great  this  man  (was),  unto 
2Z.Tolearnthoroughly,KaTa,fj.avQavwkatanianthan6. 
Matt  6.  2S  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they 
24.7*0  perceive  thorough  ly  ( with  the  mind) ,  Karavo^w. 
Matt  7.    3  but  considerest  not  the  beam  that  is  in 
Lukei2.  24  Consider  the  ravens:  for  they  neither  sow 
12.  27  Consider  the  lilies,  how  they  grow:  they 
Acts  11.    6  I  considered,  and  saw  four  footed  beasts 
Rom.  4.  19  he  considered  not  his  own  body  now  dead 
Heb.  3.    1  consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of 
to.  24  let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke 

25. To  perceive  (with  tlie  mind),  voeo?  noeo. 

2  Ti.    2.    7  Consider  what  I  say;  aud  the  Lord  give 

26.  To  look,  watch,  (tkottsco   skopeo. 

Gal.     6.    1  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be 

27.  To  see  or  perceive  with  (self),  avyelSov  suneidon 
Acts  12.  12  when  he  had  considered,  .he  came  to  the 

28. To  send  or  put  together,  avvir\y.i  suniemi. 
Mark  6.  52  they  considered  not  (the  miracle)  of  the 

CONSIDER,  to  diligently  — 

To  distinguish  for  oneself,  J'S  bin,  7a. 

Psa.  37. 10  thou  shalt  dilligently  consider  his  place 
CONSIST,  to  — 
l.To  be,  eifii  eimi. 

Lukei2.  15  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abund. 
2.  To  set,  put  togetlier,  (rvviar-qfxi  sunistemi. 

Col.     1.  17  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist 
CONSOLATION  — 
A  calling  alongside  (for  help),  Trapa.K\-nais  par  ok. 

Luke  2.  25  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel 

6.  24  for  ye  have  received  your  consolation 
Acts   4.  36  surnamed  Barnaba3 . .  The  son  of  consola. 

15.  31  they  rejoiced  for  the  consolation 
Rom  15.    5  the  God  of  patience  and  consolation 
2  Co.   1.    5  out  consolation  also  aboundeth  by  Christ 

1.    6,  6  (it  is)  for  your  consolation  and  salva. 

1.    7  so  (shall  ye  be)  also  of  the  consolation 

7.  7  the  consolation  wherewith  he  was  comfo. 
Phil.    2.    1  If  (there  be)  therefore  any  consolation  in 
2  Th.  2.  16  hath  given  (us)  everlasting  consolation 
Phm.        7  we  have  great  joy  and  consolation  in  thy 
Heb.   6.  t8  That . .  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation 

CONSOLATIONS  — 

l.C'omforts,  n'iDin;n  tanchumoth. 

Job   15.  11  (Are)  the  consolations  of  God  stnall  with 
21.   2  Hear,  .let  this  be  your  consolations 

2.Comforts,  cpinsn  tanchumhn. 

Isa.  66. 11  with  the  breasts  of  her  consolations 
Jer.  16.    7  give  them  the  cup  of  consolation  to 

CONSORT  with,  to  — 

To  take  a  lot  beside  {another),  7rpo<rK\7)p6w  2^oskl. 
Acts  17.    4  some  of  them  believed,  and  consorted  w. 

CONSPIRACY  — 

l.Conspiracy,  bond,  n^[5  qeslier. 

2  Sa.  15.  iz  and  the  conspiracy  was  strong;  for  the 
2  Ki.  17.    4  the  king  of  Assyria  found  conspiracy  in 
Jer.  11.    9  A  conspiracy  is  found  among  the  men  of 
Eze.  22.  25  a  conspiracy  of  her  prophetsin  the  midst 

2.A  swearing  together,  vvvcdfiovia,   sunomosia. 
Acts  23.  13  forty  which  had  made  this  conspiracy 


CONSPIRACY,  to  make  a  — 

l.To  bind,  conspire  togetlier,  i^i?  qashar. 

2  Ki.  12.  20  his  servants  arose,  and  made  a  conspir. 

2.7*0  bind  a  bond,  Tf  |5  i^i?  qashar  qeslier. 

2  Ki.14.  19  they  made  a  conspiracy  against  him  in 
15.  15  and  his  conspiracy  which  he  made 

15.  30  Hoshea  the  son  of  Elah  made  a  conspir. 
2  Ch.25. 27  they  made  a  conspiracy  against  him  iu 

CONSPIRATOR  — 

To  bind,  co?ispire,  te>£  qashar. 

2  Sa.  15.  31  Ahithophel  (is)  among  the  conspirators 

CONSPIRE,  to  — 

l.To  sheno  self  deceitful,  conspire,  hii  naqal,  7. 
Gen.  37.  18  they  conspired  against  him  to  slay  him 

2.  To  bind,  conspire  togetlier,  ~\y$  qashar. 

-i  Sa,  22.    8  all  of  you  have  conspired  against  me 

23.  13  Why  have  ye  conspired  against  me,  thou 

1  Ki.15.  27  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahijah.  .conspired 

16.  9  his  servant  Zimri . .  conspired  against  him 
16. 16  Zimri  hath  conspired,  and  hath  also 

2  Ki.io.    9  I  conspired  against  my  master,  and  slew 

15.  10  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  conspired 
15.  25  a  captaiu  of  his,  conspired  against  him 
21.  23  the  servants  of  Anion  conspired  against 
21.  24  slew  all  them  that  had  conspired  against 
2  Ch.24.  21  they  conspired  against  him,  and  stoned 
33.  24  his  servants  conspired  against  him 
33.  25  all  them  that  had  conspired  against  king 
Neb.  4.    8  conspired  all  of  them  together  to  come 
Amos  7. 10  Amos  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the 

3.  To  consinre  together  (for  self),  "rcrp  qashar,  7. 
2  Ki.  9.  14  So  Jehu,  .conspired  against  Joram 

2  Ch.  24.  25  his  own  servants  conspired  against  him 

24.  26  these  are  they  that  conspired  against 

CONSTANT,  to  be  — 

To  be  strong,  take  or  keep  hold  of,  pin  chazaq. 

1  Ch.28.    7  if  he  be  constant  to  do  my  comniandnients 

CONSTANTLY  — 

Pre-eminently,  perpetually,  nsi  netsach. 

Prov.21.  28  the  man  that  hearethspeaketk  constantly 

CONSTELLATION  — 

Firm,  thick,  stout  one,  Orion,  Vp?  kesil. 

Isa.   13. 10  the  stars  of  heaven  and  the  constellations 

CONSTRAIN,  to  — 

l.To  take  or  keep  hold  of,  prn  chazak,  5. 

2  Ki.  4.   8  and  she  constrained  him  to  eat  bread 

2.  To  press,  straiten,  p*x  tsuq,  5. 

Job  32. 18  the  spirit  within  me  constraineth  me 

3.  To  necessitate,  ava.yKa.fa  anaykazo. 

Matt.  14.  22  Jesus  constrained  his  disciples  to  get 
Mark  6.  45  he  constrained  his  disciples  to  get  into 
Acts  28. 19  I  was  constrained  to  appeal  unto  Cesar 
Gal.     6.  12  they  constrain  you  to  be  circumcised 

4.  To  press  beyond  measure,  irapa^  16.^0  fxai  pardbia. 
Luke24.  29  they  constrained  him,  saying,  Abide  with 
Acts  16.  15  she  besought  (us).  .And  she  constrained 

5.  To  hold  together,  crvvexv  suneclw. 

2  Co.  5.  14  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us 

CONSTRAINT,  by  — 

Of  necessity,  auayKao-rccs  anaykastos. 

1  Pe.  5.    2  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly  ;  not  for 

CONSULT,  to  — 

LTV)  give  or  take  counsel,  }']£  yaats. 

Psa.  62.    4  They  only  consult  to  cast  (him)  down 
Mic.    6.    5  what  Balak  king  of  Moab  consulted,  and 
Hab.  2.  10  Thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house 

2.7*0  be  consulted,  take  counsel,  y$i  yaats,  2. 

1  Ki.12.    6  king  Rehoboam  consulted  with  old  men 
12.    8  consulted  with  the  young  men  that  were 

1  CI1.13.    1  David  consulted  with  the  captains  of 

2  Ch.20.  21  when  he  had  consulted  with  the  people 
Psa.  83.    5  they  have  consulted  together  with  one 

3.7*0  consult  for  oneself,  ysi  yaats,  7. 

Psa.  83.    3  They  have.,  consulted  against  thy  hidden 
4.7*0  be  counselled,  take  counsel,  ^.p  malak,  2. 

Neh.    5.    7  I  consulted  with  myself,  and  I  rebuked 
5.7*0  ask,  inquire,  bity?  shaal. 

Eze.  21.  21  he  consulted  with  images,  he  looked  in 
6. To  take  counsel,  &ov\evofxat  bmeleuomai. 

Luke  14.  31  consulteth  whether  he  be  able  -with  ten 

Johni2.  10  chief  priests  consulted  that  they  might 
7 .To  take  counsel  with  (anotJier),  o-vn0ov\evta  sum. 

Matt. 26.    4  consulted  that  they  might  take  Jesus  by 

CONSULT  together,  to  — 

7*0  take  counsel,  to&\  yeat,  2. 

Dan.   6.    7  the  captains,  have  consulted  together  to 

CONSULTATION  — 

Counsel,  <rvfj.{3ov\tov  sumooulion. 

Marki5.    *  the  chief  priests  held  a  consultation  -with 

CONSULTED  — 

7*0  inquire,  Sn^  shaal. 

Deut  18.  11  a  charmer,  or  a  consulter  with  familiar 


CONSUME,  to  — 

1.7*0  eat,  devour,  b^  akal. 

Gen.  31.  40  in  the  day  the  drought  consumed  me 
Exodis.    7  thy  wrath,  (which)  consumed  them  as 
Lev.    6.  10  which  the  fire  hath  consumed  with  the 
9.  24  there  came  a  fire,  .and  consumed  upon 
Niunn.    1  fire,  .burnt  among  them,  and  consumed 
16. 35  a  fire,  .consumed  the  two  hundred  and 

21.  28  a  flame  from  the  city .  .hath  consumed  Ar 
Deut.  4.  24  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  consuming  fire 

5.  25  Now  therefore . .  for  tins  great  fire  will  con. 
7.  16  thou  shalt  consume  all  the  people  which 
9.    3  (as)  a  consuming  fire  he  shall  destroy 
32.  22  a  fire  is  kindled,  .and  shall  consume  the 
Judg  6.  21  consumed  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened 

1  Ki.  18.  38  fire  of  the  Lord,  .consumed  the  burnt 

2  Ki.   1.  10,  12  let  fire  come  downfrom  heaven,  and  c. 

1.  10  there  came  down  fire,  .and  consumed 
1. 12  fire,  .came  down  from  heaven  and  cousu. 

2  Ch   7.    1  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consu. 

Job  1.  16  The  fire.. hath  burnt.. and  consumed 
15.  34  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of 

22.  20  the  remnant  of  them  the  fire  consumeth 

31.  12  it  (is)  a  fire  (that)  consumeth  to  destructi. 
Psa.  7S.  63  The  fire  consumed  their  young  men  ;  and. 
Jer.  49.  27  it  shall  consume  the  palaces  01  Ben-hadad. 
Eze.  19. 12  her  strong  rods,  .the  fire  consumed  them 

2.7*0  eat,  devour,  Srx  akal,  3. 

Job  20.  26  a  fire  not  blown  shall  consume  him 

3. 7*0  cause  to  eat,  feed,  *?3x  akal,  5. 

Eze.  21.  28  the  sword^is)  drawn .  .to  consume  because 

4.  Food,  what  is  eaten,  njqx  oklah. 

Eze  35. 12  saying,  .they 'are  given  us  to  consume 

5.  To  fade,  wear  away,  rr?|  balah. 

Job    13.  28  he,  as  a  rotten  thing,  consumeth,  as  a 

6.  To  fade,  wear  away,  n^>a  balah,  3. 

Psa.  49.  14  their  beauty  shall  consume  in  the  grave 

7. 7*0  take  away  by  violence,  7j3  gazal. 

Job    24.  ig  Drought  and  heat  consume  the  snow 

8.7*0  trouble,  cmish,  Don  liamam,. 

Esth.  9  .24  to  consume  them,  and  to  destroy  them 

9. 7*0  consume,  crop  off,  Spn  cliasal. 

Deut.  28.  38  little  in ;  for  the  locust  shall  consume  it 

10.7*0  inherit,  possess,  b>t  yarash,  3. 

Deut.  28. 42  All  thy  trees . .  shall  the  locust  consume 

11.7*0  be  completed,  finislied,  consumed,  nSs  kalah. 
Psa.  37.  20  they  shall  consume ;  into  smoke  shall 

12.To  finish,  consume,  rps  kalah,  3. 

Gen.  41.  30  and  the  famine  shall  consume  the  land 
Exod32.  10  let  me  alone,  .that  I  may  consume  them 

32.  12  to  consume  them  from  the  face  of  the 

33.  3  I  will  not  go  up.  .lest  I  consume  thee  in 
33.    5  I  will  comeup.  .and  consumetkee :  there. 

Lev.  26.  16  the  burning  ague,  that  shall  consume  the 
Numi6.  21,  45  that  I  may  consume  them  in  a  mom. 

25. 11  I  consumed  not  the  children  of  Israel 
Deut  7.  22  thou  mayest  not  consume  them  at  once 

28.  21  until  he  have  consumed  thee  from  off  the 
Jos.  24.  20  he  will  turn . .  and  consume  you . .  after  that; 

1  Sa.  2.  33  the  man  of  thine,  .(shall  be)  to  consume 

2  Sa.  21.    5  The  man  that  consumed  us,  and  that 

22.  38  turned  not  again  until  I  had  consumed 
22.  39  I  have  consumed  them,  and  wounded 

1  Ki.22.  11  push  the  S}Tians,  until  thou  have  consu. 

2  Ki.13.  17  thou  shalt  smite,  .till  thou  have  consum. 

13.  19  smitten  Syria  till  thou  hadst  consumed  (it) 
2  Ch.   8.    8  whom  the  children  of  Israel  consumed 
Ezra   9.  14  angry  with  us  till  thou  hadst  consumed 
Psa.  59.  13  Consume(them)in  wrath,  consume  (them) 

78.  33  tbeir  days  did  he  consume  in  vanity,  and 

1 19  87  They  had  almost  consumed  me  upon  earth 

Isa.  10. 18  And  shall  consume  the  glory  of  his  forest 

27. 10  there  shall  he  lie  down,  and  consume  the 

Jer.    5.    3  thou  hast  consumed  them,  (but)  they  have 

9.  16  a  sword  after  them,  till  I  have  consumed 

10.  25  devoured  him,  and  consumed  him,  and 

14.  12  I  will  consume  them  by  the  sword,  aud 
49.  37  sword  after  them,  till  I  have  consumed 

Lam.  2.  22  brought  up  hath  mine  enemy  consumed 
Eze.  13.  13  great  hailstones  in  (my)  fury,  to  consume 
20.  13  would  pour  out  my  f ury .  .to  consume 
22.  31  I  have  consumed  "them  with  the  fire  of 
43.    8  I  have  consumed  them  in  mine  anger 
Hos-  "■    6  the  sword,  .shall  consume  his  branches 
Zee.     5-    4  shall  consume  it  with  the  timber  thereof 

13. 7*0  melt,  dissolve,  W2  mug. 

Isa    64.   7  thou  hast . .  consumed  us,  because  of  our 

14.  7*0  end,  consume,  ^D  suph,  5. 

Jer     S  13  I  will  surely  consume  them,  smth  the  L. 
Dan    2  44  breik  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these 
Z«ph.  1.   2  I  will  utterly  consume  all  (things)  from 
1.    3  will  consume  man  and  beast;  I  will  con. 

15.7*0  end,  consume,  -T?p  saphah. 

Isa.     7.  20  a  razor,  .shall  also  consume  the  beard 
16.7*0  cut  off,  destroy,  n"?*  tsamath,  3. 

Psa.119.  139  My  zeal  hath  consumed  me  ;  because 

17.  To  be  feeble,  ran  r       ?  T 

Isa.     5.  24  the  fism  .umeth  the  chaff,  (so)  their 

18.7*0  cut  off,  lay  wast?,  %$&  shemad,  5. 

Dan.    7.  26  to  consume  and  to  destroy  (it)  unto  the 


CONSUME 


200 


CONTINUAL 


19.7b  be  perfect,  finished,  consumed,  cpn  tamam. 
Jer.  27.    8  until  I  have  consumed  them  by  his  hand 

20.  To  perfect,  finish,  consume,  DD51  tamam,  5. 
Eze.  22.  15  will  consume  thy  filthiness  out  of  thee 

24.  10  kindle  the  Are,  consume  the  flesh,  and 

21.  To  use  up,  consume,  avaXiffKoi   analisko. 
Luke  9.  54  and  consume  them,  even  as  Elias  did  ? 
Gal.     5.  15  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of 
2  Th.  2.    8  whom  the  Lord  [shall  consume]  with  the 

22.  To  spend,  be  at  charges,  Sairavdm  dapanao. 
Jas.     4.    3  that  ye  may  consume  (it)  upon  your  lusts 

23.  To  use  up  utterly,  consume  utterly,  Karaua\i(TKw. 
Heb.  iz.  29  For  our  God  (is)  a  consuming  fire 

CONSUME  away,  to  — 

l.To  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  rn2  kalah. 
Psa.  37.  20  into  smoke  they  shall  consume  away 

2.  To  become  completed,  wasted  away,  ppo  maqaq,  2. 
Eze.    4. 17  and  consume  away  for  their  iniquity 
Zech.14.  12  their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their 

14. 12  their  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their 

3.  To  waste  or  consume  away,  ppo  maqaq,  5. 

Zech.14.  12  Their  flesh  shall  consume  away  in  their 

CONSUME  away,  to  make  to  — 
To  melt,  waste,  npn  masah,  5. 

Psa.  39.  u  thou  makest  his  beauty  to  consume  away 

CONSUME,  to  utterly  — 

To  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  n^a  kalah. 
Neh.  9.  3 1  thou  didst  not  utterly  consume  them,  nor 

CONSUMED,  be  — 

To  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  .172  kalah. 
Dan.    11.  16  which  by  his  hand  shall  be  consumed 

CONSUMED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  eaten,  consumed,  ^>3N  akal,  2. 

Exod22.   6  If.  .thefield,  be  consumed  (therewith); he 
Numi2.  12  of  whom  the  flesh  is  half  consumed  when 

2.7*o  be  eaten,  consumed,  ^>3N  akal,  4. 

Exod.  3.    2  and  the  bush  (was)  not  consumed 
Neh.  2.    3  the  gates  thereof  are  consumed  with  fire? 
2.  13  the  gates  thereof  were  consumed  with  fire 

3.  To  be  extinguished,  vanish,  ^sn  daak,  2. 
Job     6. 17  they  are  consumed  out  of  their  place 

4.  To  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  nps  kalah. 
Job     4.    9  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  are  they  con. 

7.  9  (As)  the  cloud  is  consumed  and  vanisheth 

19.  27  (though)  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me 
Psa.  39.  10  I  am  consumed  by  the  blow  of  thine  hand 

71.  13  Let  them  be  confounded  and  consumed 
90.    7  we  are  consumed  by  thine  anger,  and  by 
102.    3  my  days  are  consumed  like  smoke,  and 

Prov.  5.  1 1  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  con. 

Isa.     1.  28  they  that  forsake  the  Lord  shall  be  con. 
29. 20  the  scorner  is  consumed,  and  all  that 

Jer.  16.    4  they  shall  be  consumed  by  the  sword 

20.  18  that  my  days  should  be  consumed  with 
Eze.    5.  12  with  famine  shall  they  be  consumed,  in 

13.  14  ye  shall  be  consumed  in  the  midst  there. 
Mai.    3.    6  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  con. 

5.  To  be  ended,  consumed,  *\\o  suph. 

Isa.   66.  17  abomination,  and  the  mouse,  shall  be  con. 

6.  To  end,  consume,  nan  mphah. 

Jer.   12.    4  the  beasts  are  consumed,  and  the  birds 
7. To  be  ended,  consumed,  nsD  saphah,  2. 

Gen.  19.  15  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of 
19.  17  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  con. 
Numi6.  26  lest  ye  be  consumed  in  all  their  sins 

1  Sa.  12.  25  ye  shall  be  consumed,  both  ye  and  your 

8.  To  be  old,  vyy  ashesh. 

Psa  6.  7  Mine  eye  is  consumed  because  of  grief 
31.  9  mine  eye  is  consumed  with  grief,  (yea) 
31.  10  strength  faileth .  .my  bones  are  consumed 

9.  To  be  perfect,  finished,  consumed  D2J?  tamam. 
Nuni  17.  13  shall  we  be  consumed  with  dying? 

32. 13  until  all  the  generation,  .was  consumed 
Deut.  2.  15  to  destroy  them,  .until  they  were  consu.  • 

2.  16  when  all  the  men  of  war  were  consumed 
Josh.  5.    6  men  of  war.  .were  consumed,  because 

8.  24  were  all  fallen,  .until  they  were  consumed 
10.  20  slaying  them. .  till  they  were  consumed 

2  Ki.  7.  13  multitude  of  the  Israelites  that  are  con. 
Psa.  73.  19  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors 
Isa.  16.  4  the  oppressors  are  consumed  out  of  the 
Jer.     6.  29  The  bellows  are  burnt,  the  lead  is  con. 

24.  10  among  them,  until  they  be  consumed 
36.  23  until  all  the  wall  was  consumed  in  the 
44.  T2  they  shall  all  be  consumed,  (and)  fall  in 
44. 18  have  been  consumed  by  the  sword  and  by 
^44.  27  all  the  men  of  Judah.  .shall  be  consumed 

Lam.  ^.  22  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  con. 

Eze.  24SJ1  (that)  the  scum  of  it  may  be  consumed 
47.  in  neither  shall  the  fruit  thereof  be  con. 

lO.Tobe  finished,  consumed,  D£J?  tamam,  2. 

Nunii4.  35  in  this  wilderness  they  shall  be  consumed 
rsa.iot.  35  Let  the  sinners  be  consumed  out  of  the 
Jer.  14.  15  By  sword,  .shall  those  prophets  be  con. 
44.  12  shall  all  L.    consumed,  .(even)  be  con. 

CONSUMED  with,  to  beA^^ 
To  be  gathered,  TO  asapn 

Eze.  34.  29  they  shall  be  no  more  consumed  with 


CONSUMMATION  — 

Completion,  consumption,  .173  kalah. 

Dan.    9.  27  even  until  the  consummation,  and  that 

CONSUMPTION  — 

1.  Completion,  consumjjtion.,  n?s  kalah. 

Isa.   10.  23  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a  con. 
28.  22  from  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  a  consumption 

2.  Completion,  consump>tion,  |V?3  killayon. 

Isa.   10.  22  the  consumption  decreed  shall  overflow 

3.  Consumption,  wasting  away,  nsniy  sliachepheth. 
Lev.  26. 16  I  will  even  appoint  over  you  terror,  con. 
Deut  28.  22  shall  smite  thee  with  a  consumption,  and 

CONTAIN,  to  — 

l.To  contain,  ^3  kid,  3a. 

1  Ki.  8.  27  the.  .heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain 
2CI1.    2.    6  the.  .heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain 
6. 18  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain 

2.  To  contain,  Sis  kid,  5. 

1  Ki.  7.  26  with  flowers  of  lilies  :  it  contained  two 
7.  38  one  laver  contained  forty  baths  ;  (and) 
Eze.  23.  32  thou shalt  be .  .had in  derision ;  it  contain. 

3.  To  bear,  contain,  Ny'J  nasa. 

Eze.  45. 11  that  the  bath  may  contain  the  tenth  part 
4.2*0  have  space  for,  ^copeoi  choreo. 

John  2.    6  containing  two  or  three  firkins  apiece 

CONTAIN,  can  — 

l.To  have  space  for,  xwP*w  choreo. 

John  21.  25  even  the  world  itself  could  not  contain 

2.  Tohavc  inward power,  iyKpaT€vo/xai  egkrateuomai. 
1  Co.    7.    9  if  they  cannot  contain,  let  them  niarry 

CONTAINED,  to  be  — 

To  hold  around,  wepiexa  periecho. 

1  Pe.  2.    6  also  it  is  contained  in  the  Scripture 

CONTAINED  in,  the  things  — 
The  things,  to  ta. 

Rom.  2.  14  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the 

CONTEMN,  to  — 

1.7*0  loathe,  despise,  contemn,  N3  buz. 

Song  8.    7  give  all.. it  would  utterly  be  contemned 
2.  To  refuse,  reject,  dnd  maas. 

Eze.  21.  10  it  contemneth  the  rod  of  my  son,  (as) 
21. 13  what  if  (the  sword)  contemn  even  the  rod? 

3.7*0  despise,  fNJ  naats. 

Psa.  107.  11  contemned  the  counsel  of  the  Most  High 

4.  7*o  despise,Y*ty  naats,  3. 

Psa.  10.  13  Wherefore  doth  the  wicked  contemn  God  ? 

CONTEMNED,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  loathed,  despised,  contemned,  nj3  bazah,  2. 

Psa.  15.    4  In  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  contemned 
2. 7*o  be  lightly  esteemed,  rh$  qalah,  2. 

Isa.   19.  14  and  the  glory  of  Moab  shall  be  contemned 

CONTEMPT  — 

1.7*o  toatlie.,  despise,  contemn,  N3    buz. 
Job     12.  21  He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and 
31.  34  or  did  the  contemptof  families  terrify  me 
Psa.  107.  40  He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and 
118.  22  Remove  from  me  reproach  and  contempt 
123-    3  we  are  exceedingly  filled  with  contempt 
123.    4  filled,  .with  the  contempt  of  the  proud 
Prov  18.    3  wicked  cometh.  .cometh  also  contempt 
'l.Loathing,  despising,  contempt,  j'vj?  bizzayon. 

Esth.  1.  18  Thus,  .too  much  contempt  and  wrath 
3. Abhorrence,  thrusting  away,  pNT)  deraon. 
Dan.  12.    2  some  to  shame,  .everlasting  contempt 

CONTEMPT,  to  bring  into  — 
To  make  light  of,  9$  qalal,  5. 

Isa.   23.   9  to  bring  into  contempt  all  the  honourable 

CONTEMPTIBLE  — 

l.To  he  loathed,  despised,  contemned,  r»3  bazah.  2. 
Mai.    1.    7  The  table  of  the  Lord  (is)  contemptible 

1.  12  and  the  fruit  thereof,  .(is)  contemptible 

2.  9  have  I  also  made  you  contemptible  and 

2.7*0  make,  think  nothing  of,  ££ovd€i/ea>  exoutheneo. 

2  Co.  10.  10  presence  (is)  weak,  and  (his)  speech  con. 

CONTEMPTUOUSLY  — 
In  contempt,  "33  babuz. 

Psa.  31.  iS  which  speak  grievous  things,  .contempt. 

CONTEND  — 

7*o  contend,  strive,  Tf  rib. 

Job  31.  13  If  I  did  despise,  .when  they  contended 

CONTEND,  to  — 

1.  7*o  stir  iip  oneself,  strive,  rria  garah,  7. 

Deut.  2.    9  Distress  not  the  Moabites,  neither  contend 

2.  24  begin  to  possess  (it),  and  contend  with 
Prov  28.    4  but  such  as  keep  the  law  contend  with 

2.  To  judge,  enter  into  judgment,  \**l  din. 

Eccl.   6.  10  neither  may  lie  contend  with  him  that 

3. To  fret  oneself,  rnn  charah,  5a. 

Jer.  12.   5  then  how  canst  thou  contend  with  horses? 


4. 7*o  contend,  strive,  T~\  rib. 

Neh.  13.  11  Then  contended  I  with  the  rulers,  and 
13.  17  I  contended  with  the  nobles  of  Judah, and 
13.  25  I  contended  with  them,  and  cursed  theni 

Job      9.    3  If  he  will  contend  with  him,  he  cannot 
10.    2  show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with 
13.    8  accept  his  person  ?  will  ye  contend  for 
40.    2  Shall  he  that  contendeth  with  the  Alniig. 

Isa.   49.  25  for  I  will  contend  with  him  that 

50.    8  who  will  contend  with  me?  let  us  stand 
57.  16  I  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will 

Amos  7.    4  the  Lord  God  called  to  contend  by  fire 

Mic.    6.    1  Arise,  contend  thou  before  the  mountains 
5.7*0  be  taken  into  judgment,  bs$?  shaphat,  2. 

Prov  29.    9  (If)  a  wise  man  contendeth  with  a  foolish 
6.  To  judge  diversely  or  differently,  SiaKplvv  diakr. 

Acts  11.    2  that  were  of  the  circumcision  contended 

Jude         9  Michael,  the  archangel  when  contending 

CONTEND  earnestly  for,  to  — 

7*o  contend  about  (anything),  i-rraycovi^ofxat  epago. 
Jude         3  ye  should  earnestly  contend  for  the  faith 

CONTENDED,  that  — 

Debate,  contention,  rvx?  matstsuth. 

Isa    41. 12  (even)  them  that  contended  with  thee 

CONTENDETH,  that  — 

One  that  contends  or  strives,  3'"v  yarib. 

Isa.  49.  25  with  him  that  contendeth  with  thee 
Jer.   18. 19  the  voice  of  them  that  contend  with  me 

CONTENT,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  pleased,  desiroits,  Sn;  yaal,  5. 

Exod.  2.  21  Moses  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man 
Jos.     7.    7  would  to  God  we  had  been  content,  and 
Judg  17.  11  the  Levite  was  content  to  dwell  with  the 
ig.    6  Be  content,  I  pray  thee,  and  tarry  all 

2  Ki.  5.  23  Naaman  said,  Be  content,  take  two  talents 

6.    3  Be  content,  I  pray  thee,  and  go  with  thy 
Job     6.  28  therefore  be  content ;  look  upon  me  :  for 

2.7*o  hearken,  yvy  sha.ma. 

Gen.  37.  27  sell  him.  .And  his  brethren  were  content 

3.7*o  ward  off,  help,  suffice,  apxew  arkeo. 
Luke  3.  14  and  be  content  with  your  wages 
1  Ti.    6.    8  having  food  and  raiment  let  us  be.  .cont. 
Heb.  13.    5  be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have 

3  Jo.     10  prating  against  us . .  and  not  conteut  there. 

4. Self  sufficient,  avrdpKvs  autarkes. 

Phil.  4. 11  in  whatsoever  state  I  am.  .to  he  content 

5.7*b  make  sufficient,  to  satisfy,  ttoUqj  to  Itcavov. 
Markis.  15  Pilate,  willing  to  content  the  people 

6.7*0  be  good  in  the  eyes  of,  \Ti!3  3q;  yatab  beene. 
Lev.  10.  20  And  when  Moses  heard  (that),  he  was  con. 

CONTENTION  — 

1. Strife,  contention,  p~i£  madon. 

Prov.  22.  10  Cast  out  the  scorner,  and  contention 
Jer.  15.  10  a  man  of  strife  and  a  man  of  contention 
Hab.    1.    3  are  (that)  raise  up  strife  and  contention 

2.Debate,  nxs  matstsah. 

Prov  13.  10  Only  by  pride  cometh  contention:  bu* 

3. Contention,  strife,  pleading,  cause,  T~)  rib. 

Prov  17.  14  leave  off  contention,  before  it  be  meddled 
18.    6  A  fool's  lips  enter  into  contention,  and 

4. Contest,  ay  tiiv  agon. 

1  Th.  2.    2  to  speak  unto  you . .  with  much  contention 

5. Strife,  contention,  wrangling.  epideta  eritheia. 
Phil.   1.  16  The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention,  not 

Q. Strife,  contention,  wrangling,  epts  eris. 

1  Co.    1.  11  that  there  are  contentions  among  you 
Tit.      3.    9  avoid  foolish  questions,  .and  contentions 

7. Paroxysm,  sharp  dispute,  irapo^v(T{x6sparoxusmos, 
Acts  15.  39  the  contention  was  so  sharp  between 

CONTENTIONS  — 

Strifes,  contentions,  C*r-p  midyanim. 

Prov  18.  18  The  lot  causeth  contentions  to  cease,  and 

18.  19  (their)  contentions  (are)  like  the  bars  of 

19.  13  the  contentions  of  a  wife  (are)  a  continual 
23.  29  who  hath  sorrow?  who  hath  contentions? 

CONTENTIOUS  — 

1. Strife    contention,  D^TP  midyanim,  fine  madon. 
Prov. 21.  19  than  with  a  contentious  and  an  angry 

26.  21  so  (is)  a  contentious  man  to  kindle  strife 

27.  15  A  continual  dropping,  .and  a  contentious 
2.Loving  strife,  tpi\6vetKos  philoneikos. 

1  Co.  11.  16  if  any  man  seem  to  be  contentious,  we 

CONTENTIOUS,  they  that  are  — 
Those  of  contention,  oi  l|  ipiQelas  hoi  ex  eritheias. 
Rom!  2.    8  them  that  are  contentious,  and  do  not 

CONTENTMENT  — 

Self  sufficiency,  avrdpKeia  autarlria. 

1  Ti.    6.   6  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain 

CONTINUAL  — 

1.7*0  drive  away,  thrust  on,  *nb  tarad. 

Prov.  19.  13  the  contentions  of  a  wife  (are)  a  continual 
27. 15  A  continual  dropping,  .and  a  contentious 


CONTINUAL 


201 


CONTRITE 


/ 


^.Continual,  ron  tamid. 

Exodsg.  42  a  continual  burnt  offering  throughout 
Num.  4.    7  and  the  continual  bread  shall  be  thereon 

28.    3  two  lambs .  .(for)  a  continual  burnt  offer. 

23.    6  a  coutiuual  burnt  offering,  which  was 

28.  10,  15,  24  beside  the  continual  burnt  offer. 
2S.  23  which  (is)  for  a  continual  burnt  offering 
23.  31  Ye  shall  offer  (them)  beside  the  contiuual 

29.  11  the  contiuual  burnt  offering,  and  the 

29.  16,  19,22,  25  beside  thecontiuualburntoffer. 

29.28,31,  34,  38  beside  the  continual  burnt  offer. 
2  Ki.  25.  30  his  allowance  (was)  a  continual  allowance 
2  Oh.  2.   4  for  the  continual  showbread,  and.. burnt 
Ezra    3.    5  afterward  (offered)  the  coutiuual  burnt 
Nen.  10.  33  the  showbread,  aud  for  the  continual 

10.  33  for  the  continual  burnt  offering,  of  the 
Prov  15.  15  a  merry  heart  (hath)  a  continual  feast 
Jer.  52.  34  there  was  a  contiuual  diet  given  him  of 
Eze.  46.  15  the  oil,  every  morning,  (for)  a  coutiuual 

3.  Uninter mitting,  not  left  at  all,  a5<a\e nrros  adia. 
Rom.  9.    2  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continual 

4.3*0  the  end,  els  reAos  eis  telos. 

LukeiS.    5  lest  by  her  contiuual  coming  she  weary 

5.  Without  turning  aside,  .tid  *j??3  bilti  sarah. 
Isa    14.    6  He  who  smote,  .with  a  continual  stroke 

CONTINUAL  employment  — 
Continual,  continuity,  TD$  tamid. 

Eze.  39.  14  sever  out  men  of  continual  employment 

CONTINUALLY  — 

1.  Thrusting  on,  driving  away,  N"V"ina  bithdira. 

Dan.    6. 16  Thy  God,  whom  thou  servest  continually 
6.  20  is  thy  God,  whom  thou  servest  continu. 
2,ContinvM,  voi-i  tamid. 

Exod28.  29  for  a  memorial  before  the  Loud  continu. 

28.  30  upon  his  heart  before  the  Lord  continu. 

29.  38  of  the  first  year  day  by  day  continually 
Lev.  24.   2  to  cause  the  lamps  to  bum  continually 

24.  3  shall  Aaron  order  it . .  before  the  Lord  con. 

24.  4  order  the  lamps,  .before  the  Lord  couti. 

24.  8  iu  order  before  the  Lord  continual^ 

2  Sa.  9.  7  shalt  eat  bread  at  my  table  continually 

9.  13  So  Mephibosheth.  .did  eat  continually 

1  Ki.  10.  8  Happy  (are)  thy  men . .  which  stand  conti. 

2  Ki.  4.  9  an  holy  man.. which passeth  by  us  conti. 

25. 29  he  did  eat  bread  continually  before  him 

1  Ch.16.    6  the  priests  with  trumpets  continually 

16.  11  Seek  the  Lord..  Siek  his  face  continually 
16.  37  to  minister  before  the  ark  continually 
16.  40  upon  the  altar,  .continually  morning  and 

23.  31  to  offer  all  burnt  sacrifices . .  continually  b. 

2  Ch.  9.    7  Happy  (are)  thy  men.  .which  stand  con. 

24.  14  they  offered  burnt  offerings,  .continually 
Psa.  34.    1  his  praise  (shall)  coutinually  (be)  in  my 

35.  27  let  them  say  continually,  Let  the  Lord 
38.  17  and  my  sorrow(is)  continually  before  me 
40.  11  let.  .thy  truth  continually  preserve  me 
40.  16  let  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  contin. 

50.  8  thy  burnt  offerings . .  continually  before 

69.  23  and  make  their  loins  coutinually  to  shake 

70.  4  let  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  contiuu. 

71.  3  whereunto  I  may  continually  resort 
71.    6  my  praise  (shall  be)  continually  of  thee 

71.  14  I  mil  hope  continually,  and  will  yet 

72.  15  prayer  also  shall  be  made  for  him  contin. 

73.  23  Nevertheless  I  (am)  continually  with  thee 

74.  23  the  tumult,  .against  thee  iDcreaseth  con. 
109. 15  Let  them  be  before  the  Lord  continually 
109. 19  a  girdle  wherewith  he  is  girded  continu. 
119.  44  So  shall  I  keep  thy  law  continually  for 
119.  109  My  soul  (is)  continually  in  my  hand:  yet 
up.  117  I  will  have  respect  unto  thystatutescou. 

Prov.  6.  2[  Bind  them  continually  upon  thine  heart 

Isa.  21.    8  I  staud  continually  upon  the  watch  tower 

49. 16  Behold.,  thy  walls  (are)  continuallybefore 

51.  13  hast  feared  continually  every  day,  because 

52.  5  my  name  continually  every  day  (is)  bias. 
58. 11  the  Lord  shall  guide  thee  continually 
60.  11  Therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  contin. 
6s-   3  that  provoketh  me  to  auger  continually 

Jer.     6.    7  before  me  continually  (is)  grief  and 

52.  33  he  did  continually  eat  bread  before  him 
Eze.  46.  14  a  meat-offering  continually  by  a  perpetual 
Hos.  12.    6  judgment,  aud  wait  on  thy  God  continu. 
Obad.      16  (so)  shall  all  the  heatheu  driuk  continu. 
Nah.  3.  19  thy  wickedness  passed  continually  ? 
Hab.  1. 17  not  spare  continually  to  slay  the  nations? 

3. All  the  day,  D'vrr1?!  hoi  hayyom. 

Gen.    6.    5  every  imagination . .  only  evil  continually 

1  Sa.  iS.  29  aud  Saul  became  David's  enemy  continu. 

2  Sa.  ig.  13  if  thou  be  not  captain . .  continually 

2  Ch.12. 15  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam  conti. 
Job     1.   5  Job.  .offered.  .Thus  did  Job  continually 
Psa  42.    3  they  continually  say  unto  me,  Where  (is) 
44. 15  My  confusion  (is)  continnaly  before  me 
52.    1  the  goodness  of  God  (endureth)  continu. 
140.    2  continually  are  they  gathered  together 
Jer.  33.  18  offerings,  and  to  do  sacrifice  continually 

4.1)1  all  time,  ny."1^?  bekol-eth. 

Prov.  6. 14  he  deviseth  mischief  continually 

5.  To  go  on  and  turn  back,  sssh  "n^n  lutlah  va-shub. 
Gen.    8.    3  returned  from  off  the  earth  continually 

^.Through  all  (time),  BtcnravTos  diapantos. 

Luke24-  53  were  continually  in  the  temple,  praising 
Heb.  13.  15  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually 

26 


7.  To  the  unbroken  continuance,  els  to  8i-nveKes,—fis 
Heb.   7.   3  Son  of  God  ;  abideth  a  priest  continually 
10.    1  coutinually  make  the  comers  thereunto 

CONTINUALLY  upon,  to  attend  — 

To  endure  or  persevere  toward  (anything),   irpov- 

naprepew  jjroskartereo. 

Rom.  13.    6  attending  continually  upon  this  very 

CONTINUALLY  to,  to  give  one's  self  — 

To  endure  or  persevere  toward  (anything),  irpoo-Kap- 

repeat  proskartereo. 

Acts    6.    4  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer 

CONTINUALLY,  to  wait  on  — 

To  endure  or  persevere  toward  (anything),  irpoo'- 

Kaprepew  proskartereo. 

Acts  10.    7  soldier,  .that  waited  on  him  continually 

CONTINUANCE  — 
l.Days,  en;  yamim. 

Psa.  139.  16  (which)  in  continuance  were  fashioned 

'l.Indefinite  time,  DTty  ola/m. 

Isa.  64.    5  in  those  is  continuance,  and  we  shall  be 

CONTINUANCE,  patient  — 

^4  remaining  under  (anything),  vtro\j.ovr\  hupomone. 
Rom.  2.    7  who  by  patient  continuance  in  welldoing 

CONTINUE  — 

To  stand,  n*p  qum. 

1  Sa.  13.  14  thy  kingdom  shall  not  continue  :  the 
Job    15.  29  neither  shall  his  substance  continue 

CONTINUE,  to  — 

1.2b  tarry,  delay,  inx  achar,  3. 

Isa.    5.  11  that  continue  until  night,  (till)  wine 

2.  To  keep  hold,  pm  chazak,  5. 

Neh.   5.  16  also  I  continued  in  the  work  of  this  wall 
'i.To  add,  f]p;  yasaph,  5. 

Job  27.    1  Job  continued  his  parable,  and  said 
29.    1  Job  continued  his  parable,  and  said 

■i.To  sit,  2v;  yashab. 

Lev.  12.   4  she  shall  then  continue  in  the  blood  of 

12.  5  she  shall  continue  iu  the  blood  of  her 
Judg  5. 17  Asher  continued  on  the  sea  shore,  and 

2  Sa.   6.  11  the  ark  of  the  Lord  continued  in  the 

1  Ki/22.    1  they  continued  three  years  without  war 

5.  To  lodge  (all  night),  p1?  lun. 

Job   17.    2  mine  eye  continue  in  their  provocation? 

6.  To  draw  out,  t^o  masliak. 

Psa.  36.  10  0  continue  thy  loving  kindness  unto  them 

7.  To  stand,  "?Dj;  amdd. 

Exod2i.  21  if  he  continue  a  day  or  two,  he  shall  not 
Ruth  2.    7  continued  even  from  the  morning  until 
Job    14.    2  he  fleeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  continueth 
Jer.  32. 14  put  them,  .that  they  may  continue  many 
Dan.  11.    8  he  shall  continue  (more)  years  than  the 

8. To  cause  to  arise,  establish,  Dip  qum,  5. 

1  Ki.   2.    4  That  the  Lord  may  continue  his  word 
9.  To  tabernacle,  dwell,  j?'^  shaken. 

Psa.  102.  28  The  children  of  thy  servants  shall  conti. 
10. To  multiply,  make  many,  nn~i  rabah,  5. 

1  Sa.    1.  12  as  she  continued  praying  before  the  Lo. 
11. To  become,  happen,  yiuo/j.a.t  ginomai. 

Acts  19.  10  this  continued  by  the  space  of  two  years 
12.2*0  remain  throughout,  Siafxevo)  diameno. 

Luke22.  28  Ye  are  they  which  have  continued  with 
Gal.     2.    5  that  the  truth  of  the  gospel  might  conti. 

2  Pe.  3.  4  all  tilings  continue  as.. from  the  begin. 

13.  To  end  fully,  SiccreAew  diateleo. 

Acts  27.  33  ye  have  tarried  and  continued  fasting 

1  Jr. To  rub  through,  pass  the  time,  B-.arpiBai  diatri. 
Johnn.  54  and  there  continued  with  his  disciples 
Acts  15.  35  Barnabas  continued  in  Antioch,  teaching 

15.7*0  remain  on,  iiritievto  epimeno. 

John  8.    7  when  they  continued  asking  him,  he 
Acts  12.  16  Peter  continued  knocking:  and  when  they 

16.  To  set,  place,  tcrieifit  histemi. 

Acts  26.  22  I  continue  unto  this  day,  witnessing  both 

17.  To  sit  down,  KaQifa  kathizo. 

Acts  18.  11  he  continued,  .a  year  and  six  months 

IS.  To  remain,  fxevw  memo. 

John  2.  12  aud  they  continued  there  not  many  days 
8.  31  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  (then)  are  ye 
15.    9  so  have  I  loved  you  :  continue  ye  in  my 

1  Ti.    2.  15  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  charity  and 

2  Ti.    3.  14  continue  thou  in  the  things  which  thou 
Heb.   7.  24  this  (man),  because  he  continueth  ever 

13.  1  Let  brotherly  love  continue 

13.  14  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but  we 
1  Jo.    2.  19  they  would,  .have  continued  with  us 

2.  24  ye  also  shall  continue  in  the  Son,  and  in 
Rev.  17.  10  he  must  continue  a  short  space 

19.  To  remain  on,  irapafievw  parameno. 

Heb.    7.  23  they  were  not  suffered  to  continue  by 
Jas.     1.  25  looketh  into  the  perfect  law.  .and  contin. 

20.  To  extend  on,  irapareivw  parateino. 

Acts  20.    7  and  continued  his  speech  until  midnight 


21.ro  do,  it 0 ie'a>  poieo. 

Rev.  13.   5  power  was  given  unto  him  to  continue  for 
CONTINUE  all  night,  to  — 
To  spend  the  whole  night,  fiiavvKTepevca. 

Luke  6.  12  and  continued  all  night  in  prayer  to  God 

CONTINUE  in,  to  — 

l.To  remain  in,  efx/xeyw  emmeno. 

Acts  14.  22  exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the  faith 
Gal.     3.  10  Cursed  (is)e very  one  that  continueth  not  in 
Heb.   8.   9  they  continued  not  in  my  covenant  and 

2.2*0  remain  on,  eirifxeuco  epimeno. 

Acts  13.  43  persuaded  them  to  continue  in  the  grace 
Rom.  6.    1  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may 

11.  22  toward  thee,  goodness,  if  thou  continue  in 
Col.     1.  23  If  ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded  and 

1  Ti.    4.  16  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  .continue  in  them 
3.  To  remain  beside  or  further,  Trpoafj-evai  prosmeno. 

1  Ti.    5.    5  continueth  iu  supplications  and  prayers 

■l.To  persevere  toward  (anything),  irpoo-Kaprepeaj. 

Acts    1.  14  These  all  continued  with  one  accord  in 

2.  46  continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the 

Col.     4.    2  Continue  in  prayer,  and  watch  in  the 

CONTINUE  instant  in,  to  — 

To  persevere  toward  (anything),  Trpoo-Kaprepeo). 
Rom  12.  12  Rejoicing  in  hope,  .continuing  instant  in 

CONTINUE  steadfastly,  to  — 

To  persevere  toward  a  thing,  irpoo-KapTepew  prosk. 
Acts    2.  42  they  continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles' 

CONTINUE  with,  to  — 

1.  To  persevere  toward  (anything),  irpoaKapTepew. 
Acts    8.  13  when  he  was  baptized,  he  continued  with 

2.  To  remain  toward,  -Kpoafievw  prosmeno. 

Matt  15.  32  because  they  continue  with  me  now  three 

3.  To  remain  alongside  with,  <rvfj.irapafj.evQ>  sumpa. 
Phil.   1.  25  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all 

CONTINUED,  to  be  — 

To  continue,  pa  nun,  2,  5. 

Psa.  72. 17  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as 

CONTINUING  — 

7*o  sojourn  or  sweep  away,  "na,  *iia  gur,  garar,  7a. 
Jer.   30.  23  a  continuing  whirlwind:  it  shall  fall  with 

CONTRADICT,  to  — 

7*o  speak  against,  avriXeyoj  antilego. 

Acts  13.  45  things  which  were  spoken  by  Taul,  con. 

CONTRADICTION  — 

A  speaking  against,  avriXoyit  antilogia. 

Heb    7.    7  without  all  contradiction  the  less  is  bles. 

12.  3  consider  him  that  endured  such  contra 
CONTRARIWISE  — 

The  opposite,  on  the  contrary,  robvavriov  tounanti. 

2  Co.  2.  7  contrariwise  ye  (ought)  ratlier  to  forgive 
Gal.  2.  7  But  contrariwise,  when  they  saw  that  the 
1  Pe.  3.    9  but  contrariwise  blessing;  knowing  that 

CONTRARY  — 

1.  Contrariety,  perversity,  a  turning,  Tjsn  hephek. 

Eze.  16.  34  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from"  (other) 
16.  34  no  reward  is  given,  .thou  art  contrary 

2.  Opposition,  *1j?  qeri. 

Lev.    26.  21  if  ye  walk  contrary  unto  me,  and  will 

26.  23  these  things,  but  will  walk  contrary  unto 
26.  24  Then  will  I  also  walk  contrary  unto  you 
26.  27  if  ye  will  not.  .hearken,  .but  walk  contr. 
26.  28  Then  I  will  walk  contrary  unto  you  also 
26.  40  that  also  they  have  walked  contrary  unto 

26.  41 1  also  have  walked  contrary  unto  them 

3.  Over  against,  opp>osite,  evavrios  enantios. 

Matti4.  24  ship  was.  .tossed,  .for  the  wind  was  con. 
Mark  6.  48  for  the  wind  was  contrary  unto  them 
Acts  26.    9  I  ought  to  do  mauy  things  contrary  to 

27.  4  we  sailed,  .because  the  winds  were  con. 

1  Th.  2.  15  they  please  not  God,  and  are  contrary  to 
Titus  2.    8  he  that  is  of  the  contrary  part  may  be 

4. Set  over  against,  virevcLvrios  hupenantios. 

Col.      2.  14  which  was  contrary  to  us,  and  took  it  out 

CONTRARY,  to  be  — 

Tolieor  be  laid  over  against,  avTtKei/j.at  aniikeimai. 
Gal.     5.  17  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other 
1  Ti.    1.  10  if  there  be  anyotherthiugthat  iscontrary 

CONTRARY  to  — 

l.From  over  against,  atvevavn  apenanti. 

Acts  17.    7  these  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of 

^.Contrary  to,  irapd para,~(acc.) 

Acts  18.  13  persuadeth  men  to  worship  God  contr.  to 
Rom. 11.  24  wert  grafted  contrary  to  nature  into  a 
16.  17  which  cause  divisions  .contrary  to  the 

CONTRIBUTION  — 

Act  of  using  a  thing  in  common,  Koivavia  koinonia. 
Rom. 15.  26  to  make  a  certain  contribution  for  the. 

CONTRITE  — 

l.Bndsed,  contrite,  x|^  dakka. 

Psa.  34. 18  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite  spirit 
Isa.   57.  15  withhimalso(thatis)of acoutrite.. spirit 


CONTRITE 


202 


CORN 


2.  To  be  bruised,  .1^5  dafodi,  2. 

Psa.  51.  17  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God 

3,  Smitten,  np3  nalceh. 

Isa.   66;   2T(him  that  is)  poor,  and  of  a  contrite  sph'it 

CONTRITE  one  — 

To  be  braised,  k:h  daka,  2. 

Isa.   57.  15  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones 

CONTROVERSY  — 

Strife,  contention,  pleading,  cause,  T~\  rib. 

Deut  17.    8  matters  of  controversy,  within  thy  gates 

19.  17  both  the  men.  between  whom  the  contro. 

21.    5  by  their  word  shall  every  controversy  aud 

25.    1  If  there  be  a  controversy  between  men 
2  6a.  15.    2  when  any  man  that  had  a  controversy 
2CI1.  19.    8  judgment  of  the  LORD,  aud  for  coutrov. 
Isa.   34.    8  the  year  of  recompences  for  the  coutrov. 
Jer.  25.  31  for  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the 
Eze.  44.  24  in  controversy  they  shall  stand  in  judg 
Hos.   4.    1  for  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the 

12.    2  The  Lord  hath  also  a  controversy  with 
Mic.    6.    2  Hear  ye,  O  mountains,  the  Lord's  con. 
6.    2  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  his 

CONTROVERSY,  without  — 
Confessedly,  said  unanimously,  bfxoXoyovfx^vojs. 
1  Ti.    3.  16  without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery 

CONVENIENT  — 

l.A  statute,  limited  and  apjwrtioyied  thing,  ph  choq. 

Prov.30.    8  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me 
2.Riyht,  upright,  ");?;  yashar. 

Jer.   40.    4  whither  it  seemeth  good  and  convenient 
40.    5  go  wheresoever  it  seemeth  convenient 
.3.  Well  timed,  evKaipos  eukairos. 

Mark  6.  21  when  a  convenient  day  was  come,  that 

CONVENIENT,  to  be  — 

To  have  come  up  to,  be  becoming,  oV^/eaj  aneko. 
Eph.   5.    4  nor  jesting,  which  are  not  convenient 
Phil.         8  to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  convenient 

CONVENIENT,  things  not  — 

The  things  not  seemly,  tcc  (at)  Ka9ri<ovTa. 

Rom.  1.  28  do  these  things  which  are  not  convenient 

CONVENIENT  season  — 

A.  season,  time,  naip6s  kairos. 

Acts  24.  25  when  I  have  a  convenient  season  I  will 

CONVENIENT  time,  to  have  — 
To  have  good  time  or  season,  eu/ccup€o>  eukoAreo. 
1  Co.  16. 12  come  when  he  shall  have  convenient  time 

CONVENIENTLY  — 

In  good  time  or  season,  evKaipus  eukairos. 

Mark  14.  11  he  sought  how  he  might  conveniently 

CONVERSANT,  to  be  — 
l.To  go  oh,  T\bn  halak. 

Josh.  8.  35  the  strangers  that  were  conversant  amo. 
%To  go  on  habitually,  T^rr  halak,  7. 

1  Sa.  25.  15  as  long  as  we  were  conversant  with  them 

CONVERSATION  — 
1.  Wary,  "ny\  derek. 

Psa.  37.  14  slay  such  as  be  of  upright  conversation 
50.  2  j  to  him  that  ordereth  (his)  conversation 

%A  turning  up  and  down,  behaviour,  avacrpotyr}. 
Gal.  1.  13  ye  have  heard  of  my  conversation  in  time 
Eph.  4.  22  put  off,  concerning  the  former  conversa. 

1  Ti.   4.  12  an  example  of  the  believers.. in convers 
Heb.13.    7  considering  the  end  of  (their)  conversa. 
Jas.     3.  13  let  him  show  out  of  a  good  conversation 
^Pe.    1.  15  he  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation 

1.  18  vaiu  conversation  (received)  by  tradition 
212  Having  your  conversation  honest  among 
3.  1  be  won  by  the  conversation  of  the  wives 
3.  2  While  they  behold  your  chaste  conversa. 
3.  16  that  falsely  accuse  your  good  conversa. 
2Pe.  2.  7  vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the 
3. 11  ought  ye  to  be  iu  (all)  holy  conversation 

3.  Citizen  stale  or  life,  iroAtTevp.a  politeuma. 

Phil.   3.  20  our  conversation  is  iu  heaven  ;  from 

4.  Turning,  turn,  manner,  rpoiros  tro})os. 

Heb.  13.    5  conversation  (be)  without  covetousuess 

CONVERSATION,  to  have  one's  — 

To  turn  up  ami  d<»m,  hr/nnr  io/rsrIg\  ava<TTpe(p60. 

2  Co.    1.  12  we  have  had  our  conversation  in  the 
Eph.    2.    3  we  all  had  our  conversation  in  times  past 

CONVERSATION,  let... be  — 

To  act  as  a  citizen,  TroKtrevaj  poUteud. 

Phil,   1.  27  let  your  conversation  he  as  it  becometh 
CONVERSION  — 
A  turning  wpon,  firiaTpocpr)  epistrophe. 

Acts  15.    3  declaring  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles 
CONVERT,  to  — 
l.To  bring  back,  refresh,  3?B»  shub,  5. 

Psa.  19.   7  The  law  of  the  Lord  (is)  perfect,  convert. 
2.To  turn  about  or  upon,  4irto-Tp4<pa>  ep/slrejdio. 

Jas.     s  19  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  convert 
5.  20  he  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the 


CONVERTED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  turned,  Tjsn  hophak,  2. 
'  Isa.   60.    5  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted 

2.To  turn  back,  3W  shub. 

Psa.  51.  13  and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  thee 
Isa.      6.  10  understand  with  their  heart,  and  convert 

3. To  turn  about  or  upon,  iirtcrTp4<pu)  episirepho. 
Matti3.  15  they,  .should  be  converted,  and  I  should 
Mark  4.  12  lest  at  anytime  they  should  be  converted 
Luke  22.  32  when  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy 
John  12.  40  and  becouverted,  and  I  should  heal  them 
Acts  3. 19  Repent  ye  therefore,  aud  be  converted 
28.  27  should  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal 

■i.  To  turn,  <rrp€<pw  strep>ho. 

MattiS.    3  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as 

CONVERTS  — 

To  turn  back,  3W  shub. 

Isa.     1.  27  redeemed  with  judgment,  and  her  con. 

CONVEY,  to  — 

To  put,  place,  set,  Dte'  sum. 

1  Ki.  5.    9  I  will  convey  them  by  sea  in  floats  unto 

CONVEY  over,  to  — 

To  cause  to  pass  over,  ~oy  ahar,  5. 

Neh.-  2.    7  may  convey  me  over,  till  I  come  into  J. 

CONVEY  one's  self  away,  to  — 

To  move  01'  glide  out  of  {the  ioay),  eKvew  ekneo. 

John  5.  13  for  Jesus  had  conveyed  himself  away 
CONVICT,  to  — 
To  convict,  i\4yxoi>  eleTjcho. 

John  8.    9  being  convicted  by  (their  own)  conscience 
CONVINCE,  to  — 
1.7*0  make  manifest  or  prominent,  na;  yakach,  5. 

Job  32.  12  (there  was)  none  of  you  that  convinced  J. 

2.  To  convict,  eAe'yx^  elegchd. 

John  8.  46  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin? 
1  C0.14. 24  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is  judged  of  all 
Titus  1.    9  to  exhort  aud  to  convince  the  gainsayers 
Jas.     2.   9  are  convinced  of  the  law  as  transgressors 

3.  To  convict  utterly,  e^eXeyxt*  exeletfcho. 

Jude       15  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among 

4.  To  convict  thoroughly,  hiaKare\4yxo}J.ai. 

Acts  18.  28  for  he  mightily  convinced  the  Jews 
CONVOCATION  — 
A  calling  {together),  convocation,  N^pP  miqra. 

Exodi2.  16  (there  shall  be)  an  holy  convocation,  and 
12.  16  there  shall  be  an  holy  convocation  to  you 

Lev.    3.    2  yeshallproelaini(tobe)holy  convocations 

3  the  sabbath  of  rest,  an  holy  convocation 

4  holy  convocations,  which  ye  shall  procl. 

7  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation 

8  in  the  seventh  day  (is)  an  holy  convoca. 
>i  it  may  be  an  holy  convocation  uutoyou 
24  blowing  of  trumpets,  an  holy  convocation 

23.  27  it  shall  be  an  holy  convocation  unto  you 
23.  35  the  first  day  (shall  be)  an  holy  convoca. 
23.  36  on  the  eighth  day  shall  be  an  holy  convo 
23.  37  which  ye  shall  proclaim  (to  be)  holy  cou. 
Nuni28.  18  In  the  first  day  (shall  be)  an  holy  convo. 

28.  25,  26  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation 

29.  1,  12  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation 
29.    7  ye  shall  have,  .an  holy  convocation 

COOK  — 

„-l  slaughterer,  cook,  n?»  tabbach. 

1  Sa.    9  23  Samuel  said  unto  the  cook,  Bring  the 

9.  24  the  cook  took  up  the  shoulder,  and  (that) 
COOKS  — 
Female  cooks,  nVnsu  tabbachoth. 

1  Sa.  8.  13  he  will  take  your  daughters,  .(to  be)  cooks 
COOL  — 
Wind,  nvi  ruurh. 

Gen.   3.    8  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day 
COOL,  to  — 
To  cool  doum,  Karatyvxw  katapsuchd. 

Lukei6.  24  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger,  .and  cool  my 

COOS,  Kws. 

A  small  island  on  the  coast  of  Caria,  near  Myndos  and 
Cnidos ;  N.W.  from  Rhodes;  now  called  Stanchio  or 
Stanko ;  it  was  the  birth  place  of  Hippocrates,  Apelles, 
and  Simonides. 

Acts  2i.    1  we  came  with  a  straight  course  unto  C. 
COPING  — 
Open  palm  {of  the  hand),  projecting  stone,  nsa. 

1  Ki.  7.   9  even  from  the  foundation  unto  the  coping 
COPPER  — 

Copper,  brass,  nwni  ?icchoshclh. 

Ezra    8.  27  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  gold 
COPPERSMITH  — 
Brazirr,  cqpper&mrfth,  xctAKtu?  chalkeus. 

2  Ti.    4.  14  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much 
COPULATION  — 

Effusion,  na?'^  shekabah. 

Lev.  15.  16  if  any  man's  seed  of  copulation  go  out 
15. 17  every  skin,  whereouis  the  seed  of  copula. 
15.  18  whom  man  shall  lie  (with)  seed  of  copu. 


3- 
23- 

23- 

23- 

23- 
23- 
23- 


COPY  — 

l.A  second,  double,  nr^o  mishneh. 

Deut  17.  18  he  shall  write  him  a  copy  of  this  law  in 
Josh.  8.  32  he  wrote  there  upou  the  stones  a  copy  of 

2.Copy,  transcript,  [J2H3 parshegen. 

Ezra   4.  11  This  (is)  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  they 

4.  23  when  the  copy,  .(was)  read  before  Rehum 

5.  6  The  copy  of  the  letter  that  Tatnai,  gov. 

7.  11  Now  this  (is)  the  copy  of  the  letter  that 
3.Copy,  transcript,  ]wnB pathshegm. 

Esth.  3.  14  The  copy  of  the  writing,  for  a  command. 
4.    8  gave  him  the  copy  of  the  writing  of  the 

8.  13  The  copy  of  the  writing  for  a  command. 
COPY  out,  to  — 

To  remove,  transcribe,  prjty  athaq,  5. 

Prov25-    1  which  the  men  of  Hezekiah.. copied  out 
COR  — 
Cor  (a  measure  of  dry  and  liquid  things),  13  kor. 

Eze.  45.  14  the  tenth  part  of  a  bath  out  of  the  cor 

CORAL  — 

Red  cored,  niDNn  ramoth. 

Job   28. 18  No  mention  shall  be  made  of  coral,  or  of 
Eze.  27.  16  they  occupied  iu  thy  fairs  with,  .coral 

CORBAN  — 

Anything  brought  near  to  God,  Kop&av  korban,Heb. 
Mark  7.  n  If  a  man  shall  say .  .(It  is)  Corban,  that 

CORD  — 

l.Rope,  cord,  h^n  chebel. 

Josh.  2. 15  she  iet  them  down  by  a  cord  through  the 
Esth.  1.    6  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and 
Job    36.    8  And.  .be  holden  in  cords  of  affliction 

41.  1  or  his  tongue  with  a  cord . .  thou  lettest 
Psa.  140.  5  The  proud  have  hid  a  snare .  .and  cords 
Prov.  5.  22  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his 
Eccl.  12.  6  Or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  loosed,  or  the 
Isa.  5.  18  that  draw  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity 
Jer.  38.  6  and  they  let  down  Jeremiah  with  cords 
38. 11  let  them  down  by  cords  into  the  dungeon 

38.  12  under  thine  arm  holes  under  the  cords 
38. 13  So  they  drew  up  Jeremiah  with  cords,  and 

Eze.  27.  24  in  chests  of  rich  apparel,  bound  with  cords 
Hos.  11.    4  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with 
Mic.    2.    5  cast  a  cord  by  lot  in  the  congregation  of 

2..-1  thread,  cord,  tain  chut. 

Eccl.  4.  12  and  a  threef  old  cord  is  not  quickly  broken 

3.  A  pin  {of  a  tent),  ^Tjiyether. 

Job    30. 11  he  hath  loosed  my  cord,  and  afflicted  me 

4.  Cord,  string,  "in\p  methar. 

Exodus.  18  aud  the  pins  of  the  court,  and  their  cords 

39.  40  the  hanging  for  the  court  gate,  his  cords 
Num.  3.  26  the  cords  of  it,  for  all  the  service  thereof 

3.  37  the  pillars  of  the  court . .  and  their  cords 

4.  26  their  cords,  and  all  the  instruments  of 
4.  32  the  pillars  of  the  court,  .and  their  cords 

Isa.   54.    2  lengthen  thy  cords,  aud  strengthen  thy 
Jer.    10.  20  My  tabernacle  is  spoiled,  and  all  my  cords 

5.  Thick  cord,  nij;;  aboth. 

Judgis-  13  they  bound  him  with  two  new  cords,  and 
15.  14  the  cords  that  (were)  upon  his  arms  beca. 

Psa.    2.    3  Let  us.  .cast  away  their  cords  from  us 
118.  27  bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  (even)  unto 
129.   4  he  hath  cut  asunder  the  cords  of  the 

CORDS,  small  — 

.1  cord  made  of  bulrushes,  cx^v'lQV  schoinion. 
John  2.  15  when  he  had  made  a  scourge  of  small  co. 

CO-RE,  Kope. 

The  Greek  form  of  Komh. 

Jude       11  for  they.,  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  C. 

CORIANDER  — 

A  round  aromatic  seed,  "ia  gad. 

Exodi6.  31  and  it  (was)  like  coriander  seed,  white 
jXuniii.    7  the  manna  (was)  as  coriander  seed,  and 

CORINTH,  Kopivdos. 

Capital  of  Achaia  Proper,  on  the  isthmus  between  the 

Peloponnesus  and  the  mainland  between  the  gulfs  of 

Lepauto  aud  .-Egina.   Here  Paid  dwelt  eighteen  months. 

Acts  18.    1  After  these  things  Paul,  .came  to  C. 

19.    1  while  A  polios  was  at  ('.,  Paul  having 

1  Co.    1.    2  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  C. 

2  Co.    1.    1  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  C. 

1.  23  to  spare  you  I  came  not  as  yet  unto  C. 
2  Ti.    4.  20  Erastus  abode  at  C. :  but  Trophimus  have 

CORINTHIAN,  Kopivdios. 

A  native  or  inhabitant  of  Corinth. 

Acts  18.    8  and  many  of  the  C.  hearing  believed,  and 
2  Co.   6.  11  O  (ye)  C,  our  mouth  is  open  unto  you 

CORMORANT  — 
l.I'dican,  nNp   qaath. 

Isa.    154.  11  the  cormorant  and  the  bittern. shall  pos. 

Zeph.  2. 14  the  cormorant  and  the  bittern  shalliodge 
I.Cormorant,  S|7p  shalrik. 

Lev.  11.  17  the  little  owl,  and  the  cormorant,  and  the 

Deut  14.  17  pelican,  and  the  gier.  .and  the  cormoraut 
CORN  — 
\.Mij>:d  produce,  7*75  beliL 

Job.  24.    6  They  reap,  .his  corn  in  the  field  ;  and 


CORN 


203 


CORRUPT 


2.  Wheat,  corn,  grain,  "i3p3  bar. 

Gen.  41.  35  lay  up  corn  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh 

41.  49  Joseph  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the 

42.  3  ten  brethren  went  down  to  buy  corn  in  E. 
42.  25  commanded  to  fill  their  sacks  with  corn 
45-  23  ten  she  asses  laden  with  corn  and  bread 

Job  39.   4  Their  young  ones . .  they  grow  up  with  corn 
Psa.  65.  13  valleys  also  are  covered  over  with  corn 

72.  16  There  shall  be  an  handful  of  corn  in  the 
Prov  11.  26  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people 

2.  A  threshing  floor,  \~\2  goren. 

Deut  16.  13  after  that  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  corn 

LCorn,  grain,  j:"i  dagan. 

Gen.  27.  28  God  give  thee .  .plenty  of  corn  and  wine 

27.  37  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  sustained  him 
Xum  18.  27  as  though,  .the  corn  of  the  threshing-flo. 
Deut.  7.  i3*he  will  also  bless,  .thy  corn,  and  thy  wine 

xi.  14  that  thou  mayest  gather  in  thy  corn,  and 

12.  17  within  thy  gates  the  tithe  of  thy  corn 
14.  23  thou  shalt  eat.  .the  tithe  of  thy  corn 
18.   4  The  first  fruit  (also)  of  thy  corn,  of  thy 

28.  51  which  (also)  shall  not  leave  thee,  .corn 
33.  28  fountain  of  Jacob . .  upon  a  laud  of  corn 

2  Ki.iS.  32  Until  I ..  take  you  away  to.,  a  land  of  com 
2  Ch  31.    5  the  first  fruits  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  and 
32.  2S  Storehouses  also  for  the  increase  of  corn 
Nell.   5.    2  we  take  up  corn . .  that  we  may  eat,  and 
5.   3  have  mortgaged,  .that  we  might  buy  corn 
5. 10  might  exact  of  them  money  and  corn  :  I 
5.  11  also  the  hundredth  (part)  of  the.  .corn 
10.  39  Levi  shall  bring  the  offering  of  the  corn 

13.  5  the  tithes  of  the  corn,  the  new  wine,  and 
13.  12  Then  brought  all.  .the  tithe  of  the  corn 

Esa.     4.    7  more  than  in  the  time,  .their  corn  and 
65.    9  thou  preparest  them  corn,  when  thou 
7S  24  and  had  given  them  of  the  corn  of  heaven 
Isa.   36.  17  a  laud  of  corn  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread 
62.    8  I  will  no  more  give  thy  corn  (to  be)  meat 
Lam.  2.  i2They"say  to  their  mothers,  "Where  (is)  corn 
Eze.  36.  29  I  will  call  for  the  corn,  and  will  increase 
Hos    2.    S  she  did  not  know  that  I  gave  her  corn 
2.   9  take  away  my  corn  in  the  time  thereof 
2.  22  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the 
7.  14  they  assemble  themselves  for  corn  and 
.14.    7  they  shall  revive  (as)  the  corn,  and  grow 
Joel    1. 10  the  laud  mourneth ;  for  the  corn  is  wasted 
1. 17  the  barns  are  broken  down  ;  for  the  corn 
2. 19  I  will  send  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil 
Hag    1.  11  upon  the  corn,  and  upon  the  new  wine 
Zee.    9. 17  Corn  shall  make  the  young  men  cheer. 

5.  Standing  corn,  najj  qamah. 

Deut  16.    9  begiunest  (to  put)  the  sickle  to  the  corn 
Isa.   17.    5  as  -when  the  harvest  man  gathereth  the  co. 

Q.Grain,  corn,  nna*  sheber. 

Gen.  42.  1  Jacob  saw  that  there  was  corn  in  Egypt 
42.  2  I  have  heard  that  there  is  corn  in  Egypt 
42.  19  go  ye,  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of  your 

42.  26  they  laded  their  asses  with  the  corn,  and 

43.  2  when  they  had  eaten  up  the  corn  which 

44.  2  put . .  in  the  sack's  mouth . .  his  corn  money 
47.  14  gathered  up  all  the  money,  .for  the  corn 

Amos  S.    5  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn  > 

7. Son,  produce,  J2  ben. 

Isa.  21. 10  0  my  threshing,  and  the  corn  of  my  floor 

8.  A  kernel,  a  grain,  seed,  k6kko?  kokkos. 

Johni2.  24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  grou. 

9.  Wheat,  corn,  grain,  <riros  sitos. 

Mark  4.  28  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in 
Acts  7. 12  when  Jacob  heard  that  there  was  corn  in 

10.  Sown  fields  of  grain,  (nr6ptpia  sporima. 

Matt  12.    1  began  to  pluck  the  earsof  corn,  and  to  eat 
CORN,  beaten  — 
Corn  beaten  or  bruised,  bna  geres. 

Lev.  2.  14  offer,  .(even)  corn  beaten  out  of  full  ears 
2. 16  of  the  beaten  corn  thereof,  and  (part)  of 

CORN  fields  — 

Sown  fields  of  grain,  a-rrSpi/xa  sjporima. 

Mark  2.  23  he  weut  through  the  corn  fields  on  the 
Luke  6.    1  that  he  went  through  the  corn  fields 

CORN,  ears  of  — 

I. An  ear  of  grain,  jraaw  shibboleth. 

Gen.  41.    5  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up  upon  one 
Ruth  2.    2  glean  ears  of  corn  after  (him)  in  whose 
Job   24.  24  cut  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  corn 

%An  ear  of  grain,  o-tclxvs  stachus. 

Matti2.    1  began  to  pluck  the  ears  of  corn,  and  to 
.Mark  2.  23  disciples  began,  .to  pluck  the  earsofcorn 
Luke  6.    1  his  disciples  plucked  the  ears  of  corn 

CORN,  full  ears  of  — 

Garden  land,  grain,  ?pi3  karmel. 

2  Ki.  4. 42  brought,  .full  ears  of  corn  in  the  husk 
CORN,  ground  — 
Pounded  corn  or  grain,  grits,  man  riphoth. 

2  Sa.  17. 19  the  woman,  .spread  ground  corn  thereon 
CORN,  heap  of  — 
A  Iieap  of  grain,  nEnj/;  aremah. 

Ruth  3.    7  lie  down  at  the  end  of  the  heap  of  corn 
CORN,  old  — 
Old  corn  or  produce,  nnj/  abur. 

Josh.  5. 11  they  did  eat  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land 
5, 12  after  they  had  eaten  of  the  old  corn  of 


CORN,  parched  — 

Parched  or  roasted  ears,  'pp,  t*7fj  qali. 

Lev.  23.  14  shall  eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched  corn 
Ruth  2.  14  he  reached  her  parched  (corn),  and  she 

1  Sa.  17. 17  Take  now. .  an  ephah  of  this  parched  (corn) 

25.  18  took.. five  measures  of  parched  (corn) 

2  Sa.  17.  28  Brought,  .flour,  and  parched  (corn),  and 

CORN,  standing  — 

What  stands  up,  n^  qamah. 

Exod22.    6  so  that'  .the  standing  corn,  or  the  field 

Deut23.  25  When  thou  comest  into  the  standing  com 

23.  25  a  sickle  unto  thy  neighbour's  standing  co. 

Judg  15.   5  he  let  (them)  go  into  the  standing  corn  of 

15.   5  both  the  shocks,  and  also  the  standing  co. 

COR-NE'-LITJS,  KopVT)\iQS. 

A  converted  Roman  centurion  at  Csesarea. 

Acts  10.    1  There  was  a  certain  man.. called  C. 
10.    3  an  angel  of  God.  .saying  unto  him,  C. 
10.    7  when  the  angel  which  spake  unto  C.  was 
10.  17  the  men  which  were  sent  from  C.  had 
10.  21  men  which  were  sent  unto  him  from  C. 
10.  22  C. . .  was  warned  from  God  by  an  holy  angel 
10.  24  C.  waited  for  them,  and.  .called  together 
10.  25  as  Peter  was  coming  in,  C.  met  him,  and 
10.  30  C.  said,  Four  days  ago  I  was  fasting 

10.  31  C,  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  thine  alms 

CORNER— 

l.Wing,  *"]j3  kanaph. 

Isa.    11.  12  gather,  .from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth 
Eze.    7.    2  the  end  is  come  upon  the  four  corners  of 

2.Shoidder,T\T\3  katheph. 

2  Ki.n.  11  about  the  king,  from  the  right  corner  of 

11.  11  to  the  left  corner  of  the  temple,  (along) 
Z. Angle,  yixj?p  miqtsoa. 

Exod26.  24  both  ;  they  shall  be  for  the  two  corners 
36.  29  thus  he  did  to  both,  .in  both  the  comers 

Eze.  41.  22  the  corners  thereof,  and  the  length  there. 
46.  21  caused  me  to  pass  by  the  four  corners  of 
46.  21  in  every  corner  of  the  court,  .(was)  a  court 
46.  22  In  the  four  comers  of  the  court,  .courts 

4. Side,  quarter,  nxs  peak. 

Exod25.  26  put  the  rings  in  the  four  corners  that 

36.  25  the  other  side,  .toward  the  north  corner 

37.  13  put  the  rings  upon  the  four  corners  that 
Lev,  19.   9  thou  shalt  not  wholly  reap  the  corners  of 

19.  27  Ye  shall  not  round  the  corners  of  your 
19.  27  neither  shalt  thou  mar  the  comers  of  thy 
21.   5  neither  shall  they  shave  off  the  corner  of 
23.  22  the  corners  of  thy  field  when  thoureapest 
NUIII24. 17  shall  smite  the  corners  of  Moab,  and 
Josh.  18,  14  compassed  the  corner  of  the  sea  southw. 
Neh.   9.  22  didst  divide  them  into  corners :  so  they- 
Jer.     9.  26  Moab,  and  all.  .in  the  utmost  corners 
25.  23  Buz,  and  all.. in  the  utmost  corners 

48.  45  shall  devour  the  corner  of  Moab,  and  the 

49.  32  them  (that  are)  in  the  utmost  corners 
Amos  3.  12  that  dwell  in  Samaria  in  the  corner  of  a 

5.  Comer,  |3  pen. 

Prov.  7.    8  Passing  through  the  street  near  her  cor. 
Zech.14.  10  unto  the  corner  gate,  and  (from)  the 

6.  Corner,  front,  a  chief  man,  nas  pinnah. 

Exod27>   2  make  the  horns,  .upon  the  foiu*  corners 

38.  2  made  the  horns  thereof  on  the  four  corn, 

1  Ki.    7.  34  undersetters  to  the  four  corners  of  one 

2  Ki.  14. 13  the  gate  of  Ephraira  unto  the  corner 

2  Ch.  26.  9  Uzziah  built  towers,  .at  the  corner  gate 
28.  24  he  made  him  altars  in  every  corner  of 

Neh.  3.  24  from  the  house  of- Azariah.  .unto  the  cor. 
3.  31  Miphkad,  and  to  the  going  up  of  the  cor. 
3.  32  between  the  going  up  of  the  corner  unto 

Job  1. 19  a  great  wind,  .smote  the  four  corners  of 
38.   6  or  who  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof 

Psa.  1 1 8.  22  is  become  the  head  (stone)  of  the  corner 

Prov.  7.  12  without.  ,aud  lieth  in  wait  at  every  cor. 
21.   9  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner  of  the  house 
25.  24  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner  of  the  house 

Isa.  28.  16  I  lay  in  Zion .  .a  precious  corner  (stone) 

Jer.  31.  33  from  the  tower . .  unto  the  gate  of  the  cor 
31.  40  unto  the  corner  of  the  horse  gate  toward 
51.  26  shaU  not  take  of  thee  a  stone  for  a  corn. 

Eze.  4-3.  20  put  (it),  .on  the  four  cornel's  of  the  settle 
45. 19  upon  the  four  corners  of  the  settle  of  the 

Zech.io.    4  Out  of  him  came  forth  the  corner,  out  of 

7. Tread,,  foot,  nys  paam. 

Exod25.  j2  and  put  (them)  in  the  four  corners 

37.    3  rings,  .(to  be  set)  by  the  four  corners  of 

1  Ki.  7.  30  thefourcornersthereof(had)undersetters 
S.Rib,  ]hy  tsela. 

Exod3o.    4  under  the  crown  of  it,  by  the  two  comers 
37.  27  under  the  crown  thereof,  by  the  two  cor. 
9. End,  extremity,  nyjj  qatsah. 

Exod27.    4  four  brasen  rings  in  the  four  corners 
10.7b  be  scraped,  cornered,  ysn  qatsa,  6. 

Eze.  46.  22  these  four  corners  (were)  of  one  measure 
11.  To  turn  the  face,  front,  nsgjtanah. 

2  Ch.  25.  23  from  the  gate  of  Ephraim  to  the  corner 
12. A  beginning,  apxh  arche. 

Acts  10. 11  as . .  a  great  sheet  knit  at  the  four  corners 
11.    5  let  down  from  heaven  by  four  corners 

IS. Angle,  corner,  yavia  gonia. 

Matt.  6.  s  they  love  to  pray  standing . .  in  the  corners 
8i.  42  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor. 


Marki2.  10  stone,  .is  become  the  head  of. the  corner? 
Luke  20.  17  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor. 
Acts    4.  11  stone,  .is  become  the  head  of  the  corner 

26.  26  for  this  tiling  was  not  done  in  a  corner 
1  Pe.  2.    7  the  same  is  made  the  head  of  the  corner 
Rev.  7.    1  four  angels  standing  on  the  tour  comers 

CORNER,  chief  — 

At  the  extreme  angle,  aKpoywviaws  akrogoniaios. 

Eph.    2.  20  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  cor. 

1  Pe.   2.   6  I  lay  in  Siun  a  chief  corner  stone,  elect 

CORNER  stones. — 

Corner  stones,  ni'ij  zaviyyoth. 

Psa.144. 12  our  daughters  (may  be)  as  corner  stones 

CORNERS  — 

1. Corner  stones,  nvij  zaviyyoth. 

Zech.  9. 15  they  shall  be  filled.. as  the  corners  of  the 
2.Angles,  corners,  nyyipp  mequtsoth. 

Exod26.  23  two  boards  shalt  thou  make  for  the  corn. 
36.  28  two  boards  made  he  for  the  corners  of 

CORNET  — 

I.Horn,  cornet,  pj3  qeren. 

Dan.  3.  5,  15  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  cor. 
3.  7  the  people  heard  the  sound  of  the  cornet 
3.  to  man  that  shall  hear  the  sound  of  the  cor. 

2.  Trumpet,  ~£ic>  shophar. 

1  Ch.15.  28  shouting,  and  with  sound  of  the  cornet 

2  Ch.15.  I4  tney  sware  unto  the  Lord,  .with  cornets 
Psa.  98.  6  With  trumpets  and  sound  of  cornet  make 
Hos.   5.    8  Blow  ye  the  cornet  in  Gibeali.  .the  truin. 

CORNETS  — 

Cornets,  sistra,  cry^D  menaanim. 

2  Sa.  6.   5  all  the  house  of  Israel  played.,  on  cornets 

CORNFLOOR  — 

Cornfloor,  jj?  pa  goren  dagan. 

Hos.   9.   1  hast  loved  a  reward  upon  every  cornfloor  . 
CORPSE  — 
l.Body,  rna  geviyyah. 

Nah.   3.  '3  and  (there  is)  none  end  of  (then-)  corpses 
3.    3  they  stumble  upon  their  corpses 
2.  Carcase,  -us  peger. 

1  Ki.  19.  35  behold,  they  (were)  all  dead  corpses 
Isa.    37.  36  behold,  they  (were)  all  dead  corpses 

%.A  fallen  object,  carcase,  wTco/j-a  ptoma. 

Mark  6.  29  they  came  and  took  up  his  corpse,  and 

CORRECT,  to  — 

l.To  manifest,  reason  with,  reprove,  rn;  yakach,  5. 
Job     5. 17  happy  (is)  the  man  whom  God  correcteth 
Psa.  94.  10  He  that  chastiseth.  .shall  not  he  correct 
Prov.  3. 12  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  correcteth 

'l.To  instruct,  chastise,  "lp;  yasar,  3. 

Psa.  39.  n  When  thou  with  rebukes  dost  correct  man 
Prov  29.  17  Correct  thy  son,  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest 
Jer.    2.  19  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee 
10.  24  O  Lord,  correct  me,  but  with  judgment 
Jer.  30.  11  I  will  correct  thee  in  measure,  and  will 
46.  28  but  correct  thee  in  measure  :  yet  will  I  not 

CORRECTED,  to  be  — 

To  be  instructed,  "id;  yasar,  2. 

Prov  29.  19  A  servant  will  not  be  corrected  by  words 
CORRECTED,  which  — 
Instructor,  iratdtvTrjs  paideutes. 

Heb.  12.    9  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected 
CORRECTION  — 

1.  To  manifest,  reason  with,  reprove,  ns;  yakach,  5. 
flab.  1.  12  thou  hast  established  them  for  correction 

2.  Instruction,  correction,  1D1D  musar- 

Prov.  7.  22  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks 
15. 10  Correction  (is)  grievous  unto  him  that 

22.  15  the  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it  far 

23.  13  Withhold  not  correction  from  the  child 
Jer.     2.  30  your  children  ;  they  received  no  correc. 

5.    3  they  have  refused  to  receive  correction 
7.  28  nor  receiveth  correction  :  truth  is  perish 
Zeph.  3.    2  obeyed  not. .she  received  not  correction 

3. Reproof,  reasoning,  nroipi  tolaehath. 

Prov.  3.  11  neither  be  weary  of  his  correction 
4. A  setting  aright,  i-wa.v6p6wais  epanorthosis. 

2  Ti.    3.  16  profitable  for  doctrine,  .for  correction 
5.A  rod,  tani?  shebet. 

Job    37.  13  whether  for  correction,  or  for  his  land 

CORRUPT  — 

l.To  be  corrupt,  nrj^  shachath,  2. 

Eze.  20.  44  nor  according  to  your  corrupt  doings,  O 
2.  To  be  corrupted,  nr#>  shachath,  6. 

Prov25.  26  a  troubled  fountain,  and  a  corrupt  spring 
Z.To  corrupt,  nny  sliechath. 

Dan.  2.   9  ye  have  prepared  lying  and  corrupt  words 

4.  To  corrupt  thoroughly,  f>ia<p9e(pm  diaphtheiro. 

1  Ti.    6.   5  Perverse  disputings  of  men  of  corrupt 

5.  To  corrupt  utterly,  KaracpQeipa}  kaiaphtheiro. 

2  Ti    3.    8  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concern. 
6. Bad,  putrid,  rotten,  rrawpSs  sapros. 

Matt.  7. 17  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit 


CORRUPT 


204 


COUNCIL 


Matt.  7.  18  neither  (can)  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth 
12.33  make  the  tree  corrupt,  ami  his  fruit  cor. 
Luke  6.  43  a  good  tree  hringeth  not  forth  corrupt 

6.  43  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit 
Eph.   4.  29  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed 

CORRUPT,  to  — 
1.7b  rebuke,  1J73  gaar, 

Mai.  2.    3  I  will  corrupt  your  seed,  and  spread  dung 

2.7*0  profane,  *pn  chaneph,  5. 

Dan.  11.  32  And  such,  .shall  he  corrupt  by  flatteries 

3.  To  corrupt,  nn^  shachath,  3. 

Exod32.    7  for  thy  people,  .have  corrupted  (them.) 
Deut.  9.  12  for  thy  people,  .have  corrupted  (them.) 
32.    5  They  have  corrupted  themselves,  their 
Eze.  28.  17  thou  hast  corrupted  thy  wisdom  by  reason 
Hos.    9.    9  They  have  deeply  corrupted  (themselves) 
Mai.    2.    8  ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of  Levi 

4.  To  be  or  become  corrupt,  nn#  shachath,  5. 

Gen.   6.  12  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the 
Deut.  4.  16  Lest  ye  corrupt  (yourselves),  and  make 
4.  25  shall  corrupt  (yourselves),  and  make  a 
31.  29  after  my  death  ye  will  utterly  corrupt 
Judg.  2.  19  corrupted  (themselves)  more  than  their 
Zeph  3.    7  they  rose  early,  (and)  corrupted  all  their 
5. To  cause  to  disappear,  a,<pa,vifa  aphanizo. 

Matt  6.  19  where  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and 
6.  20  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  cor. 

6.  To  corrupt  thoroughly,  diacpBetpw  diaphtheiro. 

Lukei2.  33  no  thief  approacheth,  neither  moth  cor. 

7.  To  act  as  a  (corrupt)  vinter,  K.a-Kn\zvo>  kapeleuo. 
2  Co.  2. 17  we  are  not  as  many,  which  corrupt  the 

8.  To  cause  to  become  putrid,  ariiraj  sepo. 

Jas.     5.    2  Your  riches  are  corrupted,  and  jour  gar. 
9. To  corrupt,  fyQeipa  phtheiro. 

1  C0.15.  33  evil  communications  corrupt  good  mann 

2  Co.  7.   2  Receive  us.  .we  have  corrupted  no  man 

ii.    3  your  minds  should  be  corrupted  from  the 
Rev.  19.    2  which  did  corrupt  the  earth  with  her 

CORRUPT,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  corrupt,  73IJ  chabal,  4. 

Job  17.    1  My  breath  is  corrupt,  my  days  are  extinct 

2.  To  act  corruptly,  plD  muk,  5. 

Psa.  73.   8  They  are  corrupt,  and  speak  wickedly 

8.  To  become  corrupt,  ppo  maqaq,  2. 

Psa.  38.    5  My  wounds  stink  (and)  are  corrupt 
4.  To  become  corrupt,  nnp  shachath,  2. 

Gen.    6.  11  The  earth  also  was  corrupt  before  God 
6.  12  looked  upon  the  earth,  and-  .it  was  cor. 

6.  To  corrupt,  make  corrupt,  nn^  shachath,  5. 

Psa.  14.    1  They  are  corrupt ;  they  have  done  abom. 

53.    1  Corrupt  are  they,  and  have  done  abom. 
Eze.  23.  11  she  was  more  corrupt  in  her  inordinate 

6.7*0  corrupt,  <p8*ipw  phtheird. 

Eph.   4.  22  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceit. 

CORRUPT  thing  — 

To  be  corrupt,  nniy  shachath,  6. 

Mai.    1. 14  sacrificeth  unto  the  Lord  a  corrupt  thing 

CORRUPT  one's  self,  to  — 

To  corrupt,  act  corruptly,  (pOt'ipcc phtheiro. 

Jude       10  in  those  things  they  corrupt  themselves 

CORRUPTED,  to  be  — 

l.To  become  corrupt,  nni£>  shachath,  2. 

Exod  8.  24  the  land  was  corrupted  by  reason  of  the 

2.  To  make  corrupt,  act  corruptly,  nny shachath,  5. 
Eze.  16.  47  thou  was  corrupted  more  than  they  in 

CORRUPTER  — 

To  make  corrupt,  act  corruptly  nn^  shachath,  5. 
Isa.     1.    4  evil  doers,  children  that  are  corrupters 
Jer.     6.  28  brass  aud  iron  ;  they  (are)  all  corrupters 

CORRUPTIBLE  — 

( 'urruptibU;  (pdapros  phthartos. 

Rom.  1.  23  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man 

1  Co.  9.  25  Now  they  (do  it)  to  obtain  a  corruptible 

*5-  53  For  fcnis  corruptible  must  put  on  incor. 

15.  54  So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put 

1  Pe.    1.  23  Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed 

CORRUPTIBLE  things  — 

Corruptible)  <p8apr6s  phthartos. 

1  Pe.  1. 18  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  th. 

CORRUPTIBLE,  not — 

Incorruptible,,  &<p6apTo's  aphthartos. 

1  Pe.  3.    4  heart,  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible 
CORRUPTING  — 

To  moke  corrupt,  act  corruptly,  nny  shachath,  5. 

Dan.  11. 17  give  him  the  daughter  of  women,  corru. 
CORRUPTION  — 
1.  Wasting,  fading  away,  ^2  belt. 

Isa.   38. 17  my  soul  (delivered  it)  from  the  pitof  cor. 
■l.i'nerttptinn,  rvri:^  mitshehifh. 

2  Ki  23.  13  on  the  right  hand  of  the  mount  of  Corru. 
Dan.  10.    8  my  comeliness  was  turned,  .into  corrupt. 

3,  Corrupt,  corrupt  thing,  ni^D  moshchath. 

Lev.  22.  25  because  their  corruption  (is)  in  them 


4.  Corruption,  place  or  state  of,  nnty  shachath. 
Job   17.  14  I  have  said  to  corruption,  Thou  (art)  my 
Psa.  16.  10  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  cor. 
49.    g  still  live  for  ever,  (and)  not  see  corruption 
John   2.    6  hast  thou  brought  up  my  life  from  cor. 
0. Thorough  corruption,  Bta<pdopd  diaphthora. 

Acts    2.  27  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  cor. 
2.  31  left  in  hell,  neither  his  flesh  did  see  cor. 
13.  34  (now)  no  more  to  return  to  corruption 
13.  35  not  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corrup. 
13.  36  laid  unto  his  fathers,  aud  saw  corruption 
13.  37  he,  whom  God  raised  again,  saw  no  cor. 

6. Corruption,  <pQopd,  phthora. 

Rom.  8.  21  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption 

1  Co.  15.  42  It  is  sown  in  corruption ;  it  is  raised  in 

15.  50  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorrup. 
Gal.     6.    8  he.  .shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption 

2  Pe.   1.    4  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world 

2.  12  utterly  perish  in  their  own  corruption 
2.  19  they,  .are  the  servants  of  corruption 

CORRUPTLY,  to  deal  — 

To  act  wickedly,  *?2n  chabal. 

Neh.    1.    7  We  have  dealt  very  corruptly  against  thee 

CORRUPTLY,  to  do  — 

To  make  corrupt,  act  corruptly,  nntr  shachath,  5. 
2  Ch.27.    2  And  the  people  did  yet  corruptly 

CO-SAM,  Kcoaa.fi. 

A  son  of  Elmodam,  and  the  5th  before  Zorobabel  in 

the  line  of  Joseph,  husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  28  of  C,  which  was  (the  son)  of  Elmodam 
COST  — 
Expense,  Sairavn,  dapane. 

Luke  14.  28  sittcth  not  down,  .and  counteth  the  cost 

COST  nothing,  to  — 

Gratis,  gratuitous,  D3n  chinnam. 

2  Sa.  24.  24  of  that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing 

COST,  without  — 

Gratis,  gratuitous,  Djn  chinnam. 

1  Ch.21.  24  nor  offer  burnt  offerings  without  cost 
COSTLINESS  — 
Preciousness,  rifit6Tvs  timiotes. 

Rev.  18.  19  made  rich,  .by  reason  of  her  costliness ! 
COSTLY  — 
1.  Precious,  rare,  *i[?;  yaqar. 

1  Ki.   5.  17  they  brought  great  stones,  costly  stones 
7.    9  these  (were  of)  costly  stones,  according  to 
7.  10  the  foundation  (was  of)  costly  stones,  even 
7. 11  above  (were)  costly  stones,  after  the  mea. 

2. High  priced,  ttoXvt€\7]S  poluteUs. 

1  Ti.    2.   9  not  with,  .gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  array 

COSTLY,  very  — 

Nigh  priced,  iroXurt/xos,  polutimos. 

Johni2.   3  took,  .ointment  of  spikenard,  very  costly 
COTES  — 
Cribs,  stalls,  ni-nx  averoth. 

2  Ch.32.  28  all  manner  of  beasts,  and  cotes  for  flocks 
COTTAGE  — 

l.A  lodge,  Up??  melunah. 

Isa.   24.  20  and  shall  be  removed  like  a  cottage 
l.A  booth,  nsp  sukkah. 

Isa.     1.    8  daughter  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  cottage  iu 
COTTAGES  — 
Places  cut  out  (of  the  rocks  or  earth),  nis  karoth. 

Zeph.  2.    6  sea  coast  shall  be  dwellings  (and)  cottages 
COUCH  — 
1.  Anything  spread  out,  jz«;  yatsvxa. 

Gen.  49.   4  Unstable  as  water,  .he  went  up  to  my  co. 
%  Place  for  lying  down,  33^a  mishkab. 

Job     7.  13  my  couch  shall  ease  my  complaint 
3.  Couch,  tfny  eres. 

Psa.    6.    6  I  water  my  couch  with  my  tears 

Amos. 3.  12  that  dwell,  .in  Damascus  (in)  a  couch 
6.   4  stretch  themselves  upon  their  couches 

4. A  small  couch  for  reclining  on,  KXivifiiov  Mini. 
Luke  5.  19  with  (Ins)  couch  into  the  midst  before 
5.  24  take  up  thy  couch,  and  go  unto  thine 

5. A  mattress,  Kpa&fiaros  krobbatos  Kpd@&aTTOS. 

Acts    5.  15  laid  (them)  on  beds  and  couches,  that  at 
COUCH,  to  — 
1.7*0  bend  down,  Vl^kara. 

Num  24.    9  He  couched,  he  lay  down  as  a  lion,  and 

2.7V)  crouch,  ran,  rabats. 

Gen.  49.    9  he  couched  as  a  lion,  and  as  an  old  lion 

Deut  33.  13  and  for  the  deep  that  coucheth  beneath 
3.  7*o  bow  down,  nn^;  shachach. 

Job   38.  40  When  they  couch  in  (their)  dens,  (aud) 
COUCH  down,  to  — 
To  crouch,  yyi  rabats. 

Gen.  49.  14  a  strong  ass  couching  down  between  two 
COUCHING  place  — 
Place/or  couching,  I'?"1?  marbets. 

Eze.  25.    5  the  Ammonites  a  couching  place  for  flo. 


COULD  — 

l.To  be  able,  "?b;  yakol. 

Gen.  13.    6  so  that  they  could  not  dwell  together 

36.  7  the  land,  .could  not  bear  them  because 

37.  4  and  could  not  speak  peacebly  unto  him 
45.    1  Joseph  could  not  refrain  himself  before 

45.  3  his  brethren  could  not  answer  him  ;  for 
Exod.  2.    3  when  she  could  not  longer  bide  him,  she 

7.  21,  24  could  not  drink  of  the  water  of  the 

8.  18  to  bring  forth  lice,  but  they  could  not 

9.  11  the  magicians  could  not  stand  before  M. 

12.  39  they  were  thrust  out  of.  .and  could  not 
15.  23  they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of  M. 

Num.  9.    6  they  could  not  keep  the  passover  on  that 
Josh.  7.  12  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  stand 

15.  63  the  children  of  Judah  could  not  drive 
17.  12  the  children  of  Mauasseh  could  not  drive 

Judg.  2.  14  they  could  not  any  longer  stand  before 

14.  14  they  could  not  in  three  days  expound  the 
1  Sa.    3.    2  eyes  began  to  wax  dim,  (that)  he  could  not 

4.  15  eyes  were  dim,  that  he  could  not  see 
2Sa.    3.  11  he  could  not  answer  Abuer  a  word  again 
1  Ki.  5.    3  David  my  father  could  not  build  an  house 

8.  11  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister 

13.  4  that  he  could  could  not  pull  it  in  again 

14.  4  Ahijah  could  not  see  ;  for  his  eyes  were 
2K1.  3.  26  to  break  through,  .but  they  could  not 

4.  40  And  they  could  not  eat  (thereof) 

16.  5  they  besieged  Ahaz,  but  could  not  overc. 
1  Ch.  21.  30  David  could  not  go  before  it  to  enquire 
2CI1.    5.  14  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister 

7.    2  the  priests  could  not  enter  into  the  house 

29.  34  they  could  not  flay  all  the  burnt  offerings 

30.  3  they  could  not  keep  it  at  that  time,  beca. 
32.  14  that  could  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine 

Ezra  2.  59  they  could  not  show  their  father's  house 
Neh.  7.  61  they  could  not  show  their  father's  house 
Job  31.  23  by  reason  of  his  highness  I  could  not 
Isa.     7.    1  Jerusalem,  .hut  could  not  prevail  against 

46.  2  they  could  not  deliver  the  burden,  but 
Jer.     3.    5  hast.. done  evil  things  as  thou  couldest 

20.    9  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could  not 
44.  22  the  Lord  could  no  longer  bear,  because 
Lam.  4.  14  that  men  could  not  touch  their  garments 
Eze.  47.    5  a  river  that  I  could  not  pass  over:  for  the 
Hos.    5.  13  yet  could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you 
Jon.    1.  13  bring  (it)  to  the  land ;  but  they  could  not 

2.  To  be  able,  Vp:  yekil. 

Dan.    6.   4  they  could  find  none  occasion  nor  fault 

3.  To  be  able,  Vns  kehal. 

Dan.    5.    8  they  could  not  read  the  writing,  nor 

5.  15  they  could  not  show  the  interpretation 

4.7*0  know,  distinguish,  "01  nakar,  5. 

Neh.  13.  24  could  not  speak  in  the  Jews'  language 

COULD  not  — 

7*o  move  away,  wander,  tij  nadad. 

Esth.  6.    1  that  night  could  not  the  king  sleep  ;  and 
COULD  not  do,  what  the  law  — 
The  impossible  of  the  law,  rh  afivvarov  rov  v6y.ov. 

Rom.  8.    3  what  the  law  could  not  do,  iu  that  it  was 

COULD  they  — 

To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  VT,  yada. 

Jer.     6.  15  not  at  all  ashamed,  neither  could  they 
COULD,  that  I  — 
Able,  Svvaros  dunatos. 

Acts  11.  17  what  was  I,  that  I  could  withstand  God? 
COULDEST  — 
7*0  be  able,  b?)  yekil. 

Dan.    2.  47  seeing  thou  couldest  reveal  this  secret 
[See  also  under  Can.] 

COULTER  — 

An  agricultural  instrument,  nx  eth. 

1  Sa.  13.  20  his  coulter,  and  his  ax,  and  his  mattock 
13.  21  for  the  coulters,  and  for  the  forks,  and 

COUNCIL  — 

l.An  assembly,  TO41  rigmah. 

Psa.  68.  27  the  princes  of  Judah  (and)  their  council 
l.A  joint  counsel,  a  council,  <rvfj.@ovAtov  sumbouli. 
Matt  12.  14  held  a  council  against  him.  how  they 
Acts  25.  12  when  he  had  conferred  with  the  council 
3. Sanhedrim,  a  sitting  together,  <rvvt$piov  suned. 
Matt.  5.  22  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council :  but 
to.  17  they  will  deliver  you  up  to  the  councils 
26.  59  priests,  and  elders,  and  all  the  council 
Mark  i3.    9  they  shall  deliver  you  up  to  councils 
*4-  55  **ne  clnef  priests  and  all  the  council 
15     1  elders  and  scribes  and  the  whole  council 
I,uke22.  66  came,  .and  led  him  into  their  council 
John  1 1.  47  Then  gathered  the  chief  priests,  .a  council 
Acts  4.  15  commanded  them  to  go.  .out  of  the  coun. 
5.  21  called  the  council  together,  and  all  the 
5.  27  they  set  (them)  before  the  council :  and 
5.  34  Then  stood  there  up  one  in  the  council 

5.  41  departed  from  the  presence  of  the  council 
6. 12  caughthim,nudbrought(bim)tothecoun. 

6.  15  all  that  sat  in  the  council,  .saw  his  face 

22.  30  the  chief  priests  and  all  their  council  to 

23.  1  Paul,  earnestly  beholding  the  council 
23.    6  Paul,  cried  out  in  the  council.  .1  am  a 
23-  15  ye  with  the  council  signify  to  the  chief 
23.  20  bring  down  Paul  tomorrow  into  the  coun. 

23.  28  I  brought  him  forth  into  their  council 

24.  20  in  me,  while  I  stood  before  the  council 


COUNSEL 


205 


COUNTENANCE 


COUNSEL  — 
l.Word,  "n?  dabar. 

Nuni3i.  16  Behold.. through  the  counsel  of  Balaam 

2.  To  counsel,  fjj;  yaats, 

2 Ch  25.  16  Art  thou  made  ol  the  kings  counsel ? 
3. Counsel,  ijS*3  melak. 

Dan.   4.  27  0  king,  let  my  counsel  be  acceptable  unto 
A.  A  sitting,  session,  assembly,  niD  sod. 

Psa.  53  "14  We  took  sweet  counsel  together,  (and) 
83.    3  They  have  taken  crafty  counsel  against 

Prov  18  22  Without  counsel  purposes  are  disappoin 

Jer.  25.  18  who  hath  stood  iu  the  counsel  of  the  Lord 
23.  22  But  if  they  had  stood  in  my  counsel,  and 

^.Counsel,  advice,  way  eta. 

Dan.   2.  14  Then  Daniel  answered  with  counsel  and 

6.  Counsel,  advice,  n^y  etsah. 

Deut32  28  they(are)a  nation  void  of  counsel,  neither 

Judg2o.    7  give  here  your  advice  and  counsel 

2  Sa.  "[5.  31  turn  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into  fool. 

"15.  34  for  me.defeat  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel 

16.  20  Give  counsel  among  you  what  we  shall  do 

16.  23  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel,  which  he  coun. 

16.  23  so  (was)  all  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel 

17.  7  The  counsel  that  Ahithophel  hath  given 
17.  14  counsel  of  Hushai.  .better  than  the  coun. 

17. 14  to  defeat  the  good  counsel  of  Ahithophel 
17-23  wheu  Ahithophel  saw  that  his  counsel 

1  Ki.  1.  12  let  me^  I  pray  thee,  give  thee  counsel,  that 

12.    8  he  forsook  the  counsel  of  the  old  men 
12.  13  the  king,  forsook  the  old  men's  counsel 
12.  14  spake  to  them  after  the  counsel  of  the 

2  Ki  18.  20  Thou  sayest.  .(I  have)  counsel  aud  stren. 
*  2  Ch.io.    8  he  forsook  the  counsel  which  the  old  men 

10.  13  Rehoooam  forsook  the  counsel  of  the  old 
22.    5  He  walked  also  after  their  counsel,  and 
25.  16  aud  hast  not  hearkened  unto  my  counsel 
Ezra  to.    3  according  to  the  counsel  of  my  lord,  aud 

10.  8  according  to  the  counsel  of  the  princes 
Neb.,  4  15  God  had  brought  their  counsel  to  nought 
Job      5  1 3  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried 

it-    3  aud  shine  upon  the  counsel  of  the  wicked? 

12.  13  With  him  (is)  wisdom,  .he  hath  counsel 
iS.  7  and  his  own  counsel  shall  cast  him  down 
21. 16  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me 
22.  18  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me 
29.  21  gave  ear.,  and  kept  silence  at  my  counsel 
38.  2  Who  (is)  this  that  darkeneth  counsel  by 
42.    3  Who  (is)  he  that  hi  Jeth  counsel  without 

Psa.     1.    1  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly 

13.  2  How  long  shall  I  take  counsel  in  my  soul 

14.  6  Ye  have  shamed  the  counsel  of  the  poor 
20.    4  Graut  thee,  .and  fulfil  all  thy  couusel 
33. 10  Lord  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heatheu 
33.  11  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for 
73.  24  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy  couusel 

106.  13  they  waited  not  for  his  counsel 

106.  43  they  provoked  (him)  with  their  counsel 

107.  11  contemned  the  counsel  of  the  Most  High 
Prov.  1.  25  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel 

1.  30  They  would  none  of  my  counsel ;  they 
8.  14  Counsel  (is)  mine,  and  sound  wisdom 

12. 15  he  that  hearkeneth  unto  counsel  (is) 
19.  20  Hear  counsel,  and  receive  instruction 

19.  2i  the  counsel  of  the  Lord,  that  shall  stand 

20.  5  Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  (is  like)  deep 
20. 18  (Every)  purpose  is  established  by  counsel 

21.  30  (There  is)  no  wisdom.,  nor  counsel  against 

27.  9  so  (doth)  the  sweetness,  .by  hearty  coun. 
Isa.     5. 19  let  the  counsel  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 

8.  10  Take  counsel  together,  and  it  shall  come 
11.   2  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the  spirit 
16.    3  Take  counsel,  execute  judgment ;  make 
19.    3  I  will  destroy  the  couusel  thereof :  and 
19.  11  the  counsel  of  the  wise  counsellors  of 
ig.  17  because  of  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  of 
25.    1  (thy)  counsels  of  old  (are)  faithfulness 

28.  29  wonderful  in  counsel,  (and)  excellent  in 
2g.  15  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide  their  counsel 
30.   1  rebellious  children .  .that  take  counsel 
36.    5  (I  have)  counsel  and  strength  for  war 

44.  26  performeth  the  counsel  of  his  messengers 
46. 10  "My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all 

46.  11  the  man  that  exeeuteth  my  counsel  from 

47.  13  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy  counsels 
Jer.   18. 18  nor  counsel  from  the  wise,  nor  the  word 

18.  23  thou  knowest  all  their  counsel  agaiust  me 

19.  7  I  will  make  void  the  counsel  of  Judah 
32.  19  Great  in  counsel,  and  mighty  in  work 
49.  7  is  counsel  perished  from  the  prudent  ? 
49.  20  hear  the  counsel  of  the  Lokd  that  he  hath. 

49.  30  king  of  Babylon  hath  taken  counsel 

50.  45  hear  ye  the  couusel  of  the  Lord,  that  he 
Eze.    7.  26  law  shall  perish,  .and  counsel  from  the 

11.    2  these  (are)  the  meu  that.,  give  wicked  co. 
Hos.  10.    6  Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  coun. 
Mia    4.  12  neither  understand  they  his  counsel 
Zech.  6.  13  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between 

1. Counsel)  purpose,  will,  &ov\r}  boule, 

Luke  7.  30  Phariseesandlawyersrejectedthecounsel 

23.  51  The  same  had  not  consented  to  the  coun. 

Acts    2.  23  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and 

4.  28  to  do  whatsoever  thy  hand  and  thy  coun. 

5.  38  for  if  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  meu 

20.  27  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare .  .all  the  c. 
27. 42  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  pris. 

1  Co.   4.    5  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  heart 
Eph.    1.  11  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own 
Heb.  6.  17  the immutabilityofhiscounsel,  confirmed 


8.  A  joint  counsel,  <rvfx&ov\iov  sumboulion. 
Matt22. 15  took  counsel  how  they  might  entangle 
27.   1  elders  of  the  people  took  counsel  against 

27.  7  they  took  counsel,  and  bought  with  them 

28.  12  wheu  they.. had  taken  counsel  they  gave 
Mark  3.    6  the  Pharisees  weut  forth,  aud.  .took  co 

COUNSEL,  to  — 

I, To  give  counsel,  fy;  yaats. 

2  Sa  16.  23  which  he  counselled  in  those  days,  as  if 
17.  11  I  counsel  that  all  Israel  be.  .gathered 
17. 15  Thus  and  thus  did  Ahithophel  counsel 
17.  15  and  thus  and  thus  have  1  counselled 
17.  2i  thus  hath  Ahithophel  counselled  against 
Job.  26.    3  How  hast  thou  counselled  (him  that  hath) 

2.7b  give  full  counsel,  cuuQovXevoj  sumboideuo. 
Rev.    3.  18  I  couusel  thee  to  buy  of  inegoUl  tried  in 

COUNSEL,  to  give  — 

I. To  give  counsel,  fy;  yaats. 

ExodiS  19  Hearken  now.  .1  will  give  thee  couusel 
Psa.  16.   7  bless  the  Lord,  who  hath  given  me  coun 
Jer.   38.  15  if  I  give  thee  counsel,  wilt  thou  not 

'2. To  be  counselled,  fy;  yaats,  2. 

1  Ki  12.    9  What  counsel  give  ye  that  we  may  answer 

2  Ch.io.    6  What  counsel  give  ye  (me)  to  return 

3.7b  counsel  together  or  fully,  avtxQovX^lw  sumbou, 
John  18.  14  C'aiaphas  was  he  which  gave  counsel  to 

COUNSEL,  to  take  — 

1.2*0  have  a  foundation  laid,  id;  yasad,  2. 
Psa.     2.    2  the  rulers  take  counsel  together 

31.  13  they  took  counsel  together  against  me 

2.  To  give  counsel,  |'y;  yaats. 

Isa.     7.   5  have  taken  evil  counsel  against  thee,  say 
23.   8  Who  hath  taken  this  couusel  against  Tyre 

3. To  be  counselled,  receive  counsel,  py;  yaats,  2. 

1  Ki.  12.  28  the  king  took  counsel,  and  made  two 

2  Ki.    6.    8  the  king  of  Syria,  .took  counsel  with  his 
2  Ch.  10.    6  king  Rehoboam  took  couusel  with  the 

10.   8  and  took  counsel  with  the  young  men 
30    2  the  king  had  taken  counsel,  and  the 
30.  23  the  whole  assembly  took  counsel  to  keep 

32.  3  He  took  counsel  with  his  princes  and  his 
Neh.  6.  7  Come  now.  .let  us  take  counsel  together 
Psa.  71.  10  they  that  lay  wait  for  my  sold  take  couu. 
Isa.   40.  14  With  whom  took  he  counsel,  and  (who) 

45.  21  yea,  let  them  take  counsel  together:  who 

4.  To  take  counsel,  consult,  fiovXevo/iai  bouleuomai. 
Acts    5  33  When  they  heard . .  [they  took  couusel]  to 

5.  To  take  counsel  with,  fully,  or  together,  <rvfxpov~ 
Xevca  sumboideuo. 

Acts   9.  23  And.  .the  Jews  took  counsel  to  kill  him 

COUNSEL  together,  to  take  — 
To  tak&  counsel  together,  or  fully,  o-vfifiovXevo). 
Johnu  53  thatdayforththeytookcounsel[together] 

COUNSELLOR  — 

l.A  lawyer,  judge,  inni  dethabar. 

Dan.    3.    2  the  counsellors,  the  sheriffs,  and  all  the 
3.    3  the  counsellors,  the  sheriffs,  and  all  the 

2.  To  give  counsel,  f  y;  yaats. 

2  Sa.  15. 12  Absalom  sent  for.  .David's  counsellor 

1  Ch.26.  14  for  Zechariah  his  son,  a  wise  counsellor 

27.  32  Also  Jonathan,  David's  uncle,  was  a  coun. 
27.  33  And  Ahithophel  (was)  the  king's  couusel. 

2  Ch.22.    3  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do 

22.    4  they  were  his  counsellors,  after  the 
Ezra    4.    5  hired  counsellors  against  them,  to 

7.  28  before  the  king,  and  his  counsellors 

8.  25  which  the  king,  and  his  counsellors,  and 
Job     3. 14  With  kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth 

12. 17  He  leadeth  counsellors  awayspoiled,  and 
Prov  11. 14  but  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors 
12.  20  but  to  the  counsellors  of  peace  (is)  joy 
15.  22  but  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors  they 
24.    6  in  multitude  of  counsellors  (there  is) 
Isa.     1.  26  will  restore  thyjudges.  .and  thy  counsel. 
3.    3  the  honourable  man,  and  the  counsellor 

9.  6  name  shall  be  called,  Wonderful,  Coun. 
19.  11  the  counsel  of  the  wise  counsellors  of 
41.  28  For  I  beheld,  and.  .no  counsellor,  that 

Mic.    4,    9  (is  there)  no  king  in  thee  ?  is  thy  counsel. 
Nah.   1.  11  evil  against  the  Lord,  a  wicked  counsellor 

^.Counsel,  nxy  etsah. 

Psa.119.  24  thy  testimonies  also  (are)  my.,  counsellors 
Isa.  40.  13  or  (being)  his  counsellor,  hath  taught 

^.Counsellor,  fiovXtvrris  bouleutes. 

Markis.  43  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  an  honourable  co. 

Luke  23.  50  behold . .  a  man  named  Joseph,  a  counsel. 
5. A  joint  counsellor,  av/xBovAos  sumhoulos. 

Rom.11.  34  or  who  hath  been  his  counsellor? 
COUNSELLORS  — 
1.  Viceroys,  counsellors,  J'TXnn  haddahrin. 

Dan.    3  24  Nebuchadnezzar,  .said unto  his  counsel. 

3.  27  the  king's  counsellors,  being  gathered 

4.  36  my  counsellors  and  my  lords  sought  unto 
6.    7  the  counsellors,  and  the  captains,  have 

2. To  give  counsel,  tty?  yeat. 

Ezra   7.  14  thou  art  sent,  .of  his  seven  counsellors 
7. 15  the  king  and  his  counsellors  have  freely 


COUNSELS  — 

l.Counsels,  niuyiD  nwetsoth. 

Psa.    5.  ioOGod;  let  them  fall  by  their  own  coun. 
81.  12  (and)  they  walked  in  their  own  couusels 

Prov  22.  20  Have  not  I  written  to  thee,  .things in  co. 

Jer.     7.  24  but  walked  in  the  counsels  (and)  in  the 

Hos   11.    6  devour  (them),  because  of  their  own  co. 

Mic.    6  16  ye  walk  in  their  counsels  ;  that  I  should 
2.Comb inatwns,  jjlans,  ni^ann  tachbidoth. 

.lob  37.  12  it  is  turned  round"  about  by  his  counsels 

Prov  s  1  14  Where  no  counsel  (is),  the  people  fall 
12    ^  (but)  the  counsels  01  the  wicked  (are) 
COUNSELS,  wise  — 
Combinations,  plans,  rvnann  tachbidoth. 

Prov   i     5  and  a  (man),  shall  attain  unto  wise  coun. 

24  b  by  wise  counsel  thou  shalt  make  thy  war 

COUNT,  to  — 

1.7V)  think,  devise,  reckon,  3ffn  chashab. 

Gen.  15.    6  he  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousuess 
Job    19.  11  he  counteth  me  unto  him  as  (one  of)  his 
19.  15  and  my  maids,  count  me  for  a  stranger 
33  10 Behold... he  counteth  me  for  his  enemy 

2. To  think,  devise,  reckon,  209  chashab,  3. 

Lev  25  27  let  him  count  the  yearsof  thesale  thereof 

25  52  unto  the  year  of  jubilee,  .he  shall  count 

3.  To  number,  nip  manah. 

Num.  23. 10  Who  can  count  the  dust  of  Jacob,  aud 

4.  To  give,  fro  nathan. 

1  Sa.  1  16  Count  not  thine  handmaidfora  daughter 

5.  To  number,  idd  saphar. 

Lev.  23.  15  ye  shall  count  unto  you  from  the  morrow 
Job  31.    4  Doth  not  he  see  my  ways,  and  count  all 
Psa  87    6  The  Lord  shall  count,  when  he  writeth 
1 39.  18  (If)  I  should  count  them,  they  are  more 
Isa.  33. 18  where  (is^)  he  that  counted  the  towers  ? 
6.7b  visit,  inspect,  nuitiber^  "ij23  pagad. 

1  Ch  21.    6  But  Levi  and  Benjamin  counted  he  not 

7.  To  have,  hold,  tx03  who. 

Matt  14.    5  because  they  counted  him  as  a  prophet 
Markn.  32  all  (men)  counted  John,  that  he  was  a 
Acts  20.  24  neither  [count  I]  my  life  dear  unto  myself 
Plim.        17  If  thou  count  me  therefore  a  partner 

8.  To  lead  out,  account,  riytofxat  hegeomai. 

Phil.   3.    7  what  things  were  gain,  .those  I  counted 
3.    8  Yea  doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things 
3.    8  do  count  them  (but)  dung,  that  I  may 

2  Th.  3.  15  Yet  count  (him)  not  as  an  enemy,  but 

1  Ti.    1.  12  he  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into 

6.  1  Let  as  many  servants.. count  their  own 
Heb.  10.  29  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  cove. 
Jas.     1.    2  count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers 

2  Pe.  2. 13  they  that  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in 

3.  9  The  Lord  is  not  slack . .  as  some  men  count 
9.7b  reckon,  number,  account,  \oyi£ofiailogizomai. . 

Rom.  2.  26  shall  not  his  uncircumcision  be  counted 

4.  3  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness 
4.    5  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousuess 

9.  8  the  children  of  the  promise  are  counted 
Phil.  3.  13  I  count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended 

10. To  use  2iebbles  together,  calculate  together,  <rv,u- 
\p7](piCc0  sumpsephizo. 
Acts  19.  19  they  counted  the  price  of  them,  and  found 

11.7b  use  pebbles,  calculate,  \pw<t>l£a>  psephizo. 
Lukei4.  28  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  counteth  the 
Rev.  13.  18  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  count 
[See    also    Descent,    happy,    pure,    uncircumcised, 

worthy.] 

COUNT,  to  make  — 

To  count,  apportion,  Dps  kasas. 

Exodi2.   4  shall  make  your  count  for  the  lamb 

COUNTED,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  thought,  reckoned,  2&n  chashab,  2. 

Gen.  31. 15  Are  we  not  counted  of  him  strangers? 
Lev.  25.  31  the  houses.,  shall  be  counted  as  the  fields 
NunuS.  30  it  shall  be  counted  unto  the  Levites  as 
Josh.  13.    3  Ekron  northward,  (which)  is  counted  to 
Neh.  13.  13  I  made  treasurers,  .fortheylwerecounted 
Job   18.    3  are  we  counted  as  beasts,  .in  your  sight 
41.  29  Darts  are  counted  as  stubble  :  he  laugh. 
Psa.  44.  22  we  are  counted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter 
88.    4  I  am  counted  with  them  that  go  down 
106.  31  that  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteous. 
Prov  17.  28  whenjhetooldeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise 

27.  14  it  shall  be  counted  a  curse  to  him 
Isa.     5.  28  horses'  hoofs  shall  be  counted  like  flint 
32.  15  fruitful  field  be  counted  for  a  forest 
40.  15  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance 
40.  17  All  nations,  .are  counted  to  him  less  than 
Hos.    8.  12  (but)  they  were  counted  as  a  strange  thing 

2.7b  visit,  inspect,  count,  ")ps paqad. 

1  Ch.23.  24  they  were  counted  by  number  of  names 
3.  To  be  counted,  numbered,  i$3  paqad,  4. 

Exod38.  21  tabernacle  of  testimony,  as  it  was  counted 

COUNTENANCE  — 
l.Facc,  anger,  *]N  aph. 

Psa.  10.    4  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance 
^.Brightness,  countenance,  v\  ziv. 

Dan.    5.    6  the  king's  countenance  was  changed,  and 
5.    9  his  countenance  was  changed  in  him,  and 


COUNTENANCE 


20G 


COUPLE 


Dan.    5.  10  nor  let  thy  countenance  be  changed 
7.  28  my  countenance  changed  in  me  :  but  I 

3. Appearance,  nxiD  mareh. 

Judgi3.    6  his  countenance  (was)  like  the  counte. 

1  Sa.  16.    7  Look  not  on  his  countenance,  or  on  the 

17.  42  a  youth,  and  ruddy,  and  of  a  fair  counte. 

2  Sa.  14.  27  she  was  a  woman  of  a  fair  countenance 
Song  2.  14  let  me  see  thy  countenance,  let  me  hear 

2.  14  thy  voice,  and  thy  counteuance  (is)  come. 

5.  15  his  countenance  (is)as  Lebanon,  excellent 

Dan.    1. 13  Thenletoiircountenaucesbe looked  upon 

1.  13  the  couutenauce  of  the  children  that  eat 

1.  15  their  countenances  appeared  fairer  and 

4. Eye,  py  ayin. 

1  Sa.  16. 12  Now  he(was)..ofabeautiful  countenance 

5.  Face,  countenance,  crisjianim. 

Gen.    4.    5  Cain  was  very  wroth. andhis  countenance 
4.    6  and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ? 
31     2  Jacob  beheld  the  countenance  of  Labau 

31  5  I  see  your  father's  countenance,  that  it 
Num  6.  26  The  Lord  lift  up  .his  counteuauce  upon 

1  Sa.    1  18  and  her  counteuance  was  no  more  (sad) 

2  Ki    8.  11  he  settled  his  countenance  stedfastly 
Neh    2.    2  Why  (is)  thy  counteuauce  sad,  seeing 

2.  3  why  should  not  my  countenance  be  sad 
Job  14.  20  thou  changest  his  countenance,  and  seud. 

29  24  light  of  my  counteuance  they  cast  not 
Psa.    4    6  lift  thou  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance 

11  7  his  counteuauce  doth  behold  the  upright 
21     6  exceeding  glad  with  thy  couuteuance 

42,    5  praise  him  (for)  the  help  of  his  counte. 

42.  u  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my 

43.  5  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my 

44.  3  thine  arm,  and  the  light  of  thy  counte. 
80  r6  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  countenance 
89.  15  walk.  ,iu  the  light  of  thy  countenance 
90    8  secret  (sins)  in  the  light  of  thy  counte. 

Prov  T5  13A  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  counte 
16.  15  In  the  light  of  the  king's  couutenauce  (is) 
25  23  so  (doth)  an  angry  countenance  a  back. 
27.  17  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of 
Eccl.  7.    3  for  by  the  sadness  of  the  couutenauce  the 
Isa.     3.   9  The  show  of  their  countenance  doth 
Eze    27  35  shall  be  troubled  in  (their)  countenance 
Dan.    8.  23  a  king  of  fierce  countenance,  .shall 

6.  Form,  inpi  toar. 

1  Sa.25    3  (was)  a  wouian  of.  .beautiful  countenance 

7. Aspect,  appearance,  tSe'a  idea  ei'Sea  eidea. 

Matt23.  3  His  countenance  was  like  lightning,  and 
8.  Sight,  appearance,  otyis  opsis. 

Rev.  t  16  his  countenance  (was)  as  the  sun  shineth 
9. Front,  face,  Trpoo-onrov  prosopon. 

Luke  9.  29  fashion  of  his  countenance  was  altered 

Acts  2.  28  make  me  full  of  joy  with  thy  counteuance 

2  Co.  3.    7  for  the  glory  of  his  countenance ;  which 

COUNTENANCE,  of  a  sad  — 

Of  a  scowling  face,  o-Kv8pww6$  shithrdpos. 

Matt  6. 16  not,  as  the  hypocrites,  of  a  sad  counte. 

COUNTENANCE,  to  — 
To  honour,  inn  hadar. 

Exod23.    3  Neither  shalt  thou  countenance  a  poor 

COUNTERVAIL,  to  — 
To  he  equal,  n$  shavah. 

Esth  7.    4  enemy  could  not  countervail  the  king's 

COUNTRY  — 

1,. Ground,  land,  n?"i>;  adamah. 

Jon  4.  2  my  saying  when  I  was  yet  in  my  country 
^.Island,  'X  i. 

Jer    47.    4  the  remnant  of  the  country  of  Caphtor 
3. Land,  country,  jnx  erels. 

Gen.  to.  20  in  their  countries,  (and)  in  their  nations 

12  1  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from 
iq.  28  the  smoke  of  the  country  went  up  as  the 
20.    1  Abraham  journeyed,  .toward  the  south  c. 
24.    4  thou  shalt  go  tinto  my  country,  and  to 

24.  62  And  Isaac,  .dwelt  in  the  south  country 

25.  6  sent  them  away,  .unto  the  east  country 

26.  3  unto  thy  seed,  I  will  give  all  these  coun. 
26.    4  give  unto  thy  seed  all  these  countries 

30.  25  unto  mine  own  place,  and  to  my  country 

32  9  Return  unto  thy  country,  and  to  thy  kin. 
34.    2  when  Sheehem.  .prince  of  the  country 
36.    6  Esau,  .went  into  the  country  from  the 

41.  57  all  countries  came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph 

42.  30  The  man.. took  us  for  spies  of  the  coun. 
42.  33  the  man,  the  lord  of  the  country,  said 

Lev.  25  31  be  counted  as  the  fields  of  the  country 
Kum'20.  17  Let  us  pass,  I  pray  thee,  through  thy  co. 
32.    4  the  countrj  which  the  Loud  smote  before 
32.  33  (even)  the  cities  of  the  country  round 
Dent.  4.  43  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  plain  country 
26.    3  I  am  come  unto  the  country  which  the 
Josh.  2.    2  there  came  men.  .to  search  out  thecouu. 
2.    3  they  be  come  to  search  out  all  the  country 
2.  24  even  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country 
6.  22  the  two  men  that  had  spied  out  the  coun. 

6.  27  fame  was  (uoised)  throughout  all  the  coun. 

7.  2  Go  up  and  view  the  country 

9.    6  We  be  come  from  a  far  country :  now 
9.    9  From  a  very  far  country  thv  servants  are 
9.  11  the  inhabitants  of  our  country  spake  to 
10.  40  So  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the 
10.    41  all  the  country  of  Goshen,  even  unto  G. 


Judg.  8. 


aSa. 
tKi. 


:Ki. 


:  Ch.2 


>Ch 


Josh.  12.    7  these  (are)  the  kings  of  the  country  which 
13.  21  dukes  of  Sihon,  dwelling  in  the  country 

19.  51  they  made  au  end  of  dividing  the  country 
9  to  go  unto  the  country  of  Gilead,  to  the 

28  the  country  was  in  quietness  forty  years 
21  Amorites,  the  inhabitants  of  that  country 

12  Elon..  was  buried  in  .the  country  of  Zeb 
24  the  destroyer  of  our  country,  which  slew 
14  men  that  went  to  spy  out  the  country  of 
23  all  the  country  wept  with  a  loud  voice 

14  in  the  country  of  Benjamin  in  Zelah,  in 
19  the  son  of  Uri  (was)  in  the  country  of  G. 

19  the  country  of  Sihou  king  of  the  Amorites 
41  stranger,  that,  .cometh  out  of  afar  coun. 

13  she  turned,  and  went  to  her  own  country 

15  kings,  .and  of  the  governors  of  the  coun. 

21  that  I  may  go  to  mine  owu  country 

22  thou  seekest  to  go  to  thine  own  country? 
27  kids  ;  but  the  Syrians  filled  the  country 
36  Everyman  to  his  city,  and .  .his  own  coun. 

20  and  the  country  was  rilled  with  water 
35  godsof  the  countries,  .delivered  their  co. 

14  They  are  come  from  a  far  country .  .from 
1  Joab.  .wasted  the  coun  try  of  the  children 

22.    5  and  of  glory  throughout  all  countries 

29.  30  and  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  countries 
.  6  32  but  is  come  from  a  far  country  for  thy 

9.  14  governors  of  the  country,  brought  gold 

11.  23. dispersed,  .throughout  all  the  countries 

12.  8  service  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  countries 
T5-    5  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  countries 

20.  29  on  all  the  kingdoms  of  (those)  countries 

30.  10  the  posts  passed.,  through  the  country  of 
34.  33  the  abominations  out  of  all  the  countries 

Ezra  3.    3  because  of  the  people  of  those  countries 
Psa  no.    6  shall  wound  the  heads  over  many  coun. 
Prov  25.  25  so  (is)  good  news  from  a  far  country 
Isa.     1.    7  Your  country  (is)  desolate,  your  cities 
8.    9  give  ear,  all  ye  of  far  countries :  gird 

13.  5  They  come  from  a  far  country,  from  the 
22.  18  toss  thee  (like)  a  ball  into  a  large  country 
37.  18  all  the  nations,  and  their  countries 

39.  3  They  are  come  from  a  far  country  unto 
46.  n  execute th  my  counsel  from  a  far  country 

Jer.    2.    7  I  brought  you  into  a  plentiful  country 
4. 16  watchers  come  from  a  far  country,  and 
6.  20  and  the  sweet  cane  from  a  far  country? 
6.  22  a  people  cometh  from  the  north  country 
8.  19  because  of  them  that  dwell  in  a  far  coun. 

10.  22  great  commotion  out  of  the  north  country 
22.  10  return  no  more,  nor  see  his  native  country 

22.  26  will  cast  thee  out  .into  another  country 
23-    3  will  gather,  .my  flock  out  of  all  countries 

23.  8  the  north  country  and  from  all  countries 

28.  8  prophesied  both  against  mauy  countries 

31.  8  I  will  bring  them  from  the  north  country 

32.  8  which  (is)  in  the  country  of  Benjamin 
32.  37  I  will  gather  them  out  of  all  countries 

40.  n  the  Jews.,  in  all  the  countries,  heard  that 
44.    1  at  Noph,  aud  in  the  country  of  Pathros 
46.  10  hath  a  sacrifice  in  the  north  country  by 
48.  2i  judgment  is  come  upon  the  plain  country 

50.  9  of  great  nations  from  the  north  country 

51.  9  let  us  go  every  one  into  his  own  country 
Ez?.     5.    5  and  countries  (that  are)  round  about  her 

5.  6  my  statutes  more  than  the  countries  that 

6.  8  shall  be  scattered  through  the  countries 

11.  16  have  scattered  them  amougthe  countries 
ii.  16  as  a  little  sanctuary  in  the  countries 

11.  17  assemble  you  out  of  the  countries  where 
12. 15  I  shall.. disperse  them  in  the  countries 
20.  23  and  disperse  them  through  the  countries 
20.  32  We  will  be  as.. families  of  the  countries 
20.  34  I.  .will  gather  you  out  of  the  countries 
20.  38  will  bring  them  forth  out  of  the  country 
20  41  the  countries  wherein  ye  have  been 
20.  42  the  country  (for)  the  which  I  lifted  uplmine 
22.    4  I  made  thee  .a  mocking  to  all  countries 
2?.  13  I  will,  disperse  thee  in  the  countries 
25.    7  cause  thee  to  perish  out  of  the  countries 
25.    9  the  glory  of  the  country.  Beth-jeshimoth 

29.  12  desolate  in  the  midst  of  the  countries 

29.  12  will  disperse  them  through  the  countries 

30.  7  desolate  in  the  midst  of  the  countries 
30.  23  scatter,  .will  disperse  them  through  thee. 
30.  26  and  disperse  them  among  the  countries 
32.    9  the  countries  which  thou  hast  not  known 
32.  15  the  country  shall  be  destitute  of  that 

34.  15 1  will.. gather  them  from  the  countries 

34.  13  all  the  inhabited  places  of  the  country 

35.  10  these  two  countries  shall  be  mine,  aud  we 

36.  19  they  were  dispersed  through  the  coun. 
36.  24  I  will,  .gather  you  out  of  all  countries 

Dan.   9.    7  through  all  the  countries  whither  thou 
11.  40  he  shall  enter  into  the  countries,  and 
n.*4?  stretch  forth  his  hand,  .upon  the  countri 
Jon.     1.    8  what  (is)  thy  country?  and  of  what  peo? 
Zech.  6.    6  horses,  .go  forth  into  the  north  country 
6.    6  grisled  go  forth  toward  the  south  country 
6.    8  these  that  go  toward  the  north  country 
6.    S  quieted  my  spirit  in  the  north  country 
S.    7  east  country,  and  from  the  west  country 

i.Circuit,  rry^  gelilah. 

Eze.  47.    8  waters  issue  out  toward  the  east  country 

5.A  COrd,  land  measured  off,  bin  chebel. 

Deut.  3.  14  Jair.  .took  all  the  country  of  Argob  unto 

6. Place,  cipn  maqoni. 

Gen.  29.  26  It  must  not  be  so  done»in  our  country,  to 


7.  Elevation,  height,  ns:  nepheth. 

Josh. 17. 11  Megiddo  and  her  towns,  (even)  three  cou. 
8. An  open  village,  'n?  perazi. 

1  Sa.    6. 18  (both)  of  fenced  cities,  and  of  country  vil. 

9.  A  f  eld,  expanse,  level  place,  nn"^  sadeh. 

Gen.  14.    7  smote  all  the  country  of  the  Amalekites 
32.  23  sent  messengers . . unto . .  the  country  of  E. 

JSum2i.  20  the  valley  that  (is)  in  the  country  of  M. 

Judg2o.    6  I.  .sent  her  throughout  all  the  country 

Ruth  1.    1  went  to  sojouru  in  the  country  of  Moab 
1.    2  they  came  into  the  country  of  Moab,  and 
1.    6  she  might  return  from  the  country  of  M. 
1.    6  she  had  heard  in  the  country  of  Moab 

1.  22  which  returned  out  of  the  country  of  M. 

2.  6  with  Naomi  out  of  the  country  of  Moab 

4.  3  that  is  come  again  out  of  the  country  of 
1  Sa.   6.    1  the  ark  of  the  Lord  was  in  the  country  of 

27.  5  a  place  in  some  town  in  the  country,  that 
27.  7  the  time  that  David  dwelt  in  the  country 
27.  11  all  the  while  he  dwelleth  in  the  country 

iCh.    8.    8  Shaharaim  begat  (children)  in  the  count. 

Hos.  12.  12  And  Jacob  fled  into  the  country  of  Syria 

10.  A  {cultivated)  field,  aypds  agros. 

Mark  5.  14  told  (it)  in  the  city,  and  in  the  country 
6.  36  they  may  go  into  the  country  round 
6.  56  whithersoever,  .into villages, or.  .country 

15.  21  Simon,  .passed  by,  coming  out  of  the  co. 

16.  12  as  they  walked,  and  went  into  thefcount.l 
Luke  8.  34  told  (it)  in  the  city  and  in  the  country 

9.  12  go  into  the  towns  aud  country  round 

23.  26  Simon,  a  Cyreuian,  coming  out  of  the  co. 

11.  Genus,  ra.ee,  yevos  genos.  *  . 
Acts   4.  36  a  Levite,  (and)  of  the  country  of  Cyprus 

ll.Earth,  kind,  country,  77J  ge. 

Matt.  9.  3r  spead  abroad  his  fame  in  all  that  country 
Acts   7.    3  said  unto  him,  Get  thee  out  of  thy  count. 

IS. Father-land,  irarpls  patris. 

Luke  4.  23  heard  done,  .do  also  here  in  thy  country 
John  4  44  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  cou. 
Heb.  11.  14  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  country 

\LSjmce,  place,  x&Pa  chora. 

Matt.  2.  12  they  departed  into  their  own  country 

8.  28  when  he  was  come,  .into  the  country  of 
Mark  5     1  they  came . .  into  the  country  of  the  Gada. 

5.  10  would  not  send  them  away  out  of  the  c. 
Luke  2.    8  there  were  in  the  same  country  shepherds 

8.  26  they  arrived  at  the  country  of  the  Gada. 
15.  13  took  his  journey  into  a  far  country,  and 
T5-  15  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of  that  coun. 
19,  12  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far  country 
21.  21  let  not  them  that  are  in  the  countries 

John  n.  54  Jesus. .went  thence  unto  a  country  near 
11.  55  many  weut  out  of  the  country  up  to  Jer. 

Acts  12.  20  their  country  was  nourished  by  the  king's 
18.  23  went  over  (all)  the  country  of  Galatia 
27.  27  deemed  that  they  drew  near  to  some  c. 
[See  also  Better,  far,  hill,  king,  low,  south.] 

15.  Country  (round)  about,  ireplxupos  perichoros. 
Matt  14.  35  sent  out  into  all  that  country  round  abo. 
Luke  3.   3  he  came  into  all  the  country  about  Jor. 

4.  37  the  fame  ol^him  went  out  into .  .the  coun. 

8.  37  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes  round  about 

COUNTRY,  to  go  or  travel  into  a  far  — 

To  be  away  from  one 's  people,  awofiTjiitQ)  opodemeo. 
Matt2i.  33  let  it  out.  .and  went  into  a  far  country 

25,  14  as  a  man  travelling  into  a  far  country 
Markis.    1  let  it  out. .and  went  into  a  far  country 
Luke  20.    9  went  into  a  far  country  for  a  long  time 

COUNTRY,  born  in  or  of  the  — 

Native,  indigenous,  nnix  ezrach. 

Nuni  15.  13  All  that  are  born  of  the  country  shall  do 
Eze.  47.  22  shall  be  unto  you  as  born  in  the  country 

COUNTRY,  one  of  your  own  — 
Native,  indigenous,  rntx  ezrach. 

Lev.  16.  29  one  of  your  own  country,  or  a  stranger 

17.  15  one  of  your  own  country,  or  a  stranger 

24.  22  one.. law.. for  one  of  your  own  country 

COUNTRY,  one's  own  — 
Fatherland,  irarpis  patris. 

Matt  13.  54  when  he  was  come  into  his  own  country 
13.  57  without  honour,  save  in  his  own  country 

Mark 6.    1  went  out.  .and  came  into  his  own  count. 

6.  4  not  without  honour,  but  in  his  own  cou. 
Luke  4.  24  No  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own  coun. 

COUNTRYMAN  — 

\,One  of  the  same  tribe,  o-v/x<pu\€Tr}s  smnphuletes. 

1  Th.   2. 14  suffered  like  things  of  your  own  country. 

2.Genus,  race,  yivos  genos. 

2  Co.  11.  26  (in)  perils  by  (mine  own)  countrymen 

COUPLE  — 

l.A  pair,  poke,  *i£*  tsemed. 

Jmlgig/  3  having  his  servant  with  him,  and  a  coup. 

2  sa.  16.    1  Ziba  the  servant.,  met  him,  with  a  couple 

Isa.   21.    7  he  saw  a  chariot  (with)  a  couple  of  hors. 

21.    9  here  cometh  a  chariot  of  men,  (with)  a  co. 

2.  Two,  dup  shenayim. 

2  Sa.  13,   6  make  me  a  couple  of  cakes  in  my  sight 


COUPLE 


207 


COVENANT 


COUPLE,  to  — 

To  couple  or  join  together,  "i?n  chabar,  Z. 

Exod26.    6  couple  the  curtains  together  with  the 
26.    9  shalt  couple  five  curtains  by  themselves 
26.  11  couple  the  teut  together,  that  it  may  be 
36.  10  he  coupled  the  five  curtains  one  unto 
36. 10  five  curtains  he  coupled  one  unto  another 
36.  13  coupled  the  curtains  one  unto  another 
36.  16  he  coupled  Ave  curtains  by  themselves 
36.  iS  he  made  fifty  taches.  .to  couple  the  tent 

COTJPLE  together,  to  — 

To  couple  or  join  together,  inn  chabar. 

Exod  39.    4  for  it,  to  couple  (it)  together  :  by 

COUPLED  — 

1.  To  be  or  become  twins,  uxn  taam. 

Exod26.  24  they  shall  be  coupled  together  beneath 
36.  29  And  they  were  coupled  beneath,  and 
2.7b  couple  or  join  togetJier,  130  chabar. 

Exoda6.    3  five  curtains  (shall  be)  coupled  one  to 

COUPLED  together  — 

l.To  couple  or  join  together,  -1317  chabar. 

Exod26.    3  five  curtains  shall  be  coupled  together 
2.Twins,  D'an  tammim. 

Exod26.  24  they  shall  be  coupled  together  above  the 
36.  29  coupled  together  at  the  head  thereof,  to 

COUPLED  together,  to  be  — 

2*o  be  coupled  or  joined  together,  inn  chabar,  4. 

Exod39-    4  by  the  two  edges  was  it  coupled  together 
COUPLETH,  which  — 
Coupling,  joining,  n~orr  chobcreth. 

Exod'26.  10  edge  of  the  curtain  which  coupleth  the 
36. 17  edge  of  the  curtain  which  coupleth  the 

COUPLING  — 

1.  Coupling,  joining,  n~nh  chobereth. 

Exod26.    4  curtain,  from  the  selvage  in  the  co  ;pling 
26.  10  curtain  (that  is)  outmost  in  the  coupling 

2.  A  coupling,  joining,  junction,  rnsns  machbercth. 

Exocl26.    4  curtain,  in  the  coupling  of  the  second 

26.  5  that  (is)  in  the  coupling  of  the  second 
28.  27  over  against  the  (other)  coupling  thereof 
36.  11  edge,  .from  the  selvage  in  the  coupling 
36.  11  he  made,  .(another)  curtain,  .in  the  coup. 
36.  12  of  the  curtain  which  was  in  the  coupling 
36.  17  uttermost  edge  of  the  curtain  in  the  cou. 
39.  20  over  against  the  (other)  coupling  thereof 

COUPLINGS  — 

Couplings,  what  joins  together,  rhzn^mechabberoth, 
2  Ch.  34. 11  buy  hewn  stone,  and  timber  for  couplings 

COURAGE  — 

1. Heart,  22b  lebah. 

Dan.  11.  25  shall  stir  up  his  power  and  his  courage 

2.Spirit,  rrti  ruach. 

Josh.  2. 11  neither  did_there  remain  any  more  cour. 

3. Courage;  cheer,  d&po-os  tharsos. 

Acts  28.  15  whom  when  Paul  saw,  he. .took  courage 

COURAGE,  to  he  of  good  — 

1.7b  be  sharp,  strong,  confirmed,  |'cx  amals. 
Deut3i.    6,  7,  23  Be  strong,  and  of  a  good  courage 
Josh.  x.    6,  9,  18  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage 
10.  25  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage  :  for  thus 

1  Ch.  22  13  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage  ;  dread 

28.  20  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage  and  do 
2.7b  be,  or  become  strong,  pin  chazaq. 

2  Sa.  10. 12  Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  us  play  the 

1  Ch.19. 13  Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  us  behave 
Ezra  10.    4  we  .(will  be)  with  thee  :  be  of  good  cour. 
Psa,  27. 14  Wait  on  the  Lord;  be  of  good  courage 

31.  24  Be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  streng. 

Isa.  41.    6  said  to  his  brother,  Be  of  good  courage 
3.7b  shoio  oneself  strong,  pin  chazaq,  1. 

Num.13.  20  be  ye  of  good  courage,  and  bring  of  the 
COURAGE,  to  take  — 
To  show  oneself  strong,  pin  chazaq,  7. 

2  Ch.  15.    8  he  took  courage,  and  put  away  the  abom. 
COURAGEOUS,  COURAGEOUSLY  — 

1.  Confirmed  of  heart,  35  pQK  ammits  leb. 

Amos  2. 16  (he  that  is)  courageous  among  the  mighty 
2.7b  be  or  become  confirmed,  pes  amats. 

Josh.  1.    7  Only  be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous 

2  Ch  32.    7  Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid 
3.7b  be  or  become  strong,  pin  chazaq. 

Josh  23.    6  Be  ye ..  very  courageous  to  keepand  to  do 

2  Sa.  13.  28  have  not  I  commanded  you?  be  courage. 

2  Ch.  19.  11  Deal  courageously,  and  the  Lord  shall 
COURSE  — 
l.A  passing  on,  change,  rra^n  chaliphah. 

1  Ki.   5  14  he  sent.,  ten  thousand  a  month  by  courses 
2.Course, portion,  division,  n^no machleqah. 

Ezra    6.  18  they  set.  .the  Levites  in  their  courses 
3. Portion,  division,  course,  V&Z&  machaloqelh. 

1  Ch.  23.    6  David  divided  them  into  courses  among 

27.  1  that  served .  .in  any  matter  of  the  courses 
27.    1  of  every  course  (were)  twenty  and  four  th. 
27.   2  Over  the  first  course,  .(was)  Jashobeam 
27.   2  in  his  course  (were)  twenty  and  four  thou. 


1  Ch.  27.    4  over  the  course  of  the  second  month  (was) 

27.  4  of  his  course  (was)  Mikloth  also  the  ruler 
27.  4  in  his  course  likewise  (were)  twenty  and 
27-  5,  7,  8,  9,  -10,  n  in  his  course  (were)  twenty 
27.  12,  13,  14,  15  in  his  course  (were)  twenty  and 

27.  6  ami  in  his  course  (was)  Ammizabad  his  son 

28.  1  that  ministered  to  the  king  by  course 
28.  13  for  the  courses  of  the  priests  and  Levites 
28.  21  the  courses  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites 

2  Ch.  5.  1 1  the  priests . .  did  not  (then)  wait  by  course 

8.  14  the  courses  of  the  priests  to  their  service 
8.  14  porters  also  by  their  courses  at  every  gate 
23.  8  for  Jehoiada.  .dismissed  not  the  courses 
31.  2  And  Hezekiah  appointed  the  courses  of 
31.  2  after  their  courses,  every  man  according 
31.  15  to  give  to  their  brethren  by  courses,  as 
31.  16  their  charges  according  to  their  courses 

31. 17  upward,  in  their  charges  by  their  courses 
35.  4  houses  of  your  fathers,  after  your  courses 
35.  10  and  the  Levites  in  their  courses,  accord. 

^.Highway,  rrTpa  mesillah. 

Judg.  5.  20  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against 
5. Race,  winning,  rrpno  merutsah. 

Jer.     8.    6  every  one  turned  to  his  course,  as  the 
23.  ro  and  their  course  is  evil,  and  then-  force 

Q.Age,  course  of  things,  al&v  axon. 

Eph.  2.  2  ye  walked  according  to  the  course  of  this 
7. Race,  running,  5p6fxo$  dromos. 

Acts  13.  25  And  as  John  fulfilled  his  course,  he  said 
20.  24  so  that  I  might  finish  my  course  with  joy 

2  Ti.  4.    7  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  (my)  c. 

S. Daily  course,  i(pT)^epia  ephemeria. 

Luke  1.    5  a  certain  priest,  .of  the  course  of  Abia 
1.    8  he  executed,  .in  the  order  of  his  course 

9.  Sailing,  tt\6os  ploos. 

Acts  21.    7  when  we  had  finished  (our)  course  from 

10.^-1  runner,  running  course,  rpoxos  trochos. 

Jas.    3.   6  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature 
COURSE,  by  — 
In  part,  by  rotation,  ava  fxtpos  ana  meros. 

1  Co.  14.  27  or  at  the  most  (by)  three,  and  (that)  by  c. 

COURSE,  to  be  out  of  — 
7b  be  moved,  bid  mot,  2. 

Psa.  82.   5  all  the  foundations . .  are  out  of  course 

COURSE,  to  have  — 
To  run,  Tpe%a)  trecho. 

2  Th.  3.    1  that  the  word,  .may  have  (free)  course 

COURT  — 

1. House,  n*3  bayith. 

Amos  7.  13  the  king's  chapel,  and  it  (is)  the  king's  co. 
2. Enclosed  place,  court,  T*n  chatsir. 

Isa.  34.  13  an  habitation  of  dragous,  (and)'a  court  for 
3. Enclosed  place,  court,  "ran  chatser. 

Exod27.    9  thou  shalt  make  the  court  of  the  taberua. 
27.   9  hangings  for  the  court  (of)  fine  twined. 
27.  12,  13  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the 

27. 16  for  the  gate  of  the  court  (shall  be)  an 

27.  17  All  the  pillars  round  about  the  court 

27. 18  The  length  of  the  court  (shall  be)  an  him. 

27. 19  all  the  pins  of  the  court  (shall  be  of)  brass 

35. 17  The  hangings  of  the  court,  his  pillars,  and 

35. 17  and  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  court 
35.  18  and  the  pins  of  the  court,  and  their  cords 
38.  9  And  he  made  the  court:  on  the  south  side 
38.  9  hangings  of  the  court  (were  of)  fine  twined 
38.  15  for  the  other  side  of  the  court  gate,  on 
38. 16  All  the  hangings  of  the  court  round  about 
38.  17  all  the  pillars  of  the  court  (were)  filleted 

38. 18  the  hanging  for  the  gate  of  the  court  (was) 
38. 18  answerable  to  the  hangings  of  the  court 
38.  20  pins,  .of  the  court  round  about,  (were  of) 
38.  31  the  sockets  of  the  court  round  about,  and 
38.  31  the  sockets  of  the  court  gate,  aud  all  the 

38.  31  all  the  pins  of  the  court  round  about 

39.  40  hangings  of  the  court,  .for  the  court  gate 

40.  8  shalt  set  up  the  court  round  about,  and 
40.   8  hang  up  the  hanging  at  the  court  gate 
40.  33  set  up  the  hanging  of  the  court  gate 

Lev.    6.  16,  26  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

Mum.  3.  26  And  the  hangings  of  the  court,  and  the 

3.  26  curtain  for  the  door  of  the  court,  which 

3.  37  the  pillars  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

4.  26  hangings  of  the  court,  and  the  hangings 
4.  26  for  the  door  of  the  gate  of  the  court 

4.  32  the  pillars  of  the  court  round  about,  and 
2  Sa.  17.  18  which  had  a  well  in  his  court,  whither 

1  Ki.   6.  36  lie  built  the  inner  court  with  three  rows 

7.  8  his  house,  .(had)another  court  within  the 
7.  9  (so)  on  the  outside  toward  the  great  court 
7.  12  the  great  court  round  about  (was)  with 

7.  12  both  for  the  inner  court  of  the  house  of 

8.  64  hallow  the  middle  of  the  court  that  (was) 

2  Ki.21.    5  he  built  altars,  .in  the  two  courts  of  the 

23. 12  Jianasseh  had  made  in  the  two  courts  of 

1  Ch.23.  28  their  office  (was)  to  wait,  .in  the  courts 

28.  6  he  shall  build  my  house  aud  my  courts 
28.  12  the  pattern.,  of  the  courts  of  the  house  of 

2  Ch.   4.    9  Furthermore  he  made  the  court  of  the 

7.    7  Solomon  hallowed  the  middle  of  the  co. 
20.   5  stood.. in  the  house.. before  the  new  co. 

23.  5  all  the  people  (shall  be)  in  the  courts  of 

24.  21  stoned  him  with  stones,  .in  the  court  of 
29. 16  into  the  court  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 


2  Ch.  33.    5  he  built  altars .  .in  the  two  courts  of  the 
Neh.   3.  25  king's  high  house,  that  (was)  by  the  court 

8.  16  in  their  courts,  and  in  the  courts  of  the 
13.    7  in  preparing  him  a  chamber  in  the  courts 
Esth.  r.   5  in  the  court-of  the  garden  of  the  king's 

2.  11  Mbrdecai  walked . .  before  the  court  of  the 

4.  it  come  unto  the  king  into  the  inner  court 

5.  1  Esther,  .stood  in  the  inner  court  of  the 

5.  2  saw  Esther  the  queen  standing  in  the  co. 

6.  4  And  the  king  said,  Who  (is)  in  the  court? 
6.  4  Hainan  was  come  into  the  outward  court 
6.   5  Behold,  Hainan  standeth  in  the  court 

Psa.  65.   4  he  may  dwell  in  thy  courts:  we  shall 

84.  2  even  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord 
80.  10  For  a  day  in  thy  courts  (is)  better  than  a 
92.  13  shall  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our  God 
96.  8  bring  au  offering,  and  come  into  his  courts 
100.  4  Enter,  .into  his  courts  with  praise:  be 
116. 19  In  the  courts  of  the  LORD'S  house,  in  the 
135.  2  Ye  that  stand .  .in  the  courts  of  the  house 
Isa.      1,  12  who  hath  required,  .to  tread  my  courts? 

62.   9  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts  of  my  holi. 
Jer:  19.  14  he  stood  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house 
26.    2  Stand  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house 
32.    2  Jeremiah,  .was  shut  up  in  the  court  of 

32.  8  mine  uncle's  sou,  came  to  me  in  the  court 
32. 12  before  all  the  Jews  that  sat  in  the  court 

33.  1  he  was  yet  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the 
36.  10  in  the  higher  court,  at  the  entry  of  the 

36.  20  they  went  in  to  the  king  into  the  court 

37.  21  they  should  commit  Jeremiah  into  the  c. 

37.  21  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the 

38.  6  the  dungeon,  .that  (was)  in  the  court  of 
38.  13  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the 

38.  28  Jeremiah  abode  in  the  court  of  thejprison 

39.  14  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah  out  of  the  court 
39. 15  he  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison 

Eze.    8.    7  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  court 

8.  16  he  brought  me  into  the  inner  court  of  the 

9.  7  Defile  the  house,  and  fill  the  courts  with 
10.   3  and  the  cloud  filled  the  inner  court 
10.    4  the  court  was  full  of  the  brightness  of 
10.   5  sound,  .was  heard  (even)  to  the  outer  co. 
40. 14  post  of  the  court  round  about  the  gate 

40.  17  Then  brought  he  me  into  the  outward  c. 
40.  17  a  pavement  made  for  the  court  round 
40.  19  unto  the  forefront  of  the  inner  court 
40.  20  the  outward  court  that  looked  toward  the 
40.  23  the  gate  of  the  inner  court  (was)  over 
40.  27  a  gate  in  the  inner  court  toward  the  south 
40.  2S  he  brought  me  to  the  inner  court  by  the 
40.  31,  34  the  arches,  .(were)  toward  the  outer  c. 
40.  32  he  brought  me  into  the  inner  court  towa. 
40.  37  posts  thereof  (were)  toward  the  outer  co. 
40.  44  chambers  of  the  singers  in  the  inner  co. 

40.  47  he  measured  the  court,  an  hundred  cubits 

41.  15  inner  temple,  and  the  porches  of  the  co. 

42.  1  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court 
42.    3  for  the  inner  court,  .for  the  outer  court 
42.   6  not  pillars  as  the  pillars  of  the  courts 
42.    7  the  outer  court  on  the  fore  part  of  the 
42.    8  the  chambers  that  (were)  in  the  outer  co. 
42.   9  as  one  goeth  into  them  from  the  outer  co. 

42.  10  of  the  wall  of  the  court  toward  the  east 
42. 14  shall  they  not  go.  .into  the  outer  court 

43.  5  the  spirit,  .brought  me  into  the  inner  co. 
44. 17,  17  the  gates  of  the  inner  court 

44.  19  outer  court,  (even)  into  the  outer  court 
44.  21  when  they  enter  into  the  inner  court 

44.  27  into  the  sanctuary,  unto  the  inner  court 

45.  19  the  posts  of  the  gate  of  the  inner  court 

46.  1  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  that  looketh 
46.  20  bear  them  not  out  into  the  outer  court 
46.  21  into  the  outer  court,  .corners  of  the  court 
46. 21  every  corner  of  the  court  (there  was)  a  co. 
46.  22  In.. corners  of  the  court  (there  were)co. 

Zech.  3.    7  thou,  shalt  also  keep  my  courts,  and  I 
4.  Court,  settle,  border,  edge,  rnjj£  azarah. 

2-  Ch.  4.    g  and  the  great  court,  and  doors  for  the  co. 
6.  13  and  had  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  court 

5.A  city,  place  surrounded  by  wall,  i*y  ir. 

2  Ki.  20.    4  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into  the  middle  co. 
Q.Court,  yard,  al\T)  aide. 

Rev.  11.    2.  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple 

COURTEOUS  — 

Friendly  minded,  <pLX6<ppaiv  philophrCm. 

1  Pe.  3.   8  as  brethren,  (be)  pitiful,  (be)  [courteous] 

COURTEOUSLY  — 

l.As  a  friend  of  man,  <pi\avdpa>Trcos  pkilantkrdpds. 
Acts  27.    3  Julius  courteously  entreated  Paul,  and 

2. In  a,  friendly  minded  manner,  (pi\o<pp6vws  phil. 
Acts  28.    7  who  received  us,  and  lodged  us.  .courte. 
COUSIN  — 
One  of  the  same  race,  avyyej/'fjs  suggenes. 

Luke  1.  36  behold,  thy  [cousin]  Elisabeth,  she  hath 
1.  58  her  neighbours  aud  her  cousin  heard  how 
COVENANT  — 
1.  Covenant,  league,  thing  prepared  or  eaten,  n,l5. 
Gen.    6.  18  with  thee  will  I  establish  my  covenant 
9.   9  I,  behold,  I  establish  my  covenant  with 
9. 11  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with 
9.  12,  17  This  (is)  the  token  of  the  covenant 
9.  13  and  it  shall  be  for  a  token  of  a  covenant 
9.  15  And  I  will  remember  my  covenant,  which 
9.  16  I  may  remember  the  everlasting  covenant 
15.  18  In  that  same  day  the  Lord  made  a  cove. 


COVENANT 


208 


COVER 


Gen.  17.   2  I  will  make  my  covenant  between  me 
17.    4  As  for  me,  behold,  my  covenant  (is)  with 
17.    7  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me 
17.    7  and  thy  seed,  .for  an  everlasting  covenant 
17.    9  Thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant  therefore 
17.  10  This  (is)  my  covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep 
17.  11  it  shall  be  a  token  of  the  covenant 
17. 13  covenant  shall  be.,  for  an  everlasting  cov. 
17.  14  he  hath  broken  my  covenant 
17.  19  and  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with 

17.  iq  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  (and)  with 
17.21  But  my  covenant  will  I  establish  with 
21.  27  and  both  of  theiu  made  a  covenant 

21.  32  Thus  they  made  a  covenant  atBeer-sheba 
26.  28  and  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  thee 
31.4+  Now.. come  thou,  let  us  make  a  covenant 
Exjd.  2.  24  and  God  remembered  his  covenant  with 
6.   4  have  also  established  my  covenant  with 
6.    5  and  I  have  remembered  my  covenant; 
19.    5  if  ye  will  obey,  .and  keep  my  covenant 

23.  32  Thou  shalt  make  no  covenant  with  them 

24.  7  he  took  the  book  of  the  covenant,  and 
24.  8  and  said,  Behold  the  blood  of  the  cove. 
31.  16  keep  the  sabbath,  .(for)  a  perpetual  cov. 
34.  10  And  he  said,  Behold,  I  make  a  covenant 
34.  12,  15  lest  thou  make  a  covenant  with  thee 
34.  27  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  thee  and 
34.  28  He  wrote .  .the  words  of  the  covenant 

Lev.    2. 13  shalt  thou  suffer  the  salt  of  the  covenant 

24.  8  children.. by  an  everlasting  covenant 
26.    9  and  establish  my  covenant  with  you  ^ 
26.  15  (but)  that  ye  break  my  covenant 

26.  25  shall  avenge  the  quarrel  of  (my/covenant 
26.  42  Then  will  I  remember  my  covenant  with 
26.  42  and  also  my  covenant  with  Isaac 
26.  42  and  also  my  covenant  with  Abraham  will 
26.  44  to  break  my  covenant  with  them  ;  for  I 
26.  45  will  for  their  sakes  remember  the  coven. 
Num  10.  33  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  LoitD  went 
14.  44  the  ark  of  the  covenaut  of  the  Lord,  and 

18.  19  it  (is)  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  before 

25.  12  I  give  unto  him  my  covenant  of  peace 
25. 13  the  covenaut  of  an  everlasting  priesthood 

Deut.  4. 13  he  declared  unto  you  his  covenant,  which 

4.  23  lest  ye  forget  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
4. 31  not  forget  the  covenant  of  thy  fathers 

5.  2  The  Lord  our  God  made  a  covenant  with 

5.  3  The  Lord  made  not  this  covenant  with 
7.    2  thou  shalt  make  no  covenant  with  them 
7.    9  which  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  with 
J7.  12  thy  God  shall  keep  unto  thee  the  covena. 

8. 18  that  he  may  establish  his  covenant  which 
9.   9  the  tables  of  the  covenant  which  the  L. 
9.  11  of  stone,  (even)the  tablesof  the  covenaut 

9. 15  tables  of  the  covenant  (were)  in  my  two 

10.  8  to  bear  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  L. 

17.  2  wickedness,  .in  transgressing  his  coven. 
29.    1  These  (are)  the  words  of  the  covenant 
29.    1  the  covenant  which  he  made  with  them 
29.    9  Keep  therefore  the  words  of  this  covenant 
29. 12  enterinto  covenant  with  the  Lord  thy  G. 
29.  14  with  you  only  do  I  make  this  covenant 
29.  21  the  curses  of  the  covenant  that  are  writt. 

29. 25  they  have  forsaken  the  covenant  of  the  L. 
31.   9  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
31.  16  break  my  covenaut  which  I  have  made 
31.  20  and  provoke  me,  and  break  my  covenant 
31.  25  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenaut  of  the  Lord 

31. 26  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
33.    9  observed  thy  word,  and  kept  thy  coven. 

Josh.  3.  3  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your 
3.  6  Take  up  the  ark,of  the  covenant,  and  pass 
3.  6  they  took  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and 
3.  8  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
3. 11  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of 
3. 14  the  priests  bearing  the  ark  of  the  coven. 

3.  17  priests  that  bear  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

4.  7  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  L. 
4.    9  priests  which  bare  the  ark  of  the  coven. 
4.  18  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

6.  6  Take  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  let 

6.  8  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  followed 

7.  11  transgressed  my  covenant  which  I  comm. 

7.  15  hath  transgressed  the  covenant  of  the  L. 

8.  33  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 

3. 16  When  ye  have  transgressed  the  covenant 
24.  25  Joshua  made  a  covenaut  with  the  people 

Judg.  2.    1  I  will  never  break  my  covenant  with  you 
2.  20  this  people  hath  transgressed  my  coven. 

20.27  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God  (was)  there 

1  Sa.   4.    3  fetch  the  arkof  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 

4.    4  bring  from  thence  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

4.    4  there  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

4.    5  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  came 

11.  1  Make  a  covenant  with  us,  and  we  will 

18.  3  Then  Jonathan  and  David  made  a  cove. 
20.   8  hast  brought  thy  servant  into  a  covenant 
23. 18  they  two  made  a  covenant  before  the  L. 

2  Sa.15.  24  bearing  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 

23.    5  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  coven. 

1  Ki.   3.  15  before  the  ark  of  the  covennut  of  the  L. 

6. 19  set  there  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 
8.    1  might  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
8.    6  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  coven. 
8.  21  the  ark,  wherein  (is)  the  covenant  of  the 
8. 23  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  with 

11.  11  hast  not  kept  my  covenant  and  my  stat. 

19.  10,  i4thechildren..haveforsakenthycoven. 

20.  34  I  will  send  thee  away  -with  this  covenant 
20.  34  he  made  a  covenant  with  him,  and  sent 

2  Ki.  11.    4  made  a  covenant  with  them,  and  took  an 

11.  17  Jehoiada  made  a  covenant  between  theL. 


:  Cli.] 


!  Ki.  13.  23  because  of  his  covenant  with  Abraham 
15  his  covenant  that  he  made  with  their 
35  With  whom  the  Lord  had  made  a  covena. 
3Sthe  coveuaut  that  I  have  made  with  you 
12  obeyed  not.  .but  transgressed  his  coven. 

2  the  book  of  the  covenant  (which  was) 

3  made  a  coveuaut  before  the  Lord,  to 
3  to  perform  the  words  of  this  covenant 
3  and  all  the  people  stood  to  the  covenant 

21  as.  .written  in  the  book  of  this  covenant 

3  David  made  a  covenant  with  them  in  II. 

25,  26,  28,  29  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 

6  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 

15  Be  ye  mindful  always  of  his  covenant 
17  (and)  to  Israel  (for)  an  everlasting  coven. 
37  left  there,  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

1  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  LoRDfremaiu. 

19  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  L. 

2  for  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
2,  7  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 

11  the  ark,  wherein  (is)  the  covenant  of  the 
14  which  keepest  covenant,  and  (showest) 

5  and  to  his  sons  by  a  covenant  of  salt 

12  they  entered  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the 

7  because  of  the  covenant- that  he  had [made 
1  took  the  captains . .  intotovenant  with  him 

3  the  congregation  made  a  covenant  with 

16  Jehoiada  made  a  covenaut  between  him 
10  $t  is)  in  mine  heart  to  make  a  covenant 

30  all  the  words  of  the  book  of  the  covenant 

31  the  king,  .and  made  a  covenant  before 

31  to  perform  the  words  of  the  covenant 

32  inhabitants,  .did  according  to  the  cove. 
Ezra  10.  3  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  our  God  to 
Neh.  1.    5  thatkeepeth covenant andmercyforthem 

8  madest  a  covenant  with  him,  to  give  the 
32  the  terrible  God,  who  keepest  covenant 
29  the  covenant  of  the  priesthood,  and  of 

1  I  made  a  covenant  with  mine  eyes;  why 

4  Will  he  make  a  covenant  with  thee?  wilt 
10  unto  such  as  keep  his  covenant  and  his 

14  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant 

17  have  we  dealt  falsely  in  thy  covenant 

5  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me 

16  shouldest  takemy  covenant  in  thy  mouth? 

20  his  hands,  .he  hath  broken  his  covenant 

20  Have  respect  unto  the  covenant :  for  the 
10  They  kept  not  the  covenant  of  God,  and 
37  neither  were  they  stedf  ast  In  his  covenant 

3  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  my  chosen 
28  aud  my  covenant  shall  stand  fast  with 
34  My  covenant  will  I  not  break,  nor  alter 

39  Thou  hast  made  void  the  covenant  of  thy 
iS  To  such  as  keep  his  covenaut,  and  to 

S  He  hath  remembered  his  covenant  for 
10  (aud)  to  Israel  (for)  an  everlasting  cove. 
45  he  remembered  for  them  his  covenant 

5  he  will  ever  be  mindful  of  his  covenant 

9  he  hath  commanded  his  covenant  for 

12  If  thy  children  will  keep  my  covenant 

17  and  forgetteth  the  covenant  of  her  God 

5  they  have,  .broken  the  everlasting  cove. 

15  We  have  made  a  covenant  with  death 
iS  your  covenant  with  death  shall  be  disan. 

8  he  hath  broken  the  covenant,  he  hath 

6  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people 
8  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people 

10  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be 

3  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 

4  the  eunuchs  that,  .take  hold  of  my  cove. 
6  every  one  that,  .taketh  hold  of  my  cove. 

21  this  (is)  my  covenaut  with  them  earth 
8  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them 

16  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
2,  6  Hear  ye  the  words  of  this  covenant 

3  obeyeth  not  the  words  of  this  covenant 

8  upon  them  all  the  words  of  this  covenant 
10  Israel  and . .  Judah  have  broken  my  cove. 
21  remember,  break  not  thy  covenant  with 

9  they  have  forsaken  the  covenant  of  the 

31  I  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the 

32  Not  according  to  the  covenant  that  I 

32  which  my  covenant  they  brake,  although 

33  this  (shall  be)  the  covenant  that  I  will 

40  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 

20  my  covenant  of  the  day,  and  my  covenant 

21  (Then)  may  also  my  covenant  be  broken 
25  If  my  covenant  (be)  not  with  day  and 

8  the  king  Zedekiah  had  made  a  covenant 
10  people,  which  had  entered  into  the  cove. 

13  I  made  a  covenant  with  your  fathers  in 
15  ye  had  made  a  covenant  before  me  in  the 

18  men  that  have  transgressed  my  covenant 
18  not  performed  the  words  of  the  covenant 

5  in  a  perpetual  covenant  (that)  shall  not 
8 1  sware . .  and  entered  into  a  covenant 

59  despised  the  oath  in  breaking  the  cove. 

60  I  will  remember  my  covenant  with  thee 

60  establish  unto  thee  an  everlasting  cove. 

61  I  will  give  them.,  but  not  by  thy  cove. 

62  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  thee 

13  made  a  covenant  with  him,  and  hath 

14  by  keeping  of  his  covenant  it  might  stand 

15  shall  he  break  the  covenant,  and  be  deli.? 

16  whose  oath  he  despised,  and  whose  cove. 

18  despised  the  oath  by  breaking  the  cove. 

19  my  covenant  that  he  hath  broken,  even 
20.  37  bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant 
34.  25  will  make  with  them  a  covenant  of  peace 
37.  26  will  make  a  covenant  of  peace  with  them 
37.  26shall  be  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them 
44.   7  they  have  broken  my  covenant  because  of 


17- 
17- 
17- 
18. 
23- 
23- 
23- 

23- 

23- 
t.n. 
15- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 

17- 

22. 

28. 

>Ch.   5. 

6. 

6. 
13- 
J5- 
21. 

23. 
23- 
23- 
29. 

34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 


9- 
9- 
*3- 
Job  31. 
41. 
Psa.  25. 

25- 
44. 
50. 
50. 

55- 

74- 
73. 
7S. 


103. 
105, 
105. 
106, 
in. 
in, 
132, 
Prov.  2 
Isa.  24, 
28, 
28. 

33- 
42. 
49. 
54- 
55- 
56. 
56. 
59- 
61. 
Jer.     3. 


14, 
22. 
3i- 
3*- 
31- 
31- 
32. 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
5o. 
Eze.  16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
'7- 


Dan.  9.  4  keeping  the  covenant  and  mercy  to  them 
9.  27  he  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with  many 
11.  22  yea,  also  the  prince  of  the  covenant 
11.  28  heart  (shall  be)  against  the  holy  covenant 
11.  30  have  indignation  against  the  holy  coven. 
11.  30  with  them  that  forsake  the  holy  covenant 

11.  32  such  as  do  wickedly  against  the  covenant 
Hos.    2. 18  willl  make  a  coveuaut  for  them  with  the 

6.  7  But  they . .  have  transgressed  the  covenant 
8.    1  they  have  transgressed  my  covenaut,  and 

10.  4  swearing  falsely  in  making  a  covenant 

12.  1  they  do  make  a  covenant  with  the  Assyr. 
A.mos  1.  9  and  remembered  not  the  brotherly  cove. 
Zech.  9. 11  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent 

11.  10  might  break  my  covenant  which  I  had 
Mai.    2.   4  that  my  covenant  might  be  with  Levi 

2.    5  My  covenaut  was  with  him  of  life  and 
2.    8  ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of  Levi 
2.  10  by  profaning  the  covenant  of  our  fathers? 

2.  14  yet  (is)  she.  .the  wife  of  thy  covenant 

3.  1  even  the  messenger  of  the  covenant 

2. Arrangement,  covenant,  SiaOfjXT}  diatheke. 
Luke  1.  72  and  to  remember  his  holy  covenant 
Acts    3.  25  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with 

7.  8  he  gave  him  the  covenant  of  circumcis. 
Rom.  9.    4  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  tielaw 

11.  27  this  (is)  my  covenant  unto  them,  when  I 
Gal.    3.  15  Though  (it  be)  but  a  man's  coveuaut,  yet 

3. 17  the  covenant  that  was  confirmed  before 

4.  24  these  are  the  two  covenants  ;  the  one 
Eph.    2.  12  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise 
Heb.   8.    6  he  is  the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant 

8.  8  I  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the  house 
8.  9  Not  accordingto  the  covenant  that  I  made 
8.   9  they  continued  not  in  my  covenant,  and 

8.  10  this  (is)  the  covenant  that  I  will  make 
g.   4  the  ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  round 

9.  4  Aaron's  rod . .  and  the  tables  of  the  cove. 
10.  16  This  (is)  the  covenant  that  I  will  make 
10.  29  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant 

12.  24  to  Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  coven. 

13.  20  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant 
COVENANT,  to  — 

l.To  cut,  make  or  prepare  a  covenant,  TV"!?  ri"]2. 
2  Ch.  7. 18  according  as  I  have  covenanted  withDa.  . 
Hag.   2.    5  (According  to)  the  word  that  I  covenanted 

2.  Tosctjmt,  arrange  together,  o-vvTiermisuntithem  1. 

Luke  22.    5  they  were  glad,  and  covenanted  to  give 

COVENANT  breaker  — 

Not  bound  by  covenant,  aavv&eros  asunthetos. 

Rom.  1.  31  Without  understanding,  covenant  brea. 
COVENANT  -with  for,  to  — 
To  set,  establish,  ctjipohit,  'lar^fjn  histemi. 

Matt  26. 15  they  covenanted  with  him  for  thirty  pieces 
COVER  — 
l.Cht&yjug,  can,  nyc-p,  n^p,  qasvah,  gasah. 

Exod25.  29  spoons  thereof,  and  covers  thereof,  and 

37.  16  spoons,  and  his  bowls,  and  his  covers  to 
Num.  4.    7  and  the  bowls,  and  covers  to  cover  withal 

'l.To  hedge  in,  enclose,  T^y  sakak. 

Exod33.  22  will  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  I 
COVER,  to  — 
l.To  swallow  vp>,  yh^.  bala,  3. 

Num.  4.  20  to  see  when  the  holy  things  are  covered 
2.To  cover,  n^n  ckaphah. 

2  Sa.  13.  30  the  people  that  (was)  with  him  covered 

Esth.  7.    8  As  the  word  went  out.  .they  covered  H. 

Jer.    14.   3 they  were  ashamed,  .and  covered  their 

14.  4  the  plowmen,  .covered  their  heads 

3.  To  cover,  overlay,  protect,  *]&rj  chaphaph. 

Deut.  33.  12  (the)  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  day  long 

4.  To  shade,  conceal,  protect,  hbtp  talal,  3. 

Neh.   3.  15  he  built  it,  and  covered  it,  and  set  up  the 
5.7*0  clothe,  cover,  wrap  up  in,  tay;  yaat. 

Isa.   61.  10  covered  me  withtherobeof  righteousness 

6.  To  cover,  conceal,  nop  kasah. 

Prov  12. 16  but  a  prudent  (man)  covereth  shame 

7.  To  cover,  concecd,  nD3  kasah,  3. 

Gen.  9.  23  and  covered  the  nakedness  of  theirfather 

38.  14  covered  her  with  a  veil,  and  wrapped 
38. 15  an  harlot;  because  she  had  covered  her 

Exod.  8.    6  frogs  came  up,  and  covered  theland  of  E. 
10.    5  they  shall  cover  the  face  of  the  earth 
10.  15  they  covered  the  face  of  the  whole  earth 

14.  28  waters  returned  and  covered  the  chariots 

15.  5  The  depths  have  covered  them  :  they 
15. 10  Thou  didst  blow,  .the  sea  covered  them 

16.  13  the  quails  came  up,  and  covered  the 

21.  33  if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pit,  and  not  cover  it 
24. 15  Moses  went  up.  .and  a  cloud  covered  the 
24.  16  and  the  cloud  covered  it  six  days 
26. 13  on  this  side  and  on  that  side,  to  cover  it 
28. 42  shalt  make  them  linen  breeches  to  cover 
29.  13  take  all  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards 
29.  22  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards,  and 
40.  34  a  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the  congrega. 
Lev.    3.   3,  9, 14  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards 
4.  8  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards,  and 
7.   3  and  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards 
13.  12  if.  .the  leprosy  cover  all  the  skin  of  (him) 
13.  13  (if)  the  leprosy  have  covered  all  his  flesh 
16. 13  the  cloud  of  the  incense  may  cover  the 


COVER 


209 


COVET 


Psa. 


Isa. 


Lev.  17.  13  he  shall  even,  .cover  it  with  dust 
Num.  4.    5  and  cover  the  ark  of  testimony  with  it 
4.    8  cover  the  same  with  a  covering  of  badg. 
4.    9  cover  the  candlestick  of  the  light,  and 
4.  11  cover  it  with  a  covering  of  badger's  skins 
4.  12  cover  them  with  a  covering  of  badger's 
4.  15  have  made  an  end  of  covering  the  sane. 
9.  15  the  cloud  covered  the  tabernacleXnamely) 
9. 16  So  it  was  alway  :  the  cloud  covered  it 
16.  42  the  cloud  covered  it,  and  the  glory  of  the 
22.    5  they  cover  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  they 

22.  11  which  covereth  the  face  of  the  earth 
T)eut  22.  12  vesture,  wherewith  thou  coverest  (thyse.) 

23.  13  and  cover  that  which  cometh  from  thee 
Josh. 24.  7  brought  the  sea  upon  them,  and  covered 
Judg.  4.  18  when  he  had  turned  in.,  she  covered  him 

4. 19  and  gave  him  drink,  and  covered  him 
1  Sa.  19.  13  Michal  took  an  image .  .and  covered  (it) 

1  Ki.  1.  1  they  covered  him  with  clothes,  but  he 
7.  18  to  cover  the  chapiters  that  (were)  upon 
7.  41  to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 
7. 42  to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 

2  Ch.  4.  12  and  the  two  wreaths  to  cover  the  two 

4.  13  to  cover  the  two  pommels  of  the  chapiters 

5.  8  the  cherubims  covered  the  ark  and  the 
Neli.  4.    5  cover  not  their  iniquity,  and  let  not  their 
Job     9.  24  he  covereth  the  faces  of  the  judges 

15.  27  Because  he  covereth  his  face  with  his  fat. 
16. 18  cover  not  thou  my  blood,  and  let  my  cry 
21.  26  They  shall  lie  down,  .worms  shall  cover 
22. 11  and  abundance  of  waters  cover  thee 
23.  17  (neither)  hath  he  covered  the  darkness 

31.  33  If  I  covered  my  transgressions  as  Adam 
36.  30  Behold,  he.  .covereth  the  bottom  of  the 
36.  32  With  clouds  he  covereth  the  light ;  and 
38.  34  that  abundance  of  waters  may  cover 

32.  1  Blessed  (is  he  whose),  .sin  (is)  covered 
44.  15  and  the  shame  of  my  face  hath  covered 
44.  19  and  covered  us  with  the  shadow  of  death 
69.    7  I  have  borne  reproach  ;  shame  hath  cov. 
85.    2  Thou  hast  forgiven,  .thou  hast  covered 

104.    6  Thou  coveredst  it  with  the  deep  as  (with) 
104.    9  they  turn  not  again  to  cover  the  earth 
106.  11  the  waters  covered  their  enemies  ;  there 
106. 17  and  covered  the  company  of  Abiram 
140.    9  let  the  mischief  of  their  own  lips  cover 
147.   8  Who  covereth  the  heaven  with  clouds 
Prov. 10.  6,  11  violence  covereth  the  mouth  of  the 

10.  12  Hatred  stirreth  up.,  love  covereth  all  sins 
17.  9  He  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh 
24.  31  nettles  had  covered  the  face  thereof,  and 

28.  13  He  thatjcoverethhissinsshallnot  prosper 
6.    2  he  covered  his  face,  and  with  twain  he  co. 

11.  9  shall  be  full,  .as  the  waters  cover  the 
26.  21  the  earth  also,  .shall  no  more  cover  her 

29.  10  and  your  rulers,  the  seers  hath  he  cover. 
51.  16  I.  .have  covered  thee  in  the  shadow  of 

"     7  thou  seest  the  naked,  that  thou  coverhim 
2  For,  behold,  the  darkness  shall  cover  the 
6  The  multitude  of  camels  shall  cover 
25  We  lie  down,  .and  our  confusion  cover. 
8  I  will  go  up,  (and)  will  cover  the  earth 
51.  51  We  are  confounded,  .shame  hath  cover. 
.  11  two.  .(were)  joined,  .and  two  covered 
.  23  and  every  one  had  two,  which  covered 
7. 18  and  horror  shall  cover  them ;  and  shame 
12.   6  thou  shalt  cover  thy  face,  that  thou  see 

12.  12  he  shall  cover  his  face  that  he  see  not 
16.   8  I  spread  my  skirt  over  thee,  and  covered 
16.  10  I  girded  thee.. and  I  covered  thee  with 
16.  18  tookest  thy.  .garments,  and  coveredst 
18.   7,  16  and  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a 
24.   7  she  poured  it  not.  .to  cover  it  with  dust 
26.  10  By  reason  of.  .horses  their  dust  shall  co. 
26. 19  and  great  waters  shall  cover  thee 
30.  iS  as  for  her,  a  cloud  shall  cover  her,  and 

31. 15  I  covered  the  deep  for  him,  and  I 
32.    7  I  will  cover  the  heaven,  and  make  the 
32.    7  I  will  cover  the  sun  with  a  cloud,  and 
38.    9  thou  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  to  cover  the 

38. 16  thou  shalt  come  up.  .as  a  cloud  to  cover 
.  9  andmyflax  (given)to  cover hernakedness 
.    8  Cover  us  ;  and  to  the  hills,  Fall  on  us 

10  For  (thy)  violence,  .shame  shall  cover 
3.   6  covered  (him)  with  sackcloth,  and  sat  in 
7. 10  shame  shall  cover  her  which  said  unto 
.  14  earth  shall  he  filled,  .as  the  waters  cover 

2.  17  the  violence  of  Lebanon  shall  cover  thee 

3.  3  His  glory  covered  the  heavens,  and  the 
2. 13  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  tears 
2.  16  (one)  covereth  violence  with  his  garment 

8.  To  press  down,  t'$3  kaphash,  5. 

Lam.  3. 16  he  hath  covered  me  with  ashes 

9.7b  muffle  up,  axS  laat, 

2  Sa.  19.   4  the  king  covered  his  face,  and  the  king 

10. A  covering,  coverlet,  nopo  mekasseh. 

Lev.   9.  19  the  rump,  and  that  which  covereth  (the 
Isa..  14.  11  worm  is  spread,  .and  the  worms  cover 
Eze.  27.   7  blue  and  purple . .  was  that  which  covered 

11.  To  pour  oxit,  cover,  weave  together,  T]Dj  nasak. 
Isa.   30.    1  that  cover  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my 

12.  To  be  poured  out,  ^05  nasak,  6. 
Exod.25.  29  and  bowls  thereof,  to  cover  withal 

37.  16  his  bowls . .  to  cover  withal,  (of)  pure  gold 

13.  To  cover,  hedge  in,  ^?p  sakak. 
Exod25.  20  covering  the  mercy  seat  with  their  wings 

37.   9  covered  with  their  wings  over  the  mercy 
40.    3  and  cover  the  ark  with  the  veil 
97 


Jer 


58. 

60. 

60. 

3- 

46. 


Eze. 


Hos. 

Obad. 
Jon. 
Mic. 
Hab. 


Mai. 


1  Ki.   8.    7  the  cherubims  covered  the  ark  and  the 
1  Ch.28. 18  covered  the  ark  of  the  coveuaut  of  the 
Job  40.  22  The  shady  trees  cover  him  (with)  their 
Psa.139.  I3  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  mother's 
140.    7  thou  hast  covered  my  head  in  the  day 
Lam.  3.  43  Thou  hast  covered  with  anger,  and  pers. 

3.  44  Thou  hast  covered  thyself  with  a  cloud 
Eze.  28.  14  Thou  (art)  the  anointed  cherub  that  cov. 
28.  16  I  will  destroy  thee,  O  covering  cherub 

14.7*0  cover,  hedge  in,  "5?  sakak,  5. 

Exod4o.  21  and  covered  the  ark  of  the  testimony 
Judg  3.  24  Surely  he  covereth  his  feet  in  his  sum. 
1  Sa.  24.    3  Saul  went  in  to  cover  his  feet :  and  Da. 
Psa.  91.    4  He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers 

15.  To  cover,  ceil,  overlay,  j3D  saphan. 
1  KI.  6.   9  covered  the  house  with  beams  and  boards 

16.  To  wrap  up  in,  array,  cover,  nay  atah. 
Psa.104.    2  Whocoverest(thyself)\vithhght  as(with) 

109.  19  Let  it  be.  .as  the  garment  (which)  cover. 

Isa.   22.  17  theLoRDwillcarry.  .and  will  surely  cover 

Eze.  24. 1 7  cover  not  (thy)  lips,  and  eat  not  the  bread 

24.  22  ye  shall  not  cover(your)  bps,  nor  eat  the 

Mic.    3.    7  yea,  they  shall  all  cover  their  lips  :  for 

17.7b  wrap  up>  in,  array,  cover,  nay  atah,  5. 
Psa.  89.  45  thou  hast  covered  him  with  shame 

18.  To  cover,  clothe,  *]ay  ataph. 
Psa.  73.   6  violence  covereth  them  (as)  a  garment 

19.  To  overlay,  cover,  spread  out,  n?>*  tsaphah,  3. 
1  Ki.  6. 15  he  covered,  (them)  on  the  inside  with 

6.  15  covered  the  floor  of  the  house  with  planks 
6.  20  (so)  covered  the  altar  (which  was  of)  cedar 
6.  35  covered  (them)  with  gold  fitted  upon  the 

20.  To  cover,  overlay,  rr\y  qaram. 
Eze.  37.    6  cover  you  with  skin,  and  put  breath  in 

37.    8  the  skin  covered  them  above  :  but  (there) 

21.  To  bruise,  or  cover,  *\W  shuph. 
Psa.139.  "  Surely  the  darkness  shall  cover  me  ;  even 

22.  To  cover  over,  s-kikclKviztw  epikalupto. 
Rom.  4.    7  Blessed(are)they.  .whose  sins  are  covered 

23.Tb  cover,  KaAvirTaj  kalupto. 

Matt.  8.  24  insomuch  that  the  ship  was  covered  with 
10.  26  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not 

Luke  8.  16  No  man.  .covereth  it  with  a  vessel,  or 
23  30  Fall  on  us  ;  and  to  the  hills,  Cover  us 

1  Pe.   4.    8  charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of  sins 
24.  To  cover  fully,  KaraKaXinrro)  katakalupto. 

1  Co.  11.   7  a  man  indeed  ought  not  to  cover  (his) 
25. 7*o  cover  round  about,  irepiKa\vTnu> perikalupto. 

Marki4.  65  to  cover  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  and 

26.  To  cover  together,  avyKaKvirrw  suykalujito. 
Lukei2.   2  nothing  covered, that  shall  not  be  revealed 

COVER  self,  to  — 

1.7*0  cover  self,  npa  kasah¥  7. 

Gen.  24.  65  she  took  a  veil,  and  covered  herself 
2  Ki  19.    1  covered  himself  with  sackcloth,  and  went 
Isa.   37.    1  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered  himself 
59.    6  neither  shall  they  cover  themselves  with 

2.  To  wrap  self  up,  nay  atah. 

Psa.109.  29  cover  themselves  with  their  own  confus. 

COVERED  — 

1.7*0  cover,  nsn  chaphah. 

2  Sa.  15.  30  he  went  up,  and  had  his  head  covered 
Esth.  6.  12  but  Haman hasted,  .having  his  head  cov. 

2.7*o  be  covered,  nsrt  chaphah,  2. 

Psa.  68. 13  the  wings  of  a  dove  covered  with  silver 

3.7*0  cover,  ceil,  overlay,  }9D  saphan. 

1  Ki.  7.   3  covered  with  cedar  above  upon  the  beams 
7.    7  covered  with  cedar  from  one  side  of  the 

4.A  roof,  cover,  ny  tsab. 

Num  7.   3  brought  their  offering,  .six  covered  wag. 
5.Tb  spread  out,  cover,  overlay,  nsy  tsaphah,  4. 

Prov  26.  23  (like)  apotsherd  covered  with  silver  dross 

COVERED,  to  be  — 

I. To  be  covered,  concealed,  HD3  kasah,  2. 

Jer.  51.  42  she  is  covered  with  the  multitude  of  the 
Eze.  24.    8  that  it  should  not  be  covered 

2.7b  be  covered,  concealed,  nD3  kasah,  4. 

Gen.   7. 19  and  all  the  high  hills.,  were  covered 

7.  20  and  the  mountains  were  covered 
Psa.  80. 10  The  hills  were  covered, with  the  shadow 
Eccl.  6.   4  and  his  name  shall  be  covered  with  dark. 
Eze.  41. 16  and  the  windows  (were)  covered 

3.7b  cover  self,  np|  kasah,  7. 

2  Ki.  iq.  2  he  sent  Eliakim.  .covered  with  sackcloth 
Prov  26.  26  (Whose)  hatred  is  covered  by  deceit,  his 
Isa.  37.  2  he  sent  Eliakim.  .covered  with  sackcloth 
Jon     3.   8  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with  sack. 

4.7*0  be  thick,  covered,  nys  kasah. 

Deut32.  15  thou  art  grown  thick,  thou  art  covered 

5. To  wrap  up  in,  array,  nay  atah. 

1  Sa.  28.  14  An  old  man.  .he  (is)  covered  with  a  mantle 
Psa.  71.  13  let  them  be  covered  (with)  reproach  and 

6.7*o  cover  fully,  KaraKaXvirTw  katakalupto. 
1  Co.  11.    6  woman  be  not  covered,  let  her  also  be 
11.    6  but  if  it  be  a  shame,  .let  her  be  covered 


COVERED,  to  have  one's  head  — 

7*0  have  on  tile  head,  Kara  KecpaXrjs  *X&- 

i  Co.  11.    4  Every  man  pra>ing..having(his)head  co. 
COVERED  over,  to  he  — 
7*o  be  or  become  covered,  f]ay  ataph. 

Psa.  65.  13  valleys  also  are  covered  over  with  corn 
COVERING  — 
1.-4  tent,  (round  bright  thi?ig,)  Snx  oliel. 

Exod26.  7  (hair)to  be  a  covering  upon  the  tabernacle 
2. A  coverings  'IDS  kasui. 

Num.  4.   6  put  thereon  the  covering  of  badger's  sk. 
4. 14  spread  upon  it  a  covering  of  badger's  sk. 
3.--1  covering,  mos  kesuth. 

Gen.  20.  16  heboid,  he  (is)  to  thee  a  covering  of  the 

Exod22.  27  that  (is)  his  covering  only,  it  (is)  his 

Job    24.    7  that  (they  have)  no  covering  in  the  cold 
26.    6  and  destruction  hath  no  covering 
31.  19  If  I  have  seen.,  any  poor  without  covering 

Isa.   50.   3  aud  I  make  sackcloth  their  covering 

4.^.  veil,  a'11?  lot. 

Isa.    25.    7  face  of  the  covering  cast  over  all  people 
5.-4  covering,  nrj^p  mikseh. 

Geu.   S.  13  Noahremoved  the  covering  of  the  ark,  and 
Exod26. 14  thou  shalt  make  a  covering  for  the  tent 
26.  14  and  a  covering  above  (of)  badgers'  skins 

35.  11  The  tabernacle,  his  tent,  and  his  covering 

36.  19  he  made  a  covering  for  the  tent  (of)  ram's 
36.  19  a  covering  (of)  badgers'  skin  above  (that) 
39.  34  the  covering  of  rams*  skins  dyed  red,  and 

39.  34  the  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  and  the 

40.  19  put  the  covering  of  the  tent  above  upon 
Num.  3.  25  the  covering  thereof,  and  the  hanging 

4.    8  cover  the  same  with  a  covering  of  badgers' 
4. 10  within  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  and 
4.  11  cover  it  with  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 
4.  12  cover  them  with  a  covering  of  badgers' 
4.  25  his  covering,  and  the  covering  of  the  bad. 
Q.A  covering,  curtain,  tido  masak. 

Exod35<  12  mercy  seat,  and  the  veil  of  the  covering 

39.  34  and  the  veil  of  the  covering 

40.  21  set  up  the  veil  of  the  covering,  and 
Num.  4.    5  they  shall  take  down  the  covering  veil 
2  Sa.  17.  19  the  woman  took  and  spread  a  covering 
Psa.  105.  39  He  spread  a  cloud  for  a  covering,  and 
Isa.  22.   8  he  discovered  the  covering  of  Judah,  and 

7.A  covering,  npaj?  massekah. 

Isa.  28.  20  the  covering  narrower  than  that  he  can 
30.    1  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  Spirit,  that 
8.-4  covering,  n^pp  mesukkah. 

Eze.  28.  13  every  precious  stone  (was)  thy  covering 
9. Riding  seat,  33~]D  merkab. 

Song  3. 10  the  covering  of  it  (of)  purple,  the  midst 
10.-4  secret  place,  ttid  sether. 

Job   22.  14  Thick  clouds  (are)  a  covering  to  him,  that 

11.  Coverlet,  bracelet,  Tpy  tsamid. 

Numig.  15  winch  hath  no  covering  bound  upon  it 

12.  Overlaying,  covering,  ^M  tsipjjui. 

Nunii6.  38,  39  broad  plates  (for)  a  covering  of  the 
Isa.   30.  22  Ye  shall  defile  also  the  covering  of  thy 

IS. Something  cast  around,  irepif$6\awv peribolaion. 

1  Co.  11. 15  for  (her)  hair  is  given  her  for  a  covering 

COVERING,  to  put  a  — 

7b  wrap  up  in,  array,  nay  atah. 

Lev.  13.  45  he  shall  put  a  covering  upon  his  upper  lip 

COVERT  — 

1.-4  covered  walk,  ^c\D,  ^p'p  musak,  mesak. 

2  Ki.16. 18  the  covert  for  the  sabbath  that  they  had 

'2.  A  secret  hiding  place,  "VVfcfomistor. 

Isa.     4.   6  and  for  a  covert  from  storm  and  from  rain 

3. Covert,  booth,  3°  sok. 

Jer.  25.  38  He  hath  forsaken  his  covert,  as  the  lion 

4.  Covert,  booth,  nap  sukkah. 

Job  38.  40  (and)  abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  wait? 

5. Secret  place,  irip  sether. 

1  Sa.  25.  20  she  came  down  by  the  covert  of  the  hill 
Job  40.  21  lieth  under  the  shady  trees.. in  the  covert 
Psa.  61.   4  I  will  trust  in  the  covert  of  thy  wings 
Isa.   16.   4  a  covert  to  them  from  the  face  of  the 
32.   2  from  the  wind,  and  a  covert  from  the 

COVET,  to  — 

1.7b  desire  for  oneself,  niN  avah,  7. 

Deut.  5.  21  neither  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour's 
Prov.21.  26  He  coveteth  greedily  all  the  day  long :  but 

2.7b  cut  off,  or  gain  (unlawfully),  i'ya  batsa. 

Hab.  2.    9  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness 
3. 7*o  desire,  Tpn  chamad. 

Exod2o.  17  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's 

20. 17  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wif  0 

Josh.  7.  21  I  coveted  them,  and  took  them  ;  and 

Mic.    2.   2  they  covet  fields,  and  take  (them)  by 

4.To  fix  the  mind  on,  iirt9vfu.c'u}  epithumeo. 

Acts  20.  33  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold 
Rom.  7.    7  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shalt  not  covet 
13.   9  Thou  shalt  not  covet;  and  if  (there  be)  any 


COVET 


210 


CREDITOR 


5.  To  be  zealous  for ,  (tj\6co   zdou. 

i  Co.  14.  39  covet  to  prophesy,  and  forbid  not  to  speak 

COVET  after,  to  — 

To  extend  the  arms  for  anything,  bpeyofiai  oregomai. 

1  Ti.  6.  10  which  while  some  coveted  after,  they  have 
COVET  earnestly,  to  — 
To  be  zealous  for,  £rf\6a>  zeloo. 

1  Co.  12.  31  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts :  and  yet 
COVETOUS  — 
1.  To  gain  dishonestly,  l?*?  batsa. 

Psa.  10.    3  the  covetous,  (whom)  the  LORD  abhorreth 
2. One  who  wishes  more,  irAeoveKrys  pleonektes. 

1  Co.  5.  10  with  the  covetous,  or  extortioners,  or 

5.  it  a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolator 
6. 10  Nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards 
Z.A  lover  of  silver,  <pt\<£pyvpos  philarguros. 
Lukei6.  14  the  Pharisees  also,  who  were  covetous 

2  Ti.    3.    2  lovers  of  their  own  selves,  covetous 

COVETOUS  man  — 

One  who  wishes  more,  irAeoveKrns  pleonektes. 
Eph.   5.    5  nor  unclean  person,  nor  covetous  man 

COVETOUS  practices  — 

The  wish  to  have  7tiore,  irAeove^ia  pleonexia. 
2  Pe.   2.  14  have  exercised  with  covetous  practices 

COVETOUSNESS  — 

1. Dishonest  gain,  V%^  betsa. 

ExodiS.  21  provide. '.men  of  truth,  hating  covetous. 
Psa.119.  36  Incline  my  heart,  .not  to  covetousness 
Prov28.  16  he  that  hateth  covetousness  shall  prolong 
Isa.  57. 17  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was 
Jer.     6.  13  every  one  (is)  given  to  covetousness 

8.  10  for  every  one.  .isgiveu  to  covetousness 
22. 17  eyes. .  (are)  not  but  for  thy  covetousness 
51. 13  (and)  the  measure  of  thy  covetousness 
Eze.  33.  31  their  heart  goeth  after  their  covetousness 
Hab.    2.   9  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness 

2. The  wish  to  have  more,  7rAeoi>e£ta  pleonexia. 
Mark  7.  22  Thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit 
Lukei2. 15  Take  heed, and  beware  of  covetousness:  for 
Rom.  r.  29  fornication,  wickedness,  covetousness 
2  Co.  9.    5  bounty,  and  not  as  (of)  covetousness 
Eph.   5.    3  all  uncleanness,  or  covetousness,  let  it 
Col.     3.    5  evil  concupiscence,  and  covetousness 

1  Th.  2.    5  neither . .  used  we . .  a  cloak  of  covetousness 

2  Pe.  2.    3  through  covetousuess . .  make  merchandise 

COVETOUSNESS,  without  — 

Not  a  lover  of  silver,  a<pt\dpyupos  aphilarguros. 
Heb.  13.    5  (Let  your)  conversation  (be)  without  cov 

COW  — 

l.-l  heifer  of  tlie  herd,  "ips  nSajj  eglath  baqar. 
Isa.     7.  21  a  man  shall  nourish' a  young  cow  and 

2.A  heifer,  young  cow,  ;ri3  pardh. 

Job    21.  10  their  cow  calveth,  and  casteth  not  her 
Isa.    11.    7  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed 

Z.A  bullock,  ox,  lis'  shor. 

Lev.  22. 28  (whether  it  be)  cow  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not 
Nuiu  18.  17  the  firstling  of  a  cow.  .thou  shalt  not 

Jo,      4.  Cattle  {for  the  plough),  a  herd,  ips  baqar. 

Eze.    4. 15  I  have  given  thee  cow's  dung  for  mau's 
COZ,  \np  nimble. 
A  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur,  B.C.  1430. 

1  Ch.  4.   8  And  C.  begat  Auub,  and  Zobebah,  and 
COZ-BI,  '313  deceitful. 
A  Midianitess  slain  with  Zimri  by  Phiuehas,  B.C.  1452. 

Klines.  15  Midianitish  woman  that  was  slain  (was)  C. 
25.  18  they,  .beguiled  you  in  the  matter  of.  .C. 
CRACKLING  — 
A  voice,  7>p  qol. 

Eccl.  7.    6  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot 
CRACKNELS  — 

Small  dry  cakes,  d^ijM  niqquddim,. 
Ju  1  Ki.14.    3  take  with  thee  ten  loaves,  aud  cracknels 

CRAET  — 
1  s       1.  Deceit,  n»"!0  mirmah. 

Dan.    8.  25  shall  cau3c  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand 
2.Guile,  deceit,  a  bail,  $6\qs  dolos. 

Marki+.    1  sought  how  they  might  take  him  by  craft 
3.  Work,  epyaffia  ergasia. 

Acts  19.  25  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  our 
A.Part,  portion,  /xepos  meros. 

Acts  19.  27  not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  danger  to 
iK        5. Art,  skill,  Te'xfTj  techne. 

Rev.  x  8.  22  no  craftsman,  of  whatsoever  craft  (he  be) 
CRAFT,  of  the  same  — 
One  oft/ie  same  art,   6>oTex»'0S  homotecltws. 

Acts  18.    3  because  he  was  of  the  same  craft,  he  ab. 
CRAFTINESS  — 
l.OrafiineBs,  cunnvrtflt  subtilty,  criy  orem. 

Job     5.  13  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness 
2  K       2.  riiscri'j)  id <>usness,  iravovpyia  2>anourgia. 

Lukc2o.  23  he  perceived  their  craftiness,  and  said 

x  Co.    3.  19  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness 

2  Co.  4.    2  not  walking  in  craftiness,  nor  handling 


CRAFTINESS,  cunning  — 
lrnscrujJuloics7iess,  iravovpyia  panourgia. 

Eph.  4.  14  the  sleight  of  men,  (aud)  cunning  crafti. 

CRAFTSMAN  — 

l.One  who  plows,  carves,  engraves,  cnn  charash. 
Deut27- 15  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  craftsmau 
2  Ki.  24.  14  he  carried  away,  .all  the  craftsmen  and 

24.  16  craftsmen  and  smiths  a  thousand,  all 
Hos.  13.    2  all  of  it  the  work  of  the  craftsmen 

2. Cutting,  carving,  u>"in  ckeresh. 

1  Ch.  4. 14  valley  of  Charashim;  for  they  were  craft. 
Neh.  11.  35  Lod,  and  Ono,  the  valley  of  craftsmen 

^.Cutting,  carving,  rexvirns  technites. 

Acts  19.  24  brought  no  small  gain  unto  the  craftsmen 

19.  38  and  the  craftsmen  which  are  with  him 
Rev.  18.  22  no  craftsman,  of  whatsoever  craft  (he  be) 

CRAFTY  — 

1. Crafty,  subtile,  Din^  arum. 

Job     5. 12  disappoiuteth  the  devices  of  the  crafty 
15.   5  thou  choosest  the  tongue  of  the  crafty 

2. Working  in  everyway,  iravovpyos panourgos. 

2  Co.  12.  16  nevertheless,  being  crafty,  I  caught  you 

CRAFTY  counsel,  to  take  — 
To  act  craftily,  cny  aram,  5. 

Psa.  83.    3  They  have  taken  crafty  counsel  against 

CRAG  — 

Tooth,  \v  shen. 

Job  39.  2S  upon  the  crag  of  the  rock,  and  the  strong 

CRANE  — 

A  swallow  {from  its  alertness),  D'p,  did  sis,  sus. 

Isa.  38. 14  Like  a  crane  (or)  a  swallow,  so  did  I  chat. 

Jer.    8.    7  the  crane  and  the  swallow  observe  the 

CRASHING  — 

Breach,  breaking,  *uip  sheber. 

Zeph.  1. 10  and  a  great  crashing  from  the  hills 

CRAVE,  to  — 

I. To  cause  to  bend,  or  urge  on,  *]?n  akaph. 

Prov  16.  26  for  his  mouth  craveth  it  of  him 
2.  To  ask,  cut€o>  aiteo. 

Markis.  43  Joseph  of  Arimathea. . and  craved  the 

CREATE,  to  — 

1.  To  prepare,  form,  fashion,  create,  N"i3  bara. 

Gen.    1.    1  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth 
1.  21  God  created  great  whales,  and  every 
1.  27  So  God  created  man  in  his  (own)  image 
1.  27  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him 

1.  27  male  and  female  created  he  them 

2.  3  rested  from  all  his  work  which  God  ere. 
5.    1  God  created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God 

5.  2  Male  and  female  created  he  them  ;  and 

6.  7  I  will  destroy  man  whom  I  have  created 
Deut.  4.  32  day  that  God  created  man  upon  the  earth 
Psa.  51.  10  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God ;  and 

89. 12  The  north  and  the  south  thou  hast  crea. 
Isa.     4.    5  the  Lord  will  create  upon  every  dwelling 

40.  26  and  behold  who  hath  created  these  (things) 

41.  20  and  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  hath  created 

42.  5  he  that  created  the  heavens,  and  stretc. 

43.  1  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  O 
43.    7  I  have  created  him  for  my  glory,  I  have 
45.    7  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness 
45.    7  I  make  peace,  and  create  evil :  I  the  L. 
45.   8  spring  up.  .1  the  Lord  have  created  it 
45. 12  I  have  made  the  earth,  and  created  man 
45.  18  saith  the  Lord  that  created  the  heavens 
45. 18  he  created  it  not  in  vain,  he  formed  it  to 
54. 36  I  have  created  the  smith  that  bloweth 
54.  16  and  I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy 
57.  19  I  create  the  fruit  of  thelips  ;  Peace, peace 
65.  17  I  create  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth 
65.  18  rejoice  for  ever  (in  that)  which  I  create 
65.  18  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing 

Jer.  31.  22  for  the  Lord  hath  created  a  new  thing  in 
Amos  4.  13  he  that  formeth  the  mountains,  and  ere. 
Mai.    2.  10  hath  not  one  God  created  us?  why 

2.  To  make,  produce,  kti£w  ktizo. 

Mark  1 3.  19  of  the  creation  which  God  created  unto 
1  Co.  11.    9  Neither  was  the  man  created  for  the 
Eph.    2.  10  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works 

3.  9  in  God,  who  created  all  things  by  Jesus 

4.  24  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  aud 
Col.     1.  16  by  him  were  all  things  created  that  are 

1.  16  all  things  were  created  by  him,  and  for 

3.  10  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him 
1  Ti.    4.    3  which  God  hath  created  to  be  received 
Rev.    4.  11  for  thou  hast  created  all  things,  and  for 

4.  11  thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were  created 
10.   6  who  created  heaven,  and  the  things  that 

CREATED,  to  be  — 

To  be  prepared,  formed,  created,  n"J3  bara,  2. 
Gen.    2.   4  and  of  the  earth  when  they  were  created 

5.  2  in  the  day  when  they  were  created 

Psa.  102.  18  people  which  shall  be  created  shall  praise 
104.  30  sendest  forth  thy  spirit,  they  are  created 
148.  5  he  commanded,  and  they  were  created 
Isa.  48.  7  created  now,  and  not  from  the  beginning 
Eze.  ax.  30  in  the  place  where  thou  wast  created,  in 
28.  13  in  the  day  that  thou  wast  created 
28. 15  from  the  day  that  thou  wast  created 


CREATION— 

Creation  of  the  World.— Dr  Hales,  in  his  work 
entitled,  "A  New  Analysis  of  Chronology  and  Geo- 
graphy, History  and  Prophecy,"  (vol.  i.  p.  210),  remarks : 
'■  In  every  system  of  historical  chronology,  sacred  and 
profane,  the  two  grand  ceras— of  the  Creation  of  the 
World,  and  of  the  Nativity  of  Christ — have  been  usually 
adopted  as  standards,  by  reference  to  which  all  subor- 
dinate epochs,  ajras,  and  periods  have  been  adjusted." 
He  gives  a  list  of  120  dates,  commencing  B.C.  6984,  and 
terminating  B.C.  3616,  to  which  this  event  has  been 
assigned  by  different  authorities,  and  he  admits  that 
it  might  be  swelled  to  300.  He  places  it  at  B.C.  5411. 
The  date  commonly  adopted  is  B.C.  4004 ;  being  that 
of  Usher,  Spanheim,  Calmet,  Blair,  &c,  and  the  one 
used  in  the  English  Bible.  The  following  are  some  of 
the  principal  variations :— Alfonso  X.,  according  to 
(Muller),  6984,  (Strauchius),  6484 ;  Indian  Chronologj 
(Gentil),  6204,  (Arab  Records),  6174  ;  Babylonian  Chrono- 
logy (Bailly),  6158  ;  Chinese  Chronology  (Bailly),  6157; 
Diogenes  Lfertius  (Playfair),  6138  ;  Egyptian  Chronology 
(Bailly),5o8i  ;  Septuagint(Abulfaragi),5586;  Septuagiut, 
Alexandrine  (Scaliger), 5508;  Persian  Chronology  (Bailly), 
5507;  Chronicle  of  Axum,  Abyssinian  (Bruce),  5500; 
Jackson,  5426;  Josephus  (Playfair),  5555,  (Jackson), 
5481,  (Hales),  5402,  (Univ.  Hist.),  4698;  Hales,  5411 ; 
Indian  computation  (Megasthenes),  5369  ;  Talmudists 
(Petrus  Alliacens),  5344 ;  Septuagint,  Vatican,  5270 ; 
JJede  (Strauchius),  5199  ;  Samaritan  computation  (Scali- 
ger),  4427  ;  Samaritan  text  (Univ.  Hist.),  4305  ;  Hebrew 
text,  4161  ;  Playfair  and  Walker,  4008;  Usher,  English 
Bible,  &c,  4004;  Kepler  (Playfair),  3993;  Petavius, 
3984;  Melancthon  (Playfair),  3964;  Luther,  3961; 
Light  foot,  3960 ;  Cornelius  a  Lapiue  (Univ.  Hist.),  3951 ; 
Scaliger,  Isaacson,  3950 ;  Strauchius,  3949 ;  Vulgar 
Jewish  computation  (Strauchius),  3760 ;  Rabbi  Lipman 
(Univ.  Hist.),  3616. 

^•1  making,  thing  made,  kt'ktis  klisis. 

Mark  10.    6  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  God 
13.  19  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  crea. 
Rom.  1.  20  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation 

8.  22  weknow  thatthe  wholecreationgroaneth 
2  Pe.  3.  4  as(they  were)from  the  beginning  of  the  cr. 
Rev.    3.  14  true  Witness,  the  beginning  of  the  crea. 

CREATOR  — 

1.  To  prepare,  form,  create,  N~J3  bara. 

Eccl.  12.    1  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days 

Isa.   40.  28  the  LORD,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the 

43-  15  your  Holy  One,  the  Creator  of  Israel 

2.  To  make,  produce,  Krlfa  ktizo. 

Rom.  1.  25  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator 
3. Maker,  ktiVttjs  ktistes. 

1  Pe.   4.  19  iu  well  doing,  as  unto  a  faithful  Creator 

CREATURE  — 

1.  Breathing  creature,  e:S3  nephesh. 

Gen.     1.  21  and  every  living  creature  that  moveth 

1.  24  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  crea. 

2.  19  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  cr. 

9.  10,  12  every  living  creature  that  (is)  with 
9.  15  between  me  and  you  and  every  living  c. 
9.  16  between  God  and  every  living  creature 

Lev.    11.  46  of  every  living  creature  that  moveth  in 
n.46  of  every  creature  that  creepeth  upou  the 

2. A  makirig,  thing  made,  Kriats  ktisis. 

Marki6.  15  [preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature] 
Rom.  1.  25  worshipped  and  served  the  creature 

8.  19  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature 
8.  20  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity 
8.  21  the  creature  itself  also  shall  be  delivered 
8.  39  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  cr. 

2  Co.  5.  17  any  man  (be)  in  Christ,  (he  is)  a  new  ere. 
Gal.  6.  15  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature 
Col.      1.  15  Who  is.  .the  first  born  of  every  creature 

1.  23  (and)  which  was  preached  to  every  crea. 
Heb.    4. 13  Neither  is  there  any  creature  that  is  not 

3. Thing  made,  uric-pa  ktisma. 

1  Ti.  4.  4  every  creature  of  God  (is)  good,  and 
Jas.  1.  18  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  his  creatures 
Rev.    5.  13  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and 

8.    9  And  the  third  part  of  the  creatures  which 

CREATURE,  living  or  moving  — 

1. Living  {thing),  *n  chai. 

Eze.     1.    5  (came)thelikeuessof  fourliviug  creatures 
1.  13  As  for  the  likeness  of  the  living  creatures 
1.  13  up  and  down  among  the  living  creatures 
1.  14  the  living  creatures  ran  and  returned  as 
1.  15  as  I  beheld  the  living  creatures,  behold 
1.  15  upon  the  earth  by  the  living  creatures 
1.  19  when  the  living  creatures  went,  the 
1.  19  the  living  creatures  were  lifted  up  from 
1.  20,  21  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  (was) 
1.  22  upon  the  heads  of  the  living  creature 

3.  13  noise  of  the  wings  of  the  living  creatures 
10.  15,  20  This  (is)  the  living  creature  that  I 
10.  17  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  (was)  in 

2.-4  swarming  creature,  Y~l¥  sherds. 

Gen.    1.  20  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and 

CREDITOR  — 

1,2*0  bite,  lend  on  usury,  n^*i  na_shah. 

2  Ki.  4.  1  the  creditor  is  come  to  take  unto  him  my 
Isa.   50.    1  which  of  my  creditors  (is  it)  to  whom  I 

2. One  who  lends,  a  creditor,  Saveio-n'/s  daneistes. 
Luke  7.  41  There  was  a  certain  creditor  which  had 


CREEK 


211 


CROWN 


^Master  of  the  lending  of  the  hand,  v  nwB  !?$£. 
Deut  15.    2  Every  creditor  that  lendeth  (ought)  unto 

CREEK  — 

Gulf,  bay,  k6Kttos  kolpos. 

Acts  27.  39  they  discovered  a  certain  creek  with  a 

CREEP  — 

l.To  creep,  crawl,  fetafj;  ramas. 

Gen.    1.  26  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the 

I.  30  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 

7.  8  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 
7. 14  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the 

8. 17  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the 
8. 19  (and)  whatsoever  creepeth  upon  the  earth 
Lev.  11. 44  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the 

20.  25  any  manner  of  living  thing  that  creepeth 
Deut.  4.  18  The  likeness  of  any  thing  that  creepeth 
Psa.104.  20  the  beasts  of  the  forest  do  creep  (forth) 
Eze.  38.  20  all  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the 
2.A  swarming  creature,  yi$  sherets. 

Lev.  11.  20  Allfowls  that  creep,  going  upon  (all)  four 
11.  31  These  (are)  unclean . .  among  all  that  creep 

CREEP,  to  — 

To  swarm,  p^  shardts. 

Gen.   7.  21  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon 
Lev.  ti.  29  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the 

11.  41  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon 
11.  42  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the  earth 
11.  43  with  any  creeping  thing  that  creepeth 
11.  46  of  every  creature  that  creepeth  upon  the 

CREEP  in  unawares,  to  — 

To  come  in  sideways,  Trap€to-dvuw  pareisduno. 

Jude       4  there  are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares 
CREEP  into,  to  — 
To  go  in  to,  ivftvv.to  els  enduno  eis. 

2  Ti.    3.    6  this  sort  are  they  which  creep  into  houses 
CREEPETH,  that  — 
A  creeping  creature,  &&1  remes. 

Gen.    1.  25  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 

8.  17  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  uuon 

CREEPING  thing  — 

l.A  creeping  creature,  Iffpi  remes. 

Gen.  j.  24  cattle,  and  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of 
1.  26  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon 
6.    7  creeping  thing,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air 

6.  20  every  creeping  thing  of  the  earth  after 

7.  14  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon 

7.  23  the  creeping  things,  and  the  fowl  of  the 

8.  19  every  creeping  thing,  and  every  fowl 

1  Ki.    4.  33  of  creeping  things,  and  of  fishes 
Psa.104.  25  wherein  (are)  things  creeping  innumer. 

148.  10  Beasts,  and  all  cattle;  creeping  things,  and 
Eze.    8.  10  every  form  of  creeping  things,  and  abom. 

38.  20  all  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the 
Hos.    2. 18  (with)  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground 
Hab.  1.  14  the  creeping  things,  (that  have)  no  ruler 
2. A  sivarming  creature,  fia*  sherets. 

Gen.    7.  21  of  beast,  and  of  every  creeping  thing  that 
Lev.    5.    2  the  carcase  of  unclean  creeping  things 
11.  21  every  flying  creeping  thing  that  goeth 
11.  23  all  (other)  flying  creeping  things,  which 
11.  29  the  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the 
11.  41  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon 
11.  42  all  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the 
11.  43  with  any  creeping  thing  that  creepeth 
11.  44  with  any  manner  of  creeping  thing  that 
22.    5  Or  whosoever  toucheth  any  creeping  thi. 
Deut  14. 19  every  creeping  thing  that  flieth  (is)  unci. 

3.^4  creeping  thing,  kpTrer6v  herpeton. 

Acts  10.  12  and  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the  air 

II.  6  and  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the  air 
Rom.  1.  23  four  footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things 

CRES'-CENS,  KpTjo-Kns. 

A  disciple  with  Paul  at  Rome. 

2  Ti.    4. 10  C.  to  Galatia,  Titus  unto  Dalmatia 

CRETE,  Kp-r)Tw. 

A  large  island  midway  between  Syria  and  Malta,  now 

called  Candia. 

Acts  27.    7  we  sailed  under  C,  over  against  Salmoue 
27.  12  (which  is)  an  haven  of  C,  and  lieth 
27.  13  loosing  (thence),  they  sailed  close  by  C. 
27.  21  ye  should .  .not  have  loosed  from  C. 
Titus  1.    5  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  C. 

CRETES,  CRETIANS,  Kpnres. 

The  inhabitants  of  Crete. 

Acts    2.  11  C.  and  Arabians,  we  do  hear  them  speak 
Titus  1. 12  The  C.  (are)  always  liars,  evil  beasts,  slow 

CRIB  — 

Crib,  feeding  -place,  Din'N  ebus. 

Job    39.    9  willing  to  serve  thee,  or  abide  by  thy  crib? 
Prov.14.    4  Where  no  oxen  (are),  the  crib  (is)  clean 
Isa.     1.   3  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib 

CRIED,  to  be  — 

To  be  called,  tr$  qara,  2. 

Jer.     4. 20  Destruction  upon  destruction  is  cried 
Eze.  10. 13  it  was  cried  unto  them  in  my  hearing 

CRIME  — 

Cause,  case,  atria  aitia. 

Acts  25. 27  to  signify  the  crimes  (laid)  against  him 


CRIME  laid  against  — 

Indictment,  charge,  tyKKvfia  egklema. 

Acts  25.  16  concerning  the  crime  laid  against  him 
CRIMES  — 
Judgment,  us^o  mishp>at. 

Eze.    7.  23  the  land  is  full  of  bloody  crimes,  and  the 
CRIMSON  — 
l.Carmine  colour,  TO"]?  karmil. 

2  Ch.  2.    7  in  purple,  and  crimson,  and  blue,  and 

2.  14  in  blue,  and  in  fine  linen,  and  in  crimson 
3. 14  the  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and  crimson 
2.Scarlet  colour,  »ap  shani. 

Jer.     4.  30  Though  thou  clothest  thyself  with  crim. 
S.Crimson  colour,  y?in  tola. 

Isa.     1.  18  though*  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they 
CRIPPLE,  being  a  — 
Lame,  cripple,  halt,  x<*>^os  chdlos. 

Acts  14.    8  being  a  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb 
CRISPING  pin  — 
Pockets,  bags,  D'a,-)n  charitim. 

Isa.   3.  22  and  the  winiples,  and  the  crisping  pins 

CRIS-PUS,  Kpio-iros. 

A  convert  at  Corinth,  baptised  by  Paul. 

Acts  18.    8  C. . .  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  believed 
1  Co.   1.  14  I  baptized  none  of  you  but  C.  and  Gains 

CROOK  BACKT  — 
Hump)  backed,  J33  gibben. 

Lev.  21.  20  Or  crook-backt,  or  a  dwarf,  or  that  hath  a 
CROOKED  — 

1.  Fleeing,  shooting,  fpll  bariach. 

Job  26. 13  his  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked  serpent 

2.  To  be  perverse  or  perverted,  mj>  avath,  4. 

Eccl.  1. 15  (That  which  is)  crooked  cannot  be  made 
3. Deceitfv.l,  inscrutable,  3"pjJ  aqob. 

Isa.  40.   4  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
4.  Twisted,  crooked,  prtVpw.  aqallathon. 

Isa.   27.    1  even  leviathan  that  crooked  serpent 
5.Froward,  perverse,  lyjsy  iqqesh. 

Prov.  2. 15  Whose  ways  (are)  crooked,  and  (they)  fro. 

6.  Wrestling,  h'rhnB  pethaltol. 

Deut 32.    5  (theyare)  a  perverse  and  crooked  gener. 

7.  Crooked,  perverse,  atto\i6s  skolios. 

Luke  3.    5  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
Phil.    2. 15  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation 

CROOKED,  to  make  — 

l.To  overturn,  pervert,  nijj  avah,  3, 

Lam.  3.    9  he  hath  made  my  paths  crooked 

2.  To  pervert,  m_"  avath,  3. 

Eccl.  7.  13  make  (that)  straight  which  he.  .made  cr. 

3.  To  make  f reward,  perverse,  &$%  aqash,  3. 

Isa.  59.   8  they  have  made  them  crooked  paths 
CROOKED  place,  thing,  way  — 
l.To  be  high,  elevated,  Tin  hadar. 

Isa.  45.   2  I  will,  .make 'the  crooked  places  straight 

2.Froward,  perverse,  DTpj/D  maaqashshim. 
Isa.   42. 16  I  will  make,  .crooked  things  straight 

3.  Twisted,  crooked,  Spppy.  aqalqal. 

Psa.125.    5  such  as  turn  "aside  unto  their  crooked  w. 
CROP  — 
Crop  (of  a  bird),  nxno  murah. 

Lev.    1.  16  he  shallpluck  away  his  crop  with  his 

CROP  off,  to  — 

To  crop  off,  pluck,  ^a^  qataph. 

Eze.  17.   4  He  cropped  off  the  top  of  his  young  twigs 
17.  22  I  will  crop  off  from  the  top  of  his  young 

CROSS  — 

Stake,  aravpSs  stauros. 

Mattio.  38  And  he  that  taketh  not  his  cross,  and 

16.  24  let  him .  .take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me 
27.  32  him  they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross 
27.  40  thou  be  the  Son.  .come  down  from  the  c. 
27.  42  let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross 
Mark  8.  34  let  him . .  [take  up  his  cross,  and]  follow 
10.  21  and  come,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow 
15.  21  they  compel  one  Simon,  .to  bear  his  cross 
15.  30  Save  thyself,  and  come  down  from  the  c. 
15.  32  Let  Christ,  .descend  now  from  the  cross 
Luke  9.  23  [and  take  up  his  cross  daily,  and  follow] 
14.  27  whosoever  doth  not  bear  his  cross,  and 
23.  26  on  him  they  laid  the  cross,  that  he  might 
John  19.  17  he  bearing  his  cross  went  forth  into  a 
19.  19  wrote  a  title,  and  put  (it)  on  the  cross 
19.  25  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  his 
19.  31  bodies  should  not  remain  upon  the  cross 
1  Co.    1.  17  lest  the  cross  of  Christ  should  be  made 
1. 18  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that 
5. 11  then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross  ceased 
6.  12  suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  Christ 
6.  14  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
2. 16  both  unto  God  in  one  body  by  the  cross 

2.  8  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross 

3.  18  (they  are)  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Ch. 
1.  20  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cr. 
2. 14  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  cross 


Gal. 


Eph. 
Phil. 


Col. 
Heb. 


2  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame 


CROSSWAY  — 

Crosstvay,  pns  pereq. 

Obad.      14  shouldest  thou  have  stood  in  the  cross . 

CROTJCH,  to  — 

l.To  be  cast  down,  bruise  self,  nyy  dakah. 

Psa.  10. 10  He  croucheth,  (and)  humbleth  himself 
2.To  how  self  down,  nn$  shachah,  7. 

1  Sa.   2.  36  crouch  to  him  for  a  piece  of  silver  and 

CROW,  to  — 

To  give  forth  the  voice,  sound,  crow,  (pwviia phoned. 
Matt  26.  34  before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me 

20.  74  And  immediately  the  cock  crew 

26.  75  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me 
Marki4.  30  before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt 

14.  68  went  out  into  the  porch;  [and  the  cock  c] 

14.  72  the  second  time  the  cock  crew.    And  Pe. 

14.  72  Before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt 
Luke22.  34  the  cock  shall  not  crow  this  day,  before 

22.  60  while  he  yet  spake,  the  cock  crew 

22.  61  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me 
John  13.  3S  The  cock  shall  not  crow,  till  thou  hast 

18.  27  and  immediately  the  cock  crew 

CROWN  — 

l.Crown,  border,  ring,  edge,  ledge,  it  zer. 

Exod25.  11  make  upon  it  a  crown  of  gold  round 
25.  24  make  thereto  a  crown  of  gold  round 
25.  25  thou  shalt  make  a  golden  crown  to  the 
30.    3  make  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round 

30.  4  shalt  thou  make  to  it  under  the  crown 
37.   2  made  a  crown  of  gold  to  it  round  about 
37.  11  made  thereunto  a  crown  of  gold  round 
37.  12  he.  .made  a  crown  of  gold  for  the  border 
37.  26  made  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round 

37.  27  two  rings  of  gold  for  it  under  the  crown 

2.Crownt  diadem,  in|  kether. 

Esth.  1.  11  To  bring' Vashti .  .with  the  crown  royal 
2. 17  that  he  set  the  royal  crown  upon  her 
6.   8  the  crown  royal  which  is  set  upon  his 

Z.Chaplet,  ~\}inezer. 

Exodsg.   6  and  put  the  holy  crown  upon  the  mitre 

39.  30  the  plate  of  the  holy  crown  (of)  pure 
Lev.    8.    9  he  put  the  golden  plate,  the  holy  crown 
21. 12  the  crown  of  the  anointing  oil  of  his  God 

2  Sa.  1. 10  I  took  the  crown  that  (was)  upon  his  head 
2  Ki.11. 12  put  the  crown  upon  him,  and  (gave  him) 
2  Ch.23.  11  put  upon  him  the  crown,  and  (gave  him) 
Psa.  89.  39  thou  hast  profaned  his  crown  (by  casting) 

132.  18  but  upon  himself  shall  his  crown  flourish 
Prov.27.  24  doth  the  crown  (endure)  to  every  genera.? 
Zech.  9.  16  (they  shall  be  as)  the  stones  of  a  crown 

4.  Crown,  n"$y.  atarah. 

2  Sa.  12.  30  took  their  king's  crown  from  off  his  head 
1  Ch.20.  2  took  the  crown  of  their  king  from  off  his 
Esth.  8.  15  Mordecai  went  out.,  with  a  great  crown  of 
Job   19.    9  He  hath.. taken  the  crown  (feom) my 

31.  36  Surely  I  would,  .bind  it  (as)  a  crown  to 
Psa.  21.   3  settest  a  crown  of  pure  gold  on  his  head 
Prov.  4.   9  a  crown  of  glory  shall  she  deliver  to  thee 

12.  4  A  virtuous  woman  (is)  a  crown  to  her 
14. 24  The  crown  of  the  wise  (is)  their  riches 

16.  31  The  hoary  head  (is)  a  crown  of  glory,  (if) 

17.  6  Children's  children  (are)  the  crown  of  old 
Song  3. 11  behold  king  Solomon  with  the  crown 
Isa.  28.    1  Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride,  to  the  drunk. 

28.    3  The  crown  of  pride,  the  drunkards  of  E. 
28.    5  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  be  for  a  crown 
62.    3  Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in 
Jer.   13.  18  shall  come  down,  (even)  the  crown  of 
Lara.  5.  16  The  crown  is  fallen  (from)  our  head :  woe 
Eze.  16.  12  I  put.  .abeautiful  crown  upon  thine  head 

21.  26  Remove  the  diadem,  and  take  off  the  cro. 

23.  42  and  beautiful  crowns  upon  their  heads 
Zech.  6.  11  take  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns 

6. 14  the  crowns  shall  be  to  Helem,  and  to  Toh. 

h.Crown  or.  top  of  the  head,  l'p"}j2  qodqod. 

Job     2.    7  from  the  sole  of  his  foot  unto  his  crown 

6. Diadem,  ^idorj/xa  diadema. 

Rev.  12.   3  ten  horns,  and  seven  crowns  upon  his 

13.  1  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns,  and  upon 
19. 12  and  on  his  head  (were)  many  crowns 

l.Crown,  arityavos  Stephanos. 

Matt  27.  29  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns 
Markis.  17  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it 
John  19.    2  the  soldiers  platted  a  crown  of  thorns 

39.  5  Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing  the,  cro. 
1  Co.  9.  25  they  (do  it)  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown 
Phil.  4.    1  beloved  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown 

1  Th.  2.  19  what  (is)  our  hope,  .or  crown  of  rejoicing? 

2  Ti.    4.    8  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness 
Jas.     1.  12  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which 
1  Pe.  5.    4  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that 
Rev.   2.  10  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life 

3.  it  hold.  .fast. .that  no  man  take  thy  crown 

4.  4  they  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold 
4. 10  and  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne 
6.   2  a  crown  was  given  unto  him  :  and  he 

9.   7  on  their  heads  (were)  as  it  were  crowns 
12.    1  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve 
14. 14  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and 

CROWN,  to  — 

l.To  compass,  crown,  "itt#  aktr,  3. 

Psa.    8.    5  hast  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honour 
65. 11  Thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness 


CROWN 


212 


CRY 


rsa.103.    4  who  crowneth  thee  with  loving  kindness 
Song  3.  11  his  mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of 
2.  To  crown,  crTtfyavSw  stephanoo. 

2  Ti.    2.    5  (yet)  is  he  not  crowned,  except  he  strive 

Heb.   2.    7  thou  crownedst  him  with  glory  and  hon. 

2.   9  we  see  Jesus . .  crowned  with  glory  and  hon. 

CROWN  of  the  head  — 

Crown  or  top  of  the  head,  npip  qodqod. 

Gen.  49.  26  on  the  crown  of  the  head  of  him  that 
Deut33.  20  teareth  the  arm  with  the  crown  of  the  he. 
2  Sa  14.  25  his  foot  even  to  the  crown  of  his  head 
Isa.     3.  17  smite  with  a  scab  the  crown  of  the  head 
Jer      2  16  have  broken  the  crown  of  thy  head 

43.  45  the  crown  of  the  head  of  the  tumultuous 

CROWNED  — 

Crowned  ones,  mpp  minnezarim. 

Nah.    3.  17  Thy  crowned  (are)  as  the  locusts,  and 

CROWNED,  to  be  - 

To  compass  about,  crown,  TO?  kathar,  5. 

Provi4. 18  the  prudent  are  crowned  with  knowledge 

CROWNING  — 

To  compass,  croion,  naj;  atar,  5. 

Isa.  23.    8  the  crowning  (city),  whose  merchants 


1  (are) 


CRUCIFY,  to  — 

l.Tof-xto,  crucify,  Trpoo-n-iryi/v/it  prospegnumi. 

Acts    2.  23  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain 
2.  To  crucify,  <rravp6w  stauroo. 

Matt  20.  19  mock,  and  to  scourge,  and  to  crucify  (him) 
23.  34  (some)  of  them  ye  shall  kill  and  crucify 

26.  2  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified 

27.  22  all  say  unto  him,  Let  him  be  crucified 
27.  23  But  they  cried  out..  Let  him  be  crucified 
27.  26  he  delivered  (him)  to  be  crucified 

27.  31  and  led  him  away  to  crucify  (him) 

27.  35  they  crucified  him,  and  parted  his  gar. 

27.  38  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified 

28.  5  that  ye  seek  Jesus,  which  was  crucified 
Markis.  13  And  they  cried  out  again,  Crucify  him 

15.  14  cried  out  the  more  exceedingly,  Crucify 
15.  15  and  delivered  Jesus,  .to  be  crucified 
15.  20  and  led  him  out  to  crucify  him 
15.  24  when  they  had  crucified  him,  they  parted 
15.  25  the  third  hour,  and  they  crucified  him 

15.  27  And  with  him  they  crucify  two  thieves 

16.  6  Ye  seek  Jesus,  .which  was  crucified 
Luke23.  21  they  cried,  saying,  Crucify  (him]),  crucify 

23.  23  requiring  that  he  might  be  crucified 

23.  33  called  Calvary,  there  they  crucified  him 

24.  7  be  crucified,  and  the  third  day  rise  again 
24.  20  condemned  to  death,  and  have  crucified 

John  19.    6  cried  out,  saying,  Crucify  (him),  crucify 
19.   6  Take  ye  him,  and  crucify  (him) :  for  I 
19.  10  knowest  thou.  .1  have  power  to  crucify 
19. 15  Away  with  (him),  away  with  (him),  crucify 
19.  15  Pilate  saitlL  .shall  I  crucify  your  King? 
19.  16  Then  delivered  he  him.  .to  be  crucified 
19.  iS  they  crucified  him,  and  two  other  with 
19.  20  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified  was 
19.  23  the  soldiers,  when  they  had  crucified  Jesus 
ig.  41  in  the  place  where  he  was  crucified  there 

Acta    2.  36  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified 

4.  10  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  whom  ye  cruci. 

1  Co.  1.  13  Is  Christ  divided?  was  Paul  crucified  for 

1.  23  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  unto  the  Jews 
a.    2  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified 

2.  8  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord 

2  Co.  13.    4  he  was  crucified  through  weakness,  yet 
Gal.     3.    1  Jesus  Christ  hath  been,  .crucified  among 

5.  24  they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the 

6.  14  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me 
Rev.  11.   8  Egypt,  where  also  our  Lord  was  crucified 

CRUCIFY  afresh,  to  — 

To  crucify  anew,  avaaravpiw  anastawoo. 

Heb.   6.    6  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afr. 

CRUCIFY  with,  to  — 

To  cmcify  together,  cvrrravpuu}  su  stauroo. 

Matt 27  44  The  thieves  also,  whirhVere  crucified  with 
Marki5.  32  they  that  were  crucified  with  him  reviled 
John  19.  32  the  other  which  was  crucified  with  him 
Rom.  6.    6  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  (him) 
Gal.     2.  20  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless 

CRUEL  — 

I. Fierce,  "icx  akzar. 

Deut  32.  33  Their  wine  (is),  .the  cruel  venom  of  asps 
Job  30.  21  Thou  art  become  cruel  to  me;  with  thy 
Lam.  4.    3  the  daughter  of  my  people  (is  become)  cr. 

2.Fierce,  njpK  akzari. 

Prov  5.  *g  Lest  thou  give.. thy  years  unto  the  cruel 
11.  17  (he  that  is)  cruel  fcroubleth  his  own  flesh 
12. 10  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  (are)  cruel 

17.  11  a  cruel  messenger  shall  be  sent  against 
Isa.  13.  9  cruel  both  with  wrath  and  fierce  anger 
Jer.     6. 23  they  (are)  cruel,  and  have  no  mercy 

50.  42  they  (are)  cruel,  aud  will  not  show  mercy 
^.Fierceness,  mn^x  akzeriyyuth. 

Prov  27.    4  Wrath  (is)  cruei,  and  anger  (is)  outrageous 
4.  Violence,  DCn  chamas. 

Psa.  25.  19  and  they  hate  me  with  cruel  hatred 
5. Sharp,  hard,  n^p  qasheh. 

Exod.  6.    9  anguish  of  spirit,  and  for  cruel  bondage 

Isa.    19.    4  give  over  into  the  hand  of  a  cruel  lord 


CRUEL,  to  be  — 

To  be  sharp,  hard,  n^p  qasjuth. 

Gen.  49.   7  Cursed  (be),  .their  wrath,  for  it  was  cruel 

CRUEL  man  — 
]'mh:nt,  fen  choinets. 

Psa.  71.    4  the  baud  of  the  unrighteous  and  cruel  m. 
CRUEL  one  — 
Fierce,  HpS  akzari. 

Jer.  30.  14  with  the  chastisement  of  a  cruel  one 
CRUELLY  — 
Oppression,  P'^V  osheq. 

Eze.  18.  18  because  he  cruelly  oppressed,  spoiled  his 

CRUELTY  — 

1.  Violence,  D£n  cluimas. 

Gen.  49.  5  instruments  of  cruelty  (are  in)  their  habi. 
Judg.  9.  24  the  cruelty  (done)  to  the  three  score  and 
Psa.  27.  12  and  such  as  breathe  out  cruelty 

74.  20  are  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty 

2.  Breach,  burglary,  Tjns  perek. 

Eze.  34.    4  and  with  cruelty  have  ye  ruled  them 

CRUMB  — 

A  little  bit  or  crumb,  xpix^ou  2^sichio?i. 

Matt  15.  27  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  master's 
Mark  7.  28  yet  the  dogs . .  eat  of  the  children's  crumbs 
Lukei6.  21  desiring  to  be  fed  with  [the  crumbs]  which 

CRUSE  — 

1.  Bottle,  guglet,  pisps  baqbuq. 

1  Ki.  14.    3  take  with  thee . .  a  cruse  of  honey,  and  go 

2.  Dish,  pan,  cruse,  rrn"S'  tselochith. 

2  Ki.  2.  20  Bring  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt  there. 

3.  Dish,  cruse,  flask,  nrtD^  tsappachath. 

1  Sa.  26.  11  take  thou  now.  .the  cruse  of  water,  and 
26.  12  David  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of 

26.  16  cruse  of  water  that  (was)  at  his  bolster 
1  Ki.  17.  12  and  a  little  oil  in  a  cruse :  and,  behold 

17.  14  neither  shall  the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  until 
17. 16  neither  did  the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  accord. 

19.  6  and  a  cruse  of  water  at  his  head  :  and  he 

CRUSH,  to  — 

l.To  bruise,  »on  daka,  3. 

Lam.  3.  34  crush  under  his  feet  all  the  prisoners  of 
2.To  trouble,  crush,  destroy,  D.pn  hamam. 

Jer.   51.  34  he  hath  crushed  me,  he  hath  made  me 
%.  To  press,  ~m  zur. 

Job  39.  15  forgetteth  that  the  foot  may  crush  them 

4.  To  opi^ress,  press,  crush,  yrh  lachats. 

Num.  22.  25  and  crushed  Balaam's  foot  against  the 

5.  To  break,  oppress,  bruise,  ps"i  ratsats. 

Amos  4.    1  oppress  the  poor,  which  crush  the  needy 
Q.To  break  in  pieces,  destroy,  -!3y>  shabar. 

Lam.  1.  15  called  an  assembly,  .to  crush  my  young 
CRUSHED  — 
1.7*0  beat  down  or  out,  nns  kathath. 

Lev.  22.  24  that  which  is  bruised,  or  crushed,  or 
2.7*0  break,  oppress,  bruise,  |'s*i  ratsats. 

Deut  28.  ^  thou  shalt be  only  oppressed  and  crushed 
CRUSHED,  to  be  — 
l.To  bruise,  N31  daka,  3. 

Job    4. 19  them . .  (which)  are  crushed  before  the  moth 
2.7*0  bruise  self,  ny\  daka,  7. 

Job     5.    4  they  are  crushed  in  the  gate,  neither  (is 
CRUSHED,  that  -which  is  — 

What  is  pressed,  rrjH  zureh. 

Isa.   59.    5  that  which  is  crushed  brcaketh  out  into 

CRY  — 

1.7*0  cry  out,  call,  pj/l  zaaq. 

Isa.  "30.  19  very  gracious,  .at  the  voice  of  thy  cry 

'I.f'n/.  crying  out,  njjyi  zeaqah. 

Gen.  18.  20  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great 
Nell.    5.   6  I  was  very  angry  when  I  heard  their  cry 

9.    9  and  heardest  their  cry  by  the  Red  sea 
Esth.  4.    1  and  cried  with  a  loud  and  a  bitter  cry 

9.  31  the  matters  of  the  fastings  and  their  cry 
Job    16.  18  and  let  my  cry  have  no  place 
Prov  21.  13  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the 
Eccl.  9.  17  more  than  the  cry  of  him  that  ruleth 
Isa.    15.    5  they  shall  raise  up  a  cry  of  destruction 
15.    8  the  cry  is  gone  round  about  the  borders 
Jer.    18.  22  Let  a  cry  be  heard  from  their  houses 

20.  16  let  him  hear  the  cry  hi  the  morning,  and 
48.  4  little  ones  have  caused  a  cry  to  be  heard 
48.  34  Frrom  the  cry  of  Heshbon  (even)  unto  E. 

50.  46  and  the  cry  is  heard  among  the  nations 

51.  54  A  sound  of  a  cry  (cometh)  from  Babylon 
Eze.  27.  28  shall  shake  at  the  sound  of  the  cry  of 

Z.Cry,  crying,  nms  tsevachah. 

Jer.   14.    2  and  the  cry  of  Jerusalem  is  gone  up 
46.  12  thy  cry  hath  filled  the  land:  for  the 

4l  Cry,  crying  out,  npj;y  tseaqah. 

Gen.  18.  21  according  to  the  cry  of  it,  which  is  come 
19.  13  the  cry  of  them  is  waxen  great  before  the 

27.  34  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry 
Exod. '3.    7  have  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their 

3.   9  the  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  come 
11.    6  there  shall  be  a  great  cry  throughout  all 


Exod  1 2.  30  there  was  a  great  cry  in  Egypt;  for  (there 

22.  23  I  will  surely  hear  their  cry 
1  Sa.  9.  16  because  their  cry  is  come  unto  me 
Neh.   5.    1  there  was  a  great  cry  of  the  people,  and 
Job  27.    9  Will  God  hear  his  cry  when  trouble  com. 
34.  28  they  cause  the  cry  of  the  poor  to  come 
34.  28  and  he  heareth  the  cry  of  the  afflicted 
Psa.     9.  12  he  forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  humble 
Isa.     5.   7  for  righteousness,  but  behold  a  cry 
Jer.    25.  36  A  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  shepherds,  and 

48.  5  the  enemies  have  heard  a  cry  of  destruc. 

49.  21  at  the  cry,  the  noise  thereof  was  heard 
Zeph.  1.  10  the  noise  of  a  cry  from  the  fish  gate 

5.  Voice,  Sip  qol. 

Numi6. 34  And  all  Israel,  .fled  at  the  cry  of  them 
6. Loud  cry,  jiroclamation,  Hfi  rinnah. 

1  Ki.  8.  28  to  hearken  unto  the  cry  and  to  the  prayer 

2  Ch.  6.  19  to  hearken  unto  the  cry  and  the  prayer 
Psa.  17.    1  O  Lord,  attend  unto  my  cry,  give  ear 

61.  1  Hear  my  cry,  0  God  ;  attend  unto  my  pra. 
88.   2  incline  thine  ear  unto  my  cry 

106.  44  their  affliction,  when  he  heard  their  cry 
119.  169  Let  my  cry  come  near  before  thee,  O  L. 
142.    6  Attend  unto  my  cry;  for  I  am  brought 

Isa.    43.  14  the  Chaldeans,  whose  cry  (is)  in  the  ships 
Jer.     7.  16  neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them 

11.  14  neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them 

14. 12  When  they  fast,  I  will  not  hear  their  cry 

7.  Crying  aloud,  y\j?  sheva. 

Psa.     5.    2  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry,  my  K. 

S.Loud  cry,  crying,  n^'ity  shavah. 

Exod.  2.  23  their  cry  came  up  unto  God  by  reason  of 

1  Sa.   5.  12  the  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  heaven 

2  Sa.  22.    7  and  my  cry  (did  enter)  into  his  ears 
Psa.  18.    6  my  cry  came  before  him,  (even)  into  his 

34.  15  aud  his  ears  (are  open)  unto  their  cry 

39.  12  Hear.  .0  Lord,  and  give  ear  unto  my  cry 

40.  1  and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  c. 
102.  1  Hear.  .0  Lorp,  and  let  my  cry  come  unto 
145.  19  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  will  save 

Jer.     8.  19  of  the  cry  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 
Lam.  3.  56  hide  not  thine  ear . .  at  my  cry 

9.^4  cry,  $ot\  boe. 

Jas.     5.    4  the  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped  are 

10.^1  crying,  cry,  ttpavyt}  krauge. 

Matt25.    6  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry  made,  Behold 
Acts  23.   9  there  arose  a  great  cry:  and  the  scribes 
Rev.  14.  18  with  a  loud  cry  to  him  that  had  the  sharp 

CRY,  to  — 

1.7*0  groan,  pix  anaq. 

Eze.  26.  15  when  the  wounded  cry,  when  the  slaug. 

2.  7*0  groan  together,  pjs  anaq,  2. 

Eze.    9.    4  that  cry  for  all  the  abominations  that 

24.  17  Forbear  to  cry,  make  no  mourning  for 

3.7*0  cry  out,  pyj  zaaq. 

Exod.  2.  23  and  the  children  of  Israel.. cried  ;  and 
Judg.  3.    9,  15  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the 

6.  6,  7  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord 
10.  10  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord 

10.  14  Go  and  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  have 

1  Sa.   7.    8  Cease  not  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  our  God 

7.  9  and  Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  Israel 

12.  8  your  fathers  cried  unto  the  Lord,  then 

12. 10  they  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  We 

15. 11  it  grieved  Samuel ;  aud  he  cried  unto  the 
28.  12  she  cried  with  a  loud  voice  :  and  the 

2  Sa.  13.  19  her  hand  on  her  head,  and  went  on  crying 

19.  4  the  king  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  0  my  sou 
19.  28  what  right  therefore  have  I  yet  to  cry 

1  Ch.  5.  20  they  cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  he 

2  Ch.20.    9  cry  unto  thee  in  our  affliction,  then  thou 

32.  20  the  prophet  Isaiah,  .prayed  and  cried  to 
Neh.   9.   4  cried  with  a  loud  voice  unto  the  Lord 

9.  28  when  they  returned,  and  cried  unto  thee 
Esth.  4.    1  and  cried  with  a  loud  and  a  bitter  cry 
Job  31.  38  If  my  land  cry  against  me,  or  that  the 
Psa.  22.    5  They  cried  unto  thee,  and  were  delivered 

107.  13  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble 
107.  19  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble 
142.    1  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice 
142.    5  I  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord  :  I  said.  Thou 

Isa.    14.  31  cry,  0  city  ;  thou,  whole  Palestina,  (art) 
15.    4  Heshbon  shall  cry,  and  Elealeh :  their 
57-  J3  When  thou  criest,  let  thy  companies 

Jer.    11.  11  though  they  shall  cry  unto  me,  I  will  not 

11.  12  cry  unto  the  gods  unto  whom  they  offer 

25.  34  Howl,  ye  shepherds,  and  cry ;  and  waHow 
30.  15  Why  criest  thou  for  thine  affliction  ? 

47.  2  the  men  shall  cry.  and  all  the  inhabitants 

48.  20  howl  and  cry  ;  tell  ye  it  in  Arnon,  that 
Lam.  3.    S  when  I  cry  and  shout,  he  shutteth 
Eze.     9.    8  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  cried,  and  said 

11. 13  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said,  Ah 

21.  12  Cry  and  howl,  son  of  man  ;  for  it  shall  be 
27.  30  shall  cry  bitterly,  aud  shall  cast  up  dust 
Hos.    7.  14  they  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their 

8.  2  Israel  shall  cry  uuto  me,  My  God,  we 
Joel    1.  14  Sanctify  ye  a  fast.,  and  cry  unto  the  Lord 
Jon.    1.    s  mariners,  .cried  every  man  unto  his  god 
Mic.    3.   4  shall  they  cry  unto  the  Lord,  but  he  will 

4.7*o  cry  out,  py\  zaaq,  5. 

Zech.  6.    8  Then  cried  he  upon  me,  and  spake  unto 

5.7*o  cry  out,  py?  zeaq. 

Dau.   6.  20  cried  with  a  lamentable  voice  unto  Daniel 


CRY 


213 


CRY 


6.  To  cry  out  {painfully),  3?;  yabab,  3. 

Judg.  s.  28  The  mother  of  Sisera . .  cried  through  the 

7. To  answer,  respond,  .*n#  anah. 

Exod32.  iS  neither  (is  it)  the  voice  of  (them  that)  cry 
Isa.    13.  22  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands  shall  cry 

l.To  pant,  long  for,  lyy  arag. 

Joel    r.  20  The  beasts  of  the  field  cry  also  unto  thee 

9.  To  cry,  scream,  njja  paah. 

Isa.  42.  14  (now)  will  1  cry  like  a  travailing  woman 

10.2*0  cry  out,  pyx  tsaaq. 

Gen.   4.  10  the  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth 
27.  34  when  Esau  heard  the  words,  .he  cried 

41.  55  the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  bread 
Exod.  5.  8  they  cry,  saying,  Let  us  go  (and)  sacrifice 

5.  15  the  officers.. came  and  cried  unto  Phara. 
8. 12  Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord  because  of  the 

14. 15  the  Loud  said.. Wherefore criest  thou  uu.? 
15.  25  he  cried  uuto  the  Lord  ;  and  the  Lord 
17.    4  Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  What 
22.  23  If  thou  afflict  them,  .and  they  cry  at  all 
22.  27  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  he  crieth  unto 

Numii.  2  the  people  cried  unto  Moses  ;  and  when 
12.  13  Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  Heal 
20.  16  when  we  cried  unto  the  Lord  he  heard 

Deut  22.  24  the  damsel,  because  she  cried  not,  (being) 
22.  27  the  betrothed  damsel  cried,  and  (there 
26.    7  we  cried  unto  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers 

Josh.24.    7  when  tliey  cried  unto  the  Lord,  he  put 

Judg.  4.    3  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  L. 
10.  12  ye  cried  to  me,  and  I  delivered  you  out 

1  Ki.20.  39  as  the  king  passed  by,  he  cried  unto  the 

2  Ki.  4.    1  there  cried  a  certain  woman  of  the  wives 

6.  5  he  cried,  and  said,  Alas,  master  !  for  it 
6.  26  there  cried  a  woman  unto  him,  saying 
8.    3  she  went  forth  to  cry  unto  the  king  for 
8.    5  the  woman,  .cried  to  the  kiug  for  her 

2  Ch.13.  14  they  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  the  priests 
Neh.    9.  27  they  cried  unto  thee,  thou  heardest 
Job    19.    7  I  cry  aloud,  but  (there  is)  no  judgment 

35.  12  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  answer,  because 
Psa.  34.  17  (The  righteous)  cry,  and  the  Lord  heareth 

77.    1  I  cried  unto  God  with  my  voice,  (even) 

88.    1  I  have  cried  day  (and)  night  before  thee 
107.    6  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble 
107.  28  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble 
Isa.    19.  20  they  shall  cry  unto  the  Lord  because  of 

33.    7  Behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall  cry  with. 

42.  2  He  shall  not  cry.  .nor  cause  his  voice  to 
46.  7  shall  cry  unto  him,  yet  can  he  not  answer 
65.  14  but  ye  shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  heart,  and 

Jer.  22.  20  Go  up  to  Lebanon,  and  cry  ;  and  lift  up 
22.  20  cry  from  the  passages  :  for  all  thy  lovers 
49.    3  cry,  ye  daughters  of  Kabbah,  gird  you 

Lam.  2.  iS  Their  heart  cried  unto  the  Lord,  0  wall 

11. 2*o  cry  out,  pj,7  tsaaq,  3. 

2  Ki.  2.  12  And  Elisha  saw  (it),  and  he  cried,  My  fa. 

12.7b  shriek,  roar,  nyi  isarach. 
Zeph.    1.  14  the  mighty  man  shall  cry  there  bitterly 

13.  To  call,  K"J5  qara. 

Gen.  39.  14  he  came  in.  .and  I  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
39.  15,  18  I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  cried,  that 
4T.  43  and  they  cried  before  him,  Bow  the  knee 
45.    1  he  cried.  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from 

Lev.- 13.  45  covering  upon  his  upper  lip,  and  shall  cry 

Deut  15.   9  and  he  cry  unto  the  Lord  against  thee 
24. 15  lest  he  cry  against  thee  unto  the  Lord 

Judg.  7.  20  and  they  cried.  The  sword  of  the  Lord 
9.  7  lifted  up  his  voice  and  cried,  and  said 
18.  23  And  they  cried  unto  the  children  of  Dan 

1  Sa.  17.    8  he  stood  and  cried  unto  the  armies  of  Is. 
20.  37  Jonathan  cried  after  the  lad,  and  said 
20.  38  Jonathan  cried  after  the  lad,  Make  speed 
24.    8  cried  after  Saul,  saying,  My  lord  the  king 
26.  14  David  cried  to  the  people,  and  to  Abner 

26.  14  Who  (art)  thou  (that)  criest  to  the  king? 
28a.  18.  25  And  the  watchman  cried,  and  told  the 

20.  16  Then  cried  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  city 
22.  7  I  called  upon  the  Lord,  and  cried  to  my 
1  Ki.  13.  2  he  cried  against  the  altar  in  the  word  of 
13.  4  the  man  of  God,  which  had  cried  against 
13.  21  he  cried  unto  the  man  of  God  that  came 
13.  32  which  he  cried  by  the  word  of  the  Lord 

17.  20,  21  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  0  Lord 

18.  27  Elijah  mocked  them,  and  said.  Cry  aloud 
18.  28  And  they  cried  aloud,  and  cut  themselves 

2KI  ii.  14  Athaliah  rent  her  clothes,  and  cried 

18.  28  Rab-shakeh  stood,  and  cried  with  a  loud 
20. 11  Isaiah  the  prophet  cried  unto  the  Lord 

2CI1. 14.  11  Asa  cried  unto  the  Lord  his  God, and  said 
32.  18  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the  Jew's 

Psa.     3.   4  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice,  and 
22.   2  I  cry  in  the  day  time,  but  thou  nearest  not 

27.  7  Hear,  O  Lord,  (when)  I  cry  with  my  voice 

28.  1  Unto  thee  will  I  cry,  0  Lord  my  rock 
30.   8  I  cried  to  thee,  0  Lord;  and  unto  the  L. 
34.   6  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard 

56.  9  When  I  cry  (unto  thee),  then  shall  mine 

57.  2  I  will  cry  unto  God  most  high  ;  unto  God 
61.  2  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto 
66.  17  I  cried  unto  him  with  my  mouth,  and  he 
86.    3  Be  merciful . .  0  Lord  :  for  I  cry  unto  thee 

119.  145  I  cried  with  (my)  whole  heart ;  hear  me 

120.  1 1  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me 
138.  3  In  the  day  when  I  cried  thou  answeredst 
141.  1  I  cry  unto  thee  :  make  haste  unto  me 
147.  9  (and)  to  the  young  ravens  which  cry 


Prov.  1.  21  She  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of  concourse 
2.    3  Yea,  if  thou  criest  after  knowledge 

8.  1  Doth  not  wisdom  cry  ?  and  understanding 

9.  3  she  crieth  upon  the  highest  places  of  the 
21. 13  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the 
21.  13  he  also  shall  cry  himself,  but  shall  not 

Isa.     6.   3  And  one  cried  uuto  another,  and  said 

6.    4  moved  at  the  voiceof  him  that  cried,  and 

8.  4  the  child  shall  have  knowledge  to  cry 
21.    8  he  cried,  A  lion  :  My  lord,  1  stand  couti. 

30.  7  therefore  have  I  cried  concerning  this 
34.  14  and  the  satyr  shall  cry  to  his  fellow 
36.  13  Rabshakeh  stood,  and  cried  with  a  loud 
40.    2  cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accom. 
40.    3  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness 
40.    6  The  voice  said,  Cry,  And  he  said 

40.    6  What  shall  I  cry?  Allilesh  (is)  grass,  and 
58.    1  Cry  aloud,  spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice 
Jer.     2.    2  Go  and  cry  in  the  ears  of  Jerusalem 

3.  4  Wilt  thou  not  from  this  time  cry  unto 
4-    5  cry,  gather  together.  .Assemble  yoursel. 

4.  20  Destruction  upon  destruction  is  cried 
11.  14  neither  lift  up  a  cry  or  prayer  for  them 
11.  14  not  hear  (them)  in  the  time  that  they  cry 
20.    8  I  cried  violence  and  spoil;  because  the  w. 

31.  6  the  watchmen  upon  the  mount  Ephraim 
46. 17  They  did  cry  there,  Pharaoh  king  of  Eg. 
49.  29  shall  cry  Unto  them,  Fear  (is)  on  every 

Lam.  4.  15  They  cried  unto  them,  Depart  ye  ;  (it  is) 
Eze.    8.  18  though  they  cry  in  mine  cars  with  a  loud 

9.  1  He  cried  also  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud 
Joel  1.  19  0  Lord,  to  thee  will  I  cry  :  for  the  fire 
Jon.    1.   2  go  to  .Nineveh,  that  great  city,  and  cry 

i.  14  they  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  We 

2.  2  I  cried  by  reason  of  mine  affliction  unto 

3.  4  Jonah,  .cried,  and  said.  Yet  forty  days 

3.  8  Butletman.  .cry  mightily  uuto  God  ;  yea 
Mic.    3.    5  that  bite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry,  Peace 

6.  9  The  Lord's  voice  crieth  unto  the  city,  and 
Zech.  1.    4  unto  whom  the  former  prophets  have  cri. 

1.  14  the  angel.. said  uuto  me.  Cry  thou,  saying 
1. 17  Cry  yet,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of 

7.  7  which  the  Lord  hath  cried  by  the  former 
7.  13  (that)  as  he  cried,  and  they  would  not 

7.  13  So  they  cried,  and  I  would  not  hear,  saith 

14.7b  call,  xip  qera. 

Dan.   3.    4  an  herald  cried  aloud,  To  you  it  is  com. 

4.  14  He  cried  aloud,  aud  said  thus,  Hewdown 

5.  7  The  king  cried  aloud  to  bring  in  the  astro. 

15.  To  shout,  £n  rua,  5. 

Judg.  7.  2t  and  all  the  host  ran,  and  cried,  and  fled 
Job    30.    5  they  cried  after  them  as  (after)  a  thief 
Isa.    42.  13  he  shall  cry,  yea,  roar;  he  shall  prevail 

16.  To  cry  aloud,  jn$>  shava,  3. 

Job  29.  12  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and  the 
30.  20  I  cry  unto  thee,  and  thou  dost  not  hear 
30.  28  I  stood  up,  (and)  I  cried  in  the  congrega. 
36.  13  they  cry  not  when  he  biudeth  them 
38.  41  his  young  ones  cry  unto  God,  they  wander 

Psa.  "18.    6  I  called  upon  the  Lord,  and  cried  unto 
18.  41  They  cried,  but  (there  was)  none  to  save 
22.  24  but  when  he  cried  unto  him,  he  heard 
28.    2  when  I  cry  unto  thee,  when  I  lift  up  my 

30.  2  I  cried  unto  thee,  and  thou  hast  healed 

31.  22  thou  heardest  the  voice,  .when  I  cried 
72.  12  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  crieth 
88.  13  But  unto  thee  have  I  cried,  O  Lord 

119.  147  I  prevented  the  dawning,  .and  cried 
Isa.   58.    9  thou  shalt  cry,  and  he  shall  say,  Here  I 
Jon.    2.    2  out.  .of  hell  cried  I,  (and)  thou 
Hab.  1.    2  how  long  shall  I  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not 

17.ro  cry  out,  play,  delight,  V%y  shaa. 

Isa.  29.  9  Stay  yourselves,  aud  wonder.. and  cry 

18. Cry,  crying  out,  yiB>  shua. 

Job    30.  24  though  they  cry  in  his  destruction 

19.2*0  give  forth  tlie  %-oicc,  Sip  jm  nathan  qol. 

Num.14.    1  congregation  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  cr. 
Amos  3.    4  will  a  young  lion  cry  out  of  his  den  if 

20. To  cry  out,  ava&oaw  anaboaO. 

Matt 27.  46  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  [cried]  with  a 

21.  To  let  go,  send  away,  acpiny-t  aphiemi. 
Markis.  37  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave 

22.  2*0  cry,  shout,  Bodco  boao. 

Matt.  3.    3  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

Mark  1.    3  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

15.  34  at  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud 

Luke  3.    4  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

18.    7  which  cry  day  and  night  unto  him,  though 

18.  38  he  cried,  saying,  Jesus,  (thou)  son  of  Da. 

John  1.  23  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

Acts   8.    7  unclean  spirits,  crying  with  loud  voice 

17.   6  they  drew  Jason,  .unto  the  rulers.,  crying 

21.  34  some  [cried]  one  thing,  some  another 

Gal.     4.  27  break  forth  and  cry,  thoti  that  travailest 

23.2*0  cry  about  (anything)*  iwifioao)  epiboao. 

Acts  25.  24  [crying]  that  he  ought  not  to  live  any  lo. 
24. 2*o  give  forth  the  voice  upon  (anything)  ,kin(pu>v }4 &• 

Luke  23.  21  they  cried,  saying,  Crucify  (him),  crucify 
25.  To  cry  out,  Kpafa  krazo. 

Matt.  9.  27  two  blind  men  followed  him,  crying,  and 

14.  30  beginning  to  sink,  he  cried,  saying,  Lord 

15.  23  Send  her  away  ;  for  she  crieth  after  us 

20.  31  they  cried  the  more,  saying.  Have  mercy 

21.  9  the  multitudes.. cried,  saying,  Hosauna 


Matt  21.  15  the  children  crying  in  the  temple,  and 

27.  50  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice 
Mark  1.  26  [cried]  with  a  loud  voice,  he  came  out  of 
3.  1 1  aud  cried,  saying,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God 
5.   5  in  the  mountains,  and  in  the  tombs,  cry. 
5.    7  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said,  What 
9.  26  (the  spirit)  cried,  and  rent  him  sore,  and 
10.  48  he  cried,  .a  great  deal,  (Thou)  son  of  Da. 
ti.    9  they  that  followed,  cried.  .Hosanna  ! 
LukeiS.  39  he  cried  so  much  the  more,  (thou)  son 
John  1.  15  John  bare  witness  of  him,  and  cried 
7.  28  Then  cried  Jesus  in  the  temple  as  he 
7.  37  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying,  If  any  man 
12.  13  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and  [cried,]  Hos. 
12.  44  Jesus  cried  and  said,  He  that  believeth 
Acts   7.  60  he  kneeled  down,  and  cried  with  a  loud 
16.  17  The  same  followed  Paul  and  us,  and  cried 
19.  32  Some . .  cried  one  thing,  and  some  another 
21.  36  the  people  followed  after,  crying,  Away 
24.  21  I  [cried]  standing  among  them,  Touching 
Rom.  S.  j  5  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry 

9.  27  Esaias  also  crieth  concerning  Israel 
Gal.    4.    6  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying 
J  as.     5.    4  Behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers,  .crieth 
.Rev.   6.  10  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying.  How 
7.    2  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four 
7.  io  cried  with  aloud  voice,  saying,  Salvation 
10.   3  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  (when)  a  lion 
10.    3  when  he  had  cried,  seven  thunders 
12.    2  she  being  with  child  cried,  travailing  in 

14.  15  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  sat 
18.    2  he  cried  mightily  with  a  strong  voice 
18.  18  cried  when  they  saw  the  smoke  of  her 
18.  19  they  cast  dust  on  their  heads,  and  cried 
19. 17  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all 

26.  To  make  a  cry  or  clamour,  Kpavydfa  kraugazo. 
Matt  12.  19  He  shall  not  strive,  nor  cry;  neither  shall 

15.  22  woman  of  Canaan  came,  .and  [cried]  unto 
Johnn.  43  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come 

18.  40  Then  cried  they  all  again,  saying,  Not 
27.2b  give  forth  the  voice,  sound,  ^vew  phoneo. 
Luke  8.    8  he  cried,  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 

16.  24  he  cried  and  said,  Father  Abraham,  have 
23.  46  when  Jesus  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice 

Acts  16.  28  But  Paul  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  snying 
Rev.  14. 18  cried  with  a  loud  cry  to  him,  that  had  the 

CRY  alarm,  to  — 
To  shout,  yn  rua,  5. 

2  Ch.13.  12  witri  sounding  trumpets  to  cry  alarm 

CRY  against,  to  — 

To  give  forth  the  voice  upon  (a  thing),   itrt<po>v4it). 
Acts  22.  24  might  know  wherefore  they  cried  so  ag. 

CRY  aloud,  to  — 

l.To  make  a  noise,  nzn  hamah. 

Psa.  55. 17  and  at  noon,  will  I  pray,  and  cry  aloud 
l.To  cry  aimed,  rejoice,  Sn>*  tsahal. 

Isa.   24.  14  they  shall  cry  aloud  from  the  sea 
3.2b  cry  aloud,  rejoice,  hiy$  tsahal,  3. 

Isa.   54.    1  break  forth  into  singing,  and  cry  aloud 
l.To  shout,  yn  rua,  5. 

Hos.    5.    8  cry  aloud  (at)  Beth-aven,  after  thee,  O 
5.  To  cry  out,  vy?  shava,  3. 

Job    19.    7  I  cry  aloud,  but  (there  is)  no  judgment 
6. To  cry  out^  avafioau  anaboao. 

Markis.    8  the  multitude,  [crying  aloud,]  began  to 

CRY,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  cry  out,  pi?T  zaaq,  5. 

Job    35.   9  they  make' (the  oppressed)  to  cry 

CRY  out,  to  — 

l.To  cry  aloud,  rejoice,  Sns  tsahal,  3. 

Isa.    12.   6  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Z. 

2.  To  cry  out,  pui  zaak. 

1  Sa.  4.  13  came,  .and  told  (it),  .all  thecity  cried  out 
5.  10  the  Ekronites  cried  out,  saying,  They  have 
8.  18  cry  out  in  that  day  because  of  your  king 

1  Ki.  22.  32  they  turned,  .and  Jehoshaphat  cried  out 

2  Ch.18.  31  Jehoshaphat  cried  out,  and  the  Lord 
Isa.    15.    5  My  heart  shall  cry  out  for  Moab 

26.  17  as  a  woman  with,  .child  crieth  out  in  her 
Jer.   20.   8  For  since  I  spake,  I  cried  out,  I 

48.  31  will  I  howl  fur  Moab,  and  I  will  cry  out 
Hab.   1.    2  cry  out  unto  thee  (of)  violence,  and  thou 
2.  11  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall 

3.  To  cry  out,  pyy  tsaaq. 

Exodi4.  10  children  of  Israel  cried  out  unto  the  L. 
2  Ki.  4.  40  it  came  to  pass,  .that  they  cried  out,  and 
Job    19.    7  I  cry  out  of  wrong,  but  I  am  not  heard 

4.2b  s/wut,  yn  rua,  5. 

Isa.   15.    4  the  armed  soldiers  of  Moab  shall  cry  out 

Mic.    4.    9  why  dost  thou  cry  out  aloud  ?  (is  there)  no 
5.2b  sing,  cry  aloud,  \r\  rattan. 

Lam.  2.  19  cry  out  in  the  night ;  in  the  beginning  of 
6.2b  sing,  cry  aloud,  ]ri  ranan,  3. 

Psa.  84.    2  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God 
7.2b  cry  aloud,  y$  shava,  3. 

Job   24.  12  the  soul  of  the  wounded  crieth  out :  yet 
35-   9  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  of  the 
8.2b  cry  out  for  self ,  play,  delight,  yny  shaa,  7a. 

Isa.  29.   9  Stay  yourselves,  and  wonder ;  cry  ye  out 


CRY 


214 


CUMBER 


9.  To  cry  out,  ava&odo)  anaboao. 

Luke  9.  38  a  man  of  the  company  [cried  out,]  saying 

10.  To  cry  out,  avaKpafa  anakrazo. 

Mark  1.  23  a  man  with  an  unclean  spirit,  .cried  out 
6.  49  they  supposed  it.  .a  spirit,  and  cried  out 
Luke  4.  33  there  was  a  man . .  and  cried  out  with  a 

8.  28  When  he  saw  Jesus,  he  cried  out,  and  fell 
23.  18  they  cried  out  all  at  once,  saying,  Away 

11.  To  cry,  icpdfa  krazo. 

Matt.  8.  29  thev  cried  out,  saying,  What  have  we  to 

14.  26  It  is  a  spirit :  and  they  cried  out  for 

20.  30  two  blind  men  sitting,  .cried  out,  and 
27  23  they  cried  out  the  more,  saying,  Let  him 

Mark  9.  24  the  father  of  the  child  cried  out,  saying 
10.  47  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  say,  Jesus,  (thou) 

15.  13  And  they  cried  out  again,  Crucify  him 
15.  14  they  cried  out  the  more  exceedingly 

15.  39  the  centurion,  .saw  that  he  so  [cried  out] 
Luke  4.  41  devils  also  came  out  of  many,  [crying  out] 

9.  39  a  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he.  .crieth  out 
19.  40  I  tell  you.,  the  stones  would.,  cry  out 

John  19.  12  the  Jews  [cried  out,]  saying,  If  thou  let 
Acts    7.  57  they  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and 

14.  14  and  ran  in  among  the  people,  crying  out 
19.  28  they  were  full  of  wrath,  and  cried  out 
19.  34  all  with  one  voice,  .cried  out,  Great  (is) 

21.  28  Crying  out,  Men  of  Israel,  help :  This  is 
23.    6  he  cried  out  in  the  council,  Men  (and) 

12.ro  make  an  outcry,  Kpavy6.fa  kraugazO. 

Johnig.  6  they  cried  out,  sayiug,  Crucify  (him) 
19.  15  they  cried  out,  Away  with  (him),  away 

Acts  22.  23  as  they  cried  out,  and  cast  off  (their) 
13.  To  give  forth  the  voice,  Vlp  jru  nathan  qol. 

Jer.  12.    8  it  crieth  out  against  me :  therefore  have 

CRY  unto,  to  — 
To  call,  tr$  qara. 
Psa.  89.  26  He  shall  cry  unto  me,  Thou  (art)  my 
119.  146  I  cried  unto  thee,  save  me,  and  I  shall 
130.    1  Out  of  the  depths  have  I  cried  unto  thee 
141.    1  give  ear  unto  my  voice,  when  I  cry  unto 
CRYING  — 
l.Cry,  crying  out,  rrpwi  zeaqah. 

Isa.  65.  19  be  no  more  heard,  .the  voice  of  crying 

2.  Cry,  crying,  nrny  zevachah. 

Isa.  24. 11  (There  is)  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  streets 
Z.Cry,  crying  out,  njjift  tseaqah. 

i  Sa.   4.  14  when  Eli  heard  the  noise  of  the  crying 
Jer.   48.   3  A  voice  of  crying  (shall  be)  from  Horon. 

4.  To  call,  tt"jj5  qara. 

Psa.  69.   3 1  am  weary  of  my  crying  ;  my  throat  is 

S.Crying,  %w  shoa. 

Isa.   22.    5  (it  is)  a  day.  .of  crying  to  the  mountains 

6.  Cry,  crying,  noise,  nix^n  teshuoth. 

Job  39.    7  neither  regardeth  he  the  crying  of  the 

7.  To  put  to  death,  two  muth,  5. 

Provi9- 18  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  for  his  crying 

8.^1  crying  out,  Kpavy-f]  krauge. 

Heb.  5.    7  offered  up  prayers,  .with  strong  crying 
Rev  21.    4  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  .nor  crying 

CRYING  out— 

Groan,  groaning,  n$M  anaqah. 

Mai    2. 13  with  weeping  and  with  crying  out 
CRYSTAL  — 
l.Glass,  crystal,  n\5Wl  zekukith. 

Job  28.  17  The  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot  equal 

2.7ce,  mB  qerach. 

Eze.    1'  22  (was)  as  the  colour  of  the  terrible  crystal 

3.  Crystal,  KpvaraWos  krustallos. 

Rev.   4.   6  (there  was)  a  sea  of  glass  like  unto  cryst. 

22.  1  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal 
CRYSTAL,  clear  as  — 

To  be  as  crystal,  Kpu<rraAXifa>  krustalUzo. 

Rev.  2j.  xi  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  a  crystal 
CUBIT  — 
1. Cubit,  nax  ammah. 

Gen.   6. 15  length  of  the  ark.  .three  hundred  cubits 
6.  15  the  breadth  of  it  fifty  cubits 
6.  15  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cubits 

6.  16  and  in  a  cubit  shall  thou  finish  it  above 

7.  20  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters 
Exod25.  10  two  cubits  and  a  half  (shall  be)  the  length 

25.  10,  17  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  thereof 
25. 10  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  thereof 
25.  17  two  cubits  and  a  half  (shall  be)  the  length 
25.  23  two  cubits  (shall  be)  the  length  thereof 

25.  23  a  cubit  the  breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit 

26.  2  curtain  (shall  be)  eight  and  twenty  cubits 
26.  2,  8  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 
26.  8  The  length  of  one  curtain,  .thirty  cubits 
26. 13  a  cubit  on  the  one  side,  and  a  cubit  mi 

26.  16  Ten  cubits  (shall  be)  the  length  of  a  boa. 
26. 16  a  cubit  and  a  half  (shall  be)  the  breadth 

27,  1  five  cubits  long,  ami  live  cubits  broad 
27.    1  the  height  thereof  (shall  be)  three  cubits 
27.   9  of  an  hundred  cubit*  long  for  one  side 
37. 12  (shall  bit)  hangings  of  fifty  cubits 

27.  13  the  breadth  of  the  court.,  fifty  cubits 
=7. 14  The  hangings.. (shall  be)  fifteen  cubits 
27.  16  (shall  be)  an  hanging  of  twenty  cubits 


Exoda7. 
27. 
30. 
3°- 
36. 
36- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 

Nunin. 
35- 
35- 
35- 

~        35- 

Deut.  3. 

3- 

Josh.  3. 
1  Sa.  17. 
1  Ki.  6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 


18  The  length  of  the  court,  .an  hundred  cu. 

18  the  height  five  cubits  (of)  fine  twined 
2  A  cubit  (shall  be)  the  length,  .and  a  cubit 
2  two  cubits  (shall  be)  the  height  thereof 
9  The  length,  .(was)  twenty  and  eight  cubits 
9  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 

15  length  of  one  curtain  (was)  thirty  cubits 

15  four  cubits  (was)  the  breadth  of  one  cur. 

21  The  length  of  a  board  (was)  ten  cubits 

21  the  breadth  of  a  board  one  cubit  and  a 
1  two  cubits  and  a  half  (was)  the  length  of 
1  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  of  it 
1  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  of  it 
6  two  cubits  and  a  half  (was)  the  length 
6  one  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  thereof 

10  two  cubits  (was)  the  length  thereof,  and 

10  a  cubit  the  breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit 
25  altar,  .the  length  of  it  (was)  a  cubit 
£5  and  the  breadth  of  it  a  cubit 
25  (it  was)  four  square  ;  and  two  cubits  (was) 

1  five  cubits  (was)  the  length  thereof,  and 

1  five  cubits  the  breadth,  .and  three  cubits 
9  hangings  of  the  court . .  an  hundred  cubits 

ii  (the  hangings  were)  an  hundred  cubits 

12  west  side  (were)  hangings  of  fifty  cubits 

13  for  the  east  side  eastward  fifty  cubits 

14  hangings  of  the  one  side,  .fifteen  cubits 

15  on  this  hand,  .hangings  of  fifteen  cubits 
18  and  twenty  cubits  (was)  the  length,  and 
18  the  height  in  the  breadth  (was)  five  cub. 
31  two  cubits  (high)  upon  the  face  of  the 

4  (shall  reach),  .outward  a  thousand  cubits 

5  and  on  the  south  side  twojthousand  cubits 
5  and  on  the  west  side  two  thousand  cubits 

5  and  on  the  north  side  two  thousand  cub. 

11  nine  cubits  (was)  the  length  thereof,  and 
11  four  cubits  the  breadth,  .after  the  cubit 

4  about  two  thousand  cubits  by  measure 
4  Goliath . .  whose  height  (was")  six  cubits  and 

2  the  length  thereof  (was)  threescore  cubits 

2  and  the  height  thereof  thirty  cubits 

3  twenty  cubits  (was)  the  length  thereof, 
3  ten  cubits  (was)  the  breadth  thereof 

6  The  nethermost  chamber  (was)  five  cubits 
6  and  the  middle  (was)  six  cubits  broad 
6  and  the  third  (was)  seven  cubits  broad 

10  (then)  he  built  chambers,  .five  cubits  high 

16  he  built  twenty  cubits  on  the  sides  of 

17  the  temple  before  it,  was  forty  cubits  (long) 
20  oracle  in  the  fore  part  (was)  twenty  cubits 
20  twenty  cubits  in  breadth,  and  twenty  cu. 

23  two  cberubims  (of)  olive  tree,  .ten  cubits 

24  five  cubits  (was)  the  one  wing  of  the  cher. 
24  five  cubits  the  other  wing  of  the  cherub 

24  from  the  uttermost  part,  .(were) ten  cub. 

25  the  other  cherub  (was)  ten  cubits 

26  height  of  the  one  cherub  (was)  ten  cubits 
7.    2  the  length  thereof  (was)  an  hundred  cub. 
7.    2  and  the  breadth  thereof  fifty  cubits 
7.    2  and  the  height  thereof  thirty  cubits 
7.   6  the  length  thereof  (was)  fifty  cubits 
7.    6  and  the  breadth  thereof  thirty  cubits 
7.  10  stones  of  ten  cubits,  and.  .of  eight  cubits 
7.  15  two  pillars  of  brass,  of  eighteen  cubits 
7.  15  a  line  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  either 
7.  16  height  of  the  one  chapiter  (was)  five  cub. 
7.  16  height  of  the  other  chapiter,  .five  cubits 
7.  xg  the  chapiters,  .in  the  porch,  four  cubits 
7.  23  ten  cubits  from  the  one  brim  to  the  other 
7.  23  and  his  height  (was)  five  cubits 
7.  23  a  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it 
7.  24  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 
7.  27  four  cubits  (was)  the  length  of  one  base 
7.  27  four  cubits  the  breadth,  .and  three  cub. 
7.  31  within  the  chapiter  and  above  (was)  a  c. 
7.  31  the  mouth  thereof,  .a  cubit  and  an  half 
7.  32  the  height,  (was)  a  cubit  and  half  a  cu. 
7.  35  a  round  compass  of  half  a  cubit  high 
7.  38  (and)  every  laver  was  four  cubits 

14.  13  unto  the  corner  gate,  four  hundred  cubits 
25.  17  height  of  the  one.  .(was)  eighteen  cubits 
25.  17  the  height  of  the  chapiter  three  cubits 

1  Ch.  11.23  And  he  slew  an  Egyptian.. five  cubits  hi 

2  Ch.  3.    3  length  by  cubits,  .(was)  threescore  cubits 

3.   3  and  the  breadth  twenty  cubits 

3.    8  according  to  the  breadth .  .twenty  cubits 

3.    8  and  the  breadth  thereof  twenty  cubits 

3.  11  the  wings,  .(were)  twenty  cubits 

3.  11  wing  (of  the  one  cherub  was)  five  cubits 

3.  11  the  other  wing  (was  likewise)  five  cubits 

3.  12  (one)  wing  of  the  other  cherub  (was)  five 

3. 12  and  the  other  wing  (was)  five  cubits  (also) 

3.  13  The  wiugs.  .spread,  .forth  twenty  cubits 

3.  15  two  pillars  of  thirty  and  five  cubits  high 

3.  15  the  chapiter,  .on  the  top.  .(was)  five  cub. 

4.  1  altar,  .twenty  cubits  the  length  thereof 
4.    1  twenty  cubits  the  breadth,  .and  ten  cub. 
4.   2  he  made  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits  from 
4.    2  and  five  cubits  the  height  thereof 

4.    2  a  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it 
4.    3  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 
6.  13  a  brasen  scaffold,  of  five  cubits  long 

6.  13  five  cubits  broad,  and  three  cubits  high 
25.  23  to  the  corner  gate,  four  hundred  cubits 

.  Neh.  3.  13  a  thousand  cubits  on  the  wall  unto  the 
Esth.  5.  14  Let  a  gallows  be  made  of  fifty  cubits  high 

7.  9  the  gallows  fifty  cubits  high,  which  Ha. 
Jer.   52.  21  height  of  one  pillar  (was)  eighteen  cubits 

52.  21  a  fillet  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  it 
52.  22  height  of  one  chapiter  (was)  five  cubits 
Eze.  40.    5  reed  of  six  cubits  (long)  by  the  cubit  and 
40.    7  between  the . .  chambers  (were)  five  cubits 


2K1, 


Eze.  40.   9  Then  measured  he  the  porch .  .eight  cub. 
40,    9  and  the  posts  thereof,  two  cubits 
40. 11  the  breadth  of  the  entry,  .ten  cubits 
40. 11  the  length  of  the  gate,  thirteen  cubits 
40.  12  one  cubit  (on  this  side),  .one  cubit  on  that 
40.  12  six  cubits  on  this  side,  and  six  cubits 
40.  13  the  breadth  (was)  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  14  He  made  also  posts  of  threescore  cubits 
40.  15  from  the  face  of  the  gate,  .fifty  cubits 
40. 19  an  hundred  cubits  eastward  and  northw. 
40.  21  the  length  thereof  (was)  fifty  cubits 
40.  2i  and  the  breadth  five  aud  twenty  cubits 
40.  23  from  gate  to  gate  an  hundred  cubits 
40.  25,  36  the  length  (was)  fifty  cubits 
40.  25  and  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  27  toward  the  south  an  hundred  cubits 
40.  29,  33  fifty  cubits  long,  .five  and  twenty  cu. 
40.  30  twenty  cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  broad 
40.  36  and  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  42  four  tables  (were),  .a  cubit  aud  an  half 
40  42  a  cubit  and  an  half  broad,  and  one  cubit 
40.  47  he  measured  the  court,  an  hundred  cub. 
40.  47  and  an  hundred  cubits  broad,  four  square 
40.  48  five  cubits  on  this  side,  and  five  cubits 
40.  48  three  cubits  on  this  side,  aud  three  cub. 
40.  49  The  length  of  the  porch  (was)  twenty  cu. 

40.  49  and  the  breadth  eleven  cubits 

41.  1  six  cubits,  .on  the  one  side,  and  six  cub. 
41.  2  the  breadth  of  the  door  (was)  ten  cubits 
41.  2  the  sides  of  the  doors  (were)  five  cubits 
41.    2  and  five  cubits  on  the  other  side 

41.    2  forty  cubits,  and  the  breadth,  twenty  cu. 
41.    3  post,  .two  cubits,  and  the  door  six  cubits 
41.   3  and  the  breadth  of  the  door  seven  cubits 
41.    4  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  twenty  c. 
41.    4  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth,  twenty  c. 
41.    5  measured  the  wall  of  the  house,  six  cub. 
41.    5  breadth  of  (every)  side  chamber  four  cub. 
41.    8  a  full  reed  of  six  great  cubits 
41.   9  thickness  of  the  wall .  .(was)  five  cubits 
41.  10  between  the  chambers  (was),  .twenty  cu. 
41.  11  the  breadth  of  the  place,  .(was)  five  cub. 
41.  12  the  building,  .(was)  seventy  cubits  broad 
41.  12  the  wall  of  the  building  (was)  five  cubits 
41.  12  and  the  length  thereof  ninety  cubits 
41.  13  measured  the  house,  an  hundred  cubits 
41.  14  place  toward  the  east,  an  hundred  cubits 
41. 15  the  galleries  thereof,  .an  hundred  cubits 

41.  22  three  cubits  high,  and  the  length,  .two  c. 

42.  2  Before  the  length  of  an  hundred  cubits 
42.    2  and  the  breadth  (was)  fifty  cubits 

42.  4  ten  cubits  breadth .  .a  way  of  one  cubit 
42.    7  the  length  thereof  (was)  fifty  cubits 

42.  8  the  length  of  the  chambers,  .fifty  cubits 

43.  13  the  measures  of  the  altar  after  the  cubits 
43.  13  The  cubit  (is)  a  cubit  and  an  handbreadtb 
43.  13  (shall  be)  a  cubit,  and  the  breadth  a  cubit 
43. 14  two  cubits,  and  the  breadth  one  cubit 
43. 14  four  cubits,  and  the  breadth  (one)  cubit 
43.  15  So  the  altar  (shall  be)  four  cubits 

43.  17  the  border  about  it  (shall  be)  half  a  cubit 
43.  1 7  the  bottom  thereof  (shall  be)  about  a  cubit 
45.    2  fifty  cubits  round  about  for  the  suburbs 
47.    3  be  measured  a  thousand  cubits,  and  he 
Zech.  5.    2  the  length  thereof  (is)  twenty  cubits 

5.  2  and  the  breadth  thereof  ten  cubits 

2.  Span,  ica  gomed. 

Judg  3. 16  Ehud  made  him  a  dagger,  .of  a  cubit  len. 

3.  The  fore  arm,  a  cubit,  irrfevs  pechus. 

Matt  6.  27  "Which  of  you.  .can  add  one  cubit  unto 
Lukeia.  25  can  add  to  his  stature  one  cubit? 
John2i.    8  but  as  it  were  two  hundred  cubits 
Rev.  21.  17  an  hundred  (and)  forty  (and)  four  cubits 

CUBITS  — 

Cubits,  psN  amm.in. 

Ezra    6.    3  the  height  thereof  threescore  cubits 

6.  3  (and)  the  breadth  thereof  threescore  cub. 
Dan.    3.    1  whose  height  (was)  threescore  cubits 

3.    1  (and)  the  breadth  thereof  six  cubits 

CUCKOO  — 

Sea  maw,  sea  gull,  qnaJ  shachaph. 

Lev.  11. 16  the  cuckoo,  and  the  hawk  after  his  kind 
Deut  74.  15  the  cuckoo,  and  the  hawk  after  his  kind 

CUCUMBER  — 

Place  of  water  melon,  niypQ  miqshah. 

Isa.     1.    8  as  a  lodge  in  a  garden  of  cucumbers,  as  a 

CUCUMBERS  — 

Water  melons,  cucumbers,  gourd,  D'X^p  qishshuim. 
Num  11.    5  the  cucumbers,  and  the  melons,  and  the 

CUD  — 

Chewed  food,  rr$  gerah. 

Lev.  11.  3  Whatsoever  ..cheweth  thecud.amongthe 

11.  4  these  shall  ye  not  eat.  .that  chew  the  cud 

11.  4  the  camel,  because  he  cheweth  the  cud 

11.  5  the  coney,  because  he  cheweth  the  cud 

11.  6  the  hare,  because  he  cheweth  the  cud 

11.  7  the  swine.,  yet  he  cheweth  not  the  cud 
11.  26  (is)  not  cloven  footed,  nor  cheweth  thecud 

Deut  14.  6  (and)  cheweth  the  cud  among  the  beasts 

14.  7  shall  not  eat  of  them  that  chew  the  cud 

14.  7  they  chew  the  cud,  but  divide  not  the 

14.  8  the  swine . .  cheweth  not  the  cud,  it  (is) 

CUMBER  — 

1.  To  make  useless,  work  against.  Karapyiic  kaiargco. 
Luke  13.    7  cut  it  down;  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground 


CUMBRANCE 


215 


CURSE 


2.  To  draw  around,  distract,  wepto-irao*  perispad. 

Lukeio.  40  Martha  was  cumbered  about  much  serv. 
CUMBRANCE—- 
Burden,  pressure,  rryb  torach. 

Deut.  1. 12  cau  I  myself  alone  bear  your  cuiubrance 
CUBLT  — 

Arise,   (the  imperative  of  the  Hebrew  word  Dip 
qum),  Kodfit  koumi. 

Mark  5.  41  Tabitha  [cumi],  which  is.  .Damsel,  .arise 

CUMMIN  — 

l.Cummin,  (from  Vie  sharp  smell),  }S3  kammon. 
Isa.  28.  25  doth  he  not.  .scatter  the  cummin,  and 
28.  27  cart  wheel  turned  about  upon  the  cummin 
28.  27  with  a  staff,  and  the  cummin  with  a  rod 

2. Cummin,  KVfxtvov  kuminon. 

Matt23-  23  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and  cummin 
CUNNING  — 
1.  Knowledge,  njn  daath. 

1  Ki.  7. 14  and  cunning  to  work  all  works  in  brass 

2.Wise,  skilful,  Dan  chakam. 

2  Ch.  2.    7  Send  me . .  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  gold 

2.  13  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man,  endued  with 
Isa.     3.    3  the  cunning  artificer,  and  the  eloquent 

40.  20  he  seeketh  unto  him  a  cunning  workman 
Jer.     9. 17  send  for  cunning  (women),  that  they  may 

10.   g  they  (are)  all  the  work  of  cunning  (men) 

3.  To  think,  devise,  design,  a^n  chashah. 
Esod26.    1  (with)  cherubim  of  cunning  work  shalt 

26.  31  and  fine  twined  linen,  of  cunning  work 
28.  6  and  fine  twined  linen,  with  cunning  work 
28.  15  make  the  breastplate .  .with  cunning  work 
36.  35  (with)  cherubim  made  he  it  of  cunning  wo. 
39.  3  and  in  the  flue  linen,  (with)  cunning  work 
39.   8  he  made  the  breastplate  (of)  cunning  w. 

4. To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  yi;  yada. 

Dan.   1.    4  cunning  in  knowledge  and  understanding 

5.  Thought,  device,  design,  na^no  machashebeth. 

Exodjs.  33  to  make  any  manner  of  cunning  work 
CUNNING,  to  be  — 
To  be  intelligent,  give  understanding,  pa  bin. 

i  Ch.25.    7  number  of  them,  .all  that  were  cunning 
CUNNING  man  — 

1.  Wise,  skilful,  nrn  chakam. 

1  Ch.  22.  15  all  manner  of  cunning  men  for  every 

2  Ch.   2.    7  can  skill  to  grave  with  the  cunning  men 

2. 14  thy  cunning  men,  and  with  the  cunning  m. 

2,  To  think,  devise,  design,  ae>n  chashah. 

2  Ch.26.  15  he  made.,  engines,  invented  by  cunning  m. 
CUNNING  work  — 
l.To  think,  devise,  design,  aiyn  chasliab. 

Esod36.    8  (with)  cherubim  of  cunning  work  made 
2.  Thought,  device,  design,  na^no  machashebeth. 

Exod3i.    4  To  devise  cunning  works,  to  work  in  gold 
•    35-  35  aud  of  those  that  devise  cunning  work 
C TONING  workman  — 

1.  Artificer,  jds  oman. 

Soug  7.    1  work  of  the  hands  of  a  cunning  workman 

2.  To  think,  devise,  design,  ac:n  chashab. 

Exod35.  35  the  engraver,  and  of  the  cunning  workman 
38.  23  an  eugraver,  and  a  cunning  workman,  and 
CUP  — 
1. Basin,  bason,  |3N  aggan. 

Isa.  22.  24  from  the  vessels  of  cups,  even  to  all  the 
2.Goblet,  cup,  calyx,  spaa  gabia. 

Gen.  44.   2  put  my  cup,  the  silver  cup,  in  the  sack's 

44. 12  and  the  cup  was  found  in  Benjamin's  sack 

44. 16  and  (he)  also  with  whom  the  cup  is  found 

44. 17  the  man  in  whose  hand  the  cup  is  found 

3.  dtp,  Dia  kos. 

Gen.  40.  11  Pharaoh's  cup  (was)  in  my  hand  :  and  I 
40.  11  into  Pharaoh's  cup,  and  I  gave  the  cup 

40. 13  thou  shalt  deliver  Pharaoh's  cup  into  his 
40.  21  and  he  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand 

2  Sa.  12.    3  drank  of  hisowncup.  and  lay  in  his  bosom 

1  Ki.  7.  26  brim . .  was  wrought  like  the  brim  of  a  cup 

2  Ch.  4.    5  brim,  .like  the  work  of  the  brim  of  a  cup 
Psa.  11.    6  (this  shall  be)  the  portion  of  their  cup 

16.    5  portion  of  mine  inheritance  and  of  my  cup 
23.   5  thou  anointest  my  head .  .my  cup  runneth 
75.   8  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (there  is)  a  cup 
116. 13  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call 

Psa.  51. 17  which  hast  drunk,  .the  cup  of  his  fury 
5r.  17  thou  hast  drunken  the  dregs  of  the  cup 
51.  22  I  have  taken  out  of  thine  hand  the  cup 
51.  22  (even)  the  dregs  of  the  cup  of  my  fury 

Jer.   16.    7  neither  shall  (men)  give  them  the  cup  of 
25. 15  Take  the  wine  cup  of  this  fury  at  my 
25. 17  Then  took  I  the  cup  at  the  Lord's  hand 
25.  28  if  they  refuse  to  take  the  cup  at  thine 
35.    5  I  set.  .pots  full  of  wine,  and  cups,  and  I 
49.  12  whose  judgment(was)nottodrink  of  thee. 
51.    7  Babylon  (hath  been)  a  golden  cup  in  the 

Lam.  4.  21  the  cup  also  shall  pass  through  unto  thee 

Eze.  23.  31  will  I  give  her  cup  into  thine  hand 

23.  32  Thou  shalt  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  deep 
23-  33  the  cup  of  astonishment  and  desolation 
23-33  with  the  cup  of  thy  sister  Samaria 

Hab.  2. 16  the  cup  of  the  Lord's  right  hand  shall  be 


I  4.  Cup,  D'3  his. 

Prov.23.  31  when  it  giveth  his  colour  in  the  cup 
I  5.  Basin,  cup,  *]p  saph. 

Zech.  12.    2  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trembling 

6.  Cup,  dish,  bowl,  ilife>p  nj?£  quasah,  qasvah. 

1  Ch.28.  17  pure  gold  for  the  flesh  hooks. .and  the  c. 

7.  Drinking  vessel,  Trorr)ptov  poterion. 

Matt  10.  42  a  cup  of  cold  (water)  only  in  the  name  of 
20.  22  Are  ye  able  to  drink  of  the  cup  that 
20.  23  Ye  shall  drink  indeed  of  my  cup,  and  be 
23-  25  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and 
23.  26  cleanse.,  that  (which  is)  within  the  cup 
26. 27  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and 
26.  39  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from 
26.  42  if  this  [cup]  may  not  pass  away  from  me 

Mark  7.   4  [the  washing  of  cups,  and  pots,  brazen] 
7.    8  (as)  the  washing  of  pots  and  cups 
9.  41  whosoever  shall  give  you  a  cup  of  water 
10.  38  can  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of? 
10.  39  Ye  shall  indeed  drink  of  the  cup  that  I 
14. 23  he  took  the  cup,  and  when  he  had  given 
14.  36  all  things  (are)  possible,  .take  away  this c. 

Luken.  39  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and 
22. 17  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  aud 
22.  20  Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper 
22.  20  This  cup  (is)  the  new  testament  in  my 
22.  42  if  thou  be  willing,  remove  this  cup  from 

John  18. 11  the  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me 

1  Co.  10.  16  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it 

10.  21  Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  .cup 
11.25  After  the  same  manner,  .(he  took)thecup 

11.  25  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my 

11.  26  For  as  often  as  ye.  .drink  this  cup,  ye  do 

11. 27  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  (this)  cup 

11.  28  eat  of  (that)  bread,  and  drink  of  (that)  c. 

Rev.  14.  10  poured  out  without  mixture  into  the  cup 

16.  19  to  give  unto  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of 

17.  4  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of 

18.  6  in  the  cup  which  she  hath  filled  fill  to 

CUP  hearer  — 

To  give  to  drink,  ntf  shaqah,  5. 

1  Ki.io.   5  the  attendance,  .his  cup  bearers,  and 

2  Ch.  9.   4  his  cup  bearers  also,  and  their  apparel 
Neh.  1.  11  For  I  was  the  kings  cup  bearer 

CURDLE,  to  — 

To  congeal,  harden,  curdle,  N3|5  qapha,  5. 

Job  10.  10  Hast  thou  not.  .curdled  me  like  cheese? 
CURE  — 
1. Healing,  cure,  N?no  marpe* 

Jer.  33.   6  I  will  bring  it  health  and  cure,  and  I  will 
2. Healing,  cure,  iaats  iasis. 

Lukei3.  32  I  do  cures  to  day  and  to  morrow,  and  the 
CURE,  to  — 
l.To  remove,  cure,  nna  gahah. 

Hos.    5. 13  yet  could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you 

2.  To  heal,  (tan  raphah. 

Jer.  33.   6  I  will  cure  them,  and  will  reveal  uuto 

3.  To  cherish,  cure,  attend,,  8epaTrevu>  therapeud. 
Matti7.  16  I  brought  him.  .and  they  could  not  cure 

17.  18  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  hour 
Luke  7.  21  he  cured  many  of  (their)  infirmities  and 
g.    1  and  gave  them  power,  .to  cure  diseases 
John  5.  10  The  Jews,  .said  uuto  him  that  was  cured 

CURED  — 
A  bandage,  n?jw  tealah. 

Jer.  46. 11  in  Vain . .  (for)  thou  shalt  not  be  cured 
CURIOUS  arts,  used  — 
Working  round  about,  ireplepyos  periergos. 

Acts  ig.  19  Many  of  them  also  which  used  curious  a. 
CURIOUS  works  — 
Thought,  device,  design,  na^:po  machashebeth. 

Exod  35.  32  to  devise  curious  works,  to  work  in  gold 
CURIOUSLY  wrought  — 
To  be  embroidered,  Dp"j  raqam,  4. 

Psa.139. 15  curiously  wrought  in  the  lowest  parts 
CURRENT — 
To  pass  over,  Tajf  abar. 

Gen.  23. 16  silver,  current  (money)  with  the  merchant 
CURSE  — 
l.Oath,  execration,  imprecation,  n?x  alah. 

Num.  5. 21  The  Lord  make  thee  a  curse  and  an  oath 
5.  23  the  priest  shall  write  these  curses  in  a 
5.  27  the  woman  shall  be  a  curse  among  her 

Deut  29.  19  when  he  heareth  the  words  of  this  curse 
29.  20  all  the  curses  that  are  written  in  this 

29.  21  according  to  all  the  curses  of  the  covenant 

30.  7  Lord  thy  God  will  put  all  these  curses 
2  Ch.34.  24  all  the  curses  that  are  written  in  the 
Neh.  10.  29  entered  into  a  curse,  aud  into  an  oath 
Job    31.  30  Neither,  .by  wishing  a  curse  to  his  soul 
Isa.    24.   6  Therefore  hath  the  curse  devoured  the 
Jer.   29.  i3  to  be  a  curse,  and  an  astonishment,  and 
Dan.   9. 11  the  curse  is  poured  upon  us,  and  the 
Zech.  5.    3  This  (is)  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over 

2.  A  devoted  thing,  Dnrt  cherem. 

Josh.  6.  t8  make  the  camp  of  Israel  a  curse,  and 
Isa.  34.    s  come  down,  .upon  the  people  of  my  curse 
43.  28  have  given  Jacob  to  the  curse,  and  Israel 
Mai.    4.   6  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse 


3. Curse,  execration,  rrixp  meerah. 

Prov.  3.  33  The  curse  of  "the  Lord  (is)  in  the  house 

28.  27  hideth  his  eyes  shall  have  many  a  curse 
Mai.    2.    2  I  will  even  send  a  curse  upou  you,  and 

3.    9  Ye  (are)  cursed  with  a  curse :  for  ye 
4. A  reviling,  thing  lightly  esteemed,  n^p  qelalah. 
Gen.  27.  12  bring  a  curse  upou  me,  and  not  a  blessing 

27.  13  Upon  me  (be)  thy  curse,  my  son :  only  ob. 
Deut  11.  26  I  set.  .this  day  a  blessing  and  a  curse 

11.  28  a  curse,  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  command. 

11.  29  thou  shalt  put.  .the  curse  upon  mount  E. 

23.   5  the  Lord  thy  God  turned  the  curse  into 

27.  13  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  Ebal  to  cur. 

28. 15,  45  all  these  curses  shall  come  upon  thee 

29.  27  to  bring  upon  it  all  the  curses  that  are 

30.  1  the  curse,  which  I  have  set  before  thee 
Judg.  9.  57  upon  them  came  the  curse  of  Jotham 

1  Ki.    2.    8  with  a  grievous  curse  in  the  day  when 

2  Ki.  22.  19  should  become  a  desolation  and  a  curse 
Neh.  13.  2  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing 
Prov.26.   2  so  the  curse  causeless  6hall  not  come 

27.  14  it  shall  be  counted  a  curse  to  him 
Jer.  24.   9  reproach  and  a  proverb,  a  taunt  and  a  cu. 
25  iS  to  make  them  a  desolation,  .and  a  curse 
26.    6  will  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  the 
29.  22  of  them  shall  be  taken  up  a  curse  by  all 
42. 18  ye  shall  be  an  execration,  .and  a  curse 
44.    8  that  ye  might  be  a  curse  and  a  reproach 
44.  12  they  shall  be  an  execration,  .and  a  curse 
44.  22  therefore  is  your  laud,  .a  curse,  without 
49.  13  shall  become  a  desolation,  .and  a  curse 
Zech.  8. 13  as  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  heathen,  O 

5. Swearing,  oath,  •iipa?'  shebuah. 

Isa.  65. 15  ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a  curse  unto 
6.  Oath,  imprecation,  execration,  n7xri  taalah. 

Lam.  3.  65  Give  them  sorrow  of  heart,  thy  curse  ' 
1  .A  thing  put  up  for  execration,  KaTavade/Aa. 

Rev.  22.   3  there  shall  be  no  more  [curse] :  but  the 
8.-4  thorough  curse,  Kardpa  katara. 

Gal.    3.  10  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse 
3.  13  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of 
3. 13  being  made  a  curse  for  us  :  for  it  is  writ. 
CURSE,  to  bind  under  a  — 
To  place  tender  an  anathema,  dvaO^^ari^w. 

Acts  23. 12  bound  themselves  under  a  curse,  saying 
CURSE,  to  bind  under  a  great  — 
To  place  under  anathema,  dvadefiari  aj/a.6efj.a,Tifa. 

Acts  23. 14  have  bound  ourselves  under  a  great  curse 
CURSE,  to  — 
l.To  swear,  take  oath,  execrate,  nbi<  alah. 

Judgi7.   2  about  which  thou  cursedst,  and  spakest 

2.  To  curse,  make  bitter,  -nx  arar. 

Gen.  12.   3  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him 

27.  29  cursed  (be)  every  one  that  curseth  thee 
Exod22.  2S  nor  curse  the  ruler  of  thy  people 
Num22.    6  Come.  .1  pray  thee,  curse  me  this  people 
22.    6  for  I  wot  that,  .he  whom  thou  cursest 

22.  12  thou  shalt  not  curse  the  people  :  for  thejr 

23.  7  Come,  curse  me  Jacob,  and  come,  defy  I. 

24.  9  aud  cursed  (is)  he  that  curseth  thee 
Judg.  5.23  Curse  ye  Meroz..  curse  ye  bitterly  the 
Job     3.    8  Let  them .  .that  curse  the  day,  who  are 
Mai.    2.    2  and  I  will  curse  your  blessings  ;  yea 

2.   2  I  have  cursed  them  already,  because  ye 

3.  To  curse,  make  bitter,  "nx  arar,  3. 

Gen.   5.  29  the  ground  which  the  Lord  hath  cursed 

4.  To  bless,  (bid  farewell  to  ?),  Tpa  harak,  3. 

Job     1.    s  sinned,  and  cursed  God  in  their  hearts 
1. 11  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face 
2.   5  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face 
2.  9  retain  thine  integrity  ?  curse  God,  and 

5.  To  pierce,  execrate,  api  naqab. 

Nuni23.   8  How  shall  I  curse,  whom  God  hath  not  c. 

23.  25  Neither  curse  them  at  all,  norbless  them 
Job     3.    8  Let  them  curse  it.  .who  are  ready  to  raise 

5.   3  but  suddenly  I  cursed  his  habitation 
Prov.ii.  26  He  that  withholdeth.  .people  shall  curse 

24.  24  him  shall  the  people  curse,  nations  shall 

6. To  pierce,  execrate,  aa[?  qabab. 

Nuni22.  11  (there  is)  a  people  come  out. . curse  me 
22. 17  come.  .1  pray  thee,  curse  me  this  people 
23.    8  How  shall  I.,  whom  God  hath  not  cursed? 
23. 11 1  took  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and 
23  13  and  curse  me  them  from  thence 

23.  27  that  thou  mayest  curse  me  them  from 
24. 10 1  called  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and 

7. To  lightly  esteem,  vilify,  revile,  h%  qalal,  3. 
Gen.   8.  21  I  will  not  again  curse  the  ground  any 

12.    3  him  that  curseth  thee  :  and  in  thee  shall 

Exod2i.  17  he  that  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother 

Lev.  19. 14  Thou  shalt  not  curse  the  deaf,  nor  put  a 

20.   9  every  one  that  curseth  his  father  or  his 

20.  9  he  hath  cursed  his  father  or  his  mother 

24.  it  the.  .woman's  son  blasphemed,  .and  cur. 
24.  14  Bring  forth  him  that  hath  cursed  without 
24. 15  Whosoever  curseth  his  God  shall  bear  his 
24.  23  should  bring  forth  him  that  had  cursed 

Deut  23.  4  hired  against  thee  Balaam .  .to  curse  thee 
Josh.24.  9  called  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  to  curse  you 
Judg  9.  27  did  eat  and  drink,  and  cursed  Abimeleeh 

1  Sa.  17.  43  the  Philistine  cursed  David  by  his  gods 

2  Sa.  16.    5  he  came  forth,  and  cursed  still  as  he  ca. 


CURSE 


216 


CUT 


2  Sa.  16.  7  thus  said  Shimei  when  he  cursed,  Come 
16.  9  Why  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord 
16.  io  What  have  I  to  do  with  you.  .let  him  cu. 
16.  io  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  him,  cmse  Da. 
16.  ii  let  him  curse  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  hidden 
16.  13  Shimei  went  along,  .and  cursed  as  he 
19.  21  because  he  cursed  the  Lord's  anointed? 

iKi.  2.    8  Shimei  the  son  of  Gera..  which  cursed  me 

2  Ki.  2.  24  and  cursed  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

Sen.  13.  2  hired  Balaam,  .that  he  should  curse  them 
13-  25  I  contended  with  them,  and  cursed  them 

Job      3.    1  After  this  opened  Job  his  mouth,  and  cu. 

Psa.  37.  22  (they  that  be)  cursed  off  him  shall  be  cut 
62.  4  they  bless  with  their  mouth,  butthey  cur. 
109.  28  Let  them  curse,  but  bless  thou  :  when 

Prov  20.  20  Whoso  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother 
30.  10  lest  he  curse  thee,  and  thou  be  found 
30.  ri  (There  is)  a  generation  (that)  curseth 

Eccl.  7.  21  lest  thou  hear  thy  servant  curse  thee 

7.  22  thou  thyself  likewise  hast  cursed  others 
10.  20  Curse  not  the  king,  .and  curse  not  the 

Isa.      8.  21  they  shall,  .curse  their  king  and  their  G. 

Jer.   15. 10  (yet)  every  oue  of  them  doth  curse  me 

8.  To  anathematize,  avaQzixartfa  anathematizo. 
Mark  14.  71  he  began  to  curse  and  to  swear,  (saying) 

9.  To  speak  evil  of,  Katto\oy€w  kakologeo. 

Matti5.    4  He  that  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him 
Mark  7.  10  Whoso  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him 

10.7b  anathematize  thoroughly)  KaTavadefj-arifa. 
Matt  26.  74  Then  began  he  [to  curse]  and  to  swear 

11.  To  wish  a  curse  against  {one),  Karapdojxat. 
Matt.  5.  44  [Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse] 
Mark  n.  21  the  fig  tree  which  thou  cursadst  is  withe. 
Luke  6.  28  Bless  them  that  curse  you,  and  pray  for 
Rom  12.  14  Bless  them  which  persecute  you.  .curse 
Jas.    3.   9  therewith  curse  we  men,  which  are  made 

CURSE,  to  cause  the  — 

To  curse,  make  bitter,  "nx  arar,  3 

Num.  5. 18, 19,  24  bitter  water  that  cause th  the  curse 
5.  22,  24,  27  water  that  causeth  the  curse  shall 

CURSED  — 

1.7b  curse,  make  bitter,  ~nx  arar. 

Gen.   3. 14  thou  (art)  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and 

3.  17  cursed  (is)  the  ground  for  thy  sake 

4.  11  now(art)thou  cursed  from  the  earth,  which 
9.  25  Cursed  (be)  Canaau,  a  servant  of  servants 

27.  29  cursed  (be)  every  oue  that  curseth  thee 
49.    7  Cursed  (be)  their  anger,  for  it  (was)  fierce 
Num.  24.    9  Blessed  (is)  he  that  blesseth.  .and  cursed 
Deut27-  is  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  maketh(any) 
27.  16  Cursed  (be)  he  that  setteth  light  by  his 
27.  17  Cursed  (be)  he  that  removeth  his  neighb. 
27.  18  Cursed  (be)  he  that  maketh  the  blind  to 
27.  19  Cursed  (be)  he  that  perverteth  the  judg. 
27.  20,  21,  22,  23  Cursed  (be)  he  that  lieth  with 
27.  24  Cursed  (be)he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour 
27.  25  Cursed  (be)  he  that  taketh  reward  to  slay 

27.  26  Cursed  (be)  he  that  conflrmeth  not  (all) 

28.  16  Cursed(shalt)thou(be)inthe  city,  andcu. 
28.  17  Cursed  (shall  be)  thy  basket  and  thy  store 
28.  18  Cursed  (shall  be)  the  fruit  of  thy  body,  and 
28.  19  Cursed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  when  thou  comest 
28.  19  cursed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  when  thou  goest 

Josh.  6.  26  Cursed  (be)  the  man  before  the  Lord  that 

9.  23  therefore  ye  (are)  cursed  ;  aud  there  shall 

Judgai.  18  Cursed  (be)  he  that  giveth  a  wife  to  Benja. 

1  Sa.  14.  24,  28  Cursed  (be)  the  mau  that  eateth  (any) 

26.  19  if  (they  be)  the  children  of  meu,  cursed 

2  Ki.  9.  34  Go,  see  now  this  cursed  (woman),  and 
Psa. 119.  21  hast  rebuked  the  proud  (that  are)  cursed 
Jer.  11.    3  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  obeyeth  not 

17.    5  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man 

20. 14  Cursed  (be)  the  day  wherein  I  was  born 

20. 15  Cursed  (be)  the  man  who  brought  tidings 
48.  10  Cursed  (be)  he  that  doeth  the  work  of  the 
48.  10  cursed  (be)  hethatkeepeth  back  hissword 

.  14  cursed  (be)  the  deceiver,  which  hath  in 

2.  One  upon  whom  a  curse  lies,  iviKardparos. 

Johu  7.  49  people  who  knoweth  not  the  law  [are  cur.] 

Gal.     3.  10  Cursed  (is)  every  one  that  continueth  not 
3. 13  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 
3.-4  curse,  Kardpa  katara. 

2  Pe.  2.  14  beguiling  unstable  souls.,  cursed  children 
CURSED,  to  be  — 
l.Tb  he  cursed,  made  bitter,  "nx  arar,  2. 

Mai.    3.    9  Ye  (are)  cursed  with  a  curse :  for  ye  have 
2.  To  be  made  cursed  or  bitter,  *nx  arar,  6. 

Num  22.    6  and  he  whom  thou  cu'rsest  is  cursed 
Z.To  be  lightly  esteemed,  vilified,,  S'pp  qalal,  4. 

Job    24.  18  their  portion  is  cursed  in  the  earth 
4.  To  wish  a  curse  against  one,  Karapdo fiat  katara. 

Matt  25.  41  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever. 
CURSED  thing  — 
A  devoted  thing,  nnn  cJierem. 

Deut.  7.  26  lest  thou  be  a  cursed  thing  like  it 

7.  26  utterly  abhor  it;  for  it  (is) a  cursed  thing 
13. 17  shall  cleave  nought  of  the  cursed  thing 
CURSING  — 
l.Oath,  execration,  imprecation,  rhx  alah. 

Num.  5.  at  charge  the  woman  with  'an  oath  of  cursing 

Psa.  10.    7  His  mouth  is  full  of  cursiug  and  deceit 
59. 12  for  cursing  and  lying  (which)  they  speak 

Prov 29.  2*  he  heareth  cursing,  aud  bewrayeth  (it) 


Mai. 


2.A  curse,  bitter  thing,  nnxp  meerah. 

Deut  28.  20  The  Lord  shall  send  upon  thee  cursing 

3. Reviling,  thing  lightly  esteemed,  n??|p  qelalah. 
Deut3o.  19  have  set  before  you.  .blessing  and  cursing 
Josh.  8.  34  he  read  all  the.,  blessings  and  cursiugs 
2  Sa.  16.  12  the  Lord  will  requite  me  good  for  his  cu. 
Psa. 109.  17  As  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  come  unto 
109. 18  he  clothed  himself  with  cursing  like  as 

4.A  curse,  cursing,  apd  ara. 

Rom.  3.  14  Whose  mouth  (is)  full  of  cursing,  .bitter. 

b.Full  cursing,  Kardpa  katara. 

Heb.   6.    8  which  beareth  thorns . .  (is)  nigh  unto  curs. 
Jas.    3.  10  Out  of  the  same  mouth  proceedetti.  .cur. 

CURTAIN  — 

l.Thin  veil,  pS  doq. 

Isa    40.  22  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  as  a  curtain 

2.  Curtain,  veil,  nun*  yeriah. 

Exod26.    1  make  the  tabernacle  (with)  ten  curtains 
26.    2,  8  The  length  of  one  curtain  (shall  be) 
'    26.    2,  8  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 
26.    2  every  one  of  the  curtains  shall  have  one 
26.    3  The  five  curtains  shall  be  coupled  togeth. 
26.   3  (other)  five  curtains  (shall  be)  coupled  one 
26.   4  of  blue  upon  the  edge  of  the  one  curtain 
26.    4  in  the  uttermost  edge  of  (another)  curtain 
26.   5  Fifty  loops,  .make  in  the  one  curtain,  aud 
26.    5  shalt  thou  make  in  the^edge  of  the  curtain 
26.    6  couple  the  curtains  together  with  the 
26.    7  thou  shalt  make  curtains  (of)  goats'  (hair) 
26.    7  eleven  curtains  shalt  thou  make 
26.    8  the  eleven  curtains  (shall  be  all)  of  one 
26.    9  shalt  couplefivecurtains.-andsixcur.by 
26.   9  shalt  double  the  sixth  curtain  in  the  fore 
26.  10  fifty  loops  on  the  edge  of  the  one  curtain 
26.  10  fifty  loops  in  the  edge  of  the  curtain 
26.  12  the  remnant  that  remaineth  of  the  curtai. 

26. 13  remaineth  in  the  length  of  the  curtains 
36.    8  made  ten  curtains  (of)  fine  twined  linen 
36.   9  The  length  of  one  curtain  (was)  twenty 
36.    9  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 
36.    9  the  curtains  (were)  all  of  oue  size 

36.  10  he  coupled  the  five  curtains  one  unto 
36.  10  (the  other)  five  curtains  he  coupled  one 
36.  11  loops  of  blue  on  the  edge  of  one  curtain 
36.  n  in  the  uttermost  side  of  (another)  curtaiu 
36.  12  Fifty  loops  made  he  in  one  curtain,  aud 
36.  12  loops  made  he  in  the  edge  of  the  curtaiu 
36.  13  coupled  the  curtains  one  unto  another 

36. 14  he  made  curtains  (of)  goats'  (hair)  for  the 
36. 14  eleven  curtains  he  made  them 

36.  15  The  length  of  one  curtain  (was)  thirty  cu. 

36.  15  four  cubits  (was)the  breadth  of  one  curtain 

36.  16  he  coupled  five  curtains . .  and  six  curtains 

36.  17  fifty  loops  upon  the.  .edge  of  the  curtain 

36.  17  fifty  loops.. upon  the  edge  of  the  curtain 

Num  4.  25  shall  bear  the  curtains  of  the  tabernacle 

2  Sa.    7.    2  the  ark  of  God  dwelleth  within  curtains 

1  Ch.17.    1  ark.  .of  the  Lord  (remaineth)  under  cur. 

Psa.  104.    2  who  stretchest  out  the  heavens  like  a  cu. 

Song  1.    5  the  tents  of  Kedar,  as  the  curtains  of  So. 

Isa.  54.    2  and  let  them  stretch  forth  the  curtains  of 

Jer.     4.  20  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  (and)  my  c. 

10.  20  (there  is)  none,  .to  set  up  my  curtains 

49.  29  they  shall  take  to  themselves  their  cur. 

Hab.    3.    7  (and)  the  curtains  of  the  land  of  Midiau 

Z.Veil,  hanging,  "HDD  nutsak. 

Num  3.  26  and  the  curtain  for  the  door . .  which  (is)  by 

CUSH,  W3  black. 

1.  Eldest  son  of  Ham  and  grandson  of  Noah,  B.C.  2250. 

Gen.  10.  6  sons  of  Ham;  C,  and  Mizraim,  and  Phut 

10.  7  sons  of  C;  Seba,  and  Havilah,  and  Sabtah 

10.  8  And  C.  begat  Nimrod  :  he  began  to  be  a 

1  Ch.  1.  8  The  sons  of  Ham  ;  C,  and  Mizraim,  Put 

1.    9  sous  of  C. ;  Seba,  aud  Havilah,  and  Sabta 
1.  10  C.  begat  Nimrod  :  he  began  to  be  mighty 

2.  This  title  was  of  great  antiquity.  It  is  applied  iu 
the  Hebrew  original  to  the  people  that  sprang  from 
Cush ;  but  in  the  common  version  is  translated 
"  Ethiopian." 

3.  It  is  also  used  to  denote  the  land  in  which  the 
descendants  of  Cush  dwelt,  Ethiopia  or  Abyssinia. 

Isa.  11.  11  from  Pathros,  and  from  C,  and  from  E. 

4.  A  Benjamite,  and  enemy  of  David. 

Psa.  7.  title,  concerningthe  words  of  C.  the  Benjamite 

5.  The  land  S.  of  Ethiopia  adduced  with  Phut  and  Lud. 

Isa.  18.    1  Woe  to  the  land,  .beyoud  the  rivers  of  E. 

6.  Meroe  enclosed  by  the  Nile  and  the  Atbar. 

Psa.  68.  31  Ethiopia  shall,  .stretch  out  her  hands 

7.  A  district  in  Susiana  and  Media. 

GeD.    2.  13  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ethiopia 
CU-SHAN,  Hfha  ALdioires. 

Perhaps  the  same  as  Chushau-rishathaim  (Judg.  3.  8, 
10),  king  of  Mesopotamia  This  seems  favoured  by  the 
order  of  events  alluded  to  byHabakkuk.  Others  think 
the  land  of  Midian  as  far  as  Sinai,  between  Elath  aud 
Moab,  is  meant. 

Hab.    3.    7  I  saw  the  tents  of  C.  in  affliction 
CU-SHT,  *?h3  black. 

1.  Joab's  messenger  to  David  concerning  the  battle  in 
which  Absalom  fell,  B.C.  1023. 

2  Sa.  18.  21  C,  Go  tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen 

18.  21  And  C.  bowed  himself  unto  Joab,  and 
18.  22  let  me,  I  pray  thee,  .run  af-ter  C. 


2  Sa.  18.  23  Then  Ahimaaz  ran.  .and  overran  C. 
18.  31  And,  behold,  C.  came  ;  and  C.  said 
18.  32  And  the  king  said  unto  C,  (Is).  .Absalom 
18.  32  C.  answered,  The  enemies  of  my  lord,  .be 

2.  Ancestor  of  Jehudi,  who  was  about  Jehoiakim,  B.C. 
690. 

Jer.  36.  14  Nathaniah.  .son  of  Shelemiah..son  of  C. 

3.  Father  of  Zephaniah  the  prophet,  who  lived  in  the 
time  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah,  B.C.  640. 

Zeph.  1.    1  which  came  unto  Zephaniah  the  son  of  C. 

CUSTODY  — 
I.Hand,  ~\\  yad. 

Esth.  2.    3  the  custody  of  Hege  the  king's  chamber. 
2.    8  maidens  were  gathered,  .to  the  custody 
2.    8  to  the  custody  of  Hegai,  keeper  of  the 
2. 14  the  custody  of  Shaashgaz,  the  king's  cha. 
2.  Inspection,  rn^s  pequddah. 

Num.  3.  36  the  custody  and  charge  of  the  sons  of  M. 

CUSTOM  — 

1.  Way,  375  derek. 

Gen.  31.  35  for  the  custom  of  women  (is)  upon  me 
2. -Road  tax,  toll,  T)J>q  halak. 

Ezra  4.  13  will  they mot  pay  toll,  tribute,  and  custom 
4.  20  tribute,  and  custom,  was  paid  unto  them 
7. 24  impose  toll,  tribute,  or  custom,  upon  them 

3. Statute,  pn  choq. 

Judg  11.  39  And  it  was  a  custom  in  Israel 

Jer.  32.  11  sealed  (according)  to  the  law  and  custom 

^.Statute,  ni?n  chuqqah. 

Lev.  18.  3oiiot(any  one)oftheseabominablecustoms 
Jer.  10.   3  For  the  customs  of  the  people  (are)  vain 

5.  Judgment,  tsE^P  mishpat. 

1  Sa.   2.  13  the  priest's  custom  with  the  people  (was) 
Ezra    3.    4  according  to  the  custom,  as  the  duty  of 

6. To  accustom,  edifa  ethizo, 

Luke  2.  27  to  do  for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  law 
7. Custom,  edos  ethos. 

Luke  1.    9  According  to  the  custom  of  the  priest's 

2.  42  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem  after  the  cus. 
Acts  6.  14  shall  change  the  customs  which  Moses 
16.  21  And  teach  customs,  which  are  not  lawful 
21.  21  they  ought  not.  .to  walk  after  the  customs 
26.  3  to  be  expert  in  all  customs  and  questions 
28.  17  committed  nothing  against  the  people  or  c. 

S.A  common  usage,  (rvvfjdeta  sunetheia. 

Johu  18.  39  ye  have  a  custom,  that  I  should  release 
1  Co.  11.  16  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the 

^.Custom,  toll,  reAos  ielos. 

MatUi7.  25  of  whom  do  the  kings,  .take  custom  or 
Kom.13.    7  custom  to  whom  custom;  fear  to  whom 

CUSTOM,  receipt  of  — 

Custom  house,  toll  house,  reXuviov  teldnion. 

Matt.  9.    9  a  man.  .sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom 
Mark  2.  14  Levi,  .sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom 
Luke  5.  27  a  publican,  .sitting  at  the  receipt  of  cus. 

CUSTOM  was,  as  his  — 

According  to  his  custom,  Kara  to  elwdbs  avrw. 
Luke  4.  16  as  his  custom  was,  he  went  into  the  syna. 

CUT,  to  — 

l.To  cut  (off),  JJ33  batsa. 

Amos  9.    1  and  cut  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them 

2.To  hew  (down),  2?n  chatsab,  5. 

Isa.   51.    9  (Art)  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  Rahab 

Z.To  cut  (down,  out,  off),  rns  karath. 

Exod34.  13  break  their  images,  and  cut  down  their 
Lev.  22.  24  Ye  shall  not  offer,  .that  which  is.. cut 
Deut23.    1  He  that,  .hath  his  privy  member  cut  off 

1  Sa.   5.    4  both  the  palms  of  his  hands  (were)  cut  off 

2  Ch.  2.    8  I  know  that  thy  servauts  can  skill  to  cut 

2.  10  I  will  give  to.  .thehewers  that  cut  timber 
2.  16  And  we  will  cut  wood  out  of  Lebanon,  as 
Prov  10.  31  but  the  froward  tongue  shall  be  cut  out 
Jer.  10.    3  for  (one)  cutteth  a  tree  out  of  the  forest 
34.  18  when  they  cut  the  calf  in  twain,  and  pas. 

4.  To  cut  in  pieces,  nm  nathach,  3. 

Exod2g.  17  thou  shalt  cut  the  ram  in  pieces,  and  wash 
Lev.    1.    6  he  shall  flay,  .and  cut  it  into  his  pieces 
1.  12  he  shall  out  it  into  his  pieces   with  his 
8.  2ohe  cut  the  ram  into  pieces;  and  Moses  burnt 

5.  To  split,  nhspalach. 

Psa.  141.    7  as  when  one  cutteth  and  cleaveth  (wood) 

6.  To  cut  asunder  or  off,  f3B  qatsats,  3. 

Exod39.    3  cut*(it  into)  wires  fto  work  (it)  in  the  blue 

7.  To  cut  out  or  away,  V1Q  qara. 

Jer.  36.  23  he  cut  it  with  the  penknife,  and  cast  (it) 
S.To  cut,  Ttiv  sur. 

1  Ch.20.    3  he  brought  out  the  people . .  and  cut  (them) 

9.  To  cut  against  or  greatly,  KaraKoirTw  katakoplo. 
Mark  5.    5  crying,  and  cutting  himself  with  stoues 

CUT,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  cut,  n*ia  karath,  4. 

Eze.  16.    4  day  thou  wast  born  thy  navel  was  not  cut 
2.  To  saw  through,  Sicnrpiot  diaprio. 

Acts    7.  54  they  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and .  .gnashed 


CUT 

3.  To  be  made,  *ny.  abad,  4. 

Dan.    2.    5  ye  shall  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  your  houses 
3.  29  That  every  people,  .shall  be  cut  in  pieces 

CUT  (to the  heart),  to  be  — 

To  saio  through,  Siairpiw  diaprio. 

Acts    5.  33.  they  were  cut  (to  the  heart),  and  took 

CUT  asunder,  to  — 

l.To  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  jna  gada. 

Zechu.  10  I  took  my  staff,  .and  cut  it  asunder 

11.  14  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff,  (evenXBa. 

2.  To  cut  asunder  or  of,  fSi?  qatsats,  3. 

Psa.i2g.   4  hath  cut  asunder  the  cords  of  the  wicked 
3.7*0  cut  in  two,  Six°To/i€a>  dichotomed. 

Mat.  24.  51  shall  cut  him  asunder,  and  appoint  (him) 
CUT  asunder,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  yna  gada,  2. 

Jer.  50.  23  How  is  the  hammer,  .cut  asunder  and 

CUT  down,  to  — 

A.  To  prepare,  form,  make,  cut  down,  K"J3  bara,  3. 
Josh.  17.  15  to  the  wood  (country),  and  cut  down  for 
17.  18  it  (is)  a  wood,  and  thou  shalt  cut  it  down 
2.7*o  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  jna  gada,  3. 

Deut.  7.    5  break  down  their  images,  and  cut  down 

2  Ch.14.    3  brake  down  the  images,  and  cut  dowu  the 

31.    1  brake  the  images  in  pieces,  and  cut  down 

34.   4  the  images  that  (were)  on  high . .  he  cut  d. 

34.    7  cut  down  all  the  idols  throughout  all  the 

3.7*o  cut  down  or  off,  "in  gazar. 

2  Ki.  6.    4  when  they  came  to  Jordan,  they  cut  down 
4.7*0  cut,  hew,  nan  cliatab. 

Eze.  39.  10  neither  cut  down  (any)  out  of  the  forests 
5.7*0  cut  off  or  down,  rnii  karath. 

!Numi3.  23  and  cut  down  from  thence  a  branch  with 

13.  24  which  the  children  of  Israel  cut  down 

Deutig.   5  his  hand  fetcheth  a  stroke,  .to  cut  down 

20.  19  and  thou  shalt  not  cut  them  down.. to 

20.  20  thou  shalt  destroy  and  cut  them  down 

Judg.  6.  25  and  cut  down  the  grove  that  (is)  by  it 

6.  26  with  the  wood,  .which  thou  shalt  cut  do. 
6.  30  he  hath  cut  down  the  grove  that  (was)  by 
9.  48  Abimelech.  .cut  down  a  bough  from  the 
9.  49  the  people,  .cut  down  every  man  his  bou. 
2  Ki.  18.  4  brake  the  images,  and  cut  down  the  groves 
19.  23  will  cut  down  the  tall  cedar  trees  thereof 
23.  14  brake  in  pieces  the  images,  and  cut  down 
2  Ch  15.  16  Asa  cut  down  her  idol,  and  stamped  (it) 
Isa.    37.  24  I  will  cut  down  the  tall  cedars  thereof 
Jer.  22.    7  they  shall  cut  down  thy  choice  cedars 
46.  23  They  shall  cut  down  her  forest,  saith  the 

C.  To  (cause  to)  cut  down,  rn3  karath,  5. 

Lev.  26  30  cut  down  your  images,  and  cast  your  car. 
7.7*o  go  round,  compass,  *pj  naqaph,  3. 

Isa.   10.  34  he  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the 
8.7b  cut,  shear,  asfj  qatsab. 

2  Ki.  6.   6  he  cut  dowu  a  stick,  and  cast  (it)  in 
9.7*0  shorten,  reap,  "isR  qatsar. 

Deut24.  19  When  thou  cuttest  down  thine  harvest  in 
10.  7*o  (cause  to)  cut  down,  tt$  tazaz,  5. 

Isa.  18.    s  and  takeaway  (and)  cut  down  the  branch. 
11.7*0  cut  off  or  out,  £kk6ittc0  ekkopto. 

Luke  13.    7  cut  it  down  ;  why  cumbereth  it  the  gr.? 
13.   9  (then)  after  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  dowu 

12.7*o  cut,  k6wtw  koptd. 

Matt  2i.    8  others  cut  down  branches  from  the  trees 
Markn.   8  others  cut  down  branches  off  the  trees 

CUT  down,  to  be  — 

1.2*0  be  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  yia  gada,  2. 

Isa.   14. 12  (how)  art  thou  cut  down  to  the  ground 
22.  25  In  that  day.  .shall  the  nail,  .be  cut  down 

Eze.    6.    6  your  images  may  be  cut  down,  and  your 
2.7b  be  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  yna  gada,  4. 

Isa.    9.  10  the  sycamores  are  cut  down,  but  we  will 
3.7*o  be  cut  off,  shaven,  shorn,  112  gazaz,  2. 

Nah    1.  12  yet  thus  shall  they  be  cut  down,  when  he 
4.  7*o  be  cut  off,  silent,  cease,  ncn  damah,  2. 

Zeph.  1.  11  for  all  the  merchant  people  are  cut  down 
5.7b  be  silent,  cease,  osi  damam,  2. 

Jer.   25.  37  the  peaceable  habitations  are  cut  down 
48.   2  Also  thou  shalt  be  cut  down,  O  Madmen 
6.  To  be  hid,  cut  off,  "ins  kachad,  2. 

Job    22.  20  our  substance  is  not  cut  down,  but  the 
7.7*0  cut  down,  np3  kasach. 

Psa.  80.  16  (It  is)  burnt  with  fire ;  (it  is)  cut  down 
8.7*0  be  cut  down,  rns  karath,  2. 

Job    14.    7  there  is  hope  of  a  tree  if  it  be  cut  down 
9.7*0  be  cut  down,  ni|  karath,  4. 

Judg.  6. 28  the  grove  was  cut  down  that  (was)  by  it 
10.7*0  cut  off,  hm  mul,  Za. 

Psa.  90.   6  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down,  and  wither. 
11.7*0  be  cut  off,  hbo  malal. 

Job  14.    2  cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut  do. 

Psa.  37.    2  they  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like  the  grass 
12.7b  be  cropt,  plucked,  tp$  qataph,  2. 

Job    8.  12  (is)  yet  in  his  greenness,  (and)  not  cut  d. 
28 


217 

13.  To  be  laid  Jwld  on,  sop  qamat,  4. 

Job  22.  16  Which  were  cut  down  out  of  time,  whose 

CUT  in  pieces,  to  — 

1.7*o  cut  inpieces,  nns  nathach,  3. 

Judg2o.   6  I  took  my  concubine,  and  cut  her  in  pie. 

1  Ki.18.  23  choose  one  bullock,  .and  cut  it  in  pieces 

18. 33  cut  the  bullock  in  pieces,  and  laid  (him) 
2.7b  cut  off,  asunder,  fXjj  qatsats,  3. 

2  Ki.24.  13  cut  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold 

2  Ch.  28. 24  cut  in  pieces  the  vessels  of  the  house  of 

CUT  in  pieces,  to  be  — 

1.7b  be  cut  off,  ?5D  mid,  -7a. 

Psa.  58.    7  let  them  be  as  cut  in  pieces 
2. 7b  be  cut,  En'7  sarat,  2. 

Zech  12.    3  burden  themselves .  .shall  becut  in  pieces 
CUT  in  sunder,  to  — 
1.7b  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  jna  gada,  3. 

Isa.   45.    2  I  will,  .cut  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron 
2.7b  cut  off,  asunder,  yxj)  qatsats,  3. 

Psa.  46.    9  breaketh  the  bow,  audcutteth.  .in  sunder 
3.7b  cut  in  two,  5txoTOfX€w  dichotomco. 

Lukei2.  46  will  come,  .will  cut  him  in  sunder 

CUT  off  — 

7b  be  cut  off,  asunder,  f'gp  qatsats,  4. 

Judg.  1.    7  their  thumbs  and  their  great  toes  cut  off 

CUT  off,  to  — 

1.7b  cut  off  (dishonestly),  y*3  balsa,  3. 

Job  6.  9  would  let  loose  his  hand,  and  cut  me  off 
Isa.  38. 12  he  will  cut  me  off  with  pining  sickness 

2.7b  gather,  cut  off,  ixa  batsar. 

Psa.  76. 12  He  shall  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes 

3.  7b  cut  off,  down,  asunder,  jna  gada. 

1  Sa.    2.  31  the  days  come,  that  1  will  cut  off  thine 
Psa.  75.  10  horns  of  the  wicked  also  will  I  cut  off 
Lam.  2.    3  He  hath  cut  off  in  (his)  fierce  anger  all 
Isa.    15.    2  (shall  be)  baldness,  .every  beard  cut  off 

4.  7*o  cut  off,  shave,  shear,  ira  gazaz. 

Jer.     7.  29  Cut  off  thine  hair,  (O  Jerusalem,)  and 

5. 7*o  pass  on,  f{yt)  chalaph. 

Job   11.  10  If  he  cut  off,  and  shut  up,  or  gather 
6. 7b  hide,  cut  off,  "i~3  kachad,  5. 

Exod  23.  23  and  the  Jebusites ;  and  I  will  cut  them  0. 

1  Ki.13.  34  this  thing  became  sin.  .even  to  cut  (it)  off 

2  Ch.32.  21  the  Lord  sent  an  angel,  which  cut  off  all 
Psa.  83.  4  let  us  cut  them  off  from  (being)  a  nation 
Zech  n.   8  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one 

7.7*0  cut  doion,  off,  rns  karath. 

Exod.  4.  25  Zipporah.  .cut  off  the  foreskin  of  her 

1  Sa.  17.  51  slew  him,  and  cut  off  his  head  therewith 

24.    4  David  arose,  and  cut  off  the  skirt  of 
24.    s  because  he  had  cut  off  Saul's  skirt 
24. 11  for  in  that  I  cut  off  the  skirt  of  thy  robe 
31.   9  they  cut  off  his  head,  and  stripped  off 

2  Sa.  10.   4  Hanun.  .cut  off  their  garments  in  the 

20. 22  they  cut  off  the  head  of  Sheba  the  son  of 
1  Ch.19.    4  Hanun.  .cut  off  their  garments  in  the 
Isa.  18.    5  he  shall  both  cut  off  the  sprigs  with 
Jer.    11.  19  let  us  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of 

50. 16  Cut  off  the  sower  from  Babylon,  and 
Eze.  31.  12  terrible  of  the  nations,  have  cut  him  off 
8.7b  (cause  to)  cut  down,  off,  rns  karath,  5. 

Lev.  17.  10  I  will,  .cut  him  off  from  amonghispeople 

20.    3  I  will,  .cut  him  off  from  amonghispeople 

20.    5  I  will,  .cut  him  off,  and  all  that  go 

20.    6  I  will . .  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people 

Num.  4.  18  Cut  ye  not  off  the  tribe  of  the  families 

Deuti2.  29  When  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  cut  off  the 

19.  1  When  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  cut  off  the 
Josh.  7.    9  shall  environ  us  round,  and  cut  off  our 

11.  21  at  that  time  came  Joshua,  and  cut  off  the 

23.  4  with  all  the  nations  that  I  have  cut  off 

1  Sa.  2.  33  man  of  thine,  (whom)  I  shall  not  cut  off 

20. 15  thou  shalt  not  cut  off  thy  kindness  from 

20.  15  not  when  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  the 

24.  21  that  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  seed  after 
28.   9  he  hath  cut  off  those  that  have  familiar 

2  Sa.  7.   9  have  cut  off  all  thine  enemies  out  of  thy 

1  Ki.  9.    7  Then  will  I  cut  off  Israel  out  of  the  land 

11.  16  until  he  had  cut  off  every  male  in  Edom 
14.  10  I  will,  .cut  off  from  Jereboam  him  that 
14. 14  who  shall  cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
18.   4  when  Jezebel  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the 

21.  21  I.  .will  cut  off  from  Ahab  him  that 

2  Ki.  9.    8  I  will  cut  off  from  Ahab  him  that  pisveth 

1  Ch.17.    8  I  have,  .cut  off  all  thine  enemies  from 

2  Ch.22.    7  whom  the  Lord  had  anointed  to  cut  off 
Psa.  12.    3  The  Lord  shall  cut  off  all  flattering  lips 

34.  16  to  cut  off  the  remembrance  of  thenrfrom 
101.   8  that  I  may  cut  off  all  wicked  doers  from 
109.  13  Let  his  posterity  be  cut  off  ;  (and)  in  the 
109.  15  that  he  may  cut  off  the  memory  of  them 
Isa.    g.  14  the  Lord  will  cut  off  from  Israel  head 
10.   7  to  destroy  and  cut  off  nations  not  a  few 
14.  22  cut  off  from  Babylon  the  name,  and 
48.    9  refrain  for  thee,  that  I  cut  thee  not  off 
Jer.     9.  21  to  cut  off  the  children  from  without 
44.    7  to  cut  off  from  you  man  and  woman 
44.    8  that  ye  might  cut  yourselves  off,  and 
44.  11  I  will  set  my  face,  .to  cut  off  all  Judah 

47.  4  the  day  that  cometh.  .to  cut  off  from 

48.  2  and  let  us  cut  it  off  from  (being)  a  nation 


Amos  ; 


Obad. 
Zeph.  1. 

1. 

Zech.  9. 
9- 


CUT 


Jer.  51.  62  spoken  against  this  place,  to  cut  it  off 
Eze.  14.    8  I  will  cut  him  off  from  the  midst  of  my 
14.  13  and  will  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it 
14.  17  so  that  I  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it 
*  14.  19,  21  to  cut  off  from  it  man  and  beast 
17.  17  building  forts,  to  cut  off  many  persons 
21.   3,  4  will  cut  off  from  thee  the  righteous  and 
25.    7  I  will  cut  thee  off  from  the  people,  and 
25.  13  and  will  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it 
25.  16  I  will  cut  off  the  Cherethims,  and  destroy 

29.  8  and  cut  off  man  and  beast  out  of  thee 

30.  15  and  I  will  cut  off  the  multitude  of  No 

7  cut  off  from  it  him  that  passeth  out  and 

5  I  will . .  cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  the 

8  I  will  cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  Ashdod 
3  I  will  cut  off  the  judge  from  the  midst 

10  that  I  will  cut  off  thy  horses  out  of  the 

11  I  will  cut  off  the  cities  of  thy  land,  and 

12  I  will  cut  off  witchcrafts  out  of  thine 

13  Thy  graven  images  also  will  I  cut  off 

14  will  I  cut  off  the  graven  image  and  the 

13  I  will  out  off  thy  prey  from  the  earth 

15  the  sword  shall  cut  thee  off,  it  shall  eat 

14  to  cut  off  those  of  his  that  did  escape 

3  I  will  cut  off  man  from  off  the  land 

4  I  will  cut  off  the  remnant  of  Baal  from 

6  I  have  cut  off  the  nations :  their  towers 
6  I  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines 

10  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim 
13.   2  (that)  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols 
Mai.    2.  12  The  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  doeth 

9.  7b  cut  off,  destroy,  silence,  rc^  tsamath. 

Lam.  3.  53  They  have  cut  off  my  life  in  the  dungeon 

10.7*o  cut  off,  destroy,  silence,  n<"¥  tsamath,  3a. 
Psa.  88.  16  over  pie  ;  thy  terrors  have  cut  me  off 

11.7*o  (cause  to)  cut  off,  destroy,  n.?y  tsamath,  5. 
Psa.  54.    5  He  shall  reward  evil,  .cut  them  off  in  thy 
94.  23  shall  cut  them  off  iu  then- own  wickedness 
94.  23  the  Lord  our  God  shall  cut  them  off 
101.    5  slandereth  his  neighb.,  him  will  I  cut  off 
143. 12  of  thy  mercy  cut  off  mine  enemies,  and 

12.7*0  cut  or  pluck  off,  Dpp  qasas,  Sa. 

Eze.  17.    9  cut  off  the  fruit  thereof,  that  it  wither? 
13.7b  cut  off,  draw  together,  ~i5i?  qaphad,  3. 

Isa.   38.  12  I  have  cut  off  like  a  weaver  my  life 
14.7b  cut  off,  end,  nxfj  qatsah,  3. 

Prov  26.    6  He  that  sendeth  a  message . .  cutteth  off 
15.7b  cut  off  or  asunder,  p»i?  qatsats. 

Deut.25.  12  thou  shalt  cut  off  her  hand,  thine  eye 
16.7b  cut  off,  asunder,  j'sp  qatsats,  3. 

Judg.  1.    6  and  cut  off  his  thumbs  and  his  great  toes 

2  Sa.   4.  12  cut  off  their  hands  and  their  feet,  and 

2  Ki.16.  17  king  Ahaz  cut  off  the  bordersof  the  bases 
18. 16  that  time  did  Hezekiah  cut  off  (the  gold) 

17.7*o  cut  off,  asunder,  yxp  qetsats,  3. 

Dan.    4.  14  Hew  down  the  tree,  and  cut  off  his  bran. 
IS.  7b  take  away,  a<paipea)  aphaireo. 

Marki4. 47  and  smote  a  servant,  .and  cut  off  his  ear 

Luke22.  50  And  one  of  them,  .cut  off  his  right  ear 
19.7*0  cut  awo.y,  au-o/coVToj  apokopto. 

Mark  9.  43  And  if  thy  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 
9.  45  Aud  if  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 

John  18.  10  smote  the.  .servant,  and  cut  off  his  right 
18.  26  (his)  kinsman  whose  ear  Peter  cut  off 

Acts  27.  32  the  soldiers  cut  off  the  ropes  of  the 

Gal.     5.  12  I  would  they  were  even  cut  off  which 

20.  7*o  cut  off  or  out,  ckkoVtw  ekkojHo. 

Matt.  5.  30  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 

18.    8  hand  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut  them  off 
Rom  11.  22  otherwise  thou  also  shalt  be  cut  off 
2  Co.  ii.  12  that  I  may  cut  off  occasion  from  them 

CUT  off,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  jna  gada,  2. 
Juilg2i.    6  There  is  one  tribe  cut  off  from  Israel 
Jer.   48.  25  The  horn  of  Moab  is  cut  off,  and  his  arm 
Amos  3.  14  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be  cut  off 

2. 7b  cut  off,  tu  guz. 

Hab.  3.  17  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold 

3.7*0  cut  down,  off,  "in  gazar. 

2  Ch.  26.  21  he  was  cut  off  from  the  house  of  the  Lord 
Psa.  88.    5  and  they  are  cut  off  from  thy  hand 

4.7*0  be  cut  down,  off,  "na  gazar,  2. 

Psa.  90.  10  for  it  is  soon  cut  off,  and  we  fly  away 
Isa.  53.    8  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living 
Lam.  3.  54  flowed  over  mine  head.  .1  am  cut  off 
Eze.  37.  11  hope  is  lost  :  we  are  cut  off  for  our  parts 

5.  7b  be  cut  off,  na  garaz,  2. 

Psa.  31.  22  I  am  cut  off  from  before  thine  eyes 
6.7*0  be  silent,  cut  off,  niri  damah,  2. 

Jer.   47.    5  Ashkelon  is  cut  off  (with)  the  remnant  of 

Hos.  10.    7  her  king  is  cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the 
10. 15  in  a  morning  shall  the  king,  .be  cut  off 

Obad.       5  if  robbers  by  night,  how  art  thou  cut  off ' 

7.7*o  be  silent,  cut  off,  Don  damam,  2. 

Jer.  49.  26  the  men  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  in  that 

50.  30  her  men  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  in  that 

51.  6  be  not  cut  off  in  her  iniquity  ;  for  this  (is) 

8.7b  be  hid,  103  kachad,  2. 

Exod.  9.  15  and  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  from  the  earth 
Job     4.    7  or  where  were  the  righteous  cut  off? 


CUT 


218 


DAILY 


Zech  ii.   9  that  is  to  be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off 

ii.  16  shall  not  visit  those  that  be  cut  off 

9.  To  be  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  rna  karath,  2. 

Gen.   o.  ii  neither  shall  all  flesh  be  cut  off  any 

17.  14  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people 

Exodi2.  15  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  Israel 
i2.  19  even  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  the 

30  33  3S  Whosoever  compoundeth. . be  cut  off 

31  14  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among 
Lev     7  "o  21,  27  even  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from 

7.  as  the  soul  that  eateth  (it)  shall  be  cut  off 
17     I,  0  that  man  shall  be  cut  off  from  among 

17.  14  whosoever  eateth  it  shall  be  cut  off 

18.  29  souls  that  commit  (them)  shall  be  cut  off 
iq.  8  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his 
20.  17  they  shall  be  cut  off  in  the  sight  of  their 
20.  iS  both  of  them  shall  be  cut  off  from  among 

22.  3  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  my  pres. 

23.  29  he  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people 
Num.  9.  13  the  same  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among 

15.  30  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his 
15.  31  that  soul  shall  utterly  be  cut  off 

19.  13  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  Israel 

19.  20  that  sourshall  be  cut  off  from  among  the 
Josh.  3.  13  the  waters  of  Jordan  shall  be  cut  off 
3, 16  those  that  came  down,  .were  cut  off 
4.    7  That  the  waters  of  Jordan  were  cut  off 

4.  7  the  waters  of  Jordan  were  cut  off 
Huth  4. 10  that  the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off 
Psa.  37.   9  evil  doers  shall  be  cut  off  :  but  those  that 

37.  22  (that  be)  cursed  of  him  shall  be  cut  off 
37.  28  the  seed  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off 
37.  34  when  the  wicked  are  cut  off,  thou  shalt 
37.  38  the  end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off 
Prov.  2.  22  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  earth 

23.  iS  and  thine  expectation  shall  not  be  cut  off 

24.  14  and  thy  expectation  shall  not  be  cut  off 
Jsa    11.  13  the  adversaries  of  Judah  shall  be  cut  off 

22.  25  burden  that  (was)  upon  it  shall  be  cut  off 
29.  20  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are  cut  off 
48. 19  his  name  should  not  have  been  cut  off  nor 

55.  13  everlasting  sign  (that)  shall  not  be  cut  off 

56.  5  everasting  name,  that  shall  not  be  cut  off 
Jer.     7.  28  truth  is.  .cut  off  from  their  mouth 

Dan.   9.  26  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off,  but  not  for 
Hos.    8.   4  made  them  idols,  that  they  may  be  cut  off 
Joel.  1.    5  for  it  is  cut  off  from  your  mouth 

1. 16  Is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  our  eyes 
Obad.       9  every  one.  .may  be  cut  off  by  slaughter 

10  and  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  for  ever 
Mic.    5.    9  and  all  thine  enemies  shall  be  cut  off 
Nan.  1. 15  wicked  shall  no  more  pass,  .he  is.  .cut  off 
Zeph.  1.  11  all  they  that  hear  silver  are  cut  off 

3.    7  so  their  dwelling  should  not  be  cut  off 
Zech.  9.  10  and  the  battle  bow  shall  be  cut  off 

13.  8  two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  (and) 

14.  2  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  cut  off 
10. 7^  be  cut  down,  off,  asunder,  rni  karath,  6. 

Joel    1.   9  the  drink  offering  is  cut  off  from 
11.7V)  be  cut  off,  ty?  malal,  2. 

Job    18. 16  and  above  shall  his  branch  be  cut  off 
24.  24  cut  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  corn 

12.  To  be  free,  acquitted,  rijjj  naqolh,  2. 

Zech.  5.    3  every  one  that  stealeth  shall  he  cut  off 

5.  3  every  one  that  sweareth  shall  be  cut  off 

13.  To  go  up,  rh$  alah. 

Job  36.  20  when  people  are  cut  off  in  their  place 

1 4.  To  be  cut  off,  destroyed,  silenced,  T\iy$  tsamath,  2. 
Job  23.  17  I  was  not  cut  off  before  the  darkness 

15.7V)  be  loathed,  cut  off,  oip  qot. 

Job     8. 14  Whose  hope  shall  be  cut  off,  and  whose 

CUT  out,  to  — 

l.To  chaw,  rend,  rip  up,  yp2  baqa,  3. 

Job    28.  10  He  cutteth  out  rivers  among  the  rocks 
2.To  rend  away,  ctd  out,  ;np  qara. 

Jer.  22.  14  will  build .  .and  cutteth  him  out  windows 
3.  To  cut  off  or  out,  4kk6itto}  ekkoptr,. 

Horn  1 1.  24  thou  wert  cut  out  of  the  olive  tree 

CUT  out,  to  be  — 

To  be  cut  off,  113  gezar,  2. 

Dan.    2.  34  Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out 
2.  45  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain 

CUT  selves,  to  — 

To  cut  self,  "na  gadad,  7a. 

Denti4.    1  Ye  shall  not  cut  yourselves,  normake  any 

1  Ki.  18.  28  they  cried  aloud,  and  cut  themselves 
Jer.  16.    6  nor  cut  themselves,  uor  make  themselves 

41.  5  clothes  rent,  and  having  cut  themselves 
47.    5  how  long  wilt  thou  cut  thyself? 

CUT  short,  to  — 

l.To  end,  nyp  qaisah,  3. 

2  Ki.  10.  32  the  Lord  began  to  cut  Israel  short 

2,To  rut  together1)  crwrifxvw  sunt&twiti. 

Rom.  9.  28  [he  will  finish  the  work,  and  cut  (it)  short  ] 

CUT  up,  to  — 

Torr,-j>,  pfatcfail,   F]§Jj  qr/f-f/.h. 

■Toll  30.    4  Who  cut  up  mallows  by  the  bushes,  and 
CUT  up,  to  be  — 
To  cut  doin/,  npsj  hasaeh. 

Isa.  33.  12  (as)  thorns  cut  up  shall  they  be  burned  in 


CU-THAH,  or  CUTH,  nni3,  ffls. 

Josephus  fixes  the  residence  of  the  Cutheans  in  the  in- 
terior of  Media  and  Persia.  There  was  a  district  and 
town  between  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  after  which 
the  4th  canal  of  Xenophon  was  named.  The  site  of 
the  town  has  been  identilied  with  the  ruins  of  Towibah, 
adjacent  to  Babylon ;  the  canal  may  be  the  river  to 
which  Josephus  refers.  The  other  locality  corresponds 
with  the  statement  that  the  Cutheans  came  from  the 
interior  of  Persia  and  Media.  They  have  been  identified 
with  the  Cossmi,  a  warlike  and  lawless  tribe  that 
occupied  the  mountain  ranges  dividing  those  two 
countries.  Alexander  the  Great  subdued  them  wholly. 
2  Ki.  17.  24  king  of  Assyria  brought  (men),  .from  C. 
17.  30  and  the  men  of  C.  made  Nergal,  and  the 

CUTTING  — 

l.A  cutting,  furrow,  ina  gedud. 

Jer.  48.  37  upon  all  the  hands  (shall  he)  cuttings,  and 
2. Engrainng,  carving,  ntjhn  charosheth. 

Exod3i.    5  in  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  (them),  and  in 
35.  33  in  the  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  (them) 
CUTTING  off — 

1.  Silence,  cutting  off,  'Cn  demi. 

Isa.   38. 10  I  said  in  the  cutting  off  of  my  days,  I 
2.To  cut  off,  end,  nyp  qatsah. 

Hab.  2.  10  Thou  hast  consulted  shame . .  by  cutting  o. 
CUTTINGS  — 
l.A  cutting,  incision,  tan^  seret. 

Lev.  19.  28  Ye  shall  not  make  any  cuttings  in  your 

2.  A  cutting,  incision,  na"^7  sareteth. 

Lev.  21.    5  They  shall  not.  .make  any  cuttings  in 
CYMBAL  — 
l.Pair  of  cymbals,  D'rtap  metsiltayim. 

1  Ch.13.    8  with  timbrels,  and  withcymhals,  and  with 

15. 16  psalteries  and  harps  and  cymbals,  soun. 
15.  19  (appointed)  to  sound  with  cymbals  of 

15.  28  with  trumpets,  and  with  cymbals,  making 

16.  5  but  Asaph  made  a  sound  with  cymbals 
16.  42  with  trumpets  and  cymbals  for  those 
25.    1  with  psalteries,  and  with  cymbals 

25.   6  with  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps,  for 

2  Ch.  5.  12  arrayed  in  white  linen,  having  cymbals 

5. 13  lifted  up  (their)  voice  with  the.  .cymbals 
2g.  25  he  set  the  Levites.  .with  cymbals 
Ezra   3.  10 Levites.  .with  cymbals,  to  praise  the  Lord 
Neh.  i2.  27  with  singing,  (with)  cymbals,  psalteries 
2.Cymbals,  D'^1?*  tscltselim. 

2  Sa.    6.    5  timbrels,  and  on  cornets,  and  on  cymbals 
Psa.  150.    5  Praise  him  upon  the  loud  cymbals 

150.    5  praise  him  upon  the  high  sounding  cym. 

3.  Cymbal,  Kv/xpaXov  kumbalon. 

1  Co.  13.    1  I  am  become  (as),  .a  tinkling  cymbal 
CYPRESS,  — 
Cypress,  holm,  oak,  ilex,  nn.Ti  tirzah. 

Isa.  44.  14  He.  .taketh  the  cypress  and  the  oak,  which 

CY'-PRUS,    Kl'TTOOS,    KvTTplOS. 

An  island  of  theE.  coast  of  Cilicia  in  the  Mediterranean. 
It  was  closely  connected  with  Phoenicia,  and  seems  to 
lie  referred  to  in  Eze.  27.  6.  It  was  colonised  by  the 
Phoenicians  at  a  very  early  period,  and  passed  under 
the  supremacy  of  the  Syrians,  the  Greeks,  the  Egyptians, 
and  the  Persians.  On  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great 
it  was  incorporated  with  Egypt.  It  was  made  a  Roman 
province,  B.C.  58.  Cfosar  gave  it  to  Arsinoe  and 
Ptolemy,  the  sister  and  brother  of  Cleopatra,  B.C.  47. 
It  was  made  an  imperial  province  B.C.  27,  but  was  given 
up  to  the  senate  B.C.  22.  Paul  and  Barnabas  visited 
the  island  A.D.  44. 

Acts   4.  36  Barnabas,  .a  Levite.  .of  the  country  of  C. 

11.  19  Stephen  travelled  as  far  as  Phenice,  and  C. 

ir.  20  some  of  them  were  men  of  C.  and  Cyrene 

13.    4  and  from  thence  they  sailed  to  C. 

15.  39  Barnabas  took  Mark,  and  sailed  unto  C. 

21.    3  Now  when  we  had  discovered  C,  we  left 

21.  16  and  brought  with  them  one  Mnason  of  C. 

27.    4  from  thence,  we  sailed  under  C. 

CY-RE'-NE,  Kvp-pvn. 

A  city  of  Libya  in  Cyrenaica,  N.  Africa.  It  was  the 
chief  of  the  five  cities  called  Pentapolitana.  The  pro- 
jecting portion  of  the  coast  called  Tripoli  corresponds 
to  the  Cyrenaica  of  classical  writers ;  though  on  the 
African  coast  Cyrene  was  a  Greek  city,  in  which  Jews 
settled  in  large  numbers.  Under  the  Romans  it  was 
connected  with  Crete.  The  Greek  colonisation  began 
B.C.  631. 

Matt  27.  32  as  they  came  out,  they  found  a  man  of  C. 

Acts  2.  10  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  C,  and 
11.  20  some  of  them  were  men  of  Cyprus  and  C. 
13.    1  Niger,  and  Lucius  of  C,  and  Manaen 

CY-RE-NI-AN,  KvpT)va7os. 

A  native  or  inhabitant  of  Cyrene. 

Mark  15.  21  And  they  compel  one  Simon  a  C. 

Lukc23.  26  they  laid  hold  upon  one  Simon,  a  C. 

Acts    6.    9  which  is  called  (the  synagogue)  of  the . .  C. 

CY-RE-NI-US,  Kvp-{)Pios. 

Governor  of  Syria  A.D.  6.  His  full  name  was  Publius 
Sulpicius  Qnirinus.  B.O.  12  he  was  made  consul.  His 
special  mission  to  Syria  was  to  make  the  census,  both 
there  and  in  Jiuhca.  Luke  apparently  makes  the  census 
at  the  birth  of  Christ,  when  Syria  was  under  the 
governorship  of  Sentius  Saturninus ;  but  perhaps  the 


reference  is  to  the  conclusion  of  the  census,  not  its 
beginning. 

Luke  2.    2  this  taxing  was.  .made  when  C.  was  gov. 

CY'-RUS,  Bn'l3  sun,  throne. 

The  founder  of  the  Persian  empire,  who  conquered 

Babylon,  and  assisted  the  Jews,  B.C.  536. 

2  Ch.36.  22  in  the  first  year  of  C.  .the  spirit  of  C. 

36.  23  Thus  saith  C.  king  of  Persia,  AH  the 

Ezra    1.    1  in  the  first  year  of  C.  king  of  Persia 

1.    1  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  C.  king 
1.    2  Thus  saith  C.  king  of  Persia,  The  Lord 
1.    7  C.  the  king  brought  forth  the  vessels 
1.    8  Even  those  did  C.  king  of  Persia  bring 

3.  7  the  grant,  .they  had  of  C.  king  of  Persia 

4.  3  C.  the  king  of  Persia  hath  commanded  us 

4.  5  all  the  days  of  C.  king  of  Persia,  even 

5.  13  in  the  first  year  of  C.  the  king  of  Babylon 
5.  13  king  C.  made  a  decree  to  build 

5.  14  those  did  C.  the  king  take  out  of  the 

5. 17  a  decree  was  made  of  C.  the  king  to  build 

6.  3  In  the  first  year  of  C.  the  king 

6.   3  C. .  .made  a  decree  (concerning)  the  house 
6.  14  according  to  the  commandment  of  C. 
Isa.  44.  28  That  saith  of  C,  (He  is)  my  shepherd 

45.    1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  his  anointed,  to  C. 
Dan.    1.  21  continued,  .unto  the  first  year  of  king  C. 
6.  28  Daniel  prospered .  .reign  of  C.  the  Persian 
10.    1  In  the  third  year  of  C.  king  of  Persia  a 


D 


DA-BA'-REH,  rn:n  pasture. 

A  Levitical  city  of   Issachar,  on  the  border.     Now 

Duburieh. 

Josh  21.  28  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar.  .D.  with  her  sub. 

DAB-BA'-SHETH,  TWSft  height. 

A  border  city  of  Zebulon  and  Issachar. 

Josh  19.  11  And  their  border,  .reached  to  D.,  and 

DA-BE'-RATH,  rnrs-i  pasture. 

See  Dabareh,  which  is  erroneously  given  for  Daberath. 
Josh  19,  12  and  then  goeth  out  to  D.,  and  goeth  up 
1  Ch.  6.  72  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar.  .D.  with  her  sub. 
DAGGER  — 
Destroying  weapon,  3"in  chereb. 

Judg.  3.  16  Ehud  made  him  a  dagger  which  had  two 
3.  21  took  the  dagger  from  his  right  thigh,  and 
3.  22  he  could  not  draw  the  dagger  out  of  his 

DA'-GON,  ]Mifsh. 

The  national  god  of  the  Philistines,  whose  most  famous 
temples  were  at  Gaza  and  Ashdod.  Its  form  had  the 
face  and  hands  of  a  man,  and  the  tail  of  a  fish. 

Judgi6.  23  to  offer  a  great  sacrifice  unto  D.  their  god 
1  Sa.   5.    2  into  the  house  of  D. ,  and  set  it  by  D. 

5.    3  D.  (was)  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  earth 
5.    3  they  took  D.,  and  set  him  in  his  place 
5.    4  D.  (was)  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  ground 
5.    4  head  of  D.  and  both,  .his  hands(were)  cut 
5.    4  only  (the  stump  of)  D.  was  left  to  him 
5.    5  Therefore  neither  the  priests  of  I). 
5.    5  nor  any  that  come  into  D.'s  house 
5.    5  tread  on  the  threshold  of  D. . .  unto  this 
5.    7  for  his  hand  is  sOre.  .upon  D.  om*  god 
1  Ch.  10.  10  fastened  his  head  in  the  temple  of  D. 
DALLY  — 
I.Day  by  day,  cv?  uv  yorn  beyom. 

Exod.  5.  13  Fulfil  your  works,  (your)  daily  tasks,  as 

5.  19  (ought)  from  your  bricks  of  your  daily  task 
16.    5  be  twice  as  much  as  they  gather  daily 
Num28.  24  After  this  manner  ye  shall  offer  daily 
Judgi6.  16  when  she  pressed  him  daily  with  her 
2KL  25.  30  a  daily  rate  for  every  day,  all  the  days 
2CI1. 31.  16  unto  every  one.  .his  daily  portion  for 
Ezra  3.    4  (offered)  the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  num. 
Esth.  3.    4  when  they  spake  daily  unto  him,  and  he 
Psa.  42.  10  theysaydailyuntome,Whcret;is)thy  God? 
56.    1  he  fighting  daily  oppresseth  me 
56.    2  Mint- enemies  would  daily  swallow  (me)  up 
61.    8  that  I  may  daily  perform  my  vows 
68.  19  (who)  daily  loadeth  us  (with  benefits) 
72. 15  he  shall  live,  .daily  shall  he  be  praised 
74.  22  the  foolish  man  reproacheth  thee  daily 
86.    3  Be  merciful,  .for  I  cry  unto  thee  daily 
88.    9  I  have  called  daily  upon  thee,  I  have 
8S.  17  They  came  round  about  me  daily  like 
Prov.  S.  30  I  was  daily  (his)  delight,  rejoicing  always 
8.  34  the  man  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily 
Isa.   58.    2  they  seek  me  daily,  and  delight  to  know 
Jer.     7.  25  daily  rising  up  early  and  sending  (them) 
20.    7  I  am  in  derision  daily,  every  one  mocketh 
20.    8  a  reproach  unto  me.  and  a  derision,  daily 
Eze.  45.  23  seven  rams  without  blemish  daily  the 

45.  23  a  kid  of  the  goats  daily  (for)  a  sin  offering 

46.  13  Thou  shalt  daily  prepare  a  burnt  offering 
Dan.  1.  5  the  king  appointed  them  a  daily  provision 
Hos.  12.    1  he  daily  increaseth  lies  and  desolation 

2.Daity,  by  day,  n^r  yoma?n. 

Psa.  13.    2  (having)  sorrow  in  my  heart  daily 
Eze.  30.  16  and  Noph  (shall  have)  distresses  daily 

3. Continual,  Tpn  tamid. 

Num.  4.  16  the  daily  meat  offering,  and  the  anoint. 
29.    6  the  daily  burnt  offering,  and  his  meat 


DAINTIES 


219 


DAN 


Dan.   8,  n  by  him  the  daily  (sacrifice)  was  taken 

8. 12  was  given  (hini)agaiust  the  daily  (sacrifice) 
8.  13  the  vision  (concerning)  the  daily  (sacri.) 

11.  31  shall  take  away  the  daily  (sacrifice),  and 

12.  11  from  the  time  (that)  the  daily  (sacrifice) 
i.For  one  day,  nnx  dV?  leyom  echacL 

Neh.    5.  iS  (that)  which  was  prepared  (for  me)  daily 
5. Sufficient,  appointed,  tTrtovcrios  ejnoitsios. 
Matt.  6.  11  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread 
Luke  11.    3  Give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread 

6. Daily,  for  the  day,  i<pi]}j.€pos  ephemeros. 

Jas.     2.  15  If  a  brother . .  be . .  destitute  of  daily  food 
7.Every  day,  daily,  KaQ-tyxtpipSs  kalhemerinos. 

Acts    6.    1  were  neglected  in  the  daily  ministration 
^.According  to  each  day,  tcad*  iKaarnv  i}jx4pav. 

Heb.   3.  13  exhort  one  another  daily,  while  it  is 
9. According  to  the  day,  each  day,  kcl(P  7}p.4pav 

Matt  26.  55  I  sat  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the 

Mavki4.  49  I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple  teac. 

Luke  9.  23  [let  him.,  take  up  his  cross  daily,  audfol.] 
19.  47  And  he  taught  daily  in  the  temple 

22.  53  When  I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple 
Acts    2.  46  continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the 

e.  47  the  Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such 
3.    2  whom  they  laid  daily  at  the  gate  of  the 

16.  5  the  churches .  .increased  in  number  daily 

17.  11  These,  .searched  the  Scriptures  daily 
19.    9  disputing  daily  in  the  school  of  one 

1  Co.  15.  31  I  protest  by  your  rejoicing..!  die  daily 
2C0. 11.  28  that  which  cometh  upon  me  daily,  the 
Heb.  7.  27  Who  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high  pr. 
10.  11  every  priest  standeth  daily  ministering 

10.  Through  every  day,  Kara  ircicav  i]jx4pav. 

Acts  17. 17  in  the  market  daily  with  them  that  met 

11.  Every  day,  trao'di/  yjxepav,  p>asan  hemeran. 
Acts   5.  42  daily  in  the  temple,  and  in  every  house 

DAINTIES,  dainty  (meats)  — 

1.  Things  full  of  taste,  niBJgCi  matavimoth. 

Pro  v.  23.    3  Be  not  desirous  of  his  dainties  ;  for  they 

23.  6  neither  desire  thou  his  dainty  meats 

2. Pleasant  things,  D'ay^a  manammim. 

Psa.141.   4  and  let  me  hot  eat  of  their  dainties 

3. Dainty,  delight,  \yj_v  maadan. 

Gen.  49.  20  and  he  shall  yield  royal  dainties 

4.  Object  of  desire,  nixn  taavah. 

Job  33.  20  abhorreth  bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat 

5.  Fat,  shining,  \nrap6s  liparos. 

Rev.    18.  14  all  things  which  were  dainty  and  goodly 

DA-LA'-IAH,  rr^n  Jah  is  deliverer. 

A  descendant  ofShechaniah. 

In  the  original  this    name    is  the  same   as  that  of 

several  persons  who  are  called  Delaiah  in  the  common 

version. 

1  Ch.  3.  24  Johanan,  and  D.,  and  Anani,  seven 

DALE  — 

Deep  place,  valley,  psy  emeq. 

Gen.  14.  17  valley ofShaveh,  which(is)theking'sdale 
2Sa.  18. 18  a  pillar,  which  (is)  in  the  king's  dale 

DAL-MA-ND"-THA,  Aa\fiavov6d. 

A  village  or  small  town  on  the  W.  side  of  the  sea  of 

Galilee,  near  Magdala,  close  to  the  shore,  at  the  south 

end  of  the  plain  of  Geunesaret.    It  is  now  called  Ain- 

el-Barideh, 

Mark  8.  10  he.  .came  into  the  parts  of  D. 

DAL-MA-TIA,  Aa\u.aTia. 

A  province  on  the  E.  coast  of  the  Adriatic  Sea,  extend- 
ing from  the  Naro  in  the  S.  to  the  Savus  in  the  N.  It 
became  a  part  of  (or  another  name  for)  the  Roman 
province  of  Illyricum  after  the  expedition  of  Tiberius 
(a.d.  9). 

2  Ti.  4. 10  Crescens  to  Galatia,  Titus  unto  D. 

DAL'-PHON,  J  i2^T  Persian  word;  otherwise  dropping. 

The  second  of  the  ten  sons  of  Hainan,  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    7  And  Parshandatha,  and  D.,  and  Aspatha 

DAM  — 

Mother,  nx  em. 

Exod22.  30  seven  days  it  shall  be  with  his  dam 
Lev.  22.  27  then  it  shall  be  seven  days  under  the  dam 
Deut  22.    6  the  dam  sitting  upon  the  young,  or  upon 
22.    6  thou  shalt  not  take  the  dam  with  the 
22.    7  (But)  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  let  the  dam 

DAMAGE  — 

1. Violence,  hurt,  Snn  cluAal. 

Ezra  4.  22  why  should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of 

2.  Violence,  Den  chamas. 

Prov26.   6  cuttethoff  thefeet,(and)drinketh  damage 

3.  Loss,  pjj  nezek. 

Esth.  7.    4  could  not  countervail  the  king's  damage 
4.Da?nage,  fa/tla  zemia. 

Acts  27. 10  voyage  will  be  with  hurt  and  much  dam. 
DAMAGE,  to  have  — 
To  suffer  loss,  pi;  nezak. 

Dan.   6.   2  and  the  king  should  have  no  damage 


DAMAGE,  to  receive  — 

To  cause  loss,  £ri{ii6w  zemiod. 

2  Co.  7.    9  ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  in  nothing 

DA-MA'-RIS,  Adfxapts. 

A  woman  in  Athens  converted  by  Paul,  A.D.  54. 

Acts  17.  34  a  woman  named  D.,  and  others  with  them 

DA-MAS  CENES,  Aafj.ao-K7]uot,  belonging  to  Damasc. 
The  people  of  Damascus. 

2  Co.  1 1.  32  the  king  kept  the  city  of  the  D.  with  a  gar. 

DAM-AS'-CTJS,  P'v&?,  ptoD"n,  pif'^l,  AapaGKos. 
The  most  ancient  and  important  city  in  Syria.  It 
stands  in  a  plain  of  great  fertility  E.  of  the  great  chain 
of  Antilibanus,  on  the  edge  of  the  desert.  The  modern 
Barada  (the  Amana  of  Scripture)  waters  this  plain, 
which  is  30  miles  in  diameter  and  nearly  circular. 
According  to  Josephus  Damascus  was  founded  by  Uz, 
son  of  Aram  and  grandson  of  Shem.  It  is  apparently 
first  mentioned  in  the  time  of  Abraham,  B.C.  1912.  It 
was  taken  by  David  B.C.  1040  and  was  the  capital  of 
Syria-during  the  reign  of  Ben-hadad,  B.C.  930.  Jeroboam 
restored  it  to  Israel  B.C.  822,  but  Tiglath-Pileser,  king 
of  Assyria,  took  it  B.C.  740,  and  carried  its  inhabitants 
captive  to  Kir.  It  afterwards  remained  subject  to  the 
Assyrians  and  Persians  till  B.C.  333,  when  it  was  taken 
by  Parmenio,  the  general  of  Alexander  the  Great. 
Pompey  effected  its  capture  B.C.  64.  Paul  commenced 
his  ministry  at  Damascus  a.d.  33. 

Gen.  14.  15  Hobah,  which  (is)  on  the  left  hand  of  D. 
15.    2  steward  of  my  house  (is)  this  Eliezer  of  D.  ? 

2  Sa.  8.    5  And  when  the  Syrians  of  D.  came  to  sue. 
8.    6  Then  David  put  garrisons  in  Syria  of  D. 

1  Ki.  11.  24  he  gathered  men.  .and  they  went  to  D. 
11.  24  dwelt  therein,  and  reigned  in  D. 

15.  18  Hezion,  king  of  Syria,  that  dwelt  at  D. 

19.  15  return  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness  of  D. 

20.  34  thou  shalt  make  streets  for  thee  in  D. 

£  Ki.   5.  12  (Are)  not  Abana  and  Pliarpar,  rivers  of  D. 
8.    7  And  Elisha  came  to  D.  ;  and.  .the  king 
8.    9  even  of  every  good  thing  of  D.,  forty  ca. 
14.  28  how  he  warred,  and  how  he  recovered  D. 

16.  9  the  king  of  Assyria  went  up  against  D. 
16.  10  And  king  Ahaz  went  to  D.  to  meet 

16. 10  and  saw  an  altar  that  (was)  at  D. 
16.  11  all  that  king  Ahaz  had  sent  from  D. 

16. 11  made  (it)  against  king  Ahaz  came  from  D. 

16.  12  when  the  king  was  come  from  D. 

1  Ch.  18.   5  Syrians  of  D.  came  to  help  Hadarezer 

18.    6  David  put  (garrisons)  in  Syria-d. 

2  Ch.16.    2  Ben-hadad  king  of  Syria,  that  dwelt  at  D. 

24.  23  and  sent  all  the  spoil .  .unto  the  king  of  D. 

28.    5  and  they,  .brought  them  to  D. 

28.  23  For  he  sacrificed  unto  the  gods  of  D. 
Song  7.  4  the  tower,  .which  looketh  toward  D. 
Isa.     7.    8  For  the  head  of  Syria  (is)  D. 

7.  8  and  the  head  of  D.  (is)  Rezin 

8.  4  the  riches  of  D. .  .shall  be  taken  away 
10    9  (is)  not  Samaria  as  D.  ? 

17.  1  D.  is  taken  away  from  (being)  a  city 

17.    3  Ephraim,  and  the  kingdom  from  D.,  and 
Jer.  49.  23  Concerning  D.    Hainath  is  confounded 
49.  24  D.  is  waxed  feeble,  (and)  turneth.  .to  flee 
49.  27  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  D. 
Eze.  27.  18  D.  (was)  thy  merchant  in  the.  .wares  of 
47.  16  between  the  border  of  D.  and  the  border 
47.  17  the  border,  .shall  be.  .the  border  of  D. 

47.  18  the  east  side  ye  shall  measure  from.  .D. 

48.  1  the  border  of  D.  northward,  to  the  coast 
Amos  1.    3  ForthreetransgressionsofD.,andforfour 

1.    5  I  will  break  also  the  bar  of  D.,  and.  cut  off 
3. 12  corner  of  a  bed,  and  in  D.  (in)  a  couch 
5.  27  to  go  into  captivity  beyond  D.,  saith  the 
Zech.  9.    1  and  D.  (shall  be)  the  rest  thereof 
Acts    9.    2  And  desired  of  him  letters  to  D. 

9.  3  as  he  journeyed,  he  came  near  D. 

9.   8  led  him . .  and  brought  (him)  into  D. 

9. 10  there  was  a  certain  disciple  at  D. 

9.  19  Then  was  Saul  certain  days. .at  D. 

9.  22  confounded  the  Jews  which  dwelt  at  D. 

9.  27  and  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  D. 
22.    5  whom.. I  received  letters.,  and  went  toD. 
22.    6  and  was  come  nigh  unto  D.  about  noon 
22.  10  the  Lord  said.  .Arise,  and  go  into  D. 
22. 11  led  by  the  hand.  .1  came  into  D. 
26.  12  Whereupon,  as  I  went  to  D.  with  author. 
26.  20  showed  first  unto  them  of  D.,  and  at  Jer. 
2  Co.  11.  32  In  D.  the  governor  under  Aretas.  .kept 
Gal.     1. 17  I  went,  .and  returned  again  unto  D. 

DAMNABLE  — 

Destruction,  loosing  away,  airtaKeia  apoleia. 

2  Pe.   2.    1  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable  heresies 

DAMNATION  — 

1. Destruction,  loosing  away,  aircvKeia  ajioleia. 
2  Pe.    2.  3  and  their  damnation  slumberetli  not 

2.  Judgment,  condemnation,  npiua  krima. 

Matt.  23.  14  ye  shall  receive  the  greater  damnation 
Marki2.  40  these  shall  receive  greater  damnation 
Luke  20.  47  the  same  shall  receive  greater  damnation 
Rom.  3.    8  Let  us  do  evil,  .whose  damnation  is  just 

13.    2  shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation 
1  Co.  11.  29  eateth  and  drinketh  damnation  to  him. 
1  Ti.    5. 12  Having  damnation,  because  they  have 

3.  Judgment)  Kpttxts  Crisis. 

Matt.23.  33  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of 
Mark  3.  29  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  [damnation] 
John  5.  29  unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation 


DAMNED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  judge  one  down,  KaraKpivu  katakrino. 

Marki6.  16  [but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  dam.] 
Rom. 14.  23  he  that  doubteth  is  damned  if  he  eat 

2.To  judge,  Kpiv<»  krino. 

2  Th.  2.  i2  That  they  all  might  be  damned  who  beli. 

DAMSEL  — 

l.Lass,  girl,  ~j?i  yaldah. 

Gen.  34.   4  saying,  Get  me  this  damsel  to  wife 

I.Damsel,  young  woman,  nny.:  naarah. 

Gen.  24.  14  that  the  damsel  to  whom  I  shall  say,  Let 
24. 16  the  damsel  (was)  very  fair  to  look  upon 
24.  28  the  damsel  ran,  and  told  (them  of)  her 
24.  55  Let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  (a  few)  days 
24.  57  We  will  call  the  damsel,  and  enquire  at 
24.  61  Rebekah  arose,  and  her  damsels,  and 
34.   3  his  soul  clave,  .and  he  loved  the  damsel 
34.    3  and  spake  kindly  unto  the  damsel 

34.  12  but  give  me  the  damsel  to  wife 
Deut22.  15  Then  shall  the  father  of  the  damsel,  and 

22.  15"  take . . (the  tokens  of)  the  damsel's  vjrgini. 
22.  16  the  damsel's  father  shall  say  unto  the 
22.  19  give  (them)  uuto  the  father  of  the  dam. 
22.  20  virginity  be  not  found  for  the  damsel 
22.  21  they  shall  bring  out  the  damsel  to  the 
22. 23  If  a  damsel  (that  is)  a  virgin  be  betrothed 
22.  24  the  damsel,  because  she  cried  not,  (being 
22.  25  if  a  man  find  a  betrothed  damsel  in  the 
22.  26  But  unto  the  damsel  thou  shalt  do  noth. 
22.  26  (there  is)  in  the  damsel  no  sin  (worthy)  of 
22.  27  the  betrothed  damsel  cried,  and  (there 
22.  28  If  a  man  find  a  damsel  (that  is)  a  virgin 
22.  29  shall  give  unto  the  damsel's  father  fifty 
Judg.19.    3  when  the  father  of  the  damsel  saw  him 
19.    4  the  damsel's  father,  retained  him 
19.    5  damsel's  father  said  unto  his  son  in  law 
19.    6  the  damsel's  father  had  said  unto  the  man 
19.   8  the  damsel's  father  said,  Comfort  thine 

19.  9  the  damsel's  father,  said  unto  him,  Behold 
Ruth  2.    5  Then  said  Boaz.  .Whose  damsel  (is)  this? 

2.    6  It  (is)  the  Moabitish  damsel  that  came 
1  Sa.  25.  42  with  five  damsels  of  hers  that  went  after 
1  Ki.  1.   3  they  sought  for  a  fair  damsel  throughout 

1.    4  the  damsel  (was)  very  fair,  and  cherished 

Z.Young  womant  virgin,  ncVy  ahnoh. 

Psa.  68.  25  among  (them  were)  the  damsels  playing 

4.  Womb,  crn  racham. 

Judg.  5.  30  to  everymau  a  damsel  (or)  two  ;  to  Sisera 

5.  A  little  girl,  Kopdfftou  korasion. 

Matt  14.  11  his  head  was.  .given  to  the  damsel 
Mark  5.  41  and  said.  .Damsel,  I  say  unto  thee,  arise 

5.  42  straightway  the  damsel  arose,  and 

6.  22  the  king  said  unto  the  damsel,  Ask  of 

6.  28  brought  his  head,  .and  gave  it  to  the  dam. 
6. 28  and  the  damsel  gave  it  to  her  mother 

6.-4  young  or  little  child,  waiSiov  paidion. 
Mark  5.  39  the  damsel  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 

5.  40  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the  damsel 
5.  40  entereth  in  where  the  damsel  was  lying 
5.  41  he  took  the  damsel  by  the  hand,  and 

7. A  young  damsel,  watdiaKn  paidiske. 

Matt  26.  69  a  damsel  came  unto  him,  saying,  Thou 
JohniS.  17  Then  saith  the  damsel  that  kept  the  door 
Acts  12.  13  a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named  Khoda 
16. 16  a  certain  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit 

DAN,  J?  judge. 

1.  Fifth  son  of  Jacob,  and  first  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's 
maid.    Dan  was  the  own  brotherof  JNaphtali.   B.C.  1747. 

Gen.  30.    6  a  son :  therefore  called  she  his  name  D. 

35.  25  sons  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's  handmaid ;  D, 
46.  23  And  the  sons  of  D.  ;  Hushim 

49.  16  D.  shall  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the 
49.  17  D.  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way 

Exod.  1.    4  D.,  and  Naphtali,  Gad,  and  Asher 

Kum26.  42  These  (are)  the  sons  of  D.  after  their  fami. 
26.  42  These  (are)  the  families  of  D.  after  their 

Josh.  19.  47  children  of  D.  went  up  to  fight  Rgainst  L. 

1  Ch.  2.    2  D.,  Joseph,  and  Benjamin,  Xaplitali 

2.  The  most  northern  city  of  Canaar*,  as  seen  in  the 
common  expression  "from  Dan  even  to  Beersheba." 
The  name  was  originally  Laish  or  Leshem  (Josh.  19.  47). 
The  inhabitants  lived  like  the  Zidonians,  engaged  in 
commerce,  and  without  defence.  Hence  the  Danites 
easily  conquered  the  place,  and  named  it  Dan.  Tell-el- 
Kadi,  its  modern  name,  is  the  western  and  smaller  of 
the  two  sources  of  the  Jordan,  4  miles  from  Paueas,  on 
the  road  to  Tyre.  The  long  level  top  of  the  Tell  is 
strewed  with  ruins,  and  is  probably  the  site  of  the 
town  and  citadel  of  Dan.  The  spring  is  called  El- 
Leddan,  and  the  stream  from  it  Nahr-ed-dhan. 

Gen.  14.  14  armed  his.,  (servts.)and  pursued.,  unto  D. 
Deut.  34.  1  Lord  showed  him.,  land  of  Gilead,  unto  D. 
Josh. 19.  47  called  Leshem,  D..  after  the  name  of  Dan 
JudgiS.  29  called  the  name.  .D.,  after  the  name  of  D. 

20.  1  the  congregation  was  gathered,  .from  D. 

1  Sa.   3.  20  all  Israel,  from  D.  even  to  Beer-sheba 

2  Sa.   3.  10  to  set  up  the  throne  of  David,  .from  D. 

17. 11  all  Israel  be.  .gathered,  .from  D.  even  to 
24.  2  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  from  D. 
24.  15  there  died,  .from  D. .  .to  Beer-sheba  sev. 
1  Ki.  4.  25  from  D. .  .to  Beer-sheba,  all  the  days  of  S. 
12.  29  set.  .one  in  Bethel,  and  the  other,  .in  D. 
12.  30  people  went  (to  worship),  .(even)  unto  D 
15.  20  Ben-hadad..  sent.,  and  smote  Ijon,  and  D. 


DANCE 


220 


DARK 


2  Ki.  10.  29  departed  not  from,  .golden  calves,  .in  D. 

1  Ch  2i.    2  number  Israel  from  Beer-sheba  even  to  D. 

2  Ch.16.    4  and  they  smote  Ijon.  and  D.,  and  Abel-m. 

30.    5  established  a  decree.. Beer-sheba.. to  D. 

Jer.     4  15  >'or  a  voice  declareth  from  U.,  and  publi. 

8.  16  snorting  of  his  horses  was  heard  from  D. 

Eze  27.  19  D  .  .going  to  and  fro  occupied  in  thy  fairs 

Amos  3.  14  They  that  swear,  .and  say,  Thy  God,  0  D. 

3.  The  name  is  used  to  denote  the  tribe  that  sprang 
from  Dan,  as  well  as  their  territory. 

Exodji     6  I  have  given..  Ahotiab..  of  the  tribe  of  D. 

35.  34  may  teach.. Aholiab.  .of  the  tribe  of  D. 

3S.  23  with  him  (was)?Aholiab..of  the  tribe  of  D. 
Lev  24.  it  daughter  of  Dibri.  of  the  tribe  of  D. 
Nam   i   12  Of  D  ;  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Ammi-sliaddai 
1.  38  Of  the  children  of  D.,  by  their  generations 

1.  39  that  were  numbered,  .of  the  tribe  of  D. 

2.  25  The  standard  of  the  camp  of  D.  (shall  be^ 
2.  25  the  captain  of  the  children  of  D.  (shall  he) 
2.  31  they  that  were  numbered  in.  .camp  of  D. 
7.  66  Ahiezer.  .prince  of  the  children  of  D. 

10.  25  the  standard  of  the  camp,  .of  D.  set  for. 

13.  12  Of  the  tribe  of  D.,  Ammiel  the  son  of  G. 

26.  42  These  (are)  the  sons  of  D.  after  their  fa. 

26.  42  These  (are)  the  families  of  D.  after  their 

34.  22  prince  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  D. 
Deut27.  13  Reuben,  Gad,  and  Asher,  Zebuluu,  D. 

33.  22  of  D.  he  said,  D.  (is)  a  lion's  whelp 
Josh.  19.  40  the  seventh  lot'came.  .for  the  tribe.,  of  D. 

19.  47  the  children  of  D.  went,  .to  fight  against 

19.  47  called  Leshem,  D.,  after. .  Dan  their  fath. 

19.  48  inheritance  of.  .the  children  of  D. 

2t.    5  and  out  of  the  tribe  of  D.,  and  out  of  the 

2i.  23  And  out  of  the  tribe  of  D.,  Eltekeh 

Judg.  1.  34  the  Amorites  forced  the  children  of  D. 

5.  17  and  why  did  D.  remain  in  ships? 

13.  25  inthecampof  D.  between  Zorah  and  Esh. 
18.    2  the  children  of  D.  sent  of  their  family  five 
18.  16  six  hundred  men.  .of  the  children  of  D. 
18.  22  the  men.  .overtook  the  children  of  D 

18.  23  And  they  cried  unto  the  children  of  D. 
18.  25  And  the  children  of  D.  said  unto  him 
18.  26  And  the  children  of  D.  went  their  way 
18.  30  the  children  of  D.  set  up  the  graven  image 
18.  30  his  sons  were  priests  to  the  tribe  of  D. 

1  Ch.27.  22  Of  D. ;  Azareel  the  son  of  Jeroham 

2  Ch.  2.  14  son  of  a  woman  of  the  daughters  of  D. 
Eze.  48.    1  sides  east  (and)  west ;  a  (portion  for)  D. 

48.  2  And  by  the  border  of  D.,  from  the  east 
48.  32  one  gate  of  Benjamin,  one  gate  of  D. 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  terrritoryof  Dan:— 
Ajalou.  Baalath,  Bene-barak,  Dan,  Elon,  Eltekeh,  Esh- 
taol,  Gath-rimmon,  Gibbethon,  Ir-shemesh,  Japho,  Jeth- 
lah.  Laish,  Leshem,  Me-jarkon,  Rakkon,  Shaalabin, 
Timnah,  Zorah,  &c. 

DANCE  — 

Dance,  dancing,  chorus,  ?inO  maclwl. 

Psa.149.    3  Let  him  praise  his  name  in  the  dance 

150.    4  Praise  him  with  the  timbrel  and  dance 
Jer.  31.    4  in  the  dances  of  them  that  make  merry 

31. 13  shall  the  virgin  rejoice  in  the  dance 
Lam.  5.  15  our  dance  is  turned  into  mourning 

DANCE,  to  — 

1.  To  keep  festival,  Jjn  chagag. 

1  Sa.  30. 16  (they  were),  .drinking,  and  dancing 

2.  To  dance,  turn,  tioist,  Vin  chul. 

Judg  21.  21  daughters  of  Shiloh  come  out  to  dance 

3.7*0  dance,  turn,  twist,  Sin  chut,  '6a. 

Judg2t.  23  of  them  that  danced,  whom  they  caught 

4.  To  dance,  move  round,  tis  karar,  3a. 

2  Sa.  6.  14  David  danced  before  the  Loud  with  all  (his) 

5.  To  dance,  skip,  np"i  raqad. 

Eccl.    3.    4  a  time  to  mourn,  and  a  time  to  dance 

6.  To  dance,  skip,  ip"i  raqad,  3. 

1  Ch.15.  29  saw  king  David  dancing  and  playing 
.lob  21.  11  They  sendforth.  .and  theirchildren dance 
Isa.    13.  21  dwell  there,  and  satyrs  shall  dwell  there 

7.  To  lift  up  (the  feet),  dance,  opxtofiat  orcheomai. 

Matt  11.  17  piped  unto  you.  and  ye  have  not  danced 

14.  6  the  daughter  of  Herodias  danced  before 
Mark  6.  22  when  the  daughter  of . .  Herodias . .  danced 
Luke  7  32  piped  unto  you,  and  ye  have  not  danced 

DANCES  — 

Da?icet  dancing,  chorus,  n/inp  mecholah. 

Exodi5.  20  after  her  with  timbrels  and  with  dances 
Judgn.  34  to  meet  him  with  timbrels  and.. dances 
21.  21  the  daughters,  .come  out  to  dance  in  dan. 

1  Sa.  21.  11  sing  one  to  another  of  him  in  dances 

29.    5  they  sang  one  to  another  in  dances,  saying 

DANCING  — 

1.7V)  dance,  move  round,  T19  karar,  Za. 

2  Sa.   6.  16  saw  king  David  leaping  and  dancing  bef. 

2.1)ance}  dancing,  chorus,  tonp  mackol, 

Psa.  30.  11  turned  for  me  my  mourning  into  dancing 

S. -Dance,  dancing,  chorus,  nVinlj  mecholah. 
Exod32.  19  that  he  saw  the  calf',  and  the  dancing 
1  Sa.  18.    6  singing  and  dancing,  to  meet  king  Saul 

4. A  chorus,  company  of  dancers,  xopfc  choros. 
Luke  15.  25  as  he  came,  .ho heard  music  and  dancing 


DANDLED,  to  be  — 

To  play  with,  delight  in,  dandle,  yyy  shaa,  46. 
Isa.   66.  12  be  borne  upon  (her)  sides,  and  be  daudled 

DANGER,  to  be  in  — 

To  incur  danger,   klvSvi/evco  kinditneuo. 

Acts  19.  27  craft  is  in  danger  to  be  set  at  nought 

19.  40  we  are  in  danger  to  be  called  in  question 

DANGER  of,  in  — 

Held  in,  liable  to,  evoxos  enochos. 

Matt.  5.  21,  22  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment 
5.  22  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council 
5.  22  shall  say,  Thou  fool !  shall  be  in  danger  of 
Mark  3.  29  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  damnation 

DANGEROUS  — 

Insecure,  perilous,  iTrtfftyak-qs  episphales. 

Acts  27.    9  when  sailing  was  now  dangerous,  because 

DA-NI'-EL,  7Nyn,  AurnjA  God  is  nidge. 

1.  Second  son  of  David,  called  also  Chileol,  B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.  3.    1  thejsecond,  D  ,  of  Abigail  the  Carmelitess 

2.  A  descendant  of  Ithamar  who  came  up  with  Ezra, 
and  sealed  the  covenant,  B.C.  457. 

Ezra   8.    2  of  the  sons  of  Ithamar;  D.  :  of  the  sons  of 
Neh.  10.   6  D.,  Ginnethon,  Baruch 

3.  The  fourth  of  the  so-called  greater  prophets.  He 
appears  to  have  been  of  royal  or  noble  descent,  and  was 
taken  to  Babylon  in  the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim  (B.C. 
604),  and  trained  with  three  companions  for  the  king's 
service.  The  parallel  between  his  character  and  that 
of  Joseph  is  striking.  At  the  accession  of  Darius  he 
was  made  the  first  of  three  presidents,  and  in  the  third 
year  of  Cyrus  he  saw  his  last  recorded  vision  on  the 
banks  of  the  Tigris  (B.C.  530). 

Eze.  14.  14  these!three  men,  Noah,  D.,  and  Job,  were 
14.  20  Though  Noah,  D.,  and  Job,  (were)  in  it 
28.    3  Behold,  thou  (art)  wiser  than  D. 
Dan.  1.    6  these  were,  of  the  children  of  Judah,  D. 
1.    7  hegaveuntoD.  (thename)ofBelteshazzar 
1.    8  D.  purposed,  .that  he  would  not  defile 
1.    9  Now  God  had  brought  D.  into  favour 
1.  10  Andtheprince  of  the  eunuchs  said  untoD. 
1.  11  Then  said  D.  to  Melzar,  whom 
1.  11  the  prince  of  the  eunuchshad  set  over  D. 
j.  17  and  D.  had  understanding  in  all  visions 
1.  19  among  them  all  was  found  none  like  D. 

1.  21  D.  continued  (even)  unto  the  first  year  of 

2.  13  they  sought  D.  and  his  fellows  to  be  slain 

2. 14  Then  D.  answered  with  counsel  and  wis. 

2. 15  Then  Arioch  made  the  thing  known  to  D. 
2.  16  Then  D.  went  in,  and  desired  of  the  king 
2.  17  Daniel  went  to  his  house,  and  made  the 
2.  18  that  D.  and  his  fellows  should  not  perish 
2.  19  Then  was  the  secret  revealed  unto  D.  in 
2.  20  D.  answered ..  Blessed  be  the  name  of  G. 
2.  24  D.  went  in  unto  Arioch,  whom  the  king 
2. 25  Then  Arioch  brought  in  D.  before  the 

2.  26  The  king  answered  and  said  to  D. 

2.  27  D.  answered  in  the  presence  of  the  king 

2. 46  fell  upon  his  face,  and  worshipped  D. 

2.  47  The  king  answered  unto  D.,  and  said 

2.  48  Then  the  king  made  D.  a  great  man 

2. 49  Then  D.  requested  of  the  king,  and  he  set 

2.  40  but  D.  (sat)  in  the  gate  of  the  king 

4.  8  But  at  the  last  D.  came  in  before  me 
4. 19  Then  D. . .  was  astonied  for  one  hour 

5.  12  spirit,  and  knowledge . .  were  found  in . .  D. 
5.  12  let  D.  be  called,  and  he  will  show  the  int. 
5. 13  Then  was  D.  brought  in  before  the  king 
5.  13  the  king,  .said  unto D.,  (Art)thou  that  D. 
5.  17  Then  D.  answered  and  said  before  the  ki. 

5.  29  and  they  clothed  D.  with  scarlet 

6.  2  over  these  three  presidents,  of  whom  D. 
6.  3  D.  was  preferred  above  the  presidents  and 
6.  4  princes  sought  to  find  occasion  against  D. 
6.  5  shall  not  find  any  occasion  against  this  D. 
6.  10  when  D.  knew  that  the  writing  was  sign. 
6.  11  these  men  assembled,  and  found  D.  pray. 
6.  13  That  D.  .regardeth  not  thee,  O  king 

6.  14  the  king,  .set  (his)  heart  on  D.  to  deliver 
6.  i6the  king  commanded,  and  they  broughtD. 
6.  16  the  king.. said  unto  D.,  Thy  God.  .will 
6. 17  purpose  might  not  be  changed  concern.  D. 
6.  20  he  cried  with  a  lamentable  voice  unto  D. 
6.  20  the  king  spake  and  said  to  D.,  O  D.,  ser. 
6.  21  said  D.  unto  the  king,  0  king,  live  forever 
6.  23  commanded  that  they  should  take  D.  up 
6.  23  So  D.  was  taken  up  out  of  the  den 
6.  24  brought  those  men  which  had  accused  D. 
6.  26  tremble  and  fear  before  the  God  of  D. 
6.  27  who  hath  delivered  D.  from  the  power  of 

6.  28  this  D.  prospered  in  the  reign  of  Darius 

7.  1  In  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar. .  D.  had  a 
7.   2D.,  .said,  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night 

7.  is  I  D.  was  grieved  in  my  spirit 

7.  28  As  for  me  D.,  my  cogitations  much 

8.  1  a  vision  appeared  unto  me.  .me  D. 

8.  15  when  I,  (eveu)  I  D.,  had  seen  the  vision 

8.  27  And  I  D.  fainted,  and  was  sick  (certain) 

9.  2  I  D.  understood  by  books  the  number  of 
9.  22  O  D.,  I  am.  .come  forth  to  give  thee  skill 

10.    1  a  thing  was  revealed  unto  D. 

10.    2  I  D.  was  mourning  three  full  weeks 

10.    7  And  I  D.  alone  saw  the  vision 

10.  11  0  D. .  .understand  the  words.  .1  speak 

10.  12  Then  said  he  unto  me,  Fear  not,  D. 

12.    4  But  thou,  O  D.,  shut  up  the  words 


Dau  12.    5  I  D.  looked,  and.. there  stood  other  two 

12.   9  And  he  said,  Go  thy  way,  D.  :  for  the 
Matt  24, 15  shall  see  the.,  desolation,  spoken  of  byD. 
Marki3.  r4  [shall  see  the.  .desolation,  spoken  of  by  D.J 

DANITES,  \rin  had-dani,  the  Danite. 
Patronymic  of  the  tribe  of  Dan. 

Judg  13.    2  man  of  Zorah,  of  the  family  of  the  D. 

18.    1  the  tribe  of  the  D.  sought  them  an  inner. 
18.  11  there  went,  .of  the  family  of  the  D. 

1  Ch.  12.  33  of  the  D. . .  twenty . .  eight  thousand . .  six 

DAN  JA'-AN,  X3T\%  Dan  p>laying  the  pipe. 
A  place  between  Gilead  and  Zidon,  somewhere  near 
Dan  (Laish)  at  the  sources  of  the  Jordan.     It  may  mean 
"Dan  in  the  wood,"  which  accords  with  Tel-el  Kadi, 
and  the  surrounding  country. 

2  Sa  24.    6  they  came  to  D.,  and  about  to  Zidon 

DAN'-NAH,  HJ3  low. 

A  city  of  Judah  near  Kirjath-Sannah. 

Josh  15.  49  And  D.,  and  Kirjath-sannah,  which  (is) 

DA'-RA,  jryi  bearer,  holder. 

Son  of  Zerah  son  of  Judah  by  Tamar.     Some  identify 

him  with  Darda(?). 

1  Ch.    2.    6  of  Zerah  ;  Zimri,  and  Ethan . .  and  D. 

DAR'-DA,  jrn-i. 

A  wise  man  not  later  than  Solomon,  and  considered  by 

some  identical  with  Dara. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  wiser  than  all  men  ;  than  Ethan,  .and  D. 

DARE,  (durst),  to  — 

To  dare,  have  daring,  roAjuaoj  tolmaO. 

Matt22.  46  neither  durst  any  (man)  from  that  day  fo. 
Marki2.  34  no  manafterthatdurstaskhim(anyques.) 
Luke  20.  40  they  durst  not  ask  him  any  (question  at 
John2i.  12  none  of  the  disciples  durst  ask  him,  Who 
Acts  5.  13  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to 
7.  32  Then  Moses  trembled,  and  durst  not  beh. 
Rom.  5.  7  for  a  good  man  some  even  would  dare  to 
15.  18  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those 

1  Co.    6.    1  Dare  any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against 

2  Co.io.  12  we  dare  not  make  ourselves  of  the  num. 
Jude         9  durst  not  bring  against  him  a  railing 

DA-RI'-DS,  vyyi  (etymology  uncertain). 

1.  A  king  of  Persia,  i.e.,  Darius  Hystaspes,  B.C.  521. 

Ezra    4.    5  until  the  reign  of  D.  king  of  Persia 

4.  24  it  ceased  unto  the  second  year,  .of  D. 

5.  5  to  cease,  till  the  matter  came  to  D. 
5.    6  The  copy  of  the  letter,  .sent  unto  D. 

5.  7  Unto  D.  the  king,  all  peace 

6.  1  Then  D.  the  king  made  a  decree 

6.  12  I  D.  have  made  a  decree  ;  let  it  be  done 
6.  13  according  to  that  which  D.  .had  sent 
6. 14  theybuilded.  .accordingtothecom.of .  .D. 

6.  1 5  this  house  was  finished . .  sixth  year . .  of  D. 
Hag.    1.    1  In  the  second  year  of  D.  the  king 

1.  15  in  the  second  year  of  D.  the  king 
2. 10  in  the  second  year  of  D.,  came  the  word 
Zech.  1.    1  in  the  second  year  of  D.,  came  the  word 
1.    7  in  the  second  year  of  D.,  came  the  word 

7.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of .  .D. 

2.  Another  king,  i.e.,  Darius  Nothus,  B.C.  423. 

Neh.  12.  22  also  the  priests,  to  the  reign  of  D. 

3.  Darius  the  Mede,"  the  son  of  Ahasuerusof  the  seed  of 
the  Medes,"  who  succeeded  to  the  kingdom  of  Babylon 
on  the  death  of  Belshazzar,  and  was  then  62  years  of 
age.  He  was  Cyaxares,  and  son  and  successor  of 
Astyages  the  king  of  Media,  B.C.  538. 

Dan.    5.  31  And  D.  the  Median  took  the  kingdom 
6.    1  It  pleased  D.  to  set  over  the  kingdom 
6.   6  said  thus  unto  him,  King  D.,  live  for  ever 
6.    9  king  D.  signed  the  writing  and  the  decree 
6.  25  Then  king  D.  wrote  unto  all  people 
6.  28  So  this  Daniel  prospered  in  the  reign  of  D. 
9.    1  In  the  first  year  of  D.  the  son  of  Ahasuerns 
11.    1  Also  I,  in  the  first  year  of  D.  the  Mede 

DARK  — 

I. Thick  darkness,  gloominess,  n^DK  ajihclah. 

Prov.  7.    9  the  evening,  in  the  black  and  dark  night 

%Darkncss  (of  night),  ^n  choshek. 

Josh.  2.    5  when  it  was  dark,  that  the  men  went  out 
Job    12.  25  They  grope  in  the  dark  without  light,  and 

24.  16  In  the  dark  they  dig  through  houses 
Tsa.  15.    6  Let  their  way  be  dark  and  slippery  :  and 

S8.  12  Shall  thy  wonders  be  known  in  the  dark '.' 
Isa.   45.  19  in  secret,  in  a  dark  place  of  the  earth 
Eze.    8.  12  the  house  of  Israel  do  in  the  dark 

3. Darkness,  nyjn  cheshkah. 

Psa.  18.  11  pavilion  round  about  him  (were)  dark 

4.  Darkness,  il3^n  choshkah. 

Mic.    3.    6  it  shall  be  dark  unto  you,  that  ye  shall 

5. Darkness,  collection,  binding,  TT$ n  chashrah. 
2  Sa  22.  12  dark  waters,  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the 

6. Dark  place,  ij^nn  machshak. 

Isa.   29.  15  then:  works  are  in  the  dark,  and  they  say 

7.  Twilight,  ?$'}  nesheph. 

Jer.  13.  16  before  your  feet  stumble  upon  the  dark  m 

8. Darkness,  nsty.  alatah. 

Gen.  15.  17  when  the  sun  went  down,  and  it  was  dark 


DARK 


ooj 


£>A'SH 


9.  Thick  darkness,  secret  or  highplace,  b^l  araphel. 

Job.  22.  13  can  he  judge  through  the  dark  cloud  ? 

Eze.  34.  12  veen  scattered  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day 
lO.Dense  darkness,  congelation,  ndq  qapha,  JiK3p. 

Zech.14.    6  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  (nor)  dark 
ll.Dry,  squalid,  avxfJ-Vpos  auchmeros. 

2  Pe.    1. 19  unto  a  light  that  shineth  iu  a  dark  place 
Vl.Dark,  <tkot^i/6s  skoteinos. 

Luke  11. 36  (be)  full  of  light,  having  no  part  dark,  the 
13.  Darkness,  aKoria  skotia. 

John  6.  17  it  was  now  dark,  and  Jesus  was  not  come 
20.    1  cometh  Mary  Magdalene,  .it  was  yet  dark 

DARK,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  or  become  dark.  ~wn  chashak. 

Job     3.    9  the  stars  of  the  twilight  thereof  be  dark 
18.    6  The  light  shall  be  dark  in  his  tabernacle 

Mic.    3.    6  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  over  them 
2.  To  be  enfolded,  black,  jn~>  qadar. 

Joel    2. 10  the  suu  and  the  moon  shall  be  dark,  and 

Mic.     3.    6  and  it  shall  be  dark  unto  you,  that  ye 

DARK,  to  begin  to  be  — 

To  be  or  become  dark*  bby  tsalal. 

Neb..  13.  19  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  began  to  be  dark 
DARK,  to  make  — 
l.To  darken,  Send  darkness,  hide,  7|BJn  chashak,  5. 

Psa.  105.  28  He  sent  darkness,  and  made  it  dark  ;  aud 

Amos  5.    8  and  maketh  the  day  dark  witti  night :  that 
2.7*0  enfold,  blacken,  mourn,  ~np  qadar,  5. 

Eze.  32.    7  I  will,  .make  the  stars  tbereof  dark  ;  I 
32.   8  bright  lights  of  heaven  will  I  make  dark 

DARK  place  — 

Dark  place,  ~y;DO  machshak. 

Psa.  74.  20  for  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  are  full 
Lam.  3.    6  He  hath  set  me  hi  dark  places,  as.  .dead 

DARK  saying  or  sentence,  speech  — 

.4  knot,  acute  hidden  saying  or  thing,  rryn  chidah. 
Numi2.    8  will  I  speak,  not  in  dark  speeches 
Psa.  49.   4  I  will  open  my  dark  saying  upon  the  harp 

78.    2  I  will  utter  dark  sayings  of  old 
Prov.  1.    6  words  of  the  wise,  and  their  dark  sayings 
Dan.    8.  23  a  king,  .understanding  dark  sentences 

DARK,  darkish,  somewhat  — 

Weak,  dim,  nns  keheh. 

Lev.  13.    6  behold,  (if)  the  plague  (be)  somewhat  dark 
13.  21  lower  than  the  skin,  but  (be)  somewhat  d. 
13.  26  the  (other)  skin,  but  (be)  somewhat  dark 
13.28  spread  not.,  but  it  (be)  somewhat  dark 
13.  39  (if)  the  bright  spots,  .(be)  darkish  white 
13.  56  the  plague  (be)  somewhat  dark  after  the 

DARK,  very  — 

Very  dark,  ??n  aphel. 
Amos.  5.  20  even  very  dark,  and  no  brightness  in  Jt  ? 

DARKEN,  be  darkened,  to  — 

1.7b  be  or  become  dark,  ^n  chashak. 

Exodio.  15  so  that  the  land  was  darkened  ;  and  they 
Psa.  69.  23  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see 
Eccl.12.    2  While,  .the  stars,  be  not  darkened,  nor 

12.  3  and  those  that  look  out.  .be  darkened 
Isa.     5.  30  the  light  is  darkened  in  the  heavens 

13.  10  the  sun  shall  be  darkened  in  his  going 
Eze.  30.  18  also  the  day  shall  be  darkened,  when  I 

2.  To  cause  darkness,  darken,  hide,  -]tyn  chashak,  5. 
Job  38.  2  Who  (is)  this  that  darkeneth  counsel  by 
Amos  S.    9  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  day 

3.7*0  be  or  beemne  weak  or  dim,  r\r\3  kahah. 

Zechn.  17  his  right  eye  shall  be  utterly  darkened 
4.  To  be  or  become  dark,  3"1JJ  arab. 

Isa.  24. 11  all  joy  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land 
5.7*0  be  consumed,  cny  atham,  2. 

Isa.     9. 19  Through  the  wrath .  .is  the  land  darkened 
6.  7*o  be  enfolded,  black,  ~n£  qadar. 

Joel    3.  15  The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened 
7.7*0  be  darkened,  made  dark,  o-Kori^ofzai  skotizo. 

Matt 24.  2tj  after,  .those  days  shall  the  sun  be  dark. 

Marki3.  24  in  those  days,  .the  sun  shall  be  darkened 

Luke23.  45  the  sun  was  darkened,  and  the  veil  of  the 

Rom.  1.  21  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened 

n.  10  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened  that  they  may 

Eph.  4. 18  Raving  the  understanding  [darkened] 

Rev.    8.  12  so  as  the  third  part  of  them  was  darkened 
9.    2  the  sun  and  the  air  (were  darkened]  by 
DARKLY  — 
In  an  enigma,  ii/  atj/iy/xaTi  en  ainigmati. 

1  Co.  13.  12  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly 
DARKNESS  — 

1.  Thick  darkness,  73N  ophel. 

Job     3.    6(Asfor)that  night,  let darknessseize upon 
to.  22  darkness . .  and  (where)  the  light  (is)  as  da. 
23. 17  hath  he  covered  the  darkness  from  my 
28.    3  the  stones  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow 
30.  26, when  I  waited  for  light,  there  came  dark. 

Psa.:  91.    6  for  the  pestilence  (that)  walketh  in  dark. 

2.  Thick  darkness,  gloominess,  nS?M  aphelah. 

Deut28.  29  as  the  blind  gropeth  in  darkness,  and 
Prov.  4.  19  The  way  of  the  wicked  (is)  as  darkness 
"Isa.    8.  22  and  (they  shall  be)  driven  to  darkness 


Isa.  58.  10  and  thy  darkness  (be)  as  the  noon  day 

59.   g  for  brightness,  (but)  we  walk  in  darkness 
Jer.   23.  12  their  way  shall  be.  .as-  .in  the  darkness 

3.  Darkness,  Tp^n  chashok. 

Dan.    2  22  he  knoweth  what  (is)  in  the  darkness,  and 

^.Darkness,  rn'^n,  rctyn  chashekak. 

Gen.  15.  12  an  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him 

Psa.  82.    5  They  know  not.  .they  walk  on  in  darkness 

139.  12  the  darkness  aud  the  light  (are)  both  alike 

Isa.     8.  22  trouble  and  darkness,  dimness  of  anguish 

50.  10  Who  (is)  among  you.  .that  walketh  in  da. 

5. Darkness,  %&n  choshek. 

Gen.    1.    2  and  darkness  (was)  upon  the  face  of  the 
1.    4  God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness 

1.  5  and  the  darkness  he  called  >.'ight.    And 
1. 18  and  to  divide  the  light  from  the  darkness 

Exodio.  21  that  there  may  be  darkness  over  the  land 
10.  21  of  Egypt,  eveu  darkness  (which)  may  be 
10.  22  there  was  a  thick  darkness  in  all  the  land 

14.  20  it  was  a  cloud  and  darkness  (to  them) 
Dcut  4  11  and  the  mountain  burned  with,  .darkness 

5.  23  the  voice  out  of  the  midst  of  the  darkness 

1  Sa.   2.   9  and  the  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  darkness 

2  Sa.  22.  12  he  made  darkness  pavilions  round  about 

22.  29  and  the  Lord  will  lighten  my  darkness 
Job     3.   4  Let  that  day  be  darkness  ;  let  not  God 
3.    5  Let  darkness  aud  the  shadow  of  death 
5  14  They  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day  time 

10.  21  to  the  land  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow 
12.  22  He  discovereth  deep  things  out  of  dark. 

15.  22  that  he  shall  return  out  of  darkness,  and 
15. 23  he  knoweth  tnat  the  day  of  darkness  is 
15.  30  He  shall  not  depart  out  of  darkness  ;  the 

17.  12  the  light  (is)  short  because  of  darkness 
17. 13  I  have  made  my  bed  iu  the  darkness 

18.  18  shall  be  driven  from  light  into  darkness 

19.  8  and  he  hath  set  darkness  iu  my  paths 

20.  26  All  darkness  (shall  be)  hid  in  his  secret 
22. 11  Or  darkness,  (that)  thou  canst  not  see 
23. 17  I  was  not  cut  off  before  the  darkness 

28.  3  He  setteth  an  end  to  darkness,  and 

29-    3  hy  his  light  I  walked  (through)  darkness 
34.  22  (There  is)  no  darkness,  nor  shadow  of  de. 

37.  19  we  cannot  order,  .by  reason  of  darkness 

38.  19  (as  for)  darkness  where  (is)  the  place 
Psa,  18.  11  He  made  darkness  his  secret  place;  his 

18.  28  Lord  my  God  will  enlighten  my  darkness 

104.  20  Thou  makest  darkness,  and  it  is  night 

105.  28  He  sent  darkness,  and  made  it  dark 
107.  10  Such  as  sit  iu  darkness,  and  in  the 
107.  14  He  brought  them  out  of  darkness  and 
112.    4  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness  :  (he  is) 
139.  it  If  I  say,  Surely  the  darkness  shall  cover 
139.  12  Yea,  the  darkness  hideth  not  from  thee 

Prov.  2.  13  Who  leave  .to  walk  iu  the  ways  of  dark. 

20.  20  his  lamp  shall  be  put  out  in-  .darkness 
Eccl.  2.  13  as  far  as  light  excelleth  darkness 

2.  14  the  fool  walketh  in  darkuess:  and  I  myself 

5.  17  All  his  days  also  he  eateth  in  darkness 

6.  4  cometh  in.  .and  departeth  in  darkness 
6.    4  his  name  shall  be  covered  with  darkness 

11.  8  let  him  remember  the  days  of  darkness 
Isa.     5.  20  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkuess 

5.  30  behold  darkness  (and)  sorrow,  and  the 
9.    2  The  people  that  walked  in  darkuess  have 

29.  18  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of.  .dark. 
42.  7  to  bring,  .them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of 
45.  3  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness 
45.  7  I  form  the  light,  aud  create  darkness  ;  I 
47.  5  Sit  thou  silent  and  get  thee  into  darkness 
49.  9  mayest  say . .  to  them  that  (are)  in  darkness 
60.    2  the  darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,  and 

Lam.  3.    2  brought  (meinto)darkness,  but  not  (into) 
Eze.  32.    8  set  darkness  upon  thy  land,  saith  the  L 
Joel    2.    2  A  day  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess,  a 

2.  31  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness 
Amos  5.  18  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  darkness,  and 

5.  20  (Shall)  not  the  day  of  the  Lord  (be)  dark. 
Mic.    7.    8  when  I  sit  iu  darkness,  the  Lord  (shall  be) 
Nah.    1.    8  and  darkness  shall  pursue  "his  enemies 
Zeph.  1.15  a  day  of  darkness  and  gloominess,  a  day 

6.  Thick  darkness,  t'SNO  maaphel. 

Josh. 24.    7  he  put  darkness  between  you  and  the  E. 

7.  Thick  darkness  of  Jah,  n;?3^!3  mapelyoh. 
Jer.     2.  31  Have  I  been,  .a  land  of  darkness? 

S.Dark  place,  ^np  machshak. 

Psa.  88.    6  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit,  in  darkness 
88.  18  (aud)  mine  acquaintance  into  darkness 
143.    3  he  hath  made  me  to  dwell  in  darkness 
Isa.  42.  16  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them 

9.  Obscurity,  nD'y  ephah. 

Job   10.  22  A  land  of  darkness.. (and)  of  the  shadow 
Amos  4.  13  that  maketh  the  morning  darkness,  and 

10.  Thick  darkness,  secret  or  highplace,  Sbtjt  eraphel. 
2  Sa.  22.  10  and  darkness  (was)  under  his  feet 

Psa.  18.    g  and  darkness  (was)  under  his  feet 

97.    2  Clouds  and  darkness  (are)  round  about 

11. Gloom,  blackness,  £6<pos  zophos. 

2.pe.    2.    4  delivered  (them)  into  chains  of  darkness 
Jtfde         6  in  everlasting  chains,  under  darkness 
\2.Darkness,  aKorla  skotia. 

Matt  10.  27  What  I  tell  you  in  darkuess,  (that)  speak 

Lukei2.    3  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken  in  darkness 

John  1.    5  light  shineth  in  darkness  ;  and  the  dark. 

8.  12  followeth  me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness 

*2  35  Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  dark. 


Johni2.  35  he  that  walketh  in  darkness,  knoweth 

12.  46  believeth  on  me  should  not  abide  in  dark. 
1  Jo.    1.    5  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness 

2.  8  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light 
2.  9  He  that,  .hateth  his  brother,  is  in  dark. 
2.  11  is  in  darkness,  and  walketh  in  darkness 
2. 11  because  that  darkness  hath  blinded  his 

13.  Darkness,  (tk6tos  skotos. 

Matt  4.  16  The  people  which  sat  in  [darkness]  saw 
6.  23  be  darkness,  how  great  (is)  that  darkness ! 
8.  12  shall  be  cast  out  into  outer  darkness 
22.  13  take,  .and  cast  (him)  into  outer  darkness 

25.  30  cast  ye  the .  .servant  into  outer  darkness 
27.  45  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness 

Markis  33  there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  land 
Luke   1.  79  To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness 
11.  35  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness 

22.  53  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness 

23.  44  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the  earth 
Johu  3.  19  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light 
Acts   2.  20  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness 

13.  11  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and  a  darkness 

26.  18  to  turn  (them)  frcm  darkness  to  light 
Rom.  2.  19  a  light  of  them  which  are  in  darkness 

13.  12  let  us.  .cast  off  the  works  of  darkness 

1  Co.  4.    5  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darknes3 

2  Co.  4.    6  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  da. 

6.  14  what  communion  hath  light  with  dark.  ? 
Eph.  5.    8  ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now 

5.  11  with  the  unfruitful  works  uf  darkness 

6.  12  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world 
Col.     1.  13  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness 
1  Th.  5.    4  But  ye,  brethren  are  not  in  darkness,  that 

5.    5  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness 
Heb.  12.  18  nor  unto  blackness,  and  [darkness,]  and 

1  Pe.   2     9  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness 

2  Pe.   2. 17  to  whom  the  mist  of  darkuess  is  reserved 
1  Jo.    i-    6  fellowship  with  him.  and  walk  iu  dark 
Jude       13  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for 

DARKNESS,  full  of  — 

Dark,  GKoreivos  skoteinos. 

Matt.  6.  23  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  cf  darkness 
Luken.  34  thy  body  also  (is)  full  of  darkness 

DARKNESS,  to  be  full  of  — 

7*o  be  darkened,  o-kot6o/j.cll  skotoomai. 

Rev.  16.  10  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  darkness 

DARKNESS,  to  cause  — 

7*o  cause  darkness,  l\vn  cha.shak,  5. 

Jer.  13.  16  Give  glory,  .before  he  cause  darkness 

DARKNESS,  gross  or  thick  — 

Thick  darkness,  secret  or  high  place,  bs^y.  araphel. 
Exod2o.  21  Moses  drew  near  unto  the  thick  darkness 
Deut.  4.  11  the  midst  of  heaven,  with,  thick  dark. 
5.  22  of  the  cloud,  aud  of  the  thick  darkness 

1  Ki.  8.  12  that  he  would  dwell  iu  the  thick  darkness 

2  Ch.  6.    1  that  he  would  dwell  in  the  thick  darkness 
Job   38.    9  thick  darkness  a  swaddling  band  for  it 
Isa.   60.   2  shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness 
Jer.  13.  16  (and)  make  (it)  gross  darkness 

Joel    2.    2  A  day  of  clouds  aud  of  thick  darkness 
Zeph.  1.  15  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness 

DAR'-KON,  |ipn  bearer. 

A  servant  of  Solomon,  whose  descendants  came  up  from 

the  exile  with  Zerubbabel,  B  c.  536. 

Ezra    2.  56  The  children  of  Jaalah,  the  children  of  D. 

Neh.    7.  58  The  children  of  Jaala,  the  children  of  D 

DARLING  — 

Only,  lonely,  singly,  vu;  yachid. 

Psa.   22.  20  my  darling  from  the  power  of  the  dog 
35.  17  rescue,  .my  darling  from  the  lions 

DART  — 

1. Arrow,  fn  chets. 

Prov.  7.23  Till  a  dart  strike  through  his  liver 

2.  Dart,  missile,  J?sp  massa. 

Job  41.  26  the  spear:  the  dart,  nor  the  habergeon 

3.  Rod,  reed,  M»  shebet. 

2  Sa.  18.  14  he  took  three  darts  iu  his  hand,  and 
4. Missile,  dart,  s^>ear,  rhu?  shelach. 

2  Ch.32.    5  and  made  darts  and  shields  in  abundance 

5. Club,  nn'w  tothach. 

Job  41 ,  29  Darts  are  counted  as  stubble  :  he  laugheth 
Q.A  missile,  dart,  arrow,  fiehos  belos. 

Eph.  6.  16  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked 
7. A  missile,  dart,  arrow,  Bo\is  bolis. 

Heb  12.  20  lbe  stoned,  or  thrust  through  with  a  dart] 
DASH,  to  — 

1.  7*o  smite,  plague,  F]J3  nagoph. 

Psa.  91. 12  lest  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 

2.  To  dash,  beat,  ]'3}  ?iapats,  3. 

Psa.  1 37.   9  dasheth  thy  little  ones  against  the  stones 
Jer.  13.  14  I  will  dash  them  one  against  another 

3.7b  dash  in  pieces,  wan  ratash,  3. 

2  Ki.    812  wilt  dash  their  children,  and  rip  up  their 

4.  To  strike  toward  or  against,  ttpoo-kottto} proskopto. 

Matt.  4.    6  lest  at  any  time  thou  dash  thy  ft.Lu.4.  n 
DASH  in  pieces,  to  — 
1.7*0  dash,  beat,  y$}  naphats,  3. 

Psa.    2.    9  thuu  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a 


DASH 


222 


DAUGHTER 


9j.  To  crush,  fin  vaats. 

Exodis.   6  right  hand,  0  LOKD,  hath  dashed  iu  pieces 

DASH  to  pieces  — 

To  dash  in  pieces,  cs~>  ratash,  3, 

Isa.    13.  iS  also  shall  dash  the  youug  men  to  pieces 
DASHED  in  or  to  pieces,  to  be  — 
To  be  dashed  in  pieces  or  to  the  ground,  trtri  ratash,  4. 

Isa.    13.  16  children  also  shall  be  dashed  to  pieces 

Hos.  10.  14  the  mother  was/lashed  in  pieces  upon 
13.  16  their  infants  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces 

Nah.    3.  10  young  children  also  were  dashed  iu  pieces 

DASHETH  in  pieces,  that  — 

To  scatter,  break  in  pieces,  yiBputs,  5. 

Nah.  2.    1  He  thatdasheth  in  pieces  is  come  upbef. 

DA'-THAN,  }ni  fount. 

A  son  of  Eliab  the  Reubenite,  who  with  Koraha  Levite, 
and  Abiram  and  On,  other  two  Reubenites,  conspired 
against  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  wilderness,  and 
perished  there.     B.C.  1471. 

Xumi6.    1  Now  Korah..and  D.  and  Abiram.. took 
16. 12  And  Moses  sent  to  call  D.  and  Abiram 
16.  24  Get  you  up  from,  .the  tabernacle  of .  .D. 
16.  25  And  Moses  rose  up,  and  went  unto  D. 
16.  27  they  gat  up  from  the  tabernacle  of . .  D. 
16.  27  and  D.  and  Abiram  came  out,  and  stood 
26.   9  And  the  sons  of  Eliab  ;  Lemuel,  and  D. 
26.    9  This  (is  that)  D.  and  Abiram  (which  were) 
Deutn.   6  And  what  he  did  unto  D.  and  Abiram 
Psa.io6.  17  The  earth  opened  and  swallowed  up  D. 
DAUB,  to  — 
I. To  daub,  "isrr  chamar. 

Exod.  2.    3  daubed  it  with  slime  and  with  pitch,  and 
'l.T-i  plaister,  overlay,  rna  tuach. 

Eze.  13.  10  others  daubed  it  with  untempered  (mor. 
13.  11  Say  unto  them  whichdatib  (it)  with  ante. 
13. 12  the  daubing  wherewith  ye  have  daubed 
13.  14  break  down  the  wall  that  ye  have  daubed 
13.  15  upon  them  that  have  daubed  it  with 
13.  15  no  (more),  neither  they  that  daubed  it 
22.  28  prophets  have  daubed  them  with  untem. 
DAUBING  — 
Plaistering,  daubing,  rru  tiach. 

Eze.  13.  12  Where  (is)  the  daubing  wherewith  ye 
DAUGHTER— 
1.  House,  rra  bayith. 

Isa.   10.  32  (against)  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Z. 
'2. Son,  child,  descendant,  }%ben. 

2  Ch.n.  t8  Abihail  the  daughter  of  Eliab  the  son  of 

3. Daughter,  child,  descendant,  ro  bath. 

Gen.  11.  29  Nahor's  wife,  Milcah,  the  daughter  of 

20.  12  indeed.. she  (is) the  daughter  of  my  fath. 
20.  12  but  not  the  daughter  of  my  mother  ;  and 
24.  23  Whose  daughter  (art)  thou  ?  tell  me,  I 
24,  24  I  (am)  the  daughter  of  Eethuel  the  son  of 
24.  47  I  asked  her,  and  said,  Whose  daughter 
24.  47  The  daughter  of  Bethuel,  Nahor's  son 

24.  48  to  take  my  master's  brother's  daughter 

25.  20  the  daughter  of  Eethuel  the  Syrian  of 

26.  34  Judith  the  daughter  of  Eeerithe  Hittite 
26.  34  Bashemath  the  daughter  of  Elon  the 

28.  9  Mahalath  the  daughter  of  Ishmael,  A. 

29.  6  Rachel  his  daughter  cometh  with  the  s. 
29. 10  when  Jacob  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of  L. 
29. 18  serve  thee  seven  years  for.,  thy.  .daughter 
29.  23  he  took  Leah  his  daughter,  and  brought 
29.  24  Laban  gave  unto  his  daughter  Leah 

29.  28  he  gave  him  Rachel  his  daughter  to  wife 

29.  29  Laban  gave  to  Rachel  his  daughter  Bilhah 

30.  21  afterwards  she  bare  a  daughter,  and 
34.    1  Dinah  the  daughter  of  Leah,  which  she 
34.    3  clave  unto  Dinah  the  daughter  of  Jacob 
34.    5  that  he  had  defiled  Dinah  his  daughter 
34.    7  folly,  .in  lying  with  Jacob's  daughter 

34.    8  my  son  Shechem  longeth  for  your  daugh. 
34.  17  then  will  we  take  our  daughter,  and  we 
34.  19  because  he  had  delight  in  Jacob's  daugh. 
36.   2  Adah  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite 
36.   2  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah 
36.    2  the  daughter  of  Zibeon  the  Hivite 
36.    3  Bashemath  Ishmael's  daughter,  sister  of 
36.  14  the  sons  of  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of 
36.  18  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah,  Esau's 
36.  25  and  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah 
36.  39  the  daughter  of  Matred,  the  daughter  of 
38.    2  Judah  saw  there  a  daughter  of  a  certain 
38.  12  the  daughter  of  ShuahrJudah's  wife,  died 
41-  45.  5°  Asenath  the  daughter  of  l'oti-pherah 
46.  15  the  sons  of.  .Jacob,  .with  his  daughter 
46  18  whom  Laban  gave  to  Leah  his  daughter 
46.  20  Asenath  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest 
46.  25  which  Laban  gave  uuto  Rachel  his  daug. 
Exod.  1. 16  if  it  (be)  a  daughter,  then  shall  she  live 
.  -21  and  every  daughter  ye  shall  save  alive 
2.1a  man . .  took  (to  wife)  a  daughter  of  Levi 
2.    5  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  came  down  to 
2.   7  Then  said  his  sister  to  Pharaoh's  daugh. 
2.    8  And  Pharaoh's  daughter  said  to  her,  Go 
2.   9  Pharaoh's  daughter  said  unto  her,  Take 
2. 10  she  brought  him  unto  Pharaoh's  daugh. 
2.  21  and  he  gave  Moses  Zipporah  his  daugh. 
6.  23  took  him  Elisheba,  daughter  of  Ammina. 
20. 10  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy 

21.  7  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  maid 
21.  31  have  gored  a  son,  or  have  gored  adaugh. 


Lev. 


12. 

6 

18. 

9 

18 

10 

18. 

11 

18. 

17 

18. 

17 

19. 

29 

20 

17 

24. 
Num25. 

25- 

26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 

3°- 

36. 

Deut.  5. 

7- 

7- 


16. 
18. 


27, 

28. 

Josh.  1 5. 

*5- 
Judg.  1 


19. 

21. 

Ruth  2. 


3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 

Sa.  f. 
14. 
17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18, 

•  Sa.  3. 

3< 


Ki. 


2  Ki.  8.  18 
8.26 
9-34 


19. 
19. 


:Ch. 


3- 
3- 
4- 
7- 
*5- 
=  Ch.   8. 


for  a  son,  or  for  a  daughter,  she  shall 
the  daughter  of  thy  father,  or  daughter 
sou's  daughter,  or  of  thy  daughter's  dau. 
nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife's  daughter 
the  nakedness  of  a  woman  and  her  daug. 
son's  daughter,  or  her  daughter's  daugh. 
Do  uot  prostitute  thy  daughter,  to  cause 
father's  daughter,  or  his  mother's  daugh. 
for  his  son,  and  for  his  daughter,  and  for 
the  daughter  of  any  priest,  if  she  profane 
If  the  priest's  daughter  also  be  (married) 
if  the  priest's  daughter  be  a  widow,  or 
name  (was)  Shelomith,  the  daughter  of  D. 
Cozbi,  the  daughter  of  Zur  :  he  (was) 
Cozbi,  the  daughter  of  a  prince  of  Midian 
name  of  the  daughter  of  Asher  (was)  Sa. 
Jochebed,  the  daughter  of  Levi,  whom 
inheritance  to  pass  uuto  his  daughter 
if  he  have  no  daughter,  then  ye  shall 
between  the  father  and  his  daughter 
every  daughter,  that  possesseth  an  inherit, 
thou,  nor  thy  sou,  nor  thy  daughter,  nor 
thy  daughter  thou  shalt  not  give  unto  his 
his  daughter  shalt  thou  take  unto  thy  sou 
thou,  and  thy  son,  and  thy  daughter,  and 
thy  mother,  or  thy  son,  or  thy  daughter 
14  thou,  and  thy  son,  and  thy  daughter 
that  maketh  his  sou  or  his  daughter  to 
I  gave  my  daughter  uuto  this  man  to  wife 
saying,  I  found  not  thy  daughter  a  maid 
(are  the  tokens  of)  my  daughter's  virgin, 
daughter  of  his  father,  or  the  daughter 
toward  her  son,  and  toward  her  daughter 
to  him  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daughter  to 
he  gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife 
to  him  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daughter 
he  gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife 
his  daughter  came  out  to  meet  him  with 
beside  her  he  had  neither  son  nor  daugh. 
Alas,  my  daughter !  thou  hast  brought 
to  lament  the  daughter  of  Jephthah  the 
(here  is)  my  daughter,  a  maiden,  and  his 
There  shall  not  any  of  us  give  his  daug. 
And  she  said  unto  her,  Go,  my  daughter 
Hearest  thou  not,  my  daughter?  Go  not  to 
(It  is)  good,  my  daughter  that  thou  go 
My  daughter,  shall  I  not  seek  rest  for 
Blessed  (be)  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  daug. 
now,  my  daughter,  fear  not ;  I  will  do  to 
Who  (art)  thou,  my  daughter?  And  she 
Sit  still,  my  daughter,  until  thou  know 
Count  not  thine  handmaid  for  a  daughter 
Saul's  wife  (was)  Ahinoam,  the  daughter 
will  give  him  his  daughter,  and  make  his 
Behold  my  elder  daughter  Merab,  her 
at  the  time  when  Merab,  Saul's  daughter 
Saul's  daughter,  loved  David  :  and  they 
Saul  gave  him  Michal  his  daughter 
and  (that)  Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  loved 
Saul  had  given  Michal  his  daughter,  D.'s 
the  son  of  Maacah  the  daughter  of  Tal. 
whose  name  (was)  Rizpah,  the  daughter 
thou  first  bring  Michal  Saul's  daughter 
Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  looked  through 
Michal  the  daughter  of  Saul  came  out  to 
Michal  the  daughter  of  Saul  had  no  child 
Bath-sheba,  the  daughter  of  Eliam 
and  was  unto  him  as  a  daughter 
and  one  daughter,  whose  name  (was)  T. 
went  in  to  Abigail  the  daughter  of  Na. 
took  the  two  sons  of .  .the  daughter  of  A. 
five  sons  of  Michal  the  daughter  (if  Saul 
Rizpah  the  daughter  of  Aiah  took  sackc. 
Rizpah  the  daughter  of  Aiah  the  coucu. 
took  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  brought  her 
which  had  Taphath  the  daughter  of  Sol. 
took  Basmath  the  daughter  of  Solomon  to 
made  also  an  house  for  Pharaoh's  daugh. 
given  it  (for)  a  present  unto  his  daughter 
Pharaoh's  daughter  came  up  out  of  the 
together  with  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh 
,  10  name  (was)  Maachah,  the  daughter  of 
to  wife  Jezebel,  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal 
Azubah,  the  daughter  of  Shilhi 
for  the  daughter  of  Ahab  was  his  wife 
Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  Omrikingof  I. 
and  bury  her ;  for  she  (is)  a  king'sdaugh. 
Jehosheba,  the  daughter  of  king  Joram 
Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife 
name  (was)  Jerusha,  the  daughter  of  Zad. 
Abi,  the  daughter  of  Zachariah 
the  daughter  of  Zion  hath  despised  thee 
the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  hath  shaken 
Meshullemoth,  the  daughter  of  Haruz 
name  (was)  Jedidah,  the  daughter  of  Ad. 
no  man  might  make  his  son  or  his  daug. 
name  (was)  Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  J 
name  (was)  Zebudah,  the  daughter  of  P 
name  (was)  Nehusta,  the  daughter  of  E. 
Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  Jeremiah  of  L. 
the  daughter  of  Matred,  the  daughter  of 
the  daughter  of  Shua  the  Canaanitess 
Hezron  went  in  to  the  daughter 
Sheshan  gave  his  daughter  to  Jarha 
the  daughter  of  Caleb  (was)  Achsa 
the  daughter  of  Talmai  king  of  Geshnr 
four,  of  Bath-shua  the  daughter  of  Amm. 
the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  which  Mered 
his  daughter  (was)  Sherah,  who  built 
Michal  the  daughter  of  Saul,  looking 
Solomon  brought  up  the  daughter  of 
Mabalath  the  daughter  of  Jerimoth  the 


>Ch.i 


25 
27, 
29. 

Neh.  6. 

Esth.  2. 


Psa. 


9- 
9 

45- 
45- 
45- 
I37- 

Song  7, 
Isa.     1. 

TO. 


23- 
23- 
37- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
52- 
62. 

Jer.    4. 


Lam. 


3' 
4- 
4- 
4' 
4 
4' 
4> 

Eze.  14. 
16. 
6, 


Dan. 
Hos. 


5- 

7- 

Zeph.  3. 

3- 

3- 
Zech.  2. 

2. 

9- 
Mai.    2. 

i.Daughte 

Matt  9. 

9- 


14, 

IS- 
15- 

21. 
Mark  5 

5' 
6. 


20  he  took  Maachah  the  daughter  of  Absal. 

21  loved  Maachah  the  daughter  of  Absalom 
2  Michaiah  the  daughter  of  Uriel  of  Gibe. 

31  name  (was)  Azubah  the  daughter  of  Shi. 

6  for  he  had  the  daughter  of  Ahab  to  wife 
2  (was)  Athaliah  the  daughter  of  Omri 

11  Jehoshabeath,  the  daughter  of  the  king 

18  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife 

1  (was)  Jerushah,  the  daughter  of  Zadok 
1  name  (was)  Abijah,  the  daughter  of  Zech. 
iS  Johanan  had  taken  the  daughter  of 

7  Hadassah,  that  (is),  Esther,  his  uncle's  da. 

7  whom  Mordecai.  .took  for  his  own  daug. 
15  Esther,  the  daughter  of  Abihail  the 

15  Mordecai,  who  had  taken  her  for  his  dau. 

29  Esther  the  queen,  the  daughter  of  Abih. 

14  in  the  gates  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 
10  Hearken,  0  daughter,  and  consider 

12  the  daughter  of  Tyre  (shall  be  there) 

13  The  King's  daughter  (is)  all  glorious 

8  O  daughter  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be 

1  How  beautiful  are  thy  feet . .  O . .  daughter ! 
8  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  cottage 

30  Lift  up  thy  voice,  O  daughter  of  Gallim 

32  the  mouut  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

1  unto  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

4  the  spoiling  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

10  Pass  through  thy  land . .  O  daughter  of  T. 

12  O  thou  oppressed  virgin,  daughter  of  Zi. 

22  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  despised 

1  sit  iu  the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter  of  B. 

1  (there  is)  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the 

5  get  thee  into  darkness,  O  daughter  of  the 

2  loose  thyself.  .0  captive  daughter  of  Zi. 

11  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  Behold 

1 1  wilderness  towards  the  daughter  of  my 

31  the  voice  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  (that) 
2  I  have  likened  the  daughter  of  Zion  to 

23  for  war,  against  thee,  O  daughter  of  Zion 
26  O  daughter  of  my  people,  gird  (thee)  with 
11  healed  the  hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my 

19  the  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  daughter  of 

21  For  the  hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my  peo. 

22  is  not  the  health  of  the  daughter  of  my 
1  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  ? 

7  how  shall  I  do  for  the  daughter  of  my 

17  the  virgin  daughter  of  my  people  is 

22  How  long  wilt  thou  go  about,  O.  .daugh.? 
11  take  balm,  O  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Eg. 

19  0  thou  daughter  dwelling  in  Egypt 

24  The  daughter  of  Egypt  shall  be  confoun. 

18  Thou  daughter  that  dost  inhabit  Dibon 
4  Wherefore  gloriest  thou . .  backsliding  d. 

42  against  thee,  0  daughter  of  Babylon 

33  The  daughter  of  Babylon  (is)like  a  thresh. 
1  name  (was)  Hamutal,  the  daughter  of 

6  from  the  daughter  of  Zion  all  her  beauty 

15  trodden  the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Jud. 

1  the  Lord  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion 

2  the  strongholds  of  the  daughter  of  Judah 

4  the  tabernacle  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

5  hath  increased  the  daughter  of  Judah 

8  destroy  the  wall  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

10  The  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  sit 

11  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

13  I  liken  to  thee,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem? 
13  comfort  thee,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Zion? 
15  wag  their  head  at  the  daughter  of  Jerus. 
18  O  wall  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  let  tears 
48  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

3  the  daughter  of  my  people  (is  become) 

6  the  iniquity  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

10  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

21  Rejoice  and  be  glad,  O  daughter  of  Edom 

22  The  punishment.. is  accomplished,  0  dau. 
22  visit  thine  iniquity,  O  daughter  of  Edom 

20  shall  deliver  neither  son  nor  daughter 

44  saying.  As  (is)  the  mother,  (so  is)  her  da. 

45  Thou  (art)  thy  mother's  daughter,  that 

11  humbled  his  sister,  his  father's  daughter 

25  or  for  mother,  or  for  son,  or  for  daughter 
6  the  king's  daughter  of  the  south  shall 

17  he  shall  give  him  the  daughter  of  women 
3  and  took  Gomer  the  daughter  of  Diblain 
6  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  daughter 

13  the  beginning  of  the  sin  to  the  daughter 
8  the  stronghold  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

8  shall  come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem 
10  labour  to  bring  forth,  O  daughter  of  Zion 

13  Arise  and  thresh,  0  daughter  of  Zion 

1  Now  gather  thyself. .  Odaughter  of  troops 

6  the  daughter  riseth  up  againsther  moth. 
10  (even)  the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  shall 

14  Sing.  0  daughter  of  Zion  ;  shout,  0  Israel 
14  Be  glad  and  rejoice.  .0  daughter  of  Jer. 

7  dweUest  (with)  the  daughter  of  Babylon 

10  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion 

9  Rejoice,  daughter  of  Ziou  ;  shont,  O  dang. 

11  hath  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange 

r,  Quydrvp  thugater. 

18  My  daughter  is  even  now  dead  :  but  come 
22  Daughter,  be  of  good  comfort  ;  thy  faith 
35  the  daughter  against  her  mother,  and  the 
37  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than 

6  the  daughter  of  Herodias  danced  before 
22  my  daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a 
28  her  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that 

5  Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Ziou,  Behold,  thy 

34  Daughter,  thy  faith  hathmadetheewholc 

35  Thy  daughter  is  dead  :  why  troublest 
22  when  the  daughter  of  the  said  Herodias 


DAUGHTER 


223 


DAVID 


Mark  7.  26  cast  forth  the  devil  out  of  her  daughter 
7.  29  the  devil  is  gone  out  of  thy  daughter 

7.  30  and  her  [daughter]  laid  upon  the  bed 
Luke  1.    5  his  wife  (was)  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron 

2.  36  Auna,  a  prophetess,  the  daughter  of  Pha. 

8.  42  he  had  one  only  daughter,  about  twelve 
8.  48  Daughter,  he  of  good  comfort:  thy  faith 
8. 49  Thy  daughter  is  dead ;  trouble  not  the 

12.  53  against  the  daughter,  and  the  daughter 

13.  16  this  woman,  being  a  daughter  of  Abraham 
John  12.  15  Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion  :  behold,  thy 
Acts    7.  21  Pharaoh's  daughter  took  him  up,  and 
Heb.  ii.  24  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter 

DAUGHTER,  little  or  young  — 
Little  or  young  daughter,  dvydrptov  thugatrion. 
Mark  5.  23  My  little  daughter  lieth  at  the  point  of  d. 
7.  25  a  (certain)  woman,  whose  young  daughter 

DAUGHTER  IN  LAW  — 

1. Bride,  spouse,  sons  wife,  nps  kallah. 

Gen.  11.  31  Sarai  his  daughter  in  law,  his  son  Abram's 
38.  11  said  Judah  to  Tamar  his  daughter  in  law 
38.  16  knewnotthatshe(was)hisdaughterin  la. 
38.  24  Tamar  thy  daughter  in  law  hath  played 
Lev.  18.  15  the  nakedness  of  thy  daughter  in  law 

20.  T2  if  a  man  lie  with  his  daughter  in  law 
Ruth  1.    6  Then  she  arose  with  her  daughters  in  law 

1.  7  her  two  daughters  in  law  with  her  ;  and 
1.    8  Naomi  said,unto;her  two  daughters  in  law 

1.  22  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  her  daughter  in  law 

2.  20  And  Naomi  said  unto  her  daughter  in  law 
2.  22  Naomi  said  unto  Ruth  her  daughter  iu  la. 

4.  15  for  thy  daughter  in  law,  which  loveth  thee 
1  Sa.    4.  19  his  daughter-in-law,  Phinehas'  wife 

1  Ch.  2.  4  Tamar  his  daughter  in  law  bare  him  P. 
Eze.  22. 11  hath  lewdly  denied  his  daughter  in  law 
Mic.    7.    6  the  daughter  in  law  against  her  mother 

2.  Veiled  one,  hide,  spouse,  vu^(pr\  numphe. 

Mattio.  35  the  daughter  in  law  against  her  mother 
Lukei2.  53  mother  in  law  against  her  daughter  in  la. 
12.  53  the  daughter  in  law  against  her  mother 

DAUGHTERS  — 

1.  Daughters,  descendants,  nba  banoth. 

Gen.   5.    4,  7,  10,  13,  16,  19  begat  sons  and  daughters 

5.  22,  26,  30  and  begat  sons  and  daughters 

6.  i  and  daughters  were  born  unto  them 

6.    2  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men 
6.   4  sous  of  God  came  in  unto  the  daughters 
11.  11, 13,  15, 17,  19,  21  begat  sons  and  daughters 
11.  23,  25  aud  begat  sous  and  daughters 
19.    8  I  have  two  daughters  which  have  not 
19. 12  souinlaw.and  thy  sons,  and  thy  daughters 
19.  T4  sons  in  law,  which  married  his  daughters 

19. 15  take  thy  wife  and  thy  two  daughters 
16.  16  upon  the  hand  of  his  two  daughters 

19.  30  dwelt  in  the  mountain,  and  his  two  dau. 
19.  30  dwelt  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two  daughters 
19.  36  Thus  were  both  the  daughters  of  Lot  with 
24.    3  thou  shalt  not  take .  .of  the  daughters 

24.  13  the  daughters  of  the  men  of  the  city  come 
24.  37  take  a  wife  to  my  son  of  the  daughters 
27.  46  weary  of  my  life  because  of  the  daughters 
27.  46  if  Jacob  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of 

27.  46  such  as  these  (which  are)  of  the  daughters 

28.  1,  6  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daug. 
28.   2  a  wife  from  thence  of  the  daughters  of 

28.  8  Esau  seeing  that  the  daughters  of  Canaan 

29.  16  Laban  had  two  daughters :  the  name  of 

30.  13  for  the  daughters  will  call  me  blessed 

31.  26  carried  away  my  daughters,  as  captives 
31.  28  to  kiss  my  sons  and  my  daughters 

31.  31  thou  wouldest  take  by  force  thy  daughters 
31.  41  fourteen  years  for  thy  two  daughters 
31. 43  (These)  daughters  (are)  my  daughters 
31.  43  what  can  I  do  this  day  unto  these  my  dau. 
31. 50  If  thou  shalt  afflict  my  daughters,  or  if 
31.  50  take  (other)  wives  besides  my  daughters 

31.  55  kissed  his  sous  and  his  daughters,  and 
34.    1  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  laud 
34.   9  (and)  give  your  daughters  uuto  us 

34.   9  and  take  our  daughters  unto  you 
34.  16  Then  will  we  give  our  daughters  unto 
34.  16  we  will  take  your  daughters  to  us,  and 
34.  21  let  us  taketheir  daughters  to  us  for  wives 
34.  21  and  let  us  give  them  our  daughters 
36.    2  Esau  took  his  wives  of  the  daughters  of 

36.  6  his  wives  and  his  sons,  and  his  daught. 

37.  35  all  his  sons  and  all  his  daughters  rose  up 
46.    7  his  daughters,  and  his  sons'  daughters 
46.  15  all  the  souls  of  his  sous  and  his  daughters 

Exod.  2.  16  the  priest  of  Midian  had  seven  daughters 

2.  20  he  said  unto  his  daughters,  And  where 

3.  22  upon  your  sons,  and  upon  your  daughters 
6.  25  took  him  (one)  of  the  daughters  of  Putiel 

10.   g  with  our  sous  and  with  our  daughters 

21.  4  and  she  have  born  him  sons  or  daughters 
21.    9  with  her  after  the  manner  of  daughters 

32.  2  of  your  sons,  and  of  your  daughters,  and 

34. 16  thou  take  of  their  daughters  unto  thy 
34.  16  their  daughters  go  a  whoring  after  their 

Lev.  10.  14  aud  thy  sons,  aud  thy  daughters  with  thee 
26.  29  the  flesh  of  your  daughters  shall  ye  eat 

NunnS.  n  to  thy  sons  and  to  thy  daughters  with 
18.  19  and  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  with  thee 
21.  29  his  daughters,  into  captivity  unto  Sihon 

25.  1  to  commit  whoredom  with  the  daughters 

26.  33  the  son  of  Hepher  had  nusons,  but  daug. 

26.  33  the  names  of  the  daughters  of  Zeluphehad 

27.  1  Then  came  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 


N 111112  7. 
27. 
36. 
36. 

36. 

36. 

Deut  12. 

12. 

23- 

28. 
28. 
28. 

32- 

Josh.  7. 

17- 

17- 

17- 

Judg.  3. 


Ruth 


iSa. 


2  Ki.i 
1  Ch. 


23- 
25- 
2CI1.  2. 
11. 
13- 
24. 
28. 
29. 

31' 

Ezra    2. 

9 
9- 

9- 
Neh.   3. 

4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
7 


Job 


Psa.  45. 

48. 

97- 
106. 
106. 
144. 

Prov  30. 

31* 
Eccl.12. 
Song  1. 


3- 
3' 
5- 
5- 
6, 
8. 
Isa.     3. 


1  these  (are)  the  names  of  his  daughters 
7  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  speak  right 

2  give  the  inheritance,  .unto  his  daughters 
6  concerning  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 

io  so  did  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 

11  daughters  of  Zelophehad,  were  married 

12  ye,  and  your  sons,  and  your  daughters 

31  their  sons  and  their  daughters  they  have 

17  There  shall  be  no  whore  of  the  daughters 

32  Thy  sous  aud  thy  daughters  (shall  be)  given 
41  Thou  shalt  beget  sons  and  daughters 
53  flesh  of  thy  sons  and  of  thy  daughters 

19  provoking  of  his  sons  and  of  his  daught. 
24  his  sons,  and  his  daughters,  and  his  oxeu 

3  But  Zelophehad.  .had  no  sous,  butdaugh. 
3  these  (are)  the  names  of  his  daughters 
6  the  daughters  of  Manasseh  had  au  inher. 

6  they  took  their  daughters  to  be  their 
40  the  daughters  of  Israel  went  yearly  to 

9  and  thirty  daughters,  (whom)  he  sent 
9  took  in  thirty  daughters  from  abroad  for 
1,  2  a  woman  iu  Tininath  of  the  daughters 

3  (Is  there)  never  a  woman  among  the  da. 

7  we  will  not  give  them  of  our  daughters 

18  may  not  give  them  wives  of  our  daught. 
21  if  the  daughters  of  Shiloh  come  out  to 
21  catch,  .everynianhis  wife  of  the  daughters 

11  Turn  again,  my  daughters  ;  why  will  ye 

12  Turn  again,  my  daughters,  go  (your  way) 

13  nay,  my  daughters  ;  for  it  grieveth  me 

4  to  all  her  sous  and  her  daughters 

21  aud  bare  three  sons  and  two  daughters 
13  he  will  take  your  daughters  (to  be)  con. 
49  the  names  of  his  two  daughters  (were 

3  wives,  and  their  sons,  and  their  daughters 

6  every  man  for  his  sons  and  for  his  daugh. 

19  neither  sons  nor  daughters,  neither  spoil 

20  lest  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines 

20  lest  the  daughters  of  the  uncircumcised 

24  Ye  daughters  of  Israel,  weep  over  Saul 

13  there  were  yet  sons  and  daughters  born 
18  with  such  robes  were  the  king's  daughters 

5  lives  of  thy  sons  and  of  thy  daughters 

17  they  caused  their  sons  and  their  daught. 
34  Now  Sheshan  had  no  sons,  but  daughters 
27  Shimei  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  daught. 
15  Zelophehad  :  and  Zelophehad  had  daugh. 

3  and  David  begat  more  sous  and  daughters 

22  Eleazar  died,  aud  had  no  sons,  but  daug. 
5  to  Heman  fourteen  sons  and  three  daug. 

14  son  of  a  woman  of  the  daughters  of  Dan 

21  eight  sons,  and  threescore  daughters 
21  twenty  and  two  sons,  and  sixteen  daugh. 

3  and  he  begat  sons  and  daughters 

8  hundred  thousand,  women,  sons,  and  da. 
o  our  sons  aud  our  daughters  and  our  wives 

18  wives,  and  their  sons,  and  their  daught. 
61  which  "took  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  B. 

2  they  have  taken  of  their  daughters  for 
12  give  not  your  daughters  unto  their  sons 
12  neither  take  their  daughters  unto  your 

12  repaired  Shallum.  .he  and  his  daughters 

14  your  sons,  and  your  daughters,  your 
2  We,  our  sons,  and  our  daughters,  (are) 
5  into  bondage  our  sons  and  our  daughters 
5  (some)  of  our  daughters  are  brought  unto 

63  took  (one)  of  the  daughters  of  Barzillai 

25  their  wives,  their  sons,  aud  their  daught. 
30  that  we  would  not  give  our  daughters 
30  uor  take  their  daughters  for  our  sous 
25  Ye  shall  not  give  your  daughters  unto 
25  nor  take  their  daughters  unto  your  sons 

2  unto  him  seven  sons  and  three  daughters 

13  a  day  when  his  sons  aud  his  daughters 
18  Thy  sous  and  thy  daughters  (were)  eating 
13  had  also  seven  sons  and  three  daughters 

15  no  women  found  (so)  fair  as  the  daughters 

9  Kings'  daughters  (were)  among  thy 

11  let  the  daughters  of  Judah  be  glad 
8  the  daughters  of  Judah  rejoiced  because 

37  sacrificed  their  sons  and  their  daughters 

38  blood  of  their  sons  and  of  their  daughters 

12  (that)  our  daughters  (may  be)  as  corner 
15. The  horse  leach  hath  two  daughters 
29  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously 

4  the  daughters  of  music  shall  be  brought 

5  I  (am)  black,  but  comely,  O  ye  daughters 
2  so  (is)  my  love  among  the  daughters 

7  I  charge  you,  0  ye  daughters  of  Jerusa. 
5  I  charge  you,  O  ye  daughters  of  Jerusa. 

10  the  midst,  .(with)  love,  for  the  daughters 

11  Go  forth,  0  ye  daughters  of  Zion,  and 

8  I  charge  you,  0  daughters  of  Jerusalem 

16  This  (is)  my  friend,  O  daughters  of  Jerus. 

9  The  daughters  saw  her,  and  blessed  her 
y.  4  I  charge  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem 
3.  16  Because  the  daughters  of  Zion  are  haugh. 

3.  17  crown  of  the  head  of  the  daughters  of  Z. 

4.  4  the  Lord,  .away  the  filth  of  the  daughters 
16.    2  (so)  the  daughters  of  Moab  shall  be  at 
32.    o  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters 

43.    6  bring  my  sons  from  far,  and  my  daughters 
49.  22  thy  daughters  shall  be  carried  upon 
56.    5  name  better  than  of  sons  and  of  daugh. 
60.    4  thy  daughters  shall  be  nursed  at  (thy) 
3.  24  their  flocks,  .their  sons  and  their  daugh. 

5.  17  (which)  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  should 
7.  31  to  burn  their  sons  and  their  daughters  in 
9.  20  teach  your  daughters  wailing,  and  every 

11.  22  their  sons  aud  their  daughters  shall  die 
14.  16  wives,  nor  their  sons,  nor  their  daughters 
16.   2  neither  shalt  thou  have  sons  or  daughters 


Jer.   16.    3  concerning  the  daughters  that  are  born 
19.    9  the  flesh  of  their  daughters,  and  they 
29.    6  Take  ye  wives,  and  beget  sons  and  daugh. 
29.    6  give  your  daughters  to  husbands 

29.  6  that  they  may  bear  sons  and  daughters 
32.  35  to  cause  their  sons  and  their  daughters 
35.  8  we,  our  wives,  our  sons,  nor  our  daugh. 
41.  10  (even)  the  king's  daughters,  and  all  the 
43.    6  women,  and  children,  and  the  king's  da. 

48.  46  sons  are  taken  captives,  and  thy  daugh. 

49.  2  her  daughters  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
49.    3  cry-,  ye  daughters  of  Rabbah,  gird  you 

"Lam.  3.  51  because  of  all  the  daughters  of  my  city 
Eze.  13  .17  set  thy  face  against  the  daughters  of  thy 
14.  16,  18  shall  deliver  neither  sons  nor  daugh. 
14.  22  be  brought  forth,  (both)  sons  and  daugh. 
16.  20  thou  hast  taken  thy  sons  and  thy  daugh. 
16.  27  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines,  which 
16.  46  she  and  her  daughters  that  dwell  at  thy 
16.  46  younger  sister.  .Sodom  andher  daughters 
16.  48  Sodom. .hath  not. .nor  her  daughters 
16.  48  as  thou  hast  done,  thou  andthy  daughters 
16.  49  abuudanceof  idleness  was.  .in  her  daugh. 
16.  53  the  captivity  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters 
16.  53  the  captivity  of  Samaria  and  her  daugh. 
16.  55  Sodom  and  her  daughters,  shall  return  to 
16.  55  and  Samaria  and  her  daughters 
16.  55  then  thou  and  thy  daughters  shall  return 
16.  57  (thy)  reproach  of  the  daughters  of  Syria 
16.  57  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines,  which 
16.  61  I  will  give  them  unto  thee  for  daughters 
23.   2  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother 
23.    4  and  they  bare  sons  and  daughters 
23.  10  they  took  her  sons  and  her  daughters,  and 
23.  25  they  shall  take  thy  sons  and  thy  daugh. 

23.  47  shall  slay  their  sons  and  their  daughters 

24.  21  your  sons  and  your  daughters  whom  ye 
24.  25  they  set.  .their  sons  and  their  daughters 
26.    6  her  daughters  which  (are)  in  the  field 
26.    8  shall  slay  with  the  sword  thy  daughters 

30.  18  and  her  daughters  shall  go  into  captivity 
32.  16  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shall  lameut 
32.  18  (even)  her,  aud  the  daughters  of  the 

Hos.    4.  13  your  daughters  shall  commit  whoredom 

4.  14  I  will  not  punish  your  daughters  when 

Joel    2.  28  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy 

•  3.    8  I  will  sell  your  sons  and  your  daughters 

Amos  7.  17  thy  sens  and  thy  daughters  shall  fall  by 

2. Daughter,  descendant,  dvydr-qp  thugater. 

Luke23.  28  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me 
Acts    2. 17  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy 
21.    9  the  same  manhad  fourdaughters,  virgins 
2  Co.    6.  18  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith 

3.  Child,  renvov  teknon. 

1  Pe.  3.    6  whose  daughters  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do 

DA-VLD,  Tin,  in,  Aa0t5,  Aaveld  beloved. 
YouDgest  son  of  one  Jesse  of  Bethlehem-Ephratah  in 
the  land  of  Judah,  born  B.C.  10S6.  He  had  seven  older 
brothers  and  two  sisters,  Zeruiah  and  Abigail  (who  is 
however  called  in  2  Sa.  17  25  the  daughter  of  Kahash). 
His  mother's  name  is  not  mentioned  ;  perhaps  she  was 
the  daughter,  sister,  or  concubine  of  Nahash  king  of 
Amnion,  whom  Jesse  married  in  his  advanced  years 
(1  Sa.  17.  12).  This  would  account  for  the  kindness 
David  received  from  Nahash  and  his  son  Shobi  (2  Sa. 
10.  2  ;  17.  27  ;  Psa.  51.  5).  We  can  only  give  a  brief 
summary  of  his  eventful  life.  He  was  tending  his 
father's  sheep  when  sent  for  and  anointed  by  Samuel, 
after  which  he  received  the  Spirit,  was  sent  for  by  Saul 
and  made  his  armour  bearer  and  musician  (1  Sa.  xvi.) ; 
he  engages  to  conquer  Goliath,  and  succeeds  (ch.  xvii.) ; 
Jonathan  loves  him,  but  Saul  envies  him,  and  to  entrap 
him  gives  him  Michal  his  daughter  for  a  wife(ch.xviii.); 
while  Jonathan  befriendshim.Saulassaultshim,  and  he 
escapes  to  Naioth  (ch.  xix.) ;  he  and  Jonathan  make  a 
covenant,  but  Saul  remains  perverse,  and  David  and 
Jonathan  separate  (ch.  xx.) ;  David  resides  at  Nob  and 
at  Gath,  (ch.  xxi.);  and  then  in  the  cave  of  Adullam, 
at  Mizpah,  and  at  the  forest  of  Hareth,  when  Saul  and 
Dceg  slay  the  priests,  &c.  (ch.  xxii.) ;  David  resides  at 
Keilah.  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph,  at  the  hill  of  Ha- 
chilah,  and  in  the  wilderness  of  Maon  (ch.  xxiii.) ;  and 
at  En-gedi  he  spares  Saul's  life  (ch.  xxiv.) ;  Samuel 
dies;  Nahal  is  churlish,  but  Abigail  prudent,  so 
that  when  Nabal  dies  David  marries  her  (ch.  xxv.); 
at  Hachilah  David  spares  Saul's  life  (ch.  xxvi.) ; 
and  a  second  time  at  Gath,  where  he  is  trusted 
by  Achish  (ch.  xxvii.);  but  being  suspected  by  the 
Philistines  he  is  dismissed  by  him  (ch.  xxix.)';  David 
overtakes  the  Anialekites  and  defeats  them  (cli.  xxx.)  ; 
receives  tidings  of  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan, 
and  eulogises  them  (2  Sa.  i.) ;  is  made  king  over  Judah 
at  Hebron,  when  a  contest  takes  place  between  the 
men  of  Joab  and  those  of  Abner  (ch.  ii.) ;  the  latter 
having  come  over  to  David,  is  slain  by  the  former,  but 
lamented  by  David  (ch.  hi.);  he  also  punishes  the 
murderers  of  Ishbosheth  (ch.  iv.),  and  becomes  king 
of  all  Israel,  takes  Zion  from  the  Jebusites,  is  helped 
by  Hiram,  and  twice  defeats  the  Philistines  (ch.  v.) ; 
bringing  the  ark  to  Zion  he  is  despised  by  Michal 
(ch.  vi.) ;  designing  to  build  the  temple,  he  is  praised, 
yet  restrained,  and  blessed  (ch.  vii.);  he  conquers 
successively  the  Philistines,  Moabites,  Syrians,  and 
Edomites  (ch.  viii) ;  is  kind  to  Mephibosheth  (ch.  ix.) ; 
overcomes  the  Ammonites  and  Syrians  (ch.  x.)  ;  but 
offends  against  LTriah,  and  at  last  marries  Bath-sheba 
(ch.  xi.) ;  Nathan  puts  a  parable  before  him,  his  child 
dies,  Solomon  is  born,  aud  R.abbah  captured  (ch.  xii.); 
conduct  of  Amnon,  Tamar,  and  Absalom  (ch.  xiv.); 
Absalom's  artifice,  conspiracy,  and  David's  flight  (ch. 


DAVID 


224 


DAVID 


xv.);  Zeba's  deceit,  and  Shimei's  cursing  (2  Sa.  16. 
1-14);  Hushai  and  Ahithophel  (2  Sam  16.  15-17.  14) ; 
David's  secret  information,  Ahithophel 's  death, 
Absalom's  conduct;  and  kindness  shown  to  David  at 
Mahanaim  (2  Sa.  17.  15-29.);  battle,  with  death  of 
Absalom,  and  grief  of  David  (eh.  xviii.) ;  Joab's  appeal, 
and  conduct  of  Shimei,  Mephibosheth,  Barzillai,  and 
Israel  (ch.  xix.) ;  revolt  and  death  of  Sheba  (ch.  xx.); 
the  Gibeonites  complaint,  and  war  with  the  Philistines 
(ch.  xxi.);  David's  thanksgiving  (Psa.  xx.) ;  his  last 
words,  and  list  of  his  mighty  men  (ch.  xxiii.);  he  num- 
bers the  people,  and  chooses  the  pestilence ;  conduct 
of  Arauuah  (ch.  xxiv.);  Adonijah  presumes,  but  Solo- 
mon is  anointed  king ;  his  promise  to  Adonijah  (1  Ki. 
i.);  David  dies,  B.C.  1016,  aged  70,  after  reigning  7 
years  in  Hebron  and  33  in  Jerusalem.  Seventy-five  of 
the  Psalms  have  his  name  prefixed  to  them,  and 
remain  imperishable  monuments  of  his  poetic  genius, 
and  his  unfeigned  piety,  repentance,  and  hope  in  God, 
though  marred  by  grievous  follies  and  crimes  against 
both  God  and  man. 

Ruth  4.  17  the  father  of  Jesse,  the  father  of  D. 

4.  22  And  Obed  begat  Jesse,  and  Jesse  begat  D. 
1  Sa.  16.  13  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  D. 
16.  19  Send  me  D.  thy  son,  which  (is)  with  the 
16.  20  Jesse . .  sent  (them)  by  D.  his  son  unto  S. 
16.  21  D.  came  to  Saul,  and  stood  before  him 
16.  22  Let  D.,  I  pray  thee,  stand  before  me 

16.  23  D.  took  an  harp,  and  played  with  his  hand 

17.  12  D.  (was)  the  son  of  that  Ephrathite  of  B. 
17.  14  D.(was)the  youngest:  andthethreeeldest 
17.  15  D. .  returned  from  Saul  to  feed  his  fath. 
17.  17  Aud  Jesse  said  unto  D.  his  son 

17.  20  And  D.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 
17.  22  D.  left  his  carriage  in  the  hand  of  the 
17.  23  Goliath . .  spake . .  the  same  words :  and  D. 
17.  26  D.  spake  to  the  men  that  stood  by  him 
17.  28  Eliab'sanger  was  kindled  against  D.,  and 
17.  20,  And  D.  said,  What  have  I  now  done? 
17.  31  when  the  words  were  heard  which  D. 
17.  32  D.  said  to  Saul,  Let  no  man's  heart  fail 
17.  33  Saul  said  to  D.,  Thou  art  not  able 
17.  34  D.  said.  .Thy  servant  kept  his  father's 
17.  37  D.  said  moreover,  The  Lord,  .will  deliver 
17.  37  Saul  said  unto  D.,  Go,  aud  the  Lord  be 
17.  38  And  Saul  armed  D.  with  his  armour 
17.  39  And  D.  girded  his  sword  upon  his  armour 
17.  39  And  D.  said.  .1  cannot  go  with  these 
17.  39  And  D.  put  them  off  him 
17.  41  the  Philistine  came  on  and  drew.  .untoD. 
17.  42  when  the  Philistine.  .sawD.,hedisdained 
17.  43  the  Philistine  said  unto  D.,  (Am)  I  a  dog 
17.  43  And  the  Philistine  cursed  D.  by  his  gods 
17.  44  the  Philistine  said  to  D.,  Come  to  me 
17.  45  said  D.  .Thou  comestto  me  with  a  sword 
17.  48  the  Philistine  arose,  and  came.  .to.  .D. 
17.  49  And  D.  put  his  hand  in  his  bag 
17.  50  D.  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a 
17.  50  (there  was)  no  sword  in  the  haud  of  D. 
17.  51  Therefore  D.  ran,  and  stood  upon  the  P. 
17.  54  And  D.  took  the  head  of  the  Philistine 
17.  55  Saul  saw  D.  go  forth  against  the  Philis. 
17-  57  D.  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  P. 

17.  58  D.  answered,  (I  am)theson  of  thyservt.  J. 

18.  1  soul  of  Joua.  was  knit  withithe  soul  of  D. 
18.  3  Then  Jonathan  and  D.  made  a  covenant 
18.  4  himself  of  the  robe,  .and  gave  it  to  D. 
18.  5  and  D.  went  out  whithersoever  Saul  sent 
18.  6  when  D.  was  returned  from  the  slaughter 
18.  7  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  D.  his 
18.  8  They  have  ascribed  unto  D.  ten  thousands 
18.  9  Saul  eyed  D.  from  that  day  aud  forward 
18. 10  D.  played  with  his  hand,  as  at  other  times 
18.  11  I  will  smite  D.  even  to  the  wall 

18.  11  And-D.  avoided  out  of  his  presencetwice 
18.  12  Saul  was  afraid  of  D.,  because  the  Lord 
18.  14  D.  behaved  himself  wisely  in  all  his  ways 
18.  16  But  all  Israel  aud  Judah  loved  D. 
18.  17  Saulsaidjto  D.,  Behold  my.. daughter  M. 
18.  18  And  D.  said  unto  Saul,  Who  (am)  I  ? 
18.  19  Merab.  .should  have  been  given  to  D. 
18.  20  And  Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  loved  D. 
18.  21  Saul saidtoD., Thou  shalt.  .be  myson-in-1. 
18.  22  Commune  with  D.  secretly,  and  say,  Bo. 
18.  23  spake  those  words  in  the  ears  of  D. 
18.  24  told  him.  .On  this  manner  spake  D. 
18.  25  And  Saul  said,  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  D. 
18.  25  But  Saul  thought  to  make  D.  fall 
18.  26  And  when  his  servant's  told  D.  these 
18.  26  it  pleased  D.  well  to  be  the  king'sson-in  1. 
18.  27  D.  arose  and  went,  he  and  his  men 
18.  27  D.  brought  their  foreskins,  and  they  gave 
18.  28  Saul,  .knew  that  the  Lord  (was)  with  D. 
18.  29  Saul  was  yet  the  more  afraid  of  D. 
18.  29  and  Saul  became  D  's  enemy  continually 

18.  30  D.  behaved  himself  more  wisely  than  all 
ig.    1  to.  .his  servants,  that  they  should  kill  D. 

19.  2  Jonathan,  Saul's  son,  delighted  much  in  D. 
19.    2  Jonathan  told  D.  .my  father  seeketh  to 
19.   4  Jonathan  spake  good  of  D.  unto  Saul  his 
19.    4  Let  not  the  king  sin.  .against  D. 

19.    5  wherefore,  .wilt  thou,  .slay  D.  without  a 
19.   7  Jonathan  called  D.,  and.. showed  him 
19.    7  And  Jonathan  brought  D.  to  Saul 
19.    8  D.  went  out  and  fought  with  the  Philis. 
19.   9  he  sat.  .with  his  javelin,  .and  D.  played 
19.  10  Saul  sought  to  smite  D.  even  to  the  wall 
19.  10  and  D.  fled,  and  escaped  that  night 
19.  11  Saul  also  sent  messengers  unto  D.'s  house 
19.  11  and  Michal,  D.'s  wife,  told  him,  saying 
19.  12  So  Michal  let  D.  down  through  a  window 
ig.  14  And  when  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  D. 


1  Sa.  19.  15  Saul  sent  the  messengers  (again)  to  see  D. 
19.  iS  D.  fled,  aud  escaped,  and  came  to  Samuel 
19.  19  Behold,  D.  (is)  at  Naioth  in  Ramah 
19.  20  And  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  D. 

19.  22  he  asked  and  said,  Where  (are)  S.  and  D.? 

20.  1  and  D.  fled  from  Naioth  in  Ramah 

20.    3  D.  sware.  .and  said,  Thy  father  certainly 
20.    4  said  Jonathan  unto  D.,  Whatsoever  thy 
20.    5  D.  said  unto  Jonathan .  .to  morrow  (is) 
20.    6  D. . .  asked . .  that  he  might  run  to  Beth-le. 
20. 10  said  D.  to  Jonathan,  Who  shall  tell  me? 
20.  11  Jonathan  said  unto  D. .  .let  us  go  out  into 
20. 12  Jonathan  said  unto  D.,  O  LORD  God  of  Is. 
20.  12  and,  behold,  (if  there  be)  good  toward  D. 
20.  15  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  the  enemies  of  D. 
20.  16  J.  made  (a  covenant)  with  the  house  of  D. 
20.  16  Let  the  Lord,  .require,  .atthehandof  D.'s 
20.  17  And  Jonathau  caused  D.  to  swear  again 
20.  18  Jonathan  said  to  D.,  To  morrow  (is)  the 
20.  24  So  D.  hid  himself  in  the  field 
20.  25  Abner  sat  by  Saul's  side,  and  D.'s  place 
20.  27  on  the  morrow. .  D.'s  place  was  empty 
20.  28  D. . .  asked  (leave)  of  me  (to  go)  to  Beth-le 
20.  33  it  was  determined  of  his  father  to  slay  D. 
20.  34  he  was  grieved  for  D.,  because  his  father 
20.  35  went  out.  .at  the  time  appointed  with  D. 
20.  39  only  Jonathan  and  IX  knew  the  matter 
20.  41  D.  arose  out  of  (a  place)  toward  the  south 

20.  41  wept  one  with  another,  until  D.  exceeded 
2G.  42  And  Jonathan  said  to  D.,  Go  in  peace 

21.  1  Theu  came  D.  to  Nob  to  Ahimelech  the 
21.    1  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  themeetiug  of  D. 
21.    2  D.  said.  .The  king  hath  commanded  me  a 
21.   4  And  the  priest  answered  D.,  and  said 

21.    5  D.  answered  the  priest,  and  said  unto  him 
21.   8  D  said  unto  Ahimelech.  istherenot..sp. 
2i.   9  D.  said,  (There  is)  none  like  that ;  give  it 
21.  10  D.  arose,  aud  fled,  .for  fear  of  Saul 
21.  11  (Is)  not  this  D.  the  king  of  the  land  ? 

21.  11  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands.  .D.  his  ten 
21. 12  D.  laid  up  these  words  in  his  heart 

22.  1  D.  ..departed  thence,  and  escaped  to..  A. 
22.  3  And  D.  went  thence  to  Mizpeh  of  Moab 
22.    4  all  the  while  that  D.  was  in  the  hold 

22.    5  Gad  said  unto  D.,  Abide  not  in  the  hold 
22.    5  D.  departed,  and  came  into  the  forest  of 
22.    6  When  Saul  heard  that  D.  was  discovered 
22.  14  (is  so)  faithful  among,  .thy  servants  as  D. 
22.  17  because  their  hand  also  (is)  with  D. 
22.  20  one  of  the  sous  of  Ahimelech.  .fled  after  D. 
22.  2i  Abiathar  showed  D.  that  Saul  had  slain 
22.  22  D.  said  unto  Abiathar,  I  knew  (it)  that  d. 

1  they  told  D.  ..the  Philistines  fight  against 

2  Therefore  D.  enquired  of  the  LORD,  say. 

2  And  the  Lord  said  unto  D.,  Go 

3  D.'s  men  said  unto  him.  .we  be  afraid 

4  Then  D.  enquired  of  the  Lord  yet  again 

5  So  D.  and  his  men  went  to  Keilah 

5  So  D.  saved  the  inhabitants  of  Keilah 

6  when  Abiathar.  .fled  to  D.  to  Keilah 

7  it  was  told  Saul  that  D.  was  come 

8  Saul  called  all  the  people,  .to  besiege  D. 

9  D.  knew  that  Saul,  .practised  mischief 
10  Then  said  D.,  O  Lord  God  of  Israel 

12  Then  said  D.,  Will  the  men  of  Keilah 

13  D.  and  his  men.  .departed  out  of  Keilah 

13  it  was  told  Saul  that  D.  was  escaped 

14  D.  abode  iu  the  wilderness  in  strong  holds 

15  And  D.  saw  that  Saul  was  come  out 

15  and  D.  (was)  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph 

16  Jonathan,  .arose,  and  went  to  D.  into  the 

18  And  D.  abode  in  the  wood,  and  Jonathan 

19  Doth  not  D.  hide  himself,  .in  the  wood 

24  D.  and  his  men  (were)  in  the  wilderness 

25  they  told  D. :  wherefore  he  came  down 

25  he  pursued  after  D.  in  the  wilderness  of 

26  and  D.  and  his  men  on  that  side 
26  D.  made  haste  to  get  away  for  fear  of 
26  for  Saul  and  his  men  compassed  D. 

28  Saul  returned  from  pursuing  after  D. 

29  D.  weut  up  from  thence,  and  dwelt  in 

1  Behold,  D.  (is)  in  the  wilderness  of  En-g. 

2  Then  Saul . .  went  to  seek  D.  and  his  men 

3  D. .  .remained  in  the  sides  of  the  cave 

4  And  the  men  of  D.  said  unto  him 

4  D. .  .cut  off  the  skirt  of  Saul's  robe 

5  D.'s  heart  smote  him,  because  he.  .cut 

7  So  D  stayed  his  servants  with  these  words 
S  D.  also  arose,  .and  went  out  of  the  cave 

8  D.  stooped  with  his  face  to  the  earth 

9  D.  said  to  Saul,  Wherefore  hearest  thou 
9  saying,  Behold,  D.  seeketh  thy  hurt? 

16  when  D. .  .made  an  end  of  speaking  these 

16  Saul  said,  (Is)  this  thy  voice,  my  son  D.? 

17  he  said  to  D.,  Thou  (art)  more  righteous 
22  D.  sware  unto  Saul.     And  Saul  went 
22  D.  and  his  men  gat  them  up  unto  the  hold 

1  D. .  .went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  Paran 

4  D.  heard .  .that  Nabal  did  shear  his  sheep 

5  And  D.  sent  out  ten  young  men 
5  and  D.  said  unto  the  young  men 

8  cometh  to  thine  hand,  .to  thy  son  D. 
o  And  when  D.'s  young  men  came,  they 

9  spake,  .those  words  in  the  name  of  D. 
10  And  Nabal  answered  D.'s  servants,  aud 
10  Who  (is)  D.  ?  and  who(is)  the  sou  of  Jesse? 

12  So  D.'s  young  men  turned  their  way 

13  And  D.  said  unto  his  men,  Gird  ye  on 
13  and  D.  also  girded  on  his  sword 

13  there  went  up  after  D.  about  four  hundred 

14  D.  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wilderness 
.  20  D.  and  his  men  came  down  against  her 


=3- 

23- 

23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 

23- 

23- 

23. 

23- 

23- 

23. 

23- 

23- 

23- 

23- 
23- 

23- 

=3- 

23- 

23. 
23- 

23- 

=3- 

23- 

23- 
23- 

24. 
24. 

24. 

24- 

24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
25. 

25- 

25- 
25- 

25- 

25- 

25- 

25' 

25 
25 

25 

25 

2S 
25' 

25 


25- 
25- 
25- 

25. 

25- 

25- 

25- 

25. 
25, 

25- 

25. 

25' 

26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 

SO- 
SO- 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30- 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 


21  Now  D.  had  said,  Surely  in  vain  have  I 

22  more  also  do  God  unto  the  enemies  of  D. 

23  And  when  Abigail  saw  D.,  she  hasted 
23  and  fell  before  D.  on  her  face,  and 
32  D.  said  to  Abigail,  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord 
35  D.  received,  .(that)which  she  had  brought 
39  And  when  D.  heard  that  Nabal  was  dead 

39  And  D.  sent  and  communed  with  Abigail 

40  when  the  servants  of  D.  were  come  to  A. 
40  D.  sent  us  unto  thee,  to  take  thee  to 

42  she  went  after  the  messengers  of  D. 

43  D.  also  took  Ahinoam  of  Jezreel 

44  Saul  had  given.  .D.'s  wife,  to  Phalti 

1  Doth  not  D.  hide  himself  in  the  hill 

2  Saul  arose.. to  seek  D.  in  the  wilderness 

3  But  D.  abode  in  the  wilderness ;  and  he 

4  D.  therefore  sent  out  spies,  and  under. 

5  And  D.  arose,  and  came  to  the  place 

5  and  D.  beheld  the  place  where  Saul  lay 

6  Then  answered  D. ,  and  said  to  Ahimelech 

7  So  D.  and  Abishai  came  to  the  people 
S  Then  said  Abishai  to  D.,  God  hath  deliv. 
9  And  D.  said  to  Abishai,  Destroy  him  not 

10  D.  said  furthermore,  (As)  theLoRDliveth 

12  D.  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of  water 

1 3  Then  D.  went  over  to  the  other  side 

14  And  D.  cried  to  the  people,  and  to  Abner 

15  And  D.  said  to  Abner,  (Art)  not  thou 
17  Aud  Saul  knew  D.'s  voice,  and  said 
17  (Is)  this  thy  voice,  my  son  D.  ? 
17  And  D.  said,  (It  is)  my  voice,  my  lord 

21  I  have  sinned  :  return,  my  son  D. 

22  D.  answered  and  said,  Behold  the  king's 
25  Then  Saul  said  to  D. 
25  Blessed  (be)  thou,  my  son  D. 

25  So  D.  went  on  his  way,  and  Saul  returned 

1  And  D.  said  in  his  heart,  I  shall  now 

2  And  D.  arose,  and  he  passed  over  with 

3  And  D.  dwelt  with  Achish  at  Gath 

3  D.  with  his  two  wives,  Ahinoam.  .and  A. 

4  it  was  told  Saul  that  D.  was  fled 

5  And  D.  said  unto  Achish,  If  I  have 

7  the  time  that  D.  dwelt  in  the  country 

8  And  D.  and  his  men  went  up,  and 

9  And  D.  smote  the  land,  and  left  neither 

10  And  D.  said.  Against  the  south  of  Judah 

11  D.  saved  neither  man  nor  woman  alive 

11  So  did  D.,  and  so  (will  be)  his  manner  all 

12  And  Achish  believed  D.,  saying.  He  hath 

1  Achish  said  untoD.,Knowthou  assuredly 

2  D.  said  to  Achish,  Surely  thou  shalt  know 
2  Achish  said  to  D.,  Therefore  will  I  make 

17  andgiven  it  to  thyneighbour,(even)to  D. 

2  D.  and  his  men  passed  on.  .with  Achish 

3  (Is)  not  this  D.,  the  servant  of  Saul  the  king 
5  (Is)  not  this  D.,  of  whom  they  sang  one 

5  Saul  slew  his  thousands,  aud  D.  his  ten 

6  Then  Achish  called  D.,  and  said  unto  him 

8  And  D.  said  uuto  Achish,  But  what  have 

9  And  Achish  answered  and  said  to  D. 
11  So  D.  and  his  men  rose  up  early  to  depart 

1  when  D.  and  his  men  were  come  to  Zik. 

3  So  D.  and  his  men  came  to  the  city 

4  D.  and  the  people,  .lifted  up  their  voice 

5  And  D.'s  two  wives  were  taken  captives 

6  And  D.  was  greatly  distressed 

6  but  D.  encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord 

7  And  D.  said  to  Abiathar  the  priest 

7  Abiathar  brought  thither  the  ephod  to  D. 

8  And  D.  enquired  at  the  Lord,  saying 

9  So  D.  went,  he  and  the.  .meu  that  (were) 

10  But  D.  pursued,  he  and  four  huudred 

11  And  they,  .brought  him  to  D.,  and  gave 

13  D.  said.  .To  whom  (belongest)  thou  ? 
15  And  D.  said  to  him,  Canst  thou  bring  me 

17  And  D.  smote  them  from  the  twilight 

18  D.  recovered  all  that  the  Amalekites 

18  and  D.  rescued  his  two  wives 

19  they  had  taken  to  them  :  D.  recovered 

20  D.  took  all  the  flocks  and  the  herds 

20  and  said,  This  is  D.'s  spoil 

21  And  D.  came  to  the  two  hundred  men 
21  so  faint  that  they  could  not  follow  D. 
21  and  they  went  forth  to  meet  D. 

21  when  D.  came  near.. he  saluted  them 

22  Then  answered,  .those  that  went  with  D. 

23  Then  said  D.,  Ye  shall  not  do  so 

26  And  when  D.  came  to  Ziklag,  he  sent  of 
31  where  D.  himself  and  his  men  were  wont 

1  when  D.  was  returned  from  the  slaughter 

1  and  D.  had  abode  two  days  in  Ziklag 

2  and  (so)  it  was,  when  he  came  to  D. 

3  D.  said  unto  him,  From  whence  comest 

4  D.  said  unto  him.  How  went  the  matter? 

5  D.  said  unto  the  young  man  that  told  him 
1 1  Theu  D.  took  hold  on  his  clothes,  and 

13  D.  said  unto  the  young  man  that  told  him 

14  And  D.  said  unto  him,  How  wast  thou 

15  And  D.  called  one  of  the  young  men 

16  D.  said  unto  him,  Thy  blood  (be)  upon 

17  D.  lamented,  .over  Saul  and  over  Jonath. 
1  D.  said,  Whither  shall  I  go  up? 

1  D.  enquired  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Shall  I 

2  D.'  went  up  thither,  and  his  two  wives 

3  his  men  that  (were)  with  him  did  D.  bring 

4  aud  there  they  anointed  D.  king  over  the 

4  And  they  told  D.,  saying,  (That)  the  men 

5  D.  sent  messengers  unto  the  men  of  J. 

10  But  the  house  of  Judah  followed  D. 

1 1  the  time  that  D.  was  king  in  Hebron . .  was 
13  aud  the  servants  of  D.,  weut  out,  and  met 
15  Then  there  arose,  .twelve  of  the  se.  of  D. 


DAVID 


225 


DAVID 


i7  A.  was  beaten,  .before  the  servants  of  D. 

30  there  lacked  of  D.'s  servantsnineteen  men 

31  servants  of  D.  had  smitten  of  Benjamin 

1  the  house  of  Saul  and  the  house  of  D. 

2  And  unto  D.  were  sons  born  in  Hebron 
5  And  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  Eglah,  D.'s 

5  These  were  born  to  D.  in  Hebron 

6  the  house  of  Saul  and  the  house  of  D. 

8  have  not  delivered  thee  into  the  hand  of  D. 

9  as  the  Lord  hath  sworn  to  D. 

10  to  set  up  the  throne  of  D.  over  Israel,  and 
12  Abner  sent  messengers  to  D.  on  his  behalf 
14  O.  sent  messengers  to  Ish-bosheth,  Saul's 
17  Ye  sought  forD.  in  times  past  (to  be)  king 
.  18  the  Lord  hath  spokenof  D.,  saying 
.  18  By  the  hand  of  my  servant  D.  I  will  save 

19  Abner  went  also  to  speak  in  the  ears  of  D. 

20  So  Abner  came  to  D.  to  Hebron 

20  and  D.made  Abuer,  and  the  men.  .af east 
.  21  Abner  said  unto  D.,  I  will  arise  aud  go 
,  21  D.  sent  Abner  away ;  andhewentinpeace 
,  22  behold,  the  servants  of  D.  and  Joab  came 
.  22  but  Abner  (was)  not  with  D.  in  Hebron 
26  And  when  Joab  was  come  out  from  D. 
,  26  he  sent  messengers  after  Abner.  .but  D. 
28  And  afterward  when  D.  heard  (it)he  said 
31  And  D.  said  to  Joab.  .King  D.  followed 
35  all  the  people  came  to  cause  D.  to  eat 
35  D.  sware,  saying,  So  do  God  to  me,  and 

8  brought  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth  unto  D. 

9  D.  answered  Rechab  aud  Baanah  his 

12  D.  commanded  his  young  men,  and  they 
1  Then  came  all  the  tribes,  .to  D.  unto  H. 

3  king  D.  made  a  league  with  them  in  Heb. 

3  and  they  anointed  D.  king  over  Israel 

4  D.  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  began 
6  which  spake  unto  D.,  saying,  Except  thou 

6  thinking,  D.  cannot  come  in  thither 

7  D.  took  the  stronghold  of  Zion 

7  the  same  (is)  the  "city  of  D. 

8  and  D.  said  on  that  day,  Whosoever  gette. 

8  lame  and  the  blind,  (that  are)  hated  of  D.  's 

9  D.  dwelt  in  the  fort,  and  called  it,  The  city 
9  and  D.  built  round  about  from  Millo 

10  And  D.  went  on,  and  grew  great 

1 1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to  D. 

11  and  they  built  D.  an  house 

12  D.  perceived  that  the  LORD  had  establish. 

13  D.  took  (him)  more  concubines  and  wives 

13  there  were  yet  sons  anddaugh.  born  to  D. 
17  they  had  anointed  D.  king  over  Israel 

17  D.  heard  (of  it),  and  went  down  to  the 
19  And  D.  enquired  of  the  Lord,  saying 

19  And  the  LOR.D  said  unto  D.,  Go  up 

20  And  D.  came  to  Baal-perazim 

20  and  D.  smote  Cheni  there,  and  said 

21  and  D.  and  his  men  burnt  them 

23  And  when  D.  enquired  of  the  Lord,  he 
25  D.  did  so,  as  the  Lord  had  commanded 

1  D.  gathered  together  all  (the/chosen  (men) 

2  D.  arose,  and  went  with  all  the  people 

5  D.  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  played 

8  D.  was  displeased,  because  the  Lord  had 

9  D.  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day 

10  D,  would  not  remove  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

10  D.  carried  it  asideintothe  house  of  Obed. 
12  And  it  was  told  king  D.,  saying 

12  So  D.  went  and  brought  up  the  ark  of  God 

12  into  the  city  of  D.  with  gladness 

14  D.  danced  before  the  Lord  with  all  (his) 

14  D.  (was)  girded  witha  linen  ephod 

15  D.  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  brought  up 

16  the  ark  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  city  of  D. 

16  and  saw  king  D.  leaping  and  dancing 

17  the  tabernacle  that  D.  had  pitched  for  it 

17  D.  offered  burnt  offerings. .  before  the  L. 

18  B.  had  made  an  end  of  offering  burnt 
20  Then  D.  returned  to  bless  his  household 

20  the  daughter  of  Saul  came  out  to  meet  D. 

21  D.  said  unto  Michal,  (It  was)  before  the 
5  Go  and  tell  my  servant  D.,  Thus  saiththe 
8  so  shalt  thou  say  unto  my  servant  D. 

17  According  to  all  these  words.,  did  Nathan 

18  Then  went  king  David  in,  and  sat  before 
20  And  what  can  D.  say  more  unto  thee  ? 
26  let  the  house  of  thy  servant  D.  be  estab. 

1  it  came  to  pass,  that  D.  smote  the  Philis. 

1  D.  took  Metheg-ammah  out  of  the  hand 

2  and  (so)  the  Moabites  became  D.'s  servants 

3  D.  smote  also  Hadadezer,  the  son  of  Heh. 

4  And  D.  took  from  him  a  thousand  (char. 

4  and  D.  houghed  all  the  chariot  (horses) 

5  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty  thou. 

6  Then  D.  put  garrisons  in  Syria  of  Damas. 
6  and  the  Syrians  became  servants  to  D. 

6  the  Lord  preserved  D.  whithersoever  he 

7  And  D.  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 

8  king  D.  took  exceeding  much  brass 

9  D.  had  smitteu  all  the  host  of  Hadadezer 

0  Toi  sent  Joram  his  son  unto  king  D. 

11  Which  also  king  D.  did  dedicate  unto  the 

13  And  D.  gat  (him)  a  name  wheu  he  return. 

14  and  all  they  of  Edom  became  D.'s  servants 

15  And  D.  reigned  over  all  Israel 

15  and  D.  executed .'  .justice  unto  all  his  pe. 
18  and  D.'s  sons  were  chief  rulers 

1  D.  said,  Is  there  yet  any.  .of  the  house  of 

2  and  when  they  had  called  him  unto  D. 

5  Then  king  D.  sent,  and  fetched  him 

6  Now  when  Mephibosheth  wascomeuntoD. 

6  D.  said,  Mephibosheth.     And  he  answer, 

7  And  D.  said  unto  him,  Fear  not :  for  I 

29 


•  Sa. 


12. 
12. 
12. 


12. 

J3- 
*3- 
13- 
*3- 
*3- 
13- 
13- 
*3- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
IS- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
26. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
*7- 
17. 
17. 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17. 

*7- 
18. 
18. 


2  Then  said  D.,  I  will  show  kindness  unto 
2  Aud  D.  sent  to  comfort  him .  .for  his  fath. 

2  D.'s  servants  came  iuto  the  land  of.  .Am. 

3  Thinkest  thou  that  D.  doth  honour  thy 

3  hath  not  D.  (rather)  sent  his  servants  unto 

4  Wherefore  Hanuntook  D.'s  servants,  and 

5  When  they  told  (it)  unto  D.,  he  sent  to 

6  the  children  of  Ammon.  .stank  before  D. 

7  and  wheu  D.  heard  of  (it),  he  sent  Joab 
17  when  it  was  told  D.,  he  gathered  alllsr. 

17  Syrians  set  themselves  in  array  against  D. 

18  D.  slew  (the  men  of)  seven  hundred  char. 
1  And  it  came  to  pass,  .that  D.  sent  Joab 

1  But  D.  tarried  still  at  Jerusalam 

2  in  an  evening  tide . .  D.  arose  from  off  his 

3  And  D.  sent  and  enquired  after  the  worn. 

4  And  D.  sent  messengers  and  took  her 

5  and  told  D.,  and  said,  I  (am)  with  child 

6  D.  sent  to  Joab,  (saying),  Send  me  Uriah 

6  And  Joab  sent  Uriah  to  D. 

7  when  Uriah  was  come .  .  D.  demanded  (of) 

8  D.  said  to  Uriah,  Go  down  to  thy  house 
10  And  when  they  had  told  D.  saying 

10  D.  said  unto  Uriah,  Camest  thou  not  from 

11  And  Uriah  said  unto  D.,The  ark,  and  Is. 

12  D.  said  to  Uriah,  Tarry  here  to-day  also 

13  when  D.  had  called  him,  he  did  eat  and 

14  it  came  to  pass.  .  that  D.  wrote  a  letter 

17  andtherefell(some).  .of  the  servants  of  D. 

18  Then  Joab  sent  and  told  D.  all  the  things 

22  the  messenger .  .  showed  D.  all  that  Joab 

23  And  the  messenger  said  unto  D.,  Surely 

25  Then  D.  said  unto  the  messenger,  Thus 
27  D.  sent  and  fetched  her  to  his  house 

27  the  thing  thatD.  had  done  displeased  the 
1  And  the  Lord  sent  Nathan  unto  D. 
5  D.'s  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against 
7  Nathan  said  to  D.,  Thou  (art)  the  mau 
13  And  D.  said  unto  Nathan,  I  have  siuned 
13  And  Nathan  said  unto  D.  .  .  thou  shalt  not 

15  the  child  that  Uriah's  wife  bare  unto  D. 

16  D.  therefore  besought  God  for  the  child 
16  and  D.  fasted,  and  went  in,  and  lay 

18  And  the  servants  of  D.  feared  to  tell  him 

19  when  D.  saw  that  his  servants  whispered 
19  D.  perceived  that  the  child  was  dead 

19  D.  said  unto  his  servants,  Is  the  child  d.? 

20  Then  D.  arose  from  the  earth,  aud  washed 

24  Anil  D.  comforted  Bath-sheba  his  wife 
27  And  Joab  sent  messengers  toD.,  and  said 

20  And  D.  gathered  all  the  people  together 

30  and  it  was  (set)  on  D.'s  head 

31  So  D.  and  all  the  people  returned  unto 
1  Absalom  the  son  of  D.  had  a  fair  sister 
1  and  Ammon  the  son  of  D.  loved  her 
3  Jonadab,  the  sou  of  Shimeah,  D.'s  brother 
7  Then  D.  sent  home  to  Tamar,  saying 

21  But  when  king  D.  heard  of  all  these  things 
30  it  came  to  pass .  .  that  tidings  came  to  D. 

32  And  Jonadab,  the  son  of  Shimeah,  D.'s  b. 
39  king  D.  longed  to  go  forth  unto  Absalom 

12  Absalom  sent  for  Ahithopliel.  .  D's  coun. 

13  And  there  came  a  messenger  to  D 

14  AndD.  said  unto  alibis  servants  that 

22  D.  said  to  Ittai,  Go  and  pass  oyer 

30  D.  went  up  by  the  ascent  of  (mount)  Oli. 

31  And  (one)  told  D.,  saying,  Ahithophel(is) 

31  And  D.  said,  O  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  turn 

32  (when)  D.  was  cometo  the  top  (of  the 

33  D.  said,  If  thou  passest  on  with  me,  then 
37  So  Hushai,  D.'s  friend,  came  into  the  city 

1  when  D.  was  a  little  past  the  top  (of;the 

5  And  when  king  D  came  to  Bahurim' 

6  And  he  cast  stones  at  D. 

6  and  at  all  the  servants  of  king  D. 

10  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  him.  Curse  D. 

11  D.  said  to  Abishai,  audto  alibis  servants 
13  And  as  D.  and  his  men  went  by  the  way 
16  when  Hushai  the  Archite,  D.'s  friend,  was 

23  so  (was)  all  the  counsel  of  Ahi.  .with  D. 
1  I  will  arise  andpnrsue  after  D.  this  night 

16  Now  therefore  send  quickly  and  tell  D. 

17  and  they  went  and  told  king  D. 

21  came  up  out  of  the  well,  .and  told  kingD. 
2r  andsaid  unto  D.,  Arise,  and  pass  quickly 

22  D.  arose,  and  all  the  people  that  (were) 
?4  ThenD.  came  to  Mahanaim.  And  Absalom 
27  it  came  to  pass,  when  D.  was  come  to  if. 
29  sheep,  and  cheese  of  kine,  for  D. .  .;to  eat 

1  D.  numbered  the  people  that  (were)  with 

2  D.  sent  forth  a  third  part  of  the  people 

7  were  slain  before  the  servants  of  D. 

9  And  Absalom  met  the  servants  of  D. 

24  And  D.  sat  between  the  two  gates 

1 1  D.  sent  to  Zadok  and  to  Abiathar  the  pries. 
16  and  came  down . .  to  meet  king  D. 
22  And  D.  said,  What  have  I  to  do  with  you 
41  and  have  brought  the  kiug.  .  and  all  D.'s 
43  we  have  also  more  (right)  in  D.  than  ye 

1  and  said,  We  have  no  part  in  D.,  neither 

2  every  man  of  Israel  went  up  from.  .  D. 

3  And  D.  came  to  his  house  at  Jerusalem 

6  D.  said  to  Abishai,  Now  shall  Sheba  the 

1 1  he  that  (is)  for  D. ,  (let  him  go)  after  Joab 
2 1  hath  lifted  up  his  hand .'.  (even)  against  D. 

26  And  Ira  also,  .was  a  chief  ruler  about  D. 
1  there  was  a  famine  in  the  days  of  D. 

1  and  D.  enquired  of  the  Lord.  And  the 
3  Wherefore  D.  said  unto  the  Gibeonites 

7  the  Lord's  oath  that  (was)  between . .  D. 

11  And  it  was  told  D.  what  Rizpah,  the 

12  And  D.  went  and  took  the  bones  of  Saul 


•  Sa.  : 


[Ki. 


2  Ki.  8 


.  15  and  D.  went  down,  and  his  servants  with 

15  and  fought  against  the  Philistines:  andD. 

16  And  Ishbi-benob.  .thought  to  have  slam  D. 

17  Then  the  men  of  D,  sware  unto  him,  say. 

21  the  son  of  Shimeah,  the  brother  of  D. 

22  These  four,  .fell  by  the  hand  of  D.,  and 

,    1  D.  spake  unto  the  Lord  the  words  of  this 
51  showeth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  uuto  D. 
1  Now  these  (be)  the  last  words  of  D. 

8  the  names  of  the  mighty  men  whom  D. 

9  (one)  of  the  three  mighty  men  with  D. 

13  and  came  to  D.  in  the  harvest  time  unto 

14  And  D.  (was)  then  in  an  hold,  and  the 

15  And  D.  longed,  and  said,  Oh  that  one 

16  and  took  (it),  and  brought  (it)  to  D. 

23  and  D.  set  him  over  his  guard 

1  and  he  moved  D.  against  them  to  say 
10  And  D.'s  heart  smote  him  after  that  he 

10  D.  said  unto  the  Lord,  I  have  sinned 

11  For  when  D.  was  up  in  the  morning 

11  word,  .came  unto  the  prophet  Gad,  D.'s 

12  Go  and  say  unto  D.,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 

13  So  Gad  came  to  D.,  and  told  him 

14  D.  said  unto  Gad,  I  am  in  a  great  strait 

17  And  D.  spake  unto  the  LORD,  when  he  saw 

18  And  Gad  came  that  day  to  D.,  and  said 

19  AndD.  ..went  up,  as'the  Lord  commanded 
21  D.  said,  To  buy  the  threshing  floor  of  the 
.22  And  Araunah  said  uuto  D.,  Let  my  lord 

24  So  D.  bought  the  threshing  floor  and  the 

25  D.  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  LORD 

1  Now  king  D.  was  old  (and)  stricken  in 
8  the  mighty  men  which  (belonged)  to  D. 

11  and  D.  our  lord  knoweth  (it)  not? 

13  Go  and  get  thee  in  unto  king  D.,  and  say 
28  D.  answered  and  said,  Call  me  Bath-sheba 

31  Let  my  lord  king  D.  live  for  ever 

32  And  king  D.  said,  Call  me  Zadok  the 

37  greater  than  the  throne  of  my  lord.  .D. 

38  caused  Solomon  to  ride  upon  king  D.'s 

43  our  lord  king  D.  hath  made  Solomon  king 
47  the  king's  servants  came  to  bless . .  king  D. 

1  the  days  of  D.  drew  nigh  that  he  should 
10  So  D.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

10  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 

j  1  days  that  D.  reigned,  .(were)  forty  years 

12  Then  sat  Solomon  upon  the  throne  of  D. 
24  the  Lord,  .set  me  on  the  throne  of  D.  my 

26  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  before  D. 

32  and  slew  them  with  the  sword.  .D.  not 

33  but  upon  D. . .  shall  there  be  peace  for 

44  the  wickedness,  .that  thou  didst  to  D 

45  the  throne  of  D.  shall  be  established 
1  and  brought  her  iuto  the  city  of  D. 

3  walking  in  the  statutes  of  D.  his  father 

6  Thou  hast  showed  unto.  .D.  my  father 

7  hast  made  thy  servant  king  instead  of  D. 

14  keep  my  statutes . .  as  thy  father  D.  did 
1  for  Hiram  was  ever  a  lover  of  D. 

3  D.  my  father  could  not  build  an  house 
5  as  the  Lord  spake  unto  D.  my  father 

7  the  Lord,  .hath  given  unto  D.  a  wise  son 
12  my  word,  .which  I  spake  unto  D.  thy 

51  the  things  which  D.  his  fajther  had  dedi. 

1  bring  up  the  ark .  .  out  of  the  city  of  D. 

15  which  spake  with  his  mouth  unto  D.  my 

16  but  I  chose  D.  to  be  over  my  people  Isr. 

17  it  was  in  the  heart  of  D.  my  father  to 

18  And  the  Lord  said  unto  D.  my  father 

20 1  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  D.  my  father 

24  Who  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  D.  my 

25  keep  with  thy  servant  D.  my  father  that 

26  which  thou  spakest  unto  thy  servant  D. 
66  goodness  that  the  Lord  had  done  for  D. 

4  if  thou  wilt  walk  before  me,  as  D.  thy 

5  as  I  promised  to  D.  thy  father,  saying 
24  Pharaoh's  daughter .  .  out  of  the  city  of  D. 

4  was  not  perfect .  .  as  (was)  the  heart  of  D. 

6  went  not  fully  after  the  LORD,  as  (did)  D. 

12  I  will  not  do  itior  D.  thy  father's  sake 

13  I.  .give  one  tribe  to  thy  son  for  D.  v  34. 

15  it  came  to  pass,  when  D.  was  in  Edom 
21  when  Hadad  heard .  .  that  D.  slept  with 
24  he  gathered  men  unto  him .    when  D.  slew 

27  (and)  repaired  the  breaches  of  the  city  of  D. 

32  he  shall  have  one  tribe  for.  .D.'s  sake 

33  (to  keep)  my  statutes.  .  as(did)D.  his  fath. 
36  I  give  one  tribe  that  D. .  .  may  have  a 

38  to  keep  my  statutes.  .  as  D.  my  servant 

38  build  thee  a  sure  house,  as  I  built  for  D. 

39  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  seed  of  D. 

43  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  D.  his  fath. 

16  saying,  What  portion  have  we  in  D.  ? 
16  now  see  to  thine  own  house,  D. 

19  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house  of  D. 

20  was  none  that  followed  the  house  of  D. 
26  Now  shall  the  kingdom  return  to .  .  D. 

2  a  child  shall  be  born  unto  the  house  of  D. 

8  the  kingdom  away  from  the  house  of  D. 
8  thou  hast  not  been  as  my  servant  D. 

31  Rehoboam.  .was  buried.  .  in  the  city  of  D. 

3  heart  was  not  perfect .  .  as  the  heart  of  D. 

4  for  D.'s  sake  did  the  Lord,  .give him  a 

5  D.  did.  .right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
8  and  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 

1 1  Asa  did .  .  right .  .  as  (did)  D.  his  father 
24  Asa .  .  was  buried .  .  in  the  city  of  D. 

50  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  D. 
19  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  Judah  for  D, 
24  buried  with  histfathers  in  the  city  of  D. 

28  buried  him .  .  with  his  fa.  in  the  city  of  D. 
10  to  the  captains. .  did  the  priest  give . .  D.'s 


DAVID 

2  Ki.  12.21  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  D. 
14.   3  he  did.  .right,  .yet  not  like  D.  his  father 

14.  20  buried.. with  his  fathers  iu  tliecity  of  D. 

15.  7  and  they  buried  him . .  in  the  city  of  D. 

15.  38  and  was  buried .  .in  the  city  of  D.  his 

16.  2Ahaz..did  not .  .right,  .like  D.  Ills  father 

16.  20  Ahaz  slept.,  was  buried.,  in  the  city  of  D. 

17.  21  he  rent  Israel  from  the  house  of  D. 

18.  3  according  to  all  that  D.  his  father  did 

19.  34  I  will  defend  this  city  . .  for  my  servant  D.  's 

20.  5  Thus  saith  the  Lokd,  the  God  of  D.  thy 

20.  6  I  will  defend  this  city . .  for  my  servant  D.  's 

21.  7  of  which  the  Lord  said  to  D.,  and 

22.  2  and  walked  in  all  the  way  of  D.  his  father 
1  Ch.  2.  15  Ozem  the  sixth,  D.  the  seventh 

1  Now  these  were  the  sons  of  D.,  which. 
9  (These  were)  all  the  sons  of  D.,  beside 

31  These(were)their  cities  unto  the  reignofD. 
31  these  (are  they)  whom  D.  set  over  the 

2  whose  number  (was)  in  the  days  of  D. 
22  whom  D.  and  Samuel  the  seer  did  ordain 

10.  14  and  turned  the  kingdom  unto  D. 

11.  1  all  Israel  gathered  themselves  to  D.  unto 
11.   3D.  made  a  covenant,  .they  anointed  D. 
11.    4  D.  and  all  Israel  went  to  Jerusalem 
11.   5  the  inhabitants  of  Jebus  said  to  D. 
11.    5  Nevertheless  D.  took  the  castle  of  Zion 
it.   5  which  (is)  the  city  of  D. 
11.   6  D.  said,  Whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusites 
11.    7  And  D.  dwelt  in  the  castle 
11.    7  therefore  they  called  it  the  city  of  D. 
11.    9  So  D.  waxed  greater  and  greater  :  for 
11.  10  chief  of  the  mighty  men  whom  D.  v.  n. 
11. 13  He  was  with  D.  at  Pas-dammim,  and 
11.  15  thirtycaptains  went  down  to  the  rook  to  D. 
11.  16  And  D.  (was)  then  in  the  hold,  and  the 
11.  17  And  D.  longed,  and  said,  Oh  that 
ii.  iS  and  took  (it),  and  brought  (it)  to  D. 
11.  18  but  D.  would  not  drink  (of)  it,  but  poured 

11.  25  and  D.  set  him  over  his  guard 

12.  i  these  (are)  they  that  came  to  D.  to  Ziklag 
12.    8  there  separated  themselves  unto  D.  ..men 
12.  16  cameof  thechildren  of  Benjamin.  .untoD. 
12.  17  D.  went  out  to  meet  them,  and  answered 
12.  18  Thine  (are  we),  D.,  and  on  thy  side 
i2.  18  Then  D.  received  them,  and  made  them 
12.  19  And  there  fell  (some)  of  Manasseh  to  D. 
12.  21  they  helped  D   against  the  band  (of  the 
12.  22  day  by  day  there  came  to  D.  to  help  him 
12.  23  the  bands  (that),  .came  to  D.  to  Hebron 
12.  31  to  come  and  make  D.  king 
12.  38  All  these  men.  .came,  .to  make  D.  king 

12.  38  the  rest.. (were)  of  one  heart  to  make  D. 
i2.  39  Ajid  there  they  were  with  D.  three  days 

13.  1  D.  consulted  with  the  captains  of  thous. 
13.    2  D.  said  unto  all  the  congregation  of  Israel 
13.    5  So  D.  gathered  all  Israel  together,  from 
13.    6  D.  weut  up,  and  all  Israel,  to  Baalah 
13.    8  And  D.  and  all  Israel  played  before  God 
13.  ii  D.  was  displeased,  because  the  Lord  had 
13.  12  And  D.  was  afraid  of  God  that  day 
13.  13  So  D.  brought  not  the  ark  (honie) 

13.  13  to  himself  to  the  city  of  D. 

14.  1  Hiram  king  <>f  Tyre  sent  messengers  to  D. 

2  D.  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  confirmed 

3  And  D.  took  more  wives  at  Jerusalem 
3  and  D.  begat  more  sons  and  daughters 
S  when  the  Philistines  heard  that  D.  was 
8  all  the  Philistines  went  up  to  seek  D. 
8  D.  heard  (of  it),  and  went  out  against 

14.  10  D.  enquired  of  God . .  Shall  I  go  up 
14.  11  they  came.. to  Baal-perazim.  .D.  snrjte 
14.  11  D.  said,  God  hath  broken  in  upon  mine 
14.  12  D.  gave  a  commandment,  and  they  were 
14.  14  Therefore  D.  enquired  again  of  God 

14.  16  D.  therefore  did  a3  God  commanded  him 

14. 17  the  fame  of  D.  went  out  into  all  lands 

15.  1  city  of  D  ,  and  prepared  a  place  for  the 
15.   2D.  said,  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark . .  but 
15.    3  And  D.  gathered  all  Israel  together  to  J. 
15.    4  And  D.  assembled  the  children  of  Aaron 
15. 11  D.  called  for  Zadok  and  Abiathar  the 
15.  16  D.  spake  to  the  chief  of  the  Levites  t) 
15.  25  So  D. .  .went  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  the 
15.  27  D.  (was)  clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine  linen 
15.  27  D.  also  (had)  upon  him  an  ephod  of  linen 
15.  29  (as)  the  ark.  .came  to  the  city  of  D 

15.  29  Michal . .  saw  king  D  dancing  and  playing 

16.  1  the  tent  that  D.  had  pitched  for  it 
16.    2  when  D.  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

16.  7  D.  delivered  first  (this  psalm),  to  thank 
i(5.  43  and  D.  returned  to  bless  his  house 

17.  1  it  came  to  pass,  as  D.  sat  in  his  house 
17.    2  Nathan  said  unto  D.,  Do  all  that  (is)  iu 
17.    4  Go  and  tell  D.  my  servaut.  Thus  saith 
17.    7  thus  shalt  th'ju  say  unto  my  servant  D. 
17.  15  so  did  Nathan  speak  unto  D. 
17.  16  D.  the  king  came  and  sat  before  the  L, 

17. 18  What  can  LV  (speak)  more  to  thee 

17.  24  (let)  the  house  of  D. .  .(be)  established 

18.  1  D.  smote  the  Philistines,  and  subdued 
18.  2  the  Moabites  became  D.'s  servants,  (and) 
18.  3  D.  smote  Haiarezer  king  of  Zobah  unto 
18.  4  And  D.  took  from  him  a  thousand  chariots 
18.  4  D.  also  houghed  all  the  chariot  (horses) 
18.  5  D.  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty 
18.  6  Then  D.  put  (garrisons)  in  Syria-damascus 
18.  6  the  Syrians  became  D.'s  servants,  (and) 
t8.  6  ThustheLoRppreserved  D.  whithersoever 
iS  -  D.  took  the  shields  .and  brought  them 
18.  8  cities  of  Hadarezer.  brought  D  verymuch 
x8.  9  when  Tou.  .heard  how  1>.  had  smitten  all 


32G 


1  Ch.iS.  10  He  sent  Hadoram  his  son  to  king  D. 

18.  11  Them  also  king  D.  dedicated  unto  the  L. 
18.  13  all  the  Edomites  became  D.'s  servants 
18. 13  Thus  the  Lord  preserved  D.  whithersoever 
18.  14  D.  reigned  over  all  Israel,  and  executed 

18.  17  the  sons  of  D.  (were)  chief  about  the  king 

19.  2  D.  said,  I  will  show  kindness  unto  Hanuu 
19.    2  D.  sent  messengers  to  comfort  him  cone. 
19.   2  So  the  servants  of  D.  came,  .to  Hanun 
19.    3  Thinkest  thou  that  D.  doth  honour  thy 
19.   4  Wherefore  Hanun  took  D.'s  servants 

19.    s  Then  there  went  (certain),  and  told  D. 
19.   6  they  had  made  themselves  odious  to  D. 
19.    8  when  D.  heard  (of  it),  he  sent  Joab 
19.  17  it  was  told  D. ;  audhegathered  all  Israel 

19.  17  when  D.  had  put  the  battle  in  array 

19. 18  D.  slew  of  the  Syrians  seven  thous.  v.  19. 

20.  1  D.  tarried  at  Jerusalem.    AndJoabsmote 
20.    2  And  D.  took  the  crown  of  their  king 

20.    2  and  it  was  set  upon  D.'s  head 

20.    3  Even  so  dealt  D.  with  all  the  cities 

20.   3  D.  and  all  the  people  returned  to  Jerusa. 

20.    7  when  he  defied  Israel,  Jonathan.  .D.'s 

20.  8  and  they  fell  by  the  hand  of  D. 

21.  1  Satan  stood  up  against  Israel,  and  provo. 
21.    2  D.  said  to  Joab,  and  to  the  rulers 

21.    5  Joab  gave  the  sum  of  the  number.,  unto  D. 
21.    8  D.  said  unto  God,  I  have  sinned  greatly 
21.   9  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Gad,  D.'s  seer 
21.  10  Go  and  tell  D.,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  L. 
2i.  11  So  Gad  came  to  D.,  and  said  unto  him 
21.  13  D.  said  unto  Gad,  I  am  in  a  great  strait 
21.  16  D.  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  angel 
21.  16  D.  and  the  elders,  .fell  upon  their  faces 
21. 17  And  D.  said  unto  God,  (Is  it)  not  I  (that) 
21.  18  the  angel.. commanded  Gad  to  say  to  D. 
21.  19  And  D.  went  up  at  the  saying  of  Gad 
21.  21  And  as  D.  came  to  Oman 
21.  21  Oman  looked,  and  saw  D. 
21.  21  and  bowed  himself  to  D.  with  (his)  face 
21.  22  Then  D.  said  to  Oman,  Grant  me  the 
21.  23  And  Oman  said  unto  D.,  Take  (it)  to 
21.  24  And  king  D.  said  to  Oman,  Nay 
21.  25  So  D.  gave  to  Oman,  .sixhundred  shekels 
21.  26  D.  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
21.  28  D.  saw  that  the  Lord  had  answered  him 

21.  30  But  D.  could  not  go  before  it  to  enquire 

22.  1  D.  said,  This  (is)  the  house  of  the  Lord 
22.    2  D.  commanded  to  gather  together  the 
22.    3  D.  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  the 
22.   4  they  of  T., brought  much  cedar  wood  to  D. 
22.    5  D.  said,  Solomon  my  son  (is)  young  and 
22.    5  So  D.  prepared  abundantly  before  his 
22.    7  And  D.  said  to  Solomon,  My  son,  as  for 

22.  17  D.  also  commanded  all  the  princes  of  Is. 

23.  1  So  when  D.  was  old  and  full  of  days 

23.  6  And  D.  divided  them  into  courses  among 
23.  25  D.  said,  The  Lord,  .hath  given  rest  unto 

23.  27  by  the  last  words  of  D.  the  Levites  (were) 

24.  3  And  D.  distributed  them,  both  Zadok  of 

24.  31  likewise  cast  lots,  .in  the  presence  of  D. 

25.  1  Moreover  D.  and  the  captains  of  the  host 

26.  26  the  dedicated  things,  which  D.  the  king 
26.  31  In  the  fortieth  year  of  the  reign  of  D. 

26.  32  king  D.  made  rulers  over  the  Keubenites 

27.  iS  Elihu,  (one)  of  the  brethren  of  D. 
27.  23  But  D.  took  not  the  number  of  them 
27.  24  the  account  of  the  Chronicles  of  king  D. 
27.  31  of  the  substance  which  (was)  king  D.'s 

27.  32  Jonathan,  D.'s  uncle,  was  a  counsellor 

28.  1  D.  assembled  all  the  princes  of  Israel 
28.    2  D.  the  king  stood  up  upon  his  feet 

28.  11  D.  gave  to  Solomon  his  son  the  pattern 

28.  20  And  D.  said  to  Solomon  his  son,  Be 

29.  1  D.  the  king  said  unto  all  the  congrega. 
29.    9  D.  the  king  also  rejoiced  with  great  joy 
29. 10  Wherefore  D.  blessed  the  Lord  before 
29. 10  D.  said,  Blessed  (be)  thou,  Lord  God  of 
29.  20  D.  said  to  all  the  congregation,  Now  bless 
29.  22  they  made  Solomon  the  son  of  D.  king 
29.  23  Solomon  sat.  .as  king  instead  of  D.  his 
29.  24  the  sons  likewise  of  king  D.,  submitted 
29.  26  D.  the  son  of  Jesse  reigned  overall  Israel 
29.  29  the  acts  of  D. .  .(are)  written  in  the  book 

2  Ch.  1.    1  the  son  of  D.  was  strengthened  in  his 

1.    4  But  the  ark  of  God  had  D.  brought  up 
i-    4  to  (the  place  which)  D.  had  prepared  for 
1.    8  Thou  hast  showed  great  mercy  unto  D. 

1.  9  let  thy  promise  unto  D. .  .be  established 

2.  3  As  thou  didst  deal  with  D.  my  father 

2.  7  a  man . .  whom  D.  my  father  did  provide 
2. 12  who  hath  given  to  D.  the  kinga  wise  son 
2.  14  with  the  cunning  men  of  my  lord  D.  thy 

2.  17  the  numbering  wherewith  D. .  had  num. 

3.  1  where  (the  Lord)  appeared  unto  D.  his 
3.    1  in  the  place  that  D.  had  prepared  in 

5.    1  the  things  that  D.  his  father  had  dedica. 

5.  2  to  bring  up  the  ark . .  out  of  the  city  of  D. 

6.  4  he  spake  with  his  mnuth  to  my  father  D. 
6.  6  and  have  chosen  D.  to  be  over  my  people 
6.  7  it  was  in  the  heart  of  D. .  .to  build  an  ho. 
6.    8  But  the  Lord  said  to  D.  my  father 

6.  10  I  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  D. 
6.  15  which  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  D. 
6.  16  keep  with  thy  servant  D. .  .that  which 
6.  17  thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  servant  D. 

6.  42  remember  the  mercies  of  D.  thy  servant 

7.  6  which  D. .  .had  made  to  praise  the  Lord 
7.    6  when  D  praised  by  their  ministry 

7.  10  good,  that  the  LORD  had  showed  unto  D. 
7.  17  if  thou  wilt  walk  before  me,  as  D.  thy 
7.  18  according  as  I  have  covenanted  with  D. 


DAVID 

2  Ch.  8.  11  out  of  the  city  of  D.  unto  the  house 

8.  11  My  wife  shall  not  dwell  in  the  house  of  D. 
8.  14  according  to  the  order  of  D.  his  father 

8.  14  for  so  had  D.  the  man  of  God  commanded 

9.  31  Solomon,  .was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 
10.  16  saying,  What  portion  have  we  in  D.  ? 

10.  16  (and)  now,  D.,  see  to  tiiine  own  house 
iq.  19  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house  of  D. 

11.  17  they  walked  in  the  way  of  D.  and  Solom. 

11.  18  the  daughter  of  Jerimoth  the  son  of  D. 
i2.  16  Rehoboam.  .was  buried  in  the  city  of  D. 
13.    5  God.  .gavethe  kingdom  over,  .to  D.for 
13.    6  the  servant  of  Solomon  the  son  of  D.,  is 

13.  8  of  the  Lord  in  the  hand  of  the  sons  of  D. 

14.  1  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 

16.  14  they  buried  him.  .in  the  city  of  D. 

17.  3  he  walked  in  thefirstways  of  his  father  D. 
21.    1  Jehosaphat.  .was buried,  .in  thecityofD. 
21.    7  Lord  would  not  destroy  the  house  of  D. 
21.    7  the  covenant  that  he  had  made  with  D. 
21.  12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  D.  thy  father 
21.  20  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D.,  but  not 
23.    3. as  the  Lord  hath  said  of  the  sons  of  D. 
23.    9  and  shields,  that  (had  been)  king  D.'s 

23.  18  whom  D.  had  distributed  in  the  house  of 

23.  18  with  singing,  (as  it  was  ordained)  by  D. 
24. 16  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D.  among 

24.  25  and  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 

27.  9  and  they  buried  him  in  the  city  of  D. 

28.  1  he  did  not.  .right,  .like  D.  his  father 

29.  2  all  that  D.  his  father  had  done 

29.  25  with  harps,  according  to  the  com.  of  D. 
29.  26  Levites  stood  with  the  instruments  of  D. 
29.  27  instruments  (ordained)  by  D.  king  of  Isr. 

29.  30  praise  unto  the  Lord  with  the  words  of  D. 

30.  26  since  the  time  of  Solomon  the  son  of  D. 
32.    5  and  repaired  Millo  (in)  the  city  of  D. 
32.  30  to  the  west  side  of  the  city  of  D.  i 

32.  33  chiefest  of  the  sepulchres  of  the  sons  of  D. 

33.  7  of  which  God  had  said  to  D.  and  to  Solo. 

33.  14  he  built  a  wall  without  the  city  of  D. 

34.  2  and  walked  in  the  ways  of  D.  his  father 

34.  3  to  seek  after  the  God  of  D.  his  father 

35.  3  which  Solomon  the  son  of  D. .  -did  build 
35.  4  according  to  the  writing  of  D.  king  of  Isr. 
35.  15  according  to  the  commandment  of  D.,  and 

Ezra    3.  10  after  the  ordinance  of  D.  king  of  Israel 

8.    2  of  the  sons  of  D. ;  Hattush 

8.  20  Methinims,  whom  D. .  .had  appointed  for 
Neh.  3.  15  the  stairs  that  go  down  from  the  city  of  D. 

3.  16  place)  over  against  the  sepulchres  of  D. 

12.  24  according  to  the  commandment  of  D.  the 
12.  36  with  the  musical  instruments  of  D.  the 
12.  37  they  went  up.  .the  stairs  of  the  city  of  D. 
i2-  37  going  up  of  the  wall,  above  the  house  of  D. 
i2.  45  according  to  the  commandment  of  D. 

12.  46  in  the  days  of  D. .  .(there  were)  chief  of 
Psa.     3.  title,  A  Psalm  of  D.,  when  he  fled  from  Abs. 

4.  „     To  the  chief  Musician . .  A  Psalm  of  D. 

5.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician.  .A  Psalm  of  D. 

6.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician.  .A  Psalm  of  D. 

7.  fl     Shiggaion  of  D.,  which  he  sang  unto 

8.  „     To  the  chief  Musician. .A  Psalm  of  D. 

9.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician.. A  Psalm  of  D. 

11.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  (A  Psalm)  of  D. 

12.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician.  .A  Psalm  of  D. 

13.  „  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

14.  „  To  the  chief  Musician,  (A  Psalm)  of  D. 

15.  ,,  A  Psalm  of  D.     Lord,  who  shall  abide 

16.  ,,  Michtam  of  D.  Preserve  me,  O  God 

17.  ,,  A  Player  of  D.  Hear  the  right,  0  Lord 

18.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  (A  Psalm)  of  D. 

18.  50  and  showeth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to  D. 

19.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

20.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

21.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

22.  ,,  A  Psalm  of  D.  My  God,  my  God 

23.  „  A  Psalm  of  D.  The  Lord  (is)  my  shep. 
24.31,,  A  Psalm  of  D.    The  earth  (is)  the  Lord's 

25.  „  (A  Psalm)  of  D.    Unto  thee,  0  Lord 

26.  ,,  (A  Psalm)  of  D.    Judge  me,  O  Lord 

27.  „  (APsalm)of  D.    The  Lord  (is)my light 

28.  „  (A  Psalm)  of  D.     I'nto  thee  will  I  cry 

29.  „  A  Psalm  of  D.    Give  unto  the  Lord 

30.  ,,  fat)  the  dedication  of  the  house  of  D. 
32.  ,,  (A  Psalm)  of  D.  Maschil.  Blessed  (is  he 

34.  ,,  (A  Psalm)  of  D.,  when  he  changed  his 

35.  ,,  (APsalm)ofD.    Plead  (mycause),  O  L. 

36.  „  To  the  chief  Musician,  (A  Psalm)  of  D. 

37.  „  (A  Psalm)  of  D.    Fret  not  thyself 

38.  ,,  A  Psalm  of  D.,  to  bring  to  remembran. 
30.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician . .  A  Psalm  of  D. 

40.  .,     To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

41.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

51.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 

52.  „     To  the  chief  Musician.  .(A  Psalm)  of  D. 

52.  ,,     D.  is  come  to  the  house  of  Ahimelech 

53.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician.  .(A  Psalm)  of  D. 

54.  ,,     To  the  chief  Musician.. (A  Psalm)  of  D. 

54.  ,,  Doth  not  D.  hide  himself  with  us? 

55.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician..  (A  Psalm)  of  D. 

56.  ,,  Michtam  of  D.,  when  the  Philistines  . 

57.  ,,  To  the  chief  -Musician.  .Michtam  of  D. 

58.  „  To  the  chief  Musician.  .Michtam  of  D. 

59.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician.. Michtam  of  D. 

60.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician. .  Michtam  of  D. 

61.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician.  .(A  Psalm) of  D. 

62.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician .  .A  Psalm  of  D. 

63.  ,,  A  Psalm  of  D.,  when  he  was  in  the  wil. 

64.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 
65-  „  To  the  chief  Mus.     A  Psalm.. of  D. 
68.  „  To  the  chief  Mus.    A  Psalm . .  of  D. 


Fsa.  69. 

70. 

72 
78. 
86, 


103. 
108. 
109. 
no. 
122. 
122. 
124. 
131. 
132. 
132. 

132- 
132. 

133- 
138. 

139- 
140. 
141. 
142. 
'43- 
144 
144. 
145- 

Prov.  1. 

Eccl.  1. 

Song  4. 


Isa. 


7- 
7' 
9- 

16. 

22. 

22. 

29. 

37- 

38. 

55- 


22. 
22. 
23- 
29. 
3°- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
36- 
•  34- 
34' 
37- 

nos.  3. 

Amos  6 

9- 

Zech  12. 

12. 

12. 


Eze. 


Matt. 


Luke 


John 


DAVID 

title.  To  the  chief  Musician.  .(A  Psalm)of  D. 
(A  Psalm)  of  D.,  to  bring  to  remembra. 
2oThe  prayers  of  J). .  .are  ended 
70  He  chose  D.  also  his  servant,  and  took 
title.  A  Prayer  of  D.     Bow  down  thine  ear 
3 1  have  sworn  unto  D.  my  servant 

20  I  have  found  D.  my  servant 

35  have  I  sworn.  .1  will  not  lie  unto  D. 

40  (which)  thou  swarest  unto  D.  in  thy  truth? 
title.  A  Psalm  of  D.     I  will  sing  of  mercy 

,.     (A  Psalm)  of  D.     Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
„     A  Song  (or)  Psalm  of  D.   O  give  thanks 
„     To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 
„     A  Psalm  of  D.    The  Lord  said  unto 
„     A  Song  of  degrees  of  D.     I  was  glad 
5  the  thrones  ot  the  house  of  D. 
title.  A  Song  of  degrees  of  D.    If  (it  had  not 
,,     A  Song  of  degrees  of  D. 
1  Lord, remember  D.,  (and)all  Ms  afflictions 

10  For  thy  servant  D.'s  sake  turn  not  away 

11  The  LoRD  hath  sworn  (in)  truth  unto  D. 
17  There  will  I  make  the  horn  of  D.  to  bud 
title.  A  Song  of  degrees  of  D.     Behold,  how 

,,     (A  Psalm)  of  D.    I  will  praise  thee 
,,     To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 
„     To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  of  D. 
„     A  Psalm  of  D.    Lord,  I  cry  unto  thee 
„     Maschil  of  D.;  A  Prayer  when  he  was 
„     A  Psalm  of  D,     Hear  my  prayer,  0  L. 
„     (A  Psalm)- of  D.    Blessed  (be)  the  Loud 
10  who  delivereth  D.  his  servant  from  the 
title.  D.'s  (Psalm)  of  praise.     I  will  extol 

1  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon  the  son  of  D. 
i  The  words  of  the  Preacher,  the  sou  of  D. 

4  Thy  neck  (is)  like  the  tower  of  D. 

2  Aud  it  was  told  the  house  of  D  ,  saying 

I  3  Hear  ye  now,  0  house  of  D. 
7  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  D  ,  aud  upon 

5  he  shall  sit  upon  it.  .in  the  taberna.  of  D. 
9  have  seen,  .the  breaches  of  the  city  of  D. 

22  Aud  the  key  of  the  house  of  0.  will  1  lay 

1  Woe  to  Ariel,  .the city  (where)  D.  dwelt! 
35  I  will  defend  this  city . .  for . .  D.  "s  sake 

5  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  1). 

3  (even)  the  sure  mercies  of  D. 
13  even  the  kings  that  sit  upon  D.'s  throne 
25^kings  and  princes  sitting  upon  the  th.  of  D. 

12  O  house  of  D  ,  thus  saith  the  Lord 

2  k.  of  J  udah,  that  sittest  upoa  the  th.  of  D. 

4  kings  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  D. 

30  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  D.,  and  ruling 

5  I  will  raise  unto  D.  a  righteous  Branch 

16  the  king  that  sitteth  upon  the  th.  of  D. 
9  But  they  shall  serve .  .D.  their  king 

15  Branch  of  righteous,  to  grow  up  unto  T>. 

17  D.  shall  never  want  a  man  to  situpou  the 

21  may.  .my  covenant  be  broken  with  D. 

22  so  will  I  multiply  the  seed  of  D. 

26  Then  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of .  .D.  my 
30  none  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  D. 

23  he  shall  feed  them,  (even)  my  servant  D. 

24  my  servant  D  a  prince  among  them 

24  And  D.  my  servant  (shall  be)  king  over 

25  my  servant  D.  (shall  be)  their  prince  for 
5  the  Lord  their  God,  and  D.  their  king 

5  invent,  .instruments  of  music,  like  D. 

1 1  I  raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  D.  that  is 

7  that  the  glory  of  the  house  of  D.  and  the 

8  aud  he  that  is  feeble .  .shall  be  as  D. 

8  and  the  house  of  D.  (shall  be)  as  God 
10  And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  D. 

12  the  family  of  the  house  of  D.  apart 

1  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  ho.  of  D. 
1  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  D.,  the  son  of  A. 

6  And  Jesse  begat  D  the  king;  and  D.  the  k. 
17  from  Abraham  to  D.  (are)  fourteen  gene. 
1 7  from  D.  until  the  carrying  away  into  Ba. 
20  Joseph,  thou  son  of  D.,  fear  not  to  take 

27  (Thou)  son  of  D.,  have  mercy  on  us 

3  Have  ye  not  read  what  D.  did,  when 

23  the  people,  .said,  Is  not  this  the  son  of  D.? 
22  Haverner.  on  me,  0  Lord,  (thou)  son  of  D. 

30  Have  mer.  on  us,  O  Lord,  (thou)  son  of  D. ! 

31  Have  mercy  on  us  0  Lord,  thou  sonofD.! 

9  multi. .  .cried.  .Hosanna  to  the  son  of  D. ! 
15  childreu  crying. .  Hosanna  to  the  son  ofD. 

42  They  say  unto  him,  (The  son)  of  D. 

43  How  then  doth  D.  in  spirit  call  him  Lord 
45  If  D.  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his 
25  Have  ye  never  read  what  D.  did,  when 

47  Jesus,  (thou)  son  of  D..  have  mercy  on  mo 

48  Thou  son  of  D.,  have  mercy  on  me 

10  Blessed  (be)  the  kingdom  of  our  father  D. 

35  Howsaythescribes  thatC  is  the  sou  of  D. 

36  For  D.  himself  said  by  the  Holy  Ghost 

37  D.  therefore  himself  calleth  him  Lord 

27  mau  whose  name  was  J.,  of  the  ho.  of  D. 

32  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his  father  D. 
69  salvation  for  us  in  the  house  of  his  ser.  D. 

4  Joseph  also  went,  .uuto  the  city  of  D. 
4  he  was  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  D. 

I I  unto  you  is  born  this  day,  in  the  city  of  D. 
31  Kathau,  which  was  (the  son)  of  D. 

3  Have  ye  not  read  so  much,  .what  D.  did 

38  J  esus,  (thou)  son  of  D. ,  have  mercy  on  me ! 

39  (Thou)  son  of  D.,  have  mercy  on  me! 

41  How  say  they  that  Christ  is  D.'s  son? 

42  D.  himself  saith  in  the  book  of  Psalms 
44  D.  therefore  calleth  him  Lord,  how  is  he 
42  That  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  D. 

42  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  where  D. 

16  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  mouth  of  D. ,  spake 


227 


Acts   2.  25  D.  speaketh  concerning  him,  I  foresaw 
2.  29  freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  patriarch  D. 
2.  34  For  D.  is  not  ascended  into  the  heavens 
4.  25  Who  by  the  mouth  of  thy  servant  D.  hast 

7.  45  whom  God  drave  out . .  unto  the  days  of  D. 
13.  22  he  raised  up  uuto  them  D.  to  be  their 
13.  22  and  said,  I  have  found  D.  the  (son)  of  J. 
13.  34  I  will  give  you  the  sure  mercies  of  D. 
13.  36  ForD.  .fell  ou  sleep.,  and  saw  corruption 
15.  16  and  I  will  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  D. 

Bom.  1.    3  Jesus  Christ . .  made  of  the  seed  of  D. 

4.  6  D.  also  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the 
11.    9  D.  saith,  Let  their  table  be  made  a  snare 

2  Ti.    2.    8  Jesus  Christ  of  the  seed  of  D.  was  raised 
Heb.  4.    7  he  limiteth  a  certain  day,  saying  in  D. 

11.  32  D.  also,  and  Samuel,  and  (of)  the  proph. 
Kev.    3.    7  he  that  hath  the  key  of  D  ,  he  that  openeth 

5.  5  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda,  the  Root  of  D. 
22.  16  I  am  the  root  aud  the  offspring  of  D.  ,(and) 

DAWN,  to  — 

To  shine  through,  Siavydfa  dtaugazO. 

2  Pe.  1. 19  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day  star  arise 

DAWN,  to  begin  to  — 

To  begin  to  dawn  ujion,  eV«/>uJo~/cu>  epiphosko. 

Matt28.    1  as  it  began  to  dawn  toward  the  first  (day) 

DAW17ING  — 

l.To  go  up,  ascend,  nSjJ  alah. 

Josh.  6.  15  that  they  "rose  early  about  the  dawning 

2.  Eye  lids,  EP^Bjg  aphappim. 

Job     3.   9  neither  let  it  see  the  dawning  of  the  day 

3.  To  face,  front,  turn  about,  look,  n:p  panah. 

Judgig.  26  Then  came  the  woman  in  the  dawning  of 

DAWNING  of  the  day  or  morning  — 

Twilight,  pj»!j  nesheph. 

Job      7.    4  to  and  fro  unto  the  dawning  of  the  day 
Psa.ng.  147  I  prevented  the  dawning  of  the  morning 

DAY— 

1.  Morning,  Tg£  boker. 

Judgig.  26  came  the  woman  in  the  dawning  of  the  d. 
2  Sa.  13.    4  Why  (art)  thou,  .lean  from  day  to  day? 
Dan.    8.  14  Unto  two  thousand  and  three  hundred  d. 

2. Day,  DV  yom. 

Gen.    1.    5  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  dark. 
1.    5  evening  aud.  .morning  were  the  first  day 
i.    8  evening  and.,  morning  were  the  second  d. 
1 .  13  evening  and . .  morning  were  the  third  day 
1.  14  Let  there  be  lights,  .to  divide  the  day 

1. 16  the  greater  light  to  rule  the  day,  and  the 
1.  iS  to  rule  over  the  day  aud  over  the  night 
1.  19  evening  and . .  morning  were  the  fourth  d. 
1.  23  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  fifth  d. 

1.  31  evening  and  the  morning  were  thesixth  d. 
s.   2  And  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his 

2.  2  he  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his 
2.   3  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sanctified  it 

2.  4  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  God  made  the 

2. 17  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou 

3.  3  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat 

3.   8  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day  :  and 
4. 14  thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  day  from 
5.    1  In  the  day  that  God  created  man,  in  the 
5.    2  blessed  them . .  in  the  day  when  they  were 
7. 11  the  seventeenth  day.  .the  same  day  were 

7. 13  In  the  self  same  day  entered  Noah,  and  S. 

8.  4  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month 

8. 14  on  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
8.  22  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night 

15.  18  In  that  same  day  the  Lord  made  a  cove. 
17.  23  circumcised  the  flesh,  .the  self  same  day 
17.  26  the  self  same  day  was  Abraham  circum. 
iS.    1  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day 
19.  37  the  father  of  the  Moabites  unto  this  day 
19.  38  the  father  of  the  children,  .unto  this  day 

21.  8  Abraham  made  a  great  feast  the  (same)  d. 

22.  4  Then  on  the  third  day  Abraham  lifted  up 
22. 14  as  it  is  said  (to)  this  day,  In  the  mount  of 

24. 12  I  pray  thee,  send  me  good  speed  this  day 

24.  42  And  I  came  this  day  unto  the  well,  and 

25.  31  Jacob  said,  Sell  me  this  day  thy  birthright 
25-  33  Jacob  said,  Swear  to  me  this  day;  and  he 

26.  32  it  came  to  pass  the  same  day,  that  Isaac's 

26.  33  of  the  city  (is)  Beer-sheba  uuto  this  day 

27.  2  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  day  of  my  death 
27.  45  I  be  deprived  also  of  you  both  in  oue  day? 

29.  7  (it  is)  yet  high  day,  neither  (is  it)  time 

30.  35  he  removed  that  day  the  he  goats  that 

31.  22  it  was  told  Labau  on  the  third  day  that 
31.  39  (whether)  stolen  by  day,  orstoleu  by  night 
31.  40  (Thus)  I  was;  iu  the  day  the  drought  con. 
31.  43  and  what  can  I  do  this  day  unto  these 

31.  48  a  witness  between  me  aud  thee  this  day 

32.  32  the  hollow  of  the  thigh,  unto  this  day 

33.  13  if  men  should  over  drive  them  one  day 

33.  16  Esau  returned  that  day  on  his  way  uuto 

34.  25  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day 
35-    3  who  answered  me  in  the  day  of  my  dis. 

35.  20  the  pillar  of  Rachel's  grave  unto  this  day 

40.  20  third,  day,  (which  was)  Pharaoh  s  birthday 

41.  9  saying,  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  day 

42. 13  the  youngest  (is)  this  day  with  our  father 

42.  18  Joseph  said  unto  them  the  third  day 

42.  32  the  youngest  (is)  this  day  with  our  father 
47.  23  I  have  bought  you  this  day  and  your 
47.  26  And  Joseph  made  it  a  law.,  unto  this  day 


DAY 


Gen.  48.  15  fed  me  all  my  life  long  unto  this  day 

48.  20  he  blessed  them  that  day,  saying,  In  thee 
50.  20  as  (it  is)  this  day,  to  save  much  people 

Exod.  z.  13  And  when  he  went  out  the  second  day 

5.  6  commanded  the  same  day  the  taskmasters 

6.  28  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  day  (when)  the  L. 
8.  22  I  will  sever  in  that  day  the  land  of  Gos. 

io.   6  have  seen,  since  the  day.  .unto  this  day: 

10. 13  an  east  wind  upon  the  land  all  that  day 
10.  28  for  in  (that)  day  thou  seest  my  face  thou 
12.   6  keep  it  up  until  the  fourteenth  day  of 
12.  14  this  day  shall  be  unto  you  for  a  memorial 
12. 15  even  the  first  day  ye  shall  put  away  leav. 
12.  15  from  the  first  day  until  the  seventh  day 
12.  16  And  in  the  first  day  (there  shall  be)  an 
12.  16  in  the  seventh  day  there  shall  be  an  holy 
12. 17  in  this  self  same  day  have  I  brought  your 
12. 17  therefore  shall  ye  observe  this  day  in 

12.  18  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at 
12.  18  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month 
12.  41  even  the  self  same  day  it  came  to  pass 

12.  51  And  it  came  to  pass  the  self  same  day 

13.  3  Remember  this  day,  in  which  ye  came 
13.   4  This  day  came  ye  out,  in  the  month  Abib 
13.   6  the  seventh  day  (shall  be)  a  feast  to  the 

13.  8  thou  shalt  show  thy  son  in  that  day,  say. 

14.  30  Thus  the  Lord  saved  Israel  that  day  out 
16.    1  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  second  month 
16.    5  on  the  sixth  day  they  shall  prepare  (that) 
16.  22  on  the  sixth  day  they  gathered  twice  as 
16.  26  but  on  the  seventh  day.  .in  it  there  shall 
16.  27  there  went  out.  .on  the  seventh  day  for 
16..29  therefore  he  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day 
16.  29  let  no  man  go  out.  .on  the  seventh  day 
16.  30  So  the  people  rested  on  the  seventh  day 
19.    1  the  same  day  came  they  (into)  the  wilder. 
19.  11  And  be  ready  against  the  third  day :  for 
19.  11  the  third  day  the  Lord  will  come  down 

"  19. 15  he  said.  .Be  ready  against  the  third  day_ 

19.  16  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day,  in 

20.  8  Remember  the  sabbath  day,  to  keep  it 
20.  10  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  L. 
20.  11  rested  the  seventh  day:  wherefore  the 
20.  11  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath  d.  and  hallowed 
22.  30  on  the  eighth  day  thou  shalt  give  it  me 
23. 12  and  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest 

24.  16  and  the  seventh  day  he  called  unto  M. 
31.  15  doeth  (any)  work  in  the  sabbath  day,  he 

31.  17  seventh  day  he  rested,  and  was  refreshed 

32.  28  there  fell  of  the  people  that  day  about 
32.  29  hemay  bestowuponyouablessing  this  day 
32.  34  iu  the  day  when  I  visit  I  will  visit  their 

34. 11  that  which  I  command  thee  this  day 

34.  21  but  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest 

35.  2  the  seventh  day  there  shall  be.  .an  holy 
35.    3  shall  kindle  no  fire,  .upon  the  sabbath  d. 
40.   2  On  the  first  day . .  shall  thou  set  up  the 
40.  37  they  journeyed  not  till  the  day  that  it 

Lev.    6.    5  give  it.  .in  the  day  of  his  trespass  offering 

6.  20  unto  the  Lord  in  the  day  when  he  is 

7. 15  the  flesh,  .shall  be  eaten  the  same  clay 

7. 16  it  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  that  he 

7. 17  on  the  third  day  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

7. 18  if  (any),  .be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third  day 

7.  35  the  day  (when)  he  presented  them  to 

7. 36  in  the  day  that  he  anointed  them,  (by)  a 

7.  38  in  the  day  that  he  commanded  the  child. 

8.  34  As  he  hath  done  this  day,  (so)  the  Lord 

9.  1  came  to  pass  on  the  eighth  day,  (that)  M. 
10.  19  this  day  have  they  offered  their  sin  offer. 

12.  3  in  the  eighth  day  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin 
*3«    5  priest  shall  look  on  him  the  seventh  day 

13.  6  shall  look  on  him  again  the  seventh  day 
13.  27  priest  shall  look  upon  him  the  seventh  d. 
*3-  32,  34  in  the  seventh  day  the  priest  shall  look 

13.  51  look  on  the  plague  on  the  seventh  day 

14.  2  be  the  law . .  in  the  day  of  his  cleansing 
14.   9  it  shall  be  on  the  seventh  day,  that  he 
14.  10  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take  two  he  lambs 
14.  23  he  shall  bring  them  on  the  eighth  day 

14.  39  priest  shall  come  again  the  seventh  day 

15. 14  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take  to  him 

15.  29  on  the  eighth  day  she  shall  take  unto 

16.  30  For  on  that  day  shall,  .make  an  atone, 
ig.   6  It  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  ye  offer  it 
ig.   6  if  ought  remain  until  the  third  day,  it 
19.   7  if  it  be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third  day 

22.  27  and  from  the  eighth  day  and  thenceforth 
22.  28  cow  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not  kill,  .in  one  day 

22.  30  On  the  same  day  it  shall  he  eaten  up ;  ye 

23.  3  but  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of 
23.  6  on  the  fifteenth  clay  of  the  same  month 
23.    7  In  the  first  clay  ye  shall  have  an  holy 

23.    8  in  the  seventh  day  (is)  an  holy  convocation 

23. 12  ye  shall  offer  that  day  when  ye  wave  the 
23.  14  until  the  self  same  day  that  ye  have  broug. 
23.  15  from  the  day  that  ye  brought  the  sheaf 
23.  21  ye  shall  proclaim  on  the  self  same  day 
23.  27  a  day  of  atonement :  it  shall  be  an  holy 
23. 28  And  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  that  same  day 
23.  28  for  it  (is)  a  day  of  atonement,  to  make  an 
23.  29  shall  not  be  afflicted  in  that  same  day 
23.  30  that  doeth  any  work  in  that  same  day 
23.  34  The  fifteenth  day  of  this  seventh  month 
23.  35  the  first  day  (shall  be)  an  holy  convocation 
23.  36  eighth  day  shall  be  an  holy  convocation 
23.  37  drink  offerings,  every  thing  upon  his  day 
23.  39  Also  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh 
23.  39  on  the  first  day  (shall  be)  a  sabbath 

23.  39  on  the  eighth  day  (shall  be)  a  sabbath 
23.  40  ye  shall  take  you  on  the  first  day  the 

25.  9  in  the  clay  of  atonement  shall  ye  make 


lev.  27 
Num.  3 

3. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
!■ 
!■ 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7- 
7 
7- 
7- 


15- 
15' 
J  9. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
22. 

=5- 

28. 

28. 

28. 

28. 

28. 

28. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

30. 

30. 

30. 

30. 

30. 

3°- 

3i- 

3i- 
„  .33- 
Deut.  1. 


DAY 


23  shall  give  thine  estimation  in  that  day 

1  in  the  clay  (that)  the  Lord  spake  with  M. 

13  on  the  day  that  I  smote  all  the  llrst  born 
9  shave  his  head  in  the  day  of  his  cleansing 
9  on  the  seventh  day  shall  he  shave  it 

10  the  eighth  day  he  shall  bring  two  turtles 
ji  and  shall  hallow  his  head  that  same  day 
1  it  came  to  pass  on  the  day  that  Moses  had 

10  for  dedicating  of  the  altar  in  the  day 

11  They  shall  offer,  .each  prince  on  his  day 

12  he  that  offered  his  offering  the  first  day 

I  8  On  the  second  day  Nethaneel  the  sou  of  Z. 

24  On  the  third  day  Eliab  the  son  of  Helon 
30  On  the  fourth  (lav  Elizur  the  son  of  S. 
36  on  the  (U'thdayShelumielthesonof  Zur. 
42  On  the  sixtli  day  Eliasaph  the  son  of  De. 
4S  Ontheseventh  day  Elishamathe  son  of  A. 
54  On  the  eighth  day  (offered)  Gamaliel  the 
60  On  the  ninth  day  Abidan  the  son  of  Gid. 
66  On  the  tenth  day  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Am. 
72  On  the  eleventh  day  Pagiel  the  son  of  O. 
7S  <  >n  the  twelth  day  Ahira  the  sou  of  Euan 
S4  in  the  day  when  it  was  anointed,  by  the 

17  on  the  day  that  I  smote  every  first  born 
3  In  the  fourteenth  day  of  this  month,  at 

5  kept  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth  day 

6  could  not  keep  the  passover  on  that  day 

6  and  they  came  before  Moses . .  on  that  day 

II  The  fourteenth  day  of  the  second  month 

15  on  the  day  that  the  tabernacle  was  reared 
10  Also  in  the  day  of  your  gladness,  and  in 
19  Ye  shall  not  eat  one  day,  nor  two 

31,  31  as  it  were  a  day's  journey  on 
32  stood  up  all  that  day .  .all  the  next  day 
23  from  the  day  that  the  Lord  commanded 
32  gathered  sticks  upon  the  sabbath  day 
12  He  shall  purify  himself . .  on  the  third  day 
12  aud  on  the  seventh  day  he  shall  be  clean 
12  but  if  he  purify  not  himself  the  third  day 
12  then  the  seventh  day  he  shall  not  be  clean 
19  on  the  third  day,  and  on  the  seventh  day 

19  on  the  seventh  day  he  shall  purify  him. 
30  ever  since  (I  was)  thine  unto  this  day? 

18  in  the  day  of  the  plague  for  Peor's  sake 

9  on  the  sabbath  day  two  lambs  of  the 

16  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

17  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  this  month  (is)  the 

18  the  first  day  (shall  be)an  holy  convocation 

25  on  the  seventh  day  ye  shall  have  an  holy 

26  Also  in  the  day  of  the  first  fruits,  when 

1  it  is  a  day  of  blowing  the  trumpets  unto 
12  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  mouth 

17  the  second  day  (ye  shall  offer)  twelve 

20  on  the  third  day  eleven  bullocks,  two 

23  on  the  fourth  day  ten  bullocks,  two  rams 
26  on  the  fifth  day  nine  bullocks,  two  rams 

29  on  the  sixth  day  eight  bullocks,  two  rams 
32'on  the  seventh  day  seven  bullocks,  two 
35  eighth  day  ye  shall  have  a  solemn  assem. 

5  if  her  father  disallow  her  iu  the  day  that 

7  held  his  peace  at  her  in  the  day  that  he 

8  if  her  husband  disallowed  her  on  the  day 
12  her  husband .  .made  them  void  on  the  day 

14  hold  his  peace  at  her  from  day  to  day 

14  held  his  peace,  .in  the  day  that  he  heard 

19  on  the  third  day,  and  ou  the  seventh  day 

24  wash  your  clothes  on  the  seventh  day 

3  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month 
10  ye  (ai-e)  this  day  as  the  stars  of  heaven 
39  which  in  that  day  had  no  knowledge 

18  to  pass  over,  .the  coast  of  Moab,  this  day 
22  dwelt  in  their  stead  even  unto  this  day 

25  This  day  will  I  begin  to  put  the  dread  of 

30  deliver  him  into  thy  baud,  as.  .this  day 

14  name,  Bashan-havoth-jair,  unto  this  day 

4  ye.  .(are)  alive  every  one  of  you  this  day 
8  this  law,  which  I  set  before  you  this  day 

10  the  day  that  thou  stoodest  before  the  L. 

15  the  day  (that)  the  Lord  spake  unto  you 

20  people  of  inheritance,  as  (ye  are)  this  day 

26  I  call  heaveu.  .against  you  this  day,  that 
32  since  the  day  that  God  created  mau  upon 

38  to  give  thee  their  land . .  as  (it  is)  this  day 

39  Know  therefore  this  day,  and  consider 

40  I  command  thee  this  day,  that  it  may  go 
1  I  speak  in  your  ears  this  day,  that  ye  may 
3  who  (are)  all  of  us  here  alive  this  day 

12  Keep  the  sabbath  day  to  sauctify  it,  as 

14  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  L. 

15  commanded  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath  day 
24  we  have  seen  this  day  that  God  doth  talk 

6  these  words.  .1  commaud  thee  this  day 
24  preserve  us  alive,  as  (it  is)  at  this  day 

n  statutes,  .which  I  command  thee  this  day 
1  which  I  command  thee  this  day  shall  ye 

11  statutes,  which  I  commaud  thee  this  day 

18  sware  unto  thy  fathers,  as  (it  is)  this  day 

19  I  testify  agaiust  you  this  day,  that  ye 

1  Thou  (art)  to  pass  over  Jordan  this  day 

3  Understand... this  day,  that  the  Lord  thy 

7  the  day  that  thou  didst  depart  out  of  the 

10  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  in  the  day  of 
24  Ye  have  been  rebellious,  .from  the  day 

4  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  in  the  day 

.    8  aud  to  bless  in  his  name,  unto  this  day 
.  13  I  command  thee  this  day  for  thy  good  ? 
.  15  you  above  all  people,  as  (it  is)  this  day 
.    2  know  ye  this  day  :  for  (I  speak)  not  with 
.    4  Lord  hath  destroyed  them  unto  this  day 
.    8  I  command  you  this  day,  that  ye  may  be 
.  13  I  command  you  this  day,  to  love  the  L 
.  26  Behold,  I  set  before  you  this  day 


228 


Deut  1 1.  27  commandments..  I  commaud  you  this  day 
ir.  28  I  command  you  this  day,  to  go  after  other 

11.  32  judgments.  .1  set  before  you  this  day 

12.  8  all  (the  things)  that  we  do  here  this  day 

13.  18  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  to  do 
15-    5  command,  which  I  command  thee  this  day 
16.    3  thatthoumayestremember  the  (lay  when 
16.    4  which  thou  sacrificedst  the  first  day  at 
16.    8  and  on  the  seventh  day  (shall  be)  a 

18.  16  in  the  day  of  the  assembly,  saying,  Let 

19.  9  I  command  thee  this  day, to  love  the  LORD 

20.  3  ye  approach  this  day  unto  battle  against 

21.  23  thou  shalt  in  auy  wise  bury  him  that  day 
24. 15  At  his  day  thou  shalt  give  (him)  his  hire 
26.    3  I  profess  this  day  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
26.  16  This  day  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  com 
26. 17  Thou  hast  avouched  the  Lord  this  day  to 

26.  18  the  Lord  hath  avouched  thee  this  day  to 

27.  1  commandments.  .1  command  you  this  day 
27.    2  the  day  when  ye  shall  pass  over  Jordan 
27.    4  ye  shall  set  up  these  stones,  .this  day,  in 
27.    9  this  day  thou  art  become  the  people  of 
27. 10  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this  day 

27.  11  Moses  charged  the  people  the  same  day 

28.  1  commandments . .  I  command  thee  this  d. 

28. 13  I  command  thee  this  day,  to  observe  and 
28.  14  words  which  I  command  thee  this  day 
28.  15  his  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  thisd. 

28.  32  (with  longing)  for  them  all  the  day  long 

29.  4  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,  unto  this  day 
29.  10  Ye  stand  this  day  all  of  you  before  the  L. 
29.  12  which.  .Lord,  .maketh  with  thee  this  day 
29. 15  with  us  this  day  before  the  Lord  our  God 
29.  15  (Trim)  that  (is)  not  here  with  us  this  day 
29.  18  whose  heart  turneth  away  this  day  from 

29.  28  into  another  land,  as  (it  is)  this  day 

30.  2  I  commaud  thee  this  day,  thou  and 
30.    8  aud  do  all.  .1  command  thee  this  day 
30.  11  commandment. .  I  command  thee  this  d 
30.  15  See,  I  have  set  before  thee  this  day  life 
30.  16  I  command  thee  this  day  to  love  the  Lo. 
30.  18  I  denounce  unto  you  this  day,  that  ye 

30.  19  I  call  heaveu.  .to  record  this  day  against 

31.  2  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  old  this  day 
31.  17  my  anger  shall  be  kindled,  .in  that  day 
31. 17  so  that  they  will  say  in  that  day,  Are  not 
31.  18  I  will  surely  hide  my  face  in  that  day  for 
31.  22  therefore  wrote  this  song  the  same  day 

31.  27  while  I  am  yet  alive  with  you  this  day 

32.  35  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  (is)  at  hand 
32.  46  words  which  I  testify  among  you  this  day 

32.  48  spake  unto  Moses  that  selfsame  day 

33.  12  shall  cover  him  all  the  day  long,  and 

34.  6  knoweth  of  his  sepulclu'e  unto  this  day 
Josh.  3.    7  This  day  will  I  begin  to  magnify  thee  in 

4.    9  twelve  stones,  .they are  there  unto  thisd. 

4.  14  On  that  day  the  Lord  magnified  Joshua 

5.  9  This  day  have  I  rolled  away  the  reproach 
5.   9  the  place  is  called  Gilgal  unto  this  day 
5. 10  kept  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth  day 

5.  11  unleavened  cakes.. in  the  self  same  day 

6.  4  the  seventh  day  ye  shall  compass  the  city 
6.  10  until  the  day  I  bid  you  shout ;  then  shall 
6.  14  the  second  day  they  compassed  the  city 
6.  15  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day,  that 
6. 15  on  that  day  they  compassed  the  city  sev. 

6.  25  she  dwelleth  iu  Israel  (even)  unto  this 

7.  25  the  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  day 
7.  26  a  great  heap  of  stones  unto  this  day 

7.  26  called,  The  valley  of  Achor,  unto  this  day 

8.  25  (so)  it  was,  (that)  all  that  fell  that  day 
S.  28  made  it  an  heap  for  ever,  .unto  this  day 

8.  29  heap  ofstones,  (that  remain. )uuto  this  day 

9.  12  on  the  day  we  came  forth  to  go  unto  you 
9. 17  came  unto  their  cities  on  the  third  day 
q.  27  Joshua  made  them  that  day  hewers  of 

9.  27  even  unto  this  day,  in  the  place  which  he 
10.  12  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  delivered  up 
10.  13  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a  whole  day 
10.  14  there  was  no  day  like  that  before  it  or 
10.  27  stones,  .until  this  very  day 
10.  28  that  day  Joshua  took  Makkedah,  and 
10.  32  Israel,  which  took  it  on  the  second  day 
10.  35  And  they  took  it  on  that  day,  and  smote 
10.  35  he  utterly  destroyed  that  day,  according 

13.  13  dwell  among  the  Israelites  until  this  day 

14.  9  Moses  sware  on  that  day,  saying,  Surely 
14.  10  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  and  five  years  old 
14.  11  strong  this  day  as  (I  was)  in  the  day  that 

14.  12  whereof  the  Lord  spake  in  that  day ;  for 
14. 12  heartiest  in  that  day  how  the  Anakims 

14. 14  became  the  inheritance,  .unto  this  day 

15.  63  dwell  with  the  children,  .unto  this  day 

16.  10  the  Canaanites  dwell .  .unto  this  day,  and 

22.  3  have  not  left  your  brethren . .  unto  this  d. 
22.  16  turn  away  this  day  from  following  the  L. 
22.  16  ye  might  rebel  this  day  agaiust  the  Lord? 
22.  17  we  are  not  cleansed  until  this  day,  alth. 
22.  18  ye  must  turu  away  this  day  from  follow. 
22.  22  if  in  transgression,  .save  us  not  this  day 
22.  29  God  forbid  that  we  should . .  turn  this  day 

22.  31  This  day  we  perceive  that  the  Lord  (is) 

23.  8  But  cleave,  .as  ye  have  done  unto  this  d. 
23.    9  able  to  stand  before  you  unto  this  day 

23.  14  this  day  I  (am)  going  the  way  of  all  the 

24.  15  choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve 
24.  25  So  Joshua  made  a  covenant,  .that  day 

Judg.  1.  21  dwell  with  the  children,  .unto  this  day 
1.  26  which  (is)  the  name  thereof  unto  this  day 

3.  30  So  Moab  was  subdued  that  day  under  the 

4.  14  the  day  in  which  the  LoRDhath  delivered 
4.  23  So  God  subdued  on  that  day  Jabin  the 


DAY 


Judg.  5.    1  Then  sang  Deborah,  .on  that  day,  saying 
6.  24  unto  this  day  it  (is)  yet  in  Ophrah  of  the 
6.  32  Therefore  on  that  day  he  called  him  Jer. 
9.  18  ye  are  risen  up.  .this  day,  and  have 
9.  19  with  Jerubbaal  aud  with  his  house  thisd. 

9.  45  fe-ught  against  the  city  all  that  day  ;  and 
10.    4  which  are  called  Havoth-jair  unto  this  d. 

10.  15  deliver  us  only,  we  pray  thee,  this  day 

11.  27  be  judge  this  day  between  the  children 

12.  3  are  ye  come  up  unto  me  this  day,  to  fight 

13.  7  from  the  womb  to  the  day  of  his  death 

13.  10  man .  .that  came  uuto  me  the  (other)  day 
14-  *5»  17  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day 

14.  18  on  the  seventh  day  before  the  sun  went 

15.  19  Eu-hakkore,which(is)in  Lehi  unto  thisd. 
18.    1  for  unto  this  day  (all  their)  inheritance 

18. 12  that  place  Mahaneh-dan  unto  this  day 

18.  30  his  sons  were  priests,  .until  the  day 

19.  s  it  came  to  pass  on  the  fourth  day,  when 
19.  8  he  arose  early,  .on  the  fifth  day  to  depart 
19.  9  Behold,  now  the  day  draweth  toward 
19.  9  behold,  the  day  groweth  to  an  end  ;  lodge 
19.  11  when  they  (were)  by  Jehus,  the  day  was 
19.  30  the  day  that  the  children  of  Israel  came 

19.  30  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  unto  this  day 

20.  21  aud  destroyed,  .of  the  Israelites  that  day 
20. 22  they  put  themselves  in  array  the  first  day 
20.  24  children  of  Israel  came,  .the  second  day 
20.  25  Benjamin  went  forth,  .the  second  day 
20.  26  there  before  the  Lord,  and  fasted  that  d. 
20.  30  children  of  Israel  went  up.  .the  third  d. 
20. 35  destroyed  of  the  Benjamites  that  day 

20.  46  all  which  fell  that  day  of  Benjamin  were 

21.  6  is  one  tribe  cut  off  from  Israel  this  day 
Ruth  3.  18  until  he  have  finished  the  thing  this  day 

4.    5  What  day  thou  buyest  the  field  of  the 
4.    9,  10  Ye  (are)  witnesses  this  day 
4.  14  not  left  thee  this  day  without  a  kinsman 
1  Sa.   2.  34  in  one  day  they  shall  die  both  of  them 

3.  12  In  that  day  I  will  perform  against  Eli 

4.  12  came  to  Shiloh  the  same  day,  with  his 

5.  5  tread  on  the  threshold,  .unto  this  day 

6.  15  sacrificed  sacrifices  the  same  day  unto 
6. 16  they  returned  to  Ekron  the  same  day 

6. 18  (which  stone  remaineth)unto  this  day  in 

7.  6  fasted  on  that  day,  and  said  there,  "We 

7.  10  thundered  with  a  great  thunder  on  thatd. 

8.  8  since  the  day  that  I  brought  them  up  out 
8.    8  even  unto  this  day,  wherewith  they  have 

8.  18  ye  shall  cry  out  in  that  day  because  of 
8. 18  the  Lord  will  net  hear  you  in  that  day 
9. 15  told  Samuel  in  his  ear  a  day  before  Saul 

9.  24  So  Saul  did  eat  with  Samuel  that  day 

10.  9  and  all  those  signs'came  to  pass  that  day 

10.  19  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  God,  who 
11. 11  and  slew,  .until  the  heat  of  the  day  :  and 

11.  13  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to  death  this  day 

12.  2  I  have  walked  before  you.  .unto  this  day 
12.  5  his  anointed  (is)  witness  this  day,  that  ye 
12. 18  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  rain  that  day 
13. 22  So  it  came  to  pass,  iu  the  day  of  battle 
14.  1  it  came  to  pass  upon  a  day,  that  Jonath. 
14.  23  So  the  Lord  saved  Israel  that  day  :  and 
14.  24  the  men  of  Israel  were  distressed  that  d. 
14.  28  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  eateth.  .this  d. 
14. 31  they  smote  the  Philistines  that  day  from 
34.  33  said,  .roll  a  great  stone  unto  me  this  day 
14.  37  But  he  answered  him  not  that  day 

14.  38  see  wherein  this  sin  hath  been  this  day 

14.  45  for  he  hath  wrought  with  God  this  day 

15.  28  hath  rent  the  kingdom,  .from  thee  this  d. 

15.  35  Samuel  came  no  more,  .until  the  day  of 

16.  13  came  upon  David  from  that  day  forward 
17. 10  said,  I  defy  the  armies  of  Israel  this  day 

17.  46  This  day  will  the  LORD  deliver  thee  into 
17. 46  I  will  give  the  carcases,  .this  day  unto 

18.  2  Saul  tcok  him  that  day,  and  would  let 

18.  9  Saul  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  forw. 
28.  21  Thou  shalt  this  day  be  my  son  in  law  in 

19.  24  lay  down  naked  all  that  day  and  all  that 

20.  26  Saul  spake  not  anything  that  day  :  for 

20.  34  Jonathan,  .did  eat  no  meat  the  second  d. 

21.  5  though  it  were  sanctified  this  day  in  the 
21.  6  to  put  hot  bread  in  the  day  when  it  was 
21.    7  a  certain  man.  .(was)  there  that  day 

21.  10  David  arose,  aud  fled  that  day  for  fear 

22.  8  hath  stirred  up  my  servant,  .at  this  day? 

22. 1 3  he  should  rise  agaiust  me.,  as  at  this  day? 
22.  18  slew  on  that  day  fourscore  and  five  per. 

22.  22  David  said.  .1  knew  (it)  that  day,  when 

23.  14  And  Saul  sought  him  every  day  ;  but 

24.  4  men  of  David  said  unto  him, Behold  the  d. 
24.  10  Behold,  this  day  thine  eyes  have  seen 
24. 18  thou  hast  showed  this  day  how  that  thou 

24.  19  for  that  thou  hast  done  uuto  me  this  da, 

25.  8  for  we  come  in  a  good  day  :  give,  I  pray 
25.  32  which  sent  thee  this  day  to  meet  me 

25.  33  which  hast  kept  me  this  day  from  coming 

26.  8  God  hath  delivered  thine  enemy,  .this  d. 
26. 10  the  Lord  shall  smite  him  ;  or  his  day 
26.  19  for  they  have  driven  me  out  this  day 

26.  21  because  my  soul  was  precious,  .this  day 

26.  24  thy  life  was  much  set  by  this  day  in 

27.  1  I  shall  now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand 
27.    6  Theu  Achish  gave  him  Ziklag  that  day 

27.  6  wherefore  Ziklag pertaineth .  .unto  this  d. 

28.  18  hath  the  Lord  done  this  tiling,  .this  day 

28.  20  he  had  eaten  no  bread  all  the  day,  nor  all 

29.  3  since  he  fell  (unto  me)  unto  this  day 

29.    6  since  the  day  of  thy  coming,  .uuto thisd. 

29.  8  as  I  have  been  with  thee  unto  this  day 

30.  1  men  were  come  to  Ziglag  on  the  third  d. 


i  Sa.  30 
30. 


iKi. 


1  Ch.  4. 


DAY 


25  And  it  was  (so)  from  that  clay  forward 
25  he  made  it  a  statute,  .unto  this  day 
6  Saul  died .  .and  all  his  men,  that  same  d. 

2  It  came  even  to  pass  on  the  third  day 

17  there  was  a  very  sore  battle  thatday :  and 
8  show  kindness  this  day  unto  the  house 

35  David  to  eat  meat  while  it  was  yet  day 

37  For.  .all  Israel,  understood  that  day 

38  and  a  great  man  fallen  this  day  in  Israel? 

39  I  (am)  this  day  weak,  though  anointed 

3  and  were  sojourners  there  until  this  day 

5  and  came  about  the  heat  of  the  day  to 

8  the  Lord  hath  avenged  my  lord,  .this  d 
8  said  on  that  day,  Whosoever  getteth 

8  name  of  the  place  Perez  uzzah  to  this  d. 

9  David  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day 

23  had  no  child  unto  the  day  of  her  death 

6  Whereas  I  have  not  dwelt . .  to  this  day 

12  So  Uriah  abode  in  Jerusalem  that  day 
iS  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day,  that 
32  this  hath  been  determined  from  the  day 
37  And  (David)  mourned  for  his  son  every  d. 
20  should  I  this  day  make  thee  go  up  and 

12  requite  me  good  for  his  cursing  this  day 

7  there  was  there  a  great  slaughter  that  day 

8  the  wood  devoured  more  people  that  day 
iS  it  is  called  unto  this  day,  Absalom's  place 
20  Thou  shalt  not  bear  tidings  this  day 

20  but  thou  shalt  bear  tidings  another  day 
20  this  day  thou  shalt  bear  no  tidings,  bee. 

31  the  Lord  hath  avenged  thee  this  day  of 
2  the  victory  that  day  was  (turned)  into 

2  the  people  heard  say  that  day  how  the 

3  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  that  day 
5  Thou  hast  shamed  this  day  the  faces  of 

5  which  this  day  have  saved  thy  life,  and 

6  for  thou  hast  declared  this  day,  that  thou 
6  for  this  day  I  perceive,  that  if  Absalom 

6  and  all  we  had  died  this  day,  then  it  had 

19  the  day  that  my  lord  the  king  went  out 

20  I  am  come  the  first  tins  day  of  all  the 
22  that  ye  should  this  day  be  adversaries 
22  shall,  .any  man  be  put  to  death  this  day 
22  do  not  I  know  that  I  (am)  this  day  king 

24  the  day  the  king  departed  until  the  day 

35  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  years  old :  (and) 
3  they  were  shut  up  unto  the  day  of  their 
1  in  the  day  (that)  the  Lord  had  delivered 

19  They  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my  cal. 

10  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  victory  that  d. 

18  Gad  came  that  day  to  David,  and  said 

25  he  is  gone  down  this  day,  and  hath  slain 

30  even  so  will  I  certainly  do  this  day 

48  given  (one)  to  sit  on  my  throne  this  day 
8  cursed  me  with  agrievous  curse  in  the  d. 
24  Adonijah  shall  be  put  to  death  this  day 
37  it  shall  be,  (that)  on  the  day  thou  goest 
42  on  the  day  thou  goest  out,  and  walkest 

6  to  sit  on  his  throne,  as  (it  is)  this  day 

18  the  third  day  after  that  I  was  delivered 
22  Solomon's  provision  for  one  daywasthir. 

7  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  this  day,  which 

5  and  there  they  are  unto  this  day 

16  Since  theday  that  I  brought  forth  mypeo. 

24  and  hast  fulfilled  (it),  .as  (it  is)  this  day 
29  be  open  toward  this  house  night  and  day 
61  to  keep  his  commandments,  as  at  this  d. 
64  The  same  day  did  the  king  hallow  the 

66  On  the  eighth  day  he  sent  the  people  aw. 

13  called,  .the  land  of  Cabul  unto  this  day 
2r  a  tribute  of  bond  service  unto  this  day 
12  came  no  such  almug  trees,  .unto  this  day 

7  be  a  servant  unto  this  people  this  day 
12  people  came  to  Rehoboam  the  third  day 

12  saying,  Come  to  me  again  the  third  day 

19  against  the  house  of  Israel  unto  this  day 

32  a  feast,  .on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month 

33  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  eighth  month 

3  he  gave  a  sign  the  same  day,  saying,  This 
n  that  the  man  of  God  had  done  that  day 

14  cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam  that  day 
16  king  over  Israel  that  day  in  the  camp 

14  until  the  day  (that)  the  Lord  sendeth  rain 

36  let  it  be  known  this  day  that  thou  (art) 

4  he  himself  went  a  day's  journey  into  the 

13  will  deliver  it  into  thine  hand  this  dayl 
29  in  the  seventh  day  the  battle  was  joined 
29  an  hundred  thousand  footmen  in  one  day 

25  thou  shalt  see  in  that  day.  when  thou 
35  the  battle  increased  that  dayj;  and  the 
22  So  the  waters  were  healed  unto  this  day 

8  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  Elisha  passed  to 

11  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  he  came  thither 
18  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  he  went  out  to  his 
29  I  said  unto  her  on  the  next  day,  Give  thy 

31  if  the  head,  .shall  stand  on  him  this  day 

9  this  day  (is)  a  day  of  good  tidings,  and  we 

6  since  the  day  that  she  left  the  land,  even 

22  under  the  hand  of  Judah  unto  this  day 
27  and  made  it  a  draught  house  unto  this  day 

7  called  the  name.  .Joktheel  unto  this  day 

5  he  was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death 

6  the  Syrians,  .dwelt  there  unto  this  day 

23  their  own  land  to  Assyria  unto  this  day 

34  Unto  this  day  they  do  after  the  former 
41  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they,  .this  day 

3  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  reb. 
5  on  the  third  day  thou  shalt  go  up  unto 

8  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  the  third  day? 
17  have  laid  up  in  store  unto  this  day,  shall 

15  the  day  their  fathers  came .  .unto  this  day 
41  destroyed  them  utterly  unto  this  day 


t  Ch.  4. 

5- 
11. 

!3- 
13- 
16. 
16. 
17- 
26. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
zCh.  5. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

7- 


26. 

28. 

29. 

35- 

35- 

35' 
Ezra   3. 

6. 

8. 

9- 

9- 

9- 


Neh.   1. 

4 

5' 


Job 


229 


43  and  dwelt  there  unto  this  day 

26  brought  them  unto  Halah.  .unto  this  day 

22  and  slew  a  Hon  in  a  pit  on  a  snowy  day 

11  place  is  called  Perez-uzza  to  this  day 

12  David  was  afraid  of  God  that  day,  saying 
7  on  that  day  David  delivered  first  (this 

23  show  forth  from  day  to  day  his  salvation 
5  day  that  I  brought  up  Israel  unto  this  d. 

17  northward foura  day,  southward  four  a  d. 
7  if  he  be  constant  to  do.  .as  at  this  day 
5  willing  co  consecrate  his  service  this  day 

21  on  the  morrow  after  that  day,  (even)  a 

22  eat  and  drink  before  the  Lord  on  that  d. 
9  And  there  it  is  unto  this  day 

5  Since  the  day  that  I  brought  forth  my 

15  and  hast  fulfilled  (it),  .as  (it  is)  this  day 

9  in  the  eighth  day  they  made  a  solemn 

10  on  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the 

5  make  to  pay  tribute  until  this  day 

16  the  day  of  the  foundation  of  the  house 
12  people  came  to  Rehoboam  on  the  third  d. 

12  saying,  Come  again  to  me  on  the  third  day 
19  against  the  house  of  David  unto  this  day 

24  thou  shalt  see  on  that  day  wheji  thou 
34  the  battle  increased  that  day  :  howbeit 
26  on  the  fourth  day  they  assembled 

26  The  valley  of  Eerachah,  unto  this  day 

10  from  under  the  hand  of  Judah  unto  this  d. 
21  king  was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death 

6  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  in  one  day 

17  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  month  came 
16  in  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

21  I  (come)  not  against  thee  this  day,  but 

25  spake,  .in  their  lamentations  to  this  day 

6  From  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 
15  this  house  was  finished  on  the  third  day 
33  on  the  fourth  day  was  the  silver  and  the 

7  (been)  in  a  great  trespass  unto  this  day 
7  to  confusion  of  face,  as  (it  is)  this  day 

15  we  remain  yet  escaped,  as  (it  is)  this  day 

13  neither  (is  this)  a  work  of  one  day  or  two 

16  sat  down  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth 

17  by  the  first  day  of  the  first  month 

11  prosper,  I  pray  thee,  thy  servant,  this  d. 
2  will  they  make  an  end  in  a  day?  will 

22  be  a  guard  to  us,  and  labour  on  the  day 

1 1  Restore,  I  pray  you,  to  them,  even  this  d. 

2  upon  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 
9  This  day  (is)  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  God 

10  for  (this)  day  (is)  holy  unto  our  Lord 

11  Hold  your  peace,  for  the  day  (is)  holy 

13  on  the  second  day  were  gathered  together 

17  unto  that  day  had  not  the  children  of 

18  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last  day  he 
iS  on  the  eighth  day  (was)  a  solemn  assem. 

1  the  twenty  and  fourth  day  of  this  month 

3  they.  .read,  .(one)  fourth  part  of  the  day 
10  didst  thou  get.  .a  name,  as  (it  is)  this  day 
32  of  the  kings  of  Assyria  unto  this  day 

36  we  (are)  servants  this  day  ;  and  (for)  the 
31  bring,  .any  victuals  on  the  sabbath  day 
31  would  not  buy  it  of  them,  .on  the  holyd. 
43  that  day  they  offered  great  sacrifices 
1  On  that  day  they  read  in  the  book  of  M. 
15  in  the  day  wherein  they  sold  victuals 

15  brought  into  Jerusalem  on  the  sabbath  d. 

17  W~hat..(is)this;thatyedo..the  sabbath d.? 

19  burden  be  brought  in  on  the  sabbath  day 
22  keep  the  gates,  to  sanctify  the  sabbath  d. 

10  On  the  seventh  day,  when  the  heart  of 

18  ladies  of  Persia  and  Media  say  this  day 

11  Mordecai  walked  every  day  before  the 

7  from  day  to  day,  and  from  month  to 

12  called  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  first 

13  little  children  and  women,  in  one  day 

14  they  should  be  ready  against  that  day 

16  and  neither  eat  nor  drink,  .night  or  day 

1  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day,  that 

4  let  the  king  and  Haman  come  this  day 
9  Then  went  Haman  forth  that  day  joyful 

2  said  again  unto  Esther  on  the  second  day 
1  On  that  day  did  the  king  Ahasuerus  give 

12  Upon  one  day,  in  all  the  provinces  of 

13  the  Jews  should  be  ready  against  that  d. 

17  joy  aud  gladness,  a  feast  and  a  good  day 
1  the  month  Adar,  on  the  thirteenth  day 
1  in  the  day  that  the  enemies  of  the  Jews 

11  On  that  day  the  number  of  those  that 
13  also  according  unto  this  day's  decree 

15  on  the  fourteenth  day  also  of  the  month 
17  On  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  Adar 
17  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same  rested 
17,  18  made  it  a  day  of  feasting  aud  gladness 

19  made  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month 

19  a  good  day,  and  of  sending  portions  one 
21  that  they  should  keep  the  fourteenth  day 

21  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same,  yearly 

22  to  joy,  and  from  mourninginto  a  good  d. 
4  feasted  (in  their)  houses,  every  one  his 

6  there  was  a  day  when  the  sons  of  God 
13  there  was  a  day  when  his  sons  and  his 
"1  there  was  a  day  when  the  sons  of  God  ca. 
1  opened'Job  his  mouth,  and  cursed  hislday 

3  Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  born 

4  Let  that  day  be  darkness ;  let  not  God 
.    5  let  the  blackness  of  the  day  terrify  it 

8  Let  them  curse  it  that  curse  the  day 

6  shall  accomplish,  as  an  hireling,  his  day 

23  he  knoweth  that  the  day  of  darkness  is 
.  12  They  change  the  night  into  day :  the 

20  They  that  come.. be  astonied  at  his  day 
2S  shall  flow  away  in  the  day  of  his  wrath 


DAY 


Job  21.  30  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  destruction  ? 
21.  30  shall  be  brought  forth  to  the  day  of  wrath 
38.  23  against  the  day  of  battle  and  war? 

Psa.  2.  7  Thou  (art)  my  Son  ;  this  day  have  I  bego. 
7.  11  God  is  angry  (.with  the  wicked)  every  day 
iS.  title,  in  the  day  (that)  the  Lord  delivered 

18.  18  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my  calamity 

19.  2  Day  unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night 

20.  1  The  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble 
25.    5  on  thee  do  I  wait  all  the  day 

32.  3  waxed  old  through  my  roaring  all  the  day 
35.  28  shall  speak,  .of  thy  praise  all  the  day 

37.  13  for  he  seeth  that  his  day  is  coming 

38.  6  I  am  troubled . .  I  go  mourning  all  the  day 
^38.  12  They .  .imagine  deceits  all  the  day  long 

44.    8  In  God  we  boast  all  the  day  long,  and 
44.  22  for  thy  sake  are  we  killed  all  the  day 
50.  15  And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble 
56.    5  Every  day  they  wrest  my  words  :  all  their 
59.  16  been  my  defence  and  refuge  in  the  day 
71.    8  Let  my  mouth  be  filled,  .all  the  day 
71.  15  show  forth,  .thy  salvation  all  the  day 
71.  24  talk  of  thy  righteousness  all  the  day  long 

73.  14  all  the  day  long  have  I  been  plagued,  and 

74.  16  The  day  (is)  thine,  the  night  also  (is)  thine 

77.  2  In  the  day  of  my  trouble,  I  sought  the  L. 

78.  9  carrying  bows,  turned  back  in  the  day  of 
78.  42  (nor)  the  day  when  he  delivered  them 
81.    3  time  appointed,  on  our  solemn  feast  day 
84.  10  For  a  day  in  thy  courts  (is)  better  than  a 
86.    7  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  will  call  upon 

88.  1 1  have  cried  day  (and)  night  before  thee 

89.  16  In  thy  name,  .they  rejoice  all  the  day 
92.  title.  A  Psalm  (or)  Song  for  the  sabbath  day 

95.  8  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wilderness 

96.  2  show  forth  his  salvation  from  day  to  day 
102.   2  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me  in  the  day 
102.    2  in  the  -day  (when)  I  call  answer  me 

102.  8  .Mine  enemies  reproach  me  all  the  day 
no.  3  Thy  people  (shall  be)  willing  in  the  day 
no.    5  shall  strike  through  kings  in  the  day  of 

118.  24  This  (is)  the  day  (which)  the  LORD  hath 

119.  91  They  continue  this  day  according  to  thine 
119.  97  thy  law!  it  (is)  my  meditation  all  the  day 
119.  164  Seven  times  a  day  do  I  praise  thee 

137.  7  the  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of  Jeru. 

138.  3  In  the  day  when  I  cried  thou  answeredst 
139. 12  but  the  night  shineth  as  the  day 

140.    7  hast  covered  my  head  in  the  day  of  battle 

145.  2  Every  day  will  I  bless  thee ;  and  I  will 

146.  4  in  that  very  day  his  thoughts  perish 
Prov.  4.  18  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perf.  day 

6.  34  will  not  spare  in  the  day  of  vengeance 
7. 14  (I  have)  peace,  .this  day  have  I  paid  my 

7.  20  (and)  will  come  home  at  the  day  appoin. 
11.    4  Riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath 

16.  4  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil 

21.  26  He  coveteth  greedily  all  the  day  long 
21.  31  horse  (is)  prepared  against  the  day  of 
22. 19  I  have  made  known  to  thee  this  day,  even 

23.  17  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long 

24.  10  (If)  thou  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity,  thy 
27.  1  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth 
27. 10  into  thy  brother's  house  in  the  day  of  thy 

15  A  continual  dropping  in  a  very  rainy  day 
1  day  of  death  than  the  day  of  one's  birth 

14  In  the  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful 
14  but  in  the  day  of  adversity  consider 
8  neither  (hath  he)  power  in  the  day  of 

16  neither  day  nor  night  seeth  sleep  with  his 
3  In  the  day  when  the  keepers  of  the  house 

17  Until  the  daybreak,  and  the  shadows  flee 
3. 11  the  day  of  his  espousals,  and  in  the  day 
4.   6  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee 

8.  8  in  the  day  when  she  shall  be  spoken  for  ? 
Isa.      2.  n,  17  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted  in  that  d. 

2.  12  the  day  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  (shall  be) 

2.  20  In  that  day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols 

3.  7  In  that  day  shall  he  swear,  saying,  I  will 

3.  18  In  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away  the 

4.  1  in  that  day  seven  women  shall  take  hold 

4.  2  In  that  day  shall  the  branch  of  the  Lord 

5.  30  in  that  day  they  shall  roar  against  them 
7. 17  from  the  day  that  Ephraim  departed  from 
7.  18,  21,  23  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day 
7.  20  In  the  same  day  shall  the  Lord  shave 

g.   4  of  his  oppressor,  as  in  the  day  of  Midian 

9.  14  head  and  tail,  branch  and  rush,  in  one  day 
10.    3  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation 
10. 17  devour  his  thorns  and.  .briers  in  one  day 
10.  20,  27  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day 

10.  32  As  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob  that  day 

11.  10  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse 
n.  n  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  (that) 
n.  16  in  the  day  that  he  came  up  out  of  the 

12.  1  in  that  day  thou  shalt  say,  O  Lord,  I  will 

12.  4  in  that  day  shall  ye  say,  Traise  the  Lord 

13.  6  Howl  ye ;  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  at 
13.   9  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  cruel  both 

13.  13  and  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  anger 

14.  3  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  day  that  the 

17.  4  in  that  day  it  shall  come  to  pass,  (that) 
17.  7  At  that  day  shall  a  man  look  to  his  Maker 
17.  9  In  that  day  shall  his  strong  cities  be  as  a 
17.  11  In  the  day  shalt  thou  make  thy  plant  to 
17,  n  the  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow 
19.  16  In  that  day  shall  Egypt  be  like  unto 

19.  18  In  that  day  shall  five  cities  in  the  land  of 
19.  19  In  that  day  there  shall  be  an  altar  to 
19.  21  Egyptians  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  d. 
19.  23  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  highway  out 
19.  24  In  that  day  shall  Israel  be  the  third 


27. 
Eccl.  7, 

7' 
7- 


Song 


Isa.   20. 


28 

zg, 
SO- 
30. 
3i- 
34- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
43- 
47- 
43. 
49. 
5*- 
52- 

52- 

S6. 
58. 
58. 
58. 
58. 
58. 
61. 
62. 
6* 
65. 
65 
6  i, 


Jer. 


25- 

25. 

25- 

27. 
3°- 
30. 

31- 
3T- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
33- 
34- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
40. 
41. 
43. 
42. 

4-i- 


DAY 


6  the  inhabitant,  .shall  say  in  that  day 

5  (it  is)  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  treading 

8  thou  didst  look  in  that  day  to  the  armour 
12  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

20  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that 
25  In  that  day.  saitli  the  Lord  of  hosts 
15  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that 

21  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  (that) 

9  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo  this  (is) 
1  In  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung  in 

1  In  that  day  the  Lord,  .shall  punish  \evi. 
1 1n  that  day  sing  ye  uuto  her,  A  vineyard 
3  lest  (any)  hurt  it.  .keep  it  night  and  day 
8  he  stayeth  his  rough  wind  in  the  day  of 

12,  13  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day  (that) 

5  In  that  day  shall  the  Loud  of  hosts  be 

24  Doth  the  plowmau  plow  all  day  to  sow? 

18  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words 
23  in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  larg3 

25  rivers  (and)  streams  of  waters  in  the  day 

26  in  the  day  that  the  Loud  bindeth  up  the 

7  in  that  day  every  man  shall  cast  away  his 

8  (it  is)  the  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance 
3  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  reb. 

12  from  day  even  to  night  wilt  thou  make 

13  from  day  (even)  to  uight  wilt  thou  make 

19  he  shall  praise  thee,  as  I  (do)  this  day 

6  have  laid  up  in  store  until  this  day 
13  Yea,  before  the  day  (was)  I  (am)  he ;  and 

9  shall  come  to  thee  in  a  moment  in  one  d. 

7  before  the  day  when  thou  heardest  them 

8  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I  helped  thee 
13  hast  feared  continually  every  day,  because 

5  my  name  continually  every  day  (is)  bias. 

6  (they  shall  know)  in  that  day  that  I  (am) 

12  tomorrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  (and)much 

3  in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  pleasure 

4  ye  shall  not  fast  as  (ye  do  this)  day,  to 

5  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  soul? 

5  and  an  acceptable  day  to  the  Lord? 

13  (from)  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day 
2  To  proclaim,  .the  day  of  vengence  of  our 

6  shall  never  hold  their  peace  day  nor  night 

4  the  day  of  vengeance  (is)  in  mine  heart 

2  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day 

5  a  fire  that- burnetii  all  the  day 

8  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day  ? 
10  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  nations 

18  I  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  city 
25  from  our  youth  eveu  unto  this  day 

9  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  day,  saith 

4  Woe  unto  us  !  for  the  daygoeth  away,  for 
22  in  the  day  that  I  brought  them  out  of 
25  Siucetheday  that  your  fathers  came  forth 
25  unto  this  day  I  have  even  sent  unto  you 

4  in  the  day  (that)  I  brought  them  forth  out 

5  with  milk  and  honey  as  (it  is)  this  day 

7  in  the  day  (that)  I  brought  them  up  out 
7  of  the  laud  of  Egypt,  (even)  uuto  this  day 

3  and  prepare  them  for  the  day  of  slaughter 

19  and  my  refuge  in  the  day  of  affliction 

16  neither  have  I  desired  the  woeful  day 

17  thou  (art)  my  hope  in  the  day  of  evil 

18  bring  upon  them  the  day  of  evil,  and 

21  hear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  day,  nor 

22  out  of  your  houses  on  the  sabbath  day 
22  hallow  ye  the  sabbatli  day,  as  I  comman. 
24  the  gates  of  the  city  on  the  sabbath  day 
24  but  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  to  do  no 

27  to  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  and  not  to 

27  at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  on  the  sabbath  d. 
17  I  will  show  them  the  back.,  in  the  day  of 

14  Cursed  be  the  day  wherein  I  was  born 
14  let  not  the  day  wherein  my  mother  bare 

3  From  the  thirteenth  year,  .unto  this  day 
iS  an  hissing,  and  a  curse,  as  (it  is)  this  day 
33  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  at  that  day 
22  there  shall  they  be  until  the  day  that  I 

7  that  day  (is)  great,  so  that  none  (is)  like  it 

8  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith 

6  there  shall  be  a  day  (that)  the  watchmen 
32  in  the  day  (that)  I  took  them  by  the  hand 

20  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  (even)  unto  this  day 
20  and  hast  made  thee  a  name,  as  at  this  day 
31  day  that  they  built  it  even  unto  this  day 

20  If  ye  can  break  my  covenant  of  the  day 

13  in  the  day  that  I  brought  them  forth  out 

14  for  unto  this  day  they  driuk  none,  but 
2  from  the  day  I  spake  unto  thee,  from  the 

-,o  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  day 

28  until  the  day  that  Jerusalem  was  taken 

16  they  shall  be  (accomplished)  in  that  day 

17  I  will  deliver  thee  in  that  day,  saith 

4  I  loose  thee  this  day  from  the  chains 
4  it  came  to  jmss,  the  second  day  after  he 

19  know,  .that  Ihaveadmonishedyouthisd. 

21  I  have  this  day  declared  (it)  to  you  ;  but 
2  this  day  they  (are)  a  desolation,  and  no 
6  are  wasted  (and)  dendrite,  as  at  this  day 

10  They  are  not  humbled  (even)  unto  this  day 

22  without  an  Inhabitant,  as  at  this  day 

23  evil  is  happened  unto  you,  as  at  this  day 
10  the  day  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  a  day 

21  the  day  of  their  calamity  was  come  upon 
4  Because  of  the  .lay  that  conieth  to  spoil 

41  at  that  day  shall  be  as  the  heart  of  a 

22  at  that  day  shall  the  heart  of  the  mighty 

26  all  the  men  of  war .  .be  cut  off  in  that  day 

27  for  their  day  is  come,  the  time 

30  men  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  in  that  day 

31  thy  day  is  come.  thetime(that)I  will  visit 

2  in  the  day  of  trouble  thev  shall  be  against 


230 


Jer.  52.  n  put  him  in  prison  till  the  day  of  his  death 
Lam.  1.  12  afflicted  (me)  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  anger 

1. 13  made  me  desolate  (and)  faint  all  the  day 

1.  21  thou  wilt  bring  the  day  (that)  thou  hast 

2.  1  remembered  not  his  footstool  in  the  day 
2.   7  a  noise,  .as  in  the  day  of  a  solemn  feast 
2.  16  this  (is)  the  day  that  we  looked  for 

2. 21  hast  slain  (them)  in  the  day  of  thine  anger 
2.  22  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my 

2.  22  so  that  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger 

3.  3  turneth  his  hand  (against  me)  all  the  day 
3.  14  a  derision,  .(and)  their  song  all  the  day 
3.  57  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  (that)  I 

3.  62  and  their  device  against  me  all  the  day 
Eze.     1.  28  that  is  in  the  cloud  in  the  day  of  rain 

7.    7  time  is  come,  the  day  of  trouble  (is)  near 
7.  10  Behold  the  day,  behold,  it  is  come 
7.  12  The  time  is  come,  the  day  draweth  near 
7.  19  not  be  able  to  deliver  them  in  the  day  of 
13.    5  stand  in  the  battle  in  the  day  of  the  LORD 
16.    4  iu  the  day  thou  wast  born  thy  navel  was 
16.    5  to  the  loathing  of  thy  person,  in  the  day 
16.  56  by  thy  mouth  in  the  day  of  thy  pride 
20.    s  In  the  day  when  I  chose  Israel,  and 
20.   6  In  the  day  (that)  I  lifted  up  mine  hand 
20.  29  name,  .is  called  Bamah  unto  this  day 

20.  31  with  all  your  idols,  even  unto  this  day 

21.  25  wicked  prince  of  Israel,  whose  day  is  come 

21.  29  whose  day  is  come,  when  their  iniquity 

22.  24  nor  rained  upon  in  the  day  of  indignation 

23.  38  defiled  my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day 

23.  39  they  came  the  same  day  into  my  sanctu. 

24.  2  name  of  the  day,  (even)  of  this  same  day 
24.   2  set  himself  against  Jerusalem  this,  .day 
24.  25  in  the  day  when  I  take  from  them  their 
24.  26  he  that  escapeth  in  that  day  shall  come 
24.  27  In  that  day  shall  thy  mouth  be  opened 

26.  18  the  isles  tremble  in  the  day  of  thy  fall 

27.  27  midst  of  the  seas  in  the  day  of  thy  ruin 

28.  13  in  thee  in  the  day  that  thou  wast  created 

28.  15  from  the  day  that  thou  wast  created,  till 

29.  21  In  that  day  will  I  cause  the  horn  of  the 

30.  2  Thus.  .Howl  ye,  Woe  worth  the  day  ! 
30.    3  the  day  (is)  near,even  the  day  of  the  LORD 
30.    3  a  cloudy  day  ;  it  shall  be  the  time  of  the 
30.   9  In  that  day  shall  messengers  go  forth 
30.    9  come  upon  them,  as  in  the  day  of  Egypt 

30.  18  At  Tehaphnehes  also  the  day  shall  be 

31.  15  In  the  day  when  he  went  down  to  the 
32. 10  every  man  for  his  own  life,  iu  the  day  of 
33. 12  deliver  him  in  the  day  of.  .transgression 
33. 12  day  that  he  turneth  from  his  wickedness 
33. 12  for  his  (righteousness)  in  the  day  that  he 
34. 12  in  the  day  that  he  is  among  his  sheep 

34. 12  been  scattered  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day 
36.  33  In  the  day  that  I  shall  have  cleansed  you 
38.  14  In  that  day  when  my  people  of  Israel 

38.  19  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  great  shaking 

39.  8  this  (is)  the  day  whereof  I  have  spoken 
39.  ii  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  (that) 

39. 13  renown,  the  day  that  I  shall  be  glorified 

39.  22  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God  from  that  day 

40.  1  in  the  self  same  day  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
43.  18  in  the  day  when  they  shall  make  it,  to 
43.  22  the  second  day  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid 

43.  27  it  shall  be,  (that)  upon  the  eighth  day 

44.  27  in  the  day  that  he  goeth  into  the  sanctuary 

45.  21  in  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month,  ye 
45.  22  upon  that  day  shall  the  prince  prepare 

45.  25  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month,  shall 

46.  1  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  it  shall  be 
46.  4  offer  unto  the  LORD  in  the  sabbath  day 
46.    6  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon 

46. 12  prepare,  .as  he  did  on  the  sabbath  day 
48.  35  name  of  the  city  from  (that)  day  (shall  be) 
Dau.   6.  10  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a  d. 
6.  T3  but  maketh  his  petition  three  times  a  d. 
9.    7  unto  us  confusion  of  faces  as  at  this  day 
9.  15  hast  gotten  thee  renown,  as  at  this  day 
10.    4  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  first 
10.  12  from  the  first  day  that  thou  didst  set 
Hos.    1.    5  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  day,  that  I 

1.  11  for  great  (shall  be)  the  day  of  Jezreel 

2.  3  set  her  as  in  the  day  that  she  was 

2.  15  as  in  the  day  when  she  came  up  out  of 
2. 16  it  shall  be  at  that  day,  saith  the  Lord 
2.  18  in  that  day  will  I  make  a  covenant  for 
2.  21  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  I  will 

4.  5  Therefore  shalt  thou  fall  iu  the  day,  and 

5.  9  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of 

6.  2  in  the  third  day  he  will  raise  us  up 

7.  5  In  the  day  of  our  king  the  princes  have 
9.    5  in  the  solemn  day,  anil  in  the  day  of  the 

10.  14  spoiled  Beth-arbel  in  the  day  of  battle 
Joel    1. 15  Alas  for  the  day  !  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
2.    1  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  for  (it  is) 
2.    2  A  day  of  darkness,  .a  day  of  clouds  and 
2.  ti  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  great  and  very 

2.  31  before  the  great  and  the  terrible  day  of 

3.  14  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near  in  the  valley 
3.  18  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  (that) 

Amos  1.  14  with  shouting  in  the  day  of  battle,  with 

1. 14  a  tempest  in  the  day  of  the  whirlwind 

2. 16  mighty  shall  lice  away  naked  in  that  day 
3.  14  That  in  the  day  that  I  shall  visit  the 
5.    8  and  maketh  the  day  dark  with  night 
5. 18  Woe  unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  the 
5.  18  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  darkness,  and 

5.  20  (Shall)  not  the  day  of  the  Lord  (be)  dark. 

6.  3  Ye  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day,  and 

8.  3  the  songs,  .shall  be  howlings  in  that  day 
8.   p  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith 


Jon. 

^ 

Mic. 

2. 

3- 

4- 

S- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

Nah. 

1. 

2. 

Hab. 

J- 

Zeph 

.  1 

Hag. 


Zech. 


DAY 


9  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  day 

10  and  the  end  thereof  as  a  bitter  day 

13  In  that  day  shall  the  fair  virgins  and 

11  In  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  tabernacle 
8.  Shall  I  not  iu  that  day,  saith  the  Lord 
11  In  the  day  that  thou  stoodest  on  the 

11  in  the  day  that  the  strsngers  carried  away 

12  shouldest  not  have  lucked  on  the  day 
12  thy  brother  in  the  day  that  he  became 
*3-  J3>  *3  'n  'ne  day  of  their  calamity 

14  that  did  remain  in  the  day  of  distress 

15  the  day  of  the  LORD  (is)  near  upon  all  the 
4  Jonah,  .to  enter  into  the  city  a  day's  jour. 
4  In  that  day  shall  (one)  take  up  a  parable 
6  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  over  them 

6  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  will  I  assem. 

10  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith 
4  the  day  of  thy  watchmen  (and)  thy  visit. 

11  (In)  the  day  that  thy  walls  are  to  be 

11  (in)  that  day  shall  the  decree  be  far 

12  (In)  that  day  (also)  he  shall  come  even  to 

7  Ihe  Lord  (is),  .a  stronghold  in  the  day  of 
3  torches  in  the  day  of  his  preparation 

17  which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  d. 
16  that  I  might  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble 

7  for  the  day  of  the  Lofd  (is)  at  hand 

8  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  day  of  the 
.  9  In  the  same  day  also  will  I  punish  all 
.  10  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith 

14  The  great  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near,  (it  is) 
14  (even)  the  voice  of  the  day  of  the  Lord 
.  15  That  day  (is)  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of 
.  15  a  day  of  wasteness.  a  day  of  darkness 
.  15  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness 
.  16  A  day  of  the  trumpet  and  alarm  against 

18  deliver  them  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's 
2  (before)  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before 

2  before  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  come 

3  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger 
8  until  the  day  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey 

1 1  In  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed  for 
16  In  that  day  it  shall  be  said  to  Jerusalem 

1  in  the  sixth  month,  in  the  first  day  of 
.  15  In  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
.  15  I  pray  you,  consider  from  this  day  and 
,  18  Consider  now  from  this  day  and  upward 
.  18  from  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the 

18  from  the  day  that  the  foundation  of  the 

19  from  this  day  will  I  bless  (you) 
23  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

7  Tpon  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
2. 11  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  day 
3.    9  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in.  .day 

3.  10  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

4.  10  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small 

6.  10  come  thou  the  same  day,  and  go  into  the 

8.  9  in  the  day  (that)  the  foundation  of  the 

9.  16  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day 
11. 11  it  was  broken  in  that  day  :  and  so  the 
12.    3  in  that  day  will  I  make  Jerusalem  a  bur. 
12.    4  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  smite 
12.    6  In  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of 
12.    8  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  defend  the 
12.    8  he  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day 
12.    9  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  day,  (that) 

12.  1 1  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mour. 

13.  i  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain 

13.  2,  4  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day 

14.  1  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  and  thy 
14.    3  as  when  he  fought  in  the  day  of  battle 
14.    4  hisfeefshall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the 
14.   6,  13  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day 

14.    7  shall  be  one  day  which  shall,  .not  day 
14.   8  shall  be  in  that  day,  (that)  living  waters 
14.    9  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord 
14.  20  In  that  day  shall  there  be  upon  the  bells  of 
14.  21  in  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  the 
Mai.    3.    2  who  may  abide  tlurday  of  his  coming ? 

3.  17  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels 

4.  1  the  day  cometh,  that  shall  burn  as  an 

4.    1  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up 
4.    3  iu  the  day  that  I  shall  do  (this),  saith 
4.    5  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day 

3.  Daily,  by  day,  b£V  yovwvi. 

Lev.    8.  35  shall  ye  abide  (at)  the  door,  .day  and  ni. 
Deut28.  66  thou  shalt  fear  day  and  night,  and  shalt 
Josh.  1.    8  thou  shalt  meditate  therein  day  and  ni. 
1  8a.  25.  16  a  wall  unto  us,  both  by  night  and  day 
1  Ki.  8.  59  nigh  unto  the  Lord  our  God  day  and  ni. 

1  Ch.  9.  33  were  employed  in  (that)  work  day  and 

2  Ch.  6.  20  may  be  open  upon  this  house  day  and  ni. 
Neh.   1.    6  which  I  pray  before  theenow,  day  and  ni. 

4.  9  set  a  watch  against  them  day  and  night 
9.  12  thou  leddest  them  in  the  day  by  a  cloudy 
1.    2  in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  nig. 

32.  4  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon 
42.    3  My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  ni. 
55.  10  Day  and  night  they  go  about  it  upon  the 
34.  10  It  shall  not  be  quenched  night  nor  day 
60.  11  they  shall  not  be  shut  day  nor  night 
9.    1  that  I  might  weep  dl  y  and  night  for  the 

14.  17  eyes  run  down  with  tears  night  and  day 

15.  9  her  sun  is  gone  down  while  (it  was)  yet  d. 
16. 13  shall  ye  serve  other  gods  day  and  night 

33.  20  If  ye  can  break  my  covenant  of  the  day 
33.  25  If  my  covenant  (be)  not  with  day  and  ni. 

2.  18  tears  run  down  like  a  river  day  and  night 


Tsa. 


Isa. 
Jer. 


Lam. 


4. Dawn,  "in^  shachar. 

Gen.  32.  24  with  him  until  the  breaking  of  the  day 
32.  26  And  he  said,  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  brca. 


DAY 


231 


DAY 


Josh.  6. 15  rose  early,  about  the  dawning  of  the  clay 
Judgig.  25  when  the  day  began  to  spring,  they  let 
1  8a.  9.  26  came  to  pass,  about  the  spring  of  the  day 
Job     3.   9  neither  let  it  see  the  dawning  of  the  day 

S.Light,  iiN  or. 

Judgi6.    2  In  the  morning,  when  it  is  day.  we  shall 
Job    26. 10  until  the  day  and  night  come  to  an  end 

6.  Evening,  3TJ/  ereb. 

Dan.   8.  14  Unto  two  thousand  and  three  hundred  d. 

7.  Day,  rjfxepa  hemera. 

Matt.  6.  34  Sufficient  unto  the  day  (is)  the  evil 

7.  22  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord 
11.  22  It  shall  be  more  tolerable,  .at  the  day  of 

11.  24  it  shall  De  more  tolerable,  .in  the  day  of 

12.  36  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of 

13.  1  The  same  day  went  Jesus  out  of  the  house 

16.  21  killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third  day 

17.  23  the  third  day  he  shall  be  raised  again 
20.    2  when  he  had  agreed,  .for  a  penny  a  day 
20.    6  saith.  .'Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle? 
20.  12  have  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  d. 
20.  19  crucify  (him) :  and  the  third  day  he  shall 
22.  23  The  same  day  came  to  him  the  Sadducees 
22.  46  neither  durst  any  (man)  from  that  day 
24.  36  But  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no 
24.  38  until  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the 

24.  50  shall  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not 

25.  13  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour 

26.  29  until  that  day  when  I  drink  it  new  with 

27.  64  sepulchre  be  made  sure  until  the  third  d. 
Mark  4.  35  the  same  day  when  the  even  was  come 

5.  5  And  always  night  and  day.  he  was  in  the 

6.  11  It  shall  be  more  tolerable,  .in  the  day  of 
6.  21  when  a  convenient  day  was  come,  that  H. 
9.  31  after  that  he  is  killed,  .rise  the  third  day 

10.  34  and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise  again 

13.  32  But  of  that  day  and  (that)  hour  knoweth 

14.  12  the  first  day  of  unleavened  hread,  when 
14.  25  until  that  day  that  I  drink  it  new  in  the 

Luke  1.  20  uutil  the  day  that  these  things  shall  be 
1.  59  on  the  eighth  day  they  came  to  circum. 

1.  80  was  in  the  deserts  till  the  day  of  his 

2.  37  served  (God)  with  fastings. . night  aud  day 
2.  44  But  they,  .went  a  day's  journey;  and 

4.  16  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath  day 

4.  42  when  it  was  day,  he  departed  and  went 
6.  13  when  it  was  day,  he  called  (unto  him) 
6.  23  Rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  joy 
9. 12  And  when  the  day  began  to  wear  away 
9.  22  and  be  slain,  and  be  raised  the  third  day 
9.  37  it  came  to  pass.that  on  the  next  day  when 

10.  12  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  in  that  day 

12.  46  will  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not 

13.  14  therefore  come,  .not  on  the  sabbath  day 
13.  16  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the  sabbath  day 

13.  31  The  same  [day]  there  came  certain  of  the 

14.  5  will  not.,  pull  him  out  on  the  sabbath  d. 
17.  4  if  he  trespass,  .seven  times  in  a  day,  aud 
17.  4  seven  times  [in  a  day]  turn  again  to  thee 
17.  24  [so  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  be  in  his  d.] 
17.  27  until  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the 
17.  29  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom 
17.  30  thus  shall  it  be  in  the  day  when  the  Son 

17.  31  In  that  day,  he  which  shall  be  upon  the 

18.  7  which  cry  day  and  night  unto  him 

18.  33  and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise  again 

19.  42  even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the 

21.  34  and  (so)  that  day  come  upon  you  unawa. 

22.  7  Then  came  the  day  of  unleavened  bread 

22.  66  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  elders  of  the 
23. 12  the  same  day  Pilate  and  Herod  were 

23.  54  that  day  was  the  preparation,  and  the 

24.  7  he  crucified,  and  the  third  day  rise  again 
24.  13  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  vil. 
24.  21  to  day  is  the  third  day  since  these  things 
24.  29  it  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  far 
24.  46  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day 

.Tohn  1.  39  abode  with  him  that  day :  foritwasabout 
2.    1  the  third  day  there  was  a  marriage  in 

5.  9  and  on  the  same  day  was  the  sabbath 

6.  39  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day 

6.  40,  44,  54  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day 

7.  37  In  the  last  day,  that  great  (day)  of  the 

8.  56  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  seemyd. 

9.  4 1  must  work,  .while  it  is  day :  the  night 
11.  9  Are  there  not  twelve  hours  in  the  day? 
11.   9  If  any  man  walk  in  the  day,  hestumbleth 

11.  24  that  he  shall  rise  again . .  at  the  last  day 
11. 53  Then  from  that  day  forth  they  took  cou. 

12.  7  Let  her  alone :  against  the  day  of  my  bu. 
12.  48  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day 
14.  20  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  in 
16.  23  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing 
16.  26  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name 

19.  31  remain  upon  the  cross  on  the  sabbath  d. 

20.  19  Then  the  same  day  at  evening,  being  the 
Acts    f.    2  Until  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  up 

1.  22  unto  that  same  day  that  he  was  taken  up 

2.  1  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  co. 
2.  15  seeing  it  is  (but)  the  third  hour  of  the  d. 
2.  20  before  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the 
2.  29  and  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  this  d. 
2.  41  the  same  day  there  were  added  (unto 

7.    8  and  circumcised  him  the  eighth  day;  and 
7.  26  the  next  day  he  showed  himself  unto 
9.  24  they  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to 
10.   3  about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day.  an  angel 
10.  40  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and 
12. 18  Now  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  there  was  no 


Acts  12.  21  upon  a  set  day  Herod,  arrayed  in  royal 
13. 14  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath  day 

16.  35  when  it  was  day,  the  magistrates  sent  the 

17.  31  Because  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the 
20.  16  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  Pentecost 
20.  18  Ye  know,  from  the  first  day  that  I  came 

20.  31 1  ceased  not  to  warn,  .night  and  day  with 

21.  7  we  came,  .and  abode  with  them  one  day 
21.  26  the  next  day  purifying  himself  with  them 
23. 12  when  it  was  day,  certain  of  the  Jews 
26.    7  instantly  serving  (God)  day  and  night 

26.  22  I  continue  unto  this  day,  witnessing  both 

27.  29  cast  four  anchors,  .and  wished  for  the  d. 
27.  33  while  the  day  was  coming  on,  Paul  beso. 
27.  33  This,  .is  the  fourteenth  day  that  ye  have 

27.  39  when  it  was  day,  they  knew  not  the  land 

28.  13  and  after  one  day  the  south  wind  blew 
28.  23  when  they  had  appointed  him  a  day 

Rom.  2.    5  against  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation 
2. 16  In  the  day  when  God  shall  judge  the 
8.  36  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long 

10.  21  All  day  long  I  have  stretched  forth  my 

11.  8  they  should  not  hear;  uuto  this  day 

13.  12  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand 

13.  13  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day;  not 

14.  5  One  man  esteemeth  one  day  above  another 
14.  5  another  jsteemeth  every  day  (alike).  Let 
14.    6  He  that  regardeth  the  day,  regardeth  (it) 

14.  6  and  he  that  regardeth  not  [the  day,]  to  the 

1  Co.   i.    8  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 

3. 13  for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it 

5.  5  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day 
10.    8  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand 

15.  4  he  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to 

2  Co.   1. 14  even  as  ye  also  (are)  ours  in  the  day  of 

6.  2  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I  succoured 
6.    2  behold,  now  (is)  the  day  of  salvation 

Eph.  4.  30  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption 
6.  13  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day 

Phil.  1,  5  your  fellowship  .  .from  the  first  day  until 
1.    6  will  perform  (it)  until  the  day  of  Jesus  C. 

1.  10  without  offence  till  the  day  of  Christ 

2.  16  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ 
Col.     1.    6  since  the  day  ye  heard  (of  it),  and  knew 

1.  9  since  the  day  we  heard  (it),  do  not  cease 

1  Th.  2.    9  for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we 

3.  10  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that 
5.   2  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief 
5.    4  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief 
5.    5  Ye  are  all  the  children,  .of  the  day:  we 

5.  8  But  let  us,  who  are  of  the  day,  be  sober 

2  Th.    1. 10  in  all  them  that  believe,  .in  that  day 

2.  2  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at  hand 

3.  8  with  labour  and  travail  night  and  day 

1  Ti.    5.    5  supplications  and  prayers  night  and  day 

2  Ti.    1.3  remembrance  of  thee,  .night  and  day 

1.  12  committed  unto  him  against  that  day 

1.  18  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  d. 

4.  8  which  the  Lord,  .shall  give  me  at  that  d. 
Heb.  3.    8  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wilderness 

4.    4  God  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from  all  his 
4.    7  he  hmiteth  a  certain  day,  saying  in  David 
4.    8  not  afterward  have  spoken  of  another  d. 
8.   9  covenant  that  I  made,  .in  the  day  when 
10.  25  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching 
Jas.     5.    5  have  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day  of 

1  Pe.    2.  i2  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation 

2  Pe.    1. 19  in  a  dark  place,  until  the  day  dawn 

2.  8  vexed  (his)  righteous  soul  from  day  to  d. 
2.    9  to  reserve  the  unjust  unto  the  day  of 

2.  13  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  the  day  time 

3.  7  reserved  unto  fire  against  the  day  of 

3.    8  one  day  (is)  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 
3.    8  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day 
3.  10  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief 
3.  i2  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of 

1  Jo.   4.  17  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 
jude         6  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day 
Rev.    4.    8  they  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying,  Holy 

6.  17  For  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come 

7.  15  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple 

8.  12  the  day  shone  not  for  a  third  part  of  it 

9.  15  were  prepared  for  an  hour,  and  a  day 

12.  10  accused  them  before  our  God  day  aud 
14. 11  and  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,  who 

16.  14  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty 
18.  8  shall  her  plagues  come  in  one  day,  death 
20.  to  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever 
ai.  25  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day :  for  there 

DAY,  by  — 

By  day,  daily,  DDV  yomam. 

Exodi3.  21  went  before  them  by  day  in  a 

13.  21  to  give  them  light;  to  goby  day  and  night 
13.  22  He  took  not  away  the  pillar,  .by  day,  nor 
40.  38  the  cloud.,  (was)  upon  the  tabernacle  by  d. 

Num.  9.  21  whether  (it  was)  by  day  or  by  night  that 
10.  34  cloud  of  the  Lord  (was)  upon  them  by  d. 
Deut.  1.  33  in  fire  by  night,  .and  in  a  cloud  by  day 
Judg.  6.  27  that  he  could  not  do  (it)  by  day.  that  he 

2  Sa.  21.  10  birds  of  the  air  to  rest  ou  them  by  day 
Neh.  9.  19  the  pillar .  .departed  not  from  them  by  d. 
Psa.  91.    5  (nor)  for  the  arrow  (that)  flieth  by  day 

121.    6  The  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day  nor 
136.   8  The  sun  to  rule  by  day :  for  his  mercy 
Isa.     4.   5  upon  her  assemblies,  a  cloud,  .by  day 
28. 19  shall  it  pass  over,  by  day  and  by  night 
60.  19  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  d. 
Jer.  31.  35  which  giveth  the  sun  for  a  light  by  day 
Eze.  12.    3  prepare,  .and  remove  by  day  in  their 
12.    4  shalt  thou  bring  forth  thy  stuff  by  day 
12.    7  I  brought  forth  my  stuff  by  day.  as  stuff 


DAY,  each  — 

Day  day,  Di*  dV  yom  yom. 

Num.  14.  34  each  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear  your 
Eze.    4.   6  have  appointed  thee  each  day  for  a  year 

DAY  by  day  — 

I.Day  day,  cv  dV  yom  yom. 

Gen.  39.  10  as  she  spake  to  Joseph  day  by  day,  that 
Exod2g.  38  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  day  by  day 
N1M128.    3  two  lambs  of  the  first  year,  .day  by  day 

1  Ch.12.  22  day  by  day  there  came  to  David  to  help 

2  Ch.  21.  15  out  by  reason  of  the  sickness  day  by  day 

24.  11  Thus  they  did  day  by  day,  and  gathered 

30.  21  the  priests  praised  the  Lord  day  by  day 

Ezra    6.   9  let  it  be  given  them  day  by  day  without 

Neh.    8.  18  Also  day  by  day.  .he  read  in  the  book  of 

I.Day  and  day,  nfxepa  ko.\  rjfieprt  hem.  kai  hemera. 

2  Co.  4. 16  yet  the  inward  (man)  is  renewed  day  by  d. 
3. According  to  the  day,  tcady  Tifiepav  kathhimeran. 

Luke  1 1.    3  Give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread 

DAY,  a  certain  — 

One  of  the  days,  fiiq,  twv  iifiepav  mia  ton  hemeron. 
Luke  5.  17  it  came  to  pass  ou  a  certain  day,  as  he 
8.  22  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  that  he 

DAY,  before  — 

In  the  night,  ivuv%ov  canuchon. 

Mark  1.  35  rising  up  a  great  while  [before  day,]  he 

DAY,  break  of  — 

Light,  brightness,  dawn,  ai/yfj  auge. 

Acts  20.  1 1  talked  a  long  while,  even  till  break  of  day 

DAY,  the  Lord's  — 

The  day  to  the  Lord,  ?;  KvpLaKij  i]fj.4pahekuriake  h. 
Rev.    1.  10 1  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and 

DAY,  this  — 

l.lToiOj  just  now,  aprt  arli. 

1  Co.     4.  13  off  scouring  of  all  things  unto  tliis  day 
2. To  day,  eryj/xspou  semeron. 

Matt.  6.  11  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread 

11.  23  it  would  have  remained  until  this  day 
27.    8  called,  The  field  of  blood,  unto  this  day  . 
27.  19  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day  in 
28. 15  reported  among  the  Jews  until  this  day 

Marki4.  30  That  this  day,  (even)  in  this  night,  before 
Luke  2.  11  unto  you  is  born  this  day,  in  the  city 
4.  21  This  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in 
19.   9  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house 
22.  34  the  cock  shall  not  crow  this  day,  before 
Acts    4.    9  If  we  this  day  be  examined  of  the  good 
13.  33  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 

19.  40  called  in  question  for  this  day's  uproar 

20.  26  take  you  to  record  this  day,  that  I  (am) 
22.   3  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all  are  this  day 

24.  21 1  am  called  in  question  by  you  this  day 
26.    2  I  shall  answer  for  myself  this  day 

26.  29  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day,  were 

27.  33  This  day  is  the  fourteenth .  .that  ye  have 
Rom.  11.  8  [and  the  rest  were  blinded],  .unto  this  d. 
2  Co.  3. 14  until  this  day  remaineth  the  same  veil 

3.  15  even  unto  this  day,  when  Moses  is  read 
Heb.    1.    5  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 

DAY  was  far  spent,  when  the  — 
Many  hours  having  been,  wpas  ttoAAtj?  yevo/j-evvs- 
Mark  6.  35  when  the  day  was  now  far  spent,  his  disc. 

DAY,  every  — 

I.Day  day,  D'v  d"v  yom  yom. 

Exodi6.    4  and  gather  a  certain  rate  every  day 

29.  36  thou  shalt  offer  every  day  a  bullock  (for) 

2  Ki.  25.  30  a  daily  rate  for  every  day,  all  the  days 

1  Ch.16.  37  continually,  as  every  day's  work  required 

2  Ch.  8.  13  after  a  certain  rate  every  day,  offering 

8.  14  as  the  duty  of  every  day  required 
Ezra    3.    4  custom,  as  the  duty  of  every  day  required 
Neh.  1 1.  23  a  certain  portion,  .due  for  every  day 

12.  47  and  the  porters,  every  day  his  portion 
Jer.   52.  34  every  day  a  portion  until  the  day  of  his 
Eze.  43.  25  shalt  thou  prepare  every  day  a  goat  (for) 

2. According  to  the  day,  kclQ'  nfiepav  hath  hemeran. 
Lukei6.  19  and  fared  sumptuously  every  day 

DAY,  two  — 

Two  days,  D?I3V  yomayim. 

Num.Q.  22  (whether  it  w^ere)  two  days,  or  a  month 
Hos.   6.    2  After  two  days  will  he  revive  us 

DAY  following  — 

Upon  the  morrow,  i-navpiov  epaitrion. 

John  1.  43  The  day  following  Jesus  would  go  forth 
6.  22  The  day  following,  when  the  people 

DAY  (after),  the  nest  — 

Upon  the  morrow,  i-navptov  cpaurion. 

Matt27.  62  the  next  day.  that  followed  the  day  of 
John  1.  29  The  next  day  Johu  seeth  Jesus  coming 
1-  35  tlie  next  day  after.  John  stood,  and  two 
12.  12  On  the  next  day  much  people  that  were 
Acts  14.  20  the  next  day  he  departed  with  Barnabas 

25.  6  the  next  day,  sitting  on  the  judgment  seat 

DAY,  at  mid  — 

At  mid  day,  rjfjLepas  /j-eavs  henieras  meses. 

Acts  26. 13  At  mid  day,  O  king,  I  saw  in  the  way  a 


DAY 


DAY  spring  — 

1.  Baton,  in^  shachar. 

Job  38.  12  caused  the  day  spring  to  know  his  place 

2.  Uprising,  avaroXi)  anatole. 

Luke  1.  78  dayspring  from  on  high  hath  visited  us 

DAY  star  — 

Light  bearer,  <pa)cr<p6po$  phosphoros. 

2  Pe.    1.  19  and  the  day  star  arise  in  your  hearts 

DAY  time  — 

1. Daily,  by  day,  DO'v  yomam. 

N1UU14.  14  by  day  "time  in  a  pillar  of  cloud,  and 
Job     5.  14  They  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day  time 

24.  16  marked  for  themselves  in  the  day  time 
Psa.  22.    2  I  cry  in  the  day  time,  but  thou  hearest 

42.    8  his  loving  kindness  in  the  day  time 

78. 14  In  the  day  time  also  he  led  them  with  a 
Isa.     4.    6  tabernacle  for  a  shadow  in  the  day  time 

8i.   8  upon  the  watchtower  in  the  day  time,  and 

2.  The  days,  ra?  ^4 pas  fas  hemeras. 

Luke2i.  37  in  the  day  time  he  was  teaching  in  the 

DAYS  — 

l.Bays,  D'p;  yamim. 

Gen.    1. 14  for  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  years 

3. 14  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy 
3.  17  shalt  thou  eat  (of)  it  all  the  days  of  thy 
5.    4  days  of  Adam,  .were  eight  hundred  years 
5.    5  all  the  days,  .were  nine  hundred  and 
5.    8  all  the  days  of  Seth  were  nine  hundred 
5.  11  all  the  days  of  Enos  were  nine  hundred 
5.  14  the  days  of  Cainan  were  nine  hundred 
5.  17  the  days  of  Mahalaleel  wei'e  eight  frond. 
5. 20  the  days  of  .Tared  were  nine  hundred 
5.  23  the  days  of  Enoch  were  three  hundred 
5.  27  the  days  of  Methuselah  were  nine  hund. 

5.  31  all  the  days  of  Lamech  were  seven  hund. 

6.  3  his  days  shall  be  an  hundred  and  twenty 
.6.   4  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  days 

7.  4  For  yet  seven  days,  and  I  will  cause  it 
7.    4  to  rain  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and 
7.  10  it  came  to  pass  after  seven  days,  that 
7.  12  the  rain  was  upon  the  earth  forty  days 
7.  17  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth 

7.  24  upon  the  earth  an  hundred  and  fifty  days 

8.  3  the  end  of  the  hundred  and  fifty  days 
8.    6  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  forty  days 

8.  10,  12  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days  ;  and 

9.  29  all  the  days  of  Noah  were  nine  hundred 

10.  25  for  in  his  days  was  the  earth  divided 

11.  32  the  days  of  Terah  were  two  hundred  and 
14.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Amraphel 
17. 12  he  that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circum. 
21.  4  circumcised.  .Isaac  being  eight  days  old 
21.  34  sojourned  in  the  Philistines' land  manyd. 

24.  55  Let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  (a  few)  days 

25.  7  the  days  of  the  years  of  Abraham's  life 

25.  24  her  days  to  be  delivered  were  fulfilled 

26.  1  the  first  famine  that  was  in  the  days  of 
26. 15,  18  had  digged  in  the  daysof  Abraham  his 

27.  41  The  days  of  mourning  for  my  father  are 
27.  44  And  tarry  with  him  a  few  days,  until  thy 
29.  20  they  seemed  unto  him  (but)  a  few  days 

29.  21  Give  (me)  my  wife,  for  my  days  are  fulfil. 

30.  14  Reuben  went  in  the  days  of  wheat  harv. 

30.  36  he  set  three  days'  journey  betwixt  him. 

31.  23  and  pursued  after  him  seveu  days'  journ. 
35.  28  the  daystof  Isaac  were  an  hundred  and 
35.  29  Isaac . .  died . .  (being)  old  and  full  of  days 
37.  34  Jacob,  .mourned  for  his  son  many  days 
40. 12  The  three  branches  (are)  three  days 

40. 13,  19  within  three  days  shall  Pharaoh  lift  up 
40.  18  answered,  .three  baskets  (are)  three  days 
42.  17  put  them  altogether  into  ward  three  da. 
'47.    9  The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage 
47.    9  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years 
47.    9  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the 
47.    9  fathers  iu  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage 

49.  1  which  shall  befall  you  in  the  last  days 

50.  3  And  forty  days  were  fulfilled  for  him 
50.    3  so  are  fulfilled  the  days  of  those  which 
50.    3  mourned  for  him  threescore  and  ten  da. 
,50.   4  when  the  days  of  his  mourning  were  past 
50.  10  made  a  mourning  for  his  father  seven  d. 

Exod.  2.  ii  it  came  topass  in  those  days,  wheu  Moses 
3.  18  let  us  go.  .three  days'  journey  into  the  w. 
5.    3  three  days'  journey  into  the  desert 

7.  25  seven  days  were  fulfilled,  after  that  the 

8.  27'We  will  go  three  days'  journey  into  the 
10. 22  darkness  in  all  the  land,  .three  days 

10.  23  neither  rose  any.  .for  three  days 

12.  15  Seven  days  shall  ye  eat  unleavened  bread 

12.  19  Seven  days  shall  there  be  no  leaven 

13.  6  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened 
13.    7  Unleavened  bread  shall  he  eaten  seven 

15.  22  they  went  three  days  in  the  wilderness 

16.  26  Six  days  ye  shall  gather  it ;  but  ou  the 
16.  29  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  days 
20.    9  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  all 

20  11  (in)  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and 
20. 12  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  laud 

22.  30  seven  days  it  shall  be  with  his  dam 

23.  12  Six  days  thou  shalt  do  thy  work,  and  ou 
23  15  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread  seven  days 
23. 26  the  numher  of  thy  days  I  will  fulfil 

24.  16  Sinai,  and  the  cloud  covered  it  six  days 
?4  18  Moses  was  in  the  mount  forty  days  and 
29.  30  that  son  .shall  put  them  ou  seven  days 
29.  35  seven  days  shalt  thou  consecrate  them 


232 


Exod  29.  37  Seven  days  thou  shalt  make  an  atonem. 
31.  15  Six  days  may  work  be  done  ;  but  in  the 
31. 17  (in)  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and 
34.  18  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened 
34.  21  Six  days  thou  shalt  work ;  but  on  the 

34.  28  he  was  there  with  the  Lord  forty  days 

35.  2  Six  days  shall  work  be  done,  but  on  the 
Lev.    8.  33  And  ye  shall  not  go  out.  .(in)  seven  days 

8.  33  until  the  days  of  your  consecration  be 

8.  35  shall  ye  abide  (at)  the  door,  .seven  days 
12.    2  then  she  shall  he  unclean  seven  days 
12.   2  according  to  the  days  of  the  separation 
12.    4  of  her  purifying  three  and  thirty  days 
12.   4  until  the  days  of  her  purifying  be  fulfilled 
12.    5  of  her  purifying  threescore  and  six  days 

12.  6  when  the  days  of  her  purifying  are  fulfi. 

13.  4,  31,  33  priests  shall  shut.  .(him). .  seven  d. 
13.  21,  26  priest  shall  shut  him  up  seven  days 
13.  46  All  the  days  wherein  the  plague(shall  be) 
13.  50  shut  up  (it  that  hath)  the  plague  seven  d. 

13.  54  and  he  shall  shut  it  up  seven  days  more 

14.  8  tarry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  seven  days 

14.  38  priest  shall,  .shut  up  the  house  seven  d. 

15.  13  he  shall  number  to  himself  seven  days 
15.  19  she  shall  be  put  apart  seven  days 

15.  24  he  shall  be  unclean  seven  days 
15.  25  if  a  woman  have  an  issue,  .many  days 
15.  25  the  days  of  the  issue  of  her  uncleanness 
15.  25  shall  be  as  the  days  of  her  separation 
15.  26  whereon  she  lieth  all  the  days  of  her  iss. 

15.  28  then  she  shall  number  to  herself  seven  d. 

22.  27  then  it  shall  be  seven  days  uuder  the 

23.  3  Six  days  shall  work  be  done  :  but  the 
23.   6  seven  days  ye  must  eat  unleavened  bread 
23.    8  offer  an  offering  made  by  fire,  .seven  da. 
23. 16  unto  the  morrow  after,  .number  fifty  days 
23.  34  the  feast  of  tabernacles  (for)  seven  days 
23. 36  Seven  days  ye  shall  offer  an  offering 

23.  39  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven  days 
23.  40  rejoice  before  the  Lord  yourGod  seven  d. 
23.  41  keep  it  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven  days 

23.  42  Ye  shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  days 
Num.  6.    4  All  the  days  of  his  separation  shall  he 

6.    5  the  clays  of  the  vow  offhia  separation 
6.    5  until  the  days  be  fulfilled,  in  the  which 
6.    6  All  the  days  that  he  separateth  (himself) 
6.    8  All  the  days  of  his  separation  he  (is)  holy 
6. 12  consecrate,  .the  days  of  his  separation 
6. 12  the  days  that  were  before  shall  be  lost 
6.  13  the  days  of  his  separation  are  fulfilled 

9.  19  tarried  long  upon  the  tabernacle  many  d. 
9.  20  cloud  was  a  few  days  upon  the  tabernacle 

10.  33  departed  from  the  mount,  .three  days 

10.  33  before  them  in  the  three  days'  journey 
11. 19  Ye  shall  not  eat  one  day,  nor  two  clays 

11.  19  five  days,  neither  ten  days,  nor  twenty  d. 

12.  14  should  she  not  be  ashamed  seven  days? 

12.  14  be  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven  days 
12. 15  was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven  days 

13.  25  searching  of  the  land  after  forty  days 

14.  34  the  number  of  the  days,  .(even)  forty  d. 
19.  11  He  that  toucheth.  .be  uucleau  seven  days 
19.  14  all  that  (is)  in.  .be  unclean  seven  days 

19.  16  whosoever  toucheth . .  be  unclean  seven  d. 

20.  29  they  mourned  for  Aaron  thirty  days 

24.  14  shall  do  to  thy  people  in  the  latter  days 
28.  17  seven  clays  shall  unleavened  hread  be 
28.  24  offer  daily,  throughout  the  seven  days 
29. 12  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven  days 
31. 19  do  ye  abide  without  the  camp  seven  days 
33.   8  went  three  days'  journey  in  the  wilder. 

Deut.  1.    2  (There  are)  eleven  days'  (journey)  from 
1.  46  ye  abode  in  Kadesh  many  days 

1.  46  according  unto  the  days  that  ye  abode 

2.  1  and  we  compassed  mount  Seir  many  days 
4.    9  from  thy  heart  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

4.  10  all  the  days  that  they  shall  live  upon 
4.  26  ye  shall  not  prolong  (your)  days  upon  it 
4.  30  (even)  in  the  latter  days,  if  thou  turn  to 
4.  32  ask  now  of  the  days  that  are  past,  which 

4.  40  that  thou  mayest  prolong  (thy)  days  upon 

5.  13  Six  days  thou  shalt  labour,  and  do  all  thy 
5. 16  that  thy  days  may  be  prolonged,  and 

5.  33  (that)  ye  may  prolong  (your)  days  in  the 

6.  2  the  days  of  thy  life,  and  that  thy  days 

9.   9  I  abode  in  the  mount  forty  days  and  forty 
9.  11  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  forty  days 
9. 18  I  fell  down  before  the  Lord,  .forty  days 
9.  25  I  fell  down  before  the  Lord  forty  days 
10. 10  I  stayed  in  the  mount,  .forty  days  and 
11.    9  that  ye  may  prolong  (your)  days  in  the 
11.  21  your  days  may  be  multiplied,  and  the  d. 

11.  21  as  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth 

12.  1  all  the  days  that  ye  live  upon  the  earth 

16.  3  seven  days  shalVthou  eat  unleavened 

16.    3  mayest  remember,  .all  the  days  of  thy  life 
16.    4  with  thee  in  all  thy  coasts  seven  days 
16.    8  Six  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread 
16  13  observe  the  feast  of  tabernacles  seven  d. 

16.  15  Seven  days  shalt  thou  keep  a  solemn  feast 

17.  9  unto  the  judge  that  shall  be  in  those  days 
17. 19  he  shall  read  therein  all  the  days  of  his 
17.  20  to  the  end  that  he  may  prolong  (his)  days 
19.  17  the  judges  which  shall  lie  in  those  days 
22.    7  and  (that)  thou  mayest  prolong  (thy)  days 
22.  19  he  may  not  put  her  away  all  his  days 

22.  29  he  may  not  put  her  away  all  his  days 

23.  6  shalt  not  seek  their  peace,  .all  thy  days 

25.  15  that  thy  days  may  be  lengthened  in  the 

26.  3  the  priest  that  shall  be  in  those  days 
30.  18  ye  shall  not  prolong  (your)  days  upon 
30.  20  thy  life,  and  the  length  of  thy  days 


DAYS 


Deut  31.  14  thy  clays  approach  that  thou  must  die 

31.  29  evil  mil  befall  you  in  the  latter  days 

32.  7  Remember  the  clays  of  old,  consider  the 

32.  47  through  this,  .ye  shall  prolong  (your)  d. 

33.  25  and  as  thy  days,  (so  shall)  thy  strength 

34.  8  the  children  of  Israel  wept,  .thirty  days 
34.    8  the  days  of  weeping  (and)  mourning  for 

Josh.  1.    5  stand  before  thee  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

1.  11  within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over  this 

2.  16  hide  yourselves  there  three  days,  until 

2.  22  they  went,  .and  abode  there  three  days 

3.  2  it  came  to  pass  after  three  days,  that  the 

4.  14  they  feared  Moses,  all  the  days  of  his  life 
6.   3  Thus  shalt  thou  do  six  days 

6.  14  compassed  the  city,  .so  they  did  six  days 
9.  16  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  three  days 

20.   6  high  priest  that  shall  be  in  those  days 
22.    3  not  left  your  brethren  these  many  days 

24.  31  all  the  days  of  Joshua,  and  all  the  days 
Judg.  2.    7  all  the  days  of  Joshua,  and  all  the  days 

2.  18  delivered  them . .  all  the  days  of  the  judge 

5.  6  In  the  days  of  Shamgar  theson  of  Anath 
5.    6  in  the  days  of  Jael,  the  highways  were 

8.  28  country  was  in  quietness,  .in  the  days  of 
11.  40  to  lament  the  daughter,  .four  days  in 
14.  12  if  ye.  .declare  it  me  within  the  seven  d. 

14. 14  they  could  not  in  three  days  expound 

14.  17  she  wept  before  him  the  seven  days 

15.  20  judged  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  Philist. 

17.  6  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  in  Israel 

18.  1  In  those  days  (there  was)no  king  in  Israel 

18.  1  in  those  days  the  tribe  of  the  Dauites 

19.  1  in  those  days,  when  (there  was)  no  king 

19.  4  he  abode  with  him  three  days:  so  they 

20.  27  ark  of  the  covenant,  .there  in  those  days 

20.  28  Phinehas.  .stood  before  it  in  those  days 

21.  25  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  in  Israel 
Ruth  1.    1  in  the  days  when  the  judges  ruled 

1  Sa.    1.  11  will  give  him  unto  the  Lord  all  the  days 

2.  31  the  days  come,  that  I  will  cut  off  thine 

3.  1  the  word . .  was  precious  in  those  days 

7.  13  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days  of 

7.  15  judged  Israel  all  the  days  of  his  life 

10.  8  seven  clays  shalt  thou  tarry,  till  I  come 

11.  3  Give  us  seven  days'  respite,  that  we  may 

13.  8  he  tarried  seven  days,  according  to  the 

13. 11  thou  earnest  notwithin  the  days  appointed 

14,  52  there  was  sore  war.  .all  the  days  of  Saul 
17.  12  went  among  men  (for)  anold  man  in  the  d. 

17.  16  Philistine,  .presented  himself  forty  days 

18.  26  and  the  days  were  not  expired 

25.  28  hath  not  been  found  in  thee  (all)  thy  days 
25.  38  it  came  to  pass  about  ten  days  (after) 

28.  1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that 

29.  3  which  hath  been  with  me  these  days,  or 

30. 12  no  bread,  nor  drunk  (any)  water,  three  d. 

31. 13  under  a  tree,  and  fasted  seven  days 

2  Sa.    7. 12  when  thy  days  be  fulfilled,  and  thou  shalt 

16.  23  which  he  counselled  in  those  clays,  (was) 

20.  4  Assembleme  the  men  of.  .within  three  a. 

21.  1  there  was  a  famine  in  the  days  of  David 
21.  9  were  put  to  death  in  the  clays  of  harvest 
24.  8  at  the  end  of  nine  months  and  twenty  d. 
24. 13  there  bethree  days' pestilence  in  thy  land 

1  Ki.    2.    1  the  days  of  David  drew  nigh  that  he 

2.  11  the  days  that  David  reigned  over  Israel 

2.  38  And  Shimei  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  many  d. 

3.  2  was  no  house  built,  .until  those  days 

3.  13  not  be  any.  .like  unto  thee  all  thy  days 
3. 14  then  I  will  lengthen  thy  days 

4.  21  and  served  Solomon  all  the  days  of  his 
4.  25  dwelt  safely,  .all  the  days  of  Solomon 

8.  40  That  they  may  fear  thee  all  the  days  that 
8.  65  seven  days  and  seven  days,  .fourteen  days 

10. 21  it  was  nothing  accounted  of  in  the  days  of 
11.  12  in  thy  days  I  will  not  do  it  for  David 
11.  25  an  adversary  to  Israel  all  the  days 

11.  34  make  him  prince  all  the  days  of  his  life 

12.  5  Depart  yet  (for)  three  days,  then  come 
14.  20  the  days  which  Jeroboam  reigned  (were) 

14.  30  was  war  betw.  Rehoboam.  .all  (their)  d. 

15.  5  turned  not  aside,  .all  the  days  of  his  life 
15.    6  there  was  war.  .all  the  days  of  his  life 
15.  14  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  all  his  days 

15.  16,  32  there  was  war.  .all  their  days 

16. 15  did  Zimri  reign  seven  days  in  Tirzah 

16.  34  In  his  days  did  Hielthe  Bethelite  build 

17.  15  and  he,  and  her  house,  did  eat  (many)  days 

18.  1  it  came  to  pass,  (after)  many  days,  that 

19.  8  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  forty  days 

20.  29  one  over  against  the  other  seven  days 

21.  29  the  evil  in  hisMays.  .in  his  son's  days 

22.  46  remained  in  the  days  of  his  father  Asa 

2  Ki.   2.  17  they  sought  three  days,  but  found  him 

3.    9  fetched  a  compass  of  seven  days'  journey 

8.  20  In  his  days  Eclom  revolted  from  under 

10.  32  In  those  clays  the  Lord  began  to  cut  Israel 

12.  2  did  (that  which  was)  right,  .all  his  days 

13.  3  into  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad . .  all  (their)  d. 
13.  22  oppressed  Israel  all  the  days  of  Jehoahaz 
15.  18  be  departed  not  all  his  days  from  the  sins 
15.  29  In  the  days  of  Pekah  king  of  Israel  came 
15.  37  In  those  days  the  Lord  began  to  send 
18.  4  unto  those  days  the  children  of  Israel  did 
20.  1  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto 
20.    6  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years 

20.  17  the  days  come,  that  all  that  (is)  in  thine 
20. 19  peace  and  truth  be  in  my  days? 

23.  22  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged 
23.  22  nor  in  all  the  daysof  the  kings  of  Israel 

23.  29  Iuhis  days  Pharaoh-nechoh  king  of  Egypt 

24.  1  In  his  days  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B. 


DAYS 


233 


DAYS 


z  Ki.  25. 

t  Ch."i.' 
4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
7- 
7- 
9- 


tCh 


Ezra 


Neh. 


Esth 


Job 


14. 
15. 
*7- 
17- 

21. 
24. 
2g. 

2g. 
29. 
3°- 
30. 

32. 


29  before  him  all  the  days  of  his  life' 

30  a  daily  rate . .  all  the  days  of  his  life 

19  because  in  his  days  the  earth  was  divided 
4t  came  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 

10  in  the  days  of  Saul  they  made  war  with 
17  by  genealogies  in  the  days  of  Jotham 
17  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel 

2  whose  number  (was)  in  the  days  of  David 
22  Ephraini  their  father  mourned  many  days 

25  (were)  to  come  after  seven  days  from 
12  buried  their  bones.,  and  fasted  seven  days 
39  there  they  were  with  David  three  days 

3  enquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul 

11  when  thy  days  be  expired  that  thou  must 

12  or  else  three  days  the  sword  of  the  Lord 
9  quietness  unto  Israel  in  his  days 

1  when  David  was  old  and  full  of  days  he 
15  our  days  on  the  earth  (are)  as  a  shadow 
28  he  died  in  a  good  old  age,  full  of  days 

8  Solomon  kept  the  feast  seven  days,  and 

9  seven  days,  and  the  feast  seven  days 

20  (not) . .  accounted  of  iu  the  days  of  Solomon 
5  Come  again  unto  me  after  three  days 

20  strength  again  in  the  days  of  Abijah 

,  1  In  his  days  the  land  was  quiet  ten  years 
17  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  days 
,  25  they  were  three  days  in  gathering  of  the 
,   8  Iu  bis  days  the  Edomites  revolted  from 

2  Joash  did.  .right,  .all  the  days  of  Jehoiada 

14  continually  all  the  days  of  Jehoiada 

15  Jehoiada  waxed  old,  and  was  full  of  days 
5  he  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah 

17  they  sanctified  the  house,  .in  eight  days 

21  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven  days 

22  did  eat  throughout  the  feast  seven  days 

23  took  counsel  to  keep  other  seven  days 

,  23  they  kept  (other)  seven  days  with  glad. 

24  In  those  days  Hezekiah  was  sick  to  the 

26  came  not  upon  them  iu  the  days  of  Heze. 
33  all  his  days  they  departed  not  from 

17  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven  days 

18  from  the  days  of  Samuel  the  prophet 

9  he  reigned  three  months  and  ten  days  in 
.    2  we  do  sacrifice  unto  him  since  the  days 

5  all  the  days  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  even 
7  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes  wrote  Bishlam 

22  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven  days 
15  and  there  abode  we  in  tents  three  days 
32  to  Jerusalem,  and  abode  there  three  days 

.    7  Since  the  days  of  our  fathers  (have)  we 
,   8  'whosoever  would  not  come  within  three  d. 
,   9  together  unto  Jerusalem  within  three  d. 
,    4  mourned  (certain)  days,  and  fasted,  and 
,  11  to  Jerusalem,  and  was  there  three  days 
,  18  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  sorts  of 
,  15  wall  was  finished,  .in  fifty  and  two  days 
.  17  in  those  days  the  nobles  of  Judah  sent 
,  17  since  the  days  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  Nun 
,  iS  And  they  kept  the  feast  seven  days 
.    7  These  (were)  the  chief,  .in  the  days  of  J. 
.  12  And  in  the  days  of  Joiakim  were  priests 
.  22  The  Levites,  in  the  days  of  Eliashib,  Jo. 

23  until  the  days  of  Johanan  the  son  of 

26  These  (were)  in  the  days  of  Joiakim  the 
26  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah  the  governor 
46  in  the  days  of  David  and  Asaph  of  old 
,  47  the  days  of  Zerubbabel,  and  in  the  days 

6  after  certain  days  obtained  I  leave  of 

15  In  those  days  saw  I  in  Judah  (some) 

23  In  those  days  also  saw  I  Jews  (that)  had 

1  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  days  of  Ahasuerus 

2  in  those  days,  when  the  king  Ahasuerus 

4  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty,  many  d. 

4  (even)  an  hundred  and  four  score  days 

5  when  these  days  were  expired . .  seven  days 

12  so  were  the  days  of  their  purifications 

21  In  those  days,  while  Mordecai  sat  in  the 
,  ji'come  in  unto  the  king  these  thirty  days 

16  neither  eat  nor  drink  three  days,  night 

22  As  the  days  wherein  the  Jews  rested  from 
22  they  should  make  them  days  of  feasting 

26  they  called  these  days  Purim,  after  the 

27  that  they  would  keep  these  two  days 

28  (that)  these  days  (should  be)  remembered 
28  and  (that)  these  days  of  Purim  should  not 

31  To  confirm  these  days  of  Purim  in  their 

5  when  the  days  of  (their)  feasting  were 

13  sat.  .with  him  upon  the  ground  seven  days 

6  let  it  not  be  joined  unto  the  days  of  the 
1  (are  not)  bis  days  also  like  the  days  of 

6  My  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's 
16  let  me  alone  ;  for  my  days  (are)  vanity 

9  because  our  days  upon  earth  (are)  a  sha. 

25  Now  my  days  are  swifter  than  a  post 
5  (Are)  thy  days  as  the  days  of  man? 

5  (are)  thy  years  as  man's  days 
20  (Are)  not  my  days  few?  cease  (then,  and) 

12  and  in  length  of  days  understanding 
1  born  of  a  woman  (is)  of  few  days 

5  Seeing  his  days  (are)  determined,  the 

14  All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I 
20  man  travaileth  with  pain  all  (his)  days 

1  My  breath  is  corrupt,  my  days  are  extinct 
11  My  days  are  past,  my  purposes  are  broken 

13  They  spend  their  days  in  wealth,  and  in 

1  do  they  that  know  him  not  see  his  days? 

2  the  days  (when)  God  preserved  me 

4  As  I  was  in  the  days  of  my  youth,  when 
18  anil  I  shall  multiply  (my)  days  as  the  sand 
16  the  days  of  affliction  have  taken  hold 
27  the  days  of  affliction  prevented  me 

7  Days  should  speak,  and  multitude  of 

30 


Job    33. 

36. 

38. 

3S. 

42. 
Fsa.  21. 

23- 

27. 
34- 

37- 
37- 
39- 
39- 
44- 
49. 
55- 
72. 
77- 
78. 
89. 
8q. 
90. 
go. 
go. 
go. 
go. 
94. 

102. 

102. 

102. 

102. 

103. 

iog. 

119. 

128. 

143- 
_  144- 
Prov.  3. 

3- 
9- 
10. 

15- 

28. 

3i- 

Eccl.   2. 


Jer. 


23. 

23- 
23. 

23- 
=5- 

26. 

3°- 

30. 


25  he  shall  return  to  the  days  of  his  youth 

11  they  shall  spend  their  days  in  prosperity 

12  commanded  the  morning  since  thy  days 

21  (because)  the  number  of  thy  days  (is) 

17  So  Job  died,  (being)  old,  and  full  of  days 
4  (even)  length  of  days  for  ever  and  ever  ■ 

6  shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life 

4  that,  .in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days 
12  (and)  loveth  (many)  days,  that  he  may 
iS  The  Lord  knoweth  the  days  of  the  upri. 

19  in  the  days  of  famine  they  shall  be  satis. 

4  mine  end,  and  the  measure  of  my  days 

5  thou  hast  made  my  days  (as)  an  handbr  : 

1  (what)  work  thou  didst  in  their  days,  in" 
5  Wherefore  should  I  fear  in  the  days  of 

23  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days 

7  In  his  days  shall  the  righteous  flourish 
5  I  have  considered  the  days  of  old,  the 

33  their  days  did  he  consume  in  vanity,  and 

29  and  his  throne  as  the  days  of  heaven 

45  The  days  of  his  youth  hast  thou  shortened 

9  all  our  days  are  passed  away  in  thy  wrath  | 

10  The  days  of  our  years  (are)  three  score 

12  teach  (us)  to  number  our  days,  that  we 

14  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all  our  days 

15  Make  us  glad  according  to  the  days 

13  give  him  rest  from  the  days  of  adversity 

3  my  days  are  consumed  like  smoke,  and 

11  My  days  (are)  like  a  shadow  that  declin. 

23  He  weakened,  .he  shortened  my  days 

24  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  d. 

15  (As  for)  man,  his  days  (are)  as  grass;  as  a 

8  Let  bis  days  be  few  ;  (and)  let  another 
84  How  many  (are)  the  days  of  thy  servant? 

5  see  the  good  of  Jerusalem  all  the  days 

5  I  remember  the  days  of  old  ;  I  meditate 

4  days  (are)  as  a  shadow  that  passeth  away 

2  For  length  of  days,  and  long  life,  and 

16  Length  of  days  (is)  in  her  right  hand;  (and) 

11  by  me  thy  days  shall  be  multiplied,  and 
27  The  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  days 

15  All  the  days  of  the  afflicted  (are)  evil 

16  hateth  covetousness  shall  prolong  (his)  d. 

12  will  do  him  good,  .all  the  days  of  her  life 

3  which  tbey  should  do.  .all  the  days  of 

16  in  the  days  to  come  shall  all  be  forgotten 

23  all  his  days  (are)  sorrows,  and  his  travail 

17  All  his  days  also  he  eateth  in  darkness 

18  to  enjoy  the  good . .  all  the  days  of  his  life 

20  not  much  remember  the  days  of  his  life 
3  so  that  the  days  of  his  years  be  many 

12  all  the  days  of  his  vain  life  which  he 

10  the  former  days  were  better  than  these? 
15  All  (things)  have  I  seen  in  the  days  of  my 

13  neither  shall  he  prolong  (his)  days 

15  shall  abide  with  him .  .the  days  of  his  life 

9  whom  thou  lovest  all  the  days  of  the  life 
9  which  he  hath  given  thee,  .all  the  days 

1  for  thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  days 

8  yet  let  him  remember  the  days  of  dark. 

9  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  the  days  of 
1  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days 
1  while  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the 

1  concerning  Judah.  .in  the  days  of  Uzziah 

2  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days 

1  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  days  of  Ahaz  the 

17  Lord  shall  bring,  .days  that  have  not 

22  and  her  days  shall  not  be  prolonged 

7  (city),  whose  antiquity  (is)  of  ancient  da.! 

15  according  to  the  days  of  one  king 

22  and  after  many  days  shall  they  be  visited 

26  sevenfold,  as  the  light  of  seven  days 

10  Many  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled 

1  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto 

5  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years 
10  I  said  in  the  cutting  off  of  my  days,  I 
20  sing  my  songs,  .all  the  days  of  our  life 

6  the  days  come,  that  all  that  (is)  in  thine 

8  there  shall  be  peace  and  truth  in  my  days 

9  awake  !  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the 

10  see  (his)  seed,  he  shall  prolong  (his)  days 
20  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended 

9  and  carried  them  all  the  days  of  old 

11  he  remembered  the  days  of  old,  Moses 
20  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days 
20  an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  days 
22  as  the  days  of  a  tree  (are)  the  days  of  my 

2  word  of  the  Lord  came  in  the  days  of  J. 

3  It  came  also  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim 
32  my  people  have  forgotten  me  days  with. 

6  said  also  unto  me  in  the  days  of  Josiah 

16  in  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  they  shall 

18  In  those  days  the  house  of  Judah  shall 
18  in  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  not 
11  the  aged  with  (him  that  is)  full  of  days 
32  behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

25  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 

6  it  came  to  pass  after  many  days,  that  the 
9  and  in  your  days,  the  voice  of  mirth,  and 

14  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 

11  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst  of  bis  days 
6  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  this 
iS  that  my  days  should  be  consumed  with 

30  a  man  (that)  shall  not  prosper  in  his  days 

5  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 

6  In  his  days  Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Is. 

7  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  they 
20  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it 

34  the  days  of  your  slaughter  and  of  your 
18  prophesied  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  king 

3  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 

24  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it 


Jer.  31. 
3*- 
3i- 
3i- 
3*- 
32. 

33- 
33- 
33 
35- 
35 
35- 
35- 
36. 
37' 
42 
46. 
48. 
48. 
49, 
49. 
5°- 
51 
5i- 
52. 
52- 


Eze. 


Dan. 


Joel 


Jon. 


Mic. 


27  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

29  In  those  days  they  shall  say  no  more 

31  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

33  After  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will 

3S  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the 

14  that  they  may  continue  many  days 

14  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 

15  In  those  days,  and  at  that  time,  will  I 

16  In  those  days  shall  Judah  be  saved,  and 

1  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah 
7  but  all  your  days  ye  shall  dwell  in  tents 

7  that  ye  may  live  many  days  in  the  land 

8  charged  us,  to  drink  no  wine  all  our  days 

2  from  the  days  of  Josiah,  even  unto  this  d. 

16  Jeremiah  had  remained  there  many  days 
7  it  came  to  pass  after  ten  days,  that  the 

26  shall  be  inhabited,  as  in  the  days  of  old 
12  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 
47  the  captivity  of  Moab  in  the  latter  days 

2  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 
39  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  latter  days 

4,  20  In  those  days.and  in  that  time,  saith 
47  the  days  come,  that  I  will  do  judgment 
52  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will 

33  eat  bread  before  him  all  the  days  of  his 

34  a  continual  diet,  .all  the  days  of  his  life 

7  Jerusalem  remembered  in  the  days  of  her 

7  things  that  she  bad  in  the  days  of  old 

17  that  he.  .commanded  in  the  days  of  eld 
iS  our  end  is  near,  our  days  are  fulfilled 

21  Turn  thou  us.  .renew  our  days  as  of  old 

15  remained  there,  .astonished,  .seven  days 

16  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  seven  days 

4  (according)  to  the  number  of  days  that 

5  the  days,  three  hundred  and  ninety  days 

6  bear  the  iniquity,  .of  Judah  forty  days 

8  till  thou  hast  ended  the  days  of  thy  tiege 

9  (according)  to  the  number  of  the  days  that 
9  three  hundred  and  ninety  days  shalt  thou 
2  when  the  days  of  the  siege  are  fulfilled 

22  The  days  are  prolonged,  and  every  visiun 

23  The  days  are  at  band,  and  the  effect  of 
25  in  your  days,  O  rebellious  house,  will  I 

27  vision,  .he  seeth  (is)  fur  many  days  (t»'  c.) 
22,  43  hast  not  remembered  the  days  of  thy 
60  covenant  with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy 

4  thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  draw  near 
14  in  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee? 

19  to  remembrance  the  days  of  her  youth 

8  After  many  days  thou  shalt  be  visited 

16  it  shall  be  in  the  latter  days,  and  I  will 

17  which  prophesied  in  those  days  (many) 

25  Seven  days  shalt  thou  prepare  every  day 

26  Seven  days  shall  they  purge  the  altar 

27  when  these  days  are  expired,  it  shall  be 
26  they  shall  reckon  unto  him  seven  days 

21  have  the  passover,  a  feast  of  seven  days 
23  seven  days  of  the  feast  he  shall  prepare 
23  rams  without  blemish  daily  the  seven  days 

25  the  like  in  the  feast  of  the  seven  days 

1  gate,  .shall  be  shut  the  six  working  days 
12  Prove  thy  servants,  I  beseech  thee,  ten  d. 

14  he  consented .  .and  proved  them  ten  days 

15  at  the  end  of  ten  days  their  countenances 

18  at  the  end  of  the  days  that  the  king  had 

28  what  shall  be  in  the  latter  days 

44  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God 
34  at  the  end  of  the  days  I  Nebuchadnezzar 
n  in  the  days  of  thy  father,  light  and  under. 

7  petition  of  any  god  or  man  for  thirty  days 

12  of  any  god  or  man  within  thirty  days 

g  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  whose  garmen. 

13  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 

22  Until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and  judg. 

26  the  vision ;  for  it  (shall  be)  for  many  days 

27  Daniel  fainted,  and  was  sick  (certain)  days 

2  In  those  days  I  Daniel  was  mourning  three 

13  prince,  .withstood  me  one  and  twenty  d. 

14  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  days 

14  for  yet  the  vision  (is)  for  (many)  days 

20  but  within  few  days  he  shall  be  destroyed 
33  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword . .  (many)  days 

11  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days 

12  three  hundred  and  five  and  thirty  days 

13  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days 

1  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz 

1  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash 
13  I  will  visit  upon  her  the  days  of  Baalim 

15  sing  there,  as  in  the  days  of  her  youth 

3  Thou  shalt  abide  for  me  many  days ;  thou 

4  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many  days 

5  shall  fear  the  Lord,  .in  the  latter  days 

7  The  days  of  visitation  are  come,  the  days 
g  corrupted  (themselves),  as  in  the  days  of 
g  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Gibeah 

9  as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn  feasts 

2  been  in  your  days,  or  even  in  the  days  of 

29  in  those  days  wall  I  pour  out  my  Spirit 
1  in  those  days,  and  iu  that  time,  when  I 
1  concerning  Israel  in  the  days  of  Uzziah 

1  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash 

2  the  days  shall  come  upon  you,  that  he  will 
11  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I 
11  I  will  build  it  as  in  the  days  of  old 

13  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the 
17  was  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  three  days 

3  exceeding  great  city  of  three  days'  jour 

4  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  over. 
1  in  the  days  of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  (and)  Hez. 

1  in  the  last  days  it  shall  come  to  pass 

14  let  them  feed  (in)  Bashan.  .as  in  the  days 

15  According  to  the  days  of  thy  coming  out 


DAYS 


234 


DEAD 


Mic.    7.  20  thou  hast  sworn,  .from  the  days  of  old 
Hab.    1.    5  (I)  will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  (which) 
Zeph.  1.    1  in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  sou  of  Anion 
Zech.  8.    6  the  remnant  of  this  people  in  these  days 
8.    9  ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words 
8.  10  before  these  days  there  was  no  hire  for 
8.  11  now  I  (will)  not  (be),  .as  in  the  former  d. 
8.  15  have  I  thought  in  these  days  to  do  well 

8.  23  In  those  days  (it  shall  come  to  pass),  that 

14.  5  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah 
Mai.    3.    4  as  in  the  days  of  old,  and  as  in  former 

3.    7  Even  from  the  days  uf  your  fathers  ye  are 

%Days,  y/xtpai  hemerdi. 

Matt.  2.'    1  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  king,  behold 

3.  1  In  those  days  came  John  the  Baptist 

4.  2  when  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty 

9.  15  the  days  will  come,  when  the  bridegroom 

11.  12  from  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist  until 

12.  40  as  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights 

12.  40  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and 

15.  32  continue  with  me  now  three  days,  and 
17.    1  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James 

23.  30  If  we  had  beeu  in  the  days  of  our  fathers 
24. 19  woe . .  to  them  that  give  suck,  iu  those  d. 

24.  22  except  those  days  should  be  shortened 
24.  22  but  for  the  elect's  sake  those  days  shall 
24.  29  after  the  tribulation  of  those  days  shall 
24.  37  But  as  the  days  of  Noe  (were),  so  shall 
24.  38  For  as  in  the  days  that  were  before  the 
26.    2  know  that  after  two  days  is  (the  feast  of) 

26.  61  said,  I  am  able,  .to  build  it  in  three  days 

27.  40  Thou  that . .  buildest  (it)  iu  three  days 
27.  63  said.  .After  three  days  I  will  rise  again 

Mark  1.    9  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  Jesus 

1.  13  he  was  there  in  the  wilderness  forty  days 

2.  1  he  entered  into  Capernaum  after  (some)  d. 
2.  20  the  days  will  come,  when  the  bridegroom 
2.  20  and  then  shall  they  fast  in  those  days 

8.    1  In  those  days  the  multitude  being  very 
8.    2  they  have  now  been  with  me  three  days 

8.  31  be  killed,  and  after  three  days  rise  again 

9.  2  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  (with  him)  P. 

1 3.  1 7  woe . .  to  them  that  give  suck,  in  those  d. ! 
13.  19  For  (in)  those  days  shall  be  affliction,  such 
13.  20  the  Lord  had  shortened  those  days,  no 
13.  20  for  the  elect's  sake,  .shortened  the  days 

13.  24  in  those  days,  after  that  tribulation,  the 

14.  1  After  two  days  was  (the  feast  of)  the  pas. 

14.  58  and  within  three  days  I  will  build  another 

15.  29  Ah  !  thou  that,  .buildest  (it)  in  three  da. 
Luke  1.    5  There  was,  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  king 

1.  23  as  soon  as  the  days  of  his  ministration 
1.  24  after  those  days  his  wife  Elisabeth  cone. 
1.  25  hath  the  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the  days 
1,  39  Mary  arose  in  those  days,  and  went  into 

1.  75  In  holiness  and  righteousness,  .all  the  d. 

2.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  there 
2.    6  the  days  were  accomplished  that  she 

2.  2i  when  eight  days  were  accomplished  for 
2.  22  And  when  the  days  of  her  purification 
2.  43  when  they  had  fulfilled  the  days,  as  they 
2.  46  after  three  days  they  found  him  in  the 
4.    2  Being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil 
4.    2  in  those  days  he  did  eat  nothing  :  and 

4.  25  many  widows  were  in  Israel  in  the  days 

.  5.  3s  the  days  will  come,  when  the  bridegroom 

5.  35  and  then  shall  they  fast  in  those  days 

6.  12  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  he 
9.  28  about  an  eight  days  after  these  sayings 
9.  36  told  no  man  in  those  days  any  of  those 

13.  14  There  are  six  days  in  which  men  ought  to 
15. 13  not  many  days  after,  the  younger  son 
17.  22  The  days  will  come,  when  ye  shall  desire 
17.  22  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
17.  26  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noe,  so  shall  it 
17.  26  be  also  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
17.  28  Likewise  also  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot 

19.  43  For  the  days  shall  come  upon  thee,  that 

20.  1  on  one  of  those  days,  as  he  taught  the 

21.  6  the  days  will  come,  in  the  which  there 
21.  22  For  these  be  the  days  of  vengeance,  that 
21.  23  woe.  .to  them  that  give  suck,  in  those  d.! 

23.  29  For,  behold,  the  days  are  coming,  in  the 

24.  18  which  are  come  to  pass  there  in  these  d.? 
John  2.  12  and  they  continued  there  not  many  days 

2.  19  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I 
2.  20  and  wilt  thou  rear  it  up  in  three  days? 
4.  40  besought  him.. audbe  abode  there  twod. 

4.  43  Now  after  two  days  he  departed  thence 
11.    6  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same  place 

11.  17  he  had  (lain)  in  the  grave'fourdays  already 

12.  1  Jesus,  six  days  before  the  passover,  came 
20.  26  after  eight  days,  again  his  disciples  were 

Acts    1.    3  being  seen  of  them  forty  days,  and  speak. 

1.  5  yeshallbe  baptized .  .notmanydayshence 

2.  17  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days 

2.  18  I  will  pour  out  in  those  days  of  my  Spirit 

3.  24  have  likewise  foretold  of  these  days 

5.  36  For  before  these  days  rose  up  Theudaa 

5.  37  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee  in  the  days  of 

6.  1  in  those  days,  when  the  number  of  the 

7  41  they  made  a  calf  In  those  days,  and  offer. 
7-  45  brought  inwith  Jesus,  .unto  the  days  of  D. 
9.  9  he  was  three  days  without  sight,  and 
9.  19  Then  was  Saul  certain  days  with  the  dis. 
9.  23  after  that  many  days  were  fulfilled,  the 
9.  37  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  she 
9.  43  he  tarried  many  days  in  Joppa  with  one 
10.  30  Four  daysa;jo  I  wasfastinsuntil  this  hour 

10.  48  Then  prayed  they  him  to  tarry  certain  d 

11.  27  in  these  days  came  prophets  from  Jeru 


Jas. 
1  Pe. 


2Pe. 
Rev. 


Acts  12.   3  Then  were  the  days  of  unleavened  bread 
13.  31  he  was  seen  many  days  of  them  which 
13.  41  for  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  a  work 

15.  36  some  days  after,  Paul  said  unto  Barnabas 

16.  12  we  were  in  that  city  abiding  certain  days 
16.  18  And  this  did  she  many  days.  But  Paul 
20.    6  sailed  away  from  l'hilippi  after  the  days 

20.  6  in  five  days ;  where  we  abode  seven  days 

21.  4  rindingdisciples.we  tarried  there  seven  d. 
21.    5  when  we  had  accomplished  those  days 
21.  10  as  we  tarried  (there)  many  days,  there 
21.  15  after  those  days  we  took  up  our  carriages 
21.  36  tosignify  the  accomplishment  of  the  days 
21.  27  when  the  seven  days  were  almost  ended 
21.  38  before  these  days  madest  an  uproar,  and 
24.    1  after  five  days  Ananias  the  high  priest 
24.  1 1  there  are  yet  but  twelve  days  since  I  went 

24.  24  after  certain  days,  when  Felix  came  with 

25.  1  after  three  days  he  ascended  from  Cesarea 
25.  6  tarried  among  them  more  than  ten  days 
25.  13  after  certain  days  king  Agrippa  and 

25.  14  when  they  had  been  there  many  days,  F. 
27.    7  when  we  had  sailed  slowly  many  days,  and 

27.  20  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days 

28.  7  received  us,  and  lodged  us  three  days 
28.  12  at  Syracuse,  we  tarried  (there)  three  days 
28.  14  desired  to  tarry  with  them  seven  days  : 
28.  17  after  three  days  Paul  called  the  chief  of 

Gal.     1.  18  I  went  up.  .andabude  with  him  fifteen  d. 

4.  10  Ye  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times 
Eph.  5.  16  Redeeming  the  time,  becausethe  daysare 
2  Ti.  3.  1  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come 
Heb.    1.    2  Hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us 

5.  7  Who  iu  the  days  uf  his  flesh,  when  he  had 

7.  3  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end 

8.  8  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord 

8.  10  covenant  that  I  will  make,  .after  those  d. 
10.  16  covenant  that  I  will  make . .  after  those  d. 

10.  32  call  to  remembrance  the  former  days,  in 

11.  30  after  they  were  compassed  about  sevenfd. 
;2.  10  For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened 
5.  3  heaped  treasure  together  for  the  last  da. 
3.  10  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days 
3.  20  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark 
3.  3  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers 
2. 10  and  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  days 

2.  13  even  in  those  days  wherein  Autipas  (was) 

9.  6  in  those  days  shall  men  seek  death,  and 

10.  7  But  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seven. 

11.  3  two  hundred  (and)  three  score  days 
11.    6  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their 

11.  9  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days 
ii.  11  after  three  days  and  an  half  the  Spirit  of 

12.  6  her.  .two  hundred  (and)  three  score  days 

DAYS,  now  a  — 
To-day,  D'rn  hayyom. 

1  Sa.  25. 10  There  be  many  servants  now  a  days  that 
DAYS,  these  — 
Yesterday,  SiD^i  temol. 

1  Sa.  21.    5  (been)kept  from  us  about  these  three  days 
DAYS,  four  — 
The  fourth  day,  rerapraios  tetartaios. 

Johnn.  39  stinketh  :  for  he  hath  been  (dead)  four  d. 
DAYS  of,  in  the  — 
Upon,  at  the  time  of,  £irt  {gen.)  epi. 

Mark  2.  26  in  the  days  of  Abiathar  the  high  priest 

Acts  11.  28  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Claudius  Ces. 
[See  also  After,  eighth,  feast,  first,  holy,  night,  noon, 
sabbath,  third,  to  day.] 

DAYSMAN  — 

To  reason,  reprove,  decide,  n?;  yakacJi,  5. 

Job    9.  33  Neither  is  there  any  daysman  betwixt  us 

DEACON  — 

Ministrant,  Stdicovos  diakonos. 

Phil.    1.    1  the  saints,  .with  the  bishops  and  deacons 
1  Ti.     3.    8  Likewise  (must)  the  deacons  (be)  grave 

3.  12  Let  the  deacons  be  the  husbands  of  one 

DEACON,  to  use  the  office  of  a  — 

To  act  as  a  ministrant,  StcLKovtu  diakoneo. 

1  Ti     3.  10  then  let  them  use  the  office  of  a  deacon 
3. 13  they  that  have  used  the  office  of  a  deacon 

DEAD  — 

l.To  die,  ruo  muth. 

Gen.  23.    3  Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  dead 
23.    4  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight 
23.    6  in  the  choice  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy  d. 

13.  6  but  that  thou  mayest  bury  thy  dead 
23.    8  that  I  should  bury  my  dead  out  of  my 
23.  11  the  field  give  I  thee,  .bury  thy  dead 
23.  13  take  (it)  of  me,  and  I  will  bury  my  dead 
23.  15  me  and  thee  ?  bury  therefore  thy  dead 

Exod.12.  33  for  they  said,  We  (be)  all  dead  (men) 

14.  30  Israel  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the 
21.  34  give  money,  .and  the  dead  (beast)  shall 
21.  35  and  the  dead  (ox)  also  they  shall  divide 
2i.  36  pay  ox  for  ox  ;  and  the  dead  shall  be  his 

Lev.  21.  11  Neither  shall  he  go  iu  to  any  dead  body 

Num.6.    6  All  the  days,  he  shall  come  at  no  dead 

12.  12  Let  her  not  be  as  one  dead,  of  whom  the 

16.  48  he  stood  between  the'dead  and  the  living 

Deut  14.    1  baldness  between  your  eyes  for  the  dead 

25-    5  wife  of  the  dead  shall  not  marry 

25.  6  in  the  name  of  his  brother  (which  is)  de. 

26.  14  nor  given  (ought)  thereof  for  the  dead 
Judg.  3.  25  their  lord  (was)  fallen  down  dead  on  the 


TCi. 


aKi. 


Psa. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Judg.  4.  22  Sisera  lay  dead,  and  the  nail  (was)  in  his 

16.  30  the  dead,  .were  more  than  (they)  which 

Ruth  1.    8  as  ye  have  dealt  with  the  dead,  and  with 

2.  20  hath  not  left  off  his  kindness,  .to  the  de. 
4.  5  the  wife  of  the  dead,  .the  name  of  the  d. 
4. 10  to  raise  up  the  name  of  the  dead  upon 

4.  10  that  the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off 

1  Sa.  24.  14  after  whom  dost  thou  pursue?  after  a  d. 

2  Sa.  9,  8  look  upon  such  a  dead  dog  as  I  (am)? 
14.  2  had  a  long  time  mourned  for  the  dead 
16.    9  "Why  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord 

3.  20  and  laid  her  dead  child  in  my  bosom 
3.  22  the  living  (is)  my  son,  and  the  dead  (is) 
3.  22  the  dead  (is)  thy  son,  and  the  living  (is) 
3.  23  This  (is)  my  son.  .and  thy  son  (is)  the  d. 

3.  23  thy  son  (is)  the  dead,  and  my  son  (is)  the 

4.  32  the  child  was  dead,  (and)  laid  upon  his 
19.  35  in  the  moruing,  behold,  they  (were)  all  d. 
23.  30  his  servants  carried  him  in  a  chariot  de 
".    5  Free  among  the  dead,  like  the  slain  that 
88.  10  Wilt  thou  show  wonders  to  the  dead? 

106.  28  and  ate  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead 
115. 17  The  dead  praise  not  the  Loud,  neither 
143.    3  as  those  that  have  been  long  dead 
Eccl.   4.    2  I  praised  the  dead  which  are  already  de. 
9.    3  and  after  that  (they  go)  to  the  dead 
9.    4  for  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion 
9.    5  but  the  dead  know  not  anything,  neither 

8.  19  unto  their  God  ?  for  the  living  to  the  de.? 
22.  2  not  slain  with  the  sword,  nor  dead  in 
26.  14  (They  are)  dead,  they  shall  not  live;  (they 
26.  19  Thy  dead  (men)  shall  live,  (together  with) 
37.  36  in  the  morning,  behold,  they  .(were)  all  d. 
sq.  10  (we  are)  in  desolate  places  as  dead  (men) 

16.  7  in  mourning,  to  comfort  them  for  the  d. 
22.  10  Weepyenotfor  the  dead.neitherbemoan 

Lam.  3.    6  in  dark  places,  as  (they  that  be)  dead  of 
Eze.  24.  17  make  no  mourning  for  the  deaa,  bind 
44.  25  they  shall  come  at  no  dead  person  to 

2.  Death,  nv?  maveth. 

2  Sa.  iq.  28  all  (of)  my  father's  house  were  but  dead 
Eccl.  10.    1  Dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apo. 

3. Soul,  c'DJ  nephesh. 

Lev.  19.  28  cuttings  in  your  flesh  for  the  dead,  nor 

21.  1  There  shall  none  be  denied  for  the  dead 

22.  4  any  thing  (that  is)  unclean  (by)  the  dead 
Num.  5.    2  and  whosoever  is  defiled  by  the  dead 

6.  11  for  him,  for  that  he  sinned  by  the  dead 

4.  The  shades  {of  the  dead),  D\x?i  rephaim. 
Job  26.    5  Dead  (things)  are  formed  from  under 
Psa.  S8.  10  shall  the  dead  arise  (and)  praise  thee  ? 
Prov.  2.  18  unto  death,  and  her  paths  unto  the  dead 
g.  18  But  he  knoweth  not  that  the  dead  (are) 

21.  16  remain  in  the  congregation  of  the  dead 
Isa.    14.    9  it  stirreth  up  the  dead  for  thee,  (even) 

26. 19  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead 

5. To  destroy,  lip  shadad. 

Judg.  5.  27  where  he  bowed,  there  he  fell  down  de. 
6.  Dead,  vetcpos  nekros. 

Matt.  8.  22  Follow  me  ;  and  let  the  dead  bury  their  d. 

10.  8  cleanse  the  lepers,  [raise  the  dead,]  cast 

11.  5  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  raised  up 

14,    2  he  is  risen  from  the  dead  ;  and  therefore 

17.  9  Son  of  man  be  risen  again  from  the  dead 

22.  31  as  touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
22.  32  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 

27.  64  unto  the  people,  He  is  risen  [from  the  d.l 

28.  7  tell,  .that  he  is  risen  from  the  dead  ;  and 
Mark  6.  14  John  the  Baptist  was  risen  from  the  dead 

6.  16  It  is  John.. he  is  risen  from  the  dead 

9.  9  the  Son  of  man  were  risen  from  the  dead 
9.  10  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should 

12.  25  For  when  they  shall  rise  from  the  dead 
12.  26  And  as  touching  the  dead,  that  they  rise 
12.  27  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  the  G. 

Luke  7.  22  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  raised,  to  the 
9.  7  it  was  said . .  J  ohn  was  risen  from  the  dead 
9.  60  Jesus  said.  .Let the  dead  bury  their  dead 
16.  30  if  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead 

16.  31  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  thed. 
20.  35  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead 

20.  37  the  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  showed 
20.  38  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living 
24.   5  Why -seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead? 
24.  46  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day 
John   2.  22  When  therefore  he  was  risen  from  the  d. 

5.  21  For  as  the  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead 

5.  25  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the 
12.  1  Lazarus,  .whom  he  raised  from  the  dead 
12.    9  Lazarus,  .whom  he  had  raised  from  the  d. 

12.  17  called  Lazarus,  .and  raised  him  from  thed. 

20.  9  that  he  must  rise  again  from  the  dead 

21.  14  after  that  he  was  risen  from  the  dead 
Acts    3.  15  whom  God  hath  raised  from  the  dead 

4.  2  preached,  .the  resurrection  from  the  dead 
.4.  10  whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,(even)by 
10.  41  drink  with  him  after  be  rose  from  the  d. 
10.  42  was  ordained,  .the  Judge  of  quick  and  d. 

13.  30  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead 

13.  34  as.  .that  he  raised  him  up  from  the  dead 
17.    3  suffered,  and  risen  again  from  the  dead 

17.  31  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 
17.  32  they  heard  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 

23.  6  of  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead 

24.  15  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  [of  the  dead] 
24.  21  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
26.   8  incredible,  .that  God  should  raise  the  d.? 
26.  23  the  first  that  should  rise  from  the  dead 

Rom.  1.    4  declared.,  by  the  resurrectioa  from  the  d. 


DEAD 


235 


DEAL 


ii. 


14 
i  C0.15. 

15' 
15 


IS 

15 

J5 

15 

15 

15- 

v.  Vn 

T 

(ial 

T 

Eph. 

I. 

Phil. 

Col. 

I. 

7.. 

iTh 

I 

2Ti. 

4- 

4- 

Heb. 

6. 

Rev. 


17  (even)  God,  who  quickeneth  the  dead 
24  that  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  d. 

4  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead 
9  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth 
13  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead 

4  to  him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead,  that 
11  liim  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead 

11  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead 

7  to  bring  up  Christ  agaiu  from  the  dead 
9  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

15  receiving  (of  them  be),  but  life  from  the  d.? 

9  that  he  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead 

12  be  preached  that  he  rose  from  the  dead 

12  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  ? 

13  if  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead 

15  raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that  the  dead  rise 

16  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ 

20  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead 

21  (came)  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
29  for  the  dead,  if  [the  dead]  rise  not  at  all  ? 
29  why  are  they  then  baptised  for  the  dead? 
32  what  advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead  rise 
35  some,  .say,  How  are  the  dead  raised  up? 
42  So  also  (is)  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
52  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible 

9  but  in  God  which  raiseth  the  dead 
1  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead 
20  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and 

14  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give 

11  attain  unto  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 

18  who  is.  .the  first  born  from  the  dead 

12  God,  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

10  his  Son.  .whom  he  raised  from  the  dead 
16  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first 

8  Jesus  Christ,  .was  raised  from  the  dead 

1  who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 

2  of  hands,  and  of  resurrection  of  the  dead 

19  able  to  raise  (him)  up,  even  from  the  dead 
35  "Women  received  their  dead  raised  to  life 

20  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord 

3  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  .from  the  dead 

21  in  God,  that  raised  him  up  from  the  dead 

5  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 

5  (and)  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead,  and 
18  wrath  is  come,  and  the  time  of  the  dead 

14. 13  Blessed  (are)  the  dead  which  die  in  the  L. 
20.    5  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again 
20.  12  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand 
20.  12  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things 

10.  13  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it 
20.  13  death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  which 

DEAD  — 

Dead,  venpSs  nekros,  {adj.) 

Luke  15.  24  this  my  sou  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again 
.  32  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again 
.  10  the  young  men  came  in,  and  found  herd. 

9  and  fell  down,  .and  was  taken  up  dead 

6  swollen,  or  fallen  down  dead  suddenly 
,  11  reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead 

8  For  without  the  law  sin  (was)  dead 
.  10  And  if  Christ  (be)  in  you,  the  body  (is)  d. 
1  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins 
z.   5  Even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath 
■  13  yoii,  being  dead  in  your  sins,  and  the 
6.    1  not  laying  again,  .from  dead  works,  and 
9.  14  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to 
2.  17  Even  so  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  [d.] 
2.  20  wilt  thou  know . .  faith  without  works  is  d. 
*.  26  For  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead 
2.  26  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also 
Rev.    1.  17  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead 
1. 18  I  (am)  he  that  liveth,  and  was  dead  ;  and 

2.  8  the  First  and  the  Last,  which  was  dead 

3.  1  that  thou  hast  a  name,  .and  art  dead 

DEAD,  be  — 
Death,  m_o  nutveth. 

Lev.  ii.  31  doth  touch  them,  when  they  be  dead 

11.  32  (any)  of  them,  when  they  are  dead 
Judg.  2.  19  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  judge  was  dead 
2  Ki.  3.    5  it  came  to  pass,  when  Ahab  was  dead 

1  Ch.  2.  24  after  that  Hezron  was  dead  in  Caleb-eph. 
Esth.  2.    7  when  her  father  and  mother  were  dead 

DEAD,  to  be  — 

l.To  expire,  yia  gava. 

Nuni2o.  29  congregation  saw  that  Aaron  was  dead 

2.To  die,  wnmuth. 

Gen.  42.  38  for  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  is  left 
44.  20  and  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  alone  is 
50.  15  brethren  saw  that  their  father  was  dead 
Exod.  4.  19  all  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy 

9.    7  there  was  not  one  of  the  cattle . .  dead 
Deut.  2.  16  the  men  of  war  were  consumed  and  dead 
Josh.  1.    2  Moses  my  servant  is  dead  ;  now  therefore 
Judg.  4.    1  children . .  did  evil . .  when  Ehud  was  dead 

8.  33  it  came  to  pass,  as  "soon  as  Gideon  was  d. 

9.  55  men  of  Israel  saw  that  Abimelech  was  d. 
20.   5  concubine  have  they  forced,  that  she  is  d. 

4.  17  Hophni  and  Phinehas  are  dead,  and  the 

4.  19  herfather  in  law  and  her  husband  were  d. 

17.  51  Philistines  saw  their  champion  was  dead 

25.  39  when  David  heard  that  Nabal  was  dead 

28.    3  Samuel  wasdead.andalllsraelhadlamen. 

5  his  armour  bearer  saw  that  Saul  was  dead 

7  and  that  Saul  and  his  sons  were  dead,  they 

4  and  many  of  the  people  also  are.  .dead 

4  Saul  and  Jonathan  Ins  son  are  dead  also 

5  How  knowest  thou  that  Saul,  .be  dead  ? 
7  ye  valiant :  for  your  master  Saul  is  dead 


Acts 


Rom. 


28. 
6. 
7- 


Eph. 

Col. 
Heb. 

Jas. 


iSa. 


>Sa. 


3i- 
31- 


2  Sa.    4.    1  Saul's  son  heard  that  Abner  was  dead  in 

4.  10  one  told  me,  saying,  Behold,  Saul  is  dead 
11.  21  Thy  servant  Uriah  the  Hittite  is  dead  also 

11.  24  and  (some)  of  the  king's  servants  be  dead 
ii.  24  thy  servant  Uriah  the  Hittite  is  dead 

it.  26  heard  that  Uriah  her  husband  was  dead 
12. 18  feared  to  tell  him  that  the  child  was  dead 
12. 18  if  we  tell  him  that  the  child  is  dead  ? 

12.  19  David  perceived  that  the  child  was  dead 
12.  19  Is  the  child  dead  ?  And  they  said,  He  is  d. 
12.  21  when  the  child  was  dead,  thou  didst  rise 

12.  23  now  he  is  dead,  wherefore  should  I  fast  ? 

13.  32  Amnion  only  is  dead  :  for  by  the  appoint. 
13.  33  king's  sons  are  dead.  .Amnion  only  is  d. 

13.  39  concerning  Amnion,  seeing  he  was  dead 

14.  5  a  widow  woman,  and  mine  husband  is  d. 

18.  20  no  tidings,  because  the  king's  son  is  dead 

19.  10  Absalom,  whom  we  anointed  over  us,  is  d. 
t  Ki.  3.  21  to  give  my  child  suck,  behold,  it  was  dead 

11.  21  Joab  the  captaiu  of  the  host  was  dead 
13.  31  "When  I  am  dead,  then  bury  me  in  the 
21.  14  saying,  Naboth  is  stoned,  and  is  dead 
21.  15  heard  that  Naboth  was  stoned,  and  was  d. 
2  Ki.  4.  1  Thy  servant  my  husband  is  dead  ;  and 
11.    1  when  Athaliah.  .saw  that  her  son  was  d. 

1  Ch.  1.  44  when  Bela  was  dead,  Jobab.  .reigned  in 

1. 45  when  Jobab  was  dead,  Husham.  .reigned 
1.  46  when  Husham  wasdead,  Hadad.  .reigned 
1.  47  when  Hadad  was  dead,  Samlah . .  reigned 
1.  48  when  Samlah  was  dead,  Shaul.  .reigned 
x.  49  when  Shaul  was  dead,  Baal-hanan .  .reign. 

1.  50  when  Baal-hanan  wasdead,  Hadadreigned 
2. 19  when  Azubah  was  dead,  Caleb  took  unto 

10.    5  his  armour  bearer  saw  that  Saul  was  dead 

10.  7  and  that  Saul  and  his  sons  were  dead 

2  Ch.22.  10  when  Athaliah.  .saw  that  her  son  was  d. 
Job  1.  19  fell  upon  the  young  men,  and  they  are  d. 
Eccl.  4.    2  which  are  already  dead,  more  than  the 

Z.To  be  come  off  from,  airoyivopLcu.  apoginomai. 

1  Pe.  2.  24  that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live 

4.  To  die  away,  a-xoQwhatati  apothneska. 

Matt.  9.  24  for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 
Mark  5.  35  Thy  daughter  is  dead  :  why  troublest 

5.  39  the  damsel  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 
9.  26  insomuch  that  many  said,  He  is  dead 

15.  44  asked,  .whether  he  had  been  any  while  d. 
Luke  8.  52  Weep  not ;  she  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 

8.  53  they  laughed. .  knowing  that  she  was  dead 
John  6.  49  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna . .  and  are  dead 

6.  58  as  your  fathers  did  eat  manna,  and  are  d. 
8.  52  Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets 

8.  53  which  is  dead  ?  and  the  prophets  are  dead 

11.  14  said  Jesus  unto  them.  .Lazarus  is  dead 
11.  25  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live 

Acts    7.   4  when  his  father  was  dead,  he  removed 
Rom.  5.  15  if  through  the  offence  of  one,  many  be  d. 
6.    2  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live 
6.    7  For  he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin 

6.  8  Now  if  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we  believe 

7.  2  but  if  the  husband  be  dead,  she  is  loosed 
7.   3  but  if  her  husband  be  dead,  she  is  free 
7.    6  [that  being  dead]  wherein  we  were  held 

2  Co.  5.  14  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead 
Gal.     2.  19  For  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the 

2.  21  by  the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain 
Col.     2.  20  Wherefore,  if  ye  be  dead  with  Christ 

3.  3  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Ch. 
Heb.  11.    4  and  by  it  he,  being  dead,  yet  speaketh 
Jude       12  without  fruit,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by 

5.  To  die,  QvyaKuQ  thnesko. 

Matt.  2.  20  they  are  dead  which  sought  the  young 
Marki5.  44  Pilate  marvelled  if  he  were  already  dead 
Luke  8.  49  Thy  daughter  is  dead ;  trouble  not  v.  12. 
Johnn.  39  Martha,  the  sister  of  him  that  was  dead 
11. 41  [(from  the  place)  where  the  dead  was] 

11.  44  And  he  that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound 

12.  1  where  Lazarus  was  [which  had  been  dead] 
19.  33  saw  that  he  was  dead  already,  they  brake 

Acts  14.  19  drew  (hirn)  out.,  supposing  he  had  been  d. 

25. 19  and  of  one  Jesus,  which  was  dead,  whom 

1  Ti.    5.   6  she  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while 

6.  To  put  to  sleep,  notfidw  koimao. 

1  Co.  7.  39  if  her  husband  be  dead,  she  is  at  liberty 
7-  To  put  to  death,  veKpoco  nekroo. 

Rom.  4. 19  he  considered  not  his  own  body  now  dead 
Heb.  11.  12  even  of  one,  and  him  as  good  as  dead 

S.To  end  {life),  T6\ei)Tow  teleuiao. 

Matt.  2. 19  But  when  Herod  was  dead,  behold,  an 
9.  18  saying,  My  daughter  is  even  now  dead 

Acts   2.  29  that  he  is  both  dead  and  buried,  and 
DEAD  with,  to  be  — 
To  die  off  with,  (TvvairoQvi)aKO>  sunapolhnesko. 

2  Ti.    2. 11  For  ii  we  be  dead  with  (him),  we  shall 

DEAD,  after  men  are  — 

Over  the  dead,  iir\  vzKpols  epi  nekrm's. 

Heb.   9.  17  a  testament  (is)  of  force  after  men  are  d. 
DEAD,  to  become  — 
To  put  to  death,  Oavardtt)  lhanatoo. 

Rom.  7.    4  ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the 
DEAD  body  or  carcase  — 

1.  Carcase,  corpse,  n;i^  geviyyah. 

Psa.no.    6  fill  (the  places)  with  the  dead  bodies ;  he 

2.  To  die,  mn  mvth. 

Num.19. 11  that  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any  man 


Nuniig.  13  Whosoever  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any 

19.  16  or  a  dead  body,  or  a  bone  of  a  man,  or  a 
2  Ki.    8.    5  how  he  had  restored  a  dead  body  to  life 

3.  Car case,  ~\tepeger. 

2  Ch.  20.  24  they  (were)  dead  bodies  fallen  to  the  earth 

20.  25  they  found,  .riches  with  the  dead  bodies 
Jer.  31.  40  And  the  whole  valley  of  the  dead  bodies 

33.  5  (it  is)  to  fill  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of 
41.    9  Ishmael  had  cast  all  the  dead  bodies  of  , 

Amos  8.    3  many  dead  bodies  in  every  place ;  they 
4. Fallen  thing,  .1754  nebelah. 

Deut  14.    8  ye  shall  not.  .touch  their  dead  carcase 
Psa.  79.    2  The  dead  bodies  of  thy  servants  have  they 
Isa.  26.  19  (together  with)  my  dead  body  shall  they 
Jer.  26.  23  cast  his  dead  body  into  the  graves  of  the 

34.  20  their  dead  bodies  shall  be  for  meat  unto 
36.  30  his  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  the 

5.  Soul,  vpi  nephesh. 

Hum  .9!    6  who  were  denied  by  the  dead  body  of  a 
9.    7  We  (are)  defiled  by  the  dead  body  of  a 
9.  10  shall  be  unclean  by  reason  of  a  dead  body 
Q.A  fallen  thing,  irrco/xa  ptdina. 

Rev.  11.    8  their  dead  bodies  (shall  lie)  in  the  street 
11.    9  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days 
ti.    9  shall  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be 

DEAD  (man)  — 

l.To  die,  mn  mnth. 

Gen.  20.    3  Behold,  thou  (art  but)  a  dead  man,  for 
Psa.  31.  12  I  am  forgotten  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind 

2.  To  die,  6vfj(TKa}  thnesko. 

Luke  7.  12  there  was  a  dead  man  carried  out,  the 
S.Dead,  vtKp6s  nekros. 

Matt 23.  27  but  are  within  full  of  dead(men's)  bones 
28.    4  keepers  did  shake, aud  became  as  dead  (m.) 

Rev.  16.    3  it  became  as  the  blood  of  a  dead  (man) 

DEAD,  half  — 

Half  dead,  nfiidauns  hemithanes. 

Luke  10.  30  and  departed,  leaving  (him)  half  dead 
DEAD  of  itself  — 
Fallen  thing,  carcase,  dead  body,  ^j2i  nebelah. 

Eze.  44.  31  any  thing  that  is  dead  of  itself,  or  torn 
DEAD,  he  that  is  — 
Bead,  vetcpo's  nekros. 

Luke  7.  15  he  that  was  dead  sat  up,  and  began  to 

1  Pe.    4.    6  preached  also  to  them  that  are  dead 

DEAD,  one  — 
l.To  die,  mo  muth. 

Exodi2.  30  not  a  house  where  (there  was)  not  one  d. 

Numig.  18  or  one  slain,  or  one  dead,  or  a  grave 

2. Dead,  vetcp6s  nekros. 

Mark  9.  26  out  of  him :  and  he  was  as  one  dead 

DEADLY  — 
l.Soul,  ti'EJ  nephesh. 

Psa.  17!   9  (from)  my  deadly  enemies,  (who)  compass 
2.Death,  niD  maveth. 

1  Sa.    5.  i  1  there  was  a  deadly  destruction  throughout 

3. Death  bearing,  Bavarr\(popos  thanatephoros. 

Jas.     3.    8  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison 
4:, Dedfh,  ddvaros  thanaios. 

Rev.  13.    3  and  his  deadly  wound  was  healed  :  and 
13. 12  first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was  heal. 

DEADLY  thing  — 

Belonging  to  death,  davdai^os  tlmnasimos. 

Mark  1 6. 18  [if  they  drinkany  deadly  tiling,  it  shall] 

DEADNESS  — 

A  deadening,  putting  to  death,  vitcpooais  nekrosis. 
Rom.  4.    ;S  neither  yet  the  deadness  of  Sarah's  wo. 

DEAF  — 

I. Deaf,  silent,  £nn  cheresh. 

Exod.  4.  11  or  who  maketh  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  the 
Lev.  19.  14  Thou  shalt  not  curse  the  deaf,  nor  put  a 
Psa.  28.  13  But  I,  as  a  deaf  (man),  heard  not 

58.    4  like  the  deaf  adder(that)  stoppeth  her  ear 
Isa.  29.  18  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words 
35.    5  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped 

42.  18  Hear,  ye  deaf ;  and  look,  ye  blind,  that 
42. 19  or  deaf,  as  my  messenger  (that)  I  sent? 

43.  8  have  eyes,  and  the  deaf  that  have  ears 

2. Blunted,  dull,  dumb,  ttaxpos  kophos. 

Mattn.    5  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf 
Mark  7.  32  they  bring  unto  him  one  that  was  deaf 
7.  37  he  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the 
9.  25  (Thou)  dumb  and  deaf  spirit,  .come  out 
Luke  7.  22  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  the  d. 

DEAF,  to  be  — 

To  be  silent,  deaf  ehp  charash. 

Mic.    7. 16  they  shall  lay.  .their  ears  shall  be  deaf 

DEAL,  to  — 

l.To  apportion,  phj\  chalaq,  3. 

2  Sa.    6. 19  he  dealt  among  all  the  people,  (even) 
1  Ch.16.    3  he  dealt  to  every  one  of  Israel,  both  man 

2. To  do,  Tty%  asah. 

Gen.  24.  49'  if  ye  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  my 

47.  29  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  me  ;  bury  me 
Exod.  5.  15  Wherefore  dealest  thou  thus  with  thy 

14. 11  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  thus  with  us 


DEAL 


236 


DEATH 


Exod.21.    g  ho  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  manner 

23.  11  In  like  manner  thou  shalt  deal  with  thy 
Niimii.  15  if  thou  deal  thus  with  me,  kill  me,  I  pray 
Deut.  7.    5  But  thus  shall  ye  deal  with  them  ;  ye 
Josh.  2.  14  that  we  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with 
Judg.  9. 16  and  if  ye  have  dealt  well  with  Jerubbaal 

9.  19  If  ye  then  have  dealt  truly  and  sincerely 

18.  4  Thus  and  thus  dealeth  Micah  with  me 
Ruth  1.   8  deal  kindly  with  you,  as  ye  have  dealt 

1  Sa.  20.    8  Therefore  thou  shalt  deal  kindly  with 

24.  18  how  that  thou  hast  dealt  well  with  me 

2  Ki.  iz.  15  on  workmen  ;  for  they  dealt  faithfully 

22.    7  because  they  dealt  faithfully 

1  Ch.20.    3  Even  so  dealt  David  with  all  the  cities  of 

2  Ch.  2.    3  As  thou  didst  deal  with  David  my  father 

19.  11  Deal  courageously,  and  the  Lord  shall 
Job  42.   8  lest  I  deal  with  you  (after  your)  folly,  in 
Psa.  103.  10  He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins 

119.  65  Thou  hast  dealt  well  with  thy  servant,  0 
119.  124  Deal  with  thy  servant  according  unto 
147.  20  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation 
Prov  10.    4  He  becometh  poor  that  dealeth  (with)  a 
12. 22  but  they  that  deal  truly  (are)  his  delight 
13. 16  Every  prudent  (man)  dealeth  with  know. 
14.  17  (He  that  is)  soon  angry  dealeth  foolishly 
21.  24  his  name  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath 
Jer.     6.  13  from  the  prophet,  .every  one  dealeth 

8. 10  unto  the  priest  every  one  dealeth  falsely 
18.  23  deal  (thus)  with  them  in  the  time  of 

21.  2  if  so  be  that  the  LORD  will  deal  with  us 
Eze.    8. 18  Therefore  will  I  also  deal  in  fury:  mine 

16.  59  I  will  even  deal  with  thee  as  thou  hast 
18.   9  and  hath  kept  my  judgments,  to  deal 

22.  7  they  dealt  by  oppression  with  the  stran. 

22. 14  in  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee? 

23.  25  and  they  shall  deal  furiously  with  thee 
23.  29  And  they  shall  deal  with  thee  hatefully 
25.  12  that  Edom  hath  dealt  against  the  house 

25. 15  Because  the  Philistines  have  dealt  by  rev. 
31.  11  he  shall  surely  deal  with  him:  I  have 

Dan.    1.  13  and  as  thou  seest,  deal  with  thy  servants 

11.    7  shall  deal  against  them,  and  shall  prev. 
Zech.  1.    6  according  to  our  doings,  so  hath  he  dealt 

3.  To  deal  out,  divide,  break  asunder,  D"]3  paras. 

Isa.   58.   7  (Is  it)  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry 

4.  To  part,  portion  out,  ntpifa  merizo. 

Rom  12.    3  according  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every  mau 

[See    also    Bitterly,   corruptly,   deceitfully,     falsely, 

foolishly,    ill,    perversely,    proudly,    subtilely,  tenth, 

treacherously,  unfaithfully,  unjustly,   well,    wickedly, 

wisely,  worse.] 

DEAL  bountifully,  to. — 

To  do,  confer  benefit,  ?ipa  gamal. 

Psa.  13.   6  because  he  hath  dealt  bountifully  with 
116.    7  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with 
119.  17  Deal  bountifully  with  thy  servant,  (that) 
142.    7  for  thou  shalt  deal  bountifully  with  me 

DEAL  hardly  with  — 

To  humble,  afflict,  niy  o.nah,  3. 

Gen.  16.    6  when  Sarai  dealt  hardly  with  her,  she 

DEAL  subtilly,  to  — 

l.To  show  self  deceitful,  bii  nakal,  7. 

Psa.  105.  25  He  turned  their  heart,  .to  deal  subtilly 
2.7V)  act  wisely  against,  Karaao^i^ofxai  katasophi. 

Acts   7.  19  The  same  dealt  subtilly  with  our  kindred 

DEAL  with,  to  — 

l.To  do,  n'fj£  asah. 

Gen.  34.  31  Should  he  deal  with  our  sister  as  with  an 
2  Ki.21.  6  and  dealt  with  familiar  spirits  and  wiza. 
2  Ch.33.   6  used  witchcraft,  and  dealt  with  a  familiar 

2.7*0  fall  in  with,  svrvyxd-vw  entugchano. 

Acts  25.  24  multitude  of  the  Jews  have  dealt  with 
3.7*o  do,  7roi6aj  poieo. 

Luke  1.  25  Thus  hath  the  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the 
2.  48  Son,  why  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us? 
4.  To  hear  toward,  irpoa-tpepw  prospfiero. 

Heb.  12.    7  God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons;  for 

DEALINGS  with,  to  have  — 

To  use  together,  or  in  common,  (Tvyxpdo/j,at  supch. 

John  4,   9  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  Sam. 
DEAR  — 
1. Precious,  Tj?;  yaqqir. 

Jer.   31.  20  (Is)  Ephraim  my  dear  son  ?  (is  he)  a  plea. 
2.  Love,  ayain}  agape. 

Col.     1.  13  translated  (us)  into  the  kingdom  of  his  d. 
3. Loved,  beloved,  ayatrnrds  agapetos. 

Eph.   5.    1  Be  ye.,  followers  of  God, as  dear  children 

Col.     is    7  As  ye  also  learned  of.  .our  dear  fellowser. 

1  Th.  2.    8  we  were  willing,  .because  ye  were  dear 
4. Much  prized,  evrtfios  entimos. 

Luke  7.    2  a  certain  centurion's  servant,  who  was  de. 
5. Prized,  rt^ios  timios. 

Acts  20.  .\(  neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  myself 
DEARTH  — 
1.  Restrain^  dearth,  rrjWa  batstsoreth. 

Jer.    14.    1  came  to  Jeremiah  concerning  the  dearth 
IJIungcr,  famine,  nun  raab. 

Gen.  41.  54  the  seven  years  of  deartli  began  to  come 
41.  54  the  dearth  was  in  all  lands  ;  but  in  all 


2  Ki.  4.  38  and  (there  was)  a  dearth  in  the  land  ;  and 
2  Ch.  6.  28  If  there  be  dearth  in  the  land,  if  there  be 
Neh.  5.    3  we  might  buy  corn,  because  of  the  dearth 

3. Hunger,  want,  hifios  limos. 

Acts    7.  11  Now  there  came  a  dearth  over  all  theland 
11.  28  there  should  be  great  dearth  throughout 

DEATH  — 

1 .  To  die,  run  muth. 

Num'35.  31  of  a  murderer,  which  (is)  guilty  of  death 
Judg.  5.  18  jeoparded  their  lives  unto  the  death  in 
16.  16  (so)  that  his  soul  was  vexed  unto  death 

1  Sa.    4.  20  about  the  time  of  her  death  the  women 

2  Sa.  20.   3  shut  up  unto  the  day  of  their  death 

2  Ki.20.    1  In  those  days  was  Hezekiahsickunto.de. 
2  Ch.32.  24  those  days  Hezekiah  was  sick  to  the  death 
Isa.  38.    1  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  d. 
%  Death,  niD  maveth. 

Gen.  21.  16  for  she  said,  Let  me  not  see  the  death  of 

25.  11  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of  Abrah. 

26.  18  had  stopped  them  after  the  death 

27.  2  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  day  of  my  death 
27.  7  bless  thee  before  the  Lord  before  my  de. 
27.  10  that  he  may  bless  thee  before  his  death 

Exodio.  17  he  may  take  away  from  me  this  death 
Lev.  16.    1  after  the  death  of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron 
Num  16.  29  If  these  men  die  the  common  death  of 
23.  10  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous 
35.  25  he  shall  abide  in  it  unto  the  death  of  the 
35.  28  remained,  .until  the  death  of  the  high 
35.  28  after  the  death  of  the  high  priest  the 
35.  32  come  again .  .until  the  death  of  the  priest 
Deut  22.  26  in  the  damsel  no  sin  (worthy)  of  death 
30. 15  I  have  set.  .life  and  good,  and  death  and 

30.  19  (that)  I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death 

31.  27  and  how  much  more  after  my  death ! 

31.  29  For  I  know  that  after  my  death  ye  will 
33.    1  blessed  the  children  of  Israel  before  his  d. 

Josh.  1.  1  after  the  death  of  Moses,  .it  came  to  pass 
2.  13  save  alive,  .deliver  our  souls  from  death 
20.  6  until  the  death  of  the  high  priest  that 
Judg.  1.  1  after  the  death  of  Joshua  it  came  to  pass 
13.  7  from  the  womb  to  the  day  of  his  death 
16.  30  the  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  death  were 
Ruth  1.  17  (if  ought)  but  death  part  thee  and  me 

2.  11  all  that  thou  hast  done,  .since  the  death 

1  Sa.  15.  32  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past 

15.  35  came  no  more,  .until  the  day  of  hisdeath 
20.    3  but  a  step  between  me  and  death 

2  Sa.    1.    1  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of  Saul 

1.  23  and  in  their  death  they  were  not  divided 

6.  23  had  no  child  unto  the  day  of  her  death 
15.  21  whether  in  death  or  life,  even  there  also 
22.    5  When  the  waves  of  death  compassed  me 
22.    6  the  snares  of  death  prevented  me 

1  Ki.  it.  40  was  in  Egypt  until  the  death  of  Solomon 

2  Ki.    1.    1  Moab  rebelled,  .after  the  death  of  Ahab 

2.  21  shall  not  be  from  thence  any  more  death 

4.  40  (thou)  man  of  God,  (there  is)  death  in  the 
14. 17  lived  after  the  death  of  Jehoash.  son  of 

15.  5  he  was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death 

1  Ch.22.    5  David  prepared  abundantly  before  his  d. 

2  Ch.22.    4  after  the  death  of  his  father,  to  his  destr. 

24.  17  Now  after  the  death  of  Jehoiada  came  the 

25.  25  Amaziah.  .lived  after  the  death  of  Joash 

26.  21  was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  deatli 

32.  33  inhabitants . .  did  him  honour  at  his  death 
Job     3.  21  Which  long  for  death,  but  it(cometh)not 

5.  20  In  famine  he  shall  redeem  thee  from  de. 

7.  15  my  soul  chooseth  strangling,  (and)  death 
18.  13  (even)  the  first  born  of  death  shall  devour 

27.  15  Those  that  remain,  .be  buried  in  death 

28.  22  Destruction  and  death  say,  We  have  beard 
30.  23  I  know  (that)  thou  wilt  bring  me  (to)  d. 
38.  17  Have  the  gntes  of  death  been  opened  un. 

Psa.  6.  5  For  in  death  (there  is)  no  remembrance 
7. 13  prepared  for  him  the  instruments  of  de. 
9.  13  that  liftest  me  up  from  the  gates  of  dea. 
13.  3  lighten,  .lest  I  sleep  the  (sleep  of)  death 
18.  4  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and 
18.  5  the  snares  of  death  prevented  me 
22. 15  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust  of  death 

33.  19  To  deliver  their  soul  from  death,  and  to 
49.  14  death  shall  feed  on  them ;  and  the  uprig. 
55.   4  the  terrors  of  death  are  fallen  upon  me 

55.  15  Let  death  seize  upon  them,  (and)  let  them 

56.  13  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death 
68.  20  unto  God.  .(belong)  the  issues  from  death 
73.    4  For  (there  are)  no  bands  in  their  death 
78.  50  he  spared  not  their  soul  from  death 

89.  48  liveth,  and  shall  not  see  death?  shall  he 
107.  18  they  draw  near  unto  the  gates  of  death 
116.    3  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and 
116.    8  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death 
116.  15  Precious,  .(is)  the  death  of  his  saints 
118.  18  but  he  hath  not  given  me  over  unto  dea. 
Prov.  2.  18  her  house  inclineth  unto  death,  and  her 
5.    5  Her  feet  go  down  to  death  ;  her  steps 
7.  27  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death 
8. 36  all  they  that  hate  me  love  death 

10.  2  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death 

11.  4  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death 

11.  19  so  he.  .(pursueth  it)  to  his  own  death 

12.  28  (in)  the  pathway  (thereof  there  is)  no  de. 

13.  14  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death 

14.  12  but  the  end  thereof  (are)  the  ways  of  de. 
i.f.  27  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death 

14. 32  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death 
16.  14  wrath  of  a  king  (is  as)  messengers  of  de. 

16.  25  but  the  end  thereof  (are)  the  ways  of  de. 
18.  21  Death  and  life  (are)  in  the  power  of  the 


Prov2i.  6  tossed  to  and  fro  of  them  that  seek  death 
24.  11  to  deliver  (them  that  are)  drawn  unto  d. 
26.  18  who  casteth  firebrands,  arrows,  and  de. 

Eccl.  7.    1  the  day  of  death  than  the  day  of  one's 

7.  26  I  fiud  more  bitter  than  death  the  woman 

8.  8  neither  (hath  he)  power  in  the  day  of  de. 
Song  8.    6  love  (is)  strong  as  death  ;  jealousy  (is) 
Isa.  25.    8  He  will  swallow  up  death  iu  victory;  and 

28.  15  We  have  made  a  covenant  with  death 
28.  18  your  covenant  with  death  shall  be 
38.  18  the  grave  cannot  praise  thee,  death  can 
53.    9  made  his  grave . .  with  the  rich  in  his  de. 
53.  12  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death 
Jer.     8.    3  death  shall  be  chosen  rather  than  life 

9.  21  death  is  come  up  into  our  windows 
15.    2  Such  as  (are)  for  death,  to  death  ;  and 
18.  21  let  their  men  be  put  to  death  ;  (let)  their 

21.  8  the  way  of  life,  and  the  way  of  death 
43.  11  (and  deliver)  such  (as  are)  for  death  to  d. 
52.  11  put  him  in  prison  till  the  day  of  his  dea. 
52.  34  a  portion  until  the  day  of  his  death 

Lam.  i.  20  abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home . .  d. 

Eze.  18.  32  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him    ■ 

28. 10  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  the  uncircumcised 

31.  14  they  are  all  delivered  unto  death,  to  the 

33.  11  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 

Hos.  13.  14  I  will  redeem  them  from  death  :  O  death 

Jon.    4.    9  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  (even)  unto  death 

Hab.  2.    5  who  enlargeth  his  desire,  .and  (is)  as  ae. 

3.  Death,  rt'in  moth, 

Ezra    7.  26  whether  (it  be)  unto  deatli,  or  to  banish. 

4.  Dying,  death,  rfiO  muth. 

Psa.  48.  14  he  will  be  our  guide  (even)  unto  death 

5.  Death,  nrnpfi  temuthah. 

Psa.  102.  20  loose  those  that  are  appointed  to  death 

6.  A  lifting  or  taking  up,  avatpevis  anairesis. 
Acts  8.    1  And  Saul  was  consenting  unto  his  deatli 

22.  20  standing  by,  and  consenting  unto  [his  de.] 
7. Death,  Qavaros  thanatos. 

Matt.  4. 16  which  sat  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  d. 
10.  21  shall  deliver  up  the  brother  to  death 

15.  4  He  that  curseth.  .let  him  die  the  death 

16.  28  some,  .which  shall  not  taste  of  death 

20.  18  and  they  shall  condemn  him  to  death 
26.  38  My  soul  is.  .sorrowful,  even  unto  death 
26.  66  answered  and  said.  He  is  guilty  of  death 

Mark  7.  10  Whoso  curseth.  .let  him  die  the  death 
9.    1  some,  .which  shall  not  taste  of  death 

10.  33  they  shall  condemn  him  to  death,  and 

13.  12  brother  shall  betray  the  brother  to  death 

14.  34  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful  unto  de. 
14.  64  all  condemned  him  to  be  guilty  of  death 

Luke  1.  79  sit  in  darkness  and  (in)  the  shadow  of  d. 
2.  26  that  he  should  not  see  death,  before  he 
9.  27  some,  .which  shall  not  taste  of  death 

22.  33  with  thee,  both  into  prison,  and  to  death 

23.  15  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  unto 

23.  22  I  have  found  no  cause  of  death  in  him 

24.  20  delivered  him  to  be  condemned  to  death 
John  5.  24  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life 

8.  51  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  see  death 
8.  52  my  saying,  he  shall  never  taste  of  death 

11.  4  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  for 

11.  13  Jesus  spake  of  his  death  :  but  they 

12.  33  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 
18.  32  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 

21.  19  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glor. 
Acts   2.  24  WhomGod.  .havingloosedthepainsof[d.J 

13.  28  though  they  found  no  cause  of  death 

22.  4  And  I  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  dea. 

23.  29  nothing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy  of  de. 
25. 11  have  committed  anything  worthy  of  dea. 

25.  25  he  had  committed  nothing  worthy  of  d. 

26.  31  This  man  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death 
28.  18  because  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in 

Rom.  1.  32  commit  such  things  are  worthy  of  death 
5.  10  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son 
5.  12  death  by  sin;  and  so  [death]  passed  upon 
5.  14  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  even 
5.  17  if  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by 

5.  21  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even  so 

6.  3  many  of  us  were  baptized  into  his  death? 
6.  4  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  de. 
6.    5  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death 

6.  9  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him 
6.  16  whether  of  sin  [unto  death,]  or  of  obedi. 
6.  21  for  the  end  of  those  things  (is)  death 

6.  23  the  wages  of  sin  (is)  death ;  but  the  gift 

7.  5  did  work . .  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death 
7. 10  (was  ordained)  to  life,  I  found,  .unto  d. 
7.  13  Was  then  that  which  is  good  made  death 
7.  13  working  death  in  me  by  that  which  is 

7.  24  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death? 

8.  2  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  d. 
8.  6  to  be  carnally  minded  (is)  death;  but  to 
8.  38  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor 

1  Co.  3.  22  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or 

11.  26  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come 

15.  21  since  by  man  (came)  death,  by  man 

15.  26  last  enemy,  .shall  be  destroyed  (is)  deatli 

15.  54  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory 

15.  55  O  death,  where  (is)  thy  sting  ?  O  grave 

15.  56  The  sting  of  death  (is)  sin ;  and  the  stren. 

2  Co.   1.  9  we  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves 

1.  10  Who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  death 

2.  16  the  savour  of  death  unto  death 

3.  7  if  the  ministration  of  death,  written(and) 

4.  11  we.  .are  alway  delivered  unto  death  for 
4.  12  So  then  death  worketh  in  us,  but  life  in 


DEATH 


237 


DECEIT 


2  Co. 

Phil.' 


Col. 
aTl 
Deb. 


J  as. 

i  Jo. 


Rev. 


r,  10  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  d. 
.  23  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft 
.  20  whether  (it  be)  by  life,  or  by  death 

8  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  d. 
.  27  For  indeed  he  was  sick  nigh  unto  death 
.  30  he  was  nigh  unto  death,  not  regarding 
.  10  being  made  comformable  unto  his  death 
.  22  In  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death 
.  10  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolished  death 
.    9  Jesus .  .for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowned 
.    9  by  the  grace  of  God  should  taste  death 
.  14  that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him 
.  14  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is 
.  15  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their 
.    7  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death 
,  23  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of  death 
.  15  that  by  means  of  death,  for  theredemp. 
.  16  there  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death 
.    5  translated  that  he  should  not  see  death 
.  15  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death 
.  20  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall 
.  14  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
.  14  loveth  not.  .abideth  in  death 
.  16  brother  sin  a  sin  (which  is)  not  unto  death 
.  16  not  unto  death.  There  is  a  sin  unto  death 
.  17  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death 
.  18  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death 
.  10  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will 
.  11  He.  .shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second  death 
.  23  And  I  will  kill  her  children  with  death 

8  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death,  and 

8  with  sword,  and  with  hunger,  and  with  d. 

6  in  those  days  shall  men  seek  death,  and 

6  shall  desire  to  die,  and  death  shall  flee 
11  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death 

3  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were  wounded  to  d. 

8  shall  her  plagues  come  in  one  day,  death 

20.  6  on  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power 

20. 13  death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  w. 

20. 14  And  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake 
20. 14  This  is  the  second  death 

21.  4  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither 
si.    8  with  fire,  .which  is  the  second  death 

8.  End,  t€\€utt}  teleute. 

Matt.  2.  15  And  was  there  until  the  death  of  Herod 

DEATH,  appointed  to  — 

Condemned  to  death,  i-n-iOduanos  epithanalios. 
1  Co.  4.    9  as  it  were  appointed  to  death :  for  we  are 

DEATH,  to  be  at  the  point  of  — 
To  be  about  to  die  off,  fi4\\a  q.t7o0vt\tk^lv  mello. 
John  4.  47  his  son  :  for  he  was  at  the  point  of  death 

DEATH,  to  lie  at  the  point  of  — 
To  hold  extremely  {ill),  be  dying,  iax^TCOS  ex». 
Mark  5.  23  My . .  daughter  lieth  at  the  point  of  death 

DEATH,  to  put  to  — 

l.To  "put  to  death,  cause  to  die,  niD  muth,  5. 
Deut  13.    9  be  first  upon  him  to  put  him  to  death 

17.  7  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put  him  to  d. 
Judg2o.  13  that  we  may  put  them  to  death,  and  put 

1  Sa.  11.  12  bring  the  men,  that  we  may  put  them  to  d. 

2  Sa.  8.    2  two  lines  measured  he  to  put  to  death 

1  Ki.  2.    8  will  not  put  thee  to  death  with  the  sword 

2.  26  will  not  at  this  time  put  thee  to  death 
Esth.  4.  11  one  law  of  his  to  put  (him)  to  death 
Jer.  26.  15  if  ye  put  me  to  death,  ye  shall  surely 

26.  19  Hezekiah  king  of  J. . .  put  him  at  all  to  d.? 

26.  21  the  king  sought  to  put  him  to  death :  but 

26.  24  hand  of  the  people  to  put  him  to  death 
38.  15  wilt  thou  not  surely  put  me  to  death?  and 
38. 16  I  will  not  put  thee  to  death,  neither  will 
38.  25  and  we  will  not  put  thee  to  death 

43.    3  that  they  might  put  us  to  death,  and 
52.  27  put  them  to  death  in  Riblah  in  the  land 

2.  To  lift  or  take  up  or  away,  avaipzca  anaireo. 
Luke23.  32  led  with  him  to  be  put  to  death 
Acts  26.  10  when  they  were  put  to  death,  I  gave  my 

Z.To  go  or  lead  away,  a-wdyw  apago. 

Acts  12. 19  commanded  that  (they)  should  be  put  tod. 

4. To  kill  offhand,  airoKreivw  apokteino. 

Marki4.    1  take  him  by  craft,  and  put  (him)  to  death 

Luke  18.  33  shall  scourge  (him),  and  put  him  to  death 

Johnn.  53  took  counsel  together  for  to  put  him  tod. 

12.  10  that  they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to  death 

18.  31  It  is  not  lawful,  .to  put  any  man  to  death 

5.  To  put  to  death,  8avar6w  thanatoo. 

Matt  26.  59  sought  false  witness . .  to  put  him  to  death 

27.  1  counsel  against  Jesus  to  put  him  to  death 
Mark  14.  55  sought  for  witness.. to  put  him  to  death 

1  Pe.   3.  18  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quick. 
DEATH,  would  have  put  to  — 

To  wish  to  kill,  Qi\oD  airoKTtTvat  thelo  apokteinai. 

Matt  14.    5  when  he  would  have  put  him  to  death 
DEATH,  to  be  put  to  — 
l.To  die,  niD  math,  1  or  6. 

2  Ki.  14.    6  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his 
2.7*0  be  caused  to  die,  put  to  death,  r»D  muth,  6. 

Gen.  26.  11  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
Exodig.  12  toucheth  the  mount  shall  be.  .puttodeath 
21. 12  smiteth  a  man.  .shall  be.. put  to  death 
2i.  15  smiteth  his  father,  .shall  be.  .put  to  death 
21. 16  he  that  stealeth.  .shall,  .be  put  to  death 
21.  17  he  that  curseth.  .shall",  .be  put  to  death 
21. 29  and  his  owner  also  shall  be  put  to  death 


Exod  22. 19  lieth  with  a  beast  shall,  .be  put  to  death 
31.  14  defile th  it  shall,  .be  put  to  death 
31.  15  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
35.    2  doeth  work,  .shall  be  put  to  death 

Lev.  19.  20  they  shall  not  be  put  to  death,  because 
20.    2, 15  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
20.    9  shall  be  surely  put  to  death 
20. 10  adulteress  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
20.  11,  12  both  of  them  shall  surely  be  put  to  d. 
20.  13,  16  they  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 

20.  27  a  wizard,  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
24.  16  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  (and)  all 
24. 16  the  stranger,  .shall  be  put  to  death 

24.  17  killeth  any  man  shall,  .be  put  to  death 
24.  21  killeth  a  man,  he  shall  be  put  to  death 
27.  29  (but)  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 

Num.  1. 51  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death 
3.  io,  38  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  dea. 
15.  35  The  man  shall  be  surely  put  to  death 
18.    7  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death 
35. 16,  17,  18  murderer  shall  surely  be  put  to  d. 
35.  21  he  that  smote  (him)  shall,  .be  put  to  d. 
35.  31  but  he  shall  be  surely  put  to  death 

Deut  13.    5  dreamer  of  dreams,  shall  be  put  to  death 
17.    6  put  to  death . .  he  shall  not  be  put  to  death 

21.  22  and  he  be  to  be  put  to  death,  and  thou 
24. 16  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for 
24. 16  neither  shall  the  children  be  put  to  death 
24. 16  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his 

Josh.  1. 18  will  not  hearken,  .he  shall  be  put  to  d. 
Judg.  6.  31  let  him  be  put  to  death  whilst  (it  is  yet) 
2r.    5  saying,  He  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 

1  Sa.  11. 13  There  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to  death 

2  Sa.  19.  21  Shall  not  Shimei  be  put  to  death  for  this 

ig.  22  shall  there  any  man  be  put  to  death  this 
21.   9  were  put  to  death  in  the  days  of  harvest 

1  Ki.  2.  24  Adonijah  shall  be  put  to  death  this  day 

2  Ki.14.   6  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for 

14.  6  nor  the  children  be  put  to  death  for  the 
2  Ch.15.  13  should  be  put  to  death,  whether  small  or 

23.    7  lie  shall  be  put  to  death  :  but  be  ye 
Jer.  38.    4  let  this  man  be  put  to  death  :  for  thus  he 

3.  To  murder,  slay,  crush,  ns-]  ratsach. 

Nuni35.  30  the  murderer  shall  be  put  to  death  by  the 

DEATH,  to  cause  to  be  put  to  — 

To  put  to  death,  Qavar6o)  thanatoo. 

Matt  10.  21  and  cause  them  to  be  put  to  death 
Marki3.  12  and  shall  cause  them  to  be  put  to  death 
Luke2i.  16  shall  they  cause  to  be  put  to  death 

DEATH  seize,  let  — 
Desolations,  nio*;;^  yeshimoth. 

Psa.  55. 15  Let  death  seize  upon  them,  (and)  let  them 
DEATH,  worthy  of  — 
l.To  die,  mo  muth. 

Deut  17.    6  shall  he  that  is  worthy  of  death  be  put  to 
2. A  man  of  death,  niD  e>'n  ish  maveth. 

1  Ki.  2.  26  for  thou  (art)  worthy  of  death 

Z.  Judgment  of  death,  niO  ostpo  mishpat  maveth. 
Deut  19.   6  he  (was)  not' worthy  of  death,  inasmuch 
21.  22  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of  d. 

DEATHS  — 

Death,  the  dead,  riiDO  mamoth. 

Jer.   16.   4  They  shall  die  of  grievous  deaths 
Eze.  28.   8  thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  (them  that 

DEBASE,  to  — 

To  make  low  or  humble,  Ssy  shaphel,  5. 

Isa.   57.   9  and  didst  debase  (thyself  even)  unto  hell 

DEBATE  — 

1.  Debate,  n$?  matstsah. 

Isa.  58.   4  ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate,  and  to  smite 

2.  Strife,  epts  eris. 

Rom.  1.  29  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit 

2  Co.  12.  20  lest  (there  be)  debates,  envyings,  wraths 

DEBATE,  to  — 

To  strive,  plead,  an  rib. 

Prov  25.    9  Debate  thy  cause  with  thy  neighbour 
Isa.   27.   8  when  it  shoot eth  forth,  thou  wilt  debate 

DE'-BLR,  rrn  speaker. 

1.  An  Amorite  king  of  Eglon,  slain  by  Joshua,  B.C.  1450. 

Josh.  10.    3  and  unto  D.  king  of  Eglon,  saying 

2.  A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah  near  Hebron,  and  the  same 
as  Kirjath-sepher,  and  Kirjath-sannah. 

Josh.  10.  38  Joshua  returned.. Israel  with  him,  to  D. 

10.  39  as  he  had  done  to  Hebron,  so  he  did  to  D. 

11.  21  Joshua.,  cut  off  the  A.'s. .  from  H.t  from  D. 

12.  13  The  king  of  D.,  one ;  the  king  of  Geder 

15.  7  And  the  border  went  up  toward  D.  from 
15.  15  he  went  up  thence  to  the  inhabitants  of  D. 
15.  15  name  of  D.  before  (was)  Kirjath-sepher 
15.  49  Dannah.  .Kirjath-sannah,  which  (is)  D. 
21.  is  Holon  with  her  suburbs,  and  D.  with  her 

Judg.  j.  11  thence  he  went  against,  .inhabitants  of  D. 

1.  11  the  name  of  D.  before  (was)  Kirjath-seph. 

1  Ch.   6.  58  Hilen  with  her  suburbs,  D.  with  her  sub. 

3.  The  "border  of  Debir"  is  mentioned  as  part  of  the 
boundary  of  Gad,  and  as  not  far  from  Mahauaim. 

Josh.  13.  26  and  from  Mahanaim  unto  the  border  of  D. 
DE-BO'-RAH,  KfSPi  bee,  wasp. 
1.  Rebekah's  nurse,  B.C.  1732. 

Gen.  35.   8  But  D.  Rebekah's  nurse  died,  and  she 


2.  A  prophetess  who  judged  Israel.  Her  name  was  an 
Egyptian  symbol  of  regal  power ;  and  among  the  Greeks 
it  was  applied  not  only  to  the  poets  and  those  peculiarly 
chaste,  but  especially  to  the  priestesses  of  Delphi, 
Cybele  and  Artemis.  She  was  probably  of  Ephraim, 
though  some  suppose  her  to  have  belonged  to  Issachar 
from  the  expression  in  Judg.  5.  15.  The  common 
version  calls  her  "wife  of  Lapiduth ;"  but  another  ren- 
dering of  the  phrase  is  Tennyson's  "the  great  dame  of 
Lapidoth  ;"  or,  mulier  splendorum,  that  is,  one  divinely 
illuminated,  since  "lapidoth"  is=" lightnings".  The 
rabbis  however  say  that  she  was  one  who  tended  the 
tabernacle  lamps. 

Judg.  4.    4  And  D.,  a  prophetess,  .judged  Israel  at 

4.    5  And  she  dwelt  under  the  palm  tree  of  D. 

4.   9  And  D.  arose,  and  went  with  Barak  (o  K. 

4.  10  and  D.  went  up  with  him 

4.  14  And  D.  said  unto  Barak,  Up  ;  for  this  (is) 

5.  1  Then  sang  D.  and  Barak  the  son  of  Abin. 
5.  7  I  D.  arose,  that  I  arose  a  mother  in  Israel 
5.  12  Awake,  awake,  D.  ;  awake,  awake,  utter 
5. 15  And  the  princes  of  Issachar  (were)  with  D. 


DEBT  — 

1.  Handt  "i;  yad. 

Neh.  10.  31  seventh  year,  and  the  exaction  of  every  d. 
2. Loan,  debt,  biting  interest,  nxtfo  mashshaah. 

Prov22.  26  (or)  of  them  that  are  sureties  for  debts 
Z.Debt,  biting  interest,  VI  neshi. 

2  Ki.  4.  7  he  said,  Go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  thy  de. 
4.  To  bite,  be  a  usurer,  N^J  nasha. 

1  Sa.  22.  2  every  one  that  (was)  in  debt,  and  every 
5.-4  loan,  what  is  lent,  ddvetov  daneion. 

Matt.  18.  27  and  loosed  him,  and  forgave  him  the  d. 
6.  What  is  owing,  indebtedness,  d<pei\$  opheile. 

Matt.  18.  32  I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt,  because 
7  AVhat  is  owing, indebtedness,  6<p€t\t]/j.a  opheilema. 

Matt.  6.  12  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  d. 

Rom.  4.    4  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  de. 

S.To  owe,  be  indebted,  6<pei\co  opTieilo. 

Matt.  18.  30  into  prison,  till  he  should  pay  the  debt 

DEBTOR  — 

1. Debtor,  one  bound,  indebted;  debt,  sin  chob. 
Eze.  18.   7  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge 

2.  Debtor,  one  owing  anything,  otpeiKerrjs  opheiletes. 

Matt.  6.  12  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  d. 
Rom.  1. 14  I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks,  and  to 
8.  12  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live 

15.  27  pleased  them . .  and  their  debtors  they 
Gal.    5.   3  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law 

Z.One  owing  a  debt,  xpe&x/jetA.eTny,  xp£o<pi\eTti$. 
Luke  7.  41  a  certain  creditor  which  had  two  debtors 

16.  5  he  called  every  one  of  his  lord's  debtors 
DEBTOR,  to  be  a  — 

To  oioe,  be  indebted,  d<pei\u  qpheilo. 

Matt. 23. 16  by  the  gold  of  the  temple,  he  is  a  debtor  ! 
DE-CA'-PO-LIS,  AeKdTTo\is,  Ten  cities  (collectively). 
A  district  named  from  its  containing  ten  cities,  which 
were  mostly  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  extending  from 
near  Damascus  to  near  the  N.  end  of  the  Salt  Sea. 

Matt.  4.  25  followed  him.  .multitudes,  .(from).  .D. 

Mark  5.  20  he  departed,  and  began  to  publish  in  D. 
7.  31  through  the  midst  of  the  coasts  of  D. 

DECAY,  to  — 

l.To  be  dried  up,  Tin  chared* 

Job  14.  11  and  the  flood  decayeth  and  drieth  up 
2.  To  be  brought  low,  tjso  makak,  2. 

Eccl.io.  18  By  much  slothfulncss  the  building  decay, 
Z.To  make  old,  Trakaiow  palaioo. 

Heb.   8.  13  is'ow  that  which  decayeth  and  waxeth 
DECAY,  to  be  fallen  in  — 

To  move,  slip,  fail,  fcio  mot. 

Lev.  25.  35  fallen  in  decay  with  thee;  then  thou'shalt 
DECAYED,  to  be — 
To  be  feeble,  stumble,  bvs  kashal. 

Keh.  4. 10  The  strength  of  the  bearers,  .is  decayed 
DECAYED  place  — 
A  waste,  dried  up  place,  n3"]n  chorbah. 

Isa.  44.  26  I  will  raise  up  the  decayed  places  thereof 

DECEASE  — 

Outgoing,  «|o5os  exodus. 

Luke  9.  31  his  decease  which  he  should  accomplish 

2  Pe.   1. 15  ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease  to  have 

DECEASE,  to  — 

To  end  {life),  reXevrdw  teleutao. 

Matt. 22.  25  when  he  had  married  a  wife,  deceased 
DECEASED  — 
Shades,  fearful  ones,  d'n?")  rephaim. 

Isa.  26. 14  (they  are)  deceased,  they  shall  not  rise 
DECEIT  — 
1.  Deceit,  noip  mirmah. 

Job  15.  35  vanity,  and  their  belly  prepareth  deceit 

31.    5  or  if  my  foot  had  hasted  to  deceit 
Psa.  10.    7  His  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  deceit 
36.    3  words  of  his  mouth  (are)  iniquity  and  d. 
38. 12  and  imagine  deceits  all  the  day  long 


DECEIT 


238 


DECLARE 


Psa.  50.  19  mouth  to  evil,  and  thy  tongue  frameth  d. 

Prov.  12.    5  (but)  the  counsels  of  the  wicked  (are) dp. 
12.  17  but  a  false  witness  deceit 
12.  20  Deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  them  that 
14.    3  righteousness :  but  the  folly  of  fouls  (is)d. 
20.  24  he  that  hateth.  .layeth  up  deceit  within 

Isa.  53.    9  neither  (was  any)  deceit  in  his  mouth 

Jer.     5.  27  so  (are)  their  houses  full  of  deceit 

9.  6  Thine  habitation  (is)  in  the  midst  of  dec 
5.  6  through  deceit  they  refuse  to  know  me 
g,    8  it  speaketh  deceit :  (one)  speaketh 

Hos.  11.  12  and  the  house  of  Israel  with  deceit  :  but 
12.    7  the  balances  of  deceit  (are)  iu  his  hand 

Amos  3.   5  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  deceit  ? 

Zeph.  1.   9  fill  their  masters'  houses  with,  .deceit 

2.  Deceit,  deception,  \\n'#D  mashshaon. 

Prov.26.  26  (Whose)  hatred  is  covered  by  deceit,  his 
^.Deceit,  fraud,  7rn-i  remiyyah. 

Job  27*    4  wickedness,  nor  my  tongue  utter  deceit 

Psa.101.    7  He  that  worketh  deceit  shall  not  dwell 
A.Falsehood,  "ijjBJ  sheqer. 

Prov.20.  17  Bread  of  deceit  (is)  sweet  to  a  man  ;  but 
5. Fraud,  oppression,  ?{n  tcik. 

Psa.  55. 11  deceit  and  guile  depart  not  from  her 
72. 14  He  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  deceit 

6. Deceit,  rrD~]fl,  niD")n  tannuth,  larmith. 

Jer.   14.  14  a  thing  of  nought,  and  the  deceit  of  their 

7. Deceit,  n*Q"lE  tarmith. 

Psa. 119.  118  Thou  hast  trodden  down,  .for  their  dec. 

Jer.     8.    5  they  hold  fast  deceit,  they  refuse  to  retu. 

23.  26  prophets  of  the  deceit  of  their  own  heart 

S.Deceit,  airdry)  apate. 

Col.    2.  8  through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after 

9.  Bait,  guile,  S6\os  clolos. 

Hark  7.  22  Thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit 
Horn.  1.  29  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit 

10.  Wandering,  leading  astray,  error,  -nXdv-q  plane. 

1  TIi.  2.    3  For  our  exhortation  (was)  not  of  deceit 

DECEIT,  to  use  — 

To  use  a  bait,  guile,  8o\t6a*  dolioo. 

Rom.  3.  13  with  their  tongues  they  have  used  deceit 

DECEITFUX  — 

I. A  lie,  lying,  i}3  hazab. 

Prov.23.    3  Be  not  desirous,  .for  they  (are)  deceitful 

2.Deceit,  nDip  mirmah. 

Psa.  5.  6  will  abhor  the  bloody  and  deceitful  man 
35. 20  but  they  devise  deceitful  matters  agaiust 
43.  i  deliver  me  from  the  deceitful  and  unjust 
52.  4  lovest  all  devouring  words,  0  (thou)decei. 
55.  23  and  deceitful  men  shall  not  live  out  halfi 
109.  2  and  the  mouth  of  the  deceitful  are  opened 
Prov.  14.  25  hut  a  deceitful  (witness)  speaketh  lies 
Mic.    6.  11  and  with  the  bag  of  deceitful  weights? 

3.  Crooked,  slippery,  2py  aqob. 

Jer.   17.    9  The  heart  (is)  deceitful  above  all  (things) 
4:.  To  be  abundant,  injj  athar,  2. 

Prov  27.   6  but  the  kisses  of  au  enemy  (are)  deceitful 
5. Deceit,  remissness,  fijpn  remiyyah. 

Psa.  78.  57  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow 

120.    2  lying  lips,  (and)  from  a  deceitful  tongue 

Hos.    7. 16  they  are  like  a  deceitful  bow  :  their  prin. 

Mic.    6.  12  their  tongue  (is)  deceitful  in  their  mouth 
G.  Falsehood,  ng^  sheqer. 

Prov  1 1.  18  Ihe  wicked  worketh  a  deceitful  work 
31.  30  Favour  (is)  deceitful,  and  beauty  (is)  vain 
7.Frauds,  oppressions,  rrion  tekahim. 

Prov  29. 1 3  The  poor  and  the  deceitful  man  meet  tog. 
8.  Deceit,  rrann  tarmith. 

Zeph.  3.  13  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found 
9. Deceit)  airdrrj  apate. 

Eph.    4.  22  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts 
10.  Guileful,  86\ios  dolios. 

2  Co.11.  13  For  such  (are)  false  anostles,  deceitful 
DECEITFULLY  — 

1.  With  deceit,  nip  pa  bemirmah. 

Gen.  34. 13  the  sons'  of  Jacob  answered,  .deceitfully 
Psa.  24.  4  who  hath  not  lifted  up.  .nor  sworn  deceit. 
Dan  11.  23  after  the  league,  .he  shall  work  deceit. 

2.Deceit,  .to*)  remiyyah. 

Job  13.  7  Will  ye  speak,  .and  talk  deceitfully  for 
Psa.  52.  2  like  a  sharp  razor,  working  deceitfully 
Jer.  48.  10  doeth  the  work  of  the  Lobd  deceitfully 

DECEITFULLY,  to  deal  — 

1.  To  deal  treacherously \  deceive^  "ua  hagnd. 

Exodai,  8  seeing  he  hath  dealt  deceitfully  with  her 
Job     6.  15  My  brethren  have  dealt  deceitfully  as  a 

2.7*0  deceive,,  mock.  Snn  hathal,  3;  or  Vty  total,  5. 

Exod.  8.  29  let  not  Pharaoh  deal  deceitfully  any  more 
DECEITFULLY,  to  get  — 
Tn  get  ty  oppression,  p#u  ashaa. 

Lev.    6.    4  the  thing  which  he  hath  deceitfully  got. 
DECEITFULLY,  to  handle  — 
To  me  guilefully,  7>o\6w  doloo. 

2  Co.  4.    2  nor  handling  the  word  of  God  deceitfully 


DECEITFULNESS  — 
Deceit,  airdrv  apate. 

Matt  13  22  the  deceitfulness  of  riches  choke  the  w. 

Mark  4.  19  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  .choke  the  w. 

Heb.  3.  13  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin 

DECEITS  — 

Deceits,  deceitful  things,  rA$TJ0Q  mahathalloth. 
Isa.  30  10  speak  unto  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  d. 

DECEIV  ABLENESS  — 
Deceit,  a-nary)  apate. 

2  Th.  2.  10  with  all  deceivahleness  of  unrighteous. 

DECEIVE,  to  — 

l.To  deceive,  mock,  play  upon  one,  ?rjn  hathal,  3. 
Gen,  31.  7  And  your  father  hath  deceived  me,  and 
Jer.     9.    5  they  will  deceive  every  man  his  neigh. 

2. To  lie,  feign,  B>na  kaehash,  3. 

Zech  13.    4  shall  they  wear  a  rough  garment  to  dece. 

3.  To  lead  astray,  mpi  nasha,  5. 

2  K.i.  18.  29  Let  not  Hezekiah  deceive  you  ;  for  he 

19.  10  thy  God  in  whom  thou  trustest  deceive 
2  Ch.  32.  15  therefore  let  not  Hezekiah  deceive  you 
Isa.  36.  14  Let  not  Hezekiah  deceive  you  ;  for  he 

37.  10  thy  God  iu  whom  thou  trustest  deceive 
Jer.    4.  10  surely  thou  hast  greatly  deceived  thispe. 

29.    8  Let  not  your  prophets,  .deceive  you 

37.   9  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Deceive  not  your. 

49.  16  Thy  terribleness  hath  deceived  thee,  (and) 
Obad.       3  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived 
7  men  that  were  at  peace,  .have  deceived 

4.7*o  oppress,  p&%  ashaq. 

Lev     6.   2  or  hath  deceived  his  neighbour 

5.  To  entice,  persuade,  deceive,  n$$pathah,  3. 

2  Sa.  3.  25  Thou  knowest.  .that  he  came  to  deceive 
Prov 24.  28  Be  not  a  witness,  .and  deceive  (not)  with 
Jer.  20.   7  Lord,  thou  hast  deceived  me,  and  I  was 
Eze.  14.    9  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet 

6.  To  throw  down,  deceive,  no-}  ramah,  3. 

1  Sa.  19.  17  Why  hast  thou  deceived  me  so,  and  sent 

28  12  Why  hast  thou  deceived  me?  for  thou 

2  Sa.  19.  26  My  Lord,  O  king,  my  servant  deceive  me 
Prov  26.  19  the  man  (that)  deceiveth  his  neighbour 
Lam.  1.  19  I  called  for  my  lovers,  (but)  they  deceiv. 

7.  To  deceive,  lead  astray,  n?^  shalah,  5. 

2  Ki.   4.  28  did  I  not  say,  Do  not  deceive  me? 

8.  To  deceive,  awardce  apatao. 

Eph.   5.    6  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words 
1  Ti.    2.  14  And  Adam  was  not  deceived,  but  the  w. 

2.  14  [being  deceived]  was  in  the  transgression 
Jas.     1.  26  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  deceiveth 

9.  To  deceive  greatly,  €^a7rardcc  exapatao. 

Rom.  7.  11  Forsin.  .deceived  me,  and  by  it  slew  (me) 
16.  18  by  good  words,  .deceive  the  hearts  of  the 

1  Co.    3.  18  Let  no  man  deceive  himself.   If  any  man 

2  Th,  2.    3  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means 

10.  To  reason  amiss,  irapa\oy{Cop.a.i  paralogizomai . 
Jas.     1.  22  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your  own  sel. 

ll.To  lead  astray,  irKavdw  planao. 

Matt  24.    4  Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you 
24.    5  saying,  I  am  Christ ;  and  shall  deceive 
24.  11  many  false  prophets,  .shall  deceive  many 
24.  24  if  (it  were)  possible,  they  shall  deceive 
Mark  1 3.    5  Take  heed  lest  any  (man)  deceive  you 

13.    6  saying,  I  am  (Christ) ;  and  shall  deceive 
Lukesi.    S  Take  heed  that  ye  be  not  deceived 
John  7.  12  others  said,  Nay  ;  but  he  deceiveth  the 

7.  47  answered.  .Pharisees,  Are  ye  also  deceiv.  ? 
i  Co.  6.    9  Be  not  deceived  :  neither  fornicators,  nor 

15.  33  Be  not  deceived  :  evil  communications 
Gal.     6.    7  Be  not  deceived;  God  is  not  mocked 
2  Ti.    3. 13  wax  worse,  .deceiving.and  being  deceived 
Titus  3.    3  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived 
1  Jo.   1 .    8  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves 

3.  7  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you 
Rev.  12.   9  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole 

13.  14  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 

18.  23  by  thy  sorceries  were  all  nations  deceived 

19.  20  with  which  he  deceived  them  that  had 

20.  3  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no 
20.    8  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the  nations  which 
20.  10  the  devil,  that  deceived  them,  was  cast 

12.  Wandering,  leading  astray,  irKdv-q  plane. 

Eph.   4.  14  whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  deceive 
13.7V)  deceive  the  mind,  (ppevaTrardco  phrenapatao. 

Gal.  6.    3  when  he  is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself 

DECEIVED  — 

l.To  be  deceived,  Sprr  hathal,  4;  or  9:$  total,  6. 
Isa.  44.  20  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside 

2.  To  err,  go  astray,  H$>  shagag. 

Job   12. 16  the  deceived  and  the  deceiver  (are)  his 
DECEIVED,  to  be  — 
1.7b  be  led  astray,  nism  nasha,  2. 

Isa.   19.  13  the  princes  of  Noph  are  deceived 
2.7*0  be  enticed ,  persuaded,  deceived,  Tins  path  ah. 

Deut.n.  16  Take  heed,  .your  heart  he  not  deceived 

3.  To  be  enticed,  persuaded,  deceived,  nns  palhah,  2. 
Job  31,    9  If  mine  heart  have  been  deceived  by  a 
Jer.  20.    7  I  was  deceived;  thou  art  stronger  than  I 


4.7*0  be  enticed,  persuaded,  deceived,  nnp  pathah,  4.' 
Eze.  14.   9  if  the  prophet  be  deceived  when  he  hath 

5.  To  err,  go  astray,  nry  shagah. 

Prov  20.    1  whosoever  is  deceived  thereby  is  not  wise 

6.7*o  err,  wander,  go  astray,  n^n  taah,  2.    . 
Job  15.  31  Let  not  him  that  is  deceived  trust  in 

DECEIVER  — 

1.7*0  show  self  deceitful,  bli  nahal. 

Mai.    1.  14  cursed  (be)  the  deceiver,  which  hath  in 

2.7*0  cause  to  err,  go  astray,  n;^  shagah,  5. 

Job    12. 16  the  deceived  and  the  deceiver  (are)  his 

3.  7*o  err,  go  astray,  yu$i  taa,  3a. 
Gen.    27. 12  and  I  shall  seem  to  him  as  a  deceiver 

^.Leader  astray,  deceiver,  ir\dvos  pianos* 

Matt  27.  63  Sir,  we  remember  that  that  deceiver  said 
2  Co.  6.    8  By  honour  and  dishonour,  .as  deceivers 
2  J  o.         7  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the  world 
7  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist 

5.  One  who  deceives  the  mind,  ^peyawdrvs  phrena. 
Titus  1. 10  many  unruly. .  vain  talkers  and  deceiv. 

DECEIVING  — 

Deceit,  airdrTj  apate. 

2  Pe.  2. 13  sporting  themselves  with  their  own  [dece.] 
DECENTLY  — 
Becomingly,  iuaxflp^vws  eusclumonds. 

1  Co.  14.  40  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order 
DECIDE,  to  — 
To  determine,  jin  charats. 

1  Ki.20.  40  thy  judgment  be  ;  thyself  hast  decided 
DECISION  — 
Decision,  determination,  j'nn  charuts. 

Joel    3.  14  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision 

3. 14  the  day.  .(is)  near  in  the  valley  of  decision 
DECK,  to  — 
1.7*o  make  fair,  beautify,  no;  yaphah,  3. 

Jer.  10.    4  They  deck  it  with  silver  and  with  gold 

2.  To  prepare,  jna  kahan,  3. 

Isa.  61. 10  as  a  bridegroom  decketh  (himself)  with 

3.  To  adorn,  niu  adah. 

Eze.  16.  11  I  decked  thee  also  with  ornaments,  and 

4.  To  do,  make,  rwy  asah. 

Eze.  16. 16  deckedst  thy  high  places  with  divers 
5. 7*o  deck,  spread  oitt,  *u-i  rabad. 

Prov.  7.  16  I  have  decked  my  bed  with  coverings  of 
6.7*0  make  golden,  xpv<r6a)  chrusoo. 

Rev.  17.   4  decked  with  gold,  and  precious  stones 
18.  16  decked  with  gold,  and  precious  stones 

DECK  (self)  — 

To  adorn  (self),  my  adah. 

Job   40. 10  Deck  thyself  now  (with)  majesty  and  ex. 
Jer.     4.  30  though  thou  deekest  thee  with  ornaments 
Eze.  23.  40  and  deckedst  thyself  with  ornaments 
Hos.    2.  13  she  decked  herself  with  her  earrings  and 

DECKED  to  he  — 

To  adorn  (self),  rnj;  adah. 

Eze.  16. 13  Thus  wast  thou  decked  with  gold  and 

DECLARATION  — 

1. Showing,  declaration,  nirm  achrah. 

Job  13. 17  Hear  diligently,  .my  declaration  with 
^.Explanation,  exposition,  nv;"J? parasliah. 

Esth.io.    2  declaratiou  of  the  greatness  of  Mordecai 
3..1  leading  through,  full  declaration,  SirjyTja-is. 

Luke  1.    1  to  set  forth  in  order  a  declaration  of 
DECLARE  (to),  to  — 
1.7*o  say,  ipx  amar. 

Psa.  40.  10  *I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy 

Dan.  4.  iS  declare  the  interpretation  thereof 
2.7*o  explain,  lt*3  baar,  3. 

Deut.i.    5  began  Moses  to  declare  this  law,  saying 
3.7*0  explain,  "113  bur. 

Eccl.  9.    1 1  considered  in  my  heart,  even  to  declare 
4.7*0  speak,  "133  dabar,  3. 

Lev.  23.  44  Moses  declared  unto  the  children  of  Isr. 

Josh  20,    4  shall  declare  his  cause  in  the  ears  of 
5.7*o  make  known,  yr  yada,  5. 

Neh.  8.  12  the  words  that  were  declared  unto  them 

Job  26.  3  (how)  hast  thou  plentifully  declared  the 
40.  7  demand  of  thee,  and  declare  thou  unto 
42.    4  demand  of  thee,  and  declare  thou  unto 

Psa.  77. 14  thou  hast  declared  thy  strength  among 

Isa.   12.   4  declare  Ms  doings  among  the  people,  make 

Q.  To  put  before  (one),  11}  nagad,  5. 

Gen.  41/24  (there  was)  none  that  could  declare  (it) 
Detit.  4.  13  he  declared  unto  you  his  covenant,  which 
Judgi4-  12  if  ye  can  certainly  declare  it  me  within 
14.  13  if  ye  cannot  declare  (it)  me,  then  shall  ye 
24.  15  that  he  may  declare  unto  us  the  riddle 
2  Sa.  19.   6  thou  hast  declared  this  day,  that  thou 
Esth.  4.    8  to  declare  (it)  unto  her,  and  to  charge 
Job   21.  31  Who  shall  declare  his  way  to  his  face? 
31.  37  I  would  declare  unto  him  the  number  of 
38.    4  declare,  if  thou  hast  understanding 
38.  18  declare  if  thou  knowest  it  all 


DECLARE 


239 


DEDICATED 


Psa.    9. 


38. 
40. 
so- 
64. 

75- 

97- 

1+5- 


11  declare  among  the  people  his  doings 
31  shall  declare  his  righteousness  unto  a 
9  praise  thee?  shall  it  declare  thy  truth? 
iS  I  will  declare  mine  iniquity ;  I  will  be 

5  I  would  declare  and  speak  (of  them) 

6  the  heavens  shall  declare  hisrighteousne. 
9  fear,  and  shall  declare  the  work  of  God 

17  hitherto  have  I  declared  thy  wondrous 
9  I  will  declare  for  ever;  I  will  sing  praises 
6  The  heavens  declare  his  righteousness 
4  and  shall  declare  thy  mighty  acts 
9  they  declare  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide 
2i.   6  set  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what  he 
2i.  10  that  which  I  have  heard,  .have  I  declared 
41. 26  Who  hath  declared  from  the  beginning 
42.    9  come  to  pass,  and  new  things  do  I  declare 

42.  12  and  declare  his  praise  in  the  islands 

43.  9  who  among  them  can  declare  this,  and 

43.  12  I  have  declared,  and  have  saved,  and  I 

44,  7  who,  as  I,  shall  call,  and  shall  declare  it 
44.    8  have  not  I  told  thee,  .and  have  declared 

45. 19  I  the  Lord,  .declare  things  that  are  right 
46.  10  Declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning 
48.    3  I  have  declared  the  former  things  from 
48.    5  I  have  even  from  the  beginning  declared 
48.   6  see  all  this ;  and  will  not  ye  declare  (it)? 
48.  14  which  among  them  hath  declared  these 

48. 20  with  a  voice  of  singing  declare  ye,  tell 
57.  12  I  will  declare  thy  righteousness,  and  thy 
66.  iq  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the 

Jer.    4.    5  Declare  ye  in  Judah,  and  publish  in  Jeru. 

4.  15  a  voice  declare th  from  Dan,  and  publish. 

5.  20  Declare  this  in  the  house  of  Jacob,  and 
9.  12  and  (who  is  he),  ."that  he  may  declare  it 

31. 10  declare  (it)  in  the  isles  afar  off,  and  say 
36. 13  Michaiah  declared  unto  them  all  the  wor. 
38. 15  If  I  declare  (it)  unto  thee,  wilt  them  not 
38.  25  Declare  unto  us  now  what  thou  hast  said 
42.    4  I  will  declare  (it)  unto  you  ;  I  will  keep 
42.  20  so  declare  unto  us,  and  we  will  do  (it) 
42.  21  I  have  this  day  declared  (it)  to  you 
46.  14  Declare  ye  in  Egypt,  and  publish  in  Mis. 
50.    2  Declare  ye  among  the  nations,  and  publish 
50.  28  to  declare  in  Zion  the  vengeance  of  the 
Eze.  23.  36  yea,  declare  unto  them  their  abomination 

40.    4  declare  all  that  thou  seest  to  the  house 
Hos.   4. 12  their  staff  declareth  unto  them  :  for  the 
Amos 4.  13  he.  .declareth  unto  man  what  (is)  Ids 
Mic.    1.  10  Declare  ye  (it)  not  at  Gath,  weep  ye  not 

3.   8  declare  unto  Jacob  his  transgression 
Zech.  9.  12  to  day  do  I  declare  (that)  I  will  render 

7. To  recount,  declare,  135  sapJiar,  3. 

1  Ch.16.  24  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen 
Job   12.    8  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto  thee 
15.  17  and  that  (which)  I  have  seen  I  will  dec'. 
28.  27  Then  did  he  see  it,  and  declare  it 
Psa.    2.   7  I  will  declare  the  decree  :  the  Lord  hath 
19.    i  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God 
22.  22  I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren 
50.  16  What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  stat. 
66.  16  I  will  declare  what  he  hath  done  for  my 
73.  28  that  I  may  declare  all  thy  works 
75.    1  (that) thy  name  (is)  near  thy.  .works  dec. 
78.    6  arise  and  declare  (them)  to  their  children 
96.   3  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen 
102.  21  To  declare  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  Zion 
107.  22  and  declare  his  works  with  rejoicing 
n8. 17  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord 
119.  13  With  my  lips  have  I  declared  all  the  judg. 
1 19.  26  I  have  declared  my  ways,  and  thou  heard. 
145.    6  and  I  will  declare  thy  greatness 
Jsa.   43.  26  declare  thou,  that  thou  mayest  be  justi. 
Jer.   51.  10  let  us  declare  in  Zion  the  work  of 
Eze.  12.  16  that  they  may  declare  all  their  abomiua. 

8.  To  meditate,  declare,  ITS?  siach,  Za. 

Isa.   53.   8  and  who  shall  declare  his  generation? 

9.  To  cause  to  hear,  JJQ^  shama,  5. 

Isa.   41.  22  or  declare  us  things  for  to  come 
41.  26  yea,  (there  is)  none  that  declareth 
45.  21  who  hath  declared  this  from  ancient 

10.  To  tell  again,  avayyeWto  anaggello. 

Acts  15.   4  they  declared  all  things  that  God  had 

20. 27  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  you 
1  Jo.   1.    5  which  we  have  heard  of  him,  and  declare 

11.  To  put  or  place  up,  avaride/xai  anatithemai. 
Acts  25. 14  Festus  declared  Paul's  cause  unto  the  k. 

12.7*0  tell  off,  aTrayyzWiti  apafjgello. 

Luke  8.  47  she  declared  unto  him  before  all  the  peo. 
Heb.  2. 12  I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren 
1  Jo.   1.    3  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  dec. 

13.  To  make  Known,  yvwpifa  gnorizd. 

John  1 7.  26  1  have  declared,  .and  will  declare  (it) 
1  Co.  15.  1  I  declare  unto  you  the  gospel  which  I 
Col.     4.    7  All  my  state  shall  Tychicus  declare  unto 

14.7*0  manifest,  StjAo'cu  deloo. 

1  Co.    1.  11  it  hath  been  declared  unto  me  of  you 
3.  13  for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it 
Col.     1.    8  Who  also  declared  unto  us  your  love  in 

15.ro  tell  fully,  BiayyeKAa)  diaqgello. 

Rom.  9.  17  my  name  might  be  declared  throughout 

16.7b  lead  through,  Btnyio/j.at.  diegeomai. 

Acts    8.  33  who  shall  declare  his  generation?  for 

9. 27  declared  unto  them  how  he  had  seen  the 
12. 17  he.. declared  unto  them  how  the  Lord  had 


17.  To  lead  throughout,  iicdniyiofiai  ekdiegeoma/. 
Acts  13.  41  in  no  wise  believe,  though  a  man  declare 
1 5.    3  they  passed  through . .  declaring  the  con  v. 

18.-1  shewing,  ei/Set^is  endeixis. 

Horn.  3.  25  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  rem  is, 
3.  26  declare,  (I  say),  at  this  time  his  righteo. 

19.ro  lead  out,  ttyytofj.at.  exegeomai. 

John  1.  iS  the  only  begotten  Son.  .hath  declared" 
Acts  10.    8  when  he  had  declared  all  (these)  things 
15. 12  declaring  what  miracles  and  wonders  God 
15.  14  Simeon  hath  declared  how  God.  .did  visit 
21.  19  he  declared  particularly  what  things  God 

20. To  tell  fully,  Karayyekkcii  kataggello. 

Acts  17.  23  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  declare  I  unto 
1  Co.    2.    1  declaring  unto  you  the  testimony  of  God 

21.7*0  mark  out,  dplfa  Iwrizo. 

Rom.  1.    4  declared  (to  be)  the  Son  of  God  with 

22.  To  tell  near,  wapayyeWco  paraygello. 

1  Co.  11.  17  I  declare  (unto  you)  I  praise  (you)  not 
23.7*0  explain.  <ppd£w  jj/irazo. 

Matt  13.  36  [Declare]  unto  us  the  parable  of  the  tares 
15.  15  said  unto  him,  Declare  unto  us  this  par. 

2i. To  tell  good  news,  evayyeKifa  euatfgelizo. 
Rev.  10-    7  he  hath  declared  to  his  servants  the  pro. 

DECLARE  glad  tidings  unto,  to  — 

To  tell  good  news,  evayye\i(co  euay"gelizp. 

Acts  13.  32  we  declare  unto  you  glad  tidings,  how 

DECLARE  manifestly,  to  — 

7*o  manifest,  (pavepSoj  phaneroo. 

2  Co.    3.    3  manifestly  declared  to  be  the  epistle  of 
DECLARE  plainly,  to  — 

7*o  manifest,  ifj.<pavi((o  emphanizo. 

Heb.  11.  14  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  country 
DECLARED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  put  before,  *itt  nagad,  6. 

Isa.  21.   2  A  grievous  vision  is  declared  unto  me  ;  the 

2.  To  number,  "i£D  saphar,  3. 

Exod.  9.  16  thatmy  namemaybedeclaredthrougnout 
3.7*0  be  numbered,  "£)□  saphar,  4. 

Psa.  88.  11  Shall  thy  loving  kindness  he  declared  in 
4.7*0  be  spread  out,  explained,  w~\5  parash,  4. 

Num  15.  34  it  was  not  declared  what  should  be  done 
DECLINE,  to  — 

1.7*0  incline,  stretch  down  or  out,  nai  natah. 
Exod23.    2  shalt  thou  speak  in  a  caus'e  to  decline 
Psa.  44.  18  neither  have  our  steps  declined  from  thy 
102.  11  My  days  (are)  like  a  shadow  tnat  declin. 
109.  23  gone  like  the  shadow  when  it  declineth 
119.  51  (yet)  have  I  not  declined  from  thy  law 
119.  157  (yet)  do  I  not  decline  from  thy  testimo. 
Prov.  4.    5  neither  decline  from  the  words  of  my 

2.7*0  (cause  to)  incline,  ~bj  natah,  5. 

Job  23. 11  his  way  have  I  kept,  and  not  declined 

3.  7*0  turn  aside,  i*d  sicr. 

Deut  17.  11  thou  shalt  not  decline  from  the  sentence 
2CI1.  34.    2  declined  (neither)  to  the  right  hand  nor 
4.7*0  turn  aside,  n»g»  satah. 

Prov.  7.  25  Let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  ways 
DECREASE,  to  — 
1.7*0  be  or  become  lacking,  "ipn  chaser. 

Gen.    8.    5  the  waters  decreased  continually  until 
2.  To  lessen,  iKarrSw  elatloo. 

John  3.  30  He  must  increase,  hut  I  (must)  decrease 
DECREASE,  to  suffer  to  — 
7*0  cause  or  let  be  few,  os?3  maat,  5. 

Psa.  107.  38  He . .  surf  ereth  not  then"  cattle  to  decrease 
DECREE  — 
1.4  bond,  "1DN  esar. 

Dan.  6.  7  have  consulted,  .to  make  a  firm  decree 
6.  8  0  king,  establish  the  decree,  and  sign  the 
6.  9  Darius  signed  the  writing  and  the  decree 
6. 12  and  spake . .  concerning  the  king's  decree 
6.  12  Hast  thou  not  signed  a  decree,  that  every 
6.  13  nor  the  decree  that  thou  hast  signed,  but 
6.  15  no  decree  nor  statute  which  the  king 

%A  thing  cut  out  or  decided,  rrjM  gezerah, 
Dan.    4.  17  This  matter  (is)  by  the  decree  of  the 
4.  24  O  king,  and  thi3  (is)  the  decree  of  the 

3.*1  word,  matter,  thing,  ~q.i  dabar. 

2Ch.  30.    5  So  they  established  a  decree  to  make 

4. Law,  a  thing  given  forth,  rn  dath. 

Esth.  2.   8  when  the  king's,  .decree  was  heard,  and 

3.  15  and  the  decree  was  given  in  Shushan  the 

4.  3  the  king's  commandment  and  his  decree 
4.  8  the  writing  of  the  decree  that  was  given 
8.  14  decree  was  given  at  Shushan  the  palace 

8.  17  the  kings  commandment  and  his  decree 
g.    1  the  king's  commandment  and  his  decree 

9.  13  according  unto  this  day's  decree,  and  let 
9.  14  the  decree  was  given  at  Shushan  ;  and 

Dan.    2.    9  (there  is  but)  one  decree  for  you;  for  ye 
2. 13  the  decree  went  forth  that  the  wise  (men) 
2.  15  Why  (is)  the  decree  (so)  hasty  from  the 

5.  Statute,  thing  decreed,  or  marked  out,  ph  choq. 
Job  28.  26  When  he  made  a  decree  for  the  rain,  and 


Psa. 


Jon. 

8.  Taste, 

Ezra 


Dan. 


7  I  will  declare  the  decree  :  the  Lord  hath 
148.   6  he  hath  made  a  decree  which  shall  not 
Prov.  8. 29  When  he  gave  to  the  sea  his  decree,  that 
Jer.     5.  22  bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual  decree 
Mjc.    7.  11  that  day  shall  the  decree  be  far  removed 
Zeph.  2.  2  Before  the  decree  bring  forth,  (before)  the 

6.  Statute,  thing  decreed  or  marked  out,  js^n  cheqeq. 

Isa.    10.    1  unrighteous  decrees,  and  that  write 

7.  Taste,  discretion,  nya  taam. 
3.    7  by  the  decree  of  the  king  and  his  nobles 

discretion,  cyp  teem. 

5.  13  Cyrus  made  a  decree  to  build  this  house 

7  that  a  decree  was  made  of  Cyrus  the  king 

1  the  king  made  a  decree,  and  search  was 
3  the  king  made  a  decree  (concerning)  the 

8  I  make  a  decree  what  ye  shall  do  to  the 
11I  have  made  a  decree,  that  whosoever 

2  I  Darius  have  made  a  decree  ;  let  it  be 
13  I  make  a  decree,  that  all  they  of  the 
21  I.  .do  make  a  decree  to  all  the  treasurers 
10  Thou,  0  king,  hast  made  a  decree,  that 

3.  29  I  make  a  decree,  That  every  people,  nation 

4.  6  Therefore  made  I  a  decree  to  bring  in  all 

6.  26  I  make  a  decree,  That  in  every  dominion 

9. Saying,  "icnd  maamar. 

Esth.  9.  32  the  decree  of  Esther  confirmed  these 
10. Matter,  thing,  Dap?  pithgam. 

Esth.  1.  20  when  the  king's  decree  which  he  shall 
11. Anything  set  up  or  established,  Dr'j?  qeyam. 

Dan.    6.   7  to  make  a  firm  decree,  that  whosoever 
12.  Dogma,  decree,  b'6yfia  dogma. 

Luke  2.    1  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cesar  Aug. 

Acts  16.    4  they  delivered  them  the  decrees  for  to 
17.    7  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Cesar 

DECREE,  to  — 

1.  To  cut  out,  separate,  polish,  *ija  gazar. 

Job    22.    28  Thou  shalt  also  deciee  a  thing,  and  it 
2.7*0  cut  out,  mark  out,  ppn  chaqaq. 

Isa.   10.    1  Woe  unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous 
3.7*0  cut  out,  mark  out,  ppn  clutqaq,  Za. 

Prov.  8.  i5_kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice 
4. 7*0  raise  up,  confirm,  establish,  Dip  qum,  3. 

Esth.  9.  31  as  they  had  decreed  for  themselves,  and 
5. 7*o  judge,  Kpivw  krino. 

1  Co.  7.  37  hath  so  decreed  in  his  heart  that  he  will 
DECREED  iplace)  — 
1. Statute,  ph  choq. 

Job   38.  10  And  brake  up  for  it  my  decreed  (place) 
2.7*0  determine,  yy\  charats. 

Isa.   10.  22  the  consumption  decreed  shall  overflow 
DECREED,  to  be  — 
To  be  cut  out,  separated,  i]3  gazar,  2. 

Esth.  2.    1  remembered,  .what  was  decreed  against 
DE-DAN,  ]y\  low. 

1.  A  grandson  of  dish  son  of  Ham,  B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10.    7  the  sons  of  P^aamah  ;  Sheba,  and  D. 
1  Ch.  1.    9  the  sons  of  Raamah  ;  Sheba,  and  D. 

2.  A  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah,  B.C.  1810. 

Gen.  25.    3  And  Jokshan  begat  Sheba  and  D. 

25.    3  the  sons  of  D.  were  Asshurim,  and  Let. 
z  Ch.  1.  32  And  the  sons  of  Jokshan  ;  Sheba,  and  D. 

3.  A  district  near  Edom  between  Sela  and  the  Salt  Sea, 
not  far  from  Edom. 

25.  23  D.,  and  Tenia,  and  Buz,  and  all  (that  are) 

49.    8  turn  back,  dwell  deep,  0  inhabitants  of  D. 

25.  13  and  they  of  D.  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

27.  15  The  men  of  D.  (were)  thy  merchants 

27.  20  D.  (was)  thy  merchant  in  precious  clothes 

38. 13  Sheba,  and  D.,  and  the  merchants  of  Tar. 

DE-DA'-NIM,  C*?-n. 

Descendants  of  Raamah,  grandson  of  Ham,  B.C.  2200. 
Isa.   21.  13  O  ye  travelling  companies  of  D. 


Jer. 
Eze. 


DEDICATE,  to  — - 

l.To  press  in  or  on,  dedicate,  ^  chanak. 

Deut  20.   5  What  man . .  hath  not  dedicated  it  ?  let 
20.   5  lest  he  die . .  and  another  man  dedicate  it 

1  Ki.  8.  63  children  of  Israel  dedicated  the  house 

2  Ch.  7.    5  all  the  people  dedicated  the  house  of  God 
2.7*0  cause  a  separation,  hallow,  «hg  qadesh,  5. 

Judg  1 7.    3  I  had  wholly  dedicated  the  silver  unto 
2  Sa.    8.  11  Which  also  king  David  did  dedicate  unto 
8.  11  the  silver  and  gold  that  he  had  dedicated 
2  Ki.  12. 18  his  fathers,  kings  of  Judah,  had  dedicat. 

1  Ch.  iS.  1 1  Them  also  king  David  dedicated  unto  the 

26.  26  the  captains  of  the  host,  had  dedicated 
26.  27  the  spoils  won  in  battles  did  they  dedicate 
26.  28  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah,  had  dedicated 
26.  28  whosoever  had  dedicated  (any  thing),  (it 

2  Ch.  2.    4  to  dedicate  (it)  to  him,  (and)  to  burn 
3.7*0  make  anew,  iyxawlQw  egkainizo. 

Heb.   9.  iS  neither  the  first  (testament)  was  dedica. 

DEDICATED  thing  — 

1.A  thing  devoted  to  God,  D*in  cherem. 

Eze.  44.  29  every  dedicated  thing  in  Israel  shall  be 
2.^4  thing  separated,  hallowed,  BJnp  qodeslu 

j  Ki.  7.  51  the  things  which  David.. had  dedicated 


DEDICATING 


240 


DEFEND 


i  Ki.  15.  15  the  things  which  his  father  had  dedicated 

15.  15  the  things  which  himself  had  dedicated 
2  Ki.  12.    4  All  the  money  of  the  dedicated  things 

1  Ch.26.  20  the  treasures  of  the  dedicated  things 

26.  26  all  the  treasures  of  the  dedicated  things 
28.  12  of  the  treasuries  of  the  dedicated  things 

2  Ch.  5.    1  things  that  David  his  father  had  dedica. 

15. 18  the  things  that  his  father  had  dedicated 
15.  18  the  things.,  that  he  himself  had  dedicated 
24.    7  the  dedicated  things  of  the  house  of  the 
31.  12  tithes  and  the  dedicated  (things)  faithful. 

DEDICATING,  DEDICATION  — 

A  pressing  in,  dedication,  najq  chanukkah. 

Num.  7.  10  the  princes  offered  for  dedicating  of  the 
7.  11  offering,  .for  the  dedicating  of  the  altar 

7.  84,  88  This  (was)  the  dedication  of  the  altar 
2  Ch.  7.   9  they  kept  the  dedication  of  the  altar 
Ezra   6. 16  kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God 

6.  17  offered  at  the  dedication  of  this  house 
Neli.  12.  27  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  of  Jerusal. 
12.  27  bring  them . .  to  keep  the  dedication  with 
Psa.  30.  title,  (at)  the  dedication  of  the  house  of  D. 
Dan.    3.    2  to  come  to  the  dedication  of  the  image 

3.    3  provinces,  were  gathered . .  unto  the  dedi. 

DEDICATION,  feast  of  the  — 

The  renewals,  ra  iynaivta  ta  etjkainia. 

John  10.  22  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  the  dedication 

DEED  — 

l.Deed,  recompense,  n?>D3  gemulah. 

Isa.  59.  18  According'to  (their)  deeds,  accordingly 

2.  Word,  thing,  matter,  *i:n  dabar. 

2  Ch.35.  27  his  deeds,  first  and  last,  behold,  they  (are) 
Esth.  1.  17  (this)  deed  of  the  queen  shall  come  abro. 

1.  18  which  have  heard  of  the  deed  of  the  que. 
Jer.     5. 28  they  overpass  the  deeds  of  the  wicked 

2.Work,  deed,  nvyj?  maaseh. 

Gen.  20.   9  thou  hast  done  deeds  unto  me  that  ought 

44. 15  What  deed  (is)  this  that  ye  have  done? 
Ezra  9.  13  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds 

4.  Doing,  deed,  frpyU.  alilah. 

1  Ch.16.    8  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people 
Psa.  105.    1  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people 

5. Act,  action,  Sy_s poal. 

Psa.  28.  4  Give  them  according  to  their  deeds,  and 
Jer.  25.  14  recompense  them  according  to  their  deeds 

6.  Work,  %pyov  ergon. 

Luke  11.  48  that  ye  allow  the  deeds  of  your  fathers 

24.  19  which  was  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and 
John  3.  19  loved  darkness,  .because  their  deeds  were 
3.  20  neither  cometh.  .lest  his  deeds  should  be 
3.  21  that  his  deeds  may  be  made  manifest 

8.  41  Ye  do  the  deeds  of  your  father 

Acts    7.  22  and  was  mighty  in  words  and  in  deeds 
Rom.  2.    6  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  de. 
3.  20  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no 
3.  28  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law 

15.  18  the  Gentiles  obedient,  by  word  and  deed 

1  Co.   5.    2  that  he  that  hath  done  this  deed  might 

2  Co.  10. 11  such  (will  we  be)  also  in  deed  when  we 
Col.     3.  17  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  (do)  all 
2  Pe.   2.    8  from  day  to  day  with  (their)  unlawful  d. 

1  Jo.    3.  18  neither  in  tongue  ;  but  in  deed,  and  in 

2  Jo.        11  For  he.  .is  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds 

3  Jo.  10  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  he  do. 
Jude  15  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  have 
Rev.    2.   6  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes 

2.  22  except  they  repent  of  their  deeds 

16.  11  and  repented  uot  of  their  deeds 

7. A  doing,  iroinffts  poiesis. 

Jas.     1.  25  tliis  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed 

8.  A  doing,  npa^is  praxis. 

Luke23-  51  consented  to  the  counsel  and  deed  of  them 

Acts  19.  18  came,  aud  confessed,  and  showed  their  d. 

Roin.  8.  13  if  ye .  .do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body 

Col.     3.   9  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds 
DEED,  to  do  this  — 
To  work  this,  Karepyd^o/iai  tuvto  katergazomai 

1  Co.    e.    3  (concerning)  him  that  hath  so  done  this  d. 
DEED  clone  to,  good  — 
Well  doing,  svepyeo-ta  eucrgesia. 

Acts  4.   9  be  examined  of  the  good  deed  done  to  the 
DEEDS,  our  — 
What  we  practised,  a  iirpa.%afj.ev  ha  epraxamen. 

Luke  23.  41  for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  de. 
[See   also   Done,   good,    mighty,    such,    this,    very, 
worthy.] 
DEEM,  to  — 
To  suspect,  vttouoew  huponoeo. 

Acts  27.  27  the  shipmen  deemed  that  they  drew  near 
DEEP  — 
l.Deep  places  or  things,  D'jsaya  maamaqqim. 

Psa.  69.    2  I  am  come  into  deep  waters,  where  the 
69.  14  be  delivered,  .out  of  the  deep  waters 
2. Shady  place,  nVisa  metsolah. 

Neh.   9.  11  persecutors  thou  threwest  into  the  deeps 
Psa.  S3.    6  the  lowest  pit,  in  darkness,  in  the  deeps 

3.  Shady  places  nhisp  metsulah. 

Job    41.  31  He  maketh  the  deep  tn  boil  like  a  pot 
Psa.  69.  15  neither  let  the  deep  swallow  me  up 
107.  24  the  works  of.  .his  wonders  in  the  deep 


Jon.    2.    3  thou  hadst  cast  me  into  the  deep 
Zech  10.  11  all  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  dry 

4.^4  sunk  down  place,  yptyp  mishqa. 

Eze.  34. 18  to  have  drunk  of  the  deep  waters 

5.  Deep,  pvpy.  amiq. 

Dan.   2.  22" He  revealeth  the  deep  and  secret  thiugs 

6.  To  make  deep,  deepen,  go  deep,  pay  amaq,  5. 

Jer.  49.    8  turn  back,  dwell  deep,  6  inhabitants 
49.  3o_get  you  far  off,  dwell  deep,  O  ye  inhab. 
l.Deep,  pay  amoq. 

Lev.  13.    3  the  plague  in  sight  (he)  deeper  than  the 
13.    4  and  in  sight  (be)  not  deeper  than  the  skin 
J3-  25>  3°  it  (be  *n)  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 
13-  31  it  (be)  not  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 
13.  32  scall  (be)  not  in  sight  deeper  than  the 
13.  34  nor  (be)  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 

Job   11.    8  deeper  than  hell ;  what  canst  thou  know? 

Psa.  64.    6  theinward(thought). .  and  the  heart,(is)d. 

Prov  18.    4  words  of  a  man's  mouth  (are  as)  deep  wa. 
20.    5  Counsel  in  the  heart . .  (is  like)deep  water 

22. 14  The  mouth  of  strange  women  (is)a  deep 
23.  27  For  a  whore  (is)  a  deep  ditch ;  and  a 

Eze.  23.  32  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  deep  and  large 

8.  Shady  place,  n^s  tsulah. 

Isa.  44.  27  That  saith  to  the  deep,  Be  dry,  and  I  will 

9.  Deep  place,  the  deep  (sea),  Dinp  tehom. 

Gen.    1.   2  darkness  (was)  upon  the  face  of  the  deep 

7.  11  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep 

8.  2  The  fountains  also  of  the  deep  and  the 
49.  25  blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  under 

Deut33.  13  and  for  the  deep  that  coucheth  beneath 
Job  38.  30  and  the  face  of  the  deep  is  frozen 

41.  32  (one)  would  think  the  deep  (to  be)hoary 
Psa.  36.    6  thy  judgments  (are)  a  great  deep 

42.  7  Deep  calleth  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of 
104.    6  Thou  coveredst  it  with  the  deep  as 

148.    7  Praise  the  Lord.. dragons,  and  all  deeps 
Prov.  8.  28  strengthened  the  fountains  of  the  deep 
Isa.  51.  10  the  sea,  the  waters  of  the  great  deep 

63.  13  That  led  them  through  the  deep,  as  an 
Eze.  26.  19  when  I  shall  bring  up  the  deep  upon  thee 

31.    4  the  deep  set  him  up  on  high  with  her 

31. 15  I  covered  the  deep  for  him,  and  I  restrain. 
Amos  7.   4  it  devoured  the  great  deep,  and  did  eat 
Hab.   3.  10  the  deep  uttered  his  voice,  (and)  lifted 

10.  Very  deep  place,  &{3vo-<ros  abussos. 

Luke  8.  31  not  command  them  to  go  out  into  the  d. 
Rom  10.    7  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep  ?  that 
11. The  deep,  &ddos  bathos. 

Luke  5.    4  Launch  out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down 
2  Co.    8.    2  their  deep  poverty  abounded  unto  the 

12. Deep,  fiadvs  bathus. 

John  4.  11  nothing  to  draw  with,  and  the  well  is  d. 
Acts  20.    9  Eutychus,  being  fallen  into  a  deep  sleep 

13. Depth,  $ud6s  buthos. 

2  Co.  11.  25  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the  deep 

14.  .4  root,  V~w  shoresh. 

Psa.  80.    9  didst  cause  it  to  take  deep  root,  and  it 

DEEP  things  — 
l.Deep,  pay  amoq. 

Job  12.  22  He  discovereth  deep  things  out  of  dark. 
2.  The  depth,  (3d6os  bathos. 

1  Co.    2. 10  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God 

DEEP,  to  be  — 

To  be  deep,  pay  amaq. 

Psa.  92.    s  O  LORD.. thy  thoughts  are  very  deep 

DEEP,  to  dig  — 

To  dig  and  deepen,  aKairrio  ical  (3a8vvo>  bathund. 

Luke  6.  48  man  which  built  an  house,  and  digged  d. 
DEEP,  exceeding  — 
Deep  deep,  pb»  pay  amoq  amoq. 

Eccl.  7.  24  That  which  is  far  off,  and  exceeding  deep 

DEEP,  to  make  — 

l.To  make  deep,  pay  amaq,  5. 

Isa.  30.  33  he  hath  made  (it)  deep  (and)  large 

2. To  cause  to  sink,  V\$  shaqa,  5. 

Eze.  32. 14  Then  will  I  make  their  waters  deep,  and 

DEEP  pits  — 

Nets,  pits,  fioods,  nnaqa  mahamoroth. 

Psa.  140.  10  into  deep  pits,  that  they  rise  not  up  again 

DEEP  place  — 

l.Deep,  concealed,  innermost  places,  ipna  mechqar. 

Psa.  95.   4  In  his  hand  (are)  the  deep  places  of  the 
2.  A  deep  place,  Dinifi  tehom. 

Psa.135.    6  in  earth,  in  the  seas,  and  all  deep  places 

DEEP,  to  seek  — 

To  make  deep,  pay  amaq,  5. 

Isa.  29.  15  Woe  unto  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide 

DEEP  sleep  — 

Deep  sleep,  nanin  tardemah. 

Gen.    2.  21  the  Lord  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall 

15. 12  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  Abram ;  and,  lo 
1  Sa  26. 12  a  deep  sleep  from  the  Lord  was  fallen 
Job     4.  13  the  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  on  men 

33.  15  the  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon 


Prov  19.  15  Sktthfulness  casteth  into  a  deep  sleep 
Isa.   29.  10  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep 

DEEPER  — 
Deep,  pay  ameq. 

Isa.   33. 19  a  people  of  deeper  speech  than  chou  canst 

DEEPLY,  to  have  — 

To  make  deep,  go  deep,  p^]3r  amaq,  5. 

Isa.   31.    6  children  of  Israel  have  deeply  revolted 
Hos.    9.    9  They  have  deeply  corrupted  (themselves) 

DEEPNESS  — 
Depth,  $d6o$  bathos. 

ilatti3.   5  because  they  had  no  deepness  of  earth 
DEFAME,  to  — 
To  speak  injuriously,  t3Xa<r<pn^o}  blasphemed. 

1  Co.   4. 13  [Being  defamed,]  we  entreat;  we  are  made 
DEFAMING  — 

Slander,  evil  report,  ngri  dibbah. 

Jer.  20. 10  I  heard  the  defaming  of  many,  fear  on 
DEFEAT,  to  — 
To  break,  frustrate,  make  void,  Ti£  parar,  5. 

2  Sa.  15.  34  then  mayest  thou  for  me  defeat  the  cou. 

17.  14  the  Lord  had  appointed  to  defeat  the 

DEFENCE,  (place  of)  — 

1.-4  defence,  defence,  is|  betser. 

Job    22.  25  the  Almighty  shall  be  thy  defence,  ana 
2.  Covering,  overlaying,  nsn  chuppo.h. 

Isa.     4.    5  for  upon  all  the  glory  (shall  be)  a  defence 
3. Shield,  f3a  magen. 

Psa.     7.  10  My  defence  (is)  of  God,  which  saveth  the 
89.  18  the  Lord  (is)  our  defence;  and  the  Holy 

^.Fortress,  stronghold,  defence,  rn^a  metsudah. 
Psa.  31.    2  for  an  house  of  defence  to  save  me 

5. Fortress,  "Visa  matsor. 

2  Ch.n.    5  and  built  cities  for  defence  In  Judah 
Isa.    19.    6  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  emptied 

6. High  tower,  place  of  defence,  nafc"?  misgab. 

Psa.  59.  9  I  wait  upon  thee  :  for  God  (is)  my  defence 
59.  16  thou  hast  been  my  defence  and  refuge  in 
59.  17  God  (is)  my  defence,  (and)  the  God  of  my 
52.  2,  6  rock  and  my  salvation  ;  (he  is)  my  def. 
94.  22  the  Lord  is  my  defence  ;  and  my  God  (is) 
Isa.  33. 16  his  place  of  defence  (shall  be)  the  muni. 
7.  To  cover,  defend,  hedge  in,  ^pD  sakak. 

Nah.   2.    s  and  the  defence  shall  be  prepared 
8. Shade,  shadow,  defence,  ?)t  tsel. 

Num.  14.   9  their  defence  is  departed  from  them,  and 
Eccl.  7. 12  wisdom  (is)  a  defence,  .money  (is)  a  def. 

9. Apology,  airoKoyla  apologia. 

Acts  22.    1  hear  ye  my  defence  (which  I  make)  now 
PM1.    1.    7  in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the 
1.  17  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  Gospel 

DEFENCE,  to  make  — 

To  apologize,  speak  off,  a.-woXoylo{jiai  apologeomai. 

Acts  19.  33  would  have  made  his  defence  unto  the 
DEFENCED -- 
l.To  be  fenced  off,  1*3  batsar. 

Isa.  25.    2  thou  hast  made,  .(of)  a  defenced  city  a 
27.  10  the  defenced  city  (shall  be)  desolate,  (and) 

36.  1  came  up  against  all  the  defenced  cities 

37.  26  to  lay  waste  defenced  cities  (into)  ruinous 
Eze.  21.  20  and  to  Judah  in  Jerusalem  the  defenced 

2. Place  fenced  off,  i^^P  inibtsar. 

Jer.     1.  18  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  city 
4.    5  and  let  us  go  into  the  defenced  cities 
8.  14  let  us  enter  into  the  defenced  cities,  ami 
34.    7  these  def enced  cities  remained  of  the  cit- 

DEFEND,  to  — 

l.To  defend,  hedge  about,  ]ii  ganan. 

2  Ki.19.  34  I  will  defend  this  city,  to  save  it,  for 

20.    6  I  will  defend  this  city  for  mine  own  sake 
Isa.    31.    5  defending  also  he  will  deliver  (it) 
37-  35  I  "will  defend  this  city  to  save  it,  for 

38.  6  deliver  thee,  .and  I  will  defend  this  city 

2.  To  defend,  | j3  ganan,  5. 

Isa.   31.    5  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  defend  Jerusalem 
Zech.  9.  15  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  defend  them 
12.  8  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  defend  the 

3.  To  save,  give  width,  freedom,  yv?*  yasha,  5. 

Judgio.    1  there  arose,  to  defend  Israel,  Tola  the  son 

4.  To  deliver,  snatch  away,  *?sj  natsal,  5. 

2  Sa.  23. 12  the  midst  of  the  grouud,  and  defended  it 

5.  To  cover,  defend,  hedge  in,  *pp  sakak,  5. 

Psa.     5.  11  shout  for  joy,  because  thou  defendest 

6.  To  exalt,  make  high,  3Jb"  sagab,  3. 

Psa.  20.    1  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee 

59.    1  defend  me  from  them  that  rise  up  against 

7.  To  judge,  EW  shaphat. 

Psa.  82.   3  Defend  the  poor  and  fatherless  ;  do  jus. 

8.  To  avert,  repel,  apLvvofxai  amunomai. 

Acts    7.  24  he  defended  (him),  and  avenged  him  that 
DEFER,  to  — 
l.To  be  behind,  tarry,  defer,  inx  achar,  3. 

Gen.  34.  19  the  young  man  deferred  not  to  do  the 


DEFERRED 


241 


DELICATENESS 


Eccl.  5.   4  vowest  a  vow  unto  God,  defer  Dot  to  pay 
Dan.   9.  19  defer  not,  for  thine  own  sake,  0  my  God 

2.  To  make  long,  prolong,  tj-in  arak,  5. 
Prov.19.  11  The  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his 
Isa.   48.    9  For  my  name's  sake  will  I  defer  mine 

3.  To  cast  back,  ava,0dX\ofj.ai  anaballomai. 

Acts  24.  22  heard  these  things,  .he  deferred  them 
DEFERRED  — 
To  be  drawn  oat,  ?\VO  mashak,  4. 

Prov  13.  12  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick 
DEFILE,  to  — 
1. Defilement, pollution,  btiz  goel. 

Keh.  13.  29  they  have  defiled  the  priesthood,  and  the 

2.  To  pierce,  pollute^bn  chalal,  3. 

Gen.  49.    4  thy  father's  hed ;  then  defiledst  thou  (it) 
Esodsi.  14  every  one  that  defileth  it  shall  surely 

1  Ch.  5.    1  forasmuch  as  he  defiled  his  father's  bed 
Psa.  74.    7  they  have  defiled  (by  casting  down)  the 
Jer.   16.  iS  they  have  defiled  my  land,  they  have 
Eze.     7.  22  robbers  shall  enter  into  it,  and  defile  it 

28.    7  and  they  shall  defile  thy  brightness 
28.  18  Thou  hast  defiled  thy  sanctuaries  bs 

3.  To  profane,  f]3q  chaneph. 

Jer.     3.   9  that  she  denied  the  land,  and  committed 
i.  To  make  profane,  *]jrj  chaneph,  5. 

Num35.  33  for  blood  it  defileth  the  land 
5.  To  render  unclean,  ts*ps?  tame,  3. 

Gen.  34.    5  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  defiled  Dinah  his 
34.  13  because  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their  sister 

34.  27  because  they  had  defiled  their  sister 
Lev.  11. 44  neither  shall  ye  defile  yourselves  with 

15.  31  when  they  defile  my  tabernacle  that  (is) 

18.  28  spue  not  you  out  also,  when  ye  defile  it 
20.    3  to  defile  my  sanctuary,  and  to  profane 

Num.  5.   3  defile  not  their  camps,  in  the  midst 

6.    9  hath  defiled  the  head  of  his  consecration 
19. 13  defileth  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  ;  and 

19.  20  he  hath  defiled  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord 

35.  34  Defile  not  therefore  the  land  -which  ye 

2  Ki.  23.    8  defiled  the  high  places  where  the  priests 

23. 10  he  defiled  Topheth,  which  (is)  in  the  va. 
23.  13  And  the  high  places,  .did  the  king  defile 

Psa.  79.    1  thy  holy  temple  have  they  defiled  ;  they 
Isa.  30.  22  defile  also  the  covering  of  thy  graven 
Jer.     2.    7  but  when  ye  entered,  ye  defiled  my  land 

32.  34  But  they  set  their  abominations,  .to  def. 
Eze.     5.  11  thou  hast  defiled  my  sanctuary  with  all 

9.    7  Defile  the  house,  and  fill  the  courts  with 
18.    6  neither  hath  denied  his  neighbour's  wife 

18. 11  but  even  hath,  .defiled  his  neighbour's 
18. 15  hath  not  denied  his  neighbour's  wife 

22.  11  hath  lewdly  defiled  his  daughter  in  law 

23.  17  they  defiled  her  with  their  whoredom,  and 
23.  38  they  have  denied  my  sanctuary 

33.  26  ye  defile  every  one  his  neighbour's  wife 

36.  17  they  defiled  it  by  their  own  way  and  by 
43.  7  shall  the  house  of  Israel  no  more  defile 
43.   8  they  have  even  denied  my  holy  name 

6.  To  defile,  or  wind  about,  *]tt>  tdnaph,  3. 

Song  5.    3  washed  my  feet ;  how  shall  I  defile  them  ? 

7.  To  roll,  tyll  alal,  Za. 

Job  16.  15  I  have,  .defiled  my  horn  in  the  dust 

8.  To  humble,  rr$y  anah,  3. 

Gen.  34.    2  took  her,  and  lay  with  her,  and  defiled 

9.  To  make  common  or  unclean,  kow6w  koinoo. 

Matt. 15.  n  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth 
15.  11  that  which  cometh  out.  .defileth  a  man 
15. 18  from  the  heart ;  and  they  defile  the  man 
15.  20  These  are  (the  things)  which  defile  a  man 
15.  20  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not 
Mark  7.  15  that  entering  into  him  can  defile  him 
7.  15  those  are  they  that  defile  the  man 
7.  18  entereth  into  the  man,  (it)  cannot  defile 
7.  20  That  which  cometh  out.  .defileth  the 
7.  23  come  from  within,  and  defile  the  man 
Rev.  21.  27  enter  into  it  anything  that  [defileth] 

10. To  stain,  tinge,  colour,  defile,  fj.ia.ivQo  miaino. 
Johni8.  28  lest  they  should  be  denied,  but  that 
Titus  1.  15  unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbeliev. 
1.  15  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled 
Heb.  12.  15  trouble  (you),  and  thereby  many  be  defil. 
Jude        8  these  (filthy)  dreamers  defile  the  flesh 

11.  To  defile,  make  filthy,  fxoXvvo)  moluno. 

1  Co.  8.   7  their  conscience  heing  weak  is  denied 
Rev.   3.    4  which  have  not  defiled  their  garments 
14.    4  they  which  were  not  defiled  with  women 

I2.ro  spot,  defile,  stain,  <nri\6co  spiloo. 

Jas.     3.   6  it  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth 
13.  To  corrupt,  deprave,  <p&elpw  phtlxeiro. 

1  Co.    3. 17  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God 

DEFILE  oneself  with  mankind  — 
Lying  with  a  male,  apo-evoKotrns  arsenokoites. 
1  Ti.    1. 10  them  that  defile  themselves  with  manki. 

DEFILE  self,  to  — 

l.To  make  self  free  or  defiled,  Sya  goal,  7. 
Dan.   1.    8  he  would  not  defile  himself  with 

1.   8  requested,  .that  he  might  not  defile  him. 
2.  To  be  or  become  unclean,  ncb  tame. 

Lev.  18.  20  neighbour's  wife,  to  defile  thyself  with 
18.  23  thou  lie  with  any  beast  to  defile  thyself 

31 


Lev.  22.    8  shall  not  eat  to  defile  himself  therewith 
Eze.  22.    3  idols  against  herself  to  defile  herself 
22.    4  hast  defiled  thyself  in  thine  idols  which 
44.  25  for  father,  .they  may  defile  themselves 
3.  To  be  or  become  unclean,  Npu  tame,  2. 

Eze.  23.    7  with  all  their  idols  she  defiled  herself 
\.To  make  self  unclean,  ncb  tame,  7. 

Lev.  18.  24  Defile  not  ye  yourselves  in  any  of  these 
18.  30  that  ye  defile  not  yourselves  therein 
21.    4  he  shall  not  defile  himself,  ("being)  a  chief 
21.  11  nor  defile  himself  for  his  father,  or  for 
Eze.  20.    7  defile  not  yourselves  with  the  idols  of 
20. 18  nor  defile  yourselves  with  their  idols 
37.  23  Neither  shall  they  defile  themselves  any 
44.  25  come  at  no  dead  person  to  defile  themsel. 
DEFILED  — 
Unclean,  HObtame. 

Num.  5.    2  and  whosoever  is  defiled  by  the  dead 

9.   6  there  were  certain  men,  who  were  denied 
9.    7  We  (are)  defiled  by  the  dead  body  of  a  man 
Jer.   19.  13  shall  be  defiled  as  the  place  of  Tophet 
Eze.    4.  13  eat  their  defiled  bread  among  the  Genti. 
DEFILED,  to  be  — 
l.To  become  defied,  Sjo  gaal,  2. 

Isa.  59.  3  your  hands  are  defiled  with  blood,  and 

2.  To  be  pierced,  profaned,  hbn  chalal,  2. 

Eze.    7.  24  and  their  holy  places  shall  be  defiled 

3.  To  be  or  become  profane,  *]jrj  chaneph. 

Isa.   24.    5  The  earth  also  is  defiled  under  the 

4.  To  be  or  become  unclean,  ncd  tame. 

Lev.    5.    3  that  a  man  shall  be  defiled  withal 
13.  46  he  shall  be  defiled  ;  he  (is)  unclean 
15.  32  whose  seed  goeth  from  him,  and  is  defil. 
18.  25  the  laud  is  denied  :  therefore  I  do  visit 

18.  27  before  you,  and  the  land  is  denied 

19.  31  neither  seek  after  wizards,  to  be  defiled 
Psa.  106.  39  Thus  were  they  denied  with  their  own 

5.  To  be  or  become  unclean,  kdb  tame,  2. 

Lev.  18.  24  for  in  all  these  the  nations  are  defiled 
>um.  5.  13  she  be  defiled,  and  (there  be)  no  witness 
5.  14  jealous  of  his  wife,  and  she  be  defiled 
5. 14  jealous  of  his  wife,  and  she  be  not  defil. 
5.  20  if  thou  be  defiled,  and  some  man  have 
5.  27  if  she  be  defiled,  and  have  done  trespass 
5. 28  if  the  woman  be  not  denied,  but  be  clean 

5.  29  when  a  wife  goeth  aside . .  and  is  defiled 
Eze.  20.  43  your  doings,  wherein  ye  have  been  defiled 

23.  13  I  saw  that  she  was  defiled,  (that)  they 
Hos.    5.    3  committest  whoredom,  (and)  Israel  is  d. 

6.  10  the  whoredom  of  Ephraiin,  Israel  is  de. 
6.T0  defile,  Npo  tame,  3. 

Deut2i.  23  that  thy  land  be  not  defiled,  which  the 
7.  To  make  self  unclean,  Nipa  tame,  7. 

Lev.  21.    1  There  shall  none  be  denied  for  the  dead 
21.   3  for  his  sister  a  virgin . .  may  he  be  defiled 

S.To  be  made  unclean,  nd?  tame,  la. 

Deut  24.   4  to  be  his  wife,  after  that  she  is  defiled 

9.  To  be  or  become  unclean,  naa  tamah,  2. 

Lev.  11.  43  that  ye  should  be  defiled  thereby 

10.  To  be  separated,  halloived,  trip  qadesh. 
Deut22.    9  and  the  fruit  of  thy  vineyard,  be  defiled 

11.  To  become  polluted,  hhn  chalal,  2. 

Eze.    7.  24  and  their  holy  places  shall  be  defiled 
DEELLED  — 
Common,  koiv6s  koinos. 

Mark  7.    2  disciples  eat  bread  with  defiled,  .hands 
DEFRAUD,  to  — 
l.To  oppress,  pvy  ashaq. 

1  Sa.  12.    3  whom  have  I  defrauded?  whom  have  I 
12.    4  Thou  hast  not  defrauded  us,  nor  oppres. 

Lev.  19. 13  Thou  shalt  not  defraud  thy  neighbour 
2.rTo  deprive  of,  airoaTepcw  apostereo. 

ilarkio.  19  Defraud  not,  Honour  thy  father  and  mo. 

1  Co.  6.   7  Why  do  ye  not  rather,  .be  defrauded? 

6.  8  ye  do  wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that  (your) 

7.  5  Defraud  ye  not  one  the  other,  except 

S.To  have  or  claim  more,  ttKzovzktIw pleonekteo. 

2  Co.   7.    2  corrupted  no  man,  we  have  defrauded 
1  Th.  4.    6  no  (man)  go  beyond  and  lefraud  his 

DEFT,  to  — 

l.To  be  indignant,  defy,  cyj  za-am. 

Num  23.    7  Come,  curse  me  Jacob,  and  come,  defy  I. 
23.   8  shall  I  defy,  (whom)  the  Lord  hath  not  d. 

2.  To  reproach,  fin  charaph,  3. 

1  Sa.  17. 10  said,  I  defy  the  armies  of  Israel  this  day 

17.  25  surely  to  defy  Israel  is  he  come  up :  and 
17.  26  that  he  should  defy  the  armies  of  the 
17.  36  seeing  he  hath  defied  the  armies  of  the 
17.  45  God  of  the  armies.,  whom  thou  hast  defie. 

2  Sa.  21.  21  when  he  defied  Israel,  Jonathan  the  son 

23.    9  when  they  defied  the  Philistines  (that) 

1  Ch.20.  7  when  he  defied  Israel,  Jonathan  the  son 
DEGENERATE  — 

Turned  aside,  "iid  sur. 

Jer.    2.  21  art  thou  turned  into  the  degenerate  plant 
DEGREE  — 
l.A  going  up,  ascent,  nblifi  maalak. 

2  Ki.  20.   9  forward  ten  degrees  or  go  back  ten  deg. 


Ki.  20.  10  for  the  shadow  to  go  down  ten  degrees 
20.  10  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  degrees 
20.  11  brought  the  shadow  ten  degrees  backw. 
Psa.  120.  title.  A  Song  of  degrees.     In  my  distress  I  c. 
i2i.     „    A  Song  of  degrees.     I  will  lift  up  mine 

122.  „    A  Song  of  degrees  of  David.     I  was 

123.  „    A  Song  of  degrees.     Unto  thee  lift  I  up 

124.  „    A  Song  of  degrees  of  David.     If  (it  had 

125.  „     A  Song  of  degrees.     They  that  trust  in 

126.  ,,    A  Song  of  degrees.    When  the  Lord 

127.  ,,    A  Song  of  degrees  for  Solomon.     Exce. 

128.  ,,    A  Song  of  degrees.    Blessed  (is)  every 

129.  „     A  Song  of  degrees.     Many  a  time  have 

130.  „    A  Song  of  degrees.     Out  of  the  depths 

131.  ,,    A  Song  of  degrees  of  David.     Lord,  my 

132.  ,,    A  Song  of  degrees.  Lord,  remember  D. 

133.  „    A  Song  of  decrees  of  David.    Behold 

134.  „    A  Song  of  degrees.    Behold,  bless  ye 
Isa.   38.    8  bring  again  the  shadow  of  the  degrees 

38.    8  the  sun  dial  of  Ahaz,  ten  degrees  back. 
38.    8  sun  returned  ten  degrees,  by  which  degre. 

2.-4  step,  ascent,  f3a6/j.6s  bathmos. 

1  Ti.    3.  13  well  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  degr. 

DEGREE,  high  — 

A  going  upt  ascent,  rhyjfi  maalo.h* 

1  Ch.  17.  17  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  degree 

DEGREE,  low  — 

Low,  raireivSs  tapeinos. 

Luke   1.  52  He  hath,  .exalted  them  of  low  degree 
Jas.     1.    9  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  rejoice  in 

DE-HA-VTTES,  Kirn,  n:ni,  dehave,  dehave. 

The  inhabitants  of  modern  Dehistan  or  Dailck,  E.  of 

the  Caspian  Sea,  who  were  transferred  to  Samaria  by 

Shalmaneser. 

Ezra   4.    9  the  Susanchites,  the  D.s,  (and).  .Elamites 

DE'-KAR,  "153  lance  bearer. 

Father  of  one  of  Solomon's  officers  at  Makaz,  B.C.  1015. 
1  Ki.   4.    9  The  son  of  D.,  in  Makaz,  and  in  Shaalbim 

DE-LA'-IAH,  n;Jn,  irr^n  Jah  is  deliverer. 

1.  One  of  David's  priests,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  24.  18  The  three  and  twentieth  to  D.,  the  four 

2.  Founder  of  a  family  whose  genealogy  was  lost,  B.C. 
536. 

Ezra    2.  60  The  children  of  D.,  the  children  of  Tobiah 
Neh.  7.  62  The  children  of  D.,  the  children  of  Tobiah 

3.  One  who  tried  to  dishearten  Xehemiah,  B.C.  480. 

Neh.  6.  10  unto  the  house  of  Shemaiah  the  son  of  D. 

4.  A  prince  in  Judah  under  Jehoiakim,  B.C.  610. 

Jer.  36.  12  princes  sat  there,  (even)  Elishama.  .andD. 
36.  25  D. ..had  made  intercession  to  the  king 

DELAY  — 

Casting  back,  avafSohl)  anabole. 

Acts  25.  17  without  any  delay  on  the  morrow  I  sat 

DELAY,  to  — 

l.To  keep  behind,  nnx  achsxr,  3. 

Exod22.  29  Thou  shalt  not  delay  (to  offer)  the  first  of 

2.  To  delay,  be  long,  ena  bosh,  Za. 

Exod32.    1  when  the  people  saw  that  Moses  delayed 

3. To  tarry,linger,  delay  or  stayself,  nno  mahah,  la. 

Psa.119.  60  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy  command. 
4.  To  hesitate,  be  tardy,  okv4o>  okneo. 

Acts   9.  38  that  he  would  not  delay  to  come  to  them 

0.T0  use  time,  xpovlfa  chronizo. 

Matt  24.  48  shall  say.  .My  lord  delayeth  his  coming 
Lukei2.  45  if  that  servant  say.. My  lord  delayeth  his 

DELECTABLE  thing  — 
To  desire,  n?n  chamad. 

Isa.  44.   g  their  delectable  things  shall  not  profit 

DELICACY  — 

Hardness,  wantonness,  o-rpTjvos  strenos. 

Rev.  18.    3  through  the  abundance  of  her  delicacies 

DELICATE  — 
l.Dainty,  ]"}]}.  eden. 

Jer.  51.  34  hath  filled  his  belly  with  my  delicates 
2.  To  be  delicate,  luxurious,  JJJ/  anag,  -1. 

Jer.     6.    2  likened  the  daughter . .  to  a . .  delicate 

3. Delicate,  luxurious,  xty  anog. 

Deut  28.  54  the  man  (that  is)  tender,  .and  very  deli. 
28.  56  The  tender  and  delicate  woman  among 
Isa.  47.    1  no  more  be  called  tender  and  delicate 

i.Delicate,  luxurious,  3»£5  taanug. 

Mic.    1.  16  and  poll  thee  for  thy  delicate  children 

DELICATELY  — 

l.Dainty,  daintily,  ft£0  maadan. 

1  Sa.  15.  32  And  Agag  came  unto  him  delicately 
Lam.  4.    5  They  that  did  feed  delicately  are  desolate 

2.  In  pleasure,  ev  rpv<pf}  en  truplie, 

Luke  7.  25  gorgeously  apparelled,  and  live  delicately 

DELICATENESS  — 

To  shore  self  delicate,  JJJJ  anag,  7. 

Deut  28.  56  her  foot  upon  the  ground  for  delicateness 


D  B  L  I  C  I  O  U  5  Li  Y 


2^2 


DELIVER 


DELICIOTJSLY,  to  live  — 

To  live  hard  or  wantonly,  o-rpnviaa}  streniao. 
Rev.  18.    7  glorified  herself,  and  lived  deliciously 
18.    g  committed  fornication  and  lived  delicio. 

DELIGHT  - 

1.  Delight,  pleasure,  desire,  ysn  chephets. 

i  Sa.  15.  22  Hath  the  Lord  (as  great)  delight  in  burnt 

Psa.    1.    2  But  his  delight  (is)  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 

16.    3  the  excellent,  in  whom  (is)  all  my  delight 

2. Dainty,  daintily,  flj£p  maadan. 

Prov  29.  17  yea,  he  shall  give  delight  unto  thy  soul 
3. Dainty  thing,  fig  eden. 

2  Sa.    1.  24  clothed  you  in  scarlet,  with  (other)  deli. 

4.  Delicate,  luxurious,  11)}  oneg. 

Isa.   58.  13  call  the  sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of 

5.  Acceptable,  good  pleasure,  \v?\ratson. 

Prov  11.    1  but  a  just  weight  (is)  his  delight 

11.  20  (are)  upright  in  (their)  way  (are)  his  deli. 

12.  22  but  they  that  deal  truly  (are)  his  delight 
15.  S  the  prayer  of  the  upright  (is)  his  delight 
16. 13  Righteous  lips  (are)  the  delight  of  kings 

6.  Delights,  ny&ux?  shaashuim. 

Psa.  1 19.  24  Thy  testimonies  also  (are)  my  delight 
119.  77  that  I  may  live  :  for  thy  law  (is)  my  del. 
119.  92  Unless  thy  law  (had  been)  my  delights,  I 
T19.  143  (yet)  thy  commandments  (are)  my  deli. 
119.  174  and  thy  law  (is)  my  delight 

Prov.  S.  30  I  was  daily  (his)  delight,  rejoicing  always 
8.  31  and  my  delights  (were)  with  the  sons  of 

7. Delicate,  luxurious,  M3£fi  taanug. 

Prov  19.  10  Delight  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool ;  much 
Eecl.  2.    8  the  delights  of  the  sons  of  men,  (as) 
Song  7.    6  how  pleasant  art  thou,  0  love,  for  delights 

DELIGHT,  to  — 

l.To  desire,  ion  chamad. 

Prov.    1.  22  the  scorners  delight  in  their  scorning 

2.  To  have  delight,  VSt)  chaphets. 

Numi4.    S  If  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  then  he  will 

1  Sa.  10-    2  Jonathan,  Saul's  sou,  delighted  much  in 

2  Sa.  22.  20  delivered  me,  because  he  delighted  in  me 

24.    3  why  doth  my  lord  the  king  delight  in 

1  Ki.  10.    9  the  Lord  thyGod, which  delighted  in  thee 

2  Ch.  9.    8  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  delighted  in 
Esth.  2.  14  except  the  king  delighted  in  her,  and 

6.   6,  7,  9,  9,  11  the  king  delight eth  to  honour 
6.    6  whom  would  the  king  delight  to  do  hon. 
Psa.  18.  19  delivered  me,  because  he  delighted  in 
22.    8  deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighed  in  him 
37.  23  and  he  delighteth  in  his  way 
40.    8  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God  :  yea 
68.  30  scatter  thou  the  people  (that)  delight  in 
109. 17  he  delighted  not  in  blessing,  so  let  it 
112.    1  delighteth  greatly  in  his  commandments 
219. 35  Make  me  to  go.  .for  therein  do  I  delight 
147. 10  He  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  the 
Isa.     1.  11  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks 

13.  17  (as  for)  gold,  they  shall  not  delight  in  it 
58.    2  seek  me  daily,  and  delight  to  know  my 
62.    4  the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  and  thy 

65.  12  did  choose  (that)  wherein  I  delighted  not 

66.  3  their  soul  delighteth  in  their  abominat. 
66.    4  and  chose  (that)  in  which  I  delighted 

Jer.    9.  24  these  (things,)  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord 
Mic.   7.  iS  for  ever,  because  he  delighteth  (in)  mercy 
Mai.   2.  17  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them 

3.  To  accept,  be  pleased,  txfl  ratsah, 

Psa.  51.  16  thou  delightest  not  in  burnt  offering 
62.    4  they  delight  in  lies  ;  they  bless  with 
Prov.  3.  12  as  a  father  the  son  (in  whom)  he  delight. 
Isa.  42.   1  mine  elect,  (in  whom)  my  soul  delighteth 
l.To  delight  self,  yy:$  shaa,  Sa. 

Psa.  94.  19  thy  comforts  delight  my  soul 

119.  70  as  fat  as  grease;  (but)  I  delight  in  thy  law 
DELIGHT,  to  be  — 

'<■  tsant9  D$>3  naem. 
Prov.  24.  25  to  the'm  that  rebuke  (him)  shall  be  deli. 
DELIGHT,  great  — 
To  desire,  "liprj  chamad,  3. 

3ong  2.    3  down  under  Ms  shadow  with  great  delig. 
DELIGHT  to  have  — 
1.7*0  have  delight,  fgrj  chaphets. 

Gen.  34.  19  because  he  had  delight  in  Jacob's  daug. 
Deut.21.  14  if  thou  have  no  delight  in  her,  then 

1  Sa.  18.  22  the  king  hath  delight  in  thee,  and  all 

2  8a.  15.  27  if  he  thus  say,  I  have  delight  in  thee 
Prov.  1 3.    2  A  fool  hath  no  delight  in  understanding 
Jer.    6. 10  they  have  no  delight  in  it 

2.  To  cleave  to,  delight  in,  prrt  chash-i). 

Deut.io.  15  the  Lord  had  a  delight  in  thy  fathers  to 

3.  To  delight  self,  liy  anag,  7. 

Job   22. 26  shalt  thou  have  thy  delight  in  the  Almi. 
DELIGHT  in,  to  — 
l.To  have  delight,  pleasure,  ysi)  chaphets. 

Mai.    3.    1  even  the  messenger . .  whom  ye  delight  in 
2.2£  have  pleasure  with,  a-vvffdofiaL  sunedomoi. 

Rom.  7.  22  For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the 
DELIGHT  self  — 
J .  To  delight  self  HJ|  adan,  7. 

Ncli.  9.  25  delighted  themselves  iu  thy  great  good. 


2.  To  delight  self,  ir>}  anag,  7. 

Job    27. 10  Will  he  delight  himself  in  the  Almighty? 
Psa.  37.  4  Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord;  and  he 
37.  11  shall  delight  themselves  in  the  abundan. 
Isa.   55.   2  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness 

58. 14  shalt  thou  delight  thyself  in  the  Lord 
Z.To  show  self  pleasing,  nyi  ratsah. 

Job  34.    9  that  he  should  delight  himself  with  God 
4.  To  delight  self,  VW  shaa,  7a. 

Psa.  119. 16  I  will  delight  myself  in  thy  statutes 
119.  47  I  will  delight  myself  in  thy  command. 
DELIGHT,  to  take  — 
To  have  delight,  f'sn  chaphets. 

Isa.   58.    2  they  take  delight  in  approaching  to  God 
DELIGHTED,  to  be  — 
To  delight  self,  iiy  anag,  7. 

Isa.    66. 11  and  be  delighted  with  the  abundance  of 
DELIGHTSOBTE  — 
Delight,  pleasure,  pan  chephets. 

Mai.    3. 12  ye  shall' be  a  delightsome  land,  saith  the 

DE-Ll'-LAH,  rh^-p\  languishing. 

A  Philistine  woman  in  the  vale  of  Sorek,  who  inveigled 

and  betrayed  Samson,  B.C.  1120. 

Judgi6.  4  he  loved  a  woman . .  whose  name  (was)  D. 
16.  6  D.  said  to  Samson,  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee 
16.  10  D.  said  unto  Samson,  .thou  hast  mocked 

16. 12  D.  therefore  took  new  ropes,  and  bound 
16.  13  D.  said  unto  Samson,  .thou  hast  mocked 

16. 18  D.  saw  that  he  had  told  her  all  his  heart 

DELIVER,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  come  or  happen,  n$«  anah,  3. 
Exod2i.  13  but  God  deliver  (him)  into  his  hand 

'l.To  free,  S&ta  gaol. 

Psa.  119. 154  Plead  my  cause, and  deliver  me:  quicken 

Z.To  draio  out,  away,  deliver,  yhn  chalats,  3. 
2  Sa.  22.  20  he  delivered  me,  because  he  delighted  iu 
Job  36.  15  He  delivereth  the  poor  in  his  affliction 
Psa.     6.    4  Return,  0  Lord,  deliver  my  soul:  oh  save 

7.  4  I  have  delivered  him  that  without  cause 

18. 19  he  delivered  me,  because  he  delighted  in 
34.    7  encampeth  round  about,  .and  delivereth 

50.  15  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify 
81.    7  calledst  in  trouble,  and  I  delivered  thee 

91. 15  I  will  deliver  him,  and  honour  him 
116.    8  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death 
119.  153  Consider  mine  affliction,  and  deliver  me 
140.    1  Deliver  me,  0  Lord,  from  the  evil  man 

4.  To  give,  DD?  yehab. 

Ezra   5.  14  they  were  delivered  unto  (one),  whose 

5.  To  save,  pa*;  yasha,  5. 

Judg.  2. 16,  18  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of 
3.  9  raised  up  a  deliverer,  .who  delivered 
3.  31  Shamgar.  .he  also  delivered  Israel 

8.  22  thou  hast  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of 

8.  22  and  I  delivered  you  out  of  their  hand 

10. 13  wherefore  I  will  deliver  you  no  more 

10. 14  let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of  your 
12.    2  ye  delivered  me  not  out  of  their  hands 

12.  3  when  I  saw  that  ye  delivered  (me)  not,  I 

13.  5  he  shall  begin  to  deliver  Israel  out  of 

6.  To  cover,  give  freely,  deliver  tip,  )3D  magan,  3. 

Gen.  14.  20  which  hath  delivered  thine  enemies  into 
Prov.  4.  9  a  crown  of  glory  shall  she  deliver  to  thee 
Hos.  11.   8  (how)  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel?  how 

7. To  let  or  cav.se  to  escape,  uS?  malat,  3. 

2  Sa.  19.   9  he  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  tiie 
Job     6.  23  Deliver  me  from  the  enemy's  hand  ?  or 
22.  30  He  shall  deliver  the  island  of  the  inno. 
29.  12  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and  the 
Psa.  33.  17  neither  shall  he  deliver  (any)  by  his  great 
41.    1  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  tro. 
89.  48  shall  he  deliver  his  soul  from  the  hand 
107.  20  and  delivered  (them)  from  their  destruct. 
116.    4  0  LORD,  I  beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul 
Eccl.  8.   8  neither  shall  wickedness  deliver  those 

9.  15  and  he  by  his  wisdom  delivered  the  city 
Isa.   46.    2  they  could  not  deliver  the  burden,  but 

46.    4  even  I  will  carry,  and  will  deliver  (you) 
Jer.   39.  iS  I  will  surely  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt 

51.  6  Flee  out.  .and  deliver  every  man  his  soul 
51.  45  deliver  ye  every  man  his  soul  from  the 

Eze.  33.    5  taketh  warning  shall  deliver  his  soul 
■  Amos  2. 14  neither  shall  the  mighty  deliver  himself 
2. 15  (he  that  is)  swift  of  foot  shall  not  deliver 
2. 15  he  that  rideth  the  horse  deliver  himself 

S.To  cause  to  find,  t*V?  matsa,  5. 

2  Sa,  3.  S  have  not  delivered  thee  into  the  hand  of 
Zech  11.   6  I  will  deliver  the  men  every  one  into  his 

9.  To  turn  aside,  nuj  natah,  5. 

Job  36.  18  then  a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee 

10.  To  make  known,  girr  over,  ir;  nakar,  3. 

1  Sa.  23.    7  God  hath  delivered  him  into  mine  hand 

11.  To  snatch  or  take  away,  Sk3  natsal,  3. 

Eze.  14.  14  they  should  deliver  (but)  then-  own  souls 

12.  To  snatch  err  take  away,  hx;  natsal,  5. 

Gen.  32.  11  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand 
37.  21  and  he  delivered  him  out  of  their  hands 

Exod.  2.  19  An  Egyptian  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand 
3.    8  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them  out  of 
5.  23  neither  hast  thou  delivered  thy  people 


Exod  12.  27  smote  the  Egyptians,  and  delivered  our 
18.    4  delivered  me  from  the  sword  of  Pharaoh 
18.    8  and  (how)  the  Lord  delivered  them 
18.    9  whom  he  had  delivered  out  of  the  hand 
18.  10  who  hath  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand 
18.  10  who  hath  delivered  the  people  from  under 
Num.35.  25  the  congregation  shall  deliver  the  slayer 
Deut23. 14  to  deliver  thee,  and  to  give  up  thine 

25.  11  draweth  near  for  to  deliver  her  husband 
32.  39  neither  (is  there)  any  that  can  deliver  out 

Josh.  2.  13  and  deliver  our  lives  from  death 

9.  26  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
22.  31  ye  have  delivered  the  children  of  Israel 
24.  10  so  I  delivered  you  out  of  his  hand 

Judg.  6.    9  I  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the 

8.  34  who  had  delivered  them  out  of  the  hands 

9.  17  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  Midian 
10.  15  deliver  us  only,  we  pray  thee,  this  day 

1  Sa.   4,    8  who  shall  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of 

7.    3  he  will  deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of 
7. 14  the  coasts  thereof  did  Israel  deliver  out 
10.  18  and  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
12.  10  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies 
12.  11  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  your 
12.  21  (things),  winch  cannot  profit  nor  deliver 
14.  48  delivered  Israel  out  of  the  hands  of  them 
17.  35  and  delivered  (it)  out  of  his  mouth 
17.  37  The  Lord  that  delivered  me  out  of  the 

17.  37  he  will  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  this 

26.  24  let  him  deliver  me  out  of  all  tribulation 

2  Sa.  12.   7  I  delivered  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  Saul 

14. 16  to  deliver  his  handmaid  out  of  the  hand 
22.    1  the  day  (that)  the  Lord  had  delivered 
22.  18  He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy 
22.  49  hast  delivered  me  from  the  violent  man 

2  Ki.17.  39  he  shall  deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of 

18.  29  he  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  you  out 
18.  30  The  Lord  will  surely  deliver  us,  and  this 
18.  32  saying,  The  Lord  will  deliver  us 

18.  33  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 
18.  35  that  have  delivered  their  country  out^of 
18.  35  that  the  Lord  should  deliver  Jerusalem 

19. 12  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 
20.    6  I  will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out  of 

1  Ch.  11. 14  and  delivered  it,  and  slew  the  Philistines 

16.  35  deliver  us  from  the  heathen,  that  we  may 

2  Ch.25.  15  which  could  not  deliver  their  own  people 

32. 11  The  Lord  our  God  shall  deliver  us  out 
32.  13  to  deliver  their  lands  out  of  mine  hand 
32.  14  that  could  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine 
32.  14  be  able  to  deliver  you  out  of  mine  hand 
32.  15  was  able  to  deliver  his  people  out  of 
32.  15  God  deliver  you  out  of  mine  hand 

32. 17  have  not  delivered  their  people  out  of 
32.  17  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine  hand 

Ezra   8.  31  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy 
Neh.   9.  28  and  many  times  didst  thou  deliver  them 
Job     5.    4  neither  (is  there)  any  to  deliver  (them) 
5.  19  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  troubles 
10.   7  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  thine  hand 
Psa.    7.    1  all  them  that  persecute  me,  and  deliver 
7.    2  rending,  .while  (there  is)  none  to  deliver 
18.  title,  in  the  day  (that)  the  Lord  delivered 
18.  17  He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy 

18.  48  hast  delivered  me  from  the  violent  man 
22.    8  let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighted 

22.  20  Deliver  my  soul  from  the  sword ;  my 
25.  20  O  keep  my  soul,  and  deliver  me  :  let  me 

31.  2  deliver  me  speedily  :  be  thou  my  strong 
31. 15  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  my  enemies 
33. 19  To  deliver  their  soul  from  death,  and  to 
34.    4  and  delivered  me  from  all  my  fears 

34.  17  delivereth  them  out  of  all  their  troubles 
34. 19  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them  aU 

35.  10  which  deliverest  the  poor  from  him  that 

39.  8  Deliver  me  from  all  my  transgressions 

40.  13  Be  pleased,  O  Lord,  to  deliver  me  :  0  L. 

50.  22  lest  I  tear,  .(there  be)  none  to  deliver 

51.  14  Deliver  me  from  blood  guiltiness,  0  God 
54.    7  he  hath  delivered  me  out  of  all  trouble 
56.  13  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death 
59.    1  Deliver  me  from  mine  enemies,  0  my 
59.    2  Deliver  me  from  the  workers  of  iniquity 
69. 14  Deliver  me  out  of  the  mire,  and  let  me 

70.  1  (Make  haste,)  0  God,  to  deliver  me;  make 

71.  2  Deliver  me  in  thy  righteousness,  and 

71.  11  take  him ;  (for  there)  is  none  to  deliver 

72.  12  he  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  crietli 
79.    9  deliver  us,  and  purge  away  our  sins,  for 

86. 13  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the 
91.    3  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of 
97.  10  he  delivereth  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the 

106.  43  Many  times  did  he  deliver  them  ;  but 

107.  6  delivered  them  out  of  their  distresses 
109.  21  because  thy  mercy  (is)  good,  deliver  thou 
119. 170  deliver  me  according  to  thy  word 

120.    2  Deliver  my  soul,  O  LORD,  from  lying  lips 

142.  6  deliver  me  from  my  persecutors  ;  for 

143.  9  Deliver  me,  0  Lord,  from  mine  enemies 

144.  7  deliver  me  out  of  great  waters,  from  the 
144. 11  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  strange  chil. 

Prov.  2.  12  To  deliver  thee  from  the  way  of  the  evil 
2. 16  To  deliver  thee  from  the  strange  woman 

10.  2  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death 

11.  4  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death 
11.    6  righteousness  of  the  upright  shall  deliver 

32.  6  mouth  of  the  upright  shall  deliver  them 
14.  25  A  true  witness  delivereth  souls  :  but  a 

19.  19  if  thou  deliver  (him),  yet  thou  must  do  it 

23.  14  and  shalt  deliver  his  soul  from  hell 

24.  11  If  thou  forbear  to  deliver  (them  that  are) 
Isa.     5.  29  carry  (it)  away  safe,  and  none  shall  deli. 


DELIVER 


243 


DELIVER 


20  a  great  one,  and  he  shall  deliver  them 

5  defending  also  he  will  deliver  (it ;  and) 

14  for  he  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  you 

15  The  Lord  will  surely  deliver  us  :  this 

18  saying,  The  Lord  will  deliver  us 
iS  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 

19  have  they  delivered  Samaria  out  of  my 

20  that  have  delivered  their  land  out  of  my 
20  that  the  Lord  should  deliver  Jerusalem 
i2  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 

6  I  will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out  of 

22  they  are  for  a  prey,  and  none  delivereth 

13  (there  is)  none  that  can  deliver  out  of 
17  Deliver  me  ;  for  thou  (art)  my  god 
20  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul,  nor  say 

14  they  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from 

2  have  I  no  power  to  deliver  ?  behold 
13  criest,  let  thy  companies  deliver  thee 

8  I  (am)  with  thee  to  deliver  thee,  saith 

19  I  (am)  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  to  deli. 

20  to  save  thee,  aud  to  deliver  thee,  saith 

21  I  will  deliver  thee  out  of  the  hand  of 
13  he  hath  delivered  the  soul  of  the  poor 
12  deliver  (him  that  is)  spoiled  out  of  the 

3  deliver  the  spoiled  out  of  the  hand  of 

17  I  will  deliver  thee  that  day,  saith 

1 1  save  you,  and  to  deliver  you  from  his 
19  but  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 
21  also  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 

19  gold  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  them 
21  and  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hand 

23  I  will  deliver  mylpeople  out  of  your  hand 
16,  iS  shall  deliver  neither  sons  nor  daught. 

20  shall  deliver  neither  son  nor  daughter 
20  they  shall  (but)  deliver  their  own  souls 

9  but  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 

12  shall  not  deliver  him  in  the  day  of  his 
10  I  will  deliver  my  flock  from  their  mouth 
12  will  deliver  them  out  of  all  places  where 
27  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  those 
10  none  shall  deliver  her  out  of  mine  hand 

6  a  shadow,  .to  deliver  him  from  his  grief 
6  thus  shall  he  deliver  (us)  from  the  Assyri. 
8  teareth  in  pieces,  and  none  can  deliver 

18  shall  be  able  to  deliver  them  in  the  day 
6  I  will  deliver  the  men  every  one  into 
6  out  of  their  hand  I  will  not  deliver  (them) 

13.  To  snatch  away,  deliver,  ?xi  netsal,  5. 

Dan.  3.  29  no  other  God  that  can  deliver  after  this 
6. 14  till  the  going  down  of  the  sun  to  deliver 
8.  4  neither  (was  there  any)  that  could  deliver 
8.    7  there  was  none  that  could  deliver  the 


Isa.  19. 

3*- 

36. 

36, 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
37- 
38. 
42. 
43- 
44. 
44. 
47- 
50. 

Jer.  1. 
1. 
15 

*5- 


39- 

42. 

Eze.    3. 

3- 

7- 
T3- 
*3- 
14. 
14. 
14, 
33' 
33 
34 
34 
34^ 

Hos.    2. 

Jon.    4, 

Mic.  5. 
5' 

Zeph.  1. 

Zechn. 


14. To  givt 
Gen.  32. 

40. 

42. 

42. 
Exod.  5. 

22. 

23- 
Num"2i. 


3*' 

Josh.  2 


24 
Judg.  1 


,  }m  nathan. 

16  he  delivered  (them)  into  the  hand  of  his 
13  shalt  deliver  Pharaoh's  cup  into  his  hand 
34  (so)  will  I  deliver  you  your  brother,  and 
37  deliver  him  into  my  hand,  and  I  will 

18  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  of  bricks 

7,  10  If  a  man  shall  deliver  unto  his  neigh. 

31  I  will  deliver  the  inhabitants  of  the 

2  If  thou  wilt  indeed  deliver  this  people 

3  and  delivered  up  the  Canaanites 

34  I  have  delivered  him  into  thy  hand,  and 

27  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Amor. 
30  that  he  might  deliver  him  into  thy  hand 
33  the  Lord  our  God  delivered  him  before 
36  the  Lord  out  God  delivered  all  unto  us 

2  I  will  deliver  him,  and  all  his  people 

3  the  Lord  out  God  delivered  into  our 

22  tables  of  stone,  and  delivered  them  unto 
2  when  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver 

16  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver 

23  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver  them  unto 

24  he  shall  deliver  their  kings  into  thine 

ro  the  Lord  delivered  unto  me  two  tables  of 

12  deliver  him  into  the  hand  of  the  avenger 

13  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  delivered  it 

10  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  delivered  them 
9  Moses  wrote,  this  law,  and  delivered  it 

24  the  LORD  hath  delivered  into  our  hands 
7  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Amor. 

7  the  Lord  your  God  will  deliver  it  into 

8  for  I  have  delivered  them  into  thine 

12.  when  the  Lord  delivered  up  theAmorites 

19  the  Lord  your  God  hath  delivered  them 
30  the  Lord  delivered  it  also,  and  the  king 

32  the  Lord  delivered  Lachish  into  the 

6  will  I  deliver  them  up  all  slain  before 

8  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  the  hand 
44  the  Lord  delivered  all  their  enemies  into 

11  and  I  delivered  them  into  your  hand 

2  I  have  delivered  the  land  into  his  hand 

4  the  Lord  delivered  the  Canaanites  and 

14  he  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of 

23  neither  delivered  he  them  into  the  hand 
10  the  Lord  delivered  Chushan-rishathaim 

28  the  Lord  hath  delivered  your  enemies 

7  and  I  will  deliver  him  into  thine  hand. 
14  hath  delivered  Sisera  into  thine  hand 

1  the  Lord  delivered  them  iuto  the  hand  of 

13  delivered  us  into  the  hands  of  the  Mid. 
7  deliver  the  Midianites  into  thine  hand 

9  for  I  have  delivered  it  into  thine  hand 

14  into  his  hand  hath  God  delivered  Midian 

15  the  Lord  hath  delivered  into  your  hand 

3  God  hath  delivered  into  your  hands  the 
7  when  the  Lord  hath  delivered  Zebah 

9  and  the  Lord  deliver  them  before  me 
'21  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  delivered  Silion 
30  If  thou  shalt  without  fail  deliver  the 


Judg  11.  32  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  his  hands 
12.   3  when  I  saw  that  ye  delivered  (me)  not,  I 

12.  3  and  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  my 

13.  1  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of 
15.  12  that  we  may  deliver  thee  into  the  hand 

15.  13  bind  thee  fast,  and  deliver  thee  into  their 

16.  23  Our  goahath  delivered  Samson  our  enemy 
'     16.  24  Our  god  hath  delivered  into  our  hands 

20. 13  deliver  (us)  the  men,  the  children  of  Eel. 
20.  28  tomorrow  I  will  deliver  them  into  thine 

1  Sa.  14.  10  the  Lord  hath  delivered  them  into  our 

14.  12  the  Lord  hath  delivered  them  into  the 
14.  37  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of 
23.   4  I  Vrill  deliver  the  Philistines  into  thine 

23.  14  but  God  delivered  him  not  into  his  hand 

24.  4  I  will  deliver  thine  enemy  into  thine 
24. 10  how  that  the  Lord  had  delivered  thee 
26.  23  the  Lord  delivered  thee  into  (my)  hand  to 
28.  19  the  Lord  will  also  deliver  Israel  with 
28.  19  the  Lord  also  shall  deliver  the  host  of 
30.  23  delivered  the  company  that  came  against 

2  Sa.    3.  14  Deliver  (me)  my  wife  Michal,  which  I 

5.  19  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  mine  hand  ? 

5. 19  I  will  doubtless  deliver  the  Philistines 

10.  10  the  rest  of  the  people  he  delivered  into 

14.  7  Deliver  him  that  smote  his  brother,  that 

16.  8  the  Lord  hath  delivered  the  kingdom 

20.  21  deliver  him  only,  and  I  will  depart  from 

21.  9  he  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the 

1  Kl   8.  46  deliver  them  to  the  enemy,  so  that  they 

13.  26  the  Lord  hath  delivered  him  unto  the  lion 

15.  18  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  his  ser. 

17.  23  and  delivered  him  unto  his  mother 

18.  9  that  thou  wouldest  deliver  thy  servant 
20.    5  Thou  shalt  deliver  me  thy  silver,  and  thy 
20.  13  I  will  deliver  it  into  thine  hand  this 

20.  28  will  I  deliver  all  this  great 

22.  6,  15  the  Lord  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the 
2L2. 12  the  Lord  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  king's 

2  Ki.  3.  10,  13  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  Mo. 

3. 18  he  will  deliver  the  Moabites  also  iuto 
12.    7  deliver  it  for  the  breaches  of  the  house 

12.  15  into  whose  hand  they  delivered  the  money 

13.  3  he  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  Haz. 

17.  20  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  spoilers 

18.  23  I  will  deliver  thee  two  thousand  horses 
18.  30  saying,  The  Lord  will  surely  deliver  us 
18.  30  this  city  shall  not  be  delivered  into 

si.  14  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  their  ene. 
22.  5  let  them  deliver  it  into  the  hand  of  the 
22.    9  have  delivered  it  into  the  hand  of  them 

22.  10  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  delivered  me  a 

1  Ch.14. 10  and  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  mine 

14.  10  fori  will  deliver  them  into  thine  hand 

16.  7  on  that  day  David  delivered  first  (this) 
19. 11  the  rest  of  the  people  he  delivered  unto 

2  Ch.  6.  36  deliver  them  over  before  (their)  enemies 

13.  16  and  God  delivered  them  into  their  hand 
16.   8  he  delivered  them  into  thine  hand 
18.    5  God  will  deliver  (it)  into  the  "king's  hand 
18. 11  the  Lord  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  hand 

23.  9  Jehoiada  the  priest  delivered  to  the 

24.  24  the  Lord  delivered  a  very  great  host  into 

25.  20  that  he  might  deliver  them  into  the  hand 
28.   5  Wherefore  the  Lord  his  God  delivered 
?8.    5  he  was  also  delivered  into  the  hand 

28.  9  he  hath  delivered  them  into  your  hand 

29.  8  he  hath  delivered  them  to  trouble,  to 
34.   9  they  delivered  the  money  that  was  broil. 
34. 15  Hilkiah  delivered  the  book  to  Shaphan 

34. 17  have  delivered  it  into  the  hand  of  the 
Ezra   8.  36  they  delivered  the  king's  commissions 
Neh.  9.  27  thou  deliveredst  them  into  the  baud  of 
Esth.  6.   9  let  this  apparel  and  horse  be  delivered 
Psa.  27.  12  Deliver  me  not  over  unto  the  will  of  mine 

41.    2  thou  wilt  not  deliver  him  unto  the  will 
74. 19  O  deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle  dove 
78. 61  delivered  his  strength  into  captivity 
Prov.31.  24  anddelivereth  girdles  unto  the  merchant 
Isa.  29. 11  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned 

34.   2  he  hath  delivered  them  to  the  slaughter 
Jer.   15.   9  the  residue  of  them  will  I  deliver  to 

18.  21  Therefore  deliver  up  their  children  to  the 

20.  5  I  will  deliver  all  the  strength  of  this 

21.  7  I  will  deliver  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 

24.  9  I  will  deliver  them  to  be  removed  into 
29.  18  will  deliver  them  to  be  removed  to  all 
29.  21  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of 

38.  19  lest  they  deliver  me  into  their  hand,  and 
38.  20  Jeremiah  said,  They  shall  not  deliver 
43.    3  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Chalde. 
46.  26  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of 
Lam.  1.  14  the  Lord  hath  delivered  me  into  (their) 
Eze.  11.   9  deliver  you  into  the  hands  of  strangers 
16  21  delivered  them  to  cause  them  to  pass 
16.  27  delivered  thee  unto  the  will  of  them  that 
21.  31  deliverthee  into  the  hand  of  brutish  men 
23.    9  I  have  delivered  her  into  the  hand  of  her 
23.  28  I  will  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  (of  them) 

25.  4  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the  men  of  the 

25.  7  will  deliver  thee  for  a  spoil  to  the  heath. 
31.  11  I  have  therefore  delivered  him  into  the 

15.  To  shut  up  or  hi,  nap  sagar,  3. 

1  Sa.  17.  46  This  day  will  the  LORD  deliver  thee  into 

24. 18  when  the  Lord  had  delivered  me  into 

26.  8  God  hath  delivered  thine  enemy  into 

2  Sa.  18.  28  which  hath  delivered  up  the  men  that 

16.  To  shut  up,  13D  sagar,  5. 

Deut23. 15  Thou  shalt  not  deliver  unto  his  master 
Josh  20.    5  they  shall  not  deliver  the  slayefr  up  into 


1  Sa.  23.  12  Will  the  men  of  Keilah  deliver  me  and 

23.  20  to  deliver  him  into  the  king's  hand 
30. 15  nor  deliver  me  into  the  hands  of  my  mast. 
Job   16. 11  God  hath  delivered  me  to  the  ungodly 
17.  To  free,  redeem,  rns  padah. 

Job'  33.  28  He  will  deliver  his  soul  from  going  into 
Psa.  S5- lS  Se  hath  delivered  my  soul  in  peace  from 
69. 18  deliver  me,  because  of  mine  enemies 
78.  42  (nor)  the  day  when  he  delivered  them 
119.  134  Deliver  me  from  the  oppression  of  man 

IS. To  free,  redeem,  sns  pada. 

Job  33.  24  Deliver  him  from  going  down  to  the  pit 

19.  To  let  escape,  tffcjpaXat,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.  44  Thou  also  hast  delivered  me  from  the 
Job  23.  7  so  should  I  be  delivered  for  ever  from 
Psa.  17.  13  deliver  my  soul  from  the  wicked,  (which 

18.  43  Thou  hast  delivered  me  from  the  strivings 
18.  48  He  delivereth  me  from  mine  enemies ;  yea 
22.    4  theyktrusted,  and  thou  didst  deliver  them 
22.    8  trusted  on  the  Lord  (that)  he  would  deli. 
31.    1  deliver  me  in  thy  righteousness 
37.  40  the  Lord  shall  help  them,  and  deliyer 
37.  40  he  shall  deliver  them  from  the  wicked 
43.    1  0  deliver  me  from  the  deceitful  and 
71.    4  Deliver  me,  0  my  God,  out  of  the  hand 
82.   4  Deliver  the  poor  and  needy  :  rid  (them) 
91.  14  therefore  will  I  deliver  him  :  I  ^  ill  set 
Mic.    6.  14.  (that)  which  thou  deliverest  will  I  give 

20.  To  cause  to  (or  let)  escape,  ^?3  palat,  5. 

Mic.    6.  14  thou  shalt  take  hold,  but  shalt  not  deliver 

21.  To  open,  free,  nyp2?atsah. 

Psa.  144. 10  who  delivereth  David  his  servant  from 

22.  To  break  off,  rend,  pns  paraq. 

Lam.  5.   8  (there  is)  none  that  doth  deliver  (us)  out 

23.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  aia*  shub,  5. 
Exod22.  26  thou  shalt  deliver  it  unto  him  by  that 

'2LTo  deliver,  set  free,  D]?'  shezab,  3. 

Dan.  3.  15  who  (is)  that  God  that  shall  deliver  you 
3. 17  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver  us 
3.  17  he  will  deliver  (us)  out  of  thine  hand 

3.  28  delivered  Iris  servants  that  trusted  in 
6.  14  set  (his)  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him 
6. 16  God,  whom  thou  servest.  .will  deliver 

6.  20  is  thy  God.  .able  to  deliver  thee  from  the 
6.  27  He  delivereth  and  rescueth,  and  he  work, 

6.  27  who  hath  delivered  Daniel  from  the 

25.Tofnish,  restore,  thy  shelam,  5. 

Ezra  7.  19  (those)  deliver  thou  before  the  God  of 

26.  To  judge,  93$  shaphai. 

1  Sa.  24.  15  and  deliver  me  out  of  thine  hand 

27.  To  give  up,  avaSiScvfit  anadidomi, 

Acts  23.  33  delivered  the  epistle  to  the  governor 

28.  To  set  free,  change  from,  aizaXXa.<riJw  apallasso. 
Lukei2.  58  that  thou  mayest  be  delivered  from  him 
Heb.   2.  15  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death 

29.  To  give  away,  aTrodtBcc/it  apodidomi. 

Matt  27.  58  Pilate  commanded  the  body  to  be  derive. 

30.  To  give,  5(5a>,tu  didomi. 

Luke  7.  15  And  he  [delivered]  hini  to  his  mother 
19. 13  delivered  them  ten  pounds,  and  said  unto 

31.  To  give  safety  or  salvation,  didcc/xi  o-corripiav. 
Acts   7.  25  that  God  by  his  hand  would  deliver  them 

32.  To  free,  i\ev9€p6a>  eleutheroo. 

Koni.  8.  21  creature  itself  also  shall  be  delivered 

33.  To  give  over,  or  upon,  iiri^idw/xi  epididdmi. 
Luke  4.  17  there  was  delivered  unto  him  the  book  of 
Acts  15.  30  when  they  had  gathered ..  they  delivered. 

34.  To  take  up  out  of,  e£c«pea>  exaireo. 

Acts    7. 10  delivered  him  out  of  all  his  afflictions 

7.  34  and  am  come  down  to  deliver  them 

12. 1 1  hath  delivered  me  out  of  the  hand  of  H. 

26.  17  Delivering  thee  from  the  people,  and 
Gal.     1.    4  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  present 

35.  To  make  useless,  or  without  effect,  Karapyeco. 
Horn.  7.   6  now  we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that 

36.  To  give  over  to  or  cdongside  of,  TrapaSiSwfu. 
Matt.  5.  25  the  adversary  deliver  thee  to  the  judge 

5.  25  and  the  judge  [deliver  thee]  to  the  officer 

11.  27  All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my 
18.  34  delivered  him  to  the  tormeutors,  till  he 
20.  19  shall  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles  to  mock 
25.  14  and  delivered  unto  them  his  goods 

25.  20  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five  talents 
25.  22  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two  talents 
26. 15  and  I  will  deliver  him  unto  you 
27    2  delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate  the  gover. 
27. 18  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered  h 

27.  26  he  delivered  (him)  to  be  crucified 
Mark  7.  13  your  tradition,  which  ye  have  delivered 

9.31  The  Son  of  man  is  delivered  into  the  hands 
10!  33  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  unto 
10.  33  and  shall  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles 
15.    1  carried  (him)  away,  and  delivered  (him) 
15.  10  chief  priests  had  delivered  him  for  envy 
15.  15  delivered  Jesus,  when  he  had  scourged 
Luke  1.    2  as  they  delivered  them  unto  us,  which 

4.  6  for  that  is  delivered  unto  roe ;  and  to 
9.  44  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  into  the 

to.  22  All  tilings  are  delivered  to  me  of  my 

12.  58  and  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the  officer 


DELIVER 


244 


DENY 


Lukei8.  32  he  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  Gentiles 

20.  20  they  might  deliver  him  unto  the  power 

21.  12  delivering  (you)  up  to  the  synagogues 

23.  25  but  he  delivered  Jesus  to  their  will 

24.  7  The  Son  of  man  must  be  delivered  into 

24.  20  rulers  delivered  him  to  be  condemned  to 
Johm8.  30  we  would  not  have  delivered  him  up  unto 

18.  35  the  chief  priests  have  delivered  thee 

18.  36  I  should  not  be  delivered  to  the  Jews 

19.  11  he  that  delivered  me  unto  thee  hath  the 
19.  16  Then  delivered  he  him.  .to  be  crucified 

Acts    6.  14  change  the  customs  which  Moses  deliver. 
12.    4  delivered  (him)  to  four  quaternions  of 
16.    4  they  delivered  them  the  decrees  for  to 

21.  11  deliver  (him)  into  the  hands  of  the  Gen. 

22.  4  binding  and  delivering  into  prisons  both 

27.  1  they  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other 

28.  16  [the  centurion  delivered  the  prisoners  to] 
28.  17  yet  was  I  delivered  prisoner  from  Jeru. 

Rom.  4.  25  Who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and 
6.  17  that  form  of  doctrine  which  was  deliver. 

1  Co.  5.    5  To  deliver  such  an  one  unto  Satan  for 

ir.    2  keep  the  ordinances,  as  I  delivered  (them) 
11.  23  that  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you 
15.    3  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that 

2  Co.  4.  11  we  which  live  are  alway  delivered  unto 

1  Ti.    1.  20  whom  I  have  delivered  unto  Satan,  that 

2  Pe.  2.    4  delivered  (them)  into  chains  of  darkness 

2.  21  the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto 
Jude        3  faith  which  was  once  delivered  unto  the 

37.7V;  rescue,  frvofxat  rhuomai. 

Matt.  6.  13  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver. 
27.  43  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have 
Luken.  4  lead  us  not  into  temptation;  but  deliver 
Rom.  7.  24  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 
2  Co.  1.  10  Who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  death 
1. 10  doth  deliver,  .we  trust  that  he  will  yet  d. 
Col.     1.  13  Who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power 

1  Th.  1. 10  Jesus,  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath 

2  Ti.    3.  11  but  out  of  (them)  all  the  Lord  delivered 

4.  18  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil 
2  Pe.  2.    7  And  delivered  just  Lot,  vexed  with  the 
2.   9  The  Lord  knowethhow  to  deliver  the  god. 

38.  To  grant  (as  a  matter  of  favour),  xaPf'C°Mat* 
Acts  25.  ti  no  man  may  deliver  me  unto  them 

25.  16  It  is  not  the  manner,  .to  deliver  any  man 

DELIVER  again,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  turn  back,  1\W  shub,  5. 

Gen.  37.  22  to  deliver  him  to  his  father  again 

Lev.  26.  26  they  shall  deliver  (you)  your  bread  again 

Deut  24.  13  thou  shalt  deliver  him  the  pledge  again 

2.  To  give  away,  air o5i'5 w /j.t  apodidomi. 

Luke  9.  42  and  delivered  him  again  to  his  father 

DELIVER  self,  to  — 

l.To  be  escaped,  escape,  tobo  malat,  2. 

Zech.  2.    7  Deliver  thyself,  0  Zion,  that  dwellest 

2.  To  snatch  away,  Syj  natsal,  2. 

Prov.  6.    3  deliver  thyself,  when  thou  art  come 
6.    5  Deliver  thyself  as  a  roe  from  the  hand 

DELIVER  up,  to  — 

1,3*0  give,  jm  nathan. 

Nuni2i.    3  the  Lord,  .delivered  up  the  Canaanitea 
Josh  10. 12  when  the  Lord  delivered  up  the  Amorites 

2.  To  (cause  to)  shut  up,  "Up  sagar,  5. 

1  Sa.  23.  n  Will  the  men.  .deliver  me  up  into  Ms 

23.  12  the  Lord  said,  They  will  deliver  (thee)  up 
Amos  1.    6  they  carried  away,  .deliver  (them)  up 

1.    9  they  delivered  up  the  whole  captivity 
6.    8  I  deliver  up  the  city,  with  all  that  is 
Obad.      14  neither  shouldest  thou  have  delivered  up 
3.7^  give,  BiSw/xt  didUmi. 

Rev.  20. 13  death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead 
4.  To  give  over  to,  irapa.Sib'&iAt  paradidomi. 

Matt  10.  17  they  will  deliver  you  up  to  the  councils 
10.  19  when  they  deliver  you  up,  take  no  thou. 
10. 21  the  brother  shall  deliver  up  the  brother 

24.  9  Then  shall  they  deliver  you  up  to  be 
Marki3.    9  for  they  shall  deliver  you  up  to  councils 

13. 11  they  shall  lead  (you),  and  deliver  you  up 
Acts    3. 13  ye  delivered  up,  and  denied  him  in  the 
Rom.  8.  32  He.  .delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how 
\  Co.  15.  24  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom 

DELIVERANCE  — 

X.A  snatching  away,  n^itn  hcdstsalah. 

Esth.  4.  14  deliverance' arise  to  the  Jews  from 
2.  Safety,  nyw*  yeshuah. 

Psa.  18.  50  Great  deliverance  giveth  he  to  his  king 
44.   4  O  God:  command  deliverances  for  Jacob 

Isa.   26. 18  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the  earth 

3.22 'scape,  to1??  pallet. 

Psa.  32.   7  compass  me  about  with  songs  of  deliver. 

i.  Escape,  np^g  pclctah. 

Gen.  45.    7  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  deliverance 

Ch.12.    7  I  will  grant  them  some  deliverance 
Ezra  9.  1 3  thou . .  bast  given  us  (such)  deliverance 
Joel    2.  32  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  deliverance 
Obad.      17  upon  mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance 

5. Safety,  nywn  teshuah. 

Judg  15. 18  Thou  hast  given  this  great  deliverance 
2  Ki.   5.    1  the  Lord  hath  given  deliverance  unto 
13. 17  The  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance 


2  Ki.  13.  17  and  the  arrow  of  deliverance  from 
1  Ch.11.  14  the  Lord  saved,  .by  a  great  deliverance 
6. A  loosing  atoay,  a-n-oAvrpwo-is  apolutrosis. 

Heb.  1 1.  35  and  others  were  tortured,  not  accepting  d. 

1.A  sending  away,  &(pto~ts  aphesis. 

Luke  4.  18  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives 

DELIVERED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  drawn  out,  j'^n  chalats,  2. 

Psa.  60.   5  That  thy  beloved  may  be  delivered 
108.    6  That  thy  beloved  may  be  delivered 

Prov.11.    8  The  righteous  is  delivered  out 

11.  9  knowledge  shall  the  just  be  delivered 

'2.To  bring  forth,  lb;  yalad. 

Gen.  25.  24  when  her  days  to  be  delivered  were  fulfi. 
Exod.  1.  19  are  delivered  ere  the  midwives  come  in 
1  Sa.    4.  19  was  with  child,  (near)  to  be  delivered 
1  Ki.  3.  17  I  was  delivered  of  a  child  with  her  in  the 
3.  18  the  third  day  after  that  I  was  delivered 
3.  18  that  this  woman  was  delivered  also  :  and 

Z.To  be-escaped,  escape,  D^n  malat,  2. 

Job   22.  30  and  it  is  delivered  by  the  pnreness  of 
Psa.  22.    5  They  cried  unto  thee,  and  were  delivered 
Prov  11.  21  the  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  deliver. 

28.  26  whoso  walketh  wisely,  he  shall  be  delive. 
Ifea.   49.  24  the  mighty,  or  the  lawful  captive  deliv.? 

49.  25  the  prey  of  the  terrible  shall  be  delivered 
Eze.  17.  15  shall  he  break  the  covenant,  and  be  del.? 
Dan.  12.  1  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered 
Joel  2.  32  whosoever  shall  call,  .shall  be  delivered 
Amos 9.  1  he  that  escapeth.. shall  not  be  delivered 
Mai.    3.  15  (they  that)  tempt  God  are  even  delivered 

4.  To  cause  or  let  escape,  o^p  malat,  5. 

Isa.  66.    7  before  her  pain  came,  she  was  delivered 

5.  To  give,  give  over,  ipD  masar,  2. 

NUK131.    5  there  were  delivered  out  of  the  thousands 

6.  To  be  snatched  away,  bxx  natsal,  2. 

Psa.  33.  16  a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by  much 
Isa.   20.   6  whither  we  flee  for  help  to  be  delivered 

37.  11  thou  hast  heard,  .and  shalt  thou  be  deli.? 
Jer.  7.  10  We  are  delivered  to  do  all  these  abomin.? 
Mic.  4.  10  there  shalt  thou  be  delivered  ;  there  the 
Hab.  2.   9  he  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of 

7.  To  be  given,  ]ni  nathan,  2. 

Gen.   9.    2  intoyour  hand  are  they  delivered 
Lev.  26.  25  ye  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of 
Ki.;i8.  30  this  city  shall  not  be  delivered  into  the 
19.  10  Jerusalem  shall  not  be  delivered  into  the 
22.   7  money  that  was  delivered  into  their  hand 

1  Ch.  5.  20  the  Hagarites  were  delivered  into  their 

2  Ch.18. 14  they  shall  be  delivered  into  your  hand 

28.   5  the  Lord  his  God  delivered  him  into  the 
Isa.   29.  12  the  book  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not 
Jer.  32.    4  shall  surely  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of 
32.  36  It  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the 
34.    3  surely  be  taken,  and  delivered  into  his 
37.  17  thou  shalt  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of 
46.  24  she  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of 
Eze.  31.  14  for  they  are  all  delivered  unto  death,  to 
32.  20  she  is  delivered  to  the  sword :  draw  her 
S.To  be  given,  jru  nathan,  6. 

2  Sa.  21.   6  Let  seven  men  of  his  sons  be  delivered 

9.  To  pass  over,  "nj>  abar. 

Psa.  St.   6  his  hands  were  delivered  from  the  pots 

10.  To  rescue,  pvofxat  rhuomai. 

Luke  1.  74  we,  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  our 
Rom  15.  31  I  may  be  delivered  from  them  that  do 
2  Th.  3.    2  we  may  be  delivered  from . .  wicked  men 
2  Ti.  4. 17  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 

11.  To  bring  forth  a  child,  tIktw  tikto. 

Luke  1.  57  full  time  came,  that  she  should  be  deliv. 

2.    6  accomplished  that  she  should  be  deliver. 

Rev.  12.    2  travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  deli. 

12.  4  the  woman  which  was  ready  to  be  deliv. 

DELIVERED  of,  to  be  — 

l.To  bear,  bring  forth,  y^vvaa  gennao. 

Johm6.  21  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child 

2.  To  bring  forth  a  child,  tIktoj  tikto. 

Heb.  11. 11  Through  faith  also  Sara,  .[was  deliv.  of] 

DELIVERED,  being  — 

Given  out  or  forth,  ckSotos  ekdotos. 

Acts  2.  23  being  delivered  by  the  determinate 

DELIVERER  — 

1 .  To  save,  yty;  yasha,  5. 

Judg.  3.    9  the  Lord  raised  up  a  deliverer 

3. 15  the  Lord  raised  them  up  a  deliverer 

2.  To  snatch  away,  h%}  natsal. 

Judg  18.  28  (there  wa's)  no  deliverer,  because  it  (was) 

S.To  let  escape,  D^9 palat,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.    2  The  Lord  (is)  my  rock . .  and  my  deliverer 

Psa.  18.    2  The  Lord  (is)  my  rock,  .and  my  deliverer 

40. 17  thou  (art)  my  help  and  my  deliverer 

70.    5  thou  (art)  my  help  and  my  deliverer ;  O 

144.   2  my  high  tower,  and  my  deliverer  ;  my 

A.A  looser,  deliverer,  KvTpcvT-fjs  lutrotes. 

Acts  7.  35  the  same  did  God  send  (to  be)  a.  .deliverer 

h.TJie  rescuer,  6  p~v6/j.svos  Jw  rhuomanos. 

Rom  11.  26  There  shall  come  out  of  Sion  the  Deliverer 


DELIVERY,  time  of  — 
To  bring  forth,  ~h\  yalad. 

Isa.   26.  17  draweth  near  the  time  of  her  delivery,  iz 
DELUSION  — 
1.  Vexations,  wh^nn  taalulim. 

Isa.   66.    4  I  also  will  choose  their  delusions,  and 
2AVandering,  error,  TrKaurj  plane. 

2  Th.  2. 11  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  d. 
DEMAND  — 
Request,  requirement,  N/Nc>  sWelah. 

Dan.  4.  17  the  demandby  the  word  of  the  holy  ones 
DEMAND,  to  — 
l.To  say,  "ION  amar. 

Exod.  5.  14  officers,  .set  over  them,  .(and)  demanded 
2.7*0  ash,  beg,  hxy  shaal. 

2  Sa.  ti.    7  David  demanded  (of  him)  how  Joab  did 

Job  38.  3  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  answer  thou 
40.  7  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  declare  thou 
42.   4  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  declare  thou 

3.  To  ask,  S*;?'  sh'el. 

Dan.  2.  27  the  secret  which  the  king  hath  demanded 

4.  To  ask  of  or  at  any  one,  question,  eVepwraw. 

Luke  1 7.  20  when  he  was  demanded  of  the  Pharisees 
5. To  ask,enquire,  ■nvvQa.vo^.a.ipunthanomai. 

Matt.  2.    4  he  demanded  of  them  where  Christ  should 
Acts  21.  33  demanded  who  he  was,  and  what  he  had 

DEMAND  of,  to  — 

To  ask  of  or  at,  [any  one),  eirepoiTaaj  eperotao. 
Luke  3. 14  the  soldiers  likewise  demanded  of  him 

DE'-MAS,  A-qjxas. 

A  fellow  disciple  of  Paul  at  Rome. 

Col.    4.  14  Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  and  D. ,  gceet 
Phm.      24  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  D.,  Lucus,  my 

2  Ti.  4. 10  For  D.  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved 

DE-ME'-TRI-TJS,  A^TjTpio?. 

1.  A  silversmith  of  Ephesus  who  opposed  Paul. 

Acts  19.  24  For  a  certain  (man)  named  D.,  a  silver 
19.  38  D.,  and  the  craftsmen  which  are  with  him 

2.  A  convert  well  spoken  of, 

3  Jo.       12  D.  hath  good  report  of  all  (men),  and  of 
DEMONSTRATION  — 

A  showing  or  2>ointing  out,  aw63et£ts  apodeixis. 
1  Co.  2.   4  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power 

DEN  — 

1. Lying  in  wait,  covert,  den,  3"ix  ereb. 

Job    37.   8  the  beasts  go  into  deiis,  and  remain  in 

2. Den,  pit,  Di  gob. 

Dan.   6.    7  he  shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions 
6. 12  shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions? 
6.  16  and  cast  (him)  into  the  den  of  lions 
6. 17  and  laid  upon  the  mouth  of  the  den 
6.  19  and  went  in  haste  unto  the  den  of  lions 
6.  20  when  he  came  to  the  den,  he  cried  with 
6.  23  they  should  take  Daniel  up  out  of  the  den 
6.  23  Daniel  was  taken  up  out  of  the  den 
6.  24  they  cast  (them)  into  the  den  of  lions 
6.  24  ever  they  came  at  the  bottom  of  the  den 

3. Den,  place  of  light,  opening,  hole,  rn^Np  meurah. 

Isa.   11.   8  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den 
4. Habitation,  den,  |iyD  maon. 

Jer.    9.  11  make  Jerusalem  heaps,  (and)  a  den  of 
10.  22  Judah  desolate,  (and)  a  den  of  dragons 

5. Habitation,  den,  njiyp  meonak. 

Job  38.  40  When  they  couch  in  (then-)  deus,  (and) 
Psa.  104.  22  and  lay  them  down  in  their  dens 
Song  4.    8  from  the  lions'  dens,  from  the  mountains 
Amos  3.   4  will  a  young  lion  cry  out  of  his  den  if 
Nah.  2.  12  filled  his  holes  with  prey,  and  his  deus 

6. Den,  cave,  ht^d  mearah* 

Isa.  32. 14  and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever 
Jer.     7. 11  become  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  eyes? 

7. Covert,  covering,  ^b  sok. 

Psa.  10.  9  He  Ueth.  .secretly  as  a  lion  in  his  den 

S.Cave,  den,  (Lat.  spelaeum,)  o-ivr]\aiov  spelaion. 
Matt 21.  13  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves 
Markn.  17  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves ; 
Lukeig.  46  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves 
Heb.11.  38  and  (in)  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth 
Rev.  6.  15  in  the  dens  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  moun. 

DENOTTNCE,  to  — 

To  put  before,  ~U3  nagad,  5. 

Deut  30.  18  I  denounce  unto  you  this  day,  that  ye 
DENS  — 
Dens,  holloxos,  light  holes,  nHinjp  minharoth. 

Judg.  6.    2  children  of  Israel  made  them  the  dens 
DENY,  to  — 
l.To  lie,  feign,  tins  kachash,  3. 

Gen.  i3.  15  Sarah  denied,  saying,  I  laughed  not;  for 

Josh  24.  27  a  witness  unto  you,  lest  ye  deny  your  G. 

Job  8.  18  (it)  shall  deny  him,  (saying),  I  have  not 
31.  28  should  have  denied  the  God  (that  is) 

Prov  30.   9  Lest  I  be  full,  and  deny  (thee,)  and  say 

2. To  withhold,  keep  back,  yjp  mana. 

1  Ki.  20.   7  and  for  my  gold ;  and  I  denied  him  not 
Prov.  30.    7  deny  me  (them)  not  before  I  die 


DEPART 


245 


DEPART 


3.7*0  cause  to  turn  back,  2*&  shub,  5. 

i  Ki.  2. 16  I  ask  one  petition  of  thee,  deny  me  not 
4.7*0  speak  against,  avrtXeyai  antilego. 

Lukezo.  27  which  [deny]  that  there  is  any  resurrection 

5.  To  deny  utterly,  anapyeofxai  aparneomai. 
Mattio.  24  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his 

26.  35  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny  thee 
26.  75  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  d.  v.  24. 

Mark  8.  34  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  c. 
14.  30  before  the  cock  crow,  .thou  shalt  deny  me 
14.  31  I  will  not  deny  thee  in  any  wise 
14.  72  Before  the  cock  crow,  .thou  shalt  deny 

Luke  9.  23  let  him  [deny  himself,]  and  take  up  his 
12.  9  shall  be  denied  before  the  angels  of  God 
22.  34  shalt  thrice  deny  that  thou  knowest  me 
22.  61  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me 

Johni3.  38  till  [thou  hast  denied]  me  thrice 

6.  To  deny,  disown,  apveo/iai  arneomai. 

Mattio.  33  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men 
10.  33  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father 
26.  70  he  denied  before  (.them)  all,  saying,  I 
26.  72  he  denied  witli  an  oath,  I  do  not  know 

Marki4.  68  But  he  denied,  saying,  I  know  not 

14.  70  he  denied  it  again.     And  a  little  after 

Xuke  8.  45  "When  all  denied,  Peter  and  they  that  were 
12.   9  he  that  deuieth  me  before  men  shall  be 
22. 57  he  denied  him.  .1  know  him  not 

John   1.  20  he  confessed,  and  denied  not ;  but  confe. 
18.  25  He  denied  (it),  and  said,  I  am  not 
iS.  27  Peter.then  denied  again :  and  immediately 

Acts    3.  13  denied  him  in  the  presence  of  Pilate 

*  3.  14  ye  denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just,  and 
4. 16  miracle  hath  been  done,  .we  cannot  deny 

1  Ti.    5.    8  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse 

2  Ti.    2.  12  if  we  deny  Qum),  he  also  will  deny  us 

2.  13  abideth faithful,  .he cannot  deny  himself 

3.  5  but  denj-ing  the  power  thereof 

Titus  1.  16  in  works  they  deny  (him),  being  abomina. 

2.  12  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts 
2  Pe.  2.    1  denying  the^Lord  that  bought  them,  and 
1  Jo.  2.  22  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus,  .deuieth  the 

2.  23  Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  the  same 
Jude        4  denying  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our  Lord 
Rev.    2. 13  hast  not  denied  my  faith,  even  in  those 

3.  8  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my 

DEPART,  to  — 
1.7*0  go  in,  K13  bo. 

2KL  10.  12  arose  and  departed,  and  came  to  Samar. 

2.  7*o  remove,  n?a    galah. 

Job  20.  28  The  increase  of  his  house  shall  depart 

3.  7*0  go  on,  TjSn  halak. 

Judg.  6.  21  the  angel  of  the  Lord  departed  out  of 
1  Ki.20.  36  as  soon  as  thou  art  departed  from  me 
Jer.  37.   9  The  Chaldeans  shall  surely  depart  from 
50.    3  they  shall  depart,  both  man  and  beast 

4.7*0  go  on  far  oneself,  to  and  fro,  T^n  halak,  7. 

Judg.21.  24  the  children  of  Israel  departed  thence 
5.  7*o  go  on,  ^7;  yalak.  -   ■ 

Gen.  12.    4  Abram  departed,  as  the  Lord  had  spoken 

14.  12  they  took  Lot.  .and  his  goods,  and  depa. 

21.  14  departed,  and  wandered  in  the  wilderness 

24. 10  the  servant  took  ten  camels,  .and  depar. 
26.  17  Isaac  departed  thence,  and  pitched  his 
26. 31  and  they  departed  from  him  in  peace 
31.  55  Laban  departed,  and  returned  unto  his 
42.  26  laded  their  asses,  .and  departed  thence 
45.  24  sent  his  brethren  away,  and  they  depar. 

Exod33.    1  Depart,  (and)  go  up  thence,  thou  and 
Jsuni  10.  30  I  will  depart  to  mine  own  land,  and  to 
V2.   9  was  kindled  against  them ;  and  he  depa. 

22.  7  elders  of  Midian  departed  with  the 
Josh.  2.  21  And  she  sent  them  away,  and  they  depa. 

22.    9  departed  from  the  children  of  Israel  out 
Judg.  9.  55  they  departed  every  man  unto  his  place 

17.  8  the  man  departed  out  of  the  city  from 

18.  7  the  five  men  departed,  and  came  to  Laish 

18.  21  they  turned  and  departed,  and  pat  the 

19.  5  in  the  morning,  that  he  rose  up  to  depart 
19.    7  when  the  man  rose  up  to  depart,  his 

19.    8  arose  early,  .on  the  fifth  day  to  depart 
19.   9  when  the  man  rose  up  to  depart,  he 

19.  10  he  rose  up  and  departed,  and  came  over 

1  Sa.    6.   6  let  the  people  go,  and  they  departed  ? 

10.    2  When  thou  art  departed  from  me  to  day 

20.  42  he  arose  and  departed  :  and  Jonathan 
22.  1  David  therefore  departed  thence,  and 
22.  5  depart,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of 
22.    5  David  departed,  and  came  into  the  forest 

29.  10  and  as  soon  as  ye  be  up  early,  .depart 

29. 11  David  and  his  men  rose  up  early  to  dep. 

30.  22  that  they  may  lead  (them)  away,  and  de. 

2  Sa.    6. 19  people  departed  every  one  to  his  house 

12.  15  And  Xathan  departed  unto  his  house 

15.  14  make  speed  to  depart,  lest  he  overtake 
17. 21  it  came  to  pass,  after  they  were  departed 

19.  24  from  the  day  the  king  departed  until  the 

20.  21  deliver  him  only,  and  I  will  depart  from 
1  Ki.  12.   5  Depart  yet  (for)  three  days,  then  come 

12.   5  And  the  people  departed 
12.  16  So  Israel  departed  unto  their  tents 
12.  24  returned  to  depart,  according  to  the 
14.  17  Jeroboam's  wife  arose,  and  departed,  and 

19.  19  he  departed  thence,  and  found  Elisha 

20.  9  the  messengers  departed,  and  brought 
20.  36  as  soon  as  thou  art  departed  from  me 
20.  36  as  soon  as  he  was  departed  from  him 

20.  38  the  prophet  departed,  and  waited  for  the 


2  Ki.    1.    4  but  shalt  surely  die.    And  Elijah  depar. 
5.    5  he  departed,  and  took  with  him  ten 
5.  19  So  he  departed  from  him  a  little  way 
5.  24  and  he  let  the  men  go,  and  they  depart. 
8.  14  he  departed  from  Elisha,  and  came  to 

10. 12  he  arose  and  departed,  and  came  to  Sam. 

10. 15  when  he  was  departed  thence,  he  lighted 

1  Ch.16.  43  all  the  people  departed  every  man  to  his 

2  Ch.io.    5  And  the  people  departed 

21.  20  and  departed  without  being  desired 
24.  25  when  they  were  departed  from  him 

Job  27.  21  wind  carrieth  him  away,  and  he  depart. 
Psa.  34.  title,  who  drove  him  away,  and  he  departed 
Eccl.  6.  4  cometh  in  with  vanity,  and  departeth  in 
Jer.  41.  10  and  departed  to  go  over  to  the  Amnion. 
41.  17  they  departed,  and  dwelt  in  the  habitat. 
Mic.    2.  10  Arise  ye,  and  depart ;  for  this  (is)  not 

6.7*0  go  out,  n$j;  yatsa. 

Gen.  12.  4  when  he  departed  out  of  Haran 
Exod.21,  22  so  that  her  fruit  depart  (from  her),  and 
35.  20  the  children  of  Israel  departed  from  the 
•  Lev.  25.  41  (then)  shall  he  depart  from  thee,  (both)  he 
Deut.  9.  7  the  day  that  thou  didst  depart  out  of  the 
24.   2  when  she  is  departed  out  of  his  house 

1  Sa.  23.  13  arose  and  departed  out  of  Keilah,  and 

2  Sa.  11.    8  Uriah  departed  out  of  the  king's  house 

1  CI1.21.    4  Joab  departed,  and  went  throughout  all 
Psa.  105.  38  Egypt  was  glad  when  they  departed 
Jer.  29.    2  After.,  smiths,  were  departed  from  Jeru. 
Lam.  1.    6  daughter  of  Zion  all  her  beauty  is  depar. 
Eze.  10. 18  the  glory  of  the  Lord  departed  from  off 

7.7*0  sink  down,  be  disjointed,  yp;  yaka. 

Jer.    6.    8  Be  thou  instructed,  .lest  my  soul  depart 

8. 7*o  turn  aside,  nS  luz. 

Prov.  3.  21  son,  let  not  them  depart  from  thine  eyes 

9.  7*o  turn  aside,  Vft  luz,  5. 

Prov.  4.  21  Let  them  not  depart  from  thine  eyes 

10.7*0  move,  depart,  c:5D  mush. 

Nuni  14.  44  and  Moses,  departed  not  out  of  the  camp 
Josh.  1.    8  This  book  of  the  law  shall  not  depart  out 
Judg.  6. 18  Depart  not  hence,  I  pray  thee,  until  I 
Prov  17.  13  evil  shall  not  depart  from  his  house 
Isa.   54.  10  For  the  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the 
54.  10  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from 
59.  21  my  words,  .shall  not  depart  out  of  thy 
Jer.  31.  36  If  those  ordinances  depart  from  before  me 

1 1.7*0  move,  WDwiush,  5. 

Exod33. 11  a  young  man,  departed  not  out  of  the 
Psa.  55.  11  deceit  and  guile  depart  not  fromher  streets 
Xah.  3.    1  full  of  lies  (and)  robbery ;  the  prey  depa. 

12. 7*o  flee,  move,  wander  away,  713  nadad. 

Gen.  31.  40  and  my  sleep  departed  from  mine  eyes 

IS.  To  journey,  move,  JJD3  nasa. 

Gen.  37.  17  They  are  departed  hence ;  for  I  heard 
Exodig.    2  For  they  were  departed  from  Rephidim 
Nuniio.  33  they  departed  from  the  mount  of  the  L. 
33.   3  they  departed  from  Rameses  in  the  first 
33.    6  they  departed  from  Succoth,  and  pitched 
33.   8  And  theydeparted  from  before  Pihahiroth 
33.  13  they  departed  from  Dophkah,  and  enca. 
33.  15  they  departed  from  Rephidim,  and  pitc. 
33.  17  they  departed  from  Kibroth-hattaavah 
33.  18  they  departed  from  Hazeroth,  and  pitched 
33.  19  they  departed  from  Rithmah,  and  pitch. 
33.  20  they  departed  from  Rimmon-parez,  and 
33.  27  they  departed  from  Tahath,  and  pitched 
33.  30  they  departed  from  Hashmonah,  and  enc. 
33.  31  they  departed  from  Moseroth,  and  pitc. 
33.  35  they  departed  from  Ebronah,  and  enca. 
33.  41  they  departed  from  mount  Hor,  and  pit. 
33.  42  they  departed  from  Zalmonah,  and  pitc. 
33.  43  they  departed  from  Punon,  and  pitched 
33.  44  they  departed  from  Oboth,  and  pitched 
33.  45  they  departed  from  Iim,  and  pitched  in 
33.  48  they  departed  from  the  mountains  of  A. 
Deut,  1.  19  when  we  departed  from  Horeb,  we  went 

2  Ki.    3.  27  and  they  departed  from  hini,and  returned 

19.    8  he  had  heard  that  hewas  departed  from  L. 

19.  36  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  departed 
Ezra  8.  31  Then  we  departetLirom  the  river  of  Ah. 
Isa.   37.   8  for  he  had  heard  that  he  was  departed 

37.  37  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  departed 

14.  7*o  turn  aside,  to  sur. 

Gen.  49.  10  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah 
Exod.  8.  11  the  frogs  shall  depart  from  thee,  and 

8.  29  the  swarms  (of  flies)  may  depart  from  P. 
Eev.  13.  58  if  the  plague  be  departed  from  them,  then 
ZSuni  12.  10  cloud  departed  from  off  the  tabernacle 

14.  9  their  defence  is  departed  from  them,  and 
16.  26  Depart,  I  pray  you,  from  the  tents  of  these 

Deut.  4.    9  lest  they  depart  from  thy  heart  all  the 
Judg  16.  20  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed 

1  Sa.  15.    6  Go,  depart,  get  you  down  from  among 

15.  6  the  Kenites  departed  from  among  the  A. 

16.  14  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  Saul 
16.  23  and  the  evil  spirit  departed  from  him 
iS.  12  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  was  departed 
28.  15  God  is  departed  from  me,  and  answereth 
28.  16  seeing  the  Lord  is  departed  from  thee 

2Sa.    7. 15  my  mercy  shall  not  depart  away  from 

12.  10  the  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine 

22.  23  his  statutes,  I  did  not  depart  from  them 

2  Ki.   3.    3  sins  of  Jerobonm .  .he  departed  not  there 

10.  29  Jehu  departed  not  from  after  them,  (to 
10.  31  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jerob. 

13.  2  sins  of  Jeroboam,  .he  departed  not  there. 
13.    6  they  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  the 


2  Ki.  13.  11  he  departed  not  from  all  the  sins  of  Jer. 

14.  24  he  departed  not  from  all  the  sins  of  Jer. 

15.  9,  24,  28  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  J. 
15.  iS  he  departed  not  all  his  days  from  the  sins 

1 7.  22  the  children  of  Israel . .  departed  not  from 

18.  6  he.  .departed  not  from  following  him,  but 
2Ch.   8.  15  they  departed  not  from  the  commandm. 

20.  32  he  walked  in  the  way.  .and  departed  not 

34.  33  they  departed  not  from  following  the  L. 

35.  15  they  might  not  depart  from  their 

Nell.  9.  19  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  departed  not  from 
Job   15. 30  He  shall  not  depart  out  of  darkness 

21.  14  Depart  from  us  ;  for  we  desire  not  the 

22.  17  Which  said  unto  God,  Depart  from  us 
28.  28  and  to  depart  from  evil  (is)  understanding 

Psa.  6.  S  Depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniqu. 
34.  14  Depart  from  evil.and  do  good  ;  seek  peace 
37.  27  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  and  dwell 
101.  4  A  froward  heart  shall  depart  from  me  :  I 
119. 102  I  have  not  departed  from  thy  judgments 
119.  115  Depart  from  me,  ye  evil  doers  :  for  I  will 
139.  19  depart  from  me  therefore,  ye  bloody  men 
Prov.  3.    7  fear  the  Lord,  and  depart  from  evil 

5.   7  and  depart  not  from  the  words  of  my  mo. 
13.  14  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death 

13.  19  abomination  to  fools  to  depart  from  evil 

14.  16  A  wise  (man)  feareth,  and  departeth  from 

14.  27  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death 

15.  24  that  he  may  depart  from  hell  beneath 

16.  6  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (men)  depart 

16. 17  The  highway  of  the  upright  (is)  to  depart 
22.   6  when  he  is  old,  he  will  not  depart  from 

27.  22  will  not  his  foolishness  depart  from  him 
Isa.     7.  17  the  day  that  Ephraim  departed  from  Ju. 

n.  13  The  envy  also  of  Ephraim  shall  depart 
14.  25  then  shall  his  yoke  depart  from  off  them 
14.  25  and  his  burden  depart  from  off  their 
52.  11  Depart  ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from 
59.  15  he  (that)  departeth  from  evil  maketh 
Jer.  17.    5  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lo. 

32.  40  that  they  shall  not  depart  from  me 
Lam.  4.  15  Depart  ye ;  (it  is)  unclean  ;  depart,  depart 
Eze.    6.   9  which  hath  departed  from  me,  and  with 

16.  42  and  my  jealousy  shall  depart 
Zeclno.  11  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  shall  depart  away 
Mai.    2.    8  But  ye  are  departed  out  of  the  way ;  ye 

15.  To  pass  on,  nr\y_  adah. 

Dan.  4.  31  The  kingdom  is  departed  from  thee 

16. 7*o  go  up>,  thy  alah. 

1  Ki.;i5. 19  break  thy  league,  .that  he  may  depart 

2  Ch.  16.   3  break  thy  league,  .that  he  may  depart 

17  7*o  be  gone  uj),  roy  alah,  2. 

Jer.  37.   5  the  Chaldeans . .  heard  tidings . .  they  depa. 

18.7*0  turn  aside,  "fib  sur. 

Hos.   9.  12  woe  also  to  them  when  I  depart  from  them 
19.7*0  look,  rrjjy  shaah. 

Job     7.  19  How  long  wilt  thou  not  depart  from  me 
20.7*0  lead  up,  put  to  sea,  avayia  anago. 

Acts  27.  12  the  more  part  advised  to  depart  thence 
28. 10  when  we  departed,  they  laded  (us)  with 

28.  11  after  three  months  we  departed  in  a  ship 

21.7*o  loose  up  {an  anchor),  avaXvco  analuo. 

Phil.   1.  23  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with 
22.7*0  withdraw,  avaxtopew  anachoreo. 

Matt.  2.  12  they  departed  into  their  own  country 
2.  13  when  they  were  departed,  behold,  the 
2. 14  took  the  young  child,  .and  departed  into 

4.  12  when  Jesus  had  heard,  .he  departed  into 

14.  13  he  departed  thence  by  ship  into  a  desert 

15.  21  Then  Jesus  went  thence,  and  departed 
27.    5  and  departed,  and  went  and  hanged  him. 

John  6.  15  he  departed  again  into  a  mountain  him. 

23.7*0  change  from,  let  go,  airaWao-o-to  ajxdlasso. 

Acts  19.  12  the  diseases  departed  from  them,  and  the 
24. 7*o  come  or  go  away,  airspxo^at  aperchomai. 
Matt.  8. 18  he  gave  commandment  to  depart  unto 
9.   7  And  he  arose,  and  departed  to  his  house 
14.  16  They  need  not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to 

16.  4  And*  he  left  them,  and  departed 

27.  60  and  he  rolled  a  great  stone . .  and  departed 
Mark  1.  35  departed  into  a  solitary  place,  and  there 

i.  42  immediately  the  leprosy  departed  from 

5.  17  they  began  to  pray  him  to  depart  out  of 
5  20  he  departed,  and  began  to  publish  in  Dec. 

6.  32  they  departed  into  a  desert  place  by  ship 

6.  46  when  he  had  sent  them  away,  he  depart. 
8.  13  he.  .entering  into  the  ship  again,  departed 

Luke   1.  23  it  came  to  pass,  .he  departed  to  his  own 
1.  3S  And  the  angel  departed  from  her 
5.  13  immediately  the  leprosy  departed  from 
5.  25  departed  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God 

7.  24  when  the  messengers  of  John  were  depa. 
S.  37  the  whole  multitude .  .besought  him  to  d. 

10.  30  thieves,  which.,  wounded  (him),  and  dep. 

24.  12  Peter,  .[departed,]  wondering  in  himself 
John  4.    3  He  left  Judea,  and  departed  again  into 

.  4.  43  after  two  days  he  departed  thence,  and 
5.  15  The  man  departed,  and  told  the  Jews 

12.  36  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  departed 
Acts  10.    7  angel  which  spake  unto  Cornelius  was  d. 

28.  29  the  Jews  [departed,]  and  had  great  reason. 
Rev.  18.  14  the  fruits,  .are  departed  from  thee,  and 

18.  14  things  which  were  dainty,  .[are  departed] 

25.7*o  loose  off  or  away,  airoXvw  apoluo. 

Acts  28.  25  when  they  agreed  not.  .they  departed 


DEPART 


246 


DESCEND 


26.  To  withdraw  away,  cbroxwpe'w  apochoreo. 
Matt.  7.  23  depart  from  rue,  ye  that  work  iniquity 
Luke  g.  39  bruising  him,  hardly  departeth  from  him 
Acts  13.  13  John  departing  from  them  returned^to  J. 

27.  To  be  withdrawn j  aTvox^pK0^0-1' 

Rev.    6.  14  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it 
28. To  be  thoroughly  withdrawn,  $tax<»pi(oncu. 
Luke  9.  33  as  they  departed  from  bim,  Peter  said 

29.  To  come  or  go  through,  Stcpxopat  dierchomai. 
Acts  13.  14  when  they  departed  from  Perga,  they  ca. 

30.  To  go  or  come  out  or  forth,  tKiropevop.a.1  ekpor. 
Matt2o.  29  as  they  departed  from  Jericho,  a  great 
Mark  6.  11  when  ye  depart  thence,  shake  off  the  dust 
Acts  25.    4  and  that  he  liimself  would  depart  shortly 

31.  To  go  out  or  forth,  €%eifj.t  exeimi. 

Acts  17.  15  and  receiving  a  commandment.. they  de. 
20.    7  Paul  preached,  .ready  to  depart  on  the 

32.  To  come  or  go  out  or  forth,  e|epx°Mal  exercho. 
Matt.  9.  31  when  they  were  departed,  spread  abroad 

28.  8  they  [departed]  quickly  "from  the  sepulchre 
Mark  6.  10  there  abide  till  ye  depart  from  that  place 

7. 31  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Si. 

9.  30  they  departed  thence,  and  passed  through 
Luke  4.  42  when  it  was  day,  he  departed  and  went 

5.   8  Depart  from  me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man 

8.  35,  3S  out  of  whom  the  devils  were  departed 
g.   4  whatsoever  house . .  abide,  and  thence  de. 

9.  6  they  departed,  and  went  through  the 

10.  35  on  the  morrow,  when  [he  departed,]  he 
12.  59  I  tell  thee,  thou  shalt  not  depart  thence 

John  4.  43  after  two  days  he  departed  thence,  and 
Acts  11.  25  Then  departed  Barnabas  to  Tarsus,  for  to 

12.  17  he  departed,  and  went  into  another  place 

14.  20  next  day  he  departed  with  Barnabas  to 

15.  40  Paul  chose  Silas,  and  departed,  being 

16.  36  now  therefore  depart,  and  go  in  peace 
16.  40  when  they  had  seen  the  bretliren,  they . .  d. 
17-  33  So  Paul  departed  from  among  them 

18.  23  after  he  had  spent  some  time .  .he  depar. 
20.    1  Paul,  .departed  for  to  go  into  Macedonia 

20.  11  even  till  break  of  day,  so  he  departed 

21.  5  we  departed  and  went  our  way;  and  they 
2t.    8  we  that  were  of  Paul's  company  departed 

Phil.    4.  15  when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no 

33.77)  come  or  go  down,  Kar4pxo/J.ai.  /cater  chomai. 
Acts  13.    4  So  they.. departed  unto  Seleucia;  and 

34.  To  go  after,  away  or  back,  /j.era0aiva  metabaino. 
Matt.  S.  34  that  he  would  depart  out  of  their  coasts 

11.  1  he  departed  thence,  to  teach  and  to 
1?.    9  when  he  was  departed  thence,  he  went 
15.  29  Jesus  departed  from  thence,  aud  came 

John  7.    3  Depart  hence,  and  go  into  Judea,  that 

ij.  1  his  hour  was  come  that  he  should  depart 
Acts  iS.    7  he  departed  thence,  and  entered  into  a 

35.  To  lift  up  mid  remove,  tizraipw  metairo. 
Matti3.  53  when  Jesus  had  finished,  .he  departed 

19.  1  he  departed  from  Galilee,  and  came  into 

36.  To  go  on  beyond,  irapdya  jmrago. 

Matt  9.  27  when  Jesus  departed  thence,  two  blind 
37.7*"  go  on,  -Koptvofxai  poreuomai. 

Matt.  2.  9  when  they  had  heard  the  king,  they  dep. 
11.  7  as  they  departed,  Jesus  began  to  say  unto 
19.  15  he  laid  (his)  hands  on  them,  and  departed 

24.  1  Jesus  went  out,  and  departed  from  the 

25.  41  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast. 
Luke  4.  42  that  lie  should  not  depart  from  them 

13.  31  Get  thee  out,  and  depart  hence:  for  Her. 
Johni6.  7  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you 
Acts    5.  41  they  departed  from  the  presence  of  the 

22.  21  Depart:  for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence 

2  Ti.   4.  10  Demas.  .having  loved,  .is  departed  unto 
38.  To  go  secretly  or  quietly,  vtrdyu>  hupagO. 
Mark  6.  33  the  people  saw  them  departing,  and 
Jas.     2.  16  Depart  in  peace,  be  (ye)  warmed  and  fill 

2d.  To  put  apart,  xwP^C«  chorizo. 

Acts    1.   4  they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem 
18.    1  After  these  things  Paul  departed  from  A. 
18.    2  had  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  from 

1  Co.   7.  10  Let  not  the  wife  depart  from  (her)  husb. 

7.  11  if  she  depart,  let  her  remain  unmarried 
7.  15  if  the  unbelieving  depart,  let  him  depart 
Rim.      15  perhaps  he  therefore  departed  for  a  sea. 

DEPART  asunder,  to  — 

Tt  h-  withd 'rawit,  airo\u}pl^o^ai  apoch  orizomai. 
Acts  15.  39  they  departed  asunder  one  from  the  other 

DEPART  early,  to  — 

To  turn  about,  round,  *i£)y  tsaphar. 

Judg.  7.   3  let  him.  .depart  early  from  mount  Gilead 

DEPART  from,  to  — 

To  place  off  from,  a<piaT7jjj,t  aphistSmi, 

Luke  2.  37  a  widow,  .which  departed  not  from  the 
4.  13  he  departed  from  him  for  a  season 
*3«  27  depart  from  me,  all  (ye)  workers  of  ini. 
Acts  12.  10  and  forthwith  the  angel  departed  from 
15. 38  who  departed  from  them  from  Pamphj 
19.  9  he  departed  from  them,  and  separated 
22.  20  Btnughtway  they  departed  from  him 

2  Co  12.    8  1  besought,  .that  it  might  depart  from 

1  Ti.    4.    1  m  the  latter  tiinessome  shall  depart  from 

2  Ti.    2.  19  And,  let  every  one.  .depart  from  iniquity 
lien.  3.  12  Take  he<  a    ra  departing  from  the  liv'n  • 


DEPART  out,  to  — 

To  witlulraw  out,  e«xa>pew  ekchoreO. 

Luke2i.  21  which  are  in  the  midst  of  it  depart  out 

DEPART  out  of,  to  — 

To  come  out  or  forth,  i^pxofiai  exerehomai. 

Mattio.  14  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house  or  city 

17. 18  he  departed  out  of  him:  and  the  child 
Acts  16.  39  they,  .desired  (them)  to  [depart out  of] 

DEPART,  to  let  — 

1.2V?  send  on,  Thy  shalach,  3. 

ExodiS.  27  Moses  let  his  father  in  law  depart;  and 
Josh  24.  2S  let  the  people  depart,  every  man  unto  his 
2  Sa.  11.  12  and  to  morrow  I  will  let  thee  depart 
1  Ei.  11.  21  Let  me  depart,  that  I  may  go  to  mine 

2.  To  loose  away,  airo\vw  apoluo. 

Luke  2.  29  lettest  tbou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace 
Acts  23.  22  let  the  young  man  depart,  and  charged 

DEPART,  they  that  — 

One  that  turns  aside,  "no;  yasur. 

Jer.  17.  13  they  that  depart  from  me  shall  be  written 

DEPARTED,  to  be  — 
l.To  remove,  n?a  galah. 

1  Sa.    4.  21,  22  The  glory  is  departed  from  Israel 
Hos.  10.  5  for  the  glory  thereof,  .is  departed  from 

2.  To  be  removed,  yp3  nasa,  2. 

Isa.   38. 12  Mine  age  is  departed,  and  is  removed  from 

DEPARTING  — 

l.To  go  out,  Ny;  yatsa. 

Gen.  35.  18  came  to  pass,  as  her  soul  was  in  depart. 

Exodi6.    1  the  second  month  after  their  departing 
2.  To  turn  aside,  "11D  sur. 

Dan.   9.    5  by  departing  from  thy  precepts  and  from 
9. 11  transgressed  thy  law,  even  by  departing 

3..d  going  away,  &<pt£ts  aphixis. 

Acts  20.  29  after  my  departing  shall  grievous  wolves 
■{.Outgoing,  e|o5os  exodos, 

Heb.11.  22  of  the  departing  of  the  children  of  Israel 

DEPARTING  away  — 
To  remove,  JQJ  nasag. 

Isa.   59.  13  and  departing  away  from  our  God,  speak. 

DEPARTURE  — 

l.To  go  out,  xy;  yatsa. 

Eze.  26.  18  isles,  .shall  be  troubled  at  thy  departure 
2.  A  loosing  up  or  off,  avaAvats  analusis. 

2  Ti.    4.    6  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand 

DEPOSED,  to  be  — 

To  be  put  down,  nm  nechath,  6. 

Dan.    5.  20  he  was  deposed  from  his  kingly  throne 
DEPRIVE,  to  — 

To  cause  to  forget,  rvyi  nashah,  5. 
.   Job.  39. 17  God  hath  deprived  her  of  wisdom,  neither 
DEPRIVED,  U  be  — 
1.7V?  be  lacking,  numbered,  ips  paqad,  4. 

Isa.   38. 10  I  am  deprived  of  the  residue  of  my  years 
2.  To  be  bereaved,  fty  shakol. 

Gen.  27.  45  why  should  I  be  deprived  also  of  you  both 
DEPTH  — 

1.  Depth,  the  deep,  n^isp  metsulah. 

Psa.  68.  22  bring  (my  people)  again  from  the  depths 
Mic.    7.  19  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea 

2.  To  make  deep,  poj;  amaq,  5. 

Isa.     7.11  ask  it  either  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  height 

3.  Deep  place,  depth,  pcy  emeq. 

Prov.  9.  18  her  guests  (are)  in  the  depths  of  hell 

4.  Depth,  deep,  pcjj  onuq. 

Prov  25.    3  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for  depth 

5.  Deep,  Vie  deep,  Din?  tchom. 

Exodis.    5  The  depths  have  covered  them  :  they  sank 
15.    8  the  depths  were  congealed  in  the  heart 

Deut.  8.    7  depths  that  spring  ou1  of  valleys  and 

Job   28.  14  The  depth  saith.  It  (is)  not  in  me;  and 
38.  16  thou  walked  in  the  search  of  the  depth  ? 

Psa.  33.    7  he  layeth  up  the  depth  in  storehouses 
71.  20  bring  me  up  again  from  the  depths  of 
77. 16  were  afraid:  the  depths  also  were  troubled 
78.  15  gave  (them)  drink  as  (out  of)  the  great  d. 

106.  g  he  led  them  through  the  depths,  as  thro. 

107.  26  they  go  down  again  to  the  depths 
Prov.  3.  20  By  his  knowledge  the  depths  are  broken 

8.  24  'When  (there  were)  no  depths,  I  was 
8.  27  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of  the  depth 
Jon.    2.  5  the  depth  closed  me  round  about,  the 
G.Depth,  the  depth,  deep  things,  &ddo$  bathos. 
Mark  4.    -,  because  it  had  no  depth  of  earth 
Rom.  8.  39  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
11.  3-5  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the 
Eph.    3.  iS  what  (is)  the  breadth.,  length,  and  depth 
Rev.    1.  ?4  which  have  not  known  [the  depths]  of  S. 
7.  TJie  high  or  open  sea,  irzhayos  jwlagos. 

MattiS.    6  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea 
DEPTHS  — 
Deep  places,  0TOU£  maamaqqim. 

Psa.  130.    1  Out  of  the  depths  have  I  cried  unto  thee 


Isa.   51.  10  that  hath  made  the  depths  of  the  sea 

Eze.  27.  34  by  the  seas  in  the  depths  of  the  water 
DEPUTY  — 
l.To  be  set  up,  3sj  natsab,  2. 

1  Ki.  22.  47  then  no  king  in  Edom :  a  deputy  (was) 
2.  Governor,  stallholder,  nna  pechah. 

Esth.  8.    9  the  deputies  and  rulers  of  the  provinces 
9.    3  the  deputies,  and  officers  of  the  king 
B.A  pro-consul,  ai/Oinraros  anth/qxitos. 

Acts  13.    7  Which  was  withthedeputy  of  the  country 
13.    8  seeking  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  the 

13.  12  the  deputy,  when  he  saw  what  was  done 
ig.  38  the  law  is  open,  and  there  are  deputies 

DEPUTY,  to  be  — 

To  be  or  act  as  a  pro-consul,  apdv-Trarevo}  anthupa. 

Acts  18.  12  when  Gallio  [was  the  deputy]  of  Achaia 
DER-BE,  AepjEfy. 

A  city  of  Lycaouia,  not  far  from  Pisidia  ;  but  its  exact 
position  is  not  known.  It  was  in  the  eastern  part  of 
the  great  upland  plain  of  Lycaonia,  which  stretches 
from  Iconium  eastwards  along  the  north  side  of  the 
Taurus  chain,  near  the  pass  called  the  Galician  gates, 
which  opened  a  way  from  the  low  plain  of  Cilicia  to 
the  interior  tableland.  By  Col.  Leake  it  is  supposed 
to  be  at  Ein-bir  Kilisseh,  at  the  foot  of  the  Eara-dagh; 
but  this  is  the  site  of  Lystra.  Kiepert's  map  puts  it 
further  east,  at  a  spot  where  there  are  ruins,  in  the 
line  of  the  Roman  road.  Hamilton  and  Texier  place 
it  at  Diole,  a  little  south  west  of  the  last  position  and 
nearer  to  the  roots  of  Taurus. 

Acts  14.    6  They,  .fled  unto  Lystra  and  D.,  cities  of 

14.  20  next  day  he  departed  with  Barnabas  to  D. 
16.    1  Then  came  he  to  D.  and  Lystra 

20.    4  there  accompanied  him . .  Gaius  of  D. ,  and 
DERIDE,  to  — 
l.To  laugh  at,  deride,  priy  sachaq. 

Hab.   1.  10  they  shall  deride  every  stronghold  ;  for 
2.To  turn  up  the  nose  at,  cK/AVKTyplfa  ekmukterizo. 

Lukei6  14  And  the  Pharisees  also,  .they  derided  him 
23.  35  the  rulers  also  withthem  derided  (him) 
DERISION  — 
1. Scorn,  scorning,  Jy?  Ictag, 

Eze.  36:   4  which  became  a  prey  and  derision  to  the 

Hos.    7.  16  This  (shall  be)  their  derision  in  the  land 

2.  Derision,  scoffing,  D^p  qeles. 

Psa.  44.  13  a  scorn  and  a  derision  to  them  that  are 

7g.    4  a  scorn  and  derision  to  them  that  are 
Jer.  20.    8  made  a  reproach  unto  me,  and  a  derision 

3.  Laughter,  derision,  pi  nip  sechoq. 

Jer.  20.    7  I  am  in  derision  daily,  everyone  mocketh 
48.  26  Moab.  .he  also  shall  be  in  derision 
48.  27  For  was  not  Israel  a  derision  unto  thee? 
48.  39  so  shall  Moab  be  a  derision  and  a  dismay. 
Lam.  3. 14  I  was  a  derision  to  all  my  people 
DERISION  to  have  in  — 

1.  To  scorn,  p?  hits,  5. 

Psa.ng.  51  The  proud  have  had  me  greatly  in  derision 

2.  To  scorn,  1$)  laag. 

Psa.    2.   4  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision 
59     8  shalt  have  all  the  heathen  in  derision 
Eze.  23.  32  be  laughed  to  scorn  and  had  intension 

3.  To  laugh  at,  deride,  pny  sachaq. 

Job   30.    1  younger  than  I  have  me  in  derision 

DESCEND,  to  — 

l.To  go  or  come  down,  tv  yarad. 

Gen.  2S.  12  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending 
Exodig.  18  because  the  Lord  descended  upon  it  in 

33.  g  the  cloudy  pillar  descended,  and  stood 

34.  5  the  Lord  descended  in  the  cloud,  and 
Num34.  11  the  border  shall  descend,  and  shall  reach 
Deut.  9.  21  the  brook  that  descended  out  of  the 
Josh.  2.  23  descended  from  the  mountain,  and  passed 

17.  g  the  coast  descended  unto  the  river  Kanah 

18.  13  the  border  descended  to  Ataroth-adar 
18.  16  and  descended  to  the  valley  of  Hinnom 
18.  16  on  the  south,  and  descended  to  En-rogel 
18.  17  descended  to  the  stone  of  Bohan  the  son 

1  Sa.  26.  10  he  shall  descend  into  battle,  and  perish 
Psa.  49. 17  his  glory  shall  not  descend  after  him 

133-   3  (the  dew)  that  descended  upon  the  moun. 
Prov  30. :  4  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven,  or  descen. 
Isa.     5.  14  he  that  rejoiceth,  shall  descend  into  it 
Eze.  26.  20  down  with  them  that  descend  into  the 
31.  16  down,  .with  them  that  descend  into  the 

2.  To  go  or  come  down,  Kara$aii/ai  katalaino. 

Matt.  3.  16  he  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  descending  like 
7.  25,  27  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods 
28.    2  angel  of  the  LoRDdesceuded  from  heaven 
Mark  1. 10  Spirit  like  a  dove  descending  upon  him 

15.  32  Let  Christ  the  King  of  Israel  descend  now 
Luke  3.  22  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily 
John  1.  32  the  Spirit,  descending  from  heaven  like 
1.  33  thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  descending,  and 
1.  51  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending 
Acts  10.  11  a  certain  vessel  descending  unto  him,  as 
11.    5  A  certain  vessel  descend,  as  it  bad  been 
24.    1  Ananias  the  high  priest  descended  with 
Rom  10.    7  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep?  that  is 
Eph.   4.    9  what  is  it  but  that  he  also  descended 

4. 10  He  that  descended  is  the  same  also  that 
1  Th.  4.  16  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from 
Rev.  21.  10  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven 


DESCENT 


247 


DESIRE 


3.  To  come  down,  Karepxofxat  katerchomai. 

Jas.    3. 15  This  wisdom  descendeth  not  from  above 

DESCENT  — 

A  cooling  down,  Karct^atris  katabasis. 

Lukei9.  37  at  the  descent  of  the  mount  of  Olives 

DESCENT  counted,  to  have  one's  — 

to  have  o?ie's  genealogy  reckoned,  y€vea\oy4op.ai. 

Heb.    7.   6  he  whose  descent  is  not  counted  from 
DESCENT,  without  — 

Without  a  genealogy,  ayevea\6ynros  agenealogetos. 
Heb.  7.    3  without  descent,  having  neither  beginning 

DESCRIBE,  to  — 

1 .  To  vrrite,  nns  kathab. 

Josh  18.    4  describe  it  according  to  the  inheritance 
iS.   6  describe  the  land  (into)  seven  parts 
18.    8  them  that  went  to  describe  the  land 
18.   8  walk  through  the  land,  and  describe  it 

18.  9  described  it  by  cities  into  seven  parts 
Judg.  8.  14  he  described  unto  him  the  princes  of 

2.To  write,  ypd<pto  grapho. 

Horn  10.   5  Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which 

3.  To  lay  out,  say,  \eyu  lego. 

Rom.  4.   6  David  also  describeth  the  blessedness 
DESCRY,  to  send  to  — - 
To  go  about,  search,  spy  out,  Tffl  tur. 

Judg.  1.  23  the  house  of  Joseph  sent  to  descry  Beth-el 

DESERT  — 

l.Deed,  recompense,  ^D3  gemul. 

Psa.  28.  4  Give  them,  .render  to  them  their  desert 
^Judgment,  as^p  mishpat. 

Eze.    7.  27  according  to  their  deserts  will  I  judge 

DESERT  — 

I.  Dry  or  waste  place,  rerrn  chorbah. 
Psa.  102.   6  I  am  like  an  owl  of  the  desert 
Isa.  48.  21  led  them  through  the  deserts:  he  caused 
Eze.  13.   4  prophets  are  like  the  foxes  in  the  deserts 

'2.Desolation,  p&$\  yeshimon. 

Psa.  78.  40  oft  did  they . .  grieve  him  in  the  desert 

106.  14  and  tempted  God  in  the  desert 
Isa.   43.  19  I  will  even  make .  .rivers  in  the  desert 
43.  20  rivers  in  the  desert,  to  give  drink  to  my 

3.  Plain,  wilderness,  desert,  "i^np  midbar. 

Exod.  3.    1  the  flock  to  the  back  side  of  the  desert  !- 

5.  3  three  days'  journey  into  the  desert 

19.  2  were  come  (to)  the  desert  of  Sinai,  and 
23.    31  and  from  the  desert  unto  the  river 

Nuni2o.    1  whole  congregation,  into  the  desert  of 
27.  14  against  my  commandment  in  the  desert 
33.  16  they  removed  from  the  desert  of  Sinai 
Deut32.  10  He  found  him  in  a  desert  land,  and  in  the 
2  Ch.26.  10  he  built  towers  in  the  desert,  and  digged 
Job   24.    5  (as)  wild  asses  in  the  desert,  go  they  forth 
Isa.   21.    1  from  the  desert,  from  a  terrible  land 
Jer.  25.  24  mingled  people  that  dwell  in  the  desert 

4. Plain,  wilderness,  Arabah,  ■"iyj£  arabaJi. 

Isa.   35.    1  the  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom  as 
35.    6  waters  break  out,  and  streams  in  the  des. 
4o%  3  make  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway 
41.  19  I  will  set  in  the  desert  the  fir  tree 
51.   3  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the  LORD 

Jer.     2.    6  through  a  land  of  deserts  and  of  pits 
17.    6  he  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the  desert 
50.  12  be)  a  wilderness,  a  dry  land,  and  a  desert 

Eze.  47.    8  down  into  the  desert,  and  go  into  the  sea 

5.-4  desert,  solitude,  ipny,ia  eremia. 

Heb.  11.  38  they  wandered  in  deserts,  and  (in)  mou 
6.A  desert,  solitary  place,  zpr,p.os  eremos. 

Mattel  26  Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert ;  go  not  forth 
:  Luke  1.  80  was  in  the  deserts  till  the  day  of  his 

John  6.  31  Our  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  desert 
DESERT  — 
Desert,  solitary,  epn/xos  eremos. 

Matt  14.  13  departed  thence  by  a  ship  into  a  desert 
14. 15  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  the  time  is 

Mark  1.  45  but  was  without  in  desert  places 

6.  31  Come  ye  yourselves,  .into  a  desert  place 
6.  32  they  departed  into  a  desert  place  by  ship 
6.  35  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  now  the  time 

Luke  4.  42  he  departed  and  went  iuto  a  desert  place 
g.  10  [went  aside  privately  into  a  desert  place] 
9.  12  for  we  are  here  in  a  desert  place 

Acts  8.  26  from  Jerusalem  imto  Gaza,  which  is  des. 

DESERT,  wild  beast3  of  the  — 
Inhabitants  of  the  desert,  D"X  tsiyyim. 

Isa.  13.  21  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie  there 
34. 14  The  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  also 

Jer.  50.  39  the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  with  the 

DESERT  OF  THE  SEA,  d;  13-10  midbar  yam. 
An  unknown  portion  of  Arabia. 

Isa.   2i.    1  The  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea. 
DESERVING  — 
Deed,  recompense,  ^oa  gemul. 

Judg.  9. 16  according'to  the  deserving  of  his  hands 
DESIRABLE  — 
Desire,  ion  chemed. 

Eze.  23.   6,  12,  23  all  of  them  desirable  young  men 


DESIRE  — 

1.  Desire,  or  father,  3N  ab. 

Job  34.  36  My  desire  (is,  that)  Job  may  be  tried 

2.  Desire,  tlie  caper-berry,  ruvriN  abiyyonah. 

Eccl.12.   5  shall  be  a  burden,  and  desire  shall  fail 
3. Desire,  longing,  n\H  amah. 

Deut.iS.    6  come  with  all  the  desire  of  his  mind 
1  Sa.  23.  20  according  to  all  the  desire  of  thy  soul 
Hos.  10.  10  (It  is)  in  my  desire  that  I  should  chastise 

4.  Desire,  desirableness,  nion  chcmdah. 

1  Sa.  9.  20  And  on  whom  (is)  all  the  desire  of  Israel  ? 
Dan.  11.  37  nor  the  desire  of  women,  nor  regard  any 
Hag.  2.    7  and  the  Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come 

5.  Delight,  pleasure,  pprr  chephets. 

2  Sa.  23.    5  (this  is)  all  my  salvation,  and  all  (my)  d. 

1  Ei.  5.    8  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  concerning  timber 

5.   9  thou  shalt  accomplish  my  desire,  in 
5.  10  and  fir  trees,  (according  to)  all  his  desire 
o.  11  and  with  gold,  according  to  aU  Ins  desire 
10.  13  unto  the  queen  of  Sheba  all  her  desire 

2  Ch.  9.  12  gave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba  all  her  desire 
Job    31. 16  have  withheld  the  poor  from  (their)  desi. 

6.  Desire,  delight,  p#n  clieslieq. 

iKi.  9.    1  all  Solomon's  desire  which  he  was  pleased 

7.  Desired  or  desirable  thing,  "JI3flO  machmad. 

Eze.  24.  16  take  away  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine 
24.  21  the  desire  of  your  eyes,  and  that  which 
24.  25  joy  of  their  glory,  the  desire  of  their  eyes 

S.  Asking,  request,  n^NiffO  mishalah. 

Psa.  37.   4  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart 

9.  Soul,  V3i  nephesh. 

Eccl.  6.' '  9  Better,  .than  the  wandering  of  the  desire 
Mic.    7.    3  he  uttereth  his  mischievous  desire 
Hab.   2.    5  who  enlargeth  his  desire  as  hell,  and  (is) 

10.  Acceptance,  good  pleasure,  pari  ratson. 

2  Ch.15.  15  and  sought  him  with  their  whole  desire 
Psa. 145.  16  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living  thing 
145. 19  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  him 

11.  Desire,  longing,  -iwr  taavdh. 

Psa.  10.    3  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  heart's  desire 
10. 17  thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  humble 
21.    2  Thou  hast  given  him  his  heart's  desire 
38.  9  Lord,  all  my  desire  (is)  before  thee ;  and 
78.  29  for  he  gave  them  their  own  desire 
112.  10  the  desire  of  the  wicked  shall  perish 

Prov.io.  24  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted 
11.  23  The  desire  of  the  righteous  (is)oulygood 
13. 12  (when)  the  desire  cometh,  (it  is)  a  tree  of 
13.  19  The  desire  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the 
18.  1  Through  desire  a  man,  having  separated 
ig.  22  The  desire  of  a  man  (is)  his  kindness 
2i.  25  The  desire  of  the  slothful  killeth  him 

Isa.  26.   8  the  desire  of  (our)  soul  (is)  to  thy  name 

12.  Desire,  mojrk,  v$tav. 

Job  31.  35  my  desire  (is,  that)  the  Almighty  would 

13.  Desire,  longing,  n&vB  teshuqah. 

Gen.    3.  16  thy  desire  (shall  be)  to  thy  husband 

4.    7  unto  thee  (shall  be)  his  desire,  and  thou 
Song  7.  10  I  (am)  my  beloved's,  and  his  desire  (is) 

14.  Great  or  over  desire,  iiridvfj.ia  ejnthumia. 
Luke  22. 15  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  cut  this 
Phil.   1.  23  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be 

1  Th.   2. 17  to  see  your  face  with  great  desire 

15.  Good  pleasure,  evSoitla  eudokia. 

Bom.io.    1  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for 

16.  Wish)  will,  willing,  6e\7jp.a  thelema-. 
Eph.    2.    3  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh 

DESIRE,  earnest  — 

Great  desire,  longing  after,  iTwrSdwo'is  epipothesis. 

2  Co.    7.   7  when  he  told  us  your  earnest  desire 

DESIRE,  great  — 

Great  desire,  longing  after,  iirtiroOia  epipothia. 
Rom  15.  23  having  a  great  desire  these  many  years 

DESIRE,  vehement  — 

Great  desire,  eVrjrd'fhjcns'  epipothesis: 

2  Co.  7.  11  yea,  (what)  vehement  desire,  yea,  (what) 

DESIRE,  to  — 

l.To  desire,  incline  to,  rnx  avah,  3. 

1  Sa.   2  16  and  (then)  take  (as  much)  as  thy  soul  de. 

2  Sa.   3.  21  reign  over  all  that  thine  heart  desireth 
1  Ki.11.  37  according  to  all  that  thy  soul  desireth 
Job    23.  13  (what)  his  soul  desireth,  even  (that)  he 
Psa.  132.  13  he  hath  desired  (it)  for  his  habitation 

132.  14  here  will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have  desired  it 
Prov2i.  10  The  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  evil:  his 
Isa.   26.    9  With  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the 
Mic.    7.    1  my  soul  desired  the  first  ripe  fruit 

'l.To  desire  for  oneself,  nix  avah,  7. 

Provi3-   4  The  soul  of  the  sluggard  desireth,  and 

23.  6  neither  desire  thou  his  dainty  meats 

24.  1  Be  not  thou  envious . .  neither  desire  to  be 
Eccl.  6.'  2  wanteth  nothing,  .of  all  that  he  desireth 
Jer.  17.  16  neither  have  I  desired  the  woeful  day 
Amos  5.1S  Woe  unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  the 

3.  To  say,  iox  amar. 

1  Sa.  20.   4  Whatsoever  thy  soul  desireth,  I  will  even 
Esth.  2.  13  whatsoever  she  desired  was  given  her  to 


4. To  enquire  after,  ti%3,  nja  beah,  bea. 

Dan.    2.  16  desired  of  the  king  that  he  would  give 

2.  18  That  they  would  desire  mercies  of  the  GL. 
2.  23  made  known  unto  me  now  what  we  desi. 
5.  To  seek,  require,  trp3  baqash,  3. 

Exodio.  11  serve  the  LORD ;  for  that  ye  did  desire 
Q.To  desire,  have  delight,  ion  chamad. 

Exod34.  24  neither  shall  any  man  desire  thy  land 
Dent.  5.  2t  Neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's 

7.  25  thou  shalt  not  desire  the  silver  or  gold 
Job    20.  20  shall  not  save  of  that  which  he  desired 
Psa.  63.  16  (tills  is)  the  hill  (which)  God  desireth  to- 
Prov  12.  12  The  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  evil  (men) 
Isa.     1.  29  ashamed  of  the  oaks  which  ye.  .desired 
53.   2  (there  is)  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire 

7.  To  desire,  have  pleasure,  fsn  chaphets. 

Job  13.   3  Surely  I  would  speak,  .and  I  desire  to 
21. 14  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways 
33.  32  If  thou  hast,  .speak,  for  I  desire  to  justify 

Psa.  40.  6  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  des. 
51.  6  Behold,  thou  desirest  truth  in  the  inward 
5*1.  16  For  thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else  would 
73.  25  none  upon  earth  (that)  I  desire  beside 

Jer.  42.  22  in  the  place  whither  ye  desire  to  go 

Hos.    6.    6  For  I  desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice 

8.  Desiring,  J'sn  chaphets. 

Neh,  1.  11  thy  servants,  who  desire  to  fear  thy  name 

Psa.  34.  12  What  man  (is  he  that)  desireth  life,  (and) 

70.   2  let  them  be . .  put  to  confusion,  that  desire 

9.  Desire,  {'an  chephets. 

1  Sa.  i3.  25  The  king  desireth  not  any  dowry,  but  ait 

10. To  cleave  to,  delight  in,  pvn  chashaq. 

1  Ki.  9.  19  which  Solomon  desired  to  build  in  Jeru. 

2  Ch.  8.   6  all  that  Solomon  desired  to  build  in  Jem, 

11.  To  ask,  *?}$  shook 

Deuti4.  26  or  for  whatsoever  thy  soul  desireth:  and 
18. 16  According  to  all  that  thou  desirest  of  the 
Judg.  8.  24  Gideon  said . .  I  would  desire  a  request  of 
1  Sa.  12.  13  king  whom  ye  have  chosen,  (and),  .de.! 

1  Ki.  2.  20  said,  I  desire  one  small  petition  of  thee 

2  Ki.  4.  28  she  said,  Did  I  desire  a  son  of  my  lurd'L 
2  Ch.  11.  23  And  he  desired  many  wives 

Psa.  27     4  One  (thing)  have  I  desired  of  the  LORD 
Eccl.  2.  10  whatsoever  mine  eyes  desired  I  kept  not 

12.  To  swallow  up,  pant  after,  v\wp  shaaph. 

Job   36.  20  Desire  not  the  night,  when  people  are 

13.  To  lift  up  the  soid,  vsi  x^3  nasa  nephesh,.- 
Jer.   22.  27  to  the  laud  whereunto  they  desire  to> 

1 4.  To  ask,  aiVew  aiteo. 

Matt2o.  20  worshipping  (him),  and  desiring  a  certain 
Mark  10.  35  do  for  us  whatsoever  we  shall  desire 

11.  24  What  things  soever  ye  desire,  when  ye 
15.    6  released,  .prisoner,  whomsoever  they  de. 
15.   8  began  to  desire  (liim  to  do)  as  he  had 

Luke 23.  25  he  released  unto  them,  .whom  they,  .de 
Acts    3.  14  desired  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto 
7.  46  desired  to  find  a  tabernacle  for  the  God 
g.    2  desired  of  him  letters  to  Damascus  to  the 

12.  20  desired  peace;  because  their  country  was 

13.  21  And  afterward  they  desired  a  king:  and 

13.  28  yet  desired  they  Pilate  that  he  should  be 
25.  3  desired  favour  against  him,  that  he  would 
25.  15  desiring  (to  have)  judgment  against  him. 

Eph.    3.  13  I  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  tribula.. 
Col.    1.   9  to  desire  that  ye  might  be  filled  -with  the 
1  Jo.   5.  15  have  the  petitions  that  we  desired  of  him. 
15. To  think  worthy,  a£t6u  axioo. 

Acts  28.  22  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  thinkest 

16.  To  ask  excessively,  e£cuTe«  exalted. 

Luke22.  31  Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired,  .you. 

17.  To  ask  at  or  of,  itrepwrda)  eperttao. 

Matt  16.    1  desired  him  that  he  would  show  them  a 
IS. To  seek  after,  eVi^jTew  epizeteo. 

Acts  13.    7  and  desired  to  hear  the  word  of  God 
Phil.    4.  17  Not  because  I  desire  a  gift:  but  I  desire 

19.  To  desire  greatly,  iiriBviMto)  epithumeo. 
Matti3.  17  have  desired  to  see  (those  things)  which 
Luke  16.  21  desiring  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which 

17.  22  ye  shall  desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of 

22.  15  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  passover  with 
1  Ti.    3.    1  he  desireth  a  good  work 

Heb.    6. 11  we  desire  that  every  one  of  you  do  show 
1  Pe.    1.  12  which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look 
Rev.    9.   6  shall  desire  to  die,  and  death  shall  flee 

20.  To  desire  greatly,  iiMroQ4a>  epipofkeo. 

1  Pe    2.    2  As  new  born  babes,  desire  the  sincere 

21.  To  ask,  desire,  epojrdw  erotao. 

Luke  7.  36  one  of  the  Pharisees  desired  him  that  he 

14.  32  he  sendeth  an  ambassage,  and  desireth 
John  12.  21  desired  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see  J. 
Acts  16.  39  and  desired  (them)  to  depart  out  of  the 

iS.  20  they  desired  (him)  to  tarry  longer  time 

23.  20  The  Jews  have  agreed  to  desire  thee  that 

22.  To  be  zealous  of,  £i)\6w  zeloo. 

1  Co.  14.    1  Follow  after  charity,  and  desire  spiritual 

23.  To  seek,  fareta  zeteo. 

Matt  12.  46  his  brethren  stood  without,  desiring  to 

12.  47  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to 

Luke  9.   9  who  is  this.  .And  he  desired  to  see  him 

24.  To  u>ish,  will,  Q4\w  thelo. 

Mark  9.  35  If  any  man  desire  to  be  first,  (the  same) 


DESIRE 


248 


2  Co. 
Gal. 

iTi. 


Luke  5.  39  having  drunk  old  (wine)  straightway  de. 
8.  20  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to 
10.  24  many  prophets . .  have  desired  to  see  those 
20.  46  scribes,  which  desire  to  walk  in  long  rob. 
.  11. 12  cut  off  occasion  from  them  which  desire 
12.    6  For  though  I  would  desire  to  glory,  I 
4.   9  whereunto  ye  desire  again  to  be  in  bon.  ? 
4.  20  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you  now,  aud 
4.  21  Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the 
6.  12  As  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  show  in 
6. 13  but  desire  to  have  you  circumcised,  that 
.    7  Desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  law  :  uud. 

25.  To  stretch  the  arms  for,  opeyofiai  oregomai. 
1  Ti.    3.    1  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop,  he 
fleb.  11.  16  But  now  they  desire  a  better  (country) 

26.  To  call  alongside  of,  wapaicaKeai  parakaleo. 
Matti8.  32  I  forgave  thee  all.,  because  thou  desiredst 
Acts    8.  31  he  desired  Philip  that  he  would  come  up 

9.  38  desiring  (him)  that  he  would  not  delay  to 
19.  31  desiring  (him)  that  he  would  not  advent 
28. 14  were  desired  to  tarry  with  them  seven  d 

1  Co.  16.  12  I  greatly  desired  him  to  come  unto  you 

2  Co.    8.    6  Insomuch  that  we  desired  Titus  that  as 

12.  18  I  desired  Titus,  and  with  (him)  I  sent 
DESIRE  earnestly  or  greatly,  to  — 
l.To  desire  for  oneself,  nix  avah,  7. 
■   Psa.  45.  11  shall  the" King  greatly  desire  thy  beauty 

2.  To  swallow  up,  pant  after,  t]NB>  shaaph. 
Job     7.    2  a  servant  earnestly  desireth  the  shadow 

3.  To  desire  greatly,  eVi7ro0e'a>  epipotheo. 

2  £?'   5'    2  eamestlv  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon 

1  Th.  3.    6  desiring  greatly  to  see  us,  as  we  also  (to 

2  11.    1.    4  Greatly  desiring  to  see  thee,  being  mind. 
DESIRE  to  have,  to  — 
To  be  zealous  of  or  for,  £r)\ia  zeloo. 

Jas.     4.    2  kill,  aud  desire  to  have,and  cannot  obtaiu 
DESIRE,  to  have  a  — 

1.  To  cleave  to,  delight  in,  ppn  choshaq. 

Deut  21.  11  aud  hast  a  desire 'unto  her,  that  thou 

2.  To  have  desire,  *]P3  kasaph. 
Job  14.  15  thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of 

3.  To  lift  up  the  soul,  vsz  n\?j  nasa  nephesh. 

Jer.  44.  14  they  have  a  desire  to  return  to  dwell 
DESIRED  — 

1.  To  be  desired,  f]D3  kasaph,  2. 
Zeph.  2.    1  yea,  gather  together,  O  nation  not  desired 

2.  Desire,  pleasure,  ran  chephets. 

Psa.  107. 30  bringeth  them  unto  their  desired  haven 
DESIRED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  desired,  ion  chamad,  2 

Gen.   3.    6  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  (one) 

Prov  I9'  '°  ?T?re  '°  w  desiretl  <are  they) than  gold 
Prov  21.  20  (There  is)  treasure  to  be  desired  aud  oil 

2.  Desire,  desirableness,  ,TE>n  chemdah. 

2  Ch.21.  20  departed  witnout  being  desired  :  howbeit 

3.  Delight,  pleasure,  vsn  chephets. 

Prov.  8.  11  all  the  things  that  may  be  desired  are 
DESIRED,  things  — 
Desire,  pleasure,  j'sn  chephets. 

Prov.  3.  15  all  the' things  thou  canst  desire  are  not 
8.  1 1  all  the  things  that  may  be  desired  are  not 
DESIRES  — 
Desires,  longings,  D")N?  maavayyim. 

Psa.  140.   8  Grant  not,'  6  Lord,  the  desires  of  the  wic 
DESIROUS,  to  be  — 
l.To  show  self  desirous,  njij  avah,  7. 

Prov  23.    3  Be  not  desirous  of  his  dainties  ;  for  they 
2.  To  wish,  ei\a  thelo. 

tm^2^    8  fTU1'  he,was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  Ion" 

John  ,6.  ,9  Jesus  knew  that  theywere  desirous  to  alk 

2  00.  „.  32  the  governor.. kept  the  city. .desirous  to 
DESIRO US  of,  to  be  affectionately  — 
To  send  one's  love  after,  !p.e<p0p.cu  himeiromai. 

iih.   2.    8  .So  [being  affectionately  desirous  of]  you 
DESIROUS  of  vain  glory  — 
Vain  glorious,  Kev68o£os  Jcenodoxos. 

Gal.    5.  26  Let  us  not  be  desirous  of  vain  glory  prov 
DESOLATE,  TOO^i  sheinamah. 
A  title  of  Judah  while  under  God's  anger. 

Isa.  62.    4  neither  shall.,  land.,  more  be  termed  D 
DESOLATE  — 
I. Alone,  separate,  T33  badad. 

Isa.  27. 10  Yet  thedefeuced  city  (shall  be)  desolate 
^.Desolations,  nina  battoth. 

Isa.     7.  I9  shall  rest  all  of  them  in  the  desolate 
Z.Silent,  gloomy,  iid:j  galmud. 

Isa    £  It  f  h" the,  c°nSreSation .  .(shall  be)  desolate 
isa    4,.  2I  1  have  lost  my  chlldrenj  aud  am'  desolate 

4.  Jo  be  dry,  waste,  s-in  ehareb,  2 

ll'  ','217',?"  make  thee  a  desolate  city 
3°-    7  midst  of  the  countries  (that  are)  desolate 
5.Dry,  waste,  an  ehareb 

^  ll  1°  which  ta  SK  ft'"  ''rt  desolate  ^hout 
33-  12  winch  is  desolate  without  man  aud  with. 


DESOLATION 


6.  Dryness,  waste,  rrj-in  chorbah. 
Jer.     7.  34  Then,  .for  the  land  shall  be  desolate 
Jize.  25. 13  and  I  will  make  it  desolate  from  Teman 

7.  Only,  lonely,  singly,  Tn;  yachid. 
Psa.  25. 16  have  mercy  upon  me;  for  I  (am)  desolate 

8.  To  be  cut  off,  hidden,  ins  kachad,  2. 
Job   15.  28  he  dwelleth  in'desolate  cities,  (and)  in 

9. Desolation,  astonishment,  waste,  nsira  mesham 
Isa.    15.    6  the  waters  of  Nimrim  shall"  lie  desolate 
Jer.  48.  34  waters  also  of  Ninirim  shall  be  desolate 
nze.   6.  14  more  desolate  than  the  wilderness  toward 

10.  Wasting,  desolation,  n^iei  shoah. 

Job   30.   3  the  wilderness'in  former  time  desolate 
38.  27  To  satisfy  the  desolate  and  waste  (ground) 

ll.Desolation,  astonishment,  waste,  riser  shammah 
Isa.     5.  9  many  houses  shall  be  desolate,  (even) 

13.   9  and  fierce  anger,  to  lay  the  land  desolate 
Jer.    4.    7  nom  his  place  to  make  thy  land  desolate 

18.  16  make  their  land  desolate,  (and)  a  perpet 

19.  8  make  this  city  desolate,  and  an  hissiiif 
25.  38  their  land  is  desolate  because  of  the    " 
48.    9  for  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  desolate 
So-    3  winch  shall  make  her  land  desolate,  and 

Wos.    5.    9  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of 
Zech.  7.  14  for  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate 
12.7b  be  desolate,  cop  shamem. 

2  Sa.  13.  20  Tamar  remained. desolate  in  her  brother 
isa.   49.   8  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate  heritages 
54-    1  more  (are)  the  children  of  the  desolate 
.Lain.   1,    4  her  gates  are  desolate :  her  priests  sio-h 
1. 13  he  hath  made  me  desolate  (and)  faint  all 
1. 16  my  children  are  desolate,  because  the 
3. 11  He  hath  turned . .  he  hath  made  me  desol 
£ze.   36.   4  to  the  desolate  wastes,  and  to  the  cities 
■fan.    9.  27  that,  .shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolate 
13.7b  be  or  become  desolate,  cop  shamem,  2. 

Psa.  69.  25  Let  their  habitation  be  desolate  ;  (and)  let 

Isa.    54.    3  make  the  desolate  cities  to  be  inhabited 

Jer.  33. 10  streets  of  Jerusalem,  (that  are)  desolate 

I!.ze.  29. 12  midst  of  the  countries  (that  are)  desolate 

30.    7  the  midst  of  the  countries  (that  are)  des 

36.  34  the  desolate  land  shall  be  tilled,  whereas 

36.  33  This  land  that  was  desolate  is  become 

36.  35  the  waste  and  desolate  and  ruined  cities 

14.  Desolate,  Dap  shamem. 
Jer.   12. 11  (and  being)  desolate  it  mourneth  unto 
■Dan.   9.  17  shine  upon  thy  sanctuary  that  is  desolate 

15.  Desolation,  naap  shemamah. 
Exod23.  29  lest  the  land  become  desolate,  and  the 
Lev.  26.  33  your  land  shall  be  desolate,  and  your 
Isa.     1.    7  Your  country  (is)  desolate,  your 

1.    7  (itis) desolate,  as  overthrown  bystrangers 
6.  n  and  the  land  be  utterly  desolate 
Jer.    4.  27  The  whole  land  shall  be  desolate  •  yet 
6.    8  lest  I  make  thee  desolate,  a  land  not 
9.  11  I  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  desolate 
10.  22  to  make  the  cities  of  Judah  desolate,  (and) 
12.  10  my  pleasant  portion  a  desolate  wilderness 
12.  11  They  have  made  it  desolate,  (and  bein")d 
32.  43  (It  is)  desolate  without  man  or  beast 
44.   6  they  are  wasted  (and)  desolate,  as  at  this 

49.  2  and  it  shall  be  a  desolate  heap,  and  her 

50.  13  but  it  shall  be  wholly  desolate;  every  one 

51.  26  thou  shalt  be  desolate  for  ever,  saiththe 
Si.  62  but  that  it  shall  be  desolate  for  ever 

Hze.    6.  14  and  make  the  land  desolate ;  yea  more 
12.  20  laid  waste,  and  the  land  shall  be  desolate 

14. 15  they  spoil  it,  so  that  it  be  desolate,  that 

14. 16  but  the  land  shall  be  desolate 
15.    8  I  will  make  the  land  desolate,  because 
29.   9  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  desolate  aud  waste 
29. 10  make  the  land  of  Egypt . .  waste  (and)  des 
29. 12  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate 
29.  12  the  cities,  .laid  waste  shall  be  desolate 

32.  is  I  shall  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate 
33-  28  I  will  lay  the  land  most  desolate,  and  the 

33.  29  when  I  have  laid  the  land  most  desolate 
35.   3  I  will  make  thee  most  desolate 

35.  4  lay  thy  cities  waste,  and  thou  shalt  lie  d 
3S-   7  Thus  will  I  make  mount  Seir  most  des 
35. 14  saith  the  Lord . .  I  will  make  thee  desolate 
35-  15  thou  shalt  be  desolate,  0  mount  Seir 

36.  34  whereas  it  lay  desolate  in  the  sight  of  all 
Joel    2.   3  behind  them  a  desolate  wilderness 

2.  20  will  drive  him  into  a  land,  .desolate 

3.  19  Edom  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness 
Mie.    1.    7  all  the  idols  thereof  will  I  lay  desolate 

7.  13  Notwithstanding  the  laud  shall  be  des. 

IG.Deserted,  epvuis  eremos. 

Matt  23.  38  your  house  is  left  unto  you  [desolate] 
^ukei3-  35  your  house  is  left  unto  you  [desolate] 
acis    1.  20  Let  his  habitation  be  desolate,  and  let  no 
i»ai.    4.  27  the  desolate  bath  many  more  children 

17.7b  make  a  desert,  ipny.6w  eremoo. 

Rev.  i7.  t6  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked 

IS. To  leave  alone,  p.ov6a  monoo. 


for  she 


1  Ti. 


5-    5  Now  she  that  is  a  widow,  and  desolate 


DESOLATE,  to  be 

1. 7b  be  or  become  desolate,  dvJx  ashem 

Psa.  34.  21  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  desolate 

I«    IV  '1  ?w« %*  tr,';st, iu  "im  sM1  he  desolate 
Isa.  24.    6  they  that  dwell  therein  are  desolate  ■  ther 


2.  To  be  or  become  dried  up,  wasted,  mn  ehareb 
Jer.     2.  12  and  be  horribly  afraid,  be  ye*  very  deso 

26.   9  city  shall  be  desolate  without  au  inhabit.  ? 

3.  7b  be  burned,  ns;  yalsath,  2. 
Jer.  46.  19  Noph  shall  be  waste  and  desolate  witho 

4. 7b  be  desolate,  DE>;  yasham. 

Gen.  47.  19  give  (us)  seed,  .that  the  land  be  not  des 
Hze.    6.    6  the  high  places  shall  be  desolate 
12. 19  her  land  may  be  desolate  from  all 
19.   7  the  land  was  desolate,  and  the  fulness 
5. 7b  be  empty,  free,  acquitted,  npj  naqah,  2 

Isa.     3.  26  and  she,  (being)  desola'te,  shall  sit  upou 
6. 7b  be  wasted,  desolate,  naop  nvp  shaah  sheina  2 

Isa.     6. 11  and  the  land  be  utterly  desolate 
7. 7b  be  desolate,  DDB>  shamem. 

Psa.  40.  15  Let  them  be  desolate  for  a  reward 
t?T'  S'  *o  tlle  "o™4'™  of  Zion,  which  is  desolate 
Hze.  33.  28  the  mountains  shall  be  desolate 
35-  is  Israel,  because  it  was  desolate 

8.  To  be  or  become  desolate,  cap  shamem,  2 
Lev.  26.  22  your  (high)  ways  shall  be  desolate 
Lam.  4.    5  They  that  did  feed,  .are  desolate  iu  the 
nze.    6.   4  And  your  altars  shall  be  desolate 

25.   3  the  land  of  Israel,  when  it  was  desolate 
30.    7  they  shall  be  desolate  in  the  midst 
36.  36  (and)  plant  that  that  was  desolate 
Amos  7.    g  And  the  high  places,  .shall  be  desolate 
Zeph.  3.    6  I  have  cut.  their  towers  are  desolate 
Zecn.  7. 14  the  land  was  desolate  after  them 

9.  To  feel  self  desolate,  cop  shamem,  7a. 
Psa.  14  3.    4  my  heart  within  me  is  desolate 

DESOLATE,  to  become  — 

7b  be  or  become  desolate,  db>n  ashem. 

Hos.  13.  16  Samaria  shall  become  desolate 
DESOLATE  houses  — 
Forsaken  habitations,  rfuphif  ahnanotli. 

Isa.   13.  22  shall  cry  in  their  desolate  houses 
DESOLATE,  to  be  laid — 

I. Desolation,  be  desolate,  naap  or  cap  shamem. 
Eze.  35.  12  They  are  laid  desbiate,  they  are  given 
2.7b  be  or  become  desolate,  cap'  shamem,  2. 

Joel    i.i7  The  seed . .  the  garners  are  laid  desolate 
DESOLATE,  to  lie  — 
7b  be  made  desolate,  cop  shamem,  6. 

Lev.  26.  34  as  long  as  it  lieth  desolate,  and  ye  (be)  iu 
26.  35  As  long  as  it  lieth  desolate  it  shall 
26.  43  while  she  lieth  desolate  without  them 
2  U1.36.  21  as  long  as  she  lay  desolate  she  kept  sab. 
DESOLATE,  to  be  made  — 
1.7b  be  desolate,  cpti  ashem. 

Eze.    6.    6  that  your  altars  may  be . .  made  desolate 
2. 7b  be  or  become  desolate,  cpx  ashem,  2. 

Joel    1.  18  the  flocks  of  sheep  "are  made  desolate 
3.7b  be  or  become  desolate,  cop  shamem,  2. 
Jer.  12.  11  the  whole  land  is  made  desolate 
DESOLATE,  to  make  — 
1.7b  desolate,  cop  shamem. 

nH  3<5'    3  Because  they  have  made  (youj  desolate 
Dan.  12.  1 1  abomination  that  maketh  desolate 
2. 7b  desolate,  cop  shamem,  Sa. 

Dan.  9.  27  he  shall  make  (it)  desolate,  even  until 
11.  31  they  shall  place,  .that  maketh  desolate 
6.10  make  desolate,  cop  shamem,  5. 

Job  16.    7  thou  hast  made  desola'te  all  my  company 
Jer.  10.  25  and  have  made  his  habitation  desolate 

49.  20  he  shall  make  their  habitations  desolate 

50.  45  he  shall  make  (their)  habitation  desolate 
20.  26  that  I  might  make  them  desolate 
30. 14  And  I  will  make  Pathros  desolate 

4. 7b  leave  desolate,  ipnixoa  eremoo. 

Rev.  18. 19  for  in  one  hour  is  she  made  desolate 
DESOLATE,  making  — 
7b  make  desolate,  cap  shamem,  5. 

Mic.    6.  13  m  makmS  (thee)  desolate  because  of  thy 
DESOLATE  palaces  — 
Forsaken  habitations,  ribp^N  almanoth. 

Eze    13.    7  And  he  knew' their  desolate  palaces 
DESOLATE  place  — 
l.Desolate  places,  D'jOfjiN  ashmannim. 

Isa.  S9.  10  (we  are)  in  desolate  places'  as  dead  (men) 

2.  Dry  or  waste  place,  mn  chorbah. 
Job     3.  14  whichbuiltdesolateplacesfnrthemselves 
Isa.  103.  10  bread)  also  out  of  their  desolate  places 
Hze.  26.  20  in  places  desolate  of  old,  with  them  that 

33.  1=  turn  thine  hand  upon  the  desolate  places 
Mai.    1.    4  will  return  and  build  the  desolate  places 

3.  To  be  desolate,  car,'  shamem. 
Isa.  49.  19  thy  waste  and  thy  desolate  places,  and 

DESOLATION  — 

I. Drought,  dry,  waste  place,  :nn  choreb. 

Zeph.  2.  14  desolation  (shall  be)  in  the  thresholds 

2. Drought,  dry  or  waste  place,  n:nn  chorbah 

Ezra    9.    0  to  repair  the  desolations  thereof,  and  to 

Jer.    22.    5  that  tins  house  shall  become  a  desolation 

25.   9  and  an  hissing,  and  perpetual  desolations 


Eze. 


DESOLATION 


249 


DESTROY 


Jer.  25.  11  this  whole  laud  shall  be  a  desolation 

25.  i3  (To  wit),  .to  make  them  a  desolation,  an 
44.    2  this  day  they  (are)  a  desolation,  and 
44.  22  therefore  is  your  land  a  desolation,  and 

Dan.    9.    2  seventy  years  in  tie  desolations  of 

3.  Desolation,  waste,  rnjitfi?  meshoah. 

Zeph.  1.  15  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation,  a  day 

4  Desolations,  wastes,  rnxisv?  mashshuoth. 

Psa.  74.    3  thy  feet  unto  the  perpetual  desolations 

5  Desolation,  wasting,  rrmeJ  shaavah. 

Prov.  1.  27  When  your  fear  cometh  as  desolation 
b  Desolation,  wasting,  nx;?  sheth. 

Lam.  3. 47  Fear,  .is  come  upon  ns,  desolation  and 
7  Destruction,  spoiling,  Ye*  shod. 

Isa.   51.  19  These  two  (things)  are  come .  .desolation 

Hos.  12.    1  he  daily  increaseth  lies  and  desolation 

8.  Desolation,  wasting,  nx'ia'  shoah. 

Job  30.  14  in  the  desolation  they  rolled  themselves 
Prov.  3.  25  neither  of  the  desolation  of  the  wicked 
Isa.   10.   3  the  desolation  (which)  shall  come  from 
47.  11  desolation  shall  come  upon  thee  suddenly 

9.  Desol-ation,  ■is?'  shammah. 

2  Ki.  22.  19  that  they  should  become  a  desolation 
2  Ch.  30.   7  therefore  gave  them  up  to  desolation 
Psa.  46.    8  what  desolations  he  hath  made  in  the 
73.  19  How  are  they  (brought)  into  desolation 
Isa.   24.  12  In  the  city  is  left  desolation,  and  the 
Jer.  49.  13  Bozrah  shall  become  a  desolation 

49.  17  Edom  shall  be  a  desolation  :  every  one 

50.  23  how  is  Babylon  become  a  desolation 

51.  29  to  make  the  land  of  Babylon  a  desolation 
51. 43  Her  cities  are  a  desolation,  a  dry  land 

Mic,    6.  16  that  I  should  make  thee  a  desolation 
Zeph.  2.  15  how  is  she  become  a  desolation,  a  place 

10  To  be  desolate,  cxy  shamem. 

Isa.  61.   4  they  shall  raise  up  the  former  desolations 

6r.   4  the  desolations  of  many  generations 
Dau.  S.  13  and  the  transgression  of  desolation 
9.  18  behold  our  desolations,  aud  the  city 
9.  26  end  of  the  war  desolations  are  determined 

11.  Desolation,  ."!££;?  shemamah. 

Josli  8  28  made  it  an  heap,  .(even)  a  desolation 
Isa    17     9  aud  there  shall  be  desolation 

64.  ic  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desolation 
Jer.  25.  12  and  will  make  it  perpetual  desolations 
34  22  make  the  cities  of  Judah  a  desolation 
49  33  a  dwelling  for  dragons,  (and)a  desolation 
Eze.    7-  27  prince  shall  be  clothed  with  desolation 
23.  33  the  cup  of  astonishment  and  desolation 
Joel     3  19  Egypt  shall  be  a  desolation,  and  Edom 
Zeph.  1.  13  and  their  houses  a  desolation  :  they  shall 
2     4  be  forsaken,  and  Ashkelon  a  desolation 
2.    9  and  saltpits,  aud  a  perpetual  desolation 
2. 13  will  make  Nineveh  a  desolation,  (and)  dry 

12.  Desolation,  -ipc^  shemamah. 

Eze.  35.    9  I  will  make  thee  a  perpetual  desolation 

\%.A  making  desolate  or  desert,  €p7}fiw<ns  eremosis. 
Matt  24.  15  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation 
.SIarki3.  14  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation 
Luke2i.  20  know  that  the  desolation  thereof  is  nigh 

DESOLATION,  to  bring  into  — 

l.To  make  desolate,  Dipr  shamem,  5. 

Lev.  «6.  31  bring  your  sanctuaries  unto  desolation 
26.  32  And  I  will  bring  the  land  into  desolation 

2.  To  maize  a  desert,  ipwfiSo)  eremoo. 

Matti2.  25  against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation 
Luken.  17  against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation 

DESPAIR,  to  — 

l.To  despair,  trx;  yaash,  2. 

1  Sa.  27.    1  Saul  shall  despair  of  me,  to  seek  me  any 
2.  To  have  no  outlet  whatever,  i^a-rropeo/xaL  exapor. 

2  Co.  1.    8  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life 
DESPAIR,  to  be  in  — 

To  have  no  outlet  whatever,  ££airopeofiai  exaporeo. 

2  Co.  4.    8  (we  are)  perplexed,  but  not  in  despair 
DESPAIR,  to  cause  to  — 
To  coAtse  to  despair,  jyx;  yaash,  3. 

Eccl.  2.  20  went  about  to  cause  my  heart  to  despair 
DESPERATE  — 
To  be  or  become  sickly,  emx  anash. 

Isa.   17. 11  thedayof  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow 
DESPERATE,  one  that  is  — 
To  be  despairing  ^  t:*x;  yaash,  2. 

Job     6.  26  and  the  speeches  of  one  that  is  desperate 
DESPERATELY  wicked  — 
To  be  sick,  b'jn  anash. 

Jer.  17,   9  above  all  (tilings),  and  desperately  wicked 
DESPISE,  to  — 
1.7b  despise,  contemn,  tread  on,  113  buz. 

Prov.  1.    7  (but)  fools  despise  wisdom  and  instruction 
6.  30  (Men]  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal 
11.  12  He  that  is  void  of  wisdom  despiseth  his 

13.  13  Whoso  despiseth  the  word  shall  be  dest. 

14.  21  He  that  despiseth  his  neighbour  sinneth 
23,    9  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  words 
23.  22  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old 
30.  17  and  despiseth  to  obey  (his)  mother 

Song  8.    1  yea,  I  should  not  be  despised 
Zech.  4.  10  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small 

3'2 


2.  To  despise,  contemn,  ni2  bazah. 

Gen.  25.  34  thus  Esau  despised  (his)  birthright 
Numi5.  31  he  hath  despised  the  word  of  the  Loud 

1  Sa.  2.  30  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly 

10.  27  they  despised  him,  and  brought 

2  Sa.  6.  16  and  she  despised  him  in  her  heart 

12.    9  Wherefore  hast  thou  despised  the  com. 

12. 10  thou  hast  despised  me,  and  hast  taken 

2  Ki.19.  21  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  despised  thee 

1  Ch.  15.  29  and  she  despised  him  in  her  heart 

2  Ch.36.  16  despised  Ins  words,  and  misused  his 
.Nell.  2.  19  they  laughed  us  to  scorn,  and  despised  • 
Psa.  22.  24  he  hath  not  despised  nor  abhorred  the 

51-  17  contrite  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  des. 
69.  33  and  despiseth  not  his  prisoners 
73.  20  when  thou  awakest,  thou  shalt  despise 
102. 1 7  He  will  regard . .  and  not  despise  their 

Prov.  14.    2  (he  that  is)  perverse  in  his  ways  despiseth 
15.  20  but  a  foolish  man  despiseth  his  mother 
19. 16  (but)  he  that  despiseth  his  ways  shall  die 

Isa.   37.  22  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  despised  thee 

Eze.  16.  59  which  hast  despised  the  oath  in  breaking 
17.  16  whose  oath  he  despised,  and  whose  cov. 
17.  18  lie  despised  the  oath  by  breaking  the 
17.  rg  surely  mine  oath  that  he  hath  despised 
22.    8  Thou  hast  despised  mine  holy  things,  and 

Mai.    1.    6  unto  you,  O  priests,  that  despise  my  name 
1.    6  Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  name  ? 

3.7V)  despise,  render  contemptible,™?,  bazah,  5. 
Estli.  1. 17  they  shall  despise  then-  husbands  in  their 

4. Despised  one,  Ttizbazoh. 

Isa.  49.    7  to  him  whom  man  despiseth,  to  him 

5.7b  lightly  esteem,  hto  zul,  5. 

Lam.  1.    8  all  that  honoured  her  despise  her,  because 

6.7*0  loathe,  despise,  reject,  dxs  raaas. 

Lev.  26.  15  if  ye  shall  despise  my  statutes,  or  if 

26.  43  evenbecause  they  despised  my  judgments 
INuniii.  20  ye  have  despised  the  LoRDwhich  (is) 

14.  31  shall  know  the  land  which  ye  have  desp. 
Judg.  9.  38  this  the  people  that  thou  hast  despised  ? 
Job     5.  17  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the 

9.  21  (Though)  I  (were)  perfect. .  I  would  despise 
10.    3  that  thou  shouldest  despise  the  work  of 
19.  18  young  children  despised  me  ;  I  arose 

31. 13  If  I  did  despise  the  cause  of  my  man  serv. 
36.   5  Behold,  God  (is)  mighty,  and  despiseth  not 

Psa.  53.    5  to  shame,  because  God  hath  despised 
106. 24  Yea,  they  despised  the  pleasant  land 
Prov.  3.  11  despise  not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord 

15.  32  He  that  refuseth  instruction  despiseth 
Isa.   30.  12  Because  ye  despise  this  word,  and  trust 

33.   8  he  hath  despised  the  cities,  he  regardeth 
33.  15  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  oppressions 
Jer.     4.  30  (thy)  lovers  will  despise  thee,  they  will 
Eze.  20. 13  they  despised  my  judgments,  which  (if) 
20. 16  they  despised  my  judgments,  and  walked 
20  24  despised  my  statutes,  and  had  polluted 
Amos  2.    4  they  have  despised  the  law  of  the  LORD 

5.  21 1  despise  your  feast  days,  and  I  will  not 

7.  To  despise,  r*a  naats. 

Prov.  1.  30  they  despised  all  my  reproof 
5   12  and  my  heart  despised  reproof 
15.    5  A  fool  despiseth  his  father's  instruction 
Jer.  33.  24  they  have  despised  my  people,  that  they 
Lam.  2.    6  hath  despised  in  the  indignation  of  his 

8.  To  despise,  j'X3  naats,  3. 

Isa.     5.  24  despised  the  word  of  the  Holy  One  of  Is. 

60. 14  they  that  despised  thee  shall  bow  thems. 

9.  To  lightly  esteem,  hh$  qalal,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.  43  why  then  did  ye  despise  us,  that  our 
10.7*0  despise,  tread,  push  away,  bh?  shut. 

Eze.  16.  57  daughters  of  the  Philistines,  which  desp. 
28.  24  all  (that  are)  round  about,  .that  despised 
28.  26  those  that  despise  them  round  about 

11.  To  put  aside,  aQereco  atheteo. 

Lukeio.  16  and  he  that  despiseth  you  despiseth  me 

10.  16  he  that  despiseth  me  despiseth  him  that 
1  Th.  4.    8  He  therefore  that  despiseth,  despiseth 
Heb.  10.  28  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without 
Jude         S  despise  dominion,  and  speak  evil  of 

12.7*0  dishonour,  ari/j.a£u>  atimazo. 

Jas.     2.    6  But  ye  have  despised  the  poor 

13.7*0  think  nothing  of,  set  at  nought,  i£ov&ev£ta. 
LukeiS.    9  they  were  righteous,  and  despised  others 
Rom  14.    3  Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise  him  that 
1  Co.  1.  28  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God 

16. 11  Let  no  man  therefore  despise  him 

Gal.     4.  14  temptation,  .in  my  flesh  ye  despised  not 
1  Th.  5.  20  Despise  not  prophesyings 
14.7b  think  down  upon,  naratppoveo)  katapthroneo. 
Matt.  6.  24  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other 

78.  10  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these 
Lukei6.  13  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other 
Rom.  2.   4  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodness 
1  Co.  11.  22  despise  ye  the  church  of  God,  and  shame 

1  Ti.    4.  12  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth;  but  be 

6.  2  let  them  not  despise  (them),  because  they 
Heb.  12.    2  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame 

2  Pe.   2.  10  walk  after  the  flesh . .  and  despise  govern. 
15.7*0  be  reckoned  for  nothing,  Xoyi^ofxai  els  ovfiev. 

Acts  19.  27  the  temple  of .  .Diana  should  be  despised 
16.7*0  care  little  for,  oXtyoipiw  oh 'gored. 

Heb.  12.  5  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lo. 


17.7*0  think  around,  despise,  ireptcppoveco  periphro. 

Titus  2.  15  Let  uo  man  despise  thee 
DESPISED  — 
1. Despised  thing,  1?3  buz. 

Job    12.    5  (is  as)  a  lamp  despised  in  the  thought 

Prov  12.    S  he.  .a  perverse  heart  shall  be  despised 
2.Despised  thing,  Dji2  buzah. 

Keh.  4.    4  Hear,  0  our  God;  for  we  are  despised:  and 
^.Dishonoured,  lacking  Jwnour,  &rifios  atimos. 

1  Co.  4. 10  ye  (are)  honourable,  but  we  (are)  despised 
DESPISED,  to  be— 

l.To  be  despised,  nta  bazah,  2. 

Psa.  22.   6  reproach  of  men,  and  despised  of  the 

1 19.  141  I  (am)  small  and  despised;  (yet)  do  not  I 
Eccl.  9.  16  the  poor  man's  wisdom  (is)  despised,  and 
lsa*   53-    3  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  a 
53.    3  he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him 
Jer.  22.  28  (Is)  this  man  Coniah  a  despised  broken 
49. 15  lo,  I  will  make  thee,  .despised  among 
Obad.       2  thou  art  greatly  despised 
2.7*0  be  or  become  light,  ^?i;  qalah,  2. 

Prov  12.   9  (He  that  is)  despised,  and  hath  a  servant 
3.7*0  be  or  become  light,  V?;?  qalal. 

Gen.  16.   4  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her  eyes 
16.   5  when,  .she  had  conceived,  I  was  despised 
DESPISER  — 
One  who  thinks  down  upon  {another),  Karappoinrrjs 

Acts  13.  41  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and 
DESPISER  of  those  that  are  good  — 
Not  friendly  to  the  good,  a<pi\dyados  aphilagathos. 

2  Ti.    3.    3  fierce,  despisers  of  those  that  are  good 
DESPITE  — 

Despite,  ex;?  sheat. 

Eze.  25.    6  rejoiced  in  heart  with  all  thy  despite 
DESPITE  unto,  to  do  — 
7*o  use  despitefully,  4w$pl£w  enubrizo. 

Heb.  10.  29  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace  i 
DESPITEFTJL  — 
1. Despite,  ux^  sheat. 

Eze.  25.  is'taken  vengeance  with  a  despiteful  heart 
36.   5  with  despiteful  minds,  to  cast  it  out  for 

2.  Despiteful,  v{3pi<TT7)s  hubristes. 

Rom.  1.30  despiteful,  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of 
DESPrTEETJLLY,  to  use  — 
1.  7*o  use  spitefully,  eTrnpedfa  epereazo. 

Matt.  5.  44  [pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use] 

Luke  6.  28  pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you 
2.7*o  wse  despitefully,  o&plfa  hubrizo. 

Acts  14.   5  to  use  (them)  despitefully,  and  to  stone 
DESTITUTE  — 

1.  Lacking,  ipn  chaser. 

Prov  15.   2  joy  to  (him  that  is)  destitute  of  wisdom 

2.  Naked,  destitute,  ijjpy  arar. 

Psa.  102.  17  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  destitute 

3.  7*o  deprive  of,  airoo-repeco  apostereo. 

1  Ti.    6    5  corrupt  minds,  and  destitute  of  the  truth 

4.  7*o  leave,  lack,  \siirw  leipo. 

Jas.     2.  15  be  naked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food 
DESTITUTE,  to  be  — 

1.  7*o  be  or  become  desolate,  ccy  shamem,  2. 
Eze.  32.  15  the  couutry  shall  be  destitute  of  that 

2.  7*o  be  last,  behind,  ixrrepew  hxistereo. 

Heb.  11.  37  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented 
DESTITUTE,  to  leave  — 
l.To  forsake,  leave,  2\'jt  azab. 

Gen.  24. 27  who  hath  not  left  destitute  my  master 
2.7*0  make  naked,  expose,  rny  arah,  3. 

Psa.  141,    8  leave  not  my  soul  destitute 
DESTROY,  to  — 
1.7*o  destroy,  irix  ahad,  3. 

Deut  11.   4  (how)  the  Lord  had  destroyed  them 
12.    2  Ye  shall  utterly  destroy  all  the  places 

12.  3  destroy  the  names  of  them  out  of  that 
Num. 33.  52  destroy  all  their  pictures,  and  destroy 

2  Ki.  11.    1  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal 

13.  7  for  the  king  of  Syria  had  destroyed  them 
19.  18  therefore  they  have  destroyed  them 

21.    3  which  Hezekiah  his  father  had  destroyed 

Esth.  3.   9  let  it  be  written  that  they,  .be  destroyed 

4.   7  the  money . .  for  the  Jews,  to  destroy  them 

8.  5  which  he  wrote  to  destroy  the  Jewa 
g.   6  Jews  slew  and  destroyed  five  hundred 

9.  12  have  slain  and  destroyed  five  hundred 
9.  24  devised  against  the  Jews  to  destroy 

9.  24  to  consume  them,  and  to  destroy  them 
Job   12.  23  increaseth  the  nations,  and  destroyeth 
Psa.    5.   6  Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak 
9.    5  thou  hast  destroyed  the  wicked,  thou 
21.  10  Their  fruit  shalt  thou  destroy  from  the 
119.  95  wicked  have  waited  for  me  to  destroy  me 
Prov.  1.  32  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them 
Eccl.  7.    7  and  a  gift  destroyeth  the  heart 

9.  18  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good 
Isa.  37.  19  therefore  they  have  destroyed  them 
Jer.   12.  17  utterly  pluck  up  and  destroy  that  nation 
15.   7  I  will  bereave.  .1  will  destroy  my  people 


DESTROY 


250 


DESTROY 


Jer.  23.    1  Woe  be  unto  the  pastors  that  destroy 

51.  55  and  destroyed  out  of  her  the  great  voice 
Earn.  2.   9  he  hath  destroyed  and  broken  her  bars 
Eze.    6.    3  and  I  will  destroy  your  high  places 
22. 27  to  shed  blood,  (and)  to  destroy  souls 
28.  16  I  will  destroy  thee,  0  covering  cherub 
•    Zeph.  2.  13  stretch  out  his  hand,  .and  destroy  Assyr. 

I.To  destroy,  "ux  abaci,  5. 

Lev.  23.  30  the  same  soul  will  I  destroy  from  among 
Nam  24.  19  destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  the  city 
Dent.  7.  10  repayeth  them  that  hate .  .to  destroy 
7  24  shalt  destroy  their  name  from  under 
A.   3  drive  them  out,  and  destroy  them  quickly 
28.  51  until  he  have  destroyed  thee 
Deut28.  63  Lord  will  rejoice  over  you  to  destroy  you 
Josh.  7.    7  the  hand  of  the  Amorites,  to  destroy  us? 
2  Ki.io  19  he  might  destroy  the  worshippers  of  B. 

24.  2  sent  them  against  J  udah  to  destroy  it 
Job   14.  19  and  thou  destroyest  the  hope  of  man 
Psa.143.  12  and  destroy  all  them  that  afflict  my  soul 
Jer.     1.  10  root  out,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  destroy 

18.  7  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  destroy  (it) 

31.  28  to  throw  down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to 
46.    8  will  destroy  the  city  and  the  inhabitants 
49.  3S  will  destroy  from  thence  the  king  and 

Eze.  25.  16  and  destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea  coast 
30. 13  I  will  also  destroy  the  idols,  and  I  will 
32. 13  I  will  destroy  also  all  the  beasts  thereof 
Ohad.       8  destroy  the  wise  (men)  out  of  Edom,  and 
Mlc.    5.  10  and  I  will  destroy  thy  chariots 
Zeph.  2.    5  I  will  even  destroy  thee,  that  there  shall 

3.7*o  destroy,  "QK  abad,  5. 

Dan.  2.  12  commanded  to  destroy  all  the  wise  (men) 
2.  24  ordained  to  destroy  the  wise  (men)  of  B. 
2.  24  Destroy  not  the  wise  (men)  of  Babylon 
7.  26  consume  and  to  destroy  (it)  unto  the  end 

4.  To  gather,  *]px  ctsa,ph. 

1  Sa.  15.    6  Go,  depart .  .lest  I  destroy  you  with  them 

5. To  make  or  declare  guilty  or  desolate,  dipx  ashem  5. 
Psa.    5. 10  Destroy  thou  them,  0  God  ;  let  them  fall 

6.7*0  swallow  up,  ySa  bcda,  3. 

Job     2.    3  niovedst  me . .  to  destroy  him  without 

8. 18  If  he  destroy  him  from  his  place,  then  (it) 
10.   8  have  made  me.  .yet  thou  dost  destroy  me 
Psa.  55.   9  Destroy,  0  Lord,  (and)  divide  their  tongu. 
Isa.     3.  12  and  destroy  the  way  of  thy  paths 

19.  3  and  I  will  destroy  the  counsel  thereof 

25.  7  will  destroy  in  this  mountain  the  face 
Lam.  2.    8  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  destroying 

7.7*0  catch,  draw,  drag,  713  garar. 

Prov  21.    7  robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  destroy  them 

8. 7*o  speak  against,  destroy,  "151  dabar,  3. 

2  Ch.  22. 10  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal  of 

9.  To  bruise,  ton  claha,  3. 

Job     6.   9  that  it  would  please  God  to  destroy  me 

10.7*0  cut  off,  npj  damah, 

Hos.    4.  5  and*  I  will  destroy  thy  mother 

11.7*0  move,  destroy,  oin  hum. 

Deut.  7.  23  shall  destroy  them  with  a  mighty  destru. 

12.7*0  move,  trouble,  crush,  Don  hamam. 

Exod23.  27  will  destroy  all  the  people  to  whom  thou 
Deut.  2.  15  to  destroy  them  from  among  the  host 
Psa.  144.    6  shoot  out  thine  arrows,  and  destroy  them 

13.7*0  kill,  iirt  harag. 

Psa.  78.  47  He  destroyed  their  vines  with  hail,  and 
14.  7*o  break  or  throw  down,  Din  haras. 

1  Ch.  20.  1  And  Joab  smote  Kabbah,  and  destroyed 
Psa.  28.  5  shall  destroy  them,  and  not  build  them 
Isa.   14.  17  and  destroyed  the  cities  thereof 

15.7*o  destroy,  act  wickedly,  corrupt,  hnr$  chabal,  3. 
Eccl.  5.    6  and  destroy  the  work  of  thine  hands 
Isa.   13.    5  They  come,  to  destroy  the  whole  land 

32.  7  he  deviseth  wicked  devices  to  destroy  the 
54.  16  and  I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy 

Jlic.    2. 10  it  shall  destroy  (you),  even  with  a  sore 

1 6. 7*o  destroy,  act  loickedly,  corrupt,  Snn  chabal,  3. 
Ezra  6.  12  to  destroy  this  house  of  God  which  (is)  at 
Dan.    4.  23  saying,  Hew  the  tree  down,  and  destroy 

17.7*0  make  dry,  or  waste,  3"?n  chareb,  5. 

2  Ki.  19.  17  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  destroyed  the 
18.7*0  oppress,  break,  thrust  out,  nv  yanah. 

Psa.  74.    8  They  said.  .Let  us  destroy  them  together 

19.7*0  disjwssess,  take  as  jwssession,  ah;  yarash  5. 

Exodis.    9  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shail  destroy  ' 

20.  7*o  finish,  consume,  rhs  kalah,  3, 

Job  9.  22  He  destroyeth*  the  perfect  and  the  wicked 

21.  To  cut  off  or  down,  ma  karath. 

1  Ki.  15.  13  Asa  destroyed  her  id  d,  and  burnt  (it)  by 

22.  To  ntt  off  or  dovm,  rns  karath,  5. 

Exod  8.    9  to  destroy  the' frogs  from  thee  and  thy 
U*v.  26.  22  destroy  your  cattle,  and  make  you  few  in 
Judg.  4.  24  theyhad  destroyed  Jabin  king  of  Canaan 

23.7*0  beat  down  or  out,  nri3  kathath,  5. 

Deut.  1.  44  destroyed  you  in  Seir,  (even)  unto  Hor. 

24.7*0  cast  down,  nao  megar,  3. 

Ezra    6.  12  destroy  all  kings  and  people  that  shall 


25. 7*0  cut  off,  h'O  mul,  5. 

Psa.118.  io,  11, 12 the nameof  the LordI  will  destroy 
26.  To  put  to  death,  n'D  ?nuth,  5. 

2  Sa.  20.  19  thou  seekest  to  destroy  a  city  and  a  mot. 
27.7*o  blot  oict,  wip>e  away,  iirro  machah. 

Gen.  6.  7  I  will  destroy  man  whom  I  have  created 
7.    4  will  I  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the 

28.  To  (cause  to)  blot  out  or  wipe  away,  nap  machalu 
Prov  31.    3  thy  ways  to  that  which  destroyeth  kings 

29.  Destroying,  corrupting,  n'Ffipa  mashchith. 
Exod  12.  13  plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy 
2  Ch.  20.  23  every  one  helped  to  destroy  another 
Eze.  21.  31  hand  of  brutish  men,  (and)  skilful  to  de. 

25. 15  to  destroy  (it)  for  the  old  hatred 

30.  To  pull  down  or  away,  np3  nasach. 

Prov  15.  25  Lord  will  destroy  the  house  of  the  proud 

31.7*o  go  or  set  voumd,  compass,  f]p3  naqaph,  3. 
Job   19.  26  after  my  skin  (worms)  destroy  this  (body) 

32. 7*o  blow,  destroy,  make  desolate,  db'j  nasham. 
Isa.  42. 14  I  will  destroy  and  devour  at  once 

33.7*0  break  doion,  yni  nathats. 

Exod34.  13  ye  shall  destroy  their  altars,  break  their 
Deut.  7.    5  ye  shall  destroy  their  altars,  and  break 
Job  19.  10  He  hath  destroyed  me  on  every  side,  and 
Psa.  52.    5  God  shall  likewise  destroy  thee  for  ever 
Eze.  26.  12  and  destroy  thy  pleasant  houses 

34. 7*o  pluck  up,  wr&  nathash. 

Psa.    9.    6  and  thou  hast  destroyed  cities 

35. 7*o  end,  consume,  ncp  sap/hah. 

Gen.  18.  23  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the  righteous  with 

18.  24  wilt  thou  also  destroy  and  not  spare  the 
Psa.  40. 14  that  seek  after  my  soul  to  destroy  it 

36.7*o  hide,  destroy,  tnp  set  liar. 

Ezra   5.  12  who  destroyed  this  house,  and  carried  the 

37.7*0  cut  off,  destroy,  np>*  tsamath,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  41  that  I  might  destroy  them  that  hate  me 
Psa.  18.  40  that  I  might  destroy  them  that  hate  me 
69.    4  they  that  would  destroy  me,  (being) 
73.  27  thou  hast  destroyed  all  them  that  go  a 
101.    8  early  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the  land 

38.  7*o  dig,  dig  dourn,  destroy,  i*p  qur,  Sa, 
Nuni  24.  17  and  destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth 

39.7*o  break,  shiver,  destroy,  13$  shabar. 

Jer.  17.  18  anddestroy  them withdouble  destruction 
Dan.  11.  26  they  that  feed,  .shall  destroy  him 

40.7*0  destroy,  spioil,  "n#  shadad. 

Prov  11.  3  perverseuess  of  transgressors  shall  dest. 
41.  Wasting,  desolation,  nipti  shoah. 

Psa.  63.   9  But  those  (that)  seek  my  soul,  to  destroy 

42.7*0  mar,  corrupt,  destroy,  nnw  shachath,  3. 
Gen.    6. 17  to  destroy  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the  brea. 
9.  11  shall  there  any  more  be  a  flood  to  destroy 
9. 15  shall  no  more  become  a  flood  to  destroy 

13. 10  before  the  Lord  destroyed  Sodom  and 

19. 13  and  the  Lord  hath  sent  us  to  destroy  it 

19.  29  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the  plain 
Num  32.  15  and  ye  shall  destroy  all  this  people 
Josh  22.  33  to  destroy  the  land  wherein  the  children 
Judg.  6.    5  they  entered  into  the  land  to  destroy  it 

1  Sa.  23.  10  to  come  to  Keilah,  to  destroy  the  city 

2  Sa.    1.  14  thine  hand  to  destroy  the  Lord's  anoin. 

14. 11  revengers  of  blood  to  destroy  any  more 
24.  16  his  hand  upon  Jerusalem  to  destroy  it 

2K1.  19.  12  them  which  my  fathers  have  destroyed 
Isa.    14.  20  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  land,  (and)  slain 
Jer.     5.  10  Go  ye  up  upon  her  walls,  and  destroy 

12.  10  Many  pastors  have  destroyed  my  vineya. 

48.  18  he  shall  destroy  thy  strong  holds 
Lam.    2.    5  he  hath  destroyed  his  strong  holds,  and 
2.   6  hath  destroyed  his  places  of  the  assembly 
Eze.    5. 16  (and)  which  I  will  send  to  destroy  you 

20.  17  mine  eye  spared  them  from  destroying 
22.  30  for  the  land,  that  I  should  not  destroy  it 
26.    4  tbey  shall  destroy  the  walls  of  Tyrus 

30. 11  shall  be  brought  to  destroy  the  land 
43.   3  that  I  saw  when  I  came  to  destroy  the  c. 
Hos.  11.    9  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  Ephraira 

43.7To  mar,  corrupt,  destroy,  n"V;  shachath,  5. 
Gen.    6. 13  behold,  I  will  destroy  them  with  the  earth 
18.  28  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  city  for  (lack  of) 
18.  28  I  find,  .forty  and  five,  I  will  not  destroy 
18.  31  I  will  not  destroy  (it)  for  twenty's  sake 

18.  32  I  will  not  destroy  (it)  for  ten's  sake 

19.  13  For  we  will  destroy  this  place 

19. 14  for  the  Lord  will  destroy  this  city 
Exodi2.  23  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in 
Deut.  4.  31  will  not  forsake  thee,  neither  destroy 

9.  26  destroy  not  thy  people  and  thine  inher. 
10. 10  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  thee 
20. 19  thou  shalt  not  destroy  the  trees  thereof 

20.  20  thou  shalt  destroy  and  cut  them  down 
Judg.  6.    4  destroyed  the  increase  of  the  earth,  till 

20.  21,  25  and  destroyed  down  to  the  ground  of 
20.  35  the  children  of  Israel  destroyed  of  the 
20. 42  they  destroyed  in  the  midst  of  them 

1  Sa.  26.    9  Destroy  him  not :  for  who  can  stretch 

26.  15  there  came  one  of  tbe  people  in  to  destroy 

2  Sa.  11.    1  they  destroyed  the  clnldren  of  Amnion 

20.  20  that  I  should  swallow  up  or  destroy 
24.  16  said  to  the  angel  that  destroyed  the 


2  Ki.   8. 19  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  Judah  for  D 
13. 23  and  would  not  destroy  them,  neither 
18.  25  Am  I  now  come  up.  .to  destroy  it? 
18.  25  Go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it 

1  Ch.21. 12  angel  of  the  Lord  destroying  throughout 

21.  15  said  to  the  angel  that  destroyed,  It  is 

2  Ch.12.    7  I  will  not  destroy  them,  but  I  will  grant 

12.  12  that  he  would  not  destroy  (him)  altogether 

21.  7  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  the  house  of 

24.  23  destroyed  all  the  princes  of  the  people 

25.  16  that  God  hath  determined  to  destroy  thee 

34. 11  which  the  kings  of  Judah  had  destroyed 

35.  21  forbear  thee,  .that  he  destroy  thee  not 

36.  19  destroyed  all  the  goodly  vessels  thereof 
Psa.  78.  38  forgave  (their)  iniquity,  and  destroyed 

78.  45  He  sent,  .frogs,  which  destroyed  them 

106.  23  turn  away  his  wrath,  lest  he.  .destroy 
Prov.  6.  32  he  (that)  doeth  it  destroyeth  his  own  soul 

11.  9  with  (his)  mouth  destroyeth  his  neighbour 
Isa.   11.    9  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain 

36. 10  am  I  now  come  up.  .to  destroy  it  ? 

36. 10  Go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it 

37. 12  them  which  my  fathers  have  destroyed 
51,  13  as  if  he  were  ready  to  destroy  ? 

65.    8  Destroy  it  not ;  for  a  blessing  (is)  in  it 
65.    8  that  I  may  not  destroy  them  all 
65.  25  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain 
Jer.     2.  30  hath  devoured,  .like  a  destroying  lion 
6.  '5  by  night,  and  let  us  destroy  her  palaces 
11. 19  Let  us  destroy  the  tree  with  tbe  fruit 

13.  14  nor  spare,  nor  have  mercy,  but  destroy 
15.    3  beasts  of  the  earth,  to  devour  and  destroy 
15.    6  my  hand  against  thee,  and  destroy  thee 
36.  29  shall  certainly  come  and  destroy  this 

49.    9  they  will  destroy  till  they  have  enough 
51.    1  Behold,  I  will  raise  up . .  a  destroying  wind 
51.  11  device  (is)  against  Babylon,  to  destroy  it 
51.  20  and  with  thee  will  I  destroy  kingdoms 
51.  25  which  destroyest  all  the  earth 
Lam.  2.    8  The  Lord  hath  purposed  to  destroy  the 
Eze.     9.    8  wilt  thou  destroy  all  tbe  residue  of 
Dan.   8.  24  he  shall  destroy  wonderfully,  and  shall 
8.  24  destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  people 

8.  25  and  by  peace  shall  destroy  many 

9.  26  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary 
Mai.   3. 11  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your 

44. 7*o  bereave,  h'jy  shakol,  3. 

Deut  32.  25  shall  destroy  both  the  young  man  and  the 

45.7*0  destroy,  cut  off,  waste,  *ic^  shamad,  5. 

Lev.  26.  30  I  will  destroy  your  high  places,  and  cut 
Deut.  1.  27  to  deliver  us.  .to  destroy  us 

2.  12  they  had  destroyed  them  from  before 
2.  21  but  the  Lord  destroyed  them  before  them 
2.  22  he  destroyed  the  Horims  from  before 

2.  23  destroyed  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  stead 
4.    3  God  hath  destroyed  them  from  among 

6.  15  destroy  thee  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth 

7.  4  be  kindled  against  you,  and  destroy  thee 
7.  24  until  thou  have  destroyed  them 

9.    3  (as)  a  consuming  fire  he  shall  destroy 
9.    8  was  angry  with  you,  to  have  destroyed 
9. 14  Let  me  alone,  that  I  may  destroy  them 
9.  19  Lord  was  wroth  against  you  to  destroy 
9.  20  angry  with  Aaron  to  have  destroyed  him 
9.  25  the  Lord  had  said  he  would  destroy  you 
28.  48  put  a  yoke . .  until  he  have  destroyed  thee 
31.    3  he  will  destroy  these  nations  from  before 
31.   4  unto  the  laud  of  them,  whom  he  destroyed 
33.  27  and  shall  say,  Destroy  (them) 
Josh.  7. 12  except  ye  destroy  the  accursed  from 

9.  24  to  destroy  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
11.  14  until  they  had  destroyed  them,  neither 
11.  20  that  he  might  destroy  them,  as  the  LORD 

23.  15  until  he  have  destroyed  you  from  off  this 

24.  8  and  I  destroyed  them  from  before  you 

1  Sa.  24.  21  thou  wilt  not  destroy  my  name  out  of  my 

2  Sa.  14.    7  we  willdestroy  theheir  also :  and  so  they 

14.  n  lest  they  destroy  my  son 

14.  16  the  hand  of  the  man  (that  would)  destroy 

22.  38  pursued  mine  enemies,  and  destroyed 

1  Ki.  13.  34  destroy  (it)  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth 

15.  29  until  he  had  destroyed  him,  according 

16.  12  Thus  did  Zimri  destroy  all  the  house  of 

2  Ki.  10. 17  till  he  had  destroyed  him,  according  to 

10.  28  Thus  Jehu  destroyed  Baal  out  of  Israel 
21.   9  nations  whom  the  Lord  destroyed  before 

1  Ch.  5.  25  whom  God  destroyed  before  them 

2  Ch.20.  10  turned  from  them,  and  destroyed  them 

20.  23  utterly  to  slay  and  destroy  (them) 

33.  9  whom  the  Lord  had  destroyed  before  the 
Esth.   3.    6  Hainan  sought  to  destroy  all  the  Jews 

3.  13  to  destroy,  to  kill,  and  to  cause  to  perish 

4.  8  decree  that  was  given  at  Shushan  to  des. 

5.  11  to  stand  for  their  life,  to  destroy,  to  slay 
Psa.  106.  23  he  said  that  he  would  destroy  them,  had 

106.  34  They  did  not  destroy  the  nations,  con. 
145.  20  but  all  the  wicked  will  he  destroy 
Isa.    10.    7  (it  is)  in  his  heart  to  destroy  and  cut  off 
13.    9  destroy  the  sinners  thereof  out  of  it 

23. 11  to  destroy  the  strongholds  thereof 

26.  14  therefore  hast  thou  "visited  and  destroyed 
Lam. 3.  66  and  destroy  them  in  anger  from  under 
Eze.  14.    9  will  destroy  him  from  tbe  midst  of  my 

25.  7  I  will  destroy  thee  ;  and  thou  shalt  know 

34.  16  but  I  will  destroy  the  fat  and  the  strong 
Dan.  11.  44  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury  to  destroy 
Amos  2.    9  Yet  destroyed  I  the  Amorite  before  them 

2.  9  yet  I  destroyed  his  fruit  from  above,  and 
9.  8  I  will  destroy  it  from  off  the  face  of  the 
9.    8  not  utterly  destroy  the  house  of  Jacob 


DESTROY 


251 


DESTRUCTION 


HS&    5.  14  so  will  I  destroy  thy  cities 

Hag.    2.  22  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  kingdoms 

Zech  12.    9  I  will  seek  to  destroy  all  the  nations 

46.  T<>  make  desolate,  DDp  shamem.  5. 

1  Sa.   5.   6  he  destroyed  them,  and  smote  them  with 
H03.'   2.  i2  I  will  destroy  her  vines,  and  her  fig  trees 

47.  To  desolate,  DOai  shamem. 

Isa.   42.  14  I  will  destroy  and  devour  at  once 

48.  To  looss  off  or  away,  destroy,  air6\\v^.L  apollu. 
Matt.  2.  &3  will  seek  the  young  child  to  destroy  him 

10.  28  fear  him  which  is  able  to  destroy  both 
12. 14  against  hini,  how  they  might  destroy  him 

21.  41  He  will  miserably  destroy  those  wicked 

22.  7  destroyed  those  murderers,  and  burned 
27. 20  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  and  destroy  J. 

Mark  1.  24  art  thou  come  to  destroy  us  ?  I  know  thee 
3.    6  took  counsel,  .how  they  might  destroy 
9. 22  the  fire,  and  into  the  waters,  to  destroy 

11.  iS  and  sought  how  they  might  destroy  him 

12.  9  He  will  come  and  destroy  the  husbandm. 
Luke  4.  34  art  thou  come  to  destroy  us?  I  know  thee 

6.    9  Is  it  la wf  ul.. to  save  life  or  to  [destroy]  it? 
9. 56  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  [destroy]  men's 
17.  27  and  the  flood  came,  and  destroyed  them 
17.  29  brimstone  from  heaven,  and  destroyed 
19  47  chief  of  the  people  sought  to  destroy  him 
20.  16  shall  come  and  destroy  these  husbandmen 
John  10.  10  for  to  steal,  and  to  kill,  and  to  destroy 
Rom  14.  15  Destroy  not  him  with  thy  meat  for  whom 
1  Co.   1. 19  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and 
Jas.     4. 12  who  is  able  to  save  and  to  destroy 
Jude         5  afterward  destroyed  them  that  believed 

49.  To  mar  or  corrupt  thoroughly,  8ia(p6eipa>  diaph. 
Rev.    8.    9  third  part  of  the  ships  were  destroyed 

11.  18  destroy  them  which  destroy  the  earth 

50.  To  destroy  utterly,  e^o\oOpev<a  exoloithreuo. 
Acts   3.  23  every  soul . .  shall  be  destroyed  from  amo. 

51.  To  take  down,  tcadaipec*}  kathaireo. 

Acts  13.  19  when  he  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in 
19.  27  her  magnificence  should  be  destroyed 

52.7b  loose  down,  KaraXitoj  kataluo. 

Matt.  5.  17  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the 
5. 17  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil 

26.  61  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God 

27.  40  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and 
Marki4.  5S  I  will  destroy  this  temple  that  is  made 

15.  29  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and 
Acts    6.  14  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  this  place 
flom.  14.  20  For  meat  destroy  not  the  work  of  God 
Gal.    2.  18  build  again  the  things  which  I  destroyed 

53.  To  make  of  none  effect,  Karapyecu  katargeo. 
Rom.  6.    6  that  the  body  of  siu  might  be  destroyed 

1  Co.   6.  13  but  God  shall  destroy  both  it  and  them 

15.  26  enemy  (that)  shall  be  destroyed 

2  Tli.  2.    8  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his 
Heb.   2.  14  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that 

54.  To  loose,  Kvoj  luo. 

John '2.  19  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I 
1  Jo.   3.    8  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil 
55.7*0  destroy,  oAo0/>euw  olothreud,  oKeOpetiw. 
Heb.  11.  28  lest  he  that  destroyed  the  first  born 

56.  To  lay  waste,  iropdew  portheo. 

Acts    9.  21  Is  not  this  he  that  destroyed  them 
Gal.    1.  23  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he  destr. 

57.  To  mar,  corrupt,  (pdeipco  phtheiro. 

1  Co.  3.  17  defile  the  temple.. him  shall  God^destroy 
DESTROY  self,  to  — 
l.To  mar,  corrupt,  destroy  (self),  nn^  shachath,  3. 

Hos.  13.   9  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself 
2.  To  desolate  {self),  Du)2>  shamem,  7a. 

Eccl.  7.  16  why  shouldest  thou  destroy  thyself  ? 
DESTROY,  to  utterly  — 

l.To  devote  (to  God  or  destruction),  c~n  charam,  5. 
Nuni2i.    2  then  I  will  utterly  destroy  their  cities 
21.    3  utterly  destroyed  them  and  their  cities 
Deut.  2.  34  utterlydestroyedthemen.andthewomen 
3.    6  we  utterly  destroyed  them,  as  we  did 
3.   6  utterly  destroying  the  men,  women,  and 

7.  2  shalt  smite  them,  (ana)  utterly  destroy 
13.  15  destroyiug  it  utterly,  and  all  that  (is) 

20.  17  thou  shalt  utterly  destroy  them ;  (namely) 
Josh.  2.  10  Sihon  and  Og,  whom  ye  utterly  destroyed 

6.  21  they  utterly  destroyed  all  that  (was)  in 

8.  26  until  he  had  utterly  destroyed  all  the 

10.    1  had  taken  Ai,  and  had  utterly  destroyed 
10.  28  the  king  thereof  he  utterly  destroyed 
10.  35  that  (were)  therein  he  utterly  destroyed 
10.  37  destroyed  it  utterly,  and  all  the  souls 
to.  33  utterly  destroyed  all  the  souls  that  (were) 

10.  40  utterly  destroyed  all  that  breathed,  as 

11.  11  they  smote  all.,  utterly  destroying  (them) 
11. 12  he  utterly  destroyed  them,  as  Moses  the 
11.  20  that  he  might  destroy  them  utterly,  (and) 
11.  21  Joshua  destroyed  them  utterly  with  their 

Judg.  1   17  that  inhabited,  .and  utterly  destroyed  it 

21.  11  ye  shall  utterly  destroy  every  male,  and 
1  Sa.  15.    3  utterly  destroy  all  that  they'have,  and 

15.    8  utterly  destroyed  all  the  people  with  the 
15.    9  could  refuse,  that  they  destroyed  utterly 
15.    9  would  not  utterly  destroy  them  :  but 
15.  15  and  the  rest  we  have  utterly  destroyed 
15. 18  utterly  destroy  the  sinners  the  Amalekites 
15.  20  have  utterly  destroyed  the  Amalekites 


1  Ki.  9.  21  Israel  also  were  not  able  utterly  to  destroy 

2  Ki.19.  11  to  all  lands,  by  destroying  them  utterly  .' 

1  Ch.  4.  41  destroyed  them  utterly  unto  this  day,  and 

2  Ch.32.  14  nations  that  my  father  utterly  destroyed 
Isa.   11.  15  the  Lord  shall  utterly  destroy  the  tongue 

34.    2  he  hath  utterly  destroyed  them 
37.  11  to  all  lands  by  destroying  them  utterly 
Jer.  25.   9  will  utterly  destroy  them,  and  make 
50.  21  waste  and  utterly  destroy  after  them 

50.  26  cast  her  up  as  heaps . .  destroy  her  utterly 

51.  3  destroy  ye  utterly  all  her  host 

2.  To  finish,  consume,  rki  kalah,  3. 

Lev.  26.  44  will  I  abhor  them,  to  destroy  them  utterly 
2  Ch.31.    1  until  they  had  utterly  destroyed  them  all 

DESTROYED  — 

One  cut  off,  na'n  dummah. 

Eze.  27.  32  lilce  the  destroyed  in  the  midst  of 

DESTROYED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  lost,~i2#  abad. 

Exodio.    7  knowest  thou  not.  .that  Egypt  is  destro. 
Deut.  7.  20  until  they  that  are  left,  .be  destroyed 
Esth.  4.  14  and  thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed 
Eze.  26. 17  How  art  thou  destroyed  (that  wast)inha. 

2.  To  be  destroyed,  "t3X  abad,  6. 

Dan.    7.  11  beast  was  slain,  and  his  body  destroyed 

3.  To  be  swallowed  up,  y1?^  bala,  4. 

Isa.     9.  16  (they  that  are)  led  of  them  (are)  destroyed 

4.  To  be  bruised,  bruise  self  tern  daka,  7. 

Job  34.  25  in  the  night,  so  that  they  are  destroyed 

5. To  be  cut  off,  ns?  damah,  2. 

Hos.    4.    6  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of 

6.  To  be  or  become  marredor  corrupted,  bnn  chabal,  2. 
Prov  13. 13  despiseth  the  word  shall  be  destroyed 

7.  To  be  marred  or  corrupted,  hnn  chabal,  4. 
Isa.  10.  27  the  yoke  shall  be  destroyed  because  of 

5.  To  be  marred  or  corrupted,  "?3n  chabal,  4. 

Dan.   2.  44  a  kingdom,  which  shall  never  be  destroy. 

6.  26  kingdom  (that^  which  shall  not  be  destr. 

7.  14  kingdom  (that)  which  shall  not  destroyed 

9.  To  be  dried  up  or  wasted,  3"irr  charab,  6. 

Ezra    4.  15  for  which  cause  was  this  city  destroyed 
10. Tobe  beaten  down,  rmr?  kathath,  4. 

2  Ch.15.   6  nation  was  destroyed  of  nation,  and  city 

11.  To  be  beaten  down,  nnp  kathath,  6. 

Job     4.  20  are  destroyed  from  morning  to  evening 

12.  To  be  blotted  out  or  wiped  away,  nnnmachah,  2. 
Gen.    7.  23  every  living  substance  was  destroyed 

7.  23  and  they  were  destroyed  from  the  earth 
Judg2i.  17  a  tribe  be  not  destroyed  out  of  Israel 

13.  To  be  ended,  consumed,  -isp  saphah,  2. 

1  Ch.  21. 12  three  months  to  be  destroyed  before  thy 
Prov  13.  23  (that  is)  destroyed  for  want  of  judgment 

11.  To  be  hunted,  destroyed,  niy  tsadah,  2. 

Zeph.  3.    6  none  passeth  by;  their  cities  are  destroy. 
15.  To  shout,  suffer  evil,  be  wronged,  yn  rua,  2. 

Prov  13.  20  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed 
lQ.Tobe  broken,  shivered,  ~i3tf>  shabar,  2. 

2  Ch.14.  13  they  were  destroyed  before  theLoRD,  and 
Prov  29.    1  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that 
Jer.  22.  20  for  all  thy  lovers  are  destroyed 

48.    4  Moab  is  destroyed ;  her  little  ones  have 
51.    8  Babylon  is  suddenly  fallen  and  destroyed 
Eze.  30.    8  (when)  all  her  helpers  shall  be  destroyed 
Dan.  11.  20  but  within  few  days  he  shall  be  destroyed 

17.  To  be  spoiled,  destroyed,  Tn$  shadad. 

Psa.137.    8  daughter  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be  dest. 
IS.  Tobe  cut  off, laid  toaste,  destroyed,!^  sliamad,  2. 
Gen.  34.  30  and  I  shall  be  destroyed,  I  and  my  house 
Deut.  4.  26  but  shall  utterly  be  destroyed 
7.  23  until  they  be  destroyed 
12.  30  that  they  be  destroyed  from  before  thee 
28.  20  until  thou  be  destroyed,  and  until  thou 
28.  24  down  upon  thee,  until  thou  be  destroyed 
28.  51  eat.  .the  fruit,  .until  thou  he  destroyed 
28.  45  and  overtake  thee,  till  thou  be  destroyed 
28.  61  bring  upon  thee,  until  thou  be  destroyed 
Judg2i.  16  seeing  the  women  are  destroyed  out 
2  Sa.  21.    5  we  should  be  destroyed  from  remaining 
Psa.  37.  38  transgressors  shall  be  destroyed  together 

92.  7  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  for  ever 
Isa.   40.  19  his  name  should  not  have  been,  .destroy. 
Jer.   48.    8  the  plain  shall  be  destroyed,  as  the  Lord 

48.  42  Moab  shall  be  destroyed  from  (being)  a 
Eze.  32.  12  the  multitude  thereof  shall  be  destroyed 
Hos.  10.    8  the  sin  of  Israel,  shall  be  destroyed  ;  the 

19.  To  destroy,  1D$  sliamad,  5. 

Esth.  7.    4  are  sold,  I  and  my  people,  to  be  destroy. 

20.  To  loose  off  or  away,  destroy,  aw6\\v/j.i. 

1  Co.  10.    9  as  some  of  them .  .were  destroyed  of  serp. 

10.  10  as  some . .  were  destroyed  of  the  destroyer 

2  Co.   4.   9  Persecuted . .  cast  down,  but  not  destroyed 

21.  For  marring  or  corruption,  els  (pOopav. 

2  Pe.   2.  12  But  these,  .made  to  be  taken  and  destro 

DESTROYED,  thing  utterly  — 

Thing  devoted  (to  God  or  destruction),  □"in  cherem. 
1  Sa.  15.  21  things  which  should  have  been  utterly  de. 


DESTROYED,  to  be  utterly  — 

Vo  be  devoted,  compressed,  Din  charam,  6. 

Exod22.  20  He  that  sacrificed ..  shall  be  utterly  des. 

DESTROYER  — 

l.To  break,  throw  down,  uy\  haras,  3. 

Isa.   49. 17  thy  destroyers  and  they  that  made  thee 

2.  To  dry  up,  waste,  310  chareb,  5. 

Judg  16.  24  the  destroyer  of  our  country,  which  slew 

3.  To  put  to  death,  niD  muth,  5. 

Job   33  22  soul  draweth.  .and  his  life  to  the  destroy. 

4.  Burglar,  one  who  breaks  in  or  forth,  p">S  parits. 

Psa.  17.    4  kept  (me  from)  the  paths  of  the  destroyer 

5.  To  destroy,  spoil,  iiy  shadad. 

Job   15.  21  in  prosperity  the  destroyer  shall  come 

6.  To  mar,  corrupt,  destroy,  nnw  shachath. 

Exodi2.  23  the  Lord,  .will  not  suffer  the  destroyer 
Prov  2S.  24  the  same  (is)  the  companion  of  a  destroyer 
Jer.     4.    7  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his  way 
22.    7  I  will  prepare  destroyers  against  thee 

7.  To  spoil,  take  spoil,  noty  shasah. 

Jer.   50. 11  ye  rejoiced,  O  ye  destroyers  of  mine  heri. 

S.A  destroyer,  oAoOpevr-fjs  olotlireutes. 

1  Co.  10.  10  some  of  them . .  were  destroyed  of  the  des. 

DESTROYING  — 

1. Marring,  destroying,  irruya  viashchith. 

Jer.  51.  25  I  (am)  against  thee,  O  destroying  nioun. 

2.  Marring,  destroying,  rinso  mashcheth. 

Eze.    9.    1  every  man  (with)  his  destroying  weapon 

3.  Destruction,  "tan  qeteb. 

Isa    28.    2  a  destroying  storm,  as  a  flood  of  mighty 

DESTRUCTION  — 

1 .  To  be  lost,  i3N  abad. 

Obad.     12  children,  .in  the  day  of  their  destruction 

2.  Destruction,  p~3N,  rn3N  abaddon,  abaddoh. 

Prov  27.  20  Hell  and  destruction  are  never  full ;  so 

3. Destruction,  ji~3^  abaddon. 

Job  26.  6  Hell  (is)  naked,  .and  destruction  hath  no- 
28.  22  Destruction  and  death  say,  We  have  heard 
31.  12  it  (is)  a  fire  (that)  consumeth  to  destruc. 

Psa.  88.  11  (or)  thy  faithfulness  in  destruction? 

Prov  15.  11  Hell  and  destruction  (are)  before  the  L. 

A.  Destruction,  JTrifct,  ]i3X  abdan. 

Esth.  8.  6  how  can  I  eudure  to  see  the  destruction 
9.    5  Jews  smote  all  their  enemies  with.  .des. 

5.  Vapour,  calamity,  TN  ed. 

Job  18.  12  destruction  (shall  be)  ready  at  his  side 
21.  17  (how,  oft)  cometh  their  destruction  upon 
21.  30  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  destruc. 
30. 12  they  raise  up.  .the  ways  of  their  destruc. 
31.  3  (Is)  not  destruction  to  the  wicked?  and  a 
31.  23  For  destruction  (from)  God  (was)  a  terror 

Prov.  1.  27  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind 
G.Destructio?i,  contrition,  k*r  dakka. 

Psa.  90.    3  Thou  turnest  man  to  destruction  ;  and 

7.  Ruin,  breaking  or  throwing  down,  mo'in  harisuth. 

Isa.  49.  19  the  land  of  thy  destruction,  shall  even  now 

8.  Breaking  or  throwing  down,  ruin,  Din  heres. 

Isa.    19.  18  one  shall  be  called,  The  city  of  destruction 

9.  Destruction,  San  cliehel. 

Mia    2. 10  destroy  (you),  even  with  asore  destruction 

10.  Waste,  drought,  n^-in  chorbah. 

Psa.    g.    6  destructions  are  come  to  a  perpetual  end 

11.  Destruction,  misfortune,  T?  kid. 

Job    21.  20  His  eyes  shall  see  his  destruction,  and  he 

12.  Trouble,  destruction,  nninp  viehumah. 

Deut.  7.  23  destroy  them  with  a  mighty  destruction 

1  Sa.    5.   9  with  a  very  great  destruction :  and  he 

5.  11  there  was  a  deadly  destruction  throughout 

\Z,  Downfall,  -ruin,  nrinp  mechittah. 

Prov  to.  14  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  near  destruction 
10.  15  the  destruction  of  the  poor  (is)  their 
10.  29  but  destruction  (shall  be)  to  the  workers 

13.  3  he  that  openeth  wide,  .shall  have  destru. 

14.  2S  in  the  want  of  people  (is)  the  destruction 
18.    7  A  fool's  mouth  (is)  his  destruction,  and 
21.  15  but  destruction  (shall  be)  to  the  workers 

14.  Wastes,  desolations,  ni^sw?  mashshuoth. 

Psa.  73.  iS  thou  castedst  them  down  into  destruction 

15.  Marring,  corruption,  destruction,  rpr^D  mashc. 

2  Ch.  22.    4  the  death  of  his  father  to  his  destruction 
Eze.     5.  16  shall  be  for  (their)  destruction,  (and) 

lQ.fiuin,  calamity,  TS^nVZ. 

Job  30.  24  though  they  cry  in  his  destruction 

31.  29  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  that 

17. Destruction,  3ap.  qeteb. 

Deut  32.  24  burning  heat,  and  with  bitter  destruction 

Psa.  91.    6  destruction  (that)  wasteth  at  noon-day 
IS. Destruction,  3n"p  qoteb. 

Hos.  13.  14  0  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction  .  repe. 
19.  Cutting  off,  destruction,  nizp  qephadah. 

Eze.     7.  25  Destruction  cometh  ;  and  they  shall  seek 


DESTRUCTION 


252 


DEVIL 


2  I,  Destruction,  rapid  moving,  pig  qerets. 

Jer.  46.  20  destruction  corueth ;  it  cometh  out  of 

21.  Wasting,  desolation,  rvxy*  sheiyyah. 

Isa.   24.  12  and  the  gate  is  smitten  with  destruction 

22.  Breaking,  breach,  13^  sheber. 

Prov  16.  18  Pride  (goeth)  before  destruction,  and  an 

17.  19  that  exalteth  his  gate  seeketh  destruction 

18.  12  Before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is 
Isa.     1.  2S  the  destruction  of  the  transgressors  and 

15.    5  they  shall  raise  up  a  cry  of  destruction 
51.  19  destruction,  and  the  famine,  and  the 

59.  7  wasting  and  destruction  (are)  in  their 

60.  iS  wasting  nor  destruction  within  thy  bor. 
Jer.     4.    6  for  I  will  bring  evil,  .a  great  destruction 

4.  20  Destruction  upon  destruction  is  cried 
6.    1  for  evil  appeareth . .  and  great  destruction 
48.    3  spoiling  and  great  destruction 
48.    5  enemies  have  heard  a  cry  of  destruction 

50.  22  A  sound  of  battle,  .and  of  great  destruct. 

51.  54  destruction  from  the  land  of  the  Chald. 
Lam.  2.  11  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

3.  47  come  upon  us,  desolation  and  destruct. 

3.  4S  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

4.  10  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 
Eze.  32,    9  when  I  shall  bring  thy  destruction  among 

^.Breaking,  p"i2E>  shibbaron. 

Jer.  17.  iS  and  destroy  them  with  double  destruction 
24.  Destruction,  spoiling,  ife*  shod. 

Job     5.  21  neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  destruct. 

5.  22  .At  destruction  and  famine  thou  shalt 
Prov  24.    2  their  heart  studieth  destruction,  and 
Isa.    13.    6  it  shall  come  as  a  destruction  from  the 
Hos.    7.  13  destruction  unto  them  !  because  they 

9.    6  they  are  gone  because  of  destruction 
Joel    1.  15  as  a  destruction  from  the  Almighty  shall 

..o.  Vanity,  falsehood,  nib>  sho. 

Psa.  35.  17  rescue  my  soul  from  their  destructions 
20.  Wasting,  desolation,  ftfciiB?  shoah. 

Psa,  35.    8  Let  destruction  come  upon  him  at  unawa. 
35.    8  into  that  very  destruction  let  him  fall 
27 .Corruption,  destruction, pit,  jtw  shechith. 

Psa.  107  20  He . .  delivered  (them)  from  their  destine. 

23.  To  mar,  corrupt,  destroy,  nn^  skachath,  5. 

2  Ch.26.  16  heart  was  lifted  up  to  (his)  destruction 
23. Corruption,  destruction,  nnty  skachath. 

Psa.  55.  23  them  down  into  the  pit  of  destruction 
10?.    4  Who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  destruction 

30.  To  cut  off,  lay  waste,  ne^  shamad,  5. 

Isa.    14.  23  sweep  it  with  the  besom  of  destruction 
31.^  treading  down,  run  3$  tebusak. 

2  Ch.22.    7  the  destruction  of  Ahaziah  was  of 

32.  A  wearying  out,  JV735)  tablith. 

Isa.    10.  25  and  mine  anger,  in  their  destruction 

33.  Passing  on,  change,  *)i?n  chaloph. 

Prov  31.    8  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  destruction 
Z^.Loss,  cnru>\eta  apoleicc. 

Matt.  7.  13  (is)  the  way,  that  leadeth  to  destruction 
Rom.  9  22  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction 
Phil    3  19  Whose  end  (is)  destruction,  whose  god  (is 
2  Pe    2     1  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction 
3.  16  as  (they  do),  .unto  their  own  destruction 
35. --1  taking  down,  KaOaipeais  kathairesis. 
2  Co    10    8  edification,  and  not  for  your  destruction 
13.  10  to  edification,  and  not  to  destruction 
26.  Destruction,  tjKeOpos  olethros. 

1  Co.   5     5  unto  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh 

1  Th    5.    3  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them 

2  Th.  1.    9  be  punished  with  everlasting  [destruction] 
1  Ti     6.    9  winch  drown  men  in  destruction  and 

37. A  breaking  together,  o'uvrpip.fxa  suntrimmct. 
Rom.  3.  16  Destruction  and  misery  (are)  in  their  ways 

DESTRUCTION,  appointed  to  utter  — 

Devotion  (to  Qod  or  destruction),  D"irt  clverem. 

1  Ki.20.  42  whom  I  appointed  to  utter  destruction 
DETAIN,  to  — 
To  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  "\$%  alsar. 

Judgi3.  15  let  us  detain  thee,  until  we  shall  have 
13.  16  Though  thou  detain  me,  I  will  not  eat  of 
DETAINED  — 
To  be.  kept  wi,  restrained,  detained,  tjjj  atsar,  2. 

1  Sa.  21.    7  there  that  day,  detained  before  the  Lord 

DETERMINATE  — 

To  mark  out,  dplfa  horiz'i. 

Acts  2.  23  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and 

DETERMINATION  — 
Judgment,  B9§>a  mishpat. 

Zeph.  3.   8  my  determination  (is)  to  gather  the  nations 

DETERMINE,  to  — 
1.  T<>  s-i>t,  t?x  amar. 

2  Ch.  2.    1  Solomon  determined  to  build  an  house 
■J  To  }»■  determined,  tjjvi  chathak,  2. 

I 'hi.   9.  24  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy 
I  To  give  counsel,  ;•;■;  yaats. 
2  Ch.25.  16  that  Qod  hath  determined  to  destrov  the 
Isa.   eg.  17  which  he  hath  determined  against  it 


4.  To  take  counsel,  povXevo/xat  bouleuomai. 

Acts  15.  37  Barnabas  [determined]  to  take  with  them 

5.  To  loose  thereupon,  decide,  4-klKvw  ejriliiO. 

Acts  19.  39  shall  be  determined  in  a  lawful  assembly 

0.  To  judge,  decide,  Kptvco  hrino. 

Acts  3.  13  when  he  was  determined  to  let  (him)  go 
20.  16  Paul  had  determined  to  sail  by  Ephesus 
25.  25  to  Augustus,  I  have  determined  to  send 

27.  1  when  it  was  determined  that  we  should 

1  Co.  2.    2  I  determined  not  to  know  any  thing 

2  Co.  2.    1  I  determined  this  with  myself,  that  I 
Titus  3.  12  for  I  have  determined  there  to  winter 

7.  To  mark  out,  dplfa  horizo. 

Luke22.  22  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it  was  detenu. 
Acts  11.  29  determined  to  send  relief  unto  the  breth. 

17.  26  and  hath  determined  the  times  before 

8.  To  arrange,  rdo-aai  tasso* 

Acts  15.    2  they  determined  that  Paid  and  Barnabas 
DETERMINE  before,  to  — 
To  mark  out  beforehand,  trpooplfa  proorizo. 

Acts  4.  28  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done 
DETERMINED  — 
I. To  determine,  move  sharply t  be  cutoff,  pn  char. 

Job  14.    5  Seeing  his  days  (are)  determined,  the 

2.  To  place,  set,  put,  q*e?,  u*&  sum,  sim. 

2  Sa.13.  32  this  hath  been  determined  from  the  day 

DETERMINED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  determined,  pn  charats,  2. 

Isa.    10.  23  shall  make  a  consumption,  even  determin. 

28.  22  even  determined  upon  the  whole  earth 
Dan.   9.  26  end  of  the  war  desolations  are  determined 

9.  27  that  determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the 
11  36  for  that  that  is  determined  shall  be  doue 

2.  To  complete,  finish,  determine,  n?3  katah. 

1  Sa.  20.    7  be  sure  that  evil  is  determined  by  him 

20.    9  knew  certainly  that  evil  were  determined 

20.  33  was  determined  of  hisfatherto  slay  David 

25  17  for  evil  is  determined  against  our  master 

Esth.  7.    7  there  was  evil  determined  against  him  by 

DETEST,  to  — 

To  have  in  abomination,  yjiv  shakats,  3. 

Deut.  7.  26  thou  shalt  utterly  detest  it,  and  thou 
DETESTABLE  — 
Abominable  thing,  ppy>  shiqquts. 

Jer.  16. 18  with  the  carcases  of  their  detestable  and 

Eze.     5.  11  with  all  thy  detestable  things,  and  with 

7.  20  (and)  of  their  detestable  things  therein 

11.  18  shall  take  away  all  the  detestable  things 

11.  21  after  the  heart  of  their  detestable  things 

37.  23  nor  with  their  detestable  things,  nor  with 

DE-TJ'-EL,  Sn'IH  God  is  knowing. 

Father  of  Eliasaph,  prince  of  Gad,  B.C.  1510. 
Num.  1.  14  Of  Gad  ;  Eliasaph,  the  son  of  D. 

2.  14  of  Gad.  .Eliasaph  the  son  of  D.[or  Reuel] 
7.  42  D.  prince  of  the  children  of  Gad,  (offered) 
7.  47  the  offering  of  Eliasaph  the  sou  of  D. 

10.  20  children  of  Gad . .  Eliasaph  the  son  of  D. 

DEVICE  — 

1.  Meditation,  f'van  higgayon. 

Lam.  3.  62  and  their  device  against  me  all  the  day 
'2. Reason,  device,  reckoning,  jia^n  cJieshbon. 

Eccl    9. 10  (there  is)  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  know. 

3.  Wicked  device,  rvsvp  mezimmah. 

Job    21.  27  the  devices  (which)  ye  wrongfully  imagine 
Psa.  10.    2  in  the  devices  that  they  have  imagined 
Jer.  51.  11  his  device  (is)  against  Babylon,  to  destroy 

^.Thought,  device,  n^nip  machashabah. 

Jer.  18. 11  I  frame.. arid  devise  a  device  against  you 

5.  Thought,  device,  n^^'n.p  machashebeth. 

2  Ch.  2.  14  to  find  out  every  device  which  shall  be 
Esth.  8.    3  device  that  he  had  devised  against  the 

9.  25  his  wicked  device,  which  he  devised 
Job     5. 12  disappointeth  the  devices  of  the  crafty 
Psa.  33.  10  make tli  the  devices  of  the  people  of  none 
Prov  19.  21  (There  are)  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart 
Jer.  11.  19  that  they  had  devised  devices  against  me 

18.  12  we  will  walk  after  our  own  devices,  and 
18.  18  let  us  devise  devices  against  Jeremiah 

Dan.  ii.  24  he  shall  forecast  his  devices  against  the 

11.  25  they  shall  forecast  devices  against  him 

6.  Inward  or  inner  thought,  ivdv^nais  enthumesis. 
Acts  17.  29  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device 

7.  Thought,  plan,  v6n/xa  noema. 

2  Co.    2.  11  for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices 
DEVICES  — 
Counsels,  ris#D  moetsoth. 

Prov.  1.  31  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices 
DEVIL  — 
1.  Hairy  one,  kid,  goat,  YJty'  sa-ir. 

Lev.  17.    7  no  more  offer  their  sacrifices  unto  devils 

2  Ch.11.  15  for  the  high  places,  and  for  the  devils 
2. Spoiler,  destroyer,  IB*  sked. 

Deut32.  17  They  sacrificed  untu  devils,  not  to  God 

Psa.  106.  37  their  sons  and  their  daughters  unto  devils 
Z.Daimon,  demon,  shade,  Sat/idViov  daimonion. 

Matt.  7-  22  in  thy  name  have  cast  out  devils?  and  in 


Matt.  9.  33  when  the  devil  was  cast  out,  the  dumb 
9.  34  devils  through  the  prince  of  the  devils 

10.  8  the  lepers,  raise  the  dead,  cast  out  devils 

11.  18  nordi-inking,  and  they  say,  He  hath  a  devil 

12.  24  This  (fellow)  doth  not  ca;t  out  devils 

12.  24  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  the  devils 
12.  27  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils,  by  whom 

12.  28  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of  God 

17.  18  Jesus  rebuked  the  devil;  and  he  departed 
Mark  1.  34  divers  diseases,  and  cast  out  many  devils 

1.  34  suffered  not  the  devils  to  speak,  because 
1.  39  throughout  all  Galilee,  and  cast  out  devils 
3.  15  to  heal  sicknesses,  and  to  cast  out  devils 

3.  22  prince  of  the  devils  casteth  he  out  devils 

6.  13  they  cast  out  many  devils,  and  anointed 

7.  26  cast  forth  the  devil  out  of  her  daughter 
7.  29  the  devil  is  gone  out  of  thy  daughter 

7.  30  she  found  the  devil  gone  out,  and  her 
9.  38  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 
16.    9  [out  of  whom  he  had  cast  seven  devils] 
16.  17  [In  my  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils] 
Luke  4.  33  which  had  a  spirit  of  an  unclean  devil 

4.  35  when  the  devil  had  thrown  him  in  the 

4.  41  devils  also  came  out  of  many,  crying  out 

7.  33  nor  drinking  wine,  and  ye  say,  He  hath  ad. 

8.  2  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went  seven  dev. 
8.  27  a  certain  man,  which  had  devils  a  long 
8.  30  because  many  devils  were  entered  into 

8.  33  Then  went  the  devils  out  of  the  man,  and 
8-  3S>  38  man,  out  of  whom  the  devils  were  de. 
g.    1  them  power  and  authority  over  all  devils 

9.  42  the  devil  threw  him  down,  and  tare  (him) 
9.  49  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 

10. 17  the  devils  are  subject  unto  us  through 
11.  14  he  was  casting  out  a  devil,  and  it  was 
11.  14  when  the  devil  was  gone  out,  the  dumb 
11.  15  some  of  them  said,  He  casteth  out  devils 
11.  15  through  Beelzebub  the  chief  of  the  devils 

11. 18  that  I  cast  out  devils  through  Beelzebub 
11.  19  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  devils,  by 

11.  20  if  I  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils 

13.  32  I  cast  out  devils,  and  I  do  cures  to  day 
John  7  20  Thou  hast  a  devil :  who  goeth  about  to 

8.  48  thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and  hast  a  devil? 
8.  49  I  have  not  a  devil ;  but  I  honour  my 
8.  52  Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  devil 
10.  20  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad  ;  why  hear 
10.  21  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ? 
1  Co.  10.  20  they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God 
10.  20  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  devils 
10.  21  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  and  the  cup  of  devils 
10.  21  the  Lord's  table,  and  of  the  table  of  devils 
1  Ti.    4.    1  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils 
Jas.     2.  19  the  devils  also  believe,  and  tremble 
Rev.   9.  20  they  should  not  worship  devils,  and  idols 

4.  .-1  deified  spirit,  Bafacw  daimon. 

Matt.  8.  31  the  devils  besought  him,  saying,  If  thou 
Mark  5.  12  [the  devils]  besought  him,  saying,  Send  us 
Luke  8.  29  driven  [of  the  devil]  into  the  wilderness 
Rev.  16.  14  they  are  the  spirits  of  [devils,]  working 

18.  2  is  become  the  habitation  of  [devils,]  and 

5. Accuser,  calumniator,  o"idf3o\os  diabolos. 

Matt.  4.    1  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  dev. 
4.    5  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy  city 
4.    8  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceed. 
4.  11  the  devil leaveth him!  and, behold, angels 
13.  39  The  enemy  that  sowed  them  is  the  devil 
25.  41  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels 
Luke  4.    2  Being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil 
4.    3  the  devil  said  unto  him,  If  thou  be  the 
4.    5  [the  devil,]  taking  him  up  into  an  high 
4.    6  the  devil  said  onto  him,  All  this  power 

4.  13  the  devil  had  ended  all  the  temptation 
8. 12  then  cometh  the  devil,  and  taketh  away 

John  6.  70  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ? 

8.  44  Ye  are  of  (your)  father  the  devil,  and  the 
13.    2  the  devil  having  now  put  into  the  heart 
Acts  10.  38  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil 

13.  10  (thou)  child  of  tlic  devil,  (thou)  enemy  of 
Eph.    4.  27  Neither  give  place  to  the  devil 

6.  11  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil 

1  Ti.    3.    6  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil 

3.    7  into  reproach  and  the  snare  of  the  devil 

2  Ti.   2.  26  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil 
Heb.   2.  14  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil 
Jas.    4.    7  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  fiee  from  you 
1  Pe.   5.    8  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion 
1  Jo.    3.    S  He  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil 

3.  8  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning 
3.  8  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil 
3.  10  and  the  children  of  the  devil ;  whosoever 

Jude        9  when  contending  with  the  devil,  he  dis. 

Rev.    2.  10  devil  shall  cast  (some)  of  you  into  prison 

12.  9  that  old  serpent,  called  the  Devil,  and 
12.  12  the  devil  is  come  down  unto  you,  having 
20.    2  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the  Devil,  and 
20.  10  the  devil  that  deceived  them  was  cast 

DEVIL,  to  be  possessed  with  a  — 

To  be  demonized,  b*cuf.toyl£ofj.ai  da'nnonizomai. 

Matt.  9.  32  to  him  a  dumb  man  possessed  with  a  dev. 
12.  22  unto  him  one  possessed  with  a  devil 

Mark  5.  15  see  him  that  was  possessed  with  the  devil 

5.  16  to  him  that  was  possessed  with  the  devil 
5.  18  he  that  had  been  possessed  with  the  devil 

DEVIL,  to  have  or  be  vexed  with  a  — 
To  be  demonized,  datfxovi^o^ai  diamonizomai. 
Mattis,  22  daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  devil 
John  10.  21  not  the  words  of  him  that  hath  a  devil 


DEVILISH 


253 


DIAMOND 


DEVILISH  — 

Demoniacal,  SatfxoviwS-ns  daiirumiodes. 

Jas.    3. 15  but  (is)  earthly,  sensual,  devilish 
DEVILS,  to  be  possessed  with  or  of  the  — 
To  be  demonized,  hat}j.cvi^o^ai  daimonizomai. 
Matt.  4.  24  those  which  were  possessed  with  devils 
8.  16  many  that  were  possessed  with  devils 
8.  28  there  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils 

8.  33  befallen  to  the  possessed  of  the  devils 
Mark  1.  32  and  them  that  were  possessed  with  devils 
Luke  8.  36  he  that  was  possessed  of  the  devils  was 

DEVISE,  to  — 

1.7b  devise,  feign,  (fia  bada. 

1  Ki.  12.  33' which  he'  had  devised  of  his  own  heart 
2.  To  think,  devise,  HOT  damah,  3. 

2  Sa.  21.    5  that  deviseth  against  us  (that)  we  should 
3.7b  devise,  design, pwrpose,  D£|  zamam. 

Psa.  31. 13  they  devised  to  take  away  my  life 

Jer.  51.  12  the  Lord  hath  both  devised  and  done  that 

Lam.  2.  17  Loed  hath  done  (that)  which  he  had  devis. 

4,  To  plow,  grave,  devise,  w~\n  charash. 

Prov.  3.  29  Devise  not  evil  against  thy  neighbour 
6.  14  he  deviseth  mischief  continually 
6.  18  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  imaginations 
14.  22  Do  they  not  err  that  devise  evil?  but 
14.  22  truth  (shall  be)  to  them  that  devise  good 

5. To  think,  devise,  reckon,  2'#n  chashab. 

Exod3i.  4  To  dense  cunning  works,  to  work  in  gold 
35.  32  to  devise  curious  works,  to  work  in  gold 
35.  35  and  of  those  that  dense  cunning  work 

2  Sa.  14.  14  yet  doth  he  devise  means,  that  his  banis. 

Esth.  S.    3  that  he  had  devised  against  the  Jews 

9.  24  had  devised  against  the  Jews  to  destroy 
9.  25  whichhe  devised  against  the  Jews,  should 

Psa.  35.    4  let  them  be . .  brought  to  confusion  that  d. 
35.  20  they  devise  deceitful  matters  against 
30.   4  He  deviseth  mischief  upon  his  bed ;  he 
41.    7  against  me  do  they  dense  my  hurt 
52.   2  Thy  tongue  deviseth  mischiefs ;  like  a 
Prov  16.  30  shutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  froward  things 
Jer.  11.  19  and  I  knew  not  that  they  had  devised 
18.  11  I  frame  evil  against  you,  and  devise  a 
18.  iS  Then  said  they,  Come,  and  let  us  devise 
48.    2  Heshbon  they  have  devised  evil  against  it 
Eze.  11.    2  these  (are)  the  men  that  devise  mischief 
Hie.    2.    1  Woe  to  them  that  devise  iniquity,  and 
2.    3  against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  evil 
6.7b  think,  devise,  reckon,  2Z'n  chashab,  3. 

Prov  16.    9  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way :  but  the 
24.    8  He  that  deviseth  to  do  evil  shall  be  called 
7.  To  give  counsel,  j*y;  yaats. 

.   Isa.  32.    7  he  deviseth  wicked  devices  to  destroy  the 
32,   8  But  the  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things 
DEVISE,  to  cunningly  — 
To  make  wise,  &o<pi£co  sophizo. 

2  Pe.    1.  16  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables 
DEVISED  — 
Thought,  device,  rq^rp  machashebeth. 

Esth.  8.    5  the  letters  devised  by  Haman  the  son  of 
DEVOTE,  to  — 
To  devote  (to  God  or  destruction),  enn  charam,  5. 

Lev.  27.  28  that  a  man  shall  devote  unto  the  Lord  of 
DEVOTED  — 

-4  thing  devoted  [to  God  or  destruction),  C"in  cherem. 
Lev.  27.  21  be  holy  unto  the  Lord,  as  a  field  devoted 
27.  29  None  devoted,  .shall  be  redeemed ;  (but) 
DEVOTED,  to  be  — 
To  be  devoted,  cvi  charam,  6. 

Lev.  27.  29  which  shall  be  devoted  of  men,  shall  be 
DEVOTED  thing  — 
A  thing  devoted,  D*irt  cJierem. 

Lev.  27.  28  Notwithstanding  no  devoted  thing  that  a 

27.  28  every  devoted  thing  (is)  most  holy  unto 
Nunii8.  14  Every  thing  devoted  in  Israel  shall  be 
DEVOTION  — 

Object  of  worship  or  devotion,  (?4$ao'na  sebasma. 
Acts  17.  23  I  passed  by,  and  beheld  your  devotions 
DEVOUR,  to  — - 
l.To  eat,  consume,  devour,  Ssx  akal. 

Gen.  31.  15  and  hath  quite  devoured  also  our  money 

37.  20  Some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him  :  and 

37.  33  an  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him 

49  27  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the  prey 

Exod24>  17  glory  of  the  Lord  (was)  like  devouring  fire 

Lev.  10.    2  outfirefromtheLoRD.anddevouredthem 

Num26.  10  fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 

Deutji.  17  they  shall  be  devoured,  and  many  evils 

32.  42  and  my  sword  shall  devour  flesh 
Judg.  9.  15  let  fire,  .devour  the  cedars  of  Lebanon 

9.  20  devour  the  men  of  Shechem,  and  the  house 
9.  20  the  house  of  Millo,  and  devour  Abimelech 
2  Sa.   2.  26  Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?  knowest 
11.  25  sword  devoureth  one  as  well  as  another 
18.    8  devoured  more . .  than  the  sword  devoured 
22.    9  and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured 
2  Ch.  7.  13  I  command  the  locusts  to  devour  the  land 
Job    18.  13  It  shall  devour  the  strength  of  his  skin 

i3.  13  first  born  of  death  shall  devour  his  stren. 
Psa.  18.    8  and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured 

2T.    9  his  wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them 


Psa.  50.    3  a  fire  shall  devour  before  him,  and  it 

78.  45  flies  among  them,  which  devoured  them 

79.  7  they  have  devoured  Jacob,  and  laid  waste 
105.  35  and  devoured  the  fruit  of  their  ground 

Prov.  30.  14  to  devour  the  poor  from  off  the  earth 
Isa. 


5- 
9- 
9- 

10. 
24. 


Jer. 


Lam. 
Eze. 


Hos. 


Joel 


7  land,  strangers  devour  it  in  your  presence 
4  as  the  fire  devoureth  the  stubble,  and  the 
12  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  open  mouth 
18  it  shall  devour  the  briers  and  thorns,  and 
17  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers  in  one 
6  Therefore  hath  the  curse  devoured  the 
26.  11  fire  of  thine  enemies  shall  devour  them 
31.    8  sword,  not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  devour 
33.  11  your  breath,  (as)  fire,  shall  devour  you 
56.    9  All  ye  beasts  of  the  field,  come  to  devour 
2.    3  all  that  devour  him  shall  offend 

2.  30  your  own  sword  hath  devoured  your  pro. 

3.  24  shame  hath  devoured  the  labour  of  our 
5.  14  thy  mouth  fire,  .and  it  shall  devour  them 
8. 16  have  devoured  the  land,  and  all  that  is 

10.  25  they  have  eaten  up  Jacob,  and  devoured 

12.  12  sword  of  the  Lord  shall  devour  from  the 
15.    3  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  to  devour  and  de. 
17.  2/  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Jerusalem 
21.  14  shall  devour  all  things  round  about  it 
30.  16  they  that  devour  thee  shall  be  devoured 
46.  10  the  sword  shall  devour,  and  it  shall  be 
46. 14  the  sword  shall  devour  round  about  thee 
48.  45  shall  devour  the  corner  of  Moab,  and  the 
50.   7  All  that  found  them  have  devoured  them 
50.  17  the  king  of  Assjiia  hath  devoured  him 

50.  32  and  it  shall  devour  all  round  about  him 

51.  34  the  king  of  Babylon  hath  devoured  me 
2.    3  flaming  fire,  (which)  devoureth  round 

4.  11  it  hath  devoured  the  foundations  thereof 
7.  15  famine  and  pestilence  shall  devour  him 

15.    4  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  ends  of  it 
15.   5  when  the  fire  hath  devoured  it,  and  it  is 

15.  7  and  (another)  fire  shall  devour  them 

16.  20  thou  sacrificed  unto  them  to  be  devoured 
19.   3  learned  to  catch  the  prey ;  it  devoured  m. 

19.  6  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  (and)  devoured 
19. 14  hath  devoured  her  fruit,  so  that  she 

20.  47  it  shall  devour  every  green  tree  in  thee 
22  25  they  have  devoured  souls;  they  have  taken 
28. 18  it  shall  devour  thee,  and  I  will  bring  thee 

33.  27  will  I  give  to  the  beasts  to  be  devoured 

34.  28  shall  the  beast  of  the  land  devour  them 
36.  14  thou  shalt  devour  men  no  more,  neither 

5.  7  nowshall  a  month  devour  them  with  their 
7.    7  and  have  devoured  their  judges 

7.  9  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength 

8.  14  and  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  thereof 

1.  6  devour  (them),  because  of  their  own  cou. 

13.  8  and  theie  will  I  devour  them  like  a  lion 
1. 19,  20  the  fire  hath  devoured  the  pastures 

2.  3  A  fire  devoureth  before  them,  and  behind 
2.    5  flame  of  fire  that  devoureth  the  stubble 

Amos  1.    4  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Ben-hadad 

1.    7,  10  whichishall  devour  the  palaces  thereof 
1.  12  which  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Bozrah 

1.  14  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  thereof,  with 

2.  2  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Kirioth 
2.    5  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Jerusalem 
4.    9  the  palmer  worm  devoured  (them) 

6  fire  in  the  house  of  Joseph,  and  devour  (it) 
4  it  devoured  the  great  deep,  and  did  eat 
18  they  shall  kindle  in  them,  and  devour 
13  the  sword  shall  devour  thy  young  lions 

13  the  fire  shall  devour  thy  bars 
15  There  shall  the  fire  devour  thee ;  the 

14  rejoicing  (was)  as  to  devour  the  poor  sec. 

15  they  shall  devour,  and  subdue  with  sling 

11.  1  that  the  fire  may  devour  .thy  cedars 

12.  6  they  shall  devour  all  the  people  round 

2.  To  eat,  consume,  devour,  Ssx  akal. 

Dan.   7.    5  said  thus  unto  it,  Arise,  devour  much  fl. 
7.    7  it  devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and- 
7.  19  (which)  devoured,  brake  in  pieces,  and 
7.  23  shall  devour  the  whole  earth,  and  shall 

3.  Eating,  food,  n^?£  oklah. 

Jer.  12.   9  the  beasts  of  the  field,  come  to  devour 
Eze.  23.  37  for  them  through  (the  fire),  to  devour 
39.    4  the  beasts  of  the  field  to  be  devoured 

4.  To  swallow  up,  y?3  bala. 

Gen.  41.    7  the  seven  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven 
41.  24  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  good  ears 

5.  To  swallow  uj>,  jta  bala,  3. 

Prov  19.  28  mouth  of  the  wicked  devoureth  iniquity 
Hab.    1.  13  when  the  wicked  devoureth  (the  man  that) 

6.  To  sioallow,  devour,  retain,  fy  yala. 

Prov  20.  25  the  man  (who)  devoureth  (that  which  is) 

7.  To  eat,  consume,  DnS  lacham. 

Deut32.  24  devoured  withJ^urning  heat,  and  with  bi. 
S.  To  feed,  consume,  n%~)rraah. 

Psa.  80. 13  mid  beast  of  the  field  doth  devour  it 

9.  To  pant  after,  swallow  up,  ^Xff  shaaph. 

Isa.  42. 14  I  will  destroy  and  devour  at  once 

10.  To  eat,  eat  up,  iadioo  esthio. 

Heb.  10.  27  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries 
11.7*0  drink  down,  swallow  up,  Karairiv<a  katapino. 

1  Pe.    5.    8  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  d. 
12.  To  eat  down,  KarcMpdyct}  kaiaphago. 

Matt 23.  14  ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a  pre. 

Marki2.  40  Which  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a 

Luke  S.    5  and  the  fowis  of  the  air  devoured  it 


5- 

Obad. 7" 

Nah.  2. 

3- 

3- 

Hab.   3. 
Zech.  9. 


Lukeis-  30  which  hath  devcuredthy  living  with  bar. 
20.  47  Which  devour  widows"  houses,  and  for  a 
2  Co.  11.  20  if  a  man  devour  (you),  if  a  man  take  (of 
Gal.     5.  15  if  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  take 
Rev.  11.    5  fire  proceedeth.  .and  devoureth  their 

12.    4  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born 
20.    9  frum  God  out  of  heaven,  and  devoured 

DEVOUR  up.  to  — 

l.To  eat,  consume,  devour,  "??n  akal. 

Eze.  36.  13  Thou  (land)  devourest  up  men,  and  hast 

2.7*0  eat  down,  Karacpdyw  kataphago. 

Matt  13.    4  and  the  fowls  came  and  devoured  them  up 
Mark  4.    4  fowls  of  the  air  came  and  devoured  it  up 

DEVOURED,  to  be  — 

1.7b  be  eaten  up,  consumed,  "?=!<  akal,  2. 

Jer.  30.  16  Therefore  all  they,  .shall  be  devoured 
Eze.  23.  25  thy  residue  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire 
Zeph.  1.  18  the  whole  land  shall  be  devoured  by  the 
3.    8  the  earth  shall  be  devoured  with  the  fire 
Zech  9.    4  and  she  shall  be  devoured  with  fire. 

2.7b  be  eaten  up,  consumed,  Srx  akal,  4. 

Isa.     1.  20  ye  shall  be  devoured  with  the  sword 
Nah.    1.  10  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully  dry 
DEVOURER  — 
7b  eat,  consume,  devour,  tcn  akal. 

Mai.    3.  11 1  will  rebuke  the  devourer  for  your  sakes 
DEVOURING  — 
1. 7b  eat,  consume,  devour,  *?rx  akal. 

Isa.   29.    6  tempest,  and  the  flame  of  devouring  fire 
30.  27  and  his  tongue  as  a  devouring  fire 
30.  30  the  flame  of  a  devouring  fire,  .scattering 
33.  14  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire  ?  who 

2.  Swallowing  up,  y?2  bela. 

Psa.  52.    4  Thou  lovest  all  devouring  words,  O  (thou) 
DEVOUT  (persons')  — 

1. Taking  or  receiving  well,  devout,  ev\a&ris  eulabes. 
Luke  2.  25  the  same  man  (was)  just  and  devout 
Acts    2.   5  devout  men,  out  of  every  nation  under 
8.    2  devoutmencarriedStephen(tohisburiai) 
%  Reverential,  €vo-€&t}s  eusebes. 

Acts  10.    2  (A)  devout  (man),  and  one  that  feared  God 
10.    7  a  devout  soldier  of  them  that  waited  on 
22.  12  Ananias,  a  devout  man  according  to  the 
3.7b  worship,  be  devout,  reverential,  o-c&ofiat. 
Acts  13.  50  Jews  stirred  up  the  devout  and  honour. 
17.    4  and  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  great  nrultit. 
17. 17  with  the  Jews,  and  with  the  devout  persons 
DEW  — 
Dew,  Vs  ted. 

Gen.  27.  28  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  ard 

27.  39  and  of  the  dew  of  heaven  from  above 
Exodi6.  13  in  the  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about 

16.  14  when  the  dew  that  lay  was  gone  up 
Num  11.  9  dew  fell  upon  the  camp  in  the  night 
Deut  32.    2  my  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew,  as  the 

33.  13  the  precious  things  of  heaven,  for  the  d. 
33.  28  also  his  heavens  shall  drop  down  dew 
Judg.  6.  37  if  the  dew  be  on  the  fleece  only,  and 

6.  38  wringed  the  dew  out  of  the  fleece,  a  bowl 
6.  39  upon  all  the  ground  let  there  be  dew 
6.  40  and  there  was  dew  on  all  the  ground 
2  Sa.    1.  21  (let  there  be)  no  dew,  neither  (let  there 

17.  12  we  will  light  upon  him  as  the  dew  falleth 
1  Ki.  17.    1  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these 
Job  29.  19  the  dew  lay  all  night  upon  my  branch 

38.  28  or  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew  ? 
Psa.  1 10.    3  morning :  thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth 
133.    3  As  the  dew  of  Hermon.  .that  descended 
Prov.  3.  20  and  the  clouds  drop  down  the  dew 

19.  12  but  his  favour  (is)  as  dew  upon  the  grass 
Song  5.  2  for  my  head  is  filled  with  dew,  (and)  my 
Isa.  18.    4  bike  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest 

26.  19  for  thy  dew  (is  as)  the  dew  of  herbs,  and 
Dan.  4.  15,  23  let  it  be  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 
4.  25  shall  wet  thee  with  the  dew  of  heaven 

4.  33  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 

5.  21  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 
Hos.   6.    4  for  your  goodness  (is)  as.  .the  early  dew 

13.  3  and  as  the  early  dew  that  passeth  away 

14.  5  1  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel :  he  shall 
Mic.    5.    7  in  the  midst  of  many  people  as  a  dew 
Hag.  1.  10  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  from  dew 
Zech.  8.  12  the  heavens  shall  give  their  dew ;  and  I 

DIADEM  — 

1.  Mitre,  n§3?0  mitsnepheth. 

Eze.  21.  '26  Remove  the  diadem,  and  take  off  the  cr. 

2.  Diadem,  fpiy,  vprttsanovh,  tsaniph. 

Isa.  62.    3  Thou  shalt  also  be.  .a  royal  diadem  in 

3.  Diadem,  hood,  fpy  tsaniph. 

Job  29.  14  my  judgment  (was)  as  a  robe  and  a  diad. 

4.  Diadem,  tiara,  rryBS  tsephirah. 

Isa.  28.   5  for  a  diadem  of  beauty,  unto  the  residue 
DIAL  — 
Going  up,  ascent,  step,  nbyji  maalah. 

2  Ki.20.  11  by  which  it  had  gone  down  in  the  dial  of 

Isa.  38.    8  is  gone  down  in  the  sun-dial  of  Ahaz,  ten 
DIAMOND  — 
1. Diamond,  adamant,  emerald,  xr><yi  yahalom. 

Exod28.  18  the  second  row  (shall  be),  .a  diamond 
39. 11  an  emerald,  a  sapphire,  and  a  diamond 

Eze.  28.  13  the  sardius,  topaz,  and  the  diamond,  the 


DIANA 


254 


DIE 


2.  Brier j  diamond,  point,  Tp?  shcmir, 

Jer.  17.    1  The  sin.  .(is)  written,  .the  point  of  a  dla. 

DI-A'-NA,  "Apre^is,  Artemis. 

One    of  the  principal  goddesses  of  the  Greeks    and 

Romans.     Artemis  is  her  Greek  name. 

Acts  19.  24  a  silversmith,  .made  silver  shrines  for  D. 
19.  27  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  D.  should 
10.  28  saying,  Great  (is)  D.  of  the  Ephesians 

19.  34  cried  out,  Great  (is)  D.  of  the  Ephesians 
t9.  35  city  of..  Ephesians  is  a  worshipper  of..D. 

DIB-LA'-rM,  D:S:n  double  embrace. 
father  of  Gomer  wife  of  Hosea  the  prophet,  B.C.  800. 
Hos.    t.    3  went  and  took  Gomer  the  daughter  of  D. 

DIB'-LATH,  rhm  circle. 

A  place  in  the  N.  of  Canaan,  which  should  be  spelled 

Diblah,  or  rather  Riblah. 

Eze.    6.  14  desolate  than  the  wilderness  toward  D. 

DI'-BON,  px^ji'i  rircr  course. 

1.  A  city  N.  of'  the  Arnon,  S.W.  of  Heshbon,  rebuilt  by 
Gad,  given  to  Reuben,  and  retaken  by  Moab. 

Nuni2i.  30  Heshbon  is  perished  even  unto  D.,  and 
32.    3  Ataroth,  and  D.,  and  Jazer,  and  Nimrah 

32.  34  And  the  children  of  Gad  built  D.,  and  A. 
Isa.    15.    2  He  is  gone  up  to  Bajith,  and  to  D. 

2.  A  city,  perhaps  the  same  as  No.  1. 

Josh.  13.    9  and  all  the  plain  of  Medeba  unto  D. 

13.  17  D.,  and  Bamoth-baal,  and  Beth-baal-meon 
Jer.  48. 18  Thou  daughter  that  dost  inhabit  D. 

48.  22  And  upon  D.,  and  upon  Nebo,  and  upon 

3.  A  town  in  Judah,  perhaps  the  same  as  (Dimonah) 
Dibon. 

Neh.  11.  25  and  at  D.,  and  (in)  the  villages  thereof 
DI'-BON  GAD,  -13  pn. 

A  halting  place  of  the  Israelites  after  leaving  Egypt, 
and  was  in  Moab  between  Ije-Abarim  and  Almon- 
diblathaim,  and  is  no  doubt  the  same  place  called 
Dibon. 

Num33.  45  departed  from  Iim  and  pitched  in  D.-g. 

33.  46  they  removed  from  D.-g.,  and  encamped 

DIB'-RI,  nan  on  the  pasture  born. 

A  Dauite,  whose  daughter  had  married  an  Egyptian 

and  whose  son  was  stoned  for  blasphemy,  B.C.  1490. 

Lev.  24. 11  Shelomith,  the  daughter  of  D.,  of  the  tribe 
DID,  he  — 
Wakeb,  (a place  in  Siqjh,)  nrn  valieb. 

Nuni2i.  14  What  he  did  in  the  Red  sea,  and  in  the 

DI-DY'-MTJS,  AtSvfios  a  twin. 
The  surname  of  the  apostle  Thomas. 

John  11.  r6  Then  said  Thomas,  which  is  called  D. 

20.  24  Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve,  called  D. 

21.  2  together  Simon  Peter,  and  T.  caUed  D. 

DIE  — 

1 .  Death,  ni ft  maveth. 

Num.  6. '  7  not  make  himself  unclean,  .when  they  d. 

1  Sa.  20.  31  fetch  him  unto  me,  for  he  shall  surely  die 

26. 16  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  ye  (are)  worthy  to  d, 

2  Sa.    3.  33  the  king  lamented . .  and  said . .  as  a  tool  d. 

12.  5  the  Lord  liveth,  the  man.  .shall  surely  die 
Psa.  49. 17  For  when  he  dieth  he  shall  carry  nothing 
Provn.  7  When  a  wicked  man  dieth,  (his)  especta. 
Eccl.  3. 19  as  the  one  dieth,  so  dieth  the  other ;  yea 
Jer.  26. 11  saying,  This  man  (is)  worthy  to  die  ;  for 

26. 16  This  man  (is)  not  worthy  to  die  :  for  he 
Eze.  1 8.  23  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  d.  ? 
Jon.   4.  3,8  (It  is)  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live 

2.  Death,  dying,  npra?  temuthah. 

Psa,  79. 11  preserve,  -those  that  are  appointed  to  die 
DIE,  to  — 
X.To  expire,  ffasp,  breathe  out,  yii  gava. 

Gen.  6.  17  everything  that  (is)  in' the  earth  shall  die 
7.  21  all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth 
Ntuui7.  12  Behold,  we  die,  we  perish,  we  all  perish 
17.  13  shall  we  be  consumed  with  dying? 
20.   3  spake,  saying,  Would  God  that  we  had  d. 
20.   3  when  our  brethren  died  before  the  Lord 
Joh    27.    5  till  I  die  I  wih\  not  remove  miue  integrity 
29. 18  I  shall  die  in  my  nest,  and  I  shall  multi. 
36. 12  and  they  shall  die  without  knowledge 
Psa.  88.  15  afflicted  and  ready  to  die  from  (my)  youth 

104.  29  they  die,  and  return  to  their  dust 
Zech  13.    8  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  (and)  die 

2.  To  die,  rwo  muth. 

Gen.    2.  17  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die 
3.    3  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die 
3.    4  unto  the  woman,  Ye  shall  not  surely  die 
5.    5  nine  hundred  aud  thirty  years :  and  he  d. 
5.    8  nine  hundred  and  twelve  years :  and  he'd. 
5.  11  nine  hundred  and  five  years :  and  he  died 
5. 14  nine  hundred  and  ten  years  :  and  he  died 
5.  17  hundred  ninety  and  five  years:  and  he  d. 
5.  20  hundred  sixty  and  two  years:  and  he  died 
5.  27  hundred  sixty  and  nine  years :  and  he  died 
5.  31  seventy  and  seven  years :  and  he  died 
7.  22  of  all  that  (was)  in  the  dry  (land,)  died 
9.  29  nine  hundred  and  fifty  years :  and  he  died 
11.  28  Haran  died  before  his  father  Terah  in  the 
11.  32  twohundredandflve  years:  and  Terah  d. 
19.  19  lest  some  evil  take  me,  and  I  die 
30.    7  know  thou  that  thou  shalt  surely  die,  thou 
93.    2  Sarah  died  iu  Kirjath-arbn ;  the  same  (is) 
23.   8  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,  aud  died  in 


Gen.  25.  17  he  gave  up  the  ghost  and  died,  and  was 

25.  32  I  (am)  at  the  point  to  die ;  and  what  prufit 

26.  9  Because  I  said,  Lest  I  die  for  her 

27.  4  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die 
30.    1  unto  Jacob,  Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die 
33.  13  overdrive  them  one  day.  .flock  will  die 
35.    8  Rebekah's  nurse,  died,  and  she  was  buried 
35.  18  her  soul  was  in  departing,  for  she  died 
35.  19  Rachel  died,  and  Mas  buried  in  the  way 

35.  29  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died,  and 

36.  33  Bela  died,  and  Jobab  the  son  of.  .reigned 
36.  34  And  Jobab  died,  and  Husham.of  the  land 
36.  35  Husham  died,  and  Hadad  the  son  of  B. 
36.  36  Hadad  died, and  Samlah  of  Masrekah  reig. 
36.  37  Samlah  died,  and  Saul  of  Rehoboth  (by) 
36.  38  Saul.died,  and  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  A. 
36.  39  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  Achbor  died,  and 
38.  11  peradventure  he  die  also,  as  his  brethren 
38.  12  the  daughter  of  Shuah,  Judah's  wife,  died 
42.    2  buy  for  us . .  that  we  may  live,  and  not  die 

42.  20  words  be  verified,  and  ye  shall  not  die 

43.  8  that  we  may  live,  and  not  die,  both  we 

44.  9  both  let  him  die,  and  we  also  will  be  my 
44.  22  leave  Iris  father,  .(his  father)  would  die 

44.  31  the  lad  (is)  not  (with  us),  that  he  will  die 

45.  28  I  will  go  and  see  him  before  I  die 

46.  12  Er  and  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

46.  30  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face 

47,  15  whyshould  we  die  in  thy  presence?  for  the 
47.  19  Wherefore  shall  we  die  before  thine  eyes 
47.  19  give  (us)  seed,  that  we  may  live,  and  not  d. 

47.  29  the  time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die 

48.  7  Rachel  died  by  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
48.  21 1  die;  but  God  shall  be  with  you,  and 

50.    5  Lo,  I  die :  in  my  grave  which  I  have  dig. 
50.  24  I  die :  and  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and 
50.  26  Joseph  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten 
Exod.  1.   6  Joseph  died,  and  all  his  brethren,  and 
2.  23  it  came  to  pass . .  the  king  of  Egypt  died 
7. 18  the  fish  that  (is)  in  the  river  shall  die 

7.  21  fish  that  (was)  in  the  river  died 

8.  13  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  houses,  out  of 

9.  4  there  shall  nothing  die  of  all  (that  is) 
9.    6  and  all  the  cattle  of  Egypt  died 

9.    6  but  of  the  cattle  of.  .Israel  died  not 

9.  19  come  down  upon  them,  and  they  shall  die 

10.  28  day  thou  seest  my  face  thou  shalt  die 

11.  5  first  born  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  die 

14. 11  taken  us  away  to  die  in  the  wilderness 

14. 12  than  that  we  should  die  in  the  wilderness 
16.    3  Would  to  God  we  had  died  by  the 

20. 19  but  let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die 
tax.  12  He  that  smiteth  a  man  so  that  he  die 
21.  14  take  him  from  mine  altar,  that  he  may  die 
21.  18  and  he  die  not,  but  keepeth  (his)  bed 
ai.  20  if  a  man  smite  his  servant,  .and  he  die 
2i.  28  ox  gore  a  man  or  a  woman,  that  they  die 

21.  35  if  one  man's  ox  hurt  another's,  that  he  die 

22.  2  If  a  thief,  .be  smitten  that  he  die 

22. 10  it  die,  or  be  hurt,  or  driven  away,  no  man 
22. 14  it  be  hurt,  or  die,  the  owner  (thereof) 

28.  35  and  when  he  cometh  out,  that  he  die  not 
28.  43  that  they  bear  not  iniquity,  and  die 

30.  20  shall  wash  with  water,  that  they  die  not 
30.  21  shall  wash  their  hands,  .that  they  die  not 
Lev.  8.  35  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  die 
10.  2  devoured  them ;  and  they  died  before  the 
10.  6  neither  rend  your  clothes,  lest  ye  die,  and 
10.   7  ye  shall  not  go  out . .  lest  ye  die 

10.  9  Do  not  drink  wine. .  lest  ye  die 

11.  39  And  if  any  beast  of  which  ye  may  eat  die 

15.  31  that  they  die  not  in  their  uucleanness 

16.  1  when  they  offered  before  the  Lord,  and  d. 
16.    2  he  come  not  at  all  times,  .that  he  die  not 

16. 13  he  shall  put  the  incense,  .that  he  die  not 
20.  20  bear  their  sin  ;  they  shall  die  childless 
22.    9  lest  they  bear  sin  for  it,  and  die  therefore 

Num.  3.   4  Nadab  and  Abihu  died  before  the  Lord 
4.  15  not  touch  (any)  holy  thing,  lest  they  die 
4.  19  that  they  may  live,  and  not  die,  when  they 
4.  20  they  shall  not  go  in.  .lest  they  die 
'  6.    9  if  any  man  die  very  suddenly  by  him,  and 
14.   2  Would  God  that  we  had  died  in  the  land 
14.    2  or  would  God  we  had  died  in  this 
14.  35  in  this  wilderness,  .there  they  shall  die 

14.  37  died  by  the  plague  before  the  Lord 

15.  36  and  stoned  him  with  stones,  and  he  died 

16.  29  these  men  die  the  common  death  of.  .men 
\6, 49  they  that  died  in  the  plague  were  fourteen 

16.  49  them  that  died  about  the  matter  of  Koran 

17.  10  their  murmurings  from  me,  that  they  die 

17.  13  unto  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  shall  die 

18.  3  that  neither  they,  nor  ye  also,  die 
18.  22  lest  they  bear  sin,  and  die 

18.  32  neither  shall  ye  pollute .  .lest  ye  die 

19.  14  This  (is)  the  law,  when  a  man  dieth  in  a 

20.  1  Miriam  died  there,  and  was  buried  there 
20.  4  that  we  and  our  cattle  should  die  there? 
20.  26  gathered  (unto  his  people,)  and  shall  die 

20.  28  Aaron  died  there  in  the  top  of  the  mount 

21.  5  up  out  of  Egypt  to  die  in  the  wilderness 
21.   f>  and  much  people  of  Israel  died 

23.  fo  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous 

25.  9  those  that  died  in  the  plague  were  twenty 

26.  11  the  children  of  Korah  died  not 

26.  19  Er  and  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
26.  61  Nadab  and  Abihu  died,  when  they  offered 

26.  65  They  shall  surely  die  in  the  wilderness 

27.  3  Our  father  died  in  the  wilderness,  and  he 
27.    3  but  died  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  no  sons 
27.    8  If  a  man  die,  and  have  no  son,  then  ye 
33.  3S  Aaron  the  priest  went  up.,  and  died  there 


NU11135. 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 

Deut.  5. 
5- 
10. 
13- 
17- 
17- 
18. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


22. 
24. 
24. 
25- 

32- 

32- 

33- 
t     t34' 

Josh.  5. 


Judg. 


[  Sa. 


iS& 


12  that  the  manslayer  die  not,  until  he  stand 
16  with  an  instrument  of  iron,  so  that  he  die 
17,  18  wherewith  he  may  die,  and  he  die,  he 

20  hurl  at  him  by  laying  of  wait,  that  he  die 

21  smite  him  with  his  hand,  that  he  die 

23  with  any  stone,  wherewith  a  man  may  die 

23  cast  (it)  upon  him,  that  he  die,  and  (was) 
30  against  any  person  (to  cause  him)  to  die 
25  why  should  we  die?  for  this  great  fire 

25  if  we  hear  the  voice,  .then  we  shall  die 

6  there  Aaron  died,  and  there  he  was  buried 

10  shalt  stone  liim  with  stones,  that  he  die 
5  stone  them  with  stones,  till  they  die 

12  the  man  that  will,  .not  hearken,  .shall  d. 

16  neither  let  me  see  this,  .that  I  die  not 

20  prophet  which  shall  presume,  .shall  die 
5  lighteth  upon  his  neighbour-,  that  he  die 

1 1  smite  him  mortally  that  he  die,  and  fleeth 

12  and  fetch  him  thence,  .that  he  may  die 

5,  6,  7  lest  he  die  in  the  battle,  and  another 

21  shall  stone  him  with  stones,  that  he  die 

21  shall  stone  her  with  stones  that  she  die 

22  they  shall  both  of  them  die,  (both)  the  m. 

24  stone  them  with  stones  that  they  die  . 

25  the  man  only  that  lay  with  her  shall  die 

3  if  the  latter  husband  die,  which  took  her 

7  that  thief  shall  die;  and  thou  shalt  put 

5  one  of  them  die,  and  have  no  child,  the 
50  die  in  the  mount  whither  thou  goest  up 
50  as  Aaron  thy  brother  died  in  mount  Hor 

6  Let  Reuben  live,  and  not  die  ;  and  let 

5  So  Moses,  .died  there  in  the  land  of  Moab 

4  the  men  of  war,  died  in  the  wilderness  by 
1 1  Lord  cast  down  great  stones . .  and  they  d. 
11  (they  were)  more  which  died  with  hailst. 

9  not  die  by  the  hand  of  the  avenger  of 

29  it  came  to  pass,  .that  Joshua,  .died 

33  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  died  ;  and  they 

7  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  he  d. 

8  Joshua,  .the  servant  of  the  Lord,  died 
21  nations  which  Joshua  left  when  he  died 

11  And  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz  died 

21  he  was  fast  asleep  and  weary :  so  he  died 

23  Peace  (be)  unto  thee . .  thou  shalt  not  die 

30  Bring  out  thy  son,  that  he  may  die 

32  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash  died  in  a  good 
49  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  died 
54  young  man  thrust  him  through,  and  he  d. 

2  he  judged  Israel,  .and  died,  and  was 

5  And  Jatr  died,  and  was  buried  in  Camou 
7  Then  died  Jephthah  the  Gileadite,  and 

10  Then  died  Ibzan,  and  was  buried  at  Beth. 

15  Abdon  the  son  of  Hillel  the  Pirathonite  d. 

22  We  shall  surely  die,  because  we  have 

18  now  shall  I  die  for  thirst,  and  fall  into 

30  Samson  said.  Let  me  die  with  the  Philis. 

3  Elimelech,  Naomi's  husband,  died;  and 

5  Mahlon  and  Chilion  died  also  both  of  them 

17  Where  thou  diest,  will  I  die,  and  there 

33  all  the  increase  of  thine  house  shall  die 

34  in  one  day  they  shall  die  both  of  them 
iS  he  died ;  for  he  was  an  old  man,  and 

12  men  that  died  not  were  smitten  with  the 

19  Pray  for  thy  servants,  .that  we  die  not 
39  be  in  Jonathan  my  son,  he  shall  surely  d. 

44  answered,  .thou  shalt  surely  die,  Jonat. 

45  Shall  Jonathan  die,  who  hath  wrought 

45  the  people  rescued  Jonathan,  that  he  died 

2  God  forbid;  thou  shalt  not  die:  behold 

14  show  me  the  kindness,  .that  I  die  not 

16  Thou  shalt  surely  die,  Ahimelech,  thou 
1  Samuel  died;  and  all  the  Israelites  were 

37  his  heart  died  within  him,  and  he  became 

38  that  the  Lord  smote  Nabal,  that  he  died 
10  smite  liim;  or  his  day  shall  come  to  die 

5  he  fell  likewise  upon  his  sword,  and  died 

6  So  Saul  died,  and  liis  three  sons,  and  lua 

15  And  he  smote  him  that  he  died 

23  fell  down  there,  and  died  hi  the  same 
23  place  where  Asahel  fell  down  and  died 

31  three  hundred  and  threescore  men  died 
27  smote  him  there.. that  he  died,  for  the 
33  the  king  lamented,  .and  said,  Died  Aimer 

7  God  smote  him . .  and  there  he  died  by  the 
1  the  king  of  the  children  of  Amnion  died 

18  and  smote Shobach  the  captain,  .who  died 
15  that  he  may  be  smitten,  and  die 

17  and  Uriah  the  Hittite  died  also 

21  cast  a  piece  of  a  millstone,  .that  he  died 

13  hath  put  away  thy  sin;  thou  shalt  not  die 

14  child  also  (that  is)  bom.  .shall  surely  die 

18  And  it  came  to  pass,  .that  the  child  died 

14  we  must  needs  die,  and  (are)  as  water 
23  and  hanged  himself,  and  died,  and  was 

3  neither  if  hah  of  us  die,  will  they  care 
33  would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  O  Absalom 

6  if  Absalom  had  lived,  and  all  we  had  died 
23  king  said  unto  Sliimei,  Thou  shalt  not  die 
37  that  I  may  die  in  mine  own  city,  (and  be) 

10  and  struck  him  not  again ;  and  he  died 

15  there  died  of  the  people  from  Dan  even 
52  if  wickedness,  .be  found,  .he  shall  die 

1  days  of  David  drew  nigh,  .he  should  die 
25  and  he  fell  upon  liim  that  he  died 
30  And  he  said.  Nay;  but  I  will  die  here 
37  for  certain  that  thou  shalt  surely  die 
42  day  thou  goest  out . .  thou  shalt  surely  die 

46  went  out,  and  fell  upon  him,  that  he  died 

19  And  this  woman's  child  died  in  the  night 
18  all  Israel  stoned  him.  .that  he  died 

11  Him  that  dieth  of  Jeroboam  in  the  city 
11  him  that  dieth  in  the  field  shall  the 


DIB 


255 


DIFFERENCE 


i  Ki.  14 
14. 

16, 
16. 
16. 
16. 

19. 
21. 
21. 


iKi. 


[Ch. 


i3< 

19. 

23- 

24. 

29. 

2  Ch.  10, 

13- 
16, 


Job 


34- 

36, 

42, 
Psa.  41, 

49. 

82. 

118. 

Prov.  5. 

10. 

iS- 

19, 

23' 

3^ 


Eccl. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


12  enter  into  the  city,  the  child  shall  die 
17  came  to  the  threshold,  .the  child  died 
4  Him  that  dieth  of  Baasha  in  the  city 
4  him  that  dieth  of  his  in  the  fields  shall 
i3  burnt  the  king's  house  over  him.  .and  died 
22  so  Tibni  died,  and  Omri  reigned 

12  and  my  son,  that  we  may  eat  it,  and  die 
4  requested  for  himself  that  he  might  die 

10  carry  him  out,  and  stone  him,  that  he . .  d. 

13  and  stoned  him  with  stones,  that  he  died 
24  Him  that  dieth  of  Ahab  in  the  city  the 
24  him  that  dieth  in  the  field  shall  the  fowls 
35  was  stayed  up  iu  his  chariot,  .and  died 
37  the  king  died,  and  was  brought  to  Suma. 

4,  6,  16  Thou  shalt  not  come.,  but  shalt..  die 

17  he  died  according  to  the  word  of  the  LORD 
20  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon,  and.  .died 

3  they  said.  .Why  sit  we  here  until  we  die? 

4  famine  (is)  in  the  city,  and  we  shall  die 
4  and  if  we  sit  still  here,  we  die  also 

4  and  if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  but  die 

20  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate,  and  he  died 
10  hath  showed  me  that  he  shall  surely  die 

15  and  spread  (it)  on  his  face,  so  that  he  died 

27  And  he  fled  to  Megiddo,  and  died  there 

21  his  servants,  smote  him,  and  he  died 

14  sick  of  his  sickness  whereof  he  died 
20  And  Elisha  died,  and  they  buried  him 

24  Hazael  king  of  Syria  died ;  and  Ben-hadad 
32  take  you  away,  .ye  may  live,  and  not  die 

1  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live 
34  and  he  came  to  Egypt,  and  died  there 

25  smote  Gedaliah,  that  he  died,  and  the 
51  Hadad  died  also.    And  the  dukes  of  Ed. 
30  but  Seled  died  without  children 

32  and  J  ether  died  without  children 

5  he  fell  likewise  on  the  sword,  and  died 

6  So  Saul  died,  and  his  three  sons 

6  and  all  his  house  died  together 

13  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  which  he 

10  smote  him . .  and  there  he  died  before  God 

1  the  king  of  the  children  of  Amnion  died 

22  And  Eleazar  died,  and  had  no  sons,  but 

2  Nadab  and  Abihu  died  before  their  father 

28  he  died  in  a  good  old  age,  full  of  days 

18  and.  .stoned  him  with  stones,  that  he  died 

20  and  the  Lord  struck  him,  and  he  died 

13  died  in  the  one  and  fortieth  year  of  his 
34  the  time  of  the  sun  going  down  he  died 

19  bowels  fell  out :  so  he  died  of  sore  diseases 

15  and  was  full  of  days  when  he  died 

25  slew  him  on  his  bed,  and  he  died :  and 
4  The  fathers  shall  not  die  for  the  children 
4  neither  shall  the  children  die  for  the  fath. 

4  but  every  man  shall  die  for  his  own  sin 

11  persuade  you  to  give  over  yourselves  to  d. 

24  they  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  and  he  d. 
9  Theu  said  his  wife,  .curse  God,  and  die 

11  "Wiry  died  I  not  from  the  womb?  (why) 

21  go  away?  they  die,  even  without  wisdom 
2  No  doubt . .  and  wisdom  shall  die  with  you 

8  and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  ground  - 
10  But  man  dieth,  and  wasteth  away ;  yea 

14  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  (again)?  all 

23  One  dieth  in  his  full  strength,  being 

25  another  dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  bis  soul 

20  In  a  moment  shall  they  die,  and  the  peo. 
14  They  die  in  youth,  and  their  life  (is) 

17  So  Job  died,  (bemS)  ol(i  an(i  full  °f  day3 

5  When  shall  he  die,  and  his  name  perish? 
10  For  he  seeth  (that)  wise  men  die,  likewise 

7  ye  shall  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of 
17  I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the 

23  He  shall  die  without  instruction;  and  in 

21  feed  many:  but  fools  die  f  or  want  of  wisd. 
10  (and)  he  that  hateth  reproof  shall  die 

16  (but)  he  that  despiseth  his  ways  shall  die 
13  for  (if)  thou  beatest.  .he  shall  not  die 

7  Two  (things)  deny  me.  .not  before  I  die 

16  And  how  dieth  the  wise!(man)?  as  the  fool 
2  A  time  to  be  born,  and  a  time  to  die 

17  why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time? 

5  For  the  living  know  that  they  shall  die  : 

13  eat  and  drink,  for  tomorrow  we  shall  die 

14  shall  not  be  purged  from  you  till  ye  die 

18  there  shalt  thou  die,  and  there  the  char. 

1  Set . .  in  order :  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not 

2  their  fish  stinketh.  .and  dieth  for  thirst 

6  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like 

12  be  afraid  of  a  man  (that)  shall  die,  and 
14  that  he  should  not  die  in  the  pit,  nor  that 

5  he  that  eateth  of  their  eggs  dieth,  and 

20  the  cliild  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old 

24  for  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall 

21  Prophesy  not.  .that  thou  die  not  by  our 

22  the  young  men  shall  die  by  the  sword 
22  their  sons  and  their  daughters  shall  die 

4  They  shall  die  of  grievous  deaths ;  they 

6  Both  the  great  and  the  small  shall  die  in 
6  there  thou  shalt  die,  and  shalt  be  buried 
6  both  man  and  beast :  they  shall  die  of  a 

9  He  that  abideth  in  this  city  shall  die  by 

12  But  he  shall  die  in  the  place  whither  they 

26  into  another  country.  .andthere',shallyed. 

8  took  him,  saying,  Thou  shalt  surely  die 

13  Why  will  ye  die,  thou  and  thypeople  by 

16  this  year  thou  shalt  die,  because  thou  hast 

17  Hananiah  the  prophet  died  the  same  year 
30  every  one  shall  die  for  his  own  iniquity 

.    4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  . .  Thou  shalt  not  die 

5  (But)  thou  shalt  die  in  peace :  and  with 
20  cause  me  not  to  return,  .lest  I  die  there 


Jer.  38. 


Eze. 


18. 
24. 
28, 

28. 

33< 
33' 
33' 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
„        33' 

Hos.  13, 
Amos  2, 

6, 
7- 
7- 
9' 

Jon.  4. 
Hab.  1. 
Zech.ij: 


2  He  that  remaineth  in  tlus  city  shall  die 
10  take  up  Jeremiah  the  prophet . .  before  he  d. 
24  Let  no  man  know . .  and  thou  shalt  not  die 
26  he  would  not  cause  me  to  return,  .to  die 

16  famine,  .shallfollow.  .and  there  ye  shall  d. 

17  they  shall  die  by  the  sword,  by  the  famine 
22  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die  by  the 
12  shall  die,  from  the  least,  .unto  the  great. 
iS  Thou  shalt  surely  die ;  and  thou  givest 

18  the  same  wicked  (man)  shall  die  in  his 

19  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity;  but  thou  hast 

20  a  stumbling  block  before  him,  he  shall  d. 
20  he  shall  die  in  his  sin,  and  his  righteous. 
12  A  third  part  of  thee  shall  die  with  the 

12  He  that  is  far  off  shall  die  of  the  pestilence 

12  he  that,  .is  besieged  shall  die  by  the 

15  he  that  (is)  in  the  field  shall  die  with  the 

13  that  Palatiah  the  son  of  Benaiah  died 

13  shall  not  see  it,  though  he  shall  die  there 
19  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  die,  and 

16  (even)  with  him  in  the  midst . .  he  shall  die 
4,  20  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die 

13  he  shall  surely  die ;  his  blood  shall  be 

17  he  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  his 

18  lo,  even  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity 

21,  28  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die 
24  in  his  sin.  .he  hath  sinned .  .shall  he  die 
26  committeth  iniquity,  and  dieth  in  them 

26  iniquity  that  he  hath  done  shall  he  die 

31  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ? 

32  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  die. 
18  at  even  my  wife  died  ;  and  I  did  in  the 

8  thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  (them  that 

10  Thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  the 

8  0  wicked  (man),  thou  shalt  surely  die 

8  that  wicked  (man)  shall  die  in  his  iniquity 

9  if  he  do  not  turn . .  he  shall  die  in  his 

11  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ? 

13  but  for  his  iniquity .  .he  shall  die  for  it 

14  I  say  unto  the  wicked,  Thou  shalt  surely  d. 

15  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die 
18  committeth  iniquity,  he  shall  even  die 

27  they,  .in  the  caves  shall  die  of  the 

1  but  when  he  offended  in  Baal,  he  died 

2  Moab  shall  die  with  tumult,  with 

9  if  there  remain  ten  men.  .they  shall  die 
n  Jeroboam  shall  die  by  the  sword,  and 
17  and  thou  shalt  die  in  a  polluted  land 
10  the  sinners  of  my  people  shall  die  by  the 

8  he.fainted,  and  wished  in  himself  to  die 

12  my  God,  mine  Holy  One  ?  we  shall  not  d. 

9  that  that  dieth,  let  it  die  ;  and  that  that 


3.  To  he  put  to  death,  no  muth,  6. 

Eze.  18. 13  he  shall  surely  die  ;  his  blood  shall  be 

4.  To  fall,  h%i  naphal. 

Gen.  25. 18  he  died  in  the  presence  of  all  his  breth. 

5.  To  die  off  or  away,  airo6v7]<Tfcco  apotlmesko. 
Matt.22.  24  Moses  said,  If  a  man  die,  having  no 

22.  27  And  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 
26.  35  Though  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet 

Marki2.  19  If  a  man's  brother  die,  and  leave  (his) 
12.  20  first  took  a  wife,  and  dying  left  no  seed 
12.  21  the  second  took  her,  and  died,  neither 
12.  22  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

Lukeio,  22  the  beggar  died,  and  was  carried  by 
16.  22  the  rich  man  also  died,  and  was  buried 
20.  28  If  any  man's  brother  die,  having  a  wife 
20.  28  he  die  without  children,  that  his  brother 
20.  29  took  a  wife,  and  died  without  children 
20.  30  the  second  took  her  to  wife,  and  he  died 
20.  31  and  they  left  no  children,  and  died 
20.  32  Last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

20.  36  Neither  can  they  die  any  more  :  for 
John  4.  49  Sir,  come  down  ere  my  child  die 

6.  50  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  die 
8.  2T  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  die  in  your 
8.  24,  24  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins 
11. 16  Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with  him 
11.  26  And  whosoeverJiveth .  .shall  never  die 
11.  32  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died 
11.  37  that  even  this  man  should  not  have  died  ? 
11.  50  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people 

11.  51  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation 

12.  24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall,  .and  die 

12. 24  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit 
12.  33  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 

18.  32  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 

19.  7  We  have  a  law . .  by  our  law  he  ought  to  d. 

21.  23  that  that  disciple  should  not  die 

21.  23  Jesus  said  not  unto  him,  He  shall  not  d. 

Acts   9.  37  it  came  to  pass . .  that  she  was  sick,  and  d. 

21.  13  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the 

25. 11  tiling  worthy  of  death,  I  refuse  not  to  d. 

Rom.  5.   6  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly 

5.    7  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die 

5,    7  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die 

5.  8  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for 

6.  9  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth 

6.  10  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin  once 

7.  9  when  the  commandment  came . .  I  died 
8. 13  For  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die 

8.  34  (It  is)  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather 

14.    7  For  none . .  and  no  man  dieth  to  himself 
14.    8  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord 
14.    8  whetherwe  live . .  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's 
14.    9  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose 

14.  15  Destroy  not  him .  .for  whom  Christ  died 

1  Co.  8.  11  weak  brother  perish,  forwhom  Christ  d.  ? 
9. 15  for  (it  were)  better  for  me  to  die 

15.  3  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  accord. 


1  Co.  15.  22  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
15.  31  which  I  have  in  Christ  Jesus.  .1  die  daily 
15.  32  eat  and  drink;  for  tomorrow  we  die 

15.  36  that,  .is  not  quickened,  except  it  die 

2  Co.    5. 14  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead 
5.  15  (that)  he  died  for  all,  that  they  which  live 

5.  15  hini  which  died  for  them,  and  rose  again 

6.  9  as  dying,  and,  behold,  we  live ;  as  chast. 
Phil.    1.  21  to  live  (is)  Christ,  and  to  die  (is)  gain 

1  Th.  4. 14  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose 
5.  10  Who  died  for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake 

Heb.    7.    8  And  here  men  that  die  receive  tithes 

9.  27  And  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  d. 

10.  28  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without 

11.  13  These  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  receiv. 
Rev.    3.    2  things  which  remain,  that  are  ready  to  d. 

8.    9  which  were  in  the  sea,  and  had  life,  died 

8,  11  and  many  men  died  of  the  waters 

9.  6  and  shall  desire  to  die  ;  and  death  shall 

14. 13  Blessed  (are)  the  dead  which  die  in  the 

16.  3  and  every  living  soul  died  in  the  seaj 

6.  To  loose  off,  destroy,  air6\Kvp.i  apoUumi. 

John  18.  14  that  one  man  should  [die]  for  the  people 

7.  To  die,  he  dying,  Op^o-kw  thnesko. 

John  11.  21  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died 
S.To  end  {life),  TtAevrdw  teleutao. 

Matt  15.  4  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the 
Mark  7.  10  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the 
9.  44  Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire 
9.  46,  48  Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the 
Luke  7.  2  servant,  who.  .was  sick,  and  ready  to  die 
Acts  7.  15  Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  died 
Heb.  11.  22  Joseph,  when  he  died,  made  mention  of 

9.  To  destruction,  e*s  airwX^iau  eis  apoleian. 

Acts  25. 16  to  deliver  any  man  to  die,  before  that  he 

DIE,  to  cause  to  — 

To  put  to  death,  cause  to  die,  no  muth,  5. 
1  Sa.  28.   9  snare  for  my  life,  to  cause  me  to  die? 

DEE,  to  be  like  to,  or  must  — 
To  die,  no  muth. 

Deut.  4.  22  I  must  die  in  this  land,  I  must  not  go 

31. 14  thy  days  approach  that  thou  must  die 

1  Sa.  14.  43  that  (was)  in  mine  hand,  .lo,  I  must  die 
Jer.  38.    9  he  is  like  to  die  for  hunger  in  the  place 

DEE  -with,  to— 

To  die  off  with,  <TvvatroQvr]0'KQ}  sunapothnesko. 
Marki4.  31  If  I  should  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny 

2  Co.  7.   3  ye  are  in  oiu-  hearts  to  die  and  live  with 
DEED  — 

Death,  no  maveth. 

Gen.  50.  16  Thy  father  did  command  before  he  died 

Kiini26.  10  with  Korah,  when  that  company  died 
33.  39  hundred  and  twenty  three . .  when  he  died 

Deut 34.  7  hundred  and  twenty  years  old  when  he  d. 

2  Ch.  24. 15  hundred  and  thirty  years,  .when  he  died 
24.  22  when  he  died,  he  said,  The  Lord  look 

Isa.     6.    1  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  died  I  saw 

14.  28  In  the  year  that  king  Aliaz  died  was  this 
DEED,  which  — 
Fallen  thing,  carcase,  nhil  nehelah. 

Lev.  17. 15  that  eateth  that  which  died  (of  itself) 
DIET  — 
Usual  or  custornary  diet  or  allowance,  Tfip$  aruchah. 

Jer.  52.  34  (for)  his  diet,  there  was  a  continual  diet 

DIETH  of  itself,  (beast  that)  — 

Fallen  thing,  carcase,  n?33  nehelah. 

Lev.    7.  24  the  fat  of  the  beast  that  dieth  of  itself 

22.    8  That  which  dieth  of  itself,  or  is  torn 
Deut'14.  31  not  eat  (of)  any  thing  that  dieth  of  itself 
Eze. '  4.  14  not  eaten  of  that  which  dieth  of  itself 

DIFFER  from,  to  — 

To  hear  or  carry  diversely,  Sicupepco  diaphero. 
1  Co.  15.  41  (one)  star  differeth  from  (another)  star 
Gal.    4.    1  differeth  nothing  from  a  servant,  though 

DIFFER,  to  make  to  — 

To  judge  diversely,  StaKpivw  diakrino. 

1  Co.  4.    7  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  (from  another)? 

DIFFERENCE  — 

1,  Division,  act  of  dividing,  Staipeais  diairesis. 

1  Co.  12.   5  there  are  differences  of  administrations 
2.A  sending  apart,  distinction,  Biao-roXr}  diastole, 
Rom.  3.  22  and  upon  all  them .  .there  is  no  difference 
10. 12  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew 

DIFFERENCE  between  — 

To  divide  into  parts,  pepifa  mwizo* 

1  Co.  7.  34  There  is  difference  (also)  between  a  wife 

DIFFERENCE,  to  make  a  — 
l.To  separate,  hi?  badal,  5. 

Lev.  11.  47  To  make  a  difference  between  the  unclean 

2.  To  judge  diversely,  BiaKplvw  diakrino. 

Jude      22  of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  diff. 
DIFFERENCE,  to  put  (a)  — 
l.To  separate,  Sna  badal,  5. 

Lev.  10.  10  that  ye  may  put  difference  between  holy 
20.  25  therefore  put  difference  between  clean 

Eze.  22.  26  they  have  put  no  difference  between  the 


DIFFERING 


256 


DIPPED 


2.  To  make  a  separation,  n??  palah,  5. 

Exodn.    7  the  Lord  doth  "put  a  difference  between 

3.  To  judge  diversely,  dtaKptvat  diakrino. 

Acts  15.    9  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them 

DIFFERING  — 

Bearing  diversely,  different,  Stdtyopos  diaphoros. 
Rorn  12.    6  Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to 

DIG,  to  — 

l.To  seek,  dig,  search,  n*n  chrrphar. 

Gen.  21.  30  witness  unto  me,  that  I  have  digged  this 
26.  15  which  his  father's  servants  had  digged 
26.  18  Isaac  digged  again  the  wells  of  water 
26.  18  which  they  had  digged  in  the  days  of 
26.  19  Isaac's  servants  digged  in  the  valley,  and 
26.  21  they  digged  another  well,  and  strove  for 
26.  22  removed  from  thence,  and  digged  another 
26.  32  concerning  the  well  which  they  had  dig. 
Exod.  7.  24  the  Egyptians  digged  round  about  the 
>"uni2i.  18  The  princes  digged  the  well,  the  nobles  of 
Deut.23.  13  thou  shalt  dig  therewith,  and  shalt  turn 
Job     3.  21  and  dig  fof  it  more  than  for  hid  treasures 

11.  18  yea,  thou  shalt  dig  (about  thee,  and)  thou 
Psa.     7.  15  He  made  a  pit,  and  digged  it,  and  is  fallen 

35.    7  (which)  without  cause  they  have  digged 
Eccl.io.    8  He  that  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  into  it 
Jer.    13.    7  I  went  to  Euphrates,  and  digged,  and 

2.  To  hcio,  dig,  3*n  chatsah. 

Deut.  6.  11  and  wells  digged,  which  thou  diggedst 

8.  9  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  brass 
2  Ch.26.  10  he  built  towers,  .and  digged  many  wells 
Neh.  9.  26  houses  full  of  all  goods,  wells  digged 

3.  To  dig  through,  "mn  chathar. 

Eze.     8.    8  dignowinthe  well :  and  when  Ihaddigged 

12.  5  Dig  thou  through  the  wall  iD  their  sight 
12.   7  I  diggecLthrough  the  wall  with  mine  hand 

12.  12  they  shall  dig  through  the  wall  to  carry 
Amos  9.    2  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence  shall 

4.  To  dig,  prepare,  nis  karah. 

Gen.  26.  25  and  therelsaac's  servants  digged  a  well 
50.  5  in  my  grave  which  I  have  digged  for  me 
Exodsx.  33  if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pit,  and  not  cover 
Numai.  18  the  nobles  of  the  people  digged  it,  by  (the) 
Job  6.  27  ye  overwhelm  the  fatherless,  and  ye  dig  a 
Psa.  57.  6  they  have'digged  a  pit  before  me,  into  the 
119.  85  The  proud  have  digged  pits  for  me,  which 
Prov  16.  27  An  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  evil 

26.  27  Whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  therein 

Jer.    18.  20  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  for  my  soul 

18.  22  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  to  take  me 

5.  To  dig,  "Up  qur. 

2  Ki.  19.  24  I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters 
Isa.  37.  25  I  have  digged,  and  drunk  water ;  and  with 

6.  To  dig,  6pv<r<TCt>  orusso,  bpvTrta. 

Mattax.  33  digged  a  wine  press  in  it,  and  built  a 
25.  18  digged  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord's 
Marki2.    1  digged  (a  place  for)  the  winefat,  and  built 

l.To  delve,  scoop,  holloio  out,  o"<ca7rTco  skapto. 
Luke  6.  48  man  which  built  an  house,  and  digged 

13.  8  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  (it) 
16.    3  I  cannot  dig  ;  to  beg  I  am  ashamed 

DIG  down,  to  — 

l.To  root  out,  ipy  aqo/r,  3. 

Gen.  49.   6  in  their  self  will  they  digged  down  a  wall 

2,  To  delve  beneath,  undermine,  KaraaKairTco  kata. 
Rom  11.    3  killed  thy  prophets,  and  digged  down 

DIG  through,  to  — 

To  dig  through,  "inn  chatliar. 

Job  24. 16  they  dig  through  houses  (which)  they 

DIGGED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  he  prepared,  digged,  nns  karah,  2. 

Psa.  94. 13  until  the  pit  be  digged  for  the  wicked 

2.  To  be  picked  out,  "ipi  naqar,  4. 

Isa.  51.    1  the  hole  of  the  pit  (whence)  ye  are/ligged 

3.  To  be  set  in  order,  arranged,  Y1J7  aaar,  2. 

Isa.     5.    6  it  shall  not  be  pruned  nor  digged 
7.  25  (on)  all  hills  that  shall  be  digged 
DIGNITY  — 
1, Greatness,  n^is,  Mjnj  gedullah,  gedulah. 

Esth.  6.    3  What  honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done 
I.High  place,  DnD  niarom. 

Eccl.io.    6  Folly  is  set  in  great  dignity,  and  the 
3. A  lifting  up,  exaltation,  nNiy  seeth. 

Gen.  49.    3  excellency  of  dignity,  and  the  excellency 

Hab.   1.    7  their  dignity  shall  proceed  of  themselves 

A.Glory,  esteem,  reputation,  86£a  doxa. 

2  Pe.   2.  10  not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of  dignities 
Jude        8  despise  dominion .  speak  evil  of  dignities 

DIK'-LAH,  nSpi  pahn  grove. 

A  son  of  Joktan  of  the  family  of  Sheni,  whose  offspring 

inhabited  a  district  in  Arabia,  B.C.  2240. 

Gen.  10.  27  And  Hadoram,  and  Tzal,  and  D. 

1  Ch.  1.  21  Hadoram  also,  and  Uzal.  and  D 
DIL'-EAN,  |jf^|  gourd. 
A  city  in  the  plains  of  Judah. 

Josh  15.  38  And  D.,  and  Mizpeh,  and  Joktheel 


DILIGENCE  — 

1. Guard,  charge,  ~\&&t?  mishmar. 

Prov.  4.  23  Keeptiiy  heart  with  all  diligence;  for  out 

2.  Work,  epyaaia  crgasia. 

Lukei2.  58  give  diligence  that  thou  mayest  be  deliv. 
3. Haste,  speed,  o-irovhi)  spoude. 

Rom.  1 2.    8  he  that  ruleth,  with  diligence;  he  that 
2  Co.   8.    7  (in)  all  diligence,  and  (in)  your  love  to  us 
Heb.   6.  11  do  show  the  same  diligence  to  the  full 
2  Pe.    1.    5  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith 
Jude        3  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to  write  unto 

DILIGENCE,  to  do  or  give  — 

To  use  haste  or  speed,  <T7rou5a£«  spoudazo. 

2  Ti.  4.  9  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me 
4.  21  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter 

2  Pe.   1.  10  give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and 

DILIGENT  — 

l.To  be  searched  out,  b'?n  chaphas,  4. 

Psa.  64.  6  they  accomplish  a  diligent  search 
2.Diligent,  sharp)  pointed,  determined,  rnn  charuts. 

Prov  10.   4  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich 
12.  24  The  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule 

12.  27  substance  of  a  diligent  man  (is)  precious 

13.  4  soul  of  the  diligent  shall  be  made  fat 
2i.    5  The  thoughts  of  the  diligent  (tend)  only 

3.  To  do  good  or  well,  3a;  yatab,  5. 

Deut  13.  14  enquire,  and  make  search,  and  ask  dilig. 
17.  4  hast  heard  (of  it,)  and  enquired  diligently 
19.  18  judges  shall  make  diligent  inquisition 

4.  Might,  "ikt?  meod. 

Deut  4.   9  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget 

24.    8  that  thou  observe  diligently,  and  do 
Josh. 22.    5  take  diligent  heed  to  do  the  commandm. 
Psa. 119.    4  commanded  (us)to  keep.. precepts dilige. 
Jer.     2.  10  send  unto  Kedar,  and  consider  diligently 

5.  Hasty ,  hasting,  thd  mahir. 

Prov  22.  29  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business? 

6. Hasting,  speedy,  o-ttovScuqs  spoudaios. 

2  Co.   8.  22  we  have  oftentimes  proved  diligent  in 
8.  22  but  now  much  more  diligent,  upon  the 

DILIGENT,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  in;  yada. 
Prov  27.  23  Be  thou  diligent  to  know  the  state  of 

2.To  use  haste  or  speed,  a-irovZafa  spoudazo. 

Tit.     3.  12  be  diligent  to  come  unto  me  to  Nicopolis 
2  Pet  3.  14  be  diligent  that  ye  may  he  found  of  him 

DILIGENTLY  — 

1.  Honourably,  diligently,  KnrriNi  adrazda. 

Ezra  7.  23  let  it  be  diligently  done  for  the  house 
%  Attention,  SE'n.  qesheb. 

Isa.  2i.    7  he  hearkened  diligently  with  much  heed 
S.Accurately,  exactly,  aKpifiws  akribds. 

Matt.  2.    8  search  diligently  for  the  young  child 

Acts  18.  25  he  spake  and  taught  diligently  the  Wrings 

i.Carefully,  with  anxiety,  iirt/xekws  epimelos. 

Luke  15.    8  and  seek  diligently  till  she  find  (it)? 
5.  Hastily,  speedily,  virovo'a.lws  spondaios. 

Titus  3.  13  Bring  Zenas  .  .and  Apollos.  .diligently 

DILIGENTLY,  very  — 

More  speedily  or  hastily,  (Twovocuorepov  spoudaiot. 

2  Ti.    1.  17  he  sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and 
[See  also  Consider,  observe,  seek,  teach.] 
DIM,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  or  become  dark  or  dim,  ^n  chashak. 

Lam.  5  17  for  these  (things)  our  eyes  are  dim 

2.  To  be  or  become  weak,  nnz  kahah. 

Gen.  27.    1  when  Isaac  was  old,  and  his  eyes  were  d. 
Deut  34,    7  his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force 
Job   17.    7  Mine  eye  also  is  dim  by  reason  of  sorrow 

3.  To  look,  be  dazzled,  nj>^  shaah. 

Isa,  32.   3  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  dim 
4  To  be  heavy,  weighty,  133  kabed. 

Gen.  48. 10  Now  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age 
5.  To  stand,  stand  still,  Dip  quni. 

1  Sam  4.  15  his  eyes  were  dim,  that  he  could  not  see 
DEM,  to  become  — 
To  become  concealed,  darkened,  ddjj  amam,  6. 

Lam.  4.    1  How  is  the  gold  become  dim  !  (how)  is  the 
DIM,  to  wax  — 
Becoming  weak,  dim,  nna  kehah. 

1  Sa.   3.    2  and  his  eyes  began  to  wax  dim,  (that)  he 
DIMINISH,  to  — 
l.To  diminish,  withdraw,  Ti}  gara. 

Exod  5.    8  ye  shall  not  diminish  (ought)  thereof 

21.  10  her  duty  of  marriage,  shall  he  not  dimin. 

Deut  4.  2  neither  shall  ye  diminish  (ought)  from  it 
12.  32  not  add  thereto,  nor  diminish  from  it 

Jer.  26.    2  to  speak  unto  them  ;  diminish  not  a  word 

Eze.     5.  11  therefore  will  I  also  diminish  (thee) 

16.  27  I.  .have  diminished  thine  ordinary  (food) 
2.  To  make  few  or  small,  tsyp  maat,  5. 

Lev.  25.  16  thou  shalt  diminish  the  price  of  it 

Eze.  29.  15  I  will  diminish  them,  that  they  shall  no 


DIMINISHED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  diminished,  withdrawn,  jn?  gara,  2. 

Exod  5.  11  not  ought  of  your  work  shall  be  dimin. 
2.  To  be  or  become  few  or  little,  ayo  maat. 

Pro.  13.  11  Wealth  (gotten)  by  vanity  shall  be  dim. 

Isa.   21.  17  the  mighty  men.  .shall  be  diminished 

Jer.  29.   6  may  be  increased  there,  and  not  dimin. 

DIMINISHING  — 

A  being  less,  smaller,  worse,  rirrnp-a.  hettema. 

Rom  11.  12  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the 
DLM'-NAH,  njrn  dung. 

A  Levitical  city  of  Zebulun.  In  1  Ch.  6.  77  occurs 
Rimmon  (more  accurately  Rimmono).  which  may  be  a 
variation  of  Dimnah,  yet  Rimmon  is  probably  the  real 
name. 

Josh. 21.  35  D.  with  her  suburbs,  Nahalal  with  her 
DIMNESS  — 

1.  Dimness,  weariness,  fjjpa  muaph. 

Isa.     9.    1  the  dimness  (shall)  not  (be)  such  as  (was) 

2.  Dimness,  weariness,  ^yo  mauph. 

Isa.     8.  22  trouble  and  darkness,  dimness  of  anguish 
DI'-MON,  i^y\  river  bed. 
A  city  of  Moab,  the  same  as  Dibon,  (No  1.) 

Isa.    15.   9  For  the  waters  of  D.  shall  be  full  of  blood 
15.    9  for  I  will  bring  more  upon  D.,  lions  upon 

DI-MO'-NAH,  DJiC^. 

A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  probably  the  same  as  Dibon 

(See  Dibon  No  3.) 

Josh  15.  22  And  Kinah,  and  D.,  and  Adadah 
DI'-NAH,  ny"7]  judged  or  avenged. 
Daughter  of  Jacob  by  Leah ;  she  was  violated  by  She- 
chem  son  of  Hanior  when  about  14  or  15  years  of  age. 

B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  30.  21  hare  a  daughter,  and  called  her  name  D. 
34.  1  D  the  daughter  of  Leah,  which  she  bare 
34.  3  And  his  soul  clave  unto  D.  the  daughter 
34.  5  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  defiled  l>.  his 
34.  13  and  said,  because  he  had  defiled  D.  their 
34  25  Simeon  and  Levi,  D.'s  brethren,  took  each 
34.  26  and  took  D.  out  of  Shechem's  house,  and 
46.  15  she  bare  unto  Jacob.,  with  his  daughter  D 

DI-NA-ITES,  K}"'!. 

Assyrian  tribe    carried   to  Samaria    by  Shalmaneser. 

B.C.  721-678. 

Ezra  4.   9  Then(wrote)..theD.,  theApharsathchitcs 
DDNE,  to  — 
l.To  eat,  bnx  akal. 

Gen.  43.  i6for  (these)  men  shall  dine  with  me  at  noon 

2.  To  breakfast,  apio-raw  aristao. 

Luke  11.  37  Pharisee  besought  him  to  dine  with  him 

John2i.  12  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Come  (and)  dine 
21.  15  when  they  had  dined,  Jesus  saith  to  Sim. 
DLN-HA'-BAH,  nrinri. 

The  capital  and  probably  birthplace  of  Bela  son  of 
Beor,  king  of  Edoni,  a  Horite. 

Gen.  36.  32  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  D. 

1  Ch.  1.43  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  D. 
DINNER  — 

1.  Usual  or  customary  dish  or  allowance,  nrjTK- 
Prov.  15.  17  Better  (is)  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love 

2.  Breakfast,  frpta-Tov  ariston. 

Matt22.    4  I  have  prepared  my  dinner :  my  oxen  and 

Luken.  38  that  he  had  not  first  washed  before  dinner 

14.  12  When  thou  makest  a  dinner  or  a  supper 

DIO  NY-SI'-TJS,  Aiovvatos. 

A  convei't,  a  member  of  the  supreme  court  at  Athens. 
Acts  17.  34  among  the  which  (was)D.  the  Areopagite 

DI-O-TRE'-PHES,  Atorpecp^s. 

A  disciple  that  loved  pre-eminence. 

3  John     9  I  wrote  unto  the  church  :  but  D. .  .receiv 
DIP,  to  — 
l.To  moisten,  besprinkle,  S59  tabal. 

Gen.  37.  31  and  dipped  the  coat  in  the  blood 
Exodi2.  22  dip  (it)  in  the  blood  that  (is)  in  the  basin 
Lev.    4.    6  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood 
4.  17  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  (in  some)  of 
9.    9  he  dipped  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  put 
14.    6  shall  dip  them  and  the  living  bird  in  the 
14.  16  the  ipriest  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in 
14.  51  dip  them  in  the  blood  of  the  slain  bird 
Nuni'19.  18  dip  (it)  in  the  water,  and  sprinkle  (it) 
Deut33.  24  and  let  him  dip  his  foot  in  oil 
Ruth  2.  14  and  dip  thy  morsel  in  the  vinegar 

1  Sa.  14.  27  dipped  it  in  an  honeycomb,  and  put  his 

2  Ki.   5.  14  and  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  Jorda. 

8.  15  ilipped  (it)  in  water,  and  spread  (it)  on 

2.  To  dip,  fi&TTTw  bapto. 

Lukei6.  24  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water 
John  1 3.  26  I  shall  give  a  sop,  when  I  have  dipped  (it) 
Rev.  19. 13  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood 

3.  To  dip  in,  ifxfidTrrco  embapto. 

Matt  26.  23  He  that  dippeth  (his)  hand  with  me  in 
Marki4.  20  one  of  the  twelve,  that  dippeth  with  me 
John  13.  26  when  he  had  dipped  the  sop,  he  gave  (it) 

DIPPED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  moistened,  S39  tabal,  2. 

Josh.  3.  15  were  dipped  in  the  brim  of  the  water 


DIRECT 


257 


DISCIPLE 


2.  To  smite,  dash,  JTO  machats. 

Psa.  68.  23  That  thy  foot  may  he  dipped  in  the  blood 
DIRECT,  to  — 
l.To  understand,  ]-2  bin. 

Prov.21.  29  (as  for)  the  upright,  he  directeth  his  way 

2.  To  slwot,  show,  direct,  rrv  yarah,  5. 

Gen.  46.  28  to  direct  his  face  unto  Goshen 
S.To  keep  straight,  direct,  T?;  yashar,  3. 

Prov.  3.    6  acknowledge  him,  and  he  shall  direct  thy 

11.    5  righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  direct 
Isa.  45.  13  and  I  will  direct  all  his  ways 

4.  To  prepare,  establish,  pa  kun,  5. 

Prov  16.    g  but  the  Lori>  directeth  his  steps 
Jer.  10.  23  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his 

5.  To  make  right,  iw?  kosher,  5. 

Eccl.  10. 10  but  wisdom  (is)  profitable  to  direct 

6.  To  give,  |m  nathan. 

Isa.   61.   8  I  will  direct  their  work  in  truth,  and  I 

7.  To  arrange,  set  in  array,  Ti'J.  arak. 

Job  32.  14  hath  not  directed  (his)  words  against  me 
Psa.    5.   3  in  the  morning  will  I  direct  (my  prayer) 

3.  To  direct,  let  loose,  .Yj[S  sharah. 

Job    37.    3  He  directeth  it  under  the  whole  heaven 
8. To  weigh,  ponder,  mete  out,  J3IJ  takan,  3. 

Isa.   40.  13  Who  hath  directed  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 

10.  To  make  thoroughly  straight,  KaTevditva*. 

1  Th.  3.  11  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto 

2  Th.  3.    5  the  Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love 

DIRECTED,  to  be  — 

To  be  prep>ared,  established,  j'3  knn,  2. 

Psa.  1 19.   5  0  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep 
DIRECTLY  — 
l.Bending  to,  direct,  pn  hagin. 

Eze.  42.  12  the  way  directly  before  the  wall  toward 
2.0  ver  against,  straightforward,  roi  nokecch. 

Num  19.   4  sprinkle  of  her  blood  directly  before  the 
DIRT  — 
1.  Mire,  mud,  D'B  tit. 

Psa.  18.  42  cast  them  out  as  the  dirt  in  the  streets 

Isa.  57.  20  whose  waters  cast  up  inire  and  dirt 

•2.  Dung,  fundament,  porch,  nrieHS  parsheclonah. 
Judg.  3.  22  out  of  his  belly ;  and'  the  dirt  came  out 
IISALLOW,  to  — 
l.To  discourage,  break,  disallow,  N13  no,  5. 

Nuni3o.    5  if  her  father  disallow  her  in  the  day  that 
30.    5  because  her  father  disallowed  her 
30.   8  if  her  husband  disallowed  her  on  the  day 

30.  11  held  his  peace  at  her,  (and)  disallowed 

'l.To  disapprove  off,  <x7ro5oKtua£a>  apodokiinazo. 
1  Pe.   2.    4  disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of 
2.    7  the  stone  which  the  builders  disallowed 

disannul,  to  — 

1 .  To  break,  make  void,  113  parar,  5. 

Job  40.    8  "Wilt  thou  also'  disannul  my  judgment  ? 

Isa.   14.  27  hath  purposed,  and  who  shall  disannul 
'l.To put  aside,  a06Teo>  atheteo. 

Gal.    3. 15  no  man  disannulleth,  or  addeth  thereto 

3.  To  deprive  of  lordship,  a.Kvp6a  akuroo. 

Gal.     3.  17  the  covenant . .  cannot  disannul,  that  it 
DISANNULLED,  to  be  — 
To  be  covered,  weakened,  nsa  kaphar,  4. 

Isa.  28. 18  covenant  with  death  shall  be  disannulled 
DISANNULLING  — 
A  putting  aside,  aBernats  athetosis. 

Heb.   7.  iS  there  is  verily  a  disannulling  of  the  com. 
DISAPPOINT,  to  — 
1 .  To  break,  make  void,  f\5  parar,  5. 

Job     5. 12  disappointeth  the  devices  of  the  crafty 
'l.To  go  or  come  before,  dt[?  qadam,  3. 

Psa.  17. 13  Arise,  0  Lord,  disappoint  him,  cast  him 
DISAPPOINTED,  to  be  — 
To  break,  make  void,  "HS  parar,  5. 

Prov.  15.  22  Without  counsel  purposes  are  disappoint. 
DISCERN,  to  — 
l.To  understand,  consider,  discern,  |'3  bin. 

Prov.  7.    7  I  discerned  among  the  youths,  a  young 
l.To  cause  to  understand,  instruct,  |*3  bin,  5. 

1  EX  3.   9  that  I  may  discern  between  good  and  bad 

3.  To  knmv,  be  acquainted  with,  sn;  yada. 

Eccl.  8.    5  and  a  wise  man's  heart  discerneth  both 

4.  To  discern,  acknowledge,  "03  nakar,  5. 

Gen.  27.  23  he  discerned  him  not,  because  his  hands 

31.  32  before  our  brethren  discern  thou  what  (is) 
38.  25  Discern,  I  pray  thee,  whose  (are)  these 

1  Ki.20.  41  the  king  of  Israel  discerned  him  that  he 

5.  To  see,  nso  raah. 

Mai.    3. 18  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the 
6.7*0  hear,  vay  shama. 

2  Sa.  14. 17  so  (is)  my  lord  the  king,  to  discern  good 
1  Ki.  3. 11  asked,  .understanding  to  discern 

7.  To  judge  closely,  examine,  avaKpivcc  anakrino. 
1  Co.   2. 14  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned 

33 


S.  To  judge  thoroughly,  StaKplva)  diakrino. 
Matt  16.    3  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky 

1  Co.  1 1.  29  drinketh.  .not  discerning  the  Lord's  body 

9.  To  make  proof,  $QKi/j.d£a>  dokimazo. 

Lukei2.  56  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  and 

12.  56  how  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time  ? 

10.  Toward  a  thorough  judging,  trpos  Stdxpia-tv. 
Heb.   5. 14  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 

DISCERN,  can— 

l.To  know ,  be  acquainted  with,  yv  yada. 

2  Sa.  19.  35  (and)  can  I  discern  between  good  and  evil? 
Jon.     4.  11  that  cannot  discern  between  their  right 

l.To  understand,  consider,  discern,  }*2  bin. 

Job     6.  30  cannot  my  taste  discern  perverse  things? 

3. To  discern,  acknov)ledge,  id:  nakar,  5. 

Ezra  3.  13  the  people  could  not  discern  the  noise 
Job     4.  16  It  stood  still,  but  I  could  not  discern  the 

DISCERN,  to  cause  — 

To  cause  to  know  or  discern,  JTV  yada,  5. 

Eze.  44.  23  and  cause  them  to  discern  between  the 
DISCERNER  — 
Critic,  judge,  koitikSs  hritikos. 

Heb.  4.  12  and  (is)  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and 
DISCERNING  — 
^4  thorough  judging,  BtaKptais  diakrisis. 

1  Co.  12. 10  prophecy;  to  another  discerning  of  spirits 
DISCHARGE  — 
.•1  sending  away,  nn^p  mishlachath. 

Eccl.  8.    8  and  (there  is)  no  discharge  in  (that)  war 
DISCHARGES,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  spread  out,  y$i  naphats,  3. 

1  Ki.    5.    9  and  will  cause  them  to  be  discharged 

DISCIPLE  — 

1.  Taught  or  trained  one,  "ND?  limriutd. 

Isa.     8.  16  Bind  up.  .seal  the  law  among  my  discip. 

2.  Taught  or  frained  one,  fxaOvrris  mathetes. 
Matt.  5.    1  when  he  was  set,  his  disciples  came  unto 

8.  21  another  of  his  disciples  said  unto  him 
8.  23  when  he  was  entered,  .his  disciples 

8.  25  [his  disciples]  came  to  (him),  and  awoke 

9.  10  and  sat  down  with  him  and  his  disciples 
9.  11  they  said  unto  his  disciples,  Why  eateth 
9.  14  Then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  John 
9.  14  Pharisees  fast  oft,  but  thy  disciples  fast 
9.  19  and  followed  him,  and  (so  did)  his  disci. 
9.  37  Then  saith  he  unto  his  disciples.  The 

10.    1  he  had  called  unto  (him)  his  twelve  disc. 
10.  24  The  disciple  is  not  above  (his)  master 
10.  25  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as 

10.  42  shall  give . .  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple 

11.  1  an  end  of  commanding  his  twelve  discip. 

11.  2  when  John  had  heard,  .he  sent  two.  .di. 

12.  1  his  disciples  were  an  hungered,  and 

12.    2  thy  disciples  do  that  which  is  not  lawful 

12.  49  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  his  disc. 

13.  10  the  disciples  came,  and  said  unto  him 

13.  36  his  disciples  came  unto  liim,  saying 

14.  12  his  disciples  came,  and  took  up  the  body 
14.  15  when  it  was  evening,  his  disciples  came 
14.  19  loaves  to  (his)  disciples,  and  the  disciples 
14.  22  straightway  Jesus  constrained  his  discip. 

14.  26  when  the  disciples  saw  him  walking 

15.  2  Why  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the 
15.  12  Then  came  his  disciples,  and  said  unto 
15.  23  his  disciples  came  and  besought  him 

15.  32  Then  Jesus  called  his  disciples  (unto  Mm) 
15.  33  his  disciples  say  unto  him,  Whence 

15,  36  gave  to  his  disciples,  and  the  disciples  to 

16.  5  when  his  disciples  were  come  to  the 

16.  13  he  asked  Ms  disciples,  saying,  Whom  do 
16.  20  Then  charged  he  his  disciples  that  they 
16.  21  began  Jesus  to  show  unto  his  disciples 

16.  24  Then  said  Jesus  unto  his  disciples,  If 

17.  6  when  the  disciples  heard  (it),  they  fell 
17. 10  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Why 
17.  13  Then  the  disciples  understood  that  he 

17. 16  I  brought  him  to  thy  disciples,  and  they 

17.  19  Then  came  the  disciples  to  Jesus  apart 

18.  1  At  the  same  time  came  the  disciples  unto 

19.  10  His  disciples  say  unto  Mm,  If  the  case 
19. 13  little  children . .  and  the  disciples  rebuked 
19.  23  Then  said  Jesus  unto  Ms  disciples,  Verily 
19.  25  When  his  disciples  heard  (it),  they  were 

20. 17  took  the  twelve  [disciples]  apart  in  the 
21.    1  drew  nigh . .  then  sent  Jesus  two  disciples 
2i.    6  disciples  went,  and  did  as  Jesus  com. 
21.  20  when  the  disciples  saw  (it),  they  marvel. 
22. 16  they  sent  out  unto  him  their  disciples 

23.  1  to  the  multitude,  and  to  his  disciples 

24.  1  Ms  disciples  came  to  (him)>  f°r  to  show 
24.  3  the  disciples  came  unto  Mm  privately 
26.  1  it  came  to  pass,  .he  said  unto  his  discip. 
26.  8  when  his  disciples  saw  (it),  they  had  indi. 
26.  17  disciples  came  to  Jesus,  saying  unto  him 
26.  iS  I  will  keep  the  passover.  .with  my  disci. 
26.  19  disciples  did  as  Jesus  had  appointed  them 
26.  26  gave  (it)  to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take 
26.  35  Likewise  also  said  all  the  disciples 

26.  36  saith  unto  the  disciples,  Sit  ye  here 

26.  40  he  cometh  unto  the  disciples,  and  findeth 

26.  45  Then  cometh  he  to  his  disciples,  and 

26.  56  Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  him,  and 

27.  64  his  disciples  come  by  night,  and  steal 


Matt  2S 

28. 

28. 

28. 

28. 
Mark  2. 


14, 
16, 
Luke  5. 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6, 
7- 
7 
7- 
8. 
8 
9' 
9 
9- 
9> 
9 
9' 
9' 


John 


,    7  [go  quickly,  and  tell  his  disciples] 

8  [and  did  run  to  bring  his  disciples  word] 

9  [as  they  went  to  tell  his  disciples,  behold] 

13  Say  ye,  His  disciples  came  by  night,  and 
16  the  eleven  disciples  went  away  into 

15  sat  also  together  with  Jesus  and  his  disc. 

16  said  unto  his  disciples,  How  is  it  that  he 
18  the  disciples  of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees 
iS  the  disciples  of  John,  .but  thy  disciples 
23  his  disciples  began,  as  they  went,  to  pluck 

7  Jesus  withdrew  himself  with  his  discipl. 
9  he  spake  to  his  disciples,  that  a  small 

34  he  expounded  all  things  to  his  disciples 
31  his  disciples  said  unto  him,  Thou  seeet 

1  And  he  went  out.  .and  his  disciples 

29  when  his  disciples  heard  (of  it),  they 

35  his  disciples  came  unto  him,  and  said 

41  gave  (them)  to  Ms  disciples  to  set  before 

45  straightway  he  constrained  his  disciples 

2  when  they  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eat 

5  Why  walk  not  thy  disciples  according 

17  Ms  disciples  asked  him  concerning  the 

1  Jesus  called  his  disciples  (unto  him),  and 
4  his  disciples  answered  him,  From  whence 

6  gave  to  his  disciples  to  set  before  (them) 
10  he  entered  into  a  ship  with  his  disciples 
27  Jesus  went  out,  and  hie  disciples 

27  he  asked  his  disciples,  saying  unto  ttiem 

33  But  when  he  had . .  looked  on  his  disciples 

34  wheu  he  had  called,  .his  disciples  also,  he 

14  when  he  came  to  (Ids)  disciples,  he  saw  a 
iS  I  spake  to  thy  disciples  that  they  should 

28  his  disciples  asked  him  privately,  Why 

31  he  taught  Ms  disciples,  and  said  unto 

10  in  the  house  his  disciples  asked  him  again 

13  disciples  rebuked  those  that  brought 

23  Jesus  looked,  .and  saith  unto  his  discip. 

24  the;disciples  were  astonished  at  his  words 

46  he  went  out  of  Jericho  with  his  disciples 
1  he  sendeth  forth  two  of  his  disciples 

14  No  man  eat  fruit.  .And  his  disciples  heard 
43  he  called  (unto  him)  his  disciples,  and 

1  one  of  his  disciples  saith  unto  him,  Mas. 

12  killed  the  passover,  Ms  disciples  said 

13  And  he  sendeth  forth  two  of  his  disciples 

14  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my  disciples 

16  his  disciples  went  forth,  and  came  into 

32  he  saith  to  his  disciples.  Sit  ye  here,  while 

7  go  your  way,  tell  his  disciples  and  Peter 

30  Pharisees  murmured  against  his  disciples 

33  Why  do  the  disciples  of  John  fast  often 

1  Ms  disciples  plucked  the  ears  of  corn,  and 

13  he  called  (unto  him)  his  disciples :  and  of 

17  and  the  company  of  Ms  disciples,  and  a 
20  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  on  his  disciples,  and 
40  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master  :  but 

11  many  of  his  disciples  went  with  him,  and 

18  the  disciples  of  John  showed  him  of  all 

19  John  calling  (unto  him)  two  of  his  disci. 
9  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  What 

22  he  went  into  a  sMp  with  his  disciples 

1  Then  he  called  his  twelve  [disciples]  toge. 

14  he  said  to  his  disciples,  Make  them  sit 

16  gave  to  the  disciples  to  set  before  the 
18  his  disciples  were  with  him :  and  he 

40  I  besought  thy  disciples  to  cast  him  out 
43  while  they  wondered,  .he  said  unto  hisd. 
54  when  his  disciples  James  and  John  saw 

23  he  turned  him  unto  (his)  disciples,  and 
1  one  of  his  disciples  said  unto  him.  Lord 

1  to  pray,  as  John  also  taught  his  disciples 
1  he  began  to  say  unto  his  disciples  first  of 
22  he  said  unto  his  disciples,  Therefore  I 

26  hate  not  his  father,  .he  cannot  be  my  di. 

27  whosoever  doth  not  bear,  .cannot  be  my  .d. 
33  that  forsaketh  not  all.  .cannot  be  my  d. 

1  he  said  also  unto  Ms  disciples,  There  was 

1  Then  said  he  unto  the  disciples,  It  is  im. 
22  he  said  unto  the  disciples.  The  days  will 

1 5  when  (his)  disciples  saw  (it),  they  rebuked 

29  came  to  pass . .  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples 
37  the  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  began 
39  said  unto  him,  Master,  rebuke  thy  disci. 
45  [in  the  audience,  .he  said  unto  his  disci.] 
11  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my  disciples 
39  came  out.  .and  his  disciples  also  followed 
45  when  he.  .was  come  to  his  disciples 

35  Agam.  .John  stood,  and  two  of  his  disci. 
37  the  two  disciples  heard  him  speak,  and 

2  both  Jesus  was  called,  and  his  disciples 

11  manifested  forth  Ms  glory;  and  his  disc. 

12  Ms  mother,  and  his  brethren,  and  his  d. 

1 7  his  disciples  remembered  that  it  was  wri  t . 
22  his  disciples  remembered  that  he  had  said 
22  After  these  tMngs  came  Jesus  and  his  d. 

25  a  question  between  (some)  of  John's  dis. 

1  Jesus  made  and  baptized  more  disciples 

2  Jesus  himself  baptized  not,  but  his  dis. 

8  For  his  disciples  were  gone  away  unto 
27  upon  this  came  Ms  disciples,  and  marv. 

31  In  the  meanwhile  his  disciples  prayed  him 
33  Thereforesaid  thedisciplesone  to  another 

3  went,  .and  there  he  sat  with  his  disciples 
8  One  of  his  disciples,  Andrew,  Simon  P.'s 

11  [to  the  disciples,  and  the  discip.  to  them] 

12  he  said  unto  his  disciples,  Gather  up  the 

16  when  even  was  (now)  come,  his  disciples 
22  [save  that  one  whereinto  his  disciples] 
22  Jesus  went  not  with  Ms  disciples  into  the 
22  but  (that)  his  disciples  were  gone  away 

24  that  Jesus  was  not  there,  neither  his  dis. 
60  Many  therefore  of  his  disciples,  when 


DISCIPLE 


258 


DISGUISE 


John  6.  61  AYhen  Jesus  knew  in  himself  that  his  di. 

6.  66  From  that  (time)  many  of  his  disciples 

7.  3  that  thy  disciples  also  may  see  the  works 

8.  31  If  ye  continue  .  .(then)  are  ye  my  discip. 
g.    2  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Master 

9.  27  He  answered  them,  .will  ye  also  he  his  d. 
9,  28  art  his  disciple ;  but  we  are  Moses'  dis. 

11.  7  after  that  saith  he  to  (iris)  disciples,  Let 
11.  8  (His)  disciples  say  unto  him,  Master,  the 
11.  12  Then  said  his  disciples,  Lord,  if  he  sleep 

11.  54  and  there  continued  with  his  disciples 

12.  4  Then  saith  one  of  his  disciples,  Judas  Is. 

12.  16  These  things  understood  not  his  disciples 

13.  5  began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to 
13.  22  Then  the  disciples  looked  one  on  another 
13.  23  there  was  leaning,  .one  of  his  disciples 
13.  35  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have 

15.  8  bear  much  fruit;  so  shall  ye  be  my  dis. 

16.  17  Then  said  (some)  of  his  disciples  among 
16.  29  His  disciples  said  unto  him,  Lo,  now 

18.    1  he  went  forth  with  his  disciples  over  the 
18.    1  into  the  which  he  entered,  ami  his  dis. 
18.    2  oftimes  resorted  thither  with  his  disci. 
18.  15  Peter  followed  Jesus,  and.  .another  disci. 
18.  16  Then  went  out  that  other  disciple,  which 

18.  17,  25  Art  not  thou,  .(one)  of  this  man's  dis. 
18. 19  high  priest,  .asked  Jesus  of  his  disciples 

19.  26  the  disciple  standing  by  whom  he  loved 
19.  27  Then  saith  he  to  the  disciple,  Behold  thy 
19.  27  from  that  hour  that  disciple  took  her 

19.  38  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  being  a  disciple  of 

20.  2  to  the  other  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 
20.    3  Peter,  .went  forth,  and  that  other  disci. 
20.    4  the  other  disciple  did  outrun  Peter,  and 
20.    8  Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple 
20.  10  the  disciples  went  away  again  unto  their 
20.  18  Magdalene  came  and  told  the  disciples 
20.  19  where  the  disciples  were  assembled  for 
20.  20  Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they 
20.  25  The  other  disciples  therefore  said  unto 
20.  26  again  his  disciples  were  within,  and  Th. 

20.  30  did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  his  disciples 

21.  1  showed  himself  again  to  the  disciples 

ai.    2  of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  of  his  disciples 
21.    4  the  disciples  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus 
21.    7  that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  saith 
21.    8  the  other  disciples  came  in  a  little  ship 
21. 12  none  of  the  disciples  durst  ask  him 
21.  14  that  Jesus  showed  himself  to  his  disciples 
21.  20  seeth  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 
21.  23  that  that  disciple  should  not  die  :  yet 
21.  24  This  is  the  disciple  which  testifieth  of 
Acts    r.  15  stood  up  in  the  midst  of  the  [disciples] 
6.    1  when  the  number  of  the  disciples  was 
6.    2  called  the  multitude  of  the  disciples 
6.    7  the  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied 
9.    1  slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the 
9.  10  there  was  a  certain  disciple  at  Damascus 
g.  19  was  Saul  certain  days  with  the  disciples 
9.  25  the  disciples  took  him  by  night,  and  let 
9.  26  assayed  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples 
9.  26  and  believed  not  that  he  was  a  disciple 
9.  38  the  disciples  had  heard  that  Peter  was 
11.  26  the  disciples  were  called  Christians  first 
1 1.  29  the  disciples,  every  man  according  to  his 

13.  52  the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy,  and 

14.  20  as  the  disciples  stood  round  about  him 
14.  22  Confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples 

14.  28  they  abode  long  time  with  the  disciples 

15.  10  put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples 

16.  1  certain  disciple  was  there,  named  Timot. 
18.  23  in  order,  strengthening  all  the  disciples 

18.  27  exhorting  the  disciples  to  receive  him 

19.  1  Paul,  .to  Ephesus:  and  finding  certain  di. 

19.  9  separated  the  disciples,  disputing  daily 
19.30  the  disciples  suffered  him  not 

20.  1  Paul  called  unto  (him)  the  disciples,  and 
20.    7  when  [the  disciples]  came  together  to 

20.  30  to  draw  away  disciples  after  them 

21.  4  finding  disciples,  we  tarried  there  seven 
21.  16  also  (certain)  of  the  disciples  of  Cesarea 
21.  16  an  old  disciple,  with  whom  we  should 

3..1  female  pupil  or  disciple,  fiaOriTpia  mathetria. 
Act3   0.  36  at  Joppa  a  certain  disciple  named  Tabit. 

DISCIPLE,  to  be  a  — 

T<>  make  or  be  a  disciple,  /jLad-rrrevw  matheteuo. 
Matt2;.  57  who  also  himself  [was  Jesus'  disciple] 

DISCIPLE,  fellow  — 

A  fellow  pupil,  (Tviufj.aQr)TTis  stnnmathet's. 

John  11.  16  said  Thomas,  .unto  Ms  fellow  disciples 

DISCIPLINE  — 

Chastisement,  instruction,  iDip  musar. 

Job    36.  10  He  openeth  also  their  ear  to  discipline 

DISCLOSE,  to  — 

To  remove,  uncover,  reveal,  rh)  galah,  3. 

Isa.   26.  21  the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  blood 

DISCOMFIT,  to  — 

l.To  trouble,  <-r<i*J>,  destroy;  oprr  Jiamam. 

Josh.io.  10  the  Lokd  discomfited  them  before  Israel 
;.  4.  is  the  Lonp  discomfited  Sisera,  and  all  (his) 

1  Sa.    7.  p>  up,.n  the  Philistine?,  and  discomfited 

2  Sa.  23.  15  sent  out.  .lightning,  and  discomfited 
Tsa.  iS.  14  shot  out  lightnings,  and  discomfited  them 

2.7*"  weaken,  rr^j  chafash. 

ISxodi7.  13  Joshua  discomfited  Amalek  and  his  peo. 


3.  To  cause  to  tremble  or  trouble,  Tin  charad,  5. 
Judg.  8.  12  he  pursued,  .and  discomfited  all  the  host 

4.  To  beat  down,  nrj|  kathath,  5. 

Numi4-  45  and  smote  them,  aud  discomfited  them 

DISCOMFITED  — 

Tribute,  tributary,  Dp  mas, 

Isa.   31.    8  and  his  young  men  shall  be  discomfited 

DISCOMFITURE  — 

Trouble,  destruction,  n^n^i  mehumah. 

1  Sa.  14.  20  (and  there  was)  a  very  great  discomfiture 

DISCONTENTED  — 

Bitter,  t?$j  np  mar  nephesh. 

1  Sa.  22.   2  every  one  (that  was)  discontented,  gath. 

DISCONTINUE,  to — 

To  let  go,  release,  Dp#  shamat. 

Jer.   17.   4  shalt  discontinue  from  thine  heritage 

DISCORD  — 

\. Strife,  contention,  pip  madon. 

Prov.  6. 14  he  deviseth  mischief,  .he  soweth  discord 
2. Strifes,  contentions,  D^ip  medanim. 

Prov.  6. 19  and  he  that  soweth  discoid  among  breth. 

DISCOURAGE,  to  — 

l.To  melt,  D?p  masas,  5. 

Deut.  1.  2S  our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  heart 

2.  To  break,  Ki3  no. 

N1UU32.   7  wherefore  discourage  ye  the  heart  of  the 

3.  To  break,  wi  no,  5. 

Nuni32.    9  they  discouraged  the  heart  of  the  children 

DISCOURAGED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  cast  or  broken  down,  nrn  chathath,  2. 

Deut.  1.  21  possess,  .fear  not,  neither  be  discouraged 

2.  To  be  broken,  pfi  ratsats. 

Isa.   42.    4  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  till 

3.  To  he  disheartened,  lose  heart,  b.9vfx4<a  athumeo. 

Col.     3.  21  Fathers,  provoke  not.  .lest  they  be  disc. 
DISCOURAGED,  to  be  much  — 
To  be  or  become  shortened,  nsj5  qatsar. 

Num.  21.    4  soul  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged 
DISCOVER,  to  — 
1.7b  remove,  uncover,  reveal,  n?£  galah,  3. 

Deut  22.  30  A  rian  shall  not. .  discover  his  father's 
Job    12.  22  He  discovereth  deep  things  out  of  dark. 

41.  13  Who  can  discover  the  face  of  his  garment? 
Prov  25.    9  and  discover  not  a  secret  to  another 
Isa.   22.    8  And  he  discovered  the  covering  of  Judah 

57.    8  for  thou  hast  discovered  (thyself  to) 
Lam.  2.  14  they  have  not  discovered  thine  iniquity 

4.  22  0  daughter  of  Edom ;  he  will  discover  thy 
Eze.  16.  37  and  will  discover  thy  nakedness  unto 
22. 10  In  thee  have  they  discovered  their  fath. 
23.  10  These  discovered  her  nakedness  :  they 
23.  18  discovered  her  whoredoms,  and  discovered 
Hos.    2.  10  now  will  I  discover  her  lewdness  in  the 
Mic.    1.    6  I  will  discover  the  foundations  thereof 
Nah.  3.    5  I  will  discover  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face 

2.7b  make  bare,  ?pn  cJutsaph. 

Psa.  29.    9  The  voice  of  the  Lord,  .discovereth  the 
Jer.  13.  26  Therefore  will  I  discover  thy  skirts  upon 

3.7b  make  bare  or  naked,  iT$  arah,  3. 

Isa.     3.  17  the  Lord  will  discover  their  secret  parts 
4.7b  make  bare  or  naked,  nyjt  arah,  5. 

Lev.  20.  iS  he  hath  discovered  her  fountain,  and  she 
5.7b  be  slwwn  up,  ava(paii/o/j.ai  anaphainomai. 

Acts  21.    3  Now  when  we  had  discovered  Cyprus,  we 
6. 7b  perceive  thoroughly,  Karauoeai  katanoeo. 

Acts  27,  39  they  discovered  a  certain  creek  with  a 
DISCOVER  self,  to  — 
1.7b  be  removed,  uncovered,  revealed,  n?3  galah,  2. 

1  Sa.  14.    8  and  we  will  discover  ourselves' unto  them 

14.  11  both  of  them  discovered  themselves  unto 

2. 7b  show  self  uncovered,  revealed,  npa  galah,  7. 

Prov  18.   2  but  that  his  heart  may  discover  itself 
DISCOVERED,  to  he  — 
1.7b  be  removed,  uncovered,  revealed,  n:>3  galah,  2. 

Exod2o.  26  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  discovered 

2  Sa.  22.  16  foundations  of  the  world  were  discovered 
Psa.  iS.  15  foundations  of  the  world  were  discovered 
Jer.  13.  22  For  the  greatness,  .are  thy  skirts  discov. 
Eze.  13.  14  the  foundation  thereof  shall  be  discovered 

16.  36  and  thy  nakedness  discovered  through 
16.  57  Before  thy  wickedness  was  discovered,  as 
21.  24  in  that  your  transgressions  are  discovered 
23.  29  nakedness  of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be  dis. 
Hos.    7.    1  the  iniquity  of  Ephraini  was  discovered 

2.7b  be  or  become  known,  VTT  yada,  2. 

1  Sa.  22.    6  Saul  heard  that  David  was  discovered 
DISCOVERING  — 
To  make  naked,  tt\jjw  arah,  3. 

Hab.    3.  13  by  discovering  the  foundation  unto  the 
DISCREET  — 
l.To  be  intelligent,  home  understanding,  }'?  bin,  2. 

Gen,  41.  33  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  discreet  and 


Gen.  41.  39  none  so  discreet  and  wise  as  thou  (art) 
2.  Of  sound  mind,  (rcixpptcv  sojjhron. 

Titus  2.    5  discreet,  chaste,  keepers  at  home,  good 

DISCREETLY  — 
With  understanding,  vovvex^s  nounechos. 

Marki2.  34  Jesus  saw  that  he  answered  discreetly,  he 
DISCRETION  — 

1.  Taste,  discretion,  sense,  cup  taam. 

Prov  11.  22  a  fair  woman  which  is  without  discretion 

2.  Device,  discretion,,  th  rightfulness,  nptp  mezimmah 

Prov.  1.    4  to  the  young  man  knowledge  and  discre. 

2.  11  Discretion  shall  preserve  thee,  understa. 

3.  21  My  son.  .keep  sound  wisdom  and  discre. 

5.  2  That  thou  mayest  regard  discretion,  and 
%  Judgment,  aftfp  mishpat. 

Psa.112.    5  he  will  guide  his  affairs  with  discretion 

Isa.   28.  26  For  his  God  doth  instruct  him  to  discre. 
^Understanding,  wisdom,  meaning,  hia  sekel. 

Prov  19.  11  The  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his 
5.  Understanding,  skilfidness,  njnri  tebunah. 

Jer.  10. 12  stretchedoutthe  heavens  by  his  discretion 
DISDAIN,  to  — 
1.7b  despise,  contemn,  nia  bazoh. 

1  Sa.  17.  42  when  the  Philistine ..  saw  David,  he  dis. 
2.  To  loathe,  despise.,  reject,  dnd  maas. 

Job  30.    1  whose  fathers  I  would  have  disdained  to 
DISEASE  — 

1.  Sickness,  weak?iess,  *?n  choli. 

2  Ki.  1.    2  whether  I  shall  recover  of  this  disease 

8.  8,  9  saying,  Shall  I  recover  of  this  disease  ? 
2  CI1.16.  12  until  his  disease  (was)  exceeding  (great) 

16.  12  in  his  disease  he  sought  not  to  the  Lord 

2i.  18  the  Lord  smote  him .  .with  an  incurable  d. 

Eccl.  6.    2  this  (is)  vanity,  and  it  (is)  an  evil  disease 

2.  Disease,  sickness,  nyip  madveh. 

Deut.  7.  15  will  put  none  of  the  evil  diseases  of  Egypt 
28.  60  he  will  bring  upon  thee  all  the  diseases 
3. Sickness,  disease,n?nv  machaleh. 

2  Ch.21.  15  thou(shaltnave)great  sickness  by  disease 
i.  Sickness,  disease,  nSnp  machalah. 

Exodis.  26  I  will  put  hone  of  these  diseases  upon 

5.  Thing,  matter,  "ni  dabar. 

Psa.  41.    8  An  evil'disease,  (say  they),  cleaveth  fast 

6.  Want  of  strength,  weakness,  aaQiveta  astheneia. 

Acts  28.    9  which  had  diseases  in  the  island,  came 

7.  Softness,  /xaXaKia  malakia. 

Matt.  4.  23  and  all  manner  of  disease  among  the  peo. 

9.  35  healing  every  sickness  and  every  disease 
10.    1  to  heal,  .all  manner  of  disease 

S.Sickness,  unsoimdness,  v6any.a.  nosema. 

John  5.   4  [made  whole . .  whatsoever  disease  he  had] 
9. Sickness,  unsoundness,  v6ao$  nosos. 

Matt.  4.  24  people  that  were  taken  with  divers  disea. 

Mark  1.  34  healed  many  that  were  sick  of  divers  dis. 

Luke  4.  40  they  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  disea. 

6.  17  which  came . .  to  be  healed  of  their  diseas. 
9.    1  authority  over  all  devils,  and  to  cure  dis. 

Acts  19.  12  the  diseases  departed  from  them,  and  the 
DISEASED,  (to  be)  — 
1. 7b  be  diseased,  sick,  K^n  chala. 

Eze.  34.   4  The  diseased' have  ye  not  strengthened 
34.  21  pushed  all  the  diseased  with  your  horns 

2. To  be  or  become  sick,  or  diseased,  nVn  chalah. 

2  Ch.16.  12  Asa.  .was  diseased  iu  his  feet,  until  his 
3.7b  be  or  become  sick  or  diseased,  n?rt  chalah,  2. 
1  Ki.  15.  23  in  the  time  of  his  old  age  he  was  diseased 

4.  To  lack  strength,  ao-8evea>  astheneo. 

John  6.    2  which  he  did  on  them  that  were  diseased 

5.  To  have  badly,  be  ill,  ix^  fa/ews  echo  kakos. 
Matti4.  35  brought  unto  him  all  that  were  diseased 
Mark  1.  32  brought  unto  him  all  that  were  diseased 

DISEASES— 

1. Sicknesses,  diseases,  DV^np  machaluyim. 

2  Ch.24.  25  for  they  left  liim  in  great  diseases,  his 

2. Sicknesses,  diseases,  c^qn  iachaluim. 

■2  Ch.21.  19  bowelsfell  out!  .so  he  died  of  sorediseases 
Psa.  103.   3  Who  forgiveth.  .who  healeth  all  my  dis. 

DISFIGURE  to  — 

7b  cause  to  disappear,  hide,  a<p<zi>t£a>  aphamdesd. 

Matt.  6.  16  for  they  disfigure  their  faces,  that  they 
DISGRACE,  to  — 
To  dishonour,  cause  to  fade,  make  foolish,  S33,  3. 

Jer.    14.  21  do  not  disgrace  the  throne  of  thy  glory 
DISGUISE,  to  — 
1.7b  change  or  disguise  self,  W  shanah,  7. 

1  Ki.  14.    2  Arise,  I  pray  thee,  and  disguise  thyself 

2.21s  put  in  secret,  Tps  w»  sum  aether. 

Job    24.  15  No  eye  shall  see  me;  and  disguiseth  (his) 

DISGUISE  self,  to  — 

To  hide  or  disguise  setf,  l"5~  chaphas,  7. 

1  Sa.  28.    S  Saul  disguised  himsL-lf.  and  put  on  other 
1  Ki.20.  38  disguised  himself  with  ashes  upon  his  face 


DISH 


259 


DISPOSSESS 


i  Ki  22.  30  I  will  disguise  myself,  and  enter  into  the 
22.  30  and  the  king  of  Israel  disguised  himself 

2  Ch  18  "Q  I  will  disguise  myself,  and  will  go  to  the 
iS  20  So  the  king  of  Israel  disguised  himself 

35.  22  Josiah  would  not  turn . .  but  disguised  h. 

DISH  — 

I  .Dish,  cup,  little  bowl,  *??£  sephel. 

Judg.  5.  25  she  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish 
2.  Dish,  pan,  cruise,  nnVs  tsallachath. 

2  Ki.21.  13  wipe  Jerusalem  as  (a  man)  wipeth  a  dish 
Z.Dish,  saucer,  rn^p  qearah, 

Exodas.  29  And  thou  shaft  make  the  dishes  thereof 
37.  16  his  dishes,  and  his  spoons,  and  his  bowls 

Num.  4.    7  put  thereon  the  dishes  and  the  spoons 
4.  .4  dish,  tureen,  rpv$\iov  trublion. 

Matt  26.  23  He  that  dippeth . .  with  me  in  the  dish 

Marki4.  20  twelve,  that  dippeth  with  me  in  the  dish 

DI'-SHAN,  ivi,T)  leaping. 

The  yuungest  son  of  Seir  the  Horite,   B.C.  X780. 

Gen.  36.  21  And  Dishon,  and  Ezer,  and  D.  :  these  are 

36.  28  The  children  of  D.  (are)  these ;  Uz,  and  A. 
36.  30  Duke  Dishon,  duke  Ezer,  duke  D. 

1  Ch.  1.  38  the  sons  of  Seir . .  Dishon,  and  Ezer,  and  D. 
1.  42  The  sons  of  D. ;  Uz,  and  Aran 

Dl-SHON  or  DISHAN,  \WF[t  ]V%  |#*1,  ptf^, 

1.  Fifth  son  of  Seir  the  Horite.    B.C.  1780. 

Gen.  36.  21  And  D.,  and  Ezer,  and  Dishan 
36.  26  And  these  (are)  the  children  of  D. 
36.  30  Duke  D.,  duke  Ezer,  duke  Dishan 

1  Ch.  1.  38  the  sons  of  Seir..D.,  and  Ezer,  and  Dish. 

2.  Son  of  Anah  and  grandson  of  Seir. 

Gen.  36.  25  And  the  children  of  Anah  (were)  these ;  D. 

1  Ch.   1.  38  the  sons  of  Sen-.  .D.,  and  Ezer,  and  Dish. 

1.  41  The  sons  of  Anah ;  D.  And  the  sons  of  D. 

1.  41  And  the  sons  of  D. ;  Amram,  and  Eshban 

DISHONEST  gain  — 

Dishonest  gain,  a  cutting  off,  yy|  betsa. 

Eze.  22. 13  thy  dishonest  gam  which  thou  hast  made 
22.  27  (and)  to  destroy  souls,  to  get  dishonest  g. 

DISHONESTY  — 

Shame,  alvxvvn  aischune. 

2  Co.  4.    2  renounced  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty 

DISHONOUR  — 

1. Blushing,  shame,  rvphs  kelimmah. 

Psa.  35.  26  let  them  be  clothed  with ..  dishonour  that 

69.  19  Thou  hast  known .  .niyshame,  andmydis. 

71. 13  let  them  be  covered  (with),  .dishonour 

2.  Bareness,  nakedness,  rrny  arvah. 

Ezra,  4.  14  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the  king's  dishonour 
3. Lightness,  shame,  confusion,  }ifrj3  qalon. 

Prov.  6.  33  A  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he  get 
4.  Dishonour,  without  honour,  arifxia  atimia. 

Roni/9.  21  unto  honour,  .another  unto  dishonour? 

1  Co.  15.  43  It  is  sown  in  dishonour;  it  is  raised  in 

2  Co.  6.    8  By  honour  and  dishonour,  by  evil  reporfc 
2  Ti.  2.  20  and  some  to  honour,  and  some  to  dishonour 

DISHONOUR,  to  — 

l.To  dishonour,  make  foolish,  bii  nabel,  3. 

Mic.   7.    6  For  the  son  dishonoureth  the  father,  the 

2.To  dishonour,  arifulfa  atimazo. 

John  8.  49  I  honour  my  Father,  and  ye  do  dishonour 
Rom.  1.  24  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between 

2.  23  through  breaking  the  law  dishonourest 

3.7b  put  thoroughly,  to  shame,  Karaicx^co  katais. 

1  Co.  11.    4  having  (his)  head  covered,  dishonoureth 

11.    5  But  every  woman  that  prayeth.  .dishon. 

DISINHERIT,  to  — 

To  take  possession,  eh;  yarash,  5. 

ISunii4. 12  disinherit  them,  and  will  make  of  thee 
DISMAYED  — 
Broken  down  thing,  nn  cliath. 

Jer.  46.    5  Wherefore  have  I  seen  them  dismayed 
DISMAYED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  troubled,  hastened,  ?na  baliel,  2. 

Isa.   21.   3  I  was  dismayed  at  the  seeing  (of  it) 

2.  To  be  broken  or  cast  doion,  affrighted,  nnn  chath. 

2  Kj  19.  26  they  were  dismayed  and  confounded 
Isa.   37.  27  they  were  dismayed  and  confounded :  they 
Jer.    8.   9  wise  (men)  are  ashamed,  they  are  dismay. 

48.    1  Jlisgab  is  confounded  and  dismayed 
50.  36  mighty  men;  and  they  shall  be  dismayed 
Obad.       9  thy  mighty  (men),  .shall  be  dismayed,  to 

Z.To  be,  become  broken,  cast  dovm,  nrn  chathath,  2. 
Deut3i.    8  fear  not,  neither  be  dismayed 
Josh,  1.    9  be  not  afraid,  neither  be  thou  dismayed 
8.    1  Fear  not,  neither  be  thoii  dismayed  :  take 
10.  25  Fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed ;  be  strong 
1  Sa.  17.  11  they  were  dismayed,  and  greatly  afraid 

1  Ch.22. 13  be  strong,  .dread  not,  nor  be  dismayed 

28.  20  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed ;  fop  the  Lord 

2  Ch.20. 15  Be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  by  reason  of 

20.  17  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed ;  to  morrow  go 
32.    7  Be  strong,  .be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for 
Jer.     1.  17  be  not  dismayed  at  their  faces,  lest  I  con. 
10.    2  be  not  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  heaven 
10.    2  for  the  heathen  are  dismayed  at  them 
17. 18  them  be  dismayed,  but  let  not  me  be  dis. 


Jer.  23.    4  they  shall  fearnomore,  nor  be  dismayed 
30.  10  neither  be  dismayed,  0  Israel :  for,  lo,  I 
46.  27  be  not  dismayed,  0  Israel :  for,  behold,  I 

Eze.     2.    6  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  looks,  though 
3.    9  fear  them  not,  neither  be  dismayed  at 

■L.To  look  out  for  oneself,  be  dazzled,  nj;^  shaah,  7. 

Isa.   41.  10  be  not  dismayed ;  for  I  (am)  thy  God  :  I 
41.  23  do  evil,  that  we  may  be  dismayed,  and 
DISMAYED,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  break  or  cast  down,  nnn  chathath,  5. 

Jer.   40.  37  For  I  will  cause  Elam  to  be  dismayed 
DISMAYING  — 
A  casting  doum,  terror,  cause  of  ruin,  nnrtn  mechi. 

Jer.  48.  39  so  shall  iloab  be.  .a  dismaying  to  all  them 
DISMISS,  be  dismissed,  to  — 
l.To  free,  open,  let  away,  Tfe3patar. 

2  Ch.  23.   8  for  Jehoiada  the  priest  dismissed  not  the 
2.  To  loose  away,  oWoAuw  apoluo. 

Acts  15.  30  when  they  were  dismissed,  they  came  to 

19.  41  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  dismissed 
DISOBEDIENCE  — 

1  Disobedience,  cbreftfeta  opeitheia. 

Eph.   2.    2  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobed. 
5.    6  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children  of  disob. 
Col.     3.   6  cometh  on  the  children  of  disobedience 

2. A  liearing  amiss,  lack  of  attention,  irapaKorj. 
Rom.  5.  19  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were 
2  Co.  10.   6  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  disobedience 
Heb.   2.   2  disobedience  received  a  just  recompense 

DISOBEDIENT  — 

1. Insubordinate,  avvwSraKTo?  ani'potaktos. 

1  Ti.    1.    9  but  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient,  for 
2. Disobedient,  not  persuaded,  a-rreiO-fis  apeithes. 

Luke  1.  17  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just 
Acts  26.  19  Whereupon.  .1  was  not  disobedient  unto 
Rom.  1.  30  inventors  of  evil  things,  disobedient  to 

2  Ti.    3.    2  blasphemers,  disobedient  to  parents 
Titus  1.  16  deny  (hum),  being  abominable,  and  disob. 

3.    3  we  ourselves  also  were  sometimes,  .dis. 

Z.To  be  unpersuaded,  aireidsoo  apeitheo. 

Rom  10.  21  Ihavestretchedforth..unto  adisobedient 

DISOBEDIENT,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  or  become  bitter,  rebel,  rns  marah. 

1  Ki.13.  26  the  man  of  God,  who  was  disobedient  unto 
Neh.  g.  26  were  disobedient,  and  rebelled  against 

2.2*0  be  unpersuaded,  aireideco  apeitheo. 

1  Pe.   2.    7  but  unto  them  which  be  disobedient,  the 

2.  8  which  stumble  at  the  word,  being  disob. 

3.  20  Which  sometimes  were  disobedient,  when 
DISOBEY,  to  — 

To  be  or  become  bitter,  rebel,  nno  marah. 

1  Ki.13.  2I  thou  hast  disobeyed  the  mouth  of  the  L. 
DISORDERLY  -- 

Disorderly,  not  in  order,  araKrus  ataktos. 

2  Th.  3.    6  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorder. 

3. 11  are  some  which  walk  among  you  disorde. 
DISORDERLY,  to  behave  oneself  — 
To  be  disorderly,  out  of  order,  araKreco  atakteo. 

2  Th.  3.    7  for  we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly 
DISPATCH,  to  — 
To  cut  off  or  doum,  N"]3  bara,  3. 

Eze.  23.  47  the  company  shall ..  dispatch  them  with 
DISPENSATION"  — 
Law  or  arrangement  of  a  house,  olKovofiia  oikon. 

1  Co.  9.  17  if  against  my  will,  a  dispensation,  .is  com. 
Eph.  1.  10  That  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of 

3.    2  If  ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation  of 
Col.     1.  25accordingtothedispensationof Godwhich 

DISPERSE,  to  — 

l.To  scatter,  spread,  winnow,  r\~\\zaroJi,  3. 

Prov  15.    7  The  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  knowledge 
Eze.  12.  15  when  I  shall ..  disperse  them  in  the  coun. 

20.  23  I  would  scatter  them . .  and  disperse  them 
22.  15  disperse  thee  in  the  countries,  and  will 

29.  12  I  will  scatter,  .and  will  disperse  them 

30.  23  I  win  scatter,  .and  will  disperse  them 
30.  26  I  will  scatter . .  and  disperse  them  among 

2.To  scatter,  "nspazar,  3. 

Psa.  1 12.    9  He  hath  dispersed,  he  hath  given  to  the 

Z.To  break,  spread,  or  burst  forth,  j-'ns  parats. 

2  Ch,  11.  23  he  dealt  wisely,  and  dispersed  of  all  his 

DISPERSE  abroad,  to  — 

To  scatter,  ffKoptrifa  skorpizo. 

2  Co.  9.   9  As  it  is  written,  He  hath  dispersed  abroad 

DISPERSE  selves,  to  — 

To  be  or  become  scattered,  pis  puts. 

1  Sa.  14.  34  Disperse  yourselves  amongthe  people,  and 

DISPERSED  — 

l.To  spread  out,  scatter,  f?J  naphats. 

Isa.   11. 12  gather  together  the  dispersed  of  Judah 

2.  To  be  or  become  scattered,  ps  2>uts. 

Prov.  5.  16  Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  abroad 
Zeph.  3.  10  the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  shall  bring 

3.  What  is  sown  or  scattered  throughout,  Staawopd. 
John  7.  35  will  he  go  unto  the  dispersed  among  the 


DISPERSED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  scattered,  sjrread,  n"ij  zarah,  2. 

Eze.  36.  19  they  were  dispersed  through  thecountries 

2.  To  be  separated,,  nns  parad,  4. 

Esth.  3.    8  dispersed  among  the  people  in  all  the 

3.  To  scatter  thoroughly,  SiaaxopTrifa  diaskorjyizo. 

Acts   5.  37  (even)  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  disp. 

DISPERSION  — 
Scattering,  nrsn  tephotsah. 

Jer.  25.  34  days  of  your,  .dispersions  are  accomplish 

DISPLAYED,  to  be  — 

To  sJww  self  feeing,  be  displayed,  DiJ  nus,  7a. 
Psa.  60.    4  it  may  be  displayed  because  of  the  truth 

DISPLEASE,  to  — 
l.To  grieve,  a?JJ  atsab. 

1  Ki.    1.  6  his  father  had  not  displeased  him  at  any 
2.Evil  in  the  ears,  c^rjj?  yn  ra  beoznayim. 

yum  1 1.    1  (when)  the  people  complained,  it  displeas. 
3.7b  be  evil  in  the  eyes,  D?ry?  VTT  yara  beenayim. 

Gen.  38.  10  thing  which  he  did  displeased  the  Lord 
48.  17  it  displeased  him;  and  he  held  up  his 

1  Sa.    8.    6  the  thing  displeased  Samuel,  when  they 

18.    8  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  displeased  hini 

2  Sa.  11.  25  Let  not  this  thing  displease  thee,  for  the 

11.  27  thing  that  David  had  done  displeased  the 
Isa.  59.  15  displeased  him  that  (there  was)  no  judg. 
Jon.    4.    1  it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  he 

L.To  do  evil  in  tlie  eye,  pjfa  V~i  ^v"4  asah  ra  beyain. 
1  Sa.  29.   7  that  thou  displease  not  the  lords  of  the 

DISPLEASED  — 

Wroth,  sad,  morose,  qyj  zaeph. 

1  Ki.  20.  43  went  to  his  house  heavy  and  displeased 

21.  4  came  into  his  house  heavy  and  displeased 

DISPLEASED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  angry,  F|2N  anaph. 

Psa.  60.    1  scattered  us,  thou  hast  been  displeased 

2.  To  be  or  become  stinking,  vx^i  beesh. 

Dan.   6.  14  the  king,  .was  sore  displeased  with  him. 
Z.To  burn,  be  wroth,  displeasing,  rnn  charah. 

2  Sa.  6.  8  David  was  displeased,  because  the  LORD 
1  Ch.  13.  11  David  was  displeased,  because  the  Lord 
Hab.   3.    3  Was  the  Lord  displeased  against  the  ri.? 

i.To  be  evil  in  the  eyes,  D^y.3  VX  yara  beenayim^ 
1  Ch.  21.    7  And  God  was  displeased  with  this  thing- 
5. To  be  wroth,  t\%$  qatsaph. 

Zech.  1.  2  The  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased  with 
1.  15  I  am  verysore  displeased  with  the  heath. 
1. 15  I  was  but  a  little  displeased,  and  they 

6.  To  be  evil,  wrong,  displeasing,  VlT\raa. 

\nm  it-  10  anger,  .waskindled.  .Moses  also  was  disp. 

22.  34  if  it  displease  thee,  I  will  get  me  back 
Prov  24.  18  Lest  the  Lord  see  (it),  and  it  displease 

DISPLEASED,  to  be  much  or  sore  — 

To  be  much  weighed  down,  ayavaKTew   agantakeo. 

Matt  21.  15  saying,  Hosanna.  .they  were  sore  displ. 

Markio.  14  when  Jesus  saw  (it),  he  was  much  displ. 
10.  41  they  began  to  be  much  displeased  with  J. 

DISPLEASED  with,  to  be  highly  — 

To  fight  with  or  in  the  mind,  Qvp.o^ax^  thumoma. 

Acts  12.  20  Herod  was  highly  displeased  with  them. 
DISPLEASURE,  (hot  or  sore)  — 
l.Heat,  fury,  poison,  ncn  chemah. 

Deut.  9.  19  afraid  of  the  anger  and  hot  displeasure 

Psa.     6.    1  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure 
38.    1  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure 
2.  Fierceness,  heat,  wrath,  {inn  charan. 

Psa.    2.    5  and  vex  them  in  his  sore  displeasure 

Z.Evil,  VI  ra. 

Judg  1 5.    3  blameless . .  though  I  do  them  a  displeas. 

DISPOSE,  to  — 

To  put,  place,  set,  Gib  sum. 

Job   34.  13  or  who  hath  lisposed  the  whole  world? 
37. 15  Dost  thou  know  when  God  disposed  them 

DISPOSED,  to  be  — 

l.To  wish,  desire,  $ov\ofiai  boulomai. 

Acts  18.  27  when  he  was  disposed  to  pass  unto  Acha. 

2.To  wish,  0e\o>  thelo. 

1  Co.  10.  27  bid  you  (to  a  feast),  and  ye  be  disposed 

DISPOSING  — 
Judgment,  i^?  mishpoi. 

Prov  16.  33  whole  disposing  thereof  (is)  of  the  LORE 
DISPOSITION  — 
Arrangement,  Siarayh  diatage. 

Acts   7.  53  received  the  law  by  the  disposition  ol 
DISPOSSESS,  to  — 
To  take p>ossession,  bh;  yarash,  5. 

Kuni32.  39  dispossessed  the  Amorite  which  (was)  in  lit 
33.  53  ye  shall  dispossess  (the  inhabitants  of) 

Deut.  7.  17  (are)  more  than  I;  how  can  I  dispossess 

Judg  11.  23  the  LORD  God  of  Israel  hath  dispossessed 


DISPUTATION 


260 


DIVERS 


DISPUTATION  — 

X. Diverse  judging,  5iaKpt<m  diakrisis. 

Roni  14.    1  (but)  not  to  doubtful  disputations 

I.Joint  seeking,  o'v^tjtvo-is  suzetesis. 

Acts  15.    2  had  no  small  dissension  and  [disputation] 

DISPUTE,  to  — 

l.To  reason  with  one  another,  rn;  yalcach,  2. 

Job    23.    7  There  the  righteous  might  dispute  with 
2.7*0  speak  diversely,  8tak4yop.at  dialegomai. 

Mark  9.  34  for  by  the  way  they  had  disputed  among 

Acts  17.  17  Therefore  disputed  he  in  the  synagogue 
19.    S  for  the  space  of  three  months,  disputing 
19.   9  disputing  daily  in  the  school  of  one 
24.  12  neither  found  me . .  disputing  with  any 

Jude        9  when  contending  with  the  devil,  he  dis. 
3. To  reclcon  diversely,  8ta\oyiCoixai  dialogizomai. 

Mark  9.  33  What  was  it  that  ye  disputed  among 
4.  To  seek  together  or  jointly,  <rv(nrew  suzeteo. 

Acts    9.  29  spoke  boldly,  .and  disputed  against  the 
DISPUTE  with,  to  — 
To  seek  together  or  jointly,  o-v£wt4u)  suzeteo. 

Acts   6.   9  Then  there  arose  certain . .  disputing  with 
DISPUTER  — 
A  joint-seeker,  disputer,  (rvQt]rnri\s  suzetetes. 

1  Co.  1.  20  where  (is)  the  disputer  of  this  world? 
DISPUTING  — 
l.A  joint  seeking,  o-vtyrrjo'is  suzetesis. 

Acts  15.    7  when  there  had  been  much  disputing 
^.Diverse  reckoning,  8ta\oyio-/j.6s  dialogismos. 

Phil.   2.  14  Do  all  things  without,  .disputings 

DISPUTINGS,  perverse  — 

Misplaced  contentions,  ■Kapah'ia.Tpi&di  paradiatrib. 
1  Ti.  6.    5  [Perverse  disputings]  of  men  of  corrupt 

DISQUIET,  to  — 

To  give  trouble,  cause  to  be  angry,  Tj"i  ragaz,  5. 
1  Sa.  28. 15  Why  hast  thou  disquieted  me,  ta  bring 
Jer.  50.  34  may  give  rest  to  the  land,  and  disquiet 

DISaUIETED,  to  be  — 

l.To  roar,  move,  sound,  make  a  noise,  nvn  hamah. 
Psa.  39.   6  surelytheyaredisquietedinvain:heheap. 

42.  5  and  (why)  art  thou  disquieted  in  me?  hope 
42. 11  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  hope 

43.  5  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  hope 

2.  To  be  troubled,  73"i  ragaz. 

Prov  30.  21  For  three  (things)  the  earth  is  disquieted 
DISaUTETNESS  — 
Howling,  disquietude,  nipn;  nehamah. 

Psa.  38.    8  I  have  roared  by  reason  of  the  disquiet. 
DISSEMBLE,  to  — 
l.To  lie,  deny,  feign,  WJizkachask,  3. 

Jos.    7.  11  dissembled  also,  and  they  have  put  (it) 

2.  To  dissemble  ;  be  known,  155  nakar,  2. 

Prov  26.  24  He  that  hateth  dissembleth  with  his  lips 

3.  To  cause  to  err,  wander,  n^rn  taah,  5. 

Jer.   42.  20  For  ye  dissembled  in  your  hearts,  when 
DISSEMBLE  with,  to  — 
To  act  hypocritically  with,  o-vvviroKpivofxai  sunup. 

Gal.    2.  13  other  Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him 
DISSEMBLER  — 
To  be  hidden,  concealed,  ch'J  alam,  2. 

Psa.  26.    4  neither  will  I  go  in  with  dissemblers 
DISSENSION  — 
A  standing  uj>,  crdo'ts  stasis. 

Acts  15.   2  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  dissen. 
23.    7  there  arose  a  dissension  between  the 
23.  10  when  there  arose  a  great  dissension,  the 
DISSIMULATION  — 
Hypocrisy,  virSKpiais  hupokrisis. 

Gal.    2. 13  was  carried  away  with  their  dissimulation 
DISSIMULATION,  without  — 
Not  hypocritical,  6.vvtt6kpitos  anupokritos. 

Rom  12.   9  (Let)  love  be  without  dissimulation 
DISSOLVE,  to  — 
1.7V?  melt,  dissolve,  soften,  aw  mug*  35. 

Job   30.  22  Thou  liftest  me  up.  .and  dissolvest  my 

2.  To  solve,  loose,  kip  shere. 

Dan.  5.  16  canst  make  interpretations,  and  dissolve 

3.  To  solve,  loose,  H~\$  shere,  3. 

Dan.   5.  12  dissolving  of  doubts,  were  found  in  the 

DISSOLVED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  melted,  nn  mug,  2. 

Psa.  75.  3  all  the  inhabitants  thereof  are  dissolved 
Isa.  14.  31  thou,  whole  Palestina,  (art) dissolved :  for 
Nan.   2.    6  and  the  palace  shall  be  dissolved  * 

2.  To  become  corrupted,  wasted,  consumed,  ppp. 
Isa.   34.   4  all  the  host  of  heaven  shall  be  dissolved 

3.7*0  break  self,  be  broken,  "np  parar,  7a. 

Isa.  24.  19  the  earth  is  clean  "dissolved,  the  earth  is 

4,7V)  loose  down,  KaraKvoo  katalud. 

2  Co.    5.    1  that  if  our  earthly  house .  .were  dissolved 


5.  To  loose,  Xuco  hid. 

2  Pe.   3.  11  (that)  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved 
3.  12  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissol. 
DISTAFF  — 
Circuit,  staff,  distaff,  •££  pelek. 

Prov  31.  19  the  spindle,  and  her  hands  hold  the  distaff 
DISTANT,  equally  — 
To  be  joined,  n1?^  shalab,  4. 

Exod36.  22  two  tenons,  equally  distant  one  from 
DISTIL,  to  — 
l.To  glow,  hu  nazal. 

Deut32.    2  my  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew,  as  the 
2.  To  drop,  distil,  *\]pr  raaph. 

Job   36.  28  Which  the  clouds  do  drop  (and)  distil 
DISTINCTION  — 
Distinction,  a  sending  forth  diversely,  HutarroKfi. 

1  Co.  14.    7  except  they  give  a  distinction  in  the  sou. 
DISTINCTLY  — 
To  be  explained,  chs  parash,  4. 

Neh.   8.    8  So  they  read  in  the  book . .  distinctly,  and 
DISTRACTED,  to  be— 
To  be  distracted,  cold,  numb,  wearied,  '^3  pun. 

Psa.  88.  15  I  suffer  thy  terrors  I  am  distracted 

DISTRACTION,  without  — 

Not  drawn  around  about,  air  e  p  ta-ird<rreas  aperispas. 
1  Co.   7.  35  attend  upon  the  Lord  without  distraction 
DISTRESS  — 
l.Straitness,  distress,  pisp  matsoq. 

1  Sa.  22.   2  every  one  (that  was)  in  distress . .  gathered 
2.  Straitness,  distress,  npiup  metsuqah. 

Psa.  25. 17  O  bring  thou  me  out  of  my  distresses 
107.    6  he  delivered  them  out  of  their  distresses 
107. 13  cried,  .(and)  he  saved  them  out  of  their  d. 
107. 19  cry.  .(and)  he  saveth  them  out  of  their  d. 
107.  28  cry..andhebringeththem  out  of  their  d. 

Zeph.  1. 15  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of  trouble  and  dis. 

Z.Straiiness,  distress,  "isa  metsar. 

Psa.  118.   5  I  called  upon  ths  Lord  in  distress :  the 
4.  Strait,  distress,  IS,  "iy  tsar. 

2  Sa.  22.    7  In  my  distress  I  called  upon  the  Lord 
Psa.     4.    1  hast  enlarged  me  (when  I  was)  in  distress 

18.  6  In  my  distress  I  called  upon  the  Lord 
Isa.  25.  4  a  strength  to  the  needy  in  his  distress 
Eze.  30. 16  and  Noph  (shall  have)  distresses  daily 

5.Straitness,  distress,  nrris  tsarah. 

Gen.  35.   3  answered  me  in  the  day  of  my  distress 
42.  21  would  not  hear;  therefore  is  this  distress 

1  Ki.  1.  29  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  distress 
Neh.  9.  37  have  dominion,  .and  we  (are)  in  great  dis. 
Psa.120.    1  In  my  distress  I  cried  unto  the  Lord 
Prov.  1.  27  when  distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon 
Obad.      12  have  spoken  proudly  in  the  day  of  distr. 

14  that  did  remain  in  the  day  of  distress 

6.  To  straiten,  send  distress,  T$  tsarar,  5. 

2  Ch.28.  22  in  the  time  of  his  distress  did  he  trespass 

7.  Evil,  xn  ra. 

Neh.   2. 17  Ye  see  the  distress  that  we  (are)  in 
S.Necessity,  constraint,  avdyKn  anagke. 

Luke2i.  23  for  there  shall  be  great  distress  in  the 
1  Co.  7.  26  that  this  is  good  for  the  present  distress 

1  Th.  3.    7  we  were  comforted . .  in  all  our . .  distress 

9. Strait  place  or  state,  anvox^pta  stenochoria. 
Rom.  8.  35  (shall)  tribulation,  or  distress,  orpersecu. 

2  Co.  6.    4  hi  much  patience,  in  afflictions,  .in  distr. 

12. 10  Therefore  I  take  pleasure  in.  .distresses 

10. ,4  holding  fast  together,  o-vvoxh  sunoche. 

Luke2i.  25  upon  the  earth  distress  of  nations,  with 
DISTRESS,  to  — 
l.To  distress,  oppress,  straiten,  pte  tsuq,  5. 

Deut2S.  53,  55,  57  wherewith  thine  enemies  shall  dis. 

Isa.   29.    2  Yet  I  will  distress  Ariel,  and  there  shall 
29.   7  even  all  that ..  distress  her,  shall  be  as  a 

2.  To  bind,  distress,  besiege,  iw  tsur. 

Deut.  2.   9  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Distress  not  the 

2. 19  distress  them  not,  nor  meddle  with  them 

2  Ch.28.  20  king  of  Assyria  came . .  and  distressed  him 

3.  To  straiten,  send  distress,  yyif  tsarar,  5. 

Jer.  10.  18  will  distress  them,  that  they  may  find  (it) 

DISTRESS,  to  bring  — 

To  straiten,  send  distress,  *ny  tsarar,  5. 

Zeph.  r.  17  I  will  bring  distress  upon  men,  that  they 

DISTRESS,  to  be  in  — 

TV?  be  distressed,  *n?  tsarar. 

Judg.ii.   7  why  are  ye  come.,  when  ye  are  in  distress? 

Lam.  i.  20  Behold,  O  Lord,  for  I  (am)  in  distress 
DISTRESSED,  to  he  — 
l.To  be  distressed,  straitened,  is;  yatsar. 

Gen.  32.    7  Then  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid  and  distr. 

Judg.  2.  1 5  had  sworn . .  and  they  were  greatly  distr. 
10.   9  to  fight.. so  that  Israel  was  sore  distres. 

1  Sa.  30.   6  David  was  greatly  distressed ;  for  the 

2. To  be  exacted,  urged  on,  ten  nagas,  2. 

1  Sa.  13.   6  for  the  people  we're  distressed,  then  the 
1  Sa.  14.  24  the  men  of  Israel  were  distressed  that  day 


3.  To  be  distressed,  T$  tsarar. 

1  Sa.  28.  15  Saul  answered,  I  am  sore  distressed ;  for 

2  Sa.    1.  26  I  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother  Jon. 

4.7*o  be  vexed,  weary,  pp  quts. 

Nuni22.    3  Moab  was  distressed  because  of  the  chil. 

5.7*0  put  in  a  strait  space,  o~Ttvox<*>pt<t>  stenochoreo. 
2  Co.  4.   8  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  distressed 

DISTRIBUTE,  to  — 

1.7*0  apportion,  distribute,  share,  phn  chalaq. 

2  Ck.23. 18  David  had  distributed  in  the  house  of  the 
Neh.  13. 13  then'  office  (was)  to  distribute  unto  their 

2.7*0  be  apportioned,  distributed,  pbn  chalaq,  2. 

1  Ch.24,    3  David  distributed  them," both  Zadok  of 
3. 7*o  apportion,  distribute,  share,  pbn  chalaq,  3. 

Job  21.  17  (God)  distributeth  sorrows  in  his  anger 

4.  7*o  give,  jru  nathan. 

2  Ch.31. 14  to  distribute  the  oblations  of  the  Lord 

5.  7*o  deal  throughout,  give  out,  dta^iScc/iidiadiddmi. 
LukeiS.  22  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  [distribute] 
John  6. 11  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  distributed 

6.  7*o  make  common,  kolvwv4w  koinoneo. 

Rom  12. 13  Distributing  to  the  necessity  of  saints 
7.7*o  divide  into  parts,  f*spi£o>  merizo. 

1  Co.  7. 17  But  as  God  hath  distributed  to  every  man 

2  Co.io.  13  the  rule  which  God  hath  distributed  to  us 

DISTRIBUTE,  ready  to  — 

Willing  to  impart  or  give  away,  evp^rddoros. 

1  Ti.    6.  18  be  rich  in  good  works,  Beady  to  distribute 
DISTRIBUTION  — 

A  sharing,  participation,  Koivwvia  koinonia. 

2  Co.    9. 13  and  for  (your)  liberal  distribution  unto 
DISTRIBUTION,  to  make  — 

7*o  deal  out,  give  throughout,  diabiSco/xi  diadidomi. 

Acts  4.  35  and  distribution  was  made  unto  every 
DITCH  — 

1.  Ditch,  na  geb. 

2  Ki.  3. 16  saith  the  Lord,  Make  this  valley  full  of  d. 

2.  Ditch,  collection  of  water,  n)po  miqvah. 

Isa.  22. 11  Ye  made  also  a  ditch  between  the  two 
o.Pit,  ditch,  nmiy  shuchah. 

Prov.  23.  27  For  a  whore  (is)  a  deep  ditch;  and  a 
^.Corruption,  pit,  ditch,  nrrcJ  shachath. 

Job     9.  31  Yet  shalt  thou  plunge  me  in  the  ditch,  and 

Psa.     7.  15  He.  .is  fallen  into  the  ditch  (which)  he 

5. Deep  place,  pit,  {566vvo$  bothunos. 
Matt  15.  14  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch 
Luke  6.  39  shall  they  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch 

DIVERS  — 

I.Man  ;  some,  certain,  vSsk  enosh. 

2  Ch,3o.  11  Nevertheless  divers  of  Asher  and  Man. 

2.  Differing,  §iu<popos  diaphoros. 

Heb.  9. 10  in  meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  washings 

3.  Variegated,  spotted,  various,  different,  ttoikiAos. 
Matt.  4.  24  sick  people  that  were  taken  with  divers 
Mark  1.  34  he  healed  many  that  were  sick  of  divers 
Luke  4.  40  all  they  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  dis. 
2  Ti.  3.  6  silly  women,  .led  away  with  divers  lusts 
Titus  3.  3  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts 
Heb.    2.    4  signs  and  wonders,  and  with  divers  mir. 

13.    9  Be  not  carried  about  with  divers  and 
Jas.     1.   2  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations 
4.^4  certain  one,  some  one,  -m  tis. 

Mark  8.    3  will  faint  by  the  way:  for  divers  of  them 
Acts  19.    9  when  divers  were  hardened,  and  believed 

DIVERS  colours  — 

1. Finger  orpamted  work,  joy  tseba. 

Judg.  5.  30  of  divers  colours,  a  prey  of  divers  colours 
5.  30  of  divers  colours  of  needlework  on  both 

2. Embroidery,  ncp")  n'qmah. 

1  Ch.29.    2  divers  colours,  and  all  manner  of  precious 
Eze.  17.    3  full  of  feathers,  which  had  divers  colours 

DIVERS  manners,  in  — 

In  many  tvays  or  turns,  TroXvrpSTtws  polutrqpos. 
Heb.   1.    1  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners 

DIVERS  measures  — 

An  ephah  and  an  ephah,  na'Ni  riB'N  ephah  ve-ephah. 
Deut  25.  14  Thou  shalt  not  have,  .divers  measures,  a 
Prov  20. 10  (and)  divers  measures,  both  of  them  (arc) 

DTVERS  places,  in  — 

Down  through  (divers)  places,  Kara  t6ttovs  kata. 
Matt 24.    7  there  shall  he.  .earthquakes,  hi  divers  pi. 
Marki3.   8  shall  be  earthquakes  in  divers  places 
Luke  21. 11  earthquakes  shall  be  in  divers  places 

DIVERS  seeds  — 

Two  different  kinds,  0*^75  kilayim. 

Deut  22.   9  Thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  vineyard  with  d.  s. 

DIVERS  weights  — 

A  stone  and  a  stone,  f?Ni  }3N  cben  va-eben. 

Deut  25.  1 3  Thou  shalt  not  have . .  divers  weights,  a 
Prov 20. 10  Divers  weights,  .both  of  them  (are)  alike 
20.  23  Divers  weights  (are)  an  abomination  unto 


DIVERSE 


261 


DIVISION 


DIVERSE  — 

l.To  be  changed,  different,  njp  shanah. 

Esth.  3.    Sand  their  laws  (are)  diverse  from  all  peo. 
2.  To  be  changed,  different,  N3t?  shena. 

Dan.    7.    3  four  great  beasts . .  diverse  one  from 

7,  19  the  fourth  beast  which  was  diverse  from 

0.T0  change,  be  different,  up  sliena,  3. 

Dan.   7.    7  it  (was)  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that 

DIVERSE,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  changed,  different,  XjV  shena. 

Dan.   7.  23  fourth  kingdom  upon  earth,  .shall  be  di. 
7.  24  he  shall  be  diverse  from  the  first,  and  he 

2.7*0  be  changed,  different,  7\$  shanah. 

Esth.  1 .    7*the  vessels  being  diverse  one  from  another 

DIVERSE  kind — 

Two  different  kinds,  D^S?  kilayim. 

Lev.  19. 19  not  let  thy  cattle  gender  with  a  diverse  k. 

DIVERSITY  — 

I. Genus,  race,  sort,  yhos^genos. 

1  Co.  12.  28  helps,  governments,  diversities  of  ton. 
2.  Diverse  parting,  distribution,  Sta/petris  diairesis. 

1  Co.  12.    4  there  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same 
12.    6  there  are  diversities  of  operations,  but 

DIVIDE,  to  — 

1.  To  separate,  V]3  badal,  5. 

Gen.    1.    4  (it  was)  good:  and  God  divided  the  light 
1.    6  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the  waters 
1.    7  God . .  divided  the  waters  which  (were) 
1. 14  divide  the  day  from  the  night;  and  let 
1.  18  and  to  divide  the  light  from  the  darkness 

Exod26.  33  the  veil  shall  divide  unto  you  between  the 

2.  To  cleave,  rend,  J7p?  baqa. 

Exodi4.  16  stretch  out  thine  hand,  .anddivideit;  and 
Neh.   9.  11  thou  didst  divide  the  sea  before  them 
Fsa.  78.  13  He  divided  the  sea,  and  caused  them  to 
Isa.   63. 12  led  (them)  by  the  right  hand,  .dividing 

3.  To  dissect,  part,  separate,  in?  bathar. 

Gen.  15.  10  against  another:  but  the  birds  divided  he 

4.  To  dissect,  part,  separate,  ira  bathar,  3. 

Gen.  15.  10  he  took  unto  him  all  these,  and  divided 

5.  To  cut  down,  ~na  gazar. 

1  Ki.    3.  25  Divide  the  living  child  in  two,  and  give 

3.  26  Let  it  be  neither  mine  nor  thine,  (but)  div. 
Psa.136.  13  To  him  which  divided  the  Red  sea  into 

6.  To  apportion,  pbn  cJialaq. 

Deut.  4.  19  which  the  Lokd  thy  God  hath  divided 
Josh. 14.    5  children  of  Israel  did,  and  they  divided 
22.    8  divide  the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with  your 

2  Sa.  19.  29  I  have  said,  Thou  and  Ziba  divide  the 
Neh.   9.  22  nations,  and  didst  divide  them  into  cor. 
Job    27.  17  and  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  silver 

7. To  be  apportioned,  phn  chalaq,  2. 

1  Ch.  23.    6  David  divided  them  into  courses  among 

8.  To  apportion,  phn  chalaq,  3. 

Gen.  49.    7  I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob,  and  scatter 
-      49.  27  and  at  night  he  shall  divide  the  spoil 
Exodis.    9  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil 
Josh  13.    7  divide  this  land  for  an  inheritance  unto 

18.  10  Joshua  divided  the  land  unto  the  children 

19.  51  divided  for  an  inheritance  by  lot  in  Shi. 
19.  51  they  made  an  end  of  dividing  the  country 

Judg.  5.  30  Have  they  not  sped  ?  have  they  (not)  clivi. 
1  Ki.  18.    6  they  divided  the  land  between  them,  to 
Psa.  60.    6  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out  the 
68.  12  she  that  tarried  at  home  divided  the  spoil 
108.    7  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out  the 
Prov  16.  19  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud 
Isa.     9.    3  as  (men)  rejoice  when  they  divide  the 
34.  17  his  hand  hath  divided  it  unto  them  by 
53.  12  Therefore  will  I  divide  him  (a  portion) 
53.  12  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong 
Lam.  4.  16  The  anger  of  the  LORD  hath  divided  them 
Eze.    5.    1  balances  to  weigh,  and  divide  the  (hair) 

47.  21  So  shall  ye  divide  this  land  unto  you 
Dan.  11.  39  and  shall  divide  the  land  for  gain 
Mic.    2.    4  turning  away  he  hath  divided  our  fields 

9.  To  apportion  for  self ,  p?0  chalaq,  7. 

Josh.  18.    5  And  they  shall  divide  it  into  seven  parts 

10.7*0  hew,  dig  through,  3*n  chats'eb. 

Psa.  29.    7  voice  of  the  Lord  divideth  the  flames 

11.7V)  halve,  divide,  nyrt  chatsah. 

Gen.  32.    7  he  divided  the  people  that  (was)  with  him 

33.    1  he  divided  the  children  unto  Leah,  and 
Exod2i.  35  sell  the  live  ox,  and  divide  the  money 

21.  35  and  the  dead  (ox)  also  they  shall  divide 

Sum 31.  27  divide  the  prey  into  two  parts,  between 

31.  42  Moses  divided  from  the  men  that  warred 

Judg.  7.  16  divided  them  into  three  companies,  and 

9.  43  he  divided  the  three  hundred  men  (into) 

Vl.To  give  for  inheritance,  *?m  ndchal. 

Num.  34.  17  the  men  which  shall  divide  the  land  unto 

13.  To  cause  to  fall,  Ss:  naphal,  5. 

Psa.  7S.  55  He.  .divided  them  an  inheritance  by  line 

14.  To  cut  in  pieces,  nru  nathach,  3. 

Judg  19.  29  laid  hold  on  his  concubine,  and  divided     I 


15.7V)  divide,  ibspalag,  3. 

Job    38.  25  Who  hath  divided  a  water  course  for  the 
Psa.  55.   9  Destroy,  0  Lord,  (and)  divide  their  tong. 

16.7*o  divide,  cleave,  trya  paras,  5. 

Lev.  11.    4  not  eat.  .of  them  that  divide  the  hoof 
11.  4,  5  cheweth  the  cud,  but  divideth  not  the 
11.    7  the  swine,  though  he  divide  the  hoof,  and 
11.  26  every  beast  which  divideth  the  hoof 
Deut  14.    7  or  of  them  that  divide  the  cloven  hoof 
14.    7  chew  the  cud,  but  divide  not  the  hoof 
14.    8  the  swine,  because  it  divideth  the  hoof 
17.  To  break,  divide,  T^pa/rar,  Sa. 

Psa.  74.  13  Thou  didst  divide  the  sea  by  thy  strength 
IS. TV)  quiet,  jn"J  raga. 

Job   26.  12  He  divideth  the  sea  with  his  power,  and 
Isa.   51.  15  I  (am)  the  LORD  thy  God,  that  divided 
Jer.  31.  35  which  divideth  the  sea  when  the  waves 

19.  To  mark  off,  atyopifa  aphorizd. 

Matt 25.  32  shepherd  divideth  (his)  sheep  from  the 

20.  To  give  through,  deal  out,  SiaStSoj/xi  diadidomi. 
Luken.  22  taketh.  .Ins  armour,  .and  divideth  his 

21.7\>  take  diversely  or  apart,  Sicupew  diaireo. 
Lukeis.  12  And  he  divided  unto  them  (Iris)  living 

1  Co.  12.  11  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he 

DIVIDE  by  lot,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  fall,  apportion,  ?53  naphal,  5. 

Josh.  13.   6  divide  thou  it  by  lot  unto  the  Israelites 
23.    4  have  divided  unto  you  by  lot  these 

Eze.  45.    1  when  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  the  land  for 

47.  22  shall  divide  it  by  lot  for  an  inheritance 

48.  29  the  land  which  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  unto 

2.2*0  give  by  lot  thoroughly,  KaraxX-npoZorew  hata. 
Acts  13.  19  [he  divided  their  land  to  them  by  lot] 

DIVIDE  asunder,  to  — 

To  separate,  b~v2  badal,  5. 

Lev.    1.  17  (but)  shall  not  divide  (it)  asunder:  and 

5.  S  wring  off.  .but  shall  not  divide  (it)  asun. 

DIVIDE  self  — 

To  apportion,  divide,  distribute,  pin  chalaq,  2. 
Gen.  14. 15  he  divided  himself  against  them,  he  and 

DrVTDE  speedily,  to  — 

To  cause  to  run,  pi  ruts,  5. 

2  Ch.35.  13  divided  (them)  speedily  among  all  the 

DIVTDE-rightly,  to  — 

To  cut  straight  or  right,  bpBoroixiw  orthotomed. 
2  Ti.   2.  15  a  workman,  .rightly  dividing  the  word  of 

DIVIDED  — 

To  be  divided,  J??  pelag. 

Dan.   2.  41  the  kingdom  shall  be  divided ;  but  there 
DIVIDED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  cleft,  yp3  baqa,  2. 

Exodi4.  21  dry  (land),  and  the  waters  were  divided 
2.  To  be  apportioned,  divided,  pin  chalaq. 

1  Ch.24.  4  more  chief  men.  .and  (thus)  were  they  d. 

Hos.  10.    2  Their  heart  is  divided ;  now  shall  they  be 

3. 7*o  be  or  become  apportioned,  divided,  phn  chalaq.% 
Nuni20.  53  Unto  these  the  land  shall  be  divided  for 
26.  55  Notwithstanding  the  land  shall  Vie  divi. 
26.  56  the  possession  thereof  be  divided 

1  Ki.  16.  21  Then  were  the  people  of  Israel  divided 

4.  To  be  or  become  apportioned,  Pr?  chalaq,  4. 
Isa.  33.  23  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  divided 
Amos  7.  17  thy  land  shall  be  divided  by  line  ;  and 
Zech.14.    1  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst 

5.  To  be  halved,  rrxn  chatsah,  2. 

2  Ki.   2.    8  and  they  were  divided  hither  and 
Eze.  37.  22  neither  shall  they  be  divided  into  two 
Dan.  11.    4  shall  be  broken,  and  shall  be  divided 

6.7*o  be  divided,  cleaved,  separated,  ibspalag,  2. 
Gen.  10.  25  for  in  his  days  was  the  earth  divided 

1  Ch.   1. 19  because  in  his  days  the  earth  was  divided 

7. To  be  separated,  ~n$  parad,  2. 

Gen.  10.    5  By  these  were  the  isles,  .divided  in  their 

10.  32  by  these  were  the  nations  divided  in  the 

2  Sa.    1.  23  in  their  death  they  were  not  divided 

S.  To  be  dealt  out,  divided,  on?  peras. 

Dan.    5.  28  Thy  kingdom  is  divided,  and  given  to 

9.7V)  become,  ylvofiai  ginomai. 

Rev.  16. 19  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  parts 
10.7*o  divide  into  parts  throughout,  dta/j.epi(a>. 

Luken.  17  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is 

11.  18  If  Satan  also  be  divided  against  himself 

12.  52  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  divided 
12.  53  The  father  shall  be  divided  against  the 
22. 17  Take  this,  and  divide  (it)  among  yoursel. 

11.  2*o  divide  into  parts,  fteplfa  merizo. 

Matt  12.  25  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is 
i2.  25  every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself 
12.  26  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  is  divided  ag. 
Mark  3.  24  if  a  kingdom  be  divided  against  itself 

3.  25  if  a  house  be  divided  against  itself,  that 
3.  26  rise  up  against  himself,  and  be  divided 

6.  41  the  two  fishes  divided  he  among  them  all 
Lukei2.  13  that  he  divide  the  inheritance  with  me 

1  Co.    1.  13  Is  Christ  divided  ?  was  Paul  crucified  for 


12. To  rend,  arxl£to  scMzo. 

Acts  14.    4  But  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided 
23.   7  and  the  multitude  was  divided 
DIVTDER  — 
One  ivlw  divides  into  parts,  /lepio-r-fis  merisies. 

Lukei2.  14  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider  over  you? 

DIVIDING  — 

To  divide,  cleave,  separate,  ih$  pelag. 

Dan.    7.  25  a  time  and  times  and  the  dividing  of 

DIVIDING  asunder  — 

Division  into  parts,  p.€picr/j.6s  merismos. 

Heb.  4.  12  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and 

DIVINATION  — 

1.  Divination,  DDpp  miksam. 

Eze.  12.  24  nor  flattering  divination  within  the 
13.    7  have  ye  not  spoken  a  lying  divination 

2.  7*o  divine,  Dpp  qasam. 

Eze.  21.  23  shall  be  unto  them  as  a  false  divination 
3. Divination,  cpp  qesem. 

N 101123.  23  neither  (is  there)  any  divination  against 

Deut  18.  10  that  useth  divination,  (or)  an  observer  of 

2  Ki.  17.  17  and  used  divination  and  enchantments 

Jer.  14.  14  they  prophesy,  .a  false  vision  and  divina, 

Eze.  13.    6  They  have  seen  vanity  and  lying  divinat. 

13.  23  see  no  more  vanity,  nor  divine  divinations 

21.  21  head  of  the  two  ways,  to  use  divination 

21.  22  At  his  right  hand  was  the  divination  for 

4. Python,  irvQwv  pvthon. 

Acts  16.  16  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divination  met 

DIVTNATION,  reward  of  — 
Divination,  cpp  qesem. 

Num.22.    7  departed  with  the  rewards  of  divination 

DIVINE  — 

Divine,  godly,  god-like,  9e7os  theios. 

2  Pe.    1.    3  as  his  divine  power  hath  given  unto  us 
1.    4  might  be  pai'takers  of  the  divine  nature 

DIVINE  sentence  — 
Divination,  nop  qesem. 

Prov.  16.  10  A  divine  sentence  (is)  in  the  lips  of  the 

DIVINE  service  — 

Public  worship,  KaTpela  latreia. 

Heb.   9.    1  had  also  ordinances  of  divine  service 
DIVINE,  to  — 
1.7*0  divine,  use  enchantment,  tyru  nachash,  3. 

Gen.  44.  5  and  whereby  indeed  he  divineth?  Ye 
44. 15  that  such  a  man  as  I  can  certainly  divine 

2.7*o  cut  off,  divine,  rise  divinations,  Dpp  qasam. 
1  Sa.  28.   8  I  pray  thee,  divine  unto  me  by  the 
Eze.  13.    9  that  see  vanity,  and  that  divine  lies 

13.  23  see  no  more  vanity,  nor  divine  divinations 
21.  29  whiles  they  divine  a  lie  unto  thee,  to 
Mic.    3.    6  it  shall  be  dark,  .that  ye  shall  not  divine 
3.  11  the  prophets  thereof  divine  for  money 

DIVINER  — 

7*0  cut  off,  divine,  Dpjp  qasam. 

DeutiS.  14  hearkened  unto  observers,  .and  unto  div 

1  Sa.  6.    2  Philistines  called  for  the.  .diviners 
Isa.  44.  25  That  f rustrateth .  .and  maketh  diviners 
Jer.  27.    9  hearken  not.  .to  your  diviners.,  dreamers 

29.    8  Let  not.  .your  diviners,  .deceive  you 
Mic.   3.    7  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the  diviners 
Zechio.    2  diviners  have  seen  a  lie,  and  have  told 

DIVINING  — 

To  cut  off,  divine,  Dpp  qasam. 

Eze.  22.  28  divining  lies  unto  them,  saying,  Thus 

DIVISION  — 

1.  Apportioning,  division,  nphn:  chaluqqah. 

2  Ch.  35.    5  division  of  the  families  of  the  Levites 
2.Course,  division,  npSno  machaloqeth. 

Josh  1 1.  23  according  to  their  divisions  by  their 
12.    7  possession  according  to  their  divisions 
18.  10  the  children.,  according  to  their  divisions 

1  Ch.24.    1  (these  are)  the  divisions  of  the  sons  of 

26.    1  Concerning  the  divisions  of  the  porters 
26.  12  these  (were)  the  divisions  of  the  porters 
26.  19  These  (are)  the  divisions  of  the  porters 
Neh.  11.  36  of  the  Levites  (were)  divisions  (in)  Judah 

3. Separation,  mis  peduth. 

Exod.  8.  23  I  will  put  a  division  between  my  people 
4. Division,  nabs  pelaggah. 

Judg.  5.  15,'  16  the  divisions  of  Reuben  (there  were) 

5.  Division,  mSs  peluggah. 

2  Ch.35.    5  according  to  the  divisions  of  the  families 
Ezra   6.  18  they  set  the  priests  in  their  divisions 

6.-4  division  into  parts  throughout,  8LafA€pHrfj.6s. 
Luke  12.  51  I  tell  you,  Nay ;  but  rather  division 

7.  A  twofold  upstanding,  Ztxoa,raaia  dichostasia. 
Rom  16.  17  mark  them  which  cause  divisions  and 
1  Co.  3.    3  (there  is)among  you  envying,  .and  [divis.] 

§.A  rent,  cleft,  schism,  o-yiVua  schisma. 

John  7.  43  there  was  a  division  among  the  people 
9.  16  And  there  was  a  division  among  them 
10. 19  There  was  a  division  therefore  again 


DIVISIONS 


262 


DO 


i  Co.    1. 10  and  (that)  there  be  no  divisions  among 
ii.  x8  I  hear  that  there  be  divisions  among  you 

DIVISIONS  — 

Divisions,  nia^P  miphlaggoth. 

2  Ch.35.  12  might  give  according  to  the  divisions 

DIVORCE  — 

A  cutting  off,  rrtrr~]3  herithuth. 

Jer.    3.   8  put  her  away,  and  given,  .a  bill  of  divorce 

DIVORCED,  to  be  — 

To  loose  off  or  away,  airuXvaj  apoluo. 

Matt.  5.  32  whosoever  shall  marry  herthatisdivorced 

DIVORCED,  woman  — 

To  cast  out,  divorce,  ana  garash. 

Lev.  21.14  a  divor.  woman,  or  profane,  (or)  an  harlot 
Lev.  22.  13  priest's  daughter  be  a  widow,  or  divorced 
^1111130.    9  of  a  widow,  and  of  her  that  is  divorced 

DIVORCEMENT,  (writing  of)  — 
l.A  cutting  off,  rnrrw  kert'thuth. 

Deut24.    1  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  divorcement 

24.    3  and  write  her  a  bill  of  divorcement,  and 
Isa.  50.    1  the  bill  of  your  mother's  divorcement 
2.  A  setting  or  standing  off  or  away,  airovraviov. 
Matt.  5.  31  let  him  give  her  a  writing  of  divorcement 

19.    7  command  to  give  a  writing  of  divorce. 
llarkio.    4  suffered  to  write  a  bill  of  divorcement 

DI-ZA'-HAB,  3nj  *n  golden,  lord  of  gold. 
A  place  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  not  far  from  the  Red 
Sea,  over  against  Suph  ,  the  modern  Dahab,  a  cape  on 
the  W.  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  Akabah,  about  two  thirds 
down  its  length.    Gold  was  most  likely  found  here. 
Deut.  1.    1  Tophel,  and  Laban,  and  Hazeroth,  and  D. 

DO— 

l.Worfcj  tCv'J^  maxtseh. 

Judgi3. 12  How  shall  we  order,  .(how)  shall  we  do 

2.  Peace,  completeness,  why  shalom. 

2  Sa.  11.   7  how  Joab  did,  and  how  the  people  did 
Esth.  2.  1 1  to  know  how  Esther  did,  and  what  should 

DO  (earnestly,  a  deed),  to — 
l.To  do,  n;rr  hay  ah. 

1  Sa.   2.  11  the  child  did  minister  unto  the  LORD 

2.  To  serve,  do,  *i?V  abad. 

Num.  3.    7,  8  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 
4.  23,  30  to  do  the  work  in  the  tabernacle  of 
4.  41  that  might  do  service  in  the  tabernacle 

4.  47  came  to  do  the  service  of  the  ministry 

7.  5  that  they  may  be  to  do  the  service  of  the 

8.  15  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of 

8.  19  to  do  the  service  of  the  children  of  Israel 

5.  22  to  do  their  service  in  the  tabernacle  of 
8.  26  to  keep  the  charge,  and  shall  do  no  ser. 

16.    9  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of 
18.   6  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of 
J0SI122.  27  that  we  might  do  the  service  of  the  Lori> 
Isa.   19.  21  and  shall  do  sacrifice  and  oblation 

3,  To  do,  serve,  "TO  abad. 

Ezra  4.  22  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this 
7.  18  to  do  with  the  rest  of  the  silver  and  the 
7.  18  that  do  after  the  will  of  your  God 
7.  26  whosoever  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God 

Dan.  4.  35  he  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the 
4.  35  or  say  unto  him,  What  doest  thou? 
6. 10  and  gave  thanks  before  his  God,  as  he  did 

6.  22  before  thee,  O  king,  have  I  done  no  hurt 
Ezra  6.    S  I  make  a  decree  what  ye  shall  do  to  the 

i.Tn  do,  act,  hh'4  dial,  Za. 

Lam.  1.  22  do  unto  them  as  thou  hast  done  unto  me 
2.  20  and  consider  to  whom  thou  hast  done 
5.  To  do,  nyj;  asnh. 

Gen.    3.  13  What  (is)  this  (that)  thou  hast  done  ? 
3. 14  Because  thou  hast  done  this,  thou  (art) 
4. 10  What  hast  thou  done  ?  the  voice  of  thy 

6.  22  Thus  did  Noah ;  according  to  all .  .so  did 

7.  5  Noah  did  all  according  unto  all  that  the 

8.  21  neither  will  I  again  smite,  .as  I  have  done 

9.  24  what  his  younger  son  had  done  unto  him 
11.    6  this  they  begin  to  do :  and  now  notliing 

11.  6  which  they  have  imagined  to  do 

12.  18  What  (is)  this  (that)  thou  hast  done  unto 
16.    6  Behold,  thy  maid.,  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth 
18.   5  and  they  said,  So  do,  as  thou  hast  said 
18. 17  Shall  I  hide,  .that  thing  which  I  do 

18. 19  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do  justice 
18.  21  see  whether  they  have  done  altogether 
18.  25  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this  manner 
18.  25  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  ri. 
18.  29  he  said,  I  will  not  do  (it)  for  forty's  sake 

18.  30  I  will  not  do  (it)  if  I  find  thirty  there 

19.  8  do  ye  to  them  as  (is)  good  iu  your  eyes 

19.  8  unto  these  men  do  no'   ing ;  for  therefore 
39.  22  I  cannot  do  any  thing  till  thou  be  come 

20.  5  in.  .innocency  of  my  hands,  have  I  done 
20.   6  didst  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart 
20.    9  What  hast  tiiou  done  unto  us?  and  what 
20.    9  thou  hast  done  deeds  unto  me  that  ought 

20.  10  What  sawest  thou,  that  thou  hast  done 

21.  1  *he  Lord  did  unto  Sarah  as  he  had  spoken 
21.  22  God  (is)  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  doest 
21.  23  have  done  unto  thee,  thou  shalt  do  unto 

21.  26  said,  I  wot  not  who  hath  done  this 

22.  12  neither  do  thou  anything  uuto  him 


Gen.  22.  16  because  thou  hast  doue  this  thing,  and 
66  told  Isaac  all  things  that  he  bad  done 
10  What  (is)  this  thou  hast  done  unto  us? 
29  thou  wilt  do  us  no  hurt,  as  we  have  not 

29  as  we  have  done  unto  thee  nothing  but 
19  I  have  done  according  as  thou  badest 
37  and  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee 
45  forget  (that)  which  thou  hast  done  to  him 

15  until  I  have  done  (that)  which  I  have 

25  V\  hat  (is)  this  thou  hast  done  unto  me 
28  And  Jacob  did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week 
31  If  thou  wilt  do  this  thing  for  me,  I  will 
12  have  seen  all  that  Laban  doeth  unto  thee 

16  whatsoever  God  hath  said  unto  thee,  do 

26  What  hast  thou  done,  that  thou  hast 

28  Thou  hast  now  done  foolishly  in  (so)  doing 

29  It  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  you 
43  what  cau  I  do  this  day  unto  these  my 

14  We  cannot  do  this  thing,  to  give  our 
19  young  man  deferred  not  to  do  the  thing 

10  thing  which  he  did  displeased  the  Lord 
3  all  that  lie  did  to  prosper  in  his  hand 

9  how  then  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness 

11  went  into  the  house  to  do  his  business 

19  After  this  manner  did  thy  servant  to  me 

22  and  whatsoever  they  did  there,  he  was 

23  which  he  did,  the  LoRDmade  (it)to  prosp. 

15  here  also  have  I  done  nothing  that  they 
25  showed  Pharaoh  what  he  (is)  about  to  do 
2S  What  God  (is)  about  to  do  he  showeth 
34  Let  Pharaoh  do  (this),  and  let  hini  appoint 
55  Go  unto  Joseph ;  what  he  saith  to  you,  Co 

18  said  unto  them  the  thud  day,  This  do 

20  bring  your  youngest  brother,  .they  did  so 

25  and  thus  did  he  unto  them 
28  What  (is)  this  (that)  God  hath  done  unto 

11  If  (it  must  be)  so  now,  do  this;  take 

17  the  man  did  as  Joseph  bade;  and  the 
2  he  did  according  to  the  word  that  Joseph 

5  Ye  have  done  evil  in  so  doing 

7  God  forbid  that  thy  servants  should  do 
15  What  deed  (is)  this  that  ye  have  done? 
17  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so:  (but)  the 

17  This  do  ye ;  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,  get 

19  thou  art  commanded,  this  do  ye ;  take  you 

21  the  children  of  Israel  did  so :  and  Joseph 

30  And  lie  said,  I  will  do  as  thou  hast  said 

12  his  sons  did  unto  him  according  as  he 
Exodri.  17  did  not  as  the  king  of  Egypt  commanded 

18  Why  have  ye  done  this  tiling,  and  have 

20  all  my  wonders  which  I  will  do  in  the 
15  and  will  teach  you  what  ye  shall  do 
17  this  rod . .  wherewith  thou  shalt  do  signs 

21  see  that  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before 

30  did  the  signs  iu  the  sight  of  the  people 
1  Now  shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do  to  P. 

6  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  them,  so  did 

10  and  they  did  so  as  the  Lord  had  comma. 

11  they  also  did  iu  like  manner  with  their 
20  and  Aaron  did  so,  as  the  Lord  command. 

22  the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  so  with  their 
.    7  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchantments 
.  13,  31  Lord  (bid  according  to  the  word  of  M. 
.  17  they  did  so  :  for  Aaron  stretched  out  his 
.  18  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchantmen. 
.  24  the  Lord  did  so  :  and  there  came  a  griev. 
.  26  It  is  not  meet  so  to  do;  for  we  shall 
.    5  the  Lord  shall  do  this  tiling  in  the  land 
.    6  Lord  did  that  thing  on  the  morrow 
.  10  Moses  aud  Aaron  did  all  these  wonders 
.  28  did  as  the  Lord  had  commanded,  .so  did 
.  35  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to 
.  50  Thus  did  all  the  children,  .so  did  they 

8  because  of  that  (which)  the  Lord  did  unto 

4  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord.  And  they  did 

5  Why  have  we  done  this,  that  we  have  let 

31  saw' that  great  work  which  the  LORD  did 
11  holiness,  fearful  (in)  praises,  doing  wond. 

26  wilt  do  that  which  is  right  in  his  sight 
.  17  children  of  Israel  did  so,  and  gathered 

4  What  shall  I  do  unto  this  people? 

6  Moses  did  so  in  the  sight  of  the  elders 
10  Joshua  did  as  Moses  had  said  to  him 

1  heard  of  all  that  God  had  done  for  Moses 
B  all  that  the  Lord  had  done  unto  Pharaoh 

9  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  had  done 
14  Moses'  father  in  law  saw  all  that  he  did 
14  What  (is)  this  thing  that  thou  doest  to 
17  The  tiling  that  thou  doest  (is)  not  good 
20  must  walk,  and  the  work  .they  must  do 

18.  23  If  thou  shalt  do  this  thing,  and  God  com. 
iS.  24  So  Moses.. did  all  that  he  had  said 

19.  4  have  seen  what  I  did  unto  the  Egyptians 

19.  8  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do 

20.  9  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  all 

20.  10  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy 

21.  11  if  he  do  not  these  three  unto  her,  then 

22.  30  Likewise  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  oxen 
23. 12  Six  days  thou  shalt  do  thy  work,  .and  on 

23.  22  obey  his  voice,  and  do  all  that  I  speak 

23.  24  nor  serve  them,  nor  do  after  then:  works 

24.  3  words,  .the  Lord  hath  said  will  we  do 
24.    7  All  that  the  L<  <RD  hath  said  will  we  do 
29.    1  this  (is)  the  thing  that  thou  shalt  do  unto 
29.  35  thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  Aaron,  and  to 
29.  41  shalt  do  thereto  according  to  the  meat 
31.  11  all  that  I  have  commanded .  .shall  they  do 
31.  14  whosoever  doeth  (any)  work  therein,  that 
31.  15  Six  days  may  work  he  done;  but  in  the 

31.  15  whosoever  doeth  (any)  work  in  the  sab. 

32.  14  which  he  thought  to  do  unto  his  people 
32.  21  What  did  this  people  unto  thee,  that  thou 


Exod32.  28  the  children  of  Levi  did  according  to 
33.   5  that  I  may  know  what  to  do  unto  thee 

33.  17  do  this  thing  also  that  thou  hast  spoken 

34.  10  before  all  thy  people  I  will  do  marvels 

34.  10  terrible  tiling  that  I  will  do  with  thee 

35.  1  Lord  hath  command.,  that  (ye)  should  do 
35.    2  Six  days  shall  work  be  done,  but  on  the 

35.  2  whosoever  doeth  work  therein  shall  be 
35-  35  of  them  that  do  any  work,  and  of  those 

36.  2  stirred  him  up.  .unto  the  work  to  do  it 
36.  29  he  did  to  both  of  them  in  both  the  cor. 
39.  32  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to 
39.  32  that  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  did 
39.  43  they  had  done  it  as  the  Lord  had  com. 

39.  43  even  so  had  they  done  it 

40.  16  Thus  did  Moses  :  according  to  all . .  did 
Lev.    4.    2  which  ought  not  to  be  done,  and  shall  do 

4.  13  they  have  done  (somewhat  against)  any  of 
4.  13,  22  (things)  which  should  not  be  done 
4.  20  he  shall  do  with  the  bullock  as  he  did 
4.  20  a  sin  offering,  so  shall  he  do  with  this 
4.  22  done  (somewhat)  through  ignorance 
4.  27  he  doeth  (somewhat  against)  any  of  the 
4.  27  (things)  which  ought  not  to  done 
6.    3  in  any  of  all  these  that  a  man  doeth 
6.    7  that  he  hath  done  in  trespassing  therein 
8.    4  And  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded 
8.    5  thing  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  bed. 
8.  34  As  he  hath  done  this  day,  (so)  the  Lord 
8.  34  hath  commanded  to  do,  to  make  an  ato. 

8.  36  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  all  tilings  which 

9.  6  the  Lord  commanded  that  ye  should  do 
10.    7  they  did  according  to  the  word  of  Moses 
16.  15  do  with  that  blood  as  he  did  with  the 
16.  16  so  shall  he  do  for  the  tabernacle  of 

16,  29  shall  afflict  your  souls,  and  do  no  work 
16.  34  And  lie  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  M. 
18.    3,  3  After  the  doings,  .shall  ye  not  do 
18.    4  Ye  shall  do  my  judgments,  and  keep 
18.    5  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them 

1 8.  27  abomin.  have  the  men  of  the  land  done 

19.  15  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgm 
J9-  35  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgment 

19.  37  statutes,  and  all  my  judgments,  and  do 

20.  8  And  ye  shall  keep  my  statutes,  and  do 
20.  22  statutes,  and  all  my  judgments,  and  do 

22.  31  keep  my  commandments,  and  do  them 

23.  3  Six  days  shall  work  be  done  :  but  the 
23-    3  ye  shall  do  no  work  (therein) :  it  (is)  the 
23.    7,  8,  21,  25,  36  ye  shall  do  no  senile  work 
23.  28  And  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  that  same  d. 
23.  30  that  doeth  any  work  in  that  same  day 

23.  31  Ye  shall  do  no  manner  of  work :  (it  shall) 

24.  19  as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  to 

24.  23  the  children  of  Israel  did  as  the  LORD 

25.  iS  do  my  statutes,  .keep  my  judgm.  and  do 

26.  3  and  keep  my  commandments,  and  do 
26. 14  and  will  not  do  all  these  commandments 
26.  15  that  ye  will  not  do  all  my  commandments 

26.  16  I  also  will  do  this  unto  you  ;  I  will  even 
Num.  1.  54  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to 

1.  54  that  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  did 

2.  34  the  childreuof  Israel  did  according  to  all 
4.   3  to  do  the  work  in  the  tabernacle  of  the 

4.  19  But  thus  do  unto  them,  that  they  may 

5.  4  the  children,  .did  so,  and  put  them  out 
5.  4  as  the  Lord  spake,  .so  did  the  children 

5.  7  confess  their  sin  which  they  have  done 

6.  21  must  do  after  the  law  of  his  separation 
8.    3  Aaron  did  so  ;  lie  lighted  the  lamps 

8.   7  thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  them,  to  cleanse 
8.  20  and  Aaron . .  did  to  the  Levites  according 
8.  20  so  did  the  children  of  Israel  unto  them 
8.  22  to  do  their  service  in  the  tabernacle  of 
8.  22  as  the  LORD  had.  .so  did  they  unto  them 

8.  26  Thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  the  Levites 

9.  5  according  to.  .so  did  the  children  of  Isr. 
9.  14  according  to  the  manner,  .so  shall  he  do 

14.  22  and  my  miracles  which  I  did  in  Egypt 
14.  28  as  ye  have  spoken,  .so  will  I  do  to  you 

14.  35  I  will  surely  do  it  unto  all  this  evil 

15. 12  so  shall  ye  do  to  every  oue  according  to 

15. 13  All.  .shall  do  these  things  after  tliis 

15. 14  as  ye  do,  so  he  shall  do 

15.  30  But  the  soul  that  doeth.. presumptuously 
15.  39rememberall  the  commandments,  .and  do 

15.  40  may  remember,  and  do  all  my  command. 

16.  6  This  do  :  Take  you  censers,  Koran,  aud 

16.  28  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  do  all  these  works 

17.  11  And  Moses  did  (so),  .so  did  he 

20. 27  And  Moses  did  as  the  Lor.D  commanded 

21.  34  thou  shalt  do  to  him  as  thou  didst  unto 

22.  2  Balak.  .saw  all  that  Israel  had  dene  to 
22.  17  I  will  do  whatsoever  thou  sayest  unto 
22.  iS  I  cannot  go  beyond,  .to  do  less  or  more 
22.  20  which  I  shall  say.  .that  shalt  thou  do 
22.  2S  and  she  said.  .What  have  I  done  unto 

22.  30  was  I  ever  wont  to  do  so  unto  thee  ?  And 

23.  2  And  Balak  did  as  Balaam  bad  spilun 
23.  11  Balak  said. .  What  hast  thou  doue  unto 
23.  19  hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  (it) 

23.  26  All  that  the  Lord  speaketh,  that  I  must 

23.  30  And  Balak  did  as  Baalam  had  said,  and 

24.  13  to  do  (either)  good  or  bad  of  mine  own 
24.  14  advertise  thee  what  this  people  shall  do 
24.  18  shall  be  a  possession . .  and  Israel  shall  do 

27.  22  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him 
28. 18  ye  shall  do  no  manner  <  f  servile  work 

28.  25,  26  ye  shall  do  no  servile  woik 

29.  1,  12,  35  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work 
29.   7  ye  shall  not  do  any  work  (therein) 

29.  39  These  (thing*)  ye  shall  do  unto  theLiRD 


DO 


263 


DO 


Nump.    2  he  shall  do  according  to  all  that  proceed. 

31.  31  and  Eleazar.  .did  as  the  Lord  comman. 

32.  8  Thus  did  your  fathers,  when  I  sent  them 
32.  13  that  had  done  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
32.  20  If  ye  will  do  this  thing,  if  ye  will 

32.  23  if  ye  will  not  do  so,  behold,  ye  have 
32.  24  do  that  which  hath  proceedeth  out  of 
32.  25  servants  will  do  as  my  lord  commandeth 

32.  31  As  the  Lord  hath  said,  .so  will  we  do 

33.  56  I  shall  do  unto  you,  as  I  thought  to  do 
36.  10  so  did  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 

Deut.  1.  14  which  thou  hast  spoken  (is)  good,  .to  do 
1.  18  commanded,  .all  the  things,  .yeshoulddo 
1.  30  according  to'  all  that  he  did  for  you 

1.  44  out  against,  .and  chased  you,  as  bees  do 

2.  12  Israel  did  unto  the  land  of  his  possession 
2.  22  As  he  did  to  the  children  of  Esau,  which 

29  As  the  children  of  Esau,  .did  unto  me 

2  thou  shalt  do  unto  him  as  thou  didst 
6  as  we  did  unto  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon 

21  all  that  the  Lord  your  God  hath  done 
21  so  shall  the  Lord  do  unto  all  the  kingd. 

24  that  can  do  according  to  thy  works,  and 
1  for  to  do  (them),  that  ye  may  live,  and 

3  Your  eyes  have  seen  what  the  Lord  did 

5  that  ye  should  do  so  in  the  land  whither 

6  Keep  therefore  and  do  (them) :  for  this 
i-i  that  ye  might  do  them  in  the  land 

25  shall  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
34  all  that  the  Lord  your  God  did  for 

1  ye  may  learn  them,  and  keep  and  do 

13  Six  days  thou  shalt  labour,  and  do  all 

14  (in  it)  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou 

27  speak  thou . .  and  we  will  hear  (it),  and  do 

31  that  they  may  do  (them)  in  the  land 

32  Ye  shall  observe  to  do  therefore  as  the 
1  that  ye  might  do  (them)  in  the  land 
3  Hear  therefore,  .and  observe  to  do  (it) 

18  thou  shalt  do  (that  which  is)  right  and 

24  the  Lord  commanded  us  to  do  all  these 

25  if  we  observe  to  do  all  these  command. 

11  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  to  do 

12  if  ye  hearken  to.  .and  keep  and  do  them 

18  what  the  Lord  thy  God  did  unto  Pharaoh 

19  so  shall  the  Lord  thy  God  do  unto  all  the 
1  All  the  command. . .  shall  ye  observe  to  do 

18  I  did  neither  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water 
iS  in  doing  wickedly  in  the  sight  of  the 

21  that  hath  done  for  thee  these,  .things 

3  which  he  did  in  the  midst  of  Egypt 

4  what  he  did  unto  the  army  of  Egypt 

5  what  he  did  unto  you  in  the  wilderness 

6  what  he  did  unto  Dathan  and  Abiram 

7  the  great  acts  of  the  Lord  which  he  did 

22  which  I  command  you,  to  do  them,  to 
32  ye  shall  observe  to  do  all  the  statutes 

1  judgments  which  ye  shall  observe  to  do 

4  shall  not  do  so  unto  the  Lord  your  God 

8  not  do  after  all  (the  things)  that  we  do 

14  thou  shalt  do  all  that  I  command  thee 
25  when  thou  shalt  do  (that  which  is)  right 

28  when  thou  doest  (that  which  is)  good 

30  even  so  will  I  do  likewise 

31  Thou  shalt  not  do  so  unto  the  Lord  thy 

31  every  abomination,  .have  they  done  unto 

32  What  thing  .1  command,  .observe  to  do 

11  shall  do  no  more  any  such  wickedness  as 
18  to  do  (that  which  is)  right  in  the  eyes  of 

29  the  work  of  thine  hand  which  thou  doest 

5  to  observe  to  do  all  these  eommandinen. 

17  unto  thy  maid  servant  thou  shalt  do 

18  shall  bless  thee  in  all  that  thou  doest 

8  thou  shalt  do  no  work  (therein) 

12  thou  shalt  observe  and  do  these  statutes 
10  thou  shalt  do  according  to  the  sentence 

10  thou  shalt  observe  to  do  according  to 

11  which  they  shall  tell  thee,  thou  shalt  do 

12  the  man  that  will  do  presumptuously,  and 

1 3  and  fear,  and  do  no  more  presumptuously 

19  this  law  and  these  statutes,  to  do  them 

9  thou  shalt  not  learn  to  do  after  the 
12  all  that  do  these  things  (are)  an  abomina. 

9  keep  all  these  commandments  to  do  them 
19  do  unto  him  as  he  thought  to  have  done 

15  Thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  all  the  cities 
18  not  to  do  after  all  their  abominations 
18  which  they  have  done  unto  their  gods 

9  when  thou  shalt  do  (that  which  is)  right 
3  In  like  manner  shalt  thou  do  with  his  ass 
22.    3  and  so  shalt  thou  do  with  his  raiment 
22.   3  with  all  lost  thing,  .shalt  thou  do  likewise 
22.   5  all  that  do  so  (are)  abomination  unto  the 
22.  26  But  unto  the  damsel  thou  shalt  do 
24.    8  do  according  to  all  that  the  priests  the 
24.    8  as  I  commanded,  .ye  shall  observe  to  do 

24.  9  what  the  Lord  thy  God  did  unto  Miriam 
24. 18,  22  therefore  I  command  thee  to  do  this 

25.  16  all  that  do  such  things,  (and)  all  that  do 

25.  17  what  Amalek  did  uuto  thee  by  the  way 

26.  14  have  done  according  to  all  that  thou  hast 
26.  16  to  do  these  statutes  and  judgments 

26.  16  keep  and  do  them  with  all  thine  heart 

27.  10  and  do  his  commandments  and  his  statu. 

27.  26  confirmeth  not.  .words  to  do  them 

28.  1  to  do  all  his  commandments  which  I  com. 
28.  13  hearken  unto  the  c  >mmandments.  .to  do 
28.  15  to  do  all  his  commandments  and  his 
28.  20  thou  settest  thine  hand  unto  for  to  do 
28.  20  because  of  the  wickedness  of  thy  doings 

28.  58  If  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  all  the 

29.  2  Ye  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord  did  before 
2g.    9  Keep,  .words  of  this  covenant,  and  do 


20. 

21, 


Deut  29. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
3°- 
3°- 
3i- 
31- 
31- 
3i- 
32- 
34- 

Josh.  1. 


9  that  ye  may  prosper  in  all  that  ye  do 
24  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto 
29  that  (we)  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 

8  do  all  his  commandments  which  I  comm. 
12,  13  bring  it.  .that  we  may  hearit,  and  do 

14  and  in  thy  heart,  .that  thou  mayest  do 

4  the  Lord  shall  do  unto  them  as  he  did  to 

5  that  ye  may  do  unto  them  according 
12  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 

29  ye  will  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
46  command  your  children  to  observe  to  do ; 

9  and  did  as- the  Lord  commanded  Moses 

11  wonders  which  the  Lord  sent  him  to  do 
8  that  thou  mayest  observe  to  do  according 

16  All  that  thou  commandest  us  we  will  do 
10  what  ye  did  unto  the  two  kings  of 

5  to  morrow  the  Lord  will  do  wonders 

8  the  children  of  Israel  did  so  as  Joshua 

23  as  the  Lord  your  God  did  to  the  Red  sea 

15  Loose  thy  shoe.  .And  Joshua  did  so 
3  Thus  shalt  thou  do  six  days 

14  compassed  the  city,  .so  they  did  six  days 

9  and  what  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  great 

19  tell  me  now  what  thou  hast  done ;  hide 

20  I  have  sinned . .  thus  and  thus  have  I  done 

2  shalt  do  to  Ai  and  her  king  as  thou  didst 

8  accor.  to  the  commandment,  .shall  ye  do 

3  what  Joshua  had  done  unto  Jericho  and 

9  heard  the  fame  of  him,  and  all  that  he  d. 
10  all  that  he  did  to  the  two  kings  of  the 
20  This  we  will  do  to  them  ;  we  will  even  let 

24  we  were  sore  afraid,  .anj  have  done 

25  good  and  right  unto  thee  to  do  unto  us 

26  so  did  he  unto  them,  and  delivered  them 
1  as  he  had  done  to  Jericho  and  her  king 

1  so  he  had  done  to  Ai  and  her  king 

23  they  did  so,  and  brought  forth  those  five 
25  thus  shall  the  Lord  do  to  all  your  enein. 

28  he  did  to  the  king  of  Makkedah  as  he  d. 

30  did  unto  the  king  thereof  as  he  did  unto 
32>  35-  37  according  to  all  that  he  had  done 
39  left  none  remaining :  as  he  had  done  to 

39  so  he  did  to  Debir.  .as  he  had  done 

9  Joshua  did  unto  them  as  the  Lord  bade 

15  so  did  Moses  command  Joshua,  and  so 

5  As  the  Lord  commanded,  .so.  .Israel  did 

5  take  diligent  heed  to  do  the  command. 

24  And  if  we  have  not.  .done  it  for  fear  of 

3  ye  haveseen  allthatthe  Lord,  .hath  done 

6  and  to  do  all  that  is  written  in  the  book 
8  But  cleave,  .as  ye  have  done  unto  this 

5  according  to  that  which  I  did  among  them 

7  your  eyes  have  seen  what  I  have  done  in 

17  which  did  those  great  signs  in  our  sight 

31  the  works  of  the  Lord,  that  he  hath  done 
7  as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me 

2  ye  have  not  obeyed,  .why  have  ye  done 
7  the  great  works  of  the  Lord  that  lie  did 

10  nor  yet  the  works  which  he  had  done  for 
n  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
17  obeyingthecommandments.  .(but)  they  d. 

7  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 

12  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again 
12  they  had  done  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

1  the  children  of  Israel  again  did  evil 

1  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
20  pour  out  the  broth.  And  he  did  so 

27  and  did  as  the  Lord  had  said  unto  him, 
27  he  could  not  do  (it)  by  day,  that  he  did 

29  they  said.  .Who  hath  done  this  thing? 
29  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash  hath  done  this 

40  And  God  did  so  that  night :  for  it  was  dry 
17  he  said.  .Look  on  me,  and  do  likewise 

17  it  shall  he,  (that)  as  I  do,  so  shall  ye  do 

2  What  have  I  done  now  in  comparison  of 

3  what  was  I  able  to  do  in  comparison  of 

16  if  ye  have  done  truly  and  sincerely- 

16  and  have  done  unto  him  according  to  the 
33  then  mayest  thou  do  to  them  as  thou 

48  What  ye  have  seen  me  do.  .haste,  .do 
56  rendered  the  wickedness,  .which  he  did 

6  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again  in 

15  do  thou  unto  us  whatsoever  seemeth  good 
10  if  we  do  not  so  according  to  thy  words 
27  thou  doest  me  wrong  to  war  against  me 
36  do  to  me  according  to  that  which  hath 
39  who  did  with  her  (according)  to  his  vow 
1  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again 

8  teach  us  what  we  shall  do  uuto  the 

19  and  (the  angel)  did  wondrously;  and  M. 

6  but  he  told  not.  .what  he  had  done 
10  for  so  used  the  young  men  to  do 

3  though  I  do  them  a  displeasure 

6  the  Philistines  said,  Who  hath  done 

7  Though  ye  have  done  this,  yet  will  I  be 

10  to  do  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  us 

11  what  (is)  this,  .thou  hast  done  unto  us? 
11  As  they  did  unto  me,  so  have  I  done  unto 

6  every  man  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 
14  therefore  consider  what  ye  have  to  do 
iS  Then  said  the  priest  unto  them,  What  do 

23  seeing  that  this  man  is  come,  .do  not 

24  do  with  them  what  seemeth  good  unto 

24  but  unto  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 

9  the  thing  which  we  will  do  to  Giheah 

10  that  they  may  do,  when  they  come  to  G. 
7,  16  How  shall  we  do  for  wives  for  them 

11  And  this  (is)  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do 
23  And  the  children  of  Benjamin  did  so,  and 

25  every  man  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 

17  the  Lord  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also 

11  all  that  thou  hast  done  unto  thy  mother 


Ruth  3, 

3- 


iSa. 


•  Sa. 


4  he  will  tell  thee  what  thou  shalt  do 

5  All  that  thou  sayest  unto  me  I  will  do 

6  she  went  down . .  and  did  according  to 
11I  will  do  to  thee  all  that  thou  requirest 
1,6  she  told  her  all  that  the  man  had  done  to 
11  do  thou  worthily  in  Ephratah,  and  be 

7  And  (as)  he  did  so  year  by  year,  when  she 
23  her  husband  said . .  Do  what  seemeth  thee 

14  So  they  did  in  Shiloh  unto  all  the  Israelit. 

22  heard  all  that  his  sons  did  unto  all  Israel 

23  said  unto  them,  Why  do  ye  such  things? 

35  shall  do  according  to  (that)  which  (is)  in 
11  Behold,  I  will  do  a  thing  in  Israel,  at 

17  God  do  so  to  thee,  and  more  also,  if  thou 
iS  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good 

8  What  shall  we  do  with  the  ark  of  the  God 
2  What  shall  we  do  to  the  ark  of  the  Lord? 

9  (then)  he  hath  done  us  this  great  evil 

10  the  men  did  so ;  and  took  two  milch  kiue 
8  which  they  have  done  since  the  day  that 
8  served  other  gods,  so  do  they  also  uuto 
2  saying,  What  shall  I  do  for  my  son  ? 

7  (that)  thou  do  as  occasion  serve  thee;  for 

8  till  I . .  shew  thee  what  thou  shalt  do 

10  ye  shall  do  with  us  all  that  seemeth  good 
7  which  he  did  to  you  and  to  your  fathers 

16  which  the  Lord  will  do  before  your  eyes 

17  which  ye  have  done  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

20  Fear  not :  ye  have  done  all  thiswickedn. 

11  And  Samuel  said,  What  hast  thou  done? 

7  Do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart :  turn  thee 

36  they  said,  Do  whatsoever  seemeth  good 
40  the  people  said . .  Do  what  seemeth  good 

43  Saul  said.  .Tell  me  what  thou  hast  done? 

44  Saul  auswered,  God  do  so  and  more 

2  I  remember  (that)  which  Amalek  did  to 

19  aud  didst  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  LORD? 

3  I  will  shew  thee  what  thou  shalt  do 

4  Samuel  did  that  which  the  Lord  spake 

29  David  said,  What  have  I  now  done  ? 

18  told  him  all  that  Saul  had  done  to  him 

1  What  have  I  done'?  what  (is)  miue  iniq.  ? 

2  my  father  will  do  nothing  either  great  or 
4  Whatsoever  thy  soul  desireth,  I  will  .  .do 

13  The  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jona. 
32  shall  he  be  slain  ?  what  hath  he  done  ? 

3  till  I  know  what  God  will  do  for  me 

4  that  thou  mayest  do  to  him  as  it  shall 
6  The  Lord  forbid  that  I  should  do  this 

19  for  that  thou  hast  done  unto  me  this  day 

17  know  and  consider  what  thou  wilt  do 

22  So  and  more  also  do  God  unto  the  enemies 

30  when  the  Lord  shall  have  done  to  my 

16  This,  .(is)  not  good  that  thou  hast  done 

18  for  what  have  I  done?  or  what  evil 
25  thou  shalt  both  do  great  (things),  and 

11  So  did  David,  and  so  (will  be)  Ids  manner 

2  thou  shalt  know  what  thy  servant  can  do 

9  Behold,  thou  kuowest  what  Saul  hath  d. 

15  thou  mayest  make  known,  .what  I  shall  do 

17  the  Lord  hath  done  to  him,  as  he  spake 

18  therefore  hath  the  Lord  done  this  thing 

8  And  David  said .  .But  what  have  I  done? 

23  Then  said  David,  Ye  shall  not  do  so,  my 
11  of  that  which  the  Philistines  had  done  to 

6  because  ye  have  done  this  thing 

9  So  do  God  to  Abner,  and  more  also,  except 
9  as  the  Lord  hath  sworn,  .even  so  I  do  to 

18  Now  then  do  (it) :  for  the  Lord  hath  spok. 

24  What  hast  thou  done  ?  behold,  Abner  ca. 

25  Abner.  .came,  .to  know  all  that  thou  do. 

35  So  do  God  to  me,  and  more  also,  if  I 

36  as  whatsoever  the  king  did  pleased  all 
39  the  Lord  shall  reward  the  doer  of  evil 
25  David  did  so,  as  the  Lord  had  commanded 

3  Go,  do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart ;  for  the 

21  For  thy  word's  sake,  .hast  thou  done  all 
23  to  do  for  you  great  tilings  and  terrible 

25  establish  (it)  for  ever,  and  do  as  thou 

11  According  to  all.  .so  shall  thy  sen-ant  do 

12  the  Lord  do  that  which  seemeth  him 

11  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  do  this  thing 
27  the  thing  that  David  had  done  displeased 

5  the  man  that  hath  done  tins  (thing)  shall 

6  he  did  this  thing,  and  because  he  had  no 
9  to  do  evil  in  his  sight  ?  thou  hast  killed 

12  thou  didst  (it)  secretly  :  but  I  will  do  this 
21  What  thing  (is)  this  that  thou  hast  done  ! 

31  thus  did  he  unto  all  the  cities  of  the  chil. 

2  hard  for  him  to  do  any  thing  to  her 

12  my  brother. .  do  not  thou  this  folly 

16  greater  than  the  other  that  thou  did^t 
29  the  servants,  .did.  .as  Absalom  had  com. 

20  hath  thy  servant  Joab  done  this  thing 

21  Behold  now,  I  have  done  this  thing  :  go 
6  on  this  manner  did  Absalom  to  all  Israel 

26  let  him  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto 

10  Wherefore  hast  thou  done  so? 

20  Give  counsel  among  you  what  wre  shall  do 
6  shall  we  do  (after)  his  saying?  if  not 

4  What  seemeth  you  best  I  will  do 

13  God  do  so  to  me,  aud  more  also,  if  thou 
iS  aud  to  do  what  he  thought  good 

27  do  therefore  (what  is)  good  in  thine  eyes 

37  do  to  him  what  shall  seem  good  unto  thee 

38  I  will  do  to  him  that  which  shall  seem 
38  and  whatsoever,  .(that)  will  I  do  for  thee 

3  David  said.  .What  shalll  do  for  you? 

4  What  ye  shall  say,  (that)  will  I  do  for  you 

1 1  it  was  told  David  what  Rizpah . .  had  done 

17  Be  it  far  from  me.  .that  I  should  do  this 
17  These  things  did  these  tlnee  mighty  men. 


DO 


264 


DO 


2  Sa.  23.  22  These  (things)  did  Benaiah  the  son  of 
24.  10  I  have  sinned  greatly  in  that  I  have  done 
24.  17  I  have  sinned,  and  I  have  done  wickedly 
24.  17  but  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done? 

1  Ki.  1.    6  saying,  Why  hast  thou  done  so  ?  and  he 

1.  30  even  so  will  I  certainly  do  this  day 

2.  3  mayest  prosper  in  all  that  thou  doest 

2.  5  thou  knowest  also  what  Joab.  .did  to  me 
2.  5  what  he  did  to  the  two  captains  of  the 
2.  6  Do  therefore  according  to  thy  wisdom 
2.  9  and  knowest  what  thou  oughtest  to  do 
2.  23  saying,  God  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also 
2.  31  Do  as  he  hath  said,  and  fall  upon  him 
2.  38  my  lord . .  hath  said,  so  will  thy  servant  do 

2.  44  that  thou  didst  to  David  my  father 

3. 12  I  have  done  according  to  thy  words 

3.  28  the  wisdom  of  God  (was)  in  him  to  do  ju. 

5.  8  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  concerning  timber 
7. 18  and  so  did  he  for  the  other  chapiter 

7.  40  Hiram  made  an  end  of  doing  all  the  work 

8.  32  Then  hear  thou  in  heaven,  and  do,  and 
8.  39  and  forgive,  and  do,  and  give  to  every 
8.  43  do  according  to  all  that  the  stranger 

8.  66  all  the  goodness  that  the  Lord  had  done 

9.  1  Solomon's  desire,  .he  was  pleased  to  do 
9.   4  to  do  according  to  all  that  I  have  comma. 
9.   8  Why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this 

10.  9  therefore  made  he  thee  king,  to  do  judg. 

11.  6  Solomon  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
11.    8  likewise  did  he  for  all  his  strange  wives 
11. 12  I  will  not  do  it  for  David  thy  father's 

11.  33  to  do  (that  which  is)  right  in  mine  eyes 
11.  38  and  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  do  (that  is) 
11.  38  keep  my  statutes,  .as  David,  .did 

11.  41  and  all  that  he  did,  and  his  wisdom 

12.  27  If  this  people  go  up  to  do  sacrifice  in 
12.  32  So  did  he  in  Beth-el,  sacrificing  unto 

11  that  the  man  of  God' had  done  that  day 

4  And  Jeroboam's  wife  did  so,  and  arose 

8  to  do  (that)  only  (which  was)  right  in 

9  But  hast  done  evil  above  all  that  were 
22  And  Judah  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

22  above  all  that  their  fathers  bad  done 
24  they  did  according  to  all  the  abominations 

29  rest  of  the  acts,  .and  all  that  he  did 
3  all  the  sins,  .which  he  had  done  before 
5,  11  did  (that  which  was)  right  hi  the 
7,  31  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 

23  and  all  his  might,  and  all  that  he  did 
26,  34  And  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

5  and  what  he  did,  and  his  might 
7  all  the  evil  that  he  did  in  the"  sight  of  the 

14  rest  of  the  acts,  .and  all  that  he  did 
19  in  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

19  in  his  sin  which  lie  did,  to  make  Israel  to 
27  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Omri  which  he  did 

30  Ahab.  .did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
33  Ahab  did  more  to  provoke  the  Lord 

5  did  according  unto  the  word  of  the  LORD 
13  Fear  not;  go  (and)  do  as  thou  hast  said 

15  she  went,  and  did  according  to  the  saying 
13  what  I  did  when  Jezebel  slew  the  proph. 
36  I  have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  word 

1  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  Elijah  had  done 

2  So  let  the  gods  do  (to  me),  and  more  also 

20  Go  back  again  :  for  what  have  I  done  to 
20.  9  All.  .1  will  do  :  but  this.  .1  may  not  do 
20.  10  The  gods  do  so  unto  me,  and  more  also 
20. 22  and  mark,  and  see  what  thou  doest 

20.  24  And  do  this  thing;  Take  the  kings  away 
20.  25  he  hearkened  unto  their  voice,  and  did  so 
21. 11  the  men.  .did  as  Jezebel  had  sent  unto 
2i.  26  he  did.  .according  to  all  (things)  as  did 
22. 22  Thou  shalt  persuade . .  go  forth,  and  do  so 
22.  39  rest  of  the  acts,  .and  all  that  he  did 
22. 43  doing  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  eyes 
22.  52  And  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
22.  53  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done 
i  Ki.  1.  18  rest  of  the  acts  of  Ahaziah  which  he  did 
2.    9  Ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee,  before  I 

4.  2  Elisha  said  unto  her,  What  shall  I  do 

4. 13  what  (is)  to  be  done  for  thee?  wouldest 
5. 13  wouldest  thou  not  have  done  (it)? 

6.  15  Alas,  my  master  !  how  shall  we  do  ? 

6.  31  he  said,  God  do  so  and  more  also  to  me 

7.  9  they  said  one  to  another,  We  do  not  well 
7. 12  what  the  Syrians  have  done  to  us 

8.  2  did  after  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 
8.   4  the  great  things  that  Elisha  hath  done 

8.  12  Because  I  know  the  evil  that  thou  wilt  do 
8.  13  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing? 
8. 18  And  he  walked,  .as  did  the  house  of  Ahab 
8. 18,  27  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
8.  23  rest  of  the  acts,  .and  all  that  he  did 
10.    5  and  will  do  all  that  thou  shalt  bid  us 
10.    5  do  thou  (that  which  is)  good  in  thine  eyes 
10. 10  the  Lord  hath  done  (that)  which  he  spake 
10.  19  But  Jehu  did  (it)  in  subtilty,  to  the  intent 
10.  30  Because  thou  hast  done  well  in  executing 
10.  30  hast  done  unto  the  house  of  Ahab  accor. 

10.  34  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehu,  and  all.  .he  did 

11.  5  This  (is)  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do 

11.  0  the  captains  over  the  hundreds  did  accor. 

12.  2  Ami  Jehoash  did  (that  which  was)  right 

12,  11  into  the  hands  of  them  that  did  the  work 
12. 19  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 

13.  2,  11  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the 

13.  8,  12  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 

14.  3  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 
14.    3  he  did.  .as  Joash  his  father  did 

14.  15  rest  of  the  arts  of  Jehoash  which  he  did 
14.  24  And  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in 


2  Kl.  14.  2S  all  that  he  did,  and  his  might,  how 

J5-  3.  34  Aml  ne  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 
15.  3,  34  according  to  all.  .his  father,  .had  done 
15.  6  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 
15.  9, 18,  24,  28  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in 
15.  9  as  his  fathers  had  done :  he  departed  not 
15.  21,  26,  31,  36  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 

15.  34  did  according  to  all  that.  .Uzziah  had  done 

16.  2  and  did  not  (that  which  was)  right  in 
16.  16  Thus  did  ITrijah  the  priest,  according  to 

16.  19  rest  of  the  acts  of  Ahaz  which  he  did 

17.  2  And  lie  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the 
17.  12  Lord  had  said . .  Ye  shall  not  do  this 
17.  15  that  they  should  not  do  like  them 

17.  17  and  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in  the 
■17.  22  in  all  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  which  he  did 
17.  34  Unto  this  day  they  do  after  the  former 
17.  34  neither  do  they  after  their  statutes 
17.  37  ye  shall  observe  to  do  for  evermore 

17.  40  but  they  did  after  their  former  manner 
17. 41  as  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they  unto  this 

18.  3  did . .  according  to  all  that  David . .  did 

18.  12  and  would  not  hear  (them),  nor  do  (them) 

19.  11  what  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  done  to 
19.  25  Hast  thou  not  heard,  .(how)  I  have  done 

19.  31  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  (of  hosts)  shall  do 

20.  3  and  have  done  (that  which  is)  good  in 

20.  9  the  Lord  will  do  the  thing  that  he  hath 

21.  2  And  he  did  (that  winch  was)  evil  in  the 
21.    3  and  made  a  grove,  as  did  Ahah  king  of  I. 
21.   8  only  if  they  will  ohserve  to  do  according 
21.    9  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil  than  did 
21.  11  done,  .above  all  that  the  Amorites  did 
21. 15  they  have  done  (that  which  was)  evil  in 
21.  16  in  doing  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 
21. 17  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 

21.  20  And  he  did.  .as  his  father  Manasseh  did 

21.  25  rest  of  the  acts  of  Amon  which  he  did 

22.  2  And  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 
22.    9  into  the  hand  of  them  that  do  the  work 

22.  13  to  do  according  unto  all  that  which  is 

23.  17  proclaimed  these  things  that  thou  hast  d. 
23.  19  Josiah  took  away,  and  did  to  them  acco. 
23. 19  to  all  the  acts  that  he  had  done  in  Beth. 

23.  28  rest  of  the  acts,  .all  that  he  did 

23-  32, 37  did . .  according  to  all . .  his  fathers  had  d. 

24.  3  Manasseh,  according  to  all  that  he  did 
24.    5  rest  of  the  acts,  .alfthat  he  did 

24.    g  did.  .according  to  all.  .his  father  had  d. 
24,  19  did.  .according  to  all.  .Jehoiakimhad  do. 
1  Ch.  10.  11  heard  all  that  the  Philistines  had  done 
11.  19  God  forbid  it  me,  that  I  should  do  this 
11.  19  These  things  did  these  three  mightiest 

11.  24  These  (things)  did  Benaiah  the  son  of  Je. 

12.  32  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do 
4  the  congregation  said  that  they  would  do 

16  David  therefore  did  as  God  commanded 

12  his  marvellous  works  that  he  hath  done 
2  Do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart;  for  God 

19  according  to  thine  own  heart,  hast  thou  d. 
23  be  established,  .and  do  as  thou  hast  said 

13  let  the  Lord  do  (that  which  is)  good  in 
8  I  have  sinned,  .because  I  have  done  this 

10  choose  thee  one  of  them,  that  I  may  do 

17  (as  for)  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done? 

23  let  my  lord  the  king  do  (that  which  is) 

16  be  doing,  and  the  Lord  be  with  thee 

24  that  did  the  work  for  the  service  of  the 
26  over  them  that  did  the  work  of  the  field 

7  be  constant  to  do  my  commandments 
10  Take  heed  now.  .be  strong,  and  do  (it) 

20  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage  and  do 
19  to  do  all  (these  things),  and  to  build  the 
23  and  do,  and  judge  thy  servants,  by 
33  do  according  to  all  that  the  stranger 

17  do  according  to  all  that  I  have  command. 

21  Why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this 

8  made  he  thee  king,  .to  do  judgment  and 

14  he  did  evil,  because  he  prepared  not  his 
2  Asa  did  (that  which  was)  good  and  right 
4  to  do  the  law  and  the  commandment 

21  thou  shalt  also  prevail:  go  out,  and  do 

6  said  to  the  judges,  Take  heed  what  ye  do 

7  take  heed,  and  do  (it):  for  (there  is)  no 

9  Thus  shall  ye  do  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

19.  10  this  do,  and  ye  shall  not  trespass 

20.  12  neither  know  we  what  to  do:  but  our 
20.  32  doing  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

20.  35  king  of  Israel,  who  did  very  wickedly 

21.  6  he  walked,  .like as  did  the  house  of  Ahab 

22.  4  Wherefore  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 

23.  4  This  (is)  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do 

23.  8  So  the  Levites  and  all  Judah  did  accord. 

24,  2  And  Joash  did  (that  which  was)  right 
24.  11  Thus  they  did  day  by  day.  and  gathered 
24.  12  to  such  as  did  the  work  of  the  service 
24.  16  because  he  had  done  good  in  Israel,  both 

24.  22  which  Jehoiada  his  father  had  done  to 

25.  2  And  lie  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 
25.    8  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  (it),  be  strong  for  the 
25.    0  what  shall,  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents 

25.  16  to  destroy  thee,  because  thou  hast  done 

26.  4  did.  .according  to  all  that. .  Amaziah  did 

27.  2  he  did,  .according to  all  that.  .Uzziah  did 

28.  1  he  did  not  (that  which  was)  right  in  the 

29.  2  did.  .according  to  all.  .David,  .had  done 

29.  6  done  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  eyes  of 

30.  5  they  had  done  (it)  of  a  long  (time  in) 

30.  12  to  do  the  commandment  of  the  king  and 

31.  20  thus  did  Hezekiah  throughout  all  Judah 

31.  21  did  (it)  with  all  Ids  heart,  and  prospered 

32.  13  Knuwye.  .what  I  and  my  fathers  have  d. 


2CI1 


2  Ch.  32 
33^ 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
36. 

Ezra    7. 


Neh. 


13 
i3< 

13' 
*3 
13 
13' 
Esth.  1 


3- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 

Job  1. 
1. 
s- 

9- 
9- 
*3- 
21. 
23. 
3*- 
35- 
37- 


Fsa. 


7- 
14. 
i5- 
i5- 
22. 
31- 
34- 
34- 
37- 
37- 
39- 
40. 
40. 
50. 
5*- 
52. 
53- 
56. 
56. 
60. 
66. 

71- 

72. 

77- 
78. 
78. 
S3- 


103, 
103. 
103. 


33  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  did  him  honour 
2  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 

8  to  do  all  that  I  have  commanded  them 

9  to  do  worse  than  the  heathen,  whom  the 

22  did  (that  which  was)  evil.,  as  did  Manasseh 
2  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

12  And  the  men  did  the  work  faithfully 
16  All . .  committed  to  thy  servants,  they  do 
21  to  do  after  all  that  is  written  in  this 

32  the  inhabitants  oi  Jerusalem  did  accor. 

6  that  (they)  may  do  according  to  the  word 
5,  9,  12  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the 

8  his  abominations  which  he  did,  and  that 

10  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do 

4  be  of  good  courage,  and  do  (it) 

5  they  should  do  according  to  this  word 

11  make  confession,  .and  do  his  pleasure 

12  As  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we  do 

16  And  the  children  of  the  captivity  did  so 

9  keep  my  commandments,  and  do  them 
12  had  put  in  my  heart  to  do  at  Jerusalem 
16  knew  not  whither  I  went,  or  what  I  did 

16  nor  to  the  rulers,  nor  to  the  rest  that  did! 
19  What  (is)  this  thing  that  ye  do?  will  ye 

2  What  do  these  feeble  Jews?  will  they 
9  It  (is)  not  good  that  ye  do :  ought  ye  not 
12  so  will  we  do  as  thou  sayest 

12  they  should  do  according  to  this  promise 

13  the  people  did  according  to  this  promise 
15  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God 

19  (according)  to  all  that  I  have  done  for 

2  But  they  thought  to  do  me  mischief 

3  I  (am)  doing  a  great  work,  so  that  I  can. 

13  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and 

17  had  not  the  children  of  Israel  done  so 

17  thy  r.-onders  that  thou  didst  among  them 
24  they  might  do  with  them  as  they  would 

28  after  they  had  rest,  they  did  evil  again 

29  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them 

33  hast  done  right,  but  we  have  done  wick. 
29  to  observe  and  do  all  the  commandments 
12  their  brethren  that  did  the  work  of  the 

7  the  evil  that  Eliashib  did  for  Tobiah 

10  Levites  and  the  singers,  that  did  the  work 

14  my  good  deeds  that  I  have  done  for  the 

17  What  evil  thing  (is)  this  that  ye  do,  and 

18  Did  not  your  fathers  thus,  and 

27  then  hearken  unto  you  to  do  all  this 

8  should  do  according  to  every  man's  plea. 

15  What  shall  we  do  unto  the  queen  Vashti 
21  king  did  according  to  the  word  of  Mem. 

1  remembered  Vashti,  and  what  she  had  d. 

4  the  thing  pleased  the  king ;  and  he  did  so 

20  Esther  did  the  commandment  of  Horde. 

11  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee 

17  and  did  according  to  all  that  Esther  had 

5  haste,  that  he  may  do  as  Esther  hath 

8  will  do  to  morrow  as  the  king  hath  said 

6  What  shall  be  done  unto  the  man  whom 
6  delight  to  do  honour  more  than  to  myself 

10  and  do  even  so  to  Mordecai  the  Jew,  that 
5  that  durst  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so? 
5  did  what  they  would  unto  those  that  ha. 

12  what  have  they  done  in  the  rest  of  the 

12  what  (is)  thy  request,  .and  it  shall  be  do. 

13  to  do  to  morrow  also  according  unto  this 

23  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  begun 

5  Thus  did  Job  continually 

9  and  said,  Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought? 
9  Which  doeth  great  things  and  unsearch. 

10  Which  doeth  great  things  past  finding 

12  who  will  say  unto  him,  What  doest  thou? 

20  do  not  two  (things)  unto  me ;  then  will 
31  who  shall  repay  him  (what)  he  hath  done 

13  (what)  his  soul  desireth,  even  (that)  he  d. 

14  What  then  shall  I  do  when  God  riseth 

6  transgressions  be  multiplied,  what  doest 
5  great  things  doeth  he,  which  we  cannot 
9  did  according  as  the  Lord  commanded 

3  and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper 
3  O  LORD  my  God,  if  I  have  done  this 
1,  3  (there  is)  none  that  doeth  good 
3  nor  doeth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nm* 
5  He  that  doeth  these,  .shall  never  be 
31  shall  declare,  .that  he  hath  done  (this) 
23  and  plentifully  rewardeth  the  proud  doer 
14  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  seek 

16  the  Loud  (is)  against  them  that  do  evil 

3  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good ;  (so) 

27  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good  ;  and  dwell 
9  opened  not  my  mouth;  because  thou  di. 
5  thy  wonderful  works  (which)  thou  hast  d. 

8  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God 

21  These,  .hast  thou  done,  and  I  kept  silen. 

4  and  done  (this)  evil  in  thy  sight ;  that 

9  I  will  praise  thee . .  because  thou  hast  do. 
1,  3  (there  is)  none  that  doeth  good 

4 T  will  not  fear  what  flesh  can  do  unto 

11  I  will  not  be  afraid  what  man  can  do 

12  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly 

16  I  will  declare  what  he  hath  done  for  my 

19  O  God.  .who  hast  done  great  things  :  O 

18  the  God  of  Israel,  who  only  doeth 

14  Thou  (art)  the  God  that  doest  wonders 
4  his  wonderful  works  that  he  hath  done 

12  Marvellous  things  did  he  in  the  sight  of 
9  Do  unto  them  as  (unto)  the  Midianites 

10  For  thou  (ait)  meat,  and  doest  wondrous 
1  for  he  hath  done  marvellous  tilings 

iS  that  remember  his  commandments  to  do 

20  that  excel  in  strength,  that  do  his  com. 

21  (ye)  ministers  of  his,  that  do  his  pleasure 


DO 


265 


DO 


Psa  105.  5  his  marvellous  works  that  he  hath  done 
106.  3  he  that  doeth  righteousness  at  all  times 
106.    6  We  have  sinned . .  we  have  done  wickedly 

106.  21  which  had  done  great  things  iu  Egypt 

107.  23  that  do  business  in  great  waters 

108.  13  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly 
iog.  21  But  do  thou  for  me,  O  GOD  the  Lord 

109.  27  may  know  that,  .thou,  Lord,  hast  done 
in.  zogood  understanding  have  all  they  that  do 
115.    3  he  hath  done  whatsoever  he  hath 

11S.    6  I  will  not  fear :  what  can  man  do  unto 
118. 15,  16  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth 
no.  121  I  have  done  judgment  and  justice 
119.  166  Lord,  I  have,  .done  thy  commandments 
126.    2,  3  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for 

135.  6  Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased,  (that)  did 

136.  4  To  him  who  alone  doeth  great  wonders 
143.  10  Teach  me  to  do  thy  will ;  for  thou  (art) 

Prov.  2.  14  Who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  (and)  delight  in 
3.  27  when .  .in  the  power  of  thine  hand  to  do 
6     3  Do  this  now,  my  son,  and  deliver  thyself 
6. 32  he  ^that)  doeth  it  destroyeth  his  own 
ro.  23  (It  is)  as  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  mischief 
21.    3  To  do  justice  and  judgment  (is)  more 
21.    7  because  they  refuse  to  do  judgment 
21. 15  (It  is)  joy  to  the  just  to  do  judgment 

24.  29  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  me 

25.  8  lest  (thou  know  not)  what  to  do  in  the 
31.  29  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously 

Eccl.  2.    2  I  said .  .of  mirth.  What  doeth  it  ? 

2.  3  which  they  should  do  under  the  heaven 
2. 11  the  labour  that  I  had  laboured  to  do 

3.  i2  for  (a  man)  to  rejoice,  and  to  do  good  in 
3.  14  whatsoever  God  doeth,  it  shall  be  for 

3. 14  God  doeth  (it),  that  (men)  should  fear 
5.    1  for  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil 

7.  20-not  a  just  man  upon  the  earth,  that  do. 
S.    3  for  he  doeth  whatsoever  pleaseth 

S.    4  who  may  say  unto  him,  What  doest  thou  ? 

8.  10  were  forgotten,  .where  they  had  so  done 
8.  11  the  heart,  .is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil 

8.  12  Though  a  sinner  do  evil  an  hundred 

9.  10  Whatsoever  thy  hand  nudeth  to  do,  do 
Si  ng  3.   8  what  shall  we  do  for  our  sister  in  the 
Isa.     5.    4  What.  .more,  .that  I  havenotdone  in  it? 

5.    5  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vine. 
10.    3  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation 
10. 11  as  I  have  done  unto  Samaria  and  her 
10.  11  Shall  I  not.  .so  do  to  Jerusalem  and  her 

10.  13  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done 
12.  5  for  he  hath  done  excellent  things  :  this 
19. 15  which  the  head  or  tail,  .may  do 

20.    2  And  he  did  so,  walking  naked  and 
25.    1  for  thou  hast  done  wonderful  (things) 
28.  21  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange 
33. 13  Hear,  ye  (that  are)  far  oft",  what  I  have  d. 
37.  11  what  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  done  to 
37.  26  Hast  thou  not  heard .  .(how)  I  have  done 

37.  32  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  do 

38.  3  and  have  done,  .good  in  thy  sight 

38.   7  the  Lord  will  do  this  thing  that  he  hath 

38. 15  he  hath  both  spoken,  .and.  .hath  done 
41.    4  Wrho  hath  wrought  and  done  (it),  calling 
41.  20  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  done 

42. 16  These  things  will  I  do  unto  them,  and 

43.  19 1  will  do  a  new  thing ;  now  it  shall 

44.  23  Sing,  O  ye  heavens  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  d. 

45.  7  create  evil :  I  the  Lord  do  all  these 

46. 10  Declaring.  ,(thethings)thatarenot(yet)d. 
46. 10  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all 

46.  11  I  have  purposed  (it),  I  will  also  do  it 
48.    3  I  did  (them)  suddenly,  and  they  came 
48.    5  thou  shouldest  say,  Mine  idol  hath  done 
48.  n  for  mine  own  sake,  will  I  do  (it)  :  for 

48.  14  he  will  do  his  pleasure  on  Babylon,  and 
53.    9  because  he  hath  done  no  violence 
56.    1  Keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  justice 
56.   2  Blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  doeth  this 
56.    2  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any 
58.    2  as  a  nation  that  did  righteousness,  and 
58.  13  (from)  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day 
58.  13  and  shalt  honour  him,  not  doing  thine 

64.  3  When  thou  didst  terrible  things 

65.  8  so  will  I  do  for  my  servant's  sakes,  that 

65.  12  did  evil  before  mine  eyes,  and  did  choose 

66.  4  they  did  evil  before  mine  eyes,  and  chose 
Jer.    2.  23  See  thy  way.  .know  what  thou  hast  done 

3.  5  thou  hast  spoken  and  done  evil  things 
3.    6  Hast  thou  seen  (that) . .  Israel  hath  done  ? 

3.  7  And  I  said  after  she  had  done  all  these 

4.  30  thou  (art)  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do  ? 

5.  19  Wherefore  doeth  the  Lord  our  God  all 
5.  31  and  what  will  ye  do  in  the  end  thereof  ? 
7.  10  We  are  delivered  to  do  all  these  abomin. 
7.  12  see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  of 
7.  13  now,  because  ye  have  done  all  these 

7.  14  Therefore  will  I  do  unto  (this)  house 
7.  14  and  to  your  fathers,  as  I  have  done  to  S, 
7.  17  Seest  thou  not  what  they  do  in  the  citie? 

7.  30  the  children  of  Judah  have  done  evil  in 

8.  6  What  have  I  done  ?  every  oue  turned  to 

9.  7  how  shall  I  do  for  the  daughter  of  my 

11.  4  Obey  my  voice,  and  do  them,  according 
11.    6  Hear  ye  the  words  of  this  covenant,  and  do 
11.    8  which  I  commanded,  .to do.  .butithey  did 

11.  17  the  evil . .  which  they  have  done  against 

12.  5  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jor.? 

14.  7  0  Lord,  .do  thou  (it)  for  thy  name's  sake 

15.  4  for  (that)  which  he  did  in  Jerusalem 

16.  12  ye  have  done  worse  than  your  fathers 

17.  22  neither  do  ye  any  work ;  but  hallow  ye 
T7-  24  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  to  do  no  work 

34: 


Jer.  18. 
18, 
18. 
18. 
18. 
19, 


Eze. 


6  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter  ! 
8  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to  do 
10  If  it  do  evil  in  my  sight,  that  it  obey  not 

12  we  will  every  one  do  the  imagination  of 

1 3  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  very 
12  Thus  will  I  do  unto  this  place,  saith 

4  For  if  ye  do  this  thing  indeed,  then 

8  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  tbas  unto 
15  Did  not  thy  father,  .do  judgment  and 

17  for  oppression,  and  for  violence,  to  do  (it) 
3  to  do.  .because  of  the  evil  of  their  doings 

14  do  with  me  as  seemethgood.  .unto  you 

6  the  Lord  do  so  :  the  Lord  perform  thy 
32  shall  he  behold  the  good  that  I  will  do  for 

15  I  have  done  these  things  unto  thee 

24  shall  not  return,  until  he  have  done  (it) 
37  for  all  that  they  have  done,  saith  the  L. 
23  they  have  done  nothing  of  all  that  thou 

23  that  thou  commandest  them  to  do:  tlier. 
30  the  children  of  Judah  have  only  done 

32  which  they  have  done  to  provoke  me  to 
35  that  they  should  do  this  abomination 

9  which  shall  hear  all  the  good  that  I  do 

18  meat  offerings,  and  to  do  sacrifice  cont. 

15  ye  were  now  turned,  and  had  done  right 
10  But  we  have,  .done  according  to  all  that 
iS  kept  all  his  precepts,  and  done  according 

3  all  the  evil  which  I  purpose  to  do  unto 

8  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah  did  according 

9  in  all  that  they  have  done  to  Jeremiah 
12  under  the  cords.     And  Jeremiah  did  so 
12  look  well  to  him,  and  do  him  no  harm 
12  but  do  unto  him  even  as  he  shall  say 

3  the  Lord,  .hath  done  according  as  he 

16  Thou  shalt  not  do  this  thing;  for  thou 
n  all  the  evil  that  Ishmael.  .had  done 

3  God  may  show,  .the  thing  that  we  may  do 

5  if  we  do  not  even  according  to  all  tilings 
10  I  repent  me  of  the  evil  that  I  have  done 

20  so  declare  unto  us,  and  we  will  do  (it) 

4  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that 

17  we  will  certainly  do  whatsoever  thing 
10  Cursed  (be)  he  that  doeth  the  work  of  the 
15  Shout,  .as  she  hath  done,  do  unto  her 

21  do  according  to  all  that  I  have  comman. 

29  according  to  all  that  she  hath  done,  do 
12  the  Lord  hath  both  devised  and  done 

24  all  their  evil  that  they  have  done  in  Zion 
2  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  eyes 

2  accordingto  all  that  Jehoiakim  had  done 
21  they  are  glad  that  thou  hast  done  (it) 

17  The  Lord  hath  done  (that)  which  he  had 
20  his  righteousness  which  he  hath  done 

7  neither  have  done  accordingto  the  judg. 
9  I  will  do.  .that  which  I  have  not  done 

9  whereunto  I  will  not  do  any  more  the 

10  not  said  in  vaiD  that  I  would  do  this  evil 
27  I  will  do  unto  them  after  their  way,  and 

6  Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  they  do? 

9  behold  the.  .abominations  that  they  do 

12  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  Israel  do  in 

13  see  greater  abominations  that  they  do 

1 1  I  have  done  as  thou  hast  commanded 

12  but  have  done  after  the  manner,  of  the 

20  keep  mine  ordinances,  and  do  them 

7  And  I  did  so  as  I  was  commanded 

9  the  rebellious  house,  said.  .What  doest 
11  like  as  I  have  done,  so  it  shall  be  done 
23  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  have  not  done 

23  all  that  I  have  done  in  it,  saith  the  LORD 

3  Shall  wood  be  taken  thereof  to  do 

5  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these 

30  seeing  thou  doest  all  these  (things) 

47  not  walked  after  their  ways,  nor  done 

48  sister  hath  not  done,  .as  thou  hast  done 
51  all  thine  abominations  which  thou  hast  d. 
54  be  confounded  in  all  that  thou  hast  done 
59  will  even  deal  with  thee  as  thou  hast  done 
63  pacified . .  for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith 
15  shall  he  escape  that  doeth  such  (things) .' 

18  when,  lo,  he.  .hath  done  all  these  (tilings) 

24  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  and  have  done 
5  if  a  man  be  just,  and  do  that  which  is 

10  (that)  doeth  the  like  to  (any)  one  of  these 

11  that  doeth  not  any  of  those  (duties),  but 

13  he  shall  not  live  :  he  hath  done  all  these 

14  all  his  father's  sins  which  he  hath  done 

14  and  considereth,  and  doeth  not  such  like 

18  did  (that)  which  (is)  not  good  among  his 

19  the  son  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful 
19  and  hath  done  them,  he  shall  surely  live 

21  the  wicked  will  turn,  .and  do  that  which 

22  in  his  righteousness  that  he  hath  done  he 
24  doeth  according  to  all  the  abominations 
24  that  the  wicked  (man)  doeth,  shall  he  live '.' 
24  All  his  righteousness  that  he  hath  done 

26  for  his  iniquity  that  he  hath  done  shall 

27  and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 
11  which  (if)  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  live  in 

13  which  (if)  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  live  in 
19  and  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them 

21  neither  kept  my  judgments  to  do  them 

21  which  (if)  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  live  in 

14  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  (it),  and  will  do 
30  1  will  do  these  (things)  unto  thee,  because 
3S  Moreover  this  they  have  done  unto  me 
39  lo,  thus  have  they  done  in  the  midst  of 
48  all  women  may  be  taught  not  to  do  after 
14  it  shall  come  to  pass,  and  I  will  do  (it) ;  I 

18  I  did  in  the  morning  as  I  was  com. 

19  Wilt  thou  not  tell  us.  that  thou  doest 

22  ye  shall  do  as  I  have  done  :  ye  shall  not 


Eze.  24.  24  all  that  he  hath  done  shall  ye  do ;  and 
25.  14  they  shall  do  in  Edom  according  to  mine 
33.14,  19  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 
33.  16  he  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful  and 

33.  31  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do  them 
33-  32  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them  not 
35.  11  I  will  even  do  according  to  thine 

35.  15  so  will  I  do  unto  thee  :  thou  shalt  be 

36.  22  I  do  not  (this)  for  your  sakes,  O  house  of 
36.  27  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments,  and  do 

36.  32  Aot  for  your  sakes  do  I  (this),  saith  the 
^6.  36  I  the  LORD  have  spoken  (it),  and  I  will  do 

36.  37  to  do  (it)  for  them  ;  I  will  increase  them 

37.  24  and  observe  my  statutes,  and  do  them 
39.  24  have  I  done  unto  them,  and  hid 

43.  11  be  ashamed  of  all  that  they  have  dene 

43.  11  all  the  ordinances  thereof,  and  do  them 
45.  20  so  thou  shalt  do  the  seventh  (day)  of  the 

45.  25  shall  he  do  the  like  in  the  feast  of  the 

46.  12  prepare,  .as  he  did  on  the  sabbath  day 
Dan.    8.    4  he  did  according  to  his  will,  and  became 

8.  27  I  rose  up,  and  did  the  king's  business 

9.  14  righteous  in  all  his  works  which  he  doeth 
9.  19  O  Lord,  forgive  ;  0  Lord,  hearken  and  do 

11.    3  that  shall  rule,  .and  do  according  to  his 
11.  16  he  that  cometh  against  him  shall  do 
11.  17  thus  shall  he  do  :  and  he  shall  give  him 
11.  24  He  shall  enter,  .andhe  shall  do(that) 
11.  24  which  his  fathers  have  not  done,  nor  his 
11.  28  he  shall  do  (exploits),  and  return  to  his 
11.  30  so  shall  he  do  ;  he  shall  even  return,  and 
11.  32  people,  .shall  be  strong,  and  do  (exploits) 
11.  36  the  king  shall  do  according  to  his  will 
11.  39  Thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strong  holds. 
Hos.    6.    4  0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee? 
6.   "4  O  Judah,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee? 
9.    s  What  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day,  and 
10.    3  what  then  shoidd  a  king  do  to  us? 

10.  15  So  shall  Beth-el  do  unto  you  because  of 
Joel    2.  20  come  up,  because  he  hath  done  great 

2.  21  be  glad . .  for  the  Lord  will  do  great  things 
Amos  3.    6  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  (it?) 

3.  7  Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do  nothing,  but 

3.  10  For  they  know  not  to  do  right,  saith  the 

4.  12  Therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  O 

4.  12  because  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare 

9. 12  saith  the  Lord  that  doeth  this 

Obad.      15  as  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto 

Jon.     1.  10  said  unto  him,  Why  hast  thou  done  this  ?' 

1.  11  What  shall  we  do  unto  thee,  that  the  sea 

1.  14  for  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  done  as  it  pleased 

3.  10  that  he  would  do  unto  them  ;  and  he  did 

Mic.    6.    3  0  my  people,  what  have  I  done  unto  thee '; 

6.  8  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to 
Zeph.  3.    5  he  will  not  do  iniquity  :  every  morning  d 

3.  13  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity 
Hag.  1.  14  they  came  and  did  work  in  the  house  cf 
Zech.  1.   6  did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fathers  ? 

1.    6  Like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  thought  to  do 

1.  21  Then  said  I,  What  come  these  to  do?  And 

7.  3  as  I  have  done  these  so  many  years? 

8.  16  These  (are)  the  things  that  ye  shall  do 
Mai.    2.  12  The  Lord  will  Lutofi  the  man  that  doeth 

2.  13  this  have  ye  done  again,  covering  the 

2.  17  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  (is)  good  in  the 

4.  1  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do 

4.    3  that  I  shall  do  (this),  saith  the  Lord  of 

Q.To  act,  work,  do,  make,  7%3paaZ. 

Deut32.  27  and  the  Lord  hath  rot  done  all  this 
Job     7.  20  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee,  0  thou 

11.  8  as  high  as  heaven  ;  what  canst  thou  do? 
22.  17  and  what  can  the  Almighty  do  for  them? 

34.  32  if  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more 

35.  6  If  thou  sinnest,  what  doest  thou  against 
Fsa.  1 1.    3  be  destroyed,  what  can  the  righteous  do  ? 

44.  1  fathers  have  told  us,  (what)  work  thou  d. 
119.    3  They  also  do  no  iniquity  :  they  walk  in 

Prov.30.  20  and  saith,  I  have  done  no  wickedness 

7.  Act,  work,  deed,  doing,  h^b  pool. 

Job.  37.  12  that  they  may  do  whatsoever  he  command. 

8.7*0  set,  put,  place,  c-b  sum. 

Exod  10.   2  my  signs  which  I  have  done  among  them 

Q.To  do,  recompence,  h^  gamed. 

Gen.  50.  15  requite  us  all  the  evil  which  we  did  untc* 

50.  17  forgive,  .then'  sin ;  for  they  did  unto  thee 

Frov.  3.  30  Strive  not.  .if  he  have  done  thee  no  harm 

37.  12  She  will  do  him  good  and  not  evil  all  the 

10.  To  work  in,  evepyew  energeo. 

Phil.    2.  13  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  (his)  good 

11.  To  end  thoroughly,  €7nTe\e'a>  epiteleo. 
Lukei3.  32  I  cast  out  devils,  and  I  [do]  cures  to  day 

12.  To  work,  labour,  perform,  4pyd(o/j.at  ergazomai. 
Gal.     6.  10  let  us  do  good  unto  all  (men),  especially 
Col.     3.  23  do  (it)  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not 
3  John       5  whatsoever  thou  doest  to  the  brethren 

ld.Tohave,  hold,  ex**  ec?l°- 

Acts  15.  36  Let  us  go  again  and.  .see  how  they  do 

\4.  To  put  or  lay  down,  KaraTiQ-r\ixi  fcatatithemi. 
Acts  25.   9  Festus,  willing  to  do  the  Jews  a  pleasure 

15.  To  work  out  thoroughly,  Karcpydfafxai  kotergaz. 
Horn.  2.    9  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil 

7.  15  For  that  which  I  do  I  allow  not:  for 
7.  17  ;  7.  20  ;  1  Co.  5.  3  ;  Eph.  6.  13. 

16.  To  shew,  iuSeUvvfii  endeiknumi. 

2  Ti.  4.  14  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much 


DO 


2Q6 


DO 


17.  To  do,  -koUw  poied. 

Matt.  j.  24  being  raised  from  sleep,  did  as  the  angel 
5.  19  but  whosoever  shall  do  and  teach  (them) 
5.  44  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray 
5.  46  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  same  ? 

5.  47  what  do  ye  more .  .do  not  even  the 

6.  1  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  alms 

6.    2  thou  doest . .  alms . .  as  the  hypocrites  do 
6.    3  But  when  thou  doest  alms,  let  not  thy 

6.  3  know  what  thy  right  hand  doeth 

7. 12  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to 

7.  21  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father 
7.  22  in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works? 
7.  24  whosoever,  .doeth  them,  I  will  liken  him 

7.  26  doeth  them  not,  shall  be  likened  unto  a 

8.  9  to  my  servant,  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  (it) 

9.  28  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ? 
12.    2  do  that  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  upon 
12.    3  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did 

12. 12  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the  sabbath  days 

12.  50  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father 

13.  28  He  said.. An  enemy  hath  done  this 

13.  41  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do 

13.  58  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there 

17.  12  they,  .have  done  unto  him  whatsoever 

18.  35  So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do 

19.  16  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do 

20.  5  went  out  about  the  sixth,  .hour,  and  did 
20.  15  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will 

20.  32  Whatt  will  ye  that  I  shall  do  unto  you  ? 

21.  6  the  disciples  went,  and  did  as  Jesus 
2i.  15  saw  the  wonderful  things  that  he  did 
21.  21  ye  shall  not  only  do  this,  .to  the  fig-tree 
21.  23  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these 

21.  24,  ij  by  what  authority  I  do  these  things 
21.  31  Whether  of  them  twain  did  the  will  of 
21.  36  Again,  .they  did  unto  thein  likewise 
21.  40  what  will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen 
23.    3  whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe . .  do 
23.    3  do  not  ye  after  their  works  :  for  they,  .do 
23.    s  all  their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen  of 

23.  23  these  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not 

24.  46  whom  his  lord,  .shall  find  so  doing 

25.  40  as  ye  have  done  (it),  .ye  have  done  (it) 
25-  45  Ye  did  (it)  not.  .ye  did  (it)  not  to  me 

26.  12  in  that,  .she  did  (it)  for  my  burial 
26.  13  also  this,  that  tlus  woman  hath  done 

26.  19  the  disciples  did  as  Jesus  had  appointed 

27.  22  What  shall  I  do  theu  with  Jesus  which 

27.  23  governor  said,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  d. 

28.  15  So  they  took  the  money,  and  did  as  they 
Mark  2.  24  why  do  they  on  the  sabbath  day  that 

2.  25  Have  ye  never  read  what  David  did 

3.  8  had  heard  what  great  things  he  did 

3.  35  For  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  God 
5.  19  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for 
5.  20  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done  for 

5.  32  looked,  .about  to  see  her  that  had  done 

6.  5  And  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work 
6.  20  when  he  heard  him,  he  did  mauy  things 

6.  30  what  they  had  done,  and  what  they  had 

7.  8  [and  many  other  such  like  tilings  ye  do] 

7. 12  ye  suffer  him  no  more  to  do  ought  for 
7.  13  and  many  such  like  tilings  do  ye 

7.  37  saying,  He  hath  done  all  things  well 

9. 13  they  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they 
9.  39  there  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle 

10.  17  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  inherit  eternal 
10.  35  we  would  that  thou  shouldest  do  for  us 
10.  36  What  would  ye  that  I  should  do  for  you? 

10.  51  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  uuto 

11.  3  [if  any  man  say  unto  you,  Why  do  ye  this?] 
11.    s  certain,  .said.  .What  do  ye,  loosing  the 
11.  2S  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things? 
11.  2S  who  gave  thee  this  authority  to  do  these 
11.  29  I  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

11.  33  do  I  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do  theso 

12.  9  What  shall,  .the  lord  of  the  vineyard  do? 
14.    7  "whensoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good 

14.  S  She  hath  done  what  she  could :  she  is 

14.  9  (this)  also  that  she  hath  done  shall  be 

15.  8  to  (desire  him  to  do)  as  he  had  ever  done 
15.  12  What  will  ye  then  that  I  shall  do  (uuto) 
15.  14  Pilate  said.  .Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done? 

Luke  1.  49  For  he  that  is  mighty  hath  done  to  ni3 

2.  27  to  do  for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  law 

3.  10  the  people  asked . .  What  shall  we  do  then  ? 
3.  11  he  that  hath  meat,  let  him  do  likewise 

3.  12  publicans.. said.. what  shall  we  do? 

3. 14  soldiers  likewise . .  And  what  shall  we  do  ? 

3.  19  for  all  the  evils  which  Herod  had  done 

4.  23  whatsoever  we  have  heard,  .do  also  here 

5.  6  they  had  this  done,  they  inclosed  a  great 

6.  2  Why  do  ye  that  which  is  not  lawful  [to  do] 
6".  3  Have  ye  not  read,  .what  David  did,  when 
6.  10  And  [he  didj  so;  and  his  hand  was  rest  jr. 
6.  11  communed.,  what  they  might  do  to  Jesus 
6.  23  for  in  the  like  manner  did  their  fathers 
6.  26  so  did  their  fathers  to  the  false  prophets 
6.  27  Love  your  enemies,  do  good  to  them 

6.  31  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  also 
6.  33  for  sinners  also  do  even  the  same 
6.  46  why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  .and  do  not  the 
6.  47  hearoth  my  sayings,  and  doeth  them 

6.  49  But  he  that  heareth,  and  doeth  not,  is 

7.  8  to  my  servant,  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  (it) 

8.  21  these  which  hear  the  word,  .and  do  it 

8.  39  show  how  great  things  God  hath  done 
8  39  how  great  things  Jeaua  had  done  unto 

9.  10  told  him  all  that  they  had  done 

9.  15  they  did  so,  and  made  them  all  sit  down 
9.  43  every  one  at  all  things  which  Jesus  did 


Luke  9.  54  [and  consume  them,  even  as  Elias  did  ?  ] 
10.  25  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
10,  28  he  said,  .this  do,  and  thou  shalt  live 

10.  37  then  said  Jesus.  .Go,  and  do  thou  likewise 

11.  42  these  ought  ye  to  have  done,  aud  not  to 

12.  4  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do 
12.  17  What  shall  I  do,  because  I  have  no  room 
12.  iS  This  will  I  do :  I  will  pull  down  my  barns 
12.  43  whom  his  lord,  .shall  find  so  doing 

i2.  47  prepared  not  (himself),  neither  did  acco. 
16.    3  the  steward  said.  .What  shall  I  do? 

16.  4  I  am  resolved  what  to  do,  that,  when  I  am 
i5.   8  because  he  had  done  wisely :  for  the 

17.  9  because  he  did  the  things  that  were  com. 
17. 10  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  those  things 

17.  10  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do 

18.  18  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 

18.  41  What  wilt  thou  that  I  shall  do  uuto  thee? 

19.  48  could  not  find  what  they  might  do 

20.  2  Tell  us,  by  what  authority  doest  thou  these 
20.    8  Neither  tell  I.,  by  what  authority  I  do 
20.  13  Then  said  the  lord . .  What  shall  I  do  ? 
20.  15  What,  .shall  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  do 

22.  19  for  you :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 

23.  22  he  said.  .Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done? 
23.  31  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree 
23.  34  forgive . .  for  they  know  not  what  [they  do] 

John  2.    5  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  (it) 
2.  11  This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in 
2.  18  seeing  that  thou  doest  these  things? 

2.  23  when  they  saw  the  miracles  which  he  did 

3.  2  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou  doest 

3.  21  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light 

4.  29  which  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did 
4.  34  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him 

4.  39  He  told  me  all  that  ever  I  did 

4.  45  having  seen  all  the  things  that  he  did 

4.  54  This  (is),  .the  second  miracle.  .Jesus  did 

5.  16  because  he  had  done  these  things  on 
5.  19  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself 
5. 19  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do 

5-  19  what,  .he  doeth,  then  also  doeth  the  Son 
5.  20  showethhimall  things  that  himself  doeth 
5.  29  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  g. 
5.  30  I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing 

5.  36  the  same  works  that  I  do,  bear  witness 

6.  2  they  saw  his  miracles  which  he  did  on 
6.    6  for  he  himself  knew  what  he  would  do 

6.  14  they  had  seen  the  miracle  that  Jesus  did 
6.  28  Wliat  shall  we  do,  that  we  might  work 

6.  38  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do 

7.  3  also  may  see  the  works  that  thou  doest 
7.    4  doeth  any  thing  In  secret,  and  he  himself 
7.    4  If  thou  do  these  things,  show  thyself  to 
7.  17  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know 
7.  21  I  have  done  one  work,  and  ye  all  marvel 
7.  31  W'hen  Christ  cometh,  will  he  do  more 

7.  51  before  it  hear  him  and  know,  .he  doeth 

8.  28  I  am  (lie),  and  (that)  I  do  nothing  of  myself 
8.  -39  for  I  do  always  those  things  that  please 
8.  38  ye  do  that  which  ye  have  seen  with 

8.  39  ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham 

5.  40  which  I  have  heard  of  God :  this  did 
8.  41  Ye  do  the  deeds  of  your  father 

8.  44  and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do 

9.  16  How  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such 
9.  26  What  did  he  to  thee?  how  opened  he 
9.  31  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  and  doeth  his 

9.  33  If  this  man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do 
10.  25  the  works  that  I  do  in  my  Father's  name 
10.  37  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father 
10.  38  But  if  I  do,  though  ye  believe  not  me 

10.  41  many  resorted,  .and  said,  John  did  mir. 

11.  45  had  seen  the  things  which  Jesus  did 
11.  46  told  them  what  things  Jesus  had  done 

11.  47  What  do  we  ?  for  this  man  doeth  many 

12.  16  they  had  done  these  things  unto  him 

12.  18  they  heard  that  he  liad  done  this  miracle 

12.  37  though  he  had  done  so  many  miracles 

13.  7  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now ;  but 
13.  12  Know  ye  what  I  have  done  to  you? 

13.  15  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you 
13. 17  If  ye  know,  .happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  thein 

13.  27  Then  said  Jesus.  .That  thou  doest,  do 

14.  10  the  Father,  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth 
14.  12  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also 

14.  12  greater  (works)  than  these  shall  he  do 
14.  13  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask.  .that  will  I  do 
14.  14  If  ye  shall  ask  anything.. I  will  do  (it) 

14.  31  gave  me  commandment,  even  so  I  do 

15.  5  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing 

15.  14  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever 
15.  15  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth 
15.  21  all  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you 
15.  24  If  I  had  not  done  among  them 

15.  24  the  works  which  none  other  man  did 

16.  3  These  things  will  they  do  unto  you 

17.  4  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do 

18.  35  Am  I  a  Jew  ?. .  what  hast  thou  done  ? 

19.  24  these  things  therefore  the  soldiers  did 

20.  30  And  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus 

21.  25  also  many  other  things  which  Jesus  did 
Acts    1.    1  of  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and 

2.  22  wonders  and  signs,  which  God  did  by 
2.  37  Men  (and)  brethren,  what  shall  we  do? 
4.    7  By  what  power,  .have  ye  done  this? 
4.  16  What  shall  we  do  to  these  men?  for  that 
4.  28  to  do  whatsoever  thy  hand  and  thy  coun. 

6.  8  Stephen,  full  of  faith  and  power,  did 

8.  6  hearing  and  seeing  the  miracles,  .he  did 

9.  6  [Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?] 
9.    6  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  must  do 


Acts    g.  13  how  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints 

9.  36  was  full  of  good  works,  .which  she  did 
10.    6  [shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do] 
10.  33  thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art  come 

10.  39  we  are  witnesses  of  all  things  which  he  d. 

11.  30  Which  also  they  did,  and  sent  it  to  the 

12.  8  bind  on  thy  sandals.     And  so  he  did 

14.  11  when  the  people  saw  what  Paul  had  done 
14.  15  saying.  Sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things? 

14.  27  they  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  done 

15.  4  they  declared  all  things  that  God  had  d. 

15.  17  saith  the  Lord,  who  doeth  all  these  things 

16.  18  And  this  did  she  many  days 

16.  30  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved? 

19.  14  chief  of  the  priests,  which  did  so 

2i.  23  Do  therefore  this  that  we  say  to  thee 

21.  33  who  lie  was,  and  what  he  had  done 

22.  10  And  I  said,  What  shall  I  do,  Lord? 

22.  10  things  which  are  appointed  for  thee  to  do 

22.  26  Take  heed  what  thou  doest:  for  this  man 
26.  10  Which  thing  I  also  did  in  Jerusalem 

Rom.  1.  28  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  conven, 

1.  32  not  only  do  the  same,  but  have  pleasure 

2.  3  and  doest  the  same,  that  thou  shalt . 

2.  14  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the 

3.  8  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come  ? 

3.  12  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not 
7.  15  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I 

7.  16  If  then  I  do  that  which  I  would  not 
7.  19  For  the  good  that  I  would  I  do  not 
7.  20  if  I  do  that  I  would  not,  it  is  no  more 
7.  21  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present 
10.    5  That  the  man  which  doeth  these  things 

12.  20  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire 

13.  3  Do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt 
13.    4  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid 

1  Co.  5.    2  [he  that  hath  done]  this  deed  might 

6.  18  Every  sin  that  a  man  doeth  is  without 

7.  36  let  him  do  what  he  will,  he  sinneth  not 
7.  37  that  he  will  keep  his  virgin,  doeth  well 
7.  38  that  giveth  (her)  in  marriage  doeth  well 
7.  38  giveth  (her)  not  in  marriage  doeth  better 
9.  23  And  this  I  do  for  the  gospel's  sake 

10.  31  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 

11.  24  Take,  eat.  .this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 
11.  25  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  (it),  in  rem. 

15.  29  Else  what  shall  they  do  which  are  bap. 

16.  1  as  I  have  given  order,  .even  so  do  ye 

2  Co.  8.  10  not  only  to  do,  but  also  to  be  forward 

11.  12  what  I  do,  that  I  will  do,  that  I  may 
13.    7  that  ye  do  no  evil,  .that  ye  should  do 
Gal.     2.  10  the  same  which  I  also  was  forward  to  do 
10  continueth  not  in  all  things,  .to  do  them 

12  The  man  that  doeth  them  shall  live  in 

3  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law 

20  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  do 
6  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart 

8  whatsoever  good  tiling  any  man  doeth 

9  And,  ye  masters,  do  the  same  things  unto 
14  Do  all  things  without  murmuriiigs  and 
14  ye  have  well  done  that  ye  did  coinmun. 
17  And  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed 

23  And  whatsoever  ye  do.  .as  to  the  Lord 

10  And  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  bre. 

11  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do 

24  Faithful  (is)  he.  .who  also  will  do  (it) 

4  ye  both  do  and  will  do  the  things  which 

13  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  (it)  ignor. 

21  preferring  one  before  another,  doing 

5  endure  afflictions,  do  the  work  of  an 

5  Not  by  works,  .which  we  have  done,  but 

14  But  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing 
21  knowing  that  thou  wilt  also  do  more  than 

Heb.   6.    3  And  this  will  we  do,  if  God  permit 

7.  27  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  him. 

10.  7  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come.. to  do  thy  will 
10.    9  Then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0 
10.  36  after  ye  have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye 
13.   6  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto 
13.  17  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and  not 
13. 19  But  I  beseech  (you)  the  rather  to  do  this 
13.  21  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  hi.-,  will 

Jas.      2.    8  If  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law.  .ye  do  well 

2.  12  so  do,  as  they  that  shall  be  judged  by  the 

2.  19  Thou  believest . .  thou  doest  well :  the  de  v. 

4.  15  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do 
4. 17  to  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  do. 

1  Pe.   2.  22  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 

3.  11  Let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do  good ;  let 

3.  12  face  of  the  Lord  (is)  against  them  that  do 

2  Pe.    1. 10  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fail 

1.  19  whereunto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed 
1  Jo.    1.    6  If  we  say.  .we  lie,  and  d»  not  the  truth 

2.  17  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for 

2.  29  every  onethatdoeth  righteousness  is  born 

3.  7  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous 
3.  10  [whosoever  doeth  not  righteousuefs  is  not] 
3.  22  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his 

3  Jo.  5  doest  faithfully  whatsoever  thou  doest 

6  if  thou  bring  forward .  .thou  shalt  do  well 
10  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  lie  doeth 

Rev.    2.    5  do  the  first  works;  or  else  I  will  come 
13.  13  he  doeth  great  wonders,  so  thathemaketh 
13.  14  which  he  had  power  to  do  in  the  sight  of 
22. 14  Blessed  (are)  they  that  [do]  his  command. 

IS.  To  practice,  do,  •trpa.a'fTw  prasso. 

Luko22.  23  which  of  them  it  was  that  should  do 

23.  15  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  unto 
23.  41  but  this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss 

John  3.  20  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hatetli  the 

5.  29  and  they  that  hove  done  evil,  unto  the 


3- 
3- 

Eph. 
Phil. 

3- 
6. 
6. 
6. 

Col. 

4- 
3- 

iTh. 

3- 
4- 

sTh. 
iTi. 

5- 
5- 
3- 
1. 

zTi. 

Titus 
Phm 

5- 
4- 
3- 

DO 


267 


DOING 


Acts    3.  17  through  ignorance  ye  did  (it),  as  (did)  also 

5.  35  what  ye  intend  to  do  as  touching  these 

1 5.  29  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall  do  well 

16.  2S  Do  thyself  no  harm;  for  we  are  all  here 

17.  7  these  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees 

19.  36  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing 
26.    9  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to 
26.  20  they  should,  .do  works  meet  for  repent. 
26.  26  for  this  tiling  was  not  done  in  a  corner 
26.  31  This  man  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death 
Roni.  1.  32  but  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them 
2.    1  for  thou  that  judgest  doest  the  same 
2.    3  judgest  them  which  do  such  things 
7.  15  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not ;  but  what  I 
7. 19  the  evil  which  I  would  not,  that  I  do 
g.  11  neither  having  d  <ne  any  good  or  evil 
13.   4  to  (execute)  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth 

1  Co.  9.  17  if  I  do  this  thing  willingly,  I  have  a 

2  Co.   5  10  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
Gal.     5.  21  they  which  do  such  things  shaTl  not 
Eph.   6.  21  also  may  know  my  affairs,  (and)  how  I  do 
Phil.   4.    9  Those  tilings,  .do :  and  the  God  of  peace 
1  Til.  4.  11  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own  business 

IS.  7b  bear  toward,  Trpovtyeooj  pros2)h£ro. 

Johni6.    2  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service 

{See  also  Abominable,  abominably,  again,  better,  can, 
corruptly,  despite,  diligence,  done,  evil,  foolishly, 
good,  great,  harm,  have,  honour,  hurt,  judgment, 
marvellous,  mischief,  more,  murder,  office  of  a  priest, 
perversely,  reverence,  sacrifice,  second  time,  secretly, 
service,  shame,  shamefully,  third  time,  violence,  well, 
what,  wickedly,  wit,  worse,  wrong.] 

DO  away,  to  — 

To  cause  to  pass  over,  T3JJ  abar,  5. 

1  Ch.21.    8  I  beseech  thee,  do  away  the  iniquity  of 

DO,  can  — 

1.2b  be  strong,  have  strength,  tc^uw  ischuo. 

Phil.  4. 13  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 

2.2b  do,  Troiio)  poieo. 

Gal.    5. 17  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would 

DO  for,  to  — 

2b  hold  alongside  of,  offer,  irapix03  pareclw. 
Luke  7.    4  was  worthy  for  whom  he  should  do  this 

DO,  ■with  whom  we  have  to  — 
Of  whom  we  arc  speaking,  irphs  tv  j\fuv  6  \0y69. 
Heb.   4. 13  the  eyes  of  hini  with  whom  we  have  to  do 

DO,  have  any  matters  to  — 

Owner  of 'matters,  u*~\Ti  "?£?  bcud  debarim. 

Esod24. 14  if  any  man  have  any  matters  to  do,  let 

DO  good,  to  — 

1.2b  do,  recompense,  *?23  gamal. 

Prov  11. 17  The  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  own 

2.To  do  good,  310  tob,  5. 

Nuni  10.  29  come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  g. 

Jer.   32.  41  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good 

Psa.iig.  68  Thou  (art)  good,  and  doest  good  :  teach 

125.   4  Do  good,  O  Lord,  unto  (those  that  be)g. 

DO  (goodness),  to  — 

To  do  good,  3a;  yatab,  5. 

Num.10.  32  what  goodness  the  Lord  shall  do  unto 

DO  (a  trespass),  to  — 
To  trespass,  *?>?£  man1, 

Num.  5.    6  to  do  a  trespass  against  the  Lord,  and 

DOCTOR  — 

Teacher,  5t5ao"Ka\o?  didaskalos. 

Luke  2.  46  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  both 

DOCTOR  of  the  law  — 

Teacher  of  low,  vo/xoBt^.a.o'Ka\os  nomodidaskalos. 
Luke  5.  17  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law  sitting 
Acts  5.  34  named  Gamaliel,  a  doctor  of  the  law 

DOCTRINE  — 

1.  The  receiving,  what  is  (to  be)  received,  n$?  leqach. 
Deut32.    2  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain 
Job  11.   4  My  doctrine  (is)  pure,  and  I  am  clean  in 
Prov.  4.    2  I  give  you  good  doctrine,  forsake  ye  not 
Isa.  29.  24  they  that  murmured  shall  learn  doctrine 

I.CIiastisement,  instruction-,  lEfiD  musar. 

Jer.  10.    8  But.. the  stock  (is)  a  doctrine  of  vanities 

3.  What  is  heard,  nj'V?  shemuah. 

Isa.  28.  9  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  doct. 

^.Teaching,  (the substance),  oi§ao-ica\iadidaskalia. 
Matt  15.    9  teaching  (for)  doctrines  the  command. 
Mark  7.    7  teaching  (for)  doctrines  the  command. 
Eph.   4. 14  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctr. 
Col.    2.  22  after  the  commandments  and  doctrines 

1  Ti.   1.  10  thing  that  is  contrary  to  sound  doctrine 

4.  1  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doc. 
4.  6  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good  doctrine 
4. 13  Till  I  come,  give  attendance . .  to  doctrine 
4.  16  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the  do. 
5. 17  they  who  labour  in  the  word  and  doctri. 

6.  1  that  the  name  of  God  and  (his)  doctrine 
6.    3  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godli. 

2  Ti.    3.  10  But  thou  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine 


2  Ti.    3.  16  All  scripture,  .(is)  profitable  for  doctrine 
4.    3  when  they  will  not  endure  sound  doctr. 

Titus  1.    9  that  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine 
2.    1  things  which  become  sound  doctrine 
2.    7  in  doctrine  (showing)  uncorruptness 
2.  10  that  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God 

5. Teaching,  (the  act),  Sidcix?)  didache. 

Matt.  7.  28  the  people  were  astonished  at  his  doctr. 
16. 12  but  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  and 
22. 33  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctrine 
Mark  r.  22  And  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctri. 

1.  27  What  tiling  is  this  ?  what  new  doctrine 

4.  2  and  said  unto  them  in  bis  doctrine 

11.  18  all  the  people  was  astonished  at  his  doc. 

12.  38  And  he  said  unto  them  in  Ms  doctrine 
Luke  4.  32  And  they  were  astonished  at  his  doctri. 
John  7.  16  My  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  Ids  that 

7.  17  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether 
18. 19  The  high  priest  then  asked,  .his  doctrine 
Acts  2.  42  continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  do. 

5.  28  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem  with  your  doct. 
13. 12  being  astonished  at  the  doctrine  of  the 
17.  19  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine 

Rom.  6.  17  obeyed  from  the  heart  that  form  of  doc. 
16.  17  contrary  to  the  doctrine  which  ye  have 

1  Co.  14.   6  except  I  shall  speak  to  you.  .by  doctrine 

14.  26  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a  d. 

2  Ti.  4.    2  exhort,  with  all  long  suffering  and  doctr. 
Heb.  6.    2  Of  the  doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  of 

13.  9  Be  not  carried  about  with  divers,  .doctr. 
2  Jo.        9  abidefch  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ 

9  He  that  abideth  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ 

10  If  there  come.. and  bring  not  this  doctr. 

Rev.  2.  14  thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doct. 

2. 15  So  hast  thou  also  them  that  hold  the  do. 

2.  24  But.  .as  many  as  have  not  this  doctrine 

6.  Word,  \0y6s  logos.  * 

Heb.  6.    1  leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 

DO'-DAL,  *y~  beloved  of  J  ah. 

An  Ahohite,  one  of  David's  captains. 

1  Ch.  27.    4  over,  .courseof  thesecond  month  (was)  D. 

DO-DA'-NIM,  or  RO-DA'-NTM,  n'jrnr,  C':th. 
A  race  descended  from  Javan  son  of  Japhet.  Authori- 
ties vary  as  to  the  form  of  the  name :  the  Hebrew  text 
has  both ;  but  the  weight  of  authority  is  in  favour  of 
Dodanim,  which  is  regarded  as  identical  with  Dardani. 
Gen.  10.    4  the  sons  of  Javan.  .Tarshish,  Kittini.  .D. 

1  Ch.   1.    7  the  sons  of  Javan.  .Tarshish,  Kittim.  .D 

DO-DA'-VAH,  inifi  Jo.h  is  loving. 

Father  of  one  who  prophesied  to  Jehoshaphat.    B.C.  960. 

2  Ch.  20.  37  Then  Eliezer  the  son  of  D.  of  Mareshah 

DO'-DO,  Tii". 

1. Grandfather  of    the   judge  Tolah    of    the  tribe    of 

Issachar."  B.C.  1206. 

Judg  10.    1  Tola  the  son  of  Puah,  the  son  of  D. 

2.  Eather  of  the  second  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men. 
B.C.  1070. 

2  Sa.  23.    9  And  after  him  (was)  Eleazar  the  son  of  D. 

1  Ch.11. 12  And  after  him  (was)  Eleazar  the  son  of  D. 

3.  Father  of  one  of  David's  thirty  mighty  men.    B.C.  1070. 

2  Sa.  23.  24  Elhanan  the  son  of  D.  of  Beth-lehem 
1  Ch.  11.  26  Elhanan  the  son  of  D.  of  Beth-lehem 

DO'-EG,  lin,  agi%  vi~,  fearful. 

Chief  of  Saul's  herdsmen,  an  Edomite  who  informed 

Saul  of  Ahinielech's  having  assisted  David.    B.C.  1062. 

1  Sa.  21.    7  and  his  name  (was)  D.,  an  Edomite,  the 

22.   9  Then  answered  D.  the  Edomite,  which  was 
22.  iS  And  the  king  said  to  D.,  Turn  thou,  and 
22.  18  D.  the  Edomite  turned,  and  he  fell  upon 
22.  22  I  knew  (it),  .when  D.  the  Edomite  (was) 
Psa.  52.  title.  Doeg  the  Edomite  came  and  told  Saul 

DOER  — 

1.7b  do,  rt"75  asah. 

Gen.  39.  22  whatsoever  they  did  there,  he  was  the  d. 

2  Ki.  22.   5  the  doers  of  the  work . .  doers  of  the  work 

2.7b  act,  work,  do,  make,  h^B  paal. 

Psa.101.    8  that  I  may  cut  off  all  wicked  doers 

3.^-1  maker,  performer,  TroinTrjs  poietes. 

Rom.  2.  13  but  the  doers  of  the  law  shall  be  justifi. 

Jas.     1.  22  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 
1.  23  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not  a  doer 
1.  25  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of  the 
4. 11  thou  art  not  a  doer  of  the  law,  but  a 

DOG  — 

I. Bog,  3^3  keleb. 

Exodn.    7  shall  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue,  against 

22.  31  torn  of  beasts,  .ye  shall  cast  it  to  the  dogs 

Deut23-  18  Thou  shalt  not  bring,  .the  price  of  a  dog 

Judg.  7.    5  Every  one  that  lappeth.  .as  a  dog  lappe. 

1  Sa.  17.  43  (Am)  I  a  dog,  that  thou  comest  to  me 

24. 14  after  whom  dost  thou  pursue  ?.  .a  dead  d. 

2  Sa.   3.    8  (Am)  I  a  dog's  head,  which  against 

9.    8  shouldest  look  upon  such  a  dead  dog 
16.   9  Why  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord 
1  E!i.  14. 11  of  Jeroboam  in  the  city  shall  the  dogs 
16.    4  of  Baasha  in  the  city  shall  the  dogs  eat 
21.  19  where  the  dogs  licked,  .shall  dogs  lick 
21.  23  The  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the  wall 

21.  24  dieth  of  Aliab  in  the  city  the  dogs  shall 

22.  38  and  the  dogs  licked  up  his  blood  ;  and 


2  Ki.   8.  13  But  what !  (is)  thy  sen-ant  a  dog,  that  he 

9. 10  the  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  in  the  portion 

9.  36  In  the  portion  of  Jezreel  shall  dogs  eat 

Job   30.    1  disdained  to  have  set  with  the  dogs  of  my 

Psa.  22.  16  For  dogs  have  compassed  me ;  the  assem. 

22.  20  my  darling  from  the  power  of  the  dog 
59.    6  they  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go 

59.  14  let  them  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go 
68.  23  (and)  the  tongue  of  thy  dogs  in  the  same 

Prov  26.  11  As  a  dog  returneth  to  his  vomit,  (so)  a 
26.  17  (is  like)  one  that  taketh  adog  by  the  ears 

Eccl.  9.    4  for  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion 

Isa.    56.  10  they  (are)  all  dumb  dogs,  they  cannot 
56. 11  (they  are)  greedy  dogs  (which)  can  never 
66.    3  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  (as  if)  he  cut  off  a  dog's 

Jer.    15.    3  the  dogs  to  tear,  and  the  fowls  of  the 

2.  A  little  dog,  Kvvapiov  kunarion. 

Matt  15.  26  It  is  not  meet . .  to  cast  (it)  to  dogs 

15.  27  Truth,  Lord:  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the 
Mark  7.  27  it  is  not  meet,  .to  cast  (it)  unto  the  dogs 
7.  28  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the  chiL 

3.  A  dog,  hound,  kvuv  kuon. 

Matt.  7.    6  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs 
Lukei6.  21  moreover  the  dogs  came  and  licked  his 
Phil.  3.    2  Beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil  workers 
2  Pe.   2.  22  The  dog  (is)  turned  to  his  own  vomit 
Rev.  22. 15  For  without  (are)  dogs,  and  sorcerers,  and 

DOING  — 

I. Doing,  h'h^ip  maalil. 

Zech.  1.    4  Turn  ye  now  from  your  evil. .  doings :  but 

'l.Doing,  ti'JJS  maalal. 

Deut  28.  20 "because  of  the  wickedness  of  thy  doings 
Judg.  2.  19  they  ceased  not  from  their  own  doings 

1  Sa.  25.    3  man  (was)  churlish,  and  evil  in  his  doings 
Prov  20.  11  Even  a  child  is  known  by  his  doings 
Isa.     1.  16  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from 

3.   8  their  tongue  andtheirdoings(are)against 

3.  10  for  they  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings 
Jer.     4.    4  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

4.  18  thy  doings  have  procured  these  (things) 
7.  3  Amend  your  ways  and  your  doings,  and 
7.    5  if  ye  througldy  amend,  .your  doings 

11.  iS  then  thou  showedst  me  then1  doings 
17. 10  to  give,  .according  to  the  fruit  of  his  do 
iS.  11  make  your  ways  and  your  doings  good 
21.  12  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

21.  14  according  to  the  fruit  of  your  doings 

23.  2  visit  upon  you  the  evil  of  your  doings 
23.  22  have  turned,  .from  the  evil  of  their  do. 

25.  5  Turn  ye.  .from  the  evil  of  your  doings 

26.  3  because  of  the  evil  of  their  doings 

26. 13  now  amend  your  ways  and  your  doings 
32.  19  to  give . .  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  do. 

35.  15  Return  ye  now.  .and  amend  your  doings 
44. 22  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

Eze.  36.  31  Then  shall  ye  remember  your,  .doings 
Hos.    4.    9  I  will  punish . .  and  reward  them  their  do. 

5.  4  They  will  net  frame  their  doings  to  turn 
7.   2  now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them 
9.  15  for  the  wickedness  of  their  doings  I  will 

12.  2  according  to  his  doings  will  he  recompe. 
Mic.    2.   7  (are)  these  his  doings  ?  do  not  my  words 

3.    4  have  behaved  themselves  ill  in  their  do. 
7.  13  he  desolate,  .for  the  fruit  of  their  doings 
Zech.  1.    6  according  to  our  doings,  so  hath  he 

3.  Work,  occupation,  'V'tip  ?naaseh. 

Lev.  18.   3  After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
18.   3  and  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Can. 

2  Ch.17.    4  and  walked .  .not  after  the  doings  of  Isr. 
Psa.  64.    9  for  they  shall  wisely  consider  of  his  do. 

LDoing,  nV?£  alilah. 

Psa.    9. 11  declare  among  the  people  his  doings 

66.    5  terrible  (in  his)  doing  toward  the  child. 

77.  12  I  will  meditate,  .and  talk  of  thy  doings 
Isa.  12.  4  call  upon  his  name,  declare  his  doings 
Eze.  14.  22  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  doings 

14.  23  when  ye  see  their  ways  and  their  doings 

20.  43  there  shall  ye  remember,  .all  your  doings 

20.  44  nor  according  to  your  corrupt  doings,  0 

21.  24  in  all  your  doings  your  sins  do  appear 

24. 14  according  to  thy  doings,  shall  they  judge 

36.  17  by  their  own  way  and  by  their  doings 
36.  19  according  to  their  doings  I  judged  them 

Zeph.  3.    7  rose  early,  (and)  corrupted  all  their  doings 
3.  11  thou  not  be  ashamed  for  all  thy  doings 

5. 2b  do,  rfipy  asah. 

Exodis-  11  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful,  .praises,  do. 
1  Ch.22.  16  Arise,  .and  be  doing,  and  the  LORD  be 
Isa.    5S.  13  If  thou  turn,  .(from)  doing  thy  pleasure 
58. 13  honour  hini,  not  doing  thine  own  ways 

6.  Work,  ipyov  ergon. 

Rom.  2.    7  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well  doing 

7. 7b  do,  iroiioo  poieo. 
2  Co.     8. 11  r>ow  therefore  perform  the  doing  (of  it) 

DOING,  in  — 

To  do,  voUtc  poieo. 

Gal.    6.   9  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well  doing:  for  in 
1  Ti.    4.  16  for  in  doing  this  thou  shalt.  .save  thyself 

DOING,  to  be  one"s  — 

To  become,  ytvofiai  ginomai. 

Matt  21.  42  this  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvel. 

Marki2.  n  the  Lord's  doiug,  and  it  is  marvellous 


DOLEFUL 


268 


DOOR 


DOLEFUL,  doleful  creatures  — 
1.  Wailing,  rrru  niliyah. 

Mic.  2.  4  aud  lament  with  a  doleful  lamentation 
2,Huwlings,  D'nx  ochim. 

Isa.    13.  21  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures 
DOMINION  — 
I.Hand,  T  yad. 

Jer,  34.    1  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  of  his  dom. 
2. Ride,  dominion,  ?rpp  mimshal. 

Dan.  11.    3  a  mighty  king,  .with  great  dominion 
11.    5  his.  .(shall  be)  a  great  dominion 

Z.Rule,  dominion,  nV^pip  ■memshalah. 

1  Ki.  9.  19  and  in  a'll  the  land  of  his  dominion 

2  Ki.  20.  13  there  was  nothing,  .in  all  his  dominion 
2  Ch.  8.  6  throughout  all  the  land  of  his  dominion 
Psa.103.  22  all  his  works  in  all  places  of  his  domin. 

114.   2  Judah  was  his  sanctuary.  .Israel  his  do. 

145.  13  thy  dominion,  .throughout  all  generati. 
Isa.  39.  2  there  was  nothing,  .in  all  his  dominion 
Jer.  34.    1  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  of  his  dom. 

51.  28  Prepare,  .all  the  land  of  his  dominion 
Dan.  11.    5  and  his  dominion  (shall  be)  a  great 
Mic.    4,    8  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even  the  first  d. 

I. Dominion,  authority,  "Uppp  misktar. 

Job  38.  33  canst  thou  set  the  dominion  thereof  in 
5.  To  cause  to  rule,  ?pO  mashal,  5. 

Job  25.  2  Dominion  and  fear  (are)  with  him ;  he 
S.Rule,  7^'D  moshel. 

Dan.  1 1.    4  nor  according  to  his  dominion  which  he 

Zech.  9.  10  his  dominion  (shall  be)  from  sea  (even) 

7. Ride,  dominion,  ftpS?  sholtan. 

Dan.    4.    3  his  dominion  (is)  from  generation  to  gen. 
4.  22  and  thy  dominion  to  the  end  of  the  earth 

4.  34  whose  dominion  is  an  everlasting  domin. 
6.  26  That  in  every  dominion  of  my  kingdom 

6.  26  his  dominion  (shall  be  even)  unto  the  end 

7.  6  the  beast,  .dominion  was  given  to  it 
7.  12  they  had  their  dominion  taken  away 

7.  14  there  was  given  him  dominion  and  glory 
7.  14  his  dominion  (is)  an  everlasting  dominion 
7.  26  and  they  shall  take  away  his  dominion 
7.  27  the  kingdom  and  dominion,  aud  the 
7.  27  all  dominions  shall  serve  and  obey  him 

S.    trength,  power,  Kpdros  kratos. 

1  Pe.  4.  11  to  whom  be  praise  and  dominion  for  ever 

5.  11  To  him  (be)  glory  and  dominion  for  ever 
■hide  25  dominion  and  power,  both  now  and  ever 
Rev.    1.    6  to  him  (be)  glory  and  dominion  for  ever 

9.  Lordship,  kupiottjs  kuriotes. 

Eph.    1.  21  might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name 
Col.     1.  16  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities 
Jude         8  despise  dominion,  and  speak  evil  of  dig, 

DOMINION,  to  come  to  have  — 

To  rule,  tread  down,  ?iti  radah. 

Xum24.  19  shall  come  he  that  shall  have  dominion 

DOMINION,  to  have  — 

1.  To  ride,  possess,  have,  marry,  Sj#  baal. 

1  Ch.  4.  22  who  had  the  dominion  in  Moab,  and  Jas. 
Isa.    26.  13  lords  besides  thee  have  had  dominion 

2.  To  rule,  hvn  mashal. 

Gen.  37.  8  shalt  thou  indeed  have  dominion  over  us? 
Judg  14.  4  the  Philistines  had  dominion  over  Israel 
Neh.  9.  37  also  they  have  dominion  over  our  bodies 
Psa.  19.  13  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me 
Dan.  11.  5  shall  be  strong  above  him,  and  have  do. 
■j.  To  ride,  tread  down,  TVT}  radah. 

Gen.    1.  26  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish 
1.  28  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea 

1  Ki.  4.  24  For  he  had  dominion  over  all  (the  region) 
Neh.  9.  28  that  they  had  the  dominion  over  them 
Psa.  49.  14  the  upright  shall  have  dominion  72.  8. 

\.  To  rule,  "in  riul,  5. 

Gen.  27.  40  when  thou  shalt  have  the  dominion,  that 
5.  To  be  sultan,  bS^  shalat. 

Psa.  no.  133  lee  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over 
DOMINION,  to  make  to  ha-  e  — 
I. To  cause  to  rule,  h&D  mashal,  5. 

Psa.     8.    6  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion  over 
2.  To  rule,  tread  down,  nrj  radah,  3. 

Judg.  5.  13  he  made  him  that  remaineth  have  domi. 
5. 13  the  Lord  made  me  have  dominion  over 
DOMINION  over,  to  have  — 
To  hare  or  exercise  lordship,  Kvpuvw  kurieuo. 

Rom.  6.    9  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him 

6.  14  For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you 

7.  1  the  law  hath  dominion  over  a  man  as 

2  Co.  1.  24  Not  for  that  we  have  dominion  over  your 
DOMINION  over,  to  exercise  — 

To  have  or  exercise  lordship  against)  Ka.Ta>tvpt$vu>. 
Matt2o.  25  princes  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  dom.  over 

DONE,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  }>'■■■  ■  tredt  done,  tr\$  ham,  2. 

Exod34.  10  as  have  not  been  done  in  all  the  earth 

2.T>  be,  n;n  hayah,  2. 

Judg2o.  12  What  wickedness  (is)  this  that  is  done 
1  Ki.    1.  27  is  this  thing  clone  by  my  lord  the  kino 
a  ch.tr.    4  Ye  Bhall  not.  for  tin's  thing  is  done  of  me 
Neh,  6.   8  There  are  no  such  things  done  as  thou 


Jer.  48.  19  O  inhabitant  of  Aroer . .  say,  What  is  done  ? 
Eze.  39.    8  Behold,  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  saith 

3.  To  be  completed,  finished,  nbi  kalah. 

Isa.   24.  13  gleaning  grapes  when  the  vintage  is  done 
■i.To  be  given,  jru  natha.n,  2. 

Lev,  24.  20  as  he  hath  caused,  .so  shall  it  be  done 

5.  To  be  done,  ~ny.  abad,  ±. 

Ezra  6.  12  have  made  a  decree  ;  let  it  be  done  with 
7.  21  shall  require  of  you,  it  be  done  speedily 
7.  23  let  it  be  diligently  done  for  the  house  of 

6.  To  be  rolled,  done,  ^h^  dial,  4a. 

Lam.  1.  12  unto  my  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me 

7.  To  do,  make,  nyy  asah. 

Exod  3.  16  I  have,  .(seen)  that  which  is  done  to  you 

8.  To  be  done,  made,  n^'j;  asah.  2. 


Gen. 


Exod. 


Lev. 


23 

24 
XU11115. 

15 
Deut2  5 
Judgi 

1  Sa.  1 

17' 

2  Sa.  13 
Ezra  10 
Neh.   6 

Esth. 

Eccl. 


Isa. 
Jer. 


Eze. 


9  deeds  unto  me  that  ought  not  to  be  done 

26  It  must  not  be  so  done  in  our  country,  to 

7  folly,  .which  thing  ought  not  to  be  done 

4  stood  afar  off,  to  wit  what  would  be  done 

16  no  manner  of  work  shall  be  done  in  them 

16  man  must  eat,  that  only  may  be  done  of 

31  according  to  this  judgment  shall  it  be  d. 

15  Six  days  may  work  be  done  ;  but  in  the 

2  Six  days  shall  work  be  done,  but  on  the 
2,  27  (c.  things)  which  ought  not  to  be  done 

13,  22  (c.  things)  which  should  not  be  done 

17  which  are  forbidden  to  be  done  by  the 

32  wherein  (any)  work  is  done,  it  must  be 

3  Six  days  shall  work  be  done :  but  the 

19  cause  a  blemish,  .so  shall  it  be  done 

1 1  Thus  shall  it  be  done  for  one  bullock,  or 
34  was  not  declared  what  should  be  done 

9  So  shall  it  be  done  unto  that  man 
37  Let  this  tiling  be  done  for  me  :  let  me 
7  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  his  oxen.  And 

26  What  shall  be  done  to  the  man  that 

27  So  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  that 

12  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  Israel 
3  and  let  it  be  done  according  to  the  law 
9  shall  be  weakened .  .that  it  be  not  done 
0, 1 1  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom 

12  what  (is)  thy  request,  .it  shall  be  done 

0  which  is  done  (is)  that  which  shall  be  d. 

13  concerning  all  (things)  that  are  done 

14  I  have  seen  all  the  works  that  are  done 

1  all  the  oppressions  that  are  done  under 
3  hath  not  seen  the  evil  work  that  is  done 
9  unto  every  work  that  is  done  under  the 

14  There  is  a  vanity  which  is  done  upon  the 

16  to  see  the  business  that  is  done  upon  the 

17  cannot  find  out  the  work  that  is  done  uu. 

3  evil  among  all(things)tbatare  doneunder 
6  in  any  (thing)  that  is  done  under  the  sun 

10  Declaring,  .(the things)  that  are  not.  .d. 
16  neither  shall  (that)  be  done  any  more 

13  thus  shall  it  lie  done  unto  them 

4  for  all  the  abominations  that  be  done  in 

11  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  them  :  they  shall 
2S  word  which  I  have  spoken  shall  be  done 

14  and  for  all  that  shall  lie  done  therein 

12  hath  not  been  done  as  hath  been  done 
36  for  that  that  is  determined  shall  be  done 

15  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee:  thy  reward 

9.  To  become,  yivo/iat  ginomai. 

Matt.  1.  22  Now  all  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be 
6.  10  Thy  kingdom  come  ;  thy  will  be  done  in 
8.  13  as  thou  hast  believed,  (so)  be  it  done 

20  wherein  most  of  his.  .works  were  done 

21  which  were  done  in  you  had  been  done  in 
23  which  have  been  done  in  thee,  had  been  d. 

8.  19  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father 
:8.  31  when  his  fellow  servants  saw  what  was  d. 
[8.  31  told  unto  their  lord  all  that  was  done 
21.    4  All  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be  ful. 

21.  21  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea;  it  shall  be  done 
26.  42  if.  .except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done 

26.  56  But  all  this  was  done,  that  the  scriptures 

27.  54  centurion,  .saw.  .those  things  that  wered. 

28.  11  and  showed,  .all  the  tilings  that  were  d. 
Hark  4.  11  all  (these)  things  are  done  in  parables 

5.  14  went  out  to  see  what  it  was  that  was  d. 
5.  33  knowing  what  was  done  in  her,  came 
13.  30  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  tilings  be  d. 
Luke  4.  23  whatsoever  we  have  heard  done  in 

8.  34  they  that  feu  (them)  saw  what  was  done 
8.  35  Then  they  went  out  to  see  what  was  done 

8.  56  they  should  tell  no  man  what  was  done 

9.  7  the  tetrarch  heard  of  all  that  was  done 
10.  13  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in 

10.  13  which  have  been  done  in  you,  they  had 

11.  2  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in 

13.  17  for  all  the  glorious  things  that  were  done 

14.  22  Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  commanded 

22.  42  nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  d. 

23.  8  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done  by 
23.  31  if.  .in  a  green,  .what  shall  be  done  in 

23,  47  when  the  centurion  saw  what  was  done 

23.  48  beholding  the  things  which  were  done 

24.  21  third  day  since  these  things  were  done 
John  1.  28  These  things  were  done  in  Bethabara 

15.  7  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto 
19.  36  these  things  were  done,  that  the  scripture 

Acts    2.  43  many  wonders  and  signs  were  done  by 
4.  16  that,  .a  notable  miracle  bath  been  done 
4.  21  glorified  God  for  that  which  was  done 
4.  28  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done 

4.  30  wonders  may  be  done  by  the  name  of 

5.  -  his  wile,  not  knowing  what  was  done 


Dan.    9 
Obad 


Acts    8.  13  the  miracles  and  signs  which  were  done 

10.  16  This  was  done  thrice:  and  the  vessel  was 

11.  10  this  was  done  three  times :  and  all  were 

12.  9  wist  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  done 

13.  12  the  deputy,  when  he  saw  what  was  done 

14.  3  granted  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done 
21.  14  saying,  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done 
24,    2  worthy  deeds  are  done  unto  this  nation 
28.  '9  So  when  this  was  done,  others  also 

1  Co.  9.  15 ;  14.  26,  40;  16.  14  ;  Eph.  5. 12  ;  Rev.  16. 17. 
DONE  away,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  wit/ulrawn,  Vftgara,  2. 

Num  27.    4  the  name  of  our  father  be  done  away  from 
2. To  make  useless,  Karapycoo  katargeo. 

1  Co.  13.  10  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away 

2  Co.    3.    7  which  (glory)  was  to  be  done  away 

3.  11  For  if  that,  .is  done  away  (was)  glorious 
3  14  which  (veil)  is  done  away  in  Christ 

DONE,  deed  to  be  — 

To  be,  happen,  come  to  fiass,  befall,  a;n  hayah,  2. 
Judg  19.  30  There  was  no  such  deed  done  nor  seen 

DONE,  to  have  — 

l.To  finish,  rhs  kalah,  3. 

Gen.  24.  15  it  came  to  pass,  before  he  had  done  spea. 
24.  19  when  she  had  done  giving  him  drink 
24.  19  camels  also,  until  they  have  done  drink. 
24.  22  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  camels  had  done 
24.  45  before  I  had  done  speaking  in  mine  heart 
Exod34.  33  And  (till)  Hoses  had  done  speaking  with 
Ruth  3.    3  until  he  shall  have  done  eating  and  dri. 

2.  To  perfect,  finish,  Deri  tamam. 

Josh.  5.    8  when  they  had  done  circumcising  all  the 
2  Sa.  15.  24  until  all  the  people  had  done  passing  out 

DONE,  when. ..were  — 
To  finish,  rhs  kalah,  3. 

Ezra  9.    1  when  these  things  were  done,  the  princes 

DOOR  — 

1.  House,  rv?  bayith. 

1  Ki.  14.  17  when  she  came  to  the  threshold  of  the  d. 

2.  Door,  ^  dal. 

Psa.  141.    3  Set  a  watch,  .keep  the  door  of  my  lips 
Z.Door,  rrVi  dalah, 

Isa.   26!  20  Come,  my  people,  .shut  thy  doors  about 
4.  Door,  rrVn  cleleth. 

Gen.  19.'  '6  Lot  went  out.  .and  shut  the  door  after 
19.    9  they,  .came  near  to  break  the  door 
19.  10  pulled  Lot  into,  .and  shut  to  the  door 
Exod2i.    6  he  shall  also  bring  him  to  the  door 
Deut  15.  17  thrust  (it)  through  his  ear  unto  the  door 
Josh.  2.  19  whosoever  shall  go  out  of  the  doors  of 
Judg.  3.  23  Ehud. .shut  the  doors  of  the  parlour  upon 
3.  24  the  doors  of  the  parlour  (were)  locked 

3.  25  he  opened  not  the  doors  of  the  parlour 
11.  31  whatsoever  cometh  forth  of  the  doors 
16.    3  Samson .  took  the  doors  of  the  gate  of 
19.  22  certain  sons  of  Belial,  .beat  at  the  door 
19.  27  her  lord,  .opened  the  doors  of  the  house 

1  Sa.    3.  15  Samuel,  .opened  the  doors  of  the  house 

23.  13  and  scrabbled  on  the  doors  of  the  gate 

2  Sa.  13.  17  Put.  .out.  .and  bolt  the  door  after  her 

13.  18  brought  her  out,  and  bolted  the  door  after 

1  Ki.   6.  31  And  for  the  entering,  .he  made  doors 

6.  32  The  two  doors  also  (were  of)  olive  tree 
6.  34  And  the  two  doors  (were  of)  fir  tree 

6.  34  leaves  of  the  one  door,  .of  the  other  door 

7.  50  for  the  doors  of.  .for  the  doors  of  the 

2  Ki.  4 .    4  thou  shalt  shut  the  door  upon  thee 

4.  5  she  went  from  him,  and  shut  the  door 

4.  33  He  went  in  therefore,  and  shut  the  door 
6.  32  when  the  messenger  cometh,  shut  the  d. 
6.  32  and  hold  him  fast  at  the  door :  (is)  not 
9.    3  open  the  door,  and  flee,  and  tarry  not 
9.  10  And  he  opened  the  door,  and  fled 
18.  16  Hezekiah  cutoff  (the  gold  from) the  doors 

1  Ch.22;    3  for  the  nails  for  the  doors  of  the  gates 

2  Ch.  3.    7  He  overlaid  also  the.  .doors  thereof,  with 

4.   9  he  made,  .the  great  court,  and  doors  for 
4.    9  overlaid  the  doors  of  them  with  brass 
4.  22  the  inner  doors  thereof  for  the  most  holy 
4.  22  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  temple 

28.  24  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  L. 

29.  3  opened  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the 

29.    7  they  have  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  porch 

Neh.  3.    1  they  sanctified  it,  and  set  up  the  doors  of 

3-    3.  6,  13,  14,  15  set  up  the  doors  thereof,  the 

6.    1  I  had  not  set  up  the  doors  upon  the  gates 

6.  10  and  let  us  shut  the  doors  of  the  temple 

7.  1  I  had  set  up  the  doors,  and  the  porters 
7.    3  let  them  shut  the  doors,  and  bar  (them) 

Job     3.  10  Because  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my 
31.  32  (but)  I  opened  my  doors  to  the  traveller 
38.    8  Or  (who)  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors 
~^S.  10  brake  up  for  it.  .and  set  bars  and  doors 
41.  14  Who  can  open  the  doors  of  his  face? 
Psa.  7S.  23  Though  he  bad.  .opened  the  doors  of  hea. 
ProV26.  14  the  door  turneth  upon  his  hinges,  so 
Eccl.  12.    4  the  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets 
Song  8.    9  if  she  (be)  a  door,  we  will  inclose  her 
Isa.  26.  20  Come,  my  people,  .shut  thy  doors  about 
57.    8  Behind  the  doors  also  and  the  posts  hast 
Eze.  41.  23  temple  and  the  sanctuary  had  two  doors 
41.  24  And  the  doors  had  two  leaves  (apiece) 
41.  24  two  (leaves)  for  the  one  door,  and  two 
41.  25  on  the  doors  of  the  temple,  cherubim 


DOOR 


269 


DOUBT 


Zechn.    i  Open  thy  doors,  0  Lebanon,  that  the  fire 
Mai.    i.  10  even  among  you  that  would  shut  the  d. 

5.  Threshold,  lintel,  ^D  saph. 

2  Ki.  12.   9  the  priests  that  kept  the  door  put  therein 

22.  4  the  keepers  of  the  door  have  gathered  of 

23.  4  the  keepers  of  the  door,  to  bring  forth 

25.  18  took,  .the  three  keepers  of  the  door 

2  Ch.23.   4  third  part,  .(shall  be)  porters  of  the  doors 

34.  9  which  the  Levites  that  kept  the  doors 
Esth.  2.  21  two.  .of  those  which  kept  the  door,  were 

6.    2  chamberlains,  the  keepers  of  the  door 
Isa.     6.    4  the  posts  of  the  door  moved  at  the  voice 
Jer.  35.    4  Maaseiah.. the  keeper  of  the  door 

52.  24  took,  .the  three  keepers  of  the  door 
Eze.  41.  16  over  against  the  door,  ceiled  with  wood 

€>. Opening,  entrance  of  a  door,  nee  pethach. 

Gen.  4.  7  if  thou  doest  uot  well,  sin  lieth  at  the  d. 
6.  16  the  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  set  in  the 
18.  1  he  sat  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the 
18.    2  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the  tent  door 

18.  10  Sarah  heard  (it)  in  the  tent  door,  which 

19.  6  Lot  went  out  at  the  door  unto  them 

19.  11  they  smote  thenien  that  (were)  at  the  door 
19.  11  they  wearied  themselves  to  find  the  door 
43.  19  they  communed  with  him  at  the  door  of 
Exodi2.  22  none  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door  of 
12.  23  the  Lord  will  pass  over  the  door,  and 

26.  36  thou  shalt  make  an  hanging  for  the  door 
29.    4,  32  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

29. 11  kill  the  bullock,  .by  the  door 
33.    8  and  stood  every  man  (at)  his  tent  door 
33.    9  the  cloudy  pillar,  .stood  (at)  the  door  of 
33.  10  the  cloudy  pillar  stand  (at)  the.  .door 
33. 10  worshipped,  every  man  (in)  Iris  tent  door 

35.  15  incense,  and  the  hanging  for  the  door  at 

36.  37  made  an  hanging  for  the  tabernacle  door 

38.  8,  30  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con. 

39.  38  the  hanging  for  the  tabernacle  door 

40.  5  put  the  hanging  of  the  door  to  the  taber. 
40.    6  altar  of  the  burnt  offering  before  the  door 
40.  12  thou  shalt  bring  Aaron,  .unto  the  door 
40.  2S  he  set  up  the  hanging  (at)  the  door  of 
40.  29  put  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (by)  the  d. 

Lev.  1.  3  offer  it  of  hisbwn  voluntary  will  at  the  d. 
1.    5  upon  the  altar  that  (is  by)  the  door  of  the 

3.  2  shall,  .kill  it  (at)  the  door  of  the  taberna. 

4.  4  he  shall  bring  the  bullock  unto  the  door 
4.  7,  18  the  door  of  the  tabernacle-of  the  con. 
8.  3  the  congregation  together  unto  the  door 
8.  4  the  assembly  was  gathered,  .unto  the  d. 
8.  31  Boil  the  flesh  (at)  the  door  of  the  tabern. 
8.  33  ye  shall  not  go  out  of  the  door  of  the 

8.  35  Therefore  shall  ye  abide  (at)  the  door  of 
10.  7  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  door  of  the 
12.  6  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  c. 
14.  11,  23  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con. 

14.  38  shall  go  out  of  the  house  to  the  door 

15.  14  come  before  the  Lord  unto  the  door  of 

15.  29  bring  them,  .to  the  door  of  the  taberna. 

16.  7  present  them  before  the  Lord  (at)  the  d. 

17.  4,  9  bringeth  it  not  unto  the  door  of  the  ta. 
17.    5  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
17.    6  altar  of  the  Lord  (at)  the  door  of  the  ta. 

19.  21  bring  his  trespass  ottering,  .unto  the  do. 
Kum.  3.  25  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  taberna. 

3.  26  the  curtain  for  the  door  of  the  court 

4.  25,  26  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the 

6  10  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con. 
6.  13  he  shall  be  brought  unto  the  door  of 
6.  18  the  head  of  his  separation  (at)  the  door 
10.    3  assemble  themselves  to  thee  at  the  door 
11. 10  every  man  in  the  door  of  his  tent 
12.    5  the  Lord,  .stood  (iu)  the  door  of  the  tab. 
16. 18  every  man.. stood  in  the  door  of  the  tab. 
16.  19  Korah  gathered  all.  .unto  the  door  of 
16.  27  Dathan  and  Abiram ..  stood  in  the  door 
16  50  Aaron  returned  unto  Moses  unto  the  d. 

20.  6  Moses  and  Aaron  went  out.  .unto  the  d. 
25.    6  weeping  (before)  the  door  of  the  taberna. 

27.  2  they  stood . .  (by)  the  door  of  the  taberna. 
Deut  22.  21  shall  bring  out  the  damsel  to  the  door 

31. 15  pillar  of  the  cloud  stood  over  the  door 
Josh.  19.  51  divided . .  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of 
Judg.  4.  20  Stand  in  the  door  of  the  tent ;  and  it 

9.  52  Abimelech.  .went  hard  unto  the  door 
19.  26  the  woman,  .fell  down  at  the  door  of 
19.  27  was  fallen  down  (at)  the  door  of  the 

1  Sa.   2.  22  the  women  that  assembled  (at)  the  door 

2  Sa.  ii.  9  Uriah  slept  at  the  door  of  the  king's 

1  Ki.  6.   8  The  door  for  the  middle  chamber  (was) 

6.  33  So  also  made  he  for  the  door  of  the  tern. 

7.  5  And  all  the  doors  and  posts  (were)  square 
14.  6  as  she  came  in  at  the  door,  that  he  said 
14.  27  chief  of  the  guard,  which  kept  the  door 

2  Ki.  4.  15  he  had  called  her,  she  stood  in  the  door 

5.  9  Naaman.  .stood  at  the  door  of  the  house 
1  Ch.  9.  21  Zechariah.  .(was)  porter  of  the  door  of 
r»eh.   3.  20  the  turning  (of  the  wall)  unto  the  door 

3.  21  another  piece,  from  the  door  of  the  house 
Job  31.    9  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour's  door 

31.  34  kept  silence,  (and)  went  not  out  of  the  d. 
Psa.  24.    7  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors 

24.  9  lift  (them)  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and 
Prov.  5.    8  come  not  nigh  the  door  other  house 

8.  3  She  crieth . .  at  the  coming  in  at  the  doo. 
8.  3i  waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  doors 

9. 14  she  sitteth  at  the  door  of  her  house 
Eze.    8.    3  to  the  door  of  the  inner  gate  that  looketh 
8.   7  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  court 
3.   8  I  had  digged  in  the  wall,  behold,  a  door 


Eze.    S.  14  Then  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the 
8. 16  at  the  door  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
10. 19  stood  at  the  door  of  the  east  gate  of  the 
11.    1  at  the  door  of  the  gate  five  and  twenty 
33.  30  by  the  walls,  and  in  the  doors  of  the 
40. 13  five  and  twenty  cubits,  door  againt  door 
41.    2  the  breadth  of  the  door  (was)  ten  cubits 
41.   2  the  sides  of  the  door  (were)  five  cubits 
41.    3  and  measured  the  post  of  the  door 
41.    3  the  door,  .the  breadth  of  the  door  seven 
41.  11  And  the  doors  of  the  side  chambers 
41.  11  one  door  toward,  .and  another  door  tow. 
41.  17  To  that  above  the  door,  even  unto  the 

41.  20  From  the  ground  unto  above  the  door 

42.  2  Before  the  length .  .(was)  the  north  door 
42.    4  and  their  doors  toward  the  north 

42. 11  their  fashions,  and  according  to  their  d. 
42.  12  according  to  the  doors  of  the  chambers 
42.  12  toward  the  south  (was)  a  door  in  the 

46.  3  shall  worship  at  the  door  of  this  gate 

47.  1  he  brought  me  again  unto  the  door  of 
Hos.  2.  15  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope 
Mic.    7.    5  keep  the  doors  of  thy  niouth  from  her 

7-A  gate,  nfJ  shaar. 

Exod35-  17  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  court 
Job  38.  17  hast  thou  seen  the  doors  of  the  shadow 

S.Door,  dvpa  thwra. 

Ma-tt.  6.    6  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy 

24.  33  know  that  it  is  near,  (even)  at  the  doors 

25.  10  while  they  went  to  buy.  .the  door  was  sh. 

27.  60  he  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of  the 

28.  2  [and  rolled  back  the  stone  from  the  door] 
Mark  1.  33  all  the  city  was  gathered.,  at  the  door 

2.  2  no  room .  .not  so  much  as  about  the  door 

11.  4  they,  .found  the  colt  tied  by  the  door 
13.  29  know  that  it  is  nigh,  (even)  at  the  doors 

15.  46  and  rolled  a  stone  unto  the  door  of  the 

16.  3  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  from  the  door 
Luke  it.    7  Trouble  me  not :  the  door  is  now  shut 

13.  25  hath  shut  to  the  door,  .knock  at  the  door 
Johnio.    1  He  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into 

10.    2  he  that  entereth  in  by  the  door  is  the 
10.    7  I  say  imto  you,  I  am  the  door  of  the  sheep 
10.    9  I  am  the  door :  by  me  if  any  man  enter 
18.  16  But  Peter  stood  at  the  door  without 
20. 19  doors  were  shut  where  the  disciples  were 
20.  26  (Then)  came  Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut 
Acts    5.    9  (are)  at  the  door,  and  shall  carry  thee 
5. 19  opened  the  prison  doors,  and  brought 
5.  23  standing  without  before  the  doors :  but 

12.  6  the  keepers  before  the  door  kept  the 

12.  13  as  Peter  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate 

14.  27  how  he  had  opened  the  door  of  faith  unto 
16.  26  immediately  all  the  doors  were  opened 
16.  27  seeing  the  prison  doors  open,  he  drew  out 
2i.  30  drew  him  out.  .forthwith  the  doors  were 

1  Co.  16.    9  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto 

2  Co.  2. 12  a  door  was  opened  unto  me  of  the  Lord 
Col.     4.    3  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door  of  utter. 
Jas.     5.    9  behold,  the  judge  standeth  before  the  door 
Rev.   3.    8  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and 

3.  20  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock 

3.  20  open  the  door,  I  will  come  into  him,  and 

4.  1  behold,  a  door  (was)  opened  in  heaven 

DOOR  keeper,  or  keeper  of  the  door  — 
l.Gate  keeper,  -lintf  shoer. 

1  Ch.15.  23  Berechiah  and  Elkanah  (were)  door  kee. 

15.  24  Obed-edom  and  Jehiah  (were)  door  keep. 

%.A  door  keeper,  6vpcop6s  thurdros. 

John  iS.  16  spake  unto  her  that  kept  the  door,  and 
iS.  17  Then  saith  the  damsel  that  kept  the  door 

DOOR  keeper,  to  be  a  — 

To  keep  self  at  the  threshold,  *|30  saphaph,  7ct. 
Psa.  S4. 10  I  had  rather  be  a  door  keeper  in  the  house 

DOOR  post  — 

Threshold,  lintel,  door,  *]p  saph. 

Eze.  41.  16  The  door  posts,  and  the  narrow  windows 

DOOR  post,  upper  — 

Lintel,  upper  door  post,  ^lpi^p  mashqoph. 

Exodi2.    7  and  on  the  upper  door  post  of  the  houses 

DOPH'-KAH,  njjE^  cattle  driving. 

Eighth  station  of  Israel,  between  Sin  and  Sinai. 

ISrum33.  12  took  their  journey,  .and  encamped  in  D. 
33. 13  And  they  departed  from  D.,  and  encamped 

DOR,  "in,  mn  circle. 

An  ancient  royal  city  of  the  Cauaanites,  whose  ruler  was 
an  ally  of  Jabin  king  of  Hazor  against  Joshua.  It  was 
the  most  southern  settlement  of  the  Phoenicians  on  the 
coast  of  Syria,  and  a  maritime  city  on  the  W.  border  of 
Manasseh  and  the  N.  border  of  Dan. 

Josh  11.    2  and  in  the  borders  of  D.  on  the  west 
12.  23  The  king  of  D.  in  the  coast  of  D.,  one 
17.  11  and  the  inhabitants  of  D.  and  her  towns 

Judg.  1.  27  nor  the  inhabitants  of  D.  and  her  towns 

1  Ki.   4.  11  The  son  of  Abinadab,  in  all.  .region  of  D. 

i  Ch.  7.  29  Megiddo  and  her  towns,  D.  and  her  towns 

DOR'-CAS,  AopKas,  doe,  gazelle. 

A  female  disciple  restored  to  life  at  Joppa. 

Acts    9.  36  Tabitha.  .by  interpretation  is  called  D. 
9.  39  showing  the  coats  and  garments  which  D. 


DOTE,  to  — 

l.To  become  foolish,  "?n;  yaal,  2. 

Jer.  50.  36  upon  the  tears ;  and  they  shall  dote :  a 
2.  To  dote  on,  love,  21%  agab. 

Eze.  23.    s  she  doted  on  her  lovers,  on  the  Assyrians 

23.    7  with  all  on  whom  she  doted :  with  all 

23.    9  hand  of  the  Assyrians,  upon  whom  she  do. 

23.  12  She  doted  upon  the  Assyrians  (her)  neigh. 

23. 16  she  doted  upon  them,  and  sent  messen. 

23.  20  For  she  doted  upon  their  paramours 
3. To  be  sick,  vo<t4co  nosed. 

1  Ti.    6.    4  doting  about  questions  and  strifes  of 
DO'-THAN,  yni,  ]rn,  double  feast. 

A  city  of  Manasseh,  W.  of  the  Jordan,  near  Mount 
Gilboa,  N.E.  of  Samaria,  and  still  called  Dothan. 
Gen.  37.  17  I  heard  them  say,  Let  us  go  to  D. 

37.  17  And  Joseph  went,  .and  found  them  in  D. 

2  Ki.   6.  13  was  told  him,  saying,  Behold,  (he  is)  in  D 
DOUBLE  — 

1. Double,  fold,  hss  Icephel. 

Job   11.    6  that  (they  are)  double  to  that  which  is! 
47.  13  who  can  come  (to  him)  with  his  double 
Isa.  40.    2  she  hath  received . .  double  for  all  her  sins 
2.  To  double,  Sds  kaphal. 

Exo^ 39.    9  they  made  the  breastplate  double  :  a  span 
8.  A  second,  repetition,  nJy'P  nxishneh. 

Gen.  43.  12  take  double  money  in  your  hand:  and  the 

43.  15  they  took  double  money  in  their  hand 
Deut  15.  18  he  hath  been  worth  a  double  hired  serva. 
Isa.   61.    7  For  your  shame  (ye  shall  have)  double 

61.    7  in  their  land  they  shallpossess  thedouble 
Jer.    16.  iS  I  will  recompense . .  their  sin  double 

17.  18  destroy  them  with  double  destruction 
Zech.  9.  12  I  will  render  double  unto  thee 

4.  Two,  twofold,  D-jp  shenayim. 

Exod22.    4  whether  it  be  ox,  or  ass.  .shall  restore  d. 

22.    7  if  the  thief  be  found,  let  him  pay  doubl. 

22.    9  he  shall  pay  double  unto  his  neighbour 
Deut  21.  17  by  giving  him  a  double  portion  of  all  that 
2  Ki.  £.    9  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  upon 

5.  Double,  tivofold,  dnr\ovs  diplous. 

1  Ti.    5.  17  Let  the  elders,  .be  countedworthy  of  do. 
Rev.  18.   6  unto  her  double  according  to  her  works 

18.  6  cup  which  she  hath  filled  fill  to  her  dou. 

DOUBLE,  to  — 

l.To  double,  ^53  kapha! . 

Exod26.   9  thou  shalt.  .double  the  sixth  curtain  in 
2,  To  double,  8nr\6td  diploo. 

Rev.  18.    6  even  as  she  rewarded  you,  and  double 
DOUBLE  heart  — 
Heart  and  heart,  nSi  lb  leb  va-lcb. 

1  Ch.12.  33  such  as  went  forth,  .not  of  double  heart 

Psa.  12.    2  (and)  with  a  double  heart,  do  they  speak 
DOUBLE  minded  - 
Two  soided,  $i\pvxos  dipsuchos. 

Jas.     1.    8  A  double  minded  man  (is)  unstable  in  all 
4.    8  purify  (your)  hearts,  (ye)  double  minded 
DOUBLE  tongued  — 
Double  worded,  5i\oyos  dilogos. 

1  Ti.    3.    8  not  double  tongued,  not  given  to  much 
DOUBLED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  doubled,  bss  kaphal,  2. 

Eze.  21.  14  let  the  sword  be  doubled  the  third  time 
%To  be  repeated,  done  a  second  time,  n:y  shanah,  2. 

Gen.  41.  32  the  dream  was  doubled  unto  Pharaoh 
DOUBLED  — 
To  double,  ^?|  kaphal. 

Exod2S.  16  Four  square  it  shall  be,  (being)  doubled 
39.   9  a  span  the  breadth  thereof,  (being)  doub. 
DOUBT  — 
A  knot,  doubt,  joint,  "lap  qetar. 

Dan.   5.  12  Forasmuch  as.  .dissolving  of  doubts,  were 
5. 16  that  thou  canst,  .dissolve  doubts :  now  if 
DOUBT,  to  — 
l.To  be  without  resource,  awopeo/j-ai  aporeomai. 

Johni3.  22  the  disciples  looked . .  doubting  of  whom 

Acts  25.  20  because  I  doubted  of  such  manner  of 

2.  To  judge  diversely,  SiaKpluco  diakrino. 

Mattsi.  21  If  ye  have  faith,  and  doubt  not,  ye  shall 
Markn.  23  shall  not  doubt  in  his  heart,  but  shall 
Acts  10.  20  go  with  them,  doubting  nothing:  for  I 

11.  12  bade  me  go  with  them,  nothing  [doubt.] 
Rom  14.  23  he  that  doubteth  is  damned  if  he  eat 

3. To  be  without  any  resource,  SictTropeoj  diaporeG. 
Acts.  5.  24  doubted  of  them  whereunto  this  would 
10.  17  while  Peter  doubted  in  himself  what  this 
4. To  stand  divided,  dHrrd£w  distazo. 

Matt  14.  31  O  thou,  .wherefore  didst  thou  doubt? 
28.  17  they  worshipped  him  :  but  some  doubted 

DOUBT,  to  be  in  — 

To  be  without  any  resource,  Z:a-nop4w  diaporeo. 

Acts.  2. 12  they  were  all  amazed,  and  were  in  doubt 
DOUBT,  to  make  to  — 
To  lift.up  the  soul,  atpoi  $vxhv  airopsvehen. 

John  10.  24  How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?  If 


DOUBT 


270 


DRAW 


DOUBT,  to  stand  in  — 

To  be  without  resource,  awopeofxai  aporeomai. 

Gal.     4.  20  change  my  voice,  for  I  stand  in  doubt  of 

DOUBT,  no  — 

1. Truly,  indeed,  aipx  omnam. 

Job   12.    2  No  doubt  but  ye  (are)  the  people,  and  wis. 

2.  Then,  therefore,  apa  ara. 

Luken.  20  no  doubt  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come 

3.  Verily  then,  for,  yap  gar. 

1  Co.  9.  10  For  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  (this)  is  written 
^.Altogether,  by  all  means,  travrcos  pantos. 

Acts  28.   4  No  doubt  this  man  is  a  murderer,  whom 

DOTJBT,  -without  — 
To  tear,  fpip  taraph. 

Gen.  37.  33  Joseph  is  without  doubt  rent  in  pieces 

DOUBTFUL  — 

Reasoning,  dta\oyiafj.6s  dialogismos. 

Rom  14.    1  receive  ye,  (but)  not  to  doubtful  disput. 

DOUBTFUL  mind,  to  be  of  — 
To  lift  up  on  high,  fierecopl^co  meteorizo. 
Lukei2.  29  neither  be  ye  of  doubtful  mind 

DOUBTING  — 

Reasoning,  SiaAoyKT/xo?  dialogismos. 

1  Ti.    2.    8  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without,  .doubting 

DOUBTLESS  — 

I.  That,  because,  '3  if. 

Isa.  63.  16  Doubtless  thou  (art)  our  Father,  though 

2. At  least,  yz  ge. 

j  Co.  9.    2  If  I  be  not . .  yet  doubtless  I  am  to  you 
Z. Doubtless,  truly,  certainly,  S-f)  de. 

2  Co.  12.    1  [not  expedient  for  me  doubtless  to  glory] 

DOUBTLESS,  again  — 
To  come  in,  N*i3  bo. 

Psa.126.   6  shall  doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing 
DOUBTLESS,  not  — 
If,  DN  im. 

Num.14.  30  Doubtless  ye  shall  not  come  into  the  land 

DOUGH  — 

1.  Dough,  swelled,  psa  batseq. 

Exodi2.  34  took  their  dough  before  it  was  leavened 

12.  39  they  baked  unleavened  cakes  of  the  dough 
Jer.  7.  18  the  women  knead  (their)  dough,  to  make 
Hos.    7.    4  raising  after  he  hath  kneaded  the  dough 

2.  Dough,  mixed  dough,  npny.  arisah. 

Num.15.  20  offer  up  a  cake  of  the  first  of  your  dough 
15.  21  Of  the  first  of  your  dough  ye  shall  give 
Neh.  10.  37  should  bring  the  first  fruits  of  our  dough 
Eze.  44.  30  unto  the  priest  the  first  of  your  dough 

DOVE  — 

l.Dove,  rtiv  yonah. 

Gen.  8.T  8  he  sent  forth  a  dove  from  him,  to  see  if 
8.    9  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of 
8.  10  he  sent  forth  the  dove  out  of  the  ark 
8.  11  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  evening 
8.  12  sent  forth  the  dove  ;  which  returned  not 
Psa.  55.    6  Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove  ?  (for) 
68.  13  the  wings  of  a  dove  covered  with  silver 
Song  1.  15  behold,  thou  (art)  fair ;  thou  (hast)  doves' 
2.  14  0  my  dove,  (that  art)  in  the  clefts  of  the 

4.  1  thou  (hast)  doves'  eyes  within  thy  locks 

5.  2  Open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove 

5.  12  (the  eyes)  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  waters 

6.  9  My  dove,  my  undefiled  is  (but)  one ;  she 
Isa.    38.  14  I  did  mourn  as  a  dove  :  mine  eyes  fail 

59.  11  We  roar  all.  .and  mourn  sore  like  doves 

60.  8  and  as  the  doves  to  their  windows 
Jer.  48.  28  be  like  the  dove  (that)  maketh  her  nest 
Eze.     7.  16  shall  be  on  the  mountains  like  doves  of 
Hos.    7.  11  Ephraim  also  is  like  a  silly  dove  without 

11.  11  and  as  a  dove  out  of  the  land  of  Assyria 
Nab.  2.    7  shall  lead  (her)  as  with  the  voice  of  doves 

2,Dove,  pigeon,  Trepto-Ttpd  peristera. 

Matt.  3.  16  the  spirit  or  God  descending  like  a  dove 
10.16  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves 
21.  12  and  the  seats  of  them  that  sold  doves 
Mark  x.  10  Spirit  like  a  dove  descending  upon  him 

11. 15  and  the  seats  of  them  that  sold  doves 
Luke  3.  22  descended  in  a  bodily  shape  like  a  dove 
John  1.  32  Spirit  descending  from  heaven  like  a  dove 
2.  14  those  that  sold  oxen  and  sheep  and  doves 
2. 16  said  unto  them  that  sold  doves,  Take 
DOVE'S  dung  — 

Roasted  chicle. pea,  D?rzw  dibyonim-. 

2  Ki.  6.  25  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  dove's  dung  for 

DOWN  — 

\. Beneath,  low,  nun  mattah. 

2  Ch.  32.  30  brought  it  straight  down  to  the  west  side 

2.Doxmi,  down  from ,  Kara  kata  (gen.) 

Matt  8.  32  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down 
Mark  5.  13  the  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place 
Luke  8.  33  the  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place 

3.  Downward,  Karoo  kato. 

Matt  4.  6  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down 
Luke  4.  9  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  d. 
John  8.    6  [Jesus  stooped  down  and  with  (his)  finger] 


John  8.  8  [again  he  stooped  down,  and  wrote  on  the] 
Acts  20.  9  fell  down  from  the  third  loft 
[See  also  Beat,  beaten,  bow,  bowed,  bowing,  break, 
breaking,  bring,  broken,  brought,  carry,  cast,  cast  self, 
casting,  come,  coming,  couch,  cut,  dig,  drive,  drop,  fall, 
falling,  flow,  get,  go,  go  up,  going,  hang,  hew,  hewn, 
kneel,  laid,  lay,  let,  lie,  light,  lighting,  look,  lying, 
make  go,  pluck,  pour,  poured,  press,  pull,  pulled, 
pulling,  push,  put,  ran,  reap,  roll,  run,  set,  sink,  sit, 
sitting,  smite,  smitten,  step,  stoop,  swallow,  take,  taken, 
throw,  thrown,  thrust,  tossed,  tread,  treading,  trickle, 
trodden,  turn  upside,  turning  upside,  walk  up,  wander.] 

DOWN  sitting  — 

To  sit  down,  3»;  yashab. 

Psa.  139.    2  Thouknowest  my  down  sitting  and  mine 

DOWNWARD  — 

Beneath,  loxo,  fitta  mattah. 

2  Ki.  19.  30  Judah  shall  yet  again  take  root  downwa. 
Eccl.  3.  21  the  beast  that  goeth  downward  to  the 
Isa.  37.  31  of  Judah  shall  again  take  root  downward 
Eze.    1.  27  the  appearance  of  Ms  loins  even  downwa. 
8.    2  the  appearance  of  his  loins  even  downw. 

DOWRY  — 

\.  Do  wry,  "ia_T  zebed. 

Gen.  30.  20  God  hath  endued  me  (with)  a  good  dowry 

2. Dowry,  purchase  money,  "tnb  mohar. 

Gen.  34.  12  Ask  me  never  so  much  dowry  and  gift 
Exod22.  17  shall  pay  money  according  to  the  dowry 
1  Sa.  18.  25  The  king  desireth  not  any  dowry,  but  an 

DRAG  — 

Net,  drag,  rrppD  mikmereth. 

Hab.   1.  15  they,  .gather  them  in  their  drag 

1. 16  they,  .burn  incense  unto  their  drag 

DRAG,  to  — 

To  draw,  drag,  vvptp  surd. 

Johii2i.    8  came,  .dragging  the  net  "with  fishes 

DRAGON  — 

I. Howlers,  jackals,  niapi  tannoth. 

Mai.    1.    3  waste  for  the  dragons  of  the  wilderness 

2.Howlers,  jackals,  n^n  tannim. 

Job  30.  29  I  am  a  brother  to  dragons,  and  a  compa. 
Psa.  44.  19  hast  sore  broken  us  in  the  place  of  dragons 
Isa.  13.  22  cry  in  their  desolate  houses,  and  dragons 

34.  13  it  shall  be  an  inhabitation  of  dragons 

35.  7  in  the  habitation  of  dragons,  where  each 
43.  20  The  beast,  .shall  honour  me,  the  dragons 

Jer.  9.  1 1  I  will  make  J  erusalem . .  a  den  of  dragons 
10.  22  to  make  the  cities,  .a  den  of  dragons 
14.  6  they  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  dragons 
49.  33  AndHazor  shall  be  a  dwelling  for  dragons 
51.  37  And  Babylon. .  a  dwelling  place  for  drago. 
Eze.  29.  3  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  the  great  dragon 
Mic.    1.    8  I  will  make  a  wailing  like  the  dragons 

3. Sea-serpent,  pan  taivnin. 

Deut32.  33  Their  wine  (is)  the  poison  of  dragons 

Psa.  74.  13  thou  brakest  the  heads  of  the  dragons  in 
91.  13  the  young  lion  and  the  dragon  shalt  thou 
148.    7  Praise  the  Lord,  .ye  dragons,  and  all 

Isa.   27.    1  he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that  (is)  in  the 
51.    9  (Art)  thou  not  it  that,  .wounded  the  drago. 

Jer.    51.  34  he  hath  swallowed  me  up  like  a  dragon 
i.A  dragon,  hpaKwv  drakdn. 

Rev.  12.    3  a  great  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads 
12.    4  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman  which 
12.    7  against  the  dragon;  and  the  dragon  fought 
12.    9  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  that 
12.  13  when  the  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast 
12.  16  the  flood  which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his 

12.  17  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman 

13.  2  the  dragon  gave  him  his  power,  and  his 
13.    4  they  worshipped  the  dragon  which  gave 
13.  11  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake  as  a  dragon 
16.  13  frogs  (come)  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dra. 
20.    2  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old  serp. 

DRAGON  WELL,  prin  py  fountain  of  jackals. 
A  fountain  near  the  S.  walls  of  Jerusalem. 

Neh.   2.  13  I  went  out.  .even  before  the  dragon  well 

DRAMS  — 

l.Darics,  (Persian  coin),  D\ia~nt*  adarkonim. 

1  Ch.29.    7  five  thousand  talents  and  ten  thousand  d. 

Ezra    8.  27  twenty  basius  of  gold  of  a  thousand  dra. 

2. Dorics  (Persian  coin),  D'jb?-n  darkeinonim. 
Ezra  2.  69  threescore  and  one  thousand  drams  of 
Neh.   7.  70  gave  to  the  treasure  a  thousand  drams  of 

7.  7    treasure  of  the  work  twenty  thousand  dr. 

7.  72  the  people  gave  (was)  twenty  thousand  d. 

DRANK  — 

Drinking,  banquet,  nn^p  mishteh. 

Dan.    1.    5  provision,  .of  the  wine  which  he  drank 
1.    8  nor  with  the  wine  which  he  drank 

DRAUGHT  — 

X.A  catch,  draught,  aypa  agra. 

Luke   5.    4  and  let  down  your  nets  for  a  draught) 

5.    9  he  was  astonished . .  at  the  draught  of  the 

2.A  privy,  seat  without,  cMptSpwv  aphedron. 

Matt  15.  17  whatsoever,  .is  cast  out  into  the  draught 
Mark  7.  19  goeth  out  into  the  draught,  purging  all 


DRAUGHT  house  — 

Goings  out,  or  place  of  refuse,  niN^2  motsaoth,  or 

nix-ipD  macharaoth. 

2  Ki.'io.  27  made  it  a  draught  house  unto  this  day 

DRAW,  to  — 

1.2*0  draxo  up,  rh^  dalah. 

Exod.  2.  16  they  came  and  drew  (water),  and  filled 
2. 19  also  drew  (water)  enough  for  us,  and 

2.To  tread  (tlie  bow),  XT*  darak. 

2  Ch.14.    8  had  an  army  (of  men)  that,  .drew  bows 

3.7*o  draw  out,  n^D  mushah. 

Exod.  2. 10  Because  I  drew  him  out  of  the  water 

4.  To  draw  out,  tjejd  mashak. 

Gen.  37.  28  they  drew  and  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the 

Deut.21.    3  heifer,  .which  hath  not  drawn  in  the  yoke 

Judg.  4.    6  Go  and  draw  toward  mount  Tabor,  and 

4.    7  I  will  draw  unto  thee,  to  the  river  Kishon 

20.  37  the  liers  in  wait  drew  (themselves)  along 

1  Ki.  22.  34  a  (certain)  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture 

2  Ch.18.  33  a  (certain)  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture 
Job    21.  33  and  every  mau  shall  draw  after  him 

24.  22  He  draweth  also  the  mighty  with  his 
Psa.  10.    9  when  he  draweth  him  into  his  net 

28.    3  Draw  me  not  away  with  the  wicked 
Song  1.    4  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee.     The 
Isa.     5.  18  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  iniquity  with 

66.  19  Pul,  and  Lud,  that  draw  the  bow,  (to) 
Jer.  31.    3  with  loving  kindness  have  I  drawn  thee 

38.  13  So  they  drew  up  Jeremiah  with  cords 
Eze.  32.  20  draw  her  and  all  her  multitudes 
Hos.  11.    4  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with 

5.  To  draw  away  or  off,  pru  nathaq. 

Judg2o.  32  Let  us  flee,  and'  draw  them  from  the  city 
Q.To  draw  away  or  out,  pSj  nathaq,  5. 

Josh.  8.   6  till  we  have  drawn  them  from  the  city 

7.  To  draw  about  or  along,  ano  sachab. 

2  Sa.  17. 13  and  we  will  draw  it  into  the  river,  until 

8.  To  draw  out,  empty,  pn  rug,  5. 

Exodis.    9  I  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall 

Eze.  28.   7  they  shall  draw  their  swords  against 

30. 11  they  shall  draw  their  swords  against 

9.2*0  draw  out  or  off,  *]by  shalaph. 

Judg.  3.  22  he  could  not  draw  the  dagger  out  of  his 
8.  10  and  twenty  thousand  men  that  drew 

8.  20  but  the  youth  drew  not  his  sword ;  for 

9.  54  Draw  thy  sword,  and  slay  me,  that  men 
20.    2  huudred  thousand  footmen  that  drew 
20.  15  twenty  and  six  thousand  men  that  drew 
20.  17  four  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew 
20.  25  eighteen  thousand  men  ;  all  these  drew 
20.  35  and  an  hundred  men  :  all  these  drew  the 

20.  46  twenty  and  five  thousand  men  that  drew 

1  Sa.  17,  51  and  drew  it  out  of  the  sheath  thereof 

31.    4  Draw  thy  sword,  and  thrust  me  through 

2  Sa.  24.    9  valiant  men  that  drew  the  sword 

2  Ki.    3.  26  with  him  seven  hundred  men  that  drew 

1  Ch.  10.    4  Draw  thy  sword,  and  thrust  me  through 

2i.    5  an  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew 

21.  5  ten  thousand  men  that  drew  sword 

10.  To  cause  to  go  up  (or  land),  avafiifiafa  anabih. 
Matt  13.  48  Which,  when  it  was  full,  they  drew  to 

11.  To  draw  or  bale  out,  avrKeca  antleo. 

John  2.    9  the  servants  which  drew  the  water  knew 
4.    7  There  cometh  a  woman,  .to  draw  water 
4.  15  I  thirst  not,  neither  come  hither  to  draw 
12.ro  draxo  away  or  out,  airooTrdaj  apospao. 

Matt.  26.  51  stretched  out  (his)  hand,  and  drew  his 
13.  To  become,  begin  to  be,  ylvofiai  ginomai. 

John  6.  19  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and  drawing 
14.2b  draw,  draxo  out  or  toivards,  IAkuco  helkud. 
John  6.  44  the  Father  which .  .sent  me  draw  him 
12.  32  And  I.  .will  draw  all  (men)  unto  me 
18.  10  Then  Simon  Peter  having  a  sword  drew 
21.    6  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw  it  for 
21. 11  Simon  Feter  went  up,  and  drew  the  net 
Acts  16. 19  drew  (them)  into  the  market  place  unto 

15.  To  draxo  out  or  towards,  e\Kca  helko. 

Acts  21.  30  they  took  Paul,  and  drew  him  out  of  the 
Jas.     2.    6  and  draw  you  before  the  judgment  seats? 

16.  To  draxo,  draxo  out,  (nrdw  spao. 

Marki4.  47  one  of  them  that  stood  by  drew  a  sword 
17.2*0  draw,  drag,  a-vpoo  suro. 

Acts  14.  19  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  (him)  out  of 
17.    6  they  drew  Jason  and  certain  brethren 

Rev.  12.    4  his  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars 
18.2*0  caxtse  to  advance,  irpofiifidfa  probibazo. 

Acts  19.  33  [they  drew  Alexander  out  of  the  multit.] 

DRAW  away,  to  — 

1.7*0  draxo  off  or  away,  airoairdco  apospao. 

Acts  20.  30  speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  away 

2.2*0  set  off  or  axvay,  atyio-r-q p.i  aphistemi. 

Acts    5.  37  and  drew  away  much  people  after  him 

DRAW  back,  to  — 

1.2*0  turn  or  draxo  back,  3>E>  shub,  5. 

Gen.  38.  29  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  drew  back  his  hand 
Josh.  8.  26  For  Joshua  drew  not  bis  hand  back 
Lam.   2.    3  he  hath  drawn  back  his  right  hand  from 


DRAW 


271 


DREAM 


2.  To  send  back,  u7ro<7-Te'A\a>  hupostello, 

Heb.io.  38  if  (any  man)  draw  back,  my  soul  shall 
DRAW  back,  of  tbem  who  — 
.4  sending  {self)  back,  vTroaroh  '    tupostole. 

Heb.  10.  39  we  are  not  of  ther-    .  ho  draw  back 
DRAW  forth,  to  — 
To  cause  to  go  or  comefm     ,  N£  yatsa,  5. 

1  Ch.  10.  16  drew  forth  *      Syrians  that  (were)  beyond 

Eze.  21.3  draw  forth     .y  sword  out  of  his  sheath 
si.    5  I  the  Lo"     nave  drawn  forth  my  sword 
DRAW  near,  to  — 

1 .  To  come  on,  jnj  naga,  5. 

Esth.  9.    1  his  decree  drew  near  to  be  put  in  execution 
Psa.107.  iS  they  draw  near  unto  the  gates  of  death 
Eze.     7.  12  The  time  is  come,  the  day  draweth  near 
2. To  come  near,  in^  qarab. 

Lev.  9.  5  all  the  congregation  drew  near  and  stood 
Deut.25.  11  the  wife  of  the  one  draweth  near  for  to 
Judg.19.  13  Come,  and  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these 
1  Sa.  14.  36  Let  us  draw  near  hither  unto  God 
Esth.  5.  2  Esther  drew  near,  and  touched  the  top  of 
Job  32-  22  llis  soul  draweth  near  unto  the  grave,  and 
Isa.  41.  5  ends  of  the  earth  were  afraid,  drew  near 
57.  3  draw  near  hither,  ye  sons  of  the  sorceress 
Lam.  3.  57  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  (that)  I  ca. 
Zeph.  3.    2  she  trusted  not . .  she  drew  not  near  to  her 

3.  To  cause  to  come  near,  3")j3  qarab,  5. 

Isa.   26.  17  (that)  draweth  near  the  time  of  her  deli. 

4.  Coming  near,  ni"jjp  qerabah. 

Psa.  73.  28  But  (it  is)  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  G. 

5.  To  draw  nigh,  eyyl(<u  eggizo. 

Matt  21.  34  when  the  time  of  the  fruit  drew  near,  he 
Lukeis.    1  Then  drew  near  unto  him  all  the  publi. 

21.  8  and  the  time  draweth  near:  go  ye  not 

22.  47  went  before  them,  and  drew  near  unto 
24. 15  Jesus  himself  drew  near,  and  went  with 

6. To  lead  toward,  wpocrdyoo  jprosago. 

Acts  27.  27  that  they  drew  near  to  some  country 

7.  To  come  toward,  trpoo-epxo/j.at  prosercliomai. 
Acts    7.  31  as  he  drew  near  to  behold  (it),  the  voice 
Heb.  10.  22  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  in 

DRAW  near,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  come  near,  315  qarab,  5. 

Jer.   30.  21  I  will  cause  him  to  draw  near,  and  he 
Eze.     9.    r  Cause  them  that  have  charge . .  to  draw  n. 
22.   4  thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  draw  near 

DRAW  nigh,  to  — 

l.To  come  on,  jnj  naga,  5. 

Psa.  83.   3  and  my  life  draweth  nigh  unto  the  grave 
Eccl.  12.    1  nor  the  years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt 

2.  To  come  near,  Tl$  qarab. 

Gen.  47.  29  the  time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die 
Exod.  3.  5  Draw  not  nigh  hither :  put  off  thy  shoes 
1  Sa.  17.  48  came  and  drew  nigh  to  meet  David,  that 
1  Ki.  2.  1  days  of  David  drew  nigh  that  he  should 
Psa.  69.  18  Draw  nigh  unto  my  soul,  (and)  redeem  it 
119. 150  They  draw  nigh  that  follow  after  misch. 
Isa.     5.  19  the  counsel  of  "the  Holy  One.  .draw  nigh 

Z.To  {cause  to)  come  near,  Tin.  qarab,  5. 

Exodi4,  10  when  Pharaoh  drew  nigh,  the  children  of 

4, To  become,  yivofiai  ginomai. 

John  6.  19  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and  drawing  n. 

5.  To  draw  nigh,  4yyl(ta  eggizo. 

Matt  15.    8  This  people  draweth  nigh  unto  me  with 

ai.    i  when  they  drew  nigh  unto  Jerusalem 
Luke  15.  25  as  he  came  and  drew  nigh  to  the  house 

21.  28  look,  .for  your  redemption  draweth  n. 

22.  1  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  drew  nigh 
24.  28  they  drew  nigh  unto  the  village  whither 

Acts    7.  17  when  the  time  of  the  promise  drew  nigh 

10.    9  went  on  their  journey,  and  drew  nigh 
Heb.  7.  ig  by  the  which  we  draw  nigh  unto  God 
Jas.    4.   8  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh 
5.    8  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh 

DRAW  off,  to  — 

To  draw  off,  rfr$  shalaph. 

Ruth  4.    8  Buy  (it)  for  thee.    So  he  drew  off  his  shoe 

DRAW  out,  to  — 

l.To  make  long,  lengthen,  ^"]X  arak,  5. 

1  Ki.  8.    8  they  drew  out  the'  staves,  that  the  ends 

2  Ch.  5.    9  And  they  drew  out  the  staves  (of  the  ark) 
Isa.   57.    4  make  ye  a  wide  mouth,  (and)  draw  out 

2.  To  draw  up,  rh^  dalah. 

Pro v  20.    5  a  man  of  understanding  will  draw  it  out 

3.  To  draw  out,  ybn  ckalats. 

Lam.  4.    3  Even  the  sea  monsters  draw  out  the 

4.  To  draw  up  or  out,  *p$  chasaph. 

Hag.  2.  16  (one)  came  to  the  press  fat  for  to  draw  o. 

5.  To  draw  out,  a^a  mashah,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  17  he  took  me ;  he  drew  me  out  of  many 
Psa.  18.  16  he  took  me,  he  drew  me  out  of  many 

6.  To  draw  out,  -^wo  maskak. 

Exod  12. 21  Drawout  and  take  you  a  lamb  according 
Job   41.    1  Canst  thou  draw  out  leviathan  with  an 
Psa.  85.   5  draw  out  thine  anger  to  all  generations? 
7. To  draw  about  or  along,  snp  sachdb. 

Jer.  49.  20  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw  them  out 
50.  45  the  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw  them  out 


S.To  cause  to  go  out  or  forth,  ptBjruq. 

Isa.   58.  10  (if)  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry 

9.  To  open,  nns  pathach. 

Psa.  37. 14  The  wicked  have  drawn  out  the  sword 

10.  To  draw  out,  pin  ruq,  5. 

Lev.  26.  33  and  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  you 
Psa.  35.    3  Draw  out  also  the  spear,  and  stop  (the) 
Eze.    5.    2,  12  and  I  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  them 
12. 14  and  I  will  draw  out  the  sword  after  them 

11. 7*0  draw  out,  h.vr\ia>  antleo. 

John  2.    8  Draw  out  now,  and  bear  unto  the  gover. 
12.  To  draw,  draw  out  or  forth,  o-rrdio  spao. 

Acts  16.  27  he  drew  out  his  sword,  and  would  have 

DRAW  on,  to  — 

To  shine  or  dawn  upon,  £wi<pwo-K(o  epiphosko. 

Luke23.  54  the  preparation,  and  the  sabbath  drew  on 
DRAW  to  the  shore,  to  — 
To  anchor  near,  trpoo'opij.i^co  prosormizo. 

Mark  6.  53 -they  came,  .and  drew  to  the  shore 
DRAW  (toward  evening),  to  — 
To  be  feeble,  Jail,  nsn  raphah. 

Judgio.    9  the  day  draweth  toward  evening,  I  pray 
DRAW  up,  to  — 
l.To  draw  up,  h%  rua  giach,  guach. 

Job  40.  23  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his 
2.  To  draw  up,  ava<nrdco  anaspao. 

Acts  11.  10  and  all  were  drawn  up  again  into  heaven 
DRAW  (water),  to  — 
To  draw  {water),  2t<w  shadb. 

Gen.  24. 13  men  of  the  city  come  out  to  draw  water 
24.  19  I  will  draw  (water)  for  thy  camels  also 
24.  20  unto  the  well  to  draw  (water),  and  drew 
24. 43  the  virgin  cometh  forth  to  draw  (water) 
24.  44  and  I  will  also  draw  for  thy  camels 
24.  45  went  down  unto  the  well,  and  drew(wa.) 
Ruth  2.    g  of  (that)  which  the  young  men  have  dra. 

1  Sa.   7.    6  gathered  together  to  Mizpeh, . .  drew  (w.) 

9.  11  young  maidens  going  out  to  draw  water 

2  Sa.  23.  16  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Betlvlehem 
1  Ch.  1 1.  18  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Beth-lehem 
Isa.    12.    3  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation 
Nah.  3.  14  Draw  thee  waters  for  the  siege,  fortify 

DRAW  with,  to  — 

Bucket,  something  to  draio  with,  ^vrXvfxaantlema, 

John  4. 11  thou  hast  nothing  to  draw  with,  and  the 
DRAW,  woman  to  — 
To  d'.aic  {water),  3N3*  shadb. 

Gen.  24.  11  the  time  that  women  go  out  to  draw 
DRAWER— 
To  draw  up  {water),  asy  shadb. 

Deut  20.  11  the  hewer  of  thy  wood  unto  the  drawer  of 

Josh.  9.  21,  23,  he  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  w. 
9.  27  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  for 
DRAWING  water,  places  of  — 
Places  for  drawing  water,  D'SN^d  mashabbvm. 

Judg.  5.  11  noise  of  archers  in .  .places  of  drawing  w. 
DRAWN  — 
l.To  take,  r\jh  laqach. 

Prov.24.  11  If  thou  forbear  to  deliver,  .drawn  unto  d. 
2.  To  spread  out,  B>aj  naiasfi. 

Isa.  ai.  15  for  they  fled,  .from  the  drawn  sword 
Z.To  draw,  tear,  3no  sachdb. 

Jer.  22. 19  drawn  and  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates  of 
LRemoved,  pJflH  attiq. 

Isa.   28.    9  weaned  from  the  milk,  (and)  drawn  from 
5. To  open.,  nri5 pathach. 

Eze.  21.  28  say  thou,  The  sword,  the  sword  (is)  drawn 
6.  To  draw  out,  tfy)  shalaph. 

Nuni22.  23  ass  saw  the  angel,  .and  his  sword  drawn 
22.  31  saw  the  angel,  .and  his  sword  drawn  in 

Josh.  5. 13  there  stood  a  man.  .with  his  sword  drawn 

1  Ch.  31.  16  the  angel,  .having  a  drawn  sword  in  his 

DRAWN,  to  be  — 

l.To  draxo  out,  f]72?  shalaph. 

Job  20.  25  It  is  drawn,  and  cometh  out  of  the  body 

2.  To  be  marked  out,  *inj?  taar. 

Josh.  15.    9  the  border  was  drawn  from  the  top 
15.    9  and  the  border  was  drawn  to  Baalah 
15.  11  and  the  border  was  drawn  to  Shicron 
18. 14  the  border  was  drawn  (thence),  and 
18.  17  And  was  drawn  from  the  north,  and 
DRAWN  away,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rm  nadach,  2. 

Deut.30.  17  but  shalt  be  drawn  away,  and  worship 
2. To  be  drawn  away  or  out,  pm  nathaq,  2. 
Josh.  8.  16  all  the  people,  .were  drawn  away  from 

3.  To  be  drawn  away,  pr\i  nathaq,  6. 

Judg2o.  31  the  children  of  Benjamin,  .were  drawn  a. 

4.  To  be  drawn  out  or  forth,  e£4\K0fiat  exelkomai. 

Jas.    1. 14  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust,  and 
DREAD  — 
1. Terror,  no'N  emah. 

Job  13.  21  and  let  not  thy  dread  make  me  afraid 


2.Terror,  fright,  nn  chath. 

Gen.    9.    2  the  dread  of  you  shall  be  upon  every 

3. Fear,  reverence,  vrfia  mora. 

Deut  11.  25  the  dread  of  you  upon  all  the  land  that 

4.  Fear,  dread,  ins  pachad. 

Exod.15.16  Fear  and  dread  shall  fall  upon  them 
Deut.  2.  25  This  day  will  I  begin  to  put  the  dread 
Job     13.  11  Shall  not.  .his  dread  fall  upon  you? 

DREAD,  to  — 

l.To  fear,  be  afraid,  K"V  yare. 

1  Ch.22.  13  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage;  dread  not 

2.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  terrifed,  HJJ  arats. 
Deut.  1.  29  Dread  not,  neither  be  afraid  of  them 

DREAD,  to  be  — 

To  declare  or  hold  as  fearful,  pj;  arats,  5. 

Isa.     8.  13  Sanctify  the  Lord  .  .(let)  him  (be)  your  dr. 
DREADFTTL  — 
l.To  be  afraid,  terrible,  Vrn  dechal. 

Dan.    7.    7  behold,  a  fourth  beast,  dreadful  and  terr. 
7.  19  of  the  fourth  beast,  which  was.  .dreadful 

2. To  be  feared,  reverenced,  K"V  yare,  2. 

Geu.  28.  17  And  he . .  said,  How  dreadful  (is)  this 
Dan.    9.    4  0  Lord,  the  great  and  dreadful  God 
Hab.   1.    7  They  (are)  terrible  and  dreadful :  their 
Mai.    1.  14  and  my  name  (is)  dreadful  among  the  h. 

4.  5  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day 

3.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  nn?  pachad. 

Job-  15.  21  A  dreadful  sound  (is)  in  his  ears 
4.Fear,  reverence,  mo?  yvrah. 

Eze.     1.  18  they  were  so  high  that  they  were  dreadf. 

DREAM  — 

1. Dream-,  Di"?n  chalom. 

Gen.  20.    3  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by 
20.    6  God  said  unto  him  in  a  dream,  Yea,  I  kn. 
31.  10  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a  dream 
31.  11  angel  of  God  spake  unto  me  in  a  dream 
31.  24  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a  dream 
37.    5  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream,  and  he  told  (it) 
37.    6  Hear,  .this  dream  which  I  have  dreamed 
37.    8  And  they  hated  him  yet.  .for  his  dreams 
37.   g  And  he  dreamed  yet  another  dream 
37.   9  Behold,  I  have  dreamed  a  dream  more 
37.  10  What  (is)  this  dream  that  thou  hast  dre.? 
37.  20  we  shall  see  what  will  become  of  his  drea. 
40.    5  they  dreamed  a  dream  both  of  them 
40.    5  each  man  his  dream  in  one  night 
40.    5  according  to  the  interpretation  of  his  dre. 
40.    8  they  said  unto  him,  We  have  dreamed  a  d. 
40.    9  And  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to 
40.    9  In  my  dream,  behold,  a  vine  (was)  before 

40.  16  chief  baker,  .said.  .1  also  (was)  in  my  d. 
41    7  Pharaoh  awoke,  and,  behold,  .a  dream 

41.  8  and  Pharaoh  told  them  his  dreams ;  but 
41.  11  we  dreamed  a  dream  in  one  night,  I  and 
41.  11  according  to  the  interpretation  of  Ins  d. 
41.  12  and  he  interpreted  to  us  our  dreams 

41. 12  to  each  man  according  to  his  dream  he 
41. 15  Pharaoh  said.  .1  have  dreamed  a  dream 
41.  15  thou  canst  understand  a  dream  to  inter. 
41.  17  In  my  dream,  behold,  I  stood  upon  the 
41.  22  I  saw  in  my  dream,  and,  behold,  seven 
41.  25  Joseph  said . .  The  dream  of  Pharaoh  (is) 
41.  26  seven  good  ears,  .the  dream  (it)  one 

41.  32  the  dream  was  doubled  unto  Pharaoh  twi. 

42.  .9  Jc™eph  remembered  the  dreams  which 
Num  12.    6  (and)  will  speak  unto  him  in  a  dream 
Deut  13.    1  a  prophet,  or  a  dreamer  of  dreams,  and 

13.   3  that  prophet,  or  that  dreamer  of  dreams 

13.    5  dreamer  of  dreams,  shall  be  put  to  death 

Judg.  7.  13  a  man  that  told  a  dream  unto  his  fellow 

7.  13  I  dreamed  a  dream,  and,  lo,  a  cake  of 

7.  15  Gideon  heard  the  telling  of  the  dream 

1  Sa.  23.    6  LORD  answered  him  not,  neither  by  dre. 

28. 15  neither  by  prophets,  nor  by  dreams 
1  Ki.  3.    5  the  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  in  a  dream 
3.  15  Solomon  awoke  ;  and,  behold,  (it  was)  a  d. 
Job     7.  14  thou  scarest  me  with  dreams,  and  terri. 
20.    8  He  shall  fly  away  as  a  dream,  and  shall 
33.  15  In  a  dream,  in  a  vision  of  the  night, when 
Psa.  73.  20  As  a  dream  when  (one)  awaketh ;  (so),  O 
Eccl.  5.    3  a  dream  cometh  through  a  multitude  of 

5.  7  in  the  multitude  of  dreams  and  many 
Isa.  29.    7  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  a  night  vision 
Jer.  23.  27  people  to  forget  my  name  by  their  dreams 

23.  2S  that  hath  a  dream,  let  him  tell  a  dreani 
23.  32  against  them  that  prophesy  false  dreams 
29.    8  neither  hearken  to  your  dreams  which  ye 
Dan.    1.  17  understanding  in  all  visions  and  dreams 
2.   1  Nebuchadnezzar  dreamed  dreams,  where. 
2.    2  for  to  show  the  king  his  dreams 
2.    3  said  unto  them,  I  have  dreamed  a  dream 
2.    3  my  spirit  was  troubled  to  know  the  dre. 
Joel    2.  28  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your 
Zech.io.   2  seen  a  lie,  and  have  told  false  dreams 
2. Dream,  o?n  chelem. 

Dan.  2.  4  tell  thy  servants  the  dream,  and  we  will 
2.  s  ye  will  not  make  known  unto  me  the  dr. 
2.  6  ye  show  the  dream,  and  the  interpretation 
2.  6  show  me  the  dream,  and  the  interpretat. 
2.  7  Let  the  king  tell  his  servants  the  dreani 
2.  9  ye  will  not  make  known  unto  me  the  dr. 
2.  9  tell  me  the  dream,  and  I  shall  know  that 
2.  26  able  to  make  known  unto  me  the  dream 


DREAM 


272 


DRINK 


Dan.    2.  28  Thy  dream,  and  the  visions  of  thy  head 
2.  36  This  (is)  the  dream  ;  and  we  will  tell  the 
2.  45  dream  (is)  certain,  and  the  interpretation 
4.    5  I  saw  a  dream  which  made  me  afraid,  and 
4.    6  unto  me  the  interpretation  of  the  dream 
4.    7  I  told  the  dream  before  them ;  but  they 
4.    8  and  before  him  I  told  the  dream,  (saying) 
9  tell  me  the  visions  of  my  dream  that  I 
18  This  dream  I  king  Nebuchadnezzar  have 
,  19  let  not  the  dream,  or  the  interpretation 
,  19  the  dream  (Ije)  to  them  that  hate  thee 
.  12  interpreting  of  dreams,  and  showing  of 
:  Daniel  had  a  dream  and  vision  of  his 
:  he  wrote  the  dream,  (and)  told  the  sura 

3.  What  happens  in  sleep,  a  dream,  ivxmviov. 
Acts.  2.  17  and  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams 

4.  A  dream,  ovap  onar. 

Matt.  1.  20  the  angel.,  appeared  unto  him  in  a  dream 
2.  12  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream  that 
2. 13  the  angel,  .appeareth  to  Joseph  in  a  dr. 
2..  19  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth  in  a  dream 
2.  22  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream,  he  tur. 
27.  19  suffered  many  things  this  day  in  a  dream 

DREAM,  to  — 

l.To  dream,  D?p  chalam. 

Gen.  28.  12  he  dreamed,  and  behold  a  ladder  set  up 
37.  5  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream,  and  he  told  (it) 
37.  6  Hear,  .this dream  which  I  have  dreamed 
37.  9  he  dreamed  yet  another  dream,  and  told 
37.  9  I  have  dreamed  a  dream  more ;  and 
37.  10  What  (is)  this  dream  that  thou  hast  dre  ? 
40.    5  they  dreamed  a  dream  both  of  them,  each 

40.  8  We  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  (there  is) 

41.  1  Pharaoh  dreamed  :  and,  behold,  lie  stood 
41.    5  And  he  slept  and  dreamed  the  second 
41.  11  we  dreamed  a  dream  in  one  night,  I  and 
41.  11  we  dreamed  each  man  according  to  the 

41.  15  I  have  dreamad  a  dream,  and  (there  is) 

42.  9  remembered  the  dreams  which  he  drea. 
Judg.  7.  13  I  dreamed  a  dream,  and,  lo,  a  cake  of 
Psa.126.    1  Lord  turned,  .we  were  like  them  that  d. 
Isa.  29.    8  even  be  as  when  a  hungry  (man)  dream. 

29.    8  when  a  thirsty  (man)  dreameth,  and,  be. 
Jer.   23.  25  saying,  I  have  dreamed,  I  have  dreamed 
Dan.    2.    1  Nebuchadnezzar  dreamed  dreams,  where. 
2.    3  I  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  my  spirit 
Joel    2.  28  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your 

2.To  dream  (frequently),  4vvirvi&{ofiai  enupniazo. 
Acts    2. 17  and  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams 

DREAMED,  to  cause  to  he  — 

To  cause  to  be  dreamed,  ubn  chalam,  5 

Jer.   29.    8  your  dreams  which  ye  caused  to  be  drea. 

DREAMER  — 

1.  To  dream.,chn  chalam. 

Deuti3.  1  arise  among  you  a  prophet,  or  a  dreamer 

13.  3  the  words  of  that  prophet,  or  that  drea. 

13.  5  dreamer  of  dreams,  shall  be  put  to  death 

Jer.   27.  9  nor  to  your  diviners,  nor  to  your  dream. 

2.  Master  of  dreams -t  Di^q  ?y3  baed  chalam. 

Gen.  37. 19  to  another,  Behold,  this  dreamer  cometh 

3.  To  dream  (frequently),  kvvwptd(oftai  enupnizoma. 

Jude        8  these  (filthy)  dreamers  defile  the  flesh 
DREGS  — 

1.  Goblet,  bowl,  large  cup,  nyajp  qubbaath. 

Isa.    51.  17  thou  hast  drunken  the  dregs  of  the  cup 
51.  22  (even)  the  dregs  of  the  cup  of  my  fury 

2.  Preserves,  dregs,  lees,  Dnetp  shemarim. 

Psa.  75.   8  but  the  dregs,  .all  the  wicked  of  the  earth 

DRESS,  to  — 

l.To  do  good,  make  right,  3&;  yatab,  5. 

Exod3o.    7  when  he  dresseth  the  lamps,  he  shall 
2.  To  serve,  till,  ~\2y  abad. 

Gen.    2.  15  put  him  into  the  garden,  .to  dress  it 

Deut23.  39  Thou  shalt  plant  vineyards,  and  dress 
3. To  do,  make,  n'j'jj  asah. 

Gen.  18.    7  gave  (it)  unto  a  young  man.  .to  dress  it 
18.    8  he  took,  .the  calf  which  he  had  dressed 

2  Sa.  12.    4  to  take  of  his  own .  .to  dress  for  the 

12.  4  took  the  poor  man's  lamb,  and  dressed 

13.  5  let.  .Tamar.  .dress  the  meat  in  my  sight 
13.    7  saying,  Go  now.  .and  dress  him  meat 

2  Sa.  19.  24  had  neither  dressed  his  feet,  nor  trimmed 
iKi.  17.  12  that  I  may  go  in  and  dress  it  for  me  and 
18.  23  and  I  will  dress  the  other  bullock,  and 
18.  25  Choose  you  one  bullock,  .and  dress  (it) 
18.  26  they  took  the  bullock,  .and  they  dressed 

DRESSED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  clone,  made,  ryy  asah,  2. 

Lev.    7.   9  and  all  that  is  dressed  in  the  frying  pan 
2.70  be  a  husbandman,  yewpyiofiat  georgeomai. 

Heb.  6.    7  herbs  meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dress. 
DRESSED,  ready  — 
To  do,  make,  n'pjj  asah. 

1  Sa.  25.  iS  Abigail,  .took,  .five  sheep  ready  dressed 
DREW  near  — 
To  come  near,  3*33  qarab. 

1  Sa.  17.  41  the  Philistine  came  on  and  drew  near 

1  Sa.  iS.  25  And  he  came  apace,  and  drew  near 


DRIED  — 

1.  7b  be  dry,  or  dried  up,  e>a;  yahesh. 

Num.  6.    3  neither  shall  he.  .eat moist  grapes,  or  dr. 

2.  To  roast,  rhft  qalah. 

Lev.    2.  14  thy  first  fruits  green  ears  of  corn  dried  by 
DRIED,  to  he  — 
1.7*o  be  dried,  3"in  chareb. 

Judg  16.    7  seven  green  withs  that  were  never  dried 

16.  8  green  withs  which  had  not  been  dried 

2.  To  be  burnt,  scorched,  Tiri  charar,  2. 

Psa.  69.    3  weary  of  ray  crying ;  my  throat  is  dried 

3.  To  be  dry  or  dried  tip,  isq;  yahesh. 

Gen.    8.  14  in  the  second  month . .  was  the  earth  dried 
Eze.  37.  11  Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost 

DREED  away  — 

l.To  be  dry  or  dried  up,  eq;  yahesh. 

Numn.    6  But  now  our  soul  (is)  dried  away 

DRIED  up  — 

Dried  up,  nnx  tsiclzeh. 

Isa.     5.  13  then-  multitude  dried  up  with  thirst 

DRIED  up,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  or  become  lean,  poor,  lo\o,  weak,  hh^  dalal. 
Job  28.    4  they  are  dried  up,  they  are  gone  away 

2.7*0  be  dried  vp,  3  "in  chareb. 

Gen.    8.  13  the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the 
Psa.To6.    9  the  Red  sea  also,  and  it  was  dried  up 
Isa.    19.    6  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be.  .dried  up 
Hos.  13.  15  his  fountain  shall  be  dried  up :  he  shall 

3.7*0  be  dry  or  dried  up,  ttb;  yahesh. 

Gen.    8.    7  until  the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off 
1  Ki.13.   4  his  hand,  .dried  up,  so  that  he  could  not 

17.  7  the  brook  dried  up,  because  there  had 
Job    18.  16  His  roots  shall  be  dried  up  beneath,  and 
Psa.  22.  15  My  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd 
Isa.    19.    5  the  river  shall  be  wasted  and  dried  up 
Jer.  23.  10  the  pleasant  places,  .are  dried  up,  and 

50.  38  they  shall  be  dried  up  :  for  it  (is)  the  land 
Hos.  9.  16  their  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  bear  no 
Joel  1.  20  for  the  rivers  of  waters  are  dried  up,  and 
Zech.11.  17  his  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his 

4.  7*o  make  or  become  dry,  K>n;  yahesh,  5. 

Joel    1.  10  new  wine  is  dried  up,  the  oil  languasheth 
1.  12  The  vine  is  dried  up,  and  the  fig  tree 
DRINK  — 
1.  Drink,  juice,  ri\x?n  mashqeh. 

Lev.  1 1.  34  all  drink  that  may  be  drunk  in  every  (such) 

Isa.   32.    6  he  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  thirsty  to 
2. Banquet,  drinking,  rrggrp  mishteh. 

Ezra   3.    7  They  gave .  .'meat,  and  drink,  and  oil,  unto 

Dan.    1. 10  hath  appointed  your  meat  and  your  drink 
3. Anything  sucked  up,  N3b  sobe. 

Hos.   4.  18  Then  drink  is  sour :  they  have  committed 
4.  Juice,  marrow,  refreshment,  Ij3?'  shiqquv. 

Psa.  102.    g  I  have,  .mingled  my  drink  with  weeping 
o.Juice,  marrow,  refreshment,  *\$$  shiqqui. 

Hos.    2.    5  that  give,  .my  flax,  mine  oil  and  my  dri. 
6. Anything  drunk,  TrSfxa poma. 

1  Co.  10.    4  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink 

Heb.  9.  10  (Which  stood)  only  in  meats  and  drinks 

7. A  drinking,  ir6ms  posis. 

John  6.  55  For  my.  .blood  is  drink  indeed 
Rom  14.  17  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  dri. 
Col.     2.  16  Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you.  .in  drink 
DRINK,  to  — 
l.A  banquet,  drinking,  nn^p  mishteh. 

Dan.    1.  16  took  away,  .the  wine  that  they  should  dr. 
2. 7*o  drink,  banquet,  nrr#  shathah. 

Gen.    9.  21  And  he  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drun. 
24.  14  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  .that  I  may  drink 
24. 14  Drink,  and  I  will  give  thy  camels,  .also 
24.  18  Drink,  my  lord  :  and  she  hasted,  and  let 
24.  44  Both  drink  thou,  and  I  will  also  draw  for 
24.  46  Drink,  and  I  will  give,  .so  I  drank,  and 

24.  54  And  they  did  eat  and  drink,  he  and  the 

25.  34  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up,  and 

26.  30  made,  .a  feast,  and  they  did  eat  and  dri. 

27.  25  and  he  brought  him  wine,  and  he  drank 
30.  38  when  the  flocks  came  to  drink,  that  they 
30.  38  should  conceive  when  they  came  to  drink 

43.  34  And  they  drank,  and  were  merry  with  him 

44.  s  (Is)  not  this  (it)  in  which  my  lord  drink. 
Exod.  7.  iS  the  Egyptians  shall  loathe  to  drink  of 

7.  21  Egyptians  could  not  drink  of  the  water 
7.  24  the  Egyptians  digged . .  for  water  to  drink 
7.  24  could  not  drink  of  the  water  of  the  river 
15.  23  they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of  M. 
15.  24  murmured,  .saying,  What  shall  we  drink? 
17.    1  (there  was)  no  water  for  the  people  to  d. 
17.    2  and  said,  Give  us  water  that  we  may  dr. 
1 7.    6  shall  come  water . .  that  the  people  may  d. 
24.  11  also  they  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  drink 
32.    6  the  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink 
34.  28  he  did  neither  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water 
Lev.  10.    9  Do  not  drink  Mine  nor  strong  drink,  thou 
Num.  6.    3  He  shall,  .drink  no  vinegar  of  wine,  or 
6.    3  neither  shall  he  drink  any  liquor  of 
6.  20  after  that  the  Nazarite  may  drink  wine 
20.    5  neither  (is)  there  any  water  to  drink 
20. 11  the  congregation  drank,  and  their  beasts 
20.  1 7  neither  will  we  drink  (of)  the  water  of  the 
20.  19  and  if  I  and  my  cattle  drink  of  thy  water 


Nuni2i. 
23. 

33- 

Deut.  2. 

2. 

9- 

9- 

11. 
28. 
29. 

32' 

32- 
Judg.  7 

7- 
9- 
13- 
13' 
13' 
15 
19. 
19, 
19. 
Ruth  2. 

3- 

1  Sa.    1. 
1. 

«     3°- 


Ezra  10. 

Neh.  8. 

8. 

Esth.  3. 

4- 
Joh     1. 

6. 

iS- 

21. 

34- 
50. 
75- 
78. 
no. 

Prov.  4. 

5' 
9' 
23. 
26. 
3i< 
3i' 
3i' 

Eccl.  2. 

3' 
5 
8 

Song  5. 
Isa.     5, 


Psa. 


22  we  will  not  drink  (of)  the  waters  of  the 
24  until  he  eat  (of)  the  prey,  and  drink  the 
14  was  no  water  for  the  people  to  drink 

6  buy  water  of  them . .  that  ye  may  drink 
28  give  me  water,  .that  I  may  drink :  only 

9  I  neither  did  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 
iS  1  did  neither  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water 

1 1  land  drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heaven 
39  but  shalt  neither  drink  (of)  the  wine,  nor 

6  neither  have  ye  drunk  whre  or  strong  dr. 
14  thou  didst  drink  the  pure  blood  of  the 
38  Which . .  drank  the  wine  of  their  drink  off. 

5  that  boweth  down  upon  his  knees  to  d. 

6  bowed  down  upon  their  knees  to  chink 
27  did  eat  and  drink,  and  cursed  Abimelech 

4  beware,  I  pray  thee,  and  drink  not  wine 

7  bear  a  sou  ;  and  now  drink  no  wine  nor 

14  neither  let  her  drink  wine,  .nor  eat  any 
19  when  he  had  drunk,  his  spirit  came  again 

4  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  lodged  there 

6  they  sat  down,  and  did  eat  and  drink  toge. 

21  washed  their  feet,  and  did  eat  and  drink 
9  drink  of  (that)  winch  the  young  men  have 

7  when  Boaz  had  eaten  and  drunk,  and  his 
9  So  Hannah  rose  up . .  after  they  had  drunk 

15  I  have  drunk  neither  wine  nor  strong  dr. 

12  had  eaten  no  bread,  nor  drunk  (any)  water 

1 1  shall  I  then  go  into  mine  house . .  to  drink 

13  he  did  eat  and  drink  before  him  ;  and  he 

3  and  drank  of  his  own  cup,  and  lay  in  his 
2  the  wine,  that  such  as  be  faint,  .may  dr. 

35  taste  what  I  eat  or  what  I  drink  ?  can  I 

16  he  would  not  drink  thereof,  but  poured 

17  the  blood,  .therefore  he  would  not  drink  it 
.  25  behold,  they  eat  and  drink  before  him 

8,  16  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor  drink  wat. 
9  Eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water,  nor  turn 

17  Thou  shalt  eat  no  bread  nor  drink  water 

18  that  he  may  eat  bread  and  drink  water 

19  did  eat  bread  in  his  house,  and  drank  w. 

22  and  hast  eaten  bread  and  drunk  water 

22  Eat  no  hread,  and  drink  no  water ;  thy 

23  it  came  to  pass . .  after  he  had  drunk,  that 

4  it  shall  be,  (that)  thou  shalt  drink  of  the 
6  ravens  brought  him  bread . .  and  he  drank 

10  a  little  water  in  a  vessel,  that  I  may  dr. 

4 1  Get  thee  up,  eat  and  drink ;  for  (there  is) 

42  So  Ahah  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink 

6  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  laid  him  down 

8  he  arose,  and  did  eat  and  drink,  and  went 

17  ye  may  drink,  both  ye,  and  your  cattle 

22  they  may  eat  and  drink,  and  go  to  their 

23  when  they  had  eaten  and  drunk,  he  sent 
8  went  into  one  tent,  and  did  eat  and  drink 

34  when  he  was  come  in,  he  did  eat  and  dr. 
27  may  eat  their  own  dung,  and  drink  their 
31  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  cist. 

24  I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters 

18  David  would  not  drink  (of)  it,  but  poured 

19  shall  I  drink  the  blood  of  these  men  that 

19  Therefore  he  would  not  drink  it.  These 
22  did  eat  and  drink  beiore  the  Lord  on  that 

6  he  did  eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water  :  for 
10  eat  the  fat,  and  drink  the  sweet,  and  send 

1 2  went  their  way  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and 

15  And  the  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to  dr. 

16  and  neither  eat  nor  drink  three  days 
4  called  for  their  three  sisters,  .to  drink 

4  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit 

16  man,  which  drinketh  iniquity  like  water? 

20  he  shall  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  Alrai. 

7  What  man  (is)  like  Job,  (who)  drinketh 

13  Will  I  eat.  .or  drink  the  blood  of  goats? 

8  all  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall,  .drink 
44  turned  their  rivers,  .they  could  not  dri. 

7  He  shall  drink  of  the  brook  in  the  way 

17  For  they,  .drink  the  wine  of  violence 

15  Drink  waters  out  of  thine  own  cistern 

5  drink  of  the  wine  (which)  I  have  mingled 
7  Eat  and  drink,  saith  he  to  thee  ;  but  his 

6  cutteth  off  the  fecst,  (and)  drinketh  dam. 

4  (It  is)  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine  ;  nor 

5  Lest  they  drink,  and  forget  the  law,  and 

7  Let  him  drink,  and  forget  his  poverty 

24  that  he  should  eat  and  drink,  and . .  enjoy 
13  also  that  every  man  should  eat  and  dri. 

18  good  and  comely,  .to  eat  and  to  drink 
.  15  a  man  hath  no  better,  .than.  .to.  .drink 

7  Go.  .drink  thy  wine  with  a  merry  heart 
1  I  have  drunk  my  wine . .  O  friends ;  drink 

22  mighty  to  drink  wine,  and  men  of  streu. 
5  Prepare  the  table,  .eat,  drink  :  arise,  ye 
13  let  us  eat  and  drink  ;  for  to  morrow  we 

9  They  shall  not  drink  wine  with  a  song 
9  shall  be  bitter  to  them  that  drink  it 

8  a  thirsty  man  dreameth . .  he  drinketh 

12  they  may.  .drink  their  own  piss  with  you 

16  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  own 

25  I  have  digged,  and  drunk  water;  and 

12  he  drinketh  no  water,  and  is  faint 

17  which  hast  drunk,  .thou  hast  drunken 
22  dregs,  .thou  shalt  no  more  drink  it  again 

8  the  sons  of  the  stranger  shall  not  drink 

9  they  that  have  brought  it.  .shall  drink 

13  behold",  my  servants  shall  drink,  hut  ye 
iS  what  hast  thou  to  do.  .to  drink  the  waters 

18  to  drink  the  waters  of  the  river? 

8  Thou  shalt  not.  .sit  with  them,  .to  drink 

15  did  not  thy  father  eat  and  drink,  and  do 

16  they  shall  drink,  and  be  moved,  and  be 

26  the  king  of  Sheshach  shall  drink  after 

27  Drink  ye,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and 


DRINK 


273 


DRIVE 


Jer.  25 
25- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
49- 
49. 

Lam.  5. 

Eze.  4. 
4- 
4- 


23 

23- 

25' 
31- 

3i- 
34- 
34- 

39' 

39 

-  39' 

44. 

Dan.   1. 

Joel    3. 

Amos  2. 


4 
4- 
5 
6, 

Obad. 9' 

Jon.  3. 
Mic.  6. 
Hah.  2. 

Zeph.  1. 
Hag.  1. 
Zech.  7. 

9- 


28  to  take  the  cup  at  thine  hand  to  drink 
28  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Ye  shall,  .drink 

5  and  I  said  unto  them,  Drink  ye  wine 

6  But  they  said,  We  will  drink  no  wine 

6  Ye  shall  drink  no- wine,  (neither)  ye,  nor 
8  to  drink  no  wine  all  our  days,  we,  our 

14  he  commanded  his  sous  not  to  drink 
14  for  unto  this  day  they  drink  none,  but 
12  not  to  drink,  .have  assuredly  drunken 
12  but  thou  shalt  surely  driuk  (of  it) 

7  the  nations  have  drunken  of  her  wine 

4  We  have  drunken  our  water  for  money 
11  Thou  shalt  drink  also  water  by  measure 

11  from  time  to  time  shalt  thou  drink 

16  and  they  shall  drink  water  by  measure 
iS  drink  thy  water  with  trembling  and  with 
19  and  drink  their  water  with  astonishment 
32  Thou  shalt  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup 
34  Thou  shalt  eveu  drink  it  and  suck  (it)  out 

4  and  they  shall  drink  thy  milk 

14  their  trees  stand,  .all  that  drink  water 

16  all  that  drink  water,  shall  be  comforted 
iS  and  to  have  drunk  of  the  deep  waters 
19  they  drink  that  which  ye  have  fouled 

17  that  ye  may  eat  flesh,  and  drink  blood 
iS  Ye  shall,  .drink  the  blood  of  the  princes 
19  and  shall,  .drink  blood  till  ye  be  drunken 
21  Neither  shall  any  priest  driuk  wine 

12  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  aud  water  to  drink 
3  sold  a  girl  for  wine,  that  they  might  dri. 

5  they  drink  the  wine  of  the  condemned 
1  which  say.  .Bring,  and  let  us  drink 

8  So.  .three  cities  wandered,  .to  drink  wa. 
11  but  ye  shall  not  drink  wine  of  them 

6  That  drink  wine  in  bowls,  aud  anoint 

14  they  shall  plant,  .and  drink  the  wine 

16  as  ye  have  drunk  upon  my  holy  mountain 
16  shall  all  the  heathen  drink,  -they  shall  d. 

7  let  them  not  feed,  nor  drink  water 

15  and  sweet'wine,  but  shalt  not  drink  wine 

16  drink  thou  also,  and  let  thy  foreskin  be 

13  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  but  not  drink 
6  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  wit  IV  drink 
6  when  ye  did  drink,  .did  not  ye.  .drink 

15  they  shall  drink,  (and)  make  a  noise  as 


3.  To  drink,  banquet,  nri^  shethah. 

Dan.  5.  1  Belshazzar  the  king,  .drank  wine  before 
5.  2  that,  .his  concubines,  might  drink  therein 
5.    3  wives,  and  his  concubines,  drank  in  them 

5.  4  They  drank  wine,  and  praised  the  gods 
5-  23  thy  concub;nes,  have  drunk  wine  in  them 

4,  To  drink,  irlva  pino. 

Matt.  6.  25  what  ye  shall  eat,  [or  what  ye  shall  drink] 

6.  31  What  shall  we  eat  ?.  .What  shall  we  d.  ? 
n.  18  John  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking 

11.  19  The  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  drinking 
24.  38  they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying 
24.  49  and  to  eat  and  drink  with  the  drunken 
26.  27  gave  (it)  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all  of 
26.  29  I  will  not  drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit 
26.  29  when  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  Fa. 

26.  42  pass,  .except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done 

27.  34  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  with 
27.  34  when  he  had  tasted . .  he  would  not  drink 

Mark  2.  16  [and  drinketh]  with  public  an  s  -an  d-sinners 
T4.  23  he  gave  (it)  to  them  :  and  they  all  drank 
14.  25  I  will  drink  no  more  of  the  fruit  of  the 

14.  25  that  I  drink  it  new  hi  the  kingdom  of 

15.  23  gave  him  [to  drink]  wine  mingled  with 

16.  18  [if  they  drink  any  deadly  tiling,  it  shall] 
Luke  1.  15  and  shall  drink  neither  wine  nor  strong 

5.  30  eat  and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners? 
5.  33  they  said  unto  him.  .but  thineeatandd.  ? 

5.  39  No  man  also  having  drunk  old  (wine) 

7.  33  neither  eating  bread  nor  drinking  wine 
7.  34  Son  of  man  is  come  eating  and  drinking 

10.    7  and  drinking  such  things  as  they  give 
12. 19  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  (and)be  merry 

12.  29  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink 

12.  45  and  to  eat  and  drink,  and  to  be  drunken 

13.  26  We  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  thy  presen. 

17.  8  serve  me,  till  I  have  eaten  and  drunken 
17.  8  and  afterward  thou  shalt  eat  and  drink 
17.  27  They  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  married 

17.  28  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  bought 
22.  18  I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit  of-  the  vine 

22.  30  That  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table 
John  4.    7  Jesus  saith  unto  her.  Give  me  to  drink 

4.    9  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest  drink  of 
4.  10  it-is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink 
4.  12  gave  us  the  well,  and  drank  thereof  him. 
4.  13  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water  shall 
4.  14  whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I 

6.  53  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you 

6.  54  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my 

6.  56  He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my 

7.  37  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink 

18.  ii  the  cup.  .given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it? 
Acts    9.    9  three  days,  .neither  did  eat  nor  drink 

23.  12  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had  killed  Paul 
23.  21  eat  nor  drink  till  they  have  killed  him 

Rom  14.  21  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  wine 
1  Co.  9.  4  Have  we  not  power  to  eat  and  to  drink  ? 
10.  4  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink 
10.  4  they  drank  of  that  spiritual  P^ock  that 
10.  7  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink 
10.  21  Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord 

10.  31  Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or 

11.  22  have  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  to  drink  in? 
11.  25  as  oft  as  ye  drink  (it),  in  remembrance 

35 


1  Co.  11.  26  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
11.  27  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
11.  28  so  let  him  eat  of  (that)  bread,  and  drink 
11.  29  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh 

15.  32  let  us  eat  and  drink;-  for  to  morrow  we  d. 
Heb.  6.  7  the  earth  which  drinketh  in  the  rain  that 
Rev.  14.  10  The  same  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the 

16.  6  and  thou  hast  given  them  blood  to  drink 
18.    3  all  nations  have  drunk  of  the  wine  of  her 

DRINK  abundantly,  to  — 

To  drink  to  satiety,  ~oy  shakar. 

Song  5.    1  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved 
DRINK,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cause  or  give  to  drink,  to  water,  Ttftp  shaqah,  5. 

Num.  5.  24  he  shall  cause  the  woman  to  drink  the 

5.  26  shall  cause  the  woman  to  drink  the  water 

Song   8.    2  I  would  cause  thee  to  drink  of  spiced  wi. 

Jer.  25.  15  and  cause  all  the  nations,  .to  drink  it 
DRINK,  to  be  filled  with  — 
To  drink  to  satiety,  "D^  shakar. 

Hag.   1.    6  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink 
DRINK,  to  give  — 

1.  To  cause  or  give  to  drink,  to  water,  npy  shaqah,  5. 

Gen.  21.  19  bottle  with  water,  and  gave  the  lad  drink 
24.  14,  46  and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink  also 
24.  18  pitcher  upon  her  hand,  and  gave  him  dr. 

24.  43  Give  me,  I  pray,  .a  Little  water,  .to  drink 
Num  20.  8  give  the  congregation  and . .  beasts  drink 
Judg.  4.  19  Give  me,  I  pray .  .a  little  water  to  drink 

4.  19  opened  a  bottle  of  milk,  and  gave  him  d. 
2Sa.  23.  15  Oh  that  one  would  give  me  drink  of  the 
1  Ch.  11.  17  Oh  that  one  would  give  me  drink  of  the 
Esth.   1.    7  they  gave  (them)  drink  in  vessels  of  gold 
Job    22.    7  not  given  water  to  the  weary  to  drink 
Psa.  69.  21  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  dr. 
78.  15  gave  (them)  drink  as  (out  of)  the  great 
80.    5  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  mea. 
104.  11  give  drink  to  every  beast  of  the  field 
Prov  25.  21  if  he  be  thirsty,  give  him  water  to  drink 
Isa.   43.  20  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  chosen 
Jer.     8.  14  given  us  water  of  gall  to  drink,  because 
9.  15  and  give  them  water  of  gall  to  drink 
16.    7  give  them  the  cup  of  consolation  to  drink 
35.    2  bring  them . .  and  give  them  wine  to  drink 
Amos  2. 12  But  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to  drink 

2.  To  give  to  drink,  worlfa  potizo. 

Matt 25.  35  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink:  I 

25.  37  when  saw  we  thee,  .thirsty,  and  gave.  ,d. 
25.  42  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink 

Rom  12.  20  if  he  thirst,  give  him  think :  for  in  so 

DRINK,  to  give  to  — 

To  give  to  drink,  ttoti^w  potizo. 

Matt  10.  42  whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one 
27.  48  put  (it)  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  driuk 

Mark  9.  41  give  you  a  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  my 
15-  36  put  (it)  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink 
DRINK,  giving  — 
To  give  to  drink,  ntf  shaqah,  5. 

Gen.  24.  19  when  she  had  done  giving  him  drink 
DRINK,  to  let  — 
l.To  suffer  to  suck  up  &r  swallow,  K£3  gama,  5. 

Gen.  24.  17  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  drink  a  little  water 
2.7*0  cause  or  give  to  drink,  njry  shaqah,  5. 

Gen.  24. 45  I  said  unto  her,  Let  me  drink,  I  pray  thee 

DRINK,  to  make  — 

l.To  cause  or  give  to  drink,  n^  shaqah,  5. 

Gen.  19.  32  Come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine 
*9-  33>  35  they  made  their  father  drink  wine 
19. 34  let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this  night 
24. 46  and  she  made  the  camels  drink  also 
Exod32.  20  and  made  the  children  of  Israel  drink 
1  Sa.  30. 11  he  did  eat ;  and  they  made  him  drink 
Psa.  36.    8  thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the  river 

2.  To  give  to  drink,  -koti^w  potizo. 

Rev.  14.    3  she  made  all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of 

DRINK,  to  make  to  — 

1.  To  cause  or  give  to  drink,  ?\$v  shaqah,  5. 
Num.  5.  27  when  he  hath  made  her  to  drink  the 
Psa.  60.   3  thou  hast  made  us  to  drink  the  wine  of 
Jer.  25. 17  I.  .made  all  the  nations  to  drink,  unto 

2.7*0  give  to  drink,  irorifa  potizo. 

1  Co.  12. 13  have  been  all  made  to  drink  into  one  spi. 

DRINK  offering  — 

1. Mixed  or  spiced  drink,  "^Dpp  miinsah. 

Isa.  65.  11  that  furnish  the  drink  offering  unto  that 
%  Anything  poured  out,  TP3  uasik. 

Deut  32.  38  drank  the  wine  of  their  drink  offerings? 

3.  Anything  poured  out,  ^01  nesek. 

Gen.  35.  14  and  he  poured  a  drink  offering  thereon 
Exod2g.  40  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  wine . .  a  drink  off. 

29.  41  according  to  the  drink  offering  thereof 

30.  9  neither  shall  ye  pour  drink  offering  there. 
Lev.  23.  13  the  drink  offering  thereof  (shall  be)  of 

23.  18  their  meat  offering  and  their  drink  offe. 
23-  37  drink  offerings,  everything  upon  his  day 
Num.  6.  15,  17  meat  offering,  and  their  drink  offer. 
15.    s  fourth,  .of  an  hin  of  wine  for  a  drink  off. 
15.    7  for  a  drink  offering  thou  shalt  offer  the 


Num  15.  10  bring  for  a  drink  offering  half  an  hin  of 

15.  24  his  meat  offering,  and  his  drink  offering 
28.  7  the  drink  offering  thereof  (shall  be)  the 
28.  7  the  strong  wine,  .(for)  a  drink  offering 
28.  8  as  the  drink  offering  thereof,  thou  shalt 
28.  9  mingled  with  oil,  and  the  drink  offering 
28. 10,  15,  24  burnt  offering,  and  his  drink  offer. 
28.  14  their  drink  offerings  shall  be  half  an  hin 

28.  31  his  meat  offering,  .and  their  drink  offer. 

29.  6  meat  offering,  and  their  drink  offerings 
[So  in  v.  ir,  16,  18,  19,  21,  22,  24,  25,  27,  28,  30,  31,  33, 
34.  37.  38,  39O 

2  Ki.  16.  13  and  poured  his  drink  offering,  .upon  the 

16.  15  meat  offering,  and  their  drink  offerings 

1  Ch.29. 21  a  thousand  lambs,  with  their  drink  offer. 

2  Ch.  29.  35  peace  offerings,  and  the  drink  offerings 
Psa.  16.  4  then*  drink  offerings  of  blood  will  I  not 
Isa.  57.  6  to  them  hast  thou  poured  a  drink  offer. 
Jer.     7.  18  to  pom-  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  g. 

19.  13  have  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto 
32.  29  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other 
44. 17  But  we  will,  .pour  out  drink  offerings 
44.  18  to  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  her,  we 
44.  19  and  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  her 
44. 19  and  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  her 

44.  25  to  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  her 
Eze.  20.  28  poured  out  there  their  drink  offerings 

45.  17  meat  offerings,  and  drink  offerings 
Joel    1.    9  the  drink  offering  is  cut  off  from  the  hou. 

1. 13  the  drink  offering  is  withbolden  from  the 
2.  14  a  meat  offering  and  a  drink  offering  unto 

4. Anything  poured  out,  T]03  nesak. 

Ezra    7.  17  meat  offerings  and  their  drink  offerings 

DRINK,  strong  — 

l.Siveet  drink  (what  satiates  or  intoxicates),  ~\2y. 
Lev.  10.    9  Do  not  drink  wine  nor  strong  drink,  thou 
Num.  6.    3  shall  separate  (himself)  from . .  strong  dr. 

6.   3  shall  drink  no.  .vinegar  of  strong  drink 
Deut  14.  26  shalt  bestow  that  money,  .for  strong  dri. 

29.    6  neither  have  ye  drunk,  .strong  drink 
Judg  13.   4  and  drink  not  wine  nor  strong  drink 
13.    7  now  drink  no  wine  nor  strong  drink 
13.  14  neither  let  her  drink  wine  or  strong  drink 
1  Sa.    1.  15  have  drunk  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink 
Prov  20.    1  Wine  (is)  a  mocker,  strong  drink  (is)  rag. 
31.    4  to  drink  wine,  nor  for  princes  strong  dri. 
31.    6  Give  strong  drink  unto  him  that  is  ready 
Isa.     5. 11  (that)  they  may  follow  strong  drink;  that 
5.  22  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  drink 
24.    9  strong  drink  shall  be  bitter  to  them  that 
28.    7  through  strong  drink  are  out  of  the  way 
28.    7  prophet  have  erred  through  strong  drink 

28.  7  are  out  of  the  way  through  strong  drink 

29.  9  they  stagger,  but  not  with  strong  drink 
56.  12  we  will  fill  ourselves  with  strong  drink 

Mic.    2.  11  prophesy.. of  wine  and  of  strong  drink 

2.Sweet  drink,  (often  fermented),  o-'iKepa,  *i;ti'  Heb. 
Luke  1.  15  shall  drink  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink 

DRINK  of,  to  — 

To  drink,  tzIvu>  pino. 

Matt  20.  22  to  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of 

20.  23  Ye  shall  drink  indeed  of  my  cup,  and  be 
Markio.  38  can  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of? 

10.  39  indeed  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of 

DRINK  up,  to  — 

To  press  upon,  psty  aslmq. 

Job   40.  23  he  drinketh  up  a  river,  (and)  hasteth  not 
DRINK  with,  to  — 
To  drink  with,  o'vfx-wivw  sumpino. 

Acts  10.  41  did  eat  and  drink  with  him  after  he  rose 
DRINKER  — 
To  drink,  banquet,  njry  shathah. 

Joel    1.    5  howl,  all  ye  drinkers  of  wine,  because  of 
DRINKING  — 
1.  Drink,  juice,  np^D  mashqeh. 

1  Ki.  10.  21  Solomon's  drinking  vessels  (were  of)  gold 

2  Ch.  9.  20  drinking  vessels  of  king  Solomon  (were  of) 

2. To  drink,  n$y  shathah. 

Gen.  24.  19  camels  also,  until  they  have  done  drink. 
24  22  as  the  camels  had  done  drinking,  that  the 
Ruth  3.   3  he  shall  have  done  eating  and  drinking 
1  Sa.  30.  16  eating  and  drinking,  and  dancing,  because 
1  Ki.  4.  20  eating  and  drinking,  and  making  merry 
16.   9  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  house  of 
20.  12  heard  this  message,  as  he  (was)  drinking 
20.  16  Ben-hadad  (was)  drinking  himself  drunk 

1  Ch.12.  39  with  David  three  days,  eating  and  drink. 
Job     1.  13,  18  (were)  eating  and  drinking  wine  in 
Isa.   22. 13  And  behold . .  eating  flesh  and  drinking  w. 

Z.Drinking,  r\'ny  shethiyyak. 

Esth.  1.    8  the 'drinking  (was)  according  to  the  law 

DRIVE,  to  — 

l.To  thrust  away  or  out,  rpjj  hadaph. 

Isa.   22.  19  I  will  drive  thee  from  thy  station,  and 
Jer.  46. 15  stood  not,  because  the  LORD  did  drive 

l.To  drive  away,  Tip  terad. 

Dan.  4.  25,  32  they' shall  drive  thee  from  men,  and 

0.T0  drive  away,  *nj  nada,  5,  or  rm  nadach,  5. 

2  Ki.17.  21  Jeroboam  drave  Israel  from  following  the 
4.  To  drive  or  force  away,  rnj  nadach,  5. 

Deut  30.    1  whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  driven 


DRIVE 


274 


DROVE 


Jer.     8.   3  the  places  whither  I  have  driven  them 
16.  15  all  the  lauds  whither  he  had  driven  them 
23.    3  all  countries  whither  I  have  driven  them 

23.  8  all  countries  whither  I  had  driven  them 

24.  g  iu  all  places  whither  I  shall  drive  them 
29. 14  all  the  places  whither  I  have  driven  you 
29.  18  the  nations  whither  I  have  driven  them 
32.  37  all  countries  whither  I  have  driven  them 
46.  28  the  nations  whither  I  have  driven  thee 

Eze.  4,  13  among  the  Gentiles,  whither  I  will  drive 
Dan.  g.  7  countries  wluther  thou  hast  driven  them 
Joel    2.  20  will  drive  him  into  a  land  barren  and 

5.  To  lead,  drive,  3m  nahag. 

1  Sa.  30.  20  (which)  they  drave  before  those  (other) 

2  Sa.  6.  3  the  sons  of  Abiuadab,  drave  the  new  cart 
2  Ki.  4.  24  Drive,  and  go  forward;  slack  not  (thy) 

9.  20  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi ;  for  he  driveth 

1  Ch.13.    7  and  Uzza  and  Ahio  drave  the  cart 

6.  To  lead,  drive,  :ru  nahag,  3. 

Exodi4.  25  took  off  their. .  wheels,  that  they  drave 

7. To  cast  out,  iwi  nashal,  3. 

2  Ki.16.   6king'of  Syria.,  drave  the  Jews  from  Elath 
8. To  scatter,  y^s  puts,  5. 

Job  18.  11  Terrors ..  shall  drive  him  to  his  feet 
9.  To  drive  away,  airsXavvu)  apelauno. 

Acts  18.  16  And  he  drave  them  from  the  judgment 
10.7b  cast  out,  4ic&d\\a  ekballd. 

Mark  1.  12  Spirit  driveth  him  into  the  wilderness 

John  2.  15  he  drove  them  all  out  of  the  temple,  and 

DRIVE  asunder,  to  — 

To  shake  off,  cause  to  move,  "iru  nathar,  5. 

Hab.  3.    6  he  beheld,  and  drove  asunder  the  nations 

DRIVE  away,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  flee,  rm  barach,  5. 

1  Ch.  8. 13  who  drove  away  the  inhabitants  of  Gath 
2.  To  cast  out,  drive  away,  aha  garash,  3. 

Exod.  2.  17  the  shepherd  came  and  drove  them  away 

Psa.  34.  title,  who  drove  him  away,  and  he  departed 
S.To  bring  forth,  Vn,  hm  chit,  chill,  Za. 

Prov  25.  23  The  north  wind  driveth  away  rain;  so 

4.  To  drive  or  force  away,  nil  nadach,  5. 

Jer.  23.    2  scattered  my  flock,  and  driven  them  away 
50.  17  the  lions  have  driven  (him)  away ;  first 

5.  To  drive  or  thrust  away,  ni}  nadaph. 

Psa.     1.    4  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away 
68.    2  As  smoke  is  driven.. so  drive  them  away 

6. To  lead  away,  ini  nahag. 

Job  24.    3  They  drive  away  the  ass  of  the  fatherless 
7.  To  blow  or  drive  away,  3b;j  nashab)  5. 

Gen.  15.  11  the  fowls  came..  Abram  drove  them  away 

DRIVE  far,  to  — 

To  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

PV0V22.  15  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it  far  from 
DRIVE  out,  to  — 
l.To  cast  out,  drive  away,  aha  garash. 

Exod34_  11  I  drive  out  before  thee  the  Amorite,  and 

2.  To  cast  out,  drive  away,  BH3  garash,  3. 

Gen.  3.  24  he  drove  out  the  man  ;  and  he  placed  at 
4.  14  thou  hast  driven  me  out  from  the  face  of 

Exod.  6.  1  a  strong  hand  shall  he  drive  them  out  of 
10.  11  were  driven  out  from  Pharaoh's  presence 
23.  28  hornets,  .which  shall  drive  out  the  Hivito 
23.  29 1  will  not  drive  tliem  out  from  before 
23.  30  I  will  drive  them  out  from  before  thee 

23.  31  and  thou  shalt  drive  them  out  before 
33.    2  I  will  drive  out  the  Canaanite,  the 

Num.  22.   6  and  (that)  I  may  drive  them  out  of  the 

22.  11  to  overcome  them,  and  drive  them  out 
osli24.  12  which  drave  them  out  from  before  you 

24.  iS  the  Lord  drave  out  from  before  us  all 
Judg.  2.    3  I  will  not  drive  them  out  from  before 

6.    9  drave  them  out  from  before  you,  and 
1  Sa.  26.  19  they  have  driven  me  out  this  day  from 
1  Ch.17.  21  by  driving  out  nations  from  before  thy 
Eze.  31.  11  I  have  driven  him  out  for  his  wickedness 
Hos.   9. 15  I  will  drive  them  out  of  miue  house 
Zeph.  2.   4  they  shall  drive  out  Ashdod  at  the  noon  d, 

3.  To  possess,  occupy,  succeed,  an;  yarash. 

Kumsz.  32  drove  out  the  Amorites  that  (were)  there 

4.  To  (cause  to)  possess,  dispossess,  en;  yarash,  5. 

NU11132.  21  driven  out  his  enemies  from  before  him 
33.  52  ye  shall  drive  out  all  the  inhabitants 
33.  55  if  ye  will  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants 

Josh.  3.  10  he  will  without  fail  drive  out  from 
13.   6  them  will  I  drive  out  from  before  the 
14. 12  I  shall  be  able  to  drive  them  out,  as  the 
15,  63  children  of  Judah.  .not  drive  them  out 
16. 10  they  drave  not  out  the  Canaanites  that 
17.  12  children  of  Manasseh-could  not  drive  out 
17.  13  but  did  not  utterly  drive  them  out 
17.  18  for  thou  shalt  drive  out  the  Canaanites 

23.  5  and  drive  them  from  out  of  your  sight 
23.  g  the  LORD  hath  driven  out  from  before 
23.  13  the  Lord  your  God  will  no  more  drive  out 

Judg.  1.  zg  drave  out  (the  inhabitants  of)  the  moun. 
1. 19  could  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of 
r.  21  children  of  Benjamin  did  not  drive  out 
1.  27  Neither  did  Manasseh  drive  out  (the  in. 
1.  28  and  did  not  utterly  drive  them  out 
1. 29  Neither  did  Epliraim  drive  out  the  Cana. 


Judg.  1.  30  Neither  did  Zebulun  drive  out  the  inha. 
1.  31  Neither  did  Asher  drive  out  the  inhabit. 
1.  32  for  they  did  not  drive  them  out 

1.  33  Neither  did  Naphtali  drive  out  the  inha. 

2.  21  I  also  will  not  henceforth  drive  out  any 
2.  23  without  driving  them  out  hastily  ;  neither 

11.  24  the  Lord  our  God  shall  drive  out  from 
2  Ch.20.    7  (who)  didst  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of 
Psa.  44.    2  (How)  thou  didst  drive  out  the  heathen 
5. To  drive  or  force  away,  rna,  nadach,  5. 
Jer.   27.  10  that  I  should  drive  you  out,  and  ye 

27.  15  that  I  might  drive  you  out,  and  that  ye 
6.  To  drive  or  thrust  out,  i^wddco  exotheo. 

Acts    7.  45  whom  God  drave  out  before  the  face  of 

DRIVE  up  and  down,  to  — 

To  bear  diversely,  in  different  directions,  Btatp^pu. 

Acts  27.  27  we  were  driven  up  and  down  in  Adria 
DRIVE,  to  let  — 
To  give  over  to  be  driven,  etrtoiSwut  (pepuv. 

Acts  27. 15  bear  up  into  the  wind,  we  let  (her)  drive 
DRIVEN  — 

1.  To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rnj  nadach,  4. 
Isa.     8.  22  and  (they  shall  be)  driven  to  darkness 

2.  To  be  driven  or  thrust  away,  f\ii  nadaph,  2. 
Isa.   41.   2  gave  (them).,  as  driven  stubble  to  his  bow 

DRIVEN",  to  be  — 

l.To  thrust  out  or  away,  nirj  hadaph. 

Job   18.  iS  He  shall  be  driven  from  light  into  dark. 
l.To  drive  away,  "na  terad. 

Dan.  4.  33  he  was  driven  from  men,  and  did  eat 
5.  2i  he  was  driven  from  the  sons  of  men 

3.  To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rni  nadach,  2. 
Deut.  4.  19  shouldest  be  driven  to  worship  them 
Jer.  40.  12  out  of  all  places  whither  they  were  driv. 

43.    5  nations  whither  they  had  been  driven 
Eze.  34.    4  brought  again  that  which  was  driven 
34.  16  bring  again  that  which  was  driven  away 

4.  To  be  turned  round  about,  339  sabab,  2. 
Psa.114.    3  sea  saw  (it),  and  fled  :  Jordan  was  driven 

114.    5  thou  Jordan,  (that)  thou  wast  driven 

5. To  be  turned  back,  jid  sug,  2. 

Psa.  40. 14  let  them  be  driven  backward  and  put  to 
6. To  drive,  iXavi/w  elauno,  Zx&w  elao. 

Luke  8.  29  and  was  driven  of  the  devil  into  the  wil. 

Jas.     3.    4  Behold  also  the  ships,  .driven  of  fierce 
7.7*0  be  borne  or  carried,  <p€po/j.ai  pheromai. 

Acts  27.  17  fearing,  .strake  sail,  and  so  were  driven 
DRIVEN  away,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  thrust  or  driven  away  or  down,  ?\ry\dachah,2. 
Prov  14.  32  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in 'his  wicked. 

2.  To  be  driven  or  thrust  away,  *H3  nadaph,  2. 
Psa.  68.    2  As  smoke  is  driven  away . .  as  wax  melteth 
Isa.   19.    7  shall  wither,  be  driven  away,  and  be  no 

0.T0  be  taken  captive,  n^y  shabah,  2. 

Exod22.  10  be  hurt,  or  driven  away,  no  man  seeing 
DRIVEN  forth,  to  be  — 
To  be  cast  out  or  driven  away,  eh3  garash,  4. 

Job  30.    5  They  were  driven  forth  from  among 
DRIVEN  on,  to  be  — 
To  be  thrust  or  driven  away  or  down,  nrn  dachah,  2. 

Jer.  23.  12  they  shall  be  di'iven  on,  and  fall  therein 
DRIVEN  out,  to  be  — 
To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rns  nadach,  2. 

Deut 30.    4  If  (any)  of  thine  be  driven  out  unto  the 

Jer.  49.    5  shall  be  driven  out  every  man  right  forth 

Mic.    4.    6  I  will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out 

Zeph.  3. 19  I  will .  .gather  her  that  was  driven  out 
DRIVEN  quite,  to  be  — 
To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rm  nadach,  2. 

Job     6.  13  and  is  wisdom  driven  quite  from  me? 
DRIVEN  to  and  fro  — 
To  be  driven  or  thrust  away,  ?p}  nadaph,  2. 

Job  13.  25  Wilt  thou  break  a  leaf  driven  to  and  fro? 
DRIVER  — 
To  exact,  toj  nagas. 

Job   39.    7  neither  regardeth  he  the  crying  of  the  d. 
DRIVER  of  a  chariot  — 
Rider,  charioteer,  331  rakkab. 

1  Ki.  22.  34  he  said  unto  the  driver  of  his  chariot 
DRIVING  — 
Leading  on,  art#?  minhag. 

2  Ki.  9.  20  the  driving  is  like  the  driving  of  Jehu 
DRIVING  out  — 
To  (cause  to)  possess,  dispossess,  en;  yarash,  5. 

Judg.  2.  23  left  those  nations,  without  driving,  .out 
DROMEDARY  — 
l.A  young  camel,  dromedary,  Tp9,  1??  beker,  bik. 

Isa.  60.    6  the  dromedaries  of  Midian  and  Ephah 

Jer.     2.  23  (thou  art)  a  swift  dromedary  traversing 
2.Swift  beast,  courser,  e:3"i  rekesh. 

1  Ki.  4.  28  straw  for  the  horses  and  dromedaries 
3. Mare,  nude,  °i\i$-\  rammak. 

Esth.  8. 10  riders  on  mules,  camels,  (and)  young  dro 


DROP  — 

A  drop,  ID  mar. 

Isa.   40.  15  Behold  the  nations  (are)  as  a  drop  of  a 
DROP,  to  — 
l.To  flow,  b}2  nazal. 

Job  36.  28  "Which  the  clouds  do  drop  (and)  distil 

2.  7*o  drop,  *]cj  nataph. 

Judg.  5.    4  the  heavens  dropped,  the  clouds  also  dr. 

Job  29.  22  they  spake  not  again,  and  my  speech  dr. 

Psa.  68.    8  the  heavens  also  dropped  at  the  presence 

Prov.  5.    3  the  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  (as)  an 

Song  4.  1 1  Thy  lips,  O  (my)  spouse,  drop  (as)  the  hon. 
5.    5  I  rose  up.  .and  my  hands  dropped  (with) 
S.To  (cause  to)  drop,  r\p)  nataph,  5. 

Eze.  20.  46  set  thy  face  toward  the  south,  and  drop 
si.   2  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem,  and  drop 

Amos  7.  16  drop  not  (thy  word)  against  the  house  of 
9.  13  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and 
4.  To  be  poured  out,  Tjrn,  nathak,  2. 

2  Sa.  2z.  10  beginning  of  harvest  until  water  dropped 
5. To  drop,  be  abundant,  r\TJt  araph. 

Deut. 32.    2  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain,  my 
6.  To  drop,  distil,  qyi  raaph. 

Psa.  65.  11  Thou  crownest.  .and  thy  paths  drop  fat, 
65.  12  They  drop  (upon)  the  pastures  of  the  wil. 
DROP  down,  to  — 
l.To  drop,  f]Dj  nataph. 

Joel    3.  18  the  mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine 
2. To  drop,  be  abundant,  fpj;  araph. 

Deut  33.  28  also  his  heavens  shall  drop  down  dew 

3.  To  drop,  distil,  *]yi  raaph. 

Prov.  3.  20  and  the  clouds  drop  down  the  dew 

4.  To  (cause  to)  drop,  distil,  t\]pt  raaph,  5. 

Isa.   45.    8  Drop  down,  ye  heavens,  from  above,  and 
DROP  through,  to  — 
To  drop,  fjtj  dalaph. 

Eccl.io.  i3 through  idleness,  .the  house  droppeth  th. 
DROPPED  — 
Flow,  stream,  tjSi  helek. 

1  Sa.  14.  26  when  the  people  were  come . .  honey  drop. 
DROPPING  — 
1. Dropping,  f\bi  deleph. 

Prov  19.  13  contentions  of  awife(are)a  continual  dr. 
27.  15  A  continual  dropping  in  a  very  rainy  day 

2.To  drop,  fjC}  nataph. 

Song  5.  13  his  lips ..  dropping  sweet  smelling  myrrh 
DROPS  — 

1 .  Drops,  d^3K  agalim. 

Job  38.  28  or  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew? 

2.  Drop,  19}  nataph. 

Job  36.  27  For  he  maketh  small  the  drops  of  water 
Z.Dropping,  D'pTH  resisim. 

Song  5.    2  (and)  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night 
DROPS,  great  — 
A  clot,  drop,  6p6ufios  thrombos. 

Luke22.  44  [great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the] 
DROPSY,  having  the  — 
Dropsical,  full  of  water,  udpcoiriKSs  hudropikos. 

Luke  14.    2  a  certain  man.  .which  had  the  dropsy 
DROSS  — 
1  .Dross,  JlD  sug. 

Eze.  22. 18  the  house  of  Israel  is  to  me  become  dross 
2. Dross,  J'p  sig. 

Psa.  1 19.  119  Thou  puttest  away  all  the  wicked.,  dross 

Prov.  25.    4  Take  away  the  dross  from  the  silver,  and 
26.  23  a  potsherd  covered  with  silver  dross 

Isa.     1.  22  Thy  silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  mix. 
1.  25  I  will,  .purely  purge  away  thy  dross,  and 

Eze.  22.  18  all  they  (are)  brass,  .the  dross  of  silver 
22.  19  Because  ye  are  all  become  dross,  behold 

DROUGHT  — 

1.  Restraint,  dearth,  rvjlj  bitstsoreth. 

Jer.  17.    8  and  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  year  of  d. 

2. Drought,  waste,  3*yi  choreb. 

Gen.  31.  40  in  the  day  the  drought  consumed  me 
Jer.  50.  38  A  drought  (is)  upon  her  waters,  and  they 
Hag.    1.  11  And  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  the  land 

3.  Drought,  Ji3"JD  charabon. 

Psa.  32.    4  is  turned  into  the  drought  of  summer 

4.Drought,  mnjitis  isachtsachoth. 

Isa.  58.  1 1  the  LORD  shall . .  satisfy  thy  soul  in  drought 

^.Drought,  n;v  tsiyyah. 

Job    24.  19  Drought  and  heat  consume  the  snow  w. 
Jer-     2.    6  through  a  laud  of  drought,  and  of  the 

6.  Thirst,  |ixsx  tsimmaon. 

Deut.  8.  15  fiery  serpents,  and  scorpions,  and  drought 

DROUGHT,  great  — 
Droughts,  rfCBMTfl  taluboth. 

Hos.  13.    5  know  thee,  .in  the  land  of  great  drought 

DROVE  — 

X.Camp,  runs  machaneh. 

Gen.  33.  *  8  What  (meanest)  thou  by  all  this  drove 


DROWN 


275 


DUB 


2.  Drove,  flock,  herd,  order,  "ny  eder. 

Gen.  32.  16  he  delivered.. every  drove  by  themselves 
32.  *6  and  put  a  space  betwixt  drove  and  drove 
32. 19  and  all  that  followed  the  droves 

DROWN,  to  — 

l.To  overflow,  wash  away,  ^ey  shataph. 
Song   8.    7  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it 

2.  To  make  to  sink,  $odi£u)  bothizo. 

1  Ti.    6.    9  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition 

3.  To  drink  down,  swallow  up,  Karairlva)  katapino. 
Heb.  11.  29  Egyptians  assaying  to  do  were  drowned 

DROWNED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  sunk,  y^p  taba,  4. 

Exodi5-    4  captains  also  are  drowned  in  the  Red  sea 
2.To  be  watered,  to  sink,  ypy,  2,  or  np^  shaqah,  2. 

Amos  8.    8  it  shall  be  cast  out  and  drowned,  as  (by) 

3.  To  sink,  water,  y$p  shaqa. 

Amos  9.    5  shall  be  drowned,  as  (by)  the  flood  of  E. 

4.  To  be  made  to  sink  down,  tear air -ozrf  £bjuai. 

Matt  tS.    6  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea 

DROWSINESS  — 

Slumber,  drowsiness,  nsu  numah. 

Prov.23.  21  drowsiness  shall  clothe  (a  man)  with  rags 
DRUNK  — 
Satiated,  merry,  msB*  shikkur. 

1  Ki.  16.    9  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  house  of 

20.  16  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  pavilions 

DRUNK,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  drunk,  nny  shathah,  2. 

Lev.  11.  34  and  all  drink  that  may  be  drunk  in  every 
2. To  begin  to  be  softened,  fj,<z6v<rKa}  methusko. 

Eph.    5.  18  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess 
DRUNK,  to  be  made  — 
l.To  be  filled,  satisfied,  Tvft  ravah. 

Jer.   46.  10  be  satiate  and  made  drunk  with  their 
2.  To  be  softened  (with  drink),  fx^Qvoj  methuo. 

Pcev.  17.    2  have  been  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of 
DRUNK,  to  make  — 
J.  To  satiate,  make  merry,  15P  shakar,  3. 

2  Sa.  11.  13  he  made  him  drunk  :  and  at  even  he 
Isa.  63.    6  make  them  drunk  in  my  fury,  and  I  will 

2.  To  satiate,  make  merry,  ir^  shakar,  5. 

Deut32.  42  I  will  make  mine  arrows  drunk  with  bl. 

Jer.  51.  57 1  will  make  drunk  her  princes,  and  her 
DPJTNK,  to  have  well  — 
To  be  softened  with  drink,  fieOvco  methuo. 

John  2.  10  when  men  have  well  drunk,  then  that 
DRUNKARD  — 
l.To  suck  up,  be  satiated,  N}D  saba. 

Deut2i.  20  This  our  son  (is),  .a  glutton  and  a  drun. 

Prov.23.  21  drunkard  and  the  glutton  shall  come  to 

Nah.    1  10  while  they  are  drunken  (as)  drunkards 

2.Satiated,  merry,  H3p  shikkur. 

Prov.26.    9  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  a  drunk. 
Isa.   24.  20  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard 

28.    1  Woe  to  the  crown . .  to  the  drunkards  of  E. 

28.    3  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim,  shall  be  trod. 
Joel.    1.    5  Awake,  ye  drunkards,  and  weep;  and 

3.  To  drink  sweet  drink,  15?!'  nrry  shathah  shekar. 
Psa.  69.  12  and  I  (was)  the  song  of  the  drunkards 

4.  Softened  with  drink,  /xiQucros  methusos. 

1  Co.  5.  11  or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard 
6.  10  Nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards 

DRUNKEN  — 

l.Sucki7iy,  satiated,  N2b  sobe. 

Nan,    1.  10  while  they  are  drunken  (as)  drunkards 

2. Satiated,  merry,  "list?  shikkur. 

1  Sa.  1. 13  therefore  Eli  thought  she  had  been  drun. 
25.  36  merry  within  him,  for  he  (was)  very  drun. 
Job  12.  25  maketh  them  to  stagger  like  (a)  drunken 
Isa.  19.  14  err.  .as  a  drunken  (man)  staggerethjn  his 
Jer.  23,    9  I  am  like  a  drunken  man,  and  like  a  man 

Z.To  be  satiated,  merry,  ~cv?  shakar. 

Isa.  51.  21  hearnow  this,  thou  afflicted,  and  drunken 

4.  To  be  softened,  soalced  with  drink,  fiedvco  methuo. 
Matt  24.  49  and  to  eat  and  drink  with  the  drunken 
Acts  2.  15  For  these  are  not  drunken  as  ye  suppose 
1  Co.11.  21  and  one  is  hungry,  and  anotheris  drunken 
1  Th.  5.  7  and  they  that,  .are  drunken  in  the  night 
Rev.  17.    6 1  saw  the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood 

DRUNKEN,  be  — 

Satiety,  merriment,  ]M2y  shikkaron. 

Eze.  39. 19  and  drink  blood  till  ye  be  drunken,  of 

DRUNKEN,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  satiated,  merry,  ire'  shakar. 

Gen.    9.  21  And  he  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  dru. 
Isa.   29.    9  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  wine ;  they 
49.  26  they  shall  be  drunken  with  their  own  bl. 
Jer.  25,  27  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and  fall,  and  rise 
Lam.  4.  21  sbalt  be  drunken,  and  shalt  make  thyself 
Nan.   3.  11  Thou  also  shalt  be  drunken  ;  thou  shalt 

2.  To  be  (shmo  self)  drunken,  merry,  T3$>  shakar,  7. 
1  Sa.  1. 14  How  long  wilt  thou  be  drunken  ?  put 


3.  To  begin  to  be  softened,  fxeOvtrKw  methusko. 

Lukei2.  45  and  to  eat  and  drink,  and  to  be  drunken 
1  Th.  5.    7  and  they  that  be  drunken,  .in  the  night 

DRUNKEN,  to  make  — 

l.To  be  filled,  satisfied,  Trn  ravah,  5. 

Lam.  3.  15  he  hath  made  me  drunken  with  wormw. 

2.  To  satiate,  make  merry,  *i?^  shakar,  3. 

Jer.  51.    7  cup.  .that  made  all  the  earth  druuken 
Hab.   2.  15  andmakest(him)  drunken  also,  that  thou 

3.  To  satiate,  make  merry,  irv  shakar,  5. 

Jer.  48.  26  Make  ye  him  drunken ;  for  he  magnified 
51.  39  I  will  make  them  drunken,  that  they  may 

DRUNKEN  man  — 

Satiated,  merry,  "flaa*  shikkur. 

Psa.  107.  27  They  reel ..  and  stagger  like  a  drunken  m. 

DRUNKENNESS  — 

1.  Fulness,  satiety,  Tvn  raveh. 

Deut2g.  19  though  I  walk,  .to  add  drunkenness  to 
2.Satiety,  merriment,  fn^V  shikkaron. 

Jer.  13.  13  I  will  fill  all.  .Jerusalem,  with  drunken. 

Eze  23.  33  Thou  shalt  be  rilled  with  drunkenness 
3. Drinking,  carousing,  T)y  sliethi. 

Eccl.io.  17  eat.  .for  strength,  and  not.  .drunkenness! 

4.  Drink,  mulled  drink,  fx4Qr\  methe. 

Luke2i.  34  overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and  drunk. 
Rom  13.  13  Let  us  walk,  .not  in  rioting  and  drunken. 
Gal.     5.  21  drunkenness,  revellings,  and  such  like 

DRU-SLX'-LA,  ApovcriWa. 

A  daughter  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.    She  became  wife  of 

Felix  governor  of  Judea. 

Acts  24.  24  when  Felix  came  with  his  wife  D. 

DRY  — 

l.Dry,  D"in  chareb. 

Lev.    7.  10  meat  offering  ningled  with  oil,  and  dry 
Prov.17.    1  Better  (is)  a  dry  morsel,  and  quietness 

2.  Dry,  drought,  Tin  choreb. 

Judg.  6.  37  and  (it  be)  dry  upon  all  the  earth  (beside) 
6.  39  let  it  now  be  dry  only  upon  the  fleece 
6.  40  for  it  was  dry  upon  the  fleece  only 

3.  A  dry  place,  nann  charabah. 

Eze.  30.  12  I  will  make  the  rivers  dry,  and  sell  the 
i.Dry,  dried  up,  withered,  Kb;  yabesh. 

Job    13.  25  and  wilt  thou  pursue  the  dry  stubble? 

Isa.  56.    3  neither  let  the  eunuch  say.  .1  (am)  a  dry 

Eze.  17.  24  and  have  made  the  dry  tree  to  flourish 
20.  47  and  it  shall  devour  every,  .dry  tree  in 
37.    2  very  many. .  and,  lo,  (they  were)  very  dry 
37.    4  O  ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of  the  L. 

Nah.    1.  10  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully  dry 

5. A  dry  2>lace,  nc:3:  yabbashah. 

Gen.    1.    9  let  the  dry  (land)  appear  :  and  it  was  so 

t.  10  And  God  called  the  dry  (land)  Earth 
Exod.  4.    9  it  upon  the  dry  (land),  .blood  upon  the 
14.  16  the  children  of  Israel  shall  go  on  dry 
14.  22  children  of  Israel  went,  .upon  the  dry 

14.  29  the  children  of  Israel  walked  upon  dry 

15.  19  but  the  children  of  Israel  went  on  dry 
Psa.  66.    6  He  turned  the  sea  into  dry  (land) 
Jon.    1.   9  which  bath  made  the  sea  and  the  dry 

2.  10  and  it  vomited  out  Jonah  upon  the  dry 

6.^-1  dry  place,  n^'^:  yabbeslietli. 

Exod.  4.    9  shall  become  blood  upon  the  dry  (land) 
Psa.  95.    s  and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  (land) 

I.Clear,  shining,  ns  tsach. 

Jer.     4.  11  A  dry  wind  of  the  high  places  in  the  wil. 

S.^'l  dry  place,  glowing,  burning,  fvs  tsiyyah. 
Psa.  63.    1  my  flesh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  and 

107.  35  He  turneth.  .dry  ground,  .water-springs 
Isa.  41.  18  I  will  make,  .the  dry  land  springs  of 

53.    2  grow  up . .  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground 
Jer.   51.  43  Her  cities  are  a  desolation,  a  dry  land 
Eze.  ig.  13  planted,  .in  a  dry  and  thirsty  ground 
Hos.    2.    3  Lest  I.  .set  her  like  a  dry  land,  and  slay 
Zeph.  2.13  will  make  Nineveh . .  dry  like  a  wilderness 

9.7b  be  dry,  dried  wp,  pressed,  p£y  tsamaq. 

Hos.   9. 14  give  them  a  miscarrying  womb  and  dry 

10.  Waterless,  without  water,  &t/vh*pos  anudros. 
Matt  12.  43  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking 
Luken.  24  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking 

11.  Dry,  withered,  £-np6s  xeros. 

Luke23.  31  in  a  green. .  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry? 

DRY,  to  — 

To  dry  up,  wither,  El1?;  yabesh,  3. 

Prov  17.  22  but  a  broken  spirit  driefch  the  bones 

DRY,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  dry,  TVn  chareb. 

Gen.  8.  13  behold,  the  face  of  the  ground  was  dry 
Isa.   44.  27  That  saithto  the  deep,  Be  dry,  and  I  will 

2.  To  be  or  become  dry,  withered,  cb;  yabesh, 

Josh.  9.    5  all  the  bread  of  their  provision  was  dry 
9.  12  now,  behold,  it  is  dry,  and  it  is  mouldy 

DRY,  to  become  — 

To  be  dried  up,  ashamed,  em3  bosh. 

Hos.  13.  15  and  his  spring  shall  become  dry,  and  his 


DRY,  ground  — 

l.A  dry  place,  ranrt  charabah. 

Josh.  3. 17  the  priests,  .stood  firm  on  dry  ground  in 

3.  17  the  Israelites  passed  over  on  dry  ground 
2  Ki.  2.    8  so  that  they  two  went  over  on  dry  ground 

2.  A  dry  place,  mp^l  yabbashah. 

Isa.  44.   3  I  will  pour,  .floods  upon  the  dry  ground 

3.  A  thirsty  place,  jlNls*  tsimmaon, 

Psa  107.  33  He  turneth.  .water-springs  into  dry  gro. 

DRY  land  — 

l.A  dry  place,  n:nn  charabah. 

Gen.    7.  22  of  all  that  (was)  in  the  dry  (land),  died 
Exodi4.  21  and  made  the  sea  dry  (land),  and  the 
Josh.  4.  18  priests'  feet  were  lifted  up  unto  the  dryl. 
Hag.    2.    6  I  will  shake  the  heavens . .  and  the  dry  (1.) 

2.  A  dry  place,  nc'a;  yabbashah. 

Josh.  4.  22  Israel  came  over  this  Jordan  on  dryland 
Neh.  9. 11  went  through,  .the  sea  on  the  dry  land 

3. A  clear,  shining  place,  nrrnx  tsechichah. 

Psa.   68.    6  but  the  rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  (land) 
4./1  dry  place,  glowing,  burning,  n;s  tsiyyah. 

Jer.  50.  12  nations  (shall  be)  a  wilderness,  a  dry  land 
5. Dry,  withered,  £np6s  xeros. 

Heb.11.  29  passed  through  the  Red  sea  as  by  dry  (1.) 

DRY,  to  make  — 

l.To  dry  up,  wither,  ab;  yabesh,  3. 

Nah.  1.    4  He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  dry 
2.  To  cause  to  dry  tip,  &TT  yabesh,  5. 

Jer.  51.  36  dry  up  her  sea,  and  make  her  springs  dry 

DRY  place  — 

l.A  dry  place,  glowing,  burning,  p7  tsayon. 
Isa.  25.    5  as  the  heat  in  a  dry  place  ;  (even)  the 
32.    2  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place  ;  as  the 

2.-4  dry  place,  glowing,  burning,  it?  tsiyyah. 
Psa.105.  41  they  ran  in  the  dry  places  (like)  a  river 

DRY  scall  — 

Scall,  scurf,  scab,  mange,  pni  netheq. 

Lev.  13.  30  it  (is)  a  dry  scall,  (even)  a  leprosy  upon 

DRY  up,  to  — 

l.To  dry  up,  ann  charab,  5. 

2  Ki.19.  24  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up 
Isa.   37.  25  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up 

50.   2  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make 
Jer.  51.  36  will  dry  up  her  sea,  and  make  her  springs 
Nah.  1.    4  rebuketh  the  sea..driethupallthe  rivers 

2.To  be  or  become  dry,  withered,  ab;  yabesh. 

1  Ki.  13.   4  his  hand,  which  he  put  forth . .  dried  up  • 

17.    7  after  a  while,  that  the  brook  dried  up 
Job    12.  15  withholdeth  the  waters,  and  they  dry  up 

14. 11  and  the  flood  decayeth  and  drieth  up 

3. To  dry  up,  wither,  -Kb;  yabesh,  3. 

Job    15.  30  the  flame  shall  dry  up  his  branches ;  and 
i.To  (cause  to)  dry  up,  ab;  yabesh,  5. 

Josh.  2.  10  how  the  Lord  dried  up  the  water  of  the 

4.  23  the  Lord  your  God  dried  up  the  waters 

4.  23  which  he  dried  up  from  before  us,  until 

5.  1  that  the  Lord  had  dried  up  the  waters  of 
Psa.  74. 15  thou  driedst  up  mighty  rivers 

Isa.  42. 15  I  will,  .dry  up  all  their  herbs 

42.  15  make  the  rivers  islands,  and  I  will  dry  up 
44.  "7  That  saith.  .1  will  dry  up  thy  rivers 

Eze.  17.  ^    have  dried  up  the  green  tree,  and  have 
ig.  i2>  ud  the  east  wind  dried  up  her  fruit 

Zech  10. 11  &, '  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  dry  up 

5.  To  dry  up,  |\  liva  xeraino. 

Mark  5.  29  the  i  untain  of  her  blood  was  dried  up 
11.  20  saw  the  fig  tree  dried  up  from  the  roots 
Rev.  16. 12  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,  that  the 

DRY  shod  — 

With  shoes,  sandals,  O'V^S  bannealim. 

Isa.   11. 15  and  shall,  .make  (men)  go  over  dry-shod 
DUE  — 
1.  Thing,  matter,  "Cfi  dabar. 

Neh.11.  23  a  certain  portion,  .due  for  every  day 
2.Statute,  portion,  limit,  p'n  clwq. 

Lev.  10.  13  it  (is)  thy  due,  and  thy  sons'  due,  of  the 
10.  14  (they  be)  thy  due,  and  thy  sons'  due 

Z .Judgment,  be*'!?  mishpat. 

DeutiS.   3  shall  be  the  priest's  due  from  the  people 

4.  What  is  due,  a  debt,  ocpetKT)  opheiU. 
Rom  13.    7  Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues 

S.Own,  proper,  15tos  idios. 

Gal.    6,    9  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint 
1  Ti.    2.    6  ransom  for  all,  to  be  testified  in  due  time 
Titus  1.   3  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  word 

6. To  owe,  be  due,  6<f>ei\w  opheilo. 

1  Co.  7.   3  render  unto  the  wife  [due  benevolence] 

DUE,  to  be  — 

To  owe,  be  due,  d<pet\o)  opheilo. 

Matt  18.  34  he  should  pay  all  that  was  due  unto  him 

DUE  season  — 

Time,  season,  ny  eth. 

Lev.  26.   4  I  will  give  you  rain  in  due  season,  and 
Deut  11. 14  the  rain  of  your  land  in  his  due  season 


DUE 


276 


DUTY 


Psa.104.  27  mayest  give  (them)  their  meat  in  due  se. 
145.  15  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  due  season 
Prov  15.  23  word  (spoken)  in  dueseason,  Eccl.  10.  17. 
DUE  (reward),  those  to  whom  it  is  — 

1.  Worthy,  meet  things,  &^ta  axia. 

Luke23.  41  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds 
Its  owners,  vb'jz  bealav. 

Prov.  3.  27  Withhold  not  good  from.,  whom  it  is  due 
DUKE — 

I. Leader,  head  of  a  thousand,  p|Vn,  *p$  alluph. 
Gen.  36.  15  These  (were)  dukes  of  the  sons  of  Esau 
36. 15  duke  Teman,  duke  Omar,  duke  Zepho,  d. 
36.  16  Duke  Korah,  duke  Gatam,  (and)  duke  A. 
36.  16  these  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  Elip. 
36.  17  duke  Nahath,  duke  Zerah,  d.Shammah,  d. 
36.  17  these  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  Iteuel 
36.  18  duke  Jeush,  duke  Jaalani,  duke  Korah 
36.  18  (were)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  Aholiba. 
36.  19  These  (are)  the  sons,  .these  (are)  their  d. 
36.  2r  these  (are)  the  dukes  of  the  Horites,  the 
36.  29  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  the  Horites 
36.  29  dukeLotan,  duke  Shobal,  duke  Zibeon,  d. 
36.  30  Duke  Dishon,  duke  Ezer,  duke  Disdan 
36.  30  these  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  Hori 
36.  30  among  their  dukes  in  the  land  of  Seir 
36.  40  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  dukes  (that 
36.  40  duke  Tinman,  duke  Alvah,  duke  Jetheth 
36.  41  Duke  Aholibamah,  duke  Elah,  duke  Pinon 
36.  42  Duke  Kenaz,  duke  Teman,  duke  Mibzar 
7.  43  D.  Magdiel,  duke  Irani ;  these  (be)  the  d. 
Exodis.  15  Then  the  dukes  of  Edom  shall  be  amazed 
1  Ch.  1.  51  dukes,  .were  ;  duke  Timnah,  d.  Aliah,  d. 
i.  52  Duke  Aholibamah,  duke  Elah,  duke  Pin. 
1.  53  Duke  Kenaz,  duke  Teman,  duke  Mibzar 
1.  54  Duke  Magdiel,  duke  Iraui.  .dukes  of  Ed. 

2.  Prince,  one  anointed,  ruler,  TPJ  nasik. 

Josh  13.  2i  dukes  of  Sihon,  dwelling  in  the  country 
DULCIMER  — 
l.A  double  pipe,  bagpipe,  symphony,  rnbpiD. 

Dan.    3.    5,  15  at  what  time  ye  hear  the. '.dulcimer 
2.  A  double  pipe,  bagjiipe,  symphony,  n;32*D  sipho. 

Dan.    3.  10  that  every  man  that  shall  hear  the . .  dulc. 
DULL  — 
Slothful,  vcoOpus  nothros. 

fleb.    5. 11  hard  to  be  uttered,  seeing  ye  are  dull  of 

DU'-MAH,  non  silence. 

1.  Son  of  Ishmael  son  of  Abraham  by  Hagar.   B.C.  1840. 

Gen.  25.  14  And  Mishma.  aud  D.,  and  Massa 

1  Ch.    1.  30  Mishma,  and  D.,  Massa,  Hadad,  and  T. 

2.  A  city  of  the  tribe  of  Judah. 

Josh  15.  52  Arab,  and  D.,  and  Eshean 

3.  A  city  whose  site  is  doubtful. 

Isa.  21.  11  The  burden  of  D.  He  calleth  to  me  out  of 
DUMB  — 
l.Dumb,  bound,  tied,  D?x  illem. 

Exod  4.  11  man's  mouth?  or  who  maketh  the  dumb 
Prov  31.  8  Open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  in  the  ca. 
Isa.  35.  6  Then  shall,  .the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing 
56.  10  they  (are)  all  dumb  dogs,  they  cannot  bark 
Hab.  2.  18  the  maker,  .trusteth  therein,  to  make  d. 
2.Silent,  still,  0211  dumam. 

Hab.  2.  19  to  the  dumb  stone,  Arise,  it  shall  teach ! 
3. Speechless,  &\a\os  alalos. 

Mark  7.  37  he  maketh.  .the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the  d. 
9.  17  brought,  .my  son,  which  hath  a  dumb 
9.  25  dumb  and  deaf  spirit,  I  charge  thee,  come 

4.  Voiceless,  &<pojvo$  aphOnos. 

Acts    8.  32  like  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearer,  so 

1  Co.  12.    2  carried  away  unto  these  dumb  idols,  even 

2  Pe.    2. 16  the  dumb  ass  speaking  witlvman's  voice 

5. Blunted,  dumb,  Ka><p6$  kophos. 

Matt  9.  32  behold,  they  brought  to  him  a  dumb  man 
9.  33  when  the  devil  was  cast  out,  the  dumb  s. 
12.  22  Then  was  brought  unto  him  one .  .dumb 
12.  22  insomuch  that  the  blind  and  dumb  both 
15.  30  having  with  them,  .dumb,  maimed,  and 
15.  31  when  they  saw  the  dumb  to  speak,  the 
Luke  11.  14  he  was  casting  out  a  devil,  and  it  was  d. 
ir.  14  when  the  devil  was  gone  out,  the  dumb 

6.  To  be  silent,  viuiiraa}  siopad. 

Luke  1.  20  thou  shalt  be  dumb,  and  not  able  to  speak 

DUMB,  to  be  or  become  — - 

To  be  dumb,  bound,  tied,  tnx  alam,  2. 

Psa.  39.    2  I  was  dumb  with  silence,  I  held  my  peace 

39.    9  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth 
Isa.   53.    7  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb 
Eze.    3.  26  that  thou  shalt  be  dumb,  and  shalt  not 
24.  27  thou  shalt  speak,  and  be  no  more  dumb 
33.  22  mouth  was  opened,  and  I  was  no  mored. 
Dan.  10.  15  face  toward  the  ground,  and  I  became  d. 

DUMB  man  — 

Dumb,  bound,  tied,  cbx  illem. 

Psa.  38.  13  as  a  dumb  man  (that)  openeth  not  his  m. 
DUNG  — 
l.Dung,  dirt,  rubbish,  nbyx,  rris^x  ashpoth. 

Neh.   2.  13  before  the  dragon  we'll,  and  to  the  dung 
3.  13  a  thousand  cubits  on  the  wall  unto  thed. 
%Du?ig,  bhi  gelel. 

Job  20.    7  he  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  own  dung 


Eze.    4.  12  thou  shalt  bake  it  with  dung  that  cometh 
4.  15  I  have  given  thee  cow's,  .for  man's  dung 
Zeph.  1. 17  out  as  dust,  and  their  flesh  as  the  dung 

3.  Dung,  dunghill,  bh}  galal. 

1  Ki.  14. 10  as  a  man  taketh  away  dung,  till  it  be  all 

4.  Dung,  dung  heap,  dunghill,  }st  domen. 

2  Ki.  9.  37  And  the  carcase  of  Jezebel  shall  be  asdu. 
Psa.  83.  10  they  became  (as)  dung  for  the  earth 
Jer.     8.   2  they  shall  be  for  dung  upon  the  face  of 

9.  22  the  carcases  of  men  shall  fall  as  dung  up. 
16.    4  they  shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  face  of 
25.  33  they  shall  be  dung  upon  the  ground 
5. Dung,  offscourings,  D'"in  charim. 

2  Ki.   6.  25  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  dove's  dung 
Q.Dung,  excrement,  v~g  peresh. 

Exotbg.  14  the  flesh  of  the  bullock,  .and  his  dung 
Lev.    4.  11  the  skin  of  the  bullock,  .and  his  dung 

8.  17  the  bullock,  and  his  hide,  .and  his  dung 
16.  27  they  shall  burn  in  the  fire  their,  .dung 
Nuniig.    5  her  blood,  with  her  dung,  shall  he  burn 
Mai.    2.    3  I  will . .  spread  dung . .  the  dung  of  your 
7 .Outcome,  filth,  W\n  or  D*xnn  charaim,  nxis  tsoah. 
2  Ki  18.  27  they  may  eat  their  own  dung,  and  drink 
Isa.    36.  12  they  may  eat  their  own  dung,  and  drink 
S.Dung,  what  is  blown  out,  yisx  tsaphua. 

Eze.     4.  15  I  have  given  thee  cow's  dung  for  man's 
9.  Dung,  what  is  blown  out,  jf9V  tsaphia. 

Eze.     4.  15  I  have  given  thee  cow's  dung  for  man's 
10. Dregs,  refuse,  <TKvf&a\QV  skubalon. 

Phil.   3.   8  and  do  count  them.. dung,  that  I  may 

DUNG,  to  — 

To  cast  dung,  fi&Wv  Koirptav  hallo  kojyrian. 
Lukei3.    8  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  [duBg]  (it) 

DUNGEON  — 

l.Pit,  dungeon,  ")ia  bor. 

Gen.  40. 1 5  that  they  should  put  me  into  the  dungeon 
41.  14  they  brought  him  hastily  out  of  the  dung. 
Jer.  38.    6  cast  him  into  the  dungeon  of  Malchiah 
38.    6  And  in  the  dungeon,  .no  water,  but  mire 
38.   7  they  had  put  Jeremiah  in  the  dungeon 
38.    9  whom  they  have  cast  into  the  dungeon 
38. 10  take  up  Jeremiah,  .out  of  the  dungeon 
38.  11  let  them  down  by  cords  into  the  dungeon 
38.  13  and  took  him  up  out  of  the  dungeon :  and 
Lam.  3.  53  They  have  cut  olf  my  life  in  the  dungeon 
3.  5s  I  called..  O  Lord,  out  of  the  low  dungeon 

2.House  of  the  pit,  "ii3n  n*2  beth  habbor. 

Exod  12.  29  of  the  captive  that  (was)  in  the  dungeon 
Jer.  37.  16  Jeremiah  was  entered  into  the  dungeon 

DUNGHILL  — 

\.Dung,  dirt,  nb^x,  n3^t>*  ashpoth,  ashpath. 

1  Sa.  2.  8  lifteth  up  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill 
Psa.  1 13.  7  (and)  lifteth  the  needy  out  of  the  dungh. 
Lam.  4.    5  that  were  brought  up.  .embrace  dungh. 

2.  Dunghill,  dung  heap,  n:p"|D  madmenah. 

Isa.   25.  10  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  dunghill 

3.  Dunghill  or  heap,  5?iJ  nevalu. 

Ezra  6.  n  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  this 

£. Dunghill,  heap,  *?}i  nevali. 

Dan.    2.    5  and  your  houses  shall  be  made  a  dungh. 
3.  29  and  their  houses  shall  be  made  a  dungh. 

5  .Dunghill,  Kopwla  korpia. 

Luke  14.  35  fit  for  the  land,  not  yet  for  the  dunghill 

DUNG  GATE  or  PORT,  nb'f  Nil  nytf. 
A  gate  at  the  S.W.  of  Jerusalem. 

Neh.   2.  13  before  the  dragon  well,  and  to  the  dung  p. 
3. 14  the  dung  gate  repaired  Malchiah  the  son 

12.  31  right  hand  upon  the  wall  toward  the  d.  g. 

DU'-RA,  vrrn  circle. 

A  plain  in  the  province  of  Babylon  where  Nebuchad- 
nezzar set  up  a  golden  image. 

Dan.    3.    1  he  set  it  up  iu  the  plain  of  D.,  in  the  pro. 
DURABLE,  dureth  — 
I. Lasting,  pTi'J,  athiq. 

Isa.  23.  18  eat  sufficiently,  and  for  durable  clothing 
2.  Lasting,  pB"  atheq. 

Prov.  *8.  18  (yea),  durable  riches  and  righteousness 
Z.It  is,  iarl  esti,  Matt.  13.  21. 
DURST  — 
To  fear,  be  afraid,  n*v  yare. 

Job   32.    6  and  durst  not  show  you  mine  opinion 
DUST  — 
l.Dust  (j?ounded  small),  pax  abaq. 

Isa.     5.  24  theirblossomshallgoup  asdust :  because 
29.    5  the  multitude,  .shall  be  like  small  dust 

Eze.  26.  10  By  reason,  .their  dust  shall  cover  thee 

Nah.   1.    3  and  the  clouds  (are)  the  dust  of  his  feet 

2.Ashes,  clay,  dust,  idj;  aphar. 

Gen.    2.    7  the  Lord  God  formed  man  (of)  the  dust 
3.  14  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy 
3.  19  for  dust  thou  (art),  and  unto  dust  shalt 

13.  16  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the 
13.  16  so  that  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of 
18.  27  taken  upon  me . .  which  (am  but)  dust  and 
a8. 14  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth 


Exod  8 
8. 
8. 

Lev.  14. 

Isum.  5. 

23. 
Deut.  9 

28. 

32- 
Josh.  7. 

1  Sa.    2 

2  Sa.  16 

1  Ki.  16 


2  Ki.  13 

23- 

2Ch.  1. 

Job     2. 

4. 

5. 
7- 

7- 


Psa. 


30. 

44- 

72. 

78. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
1*3- 
119. 
Prov.  8 
Eccl.  3. 

12. 
Isa.     2, 

25. 

26. 

26. 

29. 

29. 

34< 

34' 
40. 
41. 
47' 
49- 

Lam.  2. 

3- 
Eze.  24. 

26. 
26, 
27. 

Dan.  12. 

Amos  2. 

Mic.    1. 

7- 
Hab.  1. 
Zeph.  1. 
Zech.  9. 


16  Stretch  out  thy  rod,  and  smite  the  dust 

1 7  smote  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  it  became 
17  all  the  dust  of  the  land  became  lice 

41  they  shall  pour  out  the  dust  that  they 
13  pour  out  the  blood,  .and  cover  it  with  d. 
17  and  of  the  dust  that  is  in  the  floor  of  the 
10  Who  can  count  the  dust  of  Jacob,  and 

21  was  as  small  as  dust :  and  I  cast  the  d. 
24  the  rain  of  thy  land  powder  and  dust 
24  with  the  poison  of  serpents  of  the  dust 

6  and  the  elders . .  put  dust  upon  their  heads 

8  He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust 

13  and  threw  stones  at  him,  and  cast  dust 
43  Then  did  I  beat  them  as  small  as  the  du. 

2  as  I  exalted  thee  out  of  the  dust,  and 
3S  fire . .  fell,  and  consumed . .  the  dust,  and 

10  if  the  dust  of  Samaria  shall  suffice  for 

7  had  made  them  like  the  dust  by  threshing 
12  cast  the  dust  of  them  unto  the  brook 

g  king  over  a  people  like  the  dust  of  the 

12  they,  .sprinkled  dust  upon  their  heads 
19  whose  foundation  (is)  in  the  dust,  (which) 

6  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of  the  dust 

5  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods  of  dust 
21  for  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the  dust ;  and 

9  and  wilt  thou  bring  me  into  dust  again? 
19  things  which  grow  (out)  of  the  dust  of 

15  I  have,  .defiled  my  horn  in  the  dust 

16  when  (our)  rest  together  (is)  in  the  dust 

11  His  bones,  .shall  lie  down.. in  the  dust 

26  They  shall  lie  down,  .alike  in  the  dust 

24  Then  shalt  thou  lay  up  gold  as  dust 

16  Though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust 

6  The  stones  of  it.  .hath  dust  of  gold 

19  and  I  am  become  like  dust  and  ashes 
15  and  man  shall  turn  again  unto  dust 
38  When  the  dust  groweth  into  hardness 

14  her  eggs,  .and  warmeth  them  in  dust 

13  Hide  them  in  the  dust  together;  (and) 

6  I  abhor  (myself),  and  repent  in  dust  and 
5  Let  the  enemy . .  lay  mine  honour  in  the  d. 

42  Then  did  I  beat  them  small  as  the  dust 

15  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust  of 
29  all  they  that  go  down  to  the  dust  shall 

9  Shall  the  dust  praise  thee  t  shall  it  declare 

25  For  our  soul  is  bowed  down  to  the  dust 
9  and  his  enemies  shall  lick  the  dust 

27  He  rained  flesh  also  upon  them  as  dust 

14  For  thy  servants . .  favour  the  dust  thereof 
14  For  he.  .remembereth  that  we  (are)  dust 
29  they  die,  and  return  to  their  dust 

7  He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust 

25  My  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust :  quicken 

26  nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the 

20  all  are  of  the  dust,  and  all  turn  to  dust 
7  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  earth  as  it 

10  hide  thee  in  the  dust,  for  fear  of  the  Lord 

12  (and)  bring  to  the  ground,  (even)  to  the  d. 
5  ground  ;  he  bringeth  it  (even)  to  the  du. 

19  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust 
4  thy  speeeh  shall  be  low  out  of  the  dust 
4  thy  speech  shall  whisper  out  of  the  dust 
7  aud  their  dust  made  fat  with  fatness 
9  the  dust  thereof  into  brimstone,  and  the 

12  comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in 
2  he  gave  (them)  as  the  dust  to  his  sword 

1  Come  down,  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin 
23  they  shall,  .lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet   - 

2  Shake  thyself  from  the  dust ;  arise,  (and) 
25  and  dust  (shall  be)  the  serpent's  meat 
*io  they  have  cast  up  dust  upon  their  heads 

29  He  putteth  his  mouth  in  the  dust;  if  so 
7  she  poured  it  not.  .to  cover  it  with  dust 
4  I  will  also  scrape  her  dust  from  her,  and 

12  they  shall  lay.  .thy  dust  in  the  midst  of 

30  and  shall  cast  up  dust  upon  their  heads 

2  many  of  them  that  sleep  iu  the  dust  of 
7  That  pant  after  the  dust  of  the  earth  on 

10  in  the  house  of  Aphrah  roll,  .in  the  dust 

17  They  shall  lick  the  dust  like  a  serpent 
10  for  they  shall  heap  dust,  and  take  it 

17  their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust 

3  Tyrus.  .heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust 


3. Dust,  KouioprSs  koniortos. 

Matt  to.  14  when  ye  depart,  .shake  off  the  dust  of 
Luke  9.    5  shake  off  the  very  dust  from  your  feet 

10.  11  Even  the  very  dust  of  your  city,  which 
Acts  13.  51  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet 

22.  23  And  as  they  cried  out.  .and  threw  dust 

A.Clay,  earth,  x^os  choos. 

Mark  6.  n  shake  off  the  dust  under  your  feet  for  a 
Hev.  18.  19  they  cast  dust  on  their  heads,  and  cried 

DUST,  to  make  — 

To  beat  small,  thin,  pp?  daqaq,  5. 

2  Ch.34.    4  he  brake  in  pieces,  and  made  dust  (of 

DUST,  small  — 

l.Dust  {pounded  small),  pnx  abaq. 

Exod.  9.    9  it  shall  become  small  dust  in  all  the  land 

2.Small,  thin,  or  fine  dust,  prjv  shachaq. 

Isa.    40.  15  are  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  bal. 

DUTY — 

Matter,  i;n  dabar. 

2  Ch.  8. 14  to  praise,  .as  the  duty  of  every  day  requ. 
Ezra    3.  4  according,  .as  the  duty  of  ever}'  day  req. 


/ 


DUTY 


277 


DWELL 


DUTY,  to  be  one  s  — 

To  owe,  be  due,  6<pelha)  qpJieUo. 

Lukei7.  10  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty 
Horn  15.  27  their  duty  is  also  to  minister  unto  them 

DUTY  of  marriage  — 
Habitation,  nx\y  onah. 

Exod2i.  10  her  duty  of  marriage,  shall  henot  diniin. 

DWART  — 

Lean,  thin,  small,  p"i  daq. 

Lev.  zi,  20  Or  crook  backt,  or  a  dwarf,  or  that  hath 

DWELL,  to  — 

1.  To  sojourn,  inhabit,  draw  together,   Tia  gur. 

Lev.  19,  34  the  stranger  that  dwelleth  with  you  shall 
Job    19.  15  They  that  dwell  in  mine  house,  and  my 
Psa.     5.    4  For.  .neither  shall  evil  dwell  with  thee 
Isa.    11.   6  The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb 
16.    4  Let  mine  outcasts  dwell  with  thee,  Moab 

33. 14  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  dev. 

33.  14  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlast. 
Jer.   43.   5  returned . .  to  dwell  in  the  land  of  Judah 

44.  S  whither  ye  be  gone  to  dwell,  that  ye 
49.  iS  neither  shall  a  son  of  man  dwell  in  it 

49.  33  nor  (any)  son  of  man  dwell  in  it 

50.  40  ueither  shall  any  son  of  man  dwell  there. 

2.  To  dwell,  in  dur. 

Psa.  84. 10  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness 

3.  To  dwell,  in  dur. 

Dan.    2.  3S  And  wheresoever  the  children  of  men  d. 
4.    1  unto  all  people, .  .that  dwell  in  all  the 
4.  12  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  dwelt  hi  the 
4.  21  under  which  the  beasts  of  the  field  dwelt 
6.  25  all  people,  .that  dwell  in  all  the  earth 

i.To  camp,  nin  c/ianah. 

Isa.   29.    1  to  Ariel,  the  city  (where)  David  dwelt ! 
5.  To  sit  dozvn  or  still,  3#;  yashab. 

Gen.    4. 16  Cain  went  out.  .and  dwelt  in  the  land  of 
4.  20  the  father  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents 
11.    2  they  found  a  plain,  .and  they  dwelt  there 

11.  31  they  came  unto  Haran,  and  dwelt  there 
13.   6  that  they  might  dwell  together 

13.    6  so  that  they  could  not  dwell  together 
13.    7  the  Canaanite  and  the  Perezite  dwelt 
13.  12  Abram  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
13.  12  Lot  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  the  plain 

13.  18  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre 

14.  7  also  the  Amorites,  that  dwelt  in  Hazezon. 
14. 12  And  they  took  Lot .  .who  dwelt  in  Sodom 
16.    3  after  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the 
19.  2g  overthrew  the  cities  in  the  which  Lot  d. 
19.  30  Lot  went  up  out  of  Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the 

19.  30  feared  to  dwell  iu  Zoar:  and  he  dwelt 

20.  1  and  dwelled  between  Kadesh  and  Shur 

20. 15  Abimelech  said,  .dwell  where  it  pleaseth 

21.  20  and  he  grew,  and  dwelt  in  the  wilderness 

21.  21  And  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 

22.  19  and  Abraham  dwelt  at  Beer-sheba 

23. 10  Ephron  dwelt  amoug  the  children  of  H. 
24.  3  of  the  Canaanites,  among  whom  I  dwell 
24.  37  of  the  Canaanites,  in  whose  land  I  dwell 

24.  62  And  Isaac,  .dwelt  in  the  south  country 

25. 11  and  Isaac  dwelt  by  the  well  Lahai-roi 
26.    6  And  Isaac  dwelt  in  Gerar 

26.  17  in  the  valley  of  Gerar,  and  dwelt  there 
34  10  ye  shall  dwell  with  us.  .dwell  and  trade 

34.  16  we  will  dwell  with  you,  and  we  will 
34.  21  let  them  dwell  in  the  land,  and  trade 
34.  22  men  consent  unto  us  for  to  dwell  with  us 

34.  23  consent  unto  them,  and  they  will  dwell 

35.  1  Arise,  go  up  to  Beth-el,  and  dwell  there 

36.  7  more  than  that  they  might  dwell  togeth. 

36.  8  Thus  dwelt  Esau  in  mount  Seir  :  Esau 

37.  1  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land  wherein  his 

38.  11  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  her  father's 

45.  10  thou  shalt  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen 

46.  34  that  ye  may  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen 

47.  4  thy  servants  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen 
47.    6  make  thy  father  and  brethren  to  dwell 
47.   6  in  the  land  of  Goshen  let  them  dwell 
47.  27  Israel  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the 
50.  22  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he  and  his  father's  house 

Exod.  2. 15  Moses  fled.  .and.  dwelt  in  the  land  of  11. 
2. 21  Moses  was  content  to  dwell  with  the 

12.  40  the  children  of  Israel,  who  dwelt  in  Eg. 

15.  17  thou  hast  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in 

23.  33  They  shall  not  dwell  in  thy  land,  lest 
Lev.  13.  46  he  (is)  unclean  :  he  shall  dwell  alone 

18.    3  the  land  of  Egypt,  wherein  ye  dwelt 
20.  22  land,  whither  I  bring  you  to  dwell 
23.  42  Ye  shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  days 
23. 42  Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in  booths 

25.  18  and  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  in  safety 
25. 19  eat  your  fill,  and  dwell  therein  in  safety 

26.  5  and  ye  shall,  .dwell  in  your  land  safely 
26.  32  your  enemies  which  dwell  therein  shall 
26.  35  it  did  not  rest . .  when  ye  dwelt  upon  it 

Numi3.  iS  and  the  people  that  dwelleth  therein 
13. 19  And  what  the  land  (is)  that  they  dwell 

13.  19  what  cities  (they  be)  that  they  dwell  in 
13.  28  people  (be)  strong  that  dwell  in  the  land 
13.  29  Amalekites  dwell  in  the  land  of  the 

13.  29  and  the  Amorites,  dwell  in  the  mountains 

13.  29  the  Canaanites  dwell  by  the  sea,  and  by 

14.  25  and  the  Canaanites  dwelt  in  the  valley 
14. 45  the  Canaanites  which  dwelt  in  that  hill 

20.  15  and  we  have  dwelt  in  Egypt  a  long  time 

21,  1  the  Canaanite, which  dwelt  in  the  south 


Nuni2i.  25  dwelt  in  all  the  cities  of  the  Amorites 
21.  31  Israel  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  Amorites 
21.  34  king  of  the  Amorites,  winch  dwelt  at  H. 
32.  17  our  little  ones  shall  dwell  iu  the  fenced 

32.  40  gave  Gilead  unto  Machir.  .he  dwelt 

33.  40  Arad  the  Canaanite,  which  dwelt  in  the 
33.  53  dispossess,  .the  land,  and  dwell  therein 
33-  55  v^x  you  in  the  land  wherein  ye  dwell 
35.    2  give  unto  the  Levites.  .cities  to  dwell  in 
35.    3  the  cities  shall  they  have  to  dwell  in 

35.  32  should  come  again  to  dwell  in  the  land 
Deut.  1.    4  king  of  the  Amorites,  which  dwelt  in 

1.    4  the  king  of  Bashau,  which  dwelt  at  Ast. 
1.    6  Ye  have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount 

1.  44  the  Amorites,  which  dwelt  in  that  moun. 

2.  4  the  children  of  Esau,  which  dwell  in  Se. 
2.    8,  22  children  of  Esau,  which  dwelt  in  Seir 
2. 10  The  Emims  dwelt  therein  in  times  past 
2. 12  The  Horims  also  dwelt  in  Seir  beforetime 
2.  12  succeeded  them .  .and  dwelt  in  their 

2.  20  giants  dwelt  therein  in  old  time 

2.  21,  22  succeeded  them,  and  dwelt  in  their 

2.  23  the  Avims  which  dwelt  in  Hazerim 

2.  23  destroyed  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  stead 

2.  29  dwell  in  Seir,  and  the  Moabites  which  d. 

3.  2  king  of  the  Amorites,  which  dwelt  at  H. 

4.  46  king  of  the  Amorites,  who  dwelt  at  Hes. 

8.  12  built  goodly  houses,  and  dwelt  (therein) 
11.  30  which  dwell  in  the  champaign  over 

11.  31  and  ye  shall  possess  it,  and  dwell  therein 
12. 10  dwell  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  your 
12. 10  giveth  you  rest,  .that  ye  dwell  in  safety 
12. 29  succeedest  them,  and  dwellest  in  their 

;.  12  thy  God  hath  given  thee  to  dwell  there 

.  14  shalt  possess  it,  and  shalt  dwell  therein 

1  dwellest  in  their  cities,  and  in  their 

16  He  shall  dwell  with  thee,  (even)  among 

5  If  brethren  dwell  together,  and  one  of 

1  and  possessest  it,  and  dwellest  therein 
30  and  thou  shalt  not  dwell  therein 
16  how  we  have  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
20  that  thou  mayest  dwell  in  the  land 

Josh.  2.  15  and  she  dwelt  upon  the  wall 

25  she  dwelleth  in  Israel  (even)  unto  this 
7  been  content  and  dwelt  on  the  other  side 
7  Peradventure  ye  dwell  among  us  ;  and 
16  they  heard,  .(that)  they  dwelt  among 
22  very  far  from  you  ;  when  ye  dwell  among 

6  kings  of  the  Amorites  that  dwell  in  the 

2  king  of  the  Amorites,  who  dwelt  in  Hes. 
4  that  dwell  at  Ashtaroth  and  at  Edrei 

13  Maachathites  dwell  among  the  Israelites 
.  21  dukes  of  Sihon,  dwelling  in  the  country 
4  save  cities  to  dwell  (in),  with  their  subu. 
63  the  Jebusites  dwell  with  the  children 
10  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  Gezer 
10  Canaanites  dwell  among  the  Ephraimites 

12  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that  land 
16  the  Canaanites  that  dwell  in  the  land  of 
47  possessed  it,  and  dwelt  therein,  and 
50  and  he  built  the  city,  and  dwelt  therein 

4  give  him  a  place,  that  he  may  dwell 

6  he  shall  dwell  in  that  city,  until  he  stand 
2  to  give  us  cities  to  dwell  in,  with  the 

43  and  they  possessed  it,  and  dwelt  therein 

33  the  land  wherein  the  children  of.  .Gad  d. 

2  Your  fathers  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of 

7  and  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long 

5  which  dwelt  on  the  other  side  Jordan 

13  cities  which  ye  built  not,  and  ye  dwell 
15  of  the  Amorites,  in  whose  land  ye  dwell 
18  the  Amorites  which  dwelt  in  the  land 

Judg.  1.    9  to  fight  against  the  Canaanites,  that  dwelt 
1. 10  against  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  Heb. 
1.  16  and  they  went  and  dwelt  among  the  peo. 
1.  21  the  Jebusites  dwell  with  the  children  of 
1.  27  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that  land 
1.  29  the  Canaanites  dwelt  in  Gezer  among 
1.  30  the  Canaanites  dwelt  among  them,  and 
1.532  the  Asherites  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites 
1.  33  but  he  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites 
1.  35  the  Amorites  would  dwell  inmountHeres 
3.    3  the  Hivites  that  dwelt  in  mount  Lebanon 

3.  5  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the  C. 

4.  2  which  dwelt  in  Harosheth  of  the  Gentiles 

4.  s  she  dwelt  under  the  palm  tree  of  Deborah 

6.  10  gods  of  the  Amorites,  in  whose  land  ye  d. 
8. 29  the  son  of  Joash . .  dwelt  in  his  own  house 

9.  21  Jotham.  .went  to  Beer,  and  dwelt  there 
9.  41  And  Abimelech  dwelt  at  Arumah 
9.  41  that  they  should  not  dwell  in  Shechem 

0.  1  he  dwelt  in  Shamir  in  mount  Ephraim 

1.  3  Then  Jephthah  fled,  .and  dwelt  in  the 

1.  26  While  Israel  dwelt  in  Heshbon  and  her 

5.  8  he  went  down  and  dwelt  in  the  top  of  the 

7,  10  Dwell  with  me,  and  be  unto  me  a  father 

7.  11  the  Levite  was  content  to  dwell  with  the 

8.  1  Danites  sought  them  an  inheritance  to  d. 
8.  7  the  five  men . .  saw . .  how  they  dwelt  care. 
8.  28  And  they  built  a  city,  and  dwelt  therein 

21.  23  they,  .repaired  the  cities,  .and  dwelt  in 
Ruth  1.   4  they  dwelt  there  about  ten  years 

2.  23  So  she.  .dwelt  with  her  mother-in-law 
1  Sa.   4.   4  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth 

12.  11  enemies  on  every  side,  and  ye  dwelled 
19.  18  And  he  and  Samuel  went  and  dwelt  in 

22.  4  and  they  dwelt  with  him  all  the  while 

23.  29  And  David,  .dwelt  in  strong  holds  at  En. 
27.    3  And  David  dwelt  with  Achish  at  Gath 
27.    5  some  town  in  the  country,  that  I  may  dw. 
27.    s  why  should  thy  servaut  dwell  in  the  royal 
27.   7  the  time  that  David  dwelt  in  the  country 


2Sa. 


11  all  the  while  he  dwelleth  in  the  country 

7  the  Philistines  came  and  dwelt  in  them 
3  and  they  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Hebron 

9  David  dwelt  in  the  fort,  and  called  it,  The 
2  name  of  The  LORDof  hosts,  that  dwelleth 
2  See  now,  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedar,  but 
2  the  ark  of  God  dwelleth  within  curtains 

5  Shalt  thou  build  me  an  house,  .to  dwell 

6  I  have  not  dwelt  in  (any)  house  since  the 
13  So  Mephibosheth  dwelt  in  Jerusalem ;  for 
28  So  Absalom  dwelt  two  full  years  in  Jeru. 
36  Build  thee  an  house,  .and  dwell  there 
38  And  Shimei  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  many  da. 
17  I  and  this  woman  dwell  in  one  house 
25  And  Judah  and  Israel  dwelt  safely,  every 

8  And  his  house  where  he  dwelt  (had)  ano. 
27  But  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the  earth  ? 

16  Pharaoh,  .had.  .slain  the  Canaanites  that 

24  they  went  to  Damascus,  and  dwelt  therein 
2  fled,  .and  Jeroboam  dwelt  in  Egypt 

17  the  children  of  Israel  which  dwelt  in  the 

25  Jeroboam  built  Shechem .  .and  dwelt 
11  Now  there  dwelt  an  old  prophet  in  Beth. 
25  in  the  city  where  the  old  prophet  dwelt 

18  the  son  of  Hezion.  .that  dwelt  at  Damas. 

21  he  left  off  building,  .and  dwelt  in  Tirzah 
5  he  went  and  dwelt  by  the  brook  Cherith 

9  get  thee  to  Zarephath.  .and  dwell  there 

13  she  answered,  I  dwell  among  mine  own 

1  the  place  where  we  dwell  with  thee  is  too 

2  make  us  a  place  there,  where  we  may  dw. 
5  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  in  then*  tents 

5  so  that  he  was  a  leper,  .and  dwelt  in  a 

6  the  Syrians,  .dwelt  there  unto  this  day 
24  they  possessed  Samaria,  and  dwelt  in  the 

27  let  them  go  and  dwell  there,  and  let  him 

28  one  of  the  priests,  .came  and  dwelt  in  B. 

29  every  nation  in . .  cities . .  wherein  they  d. 

15  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  dwellest 
36  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria,  .dwelt  at 

14  she  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  the  college 

24  dwell  in  the  land,  and  serve  the  king  of  B. 
55  the  families  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt  at 
23  those  that  dwelt  among  plants  and  hedges 
23  there  they  dwelt  with  the  king  for  his 

28  And  they  dwelt  at  Beer-sheba,  and  Mol. 

40  for  (they)  of  Ham  had  dwelt  there  of  old 

41  these  written  by  name,  .dwelt  in  their 
43  they  smote  the  rest . .  and  dwelt  there  unto 

8  the  son  of  Joel,  who  dwelt  in  Aroer 
io  they  dw  elt  in  their  tents  throughout  all 
11  And  the  children  of  Gad  dwelt  over  aga. 

16  And  they  dwelt  in  Gilead  in  Bashau 

22  And  they  dwelt  in  their  steads  until  the 

23  the  children  of  the  half  tribe,  .dwelt.in 

29  In  these  dwelt  the  children  of  Joseph  the 

28  These  (were)  heads.  .These  dweltin  Jeru. 

29  And  at  Gibeon  dwelt  the  father  of  Gibeon 
32  And  these  also  dwelt  with  then-  brethren 

3  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  the  children  of  Ju. 

16  the  son  of  Elkanah,  that  dwelt  in  the  vil. 

34  These  chief  fathers  of  the  Levites.  .dwelt 

35  And  in  Gibeon  dwelt  the  father  of  Gibeon 
38  they  also  dwelt  with  their  brethren  at  J. 

7  the  Philistines  came  and  dwelt  in  them 

7  David  dwelt  in  the  castle;  therefore  they 

6  the  ark  of  God  the  Lord,  that  dwelleth 

1  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedars,  but  the  ark 

4  Thou  shalt  not  build  me  an  house  to  dw. 

5  I  have  not  dwelt  in  an  house  since  the  day 

3  to  build  him  an  house  to  dwell  therein 
18  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men 

11  My  wife  shall  not  dwell  in  the  house  of 

17  the  children  of  Israel  that  dwell  in  the 

5  Rehoboam  dwelt  in  Jerusalem,  and 

2  to  Benhadad  king  of  Syria,  that  dwelt  at 

4  Jehoshaphat  dwelt  at  Jerusalem;  and  he 

10  of  your  brethren  that  dwell  in  their  cities 

8  they  dwelt  therein,  and  have  built  thee 

7  against  the  Arabians  that  dwelt  in  Gur 

21  the  king  was  a  leper,  .and  dwelt  in  a 

18  had  invaded  the  cities,  .and  they  dwelt 

25  the  strangers,  .that  dwelt  in  Judah 
4  he  commanded  the  people  that  dwelt  in 

6  the  children  of  Israel,  .that  dwelt  in  the 

22  she  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  the  college 
.  70  and  the  Nethinims,  dwelt  in  their  cities 

26  Moreover  the  Nethinims  dwelt  in  Ophel 

12  when  the  Jews  which  dwelt  by  them  came 
73  the  Nethinims,  and  all  Israel,  dwelt  in 

8.  14  the  children  of  Israel  should  dwell  in 
11.    1  And  the  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt  at  J. 
11.    1  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem 
11.    2  willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwell  at 
11.    3  the  chief  of  the  province  that  dwelt  in  J. 
11.  3  in  the  cities  of  Judah  dwelt  every  one  in 
11.    4  at  Jerusalem  dwelt  (certain)  of  the  child. 
11.    6  All  the  sons  of  Perez  that  dwelt  at  Jeru. 
11.  21  But  the  Nethinims  dwelt  in  Ophel 
11.  25  the  children  of  Judah  dwelt  at  Kirjath. 
13. 16  There  dwelt  men  of  Tyre  also  therein 
Esth.  9.  19  the  Jews,  .that  dwelt  in  the  unwalled 
Job    22.   8  and  the  honourable  man  dwelt  in  it 
Psa.    9. 11  Sing  praises  to  the  Lord,  which  dwelleth 

23.  6  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 

24.  1  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein 
27.   4  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  L. 
65.    S  They  also  that  dwell  in  the  uttermost 
68. 10  Thy  congregation  hath  dwelt  therein 
68. 16  the  hill  (which)  God  desireth  to  dwell  in 
69.  25  (and)  let  none  dwell  in  their  tents 

69.  35  that  they  may  dwell  there,  and  have  it 


'3' 
13' 
*5- 
*5- 
*7- 
17 
:  Ki.   4 

6. 

6. 
13 
15 
16, 
17' 
17 
17 
17 
19 
19. 
22. 

25< 
:  C'h.  2. 


13 
*7 
17 
i7< 
•Ch.  2 


3i' 

31 

34 

Ezra    2 

Neh.  3, 

4' 
7' 


DWELL 


278 


DWELL 


Psa.  80. 
84. 
91. 
98. 

101. 


1  thou  that  dwellest  (between)  the  cherub. 
4  Blessed  (are)  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house 

I  He  that  dwelleth  in  the  secret  place  of 
7  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein 

1.  6  the  faithful,  .that  they  may  dwell  with 
101    7  He  that  worketh  deceit  shall  not  dwell 
107.  14  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell 
,1,    I  the  Lord  our  God,  who  dwelleth  on  high 
I2i     1  O  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  heavens 
ill  14  here  will  I  dwell;  for  I  have  desired  it 
111     1  how  pleasant  (it  is)  for  brethren  to  dwell 
4o!  13  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  thy  presence 

Prov.  3.  29  seeing  he  dwelleth  securely  by  thee 
21     q  (It  is)  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner  of  the 
si.  iq  (It  is)  better  to  dwell  in  the  wilderness 
21  24  (It  is)  better  to  dwell  in  the  corner  of  the 
Songs'  11  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the 
Isa  "   6     s  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of 

0    2  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow 

10  24  O  my  people  that  dwellest  in  Zion,  be 

21  18  merchandise  shall  be  for  them  that  dwell 
24'   6  they  that  dwell  therein  are  desolate 
26    s  he  bringeth  down  them  that  dwell  on 
10. 10  tlie  people  shall  dwell  iu  Zion  at  Jerusa 
12  18  And  my  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable 

11  24  the  people  that  dwell  therein  (shall  be) 
-7  16  0  Lord  of  hosts . .  that  dwellest  (between) 
17  17  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria . .  dwelt  at 
40.  22  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent  to  dwell  in 
47     8  Therefore  hear  now  this,  .that  dwellest 
40.  20  give  place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell 

51    6  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  iu  like 
58. 12  The  restorer  of  paths  to  dwell  in 

2.  6  through  a  land,  .where  no  man  dwelt? 
4  29  every  city,  .forsaken,  and  not  a  man  dwell 
8.  16  the  city,  and  those  that  dwell  therein 
026  and  all . .  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness 

12.  4  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell 

20  6  all  that  dwell  in  thine  house,  shall  go 

21  8  and  they  shall  dwell  in  their  owu  laud 
4    8  and  them  that  dwell  in  the  laud  of  Egypt 

5  dwell  in  the  land  that  the  Lord  hath 

II  and  they  shall  till  it,  and  dwell  therein 
5,  28  Build  ye  houses,  and  dwell  (in  them) 

16  of  all  the  people  that  dwelleth  in  this  city 

32  he  shall  not  have  a  man  to  dwell  among 

24  there  shall  dwell  in  Judah  itself,  and  in 

7  but  all  your  days  ye  shall  dwell  in  tents 


Jer. 


25. 
27. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
3i: 

It  10  we' have  dwelt  in  tents,  and  have  obeyed 
15     9  Nor  to  build  houses  for  us  to  dwell  in 
15  11  for  fear  of  the  army,  .so  we  dwell  at  Jer. 
15.  is  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  have 
19.  14  Even  they  sent,  .so  he  dwelt  among  the 
40.    5  dwell  with  him  among  the  people,  or  go 
40.    6  dwelt  with  him  among  the  people  that 
40    9  dwell  in  the  laud,  and  serve  the  king  of 
40.  10  As  for  me,  behold,  I  will  dwell  at  Mizpah 

10  dwell  in  your  cities  that  ye  have  taken 
17  and  dwelt  in  the  habitation  of  Chimham 

11  But  if  ye  say,  We  will  not  dwell  iu  this 
14  but  we  will  go . .  and  there  will  we  dwell 

4  obeyed  not  the  voice,  .to  dwell  in  the  1. 
1  all  the  Jews  which  dwell  in  the  land  of 
1  which  dwell  at  Migdol,  and  Taphauhes 
,.    2  desolation,  and  no  man  dwelleth  therein 
44.  13  I  will  punish  them  that  dwell  in  the  land 
44.  14  they  have  a  desire  to  return  to  dwell 
44  15  even  all  the  people  that  dwelt  in  the  land 
44.  26  all  Judah  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

47.  2  the  city,  and  them  that  dwell  therein 

48.  9  shall  be  desolate,  without  any  to  dwell 
48  28  0  ye  that  dwell  in  Moab,  leave  the  cities 

49.  1  why  (then)  doth .  .his  people  dwell  in  his 
49.  8  turn  back,  dwell  deep,  0  inhabitants  of 
40.  30  dwell  deep,  0  ye  inhabitants  of  Hazor 

49.  31  thewealthynation,  that  dwelleth  without 

50.  3  none  shall  dwell  therein  :  they  shall 

50.  39  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands  shall  dwell 
so.  39  the  owls  shall  dwell  therein  :  and  it  shall 

51.  1  against  them  that  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
51.  43  a  land  wherein  no  man  dwelleth,  neither 

Lam.  1.    3  she  dwelleth  among  the  heathen,  she 

4.  21  O  daughter  of  Edom,  that  dwellest  in  the 

Eze.     2.    6  and  thou  dost  dwell  among  scorpions  :  be 
3.  is  that  dwelt  by  the  river  of  Chebar,  and 
7.    7  O  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  land  :  the 
12.    2  thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  a  rebellious 
12.  19  violence  of  all  them  that  dwell  therein 
16.  46  she  and  her  daughters  that  dwell  at  thy 
16.  46  thy  younger  sister,  that  dwelleth  at  thy 
-8.  25  then  shall  they  dwell  in  their  land  that 
28.  26  they  shall  dwell  safely  therein,  and  shall 
28  26  yea,  they  shall  dwell  with  confidence 
31.6  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations 
31  17  dwelt  under  his  shadow  in  the  midst  of 
!•>.  ,5  when  I  shall  smite  all  them  that  dwell 
14.  25  they  shall  dwell  safely  iu  the  wilderness 
34.  28  they  shall  dwell  safely,  and  none  shall 
36.  17  when  the  house  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their 

36.  28  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to 

37.  25  they  shall  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  have 

37.  25  fathers  have  dwelt ;  and  they  shall  dwell 

38.  8  and  they  shall  dwell  safely  all  of  them 
38.  11  that  dwell  safely,  all  of  them  dwelling 

38.  12  that  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

38. 14  when  my  people  of  Israel  dwelleth  safely 

39,  6  among  them  that  dwell  carelessly  in  the 
39.    9  they  that  dwell  in  the  cities  of  Israel 

39.  26  when  they  dwelt  safely  in  their  land,  and 
Hos.    4.    3  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall 

9.    3  They  shall  not  dwell  in  the  LORD'S  land 
14.    7  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall 


Joel    3.  20  Judah  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusalem 
Amos  3.  12  that  dwell  in  Samaria  in  the  corner  of 
5.  11  ye  have  built  houses,  .ye  shall  not  dwell 
8.    8  and  every  one  mourn  that  dwelleth 
o.    5  and  all  that  dwell  therein  shall  mourn 
Mic.    7.  13  because  of  them  that  dwell  therein,  for 
Nali.    1.    5  yea,  the  world,  and  all  that  dwell  therein 
Hah.   2.    8,  17  of  the  city,  and  of  all  that  dwell  ther. 
Zeph.  1.  18  a  speedy  riddance  of  all  them  that  dwell 

2.  15  This  (is)  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt 
Hag.    1.    4  (Is  it)  time.,  to  dwell  in  your  ceiled  hou. 
Zech.  2.    7  that  dwellest  (with)  the  daughter  of  B. 

8.  4  old  women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerus. 

9.  6  And  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod,  and 
14.  11  (men)  shall  dwell  in  it,  and  there  shall  be 

.To  sit  dovm  or  still,  3D:  yethab. 

Ezra   4. 17  and  (to)  the  rest,  .that  dwell  in  Samaria 
'.To  lodge,  pass  the  night,  -fy,  \h  lun,  lin. 

Psa.  25.  13  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease  ;  and  his  seed 
\.To  stand  up  or  still,  10"  amad. 

Exod.  8.  22  land  of  Goshen,  in  which  my  people  dw. 

\.To  tabernacle,  J3V>  shaken. 

Gen.    9.  27  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem ;  and 
14.  13  for  he  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre  the 
16.  12  he  shall  dwell  in  the  presence  of  all  his 
25. 18  And  they  dwelt  from  Havilah  unto  Shur 
26.    2  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  shall  tell  thee 
33.  2->  it  came  to  pass,  when  Israel  dwelt  in  that 
49.  13  Zebulun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the 

Exod2s.  8  make  me  a  sanctuary;  thatU'may  dwelljam. 
29.  45  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel 
29.  46  that  I  may  dwell  among  them 

Sum.  5.    3  their  camps,  in  the  midst  whereof  I  dwell 
23.    9  the  people  shall  dwell  alone,  and  shall 
35.  34  land,  .ye  shall  inhabit,  wherein  I  dwell 
15  34  I  the  Lord  dwell  among  the  children 

Deut33.  12  The  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in 
13. 12  and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders 
33.  16  goodwill  of  him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush 
33.  20  he  dwelleth  as  a  lion,  and  teareth  the  arm 
13.  28  Israel  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone 

Josh  22. 19  wherein  the  Lord's  tabernacle  dwelleth 

2  Sa.    7. 10  they  may  dwell  in  a  place  of  their  own 

1  EX   6.  13  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel 
8  12  The  Lord  said  that  he  would  dwell  in 

1  Ch.17.   9  they  shall  dwell  in  their  place,  and  shall 

23.  25  that  they  may  dwell  in  Jerusalem  for 

2  Ch.  6.    1  that  he  would  dwell  in  the  thick  darkness 
Job     3.    5  let  a  cloud  dwell  upon  it ;  let  the  black. 

4.  19  much  less  (in)  them  that  dwell  in  houses 
15.  2S  he  dwelleth  in  desolate  cities,  (and)  in 
18.  15  It  shall  dwell  in  his  tabernacle,  because 
-9  "5  sat  chief,  and  dwelt  as  a  king  in  the  army 
10    6  To  dwell  in  the  cliffs  of  the  valleys 
38. 19  Where  (is)  the  way  (where)  light  dwelleth? 
39.  28  She  dwelleth  and  abideth  on  the  rock 
Psa.  15.    1  who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ? 

37.    3  (so)  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and 
37  27  and  do  good ;  and  dwell  for  evermore 
37.  29  inherit  the  land,  and  dwell  therein  for 
65.    4  (that)  he  may  dwell  in  thy  courts 
68.    6  but  the  rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  (land) 
68.  16  yea,  the  LORD  will  dwell  (in  it)  for  ever 
68.  18  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  (among 
69  36  they  that  love  his  name  shall  dwell 
74.    2  this  mount  Zion,  wherein  thou  hast  dwelt 
85.   9  that  glory  may  dwell  in  our  land 
94  17  my  soul  had  almost  dwelt  in  silence 
i'o     5  Woe . .  (that)  I  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Kedar ! 
120.    6  My  soul  hath  long  dwelt  with  him  that 
135.  21  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  .which  dwelleth  at 
139.   9  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea 
Prov.  i  33  hearkeneth  unto  me  shall  dwell  safely 
2.  21  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  the  land,  and 
8  12  I  wisdom  dwell  with  prudence,  and  find 
Isa.     8. 18  Lord  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth  in  mount  Z. 
13.  20  neither  shall  it  be  dwelt  in  from  genera. 
13  21  owls  shall  dwell  there,  and  satyrs  shall 
26. 19  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust 
3'.  16  judgment  shall  dwell  in  the  wilderness 
33    5  The  Lord  is  exalted  ;  for  he  dwelleth  ou 
33. 16  He  shall  dwell  on  high  :  his  place  of 
34.11  the  owl  also  and  the  raven  shall  dwell 
34.  17  generation  to  generation  shall  they  dwell 
57. 15  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  (place),  with 
63.   9  and  my  servants  shall  dwell  there 
Jer.  23.   6  In  his  days.. Israel  shall  dwell  safely 
25  24  mingled  people  that  dwell  in  the  desert 
33.  16  those  days.  .Jerusalem  shall  dwell  safely 

48.  28  leave  the  cities,  and  dwell  in  the  rock 

49.  16  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock 
49.  31  neither  gates  nor  bars,  (which)  dwell 
51.  13  0  thou  that  dwellest  upon  many  waters 

Eze.  17.  23  under  it  shall  dwell  all  fowl  of  every 

17.  23  shadow  of  the  branches,  .shall  they  dwell 
43.   7  where  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the 
43.    9  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them  for  ever 
Joel    3.  17  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God  dwelling  in 

3.  21  for  the  Lord  dwelleth  in  Zion 
Obad.       3  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock 
Mic.    4.  10  thou  shalt  dwell  iu  the  field,  and  thou 

7. 14  which  dwell  solitarily  (in)  the  wood 
Nail.   3.  18  thy  nobles  shall  dwell  (in  the  dust);  thy 
Zech.  2.  10  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith 
2.  11 1  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee 
8.   3  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem 
8.    8  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem 
10.  To  cause  A)  tabernacle,  lip  shaken,  5. 

Judg.  S.  11  by  the  way  of  them  that  dwelt  in  tents 
Job   11. 14  let  not  wickedness  dwell  in  thy  tabernacl 


11.  To  dwell,  tm&  shere. 

Dan.   2.  22  and  the  light  dwelleth  with  him 
12.ro  sit  down-,  KaBniJ-ai  kathemai. 

Luke2i.  35  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth 
13.ro  settle  dovm,  KaroiKea  katoikeo. 

Matt.  2.  23  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  Nazareth 
4.  13  he  came  and  dwelt  in  Capernaum,  which 

12.  45  and  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there 
Luken.  26  and  they  enter  in,  and  dwell  there 

13.  4  above  all  men  that  dwelt  in  Jerusalem? 
Acts    1.  20  be  desolate,  and  let  no  man  dwell  there. 

2.    5  there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  Jews 
7.    2  Mesopotamia,  before  he  dwelt  in  Charran 
7.    4  Then  came  he  out.  .and  dwelt  in  Charran 
7.    4  into  this  land,  whereiu  ye  now  dwell 
7.  48  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  iu  temples 
9.  22  confounded  the  Jews  which  dwelt  at  D. 
11.  29  unto  the  brethren  which  dwelt  iu  JudEea 
13.  27  they  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  and  their 
17.  24  God.  .dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with 
17.  26  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth 
22.  12  good  report  of  all  the  Jews  which  dwelt 
Eph.  3. 17  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith 
Col.    1.  19  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell 

2.  9  For  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of 
Heb.  11.    9  dwelling  in  tabernacles  with  IsaacandJ. 
Jas.     4.    5  The  spirit  that  [dwelleth]  in  us  2  Pe.  3. 13. 
Rev.  2.  13  where  thou  dwellest.  .where  Satan  dwel. 

3.  10  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth 
6.  10  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on 

11.  10  they  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  rej. 
11.  10  two  prophets  tormented  them  that  dwelt 
13.   8  all  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall 
13.  12  the  earth  and  them  that  dwell  therein 

13.  14, 14  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 

14.  6  to  preach  unto  [them  that  dwell]  on  the 
17.    8  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  wonder 

14.  To  remain,  ueVw  menu. 

John  1.  38  They  said  unto  him.  .Where  dwellest  th.  ? 
1.  39  They  came  and  saw  where  he  dwelt 

6.  56  He  that  eateth  my  flesh . .  dwelleth  in  me 
14.  10  the  Father  that  dwelleth  iu  me,  he  doeth 
14.  17  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  lie  in 

Acts  28.  16  Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself 
28.  30  Paul  dwelt  two  whole  years  iu  his  owu 

1  Jo    3. 17  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him? 

3.  24  And  he  that  keepeth.  .dwelleth  in  him 

4.  12  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  perf. 
4.  13  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  him 
4.  15  God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  God 

4  16  he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God 

2  Jo.  2  For  the  truth's  sake,  which  dwelleth  m 
15. To  use  or  have  a  house,  01/ce'w  oikcS. 

Horn.  7. 17.  20  no  more  I .  .but  sin  that  dwelleth  in 

7.  18  I  know  that  in  me.  .dwelleth  no  good 

8.  9  if  so  be  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in 
8  11  But  if  the  Spirit  of  him.  .dwell  in  you 

1  Co    3.  16  (that)  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ? 
7. 12  and  she  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  him 
7  13  and  if  he  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  her 

1  Ti.    6.  16  dwelling  in  the  light  which  no  man  can 
16.  To  tent,  tabernacle,  aitnvAw  skenoo. 

John  1.  14  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
Kev.    7. 15  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell 
12  12  rejoice,  (ye)  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell 
13.    6  to  blaspheme . .  them  that  dwell  in  heaven 
21.    3  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall 

DWELL,  to  cause  to  — 

I. To  cause  to  sit  down  or  still,  3»;  yashab,  5. 

2  Ch.  8.  2  caused  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell 
Jer.  32.  37  and  I  will  cause  them  to  dwell  safely 
Eze.  36.  33  I  will  also  cause  (you)  to  dwell  iu  the 

2.  To  make  to  tabernacle,  j3f'  shaken,  3. 

Deuti2. 11  choose  to  cause  his  name  to  dwell  there 
Jer.     7.    3  and  I  will  cause  you  to  dwell  in  this 
7.    7  Then  will  I  cause  you  to  dwell  in  this 

3.2*0  make  to  tabernacle,  |3Bi  shekan,  3. 

Ezra  6.  12  that  hath  caused  his  name  to  dwell  there 

DWELL  among,  to  — 

To  settle  down  among,  eyKaroiKea  etjkatoikeo. 
2  Pe.  2.    8  For  that  righteous  man  dwelling  among 

DWELL  at,  to  — 

To  settle  down,  Karouceia  katoikeo. 

Acts  2  14  all  (ye)  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem  be  this 
q  32  also  to  the  saints  which  dwelt  at  Lydda 
19.  17  the  Jews  and  Greeks  also  dwelling  at  E. 

DWELL  in,  to  — 

1.A  habitation,  73!,  ?'='  zebul. 

1  Ki.  8. 13  I  have  surely  built,  .an  house  to  dw.  in 

%A  seat,  3V;io  moshab. 

Psa.  107.   4  wandered.,  they  found  no  city  to  dwell  in 

S.To  be  in  a  "he/use,  tvoiKtw  enoikeo. 

Bom   8  11  by  his  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you 

2  Co.  6  16  God  hath  said.  I  will  dwell  in  them,  aud 
Col      3. 16  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you 

-  Ti    1     5  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois 
1. 14  keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  dwelleth  in 

i.To  settle  down,  KaTomeu  kaioikeo. 

Hatta3.  21  sweareth.  .by  him  that  dwelleth  therein 
\cts  4.  16  manifest  to  all  them  that  dwell  in  Jerus. 
9.  35  all  that  dwelt  in  Lydda  and  Saron  saw 
19. 10  all  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the 


DWELL 


279 


EAR 


DWELL,  to  make  (to)  — 

l.To  cause  to  sit  down  or  still,  3#;  yasJiab,  5. 
Gen.  47.    6  make  thy  father  and  brethren  to  dwell 
Lev.  23.  43  that  I  made.  .Israel  to  dwell  in  booths 
1  Sa.  12.   8  and  made  them  dwell  in  this  place 
Psa.    4.    8  thou,  Loud,  only  maketh  me  dwell  in 
107.  36  there  he  maketh  the  hungry  to  dwell 
143.    3  he  hath  made  me  to  dwell  in  darkness 
Hos.  12.  9  I .  -will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabern. 

2.To  make  to  tabernacle,  jry  shaken,  3. 

Num.14.  30  which  I  sware  to  make  you  dwell  therein 

3.  To  cause  to  tabernacle,  )3^  shaken,  5. 

Psa.  78.  55  and  made  the  tribes,  .to  dwell  in  their 

DWELL  round  about,  to  — 

To  dwell  round  about,  ireptotKCQ)  perioikeo. 

Luke  1.  65  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  about 

DWELL  with,  to  — 
l.To  dwell,  ■??}  zabal. 

Gen.  30.  20  now  will  my  husband  dwell  with  me 
2.To  dwell  along  with,  (tvvoikzui  sunoikeo. 

1  Pe.   3.    7  Likewise,  ye  husbands,  dwell  with  (them) 

DWELLERS  — 

l.To  tabernacle,  ]2V  shaken. 

Isa.   iS.   3  All  ye.  .dwellers  on  the  earth,  see  ye 
2.2*0  settle  down,  KaroiKioi  kaioikeo. 

Acts    1.  19  it  was  known  unto  all  the  dwellers  at 
2.   9  Elaniites,  and  the  dwellers  in  Mesopo. 

DWELLETH^- 

Tabernacle,  dwelling,  }|?p  mishkan. 

Psa*  26.   8  the  place  where  thine  honour  dwelleth 

DWELLING  — 
l.Tent,  hnk  ohel. 

Psa.  91.'  10  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy  dwelling 
%Hdbitation,  dwelling,  hi],  *?Uj  zebul. 

Psa.  49.  14  consume  in  the  grave  from  their  dwelling 
3.  To  sit  doivn  or  still,  2V"T  yasJiab. 

Gen.  25.  27  Jacob  (was)  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  tents 

Num.21.  15  that  goeth  down  to  the  dwelling  of  Ar 

1  Ki.   8.  30,  39,  43,  49  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwell. 

21.    8  the  nobles  that  (were)  in  his  city,  dwelling 

2  Ki.  17.  25  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  their  dwelling 
2  Ch.   6.    2  and  a  place  for  thy  dwelling  for  ever 

6.  21  hear  thou  from  thy  dwelling  place 

6.  30  hear  thou  from  heaven  thy  dwelling  place 

6.  33,  39  hear  thou  from,  .thy  dwelling  place 
Jer.  46.  19  0  thou  daughter  dwelling  in  Egypt 

4. Place  of  sojourn,  ~\^magur. 

Job    18.  19  nor  any  remaining  in  Ms  dwellings 
Psa.  55.  15  for  wickedness  (is)  in  their  dwellings 

5. Place  of  dwelling,  iinp  medor. 

Dan.    4.  25,  32  thy  dwelling  shall  be  with  the  beasts 
5.  21  Ms  dwelling  (was)  with  the  wild  asse3 

6.  Dwelling-place,  *n?  medar. 

Dan.  2.  11  except  tire  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not 

7. A  seat,  sitting,  dwelling,  ixpS&moshdb. 

Gen.  10.  30  And  their  dwelling  was  from  Mesh  a 

27.  39  thy  dwelling  shall  be  the  fatness  of  the 
Exod  10.  23  children  of  Israel  had  light  in  their  d. 
Lev.    3.  17  a  perpetual  statute . .  throughout . .  your  d. 

7.  26  of  fowl,  or  of  beast,  in  any  of  your  dwell. 
23.   3  sabbath  of  the  Lord  in  all  your  dwellings 
23. 14,  21,  31  a  statute  for  ever,  .in  all  your  d. 
25.  29  if  a  man  sell  a  dwelling  house  in  a  walled 

Num.35.  29  shall  be  for  a  statute,  .in  all  your  dwell. 
Eze.  48.  15  be  a  profane  (place)  for  the  city,  for  dwel. 

8. Habitation,  ]1V£  maon. 

Jer.  49.  33  Hazor  shall  be  a  dwelling  for  dragons 
Nah.  2.  11  Where  (is)  the  dwelling  of  the  lions 
Zeph  3.    7  so  their  dwelling  should  not  be  cut  off 

9.  Tabernacle,  ]2'j?  mishkan. 

Job    18. 21  Surely  such  (are)  the  dwellings  of  the 
21.  28  where  (are)  the  dwelling  places  of  the 
39.  6  I  have  made,  .the  barren  land  Ms  dwell. 
Psa.  87.    2  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob 
Isa.    32.  18  my  people  shall  dwell . .  in  sure  dwellings 
Jer.     9. 19  because  our  dwellings  have  cast  (us)  out 
Eze.   25.    4  they  shall.. maks  their  dwellings  in  thee 

10. Home,  habitation,  fold,  rm  naveh. 

Prov.21.  20  and  oil  in  the  dwelling  of  the  wise 

24.  15  against  the  dwelling  of  the  righteous 
Zeph.  2.    6  And  the  sea  coast  shall  be  dwellings 

11.  A  settled  house  or  dwelling,  KaroiKvats  katoikes. 
Mark  5.    3  Who  had  (Ms)  dwelling  among  the  tombs 

DWELLING  place  -  - 

l.Tent,  Six  ohel. 

Job     8.  22  the  dwelling  place  of  the  wicked  shall 
Psa.   52.    5  pluck  thee  out  of  (thy)  dwelling  place 

2.  .4  seat,  3^io  moshab. 

Num.  24.  21  Strong  is  thy  dwelling  place,  and  thou  ■ 
1  Ch.    6.  54  Now  these  (are)  their  dwelling  places 
Eze.      6.    6  In  all  your  dwelling  places  the  cities 

37.  23  will  save  them  out  of  all  their  dwellingp. 
3. Fixed  place,  paa  makon. 

Isa.      4.    5  Lord  will  create  upon  every  dwelling  p. 
18.   4  I  will  consider  in  my  dwelling  place  like 


4.  Habitation,  pyp  maon. 

2  Ch.  30.  27  prayer  came  (up)  to  his  holy  dwelling  p. 

36.  15  he  had  compassion,  .on  Ms  dwelling  place 

Psa.   90.    1  Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling  place 

Jer.    51.  37  Babylon  shall  become,  .a  dwelling  place 

5. Habitation,  n:'i;v?  meonah. 

Psa.  76.    2  tabernacle,  and  his  dwelling  place  in  Zion 
6. Tabernacle,  jrso  mishkan. 

1  Ch.  6.  32  they  ministered  before  the  dwelling  place 
Psa.  49.  11  (and)  their  dwelling  places  to  all  genera. 

74.    7  they  have  defiled,  .the  dwelling  place 
Jer.  30.  18  I  will,  .have  mercy  on  his  dwelling  places 

51.  30  they  have  burned  her  dwelling  places 
Hab.  1.    6  march,  .to  possess  the  dwelling  places 

7. Home,  habitation,  fold,  nu  naveh. 

Psa.  79.   7  they  have . .  laid  waste  Ms  dwelling  place 
DWELLING  place,  to  have  110  certain — ■ 
To  be  unsettled,  atrraTew  astateo. 

1  Co.  4.  11  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain  dwelling  p. 

DWELT  in,  to  be  — 

To  tabernacle,  ]-*$  shaken. 

Jer.  50.  39  neither  shall  it  be  dwelt  in  from  genera. 

DWELT  in  (that);   or  wherein  they  dwelt  — 
Sitting,  seat,  sitter,  a^lD  moshab. 

Nuni3T.  10  burnt  all  their  cities  wherein  they  dwelt 

2  Sa.  g.  12  all  that  dwelt  in  the  house  of  Ziba  (were) 

DYED  — 

Leavened,  brightened,  j'ipn  chamets. 

Isa.  63.    1  Who  is  this  that  cometh.  .with  dyed  gar. 
DYED  attire  — 
Turbans,  dyed  attire,  D'^13|?  tebulim. 

Eze.  23.  15  exceeding  in  dyed  attire  upon  their  heads 
DYED  red,  to  be  — 
To  be  made  red,  DIN  adam,  4. 

Exod25.   5  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 
26. 14  cov.  for  the  tent  (of)  rams'  skins  dyed  red 

35.  7  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 

36.  19  cov.  for  the  tent  (of)  rams'  skins  dyed  red 
39.  34  And  the  covering  of  rams'  skins  dyed  red 

DYING  — 

A  putting  to  death,  vettpoxris  nekrosis. 

2  Co.  4.  10  bearing  about  in  the  body  the  dying  of 

DYING,  to  be  or  he  a  — 

To  die  off,  a-woQvhvKQ}  apothneskd. 

Luke  8.  42  one  only  daughter,  .and  she  lay  a  dying 
Heb.  11.  21  Jacob,  when  he  was  a  dying,  blessed  both 


E 

EACH  — 

l.One,  "inx  echad. 

Num.  7-Tn  They  shall  offer  their  offering,  each  prince 
7.  85  Each  charger  of  silver . .  each  bowl  seventy 

29. 14  two  tenth  deals  to  each  ram  of  the  two 

29. 15  a  several  tenth  deal  to  each  lamb  of  the 
Josh  22. 14  with  Mm  ten  princes,  of  each  chief  house 
2  Ki.15.  20  of  each  man  fifty  shekels  of  silver,  to  give 
2  Ch.  4. 13  two  rows-of  pomegranates  on  each  wreath 

2.^4  man,  each  one,  e;,n  ish. 

Gen.  15. 10  and  laid  each  piece  one  against  another 
Num.  1.  44  each  one  was  for  the  house  of  his  fathers 
16.  17  thou  also,  and  Aaron,  each.  .Ms  censer 

1  Ki.22.  10  sat  each  on  Ms  tlirone,  having  put  on 

2  Ki.  9.  21  each  in  his  chariot,  and  they  went  out 

Z.A  woman,  each  one,  he's  ishshah. 

Ruth  1.    8  Go,  return  each  to  her  mother's  house 
1.   9  Lord  grant  you  that  ye  may  find  rest,  each 

4.  One  by  one,  apiece,  %v  nad"1  eavrb  hen  kath  heauto. 
Rev.   4.    8  [the  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six] 

5. Each,  each  one,  %va  eKacroy  liekaston. 

Acts    2.    3  cloven  tongues,  .sat  upon  each  of  them 

EACH,  a  lite  of  — 

Part  by  part,  13?  13  bad  bebad. 

Exod3o.  34  sweet  spices . .  of  each  shall  there  be  a  like 
EACH  man  — 
l.One,  each  one,  inx  echad. 

1  Ki.  4.    7  each  man  Ms  month  in  a  year  made  pro. 
2.^4  man,  each  one,  tr'N  ish. 

Gen.  34.  25  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each  man  his  sword 

40.  5  each  man  his  dream . .  each  man  according 

41.  11  we  dreamed  each  man  according  to  the 
41. 12  to  each  man  according  to  his  dream  he 
45.  22  he  gave  each  man  changes  of  raiment 

Judg2i.  22  we  reserved  not  to  each  man  Ms  wife  in 

EACH  one  — 

l.One,  each  one,  "irtx  echad. 

Num.  7.    3  for  two  of  the  princes,  and  for  each  one 
Isa.     6.   2  Above  it  stood  the  seraphims  :  each  one 

2.  Each,  each  one,  sKao-ros  hekastos. 

Lukei3. 15  doth  not  each  one  of  you  on  the  sabbath 

EAGLE  — 

l.A?i  eaghy  "i^j  nesher. 

Exodig.    4  I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings,  and  brought 


Lev.  11.  13  the  eagle,  and  the  ossifrage,  and  the  osp. 
Deut  14.  12  the  eagle,  and  the  ossifrage,  and  the  osp. 

28.  49  from  the  end  of  the  earth,  .as  the  eagle 
32.  11  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  hernest,  fluttereth 

2  Sa.    1.  23  swifter  than  eagles,  they  were  stronger 
Job     9.  26  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth  to  the  prey 

39.  27  Doth  the  eagle  mount  up  at  thy  command 
Psa.  103.    5  thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's 
Prov  23.    5  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward  heaven 

30. 17  shall  pick  it  out,  and  the  young  eagles 

30.  19  The  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air  ;  the  way 
Isa.  40.  31  they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles 
Jer.     4.  13  Behold.,  his  horses  are  swifter  than  eagles 

48.  40  he  shall  fly  as  an  eagle,  and  shall  spread 

49.  16  shouldest  make  thy  nest  as  high  as  the  e. 

49.  22  he  shall  come  up  and  fly  as  the  eagle 
Lam.  4. 19  Our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  eag. 
Eze.     1. 10  they  four  also  had  the  face  of  an  eagle 

10.  14  and  the  fourth  the  face  of  an  eagle 
17.    3  A  great  eagle  with  great  wings,  long 
17.    7  There  was  also  another  great  eagle  with 
Hos.    8.    1  as  an  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord 
Obad.       4  Though  thou  exalt  (thyself)  as  the  eagle 
Mic.    1.  16  enlarge  thy  baldness  as  the  eagle ;  for 
Hab.    1.    8  they  shall  fly  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth 
2. An  eagle,  t^;  neshar. 

Dan.    4.  33  till  Ms  hairs  were  grown  like  eagle's 

7.  4  The  first  (was)  like  a  lion,  and  had  eagle's 

Z.An  eagle,  a,er6s  aetos. 

Matt  24.  28  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together 

Lukei7.  37  thither  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  toget. 

Rev.   4.    7  the  fourth  beast  (was)  like  a  flying  eagle 

12. 14  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  agreat  e. 

EAR  — 

l.Ear,   jjk  ozen. 

Gen.  20.   8  and  told  all  these  things  in  their  ears 
35.   4  the . .  ear  rings  which  (were)  in  their  ears 

44. 18  let.  .speak  a  word  in  my  lord's  ears 

50.  4  speak,  I  pray  you,  in  the  ears  of  Pharaoh 
Exod  10.    2  thou  mayest  tell  in  the  ears  of  thy  son 

ir.    2  Speak  now  in  the  ears  of  the  people 
17. 14  and  rehearse  (it)  in  the  ears  of  Joshua 
21.    6  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear  through  with 

29.  20  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of 
29.  20  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of  his  sons 
32.  2  golden  earrings,  which  (are)  in  the  ears 
32.   3  golden  ear  rings,  wliich  (were)  intheir  ears 

Ley.    8.  23  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of  Aaron's  right  ear 

8.  24  put  of  the  blood  upon,  .their  right  ear 
14. 14,  17,  25,  28  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear 

Num  11.  18  for  ye  have  wept  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord 

14.  2S  as  ye  have  speken  m  mine  ears,  so  will  I 
Deut.  5.    1  judgments  wMch  I  speak  in  your  ears 

15.  17  and  thrust  (it)  through  Ms  ear  unto  the 
29.    4  the  LORD  hath  not  given  you . .  ears  to 

31.  28  I  may  speak  these  words  in  their  ears 

31.  30  spake  in  the  ears  of  all  the  congregation 

32.  44  Moses,  .spake  all  the  w*ords.  .in  the  ears 
Josh.20.  4  declare  Ms  cause  in  the  ears  of  the  elders 
Judg.  7.    3  go  to,  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  the  people 

9.  2  Speak,  I  pray  you,  in  the  ears  of  all  the 
9.    3  brethren  spake  of  him  in  the  ears  of  all 

17.  2  which  thou . .  spakest  of  also  in  mine  ears 

1  Sa.   3.  11  both  the  ears  of  every  one  that  heareth 

8.  21  he  rehearsed  them  in  the  ears  of  the  Lokd 
9. 15  the  Lord  had  told  Samuel  in  his  ear  a  day 
it.    4  told  the  tidings  in  the  ears  of  the  people  * 
15.  14  What  (meanetb)  then  this,  .in  mine  ears 

18.  23  servants  spake  those  words  in  the  ears  of 

2  Sa    3.  19  Abner  also  spake  in  the  ears  of  Penjaniin 

3. 19  Abner  went  also  to  speak  in  the  ears  of  D. 
7.  22  to  all  that  we  have  heard  with  our  ears 

22.  7  hear.,  and  my  cry  (did  enter)  into  his  ears 
2  Ki.18.  26  m  the  ears  of  the  people  that  (are)  on  the 

19. 16  Lord,  bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear 

19.  2S  and  thy  tumult  is  come  up  into  mine  ears 
21. 12  whosoever  heareth  of  it,  both  his  ears 

23.  2  he  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of  the  . 

1  Ch.17.  20  to  all  that  we  have  heard  with  our  ears 

2  Ch.  6.  40  (let)  thine  ears  (be)  attent  unto  the  prayer 

7.  15  and  mine  ears  attent  unto  the  prayer 
34.  30  he  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of  the 

Neh.  1.   6  Let  thine  ear  now  be  attentive,  and  thine 
1. 11  let  now  thine  ear  be  attentive  to  the 

8.  3  ears  of  all  the  people  (were  attentive)  unto 
Job     4.  12  and  mine  ear  received  a  little  thereof 

12.  11  Doth  not  the  ear  try  words?  and  the 

13.  1  mine  ear  hath  heard  and  understood  it 
13.  17  Hear,  .my  declaration  with  your  ears 

15.  21  A  dreadfulsound  (is)  in  his  ears  :  in  pros. 

28.  22  have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with  our  ears 

29.  11  When  the  ear  heard  (me),  then  it  blessed 

33.  16  he  openeth  the  ears  of  men,  and  sealeth 

34.  3  the  ear  trieth  words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth 
36.  10  He  openeth  also  their  ear  to  discipline., 
36.  15  and  openeth  their  ears  in  eppression 

42.   5  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear 
Psa.  10.  17  thou  wilt  cause  thine  ear  to  hear 

17.  6  incline  thine  ear  unto  me,  (and  hear)  my 

18.  6  cry  came  before  Mm,  (even)  into  his  ear1? 
31.   2  Bow  down  thine  ear  to  me  ;  deliver  me 
34. 15  and  his  ears  (are  open)  unto  their  cry 
40.    6  mine  ears  hast  thou  opened :  burnt  offer. 

44.  1  We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  0  God,  our 

45.  10  consider,  mcline  thine  ear ;  forget  also 
49.    4  I  will  incline  mine  ear  to  a  parable :  I  will 
58.    4  like  the  deaf  adder  (that)  stoppeth  her  ear 
71.    2  incline  thine  ear  unto  me,  and  save  me 
78.    1  incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my 

86.   1  Eow  down  thine  ear,  0  LORD,  hear  me 


EAR 


280 


EARTH 


92. 

94. 
102. 
115- 
116. 
130. 

Prov.  2. 
4- 
5- 

5- 

15- 
18. 


22, 

23' 

23- 
25- 
26. 
28. 

Eccl.   1. 

Isa.     5. 

6. 
6. 
ii. 


3°- 
32- 
33- 
35- 
36. 
37- 
37^ 
42. 
43- 
48. 
49. 
5°- 
50. 
55- 

Jer.  2. 
5- 
6. 

7- 
7- 
9- 
11. 

17- 
19. 

25- 

26. 

26. 

28. 

29. 

34- 

35- 

36- 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

36. 

44- 
Lam.  3. 
Eze.    3. 


16. 
23. 
24. 

40. 

44- 
Dan.  9. 
Amos  3. 
Mic.  7. 
Zeeh.  7. 


2  incline  thine  ear  unto  my  cry 

11  mine  ears  shall  hear  (my  desire)  of  the 
9  lie  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  h.  ? 
2  I  am  in  trouble ;  incline  thine  ear  unto 

6  They  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not ;  noses 
2  Because  he  hath  inclined  his  ear  unto 

2  let  thine  ears  be  attentive  to  the  voice  of 
17  They  have  ears,  but  they  hear  uot ;  neit. 

,    2  So  that  thou  incline  thine  ear  unto  wis. 

20  My  son.  .incline  thine  ear  unto  my  sayings 
1  bow  thine  ear  to  my  understanding 

13  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that  inst. 
31  The  ear  that  heareth  the  reproof  of  life 
1 5  and  the  ear  of  the  wise  seeketh  knowledge 

12  The  hearing  ear,  and  the  seeing  eye,  the 

13  Whoso  stoppeth  bis  ears  at  the  cry  of  the 
17  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the  words 

9  Speak  not  in  the  ears  of  a  fool ;  for  he 

12  Apply,  .thine  ears  to  the  words  of  know. 
i2  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obedient  ear 

17  (is  like)  one  that  taketh  a  dog  by  the  ears 
9  turneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the 

8  the  eye  is  not  satisfied,  .nor the  ear  filled 

9  In  mine  ears  (said)  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Of 
10  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes 

10  hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand  with 

3  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his  ears 

14  it  was  revealed  in  mine  ears  by  the  LORD 

21  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee 

3  the  ears  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken 

15  he  that,  .stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing 

5  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped 

11  in  the  ears  of  the  people  that  (are)  on  the 

17  Incline  thine  ear,  0  Lord,  and  hear 
29  thy  tumult,  is  come  up  into  mine  ears 
20  opening  the  ears,  but  he  heareth  not 

8  Bring  forth,  .the  deaf  that  have  ears 
8  that  time  (that)  thine  ear  was  not  opened 

20  children,  .shall  say  again  in  thine  ears 

4  he  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as  the 

5  The  Lord  God  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and 
3  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me  :  hear 

1  neither  his  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot  hear 

2  Go  and  cry  in  the  ears  of  Jerusalem 

21  O  foolish  people,  .which  have  ears,  and 

10  their  ear  (is)  uncircumcised,  and  they 

24  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear 
26  hearkened  not.  .nor  inclined  their  ear 
20  let  your  ear  receive  the  word  of  his 

8  they  obeyed  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear 
23  obeyed  not,  neither  inclined  their  ear 

3  the  which  whosoever  heareth,  his  ears 

4  have  not  hearkened,  nor  inclined  your  e. 

11  as  ye  have  heard  with  your  ears 

15  to  speak  all  these  words  in  your  ears 

7  in  thine  ears,  and  in  the  ears  of  all  the 
29  the  priest  read  this  letter  in  the  ears  of 

14  hearkened  not.  .neither  inclined  their  ear 

15  ye  have  not  inclined  your  ear,  nor  heark. 

6  read,  .in  the  ears  of  the  people,  in  the  L. 

6  thou  shalt  read  them  in  the  ears  of  all 
10  at  the  entry . .  in  the  ears  of  all  the  people 

13  Baruch  read  the  book  in  the  ears  of  the 

14  wherein  thou  hast  read  in  the  ears  of  the 

15  Sit  down  now,  and  read  it  in  our  ears 

15  So  Baruch  read  (it)  in  their  ears 

20  told  all  the  words  in  the  ears  of  the  king 

21  in  the  ears  of  the  king,  and  in  the  ears  of 

5  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear 

56  hide  not  thine  ear  at  my  breathing,  at  my 

10  all  my  words,  .hear  with  thine  ears 

18  they  cry  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud  voice 

1  He  cried  also  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud 

2  they  have  ears  to  hear,  and  hear  not 

12  And  I  put.  .ear  rings  in  thine  ears 

25  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine  ears 

26  to  cause  (thee)  to  hear  (it)  with  (thine)  e? 

4  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears 

5  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears 
18  O  my  God,  incline  thine  ear,  and  hear 

1 2  As  the  shepherd  taketh . .  a  piece  of  an  ear 

16  (their)  hand  upon  (their)  mouth, their  ears 

1 1  they . .  stopped  their  ears,  that  they  should 


2.  Hearing,  o.kot)  akoe. 

Mark  7.  35  And  straightway  his  ears  were  opened 
Acts  17.  20  thou  bringest . .  strange  things  to  our  ears 
2  Ti.   4.    3  heap  to  themselves,  .having  itching  ears 
4.    4  they  shall  turn  away  (their)  ears  from  the 

3. The  ear,  ovs  ous. 

Matt  10.  27  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear,  (that)  preach  ye 

11.  15  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
13.   9  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
13.  15  and  (their)  ears  are  dull  of  hearing 

13. 15  lest,  .they  should,  .hear  with  (their)  ears 

13.  16  But  blessed(are)  your,  .ears,  fortheyhear 
*3-  43  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 

Mark  4.    9  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
4. 23  If  any  man  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
7. 16  If  any  man  have  ears,  .let  him  hear 

7.  33  put  his  fingers  into  his  ears,  and  he  spit 

8.  18  having  ears,  hear  ye  not?  and  do  ye  not 
Luke  1.  44  of  thy  salutation  sounded  in  mine  ears 

4.  21  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears 
;-..     o  lb:  tlint.  hath  i;iis  tu  lir:u\  h>t  him  hear 

9.  44  Let  these  sayings  -ink  down  into  your  e. 

12.  3  that  which  ye  have  spoken  in  the  ear 

14.  35  He  that  hath  cars  to  hear,  let  him  bear 
22.  50  And  one  of  them.. cut  oil  his  right  ear 

Acts    7.  51  Ye.  .uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears 
7.  57  they  cried  out.  .and  stopped  their  ears 


Acts  ] 


Rom  11. 
1  Co.  : 

1 

Jas.     5. 

1  Pe.  3- 

Rev.    2. 

3- 

13- 


Psa. 


22  tidings  of  these  things  came  unto  the  ears 
27  their  cars  are  dull,  .hear  with,  .ears 

8  God  hath  given  them,  .ears  that  they 

0  written,  Eye  hath]not  seen,  nor  ear  heard 
16  if  the  ear  shall  say,  Because  I  am  not  the 

4  cries  of  them,  .are  entered  into  the  ears 
12  his  ears  (are  open)  unto  their  prayers 
7,  11,  17,  29  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
6,  13,  22  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear 

9  If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let  him  bear 

4.  The  ear,  its  external  lobe,  wtlov,  otion. 

Matt26.  51  drew,  .and  struck,  .and  smote  off  his  ear 
Marki4. 47  And  one  of  them,  .cut  off  his  [ear] 
Luke22.  51  And  he  touched  his  ear,  and  healed  Mm 
Johni8.  10  Then  Simon  Peter,  .cut  off  his  right  [ear] 
18.  26  being  (his)  kinsman,  .whose  ear  Peter  cut 

5.  Budding,  sprout,  ear,  3*5N  abib. 

Exod.  9.  31  the  barley  (was)  in  the  ear,  and  the  flax 
6. An  ear  of  grain  or  corn,  o-rdxvs  stachus. 

Mark  4.  23  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  e. 

EAR  of  corn  - 

An  ear  of  grain  or  corn,  o-rdxvs  stachus. 

Matti2.    1  disciples,  .began  to  pluck  the  ears  of  c. 

Mark  2.  23  disciples  began,  .to  pluck  the  ears  of  c. 

Luke  6.    1  his  disciples  plucked  the  ears  of  corn 

EAR,  to  — 

1.  To  plough,  enn  charash. 

1  Sa.   8. 12  he  wiU.  .(set  them)  to  ear  his  ground 

2.  To  serve,  "njJ  dbad. 

Isa.  30.  24  the  young  asses  that  ear  the  ground 

EAR,  to  give  — 

l.To  give  ear,  }]x  azan,  5. 

Exod  15.  26  and' wilt  give  ear  to  his  commandments 
Deut.  1.  45  hearken  to  your  voice,  nor  give  ear  unto] 
32.    1  Give  ear,  O  ye  heavens,  and  I  will  speak 
Judg.  5.    3  give  ear,  O  ye  princes ;  I,  (even)  I,  will 

2  Ch.24.  19  testified,  .they  would  not  give  ear 

Neh.   9.  30  many  years,  .yet  would  they  not  give  ear 
Job  32. 11 1  gave  ear  to  your  reasons,  whilst  yei 

34.    2  give  ear  unto  me,  ye  that  have  knowledge 
5.    1  Give  ear  to  my  words,  O  Lord  ;  consider 
17.    1  give  ear  unto  my  prayer,(that  goeth)  not 
39. 12  Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  give  ear 
49.    1  give  ear,  all  (ye)  inhabitants  of  the  world 

54.  2  O  God ;  give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  mouth 

55.  1  Give  ear  to  my  prayer,  O  God ;  and  hide 

77.  1  I  cried  unto  God.  .and  he  gave  ear  unto 

78.  1  Give  ear,  0  my  people,  (to)  my  law  :  incl. 
80.    1  Give  ear,  O  Shepherd  of  Israel,  thou  that 

8  hear  my  prayer :  give  ear,  O  God  of  Jacob 
6  Give  ear,  0  Lord,  unto  my  prayer ;  and 

1  give  ear  unto  my  voice,  when  I  cry  unto 
1  O  Lord,  give  ear  to  my  supplications 

1  (and)aliargivethearto  a  naughty  tongue 

2  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth 
10  give  ear  unto  the  law  of  our  God,  ye  pe. 

8.   9  and  give  ear,  all  ye  of  far  countries 
28.  23  Give  ye  ear,  and  hear  my  voice ;  hearken 
32.    9  careless  daughters ;  give  ear  unto  my  sp. 
42.  23  Who  among  you  will  give  ear  to  this? 
51.    4  give  ear  unto  me,  O  my  nation :  for  a  law 
Jer.  13.  15  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear;  be  not  proud ;  for 
Hos.    5.    1  and  give  ye  ear,  O  house  of  the  king 
Joel    1.  2  give  ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  laud 

2.  To  hear,  hearten,  yzy  shama. 

Job  29.  21  Unto  me  (men)  gave  ear,  and  waited,  and 

EAR,  to  perceive  by  the  — 
To  give  car,  fix  azan,  5. 

Isa.   64.   4  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear 
EARED,  to  be  — 
To  be  served,  13;;  abad,  2. 

Deut2i.    4  a  rough  valley,  which  is  neither  eared 
EARING  (time)  — 
Ploughing,  cutting,  BHD  charish. 

Gen.  45.   6  (there  shall)  neither  (be)  earing  nor  harv. 

Exod34.  21  in  earing  time  and  in  harvest  thou  shalt 

EARLY  — 

1.  Morning,  1R3  boqer. 

Psa.  46.  s  God  shall  help  her,  (and  that)  right  early 
9o.-i4  satisfy  us  early  with  thy  mercy  ;  that  we 
101.    8  will  early  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the 

2. Dawn,  "i~c'  shachar. 

Psa.  57.   8  Awake  up.  .1  (myself)  will  awake  early 
108.   2  Awake,  psaltery .  .1  (myself)  will  awake  e. 

Z.To  rise  or  go  earl?/,  D2tf  shakam,  5. 

Psa. 127.    2  (It  is)  vain  for  you  to  rise  up  early 
Hos.    6.    4  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away 

13.    3  and  as  the  early  dew  that  passeth  away 

4.  At  early  dawn,  vpQpios  orthrios. 

Luke 24.  22  women,  .which  were  [early]  at  the  sepul. 

5.  Early,  before,  irpeotproi. 

Marki6.    9  fwhen  (Jesus)  was  risen  early  the  first  (d.)l 
John 20.    1  first  day  of  the  week  cometh  Mary.  .ear. 

G.fi'irh/  (rain),  irpdtTftos proimos,  irpoX/nos. 
Jas.     5.    7  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain 

7. Early,  irpu>'ia  proia. 

John  18.  28  it  was  early;  aud  they  themselves  went 
[Sec  also  Arise,  depart,  inquire,  morning,  rise,  rise  up, 

rising,  rising  up,  seek.] 


84. 
86. 
141. 

Prov  17. 
Isa. 


EARLY,  to  be  up  — 

To  rise  or  go  early,  U3$  shakam,  5. 

1  Sa.  29. 10  as  soon  as  ye  be  up  early  in  the  morning 

EARLY,  to  get  (oneself)  — 

To  rise  0?'  go  early,  Drtj>  shakam,  5. 

Judg  19.   9  tomorrow  get  you  early  on  your  way,  that 

EARLY,  to  get  up  — 

To  rise  or  go  early,  uiw  sliakam,  5. 

Gen.  19.  27  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to 
Song  7.  i2  Let  us  get  up  early  to  the  vineyards 

EARLY  in  the  morning,  very  — 
Early,  joshes'  shepharpara. 

Dan.   6.  19  the  king  arose  very  early  in  the  morning 

EARN  wages,  to  — 

To  hire  self  out,  "Ci?  sakar,  7. 

Hag.   1.    6  he  that  earneth  wages,  earneth  wages  (to) 

EARNEST  — 

Surety,  pledge,  earnest,  appaficbv  arrhabon. 

2  Co.   1.  22  the  earnest  of  the  spirit  in  our  hearts 

5.  5  given  unto  us  the  earnest  of  the  spirit 
Eph.    1. 14  Which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance 

EARNESTLY  — 
With  jrrayer,  Trpoaevxy  proseuche. 

Jas.     5.  17  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not  rain 

EARNESTLY,  to  behold  — 

To  look  stedfasthj,  arei/lCco  atenizo. 

Acts  23.    1  And  Paul, earnestly  beholding  the  coun. 

EARNESTLY  on  or  upon,  to  look  — 

To  look  stedfasthj,  aTsvifa  atenizo. 

Luke  22.  56  and  earnestly  looked  upon  him,  and  said 
Acts   3.  12  why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us,  as  though 

EARNESTLY,  more  — 

More  fervently,  stretclied  out,  iicrei/fo-Tepov  ektene. 
Luke22.  44  being  in  an  agony,  he  prayed . .  more  earn. 

EAR  RING  — 

1. Charm,  whisper,  amxdet,  unh  lachash. 

Isa.     3.  20  head  bands,  and  the  tablets,  and  the  ear  r. 
2. Ring  for  ear  or  nose,  DU  nezem. 

Gen.  24.  22  the  man  took  a  golden  ear  ring  of  half 
24.  30  when  he  saw  the  ear  ring,  and  bracelets 
24.  47  and  I  put  the  ear  ring  upon  her  face 
35.    4  And  they  gave  unto  Jacob  all  the.  .ear  r. 
Exod32.    2  Break  off  the  golden  ear  rings  which 
32.   3  all  the  people  brake  off  the  golden  ear  r. 
35.  22  many  as  were  willing . .  brought . .  ear  rings 
Judg.  8.  24  ye  would  give  me  every  man  the  ear  rings 
8. 24  they  had  golden  ear  rings,  because  they 
8.  25  did  cast  therein  every  man  the  ear  rings 

8.  26  the  weight  of  the  golden  ear  rings  that 
Job   42.  11  every  man  also  gave  him.  .an  ear  ring  of 
Prov  25.  12  an  ear  ring  of  gold,  and  an  ornament  of 
Hos.   2.  13  she  decked  herself  with  her  ear  rings  and 

3.  A  ring,  ^JJJ  agil. 

Nuni3i.  50  what  every  man  hath  gotten,  of. .  ear  rings 
Eze.  16.  12  And  I  put.. ear  rings  in  thine  ears,  and 

EARS  — 

l.Ear  of  corn,  sprout,  nrSp  melilah. 

Deut  23.  25  thou  mayest  pluck  the  ears  with  thine 
2.  Ear  of  corn,  branch,  sprout,  rosy  shibboleth. 
Gen.  41.    5  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up  upon  one 
41.    6  seven  thin  ears,  .sprung  up  after  them 
41.    7  seven  thin  ears  devoured  the.  .full  ears 
41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and 
41.  23  seven  ears,  .sprung  up  after  them 
41.  24  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  good  ears 
41.  26  and  the  seven  good  ears  (are)seven  years 
41.  27  the  seven  empty  ears,  blasted  with  the 
Ruth  2.    2  Let  me  now  go.  .and  glean  ears  of  corn 
Job    24.  24  cut  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  corn 
Isa.    17.    5  the  harvest  man.  .reapeth  the  ears  with 
17.    5  as  he  that  gathereth  ears  in  the  valley  of 

EARS  (of  corn),  full  or  gTeen  — 

l.Grain,  (for  garden  load),  7D"i3  karmel. 

Lev.    2. 14  green  ears  of  corn  dried  by  the  fire 
2. 14  (even)  corn  beaten  out  of  full  ears 

2  Ki.  4. 42  full  ears  of  corn  in  the  husk  thereof 
%Budding,  sprout,  ear,  iy2i<  abib. 

Lev.  23. 14  ye  shall  eat  neither  bread.,  nor  green  ears 

EARS,  to  come  to  one's  — 

To  h'-xr  about,  d/couco  twt  akoito  epi. 

Matt  2S.  14  And  if  this  come  [to]  the  governor's  ears 

EARTH  — 

l.Growid,  soil,  land,  hdtx  adamah. 

Gen.    1.  25  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 
4.  11  now  (art)  thou  cursed  from  the  earth 
4.  14  driven  me  out.  .from  the  face  of  the  earth 

6.  1  began  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
6.    7  destroy  man.  .from  the  face  of  the  earth 

6.  20  of  every  creeping  thing  of  the  earth  after 

7.  4  I  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth 
7.    8  of  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  ea. 

9.  2  upon  all  that  moveth  (upon)  the  earth 
12.    3  in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be 
28. 14  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth 


EARTH 


281 


EARTH 


Exodio. 
20. 
.32- 

Kumi2. 
16. 

Deut.  4. 
4* 
6. 


14. 

26. 

1  Sa.    4. 


6  the  day  that  they  were  upon  the  earth 
24  An  altar  of  earth  thou  shalt  make  unto 
12  consume  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth? 
16  from  all  the  people,  .upon,  .the  earth 

3  all  the  men  which  (were)  upon . .  the  earth 
30  But  if.  .the  earth  open  her  mouth,  and 
10  the  days,  .they  shall  live  upon  the  earth 
40  mayest  prolong  (thy)  days  upon  the  earth 
15  destroy  thee  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth 

6  all  people  that  (are)  upon,  .the  earth 

1  all  the  days  that  ye  live  upon  the  earth 
19  as  long  as  thou  livest  upon  the  earth 

2  all  the  nations  that  (are)  upon  the  earth 
2  of  the  first  of  all  the  fruit  of  the  earth 

12  ran  a  man.  .with  earth  upon  his  head 
20.  15  every  one  from  the  face  of  the  earth 
2  Sa.    1.    2  clothes  rent,  and  earth  upon  his  head 

14.  7  name  nor  remainder  upon  the  earth 

15.  32  his  coat  rent,  and  earth  upon  his  head 

1  Ki.  13. 34  destroy  (it)  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth 

17. 14  the  Lord  sendeth  rain  upon  the  earth 
18.    1  Go.  .1  will  send  rain  upon  the  earth 

2  Ki.  5.  17  thy  servant  two  mules'  burden  of  earth  ? 
Neh.  9.  1  with  sackclothes,  and  earth  upon  them 
Psa.  83.  10  they  became  (as)  dung  for  the  earth 

104.  30  thou  renewest  the  face  of  the  earth 
146.   4  His  breath,  .he  returneth  to  his  earth 

Isa.   23. 17  all  the  kingdoms,  .upon,  .the  earth 
24.  21  the  kings  of  the  earth  upon  the  earth 
30.  23  give,  .bread  of  the  increase  of  the  earth 
45.  9  potsherd  .with  the  potsherds  of  theearth 

Jer.  16.   4  they  shall  be  as  dung  upon,  .the  earth 
25. 26  and  all  the  kingdoms,  upon,  .the  earth 

Eze.  38.  20  creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the  earth 
38:20  all  the  men  that  (are)  upon,  .the  earth 

Dan.  i2.    2  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth 

Amos  3.    2  You  only  have  I  known  of  all . .  the  earth 

3.  5  shall  (one)  take  up  a  snare  from  the  earth 
9.8  1  will  destroy  it  from  otf .  .the  earth 

2.  Earth,  land,  ynx  ara. 

Ezra   5.  11  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth 
Jer.    10. 11  they  shall  perish  from  the  earth,  and 
Dan.   2.  35  became  a.  .mountain,  and  filled  the..ea. 
2.  39  which  shall  bear  rule  over  all  the  earth 

4.  1  all  people,  .that  dwell  in  all  the  earth 
4.  10  behold  a  tree  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 
4.  11  sight  thereof  to  the  end  of  all  the  earth 
4.  15  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots  in  the  earth 
4. 15  with  the  beasts  in  the  grass  of  the  earth 
4.  20  and  the  sight  thereof  to  all  the  earth 

4.  22  and  thy  dominion  to  the  end  of  the  earth 
4.  23  leave  the  stump  of  the  roots,  .in  the  ear. 
4.  35  inhabitants  of  the  earth  (are)  reputed  as 
4. 35  and  (among)  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
6.  25  all  people,  .that  dwell  in  all  the  earth 

6.  27  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven  and  in  earth 

7.  4  it  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  and  made 
7.  17  kings,  (which)  shall  arise  out  of  the  earth 
7.  23  shall  be  the  fourth  kingdom  upon  earth 
7.  23  shall  devour  the  whole  earth,  and  shall 

ZJSartk,  land,  Y~$$  erets. 

Gen.    1.    1  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth 
1.    2  And  the  earth  was  without  form  and 
1.  10  And  God  called  the  dry  (land)  Earth 
1.  11  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth 
1.  11  whose  seed  (is)  in  itself,  upon  the  earth 
1.  12  the  earth  brought  forth  grass,  (and)  herb 
1. 15  for  lights,  .to  give  light  upon  the  earth 
1.  17  set  them,  .to  give  light  upon  the  earth 
1.  20  fowl  (that)  may  fly  above  the  earth  in  the 
1.  22  and  let  fowl  multiply  in  the  earth 
1.  24  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  crea. 
1.  24  and  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind 
1.  25  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after 
1.  26  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth 
1.  26  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon . .  earth 

1. 28  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth 

1.  28  living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth 

1. 29  winch  (is)  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth 

1. 30  to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  to  every 
1. 30  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 

2.  1  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  finished 
2.  4  generations  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth 
2.  4  Lord  God  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens 
2.  5  every  plant,  .before  it  was  in  the  earth 
2.  5  had  not  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth 
2.  6  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth,  and 
4.  12  and  a  vagabond  shalt  thou  bein theearth 
4. 14  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth 

6.    4  There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those 
6.    5  wickedness  of  man  (was)  great  in  the  ea. 
6.    6  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth 
6  11  The  earth  also  was  corrupt  before  God 
6.  1 1  and  the  earth  was  filled  with  violence 
6. 12  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold 

6. 12  all  flesh,  .corrupted  his  way  upon  the  ea. 
6.  13  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through 

6. 13  behold,  I  will  destroy  them  with  the  ea. 
6. 17  do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the  earth 

6.  17  every  thing  that  (is)  in  the  earth  shall  die 

7.  3  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth 
7.    4  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth 

7.    6  the  flood  of  waters  was  upon  the  earth 
7. 10  waters  of  the  flood  were  upon  the  earth 
7.  12  the  rain  was  upon  the  earth  forty  days 
7. 14,  21  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 
7. 17  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth 

7. 17  and  it  was  lift  up  above  the  earth 

7. 18  and  were  increased  greatly  upon  the  ea. 
7.  ig  waters  prevailed,  .upon  the  earth 

36 


7.  21  all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth 
7.  23  and  they  were  destroyed  from  the  earth 

7.  24  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  an 

8.  1  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth 
8.    3  returned  from  oft  the  earth  continually 
8.    7  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth 
8.    9  waters  (were)  on  the  face  of  the  whole  e. 
8. 11  the  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  earth 
8.  13  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth 
8.  14  in  the  second  month,  .was  the  earth  dri. 
8. 17  creeping  tiling  that  creepeth  upon  the  e. 
8.  17  they  may  breed  abundantly  in  the  earth 
8.  17  be  fruitful,  and  multiply  upon  the  earth 
8. 19  whatsoever  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  after 

8.  22  While  the  earth  remaineth,  seedtime 

9.  1  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth 
g.    2  shall  be  upon  every  beast  of  the  earth 
9.   7  bring  forth  abundantly  in  the  earth,  and 
9.  10  and  of  every  beast  of  the  earth  with  you; 
9.  10  all  that  go .  .to  every  beast  of  the  earth 
9. 11  any  more  be  a  flood  to  destroy  the  earth 
9. 13  of  a  covenant  between  me  and  the  earth 
9.  14  when  I  bring  a  cloud  over  the  earth 

9. 16  of  all  flesh  that  (is)  upon  the  earth 

9. 17  and  all  flesh  that  (is)  upon  the  earth' 
9. 19  of  them  was  the  whole  earth  overspread 

10.    8  he  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the  earth 
10.  25  for  in  his  days  was  the  earth  divided 

10.  32  were  the  nations  divided  in  the  earth 

11.  1  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language,  and 
11.   4  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  eafth 
11.   8  thence  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth 
11.   9  confound  the  language  of  all  the  earth 
xi.   9  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth 

16  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  earth 
16  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of  the  earth 
19  high  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth 

22  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth 
iS  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  bless. 

25  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 

23  The  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when 
31  and  (there  is)  not  a  man  in  the  earth 

31  to  come . .  after  the  manner  of  all  the  earth 

18  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  bles. 

3  swear  by.  .the  God  of  the  earth,  that 
52  worshipped  the  Lord.  .  to  the  earth 

4  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  bles. 
28  give  thee  of.  .the  fatness  of  the  earth,  and 
39  dwelling  shall  be  the  fatness  of  the  earth 
12  and  behold  a  ladder  set  up  on  the  earth 
14  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth 

10  to  bow  down  ourselves  to  thee  to  the  ea.? 
56  famine  was  over  all  the  face  of  the  earth 

6  Joseph's  brethren,  .bowed  down,  .to  thee. 

26  and  bowed  themselves  to  him  to  the  ear. 

7  to  preserve  you  a  posterity  in  the  earth 
12  he  bowed  himself  with  his  face  to  the  ea, 

,     16  into  a  multitude  in  the  midst  of  the  ear. 
Exod.  9. 14  (there  is)  none  like  me  in  all  the  earth 

9. 15  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  from  the  earth 

9. 16  may  be  declared  throughout  all  the  earth 
9.  29  mayest  know  how  that  the  earth  (is)  the 
g.  33  the  rain  was  not  poured  upon  the  earth 

10.    5  they  shall  cover  the  face  of  the  earth 

10.  5  one  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  earth 

10. 15  they  covered  the  face  of  the  whole  earth 
15.  12  Thou  stretchedst  out.  .earth  swallowed 

19.  5  above  all  people :  for  all  the  earth  (is) 

20.  4  above,  or  that  (is)  in  the  earth  beneath 
20.    4  or  that  (is)  in  the  water  under  the  earth 
20.  11  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth 
34.    8  and  bowed  his  head  toward  the  earth 
34.  10  as  have  not  been  done  in  all  the  earth 

Lev.  11.    2  among  all  the  beasts  that  (are)  on  the  e. 
11. 21  legs,  .to  leap  withal  upon  the  earth 

11.  29,  42  creeping  tilings  that  creep  upon  thee. 
11.  41,  44  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 
11.  46  creature  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 

19  and  1  will  make  your,  .earth  as  brass 
21  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory 

32  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swall. 

33  the  earth  closed  upon  them ;  and  they 

34  for  they  said,  Lest  the  earth  swallow  us 

5  behold,  they  cover  the  face  of  the  earth 

11  which  coveretb  the  face  of  the  earth 
10  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swall. 

24  what  God  (is  there)  in  heaven  or  in  earth 

4. 17  of  any  beast  that  (is)  on  the  earth 
4.  18  that  (is)  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth 
4.  26  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against 
4. 32  that  God  created  man  upon  the  earth 

4.  36  upon  earth  he  shewed  tliee  Ms  great  fire 
4. 39  be  (is)  God.  .upon  the  earth  beneath 

5.  8  above,  or  that  (is)  in  the  earth  beneath 
5.   8  or  that  (is)in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth 

10.  14  the  earth  (also),  with  all  that  therein  (is) 

11.  6  how  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and 
11.  21  as  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth 
12. 16,  24  shall  pour  it  upon  the  earth  as  water 
13.   7  end  of  the  earth . .  (other)  end  of  the  earth 
28.    1  on  high  above  all  nations  of  the  earth 
28. 10  all  people  of  the  earth  shall  see  that 
28.  23  the  earth  that  (is)  under  thee  (shall  be) 
28.  25  removed,  .into  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  e. 
28.  26  shall  be  meat,  .unto  the  beasts  of  the  ea. 
28.  49  bring  a  nation . .  from  the  end  of  the  earth 
28.  64  from  the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto 

30.  19  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  this  day 

31.  28  I  may.  .call  heaven  and  earth  to  record 

32.  1  hear,  0  earth,  the  words  of  my  mouth 
32.  13  ride  on  the  high  places  of  the  earth 
32.  22  shall  consume  the  earth  with  herincrease 


26. 

Num  14 
16 
16. 
16. 


Deut. 


Deut  33. 
Josh.  2 

3- 

4- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
23- 
Judg.  5 
6. 


1  Sa. 


cCh. 


2  Ch. 


Ezra 
Neh. 
Job 


16  for  the  precious  things  of  the  earth  and 

17  push  the  people.. to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
11  he  (is)  God  in  heaven  above,  and  inearth 
ii,  13  the  ark.  .of  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth 
24  That  all  the  people  of  the  earth  might 

6  Joshua,  .fell  to  the  earth  upon  his  face 
9  and  cut  off  our  name  from  the  earth 
21  they  (are)  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of 

14  I  (am)  going  the  way  of  all  the  earth 

4  the  earth  trembled,  and  the  heavens  dr. 

4  and  destroyed  the  increase  of  the  earth 
37  and  (it  be)  dry  upon  all  the  earth  (beside) 

10  the  Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the  ear. 

5  great  shout,  so  that  the  earth  rang  again 

3  Dagon.  .fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  earth 

15  the  earth  quaked :  so  it  was  a  very  great 
46  will  give,  .to  the  wild  beasts  of  the  earth 
46  that  all  the  earth  may  know  that  there 
49  and  he  fell  upon  his  face  to  the  earth 

8  David  stooped  with  his  face  to  the  earth 

41  bowed  herself  on  (her)  face  to  the  earth 

8  with  the  spear  even  to  the  earth  at  once 
20  let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the  earth  before 

13  I  saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth 

20  Saul  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the  ea. 
23  So  he  arose  from  the  earth,  and  sat  upon 

16  spread  abroad  upon  all  the  earth,  eating 
2  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and  did  obeisance 

1 1  shall  I  not . .  take  you  away  from  the  earth 

9  of  the  great  (men)  that  (are)  in  the  earth 
23  what  one  nation  in  the  earth  (is)  like  thy 

16  went  in,  and  lay  all  night  upon  the  earth 

17  to  raise  him  up  from  the  earth  :  but  he 
20  Then  David  arose  from  the  earth,  and 
31  the  king  arose,  .and  lay  on  the  earth 

11  there  shall  not  one  hair,  .fall  to  the  earth 

20  to  know  all  (things)  that  (are)  in  the  earth 
9  taken  up  between  the  heaven  and  the  e. 

28  he  fell  down  to  the  earth  upon  his  face 

5  Then  the  earth  shook  and  trembled  ;  the 
43  beat,  .as  small  as  the  dust  of  the  earth 

4  the  tendergrass(sprin<nug)outof  the  ear. 
31  bowed  with  (her)  face  to  the  earth 

40  the  earth  rent  with  the  souud  of  them 

52  shall  not  an  hair  of  him  fall  to  the  earth 
2  I  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth  :  be  thou 

34  there  came,  .from  all  kings  of  the  earth 

23  in  heaven  above,  or  on  earth  beneath 

27  But  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the  earth  ? 
43  that  all  people  of  the  earth  may  know 

53  from  among  all  the  people  of  the  earth 
60  all  the  people  of  the  earth  may  know  that 

24  all  the  earth  sought  to  Solomon,  to  hear 

42  he  cast  himself  down  upon  the  earth  and 
15  no  God  in  all  the  earth,  but  in  Israel 

10  there  shall  fall  unto  the  earth  nothing  of 
15  God.  .of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 

15  thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth 

19  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may  know 

10  he  began  to  be  mighty  upon  the  earth 

19  because  in  his  days  the  earth  was  divided 

14  his  judgments  (are)  in  all  the  earth 

23  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth  ;  shew 

30  Fear  before  hini,  all  the  earth  :  the  world 

31  heavens  be  glad,  and  let  the  earth  rejoice 
33  because  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth 

8  of  the  great  men  that  (are)  in  the  earth 

21  one  nation  in  the  earth  (is)  like  thy  people 

16  stand  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven 

8  hast  shed  much  blood  upon  the  earth 

11  for  all  (that  is)  in.  .the  earth  (is  thine) 

15  our  days  on  the  earth  (are)  as  a  shadow 

0  like  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  multitude 

12  that  made  heaven  and  earth,  who  hath 

14  (there  is)  no  god  like  thee,  .in  the  earth 

1 5  But  will  God . .  dwell  with  meu  on  the  ear. 
33  all  people  of  the  earth  may  know  thy 

22  passed  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  in  riches 

23  kings  of  the  earth  sought  the  presence  of 

9  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  ear. 

24  they  (were)  dead  bodies  fallen  to  the  earth 
19  against  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the  earth 

23  All  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  hath  the 
2  given  me  ail  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 

6  thou  hast  made  heaven .  .the  earth,  and 

7  From  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and 

8  that  (there  is)  none  like  him  in  the  earth 

2  From  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and 

3  (there  is)  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a 

14  With  kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth 
10  Who  giveth  rain  upon  the  earth,  and 

22  thou  be  afraid  of  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

25  thine  offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  earth 

1  not  an  appointed  time  to  man  upon  earth"? 

9  because  our  days  upon  earth  (are)  a  sha. 
6  Which  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place 

24  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 
9  measure  thereof  (is)  longer  than  the  earth 
8  Or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  teach 

15  sendeth  them, and  they  overturn  the  earth 
24  of  the  chief  of  the  people  of  the  earth 

8  the  root  wax  old  in  the  earth,  and  the 
19  which  grow  (out)  of  the  dust  of  the  earth 
19  Unto  whom  alone  the  earth  was  given 

29  prolong  the  perfection .  .upon  the  earth 

18  0  earth,  cover  not  thou  my  blood,  and  let 

4  shall  the  earth  be  forsaken  for  thee  ?  and 

17  remembrance  shall  perish  from  the  earth 
4  since  man  was  placed  upon  earth 

27  and  the  earth  shall  rise  up  against  him 
8  (as  for)  the  mighty  man,  he  had  the  earth 
4  the  poor  of  the  earth  hide  themselves 


EARTH 


282 


EARTH 


Job  24. 
26. 
28. 
28. 
3°- 

34. 
35' 
37 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 


7- 


33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
41. 
44. 

45- 
46. 
46. 
46- 
46. 
46. 
47- 
47- 
47- 
48. 
48. 
50- 
50. 
57- 
58. 
58. 
59- 
60. 
61. 
63- 
65- 
65- 
66. 
67. 
67. 
67. 
67. 
68. 
68. 
69. 

71 
72. 

72. 
72. 

72. 
72. 
73- 
73. 
74- 
74- 
74- 
75- 
75- 
76. 
76. 
76. 

77- 
78. 

79- 
82. 
82. 

S3- 
85. 

:  , 
89. 
90. 
94. 
95- 

96. 

./.. 
96. 

97- 
97- 
97- 
97- 
98 
98, 
98. 
99 


18  their  portion  is  cursed  in  the  earth  :  he 

7  He  stretcheth  out . .  and  hangeth  the  earth 

5  (As  for)  the  earth,  out  of  it  cometh  bread 
24  For  he  looketh  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 

8  base  men  :  they  were  viler  than  the  ear. 
13  bath  given  him  a  charge  over  the  earth? 

11  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and 

3  He  directeth.  .unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

6  he  saith  to  the  snow,  Be  thou  (on)  the  ear. 

12  upon  the  face  of  the  world  in  the  earth 

17  when  he  quieteth  the  earth  by  the  south 

4  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth? 

13  might  take  hold  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 

18  thou  perceived  the  breadth  of  the  earth? 

24  scattereth  the  east  wind  upon  the  earth? 

26  To  cause  it  to  rain  on  the  earth,  (where) 

33  set  the  dominion  thereof  in  the  earth  ? 

14  Which  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the  earth,  and 

2  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and 
8  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  (for)  thy 

10  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth 

5  tread  down  my  life  upon  the  earth,  and 

1,  9  how  excellent  (is)  thy  name  in  all  the  e. 

18  man  of  the  earth  may  no  more  oppress 

6  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth,  purified 

3  to  the  saints  that  (are)  in  the  earth,  and 

11  set  their  eyes  bowing  down  to  the  earth 

7  Then  the  earth  shook  and  trembled 

4  Their  line  is  gone,  .through  all  the  earth 

10  Their  fruit  shalt  thou  destroy  from.  .ea. 
29  All.  .fat  upon  earth  shall  eat  and  worship 

1  The  earth  (is)  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness 

13  and  his  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth 

5  the  earth  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  L. 

8  Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord  :  let 

14  looketh  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  ear. 
16  the  remembrance  of  them  from  the  earth 

9  those  that  wait,  .shall  inherit  the  earth 

11  But  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth 
22  blessed  of  him  shall  inherit  the  earth 

2  he  shall  be  blessed  upon  the  earth 

25  For. .  our  belly  cleaveth  unto  the  earth 
16  thou  mayestmake  princes  in  all  the  earth 

2  will  not  we  fear,  though  the  earth  be 

6  he  uttered  his  voice,  the  earth  melted 

8  desolations  he  hath  made  in  the  earth 

9  wars  to  cease  unto  the  end  of  the  earth 
10  Be  still.  .1  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth 

2  (lie  is)  a  great  King  over  all  the  earth 

7  For  God  (is)  the  King  of  all  the  earth 

9  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  (belong)  unto 
2  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  (is)  mount  Ziou 

10  thy  praise  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

1  God.  .hath  spoken,  and  called  the  earth 

4  He  shall  call  to.  .the  earth,  that  he  may 
5,  11  (let)  thy  glory  (be)  above  all  the  earth 

2  weigh . .  violence  of . .  hands  in  the  earth 

11  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth 
13  God  ruleth.  .unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

2  Thou  hast  made  the  earth  to  tremble 
2  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto 
9  shall  go  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth 

5  the  confidence  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 
9  Thou  visitest  the  earth,  and  waterest  it 
4  All  the  earth  shall  worship  thee,  and 

2  That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  earth 

4  thou  shalt .  .govern  the  nations  upon  ear. 

6  (Then)  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase 

7  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him 

8  The  earth  shook,  the  heavens  also  dropped 
32  Sing  unto  God.  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth 

34  Let  the  heaven  and  earth  praise  him 
20  up  again  from  the  depths  of  the  earth 

6  come  down.. showers  (that)  water  the  e. 

8  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 
16  shall  be  an  handful  of  corn  in  the  earth 

16  shall  flourish  like  grass  of  the  earth 

19  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  (with)  Ills 

9  their  tongue  walketh  through  the  earth 
25  none  upon  earth.. I  desire  beside  thee 

12  working  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  e. 

17  Thou  hast  set  all  the  borders  of  the  earth 

20  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  are  full  of 

3  The  earth  and  all  the  inhabitants  thereof 
8  all  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall  wring 

8  the  earth  feared,  and  was  still 

9  God  arose,  .to save  all  the  meek  of  the  e. 

12  (he  is)  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth 
iS  thunder  (was)  in  the  heaven,  .the  earth 
69  like  the  earth  which  he  hath  established 

2  of  thy  saints  unto  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

5  ail  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are  out 

8  Arise,  0  God,  judge  the  earth:  for  thou 

18  th  ui .  .(art)  the  Most  High  over  all  the  e. 
11  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth ;  and 
1 1  Tin-  heavens  (are)  thine,  the  earth  also 

27  make  him.  .higher  than  the  kings  of  the  e. 

2  or  ever  thou  hadst  formed  the  earth  and 

7  bill  up  thyself,  thou  judge  of  the  earth 

4  In  his  hand,  .the  deep  places  of  the  earth 
1  sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth 

9  fear  before  him,  all  the  earth 

11  Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  .let  the  earth 

13  he  cometh.  .hecometh  to  judge  the  earth 
1  The  Lord  reigneth;  let  the  earth  rejoice 

4  His  lightnings.,  the  earth  saw,  and  trem. 

5  presence  of  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth 
9  thou,  Lord  (art)  high  above  all  the  earth 

3  all  the  ends  <>t  the  earth  have  seen  the 

4  Make  a  joyful  noise,  .all  the  earth 

9  Lord  ;  for  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth 
1  let  the  people  tremble,  .let  the  earth  be 


rsa.102. 
102. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
104. 
104. 
104. 
104. 
104. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
108. 
109. 
112. 

i'3- 
"S- 
115. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
n9. 
121. 
124. 
134- 
135- 
135- 
T36. 
•  138. 
*39- 
140. 
141. 
146. 
147. 
147. 
148. 
148. 


Song 
Isa. 


15  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  thy  glory 
19  from  heaven  did  the  Lord  behold  the  e. 

25  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth 
11  as  the  heaven  is  high  above  the  earth 

5  (Who)  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
9  that  they  turn  n>>t  again  to  cover  the  e. 

13  the  earth  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy 

14  he  may  bring  forth  food  out  of  the  earth 
24  O  Lord,  .the  earth  is  full  of  thy  riches 
32  He  looketh  on  the  earth,  and  it  trembleth 
35  Let.  .sinners  be  consumed  out  of  the  ear. 

7  his  judgments  (are)  in  all  the  earth 

17  The  earth  opened  and  swallowed  up  D. 

5  Be  thou  exalted,  .above  all  the  earth 

15  cut  off  the  memory  of  them  from  the  e. 
2  His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  earth 

6  things  that  are)  in  heaven  and  in  the  ear. 

15  of  the  Lord,  which  made  heaven  and  ea. 

16  the  earth  hath  he  given  to  the  children 
19  I  (am)  a  stranger  in  the  earth  :  hide  not 
64  The  earth  O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy 
87  They  had  almost  consumed  me  upon  ea. 
90  hast  established  the  earth,  and  it  abide. 
119  puttest  away  all  the  wicked  of  the  eart. 

2  the  Loud,  which  made  heaven  and  earth 

8  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven  and  earth 

3  The  Loud  that  made  heaven  and  earth 

6  (that)  did  he  in  heaven,  and  in  earth,  in 

7  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 

6  him  that  stretched  out  the  earth  above 

4  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  praise  thee 
15  wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth 
11  evil  speaker  be  established  in  the  earth 

7  cutteth  and  cleaveth  (wood)  upon  the  ea. 

6  Which  made  heaven,  and  earth,  the  sea 

8  who  prepareth  rain  for  the  earth,  who 

15  sendeth  forth  his  commandment  (upon)  e. 

7  Praise  the  Lord  from  the  earth,  ye  dra. 
11  Kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  people 

11  princes,  and  all  judges  of  the  earth 

13  his  glory  (is)  above  the  earth  and  heaven 

22  wicked  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  earth 

19  The  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the  e. 

16  nobles,  (even)  all  the  judges  of  the  earth 

23  from  tlie  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth 

26  While  as  yet  he  had  not  made  the  earth 

29  appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
31  Rejoicing  in.. habitable  partof  his  earth 

30  the  wicked  shall  not  inhabit  the  earth 

31  righteous,  .be  recompensed  in  the  earth 

24  eyes  of  a  fool  (are)  in . .  ends  of  the  earth 

3  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for  dep. 

4  established  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ? 

14  to  devour  the  poor  from  off  the  earth 
16  the  earth  (that)  is  not  filled  with  water 
21  For  three  (things)  the  earth  is  disquieted 
24  (things  which  are)  little  upon  the  earth 

4  but  the  earth  ahideth  for  ever 

21  beast  that  goeth  downward  to  the  earth? 
2  for  God  (is)  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon  e. 

9  Moreover  the  profit  of  the  earth  is  for 

20  (there  is)  not  a  just  man  upon  earth 
14  a  vanity  which  is  done  upon  the  earth 
16  the  business  that  is  done  upon  the  earth 

7  princes  walking  as  servants  upon  the  ea. 

2  knowest  not.  .evil  shall  be  upon  the  ear. 

3  they  empty  (themselves)  upon  the  earth 

7  the  dust  return  to  the  earth  as  it  was 

12  The  flowers  appear  on  the  earth  ;  the 

2  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth 
19,  21  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the  earth 

2  the  fruit  of  the  earth  (shall  be)  excellent 

8  placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 
26  hiss  unto  them  from  the  end  of  the  earth 

3  the  whole  earth  (is)  full  of  his  glory 

22  they  shall  look  unto  the  earth  ;  and  lie. 

14  have  I  gathered  all  the  earth  ;  and  then 

4  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth 

4  he  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of 

9  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge 

12  Judah  from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth 

5  tins  (is)  known  in  all  the  earth 

13  the  earth  shall  remove  out  of  her  place 

7  The  whole  earth  is  at  rest,  (and)  is  quiet 
9  (even)  all  the  chief  ones  of  the  earth 

16  the  man  that  made  the  earth  to  tremble 
26  that  is  purposed  upon  the  whole  earth 

3  and  dwellers  on  the  earth,  see  ye,  when 

6  and  to  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

6  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  winter  upon 

8  traffickers  (are)  the  honourable  of  the  ea. 
q  into  contempt,  .the  honourable  of  the  e. 

1  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  empty,  and 

4  The  earth  mourneth  (and)  fadeth  away 

4  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish 

5  The  earth  also  is  defiled  under  the 

6  hath  the  curse  devoured  the  earth 

6  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  burned 

16  From  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth 

17  (are)  upon  thee,  O  inhabitant  of  the  ear. 

18  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth  do 

19  earth  is  utterly  broken  down,  the  earth 

19  the  earth  is  moved  exceedingly 

20  The  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a 

8  shall  he  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth 

9  when  thy  judgments  (are)  in  the  earth 

15  far  (unto)  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 

18  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the  earth 
iq  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead 

21  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
21  the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  blood 

2  shall  cast  down  to  the  earth  with  the  ha. 


-fer. 


Isa.  28.  22  even  determined  upon  the  whole  earth 

33.  9  The  earth  mourneth  (and)  languisheth 

34.  1  let  the  earth  hear,  and  all  that  is  therein 
37.  16  alone,  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
37.  iG  thou  liast  made  heaven  and  earth 

37.  20  that  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may 
40.  12  comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a 
40.  21  understood  from,  .foundations  of  the  ea. 
40.  22  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  the  earth 
40.  23  maketh  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  vanity 

40.  24  stock  shall  not  take  root  in  the  earth 
,10.  28  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 

41.  5  the  ends  of  the  earth  were  afraid,  drew 

41.  9  I  have  taken  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 

42.  4  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth 
42.    5  God.  .he  that  spread  forth  the  earth 

42. 10  Sing,  .his  praise  from  the  end  of  the  earth 
6  my  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 

23  shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth  :  break 

24  that  spreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  niyself 
8  let  the  earth  open,  and  let  them  bring 

12  I  have  made  the  earth,  and  created  man 

18  God  himself  that  formed  the  earth  and 

19  not  spoken,  .in  a  dark  place  of  the  earth 

22  be  the  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 

13  also  hath  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth 

20  utter  it  (even)  to  the  end  of  the  earth 
6  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the  earth 

8  to  establish  the  earth,  to  cause  to  inherit 
13  Sing,  0  heavens  ;    and  he  joyful,  O  earth 

23  they  shall  bow  down,  .toward  the  earth 

0  Lift  up  your  eyes,  .look  upon  the  earth 

6  the  earth  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment 

13  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
16  and  lay  the  foundations  ot  the  earth 
10  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the 

5  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called 

9  waters . .  should  no  more  go  over  the  earth 
9  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth 

10  hut  watereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it 

14  to  ride  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth 

2  darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross 

11  For  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  bud 

7  till  he  made  Jerusa.  a  praise  in  the  earth 

6  will  bring  down  their  strength  to  the  e. 
16  he  who  blesseth  himself  in  the  earth 

16  and  he  that  sweareth  in  the  earth  shall 

17  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth 

1  heaven  (is)  my  throne,  and  the  earth  (is) 

8  Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth 
22  For  as  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth 
19  Hear,  O  earth  :  behold,  I  will  bring  evil 
22  shall  be  raised  from  the  sides  of  the  earth 
33  shall  be  meat.,  for  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

3  not  valiant  for  the  truth  upon  the  earth 

24  judgment,  and  righteousness,  in  the  earth 
10  at  his  wrath  the  earth  shall  tremble 

12  He  hath  made  the  earth  by  his  power 

13  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 

4  for  there  was  no  rain  in  the  earth 

3  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  to  devour  and 

4  removed  into  all  kingdoms  of  the  earth 

10  a  man  of  contention  to  the  whole  earth 

4  shall  be  meat  for  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

19  come  unto  thee  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 
13  depart  from  me  shall  be  written  in  the  e. 

7  to  be  meat  for.. the  beasts  of  the  earth 
29  O  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of 

5  execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth 

24  Do  not  I  till  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the 

9  into  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  for 

29  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 

30  against  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 

31  shall  come  (even,  *o  the  ends  of  the  earth 

32  be  raised  up  from  me  coasts  of  the  earth 

33  end  of  the  earth.. unto.. end  oi  the  earth 

6  a  curse  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
5  I  have  made  the  earth,  the  man.  and  the 

18  removed  to  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 

22  hath  created  a  new  thing  in  the  earth 
37  the  foundations  of  the  earth  searched  out 
17  thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth 

9  honour  before  all  'he  nations  of  the  earth 

25  the  ordinances  of  heaven  and  earth 
1  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  of  his  dom. 

17  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  ea. 

20  for  meat,  .to  the  beasts  of  the  earth 

8  I  will  go  up,  (and)  will  cover  the  earth 

21  The  earth  is  moved  at  the  noise  of  their 

23  How  is  the  han-mer  of  the  whole  earth 
41  be  raised  up  from  the  eeasts  of  the  earth 
46  the  earth  is  moved    and  the  cry  is  heard 

7  a  golden  cup.  .that  made  all  the  earth 

15  He  hath  made  the  earth  by  his  power 

16  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 
25  mountain.,  which  destroy  est  all  the  earth 
41  how  is  the  praise  of  the  whole  earth  sur  ! 
4S  Then  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  all 
40  so.  .shall  fall  the  slain  of  all  the  earth 

i  cast  down  from  heaven  unto  the  earth  the 

11  my  liver  is  poured  upon  the  earth 
15  (Is)  this.. the  joy  of  the  whole  earth? 

34  To  crush.. all  the  prisoners  of  the  earth 

12  The  kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  tl  e 

15  one  wheel  upon  the  earth  by  the  living 
ig  creatures  were  lifted  up  from  the  earth 
2i  when  those  were  lifted  up  from  the  earth 
21  to  the  wicked  oi  the  earth  Cor  a  spoil 

3  the  spirit  lifted  me  up  between  the  earth 
12  say.  .the  LORD  hath  forsaken  the  earth 

9  Tlie  Lord  hath  forsaken  the  earth,  the 

16  their  wings  to  mount  up  from  the  earth 


Lam. 


Eze. 


mi~m* 


EARTH 


283 


EARTHQUAKE 


Eze.  10. 19  cherubims.  .mounted,  up  from  the  earth 

26.  20  shall  set  thee  in  the  low  parts  of  the  earth 

27.  33  tliou  didst  enrich  the  kings  of  the  earth 
's-3.  iS  I  will  bring  thee  to  ashes  upon  the  earth 

31.  14  death,  to  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth 
31. 16  comforted  in  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth 

31.  iS  unto  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth 

32.  4  I  will  fill  the  beasts  of  the  whole  earth 
32. 18  cast,  .unto  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth 
32.  24  gone,  .into  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth 

34.  6  was  scattered  upon  all  the  face  of  the  e. 
34. 27  and  the  earth  shall  yield  her  increase 

35.  14  When  the  whole  earth  rejoieeth,  I  will 
39.  14  that  remain  upon  the  face  of  the  earth 
39. 18  drink  the  blood  of  the  princes  of  the  earth 

Dan.    8.    5  from  the  west  on  the  face  of  the  whole  e. 
Hos.    2.  21  the  heavens,  and  they  shall  hear  the  earth 
2.  22  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the 

2.  23  I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth 

6.    3  the  latter  (and)  former  rain  unto  the  ea. 
Joel    2.  30  wonders  in  the  heavens  and  in  the  earth 

3.  16  the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  shake 
Amos  2.    7  That  pant  after  the  dust  of  the  earth  on 

3.  5  Can  a  bird  fall  in  a  snare  upon  the  earth 

4.  13  treadeth  upon  the  high  places  of  the  ea. 

5.  7  and  leave  off  righteousness  in  the  earth 
5.    8  and  poureth  them  out  upon,  .the  earth 

8.  9  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  day 

9.  6  and  hath  founded  his  troop  in  the  earth 
9.  6  and  poureth  them  out  upon,  .the  earth 
9.    9  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the  ea. 

Jon.    2.    6  the  earth  with  her  bars  (was)  about  me 
Mic.    4.  13  substance  unto  the  Lord  of  the.  .earth 

5.  4  he  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

6.  2  Hear  ye . .  strong  foundations  of  the  earth 

7.  2  The  good,  .is  perished  out  of  the  earth 

7.  17  out  of  their  holes  like  worms  of  the  earth 
Nah.    1.    5  and  the  earth  is  burned  at  his  presence 

2.  13  I  will  cut  off  thy  prey  from  the  earth 
Hab.   2.  14  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  know. 

2.  20  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  him 

3.  3  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  praise 
3.    6  He  stood,  and  measured  the  earth 

3.   9  Thou  didst  cleave  the  earth  with  rivers 
Zeph.  2.    3  Seek  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  meek  of  the  earth 

2.  11  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth 

3.  8  all  the  earth  shall  be  devoured  with  the 

3.  20  a  praise  among  all  people  of  the  earth    - 
Hag.   1.  10  and  the  earth  is  stayed  (from)  her  fruit 

2.    6,  21 1  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth 

Zech.  1.  10  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 

1.  11  have  walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 

1.  11  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at  rest 

4.  10  run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  earth 

4.  14  that  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth 

5.  3  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the.  .earth 
5.    6  their  resemblance  through  all  the  earth 

5.  9  lifted  up  the  ephah  between  the  earth 

6.  5  stauding  before  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth 
6.  7  might  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 
6.    7  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 

6.    7  they  walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 
9. 10  from  the  river,  .to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
12.    1  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth 
12.    3  though  all  the  people  of  the  earth  be 
14.   9  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth 
14.  17  come  up  of  (all)  the  families  of  the  earth 
Mai.    4.    6  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  cursf. 

i.J-J'tfth,  land,  N?riN  arqa. 

Jer.   10. 11  The  gods  that  have  not  made  the.  .earth 

0. Earthen  ware,  &~ir\  cheres. 

Lev.  15.  12  the  vessel  of  earth,  that  he  toucheth 

G.Dry  land,  rv^5;  yabbesheth. 

Dan.    2,  10  There  is  not  a  man  upon  the  earth  that 

7.  Dust,  ~\d%  aphar. 

Gen.  26.  15  Philistines  had  .filled  them  with  earth 
Job     S.  19  and  out  of  the  earth  shall  others  grow 
19.  25  stand  at  the  latter  (day)  upon  the  earth 

28.  2  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  brass 
30.  6  To  dwell . .  (in)  caves  of  the  earth,  and  (in) 
41.  33  Upon  earth  there  is  not  his  like,  who  is 

2.  19  they  shall  go  into,  .caves  of  the  earth 
12.    2  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth 


Isa, 
Dan 

.Earth,  land,  y?j  ge. 
Matt.  5.    5  the  meek:  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earfli 
5.  13  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth :  but  if  the 
5. 18  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or 

5.  35  Nor  by  the  earth ;  for  it  is  his  footstool 

6.  10  thy  will  be  done  in  earth,  as  (it  is)  in  hea. 
6.  19  Lay  not  up.  .treasures  upon  earth,  where 
9.    6  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth 

10.  34  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth 

11.  25  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,because 

12.  40  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth 

12.  42  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth 

13.  5  fell,  .where  they  had  not  much  earth 
13.    5  because  they  had  no  deepness  of  earth 

16.  19  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth 
16. 19  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth 

17.  25  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take 

18.  18  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall 
18.  18  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth  shall 
18. 19  That  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth 

23.  9  call  no  (man)  your  father  upon  the  earth 
23-  35  tlje  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  earth 

24.  30  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mo. 
24.  35  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
25. 18  he.  .went  and  digged  in  the  earth,  and 


Matt  25. 

27- 

28. 

Mark  2. 


4- 
9- 
13- 
13- 
Luke  2. 

5- 
6. 


24 
John  3. 


Rom.  9 
9- 


Eph. 


Jas. 


jPe. 


1  Jo. 
Rev. 


25  I.,  went  and  hid  thy  talent  iu  the  earth 
51  the  earth  did  quake,  aud  the  rocks  rent 

18  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in.  .earth 

10  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to 
5  fell,  .where  it  had  not  much  earth 

5  because  it  had  no  depth  of  earth 
28  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself 
31  when  it  is  sown  in  the  earth,  is  less 
31  than  all  the  seeds  that  be  in  the  earth 

3  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 
27  from  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  to 
31  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away:  but 

14  aud  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward 

24  hath  power  upon  earth  to  forgive  sins 
49  man  that,  .built  an  house  upon  the  earth 

21  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 

2  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in  earth 
31  came  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  e. 
49  I  am  come  to  send  fire  ou  the  earth 

51  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace  on  earth  ? 
56  the  face  of  the  sky  and  of  the  earth 
17  it  is  easier  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass 
8  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ? 

25  upon  the  earth  distress  of  nations,  with 
33  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away :  but 
35  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth 
44  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the  earth 

5  and  bowed  down  (then-)  faces  to  the  earth 
31  he  that  is  of  the  earth  is  earthly 

31  and  speaketh  of  the  earth 

32  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will 

4  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have 
8  and  uuto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth 

19  I  will  show,  .signs  in  the  earth  beneath 

25  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  be  blessed 
24  which  hast  made  heaven  and  earth,  and 

26  The  kiu-rs  of  the  earth  stood  up,  and  the 
49  Heaven(is)my tlirone,and earth,  .myfoot. 

33  for  his  life  is  taken  from  the  earth 

4  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard  a  voice 

8  Saul  arose  from  the  earth  ;  aud  when  his 

11  a  great  sheet,  .let  down  to  the  earth 

12  all  manner  of  four  footed  beasts  of.  .ea. 

6  I.  .saw  four  footed  beasts  of  the  earth 
47  for  salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

15  which  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the 

24  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 
26  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth 

22  Away  with  such  a  (fellow)  from  the  earth 

14  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth,  I 

17  might  be  declared  throughout  all  the  e. 

25  will  the  Lord  make  upon  the  earth 

18  their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth,  and 

5  called  gods,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth 
26,  2S  The  earth  (is)  the  Lord's,  and  the  ful. 
47  The  first  man  (is)  of  the  earth,  earthy 

10  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  on  earth 

15  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is 

9  first  into  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth 

3  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth 

16  that  are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth 

20  whether  (they  be)  things  in  earth,  or 

2  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth 
5  your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth 

10  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth 

7  the  earth  which  drinketh  iu  the  rain 

4  For  if  he  were  on  earth  he  should  not  be 

13  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth 
38  and  (in)  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth 

25  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth 

26  AYhose  voice  then  shook  the  earth  :  but 
26  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also  heaven 

5  Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth 
7  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth 

12  neither  by  heaven,  neither  by  the  earth 

17  it  rained  not  on  the  earth  by  the  space 

18  and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit 

5  the  earth  standing  out  of  the  water  and 

7  the  heavens  and  the  earth  which  are  now 
10  the  earth  also  and  the  works  that  are 

13  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth 

8  there  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  earth 

5  and  the  prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth 

7  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because 
10  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth 

3  nor  in  earth,  neither  under  the  earth 

6  spirits  of  God  sent,  .into  all  the  earth 
10  and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth 

13  on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and 

4  sat  thereon  to  take  peace  from  the  earth 

5  power,  .over  the  fourth  part  of  the  earth 

8  death,  and  with  the  beasts  of  the  earth 
10  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 
13  stars  of  the  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth 
15  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men 

1  standing  on  the  four  corners  of  the  earth 
1  holding  the  four  winds  of  the  earth,  that 

1  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  earth 

2  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea 

3  Hurt,  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor 
5  the  censer,  .and  cast  (it)  into  the  earth 

7  and  they  were  cast  upon  the  earth 

13  woe,  woe  to  the  inhabiter3  of  the  earth 

1  a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto  the  earth 

3  there  came  out.  .locusts  upon  the  earth 

3  as  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have  power 

4  should  not  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth 

2  and  he  set.  .(his)  left  (foot)  on  the  earth 

5  stand  upon  the  sea  and  upon  the  earth 

6  the  earth,  aud  the  things  that  therein  are 

8  standeth  upon  the  sea  and  upon  the  earth 
4  standing  before  the  God  of  the  earth 


Rev.  11.    6  to  smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues,  as 
11.  10  they  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  rejo. 
11.  to  tormented  them  that  dwelt  on  the  earth 

11.  18  destroy  them  which  destroy  the  earth 

12.  4  his  tail,  .did  cast  them  to  the  earth 
12.   9  he  was  cast  out  into  the  earth,  and  his 
12.  12  Woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth  and 
12.  13  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast  unto  the  ea. 

12.  16  the  earth  helped  the  woman,  aud  the  ea. 

13.  8  all  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  wor. 
13.  11  another  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  earth 
13.  12  and  causeth  the  earth  aud  them  which 
13.  13  maketh  lire  come  down,  .on  the  earth 

13.  14  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth. 

14.  3  which  were  redeemed  from  the  earth 
14.    6  preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the  ear. 
14.    7  worship  him  that  made  heaven,  and  earth 
14.  15  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe 

14.  16  on  the  earth;  and  the  earth  was  reaped 
14.  18  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  ea. 
14.  19  angel  thrust  in  his  sickle  into  the  earth 
14.  19  aud  gathered  the  vine  of  the  earth,  and 
16.    1  vials  of  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth 
16.    2  and  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  earth 
16.  14  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and 

16.  18  as  was  not  since  men  were  upon  the  earth 

17.  2  With  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  have 
17.    2  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have 
17.    5  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth 
17.    8  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  won. 

17.  18  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  ear. 

18.  1  and  the  earth  was  lightened  with  his 
18.  3  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  committed 
18.  3  the  merchants  of  the  earth  are  waxed 
18.  9  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  who  have 
18.  n  And  the  merchants  of  the  earth  shall 
18.  23  merchants  were  the  great  men  of  the  ea. 

18.  24  and  of  all  that  were  slain  upon  the  earth 

19.  2  which  did  corrupt  the  earth  with  her 
19. 19  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  ea. 

20.  8  are  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth 

20.    9  they  went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth 

20.  11  from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven 

21.  1  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth 
21.    1  for  the  first  heaven  aud  the  first  earth 
21.  24  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their 

9. Inhabited  earth  or  land,  oiKovf.Uvn  oikoumenH. 
Luke2i.  26  things  which  are  coming  on  the  earth 

EARTH,  in  — 

On  earth,  terrestrial,  eVtyeios  epigeios. 

Phil.   2.  10  of  (things)  in  heaven,  and  (things)  in  earth 
EARTH,  of  — 
Made  of  earthenware,  oarpamvos  ostrakinos. 

2  Ti.    2.  20  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth;  and  some 

EARTH,  under  the  — 

Under  ground,  KaraxOSvtos  katachthonios. 

Phil.   2.  10  in  heaven,  .and  (things)  under  the  earth 
EARTHEN  — 
l.Earihen  ware,  b"vt  cheres. 

Lev.    6.  28  the  earthen  vessel  wherein  it  is  sodden 
««  33  every  earthen  vessel,  whcreinto  (any)  of 
14.    5  the  birds  be  killed  in  an  earthen  vessel 
14.  50  shall  kill  the  one  of  the  birds  in  au  earth. 
Num.  5.  17  shall  take  holywater  in  ah  earthen  vessel 
Jer.  19.    1  Go  and  get  a  potter's  earthen  bottle 

32.  14  put  them  iu  an  earthen  vessel,  that  they 
Lam.  4.    2  how  are  they  esteemed  as  earthen  pitch. 

'1.  Made  of  earthen  ware,  otrrpaKtvos  ostrakinos. 

2  Co.  4.   7  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels 
3.  To  form,  fashion.,  frame,  is;  yatsar. 

2  Sa.  17.  28  Brought  beds,  and  basons,  and  earthen 
EARTHLY  — 
l.Out  of  the  earth,  4k  ttjs  yrjs  ek  tes  ges. 

John  3.  31  he  that  is  of  the  earth  is  earthly,  and 
2.  Upon  earth,  eirlyttos  epigeios. 

2  Co.   5.    1  For  we  know  that  of  our  earthly  house 

Jas.     3. 15  descendeth  not  from  above,  but  (is)  ear. 
EARTHLY  things  — 
Upon  earth,  i-rriy^tos  epigeios. 

John  3.  12  If  I  have  told  you  earthly  things,  and  ye 

Phil.    3.  19  in  their  shame,  who  mind  earthly  things 

EARTHaTTAKE  — 

I. Shaking,  trembling,  vm  raash. 

1  Ki.19.  11  and  after  the  wind  an  earthquake 

19.  11  the  Lord  (was)  not  in  the  earthquake 
19.  12  And  after  the  earthquake  a  fire 
Isa.   29   6.  with  earthquake,  and  great  noise,  with 
Amos  1.    1  hesaw.  .two  years  before  the  earthquake 
Zech.14.    5  as  ye  fled  from  before  the  earthquake  in 
2.  A  shaking,  o-Gt<ru6s  seismos. 

Matt 24.    7  there  shall  be  famines,  .and  earthquakes 
27.  54  when  the  centurion .  .saw  the  earthquake 
2S.    2  behold,  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
Marki3.    8  there  shall  be  earthqy  kes  in  divers  pla. 
Lukeai.  11  great  earthquakes  si:  .1  be  in  divers 
Acts  16.  26  suddenly  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
Rev.   6.  12  aud,  lo,  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
8.    5  voices,  .and  lightnings,  and  an  earthqu. 
11.  13  the  same  hour  was  there  a  great  earthqu. 
11.  13  and  in  the  earthquake  were  slain  of  men 
11.  ig  voices,  and  thuuderings,  and  an  earthqu. 
16.  18  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  such  as 
16. 18  so  might  an  earthquake  (and)  so  great 


EARTHY 


284 


EAT 


EARTHY  — 

Made  of  earth  or  clay,  xoiretfo  choikos. 

i  Co.  15.  47  The  first  man  (is)  of  the  earth,  earthy 
15.  48  theearthy,  such  (are)  they  also  that  aree. 

15.  49  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy 
EASE  — 

Place  of  rest,  ease,  nnup  menuchah. 

Judg2o.  43  trode  them  down  with  ease  over  against 
EASE,  to  — 
l.To  lift  up,  K'yi  nasa. 

Job     7.  13  bed' shall  comfort  me,  my  couch  shall  ease 

2.7*0  make  light,  V?p  qalal,  5. 

2  Ch.  10.    4  ease  thou  somewhat  the  grievous  servi. 
10.    9  Ease  somewhat  the  yoke  that  thy  father 

EASE,  at  — 
l.Oood,  3ita  tob. 

Psa.  25. 13  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease ;  and  his  seed 
2. Rest,  quiet,  safe,  secure,  iby,  vhf  shalev. 

Job  16.  12  I  was  at  ease,  but  he  hath  broken  me 
EASE,  to  be  at  — 
To  be  quiet,  at  ease,  secure,  jJ>'^  shaan,  Za. 

Jer.  46.  27  be  in  rest  and  at  ease,  and  none  shall 
48.  11  Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth 

EASE,  being  at  — 

l.Safe,  at  ease,  i7a>  shalev. 

Eze.  23.  42  voice  of  a  multitude  being  at  ease  (was) 

2.  Quick,  at  ease,  secure,  ]\xhw  shalanan. 

Job  2i.  23  in  his  full  strength,  being  wholly  at  ease 
EASE,  to  find  — 
To  cause,  give,  or  let  rest,  VVT  raga,  5. 

Dent 28.  65  among  these  nations,  .thou  find  no  ease 
EASE,  to  take  — 
To  cause  to  cease,  avairavoD  anapauo. 

Lukei2.  19  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  (and)  be  merry 
EASE  (one's  self),  to  — 
To  be  comforted,  get  breath  again,  um  nacham,  2. 

Isa.     t.  24  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries,  and 
EASE  self,  to  — 
To  sit  down,  3g^  yashab. 

Deut  23.  13  when  thou  wilt  ease  thyself  abroad,  thou 
EASE,  (that  is)  at  — 
Ease,  quiet,  at  rest,  ]}$&  shaanan. 

Job    12.   5  in  the  thought  of  him  that  is  at  ease 

Psa.123.    4  the  scorning  of  those  that  are  at  ease 

Isa.   32.   9  Rise  up,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease ;  hear 
32.  11  Tremble,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease 

Amos  6.    1  Woe  to  them  (that  are)  at  ease  in  Zion 

Zech.  1,  15  displeased  with,  .heathen  (that  are)  at  e. 

EASED,  to  be  — 

l.To  go,  go  on.,  -jbri  halak. 

•     Job   16.    6  and  ("though)  I  forbear,  what  am  I  eased? 

2.A  sending  back,  release,  fo/etrts  anesis. 

2  Co.  8.  13  that  other  men  be  eased,  and  ye  burdened 
EASIER  — 
Less  wearisome  or  laborious,  evKowdoTspos  eukopo. 

Matt.  9.    5  For  whether  is  easier  to  say,  (Thy)  sins  be 
19.  24  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through 

Mark  2.    9  Whether  is  it  easier  to  say  to  the  sick 
10.  25  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through 

Luke  5.  23  Whether  is  easier,  to  say,  Thy  sins  be 

16.  17  it  is  easier  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass 
18. 25  it  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  a 

EASIER,  to  be  — 

To  make  light,  rpp  qalal,  5. 

ExodiS.  22  so  shall  it  be  easier  for  thyself,  and  they 
EAST  — 
1. Pottery,  rrpin,  rrtDin  charsith,  cliarsuth. 

Jer.  19.    2  which  (is)  by  the  entry  of  the  east  gate 
^.Outgoing  (of  the  sun),  n^'id  motsa. 

Psa.  75.    6  promotion  (cometh)  neither  from  the  east 

3.  Rising  (of  the  sun),  n"j]p  mizrach. 

Josh.  4.  19  in  Gilgal ;  in  the  east  border  of  Jericho 
n.    3  the  Canaanite  on  the  east  and  on  the  w. 
12.    1  Hermon,  and  all  the  plain  on  the  east 
12.   3  to  the  sea  of  Chinneroth  on  the  east 
12.   3  (even)  the  salt  sea  on  the  east,  the  way 
16.    1  unto  the  water  of  Jericho  on  the  east,  to 
16.    5  of  their  inheritance  on  the  east  side 
16.   6  and  passed  by  it  on  the  east  to  Janohah 
17. 10  on  the  north,  aud  in  Issachar  on  the  east 
18.    7  inheritance  beyond  Jordan  on  the  east 
19. 13  on  along  on  the  east  to  Gittah-hepher 

1  Ki.  7.  25  and  three  looking  toward  the  east 

1  Ch.  5.  10  throughout  all  the  east  (land)  of  Gilead 

9.  24  toward  the  east,  west,  north,  and  south 
12.  15  toward  the  east,  and  toward  the  west 

2  Ch.  4.    4  and  three  looking  toward  the  east 

5.  12  stood  at  the  east  end  of  the  altar,  and 
29.   4  gathered  them  together  into  the  east 
31.  14  porter  toward  the  east,  (was)  over  the 
Neh.  3. 26  against  the  water  gate  toward  the  east 

3.  29  of  Shechaniah,  the  keeper  of  the  east  gate 
Psa.  103.  12  As  far  as  the  cast  is  from  the  west,  (so)  far 

107.    3  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  from 
Isa.   41.    2  raised  up  the  righteous  (man)  from  the  e. 
43.    5  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east,  and 
46.  11  Calling  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  east 


Jer.  31.  40  corner  of  the  horse  gate  toward  the  east 
Dan.   8.    9  toward  the  east,  and  toward  the  pleasant 

11.  44  But  tidings  out  of  the  east  and  out  of  the 
Amos  8.  12  from  the  north  even  to  the  east,  they  shall 
Zech.  8.    7  will  save  my  people  from  the  east  country 

14.   4  in  the  midst  thereof  toward  the  east 

±.East,  what  is  before,  DHp  qadim. 

Exodio.  13  brought  an  east  wind,  .the  east  wind 

14.  21  caused  the  sea  to  go  (back)  by  a  strong  e. 
Psa.  48.    7  Thou  breakest  the  ships,  .with  an  east 
Jer.  18.  17  I  will  scatter  them  as  with  an  east  wind 
Eze.  17.  10  wither,  when  the  east  wind  toucheth  it? 
19.  12  the  east  wind  dried  up  her  fruit;  her 
27.  26  east  wind  hath  broken  thee  in  the  midst 
40.   6  the  gate  which  looketh  toward  the  east 
40.  22  of  the  gate  that  looketh  toward  the  -east 
40.  23  over  against  the  gate,  .toward  the  east 
40.  32  into  the  inner  court  toward  the  east :  and 
40.  44  one  at  the  side  of  the  east  gate  (having) 
41. 14  and  of  the  separate  place  toward  the  east 
42.  10  of  the  wall  of  the  court  toward  the  east 
42. 12  directly  before  the  wall  toward  the  east 
42.  15  the  gate  whose  prospect  (is)  toward  the  e. 

42.  16  He  measured  the  east  side  with  the  me. 

43.  1  (even)  the  gate  that  looketh  toward  the  e. 
43.  2  the  glory,  .came  from  the  way  of  the  east 
43.    4  the  gate  whose  prospect  (is)  toward  the  e. 

43.  17  and  his  stairs  shall  look  toward  the  east 

44.  1  sanctuary  which  looketh  toward  the  east 

45.  7  from  the  west  border  unto  the  east  bor. 

46.  1  inner  court  that  looketh  toward  the  east 

46.  12  the  gate  that  looketh  toward  the  east 

47.  1  front  of  the  house  (stood  toward)  the  east 
47.  18  the  east  side  ye  shall  measure  from  Hau. 

47.  18  from  the  border.  .And  (this  is)  the  east 

48.  1  for  these  are  his  sides  east  (and)  west 
48.  2,  4,  5,  7,  8,  8,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27  from  the  east 
48.  3,  6  from  the  east  side  even  unto  the  west 
48. 10  toward  the  east  ten  thousand  in  breadth 
48. 16,  32  on  the  east  side  four  thousand  and  five 
48.  17  toward  the  east  two  hundred  and  fifty 
48.  21  of  the  oblation  toward  the  east  border 

Hos.  13. 15  an  east  wind  shall  come,  the  wind  of  the 
Jon.     4.    8  that  God  prepared  a  vehement  east  wind 

5. East,  Dip  qedem. 

Gen.   3.  24  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  E. 

10.  30  goest  unto  Sephar  a  mount  of  the  east 

11.  2  as  they  journeyed  from  the  east,  that 

12.  8  from  thence  unto  a  mountain  on  the  east 

12.  8  Beth-el  on  the  west ;  and  Hai  on  the  east 

13.  11  Lot  journeyed  east:  and  they  separated 
25.  6  and  sent  them  away . .  unto  the  east  coun. 
29.    1  into  the  land  of  the  people  of  the  east 

Num.23.  7  out  of  the  mountains  of  the  east,  (saying) 
Judg.  6.    3  the  children  of  the  east,  even  they  came 

6.  33  children  of  the  east  were  gathered  togeth. 

7.  12  all  the  children  of  the  east  lay  along  in 

8.  10  all  the  hosts  of  the  children  of  the  east 
8. 11  them  that  dwelt  in  tents  on  the  east  of 

1  Ki.  4.  30  the  wisdom  of  all  the  children  of  the  east 
Job  1.  3  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the  ea. 
Isa.     2.    6  because  they  be  replenished  from  the  ea. 

11.  14  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the  east  togeth, 
Jer.  49.  28  Arise  ye,  go.  .and  spoil  the  men  of  the  e. 
Eze.  25.   4  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the  men  of  the  east 

25. 10  Unto  the  men  of  the  east  with  the  Amm. 
Zech  14.    4  which  (is)  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east 

6. East,  DHp  qedem. 

Gen.  28.  14  and  thou  shalt  spread  abroad . .  to  the  east 

Esod27. 13  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  east  side 
38.  13  And  for  the  east  side  eastward  fifty  cubi. 

Num.  3.  38  encamp  before  the  tabernacleto  ward  the  e. 
34. 10  ye  shall  point  out  your  east  border  from 
35.    5  from  without  the  city  on  the  east  side  two 

Josh.  15.    5  the  east  border  (was)  the  salt  sea,  (even) 

18.  20  Jordan  was  the  border  of  it  on  the  east 

19.  13  from  thence  passeth  on  along  on  the  east 
Eze.     8.  16  the  temple,  .and  their  faces  toward  the  e. 

8.  16  they  worshipped  the  sun  toward  the  east 
45.    7  from  the  west,  .and  from  the  east  side 

7. East,  eastward,  n?ip  qidmah. 

Gen.    2. 14  that  (is)  it  which  goeth  toward  the  east  of 

4.  16  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Nod,  on  the  east  of  E. 

Eze.  39.  11  valley  of  the  passengers  on  the  east  of  the 

8. East,  eastern,  |iD"ij3  qadmon. 

Eze..  47.   8  waters  issue  out  toward  the  east  country 
9.  East,  eastern,  'tf Dip  qadmoni. 

Eze.  10.  19  stood  at  the  door  of  the  east  gate  of  the 
11.    1  brought  me  unto  the  east  gate  of  the  L. 
47. 18  from  the  border  unto  the  east  sea 
Joel    2.  20  with  his  face  toward  the  east  sea,  and 

10. East,  uprising  {of  the  sun),  avaro\^  anatole. 
Matt  2.    1  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  Jerus. 
2.    2  we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and 
2.    9  the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the  east,  went 
8.  11  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west 
24.  27  as  the  lightening  cometh  out  of  the  east 
Lukei3.  29  they  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  (from) 
Rev.    7.    2  Tsaw  another  angel  ascending  from  the  e. 
16.  12  the  way  of  the  kings  of  the  east  might 
si.  13  On  the  east,  three  gates;  on  the  north 
EAST  end  or  part  — 
The  east,  D"ip  qedem. 

Lev.    1. 16  cast  it  beside  the  altar  on  the  east  part 
Numio.    5  camps  that  lie  on  the  east  parts  shall 

2  Ch.  4.  10  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  east  end 


EAST  side  — 

1. Rising  (of  the  sun),  (ti'^ts^Tnip  mizrach-{shemesh.) 
Judgn.  18  came  by  the  east  side  of  the  land  of  Moab 
21.  19  on  the  east  side  of  the  highway  that  goeth 
1  Ch.  4.  39  unto  the  east  side  of  the  valley,  to  seek 
6.  78  by  Jericho,  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan 
2. East,  ivhat  is  before,  DHp  qadim. 

Eze.  42.    9  the  entry  on  the  east  side,  as  one  goeth 

3.  East,  Dip,  qedem. 

Num  34.  11  Shepham  to  Riblah,  on  the  east  side  of 
Josh.  7.    2  Beth-aven,  on  the  east  side  of  Beth-el 
Eze.  11.  23  which  (is)  on  the  east  side  of  the  city 
Jon.    4.    5  and  sat  on  the  east  side  of  the  city 

4.  East,  Dip  qedem. 

Num.  2.    3  on  the  east  side  toward  the  rising  of 
EAST  -wind  — 
East  (wind),  DHp  qadim. 


Gen. 


Job 


Psa. 
Isa. 


41. 
41. 
41. 

15- 
27. 
38. 
78. 
27. 


6  thin  ears  and  blasted  with  the  east  wind 
3  thin,  (and)  blasted  with  the  east  wind 
27  empty  ears,  blasted  with  the  east  wind 

2  and  fill  his  belly  with  the  east  wind  ? 
21  The  east  wind  carrieth  him  away,  and  he 
»4  scattereth  the  east  wind  upon  the  earth  ? 
:6  caused  an  east  wind  to_blow  in  the  heaven 
8  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind 
Hos.  12.    1  Ephraim .  .followeth  after  the  east  wind 
Hab.  1.    9  their  faces  shall  sup  up  (as)  the  east  wind 
EASTER  — 

Passover  (from  ffeb.  nps  a  passing  over)',  irdaxa. 
Acts  12.    4  intending  after  Easter  to  bring  him  forth 
EASTWARD  — 
l.Rising  (of  the  sun),  mro  mizrach. 

Exod27. 13  the  court  on  the  east  side  eastward 

38. 13  for  the  east  side  eastward  fifty  cubits 
Num.  3.  38  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  eastward 
32.  19  fallen  to  us  on  this  side  Jordan  eastward 
Deut.  3.  17  the  salt  sea,  under  Ashdoth-pisgah  eastw. 

3.  27  northward,  and  southward,  and  eastward 

4.  49  the  plain  on  this  side  Jordan  eastward 
Josh. 11.    8  and  unto  the  valley  of  Mizpeh  eastward 

13.    8  Moses  gave  them,  beyond  Jordan  eastw. 

13.  27  on  the  other  side  Jordan  eastward 

13.  32  the  other  side  Jordan,  by  Jericho,  eastw. 

16.  6  went  about  eastward  unto  Taanath-shiloh 
20.    8  the  other  side  Jordan  by  Jericho  eastw. 

2  Ki.  10.  33  From  Jordan  eastward,  all  the  land  of 
1  Ch.   5.    9  eastward  he  inhabited  unto  the  entering 
7.  28  eastward  Naaran,  and  westward  Gezer 
9.  18  hitherto  (waited)  in  the  king's  gate  eastw. 
26.  14  And  the  lot  eastward  fell  to  Shelemiah 
26.  17  Eastward  (were)  six  Levites,  northward 
Neh.  12.  37  even  unto  the  water  gate  eastward 
2.  East,  eastward,  DHg  qadim. 

Eze.  11.    1  the  east  gate,  .which  looketh  eastward 
40.  19  an  hundred  cubits  eastward  and  north. 
45.    7  westward,  and  from  the  east  side  eastw. 
47.    1  under  the  threshold  of  the  house  eastw. 
47.    2  gate  by  the  way  that  looketh  eastward 

47.  3  the  line  in  his  hand  weut  forth  eastward 

48.  18  (portion  shall  be)  ten  thousand  eastward 
3. East,  eastward,  nip  qedem. 

Gen.   2.    8  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden 
4.  East,  eastward,  Dip  qedem. 

Gen.  13. 14  art  northward,  and  southward,  and  eastw. 
25.    6  sent  them  away  from  Isaac,  .eastward 

Lev.  16.  14  his  finger  upon  the  mercy  seat  eastward 

Num  34.  3  outmost  coast  of  the  salt  sea  eastward 
34.  11  side  of  the  sea  of  Chinnereth  eastward 
34.  15  on  this  side  Jordan  (near)  Jericho  eastw. 

Josh.  19.  12  turned  from  Sarid  eastward  toward  the 

1  Ki.  7.  39  on  the  right  side  of  the  house  eastward 

17.  3  Get  thee  hence,  and  turn  thee  eastward 

2  Ki.  13. 17  he  said,  Open  the  window  eastward  :  and 

5. The  east,  no~\p  qidmah. 

1  Sa.  13.   5  in  Michmash,  eastward  from  Beth-aven 
EASY  — 
Useful,  good,  hind,  xpvo'^os  chrestos. 

Matt  1 1.  30  my  yoke  (is)  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light 
EASY,  to  be  — 
To  be  light,  *?^p  qalal,  2. 

Prov.  14.    6  knowledge  (is)  easy  unto  him  that  under 
EAT,  to  — 
l.To  eat,  hix  akal. 


Gen. 


_6  Of  every  tree,  .thou  may  est  freely  eat 
17  But  of  the  tree,  .thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it 
17  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou 

1  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden  ? 

2  We  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of 

3  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye 

5  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat 

6  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat 
6  gave,  .unto  her  husband,  .and  he  did  eat 

11  Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree,  whereof 

1 1  commanded . .  that  thou  shouldest  not  e.  ? 

12  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat 

13  The  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat 

14  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy 
17  Because  thou  hast,  .eaten  of  the  tree,  of 
17  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it ;  cursed  (is)  the 
17  shalt  thou  eat  (of)  it  all  the  days  of  thy 
iS  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  herb  of  the  field 
19  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat 
22  take  also,  .and  eat,  and  live  for  ever 

4  flesh  with  the  life,  .shall  ye  not  eat 


EAT 


2S5 


EAT 


Gen.  14.  24  only  that  which  the  young  men  have  ea. 

18.  8  stood,  .under  the  tree,  and  they  did  eat 

19.  3  bake  unleavened  bread,  and  they  did  eat 
24.  33  And  there  was  set  (meat)  before  him  to  eat 
24.  33  I  will  not  eat,  until  I  have  told  mine 

24.  54  they  did  eat  and  drink,  he  and  the  men 

25.  34  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up,  and 

26.  30  he  made  them  a  feast,  and  they  did  eat 

27.  4  and  bring  ut)  to  me,  that  I  may  eat 
27.    7  make  me  savoury  meat,  that  I  may  eat 
27.  10  bring  (it)  to  thy  father,  that  he  may  eat 
27.  19  arise,  I  pray  thee,  sit  and  eat  of  my  veni. 
27. 25  Bring  (it)  near  to  me,  and  I  will  eat  of 
27.  25  he  brought  (it)  near  to  him,  and  he  did  e. 
27.  31  Let  my  father  arise,  and  eat  of  his  son's 

27.  33  I  have  eaten  of  all  before  thou  earnest 

28.  20  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raim. 
31.  38  the  rams  of  thy  flock  have  I  not  eaten 
31.  46  and  they  did  eat  there  upon  the  heap 
31. 54  Jacob,  .called  his  brethren  to  eat  bread 

31.  54  they  did  eat  bread,  and  tarried  all  night 

32.  32  the  children  of  Israel  eat  not  (of)  the 
37.  25  And  they  sat  down  to  eat  bread  ;  and 

39.  6  ought,  .save  the  bread  which  he  did  eat 

40.  17  the  birds  did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket 
40.  19  the  birds  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  thee 
43.  2  when  they  had  eaten  up  the  corn  which 
43.  25  they  heard  that  they  should  eat  bread 
43.  32  for  the  Eg),ptians  which  did  eat  with 
43.  32  because  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  br. 
45. 18  and  ye  shall  eat  the  fat  of  the  land 

47. 22  for  the  priests,  .did  eat  their  portion 
Exod.2.  20  he  said,  .call  him,  that  he  may  eat  bread 
10.    5  they  shall  eat.  .and  shall  eat  every  tree 
10.  12  and  eat  every  herb  of  the  land,  (even)  all 
10. 15  and  they  did  eat  every  herb  of  the  land 
12.    4  every  man  according  to  his  eating  shall 
12.    7  the  houses,  wherein  they  shall  eat  it 
12.   8  they  shall  eat  the  flesh  in  that  night 
12.   S  (and)  with  bitter  (herbs)  they  shall  eat 
12.    9  Eat  not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at  all  with 
12.  11  thus  shall  ye  eat  it ;  (with)  your  loins 
12. 11  eat  it  in  haste  :  it  (is)  the  Lord's  passov. 
12. 15  Seven  days  shall  ye  eat  unleavened  bread 
12.  15  whosoever  eateth  leavened  bread  from 
12.  18  ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread,  until  the 
12.  19  whosoever  eateth  that  which  is  leavened 
12.  20  Ye  shall  eat  nothing  leavened 
12. 20  in  all  your  habitations  shall  ye  eat  unle. 
12.  43  There  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof 
12.  44  hast  circumcised  him,  then  shall  he  eat 
12.  45  an  hired  servant  shall  not  eat  thereof 

12.  48  no  uncircumcised  person  shall  eat  thereof 

13.  6  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  b. 
16.  3  when  we  did  eat  bread  to  the  full !  for  ye 
16.  8  shall  give  you  in  the  evening  flesh  to  eat 
16.  12  At  even  ye  shall  eat  flesh,  and  in  the  mo. 
16.  25  Eat  that  to  day  ;  for  to  day  (is)  a  sabbath 
16.  35  the  children  of  Israel  did  eat  manna  forty 
16.  35  they  did  eat  manna,  until  they  came  unto 
18.  12  Aaron  came,  .to  eat  bread  with  Moses' 

22.  31  neither  shall  ye  eat  (any)  flesh  (that  is) 
23. 11  that  the  poor  of  thy  people  may  eat 

23.  11  and  what  they  leave  the  beasts . .  shall  e. 
23. 15  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread  seven  d. 

24.  11  also  they  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  dri. 

29.  32  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  eat  the  flesh  of 
29.  33  they  shall  eat  those  things  wherewith 
29.  33  a  stranger  shall  not  eat . .  because 

32.   6  the  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  driuk 
34.  15  call  thee,  and  thou  eat  of  his  sacrifice 
34.  18  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened 
34.  28  he  did  neither  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water 
Lev.    3.  17  statute,  .that  ye  eat  neither  fat  nor  blood 
6.  16  remainder,  .shall  Aaron  and  his  sons  eat 
6. 16  in  the.  .congregation  they  shall  eat  it 
6. 18  males  among  the  children.,  shall  eat  of  it 
6.  26 The  priest  that  offereth  it.  .shall  eat  it 

6.  29  All  the  males  among  the  priests  shall  e. 

7.  6  Every  male  among  the  priests  shall  eat 
7.  18  the  soul  that  eateth  of  it  shall  bear  his 
7.  19  as  for  the  flesh,  all  that  be  clean  shall  e. 
7.  20  the  soul  that  eateth  (of)  the  flesh  of  the 
7.  21  eat  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace 
7.  23  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat,  of  ox,  or 
7.  24  be  used,  .but  ye  shall  in  no  wise  eat  of  it 
7. 25  Eor  whosoever  eateth  the  fat  of  the  beast 
7.  25  the  soul  that  eateth  (it)  shall  be  cut  off 
7.  26  Moreover  ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  blood 

7.  27  Whatsoever  soul  (it  be)  that  eateth  any 

8.  31  there  eat  it  with  the  bread  that  (is)  hi 
8.  31  saying,  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  eat  it 

10.  12  and  eat  it  without  leaven  beside  the 
10. 13  And  ye  shall  eat  it  in  the  holy  place 
10.  14  wave  breast . .  shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place 
10.  17  Wherefore  have  ye  not  eaten  the  sin  off. 
10.  18  ye  should  indeed  have  eaten  it  in  the  holy 

10.  19  (if)  I  had  eaten  the  sin  offering  to  day 

11.  2  These  (are)  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat 
11.    3  Whatsoever  parteth  the  hoof .  .shall  ye  eat 
11.    4  Nevertheless  these  shall  ye  not  eat  of  them 
11.    8  Of  their  flesh  shall  5'e  not  eat,  and  their 
11.   9  These  shall  ye  eat  of  all  that  (are)  in  the 
11.    9  whatsoever  hath  fins,  .them  shall  ye  eat 
n.  11  ye  shall  not  eat  of  their  flesh,  but  ye  shall 
11.  21  Yet  these  may  ye  eat  of  every  flying  cree. 
11. 22  these  of  them  ye  may  eat ;  the  locust 
11. 40  he  that  eateth  of  the  carcase  of  it  shall 
11.  42  them  ye  shall  not  eat ;  for  they  (are)  an 
14. 47  he  that  eateth  in  the  house  shall  wash  his 
17. 10  that  eateth  any  manner  of  blood 

17. 10  set  my  face  against  that  soul  that  eateth 


Lev.  17 

17 
17 
17 

17' 

19 
19, 
19. 

21, 

22. 


23. 

23- 

24. 

25. 

25 

25- 

25- 
25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
Num.  6. 
6. 

9- 
11. 
11. 


Deut.  2 


12  I  said.  .No  soul  of  you  shall  eat  blood 
12  neither  shall  any  stranger,  .eat  blood 
14  Ye  shall  eat  the  blood  of  no  manner  of 

14  whosoever  eateth  it  shall  be  cut  off 

15  every  soul  that  eateth  that  which  died 
8  that  eateth  it  shall  bear  his  iniquity 

25  in  the  fifth  year  shall  ye  eat  of  the  fruit 

26  Ye  shall  not  eat  (any  thing)  with  the 
22  He  shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God 

4  he  shall  not  eat  of  the  holy  things,  until 

6  shall  not  eat  of  the  holy  things,  unless 

7  he  shall . .  afterward  eat  of  the  holy  things 

8  he  shall  not  eat  to  defile  himself  therewith 
10  There  shall  no  stranger  eat  (of)  the  holy 

10  an  hired  servant,  shall  not  eat  (of)  the 

11  if  the  priest  buy .  .he  shall  eat  of  it 

11  he  that  is  born  in  his  house,  .shall  eat  of 

12  she  may  not  eat  of  an  offering  of  the  holy 

13  she  shall  eat  of  her  father's  meat 

13  but  there  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof 

14  if  a  man  eat  (of)  the  holy  things  unwitt. 

16  when  they  eat  then"  holy  things  :  for  I 

6  seven  days  ye  must  eat  unleavened  bread 

14  ye  shall  eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched 

9  and  they  shall  eat  it  in  the  holy  place 

12  ye  shall  eat  the  increase  thereof  out  of 

19  ye  shall  eat  your  fill,  and  dwell  therein 

20  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year? 

22  eat  (yet)  of  old  fruit  until  the  ninth  year 
22  until  her  fruits  come  in  ye  shall  eat  (of) 

5  and  ye  shall  eat  your  bread  to  the  full 

10  j'e  shall  eat  old  store,  and  bring  forth  the 
16  sow.  .in  vain,  for  your  enemies  shall  eat 

26  and  ye  shall  eat,  and  not  be  satisfied 
2q  And  ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  your  sons 
29  the  flesh  of  your  daughters  shall  ye  eat 

38  the  land  of  your  enemies  shall  eat  you  up 

3  neither  shall  he.  .eat  moist  grapes,  or 

4  shall  he  eat  nothing  that  is  made  of  the 

1 1  at  even  they  shall  keep  it,  (and)  eat  it  with 

5  We  remember  the  fish  which  we  did  eat 

13  saying.  Give  us  flesh,  that  we  may  eat 

18  Sanctify  yourselves,  .ye  shall  eat  flesh 

iS  L  ird  will  give  you  flesh,  and  ye  shall  eat 

19  Ye  shall  not  eat  one  day,  nor  two  days 

21  I  will  give  them  flesh,  that  they  may  eat  a 
32  a  land  that  eateth  up  the  inhabitants 

19  when  ye  eat  of  the  bread  of  the  land 
10  In  the  most  holy,  .shalt  thou  eat  it 

10  every  male  shall  eat  it :  it  shall  be  holy 
11,  13  that  is  clean  in  thy  house  shall  eat 
31  And  ye  shall  eat  it  in  every  place 

24  he  shallmot  lie  down  until  he  eat  (of)  the 

2  the  people  did  eat,  and  bowed  down  to 

6  shall  buy  meat  of  them,  .that  ye  may  eat 
28  sell  me  meat  for  money,  that  I  may  eat 

28  ye  shall  serve  gods,  .which  neither,  .eat 

11  when  thou  shalt  have  eaten,  and  be  full 
9  A  land  wherein  thou  shalt  eat  bread 

io,  12  When  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full 
9,  18  neither  did  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 

15  And  I  will  send,  .that  thou  mayest  eat 

7  there  ye  shall  eat  before  the  Lord  your 

15  thou  mayest  kill  and  eat  flesh  in  all  thy 
15,  22  the  unclean  and  the  clean  may  eat 

16  Only  ye  shall  not  eat  the  blood  ;  ye  shall 

17  Thou  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  gates  the 

18  thou  must  eat  them  before  the  Lord  thy 

20  and  thou  shalt  say,  I  will  eat  flesh 
20  because  thy  soul  longeth  to  eat  flesh 

20  thou  mayest  eat  flesh,  whatsoever  thy 

21  thou  shalt  eat  in  thy  gates  whatsoever 

22  shalt  eat  them,  .the  clean  shall  eat 

23  Only  be  sure  that  thou  eat  not  the  blood 

23  thou  mayest  not  eat  the  life  with  the  flesh 

24  Thou  shalt  not  eat  it ;  thou  shalt  pourit 

25  Thou  shalt  not  eat  it,  that  it  may  go 

27  thou  shalt  offer,  .and  thou  shalt  eat  the 

3  Thou  shalt  not  eat  any  abominable  thing 

4  These  (are)  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat 

6  among  the  beasts,  that  ye  shall  eat 

7  shall  not  eat  of  them  that  chew  the  cud 

8  ye  shall  not  eat  of  their  flesh,  nor  touch 

9  shall  eat  of  all  that  (are)  in  the  waters 
9  that  have  flus  and  scales  shall  ye  eat 

10  hath  not  fins  and  scales  ye  may  not  eat 

11  (Of)  all  clean  birds  ye  shall  eat 

12  these  (are  they)  of  which  ye  shall  not  eat 

20  (But  of)  all  clean  fowls  ye  may  eat 

21  not  eat  (of)  anything  that  dieth  of  itself 

21  unto  the  stranger,  .that  he  may  eat  it 
23  thou  shalt  eat  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

26  shalt  eat  there  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

29  shall  come,  and  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied 
20  Thou  shalt  eat  (it)  before  the  Lord  thy 

22  Thou  shalt  eat  it  within  thy  gates 

23  Only  *hou  shalt  not  eat  the  blood  thereof 
3  Thou  shalt  eat  no  leavened  bread  with 

3  seven  days  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened 

7  thou  shalt  roast  and  eat  (it)  in  the  place 

8  Six  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread 
1  they  shall  eat  the  offerings  of  the  Lord 

8  They  shall  have  like  portions  to  eat 

14  thou  shalt  eat  the  spoil  of  thine  enemies 

19  thou  mayest  eat  of  them,  and  thou  shalt 

24  thou  mayest  eat  grapes  thy  fill  at 

12  may  eat  within  thy  gates,  and  be  filled 
14  I  have  not  eaten  thereof  in  my  mourning 
7  offer  peace  offerings,  and  shalt  eat  there 
31  Thine  ox.  .thou  shalt  not  eat  thereof 

39  (the  grapes);  for  the  worms  shall  eat  them 
51  he  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and 


29 
31 
32 
32. 
Josh.  5 
S 

5' 
24. 

Judg.  9. 
*3- 

J5- 
r3 

r3' 

13 

74. 

14. 

19. 

19. 

19. 

19. 

Ruth  2. 

2. 

3' 

3- 


2  Sa. 


[  Ki. 


9- 
9- 
9- 

9- 
9- 
9- 

14. 

14. 

34. 

14- 

14. 

14. 

20. 

20. 

28. 

28. 

28. 

28. 

3°- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 


:  Ki. 


!.  53  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thine  own  body 
.  55  flesh  of  his  children  whom  he  shall  eat 
57  she  shall  eat  them  for  want  of  all  (.things) 

6  Ye  have  not  eaten  bread,  neither  have  ye 

20  shall  have  eaten  and  filled  themselves 
13  he  might  eat  the  increase  of  the  fields 
38  Which  did  eat  the  fat  of  their  sacrifices 

11  they  did  eat  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land 

12  had  eaten  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land 

12  they  did  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  laud  of 

13  oliveyards  which  ye  planted  not  do  ye  eat 

27  did  eat  and  driuk,  and  cursed  Abimelech 
4  drink  not  wine,  .and  eat  not  any  unclean 

7  drink  no  wine,  .neither  eat  any  unclean 

14  eat  of  any  (thing)  that  coineth  of  the  vine 
14  neither  let  her.  .eat  any  unclean  (thing) 
16  Though  thou  detain  me,  I  will  not  eat  of 

9  took  thereof  in  his  hands . .  went  on  eating 
9  and  he  gave  them,  and  they  did  eat 

4  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  lodged  there 

6  did  eat  and  drink  both  of  them  together 

8  tarried  until  afternoon,  and  they  did  eat 

21  washed  their  feet,  and  did  eat  and  drink 
14  eat  of  the  bread,  and  dip  thy  morsel  in 

14  and  she  did  eat,  and  was  sufficed,  and 
3  he  shall  have  done  eating  and  drinking 

7  when  Boaz  had  eaten  and  drunk,  and  his 
7  therefore  she  wept,  and  did  not  eat 

5  why  weepest  thou?  and  why  eatest  thou 

9  Hannah  rose  up  after  they  had  eaten  in 
iS  the  woman  went  her  way,  and  did  eat 
36  that  I  may  eat  a  piece  of  bread 
13  before  he  go  up  to  the  high  place  to  eat 
13  for  the  people  will  not  eat  until  he  come 
13  (and)  afterwards  they  eat  that  be  bidden 

19  ye  shall  eat  with  me  to  day;  and  to  morrow 
24  which  is  left !  set(it)  before  thee,  (and)  eat 
24  So  Saul  did  eat  with  Samuel  that  day 
24,  28  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  eateth  (any) 
30  if  haply  the  people  had  eaten  freely 

32  the  people  did  eat  (them)  with  the  blood 

33  in  that  they  eat  with  the  blood 

34  Ins  sheep,  and  slay  (them)  here,  and  eat 
34  sin  not  against  the  Lord  in  eating  with 

24  the  king  sat  him  down  to  eat  meat 

34  did  eat  no  meat  the  second  day  of  the 

20  eaten  no  bread  all  the  day,  nor  all  the 

22  eat,  that  thou  mayest  have  strength  when 

23  But  he  refused,  and  said,  I  will  not  eat 

25  And  she  brought  (it),  .and  they  did  eat 

11  and  gave  him  bread,  and  he  did  eat 

12  when  he  had  eaten,  his  spirit  came  again 

12  he  had  eaten  no  bread,  nor  drunk  (any) 

16  eating  and  drinking,  and  dancing,  beca. 
7  shalt  eat  bread  at  my  table  continually 

10  that  thy  master's  son  may  have  food  to  eat 

10  master's  son  shall  eat  bread  alway  at  my 

11  eat  at  my  table,  as  one  of  the  king's  sons 

13  he  did  eat  continually  at  the  kings  table 

11  go  into  mine  house,  to  eat  and  to  drink 

13  when  David  had  called  liim,  he  did  eat 

3  it  did  eat  of  his  own  meat,  and  drank  of 

20  they  set  bread  before  him,  and  he  did  eat 

21  child  was  dead,  thou  didst  rise  and  eat 

5  that  I  may  see  (it),  and  eat  (it)  at  her  hand 
9  poured  (them)  out.  .but  he  refused  to  eat 

11  when  she  had  brought,  .unto  him  to  eat 
2  summer  fruit  for  the  young  men  to  eat 

29  for  the  people  that  (were)  withhim,  to  eat 

28  them  that  did  eat  at  thine  own  table 

35  can  thy  servant  taste  what  I  eat  or  what 
42  have  we  eaten  at  all  of  the  king's  (cost)? 
25  they  eat  and  drink  before  him,  and  say 
41  heard  (it)  as  they  had  made  an  end  of  eat. 

7  let  them  be  of  those  that  eat  at  thy  table 

20  eating  and  drinking,  and  making  merry 
8,  16  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor  drink 

9  Eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water,  nor  turn 

15  Come  home  with  me,  and  eat  bread 

17  Thou  shalt  eat  no  bread  nor  drink  water 

18  Bring  him  back .  .that  he  may  eat  bread 

19  So  he  went  back  with  him,  and  did  eat 

22  But  earnest  back,  and  hast  eaten  bread 

22  Eat  no  bread,  and  drink  no  water 

23  it  came  to  pass,  after  he  had  eaten  bread 
28  the  lion  had  not  eaten  the  carcase,  nor 
11  dieth.  .in  the  city  shall  the  dogs  eat 

11  dieth  in  the  field  shall  the  fowls,  .eat 

4  dieth.  .in  the  city  shall  the  dogs  eat 

4  dieth.  .in  the  fields  shall  the  fowls,  .eat 

12  of  meal,  .that  we  may  eat  it,  and  die 

15  and  she,  and  he,  and  her  house,  did  eat 
19  the  prophets . .  which  eat  at  Jezebel's  table 

41  Elijah  said.  .Get  thee  up,  eat  and  drink 

42  So  Ahab  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink 

5  angel  touched  him,  and  said.  .Arise,  .eat 

6  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  laid  him  down 

8  And  he  arose,  and  did  eat  and  drink 

21  he.  .gave  unto  the  people,  and  they  did  e. 

4  he.. turned  away,  .and  would  eat  no  bre. 

5  Why  is  thy  spirit  so  sad,  that  thou; eatest 

7  Arise . .  eat  bread,  and  let  thine  heart  be 

23  The  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the  wall  of 

24  dieth.  .in  the  city  the  dogs  shall  eat 
24  dieth  in  the  field  shall  the  fowls,  .eat 

8  and  she  constrained  him  to  eat  bread 
8  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned  in .  .to  eat 

4c  So  they  poured  out  for  the  men  to  eat 
40  as  they  were  eating  of  the  pottage,  that 

40  And  they  could  not  eat  (thereof) 

41  he  said,  Pour  out.  .that  they  may  eat 

42  Give  unto  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 


EAT 


286 


EAT 


2  Ki.  4.  43  Give  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 

4.43  They  shall  eat,  and  shall  leave  (thereof) 
4.  44  he  set  (it)  before  them,  and  they  did  eat 
6.  22  set  bread  and  water,  .that  they  may  eat 
6.  23  and  when  they  hud  eaten  and  druuk 
6.  28,  29  Give  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him 
6.  28  and  we  will  eat  my  son  to  morrow 

6.  29  So  we  boiled  my  son,  and  did  eat  him 

7.  2,  19  thou  shalt  see .  .but  shalt  not  eat 
7.    8  they  went  into  one  tent,  and  did  eat 

9.  10  the  dogg  shall  eat  Jezebel  in  the  portion 
9.  34  he  was  come  ill,  he  did  eat  and  drink 
9.  36  In  the  portion  of  Jezreel  shall  dogs  eat 
18.  27  that  they  may  eat  their  own  dung,  and 

18.  31  eat  ye  every  man  of  his  own  vine 

19.  29  Ve  shall  eat  this  year  such  things  as  grow 
19.  29  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruits  there. 
23.    9  they  did  eat  of  the  unleavened  bread 

25.  29  he  did  eat  bread  continually  before  him 

1  Ch.12.  3ji  they  were  with  David,  .eating and  drink. 

29.  22  Anil  did  eat  and  drink  before  the  LORD 

2  Ch.  ^o.  iS  yet  did  they  eat  the  passover  otherwise 

30.  22  they  did  eat  throughout  the  feast  seven 

31.  10  we  have  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have 
Ezra    2.  63  the  Tirshatha  said . .  they  should  not  eat 

6.  21  all . .  as  had  separated  themselves . .  did  e. 
9.  12  that  ye  may  be  strong,  and  eat  the  good 

10.    6  he  did  eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water 
.tfeh.    5.    2  we  take  up  corn .  .that  we  may  eat,  and 
5. 14  I  and  my  brethren  have  not  eaten  the 

7.  65  the  Tirshatha  said,  .they  should  not  eat 

8.  10  Go  your  way,  cat  the  fat,  and  drink  the 
8. 12  all  the  people  went  their  way  to  eat 

9.  25  so  they  did  eat,  and  were  filled,  and 

9.  36  thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers  to  eat  the 
Esth.  4.  16  neither  eat  nor  drink  three  days,  night 
Job      1.    4  called  for  their  three  sisters  to  eat 

1.  13  his  sons  and  his  daughters  (were)  eating 
1. 18  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  (were)  eating 

2i.  25  And  another,  .never  eateth  with  pleasure 
31.    8  let  me  sow,  and  let  another  eat;  yea 
31.  17  Or  have  eaten  my  morsel  myself  alone 
31.  17  and  the  fatherless  hath  not  eaten  thereof 
31.  39  If  I  have  eaten  the  fruits  thereof  without 

40. 15  Behold  now  behemoth,  .he  eateth  grass 
42.  11  they.,  did  eat  bread  with  him  in  hishou. 

Psa    14.    4  who  cat  up  my  people. .  they  eat  bread 
22.  26  The  meek  shall  cat  and  be  satisfied 

22.  2Q  All . .  fat  upon  earth  shall  cat  and  worship 
27.  2  When,  .my  foes,  came  upon  me  to  eat  up 
41.  9  mine  own.  .friend,  .which  did  eat  of  my 
50.  13  Will  I  eat  the  flesh  erf  bulls,  or  drink  the 
53.  4  who  eat  up  my  people . .  they  eat  bread 
78.  24  had  rained  down  manna  upon  them  to  e. 
78.  25  Man  did  eat  angels'  food:  he  sent  them 
78.  29  So  they  did  eat,  and  were  well  filled 

102.  4  heart  is  smitten . .  so  that  I  forget  to  eat 
102.    9  For  I  have  eaten  ashes  like  bread,  and 

105.  35  And  did  eat  up  all  the  herbs  in  their 

106.  20  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  grass 
106.  28  They  joined,  .and  ate  the  sacrifices  of  the 

127.  2  vain  for  you.,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows 

128.  2  thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of  thine  hands 
Prov.  1.  31  Therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of 

13.    2  A  man  shall  cat  good  by  the  fruit  of  (his) 
13.  25  righteous  eateth  to  the  satisfying  of  his 
18.  21  they  that  love  it  shall  eat  the  fruit 

23.  7  Eat  and  drink,  saith  he  to  thee  ;  but  his 

23.  8  morsel  (which)  thou  hast  eaten  shalt  thou 

24.  13  My  son,  eat  thou  honey,  because  (it  is) 

25. 16  eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee 

25.  27  (It  is)  not  good  to  eat  much  honey;  so 
27.  18  Whoso  keepeth  the  fig  tree  shall  eat  the 
30.  17  and  the  young  eagles  shall  eat  it 

30.  20  she  eateth,  and  wipeth  her  mouth,  and 

31.  27  and  eateth  not  the  bread  of  idleness 
Eccl.  2.  24  that  he  should  eat  and  drink,  and  (that) 

2.  25  For  who  can  eat,  or  who  else  can  hasten 

3.  13  also  that  every  man  should  eat  and  drink 

4.  5  The  fool,  .eateth  his  own  flesh 

5.  11  increase,  they  are  increased  that  eat  them 
5.  12  (is)  sweet,  whether  lie  eat  little  or  much 

5. 17  AH  Ins  days  also  he  eateth  in  darkness 

5. 18  (it  is)  good  and  comely  (for  one)  to  eat 

5.  19  hath  given  him  power  to  eat  thereof,  and 

6.  2  to  eat  thereof,  but  a  stranger  eateth  it 
8. 15  no  better  thing  under  the  sun,  than  to  e. 
g.   7  eat  thy  bread  with  joy,  and  drink  thy 

10.  16  and  thy  princes  eat  in  the  morning! 

10.  17  thy  princes  cat  in  due  season,  for  strength 
Song  4.  16  his  garden,  and  eat  his  pleasant  fruits 

5.    1  I  have  eaten  my  honey  comb  with  my  h. 
5.    1  eat,  O  friends  ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abun. 
iBa.     1.  19  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the 

3.  10  they  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings 

4.  1  We  will  eat  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our 

5.  17  and  the  waste  places,  .shall  strangers  eat 

7.  15  Butter  and  honey  shall  he  eat,  that  he 
7.  22  for  the  abundance  of  milk,  .he  shall  eat 
7.  22  butter  and  honey  shall  every  one  eat 

9.  20  he  shall  eat  on  the  left  hand,  and  they 
9.  20  eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm 

11.  7  and  the  linn  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox 

21.  5  watch  in  the  watch  tower,  eat,  drink 

22.  13  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh,  and  drinking 

22.  13  cat  ami  drink;  for  to  morrow  we  shall  die 

23.  iS  eat  suilU-k-ntly,  and  for  durable  clothing 

29.  8  hungry  (man)  dreameth,  and,  behold, hee. 

30.  24  young  asses,  .shall  eat  clean  provender 

36.  12  tli.  \  in  i.v  eat  their  own  duug,  and  driuk 
36. 16  eat  ye  every  one  of  his  vine,  and  every 

37.  30  cut  (this)  year  such  as  growcth  of  itself 


Isa.    37.  30  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  thereof 
44.  16  with  part  thereof  he  eateth  flesh 
4  j.  19  I  have  roasted  flesh,  and  eaten  (it) 

51.  8  and  the  worm  shall  eat  them  like  wool 
55.    1  come  ye,  buy.andeat;  yea,  come,  buy  wine 
55.    2  eat  ye  (that  which  is)  good,  and  let  your 
59.    s  he  that  eateth  of  then-  eggs  dieth,  and 

61.  6  ye  shall  eat  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles 

62.  9  they  that  have  gathered  it  shall  eat  it 
65.    4  eat  swine's  flesh,  and  broth  of  abominable 
65.  13  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be  hungry 
65.  21  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruitof  them 
65.  22  they  shall  not  plant,  and  another  eat 

65.  25  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bullock 

66.  17  eating  swine's  flesh,  and  the  abomination 
Jer.     2.    7  to  eat  the  fruit  thereof,  and  the  goodness 

5.  17  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  should  eat 
7.  21  put.  .offerings  unto,  .sacrifices,  and  eat 

15.  16  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them 

16.  8  to  sit  with  them  to  eat  and  to  drink 

19.   9  shall  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  friend 
22.  15  Did  not  thy  father  eat  and  drink,  and  do 
29.    5,  28  plant  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of 
31.  29  The  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  grape,  and 
31.  30  every  man  that  eateth  the  sour  grape 

41.  1  they  did  eat  bread  together  in  Mizpah 

52.  33  he  did  continually  eat  bread  before  him 
Lam.   2.  20  Shall  the  women  eat  their  fruit,  (and) 
Eze.     2.    8  open  thy  mouth,  and  eat  that  I  give  thee 

3.    1  Sou  of  man,  eat  that  thou  findest;  eat 

3.  3  Then  did  I  eat  (it) ;  and  it  was  in  my  mo. 

4.  9  hundred  and  ninety  days  shalt  thou  eat 
4.  10  meat  which  thou  shalt  eat  (shall  be)  by 
4.  10  from  time  to  time  shalt  thou  eat  it 

4.  T2  thou  shalt  eat  it  (as)  barley  cakes,  and 
4.  13  the  children  of  Israel  eat  their  defiled 
4.  14  have  I  not  eaten  of  that  which  dieth  of 

4.  16  they  shall  eat  bread  by  weight,  and  with 

5.  10  fathers  shall  eat  the  sons  in  the  midst 

5.  10  and  the  sons  shall  eat  their  fathers 

12.  18  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking,  and  drink 

12.  19  shall  eat  their  bread  witli  carefulness 
16.  13  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil 
18.    2  The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and 
18.    6  hath  not  eaten  upon  the  mountains 

18.  11  hath  eaten  upon  the  mountains,  and  de. 
18.  15  (That)  hath  not  eaten  upon  the  mount. 
22.    9  and  in  thee  they  eat  upon  the  mountains 
24.  17  cover  not  (thy)  lips,  and  eat  not  the  bread 

24.  22  cover  your  lips,  nor  eat  the  bread  of  men 

25.  4  they  shall  eat  thy  fruit,  and  they  shall 

33.  25  Ye  eat  with  the  blood,  and  lift  up  your 

34.  3  Ye  eat  the  fat,  and  ye  clothe  you  with 
39.  17  that  ye  may  eat  flesh,  and  drink  blood 
39.  18  Ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  mighty,  and 

-  39-  J9  J'e  shall  eat  fat  till  ye  be  full,  and  driuk 

42.  13  priests,  .shall  eat  the  most  holy  things 
44.    3  he  shall  sit  in  it  to  eat  bread  before  the 
44.  29  They  shall  eat  the  meat  offering,  and  the 
44.  31  The  priests  shall  not  eat  of  any  thing 

Dan.    1.  12  let  them  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  and  water 
1.  13  the  countenance  of  the  children  that  eat 

1.  15  than  all  the  children  which  did  eat  the 
10.    3  I  ate  no  pleasant  bread,  neither  came 

Hos.    2.  12  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat  them 
4.  10  For  they  shall  eat,  and  not  have  enough 

8.  13  They  sacrifice  flesh,  .offerings,  .and  eat 

9.  3  they  shall  eat  unclean  (things)  in  Assyria 
9.    4  all  that  eat  thereof  shall  be  polluted 

10.  13  ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of  lies :  because 
Joel    1.   4  locust  eaten,  cankerworm  eaten,  .eaten 

■2.  25  the  years  that  the  locust  hath  eaten 

2.  26  ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied 
Amos  6.   4  That,  .eat  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock,  and 

7.    2  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating  the 
7.  12  there  eat  bread,  and  prophesy  there 
9.  14  they  shall  also  make  gardens,  and  eat 
Mic.    3.    3  Who  also  eat  the  flesh  of  my  people 

6.  14  Thou  shalt  eat,  but  not  be  satisfied 

7.  1  no  cluster  to  eat ;  my  soul  desired  the 
Nah.  3.  15  it  shall  eat  thee  up  like  the  cankerworm 
Hab.    1.    8  shall  fly  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth  to  eat 
Hag.    1.   6  ye  eat,  but  ye  have  not  enough 

Zech.  7.   6  when  ye  did  eat,  and  when  ye  did  drink 
7.    6  did  ye  not  eat . .  and  drink  (for  yourselves) 

11.  9  let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of 
11.  16  but  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat 

2.  To  be  eaten,  hix  alcal,  2. 

Exodi2.  16  save  (that)  which  every  man  must  eat 

3.7*0  eat,  *?3K  akal. 

Dan.    4.  33  did  eat  grass  as  oxen,  and  his  body  was 

4. Eating,  food,  n^ox  oldah. 

Exodi6.  15  which  the  Lord  hath  given  you  to  eat 
Lev.  11.  39  And  if  any  beast,  of  which  ye  may  eat 

5.  To  eat,  nourish,  fill,  ?T$  barah. 

2  Sa.  12.  17  neither  did  he  eat  bread  with  them 

13.  6  in  my  sight,  that  I  may  eat  at  her  hand 

13.  10  Bring  the  meat,  .that  I  may  eat  of  thine 
6.7b  eat  (bread),  crh  lacham. 

Psa.141.    4  and  let  me  not  eat  of  their  dainties 
Trov.  4.  17  For  they  eat  the  bread  of  wickedness 

9.    5  Come,  eat  of  my  bread,  and  drink  of  the 
23.    1  When  thou  sittest  to  eat  with  a  ruler 
23.    6  Eat  thou  not  the  bread  of.  .an  evil  eye 

7.  To  feed,  enjoy,  consume,  r\y~\  raah. 

Eze,  34.  19  they  eat  that  which  ye  have  trodden  with 

8.  To  eat,  f}t(3pd>(TKw  bibrdsko. 

John    6.  13  over  and  above  unto  them  that  had  eaten 


9.  To  taste,  yetiofxat  geuomai. 

Acts  10.  10  became  very  hungry,  and  would  have  ea. 
20.  11  he.  .was  come  up  again  and.  .had.  .eaten 

23.  14  we  will  eat  nothing  until  we  have  slain 
10. 7*0  eat,  £v6iw  esthio. 

Matt.  9.  xi  Why  eateth  your  Master  with .  .sinners? 
11.  18  John  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking 

11.  19  The  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  drinking 

12.  1  began  to  pluck  the  ears  of  corn,  and  to  e. 

14.  21  they  that  had  eaten  were  about  five  tho. 

15.  2  wash  not  their  hands  when  they  eat 
15.  27  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  which 
15.  38  they  that  did  eat  were  four  thousand 

24.  49  And  shall  begin .  .to  eat  and  drink  with 
26.  21  as  they  did  eat,  he  said,  Verily  I  say 

Mark  1.    6  and  he  did  eat  locusts  and  wild  honey 
2.  16  the  scribes,  .saw  him  eat  with  publicans 

2.  16  How  is  it  that  he  eateth  and  drinketh 

7.  2  they  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eat  bread 
7.  3  the  Jews,  .eat  not,  holding  the  tradition 
7.  4  the  market . .  except . .  they  wash . .  eat  not 
7.  5  thy  disciples,  .eat  bread  with  uuwasheu 
7.  28  yet  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the 
14.  18  as  they  sat  and  did  eat,  Jesus  said 
14.  18  One  of  you  which  eateth  with  me,  shall 

14.  22  as  they  did  eat,  Jesus  took  bread,  and 
Luke  5.  30  Why  do  ye  eat  and  drink  with  publicans 

5.  3^  the  disciples  of  John  fast,  .but  thine  eat 

6.  1  his  disciples  plucked,  .and  did  eat 

7.  33  John  the  Baptist  came  neither  eating 

7.  34  The  Son  of  man  is  come  eating  and  drin. 
10.  7  in  the  same  house  remain,  eating  and  d. 
10.    8  eat  such  things  as  are  set  before  you 

12.  45  to  eat  and  drink,  and  to  be  drunken 

15.  16  with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat 
17.  27  They  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  married 
17.  28  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  bought 
22.  30  That  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table 

Acts  27.  35  when  he  had  broken  (it),  he  began  to  eat 
Rom  14.    2  another,  who  is  weak,  eateth  herbs 

14.    3  that  eateth  despise  him  that  eateth  not 
14.    3  which  eateth  not  judge  him  that  eateth 
14.    6  He  that  eateth,  eateth  to  the  Lord,  for 
14.    6  he  that  eateth  not,  to  the  Lord  he  eateth 
14.  20  evil  for  that  man  who  eateth  with  offence 

1  Co.  S.    7  eat  (it)  as  a  thing  offered  unto  an  idol 

8.  10  to  eat  those  things  which  are  offered  to 

9.  7  who  planteth  a  vineyard,  and  eateth  not 
9.    7  who  feedeth  a  flock,  and  eateth  not  of 

10.  18  are  not  they  which  eat  of  the  sacrifices 
10.  25  eat,  asking  no  questions  for  conscience 
10.  27  whatsoever  is  set  before  you,  eat,  asking 
10.  28  This  is  offered  in  sacrifice,  .eat  not  for 

10.  31  Wliether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or 

11.  22  have  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  to  drink  in 
11.  26  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
11.  27  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
11.  28  so  let  him  eat  of  (that)  bread,  and  drink 
11.  29  For  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworth. 
11.  29  eateth  and  drinketh  damnation  to  himself 

11.  34  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him  eat  at  home 

2  Th.  3.  10  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat 

3.  12  that  with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat 
11. To  take  or  receive  over,  txeTa\afj.fZavw  metalam. 

Acts   2.  46  they,  .did  eat  their  meat  with  gladness 
12.7o  have  pasture,  l^m  vop.r\v  echo  uomen. 

2  Ti.   2.  17  And  their  word  will  cat  as  doth  a  canker 
13.  To  eat,  gnaw,  chew,  drvour,  vpwyu>  trogo* 

Matt24.  38  they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying 

John  6.54,  56  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood 

6.  57  so  he  that  eateth  me,  even  he  shall  live 

6.  58  he  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for 

3.  iS  He  that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted 

14.7*0  eat,  <pdyo)  phagd. 

Matt  6.  25  Take  no  thought,  .what  ye  shall  eat 
6.  31  take  no  thought . .  What  shall  we  eat  ? 

12.  4  entered  into  the  house  of  God,  and  did  eat 
12.    4  which  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  eat 

14. 16  They  need  not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to  eat 

14.  20  And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled 

15.  20  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not 
15.  32  now  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to  eat 
15.'  37  And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled 

26.  17  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  thee  to  eat 
26.  26  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body 
Mark  2.  26  How  he  went,  .and  did  eat  the  shewbread 

2.  26  which  is  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the 

3.  20  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  eat  bread 

5.  43  that  something  should  be  given  her  to  e. 

6.  31  they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat 

6.  36  buy.. bread:  for  they  having  nothing  toe. 
6.  37  He  auswered .  .Give  ye  them  to  eat 
6.  37  Shad  we.  .buy.  .and  give  them  to  eat? 
6.  42  And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled 
6.  44  they  that  did  cat  of  the  leaves  were 
8.    1  the  multitude,  .having  nothing  to  eat 
8.   2  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to  eat 
8.    8  So  they  did  eat,  and  were  filled 
8.    9  they  that  had  eaten  were  about  four 
11.  14  >>o  man  cat  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for 
14.  12  that  thou  maye&t  eat  the  passover? 
14.  14  where  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my 
14.  22  and  said,  Take,  eat :  this  is  my  body 
Luke  4.  2  And  in  those  days  he  did  eat  nothing 

6.    4  and  did  take  and  eat  the  shewbread,  and 

6.  4  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  eat-  but  for  the 

7.  36  desired  him  that  he  would  eat  with  him 
9. 13  he  said  unto  them,  Give  ye  them  to  eat 
g.  17  And  they  did  eat,  and  were  all  tilled 


EAT 


Lukei2.  19  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  (and)  be 
12.22  Take  110  thought,  .what  ye  shall  eat 

12.  29  And  seek  not  ye  what  ye  shall  eat 

13.  26  We  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  thy  presence 

14.  1  he  went  into  the  house,  .to  eat  bread  on 

14.  15  Blessed  (is)  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the 

15.  23  and  kill  (it) ;  and  let  us  eat,  and  be  merry 

17.  8  and  serve  me,  till  I  have  eaten  and  drunk. 
17!    8  afterward  thou  slialt  eat  and  drink? 

22.  S  prepare,  .the  passover,  that  we  may  eat 
22.  ti  where  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my 
22.  15  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this 

22.  16  I  will  not  any  more  eat  thereof,  until  it 
24.  43  And  he  took  (it),  and  did  eat  before  them 

John  4.  31  disciples  prayed  him,  saying,  Master,  eat 
4.  32  he  said  unto  them,  I  have  meat  to  eat 

4.  33  Hath  any  man  brought  him  (ought)  to  e.  ? 
6.  5  Whenceshall  we  buy.,  that  these  may  eat? 
6.  23  unto  the  place  where  they  did  eat  bread 
6.  26  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and 

6.  31  Our  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  desert 
6.  31  He  gave  them  bread  from  heaven  to -eat 
6. 49  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  wild. 
6.  50  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  die 
6. 51  If  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live 
6.  52  How  can  this  man  give  us.  .flesh  to  eat? 
6.  51  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man 
6.  58  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  manna 

18.  28  but  that  they  might  eat  the  passover 
Acts   9.    9  three  days,  .and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink 

10.  13  there  came  a  voice.  .Peter  ;  kill,  and  eat 

10.  14  for  I  have  never  eaten  any  thing  that  is 

11.  7  a  voice  saying.  .Arise,  Peter  ;  slay,  and  e. 

23.  i2,  21  neither  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had 
Horn  14.    2  one  believeth  that  lie  may  eat  all  things 

14.  21  good  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink 

14.  23  he  that  doubteth  is  damned  if  he  eat 

1  Co.  S.    8  for  neither,  if  we  eat,  are  we  the  better 

8.    3  neither,  if  we  eat  not,  are  we  the  worse 

8.  13  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  stand. 

9.  4  Have  we  not  power  to  eat  aud  to  drink? 
10.    3  And  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat 

10.  7  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink 

11.  20  (this)  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper 

11.  24  he  brake  (it),  and  said,  Take,  eat :  this  is 
11.  33  when  ye  come  together  to  eat,  tarry  one 

15.  32  let  us  eat  and  drink ;  for  to  morrow  we 

2  Th.  3.    8  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for 
Heb.  13.  10  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which 
Jas.     5.    3  and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire 
Rev.    2.    7,  17  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  e. 

2.  14  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,  and  to 

2.  20  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols 

10.  10  soon  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  belly  was  bitter 
17.  16  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  lire 

19.  iS  That  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  kings,  and 

15.  Bread,  food,  cnb  lechem. 

Job     3.  24  For  my  sighing  cometh  before  I  eat 

16.  In  his  mouth,  V32  b&phvu. 

Gen.  25.  28  Isaac  loved  Esau,  because  he  did  eat  of 

17.  To  make  common,  bhn  eluded,  3. 

Deut  20.    6  and  hath  not  (yet)  eaten  of  it  ?  let  him 

20.  6  lest  he  die.. and  another  man  eat  of  it 

18.  To  go  in  unto  the  heart,  ^ir^x  nia  bo  el  qereb. 
Gen.  41.  21  it  could  not  be  known  that  they  had  eaten 

EAT,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

l.To  cause  or  give  to  eat,  ??N  ahal,  5. 

Jer.   19.    g  I  will  cause  them  to  eat  the  flesh  of 
Eze.    3.    2  and  he  caused  me  to  eat  that  roll 

3.  3  Son  of  man,  cause  thy  belly  to  eat,  and 

l.To  cause  to  eat,  rns  barah,  5. 

2  Sa.3.  35  people  came  to  cause  David  to  eat  meat 

3.7*0  [cause  to)  taste,  C£.'p  team. 

Dan.    4.  25,  32  they  shall  make  thee  to  eat  grass  as 

EAT  enough  — 

To  satiate,  satis///,  fill,  icop^uvv/xL  korennumi. 
Acts  27.  3S  when  they  had  eaten  enough,  they  light. 

EAT  up,  to  — 

l.To  eat,  bis  ahal. 

Gen.  41.  4',  20  And  the  ill  favoured,  .kine  did  eat  up 
Nuni24.  8  he  shall  eat  up  the  nations  his  enemies 
Deut 28.  33  shall  a  nation,  .thou  knowest  not  eat  up 
Job  5.  5  Whose  harvest  the  hungry  eateth  up,  and 
Psa.  69.  9  the  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up 
Isa.    50.   9  wax  old.  .the  moth  shall  eat  them  up 

51.    8  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a  garment 
Jer.     5.  17  And  they  shall  eat  up  thine  harvest 

5.  17  they  shall  eat  up  thy  flocks  and  thine  h. 
10.  25  they  have  eaten  up  Jacob,  and  devoured 

Hos.    4.   8  They  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  people,  and 
Amos  7.   4  devoured  the  great  deep,  and  did  eat  up 

2.To  sioalloio  up,  y?3  bala. 

Isa.   28.    4  while  it  is  yet  in  his  hand  he  eateth  it  up 

3.  To  consume,  1^3  baar,  3. 

Isa.  3.  14  ye  have  eaten  up  the  vineyard ;  the  spoil 
5.  5  take  away  the  hedge . .  it  shall  be  eaten  up 
4..To  feed,  enjoy,  consume,  njri  raah. 

Eze.  34.  18  a  small  thing  unto  you  to  have  eaten  up 

5.7b  go  in  unto  the  heart,  3~$*S^  «i3  bo  el-qercb. 
Gen.  41.  21  And  when  they  had  eaten  them  up 

6.  To  eat  dovm  or  fully,  Karacpdyw  kataphago. 
John  2. 17  The  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up 


287 

Rev.  10.   9  he  said  unto  me,  Take  (it),  and  eat  it  up 

10.  10  I  took  the  little  book,  .and  ate  it  up 
EAT  -with,  to  — 

To  eat  with,  o-vu^cOiui  sunesthio. 

Lukers-    2  This,  .receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth  with 
Acts  10.  41  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him  after  he 

11.  3  Thou  weutest  in.  .and  didst  eat  with 

1  Co.  5.  11  written,  .with  such  an  one  no  nottoeatw. 
Gal.     2.  12  he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles :  but  when 
EATEN,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  eaten,  hiK  ahal,  2. 

Gen.    6.  21  take  thou  unto  thee  of  all  food  that  is  e. 
Exodi2.  46  In  one  house  shall  it  be  eaten  :  thou 
13.    3  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  eaten 
13.    7  Unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten  seven 

21.  28  and  his  flesh  shall  not  be  eaten  ;  but  the 
29.  34  it  shall  not  be  eaten,  because  it  (is)  holy 

Lev.  6.  16  with  unleavened  bread  shall  it  be  eaten 
6.  23  every  meat  offering,  .shall  not  be  eaten 
6.  26  in  the  holy  place  shall  it  be  eaten 

6.  30  And  no  sin  offering,  .shall  be  eaten  ;  it 

7.  6  it  shall  be  eaten  iu  the  holy  place  :  it  (is) 
7.  15  the  flesh,  .shall  be  eaten  the  same  day 

7.  16  it  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  that  he 
7.  16  also  the  remainder  of  it  shall  be  eaten 
7.  iS  And  if  (any)  of  the  flesh,  .be  eaten  at  all 

7.  19  And  the  flesh,  .unclean,  .shall  not  be  eat. 
11.  13  they  shall  not  be  eaten,  they  (are)  an  ab. 
11.  34  Of  all  meal  which  maybe  eaten,  (that)  on 
11.  41  every  creeping  thing,  .shall  not  be  eaten 
11.  47  between  the  beast  that  may  be  eaten 

11.  47  and  the  beast  that  may  not  be  eaten 
17.  13  any  beast  or  fowl  that  may  be  eaten 
19.    6  It  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  ye  offer  it 
19.   7  if  it  be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third  day 
19.  23  three  years,  .it' shall  not  be  eaten  of 

22.  30  On  the  same  day  it  shall  be  eaten  up 
Num28.  17  seven  days  shall  unleavened  bread  be  ea. 
Deut  12.  22  as  the  roebuck  and  the  hart  is  eaten 

14. 19  every  creeping  thing,  .shall  not  be  eaten 
Job     6.    6  Can  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten 
Jer.  24.    2  which  could  not  be  eaten,  they  were  so 
24.    3  that  cannot  be  eaten,  they  are  so  evil 
24.    8  which  cannot  be  eaten,  they  are  so  evil 
29.  17  like  vile  figs,  that  cannot  be  eaten 
Eze.  45.  21. unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten 

2.  To  cause  to  bum,  consume,  *U?3  baar,  3. 

Isa.     6. 13  and  (it)  shall  return,  and  shall  be  eaten 

EATEN,  to  cause  to  be  — 

To  cause  to  eat  up,  conmme,  nys  baar,  5. 

Exod22.   5  If  a  man  shall  cause  a  field,  .to  be  eaten 

EATER  — 

To  eat,  *?DK  ahal 

Judg  14.  14  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and 
Isa.    55.  10  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater 
Nah.   3.  12  even  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater 

EATING  — 

1.  Eating,  food,  bix  oTcel. 

Exodi2.    4  every  man  according  to  his  eating  shall 
16. 16,  iS,  21  every  man  according  to  his  eating 

2. Eating,  {the  act),  ppaxris  brosis. 

1  Co.  8.   4  concerning  therefore  the  eating  of  those 

3.  To  eat,  tyaryw  phago. 

1  Co.  11.  21  in  eating  every  one  taketh  before  (other) 

EATING,  to  be  — 
To  eat,  iadlw  e-sthio. 

Matt26.  26  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread 

EATING,  while ...  is  — 
Food,  am1?  lechum. 

Job  20!  23  shall  rain  (it)  upon  him  while  he  is  eating 

E'-EAL,  bT%  bare. 

1.  Son  of  Shobal,  son  of  Seir  the  Horite.     B.C.  1797. 

Gen.  36.  23  children  of  Shobal  (were)  these.  .E. 

1  Ch.  1.  40  The  sons  of  Shobal.  .E.,  Shephi,  and  On. 

2.  A  rocky  mountain  in  Ephraim. 

Deut  11.  29  and  the  curse  upon  mount  E. 

27.    4  I  command  you  this  day,  in  mount  E. 

27. 13  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  E.  to  curse 
Josh.  8.  30  Then  Joshua  built  an  altar,  .in  mount  E. 

8.  33  and  half  of  them  over  against  mount  E. 

3.  A  son  of  Joktan,  son  of  Eber  grandson  of  Shem,  B.C. 
2200. 

1  Ch.  1.  22  And  E.,  aud  Abimael,  and  Sheba 

E'-BED,  13^  servant,  slave. 

1.  An  Ephramite,  father  of  Gaal  who  rebelled  against 
Abimelech  when  he  was  reigning  in  Shechem,  B.C.  1209. 

Judg.  9.  26  Gaal  the  son  of  E.  came  with  his  brethren 

9.  28  Gaal  the  son  of  E.  said,  Who  (is)  Abimel. 
9. 30  heard  the  words  of  Gaal  the  son  of  E. 

9.  31  Gaal  the  son  of  E.,  and  his  brethren,  be 
9.  35  Gaal  the  son  of  E.  went  out,  and  stood 

2.  One  of  the  Bene-Adin  that  came  up  with  Ezra,  B.C. 

457- 

Ezra    8.    6  E.  the  son  of  Jonathan,  and  with  him 

EBED  HE'-LECH,  7$a  "DJ£  servant  of  tile  king. 

An  Ethiopian  eunuch  in  the'service  of  Zedekiah,  through 

whose  aid  Jeremiah  was  released  from  prison,  B.C.  589. 

Jer.  38.    7  Now,  when  E.  the  Ethiopian,  .heard  that 

38.    8  E.  went  forth  out  of  the  king's  house 

38. 10  Then  the  king  commanded  E.  the  Ethio. 


EDGE 

Jer.    38. 11  So  E.  took  the  men  with  him,  and  went 

38.  12  And  E.  the  Ethiopian  said  unto  Jeremiah 

39.  16  Go  and  speak  to  E.  the  Ethiopian,  saying 
E'-BER,  HE'-BER,  lay  a  shoot. 

1.  A  great  grandson  of  Shem,  B.C.  2255. 

Gen.  10.  21  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  E. 

10.  24  Arphaxad  begat  Salah ;  and  S.  begat  E. 

10.  25  unto  E.  were  born  two  sons  :  the  name 

11.  14  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  E. 
11.  15  Salah  lived  after  he  begat  E.  four  hundred 
11.  16  E.  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  begat 
11.  17  E.  lived  after  he  begat  Pelegfour  hundred 

1  Ch.  1.  18  Arphaxad  begat  Shelah,  and  S.  begat  E. 
1.  19  unto  E.  were  born  two  sous  :  the  name 

1.  25  E.,  Peleg,  Reu 

2.  The  head  of  a  family  in  Gad,  B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  5.  13  Jorai,  and  Jachan,  and  Zia,  and  H. 

3.  A  son  of  Elpaal,  a  Eenjamite,  B.C.  1100. 

1  Ch.  8.  12  sons  of  Elpaal ;  E.,  and  Misham,  and 

4.  A  son  of  Shashak,  a  Eenjamite,  B.C.  1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  22  And  Ishpan,  and  H.,  and  Eliel 
5.A  priest  of  the  family  of  Amok,  B.C.  447. 

Neh.  12.  20  Of  Sallai,  Kallai ;  of  Amok,  E. 
6.  This  name  seems  used  as  a  patronymic  denoting  the 
descendants  of  Eber ;  but  it  may  also  be  understood  as 
referring  to  those  "  beyond  the  river." 

Num24.  24  And  ships,  .shall  afflict  E.,  and  he  also 
E-BEN  E'-ZER,  "nun  J3N  stone  of  the  help. 
A  stone  set  up  by  Samuel  after  a  defeat  of  the  Philis- 
tines as  a  memorial  of  the  help  received,  B.C.  1141.     It 
stood  between  Mizpeh("the  watch-tower,"  a  few  miles 
N.  of  Jerusalem)  and  Shen  ("  the  tooth  or  crag*'). 

1  Sa.    4.    1  Israel  went  out.  .and  pitched  beside  E. 

5.  1  Philistines,  .brought  it  from  E.  unto  Ash. 
7.  12  Then  Samuel,  .called  the  name  of  it  E. 

EB-IA'-SAPH,  r(D;3N  the  father  of  gathr ring. 

A  great-grandson  of  korah,  B.C.  1470.     (See  Abiasaph.) 

1  Ch.  6.  23  Elkanah  his  son,  and  E.  his  son,  and 

6.  37  Assir,  the  son  of  E.,  the  son  of  Korah 

9. 19  Kore,  the  son  of  E.,  the  son  of  Korah,  and 
EBONY  — 
Ebony,  D'^ri  hobaim. 

Eze.  27.  15  (for)  a  present  horns  of  ivory  and  ebony 
EB-RO'-NAH,  nrny  bank,  beach,  coast. 
The  thirtieth  station  of  the  Israelites  in  the  Wilder- 
ness, and  the  nineteenth  from  Sinai,  near  Ezion-geber 
on  the  Red  Sea. 

Nuni33.  34  they  removed,  .and  encamped  at  E. 

33.  35  they  departed  from  E.,  and  encamped  at 
E'-DEN,  |-iy  delight. 

1.  The  place  of  man's  creation  and  first  abode ;  the 
situation  of  which  is  uncertain. 

Gen.    2.    8  And  the  Lord  planted  a  garden,  .in  E. 

2.  10  a  river  went  out  of  E.  to  water  the  gaTden 

2.  15  put  him  into  the  garden  of  E.  to  dress  it 

3.  23  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of  E. 

3.  24  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  E. 

4.  16  in  the  land  of  Nod,  on  the  east  of  E. 
Isa.  51.    3  he  will  make  her  wilderness  like  E.,  and 
Eze.  28.  13  Thou  hast  been  in  E.  the  garden  of  God 

31.    9  so  that  all  the  trees  of  E. .  .envied  him 
31.  16  all  the  trees  of  E. . .  shall  be  comforted 
31.  18  whom  art  thou . .  among  the  trees  of  E.  ? 
31.  18  be  brought  down  with  the  trees  of  E. 
36.  35  This  land.  .is.  .like  the  garden  of  E. 
Joel    2.    3  the  land  (is)  as  the  garden  of  E.  before 

2.  A  Gershomite,  son  of  Joah,  B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29.  12  Joah  the  son  of  Zimmah,  and  E.  the  son 

3.  A  Levite  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah  appointed  to  dis- 
tribute the  oblations,  B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.31.  15  next  him  (were)  E.,  and  Miniamin,  and 

4.  A  mart  that  supplied  Tyre  with  richly  embroidered 
stuffs.  It  is  associated  withHaran,  Sheba,  and  Asshur. 
The  sons  of  Eden  are  mentioned  with  Gozan,  Haran, 
and  Rezeph  as  victims  of  Assyrian  conquest.  It 
probably  lay  to  the  KW.  of  Mesopotamia,  or  near 
Damascus. 

1  Ki.19.  12  children  of  E.  which  (were)  in  Thelasar? 
Isa.  37.  12  cliildren  of  E.  which  (were)  in  Telassar? 
Eze.  27.  23  Haran,  and  Canneh,  and  E.,  the  mercha. 
Amos  1.    5  holdeth  the  sceptre  from  the  house  of  E. 

E'-DER,  E'-DAR,  iny  flock. 

1.  A  place  near  Ephrath  in  Bethlehem. 

Gen.  35.  21  spread  his  tent  beyond  the  tower  of  E. 

2.  A  border  city  in  the  S.  of  Judab  towards  Edom.  See 
also  Adar  and  Arad. 

Jos.  15.  21  uttermost  cities,  .of  Judah..were..E. 

3.  A  grandson  of  Merari  son  of  Levi,  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  23  sons  of  Mushi  ;  Mahli,  and  E.,  and  Jer. 
24.  30  sons  also  of  Mushi  ;  Mahli,  and  E.,  and 

EDGE  — 

1.  Mouth,  ns  peh. 

Gen.  34.  26  slew  Hamor. .  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
Exodi7-  13  discomfited  Amalek.  .with  the  edge  of 
Nnm  21.  24  smote  him  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
Deut  13.  15  surely  smite,  .with the  edge  of  the  sword 
13.  15  cattle  thereof,  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
20. 13  shalt  smite,  .with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
Josh.  6.  21  destroyed  all.  .with  the  edge  of  the  swo. 
8.  24  were  all  fallen  on  the  edge  of  the  sword 
3.  24  and  smote  it  with  the,  edge  of  the  sword 


EDGE 


288 


EGLON 


Josh  10.  28,  30  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
io-  32,  35,  37  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the 

10.  39  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
n.  11  smote  all.  .with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
11. 12  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

11.  14  they  smote  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
79.  47  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and 

Judg.  1.  8  and  smitten  it  with  the  edge  of  the  swo. 
1. 25  smote  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  swo. 
4.  15  discomfited  Sisera.  .with  the  edge  of  the 
4.  16  the  host . .  fell  upon  the  edge  of  the  sword 
18.  27  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
20.  37  smote . .  the  city  with  the  edge  oCthe  sword 

20.  48  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

21.  ic  smite  the  inhabitants,  .with  the  edge  of 

1  Sa.  15.    8  destroyed  all  the  people  with  the  edge  of 

22.  19  smote  he  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
22.  19  and  sheep,  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

2  Sa.  15.  14  smite  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
2  Ki.  10.  25  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
Job     1.  15,  17  slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of 
Jer.  21.    7  smite  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

2.Mouth,  n;§  peyah. 

Judg.  3. 16  made  him  a  dagger  which  had  two  edges 
B.Faces,  face,  D'i3  panim. 

Eccl.io.  10  iron  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet  the  e. 

i.SJmrpness,  TW  tsur. 

Psa.  89.  43  hast  also  turned  the  edge  of  his  sword 

5. .End,  extremity,  nyp,  qatsah. 

Exod.28.    7  shoulder  pieces,  .joined  at  the  twoedges 

G.End,  extremity,  ns^  qatseh. 

Exod.13.  20  in  Etham,  in  the  edge  of  the  wilderness 
26.   5  fifty  loops  shalt  thou  make  in  the  edge 
36.  12  fifty  loops  made  he  in  the  edge  of  the 
Nuni33.    6  which  (is)  in  the  edge  of  the  wilderness 

33.  37  mount  Hor,  in  the  edge  of  the  laud  of 
Josh.  13.  27  unto  the  edge  of  the  sea  of  Chiuuereth' 
7.  End,  extremity,  niyp  qitsvah. 

Exod.3g.    4  by  the  two  edges  was  it  coupled  together 

S.Lip,  hd^  S'tphah, 

Exodz6.    4  loops  of  blue  upon  the  edge  of  the  oue 
26.    4  in  the  uttermost  edge  of  (another)  curta. 
26.  10  loops  on  the  edge  of  the  one  curtain 
26.  10  fifty  loops  in  the  edge  of  the  curtain 
36. 11  loops  of  blue  on  the  edge  of  oue  curtaiu 
36.  17  upon  the  uttermost  edge  of  the  curtain 
36.  17  fifty  loops  made  he  upon  the  edge  of  the 

Eze.  43.  13  the  border  thereof  by  the  edge  thereof 
9.  Mouth,  (rr6fxa  stoma. 

Luke  21.  24  they  shall  fall  by  the  edge  of  the  sword 

Heb.  11.  34  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of 

EDGE,  to  be  set  on  — 
To  be  blunt,  nnp  qahak. 

Jer.  31.  29  aud  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge 
31.  30  sour  grape,  his  teeth  shall  be  set  on  ed. 

Eze.  18.    2  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge? 

EDGES,  with  two  — 

Two  mouthed,  o'Io'to/j.os  distomos. 

Rev.    2.  12  which  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  two  ed. 

EDIFICATION  — 

Building  uj>,  oIkoSo/at}  oikodome. 

Rom  15.    2  please  (his)  neighbour,  .to  edification 

1  Co.  14.   3  speaketh  unto  men  (to)  edification 

2  Co.  10.    8  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  edification 

13.  10  the  Lord  hath  given  me  to  edification 

EDIFY,  to  — 

To  build  up,  oIkoSo/j.€Q}  oikodomeo. 

Acts   9.  31  had  the  churches  rest,  .and  were  edified 
1  Co.  8.   1  Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifi. 
10.  23  lawful  for  me,  but  all  things  edify  not 

14.  4  speaketh  in  an  (unknown)  tuugue  edifieth 
14.  4  he  that  prophesieth  edifieth  the  church 
14.  17  but  the  other  is  not  edified 

1  Th.  5.  11  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do 
EDIFY,  things  wherewith  one  may  — 
The  things  of  the  building  up,  tS  tt)s  oi/coSojufjs.. 

Rom.  14.  19  things  wherewith  one  may  edify  another 
EDIFYING  — 
1. Building  up,  oIkoBo/j.^  oikodome, 

1  Co.  14.    5  that  the  church  may  receive  edifying 

14. 12  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  church 
14.  26  Let  all  things  be  done  unto  edifying 

2  Co.  12.  19  but  (we  do)  all  things,  .for  your  edifying 
Eph.  4.  12  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ 

4.  16  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  edifying 
4.  29  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying 

2. Building  up,  oiKoBo/xia  oikodomia. 

1  Ti.    1.    4  ratherthangodlyedifying  which  is  in  faith 

E'-DOM,  Dix  red. 

1.  Elder  son  of  Isaac,  and  so  named  from  the  colour  of 
the  lentile  pottage  for  which  he  sold  his  birthright  to 
his  twin  brother  Jacob,  B.C.  1809. 

Gen.  25.  30  therefore  was  his  name  called  E. 

36.    1  these .  .the  generations  of  Esau,  who(is)E. 
36.    8  Thus  dwelt  Esau  iu.  .Seir  :  Esau  (is)  E. 
36.  19  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Esau,  who  (is)  E. 

2.  This  name  is  also  employed  to  designate  both  the 
people  that  sprang  from  Esau  and  the  country  in  which 
they  lived.  (In  Mark  3.  8  only  is  the  country  called 
Idumea).    Previously  the  country  was  called  Mount 


Seir,  from  the  progenitor  of  the  Horites,  who  had  their 
name  from  Hori  grandson  of  Seir,  because  it  was  de- 
scriptive of  their  habits  as  dwellers  in  caves. 

Gen.  32.    3  unto  the  land  of  Seir,  the  country  of  E. 

36.  16  the  dukes,  .of  Eliphaz  in  the  laud  of  E. 

36.  17  the  dukes,  .of  Reuel  in  the  land  of  E. 

36.  21  the  children  of  Seir  in  the  land  of  E. 

36.  31  the  kiugs  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  E. 

36.  32  Bela  the  son  of  Beor  reigned  in  E. 

36.  43  duke  Magdiel.  .these  (be)  the  dukes  of  E. 
Exodis.  15  Then  the  dukes  of  E.  shall  be  amazed 
Num2o.  14  sent  messengers,  .unto  the  king  of  E. 

20.  18  E.  said  unto  him.  Thou  shalt  not  pass  by 

20.  20  E.  came  out  against  him  with  much  pe. 

20.  21  E.  refused  to  give  Israel  passage  through 

20.  23  by  the  coast  of  the  land  of  E.,  saying 

21.  4  journeyed,  .to  compass  the  land  of  E. 

24.  18  E.  shall  be  a  possession,  Seir  also  shall 

33.  37  Hor,  in  the  edge  of  the  land  of  E. 

34.  3  the  wilderness,  .along  by  the  coast  of  E. 
Josh. 15.   1  to  the  border  of  E.  the  wilderness  of  Zim 

15.  21  cities  of. . Judah  toward  the  coast  of  E. 
Judg.  5.    4  thou  marchedst  out  of  the  field  of  E. 
11.  17  sent  messengers  unto  the  king  of  E. 

11. 17  but  the  king  of  E.  would  not  hearken 

11. 18  Then  they,  .compassed  the  land  of  E. 

1  Sa.  14.  47  Saul,  .fought,  .against  E.,  and  against 

2  Sa.   8.  14  he  put  garrisons  iu  E.;  throughout  all  E. 

1  Ki.  9.  26  the  shore  of  the  Red  sea,  in  the  land  of  E. 

11.  14  he  (was)  of  the  king's  seed  in  E. 
11.  15  it  came  to  pass,  when  David  was  in  E. 
11.  15  after  he  had  smitten  every  male  in  E. 
n.  16  until  he  had  cut  off  every  male  in  E. 

22.  47  then  no  king  in  E.  ;  a  deputy  (was)  king 

2  Ki.  3.    8  The  way  through  the  wilderness  of  E. 

3.  9  the  king  of  Juilah,  and  the  king  of  E. 
3.  12  Jehoshaphat  and  the  king  of  E.  went 
3.  20  behold,  there  came  water  by  the  way  of  E. 

3.  26.to  break  through,  .unto  the  king  of  E. 

8.  20,  22  E.  revolted  from  under  the  hand  of 
14.  7  He  slew  of  E.  in  the  valley  of  Salt  ten 
14.  10  Thou  hast  indeed  smitten  E.,  and  thine 

1  Ch.  1.  43  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  E. 

1.  51  the  dukes  of  E.  were  ;  duke  Tinman,  d. 

1.  54  duke  Iram.     These  (are)  the  dukes  of  E. 
18.  11  from  E.,  and  from  Moab,  and  from  the 
18.  13  he  put  garrisons  in  E.  ;  and  all  the  Edo. 

2  Ch.  8. 17  to  Eloth,  at  the  sea  side  iu  the  land  of  E. 

25.  20  because  they  sought  after  the  gods  of  E. 
Psa.  60.  title,  and  smote  of  E.  in  the  valley  of  Salt 

60.    8  over  E.  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe  :  Philistia 
60.    9  the  strong  city  ?  who  will  lead  me  into  E.  ? 
83.   6  The  tabernacles  of  E.,  and  the  Ishmael. 
108.   9  over  E.  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe ;  over  P. 
10S.  10  the  strong  city  ?  who  will  lead  me  into  E.  ? 
137.    7  Remember,  0  Lord,  the  children  of  E.  in 
Isa.    11.  14  they  shall  lay  then-  hand  upon  E.  and  M. 
63.    1  Who  (is)  this  that  cometh  from  E.,  with 
Jer.     9.  26  Egypt,  and  Judah,  and  E.,  aud  the  chil. 
25.  21  E,,  and  Moab,  and  the  childreu  of  Aram. 

27.  3  send  them  to  the  king  of  E.,  and  to  the 
40.  11  Likewise,  .all  the  Jews  that(were)  in.  E. 
49.   7  concerning  E.,  thus  saith  the  Lord  of 
49.  17  Also  E.  shall  be  a  desolation  :  every  one 
49.  20  of  the  Lord,  that  he  hath  taken  against  E. 
49.  22  shall  the  heart  of  the  mighty  men  of  E. 

Lam.  4.  21  R.ejoice  and  be  glad,  O  daughter  of  E. 

4.  22  he  will  visit  thine  iniquity,  O  daughter  of  E. 
Eze.  25.  12  Because  that  E.  hath  dealt  against  the 

25.  13  I  will,  .stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  E 
25.  14  And  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  E. 
25.  14  they  shall  do  in  E.  according  to  mine 
32.  29  There  (is)  E.,  her  kings,  and  all  her  prin. 
Dan.  ii.  41  these  shall  escape  out  of  his  hand..E. 
Joel    3.  19  E.  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness,  for  the 
Amos  1.    6  the  whole  captivity,  to  deliver,  .up  to  E. 
1.    9  delivered  up  the  whole  captivity  to  E. 

1.  11  For  three  transgressions  of  E. .  .1  will  not 

2.  1  he  burned  the  bones  of  the  king  of  E.  iuto 

9.  12  That  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  E. 
Chad.        1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  concerning  E. 

8  Shall  I  not . .  destroy  the  wise . .  out  of  E. 
Mai.    1.   4  Whereas  E.  saith,  We  are  impoverished 

E-DOM-ITES,  D'piix,  d'iin  adomim,  edom. 

The  patronymic  of  the  descendants  of  Edom  or  Esau. 

Their  first  form  of  government  resembled  that  of  the 

modern  Bedawin,  each  tribe  baring  a  petty  cluef  or 

Sheikh. 

Gen.  36.    9  Esau  the  father  of  the  E.  in  mount  Seir 

36.  43  he  (is)  Esau  the  father  of  the  E. 
Deut23.    7  Thou  shalt  not  abhor  an  E.  ;  for  he  (is) 
1  Sa.  21.    7  his  name  (was)  Doeg,  an  E. ,  the  chiefest  of 
22.   9  Then  answered  Doeg  the  E.,  which  was 
21. 18  Doeg  the  E.  turned,  and  he  fell  upon  the 

1  Ki.  11.    1  Solomon  loved.,  women  of  the.  .E.,Zidon. 

11. 14  And  the  Lord  stirred  up.  .Hadad  the  E. 

2  Ki.    8.  21  he  rose  by  night,  and  smote  the  E.  which 

1  Ch.18.  12  the  son  of  Zeruiah  slew  of  the  E.  in  the 

18.  13  and  all  the  E.  became  David's  servants 

2  Ch.21.    8  In  his  days  the  E.  revolted  from  under 

21.    9  he  rose  up  by  night,  and  smote  the  E. 
21.  10  So  the  E.  revolted  from  under  the  hand 
25.  14  was  come  from  the  slaughter  of  the  E. 
25.  19  Thou  sayest,  Lo,  thou  hast  smitten  the  E. 

28.  17  For  again  the  E.  had  come  and  smitten 
Psa.  52.  title,  when  Doeg  the  E.  came  and  told  Saul 

ED-RE'-I,  T]"$  sown  land. 

1.  A  city  of  Og,  in  the  S,,  of  Bashan,  and  N.  of  the  river 

Jabbok,  given  to  Manasseh.    It  is  25  miles  from  Bozrah 


and  9  from  Abila  (now  Draa),  which  is  itself  24  from 
Damascus. 

Kuni2i.  33  he,  and  all  his  people,  to  the  battle  at  E. 
Deut   1.    4  and  Og.  .which  dwelt  at  Astaroth  in  E. 
3.    1  he  and  all  his  people,  to  the  battle  at  E. 
3.  10  Salchah  and  E.,  cities  of  the  kingdom  of 
Josh. 12.    4  Og.  .that  dwelt  at  Ashtaruth  and  at  E. 
13.  12  Og.  .which  reigned  in  Ashtaroth  and  in  E. 
13.  31  Ashtaroth,  and  E.,  cities  of  the  kingdom 
2.  A  city  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali. 

Josh.  19.  37  And  Kedesh,  and  E.,  and  En-hazor 
EFFECT  — 
\. Matter,  ~qr\  dabar. 

Eze  12.  23  The  days  are  at  hand,  and  the  effect  of 

2.  Service,  -Tray,  abodah. 

Isa.  32.  17  the  effect  of  righteousness  quietness  and 
EFFECT,  to  become  of  no  — 
To  be  made  useless,  Karapyeo/Acu  katargeomai. 

Gal.     5.    4  Christ  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you 
EFFECT,  to  make  of  none  — 
1.  To  break,  discourage,  disallow,  tm  no,  5. 

Psa.  33.  10  he  maketh  the  devices,  .of  none  effect 
2. To  break,  make  void,  ~ns  parar,  5. 

N111U30.    8  he  shall  make  her  vow.  .of  none  effect 

3.  To  make  powerless,  lordless,  anvpdw  akuroo. 

Matt.  1 5.    6  Thus  have  ye  made . .  of  none  effect  by 
Mark  7.  13  making  the  word  of  God  of  none  effect 

i.To  make  useless,  Karapyew  katargeo. 

Rom.  4.  14  and  the  promise  made  of  none  effect 
Gal.     3.  17  it  should  make  the  promise  of  noue  effect 

5.  To  make  vain,  empty,  KevSm  kenoo. 

1  Co.    1.  17  the  cross,  .should  be  made  of  none  effect 
EFFECT,  to  make  without  — 

To  make  useless,  KaTapyew  katargeo. 

Rom.  3.    3  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect  ? 
EFFECT,  to  take  none  — 
To  fall  out  of,  eK7ri7TTw  ekpipto. 

Rom.  9.    6  the  word  of  God  hath  taken  none  effect 
EFFECT,  to  (prosperously)  — 
l.To  do,  n^w  asah. 

Jer.  48.  30  saith  the  Lord.,  his  lies  shall  not  so  effect 
2.  To  cause  to  prosper,  rqy  tsaleach,  5. 

2  Ch.  7.  11  all  that  came .  .he  prosperously  effected 
EFFECTUAL  — 

In  working,  evepyqs  energes. 

1  Co.  16.    9  For  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened 
Phm.        6  That  the  communication.,  may  become  e. 

EFFECTUAL,  to  be  — 

To  work  in,  ii/epy4u>  energeo. 

2  Co.  1.   6  which  is  effectual  iu  the  enduring  of  the 
EFFECTUAL  fervent  — 

To  work  in,  evepyew  energeo. 

Jas.    5.  16  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
EFFECTUAL  working  — 
Inworking,  ivepyeia  energeia. 

Eph.   3.    7  given  unto  me  by  the  effectual  working 
4.  16  according  to  the  effectual  working  in  the 
EFFECTUALLY  in,  to  work  — 
To  work  in,  ivepysw  energeo. 

Gal.     2.   8  For  he  that  wrought  effectually  in  Peter 

1  Th.  2.  13  which  effectually  worketh  also  in  you  that 
EFFEMINATE  — 
Soft,  iaclXclkSs  malakos. 

1  Co.  6.   9  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  themselves 
EGG  — 

I.  Egg,  yolk,  curdled  milk,  niD?n  cliallamuth. 

Job     6.   6  is  there  (any)  taste  in  the  white  of  an  egg? 

2.Eggs,  DT3  belsim. 

Deut  22.   6  young  ones,  or  eggs,  and  the  dam 

22.    6  and  the  dam  sitting  upon,  .the  eggs 
Job    39.  14  Which  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the  earth,  and 
Isa.    10.  14  and  as  one  gathereth  eggs  (that  are)  left 
59.    5  They  hatch  cockatrice'  eggs,  and  weave 
59.   5  he  that  eateth  of  their  eggs  dieth,  and  that 

Z.Egg,  w6v  oon. 

Lukei  1. 12  Or  if  he  shall  ask  an  ess,  will  he  offer 

EG'-LAH,  rhty  calf. 

One  of  David's  wives,  and  mother  of  his  6th  son,  B.C. 

1050. 

2  Sa.   3.    5  And  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  E.,  David's 
1  Ch.  3.    3  the  sixth,  Ithream  by  E.,  his  -wife 

EG-LA'-IM,  d»7|N  double  spring. 

A  city  of  Moab,  eight  miles  S.  of  Areopolis. 

Isa.    15.    8  the  howling  thereof  unto  E.,  and.. Beer. 

EG'-LON,  Jl^Ju  circle. 

1.  An  Amorite  city  in  N.W.   of  Judah  (now  Ajtan). 

in  the  Shefelah  or  "low  country."   King  Debir  was  its 

ruler  when  Joshua  conquered  it  and  its  four  confederate 

cities. 

Josh.  10.    3  sent,  .unto  Debir  king  of  E.,  saying 

10.    5  king  of  Lachish,  the  king  of  E.,  gathered 
10.  23  the  king  of  Lachish,  (and)  the  king  of  E. 
10.  34  from  Lachish  Joshua  passed  unto  E. 
10.  36  Joshua  went  up  from  E.,  and  all  Israel 
10.  37  according  to  all  that  he  had  done  to  E. 
12.  12  The  king  of  E.,  one  ;  the  king  of  Gezer 
15.  39  Lachish,  and  Bozkath  and  E. 


EGYPT 


2.  A  king  of  the  Moabites  who,  aided  by  the  Ammonites 
and  Amalekites,  crossed  the  Jordan  and  took  "the city 
of  Palm-trees,"  or  Jericho,  where  he  built  a  palace  and 
continued  for  eighteen  years  to  oppress  the  Israelites. 
He  was  slain  by  Ehud,  sou  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite,  B.C. 

Judg.  3.  12  the  Lord  strengthened  E.  the  king  of 
3.  14  So  the  children  of  Israel  served  E.  the 
3.  15  Israel  sent  a  present  unto  E.  the  king  of 
3.  17  E.  king  of  Moab  :  and  E.  (was)  a  very  fat 

E'-GYPT,  DHSD,  Atywirros,  MecpaiV. 
A  country  at  the  N.E.  angle  of  Africa,  and  lying  between 
310  37'  and  240  1'  N. ;  and  27'  13'  and  34*  12'  E.  Its 
limits  appear  to  have  been  almost  always  the  same. 
In  Eze.  29. 10  and  30.  6  the  whole  country  is  spoken  of  as 
extending  from  Migdol  to  Syene,  which  indicates  the 
same  limits  to  the  E.  and  S.  as  at  present.  The  tract 
irrigated  by  the  Nile  was,  in  ancient  times,  the  real 
extent  of  Egypt.  In  modern  times  alone  has  the  name 
been  used  in  a  more  extended  sense.  In  the  Bible  the 
common  name  is  "  J/ itsraim  "  or  "  the  land  of  Mitsraini." 
It  was  colonised  by  the  descendants  of  Ham.  The  word 
Mitsvaini  is  dual,  and  indicates  the  natural  division  of 
the  country  into  an  upper  and  lower  region— the  plain 
of  the  Delta,  and  the  narrow  valley  above,  as  it  has 
been  commonly  called  at  all  times.  When  the  singular 
iorm  Matsor  occurs,  some  suppose  it  points  out  Lower 
.Egypt  only.  Matsor  means  "  red  mud."  The  "land  erf 
Ham,"  is  also  poetically  used  in  the  Bible  for  Egypt. 

The  folio  wing  table  has  been  compiled  from  the  works 
of  thebest  authorities  :— In  B.C.  2717  Menes.the  first  king 
of  Egypt,  and  founder  of  the  Thinite  dynasty,  begins  to 
reign;  2280  Thebes  founded;  2188  Memphis  founded; 
2126  Egypt  divided  into  Egypt  proper,  Lower  Egypt, 
This,  and  Memphis;  2122  Hieroglyphics  invented  by 
Athotes ;  2i2oSuphis  and  his  brother  Sensuphis  build 
pyramids  to  the  north  of  Memphis,  which  still  exist; 
2100  Osymandyas  extends  his  conquests  into  Asia  ;  the 
worship  of  Osiris,  Isis,  Vhtha,  and  Amnion  introduced; 
2080  Memphis  taken  by  the  shepherd  kings  of  Phoenicia, 
who  establish  their  dynasty;  1938  lake  Mceris  con- 
structed; 1920  arrival  of  Abraham,  and  expxilsion  of 
the  shepherd  kings  ;  1S91  Syphoas  introduces  common 
letters ;  1S2S  the  Phoenicians  expelled  from  Lower 
Egypt ;  1822  Memnon  invents  the  Egyptian  alphabet ; 
1S21  Amenophis  I.  becomes  king  of  all  Egypt;  172S 
Joseph  sold  into  Egypt;  1706  settlement  of  Jacob  and 
his  family  in  Goshen;  1635  death  of  Joseph;  1618 
accession  of  Sesostris;  1615  the  Ethiopians  obtain  a 
footing  in  Egypt ;  1491  the  ten  plagues  are  suffered  by 
the  Egyptians,  and  the  exodus  of  the  Israelites  is 
accomplished  ;  1485  reign  of  Egyptus,  from  whom  the 
country  is  named  Egypt  instead  of  Mizraim ;  1322  com- 
mencement of  first  Sothic  cycle ;  1308  reign  of  Sethos, 
who  builds  the  temple  of  Vulcan  at  Memphis,  and 
other  works;  1214  reign  of  Thuoris,  or  Proteus;  1183 
Menelaus  arrives  in  Egypt  after  the  Trojan  war,  and 
receives  Helen  from  Thuoris ;  1082  reign  of  Cheops ; 
1004  alliance  between  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,  and 
Solomon  ;  972  Shishak  invades  Judea,  and  takes  Jeru- 
salem ;  S25  accession  of  Peterbastes,  founder  of  the 
Tanaite  dynasty ;  7S6  Egypt  establishes  her  supremacy 
over  the  Mediterranean ;  7S1  commencement  of  the 
Saite  dynasty ;  769  So,  the  Ethiopian,  deposes  Anysis  ; 
722  alliance  with  Hosea  kingof  Israel;  719  Soabdicates 
and  returns  to  Ethiopia  ;  711  invaded  by  Sennacherib 
king  of  Assyria ;  685  Egypt  divided  between  twelve 
kings;  660  Psammetichus  I.  obtains  the  sovereignty  of 
the  whole  of  Egypt ;  630  siege  of  Azotus,  or  Ashdod",  by 
Psammetichus — it  lasts  twenty  years ;  610  Pharaoh 
Necho  attempts  to  connect  the  Mediterranean  and  Red 
Seas  by  a  canal;  but,  after  losing  120,000  men,  com- 
pelled to  relinquish  the  undertaking;  605  Pharaoh 
Necho  defeated  by  Nebuchadnezzar ;  600  Psammis, 
king  of  Egypt,  invades  Ethiopia  ;  5S1  Nebuchadnezzar 
deposes  Pharaoh  Hophra,  or  Apries ;  572  he  ravages 
Egypt ;  569  makes  Amasis  king,  during  whose  reign 
Egypt  contains  20,000  cities ;  554  Solon  visits  it ;  536 
Pythagoras  visits  it ;  535  Cyrus  renders  Egypt  tributary; 
525  Cambyses  invades  Egypt,  and  abolishes  the  empire 
of  the  Pharaohs ;  484  Xerxes  suppresses  an  insurrection 
of  the  Egyptians ;  460  Inarus  rebels  against  the 
Persians;  41S  Herodotus  visits  Egypt ;  413  Amyrtseus 
restores  it  to  independence ;  350  it  is  again  subjected  to 
Persia  by  Ochus  ;  332  Alexandria  founded  by  Alexander 
the  Great ;  322  Ptolemy  I.  (Soter)  restores  the  inde- 
pendence of  Egypt,  and  transfers  the  seat  of  govern- 
ment to  Alexandria;  320  revolt  of  Phoenicia,  and 
immigration  of  about  100,000  Jews ;  314  Phoenicia  is 
wrested  from  Egypt  by  Antigonus,  king  of  Phrygia ; 
301  battle  of  Ipsus,  which  secures  the  independence  of 
Egypt,  and  final  restoration  of  Phoenicia ;  273  an 
Egyptian  embassy  arrives  at  Rome  ;  272  Memphis  is 
made  capital;  246  Ptolemy  III.  invades  Syria;  217 
battle  of  Raphia,  which  subjects  Coele-Syria  and 
Palestine  to  the  Egyptian  yoke ;  203  alliance  concluded 
with  Rome — Judea  is  lost ;  198  Syria  regains  its  inde- 
pendence ;  1S3  an  insurrection  quelled  by  Polycrates ; 
171  Antiochus  Epiphanes  defeats  Eukeus,  regent  of 
Egypt,  and  makes  him  prisoner;  164  kingdom  divided 
between  Ptolemy  VI.  and  his  brother  Physcon;  146 
Ptolemy  falls  in  battle,  and  Physcon  usurps  the 
throne;  131  Physcon  (Ptolemy  VII.)  puts  away  his 
wife  Cleopatra  and  marries  her  daughter  by  his  own 
brother ;  1 29  is  compelled  to  flee  to  Cyprus ;  128  a 
pestilence,  caused  by  swarms  of  locusts,  carries  off 
800,000  of  the  population ;  107  Cleopatra  compels 
Ptolemy  YIII.  to  retire  to  Cyprus,  and  governs  Egypt ; 
88  civil  war  between  Ptolemy  VIII.  and  Alexander  I. ; 
82  capture  and  destruction  of  Thebes ;  80  abdication 
of  Alexander  III.,  and  election  of  Ptolemy  X.,  who 

37 


4* 

43- 

43- 
45- 
45- 
45- 


2S9 


renders  his  country  tributary  to  the  Romans ;  58  the 
Egyptians  expel  Ptolemy  X.,  and  establish  Berenice 
and  Tryphama ;  51  death  of  Ptolemy.,  who  leaves  Ins 
kingdom  to  Ptolemy  XI.  and  Cleopatra ;  49  Ptolemy 
expels  Cleopatra,  and  civil  war  ensues. 

Gen.  12. 10  Abramwent  down  into  E.  to  sojourn  there 
12.  11  when  he  was  come  near  to  enter  into  E. 

12.  14  it  came  to  pass. .  Abram  was  come  into  E. 

13.  1  Abram  went  up  out  of  E.,  he,  and  his 
13.  10  like  the  land  of  E.,  as  thou  comest  unto 
15.  18  from  the  river  of  E.  unto  the  great  river 
21.  21  took  him  a  wife  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

25.  18  from  Havilah  unto  Shur,  that  (is) before  E. 

26.  2  And  the  Lord  . .  said,  Go  not  down  into  E. 
37.  25  bearing,  .myrrh,  .to  carry  (it)  down  to  E. 
37.  28  and  they  brought  Joseph  into  E. 

37.  36  the  Midianites  sold  him  into  E.  unto  P. 

39.  1  And  Joseph  was  brought  down  to  E. 

40     1  the  butler  of  the  king  of  E.  and  (his)  ba. 

40.  1  had  offended  their  lord  the  king  of  E. 

40.  5  the  butler  and  the  baker  of  the  king  of  E. 

41.  8  sent  and  called  for  all  the  magicians  of  E. 
41.  19  such  as  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  E. 
41.  29  great  plenty  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 

■    41. 30  plenty  shall  be  forgotten  in  the  land  of  E. 
41.  33  man.  .wise,  and  set  him  over  the  land  of  E. 
41.  34  take  up  the  fifth  part  of  the  land  of  E. 
41.  36  of  famine,  which  shall  be  in  the  land  of  E. 
41.  41  I  have  set  thee  over  all  the  land  of  E. 
41. 43  made  him  (ruler)  over  all  the  land  of  E. 
41.  44  shall  no  man  lift  up  lus  hand.  .in.  .E. 
41.  45  Joseph  went  out  over,  .the  land  of  E. 
41.  46  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
41.  46  Jos. .  .went  throughout  all  ttie  land  of  E. 
41.  48  seven  years,  which  were  in  the  land  of  E. 
41.  53sevenyearsofpleuteousness. . in.. E.,  were 
41.  54  in  all  the  land  of  E.  there  was  bread 
41.  55  And  when  all  the  land  of  E.  was  famished 
41.  56  the  famine  waxed  sore  in  the  land  of  E. 

41.  57  all  countries  came  into  E.  .to  buy  (corn$ 

42.  1  Jacob  saw  that  there  was  corn  in  E. 
42.    2  I  have  heard  that  there  is  corn  in  E. 

3  ten  brethren  went  down  to  buy  corn  in  E. 
2  corn  which  they  had  brought  out  of  E. 

.  15  rose  up,  and  went  down  to  E.,  and  stood 

4  Jos.  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold  into  E. 
"5  and  a  ruler  throughout  all  the  land  of  B. 
9  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  E. 

45.  13  shall  tell  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in  E. 
45. 18  will  give  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  E. 
45.  19  take  you  wagons  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
45.  20  for  the  good  of  all  the  land  of  E.  (is) 
45.  23  asses  laden  with  the  good  things  of  E. 
45.  25  they  went  up  out  of  E.,  and  came  into 

45.  26  he  (is)  governor  over  all  the  land  of  E. 

46.  3  fear  not  to  go  dowu  into  E. ;  for  I  will  there 
46.   4  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  E. 

46.  6  they  took  their  cattle,  .and  came  into  E. 
46.  7  all  his  seed,  brought  he  with  him  into  E. 
46.  8  the  children  of  Israel  winch  came  into  E. 
46.  20  unto  Joseph  in  the  land  of  E.  were  born 
46.  26  the  souls  that  came  with  Jacob  into  E. 

46.  27  sons  of  Joseph,  which  were  born  him  in  E. 
46  27  souls  of  the  house  of  Jacob . .  came  into  E. 

47.  6  The  land  of  E.  (is)  before  thee  :  in  the 
47.  11  gave  them  a  possession  in  the  land  of  E. 
47.  13  the  land  of  E. .  .fainted  by  reason  of  the 
47. 14  the  money  that  was  found  in  the  land  of  E. 
47.  15  And  when  money  failed  in  the  land  of  E. 
47.  20  Joseph  bought  all  the  land  of  E.  for  Ph. 
47.  21  removed  them,  .from  (one)  end  of.  .E. 
47. 26  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  E. 
47.  27  And  Israel  dwelt  in  the  land  of  E. 

47.  2S  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  E.  seventeen 
47.  29  bury  me  not,  I  pray  thee,  in  E. 

47.  30  thou  shalt  carry  me  out  of  E.,  and  bury 

48.  5  Ephr.  and  Manasseh . .  were  born . .  in . .  E. 
48.    5  before  I  came  unto  thee  into  E.,  (are) 
50.    7  and  all  the  elders  of  the  land  of  E. 

50.  14  Joseph  returned  intoE.,  he,  and  his 
50.  22  Joseph  dwelt  in  E.,  he  and  his  father's 
50.  26  and  he  was  put  in  a  coffin  in  E. 
Exod.  1.    1  children  of  Israel,  which  came  into  E. 
1.    5  for  Joseph  was  in  E.  (already) 
1.    8  Now  there  arose  up  a  new  king  over  E. 

1.  15  And  the  king  of  E.  spake  to  the  Hebrew 

1. 17  midwives.  .did  not  as  the  king  of  E.  co. 

1. 18  And  the  king  of  E.  called  for  the  midwives 

2.  23  in  process  of  time .  .the  king  of  E.  died 

3.  7  affliction  of  my  people  which  (are)  in  E. 
3.  10  mayest  bring  forth  my  people . .  out  of  E. 

3. 11  I  should  bring  f orth ..  Israel  out  of  E.? 

3. 12  hast  brought  forth  the  people  out  of  E. 
3.  16  have..(seen)thatwhichisdonetoyouinE. 
3. 17  will  bring  you  up  out  of  the  affliction  of  E. 
3.  18  and  thou  shalt  come .  .unto  the  king  of  E. 

3. 19  the  king  of  E.  will  not  let  you  go,  no 

3.  20  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  and  smite  E. 

4.  18  return  unto  my  brethren  which  (are)  in  E. 
4. 19  And  the  Lord  said.  .Go,  return  into  E. 
4.  20  and  he  returned  to  the  land  of  E. 

4.  21  When  thou  goest  to  return  into  E.,  see 

5.  4  the  king  of  E.  said  unto  them,  Wherefore 

5. 12  scattered,  .throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 
6. 11  Go  in,  speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

6. 13  them  a  charge  unto.  .Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

6.  13  to  bring  the  children  of  Israel  out  of.  .E. 
6.  26  Bring  out  the  children  of  Israel  from..E. 
6.  27  they  which  spake  to  Paraoh  king  of  E. 

6.  27  to  bring  out  the  children  of  Israel  from  E. 
6.  28  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  land  of  E. 
6.  29  speak  thou  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  E.  all 


EGYPT 


Exod.  7.    3  multiply,  .my  wonders  in  the  land  of  E. 
7.    4  that  I  may  lay  my  hand  upon  E. 
7.    4  out  of  the  land  of  E.by  great  judgments 
7.    5  when  I  stretch  forth  mine  hand  upon  E. 
7.  11  the  magicians  of  E.,  they  also  did  in  like 
7.  19  stretch . .  thine  hand  upon  the  waters  of  E. 
7.  19  may  be  blood  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 

7.  22  the  magicians  of  E.  did  so  with  their  v.  21 

8.  5  cause  frogs  to  come  up  upon  the  rand  of  E. 
8.  6  stretched .  .  his  band  over  the  waters  of  E. 
8.  6  frogs  came  up,  and  covered  the  land  of  E. 
8.  7  and  brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land  of  E. 
8.  16  become  lice  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 
8.  17  became  lice  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 

8.  24  there  came . .  (flies)  into . .  all  the  land  of  E. 

9.  4  the  cattle  of  Israel  and  the  cattle  of  E. 
9.    6  and  all  the  cattle  of  E.  died :  but  of 

9.   9  become  small  dust  in  all  the  land  of  E. 

9.   9  upon  beast,  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 

g.  18  such  as  hath  not  been  in  E.  since  the  fou. 

9.  22  there  may  be  hail  in  all  the  land  of  E. 

9.  22  every  herb .  .throughout  the  land  of  E. 

9.  23  the  Lord  rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  E. 

9.  24  there  was  none  like  it  hi  all  the  land  of  E. 

9.  25  hail  smote  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 
10.   2  what  things  I  have  wrought  in  E.,and  my 
10.    7knowestthou  not  yet  thatE.  isdestroyed? 
10.  12  Stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  land  of  E. 
10.  i2  they  may  come  up  upon  the  land  of  E. 
10.  13  stretched  forth  his  rod  over  the  land  of  E. 
10. 14  the  locusts  went  up  over  all  the  land  of  E. 
10.  14  and  rested  in  all  the  coasts  of  E. 
10.  15  not  any  green  thing,  .through.  .E. 
10. 19  not  one  locust  in  all  the  coasts  of  E. 
10.  21  there  may  be  darkness  over  the  land  of  E. 

10.  22  there  was.  .darkness  in  all  the  land  of  E. 

11.  1  will  I  bring  one  plague  (more)  upon.  .E. 
11.    3  Moses  (was)  very  great  in  the  land  of  E. 
11.    4  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the  midst  of  E. 
11.    5  ail  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  E.  shall 
11.    6  shall  be  a  great  cry  throughout  all.  .E. 

11.  9  wonders  may  be  multip.  in  the  land  of  E. 

12.  1  Lord  spake  unto  Moses.,  in  the  land  of  E. 
12. 12  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of  E.  this 
12.  12  will  smite  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  E. 
12.  12  against  all  the  gods  of  E.  I  will  execute 
j2.  13  when  I  smite  the  land  of  E. 

12.  17  IbroughtyourarmiesoutofthelandofE. 
12.  27  passed  over  the  houses  of .  .Israel  in  E. 
12.  29  smote  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  E. 
12. 30  and  there  was  a  great  cry  in  E.  ;  for 
12.  39  dough  which  they  brought  forth  out  of  E. 
12.  39  because  they  were  thrust  out  of  E.,  aod 
12.  40  of  the  children  of  Israel,  who  dwelt  in  E. 
12.  41  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out . .  of  E. 
12.  42  for  bringing  them  out  from  the  land  of  E. 

12.  51  the  Lord  did  bring.  .Israel  out  of .  .E. 

13.  3  this  day,  in  which  ye  came  out  from  E. 
13.    8  unto  me  when  I  came  forth  out  of  E. 
13.  9  hath  the  Lord  brought  thee  out  of  E. 
13. 14  the  Lord  brought  us  out  from  E.,  from 
13.  15  slew  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  E. 
13. 16  strength.  .Lord  brought,  .us  out  of  E. 
13.  17  the  people  repent,  .and.  .return  to  E. 

13.  iS  went  up  harnessed  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

14.  s  it  was  told  the  king  of  E.  that  the  people 
14.  7  And  he  took,  .all  the  chariots  of  E.,  and 
14.  8  the  LORD  hardened.  .Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
14. 11  Because  (there  were)  no  graves  in  E.,  hast 
14.  11  dealt  thus,  .to  carry  us  forth  out  of  E.  ?  j 
14.  12  (Is)  not  this . .  that  we  did  tell  thee  in  E. 
16.  1  month  after  their  departing  out  of.. E. 
16.  3  had  died  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in.  .E 
16.   6  hath  brought  you  out  from  the  land  of  E. 

16.  32  I  brought  you  forth  from  the  land  of  E. 

17.  3  thou  hast  brought  us  up  out  of  E.,  to  kill 

18.  1  the  Lord  had  brought  Israel  out  of  E. 

19.  1  when.  .Israel  were  gone  forth  out  of .  .E. 

20.  2  which  have  brought  thee  out  of.  .E. 

22.  21  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  E. 

23.  9  seeing  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  E. 
23.  15  for  in  it  thou  earnest  out  from  E. 

29.  46  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
32.    1  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
32.    4  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
32.   7  which  thou  broughtest  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
32.   8  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
32.  11  hast  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

32.  23  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

33.  1  hast  brought  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

34.  18  the  month  A  bib  thou  earnest  out  from  E. 
Lev.  11.  45  the  Lord  that  bringeth  you  up  out  of. .E. 

18.  3  After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  E. 

19.  34  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  E. 
19.  36  which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

22.  33  That  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

23.  43  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
25.  38  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
25.  42  servants,  which  I  brought  forth  out  of . .  E. 

25.  55  servants  whom  I  brought  forth  out  of .  .E. 

26.  13  God,  which  brought  you  forth  out  of.  .E. 
26.  45  ancestors,  whom  I  brought  forth  out  of  ..E. 

Num.  1.    1  after  they  were  come  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
3. 13  I  smote  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  E. 

8.  17  I  smote  eyery  first  born  in  the  land  of  E. 

9.  1  after  they  were  come  out  of  the  laDd  of  E. 
11.   5  We  remember  the  fish,  .we  did  eat  in  E. 
11.  18  flesh  to  eat?  for  (it  was)  well  with  usinE. 
11.  20  saying,  Why  came  we  forth  out  of  E.? 
13. 22  Hebron  was  built,  .before  Zoan  in  E. 

14.   2  Would  God  that  we  had  died  in . .  E.  ! 
14.   3  Were  it  not  better  for  us  to  return  into  E. 


\ 


EGYPT 


290 


EGYPT 


Num  14.    4  make  a  captain,  and  let  us  return  into  E. 
14.  19  forgiven  this  people,  from  E.  even  until 

14.  22  my  miracles,  which  I  did  in  E.  and  in 

15.  41  which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
20.  5  have  ye  made  us  to  come  up  out  of  E.,  to 
20.  15  How  our  fathers  went  down  into  E. 

20.  15  and  we  have  dwelt  in  E.  a  long  time 
20  16  and  hath  brought  us  forth  out  of  E. 

21.  5  have  ye  brought  us  up  out  of  E.  to  die 

22.  5,  11  Behold,  .a-people  come  out  from  E. 

23.  22  God  brought  them  out  of  E.  ;  he  hath 

24.  8  God  brought  him  forth  out  of  E. ;  he  hath 
26.    4  which  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
26.  59  whom  (her  mother)  bare  to  Levi  in  E. 

32.  11  noue  of  the  men  that  came  up  out  of  E. 

33.  1  which  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

33.  38  Israel  were  come  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

34.  5  compass  from  Azmon  unto  the  river  of  E. 
Dent.  1.  27  hath  brought  us  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

I.  30  according  to  all  that  he  did  for  you  in  E. 
4.  20  the  Lord  hath  taken  you.  .out  of  E. 

4.  34  according  to  all.  .God  did  for  you  in  E. 
4.  37  thee,  .with  his  mighty  power  out  of  E. 
4.  45  spake,  .after  they  came  forth  out  of  E. 

4.  46  after  they  were  come  forth  out  of  E. 

5.  6  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

5.  15  thou  wast  a  servant  in  the  land  of  E. 

6.  12  brought  thee  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
6. 21  We  were  Pharaoh's  bondmen  in  E. 

6.  21  Lord  brought  us  out  of  E.  with  a  mighty 

6.  22  Lord  showed  signs  and  wonders . .  upon  E. 

7.  8  from  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
7. 15  will  put  none  of  the  evil  diseases  of  E. 
7.  iS  remember  what . .  God  did . .  unto  all  E. 
8. 14  brought  thee  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
9.    7  thou  didst  depart  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
9. 12,  26  which  thou  hast  brought  forth  out  of  E. 

10. 19  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  E. 
10. 22  Thy  fathers  went  down  into  E.  with  three. 
11.    3  miracles,  .which  he  did  in  the  midst  of  E. 
11.   3  unto  Pharaoh  the  king  of  E.,  and  unto 
11.   4  what  he  did  unto  the  army  of  E.,  unto 
11. 10  laud .  .(is)  not  as  the  land  of  E.,  from 
13.    5»  10  which  brought  yououtof  thelandof  E. 

15.  15  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  E. 

16.  1  God  brought  thee  forth  out  of  E.  by  night 
16.  3,  3  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
16.  6  season  that  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  E. 
16.  12  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  E. 
17. 16  shall  not.  .cause  the  people  to  return  to  E. 
20.    1  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

23.  4  met  you  not.  .when  ye  came  fo.  out  of  E. 

24.  9  after  that  ye  were  come  forth  out  of  E. 
24. 18,  22 remember,  .thou  wastabondman in  E. 

25  17  when  ye  were  come  forth  out  of  E. 

26.  5  he  went  down  into  E.,  and  sojourned 

26  8  And  the  Lord  brought  us  forth  out  of  E. 
28.  27  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  botch  of  E. 
28.  60  bring  upon  thee  all  the  diseases  of  E. 

28.  68  the  Lord,  .shall  bring  thee  into  E.  again 

29.  2  all  that  the  Lord  did.  .in  the  land  of  E. 

29. 16  know  how  we  have  dwelt  in  the  land  of  E. 

29.  25  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
34.  11  which  the  LORD  sent  him  to  do  in.  .E. 

Josh.  2.  10  dried  up  the . .  sea . .  when  y  came  out  of  E. 
4  All  the  people  that  came  out  of  E. 

4  of  war,  died,  .after  they  came  out  of  E. 

5  by  the  way  as  they  came  forth  out  of  E. 

6  men  of  war,  which  came  out  of  E.,  were 
9  I  rolled  away  the  reproach  of  E.  from  off 
9  we  have  heard . .  all  that  he  did  in  E. 

3  From  Sihor,  which  (is)  before  E.,  even 

4  Azmon,  and  went  out  unto  the  river  of  E. 
15.  47  unto  the  river  of  E.,  and  the  great  sea 
24.    4  Jacob  and  hischildi"en  went  down  into  E. 

5  I  sent  Moses  also,  .and  I  plagued  E. 

6  And  I  brought  your  fathers  out  of  E. 

7  eyes  have  seen  what  I  have  done  in  E. 
,.  14  gods  which  your  fathers  served,  .in  E. 

24. 17  brought,  .our  fathers  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
24.  32  children  of  Israel  brought  up  out  of  E. 

Judg.  2.    1  and  said,  I  made  you  to  go  up  out  of  E. 
2.  12  which  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
6.    8  saith  the  Lord  . .  I  brought  you  up  from  E. 

6.  13  Did  not  the  LORD  bring  us  up  from  E.  ? 

II.  13  my  land,  when  they  came  up  out  of  E. 

11.  16  But  when  Israel  came  up  from  E. 

19.  30  that.  .Israel  came upout  of  the  land  of  E. 

1  Sa,    2.  27  when  they  were  in  E.  in  Pharaoh's  house? 

8.  8  day  that  I  brought  them  up  out  of  E. 

10. 18  saith  the  Lord.  .1  brought  up.  .out  of  E. 

12.  6  Lord  . .  brought  your  fathers  up  out  of . .  E. 
12.    8  "When  Jacob  was  come  into  E.,  and  your 
12.    8  which  brought  forth  your  fathers  out  of  E. 
15.    2  I  remember,  .when  he  came  up  from  E. 
15,    6  kindness,  .when  they  came  up  out  of  E. 
15.    7  comest  to  Shur,  that  (is)  over  against  E. 

27.  8  goest  to  Shur,  even  unto  the  land  of  E. 

30.  13  he  said,  I  (am)  a  young  man  of  E.,  servant 

2  Sa.    7.    6  since  the  time.  .1  brought.  .Isr.  out  of  E. 

7.  23  which  thou  redeemedst  to  thee  from  E. 
1  Ki.  3.    1  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

4.  21  Solomon  reigned,  .unto  the  border  of  E. 
4.  30  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled .  .wisdom  of  E. 
6.    1  children  of  Israel  were  come  out  of .  .E. 

8.  9  when  they  came  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
8.  16  I  brought  forth  my  people,  .out  of  E. 
8.  21  he  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
8.  51  which  thou  broughtest  forth  out  of  E. 
8.  53  thou  broughtest  our  fathers  out  of  E. 

8.  65  from.  .Hamatb  unto  the  river  of  E. 

9.  9  brought  forth  then*  fathers  out  of.  .E. 


5- 
5- 

5- 
5- 
5- 
9- 

13. 

*5- 


24. 
24. 
24. 

24. 


1  Ki.  9.  16  (For)  Pharaoh  king  of  E.  had  gone  np  and 

10.  28  Solomon  had  horses  brought  out  of  E. 

10.  29  a  chariot  came  up  and  went  out  of  E.  for 

1 1 .  1 7  That  Hadad  fled . .  to  go  into  E. 

11. 18  came  to  E.,  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

11.  21  Hadad  heard  in  E.  that  David  slept  with 

11.  40  fled  into  E.,  unto  Shishak  king  of  E. 

11.  40  and  was  in  E.  until  the  death  of  Solomon 

12.  2  when  Jeroboam,  .who  was  yet  in  E. 

12.  2  was  fled  from.  .Solomon,  and.  .dwelt  inE. 
12.  28  which  brought  thee . .  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
14.  25  Shishak  kiug  of  E.  came  up  against  Jer. 

2  Ki.  17.    4  he  had  sent  messengers  to  So  king  of  E. 

17.    7  brought  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
17.    7  from  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

17.  36  the  Lord,  who  brought  you  up  out  of.  .E. 

18.  21  the  staff  of  this  bruised  reed,  .upon  E. 
18.  21  so  (is)  Pharaoh  king  of  E.  unto  all  that 
18.  24  put  thy  trust  on  E.  for  chariots  and  for 
at.  15  the  day  their  fathers  came  forth  out  of  E. 
23.  29  In  his  days  Pharaoh-nechoh  king  of  E. 

23.  34  and  he  came  to  E.,  and  died  there 

24.  7  And  the  king  of  E.  came  not  again  any 
24.    7  king,  .had  taken  from  the  river  of  E.  unto 

24.  7  all  that  pertained  to  the  king  of  E. 

25.  26  the  captains  of  the  armies,  .came  to  E. 

1  Ch.  13.  5  from  Shihor  of  E.  even  unto  the  entering 

17.  21  people,  .thou  hast  redeemed  out  of  E.? 

2  Ch.  1.  16  Solomon  had  horses  brought  out  of  E. 

1. 17  And  they,  .brought  forth  out  of  E.  a  cha. 
5. 10  children  of  Israel,  when  they  ca.  out  of  E. 

6.  5  I  brought  forth  my  people  out  of .  .E. 

7.  8  from . .  Hamath  unto  the  river  of  E. 

7.  22  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

9.  26  reigned  over  all . .  to  the  border  of  E. 

9.  28  brought  unto  Solomon  horses  out  of  E. 
10.    2  Jeroboam .  .in  E. .  .returned  out  of  E. 
12.    2  Shishak  king  of  E.  came  up  against  Jer. 
12.    3  without  number  that  came,  .out  of  E. 
12.    9  So  Shishak  king  of  E.  came  up  against 

20. 10  when  they  came  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

26.  8  name  spread .  .to  the  entering  in  of  E. 

35.  20  Necho  king  of  E.  came  up  to  tight  against 

36.  3  the  king  of  E.  put  him  down  at  Jerusalem 
36.  4  the  king  of  E.  made  Eliakim  his  brother 
36.   4  Necho  took  Jehoahaz.  .and  carried,  .to  E. 

Neh    9.    9  didst  see  the  affliction  of  our  fathers  in  E. 

9. 18  God  that  brought  thee  up  out  of  E. 
Psa.  68.  31  Princes  shall  come  out  of  E. ;  Ethiopia 

78.  12  Marvellous  things  did  he.  .in  thelandof  B. 
78.  43  How  he  had  wrought  his  signs  in  E. 
78.  51  And  smote  all  the  first  born  in  E. 

80.  8  Thou  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  E. 

81.  5  when  he  went  out  through  the  land  of  E. 
81.  10  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

105.  23  Israel  also  came  into  E. ;  and  Jacob 

105.  38  E.  was  glad  when  they  departed  :  for  the 

106.  7  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders  in  E. 
106.  21  saviour,  which  had  done  great  things  in  E. 
114.  1  When  Israel  went  out  of  E.,  the  house  of 
135.    8  Who  smote  the  first  born  of  E.,  both  of 

135.  9  sent,  .wonders  into  the  midst  of  thee,  OE. 

136.  10  To  him  that  smote  E.  in  their  first  born 
Prov.  7. 16  have  decked  my  bed .  .with  fine  linen  of  E. 
Isa.    7.  18  in  the  uttermost  part  of  the  rivers  of  E. 

10.  24  lift  up  his  staff,  .after  the  manner  of  E. 

10.  26  shall  he  lift  it  up  after  the  manner  of  E. 

11. 11  recover  the  remnant  of  his  peo. .  .from  E. 

11. 16  day  that  he  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
19.    1  The  burden  of  E . .  Behold,  the  Lord  rideth 

1  Behold,  the  Lord,  .shall  come  into  E. 
1  the  idols  of  E.  shall  be  moved  at  his  pre. 
1  the  heart  of  E.  shall  melt  in  the  midst  of 
3  the  spirit  of  E.  shall  fail  in  the  midst 
•  what  the  Lord  of  hosts , .  purposedupou  E. 
_,;  13  they  have  also  seduced  E.,  (even  they 
19.  14  they  have  caused  E.  to  err  in  every  work 
19.  15  Neither  shall  there  be  (any)  work  for  E. 
19.  16  that  day  shall  E.  be  like  unto  women 

19. 17  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a  terror  unto  E. 
19.  18  In  that  day.  .five  cities  in  the  land  of  E. 
19. 19  an  altar  to  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of.  .E. 
19.  20  witness  unto  the  Lord,  .in the  land  of  E. 
19.  21  And  the  LORD  shall  be  known  to  E. 

19.  22  the  Lord  thall  smite  E.;  he  shall  smite 
19.  23  In  that  day  shall . .  be  a  highway  out  of  E. 
19,  23  aud  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  E. 

19.  24  In  that  day  shall  Israel  be.  .with  E.  and 
19. 25  Blessed  (be)  E.  my  people,  and  Assyria 

20.  3  a  sign  and  wonder  upon  E.  and  upon  Eth. 
20.  4  buttocks  uncovered,  to  the  shame  of  E. 
20.    5  they  shall  be.  .ashamed  of .  .E.  their 

23.   5  As  at  the  report  concerning  E.,  (so)  shall 

27. 12  from  the  channel,  .unto  the  stream  of  E. 

27. 13  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  E..  .shall 
30."  2  That  walk  to  go  down  into  E.,  and  have 
30.    2  and  to  trust  in  the  shadow  of  E.! 

30.  3  the  trust  in  the  shadow  of  E.  (your)  con. 

31.  1  Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  E.  for  help 
36.  6  thou  trustest  in . .  this  broken  reed,  on  E. 
36.  6  so  (is)  Pharaoh  king  of  E.  to  all  that  trust 
36.  9  put  thy  trust  on  E.  for  chariots  and  for 
43.  3  I  gave  E.  (for)  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia  and 
45.  14  The  labour  of  E. . .  shall  corao  over  unto 
52.    4  My  people  went  down  aforetime  into  E. 

Jer     2.    6  Lord,  .brought  us  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
2.  18  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  E. 
2. 36  thou  also  shalt  be  ashamed  of  E.,  as  thou 
7.  22  the  day  that  I  brought  them  out  of .  .E. 
7.  25  day.,  your  fathers  came  forth  out  of..E. 
9.  26  E.,  and  Judah,  and  Edom,  and  the  chil. 

11.  4  I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  laud  of  E. 


1  ■">■ 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


16. 
23. 
24. 
25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
3*- 
32. 
32. 
34- 
37- 
37- 
41. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 

44- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 

Eze  17. 
19. 
20. 


3°' 
3°' 
3°' 
30. 
30. 
30. 
3°- 
3*- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32- 
Dau.    9. 


7  I  brought  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  E 
14  brought  up  the  child,  of  Israel  out  of .  .E. 

7  brought  up  the  children  of  Is.  out  of .  .E. 

8  and  them  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  E. 

19  Pharaoh  king  of  E. . .  and  all  his  people 

21  he  was  afraid,  and  fled,  and  went  into  E. 

22  Jehoiakim  the  king  sent  men  into  E. 

22  and  (certain)  men  with  him  into  E. 

23  And  they  fetched  forth  Drijah  out  of  E. 
32  to  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

20  Which  hast  set  signs,  .in  the  land  of  E. 

21  hast  brought  forth  thy  people,  .out  of .  .E. 

13  I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
5  Pharaoh's  army  was  come  forth  out  of  E. 
7  Pharaoh's  army,  .shall  return  to  E.  into 

1 7  And  they  departed . .  to  go  to  enter  into  E. 

14  No  ;  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  E. 

15  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into  E. 

16  sword,  .shall  overtake  you  there  in.  .E. 

16  shall  follow  close  after  you  there  in  E. 

17  the  men  that  set  their  faces  to  go  into  E. 

18  upon  you,  when  ye  shall  enter  into  E. 

19  ye  remnant  of  Judah  ;  Go  ye  not  into  E. 
2  to  say,  Go  not  into  E.  to  sojourn  there 

7  So  they  came  into  the  land  of  E. ;  for  they 

11  he  cometh,  he  shall  smite  the  land  of  E. 

12  kindle  a  fire  in.  .houses  of  the  gods  of  E. 

12  shall  array  himself  with  the  land  of  E. 

13  Beth-shemesh,  that  (is)  in  the  land  of  E. 

1  the  Jews  which  dwell  iu  the  land  of  E. 

8  incense  unto  other  gods  in  the  land  of  E. 
12  set  their  faces  to  go  into  the  land  of  E. 

12  they  shall  all.  .fall  in  the  land  of  E. 

13  punish  them  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  E. 

14  which  are  gone  into  the  land  of  E.,  to 

15  the  people  that  dwelt  in  the  land  of  E. 

24  all  Judah  that  (are)  in  the  laud  of  E. 
26  all  Judah  that  dwell  in  the  laud  of  E. 

26  any  man  of  Judah  in  all  the  land  of  E. 

27  men  of  Judah  that  (are)  in  the  land  of  E. 

28  number,  .shall  return  out  of  the  la.  of  E. 
28  that  are  gone  into  the  land  of  E. 
30  I  will  give  Pharaoh-hophra  king  of  E. 

2  Against  E.,  against  the  army  of .  .E. 
8  E.  riseth  up  like  a  flood,  and  (his)  waters 

11  take  balm,  O  virgin,  the  daughter  of  E. 

13  Nebuchadrezzar,  .come  (and)  smite.  .E. 

14  Declare  ye  in  E.,  and  publish  in  Migdol 

17  Pharaoh  king  of  E.  (is  but)  a  noise 

19  0  thou  daughter  dwelling  iu  E.,  furnish 

20  E.  (is  like)  a  very  fair  heifer,  (but)  destr. 

24  The  daughter  of  E.  shall  be  confounded 

25  I  will  punish .  .Pharaoh,  and  E.,  with 

15  rebelled  against  him  in  sending,  .into  E. 

4  brought . .  with  chains  unto  the  land  of  E. 

5  made  myself  known  unto  them  in.  .E.- 

6  to  bring  them  forth  of  the  land  of  E. 

7  defile  not  yourselves  with  the  idols  of  E. 

8  neither  did  they  forsake  the  idols  of  E. 

8  accomplish  my  anger,  .in  the  midst  of.  .E. 

9  bringing  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
10  I  caused  them  to  go . .  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
36  as.  .with  your  fathers  in  the.  .land  of  E. 

3  And  they  committed  whoredoms  in  E. 

8  Neither  left  she  her  whoredoms . .  from  E. 
19  she  had  played  the  harlot  in  the  land  of  E. 
27  and  thy  whoredom,  .from  the  land  of  E. 
27  thou  shalt  not.  .remember  E.  any  more 

7  Fine  linen  with  broidered  work  from  E. 
2  set  thy  face  against  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

2  prophesy  against  him,  and  against  all  E. 

3  I  (am)  against  thee,  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

6  inhabitants  of  E.  shall  know  that  I  (am) 

9  the  land  of  E.  shall  be  desolateand  waste 
10  I  will  make  the  land  of  E.  utterly  waste 

12  And  I  will  make  the  land  of  E.  desolate 

14  And  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  ofE. 

19  I  will  give  the  land  of  E.  unto  Nebucha. 

20  I  have  given  him  the  land  of  E.  (for)  his 

4  And  the  sword  shall  come  upon  E.,  and 

4  when  the  slain  shall  fall  in  E.,  and  they 
6  They  also  that  uphold  E.  shall  fall 

5  when  I  have  set  a  fire  in  E.,  and  (when) 
9  great  pain  shall  come . .  as  in  the  day  of  E. 

10  I  will  also  make  the  multitude  of  E.  to 

11  they  shall  draw  their  swords  against  E. 
.  13  there  shall  be  no  more  a  prince  of .  .E. 

.  13  and  I  will  put  a  fear  in  the  land  of  E. 

15  pour  my  fury  upon,  .the  strength  of  E. 

16  And  I  will  set  fire  in  E.  :  Sin  shall  have 

18  when  I  shall  break  there  the  yokes  of  E. 

19  Thus  will  I  execute  judgmeuts  in  E. 

21  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pha.  king  of  E. 

22  Behold,  I  (am)  against  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
25  shall  stretch  it  out  upon  the  land  of  E. 

2  speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  E.,  and  to 

2  take  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh,  .of  E. 

12  and  they  shall  spoil  the  pomp  of  E.,  and 

15  When  I  shall  make  the  laud  of  E.  deso. 

16  they  shall  lament  for  her.  .for  E.,  and 
18  Son  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  E. 
15  hast  brought  thy  people  forth  out  of.  .E. 

8  And  shall  also  carry  captives  into  E.  their 

42  and  the  land  of  E.  shall  not  escape 

43  power,  .over  all  the  precious  things  of  E. 
15  when  she  came  up  out  of  the  laud  of  E. 
11  they  call  to  E.,  they  go  to  Assyria 

in  (shall  lie)  their  derision  in  the  land  of  E. 

13  and  visit  their  sins:  they  shall  return  to  E. 

3  Ephraim  shall  return  to  E.,  and  they 

6  E.  shall  gather  them  up,  Memphis  shall 
1  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out  of  E. 


EGYPTIAN 


291 


EIGHTH 


Hos. 


Joel  3 
Amos  2. 
3- 
3- 
4- 
8. 
9- 
9- 
Mic.  6. 
7- 

Nah.  3. 


14 

Matt.  2. 


Acts    2, 

7- 
7 
7- 
7- 
7' 
7- 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7' 
*3' 
Heb.   3 


Jude 
Rev.  1 


5  He  shall  not  return  into  the  land  of  E. 
11  They  shall  tremble  as  a  bird  out  of  E. 

j  and  oil  is  carried  into  E. 

9  I.  .the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  E. 
13  by  a  prophet  the  Lord  brought,  .out  of  E. 

4  I.  .the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  E. 
19  E.  shall  be  a  desolation,  and  Edom  shall 
10  I  brought  you  up  from  the  land  of  E. 

1  wliich  I  brought  up  from  the  land  of  E. 
9  Publish,  .in  the  palaces  in  the  land  of  E. 
10  have  sent  among  you  the  pestilence . .  of  E. 

8  and  drowned,  as  (by)  the  flood  of  E. 

5  shall  be  drowned,  as  (by)  the  flood  of  E. 

7  I  brought  up  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  E.? 

4  I  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  E.  ? 
15  days  of  thy  coming  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

9  Ethiopia  and  E.  (were)  her  strength,  and 

5  I  covenanted  with  you . .  ye  came  out  of  E. 

10  I  will  bring  them  .out  of  the  land  of  E. 

11  and  the  sceptre  of  E.  shall  depart  away 

18  if  the  family  of  E.  go  not  up,  and  come 

19  This  shall  be  the  punishment  of  E.,  and 

13  and  take  the  young  child,  .and  flee  into  E. 

14  When  he  arose,  .and  departed  into  E. 

15  Out  of  E.  have  I  called  my  son 

19  Lord  appeareth  in  a  dream  to  Joseph  in  E. 

10  Phrygia,  and  Pamphilia,  in  E.,  and  in 

9  And  the  patriarchs,  .sold  Joseph  into  E. 
10  favour,  .in  the  sight  of  Pha.  king  of  E. 

10  he  made  him  governor  over  E.  and  all  his 

11  came  a  dearth  over  all  the  land  of  E. 

12  Jacob  heard  that  there  was  corn  in  E. 

15  So  Jacob  went  down  into  E.,  and  died 
17  the  people  grew  and  multiplied  in  E. 

34  I  have  seen  the  affliction . .  which  is  in  E. 
34  Aud  now  come,  I  will  send  thee  into  E. 
36  he  had  showed  wonders,  .in  the  land  of  E. 

39  their  hearts  turned  back  again  into  E. 

40  which  brought  us  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
17  they  dwelt  as  strangers  in  the  laud  of  E. 

16  howbeit  not  all  that  cameoutof  E.  by  Mo. 
9  hand  to  lead  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

26  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  E. 

27  By  faith  he  forsook  E.,  not  fearing  the 
5  saved  the  people  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

8  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  E. 


EGYPTIAN,  EGYPTIANS,  □'>"?,  d>T?i?,  Alyvwrios. 

1.  The  inhabitants  of  Egypt — descendants  of  Mitsraim 

the  son  of  Ham. 

Gen.  12.  12  when  the'E.  shall  see  thee,  that  they  shall 
12. 14  the  E.  beheld  the  woman  that  she  (was) 
16.  1  she  had  an  handmaid,  an  E.,  whose  name 
16.    3  And  Sarai.  .took  Hagar  her  maid,  the  E. 
21.    9  And  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  E. 
25.  12  Ishmael.  .whom  Hagar  the  E... bare  unto 
39.    1  an  E.,  bought  hiui  of  the  hands  of  the  Is. 
39.    2  he  was  in  the  house  of  his  master  the  E. 
39.    5  the  Lord  blessed  the  E.'s  house  for  Jose. 
41.  55  Pharaoh  said  unto  all  the  E.,  Go  unto  J. 
41.  56  Joseph,  .sold  unto  the  E.  :  and  the  famine 
43.  32  and  for  the  E.  which  did  eat  with  him 
43.  32  because  the  E.  might  not  eat  bread  with 
43.  33  that  (is)  an  abomination  unto  the  E. 

45.  2  the  E.  and  the  liouse  of  Pharaoh  heard 

46.  34  shepherd  (is)  an  abomination  unto  the  E. 

47.  15  all  the  E.  came  unto  Joseph,  and  said 
47.  20  for  the  E.  sold  every  man  his  field,  beca.' 
50.    3  the  E.  mourned  for  him  threescore  and 
50.  11  This  (is)  a  grievous  mourning  to  the  E. 

Exod.  1. 13  the  E.  made  the  children  of  Israel  to 

.  19  the  Hebrew  women  (are)  not  as  the  E. 

.  11  and  he  spied  an  E.  smiting  an  Hebrew 

2.  12  he  slew  the  E.,  and  hid  him  in  the  sand 

2.  14  thou  to  kill  me,  as  thou  killedst  the  E.  ? 

2.  19  An  E.  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the 

3.  8  to  deliver  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 
3.   9  the  oppression  wdierewith  the  E.  oppress 
3.  21  I  will  give,  .favour  in  the  sight  of  theE. 
3.  22  and  ye  shall  spoil  the  E. 
6.    5  the  children  of  Israel,  whom  the  E.  keep 

6.  6,  7  out  from  under  the  burdens  of  the  E. 

7.  5  the  E.  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
7.  18  the  E.  shall  loathe  to  drink  of  the  water 
7.  21  the  E.  could  not  drink  of  the  water  of  the 

7.  24  all  the  E.  digged  round  about  the  river 

8.  21  the  houses  of  the  E.  shall  be  full . .  (of  flies) 
8.  26  shall  sacrifice  the  abomination  of  the  E. 

8.  26  shall  we  sacrifice  the  abomination  of  theE. 

9.  11  for  the  boil  was  upon,  .all  the  E. 
ro.    6  they  shall  fill,  .the  houses  of  all  the  E. 
11.    3  the  people  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  E. 

11.  7  Lord  doth  put  a  difference  between  theE. 

1 2.  23  the  Lord  will  pass  through  to  smite  the  E. 
12.  27  when  he  smote  the  E.,  and  delivered  our 
12.  30  he,  and  all  his  servants,  and  all  the  E. 
12.  33  And  the  E.  were  urgent  upon  the  people 
12.  35  they  borrowed  of  the  E.  jewels  of  silver 
12.  36  sight  of  the  E. .  .and  they  spoiled  the  E. 
14.    4  that  the  E.  may  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 
14.   9  But  the  E.  pursued  after  them,  all  the 
14.  10  and,  behold,  the  E.  marched  after  them 
14.  12  Let  us  alone,  that  we  may  serve  the  E.  ? 
14.  12  (it  had  been)  better  for  us  to  serve  the  E. 
14.  13  for  the  E.  whom  ye  have  seen  to  day,  ye 

14. 17  I  will  harden  the  hearts  of  the  E. 

14. 18  the  E.  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
14.  20  it  came  between  the  camp  of  the  E.  and 
14.  23  And  the  E.  pursued,  and  went  in  after 
14.  24  the  Lord  looked  unto  the  host  of  the  E. 
14.  24  and  troubled  the  host  of  the  E. 
14.  25  the  E.  said,  Let  us  flee  from  the  face  of 


ig. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
20. 
3°- 


Exodi4.  25  the  Lord  fighteth  for  them  against  the  E. 
14.  26  the  waters  may  come  again  upon  the  E. 
14.  27  and  the  E.  fled  against  it 
14.  27  the  Lord  overthrew  the  E.  in  the  midst 
14.  30  saved  Israel,  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 

14.  30  Israel  saw  the  E.  dead  upon  the  sea  shore 
14. 31  work  which  the  Lord  did  upon  the  E. 

15.  26  diseases.  .1  have  brought  upon  the  E. 
18.   8  all  that  the  Lord  had  done  unto .  .the  E. 
18.    9  had  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 
18.  10  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 

18.  10  delivered  the  people  from  under  the.  .E. 

19.  4  Ye  have  seen  what  I  did  unto  the  E. 

32.  12  Wherefore  should  the  E.  speak,  and  say 
Lev.  24.  10  Israelitish  woman,  whose  father(was)anE. 
Numi4.  13  Then  the  E.  shall  hear  (it),  for  thou  bro. 

20.  15  and  the  E.  vexed  us  and  our  fathers 

33,  3  Israel  went  out.  .in  the  sight  of  all  the  E. 
33.    4  For  the  E.  buried  all.  .first  born,  which 

Deut23.    7  thou  shalt  not  abhor  an  E.,  because  thou 
26.   6  And  the  E.  evil  eutreated  us,  and  afflicted 

Josh  24.    6  the  E.  pursued  after  your  fathers  with 
24.    7  he  put  darkness  between  you  and  the  E. 

Judg.  6.   9  I  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 

10.  11  (Bid)  not  (I  deliver  you)  from  the  E. 

1  Sa.  4.   8  these  (are)  the  Gods  that  smote  the  E. 

6.  6  as  the  E.  and  Pharaoh  hardened  their  h.  ? 
10. 18  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 

30.  11  And  they  found  an  E.  in  the  field,  and 

2  Sa.  23.  21  And  he  slew  an  E.,  a  goodly  man 

23.  21  and  the  E.  had  a  spear  in  his- hand 
^V  23.  21  and  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  E.'s 
2  Ki.  7.    6  the  kings  of  the  E.,  to  come  upon  us 
1  Ch.  2.  34  And  Shesaam  had  a  servant,  an  E.,  whose 

11.  23  he  slew  an  E.,  a  man  of  (great)  stature 
11.  23  in  the  E.'s  hand  (was)  a  spear  like  a  wea. 
11.  23  and  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  E.'s  hand 

Ezra  9.  1  the  Moabites,  the  E.,  and  the  Amorites 
Isa.   ig.    2  I  will  set  the  E.  against  the  E.  11.  15. 

4  the  E.  mil  I  give  over  into  the  hand  of 
21  the  E.  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  day 

■3  and  the  E.  into  Assyria ;  and  the  E.  shall 

4  So  shall  the  king,  .lead  away  the  E.  pris. 

7  the  E.  shall  help  in  vain,  and  to  no  purp. 

31.  3  Now  the  E.  (are)  men,  and  not  God 
Jer.   43.  13  the  houses  of  the  gods  of  the  E.  shall  he 
Lam.  5.    6  We  have  given  the  hand(to)  the E.,(and  to) 
Eze.  16.  26  hast,  .committed  fornication  with  the  E. 

23.  21  in  bruising  thy  teats  by  the  E.  for  the 

29.  12  and  I  will  scatter  the  E.  among  the  nati. 
29-  13  I  gather  the  E.  from  the  people  whither 

30.  23,  26 1  wilt  scatter  theE.  among  the  nations 
Acts    7.  22  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  E. 

7.  24  him  that  was  oppressed,  and  smote  the  E. 

7.  2S  kill  me,  as  thou  diddest  the  E.  yesterday? 
21.  38  Art  not  thou  that  E.,  which,  .madest  an 

Heb  11.  29  which  the  E.  assaying  to  do  were  drow. 
2.  As  an  adjective,  an  epithet  applied  to  the  whole  or 
ouly  the  northern  part  of  the  Red  Sea. 

Isa.  11. 15  Lord  shall,  .destroy  the  tongue  of  the  E. 

E'-HI,  'rtJs'  unity. 

Son  of  Benjamin,  same  as  Ehud  in  1  Ch.  8.  6.    B.C.  1690. 
Gen.  46.  21  sons  of  Benjamin  (were).  .Naanian,  E. 

E'-HTJD,  iinx  strong. 

1.  Ehud  the  greatrgrandson  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1690. 

iCh.   7. 10  sons  of  Bilhan.. Benjamin,  and  E.,  and 

8.  6  these  (are)  the  sons  of  E.:  these  are  the 

2.  The  son  of  Gera,  the  second  judge  (or  deliverer)  of 
the  Israelites,  B.C.  1336.  He  slew  Eglon,  who  had 
established  himself  in  Jericho,  which  was  within  the 
boundaries  of  Benjamin. 

Judg  3. 15  E.  the  son  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite,  a  man 
16  E.  made  him  a  dagger  which  had  two  ed. 
20  E.  came  unto  him  ;  and  he  was  sitting  in 

20  E.  said,  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto 

21  E.  put  forth  his  left  hand,  and  took  the 

3  E.  went  forth  through  the  porch,  and 
26  E.  escaped  while  they  tarried,  and  passed 

1  Israel  again  did  evil,  .when  E.  was  dead 
EIGHT  — 
1.  Eight.,  njbp,  nib®  sliemoneh,  shemonah. 

4" the  days  of  Adam,  .were  eight  hundred 
7  Seth  lived . .  eight  hundred  and  seven 
ioTEuos  lived,  .eight  hundred  and  fifteen 
13  Catnan  lived,  .eight  hundred  and  forty 

16  Mahalaleel  lived,  .eight  hundred  and  th. 

17  all  the  days  of  Mahalaleel  were  eight 
19  Jared  lived . .  eight  hundred  years,  and 
12  he  that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circum. 

4  circumcised  his  son  Isaac  being  eight 
22.  23  these  eight  Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor 

Esod26.    2  The  length  of  one  curtain . .  eight  and 
26.  25  they  shall  be  eight  boards,  and  their  soc. 
36.    9  The  length  of  one.  .(was)  twenty  and  eig. 
36.  30  there  were  eight  boards ;  and  their  sock. 
Num.  2.  24  an  hundred  thousand  and  eight  thousand 
3.  28  eight  thousand  and  six  hundred,  keeping 
4. 48  eight  thousand  and  five  hundred  and 
7.    8  four  wagons  aud  eight  oxen  he  gave  unto 
29.  29  on  the  sixth  day  eight  bullocks,  two  rams 
35-   7  give  to  the  Levites.  .forty  and  eight  cities 
Deut.  2. 14  the  space . .  (was)  thirty  and  eight  years 
Josh  21.  41  All  the  cities.,  (were)  forty  and  eight  cities 
Judg.  3.    8  the  children  of  Israel  served,  .eight  years 
12.  14  and  he  judged  Israel  eight  years 

1  Sa.   4. 15  Now  Eli  was  ninety  and  eight  years  old 
17.  12  he  had  eight  sons  :  and  the  man  went 

2  Sa.  23.    8  (lie  lift  up  his  spear)  against  eight  hund. 


Gen. 


5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
17. 


2  Sa.  24.    9  there  were  in  Israel  eight  hundred  thou 

1  Kj.  7.  10  of  ten  cubits,  and  stones  of  eight  cubits 

2  Ki.  8.  17  he  reigned  eight  years  in  Jerusalem 

10.  36  And  the  time,  .(was)  twenty  and  eight 

22.  1  Josiah  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he 

1  Ch.12.  24  six  thousand  and  eight  hundred,  r< 

12.  30  twenty  thousand  and  eight  hundred 

12.  35  of  the  Danites.  .twenty  and  eight  tlious 
16.  38  with  their  brethren,  threescore  and  ei^ht 

23.  3  man  by  man,  was  thirty  aud  eight  tin 

24.  4  and  eight  among  the  sons  of  Ithamar 

25.  7  was  two  hundred  fourscore  and  eight 

2  Ch.11.  21  Itehoboam. .  begat  twenty  and  eight  sons 

13.  3  with  eight  hundred  thousand  chosen  m. 
21.  5,  20  he  reigned  eight  years  in  Jerusalem 
29.  17  sanctified  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  eight. 
34.    1  Josiah  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he 

.36.    9  Jehoiachin  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he 

Ezra    2.   6  two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twelve 

2.  16  The  children  of  Ater.  .ninety  and  eiglir 

2.  23  of  Anathoth,  an  hundred  twenty  and  eig. 

2.  41  of  Asaph,  an  hundred  twenty  and  eight 

8.  11  and  with  him  twenty  and  eight  males 
Neh.   7.  11  two  thousand  and  eight  himdred:(and)e. 

7.  13  of  Zattu,  eight  hundred  forty  and  five 
7.  15  of  Binnui,  six  hundred  forty  and  eight 
7.  16  of  Bebai,  six  hundred  twenty  and  eight 
7.  21  of  Ater  of  Hezekiah,  ninety  and  eight 
7.  22  of  Hashum,  three  hundred  twenty  and_e. 
7.  26  of  Bethlehem,  .hundred  fourscore  and  e. 
7.  27  of  Anathoth,  an  hundred  twenty  and  ei. 

7.  44  of  Asaph,  an  hundred  forty  and  eight 
7.  45  The  porters,  .hundred  thirty  and  eight 

11.  6  of  Perez,  .four  hundred  threescore  aud  e. 
11.    8  Sallai,  nine  hundred  twenty  and  eight 
11.  12  their  brethren,  .eight  hundred  twenty 
11. 14  their  brethren,  .hundred  twenty  and  ei. 

Eccl.  11.    2  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight 

Jer.   41.  15  escaped  from  Johanan  with  eight  men 
53.  29  he  carried  away  captive . .  eight  hundred 

Eze.  40.   9  the  porch  of  the  gate,  eight  cubits 

40.  31,  34,  37  the  going  up  to  it  (had)  eight  steps 
40.  41  eight  tables,  whereupon  they  slew  (their 

Mic.    5.    5  shall  we  raise  against  him . .  eight . .  men 
2. Eight,  uKTcb  olctd. 

Luke  2.  21  when  eight  days  were  accomplished  for 

9.  28  it  came  to  pass,  about  an  eight  days  after 
John  5.    5  had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight  years 

20.  26  after  eight  days,  again  his  disciples  were 
Acts   9.  33  which  had  kept  his  bed  eight  years 

1  Pe.  3.  20  few,  that  is,  eight  souls,  were  saved  by 

EIGHTEEN  — 

1. Eight  (and)  ten,  "VJJ  fQhj?  shemonah  asar: 

Gen.  14.  14  own  house,  three  hundred  and  eighteen 
Judg.  3.  14  the  children  of  Israel  served,  .eighteen 
10.    8  they  vexed .  .the  children . .  eighteen  years 
20.  25  eighteen  thousand  men  ;  all  these  drew 
20.  44  there  fell  of  Benjamin  eighteen  thousand 

2  Sa.   8. 13  smiting  of  the  Syrians,  .eighteen  thousa. 

1  Ki.    7.  13  lie  cast  two  pillars . .  eighteen  cubits  high 

2  Ki.  24-    S  Jehoiachin  (was)  eighteen  years  old 

25.  17  The  height  of  the  one  pillar  (was)  eight. 

1  Ch.12.  31  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  eighteen  thousand 

18.  12  slew,  .in  the  valley  of  salt  eighteen  tho. 

26.  9  Meshelemiah  had.  .strongmen,  eighteen 

2  Ch.n.  21  he.took  eighteen  wives,  and  threescore 
Ezra   8.   9  with  him  two  hundred  and  eighteen 

8.  iS  with  his  sons  and  his  brethren,  eighteen 
Neh.  7.  11  thousand  and  eight  hundred  (and)  eight. 
Jer.  52.  21  the  height  of  one  pillar  (was)  eighteen 
Eze.  48.  35  (It  was)  round  about  eighteen  thousand 

2.  Ten  and  eight,  5erca  Kal  oktw  delca  kai  ofcto. 
Lukei3.   4  Or  those  eighteen,  upon  whom  the  tower 
13. 11  which  had  a  spirit  of  infirniity  eighteen 
13. 16  whom  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eight. 

EIGHTEEN  thousand — 

A  myriad  and  8,000,  d'd^n  miopi  \2~\. 

1  Ch.29.  7  and  of  brass  eighteen  thousand  talents 

EIGHTEENTH  — 

Eight  (and)  ten,  I'^J?  ^30$  shemonah  asar. 

1  Ki.  15.    1  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Jeroboam 

2  Ki.  3.    1  the  eighteenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  king 

22.  3  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Josiah 

23.  23  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Josiah 

1  Ch/24.  15  seventeenth  to  Hezir,  the  eighteenth  to 

25.  25  The  eighteenth  to  Hanani,  (he),  his  sons 

2  CI1.13.    1  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Jeroboam 

34.  S  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign,  when 

35.  19  In  the  eighteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  J . 
Jer.  32.    1  the  eighteenthjyear  of  Nebuchadrezzar 

52.  29  the  eighteenth  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar 

EIGHTH  — 

1.  Eighth,  WG&  shemini. 

Exod-2.  30  on  the  eighth  day  thou  shalt  give  it  me 
Lev.    9.    1  it  came  to  pass  on  the  eighth  day,  (that) 
12.    3  the  eighth  day  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin 
14.  10  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take  two  he 

14.  23  he  shall  bring  them  on  the  eighth  day  for 

15.  14  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take  to  him 
15.  29  on  the  eighth  day  she  shall  take  unto  her 
22. 27  from  the  eighth  day  and  thenceforth  it 
23.  36  on  the  eighth  day  shall  be  an  holy 

23.  39  and  on  the  eighth  day  (shall  be)  a  sabbath 
25.  22  ye  shall  sow  the  eighth  year,  and  eat  (yet) 
Num.  6.  10  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  bring  two 

7.  54  On  the  eighth  day  (offered)  Gamaliel  the 
29.  35  On  the  eighth  day  ye  shall  have  a  solemn 


EIGHTH 


292 


ELDER 


i  Ki.  6.  38  the  month  Bui,  which  (is)  the  eighth  nion. 
8.  66  On  the  eighth  day  he  sent  the  people  away 
12.  32  ordained  a  feast  in  the  eighth  month,  on 
i2.  33  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  eighth  month 

1  Ch.12.  12  Johanan  the  eighth,  Elzabad  the  ninth 

24.  to  seventh  to  Hakkoz,  the  eighth  to  Abijah 

25.  15  The  eighth  to  Jeshaiah,  (he),  his  sous,  and 

26.  s  Issachar  the  seventh,  Peulthai  the  eighth 

27.  11  The  eighth  (captain)  for  the  eighth  month 
1  Ch.  7.  9  eighth  day  they  made  a  solemn  assembly 
Neh.  8.  18  on  the  eighth  day  (was)  a  solemn  assembly 
Eze.  43.  27  upon  the  eighth  day,  and  (so) forward,  the 
Zech.  1.    1  Iu  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year 

%  Eight,  npy,  nibtf  shemonah,  shemoneh. 

1  Ki.16.  29  in  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Asa  king 

2  Ki.15.    8  In  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Azariah 

24. 12  took  him  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign 
2  Ch.29.  17  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  month,  came  they 
34.    3  iu  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,  while  he 

3. Eighth,  oySoos  ogdoos. 

Xuke  1.  59  on  the  eighth  day  they  came  to  circumcise 
Acts  7.  8  (Abraham),  .circumcised  him  the  eighth  d. 
2  Pe.  2.  5  saved  Noah,  the  eighth  (person),  a  prea. 
Rev.  17.  11  he,  is  the  eighth,  and  is  of  the  seven,  and 
2i.  20  the  eighth,  beryl ;  the  ninth,  a  topaz 

EIGHTH  day,  the  — 

Eighth  dag,  OKTtefi/iepos oHaemeros. 

Phil.  3.   5  Circumcised  the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock 

EIGHTIETH  — 

Eighty,  wio&  shemonim. 

1  Ki.  6.    1  in  the  four  hundred  and  eightieth  year 

EIGHTY  — 

Eighty,  D'jbip  shemonim. 

Gen.    5.  25' Methuselah  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and 
5.  26  seven  hundred  eighty  and  two  years 
5.  28  Lamech  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two 

EITHER  — 
l.O,  ix  0. 

Lev  13.  49,  53  either  iu  the  warp,  or  in  the  woof,  or 
2.1/,  on  im. 

1  Ch.21. 12  Either  three  years'  famine  ;  or  three  mo. 
Z.And,  1  ve. 

Deuti7.    3  either  the  suu,  or  moon,  or  any  of  the 

4.  That,  '3  ki. 

'  1  Ki.18.  27  either  he  is  talking,  or  he  is  pursuing 

5.  Either,  ij  e. 

Matt.  6.  24  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the 
i2.  33  Either  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit 
Luke  6.  42  Either  how  canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother 

15.  8  Either  what  woman,  having  ten  pieces  of 

16.  13  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  anddove  the 
Acts  17.  21  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new  thing 
1  Co. 14.    6  shall  speak  to  you  either  by  revelation 
Phil   3.  12  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either 
Jas.    3.  12  Can  the  fig  tree.  .hear,  .berries?  either 

EITHER  side,  on  — 

Hence  and  hence,  ivrevdev  na\  ivrevOev. 

Johnig.  18  and  two  other  with  him,  on  either  side 
Rev.22.   2  on  either  side  of  the  river,  (was  there)  the 

EITHER  of  them  — 

1.  A  man,  t?*x  ish. 

Lev.  10.    1  took  either  of  them  his  censer,  and  put 

2.  Two,,  both,  *w  slieni. 

1  Ki.  7.  15  a  iine.  .did  compass  either,  of  them  about 

EITHER. ..or  — 

Even. ..even,  D3...D3  gam.,  gam. 

Eccl.  9.    1  no  man  kuoweth  either  love  or  hatred  (by) 

E'-KER,  if^y  root. 

Descendant  of  Judah  through  Hezron  and  Jerahnieol. 

B.C.  1421. 

1  Ch.  2.  27  of  Ram.  .were  Maaz,  and  Jamin.^and  E. 
EK'-RON,  fiiplj  naturalise ( ion. 

The  most  northerly  of  the  five  cities  belonging  to  the 
Philistines.  It  was  in  the  low  country  or  She/etah,  as 
well  as  the  other  four,  and  fell  to  the  lot  of  Judah,  and 
then  to  Dan.  It  is  now  called  AHr  and  lies  five  miles 
S.W.  of  Ramleh,  and  three  dneE.  of  Jabneh  (Yebna),  on 
the  N.  side  of  the  Wady  Surar. 

Josh  13.    3  From  Sihor.  .unto  the  borders  of  E.  nort. 
15. 11  the  border  went  out  unto  the  side  of  E. 
15.  45  E.,  with  her  towns  and  her  villages 
15.  46  From  E.  even  unto  the  sea,  all  that  (lay) 
19.  43  And  Elon,  and  Thimnathah,  and  E. 
Judg.  t.  iS  Askelon.  .and  E.  with  the  coast  thereof 

1  Sa.   5.  10  Therefore  they  sent  the  ark  of  God  to  E. 

5.  10  as  the  ark  of  God  came  to  E. 

6.  16  they  returned  to  E.  the  same  day 

6.  17  for  Askelon  one,  for  Gath  one,  for  E.  one 

7.  14  cities,  .were restored.  .fromE.  even  unto 
17.  52  until  thou  come,  .to  the  gates  of  E. 

17.  52  Philistines  fell  down  by  the  way.,  unto  E. 

2  Ki.    1.    2  Go,  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  E. 

1.    3,  6,  16  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  E.? 
Jer.   25.  20  all  the  kings  of  the  land  of .  .E.,  and 
Amos  1.  C  and  I  will  turn  mine  hand  against  E. 
Zepb.  2.    4  at  the  noon  day,  and  E.  shall  be  rooted 
Zech.  9.    5  Gaza  also,  .and  be  very  sorrowful,  and  E. 

9.   7  as  a  governor  iu  Judah,  and  E.  as  a  Jeb. 


EK-RONITE  and  EK-RON-ITES,  »211j?£ 
The  inhabitants  of  Ekron. 

Josh  13.    3  Eshkalonites,  the  Gittites,  and  the  E. 

1  Sa.    5.  10  the  E.  cried.  .They  have  brought  about 

EL-A'-DAH,  nny^N  God  is  ornament. 

Descendant  of  Ephraim  in  the  fourth  degree.   B.C.  1570. 

1  Ch.  7.  20  and  E.  his  son,  and  Tahath  his  sou 
E'-LAH,  n^x,  n^n  oak. 

1.  A  duke,  chief,  or  prince  of  Edom.     B.C.  1470. 

Gen.  36.  41  Duke  Aholibamah,  duke  E.,  duke  Pinon 
1  Ch.  1.  52  Duke  Aholibamah,  duke  E.,  duke  Pinon 

2.  A  valley  in  Judah  where  David  slew  Goliath.  Now 
called  Wady  Sumt. 

1  Sa.  17.    2  And  Saul,  .pitched  by  the  valley  of  E. 
17.  19  Saul,  and  they,  .(were)in  the  valley  of  E. 
21.   9  whom  thou  slewest  iu  the  valley  of  E. 

3.  Father  of  a  Benjamite  commissariat  officer  under 
Solomon.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  4.  18  Shiniei  the  son  of  E.  in  Benjamin 
A.  Son  and  successor  of  Baasha  king  of  Israel.      He 
reigned  little   more  than  a  year,  being  killed  (while 
drunk)  by  Zimri  while  his  army  was  absent  at  the  siege 
of  Gibbethon.     B.C.  930. 

1  Ki.  16.   6  and  E.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

16.  8  began  E.  the  son  of  Baasha  to  reign  over 

16. 13  For  all  the  sins  of  Baasha,  and.  .of  E.  his 

16. 14  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  E.,  and  all 

5.  Father  of  Hoshea,  last  king  of  Israel.    B.C.  739. 

2  Ki.15.  3°  Hoshea  the  son  of  E.  made  a  conspiracy 

17.  1  began  Hoshea  the  son  of  E.  to  reign  in 

18.  1  in  the  third  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  E. 

18.   9  the  seventh  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  E.  king 

6.  A  son  of  Caleb  son  of  Jephunneh.    B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  4.  15  Iru,  E.,  and  Naam  :  and  the  sons  of  E. 

7.  One  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.    8  E.  the  son  of  Uzzi,  the  son  of  Mlchri,  and 

E'-LAM,  d^'jb,  oViy  youth. 

1.  A  son  of  Shem,  whose  family  gave  his  name  to  a 
district  which  lay  S.  of  Assyria  and  E.  of  Persia  Proper. 
B.C.  2300. 

Gen.  10.  22  children  of  Shem  ;  E.,  and  Asshur,  and 
1  Ch.  1. 17  sons  of  Shem ;  E.,  and  Asshur,  and  Arp. 

2.  Country  inhabited  by  the  descendants  of  Elam,  i.e., 
Persia. 

Gen.  14.   1  Chedorlaomer  king  of  E.,  and  Tidal  king 

14.    9  With  Chedorlaomer  the  khig  of  E.,  and 
Isa.    11.  11  from  E.,  and  from  Sliinar,  and  from  H. 

21.  2  Go  up,  O  E.:  besiege,  O  Media  :  all  the 

22.  6  E.  bare  the  quiver  with  chariots  of  men 
Jer.  25.  25  all  the  kings  of  E.,  and  all  the  kings  of 

49. 34  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet  against  E. 
49.  35  I  will  break  the  bow  of  E.,  the  chief  of 
49.  36  upon  E.  will  I  bring  the  four  winds  from 
49.  36  no  nation  whither  the  outcasts  of  E.  shall 
49.  37  I  will  cause  E.  to  be  dismayed  before 
49.  38  I  will  set  my  throne  in  E.,  and  will  dest. 
49.  39  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  E. 
Eze.  32.  24  There  (is)  E.  and  all  her  multitude  round 
Dan.    8.    2  Shusham . .  which  (is)  in  the  province  of  E 

3.  Son  of  Shashak,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  24  And  Hananiah,  aud  E.,  and  Antothijah 

4.  A  son  of  Meshelemiah,  a  Kohathite.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.   3  E.  the  fifth,  Jehohanan  the  sixth,  Elioe. 

5.  Progenitor  of  a  family  that  came  up  from  exile.  B.C. 
536. 

Ezra    2.    7  children  of  E.,  a  thousand  two  hundred 
Neh.    7.  12  children  of  E.,  a  thousand  two  hundred 

6.  Another  whose  posterity  returned  from  exile.  B.C. 
536- 

Ezra  2.  31  children  of  the  other  £.,  a  thousand  two 
Neh.  7.  34  children  of  the  other  E.,  a  thousand  two 

7.  One  whose  descendants  came  up  with  Ezra.   B.C.  457. 

Ezra   8.   7  of  the  sons  of  E. ;  Jeshaiah  the  son  of 

8.  An  ancestor  of  Shechauiah,  who  made  confession  of 
the  people  having  trespassed  in  taking  strange  wives. 
B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.   2  Jehiel.  .of  the  sons  of  E.,  answered  and 
10.  26  of  the  sons  of  E.;  Mattaniah,  Zechariah 

9.  A  chief  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant, 

B.C.  457- 

Neh.  10.  14  chief  of  the  people.  .E.,  Zatthu,  Bani 

10.  A  priest  who  took  part  in  the  ceremonial  of  purify- 
ing the  wall  of  Jerusalem  after  it  had  been  rebuilt. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  12.  42  aud  Malchijah,  and  E.,  and  Ezer 

E-LAM-ITES,  M^y,  'E\a/i7rai. 

The  inhabitants  of  Elam  carried  to  Samaria.     B.C.  721. 

Ezra   4.    9  Susancbites,  the  Dehavites,  (and)  the  E. 

Acts   2.    9  Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  E.,  and  the 

E-LA'-SAH,  E-LEA'-SAH,  jy^k  God  is  doer. 

1.  A  priest  who  bad  married  a  strange  wife.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  22  of  the  sons  of  Pashur. . Jozabad,  and  E. 

2.  An  ambassador  whom  Zedekiah  sent  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar.   B.C.  599. 

Jer.   29.   3  By  the  hand  of  E.  the  son  of  Shaphau 


E'-LATH,  E'-LOTH,  nV*<  palm  grove. 

An  Elamite  port  now  called  JSi/leh,  on  the  E.  orElanifeic 

gulf  of  the  Red  Sea.  near  Eziongeber,  and  now  called 

Gelana. 

Deut.  2.    8  through  the  way  of  the  plain  from  E. 
2  Ki.14.  22  He  built  E.,  and  restored  it  to  Judah 

16.    6  recovered  E. .  .and  drave,  the  J  ews  from  E. 
16.   6  and  the  Syrians  came  to  E.,  and  dwelt 

EL  BETH'-EL,  Vn'2  ^  god  of  the  house  of  God. 
The  name  given  to  the  place  where  God  appeared  to 
Jacob  when  flying  from  his  brother  Esau.    B.C.  1739. 

Gen.  35.    7  built,  .an  altar,  and  called  the  place  E. 
EL-DA'-AH,  *%&$  whom  God  called. 
The  last  in  order  of  the  sons  of  Midian.     B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.    4  the  sons  of  Midian.  .Abidah,  and  E. 

1  Ch.  1.  33  the  sons  of  Midian.  .Abida,  and  E. 

EL'-DAD,  ~n^s  God  is  a  friend. 

One  of  two  elders  to  whom  was  given  the  prophetic 
power  of  Moses.     B.C.  1492. 

Xumii.  26  name  of  the  one  (was)  E.,  and  Hie  name 

11.  27  E.  and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the  camp 
ELDER  (woman)  — 

l.Great,  bw  gadol. 

Gen.  10.  21  Eber,  the  brother  of  Japheth  the  elder 
27.  42  these  words  of  Esau  her  elder  son  were 
29.  16  the  name  of  the  elder  (was)  Leah,  and  the 

1  Sa.  18. 17  Behold  my  elder  daughter  Merab,  her 

1  Ki.  2.  22  kingdom  also ;  for  he  (is)  mine  elder  broth. 

Eze.  16.  46  thine  elder  sister  (is)  Samaria,  she  and 

16.  61  thy  sisters,  thine  elder  and  thy  younger 

23.  4  Aholah  the  elder,  and  Aholibah  her  sister 

2. Old,  aged,  bearded,  ]pi  zaqen. 

Gen.  50.    7  elders  of  his  houses,  and  all  the  elders 
Exod.  3.  16  gather  the  elders  of  Israel  together,  ami 

3.  18  shalt  come,  thou  and  the  elders  of  Israel 

4.  29  gathered  together  all  the  elders  of  the 

12.  21  Moses  called  for  all  the  elders  of  Israel 

17.  5  and  take  with  thee  of  the  elders  of  Israel 
17.    6  did  so  in  the  sight  of  the  elder*  of  Israel 

ExodiS.  12  Aaron  came,  and  all  the  elders  of  Israel 
19.    7  and  called  fur  the  elders  of  the  people 

24.  1,  9  Abihu,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  Is. 

24.  14  he  said  unto  the  elders,  Tarry  ye  here  for 
Lev.    4.  15  the  elders  of  the  congregation  shall  lay 

9.  1  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  the  elders  of 
Numn.  16  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of  Israel 

11.  16  knowest  to  be  the  elders  of  the  people 
11.  24  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of  the  people 
11.  25  and  gave  (it)  unto  the  seventy  elders 
11.  30  gat  him  into  the  camp,  he  and  the  elders 
16.  25  the  elders  of  Israel  followed  him 
22.   4  And  Moab  said  unto  the  elders  of  Midian 

22.  7  elders  of  Moab  and  the  elders  of  Midian 
Deut.  5.  23  the  heads  of  your  tribes,  and  your  elders 

19. 12  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  send  and 
21.    2  thy  elders  and  thy  judges  shall  come 
21.    3  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  an  heifer 
21.    4  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  bring  down 
*     21.    6  the  elders  of  that  city,  (that  are)  next 
21.  19  bring  him  out  unto  the  elders  of  his  city 
21.  20  shall  say  unto  the  elders  of  his  city 

22. 15  unto  the  elders  of  the  city  in  the  gate 

22. 16  damsel's  father  shall  say  uuto  the  elders 

22. 17  the  cloth  before  the  elders  of  the  city 

22. 18  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  that 

25.  7  wife  go  up  to  the  gate  unto  the  elders 
25.    8  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  call  him 
25.   9  unto  him  in  the  presence  of  the  elders 
27.    1  Moses  with  the  elders  of  Israel  comman. 
29.  10  your  captains  of  your  tribes,  your  elders 
31.    9  and  unto  all  the  elders  of  Israel 

31.  28  Gather  unto  me  all  the  elders  of  your 

32.  7  thy  elders,  and  they  will  tell  thee 
Josh.  7.   6  he  and  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  put  dust 

8.  10  and  went  up,  he  and  the  elders  of  Israel 
8.  33  all  Israel,  and  their  elders,  and  officers 
9. 11  our  elders,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of 

10.  4  in  the  ears  of  the  elders  of  that  city 

23.  2  called  for  all  Israel,  (and)  for  their  elders 

24.  1  called  for  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  for 
24.  31  days  of  the  elders  that  overlived  Joshua 

Judg.  2.   7  days  of  the  elders  that  outlived  Joshua 
8. 14  princes  of  Succoth,  and  the  elders 
8. 16  he  took  the  elders  of  the  city,  and  thorns 

11.  5  elders  of  Gilead  went  to  fetch  Jephthah 
11.    7,  9  Jephthah  said  unto  the  elders  of  Gil. 
11.    8,  10  elders  of  Gilead  said  unto  Jephthah 
11.  11  Jephthah  went  with  the  elders  of  Gilead 
21.  16  Then  the  elders  of  the  congregation  said 

Ruth  4.  2  he  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 
4.  4  Buy  (it),  .before  the  elders  of  my  people 
4.   9  Boaz  said  unto  the  elders,  and  (unto)  all 

4.  11  and  the  elders,  said,  (We  are)  witnesses 

1  Sa.   4.    3  people  were  come,  .elders  of  Israel  said 

8.  4  the  elders  of  Israel  gathered  themselves 
11.    3  the  elders  of  Jabesh  said  unto  him ;  Give 

15.  30  before  the  elders  of  my  people,  and 

16.  4  the  elders  of  the  town  trembled  at  his 
30. 26  he  sent  of  the  spoil  unto  the  elders  of  J. 

2  Sa.  3.  17  communication  with  the  elders  of  Israel 

5.  3  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to  the  king  to 
12. 17  the  elders  of  his  house  arose,  (and  went) 

17.  4  pleased  Absalom  well,  and  all  the  elders 
17. 15  counsel  Absalom  and  the  elders  of  Israel 
19.  11  Speak  unto  the  elders  of  Judah,  saying 

1  Ki.  8.    1  Solomon  assembled  the  elders  of  Israel 


ELDER 


293 


ELEVEN 


iKi.  8. 


>Ki. 


:Ch.: 


19. 
23- 


2  Cn.  5 

5 
„  34- 
Ezra  1 
] 
Psa.107 
Prov.3: 
Isa.  37 
Jer.  26. 

Lam. 


Joel 


the  elders  of  Israel  came,  and  the  priests 
king,  .called  all  the  elders  of  the  land 
the  elders,  and  all  the  people,  said  unto 
sent  the  letters  unto  the  elders  and  to 
the  elders  and  the  nobles  who  were  the 
in  his  house,  and  the  elders  sat  with  him 
he  said  to  the  elders,  See  ye  how  this 
unto  the  rulers  of  Jezreel,  to  the  elders 
he  that  (was)  over  the  city,  the  elders 
the  scribe,  and  the  elders  of  the  priests 
they  gathered  unto  him  all  the  elders  of 
Therefore  came  all  the  elders  of  IsraeL 
David,  and  the  eldeis  of  Israel,  and 
David  and  the  elders,  .fell  upon  their 
Solomon  assembled,  the  elders  of  Israel 
the  elders  of  Israel  came ;    and  the  Lev. 
gathered  together  all  the  elders  of  Judah 
the  counsel  of  the  princes  and  the  elders 
with  them  the  elders  of  every  city,  and 
praise  him  in  the  assembly  of  the  elders 
he  sitteth  among  the  elders  of  the  land 
the  scribes,  and  the  elders  of  the  priests 
rose  up  certain  of  the  elders  of  the  land 
unto  the  residue  of  the  elders  which 
my  priests  and  mine  elders  gave  up  the 
The  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  sit 
the  priests,  they  favoured  not  the  elders 
the  faces  of  elders  were  not  honoured 
The  elders  have  ceased  from  the  gate 
and  the  elders  of  Judah  sat  before  me 
Then  came  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel 
certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to 
speak  uuto  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  say 
gather  the  elders  (and)  all  the  inhabitants 
2.  i&  assemble  the  elders,  gather  the  children 

Z. Great,  "*■"]  rah. 

Gen.  25  23  and  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger 

LGrey  headed,  3jp  sab. 

Ezra.    5.    5  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  elders  of 
9  Then  asked  we  those  elders,  (and)  said 
6.    7  the  governor  of  the  Jews,  and  the  elders 
6.    8  ye  shall  do  to  the  elders  of  these  Jews 

6.  14  the  elders  of  the  Jews  builded,  and  they 

5. Aged  as  to  days,  D,p;7  D'ig]  zeqenim  leyamim. 
Job  32.   4  because  they  (were)  elder  than  he 

6.  Greater,  juei(,W  meizon. 

Rom.  9.  12  The  elder  shall  serve  the  younger 

7. Elder,  aged  person,  TrpetrfivTepos  2>resbuteros. 
Mattis.    2  transgress  the  tradition  of  the  elders? 
16.  21  and  suffer  many  things  of  the  elders  and 

21.  23  chief  priests  and  the  elders  of  the  people 
26.  3  the  scribes,  and  the  elders  of  the  people 
26.  47  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people 

26.  57  the  scribes  and  the  elders  were  assembled 

26.  59  the  chief  priests,  and  elders,  and  all  the 

27.  1  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people 
27.    3  silver  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders 
27.  12  accused  of  the  chief  priests  and  elders 
27.  20  the  chief  priests  and  elders  persuaded 

27.  41  mocking  (him),  with  the  scribes  and  elders 

28.  12  when  they  were  assembled  with  the  elders 
Mark  7.    3  holding  the  tradition  of  the  elders 

7.  5  according  to  the  tradition  of  the  elders 

8.  31  and  be  rejected  of  the  elders,  and  (of)  the 
11.  27  priests,  and  the  scribes,  and  the  elders 

14.  43  priests  and  the  scribes  and  the  elders 
*4-  53  aii  the  chief  priests  and  the  elders  and 

15.  1  held  a  consultation  with  the  elders  and 
Luke  7.    3  he  sent  unto  him  the  elders  of  the  Jews 

9.  22  and  be  rejected  of  the  elders  and  15.  25. 
20.    1  the  scribes  came  upon  (him)  with  the  eld. 

22.  52  and  captains  of  the  temple,  and  the  elders 
Acts.  4.    s  that  their  rulers,  and  elders,  and  scribes 

4.    8  rulers  of  the  people,  and  elders  of  Israel 

4.  23  all  that  the  chief  priests  and  elders  had 

6.  12  they  stirred  up  the  people,  and  the  elders 
11.  30  sent  it  to  the  elders  by  the  hands  of 

23  had  ordained  them  elders  in  every  church 
2  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  apostles  and  elders 
4  church,  and  (of)  the  apostles  and  elders 
6  the  apostles  and  elders  came  together 
.  22  Then  pleased  it  the  apostles  and  elders 

15.  23  The  apostles  and  elders  and  brethren 

16.  4  were  ordained  of  the  apostles  and  elders 

20.  17  and  called  the  elders  of  the  church 

21.  18  and  all  the  elders  were  present 

23.  14  they  came  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders 

24.  1  the  high  priest  descended  with  the  elders 

25.  15  the  chief  priests  and  the  elders  of  the 
,    1  Rebuke  not  an  elder,  but  entreat  (him)  as 
.  17  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted 

19  Against  an  elder  receive  not  an  accusation 
.    5  and  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  as  I  had 
.    2  by  it  the  elders  obtained  a  good  report 
.  14  let  him  call  for  the  elders  of  the  church 

5.  1  The  elders  which  are  among  you  I  v.  2. 
1  The  elder  unto  the  elect  lady  and  her 
1  The  elder  unto  the  well  beloved  Gains 

4.    4  I  saw  four  and  twenty  elders  sitting 

4.  10  The  four  and  twenty  elders  fall  down 

5.  5  one  of  the  elders  saith  unto  me,  Weep  not 
5.    6  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb 
5.    8  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down  before 
5. 11  the  throne  and  the  beasts  and  the  elders 
5.  14  the  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down  and 

7.  11  about  the  throne,  and  (about)  the  elders 
7.  13  one  of  the  elders  answered,  saying  unto 

11.  16  the  four  and  twenty  elders  which  sat 


14. 
*5- 
15- 
IS* 
15- 


iTi 

5- 

Titus  1 

Heb.  11 

Jas.  5 

iPe.  5 

2  Jo. 

3  Jo. 
Rev.  4 


Rev.  14.    3  and  before  the  four  beasts,  and  the  elders 
19.   4  the  four  aud  twenty  elders,  and  the  four 

ELDER,  also  an  — 

A  fellow  elder,  o-v/iirptcrfivTepos  sumpresbuteros. 
1  Pe.    5.    1  who  am  also  an  elder,  and  a  witness  of 

ELDERS,  (state  of)  the  — 

1. Eldership,  presbytery,  Trpeafivrepiov presbuterion. 
Luke  22.  66  the  elders  of  the  people,  and  the  chief 
Acts  22.    s  and  all  the  estate  of  the  elders 

2.  Elder ;  aged  person,  Trpeo-fivrepos  presbuteros. 
Luke  15.  25  his  elder  son  was  in  the  field  :  and  as  he 
1  Ti.    5.    2  The  elder  women  as  mothers;  the  younger 

1  Pe.  5.    s  younger,  submit  yourselves  uuto  the  eld. 
ELDEST  (son)  — 

I. First  born,  TO?  bekor. 

Num.  1.  20  the  children  of  Reuben,  Israel's  eldest  s. 
26.    5  Reuben,  the  eldest  son  of  Israel 

2  Ki.  3.  27  he  took  his  eldest  son,  that  should  have 
Job     1.  13  drinking  in  their  eldest  brother's  house 

1. 18  drinking,  .in  their  eldest  brother's  house 

2. Great,  tfn%  gadol. 

Gen.  27.    1  he  called  Esau  his  eldest  son,  and  said 

27. 15  goodly  raiment  of  her  eldest  son  Esau 
44.  12  began  at  the  eldest,  and  left  at  the  young. 

1  Sa.  17.  13  the  three  eldest  sons  of  Jesse  went  (and) 

17.  14  and  the  three  eldest  followed  Saul 

17.  28  Eliab  his  eldest  brother  heard  when  he 

3. Aged,  Jpj  zaqen. 

Gen.  24.    2  Abraham  said  unto  his  eldest  servant  of 

4. First,  |iE?K"i'  rishon. 

2  Ch.22.    1  the  band  of  men.  .had  slain  all  the  eldest 
5. Elder,  Trpeafivrepos  presbuteros. 

John  8.   9  beginning  at  the  eldest,  (even)  unto  the 

EL'-EAD,  ~i%?#  God  is  witness. 

A  descendant  of  Ephraim,  slain  by  invaders.   B.C.  1680. 

1  Ch.  7.  21  Ezer,  and  E.,  whom  the  men  of  Gath 
EL-EA'-LEH,  rtyffi  God  is  exalted. 
A  place  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan  in  the  pastoral  country 
taken  possession  of  by  Reuben.     The  modern  name  is 
El-A'al  ("the  high"),  a  mile  N.  of  Heshbon.      Exten- 
sive nuns  are  still  seen. 

Kuni32.    3  Heshbon,  and  E.,  Shebam,  and  Nebo 

32.  37  children  of  Reuben  built  Heshbon,  and  E. 

Isa.    15.    4  Heshbon  shall  cry,  and  E. :  their  voice 
16.    9  I  will  water  thee  with,  .tears,  0..E. 

Jer.  48.  34  From  the  cry  of  Heshbon  (even)  unto  E. 

EL-EA'-SAH,  EL-A'-SAH,  rfpu^N  God  is  doer. 

1.  A  son  of  Helez  of  the  family  of  Hezron.    B.C.  1305. 

1  Ch.  2.  39  Azariah  begat  Helez,  and  Helez  begat  E. 

2.  40  E.  begat  Sisamai,  and  Sisamai  begat  Sha. 

2.  A  son  of  Rapha  or  Raphaiah,  a  descendant  of  Saul. 
B.C.  960. 

1  Ch.  8.  37  Rapha.  .his  son,  E.  his  son,  Azel  h"s  son 
9. 43  Rephaiah  his  son,  E.  his  son,  Azel  his 

EL-EA'-SAR,  ~itj£n,  'EAeafap  God  is  helper. 
1.  Third  son  of  Aaron  by  Elisheba,  daughter  of  Ammina- 
dab,  a  descendant  of  Judah  through  Pharez.    B.C.  1452. 
Exod.  6.  23  she  bare  him  Nadab,  and  Abihu,  E.,  and 
6.  25  E.,  Aaron'sson,  took,  .of  the  daughters  of 
28.    1  Nadab  and  Abihu,  E.  and  Ithamar 
Lev.  10.    6  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  and  unto  E. 
10. 12  Moses  spake  unto  Aaron,  and  unto  E. 

10. 16  he  was  angry  with  E.  and  Ithamar,  the 
Num.  3.    2  Nadab  the  first  born,  and  Abihu,  E.,  and 

3.  4  E.  and  Ithamar  ministered  in  the  priest's 

3.  32  E. .  .(shall  be)  chief  over  the  chief  of  the 

4.  16  And  to  the  office  of  E. .  .the  oil  for  the 
16.  37  Speak  unto  E.  the  son  of  Aaron  the  pri. 

16.  39  E.  the  priest  took  the  brasen  censers 

19.    3  ye  shall  give  her  unto  E.  the  priest,  that 

19.  4  E.  the  priest  shall  take  of  her  blood  with 

20.  25  Take  Aaron  and  E.  his  son,  and  bring 

20.  26,  28  and  put  them  upon  E.  his  son 

25.    7  whenPhinehas,  the  son  of  E. . .  saw  (it) 

25.  11  Phinehas,  the  son  of  E. .  .hath  turned  my 

26.  1  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  unto  E.  the 
26.    3  Moses  and  E.  the  priest  spake  with  them 

*      26.  60  unto  Aaron  was  born  Nadab, and  Abihu,E. 

26.  6^  that  were  numbered  by  Moses  and  E. 

27.  2  they  stood  before  Moses,  and  before  E. 
27.  19  set  him  before  E.  the  priest,  and  before 
27.  21  he  shall  stand  before  E.  the  priest,  who 
27.  22  he  took  Joshua,  and  set  him  before  E.  the 
31.    6  them  and  Phinehas  the  son  of  E.  the  pr. 
31.  12  they  brought  the  captives,  .unto.  .E.  the 
31.  13  Moses,  and  E.  the  priest,  .went  forth  to 
31.  21  E.  the  priest  said  unto  the  men  of  war 
31.  26  Take  the  sum  of  the  prey,  .thou,  and  E. 
31.  29  Take  (it)  of  their  half,  and  give  (it)  unto  E. 
31.  31  Moses  and  E.  the  priest  did  as  the  Lord 
31.  41  Moses  gave  the  tribute,  .unto  E.  the  pri. 

31.  51,  54  And  Moses  and  E.  the  priest  took  the 

32.  2  the  children  of  Reuben,  .spake  unto.  .E. 
32.  28  So  concerning  them  Moses  commanded  E. 
34.  17  E.  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun 

Deut  10.    6  E.  his  son  ministered  in  the  priest's  office 
Josh  14.    1  which  E.  the  priest . .  distributed  for  inh. 

17.  4  they  came  near  before  E.  the  priest,  and 
19.  51  These  (are)  the  inheritances,  which  E. 

21.  1  Then  came,  .the  Levites  unto  E.  the* 

22.  13  Phinehas  the  sou  of  E.  the  Dries* 


Josh. 22.  31  Phinehas  the  son  of  E.  the  priest  said 

22.  32  Phinehas  the  son  of  E.  the  priest,  .retu. 
24.  33  E.  the  son  of  Aaron  died  ;  and  they  bur. 

Judg2o.  28  Phinehas,  the  son  of  E. .  .stood  before  it 
1  Ch.  6.    3  The  sons  also  of  Aaron.  .E.,  and  Ithamar 
6.    4  E.  begat  Phinehas,  Phinehas  begat  Abish. 
6.  50  E.  his  son,  Phinehas  his  son,  Abishua 
9.  20  Phinehas  the  son  of  E.  was  the  ruler  over 
24.    1  sons  of  Aaron.  .Abihu,  E.,  and  Ithamar 
24.    2  E.  and  Ithamar  executed  the  priest's  office 
24.   3  both  Zadok  of  the  sons  of  E.,  and  Alum. 
24.    4  more  chief  men  found  of  the  sons  of  E. 
24.    4  Among  the  sons  of  E. .  .sixteen  chief  men 
24.    5  governors ..  were  of  the  sons  of  E.,  and 
24.    6  principal  household  being  taken  for  E. 
Ezra    7.    5  Abishua.  .son  of  Phinehas.  .son  of  E. 

2.  Son  of  Amminadab  of  Kiijath-jearim,  set  apart  to  take 
care  of  the  ark  after  it  was  sent  back  by  the  Philistines. 

B.C.  1 1 20. 

1  Sa.    7.    1  sanctified  E.  his  sou  to  keep  the  ark  of 

3.  A  son  of  Dodo,  the  Ahohite,  one  of  the  three  chief 
captains  of  David's  army.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.   9  after  him  (was)  E.  the  son  of  Dodo  the  A. 
1  Ch.11.  12  after  him  (was)  E.  the  son  of  Dodo,  the  A. 

4.  A  Merarite  and  son  of  Mahli.     He  had  daughters 
only,  who  were  married  to  their  cousins.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  21  The  sons  of  of  Mahli ;  E.  and  Kish 

23.  22  E.  died,  and  had  no  sons,  but  daughters 

24.  28  Of  Mahli  (came)  E.,  who  had  no  sons 

5.  A  priest  who  participated  in  the  feast  of  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  wall  under  Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  42  Maaseiah,  and  Shemaiah,  and  E.,  and  TJ. 
G.  A  sou  of  Phinehas,  a  Levite.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra    8.  33  and  with  him .  .E.  the  son  of  Phinehas 
7.  Son  of  Eliud,  three  generations  above  Joseph  the 
husband  of  Mary. 

Matt.  1.  15  Eliud  begat  E. ;  and  E.  begat  Matthan 
ELECT  — 
1. Chosen,  choice,  Tna  bachir. 

Isa.   42.    1  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold :  mine  elect 
45.    4  For..  Israel  mine  elect,  I  have  even  called 
65.    9  mine  elect  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  ser. 
65.  22  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of 
2. Laid  out,  chosen,  choice,  4k\€kt6s  eklektos. 
Matt  24.  22  for  the  elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be 
24.  24  if.  .possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  e. 
24.  31  and  they  shall  gather  together  his  elect 
Marki3.  20  no  flesh  should  be  saved  ;  but  for  the  el. 
13.  22  to  seduce,  if  (it  were)  possible,  even  the  e. 
13.  27  and  shall  gather  together  his  elect  from 
Luke  iS.    7  And  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own  elect 
Rom.  8.  33  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? 
Col.      3.  12  Put  on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy 
1  Ti.    5.  21  I  charge,  .before  God.. and  the  elect 
'2  Ti.    2.  10  I  endure  all  tilings  for  the  elect's  sake 
Titus  1.    1  according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and 

1  Pe.   1.    2  Elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of 

2.    6  I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner  stone,  elect 

2  Jo.         1  The  elder  unto  the  elect  lady  and  her 

13  The  children  of  thy  elect  sister  greet  thee 

ELECTED  together  with  — 
CJwsen  along  with,  aweKXttcTos  suneklektos. 
1  Pe.    5. 13  at  Babylon,  elected  together  with 
ELECTION  — 
Choice,  a  laying  out,  itiXoyi)  ekloge. 

Rom.  9.  11  according  to  election  might  stand,  not 
11.    5  there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  ele. 
11.    7  the  election  hath  obtained  it,  and  the 
11.  28  but  as  touching  the  election,  (they  are) 

1  Th.  1.    4  Knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  elec. 

2  Pe.  1. 10  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure 
EL  ELO-HE  IS-RA'-EL,  ^fai?*  'hSn  *7X  God,  the  God 

of  IsraeL 
The  name  given  by  Jacob  to  the  altar  he  erected  near 
Shechem,  where  he  pitched  his  tent  and  afterwards 
purchased  from  the  sons  of  Hamor.     B.C.  1732. 

Gen.  33.  20  he  erected.,  an  altar,  and  called  it  E. 
ELEMENTS  — 
Elements,  rudiments, first  siep,(notx^ov  stoicheion. 

Gal.     4.    3  were  in  bondage  under  the  elements  of 
4.    9  to  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements 

2  Pe.   3. 10,  12  the  elements  shall  melt  -with  fervent 

E'-LEPH,  PJ7N  union,  ox. 

A  town  of  Benjamin,  and  named  next  to  Jerusalem. 

Josh.18.  28  Zelah,  E.,  and  Jebusi,  wliich  (is)  Jerusa. 
ELEVEN  — 
l.Eleven,  one  (and)  ten,  "ip'i*  irjH  achad  asar. 

Gen.  32.  22  his  two  women,  servants,  and  his  eleven 

37.    9  the  eleven  stars,  made  obeisance  to  me 

2  Ki.  23.  36  Jehoiakim . .  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jer. 

24.  18  Zedekiah.  .reigned  eleven  years  in  Jeru. 

2  Ch.36.   5  Jehoiakim.  .reigned  eleven  years  in  Jer 

26.  11  Zedekiah.. reigned  eleven  years  in  Jeru. 

Jer.  52.    1  Zedekiah.  .reigned  eleven  years  in  Jeru. 

2.  Eleven,  (<11^)  iV'J>  'rpy  ashte  asar. 

Exod26.   7  upon  the  tabernacle  ;  eleven  curtains 
26.   8  the  eleven  curtains  (shall  be  all)  of  one 
36.  14  over  the  tabernacle  :  eleven  curtains  he 
36.  15  the  eleven  curtains  (were)  of  one  size 
Nuni29.  20  on  the  third  day  eleven  bullocks,  two 
Eze.  40.  49  and  the  breadth  eleven  cubits  ;  and 

3.  Eleven,  one  [and)  ten,  eVSeKct  hendeka. 

Mattes.  16  Then  the  eleven  disciples  went  away 


ELEVENTH 


294 


ELIEZER 


Marki6.  14  he  appeared  unto  the  eleven  as  they  sat 
Luke  24.    9  and  told  all  these  things  unto  the  eleven 

24.  33  they  rose  up.  .and  found  the  eleven 
Lets    1.  26  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven  apost. 

2. 14  Peter,  standing  up  with  the  eleven 

ELEVENTH  — 

l.Eh:,\',i,  (n-i^j;)  tyy  'n*^  askte  asar. 

Num.  7.  72  611  the  eleventh  day  Pagiel.  .(offered) 
Deut.  1.    3  in  the  eleventh  month,  on  the  first  (day) 

1  Ki.  6.  38  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  month  Bui 

2  Ki.  9.  29  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Joram  the  son  of 

25.  2  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh 

1  Ch.  12.  13  Jeremiah  the  tenth,  Machbanai  the  elev. 
24.  12  The  eleventh  to  Eliashib,  the  twelfth  to 
J25.  18  The  eleventh  to  Azareel,  (he),  his  sons 
•27.  14  The  eleventh  (captain)  for  the  eleventh 

Jer.     1.    3  unto  the  end  of  the  eleventh  year  of  Zed. 
39.    2  (And)  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah 
52.    5  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh 

Eze.  26.    1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year 

30.  20  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in 

31.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in 
Zech.  1.    7  aud  twentieth  day  of  the  eleventh  month 

%Elevmths  E^SeKaros  Iieudikatos. 

Matt  20.    6  And  about  the  eleventh  hour  he  went 

20.    9  they  came  that  (were  hired)  about  the  el. 
Rev.  21.  20  the  eleventh,  a  jacinth  ;  the  twelfth,  an 

IX-HA'-NAN,  fin^N  God  is  gracious. 

1.  Son  of  Jair,  who  slew  Lahmi  the  brother  of  Goliath 
the  Gittite.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.  20.    5  E.  the  son  of  Jair  slew  Lahmi  the  brother 
.  Sa.  21.  19  E.  the  son  of  Jaare-oregim .  .slew  (the br.) 

2.  A  son  of  Dodo  the  Bethlehemite,  and  one  of  the  thirty 
of  David's  chief  men.     B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  24  E.  the  son  of  Dodo  of  Beth-lehem 
1  Ch.11.  26  E.  the  son  of  Dodo  of  Beth-lehem 

E'-LI,  *7Jg  Jah  is  high. 

High  priest  and  judge  of  Israel,  who  immediately  pre- 
ceded Samuel.  His  descent  was  through  Ithamar  the 
younger  of  Aaron's  two  surviving  sons. 

1  Sa.    1.   3  And  the  two  sons  of  E. .  .(were)  there 
a.   9  E.  the  priest  sat  upon  a  seat  by  a  post  of 
1.  12  it  came  to  pass,  .that  E.  marked  her  mo. 
1.  13  therefore  E.  thought  she  had  been  drunk. 

1. 14  E.  said  unto  her,  How  long  wilt  thou  be 
1.  17  E.  answered  and  said,  Go  in  peace  :  and 

1.  25  slew  a  bullock,  and  brought  the  child  to  E. 

2. 11  child  did  minister  unto  the  Lord  before  E 

2. 12  Now  the  sons  of  E.  (were)  sons  of  Belial 

2.  20  E.  blessed  Elkauah  and  his  wife,  and  said 
2.  22  E.  was  very  old,  and  heard  all  that  his 

2.  27  And  there  came  a  man  of  God  unto  E. 

3.  1  Samuel  ministered  unto  the  L.  before  E. 
3.  2  when  E.  (was)  laid  down  in  his  place,  and 
3.  5  And  he  ran  unto  E.,  and  said,  Here  (am) 
3.  6  Samuel  arose  and  went  to  E.,  and  said' 

3.   8  he  arose  and  went  to  E.,  and  said,  Here 
3.    8  E.  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  called 
3.    9  E.  said  unto  Samuel,  Go,  lie  down  :  ami 
3. 12  I  will  perform  against  E.  all.  .which  I 
3.  14  I  have  sworn  unto  the  house  of  E.,  that 
3.  14  the  iniquity  of  E.'s  house  shall  not  be 

3.  15  And  Samuel  feared  to  show  E.  the  vision 
3. 16  E.  called  Samuel,  and  said,  Samuel,  my 

4.  4  the  two  sons  of  E. .  .(were)  there  with  the 
4.  11  the  two  sons  of  E.,  Hophni  andPhhuli;^ 
4.  13  E.  sat  upon  a  seat  by  the  wayside  watch. 
4.  14  when  E.  heard  the  noise  of  the  crying,  he 
4.  14  And  the  mau  came  in  hastily,  and  told  E. 

4. 15  Now  E.  was  ninety  and  eight  years  old 

4. 16  the  man  said  unto  E.  I  (am)  he  that  came 

14.  3  Phiuehas,  the  son  of  E.,  the  Lord's  priest 
1  Ki.  2.  27  he  spake  concerning  the  house  of  E.  in 

E-LI.    H\i;  in  Heb.  *V«  eli,  my  God. 

Matt.  27.  46  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli !  Eli ! 

E-LI'-AB,  3N,!?n  Gocl  is  father. 

1.  A  son  of  Helon,  and  leader  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun 
at  the  time  of  the  census  in  the  wilderness.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1.   9  Of  Zebulun ;  E.  the  son  of  HMon 

2.    7  E.  the  son  of  Helon . .  captain  of  the  chil. 
7. 24  On  the  third  day  E.  the  son  of  Helon 
7.  29  this  (was)  the  offering  of  E.  the  son  of  H. 
10. 16  over  the  host,  .of  Zebulun .  .E.  the  son  of 

2.  A  Reubenite,  son  of  Pallu  or  Phallu,  aud  father  of 
Dathan  and  Abiram.     B.C.  1490. 

Numi6.    1  Dathan  and  Abiram  the  eons  of  E. .  .took 
16. 12  to  call  Dathan  and  Abiram,  the  sons  of  E. 

26.  8  And  the  sons  of  Pallu  ;  E. 

26.   9  the  sons  of  E.;  Nemuel,  and  Dathan,  and 
Deut  11.    6  did  unto  Dathan  aud  Abiram..  sous  of  E. 

3.  The  eldest  son  of  Jesse  and  brother  of  David,  lie 
U  called  Elihu  in  1  Ch.  27.  iS.    B.C.  1065. 

1  Sa.  16.    6  it  came  to  pass,  .that  he  looked  on  E. 

17.  13  thieesoiisthatwenttothebattle(\V(.'tvii:. 
17.  28  E.  his  eldest  brother  heard  when  he  spake 
17.  28  E.'sanger  wns'kindlcd  against  D.,  and  he 

1  Ch.  2.  13  Jesse  begat  bis  first  born  E.,  and  Abina. 

2  Ch.n.  18  Abihail  the  daughter  of  E.  the  son  of  Je, 

4.  A  Levite  in  the  time  of  David,  and  was  both  a  porter 
■ind  a  musician  on  the  psaltery.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  18  Jehiel,  and  Unni,  E.,  and  Benaiah,  and 

15.  2oJehiel,  and  Unni,  and  E.,  and  Maaseiah 

16.  s  Jehiel,  and  Mattithiah,  and  E.,  and  Ben. 
6.  A  Gadite  warlike  leader  who  with  others  came  over 
to  David  in  the  wilderness.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    9  Ezer  the  first,  Obadiah  the  second,  E.  the 


6,  An  ancestor  of  Samuel  the  prophet ;  a  Kohathite 
Levite,  son  of  Nahath.  In  other  statements  of  the 
genealogy  he  is  called  Elihu  (1  Sa.  1.  1);  and  Eliel 
(1  Ch.  6.  34)- 

1  Ch.  6.  27  E.  his  son,  Jeroham  his  son,  Elkanah  his 

EL-IA'-DA,  V"}1?#  God  is  knowing. 

1.  One  of  the  sons  of  David.     B.C.  1030. 

2  Sa.   5.  16  And  Elishama,  aud  E.,  and  Eliphalet 

1  Ch.  3.    8  And  Elishama,  and  E.,  and  Eliphalet 

2.  A  Benjamite  mighty  warrior  who  led  200,000  of  his 
tribe  to  the  army  of  Jehoshaphat.    B.C.  941. 

2  Ch.17.  17  of  Benjamin;  E.  a  mighty  man  of  valour 
EL-IA'-DAH,  jn;?^  God  is  knowing. 

An  Aramite  of  Zobah,  father  of  Rezon,  the  captain  of  a 
marauding  band  that  annoyed  Solomon.   B.C.  1025. 

1  Ki.11.  23  Rezon  the  son  of  E.,  which  fled  from  his 
E-LI'-AH,  rv*?x  God  is  Jah. 

1.  A  son  of  Jeroham  the  Benjamite,  and  head  of  his 
tribe.     B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  27  Jaresiah,  and  E.,  and  Zichri,  the  sons  of 

2.  One  of  the  Bene-Elam  that  married  a  strange  wife. 

B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  26  Jehiel,  and  Abdi,  and  Jeremoth,  and  E. 

EL-IAH'-BA,  N3n:^  God  hides. 

A  Shaalbonite,  one  of  David's  famous  guard  of  thirty. 

B.C.      1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  32  E.  the  Shaalbonite,  of  the  sons  of  Jashen 

1  Ch.11.  33  Azniaveth  the  Baharumite,  E.  the  Shaal. 

EL-IA'-KJM,  C'p^N,  'Y.KiaKeifx  God  is  setting  up. 

1.  A  son  of  Hilkiah,  successor  of  Shebna  as  master  of 
Hezekiah's  household.    B.C.  710. 

2  Ki.iS.  iS  there  came  out  to  them  E.  the  son  of  H. 

18.  26  Then  said  E.  the  sou  of  Hilkiah,  and  Sh. 

18.  37  Then  came  E.  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  which 

19.  2  And  he  sent  E.,  which  (was)  over  the  ho. 
Isa.   22.  20  I  will  call  my  servant  E.  the  son  of  Hilk. 

36.   3  Then  came  forth  unto  him  E.,  Hilkiah's 
36. 11  Then  said  E.  and  Shebna  and  Joah  unto 

36.  22  Then  came  E. . .  that  (was)  over  the  house. 

37.  2  And  he  sent  E.,  who  (was)  over  the  house. 

2.  Original  name  of  king  Jehoiakim.    B.C.  599. 

2  Ki.23.  34  Pharaoh-nechoh  made  E.  thesonof  Josiah 
2  Ch.36.    4  the  king  of  Egypt  made  E.  his  brother 

3.  A  priest  that  assisted  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  in 
the  time  of  Nehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  41  the  priests;  E.,  Maaseiah,  Miniamin,  Mi. 

4.  Eldest  son  of  Abiud  or  Judah ;  brother  of  Joseph,  and 
father  of  Azor  in  the  genealogy  of  Christ. 

Matt.  1. 13  Abiud  begat  E.  ;  and  E.  begat  Azor 
Luke  3.  30  (son)  of  Jonan,  which  was  (the  son)  of  E. 

E-LI'-AM,  DSJ'^N  God  is  founder  of  the  people. 

1.  Fatherof  Bath-sheba,  wifeof  David,  B.C.  1060.  Called 
also  A  mm ''■/. 

2  Sa.  11.    3  not  this  Bath-sheba,  the  daughter  of  E. 

2.  One  of  David's  thirty  might;  men.     B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  34  E.  the  son  of  Ahithophel  the  Gilonite 

E-LI'-AS,  'HAfas,  the  Greek  form  of  Elijah. 
Mattn.  14  if  ye  will  receive  (it),  this  is  E.,  which 

16.  14  Some.  .John  the  Baptist ;  some,  E. 

17.  3  there  appeared  unto  them  Moses  and  E. 
17.  4  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  E. 
17.  10  Why  then  say  the  scribes  that  E.  must 
17.  11  E.  truly  shall  first  come,  and  restore  all 
17.  12  E.  is  come  already,  aud  they  knew  him 
27.  47  Some,  .said,  This  (man)  calleth  for  E. 
27.  49  let  us  see  whether  E.  will  come  to  save 

Mark  6.  15  Others  said,  That  it  is  E.  And  others  said 

8.  28  but  some .  .E. ;  and  others,  One  of  the  pr. 

9.  4  there  appeared  unto  them  E.  with  Moses 
9.   5  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  E. 
9.  11  Why  say  the  scribes  that  E.  must  first  c? 
9.  12  E.  verily  cometh  first,  and  restoreth  all 
9.  13  E.  is  indeed  come,  and  they  have  done 

15.  35  some  of  them.,  said,  Behold,  he  calleth  E. 
15.  36  let  us  see  whether  E.  will  come  to  take 
Luke  1.  17  shall  go  before  him  in  the  spirit,  .of  E. 

4.  25  many  widows,  .in  Israel  in  the  days  of  E. 

4. 26  unto  none  of  them  was  E.  sent,  save  unto 

g.    8  And  of  some,  that  E.  had  appeared ;  and 

9.  19  They  answering  said,  .but  some  (say),  E. 

9.  30  talked  with  him  two  men.  .Moses  and  E. 

9.  33  thee,  and  .one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  E. 

9.  54  and  consume  them,  even  as  E.  did  ? 
John  1.  21  they  asked  him,  What  then?  Art  thou  E.  ? 

1.  25  Why  baptizest  thou . .  if  thou  be  not . .  E. 
Rom  1 1.    2  Wot  ye  not  what  the  Scripture  saith  of  E.  ? 
Jaa.    5.  17  E.  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as 

EL-IA'-SAPH,  t|p^g  God  is  gatherer. 

1.  Son  oJ  Deuel  and  head  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  at  the 
census  in  the  wilderness.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1.  14  Of  Gad  ;  E.  the  son  of  Deuel 

2.  14  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Gad .  ,E. 

7.  42  On  the  sixth  day  E.  the  son  of  Deuel 
7.  47  this,  .the  offering  of  E.  the  son  of  Deuel 
10.  20  over,  .the  children  of  Gad.  .E.  the  son  of 

2.  Sou  of  Lael  a  chief  of  the  house  of  the  father  of  the 
Gershunites  at  the  census  hi  the  wilderness.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  3.  24  the  chief .  .of  the  Gershonites . . E.  the  son 
EL-IA'-SHIB,  y#;V$  God  is  requiter. 
1.  A  -priest  in  the  tune  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  12  The  eleventh  to  E.,  the  twelfth  tu  Jal.im 


2.  A  descendant  of  the  royal  family  of  Judah.    B.C.  445 

1  Ch.  3.  24  the  sons  of  Elioenai.  .Hodaiah,  and  E. 

3.  The  high  priest  at  the  time  of  the  rebuilding  of  the 
wall  under  Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.    1  E.  the  high  priest  rose  up,  with  Ms  breth. 
3.  20  unto  the  door  of  the  house  of  E.  the  high 
3.  21  house  of  E. .  .to  the  end  of  the  house  of  E. 
13.    4  E.  the  priest,  .(was)  allied  unto  Tobiah 
13.   7  I.  .understood,  .the  evil  that  E.  did  for 
13.  28  Juiada,  the  son  of  E.  the  high  priest 

4.  A  singer  who  married  a  strange  wife  in  the  exile. 

B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  24  Of  the  singers  also  ;  E.  :  and  of  the 

5.  A  son  of  Zattu,  whose  wife  was  a  stranger.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  27  of  the  sons  of  Zattu  ;  Elioenai,  E.,  Matt. 
G.  A  son  of  Baui,  who  married  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  36  Vaniah,  Meremoth,  E. 
7.  An  ancestor  of  Johanau  who  assisted  Ezra  in  the  as- 
sembly about  strange  wives.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.   6  into  the  chamber  of  Johanau  the  son  of  E. 

Neh.  12.  10  J.  begat  Joiakim,  Joiakim  also  begat  E. 
12.  22  The  Levites,  in  the  days  of  E. .  .(were) 
12.  23  until  the  days  of  Johanau  the  sou  of  E. 
E-LI-A'-THAH,  nnx^N  God  is  come. 
A  son  of  Heman  appointed  by  lot  for  the  service  of 
song  in  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.   4  Hem.  :  the  sons  of  Heman  ;  Bukkiah . .  E. 

25.  27  The  twentieth  to  E.,  (he),  his  sons,  and 

E-U'-DAD,  "it1?**  God  is  a  friend. 

A  chief  of  Benjamin  chosen  to  represent  his  tribe  in 

the  allotment  of  Canaan.     B.C.  1452. 

Num.34.  2I  0f  tne  trilje  of  Benjamin,  E.  the  son  of 
E-LI'-EL,  V^  God  is  God. 

1.  Great-grandfather  of  Samuel  the  prophet :  in  1  Ch. 

6.  27  it  is  Elidb. 

1  Ch.  6.  34  Jeroham,  the  son  of  E.,  the  sou  of  Toah 

2.  Head  of  the  house  of  Manasseh  in  Bashan.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  5.  24  E. .  .heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

3.  A  son  of  Shimhi  the  Eenjamite.     B.C.  1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  20  And  Elienai,  and  Zilthai,  and  E. 

4.  A  son  of  Shashak,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  22  And  Ishpan,  and  Heber,  and  E. 

5.  A  captain  of  David's  army.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  46  E.  the  Mahavite,  and  Jeribai  and  Josh. 
G.  Another  of  David's  valiant  men.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Gh.11.  47  E.,  and  Obed,  and  Jasiel  the  Mesobaite 

7.  A  Gadite  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag ;  perhaps  the 
same  as  No.  5.  or  6. 

1  Ch.12.  11  Attai  the  sixth,  E.  the  seventh 
S.  A  chief  of  Judah  in  David's  time  ;  perhaps  the  same 
as  No.  5. 

1  Ch.15.   9  Of  the  sons  of  Hebron  ;  E.  the  chief 

9.  A  chief  Levite  whom  David  called  on  to  assist  hi 
bringing  up  the  Ark  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom.  B.C. 
1042. 

1  Ch.15.  1J  David  called  for.. the  priests,  and..E. 

10.  A  Levite,  overseer  of  the  dedicated  things  in  the 
time  of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.31.  13  E.,  and  Ismachiah,  and  Mahath.  .overs. 

E-LI-E'-NAI,  *j'>!^n  unto  God  are  mine  eyes. 
A  son  of  Shimhi,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1340. 
1  Ch.  S.  20  And  E.,  and  Zilthai,  and  Eliel 

E-LI-E'-ZER,  W^«,  *EA«fep  God  is  help. 

1.  Abraham's  chief  servant,  called  by  him  "  Eliezer  of 
Damascus,"  (or  rather  Damascus  Eliezer).  The  com- 
mon version  makes  hini  born  in  Abraham's  house ; 
but  the  original  is  simply  "sou  of  my  house"  (Gen. 
15.  3),  which  imports  no  more  than  that  he  was  one  of 
the  household.    B.C.  1913. 

Gen.  15.    2  the  steward  of  my  house  (is)  this  E.  of  D. 

2.  Second  son  of  Moses  and  Zipporah,  to  whom  his 
father  gave  this  name  as  a  memento  of  his  gratitude  to 
God.    B.C.  1500. 

Exod.iS.    4  the  name  of  the  other  (was)E.  ;  for  the 
1  Ch.23.  15  The  sons  of  Moses(were)  Gershom  and  E. 
23.  17  the  sons  of  E.  (were)  Rehabiah  the  chief 
23.  17  And  E.  had  none  other  sons 

26.  25  And  his  brethren  by  E.  ;  Kehabiah  his 

3.  A  grandson  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.    S  And  the  sons  of  Becher  ;  Zemira,  and.  .E. 

4.  A  priest  who  assisted  in  bringing  up  the  ark  from  the 
house  o£ Obed-edom,     B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.15.  =4  Benaiah,  andE.,  the  priests,  did  blow 
;".  A  ruler  of  Reuben  in  the  time  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  16  the  ruler  of  the  Reubeuites  (was)  E. 

G.  A  prophet  that  rebuked  Jehoshaphat  for  joining 
with  Ahaziah  king  of  Israel  in  an  expedition  to  Ophir. 
B.C.  896. 

2  Ch.20.  37  E.  the  son  of  Dodavah.  .prophesied  agai. 

7.  A  chief  sent  with  others  to  induce  some  Levites  and 
others  to  accompany  Ezra  to  Jerusalem.     B.C.  457; 

Ezra  8. 16  Then  sent  I  for  E.,  for  Ariel,  for  Shemai. 

8.  A  priest  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  iS  Maaseiah,  and E., and  Jarib,  and  Gedaliah 

9.  A  Levite  who  had  trespassed  like  No.  8. 

Ezra  10.  23  Levites  ;  Jozabad,  and  Shimei.  .and  E. 


ELIHOREPH 


295 


ELISHAMA 


10.  One  of  the  sons  of  Harim  who  had  done  likewise. 
Ezra  10.  31  And  (of)  the  sons  of  Harim  ;  E.,  Ishijah 

11.  An  ancestor  of  Joseph  husband  of  Mary  in  the  line 
traced  by  Luke. 

Luke  3.  29  (the  son)of  Jose, which  was  (the  son)  of  E. 
E-U-HO'-REPH,  ipft^B  God  of  harvest  rain. 
A  scribe  or  secretary  of  Solomon.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  4.    3  E.  and  Aliiah,  the  sons  of  Shisha,  scribes 

E-LI'-HTJ,  (H^N  God  himself. 

1.  Great-grandfather  of  Samuel  the  prophet,  and  son  of 
Tohu.  Both  Eliel  and  Eliab  are  used  of  this  man  in 
1  Ch.  vi.     B.C.  1230. 

1  Sa.    1.    1  the  son  of  Jeroham,  the  son  of  E. 

2.  Alanassehite  who  joined  David  at  Ziglag.  B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.  20  E.,  and  Zilthai,  captains  of  the  thousands 

3.  A  Kohathite  of  the  family  of  Korah,  and  a  porter  at 
the  tabernacle  in  the  time  of  David.  B.C.  1022. 

1  Ch.  26.    7  whose  brethren  (were)  strong  men,  E. 

4.  A  brother  of  Davktf(sanie  as  Eliab),  made  ruler  over 
Judah.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Ch.27.  18  Of  Judah;  E.,  (one)  of  the  brethren  of  D. 

5.  Youngest  of  Job's  three  friends.     B.C.  1520. 

Job    32.  2  Then  was  kindled  the  wrath  of  E.  the  son 

32.  4  Now  E.  had  waited  till  Job  had  spoken 

32.  5  When  E.  saw  that  (there  was)  no  answer 

32.  6  E. .  .said,  I  (am)  young,  and  ye  (are)  very 

34.  1  Furthermore,  E.  answered  and  said,  Hear 

35.  1  E.  spake  moreover,  and  said,  Thinkest 

36.  1  E.  also  proceeded,  and  said,  Suffer  me 

E-LI'-JAH,  to)?*?  my  God  is  Jah,  or  God  himself. 

1.  The  grandest  and  most  romantic  character  that  Israel 
ever  produced.  "  Elijah  the  Tishbite  of  the  inhabitants 
ofGilead,"  is  literally  all  we  know  of  his  parentage. 
B.C.  S97. 

1  EX  17.    1  And  E.  the  Tishbite.  .said  unto  Aliab 

17.  T3  And  E.  said  unto  her,  Fear  not ;  go  I 
17.  15  she.  .did  according  to  the  saying  of  E. 

17. 16  word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  spake  by  E. 

17. 18  she  said  unto  E.,  What  have  I  to  do  with 
17.  22  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  E.;  and  the 
17.  23  E.  took  the  child,  and  brought  him  down 
17,  23  and  E.  said,  See,  thy  son  liveth 

17.  24  the  woman  said  to  E.,  Now  by  this  I  know 

18.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  E.  in  the 
18.    2  And  E.  went  to  show  himself  unto  Ahab 
18.    7  as  Obadiah  was  in  the  way,  behold,  E. 
18.    7  and  said,  (Art)  thou  that  my  lord  E.? 
18.   8,  11, 14  go,  tell  thy  lord.  Behold,  E.(ishere) 
18.  15  E.  said,  (As)  the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth 

18.  16  and  Ahab  went  to  meet  E. 

18. 17  it  came  to  pass,  when  Ahab  saw  E.,  that 
18.  21  E.  came  uuto  all  the  people,  and  said 
iS.  22  Then  said  E.  unto  the  people,  I.  .1  only 
18.  25  And  E.  said  unto  the  prophets  of  Baal 
18.  27  E.  mocked  them,  and  said,  Cry  aloud 
18.  30  E.  said  unto  all  the  people,  Come  near 
18.  31  E.  took  twelve  stones,  accoi'ding  to  the 
18.  36  E.  came  near,  and  said.  Lord  God  of  Ab. 
18.  40  E.  said  unto  them,  Take  the  prophets  of 
18.  40  E.  brought  them  down  to  the  brook  K. 
iS.  41  E.  said  unto  Ahab,  Get  the  up,  eat  and 
18.  42  and  E.  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel 

18.  46  And  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  on  E. 

19.  1  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  E.  had  done 
19.    2  Jezebel  sent  a  messenger  unto  E.,  saying 
29.    9  said  unto  him,  Whatdoest  thoujhere,  J£.? 
19.  13  E.  heard  (it,),  .what  dost  thou  here,  E.? 

19. 19  E.  passed  ny  him,  and  cast  his  mantle 
ig.  20  And  he  left  the  oxen,  and  ran  after  E. 
ig.  21  he  arose,  and  went  after  E.,  and  ministe. 
21. 17  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  E.  the  T. 
21.  20  Ahab  said  to  E.,  Hast  thou  found  me,  0 
2i.  28  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  E.,  the  T. 

2  Ki.   1.    3  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  E.  the  Ti. 

1.    4  Thou . .  shalt  surely  die.   And  E.  departed 
1.    8  And  he  said,  It  (is)E.  the  Tishbite 
1. 10  E.  answered  and  said  to  the  captain  of 
1.  12  E.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  If  I  (be) 

1.  13  third  captain .  .fell  on  his  knees  before  E. 
1. 15  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  E.,  Go 
1. 17  died_according  to  the  word .  .which  E.  had 

2.  1  ,the  Lord  would  take  up  E.  into  hea  en 
2.  1  that  E.  went  with  Elisha  froiu  Gilgal 
2.  2  E.  said  unto  Elisha,  Tarry  here,  I  pray 
2.  4  E.  said  unto  him,  Elisha,  Tarry  here 

2.    6  E.  said  unto  him,  Tarry,  I  pray  thee 
2.    8  E.  took  his  mantle,  and  wrapped  (it) 
2.    9  E.  said  unto  Elisha,  Ask  what  I  shall  do 
2.  11  E.  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven 
2.  13  He  took  up  also  the  mantle  of  E.  that 
2,  14  he  took  the  mantle  of  E. .  .and  smote  the 
2. 14  and  said.  Where  (is)  the  Lord  God  of  E. .' 

2.  15  The  spirit  of  E.  doth  rest  on  Elisha 

3.  11  Elisha.  .poured  water  on  the  hands  of  E. 
9.  36  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  E.  the 

to.  10  Lord  hath  done .  .which  he  spake  by .  .E. 

10.  17  saying  of  the  LORD,  which  he  spake  to  E. 
2  Ch.21.  12  there  came  a  writing  to  him  from  E. 
Mai.    4.   5  Behold,  I  will  send  you  E.  the  prophet 

2.  One  who  took  a  strange  wife  during  the  exile.  B.C. 
456. 

Ezra  10.  21  of  the  sons  of  Harim  ;  Maaseiah,  and  E. 

E-LI'-KA,  kjj*Vb  God  is  rejector. 

A  Harodite,  one  of  David's  guard.    The  name  is  omitted 

in  1  Ch.  xi.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  25  Shammah  the  Harodite,  E.  the  Harodite 


E'-LTM,  zh^palm  trees. 

Second  encampment  of  Israel  after  they  crossed  the 
Jied  Sea.  It  had  twelve  fountains  of  water,  and  seventy 
palm  trees ;  hence  its  name. 

Exodis.  27  they  came  to  E.,  where  (were)  twelve 
16.    1  they  took  their  journey  from  E.,  and  all 
16.    1  wilderness  of  Sin,  which  (is)  between  E. 
K1UII33.    g  from  M.  and  came  unto  E. :  and  in  E. 
33.  10  they  removed  from  E.,  and  encamped  by 

E-LI-ME'-LECH,  ^D'bg  God  is  king. 
A  man  of  Judah,  and  of  the  Hezronite  family  dwelling 
in  Bethlehem  Ephratah  hi  the  days  of  the  Judges.    He 
became  husband  of  Naomi  and  father  in  law  of  Ruth. 

B.C.  1322. 

Ruth  1.    2  the  name  of  the  man  (was)  E.,  and  the 

1.  3  E.,  Naomi's  husband,  died  ;  and  she  was 

2.  1  a  kinsman,  .of  the  family  of  E.;  and  his 

2.  3  unto  Boaz,  who  (was)  of  the  kindred  of  E. 
4.    3  parcel  of  land .  .(was)  our  brother  E.'s 

4.    9  I  have  bought  all  that  (was)  E.'s  and  all 

El-IO-E'-NAI,  Tj/in^x,  ^ryv^x  to  Jah  are  mine  eyes. 

1.  A  son  of  Neariah  of  the  family  of  David.     B.C.  460. 

1  Ch.  3.  23  the  sons  of  Neariah  ;  E.,  and  Hezekiah 

3.  24  the  sons  of  E. .  .Hodaiah,  and  Eliashib 

2.  Head  of  a  family  of  Simeon.    B.C.  800/ 

1  Ch.  4.  36  E.,  and  Jaakobah,  and  Jeshohaiah,  and 

3.  Head  of  one  of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Becher 
son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.   8  the  sons  of  Becher ;  Zemira..and  E.,  and 

4.  A  priest  in  Ezra's  time  who  put  away  his  strange 
wife.    Perhaps  the  same  as  the  one  in  Neh.  12.  41. 

B.C.  457. 

Ezra   10.  22  of  the  sons  of  Pashur  ;  E.,  Maaseiah 

5.  A  son  of  Zattu  who  married  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  27  of  the  sons  of  Zattu  ;  E.,  Eliashib,  Mat. 
C.  Probably  the  same  as  No.  4. 

Neh.  12.  41  the  priests  ;  EUakim,  Maaseiah.  .E.,  Zee. 
V.  Better  Elihoenai;  the  seventh  son  of  Meshelemiah 
the  son  of  Kore,  of  the  sons  of  Asaph,  and  one  of  the 
doorkeepers  of  the  temple.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.    3  Elam  the  fifth,  Jehohanan  the  sixth,  E. 
S.  A  descendant  of  Pahath  Moab,  who  came  up  with 
Ezra  in  Artaxerxes'  time.    B.c.  457. 

Ezra    8.    4  E. .  .son  of  Zerahiah,  and  with  him  two 

E-LI'-PHAL,  Sd'^n  God  is  judge. 
A  captain  in  David's  army.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  35  Aliiham.  .son  of  Sacar.  .E.  the  son  of  ITr 

E-LI-PHA'-LET,  E-LI-PHE'-LET  vb&b^God  is  escape. 

1.  The  last  of  David's  thirteen  sons  by  his  wives.  The 
names  Elphalet  and  Phaltiel  are = Eliphalet. 

2  Sa.    5.  16  And  Elishama,  and  Eliada,  and  E. 

1  Ch.  3.    8  And  Elishama,  aud  Eliada,  and  E.,  nine 

14.  7  And  Elishama,  and  Beeliada,  and  E. 

2.  Another  of  David's  sons,  bora  after  his  establishment 
in  Jerusalem.    Called  Elphalet  in  1  Ch.  14.  5.   B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  3.    6  Ibhar  also,  and  Elishama,  and  E. 

3.  One  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men.     B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  34  E.  the  son  of  Ahasbai,  the  son  of  the 

4.  A  Beujamite,  a  son  of  Eshek  and  descendant  of  Saul 
through  Jonathan.     B.C.  830. 

1  Ch.  S.  39  the  sons  of  Eshek  his  brother  (were).  .E. 

5.  A  leader  of  the  sons  of  Adonikam  who  came  up  with 
E2ra  from  the  exile. 

Ezra  8.  13  the  last  sons  of  Adonikam.  .E.,  Jeiel,  and 
G.  One  who  took  a  strange  wife ;  the  same  as  No.  5. 

Ezra  10.  33  sons  of  Hashurn ;  Mattenai.  .Zabad,  E. 
E-U'-PHAZ,  13'^n  God  is  dispenser. 

1.  Son  of  Esau  by  the  daughter  of  Elon.    B.C.  1790. 

Gen  36.  4  Adah  bare  to  Esau  E.  ;  and  Bashemath 
36.  10  These  (are)  the  names  of  Esau's  sons  ;  E. 
36. 11  the  sons  of  E.  were  Temau,  Omar,  Zepho 
36.  12  Timna  was  concubine  to  E.,  Esau's  son 
36.  12  she  bare  to  E.  Amalek  :  these  (were)  the 
36.  15  the  sons  of  E.  the  first  born  (son)  of  Esau 
36.  16  these  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  E.  in 

1  Ch.  1.  35  The  sous  of  Esau  ;  E.,  Reuel,  and  Jeush 
1.  36  The  sons  of  E.  ;  Teman,  and  Omar,  Zephi 

2.  The  chief  of  Job's  three  friends,  a  descendant  of 
Teman  son  of  Eliphaz,  from  whom  a  portion  of  Arabia 
took  its  name,  and  whose  name  is  used  in  Jer.  49.  20  as 
a  poetical  parallel  to  Edom.    B.C.  1530. 

Job      2.  11  E.  the  Temanite,  and  Bildad  the  Shuhite 

4.  1  Then  E.  the  Temanite  answered  and  said 

15.  1  Then  answered  E.  the  Temanite,  and  said 
22.  1  Then  E.  the  Temanite  answered  and  said 
42.  7  the  Lord  said  to  E.  the  Temanite,  My 
42.  9  E. .  .did  according  as  the  Lord  comman. 

E-LI-PHX'-LEH,  irta^g  Jah  is  distinction. 
A  Levite  set  over  the  choral  service  when  the  ark  was 
brought  up  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom.     B.C.  1042. 
1  Ch.15.  iS  their  brethren  of  the  second.  .E.,  and 
15.  21  Mattithiah,  and  E.,  and  Mikneiah,  and 

E-II-SA'-BETH,  'EAitrajSeT  (from  the  Heb.)  God  is 

swearer. 
Wife  of  Zecharias  and  mother  of  John  the  Baptist.     She 
was  of  a  priestly  family  and  a  relation  of  the  Virgin 
Mary  whom  she  was  the  first  to  greet  as  the  mother  of 
her  "Lord." 


Luke  1.    5  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,  .her  name.  .E. 
1.    7  they  had  no  child,  because..  E.  was  barren. 
1.  13  thy  wife  E.  shall  bear  thee  a  son 
1.  24  after  those  days  his  wife  E.  conceived 
1.  36  E. .  .hath  also  conceived  a  son  in  her  old 
1.  40  the  house  of  Zacharias,  and  saluted  E. 
1.  41  when  E.  heard  the  salutation  of  Mary 
1.  41  and  E.  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

1.  57  E.'s  full  time  came  that  she  should  be 
E-LIS-E'-TJS,  'EAuTtralbs. 

The  form  in  which  the  name  of  Elisha  appears  in  the 
Common  Version  of  the  New  Testament  and  Apocry- 
pha. 

Luke  4.  27  were  in  .Israel  in  the  time  of  E.  theprophet 

E-U'-SHA,  y^'Sx  God  is  saviour. 
Son  of  Shaphat  of  Abel-meholah ;  the  attendant  and 
disciple  of  Elijah,  and  his  successor  as  prophet  in 
Israel.  His  call  by  Elijah  was  (B.C.  901),  four  yeai-s 
before  the  death  of  Ahab  (B.C.  897),  and  he  held  the 
office  of  prophet  in  Israel  for  55  years.  The  thrilling 
incidents  of  his  life  are  related  in  the  1  and  2  Books 
of  Kings. 

1  Ki.  19.  16  E. .  .shalt  thou  anoint  (to  be)  prophet  in 

19.  17  that  escapeth  from  the  sword,  -shall  E. 
19.  19  So  he  departed  thence,  and  found  E.  the 

2  Ki.  2.    1  Elijah  w^ent  with  E.  from  Gilgal 

2.  2  Elijah  said  unto  E.,  Tarry  here,  I  pray 
2.    2  E.  said.  .1  will  not  leave  thee.    So  they 
2.    3  the  sons  of  the  prophets . .  came  forth  to  E. 
2.    4  Elijah  said  unto  him,  E.,  tariy  here,  Fpray 
2.    5  the  sons  of  the  prophets . .  came  to  E.,  and 
2.    9  Elijah  said  unto  E. .  .And  E.  said,  I  pray 
2.  12  E.  saw  (it),  and  he  cried,  My  father,  my 
2.  14  they  parted  hither  and  thither  :  and  E. 
2.  15  said,  The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  E. 
2.  19  the  men  of  the  city  said  unto  E.,  Behold 

2.  22  according  to  the  saying  of  E.  which  he 

3.  11  Here  (is)  E.  the  son  of  Shaphat,  which 

3.  13  E.  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  What 
3. 14  E.  said,  (As)  the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth 
4-    1  there  cried  a  certain  woman .  .unto  E. 

4.  2  E.  said  unto  her,  What  shall  I  do 

4.    8  E.  passed  to  Shunem,  where  (was)  a  great 
4.  17  at  that  season  that  E.  had  said  unto  her 
4.  32  when  E.  was  come  into  the  house,  behold 

4.  38  And  E.  came  again  to  Gilgal :  and 

5.  8  E. .  .heard  that  the  king,  .rent  his  clothes 
5.  9  Na. .  .stood  at  the  door  of  the  house  of  E. 
5.  10  E.  sent  a  messenger  unto  him,  saying 

5.  20  Gehazi,  the  servant  of  E.  the  man  of  G. 

5.  25  And  E.  said  unto  him,  Whence.  .Gehazi* 

6.  1  the  sons  of  the  prophets  said  unto  E. 

6.  12  E.,  theprophet.  .telleththe  king  of  Israel 
6.  17  E.  prayed.  .LORD,  .open  his  eyes,  that  he 
6.  17  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  E. 
6.  18  E.  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  Smite 
6.  18  blindness  according  to  the  word  of  E. 
6.  19  E.  said  unto  them,  This  (is)  not  the  way 
6.  20  E.  said,  Lord,  open  the  eyes  of  these 
6.  21  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  E.,  when  he 
6.  31  if  the  head  of  E. .  .stand  on  him  this  day 

6.  32  E.  sat  in  his  house,  and  the  elders  sat 

7.  1  E.  said,  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lori> 

8.  1  Then  spake  E.  unto  the  woman,  whose 
8.  4  Tell  me.  .the  great  things  that  E.  hath 
S.  5  this  (is)  her  son,  whom  E.  restored  to 
8.  7  E.  came  to  Damascus ;  and  Ben-hadad 

8.  10  E.  said  unto  bun,  Go,  say  unto  bun,  Thou 
8.  13  E.  answered,  The  Lord  hath  showed  me 
8. 14  he  departed  from  E.,  and  came  to  his 

8.  14  who  said  to  him,  What  said  E.  to  thee? 

9.  1  E.  the  prophet  called  one  of  the  children 
13.  14  E.  was  fallen  sick  of  his  sickness  whereof 
13.  15  E.  said  unto  him,  Take  bow  and  arrows 
13. 16  E.  put  his  hands  upon  the  king's  hands 
13.  17  E.  said,  Shoot :  and  he  shot.     And  he 
13.  20  And  E.  died,  and  they  buried  him 

13.  21  cast  tlie  man  into  the  sepulchre  of  E. 

13.  21  when  the  man.  .touched  the  bones  of  E. 

E-LI'-SHAH,  n^'Vs. 

Eldest  son  of  Javan  grandson  of  Noah,  and  ancestor  of 
the  ^Eolians,  a  leading  Hellenic  tribe.   The  designation 
of  a  race  rather  than  of  a  locality.     Javan  represents 
the  Ionians,  and  Elisha  the  ^Eolians.    B.C.  2250. 
Gen.  10.   4  sons  of  Javan  ;  E.,  1  Ch.  1.  7 ;  Eze.  27.  7. 

E-LI-SHA'-MA,  yc^Vs  God  is  hearer. 

1.  Grandfather  of  Joshua,  and  son  of  Anmiihud  a  chief 
of  Ephraim  in  the  wilderness.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1.  10  of  Ephraim  ;  E.  the  son  of  Amniihud 

2.  18  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Ephraim.. E. 
7.  48  On  the  seventh  day  E. .  .(offered) 
7  53  this,  .the  offering  of  E.  the  son  of  Amm. 
10  22  over  his  host  (was)  E.  the  son  of  Amniihud 

1  Ch.  7.  26  Laadan  his  son,  Amniihud  his  son,  E.  his 

2.  A  son  of  king  David  :  one  of  the  thirteen  sons  bora 
to  him  in  Jerusalem.    B.0-.  1030. 

2  Sa,  5.  16  And  E.,  and  Eliada,  and  Eliphalet 
1  Ch    3.    8  And  E.,  and  Eliada,  and  Eliphelet 

14.  7  And  E.,  and  Beeliada,  and  Eliphalet 

3.  Another  son,  who  is  also  called  Elishua.     B.C.  1050. 

1  Ch.  3.   6  Ibhar  also,  and  E.,  and  Eliphelet 

4.  A  descendant  of  Judah.     B.C.  1280. 

1  Ch.  2.  41  Shallum  begat  Jekam. . .  Jekam.  begat  E. 

5.  The  same,  according  to  Jerome,  as  No.  4.:  father  of 
Nethaniah  and  grandfather  of  Ishmael  "  of  the  seed, 
royal,"  who  lived  at  the  time  of  the  exile.    B.C.  635. 


ELISHAPHAT 


296 


EMERALD 


2  Ki.  25.  25  Ishmael . .  son  of  Nethaniah,  the  son  of  E. 
Jer.   41.    1  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah.. son  of  E. 

6.  A  scribe  or  secretary  to  Jehoiakim.   B.C.  606. 

Jer.   36.  12  all  the  princes  sat  there.  .E.  the  scribe 
36.  20  laid  up  the  roll  in  the  chamber  of  E. 
36.  21  he  took  it  out  of  E.  the  scribe's  chamber 

7.  A  priest  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the  law.    B.C. 
912. 

2  Ch.17.   8  and  with  them  E.  and  Jehoram,  priests 
E-U-SHA'-PHAT,  DQf^g  God  is  judge. 
One  of  the  "  captains  of  hundreds  "  whom  Jehoiadathe 
priest  employed  to  collect  the  Levites  and  other  leaders 
to  Jerusalem  before  bringing  forward  Joash  as  king. 
B.C.  878. 

2  Ch.23.    r  Jehoiada..  took..  E...  into  covenant  with 

E-LI-SHE'-BA,  P3^8  God  is  swearer. 

Daughter   of    Amminadab,    sister    of    Naashon.    B.C. 

1490. 

Exod.  6.  23  And  Aaron  took  him  E. . .  to  wife  ;  and  she 
E-LT-SHTJA,  HW^g  God  is  rich. 
A  son  of  David,  B.C.  1030.     He  is  called  JElishama  in 
1  Ch.  3.  6. 

2  Sa.   5.  15  Ibhar  also,  and  E.,  and  Nepheg,  and  Ja. 

1  Ch.14.    5  And  Ibhar,  and  E.,  and  Elpalet 

E-LI'-TJD,  'EAiouS  (from  tlie  Heb.) 
Son  of  Achim  in  the  genealogy  of  Jesus  four  genera- 
tions before  Joseph. 

Matt.  1.  14  Sadoc  begat  Achim;  and  Achim  begat  E. 
1. 15  E.  begat  Eleazar ;  and  Eleazar  begat  M. 

I-LI-ZA'-PHAN,  fay^N  God  is  protector. 

1.  Son  of  I'zziel,  a  Levite,  chief  of  the  Kohathitesat  the 
taking  uf  the  census  at  Sinai.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  3.  30  the  chief,  .(shall  be)  E.  the  son  of  (Jzziel 

1  Ch.15.    8  Of  the  sons  of  E. ;  Shemaiah  the  chief 

2.  Son  of  Parnach,  "prince"  of  Zebulun,  and  appointed 
to  assist  in  apportioning  the  land.    B.C.  1490. 

Num34.  25  the  prince  of  the  tribe,  .of  Zebulun,  E. 

3.  Ancestor  of  certain  Levites  that  assisted  in  cleansing 
the  temple  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  724. 

2  Ch.29.  13  of  the  sons  of  E. ;  Shimri,  and  Jeiel 
E-LT-ZUR,  "fis^s  God  is  a  rock. 

A  chief  Reubenite  who  assisted  in  taking  the  census 
under  Moses.     B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1.  5  of  (the  tribe  of)  Reuben  ;  E.  the  son  of  8 
2.  10  the  captain  of  the  children  of  Reuben.  .E. 
7.  30  On  the  fourth  day  E.  the  son  of  Shedeur 
7.  35  this  (was)  the  offering  of  E.  the  son  of  S. 
10.  18  over  his  host  (was)  E.  the  sou  of  Shedeur 

EL-KA'-NAH,  nippx  God  is  possessing. 

1.  A  grandson  of  Korah  grandson  of  Kohath.   B.C.  1400. 

Exod.  6.  24  the  sons  of  Korah;  Assir,  and  E.,  and  A. 
1  Ch.  6.  23  E.  his  son,  and  Ebiasaph  his  son 

2.  Father  of  the  prophet  Samuel,  and  a  descendant  of 
No,  1.  in  the  fifth  generation.    B.C.  1171. 

1  Sa.    1.    1  his  name  (was)  E.,  the  son  of  Jeroham 
1.    4  when  the  time  was  that  E.  offered,  he 
1.    SThensaid  E.. .to  her,  Hannah,  why  weep. 
1.  19  E.  knew  Hannah,  .and  the  Lord  remem. 
1.  21  E. .  .went  up  to  offer  unto  the  Lord  the 

1.  23  E. .  .said  unto  her.  Do  what  seemeth  tlicc 

2.  11  And  E.  went  to  Ramah  to  his  house 

2.  20  Eli  blessed  E.  and  his  wife,  and  said,  The 
1  Ch.  6.  27  Eliab  hip  son,  Jeroham  his  son,  E.  his  son 
6.  34  The  son  of  E.,  the  son  of  Jeroham,  the 

3.  A  descendant  of  Levi  through  Kohath.    B.C.  1490. 

1  Ch.  6.  25  the  sons  of  E. ;  Amasai,  and  Ahimoth 

6.  36  The  son  of  E.,  the  son  of  Joel,  the  son  of 

4.  A  descendant  of  Ivohath,  (the  same  as  No.  3  ?) 

1  Ch.  6.  26  (As  for)  E.  :  the  sons  of  E.  ;  Zophai  his 
6.  35  The  son  of  Zuph,  the  son  of  E.,  the  son 
6.  An  ancestor  of  Netophathite  villagers.    B.C.  500. 
1  Ch.  9.  16  Berechiah,  the  son  of  Asa,  the  son  of  E. 

6.  A  Korhite  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.  12.    6  E.,  and  Jesiah,  and  Azareel,  and  Joezer 

7.  A  Levite  doorkeeeper  of  the  ark;  (the  same  as  No.  6?) 

1  Ch.15.  23  Berechiah  and  E. .  .doorkeepers  for  the 

5.  An  officer  in  the  household  of  kingAhaz,  slain  when 
Pekah  invaded  Judah.    B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.28.    7  and  E.  (that  was)  next  to  the  king 
EL-KO-SHITE,  VP^N. 

A  native  of  Elkosh,  the  birthplace  of  the  prophet 
Nahum,  which  in  Jerome's  time  was  considered  to  be 
in  Galilee.    B.C.  713. 

Nab.    1.    1  The  book  of  the  vision  of  Nahum  the  E. 
EL-LA'-SAR,  1D^. 

A  Chaldean  town,  the  city  of  Arioch.  In  the  native 
dialect  it  wascalled  Larsa  or  Larancha,  and  was  known 
to  the  Greeks  as  Larissa  or  Larachun.  This  suits  the 
connection  with  Flam  and  Shinar.  Larsa  was  in  Lower 
Babylonia  or  Chahlea,  midway  between  Vr  and  Erech 
(now  called  Mur/hcir  and  Warka)  on  the  left  of  the 
Euphrates.    It  is  now  called  Senkereh. 

Gen.  14.    1  in  the  days  of.  .Arioch  king  of  E. 

14.    9  Arioch  king  of  E. ;  four  kings  with  five 
ELM  — 
Oak,  terebinth,  n^x  elah. 

Hos.    4-  13  llP"n  the  hills,  under  oaks,  .and  elms 


EL-MO' -DAM,  'EAjuoiSa^,  'EKpatidft. 

Son  of  Er,  six  generations  earlier  than  Zerubbabel  in 

the  genealogy  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  28  which  was  (the  son)  of  E.,  which  was 
EL-NA'-AM,  rjypN  God  is  pleasant. 
Father  of  David's  guard,  Jeribai  and  Joshaviah.    B.C. 
1050. 

1  Ch.11.  46  Jeribai,  and  Joshaviah,  the  sons  of  E. 

EL-NA'-THAN,  ]™b$God  is  giving. 

1.  Father  of  Nehushta,  Jehoiakim's  queen.     B.C.  640. 

2  Ki.24.    8  Nehushta,  the  daughter  of  E.of  Jerusalem 
Jer.  26.  22  E.  the  sou  of  Achbor,  and.  .men  with 

36.  12  the  princes  sat  there.  .Elishama.  .and  E. 
36.  25  Nevertheless  E. .  .had  made  intercession 

2.  Name  of  three  Levites  in  the  time  of  Ezra.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  8.  16  Then  sent  I  for  E...andforE...andforE. 
ELOI,  'EAwi ;  in  Hcb.  'rhx  elohai,  my  God. 

Mark  15.  34  aloud  voice,  saying,  Eloi,  Eloi,  lamasaba. 
E'-LON,  j'l^N  oak,  strong. 

1.  Father  of  the  wife  of  Esau.    B.C.  1796. 

Gen.  26.  34Bashemath  the  daughter  of  E.  theHittite 
36.    2  Adah  the  daughter  of  E.  the  Hittite 

2.  The  second  of  Zebuluu's  three  sons.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  14  the  sons  of  Zebulun  ;  Sered,  and  E.,  and 
Nuni26.  26  of  E.,  the  family  of  the  Elonites  :  of 

3.  A  town  in  the  border  of  Dan,  between  Ajalon  and 
Ekron. 

Josh.  19.  43  And  E.,  and  Thimnathah,  and  Ekron 

1.  The  Zebulonite  who  judged  Israel  for  ten  years  and 
was  buried  in  Aijalon.  Elon  and  Aijalon  are  (in  Hebrew) 
composed  of  preciselythe  same  letters ;  hence  "Aijalon ' 
may  have  had  its  name  from  Elon  being  buried 
there. 

Judg.12.  11  after  him  E.,  a  Zebulonite,  judged  Israel 
12.  12  E.  the  Zebulonite  died,  and  was  buried 

E-LON  BETH  HA'-NAN,    fjn-rra    jiS'N    oak   of  the 

house  of  grace. 
One  of  the  three  Danite  towns  that  formed   one  of 
Solomon's  commissariat  districts,  (the  same  as  the  Elon 
of  Joshua  19.  43  ?) 

1  Ki.   4.    9  in  Shaalbim,  and  Beth-shemesh,  and  E. 
E-LO-NITES,  tflSx  belonging  to  Elon. 
Descendants  of  Elon,  son  of  Zebulun. 

Num  26.  26  of  Zebulon . .  of  Elon,  the  family  of  the  E. 
ELOGJJENT  — 
l.To  be  intelligent,  ]"2  bin,  2. 

Isa.     3.   3  the  cunning  artificer,  and  the  eloquent 
2. .4  man  of  words,  WI^R  c>'N  ish  debarim. 

Exod.  4.  10  I  (am)  not  eloquent,  neither  heretofore 
3. Eloquent,  full  of  words,  \6ytos  logios. 

Acts  18.  24  an  eloquent  man,  (and)  mighty  in  the  s. 
E'-LOTH,  rnVy  oak  or  terebinth  grove. 
Another  orthography  of  Elath,  which  see. 

1  Ki.  9.  26  beside  E.,  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  sea 

2  Ki.16.  6  Rezin  king  of  Syria  recovered  Elath  to 

2  Ch.  8.  17  went  Solomon  to  Ezion-geber,  and  to  E. 
26.    2  He  built  E.,  and  restored  it  to  Judah 

EL-PA'-AL,  Sj-'S^x  God  is  working. 

Son  of  Shaharaim,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8. 11  And  of  Hushim  he  begat  Ahitub,  and  E. 
8.  12  sons  of  E.  ;  Eber,  and  Misham,  and  Sha, 
8. 18  and  Jezliah,  and  Jobab,  the  sons  of  E. 

EL-PA'-LET,  uSa^x  God  is  escape. 

A  son  of  David,   called  Eliphalet  in  1  Ch.   3.  6,   but 

omitted  in  2  Sa.  5.     B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  14.    5  And  Ibhar,  and  Elishua,  and  E. 

EL  PA'-RAN,  j-in'3  S'N  oak  of  Par  an. 

A  place  in  the  S.  of  Canaan  and  W.  of  Edom,  where 

the  Horites  dwelt  in  Seir. 

Gen.  14.   6  the  Horites  in  their  mount  Seir,  unto  E. 
ELSE  — 
\.Not,  there  is  not,  ])><  ayin. 

Gen.  30.    1  unto  Jacob,  Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die 

2.  Because,  for,  but,  surely,  '3  hi. 

Exod  10.  4  Else,  if  thou  refuse  to  let  my  people  go 
3. Again,  yet,  any  more,  *iiy  od. 

Deut.  4.  35  he  (is)  God :  (there  is)  none  else  beside 
LBut  (or  now)  (f  not,  4t  Se  pA\  ci  de  me. 

Mark  2.  21  else  the  new  piece  that  filled  it  up  taketh 
2.  22  else  the  new  wine  doth  burst  the  bottles 
Z\.fiut  if  nut  indeed,  el  5e  ^1776  ci  de  mege. 

Matt  9.  17  else  the  bottles  break,  and  the  wine  run. 

Luke  5. 37  else  the  new  wine  will  burst  the  bottles 
6.  Since  if  so,  if  otherwise,  lirei  cpei. 

1  Co.  14.16  Else  when  thou  sbaltbless  with' the  spirit 
15.  29  Else  what  shall  they  do  which  are  bapti. 
7 . Since  otherwise  indeed,  eiref  &pa  epei  ara.    ! 

1  Co.    7.  14  else  were  your  children  unclean ;  but  now 
8.  The  other,  crepas  hcteros. 

Acts  17.  21  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else  but 
9. And,  even,  teal  kai. 

Rom    2.  15  accusing  or  else  excusing  one  another 


ELSE,  or  — 

And  if  not,  kVdso  ve-im-lo. 

Gen.  42.  16  or  else  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh  surely  ye 

EL-TE'-KEH,  Kp{4$,  npj-i^K  God  is  Teqe. 
A  city  in  Dan  given  to  the  Kohathites. 

Josh.  19.  44  And  E.,  and  Gibbethon,  and  Baalath 
21.  23  out  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  E.  with  her  sub. 

EL-TE'-KON,  j'pj^N  God  is  firm. 

A  city  in  the  mountains  of  Judah,  three  or  four  miles 

N.  of  Hebron. 

Josh. 15.  59  And  Maarath,  and  Beth-anoth,  and  E. 
EL-TO'-LAD,  -htihx  God  is  begetter. 
A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah  given  to  Simeon,  and  in  pos- 
session of  the  tribe  until  the  time  of  David.     In  1  Ch. 
4.  29  it  is  Tolad,  now  El-Toula. 

Josh.  1 5.  30  And  E.,  and  Chesil,  and  Hormah 
19.    4  And  E.,  and  Bethul,  and  Hormah 

EL'-TJL,  717M  the  gleaning  month. 
The    sixth    month  of   the   sacred  year  of   the  Jews, 
beginning  with  the  last  new  moon  of  September  and 
ending  with  the  first  one  of  November. 

Neh.   6.  15  in  the  twenty  aud  fifth  (day)  of.  .E. 

EL-U'-ZAI,  Mljf?*!  God  is  strong. 
A  Benjamite  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.     B.C.  1048. 
1  Ch.12.    5  E.,and  Jerimoth,  andBealiah,  andShem. 

EX-Y'-MAS,  ^EXvfxas  a  sorcerer. 

A  false  prophet  who  withstood  Saul  and  Barnabas   at 

Paphos  in  Cyprus. 

Acts  13.    8  E.  the  sorcerer,  .withstood  them,  seeking 

EL-ZA'-BAD,  -n^x  God  is  endoxoing. 

1.  A  Gadite  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.  He  was  the 
ninth  of  the  eleven  heroes  of  his  tribe  that  crossed  the 
Jordan  to  assist  David.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.  12  Johanan  the  eighth,  E.  the  ninth 
2.A  Korhite  Levite,  son  of  Shemaiah.     B.C.  1000. 
1  Ch.26.    7  E.,  wtiose  bretliren  (were)  strong  men 

EL-ZA'-PHAN,  fD^x  God  is  protecting. 
1. Second  son  of  Uzziel  and  grandson  of  Levi.     He  was 
thus  cousin  to  Miriam,  Aaron,  and  Moses.     Called  also 
Elizaphan.     B.C.  1490. 

Exod.  6.  22  And  the  sous  of  Uzziel ;  Mishael,  and  E. 

Lev.  10.    4  Moses  called  Mishael  and  E. .  .and  said 

2.  A  prince  of  Zebulun,  who  was  one  of  those  appointed 
to  divide  the  land.    B.C.  1490. 

Nuni34.  25  the  prince  of  the  tribe,  .of  Zebulun,  E. 
EMBALM,  to  — 
To  embalm,  ajn  chanat. 

Gen.  50.    2  commanded  the  physicians  to  embalm  his 
50.    2  and  the  physicians  embalmed  Israel 
50.    3  the  days  of  those  which  are  embalmed 

•        50.  26  they  embalmed  him,  and  he  was  put  in 
EMBOLDEN,  to  — 
To  make  powerful,  embolden,  pD  marats,  5. 

Job    16.    3  what  emboldeneth  thee  that  thou  answe. 

EMBOLDENED,  to  be  — 

To  build  up,  otKob*Qfj.<EU)  oikodomeo. 

1  Co.  8.  10  him  which  is  weak  be  emboldened  to  eat 
EMBRACE,  to  — 

1.  To  embrace,  clasji,  p;n  chabaq. 

2  Ki.  4.  16  About  this  season,  .thou  shalt  embrace 
Eccl.  3.    5  a  time  to  embrace .  .to  refrain  from  embr. 

2.  To  embrace,  clasp,  cleave  to,  p^n  chabaq,  3. 

Gen.  29.  13  embraced  him,  and  kissed  him,  and  bro. 
33.    4  Esau  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced 
48.  10  and  he  kissed  them,  and  embraced  them 
Job    24.    S  embrace  the  rock  for  want  of  a  shelter 
Prov    4.    8  to  honour,  when  thou  dost  embrace  her 

5.  20  and  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  stranger  ? 
Song  2.    6  and  his  right  hand  doth  embrace  me 

8.    3  and  his  right  hand  should  embrace  me 
Lam.  4.    5  that  were  brought  up  in  scarlet  embrace 

3.  To  draw  to  oneself,  salute,  a.aird^o/j.at  aspazomai. 

Acts  20.    1  called  unto  (him)  the  disciples,  and  emb. 
Heb.  ir.  13  were  persuaded  of  (them),  and  embraced 

4.  To  take  round  about,  avfxTrepiXafxfidva)  sumperi. 

Acts  20.  10  and  fell  on  him,  and  embracing  (him) 

EMBROIDER,  to  — 

T<>  interweave,  "iv  shabats,  3. 

Exod^S.  39  shalt  embroider  the  coat  of  fine  linen 

EMBROIDERER  — 

To  embroider,  Cp*7  raqam. 

Exod.35.  35  of  the  embroiderer,  in  blue,  and  in  piu*ple 

38.  23  au  embroiderer  in  blue,  aud  in  purple 

EMERALD  — 

'[.Carbuncle,  ruby,  emerald,  ^53  nopJiek. 

Exoda8.  18  And  the  second  row  (shall  be)  an  emerald 

39.  11  the  second  row,  an  emerald,  a  sapphire 
Eze.  27.  16  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  emeralds 

28.  13  the  jasper,  the  sapphire,  the  emerald,  and 
2.0/ emerald,  light  green,  a/xapdy^ivos  smaragditi. 

Rev.  4.  3  a  rainbow,  .in  sight  like  unto  an  emerald 
3. Emerald,  light  green  sto?ie, a pa paySos  smrtragdos. 

Rev.  21.  19  third,  a  chalcedony ;  the  fourth,  anemera. 


EMBRODS 


297 


END 


EMERODS  — 

1. Emerods,  tumors,  D'Tina  techorim. 

i  Sa.    6.  ii  of  gold,  and  the  images  of  their  emerods 
6.  i  7  these  (are)  the  golden  emerods  which  the 

2,£oil,  emerod,  ^sy  ophcl. 

Deut  28.  27  The  Lord  will  smite  thee.. with  the  em. 
1  Sa.    5.    6  destroyed  them,  and  smote  them  with  e. 
5.    9  they  had  emerods  in  their  secret  parts 

5.  12  men  that  died  not.  .with  the  emerods 

6.  4  Five  golden  emerods,  and  five  golden  mice 
6.    5  ye  shall  make  images  of  your  emerods 

E'-MTMS,  E'O'X  the  terrible. 

A  race  of  gigantic  stature  originally  dwelling  on  the  E. 
of  the  Salt  Sea.  Anciently  the  whole  country  was  held 
by  a  race  of  giants — the  Rephairu  on  the  N.  ;  next,  the 
Zuzini;  and  next  the  Emim  ;  then  the  Horim  on  the 
S.  Afterwards  the  kingdom  of  Bashan  embraced  the 
territories  of  the  Rephaim ;  the  Ammonites  that,  of 
the  Zuzim  ;  the  Moabites  that  of  the  Emim  ;  while 
Edom  embraced  the  mountains  of  the  Horim.  The 
Emim  were  related  to  the  Anakim,  and  generally  called 
by  the  same  name  ;  but  their  conquerors,  the  Moabites, 
called  them  Emim — "The  Terrible." 

Gen.  14.    5  and  the  E.  in  Shaveh  Kiriathaim 
Deut.  2.  10  The  E.  dwelt  therein  in  times  past 
2.  11  but  the  Moabites  call  them  E. 

EMINENT  (place)  — 
l.An  arched  place,  21  gab. 

Eze.  16.  24  also  built  unto  thee  an  emineut  place 

16.  31  In  that  thou  bulkiest  thine  eminent  pla. 

16.  .39  they  shall  throw  down  thine  eminent  pi. 

2.  To  be  lofty,  ^n  talal. 

Eze.  17.  22  plant  (it)  upon  an  high  mountain  and  em. 

EM-MA-NU'-EL,  'Efj.ij.avovf]\.      See  IMMANUEL. 
Matt.  1.  23  they  shall  call  his  name  E.,  which,  being 

EM-MA'-US,  'E/i/xaovs. 

A  village  about  -jh  miles  from  Jerusalem  to  which  two 
»f  the  disciples  of  Christ  were  going  when  He  appeared 
to  them  on  the  day  of  his  resurrection. 

Luke24. 13  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to.  .E. 

EM'-MOR,  'EfXfx6p,  'E/^cop. 

The  father  of  Sycnem.     See  hamor. 

Acts    7.  16  sepulchre  that  Abraham  bought. .of  E. 
EMPIRE  — 
Kingdom,  nw?D  malkuth. 

Esth.  1.  jo  shall  be  published  throughout  all  his  em. 
EMPLOY,  to  — 
To  go  in  from  before,  D'jsp  Ni3  bo  mippanim. 

Deut 20.  19  not  cut  them,  .to  employ  (them)  in  the 
EMPLOYED,  to  be  — 
To  stand,  stand  still,  "i5jJ  amad. 

Ezra  10. 15  Jonathan. . and  Jahaziah .  .were employed 
EMPTIED  — 
Empty,  vain,  p~|,  p"!  req. 

Neh.  5.  13  even  thus  be  he  shaken  out,  and  emptied 
EMPTIED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  emptied,  ppa  baqaq,  2. 

Isa.   24.   3  The  land  shall  be  utterly  emptied,  and 
2.  To  be  or  become  lean,  poor,  low,  weak,  hby  dalal. 

Isa.   19.    6  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  emptied 
3.7*0  be  drawn  out,  emptied,  pn  rug,  6. 

Jer.  48.  11  Moab..hath  not  been  emptied  from  ves. 
EMPTIER  — 
To  empty,  make  void,  pp3  baqaq. 

Nah.   2.    2  for  the  emptiers  have  emptied  them  out 
EMPTINESS  — 
Emptiness,  ina  bohu. 

Isa.   34.  11  line  of  confusion,  and  the  stones  of  empt. 
EMPTY  — 
l.To  (be)  empty,  ppa  baqaq. 

Hos.  10.    1  Israel  (is)  an  empty  vine,  he  bringeth  fo. 
I.Emptiness,  voidness,  npia  buqah. 

Nah.   2.  10  She  is  empty,  and  void,  and  waste 
Z.Empty,  vain,  p~i,  p"i  req. 

Gen.  37.  24  the  pit  (was)  empty,  (there  was)  no  water 
41.  27  the  seven  empty  ears,  blasted  with  the  e. 

Judg.  7.  16  with  empty  pitchers,  and  lamps  within 

2  Ki.  4.    3  borrow . .  empty  vessels ;  borrow  not  a  few 

Isa.  29.   8  but  he  awaketh,  and  his  soul  is  empty 

Eze.  24.  11  Then  set  it  empty  upon  the  coals  thereof 
i.Empty,  vain,  pn  riq. 

Jer.  51.  34  he  hath  made  r.ie  an  empty  vessel,  he 
5.Empty,  in  vain,  Dpn  reqam. 

Gen:  31.  42  surely  thou  hadst  sent  me  away  now  em. 

Exod.  3.  21  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not  go  empty 

23.  15  and  none  shall  appear  before  me  empty 
34.  20  And  none  shall  appear  before  me  empty 

Jeutij.  13  thou  shalt  not  let  him  go  away  empty 
16.  16  shall  not  appear  before  the  LORD  empty 

Ruth  1.  21  Lord  hath  brought  me  home  again  empty 
3.  17  Go  not  empty  unto  thy  mother  in  law 

1  Sa.    6.    3  If  ye  send  away . .  send  it  not  empty 

2  Sa.    1.  22  and  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  empty  | 
Job   22.    9  Thou  hast  sent  widows  away  empty 

Jer.   14,    3  they  returned  with  their  vessels  empty      [ 

38 


6. Empty,  kcvos  kenos. 

Marki2.    3  they,  .beat  him,  and  sent  (him)  away  em 
Luke   1.  53  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent  empty  away 
20.  10  but.  .beat  him,  and  sent  (him)  away  emp, 
20. 1 1  beat  him  also . .  and  sent  (him)  away  emp. 

7. To  be  free,  at  leisure,  unoccupied,  o-xoAa^oj. 

Matt  12.  44  when  he  is  come,  he  findeth  (it)  empty 
EMPTY,  to  — 
l.To  empty,  ppa  baqaq,  Za. 

Jer.   51.    2  fanners,  that,  .shall  empty  her  land  :  fo." 

2.  To  exptose,  make  naked,  empty  out,  rnj;  arah,  3. 

Gen.  24.  20  and  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  trough 
2  Ch.24.  11  the  high  priest's  officer  came  and  emptied 

3.  To  prepare,  rus  panah,  3. 

Lev.  14.  36  that  they  empty  the  house,  before  the 

4.  To  draw  out,  empty  out,  pn  ruq,  5. 

Gen.  42.  35  as  they  emptied  their  sacks,  that,  behold 
Eccl.11.    3  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 
Jer.   48. 12  and  shall  empty  his  vessels,  and  break 
Hab.   1. 17  Shall  they  therefore  empty  their  net,  and 
Zech.  4. 12  which  through  the  two  golden  pipes  emp. 

EMPTY,  to  be  — 

To  be  inspiected,  looked  after,  ip3  paqoxl,  2. 

1  Sa.  20.  18  shalt  be  missed,  bee.  thy  seat  will  be  em. 
20.  25  Abner  sat.  .and  David's  place  was  empty 
20.  27  the  second  (day)  .  .David's  place  was  em. 

EMPTY,  to  make  — 

l.To  empty,  make  void,  ppa  baqaq. 

Isa.    24.    1  Behold,  the  LORD  maketh  the  earth  empty 

2.To  draw  out,  empty  oiit,  p^~i  ruq,  5. 

Isa.  32.   6  to  make  empty  the  soul  of  the  hungry 

EMPTY  out,  to  — 

To  empty,  make  void,  ppa  baqaq. 

Nah.  2.    2  for  the  emptiers  have  emptied  them  out 

EMPTY  place  — 

Emptiness,  ihfi  tohu. 

Job  26.    7  stretchethoutthe  nort   over  the  empty  p, 

EMULATION  — 

Zeal,  £rj \os  zelos. 

Gal.    5.  20  Idolatry,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  e. 

EMULATION,  to  provoke  to  — 

To  make  one  zealous,  Trapa^7]\6co  parazelod. 

Rom  11.  14  If  by  any  means  I  may  provoke  to  emu. 
ENABLE,  to  — 
To  put  strength  in,  4v$vva/u.6aj  endunaniod. 

1  Ti.    1.  12  I  thank  Christ,  .who  hath  enabled  me 
E'-NAM,  cry  double  fountains. 
A  city  in  the  lowlands  of  Judah. 

Josh  15.  34  Zauoah,  and  En-gannim,  Tappuah,  and  E. 

E'-NAN,  jvy  fountain. 

Father  of  Ahira,  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  appointed  to 
assist  Moses  in  taking  the  census  at  Sinai. 
Num.  1. 15  Of  Naphtali ;  Ahira  the  son  of  E. 

2.  29  captain . .  of  Naphtali . .  Ahira  the  son  of  E. 
7,  78  On  the  twelfth  day  Ahira  the  son  of  E. 
7.  83  this,  .the  offering  of  Ahira  the  son  of  E. 
10.  27  And  over  the  host. .  Ahira  the  son  of  E. 

ENCAMP,  to  — 

To  encamp,  settle  down,  njn  chanah. 

Exod  1 3.  20  they  took  their  journey,  .and  encamped 

14.    2  Speak  unto.  .Israel,  that  they  turn  and  e. 

14.    2  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the  sea 

14.  9  overtook  them  encamping  by  the  sea 

15.  27  and  they  encamped  there  by  the  waters 
iS.    5  where  he  encamped  at  the  mount  of  God 

Num.  1.  50  and  shall  encamp  round  about  the  taber. 
2. 17  as  they  encamp,  so  shall  they  set  forward 

2.  27  And  those  that  encamp  by  him  (shall  be) 

3.  38  those  that  encamp  before  the  tabernacle 
10.  31  thou  knowest  how  we  are  to  encamp  in 
33.  10  they  removed  from  Elim,  and  encamped 
33. 11  removed  from  the  Red  Sea,  and  encamp. 
33.  12  they  took  their  journey,  .and  encamped 
3S-  13  they  departed,  .and  encamped  in  Alush 
33.  14  they  removed  from  Alush,  and  encamped 
33.  17  they  departed,  .and  encamped  at  Hazero. 
33.  24  they  removed .  .and  encamped  in  Harad. 
33.  26  they  removed .  .and  encamped  at  Tahath 
33.  30  they  departed .  .and  encamped  at  Mosero. 
33.  32  they  removed,  .and  encamped  atHor-ha. 
33.  34  they  removed . .  and  encamped  at  Ebronah 
33-  35  departed. .and  encamped  at  Ezion-gaber 
33.  46  removed,  .and  encamped  in  Almon-dib. 

Josh.  4.  19  the  people  came.. and  encamped  in  Gil. 
5.  10  the  children  of  Israel  encamped  in  Gilgal 
10.    5  they  and  all  their  hosts,  encamped  befo:  e 
10.  31,  34  encamped  against  it,  and  fought 
Judg.  6.    4  they  encamped  against  them,  and  destr. 
9.  50  Then  went  Abimelech.  .and  encamped 
10.  17  encamped  in  Gilead . .  encamped  in  Miz. 
20.  19  the  children  of  Israel . .  encamped  against 

1  Sa.  11.    1  Nahash . .  came  up,  and  encamped  against 

13.  16  but  the  Philistines  encamped  inMichmash 

2  Sa.  11.  11  servants,  .are  encamped  in  the  open  fields 

12.  28  therefore  gather  the  rest,  .and  encamp 
:  Ki.  16.  15  the  people  (were)  encamped  against  Gibb. 

16.  16  the  people  (that  were)  eacamped  heard 

1  Cb.11.  15  the  host  of  the  Philistines  encamped  in 

2  Ch.32.    1  and  encamped  against  the  fenced  cities 
Job   19.  12  and  encamp  round  about  my  tabernacle 


Psa.  27.  3  Though  an  host  should  encamp  against 

34.  7  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round 

53.  5  scattered  the  bones  of  hini  that  encamp. 

Zech.  g.  8  And  I  will  encamp  about  mme  house 

ENCHANTER  — 

l.To  whisper,  use  enchantment,  iyra  nacluish,  3. 

Deut  18.  10  an  observer  of  times,  or  an  enchanter,  or 
2. To  observe  the  clouds,  ]&,  anan,  Za. 

Jer.  27.    9  hearken  not  ye.  .to  your  enchanters,  nor 

ENCHANTMENT  — 

1.  Joining,  charm,  "90  cheber. 

Isa.  47.    9  for  the  great  abundance  of  thine  enchant_ 
47.  12  Stand  now  with  thine  enchantments,  and 

'2..1  whisp)er,  charm,  amulet,  vrh  lachash. 

Eccl.  10.  11  Surely  the  serpent  will  bite  without  en. 
3. Secret,  enchantment,  gentleness,  ftb  lot. 

Exod.  7.  22  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchantments 
8.    7,  18  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchant. 

^AYliisper,  enchantment,  wni  nachash. 

Num  23.  23  Surely  (there  is)  no  enchantment  against 

24.  1  went  not,  as  at  other  times,  to  seek  for  e. 
5. To  whisper,  use  enchantment,  vni  nachash,  Z. 

2  Ki.17.  17  pass  through  the  fire,  and  used,  .enchau. 

ENCHANTMENT,  to  use  — 

To  whisper,  use  enchantment,  t^n:  nachash,  3. 
Lev.  19.  26  neither  shall  ye  use  enchantment,  nor 
2  Ki.21.    6  observed  times,  and  used  enchantments 
2  Ch.33.    6  he  observed  times,  and  used  enchantme- 

ENCHANTMENTS  — 

Flashings,  D'BrrS  lehatim. 

Exod.  7.  11  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchantm. 
ENCOUNTER,  to — 
To  thrcno  (selves)  together,  o-u/i£a\Aa>  sumhallo. 

Acts  17.  18  Then  certain  philosophers,  .encountered. 

ENCOURAGE,  to  — 

To  strengthen,  harden,  fix,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

Deut.  1.  3S  encourage  him  ;  for  he  shall  cause  Israel 
3.  2S  encourage  him,  and  strengthen  him :  for 
2  Sa.  11.  25  overthrow  it ;  and  encourage  thou  him 
2  Ch.35.    2  he.  .encouraged  them  to  the  service  of 
Psa.  64.    5  They  encourage  themselves  (in)  an  evil 
Isa.  41.    7  So  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsm. 

ENCOURAGE  self,  to  — 

To  strengthen  self,  pin  chazak,  7. 

Judg  20.  22  the  men  of  Israel,  encouraged  themselves- 

1  Sa.  30.    6  David  encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord 

ENCOURAGED,  to  be  — 

To  be  or  become  strong,  pin  chazak. 

2  Ch.31.   4  that  they  might  be  encouraged  in  the  law 

END  — 

1.  Latter  end,  hinder  part,  rnnN  acharith. 

Deut  11.  12  from  the  beginning,  .unto  the  end  of  the 
32.  20  he  said.  .1  will  see  what  their  end  (shall 

Psa.  37.  37  Mark.,  behold.,  for  the  end  of  (that)  man 
37.  38  the  end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off 
73.  17  Until  I  went,  .(then) understood  I  their  e. 

Prov.  5.  4  her  end  is  bitter  as  wormwood,  sharp  as 
14.  12  the  end  thereof  (are)  the  ways  of  death 
14.  13  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  (is)  heaviness 

16.  25  the  end  thereof  (are)  the  ways  of  death 
20.  21  but  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be  blessed 
23. 18  For  surely  there  is  an  end ;  and  thine 

25.  8  lest  (thou  know  not)  what  to  do  in  the  end 
Eccl.  7.    8  Better  (is)  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the 

10.  13  end  of  his  talk  (is)  mischievous  madness 
Isa.    46.  10  Declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning 
Jer.     5.  31  and  what  will  ye  do  in;  the  end  thereof? 

17.  11  not  by  right,  .at  his  end  shall  be  a  fool 
29.  11  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  end" 
31.  17  there  is  hope  in  thine  end,  saith  the  Lord 

Dan.  12.    S  what  (shall  be)  the  end  of  these  (things)? 
Amos  S.  10  I  will  make,  .the  end  thereof  as  a  bitter 

2.End,  cessation,  ancle,  d$n  epkes. 

Deut  33.  17  he  shall  push" the  people,  .to  the  ends  of 
1  Sa.    2.  10  the  LORD  shall  judge  the  eua    of  the 
Tsa.  22.  27  All  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  1  member 
59.  13  God  ruleth.  .unto  the  ends  of  the    arth 
67.    7  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  u  t 
72.    8  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  eakh 
98.    3  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  have  seen  the 
Prov  30.    4  who  hath  established  all  the  ends  of  the 
Isa.   45.  22  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 
52.  10  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the 
Jer.  16.  19  Gentiles  shall  come,  .from  the  ends  of 
Mic.    5.    4  he  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 
Zech.  9.  10  from  the  river,  .to  the  ends  of  the  earth 

3.  Borders,  rtVai  gabluth. 

Exod28  22  niake  upon  the  breastplate  chains  at  the  e. 
39.  15  made  upon  the  breastplate  chains  at  thee. 

4.  In  tent,  rrr^\  dibrah. 

Eccl.    7.  14  to  the  end  that  man  should  find  nothing 

5.  To  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  n?3  kalah. 

Ruth  2.  23  to  glean  unto  the  end  of  barley  harvest 

^.Completion,  consuwyption,  end,  rh3  kalah. 

Eze.  20.  17  neither  did  I  make  an  end  of  them  in  the 


END 


298 


END 


7.  Wing,  f|33  kanaph. 

Job  37.   3  his  lightning  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 
33. 13  That  it  might  take  hold  of  the  ends  of 

8. Pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  nsj,  nxi  netsach. 

Job    34.  36  Job  may  be  tried  unto  the  end,  because 
Jer.     3.    5  will  he  keep  (it)  to  the  end?  Behold,  thou 

9.  End,  rear,  last,  *pn  soph. 

2  Ch.20.  16  ye  shall  find  them  at  the  end  of  the  brook 
Eccl.  3.  11  maketh  from  the  beginning  to  the  end 

.    7.    2  that  (is)  the  end  of  all  men;  and  the  living 

Dan.    4.  11  the  sight  thereof  to  the  end  of  all  the  ea. 

4.  22  and  thy  dominion  to  the  end  of  the  earth 

6.  26  his  dominion  (shall  be  even)  unto  the  end 
7. 26  consume  and  to  destroy  (it)  unto  the  end 

7.  28  Hitherto  (is)  the  end  of  the  matter.    As 

10.  Heel,  rear,  spy  eqeb. 

Psa.ng.  33  the  way.,  and  I  shall  keep  it  (unto)  the  e. 
119.  112  perform  thy  statutes.,  even  (unto)  the  e. 

11.  Corner,  side,  nxspeah. 

Eze.  41. 12  before  the  separate  place  at  the  end 
12.3/oulh,  .13  peh. 

2  Ki.io.  21  the  house  of  Eaal  was  full  from  one  end 

21. 16  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one  end 
Ezra  g.  n  have  filled  it  from  one  end  to  another 

IS. End,  extremity,  y$  gets. 

Gen.   6. 13  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  bei'ore  me;  for 

8.  6  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  forty  days 
41.    1  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  two  full  ye. 

Exodi2.  41  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  four 
Deut.  9.  11  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  forty  days 

15.  1  At  the  end  of  (every)  seven  years  thou 
31.  10  At  the  end  of  every  seven  years,  in  the 

Judgu.  39  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  two  months 
2  Sa.  14.  26  it  was  at  every  year's  end  that  he  polled 

1  Ki.  2.  39  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  three  years 

2  Ch.  S.    1  And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty 

21.  19  after  the  end  of  two  years,  his  bowels 
Job     6. 11  what  (is)  mine  end,  that  I  should  prolong 

16.  3  Shall  vain  words  have  an  end  ?  or  what 
18.    2  How  long  (will  it  be  ere)  ye  make  an  end 

28.  3  He  setteth  an  end  to  darkness,  and  sear. 
Psa.  39.    4  Lord,  make  me  to  know  mine  end,  and 

119.  96  I  have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection 
Eccl.  4.    8  yet  (is  there)  no  end  of  all  his  labour 

4. 16  no  end  of  all  the  people . .  of  all  that  have 
12.  12  of  making  many  books  (there  is)  no  end 
Isa.    9.    7  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and 
23. 15  after  the  end  of  seventy  years  shall  Tyre 

23. 17  it  shall  come  to  pass,  after  the  end  of 
Jer.   34.  14  At  the  end  of  seven  years  let  ye  go  every 

51. 13  thine  end  is  come,  .the  measure  of  thy 
Lam.  4. 18  our  end  is  near.,  for  our  end  is  come 
Eze.     7.    2  An  end,  the  end  is  come  upon  the  four 
7.    3  Now  (is)  the  end  (come)  upon  thee,  and 

7.  6  An  end  is  come,  the  end  is  come  :  itwat. 
21.  25  is  come,  when  iniquity  (shall  have)  an  end 
21.  29  when  their  iniquity  (shall  have)  an  end 

29.  13  At  the  end  of  forty  years  will  I  gather 
35.   5  the  time  (that  their)  iniquity  (had)  an  end 

Dan.   8.  17  at  the  time  of  the  end  (shall  be)  the  vision 

8.  19  at  the  time  appointed  the  end  (shall  be) 
g.  26  and  the  end  thereof  (shall  be)  with  a  flood 

9.  26  unto  the  end  of  the  war  desolations  are 
11.    6  in  the  end  of  years  they  shall  join  them. 
11.  27  yet  the  end  (shall  be)  at  the  time  appoin. 
11.  35  make,  .white,  .to  the  time  of  the  end 

11.  40  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  the  king  of 

11.  45  he  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  none  shall 

12.  4  seal  the  book,  .to  the  time  of  the  end 

12.   6  How  long  (shall  it  be)  to  the  end  of  these 
1 2.    9  closed  up  and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  e. 
12.  13  But  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  (be) 
12.  13  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the 

Amos  8.    2  The  end  is  come  upon  my  people  of  Isra. 

Hab.    2.    3  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie 

14:.  End,  extremity,  n$Q  qatsah. 

Esod25.  18  make,  .in  the  two  ends  of  the  mercy-seat 
25.  19  on  the  one  end,  and.  .on  the  other  end 
25. 19  make  the  cherubim  on  the  two  ends 
28.  23  shalt  put  the  two  rings  on  the  two  ends 
28.  24  two  rings . .  on  the  ends  of  the  breastplate 
28.  25  (the  other)  two  ends  of  the  two  wreatheu 
28.  26  thou  shalt  put  them  upon  the  two  ends 
37.    7  made,  .on  the  two  ends  of  the  mercy 
37.    8  One  cherub  on  the  end  on  this  side 
37.    8  another  cherub  on  the.  .end  on  that  side 
37.    8  made  he  the  cherubim  on  the  two  ends 
39.  16  put  the  two  rings  in  the  two  ends  of  the 
3g.  17  iu  the  two  rings  on  the  ends  of  the  breast. 
39.  18  And  the  two  ends  of  the  two  wreatheu 
39.  19  put  (them)  on  the  two  ends  of  the  breast. 
Job    28.  24  For  he  looketh  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
Psa.  19.    6  and  his  circuit  unto  the  ends  of  it 
Isa.   40.  28  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 

41.    5  the  ends  of  the  earth  were  afraid,  drew 
41.   9  (Thou)  whom  I  have  taken  from  the  ends 
Eze.  15.   4  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  ends  of  it 

15. End,  extremity,  nxff  qatseh. 

Gen.    8.    3  after  the  end  of  the  hundred  and  fifty 
23.    9  the  cave,  .which  (is) in  the  end  of  his  field 
47.  21  he  removed  them  to  cities  from  (one)  end 
47.  2 1  the  borders  of  Egypt  even  to  the  (other)  e. 

Exod26.  28  the  boards  shall  reach  from  end  to  end 
36.  33  through  the  hoards  from  the  one  end 

Deuti3-    7  from  thee,  from  the  (one)  end  of  the  earth 

13.  7  even  unto  the  (other)  end  of  the  earth 

14.  28  At  the  end  of  tlu-ee  years  thou  shalt  bring 


Deut  28 

28 

Josh.  9. 

*5 

15 


Judg.  6. 
Buth  3, 

1  Sa    9, 

14. 
14. 

2  Sa.  24. 

1  Ei.  9. 

2  Ki.  8. 

18. 
Psa.  ig 
19. 
46. 
61. 

■         13S. 

Provi7. 

Isa.    5. 

7 

13' 
42 

43 


Jer. 


Eze. 


4g  bringanation.  .from  the  end  of  theearlh 
64  the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto  the 
16  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  three  days 

5  (was)  the  salt  sea,  (even)  unto  the  end 
8  at  the  end  of  the  valley  of  the  giants 

15  And  the  south  quarter  (was)  from  the  end 

16  the  border  came  down  to  the  end  of  the 

19  the  salt  sea  at  the  south  end  of  Jordan 
21  the  an^el  of  the  Lord  put  forth  the  end 

7  he  went  to  lie  dowm  at  the  end  of  the  heap 
27  they  were  going  down  to  the  end  of  the 
27  wherefore  he  put  forth  the  end  of  the  rod 
43  taste  a  little  honey  with  the  end  of  the  rod 

8  they  came  to  Jerusalem  at  the  end  of  nine 
10  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty  years 

3  it  came  to  pass  at  the  seven  years"  end 
10  at  the  end  of  three  years  they  took  it 

4  Their  line  is  gone.,  their  words  to  the  end 

6  His  going  forth  (is)  from  the  end  of  the 

9  He  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  end 

2  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto 

7  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth 

24  the  eyes  of  a  fool  (are)in  the  ends  of  the  e. 
26  he  will . .  liiss . .  from  the  end  of  the  earth 

3  at  the  end  of  the  conduit,  of  the  upper 

5  from  a  far  country,  from  the  end  of  hea. 

10  Sing,  .his  praise  horn  the  end  of  the  earth 

6  bring  my .  .daughters  from  the  ends  of 

20  utter  it  (even)  to  the  end  of  the  earth 

6  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the  earth 

11  the  Lord  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end 

13  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from  the  e. 

12  the  sword . .  shall  devour  from  the  (one)  e. 
12  even  to  the  (other)  end  of  the  land 

31  A  noise  shall  come  (even)  to  the  ends 
33  at  that  day  from  (one)  end  of  the  earth 
33  even  unto  the  (other)  end  of  the  earth 
16  the  vapours  to  ascend  from  the  ends 
31  show  the  king.,  his  city  is  taken  at  (one)  e. 
16  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  seven  days 

14  after  the  end  of  seven  months  shall  they 
1  From  the  north  end  to  the  coast  of  the 


lQ.End,  extremity,  n*p  qetseh.  . 

Isa.     2.    7  neither  (is  there  any)  end  of  their  treasures 

2.  7  neither  (is  there  any)  end  of  their  chariots 
Nah.  2.   g  (there  is)  none  end  of  the  store  (and)  glory 

3.  3  and  (there  is)  none  end  of  (their)  corpses 

17.  End,  extremity,  i*i2  qetsev. 

Psa.  48. 10  so  (is)  thy  praise  unto  the  ends  of  the  ea. 

65.    5  the  confidence  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 

Isa.  26.  15  thou  hast  removed  (it)  far  (unto)  all  the  e. 

18.  End,  extremity,  nvfp  qitsvah. 

Exod37.    8  made . .  cherubim  on  the  two  ends  thereof 
38.    5  he  cast  four  rings  for  the  four  ends  of  the 

19.  End,  extremity,  nyp  qetsath. 

Dan.    1.    s  at  the  end  thereof  they  might  stand  be. 
1.  15  at  the  end  of  ten  days  their  countenances 
1.  18  at  the  end  of  the  days,  .he  should  bring 
4.  29  At  the  end  of  twelve  months  he  walked 
4.  34  at  the  end  of  the  days  I.  .lifted  up  mine 

20.  Head,  tfto  rosh. 

1  Ki.    8.    8  the  ends  of  the  staves  were  seen  out  in 

2  Ch.    5.   g  the  ends  of  the  staves  were  seen  from  the 

21. Perfection,  end,  n^n  taklith. 

Neb.  3.  21  even  to  the  end  of  the  house  of  Eliashib 
Job  26.  10  until  the  day  and  night  come  to  an  end 

22.  To  be  perfect,  finislied,  complete,  D3$  tamam. 
Jer.    1.    3  unto  the  end  of  the  eleventh  year  of  Zed. 

23. Revolution,  circuit,  end,  ns^pri  tequphah. 

Exod34.  22  the  feast  of  ingathering  at  the  year's  end 
2  Ch.24.  23  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  year 

2i.Outgoing,  e/c/3c«ns  ekbasis. 

Heb.  13.    7  whose  faith  follow,  considering  the  end 

25.  Extremity,  irepas  2Jeras. 

Rom  10.  18  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  wo. 
Heb.   6.  16  an  oath  for  confirmation  (is)  to  them  an  e. 

'2Q.Full  end,  o-vvrsXsia  sxmteleia. 

Matt  13.  39  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world 
13.  40  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this  world 
13.  49  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world 
24.    3  what  (shall  be)  the  sign . .  of  the  end 
28.  20  I  am  with  you  alway,  (even)  unto  the  end 

Heb.    9.  26  once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  he  ap. 

27. End,  T€\os  telos. 

Matt  10.  22  he  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be 

24.  6  all  these  things  must  come,  .but  the  end 
24.  13  he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end.  .shall 
24.  14  in  all  the  world,  .and  then  shall  the  end 
26.  58  Peter . .  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see  the  e. 

Mark  3  26  he  cannot  stand,  but  hath  an  end 

13.  7  needs  be  ;  but  the  end  (shall)  not  (lie)  yet 
13.  13  he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end 

Luke  1.  33  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end 

21.  g  these  things  must  come  first,  .the  end  (is) 

22.  37  for  the  things  concerning  me  have  an  end 
John  13.    1  his  own.  .he  loved  them  unto  the  end 
Roni.  6.  21  for  the  end  of  those  things  (is)  death 

6.  22  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting 
io.    4  Christ  (is)  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteo. 

1  Co.    1.    8  Who  shall  also  confirm  you  uuto  the  end 

10.  11  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  co. 
15.  24  the  end,  when  he  shall  have  delivered 

2  Co.    1.  13  ye  shall  acknowledge  even  to  the  end 

3.  13  to  the  end  of  that  which  is  abolished 

11.  15  whose  end  shall  be  according  to  their 


Phil.   3.  ig  Whose  end  (is)  destruction,  whose  god 
1  Ti.    1.    5  Now  the  end  of  the  commandment  is  ch. 
Heb.  3.    6  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end 
3. 14  of  our  confidence  stedfast  unto  the  end 

6.  8  nigh  unto  cursing  ;  whose  end  (is)  to  be 
6. 11  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  e. 

7.  3  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life 
Jas.     5.  11  Ye.  .have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord  ;  that 

1  Pe.  1.    9  Receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  .the  sal. 

4.    7  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand  :  be 

4.  17  what  shall  the  end  (be)  of  them  that 
Rev.   2.  r.6  he  that,  .keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end 

21.  6  I  am  Alpha,  .the  beginning  and  the  end 

22.  13  I  am . .  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first 
[See  also  cast,  Come  to,  grow  to,  hinder,  what,  world.] 
END,  to  — 

1.7b  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  b~\r}  chadal. 

Isa.   24.    8  the  noise  of  them  that  rejoice  endeth 

2.  To  be  complete,  finished,  ."rps  kalah. 

Gen.    2.  2  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work 
Buth  2.  21  until  they  have  ended  all  my  harvest 
Eze.    4.   8  till  thou  hast  ended  the  days  of  thy  siege 

3.  To  perfect,  finish,  tt?$tamam,  5. 

2  Sa.  20.  18  surely  ask.  .at  Abel ;  and  so  they  ended 

4.  To  fill  tip  or  out,  ttA^oo'&j  pderoo. 

Luke  7.    1  when  he  had  ended  all  his  sayings  in  the 
Acts  19.  21  After  these  things  were  ended,  Paul  pur. 

5.  To  endtogether  or  J "idly,  crwreAeGo  sunteleo. 

Matt.  7.  28  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jesus  had  ended 
Luke  4.    5  when  they  were  ended,  he  afterward  hu. 
4. 13  when  the  devil  had  ended  all  the  tempt. 
Acts  21.  27  when  the  seven  days  were  almost  ended 

END,  to  be  at  an  — 

l.To  cease,  fail,  have  an  end,  ddn  aphes. 

Isa.  16.    4  the  extortioner  is  at  an  end,  the  spoiler 

2,To  be  swallowed  up,  J^3  bala,  7. 

Psa.  107.  27  They . .  stagger . .  and  are  at  their  wit's  end 
3.  To  fill  in,  complete,  be  full,  n"?d  male. 

Lev.    8.  33  until,  .your  consecration  be  at  an  end 

END,  to  come  to  an  — 

To  be  perfected,  finished,  dbi-i  tamam. 

Psa.    9.    6  destructions  are  come  to  a  perpetual  end 

END,  full  — 

Completion,  consumption,  r6|  kalah. 

Jer.     4,  27  desolate  ;  yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end 

5.  10  make  not  a  full  end  ;  take  away  her  bat. 
5. 18  I  will  not  make  a  full  end  with  you 

30.  11  though  I  make  a  full  end  of  all  nations 
30. 11  yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee 
46.  28  I  will  make  a  full  end  of  all  the  nations 
46.  28  but  I  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee 

Eze.  n.  13  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  the  remnant 

END,  to  have  an  — 

l.To  be  ended,  consumed,  pjw  suph. 

Amos3-  15  and  the  great  houses  shall  have  an  end 
2.  To  be  perfected,  Dr>n  tamam,  2. 

Psa.  102.  27  But  thou,  .thy  years  shall  have  no  end 
END,  to  make  an  — 
l.To  finish,  seal  up,  Dnn  Chatham. 

Dan.   9.  24  transgression,  and  to  make  an  end  of  sins 
2.  To  finish,  consume,  detemnine,  n^s  kalah,  3. 

Gen.  27.  30  as  soon  as  Isaac  had  made  an  end  of 

49-  33  when  Jacob  had  made  an  end  of  comma. 

Exod3i.  18  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  communing 

Lev.  16.  20  when  he  hath  made  an  end  of  reconciling 

Num.  4.  15  Aaron  and  his  sons  have  made  an  end  of 
16.  31  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  all 

Deut.  20.  9  when  the  officers  have  made  an  end  of 
26.  12  When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  tithing, 

31.  24  when  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  writing 

32.  45  And  Moses  made  an  end  of  speaking  all 
Josh.  8.  24  when  Israel  had  made  an  end  of  slaying} 

ic.  20  when . .  Israel  had  made  an  end  of  slaying 
19.  49  When  they  had  made  an  end  of  dividing 

19.  51  So  they  made  an  end  of  dividing  the 
Judg.  3. 18  when  he  had  made  an  end  to  offer  the 

15.  i7  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking 
3.  12  when  I  begin,  I  will  also  make  an  end 
10.  13  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  prophesying 
13.  10  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  offering 
18.    1  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking 
24.  16  when  David  had  made  an  end  of  speaking 

6.  18  as  soon  as  David  had  made  an  end  of 
11. 19  When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  telling 
13.  36  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  speak. 

1. 41  as  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating 

3.    1  until  he  had  made  an  end  of  building  his 

7.  40  So  Hiram  made  an  end  of  doing  all  the 

5.  54  when  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  pray. 
10.  25  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

6.  2  when  David  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

7.  1  when  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  pray. 

20.  23  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  the  inha. 
24.  10  brought  in.  .until  they  had  made  an  end 
29.  17  in  the  sixteenth  day.  they  made  an  end 
29.  29  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

Ezra  10.  17  And  they  made  an  end  with  all  the  men 
Neh.   4.    2  will  they  make  an  end  in  a  day?  will 
Jer.  26.   8  when  Jeremiah  had  made  an  end  of  spea. 

43.    1  when  Jeremiah  had  made  an  end  of  spe. 

51.  63  when  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  reading 


iSa. 


IKi. 


;Ki. 
t  Ch.: 
>Ch. 


END 


299 


ENEMY 


Eze.  42.  15  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  measuring 
43.  23  When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  cleans. 

Amos  7.   2  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating 
3.  To  make  an  end,  complete,  n?j  nalah,  5. 

Isa.   33.    1  when  thou  shalt  make  an  end  to  deal 
■l.To  finish,  xhtfshalam,  5. 

Isa.   3S.  12,  13  to  night  wilt  thou  make  an  end  of  me 
6. To  perfect,  finish,  D?n  tamam,  5. 

Dan.   9.  24  to  finish . .  and  to  make  an  end  of  sins 

6.  To  end,  reAccu  teleo. 

Matt  11.   1  when  Jesus  had  made  an  end  of  comnmn. 

END  of,  to  be  an  — 

To  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  ended,  rrca. 
Jer.  44.  27  be  consumed,  .until  there  be  an  end  of 

END  of,  in  the  — 

To  go  out  or  forth,  ay;  yatsa. 

Exod23.  16  in  the  end.  of  the  year,  when  thou  hast 

END,  in  the  — 

Late  in  the  evening,  6\pe  apse. 

Matt  28,    1  In  the  end  of  the  sabbath,  as  it  began  to 

END,  to  the  — 

l.To  the  intent,  j»!??  lemaan. 

Exod.  8.  22  to  the  end  thou  mayest  know  that  I  (am) 

2.  With  a  view  to,  eis  rb  eis  to. 

Acts    7. 19  cast  out.  .to  the  end  they  might  not  live 
Rom.  1. 11  gift,  to  the  end  ye  may  be  established 
4.  16  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be  sure 
1  Th.  3. 13  To  the  end  he  may  stablish  your  hearts 

3.  Perfectly,  completely,  reAelcos  teteios. 

1  Pe.  1. 13  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to 

END,  to  this  — 

With  a  view  to  this,  ets  tovto  eis  touto. 

John  iS.  37  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause 
Horn  14.  "9  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose 

2  Co.  2.   9  For  to  this  end  also  did  I  write,  that  I 

END  that,  to  this  — 

Toward  this,  -rrpos  rb  pros  to. 

LukeiS.    1  spake  a  parable  unto  them  (to  this  e.)  that 

END,  the  latter  — 

The  last  things,  ra  eVxaf  a  ta  eschata. 

2  Pe.  2.  20  the  latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than 

END,  utter  — 

Completion,  consumption,  end,  n*?3  halah. 

Nah.    1.    8  he  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place 
1.    9  he  will  make  an  utter  end :  affliction  shall 

END  to  the  other,  from  one  — 

From  point  unto  point,  and  &Kpwv  tw$  &Kpu>v. 

Matt  24.  31  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other 
END,  world  without  — 
Unto  ages  of  duration,  ~ty  'pSij?  "i#  ad  olme  ad* 

Isa.  45. 17  shall  not  be  ashamed . .  world  without  end 
ENDAMAGE,  to  — 
To  cause  loss,  pn  nezaq,  5. 

Ezra   4.  13  thou  shalt  endamage  the  revenue  of  the 
ENDANGER,  to  make  — 
To  endanger,  forfeit,  cause  to  owe,  3*n  chub,  3, 

Dan.    1.  10  then  shall  ye  make  (me)  endanger  my 
ENDANGERED,  to  be  — 
To  be  endangered,  pD  saJcan,  2. 

Eccl.io.   9  he  that  cleaveth  wood  shall  be  endang. 
ENDEAVOTJR,  to  — 
l.To  seek,  Qqrew  zeteo. 

Acts  16. 10  immediately  we  endeavoured  to  go  into 
2.  To  make  speed  or  haste,  o-irovh'a.fa  spoudazo. 

Eph.  4.    3  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the 

1  Th.  2. 17  we.  .endeavoured  the  more,  .to  see  your 

2  Pe.  1. 15  I  will  endeavour  that  ye  may  be  able 
ENDEAVOURS  — 

Doing,  acting,  7?%$  maalal. 

Psa.  28.   4  according  to  the  wickedness  of  their  en. 
ENDED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  completed,  finished,  n?a  Jcalah. 

Gen.  41.  53  seven  years  of  plenteousness .  .were  ended 
2  Ch.29.  34  Levites  did  help,  .till  the  work  was  ended 
Jer.    8.  20  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended 

2.  To  be  completed,  finished,,  .173  halah,  4. 

Psa.  72.20  The  prayers  of.,  the  son  of  Jesse  are  ended 
3.2b  be  finished,  complete,  ch&  shalam. 

1  Ki.  7.  51  So  was  ended  all  the  work  that  king  Sol. 
Isa.  60.  20  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended 

4.  To  he  perfected,  finished,  Dpi-i  tamam. 

Gen.  47.  iS  "When  that  year  was  ended,  they  came 
Deut  31.  30  words  of  this  song,  until  they  were  ended 

34.   8  days  of  weeping,  .for  Moses  were  ended 
Job  31.  40  The  words  of  Job  are  ended 

5.  To  become,  yivofiai  ginomai. 

J0IUI13.   2  And  supper  being  ended,  the  devil  having 
ENDING  — 
End,  t4\os  telos. 

Rev.    x.   8  beginning  and  the  ending,  saith  the  Lord 


ENDLESS  — . 

l.Xot  loosed  down,  axardAvTos  akatalutos. 

Heb.  7.  16  made,  .after  the  power  of  an  endless  life 

2. Endless j  unpierced  through,  airepavTos  aperantos. 
1  Ti.    1.   4  Neither  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless 

EN'-DOR,  n'-n  or  tir  pg  fountain  of  Dor. 
A  city  of  Manasseh,  four  miles  S.  of  Tabor,  or  at  the  S. 
of  the  sea  of  Galilee  in  Issachar.  It  is  now  called 
Endur,  and  the  rock  on  which  it  stands  is  hollowed 
into  caves.  From  the  slopes  of  Gilboa  to  Endor  is  seven 
or  eight  miles  over  rugged  ground. 

Joshi7.  11  the  inhabitants  of  E.  and  her  towns 

1  Sa.  28.    7  a  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit  at  £.. 
Psa.  83. 10  perished  at  E.  :  they  became  (as)  dung 

ENDOW,  to  — 

To  endow,  piwchase,  "inn  mahar. 

Exod22.  16  he  shall  surely  endow  her  to  be  his  wife 

ENDS  — 

l.Borderst  ri?3JQ  migbaloth. 

ExochS.  14  And  two  chains  (of)  pure  gold  at  the  ends 

'2.Last  or  extreme,  point,  4ax^ros  eschatos. 

Acts  13.  47  shouldest  be  for  salvation  unto  the  ends 

ENDUE,  to  — 

To  endow,  endue,  131  zabad. 

Gen.  30.  20  God  hath  endued  me  (with)  a  good  dowry 
ENDUED  with  — 
l.To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  $n;  yada. 

2  Ch.  2. 12  endued  with  prudence  and  understanding 

2.  13  a  cuuningman,  endued  with  understand. 

'l.To  go  in,  be  clothed  with,  £i/S6w  enduo. 

Luke24.  49  until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on 

ENDURE,  to  (can)  — 
l.To  be,  rrri  hayah. 

Psa.  72. 17  His  name  shall  endure  for  ever:  his  name 
Si.  15  their  time  should  have  endured  for  ever 
89.  36  His  seed  shall  endure  for  ever,  and  his 
104.  31  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for 

2.  To  be  able,  endure,  Sb;  yakol. 

Esth.  8.   6  how  can  I  endure,  .how  can  I  endure  to 
Job    31.  23  by  reason  of  his  highness  I  could  not  en, 

3.2b  sit  down  or  still,  3^;  yasliab. 

Psa.    9.   7  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever  :  he  hath 
102. 12  thou,  0  Lord,  shalt  endure  for  ever,  and 

4.2b  lodge,  2)ass  the  night,  ]ih  Inn. 

Psa.  30.    5  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  jcy 
5. Until  not,  ,!?3  ~iy  ad  beli. 

Psa.  72.    7  peace  so  long  as  the  moon  endureth 
6 .-With... and  before,  \&sbi.,.DU  im...vehphne. 

Psa.  72.    5  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure 
7.  To  stand,  stand  still,  "i!?jJ  amad. 

ExodiS.  23  thou  shalt  be  able  to  endure,  and  all  this 
Psa.  19.  9  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  clean,  enduring  for 
102.  26  They  shall  perish,  but  thou  shalt  endure 
in.  3  and  his  righteousness  endureth  for  ever 
in.  10  of  the  Lord.  .Ms  praise  endureth  for  ever 
112.  3,  9  his  righteousness  endureth  for  ever 
Eze.  22.  14  Can  thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine 

S.To  rise  %ip,  stand  still,  D*p  gum. 

Job     8.  15  shall  hold  it  fast,  but  it  shall  not  endure 

9. To  hold  up,  aj/exofxat  anechomai. 

2  Th.  1.    4  in  all  your,  .tribulations  that  ye  endure 
2  Ti.    4.    3  when  they  will  not  endure  sound  doctr. 

10.7b  be  strong,  firm,  naprepew  kartereo. 

Heb.  11.  27  he  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisi. 

11.2b  remain,  fievco  meno. 

John  6.  27  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting 
Heb.  10.  34  a  better  and  an  enduring  substance 
1  Pe.   1.  25  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever 

12.  To  bear,  carry,  (pepco  phero. 

Rom.  9  22  endured  with  much  long  suffering  the 
Heb.  12.  20  could  not  endure  that  which  was  com. 

13.2b  remain  under,  virofitw  hupomeno. 

Matt  10.  22  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved 

24.  13  he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the 
Marki3.  13  he  that- shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the 

1  Co.  13.    7  hopeth  all  tilings,  endureth  all  things 

2  Ti.    2.  10  I  endure  all  livings  for  the  elect's  sakes 
Heb.  10.  32  ye  endured  a  great  fight  of  afflictions 

12.    2  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame 
12.  3  ;  12.  7 ;  Jas.  1.  12  ;  5.  it. 

14.  It  is,  icriesti. 

Mark  4. 17  have  no  root. ..and  so  endure  but  for 

15.7b  bear  up  under,  vwotyepcc  httpqpliero. 
2  Ti.    3.  11  at'Lystra;  persecutions  I  endured 

1  Pe.  2.  19  for  conscience  toward  God  endure  grief 

ENDURE  hardness,  to  — 

To  suffer  evil,  KaKOTraQsw  kakopatJieo. 

2  Ti.    2.    3  therefore  endure  hardness,  as  a  good  sol. 

ENDURE  patiently,  to  — 

2b  be  long  or  patient  minded,  fia.Kpo6vt.ieo}  mahro. 
Heb.  6.  15  after  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  obtain. 


^      ,49- 
Exod  1 5. 

23- 
23- 


ENDURING  — 

Remaining  up  under,  inrofj.ovr)  kupomone. 

2  Co.  1.    6  which  is  effectual  in  the  enduring  of  the 

E-NE'-AS,  AiVeay  (from  Mebrew,  praise  of  Jah.) 
A  man  of  Lydda  healed  by  Peter. 

Acts  9. 33  there  he  found  a  certain  man  named  .E. 
9.  34  M.,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole 

EN  EG-LA'-m,  q^w  \*%  fountain  of  two  calves. 
A  place  near  the  Salt  Sea  ;  but  not  the  same  as  Egtaim. 
See  Beth-hoglah. 

Eze.  47. 10  shall  stand  upon  it  from  Engedi.  .unto  E. 
ENEMY  — 
1.  Enemy,  3;.n  oyeb. 

Gen.  22.  17  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies 

5  (shall  be)  in  the  neck  of  thine  enemies 

6  hand,  .hath dashed  in  pieces  the  enemy 
9  enemy  said,  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake 
4  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or  his  ass 
!2  I  will  be  an  enemy  unto  thine  enemies 

23.  27  I  will  make  all  thine  enemies  turn  their 
Lev.  26.    7  ye  shall  chase  your  enemies,  and  they 
26.    8  your  enemies  shall  fall  before  you  by  the 
26.  16  your  seed . .  for  your  enemies  shall  eat  it 
26.  17  and  ye  shall  be  slain  before  your  enemies 
26.  25  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy 
26.  32  your  enemies  which  dwell  therein  shall 
26.  34  as  long  as.  .ye  (be)  in  your  enemies'  land 
26.  36  faintness.,in  the  land  of  their  enemies 
26.  37  no  power  to  stand  before  your  enemies 
26.  38  the  land  of  your  enemies  shall  eat  you  up 
26.  39  in  their  iniquity  in  your  enemies'  lands 
26.  41  brought  them  into,  .land  of  their  enem. 
26.  44  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  then'  enem. 
Numio.    9  go  to  war  in  your  land  against  the  enemy 
10.  35  Rise,  .and  let  thine  enemies  be  scattered 
14.  42  ye  be  not  smitten  before  your  enemies 
23. 11  I  took  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and 
24. 10  I  called  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and 

24. 18  shall  be  a  possession  for  his  enemies 
32.  21  until  he  hath  driven  out  his  enemies 
35.  23  (was)  not  his  enemy,  neither  sought  his 

Deut.  1.  42  lest  ye  be  smitten  before  your  enemies 

6.  19  To  cast  out  all  thine  enemies  from  befo. 
12.  10  rest  from  all  your  enemies  round  about 
20.    1  goest  out  to  battle  against  thine  enemies 
20.    3  this  day  unto  battle  against  your  enem 
20.    4  to  fight  for  you  against  your  enemies 

20.  14  thou  shalt  eat  the  spoil  of  thine  enemies 
21. 10  goest  forth  to  war  against  thine  enemies 
23.   9  host  goeth  forth  against  thine  enemies 
23. 14  and  to  give  up  thine  enemies  before  thee 

26. 19  given  thee  rest  from  all  thine  enemies 
28.   7  The  Lord  shall  cause  thine  enemies  that 
28.  25  to  be  smitten  before  thine  enemies 

28.  31  thy  sheep  (shall  be)  given  unto  thine  ene. 
28.  48  Therefore  shalt  thou  serve  thine  enemies 
28.  53,  55,  57  wherewith  thine  enemies  shall 
28.  68  there  ye  shall  be  sold  unto  your  enemies 
30.  7  will  put  all  these  curses  upon  thine  ene. 
32.  27  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the  ene. 
32.  31  even  our  enemies  themselves  (being) 

32.  42  the  beginning  of  revenges  upon  the  ene. 

33.  27  he  shall  thrust  out  the  enemy  from 
33.  29  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto 

Josh.  7.    S  Israel  turneth  their  backs  before  their  en. 
7. 12  Israel  could  not  stand  before  then*  enem. 

7.  12  turne  [  (their)  backs  before  their  enemies 

7.  13  thou  canst  not  stand  before  thine  enem. 
10.  13  had  avenged  themselves  upon  their  ene. 
10. 19  stay  ye  not.  .pursue  after  your  enemies 

10.  25  to  all  your  enemies  against  whom  ye  fight 

21.  44  there  stood  not  a  man  of  all  their  enem. 

21.  44  the  Lord  delivered  all  their  enemies  into 

22.  8  divide  the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with 

23.  1  rest  unto  Israel  from  all  their  enemies 
Judg.  2.  14  he  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  their  ene. 

2.  14  they  could  not.  .stand  before  their  ene. 

2.  18  delivered,  .out  of  the  hand  of  their  ene. 

3.  28  the  Lord  hath  delivered  your  enemies 
5.  31  So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  0  Lord 

8.  34  out  of  the  hands  of  all  their  enemies 

11.  36  taken  vengeance  for  thee  of  thine  enemies 
16.  23  Our  god  hath  delivered  Samson  our  ene. 
16.  24  hath  delivered  into  our  hands  our  enemy 

1  my  mouth  is  enlarged  over  mine  enemies 

4.  3  it  may  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  ene. 

12.  10  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  ene. 
12.  11  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of.  .ene. 
14.  24  that  I  may  be  avenged  on  mine  enemies 
14.  30  spoil  of  their  enemies  which  they  found  ? 
14.  47  Saul,  .fought  against  all  his  enemies  on 
18.  25  to  be  avenged  of  the  king's  enemies 

18.  29  Saul  became  David's  enemy  continually 

19.  17  Why  hast  thou,  .sent  away  mine  enemy 
20. 15  when  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  the  enemies 

20.  16  even  require  (it)  at  the  hand  of  David's  en. 

24.  4  I  will  deliver  thine  enemy  into  thine  hand 

24.  19  if  a  man  find  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him 

25.  22  So  and  more  also  do  God  unto  the  ene. 
25.  26  now  let  thine  enemies,  .be  as  Nahal 

25.  29  thine  enemies,  them  shall  he  sling  out 

26.  8  God  hath  delivered  thine  enemy  into 

29.  8  that  I  may  not  go  fight  against  the  enem. 

30.  26  of  the  spoil  of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord 
Sa.  3.  iS  and  out  of  the  hand  of  all  their  enemies 

4.  8  Saul  thine  enemy,  which  sought  thy  life 

5.  20  Lord  hath  broken  forth  upon  mine  ene. 
7.    1  had  given  him  rest,  .from  all  his  enemies 


1  Sa. 


ENEMY 


300 


ENGINES 


2  Sa.   7.    9  and  have  cut  off  all  thine  enemies  out  of 
7. 11  I.  .caused  thee  to  rest  from  all  thine  eue. 
12.  14  thou  hast  given  great  occasion  to  the  ene. 
18.  19  the  Lord  hath  avenged  him  of  his  ene. 

18.  32  And  Cushi  answered,  The  enemies  of  my 

19.  9  king  saved  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  ene. 
22.    1  him  out  of  the  hand  of  all  his  enemies 
22.    4  so  shall  1  be  saved  from  mine  enemies 
22. 18  He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy 
22.  38  I  have  pursued  mine  enemies,  and  destr. 
22.  41  hast  also  given  me  the  necks  of  mine  ene. 
22.  49  that  bringeth  me  forth  from  mine  ene. 

1  Ki.   3.  11  nor  hast  asked  the  life  of  thine  enemies 

8.  33  Israel  be  smitten  down  before  the  ene. 

5.  37  if  their  enemy  besiege  them  in  the  land 
8.  44  If  thy  people  go  out.  .against  their  ene. 
8.  46  and  deliver  them  to  the  enemy,  so  that 
8.  46  carry  them,  .unto  the  land  of  the  enemy 
8.  48  in  the  land  of  their  enemies  which  led 

21.  20  Hast  thou  found  me,  0  mine  enemy? 

2  Ki.  17.  39  he  shall  deliver  you  out  of.  .all  your  en. 

21.  14  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  their  eue. 
21.  14  they  shallbecome..aspoil  to  all  their  ene. 

1  Ch.14.  11  God  hath  broken  in  upon  mine  enemies 

17.    8  and  have  cut  oft  all  thine  enemies  from 
17.  10  Moreover  I  will  subdue  all  thine  enemies 

21.  12  while  that  the  sword  of  thine  enemies 

22.  9  I  will  give  him  rest  from  all  his  enemies 

2  Ch.  6.  24  Israel  be  put  to  the  worse  before  the  ene. 

6.  28  if  their  enemies  besiege  them  in  the  cities 
6.  34  If  thy  people  go  out.  .against  their  ene. 
6.  36  and  deliver  them  over  before  (their)  en. 

20.  27  had  made  them  to  rejoice  over  their  ene. 
20.  29  the  Lord  fought  against  the  enemies  of 

25.  8  God  shall  make  thee  fall  before  the  enemy 

26.  13  army,  .to  help  the  king  against  the  ene. 
Ezra    8.  22  to  help  us  against  the  enemy  in  the  way 

8.  31  he  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of  the  ene. 
Nell.  4.    15  when  our  enemies  heard  that  it  was 

5.  9  the  reproach  of  the  heathen  our  enemies? 

6.  1  the  rest  of  our  enemies,  heard  that  I  had 
6.  16  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  all  our  ene. 

9.  28  leftest  thou  them  in  the  hand  of  their  e. 
Estli.  7.    6  The  adversary  and  enemy  (is)  this  wicked 

8.  13  ready,  .to  avenge  themselves  on  their  e. 

9.  1  in  the  day  that  the  enemies  of  the  Jews 
9.  5  Thus  the  Jews  smote  all  their  enemies 
9.  16  had  rest  from  their  enemies,  and  slew 

9,  22  wherein  the  Jews  rested  from  their  ene. 
Job  13.  24  Wherefore,  .holdest  me  for  thine  enemy? 

27.  7  Let  mine  enemy  be  as  the  wicked,  and  he 
33.  10  Behold,  .he  counteth  me  for  his  enemy 

Psa   "  3.    7  for  thou  hast  smitten  all  mine  enemies 

6.  10  Let  all  mine  enemies  be  ashamed  and 

7.  5  Let  the  enemy  persecute  my  soul,  and 

8.  2  thou  mightest  still  the  enemy  and  the 

9.  3  When  mine  enemies  are  turned  back,  they 
g.   6  Q  thou  enemy,  destructions  are  come  to 

13.    2  how  long  shall  mine  enemy  be  exalted 
13.    4  Lest  mine  enemy  say,  I  have  prevailed 

17.  9  my  deadly  enemies,  (who)  compass  me  ah. 

18.  title,  from  the  hand  of  all  his  enemies,  and 
18.    3  so  shall  I  be  saved  from  mine  enemies 
18. 17  He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy 
18.  37  I  have  pursued  mine  enemies,  and  over. 
18.  40  hast  - .  given  me  the  necks  of  mine  enemies 
-.8.  48  He  delivereth  me  from  mine  enemies 

21.    8  Thine  hand  shall  find  out  all  thine  ene. 
25.    2  let  not  mine  enemies  triumph  over  me 
25.  19  Consider  mine  enemies,  for  they  are  many 
27.   6  mine  head  be  lifted  up  above  mine  ene. 
31.    8  not  shut  me  up  into  the  hand  of  the  ene. 
31.  15  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  mine  enemies 
35.  19  Let  not  them  that  are  mine  enemies 

37.  20  the  enemies  of  the  Lord,  .as the  fat  of  la. 

38.  19  mine  enemies  (are)  lively.,  they  are  strong 
41.  2  not  deliver  him  unto  the  will  of  his  ene. 
41.    5  Mine  enemies  speak  evil  of  me,  When  sh. 

41.  11  mine  enemy  doth  not  triumph  over  me 

42.  9  because  of  the  oppression  of  the  enemy 

44.  16  by  reason  of  the  enemy  and  avenger 

45.  5  sharp  in  the  heart  of  the.  .enemies 

54.  7  and  mine  eye  hath  seen,  .upon  mine  ene. 

55.  3  Because  of  the  voice  of  the  enemy 

55.  12  For.  .not  an  enemy  (that)  reproached  me 

56.  9  then  shall  mine  enemies  turn  back  :  this 
59.  1  Deliver  me  from  mine  enemies,  O  my  God 
61.  3  hast  been,  .a  strong  tower  from  the  enemy 
64.  1  preserve  my  life  from  fear  of  the  enemy 
66.  3  shall  thine  enemies  submit  themselves 
68.  j  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  be  scattered 
68.  21  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  his  enemies 

68.  23  foot  may  be  dipped  in  the  blood  of.  .ene. 

69.  4  mine  enemies  wrongfully,  are  mighty 
6g.  18  deliver  me,  because  of  mine  enemies 

71.  10  For  mine  enemies  speak  against  me  ;  and 

72.  9  and  his  enemies  shall  lick  the  dust 

74.    3  all  (that)  the  enemy  hath  done  wickedly 
74.  10  shall  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  name  for 
74. 18  Remember  this,  (that)  the  enemy  hath 
78.  53  but  the  sea  overwhelmed  their  enemies 
80.    6  and  our  enemies  laugh  among  themsi  h  es 
81. 14  I  should  soon  have  subdued  their  enemies 
83.   2  For,  lo,  thine  enemies  make  a  tumult 
89.  10  thou  hast  scattered  thine  enemies  with 
89.  22  The  enemy  shall  not  exact  upon  him 
89.  42  thou  hast  made  all  his  enemies  to  rejoice 
89.  51  Wherewith  thine  enemies  have  reproach. 
92.   9  thine  enemies,  O  Lord,  .thine  enemies 
102.   8  Mine  enemies  reproach  me  all  the  day 
106. 10  redeemed  them  from  the  hand  of  the  e. 
106.42  Their  enemies  also  oppressed  them,  and 


Psa.  1 10.  1  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
no.  2  rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies 
1 19.  98  Thou . .  hast  made  me  wiser  than  mine  e. 
127.  5  they  shall  speak  with  the  enemies  in  the 
132.  18  His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame 

138.  7  stretch  forth . .  against  the  wrath  of  mine  e. 

139.  22  I  hate  them..  I  count  them  mine  enemies 
143.    3  For  the  enemy  hath  persecuted  my  soul 
143.   9  Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  mine  enemies 
143.  12  And  of  thy  mercy  cut  oft'  mine  enemies 

Pro vi  6.    7  he  make th  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
24. 17  Rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy  falleth 

Isa.     1.  24  Ah,  I  will,  .avenge  me  of  ruine  enemies 
9.  1 1  the  Lord  shall . .  join  his  enemies  together 
42.  13  The  LORD,  .shall  prevail  against  his  ene. 
59.  18  he  will  repay,  .recompence  to  his  enemies 

62.  8  I  will  no  more  give,  .meat  for  thine  ene. 

63.  10  therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their  ene. 
66.  6  Lord  that  rendereth  recompence  to  his  e. 
66.  14  and  (his)  indignation  toward  his  enemies 

Jer.  6.  25  the  sword  of  the  enemy . .  (is)  on  every  side 
12.  7  beloved.of  my  soul  into  the  hand  of  her  e. 
15.  9  I  deliver  to  the  sword  before  their  enemies 
15.  n  I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  entreat  thee1 
15.  14  I  will  make  (thee)  to  pass  with  thine  en. 
17.  4  I  will  cause  thee  to  serve  thine  enemies 
18. 17  I  will  scatter  them,  .before  the  enemy 
19.    7  I  will  cause  them  to  fall,  .before  their  e. 

19.  9  wherewith  their  enemies,  .shall  straiten 

20.  4  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  of  then-  ene. 

20.  5  will  I  give  into  the  baud  of  their  enemies 

21.  7  and  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies 
30.  14  wounded  thee  with  the  wound  of  an  ene. 
31. 16  shall  come  again  from  the  land  of  the  en. 
34.  20  will,  .give  them  into  the  hand  of  their  e. 
34.  21  will  I  give  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies 
44.  30  I  will  give,  .into  the  hand  of  his  enemies 
44.  30  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  B.,  his  enemy 
49.  37  before  thine  enemies,  and  before  them 

Lam.  1.    2  all  her  friends,  .are  become  her  enemies 
1.    5  Her  adversaries  are  the  chief,  her  enemies 
1.    9  0  Lord,  behold  my  affliction  ;  for  the  e. 
1.  16  my  children  are  desolate,  because  the  e. 

1.  21  all  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  tro. 

2.  3  he  hath  drawn  back,  .from  before  the  e. 
2.  4  He  hath  bent  his  bow  like  an  enemy 
2.  5  The  LORD  was  an  enemy  :  he  hath  swall. 
2.  7  hath  given  up  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy 
2.  16  thine  enemies  have  opened  their  mouth 
2.  17  caused  (thine)  enemy  to  rejoice  over  thee 

2.  22  those  that  I.  .swaddled,  .enemy  consum. 

3.  46  our  enemies  have  opened  their  mouths 

3.  52  Mine  enemies  chased  me  sore,  like  a  bud 

4.  12  that  the  adversary  and  the  enemy  should 
Eze.  36.    2  the  enemy  hath  said  against  you,  Aha ! 

39.  27  gathered  them  out  of  their  enemies'  lands 
Hos.    8.    3  Israel,  .the  enemy  shall  pursue  him 
Amos  9.    4  go  into  captivity  before  their  enemies 
Mie.    2.    8  of  late  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy 

4.  10  redeem  thee  from  the  hand  of  thine  enem. 

5.  9  and  all  thine  enemies  shall  be  cut  off 
7.    6  man's  enemies  (are)  the  men  of  his  own 
7.    8  Rejoice  uot  against  me,  O  mine  enemy 
7.  10  (she  that  is)  mine  enemy  shall  see  (it) 

Nah.   1. "  2  and  he  reserveth  (wrath)  for  his  enemies 
1.    8  and  darkness  shall  pursue  his  enemies 
3.  n  shalt  seek  strength  because  of  the  enemy 
3.  13  shall  be  set  wide  open  unto  thine  enemies 

Zeph.  3.  15  he  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy 

2.  Enemy,  one  awake,  "i"  ar. 

1  Sa.  28. 16  seeing  the  Lord,  .is  become  thine  enemy 
Psa.  139.  20  (and)  thine  enemies  take  (thy  name)  in 
Dan.    4.  19  interpretation  thereof  to  thine  enemies 

3.  Adversary,  a  distresser,  straitener,  is,  iy  tsar. 

Gen.  14.  20  delivered  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand 
Nunuo.    9  against  the  enemy  that  oppresseth  you 

24.  8  he  shall  eat  up  the  nations  his  enemies 
Deut32.  41  I  will  render  vengeance  to  mine  enemies 

33.    7  be  thou  an  help  (to  him)  from  his  enemies 

1  Sa.   2.  32  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  (in  my)  habita. 

2  Sa.  24.  13  flee  three  months  before  thine  enemies 
1  Ch.12.  17  (ye  be  come)  to  betray  me  to  mine  enem. 
Neh-  9.  27  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  who  vex. 

9.  27  them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies 

Esth.  7.    4  enemy  could  not  countervail  the  king's 

Job     6.  23  Deliver  me  from  the  enemy's  hand?  or 

16    9  mine  enemy  sharpeneth  his  eyes  upon 

iq.  11  counteth  me.  .as  (one  of)  his  enemies 

2  When  the  wicked .  .mine  enemies  aud  my 
12  Deliver  me  not.  .unjo  the  will  of  mine  e. 

5  Through  thee  will  we  push  down  our  en. 

7  But  thou  hast  saved  us  from  our  enemies 

10  Thou  makest  us  to  turn  back  from  the  e. 

12  for  he.  .shall  tread  down  our  enemies 
42  day  when  he  delivered  them  from  the  en. 
61  delivered .  .his  glory  into  the  enemy's  ha. 
66  he  smote  his  enemies  in  the  hiuder  part 

3  A  fire. . burnetii  up  his  enemies  round 
24  he.  .made  them  stronger  than  their  ene. 

11  And  the  waters  covered  their  enemies 
2  whom  he  hath  redeemed  from,  .the  cue. 

13  he.  .shall  tread  down  our  enemies 

8  until  he  see  (his  desire)  upon  his  enemies 
139  because  mine  enemies  have  forgotten 
157  Many  (are)  my  persecutors  and  mine  e. 
24  And  hath  redeemed  us  from  our  enemies 
11  the  lire  of  thine  enemies  shall  devour 
19  When  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a 

5  the  enemies  have  heard  a  cry  of  destruc. 
5  are  gone  into  captivity  before  the  enemy 


Psa.  27 
27, 


107. 

IT, 


119. 
119. 
136. 

Isa.   26. 


59 


Jer. 

Lam. 


Lam.  1.    7  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  eue. 
Eze.  39.  23  I .  .gave  them  into  the  hand  of  their  ene. 

4.  To  straiten,  distress,  *ny  tsarar. 
Esth.  3.  10  the  son  of  Hammedatha.  .the  Jews'  ene. 

8.  1  give  the  house  of  Hamau,  the  Jews'  enemy 

9.  10  The  ten  sons  of  Hainan . .  the  enemy  of  the 

9.  24  Haman.  .the  enemy  of  all  the  Jews,  had 
Psa.    6.    7  it  waxeth  old  because  of  all  mine  enemies 

7.   4  I  have  delivered  him  that,  .is  my  enemy 

7.  6  because  of  the  rage  of  mine  enemies 

8.  2  thou  ordained  strength  because  of  thine  e. 
10.  5  (as  for)  all  his  enemies,  he  puff eth  at  them 
23.  5  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine  enem. 
31.  11  I  was  a  reproach  among  all  mine  enemies 
42.  10  with  a  sword  in  my  bones,  mine  enemies 
74.  4  Thine  enemies  roar  in  the  midst  of  thy  c. 
74.  23  Forget  not  the  voice  of  thine  enemies 

5.  To  stand  up,  withstand,  Dip  gum. 
Exod32.  25  had  made  them  naked,  .among  their  en. 

I  G.To  hate,  Kiy  sane. 

Exod.  1.  10  they  join  also  unto  our  enemies,  and  fight 
2  Sa.  19.    6  In  that  thou  lovest  thine  enemies,  and 
2  Ch.  1.  11  hast  not  asked,  .the  life  of  thine  enemies 
Prov  25.  21  If  thine  enemy  be  hungry,  give  him  bread 
27.    6  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  (are)  deceitful 

7.  To  behold,  look,  watch,  "hb>  shur. 
Psa.  92.  11  Mine  eye  also  shall  see.  .mine  enemies 

8.  To  behold,  observe,  tvatch,  t\$  sharar. 
Psa.    5.    8  Lead  me,  0  Lord,  .because  of  mine  ene. 

27.  11  Teach  me  thy  way.  .because  of  mine  ene. 
54.    5  He  shall  reward  evil  unto  mine  enemies 
56.    2  Mine  enemies  would  daily  swallow  (me) 
59.  10  God  shall  let  me  see.  .mine  enemies 
9. Enemy,  opjjonent,  ix6p6s  echthros. 

Matt,  5.  43  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy 

5.  44  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse 
13.  25  But  while  men  slept,  his  euemy  v.  28, 
13.  39  The  enemy  that  sowed  them  is  the  devil 
22.  44  till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool? 

Marki2.  36  till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
Luke   1.  71  That  we  should  be  saved  from  our  ene. 
1.  74  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  our  e. 

6.  27  Love  your  enemies,  do  good  to  them  which 
6.  35  But  love  ye  your  enemies,  and  do  good 

10.  19  power,  .over  all  the  power  of  the  enemy 
19.  27  But  those  mine  enemies,  which  would 

19.  43  thine  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench  about 

20.  43  Till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
Acts  13.  10  child  of  the  devil,  .enemy  of  all  righteo. 
Rom.  5.  10  For  if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were 

11.  28  As  concerning  the  Gospel,  .enemies  for 

12.  20  Therefore  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed 

1  Co.  15.  25  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his 
15.  26  The  last  enemy  (that)  shall  be  destroyed 

Gal.     4.  16  Am  I  therefore  become  your  enemy,  be. 
Phil.  3.  iS  (they  are)  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of 
Col.     1.  21  you,  that  were  sometime  alienated,  and  e. 

2  Th.  3.  15  Yet  count,  .not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish 
Heb.  1.  13  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 

10.  13  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his 
Jas.     4.    4  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of 
Rev.  11.    5  fire  proceedeth..and  devoureth  their  e. 

11.  12  they  ascended  up.  .and  their  enemies 

10.  Man,  enemy,  ixQpds  Mptaros  echthros  anthr. 
Matt  13.  28  He  said  unto  them.  An  enemy  hath  done 

ENEMY,  to  be  an  — 

To  be  at  enmity,  n;x  ayab. 

Exod23.  22  then  I  will  be  an  enemy  unto  thine  ene. 
ENFLAME  selves,  to  — 
To  become  warm,  enflamed,  DEn  chamam,  2. 

Isa.   57.    5  Enflaming  yourselves  with  idols  under 

ENGAGE,  to  — 

To  pledge,  iyjt  arab. 

Jer.  30.  21  for  who  (is)  this  that  engaged  his  heart 

EN  GAN'-NIM,  C33  py  fountain  of  gardens. 

1.  A  city  in  the  lowlands  of  Judah  between  Zauoah  and 

Tappuah.     Now  called  Genin. 

Josh. 15.  34  Zanoah,  and  E.,  Tappuah,  and  Enam 
'2.  A  city  on  the  border  of  Issachar  allotted  to  the 
Gershonites,  now  called  Jenin,  and  surrounded  with 
orchards  or  gardens ;  the  spring  is  still  the  character- 
istic of  the  place.  In  1  Ch.  6.  73,  Anera  is  put  for 
Enganniin. 

Josh  19.  21  Remeth,  and  E.-g.,  and  En-haddah,  and 

21.  29  E.-g.  with  her  suburbs ;  four  cities 

EN  GE'-DI,  ""i3  pK  fountain  of  Gad,  or  Kid. 
A  town  on  the  W.  shore  of  the  Salt  Sea,  in  the  wilder- 
ness of  Judah.     Its  original  name  was  Hazazon-Tamar 
("pruuing  of  the  palm,")  from  the  palm-groves  around 
it.    Now  called  Am  Jidy. 

Josh. 15.  62  Nibshan,  and  the  city  of  Salt,  and  E. 

1  Sa.  23.  29  David . .  dwelt  in  strongholds  at  E 
24.    j  Behold,  David  (is)  in  the  wilderness  of  E 

2  Ch.20.    2  they  (be)  in  Hazazon-tamar,  which  (is)  E. 
Song   1.  14  cluster  of  camphire  in .  .vineyards  of  E. 
Eze.  47.  10  the  fishers  shall  stand  upon  it  from  E. 

ENGINES  — 

1.  Inventions,  thoughtful  works,  n'i3i:y;n  chishshebon. 

2  Ch.  26.  i5-he  made  in  Jerusalem  engines,  invented 
2.Battering  ram,  'OP  mechi. 

Fze.  26.    9  he  shall  set  engines  of  war  against  thy 


ENGRAFTED 


301 


ENQUIRE 


ENGRAFTED  — 

Implanted^  tfupvTos  emphutos. 

Jas.     i.  21  receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted 

ENGRAVE,  to  — 

1.7b  open  up,  nns  pathach,  3. 

Exod  28.  11  shalt  thou  engrave  the  two  stones  with 
Zech.  3.    9  behold,  I  will  engrave  the  graving  there. 

2.  To  strife,  carve,  or  cut  in,  iuTV7r6a}  entupoo. 
2  Co.    3.    7  if  the  ministration  of  death . .  engraven 

ENGRAVER  — . 

Opener  up,  engraver,  carver,  anri  charash. 

Exod28.  11  With  the  work  of  an  engraver  in  stone 

35.  35  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the  eug. 

38.  33  Aholiab..an  engraver,  and  a  cunning  wo. 

ENGRAVING  — 

A  graving,  carving,  rrtfiD  pittuach. 

Exod28.  11,  21,  36  (like)  the  engravings  of  a  signet 
3g.  14,  30  (Tike)  the  engravings  of  a  signet 

EN  HAD'-DAH,  rrcrj  py  swift  fountain. 
A  city  on  the  border  of  Issachar,  near  Eugannim.    Van 
ele  A'elde  identifies  it  with  Ain-haud  on  the  W.  side  of 
Carniel  and  about  two  miles  from  the  sea. 

Josh.19.  21  Remeth,  and  En-ganuim,  and  E..  and  B. 
EN  HAK-KO'-RE,  xnSpn  y%  fountain  of  the  crier. 
The  spring  that  burst  forth  in  inswer  to  the  "cry"  of 
Samson.  The  name  is  a  pun  on  the  word  yikra  ("  he 
called")  in  verse  iS.  Lechi,  "jaw,"  is  the  name  of  a  place 
as  well  as  Maktesh,  the  "hollow  place." 

Judgi5.  19  wherefore  he  called  the  name  thereof  E. 

EN  HA'-ZOR,  linn  yn  fountain  of  the  village. 

A  recced  city  in  Naphtali,  distinct  from  Razor,  and 

near  Kedesh. 

Josh  19.  37  And  Eledesh,  and  Edrei,  and  E. 
ENJOIN,  to  — 
1.7b  charge,  look  after,  *ip$  paqad. 

Job.  36.  23  Who  hath  enjoined  him  his  way?  or  who 
2.7*0  raise  up,  cause  to  stand,  n*p  qum,  3. 

Esth.  9.  31  and  Esther  the  queen  had  enjoined  them 
3. To  enjoin  on,  ipreWofiat  entellomai. 

Heb.   9.  20  the  testament  which  God  hath  enjoined 
4.7b  arrange  over  or  ctbout,  eVira<ro-a>  epitasso. 

Phni.        8  bold,  .to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  conv. 

ENJOY,  to  — 

l.To  be   come,  belong  to,  7 n;n,  rt;n  hayahle. 
Deut  28.  41  thou  shalt  not  enjoy  them ;  for  they 

2.  To  possess,  eh;  yarash. 

Nuiu  36.    8  that  the  children  of  Israel  may  enjoy 
Josh.  1.  15  ye  shall  return  unto  the  land,  .and  enjoy 

Z.  To  see,  nx-\  raah. 

Eccl.  2.    1  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth;  therefore  e. 
3.  13  that  every  man  should,  .enjoy  the  good 
5.  18  and  to  enjoy  the  good  of  all  his  labour 
4.7b  be  pleased  with,  enjoy,  nyi  ratsah. 

Lev.  26.  34  Then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaths 

26.  43  The  land  also,  .shall  enjoy  her  sabbaths 

2  Ch.36.  21  until  the  land  had  enjoyed,  her  sabbaths 

5.  To  be  pleased  with,  enjoy,  nyi  ratsah,  5. 

Lev.  26.  34  then  shall  the  land  rest,  and  enjoy  her 

6.  With  a  view  to  full  enjoyment,  ets  a.Tc6\ava,iv. 

1  Ti.    6.  17  God,  whogiveth  us  richly  all  things  to  e. 
7.7b  happen,  rvyxduco  tuychano. 

Acts'   24.    2  Seeing  that  by  thee  we  enjoy  great  quie. 
8.  7b  liave  a  full  enjoyment,  *xw  a-TroXavviv. 
Heb.  11.  25  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a 

ENJOY  long,  to  — 

7b  wear  out,  nbz  balah,  3. 

Isa.   65.  22  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of 

ENJOY,  to  make  — 

7b  cause  to  see  or  enjoy,  nso  raah,  5. 

Eccl.  2.  24  he  should  make  his  soul  enjoy  good  in 

ENLARGE,  to  — 

l.To  open,  extend,  entice,  persuade,  nris pathah,  5. 
Gen.    9.  27  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  he  shall 
2.7b  make  large,  great,  nyn  rdbah,  5. 

1  Ch.  4. 10  Oh  that  thou  wouldest.  .enlarge  my  coast 
3.7b  make  broad,  wide,  3rn  rachab,  5. 

Exod34.  24  For  I  will . .  enlarge  thy  borders :  neither 
Deut  12.  20  When  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  enlarge 
19.    8  if  the  Lord  thy  God  enlarge  thy  coast 
33.  20  he  said,  Blessed  (be)  he  that  enlargeth 

2  Sa.  22.  37  Thou  hast  enlarged  my  steps  under  me 
Psa.    4.    1  thou  hast  enlarged  me . .  in  distress 

18.  36  Thou  hast  enlarged  my  steps  under  me 
119.  32  I  will  run.  .when  thou  shalt  enlarge  my 
Isa.     5.  14  Therefore  hell  hath  enlarged  herself 
54.    2  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent,  and  let 
57.    8  thou  hast  enlarged  thy  bed,  and  made 
Amos  1.  13  ripped  up.  .that  they  might  enlarge  their 
Mic.    1.  16  enlarge  thy  baldness  as  the  eagle ;  for 
Hab.  2.    5  a  proud  man.. who  enlargeth  his  desire 
4.  To  spread  out,  ra§5  shatoch. 

Job  12.  23  he  enlargeth  the  nations,  and  straiteneth 


5.7b  make  great,  fieyaKvvtt)  megaluno. 

Matt23.  5  they,  .enlarge  the  borders  of  their  gar. 

2  Co.  10.  15  that  we  shall  be  enlarged  by  you  accord. 
6.  To  make  broad,  wide,  irKarvvw  jrfatund. 

2  Co.  6.  11  our  mouth  is  open,  .our  heart  is  enlarged 
6. 13  for  a  recompence.  .be  ye  also  enlarged 
ENLARGED,  to  be —  ; 

To  be  enlarged,  broad,  wide,  irn  rachab. 

1  Sa.   2.    1  my  mouth  is  enlarged  over  mine  ensures 

Isa    60.   5  thine  heart  shall  fear,  and  be  enlarged 
ENLARGEMENT  — 
Space,  respite,  rrn  revach. 

Esth.  4.  14  (then)  shall  there  enlargement  and  deliv. 
ENLARGING,  (to  be)  an  — 
To  be  enlarged,  broad,  wide,  3n"i  rachab. 

Eze.  41.    7  And  (there  was)  an  enlarging  and  awind. 
ENLIGHTEN,  to  — 
1.7b  cause  {to  give)  light,  shine,  iw  or,  5. 

Psa.  19.   8  commandment,  .(is)  pure,  enlightening 
97.    4  His  lightnings  enlightned  the  world 

2.  To  cause  to  shine,  enlighten,  njj  nagah,  5. 

Psa.  18.  28  Lord  my  God  will  enlighten  my  darkne. 

3.  To  give  lights  (pccTifa  photizo. 

Eph.    1.  18  The  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  en. 

Heb.   6.    4  impossible  for  those  who  were  once  eh. 
ENLIGHTENED,  to  be  — 
1.7b  be  or  become  light,  shining,  *iix or. 

1  Sa.  14.  27  hand  to  his  mouth ;  and  his  eyes  were  en. 
14.  29  se« . .  how  mine  eyes  have  been  enlighten. 

2. To  become  light,  shining,  "lit*  or,  2. 

J°D    33-  30  to  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  Hie 
EN  MISH'-PAT  asp'p  py  fountain  of  judgment. 
A  place  called  Kadesh  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran  (not 
in  Zin). 

Gen.  14.    7  they  returned,  and  came  to  E.,  which(is) 
ENMITY  — 

1.  Enmity,  n^H  ebah. 

Gen.    3.  15  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the 
Nuni35.  21  Or  in  enmity  smite  liim  with  his  hand 
35.  22  if  he  thrust  him  suddenly  without  enmity 
2. Enmity,  eydpa  echthra. 

Luke23>  12  for  before  they  were  at  enmity  between 
Rom.  8.    7  Because  the  carnal  mind  (is)  enmity 
Eph.   2. 15  Having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  enmity 
2.  16  the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  thereby 
Jas.     4.    4  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  G. 

E'-NOCH,  HE'-NOCH,  ~i3n,  'E^wx  tuition,  teacher. 
1. Eldest  son  of  Cain.    B.C.  3875. 
Gen.    4.  17  she  conceived,  and  bare  E.  :  and  he  buil. 

4.  18  unto  E.  was  born  Irad :  and  Irad  begat 

2.  A  city_built  by  Cain  and  called  after  his  son's  name. 

Gen.    4. 17  builded  a  city,  and  called  the  name.  ,E. 

3.  A  son  of  Jared  a  descendent  of  Seth.    B.C.  3382-3017 

Gen.    5.  18  hundred  sixty  and  two.  .and  he  begat  E. 

5.  19  Jared  lived  after  he  begat  E.  eight  hund. 
5.  21  And  E.  lived  sixty  and  five  years 

5.  22  E.  walked  with  God.  .three  hundred  v.  24 
5.  23  the  days  of  E.  were  three  hundred  sixty 

1  Ch.   1.    3  Henock,  Methuselah,  Lamech 
Luke  3.  37  Mathusala,  which  was  (the  son)  of  E. 
Heb.  11.    5  By  faith  E.  was  translated  that  he  should 
Jude       14  And  E.  also,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  pro. 

ENOS,  Bnag,  'Ej/c$s  mortal. 

Son  of  Seth"  and  grandson  of  Adam.    B.C.  3874-2764. 

Gen.    4.  26  And  to  Seth.  .and  he  called  his  name  E. 
5.    6  an  hundred  and  five  years,  and  begat  E. 
5.   7  And  Seth  lived  after  he  begat  E.  eight 
5.    9  E.  lived  ninty  years,  and  begat  Cainan 
5.  10  E.  lived  after  he  begat  Cainan  eight  hun. 
5. 11  the  days  of  E.  were  nine  hundred  and 

t  Ch.  1.    1  Adam,  Sheth,  E. 

Luke  3.  3S  Which  was  (the  son)  of  E. .  .(the  son)  of  S. 

ENOUGH  — 

1.  Sufficiency,  ^  dai. 

Prov  27.  27  And . .  goats'  milk  enough  for  thy  food,  for 
Nah.  2.  12  The  lion  did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his 
Mai.   3.  10  that  (there  shall)  not  (be  room)  enough 

2.7b  draw  (up)  water,  nhy  dalah. 

Exod.  2.  19  An  Egyptian,  .drew,  .enough  for  us,  and 

3.  Wealth,  substance,  sufficiency,  Jin  lion. 

Prov  30.  15  (yea),  four  (things)  say  not,  (It  is)  enough 
30. 16  and  the  fire  (that)  saith  not,  (It  is)  enough 

4. All,  i3  kol. 

Gen.  33. 11  Godhath  dealt  graciously. .and. .Ihavee. 

5.  Abundant,  much,  2~)  rob. 

Gen.  24.  25  We  have  both  straw  and  provender  eno. 
33.    9  I  have  enough,  my  brother  ;  keep  that 
45.  28  (It  is)  enough  ;  Joseph  my  son  (is)  yet 

Exod. 9. 28  Entreat  the  Lord  for  (it  is)  enough 

2  Sa.  24. 16  It  is  enough  ;  stay  now  thine  hand 

1  Ki.19.  4  It  is  enough  ;  now,  0  Lord,  take  away  my 
1  Ch.21.  15  said  to  the  angel. .It  is  enough,  stay  now 

6.  Satiety,  fulness,  nya'p"  sobah. 

Isa.    56.  ii  greedy  dogs  (which)  can  never  have  eno. 

7.  Hand,  "V  yad. 

Gen.  34.  21  behold,  (it  is)  large  enough  for  them 


S.  Sufficient,  enough,  aptcerSs  arketos. 

Matt  10.  25  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be 
9.  Enough,  sufficient,  inavos  hikanos. 

Luke22.  38  And  he  said  unto  them,  It  is  enough 
ENOUGH,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  found,  met,  come  upon,  n^"?  matsa,  2. 

Josh.  17.  16  The  hill  is  not  enough  for  us :  and  all  the 
2.7b  be  enough,  apKtw  arked. 

Matt25.    9  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us  aud  you 
ENOUGH,  to  have  — 
I. Sufficiency,  "n  dai. 

Jer.   49.    9  they  will  destroy  till  they  have  enough 

Obad.  5  would  they  not  have . .  till  they  had  eno. 
2.7Y>  be  satisfied,  satiated,  yyj  saba. 

2  Ch.31.  10  we  have  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have  left 

Prov  28. 19  he  that  followeth.  .shall  have  poverty  en. 

Hos.    4.  10  For  they  shall  eat,  and  not  have  enough 

3.  Satiety,  fulness,  njgnjp  sobah. 

Hag.    1.    6  ye  eat,  but  ye  have  not  enough ;  ye  drink 
ENOUGH,  it  is  — 
7b  hold  off,  d-jrex&J  apecho. 

Marki4.  4T  take,  .rest:  it  is  enough,  the  hour  is  come 
ENOUGH,  more  than  — 
Sufficiency,  "h  dai. 

Exod36.    c,  The  people  bring  much  more  than  enough 
ENaUTRE  (for),  to  — 
1.7b  enquire,  n^3  baah. 

Isa.  21.  12  if  ye  will  enquire,  enquire  ye :  return 
2. 7b  seek,  enquire,  np3  baqar,  3. 

2  Ki.  16.  15  the  brasen  altar  shall  be  for  me  to  enqui. 

Psa.  27.  4  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  and  to  e. 
3.7b  seek,  enquire,  Tj25  beqar. 

Ezra  7. 14  of  his  seven  counsellors,  to  enquire  cone. 
4.7b  seek,  enquire,  require,  request,  irpa  baqash,  3. 

2  Sa.  21.    1  year  after  year;  and  David  enquired  of 

Job   10.    6  That  thou  enquirest  after  mine  iniquity 

Dan.  1.  20  that  the  king  enquired  of  them,  he  found 
5.  To  seek,  enquire,  require,  u~r\  darash. 

Gen.  25.  22  And  she  went  to  enquire  of  the  LORD 

ExodtS.  15  Because  the  people  come  unto  me  to  en. 

Deuti2.  30  Take  heed,  .that  thou  enquire  not  after 
13. 14  Then  shalt  thou  enquire,  and  make  search 
17.   4  thou  hast  heard  (of  it),  and  enquired  dil. 

17.  9  thou  shalt  come  unto  the  priest,  .and  en. 
Judg.  6.  29  when  they  enquired  and  asked,  they  said 

1  Sa.    g.    9  when  a  man  went  to  enquire  of  God 

28.    7  that  I  may  go  to  her,  and  enquire  of  her 

2  Sa.  11.    3  David  sent  and  enquired  after  the  worn. 

1  Ki.  22.  5  Enquire,  I  pray  thee,  at  the  word  of  the 

22.    7  not  here  a  prophet,  .that  we  might enqu. 
22.   8  by  whom  we  may  enquire  of  the  Lord 

2  Ki.   1.    2,  3,  6,  16  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of 

1. 16  no  God  in  Israel  to  enquire  of  his  word 
3.  11  not  here  a  prophet,  .that  we  may  enquire 
8.    8  meet  the  man  of  God,  and  enquire  of 

22. 13  Go  ye,  enquire  of  the  LORD  for  me,  and 
22.  18  the  king  of  Judah,  which  sent  you  to  en. 

1  Ch.io.  13  of  (one  that  had)  a  familiar  spirit,  to  enq. 

10. 14  And  enquired  not  of  the  Lord  :  therefore 

13.  3  we  enquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul 
21.30  David  could  not  go  before  it  to  enquire 

2  Ch.18.    4  Enquire,  I  pray  thee,  at  the  word  of  the 

18.  6  not  here  a  prophet,  .that  we  might  enqu. 
18.    7  by  whom  we  may  enquire  of  the  Lord 
32.  31  who  sent  unto  him  to  enquire  of  the  wo 
34.  21  Go,  enquire  of  the  Lord  for  me,  and 

34.  26  who  sent  you  to  enquire  of  the  Lord 
Jer.  21.   2  Enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  Lord  for  us 

37.    7  that  sent  you  unto  me  to  enquire  of  me 
Eze.  14.    7  and  cometh  to  a  prophet  to  enquire  of 

20.    1  certain  of  the  elders . .  came  to  enquire  of 

20.    3  Are  ye  come  to  enquire  of  me  ? 
Zeph.  1.  6  that  have  not  sought. .nor  enquired  for 

6.7b  ask,  demand,  beg,  desire,  bi<w  shoal. 

Gen.  24.  57  We  'will  call  the  damsel,  and  enquire  at 
Judg.  4.  20  when  any  man  doth  come  and  enquire 
8. 14  And  caught  a  young  man.  .and  enquired 
20.  27  the  children  of  Israel  enquired  of  the 

1  Sa.  10.  22  Therefore  they  enquired  of  the  Lord 

17.  56  Enquire  thou  whose  son  the  stripling  (is) 
22.  10  And  he  enquired  of  the  Lord  for  him 
22.  13  that  thou  hast ..  enquired  of  God  for  him 

22.  15  Did  I  then  begin  to  enquire  of  God  for 

23.  2  David  enquired  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Shall 
23.    4  David  enquired  of  the  Lord  yet  again 
28.   6  when  Saul  enquired  at  the  Lord,  the 

30.   8  David  enquired  of  the  Lord,  saying 

2  Sa.  2.    1  that  David  enquired  of  the  Lord,  saying 

5.  19  David  enquired  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Shall 
5.  23  when  David  enquired  of  the  Lord,  he 
16.  23  as  if  a  man  had  enquired  at  the  oracle  of 
1  Ch.14.  10  David  enquired  of  God,  saying,  Shall  I  go 

14.  14  Therefore  David  enquired  again  of  God 

18.  10  to  enquire  of  his  welfare,  and  to  congra. 
Job     8.    8  For  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  former 
Eccl.  7.  10  thou  dost  not  enquire  wisely  concerning 

7.  To  knoto  thoroughly,  diayLv&ffKw  diaginosko. 

Acts  23.  15  as  though  ye  would  enquire  something 
S.To  seek  after,  eVit^Tew  epizeteo. 

Acts  19.  39  But  if  ye  enquire  any  thing  concerning 
9.7b  search  out,  i^erd^co  exetazo. 

Matt.  10.  11  enquire  who  in  it  is  worthy  ;  and  there 


ENQUIRE 


302 


ENTER 


10.  To  seek,  £?rrea>  zcteo. 

Johni6.  19  Do  ye  enquire  among  yourselves  cf  that 
Acts  9.  ii  enquire  in  the  house  of  Judas  for  (one) 

11.  To  ask,  enquire,  irvv&dvouai  punthanomai. 
John  4.  52  Then  enquired  he  of  them  the  hour  when 
Acts  23.  20  as  though  they  would  enquire  somewhat 

V2.T'i  seek  together,  <rv£wr4(t>  suzeteo. 

Luke22.  23  they  began  to  enquire  among  themselves 
ENQUIRE  or  search  diligently,  to. — 
l.To  enquire  exactly,  aicpifJ6a>  ahriboo. 

Matt.  2.    7  Then  Herod . .  enquired  of  theindiligently 
2.  16  which  he  had  diligently  enquired  of  the 
2.7b  seek  out,  e/c^Te'w  ekzeteo. 

1  Pe.    1.  10  prophets  have  enquired  and  searched  di. 

ENQUIRE  early,  to  — 

To  seek  early,  iny  shachar,  3. 

Psa,  78.  34  they  returned  and  enquired  early  after 
ENQUIRED  of,  to  be  — 
To  be  sought,  v~f}  darash,  2. 

Eze.  14.   3  should  I  be  enquired  of  at  all  by  them  ? 
20    3  (As)  I  live.  .1  will  not  be  enquired  of  by 
20.  31  shall  I  be  enquired  of  by  you,  O  house  of 
36.  37',I  will  yet  (for)  this  be  enquired  of  by  the 

ENQUIRY  (for),  to  make  — 

1.7b  seek,  enquire,  ~\\%baqar,  3. 

Prov2o.  25  holy,  and  after  vows  to  make  enquiry 

2.  To  ask  or  enquire  thoroughly,  diepcoTaw  dierOtao. 
Acts  10.  17  the  men  which  were  sent,  .made  enq.  for 

ENRICH,  to  — 

1.7*0  enrich,  i^j;  ashar,  5. 

1  Sa,  17.  25  the  king  will  enrich  him  with  great  riches 
Psa.  65.    9  thou  greatly  enrichest  it  with  the  river 
Eze.  27.  33  thou  didst  enrich  the  kings  of  the  earth 

2.7b  moke  rich,  irXovrlfc  ploutizo. 

1  Co.    1.    5  That  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched  by 

2  Co.   9.  11  Being  enriched  in  everything  to  all 

EN  RIM'-MON,  |i»i  y%foimtam  of  Rimmon. 

A  city  of  Judah,  the  same  as  Ain  and  Rimmon  (Josh. 

15.  32),  Ain,  Remmon  (19.  7 :  and  see  1  Ch,  4,  32). 

Neh.  11.  29  at  E.,  and  at  Zareah,  and  at  Jarmuth 
EN  RO'-GEL,  ^ah  yv.  the  /idlers' s  fountain. 
A  fountain    near   Jerusalem    on    the   boundary  line 
between  Judah  and  Benjamin.     It  was  the  point  next 
to  Jerusalem  and  at  a  lower  level.    Its  modern  name 
is  Ain-Ummed-Daraj,  "fountain  of  the  virgin." 

Josh  15.    7  and  the  goings  out  thereof  were  at  E.-r."' 
18.  16  And  the  border,  .descended  to  E.-r. 

2  Sa.17.  17  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz  stayed  by  E.-r. 

iKi.    1.   9  the  stone  of  Zoheleth,  which  (is)  by  E.-r. 
ENSAMPLE  — 
l.A  type,  tvttos  tupos. 

1  Co.  10.  11  things  happened  unto  them  [for  ensam.] 

Phil.   3.  17  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensa. 

1  Th.  1.    7  So  that  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that 

2  Th.  3.   9  to  make  ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you 

1  Pe.   5.    3  Neither  as  being  lords . .  but  being  ensam. 

2.  A  wider  or  secret  sign,  virdSay^a  h\ipodeigma. 

2  Pe.   2.    6  an  ensample  unto  those  that  after  should 
EN  she'-MESH,  0b$  ]"•%  fountain  of  the  sun. 

A  spring  forming  one  of  the  landmarks  between  the 
tribe  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  at  the  E.  of  Jerusalem 
and  theMount'of  Olives.  Now  called  Ain  Baud,  about 
a  mile  from  Bethany,  the  first  halting-place  on  the  road 
to  Jericho. 

Josh.  15.    7  border  passed  toward  the  waters  of  E. 
18.  17  dra  wn  from  the  north,  and  went  forth  to  E. 
ENSIGN  — 
X.Sign,  ensign,  token,  signal,  niK  oth. 

Num.  2.    2  with  the  ensign  of  their  father's  house 
Psa.  74.    4  Thine  enemies.,  set  up  their  ensigns  (for) 
2.  Sign,  ensign,  banner ,  sail,  Di  nes. 

Isa.     5.  26  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations 
it.  10  which  shall  stand  for  an  ensign  of  the 
11.  12  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations 
18.    3  see  ye,  when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on  the 

30.  17  till  ye  be  left,  .as  an  ensign  on  an  hill 

31.  9  his  princes  shall  be  afraid  of  the  ensign 

ENSIGN,  to  lift  up  as  an  — 

To  lif  s,'0'  "P*  display  self,  coinasas,  7a. 

Zech.  9.  16  lifted,  up  as  an  ensign  upon  his  land 
ENSNARED,  to  be  — 
Snare,  b^tid  moqesh. 

Job    34.  30  reign  not,  lest  the  people  be  ensnared 
ENSUE,  to  — 
To  cause  to  fee,  pursue,  Biwkco  diolr,. 

1  Pe.   3.  11  let  him  seek  peace,  and  ensue  it 
ENTANGLE,  to — 

To  entrap,  ensnare,  iray<5euw  pagideuo. 

Matt  22.  15  took  counsel  how  they  might  entangle 
ENTANGLE  in,  to  — 
To  entangle  {self)  in,  ^mtXckw  cmpleko. 

2  Pe.   2.  20  For  if .  .they  are  again  entangled  therein 
ENTANGLE  one's  self  with,  to  — 

To  entangle  {self)  in,  i/Lw\4iuc  empleko. 

2  Ti.    2.    4  No  man  that  warreth  entaugleth  himself 


ENTANGLED  with,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  perplexed,  entangled,  343  buk,  2. 

Esodi4-    3  They  (are)  entangled  in  the  iand,  the  wild. 
2.7b  hold  in,  eWx&>  enecho. 

Gal.    5.    1  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of 

EN  TAP-PU'-AH,  n^Pi  fjj \  fountain  of  Tappuah. 
The  boundary  of  Manasseh  went  from  facing  Shechem 
"to  the  inhabitants  of  En-tappuah."    Probably  iden- 
tical with  Tappuah,  but  not  to  be  confounded  with 
Beth-tappuah  in  the  mountains  of  Judah. 

Josh.  17.    7  the  right  hand  unto  the  inhabitants  of  E. 
ENTER,  to  — 
l.To  go  in,  enter,  Ki3  bo. 

Gen.   7.  13  In  the  selfsame  day  entered  Noah,  and 
19.    3  and  they  turned  in  unto  him,  and  entered 

19.  23  The  sun  was  risen,  .when  Lot  entered 
31.  33  Then  went  he  out.  .and  entered  into  R. 

43.  3c  he  entered  into  (his)  chamber,  and  wept 
Exod33.    9  as  Moses  entered  into  the  tabernacle 

40.  35  Moses  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the  tent 
Num  4.    3  all  that  enter  into  the  host,  to  do  the 
4-  3°.  35.  39.  43  every  one  that  entereth  into 
5  24,  27  the  water  that  causeth  the  curse  shall 

20.  24  he  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  which 
Deut23.    1,  2,  3  shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation 

23.    2  to  his  tenth  generation  shall  he  not  enter 

23.    3  their  tenth  generation  shall  they  not  en. 

23.    8  children  that  are  begotten  of  them  shall  e. 

Josh.  2.    3  Bring  forth  the  men.  .which  are  entered 

8. 19  they  entered  into  the  city,  and  took  it 

10.  19  suffer  them  not  to  enter  into  their  cities 

10.  20  the  rest  (which)  remained  of  them  enter. 

Jiulg.  6.    5  they  entered  into  the  land  to  destroy  it 

9.  46  they  entered  into  the  hold  of  the  house 

18.  9  be  not  slothful  to  go . .  to  enter  to  possess 
2  Sa.  10. 14  the  children  of  Amnion,  .entered  into  the 

1  Ki.  14.  12  when  thy  feet  enter  into  the  city,  the 

22.  30  I  will  disguise  myself,  and  enter  into  the 

2  Ki.  7.    4  If  we  say,  We  will  enter  into  the  city 

7.    8  they,  .came  again  and  entered  another 

19.  23  I  will  enter  into  the  lodgings  of  his  bord. 

1  Ch.tg.  15  they  likewise  fled.. and  entered  into  the 

2  Ch.  7.    2  the  priests  could  not  enter  into  the  house 

12. 11  when  the  king  entered  into  the  house  of 
15/12  they  entered  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the 
27.   2  he  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the  L. 

30.  8  enter  into  his  sanctuary,  which  he  hath 

31.  16  unto  every  one  that  .  ntereth  into  the 

32.  1  Sennacherib,  .entered  "  to  Judah,  and 
Neh.    2.    8  and  for  the  house  that  I  shall  enter  into 

2. 15  Then  went  I  up .  .and  entered  by  the  gate 
10.  29  They  clave  to  their  brethren,  .and  entered 
Esth.  4.    2  none  (might)  enter  into  the  king's  gate 
Job   22.    4  will  he  enter  with  thee  into  judgment? 
38.  16  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  of  the 
38.  22  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  treasures  of 
Psa.  37.  15  Their  sword  shall  enter  into  their  own 

45.  15  they  shall  enter  into  the  king's  palace 
95.  11  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my  rest 

100.    4  Enter  into  his  gates  with  thanksgiving 

1 18.  20  gate . .  into  which  the  righteous  shall  enter 

143.    2  enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant 

Prov.  2.  10  When  wisdom  entereth  into  thine  heart 

4.  14  Enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked 

18.    6  A  fool's  lips  enter  into  contention,  and 

23.  10  enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the  fatherless 
Isa.     2. 10  Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the 

3.  14  The  Lord  will  enter  into  judgment  with 
26.  20  Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy 
37.  24  I  will  enter  into  the  height  of  Iris  border 
57.    2  He  shall  enter  into  peace  :  they  shall  rest 
59. 14  truth  is  fallen,  .and  equity  cannot  enter 
Jer.     2.    7  but  when  ye  entered,  ye  defiled  my  land 
7.    2  that  enter  in  at  these  gates  to  worship 
8. 14  and  let  us  enter  into  the  defenced  cities 
9.  21  For  death,  .is  entered  into  our  palaces 
14. 18  if  I  enter  into  the  city,  then  behold  them 
16.    5  Enter  not  into  the  house  of  mourning 
17. 25  Then  shall  there  enter  into  the  gates  of 
21.  13  or  who  shall  enter  into  our  habitations? 
34. 10  which  had  entered  into  the  covenant 
37.  16  When  Jeremiah  was  entered  into  the  du. 
41.  17  they  departed,  .to  go  to  enter  into  Egypt 
Lam.  1. 10  she  hath  seen,  .the  heathen  entered  into 
1.  10  they  should  not  enter  into  thy  congrega. 
4. 12  the  enemy  should  have  entered  into  the 
Eze.    2.    2  the  spirit  entered  into  me  when  he  spake 
3.  24  the  spirit  entered  into  me,  and  set  me 
7.  22  the  robbers  shall  enter  into  it,  and  defile 
13.   9  neither  shall  they  enter  into  the  land  of 
16.    8  I  s  ware  unto  thee,  and  entered  intoacov. 
20.  38  they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  of  Isr. 
26.  10  when  he  shall  enter  into  thy  gates,  as 
36. 20  when  they  entered  unto  the  heathen 
41.   6  they  entered  into  the  wall  which  (was)  of 
44.    3  he  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch 

44.  9  No  stranger. .  shall  enter  into  my  sanctua. 
44. 16  They  shall  enter  into  my  sanctuary 
44.  21  when  they  enter  into  the  inner  court 

46.  2  the  prince  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the 
46.    8  And  when  the  prince  shall  enter,  he  shall 
46.    9  he  that  entereth  by  the  way  of  the  south 

Dan.  1 1.    7  and  shall  enter  into  the  fortress  of  the 
ir.  17  He  shall  also  set  his  face  to  enter  with 
11.  -4  He  shall  enter  peaceably  even  upon  the 
11.  40  and  he  shall  enter  into  the  countries 
11.  41  He  shall  enter  also  into  the  glorious  land 
flos.  it.    9  I  (am)  God.  .1  will  not  enter  into  the  city 
Amos  5-    5  But  seek  not  Beth-el,nor  enterinto  Gilgal 


Obad.      13  Thou  shouldest  not  have  entered  into  the 
Jon.    3.    4  Jonah  began  to  enter  into  the  city  a  day's 
Hab.   3.  16  rottenness  entered  into  my  bones,  and 
Zech.  5.    4  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief 

2.  To  go  on,  proceed,  ^rr  halak. 

Job  34.  23  he  should  enter  into  judgment  with  God 
3.7b  come  doxon,  nnj  nachath. 

Prov.  17.  10  A  reproof  entereth  more  into  a  wise  man 
i.  To  go  or  pass  over,  i^u  abar. 

Deut29.  12  That  thou  shouldest  enter  into  covenant 
5.  To  go  up  into,  avafcaivtsj  anabaino. 

John2i.    3  They  went  forth,  and  [entered]  into  a  ship 

1  Co.  2.  9  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  m. 
6,7b  come  or  go  into,  ei<j4pxop.ai  eiserchomai. 

Matt.  5.  20  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom 

6.  6  when  thouprayest,  enter  into  thy  closet 

7.  21  "•'ot  every  one.  .shall  enter  into  the  king. 

8.  s  when  Jesus  was  entered  into  Capernaum 
10.  5  into  (any)  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye 
10.  11  into  whatsoever  city  or  town  ye  shall  en. 
12.    4  How  he  entered  into  the  house  of  God 

12.  29  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strongman's 
18.    3  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 

18.  8,  9  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life 
19. 17  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life  keep  the  com. 

19.  23  a  rich  man  shall  hardly  enter  into  the 
19.  24  than  for  a  rich  man  [to  enter]  into  the 
23. 13  neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering 

24.  38  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the 

25.  21,  23  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord 
26. 41  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation 

Mark  1.  21  [entered]  into  the  synagogue,  and  taught 

1.  45  Jesus  could  no  more  openly  enter  into 

2.  1  again  he  entered  into  Capernaum  after 

3.  1  And  he  entered  again  into  the  synagogue 

3.  27  No  man  can  enter  into  a  strong  man's 

5. 12  Send  us  into  the  swine,  that  we  may  enter 

5.  13  the  unclean  spirits  went  out,  and  entered 

6.  10  In  what  place  soever  ye  enterinto  an  ho. 

7.  17  when  he  was  entc  I  into  the  house  from 
7.  24  from  thence  he  arose,  .and  entered  into 

9.  25  come  out  of  him,  and  enter  no  more  into 
9.  43,  45,  47  it  ia  better  for  thee  to  enter.. into 

10. 15  as  a  little  udld,  he  shall  not  enter  therein 
10.  23  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter 
10.  24  for  them  that  trust  in  riches  to  enterinto 

10.  25  than  for  a  rh  h  man  to  enter  into  the  kin. 

11.  11      sus  entered  into  Jerusalem,  and  into 

13.  15  neither  enter,  .to  take  anything  out  of 

14.  38  pray,  lest  ye  [enter]  into  temptation 

16.  5  and  [entering]  into  the  sepulchre,  they  saw 
Luke  1.  40  And  entered  into  the  house  of  Zacharias 

4.  38  he  arose  out  of  the  synagogue,  and  entered 

6.  6  he  entered  into  the  synagogue  and  taught 

7.  1  when  he  had  ended . .  he  entered  into  Cap. 
7.    6  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  enter 

7.  44  I  entered  into  thine  house,  thou  gavest  me 

8.  30  because  many  devils  were  entered  into 
8.  32  that  he  would  suffer  them  to  enter  into 

8.  33  Then  went  the  devils  out.  .and  entered 

9.  4  whatsoever  house  ye  enter  into,  there  ab. 
9.  34  they  feared  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud 
9.  52  and  entered  into  a  village  of  the  Samar. 

10.   5  into  whatsoever  house  ye  enter,  first 
10.  8,  10  into  whatsoever  city  ye  enter,  and  they 
10.  38  that  he  entered  into  a  certain  village 
17. 12  as  he  entered  into  a  certain  village.,  there 

17.  27  until  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the 
iS.  17  as  a  little  child  shall  in  no  wise  enterinto 

18.  24  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  [enter] 

18.  25  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kin. 

19.  1  And  (Jesus)  entered  and  passed  through 
2i.  21  let  not  them,  .in  the  countries  enter  the. 
22.  3  Then  entered  Satan  into  Judas  surnamed 
22.  10  when  ye  are  entered  into  the  city 

22.  40  Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation 
22.  46  rise  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptat. 

24.  26  Ought  not  Christ . .  to  enter  into  his  glory  ? 
John  3.    4  can  he  enter  the  second  time  into  his  mo. 

3.  5  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 

4.  38  other  men  laboured,  and  ye  are  entered 
10.    1  He  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into  the 

13.  27  And  after  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him 
18.  1  a  garden,  into  the  which  he  entered,  and 
18.  33  Then  Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment 

Acts   3.    8  And  he.  .entered  withthem  into  the  tern. 

5.  21  wrhen  they  heard  (that),  they  entered  into 
9.  17  Ananias  went  his  way,  and  entered  into 

10.  24  the  morrow  after  they  entered  into  Cesa. 

11.  8  nothing,  .unclean  hath  at  any  time  enter. 
11. 12  and  we  entered  into  the  man's  house 

14.  22  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter 
16.  40  they  went  out  of  the  prison,  and  entered 
18. 19  but  he  himself  entered  into  the  synagogue 
21.    8  we  entered  into  the  house  of  Philip  the 

23. 16  he  went  and  entered  into  the  castle,  and 

25.  23  and  wasentered  into  the  place  of  hearing 
Rom.  5.  12  ashy  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world 
Heb.  3.  11  I  sware.  .They  shall  not  enterinto  my  rest 

3. 18  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest 
4.    ra  promise  being  left  (us)  of  entering  into 
4.   3  For  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into 
4.   3,  5  if  they  shall  enter  into  my  rest 

4.   6  Seeing  it  remaineth  that  some  must  ent. 

4. 10  For  he  that  is  entered  into  his  rest 

4.  11  Let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter  into  that 

6. 19  which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil 

6. 20  Whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered 
.    0.  24  For  Christ,  is  not  entered  into  the  10.  19. 


ENTER 


303 


ENVYING 


Heb.  9.  25  as  the  high  priest  entereth  into  the  holy 
Jas.  5.  4  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped  are  en. 
2  Jo.  7  many  deceivers  [are  entered]  into  the  wo. 

Rev.  ir.  11  the  Spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into 
- 15.    8  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple 
21.  27  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any 

7. To  pass  over  into,  €l<nropevofj.at  cisporeuomai. 
Mark  6.  56  whithersoever  he  entered,  .they  laid  the 

7.  15  There  is  nothing,  .entering  into  v.  18, 19. 
xi.   2  as  soon  as  ye  be  entered  into  it,  ye  shall 

Lukeig.  30  at  your  entering  ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied 
Acts  3.   2  to  ask  alms  of  them  that  entered  into  the 

S,7b  go  into,  ipfialva  embaino. 

Matt  S.  23  when  he  was  entered  into  a  ship,  his  dis. 

9.    1  And  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  passed 
Mark  4.    1  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  sat  in  the  sea 

8.  10  he  entered  into  a  ship  with  his  disciples 
8. 13  and,  enteringinto  the  ship  again,  departed 

Luke  5.    3  And  he  entered  into  one  of  the  ships 
John  6.  17  And  entered  into  a  ship,  and  went  over 
6.  22  [that  one  whereinto  his  disciples  were  en.] 

9.  To  go  into,  tfoei/j-i  eiseimi. 

Acts  21.  26  Paul,  .the  next  day.  .entered  into  the 

10.  IVay  m,  etaodos  eisodos. 

Heb.  10. 19  Having.,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  hoi. 

11.7b  go  or  come,  epxofiai  erchomai. 

Mark  r.  29  they  entered  into  the  house  of  Simon  and 
Acts  18.    7  he  departed  thence,  and  [entered]  into  a 

12.  To  come  into  sideways,  irapeurepxofxat  pareis. 
Rom.  5.  20  the  law  entered,  that  the  offence  might 

ENTER,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cav.se  to  go  or  come  in,  W3  bo,  5. 

Eze.  37.   5  I  will  cause  breath  to  enter  into  you 
Lam.  3.  13  He  hath  caused  the  arrows,  .to  enter  into 

ENTER  in,  to  — 

l.To  go  or  come  in,  wis  bo. 

Num.  4.  23  all  that  enter  in  to  perform  the  service 
2  Ki.  9.  31  as  Jehu  entered  hi  at  the  gate,  she  said 

11.  5  A  third  part  of  you  that  enter  in  on  the 
2  Cb.,23.  19  none,  .unclean  in  anything  should  eu.  in 
Jer.   17.  20  all  the  inhabitants,  .that  enter  in  by 

22.  2  and  thy  people  that  enter  in  by  these 
22.   4  then  shall  there  enter  in  by  the  gates  of 

Eze.  44.  2  This  gate,  .no  man  shall  enter  in  by  it 
44.  17  when  they  enter  in  at  the  gates  of  the 
46.    9  he  that  entereth  in  by  the  way  of  the 

Joel    2.   9  they  shall  enter  in  at  the  windows  like  a 

2.  To  go  or  come  into,  elaepxoiiat  eiserchomai. 
Matt.  7.  13  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate  :  for  wide 

12.  45  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there  :  and  the 
Luken.  26  [they  enter  in,]  and  dwell  there :  and  the 

11.  52  lawyers,  .ye  enter  not  in  yourselves 
11.  52  them  that  were  entering  in  ye  hindered 

13.  24  Strive  to  enter  in  at' the  strait  gate 
13.  24  will  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be 
24.    3  they  entered  in,  and  found  not  the  body 

."'  jhn  10.  2  But  he  that  entereth  in  by  the  door  is 
10.    9  I  am  the  door:  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in 

Acts  19. 30  when  Paul  would  have  entered  in  unto 
20.  29  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you 
28.    8  to  whom  Paul  entered  in,  and  prayed 

Heb.  3. 19  So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in 

4.  6  they,  .entered  not  in  because  of  unbelief 
9. 12  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place 

Rev.  22. 14  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into 

3.  To  jjoss  over  into,  ticnropevoticu  eisporeuomai. 
Matti5. 17  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth 
Mark  4.  19  the  lusts  of  other  tilings  entering  in 

5.  40  and  entereth  in  where  the  damsel  was 
Luke  8.  16  that  they  which  enter  in  may  see  the  light 

22. 10  into  the  house  where  he  entereth  in 
ENTER  into  or  therein,  to  — 
l.To  go  or  come  in,  Ni3  bo. 

Gen/12.  11  when  he  was  come  near  to  enter  into  E. 
Jer.   42.  15  If  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into 
42.  i3  when  ye  shall  enter  into  Egypt,  .ye  shall 
Eze.  42.  12  toward  the  east,  as  one  entereth  into 

42. 14  When  the  priests  enter  therein,  then  shall 
Obad.     11  foreigners  entered  into  his  gates,  and 
2.7b  go  up  on,  iirt&aiva  ep)ibain6. 

Acts  27.    2  entering  into  a  ship  of  Adramyttium 
3.7b  2MSS  over  into,   eto-iropevofj-ai  eisporeuomai. 

Acts   8.   3  made  havoc  of  the  church,  entering  into 
ENTER  into,  as  men  — 
Going  in,  entrance,  Kino  mabo. 

Eze.  26. 10  as  men  enter  into  a  city  wherein  is  made 
ENTERING  — 
1.  Going  in,  entrance,  nuo  mabo. 

2  Ch  23. 15  when  she  was  come  to  the  entering  of 
2.0pening,  nns pethach. 

Josh.  8.  29  cast  it  at  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the 

20.   4  shall  stand  at  the  entering  of  the  gate 
Judg.  9.  35  Gaal.  .stood  at  the  entering  of  the  gate 
9.  40  chased  him . .  unto  the  entering  of  the 
9.  44  stood  in  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the 
18. 16  of  the  children  of  Dan,  stood  by  the  ent. 
18.  t7  the  priest  stood  at  the  entering  of  the 
2  Sa.  11.  23  we  were  upon  them  even  unto  the  enter. 
1  Ki.  6.  31  for  the  entering  of  the  oracle  he  made 
Jer.    1. 15  the  entering  of  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 


ENTERING  in  — 

l.To  go  or  come  in,  i*i3  bo. 

Judg.  3.    3  from.  .Baal-hermon  unto  the  entering  in 

1  Ki.  <_8.  65  from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the 

2  Ki.  23.  11  at  the  entering  in  of  the  house  of  the  L. 

1  Ch.  5.   9  he  inhabited  unto  the  entering  in  of  the 

2  Ch.  7.   8  from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the 

26.   8  his  name  spread,  .to  the  entering  in  of 
33.  14  even  to  the  entering  in  at  the  fish  gate 
Isa.   23.    1  so  that  there  is  no  house,  no  entering  in 
Jer.    17.  27  even  entering  iu  at  the  gates  of  Jerusa. 
Amos  6.  14  they  shall  attlict  you  from  the  entering  in 

2.  Entrance,  Ktap  mabo. 

2  Ch.23. 13  stood  at  his  pillar  at  the  entering  in 
Eze.  44.    s  mark  well  the  entering  in  of  the  house 

3.  Opening,  nos  pethach. 

Exod35.  15  door  at  the  entering  in  of  the  tabernacle 
2  Sa.  10.    8  in  array  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate 

1  Ki.  19.  13  and  stood  in  the  entering  iu  of  the  cave 

2  Ki.   7.    3  were  four  leprous  men  at  the  entering  in 

10.    8  Lay  ye . .  in  two  heaps  at  the  entering  in 
23.    8  the  gates  that  (were)  in  the  entering  in 
2  Ch.18.   9  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  Samaria 
i.Way  in,  etaoSos  eisodos. 

1  Th.   1.   9  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto 
ENTERING  into  — 

To  go  or  come  in,  n"i2  bo. 

Josh.  13.    5  mount  Hernionunto  the  entering  into 
ENTERPRISE  — 
Substance,  wisdom,  .tehfi  tushiyyah. 

Job     5. 12  their  hands  cannot  perform  (their)  enter. 
ENTERTAIN,  to  — 
To  receive  strangers,  ^evlfa  xenizo. 

Heb.  13.   2  thereby  some  have  entertained  angels 
ENTICE,  to  — 
1.7b  move,  persuade,  rrtD  suth,  5." 

Deut  13.   6  If  thy  brother,  .entice  thee  secretly,  say. 
2.  To  entice,  persuade,  nrjs  pathah,  3. 

Exod22. 16  if  a  man  entice  a  maid  that  is  not  betro. 

Judg  14  15  Entice  thy  husband,  that  he  may  declare 
16.    5  Entice  him,  and  see  wherein  his  great 

2  Ch.18.  19  Who  shall  entice  Aliab  king  of  Israel 

18.  20a  spirit. .stood.. and  said,  I  will  entice 
18. 21  Thou  shalt  entice  (him),  and  thou  shalt 
Prov.  1.  10  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent 
16.  29  A  violent  man  enticeth  his  neighbour 

3.7b  bait  or  entice,  Be\€<L£co  deleazo. 

Jas.     1.  14  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust,  and  entic. 
ENTICED,  to  be  — 
1.7b  be  enticed,  persuaded,  rtins  pathah. 

Job  31.  27  And  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  enticed 
2.7b  be  enticed,  nns  pathah,  4. 

Jer.  20. 10  he  will  be  enticed,  and  we  shall  prevail 
ENTICING  — 
Persuasive,  iretdos  peithos. 

1  Co.  2.  4  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom 
ENTICING  words  — 
Persuasive  speech,  iriQavoKoyla  pithanologia. 

Col.    2.   4  man  should  beguile  you  with  enticing  wor. 
ENTIRE  — 
Whole  in  every  part,  bxAtcXvpos  holokleros. 

Jas.    1.   4  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  want. 
ENTRANCE  — 
1. Entrance,  strength,  firi'K  ithon. 

Eze.  40. 15  from  the  face  of  the  gate  of  the  entrance 
2. 7b  go  in,  KT"3  bo. 

Nuni34.  8  point  out.  .unto  the  entrance  of  Hamath 

1  Ki.18.  46  ran  before  Aliab  to  the  entrance  of  Jezr. 

3. Entrance,  nuo  mabo. 

1  Ch.  4.  '39  they  went  to  the  entrance  of  Gedor,  (even) 
i.Opening,  Fins  pethach. 

1  Ki.22. 10  in  a  void  place  in  the  entrance  of  the  gate 

2  Ch.12.  10  the  guard,  that  kept  the  entrance  of  the 
Mic.    5.   6  the  land  of  Ninirod  in  the  entrances 

^.Opening,  itnB pethach. 

Psa.  119. 130  The  entrance  of  thy  words  giveth  light 
Q.Way  in,  efooSos  eisodos. 

2  Pe.  1. 11  For  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered 
ENTRANCE  in — 
Way  in,  etcoBos  eisodos. 

1  Tli.  2.    1  For  yourselves .  .know  our  entrance  in 
ENTRANCE  into  — 
Going  in,  entrance,  K'129  mabo. 

Judg.  1. 24  Show  us,  we  pray  thee,  the  entrance  into 
1.  25  when  he  showed  them  the  entrance  into 
ENTREAT,  to  — 
1. 7b  meet,  come  upon,  v^paga. 

Gen.  23.    8  entreat  forme  to  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar 
2. 7b  ask,  desire,  epwrdw  erotao. 

Phil.  4.    3  And  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow 

3.  To  ash  (a  thing)  aivay,  irapatreo/xat  paraiteomai. 

Heb.  12. 19  they  that  heard  entreated  that  the  word 

4.  To  call  alongside  of  one,  irapaicaA€a>  paralcaleo. 

Luke  15.  28  therefore  came  his  father  out,  and  entre. 


1  Co.  4.  13  Being  defamed,  we  entreat :  we  are  made 

1  Ti.    5.    1  Rebuke  not  an  elder,  but  entreat  (him) 
5.7b  use,  xpaofiat  chraomai. 

Acts  27.    3  And  Julius  courteously  entreated  Paul 
ENTREAT,  to  cause  to  — 
7b  cause  to  meet,  j?:b  paga,  5. 

Jer.  15.  11  I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  entreat  thee 
ENTREATED,  easy  to  be  — 
Easily  persuaded,  evtreid^s  eupeithes. 

Jas.    3. 17  then  peaceable,  gentle,  (and)  easy  to  be  e. 

ENTREATY  — 

A  calling  alongside  for  help,  -rrapaKKvats  parable. 

2  Co.  8.    4  Praying  us  with  much  entreaty  that  we 

ENTRY  — 

1.  Going  in,  entrance,  nx?  biah. 

Eze.    8.   s  behold . .  this  image  of  jealously  in  the  en. 
2.7b  cause  to  go  in,  let  in,  ttia  bo,  5. 

Eze.  42.   9  from  under  these  chambers  (was)  the  en. 
Z. Going  in,  entrance,  Kiao  mabo. 

2  Ki.  16.18  the  king's  entry  without,  turned  he  from 

1  Ch.  9. 19  their  fathers .  .(were)  keepers  of  the  entry 
Jer.  38.  14  the  third  entry  that  (is)  in  the  house  of 
Eze.  27.    3  0  thou  that  art  situate  at  the  entry  of  the 

46.  19  After  he  brought  me  through  the  entry 
4:.Mouth,  ns  peh. 

Prov.  8.   3  She  crieth  at  the  gates,  at  the  entry  of 
^.Opening,  nns pethach. 

2  Ch.  4.  22  the  entry  of  the  house,  the  inner  doors 
Jer.  19.   2  which  (is)  by  the  entry  of  the  east  gate 

26. 10  sat  down  in  the  entry  of  the  new  gate  of 

36.  10  at  the  entry  of  the  new  gate  of  the  Lord's 
43.   9  which  (is)  at  the'entry  of  Pharaoh's  house 

Eze.  40. 11  he  measured  the  breadth  of  the  entry,  of 
40.  38  the  entries  thereof  (were)  by  the  posts 
40.  40  as  one  goeth  up  to  the  entry  of  the  north 

ENVIED  — 

Zeal,  envy,  nxjp  qinah. 

■    Eccl.  4.    4  that  for  this  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neigh. 
ENVIOUS,  to  be  — 
7b  be  zealous,  jealous,  envious,  Nif?  qana,  3. 

Psa.  37.    1  neither  be  thou  envious  against  the  wor. 
73.   3  For  I  was  envious  at  the  foolish,  (when)  I 
Prov  24.    1  Be  not  thou  envious  against  evil  men 
24.  19  neither  be  thou  envious  at  the  wicked 

ENVIRON,  to  — 

To  be,  go,  turn  round  about,  32p  sabab,  2. 
Josh.  7.    9  shall  hear  (of  it),  and  shall  environ  us 

ENVY  — 

l.Zeal,  jealousy,  envy,  nttty  qinah. 

Job     5.   2  wrath  killeth  the  foolish  man,  and  envy 
Prov  14.  30  but  envy  the  rottenness  of  the  bones 

27.    4  but  who  (is)  able  to  stand  before  envy  ? 
Eccl.  9.    6  their  hatred,  and  their  envy,  is  now  peris. 
Isa.  11.  13  The  envy  also  of  Ephraim  shall  depart 

?6.  11  shall  see,  and  be  ashamed  for  (their)  en. 
Eze.  35. 11  according  to  thine  envy,  which  thou  hast 

l.Zeal,  envy,  jealousy,  £?{\os  zelos. 

Acts  13.  45  they  were  filled  with  envy,  and  spake 

Z.Envy,  jealousy,  <pQovos  phthonos. 

Matt27-  18  he  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered 
Mark  1 5.  10  the  chief  priests  had  delivered  him  fore. 
Rom.  r.  29  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit 
Phil.  1.  15  Some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy 
1  Ti.  6.   4  whereof  coinethenvy,  strife,  railings,  evil 
Titus  3.   3  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful 
Jas.     4.    5  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  envy? 
1  Pe.  2.    1  Wherefore,  laying  aside  all . .  envies,  and 

ENVY,  to  — 

1.7b  be  zealous,  jealous,  envious,  njj?  Jcana,  3. 

Gen.  26.  14  servants  :  and  the  Philistines  envied  him 
30.    1  she  bare  Jacob  no  children,  Rachel  envied 

37.  11  his  brethren  envied  him;  but  his  father 
Numn.  29  Moses  said.  .Enviest  thou  for  my  sake? 
Psa.  106. 16  They  envied  Moses  also  in  the  camp,  (and) 
Prov.  3.  31  Envy  thou  not  the  oppressor,  and  choose 

23.  17  Let  not  thine  heart  envy  sinners :  -but 
Isa.   n.  13  Ephraim  shall  not  envyJudah,  and  Judah 
Eze.  31.    9  the  trees,  .in  the  garden  of  God,  envied 

2. 7b  be  zealous,  (n\6w  zeloo. 

1  Co.  13.  4  charity  envieth  not;  charity  vaunteth  not 
3.7b  be  envious,  <pdov4<a  phthoned. 

Gal.    5.  26  provoking  one  another,  envying  one  ano. 

ENVY,  to  be  moved  with  — 
7b  be  zealous,  (tj\6<o  zeloo. 

Acts    7.    9  the  patriarchs,  moved  with  envy,  sold  J. 
1 7.    5  [moved  with  envy,]  took  unto  them  certain 

ENVYING  — 

l.Zeal,  envy,  jealousy,  f^Aos  zelos. 

Rom.  13.  13  Let  us  walk,  .not  in  strife  and  envying 

1  Co.  3.    3  for  whereas  (there  is)  among  yon  envying 

2  Co.  12.  20  lest  (there  be)  debates,  envyings,  wraths 
Jas.    3. 14  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  strife  in 

3. 16  where  envying  and  strife  (is,)  there  (is)  c. 

2. Envy,  jealousy,  <pQ6vos  pht/ionos. 

Gal.    5.  21  Envyings,  murders,  drunkenness,  revel. 


EPAPHRAS 


304 


EPHRAIM 


EP-A'-PHRAS,  'E7ra<J>p«s. 

A  fellow-labourer  of  the  apostle  Paul. 

Col.     i.    7  As  ye  also  learned  of  E.  our  dear  fellow. 
4.  12  E.,  who  is  (one)  of  you,  a  servant  of  Christ 

Phm.      23  There  salute  thee  E.,  my  fellow  prisoner 
EP-A-PHRO-DI'-TUS,  'ETrafppfJSn-oy. 
A  messenger  between  Paul  and  the  churches. 

Phil.    2.  25  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send  to  you  E. 

4.  18  having  received  of  E.  the  things,  .from 

EP-E-NE'-TTJS,  'EiraivtTos. 
A  native  of  Asia  or  Achaia. 

Rom.  16.   5  Salute  my  well  beloved  E.,  who  is  the  first 

E'-PHAH,  nD'J?  obscurity. 

1.  A  concubine  of  Caleb  in  the  line  of  Judah.  B.C. 
1 500.  TT  , 

1  Ch.  2.  46  E.,  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Haran,  and 
•2,  A  sou  of  Jahdai,  also  in  the  line  of  Judah.    B.C. 

1  Ch.  2.  47  And  the  sons  of  Jahdai ;  Regem.  .and  E. 
3.  A  son  of  Midian  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah.  The 
name  is  also  used  of  his  posterity  and  their  land.  B.C. 
i3do. 

Gen.  25.  4  And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;  E.,  and  Epher 
1  Ch.  1.  33  And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;  E.,  and  Epher 
Isa.   60.   6  the  dromedaries  of  Midian  and  E. 

EPHAH  — 

Ephah,  a  measure,  three  seah,  ns'x  ephah. 

Exodi6.  36  an  omer  (is)  the  tenth  (pact)  of  an  ephah 
Lev.    5.  11  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour 
6.  20  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour 
19.  36  Just  balances,  just  weights,  a  just  ephah 
Num.  5.  15  the  tenth  (part)  of  an  ephah  of  barley 

28.    5  Aud  a  tenth  (part)  of  an  ephah  of  flour 
Judg.  6.  19  unleavened  cakes  of  an  ephah  of  flour 
Ruth  2.  17  and  It  was  about  an  ephah  of  barley 
1  Sa.    1.  24  one  ephah  of  flour,  and  a  bottle  of  wine 
17. 17  Take  now  for  thy  brethren  an  ephah  of 
Isa.     5.  10  the  3eed  of  an  homer  shall  yield  an  ephah 
Eze.  45.  10  just  balances,  and  a  just  ephah,  and  a 
45.  11  The  ephah  and  the  batli  shall  be  of  one 
45.  11  and  the  ephah  the  tenth  part  of  an  homer 
45-  i3i  13  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer 
45.  24  shall  prepare  a  meat  offering  of  an  ephah 

45.  24  an  ephah  for  a  ram.  .of  oil  for  an  ephah 

46.  5  an  ephah  for  a  ram . .  oil  to  an  ephah 
46.    7  an  ephah  for.  .an  ephah  for.  .an  ephah 
46.  11  an  ephah  to.  .an  ephah  to.  .to  an  ephah 
46.  14  an  ephah,  and  the  third  part  of  an  bin 

Amos  8.    5  making  the  ephah  small,  and  the  shekel 
Zech.  5.    6  said,  This  (is)  an  ephah  that  goeth  forth 

5.  7  woman  that  sitteth  in  the  midst  of  the  e. 
5.  8  And  he  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah 
5.  9  they  lifted  up  the  ephah  between  the  ea. 
5. 10  said  I . .  Whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah  ? 

E'-PHAI,  *5'j;  obscuring. 

One  whose  sons  were  among  "the  captains  of  the  forces" 
left  in  Judah  after  the  carrying  away  to  Babylon. 
They  submitted  themselves  to  Gt-daliah  the  governor, 
and  seem  to  have  been  murdered  with  him  by  Ishmael 
(Jer.  41.  3,  compare  40.  13).     B.C.  620. 

Jer.  40.    8  the  sons  of  E.  the  Netophathite,  and  Jez. 

E'  -PHER,  ~isy  young  deer  or  calf. 

1.  Second  son  of  Midian  son  of  Abraham.     B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.  4  And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;  Ephah,  and  E. 
1  Ch.  1.  33  And  the  sons  of  Midian ;  Ephah,  and  E. 

2.  One  of  the  descendants  of  Judah,  and  possibly  of  the 
family  of  Caleb  son  of  Jephunneh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  17  the  sons  of  Ezra  (were)  Jether.  .and  E. 

3.  A  chief  of  Manasseh  E.  of  the  Jordan.     B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  5.  24  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers,  even  E. 

E-PHES  DAM'-MTN,  D'tn  DSN  extension  of  brooks. 
A  place  between  Shochoh  'and  Azekah,   now  called 
Damim. 

1  Sa.  17.    1  pitched  betw.  Shochoh  and  Azekah,  in  E. 

E-PHE-SI-AN,  'E(peVi09  belonging  to  Ephesus. 
Acts  19.  28  cried .  .saying,  Great  (is)  Diana  of  the  E.s 

19.  34  cried  out,  Great  (is^  Diana  of  the  E.s 

19.  35  the  city  of  the  E.s  is  a  worshipper  of.  .D. 

21.29  For  they  na J  9een  before  with  him . .  an  E. 
E-PHE'-STTS,  *E<p€<ros. 

A  famous  city  in  Ionia  nearly  opposite  the  island  of 
Sainos,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  W.  coast  of  Asia 
Minor.  The  "Asia "of  the  New  Testament  was  the 
western  province  of  the  peninsula,  with  Ephesus  as  its 
lapital. 

Acts  18.  19  And  he  came  to  E.,  and  left  them  there 

18.  21  if  God  will.     And  he  sailed  from  E. 

18.  24  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos . .  came  to  E, 

19.  1  through  the  upper  coasts  came  to  E. 
19.  17  kuown  to.  .the  Jews  and  Greeks,  .at  E. 
19.  26  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  E. 

19.  35  men  of  E.,  what  man  is  there  that  know. 

20.  16  For  Paul  had  determined  to  sail  by  E. 
20. 17  from  Miletus  he  sent  to  E.,  and  called 

1  C0.15.  32  If.  .1  have  fought  with  beasts  at  E. 

16.   8  But  I  will  tarry  at  E.  until  Pentecost 
Eph.    1.    t  Paul .  .to  the  saints  which  are  'at  E.] 

1  Tl.    1.   3  As  I  besought  thee  to  abide  s(  ill  at  E. 

2  Ti.    1.  iS  manythings  he  ministered  unto  me  at  E. 

4.  12  And  Tychicus  have  I  sent  to  E. 
Rev.   1.  11  send(it)untotheseven  churches. .unto  E. 
2.    1  Into  the  augel  of  the  church  [of  E.]  write 


EPH'-LAL,  ^zx  judging. 

Descendant  of  Pharez  through  Jerahmeel 

1  Ch.  2.  37  And  Zabad  begat  E.,  and  E.  begat  Obed 

E'-PHOD,  is  N  oracular. 

Father  of  Hanniel,  prince  of  Manasseh,  one  of  Joshua's 

assistants  in  dividing  the  land. 

Nuni34.  23  tribe.,  of  Manasseh,  Hanniel  the  son  of  E. 

EPHOD  — 

LJSpHod,  a  priest?!/  garment,  "I3K,  lisai  ephod,. 
Exod?5.    7  stones,  and  stones  to  be  put  in  the  ephod 
28.   4  a  breastplate,  and  an  ephod,  and  a  robe 
28.    6  they  shall  make  the  ephod  (of)  gold,  (of) 
28.  12  stones  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  ephod 
28. 15  after  the  work  of  the  ephod  thou  shalt 
28.  25  on  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the  ephod 
28.  26  in  the  side  of  the  ephod  inward 
28.  27  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ephod  underneath 
28.  27,  28  above  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 
e8.  28  bind,  .unto  the  rings  of  the  ephod 
28.  28  the  breastplate  be  not  loosed  from  the  e. 

28.  31  thou  shalt  make  the  robe  of  the  ephod 

29.  5  take... the  robe  of  the  ephod,  and  the  ep. 

29.  5  gird,  .with  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 
35.  9,  27  stones  to  be  set,  for  the  ephod,  and  for 
39.  2  he  made  the  ephod  (of)  gold,  blue,  and 
39-  7  ^e  I111**  them  on  the  shoulders  of  the  ep. 
39.  8  cunning  work,  like  the  work  of  the  ephod 
39.  18  put.  .on  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the  ephod 
39.  ig  which  (was)  on  the  side  of  the  ephod  inw. 
39.  20  put  them  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ephod 
39.  20,  21  above  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 
39.  21  by  his  rings  unto  the  rings  of  the  ephod 
39.  21  might  not  be  loosed  from  the  ephod 

39.  22  he  made  the  robe  of  the  ephod  (of)  woven 
Lev.    8.    7  clothed  him.  .and  put  the  ephod  upon 

8.    7  with  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 
Judg.  8.  27  Gideon  made  an  ephod  thereof,  and  put 

17.  5  and  made  an  ephod,  and  teraphim,  aud 

18.  14  know  that  there  is  in  these  houses  an  ep. 
18.  17  took  the  graven  image,  and  the  ephod 
18.  18  fetched  the  carved  image,  the  ephod 

18.  20  priest'sheart  wasglad;  and  he  took  the  e. 

1  Sa,    2.  18  Samuel.,  a  child,  girded  with  a  linen  ephod 

2.  28  I  choose  him.  .to  wear  an  ephod  before 
14.    3  Lord's  priest  in  Shiloh,  wearing  an  ephod 

21.  9  wrapped  in  a  cloth  behind  the  ephod 

22.  18  slew . .  persons  that  did  wear  a  linen  ephod 
33.   6  he  came  down  (with)  an  ephod  in  his 

33.    9  said  to.  .the  priest,  Bring  hither  the  eph. 

30.  7  I  pray  thee,  bring  me  hither  the  ephod 
30.    7  And  Abiathar  brought  thither  the  ephod 

2  Sa.  6.  14  David  (was)  girded  with  a  linen  ephod 
1  Ch.15.  27  David  also  (had)  upon  him  an  ephod  of 
Hos.    3.    4  and  without  an  ephod,  and.  -teraphim 

2.1$phodt  garment,  nisx  aphuddah. 

Exod28.    8  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod,  which 
39.   5  the  curious  girdle  of  his  ephod,  that  (was) 

EPH-RA'-IM,  nn?^!,  'E(ppai(A,  doubly  fruitful. 

1.  Second  son  of  Joseph  by  Asenath.     B.C.     1711. 

Gen.  41.  52  the  name  of  the  second  called  he  E.:  For 
46.  20  in  the  land . .  were  bom  Manasseh  andE. 
48.    1  with  him  his  two  sons,  Manasseh  and  E. 
48.    5  thy  two  sons,  E.  and  Manasseh ..  (are) 
48.  13  Joseph  took  them  both,  E...  and  Manasseh 
48.  14  his  right  hand,  and  laid  (it)  upon  E.'s 
48.  17  laid  his  right  hand  upon  the  head  of  E. 
48.  17  to  remove  it  from  E.'s  head  unto  Maua. 
48.  20  God  make  thee  as  E.,  and  as  Manasseh 
48.  20  and  he  set  E.  before  Manasseh 
50.  23  Joseph  saw  E.'s  children  of  the  third 

Num  26.  28  sons  of  Joseph .  .(were)  Manasseh  and  E. 

1  Ch.  7.  20  the  sons  of  E. ;  Shuthelah,  and  Bered 

7.  22  And  E.  their  father  mourned  many  days 

2.  The  tribe  that  sprang  from  Ephraim  or  their  territory. 

Num  1.  10  of  E.  ;  Elishama  the  son  of  Ammihud 

1.  32  of  the  children  of  E. ,  by  their  generations 

1.  33  the  tribe  of  E. .  .forty  thousand  and  five 

3.  iS  (shall  be)  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  E. 

2.  18  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  E. .  .Elishama 
2.  24  that  were  numbered  of  the  camp  of  E. 
7.  48  Elishama.  .prince  of  the  children  of  E. 

10.  22  the  standard  .  .of  the  children  of  E.  set 
13.    8  Of  the  tribe  of  E.,  Oshea  the  son  of  Nun 
26.  35  These  (are)  the  sons  of  E.  after  their  fa. 
26.  37  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  sons  of  E. 
34.  24  prince  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  E. 

Deut33.  17  and  they  (are)  the  ten  thousands  of  E. 
34.    2  And  all  Naphtali,  and  the  land  of  E. 

Josh  14.  4  the  children  of  Joseph . .  Manasseh  and  E. 
16.  4  the  children  of  Joseph,  Manasseh  and  E. 
16. :  5  theborderofthechildrenofE. ..was(thus) 
16.    8  the  inheritance,  .of  the  children  of  E. 

16.  9  the  separate  cities  for  the  children  of  E. 

17.  8  Tappuah.  .(belonged)  to  the  children  of  E. 
17.    g  these  cities  of  E.  (are)  among  the  cities 
17. 10  Southward  (it  was)  E.'s,  aud  northward 
17.  17  Joshua  spake,  .(even)  to  E.  and  to  Mana. 
21.    5  by  lot  out  of  the  families  of  the  tribe  of  E. 
21.  20  the  cities  of  their  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of  E. 

Judg.  1.  29  Neither  did  E.  drive  out  the  Canaanites 
5.  14  Out  of  E.  (was  there)  a  root  of  them  aga. 

7.  34  all  the  men  of  E.  gathered  themselves 

8.  1  And  the  men  of  E.  said  unto  him,  Why 
8.    2  (Is)  not  the  gleaning  of  the  grapes  of  E. 

10.    9  to  fight  also  .  .against  the  house  of  E. 
12.    1  the  men  of  E.  gathered  themselves  toget. 


Judg  12.    4  gathered .  .men  of  Gil.  and  fought  with  E 
12.    4  and  the  men  of  Gilead  smote  E.,  because 
12.    4  said,  Ye  Gileadites  (are)  fugitives  of  E. 
12.  isAbdon.  .was  buried,  .in  the  land  of  E. 

2  Sa.    2.    9  made  him  king  over  Gilead.  .and  over  E. 

1  Ch.  6.  66  had  cities,  .out  of  the  tribe  of  E. 

9.    3  and  of  the  children  of  E.,  and  Manasseh 
12.  30  the  children  of  E.  twenty  thousand  and 
27.  10  Helez  the  Pelonite,  of  the  children  of  E. 
27. 14  Benaiah  the  Pirathonite,  of  the  chil.  of  E 

27.  20  Of  the  children  of  E.,  Hoshea  the  son  of. 

2  Ch.15.    9  aiul  the  strangers  with  them  out  of  E. 

17.    2  set  garrisons,  .in  the  cities  of  E.,  which 
25.    7  LoRD(is)not.  .(with) all  the  children  of  E. 
25.  10  the  army  that  was  come  to  him  out  of  E. 

28.  7  Zichri,amighty  man  of  E.,  slew  Maaseiah 
28.  12  certain  of  the  heads  of  the  children  of  E. 
30.    1  Hezekiah. .  wrote  letters  also  to  E.  and 
30.  10  posts  passed,  .through  the  country  of  E. 

30.  iS  mauyof  E. .  .had not  cleansed  themselves 

31.  1  threw  down  the  high  places,  .altars.  .inE. 
34.    6  (did),  .in  the  cities  of  Manasseh  and  E. 
34.    9  Levites  had  gathered  of  the  hand  of .  .E. 

Psa.  60.    7  E.  also  (is)  the  strength  of  mine  head 

78.    9  The  children  of  E. . .  armed . .  turned  back 
78.  67  and  chose  not  the  tribe  of  E. 
80.    2  Before  E.  and  Benjamin,  .stir  up  thy  str. 
108.    8  E.  also  (is)  the  strength  of  mine  head 
Isa.     7.    2  saying,  Syria  is  confederate  with  E. 

7.   5  Syria,  E. .  .have  taken  evil  counsel  against 
7.    8  within  threescore  and  five  years  shall  E. 
7.    9  And  the  head  of  E.  (is)  Samaria 
7.  17  from  the  day  that  E.  departed  from  Jud. 
9.    9  And  all  the  people  shall  know.  .E.,  and 

9.  21  Manasseh,  E.;  and  E.,  Manasseh.  .they 
11.  13  The  envy,  .of  E  shall  depart.  .E.  shall 
11.  13  and  Judah  shall  not  vex  E. 

17.    3  The  fortress  also  shall  cease  from  E. 

28.    1  Woe  to  the  crown .  .to  the  drunkards  of  E. 

28.    3  the  drunkards  of  E.,  shall  be  trodden 
Jer.     7.  15  as  I  have  cast  out.  .the  whole  seed  of  E. 

31.    9  I  am  a  father  to  Israel,  and  E.  (is)  my 

31.  18  I  have  surely  heard  E.  bemoaning  hims. 

31.  2o(Is)E.  my  dear  son?  (is  he)  a  pleasant  ch.? 
Eze.  37.  16  write  upon  it.  For  Joseph,  the  stick  of  E. 

37.  19  which  (is)  in  the  hand  of  E.,  and  the  tribes 

48.    5  unto  the  west  side,  a  ^portion  for)  E. 

48.    6  by  the  border  of  E. . .  a  (portion  for)  Reu. 
Hos.   4.  17  E.  (is)  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone 

5.  3  I  know  E.,  and  Israel  is  not  hid  from  me 
5.  3  O  E.,  thou  committest  whoredom,  (and} 
5.  5  therefore  shall  Israel  and  E.  fall  in  their 
5.  9  E.  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of  rebuke 
5.  11  E.  (is)  oppressed,  .broken  in  judgment 
5.  12  Therefore  (will)  I  (be)  unto  E.  as  a  moth 
5. 13  When  E.  saw  his  sickness,  and  Judah 
5.  13  then  went  E.  to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent 

5.  14  For  I  (will  be)  unto  E.  as  a  lion,  and  as 

6.  4  O  E.,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ? 

6. 10  there  (is)  the  whoredom  of  E.,  Israel  is 

7.  1  then  the  iniquity  of  E.  was  discovered 
7.    8  E.,  he  hath  mixed  himself .  .E.  is  a  cake 

7.  :i  E.  also  is  like  a  silly  dove  without  heart 

8.  9  alone  by  himself  :  E.  hath  hired  lovers 

8.  11  Because  E.  hath  made  many  altars  to  sin 

9.  3  but  E.  shall  return  to  Egypt,  and  they 
9.    S  The  watchman  of  E.  (was)  with  my  God 

9. 11  E.,  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  bird 
9.  13  E. .  .(is)  planted  in  a  pleasant  place 

9.  13  E  shall  bring  forth  Ms  children  to  the 
9. 16  E.  is  smitten,  their  root  is  dried  up 

10.  6  E.  shall  receive  shame.  .Israel  shall  be 

10. 11  And  E.  (is  as)  an  heifer  (that  is)  taught 

10.  11  I  will  make  E.  to  ride  ;  Judah  shall  plow 

11.  3  I  taught  E.  also  to  go,  taking  them  by 
11.    8  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  E.  ?.  .shall  I 

11.  9  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  E.  :  for  I  (am) 

11. 12  E.  compasseth  me  about  with  lies,  and 

12.  1  E.  feedeth  on  wind,  and  followeth  after 

t  2.    8  And  E.  said,  iVet  I  am  become  rich,  I  have 
12. 14  E.  provoked,  .to  anger  most  bitterly 

13.  1  When  E.  spake  trembling,  he  exalted  h. 

13.  12  The  iniquity  of  E.  (is)  bound  up  ;  his  sin 

14.  8  E.  (shall  say,)  "What  have  I  to  do  any  more 
Chad.      19  and  they  shall  possess  the  fields  of  E. 
Zech.  9.  10  And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  E. 

9. 13  When  I  have .  .filled  the  bow  with  E. 
10.    7  (they  of)  E.  shall  be  like  a  mighty  (man) 

The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of 
Ephraim  :— Abel-meholah,  Ajalon,  Arumah,  Ataroth 
Adar,  Baal-hazor,  Baal-shalisha,  Beth-horon  the  Upper, 
Ebal,  Gaash,  Gazer,  Gerizim,  Janoah,  Jeshanah,  Jok- 
meam  Kibzain,  Lebonah,  Michmethah,  Maarah, 
Raman,  Samaria,  Shalisha,  Shamir,  Shechem,  Taanath, 
Shiloh,  Tabbath,  Thebez,  Timnath-heres,  Tiphsah, 
Tlrzah,  Uzzen-sherah,  Zuph,  &c. 

3.  A  town  which  was  "by"  or  "beside"  Absalom's 
sheep -farm. 

2  Sa.  13.  23  sheep  shearers  in  Baal-hazor.  .beside  E. 
4  A  city  in  the  wilderness,  to  which  Christ  retired  with 
his  disciples  from  the  violence  of  the  priests.  By  the 
"  wilderness"  is  probably  meant  the  hill-country  N.E. 
of  Jerusalem,  lying  between  the  central  towns  aud 
the  Jordan  valley.  Hence  Ophrah  and  Ephraim  are  iden- 
tical, and  now  called  et  Tanjibch,  a  village  on  a  conical 
hill,  overlooking  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  and  the  Salt 
Sea.  It  stands  five  miles  E.  of  Bethel,  and  sixteen 
from  Jerusalem. 

Johnn.  54  but  went  thence.,  into  a  city  called  E.,  and 


EPHRAIM 


305 


ERROR 


EPH-BA'-IMi  Gate  of,  DyiEN  ~*$P  shaar  eph/rayim. 
A  gate  of  Jerusalem  at  the  north,  nearly  at  the  posi- 
tion of  the  modern  "  Damascus  Gate." 

2  Ki.14.  13  from  the  gate  of  E.  unto  the  corner  gate 
2  Ch.  25.  23  from  the  gate  of  E.  to  the  corner  gate 
Neh.   S.  16  and  in  the  street  of  the  gate  of  E. 

12.  39  from  above  the  gate  of  E.,  and  above  the 
EPH-RA'-Dff,  Wood  of,  D?"J?N  ny;  yaar  epkrayim. 
A  forest  in  which  a  battle  was  fought  between  the  armies 
of  David  and  Absalom,  on  the  E.  side  of  the  Jordan. 
Perhaps  it  was  so  named  from  the  tribe  of  Ephraim 
beingthe  chief  sufferers  in  thisbattle.  SeealsoJud.  12.4. 

2  Sa.  18.    6  and  the  battle  was  in  the  wood  of  E. 
EPHRAIMTTES,  DnBK,  *0"JDN. 
The  descendants  of  Ephraim,  son  of  Joseph. 

Josh.  16. 10  Canaanites  dwell  among  the  E.  unto  this 
Judgi2.   4  (are)  fugitives  of  Epliraim  among  the  E. 
12.    5  took  the  passages  of  Jordan  before  the  E. 
12.    5  when  those  E. .  .said,  Let  me  go  over 
12.    5  the  men  of  Gilead  said.  .(Art)  thou  an  E.? 
12.    6  there  fell,  .of  the  E.  forty  and  twothous. 

EPH-RA'-LN,  fllfl^,  mSP  hamlet. 

A  city  in  Benjamin  eight  miles  from  Jerusalem,  and 

near  Bethel  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah. 

2  Ch.13.  19  and  E.  with  the  towns  thereof 
EPH-RA'-TAH,  or  EPH'-RATH,  firnflN,  rn£N  fertility. 

1.  The  aucient  name  of  Bethleheni-Judah. 

Ruth  4.  11  do  thou  worthily  in  E.,  and  be  famous  in 
Psa.132.    6  Lo,  we  heard  of  it  at  E.;  we  found  it  in 
Mic.    5.    2  But  thou,  Beth-lehem  E.,  (though)  thou 

2.  Second  wife  of  Caleb  son  of  Hezron.  She  was  the 
mother  of  Hur,  and  grandmother  of  Caleb  son  of  Je- 
phunneh.    B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  2.  50  the  son  of  Hur,  the  first  born  of  E. 
4.   4  the  sous  of  Hur,  the  first  boru  of  E. 

EPH'-RATH,  n-j-JS'. 

1.  A  city  of  Judah ;  the  same  as  Ephratak. 

Gen.  35.  16  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  come  to  E. 
35.  19  R.  died,  and  was  buried  in  the  way  to  E. 
48.    7  (there  was),  .a  little  way  to  come  unto  E. 

48.  7  and  I  buried  her  there  in  the  way  of  E. 

2.  Caleb's  second  wife.    See  Ephratak  (No.  2.) 

1  Ch.  2. 19  Caleb  took  unto  hini  E.,  which  bare  him' 
EPH-RA-THXTE,  'rncx. 

1.  An  inhabitant  of  Bethlehem-Judah, 

Ruth  1.    2  his  two  sons  Mahlon  and  Chilion,  E.s  of 
1  Sa.  17.  12  David  (was)  the  son  of  that  E.  of  Beth. 

2.  A  certain  Epraimite,  twice  so  designated. 

1  Sa.    1.    1  the  son  of  Tohu,  the  son  of  Zuph,  an  E. 
1  Kli.  11.  26  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  an  E.  of  Ze. 
EPH'-RON,  piDj;  strong. 

1.  Son  of  Zohar  a  Hittite,  from  whom  Abraham  pur- 
chased a  field  (opposite  Mamre  or  Hebron),  containing 
a  cave,  and  buried  Sarah  therein.    B.C.  i860. 

Gen.  23.   8  hefu*  me,  and  entreat  for  rue  to  E.  the  son 
23. 10  E.  dwelt  among  the  children  of  Heth 
23. 10  E.  the  Hittite  answered  Abraham  in  the 
23. 13  he  spake  unto  E.  in  the  audience  of  the 
23.  14  E.  answered  Abraham,  saying  unto  him 
23.  16  And  Abraham  hearkened  unto  E. 
23.  16  Abraham  weighed  to  E.  the  silver 
23.  17  the  field  of  E.,  which  (was)  in  Machpelah 
25.    9  in  the  field  of  E.  the  son  of  Zohar  the  H. 

49.  29  in  the  cave  that  (is)  in  the  field  of  E.  the 

49.  30  Abraham  bought  with  the  field  of  E. 

50.  13  which  Abraham  bought,  .of  E.  the  Hit. 

2.  A  mountain  between  Judah  and  Benjamin,  between 
the  water  of  Nephtoah  and  Kirjath-jearim. 

Josh.15.    9  and  went  out  to  the  cities  of  mount  E. 
EPH-PHA'-THA — 
Be  opened,  s<p<pa6a  from  Cliald.  nre  to  open. 

Mark  7.  34  and  saith.  .Ephphatha,  that  is,  Be  opened 

E-PI-CU-RE'-AN,  'E-rrtfcovpeios. 

A  sect  of  philosophers  that  derived  its  name  from 
Epicurus  (B.C.  342-271),  a  philosopher  of  Attic  descent, 
whose  garden  at  Athens  rivalled  the  "  Porch  "  and  the 
"Academy."  His  aim  was  to  discover  a  practical 
guide  to  happiness ;  his  search  was  for  pleasure,  not 
absolute  truth  ;  and  he  relied  on  experience  as  the  test, 
not  on  reason. 

Acts  17  18  Then  certain  philosophers  of  the  E. 
EPISTLE  — 
Epistle,  letter,  i-KKTroKi)  epistole. 

Acts  15.  30  multitude  together,  they  delivered  the  e. 
23.  33  and  delivered  the  epistle  to  the  governor 

Rom  16.  22  I  Tertius,  who  wrote  (this)  epistle,  salute 

1  Co.  5.   9  I  wrote  unto  you  in  an  epistle  not  to 

2  Co.  3.    1  need  we.  .epistles  of  commendation  to 

3.   a  Ye  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts 
3.    3  manifestly  declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  C. 
7.    8  I  perceive  that  the  same  epistle  hath 
Col.    4. 16  And  when  this  epistle  is  read  among  you 

1  Tli.  5.  27  I  charge  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  epistle 

2  Th.  2.  15  been  taught,  whether  by  word,  or  our  ep. 

3.  14  if  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  ep. 
3.  17  which  is  the  token  in  every  epistle 
2  Pe.  3.    1  This  second  epistle,  heloved,  I  now  write 
3. 16  As  also  in  all  (his)  epistles,  speaking  in 
EOT  AX  — 
1.  Valuation,  arrangement,  ipy  ereh. 

Psa.  55. 13  But  (it  was)  thou,  a  man  mine  equal,  my 

39 


'2.  One  of  the  same  age,  <rvvw\iKi.a>Tr)S  snnelikiotes. 
Gal.     1.  14  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own 

3. Equal  to,  the  same  as,  Taos,  i<xos  isos. 

Matt  20. 12  and  thou  hast  made  them  equal  unto  us 
John  5.  18  God  washis  Father,  making  himself  equal 
Phil.  2.    6  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
Rev.  21.  16  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal 

EQUAL,  to  — 

l.To  be  set  in  array,  arrange,  '■ny  arak. 

Job   28.  17  The  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot  equal  it 
28.  19  The  topas  of  Ethiopia  shall  not  equal  it 

2.  To  m<ike  equal,  nif  shavah,  5. 

Lam.  2.  13  what  shall  I  equal  to  thee  that  I  may 

EQUAL,  to  make  — 

To  make  equal,  ny£;  shavah,  5. 

Isa.   46.    5  will  ye  liken  me,  and  make  (me)  equal 
EQUAL,  to  he  — 
To  be  weighed,  pondered,  fpJ?  takan,  2. 

Eze.  18.  25  ye  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 
18.  25  0  house  of  Israel ;  Is  not  my  way  equal  ? 
18.  29  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 
18.  29  0  house  of  Israel,  are  not  my  ways  equal  ? 
33.  17  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 
33.  17  but,  as  for  them,  their  way  is  not  equal 
33.  20  ye  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 
EQUAL,  to  be  not  — 
To  be  thin,  lean,  poor,  weak,  ?Tj  dalal. 

Prov  26.    7  The  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal ;  so 
EQUAL,  that  are  — 
Uprightness,  upright  things,  Dvw,p  meslutrim. 

Psa.  17.    2  thine  eyes  behold  the  things  that  are  eq. 
EQUAL,  that  which  is  — 
The  equcdity,  tj  1<t6tt)$  he  isotes. 

Col.     4.    1  give  unto . .  servants  that  which  is . .  equal 

EQUALITY  — 
Equality,  1(t6t7)s  isotes. 

2  Co.   8. 14  an  equality ..  that  there  may  be  equality 

EQUITY  — 

1. Right,  iqrrightness,  "iy>;  yaskar. 

Mic.    3.   9  abhor  judgment,  and  pervert  all  equity 

2.  Uprightness,  1^'  yosher. 

Prov  17.  26  not  good,  .to  sferike  princes  for  equity 

3.  What  is  right,  equity,  benefit,  \n&$  kishron. 

Eccl.  2.  21  in  wisdom,  and  in  knowledge,  and  in  eq. 

4.  Ujyrightness,  "iib^D  mishor, 

Isa.    11.    4  reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the 
Mai.    2.    6  he  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  equity 

5.  Uprightness,  upright  things,  D'l^'p  mesharim. 
Psa.  98.    9  judge  the  world,  and  the  people  with  eq. 

99.    4  thou  dost  establish  equity,  thou  executest 
Prov.  1.    3  To  receive  the  instruction  of.  .equity 
2.   9  Then  shalt  thou  understand,  .equity 

6.  Straightforwardness,  ry\3i  nakoach. 

Isa.   59. 14  truth  is  fallen  in  the  street,  and  equity 

ER,-iy  *Hp  watcher. 

1.  Eldest  son  of  Judah  by  the  daughter  of  Shua  the 
Canaanite.    B.C.  1720. 

Gen.  38.   3  bare  a  son  ;  and  he  called  his  name  E. 
38.    6  Judah  took  a  wife  for  E.  his  first  born 
38.    7  E. . .  was  wicked  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
46.  12  the  sons  of  Judah;  E.,  and  Onan,  and 
46.  12  E.  and  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

Nuni26.  19  sons  of  Judah.  .E.  and  Onan  :  and  Er 

1  Ch.  2.   3  sons  of  Judah  ;  E.,  and  Onan,  and  Shelah 

2.    3  E. .  .was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  LORD 

2.  A   son  of  Shelah,  youngest  son  of   Judah  by  the 
daughter  of  Shua  the  Canaanite.     B.C.  1660. 

iCh.  4.  21  sons  of  Shelah.. (were)  E. .. and Laadah 

3.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  28  Elmodam,  which  was  (the  son)  of  E. 

E'-RAN,  na  watcher. 

A  son  of  Ephraim*  s  eldest  son  Shuthelah.     B.C.  1452. 
Nuni26.  36  of  E.,  the  family  of  the  Eranites 

ERANTTES,  rrTH  belonging  to  Eran. 
Descendants  of  Eran,  grandson  of  Ephraim. 
NuiQ26.  36  of  Eran,  the  family  of  the  E. 

E-RAST'-US,  "Epao-ros. 

1.  A  Christian  sent  by  Paul  into  Macedonia. 

Acts  19.  22  So  he  sent.  .two.  .Timotheus  and  E.;  but 

2  Ti.  4.  20  E.  abode  at  Corinth :  but  Trophimus  have 
•2.  Chamberlain  of  Corinth/a  convert  of  Paul's  ;  perhaps 
the  same  as  No.  1. 

Rom  16.  23  E.  the  chamberlain  of  the  city  saluteth 

ERE  — 

1.  Before,  {not)  yet,  d*ib  terem. 

Num  11.  33  ere  it  was  chewed,  the  wrath  of  the  Lord 
Exod.  1.  19  are  delivered  ere  the  midwives  come  in 

2.Not,  t&  lo. 

Jer.  47.   6  how  long,  .ere  thou  be  quiet  ?  Put  up 
Hos.  8.    3  how  long,  .ere  they  attain  to  innocency? 

3.  Before,  ere,  irplv  prin. 

John  4.  49  The  nobleman  saith.  .Sir,  come  down  ere 


E'-RECH,  7|-in  length,  size. 

One  of  the  cities  of  Nimrod's  kingdom  in  the  laud  of 
Shinar.  It  is  the  same  as  Orchoe,  eighty-two  miles  S. 
and  forty-three  E.  of  Babylon,  and  is  now  U'arka,  Irka, 
and  Irak.  It  was  the  necropolis  of  the  Assyrian  kings, 
the  whole  neighbourhood  being  covered  with  mounds, 
and  strewed  with  bricks  and  coffins. 

Gen.  10.  10  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was..E. 
ERECT,  to  — 
To  set  up,  asj  natsab,  5. 

Gen.  33.  20  he  erected  there  an  altar,  and  called  it 

E'-RI,  *■"!$?  my  watcher. 
A  son  of  Gad.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  16  And  the  sons  of  Gad  ;  Ziphion,  and.  .E. 

Num26. 16  of  E.,  the  family  of  the  Erites 

E'-RITES,  mi  belonging  to  Er. 
The  descendents  of  Eri  son  of  Gad. 

Nuni26.  16  of  Eri,  the  family  of  the  E. 
ERR,  to  — 

1 .  To  err,  go  astray,  lyy  shagag. 

Lev.    5. 18  concerning  his  ignorance  wherein  he  erred 

2.  To  err,  go  astray,  nyy  shagah. 

NUKL15.  22  if  ye  have  erred,  and  not  observed  all 

1  Sa.  26.  21  I  have  played  the  fool,  and  have  erred  ex. 

Job     6.  24  me  to  understand  wherein  I  have  erred 
19.    4  And  be  it  indeed  (that)  I  have  erred 

Psa.  1 19.  21  which  do  err  from  thy  commandments 
119. 118  Thou  hast  trodden,  .all  them  that  err 

Trov  19.  27  hear  the  instruction  (that  causeth)  to  err 

Isa.   28.    7  But  they  also  have  erred  through  wine 
28.   7  the  priest  and  the  prophet  have  erred 
28.    7  they  errin  vision,  they  stumble  (in)judg. 

Eze.  45.  20  thou  shalt  do.  .for  every  one  that  erreth 

3.  To  err,  wander,  go  astray,  n^ri  taah. 

Psa.  95.  10  It  (is)  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  heart 

119.  no  yet  I  erred  not  from  thy  precepts 
Prov.  14.  22  Do  they  not  err  that  devise  evil?  but 
Isa.    29.  24  They  also  that  erred  in  spirit  shall  come 
35.    8  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall  not  err 

±.To  caiise  to  err,  wander,  go  astray,  nj;n  taah,  5. 
Prov  10.  17  but  he  that  refuseth  reproof  erreth 

5.  To  wander  off,  air oirXav do p.ai  apoplanaomai. 
1  Ti.  6.  10  while  some  coveted  after,  they  have  erred 

Q.To  miss  the  mark,  su'erve,  aarox^  astocheo. 

1  Ti.  6.  21  Which  some  professing  have  erred  concer. 

2  Ti.  2.  18  Who  concerning  the  truth  have  erred 
7 -To  wander,  TrXavdopiaL p)l&      ^mai. 

Matt22.  29  Ye  do  err,  notkno...       ""he  Scriptures 
Marki2.  24  Do  ye  not  therefore  err,  Decauseye  know 

12.  27  God  of  the  living :  ye  therefore  do.  .err 
Heb.  3.  10  They  do  alway  err  in  (their)  heart ;  and 
Jas.     1. 16  Do  not  err,  my  beloved  brethren 

5.  19  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  trutfi 

ERR,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  err,  wander,  go  astray,  n^n  taah,  5. 

Isa.     3. 12  they  which  lead  thee  cause  (thee)  to  err 

9. 16  leaders  of  the  people  cause  (them)  to  err 

19.  14  they  have  caused-  Egypt  to  err  in  every 

30.  28  in  the  jaws  of  the  people,  causing,  .to  err 

Jer    23. 13  prophesied,  .and  caused  my  people,  .to  err 

23.  32  and  cause  my  people  to  err  by  their  lies 
Hos.  4.  12  spirit  of  whoredoms  have  caused,  .to  err 
Amos  2.    4  their  lies  caused  them  to  err,  after  the 

ERR,  to  make  (to)  — 

To  cause  to  err,  wander,  go  astray,  hj;fi  taah,  5. 
2  Ch.33.    9  So  Manasseh  made  Judah.  .to  err 
Isa.  63. 17  0  Lord,  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err 
Mic.   3.    5  the  prophets  that  make  my  people  err 

ERRAND — 

Word,  matter,  "i:n  dabar. 

Gen.24.  33  I  will  not  eat,  until  I  have  told  mine  err. 
Juds.3.  ip  I  have  a  secret  errand  unto  thee,  O  king 
2  Ki.  9.    5  said,  I  have  an  errand  to  thee,  0  captain 

ERROR  — 

l.Error,  oversight,  wandering,  niwz?  meshugah. 
Job  19.    4  I  have  erred  ;  mine  error  femaineth  with 

2.Error,  wandering,  nixp  shegagah. 

Eccl.  5.   6  neither  say'thou..  that  it  (was)  an  error 
10.   5  as  an  error  (which)  proceedeth  from  the 

3. Error,  rashness,  *?ff  shal. 

2  Sa.   6.    7  and  God  smote  him  there  for  (his)  error 
4.Error,  rashness,  mistake,  1?^  shalu. 

Dan.    6.   4  neither  was  there  any  error  or  fault  found 

5.  Error,  injury,  njjin  toah. 

Isa.    32.   6  iniquity,  .to  utter  error  against  the  Lord 

6.  Ignorance,  h.yv6-np.a  agnoema. 

Heb.  9.    7  he  offered  for  himself,  and  (for)  the  errors 

7.  Wandering,  itXavq  plane. 

Matt  27.  64  so  the  last  error  shall  be  worse  than  the 
Rom.  1.  27  that  recompence  of  their  error  which  was 
Jas.  5.  20  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the  e. 
2  Pe.  2.  18  clean  escaped  from  those  who  live  in  e. 
3. 17  being  led  away  with  the  error  o_f  the  wi. 
1  Jo.  4.  6  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error 
Jude      11  and  ran  greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam 


ERRORS 


306 


ESHBAAL 


ERRORS  — 

1.  Errors,  mN^tf>  shegioth. 

Psa.  19.  i2  Who  can  understand  (his)  errors?  cleanse 

2d&rrvrsi&W$&  tatuim. 

Jer.  10.  15  They  (are)  vanity,  (and)  the  work  of  errors 

51. 18  They  (are)  vanity,  the  work  of  errors 

E-SA-I'-AS,    'Hcraiay,    'Haatas   the   Greek  form    of 
Isaiah. 
-Matt.  3.    3  And  this  is  he  that  was  spoken  of  by..E. 
4.  14  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  E.  the 
8.  17  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  E.  the 

12.  17  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  E.  the 

13.  14  in  them  is  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  E. 
15.    7  hypocrites,  well  did  E.  prophesy  of  you 

Hark  7.   6  Well  hath  E.  prophesied  of  you  hypocrit. 
Luke  3.    4  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  words  of  E. 
4.  17  was  delivered  unto  him  the  book  of .  .E. 
John  1.  23  Make  straight  the  way.  .as  said.  .E. 
12.  38  the  saying  of  E.  the  prophet  might  be 
12.  39  they  could  not  believe,  because  that  E. 
12.  41  These  things  said  E.,  when  he  saw  his 
Acts    8.  28  sitting  iu  his  chariot  read  E.  the  prophet 
8. 30  and  heard  him  read  the  prophet  E. 
2S.  25BWell  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by  E.  the 
Rom.  9.  27*E.  also  crieth  concerning  Israel,  Though 
9.  29  as  E.  said  before,  Except  the  lord  of  S. 
10.  16  E.  saith,  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our 
10.  20  E.  is  very  bold,  and  saith,  I  was  found  of 

15. 12  E.  saith,  There  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse 

E-SAR-HAD'-DON,  pnrripx  victorious,  conqueror. 

One  of  the  greatest  of  the  kings  of  Assyria.    He  was  son 

of  Sennacherib  and  grandson  of  Sargon,  who  succeeded 

Shalmaneser.     B.C.  698. 

2  Ki.  19.  37  And  E.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
Ezra    4.    2  do  sacrifice  unto  him  since  the  days  of  E. 
Isa.    37,  3S  and  E.  his  son  reigued  in  his  stead 

E'-SATT,  ip'y  'Haav  hirsute,  hairy. 

1.  Eldest  son  of  Isaac  and  twin  brother  of  Jacob  by 

Rebekah.    b,c.  1837. 

Gen.  25.  25  first  came,  .and  they  called  his  name  E. 
25.  26  aud  his  hand  took  hold  on  E.'s  heel 
25.  27  E.  was  a  cunning  hunter,  a  man  of  the 
25.  28  Isaac  loved  E.,  because  he  did  eat  of  (his) 
25.  29  E.  came  from  the  field,  and  he  (was)  faint 
25.  30  E.  said  to  Jacob,  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee 
25.  32  E.  said,  Behold,  I  (am)  at  the  point  to  die 
25.  34  Jacob  gave  E.  bread  and  pottage  of  lenti. 

25.  34  thus  E.  despised  (his)  birthright 

26.  34  E.  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took  to 

27.  1  when  Isaac  was  old.  .he  called  E.  his 
27.  5  Rebekah  heard  when  Isaac  spake  to  E. 
27.  5  E.  went  to  the  field  to  hunt  (for)  venison 
27.  6  I  heard  thy  father  speak  unto  E.  thy 

27. 11  Behold,  E.  my  brother  (is)  an  hairy  man 
27.  15  Re.  took  goodly  raiment  of  her.  .son  E. 
27.  19  Jacob  said  unto  his  father,  I  (am)  E. 
27.  21  whether  thou  (be)  my  very  son  E.  or  not 
27.  22  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands  (are)  the 
27.  23  his  hands  were  hairy,  as  his  brother  E.'s 
27.  24  he  said,  (Art)  thou  my  very  son  E.? 
27.  30  E.  his  brother  came  in  from  his  hunting 
27. 32  he  said,  I  (am)  thy  son,  thy  first  born  E. 
17.  34  when  E,  heard  the  words  of  his  father,  he 
27.  37  Isaac  answered  aud  said  unto  E.,  Behold 
27.  38  E.  said  unto  his  father,  Hast  thou  but  one 
27.  38  And  E.  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 
27.  41  E.  hated  Jacob  because  of  the  blessing  w. 
27.  41  E.  said  in  his  heart,  The  days  of  mourn. 
27.  42  these  words  of  E. .  .were  told  to  Rebekah 

27.  42  Behold,  thy  brother  E. .  .doth  comfort 

28.  5  the  brother  of  Rebekah,  Jacob's  and  E.'s 
28.  6  When  E.  saw  that  Isaac  had  blessed  Jac. 
28.  8  E.  seeing  that  the  daughters  of  Canaan 
28.  9  Then  went  E.  unto  Ishmael,  and  took 
32.  3  Jacob  seut  messengers  before  him  to  E. 
32.  4  Thus  shall  ye  speak  uuto  my  lord  E. 

32.    6  We  came  to  thy  brother  E.,  and  also  he 
32.    8  If  E.  come  to  the  one  company,  and 
32.  11  Deliver.  .1  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  E. 

32. 13  and  took,  .a  present  for  E.  his  brother 
32.  17  When  E.  my  brother  meeteth  thee,  and 

32.  18  it  (is)  a  present  sent  unto  my  lord  E. 

32. 19  On  this  manner  shall  ye  speak  unto  E. 

33.  1  E.  came,  aud  with  him  four  hundred 
33.    4  E.  ran  to  meet  him,  aud  embraced  him 
33.   9  And  E.  said,  I  have  enough,  my  brother 
33.  15  E.  said,  Let  me  now  leave  with  thee 

33.  16  So  E.  returned  that  day  on  his  way  unto 
35.    1  thou  fleddest  from  the  face  of  E.  thy 

35.  29  and  his  sons  E.  and  Jacob  buried  him 

36.  1  Now  these.. the  generations  of  E.,  who 
36.  2  E.  took  his  wives  of  the  daughters  of  C. 
36.  4  Adah  bare  to  E.  Eliphaz  ;  and  Bashem. 
36.  5  these,  .the  sons  of  E.,  which  were  born 
36.  6  E.  took  his  wives,  .and  his  sous,  ami  hi9 
36.  8  Thus  dwelt  E.  in  mount  Seir  :  E.  (is)  Ed. 
36.  9  these,  .the  generations  of  E.  the  father 
36.  10  of  E.'s  sons"  .of  Adah  the  wife  of  E. 

36.  10  Reuel  the  son  of  Bashemath  the  wife  of  E. 
36.  12  Eliphaz,  E.'s  son.. the  sons  of  Adah,  E.'s 
36.  13  these  were  the  sons  of  Bashemath,  E.'s 
36.  14  daughter  of  Zibeon,  E.'s  wife,  .bare  to  E. 
36.  15  sons  of  E. .  .Eliphaz  the  first  bom.  .of  E, 

36. 17  of  r.etn  1  K       f  Ba-diemath,  E.'swife 

36.  18  of  Almlibnmah,  E.'s  wife.  .Anal).  E.'s  wife 
36. 19  These  (are)  the  sons  of  E.,  who  (is)  Edom 
36.  40  these . .  the  names  of  the  dukes . .  of  E. 
36.  43  «e  (is)  E.  the  father  of  the  Edomites 


Josh  24.    4  And  I  gave  unto  Isaac  Jacob  and  E. 

24.    4  I  gave  unto  E.  mount  Seir,  to  possess 
1  Ch.  1.  34  The  sons  of  Isaac  ;  E.  and  Israel 

1.  35  sons  of  E. ;  Eliphaz,  Reuel,  and  Jeush 
Mai.    1.    2  (Was)  not  E.  Jacob's  brother '(  saith  the 

1.  3  I  hated  E.,  and  laid  his  mountains 

2.  The  name  Esau  is  sometimes  (not  often)  used  as  a 
patronymic  to  denote  the  descendants  of  Esau  or  the 
country  they  dwelt  in. 

Deut.  2.    5  I  have  given  mount  Seir  unto  E. .  .a  poss. 

Jer.  49.  8  I  will  bring  tiie  calamity  of  E.  upon  him 
49. 10  I  have  made  E.  bare,  I  have  uncovered 

Obad.  6  How  are  (the  things)  of  E.  searched  out  ! 
So  also  in  such  elliptical  expressions  as  these  : — 

Deut.  2.    4  Ye  (are)  to  pass  through  the  coast  of .  .E. 

2.  8  our  brethren  the  children  of  E.,  which 
2.  12  but  the  children  of  E.  succeeded  them 
2.  22  As  he  did  to  the  children  of  E.,  which 

2.  29  As  the  children  of  B.  which  dwell  in  Seir 
Obad.       8  and  understanding  out  of  the  mountof  E.  ? 
9  every  one  of  the  mount  of  E.  may  be  cut 
18  and  the  house  of  E.  for  stubble,  and 

18  there  shall  not  be.  .of  the  house  of  E. 

19  the  south  shall  possess  the  mount  of  E. 
21 ;  Rom.  9.  13  ;  Heb.  11.  20 ;  12.  16. 

ESCAPE  — 

1.  Place  of  escape,  mbsQ  miphlat. 

Psa.  55.    S  I  would  hasten  my  escape  from  the  windy 

^.Escaped  one,  tobs  palet. 

Jer.  44.  14  none  shall  return  but  such  as  shall  escape 

50.  28  The  voice  of  them  that  flee  and  escape  out 

51.  50  Ye  that  have  escaped  the  sword,  go  away 

3.  Escape,  v^S  pallet. 

Psa.  56.    7  Shall  they  escape  by  iniquity  ?  in  (thine) 

4.  One  escaped,  Q^3  paliL 

Josh.  8.  22  that  they  let  none  of  them  remain  or  es. 
2  Ki.  9.  15  let  none  go  forth  (nor)  escape  out  of  the 
Jer.  42.  17  none  of  them  shall  remain  or  escape  from 
44. 14  none  of  the  remnant,  .shall  escape  or  re. 

5.  Escape,  n&b$  peletah. 

Gen.  32.    8  the  other  company  which  is  left  shall  es. 
2  Sa.  15.  14  for  we  shall  not  (else)  escape  from  Absal. 
Jer.  50.  29  that  bend  the  bow.  .let  none  thereof  es. 
Dan. 11.  42  and  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  not  escape 
Joel  2.    3  yea,  and  nothing  shall  escape  them 

ESCAPE,  to  — 

1.7*0  go  out  or  forth,  N>;  yatsa. 

1  Sa.14.  41  Jonathan  were  taken  :  but  the  people  es. 

Jer.  11.  11  which  they  shall  not  be  able  to  escape 

2.  To  escape,  slip  away,  a?!?  malat,  2. 

Gen.  19.  17  Escape  for  thy  life;  look  not  behind  thee 
19. 17  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  con. 
19.  19  I  cannot  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest 
19.  20  let  me  escape  thither,  (is)  it  not  a  little 
19.  22  escape  thither ;  for  I  cannot  do  any  thing 
Oudg.  3.  26  And  Ehud  escaped  while  they  tarried,  and 
3.  26  and  passed  beyond  the  quarries,  and  esc. 
3.  29  men  of  valour ;  and  there  escaped  not  a 

1  Sa.  19.  10  and  David  fled,  and  escaped  that  night 

19.  12  and  he  went,  aud  fled,  and  escaped 
19.  18  So  David  fled,  and  escaped,  and  came  to 
22.    1  David,  .escaped  to  the  cave  Adullam  :  and 
22.  20  Abiathar,  escaped,  and  fled  after  David 
27.    1  escape  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 

27.  1  so  shall  I  escape  out  of  his  hand 

30.  17  there  escaped  not  a  man  of  them,  save 

2  Sa.    4.    6  Rechab  and  Baanah  his  brother  escaped 

1  Ki.18.  40  Elijah  said,  .let  not  one  of  them  escape 

19.  17  him  that  escapeth  the  sword  of  Hazael 

19.  17  him  that  escapeth  from  the  sword  of  Jehu 

20.  20  king  of  Syria  escaped  on  an  horse  -with 

2  Ki.io.  24  any.  .men.  .whom  I  have  brought,  .escape 

19.  37  and  they  escaped  into  the  laud  of  Arm. 
2  Ch.16.    7  king  of  Syria  escaped  out  of  thine  hand 
Esth.  4. 13  that  thou  shalt  escape  in  the  king's  house 
Pi'ov  19.    5  (he  that)  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape 
Eccl.    7.  26  whoso  pleaseth  God  shall  escape  from 
Isa.   20.    6  we  flee  for  help,  .and  how  shall  we  esc? 

37.  38  they  escaped  into  the  land  of  Armenia 
Jer.  32     4  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  shall  not  escape 

34.    3  thou  Shalt  not  escape  out  of  his  hand 

38.  18,  23  thou  shalt  not  escape  out  of  their  hand 
41.  15  the  son  of  Nethaniah  escaped  from  J  oliau. 
46.   6  Let  not.  .the  mighty  man  escape 

48.  8  upon  every  city,  and  no  city  shall  escape 
48. 19  ask  him  that  fleeth,  and  her  that  escapeth 

Eze.  17.  15  shall  he  escape  that  doeth  such  (things)  ? 
17.  18  done  all  these  (things),  she  shall  not  esc. 

Dan.  11.  41  these  shall  escape  out  of  Ms  hand,  (even) 

3.  To  pass  over,  *i2V  abar. 

Psa. 141.  10  whilst  that  I  withal  escape 
i.To  escape,  slip  away,  tohp palat. 

Eze.     7.  16  they  that  escape  of  them  shall  escape 
*5.To  deliver  oneself,  b$i  natsal,  5. 

2  Sa.  20.   6  he  get  him  fenced  cities,  and  escape  us 
Q.  To  fee  <!/<'<<>/,  airotyevyu)  apophev.gn. 

2  Pe.   1.    4  having  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in 
2.  iS  those  that  were  clean  escaped  from  them 
2.  20  after  they  have  escaped  the  pollutions 
7.  To  save  thoroughly,  $taau>(a}  diasodzo. 

Acts  28.    1  when  they  were  escaped,  then  they  knew 

28.  4  though  he  hath  escaped  the  sea,  yet 


8.  To  fee  different  ways,  otatysvyw  diapheugo. 
Acts  27.  42  lest  auy  of  them  should  swim  out  and  es. 

9. To  fee  out  or  forth,  iKtysvyw  ekpheugo. 

Luke2i.  36  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape 
Rom.  2.    3  thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  of  God? 
2  Co.  1 1.  33  in  a  basket  was  I  let  down,  .and  escaped 
1  Th.  5.    3  destruction  cometh.  .they  shall  not  escape 
Heb.   2.   3  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so 

10.  To  come  out  or  forth,  i^€pxop.ai  exerchomai. 
John  10.  39  to  take  him  :  but  he  escaped  out  of  their 

11.  To  fee,  (pevyca  pheugo. 

Heb.  11.  34  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of 
12.  25  if  they  [escaped]  not  who  refused  him  that 
ESCAPE,  can  — 
To  flee  from,  tpevyw  6,tt6  p>heugo  apo. 

Matt  23.  33  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell  ? 
ESCAPE,  to  cause  to  — 
To  let  to  escape,  zhspalat,  3. 

Psa.  71.    2  cause  me  to  escape :  incline  thine  ear 
ESCAPE,  not  — 
Refuge  has  perished,  Di:c  "ON  abad  manos. 

Job    11.  20  wicked  shall  fail,  and  they  shall  not  esc. 
ESCAPE,  that  — 
One  that  escaptes  or  slips  away,  tyVs  palet. 

Isa.    66.  19  I  will  send  those  that  escape  of  them 

Jer.  44.  28  Yet  a  small  number  that  escape  the  sword 

Eze.    6.    8  that  ye  may  have  (some)  that  shall  escape 
6.    9  they  that  escape  of  you  shall  remember 
7. 16  But  they  that  escape  of  them  shall  escape 

ESCAPE  safe,  to  — 

To  save  thoroughly,  Siaawfa  diasozo. 

Acts  27.  44  came  to  pass,  that  they  escaped  all  safe 
ESCAPE,  way  to  — 
A  going  up  out  of  €K0aats  el-basis. 

1  Co.  10. 13  but  'will . .  also  make  a  way  to  escape 

ESCAPED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  slipped  away,  etc  malat,  2. 

1  Sa.  19.  17  sent  away  mine  enemy,  that  he  is  escaped 

23.  13  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was  escaped 

2  Sa.    1.    3  Out  of  the  camp  of  Israel  am  I  escaped 
Job      1.  15, 16,  17,  19  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell 
Psa.  124.    7  Our  soul  is  escaped,  .and  we  are  escaped 

%To  slip  away  for  oneself,  bSd  malat,  7. 

Job    19.  20  I  am  escaped  with  the  skin  of  my  teeth 
3.  To  he  snatched  or  slipt  away,  ?y:  natsal,  2. 

Deut 23.  15  the  servant  which  is  escaped  from  his 
ESCAPED,  that  — 
l.One  that  escapes  or  slips  away,  wh%  palet. 

Nuni2i.  29  Moab.  .he  hath  given  his  sons  that  escap. 

2.  One  that  escapes  or  slips  away,  o'1??  polit. 
Gen.  14.  13  And  there  came  one  that  had  escaped 
Judgi2.    s  those  Ephraimites  which  were  escaped 
..sa.   45.  20  draw  near  together,  yft(that  are)  escaped 
Eze.  33.  21  one  that  had  escaped  out  of  Jerusalem 
33.  22  evening,  afore  he  that  was  escaped  came 

ESCAPED,  that  had  — 

Remnant,  residue,  Tfl*<y  sheerith. 

2  Ch.  36.  20  And  them  that  had  escaped  from  the  swo. 

ESCAPED,  that  have  — 

One  that  slips  away  or  escapes,  U73  palet. 

Jer.  51.  50  Ye  that  have  escaped  the  sword,  go  away 

ESCAPED,  that  is  — 

Escape^  escaped  party,  nty^s  peletah. 

Exodio.  5  eat  the  residue  of  that  which  is  escaped 
Judg2  1.  17  an  inheritance  for  them  that  be  escaped 
2  Ki.  19.  30  the  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house 

1  Ch.  4.  43  the  rest  of  the  Amalekites  that  were  esc. 

2  Ch.30.   6  that  are  escaped  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
Neh.   1.    2  asked,  .concerning  the  Jews  that  had  es. 
Isa.     4.    2  comely  for  them  that  are  escaped  of  Israel 

10.  20  such  as  are  escaped  of  the  house  of  Jacob 

ESCAPETH,  that  -  - 

One  that  escapes  or  slips  away,  d^  polit. 

Eze.  24.  26  he  that  escapeth  in  that  day  shall  come 
Amos  9.    1  he  that  escapeth  of  them  shall  not  be 

ESCAPING  — 

Escape,  escaped  party,  na,l?9  pelctah. 

Ezra  9.  14  (there  should  be)  no  remnant  nor  escaping? 

ESCHEW,  to  — 

l.To  turn  aside,  TW  sur. 

Job     1.    1  one  that  feared  God,  and  eschewed  evil 

1.  8  one  that  feareth  God,  and escheweth  evil? 

2.  3  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil  ? 
2.  To  incline  or  bend  out  of,  4nK\ivoi  elldino. 

1  Pe.  3.  11  Let  him  eschew  evil,  aud  do  good ;  let 

E'-SEK,  p'wy  contention. 

A  well  in  the  valley  of  Gezar,  dug  by  the  servants  of 

Isaac,  and  striven  for  by  the  servants  of  Abimelech. 

Gen.  26.  20  aud  he  called  the  name  of  the  well  E. 
ESH-BA'-AX,  ^fW  a  man  of  Baal. 
Fourth  sou  of  Saul  according  to  1  Ch.  8.  33  and  9.  39. 
He  is  no  doubt  identical  with   Ishbosheth   ("man  of 
shame.") 

1  Ch.  8.  33  and  Malchi-shua,  and  Abinadab,  and  E. 
9. 39  aud  Malchi-shua,  aud  Abinadab.  and  E. 


'J 


^ 


ESHBAN 


307 


ESTEEMED 


ESH-BAN,  ]3'^x  man  of  understanding. 

A  son  of  Dishbn  or  Dishan,  son  of  Seir. 

Gen.  36. 26  Henidan,  and  E.,  and  Ithran,  and  Cheran 
1  Ch.  1. 41  Ann-am,  and  E.,  and  Ithran,  and  Cherau 

ESH'-COL,  <&$$  Vidian  cluster  of  grapes. 
1  Brother  of  Mamre'aud  Aiier  the  Amorites,  allies  of 
Abraham  in  pursuing  the  four  kings  who  had  carried 
off  Lot.     B  C.  1918. 

Gen.  14. 13  of  Mature  the  Amorite,  brother  of  E. 
14.  24  the  men  which  went  with  me,  Aner,  E. 
2.  Valley  or  brook  of  Eshcol  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Hebron,  and  explored  by  the  spies  sent  out  by  Hoses. 
In  the  valley  that  crosses  the  vale  of  Hebron  N.E.  and 
S.W.  and  about  two  miles  N.  of  the  town  there  is  a 
fine  spring  now  called  Ain-Eshfcali. 

Numi3-  23  they  came  unto  the  brook  of  E.,  and  cut 
13.  24  The  place  was  called  the  brook  E. 
32.    9  they  went  up  unto  the  valley  of  E.,  and 

Deut.  1.  24  And  they,  .came  unto  the  valley  of  E. 

ESH-E'-AU\  (J^N  slope. 

A  city  in  the  mountains  of  Judah. 

Josh.  15.  52  Arab,  and  Dumah,  and  E. 
E'-SHEK,  pa?M  strife. 
A  descendant  of  Saul  through  Jonathan. 

1  Ch.  8.  39  the  sons  of  E.  his  brother.  .Ulam  his 
ESH-KA-LO-NITES,  'JiSp-f  n  belonging  to  Ashkelon. 
The  inhabitants  of  Ashkelon. 

Josh.  13.    3  Ashdothites,  the  E.,  the  Gittites,  and 
ESH-TA'-OL,  SiNjrfN  hollow  way. 
A  town  in  the  country  of  Judah,  grouped  with  Zorah. 
It  is  now  called  Stual  and  is  west  of  Zorah,  which  is 
now  called  Surah. 

Josh.  15. 33  in  the  valley,  E.,  and  Zoreah,  and  Ashnah 

19.  41  coast  of  their  inheritance  was.  .E.,  and 
Judgi3.  25  the  camp  of  Dan  between  Zorah  and  E. 
16.  31  buried  him  between  Zorah  and  E.,  in  the 
18.    2  men  of  valour,  from  Zorah,  and  from  E. 
18.    8  came  unto  their  brethren  to  Zorah  and  E. 
18. 11  there  went  out  from  thence.  .outofE.,  six 

ESH-TA  UL-ITES,  ^Nng^  belonging  to  Eshtaol. 
The  inhabitants  of  Eshtaol,  descendants  of  Shobal  son 
of  Caleb  son  of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  2.  53  of  them  came  the  Zareathites.  .the  E. 
ESH-TE-MO'-A,  ESH-TE'-MOH,  j/llWN. 

1.  A  Levitical  town  in  the  mountains  of  Judah.  It  is 
now  called  Senwa,  a  village  seven  miles  S.  of  Hebron. 

Josh.15.  50  And  Anab,  anu  E.,  and  Anim 

21. 14  Jattir.  .and  E.  with  her  suburbs 
t  Sa.  30.  28  and  to  (them)  which  were  in  E. 
1  Ch.  6.  57  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave . .  E.  with 

2.  A  Maachathite,  a  descendant  of  Ezra, 

1  Ch.  4.  17  she  bare.  .Ishbah  the  father  of  E. 

4.  19  Keilah  the  Garmite,  and  E.  the  Maacha. 

ESH'-TON,  |iFK$&  rest 

Grandson  of  Chelub,  through  Caleb. 

1  Ch.  4.  11  Mehir,  which  (was)  the  father  of  E. 

4.  12  E.  begat  Beth-rapha,  and  Paseah,  and 

ES-'LI,  'Eo-Ai,  'Eo-Aef. 

This  was  probably  Azaliah  in  the  genealogy  of  Christ ; 
the  name  occurs  in  the  line  of  the  aucestors  of  Joseph 
husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  25  Nauru,  which  was  (the  son)  of  E.,  which 
ESPECIALLY  — 
l.Might,  iko  meod. 

Psa.  31. 11I  was  a  reproach,  .especially  among  my 
2. Most  of  all,  fj.d\L(rra  malista. 

Acts  26.   3  Especially  (because  I  know)  thee  to  he 

Gal.    6. 10  especially  unto  them  who  are  of  the  hou. 

1  Ti.    5.  17  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word 

2  Ti.    4.  13  the  books,  (but)  especially  the  parchments 
ESPOUSAL  — 

1.  Espousal,  marriage,  rtirin  chathunnah. 

Song   3.  11  crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his  espousals 
2.Espousals,  niSiS?  keluloth. 
-  Jer.     2.    2  the  love  of  thine  espousals,  when  thou 
ESPOUSE,  to  — 
l.To  betrothe,  espouse,  fcnx  aras,  3. 

2  Sa.    3.  14  Deliver  (me)  my  wife,  .which  I  espoused 
%To  befitted  together,  apfj.6^ofxai  harmozomai. 

2  Co. 11.    2  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband 
ESPOUSED,  to  be  — 
To  ask  in  marriage,  fii/ncrrevco  mnesteuo. 

Matt.  1.  18  When  as  his  mother  Mary  was  espoused 

Luke  1.  27  To  a  virgin  espoused  to  a  man  whose 

2.    5  To  be  taxed  with  Mary  his  espoused  wife 
ESPY,  to  — 
l.To  watch,  look  out,  nzx  tsaphah,  3. 

Jer.  48  19  0  inhabitant .  .standby  the  way,  and  espy 

2.  To  see,  nxn  rccah. 

Gen.  42.  27  as  one  of  them  opened  Ms  sack . .  he  espied 
S.To  search,  sp>y  out,  "i^n  tur. 

Eze.  20.   6  into  a  land  that  I  had  espied  for  them 
ESPY  out,  to  — 
To  traverse,  spy  out,  "?ri  vagal,  3. 

Josh.  14.    7  Moses . .  sent  me .  .to  espy  out  the  land 


ES'-ROM,  'Zo-pdofx. 

Sou  of  Phares  in  the  genealogy  of  Jesus. 

Matt.  1.    3  Phares  begat  E.;  and  E.  begat  Aram 
Luke  3.  33  Aram,  Which  was  (the  son)  of  E.,  which, 

ESTABLISH,  to  — 

l.To  strength,  harden,  j'DX  amats,  3. 

Prov  8.  28  When  lie  established  the  clouds  above 

2.  To  found,  lay  a  foundation,  ip;  yasad. 

Psa.  78.  69  like  the  earth  which  he  hath  established 
Hab.    1.  12  thou  hast  established  them  for  correction 

3.  To  set  up,  place,  stay,  Js;  yatsag,  5. 

Amos  5.  15  love  the  good,  and  establish  judgment 

4.  To  cause  to  dwell  or  sit,  settle,  3ty;  yashab,  5. 

Job  36.    7  he  doth  establish  them  for  ever,  and  they 
5. To  form,  prepare,  establish,  pa  kun,  3a. 

Exodis.  17  the  sanctuary,  .thy  hands  have  establis. 
Deut  32.  6  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  established 
Psa.  24.    2  and  established  it  upon  the  floods 

40.    2  He  brought  me  up . .  (and)  established  my 
48.    8  God  will  establish  it  for  ever.     Selah 
87.    5  the  Highest  himself  shall  establish  her 
90.  17  establish  thou  the  work  of  our  hands 
90. 17  the  work  of  our  hands  establish  thou  it 
99.    4  thou  dost  establish  equity,  thou  executest 
119.  90  thou  hast  established  the  earth,  and  it 
Prov  3.  19  by  understanding  hath  he  established  the 
Isa.    45.  18  he  hath  established  it,  he  created  it  not 
62.    7  And  give  him  no  rest,  till  he  establish 

6.T0  prepare,  establish,  j*3  kun,  5. 

1  Sa.  13.  13  now  would  the  Lord  have  established 

2  Sa.  5.  12  the  Lord  had  established  him  king  over 

7. 12  will  set  up.  .and  I  will  establish  his  kin. 
1  Ki.  2.  24  the  Lord  liveth,  which  hath  established 

1  Ch.17.  11  raise  up.  .and  I  will  establish  his  kingd. 

22.  10  I  will  establish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom 
28.    7  I  will  establish  his  kingdom  for  ever 

2  Ch.12.  1  when  Rehoboam  had  established  the  kin. 
Psa.  89.    2  thy  faithfulness  shalt  thou  establish  in 

89.    4  Thy  seed  will  I  establish  for  ever,  and 
Jer.   10.  12  he  hath  established  the  world  by  his  wis. 
33.    2  the  Lord  that  formed  it,  to  establish  it 
51.  15  he  hath  established  the  world  by  his  wis. 

7.  To  set  up,  y$y  natsab,  5. 

Prov.  15.  25  he  will  establish  the  border  of  the  widow 

8.  To  siq)port,  stay,  tjjd  saad. 

Isa.     9.    7  to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with 

9.  To  cause  to  stand,  set  up,  establish,  ivyaviad,  5. 

1  Ki.15.    4  set  up  his  son  after  him;  and  to  establish 

2  Ch.  9.    8  loved  Israel,  to  establish  them  for  ever 

30.    5  So  they  established  a  decree  to  make 
Prov.29.    4  king  by  judgment  establisheth  the  land 
Dan.  11.  14  exalt  themselves  to  establish  the  vision 

10.  To  raise  up,  establish,  confirm,  Dip  kum,  5. 
Gen.    6. 18  with  thee  will  I  establish  my  covenant 

9.    9  I  establish  my  covenant  with  you,  and 
9.  11  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with 
9.  17  which  I  have  established  between  me  and 
17.    7  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me 
17.  19  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  him 
17.  21  my  covenant  will  I  establish  with  Isaac 
Exod.  6.    4  I  have  also  established  my  covenant  with 
Lev.  26.    9  and  establish  my  covenant  with  you 
Nuni3o.  13  Every  vow.  .her  husband  may  establish  it 

30.  14  he  establisheth  all  her  vows,  or  all  her 
Deut.  8.  iS  he  may  establish  his  covenant  which  he 
28.   9  The  Lord  shall  establish  thee  an  holy 
29. 13  That  he  may  establish  thee  to  day  for  a 
j  Sa.    1.  23  only  the  Lord  establish  his  word 
2  Sa.   7.  25  establish  (it)  for  ever,  and  do  as  thou  hast 
1  Ki.i  9.    5 1  will  establish  the  throne  of  thy  kingdom 
Psa.  78.    5  he  established  a  testimony  in  Jacob,  and 
Prov  30.    4  established  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 
Isa.   49.    8  to  establish  the  earth,  to  cause  to  inherit 
Eze.  16.  60  I  will  establish  unto  thee  an  everlasting 
16.  62  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  thee 

11.  To  establish,  Dip  qum,  3. 

Dan.   6.    7  consulted  together  to  establish  a  royal 

12.  To  raise  up,  establish,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Dan.    6.    8  establish  the  decree,  and  sign  the  writing 
6.  15  nor  statute  which  the  king  establisheth 

13.  To  make  firm,  establish,  &e(3at6o)  behaioo.. 
Heb.  13.    9  that  the  heart  be  established  with  grace 

14.  To  place,  set,  cause  to  stand,  'ta-Tn/it  histemi. 
E-om.  3.  31  God  forbid  :  yea,  we  establish  the  law 

10.    3  to  establish  their  own  righteousness 
Heb.  10.    9  that  he  may  establish  the  second 

15.2*0  appoint  a  law,  vofAodereo)  nomotlieted. 
Heb.  8.    6  which  was  established  upon  better  pro. 

16.  To  make  stable,  or  strong,  crepeo^  stereoo. 
Acts  16.    5  so  were  the  churches  established  in  the 

17.  To  set  or  make  fast,  fix,  (rrriplfa  sterizo. 
"Rom.  1.  11  to  the  end  ye  may  be  established 

1  Th.  3.    2  to  establish  you,  and  to  comfort  you 

2  Pe.  1. 12  and  be  established  in  the  present  truth 
ESTABLISHED  — 

To  sustain,  support,  7|2P  samak. 

Psa.112.   8  His  heart  (is)  established,  he  shall  not  be 
ESTABLISHED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  or  become  steady  or  firm,  j£N  aman,  2. 

1  S&.   3.  20  established  (to  be)  a  prophet  of  the  Lord 


1  Ch.17.  23  concerning  his  house,  be  established  for 

17.  24  Let  it  even  be  established,  that  thyname 

2  Ch.  1.    9  let  thy  promise  unto  David . .  be  establish. 

20.  20  Believe,  .so  shall  ye  be  established 
Isa.     7.    9  surely  ye  shall  not  be  established 

2.  To  be  or  become  strong,  pin  chazaq. 

2  Ch.25.    3  when  the  kingdom  was  established  to  him 

3.  To  be  formed,  prepared,  established,  p3  kun,  2. 

Gen.  41.  32  because  the  thing  (is)  established  by  God 

1  Sa.  20.  31  shalt  not  be  established,  nor  thy  kingdom 

2  Sa.    7.  16  shall  be  established  for  ever  before  thee 

7.  26  house  of  thy  servant  David  be  established 
1  Ki.  2.  12  and  his  kingdom  was  established  greatly 
2.  45  the  throne  of  David  shall  be  established 
2.  46  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand  of 
1  Ch.17.  *4  throne  shall  be  established  for  evermore 
17.  24  house  of  David  thy  servant  be  established 
Job  21.   8  Their  seed  is  established  in  their  sight 
Psa.  89.  21  Withwhommy  hand  shall  (be)  established. 
89.  37  It  shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the 
93.    2  Thy  tin-one  (is)  established  of  old  :  thou 
96.  10  world  also  shall  be  established  that  it 
102.  28  seed  shall  be  established  before  thee 
140. 11  Let  not  au  evil  speaker  be  established  in. 
Prov.  4.  26  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established 

12.   3  man  shall  not  be  established  by  wicked. 
12.  19  lip  of  truth  shall  be  established  for 
16.    3  and  thy  thoughts  shall  be  established 
16.  12  throne  is  established  by  righteousness 
20.  18  (Every)  purpose  is  established  by  counsel 
25.    5  throne  shall  be  established  in  righteous. 
29. 14  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  ever 
Isa.     2.    2  the  mountain . .  shall  be  established  in  the 
Jer.  30.  20  congregation  shall  be  established  before 
Mic.    4.    1  the  mountain . .  shall  be  established  in  the 

4.  To  be  prepared,  established,  pS  kun,  6. 

Isa.  16.    5  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  established 
Zech.  5.  11  it  shall  be  established,  and  set  there 

5. To  establish  self,  p3  kun,  7a. 

Prov  24.    3  and  by  understanding  it  is  established 
Isa.   54.  14  In  righteousness  shalt  thoubeestablished. 

6.  To  rise  up,  stand  up,  be  established,  Dip  kum. 
Lev.  25.  30  the  house,  .shall  be  established  for  ever 

1  Sa.  24.  20  kingdom  of  Israel  shall  Re  established 
Job  22. 28  and  it  shall  be  established  unto  thee 
Prov  15.  22  in  the  multitude,  .they  are  established 

7. To  be  made  straight  or  right,  jpn  teqan,  6. 

Dan,   4.  36  and  I  was  established  in  my  kingdom,  and 
8.  To  cause  to  stand,  'ictv/xi  histemi. 

Matti8.  16  that,  .every  word  may  be  established 

2  C0.13.    1  In  the  mouth ..  every  word  be  established 

ESTABLISHMENT  — 

Truth,  faithfuhiess,  steadfastness,  nrx  emeth. 
2  Ch.32.    1  After  these  things,  and  the  establishment 

ESTATE  — 

1. Order,  condition,  'Tini  dibrah. 

Eccl.  3.  18  concerning  the  estate  of  the  sons  of  men 

2.  Station,  |3  ken. 

Dan.  11.    7  shall  (one)  stand  up  in  his  estate,  which 
11.  20  Then  shall  stand  up  in  his  estate  a 
11.  21  in  Ins  estate  shall  stand  up  a  vile  person 
11.  38  in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  God  of 

Z.Form,  turn,  Tin  tor. 

1  Ch.17.  17  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high 
ESTATE,  your  — 
The  things  concerning  you,  to  Trepi  vix&v  to, peri. 

Col.    4.   8  that  he  might  know  [your]  estate,  and 

ESTEEM,  to  — 

l.To  think,  reckon,  3^n  chashab. 

Job   41.  27  He  esteemeth  iron  as  straw,  (and)  brass 

Isa.   53.   3  he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him 

53.   4  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of 

2.  To  set  in  array,  value,  7ns>  arak. 

Job    36.  19  Will  he  esteem  thy  riches  ?  (no),  not  gold 

S.To  lay  up),  hide,  conceal,  J?jr  tsaphan. 

Job    23.  12  I  have  esteemed  the  words  of  his  mouth 

i.To  lead,  lead  out,  Tjyeofiat  hegeomai. 

Phil.   2.    3  each  esteem  other  better  than  themselves 
1  Th.  5. 13  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for 
Heb.  11.  26  Esteemingthe  reproach  of  Christ  greater 

5.  To  judge,  ko'ivw  krino. 

Rom  14.    5  Oneman  esteemeth oneday  above  another 
14.    5  another  esteemeth  every  day  (alike) 

6,  To  reckon,  \oyl£ofxai.  logizomai; 

Eonii4. 14  that  esteemeth  any  tiling  to  be  unclean 

ESTEEMED,  highly  — 

High,  exalted,  fynAos  upselos. 

Lukei6. 15  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men  ■ 

ESTEEMED,  to  be  — 

To  be  reckoned,  thought,  esteemed,,  n^rt  chashab,  2. 

Isa.   29.  16  shall  be  esteemed  as  the  potter's  clay 
29.  17  fruitful  field  shall  be  esteemed  as  a 

Lam.  4.    2  aTe  they  esteemed  as  earthen  pitchers 

ESTEEMED,  to  be  least  — 
To  think  nothing  of,  t^ovOevea  ezoutheneo. 
1  Co.  6.    4  who  are  least  esteemed  in  the  church 


ESTEEMED 


308 


EUNUCH 


ESTEEMED,  to  be  lightly  — 

l.To  be  lightly  esteemed,  ?v?Q  qalah,  2. 

i  Sa.  18.  23  I  (am)  a  poor  man,  and  lightly  esteemed 
2. To  be  or  become  lightly  esteemed,  t?q  qalal. 

1  Sa.   2.  30  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed 

ES'-THER,  "in;?N  the  planet  Venus. 
The  Persian  name  of  Uadassah,  daughter  of  Abihail 
son  of  Shimei  son  of  Kish,  a  Benjamite  (Mordecai),  and 
cousin  of  Mordecai.  She  was  an  orphan  captive,  and 
wus  si'li.'i'ti-d  hy  AliJLsih'rus  (Xerxes  son  uf  Darius 
Hystaspis)  as  his  queen  instead  of  Vashti.  B.C.  479. 
Esth,  2.    7  he  brought  up  Hadassah,  that  (is),  E. 

2.   S  E.  was  brought  also  unto  the  king's  house 
2.  10  E.  had  not  showed  her  people  nor  her 
2,  11  Mordecai  walked,  .to  know  how  E.  did 
2.  15  when  the  turn  of  E. .  .was  come  to  go  in 
2.  15  E.  obtained  favour  in  the  sight  of  alrthem 
2. 16  E.  was  taken  unto  king  Ahasuerus  into 
2.  17  the  king  loved  E.  above  all  the  women 
2. 18  the  king  made  a  great  feast.  .E.'s  feast 
2  20  E.  had  not.  .showed  her  kindred  nor  her 
2.  20  E.  did  the  commandment  of  Mordecai 
2.  22  to  Mordecai,  who  told  (it)  unto  E.  the 
2.  22  E.  certified  the  king,  .in  Mordecai's  name 
4.    4  E.'s  maids  and  her  chamberlains  came 
4.    5  Then  called  E.  for  Hatach,  (one)  of  the 
4.    8  to  show  (it)  unto  E.,  and  to  declare  (it) 
4.    9  Hatach  came  and  told  E.  the  words  of 
4.  10  Again  E!  spake  unto  Hatach,  and  gave 
4.  12  And  they  told  to  Mordecai  E.'a  words 
4.  13  Then  Mordecai  commanded  to  answer  E. 
4.  15  Then  E.  bade,  .return  Mordecai  (this  an.) 

4.  17  did  according  to  all  that  E.  had  comma. 

5.  1  on  the  third  day . .  E.  put  on . .  royal  (app.) 
5.  2  the  king  saw  E.  the  queen  standing  in  the 
5.  2  the  king  held  out  to  E.  the  golden  sceptre 
5.  2  E.  drew  near,  and  touched  the  top  of  the 
5.  3  What  wilt  thou,  queen  E.  ?  and  what  (is) 
5.  4  answered  E.,  If.  .good  unto  the  king,  let 
5.  5  that  he  may  do  as  E.   hath  said 

5.   5  came  to  the  banquet  that  E.  had  prepared 
5.    6  the  king  said  unto  E.  at  the  banquet  of 
5.    7  answered  E.,  and  said,  My  petition  and  my 

5.  12  E.  the  queen  did  let  no  man  come  in 

6.  14  bring  Hainan  unto  the  banquet  that  E. 

7.  1  Hainan  came  to  banquet  with  E.  the  qu. 
7.  2  the  king  said  again  unto  E.  on  the  second 
7.  2  What  (is)  thy  petition,  queen  E.?  and  it 
7.  3  Then  E.  the  queen  answered  and  said,  If 
7.  5  Ahasuerus  answered  and  said  unto  E.  the 
7.  6  E.  said,  The  adversary,  .(is)  this  wicked 
7.  7  Haman  stood  up  to  make  request,  .to  E. 

7.  8  Ha.  was  fallen  upon  the  bed  whereon  E. 

8.  1  did . .  give  the  house  of  Haman . .  unto  E. 
8.  1  for  E.  had  told  what  he  (was)  unto  her 
8.  2  E.  set  Mordecai  over  the  house  of  Haman 
8.  3  And  E.  spake  yet  again  before  the  king 
8.  4  held  out  the  golden  sceptre  toward  E. 

8.   4  So  E.  arose,  and  stood  before  the  king 
8.    7  king  Ahasuerus  said  unto  E.  the  queen 

8.  7  Behold,  I  have  given  E.  the  house  of  Ha. 

9.  12  And  the  king  said  unto  E.  the  queen 

9.  13  Then  said  E.,  If  it  please  the  kiug,Iet  it 
9.  29  Then  E.  the  queen,  .wrote  with  all  auth. 
9.  31  according  as.  .E.  the  queen  had  enjoined 
9.  32  the  decree  of  E.  confirmed  these  matters 

ESTLHATE,  to  — 

To  set  in  array,  value,  TlV  ctrak. , 

Lev.  27.  14  the  priest  shall  estimate  it,  whether  it 
27. 14  as  the  priest  shall  estimate  it,  so  shall 

ESTIMATION  — 

Array,  order,  valuation,  1)"$  ereJc. 

Lev.    5.  15  with  thy  estimation  by  Bhekels  of  silver 
5. 18  with  thy  estimation, for  atrespass  offering 
6.    6  thy  estimation,  for  a  trespass  offering 
27.   2  (shall  be)  for  the  Lord  by  thy  estimation 
27.    3  thy  estimation  shall  be  of  the  male  from 
27.    3  thy  estimation  shall  be  fifty  shekels  of 
27.    4  thy  estimation  shall  be  thirty  shekels 
27.    5  thy  estimation  shall  be  of  the  male  twenty 
27.    6  thy  estimation  shall  be  of  the  male  five 
27.    6  thy  estimation  shall  be  three  shekels  of 
27.    7  thy  estimation  shall  be  fifteen  shekels 
27.    8  if  he  be  poorer  than  thy  estimation,  then 
27.  13  a  fifth  (part)  thereof  unto  thy  estimation 
27.  15,  19  (part)  of  the  money  of  thy  estimation 
27.  16  thy  estimation  shall  be  according  to  the 
27. 17  according  to  thy  estimation  it  shall  stand 
27.  18  it  shall  be  abated  from  thy  estimation 
27.  23  shall  reckon,  .the  worth  of  thy  estimation 
27.  23  he  shall  give  thine  estimation  in  that 
27.  25  thy  estimations  shall  be  according  to  the 
27.  27  redeem  (it)  according  to  thine  estimation 
27.  27  shall  be  sold  according  to  thy  estimation 
NunnS.  16  thou  redeem,  .according  to  thine  estima. 

ESTRANGE,  to  — 

To  make  unknown,  "135  nakar,  3. 

Jer.  19.    4  forsaken  me,  and  have  estranged  this  pla. 

ESTRANGED,  to  fce  — 

l.To  be  strange,  estranged,  "AT  zur. 

Job   19.  13  mine  acquaintance  are  verily  estranged 

Psa.  58.    3  The  wicked  are  estranged  from  the  womb 

78.  30  They  were  not  estranged  from  their  lust 

'J.  To  become  strange,  estranged,  "nt  zur,  2. 

tize.   14.    5  they  are  all  estranged  from  me  through 


E'-TAM,  DQ'y  wild  beasts  lair. 

1.  A  village*  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  now  called  Urtas. 

1  Ch.  4.  32  their  villages .  .E.,  and  Ain,  Rimmon,  and 

2.  A  place  in  Judah  rebuilt  by  Rehoboam. 

2  Ch.11.    6  He  built  even  Beth-lehem,  and  E.,  and 

3.  A  name  occurring  in  the  list  of  Judah's  descendants, 
but  probably  referring  to  the  place  named  in  No.  2. 

1  Ch.  4.    3  And  these  (were  of)  the  father  of  E. 

4.  A  rocky  district  in  the  W.  of  Judah. 

Judgis.  8  went,  .and  dwelt  in  the  top  of  the  rock  E. 
15. 11  Judah  went  to  the  top  of  the  rock  E. 

ETERNAL  — 

l.Age  lasting,  nbty  olam. 

Isa.   60.  15  I  will  make  thee  an  eternal  excellency 
2.  What  is  before  in  time  or  place,  Dnj?  qedem. 

Deut  33.  27  eternal  God  (is  thy)  refuge,  and  under. 
Z.Peipetual,  atZios  aidios. 

Rom.  1.  20  (even)  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead 
A. Age,  alwv  aion  {pi.) 

Eph.  3.  11  According  to  the  eternal  purpose  which 

1  Ti.    1.  17  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisi. 

5.  Age  lasting,  altavios  amnios. 

Mattig.  16  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  have  eternal  life 
25.  46  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal 

Mark  3.  29  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  damnation 
10.  17  what  shall  I  do  that  I.  .inherit  eternal 
10.  30  and  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life 

Luke  10.  25  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
18.  18  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ? 

John  3.  15  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life 

4.  36  and  ga there th  fruit  unto  life  eternal 

5.  39  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life 

6.  54  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh . .  hath  eternal  life 
6.  68  thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  lite 

10.  28  And  I  give  xuito  them  eternal  life 
12.  25  and  he . .  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal 
17.    2  that  he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as 
17.   3  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know 
Acts  13.  48  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life 
Rom.  2.    7  To  them  who.  .seek  for  glory,  .eternal  life 

5.  21  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life 

6.  23  the  gift  of  God  (is)  eternal  life  through 

2  Co.    4. 17  more  exceeding  (and)  eternal  weight  of 

4.  18  things  which  are  not  seen  (are)  eternal 

5.  1  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the 

1  Ti.    6.  12  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  whereunto  thou 

6.  19  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  [eternal]  life 

2  Ti.    2.  10  obtain  the  salvation,  .with  eternal  glory 
Titus  1.    2  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that 

3.    7  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life 
Ileb.  5.    9  he  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation 
6.    2  of  resurrection . .  and  of  eternal  judgment 
9.  12  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  (for 
9.  14  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  ottered 
9.  15  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  iuheritan. 
1  Pe.  5. 10  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory 
1  Jo.    1.    2  show  unto  you  that  eternal  life  which 
2.  25  he  hath  promised  us,  (even)  eternal  life 
3. 15  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in 
5.  11  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and 
5.  13  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life 
5.  20  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life 
Jude         7  suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  Are 

ai  the  mercy  of  our  Lord,  .unto  eternal  life 

ETERNITY  — 

Duration,  continuity,  iy  ad. 

Isa.   57. 15  and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity 
E'-THAM,  enst. 

The  second  station  of  Israel  after  leaving  Egypt.  It  is 
said  to  be  in  the  edge  of  the  wilderness  near  the  present 
Seba  Biar,  or  "  seven  wells,"  about  three  miles  from  the 
western  side  of  the  ancient  head  of  the  gulf. 

Exodi3.  20  took  their  journey,  .and  encamped  in  E. 

Nuni33.  6  they  departed,  .and  pitched  in  E.,  which 
33.  7  they  removed  from  E.,  and  turned  again 
33.   8  went  three  days'  journey  in  the  wildern. 

E'-THAN,  |jvn  ancient. 

1.  A  sage  renowned  in  the  time  of  Solomon. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  he  was  wiser  than  all  men  ;  than  E.  the 
Psa.  89.  title.  Maschil  of  E.  the  Ezrahite 

2.  A  son  of  Zerah  son  of  Judah. 

1  Ch.  2.    6  Zimri,  and  E.,  and  Heman,  an    Calcol 
2.    8  And  the  sons  of  E.;  Azariah 

3.  A  descendant  of  Gershon  son  of  Levi. 

1  Ch.  6.  42  The  son  of  E.,the  son  of  Zimmah,  the  son 

4.  A  descendant  of  Merari  the  son  of  Levi. 

1  Ch.  6.  44  E.  the  son  of  Kishi,  the  son  of  Abdi 
15.  17  their  brethren,  E.  the  son  of  Kushaiah 
15.  19  Asaph,  and  E. .  .to  sound  with  cymbals  of 
E-THA'-NTM,  tnnxn  tlie  perennial. 
The  seventh  month  of  the  sacred  year  of  the  Hebrews, 
from  the  last  new  moon  of  October  till  the  first  one  of 
November. 

1  Ki.  8.    2  the  month  E.,  which  (is)  the  seventh 

ETH-BA'-AL,  SyariN  with  Baal  or  BaaVs  man. 
A  king  of  Sidon,  father  of  Jezebel  wife  of  Ahab.  He 
was  king  of  the  Tynans  as  well,  and  is  the  same  ae 
Eithnbalus  (a  priest  of  Astarte),  who,  after  having 
murdered  Pheles,  held  the  throne  of  Tyre  for  thirty- 
two  years. 

1  Ki.  16.  31  took  to  wife  Jezebel,  the  daughter  of  E. 


E'-THER,  M)ii  riches,  fulness. 

A  city  in  the  lowlands  of  Judah,  afterwards  allotted  to 
Simeon,  now  Athar.  In  1  Ch.  4.  32  Tochen  is  substituted 
for  Ether. 

Josh. 15.  42  Libnah,  and  E.,  and  Ashan 

19.  7  Ain,  Renunon,  and  E.,  and  Ashan ;  four 

E-THI-0-PI-A,  C;i3,  Aleioip. 

1.  This  is  the  word  used  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans 
for  the  Hebrew  name  Cush.  Cush  was  the  son  of  Ham, 
and  his  descendants  occupied  the  country  to  the  S.  of 
Egypt,-  and  comprehended,  in  its  widest  sense,  the 
modern  Nubia,  Sennar,  Kordofan,  and  northern  Abys- 
sinia, but  in  its  more  limited  sense,  only  the  kingdom 
of  Meroe,  from  the  junction  of  the  White  and  Blue 
branches  of  the  Nile  to  the  S.  border  of  Egypt.  Syene 
was  the  division  between  both  countries. 

Gen.   2.  13  it  that  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  E. 
Esth.  1.    1  Ahasu. .  .reigned  from  India  even  unto  E. 
8.    9  rulers  of.  .provinces,  .from  India  unto  E. 
Job   28.  19  The  topaz  of  E,  shall  not  equal  it 
Psa.  87.   4  Tyre,  with  E.;  this  (man)  was  born  there 
Isa.  18.    1  land.. which  (is)  beyond  the  rivers  of  E. 
Eze.  29.  10  tower  of  Syene  even  unto  the  border  of  E. 
Zeph.3.  10  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  E.  my  suppli. 
Acts  8.  27  and,  behold,  a  man  of  E.,  an  eunuch 

2.  This  name  is  also  used  to  denote  the  people  who 
occupied  the  land  of  Cush. 

2  Ki.19.  9  when  he  heard  say  of  Tirhakah  king  of  E. 
Psa.  68.  31  E.  shall  soon  stretch  out  her  hands  unto 
Isa.   20.    3  sign  and  wonder  upon  Egypt  and  upon  E. 

20.  5  they  shall  be  afraid  and  ashamed  of  E. 

37.  9  heard  say  concerning  Tirhakah  king  of  E. 
43.    3  Egypt  (for)  thy  ransom,  E.  and  Seba  for 

45.  14  labour  of  Egypt,  and  merchandise  of  E. 
Eze.  30.   4  upon  Egypt,  and  great  pain  shall  be  in  E. 

30.    5  E. .  .and  Lydia,  and  all  the  mingled  peo. 

38.  5  Persia,  E.,  and  Libya  with  them 

Nah.  3.   9  E.  and  Egypt,  .her  strength,  and  (it  was) 

E-THI-0-PI-AN,     and    E-THI-O-PI-ANS,    •£»,    E-13, 

The  name  generally  given  in  the  English  Bible  to  the 
descendants  of  Cush  son  of  Ham.  It,  is  used  both  as  a 
noun  and  an  adjective. 

Numi2.    1  because  of  the  E.  woman  whom  he  had 

12.    1  for  he  had  married  an  E.  woman 
2  Ch.12.    3  the  Lubims,  the  Sukkiims,  and  the  E  s 
14.    9  there  came  out  against  them  Zerah  the  E. 
14.  12  the  Lord  smote  the  E. .  .and  the  E.  fled 
14.  13  the  E.  were  overthrown,  that  they  could 
16.    8  Were  not  the  E.  and  the  Lubims  a  huge 

21.  16  of  the  Arabians,  that  (were)  near  the  E. 
Isa.  20.   4  and  the  E.  cajttives,  young  and  old 
Jer.  13.  23  Can  the  E.  change  his  skin,  or  the  leop. 

38.    7  Ebed-melech  the  E.,  one  of  the  eunuchs 
38.  10  the  king  commanded  Ebed-melech  the  E. 

38.  12  Ebed-melech  the  E.  said  unto  Jeremiah 

39.  16  Go  and  speak  to  Ebed-melech  the  E.,  say 

46.  9  the  E.  and  the  Libyans,  that  handle  the 
Eze.  30.    9  in  ships  to  make  the  careless  E.  afraid 
Dan.  11.  43  and  the  E.  (shall  be)  at  his  steps 

Amos  9.  7  (Are)  ye  not  as  children  of  the  E  unto  me 
Zeph.  2.  12  Ye  E.  also,  ye  (shall  be)  slain  by  my  sword 
Acts   S.  27  authority  under  Caudace  queen  of  the  E. 

ETH'-NAN,  f.;nN  gift. 

Grandson  of  Ashur  through  Caleb  son  of  Hur.    B  C.  1500- 

1  Ch.  4.    7  the  sons  of  Helah.  .Zersth..and  E. 
ETH'-NI,  'jnx  my  gift. 

Ancestor  of  Asaph  whom  David  set  over  the  service  of 
song.    B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.  6.  41  The  son  of  E.,  the  son  of  Zerah 

EU-BU'-LUS,  Evpov\os. 

A  disciple  at  Rome  who  saluted  Timothy. 

2  Ti.  4.  21  E.  greeteth  thee,  and  Pudens,  and  Linus 

ETJ-NI'-CE,  EvvUrj- 

Timothy's  mother;  in  Acts  16,  1  she  is  spoken  of  as  a 

"Jewess  that  believed." 

2  Ti.    1.    5  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  E. 
EUNUCH  — 
1. Eunuch,  officer,  D"ip  saris. 

2  Ki.   9.  32  looked  out  to  him  two  (or)  three  eunuchs 

20.  18  they  shall  be  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of 
Isa.   39.    7  they  shall  be  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of 
56.    3  neither  let  the  eunuch  say,  Behold,  I  (am) 
56.    4  unto  the  eunuchs  that  keep  my  sabbaths 
Jer.  29.    2  the  king,  and  the  queen,  and  the  eunuchs 
34.  19  the  princes  of  Jerusalem,  the  eunuchs 
38.   7  one  of  the  eunuchs  which  was  in  the 
41.  16  women,  and  the  children,  and  the  eunu. 
52.  25  He  took  also  out  of  the  city  an  eunuch 
Dan.    1.    3  Ashpenaz  the  master  of  his  eunuchs 
1.    7  whom  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  gave 
1.   8  he  requested  of  the  prince  of  the  eunuch 
1.   9  love  with  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs 
1.  10  prince  of  the  eunuchs  said  unto  Daniel 
1.  11  whom  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  had  set 
1.  18  prince  of  the  eunuchs  brought  them  in 
%  Eunuch,  cifvovxos  eunauchos. 

Matt.  19.  12  there  are  some  eunuchs,  .are  some  eun. 

19.  12  there  be  eunuchs,  which  have  made 
Acts    8.  27  an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under 
8.  34  the  eunuch  answered  Philip,  and  said 
8.  36  the  eunuch  said,  See,  (here  is)  water 
8.  38  into  the  water,  both  Philip  and  the  eunuch 
8.  39  that  the  eunuch  saw  him  no  more 


EUNUCH 


309 


EVEN 


EUNUCH,  to  make  — 

To  make  a  eunuch,  evvovxifa  eunouchizo. 
Mattig.  12  which  were  made  eunuchs  of  men 

19.  12  which  have  made  themselves  eunuchs 

EU-O-DI'-AS,  EvcoSta,  EvoSia. 

This  name  is  more  accurately  Euodia ;  a  Christian 
woman  at  Philippi.  The  two  persons  here  mentioned 
by  Paul  are  both  women. 

Phil.  4.    2  I  beseech  E.,  and  beseech  Syntyche,  that 

ETJ-PHRA'-TES,  ro3,  E^cpparns  bursting,  sweet. 
The  River  (Ha-na-har  in  Heb.  often),  as  pre-eminently 
the  river  of  Asia  in  contrast  to  the  short-lived  torrents 
of  Canaan.  Its  modern  name  is  Frat,  which  is  nearly 
the  Hebrew  spelling.  It  rises  in  Armenia,  flows  S. 
like  the  Tigris,  and  falls  into  the  Persian  Gulf. 
Geu.   2.  14  And  the  fourth  river  (is)  E. 

15.  18  from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto.,  the  river  E. 
Deut.  1 .    7  Lebanon,  unto  the . .  river,  the  river  E. 

11.  24  from,  .the  river  E.,  even  unto  the  utter. 
Josh.  1.    4  From  the  wilderness .  .unto  the .  .river  E. 
2  Sa.    8.    3  to  recover  his  border  at  the  river  E. 
2  Ki.23.  29  against  the  king  of  Assyria  to  the.  .E. 

24.    7  from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto  the  river  E. 

1  Ch.   5.    9  of  the  wilderness  from  the  river  E. 

18.    3  to  stablish  his  dominion  by  the  river  E. 

2  Ch.35.  20  up  to  fi*ht  against  Carchemish  by  E. 
Jer.  13.    4  arise,  go  to  E.,  and  hide  it  there  in  a  hole 

j.3.  5  So  I  went,  and  hid  it  by  E.,  as  the  Lord 
13.  6  Arise,  go  to  E.,  and  take  the  girdle  from 
13.  7  Then  I  went  to  E.,  and  digged,  and  took 
46.  2  against  the  army . .  which  was  by  the . .  E. 
46.  6  and  fall  toward  the  north  by  the  river  E. 
46.  10  a  sacrifice  in  the  north,  .by  the  river  E. 
51.  63  and  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  E. 
Rev.    9. 14  angels  which  are  bound  in  the  great.  .E. 

16.  12  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the.  .river  E. 

EU-RO-CLY'-DON,         EvpoKKvZoov,         EvpvK\v$uv, 

EupaKvKov. 
A  tempestuous  wind  often  experienced  by  navigators  in 
the  Levant;   it  blows  from  N.E.  or  E.N.E.     The  name 
really  means  the  united  winds  Eurus  and  Aquilo. 
Acts  27.  14  there  arose.. atempestuouswind.calledE. 

ETJ-TY'-CHTJS,  Evtvxos. 

A  young  man  of  Troas  restored  to  life. 

Acts  20.    9  in  a  window  a  certain  young  man  named  E. 
EVANGELIST  — 
One  loho  announces  good  tidings,  sbayys\iaTT)s. 

Acts  21.    S  into  the  house  of  Philip  the  evangelist 

Eph.   4.  11  and  some,  prophets  ;  and  some,  evangel. 

2  Ti.    4.    5  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  make  full 

EVE,  mn,  Eva  life,  life-giving. 
The  name  of  the  first  woman. 

Gen.    3.  20  Aud  Adam  called  his  wife's  name  E. 

4.  1  Adam  knew  E.  his  wife  ;  and  she  coucei. 
2  Co.  11.    3  as  the  serpent  beguiled  E.  through  his 

1  Ti.    2.  13  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  E. 

EVEN  — 
l.Only,  ^N  ak. 

Exod.12. 15  even  the  first  day  ye  shall  put  away 

2.  A  ho,  *]N  aph. 

Lev.  26.  28  I,  even  I,  will  chastise  j'ou  seven  times 

o.Even,  also,  D3  gam. 

Gen.  20.    5  even  she  her3elf  said,  He  (is)  my  brother 

i.Lo,  lo  as,  Nil  he. 

Dan.    2.  43  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay 

5.  Tliat,  when,  because,  *3  hi. 

Exod.32.  29  even  every  man  upon  his  son,  and  upon 

6.  Till,  unto,  during,  which,  -iy  ad. 

Lev.  23.  16  Even  unto  the  morrow  after  the  seventh 
7. Only,  surely,  nevertheless,  piraq. 

2  Ch.28. 10  (are  there)  not  with  you,  even  with  you 
S.For,  verily  then,  yap  gar. 

Jas.    4. 14  It  is  [even]  a  vapour,  that  appeareth  for  a 
9.  But,  moreover,  B4  de. 

Rom.  3.  22  Even  the  righteousness  of  God  (which  is) 
9.  30  even  the  rig,  'eousness  which  is  of  faith 

Phil.  2.    S  unto  death,  e\  n  the  death  of  the  cross 
\Q. Any  more,  any  longer,  yet,  still,  en  eti. 

Luke  1.  15  the  Holy  Ghost",  even  from  his  mother's 
11.  Unto,  up  to,  ecus  heds. 

Marki4.  54  even  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest 
1 2  A  nd,  even,  n.ai  kai. 

Matt.  5.  46  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  same  ? 

5.  47  do  not  even  the  publicans  so  ? 

7.  12  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them 

8.  27  that  even  the  winds  and  the  sea  obey 

12.  8  Son  of  man  is  Lord  even  of  the  sabbath 

13.  12  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  he  hath 
18.  33  compassion . .  [even]  as  I  had  pity  on  thee  ? 
20.  14  give  unto  this  last  even  as  unto  thee 

25.  29  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath 
.Mark  1.  27  commandeth  he  even  the  unclean  spirit  s 
4.  25  shall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  hath 
4.  41  that  even  the  wind  and  the  sea  obey  him  : 

6.  2  even  such  mighty  works  are  wrought  by 
13. 32  seduce,  if  (it  were)  possible,  even  the 


:Co. 


•  Co. 


Luke  8.  18  taken  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to 
8.  25  he  commandeth  even  the  winds  and 
9. 54  and  consume  them,  even  as  Elias  did 

10.  11  Even  the  very  dust  of  your  city,  which 
12.  41  this  parable  unto  us,  or  even  to  all 
12. 57  why  even  of  yourselves  judge  ye  not 

18.  11  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this  publi. 

19.  26  even  that  he  hath  shall  be  taken  away 
19. 42  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day 

20.  37  even  Moses  showed  at  the  bush,  when  he 
24.  24  found  (it)[even]so  as  the  women  had  said 

John  5.  21  even  so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will 
8.  25  Even  (the  same)  that  I  said  unto  you  from 

11.  22  even  now,  whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of 
11.  37  that  even  this  man  should  not  have  died 

Acts  15.    8  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  as  (lie  did)  unto  us 
26.  11  persecuted  (them)  even  unto  strange  cit. 

Rom.  1.  13  you  also,  even  as  among  other  Gentiles 
5. 14  even  over  them  that  had  not  sinned  after 
5.  18  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  (the) 
5.  21  even  so  might  grace  reign  through 
8.  23  even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves 

8.  34  who  is  [even]  at  the  right  hand  of  God 

9.  24  Even  us,  whom  he  hath  called,  not  of  the 
11.    5  Even  so  then  at  this  present  time  also 
15.    3  even  Christ  pleased  not  himself;  but,  as 

6  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
11  even  so  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no 

3.  5  even  as  the  Lord  gave  to  every  man? 
7.    7  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  myself 
9.  14  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that 

14.  12  Even  so  ye,  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous 

15.  22  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive 
15.  24  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father 

1  as  I  have  given  order,  .even  so  do  ye 
3  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
1.    8  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life 

1.  13  ye  shall  acknowledge  [even]  to  the  end 
7.  14  even  so  our  boasting,  which  (I  made)  be. 

10.    7  as  he  (is)  Christ's,  even  so  (are)  we  Christ's 

10.  13  a  measure  to  reach  even  unto  you 

11.  12  wherein  they  glory  they  maybe,  .even  as 
2. 16  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ 

4.  3  Even  so  we,  when  we  were  children,  were 

4.  29  (born)  after  the  Spirit,  even  so  (it  is)  now 

5.  12  would  they  were  even  cut  off  which  tro. 

2.  3  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others 
4.    4  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your 

4.  32  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgi. 

5.  12  For  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those 
5.  23  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church 
5.  29  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  church 

1.  15  preach  Christ  even  of  envy  and  strife 

3.  15  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  you 
3. 18  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  (that  they) 

4.  16  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and 
3.  13  even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also  (do) 

2.  14  suffered,  .even  as  they  (have) of  the  Jews 

2.  19  (Are)  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our 

3.  4  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  aud  ye  know 
3.  12  toward  all  (men),  even  as  we  (do)  toward 

3.  13  in  holiness  before  God,  even  our  Father 

4.  5  even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know  not  God 
4.  13  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope 

2.  16  [even]  our  Father,  which  hath  loved  us 

3.  1  and  be  glorified,  even  as  (it  is)  with  you 
19  owest  unto  me  even  thine  own  self  besides 

7.    4  [even]  the  patriarch  Abraham  gave  the 
1 1.  12  sprang  there  even  of  one  and  him  as  good 
11. 19  able  to  raise  (him)  up,  even  from  the  de. 
Jas.     2.  17  Even  so  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is 
3.    5  Even  so  the  tongue  is  a  little  member 
2  Pe.    1.  14  even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  show. 
2.    1  even  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them 
Jude       23  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the 
Rev.    2.  13  [even]  in  those  days  wherein  Antipas 

17.  11  even  he  is  the  eighth,  and  is  of  the  seven 

18.  6  Reward  her  even  as  she  rewarded  you 

IS. Indeed,  truly,  \xiv  men. 

1  Th.  2.  18  come  unto  you,  even  I  Paul,  once  and 
14.  Thus,  so,  oi/toj,  ovtcos  houto,  houtos. 

Acts  27.  25  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me 
15. And,  also,  re  te. 

Rom.  1.  26  even  their  women  did  change  the  natural 
16.  Right,  rir/hteousness,  just,  pis  tsedeq. 

Job    31.   6  Let  me  be  weighed  in  an  even  balance 
EVEN  — 
1. Evening,  n~iy  ereb. 

Exodi6.  12  At  even  ye  shall  eat  flesh,  and  in  the 

18.  14  stand  by  thee  from  morning  unto  even 

29.  30,  41  other  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  at  even 

30.  8  when  Aaron  lighteth  the  lamps  at  even 
Lev.  11. 24,  27,  31,  32,  39  be  unclean  until  the  even 

11.  25,  28,  40,  40  and  be  unclean  until  the  even 

14.  46  shall  be  unclean  until  the  even 

T5-    5.  6j  7,  8,  10,  11,  16,  17  unclean  until  the  e. 

15.  10,  18,  19,  2r,  22,  23,  27  unclean  until  the  e. 
17.  15  bathe,  .and  be  unclean  until  the  even 

22.  6  any  such  shall  be  unclean  until  even 

23.  5  fourteenth  (day)  of  the  first  month  at  even 
Num.  9.    3  at  even,  ye  shall  keep  it  in  His  appointed 

g.  5  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month  at  even 
9.  11  fourteenth  day  of  the  second  month  at  e. 
9.  21  cloud  abode  from  even  unto  the  morning 

19.  7  priest  shall  be  unclean  until  the  even 
19.   8,  10  be  unclean  until  the  even 

ig.  21,  22  shall  be  unclean  until  even 
28    4,  8  the  other  lamb  shalt  thou  offer  at  even 
Deut  28.  67  thou  shalt  say  "Would  God  it  were  even  ! 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Phil. 


Col. 

1  Th. 


>Th. 


Phm. 
Heb. 


Judg2o.  23  and  wept  before  the  Lord  until  even,  and 

20.  26  fasted  that  day  until  even,  and  offered 

21.  2  and  abode  there  till  even  before  God 
Ruth  2.  17  she  gleaned  in  the  field  until  even,  and 
2  Sa.  1.  12  and  fasted  until  even,  for  Saul,  and  for 
2  Ch.18.  34  stayed  (himself)  up.  .until  the  even 
Eze.  12.   7  in  the  even  I  digged  through  the  wall 

2. Late  (in  the  evening),  mj/e  ojise. 

Markn.  19  when  even  was  come,  he  went  out  of  the 
3. Evening,  dtyia  ojisia. 

Matt.  8.  16  When  the  even  was  come,  they  brought 
20.    8  So  when  even  was  come,  the  lord  of  the 

26.  20  when  the  even  was  come,  he  sat  down 

27.  57  When  the  even  was  come,  there  came  a 
Mark  4.  35  when  the  even  was  come,  he  saith  unto 

6.  47  when  even  was  come,  the  ship  was  in  the 

15.  42  when  the  even  was  come,  because  it  was 
John  6.  16  when  even  was  (now)  come,  his  disciples 

EVEN,  at  — 

1.  Evening,  2~}Si  ereb. 

Gen.  19.    1  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  even 

Exodi2.  18  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at  even 

12.  18  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month  at  even 

16.  6  At  even,  then  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord 
16.  13  at  even  the  quails  came  up,  and  covered 

Lev.  23.  32  in  the  ninth  (day)  of  the  month  at  even 
Num.  9.  15  at  even  there  was  upon  the  taberuacle  as 
19. 19  bathe  himself,  .and  shall  be  clean  at  even 
Deut  16.    4  thou  sacrificedst  the  first  day  at  even 

16.  6  thou  shalt  sacrifice  the  passover  at  even 

28.  67  at  even  thou  shalt  say,  "Would  God  it 
Josh.  5.  10  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at  even 
Judgig.  16  from  his  work  out  of  the  field  at  even 

1  Sa.  20.    5  in  the  field  unto  the  third  (day)  at  even 

2  Sa.  11.  13 ;  1  Ki.  22.  35 ;  1  Ch.  23.  30  ;  Eze.  12.  4. 

I.Evening  having  come,  btyias  ysvoy.4vT)s. 

Mark  1.  32  And  at  even,  when  the  sun  did  set 
Z.Late  (in  the  evening),  mj/e  opse. 

Marki3.  35  at  even,  or  at  midnight,  or  at  the  cock 
EVEN  as  — 
I. Even  as,  fcadd-n-ep  kathaper. 

Rom.  4.    6  Even  as  David  also  describeth  the  bless. 

2  Co.  1.  14  even  as  ye  also  (are)  ours  in  the  day  of 

%  According  as,  KaQws  kathos. 

Markn.  6  said  unto  them  even  as  Jesus  had  comm. 
Luke  1.    2  Even  as  they  delivered  them  unto  us 

19.  32  and  found  even  as  he  had  said  unto  them 
John  5.  23  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father 

12.  50  even  as  the  Father  said  unto  me,  so  I 

15.  10  even  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  comman. 

17.  14,  16  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world 

17.  22  that  they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one 
Rom.  1.  28  even  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God 
1  Co.  1.    6  Even  as  the  testimony  of  Christ  was 

11.    1  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  (am)  of  Chr. 

13.  12  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am 
Gal.     3.    6  Even  as  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it 
Phil.   1.    7  Even  as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think  this 

1  Th.  5.  11  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do 
1  Jo.  2.    6  ought,  .also  so  to  walk,  evenashe  walked 

2.  27  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide 

3.  3  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure 
3.    7  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous 

3  Jo.         2  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth 

3  even  as  thou  walkest  in  the  truth 

Z.In  what  turn  or  manner,  %v  rp6irou  hon  tropon. 

Matt.  23.  37  even  as  a  hen  ga  there  th  her  chickens 
4.  So,   according  to  what  manner,  (outccs)  tcaQ'  i>v 

Tp6irov. 

Acts  15.  11  believe,  .we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they 
27.  25  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me 

5. As,  cos  has. 

Mattis.  28  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt 
Mark  4.  36  they  took  him  even  as  he  was  in  the  ship 
1  Co.  12.    2  Gentiles,  carried  away,  .even  as  ye  were 
Eph.    5.  33  every  one.  .love  his  wife  even  as  himself 
1  Pe.  3.    6  Even  as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham,  calling 
Jude         7  Even  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  and  the 

Q.Even  as,  &a"irep  hosper. 

Matt.  5.  48  [even  as]  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

20.  28  Even  as  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be 
EVEN  like  — 

As,  according  as,  &$  has. 

Rev.  21.  11  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal 

EVEN  ..not  — 

Not  even,  ovde  oude. 

John2i.  25  even  the  world  itself  could  not  contain 

EVEN  now  — 

1.7V)  day,  o'vn  hayyom. 

Deut.31.  21  even  now,  before  I  have  brought  them 

%1fow,  apTi  arti. 

Matt.  9.  18  My  daughter  is  even  now  dead  :  but 

Z.Now,  already,  ijSn  ede. 

Lukeig.  37  even  now  at  the  descent  of  the  mount  of 

EVEN  place  — 

Uprightness,  a  plain,  "iiE^a  mishor. 

Psa.  26.  12  My  foot  standeth  in  an  even  place  :  in 

EVEN  so  — 

1.  A  sthus,  npa  kakah. 

Jer.  19. 11  Even  so  will  I  break  this  people,  and  this 


EVEN 


310 


EVER 


Rom.  6. 
6. 


i  Co.: 
:Th. 


Q.  So,  thus,  }3  ken. 

Exod39.  43  Lord,  .commanded,  even  so  had  they 

3.  Tea,  yea,  vai  nai. 

Matt ii.  26  Even  so,  Father  ;  for  it  seemed  good  in 
Lukeio.  21  even  so,  Father  ;  for  so  it  seemed  good 
Rev.    1.    7  shall  wail  because  of  him.    Even  so.    A. 
16.  17  Even  so,  Lord  God  Almighty,  true  and 

22.  20  come  quickly.    Amen.     [Even  so],  come 

A.  Thus,  so,  ovtw,  ovrws  houto,  houtos. 

Matt.  7.  17  Even  so  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth 
12.  45  Even  so  shall  it  be  also  unto  this  wicked 
18.  14  Even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father 

23.  28  Even  so  ye  also  outwardly  appear  right. 
John  3.  14  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted 

14.  31  Father  gave  me  commandment,  even  so 
Acts  12.  15  constantly  affirmed  that  it  was  even  so 
"    4  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness 

10  even  so  now  yield  your  members  servants 
.  31  Even  so  have  these  also  now  not  believed 
.  12  even  so  (is)  the  man  also  by  the  woman 
.    4  But  as  we  were  allowed,  .even  so  we 
.  14  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
5.  Even  so,  ajcrauTOis  hOsautos. 

1  Ti.    3.  11  Even  so  (must  then-)  wives  (be)  grave 

EVEN  to,  unto,  until  — 
l.Unto,  "iy  ad. 

Exod27-    5  may  be  even  to  the  midst  of  the  altar 

2.  Unto,  up  to,  ecus-  heos. 

Matt26.  38  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death 

2  Co.  3.  15  even  unto  this  day,  when  Moses  is  read 

1  Jo.    2.   9  hateth  his . .  is  in  darkness  even  until  now 

3.  Until,  as  far  as,  &XP1  ^cAfl-fc 

Acts  11.    5  a  great  sheet,  .and  it  came  even  to  me 
Heb.    4. 12  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of 

EVEN  thus  — 

According  to  these  things,  Kara  ravra  kata  tauta. 

Lukei7.  30  Even  thus  shall  it  be  iu  the  day  when  the 
EVEN...  very  — 
And,  Kai  kcd. 

Luke  1 2.    7  even  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all 

EVEN,  also  — 
A  ud,  Kai  kai. 

Luke  6.  33  have  ye?  for  sinners  also  do  even  the  same 
EVEN,  and  — 
l.And,  Kai  h'i. 

1  Jo.   4.    3  and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world 

%Yet  even,  at  tlie  same  time,  o/xcas  homos. 

1  Co.  14.    7  even  things  without  life  giving  sound 
EVENING  — 
l.To  do  {it)  in  the  evening,  Tty  arah,  5. 

1  Sa.  17.  16  Philistine  drew  near  morning  and  evening 
2. Evening,  3"ijj  ereb. 

Gen.    1.    5,  8,  13,  19,  23,  31  evening  and  the  morning 
8.  11  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  evening 
24  11  at  the  time  of  the  evening,  (even)  the  time 

29.  23  it  came  to  pass  in  the  evening,  that  he 

30.  16  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  even. 
Exodi2.    6  Israel  shall  kill  it  in  the  evening 

16.    8  shall  give  you  in  the  evening  tiesh  to  eat 

18.  13  stood . .  from  the  morning  unto  the  even. 

27.  21  shall  order  it  from  evening  to  morning 
Xev.  24.    3  order  it  from  the  evening  unto  the  morn. 
Deut23.  11  when  evening  cometh  on,  he  shall  wash 
Josh  10.  26  hanging  upon  the  trees  until  the  evening 
1  Sa.  14.  24  man  that  eateth  (any)  food  until  evening 

30. 17  even  unto  the  evening  of  the  next  day 

1  Ki.17.   6  and  bread  and  flesh  in  the  evening 

2  Ki.  16.  15  the  evening  meat  offering,  and  the  king's 
1  Ch.16.  40  offering  continually  morning  and  evening 


■Ch. 


Ezra 


13- 

13- 
3*- 
3- 
9- 
9- 


4  the  burnt  offerings  morning  and  evening 

11  every  morning  and  every  evening  burnt 

.  11  the  lamps  thereof,  to  burn  every  evening 

3  the  morning  and  evening  burnt  offerings 

3  (even)  burnt  offerings  morning  and  even. 

4  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  sacrifice 

5  at  the  evening  sacrifice  I  arose  up  from 
Esth.  2.  14  In  the  evening  she  went,  and  on  the  mor. 
Job     4.  20  They  are  destroyed  from  morning  to  ev. 
Psa.  55.  17  Evening,  and  morning,  and  at  noon,  will 

59.    6  They  return  at  evening  ;  they  make  a 
59. 14  at  evening  let  them  return ;  (and) 
65.    8  outgoings  of  the  morning  and  evening 
90.    6  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down,  and  with. 
104.  23  and  to  his  labour  until  the  evening 
141.    2  lifting  up  of  my  hands  (as)  the  evening 
Prov.  7.   9  iu  the  evening,  in  the  black  and  dark 
Eccl.11.    6  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thine  hand 
Jer.     6.    4  shadows  of  the  evening  are  stretched  out 
Eze.  33,  22  hand  of  the  LORD,  .upon  me  in  the  even. 

46.    2  gate  shall  not  be  shut  until  the  evening 
Dan.    8.  26  the  vision  of  the  evening  and  the  morn. 

9. 21  about  the  time  of  the  evening  oblation 
Hab.    1.    8  are  more  fierce  than  the  evening  wolves 
Zeph.  2.    7  shall  they  lie  down  in  the  evening 

3.    3  her  judges  (are)  evening  wolves ;  they 
Zech  14.    7  (that)  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  light 

Z.A  plain,  wilderness,  Arabah.,  ny$L  ardbah, 
Jer.     5.  6  a  wolf  of  the  evening  shall  spoil  them 

A.Evening,  cvrntidr,  s<rirepa  hespera. 

Luke24.  29  it  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  far 
Acts  2S.  23  persuading,  .from  morning  till  evening 


5.Eevening,  o-tyia  opsia. 

Matt  14.  15  when  it  was  evening,  his  disciples  came 
16.    2  When  it  is  evening,  ye  say,  (It  will  be) 

EVENING,  at  — 

It  being  late,  o&ffws  otylas  ouses  02>sias. 

John2o.  19  the  same  day  at  evening,  being  the  first 
EVENING,  in  the  — 
Evening  having  come-,  6\plas  yevojxevqs  ojisias  gen. 

Marki4. 17  in  the  evening  he  cometh  with  the  twelve 
EVENING,  toward  — 
To  be  late,  aiiJJ.1?  laarob. 

Judg  19.    9  the  day  draweth  toward  evening,  I  pray 
EVENING  tide,  or  eventide  — 
l.Time  of  evening,  nny  ny  eth  ereb. 

2  Sa.  11.   2  it  came  to' pass  in  an  evening  tide,  that 

Isa.   17.  14  behold  at  evening  tide  trouble;  (and) 

%Evening,  eorirepa  hespera. 

Acts   4.    3  unto  the  next  day  :  for  it  was  now  even. 

3.  The  hour  being  late,  biplas  rrjs  &pas. 

Markn.  11  the  eventide  was  come,  he  went  out  unto 
EVENT  — 
Chance,  occurrence,  event,  n~\pn  miqreh. 

Eccl.  2. 14  also  that  one  event  happenethto  them  all 
9.  2  (there  is)  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and 
9.   3  that  (there  is)  one  event  unto  all 

EVENTIDE  — 

1. Evening,  TV%  ereb. 

Josh.  7.    6  and  fell  to  the  earth,  .until  the  eventide 

2.  Time  of  evening,  3*w  ny  eth  ereb. 

Gen.  24.  63  to  meditate  in  the  field  at  the  eventide 
Josh.  8.  29  of  Ai  he  hanged  on  a  tree  until  eventide 

EVER  — 

1.  Pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  nzinetsach. 

Isa.   28.  28  he  will  not  ever  be  threshing  it,  nor 
33. 20  not  one  of  the  stakes,  .ever  be  removed 

2.Age,  age-lasting,  Dyiy  olam. 

Gen.  13.  15  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever 
Exodi2.  24  ordinance  to  thee  and .  .thy  sons  for  ever 

27.  21  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  unto  their 

28.  43  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  unto  him 

29.  28  a  statute  for  ever  from  the  children  of 

30.  21  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  to  them 
Lev.    6.  18  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  in  your 

6.  22  (it  is)  a  statute  for  ever  unto  the  Lord 

7.  34  by  a  statute  for  ever  from  among  the 

7-  36  (by)  a  statute  for  ever  throughout  their 
10.    9  (it  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  throughout 

10. 15  it  shall  be  thine,  .by  a  statute  for  ever 
16.  29  (this)  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  you 

16.  31  afflict  your  souls,  by  a  statute  for  ever 

17.  7  This  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  them 

23.  14,  21,  31,  41  (it  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever 

24.  3  (it  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  in  your 
Numio.   8  shall  be  to  you  for  an  ordinance  for  ever 

15.  15  an  ordinance  for  ever  in  your  generations 

18.  8  and  to  thy  sons,  by  an  ordinance  forever 
18.  11,  ig,  daughterswiththee.byastatutefor e. 

18.  23  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  through. 

19.  10  unto  the  stranger,  .for  a  statute  for  ever 
Deut  12.  28  and  with  thy  children  after  thee  for  ever 

13. 16  it  shall  be  an  heap  for  ever;  it  shall  not 

15. 17  and  he  shall  lie  thy  servant  for  ever 

23.    3  not  enter  into  the  congregation . .  fur  ever 

28.  46  be  upon  thee,  .and  upon  thy  seed  for  ever 

29.  29  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever 
Josh.  4.    7  unto  the  children  of  Israel  for  ever 

8.  28  made  it  an  heap  for  ever,  (even)  a  desola. 
14.   9  inheritance,  and  thy  children's  for  ever 

1.  22  before  the  Lord,  and  there  abide  for  ever 

2.  30  thy  house,  .should  walk  before  me  for  e. 
3. 13  that  I  will  judge  his  house  for  ever  for 

3.  14  not  be  purged  with  sacrifice,  .for  ever 
13.  13  established,  .kingdom  upon  Israel  for  ev. 

20.  15  cut.  .thy  kindness  from  my  house  for  ev. 
20.  23  the  Lord  (be)  between  thee  and  me  for  e. 
20. 42  and  between  my  seed  and  thy  seed  for  ev. 

27.  12  thei'efore  he  shall  be  my  servant  for  ever 
3.  28  (are)  guiltless  before  the  Lord  for  ever 
7.  13  establish,  .throne  of  his  kingdom  forever 
7.  16  shall  be  established  for  ever  before  thee 
7.  16  thy  throne  shall  be  established  for  ever 
7.  24  Israel  (to  be)  a  people  unto  thee  for  ever 
7.  25  concerning  his  house,  establish  (it)  for  ev. 
7.  26  let  thy  name  be  magnified  for  ever  •. 

1  Ki.  2.  33  there  be  peace  for  ever  from  the  Lord 
2.  45  be  established  before  the  Lord  for  ever 
8. 13  settled  place  for.  .to  abide  in  for  ever 

9.  3  this  house,  .to  put  my  name  there  forever 

1  Ch.15.    2  chosen,  .to  minister  unto  himfor  ever 

16.  36  Blessed  (be)  fhe  Lord  God.  .foreverande. 

17.  12  and  I  will  establish  his  throne  for  ever 
17.  14  in  mine  house  and  in  my  kingdom  for  ever 
17.  22  didst  thou  make  thine  own  people  for  ev. 
17.  23  let  the  thing,  .be  established  for  ever 
17.  24  that  thy  name  maybe  magnified  for  ever 

22.  10  and  I  will  establish  the  throne,  .for  ever 

23.  13  he  and  his  sons  for  ever,  to  burn  incense 
23.  13  and  to  bless  in  Ms  name  for  ever 

28.  8  for  your  children  after  you  for  ever 

2  Ch.  6.    2  and  a  place  fur  thy  dwelling  for  ever 
7.  16  house,  that  my  name  may  be  there  for  e. 

Ezra   9.  12  nor  seek  their  peace  or  their  wealth  fore. 
9.  12  an  inheritance  to  your  children  for  ever 
Neh.   9.    s  bless  the  Lord  yourGod  for  ever  and  ever 


1  Sa. 


;  Sa. 


Neh 

Job 

Psa 

■;■ 

10. 

21. 

28. 

41;- 

4a. 

48. 

S2. 

6l. 

6l. 

66. 

8q. 

8p. 

8p. 

89. 

104. 

in. 

in. 

119. 

125- 

'Ii- 

148. 

Isa. 

9- 

3°- 

3=- 

3*- 

34- 

SQ. 

Jer. 

7- 

17- 

*5- 

35- 

49- 

5i- 

Eze 

37- 

Dan 

.  12. 

.loe: 

2. 

Mic 

4- 

Hal 

1. 

i  not  come  into  the  congregation,  .for  ever 

4  wilt  thou  take  him  for  a  servant  for  ever? 

1 1  let  them  ever  shout  for  joy,  because  thou 

16  The  Lord  (is)  King  for  ever  and 

4  (even)  length  of  days  for  ever  and 
9  feed  them  also,  and  lift  them  up  for  ever 

6  Thy  throne,  0  Gud,  (is)  for  ever  and 
8  God  will  establish  it  for  ever 

14  For  this  God  (is)  our  God  for  ever  and 

5  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and 
4  I  will  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  for  ever 

7  He  shall  abide  before  God  for  ever 

7  He  ruleth  by  his  power  for  ever  ;  his 

1  sing  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for  ever 

2  said,  Mercy  shall  be  built  up  for  ever 

4  Thy  seed  will  I  establish  for  ever,  and 
37  It  shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the 

5  (that)  it  should  not  be  removed  for  ever 

5  he  will  ever  be  mindful  of  his  covenant 

8  They  stand  fast  for.  .ever,  (and  are) 
98  mine  enemies  ;  for  they  (are)  ever  with 

2  his  people  from  henceforth,  even  for  ever 

3  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth  and  for  ever 

6  also  established  them  for.  .ever 

7  justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever 

8  for  the  time  to  come  for.  .ever 
14  and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever 

17  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever 
17  theyshall  possess  it  for  ever,  from  gener. 
21  saith  the  Lord,  .henceforth  and  for  ever 

7  I  gave  to  your  fathers,  for  ever  and  ever 

4  kindled  a  fire .  .(which)  shall  burn  forever 

5  you  and  to  your  fathers  for  ever  and  ever 

6  drink  no  wine . .  ye,  nor  your  sons  for  ever 
33  And  Ha2or  shall  be.  .a  desolation  for  ever 
26  thou  shalt  be  desolate  for  ever,  saith  the 
62  but  that  it  shall  be  desolate  for  ever 
25  and  their  children's  children,  for  ever 

7  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever,  that 
2  there  hath  not  been  ever  the  like,  neither 
7  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  them,  .forever 
4  whom  the  Lord  hath  indignation  forever 

3.  To  strive,  T"i  rib. 

Judg  1 1.  25  did  he  ever  strive  against  Israel,  or  did 

4.  Continually,  "t'"ri  tamid. 

Psa.  25.  15  Mine  eyes  (are)  ever  toward  the  Lord;  for 

51.  3  and  my  sin  (is)  ever  before  me 

5.  What  is  before  (in  time  or  place),  Dip  qedem. 
Prov.  8.  23  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was 

d. Always,  aye,  aei  aei. 

Markis.    8  (him  to  do)  as  he  had  ever  done  unto 
7. To  the  age,  els  rhv  aiava  eis  ton  aiuna. 

Heb.   7.  24  this  (man),  because  he  continueth  ever 

8.  To  all  the  ages,  els  Trduras  robs  atavas  eispantas. 
Jude       25  dominion  and  power,  both  now  and  ever 

d.Alway,  at  all.  time,  iravrore  pantote. 

Luke  15.  31  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that 
JohniS.  20  I  ever  taught  in  the  synagogiie,  and  in 

1  Th.  4.  17  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord 

5.  15  ever  follow  that  which  is  good,  both 
■2  Ti.    3.    7  Ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to 
Heb.   7.  25  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
EVER,  for  — 

l.To  pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  ma?  lanetsach,    n;u 
netsach. 

2  Sa.    2.  26  Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever  ?  knowest 
Job     4.  20  perish  for  ever  without  any  regarding 

14.  20  Thou  prevailest  for  ever  against  him,  and 
20.*  7  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  own  dung 

23.  7  should  I  be  delivered  for  ever  from  my 

36.  7  he  doth  establish  them  for  ever,  and  they 
Psa.  T3.    1  How  long  wilt  thou  forget..O  Lord?  fore.? 

44.  23  O  Lord  ?  arise,  cast  (us)  not  off  for  ever 
49.   9  he  should  still  live  for  ever,  (and)  not  see 

52.  5  God  shall  likewise  destroy  thee  for  ever 
68.  16  yea,  the  Loud  will  dwell  (in  it)  for  ever 
74.    1  O  God,  why  hast  thou  cast  (us)  off  for  e.? 
74.  10  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  name  forever? 
74  19  forget  not  the  congregation,  .for  ever 

77.    8  Is  his  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever?  doth 
79.    5  wilt  thou  be  angry  for  ever  ?  shall  thy 
89.  46  wilt  thou  hide  thyself  forever?  shall  thy 
Jer.  50,  39  it  shall  be  no  mure  inhabited  for  ever 
Lam.  5.  20  Wherefore  dost  thou  forget  us  for  ever 
Amos  t.  11  and  he  kept  his  wrath  forever 

%I)uration,  contiwuity,  "iy  ad. 

NU11124.  20  end  (shall  be)  that  he  perish  for  ever 

24.  24  Eber,  and  he  also  shall  perish  forever 

1  Ch.28.    9  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  off  forever 
Job   19.  24  they  were  graven,  .in  the  rock  for  ever 
Psa.     9.  18  expectation .  shall  (not)  perish  for  ever 
19.    9  The  fear  of  the  LORD,  .enduring  for  ever 

21.  6  thou  hast  made  him  most  blessed  forever 

22.  26  your  heart  shall  live  for  ever 

37.  29  righteous  shall,  .dwell  therein  for  ever 
61.    8  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thy  name  for  ever 

53.  17  them  be  confounded  and  troubled  forever 
89.  29  seed  also  will  I  make  (to  endure)  for  ever 
92.    7  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  for  ever 

in.    3  and  bis  righteousness  endurethfor  ever 
in.    S  They  stand  fast  for  ever  and 
in.  10  his  praise  endurcth  for  ever 
112.    3.  o  his  righteousness  endurcth  for  ever 
132.  14  This  (is)  my  rest  for  ever  :  here  will  I 
148.    6  also  stablished  them  for  ever  and  ever 
Prov  12.  19  lip  of  truth  shall  be  established  for  ever 


EVER 


311 


EVERLASTING 


Prov  29.  14  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  ever 
Isa.   26.    4  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever:  for  in  the 

64.  9  Lord,  neither  remember  iniquity  for  ever 

65.  iS  rejoice  for  ever  (in  that)  which  I  create 
Mie.    7.  iS  heretainethnothisangerforever,because 

3. Age-lasting,  oViy,  D^y-iy,  c^. 

Gen.    3.  22  take  also  of  the  tree,  .and  live  for  ever 

Exocl  3.  15  this  (is)  my  name  for  ever,  and  this  (is) 

12.  14  keep  it  a  feast  by  an  ordinance  for  ever 

12.  17  ye  observe,  .by  an  ordinance  for  ever 

14.  13  ye  shall  see  them  again  no  more  for  ever 

19.  9  people  may  hear . .  and  believe  thee  for  ev. 
21.    6  and  he  shall  serve  him  forever 

31.  17  a  sign  between  me  and.  .Israel  for  ever 

32.  13  seed,  and  they  shall  inherit  (it)  for  ever 
Lev.  25.  46  they  shall  be  your  bondmen  for  ever :  but 
XumiS.  19  it  (is)  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  before 
Deut.  5.  29  with  them,  and  with  their  children  for  e. 

23.    6  nor  their  prosperity  all  thy  days  for  ever 

32.  40  lift  np  my  hand,  .and  say,  I  live  for  ever 
2  Sa.    7.  29  that  it  may  continue  for  ever  before  thee 

7.  29  house  of  thy  servant  be  blessed  for  ever 

1  Ki.  1.  31  said,  Let  my  lord  king  David  live  for  ever 

2.  33  and  upon  the  head  of  his  seed  for  ever 
2.  33  shall  there  be  peace  for  ever  from  the 
9 .  5  Then  I  will  establish  the  throne . .  for  ever 
10.   9  because  the  Lord  loved  Israel  for  ever 

2  Ki.  5.  27  unto  thee,  and  unto  thy  seed  for  ever 

2r.    7  In  this  house . .  will  I  put  my  name  for  ever 

1  Ch.16.  34  (lie  is)  good.,  his  mercy  (euduretb)  for  ever 

16.  41  because  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever 

17.  27  that  it  may  be  before  thee  for  ever 

23.  25  that  they  may  dwell  in  Jerusalem  for  ever 
28.    4  chose  me . .  to  be  king  over  Israel  for  ever 

28.  7  I  will  establish  his  kingdom  fur  ever,  if 

29.  18  keep  this  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of 

2  Ch.  2.    4  This  (is  an  ordinance)  for  ever  to  Israel 

5.  13  (he  is)  good .  .his  mercy  (endureth)  for  e. 
7.    3  (he  is)  good,  .his  mercy  (endureth)  forever 
7.    6  because  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever 
9.    8  loved  Israel,  to  establish  them  for  ever 

13.  5  gave  the  kingdom . .  to  David  for  ever 

20.  7  gavest  it  to  the  seed  of  Abraham . .  for  ever 
20.  21  Praise  the  Lord  . .  mercy  (endureth)  for  e. 

30.  8  which  he  hath  sanctified  fur  ever 

33.  4  In  Jerusalem  shall  my  name  be  for  ever 
Ezra    3.  11  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever  toward  Is. 
Neh.    2.    3  Let  the  king  live  for  ever  :  why  should 
Psa.     9.    7  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever  :  he  hath 

12.    7  preserve,  .from  this  generation  for  ever 

29.  10  yea,  the  Lord  sitteth  King  for  ever 

30.  12  God,  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee  for  ever 
33. 11  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  e. 
37.  18  and  their  inheritance  shall  be  for  ever 
37.  28  they  are  preserved  for  ever  :  but  the  seed 
41.  12  and  settest  me  before  thy  face  for  ever 

44.  8  we  boast . .  and  praise  thy  name  for  ever 

45.  2  therefore  God  hath  blessed  thee  for  ever 
49.    8  For  the  redemption . .  ceaseth  for  ever 
49.  11  (that)  their  houses  (shall  continue)  for  e. 
52.    9  I  will  praise  thee  for  ever,  because  thou 
72.  17  His  name  shall  endure  for  ever  :  his  name 

72.  19  And  blessed  (be)  his  glorious  name  for  e. 

73.  26  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever 

75.   9  I  will  declare  for  ever ;  I  will  sing  praises 

77.  7  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever  ?  and  will 

78.  69  earth  winch  he  hath  established  for  ever 

79.  13  So  we.  .will  give  thee  thanks  for  ever 
81.  15  then-  time  should  have  endured  for  ever 
85.    5  Wilt  thou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever  ?  wilt 
89.  36  His  seed  shall  endure  for  ever,  and  his 

102.  12  thou,  O  Lord,  shalt  endure  for  ever,  and 

103.  9  neither  will  he  keep  (his  anger)  for  ever 

104.  31  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever 

105.  8  He  hath  remembered  his  covenant  for  e. 

106.  1  (he  is)  good,  .his  mercy  (endureth)  for  e. 

107.  1  (he  is)  good,  .his  mercy  (endureth)  for  e. 
no.  4  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  everafterthe  order 
in.  9  he  hath  commanded  his  covenant  for  e. 
112.  6  Surely  he  shall  not  be  moved  for  ever 
T17.  2  the  truth  of  the  Lord  (endureth)  for  ever 

118.  1,  2,  3,  4,  29  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever 

119.  89  For  ever,  O  Lord,  thy  word  is  settled  in 
119.  in  testimonies,  .taken asan heritage  forever 
119. 152  that  thou  hast  founded  them  for  ever 
119. 160  thy  righteousjud-jnients^endureth)  fore. 
125.    1  cannot  be  removed,  (but)  abideth  for  e. 

135.  13  Thy  name,  O  Lord,  (endureth)  for  ever 

136.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5  for  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ev. 
[So  In  v.  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  ir,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20, 
21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26.] 

138.   8  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  (endureth)  for  ever 
146.   6  which  keepeth  truth  for  ever 
146.  10  The  LORD  shall  reign  for  ever,  (even)  thy 
Prov  27.  24  riches  (are)  not  for  ever :  and  doth  the 
Eccl.    1.    4  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever 

2. 16  no  remembrance  of  the  wise,  .for  ever 
3.  14  whatsoever  God  doeth,  it  shall  be  for  ev. 
9.    6  neither  have  they,  .more  a  portion  for  e. 
Isa.   34.  10  the  smoke  thereof  shall  go  up  for  ever 
40.    8  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever 
47.   7  thou  saidst,  I  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever 
51.   6  but  my  salvation  shall  be  for  ever,  and 
51.    8  my  righteousness  shall  be  for  ever,  and 
57.  id  I  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will 
60.  21  they  shall  inherit  the  land  for  ever,  the 
Jer.    3.    5  Will  he  reserve  (his  anger)  for  ever?  will 
3.  12  (and)  I  will  not  keep  (anger)  for  ever 
17.  S5  and  this  city  shall  remain  for  ever 
31.  40  nor  thrown  down  any  more  for  ever 
33.  n  good;  for  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever 


Lam.  3.  31  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  forever 

5.  19  Thou,  0  Lord,  remainest  for  ever  ;  thy 
Eze.  37.  25  and  then-  children's  children  for  ever 
37.  25  David  (shall  be)  their  prince  for  ever 
43.    7  midst  of  the  children  of  Israel  for  ever 
43.    9  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them  for  ever 
Hos.    2.  19  And  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  forever 
Joel    3.  20  Judah  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusa. 
Obad.      10  and  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  for  ever 
Jon.    2.   6  earth  with  her  bars  (was)  about  me  for  e. 
aiic.    2.    9  have  ye  taken  away  my  glory  for  ever 
Zech.  1.    5  and  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever? 

4.  To  the  age,  Qi^y?  leelom. 

2  Ch.33.    7  In  this  house,  .will  I  put  my  name  for  e. 

5. Hidden  time,  uyjt  alam. 

Dan.   2.    4  0  king,  live  for  ever:  tell  thy  sen-ants  the 

2.  44  and  the  kingdom,  .shall  stand  for  ever 

3.  9  They  spake  and  said.  .Oking,  live  forever 

4.  34  honoured  him  that  liveth  for  ever,  whose 

5.  10  O  king,  live  for  ever :  let  not  thy  thoughts 

6.  6  and  said  thus.  .King  Darius,  live  for  ever 
6.  21  Then  said  Daniel.  .O  king,  live  for  ever 

6.  26  (is)  the  living  God,  and  stedfast  for  ever 

6.^1  cutting  off,  extinction,  nnv?:*  tsemithuth. 
Lev.  25.  23  The  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  ever :  for 
25.  30  walled  city  shall  be  established  for  ever 

7. For  length  of  days,  cp;  Xiph  leorek  yamim. 
Psa.  23.    6  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever 
93.    5  holiness  beconieth  thine  house .  .for  ever 

8. Age-lasting,  cd'Jivios  aidnios. 

Phni.       15  that  thou  shouldest  receive  him  for  ever 

9.  To  the  age,  els  alwva  eis  aiona. 

Matt.  6. 13  and  the  power,  and  the  glory  for  ever 

21.  19  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward  for  ev. 
Markn.  14  No  man  eat  fruit  of  thee,  .for  ever 
Luke   1.  33  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever 
1.  55  to  Abraham,  and  to  his  seed  [for  ever] 
John  6.  5i_eat  of  tins  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever 

6.  58  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for  ever 

8.  35  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever 

8.  35  (but)  the  Son  abideth  for  ever 

12.  34  We  have  heard . .  Christ  abideth  for  ever 
14. 16  that  he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever 

Horn.  1.  25  than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever 

9.  5  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever 

n.  36  (are)  all  tilings  :  to  whom  (be)  glory  for  e. 

16.  27  (be)  glory,  through  Jesus  Christ  for  ever 
2  Co.   9.    9  his  righteousness  remaineth  for  ever 
Heb.   5.    6  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever  after  the 

6. 20  (even)  Jesus,  made  an  high  priest  for  ever 

7.  17,  21  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the 

13.  8  same  yesterday,  and  to  day,  and  for  ever 

1  Pe.   1.  23  word. .  which  liveth  and  abideth  [forever] 

1.  25  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever 

2  Pe.  2. 17  the  mist  of  darkness  is  reserved  [for  ever] 

1  Jo.    2. 17  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever 

2  Jo.         2  dwelleth  in  us.  .shall  be  with  us  for  ever 
Jude       13  reserved ..  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever 

10.  To  the  day  of  the  age,  els  r,fxepav  alamos. 

2  Pe.  3. 18  To  him  (be)  glory  both  now  and  for  ever 

11.  Continuously,  els  to  fiiwveKes  eis  to  dienekes. 
Heb.  10.  12  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever 

10. 14  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sancti. 

EVER  (and  ever),  for  — 

I. To  perpetuity,  D'ns}  nsj?  lenetsach  ixetsachim. 
Isa.   34. 10  none  shall  pass  through  it  for  ever  and  ev. 

2.  To  the  age  and  omvard,  tjn  c^yV  leolam  va-ed. 

Exodis.  18  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever 
Psa.    9.   5  hast  put  out  their  name  for  ever  and  ever 
10. 16  The  Lord  (is)  king  for  ever  and  ever 
21.    4  (even)  length  of  days  for  ever  and  ever 
45.   6  Thy  throne,  O  God,  (is)  for  ever  and  ever 
45.  17  the  people  praise  thee  for  ever  and  ever 
48.  14  For  this  God  (is)  our  God  for  ever  and  ev. 
52.    8  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and  e. 
104.    5  (that)  it  should  not  be  removed  for  ever 
1  n.    8  They  stand  fast  for  ever  and  ever,  (and  are) 
119.  44  keep  thy  law  continually  for  ever  and  ev. 
145.    1  I  will  bless  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 
145.    2  I  will  praise  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 
145.  21  bless  his  holy  name  for  ever  and  ever 
Isa.   30.    8  be  for  the  time  to  come  for  ever  and  ever 
Dan.  12.    3  shine .  .as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever 
Mic.    4.    5  name  of  the  Lord.  .God  for  ever  and  ev. 

3.  From  Hie  age  even  unto  the  age,  zh'yyn  ijji  oVij/n  |». 

1  Ch.16.  36  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord.. for  ever  and  ever 
29. 10  Blessed  (be)  thou,  Lord,  .for  ever  and  e. 
Neh.  9.   5  bless  the  Lord  your  God  for  ever  and  e. 

4. From  age  even  unto  age,  **£?#  ijn  N£7JT|.'?. 

Dan.    2.  20  Blessed  be  the  name,  .for  ever  and  ever 
7. 18  kingdom  for  ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever 

5.  To  ages  of  ages,  els  alwvas  al&vw. 

Rev.  14. 11  smoke,  .ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever 

6.  To  the  age  of  the  age,  els  rbv  al£>va  rov  al&vos. 

Heb.    1.    8  Thy  throne,  0  God,  (is)  for  ever  and  ever 

7.  To  the  ages  of  tlie  ages,   els  rovs  alwvas    t&v 

aXdtvwv. 
Gal.     1.    5  To  whom  (lie)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  A. 
Phil.  4.  20  Now  unto  God.  .(be)  gloryfor  ever  and  e. 

1  TL    1.  17  (be)  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever 

2  Ti.    4.  18  to  whom  (lie)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  A. 
Heb.  13.  21  to  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever  [and  ever].  A. 


1  Pe.  4.  11  be  praise  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever 
5.  11  (be)  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  [and  ev.] 

Rev.  1.  e  (lie)  glory  and  dominion  forever  [and  ev  1 
4.   9  to  him.  .who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever 

4.  10  worship  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever 

5.  13  and  unto  the  Lamb  fur  ever  and  ever 

5.  14  worshipped  him . .  [liveth  for  ever  and  ev.  J 
7.  12  (be)  unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever,  Ani. 

10.  6  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever 

11.  15  and  he  shall  reiim  for  ever  and  ever 

15.    7  wrath  of  God,  who  liveth  for  ever  and  e. 
19.   3  And  her  smoke  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever 
20. 10  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  e. 
22.    5  and  they  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever 
EVER  yet  — 
Once,  at  any  time,  ttotg  pote. 

Eph.  5.  29  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh ;  but 
EVER,  or  — 
£>:fore,  ■np6  pro. 

Acts  23. 15  we,  or  ever  he  come  near,  are  ready  to 
EVER  of  old  — 
Age,  age-lasting,  oSiy  olam. 

Psa.  25.   6  mercies.,  for  they  (have  been)  ever  of  old 
EVERLASTING  — 
I. Duration,  contimdty,  "iy  ad. 

Isa.     9.    6  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace 
Hah.  3.    6  the  everlasting  mountains  were  scattered 
2.Age,  age-lasting,  c:nj/  olam. 

Gen.    9.  16  I  may  remember  the  everlasting  coven. 
17.    7  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a  God 
17.   8  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting  possession 
17.  13  my  covenant,  .for  an  everlasting  covenant 
17. 19  with  him  for  an  everlasting  covenant 
21.  33  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  everlasting  G. 

48.  4  this  land,  .(for)  an  everlasting  possession 

49.  26  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills 
Exod4o.  15  shall  surely  be  an  everlasting  priesthood 
Lev.  16.  34  shall  be  an  everlasting  statute  unto  you 

24.    8  (being  taken) . .  by  an  everlasting  covenant 
Nuni25.  13  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  priesthood 
Deut  2,1-  27  and  underneath  (are)  the  everlasting  amis 
2  Sa.  23.    5  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  cove, 
t  Ch.16.  17  (and)  to  Israel  (for)  an  everlasting  cove. 
Psa.  24.    7  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors 
24.    9  even  lift  (them)  up,  ye  everlasting  doors 
41.  13  God.  .from  everlasting,  and  to  everlasting 
90.    2  from  everlastingto  everlasting,  thou  (ait) 
93.    2  of  old ;  thou  (art)  from  everlasting 
100.   5  the  Lord  is  good  ;  his  mercy  (is)  everlast. 
103.  17  Lord  (is)  from  everlasting  to  everlasting 

105.  10  (and)  to  Israel  (for)  an  everlasting  cove. 

106.  4S  Blessed,  .from  everlasting  to  everlasting 
112.    6  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  renieni. 
119. 142  righteousness  (is),  .everlasting  right. 
119. 144  Thy  righteousness,  .(is)  an  everlasting 
139.  24  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting 

145.  13  Thy  kingdom  (is)  an  everlasting  kingdom 
Prov.  8.  23  I  was  set  up  from  everlasting,  from  the 
10.  25  righteous  (is)  an  everlasting  foundation- 
Isa.    24.    5  have,  .broken  the  everlasting  covenant 
26.   4  the  Lord  Jehovah  (is)  everlasting  stre 
33. 14  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  ? 
35.  10  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads 
40.  28  thou  not  heard,  (that)  the  everlasting  God 
45.  17  be  saved,  .with an  everlasting  salvation 
51.  11  everlasting  joy  (shall  be)  upon  their  head 

54.  8  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  have 

55.  3  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
55. 13  for  an  everlasting  sign  (that)  shall  not  be 

56.  5  I  will  give  them  an  everlasting  name 
60. 19  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  lighr 

60.  20  the  LORD  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light 

61.  7  everlasting  joy  shall  be  unto  them 

61.    8  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them 
63.  12  to  make  himself  an  everlasting  name 
63.  16  our  Redeemer ;  thy  name  (is)  from  ever. 
Jer.  10.  10  the  living  God,  and  an  everlasting  king 
20.  11  (their)  everlasting  confusion  shall  never 
23.  40  bring  an  everlasting  reproach  upon  you 

31.  3  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love 

32.  40  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them 
Eze.  16.  60  establish  unto  thee  an  everlasting  coven. 

37.  26  be  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them 
Dan.    9.  24  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and 

12.  2  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to . .  ev. 
Mic.  5.  2  (have  been)  from  of  old,  from  everlasting 
Hab.  3.    6  hills  did  bow  :  his  ways  (are)  everlasting 

o.Age,  age-lasting,  nty  alam. 

Dan.  4.  3  his  kingdom  (is)  an  everlasting  kingdom 
4.  34  whose  dominion  (is)  an  everlasting  dom. 
7.  14  his  dominion  (is)  an  everlasting  dominion 
7.  27  whose  kingdom  (is)  an  everlasting  king. 

4.  What  is  befm-e  {in  time  or  place),  Dip.  qedem. 
Hab.  1.  12  (Art)  thou  not  from  everlasting,  O  Lord 

5. Perpetual,  6'totos  aidios. 

Jude        6  he  hath  reserved  in  everlasting  chains 

6. Age-lasting,  alwvios  aidnios. 

5Iatti8.    8  or  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  everlasting  fire 
iq.  29  and  shall  inherit  everlasting  life 
25.  41  Depart.. ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire 
25.  46  shall  go  away  into  everlastingpunishment 
Lukei6.   9  receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations 
18.  30  and  in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting 
John   3.  16  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life 
3.  36  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting 


EVERMORE 


312 


EVERY 


John  4.  14  water  springing  up  into  everlastiug  life 

5.  24  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 

6.  27  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting 
6.  40  helieveth  on  him,  may  have  everlasting 
6.  47  helieveth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life 

12.  50  that  his  commandment  is  life  everlasting 
Acts  13.  46  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life 
Rom.  6.  22  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life 

16.  26  the  commandment  of  the  everlasting  God 
Gal.    6.    8  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting 
2  Th.  1.    9  he  punished  with  everlasting  destruction 
2. 16  hath  given  (us)  everlasting  consolation 

1  Ti.    1.  16  helieve  on  him  to  life  everlasting 

6.  16  to  whom  (be)  honour  and  power  everlas. 
Heb.  13.  20  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant 

2  Pe.  1.  11  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom 
Rev.  14.    6  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach 

EVER  MORE  — 

1. Pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  n%}  netsach. 
Psa.  16. 11  (there  are)  pleasures  for  evermore 

2.Age,  age-lasting,  Dyiy  olctm. 

2  Sa.  22.  51  unto  David,  and  to  his  seed  for  evermore 

1  Ch.17.  14  throne  shall  he  estahlished  for  evermore 
Psa.  18.  50  to  David,  and  to  his  seed  for  evermore 

106.  31  for  righteousness  unto  all.  .for  evermore 
113.    2  from  this  time  forth  and  for  evermore 
115.  18  from  this  time  forth  and  for  evermore 
121.    8  from  this  time  forth,  and  even  for  ever. 
133.    3  the  blessing,  (even)  life  for  evermore 

3. Continual,  continually,  Tpn  tamid. 

Psa.  105,   4 Seek  the  Lord,  .seek  his  face  evermore 

4.  To  the  age,  els  rhv  ai£>va. 

2  Co. 11.  31  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  blessed  evermore 
Heb.    7.  28  the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  evermore 

5.  To  the  ages  of  the  ages,  eis-rou?  alwv  as  Ta>v  atwvwy. 

Rev.    1.  18  I  am  alive  for  evermore,  Amen ;  and 
Q.Alway,  at  all  time,  wdvTOTe  -panlote. 
John  6.  34  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread 
1  Th.  5,  16  Rejoice  evermore 

7.  To  generation  and  generation,  Til  -vh  ledor. 
Psa.  77.    8  doth  (his)  promise  fail  for  evermore? 

S.All  the  days,  uwn~72  kol  hayyamim. 

Deut.28  29  be  only  oppressed  aud  spoiled  evermore 

EVER  MORE,  for  — 

1.  Durations  of  duration,  TJT*3^  ode  ad. 

Psa.132.  12  also  sit  upon  thy  throne  for  evermore 

2.  To  the  age,  njAjfl  leolam. 

Psa.  37.  27  aud  do  good  ;  and  dwell  for  evermore 
86.  12  and  I  will  glorify  thy  name  for  evermore 
89.  28  My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  everm. 
89.  52  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  for  evermore  Am. 
Q2.    8  But  thou.  Lord,  (art  most)  high  for  ever. 
Eze.  37.  26  my  sanctuary  in  the  midst . .  for  evermore 
37.  28  be  in  the  midst  of  them  for  evermore 
EVERY  (in,  out  of,  throughout,  which)  — 
I. One,  inN  echad. 

Exod36.  30  of  silver,  under  every  board  two  sockets 
Nuni29.  14  three  tenth  deals  unto  every  bullock 
Josh.  3.  12  twelve  men.  .out  of  every  tribe  of  man 
1  Ki.  7.  38  (and)  every  laver  was  four  cubits  :  (and) 
2.  A  man,  ty'N  ish.  * 

1  Ki.  7.  3oundersetters..atthesideofeveryaddition 
Job  42.  1 1  every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  of  money 

Z.A  woman,  ns'x  ishshah, 

Amos  4.    3  every  (cow  at  that  which  is)  before  her 
A.  A  man  which,  *ia>N  ty'x  ish  asher. 

Gen  49  28  every  one  according  to  his  blessing  he 
5.  All,  every,  -l?3  kol. 

Gen.    7.    4  every  living  substance  that  I  have  made 
Psa.  39.    5  every  man  at  his  best  state  (is)  altogether 
Dan.    3.  10  every  man  that  shall  hear  the  sound 
3.  29  every  people,  nation,  and  language 
6.  12  every  man  that  shall  ask  (a  petition)  of 
6.  26  in  every  dominion  of  my  kingdom  men 
S.Each  one,  els  ckugtos  hei's  hekastos. 

Eph.  4.  16  working  in  the  measure  of  every  part 
7 .Each,  eica<rTo$  hekastos. 

Luke  4,  40  he  laid  his  hands  on  every  one  of  them 

6.  44  For  every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit 

16.    5  he  called  every  one  of  his  lord's  debtors 

John  1 9.  23  made  four  parts,  to  every  soldier  a  part 

Acts  17.  27  though  he  he  not  far  from  every  one  of 

20.  31  I  ceased  not  to  warn  everyone  night  and 

21.  26  should  be  offered  for  every  oue  of  them 
1  Co. 12.  18  the  members  every  one  of  them  in  the 

15.  38  God  giveth.  .to  every  seed  his  own  body 
Eph.  4.    7  But  unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace 

1  Th.  2.  11  comforted  and  charged  every  one  of  you 

2  Th.  1.    3  charity  of  every  one  of  you  all  toward 
S.Dovm  along  or  during,  koto,  kata  (ace.) 

Luke  2.  41  his  parents  went  to  Jerusalem  every  year 

16.  19  and  fared  sumptuously  every  day 
Heb.  9.  25  entereth  into  the  holy  place  every  year 

10.    3  ;  Luke  8. 1,  4 ;  Acts  14.  23 ;  15.  21 ;"  20.  23. 
9.  Down  through  each  one,  Kara  eVo  tKaarov. 

Rev.  22.    2  (and)  yielded  her  fruit  [every]  month 
10. A II,  every,  iras  pas. 

Matt.  3. 10  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good 


13 
13 

15. 
18. 
19. 
Mark  9. 
16. 
Luke  2. 
3- 
3- 
4- 

4- 
5- 


John 


26. 
Rom.  2. 

3' 

3' 

3 

T3< 

14. 


it 


Matt.  4.    4  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of 

7.  17  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good 

7.  19  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 

9.  35  healing  every  sickness  and  every  disease 

12.  25  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is 

12.  25  every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself 

12.  36  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak 
47  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  of  every  kind 
52  every  scribe  (which  is)  instructed  unto 
13  Every  plant,  which  my  heavenly  Father 

16  that,  .every  word  may  be  established 

3  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  every  cause? 
49  [every  sacrifice  shall  he  salted  with  salt] 
15  [and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature] 
23  Every  male  that  openeth  the  womb  shall 

5  Every  valley  shall  be  filled,  and  every 
9  every  tree  therefore  which  bringeth  not 

4  [by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  of] 
37  every  place  of  the  country  round  about 

17  were  come  out  of  every  town  of  Galilee 

1  before  his  face  into  every  city  and  place 
17  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is 

9  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh 
2.  10  Every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set 
15.    2  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fr. 
15.    2  every  (branch)  that  beareth  fruit  he  pur. 
Acts    2.    5  men,  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven 

2.  43  fear  came  upon  every  soul  :  and  many 

3.  23  (that)  every  soul,  which  will  not  hear 

10.  35  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  him,  and 

13.  27  Prophets  which  are  read  every  sabbath 
15.  21  read  in  the  synagogues  every  sabbath  day 
15.  36  visit  our  brethren  in  every  city  where 
18.   4  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every  sabbath 

31  warn  every  one  night  and  day  with  tears 
11I  punished  them  oft  in  every  synagogue 
9  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil 

2  Much  every  way  :  chiefly,  because  that 

4  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar 
19  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all  the 

1  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher 

5  another  esteemeth  every  day  (alike) 
11  every  knee  shall  bow  to  me,  and  every 

:  uo.   1.    2  all  that  in  every  place  call  upon  the 

4.  17  as  I  teach  every  where  in  every  church 
6.  18  Every  sin  that  a  man  doeth  is  without  the 

11.  3  know,  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  Chr. 
11.  4  Every  man  praying  or  prophesying,  havi. 

11.  5  every  woman  that  prayeth  or  prophesieth 

15.  30  And  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  h.? 
:  Co.  2.  14  of  his  knowledge  by  us  in  every  place 

2  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of 
5  but  we  were  troubled  on  every  side 
8  that  ye.  .may  abound  to  every  good  work 
5  and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself 
5  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ 
1  shall  every  word  be  established 
3  I  testify  again  to  every  man  that  is 

21  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this 
14  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine 
4.  16  by  that  which  every  joint  supplieth 
Phil.   1.    3  thank  my  God  upon  every  remembrance 

1.  4  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all  making 
1. 18  every  way,  whether  in  pretence,  or  in  tru. 

2.  9  him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name 
2.  10  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow 

2.  11  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus 

4.  21  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus 
Col.     1.  10  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and 

1.  15  the  first  born  of  every  creature 
1.  23  (and)  which  was  preached  to  every  creat. 
x.  28  warning  every  man,  and  teaching  every 
1.  28  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  C. 

1  Th.  1.    8  in  every  place  your  faith  to  Godward  is 

2  Th.  2.  17  stablish  you  in  every  good  word  and  work 

3.  6  withdraw  yourselves  from  every  brother 

3.  17  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  epistle 

1  Ti.    4.   4  every  creature  of  God  (is)  good,  and  noth. 

5.  10  have  diligently  followed  every  good  work 

2  Ti.    2.  21  (and)  prepared  unto  every  good  work 

4.  18  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work 
Titus  1. 16  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate 

3.  1  in  mind,  .to  be  ready  to  every  good  work 
Phm.  6  by  the  acknowledging  of  every  good  thing 
Heb.   2.    2  and  every  transgression  and  disobedience 

3.  4  every  house  is  builded  by  some  (man) 

5.  1  every  high  priest  taken  from  among  men 

8.  3  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer 

9.  19  when  Moses  had  spoken  every  precept  to 
10.  11  every  priest  standcth  daily  ministering 

12.  1  let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin 
12.    6  and  scourgeth  every  sou  whom  he  receive. 

21  Make  you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to 
17  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift 
19  let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to 
7  every  kind  of  beasts,  and  of  birds,  and  of 
16  there  (is)  confusion  and  every  evil  work 
13  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of 
1  jo.   4.    1  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the 

4.  2  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  that  Jesus 

4.  3  every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that 
Rev.    1.    7  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  (also) 

5.  9  to  God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred 

5.  13  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and 

6.  14  cvcrymountainnndislandweremovedont 
6.  15  and  every  bondman,  and  [every]  free  man 

14.  6  to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  aud  tongue 

16.  3  and  every  living  soul  died  in  the  sea 
16  20  every  island  fled  away,  and  the  mount. 
18.    2  is  become  the  hold  of  every  foul  spirit 
18.    2  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird 
18.  17  every  ship  master,  and  all  the  company 


4- 

7- 

9- 

10. 

10. 

Gal. 

13- 

Eph 

1. 

Jas.    1. 

i, 

3 

3 

1  Pe.  2 


EVERY  (man)  — 
Head,  vttl  rosh. 

Judg.  5.  30  to  every  man  a  damsel  (or)  two  ;  to  Sisera 

EVERT  man  (woman)  — 

\.A  via n9  e>*n  ish. 

Gen.    9.    5  at  the  hand  of  every  man's  brother  will 
42.  25  restore  every  man's  money  into  his  sack 
45.    1  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me 
47.  20  the  Egyptians  sold  every  man  his  field 
Exod.  1.    1  every  man  and  his  household  came  with 
7. 12  they  cast  down  every  man  his  rod,  and 
12.    3  they  shall  take  to  them  every  man  a  lamb 
16.  16  Gather  of  it  every  man  according  to  his 
16.  16  take  ye  every  man  for  (them)  which  (are) 
16.  18  gathered  every  man  according  to  his  eat. 
16.  21  gathered.,  every  man  according  to  his  e. 
16.  29  abide  ye  every  man  in  his  place  ;  let  no 
25.    2  of  every  man  that  giveth  it  willingly 
30. 12  they  give  every  man  a  ransom  for  his 
32.  27  Put  every  man  his  sword  by  his  side 
32.  27  (and)go  in.  .and  slay  every  man  his  bro. 
32.  27  every  man  his  companion,  and  every  man 

32.  29  even  every  man  upon  his  son,  and  upon 

33.  8  and  stood  every  man  (at)  his  tent  door 
33.  10  and  worshipped,  every  man  fin)  his  tent 
36.    4  every  man  from  his  work  winch  they 

Lev.  10.    3  fear  every  man  his  mother  and  his  father 

25.  10,  13  return  every  man  unto  his  \  ossession 

25.  10  shall  return  every  man  unto  his  fam. 

Num.  1.  52  every  man  by  his  own  camp,  and  every  m. 

2.   2  Every  man  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall 

2.  17  every  man  in  his  place  by  their  standards 

5.  10  every  man's  hallowed  things  shall  be  his 
7.    5  to  every  man  according  to  his  service 

11. 10  every  man  in  the  door  of  his  tent 

16. 17  take  every  man  his  censer,  and  put  inse. 

16. 17  before  the  LORD  every  man  his  censer 

16.  18  they  took  every  man  his  censer,  and  put 

17.  2  write  thou  every  man's  name  upon  his 
17.    9  they  looked,  and  took  every  man  his  rod 
31.  50  what  every  man  hath  gotten,  of  jewels  of 
31.  53  had  taken  spoil,  every  man  for  himself 
36.    8  every  man  the  inheritance  of  his  fathers 

Deut.  1.  41  girded  on  every  man  his  weapons  of  war 
3-  20  ye  return  every  man  unto  his  possession 

12.  8  every  man  whatsoever  (is)  right  in  his  own 

16.  17  Every  man  (shall  give)  as  he  is  able 

24.  16  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his 
Josh    6.    5  ascend  up  every  man  straight  before  him 

6.  20  every  man  straight  before  him,  and  they 

24.  28  depart,  every  man  unto  his  inheritance 
Judg.  2.    6  Israel  went  every  man  unto  his  inheri. 

7.  7  (other)  people  go  every  man  unto  his  pi. 
7.  21  thej  stood  every  man  in  his  place  round 

7.  22  set  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow 

8.  24,  25  every  man  the  earrings  of  his  prey 

9.  49  likewise  cut  down  every  man  his  bough 
9.  55  they  departed  every  man  unto  Iris  place 

17.  6.  25  every  man  did  (that  which  was)  right 
21.  21  catch  you  every  man  his  wife  of  the  dau 
21.  74  every  man  to  his  tribe  and  to  his  family 

21.  24  from  thence  everyman  to  his  inheritance 

1  Sa.    4.  10  and  they  fled  every  man  into  bis  tent 

8.  22  Go  ye  every  man  unto  his  city 
10.  25  the  people  away,  every  man  to  his  house 

13.  2  the  rest,  .he  sent  every  man  to  his  tent 

13.  20  to  sharpen  every  man  his  share,  and  his 

14.  20  every  man's  sword  was  against  his  fellow 
14.  34  hither  every  man  his  ox,  and  every  man 

14.  34  brought  every  man  his  ox  with  him  that 

25,  10  that  break  away  every  man  from  his 

25.  13  Gird  ye  on  every  man  his  swurd 

25  13  And  they  girded  on  every  man  his  sword 

26.  23  render  to  every  man  his  righteousness 

27.  3  every  man  with  his  household,  (even)  D. 
30.  6  every  man  for  his  sons  and  for  his  daugh. 
30.  22  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  children 

2  Sa.    2.   3  bring  up,  every  man  with  his  household 

13.    9  And  they  went  out  every  man  from  him 

13.  29  every  man  gat  him  up  upon  his  mule,  and 
T5.    4  every  man  which  hath  any  suit  or  cause 

15.  30  the  people,  .covered  every  man  his  head 

19.  8  for  Israel  had  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 

20.  1  every  man  to  his  tents,  O  Israel 

20.  2  every  man  of  Israel  went  up  from  after 
20.  22  from  the  city,  every  man  to  bis  tent 

1  Ki.    4.  25  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his 

4.  27  all  that  came,  .every  man  in  his  month 
4.  28  every  man  according  to  his  charge 

8.  39  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways 

10.  25  they  brought  every  man  his  present,  ves 
12.  24  return  every  man  to  his  house ;  for  this 
20.  24  Takeaway,  every  man  out  of  his  place 
22. 17  return  every  man  to  his  house  in  peace 

22.  36  Every  man  to  his  city,  and  every  man  to 

2  Ki.  3.  25  piece  of  land  cast  every  man  his  stone 

9.  13  took  every  man  his  garment,  and  put 

11.  8,  11  every  man  with  his  weapons  in  his 

11.  9  they  took  every  man  his  men  that  were 

12.  4  the  money  that  every  man  is  set  at,  (and) 
12.   5  to  them,  every  c  a  1  of  bis  acquaintance 

14.  6  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his 
14.  12  and  they  fled  every  man  to  their  tents 
iS.  31  (then)  eat  ye  every  man  of  his  own  vine 

1  f'h.16.  43  people  departed  every  man  to  his  house 

2  Ch.  6.  30  render  unto  every  man  according  unto  all 

0.  24  they  brought  every  man  his  present,  ves. 

10.  16  every  man  to  your  tents,  0  Israel :  (and) 

11.  4  return  every  man  to  his  house  ;  for  this 
18.  16  return  (theref ore) every  man  to  his  house 


EVERY 


313 


EVERY 


2  Cll.23. 

=3- 
=3- 
25- 
*5- 
SI- 
Neh. 5. 
Esth.  1. 
1. 
Job  34. 
42. 
Psa.  39. 
62. 
Isa.     9. 

Jer.  12. 
17- 

22. 

23- 
=3- 
26. 
29. 
3'- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
36. 
37- 
49. 

51- 

5i- 
Eze.  8. 
8. 
9- 
9- 

14. 


32- 
38. 

46- 
Jon.  1. 
Mic.  4. 
7- 
Has.  1. 
Zech.  a. 


Mai. 


7  every  mail  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand 

8  took  every  man  his  men  that  were  to  co. 

10  every  man  having  his  weapon  in  his  hand 

4  but  every  man  shall  die  for  his  own  sin 
22  they  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 

1  every  man  to  his  possession,  into  their 

2  every  man  according  to  his  service,  the 

13  God  shake  out  every  man  from  his  house 
8  should  do  according  to  every  man's  plea. 

22  every  man  should  bear  rule  in  his  own 

11  every  man  to  find  according  to  (his)  ways 

11  "every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece 

6  Surely  every  man  walketh  in  a  vain  show 

12  renderest  to  every  man  according  to  his 

20  eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm 

7  every  man  shall  cast  away  his  idols  of 

15  every  man  to  his  heritage,  and  every  man 
10  to  give  every  man  according  to  his  ways 

8  they  shall  say  every  man  to  hisneighbour 
27  they  tell  every  man  to  his  neighbour 

36  for  every  man's  word  shall  be  his  burden 

3  turn  every  man  from  his  evil  way,  that  I 
26  every  man  (that  is)  mad,  and  maketh  him. 
34  every  man  his  neighbour,  and  every  man 

9  every  man  should  let  his  man  servant 
9  every  man  his  maid  servant,  .go  free 

14  let  ye  go  every  man  his  brother  an  Hebr. 
15,  17  proclaiming,  .every  man  to  his  neigh. 

16  caused  every  man  his  servant,  and  every  m. 

15  Return  ye  now  every  man  from  his  evil 

3  may  return  every  man  from  his  evil  way 

10  should  they  rise  up  every  man  in  his  tent 

5  shall  be  driven  out  every  man  right  forth 

6  Flee  out.  .and  deliver  every  mau  his  soul 
45  deliver  ye  every  man  his  soul  from  the 

11  with  every  man  his  censer  in  his  hand 

12  every  man  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery 

1  every  man  (with)  his  destroying  weapon 

2  every  man  a  slaughter  weapon  in  his  hand 

4  Every  man  of  the  house  of  Israel  that 

7  Cast  ye  away  every  man  the  abominations 

8  they  did  not  every  man  cast  away  the 

10  every  man  for  his  own  life,  in  the  day  of 

21  every  man's  sword  shall  be  against  his 
18  scattered  every  man  from  his  possession 

5  cried  every  man  unto  his  god,  and  cast 
4  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine 
2  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a  net 

9  and  ye  run  every  man  unto  his  own  house 
10  call  every  man  his  neighbour  under  the 

9  show  mercy  and  compassions  every  man 
4  every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for 

16  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  his 

10  deal  treacherously  every  man  against  his 


2.Any  one,  av  rts  an  tis. 

Acts    z.  45  parted  them  to  all.  .as  every  man  had 

Z.JXp  to,  up  by,  apiece,  ava  ana. 

Matt2o.    9  they  received  every  man  a  penny 

20.  10  they  likewise  received  every  man  a  penny 

A. All  together,  all  at  once,  airas  hapas. 

Mark  8.  25  he  was  restored,  and  saw  every  man 

5.  Each  one,  els  e/caoros  heis  Iwkastos. 

Acts    2.    6  every  man  heard  them  speak  in  his  own 
Col.    4.    6  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every 

6. Each,  etcaffTos  hekastos. 

Matt  1 6.  27  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works 

25.  15  every  nian  according  to  his  several  ability 

Marki3-  34  gave,  .to  every  man  his  work,  and  coram. 

John  7.  53  [And  every  man  went  unto  his  own  house] 

16.  32  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own 

Acts    2.    8  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue 

4.  35  unto  every  man  according  as  he  had  need 

11.  29  every  man  according  to  his  ability 
Rom.  2.    6  render  to  every  man  aceording-to  his 

12.  3  dealt  to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith 

14.  5  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his 

1  Co.  3.    5  even  as  the  Lord  gave  to  every  man 

3.    8  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward 
3. 10  let  everj'  man  take  heed  how  he  buildeth 
3.  13  Every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest 

3.  13  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is 

4.  5  then  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God 
7.  2  every  man  have  his  own  wife . .  every  worn. 
7.    7  every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God 

7.  17  But  as  God  hath  distributed  to  every  man 

7.  20  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 

7.  24  let  every  man,  wherein  he  is  called 

10.  24  seek  his  own,  but  [every  man]  another's 

12.    7  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal 

12.  1 1  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will 

15.  23  every  man  in  his  own  order :  Christ  the 

2  Co.  9.    7  Everyman  according  as  he  purposeth  in 
Gal.     6.    4  let  every  man  prove  his  own  work 

6.  5  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden 
Eph.  4.  25  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour 
Phil.  2.  4  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  m. 
Heb.  8. 11  every  man  his  neighbour,  and  every  man 
Jas.  1.  14  But  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is 
1  Pe.  1. 17  judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work 

4.  10  As  every  man  hath  received  the  gift, (even) 
Rev.  20.  13  judged  every  man  according  to  their 

22. 12  every  mau  according  as  his  work  shall  be 

7. All,  evert/  one,  iras  pas. 

Luke  6.  30  Give  to  every  man  that  asketh  of  thee 

16.  16  the  kingdom,  .every  man  presseth  into  it 
John  6.  45  Every  man  therefore  that  hath  heard 
Rom.  2.  10  and  peace,  to  every  man  that  worketh 

12.    3  to  every  man  that  is  among  you,  not  to 

40 


1  Co.  8.    7  (there  is)  not  in  every  man  that  knowledge 

9.  25  every  man  that  striveth  for  the  mastery 

2  Co.  8.    7  as  ye  abound  in  every  thing,  (in)  faith 
Heb.   2.    9  that  he . .  should  taste  death  for  every  man 
1  Pe.   3.  15  always  to  (give)  an  answer  to  every  man 
1  Jo.   3.    3  And  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him 
Rev.  22.  iS  I  testify  unto  every  man  that  heareth 

S.  Who — what  1  ris  ri  tis  ti. 

Mark  15.  24  lots  upon  them,  what  every  man  should 

EVERY  man,  how  much  — 
Who — what  ?  ris  ri  tis  ti. 

Lukeig.  15  how  much  [every]  man  had  gained  by  tra 
EVERY  one  — 
l.A  man,  btn  %sh. 

Gen.  10.    5  every  one  after  his  tongue,  after  their 

49.  28  every  one  according  to  his  blessing  he 

Exod28.  21  every  one  with  his  name  shall  they  be 

39.  14  every  one  with  his  name,  according  to  the 
Lev.  20.    9  every  one  that  curseth  his  father  or  his 
Num.  2.  34  set  forward,  everyone  after  their  families 
4.  19  appoint  them  every  one  to  his  service 
4.  49  every  one  according  to  his  service,  and 

25.  5  Slayyeeveryonehismenthatwere  joined 

26.  54  to  everyone  shall  his  inheritance  be  given 

35.  8  every  one  shall  give  of  his  cities  unto 

36.  7  every  one  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall 
36.    9  every  one  of  the  tribes  of  the  children 

Judgi6.    5  we  will  give  thee,  every  one  of  us,  eleven 

1  Sa.  20.  15  every  one  from  the  face  of  the  earth 

2  Sa.    2.  16  caught  every  one  his  fellow  by  the  head 

6.  19  to  every  one  a  cake  of  bread,  and  a  good 

6.  19  people  departed  every  one  to  his  house 
18. 17  and  all  Israel  fled  every  one  to  his  tent 

1  Ki.20.  20  And  they  slew  every  oue  his  man;  and 

2  Ki.iS.  31  and  every  one  of  his  fig-tree 

18.  31  and  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his 
23-  35  0I  every  one  according  to  his  taxation 

1  Ch.16.   3  he  dealt  to  every  one  of  Israel,  both  man 

16.   3  to  every  one  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  a  good 

Ezra    2.    1  and  came  again,  .every  one  unto  his  city 

Neh.  3.  28  priests,  every  one  over  against  his  house 

4. 15  we  returned,  .every  one  unto  his  work 

4. 18  every  one  had  his  sword  girded  by  his 

4.  22  Let  every  one  with  his  servant  lodge 

4.  23  (that)  everyone  put  them  off  for  washing 

5.  7  Ye  exact  usury,  every  one  of  his  brother 

7.  3  every  one  in  his  watch,  and  every  one 

7.  6  and  came  again . .  every  one  unto  his  city 

8.  16  every  one  upon  the  roof  of  Iris  house,  and 
11.    3  dwelt  every  one  in  his  possession  in  their 
11.  20  of  Judah,  every  one  in  his  inheritance 
13.  10  Levites.  .were  fled  every  one  to  his  field 

13.  30  the  Levites,  every  one  in  his  business 
Job     1.    4  feasted  (in  their)  houses,  every  one  his 

2.  11  they  came  every  one  from  his  own  place 
2.  12  and  they  rent  every  one  lus  mantle,  and 
42.  11  and  every  one  an  ear  ring  of  gold 
Psa.  12.    2  speak  vanity  every  one  with  his  neighb. 

64.    6  the  inward  (thought)  of  every  one  (of  th.) 
Prov  20.    6  will  proclaim  every  one  his  own  goodness 
Song  8.  11  every  one  for  the  fruit  thereof  was  to 
Isa.     3.    5  every  one  by  another,  and  every  one  by 

14.  18  lie  in  glory,  every  one  in  his  own  house 

19.  2  every  one  against  his  brother,  .every  one 
36.  16  every  one  of  his  vine,  and  every  one  of 
36.  16  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  own 
41.    6  They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour 

47. 15  shall  wander  every  one  to  his  quarter 
53.   6  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way 
56.  11  every  one  for  his  gain,  from  his  quarter 
Jer      1. 15  they  shall  set  every  cne  his  throne  at 

5.  8  every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's 

6.  3  they  shall  feed  every  one  in  his  place 

9.  4  Take  ye  heed  every  one  of  his  neighbour 
9.   5  they  will  deceive  every  one  his  neighbour 

11.  8  every  one  in  the  imagination  of  their 
16. 12  every  one  after  the  imagination  of  his 
18. 11  return  ye  now  every  one  from  his  evil 

18.  12  every  one  do  the  imagination  of  his  evil 

19.  9  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  friend 

22.  7  against  thee,  every  one  with  his  weapons 

23.  30  that  steal  my  words  every  oue  from  his 
23.  35  every  one  to  his  neighbour,  and  every  one 
25.    5  Turn  ye.  .now  every  one  from  his  evil 

31.  30  every  one  shall  die  for  his  own  iniquity 

32.  19  to  give  every  one  according  to  his  ways 
34.  10  that  every  one  should  let  his  man  serva. 
34.  10  everyone  his  maid  servant,  go  free,  that 
34.  17  in  proclaiming,  .every  one  to  his  brother 
50.  16  they  shall  turn  every  one  to  his  people 

50.  16  they  shall  flee  every  one  to  his  own  land 

51.  9  let  us  go  every  one  into  his  own  country 
Eze.     1.    9,  12  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 

1.  11  two  (wings)  of  every  one  (were)  joined 
i-  23>  23  every  one  I.ad  two,  which  covered  on 

7.  16  all.  .mourning,  every  one  for  his  iniquity 
10.  22  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 

14.    7  every  one  of  the  house  of  Israel,  or  of 
18.  30  judge,  .every  one  according  to  his  ways 

20.  39  serve  ye  every  one  his  idols,"  and  hereafter 
22.    6  every  one  were  in  thee  to  their  power  to 

33.  20  will  judge  you  every  one  after  his  ways 
33.  26  ye  defile  every  one  his  neighbour's  wife 
33.  30  speak,  .every  one  to  his  brother,  saying 
45.  20  thou  shalt  do.  .for  every  one  that  erreth 

Joel    2.  7  they  shall  march  every  one  on  his  ways 

Obad.  9  to  the  end  that  every  one  of  the  mount 

Jon.    1.  7  they  said  every  one  to  his  fellow,  Come 

3.  3  let  them  turn  every  one  frum  His  evil  way  I 


Mic.    4.    5  walk  every  one  in  the  name  of  his  god 
Zeph.  2.  11  every  one  from  his  place,  (even)  all  the 
Hag.    2.  22  every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  brother 
Zech.  8.  10  all  men  every  one  against  nis  neighbour 

10.  1  of  rain,  to  every  one  grass  in  the  field 

11.  6  men  every  one  into  his  neighbour's  hand 

13.  4  shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of  his  vision 

14.  13  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his  neighbour 
2.A  man,  "123  geber. 

Joel    2.    8  they  shall  walk  every  one  in  his  path 
Z.AU,  every,  '%  hnkol. 

Gen.  30.  33  every  one  that  (is)  not  speckled  and 
Isa.   43.    7  (Even)  every  one  that  is  called  by  my  na. 

4. All  together,  airas  hapas. 

Acts    5. 16  and  they  were  healed  every  one 

5, Each,  €Kaoros  hekastos. 

Matt  18.  35  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one 

26.  22  began  every  one  of  them  to  say  unto  him 
Luke  2.    3  to  be  taxed,  every  one  into  his  own  city 
John  6.    7  that  every  one  of  them  may  take  a  little 
Acts   2.  38  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  name 

3.  26  in  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from 
Rom.  14.  12  every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of 

15.  2  Let  every  one  of  us  please(his)  neighbour 

1  Co.  1.  12  that  every  one  of  yousaith,  I  am  of  Paul 

7.  17  as  the  Lord  hath  called  every  one,  so  let 
ii.2t  every  one  taketh  before  (other)  his  own 
14.  26  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a 

16.  2  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store 

2  Co.  5.  10  every  one  may  receive  the  things  (done) 
1  Th.  4.  4  That  every  one  of  you  should  know  how 
Heb.  6.  1:  we  desire  that  every  one  of  you  do  show 
Rev.    2.  23  will  give  unto  every  one  of  you  according 

5.  8  having  every  one  of  them  harps,  and 

6.  11  robes  were  given  unto  [every  one  of]  them 
6. One  by  one,  Kad1  %v  hath  hen. 

Jolnm.  25  which, if  they  should  be  written  everyone 
Rom. 12.    5  and  every  one  members  one  of  another 

7. Ally  every,  iras  pas. 

Matt.  7.    8  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth  ;  and  he 

7.  ai  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord 
7.  26  every  one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of 

19.  29  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  houses,  or 
25.  29  unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given 
Mark  7.  14  Hearken  unto  me  every  one  (of  you),  and 
9.  49  [every  one  shall  be  salted  with  fire,  and] 
Luke  6.  40  every  one  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  his 
9.  43  they  wondered  every  one  at  all  things 
it.  4  forgive  every  one  that  is  indebted  to  us 
11.  10  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth  ;  and  he 

18.  14  every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be 

19.  26  unto  every  one  which  hath  shall  be  given 
John  3.    8  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit 

3.  20  For  eveiy  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the 
6.  40  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and 

18.  37  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth 
Acts  16.  26  opened,  and  every  one's  bands  were  loosed 

28.    2  leceived  us  every  one,  because  of  the 
Rom.  1.  16  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth 

10.    4  righteousness  to  everyone  that  believeth 

1  Co.  16.  16  and  to  every  one  that  helpeth  with  (us) 
Gal.     3.  10  Cursed  (is)  every  one  that  continueth  not 

3. 13  Cursed  (is)  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 

2  Ti.    2.  19  let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of 
Heb.    5. 13  every  one  that  useth  milk  (is)  unskilful 

1  Jo.    2.  29  every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is 

4.  7  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and 

5.  1  every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat 

EVERY  one  in  particular  — 

Each  one  by  one,  Ka8*  iva,  sKasros. 

Eph.   5.  33  let  every  one  of  you  in  particular  so  love 
EVERY  place  — 
.1//,  whole,  every,  any,  ?3  hoi. 

Isa.    30.  32  (in)  every  place  where  the  grounded  staff 
EVERY  several  — 
Each  one  separately,  ara  els  kKaaros. 

E.ev.  21.  21  every  several  gate  was  of  one  pearl :  and 

EVERY  side,  on  — 

1.7b  be  round  about,  n?n  sabab. 

Psa.  71. 21  Thou  shalt.  .comfort  me  on  every  side 

2.  In  every,  iv  -rravTi  en  panti. 

2  Co.  4.    8  (We  are)  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not 

Z.From  every,  iravroQsv  pantothen. 

LukeiQ.  43  compass,  .and  keep  thee  in  on  every  side 

EVERY  thing  — 

I. All,  whole,  every,  any,  73  hoi. 

Gen.    6.  17  every  thing  that  (is)  in  the  earth  shall 

2. All,  every,  iras  pas. 

Matt.  8.  33  told  every  thing,  and  what  was  befallen  to 

1  Co.  1.    5  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched  by  him 

2  Co.  9.  11  enriched  in  everything  to  all  8.  7. 
Eph.  5.  24  so  (let). the  wives  (be),  .in  every  thing 
Phil.  4.    6  in  every  thing  by  prayer  and  supplication 
1  Th.  5.  18  In  every  thing  give  thanks  :  for  this  is 

EVERY  where  — 

l.In  every,  4v  iravri  en  panti. 

Pliil.  4'  12  every  where  and  in  all  things  I  am 
2.ln  everyplace,  iv  iravri  roiras  en  panti  topd. 

1  Ti.  2.    8  will  therefore  that  men  pray  every  where 

3.  Every  where,  iravraxov  pantachou. 

MarkiD.  20  [they  went  forth,  and  preached  every  wh.] 


EVERY 


314 


EVIL 


Luke  9.    6  preaching,  .and  healing  every  where 
Acts  17.  30  cornniandeth  all  men  every  where  to  rep. 

21.  28  teacheth  all  (men)  [every  where]  against 
28.  22  that  every  where  it  is  spoken  against 

1  Co.   4.  j  7  as  I  teach  every  where  in,  every  church 

EVERY  whit  — 

1.  Complete,  completely,  ?'73  kalil. 

Deut  13.  16  all  the  spoil  thereof  every  whit,  for  the 

2.  Whole,  oKos  holos. 

John  7.  23  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit  whole  on 

13.  10  He  that  is  washed,  .is  clean  every  whit 

EVERY,  in  or  into  — 

Down  along,  Kara,  (ace.)  kat-c. 

Acts  5.  42  in  every  house,  they  ceased  not  to  teach 
8.    3  entering  into  every  house,  and  haling 

14.  23  had  ordained  them  elders  in  every  church 

15.  21  Moses  of  old  time  hath  in  every  city  them 
20.  23  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in  every  city 

22.  19  imprisoned  and  beat  in  every  synagogue 
Titus  1.    5  and  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  as  I  had 

EVERY,  out  of  or  throughout  — 
Down,  along,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Luke  8.    1  he  went  throughout  every  city  and  villa. 
8.    4  and  were  come  to  him  out  of  every  city 

EVERY  quarter,  from  — 

From  every  where,  wavrax^Oev  pantachotJien. 
Mark  1.  45  and  they  came  to  him  [from  every  quarter] 

E'-VT,  'in*  desire. 

A  prince  of  Midian,  slain  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  whose 
lands  were  afterwards  given  to  Reuben.     B.C.  1452. 
NUIU31.    8  E.,  and  Rekem,  and  Zur,  and  Hur,  and  n, 
Josh  13.  21  princes  of  Midian,  E.,  and  Rekem,  and 

EVIDENCE  — 

l.Book,  letter,  "ipp  sepher. 

Jer.   32. 10  I  subscribed  the  evidence,  and  sealed  (it) 
32.  11  So  I  took  the  evidence  of  the  purchase 
32.  12  1  gave  the  evidence  of  the  purchase  unto 
32.  14  Take  these  evidences,  this  evidence  of  the 
32.  14  both  which  is  sealed,  and  this  evidence 
32.  16  Now  when  I  had  delivered  the  evidence 
32.  44  and  subscribe  evidences,  and  seal  (them) 
%.  Conviction,  tXeyxos  eleychos. 

Heb.  11.    1  Now  faith  is.  .the  evidence  of  tilings  not 
EVIDENT,  more  evident  — 
\.0n  the  face,  □'33'Sy  al  panim. 

Job     6.  28  look  upon  me  :  for  (it  is)  evident  unto 
^.Manifest,  hrtKos  delos. 

Gal.     3.  11  that  no  man  is  justified,  .(it  is)  evident 
3.  Very  manifest,  naraSyXos  katadelos. 

Heb.   7.  15  it  is  yet  far  more  evident :  for  that  after 
&. Manifest  beforehand,  TrpSdrjKos  prodelos. 

Heb.   7.  14  (it  is)  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  out 
EVIDENTLY  — 
Openly,  manifestly,  <pavepu>s  })haneros. 

Acts  10.    3  He  saw  in  a  vision  evidently,  .an  angel 
E7TX  — 

1.  Vanity,  iniquity,  JlN  aven. 

Prov  12.  21  There  shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just 

2.  Worthlessness,  ?yi?3  bchyyaal, 

Psa.  41.    8  An  evil  disease,  .cleaveth  fast  unto  him 

3.  Evil,  bad,  VI  ra. 

Gen.    2.    9  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 

2.  17  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  e, 

3.  5  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil 
3.  22  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil 

6.  5  every  imagination,  .(was)  only  evil  conti. 
8.  21  for  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  (is)  e. 

19.  19  lest  some  evil  take  me,  and  I  die 

37.  2  brought  unto  his  father  their  evil  report 
37.  20  Some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him  :  and 
37.  33  an  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him:  Joseph 
44.  4  Wherefore  have  ye  rewarded  evil  for  good? 
44.  34  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  on  my  father 

47.  9  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years 

48.  16  Angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  evil 
50.  15  and  will  certainly  requite  us  all  the  evil 
50.  17  for  they  did  unto  thee  evil :  and  now 
50.  20  a*  for  you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me 

Exod.  5.  19  did  see  (that)  they  (were)  in  evil  (case) 
10.  10  he  said,  .look  (to  it);  for  evil  (is)  before 

23.  2  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to  (do)  evil 
32. 12  and  repent  of  this  evil  against  thy  people 

32.  14  the  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  which  he 

33.  4  when  the  people  heard  these  evil  tidings 
Lev.  26.    6  I  will  rid  evil  beasts  out  of  the  land 
Nunii4.  27  How  long  (shall  I  bear  with)  this  evil 

14-  35  1  wiH  surely  do  it  unto  all  this  evil  cong. 
14.  37  those  men  that  did  bring  up  the  evil  rep. 

20.  5  to  bring  us  in  unto  this  evil  place  ? 

32.  13  that  had  done  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
Deut.  1.  35  not  one  of  these  men  of  this  evil  genera. 
1.  ;yJ  hail  no  knowledge  between  g 1  and  evil 

4.  25  shall  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  thy 
7.  15  will  put  none  of  the  evil  diseases  of  Egypt 

13.    5  so  shalt  thou  put  the  evil  away  from  the 
17.    7  So  thou  shalt  put  the  evil  away  from 
17  12  thou  shalt  put  away  the  evil  from  Israel 
19.  19  so  shalt  thou  put  the  evil  away  from 
19.  20  commit  qo  more  any  such  evil  among  you 

21.  21  so  shalt  thou  put  evil  away  from  among 


22. 

22. 
24. 
29. 
30. 

31* 
3r- 
3i- 
31- 
31- 
3*- 

Josh  23. 

Judg.  2. 
2. 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
6. 
9- 
9- 
10. 

13- 


:Sa. 


12. 
r3- 
15- 
*7- 

19. 
19. 

Ki.  5. 

9- 
11. 

*3- 
14 
14. 
15- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 


1  Ch. 


2CI1.  7 


14  bring  up  an  evil  name  upon  her,  and  say 
19  he  hath  brought  up  an  evil  name  upon  a 

21  shalt  thou  put  evil  away  from  among  you 

22  so  shalt  thou  put  away  evil  from  Israel 
24  so  thou  shalt  put  away  evil  from  among 

7  thou  shalt  put  evil  away  from  among  you 
21  the  Lord  shall  separate  him  unto  evil 

15  I  have  set  before  thee.. death  and  evil 
17  many  evils  and  troubles  shall  befall  them 

17  Are  not  these  evils  come  upon  us,  because 

18  for  all  the  evils  which  they  shall  have 
21  when  many  evils  and  troubles  are  befal. 
29  and  evil  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  days 

29  ye  will  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  LORD 
15  shall  the  Lord  bring  upon  you  all  evil 

11  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight  of 
15  hand  of  the  Lord  «  as  against  them  for  e. 

7  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 

12  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the 

12  they  had  done  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
1  children  of  Israel  again  did  evil  in  the 
1  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 

23  God  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abimele. 
57  all  the  evil,  .did  God  render  upon  their 

6  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the 

1  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  again  in 

13  that  we  may.  .put  away  evil  from  Israel 

34  but  they  knew  not  that  evil  (was)  near 
41  they  saw  that  evil  was  come  upon  them 
23  I  hear  of  your  evil  dealings  by  all  this 

9  (then)  he  hath  done  us  this  great  evil 

19  we  have  added  unto  all  our  sins  (this)  ev. 
19  and  didst  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  LORD? 

14  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  troubled 

15  an  evil  spirit  from  God  troubleth  thee 

16  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  is  upon 
23  and  the  evil  spirit  departed  from  him 

10  the  evil  spirit  from  God  came  upon  Saul 
9  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  was  upon  Saul 

7  be  sure  that  evil  is  determined  by  him 

9  if  I  knew  certainly  that  evil  were  deter. 

13  but  if  it  please  my  father  (to  do)  thee  ev. 

11  and  see  that  (there  is)  neither  evil  nor 

17  whereas  I  have  rewarded  thee  evil 

3  the  man  (was)  churlish  and  evil  in  his 

17  for  evil  is  determined  against  our  master 

21  and  he  hath  requited  me  evil  for  good 
26  they  that  seek  evil  to  my  lord,  be  as  Na. 

28  evil  hath  not  been  found  in  thee  (all)  thy 
39  and  hath  kept  his  servant  from  evil  :  for 

18  what  have  I  done  ?  or  what  evil  (is)  in 

6  for  I  have  not  found  evil  in  thee  since  the 
39  Lord  shall  reward  the  doer  of  evil  acco. 

9  Wherefore  hast  thou  despised,  .to  do  ev. 

11  Behold,  I  will  raise  up  evil  against  thee 
16  this  evil  in  sending  me  away  (is)  greater 

14  overtake  us  suddenly,  and  bring  evil 

14  that  the  Lord  might  bring  evil  upou  Ab*. 

7  than  all  the  evil  that  befell  thee  from 

35  (and)  can  I  discern  between  good  and  ev.  ? 

16  the  Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil 

4  (there  is)  neither  adversary  nor  evil  occu. 
9  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  all  this  ev. 

6  Solomon  did  evil  in  the  sight -of  the  LORD 
33  Jeroboam  returned  not  from  his  evil  way 
10  I  will  bring  evil  upon  the  house  of  Jero. 

22  Judah  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
26,  34  he  did  evil  iu  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

7  even  for  all  the  evil  that  he  did  in  the 

19  in  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

25  Omri  wrought  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

30  Ahab.  .did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

20  to  work  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

21  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  thee,  and 

29  I  will  Dot  bring  the  evil  in  his  days 

20  (but)  in  his  son's  days  will  I  bring  the  e. 

8  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good,  .but  evil 
iS  he  would  prophesy  no  good,  .but  evil? 

23  the  Lord  hath  spoken  evil  concerning 
52  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and 

2  he  wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
33  Behold,  this  evii  (is)  of  the  Lord  ;  what 

12  Because  I  know  the  evil  that  thou  wilt  do 
18,  27  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

2,  1 1  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 

24  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
9, 18,  24, 28  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 

2  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 

13  saying,  Turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways,  and 

17  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in  the  sight  of 
2,  16,  20  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 

q  Manasseh  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil 
12  I  (ani)bringing(such)evil upon  Jerusalem 

15  they  have  done  (that  which  was)  evil  in 

16  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place 
20  and  thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all  the  evil 
32,  37  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 
9,  19  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 

3  a.     was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
to  that,  thou  wouldst  keep  (me)  from  evil 
23  because  it  went  evil  with  his  house 

15  he  repented  him  of  the  evil,  and  said  to 

22  therefore  hath  he  brought  all  this  evil 

14  he  did  evil,  because  he  prepared  not  his 
7  lie  uever  prophesied  good,  .but  always  e. 

17  would  not  prophesy  good  unto  me,  but  e.? 
22  the  LORD  hath  spoken  evil  against  thee 

9  If,  (when)  evil  cometh  upon  us,  (as)  the 
6  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the 

4  Wherefore  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
6  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the 
2,  22  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 


2C11 

33- 

34- 

14- 

,6. 

Ezra 

IX  eh 

6. 

9- 

'.I- 

i.V 

'3- 

11- 

iisth 

7- 

a. 

Job 

1. 

Psa. 


23- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
3fi- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
40. 
40. 
41. 
49. 
5°- 
Si- 
5=- 
54- 
56. 
64. 
78. 
90. 
91. 

97- 
109. 
109. 
112, 
119. 
121. 
140, 
140. 
141. 


Prov. 


Eccl. 


23- 

24. 
24. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 

3i- 
2. 
4- 

5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 


6  he  wrought  much  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
24  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upou  this  place 
28  neither  shall  thine-eyes  see  all  the  evil 

5,  9, 12  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 
13  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds 
13  they  might  have  (matter)  for  an  evil  rep. 
28  But  after,  .they  did  evil  again  before 

7  and  understood  of  the  evil  that  E.  did 
17  What  evil  thing  (is)  this  that  ye  do,  and 
iS  did  not  our  God  bring  all  this  evil  upon 

27  hearken  unto  you  to  do  all  this  great  evil 

7  he  saw  that  there  was  evil  determined 

6  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  evil  that  shall 
1  and  one  that  feared  God,  and  eschewed  e. 

8  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil? 

3  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  ev.  ? 

10  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?    In  all 

1 1  heard  of  all  this  evil  that  was  come  upon 
19  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee 

28  and  to  depart  from  evil  (is)  understand. 

26  When  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  came 

29  or  lifted  up  myself  when  evil  fouud  him 
11  over  all  the  evil  that  the  Lord  had  brou. 

4  neither  shall  evil  dwell  with  thee 

4  If  I  have  rewarded  evil  unto  him  that 

15  Break  thou  the  arm  of.  .the  evil  (man) 

3  nor  doeth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nor  tak. 

1 1  For  they  intended  evil  against  thee ;  they 

4  Yea,  though  I  walk.  .1  will  fear  no  evil 

13  Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips 

14  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good  ;  seek  pe. 

16  the  Lord  (is)  against  them  that  do  evil,  to 
21  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked ;  and  they  that 

12  They  rewarded  me  evil  for  good,  (to)  the 

4  He deviseth mischief .  .heabhorreth  note. 

19  They  shall  not  be  ashamed  in  the  evil  time 

27  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  and  dwell 

20  They  also  that  render  evil  for  good  are 
12  innumerable  evils  have  compassed  me 

14  them  be.,  put  to  shame  that  wish  me  evil 

5  Mine  enemies  speak  evil  of  me,  When 

5  Wherefore  should  I  fear  in  the  days  of  e. 

19  Thou  givest  thy  mouth  to  evil,  and  thy 

4  and  done  (this)  evil  in  thy  sight;  that 

3  Thou  Invest  evil  more  than  good ;  (arid) 

5  He  shall  reward  evil  unto  mine  enemies 
5  all  their  thoughts  (are)  against  me  for  e. 
5  They  encourage  themselves  (in)  an  evil 

49  by  sending  evil  angels  (among  them) 

15  (and)  the  years  (wherein)  we  have  seen  e, 
10  There  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither 

10  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil :  he 

5  And  they  have  rewarded  me  evil  for  good 

20  of  them  that  speak  evil  against  my  soul 

7  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings :  his 
101  I  have  refrained  my  feet  from  every  e. 

7  The  Lord  shall  preserve  thee  from  all  evil 
1  Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  evil  man 

11  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  overth. 

4  Incline  riot  my  heart  to  (any)  evil  thing 

16  For  their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  make  haste 
33  ami  shall  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil 

12  To  deliver  thee  from  the  way  of  the  evil 
14  Who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  (and)  delight  iu 

7  fear  the  Lord,  and  depart  from  evil 

29  Devise  not  evil  against  thy  neighbour 
14  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil  (men) 
27  Turn  not.  .remove  thy  foot  from  evil 

14  I  was  almost  in  all  evil  in  the  midst  of 
24  To  keep  thee  from  the  evil  woman,  from 

13  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  to  hate  evil 

13  and  arrogancy,  and  the  evil  way,  and  the 

19  he  that  pursueth  evil  (pursueth  it)  to  his 

12  The  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  evil  (men) 

20  (is)  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imagine  evil 
19  abomination  to  fools  to  depart  from  evil 

21  Evil  pursueth  siuners  :  but  to  the  righte 

16  wise  (man)  feareth,  and  departeth  from  e. 

19  The  evil  bow  before  the  good  ;  and  thevv. 

22  Do  they  not  err  that  devise  evil  ?  but  me. 

3  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the 

15  All  the  days  of  the  afflicted  (are)  evil? 

4  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil 

6  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord .  .depart  from  evil 

1 7  The  highway . .  (is)  to  depart  from  evil :  he 
27  An  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  evil ;  and  in 

30  moving  his  lips  he  bringeth  evil  to  pass 

11  evil  (man)  seeketh  only  rebellion  ;  there. 

13  Whoso  rewardeth  evil  for  good,  evil  shall 

23  he  shall  not  be  visited  with  evil 

8  A  king..scattereth  away  all  evil  with  his 
22  Say  not  thou,  I  will  recompense  evil 

30  blueness  of  a  wound  eleanseth  away  evil 
10  The  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  evil :  his 
3  A  prudent  (man)  forseeth  the  evil,  and 
6  the  bread  of  (1dm  that  hath)  an  evil  eye 
1  Be  not  thou  envious  against  evil  men 

20  For  there  shall  be  no  reward  to  the  evil 

12  A  prudent  (man)  forseeth  the  evil,  (and) 

5  Evil  men  understand  not  judgment :  but 
10  causeth.  .to  go  astray  in  an  evil  way,  he 
22  He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  (hath)  an  evil 

6  In  the  transgression  of  an  evil  man 

12  She  will  do  him  good  and  not  evil  all  the 

21  This  also  (is)  vanity  and  a  great  evil 

3  who  hath  not  seen  the  evil  work  that  is 
1  for  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil 

13  There  is  a  sore  evil  (which)  I  have  seen 

14  But  those  riches  perish  by  evil  travail 

16  And  this  also  (is)  a  sore  evil,  (that)  in  all 
1  There  is  an  evil  which  I  have  seen  under 
1  this  (is)  vanity,  and  it  (is)  an  evil  disease 


EVIL 


315 


EVIL 


Eccl.  8. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


23- 
23. 
23. 
23. 
24. 
24. 

25- 

25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
28. 
29. 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
39- 
40. 
41. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
45- 
48. 
49. 
49. 
Si- 
5i- 
5i- 
52. 


3  stand  not  in  an  evil  thing  ;  for  he  doeth 
5  Whoso  keepeth.  .shall  feel  no  evil  thing 
11  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  exe. 

11  the  heart,  .is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil 

12  Though  a  sinner  do  evil  an  hundred  times 
3  This  (is)  an  evil  among  all  (things)  that 

3  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  full  of  evil 

12  as  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net 
12  so  (are)  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil 
5  There  is  an  evil  (which)  I  have  seen  under 
2  thou  knowest  not  what  evil  shall  be  upon 

10  and  put  away  evil  from  thy  flesh:  for 

1  while  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  ye. 

14  whether  (it  be)  good,  or  whether  (it  be)  e. 
9  they  have  rewarded  evil  unto  themselves 

20  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  e. 
5  Syria,  Ephraim.  .have  taken  evil  couusel 

15  that  he  may  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and 

16  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil 

11  And  I  will  puuish  the  world  for  (their)  e. 
2.  Yet  he  also  (is)  wise,  and  will  bring  evil 
7  The  instruments  also  of  the  churl  (are)  e. 

15  and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil 
7  I  make  peace,  and  create  evil :  I  the  Lo. 

11  Therefore  shall  evil  come  upon  thee 

2  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any  evil 
1  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evil 

7  Their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  they  make 
15  he  (that)  departeth  from  evil  maketh 

12  ye  did  not  hear ;  but  did  evil  before  mine 

4  they  did  evil  before  mine  eyes,  and  chose 

14  Out  of  the  north  an  evil  shall  break  forth 

3  evil  shall  come  upon  them,  saitli  the  Lord 

13  For  my  people  have  committed  two  evils 
19  and  see  that  (it  is)  an  evil  (thing)  and 

5  Behold,  thou  hast  spoken  and  done  evil 

17  after  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart 

6  for  I  will  bring  evil  from  the  north,  and 
12  neither  shall  evil  come  upon  us  ;  neither 

1  for  evil  appeareth  out  of  the  north,  and 

19  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  people 
24  in  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart 

30  children  of  Judah  have  done  evil  in  my 
3  of  them  that  remain  of  this  evil  family 
3  for  they  proceed  from  evil  to  evil,  and 

8  in  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart 

1 1  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  them,  which 
17  pronounced  evil  against  thee,  for  the  evil 
23  I  will  bring  evil  upon  the  men  of  Anath. 

14  saith  the  Lord  against  all  mine  evil 

10  This  evil  people . .  shall  even  be  as  this 

11  in  the  time  of  evil  and  in  the  time  of  affl. 
10  pronounced  all  this  great  evil  against  us? 

12  after  the  imagination  of  his  evil  heart 

17  thou  (art)  my  hope  in  the  day  of  evil 

18  bring  upon  them  the  day  of  evil,  and 
8  If  that  nation . .  turn  from  their  evil,  I 

8  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to 

10  If  it  do  evil  in  my  sight,  that  it  obey  not 
11I  frame  evil  against  you,  and  devise  a 

11  return  ye  now  every  one  from  his  evil 

12  every  one  do  the  imagination  of  his  evil 

20  Shall  evil  be  recompensed  for  good?  for 
3  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place 

15  I  will  bring  upon  this  city,  .all  the  evil 
10  have  set  my  face  against  this  city  for  evil 

10  their  course  is  evil,  and  their  force  (is) 

12  for  I  will  bring  evil  upon  them,  (even) 
17  they  say.  .No  evil  shall  come  upon  you 

22  turned  them  from  their  evil  way,  and 

3  the  evH,  very  evil,  that  cannot  be  eaten 
8  And  as  the  evil  figs,  which  cannot  be 

5  Turn  ye .  .now  every  one  from  his  evil  way 
32  evil  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation 

3  and  turn  every  man  from  his  evil  way 
3  that  I  may  repent  me  of  the  evil  which 

13  the  Lord  will  repent  him  of  the  evil  that 

19  the  Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil  which 
19  Thus  might  we  procure  great  evil  against 

8  of  war,  and  of  evil,  and  of  pestilence 

11  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  evil,  to  give 

23  therefore  thou  hast  caused  all  this  evil  to 

30  the  children  of  Judah  have  only  done  e. 
32  Because  of  all  the  evil  of  the  children  of 
42  Like  as  I  have  brought  all  this  great  evil 

15  Return  ye  now  every  man  from  his  evil 
17  I  will  bring,  .all  the  evil  that  I  have 

3  all  the  evil  which  I  purpose  to  do  unto 
3  they  may  return  every  man  from  his  evil 

7  will  return  every  one  from  his  evil  way 

31  I  will  bring  upon  them,  .all  the  evil  that 

16  will  bring  my  words  upon  this  city  for  e 

2  Lord  thy  God  hath  pronounced  this -evil 
ti  But  when  Johanan.  .heard  of  all  the  evil 

6  Whether  (it  be)  good,  or  whether  (it  be)  e. 

10  I  repent  me  of  the  evil  that  I  have  done 

17  or  escape  from  the  evil  that  I  will  bring 
2  have  seen  all  the  evil  that  I  have  brought 

7  Wherefore  commit  ye  (this)  great  evil 

11  I  will  set  my  face  against  you  for  evil 
17  (then)  had  we  plenty,  .and  saw  no  evil 
23  therefore  this  evil  is  happened  unto  you 
27  Behold,  I  will  watch  over  them  for  evil 
29  shall  surely  stand  against  you  for  evil 

5  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  all  flesh 
2  in  Heshbon  they  have  devised  evil  against 

23  for  they  have  heard  evil  tidings :  they  are 
37  I  will  bring  evil  upon  them,  (even)  my 

24  all  their  evil  that  they  have  done  in  Zinn 
60  Jeremiah  wrote,  .all  the  evil  that  should 
G4  shall  not  rise  from  the  evil  that  I  will 

2  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the 


Lam.  3.  38  Out  of  the  mouth,  .proceedeth  not  evil 
Eze.    5. 16  When  I  shall  send  upon  them  the  evil 

5.  17  So  will  I  send  upon  you.  .evil  beasts,  and 

6.  9  for  the  evils  which  they  have  committed 

6. 10  that  I  would  do  this  evil  unto  them 

6. 11  Alas  for  all  the  evil  abominations  of  the 

7.  5  Au  evil,  an  only  evil,  behold,  is  come 
14.  22  concerning  the  evil  that  I  have  brought 

20.  43  for  all  your  evils  that  ye  have  committed 

33.  11  turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways;  for 

34.  25  will  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of 
36.  31  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil 
38.  10  and  thou  shalt  think  an  evil  thought 

Dan.   9. 12  by  bringing  upon  us  a  great  evil :  for 
9.  13  As  (it  is)  written,  .all  this  evil  is  come 
9. 14  hath  the  Lord  watched  upon  the  evil 
Joel    2.  13  kindness,  and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil 
Amos  3.    6  shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord 
5. 13  silence  in  that  time ;  for  it  (is)  an  evil  time 
5.  14  Seek  good,  aud  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live 

5.  15  Hate  the  evil,  and  love  the  good,  and 

6.  3  Ye  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day,  and 
9.  4  I  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  evil 
9. 10  The  evil  shall  not  overtake  nor  prevent 

Jon.    1.    7  we  may  know  for  whose  cause  this  evil 

1.  8  for  whose  cause  this  evil  (is)  upon  us? 

3.    8  let  them  turn  every  one  from  his  evil  way 
3.  10  that  they  turned  from  their  evil  way 

3.  10  God  repented  of  the  evil  that  he  had  said 

4.  2  kindness,  and  repentest  thee  of  the  evil 
Mic.    1.  12  evil  came  down  from  the  Lord  unto  the 

2.  1  Woe  to  them  that,  .work  evil  upon  their 
2.    3  against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  evil 

2.  3  neither  shall  ye  go.  .for  this  time  (is)  evil 

3.  2  Who  hate  the  good,  and  love  the  evil 
3.  11  (Is)  not  the  Lord  among  us?  none  evil 

7.  3  That  they  may  do  evil  with  both  hands 
Nah.  1.  11  that  imagineth  evil  against  the  Lord 
Hab.    1.  13  (Thou  art)  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  e. 

2.    9  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetous. 

2.    9  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil ! 
Zeph.  3.  15  thou  shalt  not  see  evil  any  more 
Zech.  1.    4  Turn  ye  now  from  your  evil  ways 

1.    4  and  (from)  your  evil  doings  :  but  they 

7. 10  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  against  his 

8.  17  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hea. 
Hal.    1.   8  if  ye  offer  the  blind,  .(is  it)  not  evil?  and 

1 .  8  and  if  ye  offer  the  lame . .  (is  it)  not  evil  ? 

2.  17  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  (is)  good  in  the 

■i.  Evil,  badness,  jn  tool. 

Isa.     1.  16  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from 
Jer.    4.    4  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 

21.  12  because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings 
23.    2  I  will  visit  upon  you  the  evil  of  your 
23.  22  and  from  the  evil  of  their  doings 

25.  5  from  the  evil  of  your  doings,  and  dwell 

26.  3  because  of  the  evil  of  their  doings 

44.  22  could  no  longer  bear,  because  of  the  evil 

5.  To  be  evil,  yyr  race. 

Josh.  24.  15  if  it  seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord 

Q.To  do  evil,  VTl  raa,  5. 

Prov24-  19  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil  (men) 
7.  Evil,  Katia  JcaJcia. 

Matt.  6.  34  Sufficient  unto  the  day  (is)  the  evil  thereof 

S.Evil,  k<xk6s,  kolk6v  kakos,  kakon. 

Matt24.  48  if  that  evil  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart 

27.  23  Wliy,  what  evil  hath  he  done?  But  they 
Mark  7.  21  For  from  within,  .proceed  evil  thoughts 

15. 14  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done?  And  they 
Luke23.  22  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done?  I  have 
JohmS.  23  If  I  have  spoken . .  bear  witness  of  the  evil 

9.  13  how  much  evil  lie  hath  doue  to  thy  saints 
13.   9  saying,  We  find  no  evil  in  this  man :  but 

2.  9  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil 

3.  8  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come? 

7.  19  but  the  evil  which  I  would  not,  that  I  do 
7.  21  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present 
9.  11  neither  having  done  any  good  or  evil 
12.  17  Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil 

12.  21  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  e. 

13.  3  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil 

13.  4  to  (execute)  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth  e. 

14.  20  (it  is)  evil  for  that  man  who  eateth  with 
16.  19  which  is  good,  and  simple  concerning  evil 

1  Co.  13.    5  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  evil 

15.  33  evil  communications  corrupt  good  maun. 

2  Co  13.    7  Now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil 
Phil.  3.    2  Beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil  workers 
Col.     3.    5  evil  concupiscence,  and  covetousness, 

1  Th.  s-  15  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto 

1  Ti.    6.  10  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil 

2  Ti.  4.  14  the  coppersmith  did  me  much  evil  :  the 
Titus  1.  12  The  Cretians  (are)  al way  liars,  evil  beasts 
Heb.  5.  14  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 
Jas.      1.  13  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil 

3.    8  (it  is)  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison 
1  Pe.   3.    9  Not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or  railing  for 
3.  10  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil 
3.  11  Let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do  good  ;  let 
3.  12  but  the  face,  .(is)  against  them  that  do  e. 

9. -Evilly,  KafcoJs  kakos. 

John  1 8.  23  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of 
Acts  23.    5  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of 

10.  The  evil,  (6)  Trovwp6s  (ho)  poneros. 

Matt.  5.  37  for  whatsoever  is  more . .  cometh  of  evil 

5.  39  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye  resist  not  evil 

5.  45  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and 

6.  13  lead,  us  not . .  but  deliver  us  from  evil 


Acts 
Rom. 


Matt.  6.  23  But  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body 
7.  11  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
7.  17  but  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth  forth  evil 
7.  18  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 
9.    4  Wherefore  think  ye  evil  in  your  hearts  ? 

12.  34  how  can  ye,  being  evil,  speak  good  thin.? 

12.  35  and  an  evil  man,  out  of  the  evil  treasure 

12.  39  An  evil  and  adulterous  generation  seek. 
15.  19  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts 
20.  15  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good? 

Mark  7.  22  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishne. 

Luke  3.  19  for  all  the  evils  which  Herod  had  done 
6.  22  and  cast  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the 
6.  35  kind  unto  the  unthankful  arid  (to)  the  e. 

6.  45  an  evil  man  out  of  the  evil  treasure  of 

7.  21  infirmities  and  plagues,  and  of  evil  spirits 

8.  2  which  had  been  healed  of  evil  spirits  and 
11.    4  lead  us  not.  .but  deliver  us  from  evil 

11.  13  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
11.  29  he  began  to  say,  This  is  an  evil  generat. 
11.  34  when  (thine  eye)  is  evil,  thy  body  also  (is) 

John  3.  19  men  loved . .  because  their  deeds  were  evil 
7.   7  I  testify,  .that  the  works  thereof  are  evil 

Acts  19.  12  and  the  evil  spirits  went  out  of  them 
19.  13  to  call  over  them  which  had  evil  spirits 
19.  15  the  evil  spirit  answered  and  said,  Jesus 

19. 16  the  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was  le. 
Gal.  1.  4  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  world 
Eph.   5.  16  Redeeming  the  time .  .the  days  are  evil 

6.  13  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day 

1  Th.  5.  22  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil 

2  Th.  3     3  establish  you,  and  keep  (you)  from  evil 

1  Ti.   6.    4  whereof  cometh  envy,  .evil  surmisings 

2  Ti.    3.  13  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse 

4.  18  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil 
Heb.   3.  12  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart 

10.  22  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 
Jas.    2.   4  and  are  become  judges  of  evil  thoughts  ? 

4.  16  now  ye  rejoice,  .all  such  rejoicing  is  evil 
1  Jo.  3.  12  because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and 

11. Evil  ivord,  irovripbv  firma  poneron  rhema. 
Matt.  5.  11  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you 

12.  Worthless,  <pav\os  phaulds. 

John  3.  20  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light 

5.  29  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrect. 
Jas.     3.  16  there  (is)  confusion  and  every  evil  work 

EVIL,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  evil,  yv  yara. 

Deut  28.  54  his  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  his  brother 
28.  56  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  the  husband 

2.  To  be  evil,  yyi  raa. 

Deut.  15.   9  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  poor  brother 

EVIL,  to  be  so  — 

From  badness,  yip  meroa. 

Jer.  24.  3,  8  canuot  be  eaten,  they  are  so  evil 

29. 17  that  cannot  be  eaten,  they  are  so  evil 

EVIL,  to  bring  — 

To  do  evil,  treat  ill,  y£>")  ™rt»  5. 

1  Ki.17.  20  hast  thou  also  brought  evil  upon  the  wi. 

Jer.  25.  29  lo,  I  begin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  which 

EVIL,  to  do  — 
l.Evil,  n  ra. 

Jer.  11.  15  when  thou  doest  evil,  then  thourejoxest 

2.  To  do  evil,  treat  ill,  VT\  raa,  5. 

Gen.  44.    5  Ye  have  done  evil  in  so  doing 
Exod.  5.  23  since  I  came,  .he  hath  done  evil  to  this 
Lev.     5.    4  pronouncing  with  (his)  lips  to  do  evil 
1  Ki  14.    9  hast  done  evil  above  all  that  were  before 
1  Ch.21.  17  that  have  sinned,  and  done  evil  indeed 
Psa.  37.    8  fret  not  thyself  in  anywise  to  do  evil 
PTOV24.    8  He  that  deviseth  to  do  evil  shall  be 
Isa.     1.  16  Wash  you,  make  you  clean,  .cease  to  doe. 

41.  23  or  do  evil,  that  we  may  be  dismayed 
Jer.     4.  22  they  (are)  wise  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good 

10.    5  for  they  cannot  do  evil,  neither  also  (is 

13.  23  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil 
38.    9  these  men  have  done  evil  in  all  that  they 

Zeph.  r.  12  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil 

3.7*0  do  evil,  kclkottoUw  kakopoieo. 

Mark  3.    4  Is  it  lawful  to  do  good . .  or  to  do  evil  ? 
Luke  6.    9  Is  it  lawful,  .to  do  good,  or  to  do  evil  ? 

3  Jo.       11  but  he  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God 

EVIL  entreat,  to  — 

l.To  evil  entreat,  rrjn  raah. 

Job  24.  21  He  evil  entreateth  the  barren  (that)  bear 

2.7*0  do  evil,  treat  ill,  TO  raa,  5. 

Exod.  5.  22  wherefore  hast  thou  (so)  evil  entreated 
Deut  26.    6  Egyptians  evil  entreated  us,  and  afflicted 

3.  T'o  do  evil  to,  Kax6a  kakoo. 

Acts    7.    6  and  entreat  (them)  evil  four  hundred 

7.  19  dealt  subtilly.  .and  evil  entreated  our 

EVIL  man  — 

Evil,  bad,  VI  ra. 

Job  35. 12  answer,  because  of  the  pride  of  evil  men 

EVIL  report  — 

Evil  account  or  report,  n2i  dibbah. 

Gen.  37.    2  brought  unto  his  father  their  evil  report 
Numi3.  32  they  brought  up  an  evil  report  of  the 

14.  37  that  did  bring  up  the  evil  report  upon 


EVIL 


316 


EXCEED 


EVIL  speaker  — 

.4  man  of  tongue,  jwj  r'N  ish  lashon. 

Psa.  140.  ii  Let  not  au  evil  speaker  be  established  in 
EVIL  things  — 
I. Evil,  m  ra. 

Prov  15.  28  mouth  of  the  wicked  poureth  out  evil  th. 
2  Evil,  bad,  k<zk6s  kakos. 

Lukei6.  25  and  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things  :  but 

Rom.  1.  30  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of  evil  things 

1  Co.  10.  6  we  should  not  lust  after  evil  things,  as 

?j,Evil,  irovTjpSs  poneros. 

Matti2.  35  and  an  evil  man . .  bringeth  forth  evil  thi. 
Mark  7.  23  All  these  evil  things  cometh  from  within 

2  Jo.       11  that  biddeth . .  is  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds 
4.  Worthless,  <pav\c?  phaulos. 

Titus  2.    8  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of 

EVIL  doing  — 

1.  Injustice,  aBUnfia  adikema. 

Acts  24.  20  if  they  have  found  any  evil  doing  in  me 
'2.  To  do  evil,  Kavoiroieco  kakopoieo. 

1  Pe.  3. 17  suffer  for  well  doing,  than  for  evil  doing 

EVIL  doer  — 

1.  To  work  vanity,  do  iniquity,  |ix  7y3  paal  aven. 
Isa.    31.    2  arise  against  the  house  of  the  evil  doers. 

2.  To  do  evil,  treat  ill,  VT\  ?aa,  5. 

Job     8.  20  neither  will  he  help  the  evil  doers 

Psa.  26.    5  have  hated  the  congregation  of  evil  doers 

37.    1  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil  doers 

37.   9  For  evil  doers  shall  be  cut  off  :  but  those 

94.  16  Who  will  rise  up  for  me  against  the  evil  d.? 

119.  115  Depart  from  me,  ye  evil  doers  :  for  I  will 

Isa.      1.    4  a  seed  of  evil  doers,  children  that  are  cor. 

g.  17  every  one  (is)  an  hypocrite  and  an  evil  d. 

14.  20  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  never  be  renowned 
Jer.    20.  13  hath  delivered,  .from  the  hand  of  evil  d. 

23.  14  they  strengthen  also  the  hands  of  evil  d. 

•j. Evil  doer,  KaKowotSs  kakopoios. 

1  Pe.  2. 12  they  speak  against  you  as  evil  doers,  they 

2.  14  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  evil  doers 

3.  16  [whereas  they  speak . .  of  you,  as  of  evil  d.  ] 
4. 15  (as)  a  thief,  or  (as)  an  evil  doer,  or  (as)  a 

4.  Evil  worker,  naKovpyos  kakourgos. 

2  Ti.    2.   9  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble,  as  an  evil  doer 
EVIL  favouredness  — 

Evil  thing,  in~i;n  dabar  ra. 

Dent  1 7.    1  wherein  is  blemish,  (or)  any  evil  favour. 
EVIL,  tfiat  which  is  — 
l.That  which  is  evil  or  bad,  6  k<xk6s  ho  kakos. 

£.01013.    4  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid 

3  Jo.       11  Beloved,  follow  not  that  which  is  evil,  but 

2.  That  which  is  evil,  &  irouwp6s  poneros. 

Luke  6  45  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  evil :  for  of 
Rom  12.    9  Abhor  that  which  is  evil ;  cleave  to  that 

EVLL,  the  — 

That  which  is  evil,  6  irovr]p6s  ho  poneros. 

John  17.  15  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil 
EVIL,  t  ey  which  are  — 
Evil,  bid,  kolk6s  kakos. 

Rev.   2.    2  thou  canst  not  bear  them  which  are  evil 
EVIL  affected,  to  make  — 
To  make  bad,  nanSta  kakoo. 

Acts  14.    2  made  their  minds  evil  affected  against 
r-VLL  ME-RO'-DACH,  7Q"ip  V}£. 

S  111  and  successor  of  N  buchadnezzar.  He  released 
Jehoiakin  whom  his  father  had  kept  in  prison  for  thirty- 
seven  years.     His  reign  was  short,  from  561-559.  B.C. 

2  Ki.25.  27  E. .  .did  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin 

Jer.   52.  31  E.  .lifted  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king 
EWE  — 
l.Ewe,  lamb,  Srri  racket. 

Gen.  31.  38  thy  ewes.,  have  not  cast  their  young,  and 
32.  14  he  goats,  two  hundred  ewes,  and  twenty 

2.  Young  lamb,  kid,  sheep,  ngf  seh. 

Lev.  22.  28  (whether  it  be)  cow  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not 

EWE  LAMB  — 

Em  lavib,  n'aa;-),  n'^35  kabsah,  kibsah. 

Gen.  21.  28  Abraham  set  seven  ewe  lambs  of  the  flock 
21.  29  What  (mean)  these  seven  ewe  lambs  which 
21.  30  For  (these)  seven  ewe  lambs  shalt  thou 
Lev.  14.  10  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without 
Num.  6.  14  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without 
2  Sa,  12.    3  had  nothing,  save  one  little  ewe  lamb 

EWES  great  with  young  — 
Suckling,  one  giving  milk,  TV  ul. 

Psa.  78.71  From  following  the  ewes  great  with  young 
EXACT,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  come  out,  bring  forth,  Ny;  yatsa,  5. 

2  K.i ,  1 5.  20  And  Menaheiu  exacted  the  money  of  Israel 
2,  To  exact,  (Mj  nagas. 

Deutis.    2  he  shall  not  exact  (it)  of  his  neighbour 

15.  3  Of  a  foreigner  thnumayest  exact  (it  again) 
2  Ki.2^.  35  he  exacted  the  silver  and  the  gold  of  the 
Isa.  5S.    3  ye  find  pleasure,  and  exact  all  your  lab. 

■  ).  T<>  exact,  lift  up,  v$\  nasha. 

Nch.  5.    7  Ye  exact  usury  every  one  of  his  brother 


4.  To  (cause  to)  exact,  tupi  nasha,  5. 

Psa.  89.  22  The  enemy  shall  not  exact  upon  him ;  nor 

5.  To  exact,  ni?3  nashah. 

Neh.  5.  10  I  likewise,  .might  exact  of  them  money 
5. 11  Restore,  .to  them,  .that  ye  exact  of  them 

6.  To  (cause  to)  exact,  nyi  nashah,  5. 

Job   11.   6  Know  therefore  that  God  exacteth  of  thee 

7.  To  do,  practice,  produce,  irpda^m  p>rasso. 

Luke  3.  13  Exact  no  more  than  that  which  is  appoin. 

EXACTION  — 

1.  Expulsion,  exaction,  npna  gerushah. 

Eze.  45.    9  take  away  your  exactions  from  my  people 

2.  An  exaction,  lifting  up,  k&o  mashsha. 

Neh.  10.  31  would  leave,  .and  the  exaction  of  every 

EXACTOR  — 

To  exact,  iwj  nagas. 

Isa.  60. 17  also  make,  .thine  exactors  righteousne?s 

EXALT,  to  — 

l.To  make  high,  Pina  gabah,  5. 

Prov  17.  19  he  that  exalteth  his  gate  seekethdestruc. 

Eze.  17.  24  know  that  I  the  Lord,  .have  exalted  the 
2i.  26  exalt  (him  that  is)  low,  and  abase  (him 

Obad.      4  Though  thou  exalt  (thyself)  as  the  eagle 
2. To  lift  up  (self),  H'yi  nasa. 

Hos.  13.    1  he  exalted  himself  in  Israel ;  but  when 

3.  To  lift  ttp,  aj^i  nasa,  3. 

2  Sa.   5.  12  he  had  exalted  his  kingdom  for  his  people 

4.  To  raise  up,  exalt,  ^D  salal,  3ft. 

Prov.  4.    8  Exalt  her,  and  she  shall  promote  thee 

5.  To  lift  up,  exalt,  on  rum,  3a. 

Exod  15.    2  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength,  .and  I  will  e. 
Job    17.    4  therefore  shalt  thou  not  exalt  (them) 
Psa.  34.    3  and  let  us  exalt  his  name  together 

37.  34  and  he  shall  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  land 
99.    5  Exalt  ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship 
99.   9  Exalt  the  Lord  our  God, and  worship  at  his 
107.  32  Let  them  exalt  him  also  in  the  congreg. 
118.  28  praise  thee  :  (thou  art)  my  God,  I  will  e. 
Prov  14.  34  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  :  but 
Isa.   25.    1  O  Lord.  .1  will  exalt  thee,  I  will  praise 
Hos.  it.    7  though  they  called,  .none  at  all  would  e. 
6. To  lift  up,  exalt,  on  rum  5. 

1  Sa.    2.  10  and  exalt  the  horn  of  his  anointed 

1  Ki.  14.    7  as  I  exalted  thee  from  among  the  people 

16.    2  Forasmuch  as  I  exalted  thee  out  of  the 

2  Ki.  19. 5  2  against  whom  hast  thou  exalted  (thy)  voi. 
Psa.  S9.  19  I  have  exalted  (one)  chosen  out  of  the 

92.  10  my  horn  shalt  thou  exalt  like  (the  horn  of) 

148.  14  He  also  exalteth  the  horn  of  his  people 

Prov  14.  29  (lie  that  is)  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  folly 

Isa.    13.    2  exalt  the  voice  unto  them,  shake  the  hand 

14.  13  I  will  exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of 

37.  23  against  whom  hast  thou  exalted  (thy)  voi. 

7.  To  set  on  high,  33^  sagab,  5. 

Job.  36.  22  Behold,  God  exalteth  by  his  power :  who 

8.  To  raise  high,  elevate,  vty6ai  hupsoo. 

Matt  1 1.  23  And  thou,  .which  art  exalted  unto  heaven 
23.  12  whosoever  shall  exalt  himself  shall  be 
23.  12  that  shall  humble  himself  shall  be  exal. 

Luke   1.  52  put  down  the  mighty,  .and  exalted  them 

10.  15  And  thou,  .which  art  exalted  to  heaven 
14.  11  whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  aba. 
14.  11  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted 
18.  14  every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be 
18.  14  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted 

Acts    2.  33  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted 
5.  31  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  his  right 
13.  17  exalted  the  people  when  they  dwelt  as 
2  Co.  it.    7  in  abasing  myself  that  ye  might  be  exalted 
1  Pe.   5.    6  that  he  may  exalt  you  in  due  time 

EXALT  self,  to  — 

l.To  be  or  become  high,  33a  gabah. 

Eze.  31.  14  To  the  end  that  none,  .exalt  themselves 
2.To  lift  up  self,  tfyl  nasa,  7. 

1  Ki.    1.    5  the  son  of  Haggith  exalted  himself,  saying 
Eze.  29.  15  neither  shall  it  exalt  itself  any  more 
Dan.  11.  14  also  the  robbers,  .shall  exalt  themselves 

Z.To  raise  up  self  bhc  salal,  7a. 

Exod.  9.  17  As  yet  exaltest  thou  thyself  against  my 

4.  To  be  high,  lifted  up,  on  rum. 

Psa.  66.   7  let  not  the  rebellious  exalt  themselves 
140.    8  further  not.  .(lest)  they  exalt  themselves 

5.  To  lift  up  self,  on  rum,  7a. 

Dan.  11.  36  he  shall  exalt  himself,  and  magnify 

6.  To  lift  up  upon  or  against,  iiraipa)  epairo. 

2  Co.  10.    5  and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself 

11.  20  if  a  man  exalt  himself,  if  a  man  smite 
7. To  lift  up  above,  vwepaipa}  huperaird. 

2  Th.  2.    4  Who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself 
EXALT  highly,  to  — 
To  lift  up  above,  virepv\\>6co  huperupsoo. 

Phil.   2.    9  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and 
EXALTED,  to  be  — 
1.  To  be  or  become  high  or  haughty,  nja  gabah. 

Job  36.   7  doth  establish  them.. and  they  are  exalt. 

Isa.     5.  16  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  exalted  in  judg. 


Eze.  19.  11  her  stature  was  exalted  among  the  thick 
31.    s  his  height  was  exalted  above  all  the  trees 

2.  To  be  lifted  up),  nvj  nasa,  2. 

Isa.     2.    2  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and  all 
40.    4  Every  valley  shall  be  exalted,  and  every 

Mic.    4.    1  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and 
Z.To  lift  up  self  N'pj  nasa,  7. 

Nuni24.    7  higher.,  and  his  kingdom  shall  be  exalted 

1  Ch.  29.  11  and  thou  art  exalted  as  head  above  all 
4.  To  be  gone  up,  rhy  alah,  2. 

Psa.  47.    9  (belong)  unto  God  :  he  is  greatly  exalted 
97.    9  For  thou,  Lord,  .art  exalted  far  above 
5. To  be  high,  lifted  up,  on  rum. 

1  Sa.    2.    1  mine  horn  is  exalted  in  the  Lord  ;  my 

2  Sa.  22.  47  exalted  be  the  God  of  the  rock  of  my  salv. 
Psa.  12.    8  wicked  walk,  .when  the  vilest  men  are  e. 

13.    2  how  long  shall  mine  enemy  be  exalted 
18.  46  and  let  the  God  of  my  salvation  be  exal. 
21. 13  Be  thou  exalted,  Lord,  in  thine  own 
46. 10  I  will  be  exalted.  .1  will  be  exalted  in 
57.    5,  11  Be  thou  exalted,  0  God,  above  the 
89.  16  in  thy  righteousness  shall  they  be  exalt. 
89.  24  and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be  exalted 
108.    5  Be  thou  exalted,  O  God,  above  the  heavens 
112.    9  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  honour 
Prov  11.  11  By  the  blessing,  .the  city  is  exalted 
Isa.   30.  18  therefore  will  he  be  exalted,  that  he 
49.  ti  and  my  highways  shall  be  exalted 
52.  13  he  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be 
H0S.J13.    6  were  filled,  and  their  heart  was  exalted 

6.  To  be  lifted  up,  exalted,  on  rum,  3&. 

Neh.   9.    5  which  is  exalted  above  all  blessing  and 
Psa.  75.  10  the  horns  of  the  righteous  shall  be  exal. 

7.  To  lift  tip,  exalt,  on  rum,  1  or  5. 

Psa.  89.  17  in  thy  favour  our  horn  shall  be  exalted 

3.  To  be  high,  Dpi  ramam. 

Job  24.  24  They  are  exalted  for  a  little  while,  but 
Psa.118.  16  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  is  exalted 

9.  To  be  or  become  high ,  DQ"i  ramam,  2,  or  on  rum,  7a. 

Isa.   33.  10  Now  will  I  rise,  .now  will  I  be  exalted 

10.  To  be  high  or  strong,  nj#  sagab. 

Job     5.  11  those  which  mourn  may  be  exalted  to  saf . 

11.  To  be  or  become  high  or  strong,  3:fc>  sagab,  2. 
Isa.     2.  11,  17  the  Lord  alone  shall  oe  exalted  in 

12.    4  make  mention  that  his  name  is  exalted 
33.    5  The  Lord  is  exalted ;  for  he  dwelleth 

EXALTED  above  measure,  to  be  — 

To  lift  up  above,  vwepaipec  huperairo. 

2  C0.12.    7,  7  lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  measure 

EXALTED,  in  that  he  is  — 

In  his  lifting  up,  iv  t$  tyei  clvtov. 

Jas      1.    9  Let  the  brother,  .rejoice  in  that  he  is  ex. 

EXAMINATION  — 

A  judging  up,  examination,    investigation,   avd- 

Kpicris  anakrisis. 

Acts  25.  26  after  examination  had,  I  might  have  so. 

EXAMINE,  be  examined,  to  — 
l.To  try,  prove,  test,  jna  bachan. 

Psa.  26.    2  Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me  ;  try 
2. To  examine,  seek,  enquire,  c-'~n  darash,  3. 

Ezra  10.  16  and  sat  down . .  to  examine  the  matter 
B.To  examine,  investigate,  avaKpivut  anakrino. 
Luke23.  14  I,  having  examined  (him)  before  you,  have 
Acts   4,    9  If  we  this  day  be  examined  of  the  good 
12.  19  he  examined  the  keepers,  and  commanded 
24.    8  by  examining  of  whom  thyself  mayest 
28.  18  Who,  when  they  had  examined  me,  would 
1  Co.   9.    3  Mine  answer  to  them  that  do  examine 

4.  To  examine  fully,  averafa  aneiazo. 

Acts  22.  24  bade  that  he  should  be  examined  by  sc. 
22.  29  from  him  which  should  have  examined 

5.  To  prove,  SoKifxafa  dokimazo. 

1  Co.  ix.  28  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him 

6.  To  try,  iretpafa  peirazo. 

2  Co.  13.    5  Examine  yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the 

EXAMPLE  — 

1. Sample,  exhibition,  Sety^uct  deigma. 

Jude         7  the  cities,  .are  set  forth  for  an  example 
2.  A  type,  model,  tvwos  tupos. 

1  Co.  10.    6  Now  these  things  were  our  examples,  to 

1  Ti.    4.  12  but  be  thou  an  example  of  the  believers 
Z.Oopy,  an  under-writing,  viroypafj./.i6s  hupogra. 

1  Pe.    2.  21  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should 
A.  A  sample,  exhibition,  fiirdheiyfia  hupodeigma. 

John  13.  15  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye 

Heb.   4.  11  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example 
8.   5  Who  serve  unto  the  example  and  shadow 

Jas.     5.  10  for  an  example  of  suffering  affliction,  and 

EXAMPLE,  to  mnke  a  public  — 

To  exhibit  publicly,  Trapab'etyfxa.Tifa  paradeigmaU. 

Matt.  1.  i9Uotwilling[tomakehcr  a  public  example] 
EXCEED,  to  — 
l.To  show  self  mighty,  "133  gabar,  7. 

Job  36.    9  their  transgressions  that  they  have  exce. 


EXCEEDING 


317 


EXCEPT 


2.  To  be  or  become  great,  Tna  gadal. 

i  Ki.  10.  23  So  king  Solomon  exceeded  all  the  kings  of 

3.  To  make  or  become  great,  hiz  gadal,  5. 

1  Sa.  20.  41  wept  one  with  another,  until  David  exc. 

4.  To  add,  fjp;  yasaph. 

2  Ch.  9.   6  (for)  thou  exceedest  the  fame  that  I  heard 

5.To  add,  *]p;  yasaph,  5. 

Deut25.    3  not  exceed :  lest,  (if)  he  should  exceed 

1  Ki.  10.    7  thy  wisdom  and  prosperity  exceedeth  the 
6.  To  be  over  and  above,  abound,  exceed,  ireptaaevco. 

Matt.  5.  20  except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed 

2  Co.   3.    9  much  more  doth  the  ministration,  .exceed 

EXCEEDING  — 

1. Excellent,  abundant,  Vffi  yattir. 

Dan.    3.  22  the  furnace  exeeediug  hot,  the  flame  of 
7. 19  exceeding  dreadful,  whose  teeth  (were  of) 

^Superabundance,  excellency,  in*  yether. 

Dan.   8.    9  a  little  horn,  which  waxed  exceeding  gr. 

S.Might,  *ind  meod. 

Gen.  15.    i  I  (am)  thy  shield,  (aud)  thy  exceeding  g. 

17.    6  And  I  will  make  thee  exceeding  fruitful 

27.  34  he  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter 
Exod.  1.    7  multiplied,  and  waxed  exceeding  mighty 

19.  16  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud 
Nunii4.    7  The  land,  .(is)  an  exceeding  good  laud 
2  Sa.    8.    8  from  Betah . .  king  David  took  exceeding 

12.    2  The  rich  (man)  had  exceeding  many  flue. 
1  Ki.  4.  29  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  .exceeding 

7.  47  because  they  were  exceeding  many 

1  Ch.  '20.    2  he  brought  also  exceeding  much  spoil  out 

2  Ch.  32.  27  Hezekiahhad  exceeding  much  riches  and 
Psa.119.  96  (but)  thy  commandment  (is)  exceeding 
Jer.  48.  29  the  pride  of  Moab,  he  is  exceeding  proud 
Eze.    9.   9  The  iniquity  of  the  house  .  (is)  exceeding 

16.  13  thou  wast  exceeding  beautiful,  and  thou 
37.  10  and  stood  up.  .an  exceeding  great  army 
47.  10  as  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  exceeding 

4. Above,  upward,  onward,  nbyo?  lemalah. 

1  Ch.22.    5  thehouse..(mu5tbe)exceedingmagniflcal 

2  Ch.  16.  12  until  Ms  disease  (was)  exceeding  (great) 

5.  To  spread  out,  rna  sarach. 

Eze.  23.  15  exceeding  in  dyed  attire  upon  their  heads 

6.  Many,  much,  enough,  abundant,  an  rah. 

2  Ch.  14. 14  for  there  was  exceeding  much  spoil  in 
7. To  make  great  or  abundant,  iKp  nn-i  rabahmeod,o. 

2  Ch.  11. 12  (he  put)  shields,  .and  made  them  exceed. 
8.  Great,  xw  saggi. 

Dan.    6.  23  Then  was  the  king  exceeding  glad  for 
9. Beyond  surpassing,  ko.9'  virtpfioArfv  kath  huper. 

Roni.  7.  13  that  sin.  .might  become  exceeding  sinful 

10.  Very,  greatly,  Aiav  lion. 

Matt.  2.  16  Then  Herod,  .was  exceeding  wroth,  and 
4.    8  taketli  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high 

8.  28  two  possessed  with  devils,  .exceeding 
Mark  g.    3  became  shining,  exceeding  white  as  snow 
Luke23-    8  when  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding 

11.  To  God,  Tt?  0e£  to  tiled. 

Acts    7.  20  Moses  was  born,  and  was  exceeding  fair 

12.  Greatly,  vehemently,  a<p6$pa  sphodra. 

Matt   2. 10  they  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great  joy 

17.  23  And  they  were  exceeding  sorry 

26.  22  they  were  exceeding  sorrowful,  and  began 
Rev.  16.  21  for  the  plague  thereof  was  exceeding 

13.  Over,  above,  inrep  huper. 

Eph.   3.  20  Now  unto  him  that  i3  able  to  do  exceed. 

14.  To  cast  beyond,  surpass,  virep&dAAiti  huperballo. 
2  Co.   9.  14  which  long  after  you  for  the  exceeding 
Eph.   1.  19  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to 

2.   7  he  might  show  the  exceeding  riches  of  his 

lo.To  be  over  and  above,  virepirepiao-evco  huperper. 
2  Co.  7.  4  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  tribulation 

16.  To  God,  VTibxb  lelohim. 

Jon.    3.    3  Now  Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  city 

17.  To  be  made  wise,  D?n  chakam,  4. 

Prov  30. 24  little  upon  theearth,  but  they  (are)  exceed. 
IS. Rejoicing,  joy,  gladness,  mirth,  nnpiy  simchcih, 
Psa.  2i.   6  thou  hast  made  him  exceeding  glad  with 
43.   4  Then  will  I  go.  .unto  God  my  exceeding 

19.  Great,  nSna  gedolah. 

Jon.    4.    6  So  Jonah  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd 
EXCEEDING,  far  more  — 
Beyond   measure  surpassing,  /cat?'   virtpfSo\T}v  els 

i>TT€pf3oK7)V. 

2  Co.  4. 17  a  far  more  exceeding  (and)  eternal  weight 
EXCEEDING  proudly  — 
High,  haughty,  fitaa  gaboah. 

1  Sa.  2.   3  Talk  no  more  so  exceeding  proudly ;  let 
EXCEEDINGLY  — 
\.  Abundant,  excellent,  tjv  yattir. 

Dan.   7.    7  dreadful  and  terrible,  and  strong  exceed. 
2.  Might,  (litt?)  *ind  meod  {meod). 

Gen.   7.  19  the  waters  prevailed  exceedingly  upon 
13.  13  and  sinners  before  the  Lord  exceedingly 
17.    2  and  will  multiply  thee  exceedingly 
17.  20  aad  will  multiply  liim  exceedingly;  twelve 


Gen.  30.  43  the  man  increased  exceedingly,  and  had 

47.  27  and  grew,  and  multiplied  exceedingly 
2  Ki.io.    4  But  they  were  exceedingly  afraid,  and 
Esth.  4.    4  Then  was  the  queen  exceedingly  grieved 
Psa.119.  r^7  thy  testimonies ;  and  I  love  them  exce. 
Z.  Above,  upward,  onward,  nSya?  lemalah. 

1  Ch.29.  25  the  Lord  magnified  Solomon  exceedingly 

2  Ch.    1.    1  God  (was)  with  him,  and  magnified  him  e. 

17. 12  And  Jehoshaphat  waxed  great  exceedin. 
26.   8  for  he  strengthened  (himself)  exceedingly 
4. Many,  much,  enough,  abundant,  a*i  rob. 

Psa. 123.    3  for  we  are  exceedingly  filled  with  conte. 
123.   4  Our  soul  is  exceedingly  filled  with  the 

5.  To  make  many  or  abundant,  1RD  nqr\  rabah})ieod,5. 
Gen.  16.  10  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  exceedingly,  that 

1  Sa.  26.  21  have  played  the  fool,  and  have  erred  ex. 
6. Joy,  rejoicing,  r3r^?to  elegit. 

Job     3.  22  Which  rejoice  exceedingly,  (and)  are  glad 

7.  A  great  trembling,  '"ibiia.  rrrin  charadah  gedolah. 

Gen.  27.  33  Isaac  trembled  very  exceedingly,  and 

8.  With  rejoicing,  gladness,  mirth,  nnpa'a  besimehah 
Psa.  68.    3  rejoice  before  God ;  yea,  let  them  exceed. 

9. Desire,  lust,  hixpi  taxtvah. 

Psa.  106. 14  But  lusted  exceedingly  in  the  wilderness 

10.  Great,  rrVna  gedolah. 

Neh.  2.  10  it  grieved  them  exceedingly  that  there 
Jon.    1.  10  Then  were  the  men  exceedingly  afraid 

1.  j6  the  men  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly,  aud 
4.    1  But  it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and 

11.  Great  (with)  might,  1NQ  •"iVna  gedolah  meod. 

2  Sa.  13.  15  Then  Amnon  hated  her  exceedingly ;  so 
12. More  abundantly,  Trepio-a'OTepws  perissoteros. 

2  Co.  7.  13  and  exceedingly  the  more  joyed  we  for 

13. Exceedingly,  Treptcro'ws  perissos. 

Acts  26.  11  and,  being  exceedingly  mad  against  them 

li.Greatly,  vehemently,  <r<p68pa  sphodra. 

Mattig.  25  they  were  exceedingly  amazed,  saying 
15.Greatly,  vehemently,  o-<po$pa>s  sphodros. 

Acts  27.  iS  we  being  exceedingly  tossed  with  a  temp. 

16.  Above  out  of  measure,  vtrkp  e/c  Treptcraov. 

1  Tli.  3.  10  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that 

17.  A  great  fear,  (p6$ov  p.iyo.v  phobon  megan. 
Mark  4.  41  they  feared  exceedingly,  and  said  one  to 

EXCEEDINGLY,  the  more  — 

More  abundantly,  •n-epicnroTep&js'  perissoteros. 

Markis.  14  they  cried  out  [the  more  exceedingly] 

Gal.     1.  14  being  [more  exceedingly]  zealous  of  the 
EXCEL,  to  — 
1. Mighty,  "lisa  gibbor. 

Psa.  103.  20  ye  his  angels,  that  excel  In  strength,  that 
2.7*0  make  abundant,  "ip;  yatltar,  5. 

Gen.  49.    4  Unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel 
3.7b  be  pre-eminent,  excel,  nsa  natsach,  3. 

1  Ch.15.  21  with  harps  on  the  Sheniinith  to  excel 
4.  To  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

Prov.  31.  29  done  virtuously,  but  thou  excellest  them 
5.7*0  be  abundant,  h^t  rabah. 

1  Ki.  4.  30  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled  the  wisdom 

6.  To  be  over  and  above,  Treptaaevio  perisseuo. 

1  Co.  14. 12  seek  that  ye  may  excel  to  the  edifying 
7. 7*o  cast  beyond,  surpass,  vwep&dAAQ)  huperballo. 

2  Co.  3. 10  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth 
EXCELLENCY  — 

1. Rising,  excellency,  rnsa  gaavah. 

Deut33.  26  ( who)  rideth. .  in  his  excellency  on  the  sky 
33.  29  and  who  (is)  the  sword  of  thy  excellency ! 
Psa.  68.  34  his  excellency  (is)  over  Israel,  and  his 

2. Rising,  excellency,  Jixa  goon. 

Exod  1 5.  7  in  the  greatness  of  thine  excellency  thou 
Job  37  4  thundereth  with,  .voice  of  his  excellency 
Psa.  47.  4  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  whom  he  loved 
Isa.    13.  19  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees'  excellency 

60. 15  I  will  make  thee  an  eternal  excellency,  a 

Eze.  24.  21  excellency  of  your  strength,  the  desire 

Amos  6.    8  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  and  hate 

8.    7  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  Jac. 

Nah.   2.    2  excellency  of  Jacob,  as  the  excellency  of 

3. Height,  loftiness,  nja  gobah. 

Job  40.  10  Deck  thyself,  .(with)  majesty  and  excell. 
^.Honour,  beauty,  'majesty,  *nrr  hadar. 

Isa.  35.    2  the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  Sharon 
35.;  2  shall  see .  .the  excellency  of  our  God 

5. Superabundance,  excellency,  T#;  yether. 

Gen.  49.   3  excellency  of  dignity,  and  the  exoellency 
Job  :  4.  21  Doth  not  their  excellency  (which  is)  in 

6. Advantage,  frvy.  yithron. 

Eccl.  7.  12  excellency  of  knowledge  (is,  that)  wisdom 
7 .Excellence,  rising,  n^i?  seeth. 

Job    13.  11  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid? 

Psa.  62.    4  to  cast  (him)  down  from  his  excellency 
8. Excellency,  N't?  si. 

Job    20.   6  his  excellency  mount  up  to  the  heavens 
9. A  casting  beyond,  surpassing,  inrep$o\7]  huperb. 

2  Co.  4.    7  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God 


10.  The  pre-eminence,  rb  \nrsp4xov  to  huperechon. 

Phil.    3.    8  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
11. .4  Jiolding  over  or  beyond,  vTrspoxh  huperoche. 

1  Co.   2.    1  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of  wisdom 

EXCELLENT  — 

1. Honourable,  THN  addir. 

Psa.    8.  1,  9  how  excellent  (is)  thy  name  in  all  the  ea. 
16.   3  the  excellent,  in  whom  (is)  all  my  delight 
76.    4  Thou  (art)  more  glorious  (and)  excellent 
2.  To  clwose,  try,  fix  on,  "irn  bachar. 

Song  5.  15  (is)  as  Lebanon,  excellent  as  the  cedars 
S.Rising,  excellency,  pride,  ps*a  gaon. 

Isa.     4.    2  the  fruit  of  the  earth  (shall  be)  excelienu 

4. 7b  make  or  become  great,  t]3  gadal,  5. 

Isa.  28.  29  wonderful  in  counsel,  .excellent  in  wor. 
5. Precious,  "13;  yakar. 

Psa.  36.    7  How  excellent  (is)  thy  loving  kindness,  O 

6. Excellent,  abundant,  tb;  yattir. 

Dan.    2.  31  great  image,  whose  brightness  (was)  ex. 

4.  36  and  excellent  majesty  was  added  unto  me 

5.  12  as  an  excellent  spirit,  and  knowledge,  and 

5.  14  and  excellent  wisdom  is  found  in  thee 

6.  3  because  an  excellent  spirit  (was)  in  him 

7 .  Superabundance,  excellency,  id*  yether. 

Prov  17.    7  Excellent  speech  becometh  not  a  fool 

S.Excellentj  cool,  *ip  qar. 

Provi7.  27  man  of  understanding  is.,  excellent  spirit 

9. Abundance,  ai  rob. 

Psa  150.   2  praise  him .  .to  his  excellent  greatness 

10.  Great,  N'ai?  saggi. 

Job  37.  23  (he  is)  excellent  in  power,  and  in  judgment 

11.  Ornaments,  ""i)L  adi. 

Eze.  16.    7  and  thou  art  come  to  excellent  ornaments 

12.  Beauty,  mvNrn  tiphereth. 

Esth.  1.   4  and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty 
1Z. Proper  or  becoming  to  th?.  great,  fieyaAoTrpeir-ns. 

2  Pe.    1.  17  a  voice  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory 

EXCELLENT,  more  — 

l.Greater,  better,  widely  different,  b*ia<pop&Tepos- 
Heb.    1.    4  obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than 
8.    6  he  obtained  a  more  excellent  ministry 

2.  Very  surpassing,  naO*  irrrep^oA-qv. 

1  Co.  12.  31  yet  show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way 
Z.More,  greater,  fuller,  irAe'iav  pleion. 

Heb.11.    4  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain 

EXCELLENT,  most  — 

A  host,  powerful,  noble,  Kp&TtaTos  kratistos. 

Luke  1.    3  write  unto  thee .  .most  excellent  Theoph. 

Acts  23.  26  Claudius  Lysias  unto  the  most  excellent 

EXCELLENT,  things  thr.t  axe  (more)  — 

Things  lluit  differ,  are  pre-eminent,  to  h~ia<p4povTa. 
Eom.  2.  18  approvest.  .things  that  are  more  excellent 
Phil.    1.  10  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  excellent 

EXCELLENT,  to  be  — 

l.To  become  set  on  high,  2i&  sagab,  2. 

Psa.  148.  13  his  name  alone  is  excellent ;  his  glory 
2. 7*0  cause  to  go  about  or  spy  out,  *iw  iur,  5. 

Prov.  1 2.  26  The  righteous  (is)  more  excellent  than  his 

EXCELLENT  thing  — 
l.Rising,  excellency,  n-xa  geuth. 

Isa.  12.   5  he  hath  done  excellent  things  :  this  £s) 

^.Foremost,  leading,  TJ3  nagid. 

Prov.  S.   6  Hear ;  for  I  will  speak  of  excellent  things 

3.  TJireefokl,  excellent,  weighty,  v*bv  shalish. 

Prov  22.  20  Have  not  I  written . .  thee  excellent  things 

EXCELLENT  (oil)  — 
Head,  top,  thh  rosh. 

Psa.  141.   5  (it  shall  he)  an  excellent  oil,  (which)  shall 

EXCELLETH  — 
Advantage,  jiin'  yithron. 

Eccl.  2.  13  excelleth  folly,  as  far  as  light  excelleth 

EXCEPT  — 

l.Is  not,  pN  ayin. 

Gen.  44.  26  except  our  youngest  brother  (be)  with  us 

2.7b  the  separation  of,  "Q?  lebad. 

Esth.  4.  11  except  such  to  whom  the  king  shallhold 

3.  WitJimd,  ^3  bilti. 

Gen.  43.    3  shall  not  see  my  face  except  your  brot- 
Amos 3.    3  two  walktogether,excepttheybeagreed? 

4.  That,  because,  when,  '?  ki. 

Num.16. 13  except  thou  make  thyself  altogether 

5.  Therefore,  except,  but,  ]rh  lahen. 

Dan.    2.  11  except  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not 
6.    s  except  we  find  (it)  against  him  concerning 

Q.If  not,  vth>b  lule. 

Gen.  43.  10  except  we  had  lingered  surely  now  we 

7. If  not,  ^V  lule. 

1  Sa.  25.  34  except  thou  hadst  hasted  and  come  to 
fc;>      1.    9  Except  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  left  unto 


EXCEPT 


31S 


EXPECTATION 


8. Only,  surely,  nevertheless,  pi  raq. 

Gen.  47.  26  except  the  land  of. . priests  only,  (which) 
9. If '...not,  iav...^  earn. ..we. 

Matt.  5.  20  except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed 
12.  29  except  he  first  bind  the  strong  man  t 
18.   3  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as 

26.  42  not  pass  away  from  me,  except  I  drink 
Hark  3.  27  except  he  will  first  bind  the  strong  man 

7.   3  except  they  wash  (their)  hands  oft,  eat 
7.   4  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not  Lu.  13  3, 5 
John  3.    2  do  these  miracles . .  except  God  be  with 
3.    7  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
3.   5  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  (of) 

3.  27  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven 

4.  48  Except  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,  ye  will 
6.  44  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me 
6.  53  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man 
6.  65  except  it  were  given  unto  him  of  my 

12.  24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the 
15.   4  bear  fruit,  .except  it  abide  in  the  vine 
15.    4  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  20.  25. 
Acts   8.  31  How  can  I,  except  some  man  should 
15.    1  Except  ye  be  circumcised  after  the 

27.  31  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot 
Rom.  10.  15  how  shall  they  preach  except  they  be 

1  Co.  14.   6  except  I  shall  speak  to  you  either  by 

14.    7  except  they  give  a  distinction  in  the 

14.  9  except  ye  utter  by  the  tongue  words  easy 

15.  36  that,  .is  not  quickened,  except  it  die 

2  Th.  2.  3  except  there  come  a  falling  away  first 
2  Ti.  2.  5  not  crowned,  except  he  strive  lawfully 
Rev.  2.    5  remove  thy  candlestick.. except  thou  re. 

2.  22  except  they  repent  of  their  deeds 

10.1/  not,  ei  ia4}  ei  vie. 

Matt  19.    9  [except  (it  be)  for  fornication,  and  shall] 
24.  22  And  except  those  days  should  be  shorte. 
John  19.  11  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above 
Rom.  7.    7  except  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shalt  not 
9.  29  Except  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  had  left  us 
2  Co.  12.  13  except  (it  be)  that  I.  .was  not  burdenso. 

11.  If  not,  el  Li-'n  ti  ei  nie  ti. 

Luke  9. 13  except  we  should  go  and  buy  meat  for 

1  Co.  7.    5  except  (it  be)  with  consent  for  a  time 

2  Co.  13.   5  Christ  is  in  you,  except  ye  be  reprobates 
12. If  not,  except,  eicrSs  ei  n.7)  ektos  ei  me. 

1  Co.  14.    5  except  he  interpret,  that  the  church 

13. Near  by,  without,  outside  of,  wapeKr6s  parektos. 

Acts  26.  29  altogether  such  as  I  am,  except  these 

14.  More  than,  except,  irXriv  plen. 

Acts    8.    1  were  all  scattered . .  except  the  apostles 

15.  Bat  if,  except,  nx  '3  ki  im. 

Gen.  32.  26  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me 

16. If  not,  tib  en  im  lo. 

Gen.  44.  23  Except  your  youngest  brothercome  down 
Josh.  7.  i2  except  ye  destroy  the  accursed  from 
Deut  32.  30  except  their  Rock  had  sold  them  and 

EXCEPT  it  be  — 

Either,  or,  %  e. 

Acts  24.  21  Except  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that  I 

EXCEPT  that  — 

If  not,  el  Li.ii  ei  me. 

Marfci3.  20  except  that  the  Lordhad  shortened  those 

EXCEPTED,  to  be  — 
Without,  outside,  4kt6s  ektos. 

1  Co.  13.  27  he  is  excepted  which  did  put  all  things 
EXCESS  — 
l.Incontinenre,  oMpaaia.  akrasia. 

Matt  23.  25  they  are  full  of  extortion  and  [excess] 
2.A  pouring  out  upon,  avayycris  anachusis. 

1  Pe.  4.   4  not  with  (them)  to  the  same  excess  of 
3. Prodigality,  aaaria  asotia. 

Eph.  5. 18  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  exc. 
EXCESS  of  wine  — 
Overflowing  of  wine,  olvotpAvyla  oinophlugia. 

1  Pe.  4.    3  in  lasciviousness,  lusts,  excess  of  wine 
EXCHANGE   - 
Change,  exchange,  rniDfi  temurah. 

Lev.  27.  10  it  and  the  exchange  thereof  shall  be  holy 

Job  28. 17  exchange  of  it  (shall  not  be  for)  jewels  of 
EXCHANGE,  in  — 
An  equivalent,  fair  exchange,  avraWayixa  antall. 

Matt  16.  26  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for 

Mark  8.  37  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for 
EXCHANGE,  to  — 
To  change,  exchange,  lis  mur,  5. 

Eze.  48. 14  neither  exchange,  nor  alienate  the  first 
EXCHANGER  — 
One  who  sits  at  a  table,  exchanger,  rpane(iTns. 

Matt2S.  27  to  have  put  my  money  to  the  exchangers 
EXCLUDE,  to  — 
To  shut  out,  iitK\elu  ekkleio. 

Rom.  3.  27  Where  (is)  boasting  then  ?  It  is  excluded 

Gal.    4.  17  they  would  exclude  you,  that  ye  might 
EXCUSE,  to  make  — 
Toask  off  from,  or  away,  irapaireonat  paraiteomai. 

Lukei4.  iS  all  with  one  (consent)  began  to  make  ex. 


EXCUSE,  without  — 

Without  apology,  ava.Tro\6ynros  anapologetos. 

Rom.  1.  20  30  that  they  are  without  excuse 
EXCUSE  (one's)  self,  to  — 
To  speak  self  off,  apologise,  airoAoyeo/xat  apologeo. 

Rom.  2.  15  accusing  or  else  excusing  one  another 

2  Co.  12.  19  think  ye  that  we  excuse  ourselves  unto 
EXCUSED,  to  be  — 
To  ask  off  from,  irapaiTeofiai  paraiteomai. 

Lukei4.  18  go  and  see  it :  I  pray  thee  have  me  exc. 
14. 19  to  prove  them  :  I  pray  thee  have  me  ex. 
EXECRATION  — 
Execration,  oath,  curse,  nSx  alah. 

Jer.  42.  iS  shall  be  an  execration,  and  an  astonish. 
44. 12  shall  be  an  execration,  (and)  an  astonish. 
EXECUTE,  to  — 
1.  To  do,  12$!  abad. 

Num.  S.  11  they  may  execute  the  service  of  the  Lord 
l.To  do,  niyj;  asah. 

Exodi2.  12  the  gods  of  Egypt  I  will  execute  judgment 

Num.  5.  30  priest  shall  execute  upon  her  all  this 
33.   4  gods  also  the  Lord  executed  judgments 

Deut  10.  18  execute  the  judgment  of  the  fatherless 
33.  21  he  executed  the  justice  of  the  Lord,  and 

1  Sa.  28. 18  executedst  his  fierce  wrath  upon  Amalek 

2  Sa.   8.  15  David  executed  judgment  and  justice 

1  Ki.  6.  12  and  execute  my  judgments,  and  keep  all 

1  Ch.  18. 14  executed  judgment  and  justice  among  all 

2  Ch.24.  24  So  they  executed  judgment  against  Joash 
Psa.    9. 16  known  (by)  the  judgment  (which)  he  exe. 

99.   4  thou  executest  judgment  and  righteous. 
103.    6  Lord  executeth  righteousness  and  judg. 
119.  84  execute  judgment  on  them  that  persecute 
146.    7  Which  executeth  judgment  for  the  oppr. 
149.    7  To  execute  vengeance  upon  the  heathen 
149.   9  To  execute  upon  them  the  judgment 
Isa.    16.   3  execute  judgment ;  make  thy  shadow  as 
Jer.     5.    1  if  there  be  (any)  that  executeth  judgment 
7.    5  if  ye  tliroughly  execute  judgment  betw. 

22.  3  Execute  ye  judgment  and  righteousness 

23.  5  execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth 
23.  20  until  he  have  executed,  and  till  he  have 
33.  15  shall  execute  judgment  and  righteousness 

Eze.    5.    8  will  execute  judgments  in  the  midst  of 
5. 10  I  will  execute  judgments  in  thee,  and  the 

5. 15  I  shall  execute  judgments  in  thee  in  anger 
n.  9  and  will  execute  judgments  among  you 
11. 12  neither  executed  my  judgments,  but  have 
16.  41  execute  judgments  upon  thee  in  the  sight 
18.  8  executed  true  judgment'between  man  and 
18.  17  hath  executed  my  judgments,  hath  walked 
20.  24  they  had  not  executed  my  judgments,  but 

23. 10  fur  they  had  executed  judgment  upou  her 

25. 11  I  will  execute  judgments  upon  Moab 

25. 17  I  will  execute  great  vengeance  upon  them 
28.  22  I  shall  have  executed  judgments  in  her 
28.  26  I  have  executed  judgments  upou  all  those 
30.  14  and  will  execute  judgments  in  No 
30.  19  Thus  will  I  execute  judgments  in  Egypt 
39.  21  see  my  judgment  that  I  have  executed 
45.    9  execute  judgment  and  justice,  take  away 
Hos.  11.    9  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  anger 
Joel    2. 11  for  (he  is)  strong  that  executeth  his  word 
Mic.    5.  15  will  execute  vengeance  in  anger  and  fury 
7.   9  plead  my  cause . .  execute  judgment  for 
3.  To  judge,  act  as  magistrate,  caa"  shaphat. 

Zeeh.  7.    9  Execute  true  judgment,  and  show  mercy 

8. 16  execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace 
i.To  do,  iroieoi  poieo. 

John  5.  27  given  him  authority  to  execute  judgment 
Jude       15  To  execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to 

EXECUTE  (judgment),  to  — 
To  judge,  decide,  ]'i  din. 

Jer.  21. 12  Execute  judgment  in  the  morning,  and 
EXECUTED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  done,  performed,  in]>.  abad,  i. 

Ezra    7. 26  let  judgment  be  executed  speedily  upon 

2.  To  be  done,  performed,  rtyu  asah,  2. 

Eccl.  8. 11  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily 
EXECUTING  — 
To  do,  nj?u  asah. 

2  Ki.10.  30  executing  (that  which  is)  right  in  mine 
EXECUTION,  to  be  put  in  — 
To  be  done,  n'f!"  asah,  2. 

Esth.  9.    1  decree  drew  near  to  be  put  in  execution 
EXECUTIONER  — 
A  spearman  (from  Lat.  speculator),  a-ireKov\a.Ta<p. 

Mark  6.  27  kingsent  an  executioner,  and  commanded 
EXEMPTED  — 
Free,  acquitted,  exempt,  'pj  naqi. 

1  KJ.15.  22  throughout  all  judah;  none  (was)exem. 
EXERCISE  — 
Gymnastic  exercise,  yv/ivaala  gumnasia. 

1  Ti.   4.    8  For  bodily  exercise  profiteth  little  ;  but 
EXERCISE,  to  — 

1.  To  do,  nfsi  asah. 

Jer.     9.  24  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving  kindness 

2.  To  work  up,  atricew  asked. 

Acts  24.  16  herein  do  I  exercise  myself,  to  have  alw. 


3.  To  use  exercise,  train  up,  yvy.va.£ai  gumnazo. 

1  Ti.   4.    7  exercise  thyself  (rather)  unto  godliness 
Heb.   5.  14  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 

12.  11  unto  them  which  are  exercised  thereby 

2  Pe.  2. 14  have  exercised  with  covetous  practices 
i.To  do,  iroteai  poieo. 

Rev.  13. 12  he  exerciseth  all  the  power  of  the  first 
EXERCISE  (robbery),  to  — 
To  take  away  violently,  bu  garni. 

Eze.  22.  29  exercised  robbery,  and  have  vexed  the 
EXERCISE  self,  to  — 
To  go,  walk,  proceed,  ifcn  halak,  3. 

Psa.  131.    1  neither  do  i'exercise  myself  in  great 
EXERCISED,  to  be  — 
To  be  afflicted,  humbled,  mu  anah. 

Eccl.-   1. 13  hath  God  given',  .to  be  exercised  therew. 
3. 10  to  the  sons  of  men  to  be  exercised  in  it 
EXHORT,  to  — 
l.To  exhort,  recommend,  -xapaivea  paraineo. 

Acts  27.  22  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  cheer :  for 

2.  To  call  near,  en- for,  wapaKaAeto  parakaleo. 
Acts    2.  40  other  words  did  he  testify  and  exhort 

11.  23  exhorted  them  all,  that  with  purpose 

14.  22  exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the  faith 

15.  32  exhorted  the  brethren  with  many  words 
Rom  12.    8  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation  :  he 

2  Co.  9.   5  thought,  .necessary  to  exhort  the  breth. 

1  Th.  2.  11  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  cornfo. 

4.    1  exhort  (you)  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  as  ye 
5. 14  we  exhort  you,  brethren,  warn  them  that 

2  Th.  3.  1 2  exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with 

1  Ti.    2.    1  I  exliort  therefore,  that,  first  of  all 

6.    2  These  things  teach  and  exhort 

2  Ti.    4.    2  exliort,  with.  .long  suffering  and  doctri. 
Titus  1.   9  to  exliort  and  to  convince  the  gainsayers 

2.   6  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober 
2.  15  and  exhort,  and  rebuke  with  all  author. 
Heb.   3. 13  But  exliort  one  another  daily,  while  it  is 
1  Pe.  5.    1  The  elders  which  are  among  you  I  exh. 

5. 12  exhorting,  and  testifying-  that  this  is  the 
Jude         3  and  exhort  (you)  that  ye  should  earnestly 

3.  To  turn  forward,  ptropel,  irpoTpetrw  protrepo. 
Acts  18.  27  exhorting  the  disciples  to  receive  him 

EXHORT  (one  another),  to  — 

To  call  near  or  for,  irapaKa\ea  parakaleo. 

Heb.  10.  25  exhorting  (one  another) :  and  so  much 

EXHORTATION  — 

A  calling  near  or  for,  irapanXnais  paraklesis. 
Acts  13. 15  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation  for 
Rom  12.    8  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation  :  he 

1  Co.  14.   3  edification,  and  exhprtation,  and  comfort 

2  Co.    8. 17  he  accepted  the  exhortation ;  but  being 
1  Th.  2.    3  our  exhortation  (was)  not  of  deceit,  nor 

1  Ti.    4.  13  to  reading,  to  exhortation,  to  doctrine 
Heb.  12.    5  ye  have  forgotten  the  exhortation  which 

13.  22  brethren,  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation 
EXHORTATION,  to  give  much  — 

To  ccdl  near  with  much  discourse,  TrapaKaAea:  \6yw 

TTOWtp. 

Acts  20.    2  had  given  them  much  exhortation,  he 
EXHORTATION,  in  one's  — 
To  call  near  or  for,  77 apattaAew  parakaleo. 

Luke  3. 18  Andmany  other  things  in  his  exhortation 
EXILE  — 
To  remove,  rbs  galah,  3. 

2  Sa.  15. 19  for  thou  (art)  a  stranger,  and  also  an  ex. 
EXILE,  captive  — 

To  wander,  nj^x  tsoeh. 

Isa.   51.  14  The  captive  exile  hasteneth  that  he  may 
EXORCIST  — 
One  who  adjures  out  demons,  e^opKia-T-ris  exorkistes. 

Acts  19. 13  certain  of  the  vagabond  Jews,  exorcists 
EXPECT,  to  — 
l.To  receive  from,  expect,  wait  for,  eV8e'xO|"ai. 

Heb.  10. 13  expecting  till  Ms  enemies  be  made  his 
2.  To  think  toward,  look  for,  ■KpocSoKaa  prosdokao. 

Acts   3.    5  expecting  to  receive  something  of  them 
EXPECTATION  — 
1.  Expectation,  135a  niabbat. 

Isa.   20.    5  and  ashamed  of  Ethiopia  their  expecta. 
20.   6  such  (is)  our  expectation,  whither  we  flee 

^.Expectation,  tta£  mebbat. 

Zech.  9.    5  Ekron,  for  her  expectation,  shall  be  asha. 
3. Hope,  expectation,  aipp  tic/rah. 

Psa.     9. 18  expectation' of  the  poor  shall  (not)  perish 
62.    5  for  my  expectation  (is)  from  him 

Pl'ov  10.  28  expectation  of  the  wicked  shall  perish 
11.   7  man  dieth,  (Ins)  expectation  shall  perish 
11.  23  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  (is)  wrath 
23. 18  thine  expectation  shall  not  be  cut  off 
24. 14  and  thy  expectation  shall  not  be  cut  off 

i.Thinking  toward, looking  for, TtpoaSoKlaprosdoki. 

Acts  12.  11  (from)  all  the  expectation  of  the  people  of 
EXPECTATION,  to  he  in  — 
To  think  toward,  look  for,  wpoa-SoKciai  prosdokaS. 

Luke  3. 15  as  the  people  were  in  expectation,  and  ai: 


EXPECTATION 


319 


EYE. 


EXPECTATION",  earnest  — 

A  thinking  or  looking  away  to,  aTroKapafionia. 
Rom.  8. 19  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature 
Phil.    1.  20  According  to  ray  earnest  expectation  and 

EXPECTED  — 

Hope,  expectation,  nipp  tiqvah. 

Jer.   29.  ri  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  eud 
EXPEDIENT,  to  be  — 
To  bear  together,  avpLtpepa)  sumphero. 

John  1 1.  50  it  is  expedient  for  us,  that  one  man  should 
16.    7  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away 
18.  14  that  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  should 

1  Co.   6.  12  lawful,  .but  all  things  are  not  expedient 

10.  23  lawful,  .but  all  things  are  not  expedient 

2  Co.   8.  10  this  is  expedient  for  you,  who  have  begun 

12.    1  It  is  not  expedient  for  me  doubtless  to 

EXPEL,  to  — 

l.To  cast  out,  cna  garash,  3. 

Judgn.    7  expel  me  out  of  my  father's  house?  and 
2.7Y>  thrust  out,  pnn  hadaph. 

Josh. 23.    5  he  shall  expel  them  from  before  you,  and 
3.  To  take  possession  of,  dispossess,  eH;  yarash,  5. 

Josh.  13.  13  Israel  expelled  not  the  Geshurites,  nor 

Judg.  1.  20  expelled  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak. 

4.7b  cast  out,  gk&cLWo)  ekballo. 

Acts  13.  50  and  expelled  them  out  of  their  coasts 
EXPELLED,  to  be  — 
To  drive  or  force  away,  rnj  nadach. 

2  Sa.  14.  14  his  banished  be  not  expelled  from  him 
EXPENSES  — 
Outgoing,  expenditure,  Kgsj  niphqa. 

Ezra.  6.  4  let  the  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  king's 
6.    8  expenses  be  given  unto  these  men,  that 

EXPERIENCE  — 

Proof,  testing,  SoKifxr)  dohime. 

Rom   5.    4  patience,  experience  ;  and  experience 
EXPERIENCE,  to  have  — 
To  see,  rtifi  raah. 

JSccl.  1.  16  had  great  experience  of  wisdom  and  kno. 
EXPERIENCE,  to  learn  by  — 
To  observe  diligently,  tynj  nachash,  3. 

Gen.  30.  27  I  have  learned  by  experience  that  the 
EXPERiaLENT  — 
Proof  trying,  Sokl/j.t)  dohime. 

2  Co.   9. 13  by  the  experiment  of  this  ministration 

EXPERT  — 

l.To  be  taught,  accustomed,  in?  lamad,  4. 

Song  3.    8  They  all  hold  swords,  (being)  expert  in 
l.To  cause  to  act  wisely,  ?yy  sakal,  5. 

Jer.    50.    9  arrows  (shall  be)  as  of  a  mighty  expert 
Z.One  that  knows,  yvwo-r-ns  gnostes.    . 

Acts  26.    3  I  know)  thee  to  he  expert  in  all  customs 

EXPERT  in  — 

To  set  in  array,  ?HV  <wak. 

1  Ch.  12.  33  expert  in  war,  with  all  instruments  of 

12.  35  of  the  Danites  expert  in  war  twenty  and 
12.  36  went  forth  to  battle,  expert  in  war,  forty 

EXPIRE,  to  — 

l.To  Jill  out,  TcKy]p6ia  pViroo. 

Acts    7.  30  And  when  forty  years  were  expired,  there 
2.  To  end,  Te\ea>  teleo. 

Rev.  20.    7  [when  the  thousand  years  are  expired] 

EXPIRED,  be  — 

Return,  revolution,  r?niE?fi  teshubah. 

2  Sa.  11.    1  after  the  year  was  expired,  at  the  time 

1  Ch.  20.    1  after  the  year  was  expired,  at  the  time 

2  Ch.  36. 10  the  year  was  expired,  king  Nebuchadne. 

EXPIRED,  to  be  — 

l.To  finish,  consume,  nSa  kalah,  3. 

Eze.  43.  27  when  these'  days  are  expired,  it  shall  be 

2.  To  be  full,  kS?  male. 

1  Sa.  18.  26  and  the  days" were  not  expired 

1  Ch.r7.  11  when  thy  days  be  expired  that  thou  must 

Esth.i  .    5  when  these  days  were  expired,  the  king 

EXPOUND,  to  — 

l.To  put  or  bring  before,  *U3  nagad,  5. 

Judg  14.  14  could  not  in  three  days  expound  the  rid. 
14.  19  unto  them  which  expounded  the  riddle 

2.  To  interpret  thoroughly,  Stepfx-qvevco  diermeneuo. 
Luke  24.  27  expounded  unto  them  in  all  the  Scriptures 
3. To  put  forth,  £ktI$ihii  ektitliemi. 

Acts  11.  4  expounded  (it)  by  orderunto  them, saying 
18.  26  expounded  unto  him  the  way  of  God  more 
28.  23  to  whom  he  expounded  and  testified  the 

4.2*0  loose  further,  solve,  iiri\va>  cpiluo. 

Mark  4.  34  he  expounded  all  things  to  his  disciples 

EXPRESSED,  to  be  — 

To  be  pierced,  defined,  marked  out,  3pj  naqab,  2. 
Num  1.  17  men  which  are  expressed  by  (their)  names 
1  Ch.  12.  31  half  tribe,  .which  were  expressed  by  na. 
16.  41  were  chosen,  who  were  expressed  by  name 


2  Ch.28.  15  men  which  were  expressed  by  name  rose 
31. 19  the  men  that  were  expressed  by  name,  to 
Ezra.  8.  20  all  of  them  were  expressed  by  name 

EXPRESSLY  — 

1.  To  say,  t?x  amar. 

1  Sa.  20.  21  If  I  expressly  say  unto  the  lad,  Behold 
%In  express  words,  prirws  rhetos. 

1  Ti.   4.    1  the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the 
EXTEND,  to  — 
l.ITo  draiu  out,  y\wn  mashak. 

Psa.  109. 12  there  be  none  to  extend  mercy  unto  him 
2.7*0  stretch  out,  nai  natah. 

Isa.   66. 12  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  river 
3.7V>  stretch  out,  noi  natah,  5. 

Ezra    7.  28  hath  extended  mercy  unto  me  before  the 
9.    9  hath  extended  mercy  unto  us  in  the  sight 
EXTINCT,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  extinguished,  Tjjr-i  daak. 

Isa.   43. 17  they  are  extinct,  they  are  quenched  as 
2. 7*o  become  extinguished,  T£\  zaak,  2. 

Job   17.    1  my  days  are  extinct;  the  graves  (are  ready) 
EXTOL,  to  — 
1.7*0  exalt,  raise  up,  ?ho  salal. 

Psa.  68.   4  extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens 
2. 7*o  lift  up,  exalt,  on  rum,  3«. 

Psa.  30.    1  I  will  extol  thee,  O  Lord  ;  for  thou  hast 
145.    1 1  will  extol  thee,  my  God,  0  king ;  and  I 
3. 7*o  lift  up,  exalt,  en  rum,  3a. 

Dan.    4.  37  and  extol  and  honour  the  King  of  heaven 
EXTOLLED,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  lifted  up,  up}  nasa,  2. 

Isa.  52.  13  he  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be 
^.Lifting  up,  exaltation,  dd'h  romam. 

Psa.  66. 17  and  he  was  extolled  with  my  tongue 
EXTORTION  — 
l.Oppression,  strife,  p&y  osheq. 

Eze.  22. 12  thou  hast  greedily  gained,  .by  extortion 
^.Snatching  away,  apTrayrj  harpage. 

Matt  23.  25  within  they  are  full  of  extortion  and  ex. 
EXTORTIONER  — 
1.7*0  wring  out,  extol,  pD  muts. 

Isa.   16.    4  the  extortioner  is  at  an  end,  the  spoiler 
2.7*o  bite,  lend  on  usury,  nyi  nashah. 

Psa.  109.  1 1  Let  the  extortioner  catch  all  that  he 

3.  One  that  snatches  away,  apira^  harpax. 

Luke  18.  11  I  am  not  as  other  men  (are),  extortioners 
1  Co.    5.  10  with  the  covetous,  or  extortioners,  or 
5. 11  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortion. 
6. 10  nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  kingd. 
EXTRETVTTTY  — 
Extremity,  K3 posh. 

Job  35. 15  yet  he  knoweth  (it)  not  in  great  extrem. 
EYE  — 
IS  ye,  j;h  ayin. 

Gen.   3.    5  then  your  eyes  shall  be  opened,  and  ye 
3.    6  and  that  it  (was)  pleasant  to  the  eyes 
3.    7  And  the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened 
6.   8  Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
13. 10  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the 
13.  14  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from 
16.   4  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her  eyes 
16.    5  when  she  saw . .  I  was  despised  in  her  eyes 
18.    2  And  he  lift  up  Ins  eyes  and  looked 
ig.    8  and  do  ye  to  them  as  (is)  good  in  your  ey. 

20.  16  behold  he  (is)  to  thee  a  covering  of  the  ey. 

21.  19  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well 

22.  4  the  third  day  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes 
22. 13  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked 
24.  63  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  beh. 
24.  64  And  Rebekah  lifted  up  her  eyes,  and 

27.    1  his  eyes  were  dim,  so  that  he  could  not 
30.  27  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes,(tarry) 

30.  41  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  eyes  of 
31. 10  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a  dream 
31. 12  he  said,  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes  and  see 

31.  40  and  my  sleep  departed  from  mine  eyes 
33.    1  Jacob  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and 

33.  5  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  women 

34.  ti  Let  me  find  grace  in  your  eyes,  and  what 
37.  25  and  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  looked 
39.    7  his  master's  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  Jos. 

41.  37  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes  of 

42.  24  Simeon,  and  bound  him  before  their  eyes 

43.  29  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  his  brother 
44. 21  that  I  may  set  mine  eyes  upon  him 

45. 12  your  eyes  see,  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother 
46.   4  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  ey. 
47. 19  Wherefore  shall  we  die  before  thine  eyes 
48. 10  Now  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age 
49. 12  His  eyes,  .red  with  wine,  and  his  teeth 
50.    4  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  your  eyes 
Exod.  5.  21  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes 
8.  26  shall  we  sacrifice,  .before  their  ejres,  and 

13.  9  and  for  a  memorial  between  thine  eyes 
13. 16  and  for  frontlets  between  thine  eyes 

14.  10  the  children  of  Israel  lifted  up  their  eyes 
21.  24  Eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for 
21.  26  if  a  man  smite  the  eye  of  his  servant 

21.  26  or  the  eye  of  his  maid,  that  it  perish 


Exod  21 
Lev.    4. 


24. 

26. 
Num.  5. 


Deut. 


13- 
*3- 

14. 

15- 

16. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
21. 
24. 

25- 

28. 
28. 

28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 

23. 

29. 
29. 

29. 
32- 
34- 
34- 
Josh.  5. 

23- 

24. 

Judg  16. 

16. 

i7« 

19. 

21. 

Ruth  2. 


14. 
14. 
20. 
20. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
26. 
26. 


;Sa. 


tXi. 


26  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his  eye's  sake 
17  fire,  .in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel 
13  the  thing  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  the 

4  if  the  people  ...hide  their  eyes  from  the 
20  or  that  hath  a  blemish  in  his  eye,  cr  be 

20  Breach  for  breach,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for 
16  burning  ague,  that  shall  consume  the  ey. 

13  and  it  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  her  husba. 
31  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  instead  of  eyes 

6  (there  is)  nothing  at  all . .  (before)  our  eyes 
39  after  your  own  heart  and  your  own  eyes 

14  wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of  these  men  ? 

8  speak  ye  unto  the  rock  before  their  eyes 
12  to  sanctify  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children 
31  Then  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  Balaam 

2  Balaam  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  he  saw 

3,  15  the  man  whose  eyes  are  open  hath 

4,  16  falling,  .but  having  Ms  eyes  open 

14  sanctify  me  at  the  water  before  their  ey. 

55  that  those,  .(shall  be)  pricks  in  your  eyes 

30  according  to  all.  .he  did.  .before  your  ey. 

21  Thine  eyes  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord 

27  lift  up  thine  eyes  westward,  and  northw. 

27  and  behold  (it)  with  thine  eyes  :  for  thou 

3  Your  eyes  have  seen  what  the  Lord  did 

9  forget  the  things,  .thine  eyes  have  seen 
19  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven 
34  to  all  that  tne  Lord  . .  did . .  before.'your e.  ? 

8  shall  be  as  frontlets  between  thine  eyes 

22  the  Lord  showed  signs,  .before  our  eyes 

16  thine  eye  shall  have  no  pity  upon  them 
19  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes 

17  I  took.. and  brake  them  before  your  eyes 
21  terrible  things  which  thine  eyes  have 

7  But  your  eyes  have  seen  all  the  great  acts 

12  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God  (are)  always 

18  they  may  be  as  frontlets  between  your  e. 

8  every  man  whatso.  (is)  right  in  his  own  ey. 

8  neither  shall  thine  eye  pity  him,  neither 

18  to  do.  .right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

1  nor  make  any  baldness  between  your  eyes 

9  and  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  poor  br. 

19  for  a  gift  doth  blind  the  eyes  of  the  wise 

13  Thine  eye  shall  not  pity  him  :  but  thou 
21  And  thine  eye  shall  not  pity 

21  life .  .for  life,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for 
7  and  say. .  neither  have  our  eyes  seen 

1  that  she  find  no  favour  in  his  eyes 

12  Then .  .thine  eye  shall  not  pity  (her) 

31  Thine  ox.  .slain  before  thine  eyes,  and 

32  thine  eyes  shall  look,  and  fail,  .for  them 
34  shalt  be  mad  for  the  sight  of  tliine  eyes 
54  his  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  his  brother 

56  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  the  husband 
65  and  failing  of  eyes,  and  sorrow  of  mind 
67  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou 

2  all  that  the  Lord  did  before  your  eyes 

3  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes 

4  and  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,  unto, 
10  he  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  his  eye 

4  I  have  caused  thee  to  see.  .with  thine  ey. 
7  his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force 

13  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and 
13  but  they  shall  be.  .thorns  in  your  eyes 

7  your  eyes  have  seen  what  I  have  done  in 
21  Philistines  took  him,  and  put  out  his  eyes 

28  I  may  be  at  once  avenged,  .for  my  two  e. 

6  every  man  did . .  right  in  his  own  eyes 
17  when  he  had  lifted  up  his  eyes,  he  saw 
25  every  man.  .did  light  in  his  own  eyes 

9  (Let)  thine  eyes  (lie)  on  the  field  that  they 
10  Why  have  I  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

33  the  man . .  (shalljbe)  to  consume  tliine  eyes 
2  his  eyes  began  to  wax  dim,  (that)  he  could 

15  his  eyes  were  dim,  that  he  could  not  see 
13  they  lifted  up  their  eyes,  and  saw  the  ark 

2  that  I  may  thrust  out  all  your  right  eyes 

3  (any)  bribe  to  blind  mine  eyes  therewith? 

16  which  the  Lord  will  do  before  your  eyes 

27  and  his  eyes  were  enlightened 

29  how  mine  eyes  have  been  enlightened 
3  that  I  have  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

29  now,  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes 

10  Behold,  this  day  thine  eyeshaveseenhow 

8  let  the  young  men  find  favour  in  thine  ey 
21  my  soul  was  precious  in  thine  eyes  this 
24  thy  life  was  much  set  by.  .in  mine  eyes 

24  let  my  life  be  much  set  by  in  the  eyes  of 

5  If  I  have  now  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

20  who  uncovered  himself  to  day  in  the  eyes 

11  and  I  will  take  thy  wives  before  thine  e. 

34  And  the  young  man . .  lifted  up  his  eyes 

25  if  I  shall' find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the 

24  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold 

28  but  thine  eyes  (are)  upon  the  haughty 

3  that  the  eyes  of  my  lord  the  king  may  see 
20  And  thou.,  the  eyes  of  all  Israel  (are)  upon 
48  to  sit  on  my  throne  this  clay,  mine  eyes 

29  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open  toward  this 
52  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open  unto  the 

3  mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there 

7  until  I  came,  and  mine  eyes  had  seen  (it) 

33  not  walked,  .to  do.  .right  in  mine  eyes 

4  for  his  eyes  were  set  by  reason  of  his  age 

8  who  followed,  .to  do.  .right  in  mine  eyes 
5,  it  did .  .right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

25  Omri  wrought  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

6  whatsoever  is  pleasant  in  thine  eyes 
43  doing,  .right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

34  his  eyes  upon  his  eyes,  and  his  hands 

35  seven  times,  and  the  child  opened  his  ey. 

1 7  I  pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  he  may  see 


BYE 


320 


BYE 


2  Ki.  6. 

6. 
6. 
7- 


19. 

19, 
22. 
25- 

25- 

1  Ch.13. 

17- 
21. 

21. 

2  Ch.  6. 

6. 
7- 
7- 
9 

14. 

16. 


29. 
29. 

Ezra  3. 
5- 
9- 

Neh  1. 
6. 

Esth.  1. 

Job  2. 
3- 
4- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


24. 

24. 
24. 
27. 
c8. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
3i- 
31. 
31- 
32- 
34- 
36. 
39- 
40. 
41. 
42. 
6. 


17  And  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the 
20  open  the  eyes  of  these . .  that  they  may 
20  the  Lord  opened  their  eyes,  and  they 
2,  19  Behold,  thou  shalt  see . .  with  thine  ey. 

5  do  thou  (that  which  is)  good  in  thine  eyes 
30  in  executing,  .right  in  mine  eyes 

16  and  hear ;  open,  Lord,  thine  eyes,  and  see 

22  against  whom  hast  thou . .  lifted  up  thine  e. 
20  thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all  the  evil 

7  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  his  eyes 

7  put  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah,  and  bound 

4  the  thing  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  all  the 

17  this  was  a  small  thing  in  thine  eyes,  O  G. 
16  David  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  an. 

23  let  my  lord.  .do.  .good  in  his  eyes 
20  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open  upon  this 
40  let,  I  beseech  thee,  thine  eyes  be  open 

15  Now  mine  eyes  shall  be  open,  and  mine 

16  mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there 

6  until  I  came,  and  mine  eyes  had  seen  (it) 

2  Asa  did.  .good  and  right  in  the  eyes  of  the 
9  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro 

12  our  God.  .our  eyes  (are)  upon  thee} 
6  he  wrought . .  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  LORD 

6  and  done,  .evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

8  and  to  hissing,  as  ye  see  with  your  eyes 
12  the  foundation . .  was  laid  before  their  ey. 

5  But  the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the 
8  that  our  God  may  lighten  our  eyes,  and 

6    Let  thine  ear.  .be  attentive,  and  thine  e. 

16  were  much  cast  down  in  their  own  eyes 

17  shall  despise  then-  husbands  in  then:  eyes 
12  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off 
10  not  shut,  .nor  hid  sorrow  from  mine  eyes 
1 6  an  image  (was)  before  mine  eyes . .  silence 

7  mine  eye  shall  no  more  see  good 

8  The  eye  of  him  that  hath  seen  me  shall 

8  thine  eyes  (are)  upon  me,  and  I  (am)  not 
4  Hast  thou  eyes  of  flesh?  or  seeSt  thou  as 

18  I  had  given  up  the  ghost,  and  no  eye  had 

4  thou  hast  said . .  I  am  clean  in  thine  eyes 
20  But  the  eyes  of  the  wicked  shall  fail 

1  Lo,  mine  eye  hath  seen  all.  .mine  ear 

3  dost  thou  open  thine  eyes  upon  such  an 
12  carry  thee  away  ?  and  what  do  thy  eyes 

9  mine  enemy  sharpeneth  his  eyes  upon  me 
20  mine  eye  poureth  out  (tears)  unto  God 

2  doth  not  mine  eye  continue  in  their  pro. 

5  even  the  eyes  of  his  children  shall  fail 

7  Mine  eye  also  is  dim  by  reason  of  sorrow 
27  Whom  I  shall  see.  .and  mine  eyes  shall 

9  The  eye  also  (which)  saw  him  shall  (see 

8  and  their  offspring  before  their  eyes 

20  His  eyes  shall  see  his  destruction,  and 
15  The  eye  also  of  the  adulterer  waiteth  for 

15  No  eye  shall  see  me ;  and  disguiseth  (his) 

23  safety,  .yet  his  eyes  (are)  upon  their  ways 

19  The  rich,  .openeth  his  eyes,  and  he  (is) 
7  and  which  the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  seen 

10  and  his  eye  seeth  every  precious  thing 

21  Seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living 
ri  when  the  eye  saw  (me),  it  gave  witness  to 
151  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (wae)  I 

1  I  made  a  covenant  with  mine  eyes  ;  why 
7  and  mine  heart  walked  after  mine  eyes 

16  have  caused  the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  fail 
1  because  he  (was)  righteous  in  his  own  e. 

21  For  his  eyes  (are)  upon  the  ways  of  man 
7  He  withdraweth  not  his  eyes  from  the 
29  From  thence,  .her  eyes  behold  afar  off 

24  He  taketh  it  with  his  eyes  ;  (his)  nose 
18  his  eyes  (are)  like  the  eyelids  of  the 

5  I  have  heard,  .but  now  mine  eye  seeth 

7  Mine  eye  is  consumed  because  of  grief 

8  his  eyes  are  privily  set  against  the  poor 
11.    4  his  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the  chil. 
13.    3  lighten  mine  eyes,  lest  I  sleep  the.  .death 
15.    4  In  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  contemned 
17.    2  let  thine  eyes  behold  the  things  that  are 
17.    8  Keep  me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye;  bide 
17.  11  they  have  set  their  eyes  bowing  down  to 
19.    8  rejoicing  the  heart,  .enlightening  the  e. 

25.  15  Mine  eyes  (are)  ever  toward  the  LORD 

26.  3  thy  loving  kindness  (is)  before  mine  eyes 
31.   9  mine  eye  is  consumed  with  grief,  .my 

31.  22  I  am  cut  off  from  before  thine  eyes 

32.  8  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine  eye 

33.  18  the  eye  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  them  that 
34. 15  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  upon  the  righ. 
35.  19  let  them  wink  with  the  eye  that  hate  me 

35.  21  (and)  said,  Aha,  aha!  our  eye  hath  seen 

36.  1  (there  is)  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes 
36.    2  For  he  flattereth  himself  in  his  own  eyes 
38.  10  as  for  the  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  also  is  gone 
50.  21  and  set,  .in  order  before  thine  eyes 

54.    7  mine  eye  hath  seen  (his  desire)  upon  mine 
66.    7  his  eyes  behold  the  nations  :  let  not  the 
69.    3  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait  for  my  God 
69.  S3  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see 
73.    7  Their  eyes  stand  out  with  fatness 
77.    4  Thou  boldest  mine  eyes  waking  :  I  am  so 
88.   9  Mine  eye  mourneth  by  reason  of  affliction 

91.  8  Only  with  thine  eyes  shalt  thou  behold 

92.  11  Mine  eye  also  shall  see  (my  desire)  on 
94.   9  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see? 

101.    3  I  will  set  no  wicked  thing  before  mine  e. 
101.    6  Mine  eyes  (shall  lie)  upon  the  faithful  of 

115.  5  they  speak  not ;  eyes  have  they,  but  they 

116.  8  mine  eyes  from  tears .  .my  feet  from 

118.  23  Lord's  doing  ;  it  (is)  marvellous  in  our  e. 

119.  18  Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold 
119.  37  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  va. 


Psa.119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
121. 
123. 
123. 
123. 
123. 

131- 

132. 

135- 
*39- 
141. 

145- 

Prov.  3. 

3- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
7- 


Song   1. 

4- 
4- 
5- 
6. 
7- 
8. 

Isa.     1. 

1. 

3- 

3- 

5- 

5- 

6. 

6. 

6. 

11. 

J3- 

*3- 

*7- 

29. 

29. 

30. 

32- 

33- 

33- 

33- 

35- 

37- 

37- 


Jcr. 


82  Mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  word,  saying 
123  Mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  salvation,  and 
136  Rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes 
148  Mine  eyes  prevent  the  (night)  watches 
1  I  will  lilt  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills 

1  Unto  thee  lift  I  up  mine  eyes,  O  thou 

2  as  the  eyes  of  servants,  .unto  the  hand 
2  as  the  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand 
2  so  our  eyes,  .upon  the  Lord  our  God 

1  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes 

4  I  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine  eyes,  (or) 

16  they  speak  not ;  eyes  have  they,  but  they 

16  Thine  eyes  did  see  my  substance,  yet 
8  mine  eyes  (are)  unto  thee,  O  God  the 

15  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  thee  ;  and  thou 

7  Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes  :  fear  the 
21  son,  let  not  them  depart  from  thine  eyes 
21  Let  them  not  depart  from  thine  eyes 

25  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on,  and  let 

21  the  ways  of  man  (are)  before  the  eyes  of 

4  Give  not  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber 
13  He  winketh  with  his  eyes,  he  speaketh 

2  Keep,  .my  law  as  the  apple  of  thine  eye 
10  He  that  winketh  with  the  eye  causeth 

26  as  smoke  to  the  eyes,  so  (is)  the  sluggard 

15  The  way  of  a  fool  (is)  right  in  his  own  eyes 

3  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  in  every  place 
30  The  light  of  the  eyes  rejoiceth  the  heart 

2  the  ways  of  a  man  (are)  clean  in  his  own  e. 
30  He  shutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  frowardj 

8  A  gift  (is  as)  a  precious  stone  in  the  eyes 
24  but  the  eyes  of  a  fool  (are)  in  the  ends  of 

8  A  king . .  scattereth  away  all  evil  with  his  e. 

12  The  hearing  ear,  and  the  seeing  eye,  the 

13  open  thine  eyes,  .thou  shalt  be  satisfied 

2  way  of  a  man  (is)  right  in  his  own  eyes 
10  his  neighbour  fiudeth  no  favour  in  his  e. 

9  He  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye  shall  be 

12  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve  knowledge 

5  Wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes  upon  that  which 

6  Eat  thou  not  the  bread  of .  .an  evil  eye 

26  My  son.  .let  thine  eyes  observe  my  ways 
29  without  cause  ?  who  hath  redness  of  eyes  ? 
33  Thine  eyes  shall  behold  strange  women 

7  presence  of  the  prince  whom  thine  eye3 

20  so  the  eyes  of  man  are  never  satisfied 

22  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  (hath)  an  evil  eye 

27  he  that  hideth  his  eyes  shall  have  many 

13  the  Lord  lighteneth  both  their  eyes 

12  a  generation,  .pure  In  their  own  eyes '' 

13  a  generation,  O  how  lofty  are  their  eyes  ! 

17  The  eye  (that)  mocketh  at  (his)  father 

8  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor 

10  whatsoever  mine  eyes  desired  I  kept  not 

14  The  wise  man's  eyes  (are)  in  his  head 

8  neither  is  his  eye  satisfied  with  riches 

11  saving  the  beholding,  .with  their  eyes? 

9  Better  (is)  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the 

16  neither  day  nor  night  seeth.  .with  his  e. 

7  pleasant,  .for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun 
9  of  thine  heart,  and  in  the  sight  of  thine  e. 

15  thou  (art)  fair;  thou  (hast)  doves'  eyes 

1  thou  (hast)  doves'  eyes  within  thy  locks 
9  ravished  my  heart  with  one  of  thine  eyes 

12  His  eyes  (are)  as.  .of  doves  by  the  rivers 

5  Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they 

4  thine  eyes,  .the  fishpools  in  Heshbon,  by 
10  then  was  I  in  his  eyes  as  one  that  found 

15  spread . .  your  hands,  I  mil  hide  mine  eyes 

16  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine  e. 

8  against  the  Lord,  to  provoke  the  eyes  of 
16  with  stretched  forth  necks,  and  wanton  e. 

15  and  the  eyes  of  the  lofty  shall  be  humbled 

21  Woe  unto,  .wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and 

5  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord 
10  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  e. 
10  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear 

3  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  his  e. 

16  shall  be  dashed  to  pieces  before  their  e. 

18  no  pity.,  their  eye  shall  not  spare  children 
7  his  eyes  shall  have  respect  to  the  Holy 

10  of  deep  sleep,  and  hath  closed  your  eyes 
18  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  ob. 
20  but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers 

3  the  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be 

15  and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil 

17  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his  beauty 

20  thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet 
5  Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened 

17  Incline  thine  ear.  .open  thine  eyes,  O 

23  against  whom  hast  thou . .  lifted  up  tliine  e. 
14  mine  eyes  fail  (with  looking)  upward 

26  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold 

7  To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the 

8  Bring  forth  the  blind,  .that  have  eyes 

18  he  hath  shut  their  eyes,  that  they  cannot 

5  yet  shall  I  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the 
18  Lift  up  tlune  eyes  round  about,  and  beh. 

6  Lift  up  youreyes  to  the  heavens,  andlook 
8  they  shall  see  eye  to  eye,  when  the  Lord 

10  made  bare  his  holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of  all 

10  and  we  grope  as  if .  .no  eyes :  we  stumble 

4  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see 

4  perceived  by  the  ear,  neither  hath  the  eye 
12  did  not  hear ;  but  did  evil  before  mine  e. 

16  and  because  they  are  hid  from  mine  eyes 
4  not  hear:  but  thuy  did  evil  before  mine  e. 

2  Lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  the  high  places 

3  O  Lord,  (are)  not  thine  eyes  upon  the 

21  which  have  eyes,  and  see  not;  which 

11  become  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  eyes? 

1  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I 


Jer.  9. 
'3- 
*3- 
14. 
14. 
16. 
16. 
16. 


Lam. 


Eze. 


Hos.  13. 
Joel  1. 
Amos  9. 

9- 
Mic.    4. 

7- 
Hab.  1. 
Zeph.  3. 
Hag.  2. 
Zech.  1. 

2. 

2. 

3- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 


14. 
Mai.    1. 

2.  The  eye 
Mark  8. 

S.The  eye, 
Matt.  5. 

5- 

6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


18  that  our  eyes  may  run  down  with  tears 
17  mine  eye  shall  weep  sore,  and  run  down 

20  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  behold  them  that 
6  their  eyes  did  fail,  because,  .no  grass 

17  Let  mine  eyes  run  down  with  tears  night 

9  to  cease  out  of  this  place  in  your  eyes 
17  For  mine  eyes  (are)  upon  all  their  ways 
17  neither  is.  .iniquity  hid  from  mine  eyes 

4  they  shall  fall,  .and  thine  eyes  shall  be. 

17  But  thine  eyes  and  thine  heart  (are)  not 
6  For  I  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for 

21  and  he  shall  slay  them  before  your  eyes 
16  Refrain,  .thine  eyes  from  tears :  for  thy 

4  and  his  eyes  shall  behold  his  eyes 

19  thine  eyes  (are)  open  upon  all  the  ways 

3  tlune  eyes  shall  behold  the  eyes  of  the 

6  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah .  .before  his  ey. 

7  Moreover  he  put  out  Zedekiah's  eyes 

2  a  few  of  many,  as  thine  eyes  do  behold 
2  he  did.  .evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

10  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  his  eyes 

11  Then  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah 

16  mine  eye,  mine  eye  runneth  down  with 

4  and  slew  all.  .pleasant  to  the  eye  in  the 
11  Mine  eyes  do  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels 

18  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  eye  cease 

48  Mine  eye  runneth  down  with  rivers  of  w. 

49  Mine  eye  trickleth  down,  and  ceaseth  not 
51  Mine  eye  affecteth  mine  heart  because  of 

17  our  eyes  as  yet  failed  for  our  vain  help 

17  heart  is  faint;  for  these . .  our  eyes  are  dim 

18  their  rings,  .full  of  eyes  round  aboutthem 

11  neither  shall  mine  eye  spare,  neither  will 

9  with  their  eyes,  which  go  a  whoring  after 
4,  9  mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  .neither  will 

5  lift  up  thine  eyes  now  the  way  toward 

5  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  the  way  toward  the 
18  mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I 
5  let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  have  ye 

10  as  for  me  also,  mine  eye  shall  not  spare 

12  and  the  wheels,  .full  of  eyes  round  about 

2  which  have  eyes  to  see,  and  see  not 

12  that  he  see  not  the  ground  with  (his)  eyes 
5  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these 
6,  12,  is  hath  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  the  idols 

7  every  man  the  abominations  of  bis  eyes 

8  cast  away  the  abominations  of  their  eyes 

17  mine  eye  spared  them  from  destroying 

24  their  eyes  were  after  their  fathers'  iduls 

.    6  and  with  bitterness  sigh  before  their  eyes 

26  and  have  hid  their  eyes  from  my  sabbaths 
.  16  as  soon  as  she  saw  them  with  her  eyes 

27  so  that  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  thine  eyes 
40  thou  didst  wash  thyself,  paintedst  thine  e, 
16  I  take  away,  .the  desire  of  thine  eyes  with 
21  the  excellency,  .the  desire  of  your  eyes 

25  joy  of  their  glory,  the  desire  of  their  eyes 
25  and  lift  up  your  eyes  toward  your  idols 
23  I  shall  be  sanctified,  .before  their  eyes 

20  the  sticks,  .in  thine  hand  before  their  e. 
16  I  shall  be  sanctified,  .before  their  eyes 
23  I  will  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many  nat. 

4  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with 

5  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with 
34  I  Nebuchadnezzar  lifted  up  mine  eyes 

8  in  this  horn  (were)  eyes  like  the  eyes  of 

20  even  (of)  that  horn  that  had  eyes,  and  a 

3  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  beh 
5  goat  (had)  a  notable  horn  between  his  e. 

21  the  great  horn  that  (is)  between  his  eyes 

18  open  thine  eyes,  and  behold  our  desola. 

5  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and 

6  his  eyes  as  lamps  of  fire,  and  his  arms 
14  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  mine  eyes 

16  Is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  our  eyes 

4  I  will  set  miue  eyes  upon  them  for  evil 
8  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  Goi>  (are)  upon  the 

11  Let  her  be  defiled,  and  let  our  eye  look 

10  mine  eyes  shall  behold  her :  now  shall 

13  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and 
20  turn  back  your  captivity  before  your  eyes 

3  in  your  eyes  in  comparison  of  it  as  nothing? 
18  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw 

1  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  again,  and  looked 

8  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  e. 

9  For.  .upon  one  stone  (shall  be)  seven  eyes! 
10  they  (are)  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  which 

1  Then  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes 

5  said  unto  me,  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes 
9  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked 
1  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and 

6  If  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the 

6  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  mine  eyes? 
1  when  the  eyes  of  man,  as  of  all  the  tribes 
8  for  now  have  I  seen  with  mine  eyes 

17  sword . .  upon  his  arm,  and  upon  his  right  e. 
17  his  right  eye  shall  be  utterly  darkened 

4  I  will  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of 

12  their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their 

5  And  your  eyes  shall  see,  aud  ye  shall  say 

■  sight,  vfxfia  om?na. 

23  when  he  had  spit  on  his  eyes,  .he  asked 

6<p6a\fx6s  ophthalmos. 

29  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 

38  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth 

22  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye 

22  if  therefore  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole 

23  But  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body 

3  beholdest . .  the  mote . .  in  thy  brother's  eye 

3  considerest  not  the  beam . .  in  thine  own  e. 

4  Let  me  pull . .  the  mote  out  of  thine  eye 


EYE 


321 


PACE 


Matt.  7.    4  and,  behold,  a  beam  (is)  in  thine  own  eye? 
7.   5  first  cast,  .the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye 

7.  5  to  cast,  .the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye 
9.  29  Then  touched  he  their  eyes,  saying,  Ace. 
9.  30  their  eyes  were  opened  :  and  Jesusstraitly 

13. 15  and  their  eyes  they  have  closed  ;  lest 
13. 15  any  time  they  should  see  with  (iheir)eyes 

13.  16  But  blessed  (are)  your  eyes,  for  they  see 

17.  8  And  when  they  had  lifted  up  their  eyes 

18.  9  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 
18.    9  rather  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast 

23.  15  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good? 
20.  33  Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be  opened 
20.  34  had  compassion,  .and  touched  their  eyes 

20.  34  immediately  [their  eyes]  received  sight 

21.  42  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes? 
26.  43  asleep  again :  for  their  eyes  were  heavy 

Mark  7.  22  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness 

8.  18  Having  eyes,  see  ye  not';  and  having  ears 

8.  25  he  put  (liis)  hands  again  upon  his  eyes 

9.  47  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 
9.  47  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into 

12.  11  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes? 

14.  40  asleep  again,  for  their  eyes  were  heavy 
Luke  2.  30  For  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation 

4.  20  And  the  eyes  of  all . .  were  fastened  on 
6.  20  And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  on  his  disciples 
6.  41  beholdest . .  the  mote . .  in  thy  brother's  eye 
6.  41  perceivest  not  the  beam,  .in  thine  owne.  ? 
6.  42  let  me  pull  out  the  mote . .  in  thine  eye 
6.  42  beholdest  not  the  beam . .  in  thine  own  eye? 
6.  42  out  of  thine  own  eye . .  in  thy  brother's  eye 

10.  23  Blessed  (are)  the  eyes  which  see  the  things 

11.  34  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye 
11.  34  therefore  when  thine  eye  is  single,  thy 

16.  23  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  tor. 

18.  13  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  (his)  eyes 

19.  42  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes 

24.  16  their  eyes  were  holden  that  they  should 
24.  31  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  knew 

John  4.  35  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields 

6.  5  When  Jesus  then  lifted  up  (his)  eyes,  and 
9.  6  he  anointed  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man 
9.  10  said  they . .  How  were  thine  eyes  opened  ? 
9. 11  Jesus  made  clay,  and  anointed  mine  eyes 
9.  14  Jesus  made  the  clay,  and  opened  his  eyes 
9.  15  He  put  clay  upon  mine  eyes,  and  I  washed 
9.  17  thou  of  him,  that  he  hath  opened  thine  e.? 
9.  21  or  who  hath  opened  his  eyes,  we  know 
9.  26  What  did  he.  .how  opened  he  thine  eyes? 
9.  30  he  is,  and  (yet)  he  hath  opened  mine  eyes 
9.  32  that  any  man  opened  the  eyes  of  one  that 

10.  21  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind? 
ti.  37  man,  which  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind 

11.  41  Jesus  Lifted  up  (his)  eyes,  and  said,  Father 

12.  40  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and  hardened 
12.  40  that  they  should  not  see  with  (their)  eyes 

17.  1  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and 
Acts    9.    8  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  he  saw  no 

9.  18  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been 
9.  40  she  opened  her  eyes :  and  when  she  saw 

26.  18  To  open  their  eyes,  .to  turn,  .from  dark. 

28.  27  their  ears  are  dull,  .their  eyes  have  they 

28.  27  lest  they  should  see  with  (their)  eyes 
Horn.  3.  18  Their  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes 

11.    8  God  hath  given  them,  .eyes  that  they 

11.  10  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they 
1  Co.  2.    9  as  it  is  written,  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor 

12.  16  Because  I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am  not  of 
12. 17  If  the  whole  body  (were)  an  eye,  where 
12.  21  And  the  eye  cannot  say  unto  the  hand 

52  In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye 
1  before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been 
15  ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes 
18  The  eyes  of  your  understandingjDeing 

13  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom* we  have 
12  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  over  the 

14  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  and  that 
1  That,  .which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes 

2. 11  because  that  darkness  hath  blinded  his  e. 

2.  16  the  lust  of  the  ej-es.  .is  not  of  the  Father 
Rev.    1.    7  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they 

1.  14  and  his  eyes  (were)  as  a  flame  of  fire 
2. 18  who  hath  his  eyes  like  unto  a  flame  of 

3.  18  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eyesalve,  that 

4.  6  four  beasts,  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind 

4.  8  full  of  eyes  within  :  and  they  rest  not 

5.  6  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes 

7.  17  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes 
19.  12  His  eyes  (were)  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and 
21.   4  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes 

i.Hole,  a  boring,  rpvfj.a\ia  trumalia. 

Markio.  25  It  is  easier.,  to  go  through  the  eye  of  an. 
LukeiS.  25  it  is  easier,  .to  go  through  a  needle's  [e.] 

5. Sole,  a  boring,  rpvirvfia  trupema. 

Matt.19.  24  It  is  easier,  .to  go  through  the  eye  of  a 

EYE,  with  one  — 

One-eyed,  fxoi/6<p8a\fius  monophthalmos. 

Matt. 18.   9  better,  .to  enter  into  life  with  one  eye 
Mark  9.  47  to  enter  into  the  kingdom,  .with  one  eye 

EYE,  to  — 

To  eye,  yj},  |ij;  avan,  ayan. 

1  Sa.  18.   9  Saul  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  for. 

EYE  brows  — 

Hie  arch  of  the  eyes,  o^ry  niaa  gabboih  emayim. 
Lev.  14.   9  shall  shave  all  his  hair  off  his.,  eyebrows 

41 


Gal. 

IS- 
3- 

Eph. 

4- 
1. 

Heb. 

4- 

1  Pe. 

> 

■?.  Pe. 

?.. 

1  Jo. 

1. 

EYE  Litis  — 

Eyelids,  cr^y^y  aphappim. 

Job  16.  16  and  on  my  eyelids  (is)  the  shadow  of  death 
41.  iS  his  eyes  (are)  like  the  eyelids  of  the  morn. 

Psa.  11.    4  Ins  eyes  behold,  Ms  eyelids  try.  the  child. 
132.   4  sleep  to  mine  eyes . .  slumber  to  mine  eye. 

Prov.  4.  25  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before 

6.    4  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber  to  thine  eyelids 
6.  25  neither  let  her  take  thee  with  her  eyelids 
30.  13  how  lofty  are  their  eyes !  and  their  eyelids 

Jer.     9.  18  and  our  eyelids  gush  out  with  waters 
EYE  salve  — 
Collyrium,  a  small  cake,  koWovoiov,  KoWvpiov. 

Rev.    3.  18  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye  salve,  that 
EYE  service  — 
Eye  service,  6<£0aA/xo5ouAeta  ophtlialmodouleia. 

Eph.  6.    6  Not  with  eye-service,  as  men  pleasers;  but 

Col.    3.  22  not  with  eye-service,  as  men  pleaser3 ;  but 
EYE  sight  — 
Eye,  py  ayin. 

2  Sa.  22.  25  according  to  my  cleanness  in  his  eyesight 

Psa.   18.  24  according  to  the  cleanness,  .in  his  eyesi. 
EYE  witness  — 
l.One  who  beholds  for  himself,  ahrSivrns  autoptes. 

Luke  1.    2  which  from  the  beginning  were  eyewitn. 
2. A  looker  on,  zttotttws  epoptes. 

2  Pe    1.  16  but  were  eyewitnesses  of  his  majesty 
EZ'-BAI,  ^tn  shining,  beautiful. 
The  father  of  one  of  David's  thirty  mighty  men.        In 
2  Sa.  23.  35,  the  words  are  "Paarai  the  Arbite."   B.C. 
1048. 

1  Ch.11.  37  Hezro  the  Carmelite,  Naarai  the  son  of  E. 

EZ'-BON,  |i3?£  splendour. 

1.  Son  of  Gad  and  founder  of  a  Gadite  family.  In  Nu. 
26. 16,  the  name  is  written  "  Ozni."    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  16  Shuni,  and  E.,  Eri,  aud  Arodi,  and  Areli 

2.  Son  of  Bela  son  of  Benjamin.  It  is  strange  that 
while  Ezbon  is  not  elsewhere  mentioned  among  the 
children  of  Bela  orofBenjaniin  he  appears  here  with  Iri, 
which  was  not  a  Benjamite  family,  but  which  is  found 
with  Ezbon  (Ozni)  among  Gadite  families,  both  in  Gen. 
46.  16,  ("Eri")  and  Num.  26.  16.    B.C.  1670. 

1  Ch.  7.   7  the  sons  of  Bela  ;  E.,  and  Uzzi,  and  Uzz. 

E-ZE-KI'-AS,  'ECeKias,  the  Greek  form  of  Hezeteah. 

Matt.  1.  9  Joatham  begat  Achaz ;  and  Achaz  begat  E. 
1.  10  E.  begat  Manasses;  and  Manasses  begat 
E-ZE-KI'-EX,  ^xpjrr  God  is  strong. 
A  priest  who  prophesied  to  the  exiles  in  Mesopotamia, 
by  the  river  Chebar,  (the  Nahr  Malcha)  and  wrote  the 
book  in  the  Old  Testament  whicli  bears  his  name.  He 
is  one  of  the  four  so  called  "greater  prophets,"  but  he 
rarely  alludes  to  himself.  He  prophesied  from  the  fifth 
year  (B.C.  595)  of  Jehoiachin. 

Eze.    1.    3  word  of  the  Lord  came  expressly  unto  E. 
24.  24  Thus  E.  is  unto  you  a  sign :  according  to 

E'-ZEL,  *?ix  division,  separation. 
A  memorial  stone  near  Saul's  residence,  the  scene  of  the 
final  parting  of  David  and  Jonathan.      The  place  or 
"  Heap  of  Stones  "  was  between  Rama  and  Nob. 

1  Sa.  20.  19  thou,  .shalt  remain  by  the  stone  E. 
E'-ZEM,  dsj;  strength. 

A  city  of  Simeon.  The  name  appears  in  Joshua  (15.  29. 
aud  19.  3)  as  Azem. 

1  Ch.  4.  29  And  at  Bilhah,  and  at  E.,  and  at  Tolad 
E'-ZER,  1$  help. 

1.  A  son  of  Ephraim  slain  by  the  inhabitants  of  Gath 
wliile  carrying  off  their  cattle.    B.C.  16S0. 

1  Ch.  7.  21  and  Shuthelah  his  son,  andE.,  and  Elead 

2.  A  priest  noticed  in  tlie  book  of  Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  42  Jeh.,  and  Malchijah,  and  Elam,  and  E. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb  son  of  Hur. 
Perhaps  the  same  as  Ezra  in  1  Ch.  4.  17. 

1  Ch.  4.    4  Penuel  the  father  of  Gedor,  and  E.  the 

4.  A  valiant  Gadite  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.  B.C. 
1048. 

1  Ch.12.   9  E.  the  first,  Obadiah  the  second,  Eliab 

5.  A  Levite  who  assisted  in  repairing  the  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem in  the  tune  of  Nehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  3. 19  next  to  him  repaired  E.  the  son  of  Jeshua 
E'-ZER,  "I3ty  union. 
A  son  of  Seir  the  Horite.     B.C.  1780. 

Gen.  36.  21  Dishon,  and  E.,  and  Dishan:  these  (are) 
36.  27  children  of  E. .  .these  ;  Bilhan,  and  Za. 
36.  30  Duke  Dishon,  duke  E.,  duke  Dishan 
1  Ch.  1.  38  Anah,  and  Dishon,  and  E.,  and  Dishan 
1.  42  sons  of  E.;  Bilhan,  and  Zavan,  (and)  J. 

EZ-ION  GA'-BER,   133   p^-y  baclcbone  of  a   mighty 

one. 
The  last  station  of  the  Israelites  before  coming  to  the 
"  wilderness  of  Zin,  which  is  Kadesh."  It  was  subse- 
quently the  station  of  Solomon's  navy ;  that  at  which 
Jehoshaphat's  ships  were  broken.  Tin's  port  is  at  the 
Modern  Ain-el  Ghudyan  about  ten  miles  up  the  dry 
bed  of  the  Arabah,  and  near  Elath  or  Berenice. 

N1UII33.  35  And  they  departed,  .and  encamped  at  E. 
33.  36  And  they  removed  from  E.,  and  pitched 

Deut.  2.   8  the  plain  from  Elath,  and  from  E. 


1  Ki.  9.  26  king  Solomon  made  a  navy  of  ships  in  E. 

22.  48  went  not ;  for  the  ships  were  brok.  at  E. 

2  Ch.  8.  17  Then  went  Solomon  to  E.,  and  to  Eloth 

20.  36  and  they  made  the  ships  in  E. 
EZ'-NTTE,  ^yyrr  the  one  belonging  to  Etsen. 
Patronymic  of 'Adino  one  of  David's  worthies. 

2  Sa.  23.    8  the  same  (was)  Adino  the  E.:  (lie  lift  up 
EZ'-RA,  N-iijj,  nniy  help. 

1.  The  head  of  one  of  the  twenty-two  courses  of  priests 
that  came  up  from  exile  with  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua 
Neheruiah  (10.  2-8)  has  the  name  Azariah  as  is  pro- 
bably the  case  in  Ezra  7.  1. 

Neh.  12.    1  Seraiah,  Jeremiah,  E. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb. 

1  Ch.  4. 17  the  sons  of  E. . .  Jether,  and  Mered,  and  E. 

3.  A  famous  scribe  and  priest  descended  from  Hilkiah 
the  high  priest. 

Ezra  7.   1  E.  the  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son  of  Azariah 
7.    6  Tins  E.  went  up  from  Babylon  ;  anil  he 
7.  10  E.  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the 
7.  11  the  king  Artaxerxes  gave  unto  E.  the 
7.  12  Artaxerxes,  king  of  kings,  unto  E.  the 
7.  21  whatsoever  E. .  .shall  require  of  you,  it 

7.  25  thou,  E. .  .set  magistrates  and  judges 
10.    1  when  E.  had  prayed,  aud  when  he  had 
10.    2  Shechaniah.  .answered  and  said  unto  E. 
10.    5  Then  arose  E.,  and  made  the  chief  prie. 
10.   6  E.  rose  up  from  before  the  house  of  God 
10. 10  E.  the  priest  stood  up,  and  said  unto  them 
10.  16  E.  the  priest,  (with)  certain  chief  of  the 

Neh.   8.    1  they  spake  unto  E.  the  scribe  to  bring 

8.  2  E.  the  priest  brought  the  law  before  the 
8.  4  E.  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood 
8.    5  E.  opened  the  book  in  the  sight  of  all 

8.   6  And  E.  blessed  the  Lord,  the  great  G. 
8.   9  E.  the  priest,  .said  unto  all  the  people 
8  13  were  gathered  together. .  unto  E. .  .to 
12.  13  Of  E.,  Meshullam  ;  of  Aniariah,  Jehoha. 
12. 26  in  the  days  of .  ,E.  the  priest,  the  scribe 
12.  33  And  Azariah,  E.,  and  Meshullam 
12.  36  of  David  the  man  of  God,  and  E.  the 
EZ-RA-HITE,  <rnjN  belonging  to  Ezrach. 
Patronymic  of  Ethan  and  Heman.     The  word  is  deriv- 
able from  Ezrah  or  Zerach ;  and  Ethan  aud  Heman  are 
both  given  as  sons  of  Zerah,  son  of  Judah.    Another 
Ethan  and  Heman  are  named  as  Levite  musicians  in 
1  Ch.  vi. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  he  was  wiser  than.  .Ethan  the  E. 
Psa.  8S.  title.  Maschil  of  Heman  the  E. 
89.  title.  Maschil  of  Ethan  the  E.  , 
EZ'-RI,  ,-iiy  my  help. 

Qne  of  the  superintendents  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 
1  Ch.27.  26  And  over  them.  .E.  the  son  of  Cherub 


P 

FABLE  — 

Talk,  tale,  legend,  myth,  fxvBos  inuthos. 

1  Ti.    1.4  Neither  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless 

4.    7  But  refuse  profane  and  old  wives'  fables 

2  Ti.    4.    4  turn  away,  .and  shall  be  turned  unto  fa. 
Titus  1.  14  Not  giving  heed  to  Jewish  fables,  and 

2  Pe.   1. 16  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fa. 
FACE  — 
l.Face,  p?3N  anpin. 

Dan.   2.  46  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar  fell  upon  his  f. 
%Face,  nose,  f]N  aph. 

Gen.    3.  19  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat 

19.  1  bowed  himself  with  his  face  toward  the 
24.  47  and  I  put  the  ear  ring  upon  her  face,  and 
42.    6  and  bowed  down,  .(with)  their  faces  to 
48.  12  he  bowed  himself  with  his  face  to  the 

Nuni22.  31  he  bowed  down. .and  feLl  flat  on  his  face 

1  Sa.  20.  41  fell  on  Ins  face  to  the  ground,  and  bowed 

24.  8  David  stooped  with  his  face  to  the  earth 

25.  41  and  bowed  herself  on  (her)  face  to  the  e. 
28. 14  and  he  stooped  with  (his)  face  to  the  gr. 

2  Sa.  14.    4  she  fell  on  her  face  to  the  ground,  and 

14.  33  and  bowed  himself  on  his  face  to  the  gr. 
18.  28  he-fell  down  to  the  earth  upon  his  face 
24.  20  bowed  himself  before  the  king  on  his  face 
1'  Ki.  1.  23  he  bowed  himself . .  with  his  face  to  the  g. 
1.  31  Then  Bath-sheba  bowed  with  (her)  face 

1  Ch.21.  21  and  bowed  himself,  .with  (his)  face  to 

2  Ch.   7.   3  they  bowed  themselves  with  their  faces 

20.  18  Jehoshaphat  bowed  his  head  with  (his)f. 
Neh.   8.    6  worshipped  the  Lord  with  (their)  faces 
Eze.  38.  iS  (that)  my  fury  shall  come  up  in  my  face 

S.Eye,  aspect,  py  ayin. 

Exodio.    5  And  they  shall  cover  the  face  of  the  earth 
10.  15  they  covered  the  face  of  the  whole  earth 

Nuniu!  14  that  thou,  Lord,  art  seen  face  to  face 
22.    5  behold,  they  cover  the  face  of  the  earth 
22. 11  (there  is)  a  people,  .which  covereth  the  f. 

1  Ki.  20.  38  disguised  himself  with  ashe3  upon  his  face 

20.  41  and  took  the  ashes  away  from  his  face 

2  Ki.  9.  30  she  painted  her  face,  and  tired  her  head 

4.Face,  D'J?  panim. 

Gen.    1.   2  and  darkness  (was)  upon  the  face  of  the 
1.    2  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of 

1.  29  which  (is)  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth 

2.  6  and  watered  the  whole  faoe  of  the  ground 


PACE 


322 


PACE 


Geii.  4.  14  thou  hast  driven  me  out.  .from  the  face 
4.  14  and  from  thy  face  shall  I  be  hid ;  and  I 
6.    1  when  men  began  to  multiply  upon  the  f . 

6.  7  I  will  destroy  man.  .from  the  face  of  the 

7.  3  to  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of  all 
7.    4  will  I  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the 
7. 18  and  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the 

7.  23  which  was  upon  the  face  of  the  ground 

8.  8  the  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  face 
8.    g  for  the  waters  (were)  on  the  face  of  the 

8.  13  and,  behold,  the  face  of  the  ground  was 

9.  23  their  faces  (were)  backward,  and  they  saw 
11.  4  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the.  .e. 
11.  8  the  Lord  scattered  them,  .upon  the  face 
11.  9  scatter  thenrabroad  upon  the  face  of  all 
16.    6  Sarai  dealt  hardly . .  she  fled  from  her  face 

16.  8  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  Sarai 

17.  3  Abram  fell  on  his  face:  and  God  talked 
17.  17  Then  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face,  and  la. 
19.  13  cry  of  them  is  waxen  great  before  the  fa. 
30.  33  it  shall  come  for  my  hire  before  thy  face 

30.  40  set  the  faces  of  the  flocks  toward  the  ri. 

31.  21  and  set  his  face  (toward)  the  mountGilead 

32.  20  afterward  I  will  see  his  face  ;  peradven. 

32.  30  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my 

33.  10  seen  thy  face,  as  though  I  had  seen  the  f. 
35.    1  when  thou  fleddest  from  the  face  of  Esau 

35.  7  when  he  fled  from  the  face  of  his  brother 

36.  6  weut  into  the  country  from  the  face  of 
38.  15  an  harlot ;  because  she  had  covered  her  f. 
41.  56  the  famine  was  over  all  the  face  of  the 
43-    3.  5  Ye  shall  not  see  my  face,  except  your 

43.  31  And  he  washed  his  face,  and  went  out 

44.  23  Except,  .ye  shall  see  my  face  no  more 
44.  26  for  we  may  not  see  the  man's  face,  except 
46.  28  he  sent  Judah.  .to  direct  his  face  unto 
46.  30  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  f. 
48.  ii  I  had  not  thought  to  see  thy  face ;  and,  lo 
50.    1  And  Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's  face,  and 
50.  18  also  went  and  fell  down  before  his  face 

Exod.  2.  15  But  Moses  fled  from  the  face  of  Pharaoh 
3.  6  Moses  hid  his  face;;  for  he  was  afraid  to 
10.28  Get  thee  from  me.  .see  my  face  no  more 
10.  28  for  in  (that)  day  thou  seest  my  face  thou 

10.  29  Thou  hast  spoken  well,  I  will  see  thy  face 
14.  25  Let  us  flee  from  the  face  of  Israel ;  for 
16.  14  behold,  upon  the  face  of  the  wilderness 

19.  7  and  laid  before  their  faces  all  these  words 

20.  20  that  his  fear  may  be  before  your  faces 
25.  20  and  their  faces  (shall  look)  one  to  another 

25.  20  toward  the  mercy  seat  shall  the  faces  of 

32.  12  consume  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth? 

33.  11  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  face  to  face 

33. 16  all  the  people  that  (are)  upon  the  face  of 
33.  20  And  he  said,  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face 

33.  23  back  parts  ;  but  my  face  shall  not  be  seen 

34.  29  the  skin  of  his  face  shone  while  he  talked 
34.  30  skin  of  his  face  shone  ;  and  they  were 
34.  33  Moses  had  done . .  he  put  a  veil  on  his  face 
34.  35  the  children  of  Israel  saw  the  face  of  M. 
34.  35  that  the  skin  of  Moses'  face  shone :  and 

34.  35  Moses  put  the  veil  upon  his  face  again 

37.  9  cherubim,  .with  their  faces  one  to  anot. 
37.    9  to  the  mercy  seatward  were  the  faces  of 

Lev.    9.  24  they  shouted,  and  fell  on  their  faces 

13.  41  from  the  part  of  his  head  toward  his  face 
17. 10  I  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul 
20.   3,  5  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and 
20.    6  X  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul 

26,  17  I  will  set  my  face  against  you,  and  ye 
Num.  6.  25  The  Lord  make  his  face  shine  upon  thee 

11.  31  two  cubits  (high)  upon  the  face  of  the 

12.  3  all  the  men  which  (were)  upon  the  face 
12. 14  If  her  father  had  but  spit  in  her  face 

14.  5  Moses  and  Aaron  fell  on  their  faces  before 
16.  4  when  Moses  heard  (it),  he  fell  upon  his  f. 
16.  22  they  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  said,  O  God 

16.  45  Get  you  up.  .And  they  fell  upon  their  fa. 
20.   6  they  fell  upon  their  faces  :  and  the  glory 

24.  1  but  he  set  his  face  toward  the  wilderness 
Deut.  1.  17  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the  face  of  man 

5.  4  The  Lord  talked  with  you  face  to  face  in 
6. 15  destroy  thee  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth 

7.  6  above  all  people  that  fare)  upon  the  face 
7. 10  repayeth  them  that  hate  him  to  their  face 
7. 10  not  be  slack . .  he  will  repay  him  to  his  face 

8.  20  which  the  Lord  destroyeth  before  your  f. 

35.  2  to  be  beaten  before  his  face,  according  to 

25.  9  spit  in  his  face,  and  shall  answer  and  say 
28.  7  thine  enemies . .  to  be  smitten  before  thy  f. 
28.  31  violently  taken  away  from  before  thy  face 
31.    5  Lord  shall  give  them  up  before  your  face 

31. 17  I  will  hide  my  face  from  them,  and  they 

31.  18  And  I  will  surely  hide  my  face  in  that  day 

32.  20  And  he  said,  I  will  hide  my  face  from 
34. 10  Moses,  whom  the  Lord  knew  face  to  face 

Josh.  5. 14  Joshua  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth,  and 

7.    6  fell  to  the  earth  upon  his  face  before  the 

Judg.  6.  22  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord  face  to  f. 

13.  20  Manoah  and  his  wife,  .fell  on  their  faces 
18.  23  they  turned  their  faces,  and  said  unto 

Ruth  2. 10  Thon  she  fell  on  her  face,  and  bowed 
x  8a.    5.  3,  4,  Dagon  (was)  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the 

17.  49  and  he  fell  upon  his  face  to  the  earth 
20.  15  cut  off .  .every  one  from  the  face  of  the 

25.  23  fell  before  David  on  her  face,  and  bowed 

26.  20  let  not  my  blood  fall . .  before  the  face  of 
2  Sa.    2.  22  how  then  should  I  hold  up  my  face  to  J. 

3. 13  Thou  shalt  not  see  my  face,  except  thou 
3. 13  Miehal..when  thou  comest  to  see  my  face 

9.  6  he  fell  on  his  face,  and  did  reverence 

14.  24  And  the  king  said,  let  him  not  see  my  f. 


2  Sa.  14. 

14. 

18. 

19. 

19. 

1  Ki.  2. 

8. 

13- 

13- 

18. 

18. 

18. 

19. 


iCh.i 


i  Ch. 


16. 
21. 
3- 
6. 
6. 
25- 
25- 
29. 
30. 

32- 

35- 

Ezra   9. 

9- 
Esth.  7. 
Job     1. 

2. 

4- 

9- 
11. 

13- 
16. 
16. 


24. 

27. 

27. 

3°- 

31- 

34- 

34- 

41. 

44. 

44. 

5*« 

67. 

69. 

69. 

80. 

83. 

84. 

88. 

89. 

89. 
102. 
104. 
104. 
104. 
105. 
119. 
132. 

^      J43* 

Pro  v.  7. 

8. 

21. 

24. 

27. 

Ecel.  8. 

8. 

Isa,      3. 


i3- 
14, 
16. 
=3- 
25. 

25- 

27. 
29. 

36. 


24,  28  So  Absalom,  .saw  not  the  king's  face 
32  now  therefore  let  me  see  the  king's  face 
8  battle  was  there  scattered  over  the  face 

4  the  king  covered  his  face,  and  the  king 

5  Thou  hast  shamed  this  day  the  faces  of 
15  set  their  faces  on  me,  that  I  should  reign 

14  the  king  turned  his  face  about,  and  blessed 

6  Entreat  now  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy 
34  to  destroy  (it)  from  off  the  face  of  the 

7  he  knew  him,  and  fell  on  his  face,  and 
39  they  fell  on  their  faces ;  and  they  said 
42  and  put  his  face  between  his  knees 

13  when  Elijah  heard  (it) . .  he  wrapped  his  f. 

4  he  laid  him  down . .  and  turned  away  his  f . 
29  and  lay  my  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  ch. 

31  and  laid  the  staff  upon  the  face  of  the 

15  and  spread  (it)  on  his  face,  so  that  he 

32  he  lifted  up  his  face  to  the  window,  and 
37  the  carcase,  .shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  f. 
17  Hazael  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 

14  Joash.  .came  down .  .and  wept  over  his  f. 

8  Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face 
n  looked  one  another  in  the  face  at  Beth-s. 

2  he  turned  his  face  to  the  wall,  and  prayed 

8  whose  faces  (were  like)  the  faces  of  lions 
11  Seek  the  Lord,  .seek his  face  continually 

16  David  and  the  elders,  .fell  upon  their  faces 
13  they  stood  on  their  feet,  and  their  faces 

3  king  turned  Ins  face,  and  blessed.  .Israel 
42  turn  not  away  the  face  of  thine  anointed 

17  Come,  let  us  see  one  another  in  the  face 
21  they  saw  one  another  in  the  face,  (both) 

6  turned  away  their  faces  from  the  habita. 

9  will  not  turn  away  (his)  face  from  you,  if 

21  So  he  returned  with  shame  of  face  to  his 

22  Josiah  would  not  turn  his  face  from  him 

6  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up  my  f. 

7  and  to  confusion  of  face,  as  (it  is)  this  day 

8  the  word  went,  .they  covered  Haman's  f. 

1 1  put  forth . .  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  f . 

5  put  forth . .  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  f. 

15  Then  a  spirit  passed  before  my  face ;  the 
24  he  covereth  the  faces  of  the  judges  there, 
is  For  then  shalt  thou  lift  up  thy  face 

24  "Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face,  and 

8  my  leanness,  .beareth  witness  to  my  face 

16  My  face  is  foul  with  weeping,  and  on  my 
31  Who  shall  declare  his  way  to  his  face? 
26  For  then  shalt  thou,  .lift  up  thy  face 

15  shall  see  me ;  and  disguiseth  (his)  face 

9  He  holdeth  back  the  face  of  his  throne 

10  abhor,  .and  spare  not  to  spit  in  my  face 

26  he  shall  see  his  face  with  joy :  for  he  will 

29  when  he  hideth  (his)  face,  who  then  can 

12  commanded  them  upon  the  face  of  the 

30  The  waters  are  hid.  .and  the  face  of  the 

13  them  in  the  dust,  .(and)  bind  their  faces 

13  Who  can  discover  the  face  of  his  garment? 

14  Who  can  open  the  doors  of  his  face  ?  bis 
8  make  thy  way  straight  before  my  face 

11  he  hideth  his  face ;  he  will  never  see  (it) 
1  how  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from  me? 

15  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness 

12  upon  thy  strings  against  the  face  of  them 
24  neither  hath  he  hid  his  face  from  him 

6  This  (is)  the  generation,  .that  seek  thy  f. 

8  Seek  ye  my  face.  .Thy  face,  LORD,  will  I 

9  Hide  not  thy  face  (far)  from  me ;  put  not 

7  thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  (and)  I  was 

16  Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  servant 

5  They  looked,  .and  their  faces  were  not 

16  The  face  of  the  Lord  (is)  against  them 
12  upholdest.  .and  settest  me  before  thy  fa. 

15  and  the  shame  of  my  face  hath  covered 
24  Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face,  (and) 

9  Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out 

1  bless  us;  (and)  cause  his  face  to  shine 

7  for  thy  sake . .  shame  hath  covered  my  face 

17  hide  not  thy  face  from  thy  servant ;  for 
3,  7,  19  cause  thy  face  to  shine;  and  we 

16  Fill  their  faces  with  shame ;  that  they 

9  and  look  upon  the  face  of  thine  anointed 
14  Lord,  .(why)  hidest  thou  thy  face  from 

14  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face 

23  I  will  beat  down  his  foes  before  his  face 

2  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me  in  the  day 

15  oil  to  make  (his)  face  to  shine,  and  bread 

29  Thou  hidest  thy  face,  they  are  troubled 

30  and  thou  renewest  the  face  of  the  earth 

4  Seek  the  Lord,  .seek  his  face  evermore 
135  Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  servant 
10  turn  not  away  the  face  of  thine  anointed 

7  hide  not  thy  face  from  me,  lest  I  be  like 
15  came  I.  .diligently  to  seek  thy  face 

27  when  he  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of 
29  A  wicked  man  hardeneth  his  face:  but  (as) 

31  (and)  nettles  had  covered  the  face  thereof 
19  As  in  water  face  (answereth)  to  face,  so 

1  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine 
1  the  boldness  of  his  face  shall  be  changed 
15  What  mean  ye  (that)  ye.  .grind  the  faces 
■2  with  twain  he  covered  his  face,  and  with 

17  that  bldeth  his  face  from  the  house  of 

8  be  amazed  one  at  another ;  their  faces 

21  nor  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  cities 
4  be  thou  a  covert  to  them  from  the  face 

17  of  the  world  upon  the  face  of  the  earth 

7  face  of  the  covering  cast  over  all  people 

8  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  fa. 

6  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit 

22  neither  shall  his  face  now  was  pale 

9  How  then  wilt  thou  turn  away  the  face  of 


Lam  ' 


Eze. 


Isa.    38.    2  Hezekiah  turned  his  face  toward  the  wall 

6  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting 

7  therefore  have  I  set  my  face  like  a  flint 
3  and  we  hid  as  it  were  (our)  faces  from 

8  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a  moment 

2  your  sins  have  hid  (his)  face  from  you 

7  for  thou  hast  hid  thy  face  from  us,  and 
„     3  A  people  that  provoketh  me.  .to  my  face 

Jer.     1.    8  Be  not  afraid  of  their  faces  :  for  I  (am) 
1.  13  and  the  face  thereof  (is)  toward  the  north 

1.  17  be  not  dismayed  at  their  faces,  lest  I  con. 

2.  27  (their)  back  unto  me,  and  not  (their)  face 
5.    3  they  have  made  their  faces  harder  than  a 

7.  19  to  the  confusion  of  their  own  faces? 

8.  2  they  shall  be  for  dung  upon  the  face  of 
13.  26  will  I  discover  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face 
16.    4  they  shall  be  as  clung  upon  the  face  of 
16.  17  they  are  not  hid  from  my  face,  neither  is 
18.  17  I  will  show  them  the  back,  and  not  the  f. 

21.  10  I  have  set  my  face  against  this  city  for 

22.  25  the  hand  of  (them)  whose  face  thou 
25.  26  which  (are)  upon  the  face  of  the  earth 
28.  16  I  will  cast  thee  from  off  the  face  of  the 

6   and  all  faces  are  turned  into  paleness? 
31  I  should  remove  it  from  before  my  face 
33  turned  unto  me  the  back,  and  not  the  fa. 
5  I  have  hid  my  face  from  this  city 

15  If  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into 
17  be  with  all  the  men  that  set  their  faces 

11  I  will  set  my  face  against  you  for  evil 

12  that  have  set  their  faces  to  go  into  the 

5  shall  ask  the  way  to  Zion,  with  their  faces 
51  shame  hath  covered  our  faces ;  for 

19  pour  out.  .like  water  before  the  face  of 

3.  35  To  turn  aside,  .before  the  face  of  the 

5.  12  the  faces  of  elders  were  not  honoured 
1.  6  every  one  had  four  faces,  and  every  one 
1.  8  they  four  had  their  faces  and  their  wings 
1. 10  As  for  the  likeness  of  their  faces,  they 
1. 10  had  the  face  of  a  man,  and  the  face  of 
1. 10  they  four  had  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the 
1.  10  they  four  also  had  the  face  of  an  eagle 
1.  11  Thus  (were)  their  faces  :  and  their  wings 

1.  15  behold  one  wheel,  .with  his  four  faces 
1.  28  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  I  heard  a  voice 
3.    8  made  thy  face  strong  against  their  faces 

3.  23  arose,  and  went  forth . .  and  I  fell  on  my  f. 

4.  3  set  thy  face  against  it,  and  it  shall  be 

4.  7  Therefore  thou  shalt  set  thy  face  toward 

6.  2  set  thy  face  toward  the  mountains  of  Isr. 

7.  18  and  shame  (shall  be)  upon  all  faces,  and 

7.  22  My  face  will  I  turn  also  from  them,  and 

8.  16  their  faces  toward  the  east ;  and  they 

9.  8  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  cried,  and  said 
10.  14  every  one  had  four  faces  :  the  first  face 
10.  14  the  face  of  a  cherub,  and  the  second  face 
10.  14  face  of  a  man,  ami  the  third  the  face  of 
10.  14  and  the  fourth  the  face  of  an  eagle 
10.  21  Every  one  had  four  faces  apiece,  and 

10.  22  likeness  of  their  faces  (was)  the  same  fa. 

11.  13  Then  fell  I  down  upon  my  face,  and  cried 

12.  6  thou  shalt  cover  thy  face,  that  thou  see 
12.  12  he  shall  cover  his  face,  that  he  see  not 

17  set  thy  face  against  the  daughters  of  thy 

3  the  stumhlingblock.  .before  their  face 
4,  7  the  stumhlingblock.  .before  his  face 

6  turn  away  your  faces  from  all  your  abo. 

8  And  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man 

7  I  will  set  my  face  against  them  ;  they 
7  ye  shall  know,  .when  I  set  my  face 

35  there  will  I  plead  with  you  face  to  face 

46  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south 

47  all  faces  from  the  south  to  the  north 
2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusal. 

16  Go  thee,  .whithersoever  thy  face  (is)  set 
2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the  Am. 

21  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Zidon 
2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Pharaoh 
6  my  flock  was  scattered  upon  all  the  face 
2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  mount 

2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Gog,  the 

20  all  the  men  that  (are)  upon  the  face  of 

14  those  that  remain  upon  the  face  of  the 

23  therefore  hid  I  my  face  from  them,  and 

24  According,  .have  I  done,  .and  hid  my  fa. 
29  Neither  will  I  hide  my  face  any  more 

15  from  the  face  of  the  gate  of  the  entrance 
15  unto  the  face  of  the  porch  of  the  inner 
19  So  that  the  face  of  aman(was)towardthe 
19  face  of  a  young  lion  toward  the  palm  tree 

21  (and)  the  face  of  the  sanctuary  ;  the 

25  thick  planks  upon  the  face  of  the  porch 

3  like  the  vision,  and  I  fell  upon  my  face 

4  and  I  looked,  and  I  fell  upon  my  face 
Dan.  1.  10  for  why  should  he  see  your  faces  worse 

8.  5  an  he  goat  came  from  the  west,  on  the  f. 
8. 17  I  was  afraid,  and  fell  upon  my  face  :  but 

8.  18  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my  face  toward 

9.  3  I  set  my  face  unto  the  Lord  God,  to  seek 
9.  7  but  unto  us  confusion  of  faces,  as  at  this 
9.   8  to  us  (belongeth)  confusion  of  face,  to 

10.    6  his  face  as  the  appearance  of  lightning 
io.    9  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my  face,  and  my  face 

10.  15  I  set  my  face  toward  the  ground,  and  I 

11.  17  He  shall  also  set  his  face  to  enter  with 
11.  18  After  this  shall  he  turn  his  face  unto  the 
11. 19  Then  he  shall  turn  his  face  toward  the 

Hos.    5.    5  the  pride  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  his  face 

5.  15  till  they  acknowledge,  .and  seek  my  face 
7.  10  And  the  pride  of  Israel  testifieth  to  his  f. 

Joel    2.    6  Before  their  face  the  people  shall  be 

2.  20  with  his  face  toward  the  east  sea,  and 


FACE 


323 


PAINT 


Amos  5.  S  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of  the 

9.  6  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of  the 

9.  8  I  will  destroy  it  from  off  the  face  of  the 

Mic.    3.  4  he  will  even  hide  his  face  from  them  at 

Nah.   2.  1  Hethatdasheth.  .is  come  up  before  thy  f. 

2.  10  the  faces  of  them  all  gather  blackness 

3.  5  I  will  discover  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face 
Hab.    r.  9  their  faces  shall  sup  up  (as)  the  east  wind 
Zeeh.  5.  3  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  face  of 
Mai.    2.  3  and  spread  dung  upon  your  faces,  (even) 

5. Face,  uipis  opsis. 

J  ohm  1.  44  nod  his  face  was  bound  about  with  a  nap. 

6. Face,  irporamov  p>rosopon. 

Matt.  6.  16  for  they  disfigure  their  faces,  that  they 

6. 17  anoint  thine  head,  and  wash  thy  face 

11.  10  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face 

16.  3  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  ;  but 

17.  2  and  his  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and 
17.    6  they  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore 
18. 10  their  angels  do  always  behold  the  face 
26.  39  fell  on  his  face,  and  prayed,  saying,  0  my 
26.  67  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffeted 

Mark  1.    2  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face 

14. 65  to  cover  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  and  to 
Luke  1.  76  for  thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the 

2.  31  Which  thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face 

5.  12  seeing  Jesus,  fell  on  (his)  face,  and  besou. 
7.  27  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face 

9.  51  he  stedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jerusa. 
9.  52  sent  messengers  before  his  face  :  and 
9.  53  his  face  was  as  though  he  would  go  to  J. 

10.  1  sent  them  two  and  two  before  his  face 

12.  56  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  and  of 
17.  16  fell  down  on  (his)  face  at  his  feet,  giving 
2T.  35  all  them  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the 
22.  64  they  struck  him  on  the  face,  and  asked 
24.    5  bowed  down  (their)  faces  to  the  earth 

Acts    6.  15  saw  his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an 
7. 45  whom  God  drave  out  before  the  face  of  our 
17.  26  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth 
20.  25  I  know  that  ye  all.  .shall  see  my  faee  no 
20.  38  that  they  should  see  his  face  no  more 

1  C0.13.  12  For  now  we  see.  .but  then  face  to  face 

14.  25  falling  down  on  (his)  face  he  will  worship 

2  Co.  3.    7  could  not  stedfastly  behold  the  face  of  M. 

3.  13  as  Moses,  (which)  put  a  veil  over  his  face 

3. 18  we  all,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a 

4.  6  to  (give)  the  light,  .in  the  face  of  Jesus 

11.  20  ye  suffer,  .if  a  man  smite  you  on  the  face 
GaL     1.  22  was  unknown  by  face  unto  the  churches 

2.  11  I  withstood  him  to  the  face,  because  he 
Col.     2.    1  and  (for)  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  f. 

1  Th.  2.  17  endeavoured,  .to  see  your  face  with  great 

3.  10  prajiug.  .that  we  might  see  your  face 
Jas.      1.  23  a  man  beholding  Ms  natural  face  in  a 

1  Pe.    3. 12  the  face  of  the  Lord  (is)  against  them 
Hev.    4.    7  and  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  man 

6.  16  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth 

7.  11  and  fell  before  the  throne  on  their  faces 
9.    7  and  their  faces  (were)  as  the  faces  of  men 

10.  1  and  his  face  (was)  as  it  were  the  sun,  and 

11.  16  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  worshipped 

12.  14  half  a  time,  from  the  face  of  the  serpent 
20. 11  from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven 
22.    4  And  they  shall  see  his  face  ;  and  his  name 

FACE  to  face  — 

l.Face  to  face,  koto.  TrpSaanrov  kctta  prosopon. 

Acts  25. 16  he  which,  .have  the  accusers  face  to  face 
2.  Mouth  to- mouth,  arSfia  irpbs  crrofta. 

2  John    12  but  I  trust  to  come,  .and  speak  face  to  f. 

3  John    14  and  we  shall  speak  face  to  face.    Peace 

FADE  (away),  to  — 

1.  To  fade,  S^  baled,  5. 

Isa.  64.    6  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf ;  and  our  iniquities 

2.  To  fade  or  wear  atvay,  bii  nabel. 

2  Sa.  22.  46  Strangers  shall  fade  away,  and  they  shall 
Psa.   18.  45  The  strangers  shall  fade  away,  and  be 
Isa.     1.  30  ye  shall  be  as  an  oak  whose  leaf  fadeth 
24.   4  The  earth  mourneth  (and)  fadeth  away 
24.    4  the  world  languisheth  (and)  fadeth  away 
28.    1  whose  glorious  beauty  (is)  a  fading  flower 
28.    4  the  glorious  beauty,  .shall  be  a  fading 
40.    7,  8  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth 
Jer.     8. 13  the  leaf  shall  fade  ;  and  (the  things  that) 
Eze.  47.  12  whose  leaf  shall  not  fade,  neither  shall 

Z.To  cause  to  fade,  fiapaivoj  maraino. 

Jas.     1. 11  so  also  shall  the  rich  man  fadeaway  in 
FADETH  not  away,  that  — 
1.  Unfading,  kfiapavTivos  amarantinos. 

1  Pe.   5.   4  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away 
2.Uiifading,  afxdpavros  amarantos. 

1  Pe.  i.    4  To  an  inheritance,  .that  fadeth  not  away 
FAIL  — 
1.7s  not,  ]".i<  ay  in. 

Isa.  44.  12  yea,  he  is  hungry,  and  Ins  strength  faileth 
2.7*o  sity  3#;  yashab. 

1  3a.  20.    5  I  should  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king  at 
3. Failing,  consumption,  nbs  kaleh. 

Deut23.  32  and  fail  (with  longing)  for  them  all  the 
4,  To  perish,  be  lost,  "OK  abad. 

Psa.  142.  4  refuge  failed  me  ;  no  man  cared  for  my 

Eze.  12.  22  days  are  prolonged,  and  every  vision  fail. 
5. To  go  away,  Sin;  azal. 

Job   14. 11  (As)  the  waters  fail  from  the  aea,  and  the 


6.  To  cease,  fail,  have  an  end,  bdn  aplies. 

Gen.  47. 15  why  should  we  die.  .for  the  money  faileth 
47.  16  will  -give  you  for  your  cattle,  if  money  fail 

7. To  be  cmpii-.d,  made  void,  ppr  baqaq,  2. 

Isa.    19.    3  the  spirit  of  Egypt  shall  fail  in  the  midst 
S.  To  fail,  i?a  gamar. 

Psa.  77.    8  doth  (his)  promise  fail  for  evermore? 

9. To  loathe,  cast  away,  h%$  gaal,  5. 

Job  21. 10  Their  bull  gendereth,  and  faileth  not 

10.  To  be  lean,  poor,  low,  weo.k,  hh*  dotal. 

Isa.   38. 14  mine  eyes  fail  (with  looking)  upward  :  O 
11. To  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  h-mchado.L 

Job  19. 14  My  kinsfolk  have  failed,  and  my  familiar 
12.ro  lack,  abate,  npn  chaser. 

1  Ki.17.  14  neither  shall  the  cruise  of  oil  fail,  until 

Isa.    51.  14  not  die.  .nor  that  his  bread  should  fail 
13. Lacking,  "ipn  chaser. 

1  Ki.17. lS  neither  did  the  cruise  of  oil  fail,  accord. 
Eccl.io.    3  a  fool  walketh  by  the  way,  his  wisdom  f. 

14.  To  go  out  or  forth,  n$;  yatsa. 

Gen.  42.  28  their  heart  failed,  .and  they  were  afraid 
Song  5.    6  my  soul  failed  when  he  spake :  I  sought 

15.  To  oe  or  become  weak,  dim,  xnz  kahah. 

Isa.  42.   4  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  till 
lfi-To  lie,  deceive,  313  ka-zab,  3. 

Isa.  58. 11  like  a  spring  of  water,  whose  waters  fail 
VJ. To  fail,  c-ns  kachash. 

Psa.  109.  24  are  weak . .  and  my  flesh  faileth  of  fatness 
IS.  To  fail,  lie,  deceive,  iyn3  kachash,  3. 

Hos.   9.    2  not  feed,  .the  new  wine  shall  fail  in  her 
Hab.  3. 17  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  aud  the 
19.7*0  be  completed,  consumed,  ended,,  nS|  kalah. 
Job    11.  20  the  eyes  of  the  wicked  shall  fail,  and 

17.    5  even  the  eyes  of  his  children  shall  fail 
Psa.  69.    3  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait  for  my  God 
71.    9  forsake  me  not  when  my  strength  faileth 
73.  e6  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth.  .God 
119.  82  Mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  word,  saying 
119.  123  Mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  salvation,  and  for 
143.    7  my  spirit  faileth :  hide  not  thy  face  from 
Prov  22.    8  and  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall  fail 
Isa.  15.    6  the  grass  faileth,  there  is  no  green  thing 
21.  16  and  all  the  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fail 

31.  3  fall  down,  and  they  all  shall  fail  together 

32.  10  for  the  vintage  shall  fail,  the  gathering 
Jer.  14.    6  their  eyes  did  fail  because,  .no  grass 
Lam.  2.  11  Mine  eyes  do  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels 

3.  22  consumed,  because  his  compassions  fail 

4.  17  our  eyes  as  yet  failed  for  our  vain  help 

20.  To  be  cut  off,  rns  karath,  2. 

2  Sa.  3.  29  let  there  not  fail  from  the  house  of  Joab 

1  Ki.  2.    4  there  shall  not  fail  thee,  .a  man  on  the 

8.  25  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my 

9.  5  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  upon  the 

2  Ch.  6.  16  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man,  in  my 

7. 18  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  (to  be) 
21.7*0  stumble,  be  feeble,  S?3  kashal. 

Psa.  31.  10  strength  faileth,  because  of  mine  iniquity 
22.Tofall,  ^naphah 

Josh  21.  45  There  failed  not  ought  of  any  good  thing 
23.  14  not  one  thing  hath  failed  of  all  the  good 
23. 14  (and)  not  one  thing  hath  failed  thereof 
1  Sa.  17.  32  Let  no  man's  heart  fail  because  of  him 
1  Ki.  8.  56  there  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  his 
23.7*0  be  dried,  up,  rvpj  nashath. 

Isa.  41. 17  their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  I  the  Lorb 
Jer.  51.  30  in  (their)  holds ;  their  might  hath  failed 

24.7*0  become  dried  up,  twi  nashath,  2. 

Isa.    19.   5  the  waters  shall  fail  from  the  sea,  and 
25.7*0  pass  over,  away,  by,  13".  abar. 

Esth.  9.  27  so  as  it  should  not  fail,  that  they  would 
9.  28  these  days  of  Purini  should  not  fail  from 

26.  To  be  lacking,  ~ny  adar,  2. 

Isa.   34.  16  no  one  of  these  shall  fail,  noue  shall  want 

40.  26  for  that  (he  is)  strong  in  power ;  not  one  f . 

59.  15  Yea,  truth  faileth.  .the  Lord  saw  (it),  and 
Zeph.  3.    5  he  faileth  not ;  but  the  unjust  knoweth 

27.7*0  leave,  forsake,  abandon,  2\]}r  azdb. 

Psa.  38.  10  My  heart  panteth,  my  strength  faileth 
40.  12  they  are  more . .  therefore  my  heart  faileth 

28.7*o  he  feeble,  covered,  *]sj;  ataph. 

Isa.   57. 16  for  the  spirit  should  fail  before  me,  and 
29.  To  pass  ancay,  come  to  an  end,  Dps  pecsas. 

Psa.  12.   1  for  the  faithful  fail  from  among ..  men 
30.7*0  break,  make  void,  fail,  "qs  parar,  5. 

Eccl.12.    5  they  shall  be  afraid.. desire  shall  fail 
31.7*0  moke  feeble,  let  be  feeble,  ns~\  rapluth,  5. 

Deut.31.    6  he  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 
31.    8  he  will  not  fail  thee,  neither  forsake  thee 

Josh.  1.    5  I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

r  Ch.28.  zo  he  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

32. Error,  mistake,  V7$  shalu. 

Ezra.  4.  22  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this 
6.   9  it  be  given  them  day  by  day  without  fail 

33.7*0  lie,  deceive,  ipy  shakar,  3. 

Psa   89.  33  from  him,  nor  suffer  my  faithfulness  to  f. 


34.7*0  be  finished,  consumed,  D£n  tamam. 

Gen.  47. 15  when  money  failed  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
Josh.  3.  16  those  that  came  down  toward  the  sea.  .f. 

35.Nbt  to  be  steadfast,  |£N  n1?  lo  aman,  2. 

Jer.   15.  18  be ..  as  a  liar,  (and  as)  waters  (that)  fail  ? 
36.7*0  leave  out,  cease,  6KAei7ro)  ekleipo. 

Lukei6.    9  when  ye  fail,  they  may  receive  you  into 
22.  32  But  I  have  prayed  . .  that  thy  faith  fail  not 

Heb.   1. 12  thou  art  the  same .  .thy  years  shall  not  fa. 
37.  To  fall  off  or  aioay,  iKir'nrTO}   ekpipto. 

1  C0.13.  8  Charity  never  [faileth]:  but  \vhether(there 
3S.7*o  leave  upon  or  besides,  i-KiK^'nzta  epileipo. 

Heb. 11.  32  for  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  G. 
39.7*0  make  useless,  Karapytw  katargeo. 

1  Co.  13.   8  prophecies,theyshallfail;whetJaer(thei:e 
40. 7*o  fall,  TTITTTCO  p}i})to. 

Lukei6.  17  to  pass,  than  one  tittle  of  the  law  to  fail 
41.7*0  be  behind.*,  lack,  vo-repeco  huslereo. 

Heb.12. 15  lest  any  man  [fail]  of  the  grace  of  God 
FAIL,  to  cause  to  — 
1.7*0  cause  to  be  lacking,  "ipn  cliaser,  5. 

Isa.   32.    6  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  thirsty  to  fail 

2.  To  finish,  consume,  ffaa  kalah,  3. 

Job  31. 16  have  caused/the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  fail 

3.7*0  cause  to  cease,  n5v*  shabath,  5. 

Jer.  48.  33  I  have  caused  wine  to  fail  from  the  wine. 

FALL,  to  let  — 

To  cause  or  let  fall,  %i  naphal,  5. 

Esth.  6.  io  let  nothing  fail  of  all  that  thou  hast  spo. 
FAIT,,  to  make  to  — 
7*o  cause  to  cease,  n?^  shabath,  5. 

Amos  8.   4  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail 

FAILETH  not,  that  — 

Not  leaving  off,  unfailing,  oW/cAei7rTos  aneTdeiptos. 

Lukei2.  33  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not 
FALLING-- 
Consumption,  failing,  ji'^3  killayon. 

Deut2S.  65  and  failing  of  eyes.,  and  sorrow  of  mind 

FAILING,  hearts  — 

7*o  swoon  away,  awo-tyvxv  ajyopsueho. 

Luke2i.  26  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,  and 
FAIN,  would  — 
\.  To  flee,  n-15  barach. 

Job  27.  22  he  would  fain  flee  out  of  his  hand 
2.7*o  fix  the  mind  or  desire  on,  i7n9vfj.€(o  epithum. 

Lukeis.  16  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with 
FAINT  — 
l.Sick,  nr?  daveh. 

Lam.  1.  13  he  hath  made  me  desolate .  .faint  all  the 
5. 17  For  this  our  heart  is  faint ;  for  these 

2. Sick,  *n  clavvai. 

Isa.  1.  5  The  whole  head  is  sick.  .the.  .heart  faint 
Jer.  8. 18  I  would  comfort  myself,  .my  heart  (is)  L 
Lam.  1.  22  my  sighs  (are)  many,  and  my  heart  (is)  f. 

3.  Weary,  *$*  yaeph. 

2  Sa.  16.    2  that  such  as  be  faint  in'  the  wilderness 
Isa.  40.  29  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to 

iAVearied,  fpy  ayejph. 

Gen.  25.  29  Esau  came  from  the  field,  and  he  (was)  f. 

25.  30  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee,  .for  I  (am)  faint 

-<    Deut25.  iS  smote,  .when  thou  (wast)  faint  and  weary 

Judg.  8.    4  Gideon . .  passed  over . .  faint,  yet  pursuing 

8.    5  Give,  I  pray  you,  loaves,  .for  they  (be)  f. 

Isa.  29.   8  (lie  is)  faint,  and  his  soul  hath  appetite 

FAINT,  to  — 

1.7*0  become,  happen,  wn  hayah,  2. 

Dan.  8.  27  And  I  Daniel  fainted,  and  was  sick 

2.7*0  labour,  be  weary,  yv  yaga. 

Jer.  45.    3  I  fainted  in  my  sighing,  and  I  find  no  rest 

3. To  be  weary,  pjh;  yaaph. 

Isa.  40.  28  the  Creator.. fainteth  not,  neither  is  wea.? 
40.  30  Even  the  youths  shall  faint  and  be  wTeary 
40. 31  (and)  they  shall  walk,  and  not  faint 
44. 12  he  drinketh  no  water,  and  is  faint 
4.7*0  become  weak,  restrain,  nrra  kahah,  3. 

Eze.  21.   7  shall  be  feeble,  and  every  spirit  shall  fa. 
5.7*o  be  complete,  fnislied,  consumed,  nbs  kalah. 
Psa.  84.    2  My  soul  longeth,  yea,  even  fainteth  for 
119.  81  My  soul  fainteth  for  thy  salvation 
6.7*o  be  feeble,  weary,  nxh  laali. 

Job     4.    5  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou  faintest 
7.  To  faint,  be  feeble,  ar$  lahcth. 

Gen.  47. 13  Canaan,  fainted  by  reason  of  the  famine 

8.7*0  melt,  dissolve,  nn  mug. 

Eze.  21.  15  that  (their)  heart  may  faint,  and  (their) 

9.7*0  be  melted,  3iD  imtg,  2. 

Josh.  2.  24  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  do  faint 

10.7*0  faint,  be  melted,  Dpn  masas. 

Isa.   10. 18  as  when  a  standard  bearer  fainteth 

11.7*0  be  melted,  Dps  masas,  2. 

Deut2o.    8  lest  his  brethren's  heart  faiiit  as  well  as 


PAINT 


324 


FAITH 


12.  To  show  self  feeble,  *pv,  ataph,  7. 

Psa.io7.    5  Hungry  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted 
Jon.    2.    7  When  my  soul  fainted  within  me  I  re. 

13.7*0  be  covered,  wrapped  up,  faint,  rfcy  alaph,  4. 
Isa.   51.  20  Thy  sons  have  fainted,  they  lie  at  the  head 

14.7*0  cover  or  wrap  self  up,  faint,  *)"?"  alaph,  7. 
Amos  8.  13  In  that  day  shall  the  fair  virgins,  .faint 
Jon.    4.    8  he  fainted,  and  wished  in  himself  to  die 

15.7*0  be  feeble,  cease,  faint,  Ji3  pug. 

Gen.  45.  26  Jacob's  heart  fainted,  for  he  believed 

16.7*0  be  tender,  soft,  timid,  Spl  rakak,  2. 

Deut2o.  3  let  not  your  hearts  faint,  fear  not,  and  do 
Isa.  7.  4  fear  not,  neither  be  faint  hearted  for  the 
Jer.  51.  46  lest  your  heart  faint,  and  ye  fear  for  the 

17.7*0  show  self  feeble,  nan  rapkah,  7. 

Prov  24.  10  (If)  thou  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity 

18.7*0  turn  out  badly,  cave  in,  e/c/ca/ce'aj  ehkakeo. 
Lukei8.    1  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint 
2  Co.  4.    1  as  we  have  received  mercy,  we  faint  not 
4.  16  For  which  cause  we  faint  not;  but  though 
Eph.   3.  13  Wherefore  I  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at 

19.7*0  loose  out,  relax,  ifcXvu  ekluo. 

Matt.  9.  36  because  [they  fainted],  and  were  scattered 

15.  32  I  will  not  send  them,  .lest  they  faint  in 
Mark  8.  3  if  I  send  them  away,  .they  will  faint  by 
Gal.  6.  9  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint 
Heb.  12.    3  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your 

12.    5  nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him 

20.7*0  toil,  work  out,  weary,  Ka/xuaj  kamno. 
Rev.    2.    3  And  hast  borne,  .and  hast  not  fainted 

FAINT,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  weary,  riy  uph. 

1  Sa.  14.  28  And  the  people  were  faint 

14.  31  and  the  people  were  very  faint 

2.7*0  be  or  become  faint,  ~ijs  pagar,  3. 

1  Sa.  30.  10  two  hundred . .  which  were  so  faint  that 

30.  21  two  hundred  men,  which  were  so  faint 

3.7*0  be  feeble,  nan  rapkah. 

Isa.   13.    7  Therefore  shall  all  hands  be  faint,  and 

FAINT,  that  — 

7*o  be  feeble,  nay  ataph. 

Lam.  2.  19  thy  young  children,  that  faint  for  hunger 

FAINT,  to  wax  — 

To  be  weary,  *|iy  uph. 

2  Sa.  21. 15  David  went  down,,  and  David  waxed^faint 
FAINT  hearted  — 

Tender  of  heart,  lib  ?n  Taik  lebab. 

Deut2o.    8  What  iuan.  .fearful  and  faint  hearted? 
FAINT  hearted,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  melted,  J1D  mug,  2. 

Jer.  49.  23  they  are  faint  hearted . .  sorrow  on  the  sea 

FAINTED  — 

Faintness,  n3?j|  ulpeh. 

Eze.  31. 15  all' the  trees  of  the  field  fainted  for  him 
FAINTNESS  — 
Faintness,  -)"ib  morek. 

Lev.  26.  36  I  will  send  a  faintness  into  their  hearts 
FAIR,  fairer  — 
\. Clean,  pure,  "11  na  tahor. 

Zech.  3.    5  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head 

3.  5  So  they  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head 

2.Good,  fair,  3>o  tob. 

Gen.   6.    2  the  daughters  of  men  that  they  ("were)  fair 
24.  16  And  the  damsel  (was)  very  fair  to  look 
26.    7  because  she  (was)  fair  to  look  upon 
Judgis.    2  (is)  not  her.  .sister  fairer  than  she? 
Esth.  1.  21  the  queen,  .for  she  (was)  fair  to  look  on 
Isa.     5.    9  many  houses,  .great  and  fair,  without  in. 
Dan.    1.  15  their  countenances  appeared  fairer  and 
Z.Goodness,  aio  tub. 

Hos.  10. 11  but  I  passed  over  upon  her  fair  neck 
4.Fair,  beautiful,  n3;  yapheh. 

Gen.  12.  11  I  know  that  thou  (art)  a  fair  woman  to 
12. 14  beheld  the  woman,  that  she  (was)  very  fair 

1  Sa.  17.  42  a  youth,  and  ruddy,  aud  of  a  fair  counte. 

2  Sa  13.    1  Absalom  the  son  of  David,  had  a  fair  sis. 

14.  27  she  was  a  woman  of  a  fair  countenance 
1  Ki.  1.  3  they  sought  for  a  fair  damsel  throughout 
1.  4  the  damsel  (was)  very  fair,  and  cherished 
Job  42.  15  no  women  found  (so)fairas  the  daughters 
Prov  11.  22  a  fair  women  which  is  without  discretion 
Song  1.  15  thou  (art)  fair,  my  love,  .thou  art  fair 

1.  16  thou  (art)  fair,  my  beloved,  yea,  pleasant 

4.  1  thou  art  fair,  my  love .  .thou  art  fair 

4.    7  Thou  (art)  all  fair,  my  love,  .no  spot  in 
6.  10  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun 
11.  16  A  green  olive  tree,  fair,  .of  goodly  fruit 
.31.   3  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  with  fair  branches 

31.  9  I  have  made  him  fair  by  the  multitude  of 
Amos  8.  13  In  that  day  shall  the  fair  virgins,  .faint 

S.Qood  in  appearance,  runs  aia  tob  march. 

Esth.  2.    2  Let  there  be  fair  young  virgins  sought 

2.  3  gather  together  all  the  fair  young  virgins 
6. Fair,  beautiful,  T5B>  shappir. 

Dan.    4.  12  The  leaves  thereof  (were)  fair,  and  the 
4.  21  Whose  leaves  (were)  fair,  and  the  fruit 


Jer. 

Eze. 


7. Traffic,  market,  |iajj/  izzabon. 

Eze.  27.  12  with  silver,  .they  traded  in  thy  fairs 

27.  14  the  house  of  Tugarm ah  traded  in  thy  fairs 
27.  16,  22  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with 
27.  19  going  to  and  fro  occupied  in  thy  fairs 
27.  27  Thy  riches,  and  thy  fairs,  thy  merchandise 
8.7*0  be  or  act  graciously,  |Jn  chanan,  3. 

Prov.  26.  25  When  he  speaketh  fair,  believe  him  not 
9. Fair  of  form,  *iNh  na?  yepheh  toar. 

Esth.  2.   7  and  the  maid  (was)  fair  and  beautiful 
10. Belonging  to  the  town,  agreeable,  ao-reTos. 
Acts   7.  20  Moses  was  born,  and  was  exceeding  fair 

FAIR,  to  be  — 

7*o  be  fair,  beauteous,  ns;  yaphah. 

Song  4. 10  How  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister 

7.   6  How  fair  and  how  pleasant  art  thou,  0 

Eze.  31.    7  Thus  was  he  fair  in  his  greatness,  in  the 

FAIR,  to  make  self  — 

7*o  make  or  show  self  fair,  ns;  yaphah,  7. 
Jer.     4.  30  in  vain  shalt  thou  make  thyself  fair 

FAIR,  very  — 

Very  fair,  rr^rnpj  yepheh-phiyyah, 

Jer.  46.  20  Egypt . .  a  very  fair  heifer . .  destruction 

FAIR  colours  — 

lied  ore,  stibium,  ruby,  "^3  puk. 

Isa.    54.  11  I  will  lay  thy  stone,  with  fair  colours 
FAIR  one  — 
Fair,  beauteous  one,  ri3;  yapheh. 

Song  2.  10  my  love,  my  fair  one,  aud  come  away 
FAIR  show,  to  make  a  — 
7*o  make  a  fair  face,  ^vTrpoo-wwew  euprosopeo. 

Gal.     6.  12  As  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fan*  show  in 
FAIR  speech  — 
l.A  taking,  reception,  doctrine,  npS  leqach. 

Prov.  7.21  With  her  much  fair  speech  she  caused  him 
2.  Easy  discourse,  evXoy'ia  culogia. 

Rom  16.  18  by  good  words  and  fair  speeches  deceive 
FAIR  weather  — 
l.Gfold,  shining,  fair  weather,  nni  zahab. 

Job  37.  22  Fair  weather  cometh  out  of  the  north 
2. Fine  weather,  cuSfet  cudia. 

Matti6.    2  ye  say,  (It  will  be)  fair  weather ;  for  the 
FAIR  word  — 
Good,  aia  tob. 

Jer.  12.    6  though  they  speak  fair  words  unto  thee 

FAIRER,  to  be  — 

7*o  become  fair,  be  made  fair,  na;  yaphah,  4. 

Psa.  45.   2  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  children  of  men 

FAIREST  — 

Fair,  beauteous  one,  hb;  yapheh. 

Song  1.    8  O  thou  fairest  among  women,  go  thy  way 

5.  9  0  thou  fairest  among  women  ?  what  (is) 

6.  1  O  thou  fairest  among  women?  whither 

FAXR  HAVENS,  icaXol  Atfievss  kaloi  limenes. 
A  harbour  in  the  island  of  Crete,  not  mentioned  in  any 
other  ancient  writing.  It  was  on  the  S.  and  was  prac- 
tically the  harbour  of  Lasa?a,  about  five  miles  to  the  E. 
of  Cape  Matala,  the  most  conspicuous  headland  on  the 
S.  coast  of  the  island. 

Acts  27.    8  a  place  which  is  called  The  Fair  Havens 
FAITH  — 
X.Faithfidness,  steadiness,  poN  emun. 

Deut32.  20  very  froward . .  children  in  whom  (is)  no  f . 
2.  Faithfulness,  stability,  hjIEk  emunah. 

Hah.  2.    4  but  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith 

Z.Hope,  4attIs  elpis. 

Heb.  10.  23  hold  fast  the  profession  of  (our)  faith 

4.  Faith,  faithfulness,  steadfastness,  Tritrris  pistis. 
10  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel 
2  Jesus,  seeing  their  faith,  said  unto  the 
2  Daughter,  .thy  faith  hath  made  thee  who. 
29  According  to  your  faith  lie  it  unto  you 
2S  woman,  great  (is)  thy  faith  :  be  it  unto 

20  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard 

21  If  ye  have  faith,  and  doubt  not,  ye  shall 
23  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy,  and  faith 

5  Jesus  saw  their  faith,  he  said  unto  the 
40  he  said,  .how  is  it  that  ye  have  no  faith? 

5.  34  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole  ;  go  in 
10.  52  Go  thy  way  ;  thy  faith  hath  made  thee 
xx.  22  Jesus  answering  saith.  .Have faith  in  God 

Luke  5.  20  when  he  saw  their  faith,  he  said  unto  him 

7.  9  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel 

7.  50  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee  ;  go  in  peace 

8.  25  Aud  he  said  unto  them,  Where  is  yourf.? 
8.  48  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole  ;  go  in 

17.    5  And  the  apostles  said.  .Increase  our  faith 

17.  6  If  ye  had  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard 
17. 19  go  thy  way  ;  thy  faith  hath  made  thee 

18.  8  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth? 
18.  42  Receive  thy  sight,  .faith  hath  saved  thee 
22.  32  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not 

Acts    3.  16  his  name  through  faith  in  his  name  hath 
3.  16  the  faith  which  is  by  him  hath  given  him 

6.  5  man  full  of  faith  ami  of  the  Holy  Ghost 


Matt. , 
9- 

9- 
9- 

15- 
*7- 
21. 
23. 

Mark  2. 


Acts    6. 

6. 

XI. 

13- 
14. 

14. 
14. 
15- 
16. 
20. 
24. 
26. 


zCo. 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Phil. 


Col. 


tTh. 


>Th. 


7  the  priests  were  obedient  to  the  faith 

8  Stephen,  full  of  [faith]  and  power,  did 
24  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  aud  of  faith 

8  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  the  faith 

9  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed 
22  exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the  faith 
27  opened  the  door  of  faith  unto  the  Gentiles 

9  purifying  their  hearts  by  faith 

5  the  churches  established  in  the  faith 

21  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

24  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in  Christ 

18  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  in  me 

5  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  nations 

8  your  faith  is  spoken  of  throughout  the 
12  by  the  mutual  faith  botfc  of  you  and  me 
17  righteousness,  .revealed  from  faith  to  fa. 
17  is  written,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 

3  shall  their  unbelief  make  the  faith  of 

22  righteousness  of  God  (which  is)  by  faith 

25  propitiation  through  faith  iu  bis  blood 
27  of  works  ?  Nay ;  but  by  the  law  of  faith 

25  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of 

30  faith,  and  uncircuracision  through  faith 

31  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  fai.  ? 

5  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness 

9  that  faith  was  reckoned  to  Abraham  for 

11  righteousness  of  the  faith,  which  (he  had 

12  steps  of  that  faith  of  our  father  Abraham 

13  but  through  the  righteousness  of  faith 

14  faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promise 

16  (it  is)  of  faith,  that  (it  might  be)  by  grace 

16  that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  Abrah. 

19  being  not  weak  iu  faith,  he  considered 

20  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God 

1  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 

2  access  by  [faith]  into  this  grace  wherein 
30  even  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith 

32  (they  sought  it)  not  by  faith,  but  as  it 

6  righteousness  which  is  of  faith  speaketh 

8  that  is,  the  word  of  faith,  which  we  pre. 

17  faith  (cometh)  by  hearing,  and  hearing 
20  thou  standest  by  faith.     Be  not  high 

3  dealt  to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith 

6  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith 

1  Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith  receive  ye 

22  Hast  thou  faith  ?  have  (it)  to  thyself 

23  damned .  .because  (he  eatetb)  not  of  faith 

23  for  whatsoever  (is)  not  Of  faith  is  sin 

26  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of  faith 

5  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom 

9  To  another  faith  by  the  same  Spirit 

■2  though  I  have  all  faith,  so  (bid.  I  could 

13  now  abidcth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these 

14  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  (is),  .vain 
17  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith  (is)  vain 
13  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like  men 

24  that  we  have  dominion  over  your  faith 
24  helpers  of  your  joy  :  for  by  faith  ye  stand 

13  having  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  according 

7  For  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight 

7  (in)  faith,  andjitterance,  and  knowledge 

15  when  your  faith  is  increased,  that  we  shall 
5  Examine,  .whether  ye  be  in  the  faith 

23  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he  destr. 

16  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have 

16  might  be  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ 
20  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God 

2,  5  bythe  works. ,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith? 

7  they  which  are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the 

8  would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith 

9  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with 

11  evident :    for,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 

12  the  law  is  not  of  faith  :  but,  The  man  that 

14  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through  faith 

22  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might 

23  before  faith  came,  we  were  kept  under 

23  the  faith  which  should  afterwards 

24  that  we  might  be  justified  by  faith 

25  after  that  faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer 

26  children  of  Cud  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus 

5  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith 

6  but  faith  which  worketh  by  love 

22  long  suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith 

10  them  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith 

15  I  heard  of  your  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 

8  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith 

12  access  with  confidence  by  the  faith  of 

17  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith 
5  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism 

13  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith 

16  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  ye 

23  love  with  faith,  from  God  the  Father 
25  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of  faith 

27  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the 

17  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith 

9  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith 

9  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ 

4  Since  we  beard  of  your  faith  in  Christ 
23  If  ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded  ana 

5  the  stedfastness  of  your  faith  in  Christ 

7  stablished  in  the  faith,  as  ye  have  been 
12  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God 

3  Remembering,  .your  work  of  faith,  and 

8  your  faith  to  God  ward  is  spread  abroad 

2  and  to  comfort  you  concerning  your  faith 

5  I  sent  to  know  your  faith,  lest  by  some 

6  good  tiding  of  your  faith  aud  charity 

7  we  were  comforted  over  you.  .by  your  f. 
10  that  which  is  lacking  in  your  faith? 

S  putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  and 

3  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,  and  the 

4  for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your 


FAITH 

2  Th.  i.  ii  goodness,  and  the  work  of  faith  with  po. 
.3.   2  be  delivered . .  for  all  (men)  have  not  faith 

1  Ti.    1.    2  Unto  Timothy,  (my)  own  son  in  the  faith 

1.    4  than  godly  edifying  which  is  in  faith 
1.    5  a  good  conscience,  and  (of)  faith  unfeig. 
1.  14  faith  and  love  which  is  m  Christ  Jesus 
1. 19  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience 

1.  19  concerning  faith  have  made  shipwreck 

2.  7  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and 

2. 15  if  they  continue  in  faith  aud  charity  and 

3.  9  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience 

3.  13  in  the  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

4.  1  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving 
4.    6  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good  doctrine 

4.  12  in  charity,  in  spirit,  in  faith,  in  purity 

5.  8  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse 

5. 12  they  have  cast  off  their  first  faith 

6. 10  have  erred  from  the  faith,  and  pierced 

6. 11  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meekness 

6.  12  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold 
6.  21  some,  .have  erred  concerning  the  faith 

2  Ti.    1.   5  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee 

1.  13  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

2.  18  and  overthrow  the  faith  of  some 

2.  22  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace 

3.  8  corrupt,  .reprobate  concerning  the  faith 
3. 10  faith,  long  suffering,  charity,  patience 

3.  15  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

4.  7  finished  (my)  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith 
Titus  1.    1  according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and 

1.  4  Titus,  (mine)  own  son  after  the  common  f. 

1. 13  that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith 

2.  2  sound  in  faith,  in  charity,  in  patience 

3.  15  Greet  them  that  love  us  in  the  faith 
Phm.        5  Hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith,  which  thou 

6  the  communication  of  thy  faith  may  bee. 

Heb.   4.   2  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  (it) 

6.    1  from  dead  works,  and  of  faith  toward  G. 

6. 12  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the 
to.  22  in  full  assurance  of  faith,  having  our 

10.  38  the  just  shall  live  by  faith :  but  if  (any) 

11.  1  faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped 
11.  3  Through  faith  we  understand  that  the 
11.  4  By  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more 
11.  5  By  faith  Enoch  was  translated  that  he 
11.  6  without  faith  (it  is)  impossible  to  please 
11.  7  By  faith  Noah,  being  warned  of  God  of 
11.  7  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith 

11.   8  By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to 
11.    9  By  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of 
11. 11  Through  faith  also  Sara  herself  received 
11.  13  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received 
11.  17  By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  tried 
11.  20  By  faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau 
11.  21  By  faith  Jacob,  when  he  was  a  dying 
11.  22  By  faith  Joseph,  when  he  died,  made 
11.  23  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  born,  was 
11.  24  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  come  to 
11.  27  By  faith  he  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing 
11.  28  Through  faith  he  kept  the  passover,  and 
11.  29  By  faith  they  passed  through  the  Red  sea 
11.  30  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down 
11.  31  By  faith  the  harlot  Rahab  perished  not 
11.  33  througiufaith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought 

11.  39  obtained  a  good  report  through  faith 

12.  2  the  author  and  finisher  of  (our)  faith 

13.  7  whose  faith  follow,  considering  the  end 
Jas.     1.    3  trying  of  your  faith  worketh  patience 

1.  6  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering 

2.  1  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
2.    5  the  poor  of  this  world  rich  in  faith 

2.  14  hath  faith,  and  have  not  works?  can  fa. 
2.  17  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead,  being 
2.  18  Thou  hast  faith,  .show  me  thy  faith 
2.  18  and  I  will  show  thee  my  faith  by  my 
2.  20  know,  .that  faith  without  works  is  dead? 
2.  22  Seest  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  Ins 
2.  22  and  by  works  was  faith  made  perfect 
2.  24  that  by  works,  .and  not  by  faith  only 
2.  26  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also 

5.  15  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick 

1  Pe.  1.    5  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be 

1.    7  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much  more 
1.    9  Receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  (even) 
1.  21  that  your  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God 
5.    9  Whom  resist  stedfast  in  the  faith,  know. 

2  Pe.  1.    1  that  have  obtained  like  precious  faith 

1.    5  add  to  your  faith  virtue ;  and  to  virtue 
1  Jo.  5.    4  that  overcometh  the  world,  (even)  our  fa. 
Jude        3  the  faith  which  was  once  delivered  unto 

20  building  up . .  on  your  most  holy  faith 
Rev.    2.  13  hast  not  denied  my  faith,  even  in  those 

2. 19  and  faith,  and  thy  patience,  and  thy 

13.  10  the  patience  and  the  faith  of  the  saints 

14.  12  commandments  of  God,  and  the  faith  of 
FAITH,  of  little  — 

Little  of  faith,  oKtySirKTros  oligopistos. 

Matt  6.  30  more  (clothe)  you,  6  ye  of  little  faith? 
8.  26  Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye  of  little  faith? 
14.  31  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst 
16.    8  O  ye  of  little  faith,  why  reason  ye  among 
Lukei2.  28  how  much  more . .  you,  0  ye  of  little  faith? 
FAITHFUL  — 
1. Faithful,  stead}/,  pDN  emuh. 

Prov  13. 17  but  a  faithful  ambassador  (is)  health 
14.    5  A  faithful  witness  will  not  lie  :  but  a 
20.    6  but  a  faithful  man  who  can  find? 
2. Faithfulness,  stability,  msox  emunah. 

Psa.119.  86  All  thy  commandments  (are)  faithful 
119.  13S  Thy  testimonies,  .(are),  .very  faithful 


325 

3.  To  be  steady,  faithful,  |Dt$  aman. 

2  Sa.  20.  19  (that  are)  peaceable  (and)  faithful  in  Isr. 
Psa.  12.    1  faithful  fail  from  among  the  children  of 
31.  23  (for)  the  Loud  preserveth  the  faithful 

4.  To  be  steady,  faithful,  }0»  aman. 

Dan.   6.   4  forasmuch  as  he  (was)  faithful,  neither 

5.  Truth,  stedfastness,  n^x  emeth. 

Neh.   7.    2  he  (was)  a  faithful  man,  and  feared  God 
6. Faithful,  steady,  tnffr6s  pistos. 

MAU24.  45  Who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant 
25.  2i,  23  faithful  servant:  thou  hast  been  fait. 

Lukei2.  42  Who  then  is  that  faithful  and  wise  stew. 
16.  10  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  .faithful 
16. 11  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mam. 

16.  12  faithful  in  that  winch  is  another  man's 
19.  17  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  very  little 

Acts  16.  15  judged  me  to  be  faithful  to  the  Lord 
i  Co.  1.    9  God  (is)  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were  called 
4.    2  required- .  that  a  man  be  found  faithful 
4.  17  ray  beloved  son,  and  faithful  in  the  Lord 

7.  25  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful 
10. 13  God  (is)  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you 

Gal.     3.    9  they,  .are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham 
Eph.    1.    1  and  to  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus 

6.  21  brother  and  faithful  minister  in  the  Lord 
Col.     1.    2  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  which  are  at 
1.    7  is  for  you  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ 
4.    7  faithful  minister  and  fellow  servant  in 
4.    9  Onesimus,  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother 

1  Th.  5.  24  Faithful  (is)  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also 

2  Th.  3.    3  the  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shall  stablish 

1  Ti.    1.  12  he  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into 

1.  15  This  (is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

3.  11  not  slanderers,  .faithful  in  all  things 

4.  9  This  (is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 
6.    2  they  are  faithful  and  beloved,  partakers 

2  Ti.    2.    2  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men 

2.  11  (It  is)  a  faithful  saying:  For  if  we  be 

2.  13  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself 
Titus  1.    6  having  faithful  children,  not  accused  of 

1.  9  the  faithful  word  as  he  hath  been  taught 

3.  S  (This  is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  these 
Heb.   2.  17  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest  in 

3.    2  was  faithful  to  him  that  appointed  him 
3.    s  Moses  verily  (was)  faithful  in  all  his 
10.  23  for  he  (is)  faithful  that  promised 

11. 11  she  judged  him  faithful  who  had  prorni. 
Pe.  4.  19  commit . .  (to  him) . .  as  unto  a  faithful  Crea. 

5.  12  By  Silvanus,  a  faithful  brother  unto  you 
1  Jo.  1.  9  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  (our) 
Rev.    1.    5  (who  is)  the  faithful  Witness,  (and)  the 

2.  10  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will 

2.  13  wherein  Antipas  (was)  my  faithful  martyr 

3.  14  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  begin. 

17.  14  and  they  that  are  with  him  (are),  .faithful 
19.  11  he  that  sat.  .(was)  called  Faithful  andTr. 

21.  5  for  these  words  are  true  and  faithful 

22.  6  These  sayings  (are)  faithf ul  and  true  :  and 
FAITHFUL,  to  be  — 

To  be  faithf  ul,  steady,  |£n  aman,  2. 

Numi2.    7  My  servant  Moses.,  who  (is)  faithful  in  all 
Deut.  7.    9  Know,  .he  (is)  God,  the  faithful  God 

1  Sa.   2.  35  And  I  will  raise  me  up  a  faithful  priest 

22.  14  who  (is  so)  faithful  among  all  thy  servants 
Neh.   9.    8  And  foundest  his  heart  faithful  before 

13.  13  for  they  were  counted  faithful ;  and  their 
Psa.  89/37  and  (as)  a  faithful  witness  in  heaven 

101.    6  Mine  eyes  (shall  be)  upon  the  faithful  of 
Prov  11.  13  he  that  is  of  a  faithful  spirit  concealeth 

25. 13  (so  is)  a  faithful  messenger  to  them  that 

27.    6  Faithful  (are)  the  wounds  of  a  friend :  but 
Isa.     1.  21  How  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  har. ! 
1.  26  thou  shalt  be  called.  .The  faithful  city 

8.  2  I  took  unto  me  faithful  witnesses  to  rec. 
49.    7  because  of  the  Lord  thatis  faithful,  (and) 

Jer,   42.    5  be  a  true  and  faithful  witness  between  us 
Hos.  11.  12  but  Judah.  .is  faithful  with  the  saints 

FAITHFUL  (man)  — 

Faithfulness,  stability,  rrsffig  emunah. 

Prov  28.  20  A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  bless. 

FAITHF  TILLY  — 

1. Faithfulness,  stability,  fiHDN  emunah. 

2  Ki.  12.  15  they  reckoned  not.  .for  they  dealt  faith. 

22.    7  no  reckoning,  .because  they  dealt  faith. 

2  Ch.19.    9  faithfully,  and  with  a  perfect  heart 

31.  12  brought  in.  .the  dedicated  (things)  faith. 

34. 12  the  men  did  the  work  faitlifully :  and  the 

^.Faithful,  steady,  tu<jt6s  pistos. 

3  Jo.        5  Beloved,  thou  doest  faitlifully  whatsoever 

FAITHFULNESS  — 

1. Faithfulness,  stability,  WDN  emunah. 

1  Sa.  26.  23  render  to  every  man.  .his  faithfulness:  for 

Psa.  36.    5  thy  faithfulness  (reacheth)  unto  the  clou. 

40.  10  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy 

88.  11  (or)  thy  faithfulness  in  destruction? 

89.  1  will  I  make  known  thy  faithfulness  to  all 
89.  2  thy  faithfulness  shalt  thou  establish  in 
89.  5  thy  faithfulness  also  in  the  congregation 
89.  8  or  to  thy  faithfulness  round  about  thee? 
89.  24  my  faithfulness  and  my  mercy  (shall  be) 
89.  33  nor  suffer  my  faithfulness  to  fail 

92.    2  To  show  forth,  .thy  faithfulness  every 
119.  75  (that)  thou  in  faithfulness  hast  afflicted  me 
119.  90  Thy  faithfulness  (is)  unto  all  generations 
143.    1  in  thy  faithfulness  answer  me,  (and}  in 
Isa.    11.   5  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  reins 


FALL 

Isa.    25.    1  counsels  of  old  (are)  faithfulness  (and) 
Lam.  3.  23  new  every  morning :  great  (is)  thy  faith. 
Hos.   2.  20  even  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  faithfulness 

2.To  be  prepared,  established,  ready,  pu  kun,  2. 
Psa.    5.   9  For  (there  is)  no  faithfulness  in  their  mo. 

FAITHLESS  — 

Unsteadfast,  unfaithful,  &iri<7Tos  apistos. 

Matt  17. 17  O  faithless  and  perverse  generation,  how 
Mark  9.  19  0  faithless  generation,  how  loug  shall  I  be 
Luke  9.  41  O  faithless  and  perverse  generation  1  how 
John  20.  27  and  be  not  faithless,  but  believing 

FALL  — 

1. Stumbling,  fb$3  kishshalon. 

Prov.  16.  18  and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall 

2. Fall,  carcase,  rtao  mappeleth. 

Prov. 29.  16  but  the  righteous  shall  see  their  fall 
Eze.  26.  15  isles  shake  at  the  sound  of  thy  fall 
26.  18  the  isles  tremble  in  the  day  of  thy  fall 
31.  16  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound  of  his  fall 
32. 10  at  (every)  moment . .  in  the  day  of  thy  fall 

3.  To  fall,  •??:  naphal. 

Jer.  49.  21  earth  is  moved  at  the  noise  of  [their  fall 

4..-1  falling  aside,  irapoLirToofia  paraptoma. 
Rom  11. 11  through  their  fall  salvation  (is  come) 
11. 12  Now  if  the  fall  of  them  (be)  the  riches  of 

5.  Fall,  downfall,  vranns  ptosis. 

Matt.  7.  27  and  it  fell :  and  great  was  the  fall  of  it 
Luke  2.  34  Behold,  this  (child)  is  set  for  the  fall  and 

FALL  (among),  to — 

l.To  be,  n;rr  hay  ah. 

Josh  22.  20  wrath  fell  on  all  the  congregation  of  Is.  ? 

2.  To  go  or  come  out,  ttfl  yatsa. 

Nuni33.  54  shall  be  in  the  place  where  his  lot  falleth 
Josh  16.    1  the  lot  of  the  children  of  Joseph  fell  from 

3.  To  go  ar  come  down,  tv  yarad. 

Nunin.    9  when  the  dew  fell,  .the  manna  fell  upon 
4. To  bend  or  bow  the  knee,  jn3  kara. 

2  Ki.  1.  13  came  and  fell  on  his  knees  before  Elijah 
Ezra  9.    5  I  fell  upon  my  knees,  and  spread  out  my 

5.  To  stumble,  be  feeble,  h&3  kashal. 

Lev.  26.  37  they  shall  fall  one  upon  another,  as  it 
Isa.   28.  13  go,  and  fall  backward,  aud  be  broken 

31.  3  both  he  that  helpeth  shall  fall,  and  lie 
Jer.    6.  21  and  the  sons  together  shall  fall  upon  them 

46.  16  He  made  many  to  fall,  yea,  one.  .upon 
Lam.  5.  13  and  the  children  fell  under  the  wood 
Hos.   4.    5  Therefore  shalt  thou  fall  in  the  day,  and 

4.  5  the  prophet  also  shall  fall  with  thee  in 

5.  5  therefore.  .Judah  also  shall  fall  with  them 
14.    1  for  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity 

6.  To  stumble,  be  feeble,  bys  kashal,  2. 

Psa.    9.    3  they  shall  falland  perish  at  thy  presence 
Prov.24.  16  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  mischief 
Isa.   40.  30  and  the  young  men  shall  utterly  fall 
Eze.  33.  12  he  shall  not  fall  thereby  in  the  day  that 
Dan.  11.  14  exalt  themselves,  but  they  shall  fall 
"•  33  yet  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  by 
11.  34  when  they  shall  fall,  they  shall  be  holpen 
ii-  35  (some) of  them,  .shall  fall,  to  try  them 
Hos.    5.    5  therefore  shall  Israel . .  fall  in . .  iniquity 
14.    9  but  the  transgressors  shall  fall  therein 

7.7*0  be  stumbled,  sib  labat,  2. 

Prov  10.    8,  10  but  a  prating  fool  shall  fall 

Hos.   4.  14  people(that)  doth  not  understand  shall  fall 

8.  To  cause  to  pour' out  or  run  over,  ij}  nagar,  5. 

Psa.  63. 10  They  shall  fall  by  the  sword ;  they  shall 

9.  To  fall,  b^naphal. 

Gen.   4.    5  was  very  wroth,  and  his  countenance  fell 
4.    6  Lord  said . .  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen? 

14.  10  and  the  kings  of  Sodom,  .fell  there ;  and 

15.  12  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  Abram ;  and,  lo,  an 

15.  12  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him 
17.    3  And  Abram  fell  on  his  face  :  and  God 
17. 17  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face,  and  laughed 

33.  4  Esau  ran . .  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed 

44.  14  and  they  fell  before  him  on  the  ground 

45.  14  he  fell  upon  his  brother  Benjamin's  neck 

46.  29  Joseph,  .fell  on  his  neck,  and  wept  on  his 

49.  17  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward 

50.  1  Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's  face,  and 
Exodis.  16  Fear  and  dread  shall  fall  upon  them ;  by 

21.  33  dig  a  pit . .  and  an  ox  or  an  ass  fall  therein 

32.  28  there  fell,  .that  day  about  three  thousand 
Lev.    9.  24  they  shouted,  and  fell  on  their  faces 

11.  32  upon  whatsoever  (any)  of  them . .  doth  fall 
11.  33  every  earthen  vessel  whereinto  (any),  .f. 
11.  35  whereupon(any  part)  of  their  carcase  fall. 
11.  37  if  (any  part)  of  their  carcase  fall  upon  any 
11.  38  and  (any  part)  of  their  carcase  fall  thereon 
26.    7  they  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  sword 
26.    8  your  enemies  shall  fall  before  you  by  the 
26.  36  and  they  shall  fall  when  none  pursueth 
Num  14.   3  brought  us  unto  this  land,  to  fall  by  the 
14.    5  Moses  and  Aaron  fell  on  their  faces  before 
14.  29  Your  carcases  shall  fall  in  this  wilderness 
14.  32  carcases,  they  shall  fall  in  this  wilderness 
14.  43  ye  shall  fall  by  the  sword  :  because  ye  are 

16.  4  when  Moses  heard  (it),  he  fell  upon  his  f. 
16.  22  they  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  said,  O  God 
16.  45  consume .  .And  they  fell  upon  their  faces 
20.    6  Moses  and  Aaron .  .fell  upon  their  faces 

34.  2  the  land  that  shall  fall  unto  you  for  an 


FALL 


Deut  22.    8  that  thou  bring  not  blood .  .if  any  man  f. 
Josh.  5.  14  Joshua  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth,  and 

7.  6  Joshua,  .fell  to  the  earth  upon  his  face 

8.  25  And  (so)  it  was,  (that)  all  that  fell  that  day 

11.  7  So  Joshua  came,  .and  they  fell  upon  them 

17.  5  And  there  fell  ten  portions  to  Manasseh 
Judg.  4.  16  all  the  host  of  Syria  fell  upon  the  edge 

5.  27  he  fell,  .at  her  feet  he  bowed,  he  fell 

7.  13  smote  it  that  it  fell,  and  overturned  it 

8.  10  there  fell  an  hundred  and  twenty  thous. 

12.  6  there  fell  at  that  time  of  the  Ephraimites 

13.  20  Manoah  and  his  wife  looked .  .and  fell  on 

15.  18  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  un circumcised  ? 

16.  30  the  house  fell  upon  the  lords,  and  upon 

18.  1  inheritance  had  not  fallen  unto  them 
20.  44  there  fell,  .eighteen  thousand  men :  all 
2o.  46  So  that  all  which  fell  that  day  of  Benja. 

Ruth  2.  10  Then  she  fell  on.  her  face,  and  bowed  her. 

3.  18  until  thou  know  how  the  matter  will  fall 

1  Sa.  4.  10  there  fell  of  Israel  thirty  thousand  footm. 

4.  18  he  fell  from  off  the  seat  backward  by  the 
11.    7  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fell  on  the  people 

14.  13  fell  before  Jonathan  ;  and  his  arniour  b. 
14.  45  there  shall  not  one  hail-  of  his  head  fall 

17.  49  and  he  fell  upon  his  face  to  the  earth 

20.  41  fell  on  his  face  to  the  ground,  and  bowed 

25.  23  fell  before  David  on  her  face,  and  bowed 
25. 24  fell  at  his  feet,  and  said,  Upon  me,  my 

26.  20  let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the  earth  before 

28.  20  Saul  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the  ea. 

29.  3  I  have  found  no  fault  in  him  since  he  fell 
31.  4  Therefore  Saul  took  a  sword,  and  fell  upon 
31.    5  his  armour  bearer,  .fell  likewise  upon  his 

2  Sa.   j.    2  when  he  came .  .he  fell  to  the  earth,  and 

3.  29  or  that  falleth  on  the  sword,  or  that 

3.  34  falleth  before  wicked  men,  (so)  fellest 

4.  4  it  came  to  pass . .  that  he  fell,  and  became 
g.   6  he  fell  on  his  face,  and  did  reverence.  And 

11.  17  there  fell  (some)  of  the  people  of  the  ser. 
14.    4  she  fell  on  her  face  to  the  ground,  and 
14.  11  there  shall  not  one  hair  of  thy  son  fall  to 
14.  22  Joab  fell  to  the  ground  on  his  face,  and 

17.  12  we  will  light  upon  him  as  the  dew  falleth 

20.  8  a  girdle . .  as  he  went  forth  it  fell  out 

21.  9  they  fell  (all)  seven  together,  and  were 

21.  22  fell  by  the  hand  of  David,  and  by  the  hand 
24. 14  let  us  fall  now.  .let  me  not  fall  into 

1  Ki.  1.  52  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  him  fall  to  the 

18.  7  he  knew  him,  and  fell  on  his  face,  and 
18.  38  the  Are  of  the  LORD  fell,  and  consumed 
18.  39  when  all  the  people  saw  (it),  they  fell  on 
20.  30  a  wall  fell  upon  twenty  and  seven  thous. 

22.  20  that  he  may  go  up  aud  fall  at  Ramoth-g.  ? 

2  Ki.  2.  13  He  took,  .the  mantle,  .that  fell 

2.  14  he  took  the  mantle,  .that  fell  from  him 
4.  37  Then  she  went  in,  and  fell  at  his  feet 
6.    5  the  ax  head  fell  into  the  water  :  and 

6.  6  And  the  man  of  God  said,  Where  fell  it  ? 

7.  4  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the  Syrians 
10.  10  there  shall  fall  unto  the  earth  nothing 
14.  10  that  thou  shouldest  fall . .  thou,  and  Judah 

1  Ch.  5. 10  with  the  Hagarites,  who  fell  by  their  hand 

10.    4  So  Saul  took  a  sword,  and  fell  upon  it 

10.  5  wheu  his  armour  bearer  saw.  .he  fell  lik. 
12. 19  And  there  fell  (some)  of  Manasseh  to  D. 
12. 19  saying,  He  will  fall  to  his  master  Saul 

12.  20  there  fell  to  him  of  Manasseh,  Adnah 
20.    8  they  fell  by  the  hand  of  David,  and  by 

21. 13  let  me  fall  now.  .let  me  not  fall  into 

21. 14  there  fell  of  Israel  seventy  thousand  men 

21. 16  clothed  in  sackcloth,  fell  upon  their  faces 

26. 14  And  the  lot  eastward  fell  to  Shelemiah 

2  Ch.i5.   9  for  they  fell  to  him  out  of  Israel  in  abun. 

18.  19  that  he  may  go  up  and  fall  at  Ramoth-g.? 
2g.  18  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  fell  before  the 

25.  19  that  thou  shouldest  fall,  .thou,  and  Jud. 
29.    9  lo,  our  fathers  have  fallen  by  the  sword 

Esth.  6. 13  before  whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall 
6.  13  but  shatt  surely  fall  before  him 

8.  17  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them 

9.  2  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all  people 
9.    3  because  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upon 

Job     1.  15  And  the  Saheans  fell,  .and  took  them 
1. 19  fell  upon  the  young  men,  and  they  are 
4.  13  the  visions . .  wheu  deep  sleep  falleth  upon 

13.  11  Shall  not.  .his  dread  fall  upon  you? 

31.  22  let  mine  arm  fall  from  my  shoulder  blade 

33. 15  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men 

Psa.     5.  10  letthem  fall  by  their  own  counsels  ;  cast 
10. 10  that  the  poor  may  fall  by  his  strong  ones 

27.  2  and  my  foes,  .they  stumbled  and  fell 
35.   8  into  that  very  destruction  let  him  fall 
37.  24  Though  he  fall,  he  shall  not  be  utterly 
45.    5  aiTows  (are)  sharp,  .the  people  fall  under 
78.  64  Their  priest  fell  by  the  sword  ;  and  their 
82.    7  But  ye  shall,  .fall  like  one  of  the  princes 
91.    7  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten 

105.  38  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  them 
118. 13  that  I  might  fall:  hut  the  Lord  helped  me 
141. 10  Let  the  wicked  fall  into  their  own  nets 
145.  14  The  Lord  upholdeth  all  that  fall,  and 
Pl*ov  11.    5  the  wicked  shall  fall  by  his  own  wicked. 

11.  14  Where  no  counsel  (is),  the  people  fall 
11.  28  He  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  fall 

13. 17  A  wicked  messenger  falleth  into  mischief 
17.  20  he  that  hath  a  perverse  tongue  falleth 
22.  14  he  that  is  ahhored  of  the  Lord  shall  fall 
24,  16  For  a  just  (man)  falleth  seven  times 

24.  17  Rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy  falleth 

26.  27  Whoso  digKeth  a  pit  shall  fall  therein 

28.  10  he  shall  fall  himself  into  his  own  pit 

28.  14  he  that  hardeenth  his  heart  shall  fall  into 


326 


Prov28.  18  but.. perverse  (in  his)  ways  shall  fall  at 
Eccl.  4.  10  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow 

4.  10  woe  to  him  (that  is)  alone  when  he  falle. 

9.  12  when  it  falleth  suddenly  upon  them 

10.  8  He  that  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  into  it 

11.  3  and  if  the  tree  fall  toward  the  south 
11.    3  in  the  place  where  the  tree  falleth,  there 

Isa.  3. 25  Thy  men  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  thy 
8. 15  many  among  them  shall  stumble,  and  fall 
10.   4  Without  me . .  they  shall  fall  under  the 

10.  34  and  Lebanon  shall  fall  by  a  mighty  one 
13.  15  every  one  that  is  joined,  .shall  fall  bythe 

22.  25  be  removed,  and  be  cut  down,  and  fall 
24.  18  fleeth  from  the  noise  of  the  fear  shall  fa. 

24.  20  and  it  shall  fall,  and  not  rise  again 
26. 18  neither  have  the  inhabitants,  .fallen 

30.  25  And  there  shall  be . .  when  the  towers  fair 

31.  8  Then  shall  the  Assyrian  fall  with  the  swo.' 

47. 11  Therefore .  .mischief  shall  fall  upon  thee 
54. 15  whosoever,  .against  thee  shall  fall  for  thy 

Jer.    6.  15  they  shall  fall  among  them  that  fall 

8.  4  Shall  they  fall,  and  not  arise  ?  shall  he 
8. 12  shall  they  fall  among  them  that  fall 

9.  22  men  shall  fall  as  dung  upon  the  open  field 

20.  4  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  of  their 

21.  9  he  that  goeth  out,  and  falleth  to  the  C. 

23. 12  they  shall  be  driven  on,  and  fall  therein 

25.  27  Drink  ye.  .spue,  and  fall,  and  rise  no  more 
25.  34  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  pleasant  vessel 
39.    9  and  those  that  fell  away,  that  fell  to  him 
39. 18  thou  shalt  not  fall  by  the  sword,  but  thy 
44.  12  and  they  shall  all.  .fall  in  the  land  of  Eg. 
46.    6  they  shall  stumble,  and  fall  toward  the 
46.  16  one  fell  upon  another ;  and  they  said 

48.  44  He  that  fleeth  from  the  fear  shall  fall 

49.  26  Therefore  her  young  men  shall  fall  in  her 

50.  30  Therefore  shall  her  young  men  fall  in  the 

50.  32  the  most  proud  shall  stumble  and  fall 

51.  4  Thus  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  land  of  the 
51. 44  yea,  the  wall  of  Babylon  shall  fall 
51.  47  all  her  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  her 
51.  49  Babylon  (hath  caused)  the  slain,  .to  fall 

51.  49  so  at  Babylon  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all 

52.  15  residue,  .that  fell  to  the  king  of  Babylon 
Lam.  1.  7  when  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the 
Eze.     1.  28  when  I  saw  (it),  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  I 

3.  23  behold  the  glory,  .and  I  fell  on  my  face 
5. 12  a  third  part  shall  fall  by  the  sword  round 
6.    7  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  you 
6.  11  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  by  the  fami. 

6.  12  and  he  that  is  near  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

8.  1  the  hand  of  the  Lord  God  fell  thereupon 

9.  8  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  cried,  and  said 

11.  5  Aud  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  me 
n.  10  Ye  shall  fall  by  the  sword :  I  will  judge 
13.  11  Say  unto  them,  .it  shall  fall  :  there  shall 
13.  11  and  ye,  O  great  hail  stones,  shall  fall 

13. 14  the  foundation  thereof,  .shall  fall,  and  ye 
17.  21  with  all  his  bands  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

23.  25  and  thy  remnant  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

24.  6  bring  it  out  piece  by  piece ;  let  no  lot  fall 

24.  21  your  daughters .  .shall  fall  by  the  sword 

25.  13  they  of  Dedan  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
27.  27  shall  fall  into  the  midst  of  the  seas  in  the 
27.  34  all  thy  company  in  the  midst,  .shall  fall 

29.  5  thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  fields 

30.  4  when  the  slain  shall  fall  in  Egypt,  and 
30.    5  the  men  of  the  land . .  shall  fall  with  them 
30.    6  They  also  that  uphold  Egypt  shall  fall 
30.    6  shall  they  fall  in  it  by  the  sword,  saith 
30.  17  The  young  men.  .shall  fall  by  the  sword 

32.  20  They  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of.  .slain  by 

33.  27  they  that  (are)  in  the  wastes  shall  fall  by 
35.    8  shall  they  fall  that  are  slain  with  the  swo. 

38.  20  steep  places  shall  fall,  and  every  wall 
3g.   4  Thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  mountains  of  Is. 

39.  5  Thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  field  ;  for 
39.  23  gave  them,  .so  fell  they  all  by  the  sword 

43.  3  that  I  saw.  .and  I  fell  upon  my  face 

44.  4  behold,  the  glory . .  and  I  fell  upon  my  face 
47. 14  this  land  shall  fall  unto  you  for  inherita. 

Dan.   8.  17  I  was  afraid,  and  fell  upon  my  face :  but 

10.  7  a  great  quaking  fell  upon  them,  so  that 

11.  19  he  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  not  be 
Hos.    7.  16  their  princes  shall  fall  by  the  sword  for 

10.    8  they  shall  say.  .to  the  hills,  Fall  on  us 
13.  16  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  ;  then-  infants 
Joel    2.   8  they  fall  upon  the  sword,  they  shall  not 
Amos  3.    5  Can  a  bird  fall  in  a  snare  upon  the  earth 

3.  14  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be  cut  off,  and  fall 

7.  17  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  shall  fall  by 

8.  14  they  shall  fall,  and  never  rise  up  again 

9.  9  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the 
Jon.    1.    7  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  Jonah 
Mic.    7.    8  Rejoice  not.  .when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise 
Nah.   3. 12  they  shall  even  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the 

10. To  cause  or  let  self  lo  fall,  ^55  naphal,  7. 
Gen.  43. 18  that  he  may  seek,  .aud  fall  upon  us 

11.  To  fall,  tynephal. 

Dan.   2.  46  king  Nebuchadnezzar  fell  upon  his  face 

4.  31  there  fell  a  voice  from  heaven.  .0  king  N. 
7. 20  before  whom  three  fell ;  even  (of)  that 

l2.ro  go  up,  n$»"  alah. 

Lev.  16.    9  the  goat  upon  which  the  Lord's  lot  fell 
16. 10  the  goat,  on  which  the  lot  fell,  to  be  the 
IS,  To  fall  upon,  ya$  paga. 

Judg.  8.  21  Rise  thou,  and  fall  upon  us  ;  for  as  the 
15.  12  that  ye  will  not  fall  upon  me  yourselves 
1  Sa.  22.  17  to  fall  upon  the  priests  of  the  LORD  I 


FALL 


i  Sa.  22. 18  fall  upon  the  priests.,  andhe  fell  upon  the 
2  Sa.    1.  15  David . .  said,  Go  near,  (and)  fall  upon  him 

1  Ki.   2.  25  and  he  fell  upon  him  that  he  died 

2.  29  Solomon  sent,  .saying,  Go,  fall  upon  him 
2.  31  Do  as  he  hath  said,  and  fall  upon  him 
2.  34  Benaiah.  .went  up,  and  fell  upon  him 

2.  46  Benaiah.  .which  went  out,  and  fell  upon 

li.To  be  come,  come  into  being,  yivofxai  ginomai. 
Rev.  16.   2  there  fell  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore 

15.  To  fall  out,  €KTrtirT<a  ekjripto. 

Marki3.  25  the  stars  of  heaven  [shall  fall],  and  the 
Acts  27.  17  fearing  lest  they  should  fall  into  the 

27.  29  fearing  lest  we  should  have  fallen  upon 
Jas.     1.  11  the  flower  thereof  falleth,  and  the  grace 

2  Pe.   3.  17  lest  ye  also,  .fall  from  your  own  sted. 

16.  To  fall  in  or  into,  4fj.w'nrTta  els  empipto  eis. 
Matti2.  11  and  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath  day 
Luke  10.  36  was  neighbour  unto  him  that  fell  among 

14.  5  Which  of  you  shall  have  an.  .ox  [fallen 
1  Ti.    3.    6  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride  he  fall 

3.  7  lest  he  fall  into  reproach  and  the  snare 

6.  9  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 
Heb  10.  31  (It  is)  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  ha 

17.  To  fall  upon,  iirnvitrTa)  epiptipto. 

Luke  1.  i2  he  was  troubled,  and  fear  fell  upon  him 

15.  20  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him 
Acts    8.  16  as  yet  he  was  fallen  upon  none  of  them 

10.  10  while  they  made  ready,  [he  fell]  into  a 

10.  44  the  Holy  Ghost  [fell  on]  all  them  which 

11.  15  as  I  began  to  speak,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell 
13.  11  there  [fell  on]  him  a  mist  and  a  darkness 
19. 17 ",  20.  10 ;  20.  37 ;  Rom.  15.  3. 

18.  To  cast  upon,  a.Trt&dk\a>  cpiballo. 

Lukeis.  12  give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth 

19.  To  come  down,  KaTaf&alvw  katabaino. 

Rev.  16.  21  there  fell  upon  men  a  great  hail  out  of 

20.  To  fall  down-,  KaTairiirTO)  katapiplo. 

Acts  26.  14  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth 

21.  To  bear  down,  Karaipepia  katapliero. 

Acts  20.    9  Eutychus,  being  fallen  into  a  deep  sleep 

22.Tofall,  ttItttw pipto. 

Matt.  7.  25  beat  upon  that  house ;  and  it  fell  not 

7.  27  and  heat  upon  that  house;  and  it  fell 
10.  29  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground 
13.    4  some,  .fell  by  the  wayside,  and  the  fowls 
13.    5  Some  fell  upon  stony  places,  where 

13.    7  some  fell  among  thorns  ;  and  the  thorns 

13.  8  other  fell  into  the  good  ground,  aud  bro. 
15.  14  Let  them  alone,  .both  shall  fall  into  the 

15.  27  crumbs  which  fell  from  their  masters' 
17.   6  they  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore  afr. 

17.  15  ofttimes  he  falleth  into  the  fire,  and  oft 
21.  44  whosoever  shall  fall  on  the  stone 

21.  44  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind 
24.  29  and  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven 

26.  39  he  went  a  little  farther,  and  fell  on  his 
Mark  4.    4  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 

4.  5  some  fell  on  stony  ground,  where  it  had 
4.   7  some  fell  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns 

4.  8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  did  yield 

5.  22  and  when  he  saw  him,  he  fell  at  his  feet 
9.  20  fell  on  the  ground,  and  wallowed  foaming 

14.  35  fell  on  the  ground,  and  prayed  that,  if  it 
Luke  5.  12  a  man  full  of  leprosy .  .fell  on  (Ins)  face 

6.  39  shall  they  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch  ? 
6.  49  stream  did  beat. .  and  immediately  [it  fell] 

8.  5  and  as  he  sowed,  some  [fell]  by  the  "way 
8.  6  some  fell  upon  a  rock ;  and  as  soon  as  it 
8.   7  some  fell  among  thorns  ;  and  the  thorns 

8.  8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  sprang  up 
8. 14  And  that  which  fell  among  thorns  are  they 

10.  18  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  he. 

11.  17  a  house  (divided)  against  a  house  falleth 

13.  4  upon  whom  the  tower  in  Siloam  fell,  and 

16.  21  crumbs  which  fell  from  the  rich  man's 
20. 18  Whosoever  shall  fall,  .shall  be  broken 

20.  18  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind 

21.  24  they  shall  fall  by  the  edge  of  the  sword 
23.  30  begin  to  say.  .Fall  on  us ;  and  to  the  hills 

J0I11112.  24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 

18.  6  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  thegro. 
Acts    1.  26  the  lot  fell  upon  Matthias  ;  and  he  was 

9.  4  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard  a  voice 

22.  7  I  fell  unto  the  ground,  and  heard  a  voice 

27.  34'there  shall  not  an  hair  [fall]  from  the  head 
Ronin.  11  Have  they  stumbled  that  they  should  fall? 

11. 22  on  them  which  fell,  severity ;  but  toward 

14.  4  to  his  own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth 
1  Co.  10.    8  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand 

10.  12  Wherefore  let  him . .  take  heed  lest  he  fall 
Heb.   3.  17  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness? 

4.  11  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example 

Jas.     5.  12  let  your  yea  be  yea.  .lest  ye  fall  into  con. 

Rev.    1. 17  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead 

2.    5  Remember . .  from  whence  [thou  art  fallen] 

6.  13  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth 

6.  16  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 

7.  n  and  fell  before  the  throne  on  their  faces 

8.  10  aud  there  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven 
8.  10  it  fell  upon  the  third  part  of  the  rivers 
g.    1  and  I  saw  a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto 

11. 11  great  fear  [fell]  upon  them  which  saw  them 

11.  13  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  fell,  and  in  the 
11.  16  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  worshipped  God 
14.    8  Babylon  is  fallen,  [is  fallen],  that  great  city 
16.  19  cities  of  the  nations  fell :  aud  great  Bab. 


PALL 

Eev.  17.  10  five  are  fallen,  and  one  is,  (and)the  other 

18.  2  Babylon  the  great  is  fallen,  [is  fallen],  and 
19. 10  I  fell  at  his  feet  to  worship  him.    And  he 

22.7b  stumble,  irTa'tw  ptaio. 

2  Pe.    1. 10  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall 

FALL  among,  to  — 

To  fall  around,  7repnr£*TTa>  peripipio. 

Lukeio.  30  Acertain(man).  .fell  among  thieves,  which 
FALL  at,  to  — 
To  fall  toward,  Trpoo-TritrTco  prospipto. 

ilark  7.  25  a  (certain)  woman,  .came  and  fell  at  his 

FALL  away,  to  — 
l.To  fall,  ^5}  napMl. 

2  Ki.25. 11  fugitives  that  fell  away  to  the  king  of 

Jer.  37.  13  saying,  Thou  fallest  away  to  the  Chaldeans 

37. 14  (It  is)  false  ;  I  fall  not  away  to  the  Chal. 

3g.    g  those  that  fell  away,  .with  the  rest  of  the 

52.  15  those  that  fell  away .  .and  the  rest  of  the 

2.  To  place  away,  atpia-r-n/xt  aphistemi. 

Luke  8. 13  and  in  time  of  temptation  fall  away 

3.  To  fall  out,  iKiriirrw  ekpipto. 

1  Pe.  1.  24  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away 
^.To  fall  beyond,  amiss,  irapairiirTCt)  parapipto. 

Heb.  6.    6  If  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them 

FALL,  to  cause  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  stumble,  *?b;3  kashal,  5. 

Prov.  4.  16  sleep  not.  .unless they  cause  (some)  to  fall 
Eze.  36.  15  shalt  thou  cause  thy  nations  to  fall  any 

2.7b  cause' to  fall,  *?S3  naphal,  5. 

Gen.    2.  21  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam 

2  Ki.19.  7  I  will  cause  him  to  fall  by  the  sword  in 
Isa.  37.  7  I  will  cause  him  to  fall  by- the  sword  in 
Jer.    3.  12  I  will  not  cause  mine  auger  to  fall  upon 

15.   8  I  have  caused  (him)  to  fall  upon  it  sudd. 

19.  7  I  will  cause  them  to  fall  by  the  sword 
Eze.  30.  22  I  will  cause  the  sword  to  fall  out  of  his 

32.  12  will  I  cause  thy  multitude  to  fall,  the 
39.    3  will  cause  thine  arrows  to  fall  out  of  thy 
FALL,  caused  to  — 
A  stumbling  block,  7i#3b  mikshol. 

Eze.  44. 12  caused  the  house  of  Israel  to  fall  into  in. 
FALL  down,  to  — 
1.7b  stumble,  *7p$  kashal. 

Psa.107.  12  they  fell  down,  and  (there'was)  none  to 

2.  To  fade,  wear  away,  S33  nabel. 

Isa.   34.  4  all  their  host  shall  fall  down,  as  the  leaf 
S.Tofall,  h$)  naphal.  ' 

Gen.  50. 18  bis  brethren  also  went  and  fell  down  be. 
Deut22.  4  Thou  shalt  not  see.  .his  ox  fall  down  by 
Josh.  6.    5  the  wall  of  the  city  shall  fall  down  flat 

6.  20  the  wall  fell  down  flat,  so  that  the  people 

Judg.  5.  27  where  he  bowed,  there  he  fell  down  dead 

19.  26  Then  came  the  woman,  .and  fell  down  at 

1  Sa.  17.  52  the  wounded  of  the  Philistines  fell  down 

31.    1  the  men.  .fell  down  slain  in  mount  Gilboa 

2  Sa.   2.  16  so  they  fell  down  together  :  wherefore 

'  2.  23  he  fell  down  there,  and  died  in  the  same 

2.  23  to  the  place  where  Asahel  fell  down  and 
19.  18  the  son  of  Gera  fell  down  before  the  king 

2  Ki.  1.    2  Ahaziah  fell  down  through  a  lattice  in  his 

1  Ch.  5.  22  For  there  fell  down  many  slain,  because 

10.    1  the  men .  .fell  down  slain  in  mount  Gilboa 

2  Ch.13.  17  so  there  fell  down,  .five  hundred  thousand 
Esth.  8.    3  Esther  spoke,  .and  fell  down  at  his  feet 
Job     1.  20  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  and  worship. 
Isa.     9. 10  The  bricks  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will 

31.    3  he  that  is  holpen  shall  fall  down,  and 
Eze.  11. 13  Then  fell  I  down  upon  my  face,  and  cried 

30.  25  and  the  arms  of  Pharaoh  shall  fall  down 
Dan.  11.  26  overflow  ;  and  many  shall  fall  down  slain 

4.7b  cause  self  to  fall,  %i  naphal,  7. 

Deut.  9.  18  I  fell  down  before  the  Lord,  as  at  the 

9.  25  fell  down  before  the  Lokd.  .as  I  fell  down 

5. To  fall,  h%;  ncphal. 

Dan.    3.    5^  10  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden 

3.  6, 11  whoso  falleth  not  down  and  worship. 
3.   7  fell  down  (and)  worshipped  the  golden  im. 
3. 15  fall  down  and  worship  the  image  which 

3.  23  these  three  men.  .fell  down  bound  into 
6.7b  bow  down,  do  obeisance,  "uo  sagad. 

iBa.   44. 15  he  maketh  a  god.  .and  falleth  down 

44.  17  he  falleth  down  unto  it,  and  worshippeth 
44. 19  shall  I  fall  down  to  the  stock  of  a  tree? 
46.    6  he  maketh  it  a  god ;  they  fall  down,  yea 

7.7b  crouch,  lie  down,  J'3*i  rabats. 

Num22.  27  she  fell  down  under  Balaam  :  andBalaam's 

8.7b  bow  self,  do  obeisame,  worshi}},  nn$  shachah,  7. 
2  Sa.  18.  28  he  fell  down  to  the  earth  upon  his  face 
Psa.  72. 11  yea,  all  kings  fall  down  before  him 
Isa.  45. 14  they  shall  fall  down  unto  thee,  they  shall 

9.7b  go  or  come  down,  Karapaivco  katabaino. 

Luke22. 44  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  ground 
10. 7b  fall  down,  KaraTTtinw  katapipto. 

Acts  28.   6  swollen,  or  fallen  down  dead  suddenly 
11.  To  fall,  iriirroj  pipto. 

Matt.  2. 1 1  they  saw  the  young  child . .  and  fell  down 

4.  9  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me 
i8. 26  servant  therefore  fell  down,  and  worship. 
18.  29  his  fellow-servant  fell  down  at  his  feet 


327 


Luke  S.  41  he  fell  down  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  besought 
17.  16  fell  down  on  (his)  face  at  his  feet,  giving 
John:  1.  32  she  fell  down  at  his  feet,  saying  unto  him 
Acts   5.   5  Ananias  hearing  these  words  fell  down 
5. 10  Then  fell  she  down  straightway  at  his 
10.  25  Cornelius  met  him,  and  fell  down  at  his 
15. 16  tabernacle  of  David, which  is  fallen  down 
20.    9  fell  down  from  the  third  loft,  and  was 

1  Co.  14.  25  so  falling  down  on  (his)  face  he  will  wor, 
Heb.  11.  30  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down 
Rev.    4. 10  The  four  and  twenty  elders  fall  down  bef . 

5.   8  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down  before 
5.14  the  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down  and 
19.   4  the  four  and  twenty  elders .  .fell  down 
22.   8  I  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  of 

FAIL  down  at,  to  — 

To  fall  toward,  irpoinr'nrTu)  prospipto. 

Luke  5.   8  When  Simon  Peter  saw  (it),  he  fell  down 
FALL  down,  to  let  — 
To  cause  or  let  go  down,  TV  yarad,  5. 

i  Sa.  21. 13  let  his  spittle  fall  down  upon  his  beard 
FALL  down  before,  to  — 
To  fall  toward,  irpofrirtTTToi  prospipto, 

Mark  3.  11  unclean  spirits,  .fell  down  before  him 
5-33  the  woman,  .fell  down  before  him,  and 

Luke  8.  28  he  cried  out,  and  fell  down  before  him 
8.  47  she  came  trembling,  and  falling  down 

Acts  16.  29  came  trembling,  and  fell  down  before 
FALL  down  from  Jupiter,  which  — 
Fallen  from  Zeus,  i.e.,  liea-ven,  Aioirerns  Diopetes. 

Acts  19.  35  of  the  (image)  which  fell  down  from  Ju.» 
FALL  flat,  to  — 
To  bote  self,  do  obeisance,  worship,  nnr,;  shachah,  7. 

N1UH22.  31  bowed  down  his  head,  and  fell  flat  on  his  f. 
FALL  from,  to  — 
1. To  fall  off  from,-  aTroiriirrw  apqpipto. 

Acts   9. 18  immediately  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it 
2.  To  fall  out  of,  iKTriiTTw  ekpipto. 

Gal.    5.   4  justified  by  the  law;  ye  are  fallen  from 

2  Pe.  3. 17  lest  ye.  .fall  from  your  own stedfastness 
FALL  grievously,  to  — 

To  resolve,  b'n,  S<n  chid,  chil. 

Jer.  23.  19  it  shall  fall  grievously  upon  the  head  of 
FALL  headlong,  to  — 
Becoming  prostrate,  irpnvi]s  ya>6p.ei>05  prenes  gen. 

Acts    1. 18  falling  headlong,  he  burst  asunder  in  the 
FALL  into,  to  — 
To  fall  around,  irepnrlirra  peripipio. 

Acts  27.  41  falling  into  a  place  where  two  seas  met 

Jas.     1.   2  count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers 
FALL,  to  let  — 
l.To  spread  out,  leave,  ts'uj  natash. 

Numn.  31  let  (them)  fall  by  the  camp,  as  it  were  a 
2.  To  let  or  cause  to  fall,  b$i  naphal,  5. 

t  Sa.   3. 19  let  none  of  hiH  words  fall  to  the  ground 

Psa.  78.  28  And  he  let  (it)  fall  in  the  midst  of  their 
Z.To  spoil,  Vtf  shalal. 

Ruth  2.  16  And  let  fall  also  (some)  of  the  handfuls 
FALL,  to  make  — 
l.To  cause  to  fall,  hgi  naphal,  5. 

1  Sa.  18.  25  Saul  thought  to  make  David  fall  by  the 
2. To  cause  to  stumble,  Ws  kashal,  5. 

2  Ch.25.  8  God  shall  make  thee  fall  before  the  enemy 
Psa.  64.  8  they  shall  make  their  own  tongues  to  fall 
Lam.  1.  14  hath  made  my  strength  to  fall,  the  Lord 

FALL  off,  to  — 

1 .  To  fade,  wear  away,  Sgj  nabel. 

Isa.   34.   4  as.  the  leaf  falleth  off  from  the  vine,  and 

2.  To  fall  off,  £K-KiiTTa>  ekpipto. 

Acts  12.    7  And  his  chains  fell  off  from  (his)  hands 
27.  32  Then  the  soldiers  cut . .  aud  let  her  fall  off 
FALL  out,  to  — 

1.  To  go  or  come  out,  «y;  yatsa. 

2  Cn.21. 19  his  bowels  fell  out  by  reason  of  his  sickn. 

2.  To  meet,  happjen,  vr\$  qara. 

Exod.  1.  10  when  there  falleth  out  any  war,  they  join 
Z.To  be  angry,  U"i  ragaz. 

Gen.  45.  24  See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way 
4.  To  come,  epxo/j.at  erchomai. 

Phil.   1. 12  things  (which  happened),  .have  fallen  out 
FALL,  ready  to  — 
To  fall,  S52  naphal. 

Isa.   30.  13  shall  be  to  you  as  a  breach  ready  to  fall 
FALL  upon,  to  — 
l.To  fall  upon,  Sn!J  paga. 

Exod.  5.    3  lest  he  fall  upon  us  with  pestilence,  or 

1  Ki.  z.  32  who  fell  upon  two  men  more  righteous 
2. To  push  out,  strip,  Bt?9  pashat. 

2  Ch.25.  r3  the  soldiers.,  fell  upon  the  cities  of  Judah 
Job     1.  17  The  Chaldeans.,  fell  upon  the  camels,  and 

FAIL  with  pain,  to  — 

To  revolve,  S'n,  *?3M  ehul,  chil. 

Jer.  30.  23  it  shall  fall  with  pain  upon  the  head  cf 


FALSE 


FALLEN,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  come  in,  N'i3  bo. 

Num32.  19  our  inheritance  is  fallen  to  us  on  this  side 

2.  To  stumble,  has  kashal. 

Isa.  59.  14  for  truth  is  fallen  in  the  street,  and  equi 

3.  To  fall,  bsi  naphal. 

Gen.    4.    6  and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen? 
Josa.  2.    9  that  your  terror  is  fallen  upon  us,  and 
8.  24  they  were  all  fallen  on  the  edge  of  the 
Judg.  3.  25  their  lord  (was)  fallen  down  dead  on  the 

19.  27  the  woman  his  concubine  was  fallen  down 

1  Sa-   5-   3>  4  Dagon(was)  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the 

26. 12  becauseadeep  sleep,  .was  fallen  upon 

31.  8  found  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fallen  in 

2  Sa.   1. .  4  many  of  the  people  also  are  fallen  and 

1.  10  could  not  live  after  that  he  was  fallen 
1.  12  because  they  were  fallen  by  the  sword 
1.  19  high  places  :  how  are  the  mighty  fallen ! 
1.  25  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst 
1. 27  How  are  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the  weap. 
3.  38  aud  a  great  man  fallen  this  day  in  Israel  1 
22.  39  yea,  they  are  fallen  under  my  feet 

1  Ch.  10.   8  they  found  Saul  and  his  sons  fallen  in 

2  Ch.20.  24  they  (were)  dead  bodies  fallento  the  earth 
Esth.  7.  8  Haman  was  fallen  upon  the  bed  whereon 
Job  1.  16  The  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from  heaven,  and 
Psa.    7. 15  and  is  fallen  into  the  ditch  (which)  he 

16.  6  The  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant 
18.  38  were  not  able  to  rise  :  they  are  fallen 

20.  8  They  are  brought  down  and  fallen  :  but 
36. 12  There  are  the  workers  of  iniquity  fallen 
55.  4  and  the  terrors  of  death  are  fallen  upon 
57.;  6  into  the  midst  whereof  they  are  fallen 

■    69.   9  the  reproaches  of  them.,  are  fallen  upon 

isa.     3.   8  Jerusalem  is  ruined,  and  Judah  is  fallen 

14. 12  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Luci. 

16.    9  for  the  shouting,  .for  thy  harvest  is  fallen 

21.  9  and  said,  Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen ;  and 
Jer.  38. 19  I  am  afraid  of  the  Jews  that  are  fallen  to 

46.  12  mighty,  (and)  they  are  fallen  both  togeth. 
48.  32  the  spoiler  is  fallen  upon  thy.  .fruits  and 

50.  15  her  foundations  are  fallen,  her  walls  are 

51.  8  Babylon  is  suddenly  fallen  and  destroyed 
Lam.  2.  21  my  young  men  are  fallen  by  the  sword 

5. 16  The  crown  is  fallen  (from)  our  head  :  woe 
Eze.  13. 12  Lo,  when  the  wall  is  fallen,  shall  it  not 
31. 12  in  all  the  valleys  his  branches  are  fallen 

32.  22,  23,  24  all  of  them  slain,  fallen  by  the  sw. 
32.  27  not  lie  with  the  mighty  (that  are)  fallen 

Hos.    7.    7  ;  Amos  5.  2;  9.  n  ;  Zech.  n.  2. 

4.  To  fall  out  of  etari-n-Ttc  ekpipto. 

Rev.   2.    5  Remember,  .from  whence  thou  hast  fall. 

FALLING  — 

1. Overthrow,  falling,  'rn  dechi. 

Psa.  56.  13  (wilt)  not  (thou  deliver)  my  feet  from  fal. 
116.   8  thou  hast  delivered . .  my  feet  from  falling 

2.Tofall,  bsi  naphal. 

Num24.   4,  16  falling  (into  a  trance),  but  having  his 

Job    14. 18  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  nought 
3. 7*o  stumble,  W|  hashed. 

Job    4.   4  word's  have  upholden  him  that  was  falling 
4.  To  fade,  wear  away,  *?2i  nabel. 

Isa.   34.   4  and  as  a  falling  (fig)  from  the  fig  tree 

FALLING  away  — 

The  falling  away,  rj  aTroarauia  he  apostasia. 

2  Th.  2.   3  except  there  come  a  falling  away  first 
FALLING  down  — 
7*o  move,  slip,  fail,  BiD  mot. 

Prov.25.  26  A  righteous  man  falling  down  before  the 
FALLING,  from  — 
Unfailing,  without  falling,  airTaio-ros  aptaistos. 

Jude       24  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  from  falling 
FALLOW  deer  — 
Fallow  deer,  brown  goat  or  gazelle,  "iidit  yachmur. 

Deut.  14.    5  the  roebuck,  and  the  fallow'  deer,  and 

1  Ki.  4.  23  harts,  and  roebucks,  and  fallow  deer 
FALLOW  ground  — 
Broken  up  ground,  tillage,  YJ  nir. 

Jer.    4.   3  Break  up  your  fallow  ground,  and  sow 

Hob.  10.  12  reap  in  mercy;  break  up  your  fallow  gro. 

FALSE  — 

1.  Vanity,  iniquity,  |;x  avert. 

Prov.17.   4  A  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  lips 

2.  Violence,  ovn  chamcts. 

Psa.  35.  11  False  witnesses  did  rise  up  ;  they  laid  to 
3.^4  lie,  deceit,  3,1?  kazab. 

Prov.21.  28  A  false  witness  shall  perish:  but  the  man 

4. Deceit,  nD"ip  mirinah. 

Prov.  1 1.  Ti  A  false  balance  (is)  abomination  to  the 
20.  23  Divers  weights . .  and  a  false  balance  (is) 

5. Deceit,  "i;p"!  remiyyah. 

Psa.120.    3  what  shall  be  done  unto  thee,  thou  false 

6. Emptiness,  vanity,  falsehood,  N$  shav, 

Exod. 23.    1  Thou  shalt  not  raise  a  false  report ;  put 
Deut.'  5.  2D  Neither  shalt  thou  bear  false  witness 
Lam.    2.  14  but  have  seen  for  thee  false  burdens  and 
Eze.  21.  23  it  shall  be  unto  them  as  a  false  divinati. 
Zech.  10.    2  and  the  diviners . .  have  told  false  dreams 


FALSEHOOD 


328 


FAMILY 


V '.Falsehood,  "^  sheqer. 

Eiod2o.  16  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness 

23.    7  Keep  thee  far  from  a  false  matter 
Deut  19.  18  behold  (if)  the  witness  (be)  a  false  witness 
2  Ki.  9.  12  And  they  said,  (It  is)  false ;  tell  us  now 
Job  36.    4  For  truly  my  words  (shall)  not  (be)  false 
Psa.  27.  12  false  witnesses  are  risen  up  against  me 
119.  104  I  get.  .therefore  I  hate  every  false  way 
1 19. 128  Therefore . .  1  hate  every  false  way 
Pro v  12.  17  showeth.. righteousness,  but  a  false  wit. 

14.    5  A  faithful  witness  will  not  lie  :  but  a  fal. 

19.    5,  9  A  false  witness  shall  not  be  unpunish. 

25.  14  Whoso  boasteth  himself  of  a  false  gift 

25.  18  A  man  that  beareth  false  witness  against 
Jer.  14.  14  they  prophesy  unto  you  a  false  visionand 

23.  32  I  (am)  against  them  that  prophesy  false 

37!  14  (It  is)  false;  I  fall  not  away  to  the  Chald. 
Zech.  8. 1 7  let  none . .  imagine  evil . .  love'no  false  oath 
Mai.    3.    5  And  I  will  come  near  to.  .false  swearers 

8.  False,  lying,  xpevSijs  pseudes. 

Acts   6. 13  And  set  up  false  witnesses,  which  said 
[See  also  Accusation,  accuser,  apostle,  brethren,  christs, 
prophet,  witness.] 

FALSEHOOD  — 

\. Transgression,  Vyo  maal. 

Job  21.  34  in  your  answers  there  remaineth  falseho. 

2. Falsehood,  i^  sheqer. 

2  Sa.  18. 13  Otherwise  I  should  have  wrought  falseh. 
Psa.     7.  14  Behold,  he.  .brought  forth  falsehood 
119.  118  them  that  err.  .for  their  deceit  (is)  fala. 

144.  8,  n  right  hand  (is)  a  right  hand  of  falseh. 
Isa.  28.  15  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves 

57.    4  (are)  ye  not.  .a  seed  of  falsehood? 

59.  13  uttering  from  the  heart  words  of  falseh. 
Jer.  10. 14  for  his  molten  image  (is)  falsehood,  and 

13.  25  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  trusted  in  f. 

51. 17  for  his  molten  image  (is)  falsehood,  and 
Hos.    7.    1  for  they  commit  falsehood,  and  the  thief 
Mic.  2. 11  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  falseh. 

FALSELY  — 

1. Emptiness,  vanity,  toa>  shav. 

Hos.  10.    4  swearing  falsely  in  making  a  covenant 

^.Falsehood,  "lj^  sheqer. 

Lev.    6.    5  all  that  about  which  he  hath  sworn  fals. 

19. 12  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  name  falsely 
Deut  19.  18  hath  testified  falsely  against  his  brother 
Jer.    5.   2  The  Lord  liveth  ;  surely  they  swear  fals. 

5.  31  The  prophets  prophesy  falsely,  and  the 

6.  13  unto  the  priest  every  one  dealeth  falsely 

7.  9  Will  ye . .  swear  falsely,  and  burn  incense 
8. 10  from  the  prophet . .  every  one  dealeth  fal. 

29.    9  For  they  prophesy  falsely  unto  you  in  my 
40. 16  for  thou  speakest  falsely  of  Ishmael 
43.    2  saying  unto  Jeremiah,  Thou  speakest  fa. 
Zech.  5.   4  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely 

3.  Over  afalselwod,  *\^"hn  al-sheqer. 

Lev.    6.   3  lieth  concerning  it,  and  sweareth  falsely 

4.7To  speak  falsely,  lie,  i//ev5a>  pseudo. 

Matt.  5.  11  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely 

FALSELY    so  called  — 

Falsely  named,  \l/ev$u)vvfj.os  pseudonumos. 

1  Ti.  6.  20  oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  called 

FALSELY,  to  deal  — 

l.To  lie,  act  deceit/idly,  i?n3  kachash. 

Lev.  19.  11  ye  shall  not  steal,  neither  deal  falsely 
l.To  lie,  utter  falsehood,  "ipy>  shaqar. 

Gen.  21.  23  that  thou  wilt  not  deal  falsely  with  me 
3.  To  lie,  deal  falsely,  "ip^  shaqar,  3. 

Psa.  44. 17  neither  havejwe  dealt  falsely  in  thy  cov. 
FALSIFYING  — 
To  pervert,  mj;  avath,  3. 

Amos  8.   5  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  deceit  ? 
FAME  — 
1.  Voice,  h\p  qol. 

Gen.  45.  16  the  fame  thereof  was  heard  in  Pharaoh's 
2. Name,  ci?  shem. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  his  fame  was  in  all  nations  round  about 

1  Ch.14.  17  the  fame  of  David  went  out  into  all 

22.    5  the  house . .  exceeding  magnincal,  of  fame 

Zeph  3.  19  and  I  will  get  them  praise  and  fame  in 

Z.IIcariiig,  fame,  report,  Fi]pD^  slie-muah. 

1  Ki.  10.    7  prosperity  exceedeth  the  fame  which 

2  Ch.  9.    6  (for)  thou  exceedest  the  fame  that  I  heard 

^Hearing,  fame,  report,  ya»  shema. 

Num  14.  15  the  nations  which  have  heard  the  fame  of 

1  Ki.  10.    1  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame 

2  Ch.  9.  1  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame 
Job  28.  22  We  have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with 
Isa.   66.  19  that  have  not  heard  my  fame,  neither 

5,  Hearing,  fame,  "£#  shoma. 

Josh.  6.  27  and  his  fame  was  (noised)  throughout  all 

9.    9  for  we  have  heard  the  fame  of  him,  and 
Esth.  q.    4  For  Mordecai  (was)  great,  .and  his  fame 
Jer.     6.  24  We  have  heard  the  fame  thereof ;  our 
^.Hearing,  o.kot)  akoe. 

Matt.  4.  24  And  his  fame  went  throughout  all  Syria 

14.    1  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  fame  of 

Mark  1,  3S  And  immediately  his  fame  spread  abroad 


7. A  sound,  noise,  ^xos  ec^s- 

Luke  4.  37  And  the  fame  of  him  went  out  into  every 

SAVord,  \6yos  logos. 

Luke  5.  15  But  so  much  the  more  went  there  a  fame 
d.Fame,  saying,  <p-f}[iw  pheme. 

Matt.  9.  26  And  the  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into 

Luke  4.  14  there  went  out  a  fame  of  him  through 
FABLE,  to  spread  abroad  one's  — • 
To  say  throughout,  everywhere,  ota(p-q/j.i(o>  diaphe. 

Matt.  9.31  But  they . .  spread  abroad  his  fame  in  all 
FAMILIAR  — 
Peace,  prosperity,  completeness,  D17$  shalom. 

Psa.  41.    9  Yea,  mine  own  familiar  friend,  in  whom 

Jer.   20.  10  All  my  familiars  watched  for  my  halting 
FAMILIAR  friend  — 
To  be  known,  acquainted  with,  jn;  yada,  4. 

Job  19.  14  my  familiar  friends  have  forgotten  me 
FAMILIAR  spirit  — 
A  neckromancer,  21K  ob. 

Lev.  19.  31  Regard  not  them  that  have  familiar  spir. 
20.  6  the  soul  that  turnetn  after,  .familiar  spi. 
20.  27  A  man  also,  .that  hath  a  familiar  spirit 

Deut  18.  11  or  a  consulter  with  familiar  spirits,  or  a 

1  Sa.  28.    3  had  put  away  those  that  had  familiar  sp. 

28.  7  Seek  me  a  woman  that  hath  a  familiarsp. 
28.  7  Behold,  .a  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  s. 
28.   8  divine  unto  me  by  the  familiar  spirit 

28.  9  hath  cut  off  those  that  have  familiar  spi. 

2  Ki  21.    6  dealt  with  familiar  spirits  and  wizards 

23.  24  Moreover  the  (workers  with)  faniLiar  sp. 

1  Ch.io.  13  for  asking  (counsel)  of.  .a  familiar  spirit 

2  Ch.33.    6  dealt  with  a  familiar  spirit,  and  with  wiz. 
Isa.     8.  19  Seek  uuto  them  that  have  familiar  spirits 

19.    3  seek,  .to  them  that  have  familiar  spirits 

29.  4  as  of  one  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit,  out 

FAMILIES  — 

Infants,  household,  *p  taph. 

'Gen.  47.  12  with  bread  according  to  (their)  families 
FAMILY  — 
l.A  thousand,  ^N  eleph. 

Judg.  6.  15  behold,  my  family  (is)  poor  in  Manasseh 

2.House,  household,  n?3  bayith. 

1  Ch.13. 14  the  ark  of  God  remained  with  the  family 

2  Ch.35.    5,  12  to  the  divisions  of  the  families  of  the 
Psa.  68.   6  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families  :  he 

^.Family,  nns^p  niishpachah. 

Gen.  10.    5  every  one.  .after  their  families,  in  their 
10. 18  and  afterward  were  the  families  of  the 
10.  20  the  sons  of  Ham,  after  their  families 
10.  31  the  sons  of  Shem,  after  their  families 
10.  32  These,  .the  families  of  the  sons  of  Noah 
12.    3  in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be 
'  28.  14  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the 
36.  40  These,  .the  names,  .according  to  their  fa. 
Exod.  6.  14  Carmi :  these  (be)  the  families  of  Reuben 
6. 15  Shaul.  .these  (are)  the  families  of  Simeon 
6.  17  Libni  and  Shimi,  according  to  their  fam. 
6.  19  these  (are)  the  families  of  Levi  according 
6.  24  these  (are)  the  families  of  the  Korhites 
6.  25  these . .  the  heads . .  according  to  their  fa. 
12.  21  take  you  a  lamb  according  to  your  fanii. 
Lev.  20.    5  I  will  set  my  face,  .against  his  family 

25.  10  ye  shall  return  every  man  unto  his  family 
25.  41  and  shall  return  unto  his  own  family 
25.  45  and  of  their  families  that  (are),  with  you 
25.  47  or  to  the  stock  of  the  stranger's  family 
25.  49  or  (any)  that  is  nigh,  .of  his  family  may 
Num.  1.    2  Take  ye  the  sum  of  all.  .after  their  fami. 
1.  18  declared  their  pedigrees  after  their  fami. 

1.  20  of  the  children  of .  .after  their  families 
[So  in  v.  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42.] 

2.  34  they  set  forward,  every  one  after  their  f. 
3. 15  Number  the  children .  .by  their  families 

3.  18  these  (are)  the  names,  .by  their  families 
3. 19  the  sons  of  Kohath  by  their  families 

3.  20  the  sons  of  Merari  by  their  families 
3.  20  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Levites 
3.  21  Of  Gershon.  .the  family  of  the  Libnites 
3.  21  and  the  family  of  the  Shimites.  .families 
3.  23  The  families  of  the  Gershonites  shall 
3.  27  And  of  Kohath.  .the  family  of  the  A. 
3.  27  and  the  family  of  the  Izeharites 
3.  27  and  the  family  of  the  IIebronite3 
3.  27  and  the  family  of  the  Uzzielites 
3,  27  these  (are)  the  families  of  the  Kohathites 
3.  29  The  families  of  the  sons  of  Kohath  shall 
3.  30  And  the  chief,  .of  the  families  of  the  Ko. 
3.  33  Of  Merari.  .the  family  of  the  Mahlites 
3.  33  and  the  family  of  the  Mushites 
3.  33  these  (are)  the  families  of  Merari 
3.  35  And  the  chief,  .of  the  families  of  Merari 

3.  39  throughout  their  families,  all  the  males 

4.  2  the  sons  of  Levi,  after  their  families,  by 
4.  18  Cut  ye  not  off  the  tribe  of  the  families  of 
4.  22  of  the  sons  of  Gershon .  .by  their  families 
4.  24,  28,  33  This(is)theserviceof  thefamiliesof 
4.  29  thoushaltnumberthemaftertheirfamilies 
4.  34  numbered  the  sous,  .after  their  families 
4.  36  those  that  were  num>ered.  .by  their famil. 
4.  37  These,  .they  that  were  numbered  of  the  f. 
4.  38  the  sons  of  Gersbm,  throughout  their  f. 
4.  40  numbered  of  them,  throughout  their  fam. 
4.  41  they  that  were  numbered  of  the  families 
4. 42, 45  those  that  were  numbered  of  the  families 


Num.  4.  42  sons  of  Merari,  throughout  their  families 
4.  44  those  that  were  numbered,  .after  their  f. 
4.  46  numbered  of  the  Levites.  .after  their  fa. 
ii_  10  heard  the  people  weep  throughout  their  fa. 
26.    5  of  Reuben  ;  Hanoch.  .the  family  of  the  H. 
26.    5  of  Pallu,  the  family  of  the  Palluites 
26.    6  Of  Hezron,  the  family  of  the  Hezronites 
26.    6  of  Carmi,  the  family  of  the  Carmites 
26.    7  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Reubenites 
26.  12  The  sons  of  Simeon  after  their  families 
26.  12  of  Nemuel,  the  family  of  the  Nemuelites 
26.  12  of  Jamin,  the  family  of  the  Jaminites 
26.  12  of  Jachin,  the  family  of  the  Jachinites 
26.  13  Of  Zerah,  the  family  of  the  Zarhites 
*  26.  13  of  Shaul,  the  family  of  the  Shaulites 
26.  14  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Simeonites 
26.  15  The  children  of  Gad  after  their  families 
26.  15  of  Zephon,  the  family  of  the  Zephonites 
26.  15  of  Haggi,  the  family  of  the  Haggites 
26.  15  of  Shuni,  the  family  of  the  Shimites 
26.  16  Of  Ozni,  the  family  of  the  Oznites 
26.  16  of  Eri,  the  family  of  the  Erites 
26.  17  Of  Arod,  the  family  of  the  Arodites 
26.  17  of  Areli,  the  family  of  the  Arelites 
26.  18  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  children  of 
26.  20  the  sons  of  Judah  after  their  families 
26.  20  of  Shelah,  the  family  of  the  Shelanites 
26.  20  of  Pharez,  the  family  of  the  Pharzites 
26.  20  of  Zerah,  the  family  of  the  Zarhites 
26.  21  of  Hezron,  the  family  of  the  Hezronites 
26.  21  of  Hamul,  the  family  of  the  Hamulites 
26.  22  These  (are)  the  families  of  Judah  according 
26.  23  the  sons  of  Issachar,  after  them  families 
26.  23  (of)  Tola,  the  family  of  the  Tolaites 
26.  23  of  Pua,  the  family  of  the  Punites 
26.  24  of  Jashub,  the  family  of  the  Jashubites 
26.  24  of  Shimron,  the  family  of  the  Shimronites 
26.  25  These  (are)  the  families  of  Issachar 
26.  26  the  sons  of  Zebulun  after  their  families 
26.  26  of  Sered,  the  family  of  the  Sardites 
26.  26  of  Elon,  the  family  of  the  Elonites 
26.  26  of  Jahleel,  the  family  of  the  Jahleelites 
26.  27  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Zebulunites 
26.  28  The  sons  of  Joseph  after  their  families 
26.  29  of  Machir,  the  family  of  the  Machirites 
26. 29  of  Gilead.  .the  family  of  the  Gileadites 
26.  30  (of)  Jeezer,  the  family  of  the  Jeezerites 
26.  30  of  Helek,  the  family  of  the  Helekites 
26.  31  And(of)Asriel,  the  family  of  the  Asrielites 
26.  31  and  (of)  Shechem,  the  family  of  the  Shec. 
26.  32  And  (of)  Shemida,  the  family  of  the  Shem. 
26.  32  and  (of)  Hepher,  the  family  of  the  Heph. 
26.  34  These  (are)  the  families  of  Manasseh 
26.  35  the  sons  of  Ephraim  after  their  families 
26.  35  of  Shuthelah,  the  family  of  the  Shuthali 
26.  35  of  Becher,  the  family  of  the  Bachrites 
26.  35  of  Tahan,  the  family  of  the  Tahanites 
26.  36  of  Eran,  the  family  of  the  Eranites 
26.  37  These  (are)the  families  of  the  sons  of  Eph. 
26.  37  the  sons  of  Joseph  after  their  families 
26.  38  The  sons  of  Benjamin  after  their  families 
26.  38  of  Bela,  the  family  of  the  Belaites 
26.  38  of  Ashbel,  the  family  of  the  Ashbelites 
26.  38  of  Ahirani,  the  family  of  the  Ahiramites 
26.  39  Of  Shupham,  the  family  of  the  Shupham. 
26.  39  of  Hupham,  the  family  of  the  Huphamit. 
26.  40  (Of  Ard),  the  family  of  the  Ardites 
26.  40  of  Naaman,  the  family  of  the  Naamites 
26.  41  the  sons  of  Benjamin  after  their  families 
26.  42  These,  .the  sons  of  Dan  after  their  famil. 
26.  42  of  Shuham,  the  family  of  the  Shuhamites 
26.  42  These,  .the  families  of  Dan  after  their  fa. 
26.  43  All  the  families  of  the  Shuhamites,  accord. 
20.  44  the  children  of  Asher  after  their  families 
26.  44  of  Jimna,  the  family  of  the  Jimnites 
26.  44  of  Jesui,  the  family  of  the  Jesuites 
26.  44  of  Beriah,  the  family  of  the  Beriites 
26.  45  of  Heber,  the  family  of  the  Heberites 
26.  45  of  Malchiel,  the  family  of  the  Malchielit. 
26.  47  These,  .the  families  of  the  sons  of  Asher 
26.  48  the  sons  of  Naphtali  after  their  families 
26.  48  of  Jahzeel,  the  family  of  the  Jahzeelites 
26.  48  of  Guni,  the  family  of  the  Gunites 
26.  49  of  Jezer,  the  family  of  the  Jezerites 
26.  49  of  Shillem,  the  family  of  the  Shillemites 
26.  50  families  of  Naphtali  ace.  to  their  families 
26.  57  And  these,  .of  the  Levites  after  their  fa. 
26.  57  of  Gershon,  the  family  of  the  Gershonites 
26.  57  of  Kohath.  the  family  of  the  Kohathites 
26.  57  of  Merari,  the  family  of  the  Merarites 
26.  58  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Levites 
26.  58  the  family  of  the  Libnites,  the  family  of 
26.  58  the  family  of  the  Mahlites,  the  family  of 

26.  58  the  family  of  the  Kohathites 

27.  1  of  the  families  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  J. 
27.   4  be  done  away  from  among  his  family 

27.  11  kinsman  that  is  next  to  him  of  his  family 
33.  54  shall  divide  the  land,  .among  your  fami. 
36.    1  the  chief  fathers  of  the  families  of  the 
36.    1  of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Joseph 
36.    6  only  to  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  their 
36.    8  shall  be  wife  unto  one  of  the  family  of 
36.  12  they  were  married  into  the  families  of 
^6.  12  their  inheritance  remained  in . .  the  family 
Deutz9.  18  Lest  there  should  be  among  you.  .family 
Josh.  7.  14  the  tribe,  .shall  come  according  to  the  f. 
7.  14  and  the  family  which  the  Lord  shall  take 
7.  17  And  he  brought  the  family  of  Judah 
7.  17  and  he  took  the  family  of  the  Zarhites 
7.  17  and  he  brought  the  family  of  the  Zarhites 
13.  15  Moses  gave,  .according  to  their  families 
13.  23  This,  .of  Reuben  after  their  families 


FAMINE 


329 


PAR 


Josh.  1 3 

13- 
•13- 
*3- 
IS- 
i5> 
1 6. 
16. 
17- 
17- 
18. 
ig. 
19. 
ig. 
19. 
ig. 
19. 


Judg.  1 

9 

13 

17 

18 

18. 

18 

21. 

Ruth  2 

1  Sa.   9 


[Ch. 


5- 
6. 

6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 

Neh.  4! 
Esth.  9. 
Job  31. 
Psa.107. 
Jer.    1. 


31- 

^  33- 
Eze.  20. 
Amos  3. 

3- 
Mic.  2. 
Nah.  3. 
Zech.12. 


14 

4.  Family 

Eph.   3 


24  tribe  of  Gad.  .according  to  their  families 

28  inheritance,  .of  Gad  after  their  families 

29  the  half  tribe  of  Maiiasseh.  -by  their  fa. 

31  one  half,  .of  Machir  by  their  families 

1  the  tribe,  .of  Judah  by  their  families 
12,  20  of  Judah.  .according  tu  their  families 

5  Ephraim  according  to  their  families 
8  the  children  of  Ephraim  by  their  families 

2  the  children  of  Manasseh  by  theirfamilies 
2  male  children ..  of  Joseph  by  their  fami. 

ii,  20,  21,  28  Benjamin,  .according  to  their  f. 
1,  8  Simeon  according  to  their  families 
10,  16  Zebulun  according  to  their  families 
17,  23  Issachar  according  to  their  families 
24,  31  of  Asher  according  to  their  families 
32,  39  Naphtali  according  to  their  families 
40,  48  of  Dan  according  to  their  families 
.    4  And  the  lot  came  out  for  the  families  of 
.    5  Kohath  (had)  by  lot  out  of  the  families 
.   6  of  Gershon  (had)  by  lot  out  of  the  families 
.    7  The  children  of  Merari  by  their  families 
.  10  the  children  of  Aaron,  (being)  of  the  fa. 
.  20  the  families  of  the  children  of  Kohath 
;.  26  All  the  cities  (were)  teD..for  the  families 
.  27  children  of  Gershon,  of  the  families  of 
.  33  of  the  Gershonites  according  to  their  fa. 
.  34  unto  the  families  of  the  children  of  Merari 
.  40  for  the  children  of  Merari,  by  their  fam. 
.  40  which  were  remaining  of  the  families  of 

25  but  they  let  go  the  man  and  all  his  family 

1  communed  with  them,  and.  .all  the  fam. 

2  a  certain  man  of  Zorah,  of  the  family  of 
7  there  was  a  young  man.  .of  the  family  of 

,  2  the  children  of  Dan  sent  of  their  family 
ii  there  went  from  thence  of  the  family  of 
19  thou  be  a  priest  uuto  a.  .family  in  Israel? 

24  every  man  to  his  tribe  and  to  his  family 

1  a  mighty  man  of  wealth,  of  the  family  of  E. 
21  and  my  family  the  least  of  all  tlie  families 
21  to  come  near  by  theirfamilies,  the  family 
iS  what  (is)  my  life,  (or)  my  father's  family 

6  a  yearly  sacrifice  there  for  all  the  family 
29  Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee ;  for  our  family 

7  the  whole  family  is  risen  against  thine 
5  thence  came  out  a  man  of  the  family  of 

53  the  families  of  Kirjath-jearim ;  the  Itur. 
55  the  families  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt 

2  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Zorathites 

8  the  families  of  Aharhel  the  son  of  Haruni 
21  the  families  of  the  house  of  them  that 

27  neither  did  all  their  family  multiply,  like 
38  These  mentioned,  .princes  in  their  fami. 

7  his  brethren  by  their  families,  when  the 
19  these  are  the  families  of  the  Levites  ace. 

54  of  the  fam  .lies  of  the  Kohathites ;  for 

60  All  their  cities  throughout  their  families 

61  sons  of  Kohath.  .left  of  the  family  of 

62  sons  of  Gershom,  throughout  their  fami. 

63  sons  of  Merari.  .throughout  their  famil. 
66  And.  .of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Koh. 

70  Bileam  with  her  suburbs,  for  the  family 

71  out  of  the  family  of  the  half  tribe  of  Ma. 
5  their  brethren  among  all  the  families  of 

13  I  even  set  the  people  after  their  families 

28  every  family,  every  province,  and  every 
.  34  or  did  the  contempt  of  families  terrify 

41  and  maketh  (Trim)  families  like  a  flock 
15  I  will  call  all  the  families  of  the  kingdo. 
4  Hear,  .all  the  families  of  the  house  of  I. 

14  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  .two  of  a  f. 

3  residue  of  them  that  remain  of  this  evil  f. 

25  Pour  out  thy  fury . .  upon  the  families  that 

9  I  will  send  and  take  all  the  families  of 
1  will  I  be  the  God  of  all  the  families  of  Is. 

24  The  two  families  which  the  Lord  hath 

32  We  will  be  as  the  heathen,  as  the  families 

1  children  of  Israel,  against  the  whole  fam. 

2  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families 

3  saith  the  Lord  ;  Behold,  against  this  fa. 

4  selleth.  .families  through  her  witchcrafts 
12  the  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart 
12  the  family  of  the  house  of  David  apart 

12  the  family  of  the  house  of  Nathan  apart 

13  The  family  of  the  house  of  Levi  apart 

13  the  family  of  Shimei  apart,  and  their 

14  All  the  families  that  remain,  every  family 

17  whoso  will  not  come  up  of  (all)  the  fami. 

18  And  if  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up 

{one's  own),  Trarptd  patria. 

15  Of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and 


FAMINE  — 

\. Famine,  hunger,  |33  Jcaphan. 

Job     5.  22  At  destruction  and  famine  thou  shalt  la. 
30.    3  For  want  and  famine . .  solitary ;  fleeing 

2,  Hunger,  famine,  3^"i  raab. 

Gen.  12.  10  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land  :  and  A. 
12.  10  for  the  famine  (was)  grievous  in  the  land 
26.    1  And  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land 
26.    1  beside  the  first  famine  tiiat  was  in  the 
41.  27  seven  empty,  .shall  be  seven  years  of  fa. 
41.  30  there  shall  arise,  .seven  years  of  famine 
41.  30  and  the  famine  shall  consume  the  land 
41.  31  shall  not  be  known .  .by  reason  of  that  f. 
41.  36  store,  .against  the  seven  years  of  famine 
41.  36  that  the  land  perish  not  through  the  fam. 
41.  50  born  two  sons  before  the  years  of  famine 
41. 56  the  famine  was  over  all  the  face  of  the 
41.  56  the  famine  waxed  sore  in  the  land  of  Eg. 

41.  57  because  that  the  famine  was  (so)  sore  in 

42.  5  for  the  famine  was  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

42 


Gen.  43. 

45- 
45- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 

Ruth  1. 

2  Sa.  21. 

24. 


:KL 

:Ki. 


:Ch.: 
>Ch.: 


Job 
Psa. 


Isa. 
Jer, 


1  And  the  famine  (was)  sore  in  the  land 

6  For  these  two  years  (hath)  the  famine 

11  for  yet  (there  are)  five  years  of  famine 
4  for  the  famine  (is)  sore  in  the  land  of  Ca. 

13  the  famine  (was)  very  sore,  so  that  the 
13  of  Canaan,  fainted  by  reason  of  the  famine 
20  because  the  famine  prevailed  over  them 
1  came  to  pass,  .that  there  was  a  famine 

1  there  was  a  famine  in  the  days  of  David 
13  Shall  seven  years  of  famine  come  unto 
37  If  there  be  in  the  land  famine,  if  there  be 

2  And  (there  was)  a  sore  famine  in  Samaria 
25  And  there  was  a  great  famine  in  Samaria 

4  then  the  famine  (is)  in  the  city,  and  we 

1  for  the  Lord  hath  called  for  a  famine 

3  And  on  the  ninth .  .the  famine  prevailed 

12  Either  three  years'  famine  ;  or  three  mo. 
9  If.  .evil  cometh  upon  us.  .or  famine,  we 

11  Hezekiah  persuade  you.,  to  die  by  famine 

20  In  famine  he  shall  redeem  thee  from 
19  and  to  keep  them  alive  in  famine 
16  Moreover  he  called  for  a  famine  upon  the 
30  I  will  kill  thy  root  with  famine,  and  he 
19  the  famine,  and  the  sword  :  by  whom 

12  neither  shall  we  see  sword  nor  famine 
22  sons  and  then*  daughters  shall  die  by  fa. 

12  but  I  will  consume  them,  .by  the  famine 

13  neither  shall  ye  have  famine;  but  I  will 
15  say,  Sword  and  famine  shall  not  be  in  this 

15  By  sword  and  famine  shall  those  prophets 

16  because  of  the  famine  and  the  sword 
18  behold  tliem  that  are  sick  with  famine  ! 

2  such  as  (are)  for  the  famine,  to  the  famine 

4  and  they  shall  be  consumed,  .by  famine 

21  deliver  up  their  children  to  the  famine 

7  I  will  deliver  Zedekiah . .  from  the  famine 
9  He  that  abideth . .  shall  die . .  by  the  famine 

10  I  will  send  the  sword,  the  famine,  and 

8  that  nation  will  I  punish . .  with  the  fam. 
13  Why  will  ye  die.  .by  the  famine,  and  by 

17  will -send  upon  them  the  sword,  the  fam. 

18  I  will  persecute  them . .  with  the  famine 
24  because  of  the  sword,  and  of  the  famine 
36  It  shall  be  delivered,  .by  the  famine,  and 
17  liberty,  .to  the  pestilence,  and  to  the  fa. 

2  He  that  remaineth.  .shall  die.  .by  the  fa. 

16  the  famine,  whereof  ye  were  afraid,  shall 

17  they  shall  die  by  the  sword,  by  the  famine 

22  know,  .that  ye  shall  die.  .by  the  famine 
12  they  shall,  .be  consumed,  .by  the  famine 

12  they  shall  die.  .by  the  sword  and.  .famine 

13  I  have  punished  Jerusalem .  .by  the  fam. 

18  and  have  been  consumed,  .by  the  famine 
27  men  of  Judah.  .shall  be  consumed.,  by.,  f. 

6  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  city,  so  that 

10  Our  skin  was  black,  .because  of  the.  .fa. 
12  with  famine  shall  they  be  consumed  in 
16  I  shall  send,  .the  evil  arrows  of  famine 

16  I  will  increase  the  famine  upon  you 

17  So  will  I  send  upon  you  famine  and  evil 

11  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  by  the  fam. 

12  he  that,  .is  besieged  shall  die  by  the  fam. 
15  and  the  pestilence  and  the  famine  within 

15  he  that  (is)  in  the  city,  famine  and  pestil. 

16  I  will  leave  a  few  men.  .from  the  famine 

13  and  will  send  famine  upon  it,  and  will 
21  send  my  four  sore  judgments,  .famine 

29  I  will  also  save  yon.  .and  lay  no  famine 

30  ye  shall  receive  no  more  reproach  of  fam. 
11  that  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the  land 
11  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  w. 

Z. Hunger,  famine,  psjH  reabon. 

Gen.  42. 19  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of  your  houses 

42.  33  take  (food  foi)  the  famine  of  your  house. 

Psa.  37. 19  in  the  days  of  famine  they  shall  be  satis. 

^.Hunger,  famine,  \ip.6s  linws. 

Matt  24.  7  there  shall  be  famines,  and  pestilences 
Marki3_  8  and  there  shall  be  famines  and  troubles 
Luke  4.  25  widows  were  in  Israel,  .when  great  fam. 
15.  14  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land 
21.  11  great  earthquakes  shall  be.  .and  famines 
Rom.  8.  35  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ? 
Rev.  18.    8  shall  her  plagues  come  in  one  day.  .fam. 

FATVTTSH,  to  — 

To  make  lean,  famish,  ."in  razah. 

Zeph.  2. 1 1  for  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth 
FAMISH,  to  suffer  to  — 
To  cause  to  hunger,  3;h  raeb,  5. 

Prov.io.   3  Lord  will  not  suffer  the  soul,  .to  famish 
FAMISHED  — 
Hunger,  3jn  raab. 

Isa.     5.  13  and  their  honourable  men  (are)  famished 
FAMISHED,  to  be  — 
To  be  hungry,  3y*i  raeb. 

Gen.  41.  55  when  all  the  land  of  Egypt  was  famished 
FAMOUS  — 
l.Honourable,  VW  addir. 

Psa.  136.  18  And  slew  famous  kings  :  for  his  mercy 

Eze.  32.  18  and  the  daughters  of  the  famous  nations^ 

2.Called,  K"jn  qara. 

NUU126.    9  Dathan  and  Abiram.  .famous  in  the  con. 
Z.CaUed,  N'lf?  qari. 

Num.  16.   2  famous  in  the  congregation,  men  of  ren. 
4.A  name,  cy  shem. 

Ruth  4. 11  do  thou  worthily,  .and  be  famous  in  Bet. 


32- 

5- 

33- 
105. 

14. 

5i- 
5- 

11. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

15- 

16. 

18. 

21. 

21. 

24. 

27. 

27. 

29. 

29. 

32- 

32- 

34- 

38. 

42. 

42. 

42. 

44. 

44. 

44- 

44. 

44. 

52. 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 


14. 
14. 
36- 
36- 
Amos  S. 


Lam. 
Eze. 


1  Ch.  5.  24  mighty  men  of  valour,  famous  men 

12.  30  the  children  of  Ephraim.  .famous  throu. 
Eze.  23.  10  and  she  became  famous  amongst  women 

FAMOUS,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  known,  jn;  yada,  2. 

Psa.  74.    5  was  famous  according  as  he  had  lifted 

2.To  be  called,  top  qara,  2. 

Ruth  4.  14  that  his  name  may  be  famous  in  Israel 

FAN  — 

l.Fan,  rnjp  mizreh. 

Isa.  30.24  winnowed  with  the  shovel  and.  .the  fan 
Jer.  15.   7  I  will  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  the  gates 

'2. Fan,  trrvov  ptuon. 

Matt.  3.  12  Whose  fan  (is)  in  his  hand,  and  he  will 
Luke  3.  17  Whose  fan  (is)  in  his  hand,  and  he  will 

FAN,  to  — 

l.To  scatter,  fan,  winnow,  rnj  zarah. 

Isa.   41.  16  Thou  shalt  fan  them,  and  the  wind  shall 
Jer.     4. 11  A  dry  wind,  .not  to  fan,  nor  to  cleanse 
15.    7  I  will  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  the  gates 

2. To  scatter,  winnow,  rni  zarah,  3. 

Jer.  51.    2  send  unto  Babylon  fanners,  that  shall  fan 

FANNER  — 

To  be  strange,  "rtT  zur. 

Jer.  51.   2  And  will  send  unto  Babylon  fanners,  that 
FAR  — 
1. Might,  exceedingly,  ikd  vieod. 

Judg  ig.  11  when  they  (were)  by  Jebus,  the  day  was  f. 

Psa.  97.   9  Lord  . .  thou  art  exalted  far  above  all  gods 

Jer.  49.  30  Flee,  get  you  far  off,  dwell  deep,  u  ye  in. 

2.Far  off,  pir^B  merch-aq. 

2  Sa.  15.  17  and  tarried  in  a  place  that  was  far  off 
Prov.25.  25  so  (is)  good  news  from  a  far  country 
Isa.     8.   9  and  give  ear,  all  ye  of  far  countries  :  gird 

10.    3  desolation  (which)  shall  come  from  far? 
77. 13  they  shall  flee  far  off,  and  shall  be  chased 
30.  27  the  name  of  the  Lord  cometh  from  far 
46.  11  man  that  executethmy  counsel  from  a  far 
Jer.     4.  16  watchers  come  from  a  far  country,  and 

5.  15  I  will  bring  a  nation  upon  you  from  far 

6.  20  and  the  sweet  came  from  a  far  country? 
Eze.  23.  40  ye  have  sent  for  men  to  come  from  far 

3. Far,  far  off,  afar,  p'trn  rachoq. 

Deut2S.  49  bring  a  nation  against  thee  from  far,  from 

29.  22  the  stranger  that  shall  come  from  a  far 
Josh.  9.    6  We  be  come  from  a  far  country  :  now 

9.    9  From  a  very  far  country  thy  servants  are 
9.  22  We  (are)  very  far  from  you  ;  when  ye  dw. 
Judgi8.    7  and  they  (were)  far  from  the  Zidonians 
18.  28  no  deliverer,  because  it  (was)  far  from  Z. 

1  Ki.  8.  41  a  stranger,  that.. cometh  out  of  a  far  co. 

8.  46  they  carry  them  away  captives,  .far  or 

2  Ki.20.  14  Hezekiah  said,  They  are  come  from  a  far 
2  Ch.  6.  32  stranger,  .is  come  from  a  far  country  for 
Neh.  4.  19  we  are  separated,  .one  far  from  another 
Esth.  9.  20  sent  letters  unto  all.  .(both)  nigh  and  far 
Psa.  22. 


-^    II9" 
Prov  15. 


Eccl. 
Isa. 


Jer. 


1  (why  art  thou  so)  far  from  helping  me 
155  Salvation  (is)  far  from  the  wicked :  for 
29  The  Lord  (is)  far  from  the  wicked :  but 
10  virtuous  woman?  for  her  price  (is). far 
23  I  will  be  wise  ;  but  it  (was)  far  from  me 
5.  26  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations  from  far 
22.    3  bound  together,  (which),  .fled  from  far 
39.    3  Hezekiah  said,  They  are  come  from  a  far, 
43.    6  bring  my  sons  from  far,  and  my  daught. 
46.  12  ye  stout  hearted,  that  (are)  far  from  rigt. 
49.    1  hearken,  ye  people,  from  far ;  The  Lord 
49.  12  Behold,  these  shall  come  from  far ;  and 
60.    4  thy  sons  shall  come  from  far,  and  thy  da. 
60.   9  to  bring  thy  sons  from  far,  their  silver 
12.   2  thou  (art)  Dear  in  their  mouth,  and  far 
25.  26  all  the  kings  of  the  north,  far  and  near 
48.  24  upon  all  the  cities,  .of  Moab,  far  or  near 
Eze.  22.    5  (Those  that  be)  near,  and  (those  that  be)  f. 
Hab.  1.    8  and  their  horsemen  shall  come  from  far 

4. Far,  far  off,  afar,  p'rn  rachiq. 

Ezra   6.    6  Now  (therefore),  .be  ye  far  from  thence 

5. To  be  far,  pro  rachah. 

Josh.  3.  16  upon  an  heap  very  far  from  the  city  Adam 
Psa.103.  12  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  (so) 

6. Far  off,  a  long  way  off,  fxaKpav  makran. 

Mar.  12.  34  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God 
Luke  7.    6  when  he  was  now  not  far  from  the  house 
John.2x.    8  they  were  not  far  from  land,  but  as  it 
Acts  17.  27  though  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us 

7. Far,  far  off,  fxatcpSs  makros. 

Lukeis.  13  took  his  journey  into  a  far  country,  and 
19.  12  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far  country 

S. Forwards,  far  off,  irSppw  porrko. 

Matti5.    8  This  people,  .but  their  heart  is  far  from 
Mark  7.    6  This  people,  .but  their  heart  is  far  from 

9.  Much  more,  Tro\\$  fiaWov  polio  mallon. 

Phil.   1.  23  and  to  be  with  Christ ;  which  is  far  better 

10.  From  before,  "U|D  minneged. 

Judg.  9. 17  adventured  his  life  far,  and  delivered 

11.  Separation,  imjntrity,  rru  niddah. 

Eze.    7. 20  therefore  have  I  set  it  far  from  them 
[See  also  Above,  away,  drive,  flee.go,  keep,  put,  remove, 
thus,  withdraw.] 


FAR 


330 


FASTEN 


FAR  above  — 

Over  above,  vwepdvai  huperano. 

Eph.    i.  2r  Far  above  all  principality,  and  power 

4. 10  the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far  above 

FAB,  abroad  — 

Afar,  far,  far  off,  piiri  rachoq. 

2  Ch.26.  15  his  name  spread  far  abroad;  for  he  was 

FAR  away,  to  be  — 

To  be  far  off,  prn  rachaq. 

Isa.  49.  19  they  that  swallowed  thee  up .  .be  far  away 

FAR  away,  to  put  — 

To  put  far  off,  prj"J  rachaq,  5. 

"     11. 14  iniquity  (be)  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far  away 


Job 
Psa. 


8  put  away  mine  acquaintance  far  from  me 

FAR,  be  — 

1. Profanation,  np'pn  chalilah. 

Gen.  18.  25  That  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this 
18.  25  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be  far  from  thee 

1  SaJ  2.  30  Be  it  far  from  me ;  for  them  that  honour 

20.  9  Far  be  it  from  thee  :  for  if  I  knew 

22.  15  enquire  of  God  for  him  ?  be  it  far  from  me 

2  Sa.  20.  20  Far  be  it,  far  be  it  from  thee,  that  I  sh. 

23.  17  Be  it  far  from  me,  O  Lord,  that  I  should 
Job   34.  10  Far  be  it  from  God,  (that  he  should  do) 

2.  Be  kind  to  thyself  'Ih^ws  oroi  Mhos  soi. 

Matti6.  22  Be  it  far  from  thee,  Lord ;  this  shall  not 

FAR,  to  be  — 

To  be  far  off,  prn  rachaq. 

Job     5.    4  His  children  are  far  from  safety,  and  they 

21.  16  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me 

22.  xS  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me 
Psa.  22.  11  Be  not  far  from  me;  for  trouble  (is)  near 

22. 19  But  be  not  thou  far  from  me,  0  Loud 
35.  22  keep  not  silence.  .Lord,  be  not  far  from 
38.  21  Forsake  me  not.  .my  God,  be  not  far  from 
71. 12  be  not  far  from  me  :  O  my  God,  make 
109.  17  delighted  not  in  blessing,  so  let  it  be  far 
119.  150  They  draw  nigh,  .they  are  far  from  thy 
Prov  22.    5  he  that  doth  keep  his  soul  shall  be  far 
Isa.  54.  14  thou  shalt  be  far  from  oppression;  for 

59.    9  Therefore  is  judgment  far  from  us,  neither 
Lam.  1.  16  because  the  comforter,  .is  far  from  me 

FAR  country  — ■ 

Afar,  far  off,  prn  a  merchaq. 

Zech.io.    9  they  shall  remember  me  in  far  countries 

FAR,  dwell  in  — 

Afar,  far  of,  prpip  merchaq. 

Jer.  8.  19  because  of  them  that  dwell  in  a  far  country 

FAR,  to  get  — 

To  be  far  off,  prn  rachaq. 

Eze.  11   15  Get  you  far  from  the  LORD  :  unto  us  is 

FAR  hence  — 

A  long  way,  far  off,  paKpdu  makran. 

Acts  22.  21  I.  .send  thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles 
FAR  off  — 
\.  A  far,  far  off,  prpp  merchaq. 

Isa.    17.  13  and  they  shall  flee  far  off,  and  shall  be 
2.  Far,  far  off,  pirn  rachoq. 

Deut.13.    7  nigh  unto  thee,  or  far  off  from  thee,  from 
20.  15  cities  (which  are)  very  far  off  from  thee 
30.  11  it  (is)  not  hidden,  .neither  (is)  it  far  off 

2  Ch.  6.  36  away  captives  unto  a  land  far  off  or  near 

Prov  27.  10  a  neighbour,  .near,  .than  a  brother  far  off 

Eccl.  7.  24  That  which  is  far  off,  and  exceeding  deep 

Isa.    33.  13  Hear,  ye  (that  are)  far  off,  what  I  have 
57.    9  didst  send  thy  messengers  far  off,  and  didst 
57.  19  Peace,  peace  to  (him  that  is)  far  off,  and 

Eze.    6.  12  He  that  is  far  off  shall  die  of  the  pestil. 
12.  27  prophesieth  of  the  times  (that  are)  far  off 

Dan.  9.    7  unto  alllsrael.  .(that  are)  far  off,  through 

Joel    3.    8  sell  them  to  the  Sabeans,  to  a  people  far  off 

Zech.  6.  1 5  they  (that  are)  far  off  shall  come  and  build 
Z.From  before,  ijp  minneged. 

Num.  2.    2  far  off  about,  the  tabernacle  of  the  congre. 
4.  To  p at  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Gen.  44.   4  gone  out  of  the  city,  (and)  not  (yet)  far  off 
6.  A  long  way,  far  off,  fianpav  makran. 

Eph.   2.  13  ye  who  sometime  were  far  off  are  made 
FAR,  from  — 
Wroth  far  off,  (.LaitpSdev  mahrothen. 

Mark  3.    3  faint,  .for  divers  of  them  came  from  far 
FAR,  thus  — 
Up  to  this,  ecas  tovtov  heOs  touton. 

Lukc-22.  51  And  Jesus  answered.  .Suffer  ye  thus  far 
FAR  off,  to  be  — 
Far  iff,  to  /*■,  prn  rachaq. 

Isa.    46. 13  it  shall  not  be  far  off,  and  my  salvation 
59.  11  for  salvation,  (but)  it  is  far  off  from  us 
FAR  off,  to  cast  — 
To  put  few  <ff,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Eze.  11.  16  I  have  cast  thein  far  off  among  the  heat. 
FAR  off,  very  — 
After,  fir  off,  prn-?  merchaq. 

Isa.    33.  17  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  very  far  off 


FAR  off,  to  (wander)  — 

To  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Psa.  '55.    7  Lo,  (then)  would  I  wander  far  off,  (and) 

FAR  passed  — 

Much,  many,  tto\vs  polus. 

Mark  6.  35  disciples,  .said,  .now the  time  (is)  far  pa. 

FAR,  to  put  — 

To  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Job   19.  13  He  hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me 
Psa.  88.  18  Lover  and  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from 
Prov.  4.  24  and  perverse  lips  put  far  from  thee 

FAR  removed,  to  be  — 
To  he  far  off,  prn  rachaq. 

Mic.   7. 11  that  day  shall  the  decree  be  far  removed 

FAR  richer,  to  be  — 

To  make,  great  wealth,  Vna  Tgty  rrV'V  asah  oshergad. 
Dan.  11.  2  fourth  shall  be'  far  richer  than  (they)  all 

FAR  spent  —  ttoKvs  poluSt 

Mark  6.  35  when  the  day  was  now  far  spent,  his  dis. 
FAR,  that  are  — 
Far  off,  afar,  prn  raclieq. 

Psa.  73.  27  they  "that  are  far  from  thee  shall  perish 
FAR,  to  be  too  — 
To  be  far  off,  prn  rachaq, 

Deuti2.  21  If  the  place.. there  be  too  far  from  thee 
14.  24  if  the  place  be  too  far  from  thee,  which 
FARE  — 
Peace,  propriety,  completeness,  DiSy  shalom. 

1  Sa.  17.  18  look  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  take  their 
FARE  — 

Hire,  reward,  "ipc'  sakar. 

Jon.    1.    3  so  he  paid  the  fare  thereof,  and  went 
FARE,  to  — 
To  make  merry,  ev<ppa(vca  euphraino. 

Lukei6. 19  clothed,  .and  fared  sumptuously  every  day 

FAREWELL,  or  FARE  YE  WELL  — 
l.To  make  strong,  fiwvvv^it  rhunnumi. 

Acts  15.  29  abstain,  .ye  shall  do  well.     Fare  ye  well 
23.  30  what  they  had  against  him.    [Farewell] 

2. To  rejoice,  yafpw  chairo. 

2  Co.  13.  11  Finally,  brethren,  farewell.     Be  perfect 
FAREWELL,  to  bid  — 

To  arrange  off  from,  air  or  da  a  o  pat  apotassomai. 

Luke  q.  61  bid  them  farewell,  which  are  at  home  at 

Acts  18.  21  bade  them  farewell,  saying,  I  must  byall 
FARM  — 
Field  (cultivated),  aypos  agros. 

Matt22.    5  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  nierchan. 
FARTHER  side,  the  — 
The  other  side,  beyond,  to  irepat/  to  peran. 

Markio.    1  the  coasts,  .by  the  farther  side  of  Jordan 
FARTHING  — 
X.Assarion,  (1-tenth  of  a  denarius),  aao-dptov. 

Matt  10.  29  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing? 

Lukei2.    6  Are  not  five  sparrows,  .for  two  farthings? 
'I.Quadrans,  (1-fourth  of  an  as.^,  Kob*pdvTws  kodra. 

Matt.  5.  26  till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost  farthing 

Marki2.  42  threw  in  two  mites,  which  make  a  forth. 

FASHION  — 

I. Likeness,  nSEH  demuth. 

2  Ki.  16. 10  the  fashion  of  the  altar,  and  the  pattern 

^.Judgment,  rule,  OEtfto  mishpat. 

Exod26.  30  the  tabernacle  according  to  the  fashion 
1  Ki.   6.  38  and  according  to  all  the  fashion  of  it 
Eze.  42. 11  (were)  both  according  to  their  fashions 

3. Preparation,  establishment,  n^ifl  techunah. 

Eze.  43.  11  form  of  thehouse,  and  the  fashion  thereof 
4.  Thing  seen,  sight,  appearance,  elSos  eidos. 

Luke  9.  29  fashion  of  his  countenance  was  altered 
.r\/'",v,  countenance,  wpSaco-jrov  prosqpon. 

Jas.     1.  11  the  grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  perisheth 
6. Scheme,  axn^  schema. 

1  Co.  7.  31  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away 

Phil.  2.    8  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man.  he  hum. 
7. Type,  model,  tvttos  tupos. 

Acts    7.  44  according  to  the  fashion  that  he  had  seen 
FASHION,  on  this  — 
Thus,  ovtws  houtos. 

Mark  2.  12  saying,  We  never  saw  it  on  this  fashion 
FASHION,  to  — 
1.7*0  form,  fro \me,  "is;  yatsar. 

Psa.  33.  15  He  fashioneth  their  hearts  alike;  he  con. 

Isa.   22.  11  respect  unto  him  that  fashioned  it  long 
44. 12  fashioneth  it  with  hammers,  aud  worketh 
45.   9  Shall  the  clay  say  to  him  that  fashioneth 

2.2b  prepare,  set  up,  pa  kun,  3a. 

Job   31.  15  and  did  not  one  fashion  as  in  the  womb  ? 

Psa.119.  73  Thy  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned 
3.7*0  do,  nyii  asah. 

Job  10.    8  Thine  hands  have  made  me,  and  fashioned 


4.  To  fashion,  co)npress,  "ns  tsur. 

Exod32.    4  fashioned  it  with  a  graving  tool,  after 

FASHION  one's  self  according  to,  to  — 
To  form  with,  conform  to,  o-vaxyp-aTlfa  suschema. 
1  Pe.  1.  14  not  fashioning  yourselves  according  to 

FASHIONED,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  formed,  -is;  yatsar,  4. 

Psa.  139.  16  (which)  in  continuance  were  fashioned 
2.7*0  be  prepared,  set  up,  pa  kun,  2. 

Eze.  16.   7  (thy)  breasts  are  fashioned,  and  thine 
FASHIONED  like  unto,  to  be  — 
Having  same  form  with,  o-vp(xop<pos  su  mmoiplws. 

Phil.   3.  21  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body 
FAST  — 
1. Speedily,  diligently,  carefully,  Ni"!5PX  osparna. 

Ezra  5.    8  tins  work  goeth  fast  on,  and  prospereth 
2.7*o  bind,  ipx  asar. 

Judgi5. 13  we  will  bind  thee  fast,  and  deliver  thee 

16. 11  If  they  bind  me  fast  with  new  ropes  that 

3. Might,  [with),  1«!3  mcod. 

Jer.  48.  16  calamity,  .and  his  affliction  hasteth  fast 

4.7*0  restrain,  keep  in,  *isjj  a  tsar. 

Gen.  20.  18  the  Lord  had  fast  closed  up  all  the  womba 
5.A  fast,  D>s  tsum. 

1  Ki.  21.    9  Proclaim  a  fast,  and  set  Naboth  on  high 

21. 12  They  proclaimed  a  fast,  and  set  Naboth 

2  Ch.20.    3  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  all  Judah 
Ezra  8.  21  I  proclaimed  a  fast  there,  at  the  river 
Isa.   58.    3  in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  pleasure 

58.   5  Is  it  such  a  fast  that  I  have  chosen? 
58.    5  thou  call  this  a  fast,  and  an  acceptable 
58.    6  (Is)  not  this  the  fast  that  1  have  chosen  ? 
Jer.  36.    9  they  proclaimed  a  fast  before  the  Lord 
Joel    1.  14  Sanctify  ye  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 

2.  15  sanctify  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 
Jon.    3.    5  proclaimed  a  fast,  and  put  on  sackcloth 
Zech.  8.  19  The  fast  of  the  fourth  (month),  and  the  f. 
8. 19  the  fast  of  the  seventh,  and  the  fast 
6. A  fasting,  fhstj  vvo-re7a  nesteia. 

Acts  27.    9  because  the  fast  was  now  already  past 
[See  also  Abide,  asleep,  cleave,  hold,  keep,  set,  stand, 
stick.] 


FAST,  to  — 

1.  To  fast,  bis  tsum. 

Judg.20.  26  and  fasted  that  day  until  even,  and 

1  Sa.    7.    6  And  they . .  fasted  on  that  day.  and  said 

31.  13  they  took  their  bones.. and  fasted  seven 

2  Sa.    1.  12  mourned  and  wept,  and  fasted  until  even 

12.  21  Thou  didst  fast  and  weep  for  the  child 
12.  22  While  the  child  was  yet  alive,  I  fasted  and 
12.  23  now  he  is  dead,  wherefore  should  I  fast? 
1  Ki.  21.  27  fasted,  and  lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went 

1  Ch.io.  12  buried  their  bones,  .and  fasted  seven  d. 
Ezra  8.  23  So  we  fasted,  and  besought  our  God  for 
Neh.  1.  4  and  mourned  (certain)  days,  and  fasted 
Esth.  4. 16  gather  together  all  the  Jews.,  and  fast  ye 

4.  16  I  also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  likewise 
Isa.  58.    3  Wherefore  have  we  fasted,  (say  they) 
58.    4  Behold,  ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate 
58.    4  ye  shall  not  fast  as  (ye  do  this)  day,  to 
Jer.  14.  12  When  they  fast,  I  will  not  hear  their  cry 
Zech.  7.    5  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth 
7.    5  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me,  (even)  to  me  ? 
2.Tofast  a  fast,  Dte  nix  tsum  tsom. 

2  Sa.  12.  16  David  fasted,  and  went  in,  and  lay  all 
3. 7*o  fast,  vrjarevu  nesteuo. 

Matt.  4.    2  when  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty 
6. 16  Moreover,  when  ye  fast,  be  not,  as  the 
6.  16  that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast 
6.  17  But  thou,  when  thou  fastest,  anoint  thine 
6.  18  That  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast 
9.  14  Pharisees  fast  oft,  but  thy  disciples  fast 
9.  15  days  will  come,  .and  then  shall  they  fast 
Mark  2.  18  the  Pharisees  fast,  but  thy  disciples  fast 
2.  19  [Can.  .children  of  the  bridechamberfa.l 
2.  19  as  long  as  they  have,  .they  cannot  fast 
2.  20  and  then  shall  they  fast  in  those  (lays 
Luke  5.  33  Why  do  the  disciples  of  John  fast  often 
5.  34  Can  ye  make  the  children,  .fast  while  the 
5.  35  and  then  shall  they  fast  in  those  days 
18.  12  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of 
Acts  10.  30  Four  days  ago  I  was  [fasting]  until  this 
13.    2  As  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fast. 
13.    3  And  when  they  had  fasted  and  prayed 

FAST,  used  to  — 

Thry  ire rr  fasting,  r\aav  v7}(Ttzvovt£$  esan  n~sl.  uon, 
Mark  2.  18  And  the  disciples  of  John. .used  to  fast 

FAST,  to  make  — 

7*o  make  firm,  fixed ',  sure,  aa(pa\tC<*>  (tsphalizo. 
Acts  16.  24  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks 

FASTEN,  to  — 

1.7*o  lay  hold,  »n*i  acliaz. 

1  Ki.  6.    6  (the  beams)  should  not  be  fastened  in  the 
Esth.  1.    6  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and  pu. 

2.7*0  strengthen,  harden,  fix,  pin  chazak,  3. 

Isa.  41.    7  he  fastened  it  with  nails,  (that)  it  should 
Jer.  10.    4  they  fasten  it  with  nails  and  with  ham. 


FASTEN 


331 


FATHER 


S.To  give,  \ni  nathan. 

EXOCI28.  14' fasten  the  wreathen  chains  to  the  ouches 
'   28.  25  two  wreathen  (chains)  thou  shalt  fasten 
39.  18  two  ends,  .they  fastened  in  the  two  ouc. 

39.  31  to  fasten  (it)  on  high  upon  the  mitre  ;  as 

40.  iS  Moses  reared  up  the  tabernacle,  and  fas. 

4.  To  cause  to  alight,  to  fasten,  ru>'  tsanach. 

Judg.  4.  2i~smote  the  nail,  .and  fastened  it  into  the 

5.  To  strike,  Jix,  j/pi?  taqa. 

Judg  16. 14  she  fastened  (it)  with  the  pin,  and  said 
1  Sa.  31.  10  and  they  fastened  his  body  to  the  wall  of 

1  Ch.ro.  to  fastened  his  head  in  the  temple  of  Dagon 
Isa.  22.  23  I  will  fasten  him  (as)  a  nail  in  a  sure 

22.  25  the  nail  that  is  fastened  in  the  sure  place 
FASTEN  on,  to  — 
To  fit  or  fix  down  on,  KaQaTrro*  katJmpio. 

Acts  28.   3  a  viper  out  of  the  heat,  and  fastened  on 
FASTEN  one's  eyes,  to  — 
To  look  intently,  areu'i^ca  atenizd. 

Luke  4.  20  eyes  of  all.  .in  the  synagogue  were  faste. 

Acts    3.  4  Peter,  fastening  his  eyes  upon  him  with 
rr.    6  when  I  had  fastened  mine  eyes,  I  consid. 
FASTENED  — 
l.To  be  prepared,  set  up,  established,  pa  hum,  6. 

Eze.  40.  43  within  (were)  hooks,  an  hand  broad,  fas. 

2.  To  plant,  yoj  nata. 

Eccl.  12. 1 1  words  of  the  wise  (are) . .  as  nails  fastened 

3.  To  be  joined,  coupled,  fastened,  isy  tsamad,  4. 

2  Sa.20.,  8  upon  it  a  girdle  (with)  a  sword  fastened 
FASTENED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  laid  hold  of,  mx  achaz,  6. 

2  Ch.  9.  t8  six  steps,  .(which  were)  fastened  to  the 
2.To  be  sunk,  yap  taba,  6. 

Job  38.   6  are  the  foundations  thereof  fastened  ?  or 
FASTING  — 
1. Fasting,  np  tevath. 

Dan.   6.  18  Then  the  king,  .passed  the  night  fasting 
2. Fasting,  Dia  tsom. 

Neh.  9.    1  children  of  Israel  were  assembled  with  f. 

Esth.  4.    3  mourning  among  the  Jews,  and  fasting 
9.  31  the  matters  of  the  fastings  and  their  cry 

Psa.  35.  13  I  humbled  my  soul  with  fasting;  and  my 
69.  10  I  wept,  (and  chastened)  my  soul  with  fas. 
T09.  24  My  knees  are  weak  through  fasting;  and 

Jer.  36.   6  in  the  Lord's  house  upon  the  fasting  day 

Dan.    9.    3  to  seek  by  prayer  and.  .with  fasting,  and 

Joel    2.  12  Turn  ye  (aven)  to  me  with,  .fasting,  and 

3. Fasting,  without  food,  &(Titos  asitos. 

Acts  27.  33  ye  have  tarried  and  continued  fasting 

4. A  fasting,  fast,  i/wo-reTa  nesteia. 

Mattij.  21  [kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fas.] 
Mark  9.  29  can  come  forth  by  nothing  but  by . .  [fas.] 
Luke  2.  37  but  served  (God)  with  fastings  and  pray. 
Acts  14.  23  when  they  had.  .prayed  with  fasting,  they 
1  Co.   7,    5  that  ye  may  give  yourselves  to  [fasting] 
a  Co.   6.    5  in  labours,  in  watchiugs,  in  fastings 

11.  27  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness 

t.FasUng,  not  eating,  vrja-rts  nestis. 

Matt  15.  32  and  I  will  not  send  them  away  fasting 
Mark  8.   3  if  I  send  them  away  fasting  to  their  own 

FAT  — 

1, Fat,  firm,  '13  beri. 

Eze.  34.  20  I,  will  judge  between  the  fat  cattle  and 
2.Fat,firm,  *0"i3  own. 

Gen.  41.    4  eat  up  the  seven  well  favoured  and  fat  k. 

4r,  r8  seven  kine,  fat  fleshed  and  well  favoured 

41.  20  the  lean,  .eat  up  the  first  seven  fat  kine 

Judg.  3.  T7  king  of  Moab  :  and  Eglon  (was)  a  very  fat 

r  Ki.  4.  23  Ten  fat  oxen,  and  twenty  oxen  out  of  the 

Zech  11. 16  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat,  and  tear 

Z.Fat,  opulent,  jch  daslien. 

Psa.  22.  29  All  (they  that  be)  fat  upon  earth  shall  eat 

92. 14  they  shall  be  fat  and  flourishing 
Isa.  30.  23  it  shall  be  fat  and  plenteous  :  in  that  day 

LFat,  best  part,  marroto,  ajprj,  a^n  cheleb. 

Gen.    4.    4  firstlings  of  his  flock,  and  of  the  fat  ther. 

45.  18  and  ye  shall  eat  the  fat  of  the  land 
Exod23. 18  neither  shall  the  fat  of  my  sacrifice  rem. 
29.  13  thou  shalt  take  all  the  fat  that  covereth 
29. 13  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  upon 
29.  22  Also  thou  shalt  take  of  the  ram  the  fat 
29.  22  the  rump,  and  the  fat  that  covereth  the 
29.  22  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  upon 
I&v-    3-    3)  9)  14  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards 
3.    3,  9,  14  all  the  fat  that  (is)  upon  the  inwar. 
3.    4  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  on 
3.   9  the  fat  thereof,  (and)  the  whole  rump,  it 
3.  10,  15  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  upon 
3. 16  for  a  sweet  savour.    All  the  fat  (is)  the  L. 

3.  17  statute,  .that ye  eat  neither  fat  nor  blood 

4.  8  he  shall  take  off  from  it  all  the  fat  of  the 
4.  8  the  fat  that  covereth . .  and  all  the  fat  that 
4.    9  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  upon 

4.  19  he  shall  take  all  his  fat  from  him,  and  b. 
4.  26  he  shall  burn  all  his  fat  upon  the  altar 
4.  26  as  the  fat  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offer. 
4.  31,  35  he  shall  tak«  away  all  the  fat  thereof 
4.  31  as  the  fat  is  taken  away  from  off  the 
4.  35  as  the  fat  of  the  lamb  is  taken  away 
6. 12  burn  thereon  the  fat  of  the  peace  offer. 


Lev.    7.    3  he  shall  offer  of  it  all  the  fat  thereof 

7.   3  the  rump,  and  the  fat  that  covereth  the 
.    7.    4  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  on  them 
7.  23  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat,  of  ox,  or 
7.  24  the  fat  of  the  beast,  .and  the  fat  of  that 
7.  25  For  whosoever  eateth  the  fat  of  the  beast 
7.  30  the  fat  with  the  breast,  it  shall  he  bring 
7.  3r  priest  shall  burn  the  fat  upon  the  altar 

7.  33  the  sons  of  Aaron  that  offereth.  .the  fat 

8.  r6,  25  all  the  fat  that  (was)  upon  the  inwards 
S.  16,  25  and  the  two  kidneys,  and  then-  fat 

8.  25  And  he  took  the  fat,  and  the  rump,  and 

8.  26  put  (them)  on  the  fat,  and  upon  the  right 

9.  10  But  the  fat,  and  the  kidneys,  and  the  ca. 
9.  19  And  the  fat  of  the  bullock  and  of  the  ram 
9.  20  And  they  put  the  fat.  .and  he  burnt  the  f. 
9.  24  and  consumed  upon  the  altar,  .the  fat 

10.  15  the  offerings  made  by  fire  of  the  fat,  to 

16.  25  fat  of  the  sin  offering  shall  he  burn  upon 

17.  6  burn  the  fat  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 
NumrS.  17  shalt  burn  their  fat  (for)  an  offering  made 
Deut  32.  14  with  fat  of  lambs,  and.  .fat  of  kidneys  of 

32.  38  Which  did  eat  the  fat  of  their  sacrifices 
Judg.  3.  22  the  fat  closed  upon  the  blade,  so  that  he 

1  Sa.   2.  15  Also  before  they  burnt  the  fat,  the  priest's 

2.  16  Let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the  fat  presently 
15.  22  (and)  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams 

2  Sa.    1. 22  from  the  fat  of  the  mighty,  the  bow  of 

1  Ki.   8.  64,  64  and  the  fat  of  the  peace  offerings 

2  Ch.  7.    7  he  offered  burnt  offerings,  and  the  fat  of 

7.  7  to  receive  the  burnt  offerings,  .and  the  f. 
29.  35  offerings  (were)  in  abundance,  with  thef. 
35. 14  in  offering  of  burnt  offerings  and  the  fat 

Psa.  17.  10  They  are  inclosed  in  their  own  fat :  with 

Isa.     1.  11  I  am  full  of  the.  .fat  of  fed  beasts  ;  and 

34.    6  with  the  fat  of  the  kidneys  of  rams  :  for 

43.  24  neither  hast  thou  filled  me  with  the  fat 
Eze.  34.    3  ye  eat  the  fat,  and  ye  clothe  you  with  the 

39.  19  ye  shall  eat  fat  till  ye  be  full,  and  drink 

44.  7  when  ye  offer  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the 
44.  15  they  shall  stand . .  to  offer  unto  me  the  fat 

5.Precio7isness,  Ijg  yaqar. 

Psa.  37.  20  enemies  of  the  Lord  (shall  be)  as  the  fat 
Q.Fat  oily  substance,  fl*3{3$to  mashmannim. 

Neh.  8.  10  he  said  unto  them,  Go  your  way,  eat  the  f. 
*J, Grease,  fat,  ll^ped&r. 

Lev.  1.  8  the  priests,  Aaron's  sons,  shall  lay.  .the  f. 
r.  12  he  shall  cut  it.  .with  his  head  and  his  fat 

8.  20  and  Moses  burnt  the  head,  .and  the  fat 

8. Oily,  jd^  shamen. 

Gen.  49.  20  Out  of  Asher  his  bread  (shall  he)  fat,  and 
Nunii3.  20  what  the  land  (is),  whether  it  (lie)  fat  or 
1  Ch.  4.  40  And  they  found  fatpastureand  good,  and 
Neh.   9.  25  And  they  took  strong  cities,  and  a  fatila. 

9.  35  and  in  the  large  and  fat  land  which  thou 
Eze.  34.  14  and  (in)  a  fat  pasture  shall  they  feed  upon 

34. 16  but  I  will  destroy  the  fat  and  the  strong-1 
Hab.   1.  16  because  by  them  their  portion  (is)  fat,  and 

9. A  stall,  fattening,  pa*]S  marbeq. 

1  Sa.  28.  24  And  the  woman  had  a  fat  calf  in  the  ho. 
10.0(7,  j»^  sliemen. 

Isa .  28.    1  which  (are)  on  the  head  of  the  fat  valleys 
28.    4  beauty,  which  (is)  on  the  head  of  the  fat 
FAT,  to  be  — 
To  be  fat,  insensiate,  u'sp  taphash. 

Psa. 119.  70  Their  heart  is  as  fat  as  grease ;  (but)  I 
FAT  beast  or  cattle  — 
Falling,  fcOia  meri. 

1  Ki.  1.  g'Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  oxen  and  fat  ca. 
1. 19,  25  hath  slain  oxen  and  fat  cattle  and  sheep 

Amos  5.  22  regard  the  peace  offerings  of  your  fat  be. 
FAT,  to  become  — 
To  make  or  become  fat,  ]£&  shaman,  5. 

Neh.    9.  25  and  became  fat,  and  delighted  themselves 
FAT,  to  be  made  — 
l.To  be  made  fat,  |b^i  dashen,  4. 

Provn.25  The  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat;  and  he 
13.  4  the  soul  of  the  diligent  shall  be  made  fat 
28.  25  that  putteth  his  trust,  .shall  be  made  fat 

Isa.   34.    7  and  their  dust  made  fat  with  fatness 

2.  To  be-  made  fat,  jgh  dashen.,  7b. 

Isa.   34.   6  it  is  made  fat  with  fatness,  (and)  with  the 
FAT,  to  make  — 
l.To  fatten,  fan  dashen,  3. 

Prov.15.  30  (and)  a  good  report  maketh  the  bones  fat 
2.7*0  arm,  \h$  chalats,  5. 

Isa.    58.  11  And  the  Lord  shall .  .make  fat  thy  bones 

3.  To  make  fat  or  oily,  jce*  shaman,  5. 

Isa.     6.  10  Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  and 
FAT,  to  make  selves  — 
To  make  fat,  una  bara,  5. 

1  Sa.   2.  29  to  make  yourselves  fat  with  the  chiefest 
FAT  ones  — 
l.Fat  ones,  D*np  mechim. 

Isa.  5. 17  and  the  waste  places  of  the  fat  ones  shall 
2. Fatness,  fat  one,  fopo  mishman. 

Isa.  10. 16  send  among  his  fat  ones  leanness  ;  and 
FAT  things  — 
Oil,  fatness,  |nip  shemen. 

Isa.  [251  6  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things 
'25.   6  fat  tilings  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on  the 


FAT,  to  wax  — 

l.To  be  or  become  fat,  Ttsn  dashen. 

Deut  31. 20  and  they  shall  have  eaten . .  and  waxen  fat 

2.To  be  or  become  fat,  oily,  JD?  shaman. 

Deut  32. 15  But  Jeslmrun  waxed  fat,  and  kicked 

FAT,  to  be  waxen  — 

To  be  or  become  fat,  oily,  \£>v  shaman. 

Deut  32  15  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art  grown  thick 
Jer.     5.  28  They  are  waxen  fat,  they  shine :  yea,  they 
FAT  fleshed  — 
Fat  in  flesh,  ljp|  una  beri  basar. 

Gen.  41.   2  seven  well  favoured  kine  and  fat  fleshed 
FATHER  — 
l.Fathtr,  ancestor,  source,  inventor,  ax  ah. 

Gen.   2.  24  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and 
4.  20  And  Adah  bare  Jabal :  he  was  the  father 
4.  21  he  was  the  father  of  all  such  as  handle 
9.  18  Japheth :  and  Ham  (is)  the  father  of  C. 
9.  22  the  father  of  Canaan,  saw . .  his  father,  and 
9.  23  and  covered  the  nakedness  of  their  father 
9.  23  and  they  saw  not  their  father's  nakedness 

10.  21  TJnto  Shem  also,  the  father  of  all  the  chil. 

11.  28  Haran  died  befure  his  father  Terah  in 

11.  29  father  of  Milcah,  and  the  father  of  Iscah 

12.  1  Get  thee  out. .from  thy  father's  house 
17.    4  and  thou  shalt  be  a  father  of  many  na. 
17.    5  a  father  of  many  nations  have  I  made 
19.  31  Our  father  (is)  old,  and  (there  is)  not  a 
19.  32  Come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine 
19.  33  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that 
19.  34  Behold,  I  lay  yesternight  with  my  father 
19.  35  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that 
19.  36  the  daughters.,  witli  child  by  their  father 
19.  37  the  same  (is)  the  father  of  the  Moabites 
19.  38  the  same  (is)  the  father  of  the  children  of 

20. 12  she  (is)  the  daughter  of  my  father,  but 

20. 13  God  caused  me  to  wander  from  my  fath. 
22.  7  Abraham  his  father,  and  said,  My  father 
22.  21  Huz.  .and  Kemuel  the  father  of  Aram 
24.  7  God.  .which  took  me  from  my  father's  h. 
24.  23  is  there  room  (in)  thy  father's  house  for 
24.  38  But  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  father's  house 
24.  40  thou  shalt  take  a  wife,  .of  my  father's  h. 
26.  3  oath  which  I  sware  unto  Abraham  thy  f. 
26.  15  For  all  the  wells  which  his  father's  serv. 
26.  15  digged  in  the  days  of  Abraham  his  father 
26.  18  they  had  digged  in  the  days  of.  .his  father 
26-  18  after  the  names  by  which  his  father  had 

26.  24  I  (am)  the  God  of  Abraham  thy  father 

27.  6  I  heard  thy  father  speak  unto  Esau  thy 
27.    9  I  will  make . .  savoury  meat  for  thy  father 
27.  10  thou  shalt  bring  (it)  to  thy  father,  that 
27.  12  My  father  peradventure  will  feel  me,  and 
27.  14  savoury  meat,  such  as  his  father  loved 
27.  18  came  unto  his  father,  and  said,  My  fath. 
27.  19  Jacob  said  unto  his  father,  I  (am)  Esau 
27.  22  And  Jacob  went  near  unto  Isaac  his  father 
27.  26  his  father  Isaac  said  unto  him,  Come  near 
27.  30  Jacob  was.  .scarce  gone  out  from,  .his  f. 
27.  31  savoury  meat,  and  brought  it  unto  his  f. 
27.  31  and  said  unto  his  father,  Let  my  father 
27.  32  Isaac  his  father  said  unto  him,  "Who  (art) 
27.  34  when  Esau  heard  the  words  of  his  father 
27.  34  and  said  unto  his  father.  .0  my  father ! 
27.  38  And  Esau  said  unto  his  father 

27.  38  Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,  my  father? 
27.  38  bless  me,  (even)  me  also,  O  my  father  ! 
27.  39  Isaac  his  father  answered  and  said  unto 
27.  41  because  of  the  blessing  wherewith  his  fa. 

27.  41  The  days  of  mourning  for  my  father  are 

28.  2  the  house  of  Bethuel,  thy  mother's  father 
28.  7  And  that  Jacob  obeyed  his  father  and  his 
28.  8  daughters  of  Canaan  pleased  not.  .his  fa. 
28.  13  I  (am)  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  fa. 

28.  21  So  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house 

29.  9  Rachel  came  with  her  father's  sheep;  for 
29.  12  Jacob  told  Rachel  that  he  (was)  her  fath. 
29.  12  and  she  ran  and  told  her  father 

31.  1  Jacob  hath  taken,  .all  that  (was)  cur  fa. 
31.  1  of  (that)  which  (was)  our  father's  hath  he 
31.  5  said  unto  them,  I  see  your  father's  conn. 
31.  5  the  God  of  my  father  hath  been  with  me 
31.  6  with  all  my  power  I  have  served  your  f. 
31.  7  your  father  hath  deceived me,and  changed 
31.  9  God  hath  taken,  .the  cattle  of  yourfather 
31.  14  (Is  there)  yet  any  portion,  .in  our  father's 
31.  16  the  riches.  .God  hath  taken  from  our  fa. 
31.  18  to  go  to  Isaac  his  father  in  the  land  of  C. 
31.  19  had  stolen  the  images  that  (were)  her  fa. 
31.  29  but  the  God  of  your  father  spake  unto  me 
31.  30  because  thou  sorelongedst  after  thy  fath. 
31.  35  she  said  to  her  father,  Let  it  not  displease 
31.  42  Except  the  God  of  my  father,  the  God  of 
31.  53  the  God  of  their  father,  judge  betwixt  us 

31.  53  Jacob  sware  by  the  Fear  of  his  father  Is. 

32.  9  0  God  of  my  father.  .God  of  my  father  I. 
33. 19  at  the  hand  of.  .Hamor,  Shechem's  father 
34.   4  Shechem  spake  unto  his  father  Hamor 
34.    6  Hamor  the  father  of  Shechem  went  out 
34. 11  Shechem  said  unto  her  father  and  unto 
34.  r3  sons  of  Jacob  answered .  .Hamor  his  fath. 

34.  19  honourable  than  all  the  house  of  his  fath. 

35.  rS  Ben-oni :  but  his  father  called  him  Benj. 
35.  22  Reuben  went  and  lay  with  Eilhah  his  fa. 

35.  27  Jacob  came  unto  Isaac  his  father  unto 

36.  9  Esau  the  father  of  the  Edoniites  in  mount 
36.  24  as  he  fed  the  asses  of  Zibeon  his  father 
36.  43  he  (is)  Esau  the  father  of  the  Edomites 


FATHER 


332 


FATHER 


Gen.  37. 
37 

37> 
37' 
37- 
37- 
37- 
17- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
33. 
38- 
41. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 

44- 
44. 
44. 

44- 
44- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45< 
45 
45 
45 
45 
45 
45 
46, 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
48. 
48. 
48. 
48. 
48. 
48. 
49. 
49. 
49- 
49. 
49. 
49. 
50. 
50. 
50- 
5°- 
50. 
50. 
5°- 
5°- 
5°- 
50. 
5o. 
50. 
50- 
Exod.  2. 


Lev. 


1  dwelt  in  the  land  wherein  his  father  was 

2  and  with  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  his  father's 
2  Joseph  brought  unto  his  father  their  evil 

4  when  his  brethren  saw  that  their  father 
10  he  told  (it)  to  his  father,  and  to  his  breth. 

10  his  father  rebuked  him,  and  said  unto  h. 

11  but  his  father  observed  the  saying 

12  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  father's 

22  to  deliver  him  to  his  father  again 
,  32  they  brought(it)to  their  father ;  and  said 
,  35  Thus  his  father  wept  for  him 
,  11  Remain  a  widow  at  thy  father's  house 
,  it  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  her  father's  h. 

51  God.. hath  made  me  forget  all.. my  fath. 

13  the  youngest  (is)  this  day  with  our  father 

29  they  came  unto  Jacob  their  father  unto 
32  We.  .twelve  brethren,  sons  of  our  father 
32  the  youngest  (is)  this  day  with  our  father 

35  they  and  their  father  saw  the  bundles  of 

36  Jacob  their  father  said  unto  them.  Me 

37  Reuben  spake  unto  his  father,  saying 

2  their  father  said  unto  them,  Go  again 

7  (Is)  your  father  yet  alive  ?  have  ye 

8  Judah  said  unto  Israel  his  father,  Send 
11  And  their  father  Israel  said  unto  them 

23  the  God  of  your  father,  hath  given  you 

27  (Is)  your  father  well,  the  old  man  of 

28  And  they  answered,  Thy  servant  our  fat. 
17  get  you  up  m  peace  unto  your  father 

19  saying,  Have  ye  a  father,  or  a  brother  ? 

20  We  have  a  father,  an  old  man,  and  a 
20  he  alone  is  left . .  and  his  father  loveth  him 
22  we  said.  .The  lad  cannot  leave  his  father 

22  for  (if)  he  should  leave  his  father,  (his  f.) 

24  we  came  up  unto  thy  servant  my  father 

25  our  father  said,  Go  again,  .buy  us  a  little 
27  And  thy  servant  my  father  said  unto  us 

30  when  I  come  to  thy  servant  my  father 

31  the  gray  hairs  of  thy  servant  our  father 

32  became  surety  for  the  lad  unto  my  father 
32  I  shall  bear  the  blame  to  my  father  for 
34  For  how  shall  I  go  up  to  my  father 
34  I  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  on  my  fat. 

3  I  (am)  Joseph  :  doth  my  father  yet  live  ? 

8  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to  Pharaoh 

9  Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my  father,  and 

13  ye  shall  tell  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in 
iS  take  your  father,  and  your  households 
19  this  do  ye.  .bring  your  father,  and  come 

23  And  to  his  father  he  sent  after  this 
23  bread  and  meat  for  his  father  by  the  way 
25  and  came  into.  .Canaan  unto,  .their  fat. 

27  the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  revived 
1  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac 

3  I  (am)  God,  the  God  of  thy  father  :  fear 

5  sons  of  Israel  carried  Jacob  their  father 

29  Joseph.,  went  "up  to  meet  Israel  his  father 
31  And  Joseph  said,  .unto  his  father's  house 

31  My  brethren,  and  my  father's  house 
1  My  father  and  my  brethren,  .are  come 

5  Thy  father  and  thy  brethren  are  come 

6  in  the  best  of  the  land  make  thy  father 

7  And  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob  his  father 

11  Joseph  placed  his  father  and  his  brethren 

12  And  Joseph  nourished  his  father,  and 

1  told  Joseph,  Behold,  thy  father  (is)  sick 
9  Joseph  said  unto  his  father,  They  (are) 

17  when  Joseph  saw  that  his  father  laid  his 

17  he  held  up  his  father's  hand,  to  remove 

18  Joseph  said  unto  his  father,  Not  so,  my  f. 

19  his  father  refused,  and  said,  I  know  (it) 

2  and  hearken  unto  Israel  your  father 

4  because  thou  wentest  up  to  thy  father's 

8  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down  bef. 

25  by  the  God  of  thy  father,  who  shall  help 

26  The  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevail. 

28  this  (is  it)  that  their  father  spake  unto 

1  Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's  face,  and 

2  commanded,  .physicians  to  embalm  his  f. 

5  My  father  made  me  swear,  saying,  Lo,  I 

5  therefore  let  me  go  up.  .and  bury  my  fa. 

6  Pharaoh  said,  Go  up  and  bury  thy  father 

7  Joseph  went  up  to  bury  his  father  :  and 

8  the  house  of  Joseph,  .and  his  father's  h. 

10  he  made  a  mourning  for  his  father  seven 

14  returned,  .after  he  had  buried  his  father 

15  when  Joseph's  brethren  saw  that  their  f. 

16  Thy  father  did  command  before  he  died 

17  forgive  the.,  servants  of  the  God  of  thy  fa. 
22  Joseph  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he.  .his  father's 

16  filled  the  troughs  to  water  their  father's 

18  And  when  they  came  to  Reuel  their  fat. 

6  he  said,  I  (am)  the  God  of  thy  father,  the 

2  my  father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him 
4  for  the  God  of  my  father,  .(was)  mine 

12  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother  :  that 
15  he  that  smiteth  his  father,  or  his  mother 

17  he  that  curseth  his  father,  or  his  mother 
17  If  her  father  utterly  refuse  to  give  her 
15  as  thou  didst  anoint  their  father,  that 

32  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office  in  his  f. 

7  The  nakedness  of  thy  father,  or  the  nak. 

8  The  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife  shalt 

8  it  (is)  thy  father's  nakedness 

9  nakedness  of.  .the  daughter  of  thy  fath. 

11  The  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife's  dau. 

11  begotten  of  thy  father,  she  (is)  thy  sister 

12  not  uncover  the  nakedness  of  thy  fathe. 
12  she  (is)  thy  father's  near  kinswoman 

14  not  uncover  the  nakedness  of  thy  father's 

3  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his.  .father 

9  every  one  that  curseth  his  father  or  his  m. 


Num.  3 

3' 
6. 


17- 

18. 
18. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 

30- 

30. 
SO- 
36. 
36. 

Deut.  5. 
21. 


Lev.  20.    9  he  hath  cursed  his  father  or  his  mother 
20. 11  the  man  that  lieth  with  his  father's  wife 
20.  11  hath  uncovered  his  father's  nakedness 
20.  17  if  a  man  shall  take  his  sister,  his  father's 

20.  19  not  uncover  the  nakedness,  .of  thy  fath. 

21.  2  for  his  mother,  and  for  his  father,  and 
21.    9  she  profaueth  her  father  :  she  shall  be 

21.  11  Neither  shall  he.  .defile  himself  for  his  f. 

22.  13  and  is  returned  unto  her  father's  house 

13  she  shall  eat  of  her  father's  meat 
4  ministered,  .in  the  sight  of.,  their  father 

24>  3°>  35  the  chief  of  the  house  of  the  fath. 
7  nut  make  himself  uncleau  for  his  father 

14  If  her  father  had  but  spit  in  her  face 

6  gave,  .according  to  their  fathers'  houses 

1  Thou  and  thy  sons  and  thy  father's  house 

2  the  tribe  of  thy  father,  bring  thou  with 

3  Our  father  died  in  the  wilderness,  and  he 

4  Why  should  the  name  of  our  father  be 
4  possession  among  the  brethren  of  our  fa. 

7  inheritance  among  their  father's  brethren 

7  shalt  cause  the  inheritance  of  their  father 

10  shall  give  his  inheritance  unto  his  father's 

11  if  his  father  have  no  brethren,  then  ye 

3  (being)  in  her  father's  house  in  her  youth 

4  And  her  father  hear  her  vow,  and  her 

4  and  her  father  shall  hold  his  peace  at  her 

5  But  if  her  father  disallow  her  in  the  day 

5  Lord  shall  forgive  her,  because  her  father 
16  between  the  father  and  his  daughter 

6  to  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  their  father 

8  one  of  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  her  fath. 

12  in  the  tribe  of  the  family  of  their  father 
16  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  as 

13  bewail  her  father  and  her  mother  a  full 

21.  18  which  will  not  obey  the  voice  of  his  fath. 
zi.  19  Then  shall  his  father  and  his  mother  lay 

22.  15  Then  shall  the  father  of  the  damsel,  and 
22.  16  the  damsel's  father  shall  say  unto  the  eld. 
22.  19  and  give,  .unto  the  father  of  the  damsel 
22.  21  the  damsel  to  the  door  of  her  father's  h. 
22.  21  to  play  the  whore  in  her  father's  house 
22.  29  man.  .shall  give  unto  the  damsel's  father 
22.  30  A  man  shall  not  take  his  father's  wife 
22.  30  nor  discover  his  father's  skirt 

5  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  (was)  my  father 

16  Cursed  (be)  he  that  setteth  light  by  his  f 
20  Cursed  (be)  he  that  lieth  with  Ids  father's 
20  because  he  uncovereth  his  father's  skirt 

22  lieth  with,  .the  daughter  of  his  father 

6  (is)  not  he  thy  father  (that)  hath  bought 

7  ask  thy  father,  and  he  will  show  thee 

9  Who  said  unto  his  father  and  to  his  moth. 

12  ye  will,  .show  kindness  unto  my  father's 

13  ye  will  save  alive  my  father,  and  my  moth. 
18  thou  ?halt  bring  thy  father,  and  thy 

1 5  all  thy  father's  household,  home  unto  thee 

23  men .  .brought  out  Rahab,  and  herfather 
25  Joshua  saved  Rahab.  .and  her  father's  h. 
13  the  city  of  Arba  the  father  of  Anak,  which 
18  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field 

1  Machir  the  first  born  of  Manasseh,  the  fa. 

4  gave,  .among  the  brethren  oftheirfather 
47  Dan,  after  the  name  of  Dan  their  father 
1 1  they  gave  them  the  city  of  Arba  the  father 

2  Your  fathers  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of 

2  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham,  and  the  f. 

3  I  took  your  father  Abraham  from  the 
__,.  32  sons  of  Hamor  the  father  of  Shechem  for 

Judg.  1.  14  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field 
15  and  I  (am)  the  least  in  my  father's  house 
25  Take  thy  father's  young  bullock,  even  the 
25  the  altar  of  Baal  that  thy  father  hath 

27  because  he  feared  his  father's  household 
32  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  Joash  his  fat. 

1  family  of  the  house  of  his  mother's  father 

5  he  went  unto  his  father's  house  at  Ophrah 

17  my  father  fought  for  you,  and  adventured 

18  ye  are  risen  up  against  my  father's  h. 

28  serve  the  men  of  Hamor  the  father  of  S. 
56  which  he  did  unto  his  father,  in  slaying 

36  And  she  said  unto  him,  My  father 

37  she  said  unto  her  father,  Let  this  thing 
39  she  returned  unto  her  father,  who  did 

2  he  came  up,  and  told  his  father  and  his 

3  his  father  and  his  mother  said  unto  him 

3  Samson  said  unto  his  father,  Get  her  for 

4  his  father  and  his  mother  knew  not  that 

5  Then  went  Samson  down,  and  his  father 

6  he  told  not  his  father  or  his  mother  what 
9  went . .  and  came  to  his  father  and  mother 

10  So  his  father  went  down  unto  the  woman 

15  lest  we  burn  thee  and  thy  father's  house 

16  I  have  not  told  (it)  my  father  nor  my  mo. 

19  and  he  went  up  to  his  father's  house 

1  her  father  would  not  suffer  him  to  go  in 

2  her  father  said,  I  verily  thought  that  thou 

15.  6  came  up,  and  burned  her  and  her  father 

16.  31  brethren,  and  all  the  house  of  his  father 
ifi.  31  in  the  burying  place  of  Manoah  his  father 

17.  10  Dwell  with  me,  and  be  uuto  me  a  father 

18.  19  go.  .and  be  to  us  a  father  and  a  priest 

18.  29  Dan,  after  the  name  of  Dan  their  father 

19.  2  went  away  from  him  unto  her  father's 
ig.    3  she  brought  him  unto  her  father's  house 
19.    3  when  the  father  of  the  damsel  saw  him 
19.    4  and  his  father  in  law,  the  damsel's  father 
19.    5  the  damsel's  father  said  unto  his  sou  in 
19.   6  the  damsel's  father  had  said  onto  the  man 
19.    8  the  damsel's  father  said,  Comfort  thine 
19.    9  his  father  in  law,  the  damsel's  father,  said 

Ruth  2.  11  thou  hast  left  thy  father  and  thy  mother 


26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 

32- 
32- 

Josh.  2 


Ruth  4.  17  he  (is)  the  father  of  Jesse,  the  father  of  D. 

1  Sa.   2.  25  they  hearkened  not  unto .  .their  father 

2.  27  Did  I.  .appear  unto  the  house  of  thy  fath, 
2.  28  did  I  give  unto  the  house  of  thy  father 
2.  30  thy  house,  and  the  house  of  thy  father 

2.  31  I  will  cut  otf .  .the  arm  of  thy  lather's  h, 

9.  3  And  the  asses  of  Kish  Saul's  father  were 
10.    2  thy  father  hath  left  the  care  of  the  asses 

10.  12  But  who  (is)  their  father  ?  Therefore  it 
14.    1  let  us  go  over.  .But  he  told  not  his  father 
14.  27  Jonathan  heard  not  when  his  father  ch. 
14.  28  Thy  father  straitly  charged  the  people 
14.  29  Then  said  Jonathan,  My  father  hath  tro. 
14.  51  Kish  (was)  the  father  of  Saul.  .IS er  the  f. 
17.  15  David  went,  .to  feed  his  father's  sheep  at 
17.  25  and  make  Ids  father's  house  free  in  Israel 

17.  34  Thy  servant  kept  his  father's  sheep,  and 

18.  2  would  let  him  go  no  more.,  to  his  father's 

18.  18  what  (is)  my  life,  (or)  my  father's  family 

19.  2  Saul  my  father  seeketh  to  kill  thee  :  now 
19.  3  I  will  go  out  and  stand  beside  my  father 
19.    3  I  will  commune  with  my  father  of  thee 

19.  4  spake  good  of  David  unto  Saul  his  father 

20.  1  and  what  (is)  my  sin  before  thy  father 
20.    2  behold,  my  father  will  do  nothing  either 
20.    2  why  should  my  father  hide  this  thing 
20.    3  Thy  father  certainly  knoweth  that  I  have 
20.    6  If  thy  father  at  all  miss  me,  then  say 

20.  8  why  shouldest  thou  bring  me  to  thy  fat.? 
20.  9  that  evil  were  determined  by  my  father 
20. 10  what  (if)  thy  father  answer  thee  roughly? 

20. 12  when  I  have  sounded  my  father  about 
20.  13  but  if  it  please  my  father  (to  do)  thee  evil 

20. 13  with  thee,  as  he  hath  been  with  my  father 
20.  32  Jonathan  answered  Saul  his  father,  and 
20.  33  knew  that  it  was  determined  of  his  father 

20.  34  was  grieved  for  David,  because  his  father 
2?.    1  when,  .all  his  father's  house  heard  (it) 
22.    3  Let  my  father  and  my  mother,  I  pray 
22.  11  Ahimelech..and  all  his  father's  house 
22.  15  (nor)  to  all  the  house  of  my  father  :  for 
22.  16  Thou  shalt  surely  die . .  and  all  thy  father's 

22.  22  of  all  the  persons  of  thy  father's  house 

23.  17  Fear  not :  for  the  hand  of  Saul  my  father 

23.  17  and  that  also  Saul  my  father  knoweth 

24.  Ti  Moreover,  my  father,  see,  yea,  see  the 
24.  21  wilt  not  destroy  my  name  out  of  my  fat. 

2  Sa.    2.  32  buried  him  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  father 

3.  7  Wherefore  hast  thou  gone  in  unto  my  f. 
3.  8  kindness  this  day  unto  the  house  of . .  thy  f . 
3.  29  Let  it  rest,  .on  all  his  father's  house 

6.  21  the  Loud,  which  chose  me  before  thy  fa. 
7. 14  I  will  be  his  father,  and  he  shall  be  my 
9.    7  I  will.  .show,  .kindness  for.  .thy  father's 
9.    7  will  restore,  .all  the  land  of  Saul  thy  fa. 

10.  2  as  his  father  showed  kindness  unto  me 
10.  2  David  sent  to  comforthim.  .form's  father 
10.  3  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy  father 
J3-  5  when  thy  father  cometh  to  see  thee,  say 
14.  9  the  iniquity  (be)  on  me,  and  on  my  father's 
15-  34  (as)  1  (have  been)  thy  father's  servant  hi. 
16.  3  shall,  .restore,  .the  kingdom  of  my  father 
16.  19  as  I  have  served  in  thy  father's  presence 
16.  21  Go  in  unto  thy  father's  concubines,  which 

16.  22  Absalom  went  in  unto  his  father's  concu. 

17.  8  For,  said  Hushai,  thou  knowest  thy  father 
17.  8  thy  father  (is)  a  man  of  war,  and  will  not 
17.  10  for  all  Israel  knoweth  that  thy  father  (is) 
17.  23  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  father 
19.  28  For  all  (of)  my  father's  house  were  but 
19.  37  by  the  grave  of  my  father,  and  of  my 

21.  14  Zelah,  in  the  sepulchre  of  Kish  his  father 
24.  17  Let  thine  hand,  .be  against,  .my  father's 

1  Ki.  1.  6  his  father  had  not  displeased  him  at  any 
2.  12  Solomon  upon  the  throne  of.  .his  father 
2.  24  set  me  on  the  throne  of  David  my  father 
2.  26  barest  the  ark.  .before  David  my  father 
2.  26  been  afHicted  in  all  wherein  my  father 
2.  31  from  me,  and  from  the  house  of  my  fat. 
2.  32  and  slew  them  with  the  sword,  my  father 

2.  44  that  thou  didst  to  David  my  father 

3.  3  walking  in  the  statutes  of  David  his  fat. 
3.  6  Thou .  .^showed  unto  thy  servant . .  my  fa. 
3.  7  thy  servant  king  instead  of .  .my  father 
3.  14  as  thy  father  David  did  walk,  then  I  will 
5.  1  anointed  him  king  in  the  room  of  his  fa. 
5.    3  Thou  knowest  how  that  David  my  father 

5.  5  as  the  Lord  spake  unto  David  my  father 

6.  12  which  I  spake  unto  David  thy  father 

7.  14  his  father  (was)  a  man  of  Tyre,  a  worker 

7.  51  brought  in  the  things  which  D.  his  father 

8.  15  spake  with  his  mouth  unto  David  my  fa. 
8.  17  it  was  in  the  heart  of  David  my  father  to 
8.  18  And  the  Lord  said  unto  David  my  father 
8.  20  I  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  D.  my  father 
8.  24  Who  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  D.  my  f, 

8.  25  God . .  keep  with  thy  servant  David  my  f. 
8  26  thou  spakest  unto  thy  servant  D.  my  fa. 

9.  4  as  David  thy  father  walked,  in  integrity 
o.    5  as  I  promised  to  David  thy  father,  saying 

it.    4  as  (was)  the  heart  of  David  his  father 

11.  6  went  not  fully  after  the  Lord,  as.  .his  fa. 
11.  12  I  will  not  do  it  for  David  thy  father's  sake 
11.  17  certain  Edomites  of  his  father's  servants 
11.  27  repaired  the  breaches  of  thecityof.  .hisf. 
11.  33  have  not  walked,  .as  (did)  David  bis  father 

11.  43  slept  with  his  fathers,  .of  David  his  fat. 

12.  4  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous:  now 
■12.  4  make  thou  the  grievous  service  of  thy  f. 
12.  6  men,  that  stood  before  Solomon  his  father 
12.  9  Make  the  yoke  which  thy  father  did  put 
12.  10  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy, but  make 


FATHER 


333 


FATHER 


i  EL  12.  10  shall  be  thicker  than  my  fathers  loins 
T2.  ii  now  whereas  my  father  did  lade  you  with 
ja.  ii  my  father  hath  chastised  you  with  whips 
12. 14  My  father  made  your  yoke  heavy,  and  I 

12.  14  my  father  (also)  chastised  you  with  whips 

13.  11  them  they  told  also  to  their  father 

13.  12  their  father  said  unto  them.  What  way 
15.  3  he  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  liis  father 
15.  3  not  perfect,  .as  the  heart  of  David  his  f. 
15.  11  Asa  did.  .right,  .as  (did)  David  his  father 
15.  15  he  brought  in  the  things  which  his  father 
15.  19  (and)  between  my  father  and  thy  father 
15.  24  Asa  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
15.  26  and  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and 
iS.  iS  but  thou,  and  thy  father's  house,  in  that 

19.  20  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  kiss  my  father  and 

20.  34  cities  which  my  father  took  from  thy  fa. 
20.  34  thou  shalt  make  streets,  .as  my  father 
22.  43  walked  in  all  the  ways  of  Asa  his  father 
22.  46  which  remained  in  the  days  of  his  father 
22.  50  was  buried,  .in  the  city  of  David  his  fath. 
22.  52  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in 
22.  53  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done 

2  Ki.  2.  12  My  father,  my  father!  the  chariot  of  1st. 
3.  2  he  wrought  evil,  .but  not  like  his  father 
3.    2  put  away  the  image  of  Baal  that  his  father 

3.  13  get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father 

4.  18  he  went  out  to  his  father  to  the  reapers 

4.  19  he  said  unto  his  father.  My  head,  my  he. 

5.  13  My  father,  (if)  the  prophet  had  bid  thee 

6.  21  My  father,  shall  I  smite  (them)?  shall  I 
9.  25  rode  together  after  Ahab  his  father,  the 

10.  3  set  (him)  on  his  father's  tlirone,  and  fight 
13.  1.4  0  my  father,  my  father  !  the  chariot  of  I. 

13.  25  out  of  the  hand  of  Jehoahaz  his  father  by 

14.  3  yet  not  like  David  his  father:  he  did 

14.  3  according  to  all  thiugs  as  Joash  his  father 
14.    5  slew  his  servants  which  had  slain,  .his  fa. 

14.  21  and  made  him  king  instead  of  his  father 

15.  3  according  to  all  that  his  father  Amaziah 
15.  34  he  did  according  to  all  that  his  father  U. 

15.  3S  was  buried,  .in  the  city  of  David  his  fat. 

16.  2  did  not.  .right,  .like  David  his  father 

18.  3  according  to  all  that  David  his  father  did 

20.  5  Thus  saith.  .the  God  of  David  thy  father 

21.  3  the  high  places  which  Hezekiah  his  fath. 
21.  20  he  did.  .evil,  .as  his  father  Manasseh  did 
21.  21  he  walked  in  all  the  way  that  his  father 

21.  22  And  he  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  his  fat. 

22.  2  walked  in  all  the  way  of  David  his  father 

23.  30  and  made  him  king  in  his  father's  stead 

23.  34  kiag  in  the  room  of  Josiah  his  father,  and 

24.  9  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done 
1  Ch.  2.  17  the  father  of  Amasa  (was)  Jether  the  Isli. 

2.  21  to  the  daughter  of  Machir  the  father  of 
2.  23  (belonged)  to  the  sons  of  Machir,  the  fat. 
2.  24  Hezron's  wife,  bare  him  Ashur  the  father 
2.  42  Mesha  his  first  born,  which  (was)  the  fat. 
2.  42  the  sons  of  Mareshah  the  father  of  Heb. 
2.  44  Shema  begat  B,aham  the  father  of  Jorko. 
2.  45  and  Maon  (was)  the  father  of  Beth-zur 
2.  49  She  bare  also  Shaaph  the  father  of  Mad. 
2.  49  Sheva  the  father  of  Maehbenali,  and  the  f . 
2-  50,  52  Shobal  the  father  of  Kirjath-jearim 
2.  51  father  of  Bethlehem,  Hareph  the  father 
2.  55  Hemath,  the  father  of  the  house  of  Kec. 
4.    3  these  (were  of)  the  father  of  Etani ;  Jezr. 
4.    4  the  father  of  Gedor,  and  E2er  the  father 
4.    5  Ashur  the  father  of  Tekoa  had  two  wives 
4.  11  begat  Mehir,  which  (was)  the  father  of  Es. 
4.  12  and  Tehinnah  the  father  of  Irnahash 
4.  14  Joab,  the  father  of  the  valley  of  Charas. 
4.  17  and  Ishbah  the  father  of  Eshtemoa 
4.  18  Jehudijah  bare  Jered  the  father  of  Gedor 
4.  iS  father  of  Socho,  and  Jekuthiel  the  father 
4.  19  the  father  of  Keilah  the  Garmite,  and  Es. 

4.  21  father  of  Lecah,  and  Laadah,  the  father 

5.  1  forasmuch  as  he  defiled  his  father's  bed 

7.  14  the  Araniitess  bare  Machir  the  father  of 
7.  22  And  Ephraim  their  father  mourned  many 
7.  31  Malchiel,  who  (is)  the  father  of  Birzavith 

7.  40  childreu  of  Asher,  heads  of  (their)  father's 

8.  29  And  at  Gibeon  dwelt  the  father  of  Gibeon 

9.  19  his  brethren,  of  the  house  of  his  father 
9.  35  And  in  Gibeon  dwelt  the  father  of  Gibeon 

12.  28  of  his  father's  house  twenty  and  two  cap. 
17. 13  I  will  be  his  father,  and  he  shall  he  my 

19.  2  because  his  father  showed  kindness  to  me 
19.  2  sent,  .to  comfort  him  concerning  his  fat. 
19.    3  Tliinkest.  .that  David  doth  honour  thy  f. 

21.  17  Let  thine  hand,  .be  on  me,  and  on  my  fa. 

22.  10  shall  be  my  son,  and  I  (will  be)  his  father 
23. 11  one  reckoning,  according  to  (their)  fath. 

24.  2  Nadab  and  Abihu  died  before  their  father 
24. 19  orderings.  .under  Aaron  their  father,  as 

25.  3  under  the  hands  of  their  father  Jeduthun 

25.  6  these  (were)  under  the  hands  of  their  fat. 

26.  6  ruled  throughout  the  house  of  their  fat. 
26.  10  he  was  not  the  first  bom,  yet  his  father 
28.  4  chose  me  before  all  the  house  of  my  fath. 
28.  4  the  house  of  Judah  the  house  of  my  fat. 
28.  4  among  the  sons  of  my  father  he  liked  me 
28.    6  have  chosen  him . .  and  I  will  be  his  father 

28.  9  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father 

29.  10  BIessed(be)thou,  LORDGodof  Israel  ourf. 
29.  23  Solomon  sat.  .instead  of  David  his  father 

2  Ch,  1.    8  showed  great  mercy  unto  David  my  fath. 

1.  9  let  thy  promise  unto  David  my  father  be 

2.  3  As  thou  didst  deal  with  David  my  father 
2.    7  men . .  whom  David  my  father  did  provide 

2. 13  sent  a  cunning  man.  .of  Hurani  my  fath. 

2. 14  his  father  (was)  a  man  of  Tyre,  skilful  to 


2  Ch.  2.  14  cunning  men  of  my  lord  David  thy  father 

2.  17  numbering  wherewith  David  his  father 

3.  1  Lord  appeared  unto  David  his  father,  in 

4.  16  The  pots  also . .  did  Hurani  his  father 

5.  1  brought . .  the  things  that  David  his  father 

6.  4  which  he  spake  with  his  mouth  to  my  fa. 
6.  7  Now  it  was  in  the  heart  of  David  my  fat. 
6.    8  But  the  LORD  said  to  David  my  father 

6. 10  risen  up  in  the  room  of  David  my  father 
6. 15,  16  with  thy  servant  David  my  father  that 

7. 17  if  thou  wilt  walk,  .as  David  thy  father 

7. 18  as  I  have  covenanted  with  David  thy  fat. 

8.  14  according  to  the  order  of  David  Ms  father 

9.  31  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David  his  father 
10.  4  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous  :  now 
10.  4  ease,  .the  grievous  servitude  of  thy  father 
10.  6  that  had  stood  before  Solomon  his  father 
10.  9  Ease  somewhat  the  yoke  that  thy  father 
10. 10  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  but 

10.  10  (finger)  shall  be  thicker  than  my  father's 
10.  11  For  whereas  my  father  put  a  heavy  yoke 
10.  iij  14  my  father  chastised  you  with  whips 
10.  14  My  father  made  your  yoke  heavy,  but  I 

15.  18  he  brought . .  the  things  that  his  father 

16.  3  (there  was)  between  my  father  and  thy  f. 

17.  2  cities  of  Ephraim,  which  Asa  his  father 
17.   4  But  sought  to  the  Lord  God  of  his  father 

20.  32  And  he  walked  in  the  way  of  Asa  his  fa. 

21.  3  And  their  father  gave  them  great  gifts  of 

21.  4  was  risen  up  to  the  kingdom  of  his  father 
21. 12  saith  the  Lord  God  of  David  thy  father 

21. 12  not  walked  in  the  ways  of .  .thy  father 

21. 13  hast  slain  thy  brethern  of  thy  father's  ho. 

22.  4  counsellors,  after  the  death  of  his  father 

24.  22  the  kindness  which  Jehoiada  his  father 

25.  3  slew  his  servants  that  had  killed,  .his  fat. 

26.  1  made  him  king  in  the  room  of  his  father 

26.  4  according  to  all  that  his  father  AmaziahJ 

27.  2  according  to  all  that  his  father  L'zziah  did 

28.  1  he  did  not.  .right,  .like  David  his  father 

29.  2  according  to  all  that  David  his  father  had 
33.  22  he  did.  .evil,  .as  did  Manasseh  his  father 
33.  22  carved  images  which  Manasseh  his  father 

33.  23  humbled  not  himself,  .as  Manasseh  his  f. 

34.  2  walked  in  the  ways  of  David  his  father 
34.    3  to  seek  after  the  God  of  David  his  father 
36.    1  made  him  king  in  his  father's  stead  in 

Neh.  1.    6  both  I  and  my  father's  house  have  sinned 
Esth.  2.    7  for  she  had  neither  father  nor  mother 

2.  7  when  her  father  and  mother  were  dead 
4.  14  and  thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed 

Job   15.  10  very  aged  men,  much  elder  than  thy  fat. 
17.  14  have  said  to  corruption,  Thou  (art)  my  f. 
29.  16  I  (was)  a  father  to  the  poor  :  and  the 
31.  18  he  was  brought  up  with  me,  as  (with)  a  f. 
38.  28  Hath  the  rain  a  father?  or  who  hath 

42. 15  their  father  gave  them  inheritance  among 
Psa.  27.  10  When  my  father  and  my  mother  forsake 

45. 10  forget . .  thine  own  people,  and  thy  father's 
68.    5  A  father  of  the  fatherless,  and  a  judge  of 
89.  26  Thou  (art)  my  Father,  my  God,  and  the 
103.  13  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  (his)  children,  (so) 
Prov.  1.    8  My  son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father 

3.  12  even  as  a  fathenthe  son  (in  whom)  he 

4.  1  Hear,  .the  instruction  of  a  father,  and 
4.    3  For  I  was  my  father  s  son,  tender  and 

6.  20  My  son,  keep  thy  father's  commandment 

10.  •  1  A  wise  sou  maketh  a  glad  father  :  but  a 
13.    1  A  wise  sou  (heareth)  his  father's  instruc. 
15.    5  A  fool  despiseth  his  father's  instruction 
15.  20  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father  :  but  a 
17.  21  and  the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no  joy 

17.  25  A  foolish  son  (is)  a  grief  to  his  father 
19.  13  foolish  son  (is)  the  calamity  of  his  father 

19.  26  Hethat wasteth (liis)  father,  (and)  chaseth 

20.  20  Whoso  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother 
23. 22  Hearken  unto  thy  father  that  begat  thee 
23.  24  The  father  of  the  righteous  shall  greatly 
23.  25  Thy  father  and  thy  mother  shall  be  glad 

27.  10  Thine  own  friend,  and  thy  father's  friend 

28.  7  companion  of  riotous  (men)  shameth  his  f . 

28.  24  Whoso  robbeth  his  father  or  his  mother 

29.  3  Whoso  loveth  wisdom  rejoiceth  his  father 

30.  11  a  generation  (that)  curseth  their  father 

30.  17  The  eye  (that)  mocketh  at  (liis)  father 
Isa,     3.    6  his  brother,  of  the  house  of  liis  father 

7. 17  Lord  shall  bring.. upon  thy  father's  ho. 

8.  4  For  before  the  child,  .cry,  My  father,  and 

9.  6  The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father 
22.  2t  he  shall  be  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of 
22.  23  be  for  a  glorious  tlirone  to  his  father's  ho. 
22.  24  all  the  glory  of  his  father's  house,  the 
38.  5  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thy  fa. 
38. 19  the  father  to  the  children  shall  make 

43.  27  Thy  first  father  hath  sinned,  and  thy  tea. 
45.  10  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  unto  (liis)  father 
51.  2  Look  unto  Abraham  your  father,  and  unto 
58.  14  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of.  .thy  father 

63. 16  Doubtless  thou  (art)  our  Father,  though 
63. 16  thou,  0  Lord,  (art)  our  Father,  our  Bed. 
64.    8  But  now,  0  Lord,  thou  (art)  our  Father 

Jer.  2.  27  Saying  to  a  stock,  Thou  (art)  my  father 
3. 19  I  said,  Thou  shalt  call  me,  My  father 
12.  6  thy  brethren,  and  the  house  of  thy  father 
16  7  cup  of  consolation  to  drink  for  their  fath. 
20. 15  the  man  who  brought  tidings  to  my  fath. 
22.  11  which  reigned  instead  of  Josiah  his  father 
22. 15  Did  not  thy  father  eat  and  drink,  and  do 

31.  9  for  I  am  a  father  to  Israel,  and  Ephraim 
35.  6  for  Jonadab  the  son  of  Rechab  our  father 
35.  8  have  we  obeyed . .  the  son  of  Kechab  our  f. 
35.  10  according  to  all  that  Jonadab  our  father 


Jer.  35.  14  they  drink  none,  but  obey  their  father's 
35. 16  performed  the  commandment  of  their  fa. 
35.  18  Because  ye  have  obeyed,  .your  father 

Eze.  16.    3  thy  father  (was)  an  Amorite,  and  thy  m. 
16.  45  an  Hittite,  and  your  father  an  Amorite 
18.    4  as  the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul 
18. 14  a  son,  that  seeth  all  his  father's  sins 
18.  17  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  his  father 

18. 18  his  father,  because  he  cruelly  oppressed 

18. 19  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  thef. 
18.  20  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  fath. 
18.  20  neither  shall  the  father  bear  the  iniquity 
22.  7  In  thee  have  they  set  light  by  father  and 
22. 10  In  thee  have  they  discovered  their  fath. 
22.  11  hath  humbled  his  sister,  his  father's  dau. 
44.  25  but  for  father,  or  for  mother,  or  for  son 

Amos  2.  7  a  man  and  his  father  will  go  in  unto  the 
Mic.  7.  6  For  the  son  dishonoureth  the  father,  the 
Zech.13.  3  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him 
MaL    1.    6  A  son  honoureth  (liis)  father,  and  a  serv. 

I.  6  if  then  I  (be)  a  father,  where  (is)  mine  h. 
2. 10  Have  we  not  all  one  father?  hath  not  one 

2, Father,  ancestor,  3N  oh. 

Dan.   5.    2  golden  and  silver  vessels  which  his  father 
5.  11  and  in  the  days  of  thy  father,  light  and 
5.  11  whom  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  fath.  - 
5.  it  thy  father,  made  master  of  the  magicians 
5.  13  whom  the  king  my  father  brought  out  cf 
5.  iS  God  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  father  a 

3. Father,  ancestor,  irar^p  pater. 

Matt.  2.  22  did  reign  in  Judea  in  the  room  of  his  fa. 

3.  9  We  have  Abraham  to  (our)  father  :  for  I 

4.  21  in  a  ship  with  Zebedee  their  father 

4.  22  immediately  left  the  ship  and  their  fath. 

5.  16  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heav. 
5.  45  That  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your  Fat. 

5.  4S  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Fa. 

6.  1  otherwise  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  Fa. 
6.  4  thy  Father  winch  seeth  in  secret  himself 
6.   6  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret 

6.    6  and  thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret 
6.    8  for  your  Father  knoweth  what  things  ye 
6.   9  pray  ye,  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven 
6.  14  your  heavenly  Father  will  also  forgive 
6. 15  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your 
6.  iS  but  unto  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret 
6. 18  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  in  secret 
6.  26  yet  your  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them 

6.  32  for  your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that 

7.  11  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which 

7.  21  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father 

8.  21  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  f. 
10.  20  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father  which  spea. 
10.  21  brother  shall  deliver  up.  .and  the  father 
10.  29  not  fall  on  the  ground  without  your  Fat. 
to.  32  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father 
10.  33  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father 
10.  ss  I  am  come  to  set  a  man.  .against  his  fat. 

10.  37  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more 

II.  25  said.  .0  Father,  Lordof  heaven  and  earth 

11.  26  Even  so,  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed  good  in 
it.  27  All.  .are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father 
11.  27  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father 

11.  27  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save 

12.  50  For  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  F. 

13.  43  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father 
15.    4  saying,  Honour  thy  father  and  mother 
15.    4  He  that  curseth  father  or  mother,  let 

15-  5  Whosoever  shall  say  to.  .father  or.  .mot. 
15.    6  And  honour  not  his  father  or  his  mother 

15.  13  Every  plant,  which  my  heavenly  Father 

16.  17  hath  not.  .but  my  Father  which  is  in  he. 
16.  27  the  Son . .  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  liis  F. 
18.  10  behold  the  face  of  my  Father  which  is  m 
18.  14  Even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father 
18. 19  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father 

18.  35  So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do 

19.  5  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father 
19.  19  Honour  thy  father  and  (thy)  mother;  and 
19.  29  [every  one  that  hath  forsaken  father  or  m.] 
20. 23  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  Father 
21.  31  Whether  of  them . .  did  the  will  of . .  father? 
23.   9  And  call  no  (man)  your  father  upon  the 

23.  9  for  one  is  your  Father,  which  is  in  heaven 

24.  36  not  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  my  Father 

25.  34  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 

26.  29  when  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  Fat. 
26.  39  prayed,  saying,  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  pos. 
26.  42  0  my  Father  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  aw. 
26.  53  Thinkest . .  that  1  cannot . .  pray  to  my  F. 
28.  19  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Fathei 

Mark  1.  20  they  left  their  father  Zebedee  in  the  ship 
5.  40  taketh  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the 
7. 10  Moses  said,  Honour  thy  father  and  thy 
7. 10  Whoso  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him 
7.  11  If  a  man  shall  say  to  his  father  or  mother 

7.  12  suffer  him  no  more  to  do  ought  for  his  f. 

8.  38  when  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Fath. 
g.  21  he  asked  lus  father,  How  long  is  it  ago 

9.  24  straightway  the  father  of  the  child  cried 
10.  7  For  tliis  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  fat. 
10. 19  Thou  knowest . .  Honour  thy  father  and  m. 

10.  29  There isnoman  thathathleft house. .orf 
ti.  10  Blessed  (lie)  the  kingdom  of  our  father 

11.  25  that  your  Father  also  which  is  in  heaven 
11.  26  [if  ye  do  not  forgive,  neither  will  your  F.] 
13.  12  brother  shall  betray,  .and  the  father  the 

13.  32  of  that  day.,  knoweth  no  man.,  but  the  F 

14.  36  Abba,  Father,  all  things  (are)  possible 

15.  21  they  compel  one  Simon,  .father  of  Aleia. 
Luke  1.  32  God  shall  give,  .him  the  throne  of  his  fa. 


/ 


FATHER 


334 


FATHERLESS 


John 


Luke  j.  59  Zaeharias,  after  the  name  of  his  father 
i.  62  they  made  signs  to  his  father,  how  lie 
1.  67  his  father  Zaeharias  was  filled  with  the 

1.  73  The  oath  which  he  sware  to  our  father  A. 

2.  48  thy  father  and  I  have  sought  thee  sorrow. 

2.  49  wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Fat. 

3.  8  We  have  Abraham  tu  (our)  father :  for  I 
6.  36  Be  ye.  .merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is 

8.  51  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the  maiden 

9.  26  come  in  his  own  glory,  and  (in  his)  Fath. 
9.  42  and  delivered  him  again  to  his  father 

9.  59  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  f. 
10.  21  I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven 
10.  21  even  so,  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed  good 
10.  22  AH  things  are  delivered  to  me  of  my  Fat. 

10.  22  no  man  knoweth  who  the  Son  is,  but  the  F. 

11.  2  When  ye  pray,  say.  Our  Father  which  art 
11.  11  If  a  son  shall  ask  bread  of .  .a  father,  will 

11.  13  how  much  more  shall,  .heavenly  Father 

12.  30  your  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need 
12.  32  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give 
i2-  53  The  father  shall  be  divided  against  the 
12.  53  and  the  son  against  the  father  ;  the  mot. 

26  If  any.  .come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his  fat. 
12  younger  of  them  said  to  (his)  father,  Fat. 

17  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's 
iS  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,  and  will 

18  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  Heaven 
20  And  he  arose  and  came  to  his  father 

20  when  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  fat. 

21  the  son  said  unto  him,  Father,  I  have  s. 

22  the  father  said  to  his  servants,  Bring 

27  thy  father  hath  killed  the  fatted  calf 

28  therefore  came  his  father  out,  and  entrea. 

29  And  he  answering  said  to  (his)  father,  Lo 
24  And  he  cried  and  said.  Father  Abraham 
27  Then  he  said,  I  pray  thee  therefore,  fat. 
27  thou  wouhlest  send  him  to  my  father's  h. 

30  And  he  said,  Nay,  father  Abraham  :  but 
20  Thou  knowest.  .Honour  thy  father  and 
29  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  me 
42  Saying,  Father,  if  thou  be  willing,  remove 
34  [Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them] 
46  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my 
49  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you 
14  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Fath. 

1-  18  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father 
2  16  make  not  my  Father's  house  an  house  of 

3.  35  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  giv. 

4.  12  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Jacob 
4.  21  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father 
4.  23  the  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  F. 
4.  23  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship 

4.  53  So  the  father  knew  that  (it  was)  at  the 

5.  17  My  father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work 
5.  18  but  said  also  that  God  was  his  Father 
5.  19  nothing,  .but  what  he  seeth  the  Father 
5.  20  For  the  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  show. 
5.  21  Forasthe  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead,  and 
5.  22  For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath 
5.  23  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father 
5.  23  honoureth  not  the  Father  which  hath 
5.  26  For  as  the  Father  hath  life  iu  himself 
5.  30  but  the  will  of  [the  Father]  which  hath 
5.  36  for  the  works  which  the  Father  hath 
5.  36  bear  witness  of  me,  that  the  Father  hath 
5.  37  the  Father  himself,  which  hath  sent  me 
5.  43  I  am  enme  in  my  Father's  name,  and  ye 

5.  45  Do  not  think . .  I  will  accuse . .  to  the  Fath. 

6.  27  Son.  .for  him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed 
6.  32  but  my  Father  giveth  you  the  true  bread 
6.  37  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come 
6.  39  And  this  is  the  [Father's]  will  which  hath 
6.  42  Is  not  this  Jesus,  .whose  father  and  mot. 
6.  44  No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Fat. 
6.  45  and  hath  learned  of  the  Father,  cometh 
6.  46  Not  that  any  man  hath  seen  the  Father 
6.  46  he  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the  Fat. 
6.  57  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the  F. 
8.  16  not  alone,  but  I  and  the  Father  that  sent 
8.  18  the  Father  that  sent  me  beareth  witness 
8.  19  said  they  unto  him,  Where  is  thy  Father? 
8.  19  Ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father :  if 
8.  19  ye  should  have  known  my  Father  also 
8.  27  understood  not  that  he  spake . .  of  the  Fat. 
8.  28  but  as  my  Father  hath  taught  me,  I  speak 
8.  29  [the  Father]  hath  not  left  me  alone  ;  for 
8.  38  I  speak  that.  .1  have  seen  with  my  fath. 
8.  38  ye  do  that,  .ye  have  seen  with  your  father 
8.  39  They  answered,  .him,  Abraham  is  our  fa. 
8.  41  Ye  do  the  deeds  of  your  father.  Then  said 
8.  41  boru  of  fornication  ;  we  have  one  Father 
8.  42  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would  love 
8.  44  Ye  are  of  (your)  father  the  devil,  and  the 
8.  44  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do.     He  was 
8.  44  a  lie.  .for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it 
8.  49 1  honour  my  Father,  and  ye  do  dishonour 
8.  53  Art  thou  greater  thanour  father  Abraham 
8.  54  it  is  my  Father  that  honoureth  me  ;  of 
8.  56  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my 

10.  15  As  the  Father  knoweth  me,  even  so  know 
10.  17  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  beca. 
10.  iS  This  commandment.  .1  received  of  my  F. 
10.  25  the  works  that  I  do  in  my  Father's  name 
10.  29  My  Father,  which  gave  (them)  me,  is 

10.  29  is  able  to  pluck,  .out  of  my  Father's  hand 
10.  30 1  and  (my)  Father  are  one 
10.  32  Many,  .works  have  I  showed,  .from  my  F. 
10.  36  say  ye  of  him,  whom  the  Father  hath 
10.  37  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  beli. 

10.  38  ye  may  know  and  believe  that  the  Father 

1 1.  41  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard 


John  12. 


7- 
7- 
7 
7- 

16. 

16. 

28, 
Rom.  1. 
4' 
4^ 
4' 
4' 
4 
4 


1  Co. 


j  Co. 


Gal. 


Eph. 


r-hil. 


Col. 


26  if  any  man  serve  me,  him  will  (my)  Father 

27  what  shall  I  say?  Father,  save  me  from 

28  Father,  glorify  thy  name.     Then  came 
49  the  Father  which  sent  me,  he  gave  me  a 
50 1  speak  therefore,  even  as  the  Father  said 

1  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father 

3  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given 

2  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions 

6  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by 

7  ye  should  have  known  my  Father  also 

8  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  anditsufficeth 
q  he  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Fath. 

9  how  sayest  thou  (then),  Show  us  the  Fa. 
10  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father 
10  I  speak  not  of  myself :  but  the  Father 

n  that  I  (am)  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father 

12  greater,  .because  I  go  unto  my  Father 

13  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the 
16  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give 

20  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  in  my  Father 

21  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  F. 

23  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come 

24  not  mine,  but  the  Father's  which  sent  me 
26  But  the  Comforter,  .whom  the  Father 

28  I  go  unto  the  Father ;  for  my  Father  is 
31  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  Fa. 

31  as  the  Father  gave  me  commandment 

1  I  am  the  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the 

8  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye 

9  As  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I 
10  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  command. 

15  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my  Father 

16  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in 

23  He  that  hateth  me  hateth  my  Father  also 

24  now  have  they,  .hated  both  me  and  my  F. 
26  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  F. 
26  truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father 

3  because  they  have  not  known  the  Father 

10  Of  righteousness,  because  I  go  to  my  F. 

15  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine 

16  [ye  shall  see  me;  because  I  go  to  the  F.] 

17  What  is  this . .  Because  I  go  to  the  Father  ? 

23  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in 

25  but  I  shall  show  you  plainly  of  the  Father 

26  I  say  not.  .1  will  pray  the  Father  for  you 

27  For  the  Father  himself  loveth  you,  beca. 

28  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am 
28  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father 

32  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father 

1  Father,  the  hour  is  come ;  glorify  thy  Son 

5  And  now,  0  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with 

11  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own 

21  That  they  all  may  be  one  ;  as  thou,  Father 

24  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou 

25  O  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not 
11  the  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me 
17  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father 
17  I  ascend  untomy  Father,  and  your  Father 

21  as  (my)  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send 

4  but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father 
7  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own 

33  having  received  of  the  Father  the  promise 

2  The  God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our  fa. 

4  from  thence,  when  his  father  was  dead 

14  Then  sent  Joseph,  and  called  his  father 
20  Moses  was.  .nourished  up  in  his  father's 

1  the  son  of  a.  Jewess,  .but  his  father. 

3  they  knew  all  that  his  father  was  a  Greek 
8  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  father  of  Publius 
7  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our  F. 
1  What  shall  we  then  say  that . .  our  [father] 

11  that  he  might  be  the  father  of  all  them 

12  the  father  of  circumcision  to  them  who 
12  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of  our  father 

16  of  Abraham  ;  who  is  the  father  of  us  all 

17  I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  natio. 
iS  might  become  the  father  of  many  nations 

4  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father 

15  the  spirit,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father 

10  Rebecca . .  conceived . .  by  our  father  Isaac 

6  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
3  Grace,  .and  peace,  from  God  our  Father 

1  that  one  should  have  his  father's  wife 

6  But  to  us.  .one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom 
24  delivered  tip  the  kingdom  to.  .the  Father 

2  Grace,  .and  peace  from  God  our  Father 

3  Blessed  (be)  God,  even  the  Father  of  our 
3  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all 

18  And  will  be  a  Father  unto  you,  and  ye 
31  The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 

1  but  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  God  the  Father 

3  Grace,  .and  peace  from  God  the  Father 

4  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Fa. 

2  until  the  time  appointed  of  the  father 

6  sent  forth  the  spirit . .  crying,  Abba,  Fath. 

2  Grace,  .and  peace,  from  God  our  Father 

3  Blessed  (be)  the  God  and  Father  of  our  L. 

17  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Fa. 

18  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Fath. 
14  I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  Father  of  ourL. 

6  One  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  (is)  above 
20  Giving  thanks,  .unto  God  and  the  Father 
31  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  fat. 

2  Honour  thy  father  and  mother  ;  which 
23  love  with  faith,  from  God  the  Father  and 

2  Grace.,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father 

11  confess,  .to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father 

22  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath  served 
20  Now  unto  God  and  our  Father  (be)  glory 

2  Grace,  .and  peace,  from  God  our  Father 

3  We  give  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  of 

12  Giving  thanks  unto  the  Father,  which 


Col. 

iTh. 


2  Th. 


1  Ti. 

2TL    i 
Titus  i 
Rhni. 
Heb. 


Jas. 


Re. 


2Pe. 
1  Jo. 


j  Jo. 


Jnde 
Rev. 


2  [of  God.  and  of  the  Father,  and  of  Christ] 

17  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by 

1  of  the Thessalonians .  .in  God  the  Father 

1  Grace,  .and  peace,  from  God  [our  Father] 

1.  3  in  the  sight  of  God  and  our  Father 

2.  11  we  exhorted,  .as  a  father  (doth)  his  chil. 

3.  11  Now  God  himself  and  our  Father,  and  our 
3.  13  God,  even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of 

1  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Chr. 

2  Grace,  .and  peace,  from  God  our  Father 
16  God,  even  our  Father,  which  hath  loved 

2  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  Jesus 

1  Rebuke  not  an  elder,  but  entreat,  .as  a  fa. 

2  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ 
4  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  the 

3  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  L. 

1.  5  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he  shall  be 
7.  10  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  father  when 

2.  7  what  son  is  he  whom  the  father  chasten. 
2.  9  Furthermore  we  have  had  fathers  of  our 
1. 17  Every  good  gift,  .cometh  down  from  the  F. 

1.  27  Pure  religion,  .before  God  and  the  Fath. 

2.  2i  Was  not  Abraham  our  father  justified  by 

3.  9  Therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the  Father 
1.  2  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of . .  the  F. 
1.  3  Blessed  (be)  the  God  and  Father  of  our  L 
1.  17  if  ye  call  on  the  Father,  who  without 
1.  17  For  he  received  from  God  the  Father  ho 
"i.    2  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  fath. 

1.  3  truly  our  fellowship  (is}  with  the  Father 

2.  1  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father 
2.  13  because  ye  have  known  the  Father 
2. 15  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him 
2.  16  the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but 
2.  22  he  is  antichrist,  that  denieth  the  Father 
2.  23  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  F. 

2.  24  shall  continue  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Fat. 

3.  1  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
4. 14  do  testify  that  the  Father  sent  the  Son 
5.    7  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the 

3  peace,  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  the 

3  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Father,  in 

4  have  received  acommandment  from  theF. 
9  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son 
1  them  that  are  sanctified  by  God  the  Fath. 
6  made  us.  .priests  unto  God  and  his  Fath. 

2.  27  rule,  .even  as  I  received  of  my  Father 

3.  5  I  will  confess  his  name  before  my  Father 

3.  21  and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in  his 
14.    1  having  his  Father's  name  written  in  their 

FATHER,  whose  — 

Son  of  a  man,  t:;,l<"|3  ben  ish. 

Lev.  24. 10  whose  father  (was)  an  Egyptian,  went  out 
FATHER,  murderer  of  a  — 
Simier  of  a  father,  -warpaXwas  pairaloas. 

1  Ti.    1.    9  for  murderers  of  fathers  and  murderers 
FATHER,  without  — 
Without  a  father,  airdrcop  apatar. 

Heb.   7.    3  Withoutfather,  without  mother,  without 
FATHER  (in)  law  — 
1. Husband's  father,  en  chain* 

Gen.  38. 13  Behold,  thy  father  in  law  goeth  up  to 
38.  25  she  sent  to  her  father  in  law,  saying.  By 

1  Sa.    4. 19  and  that  her  father  in  law  and  her  husb. 
4. 21  because  of  her  father  iu  law  and  her  hus. 
2.  Wife's  father,  jnn  chathan. 

Exod.3.    1  Moses  kept  the  flock  of.  .his  father  in  law 

4.  18  Moses,  .returned  to  Jethro  his  father  in  1. 
18.  1  When  Jethro..  Moses'  father  in  law,  heard 
18.  2  Then  Jethro,  Moses'  father  in  law,  took 
18.  5  Moses'  father  in  law,  came  witli  his  sons 
18.  6  I  thy  father  iu  law  Jethro  am  come  unto 
18.  7  Moses  went  out  to  meet  his  father  in  law 
18.  8  Moses  told  his  father  in  law  all  that  the 
18.12  Moses'  father  inlaw,  took  a  burnt  offering 

.  18.  12  came,  .to  eat.  .with  Moses'  father  iu  law 

18.  14  when  Moses'  father  in  law  saw  all  that  he 
18.  15  Moses  said  unto  his  father  inlaw,  Because 
18.  17  Moses'  father  in  law  said  unto  him.  The 
18.  24  Moses  hearkened  to.  .his  father  in  law 

18.  27  And  Moses  let  his  father  in  law  depart 
Num  10.  20  said  unto  Hobab.  .Moses*  father  in  law 
Judg.  1.  16  children  of  the  Kenite,  Moses'  father  in  1. 

4. 11  of  the  children  of  Hobab,  the  father  in  law 

19.  4  And  his  father  iu  law,  the  damsel's  father 
19.  7  when  the  man  rose  up.  .his  father  in  law 
19.    9  his  father  in  law,  the  damsel's  father,  said 

3. Father  in  law,  irtvdepos  peritlieros. 

JohniS.  13  to  Annas  first  :  for  he  was  father  in  law 
FATHERLESS  — 
1. Orphan,  fatherless,  Din;  yathom. 

Exod22.  24  shall  be  widows,  and  your  children  fath. 
Deutio.  iS  He  doth  execute  the  judgment  of  the  fa. 
14.  29  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  w  Inch  (are) 
16.  11,  14  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  that 
24.  17  Thou  shalt  not  pervert,  .the  fatherless 
24.  19,  20,  21  shall  be  for  the  stranger,  for  the  f. 
26.  12  and  hast  given  (it)  unto,  .the  fatherless 

26.  13  also  have  given  them,  .to the  fatherless 

27.  19  Cursed  (be)  he  that  perverteth .  .the  fath. 
Job     6.  27  Yea,  ye  overwhelm  the  fatherless,  and  ye 

22.   9  the  arms  of  the  fatherless  have  been 
24.    3  They  drive  away  the  ass  of  the  fatherless 
24.    9  They  pluck  the  fatherless  from  the  breast 
29.  12  Because  I  delivered  the.  .fatherless 
31.  17  and  the  fatherless  hath  noteateu  thereof 
31.  21  If  I  haveliftedup.  .against  the  fatherless 


FATHERLESS 


335 


FATHERS 


Psa.  10. 14  for.  .thou  art  the  helper  of  the  fatherless 
10.  18  To  judge  the  fatherless  and  the  oppressed 
6S.    5  A  father  of  the  fatherless,  and  a  judge  of 
82.    3  Defend  the  poor  and  fatherless :  do  just. 
04.    6  They  slay,  .aud  murder  the  fatherless 
109.    9  Let  his  children  be  fatherless,  and  his 
109.  12  neither  let  there  he  any  to  favour  his  fa. 
146.    9  The  Lord,  .relieveth  the  fatherless  and 
Prov  23.  10  enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the  fatherless 
Isa.     1.  17  judge  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow 
1.  23  they  judge  not  the  fatherless,  neither 
9.  17  neither  shall  have  mercy  on  their  father. 
10.    2  and  (that)  they  may  rob  the  fatherless  ! 
Jer.    5.  28  they  judge  not  the  cause,  .of  the  fatherl. 
7.    6  (If)  ye  oppress  not  the  stranger,  thefath. 
22.    3  do  no  violence  to  the  stranger,  the  fath. 
49.  ir  Leave  thy  fatherless  children,  I  will  pre. 
Eze.  22.    7  in  thee  have  they  vexed  the  fatherless 
Hos.  14.    3  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  flndeth  mercy 
Zech.  7.  10  And  oppress  not  the  widow,  nor  the  fath. 
Mai.    3.    5  against  those  that  oppress . .  the  fatherless 

2.TJierc  is  not  a  father,  as*  px  en  ab. 

Lam.  5.    3  We  are  orphans  and  fatherless,  our  mot. 
3.  Orphan,  op<t>av6s  oiyhanos. 

Jas.     1.  27  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their 
FATHERLESS  child  — 
Orphan,  fatlierle-ss,  Din;  yathom. 

Exod22.  22  shall  not  afflict  any ..  fatherless  child 
FATHER'S  brother  — 
Fathers  brother,  uncle,  til  dod. 

Nuni3D.  1 1. were  married  unto  their  father's  brothers' 

2  Ki.24.  17  made  Mattaniah  his  father's  brother  king 

FATHER'S  sister  — 

Father's  sister,  aunt,  rniTi  dodah. 

Exod.  6.  20  And  Anirani  took,  .his  father's  sister,  to 
FATHERS  — 
1. Fathers,  ancestors,  niUN  aboth. 

Gen.  15.  15  And  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace 
31.    3  Return  uuto  the  land  of  thy  fathers,  and 

46.  34  even  until  now,  both  we. .  also  our  fathers 

47.  3  Thy  servants  (are)  shepherds,  .also  our  f. 
47.    9  the  years  of  the  life  of  my  fathers  in  the 

47.  30  I  will  lie  with  my  fathers,  and  thou  shalt 

48.  15  God,  before  whom  my  fathers  Abraham 
48.  16  and  the  name  of  my  fathers  Abraham  and 
48.  21  bring  you  again  unto  the  land  of  your  fa. 

Exod.  3.  13  The  God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me 

3.  15,  16  The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  G. 

4.  5  believe  that  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 
6.  14  These  (be)  the  heads  of  their  fathers'  ho. 

6.  25  these  (are)  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the 
10.    6  neither  thy  fathers,  nor  thy  father's  fat. 

12.  3  according  to  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 

13.  5  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers  to  give 
13.  11  as  he  sware  unto  thee  aud  to  thy  fathers 
20.  s  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
34.    7  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 

Lev.  25.  41  unto  the  possessions  of  his  fathers  shall 
26.  39  in  the  iniquities  of  their  fathers  shall 
26.  40  confess,  .the  iniquity  of  their  fathers 

Num.  1.    2  by  the  house  of  their  fathers,  with  the 
1.   4  every  one  head  of  the  house  of  his  fathers 
1. 16  princes  of  the  tribes  of  their  fathers,  heads 
1. 18  their  families,  by  the  house  of  their  fath. 

[So  i.n  v.  20,  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42.] 

1.  44  each  one  was  for  the  house  of  his  fathers 
1 .  45  by  the  house  of  their  fathers,  from  twenty 

1.  47  the  Levites  after  the  tribe  of  their  fathers 

2.  2  Every  man.  .with  the  ensign  of  their  fa. 
2.  32  numbered,  .by  the  house  of  their  fathers 

2.  34  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 
3.15  Number,  .afterthe  house  of  theirfathers 

3.  20  Levites  according  to  the  house  of  their  f. 

4.  2,  29,  38,  40,  42  by  the  house  of  their  fathers 
4.  22  throughout  the  houses  of  their  fathers,  by 
4.  34,  46  and  after  the  house  of  their  fathers 

7.  2  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

11. 12  land  which  thou  swarest  unto  their  fath. 

13.  2  of  every  tribe  of  then-  fathers  shall  ye 

14.  18  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
14.  23  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathers 
17.   2  according  to  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 
17.    3  for  the  head  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 
17.    6  according  to  their  fathers'  houses,  (evenl 
20.  15  How  our  fathers  went  down  into  Egypt 
20.  15  and  the  Egyptians  vexed  us  and  our  fat. 
26.   2  throughout  their  fathers'  house,  all  that 
26.  55  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  their  fathers 

31.  26  and  the  chief  fathers  of  the  congregation 

32.  8  Thus  did  your  fathers,  when  I  sent  them 
32. 14  ye  are  risen  up  in  your  fathers'  stead,  an 
32. 28  chief  fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the  children 

33.  54  according  to  the  tribes  of  your  fathers 
34. 14,  14  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathe. 
36.    1  And  the  chief  fathers  of  the  families  of 
36.    1  the  chief  fathers  of  the  children  of  Israel 
36.   3  taken  from  the  inheritance  of  our  fathe. 
36.    4,  7  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  our  fathers  , 

Deut.  1.  8  land,  .the  Lord  sware  unto  your  fathe. 
1. 11  The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers  make  you 
1.  21  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  said 
1.  35  which  I  sware  to  give  unto  your  fathers 
4.    1  which  the  Lore  God  of  your  fathers  giv. 

4.  31  nor  forget  the  covenant  of  thy  fathers 

4-  37  because  he  loved  thy  fathers,  therefore  he 

5.  3  made  not  this  covenant  with  our  fathers 
5.   9  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 


Deut.  6.  3  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  pro. 
6.  io  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers 
6.  18  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fathers 

6.  23  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  our  fat  here 

7.  8  oath  which  he  had  sworn  unto  your  fath. 
7. 12  the  mercy  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fat. 

7.  13  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathe. 

8.  1  the  land,  .the  Lord  sware  unto  your  fat. 
8.    3  humbled  thee,  .neither  did  thy  fathers 

8.  16  with  manna,  which  thy  fathers  knew  not 

8.  18  covenant  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathe. 

9.  5  the  word,  .the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fat. 

10. 11  the  land,  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathe. 
10.  15  the  Lord  had  a  delight  in  thy  fathers  to 

10.  22  Thy  fathers  went  down  into  Egypt  with 

11.  9,  21  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  your  fat. 

12.  1  the  land  which  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fat, 

13.  6  thou  hast  not  known,  thou,  nor  thy  fath. 
13. 17  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers 

19.   8  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers,  and 
19.    8  land  which  he  promised . .  unto  thy  fathers 
24.  16  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for 
24. 16  neither  shall  the  children .  .for  the  fathe. 
26.    3  winch  the  LORD  sware  unto  our  fathers 
26.   7  we  cried  uuto  the  Lord  God  of  our  fath. 

26.  15  as  thou  swarest  unto  our  fathers,  aland 

27.  3  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  promi. 

28.  1 1  the  land . .  the  LORD  sware  unto  thy  fathe. 

28.  36,  64  which  neither  thou  nor  thy  fathers 
29. 13  and  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers 

29.  25  covenant  of  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathe. 

30.  5  into  the  land  which  thy  fathers  possessed 
30.   5  and  multiply  thee  above  thy  fathers 

30.   9  rejoice,  .as  he  rejoiced  over  thy  fathers 

30.  20  the  land .  .the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fath. 

31.  7  the  Lord  hath  sworn  unto  their  fathers 
31.  16  Behold,  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers 

31.  20  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  theirfathers 

32.  17  to  new  (gods  that)  came,  .whom  your  fa. 
Josh.  1.   6  the  land  winch  I  sware  uuto  their  fathers 

4. 21  When  your  children  shall  ask  their  fath. 

5.  6  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  their  fathers 

14.  1  and  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes 

18.  3  land,  which  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers 

19.  51  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes  of 
21.    1  Then  came  near  the  heads  of  the  fathers 
2i.    1  unto  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  trib. 
21.  43  which  he  sware  to  give  unto  their  fathers 

21.  44  to  all  that  he  sware  unto  their  fathers 

22.  14  an  head  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 
22.  28  Behold  the  pattern,  .which  our  fathers 
24.   2  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Your  fathers  dwelt 
24.   6  And  I  brought  your  fathers  out  of  Egypt 
24.    6  Egyptians  pursued  after  your  fathers 

24.  14  and  put  away  the  gods  which  your  fath. 

24.  15  whether  the  gods  which  your  father  ser. 

24.  17  the  Lord,  .brought  us  up  and  our  fathe. 

Judg.  2.  10  generation  were  gathered  unto  their  fat. 

2. 12  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  fath. 

2.  17  turned,  .out  of  the  way  which  their  fath. 

2. 19  corrupted  (themselves)  more  than  their  f. 

2.  20  my  covenant.  .1  commanded  their  fathers 

2.  22  they  will  keep  the  way.  .as  their  fathers 

3.  4  which  he  commanded  their  fathers  by 

6.  13  where  (be)  all  his  miracles  which  our  fa. 
21.  22  And  it  shall  be,  when  their  fathers  or 

1  Sa.  12.   6  brought  your  fathers  up  out  of  the  land 

12.    7  which  he  did  to  you  and  to  your  fathers 
12..  8  and  your  fathers  cried  unto  the  Lord 
12.    8  Moses,  .which  brought  forth  your  fathers 

12.  15  against  you,  as  (it  was)  against  your  fat. 

2  Sa.   7.  12  and  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers 

1  Ki.  1.  21  when  my  lord,  .shall  sleep  with  his  fath. 

2. 10  So  David  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
8.  1  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  children 
8.  21  covenant,  .which  he  made  with  our  fath, 
8.  34,  48  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  their  f. 
8. 40  the  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fat. 
8.  53  when  thou  broughtest  our  fathers  out  of 
8.  57  as  he  was  with  our  fathers:  let  him  not 

8.  58  statutes,  .which  he  commanded  our  fath. 

9.  9  God,  who  brought  forth  their  fathers  out 
11.  21  heard,  .that  David  slept  with  his  fathers 

11.  43  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

13.  22  not  come  unto  the  sepulchre  of  thy  fath. 

14.  15  good  land,  which  he  gave  to  their  fathers 
14.  20  and  he  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  Nadab 
14.  22  above  all  that  their  fathers  had  done 

14.  31  And  Rehoboam  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 

14.  31  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of 

15.  8  Abijani  slept  with  his  fathers  ;  and  they 

15. 12  removed  all  the  idols  that  his  fathers 
15.  24  And  Asa  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

15.  24  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  Da. 

16.  6  Baasha  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
16.  28  Omri  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  bu. 
19.    4  for  I  (am)  not  better  than  my  fathers 
21.    3  give  the  inheritance  of  my  fathers  unto 

21.  4  give  thee  the  inheritance  of  my  fathers 

22.  40  So  Ahab  slept  with  his  fathers;  and  Ah. 
22.  50  And  Jehosaphat  slept  with  his  fathers 
22.  50  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the 

2  Ki.  8.  24  And  Joram  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 

8.  24  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of 
g.  28  buried  him  in  his  sepulchre  with  his  fat. 
10.  35  Jehu  slept  with  his  fathers:  and  they  b. 

12.  18  his  fathers,  kings  of  Judah,  had  dedicated 

12.  21  they  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the 

13.  9  Jehoahaz  slept  with  his  fathers  ;  and  they 

13.  13  Joash  slept  with  his  fathers  ;  and  Jerob. 

14.  6  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for 
14.    6  nor  the  children .  .for  the  fathers ;  but 


2  Ki.14.  16  Jehoash  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
14.  20  and  he  was  buried,  .with  his  fathers  in 
14.  22  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 

14.  29  Jeroboam  slept  with  his  fathers,  (even) 

15.  7  So  Azariah  slept  with  his  fathers;  and 
15.    7  they  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the 
15.    9  he  did . .  evil . .  as  his  fathers  had  done 
15.  22  And  Menahem  slept  with  his  fathers 
15.  38  And  Jotham  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 

15.  38  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of 

16.  20  And  Ahaz  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

16.  20  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  Da. 

17.  13  the  law  which  I  commanded  your  fathers 
17.  14  like  to  the  neck  of  their  fathers,  that  did 

17. 15  covenant  that  he  made  with  their  fathers 
17.  41  as  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they  unto  this 
19. 12  delivered  them  which  my  fathers  have 
20.  17  that  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up 

20.  21  And  Hezekiah  slept  with  his  fathers :  and 

21.  8  out  of  the  land  which  I  gave  their  fathers 
21.  15  since  the  day  their  fathers  came  forth  out 
2i.  18  And  Manasseh  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 

21.  22  And  he  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  his  fath. 

22.  13  because  our  fathers  have  not  hearkened 

22.  20  I  will  gather  thee  unto  thy  fathers,  and 
23-  32»  37  according  to  all  that  his  fathers  had 
24.    6  So  Jehoiakim  slept  with  his  fathers :  and 

i  Ch.   4.  38  the  house  of  their  fathers  increased  gre. 
5.  13  brethren  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 
'  5.  15  Ahi.  .chief  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 
5.  24,  24  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

5.  25  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  fa. 

6.  19  of  the  Levites  according  to  their  fathers 

7.  2  and  Shemuel,  headsof  their  father's  house 
7.    4  after  the  house  of  their  fathers,  (were) 

7.    7,  9  heads  of  the  house  of  (their)  fathers, 

7.  11  All  these,  .by  the  heads  of  their  fathers 

8.  6  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  inhabitants 

8.  10  These  (were)  his  sons,  heads  of  the  fathers 

8.  28  These  (were)  heads  of  the  fathers,  by 

9.  9  All  these  men  (were)  chief  of  the  fathers 
9.  13  brethren,  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fat. 
9.  19  and  their  fathers,  (being)  over  the  host  of 
9.  33  these  (are)  the  singers,  chief  of  the  fathers 
9.  34  These  chief  fathers  of  the  Levites  (were) 

12.  17  the  God  of  our  fathers  look  (thereon),  and 
12.  30  famous  throughout  the  house  of  then-  fa. 

15.  12  Ye  (are)  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  L. 
37.  11  that  thou  must  go  (to  be)  with  thy  fathers 

23.  9  These  (were)  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of 

23.  24  their  fathers ;  (even)  the  chief  of  the  fat. 

24.  4  chief  men  of  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 
24.    4  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 
24.    6  and  (before)  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of 
24.  30  Levites  after  the  house  of  their  fathers 
24.  31  and  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  priests 
24.  31  even  the  principal  fathers  over  against 
26.  13  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 
26.  21  chief  fathers,  (even)  of  Laadan  the  Ger. 
26.  26  and  the  chief  fathers,  the  captains  over 
26.  31  to  the  generations  of  his  fathers 

26.  32  brethren . .  (were)  two  thousand . .  chief  fa. 

27.  1  the  chief  fathers  and  captains  of  thous. 
29.    6  Then  the  chief  of  the  fathers  and  princes 
29  15  and  sojourners,  as  (were)  all  our  fathers 
29.  18  our  fathers,  keep  this  for  ever  in  the 
29.  20  blessed  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 

2  Ch.  1.    2  in  all  Israel,  the  chief  of  the  fathers 

5.  2  Solomon  assembled .  .the  chief  of  the  fat. 

6.  25  land,  .thou  gavest  to  them  and  to  their  f. 
6.  31  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers 

6.  38  land,  which  thou  gavest  unto  their  fathers 

7.  22  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  fath. 
9.  31  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  he 

11. 16  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  God  of  their  fa. 

12.  16  And  Rehoboam  slept  with  his  fathers - 

13.  12  not  against  the..  God  of  your  fathers 

13.  18  relied  upon  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 

14.  1  So  Abijali  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 
14.    4  Judah  to  seek  the.  .God  of  their  fathers 
15. 12  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 

16.  13  Asa  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  died  in 

17.  14  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 
19.    4  back  unto  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 

19.  8  and  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel 

20.  6  0  Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  (art)  not  thou 

20.  33  then-  hearts  unto  the  God  of  their  fathers 

21.  1  Jehoshaphat  slept  with  his  fathers 

21.  1  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  ci. 
21. 10  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers 
21.  19  no  burning,  .like  the  burning  of  his  fath. 

23.  2  and  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel 

24.  1 8  left  the  house  of  the . .  God  of  their  fathers 

24.  24  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God  of  their  fath. 

25.  4  The  fathers  shall  not  die  for  the  children 
25.  4  neither  shall  the  children  die  for  the  fath. 
25.    5  according  to  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 

25.  28  buried  him  with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of 

26.  2  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 
26.  12  whole  number  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
26.  23  So  L'zziah  slept  with  his  fathers 

26.  23  and  they  buried  him  with  his  fathers 

27.  9  Jotham  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

28.  6  had  forsaken  the.  .God  of  their  fathers 
28.    9  because  the  LORD  God  of  your  fathers  was 
28.  25  provoked  to  anger  the . .  God  of  his  fathers 

28.  27  Ahaz  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

29.  5  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers 
29.    6  For  our  fathers  have  trespassed,  and  done 

29.  9  lo,  our  fathers  have  fallen  by  the  sword 

30.  7  be  not  ye  like  your  fathers,  and  like  your 
30.   7  against  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 


FATHERS 


3% 


FAULT 


2  Ch.30. 

3°- 

30 

3*- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32. 
33^ 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 

V        36" 

Ezra  1. 


Neh. 


13- 

Job     8. 

iS- 

Psa.  22. 

39- 

44. 

45- 

49. 

78. 

78. 

78. 

78. 

78. 

95 

106. 

106. 

109 

Prov  17 


Isa.  14. 

37. 

39- 
64. 

Jer.  2. 
3- 
3- 
3- 

6. 
7- 

7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
9- 
9- 


8  be  ye  not  stifFnecked,  as  your  fathers 

19  to  seek  God,  the  Loud  God  of  bis  fathers 
22  confession  to  the.  .God  of  their  fathers 

17  priests  by  the  house  of  their  fathers 

13  Know  ye  not  what  I  and  my  fathers  have 

14  the  gods  of  those  nations  that  my  fathers 
.  15  and  out  of  the  hand  of  my  fathers 

33  Hezekiah  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 
,  8  land  which  I . .  appointed  for  your  fathers 
.  12  humbled  himself.,  before  the  God  of  hisf. 

20  Manasseh  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

21  because  our  fathers  have  not  kept  the 
28  Behold,  I  will  gather  thee  to  thy  fathers 

32  covenant  of  God,  the  God  of  their  fathers 

33  following  the  Lord,  the  God  of  iheir  fat. 

4  And  prepare,  .by  the  houses  of  your  fath. 

5  of  the  fathers  of  your  brethren  the  people 
24  buried  in.  .the  sepulchres  of  his  fathers 

15  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers  sent  to 
5  Then  rose  up  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of 

59  they  could  nut  show  their  fathers'  house 
68  And.  .of  the  chief  of  the  fathers,  when 

12  of  the  priests,  .and  chief  of  the  fathers 

2  they  came,  .to  the  chief  of  the  fathers 

3  and  the  rest  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of 

27  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers 

1  These  (are)  now  the  chief  of  their  fathers 

28  offering  unto  the  Lord  God  of  your  fath. 

29  before  the . .  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel 

7  Since  the  days  of  our  fathers  (have)  we 

11  confession  unto  the.  .God  of  your  fathers 

16  And  Ezra,  .(with)  certain  chief  of  the  fat. 
16  after  the  house  of  their  fathers,  and  all 

3  when . .  the  place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres 

5  unto  the  city  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres 
61  they  could  not  show  their  fathers'  house 
70,  71  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave 

13  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  all  the  people 

2  confessed,  .the  iniquities  of  their  fathers 
9  didst  see  the  affliction  of  our  fathers  in 

16  But  they  and  our  fathers  dealt  proudly 
23  which  thou  hadst  promised  to  their  fath. 
32  come . .  on  our  fathers,  and  on  all  thy  peo. 

34  Neither  have,  .our  fathers,  kept  thy  law 
36  the  land  that  thou  gavest  unto  our  fath. 
34  after  the  houses  of  our  fathers,  at  times 

13  And  his  brethren,  chief  of  the  fathers 

12  were  priests,  the  chief  of  the  fathers 

22  The  Levites . .  recorded  chief  of  the  fathers 

23  sons  of  Levi,  the  chief  of  the  fathers 

i3  Did  not  your  fathers  thus,  and  did  not 

3  prepare  thyself  to  the  search  of  their  fa. 
iS  Which  wise  men  have  told  from  their  fa. 

1  have  me  in  derision,  whose  fathers  I 

4  Our  fathers  trusted  in  thee  :  they  trusted 
12  a  stranger,  .a  sojourner,  as  all  my  fathers 

1  O  God,  our  fathers  have  told  us,  (what) 
16  Instead  of  thy  fathers  shall  be  thy  child. 

19  He  shall  go  to  the  generation  of  his  fath. 

3  which.. our  fathers  have  told  us 

5  which  be  commanded  our  fathers,  that 

8  And  might  not  be  as  their  fathers,  a  stub. 
12  things  did  he  in  the  sight  of  their  fathers 
57  and  dealt  unfaithfully  like  their  fathers 

9  "When  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved 

6  We  have  sinned  with  our  fathers,  we  ha. 

7  Our  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders 

14  Let  the  iniquity  of  his  fathers  be  reme. 

6  the  glory  of  children  (are)  their  fathers 
14  House  and  riches,  .the  inheritance  of  fa. 

28  the  ancient  landmark,  which  thy  fathers 
21  for  the  iniquity  of  their  fathers ;  that 

12  delivered  them  which  my  fathers  have 

6  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store 
11  Our  holy,  .house,  where  our  fathers  prai. 

7  and  the  iniquities  of  your  fathers  togeth. 
5  What  iniquity  have  your  fathers  found 

18  given  for  an  inheritance  unto  your  fathe. 

24  shame  hath  devoured  the  labour  of  our  f. 

25  we  have  sinned,  .we  and  our  fathers 

21  the  fathers  and  the  sons  together  shall 
7  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers 

14  which  I  gave  to  you  and  to  your  fathers 

18  The  children  gather  wood,  and  the  fathe. 

22  For  I  spake  not  unto  your  fathers,  nor 

25  Since  the  day  that  your  fathers  came  for. 

26  Yet.  .they  did  worse  than  their  fathers 
14  after  Baalim,  which  their  fathers  taught 
16  whom  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  hav. 

4  Which  I  commanded  your  fathers  in  the 

5  oatli  which  I  have  sworn  unto  your  fath. 
7  I  earnestly  protested  unto  your  fathers 

10  covenant  which  I  made  with  their  fathe. 

14  And  I  will  dash.. the  fathers  and  the  so. 

20  We  acknowledge,  .the  iniquity  of  our  fa. 

3  concerning  their  fathers  that  begat  them 

11  Because  your  fathers  have  forsaken  me 

12  And  ye  have  done  worse  than  your  fathe. 

13  ye  know  not,  (neither)  ye  nor  your  fathe. 

15  their  land  that  I  gave  unto  their  fathers 

19  Surely  our  fathers  have  iuherited  lies 

22  the  sabbath  day,  as  I  commanded  your  f. 

4  whom  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  ha. 

27  as  their  fathers  have  forgotten  my  name 
39  the  city  that  I  gave  you  and  your  father. 
10  that  I  gave  unto  them  and  to  their  fathe. 

5  and  to  your  fathers  for  ever  and  ever 

3  to  the  land  that  I  gave  to  their  fathers 

29  The  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  grape,  an. 
32  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their  fat. 

18  recompensest  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers 
22  which  thou  didst  swear  to  their  fathers 


3<5- 

37- 

47' 

Uan 

9- 

9- 

9- 

II. 

11. 

TT. 

Hos. 

Q. 

Joel 

I. 

Amos  2. 

Mio. 

Zee. 

I. 

Jer.  34.    5  and  with  the  burnings  of  thy  fathers 
34.  13  I  made  a  covenant  with  your  fathers  in 

34.  14  but  your  fathers  hearkened  not  unto  me 

35.  15  I  have  given  to  you  and  to  your  fathers 
44.    3  whom  they  knew  not.  .nor  your  fathers 
44.    9  forgotten  the  wickedness  of  your  fathers 
44.  10  that  I  set  before  you  and  before  your  fa. 
44.  17  our  fathers,  our  kings,  and  our  princes 
44.  21  ye,  and  your  fathers,  your  kings,  and  you. 
47.    3  fathers  shall  not  look  back  to.  .children 
50.    7  even  the  Lord,  the  hope  of  their  fathers 

Lam.  5.    7  Our  fathers  have  sinned,  (and  are)  not 
Eze.    2.    3  they  and  their  fathers  have  transgressed 
5.  10  Therefore  the  fathers  shall  eat  the  sous 
5.  10  and  the  sons  shall  eat  their  fathers 
18.    2  The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and 
20.    4  to  know  the  abominations  of  their  fathe. 
20.  18  Walk  ye  not  in  the  statutes  of  your  fath. 
20.  24  their  eyes  were  after  their  fathers'  idols 
20.  27  Yet  in  this  your  fathers  have  blaspheme. 
20.  30  polluted  after  the  manner  of  your  fathers? 
20.  36  Like  as  I  pleaded  with  your  fathers  in 
42  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  to  your  fa. 
28  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers 
25  dwell  in  the  land,  .wherein  your  fathers 
14  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  unto  your  f. 
6  which  spake  in  thy  name  to.  .our  father. 
8  to  us.  .confusion  of  face,  .and  to  our  fat. 
16  and  for  the  iniquities  of  our  fathers 
24  he  shall  do  (that)  which  his  fathers  have 

37  Neither  shall  he  regard  the  God  of  his  fa. 

38  a  god  whom  his  fathers  knew  not  shall 
10  I  saw  your  fathers  as  the  first  ripe  in  the 

2  Hath  this  been,  .in  the  days  of  your  fat.  ? 
4  after  the  which  their  fathers  have  walk. 
20  which  thou  hast  sworn  unto  our  fathers 
2  hath  been  sore  displeased  with  your  fat. 
1.    4  Be  ye  not  as  your  fathers,  unto  whom 
1.    5  Your  fathers,  where  (are)  they?  and  the 
1.    6  did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fathers? 
8.  14  when  your  fathers  provoked  me  to  wrath 
Mai.  2.  10  profaning  the  covenant  of  our  fathers  ? 

3.  7  Even  from  the  days  of  your  fathers  ye 

4.  6  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to 

4.  6  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  fathers 

2.FatIiers,  ancestors,  rrox  aboth. 

Ezra   4.  15  the  book  of  the  records  of  thy  fathers 

5.  12  But  after  that  our  fathers  had  provoked 
Dan.   2.  23  I  thank  thee.  .0  thou  God  of  my  fathers 

S.FaiJiers,  ancestors,  irarepes  pateres. 

Matt  23.  30  If  we  had  been  in  the  days  of  our  fathe. 

23.  32  Fill  ye  up.  .the  measure  of  your  fathers 
Luke  1.  17  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the 

1.  55  As  he  spake  to  our  fathers,  to  Abraham 
1.  72  To  perform  the  mercy,  .to  our  fathers 

6.  23  for  iu  the  like  manner  did  their  fathers 
6.  26  for  so  did  their  fathers  to  the  false  pro. 

11.  47  ye  build,  .and  your  fathers  killed  them 
11.  48  that  ye  allow  the  deeds  of  your  fathers 
John  4.  20  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mounta. 
6.  31  Our  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  desert 
6.  49  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  wilde. 

6.  58  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  manna, and 
Acts    3.  13  the  God  of  our  fathers,  hath  glorified  his 

3.  22  [For  Moses  truly  said  unto  the  fathers] 
3.  25  covenant  which  God  made  with  our  fath. 
5.  30  The  God  of  our  fathers  raised  up  Jesus 

7.  2  And  he  said,  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers 
7.  11  and  our  fathers  found  no  sustenance 

7.  12  Jacob  heard . .  he  sent  out  our  fathers  first 
7.  15  So  Jacob,  .died,  he, .and  our  fathers 
7.  19  The  same . .  evil  entreated  our  fathers,  so 
7.  32  I  (am)  the  God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  of 
7.  39  To  whom  our  fathers  would  not  obey, but 
7.  44  Our  fathers  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness 
7.  45  Which  also  our  fathers  that  came  after 
7.  45  God  drave  out  before  the  face  of  our  fat. 
7.  51  ye  do  always.,  as  your  fathers  (did),  so  (do) 

7.  52  Which  of  the  prophets  have  not  your  fat. 
13.  17  The  God  of  this  people,  .chose  our  fathers 
13.  32  the  promise  which  was  made  uuto  the  fa. 
13.  36  David . .  was  laid  unto  his  fathers,  and  saw 
15.  10  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were 
22.  1  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hear  ye  my 
22.  14  And  he  said,  The  God  of  our  fathers  hath 
26.  6  of  the  promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fa. 
28.  25  Well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost,  .unto  our  fa. 

Rom.  9.    5  Whose  (are)  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  as 

11.  28  (they  are)  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes 
15.    8  to  confirm  the  promises,  .unto  the  fathers 

1  Co.  4.  15  yet  (have  ye)  not  many  fathers:  for  iu  Ch. 
10.    1  how  that  all  our  fathers  were  under  the 
Eph.  6.    4  And,  ye  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children 
Col.     3.  21  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  (to  a.) 
Heb.  3.    9  When  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved 

8.  9  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their  fat. 

12.  9  Furthermore  we  have  bad  fathers  of  our 
4  for  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things 

13  I  write  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  have 
2.  14  I  have  written  unto  you,  fathers,  because 

FATHERS,  of  the,  or  of  one's  — 

1.  Paternal,  ancestral,  ■jrarptKo's  patrikos. 

Gal.     1.  14  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  my  fathers 

2. Paternal,  irarpyos  patrdos. 

Acts  22.    3  the  perfect  manner  of  the  law  of  the  fat. 

24.  14  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  beli. 
28.  17  against  the  people  or  customs  of  our  fa. 


2pe.   3 
1  Jo.    2 


Job 
Psa. 


Isa. 
Jer. 


FATHERS,  by  tradition  from  the  — 

Given  over  by  ancestors,  TrarpoTrapd.8oros  patropa. 

1  Pe.    1.  18  conversation ..  by  tradition  from  your  fa. 

FATHOM  — 

Fathom,  {length  of  outstretched  arms),  opyvtd. 
Acts  27.  28  sounded,  and  found  (it)  twenty  fathoms 
27.  28  sounded  again,  and  found  (it)  fifteen  fath. 

FATLXNG  — 

l.Fat  ones,  D'rra  mechim. 

Psa.  66.  15  I  will  offer.. burnt  sacrifices  of  fallings 
2. Fat,  firm,  Nnp  meri. 

2  Sa.   6.  13  had  gone,  .he  sacrificed  oxen  and  fatlings 
Isa.    11.    6  the  young  lion  and  the  fatling  together 
Eze.  39.  18  bullocks,  all  of  them  fatlings  of  Bashan 

3.  Second,  (younger  and  later),  niyo  mishneh. 

1  Sa.  15.    9  spared . .  of  the  fatlings,'and  the  lambs,  and 

4. Fattened,  fed  up,  (titio-tos  sitistos. 

Matt  22.    4  my  oxen  and  (my)  fatlings  (are)  killed 
FATNESS  — 
1. Fatness,  JtjH  cleshen. 

Judg.  9.  9  Should  I  leave  my  fatness,  wherewith  by 
1  36.  16  should  be  set  on  thy  table .  .full  of  fatness 
36.  8  They  shall  be.  .satisfied  with  the  fatness 
63-  5  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  (with),  .fatn. 
65.  11  goodness,  and  thy  paths  drop  fatness 
55.  2  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness 
31.  14  And  I  will  satiate  the  soul.,  with  fatness 

l.Fat,  best  jxtrt,  marrow,  sSn  cheleb. 

Job    15.  27  he  covereth  his  face  with  his  fatness 
Psa.  73.    7  Their  eyes  stand  out  with  fatness  :  they 
Isa.    34.    6  it  is  made  fat  with  fatness . .  with  the  blood 
34.    7  and  their  dust  made  fat  with  fatness 

3.  Fatness,  fat  one,  Jip^p  mishman. 

Gen.  27.  28  the  fatness  of  the  earth,  and  plenty  of  corn 

27.  39  thy  dwelling  shall  be  the  fatness  of  the 
Isa,    17.    4  and  the  fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  wax  lean 

i.  Fatness,  oil,  j£g>  shemem. 

Psa.  109.  24  weak,  .and  my  flesh  faileth  of  fatness 

5. Fatness,  fat,  Trt6rvs  piotes. 

Rom  11.  17  with  them  partakest  of  the  root  and  fat. 
FATS  — 
Press  or  vat  for  oil  or  wine,  d^  yeqeb. 

Joel    2.  24  the  fats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil 
3.  13  for  the  press  is  full,  the  fats  overflow 
FATTED  — 
1.  To  be  fattened,  din  abas. 

1  Ki.  4.  23  roebucks,  and  fallow  deer,  and  fatted  fowl 
%  Fattened,  stall,  p?"ip  marbeq. 

Jer.  46.21  her  hired  men  (are).,  like  fatted  bullocks 
3. Fattened,  fed  wp,  gitsvtSs  siteutos. 

Lukei5.  23  And  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill 
15.  27  thy  father  hath  killed  the  fatted  calf 
15.  30  thou  hast  killed  for  him  the  fatted  calf 
FATTER  — 
Fast,  firm,  a^  bari. 

Dan.    1.  15  countenances  appeared  fairer  and  fatter 
FATTEST  (places)  — 
Fatness,  fat  one,  fEHjto  mishman. 

Psa.  78.  31  slew  the  fattest  of  them,  and  smote  down 

Dan.  11.  24  He  shall  enter,  .even  upon  the  fattest  pi. 
FAULT  — 
1.  Error,  failure,  sin,  NQn  chata. 

Exod.  5.  16  but  the  fault  (is)  in  thine  own  people 
2. Error,  failure,  sin,  ttpn  civet. 

Gen.  41.    9  saying,  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  day 
3. What  and  wluxt,  whatever,  n'ChKD  meumah. 

1  Sa.  29.    3  I  have  found  no  fault  in  hini  since  he 
^.Perversity,  iniquity,  jij;  avon. 

2  Sa.   3.    8  that  thou  chargest  me  today  with  a  fault 
Psa.  59.    4  prepare  themselves  without  (my)  fault 

5.  Nrrongness,  wickedness,  r\]}y~\  rishah. 

Deut2s.    2  and  to  be  beaten. '.accurding  to  his  fault 

6.  Corruption,  nnp  shechath. 

Dan.  6.    4  they  could  find  none  occasion  nor  fault 
6.    4  neither  was  there  any  error  or  fault  found 

7.  Cause,  case,  curia  aitia. 

John  1 8.  38  Pilate  saith . .  I  find  in  him  no  fault  (at  all) 
19.    4  that  ye  may  know  that  I  find  no  fault  in 
19.    6  Pilate  saith.  .1  find  no  fault  in  him 
Q.Cause,  ca.se,  airtov  aition. 

Luke 23.    4  Then  said  Pilate.  .1  find  no  fault  in  this 
23.  14  I.  .have  found  no  fault  in  tins  man 

9. Lack,  failure,  defect,  ?jrrvfxa  hcttema. 

1  Co.  6.    7  Now  therefore  there  is  utterly  a  fault  am. 

10.  A  falling  aside,  mishap,  irapd-rrTtofj.aparaptd7na. 
Gal.  6.  1  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which 
Jas.     5.  16  Confess . .  [faults]  one  to  another,  and  pray 

FAULT,  to  find  — 

To  blame,  fxtfupo/jtai  vieinphnmai, 

Mark  7.    2  with  unwashen  bands,  they  foiind  fault 
Rom.  9.  19  Thou  wiltsay. .  Whydothhe  yet  find  fault? 
Heb.  8.    8  For,  finding  fault  with  them,  he  saith 


FAULT 


337 


PEAR 


FAULT,  to  t3ll  one's  — 

To  convict,  4\4yx^  eleycho. 

Matt.  i3.  15  go  and  tell  hi  in  his  fault  between  thee 

FATTLT,  without  — 

Wit/tout  blemish,  blame,  spot,  Hfiwfxos  amomos. 
Rev.  14.  5  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne 

FAULTLESS  — 

1,  Without  blame,  a.fj.€/j.TTTos  amemptos. 

Heb.   8.    7  For  if  that  first  (eovenant)had  been  fault. 

2.  Without  blemish,  blame,  spot,  &fj.afxos  amomos. 
Jude       24  to  present,  .faultless  before  the  presence 

FAULTS,  for  your  — 

To  miss,  err,  sin,  ap-aprdi/w  hamartano. 

1  Pe.  2.  20  if,  when  ye  be  buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye 

FAULTY,  one  which  is  — 
Guilty,  d:^ni  asliem. 

2  Sa.  14. 13  the  king  doth  speak,  .as  one  which  is  fau. 

FAULTY,  to  be  found  — 

To  be  or  become  guilty,  O'iN  asham. 

Hos.  10.    2  now  shall  they  be  found  faulty  :  he  shall 
FAVOUR  — 
l.O race,  favour,  \n  clten. 

Gen.  i3.    3  My  Lord,  if  now  I  have  found  favour  in 
30.  27  I  pray  thee,  if  I  have  found  favour  in 
39.  21  gave  him  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper 
Exod.  3.  21  I  will  give  this  people  favour  in  the  sight 

11.  3  the  Lord  gave  the  people  favour  in  the  si. 

12.  36  the  Lord  gave  the  people  favour  in  the 
Jfumn.  11  wherefore  have  I  not  found  favour  in  thy 

11.  15  if  I  have  fouud  favour  in  thy  sight 
Deut  24.    1  it  come  to  pass  that  she  find  no  favour 
Ruth  2.  13  she  said,  Let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight 

1  Sa.  16.  22  for  he  hath  found  favour  in  my  sight 

20. 29  now,  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes 
25.    8  Wherefore  let  the  young  men  find  favour 

2  Sa.  15.  25  if  I  shall  find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  L. 
1  Ki.  11.  19  Hadad  found  great  favour  in  the  sight  of 
Esth.  2.  15  Esther  obtained  favour  iu  the  sight  of  all 

5.  2  the  king  saw  Esther . .  she  obtained  favour 

5.  "8  If  I  have  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  the 

7.  3  If  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  O 

8.  5  and  if  I  have  found  favour  in  his  sight 
Prov.  3.    4  So  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  good  und. 

13.  15  Good  understanding  giveth  favour  :  but 
22.  1  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold 

28.  23  He  that  rebuketh . .  shall  find  more  favour 

31. 30  Favour  (is)  deceitful,  and  beauty  (is)  vain 
Eccl.  9.  11  nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  skill ;  but  time 

I.Grace,  favour,  nvin  chaninah. 

Jer.  16.  13  a  land,  .where  I  will  not  show  you  favour 

3. Kindness,  npn  cJiesed. 

Esth.  2.  17  she  obtained  grace  and  favour  in  his  sight 
Job   10.  12  Thou  hast  granted  me  life  and  favour 
Dan.    1.    9  Now  God  had  brought  Daniel  into  favour 

4.  Delighting ,  ysn  chapliets. 

Psa.  35.  27  Let  them,  .be  glad,  that  favour  my  righ. 
5. Face,  W25panim. 

Psa.  45.  12  (even)  the  rich,  .shall  entreat  thy  favour 
119.  58  I  entreated  thy  favour  with  (mj')  whole 

Prov  19.    6  Many  will  entreat  the  favour  of  the  prince 

29.  26  Many  seek  the  rider's  favour :  but  (every) 

6.  Pleasure,  good  will,  \y^~\  rat-son. 

Deut33.  23  0  Naphtali,  satisfied  with  favour,  and  f. 
Psa.    5. 12  with  favour  wilt  thou  compass  him  as 

30.  5  in  his  favour  (is)  life  :  weeping  may  endure 
30.  7  Lord,  by  thy  favour  thou  hast  made  my 
89. 17  in  thy  favour  our  horn  shall  be  exalted 

106.   4  Remember  me,  O  Lord,  with  the  favour 
Prov.  8.  35  and  shall  obtain  favour  of  the  Lord 

11.  27  He  that,  .seeketh  good  procureth  favour 

12.  2  A  good  (man)  obtaineth  favour  of  the  Lord 

14.  9  but  among  the  righteous  (there  is)  favour 
14.  35  The  king's  favour  (is)  toward  a  wise  serv. 
16.  15  his  favour  (is)  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter  ra. 

18.  22  (Whoso)  findeth  a  wife,  .obtaineth  favour 

19.  12  but  lus  favour  (is)  as  dew  upon  the  grass 
Isa.   60.  10  in  my  favour  have  I  had  mercy  on  thee 

7. Peace,  prosperity,  comjjleteness,  ci^  shalom. 
Song  8.  10  then  was  I.  .as  one  that  found  favour 

8.  Grace,  favour,  n|(W  techlnnah. 

Josh.  11.  20  that  they  might  have  no  favour,  but  that 

9.  Grace,  x^PLS  clutris. 

Luke  1.  30  Fear  not,  Mary  ;  for  thou  hast  found  fav. 
2.  52  Jesus  increased,  .in  favour  with  God  and 

Acts  2.  47  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all 
7. 10  gave  him  favour  and  wisdom  in  the  sight 
7.  46  Who  found  favour  before  God,  and  desir. 
25.    3  And  desired  favour  against  hini,  that  he 

FAVOUR,  to  — 

l.To  incline  or  be  gracious  to,  |jn  chanan. 

Psa.102.  13  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea,  the  set  time 
109.  12  neither  let  there  be  any  to  favour  his  fa. 

Lam.  4.  16  they  respected  not.  .they  favoured  not 
2.To  incline  or  be  gracious  to,  |jn  chanan,  3a. 

Psa.102. 14  For  thy  servants,  .favour  the  dust  thereof 
Z.To  have  delight  in,  J'Sn  chaphats. 

2  Sa.  2c.  11  He  that  favoureth  Joab,  and  he  that  (is) 

Psa.  41.  11  By  this  I  know  that  thou  favourest  me 

43 


i.Good  in  the  eyes  of,  "1^3.  Dia  tob  beene. 

x  Sa.  2.  26  was  in  favour  both  with  the  Lord,  and 
29.  6  nevertheless  the  lords  favour  thee  not 

FAVOUR,  to  find  — 

l.To  find  grace  or  favour,  j^n  chanan,  6. 

Prov.21.  10  his  neighhour  tindeth  no  favour  ill  his 

2.To  be  or  become  good,  3a;  yatab. 

Keh.   2.   5  if  thy  servant  have  found  favour  in  thy 

FAVOUR,  to  have  a  — 

To  be  pleased  xoith,  n>"i  ratsah. 

Psa.  44.   3  because  thou  hadst  a  favour  unto  them 

FAVOUR,  to  show  — 

To  incline  or  be  gracious  to,  j3ii  chanan. 

Deut.28.  50  shall  not  regard,  .nor  show  favour  to  the 
Psa.112.  5  A  good  man  showeth  favour,  and  lendeth 
Isa.  27. 11  he  that  formed,  .will  show  them  no  favo. 

FAVOUR,  to  be  showed  — 

To  find  grace  or  favour,  \it\  chanan.,  6. 

Isa.   26. 10  Let  favour'  be  showed  to  the  wicked 
FAVOURABLE,  to  be  — 
l.To  incline  or  be  gracious  to,  ]in  chanan. 

Judg.21.  22  Be  favourable  unto  them  for  our  sakes 

2.  To  be  pleased  with,  nyi  ratsah. 

Job    33. 26  he  will  he  favourable  unto  him  ;  and  he 
Psa.  77.    7  and  will  he  be  favourable  no  more  ? 
85.   1  Lord,  thou  hast  been  favourable  unto 

FAVOURED,  well  — 

l.Fair  of  appeanmce,  nspDTiSC  yephath  marek. 

Gen.  29. 17  but  Rachel  was  beautiful  and  well  favou. 

39.    6  And  Joseph  was.  .goodly,  .and  well  favo. 

41.    2  there  came  up.  .seven  well  favoured  kiue 

41.    4  did  eat  up  the  seven  well  favoured  and  f. 

Dan.  1.    4  in  whom  (was)  no  blemish,  but  well  favo. 

2.  Fair  of  form,  Itfrrn^  yephath  toar. 

Gen.  41.  iS  seven  kine,  fat  fleshed  and  well  favoured 

FAVOURED,  highly  — 

To  give  grace  to,  treat  graciously,  xaPlT^w  charitoo. 

Luke  1.  28  Hail,  .highly  favoured,  the  Lord  (is)  with 
FEAR  — 
1.  Terror,  na'N  eviah. 

Exodis-  16  Fear  and  dread  shall  fall  upon  them 

23.  27  I  will  send  my  fear  before  thee,  and  will 

Ezra   3.   3  fear  (was)  upon  them  because  of  the  peo. 

Job     9.  34  from  me,  and  let  not  his  fear  terrify  me 

Prov  20.    2  The  fear  of  a  king  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a 

2.Fear,  sorrow,  toot  deagah. 

Josh. 22. 24  if  we' have  not.  .done  it  for  fear  of  (this) 

3.  Trembling,  niTTj  charadah. 

Prov.29.  25  The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare  :  but 
Isa.  21.   4  my  pleasure  hath  he  turned  into  fear 

4.  Fright,  terror,  nrt  chalh. 

Job  41.  33  not  his  like,  who  is  made  without  fear 

5.JTear,  reverence,  "n~i*  yirah. 

Gen.  20. 11  Surely,  the  fear  of  God  (is)  not  in  this 
Exod2o.  20  and  that  his  fear  may  be  before  your  fa. 
Deut.  2.  25  This  day  will  I  begin  to  put.,  the  fear 
2  Sa.  23.    3  (must  be)  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God 
2  Ch.19.    9  Thus  shall  ye  do  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
Neh.  5.    9  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  our 

5.  15  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God 
Job     4.    6  (Is)  not  (this)  thy  fear,  thy  confidence 

6.  14  he  forsaketh  the  fear  of  the  Almighty 
15.    4  Yea,  thou  castest  off  fear,  and  restraine. 
22.    4  Will  he  reprove  thee  for  fear  of  thee  ? 
28.  28  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  (is)  wisdom 

Psa.    2. 11  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice 
5.    7  in  thy  fear  will  I  worship  toward  thy 
19.   9  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  clean,  enduring 
34.  n  I  will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
90.  11  even  according  to  thy  fear,  (so  is)  thy  wr. 
in.  10  The  fear  of  the  LORD  (is)  the  beginning  of 
119.  38  thy  servant,  who  (is  devoted)  to  thy  fear 
Prov.  1.    7  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  beginning  of 

1.  29  and  did  not  choose  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

2.  5  Then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of 

8.  13  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  to  hate  evil :  pr. 

9.  10  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  beginning  of 

10.  27  The  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  days  :  but 
14.  26  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  strong  confid. 

14.  27  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  a  fountain  of  life 

15.  16  Better  (is)  little  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

15.  33  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  instruction 

16.  6  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (men)  depart  from 
19.  23  The  fear  of  the  LORD(tendeth)  to  life ;  and 

22.  4  By  humility,  (and)  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

23.  17  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long 
Isa.      7.  25  there  shall  not  come  thither  the  fear  of 

11.  2  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of 
11.  3  of  quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the 
29. 13  their  fear  toward  me  is  taught  by  the 

33.    6  the  fsar  of  the  Lord  (is)  his  treasure 
63.  17  hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear  ? 
Jer.   32.  40  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that 
Eze.  30.  13  I  will  put  a  fear  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
Jon.    1.  16  Then  the  men  feared  the  Lord  exceed. 

6. Fear,  liJD  magor. 

Psa.  31.  13  fear  (was)  on  every  side  :  while  thay  took 
Isa.   31.    9  shall  pass  over  to  his  strong  hold  for  fear 
Jer.     6.  25  the  sword  of  the  enemy  (and)  fear  (is)  on 
20. 10  I  heard  the  defaming  of  many,  fear  on 


Jer.  46.    5  fear  (was)  round  about,  saith  the  Lord 
49.  29  they  shall  cry.  .Fear  (is)  on  every  side 

7. Fear,  nijiv  megorah. 

Prov  10.  24  The  fear  of  the  wicked,  it  shall  come  upon 

S.Fear,  ttud  megurah. 

Psa.  34.   4  and  delivered  me  from  all  my  fears 

Isa.  66.   4  will  bring  their  fears  upon  them;  because 

9. Fear,  reverence,  NT'D  mora. 

Gen.    9.   2  the  fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you  shall 
Isa.     8.  12  neither  fear  ye  their  fear,  nor  be  afraid 

8.  13  (let)  him  (be)  your  fear,  and  (let)  him  (be) 
Mai.    1.    6  and  if  I  (be)  a  master,  where  (is)  my  fear? 

2.   5  I  gave  them  to  him  (for)  the  fear  wherew. 

10.  Fear,  fniD  morah. 

Psa.    9. 20  Put  them  in  fear,  0  Lord  ;  (that)  the 

11. Dread,  fear,  "ns  pachad. 

Gen.  31.  42  Except,  .the  Fear  of  Isaac,  had  been  with 

31.  S3  Jacob  sware  by  the  Fearof  Ids  father  Isaac 
Deutn.  25  the  Lord  your  God  shall  lay  the  fear  of 

28.  67  for  the  fear  of  thine  heart  wherewith  thou 
1  Sa.  11.    7  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fell  on  the  people 

1  Ch.14.  17  the  Lord  brought  the  fear  of  him  upon 

2  Ch.  14.  14  for  the  fear  of  the  Lord  came  upon  thtrn 

17.  10  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  all  the 

19.  7  now  let  the  fear  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you 

20.  29  the  fear  of  God  was  on  all  the  kingdoms 
Esth.    8. 17  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them 

9.    2  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all  people 
9.    3  because  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upcn 
Job      4.  14  Fear  came  upon  me,  and  trembling 

21.  9  Their  houses  (are)  safe  from  fear,  neither 
22. 10  snares,  .and  sudden  fear  troubleth  thee 
25.    2  Dominion  and  fear  (are)  with  him ;  he 
39.  16  her  labour  is  in  vain  without  fear 

39.  22  He  mocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  affrighted 
Psa.    31. 11  I  was.  .a  fear  to  mine  acquaintance 

36.    1  (that  there  is)  no  fear  of  God  before  his 
53.    5  were  they,  .(where)  no  fear  was :  for  God 
64.    1  preserve  my  life  from  fear  of  the  enemy 
105.  38  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  them 
119.  120  My  flesh  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee  ;  and 
Prov.  1.  26  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometb. 
1.  27  When  your  fear  cometh  as  desolation 

1.  33  and  shall  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil 

3.  25  Be  not  afraid  of  sudden  fear,  neither  of 
Song  3.    8  every  man.  .bis  sword,  .because  of  fear 
Isa.     2.  10  hide  thee  in  the  dust,  for  fearof  the  Lord 

2.  19  they  shall  go  into  the  holes,  .for  fear  of 
2.  21  for  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  glory  of 

24. 17  Fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare,  (are) 
24.  18  he  who  fleeth  frcm  the  noise  of  the  fear 
Jer .  30.    5  We  have  heard  a  voice  of.  .fear,  and  not 
48.  43  Fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare,  .upon 

48.  44  He  that  fleeth  from  the  fear  shall  fall  into 

49.  5  Behold,  I  will  bring  a  fear  upon  thee 
Lam.   3.  47  Fear  and  a  snare  is  ccnie  upon  us,  des. 

12. Dread,  fear,  rr^s  pachdah. 

Jer.    2. 19  and  that  my  fear  (is)  not  in  thee,  saith 

\Z.Rage,  anger,  trembling,  Tri  rogez. 

Isa.   14.    3  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest,  .from  thy  fear 

14.  Fear,  terror,  trembling,  "venretet. 

Jer.  49.  24  Damascus  is  waxed  feeble  .fear  hath 

15.  Trembling,  nn^l  readah. 

Psa.  48.    6  Fear  took  hold  upon  them  there,  (and) 

16.  Timidity,  SeiKia  deilia. 

2  Ti.    1.  7  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear 
17. Fear,  terror,  <p6&os plwbos. 

Matti4.  26  It  is  a  spirit :  and  they  cried  out  for  fear 

28.    4  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  did  shake 

28.    8  they  departed  quickly,  .with  fear  and 

Iuke  1.  12  when  Zacharias  saw.  .fear  fell  upon  him 

i.  65  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  about 

5.  26  were  all  amazed,  .and  were  filled  with  f. 

7.  16  there  came  a  fear  on  all :  and  they  glori. 

8.  37  for  they  were  taken  with  great  fear.  And 
21.  26  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,  and 

John   7.  13  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for  fear  of 

19.  38  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly  for  fear 

20.  19  the  disciples  were  assembled  for  fear  of 
Acts     2.  43  fear  came  upon  every  soul  :  and  many 

5.    5  great  fear  came  on  all  them  that  heard 
5.  11  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  church,  and 

9.  31  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in 
19.  17  fear  fell  on  them  all,  and  the  name  of  the 

Rom.  3.  iS  There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes 

8.  15  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondape.  .to  fe. 

13.    7  fear  to  whom  fear ;  honour  to  whom  hon. 

1  Co.  2.    3  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear 

2  Co    7     1  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God 

7     5  without  (were)  flghtiags,  within  (were)  f. 

7.  11  (what)  indignation,  yea,  (what)  fear,  yea 

7  15  how  with  fear  and  trembling  ye  received 
£ph     5.  21  Submitting . .  one  to  another  in  the  fear  of 

6.    5  with  fear  and  trembling,  in  singleness  of 
Phil.  2.  12  work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear 
Heb.   2.  15  And  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of 
1  Pe.    1.  17  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning,  .in  fear 

2.  18  subject  to  (your)  masters  with  all  fear 

3.  2  your  chaste  conversation  (coupled)  with  f. 
3.  15  an  answer.. with  meekness  and  fear 

1  Jo.   4.  18  There  is  no  fear  in  love  ;  but  perfect 

4. 18  love  casteth  out  fear  :  because  fear  hath 
Jude       23  others  save  with  fear,  pulling.. out  of 
Rev.  11.  11  great  fear  fell  upon  them  which  saw  them 


FEAR 

Rev.  18.  10  Standing  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  tor. 

1 8.  15  shall  stand  afar  oft"  for  the  fear  of  her 

FEAR,  to  — 

l.To  be  a/raid,  "W  gw. 

Deut  32.  27  Were  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the 
Psa.  22.  23  and  fear  him,  all  ye  the  seed  of  Israel 
Hos.  10.   5  The  inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall  fear 

2.  To  be  afraid,  *?rn  dcchal. 

Dan.   5.  19  all  people,  nations,  and  languages . .  feared 
6.  26  iuevery  dominion. .men  tremble audfear 

3.  To  be  pained,  *vn,  S\n  chid,  ehil. 

1  Gh.16.  30  F^ar  before  him,  all  the  earth  :  the  world 
Psa.  96.    9  0  worship,  .fear  before  him,  all  the  earth 

4.  To  be  afraid,  ij;  yagor. 

Psa. 119.  39  Turn  away  my  reproach  which  I  fear;  for 
Jer.  22.  25  into  the  hand  of . .  whose  face  thou  fearest 

5.  To  fear,  reverence,  N"i;  yare. 

Gen.  15.    1  Fear  not,  Abram:  I  (am)  thy  shield,  (and) 

19.  30  he  feared  to  dwell  in  Zoar  :  and  he  dwelt 
2i.  17  What  aileth  thee,  Hagar?  fear  not ;  for 
26.    7  for  he  feared  to  say,  (She  is)  my  wife ;  lest 
26.  24  I  (am)  the  God  of  Abraham  thy  father :  f. 
35.  17  the  midwife  said  unto  her,  Fear  not 

43.  23  And  he  said,  Peace  (be)  to  you,  fear  not 
46.    3  fear  not  to  go  down  into  Egypt  ;  for  I 
50.  19  And  Joseph  said  unto  them,  Fear  not 
50.  21  Now  therefore  fear  ye  not :  I  will  nour. 
Exod.  1.  17  the  midwives  feared  God,  and  did  not 

1.  21  came  to  pass,  because  the  midwives  fea.i 

2.  14  Moses  feared,  and  said,  Surely  this  thing 
9.  30  I  know  that  ye  will  not  yet  fear  the  Lord 

14.  13  Moses  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  ye  not 
14. 31  the  people  feared  the  Lord,  and  believ. 

20.  20  Moses  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  not 
Lev.  19.    3  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  and 

19. 14  but  shalt  fear  thy  God:  I  (am)  the  Lord 
19.  32  Thou  shalt  rise  up.  .and  fear  thy  God 

25. 17  but  thou  shalt  fear  thy  God  :  for  I  (am) 
25.  36  Take  thou  no  usury  of  him.  .but  fear 
25.  43  Thou  shalt  not  rule,  .but  shalt  fear  thy 

Nunii4.    9  neither  fear  ye  the  people,  .fear  them 

21.  34  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Fear  him  not 
Deut.  1.  21  possess,  .fear  not,  neither  be  discouraged 

3.  2  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Fear  him  not 

3.  22  Ye  shall  not  fear  them  :  for  the  Lord 
4. 10  that  they  may  learn  to  fear  me  all  the 

5.  29  an  heart  in  them,  that  they  would  fear 

6.  2  that  thou  mightest  fear  the  Lord  thy  God 
6. 13  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
6.  24  these  statutes,  to  fear  the  Lord  our  God 
8.    6  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  fear  him 

10. 12  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  all 
io.  20  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God ;  him 
13.   4  Ye  shall  walk  after  the  Lord,  .and  fear 

13.  11  all  Israel  shall  hear,  and  fear,  and  shall 

14.  23  that  thou  mayest  learn  to  fear  the  Lord 
17.  13  And  all  the  people  shall  hear,  and  fear 
17.  19  that  he  may  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  his 

19.  20  those  which  remain  shall  hear,  and  fear 

20.  3  let  not  your  hearts  faint;  fear  not,  and  do 

21.  21  and  all  Israel  shall  hear,  and  fear 

28.  58  that  thou  mayest  fear  this  glorious  and 
31.    6  Be  strong,  and  of  a  good  courage,  fear 
31.    8  he  will  not  fail  thee,  .fear  not,  neither 

31. 12  fear  the  Lord  your  God,  and  observe  to 

31. 13  hear,  and  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  your 
Josh.  4.  14  they  feared  him,  as  they  feared  Moses 

4.  24  that  ye  might  fear  the  Lord  your  God 

8.  1  the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  Fear  not 

10.    2  That  they  feared  greatly,  because  Gibeon 
10.    8  the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  Fear  them 
10.  25  Joshua  said  unto  them,  Fear  not,  nor  be 
24,  14  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  sincerity 
Judg.  4.  1 8  Turn  in,  my  lord,  turn  in  to  me  ;  fear  not 
6.  10  fear  not  the  gods  of  the  Amorites,  in 
6.  23  Peace  (be)  unto  thee  ;  fear  not :  thou 
6.  27  because  he  feared  his  father's  household 
8/20  youth  drew  not  his  sword  ;  for  he  feared 
Ruth  3.  11  now,  my  daughter,  fear  not;  I  will  do  to 

1  Sa.   3. 15  And  Samuel  feared  to  show  Eli  the  vision 

4.  20  said.  .Fear  not ;  for  thou  hast  born  a  son 

12. 14  If  ye  will  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him 

12. 18  all  the  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord 
12.  20  Samuel  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  not 
ia.  24  Only  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in 

14.  26  no  man  put.  .for  the  people  feared  the 

15.  24  because  I  feared  the  people,  and  obeyed 

22.  23  Abide  thou  with  me,  fear  not ;  for  he 

23.  17  he  said  unto  him,  Fear  not;  for  the  hand 

2  Sa.    3.  1 1  could  not  answer . .  because  he  feared  him 

9.  7  David  said  unto  him,  Fear  not :  for  I  will 
10.  19  So  the  Syrians  feared  to  help  the  children 

12.  18  the  servants  of  David  feared  to  tell  him 

13.  28  I  say  unto  you,  Smite  Amnion,  .fear  not 

1  Ki.  1.  50  And  Adonijah  feared  because  of  Solomon 

1,  51  Behold,  Adonijah  feareth  king  Solomon 
3.  28  and  they  feared  the  king  :  for  they  saw 
8.  40  That  they  may  fear  thee  all  the  days  that 
8.  43  to  fear  thee,  as  (do)  thy  people  Israel 

17.  13  And  Elijah  said  unto  her,  Fear  not ;  go 

18.  12  IthyservantfeartheLoRDfrommyyouth 

2  Ki.  6.  16  And  he  answered,  Fear  not ;  for  they  that 

17.    7  the  children  of  Israel,  .had  feared  other 
17.  25  they  feared  not  the  Lord  ;  therefore  the 
17.  28  taught  them  how  they  should  fear  the  L. 
17.  35  Ye  shall  not  fear  other  gods,  nor  bow 
17.  36  the  Lord,  .him  shall  ye  fear,  and  him 
17.  37  and  ye  shall  nut  fear  other  gods 
17.  38  not  forget;  neither  shall  ye  fear  other 


33S 


2K1.  17.  39  But  the  Lord  your  God  ye  shall  fear ;  and 
25.  24  Fear  not  to  be  the  servants  of  the  Chald. 

1  Ch.28.  20  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed  ;  for  the  Lord 

2  Oh.  6.  31  That  they  may  fear  thee,  to  walk  in  thy 

6.  33  know,  .and  fear  thee,  as.  .thy  people  Isr. 
20.   3  Jehoshaphat  feared,  and  set  himself  to 
20. 17  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed ;  to  morrow 

Neh.    1.  11  thy  servants,  who  desire  to  fear  thy  name 

7.  2  a  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above 
Job      1.   9  said,  Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought  ? 

9.  35  (Then)  would  I  speak,  and  not  fear  him 
11. 15  thou  shalt  be  stedfast,  and  shalt  not  fear 
37.  24  Men  do  therefore  fear  him  :  he  respecteth 
Psa.  23.  4  I  will  fear  no  evil:  for  thou  (art)  with  me 
27.  1  The  Lord (is)my  light.. whom  shall  I  fe.? 
27.    3  my  heart  shall  not  fear  :  though  war 

33.  8  Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord  :  let  all 

34.  9  0  fear  the  Lord,  ye  his  saints  :  for  (there 

40.  3  many  shall  see  (it),  and  fear,  and  shall 
46.  2  Therefore  will  not  we  fear,  though  the 
49.  5  Wherefore  should  I  fear  in  the  days  of 
52.    6  The  righteous  also  shall  see,  and  fear,  and 

55.  19  they  have  no  changes,  therefore  they  fear 

56.  4  I  will  not  fear  what  flesh  can  do  unto  me 
64.    4  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  him,  and  fear 
64.   9  all  men  shall  fear,  and  shall  declare  the 
67.    7  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him 
72.   5  They  shall  fear  thee  as  long  as  the  sun 
76.   8  to  be  heard,  .the  earth  feared,  and  was 
86.  11  LORD,  .unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name 

102.  15  So  the  heathen  shall  fear  the  name  of  the 
112.    1  Blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  feareth  the  L. 

118.  6  The  Lord  (is)  on  my  side ;  I  will  not  fear 

119.  63  I  (am)  a  companion  of  all.  .that  fear  thee 
Prov.  3.    7  fear  the  Lord,  and  depart  from  evil 

24,  21  My  son,  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  king 
Eccl.  3.  14  God  doeth  (it),  that  (men)  should  fear 

5.    7  also  (divers)  vanities :  but  fear  thou  God 
8. 12  well  with  them,  .which  fear  before  him 
12. 13  Fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments 
Isa.     7.    4  Take  heed,  and  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  neither 

8.  12  A  confederacy  ;  neither  fear  ye  their  fear 

25.  3  the  city  of  the  terrible  nations  shall  fear 

35.  4  Be  strong,  fear  not :  behold,  your  God 

41.  5  The  isles  saw  (it),  and  feared  ;  the  ends 
41.  10  Fear  thou  not ;  for  I  (am)  with  thee  ;  be 
41.  13  saying  unto  thee,  Fear  not ;  I  will  help 
41.  14  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  (and)  ye  men 
43.    1  0  Israel,  Fear  not :  for  I  have  redeemed 

43.  5  Fear  not ;  for  I  (am)  with  thee  :  I  will 

44.  2  Fear  not,  0  Jacob,  my  servant ;  and  thou 
51.  7  fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  men,  neither 
54.  4  Fear  not ;  for  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed 
54.  14  far  from  oppression  ;  for  thou  shalt  not  f. 
57. 11  of  whom  hast  thou  been  afraid  or  feared 

57.  11  even  of  old,  and  thou  fearest  me  not? 
59.  19  So  shall  they  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord 

Jer.     3.    8  yet  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  feared 
5.  22  Fear  ye  not  me?  saith  the  Lord  :  will  ye 
5.  24  Let  us  now  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  that 

10.  7  Who  would  not  fear  thee,  0  king  of 

23.    4  they  shall  fear  no  more,  nor  be  dismayed 

30.  10  Therefore  fear  thou  not,  0  my  servant 
32.  39  that  they  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the 
40.    9  Fear  not  to  serve  the  Ghaldeans  :  dwell 
44.  10  neither  have  they  feared,  nor  walked  in 
46.  27  But  fear  not  thou,  0  my  servant  Jacob 
46.  28  Fear  thou  not,  O  Jacob  my  servant,  saith 
51.  46  lest  your  heart  faint,  and  ye  fear  for  the 

Lam.  3.  57  I  called  upon  thee,  .thou  saidst,  Fear  not 
Eze.    3.    9  fear  them  not,  neither  be  dismayed  at 

11.  8  Ye  have  feared  the  sword  ;  and  I  will 
Dan.  10.  12  Then  said  he  unto  me,  Fear  not,  Daniel 

10. 19  0  man  greatly  beloved,  fear  not :  peace 
Hos.  10.    3  We  have  no  king,  because  we  feared  not 
Joel  .2.  21  Fear  not,  0  land  ;  be  glad  aud  rejoice 
Amos  3.    8  The  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  ? 
Jon.    1. 16  Then  the  men  feared  the  Lord  exceedin. 
Mic.    7.  17  our  God,  and  shall  fear  because  of  thee 
Zeph.  3.    7  I  said.  Surely  thou  wilt  fear  me,  thou 

3. 16  it  shall  be  said  to  Jerusalem,  Fear  thou 
Hag.    1.  12  and  the  people  did  fear  before  the  Lord 

2.  5  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you  :  fear  ye 
Zech.  8. 13  fear  not,  (but)  let  your  hands  be  strong 

8.  15  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  :  fear  ye  not 

9.  5  Ashkelon  shall  see  (it),  and  fear  ;  Gaza 
Mai.    2.    5  wherewith  he  feared  me,  and  was  afraid 

3.  5  and  fear  not  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

). Fearing,  reverencing,  w\)  yare. 

Gen.  22.?i2  now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing 
32.  11  I  fear  him,  lest  he  will  come  and  smite  me 
42. 18  This  do,  and  live  ;  (for)  I  fear  God 

Exod.  9.  20  He  that  feared  the  word  of  the  Lord  am. 
18.  21  provide,  .able  men,  such  as  fear  God 

Deut25. 18  How  lie  met  thee,  .and  he  feared  not  God 

Judg.  7.  10  But  if  thou  fear  to  go  down,  go  thou  with 

1  Ki.18.    3  Now  Obadiah  feared  the  Lord  greatly 

2  Ki.  4.    1  thou  knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear 

17.  32  So  they  feared  the  Lord,  and  made  unto 
17.  33  They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their 
17.  34  they  fear  not  the  Lord,  neither  do  they 
17.  41  So  these  nations  feared  the  Lord,  and  se. 
Job      1.    1  one  that  feared  God,  and  eschewed  evil 

1.  8  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and 

2.  3  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and 
Psa.  1 5.    4  but  he  honoureth  them  that  fear  the  Lord 

22.  23  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  praise  him;  all  ye 
22.  25  I  will  pay  my  vows  before  them  that  fear 
25.  12  What  man  (is)  he  that  feareth  the  Lord? 
25.  14  secret  of  the  Lord  (is)  with  them  that  f. 

31.  1 9  which  thou  hast  laid  up  for  them  that  f. 


119, 
119. 


*35- 

H5- 

147. 

Prov.  1 3 

14. 

14. 

Eccl.V. 


9' 
Isa.  50. 

Jer.  26. 

42. 

Dan.    1. 

Jon.    1. 

Mai.  3. 

3. 

4- 

7.  To  fear, 

Job  31. 

Isa.   29. 

8.  To  fear, 

Deut  28. 

28. 
Job  3. 
Psa.  78. 
Isa.   19. 

44. 

44. 

60. 
Jer.  33. 
Hos.    3. 


PEAR 


Psa.  33.  iS  the  eye  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  them  that  f. 
34.    7  encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear 
34.    9  for.  .no  want  to  them  that  fear  him 

60.  4  Thou  hast  given  a  banner  to  them  that  f. 

61.  5  given  (me)  the  heritage  of  those  that  fear 
66.  16  Come,  .hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I 
85.    9  his  salvation  (is)  nigh  them  that  fear  him 

103. 11  great  is  his  mercy  toward  them  that  fear 
103.  13  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him 
103.  17  the  mercy,  .is.  .upon  them  that  fear  him 
in.  5  He  hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear 
115.  11  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  trust  in  the  Lord 
115.  13  He  will  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord 
118.  4  Let  them  now  that  fear  the  Lord  say,  that 
74  They  that  fear  thee  will  be  glad  when  they 
79  Let  those  that  fear  thee  turn  unto  me,  and 

1  Blessed  (is)  every  one  that  feareth  the  L. 

4  thus  shall  the  man  be  blessed  that  fear. 
20  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  bless  the  Lord 
T9  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  him 

11  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  them  that  fear 
13  he  that  feareth  the  commandment  shall 

2  He  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness  fear. 
16  A  wise  (man)  feareth,  and  departeth  from 
30  a  woman  (that)  feareth  the  Lord,  she  sh. 

18  he  that  feareth  God  shall  come  forth  of 

12  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God 

13  because  he  feareth  not  before  God 
2  he  that  sweareth,  as  (he)  that  feareth  an 

10  Who  (is)  among  you  that  feareth  the  L. 

19  did  he  not  fear  the  Lord,  and  besought 
16  the  sword,  which  ye  feared,  shall  over. 

10  And  the  prince,  .said  unto  Daniel,  I  fear 
9  I  (and)  an  Hebrew;  and  I  fear  the  LORD 

16  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake 
16  a  book,  .was  written.,  forthem  that  feared 
2  But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall 

be  afraid,  terrified,  jnu  arats. 

34  Did  I  fear  a  great  multitude,  or  did  the 

23  sanctify,  .and  shall  fear  the  God  of  Israel 

be  afraid,  ins paclwxl. 

66  thou  shalt  fear  day  and  night,  and  shalt 

67  of  thine  heart  wherewith  thou  shalt  fear 
25  For  the  thing  which  I  greatly  feared  is 
53  led  them  on  safely,  so  that  they  feared 
16  it  shall  be  afraid  and  fear,  because  of  the 

8  Fear  ye  not,  neither  be  afraid  :  have  not 

11  they  shall  fear,  .they  shall  be  ashamed 

5  thine  heart  shall  fear,  and  be  enlarged 

9  they  shall  fear  and  tremble  for  all  the 
5  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  his  goodness  in 

9.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  ins  pachad,  3. 

Prov  28.  14  Happy  (is)  the  man  that  feareth  alway 
Isa.  51. 13  and  hast  feared  continually  every  day 

10.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  f lightened,  "typ*  saar, 

Deut  32.  17  new  (gods) . .  whom  your  fathers  feared  not 

11.  To  be  circumspect,  cautious,  evAa&e6fj.ai  eidabeo. 
Acts  23.  10  the  cluef  captain, [fearing]  lest  Paul  should 

12.  To  cause  fear,  terrify,  ipo&eoo  phobeu. 

Matt.  1.  20  Joseph,  thou  son  of  David,  fear  not  to 
->.  10.  26  Fear  them  not  therefore  :  for  there  is 

10.  28  And  fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body 
io.  28  but  rather  fear  him  which  is  able  to  des. 

^     10.  31  Fear  ye  not  therefore,  ye  are  of  more  val. 
14.    5  he  feared  the  multitude,  because  they 
21.  26  if  we  shall  say,  Of  men  ;  we  fear  the  peo. 

21.  46  they  feared  the  multitude,  because  they 
27.  54  they  feared  greatly,  saying,  Truly  this 

■ —       28.    5  the  angel  answered.  .Fear  nor  ye  ;  for  I 
Mark  4.  41  they  feared  exceedingly,  and  said  one  to 

5.  33  But  the  woman,  fearing  and  trembling 

6.  20  For  Herod  feared  Johu,  knowing  that  he 

11.  18  they  feared  him,  because  all  the  people 

11.  32  if  we  shall  say,  Of  men  ;  they  feared  the 

12.  12  they  sought  to  lay  hold  on  him,  but  fear. 
■>  Luke  1.  13  But  the  angel  said  unto  him,  Fear  not 

1. 30  And  the  angel  said  unto  her,  Fear  not 
1.  50  his  mercy  (is)  on  them  that  fear  him 
—         2.  10  the  angel  said  unto  them,  Fear  not :  for 

5.  10  Aud  Jesus  said  unto  Simon,  Fear  not 
«C       8.  50  when  Jesus  heard  (it),  he  answered.  .Fe. 
9.  34  they  feared  as  they  entered  into  the 
9.  45  they  feared  to  ask  him  of  that  saying 
12.    5  I  will  forewarn  you  whom  ye  shall  fear 

17.  5  Fear  him.  .1  say  unto  you.  .Fear  him 

12:  7  Fear  not  therefore  :  ye  are  of  more  value 
12.  32  Fear  not,  little  flock  ;  for  it  is  your  Fath. 

18.  2  There  was  in  a  city  a  judge,  which  feared 

18.  4  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man 

19.  21  For  I  feared  thee,  because  thou  art  an 
go.  19  they  feared  the  people  ;  for  they  percei. 

22.  2  might  kill  him;  for  they  feared  the  people 

23.  40  Dost  not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou  art 
John  9.  22  These,  .spake  his  parents,  because  theyf. 

12.  15  Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion  :  behold,  thy 
Acts    5.  26  for  they  feared  the  people,  lest  they 

10.  2  A  devout  (man),  and  one  that  feared  God 
10.  22  Cornelius  the  centurion . .  one  thatfeareth 
10.  35  But  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  him 

13.  16  Men  of  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God,  give 
13.  26  whosoever  among  yon  feareth  God,  to 
16.  38  they  feared,  when  they  heard  that  they 
27.  17  fearing  lest  they  should  fall  into  the 

■*»  27.  24  Fear  not,  Paul ;  thou  must  lie  brought 

27.  29  feariug  lest  they  should  have  fallen  upon 
Rom.  1 1. 20  Well.  .Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear 
2  Co.11.    3  I  fear,  lest,  by  any  means,  as  the  serpent 
12.  2q  I  fear,  lest,  when  I  come,  I  shall  not  find 


FEAR 


339 


FEEBLE 


Gal.     2.  12  withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fearing 
Col.    3.  22  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing  God 
Heb.  4.    1  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,  a  promise 
11.  27  By  faith  he  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing 

13.  6  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto 
1  Pe.  z.  17  Honour  all.  .Fear  God.     Honour  the 

1  Jo.    4.  iS  He  that  feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in 
Rev.    1.  17  Fear  not ;  I  am  the  first  and  the  last 
2. 10  Fear  none  of  those  things  which  thou 
11.  iS  them  that  fear  thy  name,  small  and  gre. 

14.  7  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Fear  God,  and 

15.  4  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord,  and 
19.    s  Praise  our  God,  all.  .ye  that  fear  him 

\0.T0  have  fear,  <p6$ov  e^a>  phobon  echo. 

1  Ti.   5.  20  that  sin  rebuke.,  that  others  also  may  fear 
FEAR  exceedingly,  to  — 
To  be  greatly  afraid,  terrified,  e«^>oj3o?  eivai. 

Heb.  12.  21  Moses  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake 
FEAR,  to  he  in  — 
To  fear,  be  afraid,  "inB  pachad. 

Psa.  14.    5  There  were  they  in  great  fear :  for  God 
53.    5  There  were  they  in  great  fear,  (where)  no 

FEAR,  -without  — 

Fearlessly,  without  fear,  a^JjSws  aphobos, 

Luke  1.  74  we,  being  delivered,  .serve  him  without  f. 

1  Co.  16.  10  see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear 

Phil.    1.  14  more  bold  to  speak  the  word  without  fe. 

Judo       12  feeding  themselves  without  fear  :  clouds 

FEAR  of  — 
Face  of,  '33  .pene. 

Judg.  9.  21  Jotham  ran  away,  .for  fear  of  Abimelech 
1  Sa.  21.  10  David  arose,  and  fled  that  day  for  fear  of 
23.  26  David  made  haste  to  get  away  for  fear  of 
Jer.  35.  11  Come.andletusgotoJerusalemforfearof 
35.  11  and  for  fear  of  the  army  of  the  Syrians 
37.  11  was  broken  up  from  Jerusalem  for  fear  of 
41.  9  which  Asa  the  king  had  made  for  fear  of 
5q.  16  for  fear  of  the  oppressing  sword  they  shall 

FEAR,  to  put  in  — 

To  make  afraid.  HTT  yare,  3. 

Neh.   6.  14  the  rest,  .that  would  have  put  me  in  fear 
6.  19  Tobiah  sent  letters  to  put  me  in  fear 
FEARED,  to  be  — 
I, To  be  feared,  reverenced,  nyryare,  2. 

1  Ch.16,  25  he  also  (is)  to  be  feared  above  all  gods 
Psa.  76.   7  Thou,  .thou,  (art)  to  be  feared  :  and  who 
96.    4  the  Lord,  .he  (is)  to  be  feared  above  all 
130.    4  forgiveness . .  that  thou  mayest  be  feared 

2.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  terrified,  yy$  arats. 

Psa.  89.    7  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assem. 
FEARED,  that  ought  to  be  — 
Fear  or  reverence,  (an  object  of),  N~]iD  mora. 

Psa.  76. 1 1  presents  unto  him  that  ought  to  be  feared 
FEARETH,  in  that  >ne)  — 

From  or  on  account  of  his  cautiousness,  airh  t?js 
ev\a.$eia$  apo  tes  eulabeias. 

Heb.   5.    7  to  save,  .and  was  heard  in  that  he  feared 
FEARFUL  — 
\,To  be  feared,  reverenced,  n*v  yare,  2. 

Exod.15.  11  Lord,  .fearful  (in)  praises,  doing  wond.  ? 

Deut.28.  58  mayest  fear  this  glorious  and  fearful  na. 

%Feiring,  UT,  yare. 

Deut.20.    8  What  man.  .fearful  and  faint  hearted? 
Judg.  7.    3  Whosoever  (is)  fearful  and  afraid,  let 

3.  To  be  hecsty,  hastened,  ~in£  mahar,  2. 

Isa.  35.   4  Say  to  them,  .of  a  fearful  heart,  Be  strong 
4. Timid,  SeiAo's  deilos. 

Matt.  8.  26  Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ? 
Mark  4.  40  he  said  unto  them,  Why  are  ye  so  fear.  ? 
Rev.  21.    8  But  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and 

5. Fearful,  terrible,  <po&epos  phobcros. 

Heb.  10.  27  But  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judg. 
FEARFUL  sight  — 
What  is  fearful  or  terrible,  (po$nTpov,(p6&-n9poi>. 

Lnke2i.  n  fearful  sights  and  great  sigus  shall  there 
FEARFTTL  thing  — 
Fearful,  terrible,  <pof$sp6$  jihoberos. 

Heb.  10.  31  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
FEARFULLY  — 
To  be  feared,  reverenced,  K*v  yare,  2. 

Psa.  139.14  I  will  praise  thee;  fori  am  fearfully  (and) 
FEARFULNESS  — 
l.Fear,  reverence,  nx"V  yirah. 

Psa.  55.    5  Fearf  ulness  and  trembling  are  come  upon 
2,Tremhling,  horror,  fright,  rfl¥?§ pallatsuth. 

Isa.   21.    4  My  heart  panted,  fearfulness  affrighted 
Z.Trembling,  niy-i  readah. 

Isa.  33.  14  fearfulness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites 
FEARING  — 
Fearing,  reverencing,  Ni;  yare. 

Josh.  22.  25  make  our  children  cease  from  fearing  the 
FEARS  — 
Terrors,  cnrjrtn  chathchaitim. 

Eccl.  1 2.   5  fears  (shall  be)  in  the  way,  and  the  almon. 


FEAST  — 

1. Festival,  in,  in  chag. 

Exodio.    9  for  we  (must  hold)  a  feast  unto  the  Lord 

12. 14  and  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast  to  the  LORD 

13.  6  in  the  seventh  day .  .a  feast  to  the  Lord 

23. 15  Thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened 
23.  16  the  feast  of  harvest,  the  first  fruits  of  thy 
23,  16  the  feast  of  ingathering,  .in  the  end  of  the 
32,  5  said,  To  morrow  (is)  a  feast  to  the  Lord 
34.  18  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread  shalt  thou 
34.  22  thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  weeks,  of 
34.  22  the  feast  of  ingathering  at  the  year's  end 

34.  25  neither  shall  the  sacriflce  of  the  feast  of 
Lev.  23.    6  on  the  fifteenth  day.  .(is)  the  feast  of  unl. 

23.  34  The  fifteenth  day.  .(shall  lie)  the  feast  of 
23.  39  ye  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven 
23.  41  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast  unto  the  Lord 
Xuni2S.  17  the  fifteenth  day  of  this  mouth  (is)  the  fe. 

29.  12  ye  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven 
Deut  16.  10  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  weeks  unto 

16.  13  Thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  tabernac. 
16.  14  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  thy  feast,  thou,  and 
16.  16  Three  times,  .in  the  feast  of  unleavened 

16. 16  in  the  feast  of  weeks,  and  in  the  feast 
31.  10  seven  years,  .in  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

Judgai.  19  a  feast  of  the  Loud  in  Shiloh  yearly 

1  Ki.  8.    2  all  the  men  of  Israel,  .at  the  feast  in 

8.  65  And  at  that  time  Solomon  held  a  feast 
12.  32  Jeroboam  ordained  a  feast  in  the  eignth 
12.  32  like  unto  the  feast  that  (is)  in  Judah,  and 
12.  33  ordained  a  feast  unto  the  children  of 

2  Ch.  5,    3  the  men  of  Israel  assembled,  .in  the  feast 

7.    8  at  the  same  time  Solomon  kept  the  feast 

7.  9  for  they  kept,  .the  feast  seven  days 

8.  13  in  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread 

8.  13  in  the  feast  of  weeks,  and  in  the  feast  of 

30.  13  assembled,  much  people  to  keep  the  fe. 
30.  21  children  of  Israel,  .kept  the  feast  of 

35.  17  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 
Ezra    3.    4  They  kept  also  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

0.  22  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 
Hell.    8. 14  should  dwell  in  booths  in  the  feast  of 

S.  18  they  kept  the  feast  seven  days ;  and  on 
Eze.  45.  17  in  the  feasts,  and  in  the  new  moons,  aud 
45.  21  ye  shall  have  the  passover,  a  feast  of 
45.  23  seven  days  of  the  feast  lie  shall  prepare 

45.  25  shall  he  do  the  like  in  the  feast  of  the  se. 

46,  11  in  the  feasts  aud  in  the  solemnities,  the 
Hos.    9,    5  What  will  ye  do.  .in  the  day  of  the  feast 
Amos  8.  10  Aud  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning 
ZecU  14.  16  and  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

14.  18,  19  not  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

~2.Br.uul,  eating,  en1?  lechem, 

Dan.    5.    1  Belshaz'zar  the  king  made  a  great  feast  to 

3.  An  a})poinied  meeting,  ijgiB  moed. 

Lev.  23.    2  feasts  of  the  Lord  . .  these  (are)  my  feasts 
23-  4.  37  These  (are)  the  feasts  of  the  Lord 
23.  44  Moses  declared,  .the  feasts  of  the  Lord 
2  Ch.30.  22  they  did  eat  throughout  the  feast  seven 
Zech.  8.  19  joy  and  gladness,  and  cheerful  feasts 

4. Contortion,  perversion,  riyp  rnaog. 

Psa.  35.  16  With  hypocritical  mockers  in  feasts,  they 
5.  Feast,  drinking,  Pint??  mishieh. 

Gen.  19.    3  he  made  them  a  feast,  and  did  bake 

21.  8  Abraham  made  a  great  feast  the.  day 

26.  30  he  made  them  a  feast,  and  they  did  eat 
29.  22  Laban  gathered,  .the  men.  .and  made  a  f. 
40.  20  he  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  servants 

Judgi4.  10  Samson  made  there  a  feast ;  for  ao  used 
14.  12  declare,  .within  the  seven  days  of  the  fe. 
14.  17  And  she  wept,  .while  their  feast  lasted 

1  Sa.  25.  36  held  a  feast  in  his  house,  like  the  feast  of 

2  Sa.  3.  20  David  made  Abner,  and  the  men.  .a  feast 
1  Ki.  I3. 15  Solomon,  .made  a  feast  to  all  his  servants 
Esth.  1.    3  third  year  of  his  reign,  he  made  a  feast 

1.  5  the  king  made  a  feast  unto  all  the  people 

1.  9  Also  Vashti  the  queen  made  a  feast  for 

2.  18  made  a  great  feast,  .(even)  Esther's  feast 
8.  17  the  Jews  had  joy.,  a  feast  and  a  good  day 

Prov.15,  15  a  merry  heart  (hath)  a  continual  feast 
Isa,     5.  12  the  harp .  .and  wine,  are  in  their  feasts 
25.    6  inithis  mountain  shall,  .make,  .a  feast 
25.    6  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things 
Jer.   51.  39  In  their  heat  I  will  make  their  feasts 

6. Supper,  helirvav  deijmon. 

Matt  23.  6  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and 
Marki2.  39  seats,  .and  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts 
Luke2o.  46  the  scribes,  .love,  .the  chief  rooms  at  fe. 

7.  Reception,  fioxh  docile. 

Luke  5.  29  Levi  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own 
14.  13  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor 

8. Feast,  festival,  eopr-fj  heorte. 

Matt  26.    5  Not  on  the  feast .  .lest  there  be  an  uproar 

27.  15  at  (that)  feast  the  governor  was  wont  to 
Marki5.  6  at  (that)  feast  he  released  unto  them  one 
Luke  2.  41  to  Jerusalem  every  year  at  the  feast  of 

2.  42  to  Jerusalem  after  the  custom  of  the  feast 

22.  1  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  drew  nigh 

23. 17  [must  release  one  unto  them  at  the  feastl 
John  4.  45  at  the  feast:  for  they,  .went  unto  the  fea=,t 

5.  1  After  this  there  was  a  feast  of  the  Jews 

6.  4  the  passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  was 

7.  2  the  Jews'  feast  of  tabernacles  was  at  hand 
7.    8  this  feast :  I  go  not  up.  .unto  this  feast 
7.  10  then  went  he  also  up  unto  the  feast,  not 
7.  11  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the  feast,  and 

7.  14  about  the  midst  of  the  feast,  Jesus  went 


John  7.  37  In .  .that  great  (day)  of  the  feast,  Jesus 

11.  56  that  he  will  not  cume  to  the  feast'.' 

12.  12  much  people  that  were  come  to  the  feast 
j2.  20  that  came  up  to  worship  at  the  feast 

13.  1  before  the  feast  of  the  passover,  when 
13.  29  that  we  have  need  of  against  the  feast 

Acts  18.  21  [I  must  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  that] 
FEAST  of  the  dedication  — 
Dedications,  eyKalvia  eykainia. 

John  10.  22  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  the  dedication 
FEAST,  to  — 
To  make  a  feast,  nnaJp  n£u  asah  mishieh. 

Job     1.    4  his  sons  went  and  feasted  (in  their)  bouses 
FEAST  (day)  — 

1.  Festival,  an,  Jn  chag. 

Hos.    2.  1 1  I  will . .  cause . .  to  cease,  her  feast  days 
Amos  5.  2j  I  hate,  I  despise  your  feast  days,  niul  I 

2.  Feast,  festival,  kopri)  heorte, 

Marki4.    2  Not  on  the  feast  (day),  lest  there  be  an 
John  2.  23  in  the  feast  (day),  many  believed  in  bis 

FEAST,  to  hold  or  keep  (a  solemn)  — 
1.2*0  hold,  keep  or  observe  a  festival,  :;n  chagag, 
Exod.  5.    1  that  they  may  hold  a  feast  unto  me  in  the 
i2.  14  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast  by  an  ordinance 
23.  14  Three  times  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  unto 
Lev.  23.  39  ye  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven 
Deuti6.  15  Seven  days  shalt  thou  keep  a  solemn  feast 

2. To  hold  a  feast,  eoprafa  heortazo. 

j  Co.  5.    8  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven 
FEAST,  set  — 
Ajypointed  meeting,  "lyia  moed. 

Hum  29.  39  yejshall  do . .  in  your  set  feasts,  beside  your 

1  Ch.23.  31  all  burnt  sacrifices,  .on  the  set  feasts 

2  Oh. 31.  3  for  the  new  moons,  and  for  the  set  feasts 
Ezra  3.  5  set  feasts  of  the  Lord  that  were  consecr. 
Xeh.  10.  33  for  the  set  feasts,  .and  (for)  all  the  work 

FEAST,  solemn- 
ly festival,  ir,  :n  chag. 

Psa.  Si.  3  Blow  up  the  trumpet,  .on  our  solemn  fe. 
Hah.  1.  15  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  vows 
Mai.    2.    3  (even)  the  dung  of  your  solemn  feasts 

^.Appointed  meeting,  "iigiD  moed. 

Numis.    3  or  in  your  solemn  feasts,  to  make  a  sweet 
2  Ch.  2.    4  the  solemn  feasts  of  the  Lord  our  God 
Lam.  1.    4  because  none  come  to  the  solemn  feasts 
7.    6  the  Lord  hath  caused  the  solemn  feasts 
2.    7  a  noise,  .as  in  the  day  of  a  solemn  feast 
Eze.  36.  38  the  flock  of  Jerusalem  in  her  solemn  fea. 

46.  9  before  the  Lord  in  the  solemn  feasts 
Hos.    2. 11  I  will.. cause,  .to  cease,  .her  solemn  fea. 
12.    9  dwell.,  as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn  feasts 

3. Appointed  meeting,  rrjtfTR  moadah. 

2  Ch.  S.  13  on  the  solemn  feasts,  three  times  in  the 

FEAST  with,  to  — 

To  hold  well  with,  awevax*0*  suneuocheo. 

2  Pe.  2.  13  sporting,  .with,  .while  they  feast  with  you 
Jude        12  they  feast  with  yon,  feeding  themselves 

FEASTING  — 

Feast,  drinking,  nnpp  mishieh. 

Esth.  9.  17,  18  made  it  a  day  of  feasting  and  gladness 
9.  19  gladness  and  feasting,  and  a  good  day 
9.  22  that  they  should  make  them  days  of  feas. 
Job  1.  5  when  the  days  of . .  feasting  were  gone  ab. 
Eccl.  7.  2  mourning  than,  .to  the  house  of  feasting 
Jer.  16.    8  Thou  shalt  not.  .go  into  the  house  of  fea. 

FEATHER  — 

1,  Wing,  rri?^  ebrah. 

Psa.  68.  13  dove.  ,and  her  feathers  with  yellow  gold 
91.    4  He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers 

2.Feather,  rryu  notsah. 

Eze.  17.    3  full  of  feathers,  which  had  divers  colours 
17.    7  another  great  eagle  with,  .many  feathers 

^.Feather,  nyj  notsah. 

Lev.    1.  16  shall  pluck  away  his  crop  with  his  feath. 
4.Stork,  ostrich,  rrvpn  chasidah. 

Job    39.  13  or  wings  and  feathers  uuto  the  ostrich? 
FEATHERED  — 
Wing,  Fji?  fa'tnaph. 

Psa.   7T3r.  27  He  rained,  .feathered  fowls  like  as  the 

Eze.  39.  17  Speak  unto  every  feathered  fowl,  and  to 

FED  (beast)  ^- 

1. Fat,  firm,  *03  ban. 

Eze.  34.    3  Ye  eat  the  fat.  .kill  them  that  are  fed 

2.  To  be  fed,  m  pun,  or  \V,  yawn,  6. 

Jer.     5.    8  They  were  (as)  fed  horses  in  the  morning 

S.FalUng,  K*"iD  meri. 

Isa.     1.  11  I  am  full  of .  .the  fat  of  fed  beasts;  and  I 
YED,  to  he  —  ]"  sun,  2.  to  be  fed. 

Dan.    4.  12  boughs  thereof,  and  all  flesh  was  fed  of  it 

1,  To  feed,  njn  raah. 

Psa.  37.    3  Trust  in  the  Lord.,  verily  thou  shalt  be  f. 

2.To  fatten,  satisfy,  xopracTco  rhnrtazo. 

Luke  16.  21  desiring  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which  f. 

FEEBLE  — 

1,  Weak,  h^ipH  nmelal. 

Heh.   4. '  2  What  do  these  feeble  Jews?  will  thev  f. 


FEEBLE 


340 


FEET 


2.  To  be  feeble,  hpn  chashal,  2. 

Deut  25. 18  he.  .smote,  .all.  .feeble  behind  thee,  when 

3.  To  bend  or  how  the  knee,  jnii  kara. 

Job     4.   4  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  knees 

4.7b  stumble,  Sa;3  Icashal. 

2  Ch.28.  15  carried  all  the  feeble  of  them  upon  asses 
Psa. 105.  37  not  one  feeble  (person)amongtheirtribes 
Isa.   35.    3  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees 

h. To  be  stumbled,  *?g>3  Icashal,  2. 

Zech.  12.    8  he  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day 

6.Xot  abundant,  great,  mighty,  T33  tih  lo  kabbir. 
Isa.   16.  14  and  the  remnant . .  very  small . .  feeble 

7. Not  strong  or  bony,  d^jtnS  lo  atsum. 

Frov3o.  26  The  conies,  .a  feeble  folk,  yet  make  they 

^.Without  strength,  ao-devfjs  asthenes. 

1  Co.  iz.  22  members,  .which  seem  to  be  more  feeble 
9.7*0  loose,  disjoin,  irapaXxxa  }>araluo. 

Heb.  12.  iz  Wherefore  lift  up.  .the  feeble  knees 
FEEBLE,  to  be  — 
1.  To  be  feeble,  covered,  fp'jw  ataph,  5. 

Gen.  30.  42  But  when  the  cattle  were  feeble,  he  put 
2.7b  faint,  cease,  be  feeble,  21B  pug,  2. 

Psa.  38.   8  I  am  feeble  and  sore  broken ;  I  have  roar. 
3.7b  be  or  become  feeble,  ."19-1  raphah. 

2  Sa.  4.  t  his  hands  were  feeble,  and  all  the  Israel. 
Eze.     7.  17  All  hands  shall  be  feeble,  and  all  knees 

21.    7  all  hands  shall  be  feeble,  and  every  spirit 

FEEBLE,  to  wax  — 

To  be  or  become  feeble,  nan  raphah. 

Jer.     6.  24  our  hands  wax  feeble  :  anguish  hath  tak. 

49.  24  Damascus  is  waxed  feeble,  (and)  turneth 

50.  43  hath  heard,  .and  his  hands  waxed  feeble 

FEEBLE,  to  be  waxed  — 

7*0  be  or  become  weak,  7.?y  amal,  4b. 

1  Sa.    2.    5  she  that  hath.. children  is  waxed  feeble 
FEEBLE  minded  — 
Of  a  little  soul,  faint-hearted,  6\ty6^uxos  oligops. 

1  Th.  5.  14  comfort  the  feebleminded,  support  the 

FEEBLENESS  — 

Feebleness,  |VD"i  riphyon. 

Jer.  47.   3  not  look  back.,  for  feeblenesss  of  hands 

FEEBLER  — 

7*0  be  feeble,  *\vy  ataph. 

Gen.  30.  42  so  the  feebler  were  Laban's,  and  the 
FEED,  to  (bestow  to)  — 

1.  7*0  eat,  bin  akal. 

Lara.  4.  5  They  that  did  feed  delicately  are  desolate 
Dan.  11.  26  they  that  feed,  .of  Ins  meat  shall  destroy 

2.  7*0  cause  to  burn,  consume,  ")"3  baar,  3. 

Exod22.    5  and  shall  feed  in  another  man's  field;  of 

3. 7*o  taste,  D"t?  team. 

Dan.    5.  21  they  fed  him  witli  grass  like  oxen,  and 
4.7*0  cause  to  tear,  feed,  *pa  taraph,  5. 

Pro  v.  30.    8  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me 

5.7*0  sustain,  nourish,  toa  hul,  Za. 

2  Sa.  19.  33  Come  thou  over  with  me,  and  I  will  feed 

20.   3  the  king,  .put  them  in  ward,  and  fed  them 
1  Ki.  17.    4  I  have  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed 

18.    4  took  an  hundred  prophets,  .and  fed  them 
18.  13  I  hid  an  hundred  men.,  and  fed  them  with 
Zech  11.  16  nor  feed  that  that  staudeth  still ;  but  he 
G.  To  feed,  give  to  eat,  tayS  laat,  5. 

Gen.  25.  30  Esau  said  to  Jacob,  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee 
7.7*0  lead,  tend,  feed,  bm  nahal,  3. 

Gen.  47. 17  he  fed  them  with  bread  for  all  their  cattle 

S.Tofeed,  nifiraah. 

Gen.  29.  7  water  ye  the  sheep,  and  go  (and)  feed 
30.  31  I  will  again  feed  (and)  keep  thy  flock 
30.  36  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  Laban's  flocks 

36.  24  as  he  fed  the  asses  of  Zibeon  his  father 

37.  12  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  father's  fl. 
37.  13  Do  not  thy  brethren  feed . .  in  Shechem  ? 
37.  16  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  they  feed 

41.    2  well  favoured  kine.  .fed  in  a  meadow 
41.  18  seven  kine.  .and  they  fed  in  a  meadow 

48.  15  the  God  which  fed  me  all  my  life  long 
Exod34.   3  neither  let  the  flocks  nor  herds  feed  befo. 

1  Sa.  17.  15  David  went,  .to  feed  his  father's  sheep  at 

2  Sa.    s.    2  Thou  shalt  feed  my  people  Israel,  and 

7.    7  whom  I  commanded  to  feed  my  people  I. 
1  Ch.11.    2  Thou  shalt  feed  my  people  Israel,  and 
17.   6  whom  I  commanded  to  feed  my  people 
27.  29  And  over  the  herds  that  fed  in  Sharon 
Job   24.    2  they  violently  take  away  flocks,  and  feed 
Psa.  28.   9  Save  thy  people .  .feed  them  also,  and  lift 

49.  14  laid  in  the  grave  ;  death  shall  feed  on 
78.  71  he  brought  him  to  feed  Jacob  his  people 
78.  72  So  he  fed  them  according  to  the  integrity 

Prov  10.  zi  The  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  many:  but 
15.  14  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  on  foolishness 

Song   1.    7  Tell  me.  .where  thou  feedest,  where  thou 
x.  8  0  thou  fairest  among  women,  .feed  thy 
2. 16  My  beloved,  .feedeth  among  the  lilies 
4.    5  young  roes,  .which  feed  among  the  lilies 
6.    2  My  beloved  is  gone  down,  .to  feed  in  the 
6.    3  my  beloved  (is)  mine  :  he  feedeth  among 

Isa.     5.  17  Then  shall  the  lambs  feed  after  their  man. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


14. 
27. 
3°- 
40. 
44. 
49. 
61. 
65. 

3- 
6. 

23- 
23- 
5°- 

Eze.  34. 
34- 

34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34' 
34- 
34- 
llos.    4. 

9- 

12. 

Jon.    3. 

Mic.    5. 

7- 

7- 

Zeph.  2. 

Zech  11. 


7  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed 
30  the  first  born  of  the  poor  shall  feed,  and 
10  there  shall  the  calf  feed,  and  there  shall 
23  in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  large 
n  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd;  he 
20  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  deceived  heart 
9  They  shall  feed  in  the  ways,  and  their 
5  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed  your  flocks 
25  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together 
15  pastors.,  which  shall  feed  you  with  know. 

3  they  shall  feed  every  one  in  his  place 
2  against  the  pastors  that  feed  my  people 

4  set  up  shepherds . .  which  shall  feed  them 
19  he  shall  feed  cu  Carinel  and  Bashan,  and 

2  Woe  (be)  to  the  shepherds . .  that  do  feed 

2  should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  flocks? 

3  Ye  eat  the  fat.  .(but)  ye  feed  not  the  flock 
8  the  shepherds  fed  themselves,  and  fed  not 

10  cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the  flock 
10  neither  shall  the  shepherds  feed  themsel. 

13  I  will,  .feed  them  upon  the  mountains  of 

14  I  will  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  and 

14  a  fat  pasture  shall  they  feed  upon  the 

15  I  will  feed  my  flock,  and  I  will  cause  them 
■  16  the  fat.  .1  will  feed  them  with  judgment 
,  23  one  Shepherd .  .and  he  shall  feed  them 
,  23  he  shall  feed  them,  and  he  shall  be  their 
.  16  now  the  Lord  will  feed  them  as  a  lamb 

2  floor  and  the  wine  press  shall  not  feed 
1  Ephraim  feedeth  on  wind,  and  followeth 
7  flock,  .let  them  not  feed,  nor  drink  water 

4  he  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength  of 
14  Feed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock  of 
14  let  them  feed  (in)  Bashan  ami  Gilead,  as 

7  they  shall  feed  thereupon  :  in  the  houses 
13  they  shall  feed  and  lie  down,  and  none 
4  saith..Feed  the  flock  of  the  slaughter 
11.    7  I  will  feed  the  tlockof  slaughter,  .you,  O 
11.    7  And  I  took . .  two  staves . .  and  I  fed  the 
11.    9  Then  said  I,  I  will  not  feed  you:  that 

9. 7*0  feed,  pasture,  &6o-kco  bosko. 

Matt.  8.  30  there  was.  .an  herd  of  many  swine  feed. 

Mark  5.  n  there  was.  .a  great  herd  of  swine  feeding 

5.  14  they  that  fed  the  swine  fled,  and  told  (it) 

Luke  8.  32  there  was.  .an  herd  of  many  swine  feed. 

8.  34  When  they  that  fed.  .saw  what  was  done 

15.  15  he  sent  him  into  his  fields  to  feed  swine 

Julni2i.  15  He  saith  unto  him.  Feed  my  lambs 

21. 17  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Feed  my  sheep 

10.  7*0  tend  as  a  shepherd,  -n-oinaiVot  poimaino. 
John2i.  16  He  saith  unto  him,  Feed  my  sheep 
Acts  20.  28  Take  heed . .  to  feed  the  church  of  God 

1  Co.   9.    7  or  who  feedeth  a  flock,  and  eateth  not  of 
1  Pe.  5.    2  Feed  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among 
Jude       12  they  feast,  .feeding  themselves  without  f. 
Rev.    7.  1 7  For  the  Lamb . .  shall  feed  them,  and  shall 

11.  To  nourish,  rp4(pw  trepho. 

Matt.  6.  26  yet  your  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them 

25.  37  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee.,  and  fed  (thee)? 
Lukei2.  24  Consider  the  ravens.  .God  feedeth  them 
Rev.  12.   6  that  they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand 

1 2.  7*0  feed  with  bits  as  a  child,  -^wfj-i^a)  ])somiz<>. 
Rom  12.  20  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he 
1  Co.  13.    3  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed 

FEED  cattle,  to  — 

7*0  tend  as  a  shepherd,  irot/xaivu}  poimaino. 

Lukei7.    7  having  a  servant.,  feeding  cattle,  will  say 
FEED  to  the  full,  to  — 
To  satisfy,  f  II,  yly  saba,  5. 

Jer.     5.    7  when  I  had  fed  them  to  the  full,  they 
FEED  with,  to  — 

1 .  7*o  cause  or  give  to  eat,  SriN  akal,  5. 

Exodi6.  32  see  the  bread  wherewith  I  have  fed  you 

Deut.  8.    3  he  humbled  thee,  .and  fed  thee  with* m. 

8. 16  Who  fed  thee  in  the  wilderness  with  m. 

1  Ki.  22.  27  feed  him  with  bread  of  affliction, and  with 

2  Ch.  18.  26  feed  him  with  bread  of  affliction  and  with 
Psa    80.    5  Thou  feedest  them  with  the  bread  of  tears 

81.  16  He  should  have  fed  them  also  with  the 
Isa.   49.  26  I  will  feed  them,  .with  their  own  flesh 

58. 14  I  will,  .feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of  Jac. 
Jer.    9.  15  I  will  feed  them,  .with  wormwood,  and 

23.  15  I  will  feed  them  with  wormwood,  and 
Eze.  16.  19  oil,  and  honey,  (wherewith)  I  fed  thee 

2.  7*0  give  to  drink,  to  water,  iroriCw  potizo. 

1  Co.    3.    2  I  have  fed  you  with  milk,  and  not  with 
FEEDING  — 
To  feed,  njj"i  raah. 

Gen.  37.    2  Joseph,  .was  feeding  the  flock  with  his 

Job     1.  14  oxen  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding 
FEEDING  place  — 
Feeding  place,  ny~\ft  mireh. 

Nah.  2.  11  Where  (is),  .the  fcedingplaceof  the  young 
FEEL,  to  — 
1.7*0  understand,  feel,  }*3  bin, 

Psa.  58.    9  Before  your  pots  can  feel  the  thorns,  he 

2.  7*0  know,  VTr  yada. 

Job   20.  20  Surely  he  shall  not  feel  quietness  in  his 
IY0V23.  35  they  have  beaten  me,  (and)  I  felt  (it)  not 
Keel.  8.   5  keepeth  the  commandment  shall  feel  no 

3.  To  feel,  touch,  grope,  c;>a  mush  5,  or  e'f?;  yamashfi. 

Judg  16.  26Suft'ermethatlmay  feel  the  pillars  where. 


4.  7*0  feel,  touch,  P1D  mush. 

Gen.  27.  21  Come  near,  I  pray  thee,  that  I  may  feel 

5.  To  feel,  search,  grope,  B'ipd  mashash. 

Gen.27.  12  My  father  peradventure  will  feel  me,  and 
27.  22  Jacob  went  near,  .and  he  felt  liim,  and 

6.  7*0  begin  to  know,  yivwo-Kw  ginosko. 

Mark  5.  29  she  felt  in.  .body  that  she  was  healed  of 

7.  To  suffer,  irdax^  pascho. 

Acts  28.    5  he  shook  off  the  beast,  .and  felt  no  harm 
FEEL  after,  to  — 
7*o  touch,  handle,  feel  after,  ^rqKatpdia  fjselaphad. 

Acts  17.  27  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  him,  and 
FEELING,  to  be  past  — 
To  put  away  pain,  inraXytoj  apatgeo. 

Iiph.    4.  19  Who  being  past  feeling  have  given  them. 
FEELING  of,  to  be  touched  with  the  — 
7*o  suffer  along  with,  trv/xiradeo)  sumpatlieo. 

Heb.  4.  15  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
FEET  — 
l.Feet  (place  of  the),  niS^D  margeloth. 

Ruth.  3.    4  thou  shalt  go  in,  and  uncover  his  feet,  and 
3.    7  she  came  softly,  and  uncovered  his  feet 
3.    8  and,  behold,  a  woman  lay  at  his  feet 

3.  14  And  she  lay  at  his  feet  until  the  morning 
Dan.  10.    6  his  feet  like  in  colour  to  polished  brass 

2.  Ancles,  joints  (of  the  feet),  D^cnp  qarsullayim. 
2Sa.  22.  37  my  steps,  .so  that  my  feet  did  not  slip 
Psa.  iS  36  enlarged  my  steps. .  that  my  feet  did  not 

Z.Feet,  D*?ri  raglayim. 

Gen.  18. "  4  wash  your  feet,  and  rest  yourselves  under 
19.  2  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet,  and 
24.  32  to  wash  his  feet,  and  the  men's  feetthat 
43.  24  gave . .  water,  and  they  washed  their  feet 
49.  10  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  un. 
49.  33  he  gathered  up  his  feet  into  the  bed,  and 
Exod.  3.    5  put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for 

4.  25  cast  (it)  at  his  feet,  and  said,  Surely  a  bl. 

12.  11  loins  girded,  your  shoes  on  your  feet,  and 

24.  10  under  his  feet  as  it  were  a  paved  work  of 

25.  26  four  corners  that  (are)  on  the  four  feet 
30.  19  his  sons  shall  wash,  .their  feet  thereat 
30.  21  they  shall  wash  their  hands  and  their  feet 
37.  13  the  four  corners  that  (were)in  the  four  f. 
40.  31  and  his  sous  washed,  .their  feet  thereat 

Lev.     8.  24  upon  the  great  toes  of  their  right  feet ;  and 
11.  21  which  have  legs  above  their  feet,  to  leap 
11.  23  creeping  things,  which  have  four  feet 
11.  42  whatsoever  hath  more  feet  among  all  cr. 
K1U1120.  ig'I  will  only,  .go  through  on  my  feet 
Deut.  2.  28  only  I  will  pass  through  on  my  feet 

11.  24  whereon  the  soles  of  your  feet  shall  tresd 

28.  57  one  that  cometh  out  from  between  her  f. 
33.    3  they  sat  down  at  thy  feet ;  (every  one)  sh. 

Josh.  3.  13,  15  the  feet  of  the  priests  that  bare  the 
4.    3  place  where  the  priest's  feet  stood  firm 
4.    9  in  the  place  where  the  feet  of  the  priests 
4. 18  the  soles  of  the  priests'  feet  were  lifted 
9.    5  old  shoes  and  clouted  upon  their  feet,  and 
10.  24  put  your  feet  upon  the  necks  of  these  ki. 

10.  24  they,  .put  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of 
14.    9  land  whereon  thy  feet  have  trodden  shall 

Judg.  3.  24  Surely  he  covereth  his  feet  in  his  summer 
4.  10  with  ten  thousnd  men  at  his  feet :  and 
4.  15  so  that  Sisera.  .fled  away  on  his  feet 

4.  17  Sisera  fled  away  on  his  feet  to  the  tent  of 

5.  27  At  her  feet  he  bowed,  .at  her  feet  he  bo. 
19.  21  they  washed  their  feet,  and  did  eat  and 

1  Sa.   2.    9  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  saints,  and 

14.  13  Jonathan  chmbed  up  upon,  .his  feet,  and 

24.  3  Saul  went  in  to  cover  his  feet :  and  David 

25.  24  fell  at  his  feet,  and  said,  Upon  me,  my 
25.  41  handmaid  (be)  a  servant  to  wash  the  feet 

2  Sa.    3.  34  Thy  hands  (were)  not  bound,  nor  thy  feet 

4.    4  Jonathan . .  had  a  son . .  lame  of  (his)  feet 

4.  12  they,  .cut  off  their  hands  and  their  feet 
9.    3  hath  yet  a  son,  (which  is)  lame  on  (his)  f. 
9.  13  Mephibosheth.  .was  lame  on  both  his  feet 

11.  8  Go  down  to  thy  house,  and  wash  thy  feet 
19.  24  had  neither  dressed  his  feet,  nor  trimmed 
22.  10  camedown;anddarkness(was)underhisf. 
22.  34  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hinds'  (feet) ;  and 
22.  39  yea,  they  are  fallen  under  my  feet 

1  Ki.   2.    5  and  in  his  shoes  that  (were)  on  his  feet 

5.  3  until  the  Lord  put  them  under,  .his  feet 
14.    6  when  Ahijah  heard  the  sound  of  her  feet 

14.  12  when  thy  feet  enter  into  the  city,  the  ch. 

15.  23  Nevertheless,  .he  was  diseased  in  his  feet 

2  Ki.  4.  27  when  she  came,  .she  caught  him  by  the  f. 

4.  37  Then  she  went  in,  and  fell  at  his  feet,  and 

6.  32  (is)  not  the  sound  of  his  master's  feet  be. 
9.  35  they  found  no  more  of  her  than .  .the  feet 

13.  21  he  revived,  and  stood  upon  his  feet 

21.    8  Neither  will  I  make  the  feet  of  Israel  mo. 

1  Ch.28.    2  Then  David  the  king  stood  up  upon  his  f. 

2  Ch.  3.  13  and  they  stood  on  their  feet,  and  their  f. 

16.  12  And  Asa.  .was  diseased  in  his  feet,  until 
Neh.   9.  21  waxed  not  old,  and  their  feet  swelled  not 
Esth.  8.    3  Esther  spake,  .and  fell  down  at  his  feet 
Job   12.    5  He  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  (his)  feet  (ia 

13.  27  Thou  puttest  my  feet  also  in  the  stocks 
13.  27  settest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my  feet 
18.    8  For  he  is  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own  feet 
18.  11  Terrors,  .shall  drive  him  to  his  feet 

29.  15  I  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (was)  I 

30.  12  they  push  away  my  feet,  and  they  raise 


FEET 


341 


FENCE 


Job  33.  1 1  He  putteth  my  feet  in  the  stocks,  he  ma. 
Psa.    8.    6  thou  hast  put  all  (things)  under  his  feet 

18.    9  came  down,  .darkness  (was)  under  his  f. 

iS.  33  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hinds' (feet),  aud 

18.  38  not  able. .they  are  fallen  under  my  feet 

22.  16  they  nierced  my  bauds  and  my  feet 

25.  15  for  he  shall  pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  net 

31.  S  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  room 

40.  2  He.  .set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  (and)estab. 
47.    3  He  shall  subdue . .  the  nations  under  our  f . 
56.  13  (wilt)  not  (thou  deliver)  my  feet  from  fal 
66.   9  and  suffereth  not  our  feet  to  be  moved 
73.    2  my  feet  were  almost  gone  ;  my  steps  bad 

105.  iS  Whose  feet  they  hurt  with  fetters  :  he 

115.  7  feet  have  they,  but  they  walk  not ;  neith. 

116.  8  eyes  from  tears,  (and)  my  feet  from  falling 
119.  59  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  testimonies 
119.  101  refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil  way 
119.  105  Thy  word  (is)  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and 
122.  2  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  O 

Prov.  1. 16  their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  make  haste  to 
4. 26  Ponder  the  path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  all 

5.  s  Her  feet  go  down  to  death  ;  her  steps  ta. 

6.  13  he  speaketh  with  his  feet,  he  teacheth 
6.  18  feet  that  be  swift  in  running  to  mischief 

6.  28  upon  hot  coals,  and  his  feet  not  be  bum.? 

7.  11  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  house 

19.  2  and  he  that  hasteth  with  (his)  feet  sinne. 

26.  6  sendeth  a  message,  .cutteth  off  the  feet 
Song  5.   3I  have  washed  my  feet ;  how  shall  I  deft. 
Isa.    3.    16  and  making  a  tinkling  with  their  feet 

6.  2  with  twain  he  covered  his  feet,  and  with 

7.  20  shave,  .the  bead,  and  the  hair  of  the  feet 

23.  7  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to  sojou. 
26.   6  foot  shall  tread  it  down,  (even)  the  feet 
28.   3  The  crown,  .shall  be  trodden  under  feet 

32.  20  (thither)  the  feet  of  the  ox  and  the  ass 

41.  3  way  (that)  he  had  not  gone  with  his  iei'.t 
49.  23  and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet;  and  thou 
52.    7  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings 

59.  7  feet  run  to  evil,  and  they  make  baste  to 

60. 13  will  make  the  place  of  my  feet  glorious 

60.  14  themselves  down  at  the  soles  of  thy  feet 
Jer.  13.  16  before  your  feet  stumble  upon  the  dark 

14.  10  they  have  not  refrained  their  feet 

18.  22  pit  to  take  me,  and  hid  snares  for  my  f. 

38.  22  thy  feet  are  sunk  in  the  mire,  (and)  they 

Lam.  1.  13  he  hath  spread  a  net  for  my  feet;  he  hath 
3.  34  crush  under  his  feet  all  the  prisoners  of 

Eze.     1.    7  their  feet  (were)  straight  feet ;  and  the 

1.  7  sole  of  their  feet  (was)  like . .  calf's  foot 

2.  1  stand  upon  thy  feet,  and  I  will  speak  unto 

2.  2  set  me  upon  my  feet,  that  I  heard  him 

3.  24  set  me  upon  my  feet,  and  spake  with  me 
16.  25  hast  opened  thy  feet  to  every  one  that 

24.  17  put  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet,  and  cover 

24.  23  and  your  shoes  upon  your  feet :  ye  shall 

25.  6  stamped  with  the  feet,  and  rejoiced  iu 
32.  2  troubledst  the  waters  with  thy  feet,  aud 
34.  18  tread  down  with  your  feet  the  residue  of 
34.  18  ye  must  foul  the  residue  with  your  feet  ? 
34.  19  that  which  ye  have  trodden  with  your  feet 
34.  19  that  which  ye  have  fouled  with  your  feet 
37.  10  stood  up  upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding 
43.    7  the  place  of  the  soles  of  my  feet,  where 

Nah.    1.    3  and  the  clouds  (are)  the  dust  of  his  feet 

1.  15  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings 
Hab.  3.    5  and  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet 

3.  19  and  be  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds' 
Zech.14.   4  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon 

14.  12  consume,  .while  they  stand  upon  their  f. 
Mai.    4.    3  ashes  under  the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the 

4.  Foot,  bxi  regal. 

Dan.  2.33  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay 

2.  34  upon  his  feet  (that  were)  of  iron  and  clay 
2.  41  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes,  part  of  . 
2.  42  (as)  the  toes  of  the  feet  (were)  part  of  iron 
7.    4  made  stand  upon  the  feet  as  a  man,  and  a 
7.    7  stamped  the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it 

7. 19  and  stamped  the  residue  with  his  feet 

5. Foot,  irovs  pons. 

Matt.  7.    6  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet 

10. 14  depart,  .shake  off  the  dust  of  your  feet 

15.  30  came,  .and  cast  them  down  at  Jesus'  feet 
18.   8  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  everlasting  fire 
18.  29  [his  fellow  servant  fell  down  at  his  feet] 
28.    9  they  came  and  held  him  by  the  feet,  and 

Mark  5.  22  and  when  he  saw  him,  he  fell  at  his  feet 
6. 11  shake  off  the  dust  under  your  feet  for  a 
7.  25  heard  of  him . .  came  and  fell  at  his  feet 
9. 45  than  having  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  hell 

Luke  1.  79  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace 
7.  38  stood  at  his  feet,  .began  to  wash  his  feet 
7.  38  kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed  (them)  with 
7.  44  thou  gavest  me  no  water  for  my  feet 
7.  44  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with  tears,  and 
7. 45  woman,  .hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my  feet 

7.  46  woman  hath  anointed  [my  feet]  with  oint. 

8.  35  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  clothed,  and 

8.  41  he  fell  down  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  besought 

9.  5  shake  off  the  very  dust  from  your  feet 

10.  39  Mary,  which  also  sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  aud 
15.  22  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  (his)  feet 
17. 16  fell  down  on  (his)  face  at  his  feet,  giving 
24.  39  Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I 
24. 40  [showed  them  (his)  hands  and  (his)  feet] 

Johnn.    2  and  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair,  whose 

11.  32  she  fell  down  at  his  feet,  saying  unto  him 

12.  3  anointed  the  feet,  .and  wiped  his  feet 

13.  5  began  to  wash  the  disciples  feet,  and  to 
13.   6  Peter  saith.  .Lord,  dost  thou  wash  my  f.  ? 


John  13.    8  saith.  .Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet 

13.    9  not  my  feet  only,  but  also  (my)  hands  and 
13. 10  He.  .needeth  not  save  to  wash  (his)  [feet] 
-13.  12  after  he  had  washed  their  feet,  and  had 
13.  14  If  I  then,  (your)  Lord,  .washed  your  feet 
13.  14  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet 

20.  12  one  at  the  head,  and  the  other  at  the  feet 
Acts   4.  35  And  laid  (them)  down  at  the  apostles'  feet 

4.  37  money,  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles'  feet 

5.  2a..  part,  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles'  feet 
5.  9  the  feet  of  them  which  have  buried  thy 
5.  10  fell  she  down  straightway  at  his  feet 

7.  33  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  thy  feet:  for  the 
7.  58  laid,  .their  clothes  at  a  young  man's  feet 
10.  25  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  worshipped  (him) 
13.  25  whose  shoes  of  (his)  feet  I  am  not  worthy 

13.  51  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  against 

14.  8  impotent  in  his  feet,  being  a  cripple  from 

14.  10  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet.   And  he  leaped 
t6.  24  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks 

21.  11  and  bound  his  own  hands  and  feet,  and 

22.  3  yet  brought  up .  .at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel 
26.  16  stand  upon  thy  feet :  for  I  have  appeared 

Rom.  3.  15  Their  feet  (are)  swift  to  shed  blood 

10.  15  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of 
16.  20  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly 

1  Co.  12.  21  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no 

15.  25  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet 
15.  27  For  he  hath  put  all  thiugs  under  his  feet 

Eph.    1.  22  hath  put  all  (things)  under  his  feet,  and 

6. 15  your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of 

1  Ti.    5.  10  if  she  have  washed  the  saints'  feet,  if  she 

Heb.   2.    8  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet 

12.  13  make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest 

Rev.    1.  15  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they 

1. 17  when  I  saw  bun,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead 

2.  18  and  his  feet  (are)  like  fine  brass 

3.  9  them  to  come  and  worship  before  thy  feet 

10.  1  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire 

11.  11  into  them,  and  they  stood  upon  their  feet 

12.  1  a  woman.,  with,  .the  moon  under  her  feet 

13.  2  was  like  unto  a  leopard,  and  his  feet  were 
39.  10  I  fell  at  his  feet  to  worship  him.    And  he 

22.  8  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  the  angel 
Q.Sicp>ping,foot,  basis,  &&<tis  basis. 

Acts   3.    7  feet  and  ancle  bones  received  strength 
FEIGN,  to  — 
l.To  devise,  feign,  vcy^  bada. 

Keh.  6.    8  thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart 
"l.To pretend,  be  judged  under  a  mash,  vwoKpivo- 
fj.ai  hupokrinomai. 

Luke2o.  20  which  should  feign  themselves  just  men 
FEIGN  self  to  be  another,  to  — 
To  make  self  a  stranger,  T33  nakar,  7. 

1  Ki.14.    5  shall  feign  herself  (to  be)  another  (worn  an) 

14.  6  why  feignest  thou  thyself  (to  be)  another  7 
FEIGN  self  to  be  a  mourner,  to  — 

To  show  self  a  mourner ,  ^nx  abal,  7. 

2  Sa.  14.    2  I  pray,  .feign  thyself  to  be  a  mourner 

FEIGNED  — 

1.  Deceit,  TO"p  mirmah. 

Psa.  17.    1  prayer,  (that  goeth)  not  out  of  feigned 
'2. Shaped,  formed,  irAao-T  6  s  plastos. 

2  Pe.  2.    3  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise  of 

FEIGNEDLY  — 
Falsehood,  lg$F  sheqer. 

Jer.     3.  10  hot.  .with  her  whole  heart,  but  feignedly 

FE'-LTX,  <$>n\t£  phelix,  {from  Latin  felix),  happy, 
A  cruel  Roman  procurator  of  Juda:a,  appointed  (after 
Cumanus)  by  the  emperor  Claudius,  whose  freedman 
he  was.    a.d.  51-58. 

Acts  23.  24  and  bring  (him)  safe  unto  F.  the  governor 

23.  26  Claudius  Lysias  unto  the.  .governor  F. 

24.  3  We  accept  (it)  always,  .most  noble  F. 

24.  22  When  F.  beard  these  things,  .he  deferred 
24.  24  after  certain  days,  when  F.  came  with 
24.  25  as  he  reasoned  of  righteousness.  .F. 

24.  27  after  two  years  P.  Festus  came  into  F. 

25.  14  There  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by  F. 

FELL,  to  — 

To  cause  to  fall,  hzi  naphal,  5. 

2  Ki.  3.  19  shall  fell  every  good  tree,  and  stop  all 

3.  25  and  they,  .felled  all  the  good  trees  :  only 

FELLER  — 

To  cut  off,  ma  karath. 

Isa.   14.  8  Since  thou . .  no  feller  is  come  up  against  us 

FELLING  — 

To  cause  to  fall,  75J  naphal,  5. 

2  Ki.  6.   5  as  one  was  felling  a  beam,  the  axheadf. 
FELLOES  — 
Spokes  (of  a  wheel),  D'pu'n  chishshuqim. 

1  Ki.  7.  33  felloes,  and  then?  spokes,  (were)  all  molten 
FELLOW  — 
l.A  man,  individual,  B^N  ish. 

i  Sa.  29.   4  Make  this  fellow  return,  that  he  may  go 

2.A  man,  B;i3N  enosh. 

JudgiS.  25  lest  angry  fellows  run  upon  thee,  and  thou 

^.Companion,  "on  chaber. 
I       Psa.  45.    7  God.  .hath  anointed  thee,  .above  thy  fel. 


Eccl.  4.  10  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow 

Isa.  44.  11  all  his  fellows  shall  be  ashamed;  and 

Eze.  37-  19  aud  the  tribes  of  Israel  his  fellows,  and 
^.Companion,  "un  chabar. 

Dan.   2.  13  sought  Daniel  and  his  fellows  to  be  slain 
2.  18  that  Daniel  and  his  fellows  should  not 
5.  Companion,  rnir\  chabrah. 

Dan.  7.  20  whose  look,  .more  stout  than  his  fellows 
G.Felloic,  fellowship,  JVDjg  amith. 

Zechi3.  7  Awake!  .against  the  man  (that  is)  my  fell. 
7. Friend,  jh  rea. 

Exod.  2.  13  Wherefore  smitest  thou  thy  fellow? 

Judg.  7.  13  a  man  that  told  a  dream  unto  his  fellow 
7.  14  And  his  fellow  answered  and  said,  This 
7.  22  set  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow 

1  Sa.  14.  20  every  man's  sword  was  against  his  fellow 

2  Sa.    2.  16  caught  every  one  his  fellow  by  the  head 

2.  16  and  (thrust)  his  sword  in  his  fellow's  side 
Isa.   34.  14  and  the  satyr  shall  cry  to  his  fellow 
Jon.    1.    7  they  said  every  one  to  his  fellow,  Come 
Zech.  3.    8  thou,  and  thy  fellows  that  sit  before  thee 

S.Frie)id}  ~jn  reah  or  n;jn  rayah. 

Judgi  1.  37  and  bewail  my  virginity,  I  and  my  fellows 
0. A  man,  avrjp  aner. 

Acts  17.    5  certain  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort 

lO.Compan ion,  comrade,  hrdipos  hctairus. 

Matt. xr.  16  like,  .children,  .calbng  imto  their  [fell.] 
11.  Partner,  holding  with  others,  (j.€toxos  metochos. 

Heb.    1.   9  God.  .hath  anointed  thee.. above  thy  fel. 

FELLOWSHIP  — 

1.  Fellowship,  deposit,  t  nC3is>8  tesuineth  yad. 

Lev.  6.  2  commit  a  trespass,  .in  fellowship,  or  in 
2. Fellowship,  communion,  Koivcavia  koinania. 

Acts  2.  42  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship 

1  Co.  t.  9  by  whom  ye  were  called  unto  the  fellow. 

2  Co.  8.   4  the  fellowship  of  the  ministering  to  the 
Gal.  2.   9  they  gave,  .the  right  hands  of  fellowship 
Eph.  3.  9  see  what  (is)  the  [fellowship]  of  the  mys. 
Phil.  1.    5  For  your  fellowship  in  the  Gospel  from 

2.  1  if  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  if  any 

3.  10  That  I  may  kuow.  .the  fellowship  of  his 

1  Jo.    1.    3  that  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us 

1.    3  truly  our  fellowship  (is)  with  the  Father 
1.   6  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with 
1.  7  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and 

Z.Partnershi}),  a  holding  with,  fxeroxv  metoclie. 

2  Co.  6.  14  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with 
[See  also  Base,  citizen,  disciple,  heir,  helper,  labourer, 
pestilent,  prisoner,  servant,  soldier,  such,  this,  work, 
worker,  yoke.] 

FELLOWSHIP  with,  to  have  — 
l.To  be  joined,  "c^  chabar,  4. 

Psa.  94.  20  Shall ..  iniquity  have  fellowship  with 

2.  To  become  apartaker,  kolvuvos  yivofiai  koinonosg. 

1  Co.  10.  20  that  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  dev. 

3.  To  be  a  joint  partaker  with,  cvyKoiPcoi/€co  sugko. 

Eph.    5.  11  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful 

FELT,  to  be  — 

To  [cause  to)  feel,  touch,  grope,  tiv$  mashash,  5. 
Exod. 10.  21  there,  .be  darkness,  .(which)  may  be  felt 

FESLALE  — 

l.A  woman,  female,  wife,  n-j:x  ishshah. 

Gen.    7.    2  male  and  his  female,  .male  and  his  fern. 

2. A  female,  napj  neqebah. 

Gen.    1.  27  God  created  man.  .male  and  female  crea. 

5.  2  Male  and  female  created  he  them  ;  and 

6.  19  living  thing,  .they  shall  be  male  and  fem. 

7.  3  Of  fowls  also,  .the  male  and  the  female 
7.   9  There  went  in.  .the  male  and  the  female 
7.  16  they  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and  fem. 

Lev.    3.    1  whether,  .a  male  or  female,  he  shall  offer 

3.  6  male  or  female,  he  shall  offer  it  without 

4.  28  he  shall  bring,  .a  female  without  blemish 

4.  32  he  shall  bring.'. a  female  without  blemish 

5.  6  he  shall  bring,  .a  female  from  the  flock 
12.  7  the  law  for  her  that  hath  born . .  a  female 
27.  4  if  it  (be)  a  female,  then  thy  estimation 
27.  5  thy  estimation  shall  be . .  for  the  female 
27.  6  for  the  female  thy  estimation,  .three  sh. 
27.  7  thyestimation..forthefemaletenshekels 

Num.  5.    3  Both  male  and  female  shall  ye  put  out 
Deut.  4.  16  and  make,  .the  likeness  of  male  or  fem. 
Z.Female,  (from  enh-fj,  teat),  8?}\vs  thtlus. 
Matt  19.   4  that  he . .  made  them  male  and  female 
Markio.    6  But.  .God  made  them  male  and  female 
Gal.     3.  28  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  :  for  ye 

FEN  — 

Mire,  swamp,  nv3  bitstsah. 

Job   40.  21  lieth . .  in  the  covert  of  the  reed,  and  fens 
FENCE  — 
Hedge,  wall,  Tia  gader. 

Psa.  62.^  3  shall  be . .  as  a  bowing  wall . .  a  tottering  L 

FENCE,  to  — 

l.To  fence,  p#  azaq,  3. 

Isa.     5.    2  he  fenced  it,  and  gathered  out  the  stones 

2.To  hedge,  fence,  spb  side,  Za. 

Job    10.  11  Thou,  .hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and 


FENCE 


34: 


FIELD 


FENCE  up,  to  — 

To  hedge  or  wall  up,  Tia  gadar. 

Job    ig.    8  He  hath  fenced  up  my  way  that  I  cannot 

PENCED  — 

I. To  fence,  cut  of,  nyi  batsar. 

Deut.  3.    5  All  these  cities  (were)  fenced  with  high 
9.    1  to  possess.,  cities  great,  and  fenced  up  to 
28.  52  until  thy  high  and  fenced  walls  Come 
Josh.14.  12  (that)  the  cities  (were)  great  (and)  fenced 
2  Sa.  20.   6  lest  he  get  him  fenced  cities,  and  escape 
2  Ki.  18.  13  did.  .come  np  against  all  the  fenced  cities 
iq.  25  thou  shouldsfc  be  to  lay  waste  fenced  cit. 
2  Ch.17.    2  he  placed  forces  in  all  the  fenced  cities 
iq.    5  throughout  all  the  fenced  cities  of  .Tudah 

32.  1  and  encamped  against  the  fenced  cities 

33.  u  put  captains  of  war  in  all  the  fenced  cit. 
Isa.     2.  15  every  high  tower,  and .  .every  fenced  wall 
Jer.  15.  20  I  will  make  thee,  .a  fenced  braseu  wall 
Eze.  36.  35  ruined  cities  (arc  become)  fenced,  (and) 
Hos.    8.  14  and  Judah  hath  multiplied  fenced  cities 
Zeph.  1.  16  A  day  of .  .alarm  ag.iin.st  the  fenced  cities 

%Fenced  place,  i>'3p  mibtsar. 

WUni32.  17  shall  dwell  in  the  fenced  cities  because 

32.  36  Deth-minrah,  and  Beth  haran,  fenced  cit, 
Josh. 10.  20  that  the  rest,  .entered  Into  fenced  cities 

19.  35  the  fenced  cities  (are)  Ziddim,  Zer,  find 

1  Sa.    6.  18  of  fenced  cities,  and  of  country  villages 

2  Ki.   3.  19  ye  shall  smite  every  fenced  city,  and  ev. 

10.    2  chariots,  .a  fenced  city  also,  and  armour 

17.  9  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the  fenced 

18.  8  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the  fenced 
2  Ch.17. 19'whom  the  king  put  in  the  fenced  cities 
Jer.    5.  17  they  shall  impoverish  thy  fenced  cities 

3. Bulwark,  iixip  matsor. 

2  Ch.  8.    5  fenced  cities,  with  walls,  gates,  and  bars 
4. Bulwark,  nn^p  metsurah. 

2  Ch.11.  23  he  dispersed  of  all .  .unto  every  fenced  c. 
12.    4  And  he  took  the  fenced  cities  which 
14    6  he  built  fenced  cities  in  Judah  :  for  the 
21.    3  their  father  gave  them,  .fenced  cities  in 

FENCED,  to  bo  — 

To  be  or  becom-\full,  \ty&  Mate,  2. 

2  Sa,  23.    7  But  the  man .  .must  be  fenced  With  iron 

FENCES  city  — 
Bulwark,  rniap  metsnrah. 

2  Ch.n.  10  in  Judah  and  in  Benjamin  fenced  cities 

FENCED,  most  — 

Fenced  place,  "i^fi?  mibtsar. 

Dan.  11.  is  king,  .shall.,  take  the  most  fenced  cities 

FERRET  — 

A  ferret,  hedgehog,  nj?3N  anaqah. 

Lev.  11.  30  And  the  ferret,  and  the  chameleon,  and 
FERRY  boat  — 
Ferry  boat,  n*K^  abarah. 

a*;Sau  iq.  18  there  went  over  a  ferry  boat  to  carry  over 

FERVENT  — 

1. Extended,  stretched  out,  bkt€vt]s  hektenes. 

1  Pe.   4.    8  above  all  things  have  fervent  charity  am. 

2.7b  boll,  be  hot,  fervid,  few  zed, 

Rom  12.  11  Not  slothful.,  fervent  in  spirit ;  serving 

FERVENT,  to  be  — 

To  boil,  be  hot,  fervid,  ^ew  zed. 

Acts  18.  25  being  fervent  in  the  spirit,  he  spake  and 

FERVENT  mind  — 

Zeal,  fervour,  f^Aos  zehs. 

2  C/o.  7.    7  told  us.  .your  fervent  mind  toward  me 
FERVENTLY  — 

In  an  outstretched  manner,  eftTtvws  ektenOs. 
1  Pe.  1.  22  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  ferv. 

FES'-TTTS,  4*tj(Ttos  (from  Latin  festns). 

Porcius  Festus,  the  successor  of  Felix  as  procurator  of 

Judtea.    a.d.  58-62. 

Acts  24.  27  after  two  years  Porcius  F.  came  into  F." 
25.    t  when  F.  was  come  into  the  province 
25,    4  F.  answered,  that  Paul  should  be  kept  at 
35 .  9  F.,  willing  to  do  the  Jews  a  pleasure 
25.  12  F.,  when  he  had  conferred  with  the  con. 
B5.  13  Bemice  came  unto  Gesarea  to  salute  F. 
25.  14  F.  declared  Paul's  cause  unto  the  king 
25.  22  Then  Agrippa  said  unto  F.,  I  would  also 
25.  23  at  F.'s  commandment  Paul  was  brought 

25.  24  F.  said,  King  Agrippa,  and  all  men  which 

26.  24  F.  said  with  a  loud  voice,  Paul,  thou  nrt 
26.  25  But  he  said,  I  am  not  mod,  most  noble  F. 

26.  32  Then  said  Agrippa  imto  F.,  This  man 

FETCH,  to  — 

1. To  gather,  np^  asaph. 

a  Sa.  11.  27  David  sent  and  fetched  her  to  his  house 
2.To  cause  to  come  in,  bring  in,  ifta  bo,  5. 

Neh.   8.  15  Go  forth  unto  the  mount,  and  fetch  olive 
3.7b  take,  receive,  njsp  laqaoli. 

Gen.  18.   5  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  comf. 
18.    7  Abraham,  .fetched  acalf  tender  and  good 

27.  9  Go  now  to  the  flock,  mid  fetch  me  from 
27.  13  only  obey  my  voire,  and  go  fetch  me 
27.  14  And  he  went,  mid  fetched,  and  brought 
27.  45  I  will  send  and  retch  fcnee  from  thence 
42. 16  Bend  one  of  y,  r,  m?d  let  him  fetch  your 


Kxod.  2.    5  saw  the  ark.  .she  sent  her  maid  to  fetch 
Deut  19.  1 2  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  send  and  fetch 
24.  19  thou  shall  not  go  a»ain  to  fetch  it :  it 
30.   4  and  from  thence  will  he  fetch  thee 
Judgii.   5  the  elders  of  Gilead  went  to  fetch  Jeph. 
18.  18  these,  .fetched  the  carved  image,  the 
20.  10  to  fetch  victual  for  the  people,  that  they 

1  Sa.    4.    3  Let  us  fetch  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

10.  23  And  they  ran  and  fetched  him  thence 

16.  11  Samuel  said  unto  Jesse,  Send  and  fetch 
20.  31  now  send  and  fetch  him  unto  me,  for  he 
26.  22  one  of  the  young  men  come,  .and  fetch  it 

2  Sa.    4.    6  (as  though)  they  would  have  fetched  wh. 

g.  5  David,  .fetched  him  out  of  the  house  of 
14.    2  Joab  sent  to  Tekoah,  and  fetched  thence 

1  Ki.  7.  13  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  Hiram  out  of 

g,  28  they  came  to  Ophir,  and  fetched  from 

17.  10  Fetch  me.  .a  little  water  in  a  vessel,  that 
17.  11  as  she  was  going  to  fetch  (it),  he  called  to 

2  KI.  6.  13  spy  where  he  (is),  that  I  may  send  and  f. 

11.  4  Jehoiada  sent  and  fetched  the  rulers  over 

*     Isa.    56.  12  I  will  fetch  wine,  and  we  will  till  ourselves 
Jer.  36.  21  So  the  king  sent  Jehudi  to  fetch  the  roll 

4.  To  lift  up,  x"f  J  nasa. 

2  Ch.12.  11  the  guard  came  aud  fetched  them,  and 
Job  36.    3  I  will  fetch  my  knowledge  from  afar,  and 

FETCH  (a  pledge),  to — 

To  obtain  a  pledge,  onj;  abat. 

Deut  24.  to  not  go  into  his  house  to  fetch  hi6  pledge 
FETCH  a  stroke,  to  — 
To  be  driven  away,  rila  nadaeh,  2. 

Deut  19.    5  his  hand  fetcbeth  a  stroke  with  the  axe  to 
FETCH  about,  to  — 
To  go  or  bring  round  about,  220  sabah,  3. 

2  Sa.  14.  20  To  fetch  about  this  form  of  speech  hath 
FETCH  forth,  to  — 
7*o  cause  to  come  out,  bring  out,  nx;  yatsa,  5. 

Jer.   26.  23  they  fetched  forth  Urijah  out  of  Egypt 

FETCH  home  again,  to  — 

To  cause  to  come  back,  33B>  shub,  5. 

2  Sa.  14.  13  in  tthat  the  king  doth  not  fetch  home  again 
FETCH  out  — 

1 .  To  cause  to  come  out,  N>';  yatsa,  5. 

Nuni2o.  10  must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock  ? 
2.To  lead  out,  z£dya>  exagd. 

Acts  16.  37  let  them  come  themsel.  and  fetch  us  out 
FETCH  up,  to  — 
1.7*0  go  or  come  up,  rn'jr  alah. 

2  Ch.i.  17  they  fetched  up,  and  brought  forth  out 

2.  To  cause  to  come  up,  Tb%  alah,  5. 

1  Sa.   6.  21  come  ye  down, '(and)  fetch  it  up  to  yon 

7.    1  the  men.  .fetched  up  the  ark  of  the  LORD 

FETCHED,  to  be  — 

To  be  taken,  rip*?  fafOch,  6. 

Gen.  iS.    4  Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched 

FETTER  — 

1.  Fetter,  h^kebel. 

Psa.105.  iS  "Whose  feet  they  hurt  with  fetters  :  he 
149.    8  To  bind . .  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron 

^.Chains,  fetters,  c*$\  ziqqim. 

Job   36.    8  And  if.  .bound  in  fetters,  .be  holden  in 
0. Brass,  TV&nz  nechosheth. 

2  Sa.  3.  34  not  bound,  nor  thy  feet  put  into  fetters 

2  Ch.33. 11  and  bound  him  with  fetters,  and  carried 
36.   6  Nebuchadnezzar,  .bound  him  in  fetters 

4.Fetter  (for  the  feet),  iriSi}  pede. 

Mark  5.   4  be  had  been  often  bound  with  fetters  and 
5.    4  and  the  fetters  broken  in  pieces :  neither 

Lute  S.  29  was  kept  bound  with  chainsand  iu  fetters 
FETTER  of  brass  — 
Brass,  ns'nj  nehoshetJi. 

Judg  16.  21  took . .  and  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass 

2  Ki.25.   7  and  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass 

FEVER  — 

l.Feveri  burning  heat,  nrnp  qaddachath. 

Deut 28.  22  The  Lord  shall  smite  thee,  .with  a  fever 

2.  Fiery  heat,  fever,  irvper^s  purctos. 

Mate.  8.  15  he  touched  her  hand,  and  the  fever  left 
Mark  1.  31  the  fever  left  her,  and  she  ministered 
Luke  4.  38  wife's  mother  was  taken  with  agreatfev. 
4.  39  he  stood  over  her,  and  rebuked  the  fever 
John   4.  52  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  left  him 
Acts  28.    8  the  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  of  a  fever 

FEVER,  to  be  sick  of  a  — 

7*0  be  in  afcrer,  irvpcao'ct}  puresso. 

Matt.  8.  14  he  saw  his  « ife's  mother,  .sick  of  a  fever 

Mark  1.  30  Simon's  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fever 
FEW  — 
I. Single  ones,  nnnx  achadim. 

Gen.  27.  44  tarry  with  him  a  few  days,  until  thy  "broth. 
29.  20  and  they  seemed  unto  him.  .a  few  days 

Dan.  11.  20  but  within  few  days  he  shall  be  destro. 

2.Fett>t  a  small  company,  "ijJTO  miiar. 

Isa.  24.    6  inhabitants,  are  burned,  and  few  men 

3.  J  little,  few,  oyo  meat 

Gen.  47.    0  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of.  .my  life  been 


Lev.  25.  52  if  there  remain  but  few  years  unto  the 
Numi3,  18  whether  they,  .strong  or  weak,  few  or  m. 
26.  54  to  few  thou  shalt  give  the  less  inheritance 
26.  50  shall,  .be  divided  between  many  and  few 
35.    8  from  (them  that  have)  few  ye  shall  give 
Deut  26.    5  sojourned  there  with  a  few,  and  became 
c8.  62  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number,  whereas 
Josh.  7.    3  make  not  all    to  labour,  .for  they,  .few    * 
1  Sa.  14.    6  no  restraint,  .to  save  by  many  or  by  few 
17.  28  with  whom  hast  thou  left  those  few  sheep 

1  Ch.16.  19  When  ye  were,  .even  a  few, and  strangers 

2  Oh. 39.  34  the  priests  were  loo  few,  so  that  they 
Neh.  7.    4  the  peuple  (were)  few  therein,  and  the 
Job    10.  20  (Are)  not  my  days  few  V  cease,  .let  me 
Psa.109.    8  Let  his  days  he  few.  .let  another  take  his 
Eccl.  5.    2  God  (is)  in  heaven  .  .let  thy  words  be  few 

9.  14  a  little  city,  and  few  men  within  it ;  and 
Isa.    10.    7  to  destroy  and  cut  oft"  nations  not  a  few 
Jer.   42.    2  for  we  are  left,  .a  few  of  many,  as  thine 
Eze.     5.    3  Thou  shalt  also  take  thereof  a  few  In  num. 
■i.Men,  a  few,  enp  methim. 

Gen.  34.  30  I.. few  in  number,  they  shall  gather  them, 
Deut.  4.  27  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number  among  the 
1  Ch.16.  19  When  ye  were  but  few.  .and  strangers  in 
Psa.105.  12  when  they  were,  .a  few  men  in  number 

5.  Short,  1JfR  qatser. 

Job    14.    1  Man.  .born  of  a  woman  (is)  of  few  days 

Q.A  number,  *15PP  mispar. 

Num.  9.   20  when  the  cloud  was  a  few  days  upon  the 
Deut  33.   6  Let  Reuben  live,  .let  (not)  his  men  be  few 
Job    16.  22  When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall 
Isa.    10.  19  the  rest  of  the  trees,  .shall  be  few,  that 
Eze.  12.  10  I  will  leave  a  few  men  of  them  from  the 

1.  Little,  few,  oAtyos  olicjos. 

Matt.  7.  14  which  leudeth  unto  life,  and  few  (here  be 
9.  37  truly,  .plenteous,  but  the  labourers,  .few 
15.  34  they  said,  Seven,  and  a  few  little  fishes 
20.  16  [for  many  lie  called,  but  few  chosen] 
22.  14  For  many  are  called,  but  few.  .chosen 

Mark  6.    5  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick  folk 

8.    7  they  had  a  few  small  fishes  :  and  he  bles. 

Luke  10.    2  truly  (is) great,  but  the  labourers  (are)  few 
13.  23  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved?  And 

Acts  17.   4  Greeks,  .and  of  the  chief  women  not  a  few 
17.  12  of  honourable  women,  .of  men,  not  a  few 

Ileb.  12.  10  For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened 

1  Pe.   3.  20  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls  were 

Rev.    3.    4  Thou  hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis 

FEW,  few  things  — 

Little,  few,  oAt-yos  oligos. 

Mattes.  2I>  23  nast  heen  faithful  over  a  few  things 
Luke  12.  48  that  knew  not.  .shall  be  beaten  with  few 
Rev.   2.  14,  20  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  beca. 

FEW  words,  a  — 

Concisely,  briefly,  cvvrSfxajs  suntomos. 

Acts  24.    4  that  thou  wouldest  hear,  .a  few  words 
FEW  words,  in  (a)  — 

1.  In  (or  th  rough )  short  space,  Sia  /3pax«W  dia  brack. 

Heb.  13.  22  I  have  written  a  letter,  .in  a  few  words 
'2.  In  a  little,  briefy,  eV  oAiycp  en  oligo. 

Eph.    3.    3  the  mystery;  as  I  wrote  afore  in  few  wo. 
FEW,  to  be,  borrow,  or  give  — 
1.7*0  be  or  become  few,  ujjc  maat. 

Jer.  30. 19  multiply  them,  and  they  shall  not  he  few 

2.  To  become  few,  EJgO  maat,  3. 

Eccl.  12.    3  the  grinders  cease,  because  they  are  few 
3.7*0  make  few,  £#3  maat,  5. 

Num.35.   8  ye  shall  give  few :  every  one  shall  give 
■2  Ki.  4.    3  borrow  thee  vessels,  .borrow  not  a  few 

FEW  in  number,  to  make  — 
To  make  few,  eye  vutat,  5. 

Lev.  26.  22  beasts,  .which  shall,  .make  you  few  in  n. 
FEW,  some  or  very  — 
A  few,  ttjp  meat. 

Neh.    2.  12  I  arose  in  the  night,  I  and  some  few  men 

Psa.105.  *2  When  they  were  (but).,  very  few,  aud  str. 
FEWER,  FEWEST  — 
Few,  bed  meat. 

Num/33.  54  to  the  fewer  ye  shall  give  the  less  inner. 

Deut.  7.    7  for  ye  (were)  the  fewest  of  all  people 

FEWNESS  — 

To  be  few,  ayp  maat. 

Lev.  25.  16  according  to  the  fewness  of  years  thou 
FTDELITT  — 
Faith,  sfedfastness,  Tricrns  pistis. 

Titus  2.  io  Not  purloining,  but  showing  all.  .fidelity 
FIELD  — 
1. Earth,  land,  p^  €re^ 

Eze.  29.    5  I  have  given,  .to  the  boasts  of  the  field 
2. Field,  open  country,  "13  bar. 

Dan.    2.  38  the  beasts  of  the  field .  .hath  he  given 
4.  12  beasts  of  the  field  had  shadow  under  it 
4.  15,  23  leave  the  stump,  .in.  .grass  of  the  fie- 
4.  21  under  which  the  beasts  of  the  field  dwelt 
4.  23  his  portion  (be)  with .  .beasts  of  the  field 
4.  25,  32  thy  dwelling.  .With,  .beasts  of  the  fie. 

3.  Without,  ant  place,  prl  chute. 

Job     5.  10  Who.  .sendeth  waters  Upon  the  fields 
l'ruv.  8.  26  While  as  yet  he  had  not  made,  -the  fields 


FIELD 

^.Portion,  rtj^n  chelqah. 

2  Sa.  14.  30  Joab's  field  (is)  near  mine,  and  he  hath 
14.  30  Absalom's  servants  set  the  field  on  fire 
14.  30  have  thy  servants  set  my  field  on  fire? 

5. Level  place}  field,  rn'p  sadeh. 

Gen.    2.    5  every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in 
2.    5  every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew 
2. 19  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field 

2.  20  gave  names  to.  .every  beast  of  the  field 

3.  1  more  subtile  than  any  beast  of  the  field 
3.  14  cursed,  .above  every  beast  of  the  field 

3.  18  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  herb  of  the  field 

4.  8  came  to  pass,  when  they  were  in  the  fie. 
23.  g  the  cave,  .which  (is)  in  the  end  of  his  fi. 
23. 11  the  field  give  I  thee,  and  the  cave  that 

23. 13  I  will  give  thee  money  for  the  field  ;  take 
23. 17  the  field  of  Ephron,  which  (was)  in  Mac. 
23. 17  the  field,  and  the  cave  which  (was)  there. 
23. 17  and  all  the  trees  that  (were)  in  the  field 
23. 19  buried  Sarah .  .in  the  cave  of  the  field 

23.  20  the  field,  and  the  cave,  .were  made  sure 
24-  63  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field 

24.  65  What  man.  .walketh  in  the  field  to  meet 

25.  9  in  the  field  of  Ephron.  .which  (is)  before 
25.  10  The  field  which  Abraham  purchased  of 
25.  27  was  a  cunning  hunter,  a  man  of  the  field 
25.  29  Esau  came  from  the  field,  and  he  (was) 
27.  3  take . .  thy  weapons . .  and  go  out  to  the  f. 
27.  5  Esau  went  to  the  field  to  hunt  (for)  veui. 
27.  27  the  smell,  .(is)  as  the  smell  of  a  field 

29.  2  he  looked,  and  behold  a  well  in  the  field 

30.  14  Reuben,  .found  mandrakes  in  the  field 

30.  16  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  even. 

31.  4  Jacob,  .called  Rachel,  .to  the  field  unto 

33.  19  he  bought  a  parcel  of  a  field,  where  he 

34.  5  his  sons  were  with  his  cattle  in  the  field 
34.    7  the  sons  of  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field 
34.  28  They  took,  .that  which  (was)  in  tbe  field 

36.  35  who  smote  Midian  in  the  field  of  Moab 

37.  7  we  (were)  binding  sheaves  in  the  field 
37.  15  and,  behold,  (lie  was)  wandering  in  the  f. 
39.    5  blessing,  .was  upon  all  he  had.  .in  the  fi. 
41. 48  the  food  of  the  field,  which  (was)  round 
47.  20  the  Egyptians  sold  every  man  his  field 
47. 24  shall  be  your  own,  for  seed  of  the  field 
49.  29,  30  in  the  cave  that  (is)  in  the  field  of 
49.  30  which  Abraham  bought  with  the  field  of 

49.  32  The  purchase  of  the  field  and  of  the  cave 

50.  13  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of 
50.  13  which  Abraham  bought  with  the  field 

Exod.  r.  14  and  in  all  manner  of  service  in  the  field 
8. 13  and  the  frogs  died,  .out  of  the  fields 
9.    3  upon  thy  cattle  which  (is)  in  the  field 
9. 19  gather,  .all  that  thou  hast  in  the  field 
9.  19  every  man  and  beast,  .found  in  the  field 
9.  21  left  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  the  fie. 
9.  22  may  be  hail,  .upon  every  herb  of  the  fie. 
9.  25  the  hail  smote.. all  that  (was)  in  the  field 
9. 25  the  hail  smote  every  herb  of  the  field 
9.  25  the  hail,  .brake  every  tree  of  the  field 
10.    5  which  groweth  for  yon  out  of  the  field 
jo.  15  remained  not  any.  .thing,  .hi.  .the  field 

16.  25  to  day  ye  shall  not  find  it  iu  the  field 
22.   5  If  a  man  shall  cause  a  field,  .to  be  eaten 
22.    5  his  beast .  .feed  in  another  man's  field 
22.    5  of  the  best  of  his  own  field,  .shall  he 

22.  6  If  fire  break  out.  .so  that,  .the  field,  be 
22. 31  flesh  (that  is)  torn  of  beasts  in  the  field 

23.  11  what  they  leave  the  beasts  of  the  field 
23.  16  labours,  which  thou  hast,  .in  the  field 

23. 16  gathered  in  thy  labours  out  of  the  field 
23.  29  lest,  .the  beast  of  the  field  multiply 

Lev.  14.  7  let  the  living  bird  loose  iuto  the.  .field 
14.  53  let  go  the  living  bird,  .into  the  open  fields 

17.  5  which  they  offer  in  the  open  field,  even 
19.    9  thou  shalt  not  wholly  reap,  .thy  field 

19.  19  thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  mingled 
23.  22  thou  shalt  not  make  clean .  .thy  field 

25.    3  Six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  field,  and 
25.    4  thou  shalt  neither  sow  thy  field,  nor 
25.  12  ye  shall  eat  tbe  increase,  .out  of  the  field 
25.  31  villages,  .shall  be  counted  as  the  fields  of 

25.  34  the  field  of  the  suburbs  of  their  cities 

26.  4  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield  their 

27.  16  if  a  man  shall  sanctify,  .of  a  field  of  his 

27. 17  If  he  sanctity  bis  field  from  the  year  of 
27.  18  if  he  sanctify  his  field  after  the  jubilee 
27.  19  if  he  that  sanctified  the  field  will  in  any 
27.  20  And  if  he  will  not  redeem  the  field,  or  if 
27.  20  if  he  have  sold  the  field  to  another  man 
27.  zi  But  the  field,  .shall  be.,  as  a  field  devoted 
27.  22  a  field .  .which  (is)  not  of  the  fields  of  his 
27.  24  the  field  shall  return  unto  him  of  whom 
27.  28  no  devoted  thing,  .of  the  field,  .shall  be 

Nunii6. 14  or. . inheritance  of  fields  and  vineyards 
ig.  16  one . .  slain  with  a  sword  in  the  open  fields 

20.  17  we  win  not  pass  through  the  fields,  or 

21.  22  we  will  not  turn  into  the  fields,  or  into 

22.  4  as  the  ox  Hcketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field 
22.  23  the  ass  turned,  .and  went  iuto  the  field 

23. 14  he  brought  him  into  the  field  of  Zophini 
Deut.  5.  21  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour's,  .field 

7.  22  lest  the  beasts  of  the  field  increase  upon 

11. 15  I  will  send  grass  in  thy  field  for  thy  cattle 
14.  22  that  the  field  bringeth  forth  year  by  year 
20. 19  for  the  tree  of  the  field  (is)  man's  (lile) 

21.  1  If  (one)  be  found  slain,  .lying  in  the  field 

22.  25  But  if  a  man  find  a.  .damsel  in  the  field 
22,  27  he  found  her  in  the  field,  .the  betrothed 
24. 19  When  thou  cuttest  down .  .in  thy  field 
24. 19  and  hast  forgot  a  sheaf  in  the  field,  thou 


Deut  2S. 
28. 


Josh. 


Judg.  1. 
5' 
5< 
9' 
9' 
9' 
9' 
9- 


Ruth 


rKi. 


14. 

16. 

21. 
2K1.  4, 
7- 
8. 
9- 
9- 

18. 

19. 

iCh.   1. 

6. 

16. 

19. 

27. 

27, 
2  Ch.  26. 

3*- 

Neh.  11 


Job 


J3 

5' 

5' 

24, 

40 

Psa.  7S 

78. 

103. 

107. 

132. 

Prov  23. 

24 

24. 

27. 

3i 

Ecel.  5. 

Song  2. 

3 


Isa. 


Jer. 


343 


3  and  blessed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  in  the  field 
16  and  cursed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  in  the  field 
3S  Thou  shalt  carry,  .seed  out  into  the  field 
24  all  the  inhabitants  of  Ai  in  the  field,  in 
iS  that  she  moved  him  to  ask.  .afield 

12  But  the  fields,  .gave  they  to  Caleb  the  son 
i4that  she  moved  him  to  ask.  .afield 

4  when  thou  marchedst  out  of  the  field  of 
18  people,  .jeoparded  their  lives.  .in..thefi. 
27  they  went  out  into  the  fields,  and  gath. 
32  thou  and  the  people . .  lie  iu  wait  in  the  fi. 

42  that  the  people  went  out  into  the  field 

43  he  took . .  and  laid  wait  in  the  field,  and 

44  ran  upon  all.  .that  (were)  in  the  fields 

9  the  angel . .  came . .  as  she  sat  in  the  field 

16  there  came  an  old  man.  .out  of  the  field 

31  of  which  one  goeth.  .to  Gibeah  in  the  fie. 

2  Let  me  now  go  to  the  field,  and  glean 

3  she.  .gleaned  in  the  field  after  the  reap. 
3  her  hap  was  to  light  on  a  part  of  the  fie. 

8  Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field,  neither 

9  (Let)  thine  eyes  (be)  on  the  field  that 

17  So  she  gleaned  in  the  field  until  even 

22  that  they  meet  thee  not  in  any  other  field 

5  What  day  thou  buyest  the  field  of  the 

2  they  slew  of  the  army  in  the  field  about 
14  the  cart  came  into  the  field  of  Joshua,  a 

18  unto  this  day  in  the  field  of  Joshua,  the 

14  he  will  take  your  fields,  and  your  \iney. 
5  Saul  came  after  the  herd  out  of  the  field 

15  was  trembling  in  the  host,  in  the  field 
44  I  will  give  thy  flesh ..  to ..  beasts  of  the  fi. 

3  stand  beside  my  father  in  the  field  where 

5  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  the  field  unto 
11  Come,  and  let  us  go  out  into  the  field 

11  they  went  out  both  of  them  into  the  field 

24  So  David  hid  himself  in  the  field  :  and 
35  Jonathan  went  out  into  the  field  at  the 

7  will  the  son  of  Jesse  give.. you  fields  and 
15  with  them,  when  we  were  in  the  fields 
11  And  they  found  an  Egyptian  in  the  field 

21  neither ..  rain  upon  you,  nor  fields  of 

8  Syrians  of  Zoba.  .by  themselves  in  the  fi. 

1 1  servants . .  are  encamped  in  the  open  fields 

23  the  men . .  came  out  unto  us  into  the  field 

6  and  they  two  strove  together  in  the  field 

8  as  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  in  the  field 
6  So  the  people  went  out  into  the  field 

12  he  removed  Amasa.  .into  the  field,  and 

10  day,  nor  the  beasts  of  the  field  by  night 
26  Get.  .to  Anathoth,  unto  thine  own  fields 

29  and  they  two  (were)  alone  in  the  field 

11  him  that  dieth  iu  the  field  shall  the  fowls 

4  him  that  dieth  of  his  in  the  fields  shall 

24  him  that  dieth  in  the  field  shall  the  fowls 
39  one  weut  out  into  the  field  to  gather  he. 

12  are  they  gone,  .to  hide,  .in  the  field 

6  Restore,  .all  the  fruits  of  the  field  since 

25  cast  him  in  the  portion  of  the  field  of  N. 
37  shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  face  of  the  field 

1 7  which  (is)  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  fi. 

26  they  were  (as)  the  grass  of  the  field,  and 
46  which  smote  Midian  in  the  field  of  Moab 
56  the  fields,  .they  gave  to  Caleb  the  son  of 

32  let  the  fields  rejoice,  and  all  that  (is) 

9  kings  that  were  come  (were) . .  in  the  field 

25  over  the  store  houses  in  the  fields,  in  the 

26  over  them  that  did  the  work  of  the  field 
23  they  buried  him . .  in  the  field  of  the  burial 

5  brought,  .of  all  the  increase  of  the  field 

19  in  the  fields  of  the  suburbs  of  their  cities 

25  And  for  the  villages,  with  their  fields 

30  at  Lachish,  and  the  fields  thereof,  at  Az. 

29  out  of  the  fields  of  Geba  and  Azmaveth 
44  to  gather  into  them  out  of  the  fields  of 
10  Levites.  .were  fled  every  one  to  his  field 
23  be  in  league  with  the  stones  of  the  field 
23  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace 

6  They  reap . .  his  corn  in  the  field  :  and  they 

20  where  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  play 
i2|Marvellous  things  did  he  in .  .the  field  of 
43'wTOUght .  .his  wonders  in  the  field  of  Zoan 

15  as  a  flower  of  the  field,  so  he  flourisheth 
37  And  sow  the  fields,  and  plant  vineyards 

6  we  found  it  hi  the  fields  of  the  wood 

10  enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the  fatherless 

27  and  make  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the  field 

30  I  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful,  and  by 

26  and  the  goats  (are)  the  price  of  the  field 

16  She  considereth  a  field,  and  buyeth  it 

9  the  king  (himself)  is  served  by  the  field 

7  I  charge  you.  .by  the  hinds  of  the  field 
5  I  charge  you.  .by  the  hinds  of  the  field 

11  Come,  .let  us  go  forth  into  the  field ;  let 

5  Woe  unto  them,  .(that)  lay  field  to  field 

3  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field 

12  They  shall  lament,  .for  the  pleasant  fields 
2  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field 

27  they  were  (as)  the  grass  of  the  field,  and 

6  all  the  goodliness.  .as  the  flower  of  the  fi. 
20  The  beast  of  the  field  shall  honour  me 

12  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap,  .hands 
12  fields  and  wives  together  :  for  I  will 
25  Go  not  forth  into  the  field,  nor  walk  by 
20  poured  out.  .upon  the  trees  of  the  field 

10  I  give,  .their  fields  to  them  that  shall 

22  shall  fall  as  dung  upon  the  open  field 

4  shall,  .the  herbs  of  every  field  wither 

9  assemble  all  the  beasts  of  the  field,  come 
27  abominations  on  the  hills  in  the  field 

5  the  hind  also  calved  in  the  field,  and 

18  If  I  go  forth  into  the  field,  then  behold 


FIELD 


Jer.  17.    3  O  my  mountain  in  the  field,  I  will  give 

26.  18  Zion  shall  be  plowed,  .afield,  and  Jeru. 

27.  6  the  beasts  of  the  field iiave  I  given  him 
28. 14  I  have  given  him  the  beasts  of  the  field 
32.    7  Buy  thee  my  field-that  (is)  in  Anathoth 
32.    8  Buy  my  field,  I  pray  thee,  that  (is)  in  A. 
32.    9  I  bought  the  field  of  Hanameel  my  uncle's 
32.  15  Houses  aud  fields,  .shall  be  possessed 
32.  25  Buy  thee  the  field  for  money,  and  take 
32.  43  And  fields  shall  lie  bought  iu  this  land 
32.  44  Men  shall  buy  fields  for  money,  and  sub. 

35.  9  neither  have  we  vineyard,  nor  field,  nor 

40.  7,  1 3  all  the  captains  of  the  forces.,  in  the  fi. 

41.  8  we  have  treasures  in  the  field,  of  wheat 
Eze.    7.  15  he  that  (is)  in  the  field  shall  die  with  the 

16.    5  but  thou  wast  cast  out  in  the  open  field 

16.  7  thee  to  multiply  as  the  bud  of  the  field 

17.  5  seed,  .and  planted  it  in  a  fruitful  field 

1 7.  24  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that  I 
20.  46  prophesy  against  the  forest  of  the.  .field 
26.    6  her  daughters  which  (are)  in  the  field 

26.  8  He  shall  slay,  .thy  daughters  in  the  field 
29.  5  thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  fields  ;  thou 
31.  4  little  rivers  unto  all  the  trees  of  the  field 
31.  5  was  exalted  above  all  the  trees  of  the  fi. 
31.  6  did  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  bring  forth 
31.  13  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  upon 

31.  15  all  the  trees  of  the  field  fainted  for  him 

32.  4  I  will  cast  thee  forth  upon  the  open  field 

33.  27  him  that  (is)  in  the  open  field  will  I  give 

34.  5  became  meat  to  all  the  beasts  of  the  field 
34.    8  became  meat  to  every  beast  of  the  field 
34.  27  the  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  her  fruit 

36.  30  I  will  multiply,  .the  increase  of  the  field 

38.  20  the  beasts  of  the  field,  .shall  shake  at  my 

39.  4  give  thee  unto,  .the  beasts  of  the  field  to 
39.    5  Thou  shall  fall  upon  the  open  field  :  fori 
39.  10  they  shall  take  no  wood  out  of  the  field 
39. 17  Speak  unto,  .every  beast  of  the  field 

Hos.    2.  12  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat  them 
2.  18  a  covenant,  .with  the  beasts  of  the  field 
4.    3  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  f . 

Joel    1.  10  The  field  is  wasted,  the  land  mom-neth 
1.  11  because  the  harvest  of  the  field  is  perished 
1.  12  all  the  trees  of  the  field,  are  withered 
1.  19  flame  hath  burned  all  the  trees  of  the  fi. 

1.  20  The  beasts  of  the  field  cry  also  unto  thee 
Obad.  19  possess  the  fields  of  Ephraini,  and  the  fi. 
Mia    1.    6  will  make  Samaria  as  an  heap  of  the  field 

2.  2  they  covet  fields,  and  take,  .by  violence 

2.  4  turning  away  he  hath  divided  our  fields 

3.  12  Therefore  shall  Zion.  .be  plowed,  .a  field 
4. 10  thou  shalt  dwell  in  the  field,  and  thou 

Zech.io.    1  the  Lord  shall,  .give,  .grass  in  the  field 
Mai.    3. 11  your  vine  cast  her  fruit,  .in  the  field 

Q. Level  p>laces,  smyJ  sadai. 

Deut  32. 13  that  hemighteat  theiucrease  of  the  field 

Psa.     8.    7  All.  .oxen,  yea,  and  the  beasts  of  thefield 

50.  11  and  the  wildbeastsof  the  field  (are)  mine 

80. 13  the  wild  beast  of  the  field  doth  devour  it 

96. 12  Let  the  field  be  joyful,  and  all  that  (is) 

104.  11  They  give  drink  to  every  beast  of  the  fi. 

Isa.  56.    9  All  ye  beasts  of  the  field,  come  to  devour 

Jer.    4.  17  As  keepers  of  a  field,  arc  they  against  her 

18.  14  of  Lebanon,  .from  the  rock  of  the  field? 
Lam.  4.    9  pine  away.  .for.  .the  fruits  of  the  field 
Hos.  10.    4  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the  field 

12.  11  their  altars  (are)  as  heaps  in.  .the  fields 
Joel    2.  22  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field :  for 

7.  Field,  nzyj  shedemah. 

Deut32.  32  Eor  their  vine  (is),  .of  the  fields  of  Gom. 
2  Ki.23.  4  he  burned  them,  .in  the  fields  of  Kidron 
Isa.  16.  8  the  fields  of  Heshbon  languish,  .the  vine 
Hab.  3. 17  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat;  the  flock 

8. Fields  {cultivated),  DUj;  yegebim. 

Jer.  39.  10  Nebuzar-adan .  .gave  them,  .fields  at  the 

9. Fields,  burnt  places,  niDi.i^  skeremoth. 

Jer.  31.  40  all  the  fields  uuto  the  brook  of  Kidron 

10.  Field,  aypos.  agros. 

Matt.  6.  28  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they 
6. 30  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field 

13.  24  a  man  which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field 
13.  27  didst  not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field  ? 
13.  31  which  a  man  took,  and  sowed  in  his  field 
13.  36  Declare.. the  parable  of  the  taresof  thefi. 
13.  38  The  field  is  the  world ;  the  good  seed  are 
13.  44  is  like  unto  treasure  hid  in  a  field" 

13.  44  selleth  all.  .he hath,  and  buyeth  that  field 
24.  18  Neither  let  hhn  which  is  inthe  field  return 
24.  40  Then  shall  two  be  in  the  field  ;  the  one 

27.  7  bought  with  them  the  potter's  field,  to 
27.  8  that  field  was  called,  The  field  of  blood 
27.  10  gave  them  for  the  potter's  field,  as  the  L, 

Marki3. 16  let  him  that  is  in  the  field  not  turn  back 
Lukei2.  28  the  grass,  which  is  to  day  in  the  field,  and 
15.  15  he  sent  him  into  his  fields  to  feed  swine 
15.  25  Now  his  elder  son  was  in  the  field :  and 
17,  7  when  he  is  come  from  the  field,  Go  and 
17.  31  he  that  is  in  the  field,  let  him  likewise 
17-  36  [Two.  .shall  be  in  the  field ;  the  one  sh.] 

11. A  space,  open  country,  x^Pa  ehora. 

John  4.  35  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields 
Jas.    5.   4  labourers  who.  .reaped  down  your  fields 

12.  .4  little  space  or  place,  xwptoir  chorion. 

Acts    1.  18  Now  this  man  purchased  a  field  with  the 
1.  19  that  field  is  called.  .The  field  of  blood 


PIERCE 


344 


FIFTY 


FIERCE  — 

1. Fierce,  ijpij  akzar. 

Job  41.  10  None  (is  so)  fierce  that  dare  stir  him  up 

2.JIeat,  pig  chevron. 

Exod32. 12  Turn  from  thy  fierce  wrath,  and  repentof 

NU11125.    4  that  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  may  he 

32.  14  to  augment  yet  the  fierce  anger  of  the  L. 

1  Sa.  28.  18  nor  executedst  his  fierce  wrath  upon  Am. 

2  Ch.28.  1 1  the  fierce  wrath  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  you 

28.  13  and  (there  is)  fierce  wrath  against  Israel 

29.  10  that  his  fierce  wrath  may  turn  away  from 
Psa.  88.  16  Thy  fierce  wrath  goeth  over  me  ;  thy  ter. 
Isa.   13.    9  cruel  both  with  wrath  and  fierce  anger 

13. 13  remove,  .in  the  day  of  his  fierce  auger 
Jer.    4.    8  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  is  not  turned 
4.  26  cities,  .were  broken  down,  .by  his  fierce 
12.  13  ashamed,  .because  of  the  fierce  anger  of 
25.  37  are  cut  down  because  of  the  fierce  anger 
25.  38  is  desolate,  .because  of  his  fierce  anger 

30.  24  The  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  shall  not  re. 
49.  37  I  will  bring  evil  upon  them,  .my  fierce  a. 
5t.  45  deliver,  .from  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 

Lam.  1.  12  Lord  hath  afflicted,  .in.  .his  fierce  anger 
4.  n  he  hath  poured  out  his  fierce  anger,  and 

Jon.     3.   9  God  will . .  turn  away  from  his  fierce  an. 

Zeph.  2.  2  before  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  come 
3.   8  to  pour  upon  them,  .all  my  fierce  anger 

Z.Meat,  np  chori. 

1  8a.  20.  34  So  Jonathan  arose,  .in  fierce  anger,  and 
Isa.  7.  4  for  the  fierce  anger  of  Rezin  with  Syria 
Lam.  2.    3  He  hath  cut  oft'  in.  .fierce  anger  all  the 

4. To  be  strong,  tu;  yaaz,  2. 

Isa.   33. 19  Thou  shalt  not  see  a  fierce  people,  a  peo. 

5. Strong,  iy  az. 

Gen.  49.    7  Cursed  (be)  their  anger,  for  (it  was)  fierce 
Deut28.  50  A  nation  of  fierce  countenance,  which 
Isa.    19.    4  and  a  fierce  king  shall  rule  over  them 
Dan.   8.  23  a  king  of  fierce  countenance,  .shall  stand 

Q.Xot  mild,  savage,  avftfiepos  anemeros. 

2  Ti.    3.    3  false  accuseds,  incontinent,  fierce,  desp. 

7. Hard,  <TK\7]p6s  skleros. 

Jas.    3.   4  Behold  also  the  ships,  .driven  of  fierce 
B.Dang&ro'US,  fierce,  injurious,  ^aA€7r<Js  cholepos. 

Matt.  8.  28  exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might 
FIERCE,  to  be  — 
To  be  sharp,  acute,  light,  lin  chadad. 

Hab.   1.    8  Their  horses,  .are  more  fierce  than..wol. 
FIERCE,  to  be  the  more  — 
To  be  strong  upon,  iwiax^^  episcJiud. 

Luke23.    s  And  they  were  the  more  fierce,  saying 
FIERCE  lion  — 
A  (roaring)  lion,  TncJ  shacked. 

Job     4.  10  the  voice  of  the  fierce  lion,  and  the  teeth 
10.  16  Thou  huntest  me  as  a  fierce  lion  ;  and 
28.    8  not  trodden . .  nor  the  fierce  liou  passed  by 

FIERCENESS  — 

l.Heat,  pin  charon. 

Deut.13.  17  that  the  Lord  may  turn  from  the  fierce. 
Josh.  7.  26  So  the  Lord  turned  from  the  fierceness 
2  Ki.  23.  26  the  Lord  turned  not  from  the  fierceness 
2  Ch.  30.    8  that  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath  may  turn 
Psa.  78.  49  He  cast  upon  them  the  fierceness  of  his 
65.    3  thou  hast  turned,  .from  the  fierceness  of 
Jer.  25.  38  is  desolate  because  of  the  fierceness  of  the 
Hos.  11.    9  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine 
Nah.   1.    6  who  can  abide  in  the  fierceness  of  his  a.  ? 

2.  Shaking,  trembling,  trjn  raash. 

Job  39.  24  He  swalloweth  the  ground  with  fierceness 
Z.Wrath,  6u/j.6s  thumos. 

Rev.  16. 19  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness  of  his 
19. 15  the  wine  press  of  the  fierceness  and  wrath 
FIERCER,  to  be  — 
To  be  sharp,  hard,  n^p  qashah. 

2  Sa.  19.  43  the  words  of  the  men  of  Judah  were  fler. 
FIERY  — 
l.Fire,  vx  esh. 

Psa.  21.   9  Thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in 
2. Ft'rc,  113  vt/r. 

Han.    3.   6,  11,  15  into  the  midst  of  a  burning  fiery  f. 
■  3.  17  to  deliver  us  from  the  burning  fiery  furn. 
3.  20  to  cast  (them)  into  the  burning  fiery  fur. 
3.  21  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  burning  fiery  f. 
3.  23  fell  down  bound  into . .  the  burning  fiery  f . 
3.  26  came  near  to . .  the  burning  fiery  furnace 
7.    9  his  throne,  .the  fiery  flame,  .his  wheels 
7. 10  A  fiery  stream,  .came  forth  from  before 
3. Burning  one,  f\~§p  saraph. 

Nuni2i.  6  the  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  the 
Deut.  8.  15  fiery  serpents,  and  scorpions,  and  drought 

4.  Fire,  irvp  pur. 

Heb.io.  27  But  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of.  .fiery 

5.  To  be  set  on  fire,  irvpoo/xat  puroomai. 

Eph.   6.  16  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all  the  fiery 

FIERY  serpent  — 

Burning  one,  *\~vp  saraph. 

Num.21.    S  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon 
Isa,    14.  29  his  fruit  (shall  be)  a  fiery  flying  serpent 
30.    6  whence . .  the  viper  and  fiery  flying  serpent 


FIERY  trial  — 

.1  burning,  irvpwcis pu/rosis. 

1  Pe.    4.  12  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 

FIFTEEN  — 

l.Five  {and)  ten,  nb-y  n^pq  or  HTfegj  ittpq  chamesh. 
Gen.    5.  10  Enos  lived . .  eight  hundred  and  fifteen  ye. 
7.  20  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  pre. 
Exods7.  14  The  hangings  of  one  side,  .fifteen  cubits 
27.  15  on  the  other  side,  .hangings  fifteen  (cubi.) 
38.  14  The  hangings  of  the  one  side,  .fifteen  cu. 
38.  15  on  this,  .and  that,  .hangings  of  fifteen  cub. 
Lev.  27.    7  then  thy  estimation  shall  be  fifteen  she. 
Judg.  8.  10  their  hosts  with  them,  about  fifteen  tho. 

2  Sa.  q.  10  Ziba  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  servants 

ig  X7  Ziba.  .his  fifteen  sons  and  his  twenty 

1  Ki.  7.    3  (lay)  on  forty  five  pillars,  fifteen  (in)  a  row 

2  Ki.14.  17  Amaziah.  .lived after.  .Jehoash. . fifteen y. 

20.    6  And  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  yea. 
2  Ch.  15.  25  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  Israel,  fifteen  years 
Isa.   38.    5  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years 
Eze.  45. 12  five  and  twenty  shekels,  fifteen  shekels 
Hos.    3.    2  So  I  bought  her  to  me  for  fifteen,  .of  sil. 

2.Five  and  ten  ,T?^1  B>£D  chamesh  veasar. 

Gen.  25.    7  an  hundred  threescore  and  fifteen  years 
ExodsS.  25  seven  hundred  and  threescore  and  fifteen 
Num3i.  37  six  hundred  and  threescore  and  fifteen 

Z.Ten  (and)  five,  StKcnrevre  dekapente. 

Johnn.  18  Bethany  was.  .about  fifteen  furlongs  off 
Acts  27.  28  they  sounded  again,  and  found  (it)  fifteen 
Gal.    1.  18  to  see  Peter,  and  abode  with  him  fifteen 

4. Seventy  five,  e&dofj.iiKovra  ireyre. 

Acts    7.  14  all  Ins  kindred,  threescore  and  fifteen 

FIFTEENTH  — 

l.Five  {anal)  ten,  ib'j;  naton  chamishshah  asar. 
Exodi6.    1  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  second  month 
Lev.  23.    6  on  the  fifteenth  day.  .the  feast  of  uuleav. 
23.  34  The  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month 

23.  39  Also  in  the  fifteenth  day.  ye  shall  keep  a 
Nuni28.  17  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  this  month  (is)  the  f. 

29.  12  on  the  fifteenth  day.  .ye  shall  have  an 
33.    3  they  departed,  .on  the  fifteenth  day  of 

1  K.i,i2.  32  ordained  a  feast,  .on  the  fifteenth  day  of 

12.  33  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  eighth  month 

2  Ki.14.  23  In  the  fifteenth  year  of  Amaziah  the  son 

1  Ch.24.  14  The  fifteenth  to  Bilgah,  the  sixteenth  to 

25.  22  The  fifteenth  to  Jeremoth.  .his  sons,  and 

2  Ch.15.  10  they  gathered,  .together,  .in  the  fifteenth 
Esth.  9.  18  on  the  fifteenth,  .of  the  same  they  rested 

9.  21  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same,  yearly 
Eze.  32'.  17  in  the  fifteenth,  .of  the  month,  .the  word 
45.  25  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month,  shall 

l.Five  and  tenth,  irevreKaideKaros  pentehaidekatos. 
Luke  3.    1  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiber. 

FIFTH  — 

I. Fifth,  'Btoq,  ^:,pn  chamishshi,  chamishi. 

Gen.  1.    23  the  evening  and . .  morning  were  the  fifth 

30.  17  sheconceived,  and  bare  Jacob  the  fifth 
47.  24  that  ye  shall  give  the  fifth . .  unto  Pharaoh 

Lev.  19.  25  in  the  fifth  year  shall  ye  eat  of  the  fruit 
22.  14  he  shall  put  the  fifth,  .thereof  unto  it 
27. 13  he  shall  add  a  fifth,  .thereof  unto  thy 
27.  15,  19  he  shall  add  the  fifth,  .of  the  money 
27.  27  he.  .shall  add  a  fifth  (part)  of  it  thereto 
27.  31  he  shall  add  thereto  the  fifth,  .thereof 

Num.  5.    7  he  shall . .  add  unto  it  the  fifth . .  thereof 

7.  36  On  the  fifth  day  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Z. 
29.  26  on  the  fifth  day  nine  bullocks,  two  rams 
33.  38  died,  .in  the  first  (day)  of  the  fifth  month 

Josh.19.  24  the  fifth  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe,  .of  A. 
Judg.  19.  8  he  arose  early,  .on  the  fifth  day  to  depart 
2  Sa.    3.    4  the  fifth,  Shephatiah  the  son  of  Abital 

1  Ki.  14.  25  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  fifth  year  of  king  R. 

2  Ki.  25.    8  in  the  fifth  month,  .came  Nebuzar-adan 

1  Ch.  2.  14  Nethaneel  the  fourth,  Raddai  the  fifth 

3.    3  The  fifth,  Shephatiah  of  Abital ;  the  sixth 

8.  2  Nohah  the  fourth,  and  Rapha  the  fifth 
12.  10  Mishmannah  the  fourth,  Jeremiah .  .fifth 

24.  9  The  fifth  to  Malchijah,  the  sixth  to  Mij. 

25.  12  The  fifth  to  .Nethaniah.  .his  sons,  and  his 

26.  3  Elam  the  fifth,  Jehohauan  the  sixth,  Eli. 

26.  4  Sacar  the  fourth,  and  Nethaneel  the  fifth 

27.  8  The  fifth  (captain)  for  the  fifth  month 

2  Ch.  i2.    2  in  the  fifth  year.  .Shishak.  .came  up 
Ezra    7.    8  he  came  to  Jerusalem  in  the  fifth  month 

7.   9  on  the  first,  .of  the  fifth  month  came  he 
Jer.     1.    3  of  Jerusalem  captive  in  the  fifth  month 
28. 1  it  came  to  pass . .  in  the  fifth  month,  (that) 
36.  9  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoi. 
52. 12  in  the  fifth  month,  .came  Nebuzar-adan 
Eze.    1.    2  fifth,  .of  the  month,  which  (was)  the  fifth 

20.    1  it  came  to  pass,  .in  the  fifth  (month) 
Zcch.  7.    3  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  .as  I 

7.  5  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth 

8.  19  the  fast  of  the  fifth,  .shall  be.  .joy  and 

2,Five,  n&?U,  trpn  chamesh,  chamishshah. 

2  Ki.  8.    16  in  the  fifth  year. .  Jehoram.  .began  to 

Neh.  6.    15  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  twenty  and  fi. 

Eze.     1.    1  in  the  fifth,  .of  the  month,  .the  heavens 

1.    2  In  the  fifth . .  of  the  month . .  the  fifth  yea. 

8.    1  in  the  sixth  (month),  in  the  fifth,  .of  the 

33.  21  in  the  tenth  (month),  in  the  fifth,  .of  the 

3. Fifth,  irtnTTTos  pemptos. 

Rev.    6.   9  when  he  had  opened  the  fifth  seal,  I  saw 
a.    1  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I  sawa  starf. 


Rev.  16.  10  the  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon 

21.  20  The  fifth,  sardonyx  ;  the  sixth,  sardius 

FIFTH  part— 

Fifth,  ""4VU,  V'?U  chamishshi,  chamishi. 

Lev.    5.  16  he.  .shall  add  the  fifth  part  thereto,  and 

6.  5  he.  .shall  add  the  fifth  part  more  thereto 

1  Ki,  6.  31  the  lintel  (and)  side  posts  (were)  a  fifth  p. 
FIFTH  part,  to  take  up  the  — 

To  take  fifth  pa  rt,  rank  or  place,  v~n  chamesh,  3. 
Gen.  41.  34  Let  Pharaoh,  .take  up  the  fifth  part  of 

FIFTH  (rib)  — 

Fifth  (part  <rr  rib),  irrn  chomesh. 

2  Sa.    2.  23  Abner.  .smote  him  under  the  fifth  (rib) 

3.  27  Joab . .  smote  him  there  under  the  fifth  (r.) 

4.  6  and  they  smote  him  under  the  fifth  (rib) 
20.  10  so  he  smote  him  therewith  in  the  fifth  (r.) 

FIFTH  time  — 

Fifth,  T'PD,  T'PO  chamishshi,  chamishi. 

Neh.   6.    5  Then  sent  Sanballat.  .the  fifth  time  with 

FIFTIES,  by  — 

By  fifty,  avd  irevr^Kovra  ana  pentekonta. 

Mark  6.  40  ADd  they  sat  down  in  ranks,  .by  fifties 
Luke  9.  14  Make  them  sit  down  by  fifties  in  a  comp. 

FIFTIETH — 

Fifty*  c'^pn  chamishshim. 

Lev.  25.  10  ye  shall  hallow  the  fiftieth  year,  and  proc. 

25.  11  A  jubile  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  unto 
2  Ki.  15.  23  In  the  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  king  of  J. 

15.  27  In  the  two  and  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah 
FIFTY  — 

1. Fifty,  D^pn  chamishshim. 

Gen.   6.  15  the  breadth  of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the 

7.  24  upon  the  earth  an  hundred  and  fifty  days 

8.  3  after  the  end  of  the  hundred  and  fifty  da. 

9.  28  Noah  lived,  .three  hundred  and  fifty  years 
9.  29  days,  .were  nine  hundred  and  fifty  years 

18.  24  Peradventure  there  be  fifty  righteous 
18.  24  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  (are)  therein? 
iS.  26  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  within 
18.  28  there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  righteous 
ExodiS.  21,  25  rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens 

26.  5  Fifty  loops  shalt  thou  make  in  the  one 
26.    5  fifty  loops  shalt  thou  make  in  the  edge 
26.    6  And  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  gold 
26. 10  thou  shalt  make  fifty  loops  on  the  edge 
26. 10  fifty  loops  in  the  edge  of  the  curtain 

26.  11  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  brass,  and 

27.  12  on  the  west  side,  .hangings  of  fifty  cubits 
27.  13  the  breadth  of  the  court,  .(shall  be)  fifty 

30.  23  Take,  .cinnamon,  .two  hundred  and  fifty 
30.  23  sweet  calamus  two  hundred  and  fifty 
36.  12  Fifty  loops  made  he  in  one  curtain,  and  fi. 
36.  13  he  made  fifty  taches  of  gold,  and  coupled 
36.  17  fifty  loops  upon,  .and  fifty  loops  made  he 
36.  18  he  made  fifty  taches  (of)  brass  to  couple 
38.  12  for  the  west  side,  .hangings  of  fifty  cubits 
38.  13  for  the  east  side  eastward  fifty  cubits 

38.  26  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty 
Lev.  23.  16  unto  the  morrow,  .shall  ye  number  fifty 
27.    3  thy  estimation  shall  be  fifty  shekels  of  si. 
27.  16  an  homer  of  barley  seed,  .at  fifty  shekels 
Num.  1.  23  Those,  .numbered  of  them,  .(were)  fifty 
1.  25  forty,  .five  thousand  six  hund.  and  fifty 
1.  29  fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hundred 
1.  31  fifty  and  seven  thousand  andfour hundred 
1.  43  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundred 

1.  46  three  thousand,  .five  hundred  and  fifty 

2.  6  fifty  aud  four  thousand  and  four  hunched 
2.  8  fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  four  hundred 
2.  13  fifty  and  nine  thousand  and  three  hundred 
2.  15  five  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  fifty 
2.  16  fifty  and  one  thousand . .  foiu*  hund.  and  f. 
2.  30  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundred 
2.  31  an  hundred  thousand  and  fifty  and  seven 
2.  32  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty 
4-  3>  23i  3°>35>  39»  43<  47  From .  .until  fifty  years 
4.  36  were  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fi. 

8.  25  from  the  age  of  fifty  years  they  shall  cease 

16.  2  two  hundred  and  fifty  princes  of  the  ass. 
16.  17  two  hundred  and  fifty  censers ;  thou  also 
16.  35  consumed  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 
26.  10  fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 
26.  34  fiftyandtwo thousand  and  seven  hundred 
26.  47  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundred 
31.  30  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of  fifty,  of  the 

31.  47  Moses  took  one  portion  of  fifty,  .of  man 
31.  52  sixteen  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty 

Deut.  1.  15  captains  over  fifties,  and  captains  over 

22.  29  Then  the  man . .  shall  give . .  fifty . .  of  silver 
Josh.  7.  21  a  wedge  of  gold  of  fifty  shekels  weight 

1  Sa.   6.  19  he  smote  of  the  people  fifty  thousand  and 

8. 12  he  will  appoint,  .captains  over  fifties 

2  Sa.  15.    1  Absalom  prepared . .  fifty  men  to  run  before 

24.  24  David  bought . .  the  oxen  for  fifty  shekels  of 

1  Ki.  1.    5  he  prepared,  .fifty  men  to  run  before  him 

7.    2  the  breadth  thereof  fifty  cubits,  and  the 
7.    6  the  length  thereof,  .fifty  cubits,  aud  the 

9.  23  five  hundred  and  fifty,  which  bare  rule 
10.  29  and  an  horse  for  an  hundred  and  fifty 
18.  19  prophets  of  Baal  four  hundred  and  fifty 
18.  22  Baal's«prophets .  .four  hundred  and  fifty 

2  Ki.  1.    9  king  sent,  .a  captain  of  fifty  with  his  fifty 

1.  10  Elijah  answered.,  the  captain  of  fifty,  If  I 
1.  10  then  let  fire,  .consume  thee  and  thy  fifty  < 
1.  10  came.,  fire,  .and  consumed  him  and  his  fl. 
1.  11  another  captain  of  fifty  with  his  fifty 


FIFTY 


345 


FIGHT 


2  Ki.  i.  12  let  fire.. consume  thee  and  thy  fifty 

i.  12  fire . .  came . .  and  consumed  him  and  his  fi. 
i.  13  he  sent.. a  captain  of.. fifty  with  his  fifty 

1.  13  And  the  third  captain  of  fifty  went  up 

1. 13  let.  .the  life  of  these  fifty  thy  servants 

1. 14  captains  of  the.  .fifties  with  their  titties 

2.  7  fifty  men  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  went 
2.  16  there  be  with  thy  servants  fifty  strong 

2.  17  Send.    They  sent  therefore  fifty  men 
13.    7  Neither  did  he  leave,  .but  fifty  horsemen 
15.   2  he  reigned  two  and  fifty  years  in  Jerusalem 
15.  20  Menahem  exacted,  .of  each  man  fifty  sh. 

15.  25  and  with  him  fifty  men  of  the  Gileadites 
21.    1  Manasseh.  .reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in 

1  Ch.  5.  21  they  took,  .of  their  camels  fifty  thousand 

5.  21  sheep  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 

8.  40  sons,  and  sons'  sons,  an  hundred  and  fifty 

9.  9  brethren . .  nine  hundred  and  fifty  and  six 
12.  33  Of  Zebulun.  .fifty  thousand,  which  could 

2  Ch.    1.  17  and  an  horse  for  an  hundred  and  fifty 

2.  17  they  were  found  an  hundred  and  fifty  th. 

3.  9  the  weight  of  the  nails  (was)  fifty  shekels 
8.  10  two  hundred  and  fifty,  that  bare  rule  over 
S.  18  took,  .four  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of 

26.    3  he  reigned  fifty  and  two  years  in  Jerusa. 

33.    1  he  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jerusa. 
Ezra    2.    7  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 

2.  14  children  of  Bigvai,  two  thousand  fifty  and 
2.  15  children  of  Adin,  four  hundred  fifty  and  f . 
2.  22  The  men  of  Netophah,  fifty  and  six 
2.  29  The  children  of  Nebo,  fifty  and  two 
2.  30  children  of  Magbish,  an  hundred  fifty  and 
2.  31  Elani,  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and 
2.  37  children  of  Inimer,  a  thousand  fifty  and 
2.  60  children  of  Nekoda,  six  hundred  fifty  and 
8.  3  with  him . .  of  the  males  an  hundred  and  f. 
8.    6  the  son  of  Jonathan,  and  with  him  fifty 

8.  26  six  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  silver 
Neh.   5.  17  an  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  Jews  and  ru. 

6. 15  So  the  wall  was  finished . .  in  fifty  and  two 
7.  10  The  children  of  Aran,  six  hundred  fifty 

7.  12  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
7.  20  children  of  Adin,  six  hundred  fifty  and  fi. 
7.  33  The  men  of  the  other  Nebo,  fifty  and  two 
7.  34  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
7.  40  children  of  Inimer,  a  thousand  fifty  and 
7. 70  The  Tirshatha  gave,  .fifty  basons,  five  h. 
Esth.  5.  14  Let  a  gallows  be  made  of  fifty  cubits  high 
7.    9  Behold  also,  the  gallows,  fifty  cubits  high 
Isa.     3.    3  The  captain  of  fifty,  and  the  honourable 
Eze.  40. 15  from  the.  .gate,  .unto  the.  .porch,  .fifty 
40.  21,  25,  36  the  length -.fifty  cubits,  and  the 
40.  29,  33  fifty  cubits  long,  and  five  and  twenty 
42.    2  north  door,  and  the  breadth,  .fifty  cubits 
42.    7  chambers,  the  length  thereof,  .fifty  cub, 
42.    8  the  length  of  the  chambers,  .(was)  fifty 
45.    2  fifty  cubits  round  about  for  the  suburbs 
48.  17  toward  the  north  two  hundred  and  fifty 
48.  17  toward  the  south  two  hundred  and  fifty 
48.  17  toward  the  east  two  hundred  and  fifty 
48.  17  toward  the  west  two  hundred  and  fifty 
Hag.   2.  16  for  to  draw  out  fifty,  .out  of  the  press 

2. Fifty  ir£VTT)KovTa  penteconia. 

Luke  7.  41  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  other  fifty 

16.  6  Take  thy  bill,  and  sit  down .  .write  fifty 
John  8.  57  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast 

21.  11  great  fishes,  an  hundred  and  fifty  and  th. 
Acts  13.  20  about  the  space  of  four  hundred  and  fifty 

FIFTY  every  where  — 

Fifty  by  fifty ',  QWpna  G*s;2n  chamishshimbacham. 
Exod27.  18  and  the  breadth  fifty  every  where,  and 
FTFTT,  by  — 
Fifty  men  (i.e.  each),  v"ii  D'u'prj  chamishshim  ish. 

1  Ki.  18.   4  Obadiah..  hid  theni  by  fifty  ma  cave,  and  f. 

18. 13  I  hid  an  hundred  men.. by  fifty  in  a  cave 
FIG  — 
1. Fig,  fig  tree,  hjn?i  teenah. 

Gen.    3.    7  they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made 

Numi3.  23  and . .  of  the  pomegranates,  and  of  the  figs 

20.   5  it  (is)  no  place  of  seed,  or  of  figs,  or  of  vi. 

2  Ki.  20.    7  Isaiah  said,  Take  a  lump  of  figs.     And 
Neh.  13.  15  as  also  wine,  grapes,  and  figs,  and  all 
Isa.  38.  21  Isaiah.. said,  Let  them  take  a  lump  of  fi. 
Jer.  24.    1  two  baskets  of  figs.,  set  before  the  temple 

24.    2  very  good  figs.,  figs,  .first  ripe.,  naughty  fi. 
24.    3  And  I  said,  Figs  ;  the  good  figs,  very  good 
24.    5  Like  these  good  figs,  so  will  I  acknowled. 
24.    8  as  the  evil  figs,  which  cannot  be  eaten 
29. 17  I  will.,  make  them  like  vile  figs,  that  ca. 

I.Fig,  (tvkov  sukon. 

Matt.  7.  16  Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of 
Marki  r.  13  nothing  but  leaves;  for  the  time  of  figs 
Luke  6.  44  For  of  thorns  men  do  not  gather  figs,  nor 
Jas.     3.  12  either  a  vine,  figs?  so  (can)  no  fountain 

FIG,  green  — 

Green,  hard,  unripe  fig,  19  pag. 

Song.  2.  13  The  fig  tree  putteth  forth  her  green  figs 
FIG,  untimely  — 
Unripe  fig,  uKvvBos  oluntlws. 

Rev.   6. 13  as  a  fig  tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs 
FIG  tree  — 
l.Fig  tree,  fig,  ruxn  teenah. 

Deut.  8.    8  A  land  of  wheat . .  and  fig  trees,  and  pom. 

Judg.  9.  10  the  trees  said  to  the  fig  tree,  Come  thou 

9.  11  But  the  fig  tree  said  unto  them,  Should 

1  Ki.  4, 25  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree 

44 


2  Ki.  18.  31  eat  ye.  .every  one  of  his  fig  tree,  and  dr. 
Psa.  105.  33  He  smote  their  vines . .  and  their  fig  trees 
Prov  27.  iS  Whoso  keepeth  the  fig  tree  shall  eat  the  f. 
Song  2.  13  The  fig  tree  putteth  forth  her  green  figs 
isa.  34.  4  down  ..as  a  falling  (fig)  from  the  fig  tree 
36.  16  eat  ye.  .every  one  of  his  fig  tree,  and  dr. 
Jer.     5.  17  shall  eat  up  thy  vines  and  thy  fig  trees 

8.  13  nor  figs  on  the  fig  tree,  and  the  leaf  shall 
IIos.    1. 12  I  will  destroy  her  vines  and  her  fig  trees 

9.  10  as  the  first  ripe  in  the  fig  tree  at  her  first 
Joel    1.    7  He  hath.. barked  my  fig  tree  :  he  hath 

1.  12  The  vine  is  dried  up,  and  the  fig  tree  la. 

2.  22  the  fig  tree  and  the  vine  do  yield  their 
Amos  4.    9  yoirrfigtreesandyour olivetreesincreased 
Mie.    4.    4  shall  sit  every  man.  .under  his  fig  tree 
Nah.   3.  12  All  thy  strongholds  (shall  be  like)  tig  trees 
Haii.    3.  17  Although  the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom 
Hag.   2.  19  the  vine,  and  the  fig  tree,  and  the  pome. 
Zech.  3.  10  call . .  under  the  vine  and  under  the  lig  tree 

2. Fig,  fig  tree,  <xvKza,  crvxrj  sukea,  suke. 

Matt 2t.  19  when  he  saw  a  fig  tree  in  the  way,  he  came 
21. 19  presently  the  fig  tree  withered  away 
21.  20  How  soon  is  the  fig  tree  withered  away  ! 
21.  21  shall  not  only  do  this.. to  the  fig  tree 
24.  32  Now  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree :  When 
Marku.  13  seeing  a  fig  tree  afar  offjhaving  leaves,  he 
11.  20  they  saw  the  fig  tree  dried  up  from  the 
.11.  21  the  fig  tree  which  thou  cursedst  is  wither. 

13.  28  Now  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree  ;  When 
Lukei3-   6  A  certain  (man)  had  a  fig  tree  planted  in 

13-  7  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig  tree 
21.  29  Behold  the  fig  tree,  and  all  the  trees 

Jolni  1.  48  when  thou  was  under  the  fig  tree,  I  saw 
1.  50 1  saw  thee  under  the  fig  tree,  helievest 

Jas.    3. 12  Can  the  fig  tree,  .bare  olive  berries? 

Rev.   6. 13  as  a  fig  tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs 

FIGHT  — 

I. Order,  rank,  arranging,  nan^D  maardkah. 

1  Sa.17.  20  as  the  host  was  going  forth  to  the  fight 
2.  Public  conflict,  kywv  agon. 

1  Ti.    6.  12  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on 

2  Ti.   4.   7  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finish. 

Z.A  contest,  struggle,  aQ\n(ris  othlesis. 

Heb.  10.  32  ye  endured  a  great  fight  of  afflictions 
4.  War,  battle,  fight,  Tr6\€fj.os  polepws. 

Heb.  11.  34  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight 

FIGHT,  to  — 

1.  To  fight,  consume,  nrp  lacham. 

Psa.  35.    1  fight  against  them  that  fight  against  me 
56.    1  for  man.  .he  fighting  daily  oppresseth 
56.    2  for  (they  be)  many  that  fight  against  me 

2.  To  fight,  be  consumed,  crrV  lacham,  2. 

Exod.  1. 10  join.. our  enemies,  and  fight  against  us 

14.  14  The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye 
14.  25  the  Lord  fighteth  for  them  against  the 
17.    8  Then  came  Amalek,  and  fought  with  Is. 
17.    9  Choose  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with 
17. 10  So  Joshua,  .fought  with  Amalek  :  and  M. 

Nuni2i.   t  he  fought  against  Israel,  and  took,  .of 
21.  23  he  came  to  Jahaz,  and  fought  against  Is. 
21.  26  Sihon.  .had  fought  against  the  former 
Deut.  1.  30  The  Lord  your  God.  .he  shall  fight  for 

1. 41  We  have  sinned,  .we  will  go  up  and  fight 
1.  42  Say  unto  them,  Go  not  up,  neither  fight 

3.  22  the  Lord  your  God  he  shall  fight  for  you 
20.  4  to  fight  for  you  against  yoHr  enemies,  to 
20. 10  thou  comest  nigh  unto  a  city  to  fight 

Josh.  9.    2  they  gathered  themselves  together,  to  fi. 
10. 14  hearkened,  .for  the  Lord  fought  forlsr. 
10.  25  all  your  enemies  against  whom  ye  fight 
10.  29  Then  Joshua,  .and  all  Israel,  .fought 
10.  31,  34  encamped  against  it,  and  fought 
10.  36  Joshua,  .and  all  Israel,  .fought  against  it 
10.  38  Joshua  returned,  .to  Dehir,  and  fought 

10.  42  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  fought  for  Israel 

11.  5  pitched  together,  .to  fight  against  Israel 
47  the  children  of  Dan  went  up  to  fight 

3  your  God  (is)  he  that  hath  fought  for  you 

10  the  LORD  your  God,  he  (it  is)  that  fighte. 
8  they  fought  with  you  :  and  I  gave  them 

11  and  the  men  of  Jericho  fought  against 
1  Who  shall  go  up.  .to  fight  against  them  ? 
3  Come  up  with  me.  .that  we  may  fight 
5  they  fought  against  him,  and  they  slew 

8  the  children  of  Judah  had  fought  against 

9  children  of  Judah  went  down  to  fight 

19  The  kings  came  (and)  fought,  then  fought 

20  They  fought,  .the  stars  in  their  courses  f. 
1  when  thou  wentest  to  fight  with  the  M.  ? 

17  For  my  father  fought  for  you,  and  adven. 
"  go  out,  I  pray  now,  and  fight  with  them 
39  Gaal  went  out.  .and  fought  with  Abimel. 
45  Abiraelech  fought  against  the  city  all 
52  Abiraelech  came  unto  the  tower,  and  fou. 
10.    9  passed  over  Jordan  to  fight  alsoagainst  J. 

10.  18  What  man  (is  he)  that  will  begin  to  fight 

11.  6  that  we  may  fight  with  the  children  of 
11.    8  and  fight  against  the  children  of  Ammon 
11.   9  If  ye  bring  me  home  again  to  fight  against 
11. 12  that  thou  art  come  against  me  to  fight  in 
11.  20  Sihon.  .pitched  in  Jahaz,  and  fought 
11.25  Balak.  .did  he  ever  fight  against  them 

11.  32  Jephthah  passed  over,  .to  fight  against 

12.  1  Wherefore  passedst  thou  over  to  fight 
12.    3  then  are  ye  come  up.  .tofightagainstme? 
12.    4  gathered,  .all  the  men .  .and  fought  with 

:  Sa.   4.   9  quit  yourselves  like  men,  and  fight 


19, 
23 
23, 
24, 
24. 
Judg.  1. 


9-38 
9 
9' 
9' 


1  Sa.  4.  10  the  Philistines  fought,  and  Israel  was 
8.  20  go  out  before  us,  and  fight  our  battles 

i2.    9  the  Philistines,  .fought  against  them 

13.  5  the  Philistines  gathered,  .to  fight  with  I. 

14.  47  Saul,  .fought  against  all  his  enemies  on 

15.  18  fight  against  them  until  they  be  consum. 
17.  9  It  he  be  able  to  fight  with  me,  and  to  kill 
17.  10  give  me  a  man,  that  we  may  fight  toget. 
17. 19  in  the  valley  of  Elah,  fighting  with  the  P. 
17.  32  thy  servant  will  go  and  fight  with  this  P. 

17.  33  Thou  art  not  able  to  go.  .to  fight  with 

18.  17  be  thou  valiant  for  me,  and  fight  the 

19.  8  David  went  out  and  fought  with  the  Ph. 
23.  1  the  Philistines  fight  against  Keilah,  and 
23.  5  David  and  lus  men.  .fought  with  the  Ph. 
25.  28  my  lord  fighteth  the  battles  of  the  Lord 

28.  1  Philistines  gathered  their  armies,  .to  fig. 

29.  8  that  I  may  not  go  fight  against  the  enem. 

31.  1  Now  the  Philistines  fought  against  Israel 

2  Sa.   2.  28  the  people  stood  still,  .neither  fought 
8. 10  because  he  had  fought  against  Hadad. 

10.  17  Syrians  set  themselves  in  array,  .and  fo. 

11.  17  Ana  the  men  of  the  city.. fought  with  J. 

11.  20  approached  ye  so  nigh,  .when  ye  did  fi.  ? 

12.  26  Joab  fought  against  Kabbah  of  the  child. 
12.  37  I  have  fought  against  Kabbah,  and  have 
12.  29  David,  .fought  against  it,  and  took  it 

_  21.  15  David  went  down,  .and  fought  against 

1  KJ.12.  21  to  fight  against  the  house  of  Israel,  to 
12.  24  Ye  shall  not  go  up,  nor  fight  against 
20. 23  but  let  us  fight  against  them  in  the  plain 
so.  25  we  will  fight  against  them  in  the  plain 
22. 31  Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  save 
22.  32  And  they  turned  aside  to  fight  against 

2  Ki.   3.  21  that  the  kings  were  come  up  to  fight  aga. 

8.  29  when  he  fought  against  Hazael  king  of  S. 

9.  15  when  he  fought  with  Hazael  king  of  Syr. 

10.  3  Look  out . .  and  fight  for  your  master's  ho. 

12.  17  Hazael.  .fought  against  Gath,  and  took  it 
13. 12  his  might  wherewith  he  fought  against  A. 
14. 15  how  he  fought  with  Amaziah  king  of  Ju. 

19.  9  he  is  come  out  to  fight  against  thee 

1  Ch.10.  1  Now  the  Philistines  fought  against  Israel 
18.  10  because  he  had  fought  against  Haderezer 
19. 17  against  the  Syrians,  they  fought  with  him 

2  Ch.11.    1  to  fight  against  Israel,  that  he  might  bri. 

11.  4  Ye  shall  not  go  up,  nor  fight  against  your 

13.  T2  0.  .fight  ye  not  against  the  Lord  God  of 
18.  30  Fight  ye  not  with  small  or  great,  save 
18.  31  they  compassed  about  him  to  fight  :'but 

20.  17  Ye  shall  not  (need)  to  tight  in  this  (battle) 
20.  29  that  the  Lord  fought  against  the  enemies 
22.  6  when  he  fought  with  Hazael  king  of  Syria 
27.    5  He  fought  also  with  the  king  of  the  Amo. 

32.  8  with  us  (is)  the  Lord  .  .to  fight  our  battles 
35.  20  Necho  king  of  Egypt  came  up  to  fight 
35.  22  disguised  himself,  that  he  might  fight 
-*=;.  22  came  to  fight  in  the  valley  of  Megiddo 

8  to  fight  against  Jerusalem,  and  to  hinder 

14  remember  the  Lord,  .and  fight  for  your 

20  resort  ye  thither.  .God  shall  fight  for  us 

3  They,  .fought against  me  without  a  cause 

Isa.    19.    2  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  bro. 

20.  1  Tartan  came,  .and  fought  against  Ashdod 

30.  32  in  battles  of  shaking  will  he  fight  with  it 
63.  10  therefore  he  was  turned,  .he  fought 

Jer.     1.  19  they  shall  fight  against  thee  ;  but  they 
15.  20  they  shall  fight  against  thee,  but  they 

21.  4  wherewith  ye  fight  against  the  king  of  B. 
21.    5  I  myself  will  fight  against  you  with  an 
32.   5  though  ye  fight  with  the  Chaldeans,  ye 
32.  24  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans,  that  fight 

32.  29  the  Chaldeans,  that  fight  against  this  city 

33.  5  They  come  to  fight  with  the  Chaldeans 

34.  1  and  all  the  people,  fought  against  Jem. 
34.  7  the  king  of  Babylon's  army  fought  again. 
34.  22  and  they  shall  fight  against  it,  and  take 
37.  8  And  the  Chaldeans  shall,  .fight  against 
37. 10  whole  army  of  the  Chaldeans  that  fight 
41.  12  they  took  all  the  men,  and  went  to  fight 
51.  30  The .  .men  of  Babylon  have  forborn  to  fig. 

Dan.  10.  20  now  will  I  return  to  fight  with  the  prince 

11.  11  the  king  of  the  south  shall,  .fight  with 
Zech  10.    5  they  shall  fight,  because  the  Lord  (is) 

14.  3  Then  shall  the  Lord  go  forth,  and  fight 
14.    3  as  when  he  fought  in  the  day  of  battle 
14.  14  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem  :  and 

3.  To  assemble,  war,  serve,  xny  tsaba. 

Isa.  29.  7  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations  that  fight 
29.    8  so  shall . .  the  nations  be  that  fight  against 

31.  4  so  shall  the  Lord,  .come  down  to  fight 
Zech  14.  12  all  the  people  that  have  fought  against 

l.To  war,  n^v  tsabah. 

Isa.  29.   7  even  all  that  fight  against  her  and  her 
o.War,  warfare,  battle,  nzrko  milchamah. 

Deut.  2.  32  Sihon  came  out  against  us.  .to  fight  at  J. 

Judg2o.  20  Israel  put  themselves  in  array  to  fight 

1  Ki.20.  26  went  up  to  Aphek,  to  fight  against  Israel 

2  Ch.32.    2  that  he  was  purposed  to  fight  against  J. 
Psa.  144.    1  my  hands  to  war,  (and)  my  fingers  to  fight 

6.  To  agonize,  contest  publicly,  a.ywvi{ofxai  agonizo. 

JohniS.  36  thenyould  my  servants  fight,  that  I  shou. 

1  Ti.    6.  12  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on 

2  Ti.    4.    7 1  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished 

7.  To  fight,  strive,  fx&xoy-at  mvchomai. 

Jas.    4.    2  ye  fight  and  war,  yet  ye  have  not,  because 

S.To  war,  battle,  fight,  Tro\efAsa>  polemeu. 

Kev.    2,  16 1 . .  will  fight  against  them  with  the  sword 


Neh. 


4- 
Psa.  109. 


FIGHT 


346 


FILLET 


Rev.  12.    7  Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against 
12.    7  and  the  dragon  fought  and  his  angels 

9. To  box,  irvKTedo)  ptukteu5. 

i  Co.   g.  26  so  fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air 

FIGHT  against  God,  to  — 

\. To  fight  with  God,  Beo/xax^co  theomacheo. 

Acts  23.    g  find  no  evil,  .let  us  not  fight  against  God 
%  Fighting  with  God,  deoLtdxos  thcomachos. 

Acts    5.  39  haply  ye  be  found  even  to  fight  against  G. 

FIGHT  with  beasts,  to  — 

To  fight  with  wild  beasts,  Brjpto/xax^  thenomacheo. 

1  Co. 15.  32  if.  .1  have  fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesus 

FIGHTING  — 

A  fight,  striving,  /xdxv  maehe. 

2  Co.  7.    5  without  (were)  fightings,  within  (were) 
Jas.    4.    1  From  whence  (come)  wars  and  fightings 

FIGHTING  men  — 

To  do  or  make  war,  nDity?  rtyry  ashah  milchamah. 

2  Ch.26.  11  Uzziah  had  an  host  of  fighting  men,  that 
FIGURE  — 
1. Figure,  idol,  b»D,  "?^p  seviel. 

Deut.  4.  16  the  similitude  of  any  figure,  the  likeness 

2.  Form,  building,  rrjnn  tabnith. 

Isa.   44.  13  he . .  maketh  it  after  the  figure  of  a  man 

3.. Antitype,  corresponding  impression,  avrirvirou. 

Heb.   9.  24  the  holy  places,  .the  figures  of  the  true 

4...-1  parable,  placing  alongside,  irapa^oArj  parabole. 

Heb.  9.    9  Which  (was)  a  figure  for  the  time  then 
11.  19  whence  also  he  received  him  in  a  figure 
5. A  type,  impression,  tvttos  tupos. 

Acts   7.  43  ye  took  up.  .figures  which  ye  made  to 

Horn.  5.  14  who  is  the  figure  of  him  that  was  to  come 
FIGURE,  like  — 
Antitype,  aurirvizov  antitupon. 

1  Pe.  3.  21  The  like  figure  whereunto  (even)  baptism 
FIGURES,  carved  — 
Carving,  graving,  ny^pp  miqlaath. 

1  Ki.  6.  29  carved  all  the  walls,  .with  carved  figures 
FILE  — 
File,  notched  edge,  crs  n"v?9  petsirah  pirn. 

1  Sa.  13.  21  Yet  they  had  a  file  for  the  mattocks,  and 
FILL  — 
I. Fall,  N?£  male. 

Jer.  23.  24  do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth?  saith  the 
2.Fulness,  N'Sp  mclo. 

Exodi6.  32  Fill  an  omer  of  it  to  be  kept  for  your  gen. 

Isa.     8.   8  stretching  out  of  his  wings  shall  fill,  .thy 

3.  Satiety,  fulness,  y^b1  soba. 

Lev.  25.  19  ye  shall  eat  your  fill,  and  dwell  therein 
Deut  23.  24  thou  mayest  eat  grapes  thy  fill  at  thine 
FILL,  to  — 

1.  To  fill,  complete,  be  full,  N^n  male. 

Gen.    1.  22  multiply,  and  fill  the  waters  in  the  seas 

Exod  10.    6  they  shall  fill  thy  houses,  and  the  houses 

4°-  34.  35  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  tabernacle 

1  Ki.  8. 10  the  cloud  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord 

8. 11  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  house  of 

18.  33  Fill  four  barrels  with  water,  and  pour(it) 

2  Ch.  5.  14  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  house  of 

17.    1  and  the  glery  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house 

7.  2  because  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled 
Psa.  1  io.   6  shall  fill  (the  places)  with  the  dead  bodies 
Isa.   14.  21  nor  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  cities 

27.  6  Israel  shall,  .fill  the  face  of  the  world 
Jer.  16.  18  they  have  filled  mine  inheritance  with 

19.  4  they,  .filled  this  place  with  the  blood  of 
46.  12  and  thy  cry  hath  filled  the  land  :  for  the 

Eze.     8. 17  for  they  have  filled  the  land  with  violence 
10.    3  and  the  cloud  filled  the  inner  court 
28. 16  they  have  filled .  .thee  with  violence,  and 

30.  11  they  shall .  .fill  the  land  with  the  slain 

43.  5  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house 

44.  4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  of 

2.  To  fill,  Khz  male,  3. 

Gen.  21.  19  went  and  filled  the  buttle  with  water,  and 
24.  16  she  went  down,  .and  filled  her  pitcher 
26. 15  had  stopped  them,  and  filled  them  with 
42.  25  commanded  to  fill  their  sacks  with  corn 
44.    1  Fill  the  men's  sacks  (with)  food,  as  much 

Exod.  2.  16  they .  .filled  the  troughs  to  water  their  f. 

28.  3  whom  I  have  filled  with  the  spirit  of  wis. 

31.  3  I  have  filled  him  with  the  spirit  of  God 
35.  31  he  hath  filled  him  with  the  spirit  of  God 
35.  35  Them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  of  heart 

Deut.  6.  xt  houses,  .which  thou  fllledst not,  and  wells 
Josh.  9.  13  these  bottles  of  wine,  which  we  filled 
1  Sa.  16.    1  Fill  thine  horn  with  oil,  and  go,  I  will 
1  Ki,  18.  35  and  he  filled  the  trench  also  with  water 
i  20.  27  but  the  Syrians  filled  the  country 

3  Ki.   3.  25  cast  every  man  his  stone,  and  filled  it 

2X.  to  till  lie  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one  end 

23.  14  he.  .filled  their  places  with  the  bones  of 

24.  4  he  filled  Jerusalem  with  innocent  blood 
Ezra  9. 11  abominations,  which  have  filled  it  from 
Job     3.  t5  Or  with  princes,  .who  filled  their  houses 

8.  21  Till  he  fill  thy  mouth  with  laughing,  and 
15.    2  Should  a  wise  man.,  fill  his  belly  with  the 

20.  23  (When)  he  is  about  to  fill  Ins  belly,  (God) 


Job   22.  18  Yet  he  filled  their  houses  with  good 

23.  4  I  would,  .fill  my  mouth  with  arguments 
38.  39  "Wilt  thou,  .fill  the  appetite  of  the  young 
41.    7  Canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  barbed  irons? 

Psa.  17.  14  whose  belly  thou  fillest  with  thy  hid  (tr.) 

80.  9  cause  it  to  take  deep  root,  and  it  filled 

81.  10  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it 
83.  16  Fill  their  faces  with  shame  ;  that  they 

107.   9  he.  .filleth  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness 
129.    7  Wherewith  the  mower  filleth  not  his  hand 
Prov.  1.  13  we  shall  fill  our  houses  with  spoil 

8.  21  to  inherit  substance  ;  and  I  will  fill  their 
Isa.    33.    5  he  hath  filled  Zion  with  judgment  and 

65.  20  an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  days 
Jer.  13.  13  I  will  fill  all  the  inhabitants  of  this  land 
15. 17  for  thou  hast  filled  me  with  indignation 
33.   5  to  fill  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of  men 
41.   9  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah  filled  it 
51.  14  Surely  I  will  fill  thee  with  men,  as  with 
51.  34  he  hath  filled  his  belly  with  my  delicates 
Eze.    3.    3  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  roll  that  I  give 
7. 19  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls,  neither  fill 

9.  7  Defile  the  house,  and  fill  the  courts  with 

10.  2  and  fill  thine  hand  with  coals  of  fire  from 

11.  6  ye  have  filled  the  streets  thereof  with  the 

24.  4  Gather  the  pieces.. fill  (it)  with  the  choice 
32.    5  I  will,  .fill  the  valleys  with  thy  height 
35.    8  I  will  fill  his  mountains  with  his  slain 

Nah.  2.  12  The  lion,  .filled  his  holes  with  prey,  and 
Zeph.  1.  9  which  fill  their  master's  houses  with  vio. 
Hag.  2.  7  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith  the 
Zech.  9.  13  When  I  have .  .filled  the  bow  with  Ephr, 

3.  To  fill,  N^p  mela. 

Dan.    2.  3*5  the  stoue  that  smote  the  image,  .filled  the 

I.  To  cover,  nsy  atah. 

Psa.  84.   6  make  it  a  well ;  the  rain  also  filleth  the 

5.  To  fill,  satisfy,  water,  mn  ravah,  5. 

Isa.  43.  24  neither  hast  thou  filled  me  with  the  fat 

6.  To  satisfy,  satiate,  fill,  Vty  saba,  5. 

Job     9.  18  He  will  not  suffer,  .but  filleth  me  with 
Psa.  147.  14  filleth  thee  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat 
Lam.  3. 15  He  hath  filled  me  with  bitterness,  he  hath 
Eze.  27.  33  thou  fllledst  many  people  ;  thou  didst 
32.   4  I  will  fill  the  beasts  of  the  whole  earth 

7.  To  fill,  load,  yeLitfa  gemizo. 

Lukei4.  23  to  come  in,  that  my  house  may  be  filled 
15.  16  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with 
John  2.    7  Fill  the  waterpots.  .And  they  filled 

6. 13  they,  .filled  twelve  baskets  with  the  frag. 
Rev.    8.    5  the  angel,  .filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar 

15.  8  temple  was  filled  with  smoke  from  the 

8.  To  fill  in,  make  quite  full,  e/xTrlir\T]/j.t  empiplemi. 

Luke  1.  53  He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  good  tin. 
John  6. 12  When  they  were  filled,  he  said  unto  his 
Rom  15.  24  if  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your 

9.  To  fill  in,  i/xTmrKdco  empiplad. 

Acts  14.  17  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness 

10.  To  mingle,  mix,  Kepdi/j/v/xt  kerannumi, — {ia. 
Rev.  18.   6  cup  which  she  bath  filled  fill  to  her  double 

II.  To  fill,  make  full,  iri/xTrAfi/xi,  tt\t)6w  pletho. 
Matt  27.  48  took  a  sponge,  and  filled  (it)  with  vinegar 
Luke  1.  15  he  shall  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

1.  41  Elisabeth  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
1.  67  Zacharias  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

4.  28  a]l  they  in  the  synagogue,  .were  filled 

5.  7  filled  both  the  ships,  so  that  they  began 
5.  26  they  were  all  amazed,  .and  were  filled 

6. 11  were  filled  with  madness  ;  and  communed 
John  19.  29  they  filled  a  sponge  with  vinegar,  and 
Acts   2.   4  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

3.  10  they  were  filled  with  wonder  and  amaze. 

4.  8  Then  Peter,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

4.  31  and  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  G. 

5.  17  and  all  they,  .were  filled  with  indignation 
9.  17  that  thou  mightest.  .be  filled  with  the 

13.   9  Saul,  .filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  set  his 
13.  4s  they  were  filled  with  envy,  and  spake 
ig.  29  the  whole  city  was  filled  with  confusion 

12.To  fill,  make  full,  7rAi?po*w  pleroo. 

Luke  2.  40  waxed  strong  in  spirit,  filled  with  wisdom 

3.  5  Every  valley  shall  be  filled,  and  every 
John  12.    3  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment 

16.  6  because  I  have  said,  .sorrow  hath  filled 
Acts    2.    2  and  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they 

5.    3  why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie 
5.  28  have  filled  Jerusalem  with  your  doctrine 

13.  52  the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy,  and 
Rom.  1.  29  Being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness 

15. 13  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
15.  14  ye  also  are.  .filled  with  ail  knowledge 
2  Co.  7.    4  I  am  filled  with  comfort,  I  am  exceediug 
Eph.    1.  23  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all 
3. 19  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God 

4.  10  ascended  up.  .that  he  might  fill  all  things 

5.  18  be  not  drunk . .  but  be  filled  with  the  Spirit 
Col.  1 .  9  that  ye  might  be  tilled  with  the  knowledge 
2  Ti.    1.   4  desiring  to  see  thee,  .that  I  may  be  filled 

13.  To  fill  together  or  thoroughly,  <rvfj.Tr\r)p6a>  sumpl. 
Luke  S.  23  they  were  filled,  .and  were  in  jeopardy 

14.  To  feed,  xoprd(o}  chorfaz~>. 

Matt.  5.    6  Pleased  (are)  they ..  for  they  shall  be  filled 

14.  20  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled  :  and  they 

15.  33  so  much  bread,  .as  to  fill  so  great  amul.? 
15-  37  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled  :  and  they 

Mark  6.  42  And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled 


Mark  7.  27  Jesus  said . .  Let  the  children  first  be  filled 

8.  8  So  they  did  eat,  and  were  filled  :  and  they 
Luke  6.  21  Blessed  are  (ye),  .for  ye  shall  be  filled 

9.  17  And  they  did  eat,  and  were  all  filled  :  and 
John  6.  26  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  filled 
Jas.     2.  16  Depart  in  peace,  be  (ye)  warmed  and  filled 
Rev.  19.  21  all  the  fowls  were  filled  with  their  flesh 

FILL  full,  to  — 

To  fill,  load,  yefilfa  gemizu. 

Marki5.  36  one  rauand  filled  a  sponge  full  of  vinegar 
FILL  selves,  to  — 
I. To  suck  in,  satiate,  n^d  saba. 

Isa.  56.  12  we  will  fill  ourselves  with  strong  drink 
2.To  satisfy,  satiate,  ya^  saba. 

Dent  31.  20  they  shall  have  eaten  and  filled  themsel. 
FILL,  to  take  the  — 
To  be  filled,  satisfied,  watered,  nr\  ravah. 

Prov.  7.  18  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until  the  mor. 
FILL  or  be  filled  up,  to  — - 
1.  To  fill  up,  avawAwpSa)  anapleroo. 

1  Th.   2.  16  might  be  saved,  to  fill  up  their  sins  alway 
'2.  To  fill  up  instead  of,  a.i/TavcmAr}p6o)  antanapler. 

Col.     1.  24  Who . .  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the 

3.  To  fill,  make  full,  it  An  pSce  pleroo. 

Matt23.  32  Fill  ye  up  then  the  measure  of  your  fatb. 

4.  To  end,  rcAeco  teled. 

Rev.  15.    1  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God 
FELL  up,  which  is  put  in  to  — 
That  which  fills  up,  irATipv/xa  pleroma. 

Matt  9.  16  that  which  is  put  in  to  fill  it  up  taketh 
FILLED  — 
Full,  x^d  male. 

Isa.   6.    1  lifted  up,  and  his  train  filled  the  temple 
FILLED,  to  be  — 
l.Tobefull,  ahvmate. 

Gen.   6.  13  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through 

2  Ch.  5.  13  the  house  was  filled  with  a  cloud,  (even) 
Zech.  9.  15  they  shall  be  filled  like  bowls,  (and)  as 

2.To  befitted,  i6d  male,  2. 

Eccl.  6.    7  and  yet  the  appetite  is  not  filled' 

Hab.  2.  14  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge 

3.  To  fill,  lib?  male,  3. 

2  Ch.16. 14  hi  the  bed  which  was  filled  with  sweet 

4.  To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  y$p  saba. 

Deut;26.  12  may  eat  within  thy  gates,  and  be  filled 
Neh.   9.  25  so  they  did  eat,  and  were  filled,  and 
Psa.  78.  29  So  they  did  eat,  and  were  well  filled  :  for 
Prov.  1.  31  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices 

14.  14  The  backslider,  .shall  be  filled  with  his 
Eccl.  6.  3  If .  .his  soul  be  not  filled  with  good,  and 
Eze.  39.  20  ye  shall  be  filled,  .with  horses  and  char. 
Hos.  13.    6  so  were  they  filled  ;  they  were  filled,  and 

FILLED  full,  to  be  — 

To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  V^  saba. 

Lam.  3.  30  He  givetb .  .he  is  filled  full  witli  reproach 

FILLED  -with  — 
Full,  kS;?  male. 

Eze.  36.  38  the . .  cities  be  filled  with  flocks  of  men 
FILLED  with,  to  be  — 
l.Tp  be  full,  xhv  male. 

Psa.  38.    7  For  my  loins  are  filled  with  a  loathsome 

Prov  12.  21  but  the  wicked  shall  be  filled  with  misc. 

Isa.   21.   3  Therefore  are  my  loins  filled  with  pain 
34.    6  The  sword  of  the  Lord  is  filled  with  bio. 

Jer.  51.   5  then-  land  was  filled  with  sin  against  the 

2.Tobefull,  t6i?male,  2. 

Gen.    6.  11  and  the  earth  was  filled  with  violence 
Exod.  1.    7  and  the  land  was  filled  with  them 
Numi4.  21  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the 

1  Ki.   7.  14  was  filled  with  wisdom  and  understand. 

2  Ki.  3. 17  yet  that  valley  shall  be  filled  with  water 

3.  20  and  the  country  was  filled  with  water 
Psa.126.    2  Then  was  our  mouth  filled  with  laughter 
Prov.  3.  10  So  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  plenty 
20. 17  his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  gravel 

24.  4  be  filled  with  all  precious  and  pleasant 
Eccl.  1.    8  not  satisfied,  .nor  the  ear  filled  with  hea. 
Song  5.    2  for  mv  head  is  filled  with  dew,  (aud)  my 
Isa.     6.    4  and  the  house  was  filled  with  smoke 
Jer.   13.  12,  12  Every  bottle  shall  be  filled  with  wine 
Eze.  10.    4  the  house  was  filled  witli  the  cloud,  and 

23.  33  Thou  shalt  be  filled  with  drunkenness 

3, To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  yri£'  saba. 

Exodi6.  12  in  the  morning  ye  shall  be  filled  with  br. 
Psa.  104.  28  openest  thine  band,  they  are  filled  with 
123.    3  we  are  exceedingly  filled  with  contempt 
123.    4  Our  soul  is  exceedingly  filled  with  the 
Prov.  5.  10  Let  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  wealth 
18.  20  (and)  witli  the  increase,  .shall  he  be  filled 

25.  16  lest  thou  be  filled  therewith,  and  vomit 
30.  16  the  earth  (that)  is  not  filled  with  water 
30.  22  and  a  fool  when  he  is  filled  with  meat 

Hab.   2.  16  Thou  art  filled  with  shame  for  glory 
■L.  To  fill  up,  make  full,  irArip6w  pleroo. 

Phil.   1. 11  Being  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteous. 
FILLET — 
Thread,  cord,  H\n  chut. 

Jer.  52.  21  a  fillet  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  it 


FILLET 


347 


FIND 


FILLET,  to  — 

To  fillet. or  fasten,  pvn  chashaq,-§. 

£xod38.  28  overlaid  their  chapiters,  and  filleted  them 
FILLETED,  to  be  — 
To  be  filleted  or  fastened,  pt?'n  chashaq,  4. 

EX61U7.  17  the  pillars,  .(shall  be)  filleted  with  silver 
38.  17  pillars  of  the  court  (were)  filleted  with 

FILLED  up,  piece  that  — 

That  which  Jills  up,  ir\T}pa)fia  plerflma. 

Mark  2.  21  else  the  uew  piece  that  filled  It  up  taketh 

FILLETS  — 

Fillets,  fastenings,  u*$yr\  chashugini. 

Exod27.  10  the  hooks,  .and  their  fillets  (shall  be  of)  s. 
27.  11  the  hooks  of  the  pillars  and  their  fillets 
36.  38  overlaid  their  chapiters  and  their  fillets 
38.  10,  11,  12,  17  hooks  of  the  pillars  and.  .fillets 
38.  19  the  overlaying  of.  .their  fillets  (of)  silver 

FILTH  — 

I. Filth,  excrement,  Jl^is  tsoah. 

Isa.     4.    4  Lord  shall  have  washed  away  the  filth  of 
2.Cleansings,  offscourings,  Tr€piKcL6ap/j.a,  ttdOaptxa. 

i  Co.  4.  13  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of  the  world 
3. Filth,  dirt,  frviros  rhupos. 

1  Pe.   3.  21  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh 
FLLTHINESS  — 

1.  Uncleanness,  nxsu  tumah. 

Ezra   6.  21  from  the  filth iness  of  the  heathen  of  the 
Lam.  1.    9  Her  fllthiness  (is)  in  her  skirts;  she  rem. 
Eze.  22.  15  I.,  will  consume  thy  fllthiness  out  of  thee 
24.  11  the  fllthiness  of  it  may  be  molten  in  it 
24.  13  In  thy  fllthiness  (is)  lewdness  :  because  I 
24.  13  shalt  not  be  purged  from  thy  fllthiness 
36.  25  from  all  your  fllthiness.  .will  I  cleanse 
2.1mpurity,  rrns  niddah. 

2  Ch.29.   5  carry  forth  the  fllthiness  out  of  the  holy 
Ezra   9.11  unclean . .  with  the  fllthiness  of  the  people 

Z.  Brass,  impudence,  n^m  ncchosJieth. 

Eze.  16.  36  Because  thy  fllthiness  was  poured  out 
4.  Excrement,  filth,  nxis  tsoah. 

Prov.30.  12  and  (yet)  is  not  washed  from  their  filthi. 

Isa.  28.    8  tables  are  full  of  vomit  (and)  fllthiness 

5. Baseness,  obscenity,  ato-xporifs  aischroles. 

Eph.   5.    4  Neither  fllthiness,  nor  foolish  talking 
6.  Uncleanncss,  aKadaprns  akathartes. 

Rev.  17.    4  having  a  golden  cup.  .full  of.  .filthiues3 
7.A  soiling,  defilement,  jio\v(tja6s  molusmos. 

2  Co.  7.    1  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  fllthiness  of 
S.Dirt,  filth,  pvwapla  ruparia. 

Jas.     1.  21  lay  apart  all  fllthiness  and  superfluity  of 
FILTHY  — 
1  To  be  filthy,  rr?N  alach,  2. 

Job    15.  16  much  more  abominable  and  filthy  (is)  man 

2.  Things  passing  axoay,  o^y  iddim. 

Isa.  64.    6  all  our  righteousnesses  (are)  as  filthy  rags 
3. Filth,  Nfe  tso. 

Zech.  3.    3  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments 

3.  4  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him 

i.  Shameful,  cuVxpos  aischros. 

Titus  1. 11  teaching  things.. for  filthy  lucre's  sake 
5.Lasciviousness,  accKyeta  aselgeia.. 

2  Pe.    2.   7  vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the 
FILTHY  communication  — 
SJiamefuZ  discourse,  alcrxpoXoyia  aischrologia. 

Col.     3.    8  put  off.. blasphemy,  filthy  communicat. 
FILTHY,  to  he  — 
l.To  be  rebellious,  K^c  mara. 

Zeph.  3.    1  Woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  polluted,  to 
2.  To  make  filthy,  act  filthily,  pwxow  rhupoo. 

Rev  22.  11  he  which  is  [filthy],  let  liim  [be  filthy]  still 
FILTHY,  to  become  — 
To  be  filthy,  rr?N  alach,x2. 

Psa.  14.   3  they  are  (all)  together  become  filthy 

53.   3  they  are  altogether  become  filthy ;  (there 

FIN  — 

Fin,  T3Jp  senapjrir. 

Lev.  11.  9  whatsoever  hath  fins  and  scales  in  the  w. 
11.  io  that  have  not  fins  and  scales  in  the  seas 
11.  12  hath  no  fins  nor  scales  in  the  waters 
Deuti4.   g  all  that  have  fins  and  scales  shall  ye 
14.  10  whatsoever  hath  not  fins  and  scales  ye 

FINALLY  — 

l.What  is  left,  remaining,  Xotirov  loipon. 

2  Co.  13. 11  Finally,  brethren,  farewell,     Be  perfect 
Eph.    6.  10  Finally,  my  brethren,  be  strong  in  the  L. 
Phil.   3.    1  Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord 

4.  8  Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever  things  are 
2  Til.  3.    1  Finally,  brethren,  pray  for  us,  chat  the 

2.End,  completion,  tg\os  telos. 

1  Pe.  3.   8  Finally,  (be  ye)  all  of  one  mind,  having 

EOT),  to  — 

l.To  find,  x>'3  mctsa. 

Gen.  4.  14  every  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me 
6.   3  Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Loud 


Gen.    8. 


18. 
18. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
26. 
26. 
=7- 
3°- 

3°- 
31- 
3*- 
31- 
3i- 
3*- 
32- 

32- 

33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38- 
38. 
39- 
41. 
44- 
44- 
47- 
47- 
50. 
Exod.  5. 

15- 
16. 

16. 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 


Lev. 

Num; 


Dent. 


Josh. 
Judg. 


[Ki. 


9  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot 

2  they  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar 

7  angel  of  theLoRDfound  her  by  a  fountain 

3  if  now  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight 

26  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  within 

28  If  I  find  there  forty  and  five,  I  will  not 
30  I  will  not  do  (it),  if  I  find  thirty  there 

11  they  wearied  themselves  to  find  the  door 
19  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

19  and  found  there  a  well  of  springing  water 
32  and  said  unto  him,  We  have  found  water 

20  How  (is  it) . .  thou  hast  found  (it)  so  quick. 

14  found  mandrakes  in  the  field,  and  brou. 

27  if  1  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes 

32  With  whomsoever  thou  findest  thy  gods 
^^  went  into  Jacob's  tent,  .be  found  (them) 

34  searched  all  the  tent,  but  found  (them) 

35  And  he  searched,  but  found  not  the  ima. 

37  what  hast  thou  found  of  all  thy  household 
5  sent,  .that  I  may  And  grace  in  thy  sight 

19  shall  ye  speak  unto  Esau,  when  ye  find 

8  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

10  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

15  let  me  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

11  Let  me  find  grace  in  your  eyes,  and  what 

24  that  found  the  mules  in  the*  wilderness 

15  a  certain  man  found  him,  and,  behold,  he 
17  went  after  his  brethren,  and  found  them 
32  This  have  we  found  :  know  now  whether 

20  from  the  woman's  hand ;  but  he  found 

22  he  returned,  .and  said,  I  cannot  find  her 

23  I  sent  this  kid,  and  thou  hast  not  found 

4  Joseph  found  grace  in  his  sight,  and  he 

38  Can  we  find  (such  a  one)  as  this  (is),  a  man 

8  the  money  which  we  found  in  our  sack's 

16  found  out  the  iniquity  of  thy  servants 

25  let  us  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

29  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 
4  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  your  eyes 

11  Go  ye,  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find  it 

22  they  went  three  days,  .and  found  no  wa, 
25  to  day  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  field 

27  went,  .for to  gather,  and  they  found  none 

12  thou  hast  also  found  grace  in  my  sight 

13  if  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  show 

16  thy  people  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight  ? 

17  thou  hast  found  grace  in  my  sight,  and  I 

9  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  0 

3  have  found  that  which  was  lost,  andlieth 

4  restore,  .the  lost  thing  which  he  found 

11  have  1  not  found  favour  in  thy  sight 
15  kill  me.  .if  I  have  found  favour  in  thy 

32  they  found  a  man  that  gathered  sticks 

33  And  they  that  found  him  gathering  sti. 

5  if  we  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  let 
27  the  revenger  of  blood  find  him  without 

29  thou  shalt  find  (1dm),  if  thou  seek  him  w. 

3  which  he  hath  lost,  and  thou  hast  found 

14  when  I  came  to  her,  I  found  her  not  a  m. 
17  saying,  I  found  not  thy  daughter  a  maid 

23  a  man  find  her  in  the  city,  and  lie  with 
25  man  find  a  betrothed  damsel  in  the  field 
27  found  her  in  the  field,  (and)  the  betrothed 
2S  If  a  man  find  a  damsel  (that  is)  a  virgin 

I  it  come  to  pass  that  she  find  no  favour  in 

1  he  hath  found  some  uncleanness  in  her 
10  He  found  him  in  a  desert  land,  and  in  the 
22  throughout  all  the  way,  but  found  (them) 

5  they  found  Adoni-bezek  in  Bezek :  and 

17  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

15  he  found  a  new  jawbone  of  an  ass,  and 

8  to  sojourn  where  he  could  find  a  (place) 

9  go  to  sojourn  where  I  may  find  a  (place) 

12  they  found  among  the  inhabitants  of 

9  The  Lord  grant  you  that  ye  may  find  rest 

2  ffaim)  in  whose  sight  I  shall  And  grace 

10  Why  have  I  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

13  Let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 

18  Let  thine  handmaid  find  grace  in  thy  sig. 

4  land  of  Shalisha,  but  they  found  (them) 

4  through  the  land . .  but  they  found  (them) 

11  found  young  maidens  going  out  to  draw 
13  ye  shall  straightway  find  him,  before  he 

13  for  about  this  time  ye  shall  find  him 

2  shalt  find  two  men  by  Rachel's  sepulchre 

5  that  ye  have  not  found  ought  in  my  hand 

30  spoil  of  their  enemies  which  they  found  ? 
22  for  he  hath  found  favour  in  my  sight 

3  that  I  have  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 
29  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes,  let 
17  for  the  hand  of  Saul,  .shall  not  find  thee 

19  if  a  man  find  his  enemy, will  he  let  him 

8  let  the  young  men  find  favour  in  thine  cy. 

5  If  I  have  now  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

3  have  found  no  fault  in  him  since  lie  fell 

6  I  have  not  found  evil  in  thee  since  the 
8  what  hast  thou  found  in  thy  servant  so 

II  they  found  an  Egyptian  in  the  field,  and 
8  they  found  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fallen 

27  therefore  hath  thy  servant  found  in  his 
22  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 
25  shall  find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

4  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord,  0 

20  when  they  had  sought  and  could*  not  find 
3  found  Abishag  a  Shunammite,  and  brou. 

19  Hadad  found  great  favour  in  the  sight  of 
29  Abijah  the  Shilonite  found  him  in  the 

14  and  found  him  sitting  under  an  oak 

28  found  his  carcase  cast  in  the  way,  and 

5  find  grass  to  save  the  horses  and  mules 
10  took  an  oath,  .that  they  found  thee  not 
12  and  he  cannot  find  thee,  he  shall  slay  me 


[Ch. 


2  Ch. 


=5- 
29. 
32- 
34- 
34- 

Ezra   8. 

Nell.   5. 

7- 
8. 

9- 
Estll.   5 


Job 


Psa. 


107. 
116, 
119. 
132, 


Eccl. 


9 

11 

Song  3 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Lam. 


5- 
6. 

10. 
14. 
=3- 
29. 

3r- 
41. 

45- 
50. 


19  found  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat,  who 

36  was  departed  from  him,  a  lion  found  him 

37  he  found  another  man,  and  said,  Smite 

20  Hast  thou  found  me,  O  mine  enemy? 
20  I  have  found  (thee);  because  thou  hast 
17  they  sought  three  days,  but  found  him 

39  found  a  wild  vine,  and  gathered  thereof 
35  they  found  no  more  of  her  than  the  skull 

4  And  the  king,  .found  conspiracy  in  Hosh. 
8  found  the  king  of  Assyria  warring  against 
8  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the 

24  book  that  Hilkiah  the  priest  found  in  the 

40  they  found  fat  pasture  and  good,  and  the 
8  found  Saul  and  his  sons  fallen  in  mount 

25  found  (in  his  heart)  to  pray  before  thee 

2  found  it  to  weigh  a  talent  of  gold,  and 
16  shall  find  them  at  the  end  of  the  brook 

25  they  found  among  them  in  abundance 

8  found  the  princes  of  Judah,  and  the  sons 

5  found  them  three  hundred  thousand  ch. 

16  uncleanness  that  they  found  in  the  temp. 

4  kings  of  Assyria  come,  and  find  much  wat. 

14  Hilkiah  the  priest  found  a  book  of  the 

15  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  Hie 
15  and  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of  Levi 

8  their  peace,  and  found  nothing  (to  answer) 

5  I  found  ft  register. .  and  found  written  ther. 

14  they  found  written  in  the  law  which  the 
8  foundest  his  heart  faithful  before  thee 

8  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  king 

3  If  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  O 

5  and  if  I  have  found  favour  in  his  sight 

22  are  glad,  when  they  can  find  the  grave? 
10  for  I  cannot  find  (one)  wise  (man)  among 

3  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  ! 
29  or  lifted  up  myself  when  evil  found  him 

3  found  no  answer,  and  (yet)  had  condemn. 
13  ye  should  say,  We  have  found  out  wisdom 
10  findeth  occasions  against  me,  he  counteth 
24  saith,  Deliver  him.  .1  have  found  a  rans. 

23  (Touching)  the  Almighty,  we  cannot  find 

15  seek,  .his  wickedness  (till)  thou  find  none 
3  thou  hast  tried  me,  (and)  shalt  find  noth. 

20  I  looked .  .for  comforters,  but  I  found  no. 

5  none  of  the  men .  .have  found  their  hands 

3  the  sparrow  hath  found  an  house,  and 
20  I  have  found  David  my  servant ;  with  my 

4  They  wandered . .  they  found  no  city  to  dw. 

3  hold  upon  me :  I  found  trouble  and  sorr. 
162  rejoice,  .as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil 

6  we  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood 

13  We  shall  find  all  precious  substance,  we 
28  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find  me 

5  Then  shalt  thou,  .find  the  knowledge  of 

4  So  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  good 

13  Happy  (is)  the  man  (that)  findeth  wisdom 
22  they  (are)  life  unto  those  that  find  them 

15  to  seek  thy  face,  and  I  have  found  thee 

9  and  right  to  them  that  find  knowledge 

17  those  that  seek  me  early  shall  find  me 
35  whoso  findeth  me  findeth  life,  and  shall 
20  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall  find 

20  that  hath  a  frnward  heart  findeth  no  good 

22  (Whoso) findeth  a  wife  findeth  agood(th.) 
8  he  that  keepeth  understanding  shall  find 

6  but  a  faithful  man  who  can  find? 

21  He  that  followeth.  .mercy  findeth  life 

14  when  thou  hast  found  (it),  then  there 

16  Hast  thou  found  honey  ?  eat  so  much  as 

23  shall  find  more  favour  than  he  that 

10  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman  ?  for  her 
14  that  man  should  find  nothing  after  him 

26  I  find  more  bitter  than  death  the  woman 

27  this  have  I  found,  saith  the  Preacher 

28  Which  yet  my  soul  seeketh,  but  I  find  not 
28  one  man  among  a  thousand  have  I  found 

28  a  woman  among  all  those  have  I  not  found 

29  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath 

17  man  cannot  find  out  the  work  that  is  done 

17  yet  he  shall  not  find.. not  be  able  to  find 
10  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do 

1  for  thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  days 
1,  2  I  sought  him,  but  I  found  him  not 

3  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city  found 

4  but  I  found  him  whom  my  soul  Ioveth 

6  I  sought  him,  but  I  could  not  find  him 

7  watchmen  that  went  about  the  city  found 

8  if  ye  find  my  beloved,  that  ye  tell  him 

1  I  should  find  thee  without,  I  would  kiss 
10  then  was  I  in  Ins  eyes  as  one  that  found 
10  hand  hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  theidols 
14  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  the  pe. 
14  and  find  for  herself  a  place  of  rest 

8  found  the  king  of  Assyria  warring  against 

12  shalt  seek  them,  and  shalt  not  find  them 

10  thou  hast  found  the  life  of  thine  hand 
3  in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  pleasure 

5  What  iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in 

24  in  her  month  they  shall  find  her 

34  I  have  not  found  it  by  secret  search,  but 

1  if  ye  can  find  a  man,  if  there  be  (any)  that 
16  and  ye  shall  find  rest  for  your  souls 

18  distress  them,  that  they  may  find  (it  so) 
3  they  came  to  the  pits,  (and)  found  no  w. 

11  in  my  house  have  I  found  their  wicked. 

13  And  ye  "shall  seek  me,  and  find  (me) 

2  The  people,  .found  grace  in  the  wildern. 

12  found  him  by  the  great  waters  that  (are) 

3  fainted  in  my  sighing,  and  I  find  no  rest 
7  All  that  found  them  have  devoured  them 
3  among  the  heathen,  she  findeth  no  rest 

6.  become  like  harts  (that)  find  no  pasture 


FIND 


348 


PINE 


Lam 

2. 

V. 

Eze. 

1- 

?S. 

Dan. 

T. 

Hos. 

2. 

2. 

5- 

9- 

12. 

12. 

12. 

Amos  8 

Jou. 

I. 

Z.Tofind, 

Ezra 

4 

7- 

Dan. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

9  prophets  also  find  no  vision  from  the  Lord 
16  looked  for ;  we  have  found,  we  have  seen 

i  eat  that  thou  findest;  eat  this  roll,  and  go 
30  And  I  sought  for  a  man.  .but  I  found 
20  he  found  them  ten  tunes  better  than  all 

6  make  a  wall,  that  she  shall  not  find  her 

7  shall  seek  them,  but  shall  not  find  (them) 
6  they  shall  not  find  (him) ;  he  hath  withd. 

10  found  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  wilderness 

4  found  him  (in)  Beth-el,  and  there  he  spa. 

8  I  have  found  me  out  substance  ;  (in)  all 

5  find  none  iniquity  in  me  that  (were)  sin 
12  word  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  not  find  (it) 

3  he  found  a  ship  going  to  Tarshish  :  so  he 

n3?>  shckach,  5. 

15  so  shalt  thou  find  in  the  book  of  the  rec. 

16  that  thou  canst  find  in  all  the  province 
25  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  captives  of 

4  sought  to  find  occasion  against  Daniel 

4  they  could  find  none  occasion  nor  fault 

5  not  find  any  occasion  against  this  Daniel 
5  we  find  (it)  against  him  concerning  the 

1 1  found  Daniel  praying  and  making  suppli. 

3.  To  find  out,  avevpi&KCtj  aneurisko. 

Luke  2.  16  found  Mary  and  Joseph,  and  the  babe 
Acts  21.    4  finding  disciples,  we  tarried  there  seven 

4. To  find,  €upt(TKCi)  hcu.risko. 

Matt.  1.  iS  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
2.    8  when  ye  have  found  (him),  bring  me  word 
7.    7  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it 
7.    8  he  that  seeketh  fiudeth ;  and  to  him 

7.  14  the  way.  .and  few  there  be  that  find  it 

8.  10  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not 
10.  39  He  that  findeth  his  life  shall  lose  it 

10.  39  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it 

11.  29  am!  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls 

12.  43  dry  places,  seeking  rest,  and  findeth  none 

12.  44  he  findeth  (it)  empty,  swept,  and  garnish. 

13.  44  which  when  a  man  hath  found,  he  hideth 
13.  46  when  he  had  found  one  pearl  of  great 

16.  25  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it 

17.  27  thou  shalt  find  a  piece  of  money  :  that 
tS.  13  if  it  su  be  that  he  find  it,  verily  I  say 

18.  28  found  one  of  his  fellow-servants,  which 

20.  6  found  others  standing  idle,  andsaith  unto 

21.  2  shall  find  an  ass  tied,  aud  a  colt  with  her 

21.  19  found  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  only 

22.  9  as  many  as  ye.  .find,  bid  to  the  marriage 
22.  10  as  many  as  they  found,  both  bad  and  good 
24.  46  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so  doing 
26.  40  findeth  them  asleep,  and  saith  uuto  Peter 
26.  43  And  he  came  aud  found  them  asleep  again 
26.  60  found  none  :  yea,  though  many  false 

26.  60  false  witnesses  came,  (yet)  [found  they] 

27.  32  they  found  a  man  of  C'yrene,  Simon  by 
Mark  1.  37  when  they  had  found  him,  they  said  unto 

7.  30  she  found  the  devil  gone  out,  and  her 
11.    2  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never  man  sat 
ir.    4  and  found  the  colt  tied  by  the  door  with. 
11.  13  haply  he  might  find  any  thing  thereon 
11.  13  came  to  it,  he  found  nothing  but  leaves 

13.  36  Lest  coming  suddenly  he  find  you  sleeping 

14.  16  came.,  and  found  as  he  had  said  unto  them 
14.  37  and  findeth  them  sleeping,  andsaith  unto 
14.  40  he  found  them  asleep  again,  for  their  eyes 

14.  55  sought  for  witness,  .and  found  none 
Luke  1.  30  for  thou  hast  found  favour  with  God 

2.  12  shall  find  the  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling 
2.  4s  when  they  found  him  not,  they  turned 
2.  46  they  found  him  in  the  temple,  sitting  in 

4.  17  he  fouud  the  place  where  it  was  written 

5.  19  when  they  could  not  find  by  what  (way) 

6.  7  they  might  find  an  accusation  against  him 

7.  9  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not 

7.  10  found  the  servant  whole  that  had  been 

8.  35  found  the  man,  out  of  whom  the  devils 

9.  36  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found  alone 
11.   9  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and  it 
11.  10  he  that  seeketh  findeth ;  and  to  him  that 
11.  24  finding  none,  he  saith,  I  will  return  unto 

11.  25  cometh, he  findeth(it)sweptand  garnished 

12.  37  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  watching 
12. 38  find  (them)  so,  blessed  are  those  servants 
32.  43  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so  doing 

13.  6  aud  sought  fruit  thereon,  and  found  none 

7  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig  tree,  and  find  none 

4  after  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it  ? 

5  when  he  hath  found  (it),  he  layeth  (it)  on 

6  for  I  have  fouud  my  sheep  which  was  lost 

8  and  seek  diligently  till  she  find  (it)? 

9  when  she  hath  found  (it),  she  calleth  (her) 
9  I  have  found  the-piece  which  I  had  lost 

24  he  was  lost,  aud  is  found.  And  they  began 

15.  32  is  alive  again  ;  and  was  lost,  and  is  found 

17.  18  There  are  not  found  that  returned  to  give 

18.  8  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ? 

19.  30  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  yet  never 
19.  32  and  found  even  as  he  bad  said  unto  them 
22.  13  went,  and  found  as  he  had  said  unto  them 

22.  45  he  found  them  sleeping  for  sorrow 

23.  2  found  this  (fellow)  perverting  the  nation 
1  said  Pilate.. I  find  no  fault  in  this  man 

23.  14  have  found  no  fault  in  this  man  touching 

23.  22  1  have  found  no  cause  of  death  in  him 

24.  2  they  found  the  stone  rolled  away  from 
24.    3  and  found  not  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
24.  23  when  they  found  not  his  body,  they  came 
24.  24  found  (it)  even  so  as  the  woman  had  said 
24.  33  found  the  eleven  gathered  together,  and 


13- 
15- 
'5- 
*5- 


*5- 


J3- 
13- 
13- 
17- 
17- 


19. 


23. 
24. 


John  1.  41  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon 
1.  41  We  have  found  the  Messias,  which  is 
1.  43  findeth  Philip,  and  saith  uuto  him  ;  Fol. 

1.  45  Philip  findeth  Nathanael,  and  saith  unto 
1   45  We  have  found  him,  of  whom  Moses  in 

2.  14  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  oxen 

5.  14  Jesus  findeth  him  in  the  temple,  aud  said 

6.  25  found  him  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea 

7.  34,  $6  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not  find 
7.  35  Whither  will  he  go,  that  we  shall  not  find 

9.  35  when  he  had  found  him,  he  said  unto  him 

10.  9  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture 

11.  17  he  found  that  he  had  (lain)  in  the  grave 

12.  14  when  be  had  found  a  young  ass,  sat  the. 

18.  38  and  saith.  .1  find  in  him  no  fault  (at  all) 

19.  4  ye  may  know  that  I  find  no  fault  in  him 

19.  6  crucify  (him) :  for  I  find  no  fault  in  him 
21.    6  right  side  of  the  ship,  and  ye  shall  find 

Acts    4.  21  finding  nothing  how  they  might  punis'i 
5.  10  and  found  her  dead,  and,  carrying  (her) 
5.  22  found  them  not  in  the  prison,  they  retu. 
5.  23  prison  truly  found  we  shut  with  all  safety 
5.  23  when  we  had  opened,  we  found  no  man 
5.  39  ye  lie  found  even  to  fight  against  God 
7.  1 1  and  our  fathers  found  no  sustenance 
7.  46  Who  found  favour  before  God, and  desired 

7.  46  to  find  a  tabernacle  for  the  God  of  Jacob 

8.  40  Philip  was  found  at  Azotus  :  and  passing 

9.  2  if  he  found  any  of  this  way,  whether  they 
9.  33  found  a  certain  man  named  ^Eneas,  which 

10.  27  and  found  many  that  were  come  together 

11.  26  when  he  had  found  him,  he  brought  him 
xjt.  ig  found  him  not,  he  examined  the  keepers 

6  they  found  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false 
•  I  have  found  David  the  (son)  of  Jesse,  a 

28  they  fouud  no  cause  of  death  (in  him),  yet 
6  when  they  found  them  not,  they  drew  J. 

23  I  found  an  altar  with  this  inscription,  To 

17.  27  if  haply  they  might,  .find  him,  though  he 
2  found  a  certain  Jew  named  Aquila,  born 

1  came  to  Ephesus:  and  finding  certain  d. 
iq  counted  the  price,  .and  found  (it)  fifty 

2  finding  a  ship  sailing  over  unto  Phenicia 
9  We  find  no  evil  in  this  man:  but  if  a 
5  wehave  found  this  man  (a)  pestilent  (fel.) 

24.  12  neither  found  me  in  the  temple  disputing 
24.  18  Jews,  .found  me  purified  in  the  temple 
24.  20  if  they  have  found  any  evil  doing  in  me 
27.    6  found  a  ship  of  Alexandria  sailing  into 
27.  28  And  sounded,  and  found  (it)  twenty  fath. 

27.  28  they  sounded  again,  and  found  (it)  fifteen 

28.  14  Where  we  fouud  brethren,  and  were  de. 
Rom.  4.    1  What  shall  we  say.  .Abraham,  .hath  f.  ? 

7.  10  (ordained)  to  life,  I  found  (to  be)  unto  d. 
7.  18  to  perform  that  which  is  good  [I  find] 
7.  21  I  find  them  a  law,  that,  when  I  would  do 

10.  20  I  was  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not 

1  Co.   4.    2  in  stewards,  that  a  man  be  found  faithful 

15.  15  and  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of  God 

2  Co.  2.  13  I  found  not  Titus  my  brother  :  but  taking 

5.    3  being  clothed  we  shall  not  be  found  naked 
9.   4  find  you  unprepared,  we . .  should  be  ash. 

11.  12  that,  .they  may  be  found  even  as  we 

12.  20  I  shall  not  find  you  such  as  I  would,  and 

12.  20  (that)  I  shall  be  found  unto  you  such  as 
2.  17  we  ourselves  also  are  found  sinners 

2.  8  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  hu. 

3.  9  And  be  found  in  him,  not  having  mine 
1.  17  sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and  found 
1.  18  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  d. 

4.  16  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need 

11.  5  was  not  found,  because  God  had  transla. 

12.  17  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 

1.  7  the  trial,  .might  be  found  unto  praise  and 

2.  22  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
14  ye  may  he  found  of  him  in  peace,  without 

4  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth 
2  hast  tried.. and  hast  found  them  liars 

3.  2  not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  God 

5.  4  no  man  was  found  worthy  to  open  and 
9.    6  men  seek  death,  and  shall  not  find  it 

12.  8  neither  was  their  place  found  any  more 
14.    5  And  in  their  mouth  was  found  no  guile 

16.  20  and  the  mountains  were  not  found 

18.  14  and  thou  shalt  find  them  no  more  at  all 
18.21  Babylon,  .shall  be  found  no  more  at  all 
18.  22  shall  be  found  any  more  in  thee 

18.  24  in  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets 

20.  11  and  there  was  fouud  no  place  for  them 
20.  15  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the 

5.  To  tftki  thoroughly,  Ka.Ta.\c.ijL$a.vw  hitidamhano. 

Acts  25.  25  I  found  that  he  had  committed  nothing 
FIND,  can  — 
To  find,  ivpiaKw  hcuriskd. 

Luke  19.  4S  could  not  find  what  they  might  do  :  for 
FIND,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cause  to  find,  Nyo  matsa,  5. 

Job  34.  11  cause  every  man  to  find  accor.  to  (his)  ways 
FIND  occasion,  to  — 

To  find,  «V?  matsa. 

Judg.  9.  33  do  to  them  as  thou  shalt  find  occasion 

FIND  out,  to  — 

l.To  think  out,  3£:ri  choshah. 

2  Ch.   2.  14  to  find  out  every  device  which  shall  be 

2.7V;  find,  N*y?  matsa. 

Gen.  44.  16  God  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of  thy 
NUIU32.  23  aud  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out 


Gal. 
Phil. 


Heb. 


1  Pe. 

2 
2Pe.   3 

2  John 
Hev.    2 


Judgr4.  12  certainly  declare  it  me.  .and  find  (it)  out 
14. 18  If  ye  bad  not  ploughed,  .ye  had  not  fo.  out 

1  Sa.  20.  21  send  a  lad,  (saying),  Go,  find  out  the  arr. 

20.  36  Hun,  find  out  now  the  arrows  which  I  sh. 
Job    11.    7  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God? 

11.  7  canst  thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto 
Fsa.  21.    8  Thine  hand  shall  find  out  all  thine  enem. 

21.  8  right  hand  shall  find  out  those  that  hate 
132.    5  Until  I  find  out  a  place  for  the  Lord 

Trov.  8.  12  and  find  out  knowledge  of  witty  invent. 

Eccl.  3.  11  no  man  can  find  out  the  work  that  God 

7.  24  That  which  is  far.  .who  can  find  it  out? 

7.  27  (counting),  .to  find  out  the  account 

8.  17  a  man  caunot  find  out  the  work  that  is 

12.  10  Preacher  sought  to  find  out  acceptable 

FINDING  (out)  — 

1.  To  find,  «yo  matsa. 

Gen.    4.  15  lest  any  finding  him  should  kill  him 
Isa.   58.  13  nor  finding  thine  own  pleasure,  nor  spe. 

^.Search,  searching,  "ipn  cheqer. 

Job     9.  10  Which  doeth  great  things  past  finding  0. 

FINDING  out,  past  — 

Not  to  be  traced  out,  az/e^i^z'i'ao'TOS'  anexichniastos. 
Rom.  1 1.  33  judgments,  and  his  ways  pastfinding  out  I 
[See  also  Ease,  favour,  mercy.] 
FINE,  finest  — 
1. Fatness,  ibn  cJieleb. 

Psa.  81.  16  should  have  fed  them  also  with  the  finest 
147.  14  filleth  thee  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat 

2.Goodt  30  tab. 

Dan.    2.  32  image's  head  (was)  of  fine  gold,  his  breast 

Z.Good,  3iD  tob. 

2  Ch.  3.    5  which  he  overlaid  with  fine  gold,  aud  set 

3.    S  he  overlaid  it  with  fine  gold,  (amounting) 

4. Fine  combed,  p,")y  swriq. 

Isa.   19.    9  they  that  work  in  fine  flax,  and  they  that 

5.  To  be  made  to  shine,  3rt>"  tsahab,  6. 

Ezra   8.  27  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  gold 

FINE,  to  — 

To  refine,  p(2J  zaqaq. 

Job   28.    1  and  a  place  for  gold  (where)  they  fine  (io, 

FINE  flour  — 

1. Fine  fiour  (rolled  or  crushed  small),  rhb  soleth. 
Lev.    2.    1  his  offering  shall  be  (of)  fine  flour;  and  he 
2.    4  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil 
2.    5  fine  flour  unleavened,  mingled  with  cil 
2.    7  it  shall  be  made  (of)  fine  flour  with  oil 

5.  ii  of  an  ephali  of  fine  flour  for  a  sin  offering 

6.  20  fine  flour  for  a  meat  ottering  perpetual 

7.  12  cakes  mingled  with  oil,  of  fine  flour,  fried 
14. 10  deals  of  line  flour  (for)  a  meat  ottering 

14.  21  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil  for  a  meat  offer. 
23.  13  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil 

23.  17  they  shall  be  of  fine  flour;  they  shall  be 

24.  5  shalt  take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve 
Num.  6.  15  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and 

13,  19,  25,  31,  37  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil 
43>  49>  55»  61  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil 
67,  73,  79  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil 
8  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and  another 
22  was  "thirty  measures  of  fine  flour,  and 
1  measure  of  fine  flour  (lie  sold)  for  a  shekel 
[6  a  measure  of  fine  flour  was  (sold)  for  a 
[8  and  a  measure  of  fine  flour  for  a  shekel 
1  Ch.  9.  29  the  fine  flour,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil 
23.  29  for  the  fine  fiour  for  meat  offering,  and 
Eze.  16.  13  thou  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and 
16. 19  fine  flour,  and  oil,  and  honey  (wherewith) 
46.  14  hin  of  oil,  to  temper  with  the  fine  fiour 

%  Fine  flour,  o-*/j.i8a\ts  semidalis. 

Hev.  18. 13  fine  flour,  and  wheat,  and  beasts,  and 

FINE  brass  — 

Fine  frankincense  or  brass,  xa^-KoXl&avov  chalk. 
Rev.    1. 15  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they 

2.  18  flame  of  fire,  and  his  feet  (are)  like  fine  b. 

FINE  gold  — 

Fine  gold,  yiin  chamtts. 

Prov.  3.  14  and  the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold 
Zech.  9.    3  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets 

FINE  linen  — 

l.Fine  linen,  braided  or  twisted  yarn,  peg  ctun. 
Prov.  7.  16  carved  (works),  with  fine  linen  of  Egypt 

2.  Fine  white  linen,  byssits,  pa  bvts. 

1  Ch.  4.  2i  the  house  of  them  that  wrought  fine  linen 

15.  27  (was)  clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine  linen 

2  Ch.  2.  14  in  blue,  and  in  fine  linen,  and  in  crimson 

3.  14  fine  linen,  and  wrought  cherubim  thereon 
Esth.  1.    6  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and 

8.  15  with  a  garment  of  fine  linen  and  purple 
Eze.  27.  16  purple,  and  broidered  work,  aud  fine  li. 

Z.Byssus,  fine  white  linen,  fivo-o-wos  bussinos. 

Rev.  iS*  16  that  was  clothed  in  fine  linen,  and  purple 
19.   8  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  dean  and  white 
19.    8  fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  saints 
19.  14  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean 

4. Fine  Hum,  muslih,  aivZwv  sindon. 

ilarkis.  46  he  bought  fine  linen,  and  took  liirn  down 


:Ki. 


FINER 


349 


PIRfi 


i  Ch 

20. 
8. 

Pro\ 

44. 
.  6. 

Song 
Isa. 

)■ 
5- 
a. 

17- 
58. 
59- 

5.  Byssus,  fine  white  linen,  $vtr<ros  bussos* 

Lukei6.  19  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and 
Rev.  18.  12  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  scar. 

FINER  — 

To  refine,  *py  tsaraph. 

Prov.25.   4  there  shall  come,  .a  vessel  for  the  finer 
FINGER  — 
I. Finger,  jnsx  etsba. 

Exod.  8.  19  magicians  said.  .This  (is)  the  finger  of  God 
29.  12  put  (it)  upon  the  horns,  .with  thy  finger 
31.  18  tables,  .written  with  the  finger  of  God 
Lev.    4.   6  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood 

4.  17  shall  dip  his  finger  (in  some)  of  the  blood 
4.  25,  34  shall  take  of  the  blood,  .with  his  ting. 

4.  30  take  of  the  blood  thereof  with  his  finger 

8.  15  put  (it)  upon  the  horns,  .with  his  finger 

9.  9  he  dipped  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and 
14.  16  the  priest  shall  dip  his  right  finger  hi 
14. 16  shall  sprinkle  of  the  oil  with  his  finger 
14.  27  priest  shall  sprinkle  with.. right  finger 
16.  14  and  sprinkle  (it)  with  his  finger  upon  the 
16.  14  sprinkle  of  the  blood  with  his  finger 

16*  19  sprinkle  of  the  blood,  .with  his  finger 
Numig.    4  shall  take  of  her  blood  with  his  finger 
Deut.  9.  10  tables,  .written  with  the  finger  of  God 
2  Sa.  2i.  20  that  had  on  every  hand  six  fingers,  and 
6  whose  fingers  and  toes  (were)  four  and 
3  consider,  .heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fingers 
1  the  Lord  which  teacheth.  .my  fingers  to 
.  13  with  his  feet,  he  teacheth  with  his  fingers 
3  Bend  them  upon  thy  fingers,  write  them 
5  and  my  fingers  (with)  sweet  smelling 
8  that  which  their  own  fiugers  have  made 

8  respect  (that)  which  his  fingers  have  made 

9  the  yoke,  the  putting  forth  of  the  finger 
3  with  blood,  and  your  fingers  with  iniquity 

Jer.   52.  21  the  thickness  thereof  (was)  four  fingers 

2.Fingers,  JjJ3*iN  etsbean. 

Dan.  5.   5  In 'the  same  hour  came  forth  fingers  of  a 

%.  Finger,  §dtCTv\o$  daktulos. 

Matt 23.    4  will  not  move,  .with  one  of  their  fingers 
Mark  7.  33  put  his  fingers  into  his  ears,  and  he  spit 
Luken.  20  I  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils 
11.  46  touch  not  the  burdens  with,  .your  fingers 

16.  24  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water 
John  8.   6  [and  with(his)  finger  wrote  on  the  ground] 

20.  25  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails 
20.  27  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my 

FINING  pot  — 

Refining  vessel,  *]"!>"?  matsreph. 

Prov.17.    3  The  fining  pot  (is)  for  silver,  and  the  fur. 
27.  21  (As)  the  fining  pot  for  silver,  and  the  fur. 

FINISH,  to  — 

1.2V?  cut  off,  ysa  batsa,  3. 

Zech.  4.    9  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it ;  and  thou 

%To  shut,  restrain,  finish,  N73  kala,  3. 

Dan.   9.  24  to  finish  the  transgression,  and  to  make 
3.2*0  complete,  finish,  n^a  kalah. 

1  CI1.2S.  20  until  thou  hast  finished  all  the  work  for 

4.To finish,  complete,  absJcalah,  3. 

Gen.    6.  16  and  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finish  it  above 
Exod4o.  33  So  Moses  finished  the  work 
Ruth  3, 18  until  he  have  finished  the  thing  this  day 
1  Ki.  6.    9  So  he  built  the  house,  and  finished  it 

6. 14  Solomon  built  the  house,  and  finished  it 

7.    1  and  he  finished  all  his  house 

9.    1  finished  the  building  of  the  house  of  the 

1  Ch.27.  24  he  finished  not,  because  there  fell  wrath 

2  Ch,  7.  11  Solomon  finished  the  house  of  the  Lord 

24.  14  when  they  had  finished  (it),  they  brought 
31.   7  and  finished  (them)  in  the  seventh  month 

5. To  complete,  finish,  7??  kelal,  5a. 

Ezra  6. 14  finished  (it),  according  to  the  conimandni. 

6.  To  finish,  complete,  D72?  shalam,  3. 

1  Ki.  9. 25  before  the  Lord.  So  he  finished  the  house 

7.  To  finish,  complete,  chy  slielam,  5. 

Dan.   5.  26  numbered  thy  kingdom,  and  finished  it 
8.2*0  endftdlyi  aTroTeAeco  apoteleo. 

Jas.    1. 15  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death 
9.  To  finish  throughout,  Stat/va>  dianuo. 

Acts    21.    7  when  we  had  finished  (our)  course  from 
10. 2*o  end  fully,  e/creAew  ekteleo. 

Lukei4. 29  foundation,  and  is  not  able  to  finish  (it) 
14.  30  began  to  build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish 

11.2*0  end  besides  or  upon,  eirtrehea  epitcleo, 

2  Co.  8.   6  would  also  finish  in  you  the  same  grace 
12.2*0  end  tojetJier  or  wholly,  avvreXeoj  sunteleo. 

Rom.  9.  28  he  will  finish  the  work,  and  cut  (it)  short 
13.2*0  end,  finish,  re\et6ca  teleioo. 

John  4.  34  is  to  do  the  will . .  and  to  finish  his  work 

5.  36  which  the  Father  hath  given  me  to  finish 

17.  4  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gav. 
Acts  20.  24  I  might  finish  my  course  with  joy,  and 

14.2*Ae  things  toward  completion,  ra   7rpos  airap- 
ricr/x6v  ta  2rros  apartisinon . 
Lukei4.  28  whether  he  have  (sufficient)  to  [finish] 
15.2*o  end,  finish,  TeAeo  teleo. 

Matt  1 3.  53  when  Jesus  had  finished  these  parables 
19.   1  v.  hen  Jesus  had  finished  these  sayings 


Matt  26.    1  when  Jesus  had  finished  all  these  sayings 
Johnicj.  30  he  said,  it  is  finished  :  and  lie  bowed 
2  Ti.   4.    7  I  have  finished  (my)  course,  I  have  kept 
Rev.  10.    7  the  mystery  of  God  should  be  finished 

11.  7  they  shall  have  finished  their  testimony 
20.    5  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished 

16.  To  completej  to  do,  nib';/.*?  rrS|  kalah  laasoth. 

2  Ch.  4.  11  Huram  finished  the  work  that  he  was  to 
FINISHED,  to  be  — 
1.2*0  cause  to  go  out,  K>?  yctsa,  5a. 

Ezra  6.  15  this  house  was  finished  on  the  third  day 

2.  To  be  complete,  finished,  .1^3  kalah. 

Exod39.  32  Thus  was  all  the'  work,  .finished;  and  the 

1  Ki.   6.  3S  was  the  house  finished  throughout  all 

2  Ch.  8.  16  was  prepared,  .and  until  it  was  finished 

29. 28  until  the  burnt  offering  was  finished 
Dan.  12.    7  when,  .all  these  (things)  shall  be  finished 

3.  2*o  be  completed,  Jiuislied,  n^3  kalah,  4. 

Gen.    2.    1  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  finished 
2  L'h.31.    1  when  all  this  was  finished,  all  Israel 

4.  To  be  finished,  complete,  cSy  shalam, 

2  Ch.  5.    1  all  the  work,  .for  the  house,  .was  finished 
Neh.  6.  15  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  twenty  and 

5.2*0  be  finished,  complete,  nb~J  slielam, 

Ezra  5. 16  in  building,  aud  (yet)  it  is  not  finished 
G.To  become,  happen,  yivofxat  ginomau 

Tfeb.   4.    3  works  were  finished  from  the  foundation 
FINISHER  — 
Finisher,  ender,  completer,  TekeiwTTjs  teleiotes. 

Keb.  12.    2  the  author  and  finisher  of  (our)  faith 
FIR  — 
l.Fir,  cjyrcss,pine,  cni?  berosh. 

2  Sa.    6.    5  alfmanner  of  (instruments . .  of)  fir  wood 

1  Ki.  5.   8  of  cedar,  and  concerning  timber  of  fir 

5.  10  gave  Solomon  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees 
6. 15  the  floor  of  the  house  with  planks  of  fir 

6.  34  the  two  doors  (were  of)  fir  tree  :  the  two 

9. 11  with  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees,  and  with 

2  Ch.  3.    5  the  greater  house  he  ceiled  with  fir  tree 

^.Cypresses,  firs,  pines,  n'rvn?  beroihim. 

Song  1.  17  beams.. (are)  cedar,  (and)  our  rafters  of 
FIR  tree  — 
Fir,  cypress,  or  pine  tree,  ^'"."15  berosh. 

2  Ki.19.  23  cut  down.. the  choice  fir  trees  thereof 
2  Ch.   2.   8  fir  trees,  and  alguni  trees,  out  of  Lebanon 
Psa.104. 17  (as  for)  the  stork,  the  fir  trees  (are)  her 
Isa.  14.    8  the  fir  trees  rejoice  at  thee,  (and)  the 
37.  24  cut  down,  .the  choice  fir  trees  thereof 
41. 19  I  will  set  in  the  desert  the  fir  tree,  .pine 
55. 13  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come,  .fir  tree 
60. 13  the  fir  tree,  the  pine  tree,  and  the  box 
Eze.  27.   5  all  thy  (ship)  boards  of  fir  trees  of  Senir 

31.   8  the  fir  trees  were  not  like  his  boughs 
Hos.  14.   8  I  (am)  like  a  green  fir  tree.     From  me  is 
Nan.  2.  3  and  the  fir  trees  shall  be  terribly  shaken 
Zeclm.    2  Howl,  fir  tree  ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen 
FIRE  — 
I. Light,  fire,  T3N  ur. 

Isa.  24.  15  Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fires 

31.  9  whose  fire  (is)  in  Zion,  and  his  furnace  in 
44. 16  saith,  Aha,  I  am  warm,  I  have  seen  the  f. 
47.  14  coal  to  warm  at,  (nor)  fire  to  sit  before  it 

Eze,    5.   2  Thou  shalt  burn  with  fire  a  thud  part  in 
2.  Fire,  tyx  esh. 

Gen.  19.  24  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven 

22.    6  he  took  the  fire  in  his  hand,  and  a  knife 

22.    7  Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood  :  but  where 

Exod.  3.    2  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush 

3.    2  the  bush  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush 

9. 23  and  the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  ground 

9.  24  fire  mingled  with  the  hail,  very  grievous 

12.  8  eat  the  flesh  in  that  night,  roast  with  the 
12.    9  nor  sodden  at  all.  .but  roast  (with)  fire 

12.  10  which  remaineth.  .ye  shall  burn  with  fire 

13.  21  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give  them  light 

13.  22  by  day,  nor  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night 

14.  24  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  the  cloud,  and 
19.  18  because  the  Lord  descended,  .in  fire 

22.    6  If  fire  break  out,  and  catch  in  thorns,  so 

24.  17  glory  of  the  Lord  (was)  like  devouiing  fire 

25.  14  thou  burn  with  fire  without  the  camp 
29.  34  thou  shalt  bum  the  remainder  with  fire 

32.  20  and  burnt  (it)  in  the  fire,  and  ground  (it) 
32.  24  I  cast  it  into  the  fire,  and  there  came  out 
35.    3  Ye  shall  kindle  no  fire  throughout  your 
40.  38  fire  was  on  it  by  night,  in  the  sight  of  all 

Lev.    1.    7  the  priest  shall  put  fire  upon  the  altar 
1.    7  and  lay  the  wood  in  order  upon  the  fire 

1. 12  that  (is)  on  the  fire  which  (is)  upon  the  al. 

1.  17  upon  the  wood  that  (is)  upon  the  fire 

2.  14  green  ears  of  corn  dried  by  the  fire,  (even) 

3.  5  which  (is)  upon,  .wood  that  (is)  on  the  fi. 
4. 12  burn  him  on  the  wood  with  fire :  where 
6.  9  the  fire  of  the  altar  shall  be  burning  in  it 
6.  10  and  take  up  the  ashes  which  the  fire  hath 
6.  12  fire  upon  the  altar  shall  be  burning  in  it 
6.  13  fire  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar 

6.  30  sin  offering,  .it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire 

7.  17  the  remainder,  .shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
7. 19  it  shall  be  burnt  with  fire  :  and  as  for 

8. 17  dung,  he  burnt  with  fire  without  the  camp 

8.  32  that  which  remaineth.  .ye  burn  with  fire 
9:  11  hide  he  burnt  with  fire  without  the  camp 

9.  24  there  came  a  fire  out  from  before  the  Lokd 


Lev. 


*3- 

13- 

16. 

16. 

16. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

Num.  3. 

6. 

9- 

9- 

11. 


Josh.  6 


Judg 


1  Sa.  30. 

r.         3°' 

2  Sa.  14 

14. 


14 


Ki.  9. 

16. 


1  took,  .his  censer,  and  put  fire  therein,  and 

1  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord,  which 

2  went  out  fire  from  the  LORD,  and  devoured 
52  garment,  .it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire 
55  thou  shalt  burn  it  in  the  fire ;  it  (is)  fret 
57  burn  that  wherein  the  plague  (is)  with  fire 

12  take  a  censer  full  of  burning  coals  of  fire 

13  the  incense  upon  the  fire  before  the  Lord 

27  they  shall  burn  in  the  fire  then-  skins 

6  the  third  day,  it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire 

14  shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  botli  he  and  they 
9  she  profaneth . .  she  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
4  they  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lori> 

iS  and  put  (it)  in  the  fire  which  (is)  under 

15  as  it  were  the  appearance  of  fire,  until 

16  and  the  appearance  of  fire  by  night 

1  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them 

2  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  the  fire  was  quen 

3  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them 

14  goest  before,  .in  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night 

7  put  fire  therein,  aud  put  incense  in  them 
iS  put  fire  in  them,  and  laid  incense  thereon 

35  there  came  out  a  fire  from  the  Lokd,  and 
37  scatter  thou  the  fire  yonder;  for  they  are 
46  put  fire  therein  from  off  the  altar,  and 

9  most  holy  things,  (reserved)  from  the  fire 

28  For  there  is  a  fire  gone  out  of  Heshbon,  a 
10  fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 
61  they  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord 

10  burnt,  .all  their  goodly  castles,  with  fire 
23  Every  thing  that  may  abide  the  fire 

23  ye  shall  ma~ke  (it)  go  through  the  fire,  and 

23  all  that  abideth  not  the  fire  ye  shall  make 
33  in  fire  by  night,  to  show  you  by  what  way 

11  the  mountain  burned  with  fire  unto  the 

12  spake  unto  you  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

15  spake  in  Horeb  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

24  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  consuming  tire 
33  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

36  upon  earth  he  showed  thee  his  great  fire 
36  his  words  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

4  Lord  talked,  .out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

5  ye  were  afraid  by  reason  of  the  fire,  and 

22  Lord  spake,  .out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

23  for  the  mountain  did  burn  with  fire 

24  heard  his  voice  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

25  for  this  great  fire  will  consume  us  :  if  we 

26  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

5  and  burn  then  graven  images  with  fire 
25  images  of  their  gods,  .ye  burn  with  fire 

3  (as)  a  consuming  fire  he  shall  destroy  them 
10  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire  in  the  day  of 

15  the  mount  burned  with  fire  :  and  the  two 

21  and  burnt  it  with  fire,  and  stamped  it 

4  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire  in  the  day  of 
3  burn  their  groves  with  fire  ;  and  ye  shall 

31  they  have  burnt  in  the  fire  to  their  gods 

16  shalt  bum  with  fire  the  city,  and  all  the 

10  or  his  daughter  to  pass  through  the  fire 
16  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any 

22  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  anger,  and  shall 

24  they  burnt  the  city  with  fire,  and  allj 
15  accursed  thing  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

25  and  burned  them  with  fire,  after  they  had 

8  (that)  ye  shall  set  the  city  on  fire 

19  and  hasted  and  set  the  city  on  fire 

6  thou  shalt.  .burn  their  chariots  with  fire 

9  and  burnt  their  chariots  with  fire 

11  smote  all.  .and  he  burnt  Hazor  with  fire 

8  and  smitten  it.  .and  set  the  city  on  fire 
21  there  rose  up  fire  out  of  the  rock,  and 
15  let  fire  come  out  of  the  bramble,  and 

20  if  not,  let  fire  come  out  from  Abimelech 
20  let  fire  come  out  from  the  men  of  Shech. 
49  and  set  the  hold  on  fire  upon  them 

52  hard  unto  the  door,  .to  burn  it  with  fire 
1  will  burn  thine  house  upon  thee  with  fire 

15  burn  thee  and  thy  father's  house  with  fi. 

5  And  when  he  had  set  the  brands  on  fire 

6  and  burnt  her  and  her  father  with  fire 
14  became  as  flax  that  was  burnt  with  fire 

9  tow  is  broken  when  it  toucheth  the  fire 

27  they  smote,  .and  burnt  the  city  with  fire 
48  also  they  set  on  fire  all  the  cities  that 

1  smitten  Ziklag,  and  burnt  it  with  fire 
3  and,  behold,  (it  was)  burned  with  fire 
14  of  Caleb ;  and  we  burned  Ziklag  with  fire 
30  See,  Joab's  field,  .go  and  set  it  on  fire 

30  Absalom's  servants  set  the  field  on  fire 

31  have  thy  servants  set  my  field  on  fire  ? 
9  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured:  coals  were 

13  before  him  were  coals  of  fire  kindled 

7  they  shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire  in 

16  and  taken  Gezer,  and  burnt  it  with  fire 
18  Zimri.  .burnt  the  king's  house,  .with  fire 

.23,  21  lay  (it)  on  wood,  and  put  no  fire 

24  and  the  God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let 
.  25  and  call  on.  .vow  gods,  but  put  no  fire 
.  38  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell,  and  consumed 
,  12  And  after  the  earthquake  a  fire 

12  not  in  the  fire  :  and  after  the  fire  a  still 
10,  12  let  fire  come  down  from  heaven,  and 
10,  14  there  came  fire  down  from  heaven 
12  the  fire  of  God  came  down  from  heaven 

11  a  chariot  of  fire,  and  horses  of  fire,  and 

17  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round 

12  their  stronghold  wilt  thou  set  on  fire 
3  made  his  son  to  pass  through  the  fire 

17  caused  their  sons,  .to  pass  through,  .fire 
31  Sepharvites  burnt  their  children  in  fire 
1  iS  And  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire 
6  he  made  his  son  pass  through  the  fire 


FIRE 


350 


FIRE 


Nell. 


2  Ki.23: 10  make  his  son.  .to  pass  through  the  fire 
23.  11  burped  the  chariots  of  the  sun  with  fire 
25.    9  every  great,  .house  hurnt  he  with  fire 

1  0)1.14.  is  And.  .their  gods,  .were  burned  with  fire 

21.  26  he  answered  him  from  heaven  by  fire 

2  Ch.  7.    1  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consu. 

7.    3  all.  .Israel  saw  how  the  fire  came  down 
28.    3  and  burnt  his  children  in  the  fire,  after 

33.  6  to  pass  through  the  fire  in  the  valley  of 
*«;.  13  And  they  roasted  the  passover  with  fire 

19  burnt  all  the  palaces  thereof  with  fire 
3  the  gates  thereof  are  burned  with  fire 
3,  13,  17  gates  thereof,  .consumed  with  tire? 
9.  12  in  the  night  by  a  pillar  of  tire,  to  give 
9.  19  neither  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  to  shew 
Job      1. 16  The  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from  heaven,  and 
15.  34  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of  brib. 
18.    5  and  the  spark  of  his  fire  shall  not  shine 
20.  26  a  fire  not  blown  shall  consume  him  ;  it 

22.  20  the  remnant  of  them  the  fire  consumeth 

28.  5  and  under  it  is  turned  up  as  it  were  fire 

31.  12  a  fire  (that)  consumeth  to  destruction 
41.  19  go  burning  lamps,  .sparks  of  fire  leap  out 

Psa.  11.    6  he  shall  rain.. fire  and  brimstone,  aud  an 
18.   8  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured  ;  coals 

18.  12  clouds  passed,  hail,  .aud  coals  of  fire 

13  gave  his  voice  ;  hail,  .and  coals  of  fire 
9  in  his  wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour 
7  voice  of  the  Lord  divideth.  .flames  of  fire 
3  while  I  was  musing  the  fire  burned 
9  he  burnetii  the  chariot  in  the  fire 
3  a  fire  shall  devour  before  him,  and  it 

12  we  went  through  fire  and  through  water 

2  as  wax  melteth  before  the  fire,  (so)  let 

7  They  have  cast  fire  into  thy  sanctuary 

14  and  all  the  night  with  a  light  of  fire 
21  a  fire  was  kindled  agaiust  Jacob,  and 
63  The  fire  consumed  their  young  men ;  and 

5  Lord?,  .shall  thy  jealousy  burn  like  fire  ? 
16  burned  with  fire,  (it  is)  cut  down  :  they 
14  As  the  fire  burnetii  a  wood,  and  as  the 
46  Lord?,  .shall  thy  wrath  burn  like  fire? 

3  A  fire  goeth  before  him,  and  burnetii  up 

4  Who  maketh  his  ministers,  .a  flaming  fire 

32  He  gave  them,  .flaming  fire  in  their  land 
39  and  fire  to  give  light  in  the  night 
18  And  a  fire  was  kindled  in  their  company 
12  they  are  quenched  us  the  fire  of  thorns 

10  let  them  be  cast  into  the  fire ;  into  deep 

8  Fire,  and  hail ;  snow,  and  vapours ;  stormy 
27  Can  a  man  take  fire  in  his  bosom,  and  his 
27  and  in  his  lips  (there  is)  as  a  burning  fire 

20  Where  no  wood  is.  .the  fire  goeth  out 

21  (As),  .wood  to  fire  ;  so  (is)  a  contentious 
16  and  the  tire  (that)  saith  not,  (It  is)  enough 

6  the  coals  thereof  (are)  coals  of  tire 

7  your  cities  (are)  burned  with  fire  :  your 

5  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night 
24  as  the  fire  devoureth  the  stubble,  and 

5  but.  .shall  be  with  burning  -fuel  of  fire 

18  For  wickedness  burnetii  as  the  fire  :  it 

19  people  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire 

16  a  burning  like  the  burning  of  a  fire 

17  the  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire 

11  fire  of  thine  enemies  shall  devour  them 

6  tempest,  and  the  flame  of  devouring  fire 
14  a  sherd  to  take  fire  from  the  hearth 
27  and  his  tongue  as  a  devouring  fire 

30  and  (with)  the  flame  of  a  devouring  fire 

33  the  pile  thereof  (is)  fire  and  much  wood 

11  your  breath,  (as)  lire,  shall  devour  yon 

12  (as)thorns.  .shall  they  he  burned  in  the  fi. 
14  who.  .shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire? 
19  And  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire 

2  when  thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou 
16  He  burnetii  part  thereof  in  the  fire  ;  with 
19 1  have  burned  part  of  it  in  the  fire  ;  yea 

14  Behold,  .the  fire  shall  burn  them  ;  they 
11  Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,  that 
1 1  walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire,  and  in  the 
16  smith  that  bloweth  the  coals  in  the  fire 

2  As  (when)  the  melting  fire  burnetii,  the  fi. 
1 1  our  beautiful  house . .  is  burnt  up  with  fire 
5  These  (are)  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  tire 

15  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire 

15  to  render,  .his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire 

16  For  by  tire,  .will  the  Lord  plead  with  all 
24  neither  shalt  their  fire  be  quenched ;  and 

4  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like  fire,  and 
14  I  will  make  my  words  in  thy  mouth  fire 
29  lead  is  consumed  of  the  fire;  the  founder 

18  the  fathers  kindle  the  fire,  and  the  worn. 

31  to  burn.. their  daughters  in  the  fire 
11.  16  he  hath  kindled  fire  upon  it,  and  the 
15.  14  for  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  auger,  (which) 
17.   4  for  ye  have  kindled  a  fire  in  mine  anger 
17.  27  then  will  I  kindle  a  fire  in  the  gates  there. 

19.  5  burn  their  sons  with  fire  (for)  burnt  offe. 

20.  9  as  a  burning  flro  shut  up  in  my  bones 

21.  10  this  city,  .he  shall  burn  it  with  fire 
21. 12  lest  my  fury  go  out  like  fire,  and  burn 

21.  14  I  will  kindle  afire  in  the  forest  thereof 

22.  7  and  they  shall . .  cast  (them)  into  the  fire 

23.  29  (Is)  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire?  saith  the 

29.  22  the  king  of  Babylon  roasted  in  the  fire 

32.  29  Chaldeans,  .shall  come  and  set  fire  on  this 

34.  2  this  city,  .he  shall  burn  it  with  fire 
34.  22  and  they  shall,  .burn  it  with  fire  :  and  I 
36.  23  he  out  it . .  :nul  cast  (it)  into  the  fire  that 

36.  23  until  all  the  mil  was  consumed  in  the  fi. 
36.32  which  Jehoiakim..had  burnt  in  the  fire 

37.  8  Chald.  shall  come. and  burn  it  with  tire 


21. 
29. 

39- 
46. 
5°- 
66. 
63. 
74- 
78. 
78. 
78. 
79- 


97- 
104. 
105. 
105. 
106. 
11S. 
140. 
148. 
Prov.  6. 

16. 

26. 

26. 

30- 
Song  8. 
Isa.  1. 
4- 
5- 
9- 
9- 
9- 


Jor. 


Jer.  37. 
38, 


10  (yet)  should  they,  .burn  this  city  with  fire 

17  this  city  shall  not  be  burned  with  fire 
t3  they  shall  burn  it  with  lire,  and  thou 
23  cause  this  city  to  be  burned  with  fire 

a  Chaldeans  burned . .  the  houses . .  with  fire 

12  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  houses  of  the 

13  and  the  houses,  .shall  he  burn  with  tire 
45  a  fire  shall  come  forth  out  of  Heshbon 

2  and  her  daughters  shall  be  burnt  with  fi. 
27  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  Damascus 
32  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  his  cities,  aud  it 
32  the  reeds  they  have  burned  with  fire,  and 
58  her  high  gates  shall  be  burned  with  fire 
58  folk  in  the  fire,  and  they  shall  be  weary 
13  and  all  the  houses.. burned  he  with  fire 
13  From  above  hath  he  sent  fire  into  my  bo. 

3  burned  against  Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire 

4  he  stood,  .he  poured  out  his  fury  like  fi. 

11  hath  kindled  a  fire  in  Zion,  and  it  hath 
4  a  great  cloud,  and  a  fire  infolding  itself 
4  of  amber,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

13  like  burning  coals  of  fire,  (and)  like  the 

13  the  fire  was  bright,  and  out  of  the  fire 
27  I  saw.. the  appearance  of  fire  round 
27  I  saw  as  it  were  the  appearance  of  fire 

4  cast  them  into  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and 
4  burn  them  in  the  fire  ;  (for)  thereof  shall 
4  fire  come  forth  into  all  the  house  of  Israel 
2  lo,  a  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  fire 
2  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins,  .fire 

2  and  fill  thine  hand  with  coals  of  fire  from 

6  Take  fire  from  between  the  wheels,  from 

7  the  fire  that  (was)  between  the  cherubim 

4  it  is  cast  into  the  fire,  .the  fire  devoureth 

5  when  the  fire  hath  devoured  it,  and  it  is 

6  which  I  have  given  to  the  fire  for  fuel 

7  go  out  from  (one)  fire,  and  (another)  fire 
41  they  shall  burn  thine  houses  with  fire 

12  and  withered;  the  fire  consumed  them 

14  fire  is  gone  out  of  a  rod  of  her  branches 
31  make  your  sons  to  pass  through  the  fire 
47  Behold,  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  thee,  and 

31  I  will  blow  against  thee  in  the  fire  of  ray 

32  Thou  shalt  be  for  fuel  to  the  fire ;  thy 

20  to  blow  the  fire  upon  it,  to  melt  (it) ;  so 

21  blow  upon  you  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath 
31  I  have  consumed  them  with  the  fire  of 
25  thy  residue  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire 
47  and  burn  up  their  houses  with  fire 
10  Heap  on  wood,  kindle  the  fire,  consume 
12  wearied,  .her  scum  (shall  be)  in  the  fire 
14  walked,  .in  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire 
16  from  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire 

18  therefore  will  I  bring  forth  a  fire  from 

8  when  I  have  set  a  fire  in  Egypt,  and 
14  will  set  fire  in  Zoan,  and  will  execute 
16  I  will  set  fire  in  Egypt :  Siu  shall  have 

5  in  the  fire  of  my  jealousy  have  I  spoken 

19  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath  have  I  spoken 

22  and  ^reat  hailstones,  fire,  and  brimstone 

6  I  will  send  a  fire  on  Magog,  and  among 

9  shall  set  on  fire  and  burn  the  weapons 
10  they  shall  burn  the  weapons  with  fire 

6  his  eyes  as  lamps  of  fire,  and  his  arms 
6  the  morning  it  burnetii  as  a  flaming  fire 
14  but  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  his  cities 
19,  20  the  fire  hath  devoured  the  pastures  of 

3  A  fire  devoureth  before  them  ;  and  behind 

5  a  flame  of  fire  that  devoureth  the  stubble 
30  show,  .blood,  and  fire,  aud  pillars  of  sni. 

4  I  will  send  a  fire  into  the  house  of  Hazael 
7,  10 1  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  of 

12  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  Teman,  which 

14  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  Rabbah 
2,  5  But  I  will  send  a  fire,  .and  it  shall  dev. 

6  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  in  the  house  of 
4  the  Lord  God  called  to  contend  by  fire 

iS  And  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire 

4  as  wax  before  the  fire,  (and)  as  the  waters 

7  the  hires,  .shall  be  burned  with  the  fire 
6  his  fury  is  poured  out  like  fire,  and  the 

13  Behold,  .the  fire  shall  devour  thy  bars 

15  There  shall  the  fire  devour  thee  ;  the  sw. 
13  the  people  shall  labour  in  the  very  fire 
18  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire  of  his  jealo. 

8  shall  he  devoured  with  the  fire  of  myjea. 

5  For  I.  .will  be.  .a  wall  of  fire  round  about 
2  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ? 
4  Behold,  .she  shall  be  devoured  with  fire 

1  Open  thy  doors,  .that  thefire  may  devour 

6  like  an  hearth  of  fire  among  the  wood 
6  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf ;  and  they 

9  I  will  bring  the  third  part  through  the  fi. 

2  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  soap 

3. Fire,  Hy's*  csJtshah. 

Jer.    6.  29  the  lead  is  consumed  of  the  fire  ;  the  fo. 

4.  Burning,  i"HH3  bcerak. 

Exod22.   6  he  that  kiudled  the  fire  shall  surely  make 

5, Fire,  *ua  nur. 

Pan.  3.  22  the  flame  of  the  fire  slew  those  men  that 
3.  24  Bid  not  we  cast  three  men.  .into,  .the  fi.? 
3.  25  four  men.  .walking  in  the  midst  of  the  fi. 
3.  26  came  forth  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 
3.  27  upon  whoso  bodies  the  fire  had  no  power 
3,  27  nor  the  smell  of  tire  had  passed  on  them 
7.    9  fiery  flame,  .his  wheels  (as)  burning  fire 

G.Firr,  Trvp  pur. 

Matt.  3.  10  tree,  .is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire 
3. 11  baptize  yon  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and.,  fire 


Dan. 
Hos. 


Obad 

7- 

Alic. 

1, 

Is'ah. 

X. 

3- 

Hab. 

?. 

Zeph 

1. 

Zech 

2. 

3- 

9- 

11. 

12. 

12. 

Hal, 

13- 

3- 

-Matt 

3- 

5- 

7- 

lj- 

*3- 

*3- 

17- 

18. 

18. 

2S- 

Alarl 

9- 

9. 

9. 

9- 

Luke 

3. 

3- 

3. 

9. 

12. 

17- 

Jolin 

T=i, 

Acts 

2, 

2. 

7- 

28. 

Rom 

12 

1  Do, 

3- 

3- 

3- 

2  T|i 

1. 

Heb. 

1. 

11. 

12. 

T?. 

Jaa. 

3, 

3. 

S. 

T  ¥?.. 

T. 

2  Pe. 

~ 

Jude 

Rev, 


12  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire 
22  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire 
19  tree,  .is  hewn  down,  andcast  into  thefire 

40  As.  .the  tares  are.  .burned  in  the  fire ;  so 
42  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire 
50  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire 

15  for  oft  times  he  falleth  into  the  fire,  and 

8  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  everlasting  fire 

9  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire 

41  Depart  from  me.  .into  everlasting  fire 

22  oft  times  it  hath  cast  him  into  the  fire 
43i  45  [the  fire  that  shall  never  be  quenched] 
44,  46,  48  [and  the  fire  is  not  quenched] 
47  having  two  eyes  to  he  cast  into  hell  [fire] 
49  For  every  one  shall  be  salted  with  fire 

9  tree,  .is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  thefire 

16  baptize.,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fi. 

17  the  chaff  he  will  burn  with  fireuuqueneh. 

54  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down  from 
49  I  am  come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth 

29  it  rained  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven 

55  when  they  had  kindled  a  fire  in  the  midst 

6  men.  .cast,  .into  the  fire,  and  they  are  bur. 
3  cloven  tongue's  like  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat 

19  blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke 

30  an  angel,  .in  a  flame  of  fire  in  a  bush 
5  he  shook  off  the  beast  into  the  fire,  and 

20  thou  shalt  heap  Goals  of  fire  on  his  head 

13  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire 

13  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of 
15  himself  shall  he  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire 

8  In  flaming  tire  taking  vengeance  on  them 

7  Who  maketh.  .his  ministers  a  flame  of  fl. 
34  Quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped 

18  the  mount,  .that  burned  with  tire,  nor 
29  For  our  God  (is)  a  consuming  fire 

5  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  ! 

6  the  tongue  (is)  a  fire,  a  world  of  iniquity 
3  and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire 

7  your  faith,  .though  it  he  tried  with  fire 
7  reserved  unto  fire  agaiust  the  day  of 
7  suffering  the  vengeauce  of  eternal  fire 

23  pulling,  .out  of  the  fire ;  hating  even  the 

14  and  his  eyes  (were)  as  a  flame  of  fire 
18  who  hath  his  eyes  like  unto  a  flame  of  fire 
18  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire 

5  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before  the 
5  filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar,  and  cast 

7  there  followed  hail  and  fire  mingled  with 

8  a  great  mountain  burning  [with  fire]  was 

17  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire  and  smoke 

18  by  the  fire,  and  by  the  smoke,  and  by  the 
1  mighty  angel,  .his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire 

11.    5  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth,  and 

13,  13  so  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from  h. 

14.  10  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brim. 

14.  18  another  angel.,  which  had  power  over  fire 

15.  2  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire 

16.  8  given  unto  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire 

17.  :6  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  fire 

18.  8  she  shall  he  utterly  burned  with  fire 
39.  12  His  eyes,  .as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  on  his 

19.  20  both  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of  fire 

20.  9  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  heaven 
20.  10  the  devil .  .was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire 

20.  14  And  death  and  hell  were  cast  into,  .fire 
20. 15  not  found,  .was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire 

21.  8  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and 

7. Fire,   pyre,  irvpd  pura. 

Acts  28.    2  for  they  kindled  a  fire,  and  received  us 
28.    3  Ar.d  when  Paul.  ,laid  (them)  on  the  fire 

8. Light,  ^cDs^jte. 

Marki4.  54  he  sat.  .and  warmed  himself  at  the  fire 
Luke  22.  56  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by  the  fire 

FIRE,  to  be  on  — 

To  be  set  on  fire,  Ttvpoopat  puroomai. 

2  Pe.   3.  12  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall 

FIRE,  of  — 

Of  fire,  fiery,  irvpivos  purinos. 

Rev.   9.  17  having  breastplates  of  fire,  and  of  jacinth 

TIRE,  to  set  or  be  set  on  — 

1.  To  kindle,  burn,  ns;  yaisath,  5. 

2  Sa.  14.  31  have  thy  servants  set  my  field  on  fire  ? 

2.  To  set  on  fire,  burn,  ts#h  lahat,  3. 

Deut32,  22  and  set  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the  m. 
Psa.  57.    4  (even  among)  them  that  are  set  on  fire 
83,  14  the  flame  setteth  the  mountains  on  fire 
Isa,   42.  25  and  it  hath  set  him  on  fire  round  about 

3.  To  set  in  a  blaze,  <pXoylfa  phlogizo. 

Jas.    3.    6  setteth  on  fire,  .and  it  is  set  on  fire  of  hell 

FTRE,  sign  of  — 

Uplifted  signal,  nxb'.p  maseth. 

Jer.     6.    1  set  up  a  sign  of  fire  in  Beth-haccerem 
FIRE  brand — 
1.  Brand,  UK  iid, 

Isa.      7.    4  for  the  two  tails  of  these  smoking  fireb. 

Amos  4,  11  ye  were  as  a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the 

2. Sparks,  D'iPl  ziqqim. 

Prov. 26.  18  As  a  mad  (man)  who  casleth  firebrands 

3.  Lamp,  T$?  lappid. 

Judgis.   4  took  firebrands,  and  turned  tail  to  tail 
15.   4  and  put  a  firebrand  in  the  midst  between 


FIRE 

FIRE  pan  — 

Fire  2wn%  oens&j  sanjT  dish,  ft$syo  machtak. 
Exofb;.    3  aud  his  flesh  hooks,  "and  his  fire  pans 

38.    3  (and)  the  flesh  hooks,  and  the  fire  pans 
2  Ki.  25.  15  the  fire  pans,  and  the  bowls.,  such  things 
Jer.  52.  19  the  fire  pans,  and  the  bowls,  and  the  cal. 

FIRKIN  — 

A  measure,  ^Tpr\T"qs  metretes. 

John  2.    6  containing  two  or  three  firkins  apiece  ■ 

FIRM  — 

I. Firm,  fat,  N'~!5  bari. 

Psa.  73.   4  in  their  death  ;  but  their  strength  (is)  firm 
%To  prepare,  establish,  set  up,  p3  kun,  5. 

Josh.  3.  17  the  priests,  .stood  firm  on  dry  ground  in 
4.   3  the  place  where  the  priests'  feet  stood  firm 

3. Steadfast,  firm,  sure,  &e$aios  bebaios. 

Heb.    3.   6  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end 

FIRM,  to  be  (as)  — 
To  be  firm,  ps;  yatsaq. 

Job  41.  23  they  are  firm  hi  themselves  ;  they  cannot 
41.  24  His  heart  is  as  firm  as  a  stone  ;  yea,  as 
FIRM,  to  make  — 
To  make  strong,  *|pfl  teqeph,  3. 

Dan.  6.    7  to  make  a  firm  decree,  that  whosoever 
FIRMAMENT  — 
Expanse,  jrp*]  raqia. 

Gen.    i.   6  God  said,  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the 
1.    7  God  made  the  firmament,  and  divided 
1.    7  the  waters  which  (were)  under  the  firm. 
1.    7  waters  which  (were)  above  the  firmament 
1.    8  And  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven 
1.  14  Let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of 
1.  15  let  them  be  for  lights  in  the  firmament  of 
1.  17  And  God  set  them  in  the  firmament  of 
1.  20  fly  above  the  earth  in  the  open  firmament 
Psa.  ig.    1  the  firmament  showeth  his  handywork 

150.    1  praise  him  in  the  firmament  of  his  power 

Eze.    1.  22  And  the  likeness  of  the  firmament  upon 

1.  23  under  the  firmament  (were)  their  wings 

1.  25  there  was  a  voice  from  the  firmament  that 

1.  26  above  the  firmament  that  (was)  over  their 

10.    1  the  firmament  that  (was)  above  the  head 

Dan.  12.   3  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament 

FIRST  — 

J. One,  "inx  echad. 

Gen.    t.    5  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first 
2. 11  The  name  of  the  first  (is)  Pison  :  that  (is) 
8.   5  on  the  first,  .of  the  month,  were  the  tops 
8.  13  in  the  six  hundredth  and  first  year 
8.  13  the  first,  .of  the  month,  the  waters  were 
Exod4o.    2  On  the  first  day  of  the . .  month  shalt  thou 
40.  17  on  the  first.,  of  the  month.,  the  tabernacle 
Lev.  23.  24  In  the  seventh  month,  in  the  first . .  of  the 
Num.  1.    1  on  the  first,  .of  the  second  month,  in  the 
1. 18  on  the  first,  .of  the  second  month,  and 
29.    1  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  first . .  of  the 
33.  38  died,  .in  the  first,  .of  the  fifth  month 
Deut.  1.    3  in  the  eleventh  month,  on  the  first,  .of 

1  Ki.  16.  23  In  the  thirty  and  first  year  of  Asa  king  of 

2  Ch.29.  17  Now  they  began  on  the  first,  .of  the.  .mo. 

36,  22  in  the  first  year  of  Gyros  king  of  Persia 
Ezra    1.    1  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 
3.   6  From  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  mouth 
7.    g  For  upon  the  first,  .of  the.  .month 
7.    9  on  the  first,  .of  the  fifth  month  came  he 

10.  16  sat  down  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth 

10.  17  made  an  end.  .by  the  first  day  of  the 
Neh.    8.    2  upon  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 
Job    42.  14  he  called  the  name  of  the  first,  Jemima 
Eze.  26.   1  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  first . .  of  the 

29. 17  in  the  first,  .of  the  month,  the  word 

31.  1  in  the  third  (month),  in  the  first,  .of  the 

32.  1  in  the  twelfth  month,  in  the  first,  .of  the 
45.  18  in  the  first,  .of  the  month,  thou  shalt 

Dan.  1.  21  Daniel  continued .  .unto  the  first  year  of 
9.  1  In  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  son  of  A. 
o.  2  In  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  I  Daniel 

11.  1  Also  I,  in  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  Mede 
Hag.    1.    1  in  the  sixth  month,  in  the  first  day  of 

2. One,  "in  clmd. 

Ezra   5. 13  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king  of  B. 

6.  3  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king 
Dan.   6.    2  three  presidents,  of  whom  Daniel,  .first 

7.  1  In  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar  king  of  Ba. 

3.  Former,  *a"lp  qadmai. 

Dan.  7.   4  The  first.. like  a  lion,  and  had  eagle's  win. 
7.   8  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked 
7.  24  and  he  shall  be  diverse  from  the  first 
A.IIead,  first,  pi^X")  reishon. 

Josh. 2 1. 10  of  Levi,  had :  for  their*s  was  the  first  lot 
Job  15.   7  (Art)  thou  the  first  man  (that)  was  born  ? 
5. Head,  principal,  rtf*i  rosh. 

1  Ch.12.   9  Ezer  the  first,  Obadiah  the  second,  Eliab 
16    7  David  delivered  first,  .to  thank  the  L. 

23.  19  Of  the  sons  of  Hebron  ;  Jeriah  the  first 
23. 20  Of  the  sons  of  TJzziel ;  Micah  the  first 

24.  21  sons  of  Rehabiah,  the  first.  .Isshiah 
Amos  6.    7  now  shall  they  go  captive  with  the  first 

G.ffead,  first,  |win  rishon. 

Gen.  8. 13  in  the  first  (month),  .the  waters  were  dr. 
13.    4  which  he  had  made  there  at  the  first 

25.  25  the  first  came  out  red,  all  over  like  an 

26.  1  besides  the  first  famine  that  was  in  the 


351 


Gen.  28.  19  name  of  that  city.  .Luz  at  the  first 

38.  28  a  scarlet  thread,  saying.  This  came  out  fi. 
41.  20  the  ill  favoured  kine  did  eat  up  the  first 

Exod.  4.    8  neither  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  first 
12.    2  it.  .the  first  month  of  the  year  to  you 
12.  15  the  first  day  ye  shall  put  away  leaven  out 
12.  15  from  the  first  day  until  the  seventh  day 
12.  16  in  the  first  day.  .an  holy  convocation 
12.  18  In  the  first,  .on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
34.    1  Hew.  .tables  of  stone  bike  unto  the  first 
34.    1  the  words  that  were  in  the  first  tables 
34.    4  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the  first 
40.    2  On  the . .  day  of  the  first  month  shalt  thou 
40.  17  in  the  first  mouth  in  the  second  year,  on 

Lev.  4.  2i  burn  him  as  he  burned  the  first  bullock 
5.  8  offer  (that)  which  (is)  for.  .sin  offering  fi. 
9.  15  slew  it,  and  offered  it  for  sin,  as  the  first 
23.  5  In  the  fourteenth . .  of  the  first  month  at 
23.  7  In  the  first  day  ye  shall  have  an  holy 
23.  35  On  the  first  day.  .an  holy  convocation:  ye 
23.  39  on  the  first  day.  .a  sabbath,  and  on  the 

23.  40  ye  shall  take  you  on  the  first  day  the 
Num.  2.    9  camp  of  Judah . .  These  shall  first  set  forth 

7. 12  he  that  offered  his  offering  the  first  day 
9.    1  in  the  first  month  of  the  second  year  after 
9.    5  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month 
10.  13  they  first  took  their  journey  accordingto 
10. 14  In  the  first  (place)  went  the  standard  of 
20.    1  into  the  desert  of  Zin  in  the  first  month 
28.  16  in  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

28.  18  In  the  first  day.  .an  holy  convocation 
33.   3  they  departed  from  Raineses  in  the  first 
33.    3  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

Deut.  9.  18  I  fell  down,  .as  at  the  first,  forty  days 
10.    1,  3  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the  first 
10.   2  the  words  that  were  in  the  first  tables 
10.    4  wrote,  .according  to  the  first  writing 

10.  10  I  stayed,  .according  to  the  first  time,  fo. 
'  13.    9  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put 

16.  4  which  thou  sacrificedst  the  first  day  at 

17.  7  The  hands  of  the  witnesses  shall  be  first 
Josh.  4. 19  on  the  tenth,  .of  the  first  month,  and 

8.    5  it  shall  come  to  pass . .  as  at  the  first,  that 

8.  6  say,  They  flee  before  us,  as  at  the  first 
JudgiS.  29  name  of  the  city  (was)  Laish  at  the  first 

20.  22  they  put  themselves  in  array  the  first  day 
2o.  32  They  (are)  smitten  down,  .as  at  the  first 
20.  39  they  are  smitten,  .as  (in)  the  first  battle 

1  Sa.  14. 14  that  first  slaughter,  .was  about  twenty 

2  Sa.  19.  20  I  am  come  the  first  this  day  of  all  the 

19.  43  that  our  advice  should  not  be  first  had 
2i-    9  they,  .were  put  to  death,  .in  the  first 

1  Ki.17.  13  but  make  me  thereof  a  little  cake  first 

18.  25  Choose,  .one  bullock,  .and  dress  (it)  first 

20.  9  All  that  thou  didst  send  for.  .at  the  first 
20.  17  And  the  young  men.  .went  out  first ;  and 

1  Ch.  9.    2  Now  the  first  inhabitants,  .in  their  poss. 

ii.   6  Whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusites  first 

11.  6  So  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  went  first  up 

12.  15  they  that  went  over  Jordan  in  the  first 
15.  13  For  because  ye  (did  it)  not  at  the  first 

24.  7  the  first  lot  came  forth  to  Jehoiarib 

25.  9  the  first  lot  came  forth  for  Asaph  to  Jos. 
27.    2  Over  the  first  course  for  the  first  month 

27.  3  the  captains  of  the  host  for  the  first  mo. 

29.  29  the  acts  of  David  the  king,  first  and  last 

2  Ch.  3.    3  The  length  by  cubits  after  the  first  mea. 

9.  29  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon,  first  and 
12.  15  Now  the  acts  of  Rehoboam,  first  and  last 
16. 11  the  acts  of  Asa,  first  and  last,  lo,  they 
17.   3  he  walked  in  the  first  ways  of  his  father 

30.  34  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat,  first 

25.  26  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Amaziah,  first  and 

26.  22  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Uzziah,  first  and 

28.  26  rest  of  his  acts  and  of  all  his  ways,  first 

29.  3  He,  in  the  first  year,  .in  the  first  month 
29. 17  they  began  on.  .the  first  month  to  sanctify 
29. 17  in  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  first  month 
35.    1  on  the  fourteenth,  .of  the  first  month 
35.  27  And  his  deeds,  first  and  last,  behold 

Ezra  3. 12  ancient  men,  that  had  seen  the  first  house 

6.  19  upon  the  fourteenth . .  of  the  first  month 

7.  9  For  upon,  .the  first  month  began  he  to 
8. 31  on  the  twelfth,  .of  the  first  month,  to  go 
10.  17  they  made  an  end.  .by  the.  .first  month 

Neh.   7.    5  found,  .of  them  which  came  up  at  the  fi. 

8. 18  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last  day,  he 
Esth.  1.  14  (and)  which  sat  the  first  in  the  kingdom 

3.    7  In  the  first  month,  that  (is),  the  month  !N . 

3. 12  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  first  month 
Prov.18.  1 7  first  in  his  own  cause,  .just  ;  but  his 
Isa.     1,  26  I  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  the  first 

9.  1  when  at  the  first  he  lightly  afflicted  the 
41.  4  I  the  Lord,  the  first,  and  with  the  last 
41.  27  The  first  (shall  say)  to  Zion,  Behold 

43.  27  Thy  first  father  hath  sinned,  and  thy 

44.  6  I  (am)  the  first,  and  I  (am)  the  last ;  and 
48.  12  Hearken.  .1  (am)  the  first,  I  also  (ani)  the 
60.   9  the  ships  of  Tarshish  first,  to  bring  thy 

Jer.    7.  12  Shiloh,  where  I  set  my  name  at  the  first 
16.  18  first  I  will  recompense  their  iniquity  and 
33.    7  I.  .will  build  them,  as  at  the  first 
33.  11  For  I  will  cause  to  return,  .as  at  the  first 
50.  17  first  the  king  of  Assyria  hath  devoured 

Eze.  29.  17  in  the  first  (month),  .the  word  of  the  Lo. 

30.  20  in  the  first  (month)  in  the  seventh  .  .of 
40.  21  were  after  the  measure  of  the  first  gate 

45.  18  In  the  first  (month),  .thou  shalt  take  a 
45.  21  In  the  first  (month),  in  the  fourteenth 

Dan.    8.  21  and  the  great  horn,  .(is)  the  first  king 
10.    4  the  first  month,  as  I  was  by  the  side  of 
10. 12  from  the  first  day.  .thy  words  were  heard 


FIRST 


Hos.    2.    7  I  will  go  aud  return  to  my  first  husband 
Joel    2.  23  cause  to  come,  .the  latter  rain  in  the  first 
Mie.    4.    S  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even  the  first 
Hag.   2.    3  "Who.  .saw  this  house  in  her  first  glory  ? 
Zech.  6.    2  In  the  first  chariot  (were)  red  horses,  aud 
12.    7  The  LORD  also  shall  save.  .Judah  first 

14. 10  unto  the  place  of  the  first  gate,  unto  the* 
7 '.Begin n lag,  first,  'Jbtt")  rishani. 

Jer.  25.    1  the  first  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 

8.  Foremost,  first,  rrK\x~i  reshith. 

Exod23. 19* The  first  of  the  first  fruits  of  thy  land 

34.  26  The  first  of  the  first  fruits  of  thy  land 
Num  15.  20  Ye  shall  offer  up  a  cake  of  the  first  of  your 

15.  21  Of  the  first  of  your  dough-ye  shall  give 
24.  20  said,  Amalek.  .the  first  of  the  nations 

Deut.  18.  4  and  the  first  of  the  fleece  of  thy  sheep 
26.    2  That  thou  shalt  take  of  the  first  of  all  the 

Eze.  44.  30  And  the  first  of  all  the  first  fruits  of  all 
44.  30  ye  shall,  .give  unto  the  priest  the  first  of 

9.  Commencement,  first,  n?nfl  techilloh, 

Judg.  1.    1  Who  shall  go  up  for  us.  .first,  to  fight 
20.  18  Which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  the  battle 
20. 18  the  Lord  said,  Judah  (shall  go  up)  first 
2  Sa.  17.    9  some  of  them  be  overthrown  at  the  first 
Dan.  8.    1  after  that  which  appeared,  .at  the  first 

10.  To  begin,  bhn  chalal,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  35  the  same  was  the  first  altar  that  he  built 

11.  Daughter,  n?  bath. 

Lev.  14.  io  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without 
Num.  6.  14  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without 

35.  27  he  shall  bring  a  she  goat  of  the  first  year 

V2. Beginning,  principal  point,  apxh  arche. 

Heb.  5. 12  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  Ac.  26.  4 
13.  One,  fila  mia. 

Titus  3.  10  after  the  first  and  second  admonition 
14. Prior j  irportpov  proteron. 

Heb.   4.    6  they  to  whom  it  was  first  preached 

7.  27  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins 

15.  First,  irp&Tou,  or  to  Trptorov proton,  or  to  prOton. 
Matt.  5.  24  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and 

6.  33  But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God 

7.  5  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 

8.  21  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 

12.  29  except  he  first  bind  the  strong  man  ? 

13.  30  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares,  and 
17.  10  Why  then  say . .  that  Elias  must  first  come  ? 

17. 11  Elias  truly  shall  [first]  come,  aud  restore 
23.  26  cleanse  first  that,  .within  the  cup  and 

Mark  3.  27  except  he  will  first  bind  the  strong  mau 

4.  28  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that 
7.  27  Let  the  children  first  be  filled  :  for  it  is 

9.  11  Why  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first 
9.  12  he  answered.  .Elias  verily  cometh  first 

13.  10  the  Gospel  must  first  be  published  among 

16.  9  [he  appeared  first  to  Mary  Magdalene] 
Luke  6.  42  cast  out  first  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 

9.  59  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 
9.  61  but  let  me  first  go  bid  them  farewell 

10.  5  into  whatsoever  house  ye  enter,  first  say 

11.  38  he  had  not  first  washed  before  dinner 

14.  28  For  which  of  you.  .sitteth  not  down  first 

14.  31  Or  what  kiDg.  sitteth  not  down  first,  and 

17.  25  But  first  must  he  suffer  many  things 
2i.   9  for  these  things  must  first  come  to  pass 

John  iS.  13  led  him  away  to  Annas  first ;  for  he  was 
Acts    3.  26  Unto  you  first  God,  having  raised  up  his 
7. 12  in  Egypt,  he  sent  out  our  fathers  first 

11.  26  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  in  A. 
13.  46  word  of  God  should  first  have  been  spoken 
26.  20  But  showed  first  unto  them  of  Damascus 

Rom.  1.    8  First,  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Ch. 

1.  16  to  the  Jew  [first],  and  also  to  the  Greek 

2.  9  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile 

2.  10  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Gentile 

15.  24  if  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your 

1  Co.  12.  28  first  apostles,  secondarily  prophets,  third. 

15.  46  that  (was)  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but 

2  Co.   8.    5  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord 
Eph.   4.    9  he  also  descended  [first]  into  the  lower 

1  Th.  4.  16  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first 

2  Th.  2.    3  except  there  come  a  falling  away  first 

1  Ti.    2.    1 1  exhort  therefore,  that,  first  of  all 

3.  10  let  these  also  first  be  proved ;  then  let 

5.  4  let  them  learn  first  to  show  piety  at  home 

2  Ti.    1.5  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  L. 
Heb.   7.    2  first  being  by  interpretation  King  of 
Jas.    3.  17  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  first  pure 

i  Pe.   4.  17  if  (it)  first  (begin)  at  us,  what  shall  the 
2  Pe.   1.  20  Knowing  this  first,  that  no  prophecy  of 
3.    3  Knowing  this  first,  that  there  shall  come 

16.  Foremost,  first,  Trpatros  protos. 

Matt  10.    2  The  first,  Simon,  who  is  called  Peter,  and 

12.  45  last,  .of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first 
17.  27  take  up  the  fish  that  first  cometh  up;  and 

19.  30  first  shall  be  last ;  and  the  last,  .first 

20.  8  beginning  from  the  last  unto  the  first 

20.  10  But  when  the  first  came,  they  supposed 
20]  16  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last 

21.  28  he  came  to  the  first,  and  said,  Son,  go 

21.  31  They  say  unto  him,  The  [first].  Jesus  saith 
2i.  36  sent  other  servants  more  than  the  first 

22.  25  the  first,  .left  his  wife  unto  his  brother 
22.  38  This  is  the  first  and  great  comm.  26. 17. 
27.  64  last  error  shall  be  worse  than  the  first 

Mark  o.  35  If  any  man  desire  to  be  [first],  (the  same) 
10.  31  first  shall  be  last ;  and  the  last  first 
12.  20  first  took  a  wife,  and  dying  left  no  seed 


FIRST 


352 


FIRSTLING 


Stark  12.  28  Which  is  the  first  commandment  of  all  ? 
12.  29  The  first  of  all  the  commandments  (is) 

12.  30  [This  (is)  the  first  command.]  14. 12 ;  16. 9. 
t-uke  2.    2  this  taxing  was  first  made  when  Cyremua 

11.  26  the  last  (state),  .is  worse  than  the  first 

13.  30  which  shall  be  first,  and  there  are  first 

14.  18  The  first  said  unto  him,  I  have  bought  a 
16.    5  said  unto  the  first,  How  much  owest  thou 
19. 16  Then  came  the  first,  saying,  Lord,  thy 
20.  29  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  died  without 

John  1.  41  He  [first]  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon 
5.   4  [whosoever  then  first ..  stepped  in  was] 
8.    7  He  that  is  without  sin . .  [let  him  first  cast] 

19.  32  soldiers,  .brake  the  legs  of  the  first,  and 

20.  4  the  other  disciple . .  came  first  to  the  sep. 
2a    8  disciple  which  came  first  to  the  sepulchre 

Acts  12.  10  When  they  were  past  the  first,  .ward 
20.  iS  from  the  first  day  that  I  came  into  Asia 

26.  23  he  should  be  the  first  that  should  rise 

27.  43  cast  (themselves)  first  (into  the  sea),  and 
Rom  10.  19  First  Moses  saith,  I  will  provoke  you  to 
1  Co.  14.  30  If  (any  thing)  be  revealed,  .let  the  first 

15.  45  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living 

15.  47  The  first  man  (is)  of  the  earth,  earthly 
Eph.  6.  2  which  is  the  first  commandment  with 
Phil.  1.    5  For  your  fellowship,  .from  the  first  day 

1  Ti.    1.  16  in  me  first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth 

2.  13  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve 
5.  12  because  they  have  cast  off  their  first  faith 

2  Ti.    2.    6  husbandman  that  laboureth  must  be  first 

4.  16  At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with  me 
Heb.   8.    7  if  that  first  (covenant) had  been  faultless 

8.  13  new  (covenant),  he  hath  made  the  first 

9.  1  the  first  (covenant)  had  also  ordinances 
9.   2  the  first,  wherein  (was)  the  candlestick 
9.   6  priests  went,  .into  the  first  tabernacle 
9.    8  as  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  standing 
9.  15  (that  were)  under  the  first  testament 

.9.  18  neither  the  first  (testament)  was  dedica. 
10.    9  He  taketh  away  the  first,  that  he  may  est. 

1  Jo.    4.  19  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us 
Rev.    1.  11  Alpha  and  Omega,  [the  first  and  the  last] 

1.  17  Fear  not ;  I  am  the  first  and  the  last 

2.  4  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love 

2.    5  repent,  and  do  the  first  works  ;  or  else  I 
2.    8  These  things  saith  the  First  and  the  Last 
2. 19  and  the  last  (to  be)  more  than  the  first 
4.    1  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  (was)  as  it 
4.    7  the  first  beast  (was)  like  a  lion,  and  the 
8.    7  The  first  angel  sounded,  and  there  fol. 
13. 12  exercisethall  the  power  of  the  first  beast 
13.  12  causeth..  them.,  to  worship  the  first  beast 

16.  2  the  first  went,  and  poured  out  his  vial 
20.    5  finished.     This  (is)  the  first  resurrection 

20.  6  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection 
2i.    i  for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth 

21.  19  The  first  foundation,  .jasper  ;  the  second 

22.  13  Alpha  and  Omega,  .the  first  and  the  last 

FIRST,  at  (the)  — 

1.  First,  irpwrov  proton. 

Johnio.  40  into  the  place  where  John  at  first  bapti. 
12. 16  understood  not  his  disciples  at  the  first 

19.  39  which  at  the  first  came  to  Jesus  by  night 
Acts  15.  14  how  God  at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles 

'2.  Beginning,  apx^i  arche. 

Acts  26.   4  which  was  at  the  first  among  mine  own 
Heb.    2.    3  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by 

3.  Prior,  Trp6repov  proteron. 

Gal.    4. 13  how.  .1  preached,  .uuto  you  at  the  first 

FIRST,  to  be  — 

To  lie  or  be  laid  before,  -KpSKetixai  proheimai. 

2  Co.   8.  12  For  if  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  (it  is) 
FIRST  child,  to  bring  forth  — 

To  bring  forth  a  first  bom,  1371  bakar,  5. 

Jer.     4.  31  of  her  that  bringeth  forth  her  first  child 

FIRST  (day)  — 

I. One,  fxia.  mia. 

Matt28.    1  as  it  began  to  dawn  toward  the  flrst(day) 
Marki6.    2  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  they  came 
Luke24.    1  upon  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  very  e. 
John2o.    1  The  first  (day)  of  the  week  cometh  Mary 

20.  19  being  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  when 
Acts  20.    7  upon  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  when 

1  Co.  16.    2  tTpon  the  first  (day)  of  the  week  Tit.  3.  10. 

2.  Foremost,  first,  irpmros  protos. 

Matt26.  17  Now  the  first  (day)  of  the.  .unleavened 

Marki4.  12  And  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread 

16.   9  [risen  early  the  first  (day)  of  the  week] 

FIRST  estate  — 

Beginning,  principality,  o-pxh  arche. 

Jude         6  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate 

FIRST,  from  the  very  — 

From  above,  from  the  first,  ixvaiQev  anothen. 

Luke  1.    3  understanding  of  all.  .from  the  very  first 
FIRST    of  all  — 
1.  Among  the  foremost,  iv  irpwTots  en  protois. 

1  Co.  15.   3  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that  which 
'2.  First,  ir p&Tov  proton. 

Luke  12.    1  began  to  say  unto  his  disciples  first  of  a. 

1  Co.  11.  18  For  first  of  all,  when  ye  come  together 
FIRST  begotten  — 
First  born,  7rpoJT(iTOKo?  prototokos. 

Heb.    1.    6  when  he  bringeth  in  the  first  begotten 

Rev.    1.    s  Jesus  Christ,  .the  first  begotten  of  the  d. 


FIRST,  of  the  — 
Son,  produce,  ]3  ben. 

E.\odi2.    5  without  blemish,  a  male  of  the  first  year 

29.  38  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  day  by  day  co. 

Lev.    9.    3  of  the"  first  year,  without  blemish,  for  a 

12.    6  she  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  for 

23. 12  he  lamb  without  blemish  of  the  first  year 

23. 18  lambs  without  blemish  of  the  first  year 

23. 19  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  sacrifice 
Num. 6.  12  shall  bring  a  land)  of  the  first  year  fora 

6.  14  one  he  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  ble. 

6.  14  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  bl. 

7.  15  one  ram,  one  lamb  of  the  first  year 
[So  in  v.  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81.] 

7.  17  he  goats,  five  lambs  of  the  first  year 
[So  in  v.  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.] 

7.  87  the  lambs  of  the  first  year  twelve,  with 

7.  88  the  lambs  of  the  first  year  sixty 

28.   3,  9  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 

28.  11,  19,  27  one  ram,  seven  lambs  of  the  first 

29.  2  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  blemish 
29.  8,  13  lambs  of  the  first  year;  they  shall  be 
29.  17,  20,  23,  26,  29*32  fourteen  lambs  of  the  fir. 
29.  36  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  bl. 

Eze.  46.  13  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 

FIRST  part  or  time  — 

1.  Beginning,  first  or  best,  nTNl  reshith. 

Deiit33.  21  he  provided  the  first  part  for  himself 
Hos.    9.  10  as  the  first  ripe  in  the  tig  tree  at  her  first  t. 

^Commencement,  n^ni-i  techillah. 

Gen.  43.  18  returned  in  our  sacks  at  the  first  time  are 
43.  20  we  came  indeed  down  at  the  first  time 

FIRST  born  — 

1.  First  born,  firstling,  "033  bekor. 

Gen,  10.  i=;  Canaan  begat  Sidon  his  first  horn,  and 
22.  s'x  Huz  his  first  born,  and  Buz  his  brother 
25.  13  firstborn  of  Ishmael,  Nebajoth  ;  andKed. 
27.  19  I  (am)  Esau  thy  first  born  ;  I  have  done 
27.  32  he  said,  I  (am)  thy  son,  thy  first  born,  Esau 
35.  23  Reuben,  Jacob's  first  born,  and  Simeon 
36. 15  sons  of  Eliphaz  the  first  born,  .of  Esau 
38.    6  Judah  took  a  wife  for  Er  his  first  born 
38.    7  Er,  Judah's  first  born,  was  wicked  in  the 
41.  51  Joseph  called  the  name  of  the  first  born 
43.  33  the  first  born  according  to  his  birthright 
46.    8  and  his  sons  :  Reuben,  Jacob's  first  born 
48.  14  wittingly  ;  for  Manasseh  (was)  the  first  bo. 

48.  18  Not  so,  my  father:  for  this  (is)  the  first  b. 

49.  3  Reuben,  thou(art)myfirstborn,mymight 
Exod.  4.  22  saith . .  Israel  (is)  my  son . .  my  first  bora 

4.  23  I  will  slay  thy  son.  .thy  firstborn 
6.  14  sons  of  Reuben  the  first  born  of  Israel 
11.    5  all  the  first  bora  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall 
11.    5  from  the  first  born  of  Pharaoh  that  sitteth 
11.    5  unto  the  first  born  of  the  maidservant 

11.  5  and  all  the  first  bora  of  beasts 

12. 12  I.  .will  smite  all  the  first  bora  in  the  land 

12.  29  the  Lord  smote  all  the  firstborn  in  the 
i2.  29  from  the  first  born  of  Pharaoh  that  sat  on 
12.  29  unto  the  first  born  of  the  captive  that 

12.  29  and  all  the  first  born  of  cattle 

13.  2  Sanctify  unto  me  all  the  first  born,  what. 
13.  13  all  the  first  born  of  man  among  thy  chil. 
13.  15  that  the  Lord  slew  all  the  first  bora  in 
13.  15  the  first  born  of  man,  and  the  first  born 
13.  15  all  the  first  bora  of  my  children  I  redeem 
22.  29  the  first  born  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give 
34.  20  All  the  first  born  of  thy  sons  thou  shalt 

Num.  3.    2  Nadab  the  first  born,  and  Abihu,  Eleazar 
3.  12  instead  of  all  the  first  born  that  openeth 
3.  13  Because  all  the  first  born  (are)  mine 
3.  13  on  the  day  that  I  smote  all  the  first  born 
3.  13  I  hallowed  unto  me  all  the  first  born  in  I. 
3.  40  Number  all  the  first  horn  of  the  males 
3.  41  instead  of  all  the  first  born  among  the  c. 
3.  42  And  Moses  numbered . .  all  the  first  born 
3.  43  all  the  first  bora  males  by  the  number 
3.  45  Take  the  Levites  instead  of  all  the  first  b. 
3.  46,  50  of  the  first  bora  of  the  children  of  1st. 

8.  16  the  first  born  of  all  the  children  of  Israel 
8.  17,  18  all  the  first  born  of  the  children  of  Is. 
8.  17  I  smote  every  first  born  in  the  land  of  E. 

18. 15  the  first  bora  of  man  shalt  thou  surely 
33.    4  For  the  Egyptians  buried  all.  .first  born 

Deut2i.  15  and.  .the  first  born  son  be  her's  that  was 
21.  16  the  son  of  the  hated,  .the  first  born 
21.  17  for  he.  .the  right  of  the  first  born  (is)  his 
25.    6  the  first  born  which  she  beareth  shall 

Josh.  6.  26  shall  lay  the  foundation,  .in  his  first  born 
17.    1  Manasseh  ;  for  he  (was)  the  first  born  of 
17.    1  for  Machir  the  first  born  of  Manasseh 

Judg.  8.  20  he  said  unto  Jether  his  first  born,  Up 

1  Sa.  8.    2  the  name  of  his  first  bora  was  Joel 

17.  13  Eliab  the  first  born;  and  next  unto  him,  A. 

2  Sa.   3.    2  his  first  born  was  Amnion,  of  Ahinoam 
1  Ki.  16.  34  laid  the  foundation,  .in.  .his  first  born 

1  Ch.  r.  13  Canaan  begat  Zidon  bis  first  born,  and  H. 

1.  29  first  bora  of  Ishmael,  Nebaioth  ;  then  K. 

2.  3  Er,  the  first  born  of  Judah,  was  evil  in 
2.  13  Jessie  begat  his  first  born  Eliab,  and  A. 
2.  25  sons  of  Jerahmcel  the  first  born  of  Hez. 
2.  27  sons  of  Ram  the  first  born  of  Jerahmetl 
2.  42  Mesha  his  first  born,  which  (was)  the  fa, 

2.  50  the  son  of  Hur,  the  first  born  of  Ephratah 

3.  1  the  first  born  Amnion,  of  Ahinoam  the 
3. 15  sons  of  .Tosiah.  .the  first  born  Jolianan 

4.  4  sons  of  Hur,  the  first  born  of  Ephratah 

5.  1  sobs'  of  Reuben,  the  first  born  of  Israel 


1  Ch 

s- 

6. 

S. 

8. 

8. 

9- 

9- 

0- 

2b. 

26. 

?fi 

2CI1 

?T. 

Neh 

TO. 

.loh 

tR. 

Psa. 

78 

89 

I05 

it;. 

no 

Isa. 

14. 

Jer. 

Si- 

Mic 

6 

Heel 

.12 

3  sons . .  of  Reuben  the  first  born  of  Israel 
28  sons  of  Samuel ;  the  first  born  Vashni 

1  Now  Benjamin  begat  Bela  his  first  born 

30  And  his  first  born  son  Abdun,  and  Ztir 
39  Ulam  his  first  born,  Jehush  the  second 

5  Shilonites  ;  Asaiah  the  first  born,  and  his 

31  the  first  born  of  Shallum  the  Korahite 
36  And  his  first  born  son  Abdon,  then  Zur 

2  Zeehariah  the  first  born,  Jediael  the  sec. 

4  Shemaiah  the  first  born,  Jehozabad  the 
10  he  was  not  the  first  born,  yet  his  father 

3  to  Jehoram,  because  he  (was)  the  first  b. 
36  Also  the  first  born  of  our  sons,  and  of  our 
13  the  first  born  of  death  shall  devour  his 
51  And  smote  all  the  first  born  in  Egypt 
27  I  will  make  him  (my)  first  born,  higher 
36  He  smote  also  all  the  first  born  in  their 

8  Who  smote  the  first  born  of  Egypt,  both 
10  To  him  that  smote  Egypt  in  their  first  b. 
30  And  the  first  born  of  the  poor  shall  feed 

9  I  am  a  father,  .and  Ephraim  (is)  my  first  b. 
7  shall  I  give  my  first  born  (for)  my  transg. 

10  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for.  .first  born 

2.  Birthright,  rni33  be/corah. 

Deut2i.  17  son  of  the  hated,  .the  right  of  the  first  b. 

3. First  born,  n-V33  bekirah. 

Gen.  79.  31  And  the  first  born  said  unto  the  younger 
19.  33  the  first  born  went  in.  and  lay  with  her 
19.  34  that  the  first  born  said  unto  the  younger 
19.  37  the  first  born  bare  a  son,  and  called  his 
29.  26  to  give  the  younger,  before  the  first  born 

1  Sa.  14.  49  name  of  the  first  born  Merab,  and  the 

4. First  barn,  irpwrdroKos  prutotokos. 

Matt.  1.  25  till  she  had  brought  forth  her  [first  born] 
Luke  2.    7  And  she  brought  forth  her  first  born  son 
Rom.  8.  29  that  he  might  be  the  first  born  among 
Col.     1. 15  Who  is . .  the  first  born  of  every  creature 

1.  18  who  is.  .the  first  born  from  the  dead 
Heb.  11.  28  lest  he  that  destroyed  the  first  born  sho. 

12.  23  To  the  general  assembly . .  of  the  first  born 

FIRST  bom,  to  make  — 

To  constitute  first  born,  133  bakar,  3. 

Deut  21. 16  not  make  the  son  of  the  beloved  first  born 

FIRST  fruit  — 

1.  First  or  earliest  fruit,  1133  likkur. 

Exod23.  16  the  first  fruits  of  thy  labours, which  thou 
23.  19  The  first  of  the  first  fruits  of  thy  land  thou 
34.  22  of  the  first  fruits  of  wheat  harvest,  and 
34.  26  The  first  of  the  first  fruits  of  thy  land 

Lev.    2.  14  if  thou  otter  a  meat  ottering  of  thy  first  f. 

2.  14  for  the  meat  offering  of  thy  first  fruits 
23.  17  (they  are)  the  first  fruits  unto  the  LORD 
23.  20  with  the  bread  of  the  first  fruits,  (for)  a 

Nuni28.  26  in  the  day  of  the  first  fruits,  when  ye  bri. 

2  Ki.   4.  42  brought  the  man  of  God  bread  of  the  f.  f. 
Neh.  10.  35  And  to  bring  the  first  fruits  of  our  ground 

10.  35  and  the  first  fruits  of  all  fruit  of  all  trees 

13.  31  and  for  the  first  fruits.  Remember  me,  O 
Eze.  44.  30  And  the  first  of  all  the  first  fruits  of  all 

2.  First  or  principal  fruit,  rre'Nl  reshith. 

Lev.    2.  12  As  for  the  oblation  of  the  first  fruits,  ye 

23.  10  ye  shall  bring  a  sheaf  of  the  first  fruits 
Knm  18.  12  the  first  fruits  of  them  which  they  shall 
Deuti8.    4  The  first  fruit,  .of  thy  corn,  of  thy  vine 

26.  10  I  have  brought  the  first  fruits  of  the  land 
2  Ch.  31.    5  brought  in  abundance  the  first  fruits  of 
Neh.  10.  37  we  should  bring  the  first  fruits  of  our  d. 

12.  44  for  the  first  fruits,  and  for  the  tithes,  to 
Prov.  3.    9  and  with  the  first  fruits  of  all  thine  incr. 
Jer.     2.    3  the  first  fruits  of  his  increase :  all  that 
Eze.  20.  40  the  first  fruits  of  your  oblations,  with  all 

48. 14  nor  alienate  the  first  fruits  of  the  land 

3.  First  fruits,  airapxv  aparche. 

Rom.  8.  23  which  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit 

11.  16  For  if  the  first  fruit  (be)  holy,  the  lump 
16.    5  who  is  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia  unto  Ch. 

1  Co  15.  20  become  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept 

15.  23  Christ  the  first  fruits  ;  afterward  they 

16.  15  that  it  is  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia,  and 
Jas.     1.  18  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of 
Rev.  14.    4  the  first  fruits  unto  God  and  to  the  Lamb 

FIRST  ripe  — 

1. First  ripe  fruit,  1*33  likkur. 
Num.  13.  20  the  time  (was)  the  time  of  the  first  ripe 
18.  13  whatsoever  is  first  ripe  in  the  laud,  which 
2. First  ripe  fruit,  HTO3  bikkurah. 

Hos.    9.  10'  I  saw  your  fathers  as  the  first  ripe  in  the 

IS.First  ripe  fruit,  rrvos  bakkurah. 

Jer.  24.    2'very  good  figs.. like  the  figs.. first  ripe 

FIRST  ripe  fig  — 

First  ripe  fruit,  1133  bikhir. 

Nah.    3.  '12  fig  trees  with  the  first  ripe  figs  :  if  they 

FIRST  ripe  fruit  — 

First  ripe  fruit,  rP.133  bikkurali. 

Mic.    7.    1  Woe . .  my  soul  desired  the  first  ripe  fruit 

FIRSTLING  — 

l.Firstliiiq,  first  born,  li?3  beknr. 

Lev.  27.  26  Only  the  firstling  of  the  beasts,  which 
.Num.  3.  41  instead  of  all  the  firstlings  among  the  ca. 
18.  15  the  firstling  of  unclean  beasts  shalt  thou 
18.  17  But  the  firstling  of  a  cow,  or  the  firstling 
Deutis.  19  All  the  firstling  males  that  come  of  thy 


FIRSTLING 


353 


FIVE 


Deut  15.  19  tbou  shalt  do  no  work  with  the  firstling 
■  15.  19  nor  shear  the  firstling  of  thy  sheep 

33.  17  His  glory  (is  like)  the  firstling  of  his  bul. 

2. Firstling,  first  born,  rritaa  bekorah. 

Gen.    4.    4  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of 
Deut  12.    6  the  firstlings  of  your  herds  and  of  your 

12.  17  the  firstlings  of  thy  herds,  or  of  thy  .flock 
14.  23  the  firstlings  of  thy  herds  and  of  thy  flocks 

Neh.  10.  36  the  firstlings  of  our  herds  and  of  our  flocks 
Z.What  opens  (the  womb),  las  peter. 

Exod  13.  12  every  firstling,  that  cometh  01  a  beast 

13.  13  every  firstling  of  an  ass  thou  shalt  redeem 

34.  19  every  firstling  among  thy  cattle,  .ox  or 
34.  20  But  the  firstling  of  an  ass  thou  shalt  red. 

FIRSTLING,  to  be — 

To  be  made  a  firstling,  133  bakar,  4. 

Lev.  27.  26  which  should  be  the  Lord's  firstling,  no 
FISH  — 
I. Fish,  Jto  daag. 

Neh.  13/16  There  dwelt  men.  .which  brought  fish 
'2.Fish,  33  dag. 

Gen.    9.    2  shall  be.  .upon  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea 

Kum  11.  22  or  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered 

1  Ki.   4.  33  he  spake  also  of  beasts,  .and  of  fishes 

2  Ch.  33.  14  eyen  to  the  entering  in  at  the  fish  gate 
Neh.  3.   3  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons  of  Hassenaah 

12.  39  And  from . .  above  the  fish  gate . .  even  unto 
Job    12.    8  the  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto 

41.    7  Canst  thou  fill,  .his  head  with  fish  spears? 
Psa.     8.    8  The  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the 
Eccl.  9.  12  as- the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  a'n  evil  net 
Eze.   38.  20  So  that  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the  fowls 
Hos.    4.    3  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be  taken 
Jon.    1. 17  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow 
1.  17  Jonah  was  in  the  belly  of  the  fish. -three 
2:  10  Lord  spake  unto  the  fish,  and  it  vomited 
Hab.   1.  14  And  makest  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea 
Zeph.  1.    3  I  will  consume,  .the  fishes  of.the  sea,  and 
1.  10  the  noise  of  a  cry  from  the  fish  gate,  and 

'3.  Fish,  rsn  dagah. 

Gen.  1/26,  28  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea 
Exod  7.  18  And  the  fish  that  (is)  in  the  river  shall 

7.  2;  And  the  fish  that  (was)  in  the  river  died 
Nunin.    5  We  remember  the  fish  which  we  did  eat 
Deut.  4. 18  likeness  of  any  fish  that  (is)  in  the  waters 
Psa. 105.  29  turned,  .waters  into  blood,  and  slew,  .fish 
Isa.  50.    2  their  fish  stinketh;  because . .  no  water,  and 
Eze.  29.    4  I  will  cause  the  fish  of  the  rivers  to  stick 
29.   4  all  the  fish  of  thy  rivers  shall  stick  unto 
•  29.   5  leave . .  thee  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  rivers 
47.   9  there  shall  be  1.  .great  multitude  of  fish 
47.  10  their  fish  shall  be  according  to  their  kinds 
47.  10  as  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  exceeding 
Jon.     2.    1  Then  Jonah  prayed . .  out  of  the  fish's  belly 

A.  Soul,  breathing  creature,  v$3i  nephesh. 

■  Isa.    19.  10  all  that  make  sluices  (and)  ponds  for  fish 
5. Fish,  IxBvs  ichthus. 

Matt.  7. 10  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serpe.? 
14. 17  We  have  here,  .five  loaves,  and  two  fishes 

14.  19  took  the  five  loaves,  and  the  two  fishes 

15.  36  he  took  the  seven  loaves  and  the  fishes  !s 
17.  27  and  take  up  the  fish  that  first  cometh  up 

Mark  6.  38  they  knew,  they  say,  Five,  and  two  fishes 
6.  41  had  taken  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fish. 
6.  41  the  two  fishes  divided  he  among  them  all 
6.  43  full  of  the  fragments,  and  of  the  fishes  , 
Luke  5.    6  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude  of  fishes 
5.   9  draught  of  the  fishes  which  they  had  taken 
9.  13  We  have,  .but  five  loaves  and  two  fishes 
9. 16  he  took  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes 
11.  11  or  if.  .a  fish,  will  he  for  a  fish  give  him 
24/42  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  broiled  fish 
John.21.    6  able  to  draw  it  for  the  multitude  of.fishes 
21.    8  came-,  .dragging  the  net  with  fishes 
21. 11  drew,  the  net  to  land  full  of  great  fishes 
1  C0.15.  39  another  of  fishes  (and)  another  of  birds 
6.  A  little  or  small  fish,  btyapiov  opsarion. 

John  6. 11  likewise  of  the  fishes  as  much  as  they 
21.   9  they  saw  a  fire  of  coals  there,  and  fish  laid 
21. 10  Bring  of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  can. 
2r.  13  cometh,  and  taketh  bread . .  and  fish  likew. 

FISH,  little  or  small  — 

l.A.  little  or  small  fish,  IxdvStou  ichthudion. 

Matt  15.  34  they  said,  Seven,  and  a  few  little  fishes 
Mark  8.    7  they  had  a  few  small  fishes  :  and  hebles. 

%A  little  or  small  fish,  btyapiov  opsarion. 

John  6.   9  five  barley  loaves,  and  two  small  fishes 
FISH,  to  — 
To  fish,  3*1  dig. 

Jer.  16.  16  for  many  fishers . .  and  they  shall  fish  them 
FISH  hook  — 
Fish  hook,  thorn,  nxw  yd  51V  dugah. 

Amos  4.    2  will  take .  .your  posterity  with  fish  hooks 
FISHER  — 
I.Fisher,  351  dawag. 

Jer.  16. 16  I  will  send  for  many  fishers,  saith  the  L. 

Eze.  47. 10  the  fishers  shall  stand  upon  it  from  E.-g. 
2. Fisher,  2'^  dayyag. 

'  Isa.  ig.  's  The  fishers  also  shall  mourn,  and  all  they 
Z.Fisher,  akievs  halieus. 

Matt.  4. 18  a  net  into  the  sea  :  for  they  were  fishers 

45 


Matt.  4.  19  and  I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men     ■ 

Mark  1.  16  a  net  into  the  sea  :  for  they  were  fishers 
1. 17  and  I  will  make  you.  .fishers  of  meu 
FISHER'S  coat  — 
A  tunic,  cloak,  eVe^SuT^y  ependutes. 

JohD2i.   7  he  girt(his)fisher'scoat..forhewasnaked 
FISHERMAN  — 
Fisher,  aAievs  halieus. 

Luke  5.    2  but  the  fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them 
FISHING,  a  — 
To  fish,  aKtevuj  halieud. 

John2i.    3  Peter  saith  unto  them,  I  go  a  fishing 
FISHPOOL  — 
Blessing,  pool,  pond,  ."13-13  berekah.  • 

Song  7.   4  thine  eyes.  1  the  fishpools  in  Heshbon 
FIST  — 
I. Fist;  rp"i?x  egroph. 

Exod2i.  18  and  one  smite  another,  .with  (his)  fist 

Isa.  58.   4  and  to  smite  with  the  fist  of  wickedness 

2.  Two  hands,  fists,  DM?n  chophnayim. 

Prov.30.    4  who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in  his  fists  ? 
FIT  — 

1.  Ready,  fit,  opportune,  >nu  itti. 

Lev.  16.  21  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilder. 
2.Well  or  conveniently  placed,  evderos  euthetos. 
Luke  9.  62  No  man.  .looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  kin. 
14.  35  It  is  neither  fit  for  the  land,  nor  yet  for  ■ 

3,  Coming  down,  becoming,  suitable,  KaBi\K.ou  Math. 

Acts  22.  22  Away  with  such . .  for  it  is  not  [fit]  that  he 
FIT,  to  — 
l.To  do,  ntyy  ttsah. 

Isa.   44. 13  he  fitteth  it  with  planes,  and  he  marketh 

2.  To  make  fully  ready,  Karaprifa  katartizo.' 

Rom.  g.  22  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction 
FIT,  to  be — . 
To  come  up,  be  becoming,  suitable,  avf)K(o  aneko. 

Col.    3.  18  submit  yourselves,  .as it  is  fit  in  the  Lord 
FIT,  to  make  — 
To  make  ready,  injj  athad,  3. 

Prov  24.  27  and  make  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the  field 
FITCHES  — 
1. Prickly,  spelt,  n?D3  ku-ssemeth. 

Eze.  4.   9  Take  thou  also  imto  thee. .  fitches,  and  put 
%  Black  cumin,  nzp.  qetsach. 

Isa.  28.  25  doth  he  not  cast  abroad  the  fitches,  and 
28.  27  the  fitches  are  not  threshed  with  a  thres. 
28.  27  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  staff 

FITLY  — 

1.  At  fit  times  or  circumstances,  D.!JSH"7j7  al  ophna. 
Prov  25.  11  A  word  fitly  spoken  (is  like)  apples  of  gold 

2.0n  tlie  fillings  up,  nNVa-^j?  al  milleeth. 

Song  5.  12  His  eyes,  .washed  with  milk,  .fitly  set 
FITTED  — 
To  be  made  straight,  nw;  yasJiar,4. 

1  Ki.  6.  35  with  gold  fitted  upon  the  carved  work 
FITTED,  to  be  — 
To  be  prepared^  set  up,  established,  pa  kun,  2. 

Prov  22.  18  they  shall  withal  be  fitted  in  thy  lips 
FIVE  — 
l.Five,  ntparj,  t?pn  chamishshah,  chamesh. 

Gen.    5.    6  Seth  lived  au  hundred  and  five  years 

5.  11  days  of  Enos  were  nine  hundred  and  five 
5. 15  And  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty  and  five  years 
5.  17  were  eight  hundred  ninety  and  five  years 
5.  21  Enoch  lived  sLxty  and  five  years,  and 
5.  23  were  three  hundred  sixty  and  five  years 
5. 30  five  hundred  ninety  and  five  years 
5.  32  And  Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old 
11. 11  Shem  lived,  .five  hundred  years,  and 

11.  12  Arphaxad  lived  five  and'thirty  years,  and 
.    11.  32  were  two  hundred  and  five  years  :  and  T. 

12.  4  Abram.  .seventy  and  five  years  old  when 
14.    9  king  of  Ellasar  ;  four  kings  with  five 

18.  28  Perad  venture  there  shall  lack  five  of  the 
18.  28  wilt  thou  destroy  all.  .for  (lack  of)  five  ? 
iS.  28  If  I  find  there  forty  and  five,  I  will  not 
43.  34  was  five  times  so  much  as  any  of  theirs 
45.    6  yet.  .five -years,  in  the  which,  .neither 
45.  11  for  yet.  .five  years  of  famine;  lest  thou 
45.  22  to  Benjamin,  .five  changes  of  raiment 
47.    2  he  took  some  of  his  brethren .  .five  men 
Exod22.    1  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ass 

26.    3  The  five  curtains  shall  be  coupled  toge. 
26.    3  and.. five  curtains,  .coupled  one  to  anot. 
26.  9  thou  shalt  couple  five  curtains  by  tliems. 
26.  26  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 
26.  27,  27  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the 

26.  37  make . .  five  pillars . .  and . .  cast  five  sockets 

27.  1  five  cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  broad 
27.  18  the  height  five  cubits  (of)  fine  twined  lin. 
30.  23  Take,  .of  pure  myrrh  five  hundred 

30.  24  And  of  cassia  five  hundred,  .after  the 
36.  10  he  coupled  the  five  curtains  one  unto 
36.  10  five  curtains  he  coupled  one  unto  anot. 
36.  16  he  coupled  five  curtains  by  themselves 
36.  31  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 
36.  32,  32  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the 


Exod36. 

36. 

38. 

38. 

38. 

38. 
Lev.  26. 

27. 

27. 

„       27- 
>um.  1. 


3- 
3- 
4- 
7- 
[So  in 


18. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
31- 
3i- 
3i- 
3i- 
3*- 
31- 
3*- 

Josh.  8. 


r3' 

14, 

Judg.  3. 


[Sa. 


[Ki, 


2KL 


:Ch. 


7 
7- 
II. 

29. 
■  Ch.  3. 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
6. 

13- 


38  the  five  pillars  of  it  with  their  hooks 

38  but  their  five  sockets  (were  of)  brass 

1  five  cubits,  .the  length,  .and  five  cubits 

18  the  height  in  the  breadth  (was)  five  cub. 

26  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fif. 
28  of  the.,  five,  .he  made  hooks  for  the  pill. 

8  five  of  you  shall  chase  an  hundred,  and 

5  from  five  years  old  even  unto  twenty  yea. 

6  from  a  month  old  even  unto  five  years 

6  shall  be  of  the  male  five  shekels  of 

21  forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 

25  of  Gad,  (were)  forty  and  five  thousand 
33  of  Ephraim ..  forty  thousand  and  five  hu. 
37  of  Benjamin,  .thirty  and  five  thousand 
41  forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 
46  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fif. 

11  forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 

15  forty  and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred 

19  his  host,  .forty  thousand  and  five  hund. 

23  thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hund. 
28  forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 
32  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fif. 

22  (were)  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred 
50  three  hundred  and  threescore  and  five 

48  were  eight  thousand  and  five  hundred 

17  five  rams,  five  he  goats,  five  lambs  of  the  . 
v.  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.] 

24  from  twenty  and  five  years  old  and 

19  Ye  shall  not  eat  one  day.  .nor  five  days 

16  for  the  money  of  five  shekels,  after  the 

18  of  Gad.  .forty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
22  and  sixteen  thousand  and  five  hundred 

27  threescore  thousand  and  five  hundred 
37  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  five  hund. 

41  forty  and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred 
50  forty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundred 

8  and  Hur,  and  Reba,  five  kings  of  Midian 

28  one  soul  of  five  hundred,  .of  the  persons 
32  seventy  thousand  and  five  thousand  she. 
36  thirty  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 

39  (were)  thirty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
43  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 
45  thirty  thousand  asses  and  five  hundred 

12  And  he  took  about  five  thousand  men 

5  Therefore  the  five  kings  of  the  Amorites 

16  these  five  kings  fled,  and  hid  themselves 

17  The  five  kings  are  found  hid  in  a  cave  at 

22  bring  out  those  five  kings  unto  me  out  of 

23  brought  forth  those  five  kings  unto  him 

26  slew  them,  and  hanged  them  on  five  trees 
3  five  lords  of  the  Philistines ;  the  Gazat. 

10  forty  and  five  years,  .fourscore  and  five 

3  five  lords  of  the  Philistines,  and  all  the 

2  Dan  sent  of  their  family  five  men  from 

7  the  five  men  departed,  and  came  to  Laish 

14  Then  answered  the  five  men  that  went  to 

17  the  five  men  that  went  to  spy  out  the 

35  twenty  and  five  thousand  and  an  hundred 

45  they  gleaned  of  them . .  five  thousand  men 

46  twenty  and  five  thousand  men  that  drew 

4  Five  golden  emerods,  and  five  golden  mi. 
16  when  the  five  lords  of  the  Philistines  had 
iS  all  the  cities,  .(belonging) to  the  five  lords 

5  the  weight,  .(was)  five  thousand  shekels 

40  And  he.  .chose  him  five  smooth  stones 

3  give  (me)  five  (loaves  of)  bread  in  mine 
iS  slew  on  that  day  fourscore  and  five  per. 

18  five  sheep  ready  dressed,  and  five  measu. 

42  with  five  damsels  of  hers  that  went  after 

4  He  was  five  years  old  when  the  tidings 

8  five  sons  of  Michal  the  daughter  of  Saul 

9  of  Judah.  .five  hundred  thousand  men 

32  and  his  songs  wrere  a  thousand  and  five 

6  The  neithermost  chamber  (was)  five  cu. 
10  he  built  chambers,  .five  cubits  high 

24  five  cubits . .  the  one . .  and  five  cubits  the 
3" (lay)  on  forty  five  pillars,  fifteen  (in)  a 

16  the  height  ..five  cubits,  .height.,  five 

23  his  height  (was)  five  cubits ;  and  a  line  of 
39  he  put  five  bases  on  the  right  side  of  the 
39  and  five  on  the  left  side  of  the  house 

49  five  on  the  right,  .and  five  on  the  left 
23  five  hundred  and  fifty,  which  bare  rule 
42  Jehoshaphat  (was)  thirty  and  five  years 
42  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jer 

25  fourth  part  of  a  cab.  .for  five  (pieces)  of 

13  take,  I  pray  thee,  five  of  the  horses  that 

19  Thou  shouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six 
2  He  was  twenty  and  five  years  old  when 

33  Five  and  twenty  years  old  was  lie  when 

2  Twenty  and  five  years  old  was  he  when 

35  an  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand 

1  and  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jerus. 

36  Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
19  five  men  of  them  that  were  hi  the  king's 

4  All  the  sons  of  Judah  (were)  five 

6  and  Calcol,  and  Dara:  five  of  them  in 
2o0hel..and  Hasadiah,  Jushab-hesed,  five 
32  Rimmon,  and  Tochen,  and  Ashan,  five  ci. 
42  five  hundred  men,  went  to  mount  Seir 

3  Joel,  Ishiah,  five :  all  of  them  chief  men 

7  and  TJzziel,  and  Jerimoth,  and  Iri,  five 
23  he  slew  an  Egyptian.. five  cubits  high 

7  And  gave,  .of  gold  five  thousand  talents 
ii  one  wing,  .five  cubits.,  other  wing.,  five 

12  wing  of  the  other,  .five  cubits.,  five  cub. 

15  two  pillars  of  thirty  and  five  cubits  high 
15  the  chapiter,  .of  each,  .(was)  five  cubits 

2  a  molten  sea . .  five  cubits  the  height  ther. 
6,  7,  8  five  on  the  right  hand,  and  five  on 

13  of  five  cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  broad 

17  fell,  .five  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 


FIVE 


354 


FLED 


2  Ch.  15.  ig  the  five  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign  of 
20.  31  thirty  and  five  years  old  when  hebegan 
.   20.  31  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jer. 

25.  1  Amaziah  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 

26.  13  and  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred 

27.  1  Jotham  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
27.  8  He  was  five  and  twenty  years  old  when 
29.  1  Hezekiah.  .(was)  five  and  twenty  years 
33.    1  he  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jer. 

35.  9  five  thousand ..  and  five  hundred  oxen 

36.  5  Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
.Ezra    1.  ii  vessels,  .five  thousand  and  four  hundred 

2.    5  of  Arab,  seven  hundred  seventy  and  five 
2.    8  of  Zattu,  nine  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.  20  The  children  of  Gibbar,  ninety  and  five 
2.  33  of  Lod. .seven  hundred  twenty  and  five 
2.  34  of  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.  66  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.  67  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  five 
2.  69  five  thousand  pounds  of  silver,  and  one 
Neh.   7.  13  of  Zattu,  eight  hundred  forty  and  five 
7.  23  of  Adin,  six  hundred  fifty  and  five 
7.  25  The  children  of  Gibeou,  ninety  and  five 
7.  36  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty  and  five 
7.  67  two  hundred  forty  and  five  singiug  men 
7.  68  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  five 
7.  69  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  five 
7.  70  five  hundred  and  thirty  priests'  garments 
Esth.  9.    6  the  Jews.. destroyed  five  hundred  men 
9.  12  Jews  have,  .destroyed  five  hundred  men 
9. 16  of  their  foes  seventy  and  five  thousand 
Joh     1.    3  and  five  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  and 

1.    3  five  hundred  she  asses,  and  a  very  great 
Isa.     7.    8  within  threescore  and  five  years  shall 
17.    6  five  iu  the  outmost  fruitful  branches 
19.  18  In  that  day  shall  five  cities  in  the  land  of 
30. 17  at  the  rebuke  of  five  shall  ye  flee :  till 
37.  36  a  hundred  and  fourscore  and  five  thous. 
Jer,  52.  22  and  the  height  of  one.  .(was)  five  cubit  s 
52/30  seven  hundred  forty  and  five  persons 
52.  31  in  the  five  and  twentieth,  .of  the  month 
Eze.     8.  16  about  five  and  twenty  men,  with  their 
11.    1  at  the  door  of  the  gate  five  and  twenty 
40.    1  In  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  our  cap. 
40.   7  between  the  little  chambers,  .five  cubits 
40. 13  the  breadth  (was)  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  21,  25  and  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  29  fifty  cubits  long,  and  five  and  twenty  cu. 
40.  30  five  and  twenty  cubits  long,  and  five  cub. 
40.  33  fifty  cubits  long,  and  five  and  twenty  cub. 
40.  36  and  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 

40.  48  five  cubits  on  this  side,  and  five  cubits  on 

41.  2  five  cubits  on  the  one  side,  and  five  cubits 
41.  9  The  thickness  of  the  wall,  .(was)  five  cub. 
41.  11  breadth  of  the  place,  .(was)  five  cubits 

41.  12  the  wall  of  the  building  (was)  five  cubits 

42.  16,  17,  18, 19  He  measured,  .five  hundred  re. 
42.  20  five  hundred,  .long,  and  five  hundred  br. 
45,    1  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  thousand 
45.   2  five  hundred,  .with  five  hundred,  .square 
45.   3  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  thousand- 
45.    5  the  five  and  twenty  thousand  of  lengtii 
45.    6  possession  of  the  city  five  thousand  broa  1 
45.    6  and  five  and  twenty  thousand  long 

45.  12  twenty  shekels,  five  and  twenty  shekels 
48.    8,  9,  10,  13,  15  five  and  twenty  thousand 
48.  15  And  the  five  thousand  (that  are)  left  in  the 
48.  16,  16, 16,  16, 30,  S3>  34  four  thousand  ami  five 
48.  20  five  and  twenty  thousand  by  five  and 
48.  2i,  21  over  against  the  five  and  twenty  thou. 
Ban.  12.  12  three  hundred  and  five  and  thirty  days 

%.Fur,  TreVre  pente. 

Matti4.  17  We  have  here  but  five  loaves,  and  two  fi. 
14.  19  took  the  five  loaves,  and  the  two  fishes 
16.   9  remember  the  five  loaves  of  the  five  thou. 
25.    2  five  of  them  were  wise,  and  five,  .foolish 
25.  15  unto  one  he  gave  five  talents,  to  another 
35.  16  he  that  had  received  the  five  talents  went 
25.  16  traded,  .and  made,  .other  five  talents 
25.  20  And  so  he  that  had  received  five  talents 
25.  20  came  and  brought  other  five  talents 
25.  20  thou  deli  veredst.  .five.,  have  gained,  .five 

Mark  6.  38  when  they  knew,  they  say,  Five,  and  two 
6.  41  when  he  had  taken  the  live  loaves  and  the 
8.  19  "When  I  brake  the  five  loaves  among  five 

Luke  1.  24  his  wife,  .hid  herself  five  months,  saying 


9-1? 


We  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  t\\ 


9.  16  Then  he  took  the  five  loaves  and  the  two 
12.    6  Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  farth.? 
12.  52  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  divided 
14. 19  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go 

16.  28  I  have  five  brethren ;  that  he  may  testify 

19.  18  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  five  pounds 
19  19  And  he  said.  .Be  thou  also  over  five  cities 

John  4.  18  thou  hast  had  five  husbands;  and  he 

5.  2  is  called.  .Bethesda,  having  five  porche3 

6.  9  which  hath  five  barley  loaves,  and  two 
6.  13  the  fragments  of  the  five  barley  loaves 
6.  ig  So  when  they  had  rowed  about  five  and 

Acts   4.    4  and  the  number,  .was  about  five  thousand 

20.  6  and  came  unto  them  to  Troas  in  five  days 
24.    1  after  five  days  Ananias,  .descended  with 

C0.14,  19  Yet.  .1  had  rather  speak  five  words  with 
itev.   9.    5  they  should  be  tormented  five  months 

9.  10  their  power  (was)  to  hurt  men  five  months 

17.  10  there  are  seven  kings :  five  are  fallen,  and 

FIVE  apiece  — 

Five  five,  rwon  n^an  chamesheth  chamesheth. 
JNum  3.  .(7  Thou  shalt.  .take  five  shekels  apiece  by 


FIVE  times  — 

Five  times,  -rr^vroLKis  pentakis. 

2  Co.  11.  24  Of  the  Jews  five  times  received  I  forty 
FIX,  to  — 
To  set  fast,  <TT7}pl£(i>  sterizo. 

Lukei6.  26  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fi. 
FIXED,  to  be  — 

To  be  prepared,  set  up,  established,  pa  kun,  2. 
Psa.  57.    7  My  heart  is  fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed 
108.    1  O  God, my  heart  is  fixed ;  I  will  sing  and  give 
112.    7  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  LoitD 

FLAG  — 
l.Reed,  mx  achu. 

Job  •  8.  11  can  the  flag  grow  without  water? 
2.  Weed,  rpD  suph. 

Exod.  2.    3  she  laid  (it)  iu  the  flags  by  the  river's  br. 
2.    5  and  when  she  saw  the  ark  among  the  flags 

Isa.  19.    6  and  dried  up  :  the  reeds  and  flags  shall 
FLAGON  — 
\.A  cake  of  grapes,  xy'€%  ashishah.     . 

2  Sa.  6.  19  And  he  dealt.,  to  every  one.  .aflagon(ofw.) 

1  Ch.16.  3  And  he  dealt  toevery  one.. aflagon(ofw.) 
Song  2.  5  Stay  me  with  flagons,  comfort  me  with  a. 
Hos.    3.    1  the  children  of  Israel,  .love  flagons  of  w. 

%Bottle,  S^i,  f??j  nebel. 

Isa.   22.  24  of  cups,  even  to  all  the  vessels  of  flagons 

FLAKES  — 

Refuse,  flake,  hso  m/xppal. 

Job  41.  23  The  flakes  of  his  flesh  are  joined  togother 
FLAME  — 
l.Fire,  N'fX  eshsha. 

Dan.  7.  i'i  and  his  body,  .given  to  the  burning  flame 

2.  Completeness,  ^73  kalil. 

Judg.20. 40  the  flame  of  the  city  ascended  up  tohea. 

3. Heart,  middle,  n$b  labbah. 

Exod.  3.    2  the  Angel .  .appeared .  .in  a  flame  of  fire 

i.Flame,  3H7  lahab. 

Judg.13.  20  when  the  flame  went  up  toward  heaven 
13.  20  that  the  angel,  .ascended  in  the  flame  of 
Job  41.  21  and  a  flame  goeth  out  of  his  mouth 
Isa.   13.    8  at  another  ;  their  faces  (shall  be  as)  fla. 

29.  6  tempest,  and  the  flame  of  devouring  fire 

30.  30  the  flame  of  a  devouring  fire .  .scattering 
66.  15  to  render,  .his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire 

Joel    2.    5  a  flame  of  fire  that  devoureth  the  stubble 

h.Flame,  rq^fi,  nnn1?  lehabah,  lachebeth. 

Nuni2i.  28  a  flame  from  the  city  of  Sihon  :  it  hath 
Psa.  29.    7  The  voice,  .divideth  the  flames  of  fire 

83.  14  as  the  flame  setteth  the  mountains  on  fire 
106.  18  company;  the  flame  burned  up  the  wicked 
Isa.     5.  24  Therefore  as.  .the  flame  consumeth  the 
10. 17  his  Holy  One  for  a  flame  :  and  it  shall 
43.   2  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee 
47. 14  themselves  from  the  power  of  the  flame 
Jer.  48.  45  and  a  flame  from  the  midst  of  Sihon 
Dan.  11.  33  yet  they  shall  fall,  .by  flame,  by  captivity 
Joel    1.  19  the  flame  hath  burnt  all  the  trees  of 

2.    3  behind  them  a  flame  burnetii  :  the  land 
Obad.     18  the  house  of  Joseph  a  flame,  and  the 

6.  Uplifted  signal,  n^ifO  maseth. 

Judg.20.  40  when  the  flame  began  to  arise  up  out  of 

7.Sp>ark,  flame,  D'?^  shebib'. 

Dan.    3.  22  the  flame  of  the  fire  slew  those  men  that 
7.   9  his  throne . .  the  fiery  flame . .  his  wheels 

8. Flame,  ron^  shalhdbeth. 

Job  15.  30  the  flame  shall  dry  up  his  branches ;  and 
Song  8.   6  coals  of  fire.. a  most  vehement  flame 

9.Fla?nr,  <p\6%  pftfox. 

Luke  16.  24  mercy,  .for  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame 
Acts    7.  30  angel  of  the  Lord  in  a  flame  of  fire  in  a 
Heb.    1.  7  Who  maketh.  .his  ministers  a  flame  of  fl. 
Rev.    1.  14  and  his  eyes  (were)  as  a  flame  of  fire 

2.  18  who  hath  his  eyes  like  unto  a  flame  of  fire 
19.  12  His  eyes  (were)  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  on 

FLAME,  greats- 

Uplifted  signal,  nx'^n  maseth. 

Jiidg,  20.  38  that  they  should  make  a  great  flame 

FLAMING  — 

\.Fire,  K>t<  ish. 

Nah.  2.   3  the  chariots,  .with  flaming  torches  in  the 

Z.Flame,  n^nh,  rrjrrS  lehabah,  hihebeth. 

Psa.  105.  32  He  gave  them,  .flaming  fire  in  their  land 
Isa.  4.  5  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night 
Lam.  2.  3  burned  against  Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire 
Hos.   7.    6  in  the  morning  it  burnetii  as  a  flaming  fi. 

Z.  To  flame,  flash,  ttnS  lahut. 

Psa.  104.    4  Who  maketh.  .his  ministers  a  flaming  fire 

i.Flamc,  flashing,  vrh  lahat. 

Gen.   3.  24  a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way 

5.  Flame,  <p\6%  irtilox. 

2  Tli.  1.    8  In  flaming  fire  taking  vengeance  on  them 
FLAMING  flame  — 

Flame,  run^r  shalhebeth, 

Eze.  20. 47  the  flaming  flame  shall  not  be  quenched 


FLANKS  — 

Flank,  loin,  ?p3  kesel. 

Lev.     3.    4,  10,  15* which  (is)  by  the  flanks,  and  the 
4,    9  which  (is)  by  the  flanks,  and  the  caul 
7.    4  which  (is)  by  the  flanks,  and  the  caul 
Job   15.  27  and  maketh  collops  of  fat  on  (Ids)  flanks 
FLAT  — 
Under,  nnn  tachath. 

Josh.  6.    5  and  the  wall,  .shall  fall  down  flat 
FLAT  nose,  to  have  a  — 
To'be  compressed,  Din  chafam. 

Lev.  21.  18  or  a  lame,  or  he  that  hath  a  flat  nose 
FLATTEE,  to  — 
l.To  make  smooth,  flatter,  p*?n  chalaq,  5. 

Psa.     5.    9  open  sepulchre  ;  they  .flatter  with  their 

36.    2  For  he  flattereth  himself  in  his  own  eyes 

Prov.  2.  16  the  stranger,  .flattereth  with  her  words 

7.   5  the  stranger,  .flattereth  with  her  words 

28.  23  than  he  that  flattereth  with  the  tongue 

29.  5  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour 

2.  To  make  simple,  entice,  nns  pathah,  3. 

Psa.  78.   36  they  did  flatter  him  with  their  mouth 
FLATTERETH,  that  — 
To  be  or  make  simple,  entice,  nns  patluth. 

Prov  20.  19  meddle  not  with  him  that  flattereth 
FLATTERIES  — 
1. Smoothnesses,  flatteries,  rhphn  chalaqqoth. 

Dan.  11.  32  Anil  such,  .shall  he  corrupt  by  flatteries 
2.  Smoothnesses,  flatteries,  wpbphn  chalaqlaqqoth. 

Dan.  11.  21  and  obtain  the  kingdom'by  flatteries 

11.  34  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with  flatteries 
FLATTERING  — 

1.  Smooth,  flattering,  pbn  chalaq, 

Prov.  26.  28  and  a  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin 

Eze.  12.  24  nor  flattering  divination  within  the  house 
2. Smoothness,  pbn  cheleq. 

Prov.  7.  21  with  the  flattering  of  her  lips  she  forced 
3. Smoothness,  flattery,  nphn  chelqah. 

Psa.  12.    2  flattering  lips  .'.'with  a  double  heart,  do 

12.  3  The  Lord  shall  cut  off  all  flattering  lips 

4. Flattery,' adulation,  KoXaiceta  kolakda. 

1  Th.  2.    5  neither  at  any  tinie  used  we  flattering 
FLATTERING  titles,  to  give  — 

To  surname,  give  flattering  tide,  HJ3  kanah,  3. 
Job  32.  21  neither  let  me  give  flattering  titles  unto 
32.  22  For  I  know  not  to  give  flattering  titles 

FLATTERY  — 

\.Sinoothness,  flattery,  pbn  cJieleg. 

Job  17.    5  He  that  speaketh  flattery  to  (his)  friends 

%  Smoothness,  flattery,  n^n  chelqah. 

Prov.  6.  24  from  the  flattery  of  the  tongue  of  a  stra. 

FLAX  — 

I. Flax,  wick,  nn^s  pishtah, 

.    Exod.  9.  31  And  the  flax  and  the  barley  was  smitten 
9.  31  (was)  in  the  ear,  and  the  flax  (was)  boiled 
Isa.  42.    3  the  smoking  fiax  shall  he  not  quench 

2.Flax,  linen,  nri^?^/s/;;V/?. 

Josh.  2.   6  hid  them  with  the  stalks  of  flax,  which  she 
Judgis.  14  became  as  flax  that  was  burnt  with  fire 
Prov  31. 13  She  seeketh  wool  and  flax,  and  worketh 
Isa.   19.   9  they  that  work  in  fine  flax,  and  they  that 
Eze.  40.    3  with  a  line  of  flax  in  his  hand,  and  a 
Hos.    2.    5  my  wool  and  my  flax,  mine  oil  and  my 
2.    9  and  wiil  recover  my  wool  and  my  flax 

Z.Ftax,  xivov  Unon, 

Matt  12.  26  and  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench 
FLAY,  to  — 
To  strip  off,  t5t::a  pashat,  5. 

Lev.    1.   6  he  shall  flay  the  burnt  offering,  and  cut 

2  Ch.29.  34  they  could  not  flay  all  the  burnt  offerings 

35.  11  from  their  hands,  -and  the  Levites  flayed 
Mie.  "3.    3  Who  also,  .flay  their  skin  from  off  them 

FLEA  — 

Flea,  i?JHS  parosh. 

1  Sa.  24.  14" after  whomdost  thou  pursue,  .after  a  flea 
26.  20  for  the  king,  .is  come  out  to  seek  a  flea 

FLED,  to  be  — 

1.  Tojlee,  rn:p  barach. 

Gen.  31.  22  it  was  told  Laban.  .that  Jacob  was  fled? 

1  Sa.  27.  4  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was  fled  to  G. 
•     2  Sa.  19.   9  now  he  is  fled  out  of  the  laud  for  Absalom 

1  Ki.12.   2  he  was  fled  from  the  presenceof .  .Solom. 

Neh.13.  10  singers.,  were  fled  every  one  to  his  field 

2:To-movc,  wander,  flee  away,  *nj  nadad. 

Isa.   22.    3  All  thy  rulers  are  fled  together,  they  are 
Jer.     4. 25  all  the  birds  of  the  heavens  were- fled 
9.  10  both  the  fowl,  .and  the  beast  are  fled 

3. To  hasten,  flee,  dw  n/us: 

Gen.  39. 13  he  had  left  his  garment,  .and  was  fled 
Nuni35.  25,  26  city  of  his  refuge,  whither  he  was  fled 
35.  32  him  that  is  fled  to  the  city  of  his  refuge 

1  Sa.     4.  17  Israel  is  fled  before  the  Philistines,  and 

2  Sa.   1.   4  That  the  people  are  fled  from  the  battle 

10. 14  Amnion  saw  that  the  Syrians  were  fled 
1  Ki.  2.  29  that  Joab  was  fled  unto  the  tabernacle 
1  Ch.19.  15  Amnion  saw  that  the  Syrians  were  fled 


FLEE 


355 


Isa.   10. 

Jer.  46. 
TLEE,  to  - 
1.  To  flee, 

Gen.  r6. 
16. 

27- 
31- 
31- 
35- 
35- 
Exod.  2. 
14. 

Judg  n. 

1  Sa.  19. 

19. 


23- 

2Sa 

't- 

is- 

il- 

ls- 

IS- 

iKa 

2. 

II. 

II. 

II. 

2<!h 

.TO. 

Neh 

6. 

Job 

14- 

20. 

27- 

Psa. 

3- 

■S7- 

:1Q. 

Isa. 

22. 

48. 

Jer. 

4- 

26. 

39- 

S2- 

Dan 

IO. 

Hos 

12. 

Jon. 

I. 

29  Ramah  is  afraid  ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled 

5  their  mighty  ones,  .are  fled  apace,  and 

ma  harach. 

6  dealt  hardly  with  her,  she  fled  from  her 
8 I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  Sarai 

43  flee  thou  to  Laban  my  brother  to  Haran 
20  in  that  he  told  him  uot  that  hfe  fled 
2i  So  he  fled  with  all  that  he  had ;  and  he 

1  when  thou  fleddest  from  the  face  of  Esau 

7  when  he  fled  from  the  face  of  Ins  brother 
15  Moses  fled  from  the  face  of  Pharaoh  • 

5  it  was  told  the  king,  .that the  people  fled 

11  Therefore  now  flee  thou  to  thy  place 
3  Jephthah  fled  from  his  brethren,  and  dw. 

12  and  he  went,  and  fled,  and  escaped 
18  So  David  fled,  and  escaped,  and  came  to 

r  David  fled  from  Naioth  in  Ramah,  and 

10  David,  .fled  that  day  for  fear  of  Saul,  and 
17  and  because  they  knew  when  he  fled 
20  Abiathar,  escaped,  aud  fled  after  David 

6  when  Abiathar  the  son  of  Ahimelech  fled 
3  the  Beerothites  tied  to  Gittaini,  and  were 

34  But  Absalom  fled.    And  the  young  man 

37  Absalom  fled,  and  went  to  Talmai,  the 

38  Absalom  fled,  and  went  to  Geshur,  and 
14  And  David  said.  .Arise,  and  let  us  flee 

7  for  so  they  came  to  me  when  I  fled  beca. 
17  That  Hadad  fled,  he  and  certain  Edomites 

23  which  fled  from  his  lord  Hadadezer  king 
40  Jeroboam  arose,  and  fled  into  Egypt,  unto 

2  whither  he  had  fled  from  the  presence  of 

11  And  I  said,  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ? 

2  he  fleeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  continueth 

24  He  shall  flee  from  the  iron  weapon 
22  he  would  fain  flee  out  of  his  hand 
title,  when  he  fled  from  Absalom  his  son    • 
title,  when  he  fled  from  Saul  in  the  cave 

7  or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence  ? 

3  are  bound . .  (which)  have  fled  from  far 

20  .flee  ye  from  the  Chaldeans,  with  a  voice 
29  The  whole  city  shall  flee  for  the  noise  of 

21  when  Urijah  heard  it,  he.  .fled,  and  went 

4  then  they  fled,  and  went  forth  out  of  the 
7  all  the  men  of  war  fled,  and  went  forth 
7  so  that  they  fled  to  hide  themselves 

12  Jacob  fled  into  the  country  of  Syria ;  and 
3  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto  Tarshish  from 

1. 10  that  he  fled  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
4.    2  Therefore  I  fled  before  unto  Tarshish 

2.  To  move,  wander,  flee  away,  ttj  nadad. 

Psa.  3T_  11  they  that  did  see  me  without  fled  from 
Isa.  21.  14  prevented  with  their  bread  him  that  fled 
21.  15  For  they  fled  from  the  swords,  from  the 
33.    3  At  the  noise  of .  .tumult  the  people  fled 
Hos.    7.  13  Woe  unto  them !  for  they  have  fled  from 
jNah.  -3.    7  all  they  that  look  upon  thee  shall  flee 

3.  To  move  self  off,  *i«  nud. 

Psa.  11.    1  how  say  ye.  .Flee  (as)  a  bird  to  your  mo.? 

4.  To  hasten,  flee,  d«  nits. 

Gen.  14.  10  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  fled 

14. 10  they  that  remained  fled  to  the  mountain 
19. 20  Behold  now,  this  city  (is)  near  to  flee  unto 
39.  12  he  left  his  garment  in  her  hand,  and  fled 
39.  15,  18  he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled 

Exod.  4.  3  a  serpent ;  and  Moses  fled  from  before  it 
14.  25  Let  us  flee  from  the  face  of  Israel ;  for  the 
14.  27  the  Egyptians  fled  against  it ;  and  the  L. 
21.  13  appoint,  .a  place  whither  he  shall  flee 

Lev.  26. 17  and  ye  shall  flee  when  none  pursueth  you 
26. 36  they  shall  flee,  as  fleeing  from  a  sword 

Num  10.  35  let  them  that  hate  thee  flee  .before  thee 

16. .34  And  all  Israel,  .fled  at  the  cry  of  them 

"  35.   6  cities  for  refuge,  .that  he  may  flee  thither 

35.  11  that  the  slayer  may  flee  thither,  which 

35.  15  that  killeth  any  person  unawares  may  fl. 

Deut.  J4.  42  That  the  slayer  might  flee  thither,  which 
19.  3  parts,  that  every  slayer  may  flee  thither 
19.  4  of  the  slayer  which  shall  flee  thither,  that 
19.    5  he  shall  flee  nnto  one  of  those  cities,  and 

19.  11  if  anyman.  .fleeth  unto  one  of  these  cities 
28.    7  they  shall,  .flee  before  thee  seven  ways 
28.  25  thou  shalt.  .flee  seven  ways  before  them 

Josh.  7.    4  and  they  fled  before  the  men  of  Ai 
8.    5  it  shall  come  to  pass,  .we  will  flee 
8.    6  will  say,  They  flee . .  therefore  we  will  flee 
8.  15  and  fled  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness 
8.  20  they  had  no  power  to  flee  this  way  or 

8.  20  the  people  that  fled .  .turned  back  upon 

10. 11  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  fled  from  before 
10.  16  these  five  kings  fled,  and  hid  themselves 

20.  3  That  the  slayer,  .unawares,  .may  flee 

20.   4  when  he  that  doth  flee  unto  one  of  those 

20.   6  return . .  unto  the  city  from  whence  he  fled 

20.    9  whosoever  killeth.  .unawares  might  flee 

Judg.  1.    6  Adoni-bezekfled;  and  they  pursued  after 

4.  15  so  that  Sisera.  .fled  away  on  his  feet 

7.  22  the  host  fled  to  Beth-shittah  in  Zererath 

8. 12  when  Zebah  and  ZaTmunna  fled,  he  purs. 

9.  21  Jotham  ran  away  and  fled  and  went  to  B. 
9.  40  Abimelech  chased  hini,  and  he  fled  before 
9.  51  and  thither  fled  all  the  men  and  women 

20.  32  Let  us  flee,  and  draw  theni  from  the  city 
20.  45  they . .  fled  toward  the  wilderness  unto  the 
20.  47  six  hundred  men  turned  and  fled  to  the 
t  Sa.   4.  10  and  they  fled  every  man  into  his  tent 

4. 16  I  fled  to  day  out  of  the  army.  And  he  said 
14.22  they  heard  that  the  Philistines  fled,  even 
17.  24  all  the  men  of  Israel,  .fled  from  him.  and 


1  Sa.  17.  51  And  when  the  Philistines  saw.  .they  fled 

19;  8  great  slaughter;  and  they  fled  from  him 
19.  10  and  David  fled,  and  escaped  that  night 

30.  17  four  hundred  young  men,  which,  .fled 

31.  1  the  men. of  Israel  fled  from  before  the  P. 
31.   7  Israel . .  saw  that  the  men  of  Israel  fled 
31.    7  they  forsook  the  cities,  and  fled    and  the 

2  Sa.    4.    4  and  his  nurse  took  him  up,  and  fled 

4.    4  as  she  made  haste  to  flee,  that  he  fell 
10.  13  Joab  drew  nigh . .  and  they  fled  before  him 
10. 14  then  fled  they  also  before  Abishai,  and 
10.  18  the  Syrians. fled  before  Israel;  and  David 

13.  29  then  all  the  king's  sons  arose .  .and  fled 

17.  2  the  people  that  (are)  with  him  shall  flee 

18.  3  for  if  we  flee  away,  they  will  not  care  for 

18.  17  and  all  Israel  fled  every  one  to  his  tent 

19.  3  people,  .steal  away  when  they  flee  in  batt. 

19.  8  for  Israel  had  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 

23.  11  and  the  people  fled  from  the  Philistines. 

24.  13  or  wilt  thou  flee,  .before  thine  enemies 

1  Ki.  2.  28  Joab  fled  unto  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 

12. 18  Rehoboam  made  speed,  .to  flee  to  Jerus. 

20.  20  the  Syrians  fled,  and  Israel  pursued  them 
20.  30  But  the  rest  fled  to  Aphek,  into  the  city 
20.  30  Benhadad  fled,  and  came  into  the  city 

2  Ki.  3.  24  so  that  they  fled  before  them :  but  they 

7.   7  they  arose,  and  fled  in  the  twilight,  and 

7.  7  left  their  tents . .  and  fled  for  their  life 

8.  21  and  the  people  fled  into  their  tents 

9.  3  open  the  door  and  flee,  and  tarry  not 
9.  10  And  he-opened  the  door,  and  fled 

9.  23  Joram  turned  his  haiids,  and  fled,  and 
9.  27  he  fled  by  the  way  of  the  garden  house 
9.  27  and  he  fled  to  Megiddo,  and  died  there 

14. 12  and  they  fled -every  man  to  their  tents 

14.  19  he  fled  to  Lachish  ;  but  they  sent  after 

1  Ch.io.    1  the  men  of  Israel  fled  from  before  the  P. 

10.    7  when  all  the  men.  .saw  that  they  fled 
10.    7  then  they  forsook  their  cities,,  and  fled 

11. 13  people  fled  from  before  the  Philistines 
19.  14  Joab.  .drew  nigh,  .and  they  fled  before 
19.  15  they  likewise  fled  before  Abishai  Ins  bro. 

19.  18  the  Syrians  fled  before  Israel;  and  David 

2  Ch.  10.  18  Rehoboam  made  speed .  .to  flee  to  Jeru. 

13. 16  the  children  of  Israel  fled  before  Judah 
14. 12  before  Judah  ;  aud  the  Ethiopians  fled 

25.  22  and  they  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 

25.  27  he  fled  to  Lachish :  but  they  sent  to  Lac. 
Psa    68.   j  let  them  also  that  hate  luniflee  before  him 
104.    7^At  thy  rebuke  they  fled  ;  at  the  voice  of 
114.    3  The  sea  saw  (it),  and  fled :  Jordan  was 
114.    5  What  (ailed)  thee,  .that  thou  fleddest  ? 
Pi'0V28.    1  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth 

28.  17  A  mau.that  doetli  violence,  .shall  flee  to§ 
Isa.   10.    3  to  whom  will  ye  flee  for  help  ?  and  where 

13.  14  they  shall,  .flee  every  one  into  his  own 
17.  13  they  shall  flee  far  off,  and  shall  be  chased 

20.  6  whither  we  flee  for  help  to  be  delivered 
24. 18  he  who  fleeth  from  the  noise  of  the  fear 
30. 16  will  flee  upon  horses ;  therefore  shall  ye 

30.  17  at  the  rebuke  of  five  shall  ye  flee 

31.  8  he  shall  flee  from  the  sword,  and  his 
Jer.  48.    6  Flee,  save  your  lives,  and  be  like  the 

48.  19  ask  him  that  fleeth,  and  her  that  escapeth 

48.  45  They  that  fled  stood  under  the  shadow  of 

49.  8  Flee  ye,  turn  back.  .0  inhabitants  of  De. 
49.  24  Damascus,  .turneth  herself  to  flee,  and 

49.  30  Flee,  get  you  far  off,  dwell  deep,  0  ye 

50.  16  they  shall  flee  every  one  to  his  own  land 

50.  28  The  voice  of  them  that  flee  and  escape  out 

51.  6  Flee  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  and 
Amos  5.  19  As  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a 

9.    1  he  that  fleeth  of  them  shall  not  flee  away 
Zech.  2.    6  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north,  saith  the 

14.  5  ye  shall  flee  (to)  the  valley  of  the  nioun. 
14-    5  ye  shall  flee,  like  as  ye  fled  from  before 

5.  To  (cause  to)Jlee,  D«  nus,  5. 
"    Judg.  7.  21  and  all  the  host  ran,ranii  cried,  and  fled 

Q.To  go  forth,  flee,  n>'3  natsa. 

Jer.  48.    9  Give  wings  unto  Moab,  that  it  may  flee 

7.  To  flee  out,  iK(pevyco  ekplieilgo. 

Acts  16.  27  supposing,  .the  prisoners  had  been  fled 
19. 16  so  that  they  fled  out  of  that  house  naked 

8.  To  flee  down,  Kara(psvy<o  hatoptheugo. 

Acts  14.    6  They  were  ware  of  (it),  and  fled  unto  L. 
Heb.  6.  18  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon 


.To  flee, 
Matt,  : 


24. 

26, 

Mark  5, 

14, 

14. 

16. 

Luke  3, 


John  1 


Acts 


7- 

Co.   6. 


(ptvyta  pheugo. 

.  13  take  the  young  child.,  and  flee  into  Egypt 
.    7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the 
.  33  they  that  kept  them  fled,  and  went  their 
.  23  flee  ye  into  another :  for  verily  I  say  unto 
,  16  Then  let  them  which  be  in  Judea  flee 
,  56  all  the  disciples  forsook  him,  and  fled 
.  14  they  that  fed  the  swine  fled,  and  told  (it) 
,  14  then  let  them  that  be  in  Judea  flee  to 
50  And  they  all  forsook  him,  and  fled 
52  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from 
8  they  went  out  quickly,  and  fled  from  the 
7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the 
34  they  fled,  and  went  and  told  (it)  in  the 
21  let  them  which  are  in  Judea  flee  to  the 
5  will  they  not  follow,  but  will  flee  from 

12  he  that  is  an  hireling,  .fleeth:  and  the 

13  The  hireling  fleeth,  because  he.  .careth 

29  Then  fled  Moses  at  this  saying,  and  was 

30  as  the  shipmen  were  about  to  flee  out  of 
18  Flee  fornication.     Every  sin  that  a  man 

14  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idolatry 


1  Ti."    6.  11  thou,  0  man  of  God,  lu. 

2  Ti.    2.  22  Flee  also  youthful  lusts :  *, 
Jas.     4.    7  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  iiv 
Rev.    9.    6  to  die,  and  death  shall  flee  from  ... 

"  12.   6  the  womanfled  into  the  wilderness,  w.. 

FLEE  apace,  to  — 

To  move,  wander,  flee  atoay,  111  nadad. 

Psa.  68. 12  Kings  of  armies  did  flee  apace ;  and  she    0 

FLEE  away,  to  — 

I.  To  flee,  n-]3  harach. 

Gen.  31.  27  Wherefore  didst  thou. flee  away  secretly 
■     Job     9.  25  my  days . .  they  flee  away, they  see  no  good 

Amos  7.  12  flee  thee  away  into  the  land  of  Judah 

2.7/0  move,  wander,  flee  atoay,  "ninadad,  36. 
Nah.  3.  i7"when  the  sun  ariseth  theyflee  away,  and 

3.  To  move  self  off,  T\\  nadad,  la. 

Psa.  64.    8  all  that  see  them  shall  flee  away 

4.  To  flee,  on  nus. 

Judg.  4.  17  Sisera  fled  away  on  his  feet  to  the  tent  of  , 
Song  2.  17  Until.. the  shadows  flee  away,  turn,  my 
4.    6  Until,  .the  shadows  flee  away,  I  will  gefc 
Isa.   35.  to  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away 

51.  11  sorrow  and  mourning  shall  flee  away 
Jer    46.    6  Let  not  the  swift  flee  away,  nor  the 

46.  21  they  also  are  turned,  .are  fled  away  tog. 
Amos  2.  16  among  the  mighty  shall  flee  away  naked 

9.    1  of  them  shall  not  flee  away,  and  he  that 
Nah.  2.    8  yet  they  shall  flee  away.    Stand,  stand 

5.  To  flee  forth,  pa  nuts. 

Lam.  4.  15  when  they  fled  away  and  wandered,  they 
Q.To  flee,  be  weary,  ^Vuph. 

Nah.  3.  16  the  cankerworm  spoileth,and  fleeth  away 
7.  To  flee,  tpsvyay  pheugo. 

Rev.-i6.  20  every  island  fled  away,  and  themoun. 
20.  11  from  whose  face,  .the  heaven  fled  away,' 

FLEE  before,  to  — 

To  goor  come  before,  Cijs  qadam,  3. 

Jon.    4.    2  Therefore  I  fled  before  unto  Tarshish 

FLEE  far,  to  — 

To  be  far  off,  pn"j  rachaq. 

Job  30.  10  They  abhor  me,  theyflee  far  from  me,  and 

FLEE  to  hide,  to  — 

To  cover  self  -793  hasah,  3. 

Psa.143.   9  Lord.  .1  flee  unto  thee  to  hide  me 

FLEE,  to  make  — 

l.To  catcse  to  flee,  ms  harach,  5. 

Job    41.  28  The  arrow  cannot  make  him  flee  :  sling 

2.To  cause  to  flee,  an  nus,  5. 

Exod.  9.  20  He . .  made  his  servants  and  his  cattle  flee 

FLEE,  way  to  — 

Refuge  (place  of),  flight,  D13D  manos. 

Jer.  25.  35  the  shepherds  shall  have  no  way  to  flee 

FLEECE  — 

1. Fleece,  mowings  of  grass,  13  gez. 

Deut  iS.    4  the  first  of  the  fleece  of  thy  sheep,  shalt 
Job   31.  20  (not)  warmed  with  the  fleece  of  my  sheep 

2.Fleece,  mowings  of  grass,  n»  gizzah. 

Judg.  6.  37  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  wool  in  the  floor 
6.  37  if  the  dew  be  on  the  fleece  only,  and* 
6.  38  for  he.  .thrust  the  fleece  together,  and  * 
6.  38wringed  the  dew  out  of  the  fleece,  a  bowl 
6.  39  let  me  prove,  .this  once  with  the  fleece 
6.  39  let  it  now  be  dry  only  upon  the  fleece 
6.  40  for  it  was  dry  upon  the  fleece  only,  and 

FLEEING  — 

1.  Flight,  HD?3p  menusah. 
.  Lev.  26.  36  they  shall  flee,  as  fleeing  from  a  sword 

%Toflee,  D«  nus. 

Deut.  4.  42  and  that  fleeing  unto  one.  .he  might  live 

3.  To  flee,  pTJJ  araq. 

Job    30.   3  fleeing  into  the  wilderness  in  formertime 

FLEETH,  that  — 
One  fleeing,  w\  nis. 

Jer.  48.  44  He  that  fleeth  from  the  fear  shall  fall  inta 

FLESH  — 

1.  Flesh,  "v3  basar. 

Gen.  2.  21  he.  .closed  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof 
2.  23  said,  This  (is)  now.  .fleshTof  my  flesh':  she 
2.  24  unto  his  wife:  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh 
6.  3  strive  with  man,  for" that  he  also  (is)  flesh 
6.  12  for  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon 
6. 13  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me 

6.  17  waters  upon  the  earth,  to  destroy  all  flesh 
6. 10  And  of  every  living  thing  of  all  flesh,  two 

7.  15  of  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the  breath  of  life- 
7    16  went  in  male  and  female  of  all  flesh,  as 

7  21  all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth 

8.  17  all  flesh,  (both)  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and 
9    4  flesh  with  the  life . .  shall  ye  not  eat 

g.  11  neither  shall  all  flesh  be  cutoff  any  mora 
g.  15  you  and  every  living  creature  of  all  fleshs 
9. 15  no  more  become  a  flood  to  destroy  all  fle. 
o.  16  and  every  living  creature  of  all  flesh  that 
9. 17  me  and  all  flesh  that  (is)  upon  the  earth.  , 


.SH 


356 


FLESH 


17 

'7- 
39 

.        •     37- 
40. 

Exod. 4 


Lev. 


26 
Num.  8 


12 

16. 
18, 
18. 
19, 
19. 
19. 
27 
Dent.  5 


14. 
16. 
28. 
28, 

32' 

Judg.  6. 
6 
6 
6 


i  Sa' 


.cunicise  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin;  and 

aiy  covenant  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an 

14  man  child  whose  flesh.,  isnotcireumcised 

23  circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  foreskin  in 
24,  25  when  he  was  circumcised  in  the  flesh 
14  Surely  thou  (art)  my  bone  and  my  flesh 

27  for  he  (is)  our  brother  (and)  our  flesh 

19  the  birds  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  thee 

7  it  was  turned  again  as  his  (other)  flesh 

8  they  shall  eat  the  flesh  in  that  night 

46  thou  shalt  not  carry  forth,  .flesh  abroad 
3  when  we  sat  by  the  flesh  pots,  (and)  when 
8  the  LORD  shall  give  you . .  flesh  to  eat,  and 

12  saying,  At  even  ye  shall  eat  flesh,  and  in 

28  and  his  flesh  shall  not  be  eaten  ;  but  the 
31  neither  shall  ye  eat  (any)  flesh  (that  is) 

14  flesh  of  the  bullock,  .shalt  thou  burn  with 

31  and  seethe  his  flesh  in  the  holy  place 

32  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  eat  the  flesh  of 
^4  And  if  ought  of  the  flesh.,  remain  unto  the 
32  Upon  man's  flesh  shall  it  not  be  poured 

1 1  and  all  his  flesh,  with  his  head,  and  with 

10  breeches  shall  he  put  upon  his  flesh,  and 
27  Whatsoever  shall  touch  the  flesh  thereof 
15,  18  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  his  peace 
17  remainder  of  the  flesh,  .shall  be  burnt 
19  the  flesh  that]toucheth  anyunclean  (thing) 
19  as  for  the  flesh,  all  that  be  clean  shall  eat 
20,  21  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings 

17  But  the  bullock,  and  his  hide,  his  flesh 

31  Boil  the  flesh  (at)- the  door  of  the  tabern. 

32  And  that  which  remaineth  of  the  flesh 

11  the  flesh  and  the  hide  he  burnt  with  fire 

8  Of  then*  flesh  shall  ye  not  eat,  and  their 
11  ye  shall  not  eat  of  their  flesh,  but  ye  shall 

3  flesh  of  his  foreskin  shall  be  circumcised 
2  shall  have  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh  a  rising 

2  and  it  be  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh  (like)  the 

3  on  the  plague  in  the  skin  of  the  flesh 

3  (be)  deeper  than  the  skin  of  his  flesh,  it 

4  spot  (be)  white  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh 

10  (there  be)  quick  raw  flesh  in  the  rising 

11  an  old  leprosy  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh 

13  the  leprosy  have  covered  all  his  flesh,  he 

14  But  when  raw  flesh  appeareth  in  him,  he 

15  And  the  priest  shall  see  the  raw  flesh,  and 

15  the  raw  flesh  (is)  unclean  :  it  (is)  a  leprosy 

16  Or  if  the  raw  flesh  turn  again,  .he  shall 
iS  The  flesh  also,  in  which,  .was  a  boil,  and 

24  Or  if  there  be  (any)  flesh,  in  the  skin 

38  in  the  skin  of  their  flesh  bright  spot3 

39  bright  spots  in  the  skin  of  then'  flesh 
43  the  leprosy,  .in  the  skin  of  the  flesh 

9  also  he  shall  wash  his  flesh  in  water,  and 

2  hath  a  running  issue  out  of  his. flesh 

3  whether  his  flesh  run.  .or  his  flesh  be 
7  he  that  toucheth  the  flesh  of  him  that 

13  shall,  .bathe  his  flesh  in  running  water 
16  then  he  shall  wash  all  his  flesh  in  water 

19  if.  .her  issue  in  her  flesh  be  blood 

4  have  the  linen  breeches  upon  his  flesh 

4  therefore  shall  he  wash  his  flesh  in  water 
24  he  shall  wash  his  flesh  with  water  in  the 
26.  28  And  he.  .shall. .  bathe  his  flesh  in  wat. 

27  theyj  shall  burn  in  the  fire .  .their  flesh 

11  For  the  life  of  the  flesh  (is)  in  the  blood 

14  For  (it  is)  the  life  of  all  flesh  ;  the  blood 
14  shall  eat  the  blood  of  no  manner  of  flesh 

14  for  the  life  of  all  flesh  (is)  the  blood  the. 
16  if  he  wash  tthem)  not,  nor  bathe  his  flesh 

28  any  cuttings  in  your  flesh  for  the  dead 

5  nor  make  any  cuttings  in  their  flesh 

6  unless  he  wash  his  flesh  with  water 

29  eat  the  flesh  of  your  sons,  and  the  flesh 

7  and  let  them  shave  all  their  flesh,  and 

4  and  said,  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat  ? 
13  Whence  should  I  have  flesh  to  give  unto 
13  saying.  Give  us  flesh,  that  we  may  eat 

iS  ye  shall  eat  flesh  :  for  ye  have  wept  in 

18  saying,  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat? 
18  therefore  the  Lord  will  give  you  flesh,  and 

21  thou  hast  said,  I  will  give  them  flesh 

33  the  flesh  (was)  yet  between  their  teeth 

12  of  whom  the  flesh  is  half  consumed  when 

22  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  shall 

15  that  openeth  the  matrix  in  all  flesh 

18  the  flesh  of  them  shall  be  thine,  as  the 

5  her  skin,  and  her  flesh,  and  her  blood     . 

7  and  he  shall  bathe  his  flesh  in  water 

S  And  he.  .shall,  .bathe  his  flesh  in  water 

16  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  set  a  man 

26  who  (is  there  of)  all  flesh,  that  hath  heard 
15  thou  niayest.  .eat  flesh  in  all  thy  gates 

20  thou  shalt  say,  I  will  eat  flesh,  (because 

20  longeth  to  eat  flesh,)  thou  mayest  eat  flesh 

23  mayest  not  eat  the  life  with  the  flesh 

27  thou  shalt  offer,  .the  flesh  and.  .blood 
27  thy  God,  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  flesh 

8  ye  shall  not  eat  of  their  flesh,  nor  touch 
4  neither  shall,  .flesh,  .remain  all  night 

53  thou  shalt  eat.  .the  flesh  of  thy  sons  and 
55  that  he  will  not  give.  :of  the  flesh  of  his 
42  and  my  sword  shall  devour  flesh  ;  (and 

19  the  flesh  he  put  in  a  basket,  and  he 

20  Take  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes 

21  Then  the  angel,  .touched  the  flesh  and 

21  fire,  .consumed  the  flesh  and  the  unleav. 
7  I  will  tear  your  flesh  with  the  thorns 

2  also  that  I  (am)  your  bone  and  your  flesh 

13  while  the  flesh  was  in  seething,  with  a 
15  said.  .Give  flesh  to  roast  for  the  priest  ■ 
15  he  will  not  have  sodden  flesh  of  thee,  but 


1  Sa 

17. 

2Sa 

5- 

19. 

19. 

1  Kl 

17- 

'7- 

19. 

21. 

2K1 

4- 

S- 

5- 

6 

1  Ch 

9- 
11. 

=  Ch 

32- 

Neh 

'  5- 

Job 

2. 

4- 

6. 

7- 

10. 

10. 

13- 

14. 

19. 

19. 

19. 

21. 

31- 

33- 

33- 

34- 

41. 

Psa. 

16. 

27. 

38. 

50. 

se- 

es. 

65. 

78. 

79- 

84. 

109. 

119. 

136. 

>45- 

Prov.  4. 

5- 

14. 

23- 

Eccl 

•   4- 

S- 

11. 

12. 

Isa 

9- 

*7- 

22. 

3i- 

40. 

40. 

44- 

44. 

49. 

49- 

58. 

6S. 

£6. 

66. 

66. 

66. 

Jer. 

7- 

11. 

12. 

'7- 

19. 

19. 

19. 

-'5- 

3*- 

45- 

Lnn 

•   3- 

Eze. 

4- 

32< 
36 
36, 
37- 
37 
39' 
39' 
40, 
44. 

^  44- 
Dan.  1. 
10. 
Hos.  8. 
Joel  2, 
Mic.  3. 
Hag.  2. 
Zech.  2. 


44  I  will  give  thy  flesh  unto  the  fowls  of  the 
1  Behold,  we  (are)  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh 

12  my  brethren,  ye  (are)  my  bones  and  my  ft. 

13  (Art)  thou  not  of  my  bone,  and  of  my  11. v 
6  the  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  flesh 
6  bread  and  flesh  in  the  evening ;  and  he 

21  boiled  their  flesh,  .and  gave  unto  the  pi  . 
2;  that  he.  .put  sackcloth  upon  his  flesh,  ami 
34  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  waxed  warm 

10  and  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  to  thee 

14  his  flesh  came  again  like  unto  the  flesh  of 

30  (lie  had)  sackcloth  within  upon  his  flesh 
36  shall  dogs  eat  the  flesh  of  Jezebel 

1  Behold,  we  (are)  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh 

8  With  him  (is)  an  arm  of  flesh  ;  but  with 
5  our  flesh  (is)  as  the  flesh  of  our  brethren 
5  touch  his  bone  and  his  flesh,  and  he  will 

15  passed  before  my  face  ;  the  hair  of  my  fl. 

12  strength  of  stones?  or  (is)  my  flesh  of  In?.? 

5  My  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods 
4  Hast  thou  eyes  of  flesh  ?  or  seest  thou  as 

11  Thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin  and  flesh" 

14  Wherefore  do  I  take  my  flesh  in  my  teeth 

22  But  his  flesh  upon  him  shall  have  pain 

20  My  bone  cleaveth.  .to  my  flesh,  and  I  am 

22  and  are  not  satisfied  with  my  flesh  ? 
26  destroy  this  (body),  yet  in  my  flesh  shall 

6  and  trembling  taketh  hold  on  my  flesh 

31  said  not,  Oh  that  we  had  of  his  flesh  !  we 

21  Hisflesh  is  consumed  away,  that  it  cannot 

25  His  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  a  child's 

15  All  flesh  shall  perish  together,  and  man 

23  The  flakes  of  his  flesh  are  joined  together 

9  my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope 

2  came  upon  me  to  eat  up  my  flesh,  they 
3,  7  (There  is)  no  soundness  in  my  flesh 

13  Will  I  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  the 
4  I  will  not  fear  what  flesh  can  do  unto  me 

•  1  my  flesh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry . .  land 
2  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall  all  flesh 
39  he  remembered  that  they  (were  but)  flesh 

2  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  unto  the  beasts  of 
,    2  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God 

24  My  knees  are  weak,  .my  flesh  faileth  of 
120  My  flesh  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee  ;  and 

25  Who  giveth  food  to  all  flesh  :  for  his  me. 

21  let  all  flesh  bless  his  holy  name  for  ever 

22  For  they  (are),  .health  to  all  their  flesh 

11  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  consu. 

30  A  sound  heart  (is)  the  life  of  the  flesh 
20  Be  not . .  among  riotous  eaters  of  flesh 

5-The  fool.,  eateth  his  own  flesh 

6  Suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh 

10  Therefore,  .put  away  evil  from  thy  flesh 

12  and  much  study  (is)  a  weariness  of  the  fl. 

20  they  shall  eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his 

4  and  the  fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  wax 

13  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh,  and  drinking 

3  and  their  horses  flesh,  and  not  spirit 

5  and  all  flesh  shall  see  <jt)  together  :  for 

6  All  flesh  (is)  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness 

16  with  part  thereof  he  eateth  flesh ;  he 
19  I  have  roasted  flesh,  and  eaten  (it):  and 

26  that  oppress  thee  with  their  own  flesh 

26  and  all  flesh  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord 

7  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own  fl.  ? 

4  which  eat  swine's  flesh,  and  broth  of  ab. 

16  sword  will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh 

17  eating  swine's  flesh,  and  the  abomination 

23  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before  me 

24  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  unto  all  flesh 

21  Put. .unto  your  sacrifices,  and  eat  flesh 
15  and  the  holy  flesh  is  passed  from  thee? 

12  end  of  the  land  :  no  flesh  shall  have  peace 

5  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his 
9  I  will  cause  them  to  eat  the  flesh  of  their 
9  sons,  and  the  flesh  of  their  daughters 
9  they  shall  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his 

31  for  the  Lord,  .will  plead  with  all  flesh 

27  I  (am)  the  Lord,  the  God  of  all  flesh  :  is 
5  I  will  bring  evil  upon  all  flesh,  saith  the 
4  My  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  old 

14  neither  came  there  abominable  flesh  into 

3  (city  is)  the  caldron,  and  we  (be)  the  flesh 

7  they  (are)  the  flesh,  and  this  (city  is)  the 

11  neither  shall  ye  be  the  flesh  in  the  midst 
19  will  take  the  stony  heart  out  of  their  fle. 

19  and  will  give  them  an  heart  of  flesh 

26  Egyptians  thy  neighbours,  great  of  flesh 

45  all  flesh  shall  see  that  I  the  Lord  have 

4  shall  my  sword  go  forth . .  against  all  flesh 

5  That  all  flesh  may  know  that  I  the  Lord 

20  whose  flesh  (is  as)  the  flesh  of  asses,  and 
10  consume  the  flesh,  and  spice  it  well,  and 

5  I  will  lay  thy  flesh  upon  the  mountains 
26  take,  .the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh 
26  andl  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh 

6  And  I  will . .  bring  up  flesh  upon  you 

8  the  sinews  and  the  flesh  came  up  upon 

17  That  ye  may  eat  flesh,  and  drink  blood 

18  Ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  mighty 

43  upon  the  tables  (was)  the  flesh  of  the  oft'. 

7  uncircumcised  in  flesh,  to  be  in  my  sane. 

9  No  stranger.. uncircumcised  in  flesh 

15  fatter 'in  flesh  than  all  the  children  which 
3  neither  came  flesh  nor  wine  in  my  mouth 

13  They  sacrifice  flesh  (for)  the  sacrifices  of 

28  I  will  pom*  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh 
3  and  as  flesh  within  the  caldron 

12  If  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his 

13  Be  silent,  O  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord 
9  let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of 


Zech  11.  16  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat,  and 

14.  12  Their  flesh  shall  consunieaway  while  they 
'l.Flesh,  "ii?3  besar. 

Dan.    2.  11  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  fle 
4.  12  meat  for  all.  .and  all  flesh  was  fed  of  it 

7.  5  and  they  said.  .Arise,  devour  much  flesh 

3.  Slaughtered  food,  nrna  tibchah. 

1  S&.25.  11  my  flesh  that  I  have  killed  for  my  shear. 
A. Flesh,  meat,  food,  wrrp  lechum, 

Zeph.  1.  17  blood,  .as  dust,  and  their  flesh  as  the  d. 

5. Flesh,  (remainder,  remains),  "ini?  sheer. 

Psa.  73.  26  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth.  .God  (is) 
78.  20  Behold,  .can  he  provide  flesh  for  his  pe.  ? 
78.  27  He  rained  flesh  also  upon  them  as  dust 
Prov.  11. 17  but  (lie  that  is)  cruel  troubleth  his  own 
Jer.  51,  35  The  violence  done  to  me  and  to  my  flesh 
Mic    3.    2  and  their  flesh  from  off  their  bones 

3.   3  Who  also  eat  the  flesh  of  my  people,  and 

ft.Flesh,  meat,  Kptas  hreas. 

Rom.  14.  21  good  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  w. 
1  Co.    8. 13  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  stand. 
7.  Flesh,  ffapl  sarx. 

Matt  16.  17  flesh  and  blood  hath-  not  revealed  (it) 

19.    5  And  said,  .and  they  twain  shall  beonefl.? 
19.   6  they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one  flesh 
24.  22  there  should  no  flesh  be  saved  :  but  for 
26: 41  the  spirit,  .(is)  willing,  but  the  flesh  (is) 
Mark  10.    8  And  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh  :  so 
10.    8  they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one  flesh 

13.  20  no  flesh  should  be  saved  :  but  for  the 

14.  38  The  spirit,  .(is)  ready,  but  the  flesh  (is) 
Luke  3.    6  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God 

24.  39  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as 
John  1.  13  nor  of  the  will'of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 
1. 14  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
3.   6  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh 
6.  51  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh 
6.  52  How  can  this  man  give  us  (his)  flesh  to 
6.  53  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man 
6.  54  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  .hath  eternal  life 
6-  55  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is 
6.  56  He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  .dwelleth  in  me 
6.  63  the  flesh  profit  eth  nothing :  the  words 

8.  15  Ye  judge  after  the  flesh  ;■  I  judge  no  man 
17.    2  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh 

Acts    2.  17  I-will  pour  out  of  my  Spirit  upon  all  fle. 
2.  26  moreover  also  my  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope 
2. 30  [according  to  the  flesh,  he  would  raise] 
2.  31  neither  his  flesh  did  see  corruption 

Rom.  1.    3  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  fle. 

2.  28  circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the  fl. 

3.  20  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his 

4.  1  oui'  father,  as  pertaining  to  the  flesh 

6.  19  because  of  the  infirmity  of  your  flesh 

7.  5  when  we  were  in  the  flesh,  the  motions  of 
7.  18  that  in  me  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth 

7.  25  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of  sin 

8.  1  [to  them,  .who  walk  not  after  the  flesh] 
8.    3  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh 

8.    3  likeness  of  sinful  flesh .  .sin  in  the  flesh 
8.    4  in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but 
8.    5  after  the  flesh  do  mind .  .things  of  the  fle. 
8.    8  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please 
8.    9  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit 

8. 12  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live  after  the  flesh 

8.  13  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die 

9.  3. for.  .my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh 
9.  s  of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ 
9.    8  They  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh 

.    11  14  I  may  provoke  to  emulation,  my  flesh 
13.  14  and  make  not  provision  for  the  flesh 

1  Co.    1.  26  that  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh 

1/29  That  no  flesh  shotild  glory  in  his  presence 

5.  5  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the 
6. 16  for  two,  saith  he,  shall  be  one  flesh 

7.  28  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  flesh :  but 
10.  18  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh  :  are  not. 

15.  39  All  flesh  (is)  not  the  same  flesh  :  but  " 
15.  39  but.  .one.  .[flesh]  of  men,  another  [flesh] 
15.  50  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingd. 

2  Co.    1.  17  do  I  purpose  according  to  the  flesh,  that 

4.  j  1  might  be  made  manifest  in  our  mortal  f . 
5. 16  henceforth  know  we  no  man  after  the  fl. 
5. 16  we  have  known  Christ  after  thejflesh 
7.    1  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit 
7.    5  when  we  were  come,  .our  flesh  had  no 
10.    2  as  if  we  walked  according  to  the  flesh 
jo.    3  the  flesh,  we  do  not  war  after  the  flesh 
11. 18  Seeing  that  many  glory  after  the  flesh 
T2.    7  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  fle. 
Gal.     1.  16  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood 

2. 16  for  by.  .the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified 

2.  20  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I 

3.  3  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ? 

4. 13  through  infirmity  of  the  flesh  I  preached 

4.  14  my  temptation  which  was  in  my  flesh  ye 
4.  23  was  born,  after  the  flesh ;  but  he  of  the 

4.  29  as  then  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh 

5.  13  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh 
5. 16  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh 
5.  17  For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit 
5.  17  and  the  Spirit  .against  the  flesh  :  and 

5.  19  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest 

5.  24  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affect. 

6.  8  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh 
6.  12  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh 
6.  13  but.  .that  they  may  glory  in  your  flesh 

Eph.    2.    3  conversation .  .in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh 


FLESH 


357 


FLOOD 


Eph.    2.    3  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of 
2,  ii  (being)  in  time  past  Gentiles  in  the  flesh 

2.  ii  the  Circumcision  in  the  flesh  made  by 

a.  is  Having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  enmity 
-     5.  29  For  no  mau  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh 
5.  30  [For  we  are  members . .  of  Iris  flesh] 

5.  31  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh 

6.  5  that  are.  .masters  according  to  the  flesh 
6.  12  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood 

•  Phil.   1.  22  if  I  live  in  the-flesh,  this  (is)  the  fruit  of 

1.  24  Nevertheless  to  abide  in  the  flesh  (is) 

3.  3  For  we.  .have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh 
3.    4  I  might,  .have  confidence  in  the  flesh 

3.   4  hath  whereof  he  might  trust  in  the  flesh 
Col.     1.  22  In  .the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death,  to 

1.  24  afflictions,  .in  my  flesh  for  his  body's 
■  2.    1  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh 

2.  5  For  though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet 
2.  11  in  putting  off.  .the  sins  of  the  flesh  by 
2.  13  and  the  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh 

2.  23  any  honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the  flesh 

3.  22  obey,  .masters,  according  to  the  flesh 

1  Ti.    3.  16  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified' 
Phm.      16  a  brother,  .in  the  flesh,  and  in  the  Lord? 
Heb.    2.  14  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and 
5.    7  Who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  when  he 
9.  13  sanctifieth  to  the  puriflying  of  the  flesh 
10.  20  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh 
12.    9  we  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which 
Jas.     5.    3  and  shall  eat  your  Mesh  as  it  were  Are 

1  Pe.   1.  24  For  all  flesh  (is)  as  grass,  and  all  the  glo. 

3.  18  Christ,  .being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh 

3.  21  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh 

4.  1  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh 
4.    1  for  he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh 
4.    2  live  the  rest  of  (his)  time  in  the  flesh 

4.   6  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh 

2  Pe.  2.  10  chiefly  them  that  walk  after  the  flesh  in 

2.  18  they  allure  through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 

1  Jo.   2.  16  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the 

4.    2,  3  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh 

2  Jo.  7  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh 
Jude         7  and  the  cities . .  going  after  strange  flesh 

8  these  (filthy)  dreamers  defile  the  flesh 
23  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh 
Rev.  17.  16  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with 
19.  18  flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains 
.     19.  18  the  flesh  of  mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of 
19.  18  the  flesh  of  all  (men,  both)  free  and  bond 
19.  21  all  the  fowls  were  filled  with  their  flesh 

ELESH  hook  — 

I, Hook,  fork,  3710  mazlcy. 

1  Sa.    2.  13  a  flesh  hook  of  three  teeth  in  his  hand 
2.  14  all  that  the  flesh  hook  brought  up  the 

2. Hooks,  forks,  -Trubjfi  mizlagolh. 

Exod27.    3  and  his  flesh  hooks,  and  Ms  fire  pans 

38.    3  (and)  the  flesh  hooks,  and  the  fire  pans 
Num.  4.  14  the  flesh  hooks,  and  the  shovels,  and  the 

1  Ch.  28.  17  gold  for  the  flesh  hooks,  and  the  bowls 

2  Ch.  4.  16  the  flesh  hooks,  and  all  their  instruments 

FLESHLY,  fleshy  — 

\. Fleshly,  fleshlike,  gclpklkSs  sarkikos. 

2  Co.    1.  12  not  with  fleshly  wisdom,  but  by  the  grace 
1  Pe.   2.  11  abstain  from  fleshy  lusts,  which  war  aga. 

2.0/ flesh,  (xdpKLvos  sarki?ws. 

■■     2  Co.   3.   3  not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  in  fleshy  tables 
3.  Flesh,  (rdpl  sarx. 

•  Col.     2.  18  vainly  puffed  up  "by  his  fleshly  mind    "■ 

PLIES,  divers  sorts  of  — ; 
Beetle,  dog  fly,  DhjJ  arob. 

Psa.  78.  45.He  sent  divers  sorts  of  flies  among  them 
105.  31 'there  came  divers  sorts  of  flies,  (and)  lice 
ELLETH,  that  — 
Flying  fowl  or  bird,  *]iy  oph. 

Deuti4. 19  And  every  creeping  thing  that  flieth  (is) 
PLIGHT  — 
1.  Flight,  d'ijd  manos. 

Amos  2.  14  the  flight  shall  perish  from  the  swift 
2.Flight,  hbiap  menusah. . 

Isa.   52. 12  not  go  out  with  haste,  nor  go  by  flight 
'3.  Flight,  cpvyTJ  phage. 

Matt  24.  20  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter 

Marki3.  iS  that  [your  flight]  be  not  in  the  winter 

PLIGHT,  to  put  to  — ' 

I.To  cause  to  flee,  vrn  bar.ach,  5. 

1  Ch.12.  15  put  to  flight  all  (them)  of  the  valleys 

2.To  cause  to  flee,  on  nus,  5. 

Deut32.  30  two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight,  except 

3.  To  pursue,  t\ir\  radaph. 

Lev.  26.   8  you  shall  put  ten  thousand  to  flight 

FLINT  — 

1.  Flint,  B^pTn  challamish. 

Deut.  8. 1 5  brought . .  water  out  of  the  rock  of  flint 
Psa.  114.  8  turned . .  the  flint  into  a  fountain  of  waters 
Isa.  50.    7  therefore  have  I  set  my  face  like  a  flint 

2. Rock,  is  tsor. 

Eze.     3.   9  harder  than  flint  have  I  made  thy  forehe. 
FLINTY  — 
Flint,  irp^n  challamish. 

Deut32. 13  to  suck,  .oil  out  of  the  flinty  rock 


FLOATS  — 

Floats  or  rafts  {of  timber),  ninn'i  dobroth. 

1  Ki.  5.   9  I  will  convey  them  by  sea  in  floats  unto 
FLOCK-- 
1.  Cattle,  acquisition,  nij?£>  miqneh. 

Nuni32.  26  our  flocks,  and  all  our  cattle,  shall  be 

2. Flock,  drove,  herd,  Tiy  eder. 

Gen.  29.    2  (were)  three  flocks  of  sheep  lying  by  it 
29.   2  out  of  that  well  they  watered  the  flocks 
29.    3  And  thither  were  all  the  flocks  gathered 

29.  8  until  all  the  flocks  be  gathered  together 

30.  40  he  put  his  own  flocks  by  themselves,  and 
Judg.  5.  16  to  hear  the  bleatings  of  the  flocks? 

1  Sa.  17.  34  a  bear,  *and  took  a  lamb  out  of  the  flock 

2  Ch.32.  28  all  manner  of  beasts,  and  cotes  for  flocks 
Job    24.    2  they  violently  take  away  flocks,  and  feed 
Psa.  78.  52  guided  them  in .  .wilderness  like  a  flock 
Song   1.    7  turneth.  .by  the  flocks  of  thy  companions 

4.    1  thy  hah-  (is)  as  a  flock  of  goats,  that 
4.    2  like  a  flock  (of  sheep  that  are  even)  shorn 
6.    5  thy  hair  (is)  as  a  flock  of  goats  that 
6.    6  as  a  flock  of  sheep'whieh  go  up  from  the 
Isa.    17.    2  they  shall  be  for  flocks,  which  shall  lie 
32.  14  a  joy  of  wild  asses,  a  pasture  of  flocks 
40. 11  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd 
Jer.     6.    3  shepherds  with  their  flocks  shall  come 
13.  17  the  Lord's  flock  is  carried  away  captive 

13.  20  where  (is)  the  flock  (that)  was  given  thee 

31.  10  keep  him,  as  a  shepherd  (doth)  his  flock 
31.  24  and  they  (that)  go  forth  with  flocks 

51.  23  also  break,  .the  shepherd  and  his  flock 
Eze.  34. 12  As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  in 
Joel   1.  18  yea,  the  flocks  of  sheep  are  made  desolate 
Mic.    2..12  as  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their  fold  * 

4.  8  O  tower  of  the  flock,  the  strong  hold  of 

5.  8  as  a  young  lion  among  the  flocks  of  sheep 
Zeph.  2.  14  flocks  shall  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  her 
Zech.io.    3  hath  visited  his  flock  the  house  of  Judah 
Mai.    1.  14  which  hath  in  his  flock  a  male,  and  -vow. 

3. Sheep,  flock,  jxx  tson. 

Gen.    4.    4  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock 

13,'  5  Lot  also,  .had  flocks,  and  herds,  and  tents 
21.  28  set  seven  ewe  lambs  of  the  flock  by  thems. 
24.  35  he  hath  given  him  flocks,  and  herds,  and 

26.  14  he  had  possession  of  flocks.and  possession 

27.  9  Go  now  to  the  flock,  and  fetch  me  from 
29.    2  there  (were)  three  flocks  of  sheep  lying  by 

29.  10  the  flock  of  Laban  his  mother's  brother 

30.  31 1  will  again  feed  (and). keep  thy  flock 
30.  32  I  will  pass  through  all  thy  flock  to  day 
30.  36  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  Laban's  flocks 
30.  38  which  he  had  pilled  before  the  flocks  in 
30.  38  when  the  flocks  came  to  drink,  that  they 
30.  39  the  flocks  conceived  before  the  rods,  and 
30.  40  set  the  faces  of  the  flocks  toward  the 

30.  40  and  all  the  brown  in  the  flock  of  Laban 

31.  .-4  called  Rachel  and  Leah,  .unto  his  flock 

31.  38  the  ranis  of  thy  flock  have  I  not  eaten 

32.  5  I  have  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  men 

32.  7  the  flocks,  and  the  herds,  and  the  camels 

33.  13  flocks  and  herds  with  young  (are)  with 

33.  13  overdrive  them,  .all  the  flock  will  die 
37.    2  was  feeding  the  flock  with  his  brethren 
37.  12  to  feed  their  father's  flock  in  Shechem 

37.  i_4  see  whether  it  be  well,  .with  the  flocks 

38.  17  I  will  send  (thee)  a  kid  from  the  flock 

45.  10  thy  flocks,  and  thy  herds  and  all  that 

46.  32  they  have  brought  their  flocks,  and  their 

47.  1  and  their  flocks,  and  their  herds,  and  all 
47.  4  servants  have  no  pasture  for  their  flocks 
47.  17  for  horses,  and  for  the  flocks,  and  for  the 
50.    8  their  flocks,  and  their  herds,  they  left 

Exod.  2.  16  the  troughs  to  water  their  father's  flock 
.  2.  17  andh'elped  them,  and  watered  their  flock 
"  2.  19  (water)  enough  for  us,  and  watered  the  fl. 
3.    1  the  flock  of  Jethro  his  father  in  law 
3.    1  the  flock  to  the  backside  of  the  desert 
10.    9  We  will  go.  .with  our  flocks  and  with 
10.  24  let  your  flocks  and  your  herds  be  stayed 
12.  32  Also  take  your  flocks  and  your  herds,  as 
12.  38  flocks,  and  herds,  .very  much  cattle 

34.  3  neither  let  the  flocks  nor  herds  feed  bef. 
Lev     1.    2  the  cattle .  .of  the  herd,  and  of  the  flock 

1.  io  And  if  his  offering  (lie)  of  the  flocks 

3.  6  And  if  his  offering,  .(be)  of  the  flock 

5.  6  a  female  from  the  flock,  a  lamb  or  a  kid 
5/15,  18  a  rain  without  blemish  out  of  the  flo. 

6.  6  a  ram  without  blemish  out  of  the  flock 
27.  32  And  concerning  the  tithe  of.  .the  flock 

Nuni  11.  22  Shall  the  flocks  and  the  herds  be  slain 
15.    3  to  make  a  sweet  savour,  .of  the. flock 

31.  30  take  one  portion  of  fifty,  .of  the  flocks 
Deut.  8.  13  And.  .thy  herds  aud  thy  flocks  multiply 

12..  6  firstlings  of  yourherdsand  of  your  flucks 
12.  17  firstlings  of  thy  herds,  or  of  thy  flock 
12.'  21  then  thou  shalt  kill.. of  thy  flock,  which 

14.  23  firstlings  of  thy  herds  and  of  thy  flocks 

15.  14  Thou  shalt  furnish  him.  .out  of  thy  flock 

15.  19  and  of  thy  flock  thou  shalt  sanctify  unto 

16.  2  Thou  shalt.  .sacrifice,  .of  the  flock  and 

1  Sa.  30.  20  David  took  all  the  flocks  and  the  herds 

2  Sa.  12.    2  The  rich . .  had  exceeding  many  flocks  and 

12.    4  he  spared  to  take  of  his  own  flock,  and  of 
1CI1.  4.  39  they  went,  .to  seek  pasture  for  their  flo. 

4.  41  (their  was)  pasture  there  for  their  flocks 
27.  31  over  the  flocks  (was)  Jaziz  the  Hagarite 

2  Ch.17.  11  and  the  Arabians  brought  him  flocks    . 

32.  29  and  possessions  of  flocks  and  herds  in 

35.  7  Josiah  gave  to  the  people,  of  the  flock 


Ezra  10.  19  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  tresspass 
Neh.  10.  36  firstlings  of  our  herds  and  of  our  flocks 
Job    21.  11  send  .forth  their  little  ones  like  a  flock 

30.  1  to  have  set  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock 
Psa.  65.  13  The  pastures  are  clothed  with  flocks 

77.  20  Thou  leddst  thy  people  like  a  flock  by 
80.    1  thou  that  leadest  Joseph  like  a  flock 
107.  41  and  maketh  (him)  families  like  a  flock 
Prov  27.  23  diligent  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flocks 
Song   1.    8  go.  .forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the  flock 
Isa.  .60.    7  the  flocks,  .shall  be  gathered  together 
61.    5  And  strangers  shall,  .feed  your  flocks 
63. 11  of  the  sea  with  the  shepherd  of  his  flock? 
65,  10  And  Sharon  shall  be  a  fold  of  flocks 
Jer.      3.  24  their  flocks  and  their  herds,  their  sons 
5.17  they  shall  eat  up  thy  flocks  and  thine 
13.  20  where  (is),  .thy  beautiful  flock? 
23.    2  Ye  have  scattered  my  flock,  and  driveu 
23.    3  I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my  flock 
25.  34  wallow  yourselves,  .ye  principal  of  the  fl, 
25.  35  nor  the  principal  of  the  flock  to  escape 
25.  36  an  howling  of  the  principal  of  the  flock 

31.  12  for  the  young  of  the  flock  and  of  the  herd 
33,  12  shepherds  causing  (their^  flocks  to  lie  do. 

33.  13  shall  the  flocks  pass  again  under,  the  ha. 
49.  20  Surely  the  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw 

49.  29  and  their  flocks  shall  they  take  away 

50.  8  and  be  as  the  he  goats  before  the  flocks 
50.  45  Surely  the  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw 

Eze.  24.    5  Take  the  choice  of  the  flock,  and  burn 
25.    5  the  Ammonites  a  couching  place  for  flo. 

34.  2  should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  flocks? 
34-    3  ye  eat  the  fat.  .ye  feed  not  the  flock 

34.    6  my  flock  was  scattered  upon  all  the  face 
•     34.    8  my  flock  became  a  prey,  and  my  flock  b. 
34.    8  search  for  my  flock,  .fed  not  my  flock 
34.  10  I  will  require  my  flock  at  their  hand 
34. 10  cause.,  to  cease- from  feeding  the  flock  I 
34.  10  I  will  deliver  my  flock  from  their  mouth 
34.  15  I  will  feed  my  flock,  and  I  will  cause 
34.  17  O  my  flock,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God 
34.  19  my  flock,  they  eat  that  which  ye  have  ' 
34.  22  Therefore  will  I  save  my  flock,  and  they 
34.  31  And  ye  my  flock,  the  flock  of  my  pasture 
36.  37  I  will  increase  them  with  men  like  a  flock 
36.  38  As  the  holy  flock,  as  the  flock  of  Jerusalem 
36.  38  so  shall . .  waste  cities  be  filled  with  flocks 
43-  23.  25  a  ram  out  of  the  flock,  without  bleni. 
45.  15  one  lamb  out  of  the  flock,  out  of  two  hu. 
Hos.    5.    6  They  shall  go  with  their  flocks  and  with 
Amos  6.    4  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock 

7.  15  the  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock 
Jon.    3.    7  Let  neither,  .herd  nor  flock,  taste  any 
Mic.    7.  14  Feed,  .the  flock  of  thine  heritage,  which 
Hab.    3.  17  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold 
Zeph.  2.    6  the  sea  coast  shall  be.  .folds  for  flocks 
Zeoh.  9.  16  save  them,  .as  the  flock  of  his  people 

10.  2  therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a  flock 

11.  4  saith.  .Feed  the  flock  of  the  slaughter 
11.    7.  And  I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter 
ir.    7  O  poor  of  the  flock.  .And  I  fed  the  flock 
11.  11  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  me 
11.  17  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the  flock ! 

A.  A  flock,  iroifivn  poimne. 

Matt26.  31  the  sheep  of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered 
Luke  2.  8  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  night 
1  Co,  9.    7  a  flock,  and  eateth  not  of.  .the  flock? 

5. A  little  flock,  TToifiuiou  2^oivtnion. 

Lukei2.  32  Fear  not,  little  flock;  for  it  is  your 
Acts  20.  28  Take  heed  therefore,  .to  all  the  flock 

20.  29  grievous  wolves,  .not  sparing  the  flock 
1  Pe.  5.    2  Feed  the  flock  01  God  which  is  among  you 
5.    3  lords,  .but  being  ensamples  to  the  flock 

FLOCK,  little  — 

A  bare  or  exposed  flock,  r(yn  chasiph. 

'     1  Ki.20.  27  pitched,  .like  two  little  flocks  of  kids 

FLOCKS  — 

I. Pasturing,  feeding  flock,  rrjrir?  mowth. 

Jer.  10.  21  and  all  their  flocks  shall  be  scattered 

2. Multiplications,  rrni^j;  ashtaroth. 

Deut.  7.  13  he  will,  .bless,  .the  flocks  of  thy  sheep 
28.    4  Blessed  (shall  be) . .  the  flocks  of  thy  sheep 
28.  18  Cursed  (shall  be),  .the  flocks  of  thy  sheep 
28.  51  shall  not  leave  thee,  .flocks  of  thy  sheep 

FLOOD  — 

l.A  brook,  flood,  in  or. 

Amos  8.   8  and  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  as  a  flood 
^.Inundation,  flood,  storm,  dtj  zerem. 
■  Isa.    28.    2  as  a  flood  of  mighty  waters  overflowing 

Z.A  brook,  flood,  "i'i«?  yeor. 

Jer.   46.   7  Who  (is)  this  (that)  cometh  up  as  a  flood 

46.    8  Egypt  riseth  up  like  a  flood,  and  (his)  w. 

Amos  8.    8  it  shall  be.  .drowned,  as  (by)  the  flood  of 

q.    5  and  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  like  a  flood 

9.    5  and  shall  be  drowned,  as  (by)  the  flood  of 

LA  flood,  deluge,  h\3D  mabbul. 

Gen.    6.  17  behold,  I,  even  I,  do  bring  a  flood  of  wa. 
7.   6  when  the  flood  of  waters  was  upon  the  e. 
7.    7  ark,  because  of  the  waters  of  the  flood 
7.  10  waters  of  the  flood  were  upon  the  earth 
7.  17  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth 
9.  11  .cut  off  any  more  by  the  waters  of  a  flood 
9.  1 1  neither  shall  there  any  more  be  a  flood  to 
9.  15  the  waters  shall  no  more  become  a  flood 
9.  28  And  Noah  lived- after  the  flood  three 
10.    i  unto  them  were  sons  born  after  the  flood 


FLOOD 


358 


Job 


Psa.  24. 
66. 
93- 
93- 
93- 
98. 

Song  8. 


<5en.  10.  32  divided  in  the  earth  after  the  flood 

it   10  begat  Arphaxad  two  years  after  the  flood 
'    Psa.  29.  10  The  Lord  sitteth  upon  the  flood ;  yea 

5.  A  river,  in}  nahar. 

JOBh.24.    2  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood  m 
24     3  Abraham  from  the  other  side  of  the  flood 
24.  14  served  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood 
24.  is  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood 
14.  11  and  the  flood  deeayeth  and  dneth  up 
20  17  He  shall  not  see  the  rivers,  the  floods 
22  10  foundation  was  overflown  with  a  flood 
,R  u  He  bindeth  the  floods  from  overflowing 
2  For  he  .established  it  upon  the  floods 
6  they  went  through  the  flood  on  foot 
,  The  floods  have  lifted  up,  O-LORD 
i  the  floods  have  lifted  up  their  voice 
,  the  floods  lift  up  their  waves 
8  Let  the  floods  clap,  .hands  :  let  the  lulls 
b     7  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it:  if  a  man 
Isa    eg  iq  When  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood 
ISze    qi.  is  I  restrained  the  floods  thereof,  and  the 
Jon'.    2.    3  the  floods  compassed  me  about :  all  thy 

6.  To  flow,  'jij  nazal. 

Bxod  15.    8  the  floods  stood  upright  as  an  heap 
Psa    78.  44  their  floods,  that  they  could  not  drink 
Isa.'  44.    3  I  will  pour.,  floods  upon  the  dry  ground 

"7„4  brook,  hni  nachal:  ■ 

2  Sa  22.    5  floods  of  ungodly  men  made  me  afraid 
Job  28     4  The  flood  breaketh  out  from  the  inhabi. 
Psa    i3.   4  floods  of  ungodly  men  made  me  afraid 
74  15  didst  cleave  the  fountain  and  the  flood 
Jer.  47.    2  waters,  .shall  be  an  overflowing  flood 
8.  Flood,  stream,  nbiv  shibboleth. 

Psa   69.    2  waters,  where  the  floods  overflow  me 
69.  is  Let  not  the  water  floor!  overflow  me 
^.Overflowing,  flood,  nW,  rfetf  sheteph. 

Psa   32.    6  surely  in  the  floods  of  great  waters  they 
Dan.    q.  26  and  the  end  thereof .  .with  a  flood,  and 

11.  22  with  the  arms  of  a  flood  shall  they  be  ov. 
Nah.    1.   8  with  an  overrunning  flood  he  will  make 
10.  Deluge,  washing  down,  KaranXvofxis  kataklu. 
Matt  24.  38  in  the  days  that  were  before  the  flood 

24.  39  knew  not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took 
Lukei7.  27  the  flood  came,  and  destroyed  them  all   . 
2  Pe.  2.    s  bringing  in  the  flood  upon  the  world  of 
XI.  Flood  tide,  full  flowing,  vK^mmpa  plemmwra. 

Luke  6.  48  when  the  flood  arose,  the  stream  beat 
lZ.River  flood,  stream,  ttotoiuos  potamos. 

Watt  7  25  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  came 

7  27  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  came 

Rev  12  is  the  serpent  cast  out.  .water  as  a  flood 

i2. 16  the  flood  which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his 

FLOOD,  carried  away  of  the  — 

Morne  on  by  the  stream,  iroTct^oifxfpjjTos  polamoph. 

Rev.  12. 15  cause  her  to  be  carried  away  of  the  flood 

TLOOR — 

J.  Threshing  floor,  forum,  pj>  goren.  . 

Gen  so  11  saw  the  mourning  in  the  floor  of  Atad 
Deut  is  14  Thou  shalt  furnish  him.  .out  of  thy  floor 
Jud"  6  37  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  wool  in  the  floor 
Ruth  3.    3  Wash,  .and  get  thee  down- to  the  floor 

3.    6  And  she  went  down  unto  the  floor,  and. 

3  14  known  that  a  woman  came  into  the  floor 
Isa  21  10  O  my  threshing,  and  the  com  of  my  floor 
Hos    q.   1  hast  loved  a  reward  upon  every  corn  flo. 

q    2  The  floor,  .shall  not  feed  them,  and  the 

13  3  chaff  (that)  is  driven.. out  of  the  floor,  and 
Joel  i  24  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and  the  fats 
Mic.    4.  12  for  he  shall  gather  them,  .into  the  floor 

2.  Floor,  bottom,  J/pip  qarqa.      ■ 

Hum  s  17  of  the  dust  that  is  in  the  floor  of  the 
1  Ivi   615  he  built,  .both  the  floor  of  the  house,  and 
6  15  covered  the  floor  of  the  house  with  planks 
6.  16  he  built . .  both  the  floor  and  the  walls     . 
6.  30  the  floor  of  the  house  he  overlaid  with 

3.  Floor,  barn,  aAtoi/  halon. 

Matt  3.  12  and  he  will  throughly  purge  his  floor 
Luke  3  17  he  will  throughly  purge  his  floor,  and 
[See  also  Barn  floor,  corn  floor,  threshing  floor.] 

FLOOR,  to  — 

To, join,  cause  to  'meet,  Tip  qarah,  3 


•join,  cause  t-o  /i«^,  "  ;k  a""™'"'     •,.,,, 

z  Ch.  34. 11  and  to  floor  the  houses  which  the  kings 

FLOOR,  one  side  of  the  — 
Floor,  bottom,  "pip  qarqa. 

1  Ki.   7.    7  with  cedar  from  one  side  of  the  floor  to 

FLOTES  — 

Floats,  rafts,  n'nbBn  raphsodoth. 

2  Ch.  2. 16  we  will  bring  it  to  thee  in  flotes  by  sea  to 

FLOUR  — 

\.[hmqh,    pX3  batSBQ.  ■ 

2  Sa.  13.    8  she  tookflour,  and  kneaded(it),  and  made 

i.Fine  crushed  flonr,  rto  soleth. 

Efcod  10.    2  (of)  wheateh  flour  shalt  thou  make  them 
.     20.  40  a  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with  the  fo. 
Lev.    2.    2  and  he  shall  take,  .of  the  flour  thereof 

6.  15  he  shall  take,  .of  the  flour  of  the  meat  . 
Num.  15,    4  a  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with  the 
15.   6,  9  tenth  deals  of  flour  mingled  with 
28     5  a  tenth  (part)  of  an  ephah  of  flour  for  a 
28    9  two  tenth  deals  of  flour,  .mingled  « Tltn 
28.  12,  12  tenth  deals  of  flour  (for)  a  meat  offer. 


Nivni  28  13a  several  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with 
08  20  meat  offering  (shall  be  of)  flour  mingled 
28  28  their  meat  offering  of  flour  mingled  with 
29'   3,  9,  14  meat  offering  (shall  be  of)  flour  mi. 

S.Rubbed  grain,  meal,  ncp  qemach. 

Judg  6. 19  unleavened  cakes  of  an  ephah  of  flour 

1  Sa    i  24  she  took,  .one  ephah  of  flour,  and  a  bottle 

28.  24  and  she .  .took  flour,  and  kneaded  (it),  and 

2  Sa.  17.  28  Brought  beds,  .and  barley,  and  flour,  and 

FLOUR,  fine  — 

Fine  flour,  (Lat.  simila,  similago,)  o-eu£8a\is. 
Rev.  18.  13  and  fine  flour,  and  wheat,  and  beasts,  and 

FLOURISH,  to  — 

1.  To  flourish  (become  despised-})  yxinaats,  5. 

Eccl.  12.   s  tne  almond  tree  shall  flourish,  and  the 
2. To  break  forth,  flourish,  n-s  parach. 

Psa   72.    7  In  his  days  shall  the  righteous  flourish 

00  12  The  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  palm 
Prov  11  28  the  righteous  shall  flourish  as  a  branch 
Son"  6  11  (and)  to  see  whether  the  vine  flourished 
"  7. 12  let  us  see  if  the  vine  flourish,  (whether) 
Isa.   66.  14  your  bones  shall  flourish  like  an  herb 
3.  To  (cause  to)  flourish,  rns  parach,  5. 

Psa    92  13  Those.,  shall  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our 
Prov.  14.  11  tabernacle  of  the  upright  shall  flourish 
i.To  blossom,  flourish,  pa  tsiUs,  5. 

Psa    72  16  (they),  .shall  flourish  like  grass  of  the  ea. 
90    6  In  the  morning  it  flourisheth,  and  growe. 
02    7  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  do  flourish 
103  15  as  a  flower  of  the  field,  so  he  flourisheth 
132. 18  upon  himself  shall  his  crown  flourish 
FLOURISH,  to  make  to — 

-To  cause  to  break  forth  or  flourish,  rns  parach,  5. 
•     Isa     17. 11  shaft'  thou  make  thy  seed  to  flourish 

Eze.  17.  24  and  have  made  the  dry  tree  to  flourish 
FLOURISH  again,  to  — 
To  flourish,  or  shoot  up  again,  avaBaWai  anathal. 

Phil:  4. 10  your  care  of  me  hath  flourished  again 
FLOURISHING-  — 
l.Fresh,  flourishing,  |JB.~  raandn. 

Psa.  92.  14  they  shall  be  fat  and  flourishing 
l.Fresh,  flourishing,  J3T3  raanan.  _     _ 

Dan.    4.    4  Nebuchadnezzar  was . .  flourishing  in  my 

FLOW,  to  — 

1.  To  flow,  issue,  Stt  stub.  ■ 

Exod.  3.    8,  17  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey 

[So  in  13.  5  ;  33-  3 ■;  lev-  2°-  24 ;  Num-  J3-  vf>  !4-  8=  *& 
13,  14;  Deut.  6.  3;  11.  9;  26.  9,  15;  27.  3;  31.  20,  Josh. 
5.  6,  Jer.  11.  s  ;  32-  22  i  Ezek-  2°-  6>  IS'] 

Jer.  49.    4  Wherefore  gloriest  thou  in.. thy  flowing 

I.To  goon,  %V.  yalak. 

Josh.  4. 18  the  waters,  .flowed  over  all  his  banks,  as 
Joel    3  18  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  the 
3. 18  rivers  of  Judali  shall  flow  with  waters 

3.  To  flow,  become  bright,  "inj  nahar. 

Isa      2    2  above  tiie  hills  ;  and  all  nations  shall  flow 
•Mic.   4.    T  above  the  hills;  and  people  shall  flow. 

i.  To  flow,  Su  nazal. 

Psa.  147. 18  causeth.  .to  blow,  (and)  the  waters  flow 
5.  To  flow,  overflow,  f)W  tsuph. 

Lam.  3.  54  Waters  flowed  over  mine  head  ;  (then)  I 

(i.To  flow,  pe'ai  rheo. 

John  7.  38  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 

FLOW  away,  to  — 

To  be  poured  out,  spread  out,  1J;  nagar,  2. 

Job   20.  28  shall  flow  away  in  the  day  of  his  wrath 
FLOW,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cause  to  flow,  *?T3  nasal,  5. 

Isa.   48.  21  caused  the  waters  to  flow  out  of  the  rock 

FLOW  down,  to  — 

To  flow,  .tremble,  Vv\zalal,% 

isa    64    1  that  the  mountains  might  flow  down  at 
64.    3  mountains  flowed  down  at  thy  presence 

FLOW  out,  to  —  ' 

To  flow,  flow  on,  ?!}  nazal. 

Song  4. 16  (that)  the  spices  thereof  may  flow  out 

FLOW  together  to  — 

To  flow,  become  bright,  in)  nahar. 

Isa    60.    5  Then  thou  shalt  see,  and  flow  together 
■  Jer    31  12  they  shall  come,  .and  shall  flow  together 
51.  44  nations  shall  not  flow  together  any  more 

FLOWER—     • 

].  Tower,  towering  plant,  yvti  migdal. 

Song  5.  13  His  cheeks  (are). '.(as)  sweet  flowers ;  his 
■2.  Blossom,  flower,  rvpnitstsah. 

Job  15.  33  and  shall  cast  off  his  flower  as  the  olive 

Isa.  18.5  the  sour  grape  is  ripening  in  the  flower 
Z. Blossom,  flower;  \$  nitstsam. 

Song  2.  12  The  flowers  appear  on  the  earth ;  the  ti. 

1   Fhw;-,\  llnurishiml,   rrrs  prrach. 

Exod«.  31  and  his  flowers,  shall  be  of  the  same 

25.  33  (with)  a  knop  and  a  flower  in  one  branch 
25.  33  and  three  bowls,  .(with)  a  knop  and  a  fl. 
25. 34  bowls,  .(with)  their  knops  and  their  flow. 


FLY 


Exod37.  17  knops,  and  his  flowers,  were  of  the  same 
37. 19  in  one  branch,  a  knop  and  a  flower 
37. 19  and  three  bowls:  .aknopand  a  flower  :  so 
37.  20  four  bowls,  .his  knops,  and  his  flowers 

Num.  8.    4  unto  the  flowers  thereof,  (was)  beaten 

1  Ea.   7.  26  brim,  .was  wrought,  .with  flowers  of  lilies 
7.  49  with  the  flowers,  and  the  lamps,  and  the 

i  Ch.  4.    s  and  the  brim . .  with  flowers  of  lilies 

4.  21  the  flowers,  and  the  lamps,  and  the  tongs 

Nah.   1.   4  and  the  flower  of  Lebanon  languisheth  • 

5.  Blossom,  flower,  px  tsits. 

1  Hi.  6.  18  carved  with  knops  and  open  flowers :  all 
6.  29  palm  trees  and  open  flowers,  within  and 
6.  32  carved  upon  them  carvings  of.  .flowers 
6.  35  And  he  carved  (thereon),  .open  flowers 
Job   14.    2  He  cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut 
'  Psa.103. 15  as  a  flower  of  the  field,  so  he  flourisheth 
Isa.  28.    1  whose  glorious  beauty  (is)  a  fading  flower 
40.    6  all  thegoodliness  thereof  (is)as  the  flower 
40.    7,  8  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth 

6.  Blossom,  flower,  nx-x  tsitsah. 

Isa.  28.    4  glorious  beauty,  .shall  be  a  fading  flower 

1.A  flower,  S.v9os  anthos. 

Jas.     1. 10  because  as  the  flower,  .he  shall  passaway. 

1. 11  and  the  flower  thereof  lalleth,  and  the 
1  Pe    1.  24  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass 

1.  24  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away 

FLOWER  of  one's  age,  to  pass  the  — 

To  be  beyond  the  point,  elpl  !nrepatcp.os.' 

1  Co.  7.  36  if  she  pass  the  flower  of  (her)  age,  and 

FLOWER  of  their  age,  in  the  — 
Men,  D'EnJN  enoshim.    • 

1  Sa.   2.  33  all.  .shall  die  in  the  flower  of  their  age 

FLOWERS  — 

Impurity,  separation,  rra  niddah. 

Lev  15  24  lie  with  her.,  and  her  flowers  be  upon  hmi 
15.  33  of  her  that  is  sick  of  her  flowers,  and  of 

FLOWING  — 

I.To  send  or  flow  forth,  S?33  naba. 

Provi8.    4  wellspring  of  wisdom  (as)  a  flowing.brook 

2.  To  flow,  v>i:  nazal. 

Jer.  18.  14  shall  the  cold  flowing  waters  that  come 

3. To  overflow,  *ps>  shataph. 

Isa.  66. 12  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing 

FLUTE  — 

Flute,  pipe,  reed,  Nn'p'ipn  mashroqiiha. 

Dan.  3.  s,  15  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  cornet,  flute 
3  7  the  people  heard  the  sound  of  the .  .flute 
3. 10  that  shall  hear  the  sound  of  the.. .flute 

FLUTTER,  to  — 

To  more,  flutter,  shake,  rpi  raehaph,  3. 

Deut.32..n  As  an  eagle,  .fluttereth  over  her  young 

FLUX  — 

DyseMery,  fivaevTepia  dusenteria. 

Acts  28.    8  the  father.. lay  sick.. of  a  bloody  flux 

FLY  — 

Fly,  301  zebub. 

Eccl.  10.    1  Dead  flies  cause.the  ointment,  .to  send 
Isa. .  7. 18  the  LOKD  shall  hiss  for  the  fly  that  (is)  111 

FLY,  to  — 

\,To  use  the  wing,  ">3N  abar,  5. 

Job  39.  26  Doth  the  hawk  fly  by  thy  wisdom 

2.  To  fly,  nxi  daah.  ,       - 

Deut  28.  49  the  end  of  the  earth .  .as  the  eagle  flieth 
Psa    18.  10  And  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly 
Jer.  48.  40  he  shall  fly  as  an  eagle,  and  shall  spread 
49.  22  he  shall  come  up  and  fly  as  the  eagle 

Z.Toflv,  Wuph'.  -. 

Deut.  4.  17  of  any  winged  fowl  that  flieth  m  the  air 
-  Sa  22  11  And  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly 
Job    5     7  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward 
Psa.  18.  10  he  did  fly  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind 
01     s  (nor)  for  the  arrow  (that)  flieth  by  day 
Isa.     6.    6  Then  flew  ope  of  the  seraphim  unto  me 
11. 14  they  shall  fly  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  P 
60     8  Who  (are)  these  (that)  fly  as  a  cloud,  and 
Hab.    1.   8  they  shall  fly  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth 
i.To  fly,  W  uph,3a. 

Gen.    1.  20  and  fowl,  .may  fly  above  the  earth  in  the 
Isa.     6.    2  covered  his  feet . .  with  twain  he  did  fly 
5. To  be  ravenous,  try  it-  .  . 

1  Sa.  15. 19  didst  fly  upon  the  spoil,  and  didst  evil  in 

6.  To  do,  make,  fifU  asgh. 

1  Sa.  14.  32  the  people  flew  upon  the  spoil,  and  took 

7  To  flu,  expand  the  wings,  ireTao/iai  petaomai. 
'  Rev     4     7  the  fourth  beast.. like  a  [flying]  eagle 

8  13  And  I  beheld,  and  heard  an  angel  [flying] 
14'  -  6  I  saw  another  angel  [fly]  in  the  midst  of 
19. 17  all  the  fowls  that  Lily]  in  the  midst  of  h. 

8  To  fit/  expand  the  loimgs,  ireVouat  petomai. 

'  Rev.  12.  14  that  she  might  fly  into  the  wilderness 

FLY  away,  to  — 

I.To  fly,  fsuph.  .  _ 

Job  20.    8  He  shall  fly  away  as  a  dream,  and  shall 
Psa    55.    6  then)  would  I  fly  away,  and  be  at  rest 
90.  10  for  it  is  soon  cut  off,  and  we  fly  away 


PLY 


359 


FOLLOW 


2.  To  (cause  to)  fly,  *pj  «pA,  5. 

Prov.23.    5  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward  heaven 

3.  To  slww  self  flying,  yy  iq)h,  la. 

Hos.   9. 1 1  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  bird,  from 
FLY,  to  be  caused  to  — 
•  To  be-  caused  to  fly,  *$£  yaaph,  6. 

Dan.    9.  21  being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me 

FLY,  to  make  — 

To  cause  to  break  out,  rria  parach. 
.  Eze.  13.  20  ye.  .hunt  the  souls  to  make  (them)  fly 
13.  20  souls  that-ye  hunt  to  make'(them)  fly 
FLYING  — 
l.Wmg  (with),'*\i3  kanaph. 

Psa.148. 10  cattle ;  creeping  things,  and  flying  fowl 

2.  To  fly,  spy  uph. 

Prov  26.  2  as  the  swallow  by  flying,  so*  the  curse 

Isa.   31.  5  As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts 

Zech.  5.  r  Then  I. ..looked,  and,  behold,  a  flying  roll 

5.  2  And  I  answered,  I  see  a  flying  roll ;  the 

3.  To  fly,  t]ty  uph,  3a. 

Isa.    14.  29  and  his  fruit . .  a  fiery  flying  serpent 

30.   6  whence  (come)  the . .  fiery  flying  serpent 

4.Fowlt  rpy  oph.  ' 

Lev.  11.  21  of  every  flying  creeping  thing  that  goeth 
11.  23  all.  .flying  creeping  tilings,  which  have 

FOAL  — 
l.Son,  J3  ben. 

Zech.  9.   9  riding,  .upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass 

2.Foal,  colt  of  an  ass,  i;a  ayir. 

Gen.  32. 15  ten  bulls,  twenty  she  asses,  and  ten  foals 
49.  11  Binding  his  foal  unto  the  vine,  and  his 

Z.Son,  vtos  kuios. 

Matt.  21.    5  upon  an  ass,  and  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass 
FOAM  — 
Chip,  foam,  *\x%  qetseph. 

Hos.  10.   7  lier  king  is  cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the 
FOAM,  to  — 
To  foam,  froth,  a<ppt£w  aphrizo. 

Mark  9.  18  he  foameth,  and  gnasheth  with  his  teeth 
9.  20  fell  on  the  ground,  and  wallowed  foaming 

FOAM  out,  to  — 

To  foam  upon,  or  about,  eira<ppi{c*)  epaplvrizo. 

Jude        13  waves,  .foaming  out  their  own  shame 
FOAMETH  again,  that  he  — 
With  foam,  /xeTce.  aeppov  meta  aphrou. 

Luke  9.  39  it  teareth  him  that  he  foameth  again 
FODDER  — 
Provender,  V72  belil. 

Job     6.    5  grass?  or  Ioweth  the  ox  over  his  fodder? 
FOE  — 
1. Enemy,  tx  ayah. 

Psa.  27.   2  mine  enemies  and  my  foes,  came  upon 
30.    i  hast  not  made  my  foes  to  rejoice  over  me 

2. Adversary,  straitener,  distresser,  "is,  "tit  tsar. 
1  Ch.21. 12  months  to  be  destroyed  before  thy  foes 
Psa.  89.  23  I  will  beat  down  his  foes  before  his  face 

3.  To  hate,  ttiy  sane. 

Esth.  9.  16  But  the  other  Jews.,  slew  of  their  foes 

4. Enemy,  kx@pos  echthros. 

Mattio.  36  a  man's  foes,  .they  of  his  pwn household 
Aots  2.  35  Until  I  make  thy  foes  thy  footstool 

FOLD  — 

1.  Hedged  or  fenced  place,  'iTjia  gederah. 

JSiun.32.  16  We  will  build  sheep  folds  here  for  our  cat. 
32.  24  Build  you.  .folds  for  your  sheep  ;  and  do 
32.  36  And.  .fenced  cities  :  and  folds  for  sheep 
Zeph.  2.    6  the  sea  coast  shall  be .  .folds  for  flocks 

I.PoMure  land,  fold,  i?H  dober. 

Mic.    2.  12  as  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their  fold 
3.  Restrained  place,  fold,  rap  miklah. 

Psa.  50.    9  I  will  take  no.  "lie  goats  out  of  thy  folds 
78.  70  David . .  and  took  him  from  the  sheep  fol. 

Hab.   3. 17  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from'the  fold 
l.Home,  comely  place,  ny  naveh. 

Isa.  65. 10  And  Sharon  shall  be  a  fold  of  flocks 

Jer.  23.    3  and  will  bring  them  again  to  their  folds 

Eze.  34. 14  upon,  .high  mountains,  .shall  their  fold 
34.  14  there  shall  they  lie  in  a  good  fold,  and 
o.Court,  yard,  avX^j  aide. 

Johnio.  16  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold    ■ 
6.^4  flock,  iroifivTj  jpoimne. 

Johnio.  16  there  shall  be  one  fold,  .one  shepherd 
FOLD,  to  — 
To  clasp,  pan  chabaq. 

Eccl.  4.   5  The  fool  foldeth  his  hands  together,  and 
FOLD,  to  make  a  — 
To  cause  to  crouch,  pyi  rabats,  5. 

Isa.  13.  20  shall  the  shepherds  make  their  fold  there 
FOLD  up,  to  — 
To  roll  or  fold  up,  sXlaau  helzsso. 

Heb.  1. 12  And  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them  up 


FOLDEN  together  — 

To  wrap  together,  ?i?d  sabaJ^. 

Nah.  1.  10  For  while ..  f olden  together  (as)  thorns 
FOLDING  — 
1. Folding,  ?*?3  galil. 

1  Ki.  .6.  34,  34  the  two  leaves  of  the . .  door . .  folding 
2.Clasp)ing,  pan  chibbuk. 

Prov.  6. 10  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep 
24.  33  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep  " 
FOLK  — 
l.NatioUi  people,  cn?  learn. 

Jer.  51.  58  folk  in  the  fire,  and  they  shall  be  weary 
2.People,  cy,  oy.  am. 

Gen.  33.  15  leave,  .of  the  folk  that  (are)  with  me 

Prov  30.  26  The  conies,  .a  feeble  folk,  yet  make  they 

FOLLOW  — 

Foot  (at  the  foot  of),  hr}  rcgel. 

Exodn.    8  Get  thee  out,  and  all.  .that  follow  thee 
Judg.  8.    5  bread  unto  the  people  that  follow  me 
1  Sa.  25.  27  unto  the  young  men  that  follow  my  lord* 

1  Ki.  20.  10  handfuls  for  all  the  people  that  follow 

2  Ki.   3.    9  and  for  the  cattle  that  followed  them 

FOLLOW,  to  — 

1. After,  inx  acliar,  '"SBJ  achate. 

Numi4.  24  because  he.  .hath  followed  me  fully,  him 

32.  11  because  they  have  not  wholly  followed 

32. 12  for  they  have  wholly  followed  the  Lord 
Deut.  1.  36  because  he  hath  wholly  followed  the  Lo. 

12.  30  thou  be  not  snared  by-following  them 
Josh.  14.    8  but  I  wholly  followed  the  Lord  my  God " 

14.    9  because  thou  hast  wholly  followed  the 
■  14. 14  wholly  followed  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
Judg.  9.    3  their  hearts  inclined  to  follow  Abim. 

1  Sa.  13.    7  all  the  people  followed  him  trembling 

2  Sa.    2.  19  in  going  he  turned  not .  .from  following 

17.    9  slaughter  among  the  people  that  follow 

1  Ki.  12.  20  none  that  followed  the  houseof  David 

16.  22  the  people  that  followed  Oniri  prevailed 
16.  22  against  the  people  that  followed  Tibni 
20. 19  came,  .and  the  army  which  followed 
Neh.   4.  23  nor  the  men  of  the  guard  which  followed 
Psa.  45.  14  the  virgins  her  companions  that  follow 
Jer.   17. 16  Ihave  not  hastened,  .to  follow  thee 
Eze.  16.  34  none  followeth  thee  to  commit  whoredoms 
Amos  7. 15  the  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock 

2.  To  pursue,  t)~n  radaph. 

Gen.  44.   4  ITp,  follow  after  the  men  ;  and  when  thou 
Exodi4.    4  that  he  shall  follow  after  them ;  and  I 
Deut  1 6.  20  That  which  is . .  just  shalt  t  hou  follow 
Judg.  3.  28  And  he  said  unto  thorn,  Follow  after  me 

2  Ki.    5.  21  So  Gehazi  followed  after  Xaaman.    And 

9.  27  Jehu  followed'after  him,  and  said,  Smite 
Psa.  23.    6  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all- 

38.  20  because  I  follow  (the  tiling  that)  good  (is) 
Isa.    5. 11  early,  .(that)  they  may  follow  strong  dri. 

3.  To  pursue,  fvti  radaph,  3. 

Prov.12.  11  he  that  followeth  vain  (persons  is)  void 
i.To  follow,  aKoXavQca  akoloutheo. 

Matt.  4.  20  they  straightway  left,  .and  followed  him 
4.  22  And.  they,  .left  the  ship,  .and  followed 

4.  25  And  there  followed  him  great  multitudes 
8.    1  was  come,  .great  multitudes  followed 

8.  10  and  said  to  them  that  followed,  Verily  I 
8.  19  Master,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever 
8.  22  But  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Follow  me 

8.  23  into  a  ship*  his  disciples  followed  him 
9. .  9  Follow  me.  And  he  arose,  and  followed 
9. 19  And  Jesus  arose,  and  followed  him,  and 

9.  27  two  blind  men  followed  liim,  crying,  and 
~.      10.  38  that  taketh  not  his  cross,  and  followeth 

i2. 15  great  multitudes  followed  liim,  and  he 
14.  13  they  followed  him  on  foot  out  of  the  cities 
16.  24  let  liim.  .take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me 
19.    2.  great  multitudes  followed  him ;  and  he 
19.  21  "Jesus  said  unto  him.  .come,  .follow  me 
19.  27  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed  thee 

19.  28  I  say.  .That  ye  which  have  followed  me 

20.  29  from  Jericho,  a  great  multitude  followed 
20.  34  received  sight,  and  they  followed  him 

■  2i.    9  the  multitudes,  .that  followed,  cried 

26.  58  Peter  followed  him  afar  off  unto  the  high 

27.  55  women,  .which  followed  Jesus  from  Gal. 
Mark  1.  iS  they  forsook  their  nets,  and  followed 

2.  14  Follow  me.     And  he  arose  and  followed 
2. 15  there  were  many,  and  they  followed  him 

3.  7  a  great  multitude  from  Galilee  [followed] 

5.  24  and  much  people  followed  him,  and 

6.  1  he  went  out . .  and  his  disciples  follow  him 
—       8.  34  let  him . .  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me 

•      9.  38  [hi  thy  name,  and  he  followeth  not  us] 
9.  38  [forbad  him,  because  he  followeth  not  us] 
«•      10.  21  come,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  me 
.    -  10.  28  we  have  left  all,  and  have  followed  thee ' 
10.  32  and  as  they  followed,  they  were  afraid 

10.  52  he  received  his  sight,  and  followed  Jesus 

11.  9  they  that  followed,  cried,  saying,  Hosan. 
14. 13  there  shall  meet  you  a  man.  .follow  him 
14.51  there  [followed]  liim  a  certain  young  man 

14.  54  Peter  followed  him  afar  off,  even  into 

15.  41  Who  also,  .followed  Mm  and  ministered 
Luke  5.  n  land,  they  forsook  all,  and  followed  him 

5.  27  and  he  said  unto  him,  Follow  me 

5. 28  he  left  all,  rose  up,  and  followed  him 

7.  9  said  uuto  the  people  that  followed  him 
9.  11  the  people,  .followed  him  :  and  he 


Luke  9.  23  take  up  his  cross  daily,  and  follow  me 

0.  49  because  he  followeth  not  with  us 

9.  57  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever 
9.  59  And  he  said  unto  another,  Follow  me 
9.  61  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  ;  but  let  me  first 
18.  22  sell  all.  .thou  hast,  .and  come,  foil'  w  me 
18.  28  Lo,  we.  have  left  all,  and  followed  thee 

18.  43  he  received  his  sight,  and  followed  him 
22.  10  follow  him  into  the  house  where  he 

22.  39  and  his  disciples  also  followed  hiiii. 

22.  54  house.    And  Peter  followed  afar  ofT 

23.  27  there  followed  him  a  great  company  of 
John  i.  37  heard  him  speak,  and  they  followed  Jes. 

1.  38  Jesus  turned,  and  saw  them  following 

1.  40  One  of  the  two  which .  .followed  him 
1.43  findeth  Philip,  and  saith  unto  him,  FolL 
6.   2  a  great  multitude  followed  him,  because 
8.  12  he  that  followeth  me  shall  not  walk  in 

10.    4  he  goeth  before,  .and  the  sheep  follow 
10.    5  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow,  but  will 

10.  27  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me 

11.  31  The  Jews  then,  .followed her,  saying,  She 

12.  26  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  liim  follow  me 
J3-  36  Whither  1  g0)  thou  canst  not  follow  me 

13.  36  but  thou  shalt  follow  me  afterwards. 

13.  37  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  thee  now?   r 
iS.  15  And  Simon  Peter  followed  Jesus,  and  (so 

20.  6  Then  cometh  Simon  Peter  following  him. 
ex.  19  had  spoken  this,  he  saith  uuto  him,  Foil. 

21.  20  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  following 
21.  22  what  (is  that)  to  thee  ?  Follow  thou  me 

Acts  12.    8  Cast  thy  garment  about  thee,  and  follow 

12.  9  he  went  out,  and  followed  him  ;  and 

13.  43  many  of  the  Jews,  .followed  Paul  and  B. 
21.  36  the  multitude  of  the  people  followed 

1  Co. 10.    4  of  that  spiritual  Rock,  .followed  them 
Rev.  6.    8  Death,  and  Hell  followed  with,  imri 

14.  4  These  are  they  which  follow  tine  Lamb' 
14.    S  And  there  followed  another  angel,  saying 
14.    9  the  third  angel  followed  them,  saying 
14.  13  labours ;  and  their  works  do  follow  them 

19.  14  the  armies. .in  heaven  followed  him  upon 

5. To  become,  begin  to  be,  yivo/xai  ginomai. 

Rev.   8.    7  there  followed  hail  and  Are  mingled  with 
6. To  jmrsue2  SuSkoj  dioko. 

Lukei7.  23  See  here,  .go  not  after  (them)Jnor  follow 

1  Th.  5. 15  but  ever  follow  that  which  is  good,  both 

2  Ti.    2.  22  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity 
Heb. 12.  14  Follow  peace  with  all  (men),  and  holiness 

I.Come  behind,  SeCre  oiri<rca  deute  opiso. 

Matt.  4. 19  Follow  me,  and  I  will  make  you  fishers 
8. To  be  after,  elfxl  fiera  eimi  ineta. 

Matt.27.  62  that  followed  the  day  of  the  preparation 

9.  To  follow  out,  k^aKoXouOiw  exukoloutheo. 

2  Pe.  1. 16  we  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised-' 

2.  2  many  shall  follow  their  pernicious  ways 

2.  15  following  the  way  of  Balaam,  .of  Eozor 

10.  To  follow  upon  4iraKO\ov6e(t>  epakolouthzo, 
\Iark16.  20  [confirming  the  words  with  signs  follow.] 

1  Ti.    5.  10  if  she  have  diligently  followed  every  good 
■  1  Pe.   2.  21  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps 

11.  To  follow  down  or  thoroughly,  KaraKo\ovd4w, 
Acts  16. 17  The  same  followed  Paul  and  us,  and 

12. To  mimic,  imitate,  fitfj.eoiJ.cu   mimeomai.. 

2  Th.  3.    7  yourselves  know  how  ye  ought  to  follow 

3.  9  make . .  an  ensample  unto  you  to  follow 
Heb.  13.    7  whose  faith  follow,  considering  the  end 

3  Jo.       11  follow  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  that; 

13.  To  follow  alongside  of,  irapaKoXovdeco  parakoL 
Marki6. 17  [signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe!- 

14:. To  follotv  along  with,  crvvaKoXovQioj  sunakolo. 
Mark  5.  37  he  suffered  no  man  [to  follow]  him,  save 
Luke23.  49  the  women  that  followed  him  from  Gali. 

15.  To  go  in  after,  T\i<  ni-3  bo  achar. 

Exodi4.  17  they  shall  follow  them  :  and  I  will  get 
2  Ki.11. 15  him  that  followeth  her  kill  with  the 
2  Ch.23. 14  whoso  followeth  her,  let  lnm  be  slain 

16. To  be  after,  IrjNi  rrn  hayah  achar. 

Exod23.   2  Thou  shaft  not  follow  a  multitude  ten 

1  Sa.12.  14  continue  following  the  LORD  your  God" 

2  Sa.  2.  10  But  the  house  of  Judah  followed  David 
1  Ki.16.  21  half  of  the  people  followed  Tibni  the 

17. To  go  on  after,  ">r\i<  ^Sn  halak  acliar.' 

Gen.  32.  19  so  commanded  he.. all  that  followed  the 
Deut.  4.    3  for  all  the  men  that  followed  Baal-peor 
Josh.  6.    8  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  foil 

1  Sa.  17. 13,  14  and  the  three  eldest,  .followed  Saul 

2  Sa.    3.  31  And  king  David  (himself)  followed  the 
1  Ki.14.    8  and  who  followed  me  with  all  his  heart 

lS.To go  on  habitually  after,™  rfcy  halak  achar,  7. 
1  Sa.  25.  27  unto  the  young  men  that  follow  my  lord 
19.7b  go  on  after,  "inx  -]1?;  yalak  achar. 

Gen.  24.    5,  8  the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow 
24.  39  Peradventure  the  woman  will  not  follow 
24.  61  And  Rebekah  arose,  .and  followed  the 
Numi6.  25  and  the  elders  of  Israel  followed  him 
Judg.  2.  12  And  they  forsook,  .and  followed  other  g_ 
9.   4  vain  and  light  persons,  which  followed 
9.  49  all  the  people,  .followed  Abimelech 
Ruth  3.  10  inasmuch  as  thou  followedst  not  young- 
1  Sa.  30.  21  faint  that  they  could  not  follow  David 
1  Ki.  18.  18  forsaken .  .and  thou  hast  followed  Baalim 
18.  21  God,  follow  him:  but  if  Baal,  .follow  him 
19  20  Kiss .  .my  mother,  and . .  I  will  follow-  thee 


FOLLOW 


300 


FOO  L 


2  Ki    4.  30  leave  thee.     And  he  arose,  and  followed 

6.  ig  neither  (is)  this  the  city  :  follow  me,  and 
13.    2  he.  .followed  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the 

17.  15  they  followed  vanity,  and  became  vain 
Kze.  10.  11  whither  the  head  looked  they  followed  It 

13.  3  that  follow  their  own  spirit,  and  have 

20.70  go  out,  «y;  yatsa. 

2  Sa.  11.   8  there  followed  him  a  mess. .  .from  the  ki. 

FOLLOW  after,  to  — 

1.  To  pursue,  *m  radaph. 

Psa.119.  150  They  draw  nigh  that  follow  after  miseh. 
Prov2i.  21  He  that  followeth  after  righteousness  and 
Isa.     1.  23  every  .one  loveth  gifts  and  followeth  after 

51.    1  ye  that  follow  after  righteousness,  ye 
Hos.    12.    1  Ephraim.  .followeth  after  the  east  wind 

2.  To  pursue,  *]TJ  radaph,  3. 

Prov  15.  9  he  loveth  him.  .that  followeth  after  righ. 

28.  19  he  that  followeth  after  vain  (persons) 
Hos.    2.    7  she  shall  follow  after  her  lovers,  but  she 

3.  To  pursue,  BtcoKta  diokd. 

,  Rom.  9.  30  which  followed  not  after  righteousness 

9.  31  Israel,  which  folio  wed  after,  .righteousu. 

14.  19  Let  us  therefore  follow  after  the  things 

1  Co.  14.    1  Follow  after  charity,  and  desire  spiritual 
Phil.   3.  12  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend 
.    1  Ti.   6. 11  But  thou,  .follow  after  righteousness 

4.  To  follow  upon,  en-aKoAouflecu  cpakoloutheo. 

1  Ti.   5.  24  and  some  (men)  they  follow  after  . 
5.ln  order,  Kade^TJs  hathexes. 

Acts    3.  24  from  Samuel  and  those  that  follow  after 
6. To pv/rsue  thoroughly,  KaraStwKO)  katadioko. 

Mark  1.  36  they  that  were  with  him  followed  after 
7.  To  follow  thoroughly,  Ka.TaKo\ov8e<o  katakolouih. 

Luke23.  55  And  the  women  also,  .followed  after,  and 
FOLLOW,  that  should  — 
After  these  {things),  juera  ravra  vieta  tauta. 

1  Pe.  1.  11  and  the  glory  that  should  follow 
FOLLOW,  what  would  — 
What  is  about  to  be,  to  io-6/j.evov  to  esomenon. 

Luke22.  49  When  they . .  saw  what  would  follow,  they 
FOLLOW  close  or  hard,  to  — 
To  cleave,  adhere  to,  p3i  dabeq. 

Psa.  63.    8  My  soul  followeth  hard  after  thee :  thy 

Jer.  42.  16  the  famine,  .shall  follow  close  after  you 

FOLLOW  hard  (after  or  upon),  to  — 

To  (cause  to)  cleave  or  adhere  to,  piy  dabeq,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  22  they  alsofollowed  hard  after  them  in 

31.    2  the  Philistines  followed  hard  upon  Saul 

2  Sa.    1.    6  and  horsemen  followed  hard  after  him 

1  Ch.io.   2  the  Philistines  followed  hard' after  Saul 

FOLLOW  on,  to  — 

To  pursue,  f|Yi  radaph. 

Hos.    6.    3  (if)  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord 

FOLLOWED,  to  be  — 

To  be  done,  n;^  asah,  2. 

2  Sa.  17.  23  saw  that  his  counsel  was  not  followed 
FOLLOWER  — 

Imitator,  jj.i/.t.T)Tr)$  mimeles.  ' 

1  Co.  4.  16  I  beseech  yon,  be  ye  followers  of  me 

11.  1  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  (am) 
Eph.  5.  1  Be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear 
1  Th.  1.  6  ye  became  followers  of  us,  and  of  the  L. 
2.  14  became  followers  of  the  churches  of  God 
Heb.  6.  12  That  ye  be  not  slothful,  but  followers  of 
1  Pe.  3.  13  if  ye  be  [followers]  of  that  which  is  good? 

FOLLOWER  together  — 

Joint  imitator,  o-u/x/j.tfi-nTrj's  su.mmimetes. 

Phil.    3.  17  be  followers  together  of  me,  and  mark 

FOLLOWING  — 

1.  After,  afterward,  inx  achar. 

Deut.  7.    4  they  will  turn  away,  .from  following  me 
Josh.22.  16,  18  turn  away,  .from  following  the  Lord 
22.  23  an  altar  to  turn  from  following  the  Loud 
22.  29  turn  this  day  from  following  the  Lord 
Ruth  1.  16  to  return  from  following  after  thee 

1  Sa.  12.  20  turn  not  aside  from  following  the  LORD 

14.  46  Saul  went  up  from  following  the  Philis. 

15.  11  for  he  has  turned  back  from  following  ine 
24.    1  Saul  was  returned  from  following  the  P. 

2  Sa.    2.  21  Asahel  would  not  turn  aside  from  follow. 

2.  22  said .  .Turn  thee  aside  from  following 
2.  26  return  from  following  their  brethren? 
2.  27  everyone  from  following  his  brother 
2.  30  Joab  returned  from  following  Abner  :  and 

7.  8  I  took  thee,  .from  following  the  sheep,  to 
i  Ki.   1.    7  and  they  following  Adonijah  helped  (him) 

9.    6  if  ye  shall  at  all  turn  from  following  me 
2  Ki.17.  21  drave  Israel  from  following  the  Lord 

18.  6  departed  not  from  following  him,  but 
1  Ch.17.  7  I  took  thee,  .from  following  the  sheep 
aCh.25.  27  did  turn  away  from  following  the  LORD 

34.  33  departed  not  from  following  the  Lord 
Psa.  7S.  71  From  following  the  ewes.. he  brought  him 

2. Another,  tin  acher, 

Psa.109.  13  in  the  generation  following  let  their  name 

ft. Behind,  pnqht  acharon. 

Paa.  48.  [3  ye  may  tell  (it)  to  the  generation  follow. 


4. On  the  coming  (night),  rfj  firtouo-v  te  epiouse. 
Acts  23.  11  the  night  following,  the  "Lord  stood  by 

5.To  go  on  after,  "inx  ti1?;  yalak  achar. 

Judg.  2.  19  in  following  other  gods  to  serve  them 
1  Ki.  21.  26  did  very  abominably  in  following  idols 

6 .Afterwards,  |3"'"inx  achare-ken. 

Gen.  41.  31  by  reason  of  that  famine  following  ;  for 

FOLLOWING,  the  day  — 
1.  Upon  the  morrow,  tt}  iwavpiov  te  epaurion. 
John  1.  43  The  day  following  Jesus  would  go  forth 
6.  22  The  day  following,  when  the  people  which 

3.  The  coining  (day),  rfj  e-movay  te  epiouse. 

Acts  21.  18  the  (day)  following  Paul  went  in  with  us 

o.Thc  succeeding  (day),  ry  e£?is    te  hexes. 

Acts2i.    1  we  came.. the  (day) following  unto  Rhod. 
■L.The  adjoining-  (day),  tt?  e'xojueVr^t?  echmnene. 

Lukei3.  33  I  must  walk  to  day.  .and  the  (day)  folio. 

FOLLY  — 

1. Folly,  th\A  iweleth. 

Prov.  5.  23  in  the  greatness  of  his  folly  he  shall  go 

13.  16  but  a  fool  layeth  open  (his)  folly 

14.  8  his  way  :  but  the  folly  of  fools  (is)  deceit 
14.  18  The  simple  inherit  folly  :  but  the  prudent 
14.  24  (but)  the  foolishness  of  fools  (is)  folly 

14.  29  (he  that  is)  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  folly 

15.  21  Folly  (is)  joy  to  (Turn  that  is)  destitute  of 

16.  22  but  the  instruction  of  fools  (is)  folly 

17.  12  a  man,  rather  than  a  fool  in  his  folly 

18.  13  before  he  heareth  (it),  it  (is)  folly  and 
26.   4  Answer  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly 
26.    5  Answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest: 
26. 11  As  a  dog.  .(so)  a  fool  returneth  to  his  folly 

2. Self  confidence,  folly,  Spa  kesel. 

Psa.  49.  13  This  their  way  (is)  their  folly  :  yet  their 
Eccl.  7.  25  and  to  know  the  wickedness  of  folly 

3. Self  confidence,  folly,  n?p3  kislah. 

Psa.  85.    8  but  let  them  not  turn  again  to  folly,  even 
4. Emptiness,  folly,  n:>;n  nebalah. 

Gen.  34.    7  because  he  had  wrought  folly  in  Israel 
Deut22.  21  because  she  hath  wrought  folly  in  Israel 
Josh.  7.  15  because  he  hath  wrought  folly  in  Israel 
Judgig.  23  do  not  (so)  wickedly,  .do  not  this  folly 
20.   6  for  they  have  committed,  .folly  in  Israel 
20.  10  folly  that  they  have  wrought  in  Israel 

1  Sa.  25.  25  Nabal  (is)  his  name,  and  folly  (is)  with 

2  Sa.  13.  12  Nay,  my  brother,  .do  not  thou  this  folly 
Job  42.  8  lest  I  deal  with  you  (after  your)  folly,  in 
Isa.     9.  17  and  every  mouth  speaketh  folly.  For  all 

5. Thickheadedness,  75D  sekel. 

Eccl.  10.    6  Folly  is  set  in  great  diguity,  and  the  rich 
t*>.Th ieklieadedness,  ruVpp  sikluth. 

Eccl.  2.'  3  to  lay  hold  on  folly,  till  I  might  see  what 
2.  12  And  I  turned  myself  to  behold .  .folly :  for 
2.  13  Then  I  saw  that  wisdom  excelleth  folly 
.    10.    1  (so  doth)  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  rep. 

7.  Thickheadedness,  ni?5f  sikluth. 

Eccl.  1.  17  And  I  gave  my  heart  to  know,  .folly  :  I 

3.  Folly,  (light  ?)  rkn$  toholcch. 

Job    4.  18  and  his' angels  he  charged  with  folly 

9.  Insipidity,  folly,  >r?BB  tiphlah.' 

Job  24.  12  crieth  out :  yet  God  layeth  not  folly  (to 
Jer.  23. 13  And  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  prophets  of 

10. Senselessness,  &vota  anoia. 

2  Ti.    3.   9  for  their  folly  shall  be  manifest  unto  all 

11. Heedlessness,,  foolishness,  atppoavvn  aphrosune. 
2  Co.  1 1.    1  could  bear  with  me  a  little  in  (my)  folly 
FOOD  — 
1.7b  eat,  7?n  akat. 

Gen.  47.  24* four  parts  shall  be  your  own.  .fuod  for 
2. Eating,  food,  Sdk  okel. 

Gen.  41.  35  And  let  them  gather  all  the  food  of  those 
41.  35  and  let  them  keep  food  in  the  cities 
41.  36  that  food  shall  be  for  store  to  the  land 
41.  48  he  gathered  up  all  the  food  of  the  seven 

41.  48  laid  up  the  food  in  the  cities  :  the  food 

42.  7  From  the  land  of  Canaan  to  buy  food 
42. 10  but  to  buy  food  are  thy  servants  come 

43.  2  father  said.  .Go  again,  buy  us  a  little  fo. 
43.    4  we  will  go  down  and  buy  thee  food 

43.  20  O  sir,  we  came  indeed  down,  .to  buy  fond 

43.  22  other  money  have  we  brought,  .to  buy  f. 

44.  1  saying,  Fill  the  men's  sacks  (with)  food 
44.  25  said,  Go  again,  (and)  buy  us  a  little  food 
47.  24  seed  of  the  field,  and  for  your  food 

Prov  13.  23  Much  food  (is  in)  the  tillage  of  the  poor 

,  3. Eating  food,  n^x  oklah. 

Gen.   6. 21  shall  be  for  food  for  thee,  and  for  them 

4.  Increase,  food,  Sis  buL 

Job   40.  20  the  mountains  bring  him  forth  food 

5. Dread,  food,  c-p  lechem. 

Lev.    3.  11,  16  the  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire 

22.    7  of  the  holy  things ;  because  it  (is)  his  food 
Deutio.  18  loveth.  .in  giving  him  food  and  raiment 

1  Sa.  14.  24,  ?S  Cursed,  the  man  that  cateth  (any)  f. 

14.  24  So  none  of  the  people  tasted  (any)  food 

2  Sa.   9.  10  thy  master's  son  may  have  food  to  eat 

1  Ki.   5.    9  accomplish  my  desire,  in  giving  food  for 


Job    24.    5  wilderness  (yieldeth)  food  for  them  (and) 
1  sa.  78.  25  Man  did  eat  angels'  food  :  he  sent  them 
104.  14  may  bring  forth  food  out  of  the  earth 
136.  25  Who  giveth  food  to  all  flesh  :  for  his  mer. 

146.  7  which-giveth  food  to  the  hungry.     The 

147.  9  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  (and)  to 
Prov. 27.  27  (thou  shalt  have)  goats'  milk,  .for  thy  f. 

27.  27  for  the  food  of  thy  household,  and  (for) 

28.  3  a  sweeping  ram  which  leaveth  no  food 
.    30.    8  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me 

31.  14  ships  ;  she  bringeth  her  food  from  afar 
Eze.  48.  18  for  food  unto  them  that  serve  the  city 

6. Eating,  food,  7p«o  maakal. 

Gen.    2.  9  to  grow  every  tree  that  is.  .good  for -food 

3.  6  saw  that  the  tree  (was)  good  for  food,  and 

6.  21  take  thou  unto  thee  of  all  food  that  is  e. 
Lev.  19.  23  planted  all  manner  of  trees  for  food- 
Prov.  6.    8  (and)  gathereth  her  food  in  the  harvest 

7. Eating,  jtiod,  n^bo  makkoleth. 

1  Ki.  5.  11  of  wheat  (for)  food  to  his  household,  and 

".IT tinting,  venison,  Tjs  tsayid: 

Job    38.  41  Who  provideth  for  the  raven  his  food? 
'.\F>od,Jlesh,  "ixp  sheer. 

Exod2i.  10  her  food,  .and  her  duty  of  marriage,  shall 
10. Eating,  the  act  of  eating,  fipwats  brosis. 

2  Co.  9.  10  both  minister  bread  for  (your)  food,  and 
11.  Thorough  nourishment,  Siarpocp-fj  djiatrophe. 

1  Ti.   6.    8  having  food.  .let  us  be  therewith  content 
Yl.Nourishnient,  rpo<prj  irophe. 

Acts  14.  17  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness 
Jus.     2.  15  If  a  brother,  .be.  .destitute  of  daily  food 

FOOL  — 

l.Fool,  7"ix  evil. 

Psaio7.  17  Fools,  because  of  their  transgression  and  . 
Prov.  1.    7  (but)  fools  despise  wisdom  and  instruc. 

7.  22  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks 
10.    8,  10  but  'a  prating  fool  shall  fall 

10.  21  feed  many  :  but  fools  die  for  waut  of  wis. 

11.  29  the  fool  (shall  be)  servant  to  the  wise  of 

12.  15  The  way  of  a  fool  (is)right  in  his  own  eyes 
12.  16  A  fool's  wrath  is  presently  known  :  but  a 

14.  9  Fools  make  a  mock  at  siu  :  but. among 

15.  5  A  fool  despiseth  his  father's  instruction 

16.  22  but  the  instruction  of  fools  (is)  folly 

17.  28  Even  a  fool,  when  he  holdeth  bis  peace 
20.    3  strife :  but  every  fool  will  be  meddling 
24.    7  Wisdom  (is)  too  high  for  a  fool :  he  open. 
27.    3  a  fool's  wrath  (is)  heavier  than  them  both 
27.  22  Though  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a 

Isa.    19.  11  Surely  the  princes  of  Zoan  (are)  fools,  the 

35.    8  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall  not  err 

Hos.   9.    7  the  prophet  (is)  a  fool,  the  spiritual  man 

'2.  Boaster,  ??n  halal. 

Psa.  75.    4  I  said  unto  the  fools,  Deal  not  foolishly 

3.  Self  confident,  Vc?  Jcesil. 

Psa.  49.  10  the  fool  and  the  brutish  person  perish 
92.    6  neither' doth  a  fool  understand  this 
94,   8  and  (ye)  fools,  when  will  ye  be  wise  ? 
Prov.  1.  22  scorningj  and  fools  hate  knowledge? 

1.  32  the  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them 
3.  35  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools 

8.  5  ye  fools,  be  ye  of  An  understanding  heart 
10.  18  and  he  that  uttereth  a  slander,  (is)  a  fool 
10.  23  (It  is)  as  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  mischief 

12.  23  the  heart  of  fools  proclaimeth  foolishness 

13.  i6.dealeth  with  knowledge :  but  a  fool  lay. 
13.  19  abomination  to  fools  to  depart  from  evil 

13.  20  a  compauion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed 

14.  8  his  way  :  but  the  folly  of  fools  (is)  deceit 
14.  16  but  the  fool  rageth,  and  is  confident- 

14.  24  (but)  the  foolishness  of  fools  (is)  folly 

14.  33  but  (that  which  is)  in  the  midst  of  fools 

15.  2  mouth  of  fools  poureth  out  foolishness 
15.  14  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  on  foolishness 
17.  to  more  than  an  hundred  stripes  into  a  fool 
17.  12  meet  a  man,  rather  than  a  fool  in  his  folly 
17.  16  price  in  the  hand  of" a  fool  to  get  wisdom 
17.  21  He  that  begetteth  a  fool  (doeth  it)  to  his 

17.  24  eyes  of  a  fool  (are)  in  the  ends  of  the 

18.  2  A  fool  hath  no  delight  in  understanding 
18.    6  A  fool's  lips  enter  into  contention,  and 

18.  7  A  fool's  mouth  (is)  his  destruction,  and 

19.  1  perverse  in  his  lips,  and  is  a  fool 

19.  10  Delight  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool ;  much 
19.  29  and  stripes  for  the  back  of  fools 
23.   9  Speak  not  in  the  ears  of  a  fool ;  for  he 
26.    1  so  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool 
26.    3  for  the  ass,  and  a  rod  for  the  fool's  back 
26.    4  Answer  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly 
26.    5  Answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest 
26.    6  sendeth  a  message  by  the  hand  of  a  fool 
26.    7,  9  so  (is)  a  parable  in  the  mouth  of  fools 
26.    8  so  (is)  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool 
26.  10  The  great  (God),  .bothrewardcth  the  fool 
26V  11  As  a  dog.  .(so)  a  fool  returneth  to  his 
26.  12  (there  is)  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him 

28.  26  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool 

29.  11  A  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  :  but  a  wise 
2y.  20  (theie  is)more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him 

Eccl.  2.  14  the  fool  walketh  in  darkness  :  ami  1  my. 
2.  15  As  it  happeneth  to  the  fool,  so  it  hap. 
.    2.  16  of  the  wise  more  than  of  the  fool  forever 
2.  16  And  how  dieth  the  wise  (man)  ?  as  the  f. 

4.  5  fool  foldeth  his  hands  together,  and  eateth 

5.  z  to  hear  than  to  give  the  sacrifice  of  fools 


FOOL 


361 


FOOTMAN 


Eccl.  5.    3  and  a  fool's  voice  (is  known)  by.  .wonU 
5.    4  pay  it ;  for  (lie  hath)  no  pleasure  in  fools 
'  6.    8  what  hath  the  wise  more  than  the  fool?  ' 
7.    4  the  heart  of  fools  (is)  Jsi  the  house  of 
7.    5  than  for  a  man  to  hes  r  the  song  of  fools  . 
7.    6  crackling . .  so  (is)  the  laughter  of  the  f o. 
7.   9  for  anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools 
.   9. 17  the  cry  of  liim  that  ruleth  among  fools 
10.    2  right  hand  ;  but  a  fool's  heart  at  his  left 
10.  12  the  lips  of  a  fool  will  swallow  up  himself 

±.Em})ty  jierson,  f00h  ^  ndbal. 

2  Sa.    3.  33  and  said,  Died  Abner  as  a  fool  dieth  ?  J 

13.  13  thou  shalt  be  as  one  of  the  fools  in  Israel 
Job  30.  8  (They  were)  children  of  fools,  yea,  child. 
Psa.  14.    1  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  (There  is) 

53.    1  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  (There  is) 
*  Prov  17.    7  Excellent  speech  becometh  not  a  fool 

17.  21  and  the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no  joy 

30.  22  and  a  fool  when  he  is  filled  .with  meat 
Jer.  17.  11  leave  tliem.  .and  at  his  end  shall  be  a  f. 

5.  Thickheaded,  ^d  sakal.. 

Eccl.  2.  19  whether  he  shall  be  a  wise  (man)  or  a  f .  ? 
10.    3  when  he  that  is  a  fool  walketh  by  the 
10.    3  he  saith  to  every  one  (that)  he  (is)  a  fool 

10.  14  A  fool  also  is  full  of  words  :  a  mau  can. 

6.  Thoughtless,  au6t)ros  anoetos. 

Luke  24.  25  0  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all 

7.  Unwise,  &<ro(pos  osojrfios. 

Eph.  5. 15  See  then  that  ye  walk,  .not  as  fools,  but 
8. Heedless,  witless;  ouppoov  aphron. 

Luke  11.' 40  fools,  did  not  he  that  made  that  which  is 
12.  20  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required 

1  Co.  15.  36  (Thou)  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is 
2C0.  11.  16  I  say  again,  Let  no  man  think  me  a  fool 

11.  16  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me  . 

11.  19  For  ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye.  .are 

12.  6  I  shall  not  be  a  fool ;  for  I  mil  say  the 
12.  11  I  am  become  a  fool  in  glorying  ;  ye  have 

Q.Fool,  (or  as  in  Hebrew,  a  rebel),  fxa>p6s  moros. 
Matt.  5.  22  whosoever  shall  say,  Thou  fool !  shall 

23.  17,  19  (Ye)  fools,  and  blind  !  for  whether  is 
1O0.    3.  18  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be 

4.  10  We  (are)  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  but  ye 

POOL,  to  be  as  a — 

To  think  amiss  or  wrongly,  -rrapcMppoi/Gw  2mraPn'''- 

2  Co.  11.  23  I  speak  as  a  fool,  I  (am)  more  :  in  labours 
FOOL,  to  become  a  — 

To  make  foolish,  \x.tapo,iv<a  moraino. 

Roni.  1.  22  Professing,  .to  be  wise,  they  became  fools 
FOOL,  to  play  the  — 
To  act  foolishly,  7~p  sakal,  5. 

1  Sa.  26.  21  behold,  I  have  played  the  fool,  and  have 
FOOLISH  — 
1. Fool,  foolish,  "rix  evil. 

Job     5.    2  wrath  killeth  the  foolish  man,  and  envy 

5.  3  I  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  root :  but 
Prov  10. 14  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  near  destru. 

14.    3  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  a  rod  of 
29.   9  a  wise  man  contendeth  with  a  foolish  man 
Jer.     4.  22  my  people  (is)  foolish,  they  have  not  kn. 
2.  Foolish,  7W  evili. 

Zech  11.  15  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd 
£. Brutish,  1JJ3  baar. 

Psa.  73.  22  So  foolish  (was)  I,  and  ignorant :  I  was 
4.  To  boast,  hhn  halal. 

Psa.     5.    5  The  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight 

73.  3  For  I  was  envious  at  the  foolish,  fwhen) 

5. Self  confident,  V*p|  kesil. 

Prov  10.    1  but  a  foolish  son  (is)  the  heaviness  of  his 

14.  7  Go  from  the  presence  of  a  foolish  man 

15.  7  the  heart  of  the  foolish  (doeth)  not  so 
15.  20  but  a  foolish  man  despiseth  his  mother 
17.  25  A  foolish  son  (is)  a  grief  to  his  father,  and 
19.  13  foolish  son  (is)  the  calamity  of  his  father 
21.  20  but  a  foolish  man  spendeth  it  up 

Eccl.   4.  13  an  old  and  foolish  king,  who  will  no  more 
10. 15  The  labour  of  the  foolish  wearieth  every 

6. Self  confidence,  m7'p|  kesiluth. 

Prov.  9.  13  foolish  woman  (is)  clamorous";  (she  is)  si. 
7 '.Empty.,  foolish,  S3:  nabal. 

Deut32.  6  O  foolish  people  and  unwise  ?  (is)  not  he 
32.  21  provoke  them  to  anger  with  a  foolish  na. 

Psa.  39.    8  make  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  foolish 

74.  18  foolish  people  have  blasphemed  thy  name 
74.  22  the  foolish  man  reproacheth  thee  daily 

Eze.  13.    3  "Woe  unto  the  foolish  prophets,  that 

S. Thickheaded,  b?u  sakal. 

Eccl.  7.  17  neither  be  thou  foolish  :  why  shouldest 

Jer.     5.  21  Hear  now  this,  0  foolish  people,  and 
9.  Simple,  "ns  pethi. 

Prov.  9.  6  Forsake  the  foolish,  and  live ;  and  go  in 
lO.TJioughtless,  avSnros  anoetos. 

Gal.     3.    1  0  foolish  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched 
3.    3  Are  ye  so  foolish?  having  begun  in  the  S. 

1  Ti.    6.    9  (into)  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  wh. 

Titus  3.  3  For  we  ourselves  also  were,  .foolish,  dis. 
11.  Unintelligent,  atrvveros  asunetos. 

Rom.  1.  21  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened 

10.  19  (and)  by  a  foolish  nation  I  will  anger  you 

46 


12. Heedless,  senseless,  &<ppwv  aphron. 

Rom.  2.  20  An  instructor  of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of 

1  Pe.    2.  15  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish 

13. Foolish,  dull,  slow,  /xvpos  moros. 

Matt.  7.  26  shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man 
25.    2  five,  .were  wise,  and  five  (were)  foolish 
25.    3  They  that  (were)  foolish  took  their  lamps 
25.    8  the  foolish  said  unto  the  wise,  Give  us  of 

2  Ti.    2.  23  But  foolish  and  unlearned  questions  av. 
Titus  3.    9  avoid  foolish  questions,and  genealogies 

FOOLISH,  to  be  — 

1.7V)  be  or  become,  foolish,  bw  yaal,  2. 

Jer.     5.    4  Surely  these  (are)  poor;  they  are  foolish 
2.7b  he  self  confident,  foolish,  Sp3  kasal. 

Jer.    10.    8  But  they  are.. brutish  and  foolish;  the 
FOOLISH,  to  make  — 
1.7b  make  foolish,  Vpc  sakal,  3. 

Isa.    44.  25  and  maketh  their  knowledge  foolish 


2.  To  make  foolish ,  fiwoaivw 
1  Oo.    1.  20  hath  not  God  m 


moramo. 

made  foolish  the  wisdom  of 


FOOLISH  talking  or  things  — 

1. Insipid,  untempered,  *?2$  taphel. 

Lam.  2.  14  Thy  prophets  have  seen . .  foolish  things 
2.  Foolish  discourse,  fxwpoXoyia  morologia. 

Eph.    5.    4  Neither  filthiness,  nor  foolish  talking 
Z.Foolish,  fiojpos  moros. 

1  Co.  1.  27  But  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things 
FOOLISH  woman  — 

Empty,  foolish  woman  npnj  nebalah'. 

Job     2. 10  as  one  of  the' foolish  women  speaketh 
FOOLISHLY  — 
1.  Folly,  n^.N  ivvelethr 

Prov.14/17  (He  that  is)  soon  angry  dealeth  foolishly 

2.Folly,  rhtPi  ^hlah.  ' 

Job      1.V2  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  God  foolishly 
3. In  senseless)iess,  eV  atyporrvvri  en  aphrosune. 

2  Co.  11.  17  That  which  I  speak,  I  speak,  .foolishly 

11.  21  is  bold,  I  speak  foolishly,  I  am  bold  also 
FOOLISHLY,  to  deal  — 
To  boast,  b\n  halal. 

Psa.  75.  4  I  said  unto  the  fools,  Deal  not  foolishly 
FOOLISHLY,  to  do  — 
I.  To  be  or  become  foolish,  Sx;  yaal,  2. 

Nunii2. 11  wherein  we  have  done  foolishly,  and 
2.7b  be  empty,  foolish,  Vaj  nabel. 

Prov  30.  32  If  thou  hast  done  foolishly  in  lifting  up 
3.7b  act  foolishly,  boo  sakal,  2. 

1  Sa.  13.  13  Samuel  said.  .Thou  hast  done  foolishly 

2  Sa.  24.  10  take  away,  .for  I  have  done  very  foolishly 

1  Ch.21.    8  do  away .  .for  I  have  done  very  foolishly 

2  Ch.  16.    9  Herein  thou  hast  done  foolishly :  therefore 

4.  To  act  foolishly,  hie  sakal,  5. 

Gen.  31.  28  Thou  hast  now  done  foolishly  in  (so)  doing 
FOOLISHNESS  — 
1.  Folly,  rv5JN  ivveleth. 

Psa.  38.    5  are  corrupt  because  of  my  foolishness 
69.    5  O  God,  thou  kuowest  my  foolishness 

Prov  12.  23  the  heart  of  fools  proclaimeth  foolishness 

14.  24  "(but)  the  foolishness  of  fools  (is)  folly 

15.  2  mouth  of  fools  poureth  out  foolishness 
15.  14  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  pn  foolishness 
19.    3  foolishness  of  man  perverteth  his  way 
22.  15  Foolishness  (is)  bound  in  the  heart  of  a 
24.    9  The  thought  of  foolishness  (is)  sin  :  and 
27.  22  (yet)  will  not  liis  foolishness  depart  from 

2.Folly,  n^pp  sikluth. 

Eccl.  7.  25  of  folly,  even  of  foolishness  (and)  madness 
10. 13  The  beginning.. (is)  foolishness \  and  the 

3. Senselessness,  atypocvvv,  aphrosune. 

Mark  7.  22  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness 

4.  Folly,  ficopia  mona. 

1  Co.   1. 18  preaching  of  the  cross  is.  .foolishness 

1.  21  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them 
"  1.  23  and  unto  the  Greeks  foolishness 

2.  14  of  God  :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto 

3.  19  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness 

5.  That  which  is  foolish,  to  fxaphv  to  moron.  _ 

1  Co.  1.  25  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men 

FOOLISHNESS,  to  turn  into  — 
7b  make  foolish,  S29  sakal,  3. 

2  Sa.  15.  31  turn  the  counsel  of  A.  into  foolishness 
FOOLS,  to  become  or  make  — 

1.7b  boast,  2^'aise,  ^Sn  halal,  3ct. 

Job    12.  17  he  leadeth.  .and  maketh  the  judges  fools 
2. 7b  be  or  become  foolish,  ^n;  yaal,  2. 
•    Isa.   19.  13  The  princes  of  Zoan  are  become  fools 
FOOT  — 
l.Base,  station,  |3  ken. 

Exod3o.  18  Thou  shalt.  .make,  .his  foot  (also  of)  br. 

30.  28  all  his  vessels,  and  the  laver  and  his  foot 

31.  9  his  furniture,  and  the  laver  and  his  foot 
35.  16  and  all  his  vessels,  the  laver  and  his  foot 
38.    8  he  made,  .the  foot  of  it  (of)  brass,  of  the 
39. 39  and  all  his  vessels,  the  laver  and  his  foot 


Exod4o.  11  thou  shalt  anoint  the  Laver -and  his  foot 
Lev.    S.  11  his  vessels,  both  the  laver  and  his  foot 

2.  Step,  pyB  paa-m. 

2  Ki.  19.  24  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up 
Psa.  58.  10  wash  his  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked 
74.  3  Lift  up  thy  feet  unto  the  perpetual  deso. 
Prov  29.  5  flattereth . .  spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet 
Song  7.  1  How  beautiful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  0 
Isa.   37.  25  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up 

Z.Fo"t,  hr\  regel. 

Gen.    $'.    9  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot,  and 

41.  44  shall  no  man  lift  up  his  hand  or  foot 
Exod2i.  24  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  forf. 

29.  20  upon  the  great  toe  of  their  right  foot,  and 
Lev.     S.  23  and  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot 

13.  12  the  plague  from  his  head  even  to  his  foot 

14.  14, 17,  25,  28  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right  f. 
Num22.  25  crushed  Balaam's  foot  against  the  wall 
Deut.  2.    5  no,  not  so  much  as  a  foot  breadth  ;  beca. 

8.  4  neither  did  thy  foot  swell,  these  forty  ye. 
11.  10  wateredst  (it)  with  thy  foot,  as  a  garden 

19.  21  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for  f . 
25.  9  loose  his  shoe  from  off  his  foot,  and  spit 
28.  35  from  the  sole  of  thy  foot  unto  the  top  of 
28.  56  set  the  sole  of  her  foot  upon  the  ground 

28.  65  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  rest :  but 

29.  5  thy  shoe  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy  foot 

32.  35  their  foot  shall  slide  in  (due)  time  :  for 

33.  24  brethren,  and  let  him  dip  his  foot  in  oil 
Josh.  1.    3  that  the  soleof  your  foot  shall  tread  upon 

5. 15  Loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot ;  for  the 

2  Sa. .  2.  18  Asahel  (was  as)  light  of  foot  as.a  wild  roe 

14.  25  from  thesole  of  his  foot  even  to  the  cro. 

2  Ch.33.    8  Neither  will  I  any  more  remove  the  foot 

Job     2.    7  from  the  sole  of  his  foot  unto  his  crown 

28.  4  (even  the  waters)  forgotten  of  the  foot 
39.  15  forgetteth  that  the  foot  may  crush  them 

Psa.    9. 15  in  the  net.  .is  their  own  foot  taken 

26. 12  My  foot  standeth  in  an  even  place :  in  the 
36.  11  Let- not  the  foot  of  pride  come  against  me 
38. 16  when  my  foot  slippeth,  they  magnify . .  ag. 
68.  23  That  thy  foot  may  be  dipped  in  the  blood 
91.  12  lest  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 
94. 18  When  I  said,  My  foot  slippeth  ;  thymer. 

Prov,  1.  15  My  son.  .refrain  thy  foot  ironi  their  path 
3.  23  walk  in  thy  way  safely,  and  thy  foot 

3.  26  and  shall  keep  thy  foot  from  being  taken 

4.  27  Turn  not.  .remove  thy  foot  from  evil 
25.  17  Withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour's 

25.  19  Confidence,  .(is  like),  .a  foot  out  of  joint 
Eccl.  5.  1  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the  h. 
Isa.     1.    6  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the 

20.  2  and  put  off  thy  shoe  from  thy  foot.    And 

26.  6  The  foot  shall  tread  it  down,  (even)  the  f . 
41.    2  Who.  .called  him  to  his  foot,  gave  the 

58. 13  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  sab. 
Jer.     2.  25  Withhold  thy  foot  from  being  unshod 
Eze.     6.  11  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  say,  Alas  for  all 

29.  11  No  foot  of  man.  .nor  foot  of  beast  shall 

'  32.  13  neither  shall  the  foot  of  man  trouble  them 
Amos  2.  15  (he  that  is)  swift  of  foot  shall  not  deliver 

A. Foot,  irovs  pons. 

-    Matt.  4.   6  lest,  .thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 
18.    8  if  thy  hand  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut 
22. 13  Bind*  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him 
Mark  9.  45  if  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut  it  off :  it  is 
Luke  4.  11  lest,  .thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 
Johnn.  44  bound  hand  and  food  with  grave  clothes 
1  Co. 12.  15  If  the  foot  shall  say,  Because  I  am  not 
Rev.  10.    2  and  he  set  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and 
[See  also  Trample,  tread  under,  trodden,  trodden  under. 

FOOT,  on  — 

1. Foot,  hri  regel. 

Judg.  5.  15  he  was  sent  on  foot  into  the  valley.    For  ' 
Psa.  66.    6  they  went  through  the  flood  on  foot 

2.Foot  soldier,  "\  :n  ragli. 

Exod  12.  37  aboutsix  hundred  thousand  on  foot  (that 

3.  Oh  foot,  by  land,  ire(fi  peze. 

Matt  14.  13  they  followed  him  on  foot  out  of  the  cities 
FOOT  on,  to  set  one's  — 
Foot  step,  foot  breadth,  &?)fj.a  iro$6s  M?na  podos. 

Acts    7.    5  no,  not  (so  much  as)  to  set  his  foot  on 
FOOT,  garment  down  to  the  — 
Reaching  the  foot,  iroo-fipris  poderes. 

Rev.    1. 13  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot 

FOOT,  to  tread  under  — 

1.  To  tread  down,  Di3  bus. 

Isa.    14.  25  upon  my  mountains  tread  him  underfoot 

2.  To  (read  down,  D-2  bus,  *a. 

Jer.  12.  10  have  trodden  mj-portion  under  foot,  they 

3.  To  be  trodden  down,  D12  bus,  6. 

Isa.    14.  19  the  pit ;  as  a  carcase  trodden  under  foot 

FOOTMAN  — 

1.  Footman,  *hi~i  ragli. 

Numn.  21  people.,  six  hundred  thousand  footmen 
Judg2o.    2  fourhundred  thousand  footmen  that  drew 

1  Sa.    4.  10  for  there  fell,  .thirty  thousand  footmen 

15.    4  two  hundred  thousand  footmen,  and  i,en 

2  Sa.  10.    6  the  Syrians.. twenty  thousand  footmen 

1  Ki.20.  29  slew,  .an  hundred  thousand  footmen  in 

2  Ki.13.    7  ten  chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen 
Jer.  12.    5  If  thou  hast  run  with  the  footmen,  and 


FOOTSTEP 


362 


FOR 


2.7*0  r^m3  pi  ruts. 

i  Sa.  22.  .i  7  the  king  said  unto  the  footmen  that  stood 

$.  Footman,  man  on  foot,  *^n  w-v,  ish  ragli. 

2  Sa.    8.   4  horsemen,  and  twenty  thousand  footmen 
i.Ch.iS.   4  horsemen,  and  twenty  thousand  footmen 

19.  18  chariots,  and  forty  thousand  footmen 

FOOTSTEP  — 

IMeel,  trace,  footstep,  3pi>  aqeb. 

,  Psa.  77.  19  waters,  and  thy  footsteps  are  not  known 

89.  51  they  have  reproached  the  footsteps  of 

Song  1.    8  go  thy  way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the 

2. Movement,  step,  foot,  anvil,  time,  now,  vyjzpaam. 

Psa.  17.    5  in  thy  paths',  (that)  my  footsteps  slip  not 

FOOTSTOOL  — 

l.Footstool,  place  for  treading  on,  cta|  kebesh. 
2  Ch.  9.  18  six  steps,  .with  a  footstool  of  gold 

%.A  stool  for  the  foot,  %-t  onn  hadom  regel.     ■ 
1  Ch.  28.    2  for  the  footstool  of  our  God,  and  had 
Psa.  99.    5  our  God,  and  worship  at  his  footstool 
no.    1  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
132.    7  we  will  worship  at  his  footstool 
Isa.*  66.    1  my  throne,  and  the  earth  (is)  my  footstool 
Lam.  2.    i  remembered  not  his  footstool  in  the  day 
3.  Footstool,  what  is  under  the  foot,  vwoirodiou. 
Jas.    2.   3  there,  or  sit  here  under  my  footstool 
4r Footstool  of  the  feet,  vTroir6diov  tSSv  7ra>5wi>. 
Matt.  5.  35  Nor  by  the  earth ;  for  it  is  his  footstool 

22. 44  till  I  make  thine  enemies  [thy  footstool]? 
Marki2.  36  till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
Luke  20.  43  Till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
Acts    2.  35  Until  I  make  thy  foes  thy  footstool 

7.  49  earth  (is)  my  footstool :  what  house  will 
Heb.    1.  13  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool? 
10. 13  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool 
FOR  — 
l.Then,  tx  az. 
■     2  Ki.  5.   3  for  he  would  recover  him  of  his  leprosy 

2.  Unto,  hi<  el. 

Exod.  8.  25  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  and  for  Aaron 

3. Because,  for,  la's 3  baasher. 

Eccl.  7.    2  for  that  (is)  the  end  of  all  men  ;  and  the 
4.The,  that,  at,  toith,  nK  eth. 

Lev.    5.    7  then  he  shall  bring  for  his  trespass,  .two 

t.Iii  {that  which),  id?  bemo. 

Isa.   25. 10  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  dunghill 
6.  For,  through,  up,  over,  by,  in  behalf  of  t  "iya  bead. 
Gen.  20.    7  he  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
Exod  8.  28  shall  not  go  very  far  away :  entreat  for 
32.  30  I  shall  make  an  atonement  for  your  sin 
Lev.  16.    6  and  make  an  atonement  for  himself,  and 
Jer.     7.  16  neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them 
el    2  Enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  Lord  for  us 

1. Because  of,  for  the  sake  of,  S75  galal. 

Jer.   11. 17  for  the  evil  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  of 

8.  Be  cause,  for,  ^di. 

Ezra    7.  23  for  why  should  there  be  wrath  against 

9. Because, for,  ''Ski. 

Gen.    2.    5  for.  .God  had  not  caused  it  to  rain  upon 

29.  32  for  she  said,  Surely  the  Lord  hath  looked 

Exodi3.  17  for  God  said,  Lestperadventure  thepeop. 

10.  To,  for,  Szh  lemo. 

Job   27.  14'be  multiplied,  (it  is)  for  the  sword  :  and 

11. From,  |9  min. 

Dan.    2.  20  Blessed  be  the  name  of  God  for  ever  and 

5.  19  for  the  majesty  that  he  gave  him,  all  ■ 

12. For  the  sake  of,  fyn1?  lemaan. 

Gen.  18.  24  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  (are)  therein? 
13. Over  against,  nai  nokach. 

Gen.  25.  21  And  Isaac  entreated  the  Lord  for  his 
14.  For  the  purpose  df,  TKULS  baabur. 

Exod.  9.  i6  have  I  raised  th'ee  up,  for  to  show  (in) 
lh.Unto,  till,  -iy  ad. 

Gen.  13,  15  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  for 

Dan.    6.    7  ask  a  petition  of  any  god  or  man  for 

7. 12  yet  then-  lives  were  prolonged  for  a  sea. 
7.  18  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever,  even  for 

16. In  reference  to,  for,  hy_  al. 

Gen.  19.  17  that  he  said,  Escape  for  thy  life;  look  not 
Ezra   4.  15  for  which  cause  was  this  city  destroyed 

6.  n  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  this 
6.  17  and  for  a  sin  offering  for  all  Israel,  twelve 
6.  18  in  their  courses,  for  the  service  of  God 

Dan.   6.  23  Then  was  the  king  exceeding  glad  for 

11.  In  consequence  of,  DRy  eoeb. 

Isa.     5.  23  Which"  justify  the  wicked  for  reward,  and 
.18.7/t  exchange  for,  rj"?rj  cliclrph. 

NuniiS.  21  all  the  tenth  in  Israel  for  an  inheritance 
18.  31  it  (is)  your  reward  for  your  service  in 

19.  Over  against,  vn  behalf  of  ,  avrl  anti. 

Matt.  5.  38  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth 
17.  27'take,  and  give  unto  them  for  me  and  thee 

20.  28  rind  ti»  uive  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 
Markio.  45  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 
LukeiT.  11  wiU  he  for  a  fish  give  him  a  serpent? 
John  1  16  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace 

Rom  1  •   17  Kt'compensi'  lu  no  man  evil  fur  evil 


1  Co.  11.  15  for  (her)  hair  is  given  her  for  a  covering 
-iTh.   5.  15  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto 
Heb.  12.    2  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 
12.  16  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birth. 
Jas.    4.  15  For  that  ye  (ought)  to  say,  If  the  "Lord 
1  Pe.   3.    9  Not  rendering  evil  for.  evil,  or  railing  for 

W.From,  on  account  of,  atrS  apo. 

Matt  13.  44  for  joy  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all  that 
14.  26  is  a  spirit :  and  they  cried  out  for  fear 
28.    4  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  did  shake 

Lukeig.    3  could  not  for.  the  press,  because  he  .was 
21.  26  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,  and 
22. 45  he  found  them  sleeping  for  sorrow 
24.  41  while  they  yet  believed  not  for  joy,  and 

John2i.    6  were  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the  multitude 

Acts  12.  14  she  opened  not  the  gate  for  gladness,  but 
.22. 11  when  I  could  not  see  for  the  glory  of 

21. During,  until,  &XP1  ^ohri. 

Luke  4. 13  he  departed  from  him  for  a  season 
Acts"i3. 11  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  season 

22.  Verity,  therefore,  ydpgar. 

Matt.  1.  20  for  that  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of 

1.  21  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their 

2.  2  for  we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and 
2.    5  for  thus  it  is  written  by  the  prophet 

2.   6  for  out  of  thee  shall  come  a  Governor 
2.  13  for  Herod  will  seek  the  young  child  to 
2.  20  for  they  are  dead  which  sought  the  young 
3-  2,3,9, 1514-6,10,17,18 ;  5. 12, 18,20, 29, 30, 46;  6. 

7,  8, 14, 16,  21,  24,  32,  34  ;  7.  2,  8, 12,  25,  29 ;  9.  5, 13, 16,  21, 

24  ;  10.  10, 17,  [19],  20,  [23],  26,  35 ;  11.  [10],  13, 18,  30 ;  12. 

8,  33>  34»  37>  4°.  5°  J  r3-  12, 15,  17  ;  14.  3,  4,  24;  15.  2,  4, 19; 

16.  2,  3,  25,  26,  27  ;  17,  15,  20 ;  18.  7,  10,  [11],  20;  19.  12, 
14,  22 ;  20. 1,  [16] ;  21.  26,  32  ;  22. 14, 16,  28,  "30  ;  23.  3,  [4], 
8,  9,  [10],  13*  17.  29>  39  J  24.  5,  6,  7,  21,  24,  27,  [28],  38  ;  25. 
14,  29,  35,42  ;  26.9, 10,  11,  12,  28,  31,  43,  52;  27.  18, 19,  43; 

25  2,  5,  6. 

Mark  1.J16,  22,  38;  2. 15  ;  3. 10,  zi,  [35] ;  4.  22,  25,  [28] ;  5. 
8;  28,  42  ;  6.  14,  17,  18,  20,  31,  [36],  48,  50,  52,  [52J ;  7.  3, 
[8],  10,  21,  [25],  27 ;  8.  [3],  35,  36 ;  9.  6,  6,  31,  34,  39, 
40,  41,  49 ;  10.  14,  22,  [27] ;  11.  13,  18,  [23I,  32 ;  12.  12,  14, 

23.  25,  [36],  44  ;  J3-  [6],  [7],  S,  [9],  Hi  19.  22,  33.  35  J  14-  5>  7> 
40,  56  ;  15. 10 ;  16.  4,  8. 

Luke  1.  15,  18,  30,  44,  48,  76;  2.  10;  3  8:4.  [8],  10;  5.  9, 
39 ;  6.  23, 23, 26, 38,  43,  44,  44,  45,  [48] ;  7.  5, 6,  [28],  33  ;  8.  17, 
18, 29,  29,  40, 46 ;  9. 14,  24,  25,  26, 44,  48,  50,  [56] ;  10.  7, 24 ; 
11. 10,  30 ;  12.  12,  30,  34,  52,  58  ;  14.  14,  24,  28 ;  16.  2, 13, 
28  ;  17.  21,  24  ;  18. 16,  23,  25,  32 ;  19.  5, 10,  21,  [26],  48  ;  20. 
6, 19,  33,  36,  38 ;  21.  4,  8,  9, 15,  23,  26,  35  ;  22.  2,  16, 18,  27, 
37,71;  23.  8, 12, 15,  34,  41. 

John  2.  25  ;  3.  2,  16,  17,  20,  24,  34,  34 ;  4.  8,  9,  18, 42,  44, 
45»  47  >  5-  W*  x3>  J9>  2°>  2I>  22,  2^j  3^>  4^»  4^  >  ^  ^»  27> 
33.  55.  64,   71  ;  7.   1/4.  5>  39;  8.  24,  42;  9.  22;  11.  39; 

12.  8,  43,  47;  13.  11,  13,  15,  29:  *4-  3°i  i^  7.  J3>  27I  l8- 
13;  19.  6,  311  36;  20.  9,  17;  21*  7,  8.  Acts  1.  20;  2.  15, 
25,  34,  39 ;  3  [22] ;  4-  3,  12,  16,  20,  22,  27,  34 ;  5.  26,  36 ; 

6.  14 ;  'f:  33,  40;  8.  7,  16,  21,  23;  9.  11,  16;  10.  46;  13. 
8,  27,  36,  47 ;  15.  21,  28 ;  16.  3,  28  %  17.  20,  23,  28,  28 ;  18. 
[3].  [15].  18,  28;  19.  24,  32,  37;  20.  10,13,  I^.  16,  =7>  Mi 
21.  3,  13,  22,  29,  36;  22.  22,  26 ;  23.  5,  8,  11,  17,  21 ;  24. 
5;  25.  [iil  27;  26.  16,  26,  26,  26;  27.  22  23,  23,  34,  34; 
28.  2,  22,  27. 

Roni.  1.  9,  11,  16,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  26;  2.  1,  1,  ti,  12, 

13.  14,  24,  25.  28  ;  3.   3,  7,  9.-  20,  22,  23 ;  4.  2,  3,  9,  13, 

14.  [15];  5-  6>  7>  IO>  *3>  *5>  J6.  i7>  *9  >  6-  5>  7>  IO»  M»  J4» 

19,  20,  2i,  23;  7.  i,  2,  5,  7,  8,  11,  [14],  15,  15,  18,  18,  19, 
22  ;  8.  2,  3,  5,  6,  7,  13,  147  15,  18,  19,  20,  22,  24,  24,  26, 
38;  9.  3,  6,  9,  11,  15,  17,  19,  28,  [32] ;  10.  2,  3,  4,  5,  10,  11, 
12,  12,  13,  16 ;  11.  1,  [13],  15,  21,  23>  24>  25,  29,  30,  32,  34; 
12.  3,  4,  19,  20;  13.  1,  3,  4»  4.  4>  6,  6>  8    9>   «  >  T4-  3»  4>  °", 

7.  8,  9,  10,  11;  17,  18;  1*5.  3,  4,  18,  [24],  26,  27;  16.  18,  19. 
1  Co.  1.  11,  17,  18,  19,  21,  26;  2    2,  8,  10,  11,  14,  16;  3. 

2>  3.  3.  3.  4=  9.  "j  T3>  17,  *9,  *9»  ?i  ;  4-  4»  7,  9,*5>  i5»  20; 
5.  3,  12 ;  6-  16,  20;  7.  [7],  9  14,  16,  22,  31 ;  8.  [8],  ic ;  9  2, 
9, 15,  16,  16,  17,  19 ;  10.  4,  5,  17,  jz6,  [28],  29  ;  11.  5,  6,  7,  8, 

12,  18,  19,  21,  23,  26,  29.  [31] ;  12.  8,  12 ;  13  [9],  [12] ;  14. 
2,  2,  [5I  9.  [14].  17>  3i    33.  34-  35i  I5-  3.  9.  l6>  2I-  22,  25, 

.27,    32,  34,    41    .52,    53;    l6.    5,     7     9,      TO,      II,    l8.       2    CO.    I. 

8.  12,  13,  19,  20,  24;  2.  2,  4,  9,  11,  17 ;  3.  6,  9,  11,  14;  4. 

5,  11,  15,  17  18;  5.  i,  2,  7,  10,  [12],  13,  14  [21];  6.  2,  14, 
16 ;  7.  3,  [8],  9,  10,  11 ;  8.  9,  10,  12,  13  ;  9.  1,.  2.  7 ;  10.  3, 

4,  8,    12,  14,  14     18;    II.  2,   2,  4,  [5],  9,    I3>    Hi    i9-    2°;    I2- 

6,  6,  9,  10.  11,  11,  13,  14,  14,  20;  13.  4   8,  9. 

Gal.  1.  10,  [io],  12,  13 ;  2.  6.  8,  i2,  18,  19,  2i ;  3.  10,  10, 
[13],  18,  21,  26,  27,  28  ;  4.  15,  22,  24,  25,  27,  30;  5.  5,  6, 

13,  14,  17 ;  6.  3,  5,  7,  9.  13,  15,  17.     Eph.  2.  8,  io,  14;  5. 

5,  6,  8,  9,  12,  13,  29  ;  6.  1.     Phil.  1.  8,  19,  21,  [23] ;  2.  13, 

20,  21,  27  ;  3.  3,  18.  20 ;  4.  11.  Col.  2. 1,  5  ;  3.  3,  20,  [24] ; 
4.  13.  1  Th.  1.  8,  9 ;  2.  1,  3,  5,  9,  [9],  14,  19,  20 ;  3.  3,  4, 
9 ;  4-2,  3,  7,  9,  14,  15 ;  5.  2,  [3],  7,  18.    2  Th.  2.  7 ;  3.  2, 

7,  10,  11.  1  Ti.  2.  [3],  5,  13;  3.  13;  4.  5,  8<  10,  16;  5.  4, 
11,  15,  18 ;  6.  7,  10.  2  Ti.  1.  7,  12 ;  2.  11,  16;  3.  2,  6,  9 ; 
4.  3,  6,  10.  11,  15.    Titus  1.  7,  10;  2.  11 ;  3  9,  12.    Phm. 

7>  i5»  22- 
Heb.  15;  2.  2,  5,  8, 10,11,  16, 18  ;  3.  3,  4.  M>  16  ;  4.  3,  4, 

8,  10, 12, 15  ;  5- 1, 13, 13  ;  6.  4,  7,  10,  13,  16 ;  7.  1,  10,  11,  12, 
13, 14,  17,  18, 19,  21,  26,  27,  28  ;  8.  3,  [4],  5,  7,  8  ;  9.  2,  13,  16, 

17,  19,  24 ;  jo.  1,  4, 14, 15, 23,  26,  3p,  36,  37  ;  11. 2,  .5,  6,  10, 
14, 16,  26, 27,  32 ;  12.  3, 6.  7,  10,  17,  17,  18,  20,  25  ;  13. 2,  5, 

9,  11,  14, 16, 17, 17,  18. 

Jas.  1.  6,  7, 11, 13,  20,  24 ;  2.  2, 10, 11, 13,  26  ;  3.  2,  7, 16 ; 
4.  14.  1  Pe.  2.  19, 20,  21,  25  ;  3. 5, 10,  17  ;  4.  3,  6.  2  Pe.  1. 
8, 10, 11, 16, 17,  21 ;  2.  4,  8,18, 19,  20,  21 ;  3.  4,  5/1  Jo.  2.  19 ; 
4.  20;  5.  3.  2  Jo.  11.  3  Jo.  3  Jude  4.  Rev.  1.  3;  3. 
2  j  9. 19, 19  ;  13. 18  ;  14.  4,  [5] ;  16.  [6],  14  ;  17.  17 ;  19. 8, 
10  ;  21.  1,  22,  23,  25  ;  22.  [9],  [18]. 

23. Through,  by  means  <]f,  S/a  (gen.).dda. 

Rom  15.  30  Now  I  beseech  you  brethren,  for  the  L. 


24.  Because  of  this,  Bi6tl  dioti. 

Luke  1.  13  Fear  not,  Zacharias  :  for  thy  prayer  is 

21.  28  lift  up  your  heads ;  for  your  redemption 
Acts  10.  20  doubting  nothing  :  for  I  have  sent  them 

18. 10  For  I  am  with  thee,  .for  I  have  much 

22.  18  for  they  will  not  receive  thy  testimony 
Gal.     2. 16  for  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh 
1  Pe.  1. 24  For  all  flesh  (is)  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory 

25. But,  now,  moreover,  5e  de. 

Marki6.    8  for  they  trembled  and  were  amazed 
Luke23. 17  For  of  necessity  he  must  release  one  unto 

26.  With  a  view  to,  els  eis. 

Matt.  5.  13  it  is  thenceforth  good  for  nothing,  but  to 
6.  34  Take  therefore  no  thought  for  the  morr. 

8.  4  offer  the  gift,  .for  a  testimony  unto  them 
10.  10  Nor  scrip  for  (your)  journey,  neither  two 
10.  iS  for  a  testimony  against  them  and  the  G. 
24. 14  gospel,  .shall  be  preached,  .for  a  witness 
26. 13  shall  also  this,  .be  told  for  a  memorial  of 
26.  28  which  is  shed,  .for  the  remission  of  sins 
27. 1^  gave  themfor  the  potter's  field,  as  the  L. 

Mark  1.    4  preach  the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the 

1.  44  offer,  .those  things,  .fora  testimony  unto 
6.    8  they  should  take  nothing  for  (their)  jour. 

6.  it  shake  off  the  dust,  .for  a  testimony  agai. 

13.  9  brought,  .for  a  testimony  against  them 

14.  9  shall  be  spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her 
Luke  2.  34  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many 

2.  34  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  spoken  against 

3.  3  preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance  for. 
5.    4  and  let  down  your  nets  for  a  draught 

5.  14  and  offer,  .for  a  testimony  unto  them 

9.  3  Take  nothing  for  (your)  journey,  neither 
9!  5  shake  off  the  very  dust,  .for  a  testimony 
9.  13  we  should  go  and  buy  meat  for  all  this  p 

9.  62  No  man.  .looking  back,  is  fit  [for]  the 

12.  19  thou  hast,  .goods  laid  up  for  many  years 
14.  35  It  is  neither  fit  for  the  land,  nor  yet  for 

21. 13  And  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony 
John   1.    7  The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear 

9.  39  For  judgment  I  am  come  into  this  world 
Acts    2.  38  be  baptized,  .for  the  remission  of  sins 

7.  5  he  would  give  it  to  him  for  a  possession 

7.  21  took  him  up,  and  nourished  him  for  her 
to.   4  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God 

13.  2  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called  , 

13.  47  for  salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

14.  26  recommended,  .for  the  work  which  they 

23.  30  how  that  the  Jews  laid  wait  for  the  man 
Rom.  1     5  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  nat. 

2.  26  uncircunicision  be  counted  for  cireumci. 

4.  3  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness 
4.    5  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness 

4.    9  that  faith  was  reckoned  to  Abraham  for 

4.  22  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness 

8.  28  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 

9.  8  the  children .  .are  counted  for  the  seed 

10.  4  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to 

13,  4  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good 

15.  2  please1  (his)  neighbour  for  (Ins)  good  to  e. 
15.    4  were  written  for  our  learning ;  that  we 
15.  26  for  the  poor  saints  which  are  at  Jerusal. 

15.  31  my  service  which  (I  have)  [for]  Jerusalem 

16.  26  made  known,  .for  the  obedience  of  faith 

1  Co.  5.    5  to  deliver,  .for  the  destruction  of  the  11. 

11.  17  not  for  the  better,  but  for  the  worse 

14.  22  Wherefore  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to 
16.    1  the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  have  gi. 

2  Co.  5.    5  he  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  selfsame 

8.  14  abundance  (may  be  a  supply)  for  their 

8.  14  abundance  also  may  be  (a  supply)  for  your 

9.  10  both  minister  bread  for  (your)  food,  and 

10.  8  for  edification,  and  not  for  your  destruc. 
Gal.     3.    6  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness 

5.  13  only  (use)  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to 
Eph.    2.  22  are  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of 

4,  12  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edi. 

5.  2  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling 

.  6.  22  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same  purp. 
Phil.    1.  17  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  Gospel 
1.  25  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of  faith  _ 
Col.     1.  16  things  were  created  by  him,  and  for  him 

1.  25  which  is  given  to  me  for  you,  to  fulfil 
2  Ti;  4. 11  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry 
Titus  3.  14;  Heb.  3.  5;  6.  16 ;  9.9;  9. 15;  n.8;  Jas. 
2.  23 ;  1  Pe.i.  4 ;  2.  14 :  Rev.  9.  15 ;  22.  2. 

27.  Because,  Bid' (ace.)  dia. 

Matt.  6.  25 ;  12.  27 ;  13.  13,  s2  i  M-  2  ;  18.  23  ;  21.  43  ; 

23. 14  ;  24..  44 ;  Mark  6.  14;  n.  24;  12.24;  I-uke 
11   19,  49  ;  12.  22 ;  14.  20 ;  John  1.  31 ;  5.  6,  18  ; 

6.  65 ;  7.  22";  8.  47 ;  9.  23 ;  10. 17 ;  12. 39 ;  13.  n  ; 
1^.  19;  16.  15;  19.  11;  Acts  2.  26;  Rom.  4.  16"; 
2C0.  4.  1 ;  7.  13  ;  1 }.  10 ;  1  Th.  3.  7 ;  2 Ti.  2. 10 ; 
Phm.  15  ;  Heb.  i.  9 ;  2.  1 ;  1  Jo.  3. 1 ;  4.  5 ;  Rev. 

7.  15 ;  12.  12  ;  1.8.  8. 
2S.O;^  of,  from,  4k  el: 

Matt2o.  '2  agreed  with  the  labourers  for  a  penny  a 
Rev.  16. 10  and  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain 

2'9.7ti,  iv  en. 

Matt  6.    7  shall  be  heard  for  their  much  speaking 
Luke  1.  44  the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy 
Phil.    1.  26  be  more  abundant  in  Jesus  Christ  for  me 
1  Ti.    5.  10  Well  reported  of  for  good  works;  if  she 
Jas.     5.    3  treasure  together  for  the  last  days 
1  Pe.  4.  14  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ 

30. Because  of,  on  account  of,  evena  hencka. 

Acts  28.  20  for  the  hope  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with 
Rom  14.  20  For  meat  destroy  not  the  work  of  God 


FOR 


363 


FOR 


30. Since  truly,  inasmuch  as,  iireiftr)  epeide. 
Luken.    6  For  a  friend  of  mine  in  his  journey  is 
i  Co.    i.  22  For  the  Jews  retoiire  a  sign,  and  the 
Phil.  2.  26  For  he  longed  after  you  all,  and  was  full 

31;  Upon,  about,  for,  eV/  (dat.)  epi. 

Mattrg.  g  put  away,  .except  fit  he)  for  fornication 
Mark  3.  5  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their 
Luke  2.  20  for  all  the  things  that  they  had  heard 

13.  17  rejoiced  for  all  the  glorious  things  that 
Acts    4. 21  glorified  God  for  that  which  was  done 

15.  14  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  [for]  his  name 
15.  31  they  rejoiced  for  the  consolation 

20.  38  most  of  all  for  the  words  which  he  spake 
26.    6  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God 

1  Co.   1.    4  for  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  you 

2  Co.  7.  13  the  more  joyed  we  for  the  joy  of  Titus 

9. 13  glorify  God  for  your  professed  subjection 
9.  15  Thanks,  .unto  God  for  his  unspeakable 

Phil.    1.    5  For  your  fellowship  in  the  Gospel  from 

3.  12  that  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of 
1  Th.  3.  g  render,  .for  all  the  jay  wherewith  we  joy 
Jas     5.  "1  howl  for'  your  miseries  that  shall  .come 

5.  7  and  hath  long  patience  for  it,  until  he  * 
Eev.  18.   9  lament  [for]  her,  when  they  shall  see  the 

32.  Upon,  for,  eirl  (ace.)  epi. 

Luke  7.  44  thou  gavest  me  no  water  for  my  feet 

18.  4  he  would  not  for  a  while :  but  afterward 
23.  28  for  me,  but  weep  for  yourse"  *^s,  and  for 

Johnig.  24  and  for  my  vesture  they  did  Chac  lots 
Phil.   3.  14  [for]  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God 
Heb.  12. 10  but  he  for  (our)  profit,  that  (we)  might  be 
1  Pe.  1. 13  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto 
ZZ.And,  Kaikai. 

Luke.  6.  32  For  if  ye  love  them  that  love  you,  what 
Rom  11.  27  For  this  (is)  my  covenant  unto  them,  when 

1  Jo.  3.   4  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law 

Si.And  verily  indeed,  Ka\  yap  kai  gar. 

Matt.  8.  9  Fori  am  a  man  under  authority,  having 
26.  73  Surely  thou,  .for  thy  speech  bewrayeth 

Marki4.  70  for  thou  art  a  GaliUean,  and  thy  speech 
•    Luke  6.  32  for  sinners  also  love  those  that  love 

6.  33  for  sinners  also  do  even  the  same 

22.  59  also  was  with  him  ;  for  he  is  a  Galikean 
John  4.  23  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship 
Acts  19.  40  For  we  are  in  danger  "to  be  called  in 
Rom.  16.   2  for  she  hath  been  a  succourer  of  many 
.    1  Co.  8.    5  For  though  there  be  that  are  called  gods 

12. 13  For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized 

12.  14  For  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many 

14.  8  For  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain 

2  Co.   2.  10  for  if  I  forgave  anything,  to  whom  I 

3.  10  For  even  that  which  was  made  glorious 
5.    4  For  we  that  are  in  (this)  tabernacle  do 

7.  5  For,  when  we  were  come  into  Macedonia 

13.  4  For  though  he  was  crucified  through 
Heb.  4.    2  For  unto  us  was  the  Gospel  preached,  as 

5.  12  For  when,  .the  time  ye  ought  to  be  teach. 
10. 34  For  ye  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  bonds 

12.  29  For  our  God  (is)  a  consuming  fire 

13.  22  for  I  have  written  a  letter  unto  you  in 
35.  Down  upon,  or  along,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Matt  19.    3  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  every  cause 
36.0/  the,  rov  tou. 

Luke  2.  21  for  the  circumcising  of  the  child,  his  name 
37.  That,  becaiise,  on  hoti. 

Matt.  6.  26  for  they  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap 
Mark  1.  27  [for  with  authority  eommandeth  he  even]' 

12.  32  for  there  is  one  God  ;  and  there  is  none 
Luke  1.  45  for  there  shall  be  a  performance  of  those 
1.  48  for,  behold,  from  henceforth  allgenerat. 

4.  36  for  with  authority  and  power  he.  coram. 

7.  39  what  manner  of  woman .  .for  she  is  a  sin. 

8.  25  for  he  eommandeth  even  the  winds  and 
12.  24  the  ravens  :  for  they  neither  sow  nor  reap 

15.  6  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost 
15.    9  for  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  had 

John  4.  35  for  they  are  white  already  to  harvest 

5.  28  for  the  hour"  is  coming,  in  the  which  all 

7.  52  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet 

14. 17  for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in 
Acts    8.  33  for  his  life  is  taken  from  the  earth 

22.  15  For  thou  shalt  be  his  witness  unto  all 
1  Co.  16.  17  for  that  which  was  lacking  on  vour  part ' 
'    2  Co.    1.   5  For  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound 
2. 15  For  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of 

7. 14  For  if  I  have  boasted  anything  to  him 

8.  3  For  to  (their)  power,  I  bear  record,  yea 
Gal.    4.  27  for  the  desolate  hath  many  more  3.  n. 
Eph.   2.  18  For  through  him  we  both  have  access  by 
Phil.  4. 16  For  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and 

1  Th.  1.    s  For  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word 

2  Th.  3.  7  for  we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly 
1  Jo.   3.    2  like  him  ;.  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is 

3.  20  [For]  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is 

4.  8  [loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  is] 
Rev.  12.  12  for  the  devil  is  come  down  unto  you 

18." 20  Rejoice,  .for  God  hath  avenged  you  on 

19.  7  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and 

21.  5  for  these  words  are  true  and  faithful 
Z&.Because,  tin  hoti  (causal). 

Matt.  5.    3,  10  for  their's  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
■  5.    4  that  mourn  :  for  they  shall  be  comforted 

5.  5  meek  :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth 

5.  6  which  do  hunger,  .for  they  shall  be  filled 

5.  7  the  merciful:  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy 

5.  8  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God 

5.  9  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children  v.  10 


Matt.  5.  12  for  great  (is)  your  reward  in  heaven 

5.  34  neither  by  heaven  ;  for  it  is  God's  throne 
5.  35  Nor  by  the  earth  ;  for  it  is  his  footstool 
5.  35  for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great  King 

5.  45  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil' 

6.  5  for  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  the 

6.  13  [For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power] 

7.  13  for  wide  (is)  the  gate,  and  broad  (is)  the 
11.  21  for  if  the  mighty  works,  which  were  done 
11.  23  for  if  the  mighty  works,  which  have  been 
11.  26  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight 

11.  29  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and 

12.  42  for  she  came  from  the  uttermost  parts  of 

13.  16  for  they  see :  and  your  ears,  for  they  hear 

15.  23  Send  her  away  ;  for  she  crieth  after  us 

16.  17  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  (it) 

16.  23  for  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  he 

17.  15  have  mercy  on  my  son  ;  for  he  is  lunatic 
23.  13  for  ye  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
23.  14  [for  ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a] 
23. 15  for  ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one 
23.  23  for  ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and 
23.  25  for  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup 

23.  27  for  ye  are  like  unto  whited  sepulchres 

24.  42  for  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth 

24.  44  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  S. 

25.  8  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for  our  lamps  are 
25. 13  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour 

Mark  5.    9  My  name  (is)  Legion  :  for  we  are  many 
6. 17  Philip's  wife  ;  for  he  had  married  her 

8.  33  for  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be 

14.  27  for  it  is  written,  I  will  smite  the  Shepherd 
Luke  1.  37  For  with  Godnothing  shall  be  impossible 

1.  49  For  he  that  is  mighty  hath  done  to  me 

1.  68  for  he  hath  visited  and  redeemed  his 

2.  11  For  unto  you  is  born  this  day.  .a  Saviour 
2.  30  For  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation 

4.  6  for  that  is  delivered  unto  me ;  and  to  wh. 
4.  32  his  doctrine :  for  his  word  was  with  power 
4.  41  speak :  for  they  knew  that  he  was  Christ 

4.  43  other  cities  also  :  for  therefore  am  I  sent 

5.  8  Depart  from  me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man 

6.  19  for  there  went  virtue  out  of  him,  and 

6.  20  Blessed,  .for  your's  is  the  kingdom  of  God 
6,  21  for  ye  shall  be  filled,  .for  ye  shall  laugh 
6.  24  for  ye  have  received  your  consolation 
6.  25  for  ye  shall  hunger,  .for  ye  shall  mourn 

6.  35  for  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and  (to) 

7.  47  sins . .  are  forgiven ;  for  she  loved  much 

8.  37  for  they  were  taken  with  great  fear.  And 

8.  42  For  he  had  one  only  daughter,  about  twel. 

9.  12  get  victuals  :  for  we  are  here  in  a  desert 
9.  38  look  upon  my  son  :  for  he  is  mine  only  ch. 

10.  13  for  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in 

10.  21  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight 

11.  31  for  she  came  from  the  utmost  parts  of 
11.  32  for  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  J. 
11.  42  for  ye  tithe  mint  and  rue  and  all  manner 
11. 43  for  ye  love  the  uppermost  seats  in  the 
11.  44  for  ye  are  as  graves  which  appear  not 
11.  46  for  ye  lade  men  with  burdens  grievous  to 
11.  47  for  ye  build  the  sepulchres  of  the  proph. 
11.  48  for  they  indeed  killed  them,  and  ye  build 

11.  52  for  ye  have  taken  away  the  key  of  know. 

12.  15  for  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the 
12.  32  for  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to 

12.  40  for  the  Son  of  man  cometh  at  an  hour 

13.  24  for  many.,  will  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall 
13. 31  depart  hence  :  for  Herod  will  kill  thee 

13.  33  for  it  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out 
14/11  For  whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be 

14.  14  for  they  cannot  recompense  thee,  .thou 

14.  17  Come ;  for  all  things  are  now  ready 

15.  24  For  tliis  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive 

15.  32  for  this  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is  alive 

16.  3  for  my  lord  taketh  away  from  me  the 
16.    8  for  the  children  of  this  world  are.  .wiser 
16.  15  for  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  among 
16.  24  tongue ;  for  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame 

18.  14  for  every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall 

19.  4  to  see  him  :  for  he  was  to  pass  that  (way) 
19.  43  For  the  days  shall  come  upon  thee,  that 
21  22  For  these  be  the  days  of  vengeance,  that 
23.  29  For,  behold,  the  days  are  coming,  in  the 

23.  31  For  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree 

24.  29  for  it  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  f. 
24.  39  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as 

John  1,  15,  30  preferred  before  me  :  for  he  was  befo. 
1.  17  For  the  law  .was  given  by  Moses,  (but) 

4.  22  we  know  what  we  worship  :  for  salvation 
5:  38  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  believe 

5.  39  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life 

6.  38  For  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do 

7.  8  I  go  not  up  yet . .  for  my  time  is  not  yet ' 

7.  29  for  I  am  from  him,  and  he  hath  sent  me 
8. 14  for  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither 

8.  16  For  I  am  not  alone,  but  I  and  the  Father 
8.  20  no  man  laid  hands  on  him';  for  liis  hour 
8.  29  fori  do  alwaysthose  things  that  please 
S.  44  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it 

:o.    4  sheep  follow  him:  for  they  know  hisvoi. 

10.  5  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers 

11.  47  What  do  we?  for  this  man  doeth  many 

12.  49  For  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself ;  but . 

14.  28  I  go  unto  the  Father  :  for  my  Father  is 

15.  5  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing 

15.  15  for  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord 

15.  15  for  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my  F. 

16.  14  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall 

17.  8  For  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words 
17.    9  wmich  thou  hast  given  hie  ;  for  they  are  , 
17.  24  for  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation 


JohniS.    2  for  Jesus  oft  timers  resorted  thither  with 

■   18.  18  liad  made  a  fire  of  coals;  for  it  was  culd 

19.  20  for  the  place . .  was  nigh  to  the  city  :  and 

19:  42  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand 

Acts    1.    5  For  John  truly  baptized  with  water ;  but 

1, 17  For  he  was  nmnbered  with  us,  and  had 

2.  25.  for  he  is  on  ray  right  hand,  that  I  should 

4.  21  for  all  (men)  glorified  God  for  that  which. 

'    5.  38  for  if  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men 

9.  15  for  lie  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear 

10.  14  for  I  have  never  eaten  anything  that  is 
10. 38  went  about  doing  good .  .for  God  was  with 

11.  S  for  nothing  common,  .hath.,  entered  into'    • 
11. 24  For  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the 

13.  41  for  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  a  work 
22.  21  Depart :  for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence 

Rom.  8.  29  For  whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did 
11.  36  For  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him- 

1  Co.    4.    9  for  we  are  made*  a  spectacle  unto'  the 

10.  17  For  we  (being)  many  are  one  bread,  (and) 

11.  15  for  (her)  hail"  is  given  her  for  a  covering 

2  Co.   4.    6  For  God.  .hath  sliined  in"  our  hearts,  to 

7.  8  For  though  I  made  you  sorry  with  a  letter 

8.  17  For  indeed  he  accepted  the  exhortation 
10.  10  For  (his)  letters,  .(are)  weighty  and  pow. 

Gal  3.  11  evident :  for,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 
4. 12  be  as  I  (am) ;  for  I  (am)  as  ye  (are) :  ye 

4.  20  desire  to  be  present . .  for  I  stand  in  doubt 
6.    8  For  he  that  soweth  to  lus  flesh  shall  of 

Eph    4.  25  for  we  are  members  one  of  another 

5.  23  For  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife 

5.  30  For  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his 

6.  12  For  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  bio, 
Phil.  1.  29  For  unto  you  it  is  given  in  the  behalf  of 
Col.     1.  16  For  by  him  were  all  things  created,  that 

1. 19  For  it  pleased  (the  Father)  that  in  him' 

2.  9  For  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 

1  Th.  2.  14  for  ye  also  have  suffered  like  things  of  5 

3.  8  For  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the 

4.  16  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from 

5.  9  For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath 

2  Th.  2.    3  for  (that  day  shall  not  come),  except  there 

1  Ti.    4.   4  For  every  creature  of  God  (is)  good,  and 

2  Ti.    1.  16  for  he  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not 
Heb.   8.  10  For  this  (is)  the  covenant  that  I  will  make 

8.  11  for  all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to 
8. 12  For  I  will  be  merciful  to  then  unright. 

Jas.  1.  12  for  when  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the 
1.  23  For  if  any  be  ahearerof  the  word,  and  not 
5.    6  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  uigh 

1  Pe    116  it  is  ■wri*    "■   Be  ye  holy  ;  for  I  am  holy 
2  15  For  so  is  the     ill  of  God;  that  with  well 
3.  12  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  over  the 

3.  18  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for 

4.  1  for  he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath; 
4.    8  for  charity  shall  coyer  the  multitude  of 
4.  14  for  the  Spirit  of  gloiy .  .resteth  upon  you 

4.  17  For  the  time  (is  come)  that  judgment. 

5.  5"for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth    • 
5.    7  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him ;  for  he 

1  Jo    2.  16  For  all  that  (is)  in  the  world,  the  lust  of 

3.   '8  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  oeginning; 
3.    9  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him  :  and  he 

3.  11  For  thisis  the  message  thatye  heard  from 

4.  7  love  one  another  :  for  love  is  of  God ;  and 

5.  4  For  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh 
5.    7  For  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in 

5.  9  for  this  is  the  witness  of  God  which  he  - 

2  To.         7  For  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the 
Jude       11  for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain 
Rev,    3.  -4  walk  with  me  in  white  :  for  they  are  wor. 

3.  8  for  thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast 

4.  11  for  thou  hast  created  all  things,  and 

'  5.    9  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed 

6.  17  For  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come 

7  17  For  the  lamb,  .shall  feed  them,  and  shall 

11  2  for  it  is  given  unto  the  Gentiles :  and  the 

12.  10  for  the  accuser,  .is  cast  down,  which 

12  12  for  the  devil  is'come  down  unto  you 

14.  7  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come:  and 
14.  15  for  the  time  is  come  for  thee  to  reap  ;  for 

14.  18  gather  the  clusters,  .for  her  grapes  are 

15.  1  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God 
15.    4  for  (thou)  only  (art)  holy  :  for  all  nations 

15.  4  for  thy  judgments  are  made  manifest 

16.  6  For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints. 

16.  21  for  the  plague  thereof  was.  .great 

17.  14  for  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings 
iS.    3  For  all  nations  have  drunk  of  the  wine 
xS.    5  For  her  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven 

18.  .  7  for  she  saith  in  her  heart,  I  sit  a  queen 
18.    8  for  strong  (is)  the  Lord, .  who  judgeth  her 
18.  10  for  in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come 

r8.  11  for  no  manbuyeth  their  merchandise  any 
18.  17  For  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to 
.    18.  19  for  in  one  hour  is  she  made  desolate 

18.  23  for  thy  merchants  were  the  great  men  of 
■    iS.  23  for  by  thy  sorceries  were,  .nations  deceiv, 

19.  2  For  true  and  righteous(are)his  judgments; 
19.  2  for  he  hath  judged  the  great  whore,  which 
19.    6  for  the  Lord  Gcd  omnipotent  reigneth. 

21.  4  neither,  .any  more  pain  :  [fori  the  former 

22.  ■  5  for  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light :  and 
22.  10  prophecy  of  this  book  :  [for]  the  time  is 

39. Concerning,  abotif,  wept  (gen.)  pere. 

Matt.  2.    8  and  search  diligently  for  the  young  child 

6.  28  And  why  take  ye  thought  for  raiment? 

22.  16  Master,  .neither  carest  thou  for  any 

26.  28  this  is  my  blood . .  which  is  shed  for  many 

Mark  1.  44  offer  for  thy  cleansing  those  things  which 

12. 14  we  know  that  thou,  .carest  for  no  man    ■ 


FOR 


364 


FOR 


Mark  14.  24  blood  of-the.new  testament. .shed  [for] 
Luke  2.  27  to  do  for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  law 

3.  19  reproved  by  him  for  Herodias.  .and  for 

4.  38  mother,  .and  they  besought  him  for  her 

5.  14  offer  for  thy  cleansing,  according  as  M. 
12.  26  is  least,  why  take  ye  thought  for  the  rest? 
19.  37  praise  God.,  for  all  the 'mighty  works  that 
22.  32  But  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy 

Tohn  9.  21  ask  him  :  he  shall  speak  for  himself 
10.  13  The  hireling,  .careth  not  for  the  sheep 
10.  33  For  a  good  work  we  stone  thee  not 
10.  33  but  for  blasphemy;  and  because  that  thou 

1 2.  6  This . .  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor ;  but 
15.  22  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin . 

10.  26  I  say  not.  .1  will  pray  the  Father  for  you 
1*7.   9  I  pray  for  them,  .not  for  the  world,  but 

17.  20  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for 
19.  24  but  cast  lots  for  it,  whose  it  shall  be 

Acts    8.  15  Who.  .prayed  for  them,  that  they  might 
19.  40  be  called  in  question  fortius  day's  uproar 
24.  21  Except  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that  I 
Rom.  8.    3  and  for  sin,  condemed  sin  in  the  flesh 
Eph.  6.  18  Praying  always,  .in  the  spirit,  .for  all 
1  !ol.     1.    3  We  give  thanks,  .praying  always  [for]  you 
.  2.    1  what  great  conflict  I  have  [for]  you,  and 
4-    3  praying  also  for  us,  that  God  would  open 

1  Th.  1.    2  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all 

3.   9  what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God.  .for 
5.  25  Brethren,  pray  for  us 

2  Th.  i.    3  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for 

1.  11  Wherefore  also  we  pray  always  for  you 

2.  13  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God  for  you 

3.  1  Finally,  brethren,  pray  for  us,  that  the 
Phm.       10  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus 
ileb.    5.    3  he  ought,  as  for  the  people,  so  also  for 

10.  6  In  burnt  offerings,  .for  sin  thou  hast  had 
10.  S  burnt  offerings,  .forsin  thou  wouldestnot 
10.  iS  these  (is,  there  is)  no  more  offering  for  sin 
10.  26  t'.ere  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins 
ii.  40  God.  .provided  some  better  thing  for  us 

13.  1 1  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary . .  [for]  sin 
13.  iS  Pray  for  us  :  for  we  trust  we  have  a  good 

1  Pe.    3.  iS  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the 
5.    7  Casting  all.  .upon  him  ;  for  he  careth  for 
1  So.    2.    2  for  our  sins,  .for  our's  only,  but  also  for 

4.  10  his  Son.  .the  propitiation  for  our  sins 
.  5.  16  T  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it 

40.  Toward^  leading  to,  wp6s  {gen.)  pros, 
.     Acts  27.  34  take,  .meat ;  for  this  is  for  your  health 
ZX.Towavdt  in.  consideration  of,  irp6s  (ace.)  p>ros. 
Malt  26.  12  011  my  body,  she  did  (it)  for  my  burial 
Mark  10.    5  For  the  hardness  of  your  heart  he  wrote 
Luke  8.  13  have  no  root,  which  for  a  while  believe 
John  5.  35  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to  rejoice  in 
Acts   3.  10  they  knew  that  it  was  he  which  sat  for 
1*3.  15  any  word  of  exhortation  for  the  people 

1  Co.  7.    5' except,  .with  consent  for  a  time,. that  ye 

7.  35  And  this  I  speak  for  your  own  profit 
7.  35  but  lor  that  which  is  comely,  and  that 
10.  11  and  they  are  written  for  our  admonition 

2  Co.  2.  16  And  who  (is)  sufficient  for  these  things? 

7.  8  made  you  sorry,  though,  .but  for  a  season 

■  Gal.    2.    5  we  gave  place .  .no,  not  for  an  hour 
Eph.   4.  12  For  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  .the  wo. 

■  1  Tii.  2.  17  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in 

1  Ti.    1.  16  for  a  pattern  to  them  which  should 

2  Ti.  3.  1 5  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  f. 
I'inn.  15  perhaps  he.  .departed  for  a  season,  that 
II  b.  12.  10  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened 

12.  11  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth 

42.  In  behalf  of \  uirep  [yen.)  huper. 

Matt.  5.  4}  pray  for  them  which,  .persecute  you 
Luke  6.  23  pray  [for]  them  which  despitefully  use 
9.  50  said,  .he  that  is  not  against  us  is  for  us 
22. 19  This  is  my  body,  which  is  given  for  you 
22.  20  in  my  blood,  which  is  shed  for  you 
.    John  6.  51  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world 

10.  11  g)od  shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the  she. 
10. 15  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep 

1 1.  4  but  for  the  glory  of  God,  that  the  Sou  of 
11.  5  d  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people 
11.  51  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation 

11.  52  not  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also 
15.  13  that  a  man  lay  down  his  lifefor  his  friends 

18.  14  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people 
Acts   5,  41  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his 

8.  24  Pray  ye  to  the  Lord  for  me,  that  none  of 

12.  5  but  prayer  was  made,  .unto  God  [for] him 
15  26  have  hazarded  their  lives  forthe  name  of 
21.  13  to  die . .  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
21.  2  i  should  be  offered  for  every  one  of  them 

'  26.  1  Thou  art  permitted  to  speak  [for]  t  h> ,  ■]■; 

Rom.  1.  5  obedience,  .among all  nations,  forliis  na. 

1.  8  First,  I  thank  my  God.  .[for"]  you  all,  that 

5.  6  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly 
5.  7  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die 
5.  7  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare 

5.   8  while.. yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us 
8  26  the  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  [for] 

8  27  he  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  ace. 
8.  31  If  God  0)e)  for  us    who  (can  be)  against 
8.  32  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall 
8.  31  Chiist..who  also  maketh  intercession  for 

9  3  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  broth. 
1  Brethren,  my.  .praver  to  God  for  Israel 

14.  15  Destroy  not  him.  .for  whom  Christ  died 

15.  f  was  a  minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the 
15.  g  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for  (his)  mercy 
15.  30  witli  me  in  (your)  prayers  to  God  for  me 
r      4  Who  have  for  my  lite  laid  down  their  own 


1  Co.   1.  13  was  Paul  crucified  [for]  you?  or  were  ye 

4.  6  that  no  one  of  you  be  putted  up  for  one 

5.  7  For  even  Christ,  .is  sacrificed  [for]  us 

10.  30  evil  spoken  of.  .forwhich  I  give  thanks? 

11.  24  this  is  my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you 

12.  25  should  have  the  same  care  one  for  anoth. 
15.  3  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  accord. 
15.  29  they  do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead 
15.  29  why  are  they  then  baptized  for  the  dead? 

2  Co.    !.■  6  for  your  consolation.. for  your  consola. 

1.  11  also  helping  together  by  prayer  for  us 
5.  14  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead 
5.  15  And.  .he  died  for  all,  that  they  which 

5.  15  unto  him  which  died  for  them,  and  rose 
5.  20  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ 
5.  21  he  hath  made  him.  .sin  for  us,  who  knew 
7, 12  but  that  our  care  for  you  in  the  sight  of 

8.  16  put.  .care  into  the  heart  of  Titus  for  you 
9. 14  by  their  prayer  for  you,  which  long  after 

12.    8  For  this  thing  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice 

12.  15  I  will  very  gladly,  .be  spent  for  you 

12. 19  all  things,  dearly  beloved,  for  your  edify. 

13.  8  nothing  against  the  truth,  but  for  the 
Gal.     1.    4  Who  gave  himself  [for]  our  sins,  that  he 

2.  20  Son  of  God,  who.  .gave  himself  for  me 

3.  13  Christ,  .being  made  a  curse  for  us :  for  it 
Eph.    1. 16  Cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  making 

3.    1  Paul,  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 

3.  13  ye  faint  not  at  my  tribulations  for  you 

5.  2  hath  given,  himself  for  us  an  offering  and 
5.  20  Giving  thanks  always  for  all  things  unto 

5.  25  even  as  Christ  also,  .gave  himself  for  it 

6.  19  And  for  me,  that  utterance  may  be  given 
6.  20  For  which  I  am  an  ambassador  in  bonds 

Phil.    1.    4  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all  making 

Col.     1     7  who  is  for  you  a  faithful  minister  of  Chr. 

1     9  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you,  and  to  desire 

1  24  Who  now  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  you 

4.  12  labouring  fervently  for  you  in  prayers 

4.  13  that  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for  you,  and  them 

1  Th.  5,  10  Who  died  for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake 

2  Th.  1.    4  we.  .glory  in  you.  .for  your  patience  and 

1.  5  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer 
1  Ti.    2.    1  giving  of  thanks,  be  made  for  all  men 

2.  2  For  kings,  and.  .all.  .in  authority 

2.  6  Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be 
Titus  2.  14  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 
Heb.  2.  .  9  that  lie . .  should  taste  death  for  every  man 

5.  1  every  high  priest,  .is  ordained  for  men  in 
5.    1  that  he  may  offer,  .sacrifices  for  sins 

5.  3  And . .  he  ought . .  to  offer  [for]  sins 

6.  20  Whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered 

7.  25  everliveth  to  make  intercession  for  them 
7.  27  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins 

9.  7  not  without  blood,  which  he  offered  for 
9.  24  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us 

10.  12  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins 
13.  17  they  watch  for  your  souls,  as  they  that 

Jas.  5.  16  and  pray  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be 
1  Pe    2.  21  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving 

3.  18  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might 

4.  1  as  Christ,  .suffered  [for]  us  in  the  flesh 

1  Jo.  3.  16  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us  :  and 
3.  16  to  lay  down  (our)  lives  for  the  brethren 

43. As,  like  as,  ws  hos. 

Matt2i.  46  because  they  took  him  for  a  prophet 
1  Pe.  2. 16  and  not  using,  .liberty  for  a  cloak  of 

[See  also  Aloud,  as,  call,  care,  shout,  sing,  wait,  waited, 

why] 

FOR  all  — 

l.Even,  D?  gam. 

Lev.  26.  44  And  yet  for  all  that,  when  they  be  in  the 

Z-With,  oyim. 

Neh.  5.  18  yet  for  all  this  required  not  I  the  bread  of 
FOR  all  that  — 
Thus,  so,  ovtw  houto. 

1  C0.14.  21  yet  for  all  that  will  they  not  hear  me 

FOR . . .  cause  — 

l.Over  against  this,  avr\  tovtov  anti  toutou. 
Eph..  5.  31  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  f. 

%  Through  this,  on  account  of  this,  5ia  tovto. 
John  12.  18  For  this  cause  the  people  also  met  him 

12.  27  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour 
Acts  28.  20  For  this  cause,  .have  I  called  for  you,  to 
Rom.  1.  26  For  this  cause  God  gave  them  up  unto 

13.  6  For,  for  this  cause  pay  ye  tribute  also 
15.    9  For  this  cause  I  will  confess  to  thee 

1  Co.   4.  17  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  unto  you  Tim. 
11. 10  For  this  cause  ought  the  woman  to  have 

11.  30  For  this  cause  many  (are)  weak  and  sick. 
Col.      1.    9  For  this  cause  We  also,  since  the  day  we 

1  Th.  2.  13  For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without 

3.    5  For  this  cause,  when  I  could  no  longer 

2  Th.  2. 11  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong 
1  Ti.  1.  16  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy 
Heb.   9.  13  for  this  cause  he  is  the  mediator  of  the 

3,  With  a  view  to  fin's,  els  tovto  eis  touto. 

John  18.  37  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world 

1  Pe.  4.    6  for  this  cause  was  the  gospel  preachod 

I .  ];•  cause  of,  on  account  of,  eVe/ca  heneka. 

Matt  19.  5  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father 
Mark  10.  7  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  fa. 
Acts  26.  21  For  these  causes  the  Jews  caught  me  in 

2  Co.   7.  12  not  for  his  cause  that  had  done  the  wrong 

7.  12  nor  for  his  cause  that  suffered  wrong,  but 


5.  For  the  sake  of  this,  tovtov  x^Plv  toutou  charin. 
Eph.    3.    1  For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the  prisoner  of  J. 
3.  14  For  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  unto  fhe 
Titus  1.    5  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that 
6. For  you,  vfxiv  (dat.)  humin.' 

2  Co.  5. 13  whether  we  be  sober,  [it  is]  for  your  cause 
FOR  ever  — 
All  the  days,  D^rr1?!  kol-hayyamun. 

Gen.  43.    9  then  let  me  bear  the  blame  for  ever 

44.  32  shall  bear  the  blame  to  my  father  for  ev 

Deut.  4.  40  prolong  (thy)  days  upon  the  earth,  .for  e. 

18.    5  minister  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  .for  e. 

Josh.  4.  24  ye  might  fear  the  Lord  your  God  for  ev. 

1  Sa.  28.    2  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  for  ever 

1  Ki.  12.    7  then  they  will  be  thy  servants  for  ever 

2  Ch.21.    7  a  light  to  him  and  to  his  sons  for  ever 
Psa.  23.   6  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the.  Lord  for  e: 
Jer.    31.  36  from  being  a  nation  before  me  for  ever 

32.  39  that  they  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the 
35.  19  want  a  man  to  stand  before  me  for  ever 

FOR...  sake  — 

1.  Because  of,  for  the  sake  of,  S^a  galal. 

Gen. '30.  27  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  sake 

39.  5  Lord  blessed  the.  .house  for  Joseph's  sa. 
Deut.  1.  37  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sakes 
Mic.    3. 12  shall  Zion  for  your  sake  be  plowed,  .a  n- 

2. On  account  of,  Zia  (ace.)  dia,  (gen.) 

ilattio.  22  shall  be  hated  of  all.  .for  my  name's  sake 
14.    3  and  put.  .in  prison  for  Herodias'  sake 
14.   9  nevertheless  for  the  oath's  sake,  and' 
19. 12  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sa. 
24.    9  hated  of  all  nations  for  my  name's  sake 
24.  22  for  the  elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be 
Mark  4.  17  persecution  ariseth  for  the  word's  sake 
6.  17  bound  him  in  prison  for  Herodias'  sake 
6.  26  sorry  ;  (yet)  for  his  oath's  sake,  and  for 
13.  13  be  hated  of  all.  for  my  name's  sake 

13.  20  forthe  elect's  sake,  whom  he  hath  chosen 
Luke2i.  17  ye  shall  be  hated,  .for  my  name's  sake 
Johni2.    9  they  came  not  for  Jesus'  sake  only,  but 

14.  11  or  else  believe  me  for  the  very  work's  sake 

15.  21  will  they  do  unto  you  for  my  name's  sake 
Rom.  4. 23  Now  it  was  not  written  for  his  sake  alone 

13.    5  for  wrath,  but  also  for  conscience'  sake 

15.  30  for.  .Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the 

1  Co.   4.  10  We  (are)  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  but  ye 

9.  23  And  this  I  do  for  the  Gospel's  sake,  that 
10.  25,  27  asking  no  question  for  conscience' sake 

2  Co.  4.    5  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus'  sake 

4.  11  alway  delivered;unto  death  for  Jesus' sake 
Col.     3.   6  [Forwhich  things'  sake]  the  wrath  of 
1  Til.  5.  13  esteem  them . .  in  love  for  their  work's  sak. 

1  Ti.    5.  23  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake 

2  Ti.  2.  10  I  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sakes 
Phm.        9  Yet  for  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech,  .being 

1  Pe.   2.  13  Submit  yourselves,  .for  the  Lord's  sake 

3.  14  and  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake 

.  1  Jo.   2.  12  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  his  name's  sake 

2  Jo.         2  For  the  truth's  sake,  which  dwelleth  in 

3.  On-  account  ofv.s,  Bl   r^/xas  di  hemcis. 

1  Co.    9.  10  Or  saith  he  (it)  altogether  for  our  sakes  ? 
9. 10  For  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  (this)  is  written 

4.  Oh  account  of  you,  5i'  v/xas  di  humas. 
Johmi.  15  I  am  glad  for  your  sakes  that  I  was  not 

12.  30  This  voice  came  not.  .but  for  your  sakes 
Rom. 11.  28  for  your  sakes.  .beloved  for  the  fathers' sa. 

1  Co.    4.    6  transferred  to  myself,  .for  your  sakes 

2  Co.    2. 10  for  your  sakes.  .in  the  person  of  Christ 

4.  15  For  all  things  (are)  for  your  sakes,  that 
8.    9  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that 

1  Til.   1.   5  what  mannerof  men  we  were.-foryours. 
3.   9  we  joy  for  your  sakes  before  our  God 

5. Oh  account  of  that  one,  5i'  iKtivov  di  ekeinon. 

1  Co.io.  28  eat  not  for  his  sake  that  showed  it,  and 

G.Tn,  iv  en. 

Eph.  4.  32  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you 
7. Because  of,  on  account  of,  eVerca  heneka. 

Matt.  5.  10  are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake 

5.  11  say  all .  .evil  against  you.  .for  my  sake 
10.  18  brought  before  governors.,  for  my  sake 
10.  39  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake  shall 

16.  25  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
19. 29  hath  forsaken  houses,  .for  my  name's  sa. 

Mark  8.  35  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
10.  29  left  house,  .for  my  sake,  and  the  gospel's 

13.  9  shall  be  brought  before . .  kings  for  my  sa. 
Luke  6.  22  shall  reproach . .  for  the  Son  of  man's  sake 

o.  24  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
18  29  left  house . .  for  the  kingdom  of  God's  sake 
2.1.  12  brought  before  kings. .formy  name's  sake 
Rom.  8.  36  Forthy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long 

5.  Around,  about,   concerning,  irepe  peri  (gen.). 

Acts  26.  7  For  which  hope's  sake,  king  Agrippa,  I 

9.I71  behalf  of  virip  huper. 

Johni3,  37  Ix)rd..  .1  «ill  lay  down  my  life  for  thy  sake 
13.  38  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake ". 

17.  19  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they 
Acts    9.  16  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  name's  sake 

2  Co. 12.  10  pleasure,  .in  distresses,  for  Christ's  sake 
rhil  1.  29  not  only,  but  also  to  suffer  for  his  sake 
Col.     1.  24  tor  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church 

3  Jo.      .  7  that  for  his  name's  sake  they  went  forth 
10.  For  the  sake  of  x&pw  charin. 

Titus  1,  11  teaching  things,  .for  filthy  lucre's  sake 


FOR 


365 


FOREFRONT 


FOR  that  — 

1.  If,  since,  et  ei. 

Heb.    7.  15  for  that  after  the  similitude  of  Meicmseu 

2:  Since,  seeing  that,  iiret  epei. 

Heb.  5.    2  for  that  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with 

Z.Since  truly,  iweiH-fi  epeide.   -■ 

2  Co.   5.   4  not  [for  that]  we  would  be  unclothed 
'  i.Upon,  about,  for,  Ijti  (dat.)  epi. 

Rom.  jj.  12  so  death  passed  upou  all  men,  [for  that] 

5. Because,  0V1  hoti. 

Johni2.  18  the  people,  .met  him,  for  that  they  heard 
2  Co.  1.  24  Not  for  that  we  have  dominion  over  your 
1  Ti.    1.  12  for  that  he  counted  me  faithful,  putting 

TOR  that... ought  to  say  — 

Instead  of  saying,  avrl  rod  Keyeiv,  anti  tou  legem. 

Jas.    4. 15  For  that  ye  (ought)  to  say,  If  the  Lord 
FOR  then  —  . 

1.  Since,  seeing  that,  iirei  epei. 

Rom.  3.  6  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world? 
Heb.  9.  26  For  then  must  lie  often  have  suffered 

10.  2  For  then  would  they  not  have  ceased  to 

2.  Seeing  that  then,  hrei  &pa  epei  ara. 

1  Co.    5. 10  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  wor. 
FOR  to  — 

l.In  order  to,  fya?  lemaan. 

Jer.  43.   3  for  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the 

2.  With  a  view  to,  ets  rb  eis  to. 

Romn.  11  Gentiles,  for  to  provoke  them  to  jealousy 

Z.In  order  that,  to  the  end  that,  so  that,  'Ivahina. 
Mark  3. 10  they  pressed  upou  him  for  to  touch  him 
Johmo.  10  The  thief  cometh  not,  but  for  to  steal 

11.  53  took  counsel,  .for  to  put  him  to  death 
Acts  17. 15  receiving  a  commandment,  .for  to  come 

22.  5  to  bring  them,  .bound,  .for  to  be  punish. 
Eph.  2.  T5  for  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new 
Rev.    9.  15  loosed .  .for  to  slay  the  third  part  of  men 

12.  4  the  dragon  stood,  .for  to  devour  her  child 

4.  Toward  the,  irpbs  to  jyros  to. 

Matt  23.    5  all  their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen  of 
[See  also  Call,  cause,  ever,  evermore,  hope,  intent,  lay, 
lie.  little,  look,  make,  purpose,  season,  seek,  send,  tarry, 
time,  wait.] 

FORASMUCH  as  — 

1.  After j  "inN  achar. 

Gen.  41.  39  Forasmuch  as  God  hath  showed  thee  all  ■ 
2. After  that,  ~k?n   ion  achare  asher. 

Judglii".  36  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  taken  veng. 

2  Sa.  19.  30  forasmuch  as  my  lord"  the  king  is  come 

3. Because,  jy:  yaan. 

Amos  5.  n  Forasmuch  therefore  as  your  treading  (is) 
A. Because  that,  t^n  \yl  yaan  asher. 

1  Ki.14.   7  Forasmuch  as  I  exalted  thee  from  among 
5. Because  that,  *3  \%l  yaan  hi. 

1  Ki.  13. 21  Forasmuch  as  thou  hast  disobeyed  the 

Isa.     8.    6  Forasmuch  as  this  people  refuseth  the 
29. 13  Forasmuch  as  this  people  draw  near  (me) 

6. That,  because,  *■?  ki.. 

Deut  12. 12  forasmuch  as  he  hath  no  part  nor  inlier. 
7 .Because  that,  fS'Sy  *3  ki  cd-ken. 

Nuni  10.  31  forasmuch  as  thou  knowest  how  we  are 

8.  Because  that,  'i  ?5i?"73  kol-qebel  di. 

Ezra   7.  14  Forasmuch  as  thou  art  sent  of  the  king 
Dan.    2.  40  forasmuch  as  iron  breaketh .  .andsubdueth 
2. 41  forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed 
2. 45  Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  that  the  stone 
4.  18  forasmuch  as  all  the  wise  (men)  of  my 
(5-  12  Forasmuch  as  an  excellent  spirit,  and 
6.  '4  forasmuch  as  he  (was)  faithful,  neither 
6/22  forasmuch  as.  .innocency  was  found  in 

9.  Till,  in  ad. 

Josh.17. 14  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me 
10. If,  since,  ei  ei. 

Acts  11. 17  Forasmuch  then  as  God  gave  them  the 
V^. Since,  seeing  that,  eVe[  epei. 

Ik..    (.12  Even  so  ye,  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous 

Heb.    2.  14  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  par. 

12. Since  indeed,  iireiSyTrep,  iirstSr]  epeideper. 

Luke  r.    1  Forasmuch  as  many  have  taken  in  hand 

Acts  15.  24  Forasmuch  as  we  have  heard,  that  certain 
FORASMUCH  as... was  — 
-  Being,  &v  an. 

Acts   9.  38  forasmuch  as  Lydda  was  nigh  to  Joppa 
FORBEAR,  to  — 
l.Tfc  be  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  D*?*}  damam. 

Eze.  24.  17  Forbear  to  cry,  make  no  mourning  for 

2.  To  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  b^n  chadal. 
Exod23.   s  and  wouidest  forbear  to  help  him;  thou 
Num.  9.  13  and  forbeareth  to  keep  the  passover,  even 
Deut  23.  22  if  thou  shalt  forbear  to  vow,  it  shall  be 

1  Sa.  23.  13  told  Saul,  .and  he  forbare  to  go  forth 
1  Ki.  22.    6  Shall  I  go.  .to  battle,  or  shall  I  forbear? 

22. 15  shall  we  go.  .to  battle,  or  shall  we  forb.? 
2Ch.  18.    5,  14  Shall  we  go.,  to  battle,  or  shall  I  for? 

25.  16  forbear ;  why  shouldest  thou  be  smitten? 

25.  16  Then  the  prophet  forbare,  and  said,  I 


2  Ch.  35.  21  forbear  thee  from . .  God,  who  (is)  with  me 
Job  16.  6  and  (though)  I  forbear,  what  am  I  eased? 
Jer.  40.    4  but  if  it  seem  ill  unto  thee,  .forbear 

41.    8  So  he  forbare,  and  slew  them  not  among 

51.  30  Themighty  men  of  Babylon  have  forborne 

Eze.    2.    5,  7  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  willfo. 

"3.  11  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forb. 

3.  27  let  him  forbear:  for  they  (are)  a  rebellious 

Zechn.  12  give  (me)  my  price  ;  and  if  not,  forbear 

3.  To  keep  back,  spare,  withhold,  ~£'n  chasak. 

Prov  24.  i3  If  thou  forbear  to  deliver,  .drawn  unto 
4. To  draw  or  stretch  out,  *|£:o  mashak. 

Neh.    9.  30  Yet  many  years  didst  thou  forbear  them 

5.  To  hold  self  back  or  up,  av^x0^0-1  omechomai. 
Eph.    4.    2  with  long  suffering,  forbearing  one  anot. 

.  Col.     3.  13  Forbearing,  .and  forgiving  one  another 

6.  To  send  back,  let  away,  avlv/xi  aniemi. 

Eph.    6.    9  forbearing  threatening  -.  knowing  that 
~.  To  spare,  (pei'So^cu  plieidomai. 

2  Co.  12.    6  but..  I  forbear,  lest  any  man  should  think 
FORBEAR  working,  to  —    . 
Not  to  work,  fj.1]  ipya^aQat  me  ergazesthai. 

1  Co.  9.    6  have  not  we  power  to  forbear  working  ? 
FORBEAR,  can  — 
7*0  cover,  conceal,  forbear,  o-re'va*  stegd. 

1  Th.  3.    1  when  we  could  no  longer  forbear,  we 
3.    5  when  I  could  no  longer  forbear,  I  sent 
FORBEARANCE  — 
A  holding  back,  avoxh  anoche. 

Rom.  2.    4  riches  of  his  goodness  and  forbearance 

3.  25  past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God 
FORBEARETH,  he  that  — 

Ceasing,  leaving  off,  forbearing,  Tin  chadel.     ' 
Eze.    3.  27  him  hear ;  and  he  that  forbeareth,  let 

FORBEARING  — 

1. Temper,  *)i<  aph. 

Prov  25.  15  By  long  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded 

2.7b  contain,  sustain,  713  kid,  Za. 

Jer.  to.   9  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could 

FORBID  — 

Profanation,  nT7*i  chalilah. 

1  Sa.  24.   6  Th'e  Lord  forbid  that  I  should  do  this 

26.  11  The  Lord  forbid  that  I  should  stretch  fo. 
1  Ki.  21.    3  Naboth  said  to  Ahab,  The  Lord  forbid 
1  Ch.  11.  19  And  said,  My  God  forbid  it  me,  that  I 

FORBID  (to  take),  to  — 

1.7*0  restrain,  shut  up,  nbs  kala. 

Nuran.  28  Joshua,  .said,  My  lord  Moses,  forbid  the. 
2.7*0  set  up,  command,  lay  a  charge,  niy  tsavah,  3. 

Deut.  2.  37  whatsoever  the  Lord  our  God  forbade  us 

4.  23  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  forbidden  thee 

3.7*0  cut  short,  thoroughly,  restrain,  dia.Kw\vw. 
Matt  3.  14  John  forbade  him,  saying,  I  have  need  to 

4.7*0  cut  slwrt,  restrain,  icw\va>  koluo. 

Matt  iq.  14  and  forbid  them  not,  to  come  unto  me 
Mark  9.  38  he  followeth  not  us:  and  we  forbade  him 
9.  39  Jesus  said,  Forbid  him  not :  for  there  is 

10.  14  and  forbid  them  not :  for  of  such  is  the  k. 
Luke  6.  29  him  that  taketh  away  thy  cloak  forbid 

9.  49  we  forbade  him,  because  he  followeth  not 
9.  50  And  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Forbid,  .not 
18.  16  forbid  them  not :  for  of  such  is  the  king. 

23.  2  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  say. 
Acts  10.  47  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these 

16.   6  forbidden  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  preach  the 

24.  23  should  forbid  none  of  his  acquaintance  to 
1  Co.  14.  39  and  forbid  not  to  speak  with  tongues 

1  Th.  2.  16  Forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles 

1  Ti.    4.    3  Forbidding  to  marry,  .to  abstain  from  m. 

2  Pe.  2. 16  voice  forbade  the  madness  of  the  prophet 

3  Jo.       10  forbiddeth  them  that  would,  and  casteth 

FORBID,  God  — 

1.  Profanation,  rh'bn  chalilah. 

Gen.  44.    7  God  forbid  that  thy  servants  should  do 
44. 17  he  said,  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so 

Josh  22.  29  God  forbid  that  we  should  rebel  against 
24.  16  God  forbid  that  we  should  forsake  the 

1  Sa.  12.  23  God  forbid  that  I  should-  sin  against  the 
14.  45  Shall  Jonathan  die.  .God  forbid:  (as)  the 
20.    2  God  forbid ;  thou  shalt  not  die':  behold 

Job   27.   5  God  forbid  that  I  should  justify  you:  till 

2.  Let  it  not  be,  /t?j  yeuoiro  me  genoito. 

Luke  20.  16  when  they  heard  (it),  they  said,  God  for. 
Rom.  3.    4  God  forbid :  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  ev. 

3.  6  God  forbid :  for  then  how  shall  God  jud. 
•  3. 31  God  forbid :  yea,  we  establish  the  law 

6.    2  God  forbid.  How  shall  w.e,  that'are  dead 

6.  15  "What  then?  shall  we  sin.  .God  forbid 

7.  7  (Is)  the  law  sin?  God  forbid.  Nay,  I  had 
7.  13  Was.  .good  made  death  unto  me?  God  f. 
9. 14  (Is),  .unrighteousness  with  God  ?  God  fo. 

11.  1  Hath  God  cast  away  his  people?  God  fo. 
11.  11  God  forbid :  but.  .through  their  fall  salv. 

1  Co.  6.  15  make,  .members  of  an  harlot?  God  forbid 
Gal.     2. 17  (is).  .Christ  the  minister  of  sin?  God  for. 
3.  21  God  forbid  :  for  if  there  had  been  a  law 
6.  14  God  forbkl  that  I  should  glory,  save  in 
FORBIDDEN,  to  be  — 
Not,  tib  lo. 

Lev.    5. 17  any  of  these  tilings  which  are  forbidden 


FORBIDDING,  no  man  — 

Uncut  off,  unrestrained,  a.xu>kvTQ)s  akolutds. 

Acts  28.  31  and  teaching,  .no  man  forbidding  him 
FORCE  — 
1. Arm,  force,  jrnN  edra, 

Ezra   4.  23  made  them  to  cease  by  force  and  power 

2. Strength,  fit*  on. 

Job    40. 16  and  his  force  (is)  in  the  navel  of  his  belly 
3. Might,  ""i-pa  geburah. 

Jer.  23: 10  course  is  evil,  and  their  force  (is),not 
^.Strength,  npin  chozkah. 

1  Sa.    2.  16  give,  .and  if  not,  I  will  take  (it)  by  force 
Eze.  34.    4  with  force  and  with  cruelty  have  ye  ruled 

5.  Hand,  t  yad. 

Jer..  iS.  21  pour  out.  .(blood)  by  the  force  of  the  sw. 
Eze;  35.    5  by  the  force  of  the  sword  in  the  time  of 

6.  Power,  ns  koach. 

Job    30. 18  By  the  great  force,  .is  my  garment  chan. 

Jer.   48.  45  They  that  fled  stood . .  because  of  the  force 

Amos  2.  14  the  strong  shall  not  strengthen  his  force 
FORCE,  of  — 
Steadfast,  firm,  &4@aios  bebaios. 

Heb.  9.  17  For  a  testament  (is)  of  force  after  men 
FORCE,  to  — 
1.7*0  take  hold,  p]n  chazak,  5. 

Deut  22. 25  the  man  force  her,  and  lie  with  her 
2. 7*0  subdue,  ^32  kctbash. 

Esth.  7.    S  Will  he  force  the.  queen  also  before  me  in 
3.  To  press,  ci'ush,  fry?  lackats. 

Judg.  1.  34  the  Amorites  forced  the  children  of  Dan 
4.7*0  drive  or  force  away,  rm  nadach,  5. 

Prov.  7.  21  with  the  flattering  of  "her  lips  she  forced 
5.7*0  afflict,  humble,  njy  anah,  3. 

Judg  20.   5  my  concubine  have  they  forced,  that  she 

2  Sa.  13.  12  Nay,  my  brother,  do  not  force'me ;  for  no 

13.  14  but,  being  stronger  than  she  forced  her 
13.  22  because  he  had  forced  his  sister  Tamar 
13. 32  from  the  day.  .he  forced  his  sister  Tamar 

FORCE  self,  to  — 

7*o  refrain  or  force  self,  P5x  aphaq,  7. 

1  Sa.  13.  12  I  forced  myself  therefore,  and  offered  a 

FORCE,  to  take  by  — 

7*0  snatch  away,  seize,  apirafa  Tiarpazo. 

Matt  11.  12  kingdom,  .and  the  violent  take  it  by  force 
John  6.  15  they  would  come  and  take  (him  by  force 
Acts  23. 10  to  take  him  by  force  from  among  them 

FORCES  — 

1. Strength,  force,  army,  rn  chayil. 

2  Ch.17.    2  he  placed  forces  in  all  the  fenced  cities  of 
Isa.   60.   5  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  unto 

'60.  11  may  bring,  .the  forces  of  the  Gentiles 
Jer.  40.    7,  13  all  the  captains  of  the  forces 

41.  ir,  13,  16  the  captains  of  the  forces  that 

42.  1  Then  all  the  captains  of  the  forces,  and 

42.  8  and  all  the  captains  of  the  forces  which 

43.  4,  5  and  all  the  captains  of  the  forces 
Obad.      11  strangers  carried,  away  captive  his  forces 

2. Strong  ones,  forces.  D'XJpxs  niaamatstsim. 

Job   36.  19  not  gold,  nor  all  the  forces  of  strength 
3. Stronghold,  strength,  liyo  maoz. 

Dan.  11.  38  shall  he  honour  the  God  of  forces :  and  a 
FORCES,  great  — 
Strength,  force,-  army,  b*n  chayil. 

Dan.  11.  10  shall  assemblea  multitude  of  great  forces 

FORCIBLE,  to  be  — 

•7*0  be  powerful  (or  sweet),  jno  marats,  2. 

Job     6.  25  How  forcible  are  right  words  !  but  what 
FORCING  — 

1.  Wringing  out,  churning,  J"D  mits. 

Prov  30.  33  the  forcing  of  wrath  bringeth  forth  strife 
2.7*0  drive  or  force  away,  rni  nadach. 

Deut2o  19  destroy,  .by  forcing  an  ax  against  them 
FORD  — 
l.Passage,  ford,  *13&2  maabar. 

Gen.  32.  22  rose,  .arid  passed  over  the  ford  Jabbok 

2.  Passage,  ford,  rrisyD  mabarah. 

Josh.  2.  7  them  the  way  to  Jordan  unto  the  fords 
Judg.  3.  28  took  the  fords  of  Jordan  toward  Moab 
Isa.   16.    2  Moab  shall  be  at  the  fords  of  Arnon 

FORECAST,  to  — 

1.7*0  think,  devise,  design,  3e>g  chashab. 

Dan.  11.  25  they  shall  forecast  devices  against  him 
2. 7*0  think,  devise,  design,  3a:n  chashab,  3. 

Dan.  11.  24  he  shall  forecast  Iris  devices  against  the 
FOREFATHER  — 
1. First  father,  ]Svtr\  "X  ab  rishon. 

Jer.  11.  10  to  the  iniquities  of  their  forefathers  m 
2. Earlier  born  ones,  progenitors,  irpSyovot  progou, 

2  Ti.    1.    3  God,  whom  I  serve  from  (my)  forefathers 
FORE -FRONT  — 
1.0m*  against  the  face,  D'JS  b\o  mul  panim. 

Exod26..  9  double,  .in  the  fore-front  of  the  taberna. 


FOREHEAD 


366 


FORGETFUL 


Exo(b8.  37  upon  the  fore-front  of  the  mitre  it  shall  be 
Ley.  8  9  upon  his  fore-front,  did  he  put  the  golden 
2  Sa.  jj.  15  Set  ye  Uriah  in  the  fore-front  of  the  hot. 

%Face,  O'l^panim. 

2  Ki.16.  14  from  the  fore-front  of  the  house,  from 
Eze.  40.  19  from  the  fore-front  of  the  lower  gate 
40. 19  unto  the  fore-front  of  the  inner  court 
47.    1  for  the  fore-front  of  the  house  (stood)  to. 

o.ILi'i/,  vvft  rosh. 

2  Ch.  20.  27  Jehoshaphat  in  the  fore-front  of  them 
4\Tooth,  ]y  shm. 

1  Sa.  14.    5  The  fore-front  of  the  one  (was)  situate 

FOREHEAD  —  . 

^.HfOBB,  f]N  aph. 

Eze.  16. 12  I  put  a  jewel  on  thy  forehead,  and  earr. 

2. Forehead,  nsp  metsach. 

Exod2S.  3S  it  shall  be  upon  Aaron's  forehead,  that 

28.  38  it  shall  be  always  upon  his  forehead 
rSa.  17.  49  smote  the  Philistine  in  his  forehead 

17.  49  that  the  stone  sunk  into  his  forehead 

2  Ch.  26.  19  the  leprosy  even  rose  up  in  his  forehead 

26.  20  behold,  he  (was)  leprous  in  his  forehead 
Jer.  3.  3  thou  hadst  a  whore's  forehead,  thou  ref. 
Eze.    3.    8  thy  forehead  strong  against  their  forehea. 

3.    9  harder  than  flint  have  I  made  thy  foreh. 

9.    4  set  a  mark  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  men 

3.  Forehead,  between  tlie  eyes,  fieTcowovmetdpon. 
Rev.    7.   3  have  sealed  the  servants,  .in  their  foreh. 
9.    4  have  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  foreheads 
13. 16  all.  .to  receive  a  mark,  .in  their  foreheads 
14.    1  Father's  name  written  in  their  foreheads 
14.    9  receive  (his)  maik  in  liis  forehead,  or  in 
17.    5  And  upon  her  forehead  (was)  a  name 
20.    4  received  (his)  mark  upon  their  foreheads 
22.   4  and  hjs  name  (shall  be)  in  their  foreheads 
FOREHEAD,  bald  — 
With  bald  forehead,  naa  gibheach. 

Lev.  r$.  41  fallen  off.  .he  (is)  forehead  bald  :  (yet  is) 
FOREIGNER  — 
1. Unknown,  stranffer,  ""121  nokri. 

Deut  15.  3  Of  a  foreigner  thou  mayest  exact  (it  aga.) 
Obad.       11  foreigners  entered  into  his  gates,  and 

2.Settler,  n^ifl  toshab. 

Exodi2.  45  A  foreigner  and  an  hired  servant  shall 

3.  Sojourner,  one  dwelling  near,  irdpoinos  paroikos. 

Eph.   2.  19  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners 
FOREKNOW,  to  — 
To  begin  to  know  first  or  beforehand,  irpoyivatrKa. 

Rom.  8.  29  whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did  pred. 
11.   2  cast  away  his  people  whom  he  foreknew 
FOREKNOWLEDGE  — 
.ri  knowing  first  or  beforehand,  1rp6yyeotrts  progno. 

Acts    2.  23  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge 

1  Pe.    1.    2  Elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of 
FOREMOST  — 

Fi rsf  former,  foremost,  ji»M*i  rishon. 

Gen.  32.  17  he  commanded  the  foremost,  saying 

33.    2  put  the  handmaids  and  their  children  f. 

2  Sa.  18.  27  Me  thinketh  the  running  of  the  foremost 
FOREORDAIN,  to  —  . 

To  begin  to  know  ''■forehand,  Trpoyw&crKw  prrogin. 
1  Pe.     1.  20  Who  verily  was  foreordained  before  the  f. 
FORE  PART  — 
l.Face,  D^3 pnnim. 

Exod  28.  27  toward  the  fore  part  thereof,  over  against 
39.  20  underneath,  toward  the  fore  part  of  it 

1  Ki.  6.  20  the  oracle  in  the  fore  part,  .twenty  cub. 

Eze.  42.'  7  toward  the  outer  court  on  the  fore  part 
2.  Fore  part,  prow,  irpcopa  prora. 

Acts  27.  41  the  fore  part  stuck  fast,  and  remained 
FORERUNNER  — 
One  that  runs  before,  irp6Bpofj.os  prodromes. 

Heb.   6.  20  Whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered 
FORESEE,  to  — 
To  sec,  behold,  nx-!  raah. 

Prov  22:   3  a  prudent  (man)  foreseeth  the  evil,  and 
27".  12  A  prudent  (man)  foreseeth  the  evil,  (and) 
FORESEE,  see  before,  to  — 
To  see  before,  irpot'iSop  proeidon. 

Acts   2.  31  He,  seeing  this  before,  spake  of  the  v.  35. 

Gal.    3.    8  the  Scripture,  foreseeing  that  God  would 
FORESHTP  — 
Prow  {of  a,  ship),  irpupa  prora. 

Acts  27.  30  would  have  cast  anchors  out  of  the  fores. 
FORESKIN  — 
Unclrcumcision,  foreskin,  rhyjr  orlah. 

Gen.  17.  11  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin 
17.  14  whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin  is  not  circum. 
17.  23  circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  foreskin 

17.  24,  25  circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin 
Exod.  4.  25  cut  off  the  foreskin  of  her  son.  and  cast 
Lev.  12.   3  in  the  eighth  day  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin 
Deut  10.  t6  Circumcise,  .the  foreskin  of  your  heart 
Josh.  5.    3  circumcised . .  at  the  hill  of  the  foreskins 
1  8a.  iS.  25  an  hundred  foreskins  of  the  Philistines 

18.  27  David  brought  their  foreskins,  and  they 


2  Sa.    3.  X4  I  espoused  to  me  for  an  hundred  foresk. 
Jer.    4.    4  take  away  the  foreskins  of  your  heart 

FORESKIN  uncovered,  to  be  — 
To  "be  uncircumciscd,  7"Vi  arel,  2. 

Hab.   2.  16  let  thy  foreskin  be  uncovered :  the  cup 
FOREST  — 

1.  Forest,  thicket,  irjn  chorcsh. 

2  Ch,27.    4  in  the  forests  he  built  castles  and  towers 
2.Forest,  out-spread  place,  "ij,"  yaar. 

1  Sa.  22.    5  David,  .came  into  the  forest  of  Hareth 

1  Ki.   7.    2  He  built  also  the  house  of  the  forest  of 

10.  17,  21  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 

2  Ki.  19.  23  I  will  enter  into . .  the  forest  of  his  Carmel 
2  Ch.  9.  16,  20  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
Psa.  50.  10  every  beast  of  the  forest  (is)  mine,  .the 

104.  20  all  the  beasts  of  the  forest  do  creep 
Isa.     9.  18  shall  kindle  in  the  thickets  of  the  forest 
10. 18  shall  consume  the  glory  of  his  forest 
to.  19  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  his  forest  shall  be 
'  •     10.  34  shall  cut  downthe  thickets  of  the  forests 

21.  13  In  the  forest  in  Arabia  shall  ye  lodge,  0 

22.  8  to  the  armour  of  the  house  of  the  forest 
29.  17  fruitful  field  shall  be  esteemed  as  a  forest? 
32.  15  the  fruitful  field  be  counted  for  a  forest 
32.  19  it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on  the  forest 
37.  24  I  will  enter  into . .  the  forest  of  his  Carmel 
44.  14  Cypress,  .among  the  trees  of  the  forest 
44.  23  break  forth.  .0  forest,  and  every  tree  th. 
56.    9  to  devour,  .all  ye  beasts  in  the  forest 

Jer.     5.    6  a  lion  out  of  the  forest  shall  slay  them 
10.    3  for  (oue)  cutteth  a  tree  out  of  the  forest 
12.   8  heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  lion  in'the  forest 
21. 14  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  forest  thereof 
26.  18  the  house  as  the  high  places  of  a  forest 
46.  23  They  shall  cut  down  her  forest,  saith  the 
Eze.  15.    2,  6  vine  tree . .  among  the  trees  of  the  for.? 
20.  46  prophesy  against  the  forest  of  the  south 
20.  47  say  to  the  forest  of  the  south.  Hear  the      | 
39.  10  neither  cut  down  (any)  out  of  the  forests 
Hos.    2.  12  I  will  make  them  a  forest,  and  the  beasts 
Amos  3.    4  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest,  when  he 
Mic.    3.  12  the  house  as  the  high  places  of  the  forest 

5.  "8  as  a  lion  among  the  beasts  of  the  forest 
Zech  11.    2  the  forest  of  the  vintage  is  come  down 

S.Forest,  out  spread  place,  rri£  yaarah. 

Psa.  29.   9  maketh . .  to  calve . .  discovereth  the  forests 
4. Paradise,  park  or  garden  ground,  Dtib  pardes. 

Neh.  2.    8  unto  Asaph  the  keeper  of  the  king's  forest 

FOREST  of  Arabia,  tt^.3  ny!  yaar  baarab. 
Its  situation  is  quite  unknown. 

Isa.   21.  13  In  the  forest  in  A,  shall  ye  lodge 

FOREST  of  Carmel,  ta"]?  "iy:  yaar  karmel. 

South  of  Accho,  in  ZebVlun,  on  the  S.  border  of  Aslier. 

2  Ki.  19.  23  will  enter  into,  .the  forest  of  his  C. 

Isa.    37.  24  will  enter  into,  .the  forest  of  his  C. 
FOREST  of  Hareth,  rnrt  ij,"  yaar  cJiereth. 
Somewhere   on  the  border  of  the  Philistine  plain  in 
the  S.  of  Judah. 

1  Sa..22.  5  departed,  and  came  into  the  forest  of  H. 
FOREST  of  Lebanon,  {Tari^rr  iy*  yaar  hallebanon. 
The  "  House  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon"  was  so  called 
probably  from  being  fitted  up  with  cedar.  It  was  built 
by  Solomon  for  an  armoury  in  Jerusalem,  with  forest- 
like rows  of  the  cedars  of  Lebanon. 

1  Ki.  .7.    2  built  also  the  house  of  the  forest  of-L. 

10. 17  put  them  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. 
10.  21  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. 

2  Ch.  9.  16  put  them  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. 

9.  20  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. 
FORETELL  — 
l.To  say  beforehand,  irposlirov  jwoeijwn. 

Marki3.  23  behold,  I  have  foretold  you  all  tilings 
2.7b  announce  beforehand,  irpoKarayy4\Ko}. 

Acts    3.  24  have  likewise  [foretold]  of  these  days 
3.7b  lay  before,  tell  before,  irpoAeya)  prolego. 
'    2  Co.  13.  2  I  told  you  before,  and  foretell  you,  as  if 
FOREWARN,  to  — 
l.To  say  before,  irpoziirov proeipon, 

1TI1.  4.   6  as  we  also  have  forewarnedjouandtesti. 
2. To  shmo  secretly,  v-rroheUvvpLi  hupodeiknv m , i. 

Lukei2.    5  I  will  forewarn  you  whom«ye  shall  fear 
FORFEITED,  to  be  — 
To  be  devoted,  enrr  charam,  6. 

Ezra  10.   8  all  his  substance  should  be  forfeited,  and 
FORGE,  to  — 
To  stitch  w\sew  on,  hsa  tdphal. 

Job   13.    4  ye  (are)  forgers  of  lies,  ye  (are)  all  physi. 

Psa. 119.  69  The  proud  have  forged  a  lie  against  me 
FORGET  — 
Forgetful,  forgetting,  r.yj  shakeach. 

Psa.     9.  17  into  hell .  .all  the  nations  that  forget  God 

Isa.   65.  11  ye  (are)  they  that,  .forget  my  holy  moun. 
FORGET,  to  — 
l.To  forget,  n^  nashah, 

Jer.  23.  39  behold,  I,  even  I,  will  utterly  forget  you 

Lam.  3.  17  thou  hast  removed  my  soul.  .1  forgat 

2.  To  forget,  n;;r  shayah. 

Deut  32.  18  and  hast  forgotten  Gcd  that  formed  thee 


3.7b  forget,  neglect,  nr^"  shctkach. 

Gen.  27.  45  and  he  forget  (that)  which  thou  hast  done 

40.  23  did  not.  .remember  Joseph,  but  forgat 
Deut.  4.    9  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget 
4.  23  lest  ye  forget  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
4.  31  nor  forget  the  covenant  of  thy  fathers 
6.  12  beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,  which- 
8. 11  Beware  that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord  thy 
8.  14  and  thou  forget  the  Lord  thy  God,  which   - 

8.  19  if  thou  do  at  all  forget  the  Lord  thy  God 

9.  7  Remember,  .forget  not,  how  thou  provo.  ■ 

24.  19  and  hast  forgot  a  sheaf  in  the  field 

25.  19  thou  shaltblotout..thoushaltnotforget 

26.  13  commaudments,  neither  have  I  forgotten 
Jndg.  3.    7  forgat  the  Lord  their  God,  and  served 

1  Sa.    1.  11  remember  me,  and  not  forget  thine 

.12.    9  when  they  forgat  the  Lord  their  God,  he 
2K1.  17.  38  And  the  covenant,  .ye  shall  not  forget 
Job     8.  13  So  (are)  the  paths  of  all  that  forget  God   ' 
9.  27  If  I  say,  I  will  forget  my  complaint 
n.  16  Because  thou  shalt  forget  (thy)  misery 

19. 14  my  familiar  friends  have  forgotten  me 
24.  20  The  womb  shall  forget  him  ;  the  worm 
39.  15  forgetteth  that  the  foot  may  crush  them 

Psa.  9.  12  he  forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  humble 
10.  11  hath  said  in  his  heart,  God  hath  forgotten 
10. 12  Arise,  0  Lord,  .forget  not  the  humble 
13.  1  How  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  O  Lord  ? 
42.  9  Why  hast  thou  forgotten  me?  why  go  I 
44.  17  yet  have  we  not  forgotten  thee,  neither 
44.  20  If  we  have  forgotten  the  name  of  our  God 

44.  24  forgettest  our  affliction  and  our  oppres.? 

45.  10  forget  also  thine  own  people,  and  thy  fa. 

50.  22  Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God 
59.  11  Slay  them  not,  lest  my  people  forget 
74.  19  forget  not  the  congregation  of  thy  poor 
74.  23  Forget  not  the  voice  of  thine  enemies 

77.  9  Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious? 

78.  7  and  not  forget  the  works-  of  God,  but 
78. 11  And  forgat  his  works,  and  his  wonders 

102.  4  My  heart  is  smitten . .  so  that  I  forget  to 

103.  2  Bless  the  Lord,  .forgetnotall  hisbene'fits 
106.  13  They  soon  forgat  his  works  ;  they  waited 
106.  21  They  forgat  God  their  Saviour,  which 
119.  16  thy  statutes  :  I  will  not  forget  thy  word 
119.  61  robbed  me.  .1  have  not  forgotten  thy  law 
119.  83  like  a  bottle,  .do  I  not  forget  thy  statutes 
119.  93  I  will  never  forget  thy  precepts  :  for  with 
119.  109  in  my  hand  :  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  law 
119.  139  mine  enemies  have  forgotten  thy  words 
119.  141  despised;  (yet)  do  not  I  forget  thyprec. 
119.  153  Consider,  .for  I  do  not  forget  thy  law 
119.  176  for  I  do  not  forget  thy  commandments 
137.    5  If  I  forget,  .let  my  right  hand  forget 

Prov.  2. 17  and  forgetteth  the  covenant  of  her  God 

3.  1  My  son,  forget  not  my  law  ;  but  let  thine 

4.  5  get  understanding:  forget  (it)  not ;  neith. 
31.  5  Lest  they  drink,  and  forget  the  law,  and 
31.    7  Let  him  drink,  and  forget  his  poverty 

Isa.   17. 10  Because  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of 
49.  14  Zion  said .  .my  Lord  Jiath  forgotten  me 
49.  15  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child 

49.  15  they  may  forget,  yet  will  I  not  forget 

51.  13  forgettest  the  Lord  thy  Maker,  that  hath 
54.   4  thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  youth 

Jer.     2.  32  Can  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments 

2.  32  yet  my  people  have  forgotten  me  days 

3.  21  they  have  forgotten  the  Lord  their  God 
13.  25  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  trusted  in 

18. 15  my  people  hath  forgotten  me,  they  have 
23.  27  as  their  fathers  have  forgotten  niy  name 
30.  14  All  thy  lovers  have  forgotten  thee 

44.   9  Have  ye  forgotten  the  wickedness  of 

50.  6  they  have  forgotten  their  resting  place 
Lam.  5.  20  Wherefore  dost  thou  forget  us  for  ever 
Eze.  22.  12  and  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

23.  35  Because  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and 
Hos.   2.  13  she  went  after  her  lovers,  and  forgat  me 

4.  6  thou  hast  forgotten  the  law  of  thy  God 
4.    6  I  will  also  forget  thy  children 

8.  14  For  Israel  hath  forgotten  his  Maker 
13.    6  filled,  .therefore  have  they  forgotten  me 
Amos  8.    7  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works 

i.To  forget  about,  eirtXafdafofLat  epilanthanomai. 
Matt  1 6.  5  his  disciples,  .hadforgotten  to  take  bread 
Mark  8.  14  (the  disciples)  had  forgotten  to  take  bre. 
Lukei2.  6  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God 
Phil.  3.  13  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind 
Heb.  6.  10  God  (is)  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your 
13.  16  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget 
Jas.     1.  24  forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  was 

5. To  forget  utterly,  iKKav&dvofiat  cklanthanoiuai. 
Heb.  12.   5  ye  have  forgotten -the  exhortation  which 

6.  To  receive  forgeffidness,  Xa/xfldvio  \-r\6i)vlambano. 

2  Pe.  1.    9  hath  forgotten  that  he  was  purged  from 

FORGET,  to  cause  to  — 

7b  cause  to  forget,  03^  shetkach,  5. 

Jer.  23.  27  Which  think  to  cause  mypeople  to  forget 
FORGET,  to  make  — 
7b  cause  to  forget,  nv;3  nashah,  3*. 

Gen.  41.  51  God.  .hath  made  me  forget  all  my  toil 
FORGETFUL  — 
Forgctfulness,  ewiKrjtrfxovf)  epilesmone. 

Jas.     1.  25  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a 


FORGETFUL 


36/ 


FORMER 


FORGETFUL,  to  .be  — 

To  forget  (tlso  or  besides,  tiriXavQavopLai  epilantha. 

Heb..i$.    2  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers 
FORGETFTJLNESS  — 
Forget/illness,  n&  neshiyyah. 

Psa.  88.  12  thy  righteousness  in  the  land  of  forget.  ? 
.  FORGIVE,  to  — 
l.To  cover,  nss  kaphar,  3. 

Psa.  78.  38  But  he.,  full  of  compassion,  forgave  (their) 
Jer.  18.  23  forgive  not  their  iniquity,  neither  blot  out 
2.To  lift  up  or  away,  K"?}  nasa. 

Gen  50.  17  Forgive,  .the  trespass .. forgive  the  tresp. 
Exodio.  17  Now  therefore  forgive,  I  pray  thee,  my 

32.  32  Vet  now,  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin 
Num  14.  ig  and  as  thou  hast  forgiven  this  people 
Josh  24.  19  he  will  not  forgive  your  transgressions 
1  Sa.  25.  28  forgive  the  trespass  of  thine  handmaid 
•  Psa.  25.  18  Look  upon.. and  forgive  all  my  sins 

32.    5  and  thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin 
85.    2  Thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniquity  of  thy  p. 
99.    8  thou  wast  a  God  that  forgavest  them 
Isa.     2.    9  humbleth.  .therefore  forgive  them  not 
Z.To  send  away,  let  go,  rnn  salack. 

Kum3o.    5,  8,  12  and  the  Lord  shall  forgive  her 
1  Ki.  8.  30  hear  thou . .  andTvhen  thouhearest,  forgive 
8.  34  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel 
8.  36  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  and  of  thy 
8.  39  in  heaven  thy  dwelling-place,  and  forgive 

8.  50  And  forgive  thy  people  that  have  sinned 
a  Ch.  6.  21  hear,  .and  when  thou  hearest  forgive 

6.  25  hear  thou  from  the  heavens,  and  forgive 
6.  27  hear,  .and  forgive  the  sin  of.thy  servants 
6.  30  forgive,  and  render  unto  every  man  acco. 

6.  39  and  forgive  thy  people  winch  have  sinned 

7.  14  will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  heal  their 
Psa.  103.  3  Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities ;  who 
Jer.  31.  34  I  will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  I  will  re. 

36.    3  that  I  may  forgive  their  iniquity  and 
Dan.   9.  19  O  Lord,  forgive ;  0  Lord,  hearken  and 
Amos  7.   2  O  Lord  God,  forgive,  I  beseech  thee :  by 
i.To  loose  away,  airoXvw  apoluo. 

Luke  6.  37,  37  forgive,  and  ye  shall  be  forgiven 

5.  To  be gracious  to,  x^C0^1  charizomai. 

Xuke  7.  43  I  suppose,  .(he)  to  whom  he  forgave  most 

a  Co.   2.    7  So  that . .  ye  (ought)  rather  to  forgive  (him) 

2.  jo  To  whom  ye  forgive,  .for  if  I  forgave 

2.  10  any  thing,  to  whom  I  forgave  (it),  for  your 
12. 13  not  burdensome  to  you?  forgive  me  this 

Eph.   4.  32  tender-hearted,  forgiving  one  another 
4.  32  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven 
Col.     2.  13  quickened,  .having  forgiven  you  all  tres. 

3.  13  forgiving  one  another,  .as  Christ  forgave 

6.  To  send  or  let  off  or  away,  a<plny.i  aphiemi. 

Matt.  6. 12  And  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive 
6.  14  For  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses 
6.  14  your  heavenly  Father  will,  .forgive  you 
6.  15  if  ye  forgive  not  men  their  trespasses 

6.  15  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your  tr. 
$.   2  Son,  be  of  good  cheer ;  thy  sins  be  forgi. 

9.  5  sins  be  forgiven  thee ;  or  to  say,  Arise 
9.    6  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins 

12.  31  All  manner  of  sin.  .shall  be  forgiven 
12.  31  the  blasphemy .  .shall  not  be  forgiven  unto 
12.  32  the  Son  of  man,  it  shall.be  forgiven  him 
12.  32*ib  shall  not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in 
18.  21  Lord,  how  oft  shall.  .1  forgive  him?  till 
18.  27  loosed  him,  and  forgave  him  the  debt 
i3.  32  I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt,  because  thou 
18,  35  [if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every] 
Hark -2.    5  he  said.  .Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee 

2.    7  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only? 

2.  9  sins  be  forgiven  thee  ;  or  to  say,  Arise 

2.  10  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins 

3.  28  All  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto  the  sons 

4.  12  and  (their)  sins  should  be  forgiven  them 
11.  25  forgive.. that  your  Father.. may  forgive 
11.  26  [do  not  forgive,  neither  will  your  F.  f.] 

Luke  5.  20  said.  .Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee 

5.  21  Who  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  alone? 
5.  23  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee ;  or  to  say 

5.  24  Son  of  man  hath  power . .  to  forgive  sins 

7.  47  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven 
7.  47  but  to  whom  little  is  forgiven ..  loveth 
7.  48  he  said  unto  her,  Thy  sins  are  forgiven 
7.  49  Who  is  this  that  forgiveth  sins  also? 

11.  4  forgive  us  our  sins  :  for  we  also  forgive 

12.  10  shall  be  forgiven  him.  .it  shall  not  be  fo. 
17.    3  Take  heed,  .if  he  repent,  forgive  hini 

17.   4  saying,  1  repent ;  thou  shalt  forgive  him 
23.  34  [Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive  them] 
Acts    8.  22  if  perhaps  the  thought . .  may  be  forgiven 
Rom.  4.    7  Blessed,  .they  whose  iniquities  are  forgi. 
Jas.,   5.15  committed  sins,  they  shall  be  forgiven 
1  Jo.  1.   9  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us 
2. 12  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for 

FORGIVE  frankly,  to  — 

To  be  gracious  to,  x^p'C0^0'  charizomai. 

Luke  7.  42  nothing,  .he  frankly  forgave  them  both 
FORGIVE,  ready  to  — 
Semling  away,  letting  go,  n^D  sallach- 

Psa^Sfi.    5  thou,  Lord,  (art)  good,  and  ready  to  f  org. 
FORGIVEN  — 
To  lift  up  or  away,  k'^J  nasa. 

Psa.  32.    1  (is  he  whose)  transgression  (is)  forgiven 

Isa.   33.  24  the  people,  .(shall  be)  forgiven,  .iniquity 


FORGIVEN,  to  be  — 

l.To' be  covered,  ~i?3  kaphar,  7. 

Deut2i.   8  And  the  blood  shall  be  forgiven  them 

2.. To  be  sent  away,  let  go,  rhu  salach,-2. 
Lev.    4.  20,  26,  31,  35  and  it  shall  be  forgiven 

5.  10,  13,  16,  iS  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him 

6.  7  it  shall  be  forgiven  him  for  any  thing 
19.  22  the  sin.  .he  hath  done  shall  be  forgiven 

Numis.  25,  26,  28,  and  it  shall  he  forgiven 

FORGIVENESS  — 

1.-4  sending  away,  letting  go,  nrr^p  selichah. 
Psa.  130.    4  But.  .forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou 
Dan.   9.    9  To  the  Lord  our  God .  .forgivenesses 

2.^1  sending  away,  letting  go,  &<f>eo-i$  aphesis. 
Mark  3.  29  hath  never  forgiveness,  but  is  in  danger 
Acts    5.  31  a  Saviour,  .to  give,  .forgiveness  ot  sins 
13.  38  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of 
26. 18  that  they  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins 
Eph.    1.    7  In  whom  we  have,  .the  forgiveness  of 
Col.     1. 14  In  whom  we  have,  .the  forgiveness  of 

FORGIVING  — 

l.To  lift  up  or  away,  kVJ  nasa. 

Exod34.    7  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression 
Numi4.  18  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression 

2.  To  be  gracious  to,  xapt£bpa'  charizomai. 
Eph,   4.  32  tender-hearted,  forgiving  one  another 
Col.     3. 13  Forbearing,  .and  forgiving  one  another 

FORGOTTEN  — 

To  be  forgotten,  ny£  shakach,  2. 

Job  28.    4  forgotten  of  the  foot :  they  are  dried  up 
FORGOTTEN,  to  he  — 
l.To  be  forgotten,  nyi  nasJiah,  2. 

Isa,  44.  21  0  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of 

2. To  beforgotten,  res?  shakach,  2. 

Gen.  41.  30  the  plenty  shall  be  forgotten  in  the  land 
Deutsi.  21  shall  not  be  forgotten  out  of  the  mouth 
Psa.    9.  18  the  needy  shall  not  alway  be  forgotten 

31. 12  I  am  forgotten  as  a  dead  man  out  of 
Eccl.  2.  16  that  which  now  (is),  .shall  all  beforgot. 

9.    5  for  the  memory  of  them  is  forgotten 
Isa.  ^23. 15  Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  seventy  years 
23.  16  thou  harlot  that  hast  been  forgotten 
65.  16  because  the  former  troubles  are  forgotten 
Jer.  20.  11  everlasting  confusion  shall  never  be  forg. 
23. 40  shame,  which  shall  not  be  forgotten 
50.    5  covenant  (that)  shall  not  be  forgotten 

Z.To  be  or  become  forgotten,  nsy>  shakach,  7. 

Eccl.  8.  10  they  were  forgotten  in  the  city  where    " 
FORGOTTEN,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  cause  to  forget,  nr^  shakach,  3. 

Lam.  2.  6  hath  caused  the.  .sabbaths  to  be  fcrgot. 
FORK  — 
Triple  fork,  jitp^n  xfot&  shelosh  qilleshon. 

1  Sa.  13.  21  for  the  coulters,  and  for  the  forks,  and 
FORM  — 

1. Sight,  appearance,  vision,  n>p3  march. 
Job     4. 16  I  could  not  discern  the  form  thereof 

2. Judgment,  ride,  os^-p  mishpat. 

2  Ch.  4.    7  candlesticks . .  according  to  their  form 
Z.Face,  W&  panzm. 

2  Sa.  14.  20  To  fetch  about  this  form  of  speech  hath 
i.Form,  sharp  outline,  rr;3B  tsxyah. 

Eze.  43. 1 1  show  them  the  form  of  the  house,  and  the 
43.  11  the  forms  thereof,  .all  the  forms  thereof 
43.  11  that  they  may  keep  the  whole  form  ther. 

5. Image,  sliadoio,  D?*  tselem. 

Dan.  3.  19  the  form  of  his  visage  was  changed  against 

6.  Appearance,  sight,  1*1  rev. 

Dan.    2.  31  image . .  and  the  form  thereof  (was)  terri. 
3.  25  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of  God 

7. Form,  visage,  nxh  toar. 

1  Sa.  28. 14  he  said  unto  her,  What  form  (is)  he  of  ? 
Isa.  52. 14  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men 

53.   2  For . .  he  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness 

8.  Pattern,  form,  building,  TPXSQ  tdbnith. 

Eze.  8.  3  he  put  forth  the  form  of  an  hand,  and 
8.  10  behold,  every  form  of  creeping  things 
10.   8  appeared,  .the  form  of  a  man's  hand 

9. Form,  fiop<p-f)  morplie. 

Marki6.  12  [he  appeared  in  another  form  unto  two] 
Phil.   2.    6  Who,  being  in  the  fomi  of  God,  thought 
2.    7  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant 

10. Form,  appearance,  fj.6p<paxn.s  morphosis. 

Rom.  2.  20  which  hast  the  form  of  knowledge  and  of 

2  Ti.    3.    5  Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying 

ll.Type,  impress,  tvttos  tupos. 

Rom.  6.  17  that  form  of  doctrine  which  was  delivered 
12.  Under  type,  outline,  virorvTrcoats  hupotupidsis. 

2  Ti.    1. 13  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which 
FORM,  to^ 
l.To  form,  (cause  to  writhe  with  pain),  Vn,  "?in,  Zd. 

Dent  32.  iS  and  hast  forgotten  God  that  formed  thee 
.  Job  26.  13  his  hand,  .formed  the  crooked  serpent 

Psa.  90.    2  or  ever  thou  hadst  formed  the  earth  and 

Prov.26. 10  The  great  (God),  that  formed  all.  .both 


2.To  form,  fashi on,  frame,  constitute,  ■»;  yatsar. 
"Gen.   2.    7  the  Lord  God  formed  man  (of)  the  dust 
2.    8  there  he  put  the  mau.  .he  had  formed 
2.  19  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field 
2  Ki.19.  25  of  ancient  times  that-I  have  formed  it? 
Psa.  94.   9  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see? 

95.    5  and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  (land) 
Isa.   27.  11  he  that  formed  them  will  show  them  no 
37.  26  Hast  thou  not  heard . .  that  I . .  formed  it  ? 
43.    1  thus  saith.  .he  that  formed  thee,  O  Israel 
43.    7  I  have  formed  him  ;  yea,  I  have  made 

43.  21  This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself 

44.  2  Lord  that  made  thee,  and  formed  thee 
44.  10  Who  hath  formed  a  god,  or  mOlten  a 

44.  21  I  have  formed  thee ;  thou  (art)  my  servant 

44.  24  he  that  formed  thee  from  the  womb 

45.  7  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness 
45.  18  God  himself  that  formed  the  earth  and 

45.  iS  he  formed  it  to  be  inhabited :  I  (am)  the 
49.   5  And  now,  saith  the  Lord  that  formed  me 

Jer.     1.   5  Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  belly  I  knew 
10.  16  he  (is)  the  former  of  all.  .and  Israel  (is) 
33.    2  the  Lord  that  formed  it,  to  establish  it 
Amos  4.  13  For,  lo,  he  that  fonneth  the  mountains 

7.    1  he  formed  grasshoppers  in  the  beginning 
Zech.12.    1  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him 
Z.To  form,  fxop<p6a}  morphoo. 

•Gal.    4.  19  I  travail  in  birth,  .until  Christ  be  formed 
4.  To  shape,  moidd,  TrXdaaco  plasso. 

Rom.  9.  20  say  to  him  that  formed  (it),  Why  hast  thou 
1  Ti.    2. 13  For  Adam  was  tirst  formed,  then  Eve 

FORM,  -without  — 

A  ruin,  vacancy,  snh  tohu. 

Gen.  m  1.    2  And  the  earth  was  without  form,  and 
Jer.  "  4.  23  and,  lo,  (it  was)  without  form  and  void 

FORMED,  thing  — 

Thing  moulded  or  shaped,  TrXao-fxa  plasma. 
Roni.  9.  20  Shall  the  thing  formed  say.  ."Why  hast 

FORMED,  to  be — 

l.To  form,  (cause  to  writhe  with  pain),  Vn,  ^n,  Za. 
Job  26.    5  Dead  (things)  are  formed  from  under 

2.  To  be  formed,  fashioned,  framed,  is;  yatsar,  2; 

Isa.    43.  10  before  me  there  was  no  God  formed 
Z.To  be  formed,  fashioned,  framed,  "is;  yatsar,  6. 

Isa.    54. 17  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee 
4.  To  be  moved,  kneaded,  formed,  ]"]|3  qarats,  4. 

Job  33.   6  Behold . .  I  also  am  f oemed  out  of  the  clay 
FORMER  — 
l.To  form,  constitute-,  fashion,  frame,  is*  yatsar. 

Jer.  51. 19  for  he  (is)  the  former  of  all  things  ;  and    . 
2. Before,  eastern,  ancient,  *jiDij2  qadnioni. 
'  Zech  14.    8  half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea 

Mai.  3.    4  pleasant  unto  the  Lord  ..  as  in  former  ye, 

3.  First,  former,  foremost,  |iBJ*n  rishon. 

Gen.  40. 13  after  the  former  manner  when  thou  wast 
Num  21.  26  who  had  fought  against  the  former  king 
Deut  24.    4  Her  former  husband,  which  sent  her 

1  Sa.  17.  30  answered  him.  .after  the  former  manner 

2  Ki.  1.  14  the  two  captains  of  the  former  fifties  with 

17.  34  Unto  this  day  they  do  after  the  former 
17.  40  but  they  did  after  their  former  manner 

Neh.   5.  15  But  the  former  governors  that  (had  been) 

Psa.  79.    8  0  remember  not  against  us  former  iniqui. 
89. 49  where  (are)  thy  former  loving  kindnesses 

Eccl.  1.  11  (There  is)  no  remembrance  of  former 
7. 10  that  the  former  days  were  better  than 

Isa.  41.  22  let  them  show  the  former  things,  what 

42.  9  the  former  things  are  come  to  pass 

43.  9  who.  .can.  .show  us  former  things?  let 
43.  18  Remember  ye  not  the  former  things 

46.  9  Remember  the  former  things  of  old:  for 
48.    3  I  have  declared  the  former  tilings  from 
61.    4  shall  raise  up  the  former  desolations 
65.    7  therefore  will  I  measure  their  former 
65.  16  because  the  former  troubles  are  forgot. 
65: 17  and  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered 

Jer.  34.  5  the  former  kings  which  were  before  thee 
36.  28  and  write  in  it  all  the  former  words  that 
Dan.  11.  29  but  it  shall  not  be  as  the  former,  or  as  the 
Hag.  2.  9-shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former,  saith 
Zech.  1.   4  unto  whom  the  former  prophets  have 

7.    7  Lord  hath  cried  by  the  former  prophets 

7.  12  sent  in  his  Spirit  by  the  former  prophets 

8.  11 1  .(will)  not  (he),  .as  in  the  former  days 

4.  First,  former,  |W*i  rishon. 

Job'    8.   8  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  former  age 

^.Before,  first,  7rpoVepo?  pr_oteros,~ov. 

Eph.  4.  22  concerning  the  former  conversation,  the 
Heb.  10.  32  call  to  remembrance  the  former  days,  in 
1  Pe.   1.  14  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  your  ig. 

6.  First,  foremost,  irpilTos  2>^olos. 

Acts  r.  1  The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  O  The. 
Rev.  21.   4  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away 

FORMER  estate  — 

Former  state  or  condition,  ncnp  qadmah.' 

Eze.  16.  55,  55  shall  return  to  their  former  estate 
16.  55  shall  return  to  your  former  estate 

FORMER  (rain)  — 
1.  Sprinkling  rain,  .Trio  moreh. 
.   Joel    2.  23  given  you  the  former  rain,  .former  rain 


FORMER 


368 


FORTH 


2.Sprinkling  rain,  rriv  yoreh. 

Jer.  ■  5.  24  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and  the  latte. 
Z.To  be  abundant,  flow  over,  nrv  yarah. 

Hos.    6.    3  as  the'latter  (and)  former  rain  unto  the 

FORMER  things  — ■ 

First,  former,  foremost,  jW»0  rishon. 

Isa.   41.  22  let  them  show  the  former  things,  what 

42.  9  Behold,  the  former  things  are  come  to  p. 

43.  9  who:  .can.  .show  us  former  things?  let 
43.  18  Remember  ye  not  the  former  things 

46.   9  Remember  the  former  things  of  old  :  for 
48.   3  1  have  declared  the  former  things  from 

FORMER  time  — 

Face,  front,  n*3£  panim. 

Ruth  4.    7  Now  this  (was  the  manner)  in  former  time 

FORMER  time,  in  — 

Yesternight,  former  time,  tyipx  emesh. 

Job  30.   3  wilderness  in  former  time  desolate  and 

FORNICATION  — 

1. Fornication,  whoredom,  nwniaznuth. 

Eze.  16.  15  pouredst  out  thy  fornications  on  every 
16.  29  Thou  hast,  .multiplied  thy  fornication 

2.  Fornication,  whoredom,  iropveia porneia. 

Matt.  5.  32  saving  for  the  cause  of  fornication,  cause. 

15.  19  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed,  .fornicatio. 

19.    9  put  away  his  wife,  except,  .for  fornica. 
Mark  7.  21  from  within,  .proceed,  .fornications,  mu. 
John  8.  41  We  be  not  born  of  fornication  ;  we  have 
Acts  15.  20  that  they  abstain  from,  .fornication,  and 

15.  29  that  ye  abstain .  .from  fornication  :  from 

21.  25  only  that  they  keep  themselves . .  from  fo. 
Rom.  1.  29  Being  filled  with,  .[fcrnica'tion],  wicked. 


:Co. 


2  Co. 
Gal. 
Eph. 
Col. 
iTh 
Rev. 


5.  1  (that  tbere  is)  fornication  among  you 
"5.    1  fornication  as  is  not  so  much  as  named 

6.  13  Now  the  body  (is)  not  for  fornication,  but 

6.  18  Flee  fornication.     Every  sin  that  a  man 

7.  2  (to  avoid)  fornication,  let  every  man  have 
12.  21  have  not  repented  of  the.  .fornication 

5.  19  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh,  .are.  .fornic. 
5.    3  But  fornication . .  let  it  not  be  once  named 

3.  5  fornication,  .inordinate  affection,  evil 

4.  3  that  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication 
2.  21  space  to  repent  of  her  fornication  ;  and 
9.21  Neither  repented .  .of  their  fornication 

•14.    8  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  fornication 
17.    2  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication 

17.  4  abominations  and  filthiness  of  her  forni. 

18.  3  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  fornication 

19.  2  did  corrupt  the  earth  with  her  fornicati. 

FORNICATION,  to  cause  to  commit  — 
To  cause  to  commit-fornication,  njj  zanah,  5. 
2  Ch.21. 11  caused  the  inhabitants  ..to  commit  forn. 

FORNICATION,  to  commit  — 

1.7*0  commit  fornication,  rrji  zan<<h. 

Isa.   23.  17  and  shall  commit  fornication  with  all 
Eze.  16.  26  Thou  hast  also  committed  fornication 

2.7*0  commit  fornication,  iropvevw  porneHo. 

i  Co.  6. 18  but  he  that  committeth  fornication  sin. 

10.   8  Neither  let  us  commit  fornication,  as 
Rev.    2. 14  sacrificed  unto  idols,  and  to  commit  forn. 
2.  20  to  teach,  .to  commit  fornication,  and  to 

17.  2  With  whom  the  kings,  .have  committed  f. 

18.  3  have  committed  fornication  with  her,  and 
18.   9  kings,  .who  have  committed  fornication 

FORNICATION,  to  give  one's  self  over  to  — 
To  commit  much  fornication,  iKTropvtvto  ekporneuo. 
Jude        7  giving  themselves  over  to  fornication 

FORNICATOR  — 

Forn icator,  ir6pvos  ponws. 

1  Co.  5.   9  I  wrote. .nottocompany  with  fornicators 

5.  10  Yet  not  altogether  with  the  fornicators 

5.  11  if  any  man.  .be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous 

6.  9  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolators,  nor 
Heb.  12.  16  Lest  there  (be)  any  fornicator,  or  profane 

FORSAKE,  to  — 

1.7*o  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  Snn  chadal. 

Judg  9.  11  Should  I  forsake  my  sweetness,  and  my 

2. 7*o  leave,  spread  out,  C'&i  rmtash. 

Deut32.  15  then  he  forsook  God  (which)  made  him 
Judg.  6.  13  but  now  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  us,  and 
1  Sa.  12.  22  the  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people  for 

1  RX   8.  57  let  him  not  leave  us,  nor  forsake  us 

2  Ki.  ax.  14  And  I  will  forsake  the  remnant  of  mine 
Psa.  78.  60  So  that  he  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  S. 
Prov.  1.    8  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother 

6.  20  and  forrake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother 
Isa.     2.    6  Therefore  thou  hast  forsaken  thy  people 
Jer.     7.  20  the  Lord  hath  rejected  and  forsaken  the 
15.    6  Thou  hast  forsaken  me,  saith  the  Lord 
23.  33  I  will  even  forsake  you,  saith  the  Lord 
•    23-  39 1  will  forsake  you,  and  the  city  that  I 
Z.To  forsake,  leave,  leave  off,  3]y  azab. 

De'ut  12.  19  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  forsake  n. 
14.  27  the  Levite.  .thou  shalt  not  forsake  him 

28.  20  doings,  whereby  thou  hast  forsaken  me 

29.  25  Because  they  have  forsaken  the  covenant 
31.   6  he  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 
31.    8  he  will  not  fail  thee,  neither  forsake  thee 
31.  16  will  forsake  me,  and  break  my  covenant 
31.  17  I  will  forsake  them,  and  I  will  hide  my  f. 


.,-jsh.  1 
24. 
24. 

Judg.  2 


1  Sa.    8. 


19. 
2  Ki  21. 

22. 
1  Ch.  10. 

28. 

28. 

2Ch.  7. 

7- 


J3 
'3' 
15 

"  21, 
24. 
24, 
28 

29, 

34 
Ezra    8. 

9- 

9' 

Neh    9. 

9 

9- 

10 

Job     6 


Psa.    9, 

22 

27, 

27. 

37' 

37 

33. 

7T 

7i 

7i 

89 

94' 

119. 

119 

119, 

Prov.  2. 
3 

4- 


Isa.     1 

1. 
41 

42 
49 

54 
55 
58' 
65 
Jer.     1, 


19, 
22, 

25' 
5i' 

Lam.  5 
Eze.  S. 
9< 
20, 
Dan.  tr 
Jon.    2. 


5  I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

16  God  forbid  that  we  should  forsake  the 
20  If  ye  forsake  the  Lord,  and  serve  strange 

12  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers 

13  they  forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  Baal 

6  forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  not  him 

10  we  have  forsaken  our  God,  and  also  serve! 
13  Yet  ye  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  ot. 

8  wherewith  they  have  forsaken  me,  and 
10  because  we  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  and 

7  they  forsook  the  cities,  and  fled ;  and  the 
13  and  will  not  forsake  my  people  Israel 

9  Because  they  forsook  the  Lord  their  God 
33  Because  that  they  have  forsaken  me,  and 

8  But  he  forsook  the  counsel  of  the  old  m. 
13  the  king  .forsook  the  old  men's  counsel 

18  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the  commaudm. 
10,  14  the  children  of  Israel  have  forsaken 
22  he  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers 

17  Because  they  have  forsaken  me,  and  have 

7  then  they  forsook  their  cities,  and  fled 

9  if  thou  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  off 
20  will  not  fail  thee,'  nor  forsake  thee,  until 

19  But  if  ye  turn  away,  and  forsake  my 
22  Because  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of 

8  he  forsook  the  counsel  which  the  old  men 

13  king  Rehoboam  forsook  the  counsel  of 

1  he  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  all 

5  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Ye  have  forsaken  me 

10  we  have  not  forsaken  him ;  and  the  priests 

1 1  we  keep  the  charge . .  but  ye  have  forsaken 

2  if  ye  forsake  him,  he  will  forsake  you 

10  because  he  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God  of 

20  forsaken  the  Lord,  he  hath  also  forsaken 

24  because  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God 

6  because  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God 
6  For  our  fathers,  .have  forsaken  him,  and 

25  Because  they  have  forsaken  me,  and  have 
22  his  wrath(is)against  all  them  that  forsake 

9  yet  oui'  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our 
10  for  we  have  forsaken  thy  commandments 

17  ready  to  pardon,  .and  forsookest  them 
19  thou .  .forsookest  them  not  in  the  wilder. 
31  thou  didst  not  utterly,  .forsake  them;  for 
39  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God 

14  he  forsaketh  the  fear  of  the  Almighty 

13  (Though)  he  spare  it,  and  forsake.it  not 
19  he  hath  oppressed  (and)  forsaken  the  poor 
10  for  thou,  Lord,  hast  not  forsaken  them 

1  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
9  leave  me  not,  neither  forsake  me,  0  God 

10  When  my  father  and  my  mother  forsake 

8  Cease  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath  :  fret 
28  For  the  Lord,  .forsaketh  not  his  saints 

21  Forsake  me  not,  O  Lord  :  O  my  God,  be 

9  forsake  me  not  when  my  strength  faileth 

1 1  Saying,  God  hath  forsaken  him  :  persecute 

18  forsake  me  not,  until  I  have  showed  thy 
30  If  his  children  forsake  my  law,  and  walk 

14  neither  will  he  forsake  Ms  inheritance 

8  I  will  keep  thy  statutes :  0  forsake  me 
53  because  of  the  wicked  that  forsake  thy 
87  had  almost  consumed,  .but  I  forsook  not 
17  Which  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  youth 

3  Let  not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee 

2  good  doctrine,  forsake  ye  not  ray  law 

6  Forsake  her  not,  and  she  shall  preserve 

6  Forsake  the  foolish,  and  live;  and  go  in 
10  grievous  unto  him  that  forsaketh  the  way 

10  thy  father's  friend,  forsake  not;  neither; 

4  They  that  forsake  the  law  praise  the  wi. 

13  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  (them) 

4  forsaken  the  Lord,  they  have  provoked 
28  and  they  that  forsake  the  Lord  shall  be 
17  the  God  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them 
16  will  I  do  unto  them,  and  not  forsake  them 

14  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  and  my  Lord 

7  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee 
7  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
2  forsook  not  the  ordinance  of  their  God 

11  But  ye  (are)  they  that  forsake  the  Lord 

16  against  them,  .who  have  forsaken  me,  and 
13  they  have  forsaken  me,  the  fountain  of 

17  in  that  thou  hast  forsaken  the  Lord  thy 

19  thou  hast  forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
-  7  thy  children  have  forsftKen  me,  and  sworn 
19  Like  as  ye  have  forsaken  me,  and  served 
13  the  LORD  saith,  Because  they  have  forsa. 

19  because  we  have  forsaken  the  laud 

7  I  have  forsaken  mine  house,  I  have  left 

5  and  forsook  (it),  because  there  was  no 
11  Because  your  fathers  have  forsaken  me 

11  have  forsaken  me,  and  have  not  kept  ray 
13  all  that  forsake  thee  shall  be  ashamed 

13  because  they  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  the 
4  Because  they  have  forsaken  me,  and  have 

9  Because  they  have  forsaken  the  covenant 
3S  He  hath  forsaken  his  covert,  as  the  lion 

9  forsake  her,  and  let  us  go  every  one  into 

20  Wherefore  dost  thou .  .forsake  us  so  long 

12  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  the  earth 

9  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  the  earth,  and 

8  neither  did  they  forsake  the  idols  of  Eg. 
30  intelligence  with  them  that  forsake  the 

8  They  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake 


4.  To  fail,  let  alone,  desist,  n$-i  raphah,  5. 

Dent.  4.  31  he  will  not  forsake  thee,  neither  destroy 
Psa.  138.    8  forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands 

S.'Apostacy  from,  airoaraffia  kv6  apostasia  apo. 
Acts  ai.  21  thou  teachest  all  the  Jews.,  to  forsake  M. 


6.7*0  arrange  {self)  off  or  away,  airoTacr(Top.ai  apotas. 

Lukei4.  33  whosoever  he  be  of  you  that  forsaketh  not 
7.7*0  send  or  let  away,  a^>inpa  aphiemi. 

Matt  19.  27  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed  thee 
19.  29  And  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  houses 
26.  56  Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  him,  and 
Mark  1.  18  And  straightway  they  forsook  their  nets 

14.  50  And  they  all  forsook  him,  and  fled 
Luke  5.  11  they  forsook  all,  and  followed  him 

8.7*0  leave  down  in,  iyxaTaKtiirca  eykataleipo. 

Matt  27.  46  My  God!  my  God  !  why  hast  thou  forsa. 

-   Markis.  34  My  God!  my  God  !  why  hast  thou  forsa. 

2  Co.  4.   9  Persecuted,  but  not  forsaken  ;  cast  down 

2  Ti.   4. 10  For  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  lov. 

4. 16  but  all  (men)  forsook  me  :  (I  pray  God) 
Heb.  10.  25  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves 
13.   5  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

9.7*o  leave  down  or  thoroughly,  KaraKeiirai  katale* 
Heb.  11.  27  By  faith  he  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing 
2  Pe.   2.  15  Which  have  forsaken  the  right  way/and 

FORSAKEN  — 

l.Widow,  forsaken  one,  |D?N  alman, 

Jer.   51.   5  For  Israel  (hath)  not  (been)  forsaken,  nor 
2. 7*o  forsake,  leave,  3]u  azab. 

Isa.  17.  2  cities  of  Aroer  (are)  forsaken :  they^shall 
17.  9  his  strong  cities  be  as  a  forsaken  bough 
54.  6  hath  called  thee  as  a  woman  forsaken 
60. 15  thou  hast  been'forsaken  and  hated,  so 
62.  4  Thou  shalt  be  no  more  termed  Forsaken 
Jer.  4.  29  every  city  (shall  be)  forsaken,  and  not  a 
Zeph.  2.    4  For  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken,  and  Ashkelon 

Z.To  be  sent  away,  let  alone,  nhy  shalach,  4. 

Isa.   27. 10  (and) the  habitation  forsaken,  andleftlike 

FORSAKEN,  to  le  — 

1.7*0  be  left,  spread  out,  c'uj  natash,  2. 

Amos  5.    2  she  is  forsaken  upon  her  land ;  (there  is) 
2.7*0  be  left,  spread  out,  c;bi  natash,  4. 

Isa.   32.  14  Because  the  palaces  shall  be  forsaken 
3. 7*o  fail,  be  plucked  away,  etu  nathash,  2. 

Jer.    18.  14  shall  the  cold  flowing  waters.,  be  forsak..' 
4. 7*o  be  forsaken,  left,  Sty  azab,  2. 

Neh.  13.  11  said,  Why  is  the  house  of  God  forsaken  ? 

Job    18.    4  shall  the  earth  be  forsaken  for  thee?  and 

Psa.  37.  25  yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken 

Isa.     7.  16  land,  .shall  be  forsaken  of  both  her  kings 

62. 12  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken 
Eze.  36.   4  saith.  .to  the  cities  that  are  forsaken 

FORSAKING  — 

Fwsaking,  abandonment,  nnjlJi  azubah. 

Isa.     6. 12  and  (there  be)  a  great  forsaking  in  the 

FORSOMTJCH  as  — 

Because  that,  KaOori  kathoti. 

Lukeig.    9  forsomuch  as  he  also  is  a  son  of  Abraham 

FORSWEAR  oneself,  to  — 

To  swear  against  or  falsely,  £wtopK€a>  epiorkeb. 
Matt.  5.  33  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thyself,  but  shait 

FORT  — 

1.  Fort,  fortification,  p."/?  dayeq. 

2  Ki.25.    1  they  built  forts  against  it  round  about 

Jer.   52.    4  and  built  forts  against  It  round  about 

Eze.    4.    2  build  a  fort  against  it,  and  cast  a  mount 

17.  17  and  building  forts,  to  cut  off  many  pers. 

21.  22  to  cast  a  mount,  (autD,  to  build  a  fort 

26.    8  and  he  shall  make  a  fort  against  thee 

2.StrongJwld,  ityi?  maoz. 

Dan.  1 1.  19  he  shall  turn  his  face  toward  the  fort  of 

3. Stronghold,  fortress,  ">VP  nietsacl. 

Eze.  [33.  27  they  that"(be)  in  the  forts  and  in  the  caves 

4.  Stronghold,  fortress,  rnisp  metsudah. 

2  Sa.    5.    9  So  David  dwelt  in  the  fort,  and  called  it 
5. Bulwark,  n*jiSD  metsurah. 

Isa.    29.    3  and  I  will  raise  forts  against  thee 

Q.Fort,  high  or  secret  place,  Ssy  ophel. 

Isa.  32. 14  the  forts  and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  for 

FORT,  high  — 

High  place,  tou-cr,  as^po  misgab. 

Isa.   25. 12  the  fortress  of  the  high  fort  of  thy  walls 

FORTH  — 

1.7*0  go  on,  ^Sri  halak. 

Psa.  1 26.    6  He  that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearirj 
2JVithoul,  outside,  pn  chads. 

Gen.  39.  13  garment  in  her  hand,  and  was  fled  forth 

Judg  19.  25  so  the  man  took. . and  brought  her  forth 
LA  breach,  breaking  forth,  p?  perets. 

Gen.  38.  29  and  she  said,  How  hast  thou  broken  fo;? 
5.Into  Hie  midst,  els  rb  fxe<rov  eis  to  meson. 

Mark  3.   3  And  he  saith  unto  the  man.  .Stand  forth 
6.  Without,  forth,  e£a>  exo. 

Joluui.  43  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come  fc. 

15.  6  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  bra. 
tq.    4  Pilate  therefore  went  forth  again,  and 
19.    4  I  bring  him  forth  to  you,  that  ye  may  k. 
19.    5  Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing  the  cro. 

19. 13  he  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat  down  in 


FORTH 


36& 


FOULED 


Acts  5.  34  and  commanded  to  put"  the  apostles  forth 
9.  40  Peter  put  them  all  forth,  .and  kneeled 
[Sec  also  Break,  breaking,  bring,  brought,  bud,  call, 
called,  carry,  cast,  come,  conduct,  draw,  driven,  fetch, 
fruit,  get,  give,  go,  going,  have,  hold,  joy,  launch,  lead, 
led,  let,  look,  manifest,  order,  pass,  proceed,  poured, 
put,  putting,  reach,  send,  sending,-  set,  setter,  shed, 
shew,  shine,  shoot,  show,  sing,  speak,  spread,  spreadest 
spring,  stand,  stretch,  stretched,  take,  thousands, write.] 

SOUTH  of  or  without  — 

I .  Cnto  from  the  house  of,  1V3D-7N  el-mibbeth. 

1  Ki.  11.  15  Have  her  forth  without  the  ranges :  and 

2  Ch.23.  14  Have  her  forth  of  the  ranges :  and  whoso 

'l.From  07i,  tyflO  meal. 

Amos  7.  -17  Israsl  shall,  .go  into  captivity  forth  of 
FORTHWITH  — 

1. Speedily',  diligently,  carefully,  K}i3P$  osparna. 
Ezra    6.    8  forthwith  expenees  be  givenunto  these 
2. Straightway ,  ev94a>s  eutheos. 

Matt  13.    5  and  forthwith  they  sprung  up,  because 

26. 49  forthwith  he  came  to  Jesus,  and  said,  Ha. 
Mark  1.  29  forthwith,  when  they  were  come  out  of 
1.  43  charged  him,  and  [forthwith]  sent  him 
5.  13  And  forthwith  Jesus  gave  them  leave 
Acts  12.  10  forthwith  the  angel  departed  from  him 
21.  30  and  forthwith  the  doors  were  shut 
3, Straightway ,  evdvs  euthus. 

John  19.  34  forthwith  came  thereout  blood  and  wat. 
-1   With  the  thing  itself  thereuntil,  Trapaxpyfiia.  par. 
Acts  9.  18  he  received  sight  [forthwith],  and  arose 

FORTIETH . — 

Forty,  D'j>3-iN  arbaim. 

Num.33.  38  in  the  fortieth  year  after  the  children  of 
Deut.  1.    3  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fortieth  year,  in 

1  Ch.26.  31  In  the  fortieth  year  of  the  reign  of  David 

2  Ch.16.  13  died  in  the  one  and  fortieth  year  of  his 
FORTIFIED  — 

Bulwark^  ~>isa  matsor. 

Mic.    7.  12  the  fortified  cities,  and  from  the  fortress 
FORTIFY,  to  — 
I. To  strengthen,  harden,  }'£$  amats,  3.     - 

Nah.   2.    1  make,  .loins strong,  fortify. . power migh. 
'2.  To  fence,  "l«a  batsar,  3. 

Isa.    22. 10  the  houses  have  ye  broken  down  to  forti. 

J*er.   51.  53  and  though  she  should  fortify  the  height 
3.7*0  strengthen,  pin  chazalc,  3. 

2  Ch.11. 11  he  fortified  the  strongholds,  and  put 

26.   9  Uzziah  built  towers,  .and  fortified  them 

Nah.  3.  14  fortify  thy  strongholds:  go  iuto  clay 
4.  To  leave,  3]J>  azab. 

Neh.   3.    8  they  fortified  Jerusalem  unto  the  broad 
4.    2  will  they  fortify  themselves?  will  they 
0.  To  bind  together,  fortify,  lis  t&v/r. 

Judg.  9.  31  behold,  they  fortify  the  city  against  thee 
FORTRESS  — 
X.Fenced  place,  lino  mibtsar. 

Isa.  17.  3  The  fortress  also  shall  cease  from  Ephra. 
25.  12  the  fortress  of  the  high  fort  of  thy  walls 
34.  13  nettles  and  brambles  in  the  fortresses 

Jer.     6.  27  I  have  set  thee,  .a  tower,  .a  fortress  am. 

Hos.  10.  14  all  thy  fortresses  shall  be  spoiled,  as  Sh. 

Amos  5.   9  spoiled  shall  come  against  the  fortress 
2.  Stronghold,  liya  maoz. 

Jer.    16.  19  0  Lord,  my  strength,  and  my  fortress 

Dan.  11.    7  and  shall  enter  into  the  fortress  of  the 
11.  10  return,  and  be  stored  up.  .to  his  fortress 
■1.  Fortress,  bulwark,  nniss  metsudah. 

1  Sa.  22.    2  The  Lord  (is)  my  rock,  and  my  fortress 

Psa.  18.    2  the  Lord  (is)  my  rock  and  my  fortress 

31.  3  For  thou  (art)  my  rock  and  my  fortress 
71.  3  for  thou  (art)  my  rock  and  my  fortress 
91.    2  (He  is)  my  refuge  aud  my  fortress 

144.    2  My  goodness,  and  my  fortress  ;  my  high 

•i.Bithvark,  tiki?  matsor. 

Jer.    10.  17  Gather  up.  .0  inhabitant  of  the  fortress 
Mic.    7.  12  and  from  the  fortress  even  to  the  river 

FOR-TIT-NA'-TTJS,  QopTovvdros  (from  Latin),  for- 

tunate. 
A  Corinthian  Christian  mentioned  by  Paul. 

1  C0.16. 17  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of .  .F.  and  Ach. 
FORTY  — 
1. Forty,  cryrrix  arbaim. 

Gen.  5.  13  Cainan  lived.,  eight  hundred  and  forty 

7.  4,  12  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty 
7. 17  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth 

8.  6  it  came  to  pass  at  the  "end  of  forty  days 
18.  28  And  he  said,  If  I  find  there  forty  and  five 
18.  20  Peradventure  there  shall  be  forty  found 
18.  29  he  said,  I  will  pot  do  (it)  for  forty's  sake 

25.  20  Isaac  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took 

26.  34  Esau  was  f"rty  years  old  when  he  took 

32.  15  forty  kine,  aud  ten  bulls,  twenty  sheasses 
47.  28  age  of  Jacob  was  an  hundred  forty  and  se. 
50.    3  forty  days  were  fulfilled  for  him ;  for  so 

Exodi6.  35  children  of  Israel  did  eat  manna  forty 
24.  18  in  the  mount  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
26.  19  thou  shalt  make  forty  sockets  of  silver 
26.  21  their  forty  sockets  (of)  silver;  two  sockets 
4V 


EXOCI34.  28  with  the  Lord  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
36.  24  forty  sockets  of  silver  he  made  under 
36.  26  their  forty  sockets  of  silver ;  two  sockets 
Lev.  25.    8  shall  be  unto  thee  forty  and  nine  years 
Mum,  1.  21  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  .forty  and  six 
1.  25  of  the  tribe  of  Gad.  .forty  and  five 
1.  33  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim.  .forty  thousand 

1.  41  of  the  tribe  of  Asher.  .forty  and  one  tho. 

2.  11  And  his  host,  .forty  and  six  thousand 

2.  15  And  his  host,  .forty  and  five  thousand    ■ 
2.  19  And  his  host,  .forty  thousand  and  five 
2.  28  And  his  host,  .forty  and  one  thousand 

13.  25  And  they  returned,  .after  forty  days 

14.  33  your  children  shall  wander,  .forty  years 
14.  34  in  which  ye  searched  the  land . .  forty  days 
14.  34  shall  ye  bear  your  iniquities,  .forty  years 
26.    7  of  them  were  forty  and  three  thousand 
26.  18  of  them,  forty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
26.  41,  50  were  numbered  of  them,  .forty  and 
33.  13  he  made  them  wander,  .forty  years,  until 
35.    6  to  them  ye  shall  add  forty  and  two  cities 
35-   7  give  to  the  Levites.  .forty  and  eight  cities 

Deut.  2.    7  these  forty  years  the  Lord  thy  God  (hath 
8.    2  Lord  thy  God  led  thee  these  forty  years 

8.  4  neither  did  thy  foot  swell,  these  forty  ye. 

9.  9  then  I  abode . .  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
9.  11  at  the  end  of  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
9. 18,  25  fell  down,  .forty  days  and  forty  nights 

10. 10  I  stayed .  .forty  days  and  forty  nights 
25.    3  Forty  stripes  he  may  give  him.  .not  exceed 
29.    5  I  have  led  you  forty  years  in  the  wilder. 
Josh.  4.  13  About  forty  thousand  prepared  for  war 
5.   6  the  children  of  Israel  walked  forty  years 

14.  7  Forty  years  old  (was)  I  when  Moses  the 
14. 10  the  Lord  hath  kept  me  alive,  .these forty 

21.  41  All  the  cities,  .forty  and  eight  cities  with 
Judg.  3.  11  And  the  land  had  rest  forty  years.    And 

5.   8  was  there  a  shield,  .seen  among  forty  th. 
5.  31  And  the  land  had  rest  forty  years 
8.  28  the  country  was  in  quietness  forty  years 
i2.    6  and  there  fell,  .forty  and  two  thousand 
12. 14  he  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  nephews 

13.  1  into  the  hand  of  the  Philistines  forty  ye. 

1  Sa.   4.  18  And  he  had  judged  Israel  forty  years 

17.  16  the  Philistine,  .presented  himself  forty 

2  Sa.   2.  10  Ish-bosheth,  Said's  son,  (was)  forty  years 

5.  4  David,  .thirty  years  old.  .reigned  forty 
10. 18  David  slew,  .forty  thousand  horsemen 

15.  7  it  came  to  pass  after  forty  years,  that  Ab. 

1  Ki.  2. 11  David  reigned  over  Israel,  .forty  years 

4.  26  Solomon  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of 

6.  17  the  temple  before  it,  was  forty  cubits 

7.  3  the  beams,  that  (lay)  on  forty  five  pillars 

7.  38  one  laver  contained  forty  baths,  .every  lit. 
,    11.  42  Solomon  reigned  in  Jerusalem,  .forty  ye. 

14.  21  Rehoboam . .  forty  and  one  years  old  when 
15. 10  forty  and  one  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem 
19.   8  went,  .forty  days  and  forty  nights  unto 

2  Ki.  2. 24  and  tare  forty  and  two  children  of  them 

8.  9  of  every  good  thing  of  Damascus,  forty 

10.  14  two  and  forty  men  ;  neither  left  he  any 
12.  1  and  forty  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem 
14.  23  began  to  reign  in  Samaria,  .forty  and  one 

1  Ch.  5.  18  four  and  forty  thousand  seven  hundred 

12.  36  of  Asher.  .expert  in  war,  forty  thousand 
19. 18  David  slew,  .forty  thousand  footmen 
29.  27  he  reigned  over  Israel .  .forty  years ;  seven 

2  Ch.  9.  30  Solomon  reigned  in  Jerusalem,  .forty  ye. 

12.  13  Rehoboam  (was)  one  and  forty  years  old 

22.  2  Forty  and  two  years  old  (was)  Ahaziah 
24.    1  and  he  reigned  forty  years  in  Jerusalem 

Ezra  2.   8  of  Zattu,  nine  hundred  forty  and  five 
2. 10  of  Bani,  six  hundred  forty  and  two 
2.  24  the  children  of  Azmaveth,  forty  and  two 
2.  25  seven  hundred  and  forty  and  three 
2.  34  of  Jercho,  three  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.  38  Pastor,  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty 
2.  66  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  five 

Neh.   5. 15  and  wine,  besides  forty  shekels  of  silver 
7. 13  of  Zattu,  eight  hundred  forty  and  five 
7. 15  of  Binnui,  six  hundred  forty  and  eight 
7.  28  The  men  of  Beth -azmaveth,  forty  and  two 
7.  29  Berroth,  seven  hundred  forty  and  three 
7.  36  of  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty  and  five 
7. 41  of  Pashur,  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty 
7.  44  The  singers . .  an  hundred  forty  and  eight 
7.  62  of  Nekoda,  six  hundred  forty  and  two 
7.  67  and  they  had  two  hundred  forty  and  five 
7. 68  then*  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  five 

9.  21  forty  years  didst  thou  sustain  them  in  the 

11.  13  chief  of  the  fathers,  two  hundred  forty 
Job   42.  16  lived  Job  an  hundred  aud  forty  years 
Psa.  95.  10  Forty  years  long  was  I  grieved  with  (this) 
Jer.  52.  30  captive  of  the  Jews  seven  hundred  forty 
Eze.     4.    6  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Judah  forty 

29.  11  neither  shall  it  be  inhabited  forty  years 

29. 12  the  cities,  .shall  be  desolate  forty  years 

29. 13  At  the  end  of  forty  years  will  I  gather  the 
41.    2  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  forty 
46.  22  courts  joined  of  forty,  .long,  and  thirty 

Amos  2. 10  led  you  forty  years  through  the  wilder. 

5.  25  Have  ye  offered,  .offerings,  .forty  years 
Jon.     3.    4  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be 

2.Forty,  Tecro~apcLtcovTa  tessarakonta ,  Teo-o-epatcov. 
Matt.  4.    2  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
Mark  1.  13  he  was  there  in  the  wilderness  forty 
Luke  4.    2  Being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil 
John  2.  20  Then  said  the  Jews,  Forty  and  six  years 
Acts    1.    3  being  seen  of  them  forty  days,  and  speak. 
4.  22  For  the  man  was  above  forty  years  old 
7.  30  when  forty  years  were  expired,  there  ap. 


Acts    7.  36  wonders,  .in  the  wilderness  forty  years 
7.  42  sacrifices,  .forty  years  in  the  wilderness? 
13.  21  gave.  .Saul,  .by  the  space  of  forty  years 
23.  13  they  were  more  than  forty  which  had 
23.  21  for  there  lie  in  wait  for  him.  .forty  men 
2  Co.  11.  24  Of  the  Jews  five  times  received  I  forty 
Heb.  3.    9  proved  me,  and  saw  my  works  forty  years 

3.  17  But  with  whom  was  he  -grieved  forty  yea.? 
Rev     7.    4  sealedTau  hundred  (and)  forty .  .four  thou. 

11.    2  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot  forty 

13.  5  unto  him  to  continue  forty,  .two  months 

14.  1  and  with  him  an  hundred  forty .  .four 
14.    3  could  learn  that  song  but  the  hundred.,  f. 
21. 17  he  measured,  .an  hundred.. forty,  .fourc. 

FORTY...  thousand  — 

Four  myriad,  vosn.  [or  IS"])  y3lN  arba  ribbo. 

Ezra    2.  64  The  whole,  .forty  and  two  thousand  three 
Neh.   7.  66  The  whole,  .forty  and  two  thousand  three 

FORTY  years  old  — 

Forty  years'  time,  rsaaapaKovTaerTjs  xpuvos. 

Acts    7.  23  when  he  was  full  forty  years  old,  it  came 

FORTY  years,  of  — 

Forty  years,  re<ro'apaKOi/TaeTrjs  tessarakontaetes. 
Acts  13.  18  about  the  time  of  forty  years  suffered  he 

FORWARD  — 

1.  Yonder,  beyond,  henceforth,  nijbn  haleah. 

Nuni32.  19  not.  .on  yonder  side  Jordan,  or  forward 

1  Sa.  10.    3  Then  shalt  thou  go  on  forward  from  the. 

18.    9  Saul  eyed  David  from  that  day.  .forward 
Eze.  39.  22  Lord  their  God  from  that  day  and  forw. 
43.  27  and  (so)  forward,  the  priests  shall  make 

2. To  go  on,  $>n  halak. 

Gen.  26.  13  went  forward,  and  grew  until  he  became 
3. And  upward,,  nbym  umalah. 

x  Sa.  16.  13  came  upon  David  from  that  day  forward 
30.  25  it  was  (so)  from  that  day  forward,  that 

4.  To' 'the  front,  0*127  lephanim. 

Jer.     7.  24  and  went  backward,  and  not  forward 
Eze.  10.  22  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 

5.  Before,  DHf3  qedem. 

Job    23.   8  Behold,  I  go  forward,  but  he  (is)  not 

6.  Speedy,  hasty,  (nrovScuos  spoudaios. 

2  Co.   S.  17  beiug  more  forward,  of  his  own  accord 
FORWARD,  to  be  — 

\.To  wish,  will,  64\qj  thelo. 

2  Co.   8.  10  to  do,  but  also  to  be  forward  a  year  ago 
2.To  hasten,  make  speed,  o-n-ovddfa  spoudazo. 

Gal.     2.  10  the  same  which  I  also  was  forward  to  do 

FORWARD,  to  go  — 

To  lift  up,  remove,  journey,  ypj  nasa. 

Exodi4.  15  children  of  Israel,  that  they  go  forward 
Num.  2.  24  they  shall  go  forward  in  the  third  rank 
10.   5  that  lie  on  the  east  parts  shall  go  forward 

FORWARD,  to  set  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  up,  advance,  promote,  Sy;  yaal,  5. 
Job  30.  13  They  mar  my  path,  they  set  forward  my 

l.To  remove,  lift  up,  journey,  yp:  nasa. 

Num.  1.  51  when  the  tabernacle  setteth  forward,  the 
2. 17  Then  the  tabernacle,  .shall  set  forward 
2. 17  as  they  encamp,  so  shall  they  set  forward 
2.  34  and  so*  they  set  forward,  every  one  after 

4.  5  And  when  the  camp  setteth  forward,  Aa. 
10.  15  sanctuary,  as  the  camp  is  to  set  forward 
10. 17  the  sons  of  Merari  set  forward  bearing 
10.  18  the  standard .  .of  Reuben  set  forward  ac. 
10.  21  the  Kohathites  set  forward,  bearing  the 
10.  22  the  standard,  .of  Ephraim  set  forward  ac. 
10.  22  the  standard,  .of  Dan  set  forward 

10.  28  the  journeyings.  .when  they  set  forward 
10.  35  came  to  pass,  when  the  ark  set  forward 
21. 10  the  children  of  Israel  set  forward,  aud 
22.    1  the  children  of  Israel  set  forward,  and 

FORWARDNESS  — 

Speed,  haste,  airovd-ti  spoude. 

2  Co.   8.    8  but  by  occasion  of  the  forwardness  of 

FORWARDNESS  of  mind  — 

Readiness  of  mind,  ■npodvfxia  prothumia. 

2  Co.  9.   2  For  I  know  the  forwardness  of  your  mind 

FOTJL  — 

Unclean,  andOapros  akathartos. 

Mark  9.  25  he  rebuked  the  foul  spirit,  saying  unto 
Rev.  iS.    2  the  hold  of  every  foul  spirit,  and  a  cage 

FOTJL  weather  — 

Winter,  a  pouring  out  {of  rain),  x£L^v  cheimwi. 
Matt  16.    3  And  in  the  morning,  .foul  weather  to  day 

FOTJL,  to  — 

To  foid,  trample,  trouble,  b*?-i  raphas. 

Eze.  32.   2  earnest  forth . .  and  fouledst  their  rivers 
34. 18  but  ye  must  foul  the  residue  with  your 

FOTJL,  to  be  — 

To  smear,  become  smeared,  *v?n  chamar,  4a. 

Job  16. 16  My  face  is  foul  with  weeping,  and  on 
FOULED,  that  which.,  have  — 
Fold  or  trampled  thing,  i^3"ip  mvrpas. 

Eze.  34.  19  they  drink  that  which  ye  have  fouled 


POUND 


370 


FOUNTAIN 


found,  to  — 

1.  To  found,  lay  a  foundation,  ip;  yasad. 

Psa.  24.    2  For  he  hath  founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and 
89.  n  the  fulness  thereof,  thou  hast  founded 
104.    S  unto  the  pla-ce  which  thou  hast  founded 
119.  152  that  thou  hast  founded  them  fox-  ever 
Prov.  3.  19  The,  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the 
Isa.    14.  32  Lord  hath  founded  Zion,  and  the  poor  of 

23.  13  the  Assyrian  founded  it  for  them  that 
Amos  9.    6  and  hath  founded  his  troop  in  the  earth 

2.  To  found,  6€f.i€\i6co  themelioo. 

Matt.  7.  25  it  fell  not  :  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  r. 
"    Luke,  6.  48  notshakeit..[for;itwasfoundeduponar.] 

FOUND,  to  be  —   . 

l.To  iin<l,  be  found,  N?0  matsa. 

Gen.    2.  20  but  for  Adam  there  was  not  found  an  h. 

Job  20.    8  He  shall  fly  away.  .and.  .not  be  found 

Psa.  32.    6  in  a  time  when  thou  mayest  be  found 
36.    2  until  his  iniquity  be  found  to  be  hateful 

Eccl.  9.  15  Now  there  was  found  in  it  a  poor  wise 

2.  To  hp  found,  teyp  matsa,  2. 

Gen.  18.  29,  30,  31  Peradventure  there  shall  be.  .fou. 
18.  32  Peradventure  ten  shall  be  found  there 
44.    9  whomsoever  of  thy  servants  it  be  found 
44.  io.he  with  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my 
44.  12  the  cup  was  found  in  Benjamin's  sack 

44. 16  and  (he)  also  with  whom  the  cup  is  found 

44. 17  the  man  in  whose  hand  the  cup  is  found 

47. 14  gathered  up  all  the  money  that  was  found 
Exod.  9.  19  every  man  and  beast  which  shall  be  found 

12.  19  Seven  days  shall  there  be  no  leaven  found 
21. 16  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  he  shall 
22.    2  If  a  thief  be  found  breaking  up,  and  be 
22.    4  If  the  theft  be  certainly  found  in  his  h. 
22.    7  if  the  thief  be  found,  let  him  pay  double 
22.    8  If  the  thief  be  not  found,  then  the  master 
35.  23  And  every  man,  with  whom  was  found 

35.  24  every  man,  with  whom  was  found  shittim 
Deut  17.    2  If  there  be  found  among  you,  within  any 

18. 10  There  shall  not  be  found  among  you 

20. 11  all  the  people,  .found  therein  shall  be  tri. 

21.  1  If  (one)  be  found  slain  in  the  land  which 

22.  20  virginity  be  not  found  for  the  damsel 
22.  22  If  a  man  be  found  lying  with  a  woman 
22.  28  and  lie  with  her,  and  they  be  found 

24.  7  If  a  man  be  found  stealing  any  of  his 
Josh.  10.  17  The  five  kings  are  found  hid  in  a  cave  at 

1  Sa.   9.  20  set  not  thy  mind  on  them . .  they  are  found 

10.    2  The  asses,  .thou  wentest  to  seek  are  fou. 
10. 16  He  told  us.  .that  the  asses  were  found 
10.  21  they  sought  him,  he  could  not  be  found 

13.  19  Now  there  was  no  smith  found  through. 
13.  22  there  was  neither  sword  nor  spear  found 

13.  22  and  with  Jonathan  his  son  was  there  fo. 

25.  28  and  evil  hath  not  been  found  in  thee 

2  Sa.  17.  12  in  some  place  where  he  shall  be  found 

17. 13  until  there  be  not  one  small  stone  found 

1  Ki.  1.  52  but  if  wickedness  shall  be  found  in  him 

14. 13  because  in  him  there  is  found  (some)  good 

2  Ki.12.    5  wheresoever  any  breach  shall  be  found 

12. 10  told  the  money  that  was  found  in  the  ho. 

12. 18  all  the  gold  (that  was)  found  in  the  treasu. 

14.  14  all  the  vessels  that  were  found  in  the  ho. 
16.    8  silver  and  gold  that  was  found  in  the  ho. 

18.  15  Hezekiah  gave.  .all.  .(that  was)  found 
20. 13  and  all  that  was  found  in  his  treasures 
22.    9  gathered  the  money  that  was  found  in 

22.  13  concerning,  .this  book  that  is  found :  for 

23.  2  book  of  the  covenant  which  was  found  in 

25. 19  and  five  men . .  which  were  found  in  the 
25. 19  and  threescore  men  of  the  people,  .found 

1  Ch.  4.  41  the  habitations  that  were  found  there 

24.  4  there  were  more  chief  men  found  of  the 

26.  31  there  were  found  among  them  mighty 

28.  9  if  thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee 

29.  8  they  with  whom,  .stones  were  found  gave 
s  Ch.    2.  17  they  were  found  an  hundred  and  fifty 

15.  2  if  ye  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  you 

15.  4  and  sought  him,  he  was  found  of  them 

15. 15  Judah..  sought. .  and  he  was  found  of  th. 

19.  3  Nevertheless  there  are  good  things  found 

21.  17  all  the  substance  that  was  found  in  the 

25.  24  all  the  vessels  that  were  found  in  the 
34.  17  gathered,  .the  money  that  was  found  in 
34.  21  the  words  of  the  book  that  is  found 

34.  30  the  book  of  the  covenant  that  was  found 

36.  8  that  which  was  found  in  him,  behold  they 
Ezra    2.  62  their  register,  .but  they  were  not  found 

10.  18  among,  .sons  of  the  priest  there  were  fo. 
Ncli.    7.  64  their  register,  .but  it  was  not  found 

1 3.  1  and  therein  was  found  written,  that  the 
Esth.  6.  2  it  was  found  written,  that  Mordecai  had 
Job    10.  28  seeing  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found  in 

28. 12  But  where  shall  wisdom  be  fouud '( 

28.  13  ueither  Is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  living 

42.  15  in  all  the  laud  were  no  women  found 

Psa.  37.  36  I  sought  him,  but  he  could  not  be  found 

Prov.  6.  31  But  (if)  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sev. 

10.  13  In  the  lips  of  him.  .wisdom  is  found 

16.  31  (if)  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteous. 
Isa.    13.  i-,  Everyone  that  is  found  shall  be  thrust 

22.  3  all  that  are  found  in  thee  are  bound 

30.  14  so  that  there  shall  not  be  found  in  the 

35.  9  it  shall  not  be  found  there  ;  but  the 
39.  2  and  all  that  was  found  in  his  treasures 
51.  3  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  therein 
55.  6  Seek  ye  the  LORD  while  he  may  lie  found 
65.  1  I  am  found  of  (them  that)  sought  me  not 
65,  8  As  the  new  wiue  is  found  in  the  cluster 


Jer.     2.  26  As  the  thief  is  ashamed  when  he  is  found 
2.  34  Also  in  thy  skirts  is  found  the  blood  of 

2.  34  I  have  not  found  it  by  secret  search,  but 
5.  26  For  among  my  people  are  found  wicked 

it.    9  A  conspiracy  is  found  among  the  men  of 
15.  16  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them 

29.  14  And  I  will  be  found  of  you,  saith  the  L. 
41.  3  and  the  Chaldeans  that  were  found  there 
41.  8  But  ten  men  were  found  among  them  that 
48:  27  Israel,  .was  he  fouud  among  thieves?  for 
50.  20  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall -not  be  found 
50.  24  O  Babylon .  .thou art  found,  and  also  cau. 
52.  25  seven  men.  .which  were  found  in  the  city 
52.  25  that  were  found  in  the  midst  of  the  city 

Eze.  26.  21  yet  shalt  thou  never  be  found  again 

28.  15  perfect,  .till  iniquity  was  found  in  thee 
Dan.    1.  19  among  them  all  was  fouud  none  like  Da. 

11.  19  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  not  be  found 

12.  1  every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in 
Hos.  14.    8  Ephraim.  .From  me  is  thy  fruit  found 
Mic.     1.  13  the  transgressions  of  Israel  were  found  in 
Zeph.  3.  13  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found 
Zech.io.  10  and  (place)  shall  not  be  found  for  them 
Mai.    2.    6  and  iniquity  was  not  fouud  in  his  lips 

3.7*0  be  found,  ro»  shekach,  5. 

Ezra    4.  iq  it  is  found  that  this  city  of  old  time  hath 
i.To  be  found,  na?  shekach,  2. 

Ezra   6.    2  there  was  found  at  Achmetha,  in  the  pa. 
Dan.    2.  35  that  no  place  was  found  for  them  :  and 
5.  11  light,  .and  wisdom,  .was  found  in  him 
5.  12  of  doubts,  were  found  in  the  same  Daniel 
5.  14  and  excellent  wisdom  is  found  in  thee 

5.  27  Thou  art  weighed,  .and  art  found  wanting 

6.  4  neither  was  there  any . .  fault  found  in  him 
6.  22  before  him  innocency  was  found  in  me 
6.  23  no  manner  of  hurt  was  found  upon  him 

5. To  become,  yivofxat  ginomai. 

2  Co.    7. 14  our  boasting,  .before  Titus,  is  found  a 

FOUND  out,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  searclied  out,  *i[5n  chaqar,  2. 

1  Ki.    7.  47  neither  was  the  weight  of  the  brass  f.  out 

2  Ch.  4. 18  the  weight  of  the  brass  could  not  be  f .  out 
2.  To  be  found,  n^o  matsa,  2. 

Esth.  2.  23  inquisition  was  made,  .it  was  found  out 

FOUNDATION  — 

I. Socket,  }tn  eden. 

Job  38.   6  Whereupon  are  the  foundations  thereof 
2. Foundation,  ty'c'x  ashish. 

Isa.   16.    7  for  the  foundations  of  Kir-hareseth  shall 

Z.To  be  founded,  ~ip;  yasad,  '2. 

Exod  9. 18  since  the  foundation  thereof  even  until 

4.  To  be  founded,  id;  yasad,  4. 

1  Ki.    7. 10  the  foundation . .  costly  stones,  even  great 

5.  Foundation,  "lio*  yesod. 

2  Ch.  23.    5  a  third  part  at  the  gate  of  the  foundation 
Job     4. 19  them .  .whose  foundation  (is)  in  the  dust 

22.  16  whose  foundation  was  overflown  with  a 
Psa.  137.    7  Rase  (it),  rase.,  to  the  foundation  thereof 
Prov.  10.  25  the  righteous  (is)  an  everlasting  founda. 
Lam.  4.  11  it  hath  devoured  the  foundations  thereof 
Eze.  13.  14  so  that  the  foundation  thereof  shall  be 

30.  4  her  foundations  shall  be  broken  down 
Mic.  1.  6  I  will  discover  the  foundations  thereof 
Hab.  3. 13  by  discovering  the  foundation  unto  the 

6. Foundation,  nniD^  yesudah. 

Psa.  87.    1  His  foundation  (is)  in  the  holy  mountains 

7. Foundation,  idid  mu-sad. 

2  Ch.   8. 16  prepared  unto  the  day  of  the  foundation 
Isa.  28. 16  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion.  .a  sure  foundation 

S.Foundatio-n,  ni^o  musadah. 

Eze.  41.    8  the  foundations  of  the  side  chambers 
9. Base,  pso  makon. 

Psa.  104.    5  (Who)  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
10. Foundation,  tdd  massad. 

1  Ki.   7.   9  even  from  the  foundation  unto  the  coping 
11. Foundation,  prince,  column,  r\y  shath. 

Psa.  11.    3  If  the  foundations  be  destroyed,  what  can 

12.  Foun  datio?i,  anything  laid,  def.U\tos  tJiemelios. 
Luke  6.  48  digged  deep,  and  laid  the  foundation  on 
6.  49  is  like  a  man  that  without  a  foundation 
14.  29  Lest  haply,  after  he  hath  laid  the  founda. 
Acts  16.  26  so  that  the  foundations  of  the  prison  were 
"Rom  15.  20  I  should  build  upon  another  man's  foun. 
1  Co.    3.  10  I  have  laid  the  foundation,  and  another 

3.  11  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay 
3.  12  if  any  man  build  upon  this  foundation 

Eph.  2.  20  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  ap. 

1  Ti.  6.  19  Laying  up.  .a  good  foundation  against 

2  Ti.  2. 19  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure 
Heb.  6.    1  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of  repe. 

ir.  10  he  looked  for  a  city  whiehhathf  oundat  ions 
Rev.  21.  14  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  founda. 
21.  19  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city 
21.  19  The  first  foundation  (was)  jasper ;  the 

13.^4   casting  or  laying  doivn,  founding,   Kara- 
&0A71  katabole. 
Matt  13.  35  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  of  the 

25.  34  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of 
Luken.  50  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation  of 
John  17.  24  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of 


.    Eph.    1.    4  in  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world 

Heb.   4.    3  were  finished  from  the  foundations  of  the 

9.  26  suffered  since  the  foundation  of  the  world 

1  Pe.    1.  20  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the 

Rev.  13.    8  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world 

17.  8  not  written .  .from  the  foundation  of  the 
FOUNDATION  to  be  laid  — 

1.7b  be  founded,  id;  yasad,  2. 

Isa.  44.  28  even  saying . .  Thy  foundation  shall  be  laid 
2.  To  be  founded,  np;  yasad,  4. 

1  Ki.  6.  37  fourth  year  was  the  foundation,  .laid 
Ezra    3.    6  But  the  foundation.. was  not.. laid 
Hag.    2.  18  the  foundation  of  the. .temple  was  laid 
Zech.  8.    9  the  foundation  of  the  house,  .was  laid 

3.7b  be  founded,  Tp;  yasad,  6. 

Ezra    3  it,  12  the  foundation  of  the  house  was.  laid 

FOUNDATION,  to  lay  for  a  — 

To  found,  lay  as  a  foundation,  np;  yasad,  3. 

Isa.     28.  16  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone 
FOUNDATION,  to  lay  the — 
l.To  found,  lay  a  foundation,  *ip;  yasad. 

2  Ch.31.    7  they  began  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the 
Job   38.    4  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth? 
Psa.  102.  25  Of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of 
Isa.    48.  13  Mine  hand  also  hath  laid  the  foundation 

51.  13  and  laid  the  foundatious  of  the  earth 
51.  16  and  lay  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
54.  11  and  lay  thy  foundations  with  sapphires 

Zee.  12.    1  and  layeth  the  foundatiou  of  the  earth 
2.2b  found,  lay  a  foundation,  ip;  yasad,  3. 

Josh.  6.  26  he  shall  lay  the  foundation  thereof  in  Ms 

1  Ki,  5.  17  stones,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  house 

16.  34  he  laid  the  foundation  thereof  in  Abiram 
Ezra    3.  10  when  the  builders  laid  the  foundation  of 

3.  12  when  the  foundation  of  this  house  was 
Zech.  4.    9  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this  house 

FOUNDATION  of,  to  lay  the  — 

To  found,  lay  foundation  of,  dtfxeXtSw  themelioo. 

Heb.    1.  10  Thou . .  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  ea. 
FOUNDATIONS  — 
1. Foundations,  n'v^y  oshyoth. 

Jer.  50.  is  her  foundations  are  fallen,  her  walls  are 
^.Foundations,  pis'N  ushshin. 

Ezra   4. 12  have  set  up.  .and  joined  the  foundations 

5.  16  laid  the  foundatiou  of  the  house  of  God 

6.  3  let  the  foundations  thereof  be  strongly 

^.Foundations,  rrngiD  mosadoth. 

Deut32.  22  and  set  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the 

2  Sa.  22.    8  the  foundations  of  heaven  moved  and 

22.  16  the  foundations  of  the  world  were  disco. 
Psa.  18.    7  the  foundations  also  of  the  hills  moved 

18.  15  the  foundations  of  the  world  were  disco. 
82.   5  all  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are  out 

Prov.  8.  29  when  he  appointed  the  foundations  of  the 
Isa.    24.  18  the  foundations  of  the  earth  do  shake 

40.  21  have  ye  not  understood  from  the  founda. 

58.  12  thou  shalt  raise  up  the  foundations  of 
Jer.  31.  37  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth  searched 

51.  26  for  a  corner,  nor  a  stone  for  foundations 
Mic.    6.    2  Hear,  .ye  strong  foundations  of  the  earth 

FOUNDER  — 

7b  refine,  purify,  fjiy  tsaraph. 

Judgi7.    4  and  gave  them  to  the  founder, "who  made 
Jer.     6.  29  the  founder  melteth  in  vain :  for  the  wic. 
10.    9  the  work,  .of  the  hands  of  the  founder 
10.  14  every  founder  is  confounded  by  thegrav. 
51.  17  every  founder  is  confounded  by  the  grav. 
FOUNTAIN  — 
l.TJ'cll,  cistern,  11T3,  Y3  bor,  bayir. 

Jer.    6.    7  As  a  fountain  casteth  out  her  waters,  so 
2. Fountain,  jnao  mabbua. 

Eccl.  12.    6  or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at  the  fountain 
3. Spring,  fountain,  |;yp  mayan. 

Gen.    7. 11  the  same  day  were  all  the  fountains  of 
8.   2  The  fountains  also  of  the  deep  and  the 
Lev.  11.  36  Nevertheless  a  fountain  or  pit,  (wherein 
Josh.  15.    9  unto  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  Nepht. 

1  Ki.  18.    5  Go.  .unto  all  foun  tains  of  water,  and  unto 

2  Ch.  32.    4  who  stopped  all  the  fountains,  and  the 
Psa.  74.  15  Thou  didst  cleave  the  fountain  and  the  fl. 

114.  8  turned.,  the  flint  into  a  fountain  of  waters 
Prov.  5.  16  Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  abroad 

8.  24  when,  .no  fountains  abounding  with  wa. 
25.  26  a  troubled  fountain,  aud  a  corrupt  spring 

Song  4.  12  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed 

4.  15  A  fountain  of  gardens,  a  well  of  living  w. 
Isa.    41.  iS  and  fountains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys 
Hos.  13.  15  and  his  fountain  shall  be  dried  up  :  he 
Joel    3.  18  a  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the  house 

■l.F-i'/itain,  nipip  maqor. 

Lev.  20.  18  he  hath  discovered  her  fountain,  and 

20.  18  she  hath  uncovered  the  fountain  of  her 
Psa.  36.    9  For  with  thee  (is)  the  fountain  of  life 

68.  26  Bless,  .the  Lord,  from  the  fountain  of  Is. 
Prov.  5.  iS  Let  thy  fountain  be  blessed  :  and  rejoice 

13.  14  The  law  of  the  wise  (is)  a  fountain  of  life 

14.  27  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  a  fountain  of  life 
Jer.     2.  13  they  have  forsaken  me,  the  fountain  of 

9.  1  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that 

17.  13  the  Lord,  the  fountain  of  living  waters 
Hos.  13.  15  his  fountain  shall  be  dried  up  :  he  shall 
Zech.  13.    1  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain 


FOUR 


171 


FOURSCORE 


5. Spring,  fountain,  j:«  ayin. 

Gen.  16.    7  angel .  .found  her  by  a  fountain  of  water 

•  16.    7  by  the  fountain  in  the  way  to  Shur 
Xunij3.    9  and  in  Elim.  .twelve  fouutains  of  waters 
Deat,  8.    7  a  land  of  broolcs  of  water,  of  fountains 

•  33.  28  the  fountain  of  Jacob . .  upon  a  land  of 

1  Sa.  29.    1  the  Israelites  pitched  by  a  fountain  which 

2  Ch.32.    3  to  stop  the  waters  of  the  fountains  which 
Neh.    2.  14  Then  I  went  on  to  the  gate  of  the  fount. 

3.  15  But  the  gate  of  the  fountain  repaired 
12.  37  at  the  fountain  gate,  which  was  over  aga. 
Prov.  8.  28  when  he  strengthened  the  fountains  of 

6. Fount,  source,  irrjyn  pege. 

Mark  5.  29  straightway  the  fountain  of  her  blood 
Jas.     3.  11  Doth  a  fountain  send  forth  at  the  same 

3.  12  [so  (can)  no  fountain  both  yield  salt  water] 
Rev.    7.  17  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of 
8.  10  and  upon  the  fountains  of  waters 
14.    7  made  heaven,  .and  the  fountains  of  waters 
16.    4  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the . .  fountains  of 

21.  6  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely 

FOUR  — 

l.Four,  n^siN,  yaix  arba,  arbaah. 

Gen.  2.  i'o  it  was  parted,  and  became  into  four  heads 
11.  13,  15  lived,  .four  hundred  "and  three  years 
11.  16  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  be. 

11.  17  Eber  lived .  .four  hundred  and  thirty  yea. 

14.  9  king  of  Ellasar ;  four  kings  with  five 

15.  13  they  shall  afflict  them  four  hundred  years 
23.  15  the  land  (is  worth)  four  hundred  shekels 
23.  16  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  current 

32.  6  to  meet  thee,  and  four  hundred  men  with 

33.  1  Esau  came,  and  with  him  four  hundred 
47.  24  four  parts  shall  be  your  own,  for  seed  of 

Exodi2.  40  sojourning..  (was)f  our  hundred  and  thirty 

12.  41  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  four  hu. 

22.  1  he  shall  restore,  .four  sheep  for  a  sheep 
25. 12  thoa  ahalt  cast  four  rings  of  gold  for  it 
25.  12  and  put  (them)  in  the  four  corners  there. 
25.  26  thou  shalt  make  for  it  four  rings  of  gold 
25.  26  four  corners  that  (are)  on  the  four  feet 

25.  34  in  the  candlestick  (shall  be)  four  bowls 

26.  2,  8  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 
26.  32  thou  shalt  hang  it  upon  four  pillars  of 

26.  32  gold,  upon  the  four  sockets  of  silver 

27.  2  horns  of  it  upon  the  four  corners  thereof 
27.    4  make  four  brasen  rings  in  the  four  corners 

27.  16  their  pillars,  .four,  and  their  sockets  four 

28.  17  thou  shalt  set  in  it.  .four  rows  of  stones 
36.   9  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  four  cubits 
36.  15  and  four  cubits  (was)  the  breadth  of  one 
36.  36  made  thereunto  four  pillars  (of)  shittim 

36.  36  and  he  cast  for  them  four  sockets  of  silv. 

37.  3,  13  And  he  cast  for  it  four  rings  of  gold 
37.    3  (to  be  set)  by  the  four  corners  of  it ;  even 
37-  13  put  the  rings  upon  the  four  corners  that 

37.  20  in  the  candlestick  (were)  four  bowls  made 

38.  2  he  made  the  horns . .  on  the  four  corners 
38.    5  he  cast  four  rings  for  the  four  ends  of  the 
38.  19  pillars(were)four,.and  their  sockets,  .four 
38.  29  and  two  thousand  and  four  hundred  she. 
39. 10  And  they  set  in  it  four  rows  of  stones 

Lev.  11.  20  All  fowls  that  creep,  going  upon  (all)  four 

11.  21  creeping  thing  that  goeth  upon  (all)  four 

11.  23  creeping  things,  which  have  four  feet 

11.  27  all  manner  of  beasts  that  go  on  (all)  four 

11.  42  whatsoever  goeth  upon  (all)  four,  or  what. 

Num.  1.  29  fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hund. 

1.  31  fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  four  hund. 

1.  37  thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hund. 

1.  43  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hund. 

2.  6  fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hund. 
2.  8  fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  four  hund. 
2.    9  six  thousand  and  four  hundred,  through. 
2. 16  fifty  and  one  thousand  and  four  hund. 

2.  23  (were)  thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four 
2.  30  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hund. 
7.    7  Two  wagons  and  four  oxen  he  gave  unto 
7.    8  four  wagons  and  eight  oxen  he  gave  unto 
7. 85  two  thousand  and  four  hundred  (shekels) 
7.  88  peace  offerings,  (were)  twenty  and  four 
25.]  9  those  that  died,  .were  twenty  **  d  four 
26.  25,  43  threescore  and  four  tho>"  .aid  and 
26.  47  fifty  and  three  thousaud  and  four  hund. 

26.  50  forty  and  five  thousand  aud  four  hund. 
Deut  3.  11  four  cubits  the  breadth  of  it,  after  the 

22.  12  make  thee  fringes  upon  the  four  quarters 
Josh  19.  7  Ether,  and  Ashan  ;  four  cities  and  their 
21.  18  and  Almon  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 
21.  22  Beth-horon  with  her  suburbs ;  four  cities 
21.  24  Gath-rimmon  with  her  suburbs;  four  cit. 
21.  29  En-gannim  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 
ax.  31  and  Rehob  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 

21.  35  Nahalal  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cities 
21, 39  Jazer  with  her  suburbs ;  four  cities  in  all 

Judg.  9.  34  they  laid  wait  against  Shechem  in  four 
1 1 .  40  went  yearly  to  lament . .  four  days  in  a  ye. 

19.  2  and  was  there  four  whole  months 

20.  2  four  hundred  thousand  footmen  that 
20.  17  were  numbered  four  hundred  thousand 
20. 47  abode  in  the  rock  Rimmon  four  months 
2r.  12  they  found,  .four  hundred  young  virgins 

1  Sa.  4.    2  and  they  slew,  .about  four  thousand  men 

22.  2  there  were  with  him  about  four  hundred 
25.  13  there  went  up  after  David  about  four  h. 

27.  7  David  dwelt . .  a  full  year  and  four  months 
30. 10  David  pursued,  he  and  four  hundred  men 
30. 17  save  four  hundred  young  men,  which  rode 

2  Sa.  21.  20  four  and  twenty  in  number  ;  and  he  also 
21. 22  These  four  were  born  to  the  giant  in  Gath 


1  Ki.   6.    1  And  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  four  hundred 
7.    2  upon- four  rows  of  cedar  pillars,  with  ce. 
7.  19  (were)  of  lily  work  in  the  porch,  four  cu. 
7.  27  four  cubits  (was)  the  length  of  one  base 
7.  27  and  four  cubits  the  breadth  thereof,  and 
7.  30  And  every  base  had  four  brasen  wheels 
7.  30  the  four  corners  thereof  had  undersetters 
7.  yz  And  under  the  borders  (were)  four  wheels 
7.  34  four  undersetters  to  the  four  corners  of 
7. 38  every  laver.  was  four  cubits . .  upon  every 
7.  42  four  hundred  pomegranates  for  the  two 
9.  28  gold,  four  hundred  and  twenty  talents 

10.  26  he  had  a  thousaud  and  four  hundred 

I5-  33  to  reign  over  all  Israel,  .twenty  and  four 
18.  19  the  prophets  of  Baal  four  hundred  aud 
iS.  19  the  prophets  of  the  groves  four  hundred 
18.  22  but  Baal's  prophets  (are)  four  hundred 
18.  33  Till  four'  barrels  with  water,  and  pour 

22.  6  about  four  hundred  men,  and  said  unto 
2  Ki.    7.    3  And  there  were  four  leprous  men  at  the 

14.  13  unto  the  corner  gate,  four  hundred  cubits 

1  Ch.  3.    5  four,  of  Bath-shua  the  daughter  of  Amnion 

5.  18  four  and  forty  thousand  seven  hundred 
7.    1  Tola,  and  Puah,  Jashub,  and  Shimroni,  fo. 

7.  7  and  two  thousand  and  thirty  and  four 

9.  24  In  four  quarters  were  the  porters,  toward 

9.  26  For  these  Levites,  the  four  chief  porters 

12.  26  Of  the  children  of  Levi,  four  thousand 

20.  6  whose  fingers  and  toes,  .four  and  twenty 

21.  5  Judah  (was)  four  hundred  threescore  and 
21.  20  his  four  sons  with  him  hid  themselves 

23.  4  Of  which,  twenty  aud  four  thousand 
23.   5  Moreover,  four  thousand  (were)  porters 

23.  5  and  four  thousand  praised  the  Lord  with 
23. 10  These  (four)  were  the  sons  of  Shiniei 

23. 12  Amram,  Izhar,  Hebron,  and  Uzziel,  four' 

24.  18  the,  four  and  twentieth  to  Maaziah 

25.  31  The  four  and  twentieth  to  Ronianti-ezer 
2C.  17  northward  four  a  day,  southward  four  a 
26. 18  At  Parbar  westward,  four  at  the  causeway 
27.  1  of  every  course,  .twenty  and  four  thous. 
27.  2, 4, 5,  7,  8,  9  his  course  (were)  twenty  and  f. 
27.  10,  11,  12,13,  14, 1 5  his  course.,  twenty  and  t 

2  Ch.  1. 14  he  had  a  thousand  and  four  hundred 

4. 13  foiir  hundred  pomegranates  on  the  two 

8.  18  took  thence  four  hundred  and  fifty  talents 

9.  25  Solomon  had  four  thousand  stalls  for 

13.  3  with,  .four  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 
18.  5  gathered,  .of  prophets  four  hundred  men 
25.  23  to  the  corner  gate,  four  hundred  cubits 

Ezra  1.  10  basons  of  a  second,  .four  hundred  and 

1. 11  All.  .five  thousand  and  four  hundred 
2.    7  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
2.  15  of  Adin,  four  hundred  fifty  and  four 

2.  31  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 

2.  40  Levites.  .of  Hodaviah,  seventy  and  four 

2.  67  Their  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and 

Neh.  6.    4  they  sent  unto  me  four  times  after  this 

7. 12  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
7.  23  of  Bezai,  three  hundred  twenty  and  four 
7.  34  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
7.  43  Levites.  .of  Hodevah,  seventy  and  four 
7.  69  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  five 

11.  6  four  hundred  threescore  andeight  valiant 
11. 18  Levites.  .two  hundred  fourscore  and  four 

Job     1. 19  and  smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house 
42. 16  Job.  .saw.  .his  sous'  sons,  .four  generati. 
Prov  30.  15  (yea),  four  (things)  say  not,  (It  is)  enough 
30. 18  too  wonderful  for  me,  yea,  four  which  I 
30.  21  disquieted,  and  for  four,  .it -cannot  bear 
30.  24  There  be  four,  .little  upon  the  earth,  but 
30.  29  three,  .which  go  well,  yea,  four  are  comely 
Isa.   11. 12  gather,  .from the fourcorners  of  the  earth 
17.    6  four,  .five  in  the  outmost  fruitful  branches 
Jer.  15.   3  I  will  appoint  over  them  four  kinds,  saith 
36. 23  when  Jehudi  had  read  three  or  four  leaves 
49.  36  the  four  winds  from  the  four  quarters  of 
52.  21  the  thickness  thereof  (was)  four  fingers 
52.  30  all  the  persons  (were)  four  thousand  and 
Eze.     1.    5  the  likeness  of  four  living  creatures 
1.   6  And  every  one  had  four  faces 
1.    6  and  every  one  had  four  wings 
1.   8  under  their  wings  on  their  four  sides 
1.    8  they  four  had  their  faces  and  then  wings 
1. 10  they  four  had  the  face  of  a  man,  and 
1 .  10  they  four  had  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the 
1. 10  they  four  also  had  the  face  of  an  eagle 
1. 15  by  the  living  creatures,  with  his  four  f. 
1.  16  they  four  had  one  likeness  :  and  their 
1. 17  they  went  upon  their  four  sides  .they 
1 .  1 8  rings . .  full  of  eyes  round  about  them  four 
7.    2  the  end  is  come  upon  the  four  corners  of 

10.  9  when  I  looked,  behold  the  four  wheels 
10. 10  they  four  had  one  likeness,  as  if  a  wheel 

10.  11  they  went  upon  their  four  sides;  they 
10. 12  wheels,  .the  wheels  that  they  four  had 
10. 14  And  every  one  had  four  faces  :  the  first  f. 
10.  21  Every  oue  had  four  faces .  .four  wings 

14.  21  when  I  send  my  four  sore  judgments  upon 
37.  9  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath,  and 
40.  41  Four  tables  (were)  on  this  side,  and  four 

40.  42  And  the  four  tables  (were)  of  hewn  stone 

41.  5  the  breadth  of . .  side  chamber,  four  cubits 

42.  20  He  measured  it  by  the  four  sides  :  it  had 

43.  14  to  the  greater  settle  (shall  be)  four  cubits 
43.  ts  So  the  altar  (shall  be)  four  cubits ;  and 
43.  15  from  the  altar  and  upward,  .four  horns 
43.  16  altar,  .square  in  the  four  squares  thereof 
43.  17  and  fourteen  broad  in  the  four  squares 
43.  20  on  the  four  horns,  .and  on  the  four  corn. 
45. 19  upon  the  four  corners  of  the  settle  of  the 
46.  21  caused  me  to  pass  by  the  four  corners  of 


Eze.  46.  22  In  the  four  corners  of  the  coiirt.  .courts 
46.  22  these  four  corners  (were)  of  one  measure 
46.  23  And .  .a  row.  .round  about  theni  four 
48. 16,  16,  16,  16,  30, 32,  33,  34  four  thousand  and 

Dan.    1.  17  As  for  these  four  children,  God  gave  them 
8.    8  for  it  came  up  four  notable  ones  toward 

8.  22  whereas  four  stood  up  for  it,  four  kingdL 

10.  4  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  first 

11.  4  shall  be  divided  toward  the.  four  winds  of 
Amos- 1.    3,  6,  9,  11,  13  For  three  trans. .  .and  for  four 

2.    1,4,  6  For  three  transgressions., and  for  four 
Hag.    1.  15  In  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  sixth 
2. 10  In  the  four  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the 
2. 18  from  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
2.  20  the  word .  .came  unto  Haggai  in  the  four 
Zech.  1.   7  Upon  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
1.  18  Then.  .1.  .saw,  and  behold  four  horns 

1.  20  And  the  LORD  showed  me  four  carpenters 

2.  6  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  wi. 
6.    1  there  came  four  chariots  out  from  betw. 

6.  5  These  (are)  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens 
'2.Four,  n^3-]N,  ya*iN  arba,  arbaah. 

Ezra    6.  17  two  hundred  rams,  four  hundred  lambs 
Dan.    3.  25  I  see  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the  midst. 

7.  2  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven  strove  upon 
7.   3  four  great  beasts  came  up  from.the  sea 

7.    6  upon  the  back  of  it  four  wings  of  a  fowl    . 
7.    6  the  beast  had  also  four  heads ;  and  dom. 
7.  17  These,  .beasts,  which  are  four,  (are)  four 

S.Four,  rea-a-apes  tessares. 

Matt  24,  31  shall  gathertogether.  .from  the  four  winds 
Mark  2.    3  sick  of  tne  palsy,  which  was  borne  of  four 

13.  27  shall  gather  together,  .from  the  four  winds 
Luke  2.  37  a  widow  of  about  fourscore  and  foiu*  years 
Johnn.  17  he  had  (lain)  in  the  grave  four  days  already 

19.  23  made  four  parts,  to  every  soldier  a  pai  t 
Acts  10.  11  a  great  sheet  knit  at  the  four  corners 

11.  5  let  down  from  heaven  by  four  corners 

12.  4  delivered  (him)"  to  four  quaternions  of 
21.    9  the  same  man  had  four  daughters,  virgins 
21.  23  We  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on 
27.  29  they  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  stern 

Rev.    4.    4  round  about  the  throne  (were)  four  and 
4.  -4  and  upon  the  seats  I  saw  four  and  twenty 
4.    6  round  about  the  throne,  (were)  four  bea. 
4.    8  the  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  wi. 

4.  10  The  four  and  twenty  elders  fall  down  be. 

5.  6  in  the  midst,  of  the  four  beasts,  and  in 
5.    8  when  he  had  taken  the  book,  the  four 
5.    8  and  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down 
5.  14  And  the  four  beasts  said,  Amen.    And. 

5.  14  the  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down 

6.  1 1  heard,  .one  of  the  four  beasts  saying 

6.  61  heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four 
7. .  1  after  these  things  I  saw  four  angels  stan: 
7. '  1  holding  the  four  winds,  .on  the  four  cor. 

7.  2  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four  angels 

7.  4  sealed  an  hundred,  .forty.,  four  thousand 
7. 11  and  (about)  the  elders,  and  the  four  beas. 

9.  13  I  heard  a  voice  from  the  [four]  horns  of 
9.  14  Loose  the  four  angels  which  are  bound  in 
9. 15  the  four  angels  were  loosed,  which  were 

11. 16  the  four  and  twenty  elders  which  sat 
14.    1  with  him  an  hundred  forty,  .four  thousa. 
14.   3  and  before  the  four  beasts,  and  the  eW    s 

14.  3  but  the  hundred,  forty,  .four  thousa 

15.  7  one  of  the  four  beasts  gave  unto  the     .ren 

19.  4  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  and  the  lour 

20.  8  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  quarters 

21.  17  measured.. an  hundred,  .forty.. four  cub* 

4.Foitrth,  rerapros  tetartos. 

Acts  10.  30  Four  days  ago  I  was  fasting  until  this  fr- 

FOUR  (days,  months,  hundred,  thousand)  — 
l.Four  months,  (t/ie  space  of),  reTpdfxf\uov,~os 

John  4.  35  Say  not  ye,  There  are  yet  four  months? 
2. Belonging  to  fourth  day,  TerapTcuos  tetartaios. 

Johnn.  39  hestinketh:  for  he  hath  been  (dead)  four  d 
3. Four  thousand,  rerpaKto-x^^ot  tetrakischilioi. 

Matti5-  38  they  that  did  eat  were  four  thousand  men 

16.  to  Neither  the  seven  loaves  of  the  four  tho. 
Mark  8.    9  they  that  had  eaten  were  about  four  tho. 

8.  20  when  the  seven  among  four  thousand 
Acts  21.  38  leddest  out.  .four  thousand  men  that 

■l.Four  hundred,  rerpaKoo'toi  tetrakosioi. 

Acts    5.  36  to  whom  a  number  of  men,  about  four  B 
7.    6  and  entreat  (them)  evil  four  hundred  ye. 
13.  20  about  the  space  of  four  hundred  andfifty 
•  Gal.    3. 17  the  law,  which  was  four  hundred  and  th, 
FOUR  and  twenty  — 
Twenty  four,  elKOffircffffapes  eikosi 'tessares. 

Rev.    5.  14  the  [four  (and)  twenty  elders]  fell  down 

FOXTR  fold  — 

l.Four  fold,  □*J?V31^  arbaiayim. 

2  Sa.  12.   6  he  shall  restore  the  lamb  four  fold,  beca. 
%  Four  fold,  Tcrpair\6os  tetraploos. 

Luke  19.   8  by  false  accusation,  I  restore .  .four  fold.    . 

FOUR  footed  heast  — 

Four  footed,  quadruped,  rerpa-rrovs  tetrapous. 

Acts  10.  12  Wherein . .  all  manner  of  four  footed  bes„ 
11.  6  I  considered,  and  saw  four  footed  beasts 

Rom.  1.  23  and  four  footed  beasts,  and  creeping 

FOURSCORE  — 

1. Eighty,  c*:b^  sliemonim. 

Gen.  16. 16  Abram  (was)  fourscore  and  six  years  old. 


FOURSQUARE 


372 


FRAGMENT 


Gen    35.  28  Isaac  were  an  hundred  and  fourscore  y. 
Evod.  7     7  Hoses  (was)  fourscore ..  Aaron  fourscore 
Nuin  2.    9  an  hundred  thousand  and  fourscore  tho. 
4  48  eight  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fou. 
Josh  14.  10  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  and  five  years 
■    Judg  3.  30  And  the  land  had  rest  fourscore  years 
1  Sa  2-.  18  slew  on  that  day  fourscore  and  five  per. 
z  Sa  19.  32  BarziUai  was  a  very  aged  man . .  fourscore 
•10  3i  I  (am)  this  clay  fourscore  years  old.,  can 

1  Ki     515  fourscore  thousand  hewers  in  the  moun. 

'  12  21  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  chosen 

2  Ki    6.  25  until  an  ass's  head  was  (sold)  tor  fourscore 

10  24  Jehu  appointed  fourscore  men  without 
iq  35  an  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand 

1  Ch  75  reckoned  in  all. . fourscore  and  seven  th. 
1=  0  Eliel  the  chief,  and  his  brethren  fourscore 
2-     7  all    was  two  hundred  fourscore  and  eight 

•>  Ch    2     2  fourscore  thousand  to  hew  in  the  moun. 
2"  18  fourscore  thousand  (to  be)  hewers  in  the 
11'    1  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  chosen 
14'    8  two  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand 
17  i5  two  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand 
*7  18  an  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand 
•>6  17  with  him  fourscore  priests  of  the  Lord 

Ezra  3    s  Zebadiah..  and  with  him  fourscore  males 

Hell    7  "6  Netophah,  an  hundred  fourscore  and 

11  18  Levites.  .two  hundred  fourscore  and  four 
Esth  1  4  many  days . .  an  hundred  and  fourscore 
Psa  90  10  and  if  by  reasonof  strength.,  fourscore 
Son"-  6.  8  There  are  threescore  queens,  and  f  oursc. 
Isa  °  37  36  a  hundred  and  fourscore  and  Ave  thou. 
Jer'.  41.   5  there  came,  .from  Samaria,  .fourscore 

i.EiqMy,  dySojiKovra  ogdoekonta. 

Luke  2  37  And  she  (was)  a  widow  of  about  fourscore 
16.    7  he  said . .  Take  thy  bill,  and  write  fours. 

FOURSQUARE  — 
1. Fourth,  T31  rebii. 

Eze.  48.  20  ye  shall  offer  the  holy  oblation  foursquare 

2.  To  be  foursquare,  J)31  raba. 

Exod'27.  1  the  altar  shall  be  foursquare  :  and  the 
2S  16  Foursquare  it  shall  be,  (being)  doubled 
30  2  foursquare  shall  it  be  ;  and  two  cubits 
37'  •»;  he  made  the  incense  altar,  .foursquare 
,8  1  And  he  made  the  altar,  .foursquare 
39.    9  It  was  foursquare  ;  they  made  the  beast 

3.7*0  be  foursquare,  Vi~i  raba,  i. 

1  Ki    7  31  "ravings  with  their  borders,  foursquare 
Eze.'  40!  47  and  an  hundred  cubits  broad,  foursquare 

i  Four  cornered,  rerpdyasvos  tetragonos: 

Rev.  21.  16  the  city  lieth  foursquare,  and  the  length 

FOURTEE'T  — 

1  Four  (and)  ten,  -iyj  n^iiN!  jra-iN  aria  arbaah  asar. 
Gen  31  41 1  served  thee  fourteen  years  for  thy  two 
46.  22  sons  of  Rachel,  .all  the  souls  (were)  fou. 
Num  1  -7  threescore  and  fourteen  thousand  and 
2     4  threescore  and  fourteen  thousand  and 
16.  49  Now  they  that  died .  .were  fourteen  tho. 
20  13   17  20,  23/26,  29,  32  fourteen  lambs  of  the 
,„'  1 , 'tenth . .  to  each  lamb  of  the  fourteen  lambs 
Josh  it  36  of  Judah.  .fourteen  cities  with  then-  vil_ 
18  28  of  Benjamin,  .fourteen  cities  with  their 
1  Ki    8.  65  seven  days  and  seven  days . .  fourteen  days 

1  Ch  25     5  God  gave  to  Henian  fourteen  sons  and 

2  Ch  15  21  Abijah.  .married  fourteen  wives,  and 
Job  '  42.  12  for  he  had  fourteen  thousand  sheep 
Eze.  43.  17  settle,  .fourteen,  .long  and  fourteen  or. 

^.Fourteen,  SeicaTeo-o-apes  dekatessares. 

Matt  1  17  from  Abraham  to  David.,  fourteen  gener. 
'  1'  17  away  into  Babylon  (are)  fourteen  genera. 
1  17  unto  Christ  (are)  fourteen  generations 
2  Co  i''   2  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen 
Gal.'   2.    1  Then  fourteen  years  after  I  went  up  again 

FOURTEENTH — 

1. Four t and)  ten,  Ti'-J  n^aix,  "tea.  waix  arbaah  asar. 

Gen  14     5  in  the  fourteenth  year  cameChedorlaomer 

Exodiz    6  shall  keep  it  up  until  the  fourteenth  day 

12  18  In  the  first  (month),  on  the  fourteenth  day 

Lev    2-     5  In  the  fourteenth,  of  the  first  month  at 

Num   9     3  In  the  fourteenth  day  of  this  month,  at 

'  q    5  they  kept  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth 

q  11  The  fourteenth  day  of  the  second  mouth 

28  16  in  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

Josh    5.  10  kept  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth  day 

2  Ki  18.  13  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  king  Hezekiah 

1  Ch  24  ii  to  Huppah,  the  fourteenth  to  Jeshebeab 

'25  21  The  fourteenth  to  Mattithiah.  .Ins  sons 
sCh  30  15  they  killed  the  passoveron  the  fourteenth 
35    1  they  killed  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth 
Ezra   6.  19  kept  the  passover  upon  the  fourteenth 
Esth   9. 15  on  the  fourteenth  day  also  of  the  month 
9  17  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same  rested 
q  18  Jews.. assembled.. on  the  fourteenth  th. 
9  19  made  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month 
9.  21  they  should  keep  the  fourteenth  day  of 
Isa    36.    1  Now  it'came  to  pass  in  the  fourteenth  ye. 
Eze    40    1  in  the  fourteenth  year  after  that  the  city 
45.  21  in  the  fourteenth  day' of  the  month,  ye 
2. Four  and  tenth,  recrirapeaKaio'fitaTos  tessaresko :. 
Acts  27.  27  But  when  the  fourteenth  night  was  come 
27.  33  This  day  is  the  fourteenth  day  that  ye 

FOURTH  — 

l.Four,  ya-m  arba. 

1  Ki.  22.  41  in  the  fourth  year  of  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
2CI1.  3.  2  he  began  to  build.. in  the  fourth  year  of 
Neh.  9.    1  Now  in  the  twenty  and  fourth  day  of  this 


Zech  7     1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of 

7.  1  in  the  fourth  (day)  of  the  ninth  month 

i.Fourth,  'jran  rebii. 

Gen     1  10  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  f. 
■'    2.  14  And  the  fourth  river  (is)  Euphrates 

15.  16  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they  shall 
Exod28.  20  And  the  fourth  row  a  beryl,  and  an  onyx 

3-9  13  And  the  fourth  row,  a  beryl,  an  onyx,  and 
Lev  19.  24  But  in  the  fourth  year  all  the  fruit  ther. 
Num   7.  30  On  the  fourth  day  Elizur  the  son  of  She. 

■>g.  23  And  on  the  fourth  day  ten  bullocks,  two 
.Tosh.  19.  17  the  fourth  lot  came  out  to  Issachar,  for 
Jud"  19.  5  it  came  to  pass  on  the  fourth  day,  when 
2Sa.    3.   4  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith 

1  Ki.  6.  1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Solomon'sreignover 
6.  33  posts  (of)  olive  tree,  a  fourth  part  (of  the 
6  37  In  the  vourth  year  was  the  foundation  of 

2  Ki  10.  30  thy  children  of  the  fourth  (generation) 
15  12  saying,  Thy  sons  shall  sit.  .unto  the  fourth 
18     9  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of 

1  Ch.  2.  14  Nethaneel  the  fourth,  Raddai  the  fifth 
3     2  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith 
3  15  the  third  Zedekiah,  the  fourth  Shallum 

8.  2  Nohah  the  fourth,  and  Rapha  the  fifth 
12  10  Mishmannah  the  fourth.  Jeremiah  the  fi. 

23.  19  Jahaziel  the  third,  and  Jekameam  the  fo. 

24.  8  The  third  to  Harim,  the  fourth  to  Seorim 

24  23  Jahaziel  the  third,  Jekameam  the  fourth 

25  11  The  fourth  to  Izri,  (he),  his  sons,  and  his 
26.    2  Zebadiah  the  third,  Jathniel  the  fourth 
26.   4  Sacar  the  fourth,  and  Nethaneel  the  fifth 

26.  11  Tebaliah  the  third,  Zechariah  the  fourth 

27.  7  The  fourth  (captain)  for  the  fourth  month 

2  Ch.20.  26  And  on  the  fourth  day  they  assembled 
Ezra   8  33  Now  on  the  fourth  day  was  the  silver  and 
Jer    25.    1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son 

28.  1  in  the  fourth  year,  (and)  in  the  fifth  mo. 
36.  1  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  fourth  year  of 
39  2  in  the  fourth  month,  the  ninth  (day)  of 
45.  1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son 
46  2  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son 
01.  59  into  Babylon  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  re. 
52.  6  And  in  the  fourth  month,  in  the  ninth 

Eze     1.    1  it  came  to  pass.. in  the  fourth  (month) 

10  14  and  the  fourth  the  face  of  an  eagle 
Dan  11.    2  and  the  fourth  shall  be  far  richer  than 
Zech  6    3  in  the  fourth  chariot  grisled  and  bay 
8.  19  The  fast  of  the  fourth  (month),  and  the 

3. Fourth,  'yffl  rebii. 

Dan  2  40  And  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  he  strong 
-  25  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Sou  of  God 
7     7  and  behold  a  f ourth  beast,  dreadful  and 

7  iq  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the  fourth  b. 
7.  23  said,  The  fourth  beast  shall  be  the  fourth 

i. Fourth,  (those  of  the),  c-v.m  ribbcim.  _ 

Exod2o.   5  unto  the  third  and  fourth  (generation)  of 
34    7  uuto  the  third  and  to  the  foiuth  (gener.) 
Num.14  18  unto  the  third  and  fourth  (generation) 
Deut.  5.   9  unto  the  thud  and  fourth  (generation)  of 

u.  Fourth,  TeVaoTos  tetartos. 

Matt  14.  "5  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  Jesus 

Mark  6.  48  and  about  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night 

Rev.    4.   7  the  fourth  beast  (was)  like  a  flying  eagle 

6    7  And  when  he  had  opened  the  fourth  seal 

6    7  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  fourth  beast  say 

8  12  And  the  fourth  angel  sounded,  and  the  t. 
16  8  the  fourth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon 
21. 19  third,  a  chalcedony ;  the  fourth,  an  enier. 

FOURTH  (part)  — 
l.Fourth,  •yai  rebii. 

Exodzg.  40  and  the  fourth  part  of  an  liui  of  wine  (for) 

Lev  A  13  (shall  be)  of  wine,  the  fourth  (part)  of  an 

Num  1 5.    4  with  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  of  oil 

15     5  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  of  wine  for  a 

28    5  mingled  with  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin 

28    7  And  the  drink .  .(shall  be)  the  fourth  (pa.) 

28!  14  and  a  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  unto  a  lamb 

Neh    0    3  read  in  the  book . .  (one)  fourth  part  of  the 

9.   3  and  (another)  fourth  part  they  confessed 

l.Fourth,  ya-i  reba. 

Exod2g.  40  the  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  beaten  oil 

1  Sa.   9.    8  I  have  here  at  hand  the  fourth  part  of  a 

3. Fourth,  3>ai  roba. 

Num  2310  the  number  of  the  fourth  (part)  of  Israel  ? 

2  Ki.  6  25  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  dove's  dung 
i.Fourth,  TtrapTos  tetartos. 

Rev.    6.   8  power  was  given . .  over  the  fourth  part  of 

FOWL  — 

1.  Choice  or  fat  qeese,  D-ia-ia  barburim. 

1  Ki.   4.  23  roebucks,  and  fallow  deer,  and  fatted  fowl 

I.Fowl,  TO  oph. 

Gen.    1.  20  fowl  (that)  may  fly  above  the  earth  in  the 
1.  21  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his  kind  :  and 
1.  22  fill  the  waters  in  the  seas,  and  let  fowl 
1.  26,  28  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over 

1.  30  to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every 
2. 19  the  Lord  God  formed ..  every  fowl  of  the 

2.  20  gave  names,  .to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and 
6.    7  I  will  destroy,  .the  fowls  of  the  air  ;  for 

6.  20  Of  fowls  after  their  kind,  and  of  cattle 

7.  3  Of  fowls  also  of  the  air  by  sevens,  the  m. 
7.   8  of  fowls,  and  of  every  thing  that  creepeth 
7. 14  every  fowl  after  his  kind,  every  bird  of 
7.  21  And  all  flesh  died,  .both  of  fowl,  and  of 
7.  23  creeping  things,  and  the  fowd  of  the  he. 


Gen.    8.  17  Bring  forth  with  thee,  .(both)  of  fowl 
8. 19  every  creeping  thing,  and  every  fowl 
8.  20  took.. of  every  clean  fowl,  and  offered        . 
9     2  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air,  upon  all  that 
9  10  of  the  fowl,  of  the  cattle,  and  of  every   . 
Lev.    ?.  14  And  if  the  burnt  sacrifice,  .(be)  of  fowls 
7.  26  ye  shall  eat  no  manner,  .of  fowl  or  of 
11  13  shall  have  in  abomination  among  the  fo. 
11.  20  AH  fowls  that  creep,  going  upon  (all) 
11.  46  of  the  fowl,  and  of  every  living  creature 
17.  13  catcheth  any  beast  or  fowl  that  may  be 
20.  25  and  between  unclean  fowls  and  clean 
20.  25  abominable  by  beast,  or  by  fowl,  or  by 
Deut.14.  20  (But  of)  all  clean  fowls  ye  may  eat 

28.  26  thy  carcase  shall  he  meat  unto  all  fowls 
1  Sa.  17.  44  I  will  give  thy  flesh  unto  the  fowls  of  the 
17  46  give  the  carcases.,  this  day  unto  thefowls 

1  Ki   4  33  he  spake  also  of  beasts,  and  of  fowl,  and 

14  11  him  that  dieth.  .shall  the  fowls  of  the  air 
16    4  him  that  dieth  - .  shall  the  fowls  of  the 

■,1  24  and  him  that  dieth.  .shall  the  fowls,  .eat 
Job  12    7  But  ask  now.  .the  fowls  of  the  air,  and 
28  21  and  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  an- 
33  11  maketh  us  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  heav.Y 
Psa    50  11  I  know  all  the  fowls -of  the  mountains 
78  27  feathered  fowls  like  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 
70    2  given  (to  be)  meat  unto  the  fowls  of  the 
104  1-  By  them  shall  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 
Jer     7  33  carcases.,  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of 
9  10  both  the  fowl  of  the  heavens  and  the 

15  3  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  beasts 

16  4  carcases  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of 
19  7  will  I  give  to  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of 
-4  20  bodies  shall  be  for  meat  unto  the  fowls 

Eze    29    5' I  have  given  thee  for  meat.,  to  thefowls 
'  '  31    6  AU  the  fowls  of  heaven  made  their  nests 
31'  13  Upon  his  ruin  shall  all  the  fowls  of  the 
32    4  will  cause  all  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  to 
?8  20  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  beasts  of 
44.  31  shall  not  eat . .  whether  it  be  fowl  or  beast 
Hos    a  18  with  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  (with)  the 
4.   3  shall  languish.,  with  the  fowls  of  heaven 
7  12  I  will  bring  them  down  as  the  fowls  of 
Zeph.  1.    3  I  will  consume  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 

Z.Fowl,  1'iJ)  oph.  ■ 

Dan    2.  38  and  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  hath  he 

7.   6  had  upon  the  back  of  it  four  wings  of  a  f . 

i.  Ravenous  fowl,  a:E  ayit. 

Gen  15  11  the  fowls  came  down  upon  the  carcases 
Job '  -8    7  (There  is)  a  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth 
Isa.    18.   6  left.,  unto  the  fowls.,  and  the  fowls 

5.  Bird,  sparrow,  fowl,  TO*  tsippor. 

Deut  4. 17  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that  Hietli 
Neh    5  i3  also  fowls  were  prepared  for  me,  and 
Psa  '   8     8  The  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the 

'14S.  10  cattle  ;  creeping  things,  and  flying  fowl 

Eze.  17.  23  under  it  shall  dwell  all  fowl  of  every  wi. 

39.  17  Speak  unto  every  feathered  fowl,  and  to 

Q.Bird,  sparrow,  fowl,  -m  tsippar. 

Dan    4  12  fowls  of  the  heaven  dwelt  in  the  boughs 
4  14  and  the  fowls  from  his  branches 
4.  21  upon  whose  branches  the  fowls  of  t.ie 

7. Bird,  foid,  opveov  orneon.  . 

Rev  io  17  saying  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the 
'  19.  21  all  the  fowls  were  filled  with  then-  flesh 
S.Winqed  fowl,  ireTeii-oV  peteinon. 

Matt  6  26  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air  :  for  they  sow 

13     4  and  the  fowls  came  and  devoured  them 
Mark  4    4  fowls  of  the  air  came  and  devoured  it  up 

J  ,,so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  may  lodge 
Luke  8.   5  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  devoured  it 

12  24  much  more  are  ye  better  than  the  fowls? 

13  19  the  fowls  of  the  air  lodged  in  the  bran.  _ 
Acts  10. 12  and  creeping  tilings,  and  fowls  of  the  air 

11.   6  and  creeping  things,  and  fowls  of  the  air 

FOWLER  — 

I. Fowler,  ensnarer,  K"ip:  yaqosh.       .    .    .     .      '. 
Hos.   9.    8  the  prophet  (is)  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all 

2.Fowler,  ensnarer,  vtp;  yaqush. 

Psa.  91.    3  he  shall  deliver  thee  from.,  the  fowler 
Prov.  6.   5  and  as  a  bird  from  the  hand  of  the  fowler 

3  To  lav  a  snare,  ensnare,  rip;  yaqosh. 

Psa.  124.    7  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers 

FOX  — 

LFox,  jackal,  ?S»»  shual. 

Jud-15.   4  Samson .  .caught  three  hundred  foxes,  and 
Neh    4     ~  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even  break  down 
Psa.'  63.  10  they  shall  be  a  portion  for  foxes 
Son"  a  ,5  Take  us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,  that 
Lam    5'  18  which  is  desolate,  the  foxes  walk  upon 
Eze. '  13.    4  thy  prophets  are  like  the  foxes  in  the 

2  Fox,  aXonrnt  alopex. 

Matt.  8.  20  The  foxes  have  holes  and  the  birds  of 

Luke  9  5S  Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  of  the  air 

13.  3=  Go  ye,  and  tell  that  fox,  Behold,  I  cast 

FRAGMENT  — 

Fraqment,  broken  piece,  KXatrixaldasma. 

Matt  14.  20  and  they  took  up  of  the  fragments  that 
Mark  6  43  twelve  baskets  full  of  the  fragments,  and 

8  19,  20  how  many  baskets  full  of  fragments 
Luke  9. 17  and  there  was  taken  up  of  fragments 
John  6.  12  Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain 

6  13  *Uled  twelve  baskets  with  the  fragments 


FRAIL 


373 


FRIEND 


FRAIL—    " 

Left,  forbearing,  frail,  Vin  ckadel. 

Psa.  39.   4  Lord.,  (that)  I  may  know  how  frail  I  (am) 
FRAME— 
•1. Frame,  formation,  imagination,  tx*  yetser. 

Psa.103.  14  For  he  kuoweth  our  frame  ;  he  rememb. 
2. Building,  frame,  niiD  mibneh. 

Eze.  40.    2  by  which  (was)  as  the  frame  of  a  city  on 
FRAME,  to  — 

1.  To  frame,  constitute,  l$]  yatsar. 

Psa.  94.  20  iniquity. .  which irameth  mischief  by  a 
Isa.  29.  16  shall,  .say  of  him  that  framed  it,  He  hath 
Jer.  18.  11  Behold,  I  frame  evil  against  you,  and 

2.  To  prepare,  establish,  |*3  lain,  5. 

Judg.12.    6  for  he  could  not  frame  to  pronounce  (it) 
3. To  give,  fnj  nathan. 

Hos.    5.    4  They  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn 

4.  To  coitple,  join  together,  ids  tsamad,  5. 

Psa.  50.  19  to  evil,  aud  thy  tongue  frameth  deceit 

5.  To  make  thoroughly  right  or  Jit,  Karaprifa  kata. 
Heb.  11.    3  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word 

FRAME  together,  to  fitly  — 

To  lay  out  fitly  together,  a-vvap/j.o>.oyeu  sunarnwl. 
Eph;   2.  21  whom  all  the  building,  fitly  framed  toge. 
FRAMED,  thing  — 
Frame,  form,  imagination,  "fir  yetser. 

Isa.   29.  16  or  shall  the  thing  framed  say  of  him  that 
FRANKINCENSE  — 
1. Frankincense,  nrc?  lebonah. 

Esod3o.  34  sweet  spices  with  pure  frankincense 
Lev.    2.    1  and  he  shall,  .put  frankincense  thereon 
2.  15  And  thou  shalt.  .lay  frankincense  thereon 
2.  16  with  all  the  "frankincense  thereof 
5. 11  neither  shall  he  put  (any)  frankincense 

6.  15  and  all  the  frankincense  which  (is)  upon 
24.    7  thou  shalt  put  pure  frankincense  upon 

Num.  5.  15  nor  put  frankincense  thereon  ;  for  it  (is) 

1  Ch.  9.  29  and  the  frankincense,  and  the  spices 

Neh.  13.    5  they  laid,  .the  frankincense,  and  the  ve. 

13.    9  with  the  meat  offering  and  the  frankin. 

Song  3.    6  perfumed  with  myrrh  and  frankincense 

4.    6  1  will  get  me.  .to  the  hill  of  frankincense  ■ 

4.  14  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of  frankincense 

2. Frankincense,  \ifiavos  libanos. 

Matt  2.  11  they  presented  unto  him.  .frankincense 
Rev.  18.  13  ointments,  and  frankincense,  and  wine 

FRAUD — 

Fraud,  opjiressi-oyi,  ^jii  tok. 

Psa.  10.    7  His  mouth  is  full  of  cursing,  .and  fraud 

FRAUD,  to  keep  back  by  — 

To  deprive  of  cbroo-Tepeoj  apostereo. 

Jas.    5.    4  hire . .  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud 

FRAY  (away),  to  — 

To  cause  to  tremble,  trouble,  Tin  charad,  5. 

Deut28.  26  the  beasts.  :and  no  man  shall  fray,  .away 
Jer.  7.  33  the  beasts,  .and  none  shall  fray,  .away 
Zech.  1.  21  but  these  are  come  to  fray  them,  to  cast 

FREE  — 

1.  Gratis,  for  nought,  err  chinnam. 

Exod2i.  11  then  shall  she  go  out  free  without  money 

2.  Free,  Vrn  choplishi. 

Exod  zi."  2  in  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  freeforno. 
21.  5  Hove,  .my  children;  I  will  not  go  out  free 
21.  26  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his  eye's  sake 
21. 27  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his  tooth's 

Deut  15. 12  seventh  year  thou  shalt  let  him  go  free 

15. 13  And  when  thou  sendest  him  out  free  from 
15.  18  when  thou  sendest  him  away  free  from 

1  Sa.  17.  25  and  make  his  father's  house  free  in  Isra. 
Job     3.  19  and  the  servant  (is)  free  from  his  master 

39.    5  Who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  ass  free?  or 

Psa.  88.    5  Free  among  the  dead,  like  the  slain  that 

Isa.   58.    6  (Is)  not  this.,  to  let  the  oppressed  go  free 

Jer.  34.    9  man  should  let  his  man  servant,  .go  free 

34.  10  and  every  one  his  maid  servant,  go  free 

34. 11  whom  they  had  let  go  free,  to  return 

34. 14  thou  shalt  let  him  go  free  from  thee 

Z.WiUing,  liberal,  noble, .3H2  nadib. 

2  Ch.29.  31  aud  as  many  as  were  of  a  free  heart 
Psa.  51. 12  Restore,  .and  uphold  me  (with  thy)  free 

A. Acquitted,  *pi  naqi. 

Deut  24.   5  he  shall  be  free  at  home  one  year,  and 
o.Open,  let  away,  free.,  T05,  V&Spatar,  patir. 

1  Ch.  9.  33  (who  remaining)  in  the  chambers  (were)  f . 
6. Free,  at  liberty,  £\ev$epos  eleutheros. 

Matt  17.  26  Jesus  saith.  .Then  are  the  children  free 

John  8.  33  how  sayest  thou.  Ye  shall  be  made  free? 

8.  36  If  the  Son.  .ye  shall  be  free  indeed 
Rom.  6.  20  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin,  ye  were  free 

7.  3  she  is  free  from  that  law ;  so  that  she  is 
1  Co.   7.  21  if  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  use  (it) 

7.  22  he  that  is  called,  (being)  free,  is  Christ's 

9.  1  Am  I  not  an  apostle  ?  am  I  not  free  ? 

9.  19  For  though  I  be  free  from  all  (men),  yet 
12.  13  whether  (we)  be  bond  or  free ;  and  have 
Gal.     3.  28  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is 
4.  26  But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free 
4.  31  So  then  brethren,  we  are.  .of  the  free 


6.    8  receive  of  the  Lord  whether,  .bond  or  fr. 
3.  ij  Barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  (nor)  free :  but 


Eph. 

Col. 

1  Pe.  2.  16  As  free,  aud  not  using,  .liberty  for  a 

Rev.  13. 16  And  he  caused  all.  .free  and  bond,  to 
19. 18  and  the  flesh  of  all.. free  and  bond,  both 
FREE,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  err  become  free,  a>?n  chaphash,  4. 

'Lev.  29.  20  not  put  to  death,  because  she  was  not  fr. 

2.  To  be  or  become  acquitted,  hjm  naqah,  2. 

Num.  5. 19  be.  thou  free  from  this  bitter  water  that 
-  5. 28  then  she  shall  be  free,  and  shall  conceive 

FREE,  to  let  go  — 

To  open,  loose,  nris  pathach,  3. 

Psa.  105.  20  the  ruler  of  the  people,  and  let  him  go  f. 

FREE,  to  make  — 

To  free,  make  free,  €Kev9cp6ai  eleutheroo. 

John  8.  32  know,  .and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free 

8.  36  If  the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free 

Rom.  6.  18  Being  then  made  free  from  sin,  ye.be ca. 

6.  22  But  now  being  made  free  from  sin,"  and 

8.    2  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from 

Gal.    5.    1  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us  free,  and 

FREE  gift  — 

A  grace,  gift,  x^-pio-fia  charisma, 

Rom.  5.  15  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  (is)  the  free  g. 
5. 16  the  free  gift  is  of  many  offences  unto  ju. 

FREE  offering  — 

Willijig  offering,  nzrn  nedabah. 

Exod36.    3  they  brought  yet  unto  him  free  offerings 
Amos.4.   5  proclaim,  .publish  the  free  offerings ;  for 
FREE  man  or  woman  — 
I. Que  fully  freed,  aireKevQepos  apeleutlieros. 

1  Co.   7.  22  (being)  a  servant,  is  the  Lord's  free  man 
2. Free  person,  i\svdepos  eleutheros. 

Gal.    4.  22  by  a  bond  maid,  the  other  by  a  free  wo. 
4.  23  but  he  of  the  free  woman  (was)  by  promi. 
4.  30  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the  free  woman 
Rev.  6.  15  every  free  man,  hid  themselves  in  the  dens 
FREED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  cut  off,  ms  Jcarath,  2. 

Josh.  9.  23  there  shall  none  of  you  be  freed  from 
2.  To  justify,  declare  just,  Sitcatou  dikaiod, 
Rom.  6.    7  For  he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin 

FREEDOM  — 

1.  Freedom,  n^gn  chuphshah. 

Lev.  19.  20  not  at  all  redeemed,  nor  freedom  given 
2. Citizenship,  iro\treia  politeia. 

Acts  22. 28  With  a  great  sum  obtained  I  this  freedom 
FREELY  — 
l.Graiis,  for  nought,  Djn  chinnam. 

Numn.    5  the  fish  which  we  did  eat  in  Egypt  freely 

2.  Willing  offering,  n^  nedabah. 

Psa.  54.    6  I  will  freely  sacrifice  unto  thee  :  I  will 
Hos.  14.    4  I  will  love  them  freely  :  for  mine  anger 

3.  Freely,  gratis,  dwpedi/  dorean. 

Mattio.    8  Heal,  .freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give 
Rom.  3.  24  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through 

2  Co.  1 1.    7  Ihavepreached  to  you  the  gospel,  .freely? 
Rev.  21.    6  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely 

22.  17  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely 

4.  With  full  speech,fM€Ta  7ra/5  f>-q<rias  metaparrhesias. 

Acts    2.  29  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  pat. 

5. To  use  full  speech  or  ease,  ■n-app'rio-tdfyfxai  parrlie. 
Acts  26. 26  before  whom  also  I  speak  freely  :  for  I  am 

FREEWILL,  to  be  minded  of  one's  own  — 
To  offer  willingly,  2?i*nedab,  2, 

Ezra  7. 13  which  are  minded,  of  their  own  free  will 
FREEWILL  offering  — 
l.To  offer  7villingly,  nnj  nedab,  2. 

Ezra    7.  16  with  the  freewill  offering  of  the  people 
2.  Willing  offering,  nai;  ned.abah. 

Lev.  22.  18  for  all  his  freewill  offerings,  w-hich 

22.  21  or  a  freewill  offering  in  beeves  or  sheep 

22.  23  mayest  thou  offer  (for)  a  freewill  offering 

23.  38  and  beside  all  your  freewill  offerings 
Nuniis.    3  or  iu  a  freewill  offering,  or  in  yoursolemn 

29.  39  your  vows,  and  your  freewill  offerings 
Deut  12.   6  your  freewill  offerings,  and  the  firstlings 
12.  17  nor  thy  freewill  offerings,  or  heave 
16.  10  a  tribute  of  a  freewill  offering  of  thine 
23.  23  a  freewill  offering,  according  as  thou 
2  Ch.31.  14  Kore.  .(was)  over  the  freewill  offerings  of 
Ezra    1.    4  beside  the  freewill  offering  for  the  house 
3.   5  that  willingly  offered  a  freewill  offering 
8.  28  silver  and  the  gold  (are)  a  freewill  offer. 
Psa.  1 19.  108  Accept,  .the  freewill  offerings  of  my 

FREQUENT,  more  — 

More  abundantly,  irepiacroTepcos  £>erissoterds. 

2  Co.11.  23  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft. 
FRESH  — 
I. New,  fresh,  t'~\~  chadash. 

Job   29.  20  My  "glory  (was)  fresh  in  me,  and  my  bow 
2.  Moisture,  freshness,  ~W7  leshad. 

Numn.    3  the  taste  of  it  was  as  the  taste  of  fresh  oil 


3.  Fresh,  {3J/.T  raanan. 

Psa.  92.  16  my  horn.  .1  shall  be  anointed  with  fresh 
4. Sweet,  jAvkvs  glukus. 

Jas.     3.  12  no  fountain  both  yield  saltwater  and  fre. 
FRESH,  to  be  — 
To  be  fresh,  vt&~ \rutaphash. 

Job  33.  25  His  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  a  child's 

FRET,  to  — 

l.To  be. wroth,  sad,  morose,  ^y  1  zaaph. 

Prov  19.   3  and  his  heart  fretteth  against  the  Lord 
2.  To  be  angry,  iy\  ragaz. 

Eze.  16.  43  but  hast  fretted  me  in  all  these  (things) 

FRET  inward  — 

.4  hollow,  fretting,  corrosion,  nrins  pecJietheth. 
-Lev.13.  55  it  (is)  fret  inward,  (whether)  it  (be)  bare 

FRET,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  thunder  or  trembling,  DJH  raam,  5. 
1  Sa.   1.    6  for  to  make  her  fret,  because  the  Lord 

FRET  selves,  to  — 

l.To  fret  self,  rnn  charah,  7. 

Psa.  37.    i  Fret  not  thyself  Tjecause  of  evil  doers 
37.    7  fret  not  thyself  because  of  him  who  prosp. 

37.  8  fret  not  thyself  in  any  wise  to  do  evil 
Prov.24.  19  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil  (men) 

2.To  {be  or)  shmo  self  wroth,  *jsi?  qatsaph,  7. 

Isa.     8.  21  they  shall  fret  themselves,  and  curse  the. 
FRETTING  — 
To  fret,  prick,  1»<D  maar,  5. 

Lev.  13.  31  the  plague  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy  ;  it  (is) 

13.  52  for  it  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy ;  it  shall  be 

14.  44  it  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy  in  the  "house  :  it 

FRIED,  (that  which  is)  — 
To  be  fried,  ?]?"i  rabak,  6. 

Lev.    7.  12  cakes  mingled  with  oil,  of  fine  flour,  fried 

1  Ch.  23.  29  for  that  which  is  fried,  and  for  all  man. 
FRIEND  — 

l.To  love,  dhx  ahdb. 

2  Sa.  19.    6  In  that  thou,  .hatestthyfriends  :  forthou 
2CI1.  20.    7  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  thy  friend  for 
Esth.  5.  10  Haman.  .sent  and  called  for  his  friends 

5.  14  Then  said,  .all  Iris  friends  unto  him,  Let 

6.  13  And  Haman  told,  .all  his  friends  every 
Prov  14.  20  poor  is  hated . .  but  the  rich  (hath)  many  f . 

18.  24.  a  friend  (that)  sticketh  closer  than  a  bro. 
27.    6  Faithful  (are)  the  wounds  of  a  friend 

Isa.   41.    8  But  thou,  .the  seed  of  Abraham  my  fri. 
Jer.  20.    4  a  terror  to  thyself,  and  to  all  thy  friends 
20.    6  buried  there,  thou,  and  all  thy  friends 

2.  To  love,  3ns<  ahab,  3. 

Zech.13.   6  I  was  wounded  (in)  the  house  of  my  fri. 

3.  Men  of  peace,  d'i^  'e^n  anshe  shalom. 

Jer.  38.  22  Thy  friends  have  set  thee  on,  and  have 
^.Leader,  r\&H,  *]V«  aUuph. 

Prov  16.  28  and  a  whisperer  separateth  chief  friends 
17.   9  that  repeateth  a  matter  separateth.  .fr. 

5.  Friend,  jnp  inevea. 

Gen.  26.  26  Abimelech.  .and  Ahuzzath  one  of  his  fri. 
2Sa.  3.  8  show,  .to  his  brethren,  aud  to  his  friends 
Prov  19.    7  how  much  more  do  his  friends  go  far  from 

6.  Friend,  yn  rea. 

Job    6.  27  ye  overwhelm,  .ye  dig.  .for  your  friend 
7. Friend,  \n  rea. 

Gen.  38.  12  he  and  his  friend  Hirah  the  Adullamite 

38.  20  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  friend  the 
Exod33.  11  spake.,  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his  friend 

1  Sa.  30.  26  he  sent  of  the  spoil . .  to  his  friends,  saying 

2  Sa.  13.    3  But  Antnon  had  a  friend,  whose  name 

16.  17  said.. (Is)  this  thy  kindness  tc  thy  friend? 

16.  17  why  wentest  thou  not  with  thy  friend  ? 
1  Ki.  16. 11  neither  of  his  kinsfolks,  nor  of  his  friends 
Job     2.  11  Now  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  of 
6.  14  pity  (should  be  showed)  from  his  friend 

16.  20  My  friends  scorn  me.  .mine  eye  poureth 

17.  5  He  that  speaketh  flattery  to.  .friends 

19.  21  have  pity  upon  me,  O  ye  my  friends 
32.    3  Also  against  his  three  friends  was  his 
42.    7  against  thee,  and  against  thy  two  friends 
42.  10  Lord  turned,  .when  he  prayed  for  his  fr. 

Psa.  35. 14  as  though  (lie  had  been)  my  friend  (or) 
38.  11  My  lovers  and  my  friends  stand  aloof 
88.  iS  Lover,  and  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from 
Prov.  6.    1  My  son,  if  thou  be  surety  for  thy  friend 
6.    3  thou  art  come  into  the  hand  of  thy  friend 
6.    3  humble  thyself  and  make  sure  thy  friend 
17. 17  A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother 

17.  18  becometh  surety  in  the  presence  of  his  f. 

18.  24  Aman(thathath)friendsmustshowhim. 
ig.   4  Wealth  maketb  many  friends  :  but  the 

19.  6  every  man  (is)  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth 
22.  ti  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king,  .his friend 
27.   9  so  (doth)  the  sweetness  of  a  man's  friend 
27.  10  Thine  own  friend,  and  thy  father's  friend 
27. 14  He  that  blesseth  his  friend  with  a  loud 
27. 17  so  a  man.  .the countenance  of  his  friend 

Song  5.    1  eat,  0  friends ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abund. 

5.  16  This  (is)  my  beloved,  and  this  (is)  my  fri. 

Jer.     6.  21  the  neighbour  and  bis  friend  shall  perish 

19.   9  shall  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  friend 

Lam.  1.    2  all  her  friends  have  dealt  treacherously 


FRIEND 


374 


PROM- 


H03. 

Mic. 


3.    1  Go  yet,  love  a  woman  beloved  of  (her)  ff. 
7.   5  Trust  ye  not  in  a  friend,  put  ye  not  con. 


S. Friend,  nun  reek. 

2  Sa.  15.  37  So  Hushai,  David's  friend,  came  into  the 

16.  16  when  Hushai  the  Archite,  David's  friend 
iKi,   4.    5  Zubud.  .principal  officer,  .king's  friend 

9. Comrade,  era7pos  hetairos.  . 

Matt 20'.  13  Friend,  I  do  thee  no  wrong :  didst  not 

22.  12  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 

26.  50  said.  .Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come? 

1  0.  Friend,  <pi\os  pkilos. 

Matt  11.  19  Behold,  .a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners 
Luke  7.    6  the  centurion  sent  friends  to  him,  saying 

7.  34  Behold,  .a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners 
11.  5.  a  friend,  and  shall  say. .  Friend,  lend  me 
11.   6  For  a  friend  of  mine  in  his  journey  is 

11,  Snot,  .give  him  because  he  is  his  friend,  yet 

12.  4  I  say  unto  you  my  friends,  Be  not  afraid 
34.  10  he  may  say  unto  thee,  Friend,  go  up  hi. 

14.  12  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren 

15.  6  calleth  together. .  friends  and  neighbours 

15.  9  she  calleth . .  friends  and . .  neighbours. 
15'.  29  that  I  might  make  merry  with  my  friends 

16.  9  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mam. 
21. 16  ye  shall  be  betrayed  both  by.  .friends 

23.  12  Pilate  and  Herod  were  made  friends  tog 
John  3.  29  but  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  which 

hi  11  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth  ;  but  I  go 
15.  13  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  fri. 
15.  14  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever 
15.  15  but  I  have  called  you  friends  ;  for  all 
19.  12  let  this  man  go,  thou  art  not  Cesar's  fri. 
Acts  10.  24  Cornelius,  .had  called  together  big.  .fri. 
19.  31  And  certain,  .which  were  his  friends 

27.  3  gave .  .liberty  to  go  unto  his  friends  to  re. 
Jas.     2,  23  and  he  was  called  the  Friend  of  God 

4.  4  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God 

3  John    14  (Our)  frienda  salute  thee.  Greet  the  frien 

■FRIEND,  to  make  one  a  — 
To  2>ersuade,  freidw  peitho. 

Acts  12.  20  having  made  Blastus.  .their  friend,  des 
FRIEND,  to  use  as  — 
To  treat  as  a  friend,  n#n  raah,  3. 

Judg  14.  20  companion,  whom  he  had  used  as  his  fr. 
FRIENDLY  — 
Heart,  ih  leb. 

Judg  19.    3  went  after  her,  to  speak  friendly  unto 

Ruth  2.  13  thou  hast  spoken  friendly  unto  thine  ha. 
FRIENDLY,  to  show  self  — 
To  show  self  a  friend,  yyi  raa,  *Ja. 

Provi8.  24  A  man.  .must  show  himself  friendly;  and 
FRIENDS  (his)  — 
Men,  en?  methim. 

Job   19!.  19  All  my  inward  friends  abhorred  me  :  and 
Female  friend,  <plkn  2)hile.  Luke  15.9. 
TJwse  beside  him,  01  irapa  avrov  hoi  para  autov. 

Mark  3.  21  when  his  friends  heard,  .they  went  out 
FRIENDS,  thy  — 
Those  belonging  to,  or  with  thee,  ol  co\  hoi  soi. 

Mark  5.  19  Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  Jell  them 
FRIENDSHIP  — 
Friendship,  <pt\ta  philia. 

Jas.    4.    4  know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the 
FRIENDSHIP  with,  to  make  — 
To  show  self  a  friend,  nyi  raah,  7. 

Prov22.  24  Make  no  friendship  with  an  angry  man 
FRINGE  — 
l.FHnge,  lock  (of  hair),  ny*  tsitsith. 

NUU115.  38  bid  them  that  they  make  them  fringes  in 
15.  38  and  that  they  put  upon  the  fringe  of  the 
15.  39  it  shall  be  unto  you  for  a  fringe,  that  ye 
2.  Fringes,  wreaths,  n,,?"i3  gedilim. 

Deut22.  12  Thou  shalt  make  thee  fringes  upon  the 
FRO  — 
To  turn  brick,  3W  shub. 

Gen.    8.    7  a  raven,  which  went  forth  to  and  fro 
\See  also  Driven,  go,  going,  reel,  removing,  run,  run- 
ning, to,  toss,  tossed,  tossing,  walk  to.] 

FROO  — 

l.Froff,  SH*^'  tsephardea. 

Exod.  8.  '2  I  will  smite  all  thy  borders  with  frogp 

5.  3  the  river  shall  bring  forth  frogs  alum;, 

8.  4  the  frogs  shall  come  up  both  on  thee,  mid 
8.  5  cause  frogs  to  come  up  upon  the  land  of 
8.  6  the  frogs  came  up,  and  covered  the  land 
8.  7  and  brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land  of 
8.  8  that  he  may  take  away  the  frogs  from  me 
8.    9  to  destroy  the  frogs  fmm  thee  and  thy 

8.  11  the  frogs  shall  depart  from  thee,  and 
8. 12  because  of  the  frogs  which  he  bad  broug, 
8.  1    f  lie  frogs  died  out  of  the  houses,  out  of 
Psa.  78.  4.5  if        .,!     frogs,  which  destroyed  them 
105.  30  Their  land  brought  forth  frogs  in  abund. 
2. Frog,  ftdrpaxos  bairackos. 

Rev.  16.  13  And  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs 
FROM  — 
[.From  then,  tx?  mean. 

Ruth  2.    7  came,  aud  hath  continued  even  from  the 


2.  After,  inx  achar. 

2  Sa.  11.  15  retire  ye  from  him,  that  he  may  be  smit. 
Job  34.  27  Because  they  turned  back  from  him,  and 
Jer.  32.  40  that  I  will  not  turn  away  from  them,  to 

S.Unlo,  *?x  el 

Exod36.*22  tenons  equally  distant  one  from  another 

i.Near,  beside,  with,  ?}fN  etsel. 

1  Sa.  17.  30  And  he  turned  from  him  toward  another 

5.  With,  nx  eth. 

Gen.   4.    1  said,  I  have  gotten  a  man  from  the  LORD 

6.  So  as  not,  'fta?  lebilti. 

Josh. 22.  25  our  children  cease  from  fearing  the  Lord 
7 .From  the  sufficiency,  ^D  midde. 

1  Sa.   7. 16  he  went  from  year  to  year  in-  circuit  to 

2  Ch.24.  5  to  repair  the  house  of  your  God  from  ye. 
Isa.  66.  23  from  one.  .to  another,  .from  one.  .to  an. 
Zech  14.  16  shall  even  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  wor. 

8.  Over  against,  SilD  mvl. 

Ley.    5.   8  wring  off  Ins  head  from  his  neck,  but 

Q.Evenfrom,  |&7  lemin. 

Deut.  9.  7  from  the  day  that  thou  didst  depart  out 
10. From,  out  of,  ]p  min. 

Gen.    2.   6  But  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth 

Ezra  4.  12  the  Jews  which  came  up  from  thee  to  us 
4.21  until,  .commandment  shall  be  given  from 
6.  6  your  companions,  .be  ye  far  from  thence 
6.  11  let  timber  be  pulled  down  from  his  house 

Dan.    2.    5  The  thing  is  gone  from  me  :  if  ye  wall  not 
2.   8  because-ye  see  the  thing  is  gone  from  me 
3. 17  our  God . .  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the 
4.  13  and  an  holy  one  came  down  from  heaven 
4. 14  get  away  from  uuder  it.  .from  his  branch 
4. 16  Let  his  heart  be  changed  from  man's, "and 
4.  23  an  holy  one  coming  down  from  heaven 
4. 25  That  they  shall  drive  thee  from  men 
4.  31  there  fell  a  voice  from  heaven.  .0  king 
4.  31  The  kingdom  is  departed  from  thee 
4.  32  And  they  shall  drive  thee  from  men,  and 

4.  33  he  was  driven  from  men,  and  did  eat 

5.  20  he  was  deposed  from  his  kingly  throne 

5.  21  And  he  Was  driven  from  the  sons  of  men 

6.  20  is . .  God . .  able  to  deliver  thee  from  the 

6.  27  delivered  Daniel  from  the  power  of  the 
.7.    3  from  the  sea,  diverse  one  from  another 

7.  4  and  it  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth 

7.    7  it  (was)  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that 
7. 10  A  fiery  stream  issued,  .forth  from  before 
7. 19  which  was  diverse  from  all  the  others 
7.  23  which  shall  be  diverse  from  all  kingdoms 
7.  24  and  he  shall  be  diverse  from  the  first 

11. From-  before,  n~$.  p  min  qodam. 

Dan.    2. 15  Why  (is)  the  decree  (so)  hasty  from  the 

12.  From  on,  Sjjp  meal. 

Gen.   4.  14  thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  day  from  the 

13.  Over,  by  al. 

Dan.   6. 18  Then  the  king,  .his sleep  went  from  him 

li.From  (being)  with,  Dj?p  meim. 

Gen.  44.  29  if  ye  take  this  also  from  me,  and  mischief 
15.  With,  DJJ  im. 

Dan.  4.  3  his  dominion  (is)  from  generation  to  gen. 
4.  34  his  kingdom  (is)  from  generation  to  gen. 

IQ.From  with  me,  H5yn  meimmadi. 

1  Sa.  10.  2  When  thou  art  departed  from  me  to  day 
17.  Before,  D'35  panim. 

Num22.  33  and  turned  from  me  these  three  times 
22.  33  unless  she  had  turned  from  me,  surely 

1  Sa.  17.  24  all  the  men  of  Israel,  .fled  from  him,  and 

19.    8  David  went  out.  .and  they  fled  from  him 
25.  10  break  away  every  man  from  his  master 

2  Sa.  15.  14  for  we  shall  not.  .escape  from  Absalom 
2  Ki.  11.    2  hid  him.  .in  the  bedchamber  from  Atha. 
Esth.  1.  19  let  there  go  a  royal  commandment  from 
Job    13.  20  then  will  I  not  hide  myself  from  thee 
Psa.  61.    3  thou  hast  been . .  a  strong  tower  from  the 
Eccl.  10.    5  as  an  error,  .proceedeth  from  the  ruler 
Isa.    20.    6  to  be  delivered  from  the  king  of  Assyria 

21.  15  For  they  fled  from  the  swords,  from  the 
21.  15  bent  bow,  and  from  the  grievousness  of 

Jer.  41.  15  P<utlshmael. .escaped from  Johanan  with 
4S.  44  Re  that  fleeth  from  the  fear  shall  fall 

Eze.  30.    9  shall  messengers  go  forth  from  me  in  sh. 

Hos.  11.    2  they  called  them,  so  they  went  from  them 

Amos  5.  19  As  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a 
l^.Brfore,  Q~$,qoda/fi. 

Dan.    5.  24*Then  was  the  part  of  the  hand  sent  from 

lQ.From  over  against,  "ia|B  minneged. 

Jer.  r6.  17  neither  is  their  iniquity  hid  from  mine  e. 
20.  From  orer,  "Oj;p  meeber. 

Job  1.  19  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the  wilde. 
21./jV//'\v it.,  hetnven,  |'3... ]"2  turn. ..ben. 

Gen.  1.  4  God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness 
22.From  between,  p^o  mibben. 

Eze.  47. 18  shall  measure  from.,  and  from.,  and  from 
47.  18  from  the  land,  .from.the. border  unto  the 
2Z.From,  away  from,  air6  apo. 

Matt  1.  17  So  all  the  generations  from  Abraham  to 
1.  17  from  David  until  the  carrying  away  into 
1.  17  from  the  carrying  away  into  Babylon  1111. 
1.  21  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  p. 
1.  24  Then  Joseph,  being  raised  from  sleep,  did 


Matt.  2.    1  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  Je. 

2.  16  slew  all.  .from  two  years  old  and  under 

3.  7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  w. 

3.  13  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  Jor. 

4.  17  From  that  time  Jesus  began  to  preach 

4.  25  great  multitudes  of  people  from  Galilee  * 

5.  18  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the 

5.  29,  30  and  cast  (it)  from  thee  :  for  it  is  pro. 

6.  13  lead  us  not  into,  .but  deliver  us  from  evil 

7.  23  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity 

8.  1  When  he  was  come  down  from  the  moun. 
8.  j  1  That  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and 

8.  30  there  was  a  good  way  off  from  them  an 

9.  15  when  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  from 

9.  16  that  which  is  put  in.  .taketh  from  the 

■     9.  22  the  woman  was  made  whole  from  that  h. 
.    11.  12  from  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist  until 

11.  25  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 

12.  38  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from  thee 

13.  12  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be 

13.  35  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  of  the 

14.  2  This  is  John  the  Baptist :  he  is  risen  from 
15^  8  This  people,  .their  heart  is  far  from  me 

15.  27  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  from 
15.  28  her  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that 
17.    9  as  they  came  down  [from]  the  mountain    . 

17.  18  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  hour 

18.  8,  9  and  cast  .  .from  thee :  it  is  better  for 
iS.  35  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every 

19.  1  he  departed  from  Galilee,  and  came  into 

19.  8  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so 

20.  8  beginning  from  the  last  unto  the  first 

20.  29  as  they  departed  from  Jericho,  a  great 
2r.    8  others  cut  down  branches  from  the  trees 

21.  43  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 

22.  46  neither  durst  any.  .from  that  day  forth 

23.  34  and  persecute  (them)  from  city  to  city 

23.  35  from  the  Wood  of  righteous  Abel  unto 

24.  1  Jesus  went  out,  and  departed  [from]  the 
24.  29  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the 

24.  31  gather,  .from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the 

25.  28  Take  therefore  the  talent  from  him,  and 
25.  29  [from]  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken 
25.  32  lie  shall  separate  them  one  from  another 
25.  32  as  a  shepherd  divideth.  .sheep  from  the 
25.  34  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 

25.  41  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlas. 

26.  16  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 
s6.  39  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from 
26.  42  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  [from  me] 

26.  47  from  the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the 

27.  40  If.  .the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  the 
27.  42  let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross 
27.  45  Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  dark 
27.  51  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom 
=7-  55  women,  .which  foUowed  Jesus  from  Gal. 

27.  64  He  is  risen  from  the  dead ;  so  the  last  error 

28.  2  came  and  rolled  back  the  stone  [from]  the 
28.  7  tell  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen  from  the 
28.    8  they  departed  quickly  from  the  sepulch. 

Mark  1.   9  that  Jesus  came  from  Nazareth  of  Galilee 
1. 42  the  leprosy  departed  from  him,  and  he 

2.  20  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away- from 

3.  7  multitude  from  Galilee,  .and  from  Judea 
3.    8  And  from  Jerusalem,  and  from  Idumsea 

3.  22  the  scribes  which  came  down  from  Jeru. 

4.  25  from  him  shall  be  taken  even  that  which 

5.  35  there  came  from  the  ruler  of  the  synagog. 
7.    1  certain  of  the  scribes,  which  came  from 
7.   4  And . .  from  the  market,  except  they  wash 
7.    6  This  people . .  their  heart  is  far  from  ine 
7.  17  when  he  was  entered  into  the  house  from 

7.  33  he  took  him  aside  from  themulitude,  and 

8.  11  seeking  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven,  temp. 

9.  9  as  they  came  down  [from]  the  mountain 

10.  6  But  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation 

11.  12  when  they  were  come  from  Bethany,  he 

12.  34  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  G. 

13.  19  such  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of 

13.  27  from  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  to 

14.  35  if.  .possible,  the  hourmight  pass  from  him 
14.  36  Father,  .take  away  this  cup  from  me 

14.  52  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  [from] 

15.  30  Save  thyself,  and  come  down  from  the  cr. 
15.  32  Let  Christ,  descend  now  from  the  cross 

15.  38  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom 

16.  8  they  went  out  quickly,  and  fled  from  the 
Luke  1.    2  which  from  the  beginning  were  eye  witn. 

1.  38  And  the  angel  departed  from  her 

1.  48  from  henceforth  all  generations  shall  call 

1.  52  He  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  (their) 

2.  4  Joseph  also  went  up  from  Galilee,  out  of 
2.  15  as  the  angels  were  gone  away  from  them 
2.  36  and  had  lived,  .seven  years  from  her  vir. 

2.  37  which  departed  not  [from]  the  temple 

3.  7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  w. 

4.  1  Jesus,  .returned  from  Jordan,  and  was 

4.  13  the  devil . .  departed  from  him  for  a  season 
4.42  that  he  should  not  depart  from  them 

5.  3  lie  would  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land 
5.    8  Depart  from  me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man 
5.  10  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men 

5.  13  immediately  the  leprosy  departed  from 
5.  35  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away  from 

7.  *6  when  he  was  now  not  far  from  the  house 

8.  18  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be 

8.  37  multitude,  besought  him  to  depart  from 

9.  5  shake  oft'  the  very  dust  from  your  feet 
9.  33  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  departed  from 
9.  37  wht  11  they  were  come  down  from  the  hill 
9.  39  bruising  him  hardly  departeth  from  him 
9.  45  it  was  hid  from  them,  that  they  perceived 


FROM 


375 


PROM 


Luke  o.  54  command  fire  to  come  down  [from]  hear. 
io.  2i  thou  hast  hid  these  tilings  from  the  wise 
io.  30  A  certain  (man)  went  down  from  Jerusa. 

10.  42  which  shall  not  be  taken  away  from  her 

11.  4  [lead  us  not.  .but  delirer  us  from  evil] 
11.  50  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation  of  ' 

11.  51  From  the  blood  of  Abel  unto  the  blood  of 

12.  52  For  from  henceforth  there  shall  be  five 
12!  58  that  thou  mayest  be  delivered  from  him 

13.  15  oh  the  sabbath  loose  his  ox  or.  .ass  from 
13.  16  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the  sabbath 
13.  27  depart  from  me,  all  (ye)  workers  of  iniqu. 
13.  29  come  from  the  east.'. and  [from]  the  north 
16.  3  for  jny  lord  taketh  away  from  me  the 
16. 18  marrieth  her  that  is  put  away  [from]  (her  ) 
16.  21  crumbs  which  fell  from  the  rich  man's 

16.  30  but  if  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead 

17.  29  it  rained  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven 
iS.  34  this  saying  was  hid  from  them,  neither 
19.  24  Take  from  him  the  pound,  and  give  (it) 
19.  26  from  him  that  hath  not .  ■  taken  [from]  hin  1 
19.  39  some  of  the  Pharisees  from  among  the 
19.  42  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes 

21.  11  and  great  signs. shall  there  be  from  hear. 
22. 41  he  was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a 

22.  42  remove  tins  cup  from  me :  nevertheless 
22.  43  [there  appeared  an  angel  unto  him  from] 

22.  45  when  he  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  was 

23.  5  beginning  from  Galilee  to  tins  place 

23.  49  the  women  that  followed  him  from  Gal. 

24.  2  they  found  the  stone  rolled  away  from 
24.    9  Andreturned  from  the  sepulchre,  and  told 

24. 13  which  was  from  Jerusalem. .  threescore  fu. 
24.  51' he  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up 

John  3.   2  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God 

8:44  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning 
10.    5  hut  will  flee  from  him ;  for  they  know 
10.  18  Ho  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it 
ir.  53  Then  from  that  day  forth  they  took  cou. 

12.  36  departed,  and  did  hide  himself  from  them 

13.  3  that  he. was  come  from  God,  and  went  to 

14.  7  from  henceforth  ye  know  him,  and  hath 

"  15.  27  ye  have  been  with  niefrom  the  beginning 
16.  22  and  your  joy  no  mm  taketh  from  you 

16.  30  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth  from 

18.  28  Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caiaphas  unto 

19.  27  from  that  hour  that  disciple  took  her  unto 
21.    8  they  were  not  far  from  land,  but  as  it 

Acts    1.    4  they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem 
1.  11  this  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from 
1.  12  from  the  mount  called  Olivet,  which  is 
1.22  Beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto 
1.  22  that  he  was  taken  up  from  us,  must  one 
2. 40  Save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  gene. 
3. 19  of  refreshing  shall  come  from  the  presen. 
3.  24  Yea,  and  all  the  prophets  from  Samuel 
3.  26  in  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his 
5.  38  Refrain  from  these  men,  and  let  them 
5.  41  they  departed  from  the  presence  of  the  c. 
3.  10  from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  saying 
S.  26  nnto  the  way  that  goeth  down  from  Jer. 

8.  33  declare,  .for  his  life  is  taken  from  the 
<>.   3  shined  round  about  him  a  light  [from]  h. 

9.  8  Saul  arose  from  the  earth ;  and  when  his 
9. 18  immediately  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it 

.  10. 17  the  men  which  were  sent  from  Cornelius 
10. 21  [which  were  sent  unto  him  from  Cornel.] 
10.  23  certain  brethren  from  Joppa  accompanied 

10.  37  began  from  Galilee,  after  the  baptism 

11.  11  three  men.  .sent  from  Cesarea  unto  me 
xi.  27  came  prophets  from  Jerusalem  unto  An. 

12.  10  forthwith  the  angel  departed  from  him 
12. 19  And  he  went  down  from  Jndea  to  Cesarea 

13.  8  seeking  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from 
*3-  J3  when  Paul  and  his  company  loosed  from 
13.  13  John  departing  from  them,  returned  to  J. 

13. 14  when  they  departed  from  Perga,  they 
23.  29  they  took,  .down  from  the  tree,  and  laid 
x3-  31  which  came  up  with  him  from  Galilee 

13.  39  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all 

14. 15  ye  should  turn  from  these  vanities  unto 

14.  19  there  came  thither-  .Jews  from  Antioch 

15.  1  certain  men  which  came  down  from  Jud. 
15. 18  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from 
15.  20  that  they  abstain  [from]  pollutions  of  id. 
x5-  33  they  were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  bret. 
15.  38  who  departed  from  them  from  Pamphylia 
15.  39  that  they  departed  asunder  one  from  the 

16. 11  Therefore  loosing  from  Troas,  we  came 

17.  27  though  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of 

18.  2  a  certain  Jew.  .lately  come  from  Italy 
18.    5  when  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  fr. 
18.   6  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gen. 
18.  16  And  he  drave  them  from  the  judgment 

18.  21  And  he  sailed  from  Ephesus 

19.  9  he  departed  from  them,  and  separated 

19. 12  So  that  from  his  body  were  brought  unto 

19.  12  and  the  diseases  departed  from  them 

20.  6  we  sailed  away  from  Philippi  after  the 
20.   9  Eutychus.  .fell  down  from  the  third  loft 
20.  17  from  Miletus  he  sent  to  Ephesus,  and 
20. 18  Ye  know,  from  the  first  day  that  I  came 

20.  26  that  I  (am)  pure  from  the  blood  of  all 

21.  1  after  we  were  gotten  from  them,  and 

21.  7  when  we  had  finished,  .course  from  Tyre 
21. 10  there  came  down  from  Judea  a  certain 

22.  22  said,  Away  with  such,  .from  the  earth 
22.  29  Then  straightway  they  departed  from 

22.  30  he  loosed  him  [from,  .bands,]  and  com. 

23.  2  c  ready,  looking  for  a  promise  from  thee 
24. 18  "Whereupon  certain  Jews  from  Asia  found 
25.   1  he  ascended  from  Cesarea  to  Jerusalem 


Acts  25.    7  the  Jews  which  came  down  from  Jerusa. 

26.  18  To  open  their  eyes,  .to  turn,  .from  dark. 

27.  21  ye  should,  .not  have  loosed  from  Crete 

28.  23  persuading  them .  .from  morning  till  ev. 
Rom.  1.    7  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our  F. 

-1. 18  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven 

x.  20  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  ere. 

9  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through 

14  Nevertheless  death  reigned  from  Adam 

7  For  he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin 

iS  Being  then  made  free  from  sin,  ye  became 

22  But  now  being  made  free  from  sin,  and 

2  she  is  loosed  from  the  law  of  (her)  husb. 

3  if  her  husband  be  dead,  she  is  free  from 

6  now  we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that 
a.    2  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin 
8.  21  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of 
8.  35  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  C? 

8.  39  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love 

9.  3  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  breth. 
11.  26  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  J. 
15.  19  so  that  from  Jerusalem,  and  round  about 
15.  31  That  I  may  be  delivered  from  them  that 

1  Co.    1.    3  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

7. 10  Let  not  the  wife  depart  from  (her)  husba. 
7. 27  Art  thou  loosed  from  a  wife?  seek  not  a 

10.  14  Wherefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from 
14.  36  What !  came  the  word  of  God  out  from  v.? 

2  Co.'  1.    2  Grace  (be)  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

3.  iS  are-changed  into  the  same  ifliage  from 

5.  6  in  the  body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord 
7.    1  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness 

11.  3  so  your  minds  should  be  corrupted  from 

11.  9  the  brethren  which  came  from  Macedo. 

12.  8  I  besought,  .that  it  might  depart  from 
Gal.     1.    3  Grace  (be)  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

1.   6  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from  him 

2. 12  For  before  that  certain  came  from  James 

4.  24  one  from  the  mount  Sinai,  which  gender. 
Eph.    1.    2  Grace  (be)  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

3.  9  which  from  the  beginning  of  the  world 

4.  31  Let  all.  .evil  speaking,  be  put  away  from 

6.  23  and  love  with  faith,  from  God  the  Father 
Phil.    1.    2  Grace  (be)  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

1.   5  For  your  fellowship  in  the  Gospel  from 
4. 15  when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no 
Col.      .    2  Giace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God 
1.  23  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  G. 

1.  26  which  hath  been  hid  from  ages  and  from 

2.  20  if  ye  be  dead  with  Christ  from  the  rudi. 

1  Th.  1.    1  [Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  G.] 

1.    8  For  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of 
1.   9  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve 
1.  10  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to 
217  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in 

3.  6  when  Timotheus  came  from  you  unto  us 

4.  3  that  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication 

4.  16  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  hea. 

5.  22  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil 

2  Th.   1.    2  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace.,  from  God 

1.  7  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  h. 
1.    9  destruction  from  the  presence,  .and  from 

2. 13  because  God  hath  [from  the  beginning] 
3.    2  that  we  maybe  delivered  from  unreason. 
3.    3  who  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep. .from 

3.  6  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every 
1  Ti.    1.    2  Grace,  mercy .  .peace,  from  God  our  Fa. 

6.  s  corrupt  minds ..  [from  such  withdraw  th.] 
6.  10  they  have  erred  froni  the  faith,  and  pier. 
1.    2  Grace,  mercy . .  peace,  from  God  the  Father 

1.  3  God,  whom  I  serve  from  (my)  forefathers 

2.  19  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  departs. 

2.  21  If  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from 
3. 15  that  from  a  child  thou  hast  known  the 

4.  4  they  shall  turn  away  (their)  ears  from  the 
4.  iS  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil 

4  Grace,  mercy,  .peace,  from  God  the  Fa. 
14  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity 

3  Grace  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God  ourF. 
12  evil  heart,  .in  departing  from  the  living 

3  although  the  works  were  finished  from 

4  God  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from  all  his 

10  ceased  from  his  own  works,  as  God . .  from 
1  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead 

7  the  earth,  .receiveth  blessing  from  God 
t  who  met  Abraham  returning  from  the 

26  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sin. 

11  all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to  the 
14  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works 

10.  22  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 

11.  15  mindful  of  that,  .from  whence  they  came 
i2.  25  if  we  turn,  .from  him  that  (speaketh)  fr. 

Jas.     1.  17  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights 
t.  27  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world 

4.  7  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you 

5.  19  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and 
1  Pe.    1.  12  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  lie. 

3.  10  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and 
2Pe.  3.  4  continue,  .from  the  beginning  of  the  crea. 
1  Jo.    1.    1  That  which  was  from  the  beginning 

1.    7  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin 

1.  9  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous. 

2.  7  an  old  commandment  which  ye  had  from 
2.    7  is  the  word  which  ye  have  heard  [from] 
2.  13,  14  ye  have  known  him.  .from  the  begin. 
2.  20  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One 

2.  24  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning 

2.  24  If  that,  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  b. 

3.  8  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning 
3.  11  this  is  the  message  that  ye  have  heard  t. 

3.  17  and  shutteth  up  his  bowels,  .from  him 

4.  21  And  this  commandment  hare  we  from 


>Ti. 


Titus 

Phm. 

Heb.  3. 
4- 
4- 

4- 

6. 
6. 
7- 

7- 


3.  12 
6.    4 

6.  16 
7-    2 

7.  17 
9.    6 

12.  14 


1  Jo.  5.  21  Little  children  keep  yourselves  from  idols 

2  Jo.         5  but  that  which  we  had  from  the  begin.- 

6  That,  as  ye  have  heard  from  the  begin. 
Jude        14  Enoch  also,  the  seventh  from  Adam 
Rev.    1.    4  from  him  which  is.  .and  from  the  seven 
1.    5  And  from  Jesus  Christ,  .the  faithful  wit. 
1.    =;  washed  us  [from]  our  sins  in  his  own 
which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from 
to  take  peace  [from]  the  earth,  and  that 
hide  us  from  the  face,  .and  from  the 
I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the 
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  [from]  their 
shall  desire,  .and  death  shall  flee  from 
nourished,  .from  the  face  of  the  serpent 

13.  0  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world 

14.  3  which  were  redeemed  from  the  earth 

14.  4  These  were  redeemed  from  among  men 

16.  17  there  came  a  gTeat  voice,  .from  the  th. 

17.  8  written .  .from  the  foundation  of  the  wrrld 

18.  14  And  the. fruits,  .are  departed  from  thee 

18.  14  and  all  things,  .are  departed  from  thee 
20.    9  fire  came  down  [from  God]  out  of  heaven 

20.  11  from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven 

21.  2  new  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God 
21.   4  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  [from]  their 
21.  10  city,  .descending  out  of  heaven  [from] 
22. 19  if  anynian  shall  take  away  from  the  word 

2±.Through,  bid  {gen.)  dia. 

2  Th.   2.    2  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as 
25. ivear,  nigh,  iyyvs  eggus. 

Acts    1. 12  from  Jerusalem  a  sabbath  day's  journey 

26.0ut  of ,  from,  «k  ek,  e£  ex. 

Matt  3.  17  And  lo  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying 

12.  42  for  she  came  from  the  uttermost  parts  of 

15.  18  those  things,  .come  forth  from  the  heart 

16.  1  he  would  show  them  a  sign  from  heaven 

17.  9  Son  of  man  be  risen  again  from  the  dead 

19.  12  which  were  so  born  from  (their)  mother's 
21.  25  whence  was  it?  from  heaven,  or  of  men? 
21.  25  If  we  shall  say,  From  heaven;  he  will  say 
24.  31  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four 
28.    2  the  angel  of  the  Lord  descended  from  h. 

Mark  1.  n  And  there  came  a  voice  from  heaven 

6.  14  That  John  the  Baptist  was  risen  from  the 
6. 16  It  is  John,  .he  is  risen  [from  the  dead] 

7.  31  And  again,  departing  from  the  coasts  of 
9.   9  till  the  Son  of  man  were  risen  from  the 
9. 10  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should 

10.  20  all  these  have  I  obserred  from  my  youth 

11.  20  they  saw  the  fig  tree  dried  up  from  the 
11.  30  The  baptism  of  John,  was  (it)  from  hea. 

11.  31  If  we  shall  say,  From  heaven ;  he  will 

12.  25  For  when  they,  shall  rise  from  the  dead 

13.  27  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four 
16.    3  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  [from] 

Luke  1.  15  be  filled,  .even  from  his  mother's  womb 
1.  71  That  we  should  be  saved  from  our  enem. 
1.  71  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us 
1.  78  whereby  the  dayspring  from  on  high 
3.  22  and  a  voice  came  from  heaven,  which 
9.   7  vas  said,  .that  John  was  risen  from  the 

10.  7  remain.  .Go  not  from  house  to  house 

10. 18  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  he. 

11.  16  others,  .sought  of  him  a  sign  from  hear. 

11.  31  she  came  from  the  utmost  parts  of  the  ■ 

12.  36  when  he  will  return  from  the  wedding 

16.  31  neither,  .though  one  rose  from  the  dead 

17.  7  will  say. -.when  he  is  come  from  the  field 
20.  4  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it  from  heaven 
20.    5  If  we  shall  say,  From  heaven  ;  he  will  say 

20.  35  to  obtain,  .the  resurrection  from  the  d. 

23.  55  the  women,  .which  came  with  him  from 

24.  46  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  thud  day 
24.  49  until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on 

John  1.  19  when  the  Jews  sent..Levites  from  Jems. 

1.  32  I  saw  the  Spirit  descending  from  heaven  . 

2.  22  When  therefore  he  was  risen  from  the  d. 

3.  13  hut  he  that  came  down  from  heaven 
3.  27  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven 

3.  31  He  that  cometh-from  heaven  is  above  all 
■5.  24  not  come.. but  is  passed  from  death  unto 
6.  23  there  came  other  boats  from  Tiberias 
6.  31  He  gave  them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat 
6.  32  bread  from  heaven,  .true  bread  from  he. 
6.  33  is  he  that  cometh  down  from  heaven 
6.  38  For  I  came  down  [from]  heaven,  not  to 
6.  41  I  am  the  bread  which  came  down  fronih. 
6. 42  that  he  saith,  I  came  down  from  heaven? 
6.  50  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from  hea. 
6-  5i»  58  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven 
6.  64  For  Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning  who 

8.  23  Ye  are  from  beneath ;  I  am  from  above. 
8.  42  for  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from  G. 
o.    1  he  saw  a  man  which  was  blind  from 

10.  32  Many  good  works  hare  I  showed  you  from 
'  12.  1  Lazarus,  .whom  he  raised  from  the  dead 
12.  9  Lazarus.,  whom  he  had  raised  from  the  d. 
12.  17  Lazarus,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead 
12.  27  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour  :  but  for 
i2.  28  Then  came  there  a  voice  from  heaven 

12.  3?  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth 

13.  4  He  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  hht 
17. 15  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from 

18.  3  having  received  a  band . .  from  the  chief 

19.  23  coat,  .woven  from  the  top  throughout 

20.  1  Mary,  .seeth  the  stone  taken  away  from 
20.    9  that  he  must  rise  again  from  the  dead 
21. 14  after  that  he  was  risen  from  the  dead 

Acts    1.  25  [from]  which  Judas  by  transgression  fell 
2.   2  And  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from 


PROM 


376 


FRUIT 


Acts    3. 

3- 


Horn. 


10. 


1  Co.   9. 

15- 
15- 

2  CO.  ■!, 

3- 
5- 

Gal.    1. 


Eph.    1. 
4- 

5- 

6. 

Phil.    3. 

Col.    1. 


2  a  certain  man  lame  from  his  mother's 
[5  whom  God  hath  raised  from  the  dead 

2  preached,  .the  resurrection  from  the  dead 

10  Jesus,  .whom  God  raised  from  the  dead 
41  with  him  after  he  rose  from  the  dead   * 

5  let  down  from  heaven  by  four  corners 
9  But  the  voice  answered  me  again  from  h. 

7  Ami  his  chains  fell  off  from  (his)  hands 
25  Barnabas  and  Saul  returned  from  Jerus 

30  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead 
34  And.  .that  he  raised  him  up  from  the  d. 

8  being  a  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb 
24  that  certain  which  went  out  from  U3 
29  from  which  if  ye  keep  yourselves  ye  shall 

3  Christ  must  needs  have,  .risen  again  from 

31  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

1  After  these  things  Paul  departed  from  A 

2  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  [from]  R. 

6  suddenly  there  shone  from  heaven  a 

4  My  manner  of  life  from  my  youth,  which 
1 7  Delivering  thee  from  the  people,  and . .  the 
34  for  there  shall  not  an  hair  fall  [from]  the 
17  yet  was  I  delivered  prisoner  from  Jerus. 

17  righteousness  of  God  revealed  from  faith 
24  that  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  d 

4  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from 

9  Knowing  that  Christ  being  raised  from 
13  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead 
1;  but  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart  that. 

4  to  him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead 
24  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 

11  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  d. 

11  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead 

7  to  bring  up  Christ  again  from  the  dead 
9  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

15  what,  .the  receiving,  .but  life  from  the 

19  For  though  I  be  free  from  all  (men),  yet 

12  if  Christ  be  preached  that  he  rose  from 

20  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead 
47  the  second  man  (is)  the  Lord  from  heaven 
10  Who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  death 

1  or  (letters)  of  commendation  from  you? 

2  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is  fr. 

8  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body 
1  God  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the 
4  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  present 
8  though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  pre. 

15  who. separated  me  from  my  mother's  wo. 

13  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse 
20  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and 

16  From  whom  the  whole  body  fitly  joined 

14  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give 

6  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart 
20  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour 

13  Who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power 

18  the  beginning,  the  first  born  from  the  de. 

12  God,  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

19  not  holding  the  Head,  from  which  all  the 
16  ye  likewise  read  the  (epistle)  from  Laodi. 
10  And  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven 
10  whom  he  raised  from  the  dead,  (even)  J.. 

8  was  raised  from  the  dead  according  to 

7  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save,  .from 
6  he  whose  descent  is  not  counted  from 

19  able  to  raise,  .up,  even  from  the  dead 

20  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  L. 
20  he  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the 

20  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall 

3  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from 
18  redeemed,  .from  your  vain  conversation 

21  God,  that  raised  him  up  from  the  dead 

18  this  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we 
21  [to  turn  from  the  holy  commandment] 

19  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were 

14  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
10  I  also  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of 

10  and  there  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven 

1  and  I  saw  a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto 

13  I  heard  a  voice  from. the  four  horns  of 
1 1  saw  another,  .angel  come  down  from  h. 

4  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto 

8  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven  sp. 

11  the  Spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into 

12  they  heard  a  great  voice  from  heaven 

13  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven 

2  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the  voice 
13  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto 
13  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours 

.  18  auother  angel  came  out  from  the  altar 

8  from  the  glory  of  God,  and  from  hispow. 

1  I  saw  another  angel  come  down  from  h. 

4  I  heard  another  voice  from  heaven,  say. 

20.    1  I  saw  an  angel  come  down  from  heaven 

27. From,  from  beside,  trapa,  {gen.)  para. 

Marki2.    2  that  he  might  receive  from  the  husband. 

14.  43  from  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  and 
Luke  1.  45  of  those  things  which  were  told  her  from 

2.    1  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cesar  Au. 

8. 49  there  cometh  one  [from]  the  ruler  of  the 

1.   6  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 

5.  34  But  I  receive  not  testimony  from  man 

5.  41  I  receive  not  honour  from  men 

5.  44  and  seek  nut  the  honour  that  (cometh)  fr. 

7.  29  for  I  am  from  him,  and  be  hath  sent  inr 

15.  26  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Fat. 

15.  26  of  truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the  Fat. 

16.  27  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from 

16.  28  I  came  forth  [from]  the   Father,  and  am 

17.  8  and  have  known .  .that  I  came  oujt  from 
Acts    9.  14  here  he  hath  authority  from  the  chief 

22.    5  from  whom  also  I  received  letters  unto 


2Ti. 
Heb 

a 

7 
11 

Jas. 

13 

5- 

1  Pe 

5 

1 

Rev. 


Jwhn 


Acts  26.  10  having  received  authority  from  the  chief 
26.  12  authority  and  commission  [from]  the  eh. 
Phil.  4.  i8havingreceivedof  E.thethings.. from  you 
2  Pe.  1.  17  Fot  he  received  from  God  the  Father  ho. 
2  John  3  from  God.  .and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Ch. 
4  we  have  received  a  commandment  from 

28.  Of  the,  rod  ton. 

Rom  15.  22  I  have  been  much  hindered  from  coming 

29. By,  vtt6  {gen.)  hupo. 

Luke  1.  r.6  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  [from]  God 
2  Pe.  1. 17  a  voice  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory 

FROM  among  (or  up)  — 
l.From,  out  of  |6  min. 

Eze.  36.  24  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  heathen 

2. From  {being)  with,  Dj,'p  meim. 

Ruth  4.  10  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off  from  am, 

3, From,  a-r6  apo. 

Acts  15  19  them  which  from  among  the  Gentiles 

4.  Out  of,  4k  (fietrov)  ek  mesou. 

Matti3  49  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  19. 20 

Acts  3.  23  shall  be  destroyed  from  among  Lu.  18.  21. 

17-  33  So  PftU*  departed  from  among  them 

23. 10 ;  i  Co.  5.  13 ;  2  Co.  6  17 ;  Heb.  5.  i. 

FROM  thence,  that  place — intiQev  ckeithen. 

Matt.  4.21;  9.  9;  12.    15;   15.    29;  Mark  6.   i,  10; 
7.  24;  10.  1;  Luke  16.  26;  Acts  7.   4;   13.   4; 

16.  12 ;  21.  1 ;  27.  4 ;  38.  15.  ' 
FROM  beside  — 

Near,  beside,  until,  hxx  etsel, 

1  Ki.   3.  20  took  my  son  from  beside  me.  while  thine 
Eze.  10.  16  wheels  also  turned  not  from  beside  them 

FROM  between  — 

From  {being)  with,  DJ7P  meim. 

Gen.  48. 12  Joseph  brought  them  out  from  between 
FROM  off  — 
From  on,  *?i?p  meal. 

Gen.   7.   4  will  I  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the  ea. 
FROM  the  midst  — 
From  betwe&n,  psp  mibben. 

Oer.  48.  45  and  a  flame  from  the  midst  of  Sihon 

FRONT  — 

Face,  n'J3  panim. 

2  Sa,  10.    9  When  Joab  saw  that  the  front  of  the  bat. 
2  Ch.  3.    4  And  the  porch  that.(was)  in  the  front 

FRONTIER  — 

End,  extremity,  ■"rtfi?  qatseh. 

Eze.  25.   9  from  his  cities . .  on  his  frontiers,  the  glory 

FRONTLETS  — 

Frontlets,  niSQio  totaphoth. 

Exod'13.  16  and  for  frontlets  between  thine  eyes 
Deut.  6.    8  they  shall  be  as  frontlets  between  thine 
11.  18  that  they  may  be  as  frontlets  between  yo. 

FROST  — 

1. Frost,  kail  stones,  ^p;q  ch-trtamal. 

Psa.  78.  47  and  their  sycamore  trees  with  frost 

2. Cold,  frost,  ice,  rn%  qerach. 

Gen.  31.  40  consumed  me,  and  the  frost  by  night 
Job   37.  10  By  the  breath  of  God  frost  is  given 
Jer.   36.  30  shall  be  cast  out.  .in  the  night  to  the  fr. 

FROWARD  — 

l.Froivard,  tortuous,  ^B?5D  haphakpak. 

Prov  21.    8  The  way  of  man  (is)  froward  and  strange 

2.2*0  be  perverse,  perverted,  n?  luz,  2. 

Prov.  2.  15  crooked.,  and  (they)  froward  in  their  paths 
3.  32  For  the  froward  (is)  abomination  to  the 

Z.  Perverse,  i^py  iqqesh. 

2  Sa.  32.  27  with  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself 
Psa.  18.  26  with  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself 

101.    4  A  froward  heart  shall  depart  from  me 
Prov  1 1 .  20  They  that  are  of  a  froward  heart  (are)  ah. 

17.  20  He  that  hath  a  froward  heart  flndeth 
22.    5  snares  (are)  in  the  way  of  the  froward 

\.To  be  a  wrestler,  Sns pathal,  2. 

Job     5.  13  and  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried 
Prov.  8.    8  nothing  froward  or  perverse  in  them 

5.  Perverseness,  frowardness,  rvosnn  tahpukoth. 

Prov   8.  13  pride,  .and  the  froward  mouth,  do  I  hate 
10.  31  but  the  froward  tongue  shall  be  cut  out 
16.  28  A  froward  man  soweth  strife ;  and  a  wins. 

6. Perverse,  perversities,  rrtirpj,'  iqqeshuth. 

Prov.  4.  24  Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth 
6.  12  a  wicked  man,  walketh  with  a  froward 

7.  Crooked,  perverse,  h-koAiSs  sh'lios. 

1  Pe.   2.  18  not  only  to  the  good,  .but  also  to  the  fro. 

FROWARD,  to  show  self  — 

To  shoio  self  a  lorestler,  ^ns  pathal,  7. 

Psa.  18.  26  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself  froward 

FROWARD,  very,  (thing)  — 

PerversenesSi  frowwrdness,  ni^nn  tahpukoth. 
Deut  32.  20  for  they  (are)  a  very  froward  generation 
Prov.  2.  12  from  the  man  that  speaketh  froward  tbi. 
16.  30  lie  shutteth  his  eye.--  to  devise  froward  t. 


FROWARDLY  — 

Turning  back,  33ity  shobab. 

Isa.  57.  17  he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  h. 

FROWARDNESS  — 

Perverseness,  frowarchiess,  rvbsnn  tahpukoth. 

Prov    2.  14  delight  in  the  frowardness  of  the  wicked 
6  14  Frowardness  (is)  in  his  heart,  he  deviseth 
10.  32  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,  .frowardness 
FROZEN,  to  be  — 
To  become  caught  or  struck  together,  137  lakad,  7. 

Job   38.  30  and  the  face  of  the  deep  is  frozen   ■ 
FRUIT  — 
1. Fruit,  budding,  3K  eb. 

Song  6.  11  I  went  down,  .to"  see  the  fruits  of  the  va. 
'l.Fruit,  budding,  3N  eb. 

Dan.    4.  12,  21  and  the  fruit  thereof  much,  and  in  it 
4.  14  shake  off  his  leaves,  and  scatter  his  fruit 

3. Increase,  7W]  yebul. 

Deut  11.  17  and  that  the  land  yield  not  her  fruit 
Hab.   3.  17  neither  (shall)  fruit  (be)  in  the  vines ;  the 
Hag.    1.  10  and  the  earth  is  stayed  (from)  her  fruit 

i.Child,  I?*  yeled. 

Exod2i.  22  so  that  her  fruit  depart,  .and  yet  no 
5. Bread,  food,  en?  lechem. 

Jer.  11.  19  Let  us  destroy  the  tree  with  the  fruit 
6.  Eating,  food,  ^dnd  maakal. 

Keh.  9.  25  vineyards.. and  fruit  trees  in  abundance 
7 .Fulness,  '"iN?p  meleah. 

Deut  22.    9  the  fruit  of  thy  seed  which  thou  hast  sown 
8.  Fruit,  utterance,  3)3  nob. 

Isa.    57. 19  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips;  Peace 

9. Fruit,  utterance,  3*3  nib. 

Mai.    1.  12  The  table,  .(is)  polluted ;  and  the  fruit 

lO.Fruit,  *19  peri. 

Gen.    1.  11  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit,  .whose  seed 

1.  12  and  the  tree  yielding  fruit,  whose  seed 

1.  29  every  tree,  in  the  which  (is)  the  fruit  of 

-    3.    2  We  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the 

3.  3  But  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  which  (is)  in 

3.  6  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat 

4.  3  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground 
30.    2  withheld  from  thee,  .fruit  of  the  womb? 

Exodio.  15  they  did  eat.  .all  the  fruit  of  the  trees 
Lev.  19.  23  then  ye  shall  count  the  fruit  thereof  as 
19.  24  all  the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  holy,  to 
19.  25  in  the  fifth  year  shall  ye  eat  of  the  fruit 

25.  19  And  the  land  shall  yield  her  fruit,  and  ye 

26.  4  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield  their  fruit 
26. 20  neither  shall  the  trees,  .yield  their  fruits 
27-  3°  (whether)  of  the  seed .  .(or)  of  the  fruit  of 

Xum  13.  20  and  bring  of  the  fruit  of  the  land.     Now 
13.  26  and  showed  them  the  fruit  of  the  land 
13.  27  came  unto  the  land,  .and  this  (is)  the  fr. 

Deut.  1. 25  they  took  of  the  fruit  of  the  land  in  their 

7.  13  bless  the  fruit  of  thy  womb,  and  the  fruit 

26.  2  of  the  first  of  all  the  fruit  of  the  earth 
28.    4  Blessed  (shall  be)  the  fruit  of  thy  body 
28.   4  fruit  of  thy  ground,  and  the  fruit  of  thy 
28.  n'plenteous.  .in  the  fruit  of  thy  body,  and 
28. 11  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and  in  the  fruit  of 
28.  18  the  fruit  of  thy  body,  and  the  fruit  of  thy 
28.33  The  fruit  of  thy  land,  and  all  thy  labours 
28.  42  All  thy  trees  and  fruit  of  thy  land  shall 
28.  51  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and  the  fruit 
28.  53  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thine  own  body 
30.    9  plenteous,  .in  the  fruit  of  thy  body,  and 

30.  9  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and  in  the  fruit  of  thy 
2  Ki.19.  29  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruits  there. 

19.  36  take  root  downward,  and  bear  fruit  upw. 
Neh.  9.  36  to  eat  the  fruit  thereof  and  the  good  the.- 

10.  35  of  all  fruit  of  all  trees,  year  by  year,  unto 
*io.  37  and  the  fruit  of  all  manner  of  trees,  of 

Psa.     1.    3  that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season 
21.  10  Their  fruit  shalt  thou  destroy  from  the 
72.  16  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon 
704. 13  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works 
105.  35  and  devoured  the  fruit  of  their  ground 
107.  37  which  may  yield  fruits  of  increase 
127.    3  the  fruit  of  the  womb  (is  his)  reward 
i-32.  11  Of  the  fruit  of  thy  body  will  I  set  upon 
Prov.  1.  31  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way 
8. 19  My  fruit  (is)  better  than  gold,  yea,  than 

11.  30  The  fruit  of  the  righteous  (is)  a  tree  of 
12. 14  be  satisfied,  .by  the  fruit  of  (his)  mouth 
13.    2  A  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  (his) 
18.  20  be  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  his  mouth 
18.  21  they  that  love  it  shall  eat  the  fruit  there. 

27.  18  Whoso  keepeth  the.  .tree  shall  eat  the  f. 

31.  16  with  the  fruit  of  her  hands  she  planteth 
31.  31  Give  her  of  the  fruit  of  her  hands  ;  and 

EccL  2.    5  planted  trees  in  them  of  all  (kinds  of)  fr. 
Sung  2.   3  and  his  fruit  (was)  sweet  to  my  taste 

4. 13  plants  (are)  au  orchard,  .with  pleasant  fr. 

4.  16  Let  my  beloved,  .eat  his  pleasant  fruits 

8.  n  every  one  for  the  fruit  thereof  was  to  br. 
8.  12  those  that  keep  the  fruit,  .two  hundred 

Isa.     3.  10  they  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings 

4.   2  the  fruit  of  the  earth  (shall  be)  excellent 
10.  12  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart 

13.  18  have  no  pity  on  the  fruit  of  the  womb 

14.  29  and  his  frnit  (shall  be)  a  fiery  flying  serp. 
27.  9  this  (is)  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  his  sin 
37.  30  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  thereof 
37-  31  again  take  root,  .and  bear  fruit  upward 


FRUIT 


377 


FULFIL 


Isa.  65.  21  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them 
Jer.     2.    7  to  eat  the  fruit,  .and  the  goodness  there. 

6.  19  the  fruit  of  their  thoughts,  because  they 

7.  20  poured  out  upon,  .the  fruit  of  the  ground 

11.  16  A  green  olive  tree,  fair,  (and)  of  goodly  f. 

12.  2  they  grow,  yea,  they  bring  forth  fruit 
17.    S  neither  shall  cease  from  yielding  fruit 
17.  10  (and)  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings 
2i.  14  will  punish  you  according  to  the  fruit  of 
29.    5,  28  plant  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of 
32.  19  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings 

Lam.  2.  20  Shall  the  women  eat  their  fruit,  (and) 
Eze.  17.    8  It  was  planted,  .that  it  might  bear  fruit 
17.   9  shall  he  not.  .cut  off  the  fruit  thereof 
17.  23,andbearfruit,and  be  a  goodly  cedar:  and 
19.  12  the  east  wind  dried  up  her  fruit ;  her 
19.  14  fire,  .hath  devoured  her  fruit,  so  that 
25.    4  they  shall  eat  thy  fruit,  and. .  drink  thy 
34.  27  the  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  her  fruit 
36.    8  yield  your  fruit  to  my  people  of  Israel 
36.  30  I  will  multiply  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  and 


47- 


;  neither  shall  the  fruit .  .be  consumed :  it 


47.  12  the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  for  meat,  and 
Hos.    9.  16  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  bear  no  fruit 
10.    1  he  bringeth  forth  fruit  unto  himself 

10.  1  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  fruit 
jo.  13  ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of  lies  ;  because 

"         14.    8  From  me  is  thy  fruit  found 

Joel    2.  22  for  the  tree  bearethher  fruit,  the  fig  tree 

Amos  2.    9  yet  I  destroyed  his  fruit  from  above,  and 

6.  12  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into  hemlock 
9.  14  make  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them 

Mac.    6.    7  fruit  of  my  body  (for)  the  sin  of  my  soul? 

7.  13  be  desolate,  .for  the  fruit  of  their  doings 
Zech.  8.  12  the  vine  shall  give  her  fruit,  and  the 
Mai.   3. 11  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your  ground 

11.  Incoming ',  fruit,  nNi3B  tebuah. 

Exod23.  10  and  shalt  gather  in  the  fruits  thereof 
Lev.  23.  39  when  ye  have  gathered  in  the  fruit  of  the 
25.    3  and  gather  in  the  fruit  thereof 
25.  15  unto  the  number  of  years  of  the  fruits  he 

25. 16  number,  .of  the  fruits  doth  he  sell  unto 
25.  21  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  three  years 
25.  22  and  eat . .  of  old  fruit  until  the  ninth  year 
25.  22  until  her  fruits  come  in  ye  shall  eat.  .the 

Deut22.    9  and  the  fruit  of  thy  vineyard,  be  defiled 

33.  14  for  the  precious  fruits,  .by  the  sun 
Tosh.  5.  12  they  did  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  land  of 
2  Ki.  8.    6  Restore  all . .  the  fruits  of  the  field  since 
Prov  10.  16  to  life :  the  fruit  of  the  wicked  to  sin 

\2.Fruit,  increase,  rn^Jfi  tenubah. 

Judg.  9.  11  Should  I  forsake,  .my  good  fruit,  and  go 
Isa.   27.    6  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit 
Lam.  4.  .9  stricken  through  for.  .the  fruits  of  the  fl. 

13.  Produce,  y4uutj/j.a  gennema. 

Matt  26.  29  I  will  not  drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit 
Markx.4.  25  I  will  drink  no  more  of  the  fruit  of  the  v. 
Luke  12.  18  there  will  I  bestow  all  my  [fruits]  and  my 

22.  18  I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine 
2  Co.  9.  10  increase  the  fruits  of  your  righteousness 

1L  Fruit,  Kapir6s  karpos. 

Matt.  3.  8  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  meet  for  v.  10 
7.  16  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits.  Do 
7.  17  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit 
7.  17  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit 
7.  18  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 
7.  18  neither  (can)  a  corrupt  tree,  .good  fruit 
7.  19  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit 

7.  20  Wherefore  by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 

12.  33  Either  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit 
12.. 33  fruit  corrupt :  for  the  tree  is  known  by.  ,f. 

13.  8  brought  forth  fruit,  some  an  hundred  fold 
13.  26  was  sprung  up,  and  brought  forth  fruit 
21. 19  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward 
2i.  34  And  when  the  time  of  the  fruit  drew  near 
21.  34  that  they  might  receive  the  fruits  of  it 
21.  41  which  shall  render  him  thefruits  in  their 
21.  43  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits 

Mark  4.  7  thorns,  .choked  it,  and  it  yielded  no  fruit 
4.  8  did  yield  fruit  that  sprang  up  and  lucre. 
4.  29  But  when  the  fruit  is  brought  forth 

11.  14  No  man  eat  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for  ev. 
i2.    2  might  receive,  .of  the  fruit  of  the  vineya. 

Luke  r.  42  and  blessed  (is)  the  fruit  of  thy  womb 

3.    8  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  worthy  of  re. 
3.   9  which  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is 
6.  43  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt  fruit 
6.  43  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree.. good  fruit 
6.  44  For  every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit 

8.  8  sprang  up,  and  bare  fruit  an  hundred  fold 

12. 17  I  have  no  room  where  to  bestow  my  fru.? 
13.    6  he  came  and  souiht  fruit  thereon,  and 
13.    7  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on 
13.   9  And  if  it  bear  fruit,  .and  if  not.  .after  to. 
20. 10  that  they  should  give  him  of  the  fruit  of 

John  4.  36  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  life  eternal 

12.  24  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit 
15.  2  Every  branch  in  methat  beareth  not  fru, 
15.  -2  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  f. 
15.  4  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself 
15.  5  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit:  for 
15.  8  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ;  so  shall  ye  be 
15.  16  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  frait 
15.  16  and  (that)  your  "fruit  should  remain 

Acts    2.  30  that  of  the  fruit  of  his  loins,  according  to 

Rom.  1.  13  that  I  might  have  some  fruit  among  you 

6.  21  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those  things 

6.  22  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the 

15.  28  and  have  sealed  tn  them  this  fruit,  I  will 

1  Co.  9.    7  and  eateth  not  of  the  fruit  theieof?or 

48 


Gal.     5.  22  But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy 
Eph.    5.    9  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (is)  in  all  goodness 
Phil.    1.  11  Being  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteous. 
1.  22  But  if  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  (is)  the  fruit 

4.  17  I  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your  ac. 
?  Ti.  2.6  husbandm. . .  must  be . .  partaker  of  the  fr. 
Heb.  12.  11  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righte. 

13.  15  the  fruit  of  (our)  lips  giving  thanks  to  his 
Jas.     3.  17  gentle . .  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits 

3.  18  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  peace 

5.  7  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  ea. 
5.  18  and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit 

Rev.  22.    2  which  bare  twelve  (manner  of)  fruits 
22.    2  (and)  yielded  her  fruit  every  month 
{See  also  Cast,  first  ripe,  hasty,  new,  summer,  sycamore.] 
FRUIT,  best  — 
What  is  praised,  rnp]  zinvrah. 

Gen.  43. 11  take  of  the  best  fruits  in  the  land  in  your 
FRUIT,  to  bear  — 
To-  bear  fruit,  Kapirotpoptw  karpophoreo. 

Matt  13.  23  which  also  beareth  fruit,  and  bringeth  fo. 
FRUIT,  to  bring  — 
To  be  fruitful,  rri9  pa/rah, 

Eze.  36. 11  and  they  shall  increase  and  bring  fruit 
FRUIT,  to  bring  forth  — 
l.To  bring  forth i,  increase,  313  nub. 

Psa.  92.  14  They  shall  still  bring  forth'fruit  in  old 
2. To  bear  fruit,  KapTro<pop€a>  karpophoreo. 

Mark  4.  20  and  receive  (it),  and  bring  forth  fruit 

4.  28  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself 
Luke  8.  J5  keep . .  and  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience 
Rom.  7.    4  that  we  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God 

7.  5  did  work . .  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death 
Col.     1.    6  and  bringeth  forth  fruit,  as.  .also  in  you 

FRUIT,  first  of  ripe  — 
Fulness,  nx?p  vxehah. 

Exod22.  29  the  first  of  thy  ripe  fruits,  and  of  thy  liq. 
FRUIT,  without  — 
Without  fruit,  &Kapiros  akarpos. 

Jude       12  without  fruit,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by 
FRUIT  withereth,  whose  — 
Withering  autumnal  fruit,  <p6ivoirct:pii'6$  phthzno. 

Jude       12  trees  whose  fruit  withereth.  .twice  dead 
FRUITFUL  — 
I. Seed,  jra|  zera. 

Eze.  17."  5  took,  .and  planted  it  in  a  fruitful  field 
2.  To  be  fruitful,  iris  parah. 

Gen.  49.  22  a  fruitful  bough,  .a  fruitful  bough  by  a 

Psa.  1 28.    3  Thy  wife,  .as  a  fruitful  vine  by  the  sides 

Isa,    17.    6  four  (or)  five  in  the  outmost  fruitful  bra. 
32. 12  They  shall  lament,  .for  the  fruitful  vine 

Eze.  19.  10  she  was  fruitful  and  full  of  branches  by 

3. Fruit,  H?  peri. 

Psa.  107.  34  A  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  the 
148.    9  and  all  hills  ;  fruitful  trees,  and  all  ced. 

4.  Fruit  bearing,  Kap-rrncpopos  learpophoros. 

Acts  14.  17  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful 
FRUITFUL,  to  be  ^ 
l.To  produce  fruit,  vr^para,  5. 

Hos.  13.  15  Though  he  be' fruitful  among,  .brethren 
2.To  be  fruitful,  .Ti3  parah. 

Gen.   1.  22* Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  wat. 
1.  28  God  said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and  niu. 
8. 17  that  they  may  breed,  .and  be  fruitful 
9.    1  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish 
9.    7  And  you,  be  ye  fruitful,  and  multiply 
26.  22  and  we  shall  be  fruitful  in  the  land 
35.  11  And  God  said .  .be  fruitful  and  multiply 
Exod.  1.    7  And  the  children  of  Israel  were  fruitful 
Jer.  23.    3  and  they  shall  be  fruitful  and  increase 
Z.To  bear  fruit,  napTrofyopza}  karpophoreo. 

Col.     1.  10  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and 
FRUITFUL,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  make  fruitful,  .tis  parah,  5. 

Gen.  41.  52  For  God'hath  caused  me  to  be  fruitful  in 

FRUITFUL  field  — 

Fruitful  place  or  field,  bona  Jcarmel. 

Isa.   10.  18  of  his  fruitful  field,  both  soul  and  body 

29.  17  Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful fi. 

29.  17  the  fruitful  field  shall  be  esteemed  as  a  f. 

32.  15  and  the  wilderness  be  a  fruitful  field 

32. 15  the  fruitful  field  be  counted  for  a  forest 

32. 16  righteousness  remain  in  the  fruitful  field 

FRUITFUL,  to  make  — 

To  make  fruitful,  rn^ parah,  5. 

Gen.  17.    6  I  will  make  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  and 

17.  20 1,  .will  make  him  fruitful,  and  will  mult. 

28.    3  God.  .bless  thee,  and  make  thee  fruitful 

48.   4  I  will  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply 

Lev.  26.    9  I  will,  .make  you  fruitful,  and  multiply 

FRUITFUL  place  — 

Fruitful  place  or  field,  t8"?3  Jcarmel. 

Jer.     4.  26  the  fruitful  place  (was)  a  wilderness,  and 

FRUITFUL,  very  — 

A  son  of  oil,  f£^-j3  ben-shemen. 

Isa.     5.    1  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill 


FRUITS  — 
I.Power,  na  koach. 

Job  31.  39  If  I  have  eaten  the  fruits  thereof  without 
2.  Ripe  or  full  fruits,  onajpa  opora. 

Rev.  18.  14  the  fruits  that  thy  soul  lusted  after  are 
FRUSTRATE,  to  — 
l.To  break,  make 'void,  t\3  parar,  5. 

Ezra    4.    5  to  frustrate  their  purpose.,  all  the  days 
.Isa.   44.  25  That  irustrateth  the  tokens  of  the  liars 

2.  To  put  aside,  adereio  atheteo. 

Gal.     2.  21 1  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God :  for 
FRYING  pan  — 
Frying  pan,  kettle,  n^rno  marchesheth. 

Lev.    2.    7  if . .  a  meat  offering  (baken)  in  the  fryingp. 

7.  9  and  all  that  is  dressed  in  the  frying  pan 

FUEL  — 

1. Eating,  food,  rr)5$  oklah. 

-Eze.  15.    4  Behold'  it  is  cast  into  the  fire  for  fuel 
15.    6  which  I  have  given  to  the  fire  for  fuel 
21. 32  Thou  shalt  be  for  fuel  to  the  fire  ;  thy 
2.Eating,  food,  n^sn  maakoleth. 

Isa.     9.    5  but.  .shall  be  with  burning,  .fuel  of  fire 
9.  19  shall  be  as  the  fuel 
FUGITIVE  — 
l.One  fleeing,  a  fugitive,  n'12  bariach. 

Isa.    15.    5  his  fugitives,  .unto  Zoar,  an  heifer  of 
2.0ne  fleeing,  a  fugitive,  rrnp  mibrach. 

Eze.  17.  21  all  his  fugitives  with  all  his  bands  shall 
Z.To  move,  shake,  stagger,  wander,  £U  nua. 

Gen.    4.  12  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  shalt  thou  be 

4. 14  I  shall  be  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond 

4.  To  fall,  h$i  ?iaj)hal. 

2  Ki.25.  1 1  the  fugitives  that  fell  away  to  the  king  of 

5. One  who  slips  out,  B'ps  palit. 

Judg  12.    4  Ye  Gileadites  (are)  fugitives  of  Ephraim 
FULFIL,  to  — 
l.To  cut  off,  VS3  baUa,  3. 

Lam.  2.  17  he  hath  fulfilled  his  word  that  he  had 
2.To  complete,  finish,  n?|  kalah,  3. 

Exod.  5.  13  Fulfil  your'works.  .daily  tasks,  as  when 
5.  14  Wherefore  have  ye  not  fulfilled  your  task 

Z.To  fill  up  or  in,  x?a  male. 

Job  36. 17  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the  w. 

4.  To  fill  in  or  up,  nSd  male,  3. 

Gen.  29.  27  Fulfil  her  week,  and  we  will  give  thee 

29.  28  And  Jacob  did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week 
Exod23-  26  the  number  of  thy  days  I  will  fulfil 

1  Ki.  2.  27  that  he  might  fulfil  the  word  of  the  LORD 

8.  15  and  hath  with  his  hand  fulfilled  (it),  say. 
8.  24  and  hast  fulfilled  (it)  with  thine  hand,  as 

2  Ch.  6.    4  who  hath  with  his  hands  fulfilled  (that) 

6. 15  and  hast  fulfilled  (it)  with  thine  hand,  as 
36.  21  To  fulfil  the  word  of  the  LORD  by  the  m. 
36.  21  desolate,  .to  fulfil  threescore  and  ten  ye. 

Psa.  20.    5  banners  :  the  LORD  fulfil  all  thy  petitions 
Jer.  44.  25  and  fulfilled  with  your  hand,  saying 

5.  To  do,  Ttyii  asah. 

2  Sa.  14.  22*  in  that  the  king  hath  fulfilled  the  request 

1  Ch.22.  13  if  thou  takest  heed  to  fulfil  the  statutes 
Psa. 145.  19  He  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear 

148.   8  vapour;  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  word 

6.  To  fill  up,  ava.Tr\r}p6o3  anapleroo. 

Matt  13.  14  And  in  them  is  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of 
Gal.     6.    2  Bear  ye.  .and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ 

7.  To  fill  out,  ifcTrXripuco  ckpleroo. 

Acts  13.  33  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their 

8.  To  fill,  make  full,  irXypdoo  pleroo. 

Matt.  3.  15  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righ. 

4.  14  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  sp. 

5.  17  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil 
Acts  12.  25  returned,  .when  they  had  fulfilled,  .min. 

13.  25  And  as  John  fulfilled  his  course,  he  said 

13.  27  voices,  .they  have  fulfilled,  .in  condemn. 

14.  26  recommended,  .for  the  work  which  they  f. 
Rom.13.    8  he  that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled 
Phil.    2.    2  Fulfil  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  like  minded 
Col.     1.  25  made  a  minister,  .to  fulfil  the  word  of  G. 

4.  17  And  sav.  .Take  heed,  .that  thou  fulfil  it 

2  Th.   1.  11  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  (his)  good, 

9.  To  do,  make,  troUw  poieo. 

Acts  13.  22  a  man.  .which  shall  fulfil  all  my  will 
Eph.    2.    3  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of 
Rev.  17.  17  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his  will,  and  to 
10. To  accomplish,  end,  reXeiooj  teleioo. 

Luke  2.  43  And  when  they  had  fulfilled  the  dajt,  as 
Johnio.  28  that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  saith 

11.  To  end,  reA/w  teieo. 

Acts  13.  29  when  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was  wrl 
Rom.  2.  27  if  it  fulfil  the  law,  judge  thee,  who  by 
Gal.     5.  16  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh 
Jas.     2.    8  If  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law  according  to  the 
Rev.  15.    8  till  the  seven  plagues,  .were  fulfilled 
17.  17  until  the  words  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled 
20.    3  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled 

12.To  end  togetlier,  (rvvreXeaj  svnteleo. 

Marki3.    4  sign  when  all  these  things  shall  bfi  fulfil. 


FULFILLED 


378 


FULL 


FULFILLED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  complete,  finished,  rhs  kalah. 

Ezra    i.    i  that  the  word  of  the  Lord.,  might  lie  ful. 

2.  To  be  full,  n^d  male. 

'    Gen.  25.  24  when  her  days  to  be  delivered  were  fill. 
29.  21  Give,  .my  wife,  for  my  days  are  fulfilled 
50.    3  And  forty  days  were  fulfilled  for  him 
50.    3  for  so  are  fulfilled  the  days  of  those  that 

lev.  12.    4  the  days  of  her  purifying  be  fulfilled 
12.    6  when  the  days  of  her  purifying  are  ful. 

Num.  6.    5  until  the  days  be  fulfilled,  in  the  winch 

6.  13  when  the  days  of  his  separation  are  ful. 
2  Sa.    7.  12  when  thy  days  be  fulfilled,  and  thou 
Lam.   4. 18  our  end  is  near,  our  days  are  fulfilled 
Eze.    5.    2  when  the  days  of  the  siege  are  fulfilled 
Dan.  10.    3  till  three  whole  weeks  were  fulfilled 

S.To  be  filled,  completed,  vbiS  male,  2. 

Exod.  7.  25  And  seven  days  were  fulfilled,  after  that 

i.To  be  ended,  fo  suph. 

Dan.    4.  33  The  same  hour  was  the  thing  fulfilled 

5.  To  become,  come  to  pass,  ylvojiai  ginomai. 

•Matt.  5.  18  shall  in  no  wise  pass,  .till  all  be  fulfilled 

24.  34  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  f 
Luke2i.  32  shall  not  pass  away,  till  all  be  fulfilled 

Q.To-fill,  mate  full,  trX-qpou  pleroo. 
'   Matt  1.  22  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
'  2. 15  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  of 
2.  17  Then  was  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken 

2.  23  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spo. 
8. 17  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spo. 

12.  17  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spo. 

13.  35  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  that  was  spoken 
21.    4  All  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be  ful. 
26.  54  how  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled 

26.  56  scriptures  of  the  prophets  might  be  ful. 

27.  9  Then  was  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken 
27.  35  [that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  sp.] 

Mark  1.  15  The  time  is  fulfilled,  and  the  kingdom  of 

14.  49  but  the  scriptures  must  be  fulfilled 

15.  28  [And  the  scripture  was  fulfilled,  which] 
Luke  1.  20  nvy  words,  which  [shall  be  fulfilled]  in 

4.  21  This  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your 
21.  22  that  all  things,  .written  [may  be  fulfilled] 

21.  24  until  the  times  of  the  Gentilesbe  fulfilled 

22.  16  until  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
24.  44  that  all  things  must  be  fulfilled,  which 

John  3.  29  voice ;  this  my  joy  thereforeijs  fulfilled 

12.  38  That  the  saying.,  might  be  fulfilled,  which 

13.  18  but  that  the  scripture  may  be  fulfilled 
15.  25  that  the  word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is 

•  17.  12  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled 
17. 13  that  they  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled 
18.   9  That  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled,  which 

18.  32  That  the  saying  of  Jesus  might  be  fulfil. 

19.  24  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled 
19.  36  done,  that  the  scripture  should  be  ful. 

Acts    1.  16  this  scripture  must  needs  have  been  ful. 

3.  18  But  those  things,  .he  hath  so  fulfilled 

9.  23  And  after  that  many  days  were  fulfilled 
Roni.  8.    4  righteousness,  .might  be  fulfilled  in  us 

2  Co.  10.    6  disobedience,  when  your  obedience  is  fu. 
Gal.     5.  14  For  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word 
Jas.     2.  23  the  scripture  was  fulfilled  which  saith 
Eev.    6.  11  and  their  brethren,  .should  be  fulfilled 

FULFILLING  — 

Fulness,  irAVjpoj^a  pleroma. 

Rom. 13.  10  therefore  love  (is)  the  fulfilling  of  the 

FULL,  (be)  — 
l.Full,  s^D  male. 

Geu.  41. '  7  ears  devoured  the  seven  rank  and  full 

.   41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and 
Num.  7.  13  both  of  them .  .full  of  fine  flour  mingled 
7. 14,  20  One  spoon  of.  .gold,  full  of  incense 

7.  19  full  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  for  a 
[So  in  v.  25,  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79]. 

7.  26,  32,  38,  44,  50  golden  spoon,  .full  of  ince. 

7. 56,  62,  68,  74,  80  golden  spoon .  .full  of  incen. 

7.  86  The  golden  spoons,  .twelve,  full  of  incen. 

Dent.  6.  11  nouses  full  of  all  good,  .which  thou  fllle. 

33.  23  and  full  with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 

34.  9  Joshua . .  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
IUitlCi.  21  I  weut  out  full,  and  the  Lord  hath  brou. 
2  Sa.  23.  11  where  was  a  piece  of  ground  full  of  lenti. 
2  Ki.  4.    4  and  thou  shalt  set  aside  that  which  is  full 

7.  15  all  the  way  (was)  full  of  garments  and  v. 
1  Ch.11.  13  where  was  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of  bar. 
21.  22  thou  shalt  grant  it  me  for  the  full  price 

21.  24  but  I  will  verily  buy  it  for  the  full  price 
Neh.    9.  25  and  possessed  houses  full  of  all  goods 
Psa.  73.  10  waters  of  a  full  (cup)  are  wrung  out  to 

75.   8  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red;  it  is  full  of  mi. 
144.  13  our  garners,  .full,  affording  all  manner 
Prov.17.    1  than  an  house  full  of  sacrifices,  .strife 
Eccl.  1.    7  run  into  the  sea ;  yet  the  sea  (is)  not  full 
Isa.     1.  21  the  faithful  city,  .it  was  full  of  judgment 

22.  2  Thou  that  art  full  of  stirs,  a  tumultuous 
51.  20  they  are  full  of  the  fury  of  the  LORD,  the 

Jcr.    4. 12  a  full  wind  from  those,  .shall  come  unto 
5.27  cage  is  full  of  birds,  so  (are).their  houses  f. 
6. 11  I  am  full  of  the  fury  of  the  LORD;  I  am 

35.  5  And  I  set.  .pots  full  of  wine,  and  cups 
Eze.    1.  18  rings.,  full  of  eyes  round  about  them  four 

10.  12  and  the  wheels,  .full  of  eyes  round  about 
17.  3  full  of  feathers,  which  bad  divers  colours 
28. 12  Thou,  .full  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in  be. 
37.    1  midst  of  the  valley  which  (was)  full  of  b. 


Amos  2  1 3  as  a  cart  is  pressed  (that  is)  full  of  sheaves 
Nan.   3.    1  it  (is)  all  full  of  lies,  .robbery ;  the  prey 

2.  Fulness,  KiSp,  N^a  melo. 

Exodi6.  33  Take  a  pot,  and  put  an  omer  full  of  mau. 
Lev.  j6.  12  he  shall  take  a  censer  full  of  burning 

16. 12  hands  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten  small 
Num22.  18  If  Balak  would  give  me  his  house-full  of 

24.  13  If  Balak  would  give  me  his  house  full  of 
Judg.  6.  38  wringed  the  dew.  .a  bowd  full  of  water 
2  Sa.  8.  2  measured . .  with  one  full  line  to  keep  ali. 
2  Ki.  4.  39  gathered  thereof  wild  gourds  his  lap  full 
Eccl.  4.  6  than  both  the  hands  full  (with)  travail 
Isa.  6.  3  Holy.,  the  whole  earth  (is)  full  of  his  glo. 
Eze.  32. 15  be  destitute  of  that  whereof  it  was  full 

41.    8  foundations,  .a  full  reedof  six  great  cub. 

3.  Many,  much;  great,  3n  rab. 

Laim  1.    1  How  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  (that  was)  f. 

4.  Satisfied,  satiated,  JJ3'7  sabea. 

Gen.  5  5.  8  Then  Abraham . .  died . .  an  old  man,  and  f . 
1  Sa.  2.  5  full  have  hired  out  themselves  for  bread 
Prov  27.    7  The  full  soul  loathetn  an  honey  comb;  b. 

5. Satiety,  y3&  soba. 

Exodi6.  3  when  we  did  eat  bread  to  the  full ;  for 
Lev.  26.  5  ye  shall  eat  your  bread  to  the  full,  and 
Psa.  78.  23  angels'  food ;  he  sent  thein  meat  to  the  f . 

6.  To  complete,  thy  shalam,  3. 

Exod22.    3  he  should  make  full  restitution :  if  he 

7. Finished,  perfect,  ahy  shalem. 

Gen.  15.  16  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  (is)  not  yet  f. 
Ruth  2. 12  a  full  reward  be  given  thee  of  the  LORD 

8. Perfection,  on  torn. 

Job  21.  23  One  dieth  in  his  full  strength,  being  wh. 

9. Perfect,  complete,  D'ai-i  tamim. 

Lev.  25.  30  not  redeemed  within  the  space  of  a  full 

10.  Days,  Q-a;  yaimin. 

Dan.  10.    2  I  Daniel  was  mourning  three  full  weeks 

11.  To  satiate,  satisfy,  Kopepvv^t  korennumi. 

1  Co.  4.   8  Now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  rich,  ye  have 

12. Replete,  stored,  full,  fxtaros  mestos. 

Matt  23.  28  within  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iDi. 
Johni9.  29  Now  there  was  set  a  vessel  full  of  vinegar 

21. 11  drew  the  net  to  land  full  of  great  fishes 
Rom.  1.  29  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit,  ma. 

15.  14  that  ye  also  are  full  of  goodness,  filled 
Jas.     3.    8  (it  is)  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison 
3. 17  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without 

2  Pe.   2.  14  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  and  that 

13.  To  replete,  store,  fill,  /leo-row  mestoo. 

Acts   2. 13  Others ..  said,  These  men  are  full  of  new 

li.Full,  irhT)pi)s  pleres. 

Matti4.  20  up  of  the  fragments,  .twelve  baskets  full 

15.  37  broken  (meat).,  was  left  seven  baskets  f. 
Hark  4.  28  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear 
6.  43  And  they  took  up  twelve  baskets  ful]  of 

8.  19  how  many  baskets  full  of  fragments  took 
Luke  4.    1  And  Jesus,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

5.12  behold  a  man  full  of  leprosy  ;  who  seeing 
John  1.  14  dwelt  among  us. .full  of  grace  and  truth 
Acts   6.    3  men.,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  wisdom 

6.    5  they  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of  faith 

6.  8  Stephen,  full  of  faith  and  power,  did 

7.  55  he,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  looked 

9.  36  this  woman  was  full  of  good  works  and 
11.  24  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy 
13.  10  O  full  of  all  subtilty  and  all  mischief 

19.  28  they  were  full  of  wrath,  and  cried  out 
2  John      8  lose  not.  .but  that  we  receive  a  full  rew. 

15.ro  make  full,  irXnpoui  pleroo. 

Johni6.  24  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full 

1  Jo.    1.    4  write  we  unto  you  that  your  joy  may  be  f. 

2  John   12  speak  face  to  face,  that  our  joy  may  be  f. 

16. Fulness,  Tr\Ttpo>/j.a  pleroma. 

Mark  8.  20  how  many  baskets  full  of  fragments  took 
[See  also  Age,  branches,  ears,  end,  feed,  filled,  weight.] 

FTJXL,  to  be  (or  have)  — 
l.To  be  full,  uhamalc. 

Exod.  8.  21  houses  of  the  Egyptians  shall  be  full  of 

Judg  16.  27  Now  the  house  was  full  of  men  and  wo. 

2  Ki.  4.   6  came  to  pass,  when  the  vessels  were  full 
6. 17  the  mountain  (was)  full  of  horses  and  ch. 

Job  20. 11  His  bones  are  full,  .of  his  youth,  which 

21.  24  His  breasts  are  full  of  milk,  and  his  -bones 

32.  18  For  1  am  full  of  matter,  the  spirit  within 
36.  16  should  be  set  on  thy  table,  .full  of  fatness 

Psa.  10.    7  His  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  deceit 
26. 10  and  their  right  hand  is  full  of  bribes 

33.  5  earth  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord 
48.  10  thy  right  hand  is  full  of  righteousness 
.65.    9  the  river  of  God.  .is  full  of  water  :  thou  . 
74.  20 dark  places,  .are  full  of  the  habitations 

104.  24  O  LORD,  .the  earth  is  full  of  thy  riches 

119.  64  The  earth,  0  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy 

Eccl.  9.    3  also  the  heart,  .is  full  of  evil,  and  mad. 

Isa.     1.  15  will  not  hear  :  your  hands  are  full  of  bl. 

11.   9  the  earth  shall  lie  full  of  the  knowledge 

13.  21  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures 

15.    9  the  waters  of  Dimon  shall  bcfullof  blood 

22.  7  thy  choicest  valleys  shall  lie  full  of  char. 
28.   8  For  all  tables  are  full  of  vomit,  .filthiuess 


Isa.   30.  27  his  lips  are  full  of  indignation,  and  his 
Jer.     6. 1 1  I  am  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord  ;  I  am 

23. 10  For  the  land  is  full  of  adulterers ;  for 
Eze.    7.  23  is  full  of  bloody  crimes,  and  the  city  is  f. 
9.    9  land  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city  full  of 

10.  4  the  court  was  full  of  the  brightness  of  the 
Joel    2.  24  the  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and  the. 

3. 13  for  the  press  is  full,  the  fats  overflow 
Mic.    3.    8  truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  spirit  of 

6.  12  For  the  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  vio. 
Hab.  3.    3  God  came .  .the  earth  was  full  of  his  pra. 

2.  To  befitted.,  n|?d  male,  2. 

2  Ki.  10.  21  the  house  of  Baal  was  full  from  one  end 

Esth.  3.  5  bowed  not.  .then  was  Haman  full  of  wra. 

5.  9  he  was  full  of  indignation  against  Morde. 

EccLn.  3  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 

Isa.     2.  7  Their  laud  also  is  full  of  silver  and  gold 

2.  7  their  land  is  also  full  of  horses,  neither 

2.  8  Their  land  also  is  full  of  idols ;  they  wor. 

Eze.     9.  9  the  land  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city  full 

32.  6  thy  blood . .  and  the  rivers  shall  be  full  of 

Zech.  8.  5  the  streets  of  the  cityshall  be  full  of  boys 

3.  To  fill  in  or  up,  aha  male,  3. 

Psa.  127.    5  Happy . .  the  man  that  hath  his  exuivers  f. 

4.  To  befitted,  ttba  mela,  4. 

Dan.   3. 19  Then  was  Nebuchadnezzar  full  of  fury 

5. To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  1'3'f  saba. 

Deut.  6. 11  when  thou  shalt  have  eaten  and  be  full 
8.  10  When  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  then 
8.  12  Lest,  .thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  and 

11.  15  grass,  .that  thou  mayest  eat,  and  be  full 

1  Ch.23.    1 ;  Psa.  104.  16 ;  Prov.  27.  20 ;  30.  9. 

6.  To  be  fed,  x'fTa^oixai  chortazomai. 

Phil.   4. 12  I-  am  instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to 

7.  To  fill,  load,  freight,  yefilfa  gemizo. 

Mark  4.  37  beat  into  the  ship,  so  that  it  was  now  f  uL 

5.  To  fill  in,  make  full,  e^TrlirXvp-i  empiplemi. 

Luke  6.  25  Woe  unto  you  that  are  full !  for  ye  shall 

9.  To  make  full,  ir\-vp6to  pleroo. 

Matti3.  48  Which,  when  it  was  full,  they  drew  to  sh 
Johni5-  11  might  remain.,  and.  .your  joy  might  be  f. 
Acts    7.  23  And  when  he  was  full  forty  years  old 
Phil.   4. 18  I  am  full,  having  received  of  Epaphrodi. 

FTJXL,  to  become  — 

To  be  or  become  full,  she  male. 

Lev.  19.  29  and  the  land  become  full  of  wickedness 

FULL,  to  be  come  to  the  — 

To  perfect,  finish,  Deis  tamam,  5. 

Dan.   8.  23  when,  .transgressors  are  come  to  the  full 

FULL,  to  draw  — 

To  fill  up,  tbo  male,  3. 

2  Ki.  9.  24  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with  his  full  strength 

FULL  of — 

1. Satisfied,  satiated,  ja^  sabea. 

Gen.  35.  29  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost  .old  and  full  of 

1  Ch.29.  28  he  died,  .full  of  days,  riches  and  honour 
Job   10. 15  (I  am)  full  of  confusion  ;  therefore  see 

14.  1  Man.  .(is)  of  few  days,  and  full  of  trouble 
42. 17  So  Job  died,  .old,  and  full  of  days 

2.  To  be  full,  replete,  loaded,  yefxoi  gemo. 

Rev.    4.   6  four  beasts  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind 
5.   8  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which  are  the 

15.  7  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God 

17.    3  full  of  names  of  blasphemy,  having  seven 
17.   4  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of 
21.    9  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  t  lagues 

FULL  of,  to  be  — 

l.To  make  many,  n^-i  rabah,  5. 

Eccl.  10.  14  A  fool  also  is  full  of  words :  a  man  cannot 

2. To  be  satiated,  jQjp  saba. 

2  Ch.24. 15  Jehoiada.  .was  full  of  days  when  he  died 
Job  7.  4  and  I  am  full  of  tossings  to  and  fro  unto 
Psa.  17.  14  they  are  full  of  children,  and  leave  the 

88.   3  For  my  soul  is  full  of  troubles :  and  my 
Isa.     1. 11  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams 

Z.To  l>e  full,  replete,  yepa  gemo. 

Matt  23.  25  within  they  are  full  of  extortion  and 

23.  27  but  are  within  full  of  dead,  bones,  and 
Luken   30  your  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and 
Roin.  3.  14  Whose  mouth  (is)  full  of  cursing  and 
Rev.   4.    8  And  the  four  beasts.. full  of  eyes  within 

[See  also  Compassion,  heaviness,  labour-,  marrow.] 

FULL,  to  make  — 

To  make  full,  TrX-qpia  pleroo. 

Acts    2.  2S  thou  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  with  thy 

FULL  cot  e,  to  be  — 

To  make  full,  tXijoow  pleroo. 

John  7'.    8  not  up  yet .  .for  my  time  is  not  yet  full  c. 

FULL  tale,  to  give  in  — 
To  fill  up,  i&a  male,  3. 

i  Sa.  18.  27  they  gave  them  in  full  tale  to  the  king 

FULL,  till  be  — 
Satietv,  H/fM  sobah. 

Eze.  39.  19  ye  shall  eat  fat  till  ye  be  full,  and  dri.  s 


FULL 

FULL,  to  the  — 

To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  V$7  saba. 

Exodi6.   8  give  you.  .in  the  morning  bread  to  the  f. 

FULL  (time)  came 

To  fill  full,  irK-hBta  pletho. 

Luke  i.  57  Now  Elizabeth's  full  time  came  that  she 

FUXL  year  — 
Days,  D'p;  yamim. 

Lev.  25.  29  within  a;  .full  year  may  he  redeem  it 

FULLER — 

l.To  wash,  d?|  kabas. 

1  Ki.  18. 1 7  which  (is)  in  the  high  way  of  the  fuller's  f . 

Isa.     7.    3  pool  in  the  high  way  of  the  fuller's  field 
36.    2  stood . .  in  the  high  way  of  the  fuller's  field 

2.  To  wash,  D?3  kabas,  3. 

Mai.    3.    2  Uke  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's  soap 
S.A  fuller,  cloth  dresser,  yva<pevs  gnapheus. 

Mark  9.    3  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 
FULLY  — 
l.To  finish,  rhikalah,  3. 

Num.  7.    1  on*  the  day  that  Moses  had  fully  set  up 

2.Full,  B&a  male. 

Nah.  1. 10  they  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully 

3.  To  fill  in  or  up,  M^O  male,  3. 

NU11114.  24  because  he.  .hath  followed  me  fully,  him 

4.  To  be  put  before,  i;i  nagad,  6. 

Ruth  2. 11  It  hath  fully  been  showed  me  all  that 
FOLLY  preach,  to  — 
To  make  full,  ir\r\.p6a  pleroo.  . 

Horn  15.  19  I  have  fully  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ 
FULLY,  to  go  — 
To  fill  up,  complete,  NJD  male,  3. 

1  Ki.11.   6  Solomon,  .went  not  fully  after  the  Lord 
FULLY  set,  to  be  — 
To  be  full,  fill  in,  N1??  male. 

Eccl.  8.  11  the  heart,  .of  men  is  fully  set  in  them 
FULNESS  — 
l.To  be  fully  fill  in,  complete,  fbo  mala. 

Job  20.  22  In  the  fulness  of  his  sufficiency  he  shall 
2. Fulness,  1A5  melo. 

Deut  33.  16  the  precious  things  of  the  earth  and  ful. 

1  Ch.16.  32  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 

Psa.  24.    1  The  earth  (is)  *he  Lord's,  and  the  fulness 
50.  12  the  world  (is)  mine,  and  the  fulness  ther. 
89. 11  the  world  and  the  fulness  thereof,  thou 
96. 11  let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 
98.    7  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 

Eze.  19.    7  the  land  was  desolate,  and  the  fulness 

3.  Fulness,  Tti&hz?  meleah. 

NumiS.  27  as  though.. the  fulness  of  the  wine  press 

^.Satiety,  yni?  soba. 

Psa.  16. 1 1  in  thy  presence  (is)  fulness  of  joy ;  at  thy 

5.  Satiety,  nyi'y  sibah. 

Eze.  16.  49  fulness  of  bread,  and  abundance  of  idlen. 
6. Fullness,  irXi\pwy.a  pleronw. 

John  1.  16  And  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received 
Rom.  1 1.  12  if  the  fall,  .how  much  more  their  fulness! 
11.  25  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come 
15.  29  I  shall  come  in  the  fulnessof  the  blessing 
t  Co.  10.  26,  28  the  earth  (is)  the  Lord's,  and  the  ful. 
Gal.  4.  4  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was 
Eph.   1.  to  That  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness 

1.  23  the  fulness  of  him  that  fillet h  all  in  all 

3.  19  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness 

4.  13  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness 
Col.     1.  19  pleased,  .that  in  him  should  all  fulness 

2.  9  For  hi  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of 
[See  also  Assured,  come,  know,  known,  persuaded,  ripe.] 

FURBISH,  to  — 

l.To polish,  trip  marat. 

Eze.  21.    9  a  sword  is  sharpened,  and  also  furbished 
21.  11  he  hath  given  it  to  be  furbished,  that  it 
21.  28  sword .  .for  the  slaughter  (it  is)  furbished 

2.To  scour, polish,  p"T3  maraq. 

Jer.     45.   4  furbish  the  spears,  .put  on  the  brigan. 
FURBISHED  — 
To  be  polished,  tfra  marat,  4. 

Eze.  21. 10  it  is  furbished  that  it  may  glitter 

21. 11  and  it  is  furbished,  to  give  it  into  the 
FURIOUS  — 
l.Heat,  fury,  ran  chemdh. 

Prov  22.  24  and  with  a  furious  man  thou.shalt  not  go 

29.  22  and  a  furious  man  abouudeth  in  trans. 
Eze.    5.  15  execute  judgments,  .in  furious  rebukes 
25. 17  vengeance  upon  them  with  furious  rebu. 

2.  Possessor  of  heat,  ttn  Vya  baal  chemah. 

Nah.  1.    2  God.. the  Lord  revengeth,  and  (is) fur. 
FURIOUS,  to  be  — 
To  be  wroth,  TOg  getsaph. 

Dan.  2.  12  For  this  cause  the  king  was.  .very  fur. 
FURIOUSLY  — 
l.Zk  heat,  nsro  bechemaJi.    ■ 

Eze.  23.  25  and  they  shall  deal  furiously  with  thee 


379 

2.  With  madness,  fury,  jipa#a  beshiggaon. 

2  Ki.    9.  20  driving  of  Jehu .  .for  he  driveth  furiously 
FURLONG  — " 
^4  stc.de,  (one  tenth  of  English  mile,  one  eighth  of 

JRoman),  arddiop  stadion. 

Luke24.  13  was  from  Jerusalem .  .threescore  furlongs 

Johu  6.  19  about  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  furlongs 

11.  18  Bethany  was  nigh . .  about  fifteen  furlongs 
Rev.  14.  20  space  of  a  thousand . .  six  hundred  furlo. 

21.  16  with  the  reed,  twelve  thousand  furlongs 
FURNACE  — 

1. Furnace,  oven,  \\vm  ,attun. 

Dan.  3.  6,  it,  15  the  midst  of  a  burning  fiery  furnace 
3.  17  to  deliver  us  from  the  burning  fiery  fur. 
3.  19  should  heat  the  furnace  one  seven  times 
3.  20  to  cast,  .into  the  burning  fiery  furnace 
3.  21,  23  the  midst  of  the  burning  fiery  furnace 
3.  22  and  the  furnace  exceeding  hot,  the  flame 
3.  26  to  the  mouth  of  the  burning  fiery  furnace 

2.Fumace,  smelting  oven,  jybs  kibslum. 

Gen.  19.  28  smoke,  .went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  fur. 
Exod.  9.    8  Take  to  you  handiuls  of  ashes  of  the  fur. 
9.  10  they  took  ashes  of  the  furnace,  and  stood 
19  18  smoke,  .ascended  as  the  smoke  of  a  fur. 

S.Furnaee,  a  crucible,  "fl3  hu/r. 

Deut.  4.  20  brought,  you  forth  out  of  the  iron  furnace 
1  Ki.    8.  51  from  the  midst  of  the  furnace  of  iron 
Prov  17.    3  pot  (is)  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold 
27.  21  thenning  pot  for  silver,  and  the  furnace 
Isa.  48.  10  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of 
Jer.   11.    4  I  brought  them,  .from  the  iron  furnace 
Eze.  22.  18  they  (are)  brass,  .in  the  midst  of  the  fur. 

22.  20  they  gather,  .into  the  midst  of  the  fur. 
22.  22  As  silver  is  melted  in  the ..  furnace,  so 

LFurnace,  tyjL  alii. 

Psa.  12.   6  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth,  puri. 

5.An  oven,  nsfl  tannur. 

Gen.  15.  17  a  smoking  furnace,  and  a  burning  lamp 
Neh.   3.  11  Hashub.  .repaired,  .the  tower  of  the  fur. 

12.  38  from  beyond  the  tower  of  the  furnaces 
Isa.   31.    9  LORD,  whose  fire  (is)  in  Zion,  and  his  fur. 

Q.Furnacej  k<£jxiuos  ko.minos. 

Matt  13.  42  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire 

13.  50  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire 
Rev.    1.  15  his  feet,  .as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace 

9.    2  smoke,  .as  the  smoke  of  a  great  furnace 

FURNISH,  to  — 

l.To  fill  in  or  up,  complete,  xhs  male,  3. 

Isa.  65.  11  furnish  the  drink  offering  unto  that  num. 

2.To  lift  up,  Kp|  nasa,  3. 

1  Ki    9. 11  Hiram,  .had  furnished  Solomon  with 

Z.To  encircle  as  with  a  chain,  p;j/  anaq,  5. 

Deut.  15.  14  Thou  shalt  furnish  him  liberally  out  of 

4.7*0  set  in  array,  iffli  arak. 

Psa    78. 19  Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  thewilderness? 
Prov.  9.    2  wine ;  she  hath  also  furnished  her  table 

5.  To  make  a  vessel,  *?a  riyy  asah  keli. 

Jer.  46.  19  furnish  thyself  to  go  into  captivity;  for 
6,To  be  filled  in  or  up,  tr\7]dof.Lai  plelhomai. 

Matt22.  10  and  the  wedding  was  furnished  with 
7. To  spread  out,  a-rp^vvv^i  strunnumi. 

Marki4-  15  he  will  show  you  a  large  upper  room  f. 

Luke22.  12  he  shall  show  you  a  large  upper  room  1 

FURNISH  thoroughly,  to  — 
To  fit  out,  Qaprifa  exartizo. 

2  Ti.    3.  17  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works 
FURNITURE  — 

1.  Vessel,  implement,  H?3  keli. 

Exod3i.    7  and  all  the  furniture  of  the  tabernacle 
31.    8  And  the  table  and  his  furniture,  and  the 
31.   8  pure  candlestick  with  all  his  furniture 
31.   9  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  all  his  furni. 
35.  14  The  candlestick  also,  .and  his  furniture 
39.  33  the  tent,  and  all  his  furniture,  his  taches 
Nah.'  2.    9  glory  out  of  all  the  pleasant  furniture 
2.BoUter,-&  Jcar. 

Gen.  31.  34  Rachel,  .put  them  in  the  camel's  furni. 

FURROW — 

1.  Cutting,  furrow,  ina  gedud. 

Psa.  65. 10  thou  settlest  the  furrows  thereof :  thou 
2.Furrow,  n3£.D,  JTOJTB  mdanah,  maanith. 

Psa.129.    3*  The  piowers.  .they  made  long  their  fur. 
Z.Furroiv,  iniquity,  \\]l,  r\y\y  onah,  ayi d . 

Hos.  10.  10  shall  bind  themselves  in  their  two  fur. 
i.Bed,  furrow,  rui*i£  arugah. 

Eze/ 17.    7  that'he  might  water  it  by  the  furrows 
17.  10  it  shall  wither  in  the  furrows  where  it 

5. Furrow,  ridge,  n'pp  telem. 

Job  31.  38  or  that  the  furrows  likewise,  .complain 

39.  10  Canst  thou  bind  the  unicorn,  .in  the  f.? 
Hos.  10.    4  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows 

12. 11  their  altars  (are)  as  heaps  in  the  furrows 

FURTHER — 

1. Further,  moreover,  "iri'v  yother. 

Eccl.  12.  12  And  further,  by  these,  my  sou,  be  admo. 


FURY 

2. Again,  yet,  anymore,  *riy  od. 

Esth.    9.  12  what  (is)'thy  request  further?  and  it  shall 
o.Y't.  further,  in  eti. 

Matt 26.  65  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses? 

Acts  21.  28  and  further  brought  Greeks  also  into  the 

Heb.   7. 11  what  further  need,  .that  another  priest 

4.  Yet  further,  eVl  vhsiov  eti  pleion. 

Acts   4. 17  But  that  it  spread  no  further  among  the 

24.    4  that  I  be  not  further  tedious  unto  thee 
2  Ti.    3.    9  But  they  shall  proceed  no  further,  for 

5. Further,  iroppvrepca  porrhotero. 

Luke24-  28  made  as  though  he  would  have  gone  fur. 

6.  To  add,  qp;  i/asaph. 

Deut2^.    S  the  officers  shall  speak  further  unto  the 

7.  To  add,  r]p;  yasaph,  5. 

N1U1122.  26  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  further,  and 

Job  38.  ii  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further 
FURTHER,  any  — 
Yet,  still,  further,  tri  eti. 

Mark  5.  35  why  troublest  thou  the  Master  any  fur.? 
14.  63  What  need  we  any  further  witnesses  ? 

Luke22  71  "What  need  we  any  further  witness  ?  for  ■ 
FURTHER,  to  (go)  — 
1\  To  lift  uj?,  n£2  nasa,  3. 

Ezra   S.  36  they  furthered  the  people,  and  the  house 
2. To  jring  out,  p)B  puq,  5. 

Psa.  140.   8  further  not  his  wicked  device,  (lest)  they 
3.  To  set  apart,  Zuctt)^  diistemi. 

Acts  27.  28  when  they  had  gone  a  little  further,  they 
FURTHERANCE  — 
A  striking  forward,  advance,  irpoxQirt}  prokope, 

Phil.   1.  12  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the  furthera. 
1. 25  abide,  .for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of  f. 
FURTHERMORE  — 
1. Again,  yet,  anymore,  "riy  od. 

Exod.  4.    6  And  the  Lord  said  furthermore  unto  him 
2.Tiien,  so  then,  eTrct  eita. 

Heb.  12.   9  Furthermore  we  have  had  fathers  of  our 
3. As  to  what  is  left,  to  Konrhv  to  loipon. 

1  Th.  4.   1  Furthermore  then  we  beseech  you,  bret. 
4.A?id,.'\va. 

'Eze.    8.    6  He  said  furthermore  unto  me,  Son  of  m. 
FURTHERMORE,  and  — 
Also,  fjn  aph. 

Eze.  23. 40  And  furthermore,  that  ye  have  sent  for 
FURY  — 
l.Heat,  fury,  N*n  chema. 

Dan.  11.  44  he  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury  to  dest. 
2.  Heat,  fury,  n£Q  chama. 

Dan.   3.  13  Then  Nebuchadnezzar  in.  .rage  and  fury 

Dan.   3.  19  Then  was  Nebuchadnezzar  full  of  fury 

Z.Heat,  fury,  nzn  chemah. 

.     Gen.  27.  44  tarry . .  until  thy  brother's  firry  turn  away 
Lev.  26.  28  I  will  walk  contrary  unto  you.  .in  fury 
Isa.   27.    4  Fury  (is)  not  in  me  :  who  would  set  the 
34.   2  and.  .fury  upon  all  their  armies  :  he  hath 
42.  25  he  hath  poured  upon  him  the  fury  of  his 
51.  13  because  of  the  fury  of  the  oppressor,  as 
51.  13  and  where  (is)  the  fury  of  the  oppressor? 
51.  17  which  hast  drunk,  .the  cup  of  his  fury 
51.  20  they  are  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord,  the 
51. 22  the  dregs  of  the  cup  of  my  fury ;  thou 
59.  18  he  will  repay,  fury  to  his  adversaries 
63.    3  for  I  will . .  trample  them  in  my  fury ;  and 
63.   5  therefore .  .my  fury,  it  upheld  me 
63.    6  I  will . .  make  them  drunk  in  my  fury,  and 
66.  15  to  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and  his 
Jer.    4.   4  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like  fire,  and 

6.  11  I  am  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord  ;  I- am 

7.  20  mine  anger  and  my  fury  shall  be  poured 
10.  25  Pour  out  thy  fury  upon  the  heathen  that 
21.  5  in  anger,  and  in  fury,  and  in  great  wrath 
21.  12  lest  my  fury  go  out  like  fire,  and  burn 
23. 19  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  is  gone  forth  in  f. 
25. 15  Take  the  wine  cup  of  this  fury  at  my 

30.  23  the  whirlwind,  .goeth  forth  with  fury 
32.  31  city  hath  been,  .a  provocation,  .of  my  fu. 

32.  37  whither  I  have  driven  them,  .in  my  fury 

33.  .5  of  men,  whom  I  have  slain,  .in  my  fury 
36.    7  for  great(is)  the  anger  and  the  firry  that 
42. 18  As.  .my  fury  hath  been  poured  forth 

42. 18  so  shall  my  fury  be  poured  forth  upon 
44.    6  my  fury  and  mine  anger  was  poured  for. 

Lam.  2.    4  he"  stood . .  he  poured  out  his  fury  like  fire 

4.  11  The  Lord  hath  accomplished  his  fury 
Eze.     5.  13  I  will  cause  my  fury  to  rest  upon  them 

5.  13  when  I  have  accomplished  my  fury  in 

5.  15  in  anger  and  in  fury  and  in  furious  rebu. 

6.  12  thus  will  I  accomplish  my  fury  upon 

7.  8  Now  will  I  shortly  pour  out  my  fury 

8. 18  Therefore  will  I  also  deal  in  fury  :  mine 
9.  8  in  thy  pouring  out  of  thy  fury  upon  Jer.? 
13.  13  rend  (it)  with  a  stormy  wind  in  my  fury 
13.  13  great  hailstones  in  (my)  fury,  to  consume 

14. 19  and  pour  out  my  fury  upon  it  in  blood 
16.  38  I  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and  jealo. 
16.  42  So  will  I  make  my  fury  toward  thee  to 

19.  12  she  was  plucked  up  in  fury,  she  was  cast 

20.  8  I  said,  I  will  pour  out  my  fury  upon 
20.  13,  21  I  said,  I  would  pour  out  my  fury 


GAAIi 


380 


GALATIA 


Eze.  20.  33  with  fury  paured  out,  will  I  rule  over 
20.  34  I  will  bring  you.  .with  fury  poured  out 
zi.  17  I  will  cause  my  fury  to  rest  :  I  the  LORD 
22.  20  so  will  I  gather  (you),  .in  my  fury,  aud  I 
22.  22  that  I  the  Lord  have  poured  out  my  fury 
24.    8  That  it  might  cause  fury  to  come  up  to 

24.  13  till  I  have  caused  my  fury  to  rest  upon 

25.  14  nccording  to  miue  anger  and.  .to  my  fury 
30.  15  I  will  pour  out  my  fury  upon  Sin,  the 

36.   6  I  have  spoken,  .iu  my  fury,  because  ye 
36.  18  I  poured  my  fury  upon  them  for  the  bio. 
38.  iS  it  shall  come  to  pass.,  my  fury  shall  come 
Dan.    8.    6  and  ran  unto  him  in  tile  fury  of  his  pow. 

9.  16  let.  .thy  fury  be  turned  away  from  thy 
Mie.    5. 15  in  anger  and  fury  upon  the  heathen 
Nan.   1.    6  his  fury  is  poured  out  like  fire,  and  the 
Zech.  8.    2  and  I  was  jealous  for  her  with  great  fury 
4.  Heat,  fierceness,  wrath,  .j'nrj  charon. 

Job   20.  23  shall  cast  the  fury  of  Ms  wrath  upon  him 


G 

'GA'-AL,  Sy?  rejection. 

A  son  of  Ebed  who  aided  the  Shecheniites  again6t 

Abimelech.     B.C.  1209. 

Judg.  9.  26  G.  the  son  of  Ebed  came  with  his  breth. 
9. 28  G.  the  son  of  Ebed  said,  Who  (is)  Abim. 
9.  30  when  Zebul.. heard  the  words  of  G.  the 
9.  31  Behold,  G. .  .and  his  brethren  be  come  to 
9. 35  And  G.  the  son  of  E.  went  out,  and  stood 
9.  36  And  when  G.  saw  the  people,  he  said 
9.  37. G.  spake  again  and  said,  See  there  come 
9.  39.  And  G.  went  out  before  the  men  of  She. 
9.  41  and  Zebul  thrust  outG.  and  his  brethren 

GA'-ASH,  c;v;  quaking. 

More  accurately  Mount  Gaash  in  the  district  of  Mount 
Ephraim.  On  the  N.  side  of  the  hill  was  Timnath-serach 
(or  cheres),  the  city  given  to  Joshua. 

Josh  24.  30  buried,  .on  the  north,  .of  the  hill  of  G. 

Judg.  2.    9  buried . .  on  the  north . .  of  the  hill  G. 

2  Sa.  23.  30  Benaiah . .  Hiddai  of  the  brooks  of  G. 

1  Ch.  11.  32  Hurai  of  the  brooks  of  G.,  Abiel  the  Ar. 

GA'-BA,  U23  height. 

A  Levitical  city  in  Benjamin  near  Raman,  five  miles  from 
Gofna  (now  called  Gifna),  towards  Neapolis..  It  was 
t!ie  N.  border  of  Judah,  as  Riminon  was  the  southern. 

Josh  iS.  24  C'hephar-haamnidnai,  and  Ophni,  and  G. 

Ezra   2.  26  The  children  of  Raman  and  G.,  six  bun. 

Nell.  7.  30  The  men  of  Raman  and  G.,  six  hundred 

cab'-bai,  *3?  ingaiherer. 

A  chief  among  the  Benjamites  after  the  return  from 

l  \  1 .-.      B.  C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    8  after  him  G.,Sallai,  nine  hundred  twenty 
GAB-BA'-THA,  TafifiaQa,  (from  Heb.),  elevated pi 'ace. 
1'jie  tribunal  or  place  of  judgment  in  Jerusalem,  called 
.  in  Greek  AidoaTpotTov,  the  "pavement." 

Johnig.  13  called.  .Pavement,  but  in  the  Hebrew,  G. 

GAB-RT/-EL,  ^13|,  ra&pt7}\  God  is  mighty. 

A  divine  messenger  sent  to  Daniel,  to  Mary,  and  to 

Zejharias. 

Dan.    8.  16  G.,  make  this  (man)  to  understand  the 

9.  21  the  man  G.,\vhom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision 

Luke  1.  19  I  am  G.,  that  stand  in  the  presence  of  G. 

i.  26  in  the  sixth  month  the  angel  G.  was  sent 

GAD,  13,  Yafi,  the  seer,  lot,  fortune. 

].. Jacob's  seventh  son,  firstborn  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid, 

and  uterine  brother  of  Asher.     B.C.  1749. 

Gen.  30.  11  troop  cometh  :  and  she  called  his  name  G. 
35.  26  sons  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  handmaid  ;  G.  and 
46.  i6.sons  of  G.;  Ziphion,  and  Haggi,  Shuni 
49.  19  G.,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him :  but  he 
Exod.  1.    4  Dan,  and  Naphtali,  G.,  and  Asher 
1  Ch.    5.  11  the  children  of  G.  dwelt  over  against  th. 
•1. The  tribe  that  sprang  from  Gad  and  the  territory  they 
inhabited. 

Num.  1.  14  Of  G.  ;  Eliasaph  the  son  of  Deuel 

1.  24  Of  the  children  of  G.,  by  their  genera. 

1.  25  of  the  tribe  of  G. .  .forty  and  five  thou. 

2.  14  tribe  of  G. .  .the  captain  of  the  sons  of  G. 
7.  42  son  of  Deuel,  prince  of  the  children  of  G. 

10.  20  over  the  host  of  the  tribe  of.  .G.  (was)  E. 
13.  15  Of  the  tribe  of  G.,  Geuel  the  son  of  Machi. 
26.  15  The  children  of  G.  after  their  families 
26.  18  These,  .the  families  of  the  children  of  G. 
32.    1  the  children  of  G.  had  a  very  great  mul. 
32.    2  The  children  of  G. .  .came  and  spake  unto 
32.    6  And  Moses  said  unto  the  children  of  G. 
32.  25  And  the  children  of  G. .  .spake  unto  M. 
32.  29  If  the  children  of  G. .  .will  pass  with  you 
32.  31  the  children  of  G. .  .answered,  saying,  As 
3?.  33  Moses  gave,  .to  the  children  of  G. .  .the 

32.  34  the  children  of  O.  built  Dibon,  and  Atar, 
34.  1 1  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  G.  according 

Deut  27.  13  Reuben,  G.,  and  Asher,  and  Zebulmi,  I'. 

33.  20  of  G. .  .Blessed  (be)  he  that  enlargeth  G. 
Josh.  4.  12  the  children  of  G. .  passed  over  armed 

13.  24  unto  the  tribe  of  G. .  .the  children  of  G. 
13.  28  This,  .inheritance  of  the  children  of  G. 
18.    7  G.,  and  Reuben,  and  half  the  tribe  of  M. 

20.  8  Ramoth  in  Gilead  out  of  the  tribe  of  G. 

21.  7  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gk,  and  out  of  the  tribe 

21.  38  out  nf  the  tribe  of  <;  ,  Ramoth  in  Gilead 

22.  9  children  of  G... returned,  and  departed 


Josh. 22.  10  children  of  G. .  .built  there  an  altar  by  J. 
22.  11  children  of  G. .  .built  an  altar  over  against 
22.  13  sent,  .to  the  children  of  G. .  .Phinehas 
22.  15  And  they  came  unto,  .the  children  of  G. 
22.  21  the  children  of  G. . .  said  unto  the  heads  of 
22.  25  ye  children  of  Reuben  and  children  of  G. 
22.  30  the  words  that  the  children . .  of  G. . .  spake 
22.  31  Phinehas.  .said  unto  the  children,  .of  G. 
22.  32  returned  from  the  children,  .of  G.,  out 
22.  33  to  destroy  the  land  wherein.  ,G.  dwelt 
22.  34  the  cluldreu  of  G.  called  the  altar  (Ed). 
1  Sa.  13.    7  the  Hebrews  went  over.,  to  the  land  of  G. 
2Sa.  24.    5  the  city,  .in  the  midst  of  the  river  of  G. 
1  Ch.    2.    2  and  Benjamin,  Naphtali,  G.,  and  Asher 
6.  63  out  of  the  tribe  of  G.,  and  out  of  the  tribe 
6.  80  out  of  the  tribe  of  G.;  Ramoth  in  Gilead 
12.  14  These,  .of  the  sons  of  G.,  captains  of  the 
Jer.  49.    1  why  (then)  doth  their  king  inherit  G. 
Eze.  48.  27  from  the  east  side  unto  the  west  side  G. 
48.  28  by  the  border  of  G.,  at  the  south  side 
48.  34  one  gate  of  G.,  one  gate  of  Asher,  one 
Rev.    7.    5  Of  the  tribe  of  G.  (were)  sealed  twelve 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of  Gad: 
Aroer,  Ataroth,  Atroth,  Shophan,  Beth-aram  or  Haran, 
Beth-nimrah,     Betonim,    Debir,     Dibon,    Jogbethah, 
Karkor,  Magdala,  Zaphon,  Minnith,   Peniel,  Ramoth- 
Gilead,  <fec. 

3.  A  prophet  who  joined  David  when  in  "  the  hold,"  and 
by  whose  advice  he  quitted  it  for  the  Forest  of  Hareth. 

1  Sa.  22.    5  And  the  prophet  G.  said  unto  David 

2  Sa.  24.  11  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto.  .G. 

24.  13  So  G.  came  to  David,  and  told  him,  and 
24.  14  David  said  unto  G.,  I  am  in  a  great  strait 
24.  18  G.  came  that  day  to  David,  and  said  unto 
24.  19  David,  according  to  the  saying  of  G.,  went 

1  Ch.21.    9  the  Lord  spake  unto  G.,  David's  seer 

21,  11  So  G.  came  to  David,  and  said  unto  him 
21. 13  David  said  unto  G.,  I  am  in  a  great  strait 
21.  18  the  angel  of  the  Lord  commanded  G.  to 

21.  19  And  David  went  up  at  the  saying  of  G. 
29.  29  written  in  the  book  of  G.  the  seer 

2  Ch.  29.  25  according  to  the  commandment  of.  .G» 

GAD  about,  to  — 

To  go  away  or  about,  ?]N  azal. 

Jer.     2.  36  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  ch. 

GA-DA-RE-NES,  Ta$apnvoi. 

The  people  of  Gadara,  the  capital  of  Penea ;  E.  of  the 
Jordan  opposite  Tiberias  and  Scythopolis  (now  called 
Om-keis)';  S.E.  from  S.  end  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias,  and 
near  the  river  Hieromax. 

Mark  5.    1  cameover.  .into  the  country  of  the  [G.] 
Luke  8.  26  they  arrived  at  the  country  of  the  [G.] 

8.  37  the  [G.]  round  about  besought  him  to  de. 

GAD'-DI,  na  belonging  to  fortune. 

Son  of  Susi,  and  a  chief  of  Manasseh,  sent  with  others 

to  spy  out  the  land.     B.C.  1490. 

Num  13.  11  Of  the  tribe  of  Joseph..  G.  the  son  of  Susi 

GAD-DI'-EL,  ^"na  Gad  is  fortune  bringer. 

Son  of  Sodi,  and  a  chief  of  Zebulun  sent  out  with  others 

to  spy  the  land.     B.C.  1490. 

Num  13.  10  Of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  G.  the  son  of  S. 

GA'-DI,  "i*  fortunate. 

Father  of  Menahem  who  killed  Shallum,  and  succeeded 
him  as  king  of  Israel.     B.C.  772. 

2  Ki.  15.  14  Menahem,  the  son  of  G.  went  up  fromT. 
15.  17  began  Menahem  the  son  of  G.  to  reign 

GAD-ITE  (the),  '"jan  haggadi. 
Patronymic  of  the  tribe  of  Gad. 

Deut.  3. 12  the  cities  thereof,  gave  I  unto,  .the  G. 

3.  16  unto  the  G.  I  gave  from  Gilead.  .unto  the 

4.  43  and  Ramoth  in  Gilead,  of  the  G.;  and 
29.   8  took  their  land,  and  gave,  .to  the  G. 

Josh.  1.  12  to  the  Reubenites,  and  to  the  G..  .spake 

1 2.  6  Lord  gave  it . .  a  possession  unto  the . .  G. 

13.  8  "With  whom,  .the  G.  have  received  their 

22.  1  Joshua  called  the  Reubenites,  and  the  G. 
2  Sa.  23.  36  the  son  of  Nathan  of  Zobah,  Bani  the  G. 
2  Ki.  10.  33  Jordan  eastward,  all  the  land  of.  .the  G. 
1  Ch.  5.  18  The  sons  of  Reuben,  and  the  G.,  and  half 

5.  26  he  carried  them  away.  even,  .the  G.,  and 
12.    8  of  theG.  there  separated  themselves  unto 
12.  37  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  of  the.  .G. 
26.  32  made  rulers  over  the  Reubenites,  the  G. 

GA'-HAM,  Dn3  blackness. 

A  son  of  Nahor  by  his  concubine  Reumah.    B.C.  i860. 

Gen.  22.  24  she  bare  also  Tebah,  and  G.,  andThahash 
GA'-HAR,  "1131  prostration,  concealment. 
One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  posterity  came  up  with 
Zembbabel  to  Jerusalem.    B.C.  447. 

Ezra   2.  47  children  of  Giddel,  the  children  of  G. 

Neh.   7.  49  children  of  Giddel.  the  children  of  G. 

GAIN  — 

l.DisJidnest  gain,  >>'-  bztsa. 

Judg  5.  19  then  fought  the  kings,  .they  took  nognin 
Job  22.  3  (is  it) gain  (to  him),  that  thou  makest  thy 
Prov.  1.  19  ways  of  every  one  that  is  greedy  of  gain 
15.  27  He  that  is  greedy  of  gain  troubleth  his 
Isa.  33.  15  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  oppressions 
56.  11  every  one  for  his  gain,  from  his  quarter 
Mic.    4.  13  I  will  consecrate  their  gain  unto  the  L. 

2.Price,  hire,  ~v~^  mechir. 

Dan.  1 1  -  ;  >  and  shall  divide  the  land  for  gain 


3. Increase,  fruit,  njK?39  tebuah. 

Prov.  3.  14  and  the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold 

4.  Work,  ipyaala.  ergasia. 

Acts  16.  16  brought  her  masters  much  gain  by  scoths. 
16.  19  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone 
19.  24  brought  no  small  gain  unto  the  craftsmen 

5. Gain,  teepSos  kerdos. 

Phil.    1.  21  to  me  to  live  (is)  Christ,  and  to  die  (is)  g. 
3.    7  But  what  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I 
6.A  providing,  getting,  Troptafios  porismos. 

1  Ti.    6.    5  supposing  that  gain  is  godliness  :  from 
6.    6  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain 
GAIN,  dishonest  — 
Dishonest  gain,  ysa  betsa. 

Eze.  22.  13  smitten  thine  hand  at  thy  dishonest  gain 
22.  27  to  destroy  souls,  to  get  dishonest  gain 

GAIN,  to  — 

l.To  gain  dishojiestly,  i'^3  batsa. 

Job     27.   8  what  (is)  the  hope,  .though  he  hath  gai. 
2.  To  gain,  buy,  ]2]  zeban. 

Dan.    2.    8  ye  would  gain  the  time,  because  ye  see 
Z.To  gain,  make  gain,  KepScuVaj  kerdaino. 

Matt  16.  26  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
18.  15  if  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained 
25.  17  he  that  (had  received)  two,  he  also  gained 
25.  20  behold,  I  have  gained.. five  talents  more 
25.  22  behold,  I  have  gained  two  other  talents 
Mark  8.  36  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
Luke.  9.  25  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  him. 
Aets  27.  21  and  to  have  gained  this  harm  and  loss 

1  Co.   9.  19  made  myself  servant,  .that  I  might  gain 

9.  20  became  as  a  Jew,  that  I  might  gain  the 
9/20  might  gain  them  that  are  under  the  law 
9.  21  I  might  gain  them  that  are  without  law 
9.  22  became  I  as  weak,  that  I  might  gain  the 

4.  To  do,  make,  ttoi€qj  poieo. 

Lukei9.  18  Lord,  thy  pouud  hath  gained  five  pounds 
5. To  work  toward,  irpoaepydCopai  prosergazomai. 

Lukeig.  16  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  ten  pounds 
GAIN,  to  get  — 
To  make  gain,  fcepSaiVw  kerdaino. 

Jas.     4.  13  continue,  .and  buy  and  sell,  and  get  gain 

GAIN  of,  to  make  a  — 

To  get  advantage  of,  Tr\cov€KTc<*}  pleonekteo. 

2  Co.  12.  17  Did  I  make  a  gain  of  you  by  any  of  them 

i2.  18  Did  Titus  make  again  of  you?  walked  we 

GAIN  greedily,  to  — 

To  gain  dishonestly,  yss  batsa,  3. 

Eze.    22. 12  thou  hast  greedily  gained,  .by  extortion 
GAIN  by  trading,  to  - — 
To  do  in  business,  5iaTrpay/u.arevo/xat  diapragmate. 

Luke  19.  15  how  much  every  man  had  gained  by  tra. 
GAINSAY,  to  — 
1.7*0  say  against,  avreiirov  anteipon. 

Luke  21.  15  shall  not  be  able  to  gainsay  nor  resist 
2.7*0  speak  over  against,  avriKtyoi  antilego. 

Rom  10.  21  unto  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people 

GAINSATER  — 

T<:>  speak  over  against,  avriKiyw  antilego. 

Titus  1.    9  to  exhort  and  to  convince  the  gainsayers 
GAINSAYING  — 
A  speech  over  against,  aurt\oyta  antilogia. 

Jude       11  and  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  Core 
GAINSAYING,  without  — 
Without  otyection,  avavTippnTws  anantirrhetds. 

Acts  10,  29  Therefore  came  I.  .without  gainsaying 
GAI'-TJS,  Tat'os  {from  Latin)  Cains. 

1.  A  native  of  Macedonia,  and  companion  of  Paul. 

Acts  19.  29  having  caught  G.  and  Aristarchus.  .they 

2.  A  man  of  Derbe  in  Lycaonia,  and  companion  of  Paul. 

Acts  20.    4  G.  of  Derbe,  and  Timotheus ;  and  of  Asia 

3.  A  Corinthian  whom  Paul  baptised. 

Rom  16.  23  G.  mine  host,  and  of  the  whole  church 
1  Co.    1.  14  that  I  baptised  none,  .but  Crispus  and  G. 

4.  Person  to  whom  John's  third  Epistle  was  written. 

3  John   1  The  elder  unto  the  well  beloved  G.,  whom 

GA'-LAL,  ^3  great,  rolling. 

1.  A  Levite  who  came  up  from  exile,,    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9. 15  Bakbakkar,  Heresh,  and  G.,  and  Mattan. 

2.  A  Levite  who  came  up  from  exile.     B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  16  Obadiah.  .son  of  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  G. 
Neh.  11.  17  Shammua,  the  son  of  G.,  the  son  of  Jed. 

GA-LA-TIA,  TaXaria. 

The  Gallia  of  the  East;  Roman  writers  call  its  inhabi- 
tants Galfi,  just  as  Greek  writers  call  the  people  of 
ancient  France  Gahttui.  Galatia,  the  Roman  province, 
was  the  central  region  of  the  peninsula  of  Asia  Minor, 
with  the  provinces  of  Asia  on  the  W.,  Cappadocia  on  the 
E.,  P.imphylia  and  Cilicia  on  the  S.,  and  Bithynia  and 
Pontus  on' the  N.  The  exact  limits  were  frequently 
changing. 

Acts  16.    6  had  gone  throughout,  .the  region  of  G. 
iS.  23  went  oveiMainthe  country  of  G.  and  Phr. 

1  Co.  16.    1  I  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of  G. 


GALATIANS 


381 


GARMENT 


i.   2  which  are  with  me,  unto  the  churches . 
4.  10  Crescens  to  G.,  Titus  uuto  Dalinatia 


Gal. 

2Ti.    ,. 

1  Pe.    1.    1  the  strangers  scattered  throughout.  .G. 

GA-LA-TI-ANS.  TaXarat.     Inhabitants  of  Galatia. 
Gal.     3.    1  O  foolish  G.,  who  hath  bewitched  you 

GALEANTJM  — 

tnilbanum,  a  Syrian  gum,  n^pn  chelbenah. 

Exodso.  34  Take  unto  thee  sweet  spices,  .galbanum 
GAL'-EED,  1X!?3  heap  of -witness. 
A  name  given  by  Jacob  to  the  heap  that  he  and  Laban 
made  on  Mount  Gileadas  an  evidence  of  the  covenant 
between  them. 

Gen.  31.  47  Jegar-sahadutha :  but  Jacob  called  it  G. 
31.  48  Therefore  was  the  name  of  it  called  G. 

GAL  I-LE-ANS,  Ta\i\a7ot.    Inhabitants  of  Galilee. 

Marki4.  70  for  thou  art  a  G.,  and  thy  speech  agreeth 

.  Lukei3,    1  There  were,  .some  that  told  him  of  the  G. 

13.  2  these  G.  were  sinners  above  all  the  G. 

22.  59  this,  .also  was  with  him  ;  for  he  is  a  G. 

23.  6  he  asked  whether  the  man  were  a  G. 
John' 4.  45  the  G.  received  him,  having  seen  all  the 
Acts   2.    7  Behold,  are  not  all.. which  speak  G.? 

GA-LI'-LEE,  ^barr,  rWfn,  TaKiKala,  the  circle.    ■ 
A  district  of  Naphtali ;  after  the  captivity  it  embraced 
all  Canaan  N.  of  Samaria  and  W.  of  the  Jordan,  and 
was  spoken  of  as  Upper  or  N".  and  Lower  or  S.  Galilee. 
Josh. 20.    7  they  appointed  Kedesh  in  G.  in  mount 
21.  32  Kedesh  in  G.  with  her  suburbs,  (to  be)  a 

1  Ki.  9. 11  gave  Hiram  twenty  cities  in  the  land  of  G. 

2  Ki.15.  29  Hazor,  and  Gilead,  and  G.,  all  the  land 

1  Ch.  6.  76  Kedesh  in  G.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Ua. 
Isa.     9.    1  beyond  Jordan,  in  G.  of  the  nations 
Matt.  2.  22  he  turned  aside  into  the  parts  of  G. 

3.  13  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  G.  to  Jordan  un. 
4. 12  when  Jesus  had  heard,  .he  departed  into  G. 
4-  15  (by)  the  way  of  the  sea.  .G.  of  the  Gentiles 

4.  18  Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea  of  G.,  saw  two 
4.  23  Jesus  went  about  all  G.,  teaching  in  their 
4.  25  there  followed  him.  .multitudes.,  from  G. 

15.  29  departed,  .and  came,  .unto  the  sea  of  G. 
17. 22  while  they  abode  in  G.,  Jesus  said  unto 

19.  1  Jesus  had  finished,  .he  departed  from  G. 
21. 11  This  is.  .the  prophet  of  Nazareth  of  G. 
26.  32  But.  .again,  I  will  go  before  you  unto  G 

26.  69  saying,  Thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  of  G. 

27.  55  women,  .which  followed  Jesus  from  G. 

28.  7  and,  behold,  he  goeth  before  you  into  G. 
2S.  10  go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  G. 
28. 16  the  eleven  disciples  went  away  into  G. 

Hark  1.    9  came  to  pass,  .that  Jesus  came  from.  ,G. 
1. 14  Jesus  came  into  G.,  preaching  the  gospel 
1.  16  Now  as  he  walked  by  the  sea  of  G.,  he 
1.  28  throughout  all  the  region  round  about  G. 

1.  39  preached  in.  .synagogues  throughout.  -G. 
3.    7  a  great  multitude  from  G.  followed  him 

6.  21  his  lords,  high  captains,  and  chief,  .of  G. 

7.  31  he  came  unto  the  sea  of  G.,  through  the 
9.  30  departed  thence,  and  passed  through  G. 

14.  28  I  am  risen,  I  will  go  before  you  into  G. 
15. 41  Who  also,  when  he  was  in  G.,  followed 

16.  7 tell. . disciples.. hegoethbeforeyouintoG. 
Luke  1. 16  Gabriel  was  sent  from  G.  unto  a  city  of  G. 

2.  4  Joseph  also  went  up  from  G.,  out  of  the 

2.  39  had  performed  allthings.  .returned  into G. 

3.  1  Herod  being  tetrarch  of  G.,  and  his  broth. 
4. 14  returned  in  the  power  of  the  spirit  into  G 

4.  31  came  down  to  Capernaum,  a  city  of  G. 

4.  44  And  he  preached  in  the  synagogues  of  G. 

5.  17  which  were  come  out  of  every  town  of  G. 

8.  26  the  Gadarenes,  which  is  over  against  G. 

17.  11  passed  through  the  midst  of  Sam.  and  G. 
23.  5  throughout  all  Jewry,  beginning  from  G. 
23.  6  When  Pilate  heard  of  G.,  he  asked  whet. 
23. 49  the  women  that  followed  him  from  G. 

23.  55  women  also,  which  came  with  him  from  G. 

24.  6  he  spake  unto  you  when  he  was  yet  in  G. ' 
John  1.  43  day  following  Jesus  would  go.  .into  G. 

2.    1  there  was  a  marriage  in  Cana  of  G. 
2. 11  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in.  .G. 
4.    3  He  left  Judea,  and  departed,  .into  G. 
4.  43  Now  after  two  days  he.  .went  into  G. 
4.  45  Then  when  he  was  come  into  G.,  the  Ga. 
4.  46  So  Jesus  came  again  into  Cana  of  G. 

4.  47  Jesus  was  come  out  of  Judea  into  G. 

4. 54  when  he  was  come  out  of  Judea  into  G. 

6.  1  Jesus  went  over  the  sea  of  G.,  which  is 

7.  1  After  these  things  Jesus  walked  in  G. 
7.   9  had  said  these  words,  .he  abode,  .in  G. 
7.  41  some  said,  Shall  Christ  come  out  of  G.? 
7.  52  Art  thou  also  of  G.?    Search,  and  look 
7.  52  for  out  of  G.  ariseth  no  prophet 

12.  21  Philip,  which  was  of  Bethsaida  of  G.,  and 
21.   2  Didymus,  and  Nathauael  of  Cana  in  G. 

Acts    1.  11  Ye  men  of  G.,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up 

5.  37  After  this  man  rose  up  Judas  of  G. 

9.  31  the  churches  rest  throughout  all.  .G.  and 
10.  37  That  word,  (I  say),  ye  know,  .from  G. 

13.  31  which  came  up  with  him  from  G.  to  Jer. 
GALL  — 

X.Gall,  bitter  thing,  bitterness,  rrrip  merorah. 
Job  20.  14  turned,  (it  is)  the  gall  of  asps  within  him 

20.  25  glittering  sword  cometh  out  of  his  gall 

2.  Gall,  bladder,  rrnp  mererah. 

Job    16. 13  he  poureth  out  my  gall  upon  the  ground 
Z.Venom,  a  poisonous  herb,  with  rosh. 

Deut  29. 18  a  root  that  beareth  gall  and  wormwood 


Psa.  69.  21  They  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  meat ;  and 
Jer.     8.  14  God  bath,  .given  us  water  of  gall  to  dri. 
9.  15  and  give  them  water  of  gall  to  drink 
23.  15  and  make  them  drink  the  water  of  gall 
Lam.  3.    5  and  compassed  (me)  with  gall  and  travail 
3.  19  Remembering,  .the  wormwood  and  the  g. 
Amos  6.  12  for  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall 

4.  Gall,  venom,  irn  rosh. 

Deut  32.  32  their  grapes  (are)  grapes  of  gall,  their  clu. 
o.Gall,  bile,  anything  bitter,  xo^h  chole. 

Matt  27.  34  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  with  gall :  and 

Acts   8.  23  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
GALLANT  — 
Honourable,  glorious,  "VtiA  addir. 

Isa.   33.  21  neither  shall  gallant  ship  pass  thereby 

GALLERY  — 

I. Gallery,  p>ortico,  pwxattuq. 

Eze.  41.  15  and  the  galleries  thereof  on  the  one  side 

2.  Gallery,  portico,  PV3N  attiq. 

Eze.  41.  16  the  galleries  round  about  on  their  three 
42.  3  gallery  against  gallery  in  three  (stories) 
42.    5  for  the  galleries  were  higher  than  these 

Z.Flowings,  ringlet,  tarn  rahat. 

Song  7.    5  the  king  (is)  held  in  the  galleries 

GALLEY  — 

Ship,  navy,  UN  oni. 

Isa.    33.  21  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars,  ue. 

GAL'-LTM,  D"W  fountains  or  heaps. 
A  city  of  Benjamin,  N.  of  Jerusalem. 

1  Sa.  25.  44  Phalti  the  son  of  Laish,  which,  .of  G. 

Isa.    10.  30  Lift  up  thy  voice,  0  daughter  of  G. 

GAL-LI'-O,  TaWlwv. 

Seneca's  younger  brother,  a  careless  Roman  proconsul 

of  Achaia.    His  full  name  was  Junius  Annceus  Gallio. 

There  is  no  authority  for  his  being  put  to  death  by 

Nero. 

Acts  18. 12  And  when  G.  was  the  deputy  of  Achaia 
18. 14  G.  said  unto  the  Jews,  If  it  were  a  matter 
18. 17  And  G.  cared  for  none  of  those  things 

GALLOWS  — 

Wood,  tree,  j'y  ets. 

Esth.  5.  14  Let  a  gallows  be  made  of  fifty  cubits  high 
5. 14  and  he  caused  the  gallows  to  be  made 

6.  4  to  hang  Mordecai  on  the  gallows  that  he 

7.  9  Behold  also,  the  gallows,  fifty  cubits  high 

7.  10  So  they  hanged  Haman  on  the  gallows 

8.  7  and  him  they  have  hanged  upon  the  gal. 

9.  13  Hainan's,  .sons  be  hanged  upon  the  gall. 
9.  25  he  and  his  sons . .  be  hanged  on  the  gallows 

GA-HA-LI'-EL,  Sn'^23  Tafxa\i4}\  God  is  recompenser. 

1.  A  chief  of  Manasseh  chosen  to  aid  in  taking  the  cen- 
sus in  the  wilderness.     B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1. 10  of  Manasseh ;  G.  the  son  of  Pedahzur 

2.  20  the  captain,  .of  Manasseh.  .G.  the  son  of 

7.  54  On  the  eighth  day.  .G.  the  son  of  Pedah. 

7.  59  this.,  the  offering  of  G.  the  son  of  Pedah. 

10.  23  And  over  the  host.  .G.  the  son. of  Pedah. 

2.  A  celebrated  teacher  among  the  Jews. 

Acts    5.  34  a  Pharisee,  named  G.,  a  doctor  of  the  law 
22.   3  brought  up  in  this  city  at  the  feet  of  G. 

GAM-MA'-DIM,  D"n3. 

This  word  occurs  only  once,  and  has  been  said  to  mean 
"pigmies,  warriors,  giants,  Cappadocians,"  &c.  The 
TA'X,  has  "guards  or  watchmen." 

Eze.  27. 11  the  G.  were  in  thy  towers  :  they  hanged 
GA\MTJL,  ^£3  weaned,  matured. 
A  priest,  the  leader  of  the  twenty  second  course  in  the 
service  of  the  Sanctuary.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  24.  17  to  Jachin,  the  two  and  twentieth  to  G. 
GAP  — 
Breach,  fis  perets. 

Eze.  13.  5  Ye  have  not  gone  up  into  the  gaps,  neit. 
22.  30  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  land 

GAPE,  to  — 

\.To  open,  gape,  y^ paar. 

Job    16.  10  They  have  gaped  upon  me  with  their  mo. 
2.7"o  open  wide,  gape,  n$s  pat$ah. 

Psa.  22. 13  They  gaped  upon  me  (with)  their  moutha 
GARDEN  — 
I.Garden,  j3  gan. 

Gen.    2.    8  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden 
2.    9  tree  of  life,  .in  the  midst  of  the  garden 
2. 10  And  a  river  went  out.  .to  water  the  gar. 
2.  15  and  put  him  into  the  garden  of  Eden 

2.  16  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest 

3.  1  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden? 
3.  2  We  may  eat.  .of  the  trees  of  the  garden 
3.  3  tree  which  (is)  in  the  midst  of  the  garden 
3.  8  heard,  .the  Lord  God  walking  in  the  ga. 
3.  8  hid.  .amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden 

3.  10  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden 
3.  23  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of  Eden 
3.  24  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  E. 
13. 10  well  watered,  .as  the  garden  of  the  Lobd 
Deut  11.  10  and  wateredst  (it),  .as  a  garden  of  herbs 

1  Ki.  21.    2  that  I  may  have  it  for  a  garden  of  herbs 

2  Ki    9.  27  he  fled  by  the  way  of  the  garden  house 

21.  18  garden  of  his  own  house,  in  the  garden 
21.  26  in  his  sepulchre  in  the  garden  of  Uzz 


2  Ki.25. 

Neb.   3. 

Song  4. 
4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 


Isa.    51. 

Jer.  31. 

39- 

52' 
Lam.  2. 

Eze.  28. 
31- 
31- 
3r- 
36. 

Joel    2. 

'I.Garden, 

Num  24. 

Job     8. 

Eccl.  2. 

Isa.     1. 

1. 

61. 

°5- 

66. 

Jer.  29. 

Ames  4. 

9- 


4  the  gate . .  which  (is)  by  the  king's  garden 
15  of  the  pool  of  Siloah  by  the  king's  garden 

12  A  garden  inclosed  (is)  my  sister,  (my)  sp. 

15  A  fountain  of  gardens,  a  well  of.  .waters 

16  Awake,  0  north  wind,  .blow  upon  my  g. 
16  Let  my  beloved  come  into  his  garden,  and 

1  I  am  come  into  my  garden,  my  sister,  (my) 

2  My  beloved  is  gone  down  into  his  garden 

2  to  feed  in  the  gardens,  .to  gather  lilies 

13  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the 

3  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the  Loki> 
11  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  garden,  and 
12'  their  soul  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden 

4  went,  .by  the  way  of  the  king's  garden 

7  the  gate,  which  (was)  by  the  king's  gar. 
6  his  tabernacle,  as  (if  it  were  of)  a  garden 

13  Thou  hast  been  inJEden  the  garden  of  G. 

8  The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could 

5  nor  any  tree  in  the  garden  of  God  was  li. 

9  the  trees,  .in  the  garden  of  God,  envied 
35  land,  .is  become  like  the  garden  of  Eden 

3  the  land  (is)  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before 

.  n|3  gannali. 

6  spread  forth,  as  gardens  by  the  river's  si. 

16  his  branch  shooteth  forth  in  his  garden 
5  I  made  me  gardens  and  orchards,  and.  I 

29  ye  shall  be  confounded  for  the  gardens 

30  and  as  a- garden  that  hath  no  water 

11  as  the  garden  causeth  the  things  that  are 
3  Apeople.  .thatsacrificethin  gardens,  and 

17  purify  themselves  in  the  gardens  behind 
5,  28  plant  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of 

9  when  your  gardens  and  your  vineyards 

14  they  shall  also  make  gardens,  and  eat  the 


Z.Garden,  H33  ginnah. 

.Esth.  1.    5  court  of  the  garden  of  the  king's  palace 

7.    7  the  king,  .(went)  into  the  palace  garden 

7.    8  the  king  returned  out  of  the  palace  gar. 

Song   6.  11  I  went  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts  to 

^.Garden,  orchard,  plantation,  ttrfn-os  kepos. 

Luke  13.  19  which  a  man  took,  and  cast  into  his  gar. 
John  18.    1  over  the  brook  Cedron,  where  was  a  gar. 

18.  26  Did  I  not  seethee  in  the  garden  with  him? 

19.  41  there  was  a  garden ;  and  in  the  garden  a 

GARDENER  — 

Gardener,  tcqirovpos  hepouros. 

John  20.  15  She,  supposing  him  to  be  the  gardener 

GA'-REB,  3"ia  reviler,  despiser. 

l.One  of  David's  worthies,  the  son  of  Jether,  or  an 

inhabitant  of  Jathir,  in  the  mountainous  district  of 

Judah.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  38  Ira  an  Ithrite,  G.  an  Ithrite 
1  Ch.n.  40  Ira  an  Ithrite,- G.  the  Ithrite 

2.  A  hill  near  Jerusalem. 

Jer.   31.  39  go  forth  over  against  it  upon  the  hill  G. 
GARLAND  — 
Garland,  wreath,  chaplet,  o-r4fj.fj.a  stemma. 

Acts  14. 13  brought  oxeu  and  garlands  unto  the  ga. 
GARLICK  — 
Garlick,  civ  shum. 

Nunin.    5  the  leeks,  and  the  onions,  and  the  garli. 

GARMENT — 

1.  Honourable,  glorious  mantle,  rrriN  addereth. 

Gen.  25.  25  came  out  red,  all  over  like  an  hairy  gar. 
Josh.  7.  21  When  I  saw.  .a  goodly  Babylonish  gar. 

7.  24  silver,  and  the  garment,  and  the  wedge 
Zech  13.    4  neither  shall  they  wear  a  rough  garment 

2.  Cloak,  garment,  covering,  "135  beged. 

Gen.  38.  14  she  pat  her  widow's  garments  off  from 

38.  19  put  on  the  garments  of  her  widowhood 

39.  12  And  she  caught  him  by  his  garment,  sa. 
39.  12  and  he  left  his  garment  in  her  hand,  and 
39. 13  when  she  saw  that  he  had  left  his  garni. 
39.  15  he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled 
39.  16  she  laid  up  his  garment  by  her  until  his 
39.  18  he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled  out 

Exod28.  2  thou  shalt  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron 
28.  3  that  they  may  make  Aaron's  garments  to 
28.    4  these,  .the  garments  which  they  shall 

28.  4  they  shall  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron 

29.  5  thou  shalt  take  the  garments,  and  put 
29.  21  take.,  oil,  and  sprinkle. .  upon  his  gni  men 
29.  21  upon  the  garments  of  his  sons  with  him 
29.  21  he  shall  be  hallowed,  and  his  garments 
29.  21  his  sons,  and  his  sons' garments  with  him 
29.  29  the  holy  garments  of  Aaron  shall  be  his 
31.  10  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 
31.  10  the  garments  of  his  sons,  to  minister  in 
35.  19  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 
35.  19  the  garments  of  his  sons,  to  minister  in 
35.  21  for  all  his  service,  and  for  the  holy  garni. 
3g.    1  and  made  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron 
39.  41  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 

39.  41  and  his  sons'  garments,  to  minister  in 

40.  13  thou  shalt  put  upon  Aaron  the  holy  gar. 
Lev,    6.  11  And  he  shall  put  off  his  garments 

6.  11  and  put  on  other  garments,  and  carry  fo. 
6.  27  of  the  blood  thereof  upon  any  garment 

8.  2  the  garments,  and  the  anointing  oil,  and 
8.  30  sprinkled  (it)  upon  Aaron .  .upon  his  gar. 
S.  30  and  upon  his  sons'  garments  with  him 

8.  30  and  sanctified  Aaron,  (and)  his  garments 
8.  30  hissons,  and  his  sons'  garments  with  him 
13.  47  The  garment  also  that  the  plague  of  lep. 


GARMENT 


382 


GATE 


Lev.  13.  47  a  woollen  garment,  or  a  linen  garment 
13.  49  if  the  plague  be*,  .reddish  in  the  garment 
13.  51  if  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  garment 
13.  52  He  shall  therefore  burn  that  garment 
13.  53  the  plague  be  not  spread  iu  the  garment 
13.  56  then  he  shall  rend  it  out  of  the  garment 
13.  57  And  if  it  appear  still  in  the  garment 
13.  58  And  the  garment,  either  warp  or  woof 

13.  59  leprosy  in  a  garment  of  woollen  or  linen 

14.  55  for  the  leprosy  of  a  garment,  and  of  a 

15.  17  every  garment,  and  every  skin,  whereon 

16.  4  these  (are)  holy  garments ;  therefore  shall 
16.  23  Aarou.  .shall  put  off  the  linen  garments 
16.  24  and  put  on  his  garments,  and  come  forth 
16.  32  put  on  the  linen  clothes,  .the  holy  gar. 

19.  19  neither  shall  a  garment  mingled  of  linen 
21.  10  that  is  consecrated  to  put  on  the  garments 

Num  15.  38  fringes  in  the  borders  of  their  garments 

20.  26  strip  Aaron  of  liis  garments,  and  put 
20.  28  Moses  stripped  Aaron  of  his  garments 

Judy  14.  12  I  will  give  you.  .thirty  change  of  garments 
14.  23  shall  ye  give,  .thirty  change  of  garments 

2  Sa.  13.  31  Then  the  king  arose,  and  tare  his  gar. 

2Ki.    5.  22  give  them,  I  pray,  .two  changes  of  gar. 
5.  23  two  bags,  with  t\Vo  changes  of  garments 
5.  26  (Is  it)  a  time  to  receive  money,  and .  .gar. 
7.  15  all  the  way  (was)  full  of  garments  and 
9. 13  they  hasted,  and  took  every  man  his  gar. 
25.  29  And  changed  his  prison  garments:  and 

Ezra   9.    3  I* rent  my  garment  and  my  mantle,  and 
9.    5  having  rent  my  garment  and  my  mantle 

Job   13.  28  consumeth,  as  a  garment  that  is  moth-ea. 

37. 17  How  thy  garments  (are)  warm,  when  he 
Psa.  22.  iS  They  part  my  garments  among  them,  and 

45.    8  All  thy  garments,  .of  myrrh,  and  aloes 
102.  26  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment 
109.  19  Let  it  be  unto  him  as  the  garment 
Prov  20.  16  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  (for)  a 

25.  20  (As)  he  that  taketh  away  a  garment  in 

27. 13  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  for  a 
Eccl.  9.    8  Let  thy  garments  be  always  white;  and 
Isa.   50.    9  lo,  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  a  garment 

51.    6  the  earth  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment 

51.  8  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a  garni. 

52.  1  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  Jem. 
59.  6  Their  webs  shall  not  become  garments 
59.  17  he  put  on  the  garments  of  vengeance 
61.  10  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salva. 
63.  1  cometh.  .with  dyed  garments  from  Bo.? 
63.  2  thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in 
63.    3  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  gar.  % 

Jer.  36.  24  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  rent  their  gar. 
43. 12  as  a  shepherd  putteth  on  his  garment 
52.  33  And  changed  his  prison  garments  :  and 

Eze.  16.  16  of  thy  garments  thou  didst  take,  and 

16. 18  tookest  thy  broidered  garments,  and 
18.    7,  16  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  gar. 

26. 16  princes,  .put  off  their  broidered  garments 

42. 14  but  there  they  shall  lay  their  garments 
42. 14  and  shall  put  on  other  garments,  and 

44. 17  they  shall  be  clothed  with  linen  garments 

44. 19  they  shall  put  off  their  garments  wherein 
44. 19  and  they  shall  put  on  other  garmeuts 
44.  19  not  sanctify  the  people  with  their  garni. 

Joel    2.  13  rend  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments 

Hag.   2.  i2  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his  gar. 

Zech.  3.    3  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments 

3.    4  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  hini 

3.    5  So  they,  .clothed  him  with  garments  • 

3.  A  coat,  rurD,  nir\?  kethoneth,  huttoneth. 

2  Sa.  13.  18  And  (she  had)  a  garment  of  divers  colours 

13. 19  and  rent  her  garment  of  divers  colours 
Ezi'a  2.  69  Theygave.  .one  hundred  priests' garments 
Neh.   7.  70  five  hundred  and  thirty  priests'  garments 
7.  72  threescore  and  seven  priests'  garments 

LClotMng,  ts>n^  lebush. 

Gen.  49.  11  he  washed  his  garments  in  wine,  and  his 
Job   30.  18  is  my  garment  changed  :  it  bin.de th  me 

38.    9  When  I  made  the  cloud  the  garment  the. 

38.  14  It  is  turned,  .and  they  stand  as  a  garment 

41.  13  Who  can  discover  the  face  of  his  garment? 
Psa.  69.  11  I  made  sackcloth  also  my  garment ;  and 

104.    6  Thou  coveredst  it.  .as  (with)  a  garment 
Lam.  4.  14  that  men  could  not  touch  their  garments 
Mai.    2.  16  for  (one)  covereth  violence  with  his  gar. 

5.  Clothing,  &;u^>  Uhuak. 

Dan.    3.  2t  bound  in.  .their  hats,  and  their,  .garme. 
7.    9  whose  garment,  .white  as  snow,  and  the 

Q.Long  robe,  "i£  mad. 

Lev.    6. 10  the  priest  shall  put  on  his  linen  garment 

1  Sa.  18.    4  stripped  himself  of.  .his  garments,  even  to 

2  Sa.  20.    8  And  Joab's  garment  that  he  had  put  on 
Psa.109. 18  with  cursing  like  as  with  his  garment 

I.Long  robe,  nfp  middah. 

Psa.  133.    2  that  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  gar. 

8.  Long  robe,  ns  niedev. 

2  Sa.  10.    4  and  cut  off  their  garments  in  the  middle 
1  Ch.io.    4  and  cut  off  their  garments  in  the  midst 

^Covering,  iwapprng,  noj^g  maaieh. 

Isa.   61.    3  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  he 
10.  Oh/,  ,■  garment,  no^b*  safomh. 

Josh.  9.    5  old  shoes*. '.and  old  garments  upon  them 

9.  13  our  garments  and  our  shoes  are  become' 

1  Ki.To.  25  And  they  brought .  .garments,  and  armour 

11.  29  he  had  clad  himself  with  a  new  garment 

11.  30  And  Ahijah  caught  the  new  varment  that 

rsa.104.    2  Who  coverest  (thyself)  with  light  as..ag. 


Song  4.  11  the  smell  of  thy  garments  (is)  like  the 
Mic.    2.    8  ye  pull  off  the  robe  with  the  garment 

11. Outer  garment,  raiment,  nbnip  simlah. 

Gen.   9,  23  And  Shem  and  Japheth  took  a  garment 

-  35.  2  and  be  clean,  and  change  your  garments 
Deut  22.  5  neither,  .a  man  put  on  a  woman's  garment 
Judg.  8.  25  they  spread  a  garment,  and  did  cast  ther. 
Prov  30.  4  who  hath  bound  the  waters  in  a  garment? 
Isa.     9.    5  with . .  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood 

12.  Covering,  dress,  t\"&  shith. 

Psa.  73.    6  violence  covereth  them  (as)  a  garment 

13.  Garment,  VP0  takrik. 

Esth.  8.  15  with  a  garment  of  fine  linen  and  purple 
XL  Any  thing  put  on,  ei/dv/xa  enduma. 

Matt22.  11  which  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment 

22.  12  earnest  thou,  .not  having  a  wedding  gar.? 

15.  Clothing,  ecdno-ts  esthesis. 

Luke24.   4  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining  gar. 

16.  Garment,  tfidriov  himation. 

Matt.  9. 16  a  piece  of  new  cloth  unto  an  old  garment 
9. 16  for  that,  .put  in.  .taketh  from  the  gann. 
9.  20  came,  .and  touched  the  hem  of  his  garm. 
9.  21  If  I  may  but  touch  Ms  garment,  I  shall 

14.  36  might  only  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment 
21.    8  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their  gar. 

23.  5  and  enlarge  the  borders  [of  their  garme.] 
27-  35  [ailt*  parted  his  garments',  casting  lots] 
27.  35  [They  parted  my  garments  among  them] 

Mark  2.  21  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  garment 

5.  27  came,  .behind,  and  touched  his  garment 

6.  56  touch  if  it  were  but  the  border  of  his  g. 

10.  50  And  he,  casting  away  his  garment,  rose 

11.  7  brought  the  colt,  .and  cast  their  garments 
iij    8  many  spread  their  garments  in  the  way 
13.  16  not  turn  back,  .to  take  up  his  garment 

15.  24  they  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots 
Luke  5.  36  No  man  putteth  apiece  of  a  new  garment 

8.  44  Came,  .and  touched  the  border  of  his  g. 
19.  35  they  cast  their  garments  upon  the  colt 
•  22.  36  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  one 
John  13.   4  He  riseth . .  and  laid  aside  his  garment 

13.  12  So  after  he  had.  .taken  his  garments,  and 
19.  23  Then  the  soldiers . .  took  his  garments,  and 

Acts   9.  39  showing  the  coats  and  garments  which  D. 

12.  8  Cast  thy  garment  about  thee,  and  follow 
Heb.  1.  11  and  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  gar. 
Jas.  5.  2  Your  riches  are  corrupted,  and  your  gar.j 
Rev.    3.    4  a  few.  .which  have  not  defiled  their  gar. 

16. 15  Blessed  (is)  he  that,  .keepeth  his  garme. 

17. Coat,  inner  vest,  xLr(*>v  chiton. 

Jude       23  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the 

GARMENT  down  to  the  foot  — 
Joining  or  touching  the  feet,  iro^p7)s  poderes. 
Rev.    1. 13  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot 

GARMENT,  long  — 

Long  robe,  stole,  txroki}  stole. 

Marki6.    5  young  man.  .clothed  in  a  long  white  gar. 
GARMENT  of  divers  sorts  — 
-1  mixed  cloth,  up&E-'  shaatnez. 

Deut  22. 11  shalt  not  wear  a  garment  of  divers  sorts 

GAR-MITE,  \p~12n  the  strong  or  bony  one. 
Patronymic  of  Keilah,  son  of  Nahum  of  the  tribe  Of 
Judah  through  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephuneh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 19  father  of  Keilah  the  G.,  and  Eshtemoa 

GARNER  — 

1.  Treasury,  "i^'in  otsar. 

Joel    1.  17  the  garners  are  laid  desolate,  the  bams 

2.Garner,  lip  mezev. 

Psa.  144. 13  our  garners,  .full,  affording  all  manner  of 

3. Barn,  repository,  airoOJita)  apotheke. 

Matt.  3.  12  and  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner 
Luke  3.  17  and  will  gather  the  wheat  into  Ins  garner 

GARNISH,  to  — 

l.To  overlay,  cover,  nsy  tsaphah,  3. 

2  Ch.  3.    6  And  he  garnished  the  house  with  precious 
2. Splendour  JTJSP  shiphroh. 

Job  26. 13  By  his  spirit  he  hath  garnished  the  heav. 

3. To  set  in  order,  adorn,  beautify,  ko<t/x4'co  kosmeo. 

Matt  12.  44  he  findetlr(it)  empty,  swept,  and  garnish. 

'■  23.  29  garnish  the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous 
Luken.  25  when  he  cometh,  he  flndeth  (it),  .garnis. 
Rev.  21.  19  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious 

GARRISON  — 

1. Station,  garrison,  3$3  malstsab. 

1  Sa.  13.  23  And  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines  went 

1  j.    1  let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines'  garrison 

14.  4  to  go  over  unto  the  Philistines'  garrison 
14.  6  let  us  go  over  unto  the  garrison  of  these 
14.  11  discovered  themselves  unto  the  garrison 
14.  15  the  garrison,  and  the  spoilers,  they  also 

2  Sa.  23. 14  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines  (was)  then 

2. Station,  n^yo  matstsdbah. 

1  Sa.  14.  12  And  the  men  of  the  garrison  answered 
3. Station,  n^sa  matstscbah. 

Eze.  26.  11  thy  strong  garrisons  shall  go  down  to  the 
i. Station,  garrison,  a^j"  netsib, 

1  Sa.io.    5  where  (is)  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines 

13.  3  And  Jonathan  smote  the  garrison  of  the 


iSa.  i 
2  Sa. 

1  Ch.i 

2  Ch.17. 


4  heard  say.  .Saul  had  smitten  a  garrison 
6  Then  David  put  garrisons  iu  Syria  of  D. 
14  garrisons  in.  .all  Edom  put  he  garrisons 
16  the  Philistines'  garrison  was  (then)  at 
13  he  put  garrisons  in  Edom ;  and  all  the  E. 
2  and  set  garrisons  in  the  land  of  Judah 


GARRISON,  to  keep  with  a — 

To  keep  watch  or  guard,  tppovpica  phroureo. 

2  Co.  11.  32  the  governor.,  kept  the  city,  .with  a  garr. 

GASH'-MTT,  IDE'S  corporealness. 

An  influential  Samaritan  in  Nehemiah's  time.     Perhaps 

the  same  as  Geshem.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.    6.    6  It  is  reported  among  the  heathen,  and  G. 

GA'-TAM,  DPiya  burnt  valley. 

Fourth  son  of'Eliphaz  son  of  Esau.     B.C.  1680. 

Gen.  36.  11  Teman,  Omar,  Zepho,  and  G.,  and  Kenaz 

36.  16  Duke  Korah,  duke  G.,  (and)  duke  Ama. 
1  Ch.  1.  36  Teman,  and  Omar,  Zephi,  and  G.,  Kenaz 

GATE  — 

I.Door,  nrj  deleth. 

Deut.  3.  5  these  cities,  .fenced  with  high  vails,  gates 
Josh.  6.  26  in  his  youngest . .  shall  he  set  up  the  gates 
1  Sa.  23.    7  by  entering  into  a  town  that  hath  gates 

1  Ki.  16.  34  set  up  the  gates  thereof  in  his  youngest 

2  Ch.  8.    5  fenced  cities,  with  walls,  gates,  and  bars 

14.    7  make about(them)walls,andtowers, gates 
Neh.  13.  19  I  commanded  that  the  gates  should  be 
Psa.  107.  1 5  For  he  hath  broken  the  gates  of  brass,  and 
Prov.  8.  34  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at 
Isa.  45.    2  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass 
Jer.  49.  31  neither  gates  nor  bars,(which)d  well  alone 
Eze.  26.    2  Aha !  she  is  broken,  .the  gates  of  the  pe. 

38. 11  allot  them,  .having  neither  bars  nor  gates 

2.  Threshold,  *]p  saph. 

1  Ch.  9. 19  keepers  of  the  gates  of  the  tabernacle" 
9.  22  All.  .chosen  to  be  porters  in  the  gates 

Z.Opening,  nre  pethach. 

1  Ki.  17. 10  And  when  he  came  to  the  gate  of  the  city 
1  Ch.19.  9  put  the  battle  in  array  before  the  gate  of 
Esth.  5.  1  sat.  .over  against  the  gate  of  the  house 
Prov.17.  19  he  that  exalteth  his  gate  seeketh  destru. 
Song  7.  13  at  our  gates  (are)  all  manner  of.  pleasant 
Isa.     3.  26  And  her  gates  shall  lament  and  mourn 

13.  2  that  they  may  go  into  the  gates  of  the 

4.  Gate,  ny#  shaar. 

Gen.  19.    1  and  Lot  sat  in  the  gate  of  Sodom :  and 
22. 17  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  ene. 
23.  10  of  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city 

23.  18  before  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his 

24.  60  let  thy  seed  possess  the  gate  of  those 

28.  17  How  dreadful,  .this  (is)  the  gate  of  heaven 
34.  20  came  unto  the  gate  of  their  city,  and  com. 
34.  24  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  his  city 
Exod2o.  10  nor  thy  stranger  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 

27.  16  for  the  gate  of  the  court,  .an  hanging  of 
32.  26  Moses  stood  in  the  gate  of  the  camp,  and 
32.  27  go  in  and  out  from  gate  to'gate  throughout 
38.  15  Aud  for  the  other  side  of  the  court  gate 
38.  18  And  the  hanging  for  the  gate  of  the  court 

38.  31  the  sockets  of  the  court  gate,  and  all  the 

39.  40  the  hanging  for  the  court  gate,  his  cords 

40.  8  hang  up  the  hanging  at  the  court  gate 

.  40.  33  and  set  up  the  hanging  of  the  court  gate 
Num.  4.  26  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  gate  of 
Deut.  5.  14  nor  thy  stranger  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 

6.  9  And  thou  shalt  write  them . .  on  thy  gates 

11.  20  And  thou  shalt  write  them .  .upon  thy  g. 

12.  12  and  the  Levite  that  (is)  within  your  gates 
12.  15  mayest  kill  and  eat  flesh  in  all  thy  gates 

12. 17  Thou  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  gates  the 
12.  18  and  the  Levite  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 
12.  21  thou  shalt  eat  in  thy  gates  whatsoever  thy 

14.  21  unto  the  stranger  that  (is)  in  thy  gates 
14.  27  And  the  Levite  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 
14.  28  tithe,  .and  shalt  lay(it)  up  within  thy  gates 

14.  29  which  (are)  within  thy  gates,  shall  come 

15.  7  of  thy  brethren  within  any  of  thy  gates 

15.  22  Thou  shalt  eat  it  within  thy  gates :  the 

16.  5  within  any  of  thy  gates,  which  the  Lord 
16. 11  and  the  Levite  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 

16.  i4thefatherless..that(are)within  thy  gates 

16. 18  officers  shalt  thou  make,  .in  all  thy  gates 

17.  2  within  any  of  thy  gates  which  the  Lord 
17.    5  Then  shalt  thou  bring,  .unto  thy  gates 

17.  8  matters  of  controversy  within  thy  gates 

18.  6-if  a  Levite  come  from  any  of  thy  gates 

21.  19  bring  him  out.  .unto  the  gate  of  his  place 

22.  15  unto  the  elders  of  the  city  in  the  gate 

22.  24  bring  them,  .unto  the  gate  of  that  city 

23.  16  which  he  shall  choose  iu  one  of  thy  gates 

24.  14  strangers,  .in  thy  land  within  thy  gates 

25.  7  let  his  brother's  wife  go  up  to  the  gate 

26.  12  that  they  may  eat  within  thy  gates,  and 

28.  52,  52  he  shall  besiege  thee  in  all  thy  gates 
28.  55  enemies  shall  distress  thee  in  all  thy  ga. 
28.  57  enemy  shall  distress  thee  in  thy  gates 
31.  12  and  thy  stranger  that  (is)  within  thy  gat. 

Josh.  2.    5  (about  the  time)  of  shutting  of  the  gate 
2.   7  they,  .were  gone  out,  they  shut  the  gate 

7.  5  chased  them,  .before  the  gate,  .unto She. 
S.  29  cast  it  at  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the 

20.    4  at  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the  city 
Judg.  5.    8  chose  new  gods  ;  then  (was)  war  in  theg. 
5.  1 1  the  people  of  the  Lord  go  down  to  the  g. 
9.  35  in  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the  city 
9. 40  chased  him.  .unto  the  entering  of  the  ga. 


G-ATE 


383 


G-ATH 


Judg.  q.  44  stood  in  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the 

16.    2  laid  wait  for  him  all  night  in  the  gate  of 

id.    3  Samson . .  took  the  doors  of  the  gate  of 

'      iS.io  And.  .stood  by  the  entering  of  the  gate 

iR.  17  priest  stood  in  the  entering  of  the  gate 

1  Then  went  Boaz  up  to  the  gate,  and  sat 

10  be  not  cut  off . .  from  the  gate  of  his  place 

11  And  all  the  people  that  (were)  in  the  ga. 
iS  fell,  .backward  by  the  side  of  the  gate 
18  Saul  drew  near  to  Samuel  in  the  gate 
52  until  thou  come  to.. the  gates  of  Ekron 


E-uth  4 
4. 

•!■ 

1  Sa.  4. 

9' 
17' 


21.  13  and  scrabbled  on  the  doors  of  the  gate 
2  Sa.  3.  27  Joab  took  him  aside  in  the  gate  to  speak 

10.  .  8  in  array  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate 

11. 23  them  even  unto  the  entering  of  the  gate 
15.  2  Absalom,  .stood  beside  the  way  of  the  g. 
18.   4  the  king  stood  by  the  gate  side,  and  all 

18. 24  And  David  sat  betweeu  the  two  gates 
18.  24  went  up  to  the  roof  over  the  gate  unto 

18.  33  went  up  to  the  chamber  over  the  gate 

19.  S  Then  the  king  arose,  and  sat  in  the  gate 
19.    8  Behold,  the  king  doth  sit  in  the  gate 

23.  15, 16  well  of  Beth-lehem,  which  (is)  by  the  g. 
1  Ki.22.  10  in  the  entrance  of  the  gate  of  Samaria 
■2  Ki.  7.    1  two . .  of  barley  for  a  shekel,  in  the  gate  of 
7.    3  leprous  men  at  the  entering  in  of  the  ga. 
7.  17  the  lord .  .to  have  the  charge  of  the  gate 
7. 17  the  people  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate 
7.  18  to  morrow  about  this  time  in  the  gate  of 
7.  20  the  people  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate 
9.  31  And  as  Jehu  entered  in  at  the  gate,  she 

10.  8  two  heaps  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate 

11.  6  And  a  third  part,  .at  the  gate  of  Sur 

11.  6  a  third  part  at  the  gate  behind  the  guard 
11. 19  came  by  the  way  of  the  gate  of  the  guard 
14.  13  the  gate  of  Ephraini  unto  the  corner  gate 
15.35  He  built  the  higher  gate  of  the  house  of 
23.  8  brake  down  the  high  places  of  the  gates 
23.  S  in  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  Joshua 
23.   8  on  a  man's  left  hand  at  the  gate  of  the 

25.  4  by  the  way  of  the  gate  between  two  walls 

1  Ch    9.  18  Who  hitherto,  .in  the  king's  gate  eastw. 

g.  23  the  oversight  of  the  gates  of  the  house  of 
11.  17,  iS  well  of  Beth-lehem,  that  (is)  at  thega. 

22.  3  for  the  nails  for  the  .doors  of  the  gates 

26.  13  And  they  cast  lots,  .for  every  gate 

26.  16  westward,  with  the  gate  Shallecheth,  by 

2  Ch.  8.  14  porters  also  by  their  courses  at  every  ga. 

18.    9  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  Samaria 

23.  5  a  third  part  at  the  gate  of  the  foundation 
23. 15  to  the  entering  of  the  horse  gate  by  the 
23.  19  And  he  set  the  porters  at  the  gates  of  the 

23.  20  through  the  high  gate  into  the  king's  ho. 

24.  8  at  the  gate  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

25.  23  the  gate  of  Ephraini  to  the  corner  gate 

26.  9  at  the  corner  gate,  and  at  the  valley  gate 

27.  3  He  built  the  high  gate  of  the  house  of 

31.  2  to  praise  in  the  gates  of  the  tents  of  the 

32.  6  in  the  street  of  the  gate  of  the  city 

33.  14  even  to  the  entering  in  at  the  fish  gate 
35.  15  and  the  porters  (waited)  at  every  gate 

.Neb.  i-  3  and  the  gates  thereof  are  burnt  with  fire 
2.  3  the  gates  thereof  are  consumed  with  fire  ? 
2.  8  timber  to  make  beams  for  the  gates  of  the 
2. 13  I  went  out  by  night  by  the  gate  of  the 
2. 13  and  the  gates,  .were  consumed  with  fire 
2-  14  I  went  on  to  the  gate  of  the  fountain,  and 

2.  15  and  entered  by  the  gate  of  the  valley 

2. 17  and  the  gates  thereof  are  burnt  with  fire 

3.  1  they  builded  the  sheep  gate ;  they  sanct. 
3.  3  But  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons  of  Hassen. 
3.  6  Moreover  the  old  gate  repaired  Jehoiada 
3. 13  The  valley  gate  repaired  Hanun,  and  the 

3. 13  cubits  on  the  wall  unto  the  dung  gate 

3. 14  the  duug  gate  repaired  Malchiah  the  son 
3.  15  the  gate  of  the  fountain  repaired  Shallun 
3. 26  over  against  the  water  gate  toward  the 
3.  28  From  above  the  horse  gate  repaired  the 
3.  29  also  Shemaiah.  .the  keeper  of  the  east  g. 
3.  31  repaired,  .over  against  the  gate  Miphkad 
3.  32  unto  the  sheep  gate  repaired  the  goldsmi. 

6.  1  had  not  set  up  the  doors  upon  the  gates 

7.  3  Let  not  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  be  opened 

8.  1  the  street  that  (was)  before  the  water  gate 
8.  3  the  street  that  (was)  before  the  water  gate 
8.  16  and  in  the  street  of  the  water  gate 

8.  16  and  in  the  street  of  the  gate  of  Ephraini 

11.  19  and  their  brethren  that  kept  the  gates 

12.  25  the  ward  at  the  thresholds  of  the  gates 
12.  30  and  purified  the  people,  and  the  gates 
12.  31  upon  the  wall  toward  the  dung  gate 
12.  37  And  at  the  fountain  gate,  which  was 
12.  37  went  up.  .unto  the  water  gate  eastward 
12.  39  And  from  above  the  gate  of  Ephraim 
12.  39  above  the  old  gate,  .above  the  fish  gate 

12.  39  unto  the  sheep  gate .  .in  the  prison  gate 

13.  19  when  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  began  to  be 
13. 19  and  (some)  of  my  servants  set  I  at  the  g. 
13.  22  and.  .they  should  come  (and)  keep  the  g. 

Esth.  2.  19  then  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's  gate 

2.  21  while  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's  gate 

3.  2,  3  servants,  that  (were)  in  the  king's  gate 

4.  2  And  came  even  before  the  king's  gate 

4.    2  for  none  (might)  enter  into  the  kind's  ga. 

4.  6  street,  .which  (was)  before  the  king's  gate 

5.  9  Haman  saw  Mordecai  in  the  king's  gate 

5.  13  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's  g. 

6.  10  the  Jew,  that  sitteth  at  the  king's  gate 
6.  12  Mordecai  came  again  to  the  king's  gate 
5.   4  His  children .  .are  crushed  in  the  gate 

29.  7  When  I  went  out  to  the  gate  through  the 
31.  si  If  I  have,  .when  I  saw  my  help  in  the  g. 


Job 


Jer. 


Job    38.  17  Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened 
Psa.    9.  13  that  liftest  me  up  from  the  gates  of  death 
9.  14  may  show  forth  all  thy  praise  in  the  ga. 
24.    7,  9  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates 
69.  12  They  that  sit  in  the  gate  speak  against 
87.   2  The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more 
100.    4  Enter  into  his  gates  with  thanksgiving 
107.  18  they  draw  near  unto  the  gates  of  death 
118.  19  Open  to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness 
11S.  20  This  gate  of  the  Lord,  into  which  the 
122.    2  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  J. 
127.    5  shall  speak  with  the  enemies  in  the  gate 
147.  13  hath  strengthened  the  bars  of  thy  gates 
Prov.  1.  21  She  crieth.  .in  the  openings  of  the  gates 

8.  3  She  crieth  at  the  gates,  at  the  entry  of 
14.  19  the  -wicked  at  the  gates  of  the  righteous 
22.  22  neither  oppress  the  afflicted  in  the  gate 
24.    7  he  openeth  not  his  mouth  in  the  gate 
31.  23  Her  husband  is  known  in  thegates,  when 
31.  31  let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  gates 

Song  7.  4  in  Heshbon,  by  the  gate  of  Bath-rabbim 
Isa.   14.  31  Howl,  O  gate;  cry,  0  city ;  thou,  whole  P. 

22.  7  shall  set  themselves  in  array  at  the  gate 
•     24.  12  and  the  gate  is  smitten  with  destruction 

26.    2  Open  ye  the  gates,  that  the  righteous 

28.  6  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  gate 

29.  21  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the  g. 
38. 10  I  said . .  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the  grave 

1  to  open,  .and  the  gates'  shall  not  be  shut 

12  I  will  make,  .thy  gates  of  carbuncles 

11  Therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  coivti. 
iS  but  thou  shalt  call,  .thy  gates  Praise 
10  Go  through,  go  through  the  gates  ;  pre. 
15  at  the  entering  of  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 

2  Stand  in  the  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 
2  that  enter  in  at  these  gates  to  worship 
2  Judah  moumeth,  and  the  gates  thereof 
7  I  will  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  the  gates  of 

19  Go  and  stand  in  the  gate  of  the  children 

19  and  in  all  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 

20  Hear  ye.  .all.  .that  enter  in  by  these  gates 

21  nor  bring  (it)  in  by  the  gates  of  Jerusa. 

24  to  bring  in  no  burden  through  the  gates 

25  Then  shall  there  enter  into  the  gates  of 
27  entering  in  at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  on 
27  then  will  I  kindle  a  fire  in  the  gates  th. 

2  which  (is)  by  the  entry  of  the  east  gate 
2  in  the  stocks  that  (were)  in  the  high  gate 

2  thy  people  that  enter  in  by  these  gates 
4  then  shall  ttiere  enter  in  by  the  gates  of 

rg  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 
10  sat  down  in  the  entry  of  the  new  gate  of 
38  from  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  gate 
40  unto  the  corner  of  the  horse  gate  toward 
10  at  the  entry  of  the  new  gate  of  the  Lord's 

13  And  when  he  was  in  the  gate  of  Benja. 
7  the  king,  .sitting  in  the  gate  of  Benjamin 

3  princes . .  came  in,  and  sat  in  the  middle  g. 

4  fled,  .by  the  gate  betwixt  the  two  walls 
5S  her  high  gates  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

7  by  the  way  of  the  gate  between  the  two 
4  all  her  gates  are  desolate  :  her  priests 
9  Her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  ground  ;  he 

12  have  entered  into  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 

14  The  elders  have  ceased  from  the  gate 
3  to  the  door  of  the  inner  gate  that  looketh 

a.   5  northward  at  the  gate  of  the  altar  this 
S.  14  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  gate  of 

9.  2  came  from  the  way  of  the  higher  gate 

10.  19  stood  at  the  door  of  the  east  gate  of  the 

11.  1  the  spirit,  .brought  me  unto  the  east  gate 
11.    1  at  the  door  of  the  gate  five  and  twenty 
21.  15  have  set. .the  sword  against  all  their  gates 

22  to  appoint,  .rams  against  the  gates,  to 
10  when  he  shall  enter  into  thy  gates,  as 

3  behold . .  a  man . .  and  he  stood  in  the  gate 
6  Then  came  he  unto  the  gate  which  look. 

6  and  measured  the  threshold  of  the  gate 

7  of  the  gate  by  the  porch  of  the  gate 

8  He  measured  also  the  porch  of  the  gate 

9  Then  measured  he  the  porch  of  the  gate 
9  and  the  porch  of  the  gate  (was)  inward 

10  And  the  little  chambers  of  the  gate  east. 

11  the  breadth  of  the  entry  of  the  gate 
11  the  length  of  the  gate,  thirteen  cubits 

13  He  measured  then  the  gate  from  the  roof 

14  the  post  of  the  court  round  about  the  gate 

15  And  from  the  face  of  the  gate  of  the  ent. 
^5  the  face  of  the  porch  of  the  inner  gate 

16  and  to  their  posts  within  the  gate  round 
iS  And  the  pavement  by  the  side  of  the  gates 

18  over  against  the  length  of  the  gates,  (was) 

19  from  the  fore-front  of  the  lower  gate  unto 

20  And  the  gate  of  the  outward  court  that 

21  were  after  the  measure  of  the  first  gate 

22  after  the  measure  of  the  gate  that  looketh 

23  And  the  gate  of  the  inner  court  (was) 
23  over  against  the  gate  toward  the  north 

23  and  he  measured  from  gate  to  gate  an 

24  and,  behold,  a  gate  toward  the  south 
27  And.  .a  gate  in  the  inner  court  toward 

27  he  measured  from  gate  to  gate  toward 

28  to  the  inner  court  by  the  south  gate 
2?  he  measured  the  south  gate  according  to 
32  and  he  measured  the  gate  according  to 
35  And  he  brought  me  to  the  north  gate 

38  by  the  posts  of  the  gates,  where  they 

39  in  the  porch  of  the  gate  (were)  two  tables 

40  goeth  up  to  the  entry  of  the  north  gate 

40  which  (was)  at  the  porch  of  the  gate 

41  by  the  side  of  the  gate  ;  eight  tables 
44  without  the  inner  gate  (were)  the  chain. 


37 
38 

39- 

39' 
5* 

T  52' 

Lam.   1 


Eze.    E. 


Eze.  40.  44  which  (was)  at  the  side  of  the  north  gate 
40.  44  one  at  the  side  of  the  east  gate  (having) 
40.  48  the  breadth  of  the  gate  (was)  three  cubits 

42.  15  he  brought  me  forth  toward  the  gate  . 

43.  1  he  brought  me  to  the  gate .  .the  gate  that 

43.  4  by  the  way  of  the  gate  whose  prospect 

44.  1  brought  me  back  the  way  of  the  gate  of 
44.    2  This  gate  shall  be  shut,  it  shall  not  be 
44.    3  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)  g. 
4^.    4  brought  he  me  the  way  of  the  north  gate 

44. 11  (having)  charge  at  the  gates  of  the  house 
44.  17  when  they  enter  in  at  the  gates  of  the 

44. 17  whiles  they  minister  fn  the  gates  of  the 
45- 19  upon  the  posts  of  the  gate  of  the  inner 
46.    1  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  that  looketh 
46    2  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)  gate 
46.    2  and  shall  stand  by  the  post  of  the  gate 
46.   2  shall  worship  at  the  threshold  of  the  gate 
46.    2  the  gate  shall  not  be  shut  until  the  eve. 
46.    3  shall  worship  at  the  door  of  this  gate 

46.  8  go  in  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)  g. 
46.  9  entereth  in  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate 
46.  9  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  south  gate 
46.  9  that  entereth  by  the  way  of  the  south  g. 
46.  9  go  forth  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate 
46.    9  he  shall  not  return  by  the  way  of  the  g. 

46. 12  shall  then  open  him  the  gate  that  looketh 
46.  12  after  his  going  forth,  .shall  shut  the  gate 

46.  19  through  the  entry,  .at  the  side  of  the  ga. 

47.  2  out  of  the  way  of  the  gate  northward 

47.  2  and  led  me . .  unto  the  utter  gate  by  the 

48.  31  the  gates  of  the  city .  .after  thenames  of 
48.  31  three  gates  northward  ;  one  gate  of  Beu. 
48.  31  one  gate  of  Judah,  one  gate  of  Levi 

48.  32  and  three  gates;  and  one  gate  of  Joseph 
48.  32  one  gate  of  Benjamin,  one  gate  of  Dan 
48.  33  and  three  gates ;  one  gate  of  Simeon 
48.  33  one  gate  of  Issachar,  one  gate  of  Zebulun 
48.  34  (with)  their  three  gates  ;  one  gate  of  Gad 
48.  34  one  gate  of  Asher,  one  gate  of  Naphtali 
Amos  5.  10  They  hate  hhn  that  rebuketh  in  the  gate 
5.  12  and  they  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate 

5.  15  establish  judgment  in-  the  gate  :  it  may 
Ohad.     11  foreigners  entered  into  his  gates,  and  cast 

13  not  have  entered  into  the  gate  of  my  p. 
Hie.    1.    9  he  is  come  unto  the  gate  of  my  people 

1. 12  came  down  from  the  Lord  unto  the  gate 
2.  13  have  passed  through  the  gate,  and  are 

Nab.   2.    6  The  gates  of  the  rivers  shall  be  opened 

3. 13  the  gates  of  thy  land  shall  be  set  wide 
Zeph.  1.  10  the  noise  of  a  cry  from  the  fish  gate,  and 

•  Zech.  8. 16  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates 
14.  10  from  Benjamin's  gate  unto,  .the  first  gate 
14. 10  unto  the  corner  gate,  and  (from)  the  tower 

5. Gate,  infl  tera. 

Dan.    2.  49  but  Daniel  (sat)  in  the  gate  of  the  king 

6. A  door,  6vpa  thura. 

Acts    3.   2  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  which  is  called 

7.  A  gate,  {wing  of  a  double  gate),  ttvAt]  pule. 

Hatt.  7. 13  Enter  ye  in  at  the  straight  gate :  for 
7. 13  wide  (is)  [the  gate],  and  broad  (is)  the 
7.  14  Because  strait  (is)  the  [gate],  and  narrow 

16. 18  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against 
Luke  7.  12  when  he  came  nigh  to  the  gate  of  the  city 

13.  24  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  straight  [gate] 
Acts    3.  10  sat . .  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the  temple 

9.  24  they  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to 
12.  10  they  came  unto  the  iron  gate  that  leadeth 
Heb.  13. 12  Jesus  also,  .suffered  without  the  gate 

8.  Gate,  gateway,  irvXav  pulvn. 

Lukei6.  20  -which  was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores 
Acts  10. 17  behold,  the  men .  .stood  before  the  gate 

12.  13  as  Peter  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate 
.  12.  14  she  opened  not  the  gate  for  gladness 

12. 14  and  told  how  Peter  stood  before  the  gate 

14.  13  brought  oxen  and  garlands  unto  the  gates 
Rev.  21.  12  a  wall  great  and  high  (and).,  twelve  gates 

21.  12  [at  the  gates  twelve  angels,  and  names] 
21.  13  east,  three  gates ;  on  the  north,  three  ga. 

21. 13  south,  three  gates,  .the  west,  three  gates 
21.  15  to  measure  the  city,  and  the  gates  thereof 
21.  21  And  the  twelve  gates  (were)  twelve  pearls 
21.  21  every  several  gate  was  of  one  pearl 

21.  25  the  gates  of  itTshall  not  be  shut  at  all  by 

22.  14  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city- 

GATES,  two  leaved  — 

Double  door,  u*rbi  delathayim. 

Isa.    45. 1  to  op'en  before  him  the  two  leaved  gates 

GATH,  na  wine  press,  fortune. 

One  of  the  five  royal  cities  of  the  Philistines  and  native 
place  of  Goliath.  It  stood  upon  the  conspicuous  hill 
now  called  Tell-es-Safith.  This  hill  is  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountains  of  Judah,  ten  miles  E.  of  Ashdod  and  ten 
S.  by  E.  of  Ekron.     The  ruins  are  very  extensive. 

Josh  11.  22  only  in  G.  and  in  Ashdod,  there  remained 
1  Sa.   5.    8  Let  the  ark  of..  God.,  be  carried.,  unto  G. 

6.  17  atrespass  offering  unto  the  Lord,  .for  G. 

7.  14  restored  to  Israel,  from  Ekron.  .unto  G.  " 
17.    4  went  out  a  champion.  .Goliath,  of  G. 

17.  23  there  came  up.  .the  Philistine  of  G. 
17.  52  Israel,  .pursued  the  Philistines,  .unto  G. 
21.  10  D.  arose,  .and  went  to  Achish..  king  of  G. 
21.  12  D..  .  was'sore  afraid  ofAchish  the  king  of  G. 
27.  2  D..  .passed over. .unto  Achish. .kingofG. 
27.  3  And  David  dwelt  with  Achish  at  G.,  he 
27.  4  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was  fled  to  G. 
27.  11  to  bring  (tidings)  to  G.,  saying,  Lest  they 
2Sa.    1.  20  Tell  (it)  not  in  G.   publish  (it)  not  in  the 


GATHER 


384 


GATHER 


2  Sa.  15.  18  six  hundred  men  which  came,  .from  G. 
21.  20  And  there  was  yet  a  battle  in  G. 

21.  22  These  four  were  born  to  the  giant  in  Q. 
1  Ki.  2.  39  servants  of  Shimei  ran.  .unto  A. .  .of  G. 

2.  39  they  told  Shimei.. thy  servants  (be) in  G. 

2.  40  And  .Shimei  arose,  .and  went  to  G. 

2.  40  went,  and  brought  his  servants  from  G. 

2.  41  tuld  Solomon.  .Shimei  had  gone,  .to  G. 
-2  Ki.12.  17  Hazael  king  of  Syria,  .fought  against  G. 

1  Ch.  7.  21  Shuthelah.  whom  the  men  of  G... slew 

3.  13  Shema.  .drove  away  the  inhabitants  of  G. 

18.  1  David  smote  the  Philistines,  .and  took  G. 
20.    6  And  yet  again  there  was  war  at  G. 

20.    8  These  were  born  unto  the  giant  in  G. 

2  Ch.n.    8  And  G.,  and  Mareshah,  and  Ziph 

26    6  he  went,  .and  brake  down  the  wall  of  G. 

Psa.  56.  title  Miehtam .  .the  Philistines  took  him  inG. 

Amos  6.    2  then  go  down  to  G.  of  the  Philistines 

Mie.    1.  10  Declare  ye  (it)  not  at  G.,  weep  ye  not  at 
GATHER  — 
.1  gathering,  n$2p  qebut'sah. 

Eze.  22.  so  they  gather  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron 
GATHER,  to  — 

I.  To  gather,  iJN  agar. 

Deut.28.  30  shalt  neither  drink  (of)  the  wine,  nor  ga. 
Prov.  6.    8  (and)  gathereth  her  food  in  the  harvest 

10.  5  lie  that  gathereth  in  summer  (is)  a  wise 
'2.  To  gather  together  or  up,  ^pN  asaph. 

Gen.    6.  21  food  that  is  eaten,  and  thou  shalt  gather 
Exod23.  10  and  shalt  gather  in  the  fruits  thereof 
Lev.  25.    3  shalt  prune,  .and  gather  in  the  fruit  tlier. 
Nunin. -16  Gather  unto  me  seventy  men  of  the  eld. 

11.  24  gathered  the  seventy  men  of  the  elders 
11.  32  stood  up.  .and  they  gathered  the  quails 
11.  32  he  that  gathered  least  gathered  ten 

19.  9  shall  gather  up  the  ashes  of  the  heifer 
19.  10  he  that  gathereth  the  ashes  of  the  heifer 

Josh.  24.  1  Joshua  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 
Judg.  3.  13  he  gathered  unto  him  the  children  of  A. 
Ruth  2.    7  let  me  glean  and  gather  after  the  reapers 

1  Sa.    5.    8  They  sent  therefore,  and  gathered  all  the 

2  Sa.  21.  13  they  gathered  the  bones  of  them  that  were 
2  Ki.  22.    4  which  the  keepers,  .have  gathered  of  the 

22.  20  I  will  gather  thee  unto  thy  fathers,  and 

23.  1  they  gathered  unto  him  all  the  elders  of 
t  Ch.  19.  17  he  gathered  all  Israel,  and  passed  over 

2  Ch.  1.  14  Solomon  gathered  chariots  and  horsemen 

24.  11  Thus  they,  .gathered  money  in  abundance 
29.  15  they  gathered  their  brethren,  and  sanct. 
29.  20  the  king  rose  early,  and  gathered  the  nil. 
34.  9  money . .  which  the  Levites . .  had  gathered 
34.  28  I  will  gather  thee  to  thy  fathers,  and  thou 

Job    34.  14  (if)  he  gather  unto  himself  his  spirit  and 

39.  12  lie  will  bring  home  thy  seed,  and  gather 

Psa.  "26.    9  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor  my 

39.  6  and  knoweth  not  who  shall  gather  them 
Prov  30.  4  who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in  his  fists ! 
Eccl.  2.  26  giveth  travail,  to  gather  and  to  heap  up 
Isa.    10.  14  as  one  gathereth  eggs,  .have  I  gathered 

1 7.  5  when  the  harvest  man  gathereth  the  corn 
Jer.  10.  17  Gather  up  thy  wares  out  of  the  land 

40.  10  gather  ye  wine,  and  summer  fruits,  and 
40.  12  gathered  wine  and  summer  fruits  very 

Eze.  24.    4  Gather  the  pieces  thereof  into  it.  .every 
Joel    1.  14  gather  the  elders,  .all  the  inhabitants  of 
2.  16  Gather  the  people,  .gather  the  children 
Hab.    1 .    9  they  shall  gather  the  captivity  as  the  sand 

1.  15  and" gather  them  in  their  drag:  therefore 

2.  5  but  gathereth  unto  him  all  nations,  and- 
Zeph.  3.    8  to  gather  the  nations,  that  I  may  assem. 

3.  18  I  will  gather  (them  that  are)  sorrowful 
Zech.14.    2  Fur  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jer. 

3.  To  gather,  ^px  asaph,  3. 

Isa.   62.    9  they  that  have  gathered  it  shall  eat  it 
Jer.     9.  22  as  the  handful,  .none  shall  gather  (them) 

i.  Gathering,  qpst  oseph. 

Mic.    7.    1  as  when  they  have  gathered  the  summer 

5.  To  pluck,  rnx  a  rah. 

Song  5.    1  I  have  gathered  my  myrrh  with  my  spice 

6.  To  take  the  spoil,  in  bazaz. 

2  Ch.20.  25  they  were  three  days  in  gathering  of  the 

7.  To  cut  off,  -re*  batsar. 

Lev.  25.    5  neither  gather  the  grapes  of  thy  vine  un. 

25.  11  nor  gather,  .in  it  of  thy  vine  undressed 
Dent  24.  21  When  thou  gatherest  the  grapes  of  thy 
Judg.  9.  27  they  went  out  into  the  fields,  and  gathe. 

8  To  hatch)  broodt  iwdagar. 

Isa.    34.  15  and  hatch,  and  gather  under  her  shadow 
9.  To  heap  up,  dj|  Jcanas. 

Neh.  12.  44  to  gather  into  them,  out  of  the  fiehls  of 

Psa.  33.    7  He  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  sea  toge. 

Eccl.   2.    8  I  gathered  me  also  silver  and  gold,  anil 
in. To  heap  up,  djs  kanas,  3. 

Eze.  22.  21  Yea,  i  will  gather  you,  and  blow  upon 
39.  28  I  have  gathered  them  unto  their  own  la. 

II.  To  glean,  upS  laqat 

Gen.  31 .  46  Jacob  said . .  Gather  stones  ;  and  they  1 00k 
Exodi6.    4  and  gather  a  certain  rate  ev( ;.   day.  that 
16.    s  it  shall  be  twice  as  much  as  they  gather 
16. 16  Gather  of  it  every  man  according  to  his 
16.  17  the  children  of  Israel  did  so,  .-id  gathered 
16.  18  they  gathered  every  man  ac  Hiding  to 
16.  21  And  they  gathered  it  every  morning 
16.  22  on  the  sixth  day  they  gathered  twice  as 
i6\  26  Six  days  ye  shall  gather  it;  but  on  the 
16.  27  went   .on  the  .seventh  day  for  to  gather 


Nuinn.    8  gathered  (it),  and  ground  (it)  in  mills,  or 
Psa.  104.  28  (That)  thou  givest  them  they  gather 
Song  6.    2  My  belovedisgonedown..togather lilies 
12.  To  glean,  Bfa1?  laqat,  3. 

Lev.  19.    9  neither  shalt  thou  gather  the  gleanings  of 

19.  10  neither  shalt  thou  gather  (every)  grape  of 
23.  22  neither  shalt  thou  gather  any  gleaning 

Judg.  1.    7  kings,  .gathered  (their  meat)  under  my 
2  Ki.  4.  39  one  went  out  into  the  field  to  gatherherbs 
4.  39  and  gathered  thereof  wild  gourds  his  lap 
Isa.    17.    5  it  shall  be  as  he  that  gathereth  ears  in  the 
Jer.     7. 18  The  children  gather  wood,  and  the  fathers 

13.ro  glean,  v$>  laqash,  3. 

Job  24.   6  they  gather  the  vintage  of  the  wicked 

14.  To  fill  in,  xhn  male. 

Jer.  51. 11  gather  the  shields :  the  Lord  hath  raised 

15.  To  pour  out,  ^m  nathak,  5. 

2  Ki.  22.  9  Thy  servants  have  gathered  the  money 
16. To  cause  tojlee,  ny  uz,  5. 

Exod.  9.  19  Send  therefore  now.  .gather  thy  cattle 
VI. To  do,  make,  rt'^y  asah. 

1  Sa.  14.  48  he  gathered  an  host,  and  smote  the  A. 
18. 7Y>  heap  up,  "ny  tsabar. 

Gen.  41.  49  Joseph  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the 

1 9.  To  cry  or  coll  together,  pyy  tsaaq,  2. 

2  Ki.   3.  21  they  gathered  all  that  were  able  to  put 

20.  To  gather,  assemble,  collect,  f3i3  qabats. 

Gen.  41.  35  let  them  gather  all  the  food  of  those  good 
Deut  13.  16  thou  shalt  gather  all  the  spoil  of  it  into 

1  Sa.   7.    5  Samuel  said,  Gather  all  Israel  to  Mizpeh 

2  Sa.   3.  21  will  gather  all  Israel  unto  my  Lord  the  k. 

1  Ki.  11  24  he  gathered  men  unto  him,  and  became 

18.  19  gather  to  me  all  Israel  unto  mount  Carmel 

2  Ki.   6.  24  Ben-hadad.  .gathered  all  his  host,  and 

a  Ch  15.   g  And  he  gathered  all  Judah  and  Benjamin 
■  23.   2  gathered  the  Levites  out  of  all  the  cities 

24-    5  gather  of  all  Israel  money  to  repair  the 
Psa.  41.   6  his  heart  gathereth  iniquity  to  itself 
Prov  1 3  11  he  that  gathereth  by  labourshall  increase 
Eze.  22. 19  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  Jeru. 

22  20  so  will  I  gather  (you)  in  mine  anger  and 

21.7*0  gather,  assemble,  collect,  J*5p  qabats,  3. 
Deut3o.    3  and  gather  thee  from  all  the  nations 

30.  4  thence  will  the  Lord  thy  God  gather  thee 
Neh.  1.  9  (yet)  will  I  gather  them  from  thence,  and 
Psa.106.  47  and  gather  us  from  among  the  heathen 

107     3  gathered  them  out  of  the  lands,  from  the 
Prov  28.    8  he  shall  gather  it  for  him  that  will  pity 
Isa.   34.  16  and  his  spirit  it  hath  gathered  them 
40.  ti  he  shall  gather  the  Iambs  with  his  arm 
43.    5  I  will,  .gather  thee  from  the  west 
54,    7  but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee 
56.    8  The  Lord  God  which  gathereth  the  oiitc. 
56.    8  Yet  will  I  gather,  .to  him,  besides  those 
66.  18  that  I  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues 
Jer.  23     3  I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my  flock  out 
29.  14  I  will  gather  you  from  all  the  nations,  and 

31.  8  I  will,  .gather  them  from  the  coasts  of 

31.  10  He  that  scattered  Israel  will  gather  him 

32.  37  I  will  gather  them  out  of  all  countries 
Eze.  11.  17  I  will  even  gather  you  from  the  people 

16.  37  therefore  I  will  gather  all  thy  lovers,  with 
16.  37  I  will  even  gather  them  round  about  ag. 

20.  34  I  will,  .gather  you  out  of  the  countries 
20.  41  when  I.  .gather  you  out  of  the  countries 
28. 25  When  I  shall  have  gathered  the  house  of 
29.  13  At  the  end  of  forty  years  will  I  gather  the 
34. 13  I  will,  .gather  them  from  the  countries 

36.  24  I  will,  .gather  you  out  of  all  countries 

37.  21  I  will .  .gather  them  on  every  side,  and 
39.  27  gathered  them  out  of  their  enemies'  la 

Hos.    8.  10  now  will  I  gather  them,  and  they  shall 
Joel    2.    6  pained;  all  faces  shall  gather  blackness 

3.  2  I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and  will 
Mie.    1.    7  for  she  gathered  (it)  of  the  hire  of  an  ha. 

2.  12  I  will  surely  gather  the  remnant  of  Israel 

4.  6  I  will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out 

4.  12  he  shall  gather  them  as  the  sheaves  into 
Nah.  2. 10  and  the  faces  of  them  all  gather  blackness 

3. 18  people  is  scattered,  .and  no  man  gathere. 
Zeph.  3.  19  I  will,  .gather  her  that  was  driven  out 

3.  20  even  in  the  time  that  I  gather  you :  for 
Zech  10.    8  I  will  hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them ;  for 

10.  10  I  will,  .gather  them  out  of  Assyria ;  and 
22.  TV)  cause  to  congregate,  convene,  ^np  qaJutl,  5. 
Num  if.,  to  Korah  gathered  all  the  congregation  aga. 
Dent3i.  28  Gather  unto  me  all  theelders  of  your  tri. 
2  Ch.iz.  1  be  gathered  of  the  bouse  of  Judah  and  B. 
Eze.  38.  13  hast  thou  gathered  thy  company  to  take 

23.ro  gather,  ppp  qasJiash,  Sa. 

Exods.    7  let  them  go  and  gather  straw  for  them. 

5.  12  scattered.. to  gather  stubble  instead  of 
Num  15.  32  they  found  a  man  that  gathered  sticks 

24.7b  acquire]  gain,  vz~\  rakash. 

Gen.  12.    5  all  their  substance  that  they  had  gath. 

25.  To  lead  together  also,  eTrtavvdyoo  episunago. 
Matt  23.  37  even  as  a  lien  gathereth  her  chickens 

26.  To  lay  together,  o~v\Aeym  sullego. 

Ma.tt.  7.  16  Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs 
13.  40  As  therefore  the  tares  are  gathered  and 
13.  41  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
13. 48  gathered  the  good  into  vessels,  but  cast 

Luke  6,  44  For  of  thorns  men  do  not  gather  figs,  nor 


27.7*m  lead  together,  a-vvdyco  stniago. 

Matt.  3.  12  and  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner ;  but 
6.  26  neither  do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into-bar. 

12.  30  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth 

13,  30  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn 

13.  47  unto  a  net,  that,  .gathered  of  every  kind 
25.  24  gathering  where  thou  bast  not  strawed 
25.  26  and  gather  where  I  have  not  strawed 

27.  27  and  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  band 
Mark  5.  21  much  people  gathered  unto  him  :  and  he 
Luke  3. 17  and  will  gather  the  wheat  into  his  garner 

11.  23  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth 
John  4.  36  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  life  eternal 

11.  47  Then  gathered  the  chief  priests  and  the 

15.  6  men  gather  them,  and  cast,  .into  the  fire 
Rev.  16.  14  to  gather  them  to  the  battle  of  that  great 

'2S.To*roll  or  tioist  together,  cutrrpe^co  siistrejjho. 
Acts  28.    3  when  Paul  had  gathered  a  bundle  of  sticks 

29.  To  gather  in  ripe  fruit,  rpvydec  trugao. 

Luke  6.  44  nor  of  a  bramble  bush  gather  they  grapes 
Rev.  14.  iS  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  earth 

14.  19  and  gathered  the  vine  of  the  earth,  and 

30.  To  cause  to  come  together,  infer,  o-vfxIHt&dfa. 
Acts  16. 10  assuredly  gathering  that  the  Lord  had 

GATHER  in,  to  — 

To  gather  together  or  up,  *]px  asaph. 

Exod23.  16  when  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  labours 
Lev.  23.  39  when  ye  have  gathered  in  the  fruit  of  the 
25. 20  we  shall  not  sow,  nor  gather  in  our  incre. 
Deut  11. 14  that  thou  mayest  gather  in  thy  corn,  and 

16.  13  after  that  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  corn 

28.  38  and  shalt  gather,  .little  hi ;  for  the  locust 
GATHER  out  (stones),  to  — 

To  cast  out  stones,  ?pp  saqal,  3. 

Isa.     5.   2  he  fence"d  it,  and  gathered  out  the  stones 
62. 10  gather  out  the  stones  ;  lift  up  a  standard 

GATHER  self  in  troops,  to  — 

To  gather  self  together,  "na  gadad,  7a. 

Mic.    5.    1 'Now  gather  thyself  in  troops,  O  daughter 

GATHER  selves,  to  — 

1.  To  gather  together  or  up,  ^px  asaph. 

2  Sa.  10. 15  the  Syrians,  .gathered  themselves  together 
Eze.  39. 17  gather  yourselves  on  every  side  to  my 

2.  To  be  met  by  appointment,  iy;  yaad,  2. 

Num  10.    4  then  the  princes . .  shall  gather  themselves 
S.Tofill  or  set  self  N^o  male,  7. 

Job   16. 10  they  have  gathered  themselves  together 

4.  To  cause  to  fee,  strengthen  self  hasten,  ny  uz,  5. 
Jer.     6.    1  gather  yourselves  to  flee  out  of  the  midst 

5.  To  be  gathered,  assembled,  \'2$  qabats,  2. 

1  Ch.11.    1  Then  all  Israel  gathered  themselves  to  D. 
13.    2  that  they  may  gather  themselves  unto  us 

6.  To  press,  gather  or  assemble  self  yn$  qabats,  7.   - 

Josh.  9.    2  they  gathered  themselves  together,  to 
1  Sa.22.   2  gathered  themselves  unto  him  ;  and  he 

GATHER  selves  to  flee,  to  — 

To  cause  to  fee,  strengthen  self,  hasten,  Ny  uz,  5. 
Isa.    10.  31  inhabitants . .  gather  themselves  to  flee 

GATHER  selves  together,  to  — 
l.To  be  gathered,  qDN  asaph,  2. 

Gen.  34.  30  they  shall  gather  themselves  together 

49,    1  Gather  yourselves  together,  that  I  may 
Exod.32.  26  the  sons  of  Levi  gathered  themselves  tog. 
Josh.  10.    5  five  kings . .  gathered  themselves  together 
Judg2o.  14  children  of  Eenj.  gathered  themselv.  tog. 
1  Sa.  13.    5  gathered  themselves  together  to  fight 
13.  11  gathered  themselves  together  at  Michm. 

1  Ch.19.    7  of  Amnion  gathered  themselves  together 

2  Ch.30.  3  the  people  gathered  themselves  together 
Ezra  3.  1  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man 
Neh.  8.    1  the  people  gathered  themselves  together 

12.  28  the  singers  gathered  themselves  together 
Psa.  35.  15  and  gathered  themselves  together 

35.  15  the  abjects  gathered  themselves  together 
104.  22  they  gather  themselves  together,  and  lay 
2.7*0  gather  together,  decree,  Tftgadad. 

Psa.  94.  21  They  gather  themselves  together  against 

3.  To  assemble,  -»a  r/ur. 

Psa.  56.   6  They  gather  themselves  together,  they 

4.  To  be  met  bu  appointment,  "iy;  yaad,  2. 

NU11127.   3  of  them  that  gathered  themselves  together 

5.7'»  be  cried  or  called  together,  py?  tsaaq,  2. 

Judg.  7.  23, 24 the  men.. gathered  themselves  togeth. 
12.    1  gathered  themselves  together,  and  went 

G.To  bejyressed  together,  gathered,  ossendtled,  r?i?,  2. 
Gen.  49.    2  Gather  yourselves  together,  and  hear 

1  Sa.  -3.    4  gathered  themselves  together,  and  came 

2  Ch.15.  10  So  they  gathered  themselves  together  at 

20.    4  Judah  gathered  themselves  together,  to 
Ezra  10.    7  should  gather  themselves  together  unto 

10.  9  gathered  themselves  together  unto  Jerus. 
Isa.   49.  18  all  these  gather  themselves  together 

60.   4  all  they  gather  themselves  together,  they 
Joel    3.  11  gather  yourselves  together  round  about 

7.  To  press  {or  gather)  self  together,  |'3j?  qabats,  7. 

1  Sa.    8.    4  gathered  themselves  together,  and  came 

2  Sa.    2.  25  gathered  themselves  together  after  Abner 


GATHER 


385 


GATHERING 


8.  To  be  congregated,  Snp  qahal,  2. 

EXOCI32:  1  the  people  gathered  themselves  together 
Nunu6.    3  they  gathered  themselves  together  against 

20.  2  they  gathered  themselves  together  against 
Joan  22. 12  gathered  themselves  together  at  Shiloh 
Esth.  8. 11;  q.  2;  9.  15;  9.  16. 

O.To-be  led  or  brought  together,  o-vvdyofiat  sunago. 
Mark  6.  30  apostles.. themselves  together,  E.ev.  19. 17. 

W.To  gather  self  together,  vv$  gashash,  7  a. 

Zeph.  2.   1  Gather  yourselves  together.  .Onationnot 

GATHER  the  grape  thereof,  to  — 

To  make  common,  SSn  chalal,  3. 

Deut  28.  30  and  shalt  not  gather  the  grapes  thereof 
GATHER  together,  to  — 
1.7*0  gather  together  or  up,  npx  asaph. 

Gen.  29.  22  Laban  gathered  together  all  the  men  of 

Exod.  3.  16  Go,  and  gather  the  elders  of  Israel  toget. 
4.  29  gathered  together  all  the  elders  of  the 

Niimsx.  16  Gather  the  people  together,  and  I  will 

21.  23  Sihon  gathered  all  his  people  together 
Judg.  9.    6  all  the  men  of  Shechem  gathered  together 

1 1.  20  but  Sihon  gathered  all  his  people  together 

16.  23  lords  of  the  Philistines  gathered  them  to. 
1  Sa.   5. 11  and  gathered  together  all  the  lords  of 

17.  1  the  Philistines  gathered  together  their  ar. 
2Sa.  10.  17  he  gathered  all  Israel  together,  and  pas. 

12.  28  gather  the  rest  of  the  people  together 
12.  29  David  gathered  all  the  people  together 

1  Ki.io.  26  Solomon  gathered  together  chariots  and 

1  Ch.23.    2  he  gathered  together  all  the  princes  of  I. 

2  Ch.28.  24  Ahaz  gathered  together  the  vessels  of  the 

29.    4  gathered  them  together  into  the  east 
34.  29  sent  and  gathered  together  all  the  elders 
Psa.  50.   5  Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me 

2.  To  assemble,  "M  gur. 

Isa.   54.  15  they  shall  surely  gather  together.. not 
54.  15  whosoever  shall  gather  together  against 

3.2*0  {cause  to)  cry  or  call  together \  pyi  zaaq,  5. 

Judg.  4.  13  Sisera  gathered  together  all  his  chariots 
4. To  heap  up,  gather,  Djs  kanas. 

1  Ch.22.  2  commanded  to  gather  together  the  stra. 
Esth.  4.  16  Go,  gather  together  all  the  J  e  ws  (that  are) 
Eccl.  3.   5  and  a  time  to  gather  stones  together 

5.  To  heap  up,  gather,  Dj3  kanas,  3. 

Psa.147.    2  he  gathereth  together  the  outcasts  of  Is. 

6. To  gather,  heap  up,  eg?  kenash. 

Dan.  3.  2  king  sent  to  gather  together  the  princes 
7.  To  fill  in  or  tip,  complete,  xhs  male,  3. 

Jer.  4.  5  gather  together,  and.  say,  Assemble  your. 
8.7*0  draw  away  or  out,  pro  nathaq,  5. 

2  Ch.34. 17  they  have  gathered  together  the  money 
9.7*0  heap  up,  ~ny  tsabar. 

Exod.  8.  14  they  gathered  them  together  upon  heaps 
10.  To  press  together,  gather,  assemble,  f3p  qabats. 
Judg.  12.  4  Jephthah  gathered  together  all  the  men 

1  Sa.  28.    1  gathered  their  armies  together  for  warf. 

28.  4  and  Saul  gathered  all  Israel  together 

29.  1  gathered  together  all  their  armies  to  A. 

2  Sa.  2.  30  when  he  had  gathered  all  the  people  tog. 

1  Kj.iS.  20  gathered  the  prophets  together  unto  mo. 

20.    1  Ben-hadad.  .gathered  all  Ins  host  togeth. 
22.   6  gathered  the  prophets  together,  about 

2  Ki.io.  18  Jehu  gathered  all  the  people  together 

2  Ch.18.  5  gathered  together  of  prophets  four  hun. 

24.  5  he  gathered  together  the  priests  and  the 

25.  5  Araaziah  gathered  Judah  together,  and 
32.  6  and  gathered  them  together  to  him  in 

Ezra  7.  28  I  gathered  together  out  of  Israel  chief 
8.  15  I  gathered  them  together  to  the  river 
Neh.    7.   5  forgather together  the  nobles,  and  the  ru. 
Esth.  2.    3  that  they  may  gather  together  all  the 

11.7*0  be  gathered,  assembled,  |'3p  qabats,  2. 

1  Sa.   7.    6  they  gathered  together  to  Mizpeh,  and 

12.  Topress,  gather  or  collect  together,  pp  qabats,  3. 
1  Ch.16.  35  gather  us  together,  and  deliver  us  from 
Neh.13.  "  I  gathered  them  together,  and  set  them 
Isa.  it.  12  gather  together  the  dispersed  of  Judah 

22.    9  ye  gathered  together  the  waters  of  the 

13.  7*o  press  or  gather  self  together,  j*3p  qabats,  7. 
Jer.  49. 14  Gather  ye  together,  and  come  against 

14.7*0  cause  to  congregate,  convene,  Snjj  qahal,  5. 
Exod35.  1  gathered  all  the  congregation,  .together 
Lev.  8.  3  gather  thou  all  the  congregation  together 
Num.  s.  9  shalt  gather  the  whole  assembly.. toget. 
20.  8  gather  thou  the  assembly  together,  thou 
20. 10  gathered  the  congregation  together  before 
Deut.  4.  10  Gather  me  the  people  together,  and  I  will 

31.  12  Gather  the  people  together,  men,  and 
1  Ch.13.    5  So  David  gathered  all  Israel  together 

15.    3  And  David  gathered  all  Israel  together 
Job  11. 10  If  he  cut  off .  .or  gather  together,  then 
15.  To  gather,  vv$  qashash. 

Zeph.  2.    1  gather  together,  O  nation  not  desired 
16.7*0  cause  to  hear,  summon,  y$y  shamea,  3. 

1  Sa.  15.  4  Saul  gathered  the  people  together,  and 
17.7*0  lead  or  bring  together ,  h-mo-vi/dya  episunago. 
Matt-24.  31  they  shall  gather  together  his  e.Mt.23.37. 
Hark  1.  33  all  the  city  was  gathered  together  at  the 
49 


5Iarki3.  27  shall  gather  together  his  elect  from  the 
Lukei2.    1  when  there  were  gathered  together  an 

J3-  34  gathered  thy  children  together,  as  a  hen 
IS. 7*o  lay  togetJier,  cvWeyco  sullego. 

Matt.  13.  30  Gather  ye  together  tirst  the  tares,  and 
19.7*0  lead  together,  o-vvdyoo  sunago. 

Matt.  2.   4  gathered  all  the  chief  priests.,  together.be 

22.  10  gathered  together  all  as  many  as  they 

25.  32  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  22.  34. 
Mark  4.    1  there  was  gathered  unto  him  a  great 

6.  30  the  apostles  gathered  themselves  toget. 
Lukeij.  13  the  younger  son  gathered  all  together 
John  6.  13  Therefore  they  gathered,  .together,  and 

11.  52  but  that  also  he  should  gather  together 
Acts  14.  27  and  had  gathered  the  church  together 

15.  30  they  had  gathered  the  multitude  togeth. 
Rev.  16.  16  he  gathered  them  together  into  a  place 

20.   8  nations,  .to  gather  tjieni  together  to  bat. 

20.7*0  crowd  or  assemble  togetlier,  cvvadpotfa  sun. 
Luke24-  33  and  found  the  eleven  [gathered  together] 
Acts  12.  12  where  many  were  gathered  together  pr. 

21.7*o  add,  increase,  continue,  r|p;  yasapth,  5. 

2  Sa.  6.    1  David  gathered  together  all  (the)  chosen 
GATHER  together  in  one,  to  — 
7*o  make  up  under  one  head,  avaKe<pa\ai6o/j.at. 

Eph.  1.  10  he  might  gather  together  in  one  all 

GATHER  up,  to  — 

1. 7*0  gailier  together  or  up,  *]px  asaph. 

Gen.  49.  33  he  gathered  up  his  feet  into  the  bed 
2.7*0  glean,  gather,  upb  laqat,  3. 

Gen.  47.  14  Joseph  gathered  up  all  the  money  that 

1  Sa.  20.  38  Jonathan's  lad  gathered  up  the  arrows 
3.7*0  press  or  gather  together,  pjjj  qabats. 

Gen.  41.  48  he  gathered  up  all  the  food  of  the  seven 
4. 7*o  press,  gather  or  collect  together,  \^  qabats,  3. 
Jer.  49.    5  none  shall  gather  up  him  that  wandereth 
Hos.   9.    6  Egypt  shall  gather  them  up,  Memphis 

5.7*0  lay  together,  vvWeyu  sullego. 

Matt.  13.  28  Wilt  thou  then  that  we ..  gather  them  up  ? 
13.  29  Nay  ;  lest,  while  ye  gather  up  the  tares 

6.7*0  lead  together,  a-vvdyco  sunago. 

John  6.  12  Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain 
GATHERED,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  gathered  {together  or  up,)  rjpx  asaph,  2. 
Gen.  25.    8  Then  Abraham .  .was  gathered  to  his 
25.  17  Ishmael.  .was  gathered  unto  his  people 
29.    3  And  thither  were  all  the  flocks  gathered 
35.  29  Isaac,  .died,  and  was  gathered  unto  Ins 
49.  29  I  am  to  be  gathered  unto  my  people 
49.  33  Jacob,  .was  gathered  unto  his  people 
Nuni2o.  24  Aaron  shall  be  gathered  unto  his  people 
20. 26  Aaron  shall  be  gathered,  .and  shall  die 
27. 13  thou  also  shalt  be  gathered  unto  thy  pe. 
27.  13  as  Aaron  thy  brother  was  gathered 

31.  2  afterward  shalt  thou  be  gathered  unto 
Deut  32.  50  die.  .and  be  gathered  inx  •  thy  people 

32.  50  as  Aaron,  .was  itherr  I  unto  his  people 
Judg.  2.  10  all.  .were  gathered  unto  their  fathers 

6.  33  the  children  of  the  east  were  gathered 
20.  1 1  So  all  the  men  of  Israel  were  gathered 

2  Sa.  17.  11 1  counsel  that  all  Israel  be.  .gathered 

2  Ki.22.  20  thou  shalt  be  gathered  into  thy  grave  in 
2  Ch.3^.  28  thou  shalt  be  gathered  to  thy  grave  in 

"  J  ob  27.  19  The  rich  man . .  shall  not  be  gathered :  he 
Prov  27.  25  and  herbs  of  the  mountains  are  gathered 
Isa.  49.  5  Though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall 
Jer.     8.    2  they  shall  not  be  gathered,  nor  be  buried 

25. 33  they  shall  not  be.  .gathered,  nor  buried 
Mic.    4.  11  many  nations  are  gathered  against  thee 

2.7*o  be  gathered  [togetlier  or  up),  ^px  asaph,  4. 
Isa.   24.  22  And  they  shall  be  gathered  together 

33.  4  your  spoil  shall  be  gathered .  .the  gather. 
Eze.  3S.  12  the  people,  .gathered  out  of  the  nations 
Hos.  10.  10  the  people  shall  be  gathered  against  them 

3.7*0  assemble,  "R3  gur. 

Psa.  59.   3  the  mighty  are  gathered  against  me  ;  not 
140.   2  continually  are  they  gathered  together 
4.7*0  be  cried  or  called  togetJier,  pit]  zaaq,  2. 

Judg.  6.  34  and  Abi-ezer  was  gathered  after  him 

6.  35  Manasseh  ;  who  also  was  gathered  after 
5.7*0  be  gleaned,  gathered,  tsjsb  laqat,  4. 

Isa.   27. 12  ye  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one,  O  ye  ch. 
6. 7*o  gather  self  togetlier,  bj£  laqat,  7. 

Judg.  11.   3  there  were  gathered  vain  men  to  Jeph. 
7.  To  press,  gather,  assemble,  f'3p  qabats. 

Neh.   5.  16  all  my  servants,  .gathered  thither  unto 
8.7*o  be  pressed,  gathered,  assembled,  fjp  qabats,  2. 

2  Ch.i3.    7  And  there  are  gathered  unto  hini  vain 

Isa.   34.  15  there  shall  the  vultures  also  be  gathered 
56.   8  besides  those  that  are  gathered  unto  him 

Jer.  40.  15  that  all  the  Jews  which  are  gathered  unto 

Eze.  29.    5  shalt  not  be  brought  together,  nor  gath. 
9.7*0  be  pressed,  gathered  or  assembled,  j'3p  qabats,  4. 

Eze.  38.    8  gathered  out  of  many  people,  against 
10.7b  be  congregated,  S>np  qahal,  2. 

Nunii6.  42  the  congregation  was  gathered  against 

Jer.   26.    9  all  the  people  were  gathered  against  Je. 
11.  7*o  be  gathered  or  bound  together,  rnp  qavah,  2. 

Jer.     3.  17  all  the  nations  shall  be  gathered  unto  it 


GATHERED  together,  to  he  — 

1.7*0  be  gathered,  qpx  asaph,  2. 

Gen.  29.    7  that  the  cattle  should  be  gathered  toget. 
29.    8  until  all  the  flocks  be  gathered  together 
Lev.  26.  25  when  ye  are  gathered  together  within 
Numn.  22  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered  t. 

1  Sa.  17.    1  and  were  gathered  together  at  Shochoh 

17.  2  Saul  and.  .Israel  were  gathered  together 

2  Sa.  23.    9  were  there  gathered  together  to  battle 

23. 11  were  gathered  together  into  a  troop 

1  Ch.11.  13  there  the  Philistines  were  gathered  toge. 

2  Ch.12.  5  princes,  .that  were  gathered  together  to 
Neh.  8.  13  on  the  second  day  were  gathered  togeth. 
Psa.  47.  g  princes  of  the  people  are  gathered  toget. 
Isa.  13.  4  of  the  kingdoms  of  nations  gathered  tog. 
Zech.12.    3  though  all  the  people.,  be  gathered. toge. 

2. 7*o  be  gathered,  f|px  asaph,  4. 

Zech.14.  14  the  wealth,  .shall  be  gathered  together 

3.7*0  gather  self  together,  ^px  asaph,  7. 

Deut  33.   5  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  gathered  toget. 

4. 7*o  be  cried  or  called  together,  pj?j  zaaq,  2. 
Judg  18.  22  the  men.  .were  gathered  together,  and 

5.7*0  be  met  together  by  appointment,  "ry;  yaad,  2. 
Numi4.  35  that  are  gathered  together  against  me 

16.  11  all  thy  company  (are)  gathered  together 

6.  To  be  heaped  up,  gathered  together,  a>J3  kenash,  4. 
Dan.   3.    3  were  gathered  together  unto  the  dedica. 

3.  27  And  the  princes,  .being  gathered  togeth. 

7.7*o  be  added,  joined  together,  npp  saphach,  4. 
Job   30.   7  under  the  nettles  they  were  gathered  to. 

8. 7*o  be  heaped  together,  dij;  aram,  2. 

Exod  1 5.   8  the  waters  were  gathered  together,  the 

9.  7*o  be  cried  or  called  together,  pyj  zaaq,  2. 

Judg  10.  17  the  children  of  Amnion  were  gathered  t. 

10.7*0  be  pressed  togetlier,  gathered,  assembled,  }'3p. 
Josh.  10.    6  all  the  kings . .  are  gathered  together  aga. 

1  Sa.  25.    1  all  the  Israelites  were  gathered  together 

2  Oh.  32.  4  there  was  gathered  much  people  together 
Esth.  2.    8  when  many  maidens  were  gathered  toge. 

2. 19  when  the  virgins  were  gathered  together 
Psa.  102.  22  When  the  people  are  gathered  together 
Isa.   43.    9  Let  all  the  nations  be  gathered  together 
60.    7  the  flocks  of  Kedar  shall  be  gathered  to. 
Hos.    1.  11  the  children  of  Israel  be  gathered  toget. 

11.  7*o  press  self  together,  t'33  qabats,  7. 

Judg.  9.  47  that  all  the  men.  .were  gathered  togeth. 

1  Sa.    7.    7  were  gathered  together  to  Mizpeh,  the 
Isa.   44.  11  let  them  all  be  gathered  together,  let 

12.7*o  be  congregated,  br\$  qahal,  2. 

Lev.  8.  4  the  assembly  was  gathered  together  unto 
Judg.20.    1  the  congregation  was  gathered  together 

13.7*o  be  gathered,  bound  together,  nip  qavah,  2. 
Gen.    1.   9  Let  the  waters.. be  gathered  together 

14.7*0  be  congregated,  nbjj  qalah,  2. 

2  Sa.  20.  14  they  were  gathered  together,  and  went 
15.7*0  lead  together,  trwdrya  sunago. 

Matt  13.    2  great  multitudes  were  gathered  together 

18.  20  For  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  tog. 
22.  41  While  the  Pharisees  were  gathered  toge. 
24.  28  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together 
27.  17  when  they  were  gathered  together,  Pilate 

Mark  2.  2  many  were  gathered  together,  insomuch 
Luke  17.  37  thither  will  the  eagles  be  [gathered  toge.] 
Acts    4.    6  were  gathered  together  at  Jerusalem 

4.  26  the  rulers  were  gathered  together  against 
4.  27  the  people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  toge. 

20.    8  chamber,  where  they  were  gathered  toge. 

1  Co.    5.    4  when  ye  are  gathered  together,  and  my 
Rev.  19. 19  gathered  together  to  make  war  against 

16.7*0  be  together,  cruvet^i  suneimi. 

Luke  8.    4  whenmuchpeopleweregatheredtogether 

GATHERED  together,  is  to  be  — 

7*o  {cause  to)  congregate,  convene,  ?np  qahal,  5. 

Num.  10.    7  the  congregation  is  to  be  gathered  toge. 
GATHERED  thick  together,  to  he  — 
7*o  throng  or  gather  upon,  siraOpolfrucu  epalhroiz. 

Luke  1 1.  29  the  people  were  gathered  thick  together 
GATHERED  up  again,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  gathered,  ^px  asaph,  2. 

2  Sa.  14. 14  water,  .which  cannot  be  gathered  up  ag. 

GATHERER  — 

7*0  cultivate,  gather,  or  seek  out  figs,  D^3  balas. 

Amos  7. 14  but  I  (was) . .  a  gatherer  of  sycamore  fruit 
GATHERING  — 
l.Gathering,  ^px  oseph. 

Isa.  32.  10  shall  fail,  the  gathering  shall  not  come 
33-    4  gathered . .  the  gathering  of  the  caterpillar 
^.Obedience,  expectation,  hope,  t\^\  yiqqhah. 

Gen.  49. 10  and  unto  him . .  the  gathering  of  the  people 
3.7*0  gatlier,  c^jj  qashash,  3a. 

Num  15.  33  And  they  that  found  him  gathering  sticks 

1  Ki.  17.  10  the  widow  woman  (was)  there  gathering 

17.  12  and,  behold,  I  (am)  gathering  two  sticks 
4. Laying  aside,  collection,  \oyta  logia. 

1  Co.  16.   2  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come 


GATHERING 


386 


GENEALOGY 


GATHERING  together  — 
1  .Collection,  nijpo  miqveh. 

Gen.    i.  10  the  gathering  together  of  the  waters 
2.  Leading  together  unto,  itncvvay^y-i)  episunagdge. 

z  Th.   2.    i  and  (by)  our  gathering  together  unto  him 

GATH  HE'-FHER,  nm  F13  wine  press  of  tlie  well. 
A  city  of  Zebulun,  not  far  from  Japhia  (now  called 
Y(tfa);  the  native  place  of  the  prophet  Jonah,  whose 
reputed  tomb  is  shown  at  the  village  of  Et-Meshhad 
on  the  top  of  a  hilt,  two  miles  E.  of  Sujurieh.  It  is 
called  Giftah-hepher,  in  Josh.  19.  13. 

2  Ki.14.  25  which  he  spake  by.  -Jonah,  .of  G.  H. 

GATH  RIH'-MON,  f&]  na  winepress  of  Rimmon. 

1.  A  Levitical  city  of  Dan  on  the  plain  of  Philistia 
near  Joppa. 

Josh  19.  45  And  Jehud,  and  Beneberak,  and  G. 

2.  A  Levitical  town  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  W- 
of  the  Jordon.     I11  1  Ch.  6.  70,  it  is  called  Bileam. 

Josh  21.  25  Taanach  with  her  suburbs,  and  G.  with 
1  Ch.  6.  69  Aijalon  with  her  suburbs,  and  G.  with 

GAY  — 

Bright,  \a/j.irp6s  lampros. 

Jas.     2.    3  to  him  that  weareth  the  gay  clothing 

GA'-ZA,  rw&  rd(a,  tlie  strong  place. 

1.  One  of  the  five  chief  cities  of  the  Philistines,  aud  still 
called  Ghuzzeh  or  Azzah.  Like  Damascus  it  is  remark- 
aide  for  its  existence  from  the  remotest  times.  It  is 
still  a  place  of  importance,  and  even  yet  larger 
than  Jerusalem. 

Gen.  10.  19  the  border  of  the  Canaanites  was . .  unto  G. 
Josh.  10.  41  smote  them  from  Kadesh-barnea.  .uutoG. 
11.  22  only  in  G. .  .and  in  Ashdod,  there  rema. 

15.  47  G.  with  her  towns  and  her  villages 
Judg.  1.  id  Also  Judah  took  G.  with  the  coast  thereof 

16.  1  Then  went  Samson  to  G.,  and  saw  there 
16.  21  the  Philistines,  .brought  him  down  to  G. 

1  Sa.    6.  17  trespass  offering  unto  the  LoKD.  .for  G. 

2  Ki.  i3.    8  He  smote  the  Philistines,  .unto  G. 

Jer.   47.    1  that  came . .  before  that  Pharoah  smote  G. 

47.  5  Baldness  is  come  upon  G.  ;  Ashkelon  is 

Amos  1.  6  For  three  transgressions  of  G. .  .1  will  not 

1.  7  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  of  G.,  which 

Zeph.  2.  4  G.  shall  be  forsaken,  and  Ashkelon  a  des 

Zech.  9.  5  G.  also,  .and  be.  .sorrowful;  and  Ekron 

g.  5  the  king  shall  perish  from  G.,  and  Ashk. 

Acts    S.  26  that  goeth  down  from  Jerusalem  unto  G. 

2,  A  city  of  Ephraim. 

Judg.  6.   4  increase  of.  .earth,  till  thou  come  unto  G. 

1  Ch.  7.  28  Shechem  also  and  the  towns,  .unto  G. 
GAZ'-ZAM,  0*3  devourer,  swaggerer. 

The  sons  of  Gazzam  were  among  the  families  of  the 
Nethinim  who  returned  from  the  exile  with  Zerubbabel. 
B.o.  536. 

Ezra    2.  48  children  of  Nekoda,  the  children  of  G. 

Neh.   7.  51  Tlie  children  of  G.,  the  children  of  Uzza 

GA-ZA-THITES,  GA-ZITES,  D'JllJ/. 

The  inhabitants  of  Gaza  or  Azzah. 

Josh. 13.    3  five  lords  of  the  Philistines  ;  the  G.,  and 
Judg  16.    2  (Audit  wastuld)the  G.,  saying,  Samson 

GAZE,  to  — 

l.To  see,  look,  behold,  nxn  raah. 

E.\udi9.  21  lest  they  break  through. .to  gaze,  and 

2.  To  look  into,  ^^Kittos  cmblepo. 

Acts    1.  11  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven?  this 
GA'-ZER,  in  precipice.     See  Gezee. 
The  difference   in  the  orthography  arises    from   the 
Hebrew  accent  being  here  attended  to,  though  neglected 
in  other  places  where  the  same  form  occurs. 

2  Sa.    5.  2s  smote,  .from  Geba  until  thou  come  to  G. 
1  Ch.  14.  16  smote. . Philistines  from  Gibeon..to  G. 

GA'-ZEZ,  it  a  shearer. 

1.  A  son  of  Caleb  by  Ephah  his  concubine.    B.O.  1520. 

1  Ch.    2.  46  Ephah.  .bare  Haran,  and  Moza,  and  G. 

2.  Grandson  of  Caleb  son  of  Jephunueh.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Oh.    2.  46  bare  Haran.  .aud  Haran  begat  G. 
GAZING  stock  — 
Sight,  appearance,  **jH  roi. 

Nah.    3.    6  And  I.  .will  set  thee  as  a  gazing  stock 
GAZING  stock,  to  make  a  — 
To  -make  a  spectacle,  Ocarplfa  thcatrizo. 

Heb.  10.  31  whilst  ye  were  made  a  gazing  stock  both 

GE'-BA,  JOJ.,  Tafraa,  height,  kill 
A  Levitical  city  of  Benjamin.  In  the  cities  along  the  N. 
boundary  the  name  is  given  as  Gala,  (a  change  due  to 
the  emphasis  in  Hebrew  before  a  pause),  and  the  same 
change  occurs  in  Ezra  2.  26  ;  Neh.  7.  30  and  u.  31 ;  2Sa. 
5.  25  ;  2  Ki.  23.  8 ;  the  last  three  of  these  beiug  in  the 
t '01111.1011  Version  Geba.  In  one  place  the  name  Geba  is 
mm  las  the  northern  landmark  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah 
&n  I  I  n.i  ;inm_  in  the  expression  "from  l-\.i  to  1  .  ny\ 
mm"  (2  Ki.  23.  8.);  aud  also  asan  eastern  limit  to  Gazer 
(2  Sa.  5.  25). 

■l"-h  ax.  17  Gibeou  with  her  suburbs.  G.  with  her 
1  Sa.  13.    3  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines,  .in  G. 
and  smote  the  Philistines  from  G...to 
rgH  Vsa  built  with  them  G.  of  Benjamin 

a  Ki.  .■;.    3  the  priesta  had  burnt  incense,  f rom  O. 
i  1  ii.   6. 60  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin;  G. 


iCh.  8.  6  of  the  fathers  of  the  inhabitants  of  G. 
2  Ch.  16.  6  and  he  built  therewith  G.  and  fMizpah 
Neh.  11.  31  The  children  also  of  Beujamin  from  G. 

12.  29  out  of  the  fields  of  G.  and  Azmaveth 
Isa.   10.  29  they  have  taken  up  their  lodging  at  G. 
Zech  14.  10  a  plain  from  G.  to  fiimnion  south  of  Jer, 
GE'-BAL,  "?33  border,  hilly. 

1.  The  city  Bibylus,  S.  of  Sidon,  near  the  sea. 

Eze.  27.   9  The  ancients  of  G. .  .were  in  thee  thy 

2.  A  district  betweeu  the  S.  end  of  the  Salt  Sea  and 
Petra,  inhabited  by  Edom. 

Psa.  S3.   7  G.,  and  Amnion,  and  Amalek  ;  the  Phili. 

GE'-BER,  ~Q3  strong. 

1.  "The  son  of  Geber,"  who  had  charge  of  Havoth-Jair 
and  tlie  district  of  Argob  for  Solomon.    B.C.  1014. 

1  Ki.    4.  13  The  son  of  G.,  in  llamoth-gilead ;  to  him 

2.  Geber,  the  son  of  Uri,  had  "  the  land  of  Gilead,"  a 
district  S.  of  the  former— the  country  originally  pos- 
sessed by  Sihon  and  Og — probably  the  modern  Belka, 
the  great  pasture  lands  of  the  tribes  E.  of  the  Jordan. 

1  Ki.    4.  19  G.  the  son  of  Uri.  .in  the  country  of  Gil. 

GE'-BEH,  D*£g  springs,  cisterns,  ditches. 

A  city  of  Benjamin,  between  Anathoth  and  the  ridge 

on  which  Nob  was  situated.    Compare  Gob. 

Isa.    10.  31  the  inhabitants  of  G.  gather  themselves 
GE-DAL'-IAH,  ^bis,  n;bii  Jah  is  great. 

1.  Son  of  Ahikam  and  grandson  of  Shaphan  king  Josiah's 
secretary.  After  the  destruction  of  the  temple  (B.C.  588) 
Nebuchadnezzar  left  Gedaliah  with  a  Chaideean  guard 
at  Mizpeh,  six  miles  N.  of  Jerusalem,  to  govern  the  vine- 
dressers and  husbandmen  left  m  the  land. 

2  Ki.  25.  22  over  them  he  made  G.  the  son  of  Ahikam 

25.  23  the  king  of  Babylon  had  made  G.  gover. 
25.  23  there  came  to  G.  to  Mizpah,  even  Ish. 
25.  24  G.  sware  to  them,  and  to  their  men,  and 
25.  25  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah .  .smote  G. 
Jer.  39.  14  Even  they  sent,  .committed  him  unto  G. 
40.    5  Go  back  also  to  G.  tlie  son  of  Ahikam 
40.    6  Then  went  Jeremiah  unto  G.  the  son  of 
40.    7  the  king  of  Babylon  had  made  G. .  .gover. 
40.    8  Then  they  came  to  G.  to  Mizpah,  even  Is. 
40.    9  And  G.  the  son  of  Ahikam.  .sware  unto 
40.  11  he  had  set  over  them  G.  the  son  of  Alii. 
40.  12  Jews,  .came  to  the  land  of  Judah,  to  G. 
40.  13  aud  all  the  captains,  .came  to  G.  to  M. 
40.  14  But  G.  the  son  of  Ahikam  believed  them 
40.  15  Then  Johanan.  .spake  to  G.  in  Mizpah 

40.  16  But  G.  the  son  of  Ahikam  said  unto  Jo. 

41.  1  Ishmael.  .came  unto  G.  the  son  of  Ahi. 
41.  2  Then  arose  Ishmael.  .and  smote  G.theson 
41.  3  also  slew  all  the  Jews  that  were,  .with  G. 
41.  4  And  it  came  to  pass,  .after  he  had  slain  G. 
41.  6  he  said.  .Come  to  G.  the  son  of  Ahikam 
41.  9  the  men,  whom  he  had  slain  because  of  G. 
41.  10  Ncbuzar-adan .  .had  committed  to  G. 

41.  16  after  (that)  he  had  slain  G.  the  son  of  A. 
41.  18  because  Ishmael.  .had  slain  G.  the  son 
43.   6  every  person..  Nebuzar-adan.  .left  with  G. 

2.  A  Levite,  one  of  the  six  sons  of  Jeduthun. 

1  Ch.25.    3  the  sons  of  Jeduthun  ;  G.,  and  Zeri,  and 
25.   9  the  second  to  G.,  who  with  his  brethren 

3.  A  priest  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife  in  the  exile. 
B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  18  Maaseiah,  and  Eliezer,  and  Jarib,  and  G. 

4.  Grandfather  of  Zephaniah  the  prophet.    B.C.  700. 

Zeph.  1.    1  Cushi,  the  son  of  G.,  the  son  of  Amariah 

5.  A  prince  who  caused  Jeremiah  to  be  imprisoned. 
B.C.  590. 

Jer.   38.    1  G.  the  son  of  Pashur.  .heard  the  words 

GE-DE'-ON,  FsSewv,  Greek  form  of  the  Heb.  G-ideon. 

Heb.  11.  32  for  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  G. 
GE'-DER,  -i-n  tailed. 

A  royal  city  of  the  Canaanites  taken  by  Joshua.  It 
was  on  the  W.  of  the  Jordan,  in  the  extreme  tS. 
It  was  not  the  same  as  Gedor  which  was  between 
Hebron  and  Bethlehem  ;  nor  was  it  Gederah  in  the  low 
country ;  but  may  be  the  Gedor  named  in  1  Ch.  4.  39, 
in  connection  with  the  Simeonites. 

Josh.12.  13  king  of  Debir,  one  ;  the  king  of  G.,  one 
GE-DE'-BAH,  rr^ian  sheep  cote. 
A  city  in  the  lowlands  of  Judah. 

Josh.  15.  36  Sharaim,  and  Adithaim,  and  G.,  andGed. 
GE-DE-RA-THITE,  *rrna.     Inhabitant  of  Gederah. 

1  Ch.  1 2.    4  Jahaziel,  and  Johanan ,  and  Jozabad  the  G. 

GE-DE-RITE,  nna.     An  inhabitant  of  Geder. 

1  Ch.27.  28  in  tlie  low  plains.  .Baal-hanan  the  G. 
GE-DE-ROTH,  fi'ma  sheepcotes. 

A  town  in  the  lowlands  of  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  41  G.,  Beth-dagon,  and  Naamah,  and  Mak. 

2  Oh. 28.  t8  G.,  and  Shocho  with  the  villages  thereof 
GE-DE-RO  THA-IM,  D$Fna  tiro  sheepfolds. 

A  town  in  the  pastureland  of  Judah. 

Josh.  15.  36Sha.,  and  Adhitaim,  and  Gederah,  and  G. 
GE'-DOR,  *rn3,  Via. 

1.  A  city  in  the  mountainous  part  of  Judah  a  few 
miles  X.  of  Hebron.  It  is  now  called  Jedih;  and  hall- 
way between  Bethlehem  and  Hebron;  but  the  Gcedur 
of  Eusebius  is  more  likely,  and  is  ten  miles  S.  of 
Diospolia  (now  called  Ludd). 

Josh.  15. 58  Halhul,  Beth-zur,  aud  G. 


2.  The  town  of  Jeroham  whose  sons  were  among  the 
mighty  men  of  Benjamin  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag. 

1  Ch.  12.    7  Joelah,  and  Zeb  the  sons  of  Jeroham  of  G. 

3.  The  son  of  Jehiel  father  of  Gibeon,  and  an  ancestor 
of  Saul.     B.C.  1100. 

1  Ch.  ;8.  31  And  G.,  and  Ahio,  and  Zacher 

9.  37  G.,  and  Ahio,  and  Zechariah,  and  Mikloth 

4.  This  name  occurs  twice  in  the  genealogies  of  Judah, 
—in  the  former  Penuel  is  called  the  fattier  of  Gedor, 
and  in  the  latter  Jered  is  in  the  same  relation.  In  the 
Targum  both  these  names  (with  others)  are  given  to 
Moses  by  Jehudijah  who  is  identified  with  the  daughter 
of  Pharaoh. 

1  Ch.  4.    4  Penuel  the  father  of  G.,  and  Ezer  the  fa. 
4.  18  Jehudijah  bare  Jered  the  father  of  G. 

5.  A  place  in  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  in  the  extreme  S.  of 
Judah,  and  different  from  that  named  under  No.  1. 
It  was  between  the  S.  of  Judah  aud  Mount  Seir,  i.e. 
Petra. 

1  Ch.  4.  39  And  they  went  to  the  entrance  of  G. 
GE-HA'-ZI,  'in-a  denier,  diminisher. 

The  servant  of  the  prophet  Elisha.     B.C.  894. 

2  Ki.  4.  12  And  he  said  to  G.  his  servant,  Call  this 

4.  14  G.  answered,  Verily  she  hath  no  child 
4.  25  to  G.  his  servant,  Behold,  .that  Shuna. 
4.  27  but  G.  came  near  to  thrust  her  away 
4.  29  Then  he  said  to  G.,  Gird  up  thy  loins 
4.  31  G.  passed  on  before  them,  and  laid  the 

4.  36  he  called  G.,  and  said,  Call  this  Shunani. 

5.  20  G.,  the  servant  of  Elisha  the  man  of  God 
5.  21  So  G.  followed  after  Naanian 

5.  25  And  Elisha  said  unto  him,  Whence.  .G.? 
8.   4  the  king  talked  with  G.,  the  servant  of  the 

8.  s  G.  said.  .0  king,  this  (is)  the  woman,  aud 

GE-Ll'-LOTH,  rn1?^  circles. 

A  place  named  among  the  points    marking   the    S. 

boundary  line  of  Benjamin.     This  boundary  went  from 

Enshemesh  towards  Geliloth  over  against  the  ascent 

of  Adummin.     In  Josh.  15.    7,  Gilgal  is  substituted  for 

Geliloth. 

Josh  18. 17  G.,  which  (is)  over  against  the  going  up  of 
GE-MAL'-LI,  'Spa  camel  owner. 

A  Danite,  father  of  Ammiel,  ruler  of  his  tribe,  and  one 
of  the  twelve  men  sent  out  to  explore  the  land.  B.C. 
1490. 

Numi3.  12  Of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  Ammiel  the  son  of  G. 
GE-MAR'-IAH,  rrnoa,  vinca. 

1.  Son  of  Shaphan  and  father  of  Micaiah.    B.C.  599. 

Jer.  36.  10  in  the  chamber  of  G.  the  son  of  Shaphan 
36.  11  When  Michaiah  the  son  of  G. .  .had  heard 
36.  12  all  the  princes  sat  there,  (even).  .G.,  the 
36.  25  G.,had  made  intercession  to  the  king.that 

2.  Son  of  Hilkiah,  sent  (B.C.  597)  by  king  Zedekiah  as 
ambassador  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  aud  the  bearer  of 
Jeremiah's  letter  to  the  captive  Jews. 

Jer.  29.    3  By  the  hand  of.  .G.  the  son  of  Hilkiah 
GENDER,  to  — 
l.To  beget,  ~h)  yalad. 

Job  38.  29  the  hoary  frost,  .who  hath  gendered  it? 

2.  To  cause  to  pass  through,  "iny  abar,  3. 

Job  21.  10  Their  bull  gendereth,  and  faileth  not 

3.  To  beget^  yevvdta  gennao. 

Gal.     4.  24  which  gendereth  to  bondage,  which  is  A. 

2  Ti.     2.  23  knowing  that  they  do  gender  strifes 
GENDER,  to  let  — 
To  cause  to  He  dozen,  WJ  rctba,  5. 

Lev.  19.  19  Thou  shalt  not  let  thy  cattle  gender  with 
GENEALOGIES  — 
Genealogy,  yeveaXoyla  genealogia. 

1  Ti.    1.    4  Neither  give  heed  to.  .endless  genealogies 
GENEALOGIES,  to  be  reckoned  by  — 
To  reckon  by  genealogy,  bn;  yachas. 

1  Ch.    5.  17  All  these  were  reckoned  by  genealogies 

9.  1  So  all  Israel  were  reckoned  by  genealo. 

GENEALOGY  — 

l.To  be  reckoned  by  genealogy,  bti;  yachas,  7. 

1  Ch.   4.  33  These,  .their  habitations,  and  their  gene. 

7.  5  reckoned  in  all  by  their  genealogies  four. 
7.  7  were  reckoned  bytheir  genealogies  twenty 
7.    9  after  their  genealogy  by  their  generations 

7.  40  the  number  throughout  the  genealogy  of 

2  Ch.  12.  15  written  in  the  book,  .concerning  genea.? 

31.  16  Besides  their  genealogy  of  males,  from 
31.  17  Both  to  the  genealogy  of  the  priests  by 
31.  18  And  to  the  genealogy  of  all  their  little 
31.  19  to  all  that  were  reckoned  by  genealogies 
Ezra   2.  62  those  that  were  reckoned  by  genealogy 

8.  1  the  genealogy  of  them  that  went  up  with 
Neh.  7.  64  those  that  were  reckoned  by  genealogy 

^.Genealogy,  iyrjiyachas. 

Neh.  7.    5  I  found  a  register  of  the  genealogy  of 
^.Genealogy,  yeveaXoyla  genealogia. 

Titus 3.    9  But  avoid,  .genealogies,  and  contentions 
GENEALOGY,  to  he  reckoned  — 
To  be  reckoned  by  genealogy,  fc'ir  yachas,  7. 

1  Ch.  5.    1  the  genealogy  is  not  to  lie  reckoned  after 
5.    7  families,  when  the  genealogy,  .was  reck. 

9.  22  These  were  reckonedbytheirgeuealogyin 
Ezra  8.  3  were  reckoned  by  genealogy  of  the  males 
Neh.   7.   5  that  they  might  be  reckoned  by  genea. 


GENERAL 


387 


GENTILE 


GENERAL  — 

Prince,  head,  chief,  captain,  "ib*  sar. 

i  Ch.  27.  34  the  general  of  the  king's  army  (was)  J. 
GENERALLY  — 
To  be  gathered,  *]px  asaph,  2. 

2  Sa.  17.  11  Israel  'be  generally  gathered  unto  thee 
GENERATION"  — 
l.Circle,  generation,  lii  dor. 

Gen.   6.   9  a  just  man  (and)  perfect  in  his  generations 
7.    1  righteous  before  me  in  this  generation 
9.  T2  which  I  make,  .for  perpetual  generations 
15. 16  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they  shall 
17.    7,  9  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations 
17.  12  every  man  child  in  your  generations,  he 
Exod.  1.    6  And  Joseph  died . .  and  all  that  generation 
3. 15  this  (is)  my  memorial  unto  all  generations 
2. 14  a  feast,  .throughout  your  generations 
12.  17  observe  this  day  in  your  generations  by 
12.  42  to  be  observed,  .in  their  generations 
16. 32,  33  an  omer.  .to  be  kept  for  your  genera. 
17.  16  war  with  Amalek  from  generation  to  gen. 
27.  21  a  statute  for  ever  unto  their  generations 

29.  42  offering  throughout  your  generations,  (at) 

30.  8  perpetual  incense . .  throughout  your  gen. 
30.  10  atonement,  .throughout  your  generations 
30.  21  to  his  seed  throughout  their  generations 

30.  31  oil  unto  me  throughout  your  generations 

31.  13  a  sign,  .throughout  your  generations;  that 
31.  16  observe  the  sabbath  throughout  their  ge. 
40.  15  priesthood  throughout  their  generations 

Lev.    3. 17  a  perpetual  statute  for  your  generations 
6.  18  a  statute  for  ever  in  your  generations 
7. 36  for  ever  throughout  their  generations 
10.    9  a  statute,  .throughout  your  generations 

17.  7  unto  them  throughout  their  generations 

21.  17  thy  seed  in  their  generations  that  hath 

22.  3  of  all  your  seed  amoug  your  generations 
23. 14,  31  for  ever  throughout  your  generations 

23.  21  a  statute,  .throughout  your  generations 
23.  41  a  statute  for  ever  in  your  generations  :  ye 

23.  43  That  your  generations  may  know  that  I 

24.  3  a  statute  for  ever  in  your  generations 

25.  30  established,  .throughout  his  generations 
Numio.    8  ordinance  for  ever  throughout  your  gen. 

15.  14  whosoever  (be)  among  you  in  your  gener. 
15.  15  an  ordinance  for  ever  in  your  generations 
15.  21  an  heave  offering  in  j^our  generations 
15.  23  henceforward  among  your  generations 
15.  38  fringes ..  throughout  their  generations 

18.  23  for  ever  throughout  your  generations 
32. 13  forty  years,  until  all  the  generation,  that 
35.  29  unto  you  throughout  your  generations 

Deut.  1.  35  not  one  of  these  men  of  this  evil  genera. 
2.  14  until  all  the  generation  of  the  men  of  war 
7.   9  keepeth  covenant,  .to  a  thousand  genera. 
23.    2  even  to  his  tenth  generation  shall  he  not 
23.    3  even  to  their  tenth  generation  shall  they 
23.    8  children . .  shall  enter . .  in  their  third  gen. 
29.  22  So  that  the  generation  to  come . .  shall  say 
32.   5  a  perverse  and  crooked  generation 
32.   7  consider  the  years  of  many  generations 
32.  20  for  they  (are)  a  very  froward  generation 
Josh  22.  27  our  generations  after  us,  that  we  might 
22. 28  say.  .to  our  generations  in  time  to  come 
Judg.  2. 10  all  that  generation  were  gathered  unto 

2.  10  and  there  arose  another  generation  after 

3.  2  Only  that  the  generations,  .might  know 

1  Ch.16.  15  he  commanded  to  a  thousand  generations 
Esth.  9.  28  and  kept  throughout  every  generation 
Job  42.  16  lived  Job.  .and  saw.  .(even)  four  genera. 
Psa.  12.    7  preserve  them  from  this  generation  for 
14.    5  God  (is)  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous 
22.  30  it  shall  be  accounted,  .for  a  generation 
24-    6  the  generation  of  them  that  seek  him 
33. 11  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  genera. 
45.  17  name  to  be  remembered  in  all  generations 

48.  13  ye  may  tell  (it)  to  the  generation  follow. 
49. 11  their  dwelling  places  to  all  generations 

49.  19  He  shall  go  to  the  generation  of  his  fath. 
61.   6  wilt  prolong,  .his  years  as  many  genera. 

71.  18  showed  thy  strength  unto  (this)  genera. 

72.  5  They  shall  fear  thee,  .throughout all  gen. 

73.  15  I  should  offend  (against)  the  generation 
78.  4  showing  to  the  generation  to  come  the 
78.    6  That  the  generation  to  come  might  know 

78.  8  rebellious  generation  ;  a  generation  (that) 

79.  13  show  forth  thy  praise  to  all  generations 
85.  5  draw  out  thine  anger  to  all  generations  ? 
89.    1  make  known  thy  faithfulness  to  all  gen. 

89.  4  build  up  thy  throne  to  all  generations 

90.  1  been  our  dwelling  place  in  all  generations 

95. 10  long  was  I  grieved  with  (this)  generation 
100.   5  and  his  tmth(endureth)  to  all  generations 
102.  12  andthy  remembrance  unto  all  generations 
102.  18  be  written  for  the  generation  to  come 
102.  24  thy  years  (are)  throughout  all  generations 

105.  8  he  commanded  to  a  thousand  generations 

106.  31  for  righteousness  unto  all  generations  for 
109.  13  in  the  generation  following  let  their  name 
112.  2  the  generation  of  the  upright  shall  be 
119. 90  Thy  faithfulness  (is)  unto  all  generations 
135.  13  thy  memorial.,  throughout  all  generations 
145.  4  One  generation  shall  praise  thy  works  to 
145.  13  dominion  (endureth)  throughout  all  gen. 
146. 10  The  Lord  shall  reign .  .unto  all  genera. 

Prov  27.  24  doth  the  crown  (endure)  to  every  gener.  ? 

30. 11  a  generation  (that)  curseth  their  father 
30.  12  generation  (that  are)  pure  in  their  own 
30.  13  a  generation,  O  how  lofty  are  their  eyes  ! 
30. 14  a  generation,  whose  teeth  (are  as)  swords 


Eccl.  1.  4  generationpassethaway.and.. generation 
Isa.  13.  20  dwelt  in  from  generation  to  generation 
34. 10  from  generation  to  generation  it  shall  lie 
34. 17  from  generation  to  generation  shall  they 
41.  4  calling  the  generations  from  the  beginn.? 
5r.  8  my  salvation  from  generation  to  genera. 
51.  9  awake,  as-in  the  ancient  days,  in  the  gen. 
53.  8  and  who  shall  declare  his  generation '( 
58.  12  shalt  raise  up  the  foundations  of  manyg. 

60.  15  I  will  make  thee,  .a  joy  of  many  genera.? 

61.  4  repair,  .the  desolations  of  many  generat. 
Jer.    2.  31  O  generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 

7.  29  and  forsaken  the  generation  of  his  wrath 
50.  39  dwelt  in  from  generation  to  generation 

Lam.  5.  19  thy  throne  from  generation  to  generation 
Joel    1.    3  and  their  children  another  generation 

2.  2  any  more,  .to  the  years  of  many  generat. 

3.  20  Jerusalem  from  generation  to  generation 
2,Circle,  generation,  ~r  dar. 

Dan.  4.   3  his  dominion  (is)  from  generation  to  gen. 

4.  34  his  kingdom  (is)  from  generation  to  gene. 
^.Generation,  y^v^d  genea. 

Matt.  1.  17  all  the  generations .  .(are)  fourteen  gene. 
1. 17  into  Babylon  (are)  fourteen  generations 
1. 17  unto  Christ  (are)  fourteen  generations 

11.  16  whereunto  shall  1  liken  this  generation  ? 

12.  39  An  evil .  .generation  seeketh  after  a  sign 

22.  41  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  tins  generat. 
12.  42  rise  up  in  the  judgment  with  this  gener. 

12.  45  Even  so.  .also  unto  this  wicked  generation 
16.  4  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seek. 
17. 17  0  faithless  and  perverse  generation,  how 

23.  36  All.  .shall  come  upon  this  generation 

24.  34  This  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all 
Marks.  12  Why  doth  this  generation  seek  aftera  sign? 

8. 12  There  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  this  ge. 

8.  38  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation 
9. 19  6  faithless  generation,  how  long  shall  I 

13.  30  this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all 
Luke  1.  48  henceforth  all  generations  shall  call  me 

7.  31  shall  I  liken  the  men  of  this  generation  ? 

9.  41  0  faithless  and  perverse  generation,  how 
11.  29  This  is  an  evil  generation  :  they  seek  a 
;i.  30  so  shall,  .the  Son  of  man  be  to  this  gene. 
11. 31  rise  up.  .with  the  men  of  this  generation 
11.  32  rise  up  in  the  judgment  with  this  gener. 
11.  50  blood,  .may  be  required  of  this  generat. 

11.  51  It  shall  be  required  of  this  generation 

16.  8  are  in  their  generation  wiser  than  the 

17.  25  first  must  he.  .be  rejected  of  this  genera. 
21.  32  This  generation  shall  not  pass  away 

Acts    2.  40  Save  yourselves  from  this,  .generation 
8. 33  and  who  shall  declare  his  generation  ? 
13. 36  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  gen. 
Col.     1. 26  mystery,  .hid  from  ages  and  from  genera. 
Heb.  3.  10 1  was  grieved  with  that  generation,  and 
±.Birih,  origin,  yeyeas  genesis. 

Matt.  1.    1  The  book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  C'hr. 
5. Progeny,  produce,  yeyyyjfia  gennema. 

Matt.  3.    7  0  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned 

12.  34  0  generation  of  vipers,  how  can  ye,  being 
23.  33  serpents,  .generation  of  vipers,  how  can 

Luke  3.    7  0  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned 

Q.Roxe,  hind,  y4vo$  genos. 

1  Pe.    2.   9  But  ye.  .a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
GENERATION  to  generation,  from  — 
To  generations  of  generations,  els  yeveas  yevt&y. 
•     Luke  1.  50  that  fear  him  [from  generation  to  gener.] 
GENERATIONS  — 
Generations,  births,  nnVin  toledoih. 

Gen.    2.   4  These  (are)  the  generations  of  the  heav. 

5.  1  This  (is)  the  book  of  the  generations  of 

6.  9  These  (are)  the  generations  of  Noah :  No. 
10.    1  the  generations  of  the  sons  of  Noah 

10.  32  after  their  generations,  in  their  nations 

11.  10  These  (are)  the  generations  of  Shem 

11.  27  Now  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Terah 
25. 12  Now  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Ishm. 
25.  13  by  their  names,  according  to  then*  gener. 

25.  19  And  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Isaac 
36.   1  Now  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Esau 

36.  9  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Esau  the 

37.  2  These  (are)  the  generations  of  Jacob 
Exod.  6.  16  the  names,  .according  to  their  generati. 

6.  19  the  families,  .according  to  their  generat. 
Num.  1.  20  by  their  generations,  aftertheir  families 
[So  in  v.  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40.] 

1.  42  throughout  their  generations,  after  their 

3.    1  These  also  (are)  the  generations  of  Aaron 

Ruth  4.  iS  Now  these  (are)  the  generations  of  Pharez 

1  Ch.  1.  29  These  (are)  their  generations:  The  first  b. 

5.    7  when  the  genealogy  of  their  generations 

7.  2  valiant  men  of  might  in  their  generations 
7.    4  And  with  them,  by  their  generations 

7.  q  after  their  genealogy  by  their  generations 

8.  2S  heads  of  the  fathers,  by  their  generations 

9.  9  their  brethren,  according  to  their  gener. 
9.  34  These,  .(were)  chief  throughout  their  ge. 

26.  31  chief.. according  to  the  generations  of 
GEN-NE-SA'-RET,  (Sea  of),  Vevvi)(rap4r. 

In  the  Old  Testament  it  is  called  the  "Sea  of  Chinner- 
eth  or  Cinneroth,"  from  a  town  of  that  name  on  its 
shore.  It  is  also  called  the  "  Sea  of  Galilee,"  and  the 
"  Lake  or  Sea  of  Tiberias." 

Matti4-  34  gone  over,  they  came  into  the  land  of  [G.] 
Mark  6.  53  they  came  into  the  land  of  G.,  and  drew 
Luke  5.    1  came  to  pass,  .he  stood  by  the  lake  of  G. 


GENTILE  — 

l.Xation,  a  collective  body,  na  goi. 

Gen.  10.    5  By  these  were  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles 
Judg.  4.    2  which  dwelt  in  Harosheth  of  the  Gentiles 
4.  13  from  Harosheth  of  the  Gentiles  unto  the 
4. 16  pursued.,  unto  Harosheth  of  the  Gentiles 
Isa.   11.  10  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek :  and  his  rest 
42.    1  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Ge. 
42.    6  and  give  thee .  .for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles 
49.    6  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the  G. 
49.  22  I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  Gentiles 
54.    3  and  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles 
60.    3  And  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light 
60.    5  forces  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  unto 
60.  11  may  bring  unto  thee  the  forces  of  the  G. 

60.  16  Thou  shalt.  .suck  the  milk  of  the  GentiL 

61.  6  ye  shall  eat  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles 

61.  9  their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the  Ge. 

62.  2  the  Gentiles  shall  see  thy  righteousness 
66.  12  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing 
66. 19  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the  GentiL 

Jer.     4.    7  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his 
14.  22  Are  there,  .among  the  vanities  of  the  Ge. 
16.  19  the  Gentiles  shall  come  unto  thee  from 
46.    1  The  word  of  the  Lord,  .against  the  Gen. 
Lam.  2.   9  her  princes  (are)  among  the  Gentiles  :  the 
Eze.     4.  13  eat  their  defiled  bread  among  the  Genti. 
Hos.    S.    S  now  shall  they  be  among  the  Gentiles  as 
Joel    3.    o  Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  Gentiles 
Mic.    5.    S  the  remnant,  .shall  be  among  the  Gent. 
Zech.  1.  21  to  cast  out  the  horns  of  the  Gentiles 
Mai.    1.  11  my  name  (shall  be)  great  among  the  Ge. 
2.j\ration,  cBvos  cthnos. 

Matt.  4.  15  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles 
6. 32  For  after  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles 
10.    5  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
10.  18  a  testimony  against  them  and  the  Genti. 
12.  18  he  shall  show  judgment  to  the  Gentiles 

12.  21  And  in  his  name  shall  the  Gentiles  trust 
20.  19  shall  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles  to  mock 

20.  25  Ye  know  that  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles 
Markio.  33  and  shall  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles 

10.  42  are  accounted  to  rule  over  the  Gentiles 
Luke  2.  32  A  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
18.  32  For  he  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  Genti. 

21.  24  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles 

21.  24  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled 

22.  25  The  kings  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  lords. 
Acts    4.  27  Herod,  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the  Ge. 

7.  45  into  the  possession  of  the  Gentiles,  whom 
9.  15  to  bear  my  name  before  the  Gentiles,  and 

10.  45  because  that  on  the  Gentiles  also  was  po. 

11.  1  heard  that  the  Gentiles  had  also  received 
11.  18  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  gran. 

13.  42  [the  Gentiles]  besought  that  these  words 
13.  46  first,  .to  you.  .lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles 
13.  47  I  have  set  thee  to  be  alight  of  the  Gen. 

13.  4S  when  the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were 

14.  2  the  unbelieving  Jews  stirred  up  the  Gen. 
14.    5  was  an  assault  made  both  of  the  Gentiles 

14.  27  opened  the  door  of  faith  unto  the  Gentil. 

15.  3  declaring  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles 
15.  7  that  the  Gentiles,  .should  hear  the  word 
15.  12  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by 
15.  14  how  God  at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles 
15.  17  all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name  is 
15.  19  which  from  among  the  Gentiles  are  tur. 
15.  23  unto  the  brethren  which  are  of  the  Gen. 
18.  6  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gent. 
21.  11  shall  deliver,  .into  the  hands  of  the  Ge. 
21. 19  what.  .God  had  wrought  among  the  Gen. 
21.  21  the  Jews  which  are  among  the  Gentiles 

21.  23  As  touching  the  Gentiles  which  believe 

22.  21 1  will  send  thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gen. 
26. 17  Delivering  thee  from,  .the  Gentiles,  unto 
26.  20  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  repent 
26.  23  and  should  show  light,  .to  the  Gentiles 
28.  2S  the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  unto  the  Ge. 

Rom.  1.  13  among  you  also,  even  as  among  other  G. 
2. 14  For  when  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not 

2.  24  God  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles 

3.  29  not  also  of  the  Gentiles?  Yes,  of  the  G. 
9.  24  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Ge.? 
g.  30  That  the  Gentiles,  which  followed  not 

11.  11  salvation  (is  come)  unto  the  Gentiles,  for 

11. 12  of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles  how 
11.  13  For  I  speak  to  you  Gentiles,  inasmuch  as 

11. 13  as  I  am  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  I 

11.  25  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come 
15.   9  that  the  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for 
15.   9  I  will  confess  to  thee  among  the  Gentiles 
15.  10  saith,  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with  his  peo. 

15. 11  Praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles;  and 

15.  12  he  that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gent. 

15. 12  in  him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust 

15.  16  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gent. 
15. 16  that  the  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might 
15.  iS  to  make  the  Gentiles  obedient,  by  word 

15.  27  if  the  Gentiles  have  been  made  partakers 

16.  4  also  all  the  churches  of  the  Gentiles 

1  Co.  5.    1  is  not  so  much  as  named  among  the  Ge. 
10.  20  that  the  things  which  [the  Gentiles]  sac. 

12.  2  Ye  know  that  ye  were  Gentiles,  carried 
Gal.     2.    2  gospel  which  I  preach  among  the  Genti. 

2.    8  was  mighty  in  me  toward  the  Gentiles 

2.  12  For  before,  .he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles 

2. 14  why  compellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live 

2. 15  Jews  by  nature,  and  not  sinners  of  the  G. 

3.  14  the  blessing . .  might  come  on  the  Gentiles 
Eph.   2.  11  in  time  past  Gentiles  in  the  flesh,  who 

3.    1  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you  Gen 


GENTILES 


388 


GET 


Eph.   3.   6  Thai  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow  heirs 

3.  8  that  I  should  preach  among  the  Gentiles 

4.  17  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other  G. 
Col.     1.  27  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles 
1  Th.   2.  16  Forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles 

4.    5  even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know  not  God 
1  Ti.    2.    7  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  veri. 

3.  16  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  believed  on 
eTi.    1.  11  I  am  appointed.,  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles 

4.  17  and.  .all  the  Gentiles  might  hear  :  and  I 
1  Pe.   2.  12  your  conversation  honest  among  the  Ge. 

4.    3  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  Gentiles 
3  John      7  went  forth,  taking  nothing  [of  the  Gen.] 
Rev.  11.    2  for  it  is  given  unto  the  Gentiles  :  and 
Z.Helknes,  Greeks,"E\\nv  Hcllen. 

John  7.  35  among  the  Gentiles,  and  teach  the  Gen.? 
Roin.  2.    9  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile 

2.  10  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Gentile 

3.  9  have  before  proved  both  Jews  and  Gen. 
1  Co.  10.  32  Give  none  offence,  .to  the  Gentiles,  nor 

12.  13  whether.  .Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether,  .b. 

GENTILES,  after  the  manner  of  — 

In  the  manner  of  the  nations,  iBvtKws  ethnikos. 
Gal.    2.  14  If  thou,  .livest  after  the  manner  of  Gen. 

GENTLE  — 

1.  Yielding,  pliant,  iirteLK'fjs  epieikes. 

Titus  3.    2  gentle,  showing  all  meekness  unto  all 

Jas.     3.  17  gentle,  .easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of 

1  Pe.  2.  18  not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also 

2. Gentle,  mild,  ijirios  epios. 

1  Th.   2.    7  But  we  were  [gentle]  among  you,  even  as 

2  Ti.    2.  24  be  gentle  unto  all.  .apt  to  teach,  patient 

GENTLENESS  — 

l.To  be  humble,  rujj  anah. 

2  Sa.  22.  36  and  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great 
1.  Humility,  ^\}V_.,  .-my  anavah,  anvah. 

Psa.  18.  35  and  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great 
3, Gentleness,  yielding,  i-jrieiKeia  epieikeia. 

2  Co.  10.    1  beseech  you  by  the . .  gentleness  of  Christ 
4. Kindness,  usefulness,  xpV°'T^'rVs  chrestotes. 

Gal.     5.  22  the  fruit  of  the  spirit  is.  .gentleness,  go. 
GENTLY  — 
Gently,  B«^  leat. 

2  Sa.  18.    5  gently  for  my  sake  with  the  young  man 

GE-NTJ'-BATH,  njaa. 

Son  of  Hadad  the  Edomite  by  an  Egyptian  princess, 

the  sister  of  Tahpenes  the  Queen  of  the  Pharaoh  who 

governed  Egypt  near  the  end  of  David's  reign.     B.C. 

1000. 

1  Ki.11.  20  the  sister  of  Tahpenes  bare  him  G.  his 

1 1 .  20  and  G.  was  in  Pharaoh's  household  among 
GE'-RA,  M"i3  enmity. 

A  son  of  Bela.  The  text  of  1  Ch.  8.  3  is  corrupt,  and 
the  different  Geras  there  named  may  be  reduced  to 
one,  the  son  of  Bela.  The  Gera  of  Judges  3.  15,  as  the 
ancestor  of  Ehud,  and  in  2  Sa.  16.  5  as  the  ancestor  of 
Shimei,  is  probably  also  this  same  person.  B.C.  1650. 
Gen.  46.  21  the  sons  of  Benjamin.  .G.,  and  Naaman 
Judg.  3.  15  a  deliverer,  Ehud  the  son  of  G.,  a  Benja. 

2  Sa.  16.    5  whose  name  (was)  Sheruei,  the  son  of  G. 

19.  16  Shimei  the  sou  of  G.,  a  Benjamite,  which 

19.  18  Shimei  the  son  of  G.  fell  down  before  the 
1  Ki.  2.    8  behold . .  with  thee  Shimei  the  son  of  G. 

1  Ch.  8.   3  the  sons  of  Bela  were,  Addar,  and  G.,  and 

8.    5  And  G.,  and  Shephuphan,  and  Huram 
8.    7  Naaman,  and  Ahiah,  and  G.,  he  removed 
GE'-RAH  — 
Gerah,  a  small  coin,  iTia  gerah. 

Exod3o.  13  a  shekel  (is)  twenty  gerahs  :  an  half  she. 

Lev.  27.  25  shekel,  .twenty  gerahs  shall  be  the  shekel 

Num.  3.  47  shekel,  .the  shekel  (is)  twenty  gerahs 

iS.  16  after  the  shekel,  .which  (is)  twenty  gerahs 

Eze.  45.  12  And  the  shekel  (shall  be)  twenty  gerahs 
GE'-RAR,  Tia  circle. 

A  ancient  city  s.  of  Gaza,  probably  the  birthplace 
of  Isaac.  Joorf-cl-Gerar,  as  now  existing,  is  three  hours 
S.S.E.  of  Gaza,  and  limits  the  northern  boundary 
of  the  territory,  if  not  the  actual  site  of  the  town.  The 
Wady-el-Ain,  is  perhaps  the  site  of  the  ancient  Gerar 
where  the  wells  were  digged  by  Abraham  and  reopened 
by  Isaac  (Gen.  26.  18.  22.) 

Gen.  10.  ig  from  Sidon,  as  thou  comest  to  G.,  unto 

20.  1  Abraham  journeyed,  .and  sojourned iu G. 
20.   2  Abimelech  king  of  G.  sent,  and  took  S. 
26.    1  And  Isaac  went  unto  Abimelech.  .unto  G. 
26.    6  And  Isaac  dwelt  in  G. 

26. 17  Isaac,  pitched  his  tent  in  the  valley  of  G. 
26.  20  the  herdmen  of  G.  did  strive  with  Isaac's 
26.  26  Then  Abimelech  went  to  him  from  G. 

2  Ch.i.j.  13  Asa  and  the  people.,  pursued  thein  unto  G. 

14.  14  they  smote  all  the  cities  round  about  G. 

GER-GE-SEN'-ES,  Vepy^anvoi. 

The  inhabitants  of  a  district  S.E.  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias, 

In  some  MSS.  the  reading  is  Gadarenoi. 

Matt.  8.  28  he  was  come,  .into  the  country  of  the  [G.] 
GE-RI'-ZIM,  en;  waste  places. 

A  mountain  of  the  Geri/zites.  or  dwellers  in  a  "shorn" 
laud  (  '  a  desert "),  possibly  the  tribe  subdued  by  David. 
In  conjunction  with  Mount  Ebol  it  was  the  scene  of  a 
great  solemnity  upon  the  entrance  of  Israel  into 
Canaan. 


Deut  11.  29  shalt  put  the  blessing  upon  mount  G. 

27. 12  These  shall  stand  upon  mount  G.  to  bless 
Tosh.  8.  33  half  of  them  over  against  mount  G.,  and 
Judg.  9.    7  he  went  and  stood  in  the  top  of  mount  G. 

GER'-SHOM,  Diana  a  stranger  tJiere. 

1.  First  born  son  of  Moses  and  Zipporah.     B.C.  1500. 

Exod.2.  22  bare,  .a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  G. 

18.  3  sons ;  of  which  the  name  of  the  one . .  .G. 
1  Ch.23.  15  The  sons  of  Moses.  .G.,  and  Eliezer 

23. 16  Of  the  sons  of  G.,  Shebuel  (was)  the  chief 
26.  24  the  son  of  G. . .  (was)  ruler  of  the  treasures 

2.  Gershon  eldest  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.  6.  16  The  sons  of  Levi ;  G.,  Kohath,  and  Merari 
6.  17  these  (be)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  G.;  L. 
6.  20  Of  G.;  Libni  his  son,  Jahath  his  son 
6.  43  son  of  Jahath,  the  son  of  G.,  the  son  of 
6. 62  And  to  the  sons  of  G. .  .thirteen  cities 
6.  7 1  Unto  the  sons  of  G. . .  out  of  the  family  of 
15.    7  Of  the  sons  of  G.;  Joel  the  chief,  and  his 

3.  One  of  the  family  of  Phinehas.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra.  8.   2  Of  the  sons  of  Phinehas;  G.:  of  the  sons 

4.  Father  of  Jonathan,  a  Levite  that  became  priest 
to  the  Danites  that  settled  at  Laish  in  the  time  of  the 
J  udges. 

Judg.  18.  30  Jonathan,  the  son  of  G. .  .he  and  his  sons 

GER'-SHON,  pan:). 

Another  form  of  Gershom,  son  of  Levi,  found  in  the 

following  passages  :— 

Gen.  46.  11  the  sons  of  Levi  ;  G.,  Kohath,  and  Mera. 

Exod.  6.  16  G.,  and  Kohath,  and  Merari :  and  the 

6.  17  sons  of  G. ;  Libni,  and  Shimi,  according 
Num.  3.  17  sons  of  Levi.  .G.,  and  Kohath,  and  Mera. 

3. 18  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  G. 
3. 21  Of  G. .  .the  family  of  the  Libnites,  and  the 

3.  25  And  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  G.  in  the 

4.  22  Take  also  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  G. 

4.  28  This  (is)  the  service . .  of  the  sons  of  G. 
4.38  those  that  were  numbered  of  the  sons  of  G. 

7.  7  four  oxen  he  gave  unto  the  sons  of  G. 

10. 17  the  sons  of  G.  and  the  sons  of  Merari 
26.  57  of  G.,  the  family  of  the  Gershonites  :  of 

Josh. 21.   6  the  children  of  G.  (had)  by  lot.  .thirteen 
1  Ch.  6.    t  The  sons  of  Levi ;  G.,  Kohath,  and  Mer. 
23.    6  the  sons  of  Levi,  (namely),  G.,  Kohath 

GER-SHON-ITES,  ^BJ"J3. 

Patronymic  of  the  descendants  of   Gershon  son    of 

Levi. 

Num.  3.  21  Shimites:  these  (are)  the  families  of  theG. 

3.23  The  families  of  the  G.  shall  pitch  behind 

3.  24  the  chief,  .of  the  G. .  .Eliasaph  the  son  of 

4. 24  the  service  of  the  families  of  the  G. 

4.  27  be  all  the  service  of  the  sons  of  the  G. 
26.  57  family  of  the  G.:  of  Kohath,  the  family 

Josh. 21.  33  All  the  cities  of  the  G. .  .(were)  thirteen 

1  Ch.23.    7  Of  the  G.  (were),  Laadan,  and  Shimei 

26.  21  the  sons 01  the  G.  Laadan.  .(were)  Jehieli 
,  26.  21  chief  fathers,  (even)  of  Laadan  the  G. 
*  29.    8  treasure,  .by  the  hand  of  Jehiel  the  G. 

2  Ch.29.  12  of  the  G.  ;  Joan  the  son  of  Ziniruah 

GE'-SHAM,  fffi^a  (prop.  Geshan),  firm,  strong. 
A  son  of  Jahdai  of  the  family  of  Caleb.     B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2.  47  Regem,  and  Jotham,  and  G.,  and  Pelat 
GE'-SHEM,  evi  corporealness. 

An  Arabian  who  with  others  opposed  Nehemiah.    B.C. 

44<;- 

Neh.  2. 19  But  when.  .G.  the  Arabian,  heard  (it)  * 
6.  1  G.  the  Arabian,  .heard  that  I  had  builded 
6.    2  That  Sanballat  and  G.  sent  unto  me,  say. 

GE'-SHTJR,  TlEJa  bridge-land. 

A  kingdom  in  the  N.E.  of  Bashan  adjoining  Argob  and 

Aram,  and  on  the  eastern  slope  of  Hermon. 

2  Sa.  3.    3  Maacahthe  daughter  of  Talmaikingof  G. 

13.  37  But  Absalom  tied,  .to  Talmai.  .king  <»f  G. 

13.  38  So  Absalom  fled,  and  went  to  G.,  and 

14.  23  So  Joab  arose  and  went  to  G.,  and  brou. 

14.  32  to  say,  Wherefore  am  I  come  from  G.  ? 

15.  8  thy  servant  vowed,  .while  I  abode  at  G. 

1  Ch.  2.  23  he  took  G.,  and  Aram,  with  the  towns  of 
3   2  Maachah  the  daughter  of  Talmai  k.  of  G. 

GE-SHTJ'-RI  and  GESHURXTES,  n«ya. 

1.  The  inhabitants  of  Geshur. 

Deut.  3. 14  took  all  the  country .  .unto  the  coasts  of  G. 
Josh.  12.    5  And  reigned . .  unto  the  border  of  the  G. 

13. 11  Gilead,  and  the  border  of  the  G.  and  Ma. 

13.  13  the  children  of  Israel  expelled  not  theG. 

13.  13  but  the  G. . .  dwell  among  the  Israelites 

2.  A  tribe  dwelling  between  Arabia  and  Philistia. 

Josh.  13,    2  the  borders  of  the  Philistines,  and  all  G. 

1  Sa.  27.    S  David  and  his  men.  .invaded  the  G.,  and 
GET  (into),  to  — 
l.To  come  or  go  in,  jria  bo. 

Gen.  45,  17  and  go,  get  you  into  the  land  of  Canaan 

1  Sa.  22.    5  depart,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  Ju. 

2  Sa.  19.    3  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  that  day 

1  Ki.    1.  13  Go  and  get  thee  in  unto  king  David,  and 

2  Ki.    7.  12  catch  them  alive,  and  get  into  the  city 
Isa.   22.  15  Go,  get  thee  unto  this  treasurer,  .unto  S. 

47.    5  Sit  thou  silent,  and  get  thee  into  dark. 
Eze.    3.    4  go,  get  thee  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  and 
3.  11  go,  get  thee  to  them  of  the  captivity,  unto 
2.  To  cause  to  come,  R13  bo,  5. 

Lam.    5.  9  Wc  gat  our  bread  with,  .our  lives  because 


Z.To  cut  off,  gain  dishonestly,  y?3  batsa. 

Eze.  22.  27  to  destroy  souls,  to  get  dishonest  gain 

4.  To  seek,  i?j33  baqash,  3. 

Eccl.  3.    6  A  time  to  get,  and  a  time  to  lose  ;  a  time 

5.  To  go  on,  rfci  yalak. 

Gen.  12.  1  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from 
22.    2  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  Moriah 

Num  22.  13  Get  you  into  your  land  ;  for  the  Lord 

Josh.  2.  16  Get  you  to  the  mountain,  lest  the  pursu. 
22.    4  return  ye,  and  get  you  into  your  tents 

2  Sa.  17.  23  arose,  and  gat  him  home  to  his  house 

1  Ki.    2.  26  Get  thee  to  Anathoth,  unto  thine  own  fi. 

14.  12  Arise  thou  therefore,  get  thee  to  thine 
17.    3  Get  thee  hence,  and  turn  thee  eastward 
17.    9  Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath,  which 

2  Ki.    3.  13  get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father 
Jer.     5.    5  I  will  get  me  unto  the  great  men,  and 

6.  To  take,  receive,  np?  laqach. 

Gen.  34.    4  Shechem' spake.  .Get  me  this  damsel  to 
Exod.  5.  11  Go  ye,  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find  it 
Judg  14.    2  now  therefore  get  her  for  me  to  wife 

14.  3  Get  her  for  me  ;  for  she  pleaseth  me  well 
Prov.  9.    7  He  that  reproveth  a  scorner  getteth  to 

22.  25  Lest  thou  learn,  .and  get  a  snare  to  thy 

7.  To  find,  it^D  matsa. 

Num  31.  50  what  every  man  hath  gotten,  of  jewels  of 
2  Sa.  20.  6  lest  he  get  him  fenced  cities,and  escape  us 
Job  31.  25  and  because  mine  hand  had  gotten  much 
Prov.  6.  33  A  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he  get ;  and 

8.7^  move  {off),  TO  nud. 

Jer.  49.  30  Flee,  get  you  far  off,  dwell  deep,  O  ye  in. 

9.  To  remove,  journey,  J?pi  nasa. 

Num  14.  25  turn  you,  and  get  you  into  the  wilderness 

10.  To  (caitse  to)  reach,  attain,  overtake,  a;j>a  nasag,5. 
Num.  6.  21  beside  (that)  that  his  hand  shall  get 

11.  To  do,  make,  7fy%  asah. 

Gen.  12.    5  the  souls  that  they  had  gotten  in  Haran 
31.    1  of.  .our  father's  hath  he  gotten  all  this 

Deut.  8.  17  My  power,  .hath  gotten  me  this  wealth 
8.  18  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth 

2  Sa.    8.  13  David  gat.  .a  name  when  he  returned  fr. 

Neh.   9.  10  So  didst  thou  get  thee  a  name,  as  (it  is) 

Eccl.    2.    8  I  gat  me  men  singers  and  women  singers 

Isa.   15.    7  Therefore  the  abundance  they  have  got. 

Jer.   17.  11  he  that  getteth  riches,  and  not  by  right 
48.  36  the  riches,  .he  hath  gotten  are  perished 

Eze.  28.  4  With,  .wisdom,  .thou  hast  gotten  thee 
28.  4  and  hast  gotten  gold  and  silver  into  thy 
38.  12  people,  .which  have  gotten  cattle  and 

Dan.    9.  15  hast  gotten  thee  renown,  as  at  this  day 

12. To  cause  to  come  out,  bring  end,  pispuq,  5. 
Prov.  3.  13  and  the  man  (that)  getteth  understanding 

13. To  get,  obtain,  nag  qanah. 

Gen.    4.    1  said,  I  have  gotten  a  man  from  the  Lord 
Prov.  4.    5  Get  wisdom,  get  understanding  :  forget 
4.    7  get  wisdom :  and  with  all.  .get  understa. 

15.  32  he  that  heareth  reproof  getteth  understa. 

16.  16  How  much  better.,  to  get  wisdom  than  g.? 

16.  16  to  get  understanding  rather  to  be  chosen 

17.  16  a  price  in  the  hand  of  a  fool  to  get  wisd. 

18.  15  The  heart  of  the  prudent  getteth  know. 

19.  8  He  that  getteth  wisdom  loveth  his  own 
Eccl.  2.    7  I  got.  .servants  and  maidens,  and  had 
Jer.   13.    1  Go,  and  get  thee  a  linen  girdle,  and  put 

13.    2  So  I  got  a  girdle,  according  to  the  word  of 

13.  4  Take  the  girdle  that  thou  hast  got,  which 
19.    \  Go  and  get  a  potter's  earthen  bottle,  and 

14.  To  acquire,  gain,  uT\  rakash. 

Gen.  31.  18  and  all  Ins  goods  which  he  had  gotten 
31. 18  which  he  had  gotten  in  Padan-arani 
36.    6  which  he  had  got  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
46.    6  which  they  had  gotten  in  the  land  of  Ca. 

15.  To  place,  set,  put,  appoint,  c'&,  Di^  sim,  sum. 
Zeph.  3. 19  I  will  get  them  praise  and  fame  in  every 

IG.  To  go  up  into,  4/j.{3aivw  cmbaino. 

Matt  14.  22  to  get  into  a  ship,  and  to  go  before  him 
Mark  6.  45  constrained  his  disciples  to  get  into  the 

17.  To  go  out  or  forth,  ^ei/it  exeimi. 

Acts  27.  43  cast,  .first  (into  the  sea),  and  get  to  land 

18.  To  begin  to  find,  evptaKco  heurisko. 

Luke  9,  12  that  they  may  go.  .and  get  victuals  :  for 
[See also  Deceitfully,  early,  far,  heat,  possession,  stealth, 
understanding,  victory.] 
GET,  to  be  able  to  — 
To  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  Jtra  ?iasag,  5. 

Lev.  14.  22,  31  such  as  he  is  able  to  get.  .the  one 

14.  32  whose  hand  is  not  able  to  get.  .to  his  clc. 

GET  away,  to  — 
l.To  go  071,  V?;  yalak. 

iSa.  23.  26  David  made  haste  to  get  away  for  fear  of  S. 
26.  12  and  they  gat  them  away,  and  no  man  saw 

2  Sa.    4.    7  gat  them  away  through  the  plain  all  night 
2.2b  go  out,  ay,  yatsa. 

Jer.  48.   9  unto  Moab,  that  it  may  flee  and  get  away 

S.To  move  {off),  TO  nud. 

Dan.    4.  14  let  the  beasts  get  away  from  under  it 

GET,  can  — 

To  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  abj  nasag,  5. 
Lev.  14.  21  if  he  (be)  poor,  and  cannot  get  so  much 
14.  30  And  he  shall  offer,  .such  as  he  can  get 


GET 


389 


GIBEON 


GET  down,  to  — 

l.To  go  down,  tv  yarad. 

Gen.  42.    2  get  you  du\vn  thither,  and  buy  for  us 
Exodiq.  24  Away,  get  thee  down,  and  thou  shalt 

32.  7  Go,  get  thee  down  ;  for  thy  people,  which 
Deut.  9.  12  Arise,  get  thee  down  quickly  from  hence 
Judg.  7.  9  Arise,  get  thee  down  unto  the  host ;  fur 
Ruth  3.  3  anoint  thee,  .and  get  thee  down  to  the  fl. 
1  Sa.  15.    6  get  you  down  from  among  the  Amalekites 

1  Ki.  18.  44  get  thee  down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  n. 
Joel    3.  13  come,  get  3'ou  down  ;  for  the  press  is  full 

2. To  go  down,  Karafiaiva>  katabaino. 

Acts  10.  20  Arise  therefore,  and  get  thee  down,  and 
GET  thee,  to  — 
To  go  away  or  under,  virdyoi  hupctgd. 

Matti6.  23  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan :  thou  art  an 

Mark  8.  33  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  :  for  thou  sa. 

Luke  4.    8  [said.  .Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan] 

GET  forth,  to  — 

To  go  out,  ay,  yatsa. 

Exodi2.  31  Rise  up.  .get  you  forth  from  among  my  p. 

GET  hence,  to  — 

1.  To  go  on,  ~fer  yalah. 

Zech.  6.    7  Get  you  hence,  walk  to  and  fro  through 

2.To  go  out,  N*;  yatsa. 

Lsa.   30.  22  thou  shalt  say  unto  it,  Get  thee  hence 
Z.Togo  aicay  or  under,  vTrdyai  hupago. 

Matt.    4. 10  Get  thee  hence,  Satan  :  for  it  is  written 
GET  (hi-n),  to  — 
l.To  be  gathered,  *]ds?  asaph,  2. 
Kum  11.  30  Moses  gat  him  into  the  camp,  he  and  the 

2.7*0  go  on,  "£>\  yalah. 

Judg  19.  28  man  rose  up,  and  gat  him  unto  his  place 

2  Sa.  17. 23  arose,  and  gat  him  home  to  his  house 

GET  hold  upon,  to  — 
To  find,  nv?  matsa. 

Psa.116.    3  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me :  I  fo. 
GET  honour,  to  — 
To  be  or  become  honoured,  weighty,  13|  kabed,  2. 

Exodi4.  17  and  I  will  get  me  honour  upon  Pharaoh 
14.  18  when  I  have  gotten  me  honour  upon  Ph. 

GET  more,  to  — 

To  add,  F|D;  yasapli,  5. 

Eccl.   1.  16  and  have  gotten  more  wisdom  than  all 
GET  (self  back)  again,  to  — 
To  turn  back,  39E>  shub. 

Num22.  34  now  therefore .  .1  will  get  me  back  again 

Deut.  5.  30  Go  say.  .Get  you  into  your  tents  again 
GET  (self)  up,  to  — 
l.To  ride,  221  raked). 

2  Sa.  13.  29  every  man  gat  him  up  upon  his  mule 

2.  To  be  gone  up,  non  ramam,  2. 

Numi6.  45  Get  you  up  from  among  this  congregation 

GET  out,  to  — 

l.To  go  out,  vt$\  yatsa. 

Gen.  19.  14  Up,  get  you  out  of  this  place  ;  for  the 
31. 13  arise,  get  thee  out  from  this  land,  and 

Exodn.    S  Get  thee  out,  and  all  the  people  that  foL 
2.To  go  out  or  forth,  i^pxofiai  exerchomai. 

Lukei3.  31  Get  thee  out,  and  depart  hence  :  for  H. 

Acts    7.   3  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from 
22.  18  Make  haste,  and  get  thee  quickly  out  of 
GET  over,  to  — 
To  go  over,  ~o%  abar. 

Deut.  2. 13  JTow  rise  up.  .get  you  over  the  brook  Z. 

GET  thee,  to  — 

To  go  071,  Tyn  halak. 

1  Ki.14.   2  get  thee  to  Sliiloh  :  behold,  there  (is)  A. 
GET  up,  ta  — 
l.To  touch,  come  upon,  strike,  i?J3  naga. 

12.  Sa.  5.   8  Whosoever  getteth  up  to  the  gutter,  and 

2.  To  go  up,  rh%  alah. 

Gen.  44. 17  as  for  you,  get  you  up  in  peace  unto  your 
Exod.  1.  10  fight,  .and.  .get  them  up  out  of  the  land 

24. 18  Moses  went,  .and  gat  him  up  into  the  m. 
Numi3.  17  Get  you  up  this,  .southward,  and  go  up 

14.  40  gat  them  up  into  the  top  of  the  mount. 

27. 12  Get  thee  up  into  this  mount  Abarim,  and 
Deut.  3.  27  Get  thee  up  into  the  top  of  Pisgah,  and 

17.  8  get  thee  up  into  the  place  which  the  Lord 
32.  49  Get  thee  up  into  this  mountain  Abarim 

Josh.17. 15  get  thee  up  to  the  wood,  .and  cut  down 

Judg.  9.  48  Abimelech  gat  him  up  to  moimt  Zalmon 

9.  51  and  gat  them  up  to  the  top  of  the  tower 

1  Sa.  9.  13  Kow  therefore  get  you  up  ;  for  about  this 

13. 15  Samuel  arose,  and  gat  him  up  from  Gil. 

24.  22  David  and  his  men  gat  them  up  unto  theh. 

25.  5  Get  you  up  to  C'armel.  and  go  to  INabal 

1  Ki.12.  18  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to  his  chariot 

18.  41  Get  thee  up,  eat  and  drink ;  for . .  a  sound 

2  Ch.io.  18  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to  (his)  chariot 
Isa.  40.  9  O  Zion.  .get  thee  up  into  the  high  moun. 
Jer.   46.    4  get  up,  ye  horsemen,  and  stand  forth 

49.  31  Arise,  get  you  up  unto  the  wealthy  nation 

3.  To  be  gone  up,  rhy  alah,  2. 

;Numi6.  24  Get  yo'u  up  from  about  the  tabernacle  of 
16.  27  So  they  gat  up  from  the  tabernacle  of  K. 


4.  To  rise,  dp  qum. 

Josh.  7.  10  Get  thee  up  ;  wherefore  liest  thou  thus 

GET  (you)  — 

To  turn  aside,  *i*D  sur. 

Isa.   30. 11  Get  you  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out 

GE'-THER,  irj3. 

The  third  in  order  of  the  sons  of  Aram,  but  in  1  Ch.  1.  17 

reckoned  among  the  sons  of  Shem.    B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10.  23  And  the  children  of  Aram.  -G.,  and  Ma. 

1  Ch.  1.  17  Aram,  and  Uz,  and  Hul,  and  G.,  and  M. 

GETH-SE-MA'-NE,    Tedo-nnavrj  {from   Eeb.)   wine 
press  and  oil  {farm). 

A  place  beyond  the  Kedron,  at  the  foot  of  Olivet,  to 
the  N.W.,  and  nearly  a  mile  from  the  walls  of  Jeru- 
salem.   Attached  to  it  was  a  garden  or  orchard. 

Matt.26.  36  Then  cometh  Jesus.,  to  a  place  called  [G]. 

Marki4.  32  they  came  toaplace  which  was  named  G. 

GETTING  — 

l.To  work,  make,  b%3  pool. 

Prov.21.   6  The  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tong. 

2.  Getting,  obtaining,  j;jp  qinyan. 

Gen.  31.  18  he  carried  away,  .the  cattle  of  his  getting 
Prov.  4.   7  with  all  thy  getting  get  understanding 

GE-TJ'-EL,  hinttz  God  of  salvation. 

A  son  of  Machi,  a  prince  of  Gad,  and  one  of  these 

sent  out  to  search  the  land.    B.C.  1490. 

Xum.13.  15  Of  the  tribe  of  Gad,  G.  the  son  of  Machi 

GE'-ZER,  \13  a  precipice. 

An  ancient  city  of  Canaan  whose  king  Horam  or  Elam 

was  slain,  with  all  his  people,  by  Joshua  and  Israel. 

The  town  itself  was  not  destroyed  but  formed  one  of 

the  boundary  marks  of  Ephraim  on  the  W.  limit  of  the 

tribe,  and  was  allotted  to  the  Kohathites.    It  was  near 

lower  Beth-horon  and  the  sea,  and  is  now  called  Jimzu, 

the  ancient  Gimzo,  four  miles  N.  of  Nicopolis  (Amwds). 

Josh  10.  33  Horam  king  of  G.  came  up  to  help  Lach. 

12. 12  The  king  of  Eglon,  one  ;  the  king  of  G. 

16.    3  unto  the  coast  of  Beth-horon.  .and  to  G. 

16.  10  drave  not  out  the  Cana.  that  dwelt  in  G. 

21.  21  they  gave  them . .  G.  with  her  suburbs 

Judg.  1.  29  drive  out  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  G. 

1.  29  but  the  Canaanites  dwelt  in  G.  among 
1  Ki,  9.  15  Jerusalem.  .Hazor,  and  Megiddo,  and  G. 
9.  16  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  had.  .taken  G. 
9.  17  Solomon  built  G.,  and  Beth-horon  the 
1  Ch,  6.  67  they  gave  unto  them.  .G.  with  her  sub. 
7.  28  and  westward  G.,  with  the  towns  thereof 
20.    4  there  arose  war  at  G.  with  the  Philistines 

GE-ZER-ITES,  "ni3,  M"i3.     The  inhabitants  of  Gezer. 

1  Sa.  27.    8  David  and  his  men . .  invaded . .  the  G. 

GHOST  —  (See  also  Holy). 

I. Soul,  animal  breath,  v%}  nephesh. 

Job   11.  20  their  hope,  .the  giving  up  of  the  ghost 
Jer.  15.   9  she  hath  given  up  the  ghost ;  her  sun  is 

2.Spirit,  Trvsvfj.a  pneuma. 

Matt27.  50  when  he  had  cried,  .yielded  up  the  ghost 
Johnig.  30  he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost 

GHOST,  to  give  or  yield  up  the  — 
l.To  gasp  out,  expire,  jna  gava. 

Gen.  25.    8  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died  in 

25. 17  Ishmael.  .gave  up  the  ghost  and  died 
35.  29  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died,  and 
49.  33  Jacob . .  yielded  up  the  ghost,  and  was  gat. 

Job      3.  11  (why)  did  I  (not)  give  up  the  ghost  when 

10. 18  Oh  that  I  had  given  up  the  ghost,  and  no 

13.  19  if  I  hold  my  tongue,  I .  .give  up  the  ghost 

14.  10  man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  (is) 
Xam.  1.  19  mine  elders  gave  up  the  ghost  in  the  city 

2. To  breatlie  out,  eK-m/eco  ekprneo. 

Marki5.  37  And  Jesus  cried,  .and  gave  up  the  ghost 

15.  39  that  he  so  cried  out,  and  gave  up  the  g. 
Luke23.  46  and  having  said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  gh. 

3.  To  breathe  out,  expire,  tff^xw  ekpsucho. 

Acts    5.    5  Ananias,  .fell  down,  and  gave  up  the  gh. 
5.  10  yielded  up  the  ghost :  and  the  young 
12. 23  was  eaten  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the  gh. 

GI'-AH,  "'3  waterfall,  ravine  or  glen. 
A  place  on  the  way  to  the  wilderness  of  Gibeon  of  Ben- 
jamin. 

2  Sa.  2.  24  the  hill  of  Animah,  that  (lieth)  before  G. 

GIANT  — 

l.Mighty,  strong  one,  nisa  gibbor. 

Job  16. 14  He  breaketh.  .runneth  upon  me  like  a  g. 
2. Fearful  one,  giant,  N£P,  rapha. 

Deut.  2. 11  Which  also  were  accounted  giants,  as 
2. 20  That  also  was  accounted  a  land  of  giants 

2.  20  giants  dwelt  therein  in  old  time  ;  and 

3.  11  only  Og.  .remained  of  the  remnant  of  g. 
3. 13  Bashan,  which  was  called  the  land  of  gia. 

Josh.12.   4  Og.  .of  the  remnant  of  the  giants,  that 
13. 12  who  remained  of  the  remnant  of  the  gia.x 
15.    8  the  end  of  the  valley  of  the  giants  north. 

17.  15  land  of  the  Perizzites  and  of  the  giants 

18.  16  in  the  valley  of  the  giants  on  the  north 
1  Ch  20.    4  Sippai.  .of  the  children  of  the  giant 

20.    6  he  also  was  the  son  of  the  giant 

20.    8  These  were  born  unto  the  giant  in  Gath 


Z.A  fearful  one,  giant,  ns*i  raphah. 

2  Sa.  21.  16  Ishbi-benob.  .of  the  sons  of  the  giant 

21.  1 S  Saph,  which  (was)  of  the  sons  of  the  giant 
21.  20  and  he  also  was  born  to  the  giant 
21.  22  These  four  were  bornto  thegiautin  Gath 
^.Fallen  ones,  fellers,  Q'tsj  nephilim. 

Gen.   6.    4  There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those 
Xumi3-  33  And  there  we  saw  the  giants,  the 

13.  33  sons  of  Anak,  (which  come)  of  the  giants 

GIB'-BAR,  153  high,  mighty. 
One  who  came  up  with  Zerubbahel.    B.C.  536. 
Ezra  2.  20  The  children  of  G.,  ninety  and  five 

GLB-BE'-THON,  j'in33  lieight 

A  town  of  Dan  given  to  the  Kohathites. 

Josh  19.  44  And  Eltekeh,  and  G.,  and  Baalath 

21. 23  of  the  tribe  of  Dan.  .G.  with  her  suburbs 

1  EX  15.  27  and  Baasha  smote  him  at  G.,  which 

15.  27  for  Kadab  and  all  Israel  laid  siege  to  G. 

16.  15  the  people  (were)  encamped  against  G. 
16. 17  Omri  went  up  from  G.,  and  all  Israel  with 

GIB'-EA,  n^23  highlander. 

Son  of  Shevai  a  descendant  of  Judah.    But  perhaps  the 

city  Gibeah  in  Judah  is  meant. 

1  Ch.  2.  49  Sheva.  .and  the  father  of  G. :  and  the  da. 
GLB'-EAH,  GLB'-EATH,  nj^a,  ypa,  jna,  n#:i3  height. 
A  city  in  the  mountains  of  Judah,  now  el-Ful. 

Josh.  15.  57  Cain,  G.,  and  Timnah ;  ten  cities  with 

18.  28  Jebusi,  which  (is)  Jerusalem,  G.,  (and)  K. 
Judg  19.  12  city,  .of  Israel ;  we  will  pass  over  to  G. 

19.  13  draw  near  to  one  of  these  places,  .in  G. 

19. 14  the  sun  went  down,  .by  G.,  which 

19.  15  turned  aside,  .to  go  in.  .to  lodge  in  G. 

19.  16  and  he  sojourned  in  G.:  but  the  men  of 

20.  4 1  came  into  G.  that  (belongeth)to  Benja. 
20.    5  And  the  men  of  G.  rose  against  me 

20.   9  this . .  the  thing  which  we  will  do  to  G. 
20.  10  when  they  come  to  G.  of  Benjamin,  ace. 
20.  13  the  children  of  Belial,  which  (are)  in  G. 
20.  14  gathered,  .tog.  out  of  the  cities  unto  G. 

20. 15  beside  the  inhabitants  of  G.,  which  were 
20.  19  children  of  Israel . .  encamped  against  G. 
20.  20  put.  .in  array  to  fight  against  them  at  G. 
20.  21  children  of  Benjamin  came  forth  out  of  G. 
20.  25  Benjamin  went  forth,  .out  of  G.  the  sec. 
20.  29  Israel  set  liers  in  wait  round  about  G. 
20.  30  and  put  themselves  in  array  against  G. 
20.  31  and  the  other  to  G.  in  the  field,  about 
20.  33  the  liers . .  came . .  out  of  the  meadows  of  G. 
20.  34  there  came  against  G.  ten  thousand 

20.  36  the  liers  in  wait,  .they  had  set  beside  G. 
20.  37  hers  in  wait  hasted,  and  rushed  upon  G. 

20.  43  trodethenidown  with  ease  overagainstG. 

1  Sa.  10.  26  Saul  also  went  home  to  G.;  and  there 

11.  4  Then  came  the  messengers  to  G.  of  Saul 
13.  2  and  a  thousand  were  with  Jonathan  in  G. 
13.  15  and  gat  him  up  from  Gilgal  unto  G. 

13.  16  And  Saul.,  abode  in  G.  of  Benjamin 

14.  2  Saul  tarried  in  the  uttermost  part  of  G. 
14.    5  and  the  other  southward  over  against  G. 

14.  16  watchmen  of  Saul  in  G.  of  Benjamin  look. 

15.  34  Saul  went  up  to  his  house  to  G.  of  Saul 

22.  6  Saul  abode  in  G.  under  a  tree  in  Ramah 

23.  19  Then  came  up  the  Ziphites  to  Saul  to  G. 
26.    1  And  the  Ziphites  came  unto  Saul  to  G. 

2  Sa.   6.    3,  4  the  house  of  Abinadab  that  (was)  in  G. 

2i.  6  will  hang  them  up  unto  the  Lord  in  G. 
23.  29  Ittai  the  son  of  Ribai  out  of  G.  of  the 

1  Ch.n.  31  Ithai  the  son  of  Ribai  of  G.,  (that  pertai.) 

2  Ch.13.    2  Michaiah  the  daughter  of  Uriel  of  G. 
Isa.    10.  29  Ramah  is  afraid;  G.  of  Saul  is  fled 
Hos.    5.    8  Blow  ye  the  cornet  in  G. .  .the  trumpet 

g.    9  corrupted(theniselves),asinthedaysof  G. 
10.    9  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  G. 
10.   9  the  battle  in  G. . .  did  not  overtake  them 

GLB-EA-THTTE,  *?i»3a.     A  n  inhabitant  of  Gibeah. 

1  Ch.12.   3  then  Joash,  the  sons  of  Shemaah  the  G. 
GEB-E'-ON,  pyna  hill,  height 

One  of  the  four  cities  of  the  Hivites  that  made  a  league 
with  Joshua  to  escape  the  fate  of  Jericho  and  Ai.  It 
was  given  to  Benjamin  and  made  a  Levitical  city.  It 
is  now  called  El-Jib,  on  the  northern  camel  road  from 
Jerusalem  to  Jaffa,  and  stands  on  the  more  northern  of 
two  mamelons,  just  at  the  spot  where  the  road  to  the 
sea  parts  into  two  branches.  The  road  passes  to  the 
N.  of  the  base  of  the  hill  El- Jib,  four  miles  from  Bethel. 
Josh,  q  3  when  the  inhabitants  of  G.  heard  what  J. 
9.  17  >"ow  their  cities  (were)  G.,  and  Chephirah 

10.    1  the  inhabitants  of  G.  had  made  peace 

10.    2  they  feared  greatly,  because  G.  (was)  a 

10.   4  Come . .  and  help  me,  that  we  may  smite  G. 

10.    5  and  all  their  hosts . .  encamped  before  G. 

10.    6  the  men  of  G.  sent  unto  Joshua. .  saying 

10.  10  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter  at  G. 

10.  12  he  said.  .Sun,  stand  thou  still  upon  G. 

10.  41  And  Joshua  smote  them,  .even  unto  G. 

it.  19  save  the  Hivites,  the  inhabitants  of  G. 

18.  25  G.,  and  Ramah,  and  Beeroth 

21.  17  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  G.  with  her 

2  Sa.   2.  12  servants. .  went  out  from  Mahanaim  to  G. 

2.  13  went,  .andmet  together  by  the  pool  of  G. 
2.  16  was  called  Helkath-hazzurim.  .in  G. 

2.  24  Giah  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  G. 

3.  30  he  had  slain  their  brother  Asahel  at  G. 
20.    8  When . .  at  the  great  stone  which  (is)  in  G. 

1  Ki.  3.    4  the  king  went  to  G.  to  sacrifice  there 

3.    5  In  G.  the  LORD  appeared  to  Sulomon  in 


GIBBONITES 


390 


GILEAD 


i  Ki.  g.    2  time,  as  he  had  appeared  unto  hira'at  G. 

i  Ch.  8.  29  And  at  G.  dwelt  the  father  of  G.;  whose 

9.  35  Aud  in  G.  dwelt  the  father  of  G.,  Jehiel 

14.  16  smote  the  host  of  the  Philistines  from  G. 

16.  39  tabernacle,  .in  the  high  place,  .at  G. 

21.  29  For. .at  thatseason  in  thehi^hplaceat  G. 

2  Ch.  1.    3  Solomon,  .went  to  the  high  place.. at  G. 

1.  13  Solomon  came  (from).. the  high  pi. .  .at  G. 

Neh.   3.    7  repaired,  .the  men  of  G.,  and  of  Mizpah 

7.  25  The  children  of  G.  ninety  and  five 
Isa.   28.  21  he  shall  be  wroth  as  (in)  the  valley  of  G. 
Jer.  28.    1  Azur  the  prophet,  which  (was)  of  G. 

41.  12  found  him  by  the  great  waters,  .in  G. 

41.  16  eunuchs,  whom  he  had  brought,  .from  G. 
GIBEONITES,  ^i/33.      The  inhabitants  of  Gibeon. 
2  Sa.  2i.    1  (It  is)  for  Saul .  .because  he  slew  the  G. 

21.    2  the  king  called  the  G.,  and  said  unto 

21.    2  the  G.  (were)  not  of  the  children  of  Israel 

21.    3  Wherefore  David  said  unto  the  G.,  What 

21.    4  the  G.  said  unto  him,  We  will  have  no  sil. 

21.   9  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  G. 
1  Ch.12.    4  Ismaiah  the  G.,  a  mighty  man  among  the 
Neh.   3.    7  next  uuto  them  repaired  Melatiah  the  G. 

GIB-UTES,  '^33. 

The  inhabitants  of  Gebal,  a  people  of  Bibylus,  a  city 
and  district  at  the  X  of  Canaan  and  S.  of  Sidon,  near 
the  sea  shore. 

Josh.  13.   5  the  land  of  the  G.,  aud  all  Lebanon 

GLD-DAL'-TI,  'ri^a  /  have  magnified. 
One  of  the  sons  of  Heman,  "  the  king's  seer,"  and  hence 
a  Kohathite.  His  office  was,  with  thirteen  of  his 
brethren,  to  sound  the  horn  in  the  service  of  the  taber- 
nacle. He  had  also  charge  of  the  twenty-second 
course.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  Jerimoth,  Hananiah,  Hanani,  Eliath.,  G. 
25.  29  The  two  and  twentieth  to  G.,  (he),  his 

GLD'-DEL,  hii  very  great. 

1.  One  whose  children  came  up  with  Zerubbabel.  B.C. 
536- 

Ezra  2.  47  the  children  of  G.,  the  children  of  Gahar 
Neh.    7.  49  children  of  Hanan,  the  children  of  G. 

2.  Sons  of  Giddel;  were  also  among  the  servants  of  Solo- 
mon who  came  up  in  the  same  company  with  No.  1. 

Ezra   2.  56  children  of  Darkon,  the  children  of  G. 
Neh.  7.  58  children  of  Darkon,  the  children  of  G. 

GID'-EON,  pjna  feller,  sucker,  hewer,  i.e.  great  warr. 
A  son  of  Joash  a  Manassehite.  He  delivered  Israel 
from  Midian.  He  is  also  called  Jerubbael,  and  judged 
Israel  forty  years  as  the  fifth  judge.     B.C.  1256. 

Judg.  6.  11  his  son  G.  threshed  wheat  by  the  wine  p. 
6.  13  G.  said  unto  him,  Oh  my  Lord,  if  the  Lo. 
6.  19  And  G.  went  in,  and  made  ready  a  kid 
6.  22  when  G.  perceived  that  he  (was)  an  angel 
6.  22  G.  said,  Alas,  0  Lord  God  !  for  because  I 
6.  24  Then  G.  built  an  altar  there  unto  the  L. 
6.  27  Then  G.  took  ten  men  of  his  servants 
6.  29  G.  the  son  of  Joash  hath  done  this  thing 
6.  34  But  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  G. 
6.  36  G.  said  unto  God,  If  thou  wilt  save  Isra. 

6.  39  G.  said.  .Let  not  thine  anger  be  hot  aga. 

7.  1  G.,  and  all  the  people.,  rose  up  early,  and 
7.  2  the  Lord  said  unto  G.,  The  people  that 
7.  4  the  Lord  said  unto  G.,  The  people  (are) 
7.  5  the  Lord  said  unto  G.,  Every  one  that 

7.    7  the  Lord  said  unto  G.,  By  the  three  hun. 
7. 13  when  G.  was  come,  behold,  (there  was) 
7.  14  This  (is)  nothing  else  save  the  sword  of  G. 
7.  15  when  G.  heard  the  telling  of  the  dream 

7. 18  say,  (The  sword)  of  the  Lord,  and  of  G. 

7. 19  So  G.,  aud  the  hundred  men  that  (were) 
7.  20  cried,  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  G. 
7.  24  G.  sent  messengei's  throughout  all  mount 

7.  25  brought  the  heads  of  Oreb  and  Zeeb  to  G. 

8.  4  G.  came  to  Jordan,  (and)  passed  over,  he 
8.  7  G.  said,  Therefore,  when  the  Lord  hath 
8.  1 1  G.  went  up  by  the  way  of  them  that 

8. 13  G.  the  son  of  Joash  returned  from  battle 
8.  21  G.  arose,  and  slew  Zebah  and  Zalmunna 
8.  22  Then  the  men  of  Israel  said  unto  G. 
8.  23  G.  said  unto  them,  I  will  not  rule  over 
8.  24  G.  said . .  I  would  desire  a  request  of  you 
S.  27  G.  made  an  ephod  thereof,  and  put  it  in 
8.  27  which  thing  became  a  snare  unto  G.,  and 
8.  2S  country  was  in  quietness,  .in.  .days  of  G. 
8.  30  G.  had  threescore  and  ten  sons  of  his 
8.  32  G.  the  son  of  Joash  died  in  a  good  old  a. 
8.  33  it  came  to  pass,  as  soon  as  G.  was  dead 
8.  35  showed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of.  .G. 
GID-EO'-NI,  '#13\ 

Father  of  Abidan,  apriuce  of  Benjamin,  and  one  of  those 
appointed  to  take  the  census  at  Sinai.     B.C.  1490. 
Num.  1.  11  Of  Benjamin  ;  Abidan  the  son  of  G. 

2.  22  and  the  captain. .  Abidan  the  son  of  G. 
7.  60  On  the  ninth  day  Abidan  the  son  of  G. 
7.65  this.,  the  offering  of  Abidan  the  son  of  G. 
10.  24  over  the  host.  Abidan  the  son  of  G. 

ged'-OM,  by-ja  desotation. 

A  place  named  as  tin  limit  to  which  the  pursuit  of 
Benjamin  extended  after  the  battle  of  Gibean.  Hence 
it  wasbetweeuGibuahandthe  cliff  Eimmon(uow  called 
LinnuK',1).  ftbotii  three  miles  E.  of  Bethel. 

Jndgao.  45  pursued  hard  after  them  unto  G.,  and  slew 
GIER  EAGLE  — 
hParfaeolcwred  wtirure,  gier  eaglet  cn-j  racham. 

Lev.  11. 18  swan,  and  the  pelican,  and  the  gier  eagle 


%Parti-coloured  vulture,  gier  eagle,  ttTp'rachamah. 
Deut  14.  17  the  pelio'_r\.  and  the  gier  eagle,  and  the 

GIFT  — 

1  .A  reward,  "i?^n  eshkar. 

Psa.  72.  10  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts 
^.Offering,  jjresent,  nn:p  minchdh. 

2  Sa.  8.  2  became  D.'s  servants,  (and)  brought  gifts 
8.    6  became  servants  to  D.,  (and)  brought  gifts 

1  Ch.18.  2,  6  became  D.'s  servants,  (and)  brought  gifts 

2  Ch.26.    8  And  the  Ammonites  gave  gifts  to  Uzziah 

32.  23  many  brought  gifts  unto  the  Lord  to  Jer. 
Psa.  45. 12  the  daughter,  .(shall  be  there)  with  a  gift 

3. Lifting  up,  gift,  burden,  nxp'.p  maseth. 

Esth.  2.  18  Then  the  king,  .gave  gifts,  according  to 

i.Gift,  J $?  mattan. 

Gen.  34.  12  Ask  me  never  so  much  dowry  and  gift 
Num  18.  11  the  heave  offering  of  their  gift,  with  all 
Prov  18.  16  A  man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him 

21. 14  A  gift  in  secret  pacifieth  anger,  and  a  re. 

5. Gift,  kxqd  mattena. 

Dan.   2.    6  ye  shall  receive  of  me  gifts  and  rewards 
2.  48  the  Icing,  .gave  him  many  great  gifts 
5.  17  Let  thy  gifts  be  to  thyself,  and  give  thy 

Q.Gift,  ft$b  mattanah. 

Gen.  25.    6  Abraham  gave  gifts,  and  sent  them  away 
Exod28.  38  Israel  shall  hallow  in  all  their  holy  gifts 
Lev.  23.  38  beside  your  gifts,  and  beside  all  your  vows 
NumiS.    6  to  you  (they  are)  given . .  a  gift  for  the  L. 
18.   7  given  your  priest's  office,  .a service  of  gift 
18.  29  Out  of  all  your  gifts  ye  shall  offer  every 
2  Ch.21.   3  their  fathergave  them  great  gifts  of  silver 
Esth.  9.  22  days,  .of  sending,  .gifts  to  the  poor 
Psa.  68. 18  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men ;  yea 
Prov  15.  27  troubleth . .  but  he  that  hateth  gifts  shall 
Eccl.  7.    7  and  a  gift  destroyeth  the  heart 
Eze.  20.  26  I  polluted  them  in  their  own  gifts,  in 
20.  31  For  when  ye  offer  your  gifts,  when  ye 
20.  39  uo  more  with  your  gifts,  and  with  your 
46.  16  If  the  prince  give  a  gift  unto  any  of  his 
46.  17  But  if  he  give  a  gift  of  Ins  inheritance 

7. Gift,  nna  matlath. 

Prov  25. 14  Whoso  boasteth  himself  of  a  false  gift 

Eccl.  3. 13  of  all  his  labour,  it  (is)  the  gift  of  God 

5. 19  in  his  labour;  this  (is)  the  gift  of  God 

8...-1  separation  or  impure  gift,  .*na  nedeh. 

Eze.  16.  33  They  give  gifts  to  all  whores ;  but  thou 

9. A  separating  or  impure  gift,  jnj  nadan. 

Eze.  16.  33  but  thou  givest  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  lovers 

10.  Gift,  thing  lifted  up,  nxiju  nisseth. 

2  Sa.  19.  42  have  we  eaten . .  or  hath  he  given  us  any  g.  ? 

11. Bribe,  bribery,  reward,  intf'  shoehad. 

Exod23.  8  And  thou  shalt  take  no  gift :  for  the  gift 
Deut  16.  19  neither  take  a  gift :  for  a  gift  doth  blind 
2  Ch.19.  7  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of  gifts 
Prov.  6.  35  rest  content,  though  thou  givest  mauy  g. 
17.  8  A  gift  (is  as)  a  precious  stoue  in  the  eyes 
17.  23  A  wicked  (man)  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the 
Isa.  1.  23  everyone  loveth  gifts,  and followeth after 
Eze.  22.  12  In  thee  have  they  taken  gifts  to  shed  bl. 

12. Gift,  bribe,  thing  lifted  up,  nenp  terumah. 
Prov.29.    4  he  that  receiveth  gifts  overthroweth  it 

13..4  thing  put  up  or  devoted  to  God,  avddwfxa. 
Luke2i.   5  how  it  was  adorned  with  goodly,  .gifts 

1±.A  gift,  SoVa  doma. 

Matt.  7.  11  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  imto  your 
Luken.  13  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 
Eph.  4.  8  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts 
Phil.   4.  17  Not  because  I  desire  a  gift :  but  I  desire 

15./1  giving,  the  act  of  giving,  B6(tls  dosis. 

Jas.     1.  17  Every  good  gift,  .cometh  down  from  the  f. 

16. A  free  gift,  present,  Scoped  dorea. 

John  4.  10  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who 
Acts    2.  38  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
8.  20  thou  hast  thought  that  the  gift  of  God 

10.  45  was  poured  out  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

11.  17  as  God  gave  them  the  like  gift  as.  .unto 
Horn.  5.  15  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace 

5.  17  they  which  receive,  .[the  gift]  of  righteo. 
2  Co.  q.  15  Thanks,  .unto  God  for  his  unspeakable g. 
Eph.   3.    7  according  to  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  God 

4.  7  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  C. 
Heb.   6.   4  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were 

17.  A  free  gift,  what  is  given,  Sc&pyua  dorema. 
Rom.  5.  16  not  as.  .by one  that  sinned,  (so  is)  the  gift 
Jas.     1.  17  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  com. 

18.  A  gift,  Stopou  di~'n>n. 

M.dt.  2.  11  they  presented  unto  him  gifts  ;  gold,  and 
5. 23  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and 

5.  24  Leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and 
5.  24  be  reconciled. '.then come  and  offer  thyg. 
8.    4  offer  the  gift  that  Moses  commanded,  for 

15.  5  a  gift,  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be 
23.  18  whosoever  sweareth  by  the  gift  that  is 
23.  19  gift,  or  the  altar  that  sanctitieth  the  gift? 

Mark  7.  n  CoTban,  that  is  to  say,  a  gift,  by  whatsoe. 

Luke2i.    1  rich  men  casting  their  gifts  into  the  tre. 

Eph.   2.    8  not  of  yourselves;  (it  is)  the  gift  of  God 

Heb.    5.    1  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  andsacriflces 
8.    3  is  ordained  to  offer  gifts'  and  sacrifices 

8.  4  priests  that  offer  gifts  according  to  the 

9.  9  in  which  were  offered  both  gifts  and  sa. 


Heb.  11.    4  God  testifying  of  his  gifts  :  and  by  it  he 
Rev.  11. 10  and  shall  send  gifts  one  to  another 

19. Distribution,  par -ting,  /xepiafxas  merismos. 

Heb.   2.    4  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  G. 
20.i [-race,  favour,  free  gift,  x°-Pls  charis* 

2  Co.    8.   4  Praying,  .that  we  would  receive  the  gift 

21.  Grace,  favour,  kindness,  x^Pl(raa  charisma. 
Rom.  1.  11  I  may  impart  unto  you  some  spiritual  g. 

6.  23  gift  of  God  (is)  eternal  life  through  J.  C. 

11.  29  For  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  (are) 

12.  6  Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to 

1  Co.    1.    7  So  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  gift ;  wait. 

7.  7  But  every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  G. 
12.  4  there  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same 
12.  9  to  another  the  gifts  of  healing  by  the  same 
12.  28  after  that  miracles,  then  gifts  of  healmgs 
12.  30  Have  all  the  gifts  of  healing?  do  all  speak 
12.  31  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts:  and  yet 

2  Co.    1.  11  that  for  the  gift  (bestowed)  upon  us  by 

1  Ti.    4.  14  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee,  which 

2  Ti.    1. '  6  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is 
1  Pe.    4. 10  As  every  man  hath  received  the  gift 

GIFT,  free  — 

Grace,  favour,  kindness,  x^pLO'/j.a  charisma. 

Rom.  5.  15  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  (is)  the  free  g. 
5.  16  the  free  gift  (is)  of  many  offences  uuto 

GIFTS,  giveth  — 

A  man  of  gifts,  jrv?  i?*x  ish  mattan. 

Prov  19.    6  man  (is)  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth  gifts 
GI'-HON,  jirva,  jina  stream. 

1.  The  second  river  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  variously 
supposed  to  have  been  theOxus(orAraxes),  thePyramus, 
the  Ganges,  or  the  Nile. 

Gen.   2. 13  And  the  name  of  the  second  river  (is)  G. 

2.  A  place  near  Jerusalem  where  Solomon  was  anointed 
and  proclaimed  king.  Here  in  the  valley  of  Gihon  was 
a  fountain  which  had  likely  been  named  after  the  place, 
or  vice-versa. 

1  Ki.   1.  33  Solomon.. to  ride,  .and  bring  him.  .to  G. 

1.  38  Solomon  to  ride,  .and  brought  him  to  G. 

I.  45  the  prophet  have  anointed  him  kingin  G. 

2  Ch.32.  30  also  stopped  the  upper  water  course  of  G. 

33. 14  he  built  a  wall,  .on  the  west  side  of  G. 

GI-LA'-LAI,  "fy  rolling,  weighty. 
One  of  a  party  of  priests  who  played  on  David's  instru- 
ments at  the  consecration  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  in 
the  company  under  Ezra.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  36  G. .  .with  the  musical  instruments  of  D. 

GIL-BO'-A,  yapa  bubbling  fountain. 
A  hilly  district  of  Manasseh  W.  of  the  Jordan,  in  Issa 
char,  where  Saul  was  slain.      The  mount  is  six  miles 
from  Beth-shean,  and  at  its  foot  lay  Shunem  and  Aphek ; 
at  its  back  is  a  village  now  called  Gelbon. 

1  Sa.  28.   4  gathered  all  Israel . .  and  they  pitched  in  G. 

2  Sa.21.  12  when  the  Philistines  had  slain  Saul  in  G. 

GTL'-EAD,  IJ/^3  strong,  rocky. 

1.  A  mountainous  district  E.  of  the  Jordan,  occupied  by 

Reuben,  Gad,  and  Manasseh.    It  was  afterwards  called 

Percea,, 

Gen.  37.  25  a  company  of  IshmeebHes  came  from  G. 
um32.    1  they  saw  the  land  of  Jazer,  and.. of  G. 
32.  26  our  cattle,  shall  be .  .in  the  cities  of  G. 
32.  29  then  ye  shall  give  them  the  land  of  G.  for 
32.  39  the  children  of  Machir.  .went  to  G.,  and 
32. 40  Moses  gave  G.  unto  Machir  the  son  of  M. 
Deut.  2.  36  the  city  that  (is)  by  the  river,  .unto  G. 

3. 10  All  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  all  G.,  and 
3.  13  G. .. gave  I  unto  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 
3.  15  And  I  gave  G.  unto  Machir 

3.  16  unto  the  Gadites  I  gave  from  G.  even 

4.  43  and  Ramoth  in  G.,  of  the  Gadites  ;  and 
34.    1  the  Lord  showed  him  all  the  land  of  G. 

Josh. 12.    2  from  half  G.,  eveu  unto  the  river  Jabbok 

1 2.  5  half  G. ,  the  border  of  Sihon  king  of  Hesh. 

13.  11  G.,  and  the  border  of  the  Geshurites  and 
13.  25  their  coast.  .Jazer,  and  all  the  cities  of  G. 
13.  31  half  G.,  and  Ashtaroth,  aud  Edrei,  cities 
17.  1  he  was  a  man  of  war,  therefore  he  had  G. 
17.  5  there  fell,  .to  Manasseh.  .the  land  of  G. 
17.    6  of  Mauasseh's  sons  had  the  land  of  G. 

20.  8  and  Ramoth  in  G.  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad 

21.  38  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad,  Ramoth  in  G. 

22.  9  departed,  .to  go  unto  the  country  of  G. 
22.  13  child,  of  Israel  sent,  .into  the  land  of  G 
22.  15  they  came,  .unto  the  laud  of  G.,  and  thej 
22.  32  Phinehas.  .returned,  .out  of  the  land  of  G. 

Judg.  5.  17  G.  abode  beyond  Jordan:  and  why  did 
10.   4  thirty  cities,  .which  (are)  in  the  laud  of  G. 
10.    8  the  land  of  the  Amontes,  which  (is)  in  G. 
10.  17  the  children  of  Amnion    encamped  inG 
10. 18  the  people  (and)  princes  of  G.  said  one 

10.  18  be  head  over  all  the  inhabitants  of  G. 

II.  5  the  elders  of  G.  went  to  fetch  Jephthah 

11.  7  And  Jephthah  said  unto  the  elders  of  G. 
11.  8  And  the  elders  of  G.  said  unto  Jephthah 
11.  8  lie  our  bead  overall  the  inhabitants  of  G. 
11.  9  And  Jephthah  said  unto  the  elders  of  G. 
1 1.  1 1  Then  Jephthah  went  with  the  elders  of  G. 
11.  29  came  upon  Jephthah.  .he passed  over  G. 
11.  29  Manasseh,  and  passed  over  Mizpeh  of  G. 

11.  29  from  Mizpt'b  of  G,  he  passed  over  (unto) 
12.;  4  Then  Jephthah  gathered,  .the  men  of  G. 

12.  4  the  men  of  G.  smote  Ephraim,  because 
12.    5  the  men  of  G.  said  unto  him,  (Art)  thou 


GILEADITES 


391 


GIRDLE 


Judg  12.    7  and  was  buried  in  (one  of)  the  cities  of  G. 

20.   i  even  to  Beer-sheba,  with  the  land  of  G. 
i  Sa.  13.    7  went  over  Jordan  to  the  land  of.  .G. 
2  Sa.    2.   9  made  him  king  over  G.,  and  over  the  A. 

17.  26  So  Israel  and  Absalom  pitched  in.  .G. 

24.   6  they  came  to  G.,  and  to  the  land  of  Taht. 

1  Ki.  4.  13  him.  .the  towns  of  Jair.  .which  (are)  in  G. 

4.  ig  Geber  the  son  of  Uri . .  in  the  country  of  G. 
17.  1  Elijah,  .of  the  inhabitants  of  G.,  said  unto 
22.    3  Know  ye  that  Jtamoth  in  G.  (is)  ours,  and 

2  Ki.  10.  ^  From  Jordan  eastward,  all  the  land  of  G. 

10. 33  which  (is)  by  the  river  Arnon,  even  G. 
15.  29  Tiglath-pileser.  .took.  .Hazor,andG.,  and 
1  Ch.  2.  22  three  and  twenty  cities  in  the  land  of  G. 

5.  9  cattle  were  multiplied  in  the  land  of  G. 

5.  10  they  dwelt  in  their  tents  throughout . .  G. 
5. 16  they  dwelt  in  G.  in  Bashan,  and  in  her 

6.  80  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad ;  Kamoth  in  G. 

26.  31  found. . mighty  men  of  valouratJazerofG. 

27.  21  Of  the  half  (tribe)  of  Manasseh  in  G.,  Iddo 
Fsa.  60.    7  G.  (is)  mine,  and  Manasseh  (is)  mine 

10S.   8  G.  (is)  mine  ;  Manasseh  (is)  mine  ;  Ephr. 
Song  6.    5  as  a  flock  of  goats  that  appear  from  G. 

Jer.     8.  22  (Is  there)  no  balm  in  G.  ;  (is  there)  no 
22.   6  Thou  (art)  G.  unto  me,  (and)  the  head  of 
46. 11  Go  up  into  G.,  and  take  balm,  0  virgin 
50.  19  and  his  soul  shall  be  satisfied  upon . .  G. 

Eze.  47.  18  the  east  side  ye  shall  measure,  .from  G. 

Hos.    6.    8  G.  (is)  a  city  of  them  that  work  iniquity 
12.  1 1  (Is  there)  iniquity  (in)  G.  ?  surely  they  are 

Amos  1.    3  they  have  threshed  G.  with  threshing  in. 
1. 13  have  ripped  up  the  woman  with  child  of  G. 

Obatk     19  and  Benjamin  (shall  possess)  G. 

Mic.   7.  14  let  them  feed  (in)  Bashan  and  G.,  as  in 

Zech.io.  10  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  G. 

2.  Perhaps  the  name  of  a  mountain  W.  of  the  Jordan 
near  Jezreel,  but  the  true  reading  may  be  Gilboa. 
Gideon  encamped  at  the  "  Spring  of  Herod,"  which  is 
at  the  base  of  Gilboa'. 

Judg.  7.    3  let  him . .  depart  early  from  mount  G. 

3.  Son  of  Machir,  grandson  of  Manasseh.     B.C.  1620. 

Num.26.  29  Machir  begat  G. :  of  G.  (come)  the  family 

26.  30  These  (are)  the  sons  of  G.  :  (of)  Jeezer 

27.  1  the  son  of  Hepher,  the  son  of  G.,  the  son 
36.    1  chief  fathers  of  the  families  of .  ,G. 

Josh.17.  1  a  lot  for.  .Machir.  .the  father  of  G. 

17.    3  Zelophehad.  .son  of  Hepher,  the  son  of  G. 
1  Ch.  2.  21  the  daughter  of  Machir,  the  father  of  G. 

2. 23  these . .  the  sons  of  Machir,  the  father  of  G. 

7.  14  concubine,  .bare  Machir  the  father  of  G. 

7. 17  These  (were>the  sons  of  G.,  the  son  of  M. 

4.  Father  of  Jephthah,  judge  of  Israel.  B.C.  1200. 

Judg. 11.    1  the  son  of  an  harlot ;  and  G.  begat  Jeph. 
11.    2  G.'s  wife  bare  him  sons  :  and  Ms  wife's 

5.  A  chief  of  a  family  of  Gad.    B.C.  1300. 

i  Ch.  5. 14  Huri,  the  son  of  Jaroah,  the  son  of  G. 

GH-EAD-ITES,  njfrarj.     Descendants  of  Gilead. 
Num.26.  29  of  Gilead  (come)  the  family  of  the  G. 
Judg.  10.    3  after  him  arose  Jair,  a  G.,  and  judged 
11.    1  Now  Jephthah  the  G.  was  a  mighty  man 

11.  40  lament  the  daughter  of  Jephthah  the  G. 

12.  s  And  the  G.  took  the  passages  of  Jor.  v.  4. 

12.  7  Then  died  Jephthah  the  G.,  and  was 

2  Sa.  17.  27  Shobi-.and  Barzillai  the  G.  of  Hogelim 
19.  31  Barzillai  the  G.  came  down  from  Kogel 
jijKi.  2.   7  kindness  unto  the  sons  of  Barzillai  the  G. 
2  Ki.15.  25  Pekah .  .and  with  him  fifty  men  of  the  G. 
Ezra   2.  61  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Barzillai  the  G. 
Neh.  7.  63  of  the  daughters  of  Barzillai  the  G.  to  wife 

GLL'-GAL,  Yfih  circle,  wheel. 

1.  A  place  W.  of  the  Jordan,  near  Jericho,  in  Benjamin, 

where  Israel  spent  the  fir3t  night  after  crossing  the 

Jordan. 

Deut.n.  30  dwell  in  the  champaign  over  against  G. 

Josh.  4.  19  the  people  came  up . .  and  encamped  in  G. 

4.  20  those  twelve  stones.  .Joshua  pitch  in  G. 

5.  9  Wheref.  the  name  of  the  place  is  called  G. 
5.  10  And  the  children  of  Israel  encamped  in  G. 
,9.   6  they  went  to  Joshua  unto  the  camp  at  G. 

10.    6  men . .  sent  xinto  Joshua  to  the  camp  to  G. 
10.    7  So  Joshua  ascended  from  G.,  he,  and  all 
10.   9  Joshua,  .went  up  from  G.  all  night 
10.  15  Joshua  returned,  .unto  the  camp  to  G. 
10.  43  And  Josh,  returned,  .unto  the  camp  to  G. 

14.  6  children  of  Judah  came  unto  Joshua  in  G. 

15.  7  toward  G.,  that  (is)  before  the  going  up 
Judg.  2.  1  an  angel  of  the  Lord  came  up  from  G. 

3. 19 turned  again  from  the  quarries  --by  G. 

1  Sa.   7.  16  wentfrom  year  to  year  in  circuit  to.  .G. 

10.  8  And  thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to  G. 

11.  14  said  Samuel.  .Come,  and  let  us  go  to  G. 
11.  15  And  all  the  people  went  to  G. ;  and 

11.  15  they  made  Saul  king  before  the  Lord  in  G. 
13.    4  the  people  were  called  together,  .to  G. 
13.   7  Saul,  .(was)  yet  in  G.,  and  all  the  people 
13.    8  but  Samuel  came  not  to  G.  ;  and  the  pe. 

13.  12  Philistines  will  come  down  now.  .to  G. 
13. 15  And  Samuel  arose,  and  gat  him  up  from  G. 
15.  12  heset  him  up  a  place,  and  is  gone,  .to  G. 
15.  2 1  to  sacrificeunto  the  Lord  thy  God  in  G. 
15. 33  And  Samuel  hewed  Agag  in  pieces. .in  G. 

2  Sa.  19.  15  Judah  came  to  G.,  to  go  to  meet  the  king 

19.  40  Then  the  king  went  on  to  G.,  and  Chim. 
2  Ki.  2.    1  that  Elijah  went  with  Elisha  from  G. 

4.  38  And  Elisha  came  again  to  G. :  and 
Neh. 12.  20  Also  from  the  house  of  G.,  and  out  of  the 
Hos.   4.  15  and  come  not  ye  unto  G.,  neither  go  ye 

-),  15  All  their  wiekedness  (is)  in  G;  ;  for  their 


Hos.  12. 11  are  vanity  :  they  sacrifice  bullocks  inG. 
Amos  4.   4  at  G.  multiply  transgression  ;  and  bring 

5.    5  But  seek  not  Beth-el,  nor  enter  into  G. 

5.  5  for  G.  shall  surely  go  into  captivity,  and 
Mic.    6.   5  auswered  liim  from  Shittim  unto  G. 

2.  A  city  between  Dor  and  Tirsa. 

Josh.  1 2.  23  the  king  of  the  nations  of  G.,  one 

3.  A  city  N.  of  Joppa,  near  the  sea  (now  called  Jidjulah), 
near  Antipatris. 

Josh.  9.    6  they  went  to  Joshua  unto  the  camp  at  G. 
10.    6  sent  unto  Joshua  to  the  camp  to  G. 
10.    7  So  Joshua  ascended  from  G.,  he,  and  all 
10.   9  Joshua  therefore,  .went  up  from  G.  all 
10.  15,  43  Jos.  returned,  .unto  the  camp  to  G. 

4.  A  place  twelve  miles  S.  of  Ebol  and  Gerizini  (now 
called  JUjUiah). 

2  Ki.   2.    1  that  Elijah  went  with  Elisha  from  G. 

4.  38  And  Elisha  came  again  to  G.  :  and  (there 

Gl'-LOH,  rifta  circle. 

A  town  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  near  Hebron,  and 

Ahithophel's  native  place. 

Josh.15.  51  Goshen,  and  Holon,  and  G.;  eleven  cities 
2  Sa.  15. 12  Absalom  sent  for  Ahithophel.  .from  G. 

GI-LO'-NTTE,  ^3,  *f?% 

A  inhabitant  of  GUoh.    B.C.  1023. 

2  Sa.  15. 12  And  Absalom  sent  for  Ahithophel  the  G. 
23.  34  Eliam  the  son  of  Ahithophel  the  G. 

GTJff'-ZO,  i'?3  sycamore. 

A  city  in  the  N.  of  Judah,  two  or  three  miles  S.W.  of 
Lydda  and  S.  of  the  road  between  Jerusalem  and  Jaffa. 
Here  is  Jimzu  a  large  village  on  an  eminence  and  well 
surrounded  with  trees. 

2  Ch.28. 18  G.  also  and  the  villages  thereof:  and  they 
GIN  — 
l.A  snare,  v$0  moqesh. 

Psa.140.    5  The  proud,  .they  have  set  gins  for  me.  S. 
141.    9  and  the  gins  of  the  workers  of  iniquity 

Amos  3.    5  Can  a  bird  fall . .  were  no  gin  (is)  for  him  ? 
2.Gin,  snare,  ns pack. 

Job    18.   9  The  gin  shall  take  (him)  by  the  heel,  (and) 

Isa.     8.  14  for  a  gin  and  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabi. 

GI  -NATH,  ftj'J  protection. 

The  father  of  Tibni  who  disputed  the  throne  of  Israel 
with  Omri  after  the  death  of  Ziruri.    B.C.  926. 
1  Ki.  16.  21  half,  .followed  Tibni  the  son  of  G. 

16.  22  people  that  followed  Tibni  the  son  of  G. 

GTN-NE'-THON,  jlfiji,  iri|3  great  protection. 
Or  Ginnetho,  a  prince  or  priest  who,  with  Nehemiah, 
sealed  the  covenant.    B.C.  445. 
Neh.  10.   6  Daniel,  G.,  Baruch 
12.    4  Iddo,  G.,  Abijah 
12. 16  Of  Iddo,  Zechariah ;  of  G.,  Meshullani 

GIRD,  to  — 

l.To  gird,  "rift  azar,  3. 

Psa.  18.  32  God  that  girdeth  me  with  strength,  and 
Isa.  45.   5  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not 

2. To  bind,  npN  asar. 

Job  12.  18  and  girdeth  their  loins  with  a  girdle 

3.  To  put  an,  "i-)N  aphad. 

Exod2g.    5  gird  him  with  the  curious  girdle  of  the 

4.  Girdle,  iTTfun  chagorah. 

Isa.  32. 11  make  you  bare,  and  gird.  .upon,  .loins 

5.  To  gird,  restrain,  i;rt  chagar. 

Exod2g.    9  And  thou  shalt  gird  them  with  girdles 

Lev.    8.    7  girded  him  with  the  girdle,  and  clothed 

8.    7  he  girded  him  with  the  curious  girdle  of 

8.  13  girded  them  with  girdles,  and  put  bonnets 

Judg.  3.  16  he  did  gird  it  under  his  raiment  upon  his 

1  Sa.  17.  39  David  girded  his  sword  upon  his  armour 

2  Sa.    3.  31  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  and  mourn  be. 
1  Ki.  20.  32  So  they  girded  sackcloth  on  their  loins 
Psa.  45.    3  Gird  thy  sword  upon  (thy)  thigh,  O  (Most) 
Ptot  31.  17  She  girdeth  her  loins  with  strength,  and 
Isa.   22.  12  to  baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sack. 
Jer.     4.    8  For  this  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  lament 

6.  26  gird  (thee)  with  sackcloth,  and  wallow 

49.    3  gird  you  with  sackcloth  ;  lament,  and  run 

Eze.     7.  18  They  shall  also  gird  (themselves)  with  s. 

27.  31  gird  them  with  sackcloth,  and  they  shall 

44.  18  they  shall  not  gird  (themselves)  with_any 

6.  To  gird,  £u>vvv/xt  zomiumi,  tyvvvw  zwvnuo. 

.Tnnn?T   18  When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdedst 
21. 18  another  shall  gird  thee,  and  carry,  .whi. 
7-  To  gird,  Sta(d>vi/v/j,t,  favvva}  diazonnumi,  zonnuo. 

Johni3.    4  He  riseth.  .took  a  towel,  and  girded  him. 
13.    5  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded 

GIRD  about,  to  — 

To  bind,  bind  up,  vin  chabash. 

Eze.  16. 10  and  I  girded  thee  about  with  fine  linen 

GIRD  on,  to  — 

To  gird,  I3n  chagar. 

Deut.  1.  41  when  ye  had  girded  on  every  man  hisw. 
1  Sa.  25.  i3.said.  .Gird  ye  on  every  man  his  sword 
25.  13  And  they  girded  on  every  man  his  sword 
25.  13  and  David  also  girded  on  his  sword 
1  Ki.  20.  ti  Let  not  him  that  girdeth  on.  .boast  liim. 


GIRD  self,  to  — 

l.To  gird  self,  lis;  azar,  7. 

Psa.  93.    1  he  hath  girded  himself:  the  world  also  is 
Isa.     8.   9,  9  gird  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  broken 

2.  To  gird,  be  restrained,  i;n  chagar. 

Isa.    15.    3  In  their  streetsthey  shall  gird  themselves 
Lam.  2.  10  they  have  girded  themselves  with  sack 
Joel    1.  13  Gird  yourselves,  and  lament,  ye  priests 

3.  To  gird  around,  7repi£aWu/u  perizonnumi. 

Lukei2.  37  he  will  gird  himself,  and  make  them  to 
17.    8  gird  thyself,  and  serve  me,  till  I  have    ' 
Acts  12.    8  Gird  thyself,  and  bind  on  thy  sandals 

GIRD  up  — 

1.  To  gird,  *i]X  azar. 

Job   38.   3  Gird  up  now  thy  loins  like  a  man ;  for  I 
40.    7  Gird  up  thy  loins  now  like  a  man :  I  will 
Jer.     1. 17  Thou  therefore  gird  up  thy  loins,  and 

2.  To  gird,  be  restrained,  l:n  clutgar. 

2  Ki.   4.  29  Gird  up  thy  loins,  aud  take  my  staff  in 
9.    1  Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  this  box  of 
2.  To  gird  up,  compress,  dj^  shanas,  3. 

1  Ki.  18.  46  he  girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran  before  A. 
4i.To  gird  up,  ava&vvvfxt  anazonnumi. 

1  Pe.    1.  13  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober 
GIRD  unto  one's  self,  to  — 

To  gird  thoroughly,  8ta£a)vvunL  diazonnumi. 

Jolm2i.    7  he  girt  (his)  fisher's  coat,  .for  he  was  na. 
GIRD  with,  to  — 
To  gird,  itn  azar,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.  40  For  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength 
Psa.  iS.  39  For  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength 

30.  11  thou  hast  put  off.,  and  girded  me  with  g. 

GIRDED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  girded,  iin  azar. 

1  Sa.    2.    4  they  that  stumbled  are  girded  with  str. 
2.  To  become  girded,  itn  azar,  2. 

Psa.  65.   6  setteth  fast  the  mountains. .  girded  with 
3. To  bind,  -jdn  asar. 

Neh.   4.  iS  every  one  had  Ins  sword  girded  by  his 
4.  To  gird,  *i3rt  chagar. 

Exodi  2.  1 1  your  loins  girded,  your  shoes  on  your  feet 

Lev.  16.    4  and  shall  be  girded  with  a  linen  girdle 

1  Sa.    2.  18  Samuel,  .a  child,  girded  with  a  linen  ep. 

2  Sa.    6.  14  David  (was)  girded  with  a  linen  ephod 

20.   S  Joab's  garment,  .was  girded  unto  him 
21. 16  he,  being  girded  with  a  new  (sword),  tho. 
Psa.  109.  19  and  for  a  girdle  wherewith  he  is  girded 
Dan.  10.    5  whose  loins  (were)  girded  with  fine  gold 
Joel    1.   8  Lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth 

GIRDED  with  — 
Girded,  nijn  chagor. 

Eze.  23. 15  Girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  exc. 

GIRDED  about,  to  be  — 

To  gird  round  about,  -Kepityvvvfxi  perizonnumi. 
Lukei2.  35  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and(your) 

GIRDED,  to  have  — 

To  gird  round  about,  Trepi^oWu/u  Trep\  perizonnumi- 
Kev.  15.   6  having  their  breasts  girded  with  golden  g. 

GIRDING  — 

Girding,  nTiJnp  machagoreth. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  a  stomacher  a  girding  of  sack. 

GIRDLE  — 

l.Girdte,  sash,  msx  abnet. 

Exod2S.    4  a  broidered  coat,  a  mitre,  and  a  girdle 
28.  39  thou  shalt  make  the  girdle  (of)  needle-w. 

28.  40  thou  shalt  make  for  them  girdles,  and  h 

29.  9  And  thou  shalt  gird  them  with  girdles 
39.  29  a  girdle  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  and  blue 

Lev.    S.    7  girded  him  with  the  girdle,  and  clothed 
8.  13  girded  them  with  girdles,  and  put  bonnets 
16.   4  and  shall  be  girded  with  a  linen  girdle 
Isa.    22.  21 1  will . .  strengthen  him  with  thy  girdle 

2.  Girdle,  ttn  ezor. 

2  Ki.    1.    8  with  a  girdle  of  leather  about  his  loins 
Job   12.  iS  and  girdeth  their  loins  with  a  girdle 
Isa.     5.  27  neither  shall  the  girdle  of  their  loins  be 
11.   s  righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his 
11.   5  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  Ids  reins 
Jer.  13.    1  Go  and  get  thee  a  linen  girdle,  and  put 
13.    2  So  I  got  a  girdle,  according  to  the  word 
13.    4  Take  the  girdle  that  thou  hast  got,  wdiich 
13.   6  Arise,  go.  .and  take  the  girdle  from  then. 
13.    7  and  took  the  girdle  from  the  place  where 
13.    7  the  girdle  was  marred,  it  was  profitable 
13.  10  as  this  girdle,  which  is  good  for  nothing 
13.  11  For  as  the  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of 
Eze.  23. 15  Girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins 

Z.Girdle,  "run  chagor. 

1  Sa.18.    4  stripped  himself ..  even ..  to  his  girdle 

2  Sa.  20.    8  upon  it  a  girdle  (with)  a  sword  fastened 
PTOV31.  24  She . .  delivereth  girdles  unto  the  merch. 

4.  Girdle,  htuh  chagorah. 

2  Sa.18.  11  given.,  ten  (shekels)  of  silver,  andagirdle 
1  Ki.  2.  5  put  the  blood  of  war  upon  his  girdle  that 
Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  a  girdle  a  rent;  and  instead  of 


GIRDLE 


392 


GIVE 


5.  Girdle,  band,  rnp,  (rvip)  mezach,  (meziach.) 
Psa.109. 19  and  for  a  girdle  wherewith  he  is  girded 

Q.Girdle,  zone,  belt,  C&vji  zone. 

Matt.  3.    4  a  leathern  girdle  about  his  loins ;  and  his 
Mark  1.    6  with  a  girdle  of  skin  about  his  loins 
Acts  21. 13  .took  Paul's  girdle,  and  bound  his  own 

21.  11  bind  the  man  that  owneththis  girdle,  and 

.Rev.    1.  13  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle 

15.   6  having  their  breasts  girded  with  golden  g. 

GIRDLE,  curious  — 

Device,  devised  work,  2fr\  chesheb. 

Exod28.    8-  27,  28  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 

29.  5  with  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 
39.    5,  20,  21  the  curious  girdle  of  his  ephod 

Lev.    8.    7  with  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod 

GLR-GA-SHITES,  *pr)3. 

A  tribe  early  in  possession  of  part  of  Canaan.    It  is 

uniformly  plural  in  the  Common  "Version  except  twice, 

Gen.   10.    16,    and  1   Ch.    1.    14;  in  the  former    it    is 

Girgasite. 

Gen.  10.  16  Jebusite,  and  the  Aniorite,  and  the  G. 
15.  21  Amorites,  and  the  Canaanites,  and  the  G. 

Deut.  7.    1  the  Hittites,  and  the  G.,  and  the  Amor. 

Josh.  3.  to  the  Hivites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  G. 
24.  11  men  of  Jericho  fought  against,  .the  G. 

1  Ch.  1. 14  Jebusite  also,  and  the  Amorite,  and  the  G. 
Neh.   g.    8  the  land  of  the. .  Jebusites,  and  the  G. 

GIRL  — 

Child,  female,  lass,  girl,  rnp:  yaldah. 

Joel    3.    3  they  have,  .sold  a  girl  for  wine,  that  they 
Zech.  8.    5  full  of  boys  and  girls  playing  in  the  stre. 

GIRT  — 

To  be  girded,  nix  azar. 

2  Ki.  1.    8  an  hairy  man,  and  girt  with  a  girdle  of  1. 
GERT,  to  be  — 

To  gird  round  about,  irepi£&vvv(xt  perizonnumi. 
Rev.    1. 13  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle 

GERT  about,  to  have  — 

To  gird  round  about,  ir^pt^vuvfxtjjerizonnwni. 

Eph.   6.  14  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth 
GIS'-PA  (or  GISH'-PA),  nb?'?  listening,  attentive. 
An  overseer  of  the  Nethinini  in  "the  Ophel,"  after  the 
exile.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  21  Ziha  and  G.  (were)  over  the  Netliininis 

GIT-TAH  HE'-PHER,  TglTJ  nrtf. 

A  town  in  Zebulun,  also  called  Gath-hepker. 

Josh.ig.  13  passeth  on  along  on  the  east  to  G. 
GIT-TA'-LM,  d;R3  two  wine  presses. 

1.  A  place  of  refuge  near  Beeroth. 

2  Sa.   4.    3  And  the  Beerothites  fled  to  G.,  and  were 

2.  A  place  near  Gath  inhabited  by  Benjamites  after 
the  return  from  exile.  This  and  No.  x.  may  be  the 
same  place,  as  this  latter  is  N.W.  of  Jerusalem. 

Neh.  11.  33  Hazor,  Ramah,  G. 
GIT-TITES,  D*$I3,  'fia. 

Inhabitants  of  Gath,  six  hundred  of  whom  followed 
David  as  a  body  guard  under  Ittai.  Gittite  may  also 
be  an  inhabitant  of  Gittaim,  or  of  Gath-rimmon. 

Josh.  1 3.    3  the  Eshkalonites,  the  G.,  and  the  Ekron. 
2  Sa.    6. 10  into  the  house  of  Obed-edom  the  G. 

6.  11  cont.  iu  the  house  of  Obed-edom  the  G. 
15.  18  and  all  the  G. .  .passed  on  before  the  king 
15.  19  Then  said  the  king  to  Ittai  the  G. 
15.  22  Ittai  the  G.  passed  over,  and  all  his  men 
18.   2  third  part  under  the  hand  of  Ittai  the  G. 
2i.  19  Elhanan . .  slew  (the  bro.  of)  Goliath  the  G. 

1  Ch.13.  13  into  the  house  of  Obed-edom  the  G. 

20.    5  slew  Lahrni  the  brother  of  Goliath  the  G. 

Grr'-TITH,  n'mnfrom  or  of  Gath. 

A  musical  instrument  manufactured  at  Gath.     When 

David  was  in  exile  there  he  probably  became  acquainted 

with  it  and  adopted  it  in  the  musical  part  of  the  service 

of  the  tabernacle. 

Psa.  S.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  G.,  A  Psalm 
81.  „  To  the  chief  musician  upon  G.,  (A  Ps.) 
84.    „     To  the  chief  musician  upon  G.,  A  Psa. 

GIVE,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  come  in,  t*i3  bo,  5. 

Psa.  78.  29  they  did  eat . .  for  he  gave  them  their  own 

2.  To  speak,  -in^r  dabar,  3. 

2  Ki.  25.   6  So  they  took . .  and  they  gave  judgment 
Jer.     4. 12  nowalso  will  I  give  sentence  against  them 

39.   5  Riblah.  .where  he  gave  judgment  upon 
52.   9  Riblah . .  where  he  gave  judgment  upon 

3.  To  turn,  71517  hapJiak. 

1  Sa.  10.    9  when  he  had  turned..  God  gave  him  ano. 

4.  To  apportion,  pbn  chalaq. 

Deut29.  26  gods  whom,  .he  had  not  given  unto  them 

5.  To  give,  nn;  yahab. 

Gen.  29.  21  Jacob  said  unto  Laban,  Give,  .my  wife 

30.  1  Rachel,  .said.  .Give  me  children,  or  else 
47.  15  all  the  Egyptians,  .said,  Give  us  bread 
47-  16  And  Joseph  said,  Give  your  cattle;  and  I 

Josh  18.    4  Give  out  from  anions  you  three  men  for 
Judg.  1.  15  she  said  unto  him.  Give  me  a  blessing 
20.    7  Behold,  .give  here  your  advice  and  coun. 

1  Sa.  14.  di  Therefore  Saul  said .  .Give  a  perfect  (lot) 

2  Sa.  16.  2D  Give  counsel  among  you  what  we  shall  do 


1  Ch.16.  28  Give  unto  the  Lord,  ye  kindreds  of  the 
16.  28  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 
16.  29  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  (due)  imto 
Psa.  29.    1  Give  unto  the  Lord,  0  ye  mighty,  give 
29.    2  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto 
60.  11  Give  us  help  from  trouble  :  for  vain  (is) 
96.    7  Give  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye  kindreds  of  the 
96.    7  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 
96.   8  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  (due  unto) 
108.  12  Give  us  help  from  trouble:  for  vain  (is) 
Prov3o.  15  hath  two  daughters,  (crying),  Give,  give 
Hos.    4.  18  her  rulers  (with)  shame  do  love,  Give  ye 
Zech'n.  12  If  ye  think  good,  give,  .my  price,  and  if 

6.  To  give,  in)  yahab. 

Ezra    5.  12  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  Nebucha. 
Dan.    2.  21  he  giveth  wisdom  unto  the  wise,  and 
23  who  hast  given  me  wisdom  and  might 

37  God  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a  kingdom 

38  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  hath  he  given 
48  the  king,  .gave  him  many,  .gifts,  and 

5.  17  give  thy  rewards  to  another ;  yet  1  will 
5.  18  God  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  father  a 

5.  19  And  for  the  majesty  that  he  gave  him,  all 

6.  2  that  the  princes  might  give  accounts  unto 

7.  To  do  good,  benefit,  so;  yatdb,  5. 

1  Sa.    2.  32  (the  wealth)  which  (God)  shall  give  Israel 

8. To  a  man  of  gifts,  \FQ  ^"n  leish  mattan. 

Prov  19.   6  every  man  (is)  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth 
9. To  lift  up,  tfy$  nasa,  3. 

2  Sa.   19. 42  have  we  eaten . .  or  hath  he  given  us  any 
10.  To  give,  jnj  nathan. 

Gen.    1.  29  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed 
3.    6  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her 
3. 12  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest.  .with  me 
3. 12  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat 
9.    3  as  the  green  herb  have  I  given  you  all 

12.  7  said,  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land 

13.  15  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  for 

13.  17  the  land,  .for  I  will  give  it  unto  thee 

14.  20  And  he  gave  him  tithes  of  all 

14.  21  Give  me  the  persons,  and  take  the  goods 

15.  2  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing 
15.    3  Behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed 

15.  7  brought  thee,  .to  give  thee  this  land  to 

15. 18  Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from 

16.  3  gave  her  to  her  husband  Abram  to  be  his 

16.  5  I  have  given  my  maid  into  thy  bosom 

17.  8  I  will  give  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  af, 
17. 16  I  will  bless  her,  and  give  thee  a  son  also 

18.  7  fetched  a  cab!  tender  and  good,  and  gave 
20. 14  and  gave,  .unto  Abraham,  and  restored 

20.  16  I  have  given  thy  brother  a  thousand 

21.  14  and  took  bread,  .and  gave  (it)  untoHagar 
si.  27  Abraham  took  sheep  and  oxen,  and  gave 
23.    4  give  me  a  possession  of  a  burying  place 
23.   9  That  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  Machp. 
23.   9  he  shall  give  it  me  for  a  possession  of  a 
23. 11  Nay.  .hear  me  :  the  field  give  I  thee 

23. 11  the  cave  that  (is)  therein,  I  give  it  thee 
23. 11  in  the  presence  of .  .my  people  give  I  it 

23.  13  I  will  give  thee  money  for  the  field ;  take 

24.  7  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land  ;  he 
24.  32  gave  straw  and  provender  for  the  camels 
24.  35  he  hath  given  him  flocks,  and  herds,  and 
24.  36  unto  him  hath  he  given  all  that  he  hath 
24.  41  if  they  give  not  thee  (one),  thou  shalt  be 
24-  53  gold,  and  raiment,  and  gave,  .to  Rebekah 

24.  53  he  gave  also  to  her  brother  and  to  her 

25.  5  Abraham  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  Isaac 
25.    6  Abraham  gave  gifts,  and  sent  them  away 

25.  34  Jacob  gave  Esau  bread  and  pottage  of  le. 

26.  3  unto  thee.  .1  will  give  all  these  countries 

26.  4  will  give  unto  thy  seed  all  these  countries 

27.  17  she  gave  the  savoury  meat  and  the  bread 
27.  28  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and 

27.  37  all  his  brethren  have  I  given  to  him  for 

28.  4  And  give  thee  the  blessing  of  Abraham, to 
28.  4  the  land,  .which  God  gave  unto  Abraham 
28.  13  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed 

28.  20  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raim. 

28.  22  of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me  I  will  sure. 

29. 19  (It  is)  better  that  I  give  her  to  thee 

29. 19  than  that  I  should  give  her  to  another 

29.  24  Laban  gave  unto  his  daughter  Leah  Zilp. 
29.  26  to  give  the  younger  before  the  first  born 
29.  27  Fulfil  her  week,  and  we  will  give  thee 
29.  28  he  gave  him  Rachel  his  daughter  to  wife 
29.  29  Laban  gave  to  Rachel  his  daughter  Bilh. 

29.  33  he  hath  therefore  given  me  this  (son)  also 

30.  4  she  gave  him  Bilhah  her  handmaid  to  w. 
30.    6  God . .  heard  my  voice,  and  hath  given  me 
30.   9  she  took  Zilpah.  .and  gave  her  Jacob  to 
30.  14  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  of  thy  son's  mand. 
30.  18  Leah  said,  God  hath  given  me  my  hire 
30. 18  because  I  have  given  my  maiden  to  my 
30.  26  Give,  .my  wives  and  my  children,  for 

30.  28  Appoint  me  thy  wages,  and  I  will  give 
30.  31  And  he  said.  What  shall  I  give  thee? 
30.  31  Jacob  said,  Thou  shalt  not  give  me  any 

30.  35  and  cave,  .into  the  hand  of  his  sons 

31.  9  hath  taken  away  the  cattle,  .and  given 
34.    8  saying.  .1  pray  you  give  her  him  to  wife 
34.    9  give  your  daughters  unto  us,  and  take 
34.  11  and  what  yp  shall  say  unto  me  I  will  give 
34.  12  I  will  give  according  as  ye  shall  say  unto 
34.  12  but  give  me  the  damsel  to  wife 

34. 14  We  cannot  do  this,  .to  give"  our  sister  to 
34. 16  Then  will  we  give  our  daughters  unto  you 
34.  21  and  let  us  give  them  our  daughters 


Gen.  35. 
35- 
35- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
40. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
42. 
43- 
43. 
43' 
43- 
45' 
45' 
45' 
45- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47 
47. 
48. 
48. 
48. 
49. 
Exod.  2 
2. 
3- 
5< 
S- 
6. 
6. 
6. 


Lev 


22. 


=3- 
23- 

25. 

25- 
25- 

26. 
26. 
27. 
27- 

Num.  3. 
3- 
3- 
5- 
5- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
8. 
10. 


4  they  gave  unto  Jacob  all  the  strange  gods 
1 2  the  land  which  I  gave . .  to  thee  I  will  give 
12  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I  give  the  land 

9  lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  broth. 

16  What  wilt  thou  give  me,  that  thou  may. 

17  Wilt  thou  give,  .a  pledge  till  thou  send 

18  he  said,  What  pledge  shall  I  give  thee? 
18  he  gave  (it)  her,  and  came  in  unto  her 

26  because . .  I  gave  her  not  to  Shelah  my  son 
21  gave  liim  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper 
11  and  I  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand 
21  and  he  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaohs  hand 
45  he  gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  the  daughter 
25  and  to  give  them  provision  for  the  way 

27  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the  inn,  he 

14  God  Almighty  gave  you  mercy  before  the 

23  your  God.  .hath  given  you  treasure  in 

24  and  gave,  .water,  and  they  washed  their 

24  and  he  gave  their  asses  provender 

18  I  will  give  you  the  good  of  the  laud  of  E. 
21  Joseph  gave  them  wagons,  according  to 

21  and  gave  them  provision  for  the  way 

22  To  all  of  them  he  gave  each  man  changes 
22  but  to  Benjamin  he  gave  three  hundred 
iS  whom  Laban  gave  to  Leah  his  daughter 

25  which  Laban  gave  unto  Rachel  his  daug. 
11  gave  them  a  possession  in  the  land  of  E. 

16  your  cattle  ;  and  I  will  give  you  for  your 

17  Joseph  gave  them  bread,  .for  horses,  and 

19  and  give,  .seed,  that  we  may  live,  and 
22  eat  their  portion  which  Pharaoh  gave 

24  that  ye  shall  give  the  fifth,  .unto  Pharaoh 
4  and  will  give  this  land  to  thy  seed  after 
9  They,  .my  sons,  whom  God  hath  given 

22  Moreover  I  have  given  to  thee  one  porti. 
21  a  hind  let  loose  :  he  giveth  goodly  words 

9  nurse  it  for  me,  and  I  will  give . .  thy  wages 
21  and  he  gave  Moses  Zipporah  his  daughter 
21  I  will  give  this  people  favour  in  the  sight 

7  Ye  shall  no  more  give  the  people  straw  to 

10  Thus  saith  Pharaoh,  I  will  not  give  you 

4  to  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan ,  the  land 

8  I  did  swear  to  give  it  to  Abraham,  to  I. 
8  and  I  will  give  it  you  for  an  heritage 

25  Moses  said,  Thou  must  give  us  also  sacri. 

3  the  Lord  gave  the  people  favour  in  the 
25  to  the  land  which  the  Lord  will  give  you 

36  the  Lord  gave  the  people  favour  in  the 

5  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers  to  give 

11  bring  theeiuto  the  land.,  and  shall  give  it 

8  when  the  Lord  shall  give  you  in  the  eve. 

15  the  bread  whicli  the  Lord  hath  given  you 
29  for  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  sa. 

29  he  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread 
2  said,  Give  us  water  that  we  may  drink 

12  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

4  If  his  master  have  given  him  a  wife,  and 

23  if.  .mischief  follow,  then  thou  shalt  give 

30  he  shall  give  for  the  ransom  of  his  life 
32  he  shall  give  unto  their  master  thirty  sh. 

17  If  her  father  utterly  refuse  to  give  her 

29  the  first  bora  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give 

30  on  the  eighth  day  thou  shalt  give  it  me 
12  I  will  give  thee  tables  of  stone,  and  a  law 
16,  21  the  testimony.  .1  shall  give  thee 

12  then  shall  they  give  every  man  a  ransom 

13  This  they  shall  give,  every  one  that  passe. 

14  every  one.  .shall  give  an  offering  unto  the 

15  The  rich  shall  not  give  more,  and 

15  the  poor  shall  not  give  less,  than  half 

15  when  (they)  give  an  offering  unto  theLO. 

6  I  have  given  with  him  Aholiab  the  son 

18  he  gave  unto  Moses,  .two  tables  of  testi. 

13  this  land  that  I  have  spoken  of  will  I  give 

24  So  they  gave  (it)  me  :  then  I  cast  it  into 

1  saying,  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  it 

16  give  it  unto  the  priest :  and  the  priest 

5  give  it  unto  him  to  whom  it  appertaineth 

17  I  have  given  it.  .their  portion  of  my  offer. 
32  the  right  shoulder  shall  ye  give  unto  the 
34  have  given  them  unto  Aaron  the  priest 
17  and  (God)  hath  given  it  you  to  bear  the 
34  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  I  give  to 

14  and  come . .  and  give  them  unto  the  priest 
1 1  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar  to 

2  that  giveth.  .of  his  seed  unto  Molech,  he 

3  because  he  hath  given  of  his  seed  unto  M. 

4  when  he  giveth  of  his  seed  unto  Molech 
24  and  I  will  give  it  unto  you  to  possess  it 
14  and  shall  give  (it)  unto  the  priest  with 
10  When  ye  be  come  inti»  the  land  which  I 
38  all  your  freewill  offerings,  which  ye  give 

2  When  ye  come  into  the  land  which  I  give 

37  Thou  shalt  not  give  him  thy  money  upon 

38  to  give  you  the  land  of  Canaan,  .to  be 

4  Then  I  will  give  you  rain  in  due  season 

6  I  will  give  peace  in  the  land,  and  ye  shall 

9  all  that  (any  man)  giveth  of  such  unto  the 
23  he  shall  give  thine  estimation  hi  that  day 

9  thou  shalt  give  the  Levites  unto  Aaron 
48  thou  shalt  give  the  money,  wherewith 
51  Moses  gave  the  money  of  them  that  were 

7  give  (it)  unto  (him)  against  whom  he  hath 
10  whatsoever  any  man  giveth  the  priest,  it 

5  thou  shalt  give  them  unto  the  Levites,  to 

6  took  the  wagons  and  the  oxen,  and  gave 

7  Two  wagons  and  four  oxen  he  gave  unto 

8  four  wagons  and  eight  oxen  he  gave  unto 

9  But  unto  the  sons  of  Kohath  he  gave  no. 

19  I  have  given  the  Levites . .  a  gift  to  Aaron 
29  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you 
13  Whence  should  I  have  flesh  to  give  unto 


GIVE 


393 


GIVE 


Num  I  r. 


18. 
18. 
19. 
20. 


21. 

22. 
22. 
24. 
=5- 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 

31- 

31- 
3i- 
3i- 
32. 
32. 
32- 
32- 
33- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 

Deut.  1. 


13  saying,  Give  us  flesh,  that  we  may  eat 

18  therefore  the  Lord  will  give  you  flesh 

21  and  thou  hast  said,  I  will  give  them  flesh 

25  and  gave  (it)  unto  the  seventy  elders  :  and 
2  which  I  give  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

8  he  will  bring  us  into  this  land,  and  give 

2  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land.  .1  give 
21  Of  the  first  of  your  dough  ye  shall  give 

14  or  given  us  inheritance  of  fields  and  vin. 

6  everyone  of  their  princes  gave  him  a  rod 

7  I  have  given  your  priest's  office,  .a  serv. 

8  I  also  have  given  thee  the  charge  of  mine 

8  unto  thee  have  I  given  them,  by  reason 
11I  have  given  them  unto  thee,  and  to  thy 
12  the  first  fruits  of  them .  .have  I  given  thee 

19  All  the  heave  offerings,  .have  I  given 

21  I  have  given  the  children  of  Levi  all  the 

24  tithes.  .1  have  given  to  the  Levites  to  in. 

26  the  tithes  which  I  have  given  you  from 

25  ye  shall  give  thereof  the  Lord's  heave  0. 

3  ye  shall  give  her  unto  Eleazar  the  priest 

12  into  the  land  which  I  have  given  them 
21  Edom  refused  to  give  Israel  passage 

24  into  the  land  which  I  have  given  unto 
16  Gather  the  people  together,  and  I  will  g. 
29  he  hath  given  his  sons  that  escaped,  and 

13  the  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  leave  to  go 

18  If  Balak  would  give  me  his  house  full  of 
13  If  Balak  would  give  me  his  house  full  of 
12  I  give  unto  him  my  covenant  of  peace 

4  Give  unto  us.  .a  possession  among  the  b. 
7  tliou  shalt  surely  give  them  a  possession 

9  ye  shall  give  his  inheritance  unto  his  br. 

10  ye  shall  give  his  inheritance  unto  his  fat. 

11  ye  shall  give  his  inheritance  unto  his  ki. 

12  and  seethe  land  which  I  have  given  unto 

29  Take .  .and  give  (it)  unto  Eleazar  the  pri, 

30  give  them  unto  the  Levites,  which  keep 
41  Moses'gave  the  tribute,  .the  Lord's  hea. 
47  gave  them  unto  the  Levites,  which  kept 

7,  9  the  land  which  the  Lord  hath  given 
29  ye  shall  give  them  the  land  of  Gilead  for 
33  Moses  gave  unto  them,  .to  the  children 
40  Moses  gave  Gilead  unto  Machir  the  son 
53  I  have  given  you  the  land  to  possess  it 

13  commanded  to  give  unto  the  nine  tribes 
2  Command .  .that  they  give  unto  the  Lev. 
2  ye  shall  give,  .unto  the  Levites  suburbs 

4  which  ye  shall  give  unto  the  Levites 

6  which  ye  shall  give  unto  the  Levites 

7  all  the  cities  which  ye  shall  give  to  the 

8  And  the  cities  which  ye  shall  give  (shall 
8  every  one  shall  give  of  his  cities  unto  the 

13  of  these  cities  which  ye  shall  give,  six 

14  Ye  shall  give  three  cities  on  this  side  Jo. 

14  three  cities  shall  ye  give  in  the  land  of  C. 
2  Lord  commanded  my  lord  to  give  the  la. 

2  to  give  the  inheritance  of  Zelophehad 

8  to  give  unto  them  and  to  their  seed  after 

20  which  the  Lord  our  God  doth  give 

25  which  the  Lord  our  God  doth  give 

35  which  I  sware  to  give  unto  your  fathers 

36  to  him  will  I  give  the  land  that  he  hath 

39  unto  them  will  I  give  it,  and  they  shall 

5  for  I  will  not  give  you  of  their  land,  no 

5  because  I  have  given  mount  Seir  unto  E. 

9  for  I  will  not  give  thee  of  their  land 

9  I  have  given  Ar  unto  the  children  of  Lot 
12  the  laud .  .which  the  Lord  gave  unto 

19  for  I  will  not  give  thee  of  the  laud  of  the 
19  I  have  given  it  unto  the  children  of  Lot 
24  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Sihon  the 

28  give  me  water  for  money,  that  I  may  dr. 

29  the  land  which  the  Lord  our  God  giveth 

31  I  have  begun  to  give  Sihon  and  his  land 

12  gave  I  unto  the  Reubenites  and  to  the  G. 

13  gave  I  unto  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 

15  And  I  gave  Gilead  unto  Machir 

16  unto  the  Gadites  I  gave  from  Gilead  even 
iS  The  Lord  your  God  hath  given  you  this 

19  abide  in  your  cities  which  I  have  given 

.  20  Until  the  Lord  have  given  rest  unto  your 

20  your  God  hath  given  them  beyond  Jor. 

20  unto  his  possession,  which  I  have  given 
1  the  land  which  the  Lord  God.  .giveth 

21  thy  God  giveth  thee,  .an  inheritance 
38  to  give  thee  their  land,  .an  inheritance 

40  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee,  for 
16  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giv. 
31  in  the  land  which  I  give  them  to  possess 

10  to  give  thee  great  and  goodly  cities 

23  to  give  us  the  land  whichihe  sware  unto 

3  thy  daughter  thou  shalt  not  give  unto 
13  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers  to  give 

10  for  the  good  land  which  he  hath  given 
18  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth 

6  God  giveth  thee  not  this  good  land  to 

11  the  Lord  gave  me  the  two  tables  of  stone 
23  possess  the  land  which  I  have  given  you 

.   4  tables . .  and  the  Lord  gave  them  unto  me 
.  11  the  land  which  I  sware.  .to  give  unto 
.    9  to  give  unto  them,  and  to  their  seed 
.  14  I  will  give  (you)  the  rain  of  your  land 
.  17  the  good  land  which  the  Lord  giveth  you 
.  21  sware  unto  your  fathers  to  give  them,  as 
.  31  the  land,  .the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you 
.    1  land . .  the  Lord  . .  giveth  thee  to  possess  it 
.    9  to  the  inheritance,  .the Lord,  .giveth you 
.  15  the  blessing,  .which  he  hath  given  thee 
.  21  thy  flock,  which  the  Lord  hath  given  thee 
.    1  If . .  a  prophet . .  giveth  thee  a  sign  or  a  w. 
.  12  cities,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given 

50 


Deut  14. 
15- 
15- 
i5- 
i5- 
15- 
IS- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
17- 
18. 
iS. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
20. 


24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
25- 
25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29- 
30. 
3i- 
32. 
34- 
Josh.  1. 


21  thou  shalt  give  it  unto  the  stranger  that 

4  which.  .God  giveth  thee,  .an  inheritance 

7  thy  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

9  and  thou  givest  him  nought ;  and  he  cry 
10  Thou  shalt  surely  give  lum,  and  thine 
10  shall  not  be  grieved  when  thou  givest 
14  of  thy  flock,  .thou  shalt  give  unto  him 

5  gates,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
10  thou  shalt  give,  .according  as  the  Lord 

17  the  blessing,  .which  he  hath  given  thee 

18  gates,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
20  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

2  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
14  winch  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 

3  they  shall  give  unto  the  priest  the  shoul. 

4  first  of  the  fleece,  .shalt  thou  give  him 
9  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 

1  whose  land  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 

2  land,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

8  and  give  thee  all  the  land  winch  he 

8  he  promised  to  give  unto  thy  fathers 

10  land,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
14  that  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  to 

14  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee 
16  which  the  Lord  thy  God  doth  give  thee 

1  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  to  possess 

23  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  to  possess 
16  I  gave  my  daughter  unto  this  man  to  wife 

19  give,  .unto  the  father  of  the  damsel 

29  man.  .shall  give  unto  the  damsel's  father 
1  give  (it)  in  her  hand,  and  send  her  out  of 

3  giveth  (it)  in  her  hand,  and  sendeth  her 

4  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  (for) 

15  At  his  day  thou  shalt  give  (him)  his  hire 
15,  19  in  the  land  which  the  Lord,  .giveth 

19  when  the  Lord,  .hath  given  thee  rest 

1  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  (for) 

2  land  that  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 

3  Lord  sware  unto  our  fathers  for  to  give  us 

9  hath  given  us  this  land .  .a  land  that  flo. 

10  the  laud  which  thou,  0  Lord,  hast  given 

11  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  unto 

12  hast  given  (it)  unto  the  Levite,  the  stra. 

13  and  also  have  given  them  unto  the  Levite 

14  nor  given  (ought)  thereof  for  the  dead 

15  and  the  land  which  thou  hast  given  us 
2,  3  land  which  the  LORD  thy  God  giveth 
8  in  the  land  which  the  Lord,  .giveth  thee 

11  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fathers  to  give  thee 

12  the  heaven  to  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land 
52,  53  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given 
55  So  that  he  will  not  give  to  any  of  them  of 
65  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  there  a  trembL 

4  Yet  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  au  heart 

8  we  took  their  land,  and  gave  it  for  an  in. 

20  land  which  the  Lord  sware . .  to  give  them 
7  which  the  Lord  hath  sworn,  to  give  them 

49,  52  which  I  give,  .the  children  of  Israel 
4  saying,  I  will  give  it  unto  thy  seed 

2  unto  the  land  which  I  do  give  to  them 

3  have  I  given  unto  you,  as  I  said  unto  M. 

6  the  laud  which  I  sware.  .to  give  them 

1 1  which  the  Lord  . .  giveth*  you  to  possess  it 

13  God  hath  given  you  rest,  and  hath  given 

14  remain  in  the  land  which  Moses  gave  you 

15  L'ntil  the  Lord  have  given  your  brethren 
15  land  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth 

15  which  Moses  the  Lord's  servant  gave  you 

9  I  know  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the 

12  show  kindness,  .and  give  me  a  true  token 
14  when  the  Lord  hath  given  us  the  land 

6  which  the  Lord  sware.  .he  would  give  us 

2  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Jericho,  and 

16  Shout ;  for  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the 

1  I  have  given  into  thy  hand  the  king  of  Al 

18  for  I  will  give  it  into  thine  hand 

24  to  give  you  all  the  land,  and  to  destroy 

23  Joshua  gave  it  for  an  inheritance  unto  I. 

6  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave  it 

7  which  Joshua  gave  unto  the  tribes  of  Is. 

8  their  inheritance,  which  Moses  gave  them 
8  as  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave 

14  Only  unto  the  tribe  of  Levi  he  gave  none 

1 5  Moses  gave  unto . .  the  children  of  Reuben 

24  Moses  gave.,  unto  the  tribe  of  Gad.  .unto 
29  Moses  gave,  .unto  the  half  tribe  of  Man. 
33  But  unto  the  tribe  of  Levi  Moses  gave  not 

3  For  Moses  had  given  the  inheritance  of 

3  unto  the  Levites  he  gave  none  inherit. 

4  they  gave  no  part  unto  the  Levites  in  the 

12  Now  therefore  give  me  this  mountain 

13  Joshua,  .gave  unto  Caleb .. Hebron  for  an 
13  And  unto  Caleb,  .he gave  a  part  among 

16  to  him  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daughter 

17  he  gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife 

19  Give  me  a  blessing;  for  thou  hast  given  me 
19  give  me  also  springs  of  water.    And  he  g. 

4  to  give  us  an  inheritance  among  our  bret. 

4  he  gave  them  an  inheritance  among  the 

.  14  Why  hast  thou  given  me  (but)  one  lot  and 

3  the  land,  which  the  Lord,  .hath  given 

7  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  ga. 

49  gave  an  inheritance  to  Joshua  the  son  of 

50  they  gave  him  the  city  which  he  asked 

4  give  him  a  place,  that  he  may  dwell  amo. 

2  commanded,  .to  give  us  cities  to  dwell  in 

3  children  of  Israel  gave  unto  the  Levites 

8  gave  by  lot  unto  the  Levites  these  cities 

9  they  gave  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  child. 

11  they  gave  them  the  city  of  Arba  the  fath. 

12  But  the  fields.,  gave  they  to  Caleb  the  son 

13  Thus  they  gave  to  the  children  of  Aaron 


Josh  21.  21  they  gave  them  Shechem  with  her  subur. 
21.  43  the  Lord  gave  unto  Israel  all  the  land 

21.  43  which  he  sware  to  give  unto  their  fathers 

22.  4  God  hath  given  rest  unto  your  brethren 
22.    4  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  ga. 
22.    7  Moses  had  given  (possession)  in  Bashan 

22.  7  unto  the  (other)  half  thereof  gave  Joshua 
23. 13  this  good  land,  .the  Lord,  .hath  given 
23. 15  this  good  land,  .the  Lord,  .hath  given 

23.  16  the  good  land  which  he  hath  given  unto 

24.  3  multiplied  his  seed,  and  gave  him  Isaac 
24.    4  And  I  gave  unto  Isaac  Jacob  and  Esau 
24.    4  I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  Seir,  to  possess 
24.    8  I  gave  them  into  your  hand,  that  ye  mig. 
24.  13  I  have  given  you  a  laud  for  which  ye  did 

Judg.  1.  12  to  him  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daughter 
1.  13  he  gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife 
1.  15  me  a  blessing :  for  thou  hast  given  me  a 
1.  15  give  me  alsosprings.  .And  Caleb  gavehe 
1.  20  they  gave  Hebron  unto  Caleb,  as  Moses 
3.    6  and  gave  their  daughters  to  their  sons 

5.  25  He  asked  water . .  she  gave . .  milk  ;  she  br. 

6.  9  drave  them  out.  .and  gave  you  their  land 

7.  2  to  give  the  Midianites  into  their  hands 

8.  5  Give,  I  pray  you,  loaves  of  bread  unto  the 
8.    6  that  we  should  give  bread  unto  thine  ar  ? 
8. 15  that  we  should  give  bread  unto  thy  men 
8.  24  that  ye  would  give  me  every  man  the 

8.  25  they  answered,  We  will  willingly  give 

9.  4  And  they  gave  him  threescore  and  ten 
14.    9  and  he  gave  them,  and  they  did  eat :  but 
14.  12  I  will  give  you  thirty  sheets  and  thirty 
14.  13  then  shall  ye  give  me  thirty  sheets  and 

14.  19  and  gave  change  of  garments  unto  them 

15.  2  therefore  I  gave  her  to  thy  companion 
15.    6  because  he  had . .  given  her  to  his  compan. 

15.  18  Thou  hast  given  this  great  deliverance 

16.  5  we  will  give  thee,  every  one  of  us,  eleven 

17.  4  and  gave  them  to  the  founder,  who  made 
17. 10  I  will  give  thee  ten.  .of  silver  by  the  year 

18.  10  for  God  hath  given  it  into  your  hands 

20.  36  Israel  gave  place  to  the  Benjamites 

21.  1  there  shall  not  any  of  us  give  his  daugh. 
21.    7  we  will  not  give  them  of  our  daughters 
21.  14  they  gave  them  wives  which  they  had 
21.  18  we  may  not  give  them  wives  of  our  daug. 
21.  18  Cursed  (lie)  he  that  giveth  a  wife  to  Ben. 
21.  22  ye  did  not  give  unto  them  at  this  time 

Ruth  2.  18  gave  to  her  that  she  had  resened  after 

3.  17  These  six  (measures)  of  barley  gavehe  me 

4.  7  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave  (it)  to  his 
4.  12  of  the  seed  which  the  Lord  shall  give 

4..  13  Lord  gave  her  conception,  and  she  bare 

1  Sa.    1.    4  he  gave  to  Peninnah  his  wife,  and  to  all 

1.  5  But  unto  Hannah  he  gave  a  worthy  por. 
1. 11  wilt  give  unto  thine  handmaid  a  man  ch. 
1.  11  then  I  will  give  him  unto  the  Lord  all 

1.  27  Lord  hath  given  me  my  petition  which  I 

2.  10  he  shall  give  strength  unto  his  king,  and 
2.  15  Give  flesh  to  roast  for  the  priest ;  for  he 
2.  16  thou  shalt  give,  .now  :  and  if  not,  I  will 
2.  28  did  I  give  unto  the  house  of  thy  father  all 
6.    5  ye  shall  give  glory  unto  the  God  of  Israel 
8.    6  Give  us  a  king  to  judge  us.    And  Samuel 

8.  14  take,  .the  best,  .and  give,  .to  his  servants 
8. 15  take .  .of  your  vineyards,  and  give  to  his 

9.  8  will  I  give  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell  us 
9.  23  Bring  the  portion  which  I  gave  thee,  of 

10.   4  they  will  salute  thee,  and  give  thee  two 
15.  28  hath  given  it  to  a  neighbour  of  thine 
17.  10  give  me  a  man,  that  we  may  fight  together 
17.  25  the  king,  .will  give  him  his  daughter,  and 
17.  44  I  will  give  thy  flesh  unto  the  fowls  of  the 
17.  46 1  will  give  the  carcases  of  the  host  of  the 

17.  47  and  he  will  give  you  into  our  hands 

18.  4  Jonathan,  .gave  it  to  David,  and  his  gar. 
18.  17  my  elder  daughter  Merab,  her  will  I  give 
18.  21  I  will  give  him  her,  that  she  may  be  a 
18.  27  Saul  gave  him  Michal  his  daughter  to  wi. 

20.  40  Jonathan  gave  his  artillery  unto  his  lad 

21.  3  give  (me)  five  (loaves  of)  bread  in  mine 
21.    6  So  the  priest  gave  him  hallowed  (bread) 

21.  9  said,  (There  is)  none  likecthat ;  give  it  me 

22.  7  will  the  son  of  Jesse  give  every  one  of  you 
22.  10  And  he.  .gave  him  victuals,  and  gave 

22.  13  in  that  thou  hast  given  him  bread,  and  a 
25.    8  give,  I  pray  thee,  whatsoever  cometh  to 
25.  11  and  give  (it)  unto  men  whom  I  know  not 
25.  44  But  Saul  had  given  Michal  his  daughter 
27.    5  let  them  give  me  a  place  in  some  town 

27.  6  Then  Achish  gave  him  Ziklag  that  day 

28.  17  and  given  it  to  thy  neighbour,  .to  David 
30.  11  and  gave  him  bread,  and  he  did  eat 

30.  12  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  cake  of  figs 
:  30.  22  we  will  not  give  them . .  of  the  spoil  that 
30.  23  with  that  which  the  Lord  hath  given  us 

2  Sa.   4.  10  that. I  would  have  given  him  a  reward 

9.    9  I  have  given  unto  thy  master's  son  all 
12.   8  And  I  gave  thee  thy  master's  house 
12.    8  and  gave  thee  the  house  of  Israel  and  of 
12.  11  I  will.,  give.,  unto  thy  neighbour,  and  he 
18.  11  I  would'have  given  thee  ten  (shekels)  of 

21.  6  And  the  king  said,  I  will  give  (them) 

22.  36  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  shield  of  thy 
22. 41  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  necks  of 

24.    9  Joab  gave  up  the  sum  of  the  number  of 
24.  23  All  these,  .did  Araunah.  .give  unto  the 
1  Ki.   1.  48  which  hath given(one)tosit  onmy  throne 

2.  17  give  me  Abishag  the  Shunammite  to  wife 

3.  5  and  God  said,  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee 
3.  6  that  thou  hast  given  him  a  son  to  sit  on 
3.    9  Give .  .thy  servant  an  understanding  hea. 


GIVE 


394 


GIVE 


i  Ki.  3. 12  lo,  I  have  given  thee  a  wise.,  heart;  so  that 
3.  13  I  have  also  given  thee  that  which  thou 
3.  25  give  half  to  the  one,  and  half  to  the  other 
3.  26  0  ray  lord,  give  her  the  living  child,  and 

3.  27  Give  her  the  living  child,  and  in  no  wise 

4.  29  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  under. 

5.  6  unto  thee  will  I  give  hire  for  thy  servants 
5.  7  which  hath  given  unto  David  a  wise  son 
5.  10  So  Hiram  gave  Solomon  cedar  trees  and 
5.  n  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  thousand 

5.  11  thus  gave  Solomon  to  Hirim  year  by  year 
5.  12  the  Lord  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  as  he  had 
8.  32  to  give  him  according  to  his  righteous. 
8.  34  which  thou  gavest  unto  their  fathers 
8.  36  and  give  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou 
8.  36  hast  given  to  thy  people  for  an  inheritan. 
8.  39  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways 
8.  40  the  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fat. 
8.  4U  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  their  fath. 
8.  50  give  them  compassion  before  them  who 

8.  56  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  that  hath  given 

9.  7  out  of  the  land  which  I  have  given  them 
9.  11  king  Solumon  gave  Hirim  twenty  cities 
9. 12  to  see  the  cities  which  Solomon  had  given 
9.  13  What,  .(are)  these  which  thou  hast  given 
9. 16  and  given  it . .  a  present  unto  his  daughter 

Jo.  10  she  gave  the  king  an  hundred  and  twenty 
10.  10  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  to  king  Solomon 

10.  13  king  Solomon  gave  unto  the  queen  of  Sh. 

10. 13  besides  (that)  which  Solomon  gave  her  of 

11.  11  rend,  .from  thee,  and  will  give  it  to  thy 
11.  13  will  give  one  tribe  to  thy  son  for  David 
11.  18  gave  him  an  house,  .and  gave  him  land 
11.  19  so  that  he  gave  him  to  wife  the  sister  of 
11.  31  Behold,  I  will.. give  ten  tribes  to  thee 
11.  35  and  will  give  it  unto  thee.. ten  trihes 

11.  36  unto  his  son  will  I  givenne  tribe,  that  D. 

11.  38  be  with  thee,  .and  will  give  Israel  unto 
13.    3  And  he  gave  a  sign  the  same  day,  saying 
13.    5  the  sign  whiehthe  mau  of  God  had  given 
13.    7  refresh  thyself,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  rew. 

13.  8  If  thou  wilt  give  me  half  thine  house,  I 

14.  8  And  rent  the  kingdom,  .and  gave  it  thee 
14.  15  good  laud,  which  he  gave  to  their  fathers 

14.  16  he  shall  give  Israel  up  because  of  the  sins 

15.  4  for  David's  sake  did  the  Lord,  .give  him 

17.  19  And  he  said  unto  her,  Give  me  thy  son 

18.  23  Let  them  therefore  give  us  two  bullocks 

19.  21  gave  unto  the  people,  and  they  did  eat 
21.    2  Give  me  thy  vineyard,  that  I  may  have 
21     2  I  will  give  thee  for  it  a  better  vineyard 
21.    2  I  will  give  thee  the  worth  of  it  in  money 
21.    3  Lord  forbid  it  me,  that  I  should  give  the 
21.    4  1  will  not  give  thee  the  inheritance  of  my 
21.    6  said.  .Give  me  thy]  vineyard  for  money 
21.    6  or  else  if  it  please  thee,  I  will  give  thee 
21.    6  answered,  I  will  not  give  thee  my  vineya. 
21.    7  I  will  give  thee  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 
21.  15  which  he  refused  to  give  thee  for  money 

2  Ki.  4.  42  Give  uuto  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 

4.  43  Give  the  people,  that  they  may  eat:  for 

5.  1  by  him  the  Lord  hath  given  deliverance 

5.  22  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  a  talent  of  silver 

6.  28  This  woman  said  unto  me,  Give  thy  son 
6.  29  Give  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him  ;  and 
8.  19  as  he  promised  him  to  give  him  alway  a 
8.  29  wounds  which  the  Syrians  had  given  him 

10.  15  give  (me)  thine  hand.  And  he  gave  (him) 
11. 10  did  the  priest  give  king  David's  spears 

12.  11  they  gave  the  money,  being  told,  into  the 

12. 14  they  gave  that  to  the  workmen,  and  rep. 

13.  5  Lord  gave  Israel  a  saviour,  so  that  they 

14.  9  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife 

15.  19  Menahem  gave  Pul  a  thousand  talents  of 

15.  20  of  silver,  to  give  to  the  king  of  Assyria 
iR.  15  Hezekiah  gave,  .all  the  silver  (that  was) 
18.  16  cut  off.  .and  gave  it  to  the  king  of  Assyr. 

21.  S  out  of  the  hind  which  I  g:ive  their  fathers 

22.  s  let  them  give  it  to  the  doers  of  the  work 

22.  8  And  Hilkiah  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan 

23.  11  that  the  kings  of  Jndah  had  given  to  the 
23.  35  Jehoiakim  gave  the  silver  and  the  gold 
23-  35  but lie  taxed  the  land  to  give  the  money 
23-  35  exacted  the  silver  and  the  gold .  .to  give 

1  Ch.  2.  35  Sheshan  gave  his  daughter  to  Jarha  his 
6.  55  they  gave  them  HebTdn  in  the  land  of  J. 
6.  56  the  fields  of  the'  city,  they  gave  to  Caleb 
6,  57  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave  the  cities 
6.  64  the  children  of  Israel  gave  to  the  Levites 
6.  65  they  gave  by  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of  the 
fi.  1";  thej  gave  unto  them,  (of)  the  i  ities  <>i  re, 

16.  iS  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  land  of  Canasta 
si.  5  Joab  gave  the  bum  of  the  number  of  the 
21.  23  I  give  (thee)  the  oxen  (also)  for  burnt  off. 
21.  23  wheat  for  Mic  meat  offering;  I  give  it  all 

21.  25  So  David  gave  to  Oman  for  the  place  six 

22.  9  I  will  give  him  rest  from  all  his  enemies 
22.  9  will  give  peace  and  quietness  unto  Israel 
22.  12  Onlj  tile  LORD"  give  thee  wisdom  and 

22.  18  ha  til  he  (not)  given  you  rest  on  every  side? 
22.  iS  for  he  hath  given  the  inhabitants  of  the 
25.    5  God  gave  to  Reman  fourteen  sons  and 
28.   5  for  the  Lord  hath  given  me  many  sons 

28.  n  David  gave  to  Solomon  his  son  the  patt. 

29.  3  (which)  I  have  given  to  the  house  of  my 
29.    7  gave  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 
2>.    8  they,  gave  (them)  to  the  treasure  of  the 
-.■■>  1  [  and  of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee 
29.  19  give  unto  Solomon  my  son  a  perfect  hea. 

1    1-    ;  said  unto  him,  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee 
t    t    fiive  me  now  wisdom  and  knowledge 
1.  12  I  will  give  thee  riches,  and  wealth,  and 


•Ch 


Ezra 


!  Ch.  2. 10  I  will  give  to  thy  servants,  the  hewers 
2.  12  who  hath  given  to  David  the  king  a  wise 
25  which  thou  gavest  to  them  and  to  their 
27  which  thou  hast  given  unto  thy  people 
31  the  land  which  thou  gavest  uuto  our  fat. 
38  which  thou  gavest  untu  their  fathers,  and 

20  out  of  my  laud  which  I  have  given  them 
9  she  gave  the  king  an  hundred  and  twen. 
9  as  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  king  Solomon 

12  king  Solomon  gave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba 

23  and  he  gave  them  victual  iu  abundance 
5  gave  the  kingdom  over  Israel  to  David 
7  gavest  it  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  thy  fri. 
3  their  father  gave  them  great  gifts  of  silver 

3  the  kingdom  gave  he  to  Jehoram,  because 

7  as  Tie  promised  to  give  a  light  to  liim  and 
12  Jehoiada  gave  it  to  such  as  did  the  work 

9  which  I  have  given  to  the  army  of  Israel? 
9  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more 

18  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife  :  and 

8  the  Ammonites  gave  gifts  to  Uzziah :  and 

5  the  children  of  Amnion  gaveliim  the  same 

21  gave  (it)  unto  the  king  of  Assyria  :  but  he 

7  (who)  therefore  gave  them  up  to  desolat. 
12  the  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  one  h. 

4  to  give  the  portion  of  the  priests  and  the 
15  to  give  to  their  brethren  by  courses,  as 

19  to  give  portions  to  all  the  males  among 
11  Doth  not  Hezekiah  persuade  you  to  give 

24  he  spake  unto  him,  and  he  gave  him  a 

29  God  had  given  him  substance  very  much 

10  they  gave  it  to  the  workmen  that  wrought 

11  to  the  artificers  and  builders  gave  they 
iS  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  given  me  a  book 

8  gave  unto  the  priests  for  the  passover  off. 

12  that  they  might  give  according  to  the 
17  had  no  compassion,  .he  gave  (them)  all 

23  hath  the  Lord  God  of  heaven  given  me 

2  The  Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me 

69  They  gave  after  their  ability  unto  the  tre. 

7  They  gave  money  also  unto  the  masons 

6  which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  given 

11  king  Artaxerxes  gave  unto  Ezra  the  pri. 

5  to  give  us  a  nail  in  his  holy  place,  that 

5  God  may.,  give  us  a  little  reviving  in  our 

9  to  give  us  a  reviving,  to  set  up  the  house 
9  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Jndah  and  in  Jerusa. 

12  give  not  your  daughters  unto  their  sons 

13  and  hast  given  us  (such)  deliverance  as 
10. 19  they  gave  their  hands  that  they  would 

Xeh.  2.    1 1  took  up  the  wiue,  and  gave  (it)  unto  the 
2.    7  let  letters  be  given  me  to  the  governors 
2.   8  that  he  may  give  ine  timber  to  make  be. 
2.    9  I  came,  .and  gave  them  the  king's  letters 
4  give  them  for  a  prey  in  the  land  of  capti. 

70  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  unto 

70  The  Tirshatha  gave  to  the  treasure  a  th. 

71  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  to  the  trea. 

72  (that)  which  the  rest  of  the  people  gave 

8  a  covenant  with  him,  to  give  the  land  of 
8  give.,  to  his  Seed,  and  hast  performed  thy 

13  gayest  them  right  judgments,  and  true 
15  gavest  them  bread  from  heaven  for  their 
15  land  which  thou  hadst  sworn  to  give  them 
20  gavest  also  thy  good  Spirit,  .and  gavest 

22  gavest  them  kingdoms  and  nations,  and 

24  gavest  them  into  their  hands,  with  their 
27  thou  gavest  them  saviours,  who  saved 

30  therefore  gavest  thou  them  into  the  hand 

35  thy  great  goodness  that  thou  gavest  them 
9.  35  fat  land  which  thou  gavest  before  them 
9.  36  the  laud  that  thou  gavest  unto  our  fath. 

10.  30  that  we  would  not  give  our  daughters  un. 

12.  47  all  Israel,  .gave  the  portions  of  the  sing. 

13.  25  Ye  shall  not  give  your  daughters  unto 
Esth.  1.  19  let  the  king  give  her  royal  estate  unto 

1.  20  all  the  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands 

2.  3  let  their  things  for  purification  be  given 
2.  9  speedily  gave  her  her  things  for  purifica. 
2.    9  meet  to  be  given  her,  out  of  the  king's  h. 

2.  18  Then  the  king,  gave  gifts,  according  to 

3.  10  gave  it  unto  Hainan  the  son  of  Hammed. 

4.  8  he  gave  him  the  copy  of  the  writing  of 
8.    1  give  the  house  of  Haman,  the  .Tews'  ene. 
8.    2  Aud  the  king,  .gave  it  unto  Mordecai 

5.  7  I  have  given  Esther  the  house  of  Haman 
Job     1.  21  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 

2.    4  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his 
10  Who  giveth  rain  upon  the  earth,  and 

7  If  thou  be  righteous,  what  givest  thou  h.? 

10  Where  (is)  God  my  maker,  who  giveth 

6  preserveth  not.  .but  giveth  right  to  the 

31  For  by  them,  .he  giveth  meat  in  abunda. 

36  who  hath  given  understanding  to  the  h.T 
19  Hast  thou^given  the  horse  strength  ?  hast 

11  every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  of  mon. 

15  their  father  gave  them  inheritance  among 

3  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  (thee)  the  he. 
13  the  Highest  gave  his  voice  ;  hail  (stones) 
35  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  shield  of  thy 
40  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  necks  of 

2  Thou  hast  given  him  his  heart's  desire 

4  He  asked  life  of  thee,  (and)  thou  gavest 
4  Give  them  according,  .<rive  them  after 

11  The  Lord  will  give  strength  unto  his  pe. 
4  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart 
2t  the  righteous  showeth  mercy,  and  giveth 
11  Thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep,  .for  meat 

7  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him 

16  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I  give 

4  Thou  hast  given  a  banner  to  them  that 

5  thou  hast  given  (me)  thehcritage  of  those 


Psa,  68. 11  Lord  gave  the  word  ;  great  (was)  the 

68.  35  the  God  of  Israel  (is)  he  that  giveth  stre. 

69.  21  They  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  meat ;  and 
72.  1  Give  the  king  thy  judgments,  O  God,  and 
72.  15  to  him  shall  Be  given  of  the  gold  of  Sheba 

74.  14  gavest  him  (to  be)  meat  to  the  people  inn. 
78.  20  can  he  give  bread  also  ?  can  he  provide 

78.  24  and  had  given  them  of  the  corn  of  heav. 

75.  46  gave  also  their  increase  uuto  the  caterp. 

79.  2  given  (to  be)  meat  unto  the  fowls  of  the 

84.  11  the  Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory  :  no 

85.  12  Lord  shall  give  (that  which  is)good ;  and 

86.  16  give  thy  strength  unto  thy  servant,  and 
99.    7  they  kept,  .the  ordinance  (that) he  gave 

104.  27  that  thou  mayest  give  (them)  their  meat 

104.  28  (That)  thou  givest  them  they  gather :  thou 

105.  11  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  land  of  Canaan 
105.  32  He  gave  tham  hail  for  rain,  .flaming 

105.  44  And  gave  them  the  lands  of  the  heathen 

106.  15  he  gave  them  their  request ;  but  sent 
106.  41  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the  heath, 
in.    5  He  hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear 
in.    6  may  give  them  the  heritage  of  the  heath. 
112.    9  He  hath  dispersed,  he  hath  given  to  the 
115.    1  but  uuto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy  m. 
115.  16  the  earth  hath  lie  given  to  the  children 
124.    6  who  hath  not  given  us  (as)  a  prey  to  ftheir 
127.    2  (for)  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep 

132.    4  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine  eyes,  (or)  slu. 

135.  12  gave  their  land  (for)  an  heritage,  an  her. 

136.  21  gave  their  land  for  an  heritage  :  for  his 
136.  25  Who  giveth  food  to  all  flesh  :  for  his  me. 
144.  10  (It  is  he)  that  giveth  salvation  unto  kings 
145. 15  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  due  sea. 

146.  7  which  giveth  food  to  the  hungry.    The 

147.  9  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  (and)  to 
147.  16  He  giveth  snow  like  wool :  he  scattereth 

Prov.  1.    4  To  give  subtilty  to  the  simple,  to  the  yo. 

2,  6  For  the  Lord  giveth  wisdom  :  out  of  his 

3.  28  come  again,  and  to  morrow  I  will  give 

3.  34  scorneth  the  scorners :  but  he  giveth  gr. 

4.  2  For  I  give  you  good  doctrine,  forsake  ye 

4.  9  She  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament 

5.  9  Lest  thou  give  thine  honour  unto  others 

6.  4  Give  not  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber 
6.  31  shall  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house 
9.   9  Give  (instruction)  to  a  wise  (man),  and  he 

13.  15  Good  understanding  giveth  favour  :  but 

21.  26  but  the  righteous  giveth  and  spareth  not 

22.  9  for  he  giveth  of  his  bread  to  the  poor 

22.  16  he  that  giveth  to  the  rich,  (shall)  surely 

23.  26  Sly  son,  give  me  thine  heart,  and  let 
23.  31  when  it  giveth  his  colour  in  the  cup 
26.    8  so  (is)  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool 
-8.  27  He  that  giveth  unto  the  poor  shall  not 
29.  15  The  rod  and  reproof  give  wisdom  :  but 
29.  17  Correct  thy  sou,  and  he  shall  give  thee 

29.  17  yea,  he  shall  give  delight  unto  thy  soul 

30.  8  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches  ;  teed 

31.  3  Give  not  thy  strength  unto  women,  nor 
31.    6  Give  strong  drink  unto  him  that  is  ready 
31.  15  anil  givetli  meat  to  her  household,  and 
31.  31  Give  her  of  the  frriit  of  her  hands  ;  and 

Eccl.   i.  13  I  gave  my  heart  to  seek  and  Search  out 
1.  13  this  sore  travail  hath  God  given  to  the 

1.  17  I  gave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom,  and 

2.  26  For(God)  giveth  to  a  man  that  (is)  good  in 
2.  26  to  the  sinner  he  giveth  travail.  To'gather 

2.  26  he  may  give  to  (him  that  is)  good  before 

3.  10  which  God  hath  given  to  the  sons  of  men 
5.  1  more  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  the  sac. 
5.  18  which  God  giveth  him  ;  for  it  (is)  his  po. 
5.  19  Every  man  also  to  whom  Gcd  hath  given 

5.  19  and  hath  given  him  power  to  eat  thereof 

6.  2  God  hath  given,  .yet  God  giveth  him  not 
o.  15  life,  which  God  giveth  him  under  the  sun 
9.    9  which  he  hath  given  thee  under  the  sun 

11.  2  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight 

12.  7  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave  it 
13  vines  (with)  the  tender  grape  give  a  (good) 

12  vineyards,  .there  will  Igivetheemy  loves 

13  mandrakes  give  a  smell,  and  at  our  gates 
a.   7  if  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of 

Isa.     3.    4  I  will  give  children  (to  be)  their  princes 
7. 14  the  Lord  himself  shall  give  you  a  sign 
8.  18  the  children  whom  the  Lord  bath  given 
30.  20  the  Lor.D  give  you  the  bread  of  adversity 
30.  23  Then  shall  he  give  the  rain  of  thy  seed 
36.    8  Now  therefore  give  pledges,  I  pray  thee 
36.    8  and  I  will  give  thee  two  thousand  horses 

40.  29  He  sivcth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to 

41.  2  Who.  .gave  the  nations  before  him,  and 

41.  2  he  crave  (them)  as  the  dust  to  his  sword 
4>.  27  I  will  give  to  Jerusalem  one  that  bring. 

42.  5  he  that  giveth  bread  unto  the  people 
42.  6  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people 
42.    8  and  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another 

42.  24  AVho  gave  Jacob  for  a  spoil,  and  Israel 

43.  3  I  gave  Egypt  (for)  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia 
43.    4  therefore  will  I  give  men  for  thee,  and 
43.  20  because  T  give  waters*  in  the  wilderness" 
43.  2S  have  given  Jacob  to  the  curse,  and  Israel 
45.    3  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness 

47.  6  I  have,  .Given  them  intothinchand  :  thou 

48.  11  and  I  will  not  give  my  glory  unto  another 

49.  6  I  will  also  give  fchefe  for  a  fight  to  the  G. 

49.  8  I  will .  .give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the 

50.  4  The  Lord  Cop  bath  given  me  the  tongue 
50.    6  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my 
55.   4  I  have  given  him  (foi*)a  witness  to  the 

55.  10  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and 

56.  5  Even  unto'  them  will  I  '_rive  in  mine  ho. 


Song  2. 
7 


GIVE 


Isa.  56.   5 1  will  give  them  an  everlasting  name 
61".    3  to  give  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes,  the 
62.    7  give  him  no  rest,  till  He  establish,  and 
62.    8  Surely  I  will  no  more  give  thy  corn  (to 

Jer.    3.    8  I  had . .  given  her  a  bill  of  divorce  ;  yet 

3. 15  I  will  give  you  pastors  according  to  mine 

3.  18  to  the  land  that  I  have  given  tor  an 

3. 19  give  thee  a  pleasant  land,  a  goodly  herit. 

4.  16  give  out  their  voice  against  the  cities  of  J. 

5.  24  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  that  giveth  rain 
7.    7  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers 
7.  14  unto  the  place  which  I  gave  to  you  and 
S.  10  Therefore  will  I  give  their  wives  unto 
8. 13  (the  things  that)  I  have  given  them 

11.  5  to  give  them  a  land  flowing  with  milk 

12.  7  I  have  given  the  dearly  beloved  of  my 

13.  16  Give  glory  to  the  Lord  your  God,  before 

14.  13  will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this  place 

14.  22  can  the  heavens  give  showers  ?  (Arc)  not 
15. 13  thy  treasures  will  I  give  to  the  spoil  with. 

16.  15  their  land  that  I  gave  unto  their  fathers 

17.  3  I  will  give  thy  substance  (and)  all  thy 
17.   4  from  thine  heritage  that  I  gave  thee  ;  and 
17. 10  even  to  give  every  man  according  to  his 

19.  7  their  carcases  will  I  give  to  be  meat  for 

20.  4  I  will  give  all  Judah  into  the  hand  of 
20.  5  all  the  treasures,  .will  I  give  into  the 
22. 13  without  wages,  and  giveth  him  not  for 

22.  25  I  will  give  thee  into  the  hand  of  them 

23.  39  the  city  that  I  gave  you  and  your  fathers 

24.  7  I  will  give  them  an  heart  to  know  me 
24.    8  So  will  I  give  Zedekiah  the  king  of  Judah 

24.  10  from  otf  the  land  that  I  gave  unto  them 

25.  5  in  the  land  that  the  Lord  hath  given 

25.  31  he  will  give  them  (that  are)  wicked  to 

26.  24  that  they  should  not  give  him  into  the 

27.  5  have  given  it  unto  whom  it  seemed  meet 
27.   6  now  have  I  given  all  these  lands  into  the 

27.  6  the  beasts  of  the  field  have  I  given  him 

28.  14  I  have  given  him  the  beasts  of  the  field 

29.  6  give  your  daughters  to  husbands,  that 

29.  11  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  end 

30.  3  to  the  land  that  I  gave  to  their  fathers 

30.  16  all  that  prey  upon  thee  will  I  give  for  a 

31.  35  which  giveth  the  sun  for  a  light  by  day 

32.  3,  28  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of 
32. 12  I  gave  the  evidence  of  the  purchase  unto 
32. 19  to  give  every  one  according  to  his  ways 
32.  22  hast  given  them  this  land,  which  thou 
32.  22  to  give  them,  a  land  flowing  with  milk 

32.  39  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  one  way 
34.  2  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of  the 
34.  18  I  will  give  the  men  that  have  transgress. 
34.  20  I  will  even  give  them  into  the  hand  of 

34.  21  princes,  will  I  give  into  the  hand  of  their 

35.  15  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  have  given  to 
36. 32  gave  it  to  Baruch  the  scribe,  the  son  of 

37.  21  that  they  should  give  him  daily  a  piece 

38.  16  neither  will  I  give  thee  into  the  hand  of 

39.  10  land  of  Judah,  and  gave  them  vineyards 

40.  5  captain  of  the  guard  gave  him  victuals 
44.  30  I  will  give  Pharaoh-hophra  king  of  Egypt 

44.  30  as  I  gave  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  into  the 

45.  5  but  thy  life  will  I  give  unto  thee  for  a  pr. 
48.    9  Give  wings  unto  Moab,  that  it  may  flee 
50.  15  she  hath  given  her  hand :  her  foundations 

Lam.   1.  11  they  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for 
2. 18  give  thyself  no  rest ;  let  not  the  apple  of 
3.  30  He  giveth  (his)  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth 
3.  65  Give  them  sorrow  of  heart, thy  curse  unto 
5. ,  '6  We  have  given  the  hand  (to)  the  Egyp. 
Eze.    2.    8  open  thy  mouth,  and  eat  that  I  give  thee 
3.    3  with  this  roll  that  I  give  thee.    Then  did 
4. 15  Then  he  said  unto  me,  Lo,  I  have  given 
7.  21  I  will  give  it  into  the  hands  of  the  stra. 
11.  17  and  I  will  give  you  the  land  of  Israel 
11.  19  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  I  will 
11.  19  and  will  give  them  an  heart  of  flesh 

15.  6  which  I  have  given  to  the  fire  for  fuel,  so 

15.  6  will  I  give  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 

16.  17  which  I  had  given  thee,  and  madest  to 
16. 19  My  meat  also  which  I  gave  thee,  fine  fl. 
16-  33  give  gifts  to  all  whores  ;  but  thou  givest 
16.  34  in  that  thou  givest  a  reward,  and  no  re. 
16.  36  children,  which  thou  didst  give  unto 

16.  38  I  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and  jealo. 
16.  39  I  will  also  give  thee  into  their  hand,  and 
16.  41  thou  also  shalt  give  no  hire  any  more 

16.  61  I  will  give  them  unto  thee  for  daughters 
17. 15  that  they  might  give  him  horses  and 

17.  18  he  had  given  his  hand,  and  hath  done  all 

18.  7  hath  given  his  bread  to  the  hungry,  and 
18.  8  He  (that)  hath  not  given  forth  upon  usury 
18.  13  Hath  given  forth  upon  usury,  and  hath 
i8.  16  hath  given  his  bread  to  the  hungry,  and 
20. 11 1  gave  them  my  statutes,  and  showed 
20.'  12  also  I  gave  them  my  sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign 
20.  15  the  land  which  I  had  given  (them),  flow. 
20.  25  I  gave  them  also  statutes,  .not  good,  and 

20.  28,  42  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  to 
21. 11  he  hath  given  it  to  be  furbished,  that  it 

21.  11  to  give  it  into  the  hand  of  the  slayer 

21.  27  whose  right  it  is  ;  and  I  will  give  it  (him) 
23.  31  therefore  will  I  give  her  cup  into  tliine 
23.  46  will  give  them  to  be  removed  and  spoiled 
25. 10  mil  give  them  in  possession,  that  the 

28.  25  that  I  have  given  to  my  servant  Jacob 

29.  5  I  have  given  thee  for  meat  to  the  beasts 
29.  19  I  will  give  the  land  of  Egypt  unto  Nebu. 
29.  20  I  have  given  him  the  land  of  Egypt  (for) 
29.  21  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  mouth 

33.  27  will  I  give  to  the  beasts  to  be  devoured 


395 


Eze.  36.  26  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a 
36.  26  and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh 

36.  28  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers;  and  ye  shall 

37.  25  that  I  have  given  unto  Jacob  my  servant 
39.    4  I  will  give  thee  unto  the  ravenous  birds 
39.  11  I  will  give  unto  Gog  a  place  there  of  gra. 
39.  23  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies 

43.  19  thou  shalt  give  to  the  priests  the  Levites 

44.  28  ye  shall  give  them  no  possession  in  Israel 

44.  30  ye  shall  also  give  unto  the  priest  the 

45.  8  shall  they  give  to  the  house  of  Israel 

46.  16  If  the  prince  give  a  gift  unto  any  of  Ins 

46.  17  if  he  give  a  gift  of  his  inheritance  to  one 

47.  14  to  give  it  unto  your  fathers  :  and  this 
47.  23  there  shall  ye  give  (him)  his  inheritance 

Dan.  1.  2  the  Lord  gave  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 
1.  12  let  them  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  and  water 
1.  16  they  should  drink,  and  gave  them  pulse 

1.  17  God  gave  them  knowledge  and  skill  in 

8.  13  to  give  both  the  sanctuary  and  the  host 
11.  17  he  shall  give  him  the  daughter  of  women 

11.  21  shall  not  give  the  honour  of  the  kingdom 
Hos.    2.    5  that  give  (me)  my  bread  and  my  water 

2.  8  did  not  know  that  I  gave  her  corn,  and 
2. 12  that  my  lovers  have  given  me  :  and  I  will 
2. 15  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  thence 
9. 14  Give  them . .  what  wilt  thou  give?  give 

13.  10  thou  saidst,  Give  me  a  king  and  princes? 
13.  11  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger,  and 
Joel    2. 17  give  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach,  that 

2.  23  for  he  hath  given  you  the  former  rain 

3.  3  have  given  a  boy  for  an  harlot,  and  sold 
Amos  4.    6  I  also  have  given  you  cleanness  of  teeth 

9.  15  their  land  which  I  have  given  them,  saith 
Mic.    1.  14  shalt  thou  give  presents  to  Moresheth-g. 

6.  7  shall  I  give  my  first  born  (for)  my  transg. 
Hag.  2.  9  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the 
Zech.  3.    7  I  will  give  thee  places  to  walk  among 

8.  12  vine  shall  give,  .shall  give  her.  .shall  give 
10.    1  give  them  showers  of  rain,  to  every  one 

Mai.    2.    2  lay  (it)  to  heart,  to  give  glory  unto  my 
2.   5  I  gave  them  to  him  (for)  the  fear  where. 

11.7*0  give,  \r\}  nethan. 

Dan.    2.  16  desired  of  the  king  that  he  would  give 

4.  17  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  will,  and 

4.  25,  32  the  Most  High,  .giveth  it  to  whomso. 

12.  To  lift  up,  exalt,  ovirwm,  5. 

2  Ch.30.  24  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  did  give  to  the 
30.  24  and  the  princes  gave  to  the  congregation 
35.   7  Josiah  gave  to  the  people,  of  the  flock 
35.    8  his  princes  gave  willingly  unto  the  peo. 
35.   9  gave  unto  the  Levites  for  the  passover  off. 

13.  To  put,  place,  c^z' sum. 

Num.  6.  26  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance . .  give  thee 
Deut22.  14  give  occasions  of  speech  against  her,  and 
22. 17  he  hath  given  occasions  of  speech  (against 
Josh.  7.  19  My  son,  give,  I  pray  thee,  glory  to  the  L. 

1  Sa.  2.  20  Lord  give  thee  seed  of  this  woman,  for 
Ezra  4.  21  Give  ye  now  commandment  to  cause 
iNeh.   8.    8  gave  the  sense,  and  caused .  .to  underst. 

9.  7  and  gavest  him  the  name  of  Abraham 
Prov.  8.  29  When  he  gave  to  the  sea  his  decree,  that 
Isa.  42.  12  Let  them  give  glory  unto  the  Lord,  and 
Dan.    1.    7  Unto  whom  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  g. 

1.   7  for  he  gave  unto  Daniel  (the  name)  of  B. 

14.  To  give  away  {from  oneself),  airodiSta/xi  apodid. 
Matt  12.  36  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  d. 

20.    8  give  them  (their)  hire,  beginning  from 
Lukei6.    2  give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship ;  for 
Acts   4.  33  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles  wit. 

19.  40  nocausewhereby [we  maygivejan account 

2  Ti.    4.    8  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that 
Heb.  13.  17  as  they  that  must  give  account,  that  they 
1  Pe.   4.    5  Who  shall  give  account  to  him  that  is 
Rev.  22.  12  to  give  every  man  according  as  his  work 

15.7*0  apportion,  portion  off,  airovefj.(o  aponemo. 
1  Pe.   3.    7  giving  honour  unto  the  wife,  as  unto  the 

16.7V>  give  throughout,  SiadiSwfj.1  diadidomi. 

Ilev.  17.  13  [shall  give]  their  power  and  strength  unto 

17.  To  give,  StSajjui  didomi. 

Matt.  4.    9  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 

5.  31  let  him  give  her  a  writing  of  divorcement 

5.  42  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee,  and  from 

6.  11  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread 

7.  6  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs 
7.  7  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  seek,  and 
7.  11  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 

7.  11  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him 
9.    8  which  had  given  such  power  unto  men 
io.    1  he  gave  them  power  (against)  unclean 
10.    8  freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give 
10.  19  [it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour] 

12.  39  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  to  it,  but  the 

13.  11  Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the 
13.  11  but  to  them  it  is  not  given 

13.  12  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given 

14.  7  he  promised,  .to  give  her  whatsoever  she 
14.    8  Give  me  here  John  Baptist's  head  in  a 
14.    9  the  king,  .commanded  (it)  to  be  given 
14.  11  was  brought  in  a  charger,  and  given  to 
14.  16  They  need  not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to 

14.  19  gave  the  loaves  to  (his)  disciples,  and  the 

15.  36  gave  to  his  disciples,  and  the  disciples  to 

16.  4  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  it,  but 
16.  19  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  king. 
16.  26  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his 


Matt  17. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


25- 
25- 

25. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 

Mark  2. 
4- 
4- 

5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 


Luke 


GIVE 


27  that  take,  and  give  unto  them  for  me 

7  command  to  give  a  writing  of  divorcem. ' 

11  cannot  receive,  .save,  .to  whom  it  is  given 

21  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have 

4  and  whatsoever  is  right  I  will  give  you 

14  I  will  give  unto  this  last  even  as  unto 
23  to  sit  uii  my  right . .  is  not  mine  to  give 

25  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 
23  and  who  gave  thee  this  authority? 

43  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  frii. 

17  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  untu  Cesar 
29  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and 
45  to  give  them  meat  in  due  season 

8  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for  our  lamps  are 

15  unto  one  he  gave  five  talents,  to  another 

28  give  (it)  unto  him  which  hath  ten  talents 

29  For  unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  gi. 
35  For  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me 
42  For  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no 

9  might  have  been  sold  for  much,  and  giv. 
15  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver 

26  and  gave  (it)  to  the  disciples,  and  said 

27  and  gave  (it)  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye 
48  he  that  betrayed  him  gave  them  a  sign 

10  gave  them  for  the  potter's  field,  as  the 
34  They  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink  mingled 

12  they  gave  large  money  unto  the  soldiers 

18  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven 
26  gave  also  to  them  which  were  with  him 

11  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  mystery 
25  For  he  that  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given 

43  that  something  should  be  given  her  to 

2  what  wisdom  (is)  this  which  is  given  unto 
7  and  gave  them  power  over  unclean  spirits 

22  whatsoever  thou  wilt,  and  I  will  give  (it) 

23  I  will  give  (it)  thee,  unto  the  half  of  my 

25  I  "ill  that  thou  give  me  by  and  by  in  a 

28  brought  his  head  in  a  charger,  and  gave 
28  and  the  damsel  gave  it  to  her  mother 
37  said  unto  them,  Give  ye  them  to  eat 

37  Shall  we  go  and  buy .  .and  give  them  to 

41  gave  (them)  to  his  disciples  to  set  before 

6  and  gave  to  his  disciples  to  set  before 

12  There  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  this  g. 
37  Or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange 

21  sell  whatsoeverthouhast,  and  give  to  the 

40  to  sit  on  my  right,  .is  not  mine  to  give 
45  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 

28  who  gave  thee  this  authority  to  do  these 
9  and  will  give  the  vineyard  unto  others 

14  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or 

15  Shall  we  give,  or  shall  we  not  give?  But 
11  whatsoever  shall  be  given  you  in  that 

24  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light 

34  gave  authority  to  his  servants,  and  to 

5  might  have  been  sold,  .and  have  been  gi. 

11  they  were  glad,  and  promised  to  give 

22  gave  to  them,  and  said,  Take,  eat :  this 

23  he  gave  (it)  to  them  ;  and  they  all  drank 

44  he  that  betrayed  him  had  given  them  a 
23  they  gave  him  to  drink  wine  mixed  with 
32  the  Lord  God  snail  give  unto  him  the 

77  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  unto  his 

6  All  this  power  will  I  give  thee,  and  the 

6  and  to  whomsoever  I  will  I  give  it 

4  gave  also  to  them  that  were  with  him 

30  Give  to  every  man  that  asketh  of  thee 

35  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you 

3S  good  measure . .  shall  men  give  into  your 

44  thou  gavest  me  no  water  for  my  feet :  but 

45  Thou  gavest  me  no  kiss  :  but  this  woman 
10  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  myster. 
iS  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given 
55  and  he  commanded  to  give  her  meat 

1  gave  them  power  and  authority  over  all 

13  he  said  unto  them.  Give  ye  them  to  eat 

16  and  gave  to  the  disciples  to  set  before 

19  I  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  serpe. 
35  gave,  .to  the  host,  and  said  unto  him 

3  Give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread 

7  Trouble  me  not.  .1  cannot  rise  and  give 

7  Though  lie  will  not  rise  and  give  him 

8  because  of.  .he  will  rise  and  give  him  as 

9  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  seek,  and 
13  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 
13  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him? 

29  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  it,  but  the 

41  But  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye 

32  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you 

33  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms ;  prov. 

42  to  give.. portion  of  meat  in  due  season? 
48  For  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of 
51  Suppose  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace 
58  give  diligence  that  thou  mayest  be  deliv. 

9  Give  this  man  place ;  and  thou  begin 

12  Father,  give  me  the  portion  of  goods 
16  the  husks,  .and  no  man  gave  unto  him 
29  yet  thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid,  that  I 

12  who  shall  give  you  that  which  is  yourown  ? 
iS  are  not  found  that  returned  to  give  glory 

43  all  the  people,  .gave  praise  unto  God 

8  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor 

15  these  servants,  .to  whom  he  had  given 

23  Wherefore  then  gavest  not  thou  my  mo. 

24  and  give  (it)  to  him  that  hath  ten  pounds 

26  unto  every  one  which  liath  shall  be  given 

2  or  who  is  he  that  gave  thee  this  authority 
10  that  they  should  give  Kim  of  the  fruit 

16  and  shall  give  the  vineyard  to  others 

22  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to  give  tribute  unto  C. 
15  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom 

5  they  were  glad,  and  covenanted  to  give 


GIVE 


396 


GIVE 


Luke22.  19  and  brake,  .and  gave  unto  them,  saying 
22. 19  This  is  my  body,  which  is  given  for  you 

23.  2  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar 
John  1.  12  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the 

1. 17  For  the  law  was  given  by  Moses,  (but) 
1.  22  that  we  may  give  an  answer  to  them 
3.  16  that  he  gave  bis  only  begotten  Son,  that 
3.  27  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given 
3.  34  for  God  giveth  not  the  spirit  by  measure 

3.  35  and  hath  given  all  things  into  his  hand 

4.  5  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  his  son  Joseph 
4.    7  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Give  me  to  drink 

4. 10  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to 
4.  10  he  would  have  given  thee  living  water 
4. 12  our  father  Jacob,  which  gave  us  the  well 
4.  14  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 

4.  74  [but  the  waterthat  I  shall  give  him  shall] 
4. 15  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not 

5. 26  so  hath  he  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in 

5.  27  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute 

5.  36  works  which  the  Father  hath  given  me  to 

6.  27  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  give  unto  you 
6.  31  He  gave  them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat 
6.  32  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread  from  hear. 
6.  32  but  my  Father  givethyou  the  true  bread 
6.  33 the  bread.. giveth  life  unto  the  world 

6. 34  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread 
6.  37  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come 
6.  39  that  of  all  which  hehathgivenmelshould 
6.  51  and  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh 
6.  51  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world 
6. 52  How  can  this  man  give  us.  .flesh  to  eat? 

6.  65  except  it  were  given  unto  him  of  my  Fat. 
7. 19  Did  not  Moses  give  you  the  law,  and 

7.  22  Moses  therefore  gave  unto  you  circumci. 
9.  24  said  unto  him,  Give  God  the  praise  :  we 

10.  28  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they 

10.  29  My  Father,  which  gave,  .me,  is  greater 

11.  22  thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will  give  (it) 

11.  57  Phariseeshad  given  a  commandment,  that 

12.  5  three  hundred  pence,  and  given  to  the 

12.  49  he  gave  me  a  commandment,  what  I 

13.  3  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his 
13.  15  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye 

13.  26  when  he  had  dipped  the  sop,  he  gave  (it) 
13.  29  he  should  give  something  to  the  poor 

13.  34  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you 

14.  16  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 
14.  27  my  peace  I  give  unto  you  :  not  as  the 
14.  27  giveth,  give  I  unto  you.  Let  not  your 
15. 16  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  give  it 

16.  23  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  (it) 
2  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh 
2  that  he  should  give,  .to  as  many  as  thou 
4  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do 
6  men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the 

6  thou  gavest  them  me  ;  and  they  have 

7  whatsoever  thou  hast  given  me  are  of 

8  I  have  given  unto . .  winch  thou  gavest  me 

9  which  thou  hast  given  me ;  for  they  are 

17.  11  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may 
17. 12  those  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept 
17.  14  I  have  given  them  thy  word ;  and  the 
17.  22  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given 
17.  24  they  also  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be 

24  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me :  for 
9  them  which  thou  gavest  me  have  I  lost 

11  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink 
9  Whence  art  thou  ?  But  Jesus  gave  him 

19.  11  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above 
21.  13  cometh,  and  taketh  bread,  and  giveth 

Acts    2.    4  as  the  spirit  gave  them  utterance 

3.    6  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee  :   In  the  name 
3.  16  hath  given  him  this  perfect  soundness 
4. 12  other  name  under  heaven  given  among 
5.  31  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and 
5.  32  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey 
7.    5  he  gave  him  none  inheritance  in  it,  no 
7.    5  would  give  it  to  him  for  a  possession,  and 
7.    8  he  gave  him  the  covenant  of  circumcis. 
7.  10  gave  him  favour  and  wisdom  in  the  sight 

7.  (■■-  the  lively  nr;LrU-s  1"  give  unto  us 

8.  18  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  he  offered  them 
8.  19  Saying,  Give  me  also  this  power,  that  on 
9, 41  he  give  her  (his)  hand,  and  lifted  her  up 

11.  17  as  God  gave  them  the  like  gift  as  (he  did) 

12.  23  he  gave  not  God  the  glory :  and  he  was 

13.  20  [he  gave,  .judges  about  the  spaceof  four] 
13.  21  God  gave  unto  them  Saul  the  son  of  Cis 

13.  34  I  will  give  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David 

14.  17  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven 

15.  8  giving  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  as  (he 
17.  25  he  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all 

20.  32  and  to  give  you  an  inheritance  among 
20.  35  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive 

24.  26  money  should  have  been  given  him  of  P. 
Horn.  4.  20  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God 

5.    5  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us 
ix.    8  God  hath  given  them  the  spirit  of  slumber 
12.    3  For  I  say,  through  the  grace  given  unto 
12.    6  according  to  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us 
12.  19  give  place  unto  wrath  :  for  it  is  written 
14.  12  every  one  of  us  shall  give  an  account  of 
15-  15  of  the  grace  that  is  given  to  me  of  God 
1  Co.    1.    4  grace  of  God  which  is  given  you  by  J.  C. 

3.    5  even  as  the  Lord  gave  to  every  man? 

3.  10  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  unto  me 

7.  25  yet  I  give  my  judgment,  as  one  that  hath 
11. 15  for  (her)  hair  is  given  her  for  a  covering 
12.    7  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal 
12.   8  is  given  b\  the  spirit  the  word  of  wisdom 
k.  24  having  given  more  abundant  honour  to 


17. 
*7- 
*7- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
i7- 
*7- 


17- 
18. 


19. 


Eph. 


Col. 
iTh. 

2TI1. 

iTi. 

2T1. 


[  Co.  14.    7  giving  sound,  whether  pipe  or  harp 
14-    7  give  a  distinction  in  the  sounds,  how 

14.  8  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound 

15.  38  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased 
"  J5-  57  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our 

2  Co.    i.  22  and  given  the  earnest  of  the  spirit  in  our 
5.    5  hath  given  unto  us  the  earnest  of  the 
5.  12  but  give  you  occasion  to  glory  on  our 

5.  18  and  hath  given  to  us  the  ministry  of 

6.  3  Giving  no  offence  in  anything,  that  the 
8.    5  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord 

8.  10  I  give  (my)  advice  :  for  this  is  expedient 

9.  9  hath  given  to  the  poor  ■-  his  righteousness- 
xo.    8  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  edification 

12.  7  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  fl. 

13.  xo  hath  given  me  to  edification,  and  not  to 
Gal.    1.    4  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he  might 

2.  9  that  was  given  unto  me,  they  gave  to  me 

3.  21  if  there  had  been  a  law  given  which  could 

3.  22  might  be  given  to  them  that  believe 

4.  15  out  your  own  eyes,  and  have  given  them 
17  may  give  unto  you  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
22  gave  him  (to  be)  the  head  over  all  (things) 

3.   2  grace  of  God  which  is  given  me  to  you 
3.    7  grace  of  God  given  unto  me  by  the  effec. 

3.  8  is  this  grace  given,  that  I  should  preach 

4.  7  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure 
4.    8  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto 
4.  11  gave  some,  apostles  ;  and  some,  prophets 
4.  27  Keither  give  place  to  the  devil 
6. 19  may  be  given  unto  me,  that  I  may  open 

1.  25  dispensation  of  God  which  is  given  to  me 
4.   2  what  commandments  we  gave  you  by  the 

4.  8  who  hath  also  given  unto  us  his  Holy  Sp. 

2.  16  and  hath  given  (us)  everlasting  consolat. 

3.  16  give  you  peace  always  by  all  means 
2.   6  Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be 
4. 14  gift  ..which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy 

5.  14  give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to 
7  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear 
9  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus 

1. 16  The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of 

2.    7  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding  in  all 

2.  25  if  God  peradventure  will  give  them 

Titus  2.  14  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 

Heb.    2.  13  the  children  which  God  hath  given  me 

7.  4  even.  .Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of  the  sp. 
Jas.     1.    5  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  (men)  liber. 

1.  5  upbraideth  not ;  and  it  shall  be  given  him 

2.  16  notwithstanding  ye  give  them  not  those 

4.  6  But  he  giveth  more  grace.    Wherefore  he 

4.  6  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble 
«;.  18  prayed  again,  and  the  heaven  gave  rain 

21  gave  him  glory ;  that  your  faith  and  hope 

5.  5  for  God.  .giveth  grace  to  the  humble 

3.  15  according  to  the  wisdom  given  unto  him 
3.  23  and  love  one  another,  as  he  gave  us  com. 

3.  24  in  us,  by  the  spirit  which  he  hath  given 

4.  13  because  he  hath  given  us  of  his  spirit 

5.  11  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life 
5.  16  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin 

5.  20  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that 
1  which  God  gave  unto  him,  to  show  unto 

2.    7,  17  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give 
2.  10  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life 
2.  17  will  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the 
2.  21  I  gave  her  space  to  repent  of  her  fornica. 
2.  23  I  will  give  unto  every  one  of  you  accord. 
2.  26  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations 
2.  28  And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star 
4.    9  when  those  beasts  give  glory  and  honour 

6.  2  and  a  crown  was  given  unto  him  :  and  he 
6.  4  was  given  to  him  that  sat  thereon  to  take 
6.   4  there  was  given  unto  him  a  ^  eat  sword 

6.  8  power  was  given  unto  them  over  the  fou. 
6. 11  white  robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of 

7.  2  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth 

8.  2  and  to  them  were  given  seven  trumpets 

8.  3  there  was  given  unto  him  much  incense 

9.  1  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the  bottom. 
9.  3  unto  them  was  given  power,  as  the  scor. 
9.    5  to  them  it  was  given  that  they  should  not 

10.  9  said  unto  him.  Give  me  the  little  book 

11.  1  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  unto  a  rod 
11.  2  for  it  is  given  unto  the  Gentiles :  and  the 
11.    3  I  will  give,  .unto  my  two  witnesses,  and 

11.  13  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven 

11. 18  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  unto  thy 

12.  14  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  a 

13.  2  the  dragon  gave  him  his  power,  and  his 
13.   4  the  dragon  which  gave  power  unto  the  b. 
13.    5  there  was  given  unto  him  a  mouth 

13.    5  and  power" was  given  unto  him  to  con. 
13.   7  [it  was  given  unto  him  to  make  war  with] 
'3-    7  power  was  given  him  over  all  kindreds 

13.  15  he  had  power  to  give  life  unto  the  image 

14.  7  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him  ;  for  the 

15.  7  one  of  the  four  beasts  gave  unto  the  seven 

16.  6  thou  hast  given  them  blood  to  drink  ;  for 
16.  8  power  was  given  unto  him  to  scorch  men 
16.    9  and  they  repented  not  to  give  him  glory 

16.  19  to  give  unto  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of 

17.  17  give  their  kingdom  unto  the  beast,  until 

18.  7  so  much  torment  and  sorrow  give  her 

19.  7  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  hon. 

20.  4  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them  :  and 

21.  6  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the 

18.  To  give  as  a  gift,  Zwpioy.ai  doreoTnai. 

Marki5.  45  when  they  knew .  .they  gave  the  body  to 
2  Pe.  1.    3  as  his  divine  power  bath  given  unto  us 
1.    4  Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding 


:  Pe. 


iPe. 

:  Jo. 


Rev. 


19.7b  give  upon  or  over  to  eVtS/Soj/xi  epididomi. 
Matt.  7.    9  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  s.? 
7.  10  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serp.  ? 
Luke  11.  11  If  a  son  shall  ask.  .will  he  give  him  a  St.? 
11.  11  a  fish,  will  he  for  a  fish  give  him  a  serp.  ? 
24.  30  and  blessed  (it),  and  brake,  and  gave  to 
24.  42  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  broiled  fish 
Johni3.  26  [He  it  is,  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop,  when] 

20. To  give  testimony  or  witness,  jxaprvp^w  martur. 

1  Jo.   5.  10  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of 
21.  To  give  a  share,  /j.tTaSlb'to/j.i  metadidomi. 

Kom  12.    8  he  that  giveth,  (let  him  do  it)  with  simp. 

Eph.   4.  28  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that 
22. Along  side  of,  ivapa  para. 

Lukeio.    7  eating  and  drinking  such  things  as  they  g. 
23. To  give  over  to,  7rapa5t'5u'iu:  paradidomi. 

1  C0.13.  3  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and 
Gal.  2.  20  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  him. 
Eph.    5.    2  hath  given  himself  for  us  an  offering  and 

5.  25  even  as  Christ  also,  .gave  himself  for  it 

24.7b  bear  into  beside,  -rrapeiffipepw  pareispthero. 

2  Pe.  1.    5  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith  vir. 
25.  To  hold  alongside  of,  irap4xt>>  parecJw. 

Acts  17.  31  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  (men) 
Col.  4.  1  give  unto  (your)  servants  that  which  is 
1  Ti.    6. 17  who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy 

26.7V)  do,  make,  iroUo)  poleo. 

Jude      3  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to  write  unto  you 

27.  To  put,  set,  2rface,  rtd^fxi  tithemi. 

Johmo.  11  shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep 

28. To  grant  as  afavovr,  x^p'lC°^ai  eharizomai. 
Luke  7.  21  and  unto  many,  .blind  he  gave  sight 
Acts  27.  24  hath  given  thee  all  them  that  sail  with 
Gal.     3.  18  but  God  gave  (it)  to  Abraham  by  promise 
Phil.    1.  29  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only 
2.    9  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every 
Phm.      22  through  your  prayers  I  shall  be  given 

29.  To  be  chorus  leader,  to  supply,  xopvy^  chor. 

1  Pe.   4.  11  ability  which  God  giveth  :  that  God  in  all 

30.  To  draw  out,  prolong,  W?  mashak. 

Eccl.  2.    3  to  give  myself  unto  wine,  yet  acquainting 

31.7V)  cause  to  turn  back,  3*ty  shub,  5. 

2  Ej.17.    3  became  his  servant,  and  gave  him  prese 
32.7b  send  forth,  out  or  away,  nbv  shalach. 

Psa.  50.  19  Thou  gavest  thy  mouth  to  evil,  and  thy 
[See  also  Account,  answer,  charge,  commandment, 
counsel,  drink,  ear,  eat,  few,  flattering  tittles,  heat,  in- 
herit, knowledge,  law,  leave,  less,  life,  light,  many, 
marriage,  more,  name,  passages,  pledges,  possess, 
power,  praise,  provender,  quietness,  respite,  rest, 
reward,  shout,  sixth  part,  skill,  speedily,  stripes,  such, 
thanks,  understaivling,  warning,  witness.] 

GIVE  again,  to  — 

1.7b  cause  to  turn  back,  3't;!  shub,  5. 

Lev.  25.  51  he  shall  give  again  the  price  of  his 

25.  52  accord,  unto  his  years  shall  he  give  him  a 

2.  To  finish,  complete,  recompense,  D7^  shalam,  3. 

Eze.  33.  15  give  again  that  he  had  robbed,  walk  in 
3.7b  give  away,  a7ro5i'5w,ui  apodidomi. 

Luke  4.  20  gave  (it)  again  to  the  minister,  and  sat 
GIVE  against,  to  — 
To  bear  against  or  down,  Kcurcuplpto  kataph-cro. 

Acts  26. 10  put  to  death,  I  ga.  my  voice  against  (them) 
GIVE  commandment  or  charge,  to  — 
1.7b  say,  *ij?n.  amar. 

1  Ch.14.  12  David  gave  a  commandment,  and  they 

2. To  enjoin  on,  cvreWo/j-ai  entellomai. 

Matt.  4.    6  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concern. 
Luke  4.  10  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee 
Johni4.  31  as  the  Father  gave  me  commandment 
Acts    1.    2  after  that  he . .  had  given  commandments 
Heb.  11.  22  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones 

GIVE  (counsel)  to  — 

To  give  counsel,  |'y;  yaats. 

2  Sa.  1 7.    7  that  A.  hath  giv.  (is)  not  good  at  this  time 

1  Ki.  12.    8  they  had  given  him,  and  consulted  with 

12.  13  the  old  men's  counsel  that  they  gave  him 

2  Ch.io.    8  old  men  gave  him,  and  took  counsel  with 

GIVE  first,  to  — 

7b  give  forth  or  foremost,  -npoU^wjxi  prodiddmi. 

Kom  11.  35  who  hath  first  given  to  him,  and  it  shall 
GIVE  forth,  to  — 
l.To  give,  |ru  nathan. 

KUI1120.    8 'it  shall  give  forth  his  water,  and  thou 

2.7b  give,  $lb*a>fj.i  didSmi. 

Acts    1.  26  they  gave  forth  their  lots ;  and  the  lot 

GIVE  freely,  to  — 

To  grant  {as  a  favour),  xaP^C°^ai  charizomai. 

Eom.  8.  32  shall  he  not.  .freely  give  us  all  things? 
GIVE,  graciously  to  — 
7b  grace,  favour,  |jn  clia/nan. 

Gen.  ^3.    5  God  hath  graciously  given  thy  servant 
GIVE  (light*,  to  — 
l.To  (cause  to)  give  light,  shine,  nix  or,  5. 

Eze.  32.    7  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light 


GIVE 

2.7*o  cause  to  shine,  9jq  kalal,  5. 

Isa.   13. 10  For  the  stars,  .shall  not  give  their  light 

GIVE  (meat)  to  — 

To  give  or  cause  to  eat,  n"}3  barah,  5. 

2  Sa.  13.    5  give  me  meat,  and  dress  the  meat  in  my 

GIVE  more,  to  — 

To  put  or  place  toward,  irpoariO'nfxi  prostWiemi. 

Mark  4.  24  [unto  you  that  hear  shall  more  be  given] 
GIVE  moreover,  to  — 
To  {cause  to)  add,  increase,  continue,  ^p;  yasaph,  5. 

a  Sa.  12.    8  I  would  moreover  have  given  unto  thee 
GIVE  (names),  to  — 
To  call,  tn,7  qara. 

Gen.    2.  20  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,  and  to 
GIVE  one's  self  to,  to  — 
To  have  leisure,  o-xoAa^w  scholazo. 

1  Co.  7.    5  ye  may  give  yourselves  to  fasting  and 
GIVE  out,  to  — 
To  lay  out,  say,  \4yca  lego. 

Acts    8.   g  giving  out  that  himself  was  some  great 

GIVE  over,  to  — 
1.7*0  give,  jm  nathan. 

Psa.nS.  18  he  hath  not  given  me  over  unto  death 

2.7*0  {cause  to)  shut  up  or  in,  *ijd  sagar,  5. 
Psa.  78.  50  gave  their  life  over  to  the  pestilence 

78.  62  He  gave  his  people  over,  .unto  the  sword 

3.7*0  shut  up  or  in,  ~ao  sakar,  3. 

Isa.    19.    4  will  I  give  over  into  the  hand  of  a  cruel 

4.7*0  give  over,  TrapaSlSafAi  paradiclomi. 

Rom.  1.  2S  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind 
Eph.   4.  19  have  given  themselves  over  unto  lasciv. 

GIVE  place,  to  — 

1.7*0  come,  or  draw  nigh,  mi  nagash. 

Isa.   49.  20  for  me :  give  place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell 

2. 7*o  give  place,  go  bach,  withdraw,  avax^p^- 
Matt.  9.  24  Give  place;  for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  but 

3.  7*o  yield,  eYjca>  eiko. 

Gal.    2.    5  To  whom  we  gave  place  by  subjection,  no 

GI7E  presently,  to  — 

7*o  place  beside,  trapitrrni^t  paristemL 

Matt2o.  53  he  shall  presently  give  me  more  than 
GIVE  self  wholly  to,  to  — 
To  be  in  {a  thing),  elvai  iv  einai  en. 

1  Ti.    4.  15  give  thyself  wholly  to  them  ;  that  thy 

GIVE  to  eat  — 

To  cause  or  give  to  eat,  7?x  aJcal,  5. 

Numn.   4  and  said,  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat9 
it.  18  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat?,  .well  with 

2  Ch.28. 15  gave  them  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  auoi 
Prov  25.  21  hungry,  give  him  bread  to  eat ;  and  if 

GIVE  up,  to  — 

1.7*0  blow,  breathe  out,  boil,  n$\  naphach. 

Jer.  15.   9  she  hath  given  up  the  ghost :  her  sun  is 
2. 7*o  give,  fro  nathan. 

Deut23.  14  and  to  give  up  thine  enemies  before  thee 
31.   s  the  Lord  shall  give  them  up  before  your 

Isa.   43.    6  I  will  say  to  the  north.  Give  up ;  and  to 

Hos.  11.    8  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim?.  .sh. 

Mic.    5.    3  Therefore  will  he  give  them  up,  until  the 
6. 14  which  thou  deliverest  will  I  give  up  to 

3.7*0  {cause  to)  shut  up  or  in,  ian  sagar,  5. 

Lam.  2.    7  he  hath  given  up  into  the  hand  of  the 
Psa.  78.  48  He  gave  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  hail 

4.7*0  send  forth,  out,  or  away,  xh$  shalach,  3. 
Psa.  81.  12  I  gave  them  up  unto  their  own  hearts' 

5. 7*o  give,  SiSw/ju  didomi. 

Rev.  20. 13  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in 

6.7*0  give  over,  TrapaBiBcapLi  paroxliddnxi. 

John  19.  30  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost 
Acts    7.  42  God  turned,  and  gave  them  up  to  worship 
Rom.  1.  24  God  also  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness 
1.  26  For  this  cause  God  gave  them  up  unto 

GIVE  reverence,  to  — 

To  turn  toward,  in  or  back,  ivTp4iro/j.at  entrepomai. 
Heb.  12.    9  we  have  had  fathers,  .we  gave,  .reverence 

GIVE  self  continually,  to  — 

To  be  firm  or  strong  toward,  irpoo-Katyrepew  prosk. 
Acts    6.    4  we  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  pr. 

GIVE  stripes,  to  — 

7*o  {cause  to)  smite,  npi  7iakahJ  5. 

Deut25.    3  Forty  stripes  he  may  give  him,  (and)  not 
GIVE  willingly,  to  — 
7*o  give  willingly,  313  nadab. 

Exodus.    2  every  man  that  giveth  it  willingly  with 

GIVEN,  to  be  — 

1.7b  give  place,  ascribe,  3n*  yehab. 

Dan.    5.  28  Thy  kingdom  is.  .given  to  theMedes  and 
7.    4  as  a  man,  and  a  man's  heart  was  given  to 
7.    6  four  heads  ;  and  dominion  was  given  to 
7.  11  and  his  body,  .given  to  the  burning  flame 


39: 


Dan.  7.  14  there  was  given  him  dominion,  and  glory 
7.  22  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the 
7.  27  shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints 

2.7*0  be  given,  3n;  yehab,  2.   - 

Ezra  6.    4  let  the  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  king's 
6.   8  forthwith  expenses  be  given  unto  these 

6.  9  let  it  be  given  them  day  by  day  without 

7.  19  The  vessels  also  that  are  given  thee  for 
Dan.   4.  16  let  a  beast's  heart  be  given  unto  him;  and 

7.  25  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand  until 
3.7*0  give,  }m  nathan. 

Lev.    7.  36  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  given  them 
1  Sa.  18.  19  when  Merab ..  should  have  been  given  to 

4. 7*o  be  given,  jru  nathan,  2. 

Gen.  38.  14  she  was  not  given  unto  him  to  wife 
Exod.  5.  16  There  is  no  straw  given  unto  thy  servants 
5.  18  for  there  shall  no  straw  be  given  you,  yet 
Lev.  10.  14  are  given  out  of  the  sacrifices  of  peace 
19.  20  not  at  all  redeemed,  nor  freedom  given 
Nuin26.  62  was  no  inheritance  given  them  among 
Josh  24.  33  which  was  given  him  in  mount  Ephraim 

1  Sa.  18. 19  she  was  given  unto  Adriel  the  Meholath. 

25. 27  let  it  even  be  given  imto  the  young  men 

2  Ki.25.  30  a  continual  allowance  given  him  of  the 

1  Ch.  5.    1  his  birthright  was  given  unto  the  sons 
Neb.  10.  29  which  was  given  by  Moses  the  servant  of 
Neh.  13.  10  of  the  Levites  had  not  been  given,  .for 
Esth.  2.  13  whatsoever  she  desired  was  given  her  to 

3.  14  for  a  commandment  to  be  given  in  every 

3.  15  the  decree  was  given  in  Shushan  the  pa. 

4.  8  the  decree  that  was  given  at  Shushan  to 

5.  3  it  shall  be  even  given  thee  to  the  half  of 

7.  3  let  my  life  be  given  me  at  my  petition 

8.  13  a  commandment  to  be  given  in  every 

8.  14  the  decree  was  given  at  Shushan  the  pa. 

9.  14  the  decree  was  given  at  Shushan  ;  and 
Job     9.  24  The  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the 

15.  19  Unto  whom  alone  the  earth  was  given 
Eccl.12.  11  The  words,  .are  given  from  one  shepherd 
Isa.     9.    6  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given 

33.  iC  bread  shall  be  given  him  :  his  waters 
35.    2  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto 

37.  10  Jerusalem  shall  not  be  given  into  the 
Jer.  "13.  20  where  (is)  the  flock  (that)  was  given  thee 

21.  10  it  shall  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the 

32.  24,  25,  43  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  Cha. 

38.  3  This  city  shall  surely  be  given  into  the 
38. 18  shall  this  city  be  given  into  the  hand 

39.  17  thou  shalt  not  be  given  into  the  hand  of 
S2.  34  there  was  a  continual  diet  given  him  of 

Eze.  11.  15  unto  us  is  this  laud  given  in  possessiou 

16.  34  no  reward  is  given  unto  thee,  therefore 

33.  24  the  land  is  given  us  for  inheritance 

35.  12  desolate,  they  are  given  us  to  consume 
4.7.  11  not  be  healed  ;  they  shall  be  given  to  salt 
Dan.    8.  1 2  And  an  host  was  given . .  against  the  daily 
ix.  11  multitude  shall  be  given  into  his  hand 

5.  To  be  given,  put,  jm  nathan,  6. 

N  urn  26.  54  shall  his  inheritance  be  given  according 
32.    5  let  this  land  be  given  unto  thy  servants 
i  Ki.  2.  21  Let  Abishag  the  Shunammite  be  given  to 

2  Ki.  5.  17  Shall  there  not  then,  I  pray  thee,  be  giv. 

6.  To  be  placed,  appointed,  &.b>  sum,  2. 

Ezra   4.  21  commandment  shall  be  given  from  me 

GIVEN,  that  which  he  hath  — 
Recompense,  deserving,  benefit,  deed,  7*D3  gcmnl. 
Prov  iq.  1  j  that  which  he  hath  given  will  he  pay  him 

GIVEN  to  — 

1.  7*o  enslave,  8ou\6w  douloo. 

Titus  2.   3  uot  given  to  much  wine,  teachers  of  good 

2.7*o  pursue,  5tw/ta>  dioko. 

Rom  i2.  15  the  necessity  of  saints;  given  to  hospita. 

GIVEN  to,  to  be  — 

7*o  hold  toward,  irpoaex^  prosecho. 

1  Ti.    3.    8  not  given  to  much  wine,  not  greedy  of  fi. 

GIVEN,  the  things  that  are  freely  — 

The  things  granted  as  a  favour,  to  xaPl<T^^t/Ta- 

1  Co.   2. 12  the  things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of 

GIVEN  to  covetousness  — 

7*o  cut  off,  gain  dishonestly,  ys|  batsa. 

Jer.    6.  13  For.  .every  one  (is)  given  to  covetousness 
8. 10  the  greatest  is  given  to  covetousness,  from 

GIVEN  to  it,  those  that  are  — 
Master,  owner,  Sya  baal. 

Eccl.  8.    8  neither . .  deliver  those  that  are  given  to  It 

GIVEN  up,  to  be  — 

7*o  be  given,  jro  nathan,  2. 

Dan.  11.    6  but  she  shall  be  given  up,  and  they  that 

GIVEN  (wholly)  — 
7*o  give,  jru  nathan. 

Num.  3.    9  they  (are)  wholly  given  unto  him  out  of 

8.  16  they  (are)  wholly  given  unto  me  from  am. 
18.    6  to  you  (they  are)  given  (as)  a  gift  for  the 

Deut2S.  31  thy  sheep  (shall  be)  given  unto  thine  ene. 
GIVEN,  (wounds)  to  be  — 
7*o  {cause  to)  smite,  npj  nakah,  5. 

2  Ki.  8.  29  which  the  Syrians  had  given  him  at  Ram. 

9.  15  which  the  Syrians  had  given  him,  when 
2  Ch.22.   6  which  were  given  him  at  Raman,  when 


GLAD 

GIVER  — 

Giver,  Z6tns  dotes. 

2  Co.  9.   7  necessity :  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver 
GIVETH  GIFTS  — 
A  man  of  gifts,  |K?  b^n  ish  mattan. 

Prov  19.   6  man  (is)  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth  gifts 
GIVING  — 
1. 7*o  give,  JD^  nailian. 

Deut  10.  18  stranger,  in  giving  him  food  and  raiment 

21.  17  by  giving  him  a  double  portion  of  all  that 
Ruth  1.    6  visited  Ins  people  in  giving  them  bread 

1  Ki.  5.   9  my  desire,  in  giving;food  for  my  househ. 

2  Ch.  6.  23  by  giving  him  according  to  his  righteous. 

2.A  giving,  a  gift,  SoVts  dosis. 

Phil.   4. 15  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye 
GIVING  up  — 
Breathing  out,  puff,  n£D  mappach. 

Job  11.  20  hope  (shall  be  as)  the  giving  up  of  the  g. 
GI-ZO-NITE,  ^ia. 

Patronymic  of  one  whose  sons  were  among  David's 
guard.     E.c.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  34  sons  of  Hashem  the  G.,  Jonathan  the  son 
GLAD  — 
l.Good,  3iD  toh. 

1  Ki.  8.  66  glad  of  heart,  for  all  the  goodness  that 
Esth.  5.   9  that  day  joyful  and  with  a  glad  heart 

2. Rejoicing,  npj?  sameach. 

2  Ch.  7. 10  glad  and  merry  in  heart  for  the  goodness 
Esth.  8.  15  the  city  of  Shushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad 
Psa.  126.  3  hath  done  great  things  for  us.  .we  are  gl. 
Prov  17.    5  he  that  is  glad  at  calamities  shall  not  b** 

GLAD,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  rejoice,  joy,  h%  ^a  gul,  gil. 

Psa.  31.    7  I  will  be  glad  aud  rejoice  in  thy  mercy 
48.  11  let. .  Judah  be  glad,  because  of  thy  judg. 
96. 11  let  the  earth  be  glad  ;  let  the  sea  roar 
Prov  24.  17  let  not  thine  heart  be  glad  when  he  stu. 
Song  1.    4  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee  ;  we 
Isa.   25.    9  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salva, 

66.  10  and  be  glad  with  her,  all  ye  that  love  her 
Joel   2.  21  be  glad  and  rejoice  :  for  the  Lord  will  do 

2.  23  Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Zion,  and 
Hab.    1.  15  catch,  .therefore  they  rejoice  and  are  gl. 

2. 7*0  be  good,  nxp  teeb. 

Dan.   6.  23  Then  was  the  king  exceeding  glad  for 
3. 7*o  be  or  become  good,  20;  yatab. 

Judg  iS.  20  the  priest's  heart  was  glad;  and  he  took 
4.7*0  enjoy,  rejoice,  b"i?,  ifflto  sus,  sis. 

Job     3.  22  are  glad,  when  they  can  find  the  grave  ? 

Isa.  35.  1  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them 
65.  iS  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  (in 

Lam.  1.  21  they  are  glad  that  thou  hast  done  (it) 

5.  7*o  rejoice,  npV  sameach. 

Exod.  4.  14  when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in 
1  Sa.  11.    9  to  the  men  of  Jabesh ;  and  they  were  gl. 
1  Ch.16.  31  Let  the  heavens  be  glad,  and  let  the  ea. 
Job  22.  19  The  righteous  see.  .and  are  glad  ;  and 
Psa.     9.    2  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee  :  I  will 
14.    7  shall  rejoice,  (and)  Israel  shall  be  glad 
16.    g  my  heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiceth 
32.  11  Be  gladrin  the  Lord,  aud  rejoice,  ye  right. 

34.  2  the  humble  shall  hear,  .and  be  glad 

35.  27  Let  them  shout  for  joy,  and  be  glad 

40.  16  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be  glad  in  thee 
53.  6  Jacob  shall  rejoice.  .Israel  shall  be  glad 
64.  10  The  righteous  shall  be  glad  in  the  Lord 

67.  4  let  the  nations  be  glad,  and  sing  for  joy 

68.  3  But  let  the  righteous  be  glad  :  let  them 
69. 32  The  humble  shall  see  (this,  and)  be  glad 
70.    4  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be  glad  in  thee 
90.  14  that  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all  our 
97.    1  rejoice  ;  let  the  multitude  of  isles  be  glad 
97.    8  Zion  heard,  and  was  glad  ;  and  the  daug. 

104.  34  shall  be  sweet :  I  will  be  glad  in  the  Lo. 

105.  38  Egypt  was  glad  when  they  departed ;  for 
107.  30  Then  are  they  glad  because  they  be  quiet 

118.  24  hath  made  ;  we  will  rejoice  and  be  glad 

119.  74  They  that  fear  thee  will  be  glad  when 
122.    1  I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let 

Prov  23.  25  thy  mother  shall  be  glad,  and  she  that 
Isa.  39.  2  Hezekiah  was  glad  of  them,  and  showed 
Jer.  41.  13  that  (were)  with  him,  then  they  were  glad 
50.  1 1  Because  ye  were  glad,  because  ye  rejoiced 
Lam.  4.  21  Rejoice  and  be  glad,  O  daughter  of  Edom 
Jon.  4.  6  So  Jonah  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd 
Zeph.  3.  14  be  glad  and  rejoice  with  all  the  heart,  O 
Zech  10.    7  yea,  their  children  shall  see . .  and  lie  glad 

6.7*0  leap  much,  be  glad,  ay aXAia.ofj.at  agalliaomai. 
Acts    2.  26  my  heart  rejoice,  and  my  tongue  was  glad 

7.7*o  rejoice,  be  of  good  cheer,  xaiPw  ehairo. 
Marki4.  n  when  they  heard,  .they  were  glad,  and 
Lukeis.  32  It  was  meet  that  we  should,  .be glad  :  for 

22.  5  they  were  glad,  and  covenanted  to  give 

23.  8  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding  glad 
John  8.  56  to  see  my  day ;  and  he  saw.  .and  was  glad 

11.  15  I  am  glad  for  your  sakes  that  I  was  not 
20.  ao  Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they 

Actsn.  23  and  had  seen  the  grace  of  God,  was  glad 
13.  48  the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were  glad 

Rom  16.  19  I  am  glad  therefore  on  your  behalf :  but 

1  C0.16.  17  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  Stephanas  and 

2  Co.  13.    9  For  we  are  glad  when  we  are  weak,  and 


GLAD 


398 


GLORIOUS 


i  Pe.  4. 13  ye  may  lie  glad  also  with  exceeding  joy 
Eev.  19.    7  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  ami  give  hon. 
GLAD,  to  be  exceeding  — 
To  I"1/'  much,  be  glad,  ayaWidofuu  agalliaomai. 

Matt.  5.  12  Rejoice,  ami  be  exceeding  glad;  for  great 
GLAD,  to  make  — 
1.7*o  make  joyful,  n*in  chadah,  3. 

Tsa.  21.    6  thou  hast  made  him  exceeding  glad  with 
2.To  make  joyful  or  glad,  ~3y  samcach,  3. 

Psa.  45.    8  palaces,  whereby  they  have  made  thee  g. 

46.    4  the  streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the 

90.  15  Make  us  glad  according  to  the  days,  .thou 

92.    4  For  thou,  Lord,  hast  made,  me  glad  thro. 

104.  15  wine,  .makethglad  the  heart  of  man, (and) 

Prov  10.    1  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father  :  but  a 

12.  25  it  stoop :  but  a  good  word  maketh  it  glad 

15.  20  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father :  but  a 

27.  11  My  son,  be  wise,  and  make  my  heart  glad 

Jer,  20.  15  is  born  unto  thee,  making  him  very  glad 

Hos.    7.    3  They  make  the  king  glad  with  their  wick. 

3.7*o  make  glad',  cheer,  evtppatvo)  euphraino. 

2  Co.   2.    2  who  is  he  then  that  maketh  me  glad,  but 
GLAD  tidings,  to  bring,  declare,  show  — 
To  tell  good  news,  evayyeKi£o/j.at  euaggelizomai. 

Luke  1   19  am  sent,  .to  show  thee  these  glad  tidings 

8.  1  showing  the  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom 
Acts  13.  32  we  declare  unto  you  glad  tidings,  how 
Rom  10.  15  and  bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things 

GLADLY  — 

1. Gladly,  readily,  jay  fully,  aa^vas  asmenos. 
Acts    2.  41  they  that  [gladly]  received  Ids  word  were 
2i.  17  were  come,  .the  brethren  received  us  gl. 

2. Sweetly,  with  relish,  ySeas  hedeos. 

Mark  6.  20  he  did  many  things,  and  heard  him  gladly 
12.  37  And  the  common  people  heardhim  gladly 

2  Co.11.  19  For  ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye.  .are 
GLADLY,  most  or  very  — 
Most  sioeetly,  ^Sierra  heilista, 

2  Co.  12.   9  Most  gladly  therefore  will  I  rather  glory 
12.  15  I  will  very  gladly  spend  and  be  spent  for 
GLADNESS  — 
Ljoy,  fe'|  gil. 

Joel    1.  16  joy  and  gladness  from  the  house  of  our 

^.Gladness,  nyin  cliedvah. 

1  Ch.16.  27  strength  and  gladness  (are)  in  his  place 

Z.Goodness,  3?u  tub. 

Deut-S.  47  with  gladness  of  heart,  for  the  abundance 

4  Loud  cry,  proclamation,  singing,  np  rinnah. 

rsa.105.  43  brought  forth  his . . chosen  with  gladness 

5  R  .  >icing,  joy,  gladness,  mirth,  nnzy  simcliah. 
Numio.  10  in  the  day  of  your  gladness,  and  in  your 

2  Sa.   6.  12  ark.  .into  the  city  of  David  with  gladness 

1  Ch.29.  22  the  LORD  on  that,  day  with  great  gladness 

2  Ch.29.  3°  they  S:*ng  praises  with  gladness,  and  they 

30.  21  kept  the  feast,  .seven  days  with  great  gl. 

30.  23  and  they  kept,  .seven  days  with  gladness 
Neh.    S.  17  And  there  was  very  great  gladness 

12.  27  to  keep  the  dedication  with  gladness,  both 
Esth.  8.  16  The  Jews  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy 

9.  17,  iS  made  it  a  day  of  feasting  and  gladness 
9.  19  gladness  and  feasting,  and  a  good  day,  and 

Psa.    4.    7  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart,  more 
30.  11  sackcloth,  and  girded  me  with  gladness 
45-  15  With  gladness  and  rejoicing  (shall)  they 
51.    8  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness ;  (that) 
97.  11  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart 
100.    2  Serve  the  LORD  with  gladness :  come  bef. 
106.    5  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy. 
Frov  10.  28  The  hope  of  the  righteous,  .gladness ;  but 
Song  3.  11  in  the  day  of  the  gladness  of  his  heart 
Isa.    16.  10  gladness  is  taken  away,  and  joy  out  of 
22- 13  i°T  andgladness,  slaying  oxen  and  killing 

30.  29  and  gladness  of  heart,  as  when  one  goeth 
35.  10  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and 
Si.    3  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  therein 

Jer.  7.  34  the  voice  of  gladness,  the  voice  of  the  br. 
16.  9  the  voice  of- gladness,  the  voice  of  the  br. 
25. 10  the  voice  of  gladness,  the  voice  of  the  br. 

31.  7  Sing  with  gladness  for  Jacob,  and  shout 
33.  11  the  voice  of  gladness ;  the  voice  of  the  br. 

Zech.  8.  19  be  to  the  house  of  Judah  joy  and  gladness 

Q.Joy,  rejoicing,  gladness,  ytisfy  sason. 

Esth.  8.  17  the  Jews  had  joy  and  gladness,  a  feast 
Psa.  45.    7  with  the  <>il  of  gladneBS  above  thyfellows 
Isa.  51.  11  they  shall  obtain  gladness  and  Joy  :  (and) 

7 f Much  leaping,  gladness,  ayahkiaa-ts  agalliasis. 
Luke  1.  14  thou  shalt  have  joy  and  gladness  ;  and 
Acts  2.  46  cat  .with  gladness  and  singleness  of  h. 
Heb.  1.   9  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows 

%.Ch  er,  gladness,  tixppocrvvn  cuphrosunt7. 

Acts  14.  17  Ailing  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness 

9./oy,  xaP<*  chara. 

Mark  4. 16  immediately  receive  it  with  gladness 
Acts  i2.  i4  she  opened  not  the  gate  for  gladness,  but 
Phil.    2.  29  m  the  Lord  with  all  gladness  ;  and  hold 

GLASS  — 

Isa.     3.    23  The  glasses*  and  the  line  linen,  aud  the 


2. Mirror,  looking  glass,  iaoirrpov  esoptron, 

1  Co.  13.  12  Fur  now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly 
Jas.     1.  23  man  beholding  his  natural  face  in  a  glass 
3. Glass,  anything  transparent,  vaXos  hualos. 
Rev.  2i.  18  and  the  city  (was),  .like  unto  clear  glass 
21.  21  pure  gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass 
GLASS,  of  — 
Made  of  glass,  vo.\tvos  huoUnos. 

Rev.    4.    6  before  the  throne,  .a  sea  of  glass  like 
15.    2  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled 
15.    2  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps 
GLASS,  looking  — 
Vision,  looking  glass,  nip;?  marah. 

Exod38.    8  the  foot  of  it*  (of)brass,  of  the  looking  g. 

GLEAN,  to  — 

1.7*0  gather,  glean,  Bp*p  laqat. 

Ruth  2.    8  Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field,  neither  go 
2.7*o  gather,  glean,  Bjj£  laqat,  3. 

Ruth  2.    2  and  glean  ears  of  corn  after  (him)  in 

2.    3  came,  and  gleaned  in  the  field  after  the 
2.    7  I  pray  you,  let  me  glean  and  gather  after 
2.  15  And  when  she  was  risen  up  to  glean,  B. 
2.  15  Let  her  glean  even  among  the  sheaves 
2.  16  that  she  may  glean .  and  rebuke  her  not 
2.  17  So  she  gleaned  in  the  field  until  even 
2.  17  and  beat  out  that  she  had  gleaned 
2.  18  her  mother  in  law  saw  what  she  had  gle. 
2.  19  Where  hast  thou  glean      to  day?  and 
2.  23  by  the  maidens  of  Boaz  to  glean  unto  the 
3.  To  roll,  glean,  suck,  Vbj;  alal,  Sa. 

Lev.  19.  10  And  thou  shalt  not  glean  thy  vineyard 
Deut24.  21  thou  shalt  not  glean  (H)  afterward  :  it 
J  udg  20.  45  and  they  gleaned  of  them  in  the  highways 
Jer.     6.   9  They  shall  throughly  glean  the  remnant 
GLEANING  — 
Gleaning,  V:$7  leqet. 

Lev.  19.  9  neither  shalt  thou  gather  the  gleanings  of 
23.  22  neither  shalt  thou  gather  any  gleaning  of 

GLEANING  (of  the)  grapes  — 
Gleanings,  W?5$7  oleloth. 

Judg.  8.    2  (Is)  not  the  gleaning  of  the  grapes  of  E. 

Isa.   17.    6  Yet  gleaning  grapes  shall  be  left  in  it 
24. 13  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  the  vintage 

Jer.  49.   9  would  they  not  leave,  .gleaning  grapes? 

Mic.    7.    1 1  am.  .as  the  grape  gleanings  of  the  vin. 
GLEDE  — 
Vulture,  hawk,  glede,  mpr  raah. 

Deut.14. 13  the  glede,  and  the  kite,  and  the  vulture 
GLISTER,  to  — 
To  fash  as  lightning,  e^a(rrpa.Trrw  exastrapto. 

Luke  9.  29  and  his  raiment  (was)  white  (and)  glisfc. 
GLISTERING  — 
Lead  ore,  stibium,  ruby,  7p3  pick. 

1  Ch.  29.    2  and  (stones)  to  be  set,  glistering  stones 
GLITTER  — 
Brightness,  lightning,  p"}3  baraq. 

Eze.  21.  10  it  is  furbished  that  it  may  glitter  :  should 
GLITTERING  — 
1. Brightness,  lightning,  p"i3  baraq. 

Deut  32.  41  If  I  whet  my  glittering  sword,  and  mine 

Job    20.  25  the  glittering  sword  cometh  out  of  his  g. 

Eze.  21.  28  to  consume  because  of  the  glittering 

Nah.    3.    3  the  bright  sword  and  the  glittering  spear 

Hab.    3.  11  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear 

%  Flame,  blade,  nnb  laliab. 

Job    39.  23  the  glittering  spear  and  the  shield 

GLOOMINESS  — 

Thick  darkness,  gloominess,  npsK  aphelah. 

Joel    2.    2  A  day  of  darkness  'and  of  gloominess,  a 
Zeph.  1.  15  a  day  of  darkness  and  gloominess,  a  day 

GLORIFIED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  weighty,  heavy,  honoured,  "133  kabed. 
Isa.  66.   5  Let  the  Lord  be  glorified: 'but  he  shall 

2.7*0  be  or  become  heavy,  honoured,  "133  kabed,  2. 
Lev.  10.  3  before  all  the  people  I  will  be  glorified 
Isa.  26.  15  O  Lord,  .thou  art  glorified  :  thou  hast 
Eze.  28.  22  and  I  will  be  glorified  in  the  midst  of 

39.  13  a  renown,  the  day  that  I  shall  he  glorified 
Hag.    1.    8  and  I  will  be  glorified,  saith  the  Lord 

3. 7*o  beautify  self,  1N9  paar,  7. 

Isa.   49.    3  my  servant,  .in  whom  I  will  be  glorified 

60.  21  work  of  my  hands,  that  I  may  be  glori. 

61.  3  of  the  Lord,  that  he  might  be  glorified 
4.  7*o  be  glorified,  €V5o£a£bnat  endoxazomai. 

2TI1.  1. 10  When  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in 

1.  12  That  the  name,  .may  be  glorified  in  you 
GLORLTIED  together,  to  be  — 
To  glorify  together,  o-i/f5o£a£*>  sundoxazd. 

Rom.  8.  17  that  we  may  be  also  glorified  together 
GLORIFY,  to  — 
1.7*o  honour,  adorn,  TJQ  hadar,  3. 

Dan.    5.  23  and  the  God .  .hast  thou  not  glorified 
2.  T<>  make  heavy,  aire  honour.  *133  kabed,  3. 

Psa.  22.  23  all  ye  the  seed  of  Jacob',  glorify  him  ;  and 
50.  15  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify 
50.  23  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorineth  me  ;  and 


Psa.  86.    9  O  Lord  ;  and  shall  glorify  thy  name 

86.  12  and  I  will  glorify  thy  name  for  evermore 

Isa.   24.  15  Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fir. 
25.    3  Therefore  shall  the  strong  people  glorify 

3.  To  make  Jieavy,  aire  Jumour,  133  kabed,  5. 
Jer.  30.  19  I  will  also  glorify  them,  and  they  shall 

i.  To  beautify,  inq  paar,  3. 

Isa.  55.  5  for  the  Holy  One.  .for  he  hath  glorified 
60.  7  and  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  glory 
60.   9  Holy  One . .  because  he  hath  glorified  thee 

5. To  glorify,  honour,  5o£a(,a>  doxazo. 

Matt.  5.  16  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  hear. 
9.    8  they  marvelled,  and  glorified  God,  which 

15. 31  and  they  glorified  the  God  of  Israel 
Mark  2.  12  all  amazed,  and  glorified  God,  saying 
Luke  2.  20  the  shepherds  returned,  glorifying  and 

4. 15  And  he  taught,  .being  glorified  of  all 
5.  25  departed  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God 
5.  26  they  glorified  God,  and  were  filled  with 
7.  16  they  glorified  God,  saying,  That  a  great 

13. 13  she  was  made  straight,  and  glorified  God 

17.  1 5  turned . .  and  with  a  loud  voice  glorified 

18.  43  and  followed  him,  glorifying  God  :  and 
23.  47  he  glorified  God,  saying,  Certainly  this 

John  7.  39  because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet'glorified 

11.  4  that  the  Son  of  God  might  be  glorified 

12.  16  but  when  Jesus  was  glorified,  then  rem. 
12.  23  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be  glorified 
12.  28  Father,  glorify  thy  name.     Then  came 

12.  28  I  have  both  glorified,  .and  will  glorify  (it 

13.  31  Now  is  the  Son.,  [glorified].  .God  isglon. 

13.  32  If  God  be  glorified.  .God  shall,  .glorify 

13. 32  and  shall  straightway  glorify  him 

14.  13  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the 

15.  8  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear 

16. 14  He  shall  glorify  me  ;  for  he  shall  receive 
17.  1  Father,  the  hour  is  come ;  glorify  thy  Son 
17.    1  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee 

17.    4  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have 

17.  5  O  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own 
17. 10  thine  are  mine ;  and  I  am  glorified  in 
21.  19  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glorify 

Acts    3.  13  God .  .hath  glorified  his  Son  Jesus ;  whom 
4.  21  for  all.  .glorified  God  for  that  which  was 
11. 18  they  held  their  peace,  and  glorified  God 
13.  48  and  glorified  the  word  of  the  Lord :  and 

21.  20  when  they.heard  (it),  they  glorified  the  L. 
Rom.  1.  21  they  glorified  (liim)  not  as  God,  neither 

8.  30  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified 
15.  6  That  ye  may  with . .  onejmouth  glorify  God 
15.    9  that  the  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for 

1  Co.  6.  20  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in 

2  Co.  9.  13  they  glorify  God  for  your  professed  sub. 
Gal.     1.  24  And  they  glorified  God  in  me 

2  Th.  3.  1  and  be  glorified,  even  as  (it  is)  with  you 
Heb.  5.  5  So  also  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be 
1  Pe.   2.  12  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation 

4.  11  that  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified 
4.  14  [evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your  part  he  is  g.] 
4.  16  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  this  behalf 
Rev.  15.   4  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  .aud  glorify  thy 

18.  7  How  much  she  hath  glorified  herself,  and 

GLORIFY  self,  to  —r 

To  beautify  self  "iN'S  paar,  7. 

Isa.  44.  23  for  the  Lord,  .glorified  himself  in  Israel 
GLORIOUS  — 
1. Honourable,  Y^N  addir. 

Isa.   33.  21  But  there  the  glorious  Lord  (will  be) 
2.7*0  become  honourable,  tin  adar,  2. 

Exodis.  11  who  (is)  like  thee,  glorious  in  holiness 
3.7*0  become  light,  tin  or,  2. 

Psa.  76.    4  Thou  (art)  more  glorious  (and)  excellent 
4.7*o  honour,  adorn,  Tin  hadar. 

Isa.   63.    1  Who  (is),  .this  (that  is)  glorious  in  his 
5. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  adornment,  Tin  hadar. 

Psa. it  1,    3  His  work  (is)  honourable  and  glorious 
145.  12  and  the  glorious  majesty  of  his  kingdom 

6. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  lis  hod. 

Isa.   30.  30  the  Lord  shall  cause  his  glorious  voice  to 

7.7*0  be  err  become  heavy,  honoured,  133  kabed,  2. 
Deut.28.  58  that  thou  mayest  fear  this  glorious  and 
Psa.  87.   3  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O 

§. Honour,  heaviness,  wealth,  1133  kabod. 

Neh.  9.  5  and  blessed  be  thy  glorious  name,  which 
Esth.  1.  4  When  he  showed  the  riches  of  his  glorio. 
Psa.  66.    2  Sing  forth,  .make  his  praise  glorious 

72.  iq  And  blessed  (be)  his  glorious  name  for  ev. 
145.  5  I  will  speak  of  the  glorious  honour  of  thy 
145.  12  and  the  glorious  majesty  of  his  kingdom 
Isa.  4.  2  shall  the  branch  of  the  Lord  be . .  glorious 
11.  10  a  root  of  Jesse,  .his  rest  shall  be  glorious 

22.  23  he  shall  be  for  a  glorious  throne  to  his 
Jer.    17.  12  A  glorious  high  throne  from  the  beginni. 

§. Beauty,  desire,  '-*  tsebi. 

Isa.   28.    1  whose  glorious  beauty  (is)  a  fading  flower 
28.   4  And  the  glorious  beauty,  which  (is)  on 

Dan.  11.  16  and  he  shall  stand  in  the  glorious  land 
11.  41  He  shall  enter  also  into  the  glorious  land 
11.  45  between  the  seas  in  the  glorious  holy  m. 

10. Beauty,  glory,  m^rn,  ?rv^Uphereth,  tipharah. 
1  ill.  :■  1.  1  j  we  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy  glorious  n. 
Isa.  65.  12  right  hand  of  Moses  with  his  glorious  arm 
63.  14  so  didst  thou,  .to  make  thyself  a  gloiiou 


GLORIOUS 


399 


GLORY 


XI.  Glorious,  of  glory,  ttJs  Sufijs  tts  doxes. 

Roni.  8.  21  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children 
2  Co.   4.    4  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  C. 
Phil.    3.  21  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body 
CoL      1.  11  according  to  his  glorious  power,  unto  all 
1  Ti.    1.  11  According  to  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
Titus  2.  13  Looking  for.  .the  glorious  appeariug  of 

12. Through  glory,  Sta  8u£t}s  dia  doxes. 

1  Co.  3. 11  if  that  which  is  done  away  (was)  glorious 
13. In  glory,  iv  86%$  en  doxe. 

a  Co.  3.  7  if  the  ministration  of  death,  .was  glorious 
3.  S  the  ministration  of  the  spirit  be  rather  g.  ? 
3.  11  much  more  that  which  remaineth  (is)  gl. 

li.Glorious,  in  glory,  ej/5o|os  cndoxos.     - 

Lukei3.  17  rejoiced  for  all  the  glorious  things  that 
Eph.  5.  27  That  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  gl. 

GLORIOUS,  to  be  — 

To  be  or  become  heavy,  honoured,  "03  kdbed,  2. 

2  Sa.  6.  20  How  glorious  was  the  king  of  Israel  to. 
Isa.  49.    5  yet  shall  I  be  glorious  hi  the  eyes  of  the 

GLORIOUS,  all  — 

Heaviness,  honour,  rHU3  kebuddah. 

Psa.  45.  13  The  king's  daughter  (is)  all  glorious  with. 
GLORIOUS,  to  become  — 
To  become  honourable,  adorned,  TIN  adar,  2. 

Exod.15.  6  Thy  right  hand,  .is  become  glorious  in 
GLORIOUS,  to  be  made  — 
I. To  be  heavy,  honoured,  123  kdbed. 

Eze.  27.  25  made  very  glorious  in  the  midst  of  the 
2.  To  be  glorified,  5o|a£bju.at  doxazomai. 

2  Co.  3. 10  For  even  that  which  was  made  glorious 
GLORIOUS,  to  make  — 
To  make  heavy,  give  honour,  153  kabed,  3. 

Isa.  60. 13  I  will  make  the  place  of  my  feet  glorious 
GLORIOUS  things  — 
To  become  heavy,  honoured,  133  kabed,  2. 

Psa.  87.   3  Glorious  tilings  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city 

GLORIOUSLY  — 

l.To  rise,  triumph,  nxa  gaah. 

Exod.15.    1,  21  for  he*  hath  triumphed  gloriously 
2. Heaviness,  honour,  T03  kabod. 

Isa.  24.  23  shall  reign .  .before  his  ancients  gloriously 
GLORY  — 
\. Adornment,  1173  x  addereth. 

Zech.11.    3  for  their  glory  is  spoiled  :  a  voice  of  tli 
2. Honour,  adornment,  "nr?  hadar. 

Deut33.  17  His  glory  (is  like)  the  firstling  of  his  bul. 

Psa.  90.  16  and  thy  glory  unto  their  children 

Isa.     2.  10, 19.  21  and  for  the  glory  of  his  majesty 
5. 14  their  glory,  and  their  multitude,  and 

Mic.   2.   9  have  ye  taken  away  ray  glory  for  ever 
3. Honour,  o.dornment,  T\n  heder. 

Dan.  11.  20  a  raiser  of  taxes  (hi)  the  glory  of  the 
4. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  lin  Iwd. 

1  Ch.16.  27  Glory  and  honour  (are)in  his  presence 

Job  39.  20  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  (is)  terrible 

40. 10  and  array  thyself  with  glory  and  beauty 

Psa.     8.    1  who  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens 
45-    3  thy  sword,  .with  thy  glory  and  thy  maj. 
148. 13  his  glory  (is)  above  the  earth  and  heaven 

Jer.  22.  18  shall  not  lament  for  him .  .Ah  his  glory  ! 

Hab.  3.   3  His  glory  covered  the  heavens,  and  the 

Zech.  6.  13  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and 
5.  Cleanness,  purity,  irna  tohar. 

Psa.  89.  44  Thou  hast  made  his  glory  to  cease,  and 
G.Preciousness,  rarity,  "if^  yeqar. 

Dan.   2.  37  a  kingdom,  power,  and  strength,  and  gl. 

4.  36  for  the  glory  of  my  kingdom,  mine  hono. 

5.  18  a  kingdom,  and  majesty,  and  glory,  and 

5.  20  was  deposed,  .and  they  took  his  glory 

7. 14  there  was  given  him  dominion,  and  glory 

7.  Weight,  heaviness,  Jwnour,  1133  kabod. 

Gen.  31.    1  of.  .our  fathers  hath  he  gotten  all  tliis  g. 

45-  13  ye  shall  tell  my  father  of  all  ray  glory 
Exodi6.    7  then  ye  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord 

16. 10  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  the 

24. 16  the  glory  of  the  Lord  abode  upon  mount 

24. 17  And  the  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 

28.  2  holy  garments .  .for  glory  and  for  beauty 
28.40  and  bonnets,  .for  glory  and  for  beauty 

29.  43  and.  .shall  be  sanctified  by  ray  glory 

33. 18  said,  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory 
33. 22  it  shall  come  to  pass,  while  my  glory 
40-  34.  35  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  tab. 

Lev.    9.   6  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  appear  unto 
9.  23  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  all 
Num.14. 10  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  the 
14.  21  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory 
14.  22  all  those  men  which  have  seen  my  glory 
16. 19,  42  and.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared 
20.   6  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto 
Deut.  5.  24  Lord  our  God  hath  showed  us  his  glory 
Josh.  7.  19  give,  I  pray  thee,  glory  to  the  Lord  God 
1  Sa.  2.    8  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory 
4.  21,  22  The  glory  is  departed  from  Israel 

6.  5  ye  shall  give  glory  unto  the  God  of  Israel 
1  Ki.  8.  11  for  the  glory  of  the  Loud  had  filled  the 

1  Ch.16.  24  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen 
16. 28  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 


96. 

96. 

96. 

97' 
102. 
102, 
104, 
106, 
108, 


145, 

„      149' 

Prov.  3. 


Isa. 


1  Ch.16.  29  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  (due)  unto 

2  Ch.  5.  14  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the 

7.    1  and  the  glory  of  the  LoitD  filled  the  house 
7.    2  because  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled 

7.  3  the  glory  of  the  Lord  upon  the  house 
Esth.  5.  11  Haraan  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches 
Job   19.    9  He  hath  stripped  me  of  my  glory,  and 

29.  20  My  glory  (was)  fresh  in  me,  and  my  bow 
Psa.     3.    3  my  glory,  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  head 
4.    2  how  long  (will  ye  turn)  my  glory  into 

8.  5  hast  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honour 
16.    9  my  glory  rejoiceth  :  my  flesh  also  shall 
ig.    1  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God 
21.    5  His  glory  (is)  great  in  thy  salvation  :  hon. 

7, 9  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in 
8,  10  Who  (is)  this  King  of  glory  ?  The  Lo. 

10  The  Lord  of  hosts,  he  (is)  the  King  of  g. 

1  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 

2  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto 

3  the  God  of  glory  thundereth  :  the  Lord 
9  his  temple  doth  every  one  speak  of.  .glo. 

12  To  the  end  that,  .glory  may  sing  praise 

16  when  the  glory  of  his  house  is  increased 

17  For.  .his  glory  shall  not  descend  after 
5,  11  (let)  thy  glory  (be)  above  all  the  earth 

8  Awake  up,  my  glory  ;  awake,  psaltery 
7  In  God  (is)  my  salvation  and  ray  glory 
2  To  see  thy  power  and  thy  glory,  so  (as) 

19  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  (with)  his  g. 
24  Thou  shalt.  .afterward  receive  me  (to)  g. 

9  Help  us.  .for  the  glory  of  thy  name  ;  and 

11  For.  .the  Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory 
9  salvation  (is)  nigh . .  that  glory  may  dwell 

.   3  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen,  his 

7  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 

8  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  (due  unto) 

6  and  all  the  people  see  his  glory 

15  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  thy  glory 

16  the  Lord,  .shall  appear  in  his  glory 
31  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  e. 

20  Thus  they  changed  their  glory  into  the 
i  I  will,  .give  praise,  even  with  my  glory 
5  and  thy  glory  above  all  the  earth 

4  The  Lord  (is)  high,  .his  glory  above  the 

1  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy 

5  they  shall  sing . .  for  great  (is)  the  glory 

11  They  shall  speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  kin. 
5  Let  the  saints  be  joyful  in  glory  :  let 

35  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory :  but  shame 

2  (It  is)  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing 
27  to  search  their  own  glory  (is  not)  glory 

8  to  provoke  the  eyes  of  his  glory 

5  for  upon  all  the  glory  (shall  be)  a  defence 

3  Holy,  .the  whole  earth  (is)  full  of  his  glo. 

7  the  king  of  Assyria,  and  all  his  glory 
3  and  where  will  ye  leave  your  glory? 

16  under  his  glory  he  shall  kindle  a  burning 

18  And  shall  consume  the  glory  of  his  forest 
18  all  of  them,  lie  in  glory,  every  one  in  his 

14  and  the  glory  of  Moab  shall  be  contemned 

3  they  shall  be  as  the  glory  of  the  children 

4  the  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  made  thin 
16  and  all  the  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fail 

18  the  chariots  of  thy  glory,  .the  shame  of 

24  they  shall  hang  upon  him  all  the  glory  of 
2  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto 
2  they  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  (and) 

5  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed 

8  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another 

12  Let  them  give  glory  unto  the  Lord,  and 

7  for  I  have  created  him  for  my  glory 
11  I  will  not  give  my  glory  unto  another 

8  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rerew. 

19  and  his  glory  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 

1  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee 

2  and  his  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee 

13  The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come  unto 

6  in  their  glory  shall  ye  boast  yourselves 

2  and  all  kings  thy  glory  :  and  thou  shalt 

1 1  be  delighted  with  the  abundance  of  her  g. 

12  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing  s. 

18  and  they  shall  come,  and  see  my  glory 

19  nor  heard,  .neither  have  seen  my  glory 
19  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the  G. 

11  ray  people  have  changed  their  glory  for 
16  Give  glory  to  the  Lord  your  God,  before 

21  do  not  disgrace  the  throne  of  thy  glory 
18  come  down  from,  .glory,  and  sit  in  thirst 

25  of  the  likeness  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 

12  Blessed  (be)  the  glory  of  the  Lord  from 
23  behold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  stood  there 
23  as  the  glory  winch  I  saw  by  the  river  of 

4  behold,  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel 

3  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  gone 

4  Then  the  glory  of  the  Lord  went  up  from 
4  full  of  the  brightness  of  the  Lord's  glory 

18  Then  the  glory  of  the  Lord  departed 

19  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  over 

22  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  over 

23  the  glory  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the 
iS  To  whom  art  thou  thus  like  in  glory 
21 1  will  set  my  glory  among  the  heathen 

2  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  came  from 
2  and  the  earth  shined  with  his  glory 

4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  house 

5  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house 

4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  of 
39  whom  he  shall,  .increase  with  glory 

7  will  I  change  their  glory  into  shame 
11  Ephraim,  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a 

5  for  the  glory  thereof,  because  it  is  depar. 

15  he  shall  come  unto  Adullam  the  glory  of 


35- 
35- 
40. 
42. 
42. 

43- 

48. 

58. 

59- 

60. 

60. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

66. 

66. 

66. 

66. 

66. 
2. 

13- 

14. 

48. 
1. 
3- 
3- 
3- 


11, 
31- 
39- 
43- 
43- 
43* 
43- 
44. 

Dan.  11. 

Hos.   4. 

9- 

10. 

Mic.    1. 


Xah.   2.    9  none  end  of.. glory  out  of  all  the  pleasant 

Hab.    2.  14  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
2.  16  Thou  art  tilled  with  shame  for  glory 
2. 16  shameful  spewing  (shall  be)  on  thy  glory 

Hag.  2.  3  Who.  .that  saw  this  house  in  her  first  gl.? 
2.  7  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith 
2.    9  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be 

Zech.  2.    5  For  I.  .will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of 
2.    8  After  the  glory  hath  he  sent  me  unto  the 

Mai.    2.    2  to  give  glory  unto  my  name,  saith  the  Lo. 
8. Beauty,  desire,  -3.S  tsebi. 

Isa.    13.  19  Babylon,  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  the  hea. 

23.  9  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory,  .to  bring 

24.  16  have  we  heard  songs,  .glory  to  the  right. 

28.  5  Lord  of  hosts  be  for  a  crown  of  glory 
Eze.  20.    6,  1 5  a  land . .  which  (is)  the  glory  of  all  lands 

25.  9  on  his  frontiers,  the  glory  of  the  country 

26.  20  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living 

9. Beauty,  glory,  TT^SJ?,  n-ixr?  tiphereth,  Upharah. 
1  Ch.22.    5  of  fame  and  of  glory  throughout  allcoun. 

29.  11  the  power,  and  the  glory,  and  the  victory 
Psa.  78.61  delivered.,  his  glory  into  the  enemy's  hand 

89.  17  For  thou  (art)  the  glory  of  their  strength 
Prov.  4.    q  a  crown  of  glory  shall  she  deliver  to  thee 

16.  31  The  hoary  head  (is)  a  crown  of  glory,  (if)  it 

17.  6  and  the  glory  of  children  (are)  their  fath. 

19.  11  and  (it  is)  his  glory  to  pass  over  a  trans. 

20.  29  The  glory  of  young  men  (is)  their  strength 
".  12  When  righteous,  .do  rejoice,  .great  glory 

.  12  I  will  punish . .  the  glory  of  his  high  looks 
20.    5  they  shall  be  afraid . .  of  Egypt  their  glory 
46.  13  place  salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel  my  glory 
60.    7  and  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  glory 
60.  19  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory 

62.  3  Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in  the 

63.  15  habitation  of  thy  holiness  and  of  thy  glo. 
13.  11  a  name,  and  for  a  praise,  and  for  a  glory 
13.  18  come  down,  .the  crown  of  your  glory 
24.  25  the  joy  of  their  glory,  the  desire  of  their 

7  glory  of  the  house  of  David  and  the  glory 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Eze.  : 
Zech  ] 


lO.yl  matter  of  honour,  1133  T3"i  debar  kabod. 

Psa.  79.    9  for  the  glory  of  thy  name  :  and  deliver  us 
11.  Glory,  §6£adoxa. 

Matt.  4.    8  the  kingdoms,  .and  the  glory  of  them 
6.  13  [and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever] 

6.  29  That  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was 

16.  27  the  Sou  of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of 
19.  28  the  Son.  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of  his  gl. 

24.  30  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  g. 

25.  31  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory 
25.  31  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory 

Mark  8.  38  when  he  coraeth  in  the  glory  of  his  F. 

10.  37  the  other  on  thy  left  hand,  in  thy  glory 
13.  26  in  the  clouds  with  great  power  and  glory 

Lake  2.  9  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about 
3. 14  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth 
a.  32  and  the  glory  of  thy  people  Israel 

4.  6  will  I  give  thee,  and  the  glory  of  them 

9.  26  when  he  shall  come  in  his  own  glory,  and 
9.  31  Who  appeared  in  glor>,and  spake  of  his 
9.  32  they  saw  his  glory,  and  the  two  men  that 
12.  27  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed 

17.  18  that  returned  to  give  glory  to  God,  save 
19.  38  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 

21.  27  in  a  cloud,  with  power  and  great  glory 
24.  26  Ought  not  Christ,  .to  enter  into  his  glory  ? 

John   1.  14  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the 
2.  11  and  manifested  forth  his  glory  ;  and  his 

7.  18  speaketh  of  himself  seeketh  his  own  glory 
7.  18  but  he  that  seeketh  his  glory  that  sent 

5.  50  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory  :  there  is  one 

11.  4  but  for  the  glory  of  God,  that  the  Son  of 

11.  40  that.. thou shouldest  see  the  glory  of  G.  ? 

12.  41  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of  him 
17.   5  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee 
17.  22  the  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have 
17.  24  that  they  may  behold  my  glory,  which 

Acts    7.    2  The  God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our  fat. 

7.  55  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing 
12.  23  smote,  .because  hegave  not  God  the  glory 

22.  11  And  when  I  could  not  see  for  the  glory 
Rom.  1.  23  changed  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible 

2.    7  seek  for  glory  and  honour  and  immorta. 

2.  10  But  glory,  honour,  and  peace,  to  every 

3.  7  abounded  through  ray  lie  unto  his  glory 

3.  23  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  g. 

4.  20  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God 

5.  2  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God 

6.  4  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of 

8.  18  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed 

9.  4  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the 

9.  23  he  might  make  known  the  riches  of  his  g. 
9.  23  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto  glory 
n.  36  all  things  :  to  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever 

15.  7  as  Christ  also  received  us,  to  the  glory  of 

16.  27  To  God  only  wise,  (be)  glory  through  J.  C. 

1  Co.  2.    7  hidden.,  wliich  God  ordained,  .unto  our  g. 

2.  8  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory 

10.  31  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 

11.  7  as  he  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God 
11.    7  but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  man 
11.  15  it  is  a  glory  to  her:  for.. hair  is  given  her 
15.  40  but  the  glory  of  the  celestial  (is)  one,  and 
15.  41  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another  glory 
15.  41  and  another  glory  of  the  stars,  .in  glory 
15.  43  sown  in  dishonour ;  it  is  raised  in  glory 

2  Co.    i.  20  in  him  Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by 

3.  7  behold,  .for  the  glory  of  his  countenance 
3.   9  ministration  of  condemnation  (be)  glory 


=  Co.  3. 
3- 
3- 
3' 


Gal.    1. 
Eph.    1 


Phil. 


2Th. 

1. 

2. 

1  Ti. 

1. 

s- 

2  Ti. 

2. 

4- 

Heb. 

1. 

2. 

2. 

2 

3- 

9- 

JS 

Jas. 

2. 

iPe 

1 

■  Pe. 


Jude 
Ilev. 


GLORY 

9  ministration  of  righteousness  exceeding. 

10  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth 
iS  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the 

18  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory 
6  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  G. 

15  grace  might .  .redound  to  the  glory  of  God 
17  worketh  for  us . .  eternal  weight  of  glory 

19  administered  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the 

23  messengers  of  the  churches.,  the  glory  of 

5  To  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  A. 

6  To  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace 

12  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  his  glory 
14  is  the  earnest,  .unto  the  praise  of  his  g. 

17  That  the  God.  .the  Father  of  glory,  may 

18  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inner. 

13  my  tribulations  for  you,  which  is  your  g. 

16  grant . .  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory 
21  Unto  him  (be)  glory  in  the  church  by  C. 

11  filled,  .unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God 

11  confess,  .to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father 

19  Whose,  .glory  (is)  in  their  shame,  who 

19  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ 

20  Now  unto  God  and  our  Father  (be)  glory 
27  make  known  what  (is)  the  riches  01  the  g. 
27  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory 

4  shall  ye  also  appear  with  him  in  glory 

6  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory,  neither  of 

12  who  hath  called  you  unto  his.  -glory 

20  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy 

9  destruction,  .from  the  glory  of  his  power 

14  to  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord 

17  (be)  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever 

16  believed,  .in  the  world,  received,  .into  gl. 
10  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  gl. 
iS  to  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  A. 

3  Who  being  the  brightness  of  (his)  glory 

7  thou  crownedst  him  with  glory  and  hon. 
9  Jesus,  .crowned  with  glory  and  honour 

10  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,  to  make 

3  this,  .was  counted  worthy  of  more  glory 

5  over  it  the  cherubim  of  glory  shadowing 

21  to  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  A. 
1  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (the  Lord)  of  g. 
7  might  be  found  imto  praise . .  and  glory 

1 1  testified  before  hand . .  the  glory  that 
21  that  raised  him  up.  .and  gave  him  glory 

24  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of 

13  that,  when  his  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye 

14  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth 
1  a  partaker  of  the  glory  that  shall  be 

4  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fa. 

10  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory 

11  To  him  (be)  [glory  and]  dominion  for  ever 
3  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  vir. 

17  he  received  from  God.  .honour  and  glory 
17  a  voice  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory 
iS  To  him  (be)  glory  both  now  and  for  ever 

24  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory 

25  glory  and  majesty,  dominion  and  power 

6  to  him  (be)  glory  and  dominion  for  ever 
9  when  those  beasts  give  glory  and  honour 

11  to  receive  glory  and  honour  and  power 

12  to  receive,  .honour,  and  glory,  and  bless. 

13  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  po. 

12  Blessing,  and  glory,  and  wisdom,  and  th. 

13  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven 

7  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him  ;  for  the 

8  filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God 

9  and  they  repented  not  to  give  him  glory 
1  and  the  earth  was  lightened  with  his  gl. 
1  Salvation,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and 

__.  11  Having  the  glory  of  God  :  and  her  light 
21.  23  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and 
21.  24  and  the  kings,  .do  bring  their  glory  and 
21.  26  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and  honour 

12.Celebrity,  k\€os  kleos. 

1  Pe.    2.  20  For  what  glory .  .if,  when  ye  be  buffeted 

GLORY,  desirous  of  vain  — 
Vain  glorious,  fall  of  empty  glory,  kzv6Zo£os. 
Gal.     5.  26  Let  us  not  be  desirous  of  vain  glory 

GLORY,  full  of  — 

To  be  glorified,  8o£d{o/j.aL  doxazomai. 

1  Pe.    1.    8  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  g. 

GLORY,  to  have  — 

To  be  glorified,  8o|a(,o/xai  doxazomai. 

Matt.  6.    2  hypocrites,  .that  they  may  have  glory  of 

2  Co.   3.  10  had  no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of 

GLORY,  to  -  - 

1.  To  boast  self  bhrj  haled,  7. 

1  Ch.16.  10  Glory  ye  in  his  holy  name  :  let  the  heart 
Psa.  63.  11  every  one  that  sweareth  by  him  shall  gl. 
64.  10  and  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  glory 

105.  3  Glory  ye  in  his  holy  name  :  let  the  heart 

106.  5  that  I  may  glory  with  thine  inheritance 
Isa.   41.  16  shalt  glory  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 

45.  25  seed  of  Israel  be  justified,  and  shall  glory 
4.   2  and  the  nations,  .in  him  shall  they  glory 
9.  23  Let  not  the  wise,  .glory  in  his  wisdom 
9.  23  neither  let  the  mighty . .  glory  in  his  might 
9.  23  let  not  the  rich . .  glory  in  his  riches 
9.  24  But  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this 

49.    4  Wherefore  gloriest  thou  in  the  valleys 

2.  To  become  heavy,  honoured,  133  kdbedy  2. 

2  Ki.  14. 10  glory . .  and  tarry  at  home ;  for  why  sho. 

3.  To  beautify  self,  "ixp  paar,  7. 

Exod.  8.   9  Moses  said  unto  Pharaoh,  Glory  over  me 


Jer. 


400 

4.  To  praise  self,  roy  shabach,  7. 

1  Ch.  16.  35  we  may  give  thanks,  .(and)  glory  in  thy 

5.  Toboast  against,  KaTaKavxaop-atkatakauchaomai. 

Jas.     3.  14  glory  not,  and  lie  not  against  the  truth 
6. To  boast,  Kavx^ofxat  kauchaomai. 

Rom.  5.    3  And  not  only  (so),  but  we  glory  in  tribu. 

1  Co.  1.  29  That  noflesh  should  gloryin  his  presence 

r.  31  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the 

3.  21  Therefore  let  no  man  glory  in  men.  For 

4.  7  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not 

2  Co.    5.  12  them  which  glory  in  appearance,  and  not 

10.  17  he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord 

11.  12  wherein  they  glory  they  may  be  found 
11.  18  Seeing  that  many  glory.  .1  will  glory  also 

11.  30  If  I  must  needs  glory,  I  will  glory  of  the 

12.  1  not  expedient  for  me  doubtless  to  glory 
12.  5  will  I  glory :  yet  of  myself  I  will  not  gl. 
12.  6  though  I  would  desire  to  glory,  I  shall 
12.  9  Most  gladly  therefore  will  I  rather  glory 

Gal.     6.  13  that  they  may  glory  in  your  flesh 

6.  14  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in 
2  Th.  1.    4  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  churches 
7.  Boasting,  Kavx^gj-a  kauchema. 

Rom.  4.  2  he  hath,  .to  glory;  but  not  before  God 
2  Co.  5.  12  give  you  occasion  to  glory  on  our  behalf 

GLORY  of,  to  have  nothing  to  — 

Not  a  matter  of  boasting,  ov  Kavxv^0- ou  kauchema. 

1  Co.  9.  16  I  have  nothing  to  glory  of:  for  necessity 
GLORY,  whereof  I  may  — 
Boasting,  {the  act),  Kai>x'r1(ris   kaucliesis. 

Rom.  15.  17  I  have  therefore  whereof  I  may  glory 
GLORYING  — 
1 .  Boasting,  (the  subject  matter),  Kaiixvpa  kauchema. 

1  Co.  5.    6  Your  glorying  (is)  not  good.  Know  ye  not 

9.  15  any  man  should  make  my  glorying  void 

%Boasting,  (the  act),  Kavxr}ats  kauchesis. 

2  Co.  7.  4  great  (is)  my  glorying  of  you :  I  am  filled 
GLORYING,  in  — 

To      ast,  Kavx^o/xat  kauchaomai, 

2  C0.12. 11 1  am  become  a  fool  [in  glorying] ;  ye  have 
GLUTTON  — 
To  be  gluttono\ts,  vile,  lightly  esteemed,  hh]  zalal. 

Deut2i.  20  This  our  son  (is).. a  glutton,  and  a  drunk. 

Prov.23.  21  For  the  drunkard  and  the  glutton  shall 

GLUTTONOUS  — 

An  eater,  (pdyos  phagos. 

Matt  11.  19  Behold  a  man  gluttonous,  and  a  wine  hi. 

Luke  7.  34  Behold  a  gluttonous  man,  and  a  wine  bi. 

GNASH,  to  — 

l.To  gnash,  pin  charaq. 

Job   16.   9  gnasheth  upon  me  with  his  teeth;  mine 

Psa.  35.  16  they  gnashed  upon  me  with  their  teeth 

37. 12  The  wicked,  .gnasheth  upon  him  with  his 

112.  10  he  shall  gnash  with  his  teeth,  and  melt 

Lam.  2.  16  they  hiss  and  gnash  the  teeth  :  they  say 

l.To  bite,  gnash,  £puxw  brucho. 

Acts   7.  54  and  they  gnashed  on  him  with  (their)  te. 

GNASH  with,  to  — 

To  creak,  gnash,  rpi£w  trizo. 

Mark  9.  18  he  foameth,  and  gnasheth  with  his  teeth 

GNASHING  — 

A  biting,  gnashing,  fipvyjxos  brvgmos. 

Matt.  8.  12  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
13.  42,  50  there  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing 
22.  13  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 

24.  51  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 

25.  30  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
Lukei3.  28  There  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 

GNAT  — 

Gnat,  mosquito,  ku>vu>$  konops. 

Matt  23.  24  blind  guides,  which  strain  at  a  gnat,  and 
GNAW,  to  — 
To  chew,  knaw,  fxaaadopai  massaomai. 

Rev.  16.  10  and  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain 
GNAW  the  bone,  to  — 
To  gnaw  a  bone,  cna  garam. 

Zeph.  3.    3  they  gnaw  not  the  bones  till  the  morrow 

GO  — 

l.To  step,  ijft  tsaad. 

2  Sa.    6.  13  when  they  that  bare  the  ark .  .had  gone 
Prov  30.  29  There  be  three  (things)  which  go  well,  yea 

2. Procession,  going,  npi1?™  tahalukah. 

Neh.   12.  31  went  on  the  right  hand  upon  the  wall 
GO,  to  — 
l.To  go  away  or  about,  ^va  azal. 

Ezra   4.  23  they  went  up  in  haste  to  Jerusalem  unto 

5.  8  we  went  into  the  province  of  Judea,  to 
5. 15  Take  these  vessels,  go,  carry  them  into 

Dan.   2.  17  Then  Daniel  went  to  his  house,  and  made 
2.  24  he  went  and  said  thus  unto  him  ;  Destroy 

6.  18  Then  the  king  went  to  his  palace,  and 
6.  19  and  went  in  haste  unto  the  den  of  lions 

2.To  travel,  rnx  orach. 

Job     34.    8  Which  goeth  in  company  with  the  work. 

Z.To  go  straight  or  right,  x*x  ashar. 

Prov.  9.   6  and  go  in  the  way  of  understanding 


GO 


4.  To  declare  happy,  go  straight  or  right,  is5 n  ashar,  3. 

Prov.  4.  14  Enter  not.  .and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil 

5.  To  go  in,  Ni3  bo. 

Gen.  10.  19  as  thougoest,  unto  Sodom,  and  Gomorrah 
io.;"3o  as  thougoest,  unto  Sephar,  amount  of  the 
15.  15  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace 
25.  18  they  dwelt,  as  thougoest  toward  Assyria 
31.  18  to  go  to  Isaac  his  father  in  the  land  of  C. 
31.  33  Laban  went  into  Jacob's  tent,  and  into 
37.  30  The  child  (is)  not.  .whither  shall  I  go? 

39.  11  went  into  the  house  to  do  his  business 
Exod.  7.  23  Pharaoh  turned  and  went  into  his  house 

8.  1  Go  unto  Pharaoh,  and  say  unto  him,  Thus 
8.  1  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
14.  16  and  the  children  of  Israel  shall  go  on  dry 

14.  22  the  children  of  Israel  went  into  the  midst 

15.  19  For  the  horse  of  Pharaoh  went  in  with 
18.  23  all  this  people  shall  also  go  to  their  place 

24.  18  Moses  went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud 

30.  20  When  they  go  into  the  tabernacle  of  the 
34.  12  of  the  land  whither  thou  goest,  lest  it  be 

40.  32  When  they  went  into  the  tent  of  the  c. 
Lev.    9.  23  Moses  and  Aaron  went  into  the  taberaa. 

10.  9  Do  not  drink  wine,  .when  ye  go  into  the 
14.  36  before  the  priest  go.  .to  see  the  plague 
14.  46  Moreover  he  that  goeth  into  the  house 

16.  23  garments  which  he  put  on  when  he  went 
Num.  5.  22  And  this  water,  .shall  go  into  thy  bowels 

8.  22  after  that  went  the  Levites  in  to  do  their 
14.  24  bring  into  the  land  whereunto  he  went 

17.  8  Moses  went  into  the  tabernacle  of  witn. 
20.    6  Moses  and  Aaron  went  from  the  presence 

22.  14  they  went  unto  Balak,  and  said,  Balaam 

25.  8  he  went  after  the  man  of  Israel  into  the 

31.  21  the  men  of  war  which  went  to  the  battle 

32.  6  Shall  your  brethren  go  to  war,  and  shall 
32.  9  that  they  should  not  go  into  the  land 

Deut.  1.    7  and  go  to  the  mount  of  the  Amorites 

4.    5  do  so  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  poss. 
4.  34  Or  hath  God  assayed  to  go  (and)  take  him 
7.    1  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

9.  5  dost  thou  go  to  possess  their  land;  but 

11.  29  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

12.  26  and  go  unto  the  place  which  the  Lord 
12.  29  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  them,  and 

19.  5  As  when  a  man  goeth  into  the  wood  with 

23.  20  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

24.  10  thou  shalt  not  go  into  his  house  to  fetch 

26.  3  thou  shalt  go  unto  the  priest  that  shall 

28.  21,  63  the  laud  whither  thou  goest  to  possess 
30.  16  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

30.  18  passest  over  Jordan  to  go  to  possess  it 

31.  7  for  thou  must  go  with  this  people  unto 

31.  16  the  land  whither  they  go  (to  be)  among 

32.  52-thou  shalt  not  go  thither  unto  the  land 
Josh.  6.  22  Go  into  the  harlot's  house,  and  bring  out 

18.  3  How  long  (are)  ye  slack  to  go  to  possess 
Judg.  4.  21  went  softly  unto  him,  and  smote  the  nail 

9.    5  he  went  unto  his  father's  house  at  Ophr. 

9.  27  went  into  the  house  of  their  god,  and  did 
18.  10  When  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  unto  a  people 
18. 18  these  went  into  Micah's  house,  and  fetch. 
18.  20  and  went  in  the  midst  of  the  people 

Ruth.  2.  18  she  took  (it)  up,  and  went  into  the  city 
3.   7  he  went  to  lie  down  at  the  end  of  the 
3.  15  laid  (it)  on  her :  and  she  went  into  the 
3.  17  Go  not  empty  unto  thy  mother  in  law 

1  Sa.  17.  12  the  man  went  among  men  (for)  an  old 
21. 10  arose,  .and  went  to  Achish  the  king  of  G. 

25.  5  Get  you  up  to  Carmel,  and  go  to  Nabal 

27.  8  as  thou  goest  toShur,  even  unto  the  land 

29.  8  that  I  may  not  go  fight  against  the  enemi. 

2  Sa.  1 1 .  1 1  shall  I  then  go  into  mine  house,  to  eat  and 
18.   9  the  mule  went  under  the  thick  boughs  01 

20.  3  and  fed  them,  but  went  not  in  unto  them 
20.    8  at  the  great  stoue. .  Amasa  went  before 
20. 14  he  went  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 
20.  14  they  were  gathered  together,  and  went 
20.  22  Then  the  woman  went  unto  all  the  people 

1  Ki.  2.  19  Bath-sheba  therefore  went  unto  king  Sol. 
14.  3  take  with  thee  ten  loaves . .  and  go  to  him 
14.  28  when  the  king  went  into  the  house  of  the 

16.  18  he  went  into  the  palace  of  the  king's  ho. 

17.  13  Fear  not ;  go.  .do  as  thou  hast  said  :  but 
20.  33  Then  he  said,  Go  ye,  bring  him.  Then  B. 
22.  25  when  thou  shalt  go  into  an  inner  chamber 

22.  30  disguised  himself,  and  went  into  the  bat. 

2  Ki.  5.  5  go,  and  I  will  send  a  letter  unto  the  king 
5. 18  when  my  master  goeth  into  the  house  of 
7.  5  to  go  unto  the  camp  of  the  Syrians 
7.  8  they  went  into  one  tent,  and  did  eat  and 
7.  9  that  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king's  house. 
9.    6  And  he  arose,  and  went  into  the  house 

10.  23  Jehu  went,  and  Jehonadab  the  son  of  R. 

11.  16  she  went  by  the  way  by  the  which  the 
11.  18  all  the  people  of  the  land  went  into  the 

18.  21  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it 

19.  1  and  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
2  Ch.  8.  18  they  went  with  the  servants  of  Solomon 

14.  ii  in  thv  name  we  go  against  this  multitude 
18.  24  when  thou  shalt  go  into  an  inner  chamb. 
iS.  29  I  will  disguise  myself,  and  will  go  to  the 

23.  17  all  the  people  went  to  the  house  of  Baal 
25.    7  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with  thee 

25.  8  But  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  (it),  be  strong  for 

26.  16  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn 
29.  16  the  priests  went  into  the  inner  part  of  the 

Ezra  o.  11  The  land,  unto  which  ye  go  to  possess  it 
Neh.  6.  11  would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his  life? 
Esth.  2.  13  to  go  with  her  out  of  the  house  of  the 
2. 14  In  the  evening  she  went,  and  on  the  mor. 


GO 


401 


GO 


Isa. 


Jer. 


3°- 
36. 

37- 

41. 

4- 

4- 


Eze. 


Hos. 


Job   37.    8  Then  the  beasts  go  into  dens,  and  remain 
Psa.  43.4  Then  will  I  go  unto  the  altar  of  God 

49. 19  He  shall  go  to  the  generation  of  his  lath. 
66.  12  we  went  through  fire  and  through  water 
66.  13  I  will  go  into  thy  house  with  burnt  offer. 
71.  16  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God 
73.  17  Until  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God 
1 18.  19  I  will  go  into  them . .  I  will  praise  the  L. 
132.  7  We  mil  go  into  his  tabernacles;  we  will 
Prov.  7.  22  as  an  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter,  or  as  a  f. 

22.  24  and  with  a  furious  man  thoushalt  not  go 

23.  30  they  that  go  to  seek  mixed  wine 
27.  10  neither  go  into  thy  brother's  house  in  the 

2.  19  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks 
2.  21  To  go  into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and 
13.    2  that  they  may  go  into  the  gates  of  the 
8  Now  go,  write  it  before  them  in  a  table 
6  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it 
1  and  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
3  the  way.  .he  had  not  gone  with  his  feet 
5  and  let  us  go  into  the  defenced  cities 
29  they  shall  go  into  thickets,  and  climb 

16.  8  Thou  shalt  not  also  go  into  the  house  of 

26.  21  was  afraid,  and  fled,  and  went  into  Egypt 

27.  18  vessels,  .at  Jerusalem,  go  not  to  Babylon 

28.  4  with  all  the  captives  of  Judah,  that  went 

34.  3  not  escape . .  and  thou  shalt  go  to  Babylon 

35.  1 1  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  Jerusalem  for  fear 

36.  5  I  cannot  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
36.  6  Therefore  go  thou,  and  read  in  the  roll 
38.  11  went  into  the  house  of  the  king  under 

40.  6  Then  went  Jeremiah  unto  Gedaliah  the 
42.  14  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  Egypt 
42. 15  enter  into  Egypt,  and  go  to  sojourn  there 

42. 19  ye  remnant  of  Judah;  Go  ye  not  into  E. 

42.  22  whither  ye  desire  to  go  (and)  to  sojourn 

43.  2  Go  not  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there 
.    3.  24  said . .  Go,  shut  thyself  within  thine  house 

20.  29  What  (is)  the  high  place  whereunto  ye  go? 
36.  20  whither  they  went,  they  profaned  my 
36.  21  among  the  heathen. .  whither  they  went 
36.  22  which  ye  have  profaned,  whither  ye  went 
38.  11 1  will  go  to  them  that  are  at  rest,  that 

41.  3  Then  went  he  inward,  and  measured  the 

42.  9  as  one  goeth  into  them  from  the.  .court 

44.  27  in  the  day  that  he  goeth  into  the  sanctu. 
47.    8  These  waters  issue  out.  .and  go  into  the 

47.  15  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as  men  go  to  Zedad 

48.  1  the  wray  of  Hethlon,  as  one  goeth  to  Ha. 
9. 10  they  went  to  Baal-peor,  and  separated 

Amos  5.  19  or  went  into  the  house,  and  leaned  his 
Jon.    1.    3  to  go  with  them  unto  Tarshish  from  the 
Nan.   3.  14  go  into  clay,  and  tread  the  moPtar 
Mic.    4.  10  shalt  dwell  in  the  field,  and  thou  shalt  go 
Zech.  6.  10  go  into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Z. 

G.To  tread,  7|"n  darak. 

Isa.  59.  8  whosoever  goeth  therein  shall  not  know 
7.  To  go,  r^n  huh. 

Ezra  7.  13  that  all  they  of  the  people,  .go  with  thee 
8.T0  go  on,  rfin  halah. 

Gen.    2.  14  that  (is)  it  which  goeth  toward  the  east 

12.  g  Abram  journeyed,  going  on  still  toward 

13.  5  Lot  also,  which  went  with  Abram,  had 

14.  24  the  portion  of  the  men  which  went  with 

15.  2  seeing  I  go  childless,  and  the  steward  of 
18.  16  Abraham  went  with  them  to  bring  them 

24.  42  if  now  thou  do  prosper  my  way  winch  I  go 
26.  26  Then  Abimelechwentto  him  fromGerar 

28. 20  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  and 
31. 19  Laban  went  to  shear  his  sheep  :  and  R. 
32.    1  Jacob  went  on  his  way,  and  the  angels  of 

32.  20  appease  him  with  the  present  that  goeth 
35.   3  and  was  with  me  in  the  way  which  I  went 

Exod.3.  19  that  the  king  of  Egypt  will  not  let  you  go 

10.  8  he  said . .  (but)  wiio  (are)they  that  shall  go  ? 

13.  21  Lord  went  before  them  by  day  in  a  pill. 

14.  19  angel,  .which  weDt  before  the  camp  of  I. 

15.  19  Israel  went  on  dry  (land)  in  the  midst  of 

17.  5  thy  rod.  .take  in  thine  hand,  and  go 

33.  15  If  thy  presence  go  not.  .carry  us  not 
Lev.  11.  21  every  flying  creeping  thing  that  goeth 

11.  27  whatsoever  goeth  upon  his  paws,  among 
11.  27  all  manner  of  beasts  that  go  on  (all)  four 
11.  42  Whatsoever  goeth  upon  the  belly,  and 
11. 42  whatsoever  goeth  upon  (all)  four,  or 

Num  14.  14  they  have  heard . .  thou  goest  before  them 
14.  38  of  the  men  that  went  to  search  the  land 
22.  13  refuseth  to  give  me  leave  to  go  with  you 
22.  22  God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went 
24.   1  he  went  not,  as  at  other  times,  to  seek 
24.  14  And  now,  behold,  I  go  unto  my  people 
24.  25  Balaam  rose  up . .  and  Balak  also  went  his 
32.  41  Jair  the  son  of  Manasseh  went  and  took 
32.  42  Nobah  went  and  took  Kenath,  and 

Deut.  1.  30  The  Lord  your  God,  which  goeth  before 
1.  31  in  all  the  wayjthat  ye  went,  until  ye  came 
"1.  33  Who  went  in  the  way  before  you,  to 
6. 18  that  thou  mayest  go  in  and  possess  the 
14.  25  and  shalt  go  unto  the  place  which  the 

16.  7  thou  shalt  turn  in  the  morning,  and  go 
2c.    4  Lord  your  God  (is)  he  that  goeth  with 
24.   2  she  may  go  and  be  another  man's  (wife) 
26.    2  shalt  go  unto  the  place  which  the  Lord 
31.    6  Lord  thy  God,  he  (it  is)  that  doth  go 
31.   8  Lord,  he  (it  is)  that  doth  go  before  thee 

5  whither  the  men  went  I  wot  not :  pursue 


Josh.  : 


3.    3  then  ye  shall  remove,  .and  go  after  it 
6.    9  the  armed  men  went  before  the  priests 
6.  13  went  on  continually,  .went  before  them 

51 


Josh  1 


Judg 


9- 
9- 
9- 

11. 

14. 

14. 

17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
19. 

19- 

21. 

Ruth  2. 

2. 

1  Sa.  2. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

9 


14. 

*7- 

17- 
17- 
20. 
23- 
23- 
25- 
3°' 
30. 
2  Sa.  6. 
7- 
7. 


Ki. 


9' 

13- 

18. 

18. 

19. 

22. 

2ISJ.  1. 

2. 

4- 

S- 

5- 

5. 

1  Ch.  4. 

6. 
15. 
17- 
18. 
18. 

2  Ch.  7. 

8. 

9' 

18. 
Neb.   2. 

12, 
Job     1. 

16. 

23- 

41. 

Prov.  7. 

Eccl.  1. 
3- 
6. 


Song 
Isa. 


3°- 
38. 
45. 
52. 
58. 
Jer.  £2. 
3- 

3- 


24  said  unto  the  captains,  .which  went  with 
8  Joshua  charged  them  that  went  to  desc. 

16  have  gone  and  served  other  gods,  and 

17  preserved  us  in  all  the  way.  .we  went 

3  I  likewise  will  go  with  thee  into  thy  lot 
8  If  thou  wilt,  .with  me,  then  I  will  go 

1  thou  calledst  us  not  when  thou  wentest 
8  The  trees  went  forth,  .to  anoint  a  king 

11  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  trees  ? 

13  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  trees? 

8  that  thou  mayest  go  with  us,  and  fight 

3  that  thou  goest  to  take  a  wife  of  the 

19  he  went  down  to  Ashkelon,  and  slew 
g  and  I  go  to  sojourn  where  I  may  find 

5  whether  our  way  which  we  go  shall  be 

14  the  five  men  that  w.  to  spy  out  the  coun. 

17  the  live  men  that  w.  to  spy  out  the  coun. 

9  get  you  early . .  that  thou  mayest  go  home 

18  I  went  to  Bethlehem -Judah,  but.  .going 

21  catch . .  and  go  to  the  land  of  Benjamin 

g  go  thou  after  them  :  have  I  not  charged 
g  when  thou  art  athirst,  go  unto  the  vessels 

20  And  they  went  unto  their  own  home 

8  the  cart,  .and  send  it  away,  that  it  may  go 

12  lowing  as  they  went,  .the  lords,  .went 

16  he  went  from  year  to  year  in  circuit  to 

6  he  can  show  us  our  way  that  we  should  go 

2  The  asses  which  thou  wentest  to  seek 

14  Whither  went  ye  ?  And  he  said,  To  seek 
26  And  Saul  also  went  home  to  Gibeah;  and 
46  the  Philistines  went  to  their  own  place 

7  and  one  bearing  a  shield  went  before 

13  the  names  of  Ins  three  sons  that  went  to 

15  David  went  and  returned  from  Saul 

13  that  thou  mayest  go  in  peace  :  and  the 

18  David.abode.  .Jonathan  went  to  his  house 
23  come  ye  again,  .and  I  will  go  with  you 
42  five  damsels  of  hers  that  went  after  her 

22  wicked  men.  .of  those  that  went  with  D. 

22  Because  they  went  not  with  us,  we  will 

4  ark  of  God  :  And  Aliio  went  before  the 

g  I  was  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  went 

23  whom  God  went  to  redeem  for  a  people 
6  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  went 

14  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  went 
23  I  shall  go  to  liim,  but  he  shall  not  return 
1 1  with  Absalom  -went . .  men . .  they  went 

20  seeing  I  go  whither  I  may,  return  thou 
30  he  went  barefoot :  and  all  the  people 

13  and  cursed  as  he  went,  and  threw  stones 

17  why  wentest  thou  not  with  thy  friend  ? 

1 1  that  thou  go  to  battle  in  thine  own  person 
17  and  a  wench  went  and  told  them 

25  Wherefore  wentest  not  thou  with  me,  M. 
17  the  blood  of  the  men  that  went  in  jeopa. 

12  Go  and  say  unto  David,  Thus  saith  the  L. 

2  I  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth  :  be  thou  st. 

41  it  was  told  Solomon  that  Shimei  had  gone 
6  but  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship 

12  What  way  went  he  ?.  .the  man  of  God 
6  Ahab  went  one  way  by  himself,  and 

6  Obadiah  went  another  way  by  himself 

4  he  himself  went  a  day's  journey  into  the 
48  they  went  not  ;  for  the  ships  were  broken 

3  ye  go  to  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of 

7  fifty  men  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  went 
23  Wherefore  wilt  thou  goto  him  to  day? 
10  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times 

25  And  he  said,  Thy  servant  went  no  whither 

26  Went  not  mine  heart,  .when  the  man 

42  And  (some)  of  them,  .went  to  mount  Seir 

15  And  Jehozadak  went,  .when  the  Lord 
25  So  David,  .went  to  bring  up  the  ark  of 

21  whom  God  went  to  redeem  (to  be)  hisown 
6  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  went 

13  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  weut 

19  and  shall  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and 
17  Then  went  Solomon  to  Ezion-geber,  and 

21  For  the  king's  ships  went  to  Tarshish 
12  the  messenger  that  went  to  call  Micaiah 

16  the  rulers  knew  not  whither  I  went,  or 
38  And  the  other,  .went  over  against 

4  his  sons  went  and  feasted  (in  their)  houses 

22  then  I  shall  go  the  way.  .1  shall  not  ret. 

8  Behold,  I  go  forward,  but  he  (is)  not 

19  Out  of  his  mouth  go  burning  lamps 

22  He  goeth  after  her  straightway,  as  an  ox 
6  The  wind  goeth  toward  the  south,  and 

20  All  go  unto  one  place ;  all  are  of  the  dust 
6  seen  no  good :  do  not  all  go  to  one  place 

10  no  work,  .in  the  grave,  whither  thou  go. 

5  man  goeth  to  his  long  home;  and  the  mo. 

9  the  best  wine  for  my  beloved,  that  goeth 
3  many  people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye 

21  To  go  into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and 

6  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go 

7  he  shall  come,  .and  go  over  all  his  banks 
2g  as  when  one  goeth  with  a  pipe  to  come 

5  Go  and  say  to  Hezekiah,  Thus  saith  the  L. 
16  they  shall  go  to  confusion  together  (that 
12  Lord  will  go  before  you,  and  the  God  of 

8  thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee 

23  I  am  not  polluted,  I  have  not  gone  after 
1  and  she  go  from  him,  and  become  another 

12  Go  and  proclaim  these  words  toward  the 
10  they  went  after  other  gods  to  serve  [them 

12  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  go  and  cry  unto 
1  Go  and  get  thee  a  linen  girdle,  and  put  it 

19  Go  and  stand  in  the  gate  of  the  children 
1  Go  and  get  a  potters  earthen  bottle,  and 
10  in  the  sight  of  the  men  that  go  with  thee 

13  Go  and  tell  Hananiah,  saying,  Thus  saith 


Jer.  29. 12  ye  shall  go  and  pray  unto  me,  and  I  will 
31.  2  Israel,  when  I  went  to  cause  him  to  rest 
31.  21  the  way.  .thou  wentest :  turn  again,  O  vi. 

34.  2  Go  and  speak  to  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 

35.  2  Go  unto  the  house  of  the  Rechabites,  and 
35. 13  Go  and  tell  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the 
3g.  16  Go  and  speak  to  Ebed-melech  the  Eth. 
41.  6  weeping  all  along  as  he  went:  and  it  ca. 
48.  11  Moab.  .neither  hath  he  gone  into  captiv. 
50.  4  of  Israel  shall  come,  .going  and  weeping 
50.    6  they  have  gone  from  mountain  to  hill 

Eze.     7. 14  but  none  goeth  to  the  battle  :  for  my  wr. 

20.  16  for  their  heart  went  after  their  idols 

33.  31  theirheart  goeth  after  their  coveteousness 
Hos.    7.  11  they  call  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Assyria 

11.   2  they  called  them,  so  they  wentfrom  them 

Aiuos  1.  15  their  king  shall  go  into  captivity  :  he  arid 

Nan,  3.  10  she  went  into  captivity  :  her  young  chil. 

Zech.  2.    2  Then  said  I,  Whither  goestthou?  And  he 

8. 21  the  inhabitants  of  one  (city)  shall  go  to 

9.  14  and  shall  go  with  whirl  winds  of  the  south 

9.7*0  go  on,  sftn  halah,  3. 

1  Ki.21.  27  Ahab.  .lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly 
Job  30.  28  I  went  mourning  without  the  sun :  I 
Psa.  38.    6  I  am  troubled.  .1  go  mourning  all  the  day 
85.  13  Righteousness  shall  go  before  him,  and 

104.  26  There  go  the  ships,  .that  leviathan,  .thou 
Prov.  6.  28  Can  one  go  upon  hot  coals,  and  his  feet 
Hab.  3.  11  at  the  light  of  thine  arrows  they  went 

10. To  go  on  habitually,  ybn  halah,  7. 

Josh.  18.  4  they  shall  rise  and  go  through  the  land 
1  Sa.  23.  13  and  went  whithersoever  they  could  go 
1  Ch.16.  20  they  went  from  nation  to  nation,  and  fr. 

21.  4  Joab  departed,  and  went  throughout  all 
Psa.  43.    2  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  oppr. 

105.  13  When  they  went  from  one  nation  to  an. 
Prov.  6.  22  When  thou  goeit,  it  shall  lead  thee 

11. To  go  on',  ?fe  yalah. 

Gen.   3. 14  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust 
7.  18  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the  waters 
9.  23  Sheni  and  Japheth.  .went  backward,  and 

11.  31  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan;  and  they 

12.  4  So  Abram  departed,  .and  Lot  went 

12.    5  they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  C. 

12.  19  behold  thy  wife,  take  (her),  and  go  thy 

13.  3  he  went  on  his  journeys  from  the  south 
16.    8  and  whither  wilt  thou  go?  And  she  said 
18. 22  the  men  turned  their  faces,  .and  went 
21. 16  she  went,  and  sat  her  down  over  against 
21. 19  she  went  and  filled  the  bottle  with  water 

22.  3  went  unto  the  place  of  which  God  had 
22.   5  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship 
22.    6  and  they  went  both  of  them  together 

22.    8  and  they  went  both  of  them  together 
22  13  Abraham  went  and  took  the  ram,  and  offe 
22. 19  rose  up  and  went  together  to  Beer-sheba 
24.   4  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  country,  and  to 
24. 10  and  he  arose,  and  went  to  Mesopotamia 
24.  38  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  father's  house 
24.  51  Rebekah  (is)  before  thee,  take,  .and  go 
24.  55  at  the  least  ten  ;  after  that  she  shall  go 
24.  56  send  me  away  that  I  may  go  to  my  mas. 

24.  58  Wilt  thou  go.  .And  she  said,  I  will  go 

25.  22  And  she  went  to  enquire  of  the  Lord 

26.  1  Isaac  went  unto  Abimelech  king  of  the  P. 

26. 13  the  man  waxed  great,  and  went  forward 

26. 16  Abimelech  said  unto  Isaac,  Go  from  us 

27.  5  Esau  went  to  the  field  to  hunt ..  venison 
27.  9  Go  now  to  the  flock,  and  fetch  me  from 
27.  13  only  obey  my  voice,  and  go  fetch  me 

27.  14  And  he  went,  and  fetched,  and  brought 

28.  2  Arise,  go  to  Padan-aram,  to  the  house  of 
28.  5  he  went  to  Padan-aram  unto  Laban,  son 
28.  9  Then  went  Esau  unto  Ishmael,  and  took 
28.  10  J  acob  went  out  from  Beer-sheba  and  went 

28.  15  in  all  (places)  whither  thou  goest 

29.  7  water  ye  the  sheep,  and  go . .  feed  (them) 

30.  14  Reuben  went  in  the  days  of  wheat  harv. 
30.  25  Send  me  away,  that  I  may  go  unto  mine 
30.  26  for  whom  I  have  served  thee,and  let  me  g. 

32.  17  Whose  (art)  thou  ?  and  whither  goest  thou  1 

33.  12  and  let  us  go,  and  I  will  go  before  thee 

35.  22  Reuben  went  and  lay  with  Bilhah  his  fa. 

36.  6  went  into  the  country  from  the  face  of 

37.  12  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  father's  fl. 

37. 14  said  to  him,  Go,  I  pray  thee,  see  whether 

37. 17  I  heard  them  say,  Let  us  go  to  Dothan 

37.  17  Joseph  went  after  his  brethren,  and  found 

38.  11  Tamarwent  and  dwelt  in  her  father's  ho. 

41.  55  Go  unto  Joseph  ;  what  he  saith  to  you,  do 

42.  19  go  ye,  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of  your 

42.  38  befall  him  by  the  way  in  the  which  ye  go 

43.  8  Send  the  lad  with  me,  and  we  will,  .go 
45.  17  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,  get  you  unto  the 
45.  28  Israel  said . .  I  will  go  and  see  him  before  I 
50.  18  his  brethren  also  went  and  fell  down  bef 

Exod.  2.    1  there  went  a  man  of  the  house  of  Levi 

2.  7  Shall  I  go  and  call  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the 
2.    8  And  Pharaoh's  daughter  said  to  her,  Go 

2.  8  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child's  m. 
3. 11  Who  (am)  I,  that  I  should  go  unto  Phar. 
3. 16  Go,  and  gather  the  elders  of  Israel  toge. 

3.  18  and  now  let  us  go,  we  beseech  thee,  three 

3.  21  that,  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not  go  empty 

4.  12  Now  therefore  go,  and  I  will  be  with  thy 
4. 18  Hoses  went  and  returned  to  Jethro  his 

4.  18  Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee,  and  return  unto 
4.  18  And  Jethro  said  to  Moses,  Go  in  peace 
4.  19  Go,  return  into  Egypt :  for  all  the  men 
4.  21  When  thou  goest  to  return  into  Egypt 


GO 


402 


GO 


Deut. 


Exod.  4.  27  Go  into  the  wilderness  to  meet  Moses 
4.  27  he  weut,  and  met  him  in  the  mount  of 

4.  29  Moses  and  Aaron  went  and  gathered 

5.  3  let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  three  days'  jour. 
5.    7  let  them  go  and  gather  straw  for  them. 
5.    8  saying,  Let  us  go.  .sacrifice  to  our  God 

5.  11  Go  ye,  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find 
5.  17  Let  us  go  (and)  do  sacrifice  to  the  Lord 
5.  18  Go  therefore  now.  .work :  for  there  shall 
8.  25  Go  ye,  sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  land 
8.  27  We  will  go  three  days'  journey  into  the 
8.  23  Pharaoh  said,  I  will  let  you  go,  that  ye 
8.  28  only  ye  shall  not  go  very  far  away :  eut. 
to.    8  Go,  serve  the  Lord  your  God.  .who  (are) 
10.    9  We  will  go.  .with  our  herds  will  we  go 
10.  11  Not  so  :  go  now  ye.  .men,  and  serve  the  L. 
10.  24  Go  ye,  serve  the  Lord  ;  only  let  your  fl. 
10.  24  let  your  little  ones  also  go  with  you 

10.  26  Our  cattle  also  shall  go  with  us ;  there 

12.  31  and  go,  serve  the  Lord,  as  ye  have  said 
21  the  Lord,  .before  them,  .to  go  by  day 
19  the  angel,  .removed  and  w.  behind  them 

21  the  Lord  caused  the  sea  to  go.  .by  a 

22  they  went  out  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur 

22  they  went  three  days  in  the  wilderness 
27  and  he  went  his  way  into  his  owu  land 

10  Go  unto  the  people,  and  sanctifly  them 

23  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee,  and  bring 
1  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before  us 

23  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before  us 

7  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Go,  get  thee 
34  Therefore  now  go,  lead  the  people  unto 
34  behold,  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee 
14  My  presence  shall  go.  .and  I  will  give 
16  (Is  it)  not  in  that  thou  goest  with  us? 

9  let  my  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  go  among  us 
-Num"io.  30  he  said  unto  him,  I  will  not  go;  but  I 
jo.  32  it  shall  be,  if  thou  go  with  us,  yea,  it 

13.  26  they  went  and  came  to  Moses,  and  to  A. 
16.  25  Moses  rose  up,  and  went  unto  Dathan 

16.  46  go  quickly  unto  the  congregation,  and 

20.  17  we  will  go  by  the  king's  (high)  way,  we 

21.  22  we  will  go  along  by  the  king's,  .way 

22.  12  Thou  shalt  not  go  with  them  ;  thou  shalt 
22.  20  rise  up.  .go  with  them  ;  but  yet  the 

22.  21  Balaam. .went  with  the  princes  of  Moab 
22.  23  And  the  ass  saw.  .and  weut  into  the  field 
22.  35  Go  with  the  men.  .So  Balaam  went  with 
39  Baalani  went  with  Balak,  and  they  came 
3  Stand  by  thy  burnt  offering,  and  I  will  go 

3  And  he  went  to  an  high  place 
25  Baalam  rose  up,  and  went  and  returned 
39  the  son  of  Manasseh  went  to  Gilead,  and 

8  went  three  days'  journey  in  the  wilder. 
19  we  went  through  all  that  great  and  ter. 

1.  33  to  show  you  by  what  way  ye  should  go 
3.  27  I  will  go  along  by  the  high  way,  I  will 
5.  30  Go  say  to  them,  Get  you  into  your  tents 
-6.  14  Ye  shall  not  go  after  other  gods,  of  the 

11.  28  to  go  after  other  gods,  which  ye  have  not 
13.    2  Let  us  go  after  other  gods,  which  thou 
13.   6  Let  us  go  aud  serve  other  gods,  which  thou 
13.  13  Let  us  go  and  serve  other  gods,  which  thou 

17.  3  hath  gone  and  served  other  gods,  and  w. 
20.  5,  6  let  him  go  and  return  to  his  house,  lest 
20  7,  8  let  him  go  and  return  to  his  house,  lest 
28.  14  to  go  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 

28.  41  not  enjoy,  .for  they  shall  go  into  caRtivi. 
29. 18  to  go . .  serve  the  gods  of  these  nations 

29.  26  they  went  and  served  other  gods,  and 
31.    1  Moses  went  and  spake  these  words  unto 
31.  14  Moses  and  Joshua  went,  and  presented 

Josh.  1.    7  mayest  prosper  whithersoever  thou  goest 
1.    9  God  (is)  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  go. 

1.  16  whithersoever  thou  sendest  us  we  will  go 

2.  1  saying,  Go  view  the  land,  even  Jericho 
2.    1  they  went,  and  came  into  an  harlot's  ho. 
2.  16  hide,  .and  afterward  may  ye  go  your  w. 

2.  22  they  went,  and  came  unto  the  mountain 

3.  4  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye.  .go 
3.    6  took  up.  .and  went  before  the  people 

5.  13  Joshua  went  unto  him,  and  said  unto  him 
8.    9  they  went  to  Me  in  ambush,  and  abode 

8.  13  Joshua  went  that  night  into  the  midst 

4  They  did  work  wilily,  and  went  and  made 

6  they  went  to  Joshua  unto  the  camp  at  G. 

11  go  to  meet  them,  and  say  unto  them 

12  on  the  day  we  came  forth  to  go  unto  you 

7  And  it  went  down  from  Janohah  to  A. 

8  Go  and  walk  through  the  land,  and  des. 

9  the  men  went  and  passed  through  the 
22.  6  sent  them  away :  and  they  went  unto 
22.    9  to  go  unto  the  country  of  Gilead,  to  the 

Judg.  1.    3  Come  up  with  me.  .So  Simeon  went  with 
1. 10  Judah  went  against  the  Canaanites  that 
1.  11  from  thence  he  went  against  the  inhabit. 
1.  16  they  went  and  dwelt  among  the  p*  >|k' 
1.  17  Judah  went  with  Simeon  his  brother 

1.  26  the  man  went  into  the  land  of  the  Hitti. 

2.  6  when  Joshua  had  let  the  people  go,  the 

2.  6  the  children  of  Israel  went  every  man 

3.  13  weut  and  smote  Israel,  and  possessed 

4.  6  Go  and  draw  toward  mount  Tabor,  and 
4.    8  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me,  then  I  will 

4.   8  if  thou  wilt  not  go  with  me . .  I  will  not  go 
4.   9  And  she  said,  I  will  surely  go  with  thee 
4.   9  Deborah  arose,  and  went  with  Barak  to 

6.  14  Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  save 

7.  4  This  shall  go  with  thee,  the  same  shall  go 
7.  4  This  shall  not  go.  .the  same  shall  not  go 
7.  7  let  all  the.  .people  go  every  man  unto  his 
3.  29  the  son  of  Joash  went  and  dwelt  in  his 


Judg.  9. 
9- 
9- 
9- 

9- 


Ruth 


iSa 


1  the  son  of  Jerubbaal  went  to  Shechem 

6  and  went  and  made  Abimelech  king 

7  he  went  and  stood  in  the  top  of  mount 

21  and  went  to  Beer,  and  dwelt  there,  for 
50  Then  went  Abimelech  toThebez,  and  en. 
14  Go  and  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  have 

5  the  elders  of  Gilead  went  to  fetch  Jepht. 
11  Jephthah  went  with  the  elders  of  Gilead 

18  they  went  along  through  the  wilderness 

37  that  I  may  go  up  and  down  upon  the 

38  And  he  said,  Go.     And  he  sent  her  away 

38  she  went  with  her  companions,  and  bew. 
40  the  daughters  of  Israel  went  yearly  to 

1  and  didst  not  call  us  to  go  with  thee? 
11  Manoah  arose,  and  went  after  his  wife 
9  went  on  eating,  and  came  to  Ins  father 

4  Samson  went  and  caught  three  hundred 

1  Then  went  Samson  to  Gaza,  and  saw  there 
10  Dwell  with  me .  .So  the  Levite  went  in 

2  Go,  search  the  land :  who  when  they  ca. 

6  the  priest  said  unto  them,  Go  in  peace 

6  beforeithe  Lord  (is)  your  way  wherein  ye  g 
9  be  not  slothful  to  go.  .to  enter  to  possess 

19  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy  mouth,  and  go 

26  And  the  children  of  Dan  went  their  way 

3  her  husband  arose,  and  went  after  her,  to 

17  Whither  goest  thou?  and  whence  comest 
iS  I  went  to  Beth-lehem-judah,  but.  .going 

27  and  went  out  to  go  his  way ;  and,  behold 

28  said  unto  her,  Up,  and  let  us  be  going 

8  We  will  not  any  (of  us)  go  to  his  tent,  ne. 

10  Go  andsmite  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-g. 

20  saying,  Go  and  lie  in  wait  in  the  vineyards 
23  they  went  and  returned  unto  their  inner. 

1  a  certain  man  of  Beth-lehem-judah  went 

7  they  went  on  their  way  to  return  unto  the 

8  Go,  return  each  to  her  mother's  house 

11  why  will  ye  go  with  me?  (are)  there  yet 

12  Turn  again,  my  daughters,  go.  .for  I  am 

16  for  whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go;  andw. 

18  When  she  saw  that  she  was.  .to  go  with 

19  So  they  two  went  until  they  came  to 

2  Let  me  now  go  to  the  field,  and  glean 

2  And  she  said  unto  her.  Go,  my  daughter 

3  And  she  went,  and  came,  and  gleaned 

8  Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field,  neither 

17  Then  Eli  answered  and  said,  Go  in  peace 

18  So  the  woman  went  her  way,  and  did  eat 

11  Elkanah  went  to  Ramah  to  his  house 

5  lie  down  again.     And  he  went  and  lay 

6  arose  and  w.  to  Eli,  and  said,  Here  (am)  I 

8  arose  and  w.  to  Eli,  and  said,  Here  (am)  I 

9  Eli  said  unto  Samuel,  Go,  lie  down :  and 
9  So  Samuel  went  and  lay  down  in  his  pla. 

22  Samuel  said.  .Go  ye  every  man  unto  his 
3  Take  now.  .and  arise,  go  seek  the  asses 

6  now  let  us  go  thither  ;  peradventure  he 

7  But,  behold,  (if)  we  go,  what  shall  we 
9  when  a  man  went  to  enquire  of  God 

9  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  the  seer :  for  (he 

10  Well  said  ;  come,  let  us  go.  So  they  went 
9  when  he  had  turned  his  back  to  go  from 

26  home  to  Gibeah;  and  there  went  with  him 

14  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  Gilgal,  and  renew 

15  all  the  people  went  to  Gilgal ;  and  there 

16  the  multitude  melted  away,  and  they  went 

19  that  the  noise,  .went  on  and  increased 
3  Now  go  and  smite  Amalek,  and  utterly 

6  Go,  depart,  get  you  down  from  among  the 
18  Go  and  utterly  destroy  the  sinners  the  A. 

20  and  have  gone  the  way  which  the  Lord 
34  Then  Samuel  went  to  Ramah ;  and  Saul 

1  Fill  thine  horn  with  oil,  and  go,  I  will 

2  Samuel  said,  How  can  I  go?  if  Saul  hear 

13  So  Samuel  rose  up,  and  went  to  Ramah 
13  the  three  eldest  sons  of  Jesse  went  (and) 
20  and  went,  as  Jesse  had  commanded  him 

20  as  the  host  was  going  forth  to  the  fight 

32  thy  servant  will  go  and  fight  with  this  P. 

33  Thou  art  not  able  to  go  against  this  Phil. 
37  Saul  said  unto  David,  Go,  and  the  Lord 

39  he  assayed  to  go  ;  for  he  had  not  proved 

39  David  said  unto  Saul,  I  cannot  go  with 

27  Wherefore  David  arose  and  went,  he 

12  and  he  went,  and  fled,  and  escaped 

18  he  and  Samuel  went  and  dwelt  in  Naioth 

22  Then  went  he  also  to  Ramah,  and  came 

23  he  went  thither  to  Naioth  in  Ramah 

23  he  went  on  and  prophesied,  until  he  came 

21  Go,  find  out  the  arrows.     If  I  expressly 

40  Jonathan.,  said..  Go,  carry  (them)  to  the 
42  Jonathan  said  to  David,  Go  in  peace 

3  David  went  thence  to  Mizpeh  of  Moab 
2  Shall  I  go  and  smite  these  Philistines? 

2  Go  and  smite  the  Philistines,  and  save  K. 
5  So  David  and  his  men  went  to  Keilah 
16  Jonathan,  .went  to  David  into  the  wood 

22  Go,  I  pray  you,  prepare  yet,  and  know 

24  they  arose,  and  went  to  Ziph  before  Saul 

25  Saul  also  and  his  men  went  to  seek  (him) 

26  Saul  went  on  this  side  of  the  mountain 

28  Saul.. went  against  the  Philistines 

2  went  to  seek  David  and  his  men  upon  the 

7  Saul  rose  up  out  of  the  cave,  and  went  on 
22  Saul  went  home  ;  but  David  and  his  men 
42  she  went  after  the  messengers  of  David 

1 1  take . .  the  cruse  of  water,  and  let  us  go 

19  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Go,  serve  other  gods 
25  So  David  went  on  his  way,  and  Saul 

7  that  I  may  go  to  her,  and  enquire  of  her 

8  he  went,  anil  two  men  with  him,  and  they 
22  mayest  have  strength  when  thou  goest 


13- 
13- 
13- 
13- 
13- 
13- 
13- 
*3- 
13- 
13- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
*5- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15- 
15. 
16. 
J7- 
17- 


i  Sa.  29.    7  Wherefore  now  return,  and  go  in  peace 
30.    2  carried  (them)  away,  and  went  on  their 

30.  9  So  David  went,  he  and  the  sis  hundred 

31.  12  All  the  valiant  men  arose,  aud  went  all 
2  Sa.    2.  29  went  through  all  Bithron,  and  they 

2.  32  Joab  and  his  men  went  all  night,  and 

3.  16  her  husband  went  with  her  along  weeping 
3.  16  Then  said  Abner  unto  him,  Go,  return 

3.  19  Abner  went  also  to  speak  in  the  ears  of 
3.  21 1  will  arise  and  go,  and  will  gather  all 

3.  21  sent  Abner  away  ;  and  he  went  in  peace 

4.  5  Rechab  and  Baanah,  went,  and  came 

5.  6  the  king  and  his  men  went  to  Jerusalem 

6.  2  David  arese,  and  went  with  all  the  people 

6.  12  So  David  went  and  brought  up  the  ark 

7.  3  Go,  do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart ;  for 

7.  5  Go  and  tell  my  servant  David,  Thus 

8.  3  as  he  went  to  recover  his  border  at  the 

11.  22  So  the  messenger  went,  and  came  and 

12.  29  David,  .went  to  Rabbah,  and  fought 

7  Go  now  to  thy  brother  Amnon's  house 

8  So  Tamar  went  to  her  brother  Amnon's 
10  hand  on  her  head,  and  went  on  crying 

24  let  the  king,  .and  his  servants,  go  with 

25  Kay,  my  son,  let  us  not  all  now  go,  lest 

25  howbeit  he  would  not  go,  butbleesed 

26  If  not.  .let  my  brother  Amnon  go  with 
26  king  said.  .Why  should  he  go  with  thee'. 

37  Absalom  fled,  and  wtnt  to  Talmai,  the 

38  So  Absalom  fled,  and  went  to  Geshur 
S  Go  to  thine  house,  and  I  will  give  charge 

21  go  therefore,  bring  the  young  man  Absa. 
23  So  Joab  arose,  and  went  to  Geshur,  and 
30  go  and  set  it  on  fire.     And  Absalom's 

7  let  me  go  and  pay  my  vow,  which  I  have 

9  And  the  king  said  unto  him,  Go  in  peace 
9  So  he  arose,  and  went  to  Hebron 

19  Wherefore  goest  thou  also  with  us  ?  return 

20  should  I  this  day  make  thee  go  up  and 

22  And  David  said  to  Ittai,  Go  and  pass  over 
13  as  David  and  his  men  went  by  the  way 
17  and  they  went  and  told  king  David 

21  went  and  told  king  David,  and  said  unto 
21  Go  tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen 

18.  24  the  watchman  went  up  to  the  roof  over 

18.  33  as  he  went,  thus  he  said,  O  my  son  A. 

19.  15  Judah  came  to  Gilgal,  to  go  to  meet  thek. 

19.  26  that  I  may  ride  thereon,  and  go  to  the 

20.  s  So  Amasa  went  to  assemble.  .Judah 

21.  12  David  went  and  took  the  bones  of  Saul 
24.    1  to  say,  Go,  number  Israel  and  Judah 

:  Ki.  1.  13  Go  and  get  thee  in  unto  king  David,  and 
i.  49  and  rose  up.  and  went  every  man  his  way 
1.  50  went,  and  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of 

1.  53  Solomon  said  unto  him,  Go  to  thine  house 

2.  8  in  the  day  when  I  went  to  Mahanaim 

2.  29  Solomon  sent,  .saying,  Go,  fall  upon  him 
2. 40  Shimei  arose,  .and  went  to  Gath  to  Ach. 
2. 40  Shimei  went,  and  brought  his  servants 

3.  4  the  king  went  to  Gibecn  to  sacrifice  there 
8.  66  went  unto  their  tents  joyful  and  glad  of 

10. 13  so  she  turned,  and  went  to  her  own  con. 
11.    5  Solomon  went  after  Ashtoreth  the  gedd. 
it.  10  that  he  should  not  go  after  other  gods 
11.  21  Let  me  depart,  that  I  may  go  to  mine 
11.  22  thou  seekest  to  go  to  thine  own  country 
11.  22  Nothing  :  howbeit  let  me  go  in  any  wise 

11.  24  they  went  to  Damascus,  and  dwelt  therein 

12.  1  Rehoboam  went  to  Shechem  :  for  all  Is. 

12.  30  for  the  people  went,  .before  the  one 

13.  10  So  he  went  another  way,  and  returned 
13.  14  went  after  the  man  of  God,  and  found  him 
13.  17  nor  turn  again  to  go  by  the  way  that 

13.  28  he  went  and  found  his  carcase  cast  in  the 

14.  4  Jeroloam's  wife,  .went  to  Shiloh,  and 
14.    7  Go,  tell  Jeroboam,  Thus  saith  the  LORD 
14.   9  for  thou  hast  gone  and  made  thee  other 

16.  31  went  and  served  Baal,  aid  worshipped 

17.  5  So  he  went  and  did  according  unto  the 
17.    5  he  went  and  dwelt  by  the  brook  Cherith 
17.  10  So  he  arose  and  went  to  Zarephath 

17.  15  she  went,  and  did  according  to  the  pay. 

18.  1  Go,  show  thyself  unto  Ahab  ;  and  I  will 
18.  2  Elijah  went  to  show  himself  unto  Ahab 
18.  s  Go  into  the  land,  unto  all  fountains  of 
18.  S  go,  tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah  (is  here) 
18.  11  go,  tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah  (is  here) 
iS.  14  go,  tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah  (is  here) 
18.  16  Obadiah  went  to  meet  Ahab.  .Ahab  weut 

18.  45  And  Ahab  rode,  and  went  to  Jezreel 

19.  3  he  arose,  and  went  for  his  life,  and  came 
19.  8  went  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  forty  d. 
19.  15  Go,  return  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness 
ig.  20  he  said  unto  him,  Go  back  again  :  for 

19.  21  Then  he  arose,  ar.d  went  after  Elijah 

20.  22  Go,  strengthen  thyself,  and  mark,  and  see 
20.  27  the  children  of  Israel.,  went  against  them 
20.  43  king  of  Israel  went  to  his  house  heavy 
22.  4  Wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  battle  to  Ramo. 
22.  6  Shall  IgoagainstRamoth-gileadto  battle 
22. 15  Mieaiah,  shall  we  go  against  Ramoth-gil. 
22.  48  Jehoshaphat  made  ships,  .to  goto  Ophir 
22.  49  Let  my  servants  go  with  thy  servants 

>  Ki.  1.    2  Go,  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ek. 

1.  6  Go,  turn  again  unto  the  king  that  sent 

2.  1  that  Elijah  went  with  Elisha  from  Gilgal 
2.    6  not  leave  thee.     And  they  two  went  on 

2.  16  let  them  go,  we  pray  thee,  and  seek  thy 
2.  18 he  said. .Did  I  not  say  unto  you,  Go  not? 

2.  25  he  went  from  thence  to  mount  Carmel 

3.  7  he  went  and  sent  to  Jehoshaphat  the  king 
3.    7  wilt  thou  go  with  me  against  Moab  to 


GO 


403 


GO 


2  Ki.  3. 

■  4> 
4 
4- 
* 
4 
4 
5> 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6, 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7> 
7- 
8, 
8, 
8, 
8 


23 

25 

1  Ch.  4 


17- 
17- 
18. 
19. 

21- 


sCh. 


22. 

25- 

25- 

3°- 

34- 

„        34- 

Ezra  8. 

10. 

Neh.  8. 

9- 

9- 

12. 
Esth.  4. 
Job  10. 

33. 

42. 

42. 
Psa.  32. 

39- 

42. 

84. 

97- 
107. 
122. 

Prov.  3. 
4- 
6. 
6. 

14. 

15- 

3°- 

Eccl.  2. 

5- 
5- 
5- 
7 
7- 


Isa. 


g  So  the  king  of  Israel  went,  and  the  king 
3  Then  he  said,  Go,  borrow  thee  vessels  ab. 
5  So  she  went  from  him,  and  shut  the  door 

7  he  said,  Go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  thy  debt 

24  Drive,  and  go  forward  ;  slack  not.  .riding 

25  So  she  went,  and  came  unto  the  man  of 
29  Gird  up  thy  loins . .  and  go  thy  way  :  if 

19  And  he  said  unto  him,  Go  in  peace 
2  Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  unto  J  ordan,  and 

2  where  we  may  dwell.  And  he  answered,  Go 

3  go  with  thy  serv. .  .he  answered,  I  will  go 

4  So  he  went  with  them.     And  when  they 

13  he  said,  Go  and  spy  where  he  (is),  that  I 

22  that  they  may  eat.  .and  go  to  their 

23  he  sent,  .and  they  went  to  their  master 

8  and  carried  thence  (also),  and  went  and 

14  and  the  king  sent . .  saying,  Go  and  see 

15  And  they  went  after  them  unto  Jordan 

1  Arise,  and  go  thou  and  thine  household 

2  she  went  with  her  household,  and  sojou. 

8  go,  meet  the  man  of  God,  and  enquire  of 

9  So  Hazael  went  to  meet  him,  and  took  a 
10  Go,  say  unto  him,  Thou  mayest  certainly 

28  he  went  with  Joram  the  son  of  Aliab  to 

1  take  this  box.  .and  go  to  Kamoth-gilead 
4  So.  .the  prophet,  went  to  Kamoth-gilead 

15  out  of  the  city  to  go  to  tell  (it)  in  Jezreel 

16  Jehu  rode  in  a  chariot,  aud  went  to  Jezr. 

18  So  there  went  one  on  horseback  to  meet 

35  they  went  to  bury  her  ;  but  they  found 
25  and  went  to  the  city  of  the  house  of  Baal 

10  king  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus  to  meet 

27  let  them  go  and  dwell  there,  and  let  him 
36' So  Sennacherib,  .went  and  returned,  and 

13  Go  ye,  enquire  of  the  Lord  for  me,  and 

14  went  unto  Huldah  the,  prophetess,  the 

29  Pharaoh-nechoh . .  king  Josiah went  again. 
4  and  (the  king)  went  the  way  toward  the 

39  And  they  went  to  the  entrance  of  Gedor 
4  David  and  all  Israel  went  to  Jerusalem 

20  As  he  went  to  Ziklag,  there  fell  to  him 

4  Go  and  tell  David  my  servant,  Thus  saith 

11  that  thou  must  go  (to  be)  with  thy  fathers 

3  as  he  went  to  stablish  his  dominion  by 

5  Then  there  went  (certain),  and  told  David 

2  Go,  number  Israel  from  Beer-sheba  even 
10  Go  and  tell  David,  saying,  Thus  saith  the 

30  David  could  not  go  before  it  to  enquire  of 

3  So  Solomon . .  weut  to  the  high  place  that 

3  Solomon  went  to  Hamath-zobah,  and  pr. 
1  Kehoboam  went  to  Shechem  :  for  to  She. 

t6  So  all  Israel  went  to  their  tents 

4  returned  from  going  against  Jeroboam 
3  go,  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king 

3  Wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  Kamoth-gilead  ? 

5  Shall  we  go  to  Bamoth-gilead  to  battle 

14  Micaiah,  shall  we  go  to  Kamoth-gilead 

36  joined,  .to  make  ships  to  go  to  Tarshish 

37  that  they  were  not  able  to  go  to  Tarshish 

5  went  with  Jehoram  the  son  of  Ahab  king 

10  Amaziah  separated  them,  .to  go  home 

11  went  to  the  valley  of  Salt,  and  smote  of 
13  that  they  should  not  go  with  him  to 

6  So  the  posts  went  with  the  letters  from 

21  Go,  enquire  of  the  Lord  for  me,  and  for 

22  Hilkiah.  .went  to  Huldah  the  prophetess 

31  Then  we  departed,  .to  go  unto  Jerusalem 

6  Ezra,  .went  into  the  chamber  of  Johanan 

12  all  the  people  went  their  way  to  eat,  and 

12  light  in  the  way  wherein  they  should  go 

19  and  the  way  wherein  they  should  go 

32  after  them  went  Hoshaiah,  and  half  of 
16  Go,  gather  together  all  the  Jews  (that  are) 
21  Before  I  go  (whence)  I  shall  not  return 
35  that  they  may  go,  and  say  unto  thee 

8  go  to  my  servant  Job,  and  offer  up  for 

9  went  and  did  according  as  the  Lord  co. 

8  teach,  .in  the  way  which  thou  shalt  go 

13  spare  me.. before  I  go  hence,  and  be  no 

9  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  oppr. 

7  They  go  from  strength  to  strength 
3  A  fire  goeth  before  him,  and  burnetii  up 
7  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habitation 
1  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
7  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  spirit? 

28  Say  not  unto  thy  neighbour,  Go,  and  come 
12  When  thou  goest,  thy  steps  shall  not  be 

3  go,  humble  thyself,  and  make  sure  thy  fr. 

6  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard  ;  consider 

7  Go  from  the  presence  of  a  foolish  man 
12  scorner.  .neither  will  he  go  unto  the  wise 

29  three-,  .four  are  comely  in  going 
1  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth 

1  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the 

15  naked  shall  he  return  to  go  as  he  came 

16  in  all  points  as  he  came,  so  shall  he  go 

2  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning 

2  than  to  go  to  the  house  of  feasting  :  for 

3  Be  not  hasty  to  go  out  of  his  sight :  stand 
.  15  he  knoweth  not  how  to  go  to  the  city 

.  16  walking  and  mincing  (as)  they  go,  and 
,    8  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for 
.    9  And  he  said  Go,  and  tell  this  people 
.   2  Go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  nation  sea. 
.    2  Go  aud  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off  thy 
.   6  Go,  set  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what 
.  15  Go,  get  thee  unto  this  treasurer ..  unto  S. 
.  13  that  they  might  go,  and  fall  backward 
.  21  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars 
.  37  So  Sennacherib,  .went  and  returned,  and 
.  10  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the  grave 
.   2  I  will  go  before  thee,  and  make  the  croo. 


Jer. 


Lam. 
Eze. 


Isa.  48. 17  leadeth..by  the  way. .thou  shouldest  go 
52, 12  For  ye  shall  not.  .go  by  flight :  for  the  L. 
57.  17  he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his 

1.  7  thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send  thee 

2.  25  loved  strangers,  and  after  them  will  I  go 

3.  8  Judah  feared  not,  but  went  and  played 
7.  12  But  go  ye  now  unto  my  place  which 

9.  2  that  I  might  leave  my  people,  and  go 
13.   4  arise,  go  to  Euphrates,  and  hide  it  there 
13.    5  So  I  went,  and  hid  it  by  Euphrates,  as 
13.    6  Arise,  go  to  Euphrates,  aud  take  the 
13.    7  Then  I  went  to  Euphrates,  and  digged 

15.  6  thou  art  gone  backward  :  therefore  will  I 

16.  5  neither  go  to  lament  nor  bemoan  them 
20.    6  all  that  dwell  in  thy  house  shall  go  into 
22.  22  thy  lovers  shall  go  into  captivity  :  surely 
25.   6  go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 
28.  11  And  the  prophet  Jeremiah  went  his  way 
30. 16  every  one  of  them,  shall  go  into  captivity 
35. 15  go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 
36.  19  Go,  hide  thee,  thou  and  Jeremiah ;  and 
37. 12  to  go  into  the  land  of  Benjamin,  to  sep. 
40.    4  whither  it  seemeth  good,  .to  go,  thither 
40.    5  or  go  where . .  convenient  unto  thee  to  go 

40.  15  Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee,  and  I  will  slay 
41. 12  went  to  fight  with  Islunael  the  son  of  Ne. 

41.  14  went  unto  Johanan  the  son  of  Karealvj 
41.  15  escaped,  .and  went  to  the  Ammonites 
41.  17  they  departed,  .to  go  to  enter  into  Egypt 
44,    3  they  went  to  burn  incense . .  to  serve  other 
45-   5  thy  life  will  I  give,  .whither  thou  goest 
46.  22  The  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  serpent 

49.  3  for  their  king  shall  go  into  captivity 

50.  4  they  shall  go,  and  seek  the  Lord  their 

51.  9  forsake  her,  and  let  us  go  every  one  into 

51.  59  when  he  went  with  Zedekiah  the  king  of 

52.  7  and  they  went  by  the  way  of  the  plain 

4.  18  hunt,  .that  we  cannot  go  hi  our  streets 
1.   9  joined,  .they  turned  not  when  they  went 
1.    9  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 
1. 12  And  they  went  every  one  straight 

1. 12  whither  the  spirit  was  to  go,  they  weut 
1.  12  they  turned  not  when  they  went 
1.  17  they  turned  not  when  they  went 
1. 17  When  they  went,  they  went  upon  their 
1. 19  when  the.  .creatures  went,  the  wheels 
1.  20  Whithersoever  the  spirit  was  to  go 
1.  20  they  went,  thither  (was  their)  spirit  to  go 
1.  21  When  those  went,  (these)  went;  and  when 
1.  24  when  they  went,  I  heard  the  noise  of  their 
3.    1  and  go  speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
3.   4  Son  of  man,  go,  get  thee  unto  the  house 
3.  11  go,  get  thee  to  them  of  the  captivity,  unto 
3. 14  I  went  in  bitterness,  in  the  heat  of  my 

10.  11  When  they  went,  they  went  upon  their 
10.  11  they  turned  not  as  they  went 
10.  11  they  turned  not  as  they  went 
10.  16  when  the  cherubim  went,  the  wheels  we. 
10.  22  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 
12.  11  they  shall  remove,  (and)  go  into  captivity 
20.  39  Go  ye,  serve  ye  every  one  his  idols,  and 
30.  17  and  these .  .shall  go  into  captivity 
30. 18  and  her  daughters  shall  go  into  captivity 
1.   2  Go,  take  unto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms 

1.  3  So  he  went  and  took  Gomer  the  daughter 

2.  5  for  she  said,  I  will  go  after  my  lovers 

2.  7  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband 

2. 13  she  went  after  her  lovers,  and  forgat  me 

3.  1  Go  yet,  love  a  woman  beloved  of  (her)  fr. 

6  They  shall  go  with  then*  flocks  and  with 
13  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian,  and 
15  I  will  go  (and)return  to  my  place,  till  they 
12  When  they  shall  go,  I  will  spread  my  net 

7  a  man  aud  his  father  will  go  in  unto  the 

6.  2  and  from  thence  go  ye  to  Hamath  the 
7. 12  0  thou  seer,  go,  flee  thee  away  into  the 

7.  15  Go,  prophesy  unto  my  people  Israel 

9.   4  though  they  go  into  captivity  before  their 

Jon    1.    2  Arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city,  and 
3.    2  Arise,  go  unto  Nineveh,  that  great  city 
3.   3  So  Jonah  arose,  and  weut  unto  Niueveh 

Mic.    1.   S  I  will  go  stripped  and  naked  :  I  will  make 
2.    3  neither  shall  ye  go  haughtily :  for  this 

Hab.  3.    5  Before  him  went  the  pestilence,  and  bur. 

Zech.  6.    7  the  bay.  .sought  to  go  that  they  might 
8. 21  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray.  .1  will  go  also 
8. 23  We  will  go  with  you  ;  for  we  have  heard 

12.  To  (cause  to)  go  on,  37;  yalah,  5. 

Nuim6.  46  go  quickly  unto  the  congregation,  and 

13.  To  go  out,  xTr  ycttsa. 

Lev.  15.  32  This  (is)  the  law  of  him.  .whose  seed  goeth 

22.   4  or  a  man  whose  seed  goeth  from  him 
Esth.  1.  19  let  there  go  a  royal  commandment  from 
Psa.  41.   6  his  heart  gathereth . .  he  goeth  abroad 
Zech.  6.   8  these  that  go  toward  the  north  country 
14.To  remove,  journey,  ypi  nasa. 

Exodi4. 19  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  went  from  before 
Num.  2.  31  They  shall  go  hindmost  with  their  stand. 
10. 14  In  the  first  (place)  went  the  standard  of 

10.  33  the  ark.  .went  before  them  in  the  three 
JudgiS.  11  there  went  from  thence  of  the  family  of 

15.  To  go  aside,  -no  sur. 

Judg  16.  17  my  strength  will  go  from  me,  and  I  shall 
1  Sa.  22. 14  goeth  at  thy  bidding,  and  is  honourable 

16.  To  go  over,  ~QV,  aoar. 

Gen.  41.  46  and  went  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egy. 
Exod38.  26  for  every  one  that  went  to  be  numbered 
Lev.  26.    6  neither  shall  the  sword  go  through  your 
Nunii3.  32  through  which  we  have  gone  to  search  it 


Hos. 


5- 
5- 
5- 

Amos  2. 


Nuni22.  26  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  further,  and 

32.  21  And  will  go  all  of  you  armed  over 
Deut.  6.    1  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
11.    8  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
11.  u  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
30. 13  Who  shall  go  over  the  sea  for  us,  and  br. 
Judgi2.    1  went  northward,  and  said  unto  Jephthah 
Ruth  2.:  8  neither  go  from  hence,  but  abide  here  fast 
2  Sa.  20.  14  he  went  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 

1  Ki.22.  24  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 

22.  36  there  went  a  proclamation  throughout 

2  Ch.18.  23  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 
Neh.  9.  11  so  that  they  went  through  the  midst  of 
Job     9.  11  Lo,  he  goeth  by  me,  and  I  see  (him)  not 

21.  29  Have  ye  not  asked  them  that  go  by  the 
Psa.  42.   4  for  I  had  gone  with  the  multitude  ;  I 

66.    6  they  went  through  the  flood  on  foot 
Prov.24.  30  I  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful,  and 
Isa.    54.    9  the  waters  of  Noah  should  no  more  go 
Jer.   49. 17  every  one  that  goeth  by  it  shall  be  aston. 

50. 13  every  one  that  goeth  by  Babylon  shall 
Eze.     9.    5  Go  ye  after  him  through  the  city,  and  sm. 

14.  xy  Sword,  go  through  the  land;  so  that  I  cut 

17.  To  go  up),  n?^  alah. 

Nuni2o.  19  We  will  go  by  the  high  way :  and  if  I  and 
1  Ki.22.  15  Go,  and  prosper  :  for  the  Lord  shall  deb. 
Job     6.  18  The  paths . .  they  go  to  nothing  and  perish 

18.  To  (cause  to)  go  tip,  nhi!  alah,  5. 

1  Ki.  10.  16  six  hundred,  .of  gold  went  to  one  target 

10.  17  three  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield 

2  Ch.  9. 15  six  hundred . .  of  beaten  gold  went  to 

9.  16  three  hundred,  .went  to  one  shield 

19.  To  step,  go  apart,  y~3  pasa* 

Isa.    27.   4  I  would  go  through  them,  I  would  burn 

20.  To  step,  "iyv  tsaad. 

Prov.  7.    8  and  he  went  the  way  to  her  house 

Jer.   10.   5  needs  be  borne,  because  they  cannot  go  ' 

21.  To  go  or  covie  near,  2~\$  qarab. 

Lev.    9.    7  Go  unto  the  altar,  and  offer  thy  sin  offer- 
9.   8  Aaron  therefore  went  unto  the  altar,  and. 

22.  3  that  goeth  unto  the  holy  things,  which 
Isa.    8.  3  I  went  unto  the  prophetess;  and  she  con. 

22.  To  go  to  and  fro,  Bid  shut. 

2  Sa.  24.  8  So  when  they  had  gone  through  all  the 

23.  To  go  about,  or  singing,  lid  shur. 

.  Isa.   57.   9  thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  ointment 
24.Tb  go,  lead,  uya>  ago. 

Matt26.  46  Rise,  let  us  be  going :  behold,  he  is  at 
Mark  1.  38  Let  us  go  into  the  next  towns,  that  I  may 
14.  42  Kise  up,  let  us  go ;  lo,  he  that  betrayeth 
John  11.    7  saith  he.  .Let  us  go  into  Judea  again 

11.  15  notthere.  .nevertheless  let  us  go  unto  him 
11.  16  Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with  him 
14.  31  even  so  I  do.    Arise,  let  us  go  hence 

25.  To  go  up,  bvapaivco  anabaino. 

Luke  5.  19  they  went  uponthe  housetop,  andlet  him 

26.  To  go  away  or  off,  frireifxi  apewti. 

Acts  17.  10  who  coming,  .went  into  the  s3Tiagogue  of 

27.  To  go  off  or  away,  a7repx°Aiai  aperchomai. 
Matt.  2.  22  when  he  heard,  .he  was  afraid  to  go  thit. 

4.  24  And  his  fame  went  throughout  all  Syria 
8.  19  I  will  follow  thee  wluthersoever  thou  g. 
8.  21  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 

8.  32  they  went  into  the  herd  of  swine :  and 

10.  5  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
13.  28  Wilt  thou  then  that  we  go  aud  gather 

13.  46  went  and  sold  all  that  he  had,  and  bought 

14.  15  that  they  may  go  into  the  villages,  and 
14.  25  Jesus  [went]  unto  them,  walking  ou  the 
16.  21  how  that  he  hiust  go  unto  Jerusalem 
18.  30  went  aud  cast  him  into  prison,  till  he 
21.  29  but  afterward  he  repented,  and  went 

21.  30  answered  and  said,  I  (go),  sir ;  and  went 
25.  10  while  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom 
25.  18  he  that  had  received  one  went  and  digged 

25.  25  and  went  and  hid  thy  talent  in  the  earth 

26.  36  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder 

27.  5  departed,  and  went  and  hanged  himself 
28. 10  go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  G. 

Mark  1.  20  they  left  their  father. .  and  went  after  him 

5.  24  And  (Jesus)  went  with  him  ;  aud  much 

6.  27  he  went  and  beheaded  him  in  the  prison 
6.  36  that  they  may  go  into  the  country  round 

6.  37  Shall  we  go  and  buy  two  hundred  penny. 

7.  24  went  into  the  borders  of  Tyre  and  Sidon 
g.  43  than  having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell 

14.  10  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve,  went 
14  12  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  prepare 

16.  13  [they  went  and  told  (it)  unto  the  residue] 
Luke  5. 14  go.and  show  thyself  to  the  priest,and  offer 

8-  34  [went  and]  told  (it)  in  the  city  and  in  the 
g.  12  that  [they  may  go]  into  the  towns  and  co. 

9.  57  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  go. 
9.  59  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 
9.  60  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 

17.  23  See  here  !  or,  see  there!  go  not  after  (the.) 

22.  13  they  went,  and  found  as  he  had  said  unto 
24.  24  certain  of  them .  .went  to  the  sepulchre 

John  4.  47  he  went  unto  him,  and  besought  him  that 
6.    1  After  these  things  Jesus  went  over  the 
6.  68  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  thou  hast 
9.    7  He  went  his  way  therefore,  and  washed 
9. 11 1  went  and  washed,  and  I  received  sight 

11.  54  went  thence  unto  a  country  near  to  the 
12. 19  said . .  behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  him. 

18.  6  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  gro* 


GO 

Acts    5.  26  then  went  the  captain  with  the  officers 
Gal.     1.  17  I  went  into  Arabia,  and  returned  again 
Jude        7  going  after  strange  flesh  are  set  forth 
Rev.  10.    9  I  went  untothe  angel,  and  said  unto  him 

12.  17  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of 
16.    2  the  first  went,  and  poured  out  his  vial 

28.  To  go  through,  h'Upxoncu  dierchomai. 

Luke  2.  15  Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and 
Acts  11.  22  Barnabas,  that  [he  should  go]  as  far  as  A. 

20.  25  among  whom  I  have  gone  preaching  the 

"29.  To  go  into,  elo-epxop-ai   eiserchomai. 

Lukeio.    7  That  he  was  gone  to  be  Mr.  20.25,  Lu.18.25 

30.  Tn pass  out  of,  en-rvopevofiai  e/c  or  €%<*>, or  cnro" 
Markio.  46  as  he  went  out  of  Jericho  with  his  disci. 

11. 19  when  even  was  come,  he  went  out  of  the 

13.  1  as  he  went  out  of  the  temple,  one  of  his 
Rev.    1.  16  out  of  his  mouth  went  a  sharp  two  edged 

19.  15  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  asharpsword 

31.  To  go  out  or  forth,  Qipxofiat  exerchomai. 
Matti5.  2i  Then  Jesus  went  thence,  and  departed 
Lukei4.  18  I  must  needs  go  and  see  it :  I  pray  thee 
Acts  16.  10  we  endeavoured  to  go  into  Macedonia 

16.  19  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone 
Rom.  10.  18  verily,  their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth 
2  Co.  2.  13  but.  .1  went  from  thence  into  Macedonia 

8.  17  but.  .of  his  own  accord  he  went  unto  you 

32.  To  go  in  unto,  eto~etfit  els  eiseiuvi  eis. 

Acts    3.    3  Peter  and  John  about  to  go  into  the  tern. 
Heb.   9.   6  the  priests  went  always  into  the  first  tab. 

33.  To  go  on,  epxofxat  erchomai. 

Matt. 12.  9  when  he  was  departed  thence,  he  went 

13.  36  Then  Jesus,  .went  into  the  house  :  and 

14.  12  and  buried  it,  and  went  and  told  Jesus 
14. 29  Peter,  .walked  on  the  water,  to  go  to  Jes. 

Mark  3.  19  and  they  went  into  an  house 

Luke  2.  44  But  they. .  went  a  day's  journey ;  and 

14.    1  as  he  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the 
John  4.  45  seen  all . .  for  they  also  went  unto  the  feast 
6.  17  went  over  the  sea  toward  Capernaum 

21.  3  They  say  unto  him,  We  also  go  with  thee 
Acts   4. 23  being  let  go,  they  went  to  their  own  com. 

28.  14  to  tarry,  .and  so  we  went  toward  Rome 
Heb.  11.    8  obeyed,  .not  knowing  whither  he  went 

34.  To  go  in  unto,  e/j.0ct,lvca  els  embaino  eis. 
Matt.  13.  2  so  that  he  went  into  a  ship,  and  sat 
Luke  8.  22  that  he  went  into  a  ship  with  his  discip. 

35.  To  go  back,  pass,  fj.tr a&aivw  metabaino. 
Lukeio.    7  remain.  .Go  not  from  house  to  house 

36.  To  go  or  pass  along,  7rapairopevofiat  paraporeu. 
Mark  2.  23  he  went  through  the  corn  fields  on  the 

37.  To  become  alongside,  ■jrapaylvotiai  paraginomai. 
Acts  23.  16  he  went  and  entered  into  the  castle 

38.  To  make  way,  iroUw  SSbv  poieo  hodon. 
Mark  2.  23  as  they  went,  to  pluck  the  ears  of  corn 

39.  To  go  near  or  alongside,  •Kapepxofxa.i  parerclw. 
Lukei?.    7  will  say.  .Go  and  sit  down  to  meat  ? 

40.  To  wall  round  about,  TrepiiraTew  peripaleo. 
Mark  12.  38  scribes,  which  love  to  go  in  long  clothing 

41. To  go  or  pass  on,  iropevo/xai  poreuo})iai. 

Matt.  2.    8  Go  and  search  diligently  for  the  young 
2.  20  go  into  the  land  of  Israel :  for  they  are 

8.  9  I  say  to  this  (man),  Go,  and  he  goeth 

9.  13  But  go  ye  and  learn  what  (that)  ineaneth 
10.   6  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 

10.  7  as  ye  go,  preach,  saying,  The  kingdom 

11.  4  Go  and  show  John  again  those  things 

12.  1  At  that  time  Jesus  wenton  the  sabbath 
12.  45  Then  goeth  he,  and  taketh  with  himself 

17.  27  go  thou  to  the  sea,  aud  cast  an  hook 
18. 12  goeth  into  the  mountains,  and  seeketh 
21.   2  Go  into  the  village  over  against  you,  and 

21.  6  the  disciples  went,  and  did  as  Jesus  com. 

22.  9  Go  ye  therefore  into  the  highways,  and 
22.  15  Then  went  the  Pharisees,  and  took  coun. 

25.  9  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy 
25. 16  Then  he.  .went  and  traded  with  the  same 

26.  14  Then  one  of  the  twelve,  .went  unto  the 

27.  66  So  they  went,  and  made  the  sepulchre 

28.  7  go  quickly,  and  tell  his  disciples  that 
28.    9  [And  as  they  went  to  tell  his  disciples] 
28.  19  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations 

Marki6.  10  [she  went  and  told  them  that  had  been] 
16.  12  [as  they  walked,  and  went  into  the  coun.] 
16. 15  [Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the] 
Luke  1.  39  and  went  into  the  hill  country  withhaste 
2.    3  all  went  to  be  taxed,  every  one  into  Ins 
2.  41  his  parents  went  to  Jerusalem  every  year 

4.  42  departed  and  went  into  a  desert  place 

5.  24  take  up  thy  couch,  and  go  into  thine  ho. 
7.  6  Then  Jesus  went  with  them.  And  when 
7.    8  and  I  say  unto  one,  Go,  and  he  goeth 

7.  11  that  he  went  into  a  city  called  Nain  ;and 

7.  50  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee  ;  go  in  peace 

8.  48  Daughter,  be  of  good  comfort . .  go  in  peace 

9.  13  except  we  should  go  and  buy  meat  for  all 
9.  51  he  stedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jerusa. 
9.  52  they  went,  and  entered  into  a  village  of 
9.  53  face  was  as  though  he  would  go  to  Jeru. 
9.  56  And  they  went  to  another  village 

9.  57  that,  as  they  went  in  the  way,  a  certain 

10.  37  Then  said  Jesus.  .Go,  and  do  thou  likew. 

10.  38  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  went,  that  he 

11.  5  shall  go  unto  him  at  midnight,  and  say 
11.  26  Then  goeth  he,  and  taketh.  .seven  other 


404 


Lukei3-  32  Go  ye,  and  tell  that  fox.  Behold,  I  cast 
14.  10  when  thou  art  bidden,  go  and  sit  dow  n  in 
14.  19  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go  to  prove  them 

14.  31  Or  what  king,  going  to  make  war  against 

15.  4  go  after  that  which  was  lost,  until  he 
15.  15  he  went  and  joined  himself  to  a  citizen 

15.  18  I  will  arise  aud  go  to  my  father,  and  will 

16.  30  but  if  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead 

17.  11  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  went  to  Jerusalem 
17.  14  said.  .Go  show  yourselves  unto  the  priest 
19.  12  A  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far  cou. 
19.  28  he  went  before,  ascending  up  to  Jerusal. 
19.  36  as  he  went,  they  spread  their  clothes  in 

21.  8  Take  heed . .  go  ye  not  therefore  after 

22.  8  Go  and  prepare  us  the  passover,  that  we 
22.  22  truly  the  Son  .of  man  goeth,  as  it  was 

22.  33  am  ready  to  go  with  thee, both  into  prison 
22.  39  he  came  out,  and  went,  as  he  was  wont 
24.  13  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  vil. 
24.  28  drew  nigh  unto  the  village  whithertheyw. 

24.  28  as  though  he  would  have  gone  further 
John  7.  35  Whither  will  he  go,  that  we  shall  not  fi. 

7.  35  will  hego  unto  thedispersedamongtheG. 

7.  53  [And  every  man  went  unto  his  own  house] 

8.  1  [Jesus  went  unto  the  mount  of  Olives] 

8.  11  [Neither  do  I  condemn  thee :  go,  and  sin] 

10.  4  he  goeth  before  them,  and  the  sheep  fol. 

11.  11  I  go,  that  I  may  awake  him  out  of  sleep 
14.    2  I  would  have  told  you.  I  go  to  prepare  a 
14.    3  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will 
14.  12  greater,  .because  I  go  unto  my  Father 
14.  28  I  go  unto  the  Father :  for  my  Father  is 
16.  28  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father 
20. 17  go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  unto  them 

Acts    1.  11  come,  .as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heav. 

I.  25  take  part,  .that  he  might  go  to  his  own 
5.  20  Go,  stand  and  speak  in  the  temple  to  the 
8.  26  Arise,  and  go  toward  the  south,  unto  the 
8.  27  he  arose  and  went :  and,  behold,  a  man 
8.  36  as  they  went  on  (their)  way,  they  came 

8.  39  the  eunuch . .  went  ou  his  way  rejoicing 

9.  11  Arise,  and  go  into  the  street  which  is 

10.  20  go  with  them,  doubting  nothing :  for  I 

12.  17  departed,  and  went  into  another  place 
16.    7  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia  :  but  the 
16,  16  it  came  to  pass,  as  we  went  to  prayer,  a 

16.  36  now  therefore  depart,  and  go  in  peace 

17.  14  sent  away  Paul,  to  go  as  it  were  to  the 

18.  6  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gent. 

19.  21  Paul  purposed  in  the  spirit,  .to  go  to  Je. 

20.  1  and  departed  for  to  go  into  Macedonia 
20.  22  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusalem 
22.    5  went  to  Damascus,  to  bring  them  which 

22.  10  Arise,  and  go  into  Damascus ;  and  there 

23.  23  Make  ready  two  hundred  soldiers  to  go 
23.  32  they  left  the  horsemen  [to  go]  with  him 

25.  12  unto  Cesar?  unto  Cesar  shalt  thou  go 

25.  20  I  asked .  .whether  he  would  go  to  Jerus. 

26.  12  Whereupon,  as  I  went  to  Damascus  with 

27.  3  gave,  .liberty  to  go  unto  his  friends  to 

28.  26  Go  unto  this  people,  and  say,  Hearing 
Rom. 15.  25  now  I  go  unto  Jerusalem  to  minister 

1  Co.  10.  27  and  ye  be  disposed  to  go,  whatsoever  is 
16.    4  if  it  be  meet  that  I  go  also,  they  shall  go 
16.    6  bring  me  on  my  journey  whithersoever  1  g. 

1  Ti.    1.    3  As  I  besought,  .when  I  went  into  Maced. 

Jas.    4.  13  we  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and  continue 

1  Pe.  3.  19  By  which  also  he  went  and  preached 

3.  22  Who  is  gone  into  heaven,  aud  is  on  the 
Jude       11  for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain 

42.  To  go  toward,  Trpoaepxofxai  proserclxomai. 
Acts  22.  26  he  went  and  told  the  chief  captain,  saying 

43.  To  go  away,  virdyai  hupago. 

Matt.  5.  41  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him 

8.  32  And  he  said  unto  them,  Go.   And  when 

9.  6  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thine  ho. 

13.  44  for  joy  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all  that 

18.  15  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and 

19.  21  go.  .sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the 

20.  4  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and  whats. 

20.  7  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard ;  and  whats. 

21.  28  said,  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard 
26. 18  Go  into  the  city  to  such  a  man,  and  say 
26.  24  The  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  is  written  of 
28.  10  go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  G 

Mark  5.  19  Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them 

5.  34  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague 

6.  31  for  there  were  many  coming  and  going 
6.  38  How  many  loaves  have  ye?  go  and  see 

14.  13  Go  ye  into  the  city,  and  there  shall  meet 
14.  21  The  Son  of  man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  is 

Luke  8.  42  [But  as  he  went  the  people  thronged] 
i2.  58  When  thou  goest  with  thine  adversary 
17. 14  that,  as  they  went,  they  were  cleansed 
19.  30  Go  ye  into  the  village  over  against 

John  3.    8  but  canst  not  tell . .  whither  it  goeth 

4.  16  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  come  hither 

6.  21  the  ship  was  at  the  land  whither  they  w. 

7.  3  Depart  hence,  and  go  into  Juda?a,  that 

7.  33  and  (then)  I  go  unto  him  that  sent  me 

8.  14  I  know  whence  1  came,  and  whither  I  go 
8. 14  tell  whence  I  come,  and  whither  I  go 

8.  21  said  Jesus . .  whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come 

8.  22  he  saith  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come 

9.  7  said.  .Go,  wash  in  the  pool  of  Siloam 

9.  11  Go  to  the  pool  of  Siloam,  and  wash :  and 

II.  8  stone  thee ;  and  goest  thou  thither  again  ? 

11.  31  She  goeth  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there 

11.  44  Jesus  saith .  .Loose  him,  and  let  him  go 

12.  35  that  walketh.  .knoweth  not  whither  he  go 

13.  3  he  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God 


GO 


John  1 3.  33  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come ;  so  now  I 
13.  36  Simon  Peter  said.  .Lord,  whither  goest 

13.  36  Whither  I  go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me 

14.  4  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye 

14.  5  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  thou  goest 

15.  16  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit 

16.  5  none  of  you  asketh  me,  Whither  goest 
16. 10  because  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see 
j.6.  16  [ye  shall  see  me;  because  I  go  to  the  Fa.] 

16.  17  What  is  this. .  Because  I  go  to  the  Father? 
21.    3  Peter  saith  unto  them,  I  go  a  fishing 

1  Jo.  2.  11  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth,  because 
Rev.  10.    8  Go.  .take  the  little  book  which  is  open 
13. 10  He  that  leadeth  into  captivity  shall  go 
T4.    4  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth 

17.  8  and  shall  ascend,  .and  go  into  perdition 

17.  11  the  beast  that  was.  .goeth  into  perdition 

■44.  To  give  way,  ^ajpew  chorea. 

Matt  15.  17  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth  go. 
[See  also  Armed,  astray,  captive,  captivity,  forward, 
free  fully,  ill,  let,  letting,  near,  nigh,  right  on,  well, 
well  with,  whoring.] 

GO,  able  to  — 

To  go  out  or  forth,  n^'  yatsa. 

N  urn  26.   2  all  that  are  able  to  go  to  war  in  Israel 
GO  aboard,  to  — 
To  go  up  upon,  iiripaivca  epibaino. 

Acts  21.    2  finding  a  ship,  .we  went  aboard,  and  set 
GO  about,  to  — 
I. To  go  on,  TjSrt  halah. 

Prov  20.  19  He  that  goeth  about  (as)  a  talebearer  re. 

2.  To  withdraw  self,  turn  about,  pen  chamaq,  7- 
Jer.  31. 22  How  long  wilt  thou  go  about,  0  thou 

3.  To  go  round  about,  339  sabab. 

Josh  16.    6  and  the  border  went  about  eastward  unto 

1  Sa.  15.  12  he  set  him  up  a  place,  and  is  gone  about 

2  Ki.   3.  25  the  slingers  went  about  (it),  and  smote  it 
2  Ch.17.    9  went  about  throughout  all  the  cities  of  J. 

23.    2  they  went  about  in  Judah,  and  gathered 

Eccl.  *:  20  I  went  about  to  cause  my  heart'to  despair 

Song  3.    3  The  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city  fo. 

5.    7  The  watchmen  that  went  about  the  city, 

4.To  go  round  about,  rnp  sabab,  3a. 

Psa.  55.  10  Day  and  night  they  go  about  it  upon  the 
Song  3.    2  I  will  rise  now,  and  go  about  the  city  in 

5.  To  go  about,  trade,  "inp  sachar. 

Jer.  14. 18  both  the  prophet  and  the  priest  go  about 

6.  To  do,  make,  rfipy  asah. 

Deut3i.  21  know  their  imagination  which  they  goab. 

7.  To  go  to  and  fro,  eiw  shut 

Nura  11.    8  the  people  went  about,  and  gathered  (it) 

S.To  go  through,  $iepxof.iat  dierchomai. 

Acts  10.  38  who  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing 

9. To  put  hands  on,  attempt,  einxeipeco  epicheireo. 
Acts    9.  29  Grecians :  but  they  went  about  to  slay 

10.  To  seek,  desire,  fartta  zeteo. 

John  7.  19  none  of'you  keepeth . .  Why  go  ye  about  to 

7.  20  Thou  hast  a  devil :  who  goeth  about  to 
Acts  21.  31  as  they  went  about  to  kill  him,  tidings 
Rom  10.    3  and  going  about  to  establish  their  own 

11.7b  try,  attempt,  iretpdfa  peirazo. 

Acts  24.    6  Who  also  hath  gone  about  to  profane  the 

12.  To  try,  attempt,  weipdofxai  peiraomai. 

Acts  26.  21  caught  me  in  the  temple,  and  went  about 

13.  To  go  round  about,  irepidya)  2^eriago. 

Matt.  4.  23  Jesus  went  about  all  Galilee,  teaching  in 
9.  35  And  Jesus  went  about  all  the  cities  and 
Acts  13. 11  he  went  about  seeking  some  to  lead  him 
GO  abroad,  to  — 

1.  To  go  on  habitually,  r^n  halah,  7. 

Psa.  77.  17  sent  out  a  sound  :thinearrowsalsowenta. 

2. To  go  out  or  forth,  NV'  yatsa. 

Deut  23.  10  then  shall  he  go  abroad  out  of  the  camp 

3.7b  go  through,  Stepxofiai  dierchomai. 
Luke  5.  15  went  there  a  fame  abroad  of  him 

4.  To  go  out  or  forth,  4£epxofiat  exerchomai. 

Matt.  9.  26  the  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all  that 
JohU2i.  23  Then  went  this  saying  abroad  among  the 

GO  again,  to  — 

1.7*o  go  back,  3lir  shub. 

Gen.  43.    2  said  unto  them/Go  again,  buy  us  a  little 

43.  13  Take  also  your  brother,  and  arise,  go  ag. 

44.  25  our  father  said,  Go  again,  (and)  buy  us 
XUIU23.  16  said,  Go  again  unto  Balak,  and  say  thus 
Deut24.  19  thou  shalt  not  go  again  to  fetch  it :  it 

1  Sa.    5.  11  let  it  go  again  to  his  own  place,  that  it 
25. 12  So  David's  young  men.  .went  again,  and 
29.    4  that  he  may  go  again  to  his  place  which 

1  Ki.  12.  27  and  go  again  to  Rehoboam  king  of  Judah 

18.  43  Aud  he  said,  Go  again  seven  times 

19.  20  he  said  unto  him,  Go  back  again  :  for 
2KL   4.  31  wherefore  he  went  again  to  meet  him 

2  Ch.19.    4  and  lie  went  out  again  through  the  people 
Jer.  46.  16  Arise,  and  let  us  go  again  to-our  own  pe. 

2.  To  turn  upon  or  about,  iiriffrpe<j>w  episirepho. 
Acts  15.  36  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren  in 


GO 


405 


GO 


GO  along,  to  — 

To  go  on,  ~i\bn  halak. 

Josh.  1 7.    7  the  border  went  along  on  the  right  hand 
2  Sa.  16.  13  Shimei  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  over 

GO  and  meet,  to  — 

To  come  opposite  to,  vTravrda)  hupantao. 

Johnn.  20  Martha,  .went  and  met  him  :  but  Mary 

GO  aside,  to  — 

l.To  (jo  aside,  iid  sur. 

Deut  28.  14  thou  shalt  not  go  aside  from  any  of  the 

2.  To  go  aside,  T\ti&  satah. 

Num.  5.  12  If  any  man's  wife  go  aside,  and  commit 
5.  19  if  thou  hast  not  gone  aside  to  unclean. 
5.  20  But  if  thou  hast  gone  aside  (to  another) 

5.  29  when  a  wife  goeth  aside  (to  another)  ins. 

Z.To  give  space,  withdraw,  avax<*>pe<*>  anachoreo. 

Acts  23.  19  went  (with  him)  aside  privately.and  asked 
26.  31  when  they  were  gone  aside,  they  talked 
4.  To  go  away,  airtpxofiai  aperchomai. 

Acts   4.  15  commanded  them  to  go  aside  out  of  the 
5. To  give  space,  withdraw,  uwox^P^c*)  hupochoreo. 

Luke  9.  10  went  aside  privately  into  a  desert  place 
GO  astray,  to  — 
l.To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rm  nadach,  2. 

Deut  22.    1  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox . .  go  astray 
'2.  To  err,  go  astray  through  ignorance,  3$  shagag. 

Psa.119.  67  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray;  but 

3.  To  err,  go  astray  through  ignorance,  rnu>  shagah. 

Prov.  5.  23  greatness  of  his  folly  he  shall  go  astray 

4.  To  go  astray,  err,  irXaudo/iat  planaomai. 

Matt  18.  12  be  gone  astray,  .which  is  gone  astray 

18.  13  ninety  and  nine  which  went  not  astray 

1  Pe.   2.  25  For  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray ;  but 

2  Pe.  2.  15  are  gone  astray,  following  the  way  of  B. 
GO  astray,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  err  through  ignorance,  nxy  shagah,  5. 

Prov  28.  10  cause th  the  righteous  to  go  astray  in  an 
GO  away,  to  — 
l.To  go  on,  -]^n  halak.  • 

Jer.  22.  10  weep  sore  for  him  that  goeth  away :  for 
51.  50  Ye  that  have  escaped  the  sword  go  away 

Hos.    6.    4  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away 

2.  To  go  on,  tj1?;  yalak. 

Gen.  38.  19  she  arose,  and  went  away,  and  laid  by 
Exodi2.  28  children  of  Israel  went  away,  and  did  as 
Josh.  18.    8  men  arose,  and  went  away:  and  Joshua 
Judgig.    2  went  away  from  him  unto  her  father's  h. 

1  Sa.  15.  27  And  as  Samuel  turned  about  to  go  away 

28.  25  they  rose  up,  and  went  away  that  night 

2  Ki.   5.  11  But  Naaman  was  wroth,  aud  went  away 

5  12  So  he  turned,  and  went  away  in  a  rage 
Hos.    5.  14  I,  (even)  I,  will  tear  and  go  away  ;  I  will 

Z.To  go  out,  «v;  yatsa. 

Dfiut  15.  16  I  will  not  go  away  from  thee;  because 
4.To  remove,  journey,  ypi  nasa. 

Judgi6.  3  and  went  away  with  them,  bar  and  all 
16.  14  and  went  away  with  the  pin  of  the  beam 

5. To  be  removed,  J7D3  nasa,  2. 

Job     4.  21  Doth  not  their  excellency,  go  away? 
6.  To  go  on  or  over,  "\2V,  abar. 

2  Sa.  18.   9  the  mule  that  (was)  under  him  went  away 
7. To  go  up,  nby  alah. 

2  Ki.  12.  18  and  he  went  away  from  Jerusalem 
8.2*0  turn  the  face,  n:3  panah. 

Jer.     6.   4  Woe  unto  us  !  for  the  day  goeth  away,  for 

9.  To  turn,  Tisri  haphah. 

2  Ch.  g.  12  went  away  to  her  own  land,  she  and  her 

10.  To  go  away  or  off,  airzpxoy.a.L  aperchomai. 
Matt.  8.  31  [suffer  us  to  go  away  into  the  herd  of  sw.] 

19.  22  he  went  away  sorrowful :  for  he  had  gr. 

25.  46  And  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 

26.  42  He  went  away  again  the  second  time,  and 
26.  44  he  left  them,  and  went  away  again,  and 

Markio.  22  And  he  was  sad.  .and  went  away  grieved 

14.  39  And  again  he  went  away,  and  prayed 
Lube  2.  15  as  the  angels  were  gone  away  from  them 
John  4.    8  For  his  disciples  were  gone  away  unto  the 

6.  22  (that)  his  disciples  were  gone  away  alone 
10.  40  went  away  again  beyond  Jordan,  into 
16.   7  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away 
16.    7  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will 
20. 10  Then  the  disciples  went  away  again  unto 

11.  To  go  out  or  forth,  i^epxofiai  exerchomai. 
Acts  10.  23  on  the  morrow  Peter  went  away  with  th. 

12.  To  pass  on,  irop^vofxai  poreuomai. 

Matt  28.  16  Then  the  eleven  disciples  went  away  into 

13.  To  go  away,  u7rayo>  hupago. 

John  6.  67  Then  said  Jesus . .  Will  ye  also  go  away  ? 
12.  11  many  of  the  Jews  went  away,  and  belie. 
14.  28  I  go  away,  and  come  (again)  unto  you 
GO  back,  to  — 
l.To  depart,  remove,  fall  off  from,  eho  mush,  5. 

Job   23. 12  Neither  have  I  gone  back  from  the  comm. 
2.  To  go  back,  «d  svg. 

Psa.  So.  18  So  will  not  we  go  back  from  thee  :  quick. 


3.  To  be  or  keep  free,  Vip  para. 

Eze.  24  14  I  will  not  go  back,  neither  will  I  spare 

4.  To  go  back,  yutr  shub. 

Judg  1 1.  35  opened  my  mouth . .  and  I  cannot  go  back 

18.  26  he  turned  and  went  back  unto  his  house 

1  Ki.  13.  19  So  he  went  back  with  him,  and  did  eat 

2  Ki.   2.  13  went  back,  and  stood  by  the  bank  of  Jo. 

8.  29  And  king  Joram  went  back  to  be  healed 
GO  before,  to  — 
l.To  go  before,  nn^  qadam,  3. 

Psa.  68.  25  The  singers  went  before,  the  players  on 
89.  14  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face; 
2.  To  go  before,  irpodyw  proago. 

Matt.  2.  9  and,  lo,  the  star,  .went  before  them,  till 
14.  22  and  to  go  before  him  unto  the  other  side 
21.    9  And  the  multitudes  that  went  before 

21.  31  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  you 
26.  32  But  after . .  I  will  go  before  you  into  Galilee 
28.    7  behold,  he  goeth  before  you  into  Galilee 

Mark  6.  45  to  go  to  the  other  side  before  unto  Beths. 

10.  32  and  Jesus  went  before  them  :  and  they 

11.  9  And  they  that  went  before,  and  they  that 
14.  28  But  after . .  I  will  go  before  you  into  Galil. 
16.    7  tell.  .Peter  that  he  goeth  before  you  into 

LukeiS.  39  And  they  which  [went  before]  rebuked 

1  Ti.    1.  18  to  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on 

5.  24  going  before  to  judgment;  andsome(men) 
Heb.    7. 18  the  commandment  going  before  for  the 

B.To  go  before  or  first,  irpo4pxofj.cn  proerchomai. 
Luke  1.  17  And  he  shall  go  before  him  in  the  spirit 

22.  47  one  of  the  twelve,  went  before  them 
Acts  20.    5  These  going  before,  tarried  for  us  at  Tro. 

20. 13  And  we  went  before  to  ship,  and  sailed 

2  Co.   9.    5  that  they  would  go  before  unto  you 

4.  To  pass  before,  wpowopevofAai  proporeuomai. 

Luke  1  76  for  thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the  L. 

Acts    7.  40  Make  us  gods  to  go  before  us:  for  (as  for 
GO  beyond,  to  — 
l.To  go  over  or  beyond,  ~a^  abar. 

Nuni24,  13  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  commandment 
2.  To  go  over  or  beyond,  vivepfSaivto  huperbaino. 

1  Th.  4.    6  That  no  (man)  go  beyond  and  defraud 
GO  by,  to  — 

To  go  over  or  beyond,  131;  abar. 

Job  zi.  29  Have  ye  not  asked  them  that  go  by  the 
Psa.  129.    8  Neither  do  they  which  go  by  say,  The 

GO  captive,  to  — 

To  remove  into  exile,  rna  galdh. 

Amos  6.    7  Therefore  now  shall  they  go  captive  with 

GO,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

1.  To  make  to  go  on,  TjSn  halak,  3. 

Job   24.  10  They  cause  (him)  to  go  naked  without 
2. To  cause  to  go  on,  :|?;  yalak,  5. 

Exodi4.  21  Lord  caused  the  sea  to  go  (back)  by  a  st. 
Lev.  26.  13  broken  the  bands . .  and  made  you  go  upri. 

2  Sa.  13. 13  whither  shall  I  cause  my  shame  to  go? 
GO  down,  to  — 

l.To  go  in,  Ni3  bo. 

Gen.  15.  17  when  the  sun  went  down,  and  it  was  d. 
Exod22.  26  it  unto  him  by  that  the  sun  goeth  down 
Deut  24.  13  the  pledge  again  when  the  sun  goeth  do. 

24.  15  neither  shall  the  sun  go  down  upon  it 
Josh  10.  13  and  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a  whole 
Judg  14  18  the  seventh  day  before  the  sun  went  down 

19.  14  and  the  sun  went  down  upon  them 

2  Sa.    2.  24  the  sun  went  down  when  they  were  come 
Eccl.   1.    5  the  sun  goeth  down,  and  hasteth  to  his 
Isa.   60.  20  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down;  neither 
Jer.   15.   9  her  sun  is  gone  down  while .  .yet  day;  she 
Mic.    3.    6  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets 

2.  To  be  cast  down,  nrjn  chathath,  2. 

Job  21.  13  and  in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave 

3.  To  go  down,  *n;  yarad. 

Gen.  11.  7  Go  to,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound 
12. 10  Abram  went  down  into  Eg}rpt  to  sojourn 

18.  21  I  will  go  down  now,  and  see  whether 
24.  16  she  went  down  to  the  well,  and  filled 
24.  45  she  went  down  unto  the  well,  and  drew 
26.    2  Go  not  down  into  Egypt;  dwell  in  the 
37-  35  I  will  go  down  into  the  grave  unto  my  s. 
38.    1  that  Judah  went  down  from  his  brethren 
42.    3  Joseph's  ten  brethren  went  down  to  buy 

42.  38  My  son  shall  not  go  down  with  you  ;  for 

43.  4  wilt  send,  .we  will  go  down  and  buy  thee 
43.    5  thou  wilt  not  send . .  we  will  not  go  down 

43.  15  rose  up,  and  went  down  to  Egypt,  and 

44.  26  We  cannot  go  down .  .will  we  go  down 
46.  3  fear  not  to  go  down  into  Egypt ;  for  I 
46.    4  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  Egypt ;  and 

Exodig.  14  Moses  went  down  from  the  mount  unto 

19.  21  Go  down,  charge  the  people,  lest  they 
1  ).  25  Moses  went  down  unto  the  people,  and 
32.  15  Moses  turned,  and  went  down  from  the 

Numi6.  30  and  they  go  down  quick  into  the  pit;  then 
16.  33  They,  .went  down  alive  into  the  pit,  and 

20.  15  How  our  fathers  went  down  into  Egypt 
34.  11  And  the  coast  shall  go  down  from  S. 

Deut  bo.  22  Thy  fathers  went  down  into  Egypt  with 
26.    5  he  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  sojourned 

Josh  15.  10  went  down  to  Beth-shemesh,  and  passed 
16.   3  And  goeth  down  westward  to  the  coast 
i5.    7  it  went  down  from  Janohah  to  Ataroth 
i3.  18  northward,  and  went  down  unto  Arabah 


Josh  24.    4  Jacob  and  his  children  went  down  into  E. 
Judg.  1.    9  the  children  of  Judah  went  down  to  fight 
3.  27  the  children  of  Israel  went  down  with 

3.  28  they  went  down  after  him,  and  took  the 

4.  14  So  Barak  went  down  from  mount  Tabor 

5.  11  then  shall  the  people  of  the  Lord  go  down 
7.  10  But  if  thou  fear  to  go  down,  go  thou  with 
7.  10  go  thou  with  Phurah  thy  servant  down 

7.  11  shall  thine  hands  be  strengthened  to  go  d. 

7.  11  Then  went  he  down  with  Phurah  his  ser. 
11. 37  that  I  may  go  up  and  down  upon  the 

14.  1  Samson  went  down  to  Timnath,  and  saw 
14.  s  Then  went  Samson  down,  and  his  father 
14.  7  he  went  down  and  talked  with  the  worn. 
14. 10  So  his  father  went  down  unto  the  womau 

14.  19  he  went  down  to  Ashkelon,  and  slew  thi. 

15.  8  he  went  down  and  dwelt  in  the  top  of  the 
Ruth  3.    6  she  went  down  unto  the  floor,  and  did 

1  Sa.  10.   8  thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to  Gilgal 

13.  20  all  the  Israelites  went  down  to  the  Phili. 

14.  36  Let  us  go  down  after  the  Philistines  by 

14.  37  Shall  I  go  down  after  the  Philistines? 

15.  12  passed  on,  and  gone  down  to  Gilgal 

20. 19  thou  shalt  go  down  quickly,  and  come  to 

22.  1  his  father's  house  heard  (it),  they  went  d. 

23.  4  Arise,  go  down  to  Keilah  ;  for  I  will  del. 
23.    8  to  go  down  to  Keilah,  to  besiege  David 

25.  1  David  arose,  and  went  down  to  the  wild. 

26.  2  Saul  arose,  and  went  down  to  the  wilder. 
26.  6  Who  will  go  down  with  me  to  Saul  to  the 
26.    6  Abishai  said,  I  will  go  down  with  thee 

29.  4  let  him  not  go  down  with  us  to  battle 

2  Sa.    5.  17  David  heard,  .and  wentdown  to  the  hold 

11.    8  Go  down  to  thy  house,  and  wash  thy  feet 
11.    9  But  Uriah,  .went  not  down  to  his  house 
11. 10  Uriah  went  not  down  unto  his  house 
11.  10  why.  .didst  thou  not  go  down  unto  thine 

11.  13  went  out.  .but  went  not  down  to  his  ho. 
17.  18  had  a  well,  .whither  they  went  down 

19.  20  come . .  to  go  down  to  meet  my  lord  the 
21.  15  David  went  down,  and  his  servants  with 
23.  13  three  of  the  thirty  chief  went  down,  and 
23.  20  he  went  down  also  and  slew  a  lion  in 

23.  21  he  went  down  to  him  with  a  staff,  and 

1  Ki.  1.  38  Cherethites,  and  the  Pelethites,  went  do. 

21.16  that  Ahab  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the 

21.  18  Arise,  go  down  to  meet  Ahab  king  of  I. 

2  Ki.  1.  15  Go  down  with  him  ;  be  not  afraid  of  him 

1.  15  he  arose,  and  went  down  with  him  unto 

2.  2  I  will  not  leave  thee.  So  they  went  down 
3. 12  and  the  king  of  Edom  went  down  to  him 
5.  14  Then  went  he  down,  and  dipped  himself 

8.  29  Ahaziah.  .went  down  to  see  Joram  the 

10.  13  we  go  down  to  salute  the  children  of  the 

12.  20  house  of  Millo,  which  goeth  down  to  Sil. 

20.  11  by  which  it  had  gone  down  in  the  dial  of 

1  Ch  11.  15  three  of  the  thirty  captains  went  down 

11.  22  he  went  down  and  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit 
11.  23  and  he  went  down  to  him  with  a  staff 

2  Ch.18.    2  And.  .he  went  down  to  Ahab  to  Samaria 

20.  16  To  morrow  go  ye  down  against  them 

22.  6  Azariah.  .went  down  to  see  Jehoram  the 
Neh.    3.  15  unto  the  stairs  that  go  down  from  the 
Job     7.    9  so  he  that  goeth  down  to  the  grave  shall 

17.  16  They  shall  go  down  to  the  bars  of  the  pit 
Psa   22.  29  all  they  that  go  down  to  the  dust  shall 

28.    1  I  become  like  them  that  go  down  into 

30.  3  kept,  .that  I  should  not  go  down  to  the, 
30.    9  What  profit . .  when  I  go  down  to  the  pit  ? 
55.  15  let  them  go  down  quick  into  hell :  for 
88.    4  I  am  counted  with  them  that  go  down 

104.    8  they  go  down  by  the  valleys  unto  the 
107.  23  They  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships 
107  26  they  go  down  again  to  the  depths  :  their 
115.  17  neither  any  that  go  down  into  silence 
133.    2  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garments 
143.    7  lest  I  be  like  unto  them  that  go  down 
Prov.  1.  12  whole,  as  those  that  go  down  into  the  pit 
5.    5  Her. feet  go  down  to  death  ;  her  steps 
iS.    8  they  go  down  into  the  innermost  parts 
26.  22  they  go  down  into  the  innermost  parts 
Song  6.  11  I  went  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts  to 
Isa.    14. 19  that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  pit 

30.  2  That  walk  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  and 

31.  1  Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for 
38.  18  they  that  go  down  into  the  pit  cannot 
42. 10  ye  that  go  down  to  the  sea,  and  all  that 
52.   4  My  people  went  down  aforetime  into  Eg. 
63.  14  As  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the  valley 

Jer.  18.   2  Arise,  and  go  down  to  the  potter's  house 

18.  3  Then  I  went  down  to  the  potter's  house 
22.    1  Go  down  to  the  house  of  the  king  of  J. 
36.  12  Then  he  went  down  into  the  king's  house 
48.  15  his  chosen  young  men  are  gone  down  to 
50.  27  let  them  go  down  to  the  slaughter  :  woe 

Eze.  26.  1 1  thy  strong  garrisons  shall  go  down  to  the 
26.  20  with  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit,  that 
31.  14  death,  .with  them  that  go  down  to  the 
31.  15  In  the  day  when  lie  went  down  to  the 

31.  17  They  also  went  down  into  hell  with  him 

32.  18,  24,  25,  29,  30  with  them  that  go  down  to 
32.  19  go  down,' and  be  thou  laid  with  the  uncir. 
47.   8  These  waters,  .go  down  into  the  desert 

Amos  6.    2  then  go  down  to  Gath  of  the  Philistines 
Jon.    1.    3  Jonah  rose  up .  .and  went  down  to  Joppa 

1.  3  went  down  into  it,  to  go  with  them  unto 

2.  61  went  down  to  the  bottoms  of  the  mou.i 

A. To  be  taken  or  brought  down,  TV  yarad,  6. 

1  Sa.  30.  24  as  his  part  (is)  that  goeth  down  to  the 
5. To  godoiun,  nn:  nachath. 

Job  21.  13  and  in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave 


GO 


406 


GO 


6. To  stretchout^  no3  natah. 

Numzi.  15  that  goeth  down  to  the  dwelling  of  Ar. 
2  Ki.20.  10  light  thing  for  the  shadow  to  go  down 

7.7*0  go  in  upon,  itrtZvw  iirl  epiduo  epi. 

Eph.   4.  26  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath 

8.  To  go  down,  fcara&alvw  katabaino. 
Marki3.  islet  him.. not  go  down  into  the  house 
Luke  2.  51  he  went  down  with  them,  and  came  to 

10.  30  A  certain  (man)  went  down  from  Jerus. 
18.  14  this  man  went  down  to  Ins  house  justified 
John  2.  12  After  this  he  went  down  to  Capernaum 

4.  51  as  he  was  now  going  down,  his  servants 

5.  4  [an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  season] 

6.  16  his  disciples  went  down  unto  the  sea 
Acts   7.  15  So  Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  died 

8.  26  unto  the  way  that  goeth  down  from  Jer. 
8.  38  they  went  down  both  into  the  water,  both 
10.  21  Then  Peter  went  down  to  the  men  which 

14.  25  had  preached,  .they  went  down  into  A. 
18.  22  had  landed,  .he  went  down  to  Antioch 
20.  10  Paul  went  down,  and  fell  on  him,  and 
23.  10  commanded  the  soldiers  to  go  down,  and 
25.    6  had  tarried,  .he  went  down  unto  Cesarea 

9.  To  go  down,  Karepyopai kat&rcJiomai. 

Acts   8.    5  Then  Philip  went  down  to  the  city  of  S. 
12.  19  he  went  down  from  Judea  to  Cesarea 
GO  down  with,  to  — 
To  go  down  with,  G-vycarafSalvu)  sughatabaind. 

Acts  25.    5  go  down  with  (me),  and  accuse  this  man 
GO  every  where,  to  — 
To  go  througliout,  BUpxofiai  dierchomai. 

Acts    8.   4  they . .  went  every  where  preaching  the  w. 
GO  downward,  to  — 
To  go  down,  *i"v  yarad. 

Eccl.  3.  21  the  spirit  of  the  beast  that  goeth  downw. 
GO  far  (off),  to  — 
J, To  be  or  keep  far  off,  pnn  rachaq. 

Prov.19.    7  how  much  more  do  his  friends  go  far  from 

Eze.     8.    6  that  I  should  go  far  off  from  my  sanctuary 
2.  To  go  or  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Josh.  8.    4  go  not  very  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ye 
GO  far  away,  to  — 
To  go  or  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Exod  8.  28  only  ye  shall  not  go  very  far  away :  entr. 
GO  farther,  to  — 
1.  To  go  forward  or  forth,  -npofiaivw  probaino. 

Mark  1.  19  when  he  had  gone  a  little  farther  thence 
2.7*0  go  forward,  or  forth,  irpoipYOfiaiproerckomai. 

Matt26.  39  [lie  went  a  little  farther,]  and  fell  on  his 
GO  forth,  to  — 
I.To  go  forth  or  out,  xyr  yatsa. 

Gen.  8.  7  he  sent  forth  a  raven,  which  went  forth 
8.  16  Go  forth  of  the  ark,  thou,  and  thy  wife 
8.  18  Noah  went  forth,  and  his  sons,  and  his 

8.  19  Every  beast,  .went  forth  out  of  the  ark 

9.  18  the  sons  of  Noah,  that  went  forth  of  the 

10.  11  Out  of  that  land  went  forth  Asslnir,  and 

11.  31  they  went  forth  with  them  from  Ur  of 

12.  5  they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  C. 
42.  15  By  the  life  of  Pharaoh  ye  shall  not  go  fo. 

Xev.  14.    3  the  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp 
!tfum26.    4  which  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

31.  13  went  forth  to  meet  them  without  the  ca. 

33.    1  which  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
Deut2i.  10  When  thou  goest  forth  to  war  against 

23.    9  When  the  host  goeth  forth  against  thine 

23.  12a  place,  .whither  thou  shalt  go  forth  abr. 

Josh  iS.  17  went  forth  toEn-shemesh,  and  went  forth 

Judg.  3.  23  Then  Ehud  went  forth  through  the  porch 

5.  31  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  m. 

20.  25  Benjamin  went  forth  against  them  out  of 
Ruth  1.    7  Wherefore  she  went  forth  outof  the  place 

1  Sa.  17.  5s  when  Saul  saw  David  go  forth  against  the 

18.  30  the  princes  of  the  Philistines  went  forth 

18.  30  andit  cameto  pass,  after  they  went  forth 
23.  13  was  told  Saul. .  and  he  forbare  to  go  forth 
30.  21  they  went  forth  to  meet  David,  and  to  m. 

2  Sa.  11.    1  it  came,  .at  the  time  when  kings  go  forth 

13.  39  king  David  longed  to  go  forth  unto  Abs, 

15.  16  the  king  went  forth,  and  all  hishouseho. 
17  the  king  went  forth,  and  all  the  people 

2  I  will  surely  go  forth  with  you  mysel  i  also 

3  Thou  Bhalt  not  go  forth  :  for  if  we  flee 
7  Now  therefore  arise,  go  forth,  and  speak 
7  if  thou  go  not  forth,  there  will  not  tarry 

20.    8  a  sword.. as  he  went  forth  it  fell  out 

1  Ki.  2.  36  dwell  there,  and  go  not  forth  thence  any 

19.  11  And  he  said,  Go  forth,  and  stand  upon 
22.  22  said,  I  will  go  forth .  .go  forth,  and  do  so 

2  Ki.  2.  21  he  went  forth  unto  the  spring  of  the  wa. 

8.  3  she  went  forth  to  cry  unto  the  king  for 
9. 15  let  none  go  forth  (nor)  escape  out  of  the 
11.  7  two  parts  of  all  you  that  go  forth  on  the 
iS.    7  he  prospered  whithersoever  he  went  fort]  1 

19.  3 1  out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth  a  remnant 

3  Ch.  12.  33,  36  such  as  went  forth  to  battle,  expert  in 
2  Ch.  20.  20  went  forth  into  the  wilderness  of  Tekoa 

20.  20  as  they  went  forth,  .Tehnshaphat  stood 

25.  5  three  hundred  thousand,  .to  go  forth  to 

26.  6  he  went  forth  and  warred  against  the  Ph. 
TTeh.  8.  15  Go  forth  unto  the  mount,  and  fetch  olive 

8.  16  So  the  people  went  forth,  and  brought 
JEeth.  4.    6  So  Hatach  went  forth  to  Mordccai  unto 


15. 

7S. 


19. 
19. 


Esth.  5, 
Job     1. 


39> 
Psa.  44, 
68. 
104, 
108. 
146, 
Prov.  25 

3°' 

Song   1. 

3 
7' 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Eze. 


16. 
21. 
24. 
27. 
3°- 
39- 
44. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 

Dan.  11. 
Hos.  6. 
Joel    2. 

Amos  5. 
Mic.    4. 

4- 

Hab.    1 

3- 

Zech.  2. 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 

9- 

14. 

14. 

Mai.    4. 


0  Then  went  Hainan  forth  that  day  joyful 

12  So  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of 
7  So  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of 

5  go  they  forth  to  their  work  ;  rising  betim. 
4  they  go  forth,  and  return  not  unto  them 
9  But  thou . .  goest  not  forth  with  our  armi. 

7  when  thou  wentest  forth  before  thy  peop. 

23  Man  goeth  forth  Unto  his  work  and  to 
11  wilt  not  thou,  O  God,  go  forth  with  our 

4  His  breath  goeth  forth,  he  returneth  to 

8  Go  not  forth  hastily  to  strive,  lest  (thou 
27  yet  go  they  forth  all  of  them  by  bauds 

8  go  thy  way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the 
11  Go  forth,  O  ye  daughters  of  Zion,  and 

11  let  us  go  forth  into  the  field  ;  let  us  lodge 
3  for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and 
3  Go  forth  now  to  meet  Aliaz,  thou,  and  S. 

32  out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth  a  remna. 

36  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  forth 

13  The  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  man 

3  they  went  forth  out  of  my  mouth,  and  I 

20  Go  ye  forth  of  Babylon,  flee  ye  from  the 

9  Go  forth  ;  to  them  that  (are)  in  darkness 

1 7  they  that  made  thee  waste  shall  go  forth 
11  So  shall  my  word  lie  that  goeth  forth  out 

1  until  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth 

24  they  shall  go  forth,  and  look  upon  the 

37  Yea,  thou  shalt  go  forth  from  him,  and 

25  Go  not  forth  into  the  field,  nor  walk  by 

18  If  I  go  forth  into  the  field,  then  behold 

1  cast,  .out  of  my  sight    let  them  go  forth 

2  Whither  shall  we  go  forth  ?  then  thou 

2  go  forth  unto  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

1 1  Shallum . .  which  went  forth  out  of  this  pi. 

32  evil  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation 
23  the  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  goeth  forth 

4  and  shalt  go  forth  in  the  dances  of  them 
39  the  measuring  line  shall  yet  go  forth  over 

12  Then  Jeremiah  went  forth  out  of  Jerusa. 
2  he  that  goeth  forth  to  the  Chaldeans  shall 

8  Ebed-melech  went  forth  out  of  the  king's 
17  If  thou  wilt  assuredly  go  forth  unto  the 
iS  But  if  thou  wilt  not  go  forth  to  the  king 

21  But  if  thou  refuse  to  go  forth,  this  (is) 
4  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  night,  by 

6  Ishmael.  .went  forth  from  Mizpah  to 

12  he  shall  go  forth  from  thence  in  peace 

17  whatsoever  tiling  goeth  forth  out  of  our 

7  Chemosh  shall  go  forth  into  captivity 

8  go  forth  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
7  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  Dight,  by 

13  and  out  of  the  fire  went  forth  lightning 

22  Arise,  go  forth  into  the  plain,  and  I  will 

23  Then  I  arose,  and  went  forth  into  the  pi. 

7  lie  said,  .go  ye  forth.  And  they  went  forth 
4  thou  shalt  go  forth  at  even  in  their  sight 

12  the  prince . .  shall  bear. .  and  shall  go  forth 

14  thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  heathen 

4  shall  my  sword  go  forth  outof  his  sheath 
12  her  great  scum  went  not  forth  out  of  her 

33  When  thy  wares  went  forth  out  of  the 

9  In  that  day  shall  messengers  go  forth  from 

9  they  that  dwell  in  the  cities. . shall  goforth 

19  when  they  go  forth  into  the  outer  court 

2  then  he  shall  go  forth  ;  but  the  gate  shall 

8  and  he  shall  go  forth  by  the  way  thereof 

9  shall  go  forth  by  the  way  of  the  north  ga. 
9  but  shall  go  forth  over  against  it 

10  and  when  they  go  forth,  shall  go  forth 

12  then  he  shall  go  forth  ;  and  after  his 

3  And  when  the  man.  .went  forth  eastward 
44  therefore  he  shall  go  forth  with  great 

5  (are  as)  the  light  (that)  goeth  forth 

16  let  the  bridegroom  go  forth  of  his  cham. 

18  and  a  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the 

3  and  that  which  went  forth  (by)  an  hundr 

2  for  the  law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion,  and  the 
10  for  now  shalt  thou  go  forth  out  of  the 

4  and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth  ;  for 

5  and  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet 

13  Thou  wentest  forth  for  the  salvation  of 

3  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth 
3  This  (is)  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over 
5  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth 

5  and  see  what  (is)  this  that  goeth  forth 

6  This  (is)  an  ephah  that  goeth  forth.  He 
s  which  go  forth  from  standing  before 

6  The  black  horses,  goforth  into  the  north 
6  and  the  white  go  forth  after  them 

6  and  the  grisled  go  forth  townrd:the  south 

7  And  the  bay  went  forth,  and  sought  to  go 

14  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning 

2  and  half  of  the  city  shall  go  forth  into 

3  Then  shall  the  LOED  go  forth,  and  fight 
2  and  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as 


2.7*0  remove,  jowrucy,]:^}  nasa, 

Num  11.  31  And  there  went  forth  a  wind  from  the  L. 
Jer.  31.  24  and  they  (that)  go  forth  with  flocks 

3. To  goforth,  p?j  nephaq, 

Dan.   2.  13  And  the  decree  went  forth  that  the  wise 

4.  To  go  over  or  beyond,  *uy  abar. 

2  Ch.21.    9  Then  Jehoram  went  forth  with  his  princes 
Isa.   28.  19  From  the  time  that  it  goeth  forth  it  shall 

5.  To  go  on  out  of,  i kw opevo fiat  ckporeuomai. 
Markio.  17  And  when  lie  was  gone  forth  into  the  way 
Rev.  16.  14  (which)  [go  forth]  unto  the  kings  of  the 

6.  To  goforth  or  out  of  eg  e'pxo/i  at  exerehomai. 

Matt  13.    3  Behold,  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow 

14.  14  And  Jesus  went  forth,  and  saw  a  great 


Matt 24.  26  he  is  in  the  desert ;  go  not  forth 

25.    1  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom 
Mark  2.  12  and  went  forth  before  them  all:  insomuch 

2.  13  And  he  went  forth  again  by  the  sea  side 

3.  6  And  the  Pharisees  went  forth,  and  straig. 

6.  24  And  she  went  forth,  and  said  unto  her 
14.  16  And  his  disciples  went  forth,  and  came 
16.  20  [And  they  went  forth,  and  preached  every] 

Luke  5.  27  And  after  these  things  lie  went  forth 

7.  17  this  rumour  of  him  went  forth  througho. 

8.  27  And  when  he  went  forth  to  land,  there 
John   1.  43  Jesus  would  go  forth  into  Galilee,  aud 

12.  13  and  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and  cried 
18.    1  he  went  forth  with  his  disciples  over 

18.  4  Jesus,  .went  forth,  and  said  unto  them 

19.  4  Pilate  therefore  went  forth  again,  and 

19.  17  And  he  bearing  his  cross  went  forth  into 

20.  3  Peter  therefore  went  forth,  and  that 

21.  3  They  went  forth,  and  entered  into  a  ship 
Acts  16.    3  Him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth  with 
Heb.  13.  13  Let  us  go  forth  therefore  unto  him  with. 


3  Jo. 
Rev. 


7  for  his  name's  sake  they  went  forth 

2  and  he  went  forth  conquering,  and  to  co. 


I.To  go  or  pass  on,  iropetofiai  poreuomai. 

Luke  8.  14  when  they  have  heard,  go  forth,  and  are 
GO  (forth),  able  to  — 
Togo  forth  or  out  of,  xy;  yatsa. 

Num.  1.    3  all  that  are  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in 
1.  20  all  that  were  able  to  go  forth  to  war 
[So  also  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42,  45.] 
26.    2  all  that  are  able  to  go  to  war  in  Israel 

GO  forth,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  forth,  ay)  yatsa,  5. 

Eze.  20. 10  I  caused  them  to  go  forth  out  of  the  land 

GO  forth,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  remove  or  journey,  J?pi  nam,  5. 

Psa.  78.  52  But  made  his  own  people  to  go  forth  like 
GO  forward,  to  — 
I.To  go  on,  S&n  halak. 

2  Ki.  20.    9  shall  the  shadow  go  forward  ten  degrees 
2.To  (cause)  to  smite,  roi  nakah,  5. 

2  Ki.   3,  24  but  they  went  forward  smiting  the  Moab. 

3.7*0  lift  up,  vpj  nasa. 

Exodi4.  15  speak  unto.  .Israel,  that  they  go  forward 
Num.  2.  24  they  shall  go  forward  in  the  third  rank 
10.    5  that  lie  on  the  east  parts  shall  go  forward 

i.To  go  forward,  'n-poipxofiai  procrcJiomai. 

Marki4.  35  And  [he  went  forward]  a  little,  and  fell  on 
GO  further,  to  — 
To  put  asunder,  SttarTj/xt  distemi. 

Acts  27.  28  and  when  they  had  gone  a  little  further 
GO  from,  to  — 
To  move,  wander,  flee  away,  "ill  nedad. 

Dan.   6.  18  Then  the  king^.his  sleep  went  from  him 
GO  hard,  to  — 
To  be  or  go  nigh,  b>jj  nagash. 

Judg  9.  52  and  went  hard  unto  the  door  of  the  tow. 

GO  home,  to  — 

To  go  back,  Ditr  shut). 

1  Sa,  18.    2  and  would  let  him  go  no  more  home  to 
GO  in,  to  — 
I.To  go  in,  K13  bo. 

Gen.    7.    7  And  Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons,  and  his 
7.    9  There  went  in  two  and  two  unto  Noah 
7.  15  And  they  went  in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark 
7.  16  they  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and  female 
16.    2  I  pray  thee,  go  in  unto  my  maid  ;  it  may 
16.    4  And  he  went  in  unto  Hagar,  and  she 
19.  33  and  the  first  born  went  in,  and  lay  with 
19.  34  go  thou  in,  (and)  lie  with  him,  that  we 
23.  10,  18  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city 
29.  21  my  days  are  fulfilled,  that  I  may  go  in 
29.  23  brought  her  to  him  ;  and  he  went  in  unto 

29.  30  he  went  in  also  unto  Eachel,  and  he  loved 

30.  3  Behold  my  maid  Bilhah,  go  in  unto  her 
30.  4  gave  him  Bilhah . .  and  Jacob  went  in  unto 
38.  2  and  he  took  her,  and  went  in  unto  her 
38.  8  Go  in  unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry 
38.  9  he  went  in  unto  his  brothers  wife,  that  lie 

Exod.  5.    1  Moses  and  Aaron  wentin,  and  told  Phar. 

6.  11  Go  in,  speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 

7.  10  Moses  and  Aaron  went  in  unto  Pharaoh 
9.    1  Go  in  unto  Pharaoh,  and  tell  him,  Thus 

10.    1  Go  in  unto  Pharaoh  :  fori  have  hardened 
14.  23  the  Egyptians  pursued,  and  went  in  after 
28.  29,  35  when  hegoeth  in  unto  the  holy  (place) 
28.  30  when  he  goeth  in  before  the  Lord:  and 
34.  34  when  Moses  went  in  before  the  Lord  to 
34.  3i  until  he  went  in  to  speak  with  him 

Lev.  14.  36  the  priest  shall  go  in  to  see  the  house 

16.  17  when  he  goeth  in  to  make  an  atonement 
21.  11  Neither  shall  he  go  in  to  any  dead  body 
2i'  23  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  veil,  nor  come 

Num.  4.  19  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  go  in,  andappo. 
4.  20  they  shall  not  go  in  to  see  when  the  holy 

8.  15  after  that  shall  the  Le\ites  go  in  to  do 

8.  24  they  shall  go  in  to  wait  upon  the  service 

27. 17  which  may  go  in  before  them,  and  which 

Deut.  1.    8  go  in  and  possess  the  land  which  the  L. 

1.  37  saying.  Thou  also  shalt  not  go  in  thither 

1.  38  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun .  .shall  go  in  thit. 


GO 


407 


GO 


Deut.  t.  39  they  shall  go  in  thither,  and  unto  them 
4.    1  go  in  and  possess  the  land  which  the  Lo. 
4.  21  that  I  should  not  go  in  unto  that  good 
6.  iS  that  thou  mayest  go  in  and  possess  the 

8.  1  go  in  and  possess  the  land  which  the  Lo. 

9.  1  to  go  in  to  possess  nations  greater  and 
10. 11  that  they  may  go  in  and  possess  the  land 
11.    8  aud  go  in  and  possess  the  land  whither 
11.  10  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 
11.  11  the  laud,  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it,  (is)  a 

11.  31  ys  shall  pass  over  Jordan  to  go  in  to 

21.  13  after  that  thou  shalt  go  in  unto  her 

22.  13  If  any  man  take  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto 
25.  5  her  husband's  brother  shall  go  in  unto 
27.    3  that  thou  mayest  go  in  unto  the  land 

Josh.  1.  11  to  go  in  to  possess  the  land,  which  the 

6.  23  the  young  men  that  were  spies  went  in 

23.  12  and  go  in  unto  them,  and  they  to  you 
Judg.  3.  22  the  haft  also  went  in  after  the  blade 

6. 19  Gideon  went  in,  and  made  ready  a  kid 
15.    1  I  will  go  in  to  my  wife  into  the  chamber 

15.  1  would  not  suffer  him  to  go  in 

16.  1  saw  there  an  harlot,  and  went  in  unto  her 
19.  15  they  turned  aside  thither,  to  go  in  (and) 
19. 15  when  he  went  in,  he  sat  him  down  in  a  s. 

Buth  3.    4  thou  shalt  go  in,  and  uncover  Ins  feet 

4.  13  when  he  went  in  unto  her,  the  Lord  gave 

1  Sa.  24.    3  Saul  went  in  to  cover  Ins  feet :  and  David 

2  Sa,   3.    7  Wherefore  hast  thou  gone  in  unto  my 

7.  18  Then  went  king  David  in,  and  sat  before 
22.  16  David  fasted,  and  went  in,  and  lay  all 

12.  24  David  comforted  Bath-sheba.  .and  went  in 
16.  21  Go  in  into  thy  father's  concubines,  which 

16.  22  Absalom  went  in  unto  his  father's  concu. 

17.  25  Ithra,  an  Israelite,  that  went  in  to  Abigail 
2  KL  t.  15  Bath-sheba  went  in  unto  the  king  into 

11.   2  Ye  shall  not  go  in  to  them,  neither  shall 

13.  8  I  will  not  go  in  with  thee,  neither  will 
13.  16  I  may  not  return,  .nor  go  in  with  thee 

16.  10  Zimri  went  in  and  smote  him,  and  killed 

17.  12  that  I  may  go  in  and  dress  it  for  me  and 
2  Ki.  4.  33  He  went  in  therefore,  and  shut  the  door 

4.  37  she  went  in,  and  fell  at  his  feet,  and 

5.  4  went  in,  and  told  his  lord,  saying,  Thus 
5.  25  he  went  in,  and  stood  before  his  master 
9.   2  go  in,  and  make  him  arise  up  from  among 

10.  24  when  they  went  in  to  offer  sacrifices  and 
10-  25  Go  in.  .slay  them ;  let  none  come  forth 

1  Ch.    2.  21  Hezron  went  in  to  the  daughter  of  Mac. 

7.  23  when  he  went  in  to  his  wife,  she  concei. 

2  Ch.  23.   6  they  shall  go  in,  for  they  (are)  holy :  but 

26.  17  Azariah  the  priest  went  in  after  liim,  and 
29.  iS  they  went  in  to  Hezekiah  the  king,  and 
Neh.   6.  1 1  would  go  into  the  temple . .  I  will  not  go  in 
9.  15  they  should  f,o  in  to  possess  the  land 
9.  23  that  they  should  go  in  to  possess  (it) 
9.  24  the  children  went  in  and  possessed  the 
Esth.  2.  12  when  every  maid's  turn  was  come  to  go  in 
2.  15  the  turn  of  Esther,  .was  come  to  go  in 
4.    8  to  charge  her  that  she  should  go  in  unto 
4.  16  so  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king,  which  (is) 
5. 14  then  go  thou  in  merrily  with  the  king 
Psa.  26.    4  neither  will  I  go  in  with  dissemblers 

51.  title,  after  he  had  gone  in  to  Bath-sheba 
Prov.  6.  29  So  he  that  goeth  in  to  his  neighbour's 
Jer.   36.  20  they  went  in  to  the  king  into  "the  court 
Eze.    S.    9  Go  in,  and  behold  the  wicked  abomina. 
8. 10 1  went  in  and  saw;  and,  behold,  every 
9.   2  they  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  braz. 
10.    2  Go  in  between  the  wheels,  (even)  under 
10.    2  And  he  went  in  in  my  sight 
10.    3  Cherubim  stood,  .when  the  man  went  in 

10.  6  he  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  wheels 

23.  44  went  in.  .as  they  go  in.  .so  went  they  in 
46.    8  he  shall  go  in  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of 
46.  10  when  they  go  in,  shall  go  in ;  and.  when 

2.  To  go  over  or  beyond,  "UJJ  abar. 

Esod32.  27  go  in  and  out  from  gate  to  gate  through. 

3.  To  go  up,  hbii  alal. 

Dan.  2.  16  Then  Daniel  went  in,  and  desired  of  the 
2.  24  Daniel  went  in  unto  Arioch,  whom  the  k. 
6.  10  when  Daniel  knew,  .he  went  in  to  his  ho. 

4.  To  go  in  into,  e'10'ei/j.t  eiseimi. 

Acts  21. 18  Paul  went  in  with  us  unto  James  ;  and 

5. To  go  into,  elo-epxopai  eisercJwmai. 

Matt.  7.  13  and  many  there  be  which  go  in  thereat 
9.  25  he  went  in,  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  and 
23-  13  go  in.  .neither  suffer  ye  them,  .to  go  in 

25.  10  they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to 

26.  58  went  in,  and  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see 
Marki4-  14  wheresoever  he  shall  go  in,  say  ye  to  the 

15.  43  Joseph . .  came,  and  went  in  boldly  unto  P. 
Luke  8.  51  he  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save  Peter 

11.  37  and  he  went  in,  and  sat  down  to  meat 
15. 2S  And  he  was  angry,  and  would  not  go  in 

24.  29  And  he  went  in  to  tarry  with  them 
■Tohnio.    9  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture 

20.    5  stooping  down.  .saw.  .yet  went  he  not  in 
20.    8  Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple 
Acts    1.  21  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in 
9.    6  Arise,  and  go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall 
10  27  he  went  in,  and  found  many  that  were 
11.    3  Thou  wentest  in  to  men  uncircumcised 
17.    2  Paul,  as  Ms  manner  was,  went  in  unto 

GO  in  with,  to  — 

To  go  in  with,  ffvv€io-4pxofJ.ai  suneiserchomai. 
Johni8.  15  that  disciple,  .went  in  with  Jesus  into 


GO  into,  to  — 

l.To  go  in,  N13  bo. 

1  Ki.  11.  17  That  Hadad  fled,  .to  go  into  Egypt 
1  Sa.  20. 42  he  arose,  .and  Jonathan  went  into  the  c. 
Jer.  42.  17  the  men  that  set  their  faces  to  go  into  E. 
44. 12  that  have  set  their  faces  to  go  into  the 

2.To  go  into,  €i(x4pxoiu.ai  eiserchomai. 

Matt  15.  11  !Xot  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth 
21. 12  And  Jesus  went  into  the  temple  of  God 
z7-  53  went  iato  the  holy  city,  and  appeared 
Mark  2.  26  How  he  went  into  the  house  of  God  in 

8.  20  Neither  go  into  the  town,  nor  tell  (it)  to 

Luke  1.    9  when  he  went  into  the  temple  of  the  L. 

4. 16  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath 

6.  4  How  he  went  into  the  house  of  God,  and 

7.  36  he. went  into  the  Pharisee's  house,  and 
19.  45  he  went  into  the  temple,  and  began  to 

John  18.  28  went  not  into  the  judgment  hall,  lest 

19.  9  went  again  into  the  judgment  hall,  and 

20.  6  went  into  the  sepulchre,  and  seeth  the 
Acts    9.   6;  13.  14.;  14.  1 ;  19.  8. 

3.  To  go  into,  eto-et/j-t  eiseimi. 

Acts    3.   3  seeingPeteT.-abouttogointo  ;  Heb.  9.  6. 

4,To  enter  into,  slo-iropzvonai  eisporeuomai. 

Mark  1.  21  went  into  Capernaum ;  and  straightway 

GO  into  with,  to  — 

To  go  in  with,  aw eta "e px° fJ-at  suneisercliomai. 
John  6.  22  Jesus  went  not  with  his  disciples  into 

GO,  to  let  — 

l.To  become  feeble,  desist,  n2*i  raplmh. 

Exod.  4.  26  So  he  let  him  go :  then  she  said,  A  bloody 

2.  To  loose  off  or  away,  airokvco  apoluo. 

Lukei4.    4  he  took,  .and  healed  him.  and  let  him  go 

22.  68  if  Ialsoask(you),[ye  will  not.  .let(me)go] 

23.  22  therefore  chastise  him,  and  let  (him)  go 
John  19.  12  If  thou  let  this  man  go,  thou  art  not  Ce. 
Acts    3.  13  when  he  was  determined  to  let  (him)  go 

4.  21  they  let  them  go,findingnothinghowthey 

4.  23  being  let  go,  they  went  to  their  own  co. 

5.  40  And . .  they  commanded . .  and  let  them  go 

15.  33  were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  brethren 

16.  35  sent,  .saying,  Let  those  men  go 

16.  36  The  magistrates  have  sent  to  let  you  go 

17.  9  when  they  had  taken,  .they  let  them  go 
28. 18  Who.  .would  have  let  (me)  go,  because 

GO,  to  make  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  tread,  "iiT?  daruk,  5. 

Psa.  119.  35  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  com. 

Isa.   11. 15  The  Lord  shall . .  make . .  go  over  dry  shod 

2.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  n?jj  abar,  5. 

ISTum3i.  23  ye  shall  make  (it)  go  through  the  fire,  and 
31.  23  ye  shall  make  go  through  the  water 
GO  near,  to  — 
l.To  go  near,  Tip  qarab. 

Lev.  10.    5  So  they  went  near,  and  carried  them  in 

Deut.  5.  27  Go  thou  near,  and  hear  all  that  the  LORD 
2.To  go  near,  3"iQ  qarab,  3. 

Job  31.  37  as  a  prince  would  I  go  near  unto  him 

3.  To  go  toward,  irpoaepxoiJ.at  proserchomai. 

Acts   8.  29  Then  the  Spirit  said.  .Go  near,  and  join 
GO  on,  to  — 
l.To  go  on,  T^n  halah. 

Gen.  19.   2  shall  rise  up  early,  and  go  on  your  ways 

2.  To  go  forth  or  out,  ns;  yatsa. 

Nuni34.    4  shall  go  on  to  Hazar-addar,  and  pass  on 

34.  9  the  border  shall  go  on  to  Ziphron,  and  the 
Job  39.  21  he  goeth  on  to  meet  the  armed  men 

3.  To  lift  up  the  foot,  7i~\  ayi  nasa  regel. 

Gen.  29.    1  Then  Jacob  went  on  his  journey,  and  ca. 

4.  To  be  done,  -I3£  dbad,  2. 

Ezra  5.    8  this  work  goeth  fast  on,  and  prospereth 
5  To  go  over  or  beyond,  ~aj>  abar. 

Exodi7.    5  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Go  on  before  the 

1  Sa. 25. 19  Go  on  before  me;  behold,  I  come  after 

2  Sa.;i9.  40  went  on  to  Gilgal,  and  Chimham  went  on 

20. 13  all  the  people  went  on  after  Joab,  to  pur. 
Neh.  2.  14  I  went  on  to  the  gate  of  the  fountain,  and 

6.  To  go  forward,  irpofialvco  pirobaino. 

Matt.  4.  2i  going  on  from  thence,  he  saw  other  two 
l.To  bear  on,  <p4pa  phero. 

Heb.  6.    1  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection ;  not  laying 

GO  on  forward,  to  — 

To  pass  or  change,  tpn  cholaph. 

1  Sa.  10.   3  Then  shalt  thou  go  on  forward  from  the. 
GO  one  way  or  of  er,  to  — 
To  unite  self,  take  possession,  *inx  achad,  7. 

Eze.  21. 16  Go  thee  one  way  or  other,  .on  the  right 

GO  (one's)  way,  to  — 
l.To  go  on,  ^17;  yalah. 

Gen.  14. 1 1  took  all  the  goods . .  and  went  their  way 
18.  33  And  the  Lord  went  his  way,  as  soon  as 
25.  34  eat  and  drink,  .rose  up,  and  went  his  w. 
Judgig.    5  Comfort  thine  heart. .  afterward  go  your  w. 
Xeh.   S.  10  Then  he  said  unto  them,  Go  your  way,  eat 
Eccl.  9.    7  Go  thy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with  joy,  and 


Dan.  12.    9  And  he  said.  Go  thy  way,  Daniel :  for  the 

12.  13  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end.  .for  thou 

2.To  go  off  or  away,  aw€pxo/j.ai  aperchomai. 
Matt.  8.  33  and  went  their  ways  into  the  city,  and 

13.  25  his  enemy . .  sowed  tares . .  and  went  his  w_ 

20.  4  Go  ye  also.  .And  they  went  their  way 
22.   5  they  made  light  of  (it),  and  went  their  w. 
22.  22  marvelled,  and  left  liim,  and  went  their  w_ 

Markn.  4  they  went  their  way,  and  found  the  colt 
12. 12  and  they  left  him,  and  went  their  way 

Luke  S.  39  he  went  his  way,  and  published  through. 
19.  32  they  that  were  sent  went  their  way,  and 
22.   4  he  went  his  way,  and  communed  with 

John  4.  2S  The  woman,  .went  her  way  into  the  9.  7. 
11.  28  she  went  her  way,  and  called  Mary  her 
11.  46  some  of  them  went  their  ways  to  the  Ph. 

Acts   9.  17  Ananias  wrent  his  way,  and  entered  into 

Jas.    1.  24  Forhebeholdethliimself,  and  goethhis  w. 

3.  To  go  or  pass  on,  -rropevo^iai  poreuomai. 

Luke  4.  30  But  he  passing  through,  .went  his  way 

7.  22  Go  your  way,  and  tell  John  what  tilings 
17. 19  go  thy  way  :  thy  faith  hath  made  thee 

John  4.  50  Go  thy  way.  .and  he  went  luls  way 

Acts    9. 15  But  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Go  thy  way 

21.  5  we  departed  and  went  our  way ;  and 

24.  25  Go  thy  way  for  this  time ;  when  I  have  a. 

l.To  go  awa.y,  v-irdycc  hupago. 

Matt.  5.  24  Leave  there  thy  gift,  .and  go  thy  way 

8.  4  but  go  thy  way,  show  thyself  to  the  priest 
8.  13  Go  thy  way  ;  and  as  thou  hast  believed 

20. 14  Take  (that)  thine  (is)»  and  go  thy  way  ■  I 
27-  65  go  your  way,  make  (it)  as  sure  as  ye  can. 
Mark  1.  44  go  thy  way,  show  thyself  to  the  priest 

2.  11  Arise,  .and  go  thy  way  unto  thine  house^ 
7.  29  And  he  said .  .For  this  saying  go  thy  way~ 
10.  21  go  thy  way,  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast 

10.  52  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Go  thy  way  ;  thy  fa. 

11.  2  Go  your  way  into  the  village  over  against 
16.    7  But  go  your  way,  tell  his  disciples  and  P. 

Lukeio.    3  Go  your  ways  :  behold,  I  send  you  forth 
John  8.  21  I  go  my  way,  and  ye  shall  seek  me,  and 

16.  5  Eut  now  I  go  my  way  to  him  that  sent 

18.  8  if.  .ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way 
Rev.  16.    1  Go  your  wTays,  and  pour  out  the  vials  of_ 

GO  onward,  to  — 

To  remove,  journey,  yp3  nasa. 

Exod4o.  36  the  children  of  Israel  went  onward  in  all 
GO  on  journey,  to  — 
To  go  on  the  way,  dooiwopew  hodoiporeo. 

Acts  10.   9  as  they  went  on  their  journey,  and  drew 
GO  out,  out  of. — 
1.  To  go  on,  =jbrr  halah. 

Buth  1.  21  I  went  out  full,  and  the  Lord  hath  brou. 

Esth.  9.   4  his  fame  went  out  throughout  all  the. 
2.To  go  on,  ife  yalak. 

Joshi6.    8  the  goings  out  thereof  were  at  the  sea  - 
3.  To  go  forth  or  out,  ay;  yatsa. 

Gen.  2.  10  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  g. 
4. 16  Cain  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the 
9. 10  from  all  that  go  out  of  the  ark,  to  every 

14.  8  there  went  out  the  king  of  Sodom,  and 
14. 17  the  king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  meet  him 

15.  14  afterward  shall  they  come  out  with  great 

17.  6  nations . .  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thee 

19.  6  Lot  went  out  at  the  door  unto  them,  and 
19.  14  Lot  went  out,  and  spake  unto  his  sons 
24. 11  the  time  that  women  go  out  to  draw  (w.). 
24. 65  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field 

27.  3  go  out  to  the  field,  and  take  me.  .venison 

28.  10  Jacob  went  out  from  Beer-sheba  and  w. 
30. 16  Leah  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said 
31.  33  Then  went  he  out  of  Leah's  tent,  and 

34.  1  Dinah . .  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of 
34.  6  Hamor.  .went  out  unto  Jacob  to  commu. 
34.  24,  24  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  his  c. 
34.  26  took  D.  out  of  Shechem's  house,  and  went 
41.  45  Joseph  went  out  over  (all)  the  land  of  E^ 
41.  46  Joseph  went  out  from  the  presence  of  P_ 

43.  31  he  washed  his  face,  and  went  out,  and 

44.  28  And  the  one  went  out  from  me,  and  I 
47.  10  Jacob,  .went  out  from  before  Pharaoh 

Exod.  2.  11  he  went  out  unto  his  brethren,  and  look_ 
2. 13  when  he  went  out  the  second  day,  beho. 
5.  10  the  taskmasters  of  the  people  went  out 

7.  15  he  goeth  out  unto  the  water ;  and  thou 

8.  12  And  Moses  and  Aarou  went  out  from  P. 
8.  29  I  go  out  from  thee,  and  I  will  entreat  the, 

8.  30  Moses  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  and  entr_ 

9.  33  Moses  went  out  of  the  city  from  Pharaoh 
10.    6  he  turned  himself,  and  went  out  from  P. 

10.  iS  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  and  entreated 
n.    4  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the 

11.  8  Get  thee  out.  .after  that  I  will  go  out 

11.  8  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  in  a  great  an 

12.  "22  none  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door  of 
12.  41  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out  from 

14.  8  the  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an 

15.  20  all  the  women  went  out  after  her  with 

15.  22  they  went  out  into  the  wilderness  of  SIL 

16.  4  the  people  shall  go  out  and  gather  a  cer_ 
16.  27  there  went  out.  .of  the  people  on  the  se. 

16.  29  let  no  man  go  out  of  his  place  on  the  se. 

17.  9  Choose  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with 
iS.  7  Moses  went  out.  .and  did.  obeisance,  and 
21.  2  in  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  free  for 
21.  3  he  shall  go  out  by  himself :  if  he  were 


GO 


408 


GO 


Exod2i.    3  then  his  wife  shall  go  out  with  him 

21.    4  master's,  and  he  shall  go  out  by  himself 
21.    5  I  love  my  master.  .1  will  not  go  out  free 
2i.    7  she  shall  not  go  out  as  the  men  servants 
ai.  ii  then  shall  she  go  out  free  without  money 
33.    7  every  one  which  sought  the  Lord  went  o. 

Lev.    8.  33  ye  shall  not  go  out  of  the  door  of  the  ta. 
10.    2  there  went  out  fire  from  the  Lord,  and 

10.  7  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  door  of  the 

14.  38  the  priest  shall  go  out  of  the  house  to 

1 5.  16  if  any  man's  seed . .  go  out  from  him,  then 

16.  18  he  shall  go  out  unto  the  altar  that  (is) 
21.  12  Neither  shall  he  go  out  of  the  sanctuary 

24.  10  went  out  among  the  children  of  Israel 

25.  28  in  the  jubilee  it  shall  go  out,  and  he 
25.  30  it  shall  not  go  out  in  the  jubilee 

25.  31  and  they  shall  go  out  in  the  jubilee 
25.  33  the  house . .  the  city . .  shall  go  out  iu . .  jub. 
25.  54  then  he  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of  jubilee 
27.  21  the  field,  when  it  goeth  out  in  the  jubilee 
Nunii:.  24  Moses  went  out,  and  told  the  people  the 
ir.  26  but  went  not  out  unto  the  tabernacle 
21.  23  went  out  against  Israel  into  the  wilder. 

21.  33  Og  the  king  of  Bashan  went  out  against 

22.  32  I  went  out  to  withstand  thee,  because 
22.  36  he  went  out  to  meet  him  unto  a  city  of 
27.  17  Which  may  go  out  before  them,  and 

27.  21  at  his  word  shall  they  go  out,  and  at  his 
31.  27  between  them,  .who  went  out  to  battle 
31.  28  of  the  men  of  war  which  went  out  to  bat. 
31.  36  the  portion  of  them  that  went  out  to  war 
33.    3  the  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an 

Deutzo.    1  When  thou  goest  out  to  battle  against 
24.    5  he  shall  not  go  out  to  war,  neither  shall 

28.  6  blessed  (shalt)  thou  (be)  when  thou  goest  0. 
28.  19  cursed(shalt)thou(be)whenthougoest  o. 
28.  25  thou  shalt  go  out  one  way  against  them 
31.    2  I  can  no  more  go  out  and  come  in  :  also 

Josh.  2.    5  it  came  to  pass,  .that  the  men  went  out 

2.  19  whosoever  shall  go  out  of  the  doors  of 

6.  1  shut  up.  .none  went  out,  and  none  came 
8.  14  the  men  of  the  city  went  out  against  Isr. 

8.  17  not  a  man.. that  went  not  out  after  Isra. 

11.  4  they  went  out,  they  and  all  their  hosts 

14.  11  for  war,  both  to  go  out,  and  to  come  in 

15.  3  it  went  out  to  the  south  side  to  Maaleh 
15.    4  and  went  out  unto  the  river  of  Egypt 
15.    9  went  out  to  the  cities  of  mount  Ephron 

15.  11  went  out  into  the.  .went  out  unto  Jab. 

16.  2  goeth  out  to  Bethel  to  Luz,  and  passeth 
16.    6  the  border  went  out  toward  the  sea  to 
16.    7  came  to  Jericho,  and  went  out  at  Jordan 

18.  15  went  out  on  the  west,  and  went  out  to 

19.  12  then  goeth  out  to  Daberath,  and .  .to  J. 
19.  13  goeth  out  to  Remmon-methoar,  to  Neah 
19.  27  and  goeth  out  to  Oabul  on  the  left  hand 
19.  34  and  goeth  out  from  thence  to  Hukkok 
19.  47  the  coast  of  the  children  of  Dan  went  out 

Judg.  2.  15  Whithersoever  they  went  out,  the  hand 

3.  10  and  he  judged  Israel,  and  went  out  to 

3.  19  all  that  stood  by  him  went  out  from  him 

4.  18  Jael  went  out  to  meet  Sisera,  and  said 

5.  4  Lord,  when  thou  wentest  out  of  Seir.when 

9.  27  they  went  out  into  the  fields,  and  gather. 
9.  35  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed  went  out,  and  stood 
9.  38  Go  out,  I  pray  now,  and  fight  with  them 
9.  39  Gaal  went  out  before  the  men  of  Shech. 
9. 42  that  the  people  went  out  into  the  field 

11.   3  gathered  vain  men . .  and  went  out  with  him 

16.  20  I  will  go  out,  as  at  other  times  before,  and 
19.  23  the  master  of  the  house,  went  out  unto 

19.  27  her  lord  rose  up.  .and  went  out  to  go  his 

20.  1  Then  all  the  children  of  Israel  went  out 
20.  14  go  out  to  battle  against  the  children  of  I. 
20.  20  the  men  of  Israel  went  out  to  battle  aga. 
20.  28  Shall  I  yet  again  go  out  to  battle  against 
20.  31  the  children  of  Benjamin  went  out  agai. 
21. 24  they  went  out  from  thence  every  man  to 

Ruth  2.  22  that  thou  go  out  with  his  maidens,  that 

1  Sa.  4.   1  Israel  went  out  against  the  Philistines  to 

7.  11  the  men  of  Israel  went  out  of  Mizpeh 

8.  20  go  out  before  us,  and  fight  our  battles 

9.  26  they  went  out  both  of  them,  he  and  Sam. 
13.  10  Saul  went  out  to  meet  him,  that  he  might 
13.  23  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines  went  out 

17.  4  there  went  out  a  champion  out  of  the 

17.  35  I  went  out  after  him,  and  smote  him,  and 

18.  5  David  went  out  whithersoever  Saul  sent 
18. 13  he  went  out  and  came  in  before  the  peo. 

18.  16  because  he  went  out  and  came  in  before 

19.  3  I  will  go  out  and  stand  beside  my  father 

19.  8  David  went  out  and  fought  with  the  Ph. 

20.  11  Gome,  and  let  us  go  out  into  the  field 
ao.  11  they  went  out  both  of  them  into  the  field 
20.  35  Jonathan  went  out  into  the  field  at  the 
24.   8  David  also  arose  afterward,  and  went  out 
28.    1  thou  shalt  go  out  with  me  to  battle,  thou 

2  Sa.    2.  12  Abner.  .went  out  from  Mahauaim  to  Gib. 

2. 13  And  Joab.  .went  out,  and  met  together 
5.  24  for  then  shall  the  Lord  go  out  before  thee 
11.  13  at  even  he  went  out  to  lie  on  his  bed  with 
11.  17  the  men  of  the  city  went  out  and  fought 
13.    9  And  they  went  out  every  man  from  him 

18.  6  So  the  people  went  out  into  the  field  ag. 

19.  19  the  day  that  my  lord  the  king  went  out 

20.  7  there  went  out  after  him  Juab's  men,  and 

20.  7  they  went  out  of  Jerusalem,  to  pursue 

21.  17  Thou  shalt  go  no  more  out  with  us  to  ba. 
24.    4  the  captains  of  the  host  went  out  from 
24.    7  they  went  out  to  the  south  of  Judah 

24.  20  Araunah  went  out,  and  bowed  himself 
1  Ki.  2.  37  on  the  day  thou  goest  out,  and  passest 


1  Ki.  2.  42  on  the  day  thou  goest  out,  and  walkest 

2.  46  which  went  out,  and  fell  upon  him,  that 

3.  7  I  kuow  not  (how)  to  go  out  or  come  in 
8. 44  If  thy  people  go  out  to  battle  against 

10.  29  a  chariot  came  up  and  went  out  of  Egypt 

11.  29  when  Jeroboam  went  out  of  Jerusalem 
12. 25  Then  Jeroboam,  .went out  from  thence 
15. 17  not  suffer  any  to  go  out  or  come  in  to  A. 

19. 13  Elijah,  .went  out,  and  stood  in  the  enter. 
20.  16  And  they  went  outiat  noon:  butBen-hadad 
20.  17  And  the  young  men . .  went  out  first ;  and 
20.  21  And  the  king  of  Israel  went  out,  and 

20.  31  let  us,  I  pray  thee,  .go  out  to  the  king  of 
20.  39  Thy  servant  went  out  into  the  midst  of 

2  Ki.  3.    6  king  Jeroboam  went  out  of  Samaria  the 

4.  18  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  he  went  out  to  his 
4.  21  shut  (the  door)  upon  him,  and  went  out 
4.  37  and  took  up  her  son,  and  went  out 

4.  39  And  one  went  out  into  the  field  to  gather 

5.  2  the  Syrians  had  gone  out  by  companies 

5.  27  he  went  out  from  his  presence  a  leper 

7.  16  the  people  went  out,  and  spoiled  the  tents 
9.  21  Joram.  .and  Ahaziah.  .went  out,  each  in 
9.  24  the  arrow  went  out  at  his  heart,  and  he 

10.  9  he  went  out,  and  stood,  and  said  to  all 

11.  8  be  ye  with  the  king  as  he  goeth  out  and 

11.  9  with  them  that  should  go  out  on  the 

13.  5  they  went  out  from  under  the  hand  of 

19.  35  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  out,  and 

24.  12  Jehoiachin.  .went  out  to  the  king  of  Ba. 

1  Ch.  5. 18  of  valiant  men.  .that  went  out  to  the 

7. 1 1  (soldier?  ,  fit  to  go  out  to  war  (and)  battle 

12.  17  David  went  out  to  meet  theni,  and  answ. 

14.  8  David  heard,  .and  went  out  against  them 
14.  15  then  thou  shalt  go  out  to  battle:  for  God 
14.  17  the  fame  of  David  went  out  into  all  lands 

20.  1  at  the  time  that  kings  go  out.  .Joab  led 

21.  21  went  out  of  the  th-eshing  floor,  and  bowed 

27.  1  which  came  in  and  went  out  month  by 

2  Ch.  1.  10  that  I  may  go  ouH  and  come  in  before 

6.  34  If  thy  people  go  out  to  war  against  their 

14.  10  Asa  went  out  against  him,  and  they  set 

15.  2  he  went  out  to  meet  Asa,  and  said  unto 

15.  5  no  peace  to  him  that  went  out,  nor  to 

16.  1  might  let  none  go  out  or  come  in  to  Asa 

18.  21  he  said,  I  will  go  out.  .go  out,  and  do.  .so 

19.  2  Jehu,  .went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said  to 

19.  4  he  went  out  again  through  the  people 

20.  17  to  morrow  go  out  against  them :  for  the 
20.  21  praise,  .as  they  went  out  before  the  army 

22.  7  he  went  out  with  Jehoram  against  Jehu 

23.  7  when  he  cometh  in,  and  when  he  goeth  0. 

23.  8  with  them  that  were  to  go  out  on  the  s. 

24.  5  Go  out  unto  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  gat. 
26.  11  fighting  men,  that  went  out  to  war  by 
26.  18  go  out  of  the  sanctuary;  for  thou  hast  tr. 
26.  20  himself  hasted  also  to  go  out,  because  the 

28.  9  lie  went  out  before  the  host  that  came  to 
31.  1  all  Israel,  .went  out  to  the  cities  of  Judah 
35.  20  Necho..and  Josiah  went  out  against  him 

Neh.  2.  13  I  went  out  by  night  by  the  gate  of  the 
Esth.  3.  15  The  posts  went  out,  being  hastened  by 

4.  1  and  went  out  into  the  midst  of  the  city 

7.  8  As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  mouth 

8.  14  the  posts  that  rode  upon  mules,  .went out 

5.  15  Mordecai  went  out  from  the  presence  of 
Job  29.    7  I  went  out  to  the  gate  through  the  eity 

31.  34  I  kept  silence,  .went  not  out  of  the  door? 
37.    2  and  the  sound,  .goeth  out  of  his  mouth 
41.  20  Out  of  his  nostrils  goeth  smoke,  as.  .of  a 
41.  21  His  breath,  .a  flame  goeth  out  of  his  mo. 

Psa.  60.  10  God.  .didst  not  go  out  with  our  armies 
81.    5  when  he  went  out  through  the  land  of  E. 
114.    1  When  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt,  the  house 

Prov22. 10  contention  shall  go  out;  yea,  strife  and 

Isa.  52.  11  go  ye  out  from  thence,  .go  ye  out  of  the 
52.  12  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste,  nor  go  by 
55.  12  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth 

Jer.     5.    6  every  one  that  goeth  out  thence  shall  be 

17.  19  whereby  the  kings  of  Judah.  .go  out,  and 
2i.    q  he  that  goeth  out,  and  lalleth  to  the  Ch. 
21.  12  lest  my  fury  go  out  like  fire,  and  burn 
37.    4  Jeremiah  came  in  and  went  out  among 
39.    4  and  he  went  out  the  way  of  the  plain 

51.  45  My  people,  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her 
Eze.     3.  25  and  thou  shalt  not  go  out  among  them 
10.    7  into . .  hands . .  who  took . .  and  went  out 
10  19  when  they  went  out,  the  wheels  also  (were) 
15.    7  they  shall  go  out  from  (one) fire,  and  (an.) 

42. 14  then  shall  they  not  go  out  of  the  holy 
44.    3  and  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  same 
46.   9  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  south  gate 

Amos  4.    3  And  ye  shall  go  out  at  the  breaches 

5.  3  The  city  that  went  out  (by)  a  thousand 
Jon.  4.  5  So  Jonah  went  out  of  the  city,  and  sat 
Zech.  2.    3  and  another  angel  went  out  to  meet  him 

8.  10  neither,  .peace  to  him  that  went  out  or 
14.    8  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem 

4.  To  be  quenched,  nns  kabah. 

Ley.   6. 13  burning  upon  the  altar,  .shall  never  go  o. 
1  Sa.    3.    3  And  ere  the  lamp  of  God  went  out  in  the 
Prov  26.  20  Where  no  wood  is.  .the  fire  goeth  out 
31.  iS  good  :  her  candle  goeth  not  out  by  night 

5. To  remove,  journey t  yp:  nasa. 

Kumio.  34  by  day,  when  they  went  out  of  the  camp 

Q.To  go  away,  aTripxo/iai  aperchomai. 

Luke  8.  31  not  command  them  to  go  out  into  the 

7. To  go  from,  a-Kofialvw  apobaind. 

Luke  5.    2  but  the  fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them 


8.  To  pass  out  or  forth,  €Kirop€vofj.at  ekporeuomai. 

Matt.  3.   5  Then  went  out  to  him  Jerusalem,  and  all 

17.  21  [this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer] 
Mark  1.    5  there  went  out  unto  him  all  the  land  of  J. 

7.  19  goeth  out  into  the  draught,  purging  all 
Luke  4.  37  the  fame  of  him  went  out  into  everyplace 
Acts   9.  28  he  was  with  them  coming  in  and  going  0. 

9.  To  go  forth  or  out,  e^ifit  exeimi. 

Acts  13.  42  when  the  Jews  were  gone  out  of  the  syn 

10.  To  go  forth  or  out,  i^epxofiat  exerchomai. 
Matt.  9.  32  As  they  went  out,  behold,  they  brought 

11.    7  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  to 
11.    8  But  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  A  man 

11.  9  But  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  A  pro. 

12.  14  the  Pharisees  went  out,  and  held  a  coun. 

12.  43  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 

13.  1  The  same  day  went  Jesusout  of  the  house 

18.  28  the'same  servant  went  out,  and  found  one 
20.    1  which  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to 
20.    3  he  went  out  about  the  third  hour,  and 
20.   5  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  ninth 

20.  6  about  the  eleventh  hour  he  went  out,  and 

21.  17  he  left  them,  and  went  out  of  the  city 

22.  10  those  servants  went  out  into  the  highways 

24.  1  Jesus  went  out,  and  departed  from  the 

25.  6  the  bridegroom  cometh;  go  ye  out  tonieet 

26.  30  they  went  out  unto  the  mount  of  Olives 
26.  71  And  when  he  was  goneout  into  the  porch 
26.  75  And  he  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 

Mark  1.  35  he  went  out,  and  departed  into  a  solitary 

I.  45  But  he  went  out,  aud  began  to  publish 

3.  21  they  went  out  to  lay  hold  on  him :  for 

4.  3  Behold,  there  went  out  a  sower  to  sow 

5.  13  the  unclean  spirits  went  out,  and  entered 
5.  14  [they  went  out]  to  see  what  itwas  that  was 

5.  30  knowing  in  himself,  .virtue  had  gone  out 

6.  r  And  he  went  out  from  thence,  and  came 

6.  12  they  went  out,  and  preached  that  men 

7.  29  the  devil  is  gone  out  of  thy  daughter 

7.  30  she  found  the  devil  gone  out,  and  her  da. 
8.27  And  Jesus  went  out,  and  his  disciples 
11.  11  he  went  out  unto  Bethany  with  the  twel. 

14.  26  they  went  out  iuto  the  mount  of  Olives 
14.  68  he  went  out  into  the  porch  ;  aud  the  cock 

16.  8  they  went  out  quickly,  and  fled  from  the 
Luke  2.    1  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cesar  Aug. 

4.  14  there  went  out  a  fame  of  him  through  all 
6.  12  it  came  to  pass,  .that  he  went  out  into 

6.  19  there  went  virtue  out  of  him,  and  healed 

7.  24  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  for 

7,  25,  26  But  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  A 

8.  2  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went  seven  dev. 
8.    5  A  sower  went  out  to  sow  his  seed :  and 
8.  33  Then  went  the  devils  out  of  the  man,  and 
8.  35  Then  they  went  out  to  see  what  was  doue 

8.  46  I  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of  me 

9.  5  when  ye  go  out  of  that  city,  shake  off  the 

10.  10  go  your  ways  out  into  the  streets  of  the 

II.  14  when  the  devil  [was  gone  out],  the  dumb 

11.  24  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 
14.  21  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes 

14.  23  Go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and 

17.  29  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom 

21.  37  at  night  he  went  out,  and  abode  in  the 

22.  62  And  Peter  went  nut  and  wept  bitterly 
John  4.  30  they  went  out  of  the  city,  and  came  unto 

8.    9  [And  they.,  went  out  one  by  one,  beginn.) 
8.  59  went  out  of  the  temple,  going  through 

10.  9  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture 

11.  31  that  she  rose  up  hastily  and  went  out 

,  13-3°  He  then  having  received  the  sop  went . .  out 

13.  31  when  he  was  gone  out,  Jesus  said,  Now 
iS.  16  Then  went  out  that  other  disciple,  which 

18.  29  Pilate  then  went  out  unto  them,  and  said 

18.  38  he  went  out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and 
Acts    1.  21  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us 

12.  9  And  he  went  out,  and  followed  him;  and 
12.  10  they  went  out,  and  passed  on  through  one 

15.  24  that  certain  which  went  out  from  us  have 

16.  13  on  the  sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  city 
16.  40  they  went  out  of  the  prison,  and  entered 

19.  12  and  the  evil  spirits  [went  out  of]  them 

1  Co.  5.  10  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  wor. 
Heb.  ii.  8  when  he  was  called  to  go  out  into  a  plau: 
11.  8  he  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  we. 
1  Jo.    2.  19  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were 

4.  1  because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  011 1 
Rev.    3.  12  a  pillar,  .and  he  shall  go  no  more  out 

6.    4  And  there  went  out  another  horse,  .red 

20.  8  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the  nations  which 

11. To  quench,  o-fitvvvfxi  sbennumi. 

Matt25.    8  Give  us.  .oil ;  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out 
12.7b  turn  bad:,  zw  shub. 

Exod32.  27  go  in  and  out  from  gate  to  gate  through. 

GO  out,  to  cause  or  let  — 

To  cause  to  go  forth  or  out,  xy;  yatsa,  5. 

Gen.  45.    1  cried,  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from 
Job    15.  13  and  lettest . .  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth  ? 

GO  out  of  the  way,  to  — 

To  bend  or  incline  out,  iicuXiva)  ekklino. 

Rom,  3.  12  They  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  they 

GO  over,  to  — 

l.To  go  over  or  beyond,  133/  ohar. 

Deut.  2.  13  and  we  went  over  the  brook  Zered 

3.  25  I  pray  thee,  let  me  go  over  and  see  the 
3.  27  for  thou  shalt  not  go  over  this  Jordan 
3.  28  for  he  shall  go  over  before  this  people 


GO 


Deut,  4.  14  the  land  whither  ye  go  over  to  possess  it 
4.  21  sware  that  I  should  not  go  over  Jordan 
4.  22  i  must  not  go  over,  .ye  shall  go  over 
4.^26  the  land  whereunto  ye  go  over  Jordan  to 
9.  3  God  (is)  he  which  goeth  over  before  thee 
12.  10  ye  go  over  Jordan,  and  dwell  in  the  land 
31.  2  hath  said . .  Thou  shalt  not  go  over  this  J. 
31.    3  he  will  go  over,  .he  shall  go  over  before 

31.  13  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  over  Jordan  to 

32.  47  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  over  Jordan  to 
34.    4  said,  .but  thou  shalt  not  go  over  thither 

Josh.  1.    2  go  over  this  Jordan,  thou,  and  all  this  p. 

18.  13  the  border  went  over  from  thence  toward 
24.  11  ye  went  over  Jordan,  and  came  unto  Jer. 

Judg.  6.  33  went  over,  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of 
9.  26  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed.  .went  over  to  She. 

12.  5  when  those . .  said,  Let  me  go  over ;  that 

1  sa.  13.    7  the  Hebrews  went  over . .  to  the  land  of  G. 

14.    1  let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines'  garrison 
14.    4  to  go  over  unto  the  Philistines'  garrison 

14.  6  let  us  go  over  unto  the  garrison  of  these 
26.  13  David  went  over  to  the  other  side,  and 
30. 10  they  could  not  go  over  the  brook  Besor 

2  Sa.  2.  15  there  arose  and  went  over  by  number  tw. 

16.    9  let  me  go  over,  I  pray  thee,  and  take  off 

19.  18  there  went  over  a  ferryboat  to  carry  over 
19.  31  and  went  over  Jordan  with  the  king,  to 
19.  36  Thy  servant  will  go  a  little  way  over  Jo. 
19.  37  let  him  go  over  with  my  lord  the  king 
19.  38  Chimham  shall  go  over  with  me,  and  I 

19.  39  And  all  the  people  went  over  Jordan 

2  Ki.  2.  8  so  that  they  two  went  over  on  dry  ground 
2.  14  they  parted  hither.  .andElisha  went  over 
8.  21  So  Joram  went  over  to  Zair,  and  all  the 

1  Ch.12.  15  These  (are)  they  that  went  over  Jordan  in 

29.  30  the  times  that  went  over  him,  and  over 
Psa.  88.  16  Thy  fierce  wrath  goeth  over  me ;  thy  ter. 
124.    4  the  stream  had  gone  over  our  soul 
124.    5  the  proud  waters  had  gone  over  our  soul 
Isa.     8.    8  he  shall  overflow  and  go  over ;  he  shall 
51.  23  have  said.  .Bow  down,  that  we  may  go  o. 
51.  23  and  as  the  street,  to  them  that  went  over 
54.   9  waters  of  Noah  should  no  more  go  over 
Jer.  41. 10  departed  to  go  over  to  the  Ammonites 

2.  To  go  prosperously,  nby  tsaleach. 

2  Sa.  19.  17  they  went  over  Jordan  before  the  king 
Z.To  pass  through,  StaTrepda}  diaperao. 

Matt  14.  34  when  they  were  gone  over,  they  came  into 
4.To  go  through,  diepxo/xai  dierchomai. 

Luke  8.  22  Let  us  go  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the 
Acts  18.  23  went  over,  .the  country  of  Galatia  and  P. 

20.  2  when  he  had  gone  over  those  parts,  and 
5.  To  end,  re\€w  teleo. 

Matt  10.  23  Ye  shall  not  have  gone  over  the  cities  of 
GO  over,  to  make  — 
To  cause  to  tread,  TH?  darah,  5. 

Isa.    11.  15  and  shall,  .make  (men)  go  over  dry  shod 
GO  round  (about),  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  go  round,  *]j2a  naqaph,  5. 

Josh.  6.    3  ye  shall .  .go  round  about  the  city  once 

Psa.  48.  12  Walk,  .and  go  round  about  her:  tell  the 

2.  To  go  round  about,  nnp  sabab. 

Psa.  59.    6  They  return.. and  go  round  about  the  ci. 
59.  14  let  them .  .go  round  about  the  city 

3.  To  go  round  about,  irepidya)  periago. 

Mark  6.    6  he  went  round  about  the  villages,  teach. 
GO  see,  to  — 
To  look  after,  ~ips  paqad. 

2  Ki.  9.  34  Go,  see  now  this  cursed . .  and  bury  her 
GO  softly,  to  — 
To  go  softly,  lovingly,  rm  dadah,  7. 

Isa.   38.  15  I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years  in  the  bitt. 
GO,  to  teach  to  — 
To  cause  to  go  on  foot,  bxi  ragal,  5a. 

Hos.  11.    3  I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them 
GO  thence,  to  — 
To  go  forth  or  out,  Qzpxopiai  exerchomai. 

Mattio.  11  enquire.,  and  there  abide  till  ye  go  thence 
GO  through  or  throughout,  to  — 
l.To  go  over  or  beyond,  "ay  abar. 

Num2o.  19  I  will  only,  .go  through  on  my  feet 

20.  20  And  he  said,  Thou  shalt  not  go  through 

Josh.  3.    2  that  the  officers  went  through  the  host 

Isa.  60.  15  forsaken  and  hated,  so  that  no  man  w.  th. 
62.  10  Go  through,  go  through  the  gates  ;  pre. 

Eze.    9.    4  Go  through  the  midst  of  the  city,  throu. 

Mic.    5.    S  who,  if  he  go  through,  both  treadeth  do. 
l.To  go  to  and  fro,  aiff  shut 

2  Sa.  24.    2  Go  now  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 
3.7*0  go  on  through,  8ia.Tropevo/j.ai  diaporeuomai. 

Luke  6.    1  that  he  went  through  the  corn  fields  ;  and 

13.  22  And  he  went  through  the  cities  and  vil. 
Acts  16.   4  as  they  went  through  the  cities,  they  de. 

4.  To  go  through,  Si<Epxo/j.ai  dierehomai. 

Mattig.  24  Tt  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the 
Luke  9.    6  went  through  the  towns,  preaching  the 
John  4.    4  And  he  must  needs  go  through  Samaria 
8.  59  going  through  the  midst  of  them,  and  so 
Acts  13.    6  when  they  had  gone  through  the  isle  nn. 

15.  41  he  went  through  Syria,  .confirming  the 

16.  6  when  they  had  gone  throughout  Phrygia 
52 


409 

5.  To  go  in  through,  SioBeixa  diodeuo. 

Luke  8.    1  he  went  throughout  every  city  and  villa. 

6.  To  go  into,  eio-epxo/xai  eisercJwmai. 

Markio.  25  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the 
GO  to,  to  — 

1.  To  give  help,  an;  yahab. 

Gen.  11.  3  Go  to,  letus  make  brick,  and  burn  them 
11.    4  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city  and  a  tower 

11.  7  Go  to,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confou. 
38.  16  Go  to,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  come  in  unto 

2.  To  go  on,  ^h)  yalaJc. 

2  Ki.  5.  5  the  king  of  Syria  said,  Go  to.. I  will  send 
Z.Pro.y,  p&ase,  kj  na. 

Judg  7.  3  Now  therefore  go  to,  proclaim  in  the  ears 
i.Go,  crve  age. 

Jas.  4.  13  Go  to  now,  ye'that  say,  To  day  or  to  mor. 
5.    1  Go  to  now.  .rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for 

5. To  go  toward,  Tvpoa-ipxo^ai  proserchomai. 

Matt  27.  58  He  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body 

Luke  10.  34  went  to  (him),  and  bound  up  his  wounds 
GO  to  and  fro,  to  — 
I.Togo  about  or  away,  W  azal,  4, 

Eze.  27.  19  Dan  also  and  Javan  going  to  and  fro  occ. 
'2.  To  go  to  and  fro,  tttEJ  shut. 

Job     1.    7  From  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and 

2.  2  From  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and 
GO  up  — 

A  going  up,  ascent,  n^Kp  maaldh. 

Ezra    7.    9  upon  the' first  (day),  .began  he  to  go  up 
GO  up,  to  — 
l.To  go  away,  hyt  azal. 

Ezra  4.  23  they  went  up  in  haste  to  Jerusalem  unto 
2.  To  go,  *pn  huh. 

Ezra  7.  13  of  their  own  free  will  to  go  up  to  Jerus. 
3.7*0  go  nigh,  approach,  wii  nagash. 

Judg  20.  23  Shall  I  go  up  again  to  battle  against  the 
4. 7*o  go  up,  nbj;  alah. 

Gen.    2.   6  But  there  went  up  a  m  st  from  the  earth 
13.    1  Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  he,  and 
17.  22  left  off.  .and  God  went  up  from  Abraham 
19.  28  the  smoke  of  the  country  went  up  as  the 
19.  30  Lot  went  up  out  of  Zoar,  and  dwelt  in 
26.  23  he  went  up  from  thence  to  Beer-sheba 
35.    1  Arise,  go  up  to  Beth-el,  and  dwell  there 
35.   3  And  let  us  arise,  and  go  up  to  Beth-el 
35. 13  God  went  up  from  him  in  the  place  whe. 
38.  12  went  up  unto  his  sheep  shearers  to  Tim. 
38.  13  thy  father  in  law  goeth  up  to  Timnath 
44.  33  and  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his  brethren 

44.  34  For  how  shall  I  go  up  to  my  father,  and 

45.  9  Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my  father,  and 

45.  25  they  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  and  came  in. 

46.  29  Joseph,  .went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  fath. 
46.  31  I  will  go  up,  and  show  Pharaoh,  and  say 

49.  4  thou  wentest  up.  .he  went  up  to  my  cou. 

50.  5  let  me  go  up,  I  pray  thee,  and  bury  my  f. 
50.  6  Go  up  and  hmy  thy  father,  according  as 
50.  7  Joseph  went  up . .  and  with  him  went  up 
50.  9  there  went  up  with  him  both  chariots  and 
50.  14  all  that  went  up  with  Mm  to  bury  his 

Exod.  8.    3  which  shall  go  up  and  come  into  thine 
10.  14  the  locusts  went  up  over  all  the  land  of 

12.  38  a  mixed  multitude  went  up  also  with  th. 
73. 18  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  harnessed 
17. 10  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Hur,  went  up  to  the 
19.  3  Moses  went  up  unto  God,  and  the  Lord 
19. 12  Take  heed,  .go  (not)  up  into  the  mount 

19.  20  Lord  called  Moses,  .and  Moses  went  up 

20.  26  Neither  shalt  thou  go  up  by  steps  unto 
24.    2  neither  shall  the  people  go  up  with  him 
24.  9  Then  went  up  Moses,  and  Aaron,  Nadab 
24.  13  and  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount  of  G 

24.  15  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount,  and  a  cl. 

32.  30  and  now  I  will  go  up  unto  the  Lord 

33.  1  Depart,  .go  up  hence,  thou  and  the  peo. 

33.  3  I  will  not  go  up  in  the  midst  of  thee 

34.  4  went  up  unto  mount  Sinai,  as  the  Lord 
34.  24  when  thou  shalt  go  up  to  appear  before 

Numi3.  17  Get  you  up.,  and  go  up  into  the  mountain 

13.  21  they  went  up,  and  searched  the  land  from 
13.  30  Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess  it ;  for 
13.  31  But  the  men  that  went  up  with  him  said 

13.  31  We  be  not  able  to  go  up  against  the  peo. 

14.  40  and  will  go  up  into  the  place  which  the 
14. 42  Go  not  up,  for  the  Lord  (is)  not  among'you 
14.  44  they  presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top 

20.  27  they  went  up  into  mount  Hor  in  the  sight 

21.  33  they  turned,  and  went  up  by  the  way  of 

32.  9  when  they  went  up  unto  the  valley  of  E. 

33.  38  Aaron  the  priest  went  up  into  mount  H. 
f  icufc.  1.  21  go  up.  .possess,  .as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  f. 

1.  22  by  what  way  we  must  go  up,  and  into 
1.  24  they  turned  and  went  up  into  the  moun. 
1.  26  ye  would  not  go  up,  but  rebelled  against 
1.  28  Whither  shall  we  go  up?  our  brethren 

1. 41  we  will  go  up  and  fight,  according  to  all 
1.  41  ye  were  ready  to  go  up  into  the  hill 

1. 42  Say  unto  them,  Go  not  up,  neither  fight 
1.  43  and  went  presumptuously  up  iuto  the  lull 

3.  1  we  turned,  and  went  up  the  way  to  Bas. 
5.  5  ye  were  afraid . .  and  went  not  up  into  the 
9.  23  Go  up  and  possess  the  land  which  I  have 

10.    3  went  up  into  the  mount,  having  the  two 

25.  7  let  his  brother's  wife  go  up  to  the  gate 


GO 

Deutso.  12  Who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  heaven,  and 
32.  50  die  in  the  mount  whither  thou  goest  up 
34.    1  Moses  went  up  from  the  plains  of  Moab 
Josh.  6.  20  the  people  went  up  into  the  city,  every 
7.    2  spake . .  saving,  Go  up  and  view  the  couu. 
7.    2  And  the  men  went  up  and  viewed  Ai 
7.    3  and  said.  .Let  not  all  the  people  go  up 
7.    3  let  about  two  or  three  thous.  men  go  up 

7.  4  So  there  went  up  thither  of  the  people 

8.  1  arise,  go  up  to  Ai :  see,  I  have  given  into 
8.    3  So  Joshua  arose,  .to  go  up'against  Ai 

8.  10  and  went  up,  he  and  the  elders  of  Israel 
8.  11  all  the  people,  .went  up,  and  drew  nigh 
10.    5  went  up,  they  and  all  their  hosts,  and 
10.    9  Joshua,  .went  up  from  Gilgal  all  night 
10.  36  Joshua  went  up  from  Eglon,  and  all  Isr. 
11. 17  from  the  mount  Halak, that  goeth  up  toS 

12.  7  the  mount  Halak,  that  goeth  up  to  Seir 

14.  8  my  brethren  that  went  up  with  me  made 
15-  3  went  up  to  Adar,  and  fetched  a  compass 

15.  6  the  border  went  up  to  Beth-hogla,  and 
15.  6  the  border  went  up  to  the  stone  of  Bohan 
15.  7  the  border  went  up  toward  Debir  from 
15.  8  the  border  went  up  by  the  valley  of  the 
15.  8  the  border  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  mo. 

15.  15  he  went  up  thence  to  the  inhabitants  of 

16.  1  to  the  wilderness  that  goeth  up  from  J. 
18.  12  the  border  went  up  to  the  side  of  Jericho 

18.  12  went  up  through  the  mountains  westwar. 
10.  11  then*  border  went  up  toward  the  sea,  aud 

19.  12  goeth  out  to  Daberath,  and  goeth  up  to  J. 

19.  47  Dan  went  up  to  fight  against  Leshem,  and 
22.  12  at  Shiloh,  to  go  up  to  war  against  them 

22.  23  did  not  intend  to  go  up  against  them  in 
Judg.  1.    1  Who  shall  go  up  for  us  against  the  Can. 

1.   2  Lord  said,  Judah  shall  go  up  :  behold,  I 
1.   4  Judah  weut  up  ;  and  the  Lord  delivered 
1.  16  went  up  out  of  the  city  of  palm  trees 
1.  22  they  also  went  up  against  Beth-el :  and 

4.  10  he  went  up . .  and  Deborah  went  up  with 
8.  8  he  went  up  thence  to  Penuel,  and  spake 
8.  11  Gideon  went  up  by  the  way  of  them  that 

8.  20  he  said  unto  Jether.  .ITp,  (and)  slay  them 

13.  20  when  the  flame  went  up  toward  heaven 
14. 19  and  he  went  up  to  his  father's  house 

15.    9  the  Philistines  went  up,  and  pitched  in  J. 
18.    9  Arise,  that  we  may  go  up  against  them 
18.  12  they  went  up,  and  pitched  in  Kirjath-j. 

18. 17  men  that  went  to  spy  out.  .land  went  up 

20.  18  the  children  of  Israel  arose,  and  went  up 
20.  18  Which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  the  battle 
20.  23  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  and  wept 
20.  23  And  the  Lord  said,  Go  up  against.him 
20.  26  all  the  children  of  Israel,  .went  up,  and 
20.  28  Go  up ;  for  to  morrow  I  will  deliver  them 
20.  30  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  against 

20.  31  of  which  one  goeth  up  to  the  house  of  G 

21.  19  the  highway  that  goeth  up  from  Beth-el 
Ruth  4.  1  Then  went  Boaz  up  to  the  gate,  and  sat 
1  Sa.   1.    3  this  man  went  up  out  of  his  city  yearly 

1.    7  when  she  went  up  to  the  house  of  the 
1.  21  man  Elkanah,  and  all  his  house,  went  up 

1.  22  But  Hannah  went  not  up  ;  for  she  said 

5. 12  and  the  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  heaven 
6.    9  see,  if  it  goeth  up  by  the  way  of  his  own 

6.  20  and  to  whom  shall  he  go  up  from  us  ? 

7.  7  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  went  up  agai. 

9.  1 1  as  they  went  up  the  hill  to  the  city,  they 

9. 13  before  he  go  up  to  the  high  place  to  eat 
9.  14  they  went  up  into  the  city,  .when  they 
g.  14  came  out.  .for  to  go  up  to  the  high  place 
9.  19  go  up  before  me  unto  the  high  place  ;  for 

14.  9  stand  still,  .and  will  not  go  up  unto  them 
14.  10  if  they  say  thus,  .then  we  will  go  up  :  for 
14.  21  which  went  up  with  them  into  the  camp 

14.  46  Saul  weut  up  from  following  the  Philist. 

15.  34  Saul  went  up  to  his  house  to  Gibeah  of  S. 

23.  29  David  went  up  from  thence,  and  dwelt  in 
25.  13  there  went  up  after  David  about  four  hu. 
25-  35  Go  up  in  peace  to  thine  house ;  see,  I 
27.  8  David  and  his  men  went  up,  and  invaded 
29.  9  He  shall  not  go  up  with  us  to  the  battle 
29.  11  and  the  Philistines  went  up  to  Jezreel 

"  Sa.    2.    1  Shall  I  go  up  into  any  of  the  cities  of  Ju.? 

2.  1  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Go  up.  And 
2.  1  David  said,  Whither  shall  I  go  up?  And 
2.    2  So  David  went  up  thither,  and  his  two 

5.  19  Shall  I  go  up  to  the  Philistines?  wilt  thou 
5.  19  And  the  Lord  said  unto  David,  Go  up 

5.  23  Thou  shalt  not  go  up . .  fetch  a  compass  be. 
15.  24  Abiathar  went  up,  until  all  the  people 
15.  30  David  went  up.  .and  wept  as  he  went  up 
15.  30  and.  .went  up,  weeping  as  they  went  up 
i3.  33  went  up  to  the  chamber  over  the  gate 
10.  34  that  I  should  go  up  with  the  king  unto  J. 
20.    2  So  every  man  of  Israel  went  up  from  after 

22.  9  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils 

24. 18  Go  up,  rear  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  in  the 

24.  19  David .  .went  up,  as  the  Lord  commanded 
1  Ki.   2.  34  So  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  went  up 

6.  8  they  went  up  with  winding  stairs  into 
9.  16  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  had  gone  up  and 

10.  5  his  ascent  by  which  he  went  up  unto  the 
12.  24  Ye  shall  not  go  up,  nor  fight  against  your 
12.  27  If  this  people  go  up  to.,  sacrifice  in  the  h. 
12.  28  It  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jeru. 

15.  17  Baasha  king  of  Israel  went  up  against  J. 

16.  17  Omri  went  up  from  Gibbethon,  and  all  I. 
18.  42  So  Ahab  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink 

iS.  42  And  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel 
18.  43  And  said.. Go  up  now,  look  toward  the 
18.  43  And  he  went  up,  and  looked,  and  said 


GO 


410 


GOAT 


i  Ki.  18.  44  lie  said,  Go  up,  say  unto  Ahab,  Prepare 
20.    1  he  went  up  and  besieged  Samaria,  and 
20.  26  Ben-hadad.  .went up  to  Aphek,to  fight  a. 
22.    6  Go  up  ;  for  the  Lord  shall  deliver  (it)  into 
22.  12  Go  up  to  Ramoth-gilead,  and  prosper 
22.  20  that  he  may  go  up  and  fall  at  Ranioth. 
22.  29  the  king  of  Israel . .  went  up  to  Ramoth-g. 

2  Ki.    1.    3  go  up  to  meet  the  messengers  of  the  king 
1.    9  And  he  went  up  to  him  ;  and,  behold,  he 

1.  13  the  third  captain  of  fifty  went  up,  and 

2.  11  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  hea. 
2.  23  And  he  went  up  from  thence  unto  Beth-el 
2.  23  as  he  was  going  up  by  the  way,  there 

2.  23  Go  up.thou  bald  head;  go  up,  thou  bald  h. 

3.  7  And  he  said,  I  will  go  up  :  I.  .as  thou 

3.  8  And  he  said,  Which  way  shall  we  go  up? 

4.  21  she  went  up,  and  laid  him  on  the  bed  of 
4.  34  lie  went  up,  and  lay  upon  the  child,  and 
4-  35  went  up,  and  stretched  himself  upon  him 

6.  24  Ben-hadad .  .went  up,  and  besieged  Sama, 
12.  17  Hazael  king  of  Syria  went  up,  and  fought 

12.  17  Hazael  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 

14.  1 1  Therefore  Jehoash  king  of  Israel  went  up 

15.  14  Menahem  the  son  of  Gadi  went  up  from  T. 

16.  9  the  king  of  Assyria  went  up  against  Da. 

17.  5  Then  the  king  of  Assyria,  .went  up  to  S. 

18.  17  and  they  went  up  and  came  to  Jerusalem 

18.  25  Go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it 

19.  14  Hezekiah  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 

20.  5  thou  shalt  go  up  unto  the  house  of  the  L. 

20.  8  that  I  shall  go  up  into  the  bouse  of  the  L. 

22.  4  Go  up  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  that  he 

23.  2  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  theL. 
23.  29  Pharaoh-nechoh  king  of  Egypt  went  up 

1  Ch.  11.    6  So  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiab  went  first  up 

13.  6  David  went  up,  and  all  Israel,  to  Baalah 

14.  8  all  the  Philistines  went  up  to  seek  David 

14. 10  Shall  I  go  up  against  the  Philistines? 

14.  10  Go  up  ;  for  I  will  deliver  them  into  thine 

14.  14  Go  not  up  after  them  ;  turn  away  from 

21.  18  that  David  should  go  up,  and  set  up  an 
21.  19  David  wentup  at  the  saying  of  Gad,  which 

2  Ch.  9.    4  by  which  he  went  up  into  the  house  of 

11.  4  Ye  shall  not  go  up,  nor  fight  against  your 
18.  2  and  persuaded  him  to  go  up.  .toRanioth. 
18.    5  Go  up ;  for  God  will  deliver  (it)  into  the 

18. 11  Go  up  to  Ramoth-gilead,  and  prosper 

18.  14  Go  ye  up,  and  prosper,  and  they  shall  be 
18.  19  that  he  may  go  up  and  fall  at  Ramoth-g. 
18.  28  So  the  king  of  Israel . .  went  up  to  Ranioth. 
25.  21  So  Joash  the  king  of  Israel  went  up ;  and 
29.  20  Hezekiah . .  went  up  to  the  house  of  the  L. 

34.  30  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 

35.  23  Lord,  .(be)  with  him,  and  let  him  go  up 
Ezra    1.    3  let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  which  (is)  in  J. 

1.  5  to  go  up  to  build  the  house  of  the  LORD 

2.  1  the  children,  .that  went  up  out  of  the 
2.  59  And  these  (were)  they  which  went  up 

7.  6  This  Ezra  went  up  from  Babylon  ;  and 
7.    7  there  went  up.  .of  the  children  of  Israel 

7.  28  out  of  Israel  chief  men  to  go  up  with  me 

8.  1  genealogy  of  them  that  went  up  with  me 
Neh.   2.  15  Then  went  I  up  in  the  night  by  the  brook 

4.  3  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even  break  down 
7.  6  that  went  up  out  of  the  captivity,  of  those 
7.  61  these,  .they  which  went  up.  .from  Telm. 

12.  1  the  priests  and  the  Levites  that  went  up 

12.  37  they  went  up  by  the  stairs  of  the  city  of 
Psa.  iS.    8  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nost. 

104.    8  They  go  up  by  the  mountains;  they  go 
122.    4  Whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of 
132.    3  I  will  not  come,  .nor  go  up  into  my  bed 
Prov  26.    9  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  a  dm. 
Song  6.   6  as  a  flock  of  sheep  which  go  up  from  the 
7.    8  I  will  go  up  to  the  palm  tree,  I  will  take 
Isa.     2.    3  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 

5.  24  and  their  blossom  shall  go  up  as  dust 

7.  1  went  up  toward  Jerusalem  to  war  again. 
7.    6  Let  us  go  up  against  Judah,  and  vex  it 

15.  5  with  weeping  shall  they  go  it  up;  for  in 
21.    2  Go  up,  O  Elam:  besiege,  O  Media:  all  the 

34.  10  the  smoke  thereof  shall  go  up  for  ever 

35.  9  nor  (any)  ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  the. 
36. 10  Go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it 

37.  14  Hezekiah  went  up  unto  the  house  of  the 

38.  22  that  I  shall  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  L.? 
57.    7  thither  wentest  thou  up  to  offer  sacrifice 

Jer     5. 10  Go  ye  up  upon  her  walls,  and  destroy 

6.  4  Prepare,  .arise,  and  let  us  go  up  at  noon 
6.    5  Arise,  and  let  us  go  by  night,  and  let  us 

21.  2  Nebuchadrezzar,  .that  he  may  go  up  from 

22.  20  Go  up  td  Lebanon,  and  cry  ;  and  lift  up 
31.  6  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion  unto 
46.  8  saith,  I  will  go  up,  (and)  will  cover  the 
46.  11  Go  up  into  Gilead,  and  take  balm,  0  virgin 

48.  5  of  Luhith  continual  weeping  shall  go  up 

49.  28  Arise  ye,  go  up  to  Kedar,  and  spoil  the 

50.  21  Go  up  against  the  land  of  Merathaim 
Eze.    8.  11  and  a  thick  cloud  of  incense  went  up 

11.  23  the  gb>ry  <>f  the  Lord  went  up  from  the 
11.  24  the  vision  that  I  had  seen  went  up  from 

13.  5  Ye  have  not  gone  up  into  the  gaps,  neit. 
38.  11  I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  unwalled  vill. 
40.  6  went  up  the  stairs  thereof,  and  measured 
40.  22  and  they  went  up  unto  it  by  seven  steps 
40.  40  as  one  goeth  up  to  the  entry  of  the  north 
40.  49  by  the  steps  whereby  they  went  up  to  it 

Hos.   4.  15  neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-aven,  nor  swear 
Mie.    4.    2  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 
Hag.    1.    S  Go  up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood 
Zech.14.  16  shall  even  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  w. 

14.  iS  if  the  family  ol  Egypt  go  not  up,  and  come 


5.  To  be  gone  up,  nSy,  ahth,  2. 

2  Sa.  2.  27  the  people  had  gone  up  every  one  from 

6.  T<>  (cause  to)  go  up,  rrVjy  alah,  5. 

2  Ch.    1.   6  Solomon  went  up  thither  to  the  brasen 

7. To  be  or  go  high,  on  rum. 

Eze.  10.   4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the 

S.To  go  up,  avafiaivui  OMO.hn  i  a~>. 

Matt,  3.  16  Jesus,  when  he  was  baptized,  went  up 

5.  1  be  went  up  into  a  mountain :  and  when 

14.  23  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart  to  pray 

15.  29  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  sat  down 
20.  17  Jesus  going  up  to. Jerusalem  tookthe  tw. 

20.  18  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  the 
Mark  3.  13  be  goeth  up  into  a  mountain,  and  calleth 

6.  51  And  he  went  up  unto  them  into  the  shirj 
10.  32  they  were  in  the  way  going  up  to  Jeru. 

10.  33  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  the 
Luke  2.    4  Joseph  also  went  up  from  Galilee,  out  of 

2.  42  he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went  up 
9.  28  and  went  up  into  a  mountain  to  pray 

18.  10  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pr. 
18.  31  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  aud  all 
John  2.  13  passover  was  at  hand,  and  Jesus  went  up 
5.    1  After  this.  .Jesus  went  up  to  Jerusalem 

7.  8  Go  ye  up.  .1  go  not  up  yet  unto  this  feast 
7.  10  were  gone  up,  then  went  he  also  up  unto 
7. 14  Jesus  went  up  into  the  temple,  and  taug. 

11.  55  many  went  out  of  the  country  up  to  Je. 

21.  11  Simon  Peter  weut  up,  and  drew  the  net 
Acts    1.  13  they  went  up  into  an  upper  room,  where 

3.  1  Peter  and  John  went  up  together  into 
10.    g  Peter  went  up  upon  the  housetop  to  pray 
15.    2  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  unto  the  ap. 

18.  22  when  he  had  landed,  .and  gone  up,  and 
2i.  4  said,  .that  he  should  not  go  up  to  Jeru. 
21.  12  besought  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
21.  15  after  those  days  we.  .went  up  to  Jerusa. 

24.  11  since  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  for  to  wo. 

25.  9  Wilt  thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  there 
Gal.    2.    1  I  went  up  again  to  Jerusalem  with  Barn. 

2.    2  I  went  up  by  revelation,  and  communica. 
Rev.  20.    9  they  weut  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth 
9.  To  go  up,  avepxo}J.ai  anerchomai. 

John  6.    3  Jesus  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  there 
Gal.     1.  17  Neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them 

I.  18  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter,  and 
lCTo  go  up  toioard,  irpoaavafialvco  j)> rosandba mo. 

Lukei4-  10  he  may  say  unto  thee,  Friend,  go  up  high. 
11.  To  go  or  pass  on,  trope vo/xai  poreuomai. 

Acts    1. 10  as  he  went  up,  behold,  two  men  stood  by 
12.7*0  go  up  into,  efi^aivca  embaino. 

Luke  8.  37  he  went  up  into  the  ship,  and  returned 
GO  unto,  to  — 
l.To  go  in,  S03  bo, 

Prov.  2.  19  None  that  go  unto  her  return  again,  nei. 
2.  To  go  toward  or  to,  irpoo-epxo/j.at  2rroserchomai . 

Luke23-  52  This  (man)  went  unto  Pilate,  and  begged 

Acts   9.    1  And  Saul,  .went  unto  the  high  priest 

GO  up  and  down,  to  — 

l.To  go  up  and  down,  lf>n  halak,  7. 

Eze.    1.  13  it  went  up  and  down  among  the  living 

19.  6  And  he  went  up  and  down  among  the 

2.  To  go  on,  -J?;  yalalc. 

Lev.  19.16  Thou  shalt  not  go  up  and  down . .  a  tale  h. 

GO  up  and  down,  to  make  — 
To  cause  to  move,  yn  nua,  5. 

2  Sa.  15.  20  should  I  this  day  make  thee  go  up  and  d. 

GO  up,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  up,  rips;  alah,  5. 

Judg.  2.    1  I  made  you  to  go  up  out  of  Egypt,  aud 

CO  up  to,  to  — 

Going  up,  ascent,  rh'v  olah. 

Eze.  40.  26  And.  .seven  steps  to  go  up  to"it,  and 

GO  upward,  to  — 

To  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

Eccl.  3.  21  Who  knowcth  the  spirit,  .that  goeth  up. 

GO  .  way,  to  — 

l.To  go  on,  ^7;  yalah. 

Gen.  24.  61  servant  took  Rebecca,  and  went  his  way 

Judgig.  14  they  passed  on  and  went  their  way 

1  Sa.  20.  22  go  thy  way  :  for  the  Lord  hath  sent  thee 

2.  7*0  remove,  journey,  yp3  nasa. 

Zechio.    2  therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a  flock 

3.  To  go  on,  over  or  beyond,  "izry  abar. 

Estli.  4.  17  So  Mordecai  went  bis  way,  and  did  acco. 
GO  with,  to  — 
l.To  go  gently,  lovingly,  Trn  dadah,  7. 

Psa.  42.    4  I  went  with  them  to  the  house  of  God 
2.7*0  go  on  with,  crvf.nropevofj.ai  sumporcuomai. 

Luke  7.  11  many  of  his  disciples  went  with  him,  and 

14.  25  And  there  went  great  multitudes  with 
24.  15  Jesus  himself  drew  near,  and  went  with 

'^.T"  go  with}  cvve'pxofxai  siinerchomai. 

Acts    0.  39  Then  refer  arose  and  went  with  them 

II.  12  the  spirit  bade  me  go  with  them,  nothing 

15.  38  and  went  not  with  them  to  the  work 
21. 16  There  went  with  us  also,  .of  the  disciples 


GOAD  — 

l.A  goad,  lyricJc,  j:rn  dorban. 

1  Sa.  13.  21  and  for  the  axes,  and  to  sharpen  the  goa. 
2.A  teacher,  goad, prick,  "127s  malmad. 

Judg.  3.  31  slew,  .six  hundred  men  with  an  ox  goad 
GOADS  — 
Goads,  pricks,  rmi~);i  dorbonoth. 

Eccl.  12. 11  The  words  of  the  wise  (are)  as  goads,  and 
GOAT  — 
l.A  goat,  she  goat,  iy  ez. 

Gen.  27.   9  Go  now  to  the  flock,  and  fetch  me.  .goats 
27. 16  she  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  the  goats 

30.  32  the  spotted  and  speckled  among  the  go. 
30.  33  not  speckled  and  spotted  among  the  go. 
37.  31  killed  a  kid  of  the  goats,  and  dipped  the 

Exodi2.    5  take  (it)  out  from  the  sheep,  or.  .the  go. 

25.  4  purple  and  scarlet,  and  fine  liuen,  and  g. 

26.  7  And  thou  shalt  make  curtains  (of)  goats' 
35-    6»  23  purple . .  scarlet,  and  fine  linen,  and  g. 

35.  26  And  all  the  women,  .in  wisdom  spun  go. 

36.  14  he  made  curtains  (of)  goats'  (hair)  for  the 
Lev     1. 10  if  his  offering  (be),  .of  the  goats,  for  a 

3. 12  if  his  offering  (be)  a  goat,  then  he  shall 

4.  23,  28  shall  bring  his  offering,  a  kid  of  the  g. 

5.  6  a  lamb,  or  a  kid  of  the  goats,  for  a  sin 
7.  23  ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat . .  of  goat 

9.  3  Take  ye  a  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  off. 

16.  5  two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 

17.  3  that  killeth.  .lamb,  or  goat,  in  the  camp 
22.  19  nf  the  heaves,  of  the  sheep,  or  of  the  go. 

22.  27  When  a  bullock,  or  a  sheep,  or  a  goat 

23.  19  ye  shall  sacrifice  one  kid  of  the  goats  for 
Num.  7.  16  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 

[So  also  v.  22,  28,  34,  40,  46,  52,  58,  64,  70,  76,  82.] 

7.  87  kids  of  the  goats  for  sin  offering  twelve 

15.  24  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 

18. 17  the  firstling  of  a  goat,  thou  shalt  not  red. 
28.  15  one  kid  of  the  goat's  for  a  sin  offering 

28.  30  one  kid  of  the  goats,  to  make  an  atone. 

29.  5,  11,  16,  19,  25  And  one  kid  of  the  goats 

31.  20  all  work  of  goats'  (hair),  and  all  things 
Beut  14.    4  ye  shall  eat:  The  ox,  the  sheep,  and  the  g. 

1  Sa.  19. 13,  16  a  pillow  of  goats'  (hair)  for  his  bolster 

25.    2  three  thousand  sheep,  and  a  thousand  g. 

2  CI1.29.  21  seven  lambs,  and  seven  he  goats,  for  a  sin 
Ezra   6.  17  twelve  he  goats,  according  to  the  number 
Prov 27.  27  And.  .goats'  milk  enough  for  thy  food 
Song  4.   1  thy  hair  (is)  as  a  flock  of  goats,  that  app. 

6.  s  thy  ban-  (is)  as  a  flock  of  goats,  that  app. 
Eze.  43.  22  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid  of  the  goats  with. 

45.  23  and  a  kid  of  the  goats  daily,  .a  sin  offer. 
Ban.    8.   5  an  he  goat  came  from  the  west,  on  the  fa. 
%He  goat,  chief,  iwy  attud. 

Num.  7.  17  two  oxen,  five  rams,  five  he  goats,  five 
[So  also  v.  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.I 

7.  88  the  rams  sixty,  the  he  goats  sixty,  the 
Beut  32.  14  goats,  with  the  fat  of  kidneys  of  wheat 
Psa.  50.    9  I  will  take  no.  .he  goats  out  of  thy  fold 

50.  13  Will  I  eat.  .or  drink  the  blood  of  goats  ? 
66. 15  I  will  offer  bullocks  with  goats.     Selab 

Prov  27.  26  and  the  goats  (are)  the  price  of  the  field 
Isa.     1. 11 1  delight  not  in  the  blood  of.. he  goats 
34.   6  with  the  blood  of  lambs  and  goats,  with 
Jer.  50.    3  and  be  as  the  he  goats  before  the  flocks 

51.  40  I  will  bring  them  down  like,  .be  goats 
Eze.  27.  21  they  occupied  with  thee  in.  .rams  and  g. 

34. 17  I  judge,  .between  the  rams  and.  .he  go. 
39.  18  of  rams,  of  lambs,  and  of  goats,  of  hullo. 
Zech  10.    3  Mine  anger.,  and  I  punished  the  goats:  for 
ZMe  goat,  yd^  tsaphir. 

Dan.   8.    5  the  goat,  .a  notable  horn  between  his  ey. 

8.  21  And  the  rough  goat  (is)  the  king  of  Grecia 

i.Goat,  hid,  hairy  one,  Yyy  sair. 

Lev.    4.  24  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  goat 

9.  15  the  goat,  which  (was)  the  sin  offering 

10.  16  Moses  diligently  sought  the  goat  of  the 
16.    7  he  shall  take  the  two  goats,  aud  present 

16.  8  Aaron  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goats 
r6.   9  Aaron  shall  bring  the  goat  upon  which 
16. 10  the  goat,  on  which  the  lot  fell  to  be  the  s. 
16.  15  Then  shall  he  kill  the  goat  of  the  sin  off. 
16.  18  and  shall  take . .  of  the  blood  of  the  goat 
16.  20  made  an  end .  .he  shall  bring  the  live  goat 
16.  21  his  bands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat 
16.  21  putting  them  upon  the  bead  of  the  goat 
16.  22  the  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all  their 
16.  22  he  shall  let  go  the  goat  in  the  wilderness 
16.  26  he  that  let  go  the  goat  for  the  scape  goat 
16.  27  the  goat  (for)  the  sin  offering,  whose  bio. 

Nuni28.  22  one  goat,  .a  sin  offering,  to  make  an  ato. 
29.  22,  28,  31,  34,  38  And  one  goat.. a  sin  offeri. 
Eze.  43.  25  days  shalt  thou  prepare  every  day  a  goat 
b.A  young  kid,  ip'upiov  eriphon. 

Matt 25.  33  he  shall  set.. the  goats  on  the  left 
6.A  kid,  young  goat,  eptcpos  eriphos. 

Matt  25.  32  shepherd  divideth.  .sheep  from  the  goats 
7 .A  he  goat,  rpdyos  tragos. 

Heb.   9.  12  N  either  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves 
9.  13  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the 
9.  19  he  took  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  goats 
10.   4  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should 
GOAT,  he  — 
I. Goat,  lid,  hairy  one,  Y"fc*  sair. 

2  Ch.29.  23  they  brought  forth  the  he  goats,  .the  sin 
2  lie  goat,  ">'•:>'  tsaphir. 

Ezra   8.  35  offered,  .twelve  he  goats.. a  sin  offering 
Dan.'  S    8  the  he  goat  waxed  very  great:  and,  when 


GOAT 


411 


GOD 


Z.He  goat,  B^g  tayish. 

Gen.  30.  35  he  removed  that  day  the  he  goats  that 

32.  14  twenty  he  goats,  two  hundred  ewes,  and 
2  Ch.17.  11  seven  thousand  and  seven  hundred  he  g. 
Prov3o.  31  A  greyhound  ;  an  he  goat  also ;  and  a  ki. 

GOAT,  she  — ■ 
Goat,  TH  ez. 

Gen.  15.   9  a  she  goat  of  three  years  old,  and  a  ram 

30.  35  all  the  she  goats  that  were  speckled  and 

31.  38  thy  ewes  and  thy  she  goats  have  not  ca. 

32.  14  Two  hundred  she  goats,  and  twenty  he 
Num  T5-  27  he  shall  bring  a  she  goat  of  the  first  year 

GO'-ATH,  GO'-AH,  ny5  Constance. 

A  place  on  the  E.  of  Jerusalem,  and  near  it :  named  in 

connection  with  the  Mil  Gareb. 

Jer.  31.  39  measuring  line.  .shallcompassabouttoG. 

GOATS,  wild  — 

Mountain  goats,  xAy*  yeelim. 

1  Sa.  24.    2  David,  .upon  the  rocks  of  the  wild  goats 
Job    39.    1  when  the  wild  goats  of  the  rock  bring 
Psa.  104.  iS  high  hills  (are)  a  refuge  for  the  wild  goats 

GOAT  SHIN  — 

Goat  skin,  Sep/j.a  aXyeiov  derma  aigeion. 

Heb.  11.  37.  wan.  about  in  sheep  skins  and  goat  skins 

GOB,  33,  3ia  a  pit  or  hollow. 

A  locality  where  David  had  two  encounters  with  the 
Philistines.  In  1  Ch.  20.  4  the  place  of  the  first  en- 
counter is  given  as  Gaze  r  ;  whereas  the  LXX.  and  Syriac 
have  Gath.  The  third  fight  all  agree  took  place  at 
Gath. 

2  Sa.21. 18  again  a  battle  with  the  Philistines  at  G. 

21.19  again  a  hattte  in  G.  with  the  Philistines 
GOBLET  — 
Basin,  }3X  aggan. 

Song  7.    2  Thy  navel . .  a  round  goblet . .  wanteth  not 
GOD  — 
l.My  lords,  'riij  adonai. 

Hab.  3. 19  The  Loud  God  is  my  strength,  and  he  will 
^.Mighty  one,  *?x  el. 

Gen.  14.  18  and  he.  .the  priest  of  the  most  high  God 
14.  19  Blessed  (be)  Abrani  of  the  most  high  God 
14.  20  And  blessed  (be)  the  most  Mgh  God,  wh. 

14.  22  the  most  Mgh  God,  the  possessor  of  hea. 
16. 13  Thou  God  seest  me  :  for  she  said,  Have 
17.    1  I  (am)  the  Almighty  God  ;  walk  before 
2i.  33  and  called  there  on  the. . everlasting G. 
28.    3  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  make  thee 

31. 13  I  (am)  the  God  of  Beth-el,  where  thou 
35.    1  make  there  an  altar  uuto  God,  that 

35.    3  I  will  make  there  an  altar  unto  God,  who 
35.  11  I  (am)  God  Almighty  ;  be  fruitful  and 
43.  14  God  Almighty  gave  you  mercy  before 
46.   3  I  (am)  God.  .fear  not  to  go  down  into  E. 

48.  3  God  Almighty  appeared  uuto  me  at  Luz 

49.  25  by  the  God  of  thy  father,  who  shall  help 
Esod.  6.    3  God  Almighty;  but  by  my  name  Jehovah 

15.  2  he  (is)  my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  him  an 

1 5.  1 1  Who  (is)  like  unto  thee . .  among  the  gods  ? 
20.    5  I  the  Lord,  .(am)  a  jealous  God,  visiting 
34.    6  The  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious 
34.  14  For  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  god 

34. 14  Lord,  whose  name  (is)  Jealous,  (is)  a . .  God 
Miraii2. 13  Heal  her  now,  0  God,  I  beseech  thee 

16.  22  they  fell  on  their  faces,  and  said,  O  God 
23.    8  How  shall  I  curse,  whom  God  hath  not 
23.  19  God  (is)  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie 
23.  22  God  brought  them  out  of  Egypt  :  he 

23.  23  shall  be  said . .  What  hath  God  wrought ! 

24.  4  which  heard  the  words  of  God,  which  saw 
24.    8  God  brought  him  forth  out  of  Egypt 

24.  16  which  heard  the  words  of  God,  and  knew 
24.  23  Alas  !  who  shall  live  when  God  doeth 


Deut.  3 

4 

4 
5 
6. 


32 
32 

32' 

Josh.  3. 


_  what  God.  .in  heaven  or  in  earth  that 
24  Lord  . .  (is)  a  consuming  fire . .  jealous  God 
31  For  the  Lord,  .(is)  a  merciful  God;  he  will 

9  the  Lord,  .a  jealous  God,  visiting  the 
15  For  the  Lord,  .(is)  a  jealous  God  among 

9  the  faithful  God,  which  keepeth  covenant 

7.  21  among  you,  a  mighty  God  and  terrible 
10.  17  a  great  God,  a  mighty,  and  a  terrible 
32.   4  a  God  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity,  just 

12  and  (there  was)  no  strange  god  with  him 
18  and  hast  forgotten  God  that  formed  thee 
21  to  jealousy  with  (that  which  is)  not  God 
26  none  like  unto  the  God  of  Jeshurun 
10  know  that  the  living  God  (is)  among  you 

22.  22  God.  .the  Lord  God.  .he  knoweth,  and  I. 

24.  19  he  (is)  a  jealous  God  ;  he  will  not  forgive 
Jndg.  9.  46  into  an  hold  of  the  house  of  the  god  Ber. 

1  Sa.    2.    3  Lord  (is)  a  God  of  knowledge,  and  by  him 

2  Sa.  22.  31  God,  his  way  (is)  perfect ;  the  word  of  the 

22.  32  For  who  (is)  God,  save  the  Lord?  and  who 
22.  33  G  od  (is)  my  strength . .  power :  and  he 
22.  48  It  (is)  God  that  avengeth  me,  and  that  br. 
!3.  5  Although  my  house  (be)  not  so  with  God 
1.  5  the  great  and  terrible  God,  that  keepeth 
g.  3 1  for  thou  (art)  a  gracious  and  merciful  God 
9.  32  the  great,  the  mighty,  and  the  terrible  G. 
5.    8  I  would  seek  onto  God,  and.  .commit  my 

8.  3  Doth  God  pervert  judgment?  or  doth  the 
8.  5  If  thou  wouldest  seek  unto  God  betimes 
8.  13  So  (are)  the  paths  of  all  that  forget  God 

8.  2D  Behold,  God  will  not  cast  away  a  perfect 

9.  2  hut  how  should  man  Lie  just  with  God? 

12.  6  and  they  that  provoke  God  are  secure 

13.  3  Surely  I  would . .  desire  to  reason  with  G. 
13.    7  Will  ye  speak  wickedly  for  God?  and 


Neh. 


Job 


27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
3*- 
31- 
31- 
32- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
40. 

Psa.    5. 


13.  8  Will  ye  accept . .  will  ye  contend  for  God  ? 
15.  4  Yea,  thou,  .restrainest  prayer  before  God 
15.  11  (Are)  the  consolations  of  God  small  with 
15.  13  That  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  against  God 

15.  25  he  stretcheth  out  his  hand  against  God 

16.  11  God  hath  delivered  me  to  the  ungodly 

18.  21  this,  .place  (of  him  that)  knoweth  not  G. 

19.  22  Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  God,  and  are 

20.  15  God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  belly 

20.  29  the  portion,  .appointed  unto  him  by  God 

21.  14  they  say  unto  God,  Depart  from  us  ;  for 

21.  22  Shall  (any) teach  God  knowledge?  seemg 

22.  2  Can  a  man  be  profitable  unto  God,  as  he 
22.  13  And  thou  sayest,  How  doth  God  know? 

22.  17  Which  said  unto  God,  Depart  from  us 

23.  16  For  God  maketh  my  heart  soft,  and  the 
25.    4  then  can  man  be  justified  with  God? 

God  liveth,  (who)  hath  taken  away  my 
Will  God  hear  Ms  cry  when  trouble  co. 
I  will  teach  you  by  the  hand  of  God 
the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  with  God 
What  then  shall  I  do  when  God  riseth  up? 
For  destruction  (from)  God  (was)  a  terror 
for  I  should  have  denied  the  God.  .above 
should  say . .  God  thrusteth  lum  down,  not 
The  spirit  of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the 
I  (am)  according  to  thy  wish  in  God's 
God  speaketh  once,  yea  twice,  (yet  man) 
all  these. .  worketh  God  often  times  with 
and  God  hath  taken  away  my  judgment 
hearken  unto  me . .  Far  be  it  from  God 
surely  God  will  not  do  wickedly,  neither 
he  should  enter  into  judgment  with  God 
Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God 
and  multiplieth  Ms  words  against  God 
My  righteousness  (is)  more  than  God's? 
Surely  God  will  not  hear  vanity,  neither 
Behold, God  (is)  mighty,  and  despiseth  not 
God  exalteth  by  his  power  :  who  teacheth 
God  (is;  great,  and  we  know  (Mm)  not 
God  thundereth  marvellously  with  his 
By  the  breath  of  God  frost  is  given ;  and 
and  consider  the  wondrous  works  of  God 
when  his  young  ones  cry  unto  God,  they 
Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God  ?  or  canst  thou 
He  (is)  the  chief  of  the  ways  of  God  :  he 
thou  (art)  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure 
God  is  angry  (with  the  wicked)  every  day 
10.  11  God  hath  forgotten :  he  hideth  his  face 
10.  12  0  God,  lift  up  thine  hand  :  forget  not 

16.  1  Preserve  me,  0  God:  for  in  thee  do  I  put 

17.  6  I  have  called .  .thou  wilt  hear  me,  O  God 

18.  2  my  God,  my  strength,  in  whom  I  will 
18.  30  God,  his  way  (is)  perfect:  the  word  of .  .L. 
18.  32  God  that  girdeth  me  with  strength,  and 

18.  47  God  that  avengeth  me,  and  subdueththe 

19.  1  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God 
22.    1  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
22.  10  thou  (art)  my  God  from  my  mother's  be. 

the  God  of  glory  thundereth :  the  Lord 
thou  hast  redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God  of 
My  soul  tMrsteth.  .for  the  living  God 
(and)  my  prayer  unto  the  God  of  my  life 
I  will  say  unto  God  my  rock,  Why  hast 
Then  will  I  go.  .unto  God  my  exceeding 
stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange  god 
the  goodness  of  God  (endureth)  continu. 
God  shall  likewise  destroy  thee  for  ever 
God  shall  hear,  and  afflict  them,  even  he 
unto  God  that  perf orrneth .  .for  me 
thou  (art)  my  God  ;  early  will  I  seek 
the  Lord,  .the  God  of  our  salvation.   Se. 
our  God  (is)  the  God  of  salvation  ;  and 
the  goings  of  my  God,  my  king,  in  the 
the  God  of  Israel  (is)  he  that  giveth  str. 
And  they  say,  How  doth  God  know?  and 
Until  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God 
burnt  up  all  the  synagogues  of  God 
Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious?  hath 
in  the  sanctuary  :  who  (is  so)  great  a  G. 
Thou  (art)  the  God  that  doest  wonders 
and  not  forget  the  works  of  God,  but 
whose  spirit  was  not  stedfast  with  God 
they  tempted  God  in  their  heart,  by  ask. 
Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness? 
they  returned  and  enquired  early  after  G. 
they  remembered .  .the  high  God  their  Be. 
they  turned  back,  and  tempted  God,  and 
There  shall  no  strange  god  be  in  thee 
neither  shalt  thou  worship  any  strange  g. 
hold  not  thy  peace .  .be  not  still,  0  God 
my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God 
I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak 
86. 15  But  thou,  0  Lord,  (art)  a  God  full  of 

89.  7  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assem. 
Sg.  26  Thou  (art)  my  Father,  my  God,  and  the 

90.  2  everlasting  to  everlasting,  thou  (art)[  God 
94.    1  Lord  God,  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth 

94.  1  0  God,  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth 

95.  3  For  the  Lord  (is)  a  great  God,  and  a 
99.    8  thou  wast  a  God  that  forgavest  them 

102.  24  O  my  God,  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst 
104.  21  The  young  lions,  .seek  their  meatfromG 
106. 14  lusted,  .and  tempted  God  in  the  desert 

106.  21  They  forgat  God  their  saviour,  which 

107.  11  they  rebelled  against  the  words  of  God 
118.  27  God  (is)  the  Lord,  which  hath  showed  us 
11S.  28  Thou  (art)  my  God,  and  I  will  praise  thee 
136.  26  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  heaven 
139.  17  0  God  !  how  great  is  the  sum  of  them  ! 

139.  23  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart 

140.  6  I  said  unto  the  Lord,  Thou  (art)  my  God 


29. 

3*- 
42. 
42. 
42. 

43- 
44. 

52. 
52- 
55- 
57- 
S3- 
68. 
68. 
68. 
68. 
73- 
73- 
74- 
77- 
77- 
77- 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
81. 
81. 
83. 
84. 
85- 


Psa.  146.    5  Happy  (is  he)  that  (hath)  the  God  of  Jac 

149.  6  (Let)  the  high  (praises)  of  God  (be)  in 

150,  1  Praise  God  in  his  sanctuary  :  praise  him 
Isa.     5. 16  God,  (that  is)  holy,  shall  be  sanctified  in 

8.  10  Take  counsel  together,  .for  God  (is)  with 

9.  6  The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father 

10.  21  remnant . .  return . .  unto  the  mighty  God 
12.    2  God  (is)  my  salvation  ;  I  will  trust,  and 
14.  13  exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of  God 
31.   3  Now  the  Egyptians  (are)  men,  and  not  G. 
40.  18  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  God?  or 

42.  5  Thus  saith  God  the  Lord,  he  that  created 

43.  10  before  me  there  was  no  God  formed,  nei. 
43. 12  ye  (are)  my  witnesses,  .that  I  (am)  God 

44.  10  Who  hath  formed  a  god,  or  molten  a  gr. 
44-  15  yea,  he  maketh  a  god,  and  worshippeth 
44. 17  the  residue  thereof  he  maketh  a  god 

44. 17  saith,  Deliver  me  ;  for  thou  (art)  my  god 

45.  14  Surely  God  (is)  in  thee  ;  and  (there  is) 
45.  15  Verily  thou  (art)  a  God  that  Mdest  thys. 
45.  20  and  pray  unto  a  god  (that)  cannot  save 
45.  21  a  just'God,  and  a  Saviour  ;  (there  is)  none 

45.  22  for  I  (am)  God,  and  (there  is)  none  else 

46.  6  he  maketh  it  a  god  :  they  fall  down,  yea 
46.    9  I  (am)  God,  and  (there  is)  none  else 

Jer.  32. 18  the  mighty  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  (is) 
51.  56  Lord  God  of  recompences  shall  surely 

Lam.  3.  41  Let  us  lift  up.  .(our)  hands  unto  God 

Eze.  10.    5  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty  God  when 
28.    2  thou  hast  said,  I  (am)  a  god,  I  sit  (in)  the 
28.    2  yet  thou  (art)  a  man,  and  not  God,  though 
28.   9  but  thou  (shalt  be)  a  man,  and  no  god,  in 

Dan.    9.  4  O  Lord,  the  great  and  dreadful  God 

11.  36  and  magnify  himself  above  every  god,  and 
11.  36  speak,  .things  against  the  God  of  gods 

Hos.  1.  10  be  said . .  (Ye  are)  the  sons  of  the  living  G. 
11.  9  for  I  (am)  God,  andnot  man  ;  the  Holy 
11. 12  Judah  yet  ruleth  with  God,  and  is  faithf. 
Jon.  4.  2  I  kuew  that  thou  (art)  a  gracious  God,  and 
Mic.  7.  18  Who  (is)  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pard. 
Nah.  1.  2  God  (is)  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth 
Zech.  7.  2  they  had  sent  unto  the  house  of  God 
Mai.   1.   9  now,  I  pray  you,  beseech  God  that  he 

2. 10  hath  not  one  God  created  us  ?  why  do  we 
2.  11  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god 

B.God,  an  object  of  worship,  ft^K  elah. 

Ezra  4.  24  Then  ceased  the  wo'rk  of  the  house  of  G. 
5.  1  prophesied . .  m  the  name  of  the  God  of  I. 
5.  2  began  to  build  the  house  of  God  which 
5.  2  with  them,  .the  prophets  of  God  helping 
5.  5  the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  elders 
5.    8  to  the  house  of  the  great  God,  which  is 

5. 11  We  are  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven 
5.  12  provoked  the  God  of  heaven  unto  wrath 
5.  13  made  a  decree  to  build  this  house  of  God 
5.  14  And  the  vessels  also,  .of  the  house  of  G. 
5.  15  let  the  house  of  God  be  builded  in  his 

5.  16  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  God 
5. 17  to  build  this  house  of  God  at  Jerusalem 

6.  3  (concerning)  the  house  of  God  at  Jerusal, 
6.    5  and  silver  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 

6.   5  and  place  (them)  in  the  house  of  God 
6.    7  Let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  alone 
6.    7  let.  .build  this  house  of  God  in  his  place 
6.   8  for  the  building  of  this  house  of  God 
6.  9  for  the  burnt  offerings  of  the  God  of  hea_ 
6.  10  sweet  savours  unto  the  God  of  heaven 

6. 12  the  God  that  hath  caused  his  name  to 
6.  12  to  destroy  this  house  of  God  which  (is) 
6.  14  tlie  commandment  of  the  God  of  Israel 
6.  16  kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God 
6.  17  at  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God  an 

6.  18  for  the  service  of  God,  which  (is)  at  Jeru. 

7.  12  a  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven 
7.  14  according  to  the  law  of  thy  God  which 

7.  75  have  freely  offered  unto  the  God  of  Israel 
7.  16  for  the  house  of  their  God  which  (is)  m 

7. 17  upon  the  altar  of  the  house  of  your  God 
7.  18  to  do.  .that  do  after  the  will  of  your  God 
7.  19  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  thy  God 

7. 19  deliver  thou  before  the  God  of  Jerusalem 
7.  20  shall  be  needful  for  the  house  of  thy  G. 
7.  21  the  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven 
7.  23  Whatsoever  is  commanded  by  the  God 
7.  23  for  the  house  of  the  God  of  heaven 
7.  24  or  ministers  of  tMs  house  of  God,  it 
7.  25  after  the  wisdom  of  .thy  God  that  (is)  in 
7. 25  all  such  as  know  the  laws  of  thy  God 
7.  26  whosoever  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God 

Jer.   10.  11  The  gods  that  have  not  made  the  heave. 

Dan.    211  except  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not 

2. 18  would  desire  mercies  of  the  God  of  heav. 
2.  19  Then  Daniel  blessed  the  God  of  heaven 
2.  20  Blessed  be  the  name  of  God  for  ever  and 
2.  23  I  thank  thee,  and  praise  thee,  O  thou  G. 
2.  2S  there  is  a  God  in  heaven  that  revealeth 
2.  37  for  the  God  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a 
2.  44  shall  the  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom 
2.  45  the  great  G<  id  hath  made  known  to  the  k. 

2.  47  that  your  God  (is)  a  God  of  gods,  aud  a  L. 

3.  12  they  serve  not  thy  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  14  do  not  ye  serve  my  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  15  who  (is)  that  God  that  shall  deliver  you 
3.  17  our  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver 
3.  18  we  will  not  serve  thy  gods,  nor  worship 
3.  25  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of  God 
3.  26  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  come 

3.  28  Blessed  (be)  the  God  of  Shadrach,  Mesh. 
3.  28  nor  worship  any  god  except  their  own  G. 
3.  29  speak  any  thing  amiss  against  the  God  of 
3.  29  no  other  god  that  can  deliver  after  this 


GOD 


412 


GOD 


Dan.   4.    2  that  the  high  God  hath  wrought  toward 
4.    8  according  to  the  name  of  my  god,  and 
4.    8  in  whom  (is)  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods 

4.  9,  18  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  (is)  in  thee 

5.  3  out  of  the  temple  of  the  house  of  God 
5.   4  They  drank  wine,  and  praised  the  gods 
5.  11  in  whom  (is)  the  spirit  of  the  holy  god3 
5.  11  wisdom,  like  the  wisdom  of  the  gods,  was 
5.  14  that  the  spirit  of  the  gods  (is)  in  thee 

5.  18  O  thou  king,  the  most  high  God  gave  N. 
5.  21  that  the  must  high  God  ruled  in  the  kin. 
5.  23  thuu  hast  praised  the  gods  of  silver,  and 
5.  23  and  the  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath 

5.  26  God  hath  numbered  thy  kingdom 

6.  5  against  him  concerning  the  law  of  his  G. 
6.  7  whosoever  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  god 
6.  10  gave  thanks  before  his  God,  as  he  did 

6.  11  and  making  supplication  before  his  God 
6.  12  that  shall  ask  (a  petition)  of  any  god  or 
6.  16  Thy  God,  whom  thuu  servest  continually 
6.  20  0  Daniel,  .is  thy  God  whom  thou  servest 

6. 22  My  God  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  hath 

6. 23  was  found,  .because  he  believed  in  his  G. 

6.  26  the  God  of  Daniel ;  for  he  (is)  the  living  G. 

4k.  God,  gods,  objects  of  worship,  D'rnx  elohim. 
Gen.    1.    1  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven 
1.    2  the  spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of 
1.    3  God  said,  Let  there  be  light:  and  there 
1.    4  God  saw  the  light,  that  (it  was)  good 
t.    4  God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness 
1.    5  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  dark. 
1.    6  God  said,  Let  there  be  a  firmament 
1.    7  God  made  the  firmament,  and  divided 
1.   8  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven 
1.    9  God  said,  Let  the  waters  under  the  heav 
1.  id  God  called  the  dry  (land)  Earth  ;  and  the 
1.  10,  12,  21,  25  God  saw  that  (it  was)  good 
1, 11  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass 
1.  14  God  said,  Let  there  be  lights  in  the 
1.  16  God  made  two  great  lights;  the  greater 
1.  17  God  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  h. 
1.  20  God  said,  Let  the  waters  bring  forth 
1.  21  God  created  great  whales,  and  every 
x. 22  God  blessed  them,  saying,  Be  fruithful 
1.  24  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the 
1.  25  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after 
'i.  26  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image 

7.  27  80  God  created  man  in  his  (own)  image 
1.  27  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him ;  male 
1.  28  God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto 

1.  29  God  said.  .1  have  given  you  every  herb 

1.  31  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  made 

2.  2  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work 
2.  3  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sancti. 
■2.  3  rested  from  all  his  work  which  God  ere. 
2.  4  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  God  made  the 
2.  s  the  Lord  God  had  not  caused  it  to  rain 
■2,  7  Lord  God  formed  man  (of)  the  dust  of 

2.    8  Lord  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in 
2.   9  out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lord  God  to 
2.  15  Lord  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him 
2. 16  Loud  God  commanded  the  man,  saying 
-2.  18  Lord  God  said,  (It  is)  not  good  that 
•?.,  \  j  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field 

2.  21  Lord  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  up. 
■2.  22  which  the  Lord  God  had  taken  from  man 

3.  1  any  beast  of  the  field  which  the  Lord  G. 
3.  1  Yea,  hath  God  said.  Ye  shall  not  eat  of 
3.  3  God  hath  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  nei. 
3.  5  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat 

3.    8  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God 
3.    8  from  the  presence  of  the  LORD  God  amo. 
3.    9  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and  said 
3.  13  Lord  God  said  unto  the  woman,  What 
3.  14  Lord  God  said  unto  the  serpent.  Because 
3.  21  did  the  Lord  God  make  coats  of  skins 
3.  22  Lord  God  said.  Behold,  the  man  is  become 

3.  23  Lord  God  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden 

4.  25  God .  .hath  appointed  me  another  seed 

5.  1  In  the  day  that  God  created  man 

5.    1  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he  him 
5.  22  Enoch  walked  with  God  after  he  begat 

5.  24  Enoch  walked  with  God.. God  took  him 

6.  2  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  .daughters  of  m. 
6.    4  when  the  sons  of  God  came  in  unto  the 
6.    9  N.  was  a  just  man(aud).  .walked  with  G. 
6.  1 1  The  earth  also  was  corrupt  before  God 
■6.  12  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold 

6.  13  God  said.  .The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come 
■6.  22  Thus  did  Noah ;  according  to  all  that  G. 

7.  9  There  went  in .  .as  God  had  commanded 

7.  16  as  God  had  commanded  him :  and  the  L. 

8.  1  God  remembered  Noah.. and  God  made 
S.  15  And  God  spake  unto  Noah,  saying 

q,    1  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said 

9.  6  for  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  man 
9.    8  God  spake  unto  Noah,  and  to  his  sons 
9.  i2  God  said,  This  (is)  the  token  of  the  cum-. 
9.  16  everlasting  covenant  between  God  and 
9.  17  God  said.  .This  (is)  the  token  of  the  cov. 
9.  26  said,  Blessed  (be)  the  LORD  God  of  Shem 
9.  27  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  he  shall 

17.    3  Abram  fell  on  his  face:  and  God  talked 
17.    7  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after 
17.    8  I  will  give,  .and  I  will  be  their  God 
17.    9  God  said . .  Thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant 
17.  15  God  said . .  As  for  Sarai  thy  wife,  thou 
17.  18  Abraham  said  unto  God,  0  that  Ishmael 
17.  19  God  said.  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee 
17.  23  left  off  talking,  .and  God  went  up  from  A. 
17.  23  the  selfsame  day,  as  God  hud  said  unto 


Gen.  19.  29  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the  plain,  that 

19.  29  God  remembered  Abraham,  and  sent  Lot 

20.  3  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by 
20.    6  God  said  unto  him  in  a  dream,  Yea,  I 
20.  n  Surely  the  fear  of  God  (is)  not  in  this  pi. 
20. 13  when  God  caused  me  to  wander  from  my 

20.  17  So  Abraham  prayed  unto  God:  and  God 

21.  2  at  the  set  time  of  winch  God  had  spoken 
21.   4  circumcised,  .as  God  had  commanded' 
21.    6  Sarah  said,  God  hath  made  me  to  laugh 
21.  12  God  said.  .Let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy 
21.  17  God  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad  ;  and  the 
21.  17  angel  of  God  called  to  Hagar  out  of 

21.  17  for  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad 
21.  19  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well 
21.  20  God  was  with  the  lad  ;  and  he  grew,  and 
21.  22  God  (is)  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  doest 

21.  23  swear  unto  me  here  by  God,  that  thou 

22.  1  God  did  tempt  Abraham,  and  said  uuto 
22.    3  the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him 

22.    8  My  son,  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb 
22.    9  to  the  place  which  God  had  told  him  of 
22.  12  for  now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God 

3  the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  God  of  the 
7  The  Lord  God  of  heaven,  which  took  me 

12,  27,  42,  48  Lord  God  of  n.y  master  Abr. 

11  God  blessed  his  son  Isaac:  and  Isaac 
24  I  (am)  the  God  of  Abraham  thy  father 
20  Because  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  (it) 

28  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and 

4  inherit  the  land,  .which  God  gave  unto 

12  behold  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and 

13  I  (am)  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  fa. 
13  and  the  God  of  Isaac  :  the  land  whereon 
17  this  (is)  none  other  but  the  house  of  God 

20  If  God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me 

21  in  peace,  then  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God 

22  this  stone . .  shall  be  God's  house  :  and  of 
2  (Am)  I  in  Gods  stead,  who  hath  withheld 

6  Rachel  said,  God  hath  judged  me,  and 

17  God  hearkened  unto  Leah,  and  she  cone. 

18  Leah  said,  God  hath  given  me  my  hire 
20  God  hath  endued  me  (with)  a  good  dow. 

22  And  God  remembered  Rachel,  and  God 

23  said,  God  hath  taken  away  my  reproach 

5  the  God  of  my  father  hath  been  with  me 

7  but  God  suffered  him  not  to  hurt  me 
9  God  hath  taken  away  the  cattle  of  your 

11  the  angel  of  God  spake  unto  me  in  a  die. 
16  all  the  riches  which  God  hath  taken  from 
16  whatsoever  God  hath  said  unto  thee,  do 

24  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a  dream 

29  but  the  God  of  your  father  spake  unto 
42  the  God  of  my  father,  the  God  of  Abraham 
42  God  hath  seen  mine  affliction  and  the 

50  God  (is)  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee 
53  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  N". 
53  the  God  of  their  father,  judge  betwixt 

1  Jacob  went,  .and  the  angels  of  God  met 

2  he  said,  This  (is)  God's  host :  and  he  cal. 
9  0  God  of  my  father  Abraham,  and  God 

28  for  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power  with  God 

30  for  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my 
5  The  children  which  God  hath,  .given  thy 

10  though  I  had  seen  the  face  of  God,  and 

11  God  hath  dealt  graciously  with  me,  and 
1  God  said.. Arise,  go  up  to  Beth-el,  and 
5  and  the  terror  of  God  was  upon  the  cities 

7  there  God  appeared  unto  him,  when  he 
9  God  appeared  unto  Jacob  again,  when 

10  God  said.  .Thy  name  (is)  Jacob  :  thy 

11  God  said  unto  him.  .be  fruitful  and  multi. 
13  God  went  up  from  him  in  the  place  whe. 

15  called  the  name  of  the  place  where  God 
9  how . .  can  I  do  this . .  and  sin  against  God  ? 

8  (Do)  not  interpretations  (belong)  to  God? 

16  God  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  answer  of  pe. 

25  God  hath  showed  Pharaoh  what  he  (is) 
2S  What  God  (i^abouttoldoheshmvethunto 
32  because  the  thing  (is)  established  by  God 
32  and  God  will  shortly  bring  it  to  pass 

38  a  man  in  whom  the  spirit  of  God  (is)? 

39  Forasmuch  as-God  hath  showed  thee  all 

51  For  God.  .hath  made  me  forget  all  my 

52  God  hath  caused  me  to  be  fruitful  in 

18  Joseph  said.. This  do,  and  live.  .1  fear  G. 

28  What  (is)  this .  .God  hath  done  unto  us? 

23  your  God,  and  the  God  of  your  father 

29  said,  God  be  gracious  unto  thee,  my  son 

16  God  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of  thy 
5  God  did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve 

7  God  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve  you 

8  not  you  (that)  sent  me  hither,  but  God 

9  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  Egypt 

1  offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  fat. 

2  God  spake  unto  Israel  in  the  visions  of  the 

3  I  (am),  .the  God  of  thy  father  :  fear  not 
9  my  sons,  whom  God  hath  given  me  in 

11  lo,  God  hath  showed  me  also  thy  seed 
15  God,  before  whom  my  fathers  Abraham 
15  the  God  which  fed  me  all  my  life  long 

20  God  make  thee  as  Ephraim,  and  as  Man. 

21  God  shall  be  with  you,  and  bring  you 

17  of  the  servants  of  the  God  of  thy  father 

19  Fear  not ;  for  (am)  I  in  the  place  of  God  ? 

20  God  meant  it  unto  good,  to  bring  to  pass 

24  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  bring  you 

25  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  ye  shall 
Exod.  1.  17  the  midwives  feared  God,  and  did  not  as 

1.  20  God  dealt  well  with  the  midwives  :  and 

1.  21  because  the  midwives  feared  God,  that 

2.  23  their  cry  came  up  unto  God  by  reason 


34 
Lev.  3J. 


24  God  heard  then-  groaning,  and  God  rem. 

25  God  looked  upon . .  Israel,  and  God  had 

1  came  to  the  mountain  of  God.  .to  Horeb 

4  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of 
6  I  (am)  the  God  of  thy  father,  the  God  of 
6  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob 

6  for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God 

11  Moses  said  unto  God,  Who  (am)  I,  that  I 

12  ye  shall  serve  God  upon  this  mountain 

13  The  God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me 

14  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  am  that  I  am 

15  God  said  moreover  unto  Moses,  Thus 
15  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of 

15  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob 

16  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of  A. 
iS  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  met  with 
iS  that  we  may  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  out  G. 

5  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  the  God  of 

5  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob 
16  and  thou  shalt  be  to  him  instead  of  God 

20  Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  his  hand 
27  went,  and  met  him  in  the  mount  of  God 

1  Thus  saith  the  LORD  God  of  Israel,  Let 
3  The  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  met  with 

3  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  out  God  ;  lest  he 
8  saying,  Let  us  go.  .sacrifice  to  our  God 

2  God  spake  unto  Moses,  and  said  unto  him 

7  I  will  take  you . .  I  will  be  to  you  a  God 

7  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  G 

1  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh 
16  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  sent  me 
10  that,  .none  like  unto  the  Lord  our  God 
19  magicians  said.  .This  (is)  the  finger  of  G 

25  Go  ye,  sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  land 

26  we  shall  sacrifice,  .to  the  Lord  out  God 

27  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  our  God,  as  he  shall 

28  that  ye  may  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  your  G. 

1,  13  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  the  Heb. 

30  that  ye  will  not  yet  fear  the  LORD  God 

3  the  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews 

7  that  they  may  serve  the  Lord  their  God 

8  Go,  serve  the  Lord  your  God.  .who  (are), 

16  I  have  sinned  against  the  LORD  your  God 

17  entreat  the  Lord  your  God,  that  he  may 

25  we  may  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  our  God 

26  must  we  take  to  serve  the  Lord  our  God 
17  God  led  them  not.  .the  way  of  the  land 
17  for  God  said,  Lest  peradventure  the  peo. 
iS  God  led  the  people  about,  .the  way  of  the 
19  God  will  surely  visit  you  ;  and  ye  shall 
19  the  angel  of  God,  which  went  before  the 

2  my  father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him 

26  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  G. 
12  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  G. 

9  stand,  .with  the  rod  of  God  in  mine  hand 
1  heard  of  all  that  God  had  done  for  Moses 

4  for  the  God  of  my  father . .  (was)  mine  he. 

5  where  he  encamped  at  the  mount  of  God 
12  a  burnt  offering  and  sacrifices  for  God 
12  eat.  .with  Moses'  father  in  law  before  G. 

15  people  come  unto  me  to  enquire  of  God 

16  do  make  (them)  know  the  statutes  of  God 
19  Hearken,  .and  God  shall  be  with  thee 

19  Be  thou  for  the  people  to  God  ward 
19  thou  mayest  bring  the  causes  unto  God 

21  able  men,  such  as  fear  God,  men  of  truth 
23  If  thou,  .do  this  thing,  and  God  command 

3  Moses  went  up  unto  God,  and  the  Lord 

17  people  out  of  the  camp  to  meet  with  God 
19  Moses  spake,  and  God  answered  him  by 

1  And  God  spake  all  these  words,  saying 

2  I  (am)  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have 
5  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  (am)  a  jealous 

7  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of.  .God  in 
10  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  LORD  thy  God 

12  upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God 

19  but  let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  d. 

20  Fear  not :  for  God  is  come  to  prove  you 

21  near  unto  the  thick  darkness  where  God 

13  but  God  deliver  (him)  into  his  hand ;  then 

20  He  that  sacrificeth  unto  (any)  god,  save 
19  bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

25  ye  shall  serve  the  LORD  your  God,  and  he 

10  And  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel :  and 

11  also  they  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  drink 
13  and  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount  of  God 

45  And  I  will  dwell,  .and  will  be  their  God 

46  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  G. 
46  among  them  :  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God 

3  I  have  filled  him  with  the  spirit  of  God 

18  two  tables,  .written  with  the  finger  of  G. 

11  Moses  besought  the  Lord  his  God,  and 
16  And  the  tables  (were)  the  work  of  God 
16  and  the  writing  (was)  the  writing  of  God 

27  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Put 

23  before  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  Israel 

24  before  the  Lord  thy  God  thrice  in  the 

26  bring  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

31  he  hath  filled  him  with  the  spirit  of  God 

13  suffer  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of  thy  God 

22  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  his  God 

44  For  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God  :  ye  shall 

45  thatbringeth  you  up.  .to  be  your  God 

2,  4,  30  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 

21  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of  thy  God 
2  for  I  the  Lord  your  God  (am)  holy 

3,  4,  10,  25,  31,  34,  36  (am)  the  Lord  yourG. 

12  neither  shalt.  .profane  the  name  of  thy  G. 

14  but  shalt  fear  thy  God  :  I  (am)  the  Lord 

32  and  fear  thy  God  :  I  (am)  the  LORD 

7  be  ye  holy :  for  I  (am)  the  LORD  your  God 
2+  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God,  which  have 


GOD 


413 


GOD 


Lev.  21.    6  They  shall  be  holy  unto  their  God 

2i.   6  and  not  profane  the  name  of  their  God 
2i.    6  the  bread  of  their  God,  they  do  offer 
2i.    7  her  husband  :  for  he  (is)  holy  unto  his  G. 
21.    8  he  offereth  the  bread  of  thy  God  :  he 
21.  12  nor  profane  the  sanctuary  of  his  God 
2i.  12  the  anointing  oil  of  his  God  (is)upon  him 
2i.  17  not  approach  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God 
21.  21  not  come  nigh  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  G. 

21.  22  He  shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God 

22.  25  shall  ye  offer  the  bread  of  your  God  of 

22.  33  That  brought  you  out.  .to  be  your  God 

23.  14  have  brought  an  offering  unto  your  God 
23.  22,  43  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 

23.  28  atonement,  .before  the  Lori>  your  God 

23.  40  shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your  God 

24.  15  Whosoever  curseth  his  God  shall  bear  his 
24. 22  one.  .law.  .for  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 

25.  17  fear  thy  God:  for  I  (am)  the  LORD  your  G. 
25.  36  Take  thou  no  usury,  .but  fear  thy  God 
25.  38  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God,  which  brought 
25.  38  to  give  you  the  land,  .to  be  your  God 

25.  43  rule,  .with  rigour,  but  shalt  fear  thy  G. 

25.  55  my  servants.  .1  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 

26.  1  no  idols,  .for  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 
26.  12  I  will  walk,  .and  will  be  your  God,  and 
26. 13  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God,  which  brought 
26.  44  I  will  not . .  for  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God 
26.  45  I  might  be  their  God  :  I  (am)  the  Lord 

Num.  6.    7  consecration  of  his  God  (is)  upon  his 
10.   9  remembered  before  the  Lord  your  God 
10. 10  before  your  God  :  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  G. 
15.  40  remember,  .and  be  holy  unto  your  God 
15.  41,  41  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 

15.  41  brought  you  out.  .to  be  your  God 

16.  9  that  the  God  of  Israel  hath  separated  you 
16.  22  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  shall 

21.  5  the  people  spake  against  God,  and  again. 

22.  9  God  came  unto  Balaam,  and  said,  What 
22. 10  Balaam  said  unto  God,  Balak  the  son  of 

22. 12  God  said  unto  Balaam,  Thou  shalt  not  go 
22. 18  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord  my  God 
22.  20  God  came  unto  Balaam  at  night,  and  said 
22.  22  God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went 

22.  38  the  word  that  God  putteth  in  my  mouth 

23.  4  God  met  Balaam  :  and  he  said  unto  him 
23.  21  the  Lord  his  God  (is)  with  him,  and  the 

23.  27  peradventure  it  will  please  God  that  t     u 

24.  2  and  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  him 

25. 13  he  was  zealous  for  his  God,  and  made  an 
27. 16  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  set  a 

Deut.  i.   6  Lord  our  God  spake  unto  us  in  Horeb 

t.  10  Lord  your  God  hath  multiplied  you,  and 
1.  11  Lord  God  of  your  fathers  make  you  a 
1. 17  for  the  judgment  (is)  God's :  and  the 
1. 19  as  the  Lord  our  God  commanded 
1.  20  which  the  Lord  our  God  doth  give  unto 
1.  21  Lord  thy  God  hath  set  the  land  before 
1.  21  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  said 
1.  25  a  good  land  which  the  Lord  our  God  doth 
1.  26  the  commaudmeut  of  the  Lord  your  God 
1. 30  The  Lord  your  God,  which  goeth  before 
1.  31  seen  how  that  the  Lord  thy  God  bare 

1.  32  ye  did  not  believe  the  Lord  your  God 

1. 41  all  that  the  Lord  out  God  commanded  us 

2.  7  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee  in 
2.   7  these  forty  years  the  Lord  thy  God  (hath 
2.  29  the  land  which  the  LORD  our  God  giveth 
2.  30  the  Lord  thy  God  hardened  his  spirit 

2.  33  the  Lord  our  God  delivered  him  before 
2.  36  the  Lord  our  God  delivered  all  unto  us 

2.  37  whatsoever  the  Lord  our  God  forbade  us 

3.  3  So  the  Lord  our  God  delivered  into  our 
3.  18  Lord  your  God  hath  given  you  this  land 
3.  20  which  the  Lord  your  God  hath  given 

3.  21  all  that  the  Lord  your  God  hath  done 

3.  22  the  Lord  your  God  he  shall  fight  for  you 

4.  1  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers  giveth  you 
4.  2  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God 
4.    3  God  hath  destroyed  them  from  among 

4.   4  that  did  cleave  unto  the  Lord  your  God 
4.   5  as  the  Lord  my  God  commanded  me 
4.    7  who  (hath)  God.,  nigh.,  the  Lord  our  God 
4. 10  stoodest  before  the  Lord  thy  God  in  Hor. 
4. 19  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  divided  unto  all 
4.  21  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  (for) 
4.  23  forget  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God 
4.  23  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  forbidden 
4.  24  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  consuming  fire 
4.  25  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
4.  29  if.  .thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord  thy  God 
4.  30  if  thou  turn  to  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
4.  31  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  merciful  God 
4.  32  since  the  day  that  God  created  man  upon 
4.  33  Did.  .people  hear  the  voice  of  God  speak. 
4.  34  Or  hath  God  assayed  to  go  (and)  take  him 
4.  34  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  your  God 
4.  35  mightest  know  that  the  Lord  he  (is)  God 
4.  39  the  Lord  he  (is)  God  in  heaven  above 

4.  40  earth,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

5.  2  The  Lord  bur  God  made  a  covenant  with 
5.  6  I  (am)  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought 
5.    9  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  (am)  a  jealous 

5.  11  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
5. 12,  16  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hathcommanded 
5. 14  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
5.  15  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out  then. 
5.  15  the  Lord  thy  God  commanded  thee  to 
5. 16  land  winch  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
5.  24  Lord  out  God  hath  showed  us  his  glory 
5.  24  God  doth  talk  with  man,  and  he  liveth 
5.  25  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God 


8 


Deut.  '5.  26  the  voice  of  the  living  God  speaking  out 
5.  27  hear  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  say 

5.  27  all  that  the  Lord  out  God  shall  speak 

5-  32.  33  Lord  your  God  hath  commanded  you 

6.  1  Lord  your  God  commanded  to  teach  you 

2  thou  mightest  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  to 

3  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  pro. 

4  The  Lord  our  God  (is)  one  Lord 

5  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
10  when  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  have  brou. 

13  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

15  For  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  jealous 
.  15  lest  the  anger  of  the  Lord  thy  God  be  ki. 

16  Ye  shall  not  tempt  the  Lord  your  God 

17  commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God 
.  20  which  the  Lord  our  God  hath  command. 

24  to  fear  the  Lord  out  God,  for  our  good 

25  to  do  all  these .  .before  the  Lord  our  God 

1  When  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bring  thee 

2  when  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver  them 

6  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
6  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen  thee  to  be 
9  Know,  .that  the  Lord  thy  God,  he  (is)  G. 

12  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  keep  unto  thee 
16  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver 

18  remember  what  the  Lord  thy  God  did 

19  whereby  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee 

19  so  shall  the  Lord  thy  God  do  unto  all  the 

20  the  Lord  thy  God  will     nd  the  hornet 

21  Lord  thy  God  (is)  among  you,  a  mighty 

22  Lord  thy  God  will  put  out  those  nations 

23  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver  them  unto 
25  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  thy  God 

2  way  which  the  Lord  thy  God  led  thee 

5  (so)  the  Lord  thy  God  chasteneth  thee 

6  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

7  Lord  thy  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  good 

10  then  thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God 

11  that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord  thy  God 

14  and  thou  forget  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 

18  thou  shalt  remember  the  Lord  thy  God 

19  if  thou  do  at  all  forget  the  Lord  thy  God 

20  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

3  Lord  thy  God  (is)  he  which  goeth  over 

4  Lord  thy  God  hath  cast  them  out  from 

5  Lord  thy  God  doth  drive  them  out  from 

6  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  not  this  good 

7  how  thou  provokedst  the  Lord  thy  God 
10  tables.. written  with  the  finger  of  God 
16  had  sinned  against  the  Lord  your  God 
23  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  your  God 

10.   9  according  as  the  Lord  thy  God  promised 
10.  12  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of 
10.  12  but  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in 
10.  12  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 

10. 14  heaven  of  heavens,  (is)  the  Lord's  thy  G. 
10.  17  For  the  Lord  your  God  (is)  God  of  gods 
10.  20  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God 
10.  21  He  (is)  thy  praise,  and  he  (is)  thy  God 

10.  22  Lord  thy  God  hath  made  thee  as  the  stars 

11.  1  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
11.    2  the  chastisement  of  the  Lord  your  God 
11. 12  A  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth 
11. 12  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God  (are) 
11.  13  to  love  the  Lord  your  God,  and  to  serve 
11.  22  to  love  the  Lord  your  God,  to  walk  in 
11.  25  Lord  your  God  shall  lay  the  fear  of 
11.  27,  28  commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God 
11.  29  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  brought 

11.  31  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you 

12.  1  land  which  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers 
12.    4  Ye  shall  not  do  so  unto  the  Lord  your  G. 
12.   5  unto  the  place  which  the  Lord  your  God 
12.    7  ye  shall  eat  before  the  Lord  your  God 
12.    7  wherein  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed 
12.    9  inheritance  which  the  Lord  your  God  giv. 
12.  10  land  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth 
12.  11  a  place  which  the  Lord  your  God  shall 
12.  12  shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your  God 

12. 15  to  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
12. 18  must  eat  them  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
12. 18  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
12. 18  shalt  rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
12.  20  When  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  enlarge 
12.  21  H  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 
12.  27,  27  upon  the  altar  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
12.  28  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  thy  God3 
12.  29  When  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  cut  off  the 

12.  31  shalt  not  do  so  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

13.  3  the  Lord  your  God  proveth  you,  to  know 
13.  3  whether  ye  love  the  Lord  your  God 
13.  4  Ye  shall  walk  after  the  Lord  your  God 
13.  5  turn  (you)  away  from  the  Lord  your  God 
13.  5  way  which  the  Lord  thy  God  commanded 
13.  10  thrust  thee  away  from  the  Lord  thy  God 
13.  12  cities,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given 

13. 16  thereof  every  whit,  for  the  Lord  thy  God 
13.  18  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

13.  18  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

14.  1  Ye  (are)  the  children  of  the  Lord  your  G. 
14.   2,  21  an  holy  people  unto  the  LORD  thy  G. 
14.  23  thou  shalt  eat  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
14.  23  mayest  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God 
14.  24,  25  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 
14.  24  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed 
14.  26  shalt  eat  there  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

14.  29  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  bless  thee  hi 

15.  4  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
15.   5  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to 
15.    6  the  Lord  thy  God  blesseth  thee,  as  he 
15. 10,  18  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee 
15. 14  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee 


Deut  15.  15  and  the  Lord  thy  God  redeemed  thee 
15.  19  shalt  sanctify  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
15.  20  shalt  eat  (it)  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

15.  21  not  sacrifice  it  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

16.  1,  2  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
16.    5  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
16.   6,  7  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 
16.   8  a  solemn  assembly  to  the  Lord  thy  God 

16. 10  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  with  a  tribute 
16.  10  according  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  bl. 

16. 11  shalt  rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
16.  11  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen 
16.  15  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  in  the  place 

16. 15  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all 
16.  16  males  appear  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
16.  17  to  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
16.  18,  20  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
16.  21  unto  the  altar  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

16.  22  image  ;  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hateth 

17.  1  not  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

17.    1  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
17.  2,  14  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
17.   2  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  in 
17.   8  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 

17.  12  minister  there  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
17. 15  whom  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 
17. 19  he  may  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  his  God 

18.  5  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen  him  out 
18.  7  minister  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God 
18.  9  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

18. 12  Lord  thy  God  doth  drive  them  out  from 
18.  13  shalt  be  perfect  with  the  Lord  thy  God 
18.  14  Lord  thy  God  hath  not  suffered  thee  so 

18. 15  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee 

18. 16  desiredst  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  Horeb 

18.  16  hear  again  the  voice  of  the  Lord  my  God 

19.  1  When  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  cut  off 

19.  1,  2,  3, 10, 14  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
19.  8  if  the  Lord  thy  God  enlarge  thy  coast 

19.  g  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  to  walk 

20.  1  Lord  thy  God  (is)  with  thee,  which  brou. 
20.  4  Lord  your  God  (is)  he  .that  goeth  with  you 
20.  13  LORD  thy  God  hath  delivered  it  into 

20. 14  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee 
20. 16  which  the  Lord  thy  God  doth  give  thee 
20.  17  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  commanded 

20.  18  should  ye  sin  against  the  Lord  your  God 

21.  1,  23  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
21.    s  them  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen  to 

■    21. 10  LORD  thy  God  hath  delivered  them  into 

21.  23  for  he  that  is  hanged  (is)  accursed  of  God 

22.  5  abomination  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

23.  5  Lord  thy  God  would  not  hearken  unto 
23.  5  but  the  Lord  thy  God  turned  the  curse 
23.   5  because  the  Lord  thy  God  loved  thee 
23. 14  Lord  thy  Godwalkethinthemidstofthy 
23. 18  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God  for 

23. 18  abominati'  -  auLO  the  Lord  thy  God 
23.  20  th*J  Lue  Lord  thy  God  may  bless  thee  in 
23. 21  shalt  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
23.  21  Lord  thy  God  will  surely  require  it  of 

23.  23  thou  hast  vowed  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

24.  4  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
24.    9  Remember  what  the  Lord  thy  God  did 
24.  13  shall  be.  .unto  theebeforethe'LoRD  thy  G. 
24  18  the  Lord  thy  God  redeemed  thee  thence 

24.  19  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  bless  thee  in 
25. 15, 19  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

25.  16  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

25.  18  faint  and  weary ;  and  he  feared  not  God 

25. 19  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee 

26.  1,  2  land,  .the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
26.  2  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  cho. 
26.  3  I  profess  this  day  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
26.  4  down  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord  thy  G. 
26.  5  speak  and  say  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
26.  7  when  we  cried  unto  the  Lord  God  of  our 
26. 10  thou  shalt  set  it  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

26. 10  and  worship  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

26. 11  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  unto 

26. 13  thou  shalt  say  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

26. 14  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  my  G. 

26. 16  This  day  the  Lord  thy  God  hathcomman. 

26. 17  to  be  thy  God,  and  to  walk  in  his  ways 

26.  ig  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

27.  2,  3  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
27.    3  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  pro. 
27.    5  build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  thy  God,  an 
27.    6  shalt  build  the  altar  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
27.    6  shalt  offer.. thereon  unto  the  LoRDthyG. 
27.    7  and  rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  God 

27.  9  become  the  people  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
27. 10  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

28.  1,  2,  15,  45  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
28.  1  Lord  thy  God  will  set  thee  on  high  above 
28.  •  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
28.  13  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  thy  G. 
28.  47  thou  servedest  not  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
28.  52,  53  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given 

28.  58  fear  this,  .fearful  name,  The  Lord  thy  G. 
28. 62  not  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

29.  6  might  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  G. 
29.  10  stand.,  all  of  you  before  the  Lord  your  G. 
29.  12  enter  into  covenant  with  the  Lord  thy  G. 

29. 12  which  the  Lord  thy  God  maketh  with 
29.  13  he  may  be  unto  thee  a  God,  as  he  hath 

29. 15  with  us  this  day  before  the  LORD  our  G. 
2g.  18  turneth .  .this  day  from  the  Lord  our  God 
29.  25  forsaken  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  God 

29.  29  secret  (things  belong)  unto  the  Lord  . .  G. 

30.  1  whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  driven 
30.   2  And  shalt  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 


GOD 


4U 


GOD 


Deut  30.    3  Lord  thv  God  will  turn  thy  captivity,  aud 
30.   3  whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  scattered 
30.   4  will  the  Lord  thy  God  gather  thee 
30.    5  Lord  thy  Q  od  will  bring  thee  into  the  land 
30.    6  Lord  thy  God  will  circumcise  thine  heart 
30.    6  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine 
30.    7  Lord  thy  God  will  put  all  these  curses 
30.    9  Lord  thy  God  will  make  thee  plenteous 
30.  10  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  G. 
30.  10  if  thou  turn  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
30.  16  I  command  thee . .  to  love  the  LORD  thy  G. 
30.  16  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  the  land 

30.  20  That  thou  mayest  love  the  Lord  thy  G. 

31.  3  The  Lord  thy  God,  he  will  go  over  before 
31.    6  Lord  thy  God,  he  (it  is)  that  doth  go 

31. 11  to  appear  before  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
31.  12  may  learn,  and  fear  the  Lord  your  God 
31.  13  and  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  your  God 
31.  17  Are  not  these  evils.,  because  our  God  (is) 

31.  26  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  G. 

32.  3  ascribe  ye  greatness  uuto  our  God 

32.  39  and  (there  is)  no  god  with  me :  I  kill,  and 

33.  1  wherewith  Moses  the  man  of  God  blessed 
33.  27  The  eternal  God  (is  thy)  refuge,  and  un. 

Josh.  1.    9  Lord  thy  God  (is)  with  thee  whithersoever 
1. 11,  15  land,  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth 
1.  13  The  Lord  your  God  hath  given  you  rest 
1. 17  only  the  Lord  thy  God  be  with  thee,  as 
2. 11  Lord  your  God,  he  (is)  God  in  heaven 
3.    3  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  G. 

3.  g  and  hear  the  words  of  the  Lord  your  God 

4.  s  over  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord  your  God 
4.  23  Lord  your  God  dried  up  the  waters  of  J. 
4.  23  as  the  Lord  your  God  did  to  the  Red  sea 
4.  24  that  ye  might  fear  the  Lord  your  God  for 
7.  13  for  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

7. 19  give,  I  pray  thee,  glory  to  the  Lord  God 

7.  20  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

8.  7  Lord  your  God  will  deliver  it  into  your 

8.  30  Joshua  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  God 

9.  9  because  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
9.  18  had  sworn  unto  them  by  the  Lord  God  of 
9. 19  We  have  sworn  unto  them  by  the  LordG. 
9.  23  drawers  of  water  for  the  house  of  my  God 
9.  24  Lord  thy  God  commanded  his  servant 

10.  19  Lord  your  God  hath  delivered  them  into 
10.  40  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  commanded 
10. 42  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  fought  for  Israel 
13.  14  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

13.  33  Lord  God  of  Israel  (was)  their  inlieritan. 

14.  6  Lord  said  uuto  Moses  the  man  of  God 
14.   8,  9  wholly  followed  the  Lord  my  God 

14.  14  he  wholly  followed  the  Lord  God  of  Isr. 
18.  3  laud,  which  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers 
28.  6  cast  lots  for  you.  .before  the  Lord  ourG. 
22.  3  the  commandmeut  of  the  Lord  your  God 
22.  4  Lord  yot^'  God  hath  given  rest  unto  your 
22.  5  to  love  the  LO^D'your  God,  and  to  walk  in 
22.  16  that  ye  have  committer?  gainst  the  God 
22.  19  altar  besides  the  altar  of  the  Lord  out  G. 
22.  24  What  have  ye  to  do  with  the  Lord  God 
22.  29  besides  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our  God  that 
22.  33  the  children  of  Israel  blessed  God,  and 

22.  34  a  witness  between  us  that  the  Lord  (is)  G. 

23.  3  ye  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord  your  God 
23.    3  Lord  your  God  (is)  he  that  hath  fought 
23.    5  Lord  your  God,  he  shall  expel  them  from 
23.    5  as  the  Lord  your  God  hath  promised  unto 
23.    8  But  cleave  unto  the  Lord  your  God,  as 

23. 10  Lord  your  God,  he  (it  is)  that  flghteth  for 

23. 11  Take.,  heed.,  that  ye  love  the  Lord..  God 
23.  13  Lord  your  God  will  no  more  drive  out 
23-  13.  15  l&Qd  which  the  Lord  your  God  hath 

23. 14  good  things  which  the  Lord  your  God 

23. 15  which  the  Lord  your  God  promised  you 

23.  16  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God 

24.  1  and  they  presented  themselves  before  G. 
24.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Your 
24.  17  the  Lord  our  God,  he  (it  is)  that  brought 
24.  18  will  we . .  serve  the  Lord;  for  he  (is)  our  G. 
24. 19  for  he  (is)  an  holy  God ;  he  (is)  a  jealous 
24.  23  incline  your  heart  unto  the  LORD  God  of  I. 
24.  24  Lord  our  God  will  we  serve,  aud  his  voice 
24.  26  Joshua  wrote,  .in  the  book.  .thejlaw  of  G. 
24.  27  a  witness  unto  you,  lest  ye  deny  your  G. 

Judg.  1.    7  as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me 

2. 12  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  fath. 
3.    7  forgat  the  Lord  their  God,  and  served  B. 

3.  20  Ehud  said,  I  have  a  message  from  God 

4.  6  Hath  not  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  com. 

4.  23  So  God  subdued  on  that  day  Jabin  the 

5.  3  I  will  sing,  .to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

5.  5  Sinai  from  before  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

6.  8  Thus  saitli  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I  br. 
6.  10  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God ;  fear  not  the 
6.  20  the  angel  of  God  said  unto  him,  Take 

6.  26  build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
6.  31  if  he  (be)  agod,  let  himplcadfor  himself 
6.  36  Gideon  said  unto  God,  If  thou  wilt  save 
6.  39  Gideon  said  unto  God,  Letnot  thine  anger 
6.  40  God  did  so  that  night :  for  it  was  dry  up. 
7. 14  into  his  hand  hath  God  delivered  Jlidian 
8.    3  God  hath  delivered  into  your  hands  the 
8.  33  Israel . .  went . .  and  made  Baal-ber.  their  g. 

8.  34  remembered  not  the  Lord  their  God,  who 

9.  7  Hearken . .  that  God  may  hearken  unto 
9.    9  wherewith  by  me  they  honour  God  and 

9. 13  my  wine,  which  oheereth  God  and  man 
9.  23  God  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abime. 
9.  27  went  into  the  house  of  their  god,  and 

9.  56  God  rendered  the  wickedness  of  Abime. 
9.  57  the  evil  of  the  men  of  Shechem  did  God 


Judg  10.  10  we  have  forsaken  our  God,  and  also  ser. 
11.  21  Lord  God  of  Israel  delivered  Sihon  and 
11.  23  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath  dispossessed.  .A. 
11.  24  possess  that  which  Chemosh  thy  god  giv. 
11.  24  Lord  our  God  shall  drive  out  from  before 
13.    5,  7  the  child  shall  be  a  Nazarite  unto  God 
13.   6  A  man  of  God  came  unto  me,  and  his  co. 
13.    6  like  the  countenance  of  an  angel  of  God 
13.    8  let  the  man  of  God  which  thou  didst  send 
13.    9  God  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Manoah 
13.   9  the  angel  of  God  came  again  unto  the  wo. 
13.  22  We  shall,  .die,  because  we  have  seen  God 

15.  iq  God  clave  an  hollow  place  that  (was)  in 

16. 17  for  I.  .a  Nazarite  unto  God  from  my  mo. 

16.  23  offer  a  great  sacrifice  unto  Dagon  their  g. 
16.  23  Our  god  hath  delivered  Samson  our  ene. 
16.  24  when  the  people  saw.  .they  praised  their  g. 
16.  28  strengthen  me.  .only  this  once,  O  God 
18.    5  Ask  counsel,  we  pray  thee,  of  God,  that 
18.  10  for  God  hath  given  it  into  your  hands 
18.  31  all  the  time  that  the  house  of  God  was  in 
20.    2  in  the  assembly  of  the  people  of  God 

20. 18  and  asked  counsel  of  God,  aud  said,  Which 

20.  27  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God  (was) 

21.  2  and  abode  there  till  even  before  God 
21.    3  O  LORD  God  of  Israel,  why  is  this  come 

Ruth.  1.  16  people,  .my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God 

2.  12  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  under  whose 
1  Sa.    1.  17  the  God  of  Israel  grant . .  thy  petition  that 

2.  2  neither  (is  there)  any  rock  like  our  God 
2. 27  there  came  a  man  of  God  unto  Eli,  and 
2. 30  Lord  God  of  Israel  saith,  I  said  indeed 

3.  3  ere  the  lamp  of  God  went  out  in  the 

3.  3  temple  of  the  Lord,  where  the  ark  of  G. 
3. 17  God  do  so  to  thee,  and  more  also,  if  thou 

4.  4  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 

4.    7  for  they  said,  God  is  come  into  the  camp 
4.  11  the  ark  of  God  was  taken  ;  and  the  two 
4. 13  for  his  heart  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God 

4. 17  are  dead,  and  the  ark  of  God  is  taken 

4. 18  when  he  made  mention  of  the  ark  of  God 

4. 19  the  tidings  that  the  ark  of  God  was  taken 
4.  21  because  the  ark  of  God  was  taken,  and 

4.  22  glory  is  departed . .  for  the  ark  of  God  is 

5.  1  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God 

5.    2  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God,  they 
5.   7  The  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel  shall  not 
5.    7  his  hand  is  sore . .  upon  Dagon  our  god 
5.    8  What  shall  we  do  with  the  ark  of  the  God 
5.   8  Let  the  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel  be  carr. 
5.    8  they  carried  the  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel 
5. 10  Therefore  they  sent  the  ark  of  God  to  E. 
5. 10  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  ark  of  God  came  to 
5. 10  have  brought  about  the  ark  of  the  God 
5.  11  Send  away  the  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel 

5.  11  the  hand  of  God  was  very  heavy  there 

6.  3  If  ye  send  away  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I. 
6-    5  ye  shall  give  glory  unto  the  God  of  Isra. 

6.  20  to  stand  before  this  holy  Lord  God  ? 

7.  8  Cease  not  to  cry  uuto  the  Lord  our  God 
9.  6  Behold  now.  .in  this  city  a  man  of  God 
9.  7  not  a  present  to  bring  to  the  man  of  God 
9.  8  will  I  give  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell  us 
9.  9  when  a  man  went  to  enquire  of  God,  thus 
9.  10  went  unt©  the  city  where  the  man  of  God 
9.  27  that  I  may  show  thee  the  word  of  God 

10.  3  meet  thee  three  men  going  up  to  God  to 
10.  5  thou  shalt  come  to  the  hill  of  God,  where 
10.  7  do  as  occasion  serve  thee ;  for  God  (is) 
10.  9  had  turned..  God  gave  him  another  heart 
10. 10  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  and  he 
10.  18  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I  br. 
10. 19  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  God,  who 

10.  26  a  band,  .whose  hearts  God  had  touched 

11.  6  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul  when 

12.  9  when  they  forgat  the  Lord  their  God,  he 
12. 12  when  the  Lord  your  God  (was)  your  king 

12.  14  continue  following  the  Lord  your  God 
12. 19  Pray  for  thy  servants  unto  the  L.  thy  God 

13.  13  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

14.  18  Saul  said . .  Bring  hither  the  ark  of  God 
14.  18  the  ark  of  God  was  at  that  time  with  the 
14.  36  said.  .Let  us  draw  near  hither  unto  God 
14.  37  Saul  asked  counsel  of  God,  Shall  I  go 

14.  41  Saul  said  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
14.  44  God  do  so  and  more  also  :  for  thou  shalt 

14.  45  for  he  hath  wrought  with  God  this  day 
15- 15  spared,  .to  sacrifice,  .the  Lord  thy  God 

15.  21  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  in  Gi. 

15.  30  turn,  .that  I  may  worship.  .Lord  thy  God 

16.  15  an  evil  spirit  from  God  troubleth  thee 
16. 16  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  is  upon 

16.  23  when  the.  .spirit  from  God  was  upon  Sa. 

17.  26  should  defy  the  armies  of  the  living  God  ? 
17.  36  hath  defied  the  armies  of  the  living  God 
17.  45  the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  whom 

17.  46  may  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  Israel 

18.  10  the  evil  spirit  from  God  came  upon  Saul 

19.  20  the  spirit  of  God  was  upon  the  messeng. 

19.  23  the  spirit  of  God  was  upon  him  also,  and 

20.  12  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  when  I  have  soun. 
22.    3  with  you,  till  I  know  what  God  will  do 
22.  13  and  hast  enquired  of  God  for  him,  that  he 

22.  15  Did  I  then  begin  to  enquire  of  God  for 

23.  7  God  hath  delivered  him  into  mine  hand 
23.  10  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  thy  servant  hath 
23.  11  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I  beseech  thee 

23.  14  but  God  delivered  him  not  into  his  hand 
23.  16  Jonathan .  .strengthened  his  hand  in  God 
25.  22  So  and  more  also  do  God  unto  the  enem. 
25.  29  the  bundle  of  life  with  the  Lord  thy  God 
25.  32  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  whi. 


1  Sa.  25.  34  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth,  which  ha. 

26.    8  God  hath  delivered  thine  enemy  into  thi. 

28.  15  God  is  departed  from  me,  and  answeretli 

29.  9  good  in  my  sight,  as  an  angel  of  God 

30.  6  encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord  his  God 
30.  15  Swear  unto  me  by  God,  that  thou  wilt 

2  Sa.    2.  27  Joab  said,  (As)  God  liveth,  unless  thou 

3.  9  So  do  God  to  Abner,  and  more  also,  exc. 
3.  35  So  do  God  to  me,  and  more  also,  if  I  taste 

5.  10  and  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  (was)  with  hi. 

6.  2  to  bring  up  from  thence  the  ark  of  God 
6.    3  they  set  the  ark  of  God  upon  a  new  cart 
6.    4  accompanying  the  ark  of  God  :  and  Ahio 
6.    6  Lzzah  put  forth,  .to  the  ark  of  God,  and 
6.    7  and  God  smote  him  there  for  (his)  error 
6.    7  and  there  he  died  by  the  ark  of  God 

6.  12  hath  blessed,  .because  of  the  ark  of  God 

6.  12  D.  went  and  brought  up  the  ark  of  God 

7.  2  the  ark  of  God  dwelleth  within  curtains 
7.  22  Wherefore  thou  art  great,  O  Lord  God 
7.  22  neither  (is  there  any)  God  besides  thee 
7.  23  like  Israel,  whom  God  went  to  redeem 
7.  24  and  thou,  Lord,  art  become  their  God 

7.  25  And  now,  0  Lord  God,  the  word  that  thou 
7.  26  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  the  God  over  Israel 

7.  27  thou,  O  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of  Israel 
7.  28  thou  (art)  that  God,  and  thy  words  be 

9.  3  that  I  may  show  the  kindness  of  God 
10.  12  play  the  men.  .for  the  cities  of  our  God 
12.    7  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I  ano. 
12.  16  David  therefore  besought  God  for  the  ch. 
14.  11  let  the  king  remember  the  Lord  thy  God 
14.  13  such  a  thing  against  the  people  of  God? 
14. 14  neither  doth  God  respect  (any)  person 
14. 16  together  out  of  the  inheiitance  of  God 
14.  17  as  an  angel  of  God,  so  (is)  my  lord  the 
14.  17  therefore  the  Lord  thy  God  will  he  with 

14.  20  accord,  to  the  wisdom  of  an  angel  of  God 

15.  24  bearing  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 
15.  24  and  they  set  down  the'ark  of  God ;  and  A- 
15.  25  Carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city 
15.  29  Abiathar  carried  the  ark  of  God  again 

15.  32  come  to  the  top.  .where  he  worshippedG. 

16.  23  as  if  a  man . .  enquired  at  the  oracle  of  God 

18.  28  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 

19.  13  God  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,  if  thou  be 
19.  27  my  lord  the  king  (is)  as  an  angel  of  God 

21.  14  after  that  God  was  entreated  for  the  land 

22.  3  The  God  of  my  rock ;  in  him  will  I  trust 
22.  7  called  upon  the  Lord,  and  cried  to  my  G. 
22.  22  have  not  wickedly  departed  from  my  God 
22.  30  by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wall 

22.  32  and  who  (is)  a  rock,  save  our  God? 

22.  47  exalted  be  the  God  of  the  rock  of  my  sal. 

23.  1  the  anointed  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  and 
23.    3  The  God  of  Israel  said,  the  Rock  of  Israel 

23.  3  that  ruleth. .  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  G. 

24.  3  the  Lord  thy  God  add  unto  the  people 
24.  23  Araunah  said. .  The  Lord  thy  God  accept 

p  24.  24  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  my  God  of 
1  Ki.    1.  17  thou  swarest  by  the  Lord  thy  God  unto 
1.  30  as  I  sware  unto  thee  by  the  Lord  God  of 
1.  36  the  Lord  God  of  my  lord  the  king  say  so 

I.  47  God  make  the  name  of  Solomon  better 

1.  48  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which 

2.  3  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to 

2.  23  God  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,  if  Adon. 

3.  5  and  God  said,  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee 
3.  7  0  Lord  my  God,  thou  hast  made  thy  ser. 
3.  11  God  said  unto  him,  Because  thou  hast  a. 

3.  28  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  (was)  in  him 

4.  29  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  understa. 

5.  3  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God,  for 
5.  4  Lord  my  God  hath  given  me  rest  on  ev. 
5.    5  house  unto  the  name  of  the  LORD  my  God 

8.  15  Blessed  (he)  the  LORD  God  of  Israel,  wh. 
8. 17,  20  an  house  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  G. 
8.  23  Lord  God  of  Israel,  .no  God  like  thee 

8.  25  Lord  God  of  Israel,  keep  with  thy  ser. 
8.  26  0  God  of  Israel,  let  thy  word,  I  pray  thee 
8.  27  But  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the  earth? 
8.  28  Yet  have  thou  respect.  .0  Lord  my  God 
8.  57  The  Lord  our  God  be  with  us,  as  he  was 
8.  59  be  nigh  unto  the  Lord  our  God  day  and 
8.  60  That  all  .may  know  that  the  Lord  (is)  G. 
8.  61  be  perfect  with  the  Lord  our  God,  to  wa. 

8.  65  before  the  Lord  our  God,  seven  days  and 

9.  9  Because  they  forsook  the  LORD  their  God 

10.  9  Blessed  be  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 

10.  24  wisdom,  which  God  had  put  in  Ms  heart 

11.  4  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God 

II.  9  his  heart  was  turned  from  the  Lord  God 
11.  23  God  stirred  him  up  (another)  adversary 
11.  31  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel 

11.  33  Chemosh  the  god.  .and  Milcom  the  god  of 

12.  22  word  of  God  came  unto. .  the  man  of  God 

13.  1  there  came  a  man  of  God  out  of  Judali  by 
13.    4  heard  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 

13.   5  ace.  to  the  sigu  which  themanof  God 
13.    6  answered  and  said  unto  the  man  of  God 
13.    6  Entreat  now  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy  G. 
13.    6  the  man  of  God  besought  the  Lord,  and 
13.    7  the  king  said  unto  the  man  of  God,  Come 
13.   8  the  man  of  God  said  uuto  the  king,  If  th. 
13. 11  all  the  works  that  the  man  of  God  had  d. 
13.  12  had  seen  what  way  the  man  of  God  went 
13.  14  went  after  the  man  of  God,  and  found 
13. 14  (Art)  thou  the  man  of  God  that  earnest 
13.  21  he  cried  unto  the  man  of  God  that  came 
13.  21  which  the  Lord  thy  God  commanded  thee 
13.  26  It  (is)  the  man  of  God,  who  was  disobed. 
13.  29  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  man  of  God 


GOD 


415 


GOD 


i  Ki  13.  31  wherein  the  man  of  God  (is)  buried ;  lay 

14.  7  Go.  .Thus  saith  the  Lokd  God  of  Israel 
14. 13  good  thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Isr. 

15.  3  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God 


16.  26,  33  to  provoke  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

17.  1  (As)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth,  before 

27. 12  (As)  the  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  I  have  not 
17.  14  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  The 
17.  18  0  thou  man  of  God  ?  art  thou  come  unto 
17.  20  O  Lord  my  God,  hast  thou  also  brought 
17.  21  O  Lord  my  God,  I  pray  thee,  let  this  ch. 

17.  24  by  this  I  know,  .thou  (art)  a  man  of  God 
iS.  10  (As)  the  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  there  is 

18.  21  if  the  Lord  (be)  God,  follow  him  :  but  if 
18.  24  the  God  that  auswereth.  .let  him  be  God 
18.  27  Cry  aloud  ;  for  he  (is)  a  god  :  either  he  is 
18.  36  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  of  Isr. 
18.  36  let  it  be  known  this  day  that  thou  (art)  G. 
18.  37  may  know  that  thou  (art)  the  Lord  God 

18.  39  he  (is)  the  God!  the  Lord,  he  (is)  the  God ! 

19.  8  forty  nights  unto  Horeb  the  mount  of  G. 
19. 10,  14  been  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God 

20.  2S  there  came  a  man  of  God,  and  spake  unto 

20.  28  Lord  (is)  God  of  the  hills,  .he  (is)  not  G. 

21.  ro  Thou  didst  blaspheme  God  and  the  king 

21. 13  Naboth  did  blaspheme  God  and  the  kiug 
224  53  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  Isra. 

2  Ki.  r.    2 -enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  God  of  Ekrou 
1.   3  not  a  God.  .(that)  ye  go  to.,  the  god  of  E.? 
1.    6  nota;God.  .(that),thou  sendestto.  .the god 
1.    9  Thou  man  of  God,  the  king  hath  said 

1. 10  If  I  (be)  a  man  of  God,  then  let  fire  come 
1.  11  0  man  of  God,  thus  hath  the  king  said 

1.  12  If  I  (be)  a  man  of  God,  let  fire  come  down 
1, 12  the  fire  of  God  came  down  from  heaven 
1.  13  0  man  of  God  I  pray  thee,  let  my  life 
1. 16  to  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ekron 
1.  16  no  God  in  Israel  to  enquire  of  his  word  ? 
2. 14  Where  (is)  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  And 
4.   7  Then  she  came  and  told  the  man  of  God 
4.   9  I  perceive,  .this  (is)  an  holy  man  of  God 
4. 16  Nay,  my  lord,  .man  of  God,  do  not  lie 
4.  21  laid  him  on  the  bed  of  the  man  of  God 
4.  22  that- 1  may  run  to  the  man  of  God,  and 
4.  25  she  went,  and  came  unto  the  man  of  God 
4.  25  when  the  man  of  God  saw  her  afar  off 
4.  27  when  she  came  to  the  mau  of  God  to  the 
4.  27  the  man  of  God  said,  Let  her  alone  ;  for 
4.  40  0 .  .man  of  God . .  death  in  the  pot.     And 

4.  42  brought  the  man  of  God  bread  of  the  first 

5.  7  (Am)  I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive 
5-    8  when  Elisha  the  man  of  God  had  heard 

5. 11  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God 

5. 14  accord,  to  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 

5. 15  he  returned  to  the  man  of  God,  he  and 
5.  15  no  God  iu  all  the  earth,  but  in  Israel 

5.  20  the  servant  of  Elisha  the  man  of  God 

6.  6  And  the  man  of  God  said,  Where  fell  it  ? 
6.  9  the  man  of  God  sent  unto  the  king  of  Is. 
6. 10  which  the  man  of  God  told  him  and  war. 
6. 15  when  the  servant  of  the  man  of  God  was 

6.  31  God  do  so  and  more  also  to  me,  if  the  h. 

7.  2  answered  the  man  of  G.,  and  said,  Behold 
7.  17  and  he  died,  as  the  man  of  God  had  said 
7. 18  as  the  man  of  God  had  spoken  to  the  king 

7.  19  that  lord  answered  the  man  of  God,  and 

8.  2  did  after  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 
S.   4  with  Gehazi,  the  servant  of  the  mau  of  G. 
8.    7  saying,  The  man  of  God  is  come  hither 

8.    8  go,  meet  the  mau  of  God,  and  enquire  of 

8.  11  he  was  ashamed  :  and  the  man  of  God  w. 

9.  6  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I 

10.  31  walk  iu  the  law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

13.  19  the  man  of  God  was  wroth  with  him,  and 

14.  25  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  God 

16.  2  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God 

17.  7  had  sinned  against  the  Lord  their  God 
17.    9  not  right  against  the  Lord  their  God 
17.  14  did  not  believe  in  the  Lord  their  God 
17. 16,  19  commandments  of  the  Lord  their  G. 
17.  2b,  26,  27  the  mauner  of  the  God  of  the  land 

17.  39  But  the  Lord  your  God  ye  shall  fear 

18.  5  He  trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
18. 12  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God 

18.  22  if  ye  say.  .We  trust  in  the  Lord  our  God 

19.  4  It  may  be  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hear 
19.    4  king . .  sent  to  reproach  the  living  God 
19.   4  the  words  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 
19.  10  Let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou  trustest 
19.  15  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  dwellest 

19. 15  thou  art  the  God.  .thou  alone,  of  all  the 

19. 16  hath  sent  him  to  reproach  the  living  G. 
19. 19  Now  therefore,  O  Lord  our  G.,  I  beseech 
19. 19  that  thou  (art)  the  Lord  God.  .thou  only 
19.  20  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

19.  37  as  he  was.  .in  the  house  of  Xisroeh  his  g. 

20.  5  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  David 
21. 12  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

21.  22  he  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers 

22.  15,  18  Thus  saith  the  LORD  God  of  Israel 

23.  t6  which  the  man  of  God  proclaimed,  who 

23. 17  the  man  of  God.  which  came  from  Judah 
23.  21  Keep  the  passover  unto .  .your  God,  as  (it 

1  Ch.  4. 10  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying 

4.  10  God  granted  liim  that  which  he  request. 

5.  20  they  cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  he 

5.  22  many  slain,  because  the  war  (was)  of  God 
5.  25  they  transgressed  against  the  God  of 
5.  25  people .  .whom  God  destroyed  before 


1  Ch.  5. 
6. 
6. 
9 
9- 
9> 
9- 


•  Ch. 


26  the  God  of  Israel  stirred  up  the  spirit  of 

48  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  house  of  God 

49  Moses  the  servant  of  God  had  coinman. 

11  of  Ahitub,  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 

13  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 

26  over  the  chambers . .  of  the  house  of  God 

27  they  lodged  round  about  the  house  of  G. 
2  Lord  thy  God  said  unto  thee,  Thou  shalt 

19  My  God  forbid  it  me,  that  I  should  do 
17  the  God  of  our  fathers  look  (thereon) 
iS  peace  (be)  unto  thee,  .thy  God  helpeth 
22  until,  .a great  host,  like  the  host  of  God 

2  If.  .good  unto  you,  and.  .the  LORDour  G. 

3  let  us  bring  again  the  ark  of  our  God  to  us 

5  to  bring  the  ark  of  God  from  Kirjath-jear. 

6  to  bring  up  thence  the  ark  of  God  the  L. 

7  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  in  a  new 

8  and  all  Israel  played  befure  God  with  all 
10  and  there  he  died  before  God 

1 2  David  was  afraid  of  God  that  day,  saying 
12  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God .  .to  me  ? 

14  the  ark  of  God  remained  with  the  family 

10  And  David  enquired  of  God,  saying,  Shall 

11  God  hath  broken  in  upon  mine  enemies 
14  Therefore  David  enquired  again  of  God 

14  God  said  unto  him,  Go  not  up  after  them 

15  God  is  gone  forth  before  thee,  to  smite 

16  David  therefore  did  as  God  commanded 

1  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  and 

2  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark  of  God  but 
2  hath  the  L.  chosen  to  carry  the  ark  of  G. 

12  may  briug  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  of 

13  the  Lord  our  God  made  a  breach  upon 

14  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

15  the  Levites  bare  the  ark  of  God  upon 

24  with  the  trumpets  before  the  ark  of  God 
26  when  God  helped  the  Levites  that  bare 

1  So  they  brought  the  ark  of  God,  and  set 

i  sacrifices  and  peace  offerings  before  God 

4  to  thank  and  praise  the  Lord  God  01  Isr. 

6  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God 

14  He  (is)  the  Lord  our  God  ;  his  judgments 

35  Save  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and 

36  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  for 
42  and  with  musical  instruments  of  God 

2  Do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart ;  for  God 

3  the  word  of  God  came  to  Nathan,  saying 

16  Who  (am)  I,  O  Lord  God,  and  what  (is) 

17  this  was  a  small  thing  in  thine  eyes,  0  G. 

17  and  hast  regarded  me.  .0  LORD  God 

20  neither.  .God  besides  thee,  according  to 

21  whom  God  went  to  redeem  (to  be)  his  own 

22  and  thou,  Lord,  becamest  their  God 

24  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  the  God  of  Israel 

24  a  God  to  Israel :  and  (let)  the  house  of  D. 

25  For  thou,  0  my  God,  hast  told  thy  serva. 

26  And  now,  Lord,  thou  art  God,  and  hast 

13  valiantly,  .for  the  cities  of  our  God  :  and 

7  And  God  was  displeased  with  this  tiling 

8  David  said  unto  God,  I  have  sinned  grea 

15  God  sent  an  angel  unto  Jerusalem  to  de. 
17  David  said  unto  God,  (Is  it)  not  I  (that) 
17  Let  thine  hand.  .0  Lord  my  God,  be  on 
30  could  not  go  before  it  to  enquire  of  God 

1  This  (is)  the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and 

2  wrought  stones  to  build  the  house  of  G. 

6  to  build  an  house  for  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

7  house  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord  my  G. 

11  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  as 

12  mayest  keep  the  law  of  the  Lord  thy  G. 
iS  (Is)  not  the  Lord  your  God  with  you  ? 

19  set . .  your  soul  to  seek  the  Lord  your  God 
19  build  ye  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  God 
19  to  bring . .  the  holy  vessels  of  God,  into  the 

14  Now.  .Moses  the  man  of  God,  his  sous 
25  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath  given  rest  ul  to 

28  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 

5  and  governors  (of  the  house)  of  God,  were 

19  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  comnian. 
5  in  the  words  of  God,  to  lift  up  the  horn 

5  God  gave  to  Heman  fourteen  sous  and 

6  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God,  accord. 
5  Peulthai  the  eighth :  for  God  blessed  him 

20  over  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  God 
32  for  every  matter  pertaining  to  God 

2  an  house . .  for  the  footstool  of  our  God 

3  God  said  unto  me,  Thou  shalt  not  build 

4  Lord  God  of  Israel  chose  me  before  all 

8  in  the  audience  of  our  God,  keep  and  seek 

8  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God 

9  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father,  and 

12  of  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  God,  and 

20  God.  .my  God,  (will  be)  with  thee ;  he 

21  for  all  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 
1  my  son,  whom  alone  God  hath  chosen 

1  (is)  not  for  man,  but  for  the  LORD  God 

2  all  my  might  for  the  house  of  my  God 

3  set  my  affection  to  the  house  of  my  God 
3  I  have  given  to  the  house  of  my  God,  over 

7  gave  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 
10  Blessed  (be)  thou,  Lord  God  of  Israel 

13  our  God,  we  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy 

16  O  Lord  our  God,  all  this  store  that  we 

17  I  know  also,  my  God,  that  thou  triest 
iS  O  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  of 
20  said.  .Now  bless  the  Lord  your  God.  And 
20  blessed  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  and 

1  Lord  his  God  (was)  with  him,  and  magni. 

3  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  of  God 

4  the  ark  of  God  had  David  brought  up 

7  In  that  night  did  God  appear  unto  Sol. 

8  Solomon  said  unto  God,  Thou  hast  show. 


:  Ch.  1.   9  Now,  0  Lord  God,  let  thy  promise  unto 

1.  11  God  said  to  Solomon,  Because  this  was 

2.  4  house  to  the  name  of  the  Lord  my  God 
2.   4  on  the  solemn  feasts  of  the  Lord  our  God 
2.    5  (is)  great ;  for  great  (is)  our  God  above  all 
2.  12  Blessed  (be)  the  LORD  God  of  Israel,  that 

.    3  for  the  building  of  the  house  of  God.  The 
11  for  kiug  Solomon  for  the  house  of  God 
19  vessels  that  (were  for)  the  house  of  God 

1  among  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  God 
14  for  the  glory,  .had  filled  the  house  of  G. 

4  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  who 
7,  10  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Isr. 

14  O  Lord  God.  .no  God  like  thee  iu  the  he. 

16  0  Lord  God.  .keep  with  thy  servant  Da. 

17  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  let  thy  word  be 

18  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on 

19  Have  respect . .  0  Lord  my  God,  to  heark. 

40  Now,  my  God,  let.  .thine  eyes  be  open 

41  Now  therefore  arise,  O  Lord  God,  into 

41  let  thy  priests,  0  Lord  God,  be  clothed 

42  O  Lord  God,  turn  not  away  the  face  of 

5  all  the  people  dedicated  the  house  of  G 

22  Because  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of 

14  had  David  the  man  of  God  commanded 
8  Blessed  be  the  Lord  thy  God,  which 

8  king  for  the  Lord  thy  God:  because.  .G. 

23  to  hear  Iris  wisdom,  that  God  had  put  in 

15  for  the  cause  was  of  God,  that  the  LORD 

2  came  to  Shemaiah  the  man  of  God,  saying 

16  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  came  to 
16  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  God  of  their 

5  Ought  ye  not  to  know  that  the  LORD  God 

10  as  for  us,  the  Lord  (is)  our  God,  and  we 

11  we  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  our  God 

12  God  himself  (is)  with  us  for  (our)  captain 
12  fight  ye  not  against  the  Lord  God  of  your 

15  that  God  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  Israel 

16  and  God  delivered  them  into  their  hand 
18  they  relied  upon  the  Lord  God  of  their  f. 

2  and  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  his  God 
4  to  seek  the  LORD  God  of  their  fathers 
7  because  we  have  sought  the  Lord  our  G. 

11  Asa  cried  unto  the  Lord  his  God,  and 
11  help  us,  O  Lord  our  God  ;  for  we  rest  on 

11  0  Lord,  thou  (art)  our  God ;  let  not  man 
1  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Azariah  the 

3  Israel  (hath  been)  without  the  true  God 

4  did  turn  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and 

6  for  God  did  vex  them  with  all  adversity 

9  saw  that  the  Lord  his  God  (was)  with  him 

12  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  then"  fathers  with 

13  whosoever  would  not  seek  the  Lord  God 
iS  he  brought  into  the  house  of  God  the 

7  and  uot  relied  on  the  Lord  thy  God,  there. 

4  But  sought  to  the . .  God  of  his  father,  and 

5  Go  up;  lor  God  will  deliver  (it)  into  the  ki. 
13  even  what  my  God  saith,  that  will  I  speak 
31  and  God  moved  them  (to  depart) from  him 
,  3  and  hast  prepared  thine  heart  to  see  God 
'  4  brought  them  back  unto  the  Lord  God  of 

7  no  iniquity  with  the  Lord  our  God,  nor 

6  Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  (art)  not  thou  G. 
20.    7  (Art)  not  thou  our  God,  (who)  didst  drive 
20.  12  our  God,  wilt  thou  not  judge  them?  for 
20.  15  for  the  battle  (is)  not  yours,  but  God's 
20. 19  stood  up  to  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
20.  20  Believe  in  the  Lord  3'our  God,  so  shall  ye 
20.  29  the  fear  of  God  was  on  all  the  kingdoms 
20.  30  for  his  God  gave  him  rest  round  about 
20.  33  not  prepared  their  hearts  unto  the  God  of 
21. 10  he  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God  of  his  fath. 
31. 12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  David  thy  f. 

22.  7  the  destruction  of  Ahaziah  was  of  God,  by 
22. 12  was  with  them  hid  in  the  house  of  God 

23.  3  covenant  with  the  king  in  the  house  of  G. 

23.  9  shields .  .which  (were)  in  the  house  of  God 

24.  5  money  to  repair  the  house  of  your  God 
24.    7  sons,  .had  broken  up  the  house  of  God 
24.    9  collection  (that)  Moses  the  servant  of  G. 
24.  13  they  set  the  house  of  God  in  his  state,  and 
24. 16  both  toward  God,  and  toward  his  house 
24.  18  they  left  the  house  of  the  LORD  God  of 
24.  20  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Zechariah 
24.  20  Thus  saith  God,  Why  transgress  ye  the 
24.  24  because  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God 

24.  27  and  the  repairing  of  the  house  of  God 

25.  7  there  came  a  man  of  God  to  him,  saying 
25.    8  God  shall  make  thee  fall  before  the  ene. 
25.    8  God  hath  power  to  help,  and  to  cast  down 
25.   9  Amaziah  said  to  the  man  of  God,  But 
25.   9  the  man  of  God  answered,  The  Lord  is 
25.  16  I  know  that  God  hath  determined  to 
25.  20  it  (came)  of  God,  that  he  might  deliver 

25.  24  that  were  found  in  the  house  of  God  with 

26.  5  he  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah 
26.   5  had  understanding  in  the  visions  of  God 
26.    5  as  long  as  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made 
26.    7  God  helped  him  against  the  Philistines 

26.  16  transgressed  against  the  Lord  his  God 
26. 18  neither,  .thine honour  from  the  LORD  God 

27.  6  prepared  his  ways  before  the  LORD  bis  G. 

28.  5  the  Lord  his  God  delivered  liim  into  the 
28.  6  because  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God 
28.  9  because  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers 
28. 10  with  you,  sins  against  the  Lord  your  God? 
2S.  24  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  and  cut 
28.  24  in  pieces  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 

28.  25  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  his 

29.  5  sanctify,  .the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of 
29.   6  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  our  God,  and 
29.   7  in  the  holy  (place)  unto  the  God  of  Israe\ 


GOD 


416 


GOD 


2  Ch.  29. 
29. 
30- 
30. 
30. 
20. 

30. 

3°- 
30. 

3r- 
31- 
3T- 

31- 
31- 

32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
3z- 
32. 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
*  35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 


Ezra 


Neh. 


10  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
36  that  God  had  prepared  the  people :  for 

i,  5  to  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  G. 

6  turn  again  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Abra. 

7  trespassed  against  the  Lord  God  of  their 

8  serve  the  Lord  your  God,  that  the  fierce. 

9  the  Loud  your  God  (is)  gracious  and  mer. 

12  the  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  one 
16  acord.  to  the  law  of  Moses  the  man  of  God 

19  to  seek  God,  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers 
22  making  confession  to  the  Lord  God  of 

6  consecrated  unto  the  Lord  their  God 

13  and  Azariah  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  G. 

14  (was)  over  the  freewill  offerings  oE  God 

20  right  and  truth  before  the  Lord  his  God 

21  began  in  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 
21  in  the  commandments,  to  seek  his  God 

8  with  us  (is)  the  Lord  our  God  to  help  us 

11  Lord  our  God  shall  deliver  us  out  of  the 

14  your  God  should  be  able  to  deliver  you 

15  how  much  less  shall  your  God  deliver  you 

16  servants  spake  yet.  .against  the  Lord  G. 

17  letters  to  rail  on  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
17  so  shall  not  the  God  of  Hezekiah  deliver 
19  they  spake  against  the  God  of  Jerusalem 
21  he  was  come  into  the  house  of  his  god 

29  God  had  given  him  substance  very  much 

31  God  left  him,  to  try  him,  that  he  might 

7  which  he  had  made,  in  the  house  of  God 

7  of  which  God  had  said  to  David  and  to  S. 

12  he  besought  the  Lord  his  God,  and 

12  humbled  himself  greatly  before  the  God 

13  Mauasseh  knew  that  the  Lord  he  (was)  G. 

16  commanded  Judah  to  serve  the  Lord  God 

17  sacrifice,  .unto  the  Lord  their  God  only 

18  his  prayer  unto  his  God,  and  the  words 
18  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

3  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  David 

8  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord  his  God 

9  that  was  brought  into  the  house  of  God 
23,  26  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
27  thou  didst  humble  thyself  before  God 

32  to  the  covenant  of  God,  the  God  of  their 

33  made  all.  .to  serve  the  LORD  their  God 
33  from  following  the  Lord,  the  God  of 

3  serve  now  the  Lord  your  God,  and  his 
8  rulers  of  the  house  of  God,  gave  unto  the 
21  for  God  commanded  me  to  make  haste 

21  forbear  thee  from  (meddling  with)  God 

22  words  of  Necho  from  the  mouth  of  God 
5,  12  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God 

13  who  had  made  him  swear  by  God  :  but 
13  from  turning  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

15  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers  sent  to  them 

16  they  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and 

18  all  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  great 

19  they  burnt  the  house  of  God,  and  brake 

23  hath  the  Lord  God  of  heaven  given  me 
23  Lord  his  God  (be)  with  him,  and  let  him 

2  Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the 

3  his  God  be  with  him,  and  let  him  go  up 

3  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  he  (is)  the  God 

4  for  the  house  of  God  that  (is)  in  Jerusale. 

5  with  all.  .whose  spirit  God  had  raised 

68  offered  freely  for  the  house  of  God  to  set 
2  builded  the  altar  of  the  God  of  Israel,  to 
2  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  man  of  G. 

8  of  their  coming  unto  the  house  of  God  at 

9  forward  the  workmen  in  the  house  of  G. 

1  builded  the  temple  unto  the  Lord  God  of 

2  build  with  you:  for  we  seek  your  God,  as 

3  do  with  us  to  build  an  house  unto  our  G. 

3  we.  .will  build  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Is. 

21  separated  themselves . .  to  seek  the  L.  God 

22  in  the  work  of  the  house  of  God,  the  God 

6  which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  given 
6  according  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  G. 

9  according  to  the  good  hand  of  his  God 

27  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers 

28  as  the  hand  of  the  Lord  my  God  (was) 

17  bring,  .ministers  for  the  house  of  our  God 

18  by  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  us 

21  we  might  afflict  ourselves  before  our  God 

22  The  hand  of  our  God  (is)  upon  all  them 

23  So  we  fasted,  and  besought  our  God  for 
25  the  offering  of  the  house  of  our  God,  which 
28  offering  unto  the  Lord  God  of  your  fath. 

30  to  Jerusalem,  unto  the  house  of  our  God 

31  the  hand  of  our  God  was  upon  us,  and  he 
33  vessels  weighed  in  the  house  of  our  God 

35  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  God  of  I. 

36  furthered  the  people,  and  the  house  of  G. 

4  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  God  of  Isr. 

5  spread  out  my  hands  unto  the  Lord  my  G. 

6  0  my  God,  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to 
6  lift  up  my  face  to  thee,  my  God :  for 

8  grace  hath  been . .  from  the  Lord  our  God 

8  that  our  God  may  lighten  our  eyes,  and 

9  yet  our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our 
9  to  set  up  the  house  of  our  God,  and  to 

10  O  our  God,  what  shall  we  say  after  tlus? 

13  seeing  that  thou  our  God  hast  punished 
15  God  of  Israel,  thou  (art)  righteous;  for 

1  casting,  .down  before  the  house  of  God 

2  We  have  trespassed  against  our  God,  and 

3  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  our  God  to 

3  tremble  at  the  commandment  of  our  God 
6  Ezra  rose  up  from  before  the  house  of  G. 
9  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the  house  of  G. 

11  make  confession  uuto  the  Lord  God  of 

14  until  the  fierce  wrath  of  our  God  for  this 

4  and  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven 


Xeh    1.  5  I  beseech  thee,  O  Lord  God  of  heaven,  the 
2.   4  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven 
2.    8  according  to  the  good  hand  of  my  God 
2.  12  what  my  God  had  put  in  my  heart  to  do 
2.  18  I  told  them  of  the  hand  of  my  God  which 
2.  20  The  God  of  heaven,  he  will  prosper  us 
4.    4  Hear,  OourGod ;  for  weare  despised:  and 
4.   9  we  made  our  prayer  unto  our  God,  and 
4.  15  God  had  brought  their  counsel  to  nought 

4.  20  resort  ye  thither,  .our  God  shall  fight  for 
9  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  our  G. 

13  So  God  shake  out  every  man  from  his  ho. 

15  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God 
19  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good,  (acco.) 
10  Let  us  meet  together  in  the  house  of  God 

12  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  sent  him 

14  My  God,  think  thou  upon  Tobiah  and  S. 

16  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  our  God 

2  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above  many 

5  my  God  put  into  mine  heart  to  gather 

6  Ezra  blessed  the  Lord,  the  great  God:  and 

8  they  read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of  God 

9  This  day  (is)  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  G. 

16  and  in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  God 
18  he  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God 

3  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord  their  G. 

3  and  worshipped  the  Lord  their  God 

4  with  a  loud  voice  unto  the  Lord  then-  G. 

5  Stand  up.  .bless  the  Lord  your  God  for 

7  Thou  (art)  the  Lord  the  God,  who  didst 
18  This  (irHhy  god  that  brought  thee  up  out 
32  our  God,  the  great,  the  mighty,  and  the 
28  separated  themselves,  .unto  the  law  of  G. 

10.  29  entered,  .into  an  oath,  to  walk  in  God's 
10.  29  which  was  given  by  M.  the  servant  of  God 

10. 32  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  our  God 

10. 33  (for)  all  the  works  of  the  house  of  our  G. 
10.  34  to  bring  (it)  into  the  house  of  our  God 
10.  34  to  burn  upon  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our  G. 
10.  36  to  bring  to  the  house  of  our  God,  unto  the 
10.  36  that  minister  in  the  house  of  our  God 
10.  37  to  the  chambers  of  the.house  of  our  God 

10.  38  of  the  tithes  unto  the  house  of  our  God 
ro.  39  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God 

11.  11  Seraiah.  .the  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 
11.  16  the  outward  business  of  the  house  of  G. 

11.  22  over  the  business  of  the  house  of  God 

12.  24  commandment  of  David  the  man  of  G. 
12.  36  instruments  of  David  the  man  of  God 
12.  40  So  stood  the  two.  .in  the  house  of  God 

12.  43  God  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great 
12. 45  the  porters  kept  the  ward  of  their  God 

13.  46  songs  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  unto  G. 
13.    1  not  come  into  the  congregation  of  God 
13.    2  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing 
13.    4  of  the  chamber  of  the  house  of  our  God 
13.    7  chamber  in  the  courts  of  thehouse  of  God 
13.    9  brought . .  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 
13. 11  "Why  is  the  house  of  God  forsaken?  And 
13.  14  Remember  me,  0  my  God,  concerning 
13.  14  that  I  have  done  for  the  house  of  myGod 
13  18  did  not  our  God  bring  all  this  evil  upon 
13.  22  Remember  me,  O  my  God,  (concerning) 
13.  25  made  them  sware  by  God.  .Ye  shall  not 
13.  26  Solomon,  .who  was  beloved  of  his  God 
13.  26  and  God  made  him  king  over  all  Israel 
13.  27  to  transgress  against  our  God  in  marrying 
13.  29  Remember  them,  O  myGod,  because  they 
13.  31  Remember  me,  O  my  God,  for  good 

Job     1.    1  one  that  feared  God,  and  eschewed  evil? 
1.    5  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have,  .cursed  God 
1.    6  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present 
1.    8  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  ev.? 

1.  9  Satan,  .said,  Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nou.? 
1. 16  The  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from  heaven,  and 
1. 22  In  aU  this  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  G. 

2.  1  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present 

2.    3  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  ev.? 
2.   9  Then  said  his  wife,  .curse  God,  and  die 
2. 10  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God 

5.  8  and  unto  God  would  I  commit  my  cause 
20.  29  This,  .the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  from  G. 

23  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and 
2  he  justified  himself  rather  than  God 
9  that  he  should  delight  himself  with  God 
7  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy? 
2  (There  is)  no  help  for  him  in  God.     Selah 
7  Arise,  O  Lord  ;  save  me,  0  my  God  :  for 

1  Hear  me  when  I  call,  O  God  of  my  righ. 

2  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry.  .my  G. 
10  Destroy  thou  them,  O  God ;  let  them  fall 

1  O  Lord  my  God,  in  thee  do  I  put  my  tru. 

3  0  LORD  my  God,  if  I  have  done  this  ;  if 
9  the  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts  and 

10  My  defence  (is)  of  God,  which  saveththe 

11  God  judgeth  the  righteous,  and .  .is  angry 

17  (and)  all  the  nations  that  forget  God 

4  The  wicked . .  God  (is)  not  in  all  his  thoug. 

13  Wherefore  doth  the  wicked  contemn  G.? 
3  Consider,  .hear  me,  O  Lord  my  God 

1  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  .no  God 

2  any  that  did  understand,  (and)  seek  God 

5  God  (is)  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous 

6  In  my  distress  I.  .cried  unto  my  God  :  he 
21  have  not  wickedly  departed  from  my  God 

28  LORD  my  God  will  enlighten  my  darkness 

29  and  by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wall 
31  or  who  (is)  a  rock  save  our  God  ? 
46  and  let  the  God  of  my  salvation  be  exalt. 

1  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee 
5  in  the  name  of  our  God  we  will  set  up 

7  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  G. 


Psa.  22.    2  0  my  God,  I  cry  in  the  day  time,  but  thou 

24.  5  righteousness  from  the  God  of  his  salva. 

25.  2  O  my  God,  I  trust  in  thee :  let  me  not 
25.    5  thouartthe  Godof  mysalvation;  onthee 
25.  22  Redeem  Israel,  O  God,  out  of  all  his  tro. 
27.    9  neither  forsake  me,  0  God  of  my  salva. 
30.    2  O  Lord  my  God,  I  cried  unto  thee,  and 
30.  12  O  LORD  my  God,  I  will  give  thanks  unto 
31. 14  I  trusted  in  thee.  .Thou  (ait)  my  God 

33. 12  Blessed  (is)  the  nation  whose  God  (is)  the 
35.  23  awake,  .unto  my  cause,  my  God.  .my  L. 

35.  24  Judge  me,  O  Lord  my  God,  according  to 

36.  1  (that  there  is)  no  fear  of  God  before  his 

36.  7  excellent  (is)  thy  loving  kindness,  O  God ! 

37.  31  The  law  of  his  God  (is)  in  his  heart;  none 

38.  15  For.  .thou  wilt  hear,  O  Lord  my  God 
38.  21  0  Lord  :  O  my  God,  be  not  far  from  me 
40.    3  hath  put  a  new  song,  .praise  unto  our  G. 
40.    s  Many,  O  Lord  my  God,  (are)  thy  wonder. 
40.    8  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God  :  yea 

40.  17  my  help,  .make  no  tarrying,  O  my  God 

41.  13  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  from 

42.  1  so  panteth  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God 
42.  2  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living 
42.  2  when  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  G.? 
42.  3  continually  say  unto  me,  Where  (is).  ,G.  ? 
42.  4  I  went  with  them  to  the  house  of  God, with 
42.  5  hope  thou  in  God  ;  for  I  shall  yet  praise 
42.  6  O  my  God,  my  soul  is  cast  down  within 
42.  10  they  say  daily  unto  me,  Where  (is)  thy  Gf.? 

42.  1 1  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  G. 
43     1  Judge  me,  0  God,  and  plead  my  cause 

43.  2  For  thou  (art)  the  God  of  my  strength 
43.    4  Then  will  I  go  unto  the  altar  of  God,  unto 
43.    4  upon  the  harp  will  I  praise . .  O  God,  my  G. 
43-    5  hope  in  God  ;  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him 

43.  5  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  G. 

44.  1  We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  0  God,  our 
44.    4  Thou  art  my  King,  0  God  :  command  de. 
44.    8  In  God  we  boast  all  the  day  long,  and 
44.  20  If  we  have  forgotten  the  name  of  our  G. 

44.  21  Shall  not  God  search  this  out  ?  for  he 

45.  2  therefore  God  hath  blessed  thee  for  ever 
45.    6  Thy  throne,  0  God,  (is)  for  ever  and  ever 

45.  7  therefore  God,  thy  God  hath  anointed  th. 

46.  1  God  (is)  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very 
46.    4  streams,  .shall  make  glad  the  city  of  G. 
46.   5  God  (is)  in  the  midst  of  her;  she  shall  not 
46.    5  God  shall  help  her,  (and  that)  right  early 
46.    7,  11  the  God  of  Jacob  (is)  our  refuge.  Sel. 

46.  10  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  (am)  God  :  I  will 

47.  1  shout  unto  God  with  the  voice  of  triumph 
47.    5  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout,  the  Lord 
47.    6  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises ;  sing 
47.    7  For  God  (is)  the  King  of  all  the  earth,  sing 
47.    8  God  reigneth  over  the  heathen :  God  sit. 
47.  9  (even)  the  people  of  the  God  of  Abraham 

47.  9  the  shields  of  the  earth  (belong)  unto  G. 

48.  1  to  be  praised  in  the  city  of  our  God.  .the 
48.  3  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge 
48.   8  God  will  establish  it  for  ever.     Selah 

48.    9  We  have  thought.  .0  God,  in  the  midst 
48.  10  According  to  thy  name,  O  God,  so  (is)  thy 

48.  14  this  God  (is)  our  God  for  ever  and  ever 

49.  7  None.  .can.  .give  to  God  a  ransom  for 

49.  15  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from  the  pow 

50.  1  The  mighty  God.  .the  Lord,  hath  spoken 
50.    2  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  G. 
50.   3  Our  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep 
50.   6  the  heavens  shall  declare . .  God  (is)  judge 
50.    7  Hear,  O  my  people.  .1  (am)  God.  .thy  G. 
50. 14  Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving;  and  pay 
50.  16  unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  What  hast 

50.  23  to  him.  .will  I  show  the  salvation  of  G 

51.  1  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  God,  according 
51.  10  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God  ;  and 
51. 14  Deliver  me.  .0  God,  thou  God  of  my  sal. 
51.  17  The  sacrifices  of  God  (are)  a  broken  spirit 

51.  17  a  contrite  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not 

52.  7  Lo,  (this  is)  the  man  (that)  made  not  God 
52.    8  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house  of  G. 

52.  8  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and 

53.  1  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  .no  God 
53.  2  God.  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the 
53.  2  that  did  understand,  that  did  seek  God 
53.  4  of  iniquity,  .they  have  not  called  upon  G 
53.  s  God  hath  scattered  the  bones  of  him  that 
53.    5  shame,  because  God  hath  despised  them 

53.  6  When  God  bringeth  hack  the  captivity 

54.  1  Save  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name,  and  judge 
54.  2  Hear  my  prayer,  O  God  ;  give  ear  to  the 
54.    3  they  have  not  set  God  before  them.  Sel. 

54.  4  God  (is)  mine  helper :  the  Lord  (is)  with 

55.  1  Give  ear  to  my  prayer,  0  God ;  and  hide 
55.  14  walked  unto  the  house  of  God  in  company 
55.  16  As  for  me,  I  will  call  upon  God  ;  and  the 
55.  19  no  changes,  therefore  they  fear  not  God 

55.  23  thou,  O  God,  shalt  bring  them  dewuinto 

56.  1  Be  merciful  unto  me,  0  God  ;  for  man 
56.  4  In  God  I  will  praise  his  word  :  in  God  I 
56.  7  (thine)  anger  cast  down  the  people,  O  G. 
56.  9  turn  back  :  this  I  know  ;  for  God  (is)  for 
56.  10  In  God  will  I  praise  (his)  word ;  in  the  L 
56.  11  In  God  have  I  put  my  trust :  I  will  not 
56.  12  Thy  vows  (are)  upon  me,  O  God  :  I  will 

56.  13  that  I  may  walk  before  God  in  the  light 

57.  1  Be  merciful  unto  me,  O  God,  be  merciful 
57.   2  I  will  cry  unto  God  most  high  ;  unto 

57.    3  God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  his 
57.    5  Be  thou  exalted,  0  God,  above  the  heav. 
57.   6  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart  is 
57.  11  Be  thou  exalted,  0  God,  above  the  heav. 


GOD 


Psa,  58.    6  Break  their  teeth,  O  God,  in  their  mouth 

58.  11  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth 

59.  '  1  Deliver  me  from  mine  enemies,  O  my  God 
59.   5  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
50.    9  I  wait  upon  thee  :  for  God  (is)  my  defence 
59.  10  The  God  of  my  mercy  shall  prevent  me 
59.  10  God  shall  let  me  see  (my  desire)  upon 
59.  13  that  God  ruleth  in  Jacob  unto  the  ends 

59.  17  my  defence,  (and)  the  God  of  my  mercy 

60.  1  0  God,  thou  hast  cast  us  off,  thou  hast 
60.    6  God  hath  spoken  in  his  holiness  ;  I  will 
60.  10  (Wilt)  not  thou,  O  God.. (thou),  O  God 

60.  12  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly  :  for 

61.  1  Hear  my  cry,  O  God  ;  attend  unto  my 
61.   5  For  thou,  0  God,  hast  heard  my  vows 

61.  7  He  shall  abide  before  God  for  ever  :  0 

62.  1  Truly  my  soul  waiteth  upon  God  :  from 
62.    5  My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God  ;  for 
62.    7  In  God  (is)  my  salvation  and  my  glory 
62.    7  the  rock  of  my  strength,  .(is)  in  God 

62.  8  Trust  in  him . .  God  (is)  a  refuge  for  us 

62. 11  God  hath  spoken.. (belongeth)  unto  God 

63.  1  O  God . .  early  will  I  seek  thee  :  my  soul 
63. 11  the  king  shall  rejoice  in  God  ;  every  one 

64.  1  Hear  my  voice,  0  God,  in  my  prayer  :  pre. 
64.    7  God  shall  shoot  at  them  (with)  an  arrow 

64.  9  and  shall  declare  the  work  of  God  ;  for 

65.  1  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Zion 
65.    5  wilt  thou  answer  us,  0  God  of  our  salva. 

65.  9  gTeatly  enrichest  it  with  the  river  of  God 

66.  1  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  God,  all  ye 
66.   3  Say  unto  God,  How  terrible  (art  thou) 
66.    s  Come  and  see  the  works  of  God  :  (he  is) 
66.    8  0  bless  our  God,  ye  people,  and  make 

66. 10  For  thou,  0  God,  hast  proved  us  :  thou 
66. 16  Come  (and)  hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God 
66.  19  verily  God  hath  heard . .  he  hath  attended 

66.  20  Blessed  (be)  God,  which  hath  not  turned 

67.  1  God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless  us 
67.    3  Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  ;  let  all 
67.    5  Let  the  people  praise  thee,  O  God  ;  let  all  1 
6-.    6  God,  (even)  our  own  God,  shall  bless  us 

67.  7  God  shall  bless  us ;  and  all  the  ends  of 

68.  1  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  be  scattered 
68.  2  the  wicked  perish  at  the  presence  of  God 
68.    3  let  them  rejoice  before  God  ;  yea,  let  th. 
68.    4  Sing  unto  God,  sing  praises  to  his  name 
68.    5  A  father  of  the  fatherless,  .(is)  God  in  his 
68.    6  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families  :  he 
68.    7  O  God,  when  thou  wentest  forth  before 
68.    8  heavens,  .dropped  at  the  presence  of  God 
68.    8  at  the  presence  of  God,  the  God  of  Israel 
68.   9  Thou,  0  God,  didst  send  a  plentiful  rain 
68.  10  thou,  0  God,  hast  prepared .  .for  the  poor 
68.  15  The  hill  of  God  (is  as)  the  hill  of  Bashan 
68.  16  the  hill  (which)  God  desireth  to  dwell  in 
6$.  17  The  chariots  of  G.  (are)  twenty  thousand 
68.  18  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  (among  them) 
68.  21  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  his  enemies 
68.  24  They  have  seen  thy  goings,  0  God  ;  (even) 
68.  26  Bless  ye  God  in  the  congregations,  (even) 
68.  28  Thy  God  hath  commanded  thy  strength 
68.  28  strengthen,  O  God,  that  which  thou  hast 
68.  31  shall,  .stretch  out  her  hands  unto  God 
68.  32  Sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
68.  34  Ascribe  ye  strength  unto  God :  his  excel. 
68.  35  God,  (thou  art)  terrible  out  of  thy  holy  pi. 

68.  35  power  unto  Qiis)  people.  Blessed  (be)  God 

69.  1  Save  me,  0  God ;  for  the  waters  are  come 
69.    3  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait  for  my  God 
69.    5  0  God,  thou knowest my  foolishness;  and 
69.    6  confounded  for  my  sake,  0  God  of  Israel 
69.  13  0  God,  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy 
69.  29  let  thy  salvation,  O  God,  set  me  up  on 
69.  30  I  will  praise  the  name  of  God  with  a  so. 
69.  32  and  your  heart  shall  live  that  seek  God 

69.  35  For  God  will  save  Zion,  and  will  build  the 

70.  1  (Make  haste),  0  God,  to  deliver  me  ;  ma. 
70.    4  say  continually,  Let  God  be  magnified 

70.  5  I  (am)  poor,  .make  haste  uuto  me,  O  God 

71.  4  Deliver  me,  O  my  God,  out  of  the  hand  of 
71.  11  Saying,  God  hath  forsaken  him  :  persec. 
71.  12  0  God,  he  not  far  from  me :  0  my  God 
71.  17  O  God,  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my 
71.  18  Xow  also.  .0  God,  forsake  me  not,  until 
71.  19  Thy  righteousness  also,  O  God,  (is)  very 
71.  19  things :  O  God,  who  (is)  like  unto  thee ! 

71.  22  (even)  thy  truth,  0  my  God  :  unto  thee 

72.  1  Give  the  king  thy  judgments,  O  God,  and 

72.  18  Blessed  (be)  the  LORD  God,  the  God  of  I. 

73.  1  Truly  God  (is)  good  to  Israel,  (even)  to 
73.  26  God  (is)  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and 

73.  28  (it  is)  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God 

74.  1  O  God,  whyhast  thou  cast  (us)  off  for 
74.  10  God,  how  long  shall  the  adversary  repr. 

74. 12  God  (is)  my  king  of  old,  working  salvati. 

74.  22  Arise,  O  God,  plead  thiue  own  cause  :  re. 

75.  1  Unto  thee,  0  God,  do  we  give  thanks 

75.    7  God  (is)  the  judge  :  he  putteth  down  one 

75.  9  I  will  sing  praises  to  the  God  of  Jacob 

76.  1  In  Judah  (is)  God  known ;  his  name  (is) 
76.    6  At  thy  rebuke,  0  God  of  Jacob,  both  the 

76.  9  *\Vhen  God  arose  to  judgment,  to  save  all 

76. 11  Vow,  and  pay  unto  the  Lord  your  God 

77.  1  I  cried  unto  God  with  my  voice,  (even) 
77.    3  I  remembered  God,  and  was  troubled  :  I 

77. 13  0  God.  .who  (is  so)  great,  .as  (our)  God? 

77.  16  The  waters  saw  thee,  O  God,  the  waters 

78.  7  That  they  might  set  their  hope  in  God 
78.  10  They  kept  not  the  covenant  of  God,  and 
78.  19  Yea,  they  spake  against  God  ;  they  said 
78.  22  they  believed  not  in  God,  and  trusted 

53 


417 


Psa,  78.  31  The  wrath  of  God  came  upon  them,  and 
7S.  35  And  they  remembered  that  God  (was)  th. 

78.  56  provoked  the  most  high  God,  and  kept 
7S.  59  When  God  heard  (this),  he  was  wroth 

79.  1  O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into  thine 
79.    9  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for  the 

79.  10  the  heathen  say,  Where  (is)  their  God? 

80.  3  Turn  us  again,  O  God,  and  cause  thyface 
80.  4  O  LORD  God  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  thou 
80.  7  Turn  us  again,  0  God  of  hosts,  and  cause 
80.  14  Return,  we  beseech  thee,  0  God  of  hosts 

80.  19  Turn  us  again,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  ca. 
Si.    i  Sing  aloud  unto  God  our  strength 

81.  1  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  God  of  Jac. 

81.  4  statute  for  Israel,  (and)  a  law  of  the  God 
81. 10  I  (am)  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought 

82.  1  God  standeth  in  the  congregation  of  the 

82.  8  Arise,  0  God,  judge  the  earth  :  for  thou 

83.  1  keep  not  thou  silence,  OGod  :  hold  not 
83.  12  Let  us  take  to  ourselves  the  houses  of  God 

83.  13  O  my  God,  nuike  them  like  a  wheel ;  as 

84.  3  O  Lord  of  hosts,  my  King,  and  my  God 
84.    7  (every  one  of  them) . .  appeareth  before  G. 
84.    8  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  .give ear,  O  God 
84.    9  Behold,  O  God  our  shield,  and  look  upon 
84.  10  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  my  God 

84.  11  For  the  Lord  God  (is)  a  sun  and  shield 

85.  4  Turn  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and  ca. 

86.  2  0  thou  my  God,  save  thy  servant  that 
86.  10  For  thou  (art)  great . .  thou  (art)  God  alone 
86.  12  I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord  my  God,  with 

86.  14  0  God,  the  proud  are  risen  against  me 

87.  3  Glorious  things  are  spoken.  .0  city  of  G. 

88.  1  Lord  God  of  my  salvation,  I  have  cried 

89.  8  0  LORD  God  of  hosts,  who  (is)  a  strong  L. 

90.  title.  A  Prayer  of  Moses  the  man  of  God 

90.  17  let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be 

91.  2  (He  is)  my  refuge  and  my  fortress :  my  G. 

92.  13  shall  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our  God 
g4.    7  neither  shall  the  God  of  Jacob  regard  (it) 
94. 22  and  my  God  (is)  the  rock  of  my  refuge 

94.  23  (yea),  the  Lord  our  God  shall  "cut  them 

95.  7  he  (is)  our  God  ;  and  we  (are)  the  people 

98.  3  all .  .have  seen  the  salvation  of  our  God 

99.  5  Exalt  ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship 
99.    8  Thou  answeredst  them,  0  Lord  our  God 
99.  9  Exalt  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship 
99.    9  holy  hill ;  for  the  Lord  out  God  (is)  holy 

100.   3  Know  ye  that  the  Lord  he  (is)  God  :  (it 
104.    1  O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  very  great 

104.  33  I  will  siug  praise  to  my  God  while  I  have 

105.  7  He  (is)  the  Lord  our  God  :  his  judgments 

106.  47  Save  us,  0  Lord  our  God,  and  gather  us 
106.  48  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  from 
108.  1  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed  ;  I  will  sing  and 
108.  5  Be  thou  exalted,  O  God,  above  the  heav. 
108.  7  God  hath  spoken  in  his  holiness  ;  I  will 
108.  11  (Wilt)  not  (thou),  0  God,  (who)  hast  cast 
108.  11  wilt  not  thou,  O  God,  go  forth  with  our 

108.  13  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly:  for 

109.  1  Hold  not  thy  peace,  O  God  of  my  praise 
109.  26  Help  me,  O  Lord  my  God  :  O  save  me 
113.   5  Who  (is)  like  unto  the  Lord  our  God 
115.    2  the  heathen  say,  Where  (is)  now  their  G.? 
115.    3  But  our  God  (is)  in  the  heavens  :  he  hath 
116..  5  Gracious  (is)  the  LORD,  .yea,  our  God  (is) 
119.  115  I  will  keep  the  commandments  of  my  G. 

122.  9  Because  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  out  G. 

123.  2  so  our  eyes  (wait)  upon  the  Lord  our  G. 

135.  2  in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  our  God 

136.  2  0  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  gods  :  for 

143.  10  for  thou  (art)  my  God  :  thy  spirit  (is)  good 

144.  9  I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto  thee,  O  God 
144. 15  (is  that)  people,  whose  God  (is)  the  Lord 

145.  1  I  will  extol  thee,  my  God,  O  King ;  and  I 

146.  2  I  will  siug  praises  unto  my  God  while  I 
146.    5  whose  hope  (is)  in  the  Lord  his  God 

146.  10  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever,  (even)  thy  God 

147.  1  good  to  sing  praises  unto  our  God  ;  for 
147.  7  sing  praise  upon  the  harp  unto  our  God 
147.  12  Praise  the  Lord,  .praise  thy  God,  O  Zion 

Prov.  2.    5  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God 

2. 17  and  forgetteth  the  covenant  of  her  God 
3.    4  understanding  iu  the  sight  of  God  and 

25.    2  (It  is)  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing 
30.    9  and  take  the  name  of  my  God  (in  vain) 
Eccl.   1,  13  this  sore  travail  hath  God  given  to  the 
2.  24  I  saw,  that  it  (was)  from  the  hand  of  God 

2.  26  may  give  to  (him  that  is)  good  before  God 

3. 10  which  God  hath  given  to  the  sons  of  men 

3. 11  that  God  maketh  from  the  beginning  to 
3. 13  enjoy  the  good .  .it  (is)  the  gift  of  God 

3.  14  I  know  that  whatsoever  God  doeth,  it 
3.  14  God  doeth  (it),  that  (men)  should  fear 
3.  15  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  past 
3.  17  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the 

3. 18  that  God  might  manifest  them,  and  that 
5.    1  thou  goest  to  the  house  of  God,  and 

5.   2  to  utter  (any)  thing  before  God :  for  God 
5.    4  When  thou  vowest  a  vow  unto  God 
5.   6  wherefore  should  God  be  angry  at  thy 
5.    7  also  (divers)  vanities :  but  fear  thou  God 
5.  18  all  the  days  of  his  life,  which  God  giveth 

5. 19  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches  and  wea. 
5.  19  to  rejoice .  .this  (is)  the  gift  of  God 

5.  20  God  answereth  (him)  in  the  joy  of  his  he. 

6.  2  A  man  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches 

6.  2  God  giveth  him  not  power  to  eat  thereof 
7. 13  Consider  the  work  of  God  :  for  who  can 

7.  14  God.  .hath  set  the  one  over  against  the 
7.  18  he  that  feareth  God  shall  come  forth  of 
7.  26  whoso  pleaseth  God  shall  escape  from 


GOD 

Eccl.  7.  29  that  God  hath  made  man  upright ;  but 
8.   2  and  (that)  iu  regard  of  the  oath  of  God 
8.  12  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God 
8.  13  because  he  feareth  not  before  God 
8.  15  which  God  giveth  him  under  the  sun 

8.  17  Then  I  beheld  all  the  work  of  God,  that 

9.  1  their  works,  (are)  in  the  hand  of  God  :  no 
9.    7  for  God  now  accepteth  thy  works 

11.    5  so  thou  knowest  not  the  works  of  God 

11.  9  for  all  these  (things)  God  will  bring  thee 

12.  7  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave  it 
12.  13  Fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments 

12.  14  For  God  shall  bring  every  work  into 
Isa.     1.  10  give  ear  unto  the  law  of  our  God,.ye  peo. 

2.  3  Come  ye.. to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Ja. 
7.  11  Ask  thee  a  sign  of  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  ask 

7.  13  weary  men,  but  will  ye  weary  my  God 

8.  19  should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ? 
8.  21  curse  their  king  and  their  God,  and  look 

13.  19  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom 
17.   6  thereof,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
17.  10  Because  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of 
21.  10  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
21.  17  for  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath  spoken 
24. 15  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  in  the 
25.    1  0  Lord,  thou  (art)  my  God  ;  I  will  exalt 

25.  9  Lo,  this  (is)  our  God  ;  we  have  waited  for 

26.  13  0  Lord  our  God,  (other)  lords  besides 

28.  26  his  God  doth  instruct  him  to  discretion 

29.  23  sanctify . .  and  shall  fear  the  God  of  Israel 

30.  18  for  the  Lord  (is)  a  God  of  judgment 

35.  2  they  shall  see . .  the  excellency  of  our  Got"! 

35.  4  God  will  come  (with)  vengeance,  (even)  G. 

36.  7  We  trust  in  the  Lord  our  God  :  (is  it)  not 

37.  4  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hear  the  words  of 
37.  4  sent  to  reproach  the  living  God,  and  will 
37.  4  words  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 

37.  10  Let  not  thy  God.  .deceive  thee,  saying 
37.  16  0  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of  Israel,  that  dw. 
37.  16  thou  (art)  the  God,  (even)  thou  alone,  of 
37.  17  which  hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living  G. 
37.  20  O  Lord  our  God,  save  us  from  his  hand 
37.  21  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Whe. 

37.  38  in  the  house  of  Nisrocb  his  god,  that  Ad. 

38.  5  the  God  of  David  thy  father,  I  have  heard 
40.    1  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God 
40.   3  make . .  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  G. 
40,    8  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever 
40.   9  be  not  afraid  ;  say.  .Behold  your  God  ! 
40.  27  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  G.? 

40.  28  the  everlasting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Crea. 

41.  10  Fear  thou  not.  .for  I  (am)  thy  God  :  I 
41. 13  For  I  the  Lord  thy  God  will  bold  thy  ri. 
41.  17  the  God  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them 
43-   3  I  (am)  the  Lord  thy  God,  the  Holy  One 

44.  6  the  last ;  and  besides  me  (there  is)  no  G. 

45.  3  I  the  LORD,  .(am)  the  God  of  Israel 
45.    5  (there  is)  no  God  besides  me :  I  girded 
45.  14  and  (there  is)  none  else,  (there  is)  no  God 
45.  15  hidest  thyself,  O  God  of  Israel,  the  Savi. 
45.  iS  God  himself  that  formed  the  earth,  and 

45.  21  and  (there  is)  no  God  else  besides  me  ;  a 

46.  9  (I  am)  God,  and  (there  is)  none  like  me 
48.    1  make  mention  of  the  God  of  Israel,  (but) 
48.    2  and  stay  themselves  upon  the  God  of  Is. 

48.  17  the  Lord  thy  God  which  teacheth  thee  to 

49.  4  with  the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my  G. 
49.    5  and  my  God  shall  be  my  strength 

50. 10  let  him  trust,  .and  stay  upon  his  God 
51.  15  But  I  (am)  the  Lord  thy  God,  that  divid. 
51.  20  they  are  full  of.  .the  rebuke  of  thy  God 

51.  22  God  (that)  pleadeth  the  cause  of  his  peo. 

52.  7  that  saith  unto  Zion,  Thy  God  reigneth  ! 
52.  10  all.  .shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God 

52.  12  the  God  of  Israel  (will  be)  your  rereward 

53.  4  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and 

54.  5  The  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be 

54.  6  when  thou  wast  refused,  saith  thy  God 

55.  s  because  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  for  the 
55.    7  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon 

57.  21  (There  is)  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the 

58.  2  forsook  not  the  ordinance  of  their  God 

58.  2  they  take  delight  in  approaching  to  God 

59.  2  between  you  and  your  God,  and  your 

59.  13  departing  away  from  our  God,  speaking 

60.  9  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
60. 19  but  the  Lord,  .and  thy  God  thy  glory 

61.  2  and  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God  ;  to 
61.    6  shall  call  you  the  Ministers  of  our  God 

61.  io  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;  for 

62.  3  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God 
62.    5  the  bride,  (so)  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over 

64.  4  neither  hath  the  eye  seen,  O  God,  beside.-; 

65.  16  shall  bless  himself  in  the  God  of  truth 

65.  16  shall  swear  by  the  God  of  truth  ;  because 

66.  9  shall  I  cause  to  bring  forth,  .saith  thy  G. 
Jer.     2.  17,  19  thou  hast  forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God 

2.  19  my  fear  (is)  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

3.  13  thou  hast  transgressed  against.  .God,  and 
3.  21  they  have  forgotten  the  Lord  their  God 
3.  22  come,  .for  thou  (art)  the  Lord  our  God 

3.  23  truly  in  the  LORD  our  God  (is)  the  salva. 
3.  25  have  sinned  against  the  LORD  our  God 
3.  25  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  G. 
5.    4  know  not.  .the  judgment  of  their  God 
5.    5  have  known  the  judgment  of  their  God 
5.  14  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  Becau. 
5.  19  Wherefore  doeth  the  Lord  out  God  all 
5.  24  Let  us  now  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  that 
7.    3,  21  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
7.  23  and  I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be 
7.  2S  obeyeth  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord.  .God 


GOD 


418 


GOD 


Jer.     8. 14  the  Lord  our  God  hath  put  us  to  silence 
9.  15  saith  the  LORD  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

10.  xo  Lord  (is)  the  true  G.,  he  (is)  the  living  G. 

11.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  Cur. 
11.  4  ye  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  your  God 
13.  12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Gud  of  Israel,  Every 

16  Give  glory  to  the  Lord  your  God,  before 

22  (Art)  not  thou  he,  O  Lord  our  God  ?  the. 
16  called  by  thy  name,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts 

9  saitli  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
10  have  committed  against  the  Lord  our  G. 

3,  15  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Behold 
9  forsaken  the  covenant  of  the  Lord.  .God 
2  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  against 

23  God  at  hand,  saith  the  Lord,  and  not  a  G. 
36  living  God,  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  our  G. 

5  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel 
7  he  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God 

15  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  unto  me 
27  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

13  and  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

16  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God 

4,  21  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel 
2  Tims  speaketh  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel 

14  For  thus  saith  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel 
4,  8,  21  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel 

25  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel 
2  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
9  they  shall  serve  the  LORD  their  God,  and 

22  lie  my  people,  and  I  will  be  your  God 

1  will  I  be  the  God  of  all  the  families  of  I. 

6  let  us  go  up  to  Zion  unto  the  Lord.  .God 
iS  turned ;  for  thou  (art)  the  Lord  my  God 

23  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel,  As 
33  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people 

14,  15  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .God  of  Israel 
27  I  (am)  the  Lord,  the  God  of  all  flesh  :  is 
36  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel 
38  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God 

4  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Is. 
2,  13  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel 
4  the  son  of  Igdaliah,  a  man  of  God,  which 
13,  17, 18, 19  Thus  saith  the  Lord.. God  of  I. 
V  Pray  now  unto  the  Lord  our  God  for  us 

7  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel 
]  7  Thus  saith . .  the  God  of  Israel ;  If  thou 
16  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God-  of  Israel 

2  thy  God  hath  pronounced  this  evil  upon 

2  and  pray  for  us  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

3  the  Lord  thy  God  may  show  ns  the  way 

4  I  will  pray  unto  the  Lord  your  God  ace. 

5  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  send  thee  to  us 
6,  6  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God 
9  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel 

13  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

15,  iS  saith  the  LORD  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Is. 
20  when  ye  sent  me  unto  the  Lord  your  God 
20  Pray  for  us  unto  the  Lord  our  God  ;  and 
20  unto  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  say 
2T  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

1  all  the  words  of  the  Lord  their  God,  for 

1  the  Lord  their  God  had  sent  him  to  them 

2  the  Lord  our  God  hath  not  sent  thee  to 
to  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

2  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

7  the  God  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
11,  25  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

2  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  unto 
25  the  God  of  Israel,  saith  ;  Behold,  I  will 

1  Baith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

4  they  shall  go,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  G. 
18  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
28  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord  our  God,  the 
40  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and 

5  nor  Judah  of  his  God,  of  the  Lord  of  ho. 
10  in  Zion  the  work  of  the  Lord  our  God 
33  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 

Eze.    1.    1  were  opened,  and  I  saw  visions  of  God 
8.    3  and  brought  me  in  the  visions  of  God  to 

8.  4  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  there 

9.  3  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  gone 
10.  19  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  over 

10.  20  that  I  saw  under  the  God  of  Israel  by  the 
ir.  20  be  ray  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God 

11.  22  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  (was)  over 
11.  24  brought  me  in  a  vision  by.  .spirit  of  God 
14.  11  and  I  may  be  their  God,  saith  the  Lord 
20.    5  them,  saying,  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 
20.    7  and  defile  not.  .1  (am)  the  Lord  your  God 
20. 19  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God  ;  walk  in  my 
20.  20  may  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  G. 
28.    2  I  sit  (in)  the  seat  of  God,  in  the  midst  of 
28.    2,  6  set  thine  heart  as  the  heart  of  God 

28.    9  before  him  that  slayeth  thee,  I  (am)  God 
28.  13  Thou  hast  been  in  Eden  the  garden  of  G. 
28.  14  thou  wast  upon  the  holy  mountain  of  G. 
28.  16  as  profane  out  of  the  mountain  of  God 
28.  26  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  G. 
31.   8  The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could 
31.    8  nor  any  tree  in  the  garden  of  God  was 
31.    g  the  trees.,  that  (were)  in  the  garden  of  G. 
34.  24  the  Lord  will  be  their  God,  and  my  ser. 
34.  30  that  I  the  Lord  their  God  (am)  with  them 
34.  31  (ami)  I  (am)  your  God,  saith  the  LORD  G. 

36,  28  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  your  G. 

37.  23  they  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  G. 
36.  27  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my 

39.  22  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God  from  that  day 
39. 28  they  know  that  I  (am) the  Lord  their  Goi.1 

40.  2  In  the  visions  of  God  brought  he  me  into 
43.    2  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  came  from 


42. 
42 
43- 
4? 

4> 
43- 
44. 

44- 
44. 

45- 
46. 
48. 
50. 
5°- 
50. 
50. 
51. 
Si- 
Si- 


Eze.  44 
Dan.    1 


Hos.    1 
2. 

3- 
4' 
4- 
4 
5. 
6. 

7- 


Joel 


Amos  2. 

3 
4 
4 

4 
5' 
5' 
5' 
5' 
5' 
6. 
6. 


Jon. 


Hab. 
Zeph.  2. 


Hag. 


Zech.  6. 


2  the  God  of  Israel,  hath  entered  in  by  it 
2  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 
2  which  he  carried,  .to  the  house  of  his  god 
2  brought  into  the  treasure  house  of  his  god 
9  God  had  brought  Dauiel  into  favour  and 
17  God  gave  them  knowledge  and  skill  in 
.  3  I  set  my  face  imto  the  Lord  God,  to  seek 

4  I  prayed  unto  the  Lord  my  God,  and 

0  To  the  Lord  our  God  (belong)  mercies 

10  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  G. 

11  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God 

13  not  our  prayer  before  the  Lord  out  God 

14  our  God  (is)  righteous  in  all  his  works 

15  now,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  hast  brought 

17  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  servant 

18  O  my  God,  incline  thine  ear,  and  hear 

19  defer  not,  for  thine  own  sake,  0  my  God 

20  my  God  for  the  holy  mountain  of  my  God 

12  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  God,  thy 
32  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall  be 
37  Neither  shall  he  regard  the  God  of  his 

7  will  save  them  by  the  LORD  their  God 
23  and  they  shall  say,  (Thou  art)  my  God 

5  seek  the  Lord  their  God,  and  David  their 

1  nor  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land 

6  thou  hast  forgotten  the  law  of  thy  God 

12  have  gone  a  whoring  from  under  their  G. 

4  frame  their  doings  to  turn  unto  their  G. 
6  and  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than 

10  they  do  not  return  to  the  Lord  their  God 

2  shall  cry  unto  me,  My  God,  we  know  thee 
6  workmanmade  it ;  therefore  it  (is)not  G. 
1  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  from  thy  God 

8  watchman  of  Ephraim  (was)  with  my  God 

8  (and)  hatred  in  the  house  of  his  God 
17  My  God  will  cast  them  away,  because 

3  by  his  strength  he  had  power  with  God 

5  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  ;  the  Lord  (is)  Ins 

6  turn  thou  to  thy  God  :  keep  mercy  and 
6  and  wait  on  thy  God  continually 

9  the  LORD  thy  God  from  the  land  of  Egypt 

4  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  Egypt 

4  and  thou  shalt  know  no  god  but  me  ;  for 

16  for  she  hath  rebelled  against  her  God 

1  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  for  thou 

13  come,  lie  all  night,  .ministers  of  my  God 

13  is  withholden  from  the  house  of  my  God 

14  (into)  the  house  of  the  LoRDjyour  God,  and 

16  and  gladness  from  the  house  of  our  God 

13  turn  unto  the  Lord  j'our  God  :  for  he  (is) 

14  a  drink  offering  unto  the  Lord  your  God 

1 7  say  among  the  people,  Where  (is)  their  G.? 
23  Be  glad,  .and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  your  G. 

26  and  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  G. 

27  (that)  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God,  and  none 
1 7  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God  d  welling  in  Zion 

8  condemned  (in)  the  house  of  their  God 

13  Hear,  .saith  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  h. 

11  as  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 

12  prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O  Israel 

13  The  Lord,  The  God  of  hosts,  (is)  his  name 

14  the  God  of  hosts,  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye 

15  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  will  be  gracious 

16  the  God  of  hosts,  the  LORD,  saith  thus 

26  your  images,  the  star  of  your  God,  which 

27  the  Lord,  whose  name  (is)  The  God  of  h. 

8  saith  the  Lord  the  God  of  hosts,  I  abhor 

14  saitli  the  Lord  the  God  of  hosts;  and  they 

14  that  swear,  .and  say,  Thy  God,  O  Dan 

15  I  have  given  them,  saith  the  LORD  thy  G. 

5  and  cried  every  man  unto  his  god,  and  c. 

6  call  upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will 

9  the  God  of  heaven,  which  hath  made  the 

1  Jonah  prayed  unto  the  Lord  his  God  out 
6  thou  brought  up  my  life.  .0  Lord  my  G. 

5  the  people  of  Nineveh  believed  God,  and 

8  let  man  and  beast,  .cry  mightily  untoGod 

9  Who  can  tell  (if)  God  will  turn  and  repent 
10  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned 
10  God  repented  of  the  evil,  that  he  had  said 

6  the  Lord  God  prepared  a  gourd,  and 

7  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  morning 

8  that  God  prepared  a  vehement  east  wind 

9  God  said  to  Jonah,  Doest  thou  well  to  be 

7  ashamed . .  for  (there  is)  no  answer  of  God 

2  and  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob 

5  will  walk  every  one  in  the  name  of  his  god 

5  will  walk  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  G. 

4  majesty  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God 

6  (and)  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ? 

8  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God? 

7  wait  for  the  God  of  my  salvation :  my  G. 
10  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God?  mine  eyes 

17  they  shall  be  afraid  of  the  LORD  our  God 
12  0  Lord  my  God,  mine  Holy  One?  we 

x8  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation 
7  their  God  shall  visit  them,  and  turn  away 

9  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
2  trusted  not.  .she  drew  not  near  to  her  G. 

17  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  (is)  mighty 
12  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God 
12  as  the  Lord  their  God  had  sent  him,  and 

14  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  their  God 

15  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

5  and  I  will  be  their  God,  in  truth  and 
23  for  we  have  beard  (that)  God  (is)  with 

7  he  that  remainefch,  .(shall  be)  for  our  God 

16  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  as 
fi  l  (am)  the  1  ■  rd  their  1:0,1.  and  will  hear 

4  Tims  saith  the  r/mpmy  1  had ;  Feed  the 

5  strength  in  the  Lord  of  hosts  tilth'  God 

8  tile  h.-u-u  of  I 'avid  (shall  lie)  ;■,-■■  vim],  as 


15- 
16. 


Zech.  13.    9  and  they  shall  say,  The  Lord  (is)  my  God 

14.  5  my  God  shall  come,  (and)  all  the  saints 
Mai,    2. 16  the  God  of  Israel,  saith  that  he  hateth 

2.  17  or,  Where  (is)  the  God  of  judgment? 

3.  8  Will  a  man  rob  God?  Yet  ye  have  robbed 
3.  14  Ye  have  said,  It  (is)  vain  to  serve  God 

3. 15  (they  that)  tempt  God  are  even  delivered 
3. 18  between  him  that  serveth  God  and  him 

5.  God,  object  of  worship,  niVx  eloah. 

Deut  32.  15  he  forsook  God  (which)  made  him,  and 

32.  17  They  sacrificed  uuto  devils,  not  to  God 
2  Ch.32.  15  for  no  God  of  any  nation  or  kingdom 
Neh.  9.  17  thou  (art)  a  God  ready  to  pardon,  gracio. 
Job     3.    4  let  not  God  regard  it  from  above,  neither 

3.  23  (given)  to  a  man . .  whom  God  hath  hedged 

4.  9  By  the  blast  of  God  they  perish,  and  by 

4.  17  Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just  than  God 

5.  17  happy  (is)  the  man  whom  God  correcteth 

6.  4  the  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves  in 
6.    8  that  God  would  giant  (me)  the  thing  that 

6.  9  that  it  would  please  God  to  destroy  me 
9.  13  (If)  God  will  not  withdraw  his  anger,  the 

10.  2  I  will  say  unto  God,  Do  not  condemn  me 

11.  5  oh  that  God  would  speak,  and  open  his 
11.    6  that  God  exacteth  of  thee  (less)  than  thi. 

11.  7  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God? 

12.  4  who  calleth  upon  God,  and  he  answereth 
12.    6  into  whose  hand  God  bringeth  (abund.) 

S  Hast  thou  heard  the  secret  of  God  ?  and 
>o (but) mine  eye  poureth out  (tears) unto G. 
16.  21  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with  God 
19.    6  Know  now  that  God  hath  overthrown  me 
19.  21  for  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me 
19.  26  destroy .  .yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God 
21.    9  neither  (is)  the  rod  of  God  upon  them 

21.  19  God  layeth  up  his  iniquity  for  his  child. 
22. 12  (Is)  not  God  in  the  height  of  heaven?  and 

22.  26  and  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  unto  God 

24.  12  crieth . ,  yet  God  layeth  not  folly  (to  them) 
27.  3  and  the  spirit  of  God  (is)  in  my  nostrils 
27.  8  hath  gained,  when  God  taketh  away  his 
27.  10  Almighty?  will  he  always  call  upon  God? 
29.  2  as  (in)  the  days  (when)  God  preserved  me 
29.  4  the  secret,  of  God  (was)  upon  my  tabernacle 
31.  2  what  portion  of  God  (is  there)  from  above? 
31.   6  weighed,  .that God  may  know.inine  integ. 

33.  12  I  will  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater 
33.  26  He  shall  pray  unto  God,  and  he  will  be 

35.  10  none  saith,  Where  (is)  God  my  maker 

36.  2  that  (I  have)  yet  to  speak  on  God's  behalf 

37.  15  Dost  thou  know  when  God  disposed  them 
37.  22  Fair  weather,  .with  God  (is)  terrible  maj. 

39.  17  God  hath  deprived  her  of  wisdom,  neith. 

40.  2  he  that  reproveth  God,  let  him  answer 
Psa.  18.  31  For  who  (is)  God  save  the  Lord?  or  who 

50.  22  Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest 
114.    7  Tremble,  .at  the  presence  of  the  God  of 
139.  19  Surely  thou  wilt  slay  the  wicked,  O  God 
Prov.30.    5  Every  word  of  God  (is)  pure:  he  (is)  a  shi. 
Isa.   44.    g  Is  there  a  God  besides  me  ?  yea,  (there  is) 
11.  37  nor  regard  any  god:  for  he  shall  magnify 
11.  38  shall  he  honour  the  God  of  forces :  and 
11.  39  Thus  shall  he  do.  .with  a  strange  god 
1.  11  (imputing)  this  his  power  unto  his  god 
3.    3  God  came  fromTemau,  and  the  Holy  One 

6  Jehovah,  or  Jehovik,  TV\n\hc  who  is. 

Gen.  15.    2  Abram  said,  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou 

15.  8  he  said.  Lord  GOD,  whereby  shall  I  know 
Deut.  3.  24  0  Lord  God,  thou  hast  beguu  to  show  thy 

9.  26  0  Lord  God,  destroy  not  thy  people  and 
Josh.  7.    7  Joshua  said,  Alas,  O  Lord  God,  wherefore 
Judg.  6.  22  Gideon  said,  Alas,  O  Lord  God  !  for  bee. 

16.  28  0  Lord  God,  remember  me,  I  pray  thee 
2  Sa.   7.  18  he  said,  Who  (am)  I,  O  Lord  God?  and 

7.  19  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord  God 
7.  19  (is)  this  the  manner  of  man,  0  Lord  God? 
7.  20  for  thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy  servant 
7.  28  now,  O  Lord  God,  thou  (art)  that  God 

7.  29  thou,  O  Lord  God,  hast  spoken  (it) :  and 
1  Ki.   2.  26  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lo~d  God  bef. 

8.  53  our  fathers  out  of  Egypt,  O  Lord  God 
Psa.  68.  20  unto  God  the  Lord  (belong)  the  issues 

69.    6  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  be  ashamed  for  my 
71.    5  For  thou  (art)  my  hope,  O  Lord  GOD :  (th. 
71.  16  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God 
73.  28  I  have  put  my  trust  in  the  Lord  God,  that 
109.  21  do  thou  for  me,  0  God  the  Lord,  for  thy 
141.    8  mine  eyes  (are)  unto  thee.O  GODtheLord 
"     Isa.     3.  15  What  mean  ye.  .saith  the  Lord  God  of 
7.    7  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  It  shall  not 
10.  23  For  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a 
10.  24  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  O  my 
22.    5  a  day  of.  .perplexity  by  the  Lord  God  of 
22.  12  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call 
22.  14  Surely  this,  .saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 
22.  15  Thus'saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  Go,  get 

25.  8  the  Lord  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from 
28  16  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  lay  in 
28.  22  I  have  heard  from  the  Lord  GOD  of  hosts 
30.  15  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  Holy  One  of 
40.  10  the  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong  (hand 

48.  16  now  the  Lord  God,  and  his  spirit,  hath 

49.  22  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  will 

50.  4  The  Lord  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue 
50.  5  The  Lord  60D  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and 
50.    7  the  Lord  God  will  help  me;  therefore 

50.    9  the  Lord  God  will  help  me  ;  who  (is)  he 
52.    4  thus  saith  the  Lord  God.  My  people  went 
56.   8  The  Lord  God  which  gathereth  the  outc. 
61.    1  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  God  (is)  upon  me 
61. 11  so  the  Lord  God  will  cause  righteousness 


Dau. 


Hab. 


GOD 


419 


GOD 


Isa. 

Jer. 


13  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  my  ser 
15  the  Lord  God  shall  slay  thee,  aiid  call  his 

6  Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God!  behold,  I  can. 

19  my  fear  (is)  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

22  iniquity  is  marked,  .saith  the  Lord  God 
10  Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  surely  thou 

20  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  mine 

13  Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  behold,  the 
17  Ah  Lord  God!  behold,  thou  hast  made  the 

25  O  Lord  God,  Buy  thee  the  field  for  money 

26  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  The  Lord  God  liv. 
10  this  (is)  the  day  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

10  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  hath  a  sacrifice  in 
5  I  will  bring  a  fear . .  saith  the  Lord  God 

25  this  (is)  the  work  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

31  I  (am)  against  thee,  .saith  the  Lord  God 

4  say  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

11  tell  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  whet. 

27  say  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

14  Then  said  I,  Ah  Lord  God  !  behold,  my 

5  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  This  (is)  Jerus. 

7  thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD;  Because  ye 

8  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Behold,  I,  (even) 
11  Wherefore,  (as)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God 

3  mountains,  .hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  G. 
3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  the  mountains 
11  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Smite  with  thine 

2  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  the  land  of 
5  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD ;  An  evil,  an 

1  the  hand  of  the  Lord  God  fell  there  upon 
8  Ah  Lord  God  !  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the 

7  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Your  slain,  whom 

8  I  will  bring  a  sword,  .saith  the  Lord  God 

13  Ah  Lord  God  !  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end 
10  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Although  I 

17  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  even 

21  I  will  recompense,  .saith  the  Lord  God 
10  thou  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

19  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  the  inhabit. 

23  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  make 
25  and  will  perform  it,  saith  the  Lord  God 

25  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  There  shall 

20  word . .  shall  be  done,  saith  the  Lord  God 

3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Woe  unto  the 
8  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  ye  have 

8  I  (am)  against  you,  saith  the  Lord  God 

9  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  G. 
t  3  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  even 

16  and  (there  is)  no  peace,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

18  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Woe  to  the  (w.) 

20  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 

4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Every  man  of 

6  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Repent,  and 
ir  and  I  may  be  their  God,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

14  by  their  righteousness,  saith  the  Lord  God 
16,  18,  20  (as)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  they 

21  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  How  much  more 
23  that  I  have  done  in  it,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

6  thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD ;  As  the  vine 

8  I  will  make  the  laud,  .saith  the  Lord  G. 
3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  Jerusalem 

8  a  covenant  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
14  I  had  put  upon  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God 

19  and  (thus)  it  was,  saith  the  Lord  God 
23  woe,  woe  unto  thee  !  saith  the  Lord  G. 
30  How  weak  isthine  heart,saith  the  Lord  G. 
36  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  thy 

43  I.  .will  recompense,  .saith  the  Lord  God 

48  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  GOD,  Sodom 
59  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  even 
63  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the  Lord  God 

3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  A  great  eagle 

9  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Shall  it  pros.? 
16  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  surely 
ig  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  (As)  I  live,  su. 

22  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  also  take 
3  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  ye  shall 
9  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the  Lord  God 

23  Have  I  any  pleasure,  .saith  the  Lord  G. 
30  I  will  judge  you.  .saith  the  Lord  God 

32  I  have  no  pleasure,  .saith  the  Lord  God 
3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GoD;  Are  ye  eome  to 
3  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord.  God*  I  will  not 

5  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  In  the  day 

27  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Tet  in  tins 

30  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Are  ye  pollut. 

31  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  not 

33  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  surely 
35  will  I  plead  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

39  O  house  of  Israel,  thus  saith  the  Lord  G. 

40  in  mine  holy  mountain,  .saith  the  Lo.  G. 

44  0  ye  house  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  God 
47  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will 

49  Then  said  I,  Ah  Lord  God  !  they  say  of 

7  behold,  it  comet h.  .saith  the  Lord  God 
13  it  shall  be  no  (more),  saith  the  Lord  God 

24  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Because  ye  have 

26  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Remove  the 

28  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  concerning  the 
3  Tims  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  The  city  shed. 

12  and  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
19  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  ye  are 

25  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  when  the' Lord 

31  have  I  recompensed,  .saith  the  Lord  God 
22  0  Aholibah,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

28  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I 

32  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Thou  shalt 

34  for  I  have  spoken  (it),  saith  the  Lord  G. 

35  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  thou 
46  thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD ;  I  will  bring  up 
49  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lo.  G. 

3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Set  on  a  pot 


Eze.  24.  6,  9  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Woe  to  the 
24.  14  shall  they  judge  thee,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
24.  21  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will 

24.  24  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 

25.  3  of  the  Lord  God;  Thus  saith  the  Lord  G. 
25.    6  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  thou 
25.   8  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  that 
25.  12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD  ;  Because  that 

25. 13  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  also 

25.  14  they  shall  know  my.  .saith  the  Lord  God 

25.  15  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  the 
25. 16  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will 

26.  3  thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 
26.  5  I  have  spoken  (it),  saith  the  Lord  God 
26.  7  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  Behold,  1  will 
26.  14  the  Lord  have  spoken  (it),  saith  the  L.  G. 
26. 15  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  Tyrus  ;  Shall 
26.  19  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  When  I  shall 

26.  21  never  be  found  again,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

27.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  O  Tyrus,  thou 

28.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  thine 
28.  6  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  thou 
28. 10  for  I  have  spoken  (it),  saith  the  Lord  G. 
28.  12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Thou  sealest 
28.  22  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 
28.  24  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  G. 

28.  25  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  When  I  shall 

29.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 
29.    8  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will 
29.  13  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  At  the  end  of 
29.  16  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  G. 
29. 19  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will 

29.  20  they  wrought  for  me,  saith  the  Lord  God 

30.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD;  Howl  ye;  Woe 
30.  6  fall  in  it  by  the  sword,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
30.  10  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GoD;  1  will  also  make 
30.  13  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD;  I  will  also  dest. 

30.  22  thus  saith  the  Lord  GoD ;  Behold,  I  (am) 

31.  10  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  thou 

31. 15  Thus  saith  the  LordGoD;  In  the  day  when 

31.  18  This  (is)  Pharaoh  and.  .saith  the  Lord  G. 

32.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  tnerefore 
32.    8  set  darkness  upon  thy.  .saith  the  Lord  G. 
32.  1 1  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  The  sword  of 
32.  14  rivers  to  run  like  oil,  saith  the  Lord  God 

32. 16  for  all  her  multitude,  saith  the  Lord  God 
32.  31  army  slain  by.  .sword,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

32.  32  and  all  his  multitude,  saith  the  Lord  God 

33.  11  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no 
33.  25  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Ye  eat  with 

33.  27  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  (As)  I  live 

34.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  the  sheph. 
34.  8  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  surely 
34.  10  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 
34.  11  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I,  (even) 
34. 15  cause  tltem  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
34.  17  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  judge 
34.  20  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  them  ;  Be. 

34.  30  Israel,  (are)  my  people,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
31.  31  (and)  I  (am)  your  God,  saith  the  Lord  God 

35.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  0 
35.    6  (as)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God3  I  will  pr. 

35.  11  (as;  Hive,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  even 

35. 14  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  When  the  wh. 

36.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  the 
36.   3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  they 
36.   4  mountains . .  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  G. 
36.    4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  the  mounta. 
36.    5  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Surely  in  the 
36.   6  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  have 
36.   7  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  have  lifted  up 
36.  13  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Because  they 
36.  14  neither  bereave  thy.  .saith  the  Lord  God 

36. 15  to  fall  any  more,  saith  the  Lord  God 

36.  22  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD;  I  do  not  (this) 
36.  23  know . .  I  (am)  the  Lord,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
36.  32  Not  for  your  sakes.  .saith  the  Lord  God 
36.  33  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  In  the  day  that 

36.  37  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will  yet 

37.  3  And  I  answered,  O  Lord  God,  thou  know. 
37.  5  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  these  bones 
37.   9  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Come  from  the 

37. 12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  O  my 

37.  19,  21  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I 

38.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 
38.  10  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  It  shall  also 
38.  14  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  In  that  day 
38.  17  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  (Art)  thou  he 
38.  18  it  shall  come  to  pass,  .saith  the  Lord  God 

38.  21  for  a  sword  against  him . .  saith  the  Lord  G. 

39.  1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  (am) 
39.   5  for  I  have  spoken  (it),  saith  the  Lord  God 
39.    8  Behold,  it  is  come,  .saith  the  Lord  God 
39. 10  those  that  robbed  them,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

39. 13  I  shall  be  glorified,  saith  the  Lord  God 

39. 17  thou  son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  G. 
39.  20  with  all  men  of  war,  saith  the  Lord  God 
39.  25  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Sow  will  I  br. 
39.  29  poured  out  my  spirit,  .saith  the  Lord  G. 
43.  18  Son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD 
43.  19  to  minister  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  GOD 

43.  27  and  I  will  accept  you,  saith  the  Lord  God 

44.  6  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  O  ye  house  of 
44.    9  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  No  stranger 
44.  12  I  lifted  up  mine  hand,  .saith  the  Lord  G. 
44.  15  and  they  shall  stand . .  saith  the  Lord  God 

44.  27  offer  his  sin  offering,  saith  the  Lord  God 

45.  9  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD  ;  Let  it  suffice 
45.    9  and  execute  judgment . .  saith  the  Lord  G. 
45.  15  to  make  reconciliation,  .saith  the  Lord  G. 

45.  18  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  In  the  first 

46.  1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  The  gate  of 


Eze.  46. 
47- 

47- 

43. 

Amos  1. 


9- 
9- 

Obad. 
Mic.    1. 
Zeph.  1. 
Zech.  9. 


16  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  If  the  prince) 
13  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Tins  (.shall  be 
23  there  shall  ye  give,  .saith  the  Lord  '  '■•  D 
29  these,  .their  portions,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
8  remnant,  .shall  perish,  saith  the  Lord  •;. 

7  Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do  nothing,  but 

8  the  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  can  but 
ii  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  An  adversary 

13  Hear  ye,  and  testify,  .saith  the  Lord  God 

2  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  his  holiness: 
5  for  this  liketh  you.  .saith  the  Lord  G(  D 

3  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  The  city  t 
8  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  himself 

1  Thjis  hath  the  Lord  God  showed  unto  me 

2  then  I  said,  0  Lord  God,  forgive,  I  bete. 

4  Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  showed  unto  me 

4  behold,  the  Lord  God  called  to  contend 

5  Then  said  I,  O  Lord  God,  cease,  I  beseech 

6  This  also  shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

1  Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  showed  unto  me 

3  howlings  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  GoD 

0  it  shall  come  to  pass . .  saith  the  Lord  GoD 
11  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that 

5  the  Lord  God  of  busts  (is)  he  that  touch. 
8  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  God  (are)  upon  the 

1  Thus*  saith  the  Lord  God  concerning  Ed. 

2  let  the  Lord  God  be  witness  against  you 

7  Hold  thy  peace  at  the.  .of  the  Lord  Goi> 

14  The  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  trumpet 


7. A  rock,  "i*s  teur. 

Isa.  44.  8  yea,  (there  is)  no  God;  I  know  not  (any) 
S.God,  a  god,  object  of  worship,  64os  theos. 

Matt.  1.  23  Emmanuel,  .which,  .interpreted,  is,  God 
3.    9  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up 

3.  16  the  spirit  of  God  descending  like  a  dove 

4.  3  If  thou  be  the  son  of  God,  command  that 
4.  4  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God 
4.    6  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself 

4.    7  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 

4.  10  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and. 

5.  S  the  pure  in  heart,  .they  shall  see  God 
5.    9  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God 

5.  34  neither  by  heaven ;  for  it  is  God's  throne 

6.  24  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 

6.  30  If  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field 

6.  33  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  hrs 

8.  29  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  son  of  God? 

9.  8  they  marvelled  and  glorified  God,  which 
12.    4  How  he  entered  into  the  house  of  God,  aud. 
12.  28  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  spirit  of  God 
12.  28  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto 

14.  33  saying,  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God" 

15.  3  transgress  the  commandment  of  God  by 
15.  4  For  God  commanded,  saying,  Honour  thy 
15.    6  have  ye  made  the  commandment  of  God 

15.  31  to  see:and  theyglorified  the  God  of  Israel 

16.  16  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God 
16.  23  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of  God 
19.   6  What  therefore  God  hath  joined  together 

19.  17  none  good  but  one,  (that  is),  God :  but  if 
jg.  24  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G. 
ig.  26  but  with  God  all  things  are  possible 

21. 12  Jesus  went  into  the  temple  of  God,  and 
21.  31  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  you 

21.  43  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 
22. 16  thou  art  true,  and  teachest  the  way  of  G. 

22.  21  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's 
22.  29  \e  do  err,  not  knowing  the.  .power  of  G. 
-22.  30  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven 
22. 31  that  which  was  spoken  unto  you  by  God 
22.  32  God  of  A. . .  God  of  Isaac . .  G  od  of  Jacob 
22.  32  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of 

22.  37  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 

23.  22  sweareth  by  the  throne  of  God,  and  by 

20.  61 1  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God 
26.  63  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thoo. 

26.  63  whether  thou  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  G. 

27.  40  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down 
27.  43  He  trusted  in  God ;  let  him  deliver  hinx 
27.  43  for  he  said,  I  am  the  son  of  God 

27.  46  that  is  to  say,  My  God!  My  God!  why  hast 
27.  54  saying,  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God 
Mark  1.    1  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God 

1. 14  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  of  G- 
1.  15  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand :  repent 

1.  24  know,  .who  thou  art,  the  Holy  One  of  G. 

2.  7  Why . .  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only  ? 
2.  12  all  amazed,  and  glorified  God,  saying,  We 

2.  26  How  he  went  into  the  house  of  God  in 

3.  11  and  cried,  saying,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  G. 

3.  35  For  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  God 

4.  11  know  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
4.  26  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man 

4.  30  shall  we  liken  the  kingdom  of  God?  or 

5.  7  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  the  most  high  God'f 
5.    7  I  adjure  thee  by  God,  that  thou  torment 

7.  8  laying  aside  the  commandment  of  God 

7.   9  ye  reject  the  commandment  of  God,  that 

7.  13  Making  the  word  of  God  of  none  effect 

8.  33  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of  God 

9.  1  till  they  have  seen  the  kingdom  of  God 
g.  47  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  with 

10.  6  But.  .God  made  them  male  and  female 
10.  9  What  therefore  God  hath  joined  together- 
10.  14  Suffer.,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  Gocu 
10.  15  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as 
10.  18  (there  is)  none  good  but  one,  (that  is),  God: 
10-  23  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G.  £ 
10.  24  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G.  E 
10.  25  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Q. 


GOD 


420 


GOD 


Markio.  27  but  not  with  God  :  for  with  God  all  things 

11.  22  Jesus  answering  saith.  .Have  faith  in  G. 

12.  14  but  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth :  Is 
12.  17  and  to  God  the  things  that  are  God's 

12.  24  because  ye  know  not.  .the  power  of  God? 
12.  26  how  in  the  bush  God  spake  uuto  him,  say 
12.  26  God  of  Abraham  . .  God  of  Isaac . .  God  of. 
12.  27  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  the  G. 
12.  29  O  Israel ;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord 
12.  30  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
12.  32  hast  said  the  truth  :  for  there  is  one  God 

12.  34  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  G. 

13.  19  which  God  created  uuto  this  time,  neither 

14.  25  I  drink  it  new  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

15.  34  whichis,  being  interpreted,  My  G. !  myG. ! 
15.  39  he  said,  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  G. 

15.  43  which  also  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God 

16.  19  and  sat  on  the  right  band  of  God 

Luke  1.    6  both  righteous  before  God,  walking  in  all 
1.    3  executed  the  priest's  office  before  God 
1.  16  many,  .shall  he  turn  to  the  Lord  their  G. 
1.  19  stand  in  the  presence  of  God ;  and  am 
1.  26  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  from  God  uuto 
1.  30  for  thou  hast  found  favour  with  God 
1.  32  God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of 
1.  35  holy  thing,  .shall  be  called  the  Son  of  G. 
1.  37  For  with  God  nothing  shall  be  impossible 
1.  47  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour 
1.  64  opened,  .and  he  spake,  and  praised  God 
1.  68  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  for 

1.  78  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God 

2.  13  the  heavenly  host  praising  God,  and  say. 
2.  14  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth 
2.  20  the  shepherds  returned .  .praising  God  for 
2.  ?8  Then  took  he  him.  .and  blessed  God.  and 
2.  40  and  the  grace  of  God  was  upon  him 

2.  52  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man 

2  word  of  God  came  unto  John  the  son  of 
6  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God 
8  God  is  able,  .to raise  up  children  uuto  A. 

38  was.  .Adam,  which  was  (the  son)  of  God 

3  If  thou  be  the  son  of  God,  command  this 

4  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  of  G. 

8  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God 

9  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself 
12  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 
34  I  know  thee,  .the  Holy  One  of  God 

41  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  And  he 
43  I  must  preach  the  kingdom  of  God  to 

1  pressed,  .to  bear  the  word  of  God,  he 
21  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  alone? 

25  departed  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  G. 

26  were  all  amazed,  and  they  glorified  God 
4  went  into  the  house  of  God,  and  did  take 

12  and  continued  all  night  in  prayer  to  God 

20  Blessed . .  for  yours  is  the  kingdom  of  God 
16  and  they  glorified  God,  saying,  That  a 
16  and,  That  God  hath  visited  his  people 

28  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is 

29  the  publicans,  justified  God,  being  bap. 

30  and  lawyers  rejected  the  counsel  of  God 

1  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  of  God  :  and 

10  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God :  but 

11  the  parable.  .The  seed  is  the  word  of  God 

21  winch  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  do  it 
28  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  God  most  high?  I 

39  how  great  things  God  hath  done  unto 

2  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to 
11  spake  unto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
20  Peter  answering  said,  The  Christ  of  God 

27  not  taste.,  till  they  see  the  kingdom  of  G. 
43  all  amazed  at  the  mighty  power  of  God 
60  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 
62  looking  back, is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God 

9,  1  ^kingdom  of  God  is  come  nigh  unto  you 

27  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
20  I  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils 
20  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  you 

28  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  keep 

42  pass  over  judgment  and  the  love  of  God 
49  Therefore  also  said  the  wisdom  of  God,  I 

6  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God 

8  also  confess  before  the  angels  of  God 

9  shall  be  denied  before  the  angels  of  God 

20  God  said.  .(Thou)  fool,  this  night  thy  soul 

21  layeth  up.  .and  is  not  rich  toward  God 
24  God  feedeth  them  :  how  much  more  are 
28  If  then  God  so  clothe  the  grass,  which  is 

31  rather  seek  ye  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and 

13  she  was  made  straight, 'and  glorified  God 
18  Unto  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  like  ? 
20  Whereunto.  .1  liken  the  kingdom  of  God? 

28  see  Abraham,  .in  the  kingdom  of  God 

29  and  shall  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
15  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
io  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God 
13  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 
15  men ;  but  God  knoweth  your  hearts :  for 

15  that,  .is  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God 

16  the  kingdom  of  God  is  preached,  and 

15  and  with  a  loud  voice  glorified  God 
18  that  returned  to  give  glory  to  God,  save 
20  when  the  kingdom  of  God  should  come 

20  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with 

21  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you 
2  a  judge,  which  feared  not  God,  neither 
4  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man 

7  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own  elect,  which 
11  God,  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other 
13  Saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner 

16  children .  .of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God 

17  shall  nut  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as 


Lukci8l  19  none  (is)  good,  save  one,  (that  is),  God 
18.  24  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G  ! 
18.  25  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G. 
18.  27  impossible  with  men  are  possible  withG. 
18.  29  or  children,  for  the  kingdom  of  God's  sake 

18.  43  immediately,  .followed  him,  glorifyingG. 
18. 43  when  they  saw  (it),  gave  praise  unto  God 
19. 11  kingdom  of  G.  should  immediately  appear 

19.  37  disciples  began  to  rejoice  and  praise  G. 

20.  21  but  teachest  the  way  of  God  truly 

20.  25  and  unto  God  the  things  which  be  God's 
20.  36  the  children  of  God,  being  the  children 
20.  37  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of  Abraham 

20.  37  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob 
20  38  he  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 

21.  4  have  .cast  in  unto  the  offerings  of  God 

21.  31  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand 
32. 16  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

22..  18  until  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  come 

22.  69  sit  on  the  right  hand  of  the  power  of  G. 

22.  70  said  they . .  Art  thou  then  the  Son  of  God  ? 

23  35  save    iJ  he  be  Christ,  the  chosen  of  God 

23.  40  Dost  not  thj»i  fear  God,  seeing  thou  art 
23.  47  he  Olorified  God,  saying,  Certainly  this 

23.  51  himself  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God 

24  19  mighty  in  deed  and  word  before  God  and 

24.  53  in  the  temple,  praising  and  blessing  God 
John  1.    1  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  G. 

1.   2  The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God 
1.   6  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 
1.  12  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God 
1.  13  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God 
1. 18  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the 
1.  29  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
1.  34  bare  record  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God 
1.  36  looking,  .he  saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  G  ! 

1.  49  thou  art  the  Son  of  God  ;  thou  art  the  K. 
i.  51  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending 
3.    2  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God 
3.    2  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him 

3  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God 

5  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 

16  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his 

17  God  sent  not  bis  Son  into  the  world  to 

18  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God 
21  manifest,  that  they  are  wrought  in  God 

33  He.  .hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true 

34  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the  words  of  God 

34  God  giveth  not  the  spirit  by  measure 
36  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him 
10  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who 

24  God  (is)  a  spirit:  and  they  that  worship 
18  because  he . .  said  also  that  God  was  his 
18  Father,  making  himself  equal  with  God 

25  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God 
42  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  you 

44  not  the  honour  that  (cometh)  from  God 

27  for  him  bath  God  the  Father  sealed 

28  do,  that  we  might  work  the  works  of  God? 

29  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe 
33  the  bread  of  God  is  he  which  cometh  down 

45  And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God.  Every 

46  save  he  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the 
69  art  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God 
17  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  (whether)  I  spe. 

40  told,  .the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  of  G. 

41  said  they,  .we  have  one  Father,  (even)  G. 

42  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would  love 
42  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God 

47  He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God's  words 
47  hear  (them)  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  G. 
54  of  whom  ye  say,  that  he  is  your  God 

3  the  works  of  God  should  be  made  mani. 
16  This  man  is  not  of  God,  because  he  keep. 
24  Give  God  the  praise  :  we  know  that  tliis 
29  We  know  that  God  spake  unto  .Moses 
31  we  know  that  God  heareth  not  sinners 
^3  If  this  man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do 

35  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ? 
33  that  thou,  being  a  man,  makest  thyself  G. 
35  unto  whom<the  word  of  God  came,  and  the 

10.  36  because  I  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God? 

11.  4  for  the  glory  of  God,  that  the  Son  of  God 
11.  22  wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will  give  (it)  thee 
11.  27  the  Son  of  God,  which  should  come  into 
11.  40  tnoushouldest  see  the  glory  of  God? 

11.  52  the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered 

12.  43  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  G. 

13.  3  he  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God 
13.  31  the  Son.  .glorified,  and  God  is  glorified  in 

13.  32  If  God  be  glorified  in  him,  God  shall  also 

14.  1  ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me 
16.    2  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service 

16.  27  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from  God 

16.  30  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth  from  God 

17.  3  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God 

19.  7  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God 

20.  17  your  Father;  and  (to)  my  God,  and  your  G. 
20.  28  and  said  unto  him.  My  Lord  and  my  God 

20.  31  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God 

21.  19  by  what  death  he  should  glorify  God.  And 
Acts    1.    3  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God 

2. 11  in  our  tongues  the  wonderful  works  of  G. 
2. 17  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  saith  God 

2.  22  man  approved  of  God  among  you  by  mir. 
2.  22  which  God  did  by  him  in  the  midst  of  you 
2.  23  by  the.  .counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  G. 
2.  24  Whom  God  hath  raised  up.  having  loosed 
2.  30  knowingthatGod  had  swurn  with  an  oath 
2.  32  This  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof 
2.  33  being  by  the  right  band  of  God  exalted 
2.  36  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom 


Acts    2.  39  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call 

2.  47  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all 

3.  8  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God 
3.    9  people  saw  him  walking  and  praising  God 
3.  13  The  God  of  Abraham . .  the  God  of  our  fa. 
3.  15  whom  God  hath  raised  from  the  dead 

3. 18  those  things,  which  God  before  had  sbo. 
3.  21  which  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of 
3.  22  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise 
3.  25  covenant  which  God  made  with  our  fath. 

3.  26  God,  having  raised  up  his  Son  Jesus,  sent 

4.  10  whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  .by  him 
4.  19  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to 
4.  19  unto  you  more  than  unto  God,  judge  ye 
4.  21  all.  .glorified  God  for  that  which  wasdone 
4.  24  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one  ace. 
4.  24  Lord,  thou  (art)  God,  which  hast  made  h. 

4.  31  they  spake  the  word  of  God  with  boldness 

5.  4  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  G. 
5.  29  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men 
5.  30  The  God  of  our  fathers  raised  up  Jesus 
5.  31  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  his  right  ha. 
5.  32  also  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  God  hath  giv- 

5.  39  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it 

6.  2  that  we  should  leave  the  word  of  God 
6.    7  the  word  of  God  increased  ;  and  the  mi. 

6.  11  blasphemous  words  against  Mos.,and.  .G. 

7.  2  The  God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our  fath. 
7.    6  G.od  spake  on  this  wise,  That  his  seed 

7.    7  nation,  .in  bondage  will  I  judge,  said  God 
7.    9  sold  Joseph  iuto  Egypt:  but  God  was  with 
7.  17  the  time,  .which  God  had  sworn  to  Abra. 
7.  25  how  that  God  by  his  hand  would  deliver 
7.  32  I  (am)  the  God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  of 
7.  32  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob 
7.  35  the  same  did  God  send  (to  be)  a  ruler  and 
7.  37  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise 
7.  42  God  turned,  and  gave  them  up  to  worship 
7.  43  the  star  of  your  god  Kemphan,  figures 
7.  45  Gentiles,  whom  God  drave  out  before  the 
7.  46  Who  found  favour  before  God,  and  desi. 
7.  46  to  find  a  tabernacle  for  the  God  of  Jacob 
7.  55  looked  up.,  and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and 
7.  55  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

7.  56  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

8.  10  This  man  is  the  great  power  of  God 

8.  12  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  G. 
8.  14  Samaria  had  received  the  word  of  God 
8.  20  that  the  gift  of  God  may  be  purchased 
8.  21  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God 
8.  22  Kepent  therefore,  .and  pray  God,  if  per. 

8.  37  I  believe  that  Jesus  C.  is  the  Sou  of  God 

9.  20  preached  Christ . .  that  he  is  the  Son  of  G. 
10.    2  one  that  feared  God  with  all  his  house 
10.    2  to  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God  alway 
10.    3  saw.  .an  angel  of  God  coming  in  to  him 
10.    4  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  Cod 
10.  15  What  God  hath  cleansed,  .call  not  thou 
10.  22  one  that  feareth  God,  and  of  good  report 
10.  28  God  hath  showed  me  that  I  should  not 
10.  31  are  had  in  remembrance  in  the  sight  of  G. 
10.  33  are  we  all  here  present  before  God,  to 
10.  33  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God 
10.  34  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  pe. 
10.  38  How  God  anointed  Jesus  of  ISazareth  with 
10.  38  and  healing  all.  .for  God  was  with  him 
10.  40  Him  God  raised  up  the  thnd  day,  and 
10.  41  but  unto  witnesses  chosen  before  of  God 
10.  42-he  winch  was  ordained  of  God.,  the  judge 

10.  46  them  speak  with  tongues,  and  magnify  G. 

11.  1  Gentiles  had  also  received  the  word  of  G. 
11.    9  What  God  hath  cleansed,  .call  not  thou 
11.  17  as  God  gave  them  the  like  gift  as.  .unto 
ir.  17  what  was  I,  that  I  could  withstand  God  ? 
11.  iS  they  held  their  peace,  and  glorified  God 
11.  18  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  gran. 

11.  23  Who,  when  he.  .had  seen  the  grace  of  G. 

12.  5  but  prayer  was  made.  .untoGod  for  him 
12.  22  (It  is)  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man 
12.  23  smote  him,  because  he  gave  not  God  the 

12.  24  But  the  word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied 

13.  5  preached  the  word  of  God  in  the  synago. 
13.    7  and  desired  to  bear  the  word  of  God 

13.  16  Men  of  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God,  give 
13.  17  The  God  of  this  people  of  Israel  chose  our 
13.  21  God  gave  unto  them  Saul  the  son  of  Cis 
13.  23  Of  this  man's  seed  hath  God,  according  to 
13.  26  and  whosoever  among  you  feareth  God 
13.  30  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead 
13.  33  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their 
13.  36  served  his.  .generation  by  the  will  of  God 
13.  37  But  he.jwhom  G.  raised  again,  saw  no  coir. 
*3-  43  persuaded,  .continue  in  the  grace  of  God 
13.  44  whole  city  together  to  hear  the  word  of  G. 

13.  46  It  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  God 

14.  15  from  these  vanities  unto  the  living  God 
14.  22  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G- 
14.  26  been  recommended  to  the  grace  of  God 

14.  27  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  done  with  th. 

15.  4  declared  all  things  that  God  had  done 
15.  7  good  while  ago  God  made  choice  among 
15.  8  God,  which  knoweth  the  hearts,  bare  them 
15.  10  why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put  a  yoke  upon  the 
15.  12  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by 
15.  14  God  at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles,  to 
15.  18  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from 
15.  19  from  among  the  Gentiles  are  turned  to  G. 

15.  40  by  the  brethren  unto  the  grace  of  God 

16.  14  a  certain  woman,  .which  worshipped  God 
16. 17  are  the  servants  of  the  most  high  God 
16.  25  Silas  prayed,  and  sang  praises  unto  God 
16. 34  believing  in  God  with  all  his  house 


GOD 


421 


GOD 


Acts  17, 
■17. 
*7- 
*7- 
17- 
18. 
rS. 
iS. 
18. 
18. 
19- 


Rom. 


13  word  of  God  was  preached  of  Paul  at  B. 

23  this  inscription,  To  The  Unknown  God 

24  God  that  made  the  world  and  all  things 

29  as  we  are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought 

30  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked 

7  (one)  that  worshipped  God,  whose  house 
11  teaching  the  word  of  God  among  them 

13  men  to  worship  God  contrary  to  the  law 
21  I  will  return  again  unto  you,  if  God  will 

26  unto  him  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly 

8  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  G. 
11  God  wrought  special  miracles  by  the  han. 

21  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward 

24  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 

25  I  have  gone  preaching  the  kingdom  of  G. 

27  declare  unto  you  all  the  counsel  of  God 

28  to  feed  the  church  of  God,  which  he  hath 
32  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the  word 

19  what  things  God  had  wrought  among  the 
3  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all  are  this  d. 

14  The  God  of  our  fathers  hath  chosen  thee 

1  good  conscience  before  God  until  this  d. 

3  God  shall  smite  thee,  (thou)  whited  wall 

4  said,  Revilest  thou  God's  high  priest  ? 

14  worship  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  believ. 

15  And  have  hope  toward  God,  which  they 

16  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God 
6  the  promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fath. 
8  that  God  should  raise  the  dead? 

18  (from)  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that 

20  that  they  should  repent  and  turn  to  God 

22  Having  therefore  obtained  help  of  God 

29  I  would  to  God,  that  not  only  thou,  but 

23  stood  by  me  this  night  the  angel  of  God 

24  God  hath  given  thee  all  them  that  sail 

25  I  believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  as 
35  thanks  to  God  in  presence  of  them  all 

6  and  said  that  he  was  a  god 

15  Paul  saw,  he  thanked  God,  and  took  cou. 
23  testified  the  kingdom  of  God,  persuading 
28  salvation  of  God.  .sent  unto  the  Gentiles 

31  Preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teach. 
t  apostle,  separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God 
4  declared  (to  be)  the  Son  of  God  with  pow. 

7  To  all  that  be  in  Rome,  beloved  of  God 

7  peace  from  God  our  Father,  and  the  L. 

8  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ 

9  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with 

10  a  prosperous  journey  by  the  will  of  God 

16  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to 

17  righteousness  of  God  revealed  from  faith 

18  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven 

19  that  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  maul. 
19  for  God  ha«h  showed  (it)  unto  them 

21  knew  God,  they  glorified  (him)  not  as  G. 

23  changed,  .glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God 

24  God  also  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness 

25  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 

26  God  gave  them  up  unto  vile  affections 
28  like  to  retain  God  in  (their)  knowledge 

28  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind 

32  Who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God 

2  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  tru. 

3  thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  of  God  ? 

4  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to 

5  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God 

11  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God 
13  hearers  of  the  law  (are)  just  before  God 

16  In  the  day  when  God  shall  judge  the 

17  and  restest.  .and  makest  thy  boast  of  G. 

23  breaking  the  law  dishonourest  thou  G.? 

24  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among 

29  whose  praise  (is)  not  of  men,  but  of  God 

2  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God 

3  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect  ? 

4  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  li. 

5  commend  the  righteousness  of  God 

5  (Is)  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  venge. 

6  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ? 

7  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  more  abounded 
11  there  is  none  that  seeketh  after  God 

18  There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their 

19  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God 

21  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  law 

22  the  righteousness  of  God  (which  is)  by 

23  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  G.' 

25  God  hath  set  forth  (to  be)  a  propitiation 
25  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God 

29  (Is  he)  the  God  of  the  Jews  only?  (is  he) 

30  (it  is)  one  God  which  shall  justify  the 

2  (whereof)  to  glory ;  but  not  before  God 

3  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  coun. 
6  unto  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness 

17  before  him  whom  he  believed,  (even)tG. 

20  He  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God 
20  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God 

1  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  L. 

2  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God 
5  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  h. 

8  But  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us 

10  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death 

1 1  we  also  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
15  much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift 

,  10  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God 
11  but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
13  but  yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as  those 
13  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God 
17  But  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were  the  ser. 

22  and  become  servants  to  God,  ye  have 

23  but  the  gift  of  God  (is)  eternal  life  through 

4  that  we  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  G. 
22  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  in. 


Rom.  7.  25  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  L. 

7.  25  with  the  mind  I .  .serve  the  law  of  God 

8.  3  God,  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness 
8.  7  the  carnal  mind  (is)  enmity  against  God 
8.    7  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God 

8.    8  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  G. 
8.    9  if  so  be  that  the  spirit  of  God  dwell  in 
8.  14  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  spirit  of  God 
8.  14  they  are  the  sons  of  God 
8.  16  witness . .  that  we  are  the  children  of  God 
8.  17  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ 
8.  19  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God 
8.  21  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  G. 
8.  27  maketh  intercession,  .according  to.  .God 
8.  28  work,  .lor  good  to  them  that  love  God 
8.  31  If  God  (be)  for  us,  who  (cau  be)  against  us? 
8.  33  of  God's  elect  ?    (It  is)  God  that  justifieth 
8.  34  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God 

8.  39  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 

9.  5  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  A. 
g.  6  Not  as  though  the  word  of  God  hath  taken 
9.    8  these  (are)  not  the  children  of  God 

9.  11  that  the  purpose  of  God  according  to 
9.  14  What.  (Isthere)unrighteousnesswithG.? 
9.  16  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth 
9.  20  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God  ? 
9.  22  if  God,  willing  to  show,  .wrath,  and  to  . 
9.  26  be  called  the  children  of  the  living  God 

10.    1  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  I. 

10.    2  bear . .  record  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God 

10.    3  they  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteous. 

10.    3  submitted,  .unto  the  righteousness  of  G. 

10.    9  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

10.  17  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  theword  of  G. 

11.  1  I  say  then,  Hath  God  cast  away  his  peo.V 
11.  2  God  hath  not  cast  away  his  people  which 
11.  2  how  he  maketh  intercession  to  God  aga. 
11.  8  God  hath  given  them  the  spirit  of  slumber 
11.  21  if  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches 
11.  22  Behold..the  goodness  and  severity  of  G. 
11.  23  for  God  is  able  to  graff  them  in  again 

11.  29  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  (are)  without 
11.  30  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not  believed  God 
n.  32  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unbelief 

11.  33  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  G. ! 

12.  1  I  beseech  you.  .by  the  mercies  of  God 
12.    1  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  G. 
12.    2  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  God 

12.  3  according  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every  man 

13.  1  For  there  is  no  power  but  of  God 

13.    1  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God 
13.    2  Whosoever,  .resisteth  the  ordinance  of  G. 
13.    4  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good 
13.    4  he  is  the  minister  of  God,  a  revenger  to 

13.  6  they  are  God's  ministers,  attending  con. 

14.  3  that  eateth  :  for  God  hath  received  him 
14.    4  he  shall  be  holden  up  ;  for  God  is  able  to 
14.    6  eateth  to  the  Lord,  for  he  giveth  God  th. 
14.    6  to  the  Lord  he  eateth  not,  and  giveth  G. 
14.  11  and  every  tongue  shall  confess  to  God 
14.  12  every  one.  .shall  give  account,  .to  God 

14. 17  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink 

14. 18  (is)  acceptable  to  God,  and  approved  of 
14.  20  For  meat  destroy  not  the  work  of  God 

14.  22  have  (it)to  thyself  before  God.  Happy  (is) 

15.  5  the  God  of  patience  and  consolation  grant 
15.   6  That  ye  may  with  one  mind,  .glorify  God 
15.    7  Christ  also  received  us,  to  the  glory  of  G. 
15.    8  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God 
15.    9  that  the  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for 
15.  13  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
15.  15  of  the  grace  that  is  given  to  me  of  God 
15.  16  ministering  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the 
15.  17  have,  .in  those  things  which  pertain  to  G. 
15.  19  signs,  .by  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  God 
15.  30  strive  together  with  me  in.  .prayers  to  G. 
15.  32  come  unto  you  with  joy  by  the  will  of  G. 

15.  33  Now  the  God  of  peace  (be)  with  you  all 

16.  20  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under 
16.  26  the  commandment  of  the  everlasting  G. 
16.  27  To  God  only  wise,  (be)glory  through  Jesus 

1  Co.    1.    1  Paul,  .an  apostle,  .through  the  will  of  G. 
1.    2  Unto  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  Cor. 
1.    3  Grace,  .unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God 
1.   4  I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf 
1.    4  for  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  you 
1.    9  God  (is)  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were  called 
1.  14  I  thank  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you 
1.  18  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power  of  God 
1.  20  hath  not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom 
1.  21  For  after  that  in  the  wisdom  of  God 
1.  21  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God 
1.  21  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  pre. 
1.  24  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God 
1.  25  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men 
1.  25  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men 
1.  27  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the 
1. 27  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
1.  28  base  things.. hath  God  chosen.. things 

1.  30  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and 

2.  1  declaring  unto  you  the  testimony  of  God 
2.  s  should  not  stand,  .but  in  the  power  of  G 
2.    7  But  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a 

2.    7  which  God  ordained  before  the  world 
2.    9  things  which  God  hath  prepai'ed  for  them 
2. 10  God  hath  revealed  (them)  unto  us  by  his 
2.  10  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God 
2.  11  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  spirit  of  God 
2.  12  but  the  spirit  which  is  of  God  ;  that  we 
2.  12  things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God 

2.  14  not  the  things  of  the  spirit  of  God :  for 

3.  6  I  have  planted . .  but  God  gave  the  mere. 


tCo.  3. 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3' 
3- 
4- 


7  anything.  .butGod,  that  giveth  the  incre. 
9  For  we  are  labourers  together  with  God 
9  ye  are  God's  husbandry.  .God's  building 
10  According  to  the  grace  of  God  which  is 
16  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  G. 

16  and  (that)  the  spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in 

17  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him 
17  shall  God  destroy :  for  the  temple  of  God 

19  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness  with 

23  And  ye  are  Christ's ;  and  Christ  (is)  God's 

1  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God 

5  then  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God 
9  I  think  that  God  hath  set  forth  us  the 

20  the  kingdom  of  God  (is)  not  in  word,  but 
13  But  them  that  are  without  God  judgeth 

9  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ? 

10  Nor  thieves,  .shall  inherit  the  kingd.  of  G. 

11  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  spirit  of  our  God 

13  but  God  shall  destroy  both  it  and  them 

14  God  hath  both  raised  up  the  Lord,  and 

19  Holy  Ghost,  .in  you,  whichyehave  of  God 

20  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body 

20  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's 

7  But  every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  G. 

15  in  such .  .but  God  hath  called  us  to  peace 

17  as  God  bath  distributed  to  every  man,  as 

19  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God 

24  let  every  man.  .therein  abide  with  God 
40  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  spirit  of  God 

3  if  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  known 

4  and  that  (there  is)  none  other  God  but 

6  But  to  us.  .one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom 

8  But  meat  commendeth  us  not  to  God 

9  of  the  ox.  .Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen? 

21  being  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under 

5  with  many.  .God  was  not  well  pleased 

13  God  (is)  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you 

20  they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God 

31  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  G. 

32  to  the  Gentiles,  nor  to  the  church  of  God 
3  the  man ;  and  the  head  of  Christ  (is)  God 

7  as  he  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God  :  but 

12  so  (is)  the  man.  .but  all  things  of  God 

13  is  it  comely  that  a  woman  pray  unto  God 

16  suchcustom,  neither  the  churches  of  God 

22  despise  ye  the  church  of  God,  and  shame 
3  that  no  man  speaking  by  the  spirit  of  God 

6  it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in 

18  now  hath  God  set  the  members  every  one 

24  but  Godjhath  tempered  the  body  together 
28  God  hath  set  some  in  the  church,  first 

2  speaketh  not  uuto  men,  but  unto  God 
iS  I  thank  my  God,  I  speak  with  tongues 

25  will  worship  God,  and  report  that  God  is 
28  and  let  him  speak  to  himself,  and  to  God 

33  For  God  is  not.  .of  confusion,  but  of  pe. 
36  What?  came  the  word  of  God  out  from 

9  because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God 
10  But  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am 

10  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me 
15  and  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of  God 
15  because  we  have  testified  of  God  that  he 
24  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  G. 
28  Son.  .be  subject,  .that  God  may  be  all  in 

34  some  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God 
38  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased 
50  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God 
57  thanks  (be)  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the 

1  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  G. 

1  unto  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth 

2  Grace  (be)  unto  you  and  peace  from  God 

3  Blessed  (be)  God,  even  the  Father  of  our 

3  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all 

4  comfort,  .we ourselves arejeomforted of G. 
9  not  trust,  .but  in  God  which  raiseth  the 

12  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  have  had  our  co. 

18  God  (is)  true,  our  word  toward  you  was 

19  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  p. 

20  all  the  promises  of  God  in  him  (are)  yea 

20  in  him  Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by 

21  he  which  stablisheth  us  with  you.  .(is)  G. 

23  Moreover  I  call  God  forarecord  upon  my 

14  thanks  (be)  unto  God,  which  always  caus. 

15  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ 

17  as  many,  which  corrupt  the  word  of  God 
17  but  as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God  speak 

3  but  with  the  spirit  of  the  livingGod  ;  not 

4  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God 

5  of  ourselves ;  but  our  sufficiency  (is)  of  G. 
2  nor  handling  the  word  of  God  deceitfully 
2  every  man's  couscience  in  the  sight  of  G. 
4  In  whom  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blin. 

4  of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should 

6  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine 

6  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God 

7  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  G. 

15  grace  might,  .redound  to  the  glory  of  God 
1  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not 

5  he  that  hath  wrought  us.  .(is)  God,  who 

11  but  we  are  made  manifest  unto  God ;  and 

13  we  be  beside  ourselves,  (it  is)  to  God 

iS  all  things  (are)  of  God,  who  hath  recon. 

19  To  wit,  that  God  was  in  Christ,  reconcil. 

20  as  though  God  did  beseech  (you)  by  us 

20  we  pray  (you),  .be  ye  reconciled  to  God 

21  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
1  that  ye  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in 

4  approving  ourselves  as.  .ministers  of  God 
7  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of  God 

16  what  agreement  hath  the  temple  of  Gcd 
16  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God 
16  as  God  hath  said .  .1  will  be  their  God 


GOD 


422 


GOD 


2  Co.  7. 
7- 
7- 


Gal. 


Epb. 


3- 
3- 

3- 

3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 

4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 

s- 

s- 
s- 

5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
Phil.    1. 


1  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God 

6  God,  that  coniforteth  those  that  are  cast 
12  that  our  care  for  you  in  the  sight  of  God 

I  we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  of  God 

5  to  the  Lord,  and  unto  us  by  the  will  of  G. 

16  thanks  (be)  to  God,  which  put  the  same 

7  necessity :  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver 

8  God  (is)  able  to  make  all  grace  abound 

1 1  causeth  through  us  thanksgiving  to  God 

12  also  by  many  thanksgivings  unto  God 

13  they  glorify  God  for  your  professed  sub. 

14  for  the  exceeding  grace  of  God  in  you 

15  Thanks  (be)  unto  God  for  his  unspeakable 

4  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God  to 

5  exalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  G. 

13  rule  which  God  hath  distributed  to  us 

7  I  have  preached  to  you  the  gospel  of  God 
11  because  I  love  you  not?  God  knoweth 

31  The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 
2,  3  out  of  the  body,  I  camiot  tell :  God  kno. 

19  Again,  .we  speak  before  God  in  Christ 
21  lest,  when  I  come  again,  my  God  will 

4  yet  he  liveth  by  the  power  of  God 
4  with  him  by  the  power  of  God  toward  you 
7  Now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil 
11  the  God  of  love  and  peace  shall  be  with 

14  the  love  of  God.  .(be)  with  you  all.    Amen 
1  but  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  God  the  Father 

3  Grace  (be)  to  you  and  peace  from  God 

4  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Fa. 

10  For  do  I  now  persuade  men,  or  God? 

13  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God,  and  was. 

15  when  it  pleased  God,  who  separated  me 

20  unto  you,  behold,  before  God,  I  lie  not 
24  And  they  glorified  God  in  me 

6  God  accepteth  no  man's  person 

19  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  live  unto  G. 

20  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who 

21  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God :  for 

6  Even  as  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it 

5  the  Scripture,  forseeing  that  God  would 

11  is  justified  by  the  law  in  the  sight  of  God 

17  that  was  confirmed  before  of  God  in  Chr. 

18  but  God  gave  (it)  to  Abraham  by  promise 

20  a  mediator  is  not.  .of  one;  but  God  is  one 

21  the  law  then  against  the  promises  of  God? 
26  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in 

4  God  sent  forth  his  -Son,  made  of  a  woman 

6  God  hath  sent  forth  the  spirit  of  his  Son 

7  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Ch. 

8  Howbeit  then,  when  ye  knew  not  God 

9  But  now,  after  that  ye  have  known  God 

9  or  rather  are  known  of  God,  how  turn  ye 

14  received  me  as  an  angel  of  God.,  as  Christ 

21  such . .  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  G. 

7  Be  not  deceived  ;  God  is  not  mocked 

16  and  mercy,  and  upon  the  Israel  of  God 

1  Paul,  an  apostle . .  by  the  will  of  God,  to 

2  Grace  (be)  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

3  Blessed  (be)  the  God  and  Father  of  our 

17  That  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

4  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great 

8  that  not  of  yourselves  ;  (it  is)  the  gift  of  G. 

10  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we 

16  reconcile' both  unto  God  in  one  body  by 

19  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God 

22  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  sp. 

2  of  the  dispensation  of  the  grace  of  God 

7  according  to  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  God 

9  which,  .hath  been  hid  in  God,  who  creat. 
10  be  known,  .the  manifold  wisdom  of  God 
10  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fuhiessof  God 

6  One  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  (is)  above 
13  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God 

18  being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  thr. 
24  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteous. 
30  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby 

32  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you 

1  Be  ye.  .followers  of  God,  as  dear  children 

2  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  sav. 

5  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God 

6  cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  chil. 

20  Giving  thanks,  .unto God  and  the  Father 

21  Submitting  yourselves,  .in  the  fear  of  G. 
6  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart 

II  Put  ou  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye 
13  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God 

17  sword  of  the  spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  G. 

23  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
.  2  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God 
.  3  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  remembrance 
.    S  God  is  my  record,  how  greatly  I  long  af. 

,  11  which  are.  .untuthe  gloryand  praise  of  G. 
,  28  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God 
0  Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought 
.    6  tin 'light  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  withG. 
.    9  Coil  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and 
.  11  confess,  .to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father 
.  13  For  it  is  God  which  worketli  in  you  both 
.  15  That  ye  may  be.  .the  sons  of  God,  witho. 
,  r;  God  hftd  mercy  on  him;  and  not  on  him 
.    3  the  circumcision,  which  worship  God  in 
.    0  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  fai. 
.  14  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  Coil 
.  15  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  you 
.  19  whose  god  (is  their)  belly,  and  (whose) 
.   6  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God 
.    7  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  und. 
.   9  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  lie  with  you 
.  18  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  G. 
.  1     Bui  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need 
.  20  unto  Jod  and  our  Father  (be)  glory  for 


Col.     1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle,  by  the  will  of  God 

1.  2  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
1.  3  We  give  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  of 
1.  6  heard,  .and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  tr. 
1.  10  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God 
1.  15  Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God 
1.  25  according  to  the  dispensation  of  God  wh. 
t.  25  is  given  to  me.  .to  fulfil  the  word  of  God 

1.  27  To  whom  God  would  make  known  what 

2.  2  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  of  God 
2.  12  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  G. 

2.  19  body,  .increaseth  with  the  increase  of  G. 

3.  1  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
3.  3  andyour  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 
3.    6  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children 

3. 12  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved 

3. 15  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts 
3.  17  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father 

3.  22  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing  God 

4.  3  that  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door  of 
4. 11  fellow  workers  uuto  the  kingdom  of  God 
4.  12  perfect  and  complete  in  all  the  will  of  G. 

1  Th.  1.    1  unto  the  church,  .in  God  the  Father  and 

1,    1  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  G. 
1.    2  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you 
1.    3  work,  .in  the  sight  of  God  and  our  Fath. 
1.   4  Knowing,  brethren,  .your  election  of  G. 
1.   8  in  every  place  your  faith  to  God  ward 
i.    9  and  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols 

1.  9  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God 

2.  2  in  our  God  to  speak,  .the  gospel  of  God 
2.  4  as  we  were  allowed  of  God  to  be  put  in 
2.    4  not  as  pleasing  men,  but  God,  which 

2.   5  used  we  flattering  words . .  God  (is)  witness 
2.   8  not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our 
2.   9  we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God 
2. 10  Ye  (are)  witnesses,  and  God  (also),  how 
2.  12  That  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 

2. 13  For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  witho. 
2. 13  when  ye  received  the  word  of  God  which 
2.  13  but,  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  word  of  God 

2.  14  became  followers  of  the  churches  of  God 

2.  15  they  please  not  God;  and  are  contrary 

3.  2  sent,  .our  brother,  and  minister  of  God 
3.   9  what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God  again 
3.   9  we  joy  for  your  sakes  before  our  God 

3.  11  Now  God  himself,  .direct  our  way  unto 

3.  13  unblameable  in  holiness  before  God 

4.  1  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  God 
4.  3  this  is  the  will  of  God . .  your  sauctificatiou 
4.  5  even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know  not  G. 
4.  7  God  hath  not  called  us  unto  uncleanness 
4.  8  He  therefore,  .despiseth  not  man,  but  G. 
4.  14  even  so  them  also.. will  God  bring  with 

4.  16  with  a  shout,  .and  with  the  trump  of  G. 

5.  9  For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath 

5. 18  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus 

5.  23  the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly 

2  Th    1.    1  in  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 

1.    2  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
1.   3  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for 
1.    4  we . .  glory  in  you  in  the  churches  of  God 
1.    5  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God 
1.   5  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
1.   6  Seeing  (it  is)  a  righteous  tiling  with  God 
1.    8  vengeance  ou  them  that  know  not  God 
1.  11  that  our  God  would  count  you  worthy 

1.  12  according  to  the  grace  of  our  God  and 

2.  4  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped 
2.    4  he  as  God  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God 
2.    4  showing  himself  that  he  is  God 

2.  11  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that 
2.  13  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  G. 
2".  13  because  God  hath,  .chosen  you  to  salvat. 

2.  16  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and  God 

3.  5  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love  of  God 

1  Ti.    1.    1  by  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour 

1.  2  from  God  our  Father  and  Jesus  Christ 
1.  11  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God 

1.  17  immortal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God 

2.  3  acceptable  in.  .sight  of  God  our  Saviour 

2.  5  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  G. 

3.  5  shall  he  take  care  of  the  church  of  God  ? 

3. 15  God,  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  G. 

3. 16  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justirh  d 

4.  3  which  God  hath  created  to  be  received 
4.   4  every  creature  of  God  (is)  good,  and 

4.   5  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer 

4.  10  we  trust  in  the  living  God,  who  is  the 

5.  4  that  is  good  and  acceptable  before  God 
5.    5  widow  indeed,  and  desolate,  trusteth  in  G. 

5.  21  I  charge  (thee)  before  God,  and  the  Lord 

6.  1  the  name  of  God  and  (bis)  doctrine  be  not 
6.  11  man  of  God,  flee  these  things  ;  and  follow 
6.  13  I  gave  thee  charge  in  the  sight  of  God 

6.  17  in  the  living  God,  who  giveth  us  richly 

2  Ti.   1.    1  an  apostle  of  Jesus,  .by  the  will  of  God 

1.    2  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus 
1.    3  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  (my) 
1.    6  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which 
1.    7  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear 

1.  8  the  Gospel  according  to  the  power  of  G. 

2.  9  but  the  word  of  God  is  not  bound 

2.  15  Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  G. 

2. 19  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure 

2.  25  if  God  peradventure  will  give.,  repentant 

3.  17  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  through. 

4.  1  I  charge  (thee)  therefore  before  God,  and 
Titus  1.    1  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus 

1.    1  acri'i'ding  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and 
1.    2  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  i  . 
1.    3  to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour 


Titus  1.    4  froni  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 

1.  7  must  be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God 
1. 16  They  profess  that  they  know  God  ;  but 

2.  5  that  the  word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed 
2. 10  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour 

2.  11  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation 
2. 13  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God 

3.  4  the  kindness  and  love;of  God  our  Saviour 
3.    8  they  which  have  believed  in  God  might 

Phm.        3  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
4  I  thank  my  God,  making  mention  of  thee 

Heb.  1.    1  God,  who  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers 
1.    6  let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him 
1.    8  Thy  throne,  O  God,  (is)  for  ever  and  ever 

1.  9  God,  (even)  thy  God,  hath  auointed  thee 

2.  4  God  also  bearing  (them)  witness,  both 

2.  9  that  he  by  the  grace  of  God  should  taste 
2.  13  and  the  children  which  God  hath  given 

2.  17  high  priest  in  things  (pertaining)  to  God 

3.  4  but  he  that  built  all  things  (is)  God 

3.  12  unbelief,  in  departing  from  the  living  God 

4.  4  God  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from  all  his 
4.   9  remaineth.  .a  rest  to  the  people  of  God 
4.  10  from  his  own  works,  as  God  (did)  from 

4.  12  the  word  of  God  (is)  quick,  and  powerful 

4.  14  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God 

5.  1  for  men  in  tilings  (pertaining)  to  God 
5.  4  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  (was) 
5. 10  Called  of  God  an  high  priest  after  the 

5.  12  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God 

6.  1  from  dead  works,  and  of  faith  toward  G. 
6.    3  And  this  will  we  do,  if  God  permit 

6.    5  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and 
6.    6  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God 
6.    7  the  earth .  .receiveth  blessing  from  God 
6.  10  For  God  (is)  not  unrighteous  to  forget 
6.  13  God  made  promise  to  Abraham,  because 
6.  17  Wherein  God,  willing  more  abundantly 

6.  18  in  which  (it  was)  impossible  for  God  to 

7.  1  priest  of  the  most  high  God,  who  met 
7.    3  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God ;  abideth 
7.  19  by  the  which  we  draw  nigh  unto  God 

7.  25  to  save  them .  .that  come  unto  God  by 

8.  10  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall 
9. 14  who.  .offered  himself  without  spot  to  G. 

9.  14  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ! 
9.  20  testament  which  God  hath  enjoined  untu 
9.  24  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us 

10.    7  said  I,  Lo,  I  come,  .to  do  thy  will,  O  God 
10.    9  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God 
10.  12  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
10.  21  an  high  priest  over  the  house  of  God 
10.  29  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God 
10.  31  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God 

10.  36  after  ye  have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye 

11.  3  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God 
11.   4  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent 
11.    4  was  righteous,  God  testifying  of  his  gifts  " 
11.    5  not  found,  because  God  had  translated 
11.    5  he  had  this  testimony,  that  he  pleased  G. 
11.    6  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he 
11. 10  a  city. .  whose  builder  and  maker  (is)  God 
11.  16  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God 
11. 19  God  (was)  able  to  raise  (him)  up,  even 

11.  25  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God 

1 1.  40  God  having  provided  some  better  thing 

12.  2  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God 
12.    7  God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons 

12. 15  lest  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 
12.  22  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
12.  23  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits 
12.  28  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably 

12.  29  For  our  God  (is)  a  consuming  fire 

13.  4  whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will 
13.    7  who  have  spoken  unto  you  the  word  of  G 
13.  15  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God 
13.  16  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pica. 
13.  20  the  God  of  peace,  that  brought  again 

Jas.     1.    1  James,  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord 
1.   5  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all 
1.  13  Let  no  man  say.  .1  am  tempted  of  God 
1.  13  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil 
1.  20  wrath,  .worketh  not.  .righteousness ol  G 

1.  27  Pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  God 

2.  5  Hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  w. 
2.  19  Thou  believest  that  there  is  one  God 

2.  23  which  saith,  Abraham  believed  God,  and 

2.  23  and  he  was  called  the  friend  of  God 

3.  9  Therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the  Father 

3.  9  which  are  made  after  the  similitude  of  G. 

4.  4  that  the  friendship,  .is  enmity  with  God? 
4.  4  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God 
4.   6  he  saith,  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but 

4.  7  Submit  yourselves  therefore  to  God 
4.  8  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh 
1  Pe.  1.  2  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God 
1.  3  Blessed  (lie)  the  God  and  Father  of  our  L. 
1.  5  Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  thro. 
1.  21  Who  by  him  do  believe  in  God,  that  rai. 
1.  21  that  your  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  G. 

1.  23  of  incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God,  wh. 

2.  4  disallowed,  .of  nun,  but  chosen  of  God 
2.  5  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Ch. 
2.  10  not  a  people,  but.  now  the  people  of  God 
2.  12  they  may.  .glorify  God  in  the'day  of  visit. 
2.  15  so  is  the  will  of  God,  that  with  well  doing 
2.  ib  As  free,  .but  as  the  servants  of  God 

2.  17  Honour  all.  .Fear  God.  Honour  the  king 
2.  19  if  a  man  for  conscience  toward  God  end. 

2.  20  it  patiently,  this  (is)  acceptable  with  God 

3.  4  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price 
3.    5  the  holy  women  also,  who  trusted  in  God 


GOD 


423 


GODLY 


t  Pe.   3.  15  But  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts 
3.  17  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  so,  that  ye 
'3.  18  suffered,  .that  he  might  bring  us  to  God 
3.  20  the  long  suffering  of  God  waited  in  the 
3.  21  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God 

3.  22  and  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God ;  angels 
-    4.    2  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  G. 

4.  6  but  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit 

4.  10  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  G. 
4.  ii  If  any  man  speak,  .as  the  oracles  of  God 
4.  11  as  of  the  ability  which  God  giveth 
4.  11  that  God  in  all  tilings  may  be  glorified 
4.  14  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth 
4.  16  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  this  behalf 
4.  17  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God 

4.  17  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God? 
4. 19  that  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God 

5.  2  Feed  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you 
5.  5  God  resist eth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace 
5.  6  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God 
5. 10  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us 
5. 12  that  tills  is  the  true  grace  of  God  wherein 

a  Pe.  1.  1  through  the  righteousness  of  God  and  our 
1.  2  multiplied,  .through  the  knowledge  of  G. 
1.  17  he  received  from  God  the  Father  honour 

1.  21  holy  men  of  God  spake,  .moved  by  the 

2.  4  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned 

3.  5  by  the  word  of  God  the  heavens  were  of 
3.  12  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  G. 

1  Jo.   1.   5  declare  unto  you,  that  God  is  light,  and 
2.    5  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected 
2. 14  the  word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  aud  ye 

2.  17  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for 

3.  1  that  we  should  be  called  the  sous  of  God!- 
3.  2  Beloved.oiow  are  we  the  sons  of  God;  and 
3.  8  the  Son  bf  God  was  manifested,  that  he 
3.  9  Whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  com. 
3.  9  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God 
3. 10  In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest 

3. 10  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God 
3. 17  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ? 

3.  20  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  aud  know. 

3.  21  (then)  have  we  confidence  toward  God 

4.  1  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God 
4.    2  Hereby  know  ye  the  spirit  of  God 

4.    2  Every  spirit  that  coufesseth.  .is  of  God 
4.    3  spirit  that  coufesseth  not.  .is  not  of  God 
4.   4  Ye  are  of  God,  little  children,  and  have 
4.    6  we  are  of  God  :  he  that  knoweth  God  he. 
4.    6  he  that  is  not  of  God  heareth  not  us 
4.    7  let  us  love  one  another  :  for  love  is  of  G. 
4.    7  loveth  is  bom  of  God,  and  knoweth  God 
4.   8  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  G. 
4.    9  In  tills  was  manifested  the  love  of  God 
4.   9  God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the 
4-  io  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God 

4. 11  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love 
4.  12  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time 

4.  12  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in 
4. 15  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God 

4. 15  God  dwelleth  in  him  ;  and  he  in  God 

4. 16  known,  .the  love  that  God  hath  to  us.  G. 
4.  16  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him 
4.  20  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his 
4.  20  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not 

4.  21  That  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother 

5.  1  Whosoever  believeth..is  born  of  God 

5.  2  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  G. 
5.  3  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep 
5.  4  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh 
5.  5  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Sou  of  God  ? 
5.  9  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  gr. 
5.  9  this  is  the  witness  of  God  which  he  hath 
5. 10  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath 
5. 10  he  that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him 

5. 10  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave 

5. 11  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life 

5.  12  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
5.  13,  13  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  G. 
5.  18  that  whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not 
5. 18  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  hims. 
5.  19  we  know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole 
5.  20  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and 
5.  20  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life 

2  Jo.         3  mercy.. peace,  from  God  the  Father,  and 

9  Whosoever  transgresseth.  .hath  not  God 

3  Jo.       11  Beloved . .  He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God 

11  but  he  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God 
Jude        1  that  are  sanctified  by  G.  the  Father,  and 
4  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lasci. 
4  denying  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our  Lo. 
21  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  G.,  looking 
25  To  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,  (lie) 
Rev.    1.    1  which  God  gave  unto  him,  to  show  unto 
1.    2  Who  bare  record  of  the  word  of  God,  and 
1.    6  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  G. 

1.  9  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testim. 

2.  7  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God 

2.  18  These  things  saith  the  Son  of  God,  who 

3.  1  he  that  hath  the  seven  spirits  of  God,  and 
3.   2  not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  God 
3.  12  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God 
3.  12 1  will  write  upon  hini  the  name  of  my  G. 

3. 12  and  the  name  of  the  city  of  ray  God 

3.  12  cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  my  G. 
3. 14  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God 

4.  5  lamps,  .which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  G. 

4.  8  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty 

5.  6  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  God  sent 
5    9  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood 
5. 10  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and 

6.  9  that  were  slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and 


Rev.  7.  2  angel,  .having  the  seal  of  the  living  God 
7.  3  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God 
7.  10  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon 
7.  n  fell,  .ou  their  faces,  and  worshipped  God 
7.  12  (be)  unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Am. 
7.  15  are  they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and 

7.  17  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 

8.  2  the  seven  angels  which  stood  before  God 

8.  4  ascended  up  before  God  out  of  the  ang. 

9.  4  those  men  which  have  not  the  seal  of  G. 
9.  13  of  the  golden  altar  which  is  before  God 

10.  7  the  mystery  of  God  should  be  finished 

11.  1  Rise,  and  measure  the  temple  of  God 
11.    4  These  are . .  standing  before  the  God  of 
11.  11  the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into 
11.  13  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven 
11. 16  which  sat  before  God  on  their  seats,  fell 
11.  i5  upon  their  faces  and  worshipped  God 
11.  17  0  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  art,  aud 

11.  19  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  hea. 

12.  5  and  her  child  was  caught  up  unto  God 
12.    6  where  she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God 
12.  10  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God 

12.  10  which  accused  them  before  our  God 
72.  17  which  keep  the  commandments  of  God 

13.  6  opened  his  mouth  in  blasph.  against  G. 

14.  4  first  fruits  unto  God  and  to.  the  Lamb 
14.    5  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  G. 
14.    7  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him  ;  for  the 

14. 10  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wTath  of  G. 

14.  12  they  that  keep  the  commandments  of  G. 
14. 19  the  great  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God 

15.  1  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God 
15.    2  stand  on  the  sea.  .having  the  harps  of  G. 
15.    3  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  G. 
15.    3  marvellous  (are)  thy  works,  Lord  God  A. 
ig.   7  seven  golden  rials  full  of  the  wrath  of  G. 

15.  8  filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God 

16.  1  pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath  of  God 
16.  7  Eveu  so,  Lord  God  Almighty,  true  and 
16.   9  blasphemed  the  name  of  God,  which  hath 

16. 11  And  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven  beca. 
16.  14  battle  of  that  great  .day  of  God  Almighty 
16.  19  Babylon  carne  in  remembrance  before  G. 
16.  21  aud  men  blasphemed  God  because  of  the 
17. 17  For  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil 
17. 17  until  the  words  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled 
18.  5  and  God  hath  remembered  her  iniquities 
18.   8  strong  (is)  the  Lord  God  who  judge  th  her 

18.  20  Rejoice.  .God  hath  avenged  you  on  her 

19.  1  honour,  and  power,  unto  the' Lord  our  G. 
19.   4  fell  down  and  worshipped  God  that  sat 
19.    5  Praise  our  God,  all  ye  his  servants,  and 
19.    6  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth 
19.   9  saith.  .These  are  the  true  sayings  of  God 
19.  10  And  he  said  unto  me.  .worship  God;  for 
19.  13  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God 

19.  15  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  G. 
19. 17  Come,  .unto  the  supper  of  the  great  God 

20.  4  for  the  word  of  God,  and  which  had  not 
20.    6  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ 

20.  9  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  heaven 

20. 12  And  I  saw  the  dead,  .stand  before  God 
2t.    2  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven 
2i.   3  the  tabernacle  of  God  (is)  with  men,  and 

21.  3  and  God  himself  shall  be.  .their  God 
2i.    4  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
21.    7  I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son 
21.  10  city,  .descending  out  of  heaven  from  God 
21.  11  Having  the  glory  of  God  :  and  her  light 
21.  22  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are 

21.  23  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  theL. 

22.  1  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and 
22.    3  the  throne  of  God .  .shall  be  in  it ;  and 
22.   5  for  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light :  and 
22.    6 ;  22.  9 ;  22.  18  ;  22.  19. 

9. A  daimon,  demon,  shade,  Bat/xoptov  daimonion. 
Acts  17.  18  seemeth..a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods 

lQ.Lord , master,  tevpios  hu/rios.    . 

Acts  19.  20  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and 

GOD,  to  fight  against  — 
1.  To  fight  with  God,  6eo/j.axe&  theomacheo. 
Acts  23.    9  saying,  .let  us  not  fight  against  God 

%On& fighting  against  God,  Beo/xdxos  theomachos. 
Acts   5.  39  lest,  .ye  be  found  even  to  fight  against  G. 

GOD,  taught  of  — 

God  taught,  BeoSiBatcTOs  theodidaktos. 

1  Th.  4.  9  ye.  .are  taught  of  God  to  love  one  anoth. 

GOD,  given  by  inspiration  of  — 

God  breathed,,  8e6irpGvarQs  theopneastas. 

2  Ti.   3.  16  Scripture  (is)  given  by  inspiration  of  God 
GOD,  worshipper  of  — 

One  fearing  or  reverencing  God,  Beoatfi-qs  tlieoscb 

John    9.  31  but  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper  of  God 
GOD.  to  be  admonished  of  — 
To  warn  by  em  oracle,  xP7\P-aT'l-Cw  chrematizd. 

Heb.   8.    5  Moses  was  admonished  of  God  when  he 
GOD,  answer  of  — 
Oracular  warning,  xpypaTto'pSs  chreviatismos. 

Rom  11.    4  But  what  saith  the  answer  of  God  unto 
GOD,  hater  of  — 
God,  hater,  6eo<TTvyf}s  theostuges. 

Rom.  1.  30  Backbiters,  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  pr. 


GOD,  lover  of  — 

Lover  of  God,  <pi\68eos  philotheos. 

2  Ti.   3.    4  lovers  of  pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  G. 
GOD  forbid  — 
I. Profanation /  far  be  it!  nWg  chalilah. 

Gen.  44.    7  God  forbid  that  thy  servants  should  do 

44-  17  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so .  .the  man 
Josh  22.  29  God  forbid  that  we  should  rebel  against 
24. 16  God  forbid  that  we  should  forsake  the  L. 
1  Sa.  12.  23  God  forbid  that  I  should  sin  against  the 
14.  45  God  forbid  :  (as)  the  Lord  liveth,  there 
20.    2  he  said.  .God  forbid;  thou  shalt  not  die 
Job  .27.    5  God  forbid  that  I  should  justify  you :  till 
2.Let  it  not  be  !  n,^  ytpoiro  me  genoito. 

Lukezo.  16  when  they  heard  (it),  they  said,  God  fur. 
Rom.  3.    4  God  forbid|:  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but 

3.    6  God  forbid  :  for  then  how  shall  God  judge 
3.  31  God  forbid  :  yea,  we  establish  the  law 
6.    2  God  forbid.  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead 

6.  15  What  then?  shall  we  sin. .God  forbid 

7.  7  (Is)  the  law  sin?  God  forbid.     Nay,  I  had 
7.  13  Was.  .good  made  death.. God  forbid 

9.  14  unrighteousness  with  God  ?  God  forbid 
n.    1  Hath  God  cast  away  his  people  ?  God  for. 
n.  11  stumbled  that  they  should  fall?  God  for. 
1  Co.  6.  15  the  members  of  an  harlot?  God  forbid 
Gal.    2.  17  Christ  the  minister  of  sin?  God  forbid 

3.  21  againstthe  promises  of  God?  God  forbid 
6. 14  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in 

GOD  save  — ' 

To  live,  let  live,  give  life,  n;n  chayah. 

1  Sa.  10.  24  shouted,  and  said,  God  save  the  king 

2  Sa.  16.  16  God  save  the  king,  God  save  the  king 

1  Ki.  1.  25  they  eat.  .and  say,  God  save  king  Adon. 

1.  34  blow  ye.  .and  say,  God  save  king  Solomon 
1. 39  all  the  people  said,  God  save  king  Solom. 

2  Ki.11.  12  clapped,  .and said,  God  save  the  king 

2  Ch.23.  11  anointed  him,  and  said,  God  save  the  ki. 

GOD  speed  — 

To  rejoice,  be  of  good  cheer,  xa^P^  cho.ird, 

2  John    10  receive,  .not.  .neither  bid  him  God  speed 
11  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is  partak. 
GOD,  without  — 
Atheist,  without  a  god,  &8zo$  atheos. 

Eph.  2.  12  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
(GOD  1  ward,  to  — 
Over  against,  b*D  mvl. 

ExodiS.  19  Be  thou  for  the  people  to  God  ward,  thafc 
GODDESS  — 
I.Gods,  a  god,  object  of  ivorship,  n*rnx  elohim. 

1  Kj.ii.   5,  33  Ashtoreththegoddessof'theZidonians 
2.Goddess,  Bed  thea. 

Acts  19.  27  that  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Dia. 
19.  35  a  worshipper  of  the  great  [goddess]  Diana 
19.  37  nor  yet  blasphemers  of  your  [goddess] 
GODHEAD  — 
l.The  godhead,  that  which  is  divine,  to  8e7ov. 

Acts  17.  29  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,  or  si. 

2.  Divinity,  BetSrrjs  t/ieiotes. 

Rom.  1.  20  Ills  eternal  power  and  Godhead  ;  so  that 

3.  Deity,  Beorrjs  theotes. 

Col.     2.   9  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
GODLINESS  — 
l.Piety,  reverence,  evcrt&eta  eusebeia. 

1  Ti.   2.    2  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty 

3.  16  And.  .great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness 

4.  7  and  exercise  thyself  (rather)  unto  godlin. 
4.    8  but  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things 
6.    3  the  doctrine  w'hich  is  according  to  godfi. 
6.    5  supposing  that  gain  is  godliness :  from 
6.    6  godhness  with  contentment  is  great  gain 
6.  11  follow  after  righteousness,  godliness,  fai.. 

1  Ti.    3.    5  Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying 
Titus  1.    1  of  the  truth  which  is  after  godliness 

2  Pe.  1.    3  things  that  (pertain)  unto  life  and  godli. 

1.    6'patience ;;  and  to  patience  godliness 

1.    7  And  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness ;  and. 

3.  11  ought  ye  to  be  in. . conversation  and  god. 

2.Fear  or  worship  of  God,  0eoor4$eta  theoscbeia. 

1  TL  2. 10  which  becometh  women  professing  godL 
GODLY  — 

X.Kind,  Tpn  chasid. 

Psa.    4.   3  hath  set  apart  him  that  is  godly  for  him. 
32.    6  For  this  shall  every  one  that  is  godly  pray 

2.  God,  of  God,  DViSk  elohim. 

Mai.    2. 15  That  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed.  There. 

B.Pious,  reverential,  evae&ris  eusebes. 

2  Pe.  2.   9  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  g. 

4. Piously,  reverentially,  tva-efiuis  eusebos. 

2  Ti.    3. 12  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus 
Titus  2.  12  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  go. 

5. Of  God,  Beov  theou. 

2  Co.    1.  12  that  in  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity 
11.    2  jealous  over  you  with  godly  jealousy 
iTi.     1.    4  rather  than  godly  edifying" which  is  inf. 

^.According  to  God,  Kara  6<e6p  kata  theon. 

2  Co.    7.  10  For  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to 


GODLY 


424 


GOING- 


godly  man  (or  fear)  — 
Kind,  Tpn  chasid. 

Psa.  12.    i  Help,  Lord;  for  the  goldly  man  He.12.28 

GODLY  manner,  after  a  — 

According  to  God}  Kara  6e6u  kata  theon. 

2  Co.    7.    9  were  made  sorry  after  a  godly  manner 

GODLY  sort,  after  a  — 

1,  Worthy  of  God,  a£tw?  tov  $€od  axios  toil  theon. 

3  John     '6  bring  forward,  .after  a  godly  sort,  thou 

%A  ccwding  to  God,  Kara  Qe6v  kata  theon, 

2  Co.    7.  ii  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a  godly  sort,  what 

GODS  — 

I.Gods,  D 

Gen.   3, 

31 

31 

35 

Exodi2 


20. 
22. 

23- 

23- 
23- 
23- 

3=- 
32- 
32- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
Lev.  19 
NUJ1125. 

25- 

Deut.  4. 

5- 

6. 

7- 

7- 
7- 


*3- 

13- 
13- 
17- 
18. 
20. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
3*- 


Josh  : 


Judg 


'T- 
Ruth 1. 

1  Sa  .    4. 

4- 

6 

7- 


2Sa. 
1  Ki. 


H7N  elohim. 

5  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil 
.  30  wherefore  hast  thou  stolen  my  gods  ? 
.  32  With  whomsoever  thou  findest  thy  gods 

2  Put  away  the  strange  gods  that  fare) 
4  strange  gods  which  (were)  in  their  hand 

12  against  all  the  gods  of  Egypt  I  will  exe. 

3  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me 
23  Ye  shall  not  make  with  me  gods  of  silver 

23  neither  shall  ye  make  unto  you  gods  of  g. 
28  Thou  shalt  not  revile  the  gods,  nor  curse 

13  no  mention  of  the  name  of  other  gods 

24  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  to  their  gods 

32  shalt  make  no  covenant,  .with their  gods 

33  if  thou  serve  their  gods,  it  will  surely  be 
1,  23  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before 
4,  8  These  (be)  thy  gods,  O  Israel,  which 

31  this  people,  .have  made  them  gods  of  g.  ! 

15  gods,  and  do  sacrifice  unto  their  gods 

16  daughters  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods 

16  thy  sons  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods 

17  Thou  shalt  make  thee  no  molten  gods 

4  nor  make  to  yourselves  molten  gods 
2  unto  the  sacrifice  of  their  gods  :  and  the 
2  and  the  people,  .bowed  down  to  their  g. 

28  serve  gods,  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood 
7  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me 

14  shall  not  go  after  other  gods,  of  the  gods 

4  turn  away,  .that  they  may  serve  other  g. 

16  neither  shalt  thou  serve  their  gods;  for 

25  graven  images  of  their  gods  shall  ye  burn 

19  walk  after  other  gods,  and  serve  them 

17  For  the  Lord  your  God  (is)  God  of  gods 
28  command,  .to  go  after  other  gods,  which 

2  wherein  the  nations,  .served  their  gods 

3  hew  down  the  graven  images  of  their  g. 
30  thou  enquire  not  after  their  gods,  saying 

30  How  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods? 

31  abomination-  .have  theydone  unto  theirg. 
31  they  have  burnt  in  the  fire  to  their  gods 

2  saying,  Let  us  go  after  other  gods,  which 
6,  13  saying,  Let  us  go  and  serve  other  go. 
7  gods  of  the  people  which  are  round  about 

3  And  hath  gone  and  served  othergods,  and 

20  shall  speak  in  the  name  of  other  gods 

18  which  they  have  done  unto  their  gods;  so 

14  not  go  aside,  .to  go  after  other  gods  to 
36,  64  and  there  shalt  thou  serve  other  gods 
18  to  go  (and)  serve  the  gods  of  these  nations 

26  served  other  gods.,  gods  whom  they  knew 

17  and  worship  other  gods,  and  serve  them 

16  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  strangers 

18  in  that  they  are  turned  unto  other  gods 
20  then  will  they  turn  unto  other  gods,  and 

17  They  sacrificed,  .to  gods  whom  they  knew 
37  he  shall  say, Where  (are)  their  gods, (their) 

22  The  Loud  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  God  of  g. 

7  make  mention  of  the  name  of  their  gods 
16  and  have  gone  and  served  other  gods,and 

2  fathers  dwelt . .  and  they  served  other  gods 
14,  15  the  gods  which  your  fathers  served 

15  or  the  gods  of  the  Amorites,  in  whose 

16  said,  God  forbid  that  we.  .serve  other  g. 
20  serve  strange  gods,  then  will  he  turn  and 

23  put  away,  .the  strange  gods  which  (are) 

3  and  their  gods  shall  be  a  snare  unto  you 

12  othergods,  of  the  gods  of  the  people  that 

17  they  went  a  whoring  after  other  gods,  and 

19  in  following  other  gods  to  serve  them,  and 
0  ga  ve . .  to  their  sons,  and  served  their  gods 

8  They  chose  new  gods  ;  then  (was)  war  in 
10  fear  not  the  gods  of  the  Amoritesj  in 

6  served,  .the  gods  of  Syria,  and  the  gods 
6  gods  of  Moah,  and  the  gods  of  the  chil. 
6  the  gods  of  the  Philistines,  and  forsook 

13  ye  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  other  g. 

14  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  have  chosen 
16  put  away  the  strange  gods  from  among 

5  the  man  Micah  had  an  house  of  gods,  and 

24  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods  which  I 

15  unto lirrpi-nple and  unto  her  gods  :  return 
8  out  of  the  hand  of  these  mighty  gods'.' 

8  the  gods  that  smote  the  Egyptians  with 

5  from  off  your  godSj  and  from  off  your  la. 
3  put  away  the  strange  gods  and  Ashtaroth 
8  forsaken  me,  and  served  other  gods,  sodo 

43  the  Philistine  cursed  David  by  his  gods 
19  driven  me.  .saying,  Go,  serve  other  gods 
13  I  saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth 
23  Egypt,  (from)  the  nations  and  their  gods? 

6  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship  them 
q  and  have  taken  hold  upon  other  gods 

2  will  1  urn  away  your  heart  after  their  go. 
d  turned  away  ins  heart  after  other  gods 
8  wives,  which,  burnt  incense,  .unto  theirg 


1  Ki.  11.  10  that  he  should  not  go  after  other  gods 

12.  28  behold  thy  gods,  O  Israel,  which  brought 
14.  9  hast  gone  and  made  thee  other  gods,  and 
18.  24  call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  and  I 

18.  25  call  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  but  put 

19.  2  So  let  the  gods  do  (to  me),  and  more  also 

20.  10  The  gods  do  so  unto  me,  and  more  also,  if 
20.  23  Their  gods  (are)  gods  of  the  hills ;  theref. 

2  Ki.   5.  17  neither  burnt,  .sacrifice  unto  other  gods 

17.  7  that  the  children .  .had  feared  other  gods 
17.  29  every  nation  made  gods  of  their  own 
17.  31  burnt  their  children  in  fire  to.  .the  gods 
17.  33  served  their  own  gods,  after  the  manner 
17.  35  Ye  shall  not  fear  other  gods,  nor  bow  yo. 
17.  37  observe,  .and  ye  shall  not  fear  other  gods 

17.  38  forget;  neither  shall  ye  fear  other  gods 

18.  33  Hath  any  of  the  gods,  .delivered  at  all 
18.  34  Where  (are)  the  gods  of  Hamath,  and  of 
18.  34  where  (are)  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim,  He. 

18.  35  Who  (are)  they  among  all  the  gods  of  the 

19.  12  Have  the  gods.,  delivered  them  which  my 
19.  18  cast  their  gods,  .fur  they  were  (no)  gods 
22.  17  and  have  burnt  incense  unto  other  gods 

1  Ch.  5.  25  went  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  pe. 

10.  10  his  armour  in  the  house  of  their  gods 
14.  12  when  they  had  left  their  gods  there,  Da. 
16.  25  he  also  (is)  to  be  feared  above  all  gods 
16.  26  For  all  the  gods  of  the  people  (are)  idols 

2  Ch.  2.    5  for  great  (is)  our  God  above  all  gods 

7.  19  shall  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship 
7.  22  laid  hold  on  other  gods,  and  worshipped 

13.  8  calves,  which  Jeroboam  made  you  for  g. 
13.  9  may  be  a  priest  of  (them  that  are)  no  go. 
25.  14  brought  the  gods  of  the  children  of  Seir 
25.  14  set  them  up  (to  be)  his  gods,  and  bowed 
25.  15  Why  hast  thou  sought  after  the  gods  of 
25.  20  because  they  sought  after  the  gods  of  E. 
28.  23  he  sacrificed  unto  the  gods  of  Damascus 
28.  23  the  gods  of  the  kings  of  Syria  help  them 
28.  25  burn  incense  unto  other  gods,  and  prov. 
32. 13  were  the  gods  of  the  nations  of  those  la. 
32.  14  Who  (was  there)  among  all  the  gods  of 

32.  17  As  the  gods  of  the  nations  of  (other)  lands 
32. 19  as  against  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the 

33.  15  took  away  the  strange  gods,  and  the  idol 

34.  25  and  have  burned  incense  unto  other  gods 
Ezra    1.    7  had  put  them  in  the  house  of  his  gods 
Psa.  82.    1  God  standeth.  .he  judgeth  among  the  g. 

82.  6  I  have  said,  Ye  (are)  gods ;  and  all  of  you 
86.    8  Among  the  gods  (there  is)  none  like  unto 

3  the  Lord  (is),  .a  great  King  above  all  go. 

4  the  Lord,  .(is)  to  be  feared  above  all  go. 

5  For  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  (are)  idols 
7  Confounded  be  all . .  worship  him,  all  (ye)g. 
9  thou,  Lord  . .  art  exalted  far  above  all  gods 
5  and  (that)  our  Lord  (is)  above  all  gods 
2  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  gods :  for 
1  before  the  gods  will  I  sing  praise  unto 

Isa.  21.  9  images  of  her  gods  he  hath  broken  unto 
36.  18  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  deli. 
36.  19  Where  (are)  the  gods  of  Hamath  and  Ar?. 
36.  19  where  (are)  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim  ?  ami 

36.  20  Who  (are  they)  among  all  the  gods  of 

37.  12  Have  the  gods,  .delivered  them  which 
37.  19  cast  their  gods,  .for  they  (were)  no  gods 

41.  23  that  we  may  know  that  ye  (are)  gods 

42.  17  say  to  the  molten  images,  Ye  (are)  our  g. 
Jer.     1.  16  have  burnt  incense  unto  other  gods,  and 

2.  11  changed  (their)  gods,  which  (are)  yet  nog.? 

2.  28  But  where  (are)  thy  gods  that  thou  hast 
2. 28  number  of  thy  cities  arc  thy  gods,  O  Jud. 
5.  7  sworn  by  (them  that  are)  no  gods :  when 
5.  19  and  served  strange  gods  in  your  land,  so 
7.  6  neither  walk  after  other  gods  to  your  hu. 
7.  9  walk  after  other  gods  whom  ye  know  not 
7. 18  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  gods 

11.  10  they  went  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 
11. 12  go  and  cry  unto  the  gods  unto  whom  they 
11.  13  number  of  thy  cities  were  thy  gods,  0  J. 

13.  10  and  walk  after  other  gods,  to  serve  them 
16.  11  walked  after  other  gods,  and  have  served 
16.  13  there  shall  ye  serve  other  gods  day  and 
16.  20  man  make  gods . .  and  they  (are)  no  gods? 
19.    4  burnt  incense  in  it  unto  other  gods,  wh- 
ig. 13  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  g. 
22.   q  and  worshipped  other  gods,  and  served 
25.    6  And  go  not  afterother  gods  to  serve  them 
32.  29  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  go. 

35.  15  go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 

43.  12  kindle  a  fire  in  the  houses  of  the  gods  of 

43.  13  the  houses  of  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians 

44.  3  to  serve  other  gods,  whom  they  knew  not 
44.    5  to  burn  no  incense  unto  other  gods 

44.    8  burning  incense  unto  other  gods  in  the 
44.  15  burnt  incense  unto  other  gods,  and  all 
46.  25  No,  and  Tharaoh.  .with  their  gods,  and 
48.  35  and  him  that  burnetii  incense  to  his  gods 
11.    8  also  carry  captives  into  Egypt  their  gods 

3.  1  who  look  to  other  gods,  and  love  flagons 

14.  3  neither  will  we  say.  .(Ye  are)  our  gods 
14  out  of  the  house  of  thy  gods  will  I  cut 


95- 
96. 
96. 
97- 
97- 
*35- 
136. 


Dan 
Eos 


Xah 


Zeph.  2.  11  he  will  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth 
2.God,  a  god,  object  of  worship,  6e6s  tlieos. 

John  10.  34  written  in  your  law,  I  said.  Ye  are  gods? 
10.  35  he  called  them  gods  unto  whom  the  word 

Acts  7.  40  Make  us  gods  to  go  before  us :  for  (as  for) 
14.  11  gods  are  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness 
19.  26  they  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with 

1  Co.  8.  5  For  though  there  be  that  are  called  gods 
8.    5  as  there  be  gods  many,  and  lords  many 

Gal.    4.    S  unto  them  which  by  nature  are  no  gods 


3.  A  little  demon,  deified  s^iirit,  Zat(x6viov  daimonion. 
Acts  17. 18  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods 

GOETH  up,  that  — 

A  going  up,  ascent,  nhnjp  maaleh. 

Josh  10.  10  along  the  way  that  goeth  up  to  Beth-hor. 

GOETH,  where  — 

Entrance,  going  in,  Ninp  mabo. 

Deutn.  30  by  the  way  where  the  sun  goeth  down,  in 
GOG,  aia  high,  mountain. 

1.  A  Reubenite,  and  grandson  of  Joel.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  5.    4  Shemaiah  his  son,  G.  his  son,  Sh.  his  son 

2.  A  prince  of  Rosh,    Meshek,  Tubal,  and  Tiras,   in 
ancient  Scythia  or  Tartary. 

Eze.  38.    2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  G.,  the 
38.    3  Behold,  I  (am)  against  thee,  O  G.,  the 
38.  14  son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say  unto  G. 
38.  16  when  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  thee,  O  G. 

38.  18  when  G.  shall  come  against  the  land  of 

39.  1  thou  son  of  man,  prophesy  against  G. 
39.  1  Behold,  I  (am)  against  thee,  O  G.,  the 
39.  11  I  will  give  unto  G.  a  place  there  of  grav. 

39.  11  there  shall  they  bury  G.,  and  all  his  mul. 
Rev.  20.    8  G.  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together  to 

GOING  — 

1.-4  step,  going,  ik'n  ashur. 

Psa.  17.    5  Holdup  my  goings  in  thy  paths,  (that)  my 

40.  2  upon  a  rock,  (and)  established  my  goings 
Prov  14. 15  the  prudent  (man)  looketh  well  to  his  go. 

2.-4  going,  way,  company,  no^n  halikah. 

Psa.  68.  24  seen  thy  goings,  O  God ;  (even)  the  goings 

3.  To  go  on,  ife  yalak. 

2  Sa.  2.  19  in  going  he  turned  not  to  the  right  hand 
2  Ch.  11.  4  and  returned  from  going  against  Jeroboam 
Prov  30. 29  go  well,  yea,  four  are  comely  in  going 

■i.Path,  custom,  nSayp  magalah. 

Prov.  5.  21  the  Lord,  and  he  pondereth  all  his  goings 
Isa.  59.   8  and  (there  is)  no  judgment  in  their  goings 

5.-4  step,  going,  ~ijJi>p  mitsad. 

Prov  20.  24  Man's  goings  (are)  of  the  Lord  ;  how  can 
Q.To  go  over  or  beyond,  ~Oi>  abar. 

Job  33.  28  deliver  his  soul  from  going  into  the  pit 
7. A  step,  foot,  cys paam'. 

Psa.  140.    4  who  have  purposed  to  overthrow  my  go. 
8.-4  step,  pace,  iyx  tsaad. 

Job  34.  21  ways  of  man,  and  he  seeth  all  his  goings 
9.  Stepping,  going,  nij/x  iscadah. 

2  Sa.    5.  24  when  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  going 

1  Ch.  14.  15  when  thou  shalt  hear  a  sound  of  going  in 

GOING  about  — 

To  go  or  set  round,  p|p3  nagaph,  5. 

Josh.  6.  11  compassed  the  city,  going  about  (it)  once 

GOING  down  — 

l.To  go  in,  Ni3  bo. 

Gen.  15.  12  when  the  sun  was  going  down,  a  deep 
Exodi7.  12  steady  until  the  going  down  of  the  sun 
Deuti6.    6  at  the  going  dowu  of  the  sun,  at  the  sea. 
Josh  10.  27  at  the  time  of  the  going  down  of  the  sun 

1  Ki.22.  36  about  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  saying 

2  Ch.  18.  34  about  the  time  of  the  sun  going  down  he 

2.  To  go  dovn,  TV  yarad. 

Job  ?33.  24  Deliver  him  from  going  down  to  the  pit 

3. Going  in,  entrance,  Nine  mabo. 

Josh.  1.    4  sea  toward  the  going  down  of  the  sun 
Psa.  50.    1  of  the  sun  unto  the  going  down  thereof 
104.  19  the  sun  knoweth  his  going  down 
113.    3  the  sun  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same 
Mai.    1. 11  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same,  my  na. 

'i.Going  down,  TtiD  morad. 

Josh.  7.    5  smote  them  in  the  going  down :  where. 

10.  11  (and)  were  in  the  going  down  to  Beth-ho. 
Jer.  48.    5  in  the  going  down  of  Horonaim  the  ene. 

5.Going  in  or  dou-n,  *?#?  meal. 

Dan.  6. 14  till  the  going  down  of  the  sun  to  deliver 

GOING,  to  be  — 

To  1  titer,  iropevofxai  porcuomai. 

Matt28.  11  wheu  they  were  going,  behold,  some  of 

GOING  forth  — 

1.  To  go  out  or  forth,  nv;  yatsa. 

Isa.  13.  10  sun  shall  be  darkened  in  his  going  forth 

2.^1  going  out  or  forth,  nf\0  motsa. 

Psa.  19.    6  going  forth  (is)  from  the  end  of  the  heav. 
Eze.  44.    5  with  every  going  forth  of  the  sanctuary 
Dan.    9.  25  from  the  going  forth  of  the  commandm. 
Hos.    6.    3  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning 

3.  Outgoings,  n'iN>*in  totsaoth. 

Num34.    4  the  going  forth  thereof  shall  be  from  the 
14.    S  the  goings  forth  of  the  border  shall  be  to 

GOING  out  — 

l.To  go  out  or  forth,  N)t;  yatsa. 

Deut33.  18  he  said,  Rejoice,  Zcbulun,  in  thy  going  o. 

1  Sa.  29.    6  thy  going  out  and  thy  coming  in  with  me 

2  Ki.19.  27  thy  going  out,  anil  thy  coming  in,  and 
Isa.   37.  28  thy  going  out,  and  thy  coming  ir   and 


GOING 


425 


GOLD 


2,Gomg  out  or  forth,  a^  motsa. 

N1UII33.    2  ^oses  wrote  their  goings  out  according 

33.  2  journeys  according  to  their  goings  out 
2  Sa.  3.  25  to  know  thy  going  out,  and  thy  coming 
Eze.  42.  11  their  goings  out  (were)  both  according  to 

43.  11  the  goings  out  thereof,  aud  the  comings 

^.Outgoings,  nixyin  totsaoth. 

-Nuni34.    5,  12  goings  out  of  it  shall  be  at  the.  .sea 

34.  0  goings  out  of  it  shall  be  at  Hazar-enau 
Josh  15.    4  goings  out  of  that  coast  were  at  the  sea 

15.    7  the  goings  out  thereof  were  at  Eu-rogel 

15.  11  goings  out  of  the  border  were  at  the  sea 

16.  3  and  the  goings  out  thereof  are  at  the  sea 
16.   8  the  goings  out  thereof  were  at  the  sea 
18.  12  goings  out  thereof  were  at  the  wilderness 
iS.  14  goings  out  thereof  were  at  Kirjath-baal 

Eze.  48.  30  goings  out  of  the  city  on  the  north  side 

GOING  over  — 

To  go  over  or  beyond,  "QIJ  abar. 

NU11132.    7  from  going  over  into  the  land  which  the 

GOING  to  and  fro, — 

l.To  go  about,  ^ix  azal,  4. 

Eze.  27.  19  Dan  also  and  Javan  going  to  and  fro  occ. 
2.  To  go  to  and  fro,  aw  shut. 

Job     1.    7  From  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and 

2.  2  From  going  to  and  fro  iu  the  earth,  and 

GOING  up  — 

l.A  going  up,  ascent,  nblUp  maalek. 

Josh  15.    7  that  (is)  before  the  going  up  to  Adummi. 
18.  17  (is)  over  against  the  going  up  of  Adumrn. 
Judg.  1.  36  coast,  .(was)  from  the  going  up  to  Akra. 
2  Ki.  9.  27  (they  did  so)  at  the  going  up  to  Gur,  wh. 
Neh.12.  37  at  the  going  up  of  the  wall,  above  the 
Jer.  48.    5  For  in  the  going  up  of  Luhith  continual 
Eze.  40.  31,  34,  37  the  going  up  to  it  (had)  eight  steps 

2.  To  go  up,  npj;  alah. 

Neh.  3.  19  over  against  the  going  up  to  the  armoury 

3.  Upper  chamber,  gallery,  ascent,  n*blL  aliyyah. 
Neh.  3.  31  Miphkad,  and  to  the  going  up  of  the 

3.  32  between  the  going  up  of  the  corner  unto 

GOINGS  forth  — 
Outgoings,  nixy'iD  motsaoth. 

Mic.    5.    2  whose  goings  forth  (have  been)  from  of 
GO -LAN,  |Vu  circle. 

A  Levitical  city  of  ilanasseh  in  Bashan,  and  one  of  the 
three  cities  of  refuge  E.  of  the  Jordan.  The  village  of 
Nawa  on  the  E.  border  of  Jauldii  is  much  too  far 
eastward  to  be  Golan. 

Deut.  4.  43  and  G.  in  Bashan,  of  the  Manassites 

Josh. 20.    8  G.  in  Bashan  out  of  the  tribe  of  Manass. 
2i.  27  outof  ..Manasseh,  (they  gave) G.  in  Bash. 

1  Ch.  6.  71  Unto  thesonsof  Gershom (were given).  .G. 
GOLD  — 
1.  Defence,  wealth,  iz^betsar. 

Job  36.  19  not  gold,  nor  all  the  forces  of  strength 

^.Defence,  wealth,  *ii'3  betser. 

Job  22.  24  shalt  thou  lay  up  gold  as  dust,  and  the 

Z.Gold,  {from  its  shining),  3.T]  dehab. 

Ezra  5.  14  vessels  also  of  gold  and  silver  of  the 

7.  15  to  carry  the  silver  and  gold,  which  the 
7.  16  the  silver  and  gold  that  thou  canst  find 
7.  18  with  the  rest  of  the  silver  and  the  gold 

Dan.  2.  32  This  image's  head  (was)  of  fine  gold,  his 
2.  35  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the  gold 
2.  38  over  them  all.  Thou  (art)  this  head  of  gold 

2.  45  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver,  and  the  gold 

3.  1  the  king  made  an  image  of  gold,  whose 
5.    4  praised  the  gods  of  gold,  and  of  silver 

5.    7  (have)  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck,  and 
5.  16  (have) a  chain  of  gold  about  thy  neck,  and 
5.  23  hast  praised  the  gods  of  silver,  and  gold 
5.  29  (put)  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck,  and 

i.Gold,  (from  its  shining),  3nj  zahab. 

Gen.    2.  11  whole  land  of  Havilah,  where  (there  is)g. 

2.  12  the  gold  of  that  land  (is)  good  :  there  (is) 

13.    2  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver,  and  in  gold 

24.  22  bracelets,  .of  ten  (shekels)  weight  of  gold 

24.  35  flocks,  and  herds,  and  silver,  and  gold 

24.  53  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  aud 
41.  42  and  put  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck 

44.  8  out  of  thy  lord's  house  silver  or  gold? 
Exod.  3.  22  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment 

11.  2  borrow,  .jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  g. 

12.  35  of  silver,  aud  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment 
20.  23  neither  shall  ye  make,  .you  gods  of  gold 

25.  3  take  of  them  ;  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass 
25.  11  And  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold 
25.  11  make  upon  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  abo. 
25.  12  thou  shalt  cast  four  rings  of  gold  for  it 
25.  13  make  staves,  .and  overlay  them  with  g. 
25.  17  thou  shalt  make  a  mercy  seat  (of)  pure  g. 
25. 18  thou  shalt  make  two  cherubim  (of)  gold 
25.  24  gold,  and  make  thereto  a  crown  of  gold 
25.  26  thou  shalt  make  for  it  four  rings  of  gold 
25.  28  overlay  them  with  gold,  that  the  table 
25.  29  (of)  pure  gold  shalt  thou  make  them 

25.  31  shalt  make  a  candlestick  (of)  pure  gold 
25.  36  it  (shall  be)  one  beaten  work  (of)  pure  g. 
25.  38  snuff  dishes.. (shall  be  of)  pure  gold 

25.  39  a  talent  of  pure  gold  shall  he  make  it 

26.  6  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  gold,  and 
26.  ?n  with  gold,  and  make  their  rings  (of)  gold 

54 


Exod26.  29  thou  shalt  overlay  the  bars  with  gold 
26.  32  with  gold  :  their  hooks  (shall  be  of)  gold 
26.  37  with  gold,  (aud) their  hooks(shall  be  of)g. 
28.   5  they  shall  take  gold,  and  blue,  and  pur. 
28.   6  they  shall  make  the  ephod  (of)  goM,  (of)  b. 
28.    8  gold,  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
28. 11  make  them  to  be  set  in  ouches  of  gold 
28.  13  And  thou  shalt  make  ouches  (of)  gold 
28.  14  And  two  chains  (of)  pure  gold  at  the  euds 
28.  15  (of)  gold,  (of)  blue,  ami  (of)  purple,  aud 
28.  20  shall  be  set  in  gold  in  their  inclosings 
28.  22  the  ends  (of)  wreathen  work  (of)  pure  gold 
28.  23  upon  the  breastplate  two  rings  of  gofd 
28.  24  shalt  put  the  two  wreathen  (chains)  of  g. 
28.  26  thou  shalt  make  two  rings  01  gold,  and 
28.  27  two  (other)  rings  of  gold  thou  shalt  make 

28.  33  bells  of  gold  between  them  round  about 
=8.  36  thou  shalt  make  a  plate  (of)  pure  gold 
30.    3  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  the 
30.    3  make  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 

30.  5  the  staves,  .and  overlay  them  with  gold 

31.  4  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass 

32.  24  Whosoever  hath  any  gold,  let  them  break 
32.  31  great  sin,  and  have  made  them  gods  of  g. ! 
35.    5  an  offering,  .gold,  aud  silver,  and  brass 
35.  22  and  rings,  and  tablets,  all  jewels  of  gold 
35.  22  (offered)  an  offering  of  gold  uuto  the  Lord 

35.  32  work  in  gold,  and  iu  silver,  and  in  brass 

36.  13  he  made  fifty  taches  of  gold,  and  coupled 
36.  34  with  gold,  aud  made  then'  rings  (of)  gold 
36.  34  and  overlaid  the  bars  with  gold 

36.  36  them  with  gold :  their  hooks  (were  of)  g. 

36.  38  their  chapiters  and  their  fillets  with  gold 

37.  2  he  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold  within  and 
37.    2  made  a  crown  of  gold  to  it  round  about 
37.    3  he  cast  for  it  four  rings  of  gold,  (to  be  set) 
37.    4  made  staves,  .and  overlaid  them  with  g. 
37.    6  And  he  made  the  mercy  seat  (of)  pure  g. 
37.    7  he  made  two  cherubims  (of)  gold,  beaten 
37.  11  gold,  and  made  thereunto  a  crown  of  g. 
37.  12  and  made  a  crown  of  gold  for  the  border 
37.  13  he  cast  for  it  four  rings  of  gold,  and  put 
37.  15  overlaid  them  with  gold,  to  bear  the  tali. 
37.  16  his  covers  to  cover  withal,  (of)  pure  gold 
37.  17  he  made  the  candlesticks  (of)  pure  gold 
37. 22  all.  .(was)  one  beaten  work  (of)  pure  gold 
37.  23  and  his  snuff  dishes,  (of)  pure  gold 

37.  24  (Of)  a  talent  of  pure  gold' made  he  it,  and 
37.  26  he  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold,  (both)  the 
37.  26  made  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  abo. 
37.  27  he  made  two  rings  of  gold  for  it  under 

37.  28  the  staves,  .and  overlaid  them  with  gold 

38.  24  the  gold  that  was  occupied  for  the  work 

38.  24  the  gold  of  the  offering,  was  twenty  and 

39.  2  he  made  the  ephod  (of)  gold,  blue,  and 

30.  3  they  did  beat  the  gold  into  thin  plates 
39.   5,  8  (of)  gold,  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
39.    6  onyx  stones  inclosed  in  ouches  of  gold 
39.  13  in  ouches  of  gold  in  their  inclosings 

39.  15  the  ends,  (of)  wreathen  work  (of)  pure  g. 
39.  16  made  two  ouches  (of)  gold,  and  two  gold 
39.  17  they  put  the  two  wreathen  chains  of  gold 
39.  19  they  made  two  rings  of  gold,  and  put 
39.  25  they  made  bells  (of)  pure  gold  ,  and  put 

39.  30  the  plate  of  the  holy  crown  (of)  pure  go. 

40.  5  thou  shalt  set  the  altar  of  gold  for  the 
Num.  7.  14  One  spoon  of  ten  (shekels)  of  gold,  full  of 

7.  20  One  spoon  of  gold  of  ten  (shekels),  full 
7.  84  twelve  silver  bowls,  twelve  spoons  of  go. 

7.  86  the  gold  of  the  spoons  (was)  an  hundred 

8.  4  And  this  work,  .(was  of)  beaten  gold,  unto 
22.  18  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold 
24. 13  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold 
31. 22  gold,  aud  the  silver,  the  brass,  the  iron 

31.  50  of  jewels  of  gold,  chains,  and  bracelets 
31'.  51  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  gold  of  them 
31.  52  gold  of  the  offering  that  they  offered  up 
31.  54  the  priest  took  the  gold  of  the  captains 

Deut.  7.  25  desire  the  silver  or  gold  (that  is)  on  them 
8.  13  thy  silver  and  thy  gold  is  multiplied,  and 
17. 17  greatlymultiply  to  himself  silver  and  gold 

29.  xj  silver  and  gold,  which  (were)  among  them 
Josh.  6.  19  gold,  and  vessels  of  brass  and  iron,  (are) 

6.  24  the  gold,  and  the  vessels  of  brass  and  of 

7.  21  a  wedge  of  gold  of  fifty  shekels  weight 

7.  24  the  garment,  and  the  wedge  of  gold,  and 
22.   8  with  gold,  and  with  brass,  and  with  iron 

Judg.  8.  26  thousand  and  seven  hundred  (shekels),  .g. 

1  Sa.   6.    8  put  the  jewels  of  gold,  which  ye  return 

6.  11  the  coffer  with  the  mice  of  gold,  and  the 
6.  15  wherein  the  jewels  of  gold  (were),  and 

2  Sa.    1  24  on  ornaments  of  gold  upon  your  apparel 

8.  7  David  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 
8.  10 -and  vessels  of  gold,  and  vessels  of  brass 
8. 1 1  the  silver  and  gold  that  he  had  dedicated 

12.  30  talent  of  gold  with  the  precious  stones 
21.    4  We  will  have  no  silver  nor  gold  of  Saul 
1  Ki.  6.  20  he  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold  ;  and  (so) 
6.  21  overlaid  the  house  within  with  pure  gold 
6.  21  by  the  chains  of  gold  before  the  oracle 
6.  21  a  partition,  .and  he  overlaid  it  with  gold 
6.  22  And  the  whole  house  he  overlaid  with  g. 
6.  22  the  whole  altar,  .he  overlaid  with  gold 
6.  28  And  he  overlaid  the  cherubim  with  gold 
6.  30  floor  of  the  house  he  overlaid  with  gold 
6.  32  overlaid  (them)  with  gold,  and  spread  g. 

6.  35  with  gold  fitted  upon  the  carved  work 

7.  48  the  altar  of  gold,  and  the  table  of  gold 
7.  49  the  candlesticks  of  pure  gold,  five  on 
7.  49  and  the  lamps,  and  the  tongs,  (of)  gold 
7.  50  (of)  pure  gold ;  and  the  hinges  (of)  gold 
7.  51  even  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  v. 


■2  Ki.  5. 
7- 


:  Ki.  9.  11  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees,  and  with  gold 
9.  14  sent  to  the  king  sixscore  talents  of  gold 
9.  28  fetched  from  thence  gold,  four  hundred 
10.    2  and  very  much  gold,  and  precious  stones 
10. 10  an  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold 
10.  11  brought  gold  from  Ophir,  brought  iu 
10.  14  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  Solomon 
10.  14  hundred  threescore  and  six  talents,  .gold 
10.  16  beaten  gold :  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  g. 
10.  17  (of)  beaten  gold;  three  pound  of  gold  went 
10.  18  ivory,  and  overlaid  it  with  the  best  gold 
to.  21  Solomon's  drinking  vessels  (were  of)  gold 
10.  21  vessels  of  the  house,  .(were  of)  pure  gold 
10.  22  bringing  gold,  aud  silver,  ivory,  and  apes 
10.  25  vessels  of  gold,  and  garments,  and  anno. 
12.  28  made  two  calves  (of)  gold,  and  said  unto 

14.  26  shields  of  gold  which  Solomon  had  made 

15.  15  the  house  of  the  Lord,  silver,  and  gold 
15.  18  Asa  took  all  the  silver  and  the  gold  (that 

15.  19  unto  thee  a  present  of  silver  and  gold 
20.    3  Thy  silver  and  thy  gold  (is)  mine  ;  thy 
20.    5  thy  gold,  and  thy  wives,  and  thy  children 
20.    7  he  seut.  .for  my  silver,  and  for  my  gold 

22.  48  made  ships,  .to  go  to  Ophir  for  gold 
5  six  thousand,  .of  gold,  and  ten  changes 
8  carried  thence  silver,  and  gold,  and 

13  any  vessels  of  gold,  or  vessels  of  silver 
12. 18  all  the  gold,  .found  in  the  treasures  of 
14.  14  he  took  all  the  gold  and  silver,  and  all 

16.  8  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold  (that  was 
18.  14  talents  of  silver,  and  thirty  talents  of  gold 
20. 13  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  spices 

23.  33  trib. .  .talents  of  silver,  and  a  talent  of  go. 
23.  35  gave  the  silver  and  the  gold  to  Pharaoh 

23.  35  he  exacted  the  silver  and  the  gold  of  the 

24.  13  cut  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold  which 

25. 15  (and)  such  things  as  (were)  of  gold,  (in)  g„ 
:  Ch.18.    7  David  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 

18.  10  all  manner  of  vessels  of  gold  and  silver 
18.  11  with  the  silver  and  the  gold  that  he  bro. 

20.  2  and  found  it  to  weigh  a  talent  of  gold 

21.  25  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold  by  weight 

22.  14  an  hundred  thousand  talents  of  gold 

22. 16  Of  the  gold,  the  silver,  and  the  brass,  and 
28.  14  gave)  of  gold  by  weight  for  (things)  of  g. 
28.  15  the  weight  for  the  candlesticks  of  gold 
28. 15  and  for  their  lamps  of  gold,  by  weight 
28.  16  by  weight  (he  gave)  gold  for  the  tables 
28.  17  Also  pure  gold  for  the  flesh  hooks,  and 
28.  18  for  the  altar  of  incense  refined  gold  by 

18  gold  for  the  pattern  of  the  chariot  of  the 

2  the  gold  for  (things  to  be  made)  of  gold 

3  I  have  of  mine  own  proper  good,  of  gold 

4  three  thousand  talents  of  gold,  of  the  g. 

5  The  gold  for  (things)  of  gold,  and  the  sil. 
7  of  gold  five  thousand  talents  and  ten 

15  the  king  made  silver  and  gold  at  Jerusa. 
7  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  gold,  and  in 

14  skilful  to  work  in  gold,  aud  in  silver,  in 

4  And  he  overlaid  it  within  with  pure  goldi 

5  fir  tree,  which  he  overlaid  with  fine  gold 

6  and  the  gold  (was)  gold  of  Parvaim 

7  He  overlaid  also  the  house,  .with  gold 

8  he  overlaid  it  with  fine  gold,  .to  six  hun. 

9  weight  of  the  nails  (was)  fifty  shekels  of  g. 
9  he  overlaid  the  upper  chambers  with  gold1 

10  cherubim.. and  overlaid  them  with  gold 

7  And  he  made  ten  candlesticks  of  gold 

8  he  made  an  hundred  basins  of  gold 

20  Moreover  the  candlesticks,  .of  pure  gold 

21  tongs,  (made  he  of)  gold,  (and),  .perfect  g. 

22  the  spoons,  and  the  censers,  (of)  pure.g. 
22  doors  of  the  house  of  the  temp. , (were  of)  g. 

1  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  all  the  inst. 
iS  four  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  gold 
1  gold  in  abundance,  and  precious  stones 

9  an  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold 
10  servants,  .which  brought  gold  from  Ophir 
13  the  weight  of  the  gold  that  came  to  Sol. 

13  and  threescore  and  six  talents  of  gold 

14  governors,  .brought  gold  and  silver  to  S. 

15  made  two  hundred  targets  (of)  beaten  g. 

15  six  hundred,  .of  beaten  gold  went  to  one 
t6  three  hundred  shields,  .beaten  gold 

16  three  hundred,  .of  gold  went  to  one  shi. 

17  throne,  .and  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold 
iS  six  steps,  .with  a  footstool  of  gold.  .fast. 
20  And  all  the  drinking  vessels . .  (were  of)  g. 

20  and  all  the  vessels,  .(were  of)  pure  gold 

21  bringing  gold,  and  silver,  ivory,  and 
24  vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of  gold,  and 

12.  9  he  carried  away  also  the  shields  of  gold 

13.  11  and  the  candlestick  of  gold  with  the  lamps 
15. 18  he  himself  had  dedicated,  silver,  and  g, 
16.   2  Asa  brought  out  silver  and  gold  out  of 
16.    3  behold,  I  have  sent  thee  silver  aud  gold 
21.    3  great  gifts  of  silver,  and  of  gold,  and  of 

24.  14  and  spoons,  and  vessels  of  gold  and  silver 

25.  24  all  the  gold  and  the  silver,  and  all  the 
32.  27  and  for  gold,  and  for  precious  stones 
36.    3  hundred  talents  of  silver,  .a  talent  of  g_ 

Ezra  1.  4,  6  with  gold,  and  with  goods,  and  with 
1.  9  thirty  chargers  of  gold,  a  thousand  cha. 
1. 10  Thirty  basins  of  gold,  silver  basins  of 

1,  11  All  the  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver(were> 

2.  69  They  gave,  .one  thousand  drams  of  gold 
8.  25  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels 
8.  26  I  even  weighed,  .of  gold  an  hundred  tal. 
8.  27  Also  twenty  basins  of  gold  of  a  thousand 
8.  27  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  gold 
8.  28  the  silver  and  the  gold  (are)  a  freewill 

8.  30  the  weight  of  the  silver,  and  the  gold 


2  Ch. 


28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 


GOLD 


426 


GONE 


Ezra    8.  33  the  silver  and  the  gold  and  the  vessels 
Neh.   7.  70  a  thousand  drams  of  gold,  fifty  basins 

7.  71,  72  twenty  thousand  drams  of  gold,  and 
Esth.  1.    6  the  beds  (were  of)  gold  and  silver,  upon 

1.  7  they  gave  (them)  drink  in  vessels  of  gold 

8.  15  with  a  great  crown  of  gold,  and  with  a 
Job     3. 15  Or  with  princes  that  bad  gold,  who  filled 

23. 10  hath  tried  me,  I  shall  come  forth  as  gold 
28.    1  and  a  place  of  gold  (where)  they  fine  (it) 
28.    6  of  sapphires  ;  and  it  hath  dust  of  gold 
28.  17  The  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot  equal  it 
31.  24  If  I  have  made  gold  my  hope,  or  have 
42.  11  money,  and  every  one  an  earring  of  gold 
Psa.  19.  10  More  to  be  desired  (are  they)  than  gold 
45-  13  glorious,  .her  clothing  (is)  of  wrought  g. 
72.  15  to  him  shall  be  given  of  the  gold  of  Sheba 
105.  37  He  brought  them  forth  also  with,  .gold 
115.    4  Their  idols  (are)  silver  and  gold,  the  work 
119.  72  better  unto  me  than  thousands  of  gold 
119.  127  I  love  thy  commandments  above  gold 
135.  15  idols  of  the  heathen  (are)  silver  and  gold 
Prov  1 1.  22  (As)  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout 
17.    3  pot  (is)  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  g. 

20. 15  There  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  rubies 

22.  1  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold 
25.  11  like)  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver 
25.  12  (As)  an  ear  ring  of  gold,  and  an  ornament 
27.  2i  pot  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold 

Eccl.  2.    8  I  gathered  me  aiso  silver  and  gold,  and 
Song   1.  11  We  will  make  thee  borders  of  gold,  with 
3.  10  He  made . .  the  bottom  thereof  (of)  gold 

5.  14  His  hands  (are  as)  gold  rings  set  with  the 
Isa.     2.    7  Their  land  also  is  full  of  silver  and  gold 

2.  20  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold 
13.  17  (as  for)  gold,  they  shall  not  delight  in  it 

30.  22  the  ornament  of  thy  molten  images  of  gold 

31.  7  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold 

39.  2  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  spices 

40.  19  the  goldsmith  spreadeth  it  over  with  gold 
46.   6  They  lavish  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh 
60.    6  they  shall  bring  gold  and  incense ;  and 
60.    9  their  silver  and  their  gold  with  them 

60.  17  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold,  and  for  iron 
Jer.    4.  30  thou  deckest  thee  with  ornaments  of  gold 
10.    4  They  deck  it  with  silver  and  with  gold 

10.  9  gold  from  TJphaz,  the  work  of  the  work. 
52.  19  (that)  which  (was)  of  gold  (in)  gold,  and 

Lam.  4.    1  How  is  the  gold  become  dim  !  (how)  is 
Eze.    7.  19  their  gold  shall  be  removed,  .their  gold 

16.  13  Tims  wast  thou  decked  with  gold  and  si. 

16. 17  fair  jewels  of  my  gold  and  of  my  silver 

27.  22  and  with  all  precious  stones,  and  gold 

28.  4  hast  gotten  gold  and  silver  into  thy  fcrea. 
28.  13  the  emerald,  and  the  carbuncle,  and  gold 
38. 13  to  carry  away  silver  and  gold,  to  take 

Dan.  11.    8  their  precious  vessels  of  silver  and  of  gold 

11.  38  shall  he  honour  with  gold,  and  silver,  and 
'  11. 43  power  over  the  treasures  of  gold  and  of 

Hos.    2.    S  and  multiplied  her  silver  and  gold 

8.  4  of  their  silver  and  their  gold  have  they 
Joel  3.  5  ye  have  taken  my  silver  and  my  gold,  and 
Nab.  2.  9  the  spoil  of  silver,  take  the  spoil  of  gold 
Hab.  2.  19  it  (is)  laid  over  with  gold  and  silver,  and 
Zeph.  1.  iS  Neither  their  silver  nor  their  gold  sli.ill 
Hag.  2.  8  The  silver  (is)  mine,  and  thegold(is)mine 
Zech.  4.    2  behold,  a  candlestick  all  (of)  gold,  with  a 

6.  11  take  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns 

13.  9  and  will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried :  they 

14.  14  gold,  amt  silver,  and  apparel,  in  great 
Mai.    3.    3  and  purge  them  as  gold  and  silver,  that 

5.  Best  gold,,  pnij  charuis. 
'  Psa.  68.  13  silver,  and  her  feathers  with  yellow  gold 
Prov.  8.  10  and  knowledge  rather  than  choice  gold 

8.  19  My  fruit  is  better  than  gold,  yea,  than 
16.  16  How  much  better. .  to  get  wisdom  than  g.? 

6. Pure  gold,  cria  ketkem. 

Job    28.  16  It  cannot  be  valued  with  the  gold  of  Op. 

Psa.  45.    9  hand  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  Oph. 

Song  5.  11  His  head  (is  as),  .gold  ;  his  locks  (are)  bu. 
7  .Rrjined.  gold,  ~rop  segor. 

Jub  28.  15  It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall 
S.Gold,  xpvv'l0V  chrusion. 

Acts   3.    6  Peter  said,  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none 

20.  33  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold 
Heb.  9.    4  the  ark.,  overlaid  round  about  with  gold 
1  Pe.  1.    7  being  much  more  precious  than  of  gold 

1. 18  with  corruptible  things,  fas) silver  and  g. 

3.  3  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of  app, 
Rev.    3.  18  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in 

21.  18  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear 
21.  21  the  street  of  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  as 

9. Gold,  xpvor<$s  chrusos. 

Matt.  2.  11  gifts;  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh 

10.  9  Provide  neither  gold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass 
23.  16  whosoever  shall  swear  by  the  gold  of  the 

23.  17  blind  !  for  whether  is  greater,  the  gold 
23.  17  or  the  temple  that  sanctifieth  the  gold? 

Acts  17.  29  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,  or  si. 
1  Co.   3. 12  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay 
1  Ti.    2.   9  not  with  broidered  hair,  or  gold,  orpearls 
Jas.    5.   3  Your  gold  and  silver  i*  cankered  ;  and 
Rev.   9.    7  on  their  heads,  .as  it  were  crowns  of  gold 

9.  20  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass  17.  4. 
18. 12  The  merchandise  of  gold,  and  silver,  and 

18. 16  scarlet,  and  decked  with  gold,  and  preci. 
GOLD,  fine  — 

\.Best  good,  fmrj  chamts. 

Prov.  3.  14  and  the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold 
Zech.  9.    3  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  street 


%Pure  gold,  ens  kethem. 

Job  31.  24  or  have  said  to  the  fine  gold,  (Thou  art) 
Prov  25.  12  and  an  ornament  of  fine  gold,  (so  is)  a 
Lam.  4.    1  (how)  is  the  most  fine  gold  changed  !  the 
Dan.  10.    s  loins  (were)  girded  with  fine  gold  of  Up. 

S.Fine  gold,  is  paz. 

Job  28.  i7exchauge..(shallnotbefor)jewelsoffineg. 
Psa.  19.  10  yea,  than  much  fine  gold  ;  sweeter  also 

119.  127  I  love  thy  commandments,  .above  fine  g. 
Prov.  S.  19  My  fruit  (is)  better,  .yea,  than  fine  gold 
Song  5.  11  His  head  (is  as)  the  most  fine  gold ;  his 
5.  15  His  legs,  .set  upon  sockets  of  fine  gold 
Isa.   13.  12  make  a  man  more  precious  than  fine  gold 
Lam.  4.    2  sons  of  Ziou,  comparable  to  line  gold,  how 

GOLD,  pure  — 

1.  Pure  gold,  nn?  kethem. 

Job  28.  19- neither  shall  it  be  valued  with  pure  gold 

%Fine  gold,  13  paz. 

Psa.  21.   3  settest  a  crown  of  pure  gold  on  his  head 

GOLD,  of — 

Golden,  of  gold,  xpweos  chruseos. 

2  Ti.    2.  20  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of 

Rev.    4.    4  and  they  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  g 

9. 2c  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and 

GOLD  ring,  with  a  — 

Having  a  gold,  ring,  xpwoSaKrvAios  chrusodald. 
Jas.     2    2  if  there  come,  .a man  with  a  gold  ring,  in 

GOLDEN  — 

l.Gold,  nrn  deh  <h. 

Ezra    6.    5  also  let  the  golden  and  silver  vessels  of 
Dan.    3.    5  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden  image 
3.    7  fell  down  (and)  worshipped  the  golden  i. 
3.  10  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden  image 
3.  12,  14,  18  nor  worship  the  golden  image 
5.    2  to  bring  the  golden  and  silver  vessels 

5.  3  Then  they  brought  the  golden  vessels 

%Gold,  3m  zahab. 

Gen.  24.  22  that  the  man  took  a  golden  ear  ring  of 
Exod25.  25  thou  shalt  make  a  golden  crown  to  the 
28.  34,  34  A  golden  bell  and  a  pomegranate 
30.   4  two  golden  rings  shalt  thou  make  to  it 
32.    2  Break  off  the  gohl  en  earrings,  which  (are) 
32.    3  the  people  brake  off  the  golden  ear  rings 
39.  20  they  made  two  (other)  golden  rings,  and 

39.  38  the  golden  altar,  and  the  anointing  oil 

40.  26  he  put  the  golden  altar  in  the  tent  of  the 
Lev.  8.  9  did  he  put  the  golden  plate,  the  holy  cr. 
Num.  4.  11  upon  the  golden  altar  they  shall  spread 

7*  32.  38,  44,  50,  62,  68,  74,  80  One  golden  spo. 

7.  86  The  golden  spoons  (were)  twelve,  full  of 
Judg.  8.  24  they  had  golden  ear  rings,  because  they 

8.  26  the  weight  of  the  golden  ear  rings  that 

1  Sa.    6.   4  Five  golden  emerods,  and  five  golden  m. 

6.  17  these  (are)  the  golden  emerods  which  the 
6.  18  the  golden  mice,  .the  number  of  all  the 

2  Ki.io.  29  the  golden  calves  that  (were)  in  Beth-el 

1  Ch.28. 17  for  the  golden  basins,  .by  weight  for 

2  Ch.  4. 19  the  golden  altar  also,  and  the  tables 

13.  8  (there  are)  with  you  golden  calves,  which 
Esth.  4.  11  king  shall  hold  out  the  golden  sceptre 

5.    2  the  kiug  held  out  to  Esther  the  golden 

8.  4  the  king  held  out  the  golden  sceptre  to. 
Eccl. 12.  6  or  the  golden  bowl  be  broken,  or  the  ii. 
Jer.  51.  7  Babylon .  .a  golden  cup  in  the  Lord's  h. 
Zech.  4.  12  through  the.. golden  pipes,  .empty  theg. 

Z.Gohlcn,  of  gold,  xpvv*°$  chruseos, -ovs. 

Heb.   9.    4  Which  had  the  golden  censer  and  the  a. 

9.  4  wherein  (was)  the  golden  pot  that  had 
Rev.    1.  12  being  turned  I  saw  seven  golden  candle. 

j.  13  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle 

1.  20  and  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.     The 

2.  1  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candle. 
5.    8  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which  are  the 
8.   3  And  another  angel  came,  .having  a  gold. 
8.    3  upon  the  golden  altar  which  was  before 
9. 13  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden  altar 

14.  14  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and 

15.  6  their  breasts  girded  with  golden  girdles 
15.    7  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God 
17.    4  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of 
2i.  15  had  a  golden  reed  to  measure  the  city 

GOLDEN  city  — 

Golden  ore,  exactress  of  gold,  narriD  mudhebah. 

Isa.    14.    4  hath  the  oppressor  ceased  !  the  golden  c. 
GOLDEN  wedge  — 
Pure  gold,  Dn3  kethem. 

Isa.  13.  12  even  a  man  than  the  golden  wedge  of  0. 
GOLDSMITH  — 
l.To  '■'.'■  foe,  try,  purify,  pj-iy  tsaraph. 

Neh.  3.    S  Uzziel  the  son  of  Harhaiah,  of  the  gold. 

3.  32  repaired  the  goldsmiths  and  the  mercha. 
Isa.   40.  rg  the  goldsmith  spreadeth  it  over  with  go. 

41.    7  so  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsm. 
46.    6  They,  .hire  a  goldsmith  ;  and  he  maketh 

^.Refiner,  purifier,  '£ty  tsorpki. 

Nan.    3.  31  repaired  Malchiah  the  goldsmith's  sou 
GOL-GO'-THA,  r0\yoda  a  shuU. 

The  Hebrew  name  of  the  spot  at  which  Christ  was 
crucified.  It  is  so  given  by  three  of  the  evangelists; 
but  Luke,  according  to  his  usual  practice,  gives  the 
Greek  equivalent. 

Matt.27.  33  they  were  come  unto  a  place  called  G. 


Mark  1 5.  22  And  they  bring  him  unto  the  place  G. 

J0I11119.  17  a  skull,  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew,  G. 
GOL-I'-ATH,  nz?a  an  exile  or  soothsayer. 
A  famous  giant  of  Gath,  probably  a  descendant  of  the 
Rephaim.  He  defied  the  armies  of  Israel,  but  was 
slain  and  despoiled  by  David  while  a  stripling.  His 
height  was  6  cubits  and  1  span;  taking  the  cubit  at 
21  inches,  that  would  make  him  10J  feet  high,    b.c  1063. 

1  Sa.  17.    4  there  went  outa  champion,  .named  G. 

17.  23  there  came  up  the  champion..  G.  byname 

21.  9  G. . .  whom  thou  slewest  in  the  valley  of 

22.  10  and  gave  him  the  sword  of  G.  the  Philis. 
zSa,2i.  19  where  Elhanan.. slew  (the  brother  of)  G. 
1  Ch.20.    5  slew  Lahmi  the  brother  of  G.  the  Gittite 

GO'-MER,  Tta  completion,  heat. 

1.  Eldest  son  of  Japheth,"  and  father  of  Ashkenaz,  Rip- 
hath,  and  Togarmah,  B.C.  2340.  He  was  progenitor  oi 
the  <  imerians,  Cimbri,  and  other  branches  of  the 
Celtic  family,  as  well  as  of  the  modern  Gael  and  Cymry, 
the  latter  preserving  the  original  name  with  slight 
variation. 

Gen.  10.    2  sans  of  Japheth  ;  G.,  and  Magog,  and 
10.    3  the  sons  of  G.  ;  Ashkenaz,  and  Riphath 

1  Ch.  1.    5  sons  of  Japheth  ;  G.f  and  Magog,  and  M. 

1.    6  the  sons  of  G.  ;  Ashchenaz,  and  Riphath 

2.  The  people  descended  from  Gomer.  They  settled  on 
the  N.  of  the  Black  Sea,  and  then  spread  themselves 
southward  and  westward  to  the  extremities  of  Europe. 

Eze.  38.    6  G.,  and  all  his  bands ;  the  house  of  Tog. 

3.  The  wife  or  concubine  of  Hosea.    B.C.  785. 

Hos.  1.  3  So  he  went  and  took  G.  the  daughter  of 
GO-MOR'-RAH,  rrpn  fissure,  submersion.  rS/xoppa. 
One  of  the  five  "cities  of  the  plain"  or  ''vale  of 
Siddim  "  that  were  plundered  by  C'hedorlaomer  and  his 
allies.  All  these  cities  save  Zoar  were  afterwards 
destroyed  with  fire  from  heaven. 

Gen.  10. 19  as  thou  goest,  unto  Sodom,  and  G.,  and 
13. 10  before  the  Lord  destroyed  Sodom  and  G. 
14.  2  made  war.  .with  Birsha  king  of  G.,  Shin. 
14.  8  there  went  out.  .the  king  of  G.,  and  the 
14. 10  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  G.  fled,  and  fell 
14.  11  they  took  all  the  goods  of  Sodom  and  G. 

18.  20  Because  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  G.  is  great 

19.  24  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  G.  br. 
19.  28  he  looked  toward  Sodom  and  G.,  and 

Deut2g.  23  like  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  and  G.,  A. 

32.  32  For  their  vine  (is) . .  of  the  fields  of  G. :  their 

Isa.     1.   9  Except . .  we  should  have  been  like  unto  G. 

1.  io  give  ear  unto  the  law.  .ye  people  of  G. 
13.  19  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  G. 

Jer.   23.  14  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  as  G. 

49.  18  As  in  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  G. 

50.  40  As  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  G.  and  the 
Amos  4.  11  of  you,  as  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  G. 
Zeph.  2.   9  and  the  children  of  Amnion  as  G.,  (even) 
Mattio.  15  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for.  ,G.  in  the 
Mark  6.  n  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for.  .G.  in  the 
Rom.  9.  29  Except,  .we  had.. been  made  like  untoG. 

2  Pe.   2.    6  turning  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  G.  into 
Jude        7  Even  as  Sodom  and  G.,  and  the  cities 

GONE,  he  — 

A  measured  thing,  tjd  middad. 

Job     7.    4  When  shall  I  arise,  and  the  night  be  go.? 
GONE,  to  be  — 
l.To  go  away,  im  azad. 

Dan.    2.    5  The  thing  is  gone  from  me  :  if  ye  will 

2.  8  because  ye  see  the  tiling  is  gone  from  me 

2.  To  go  about  or  away,  'tjx  azal. 

Deut  32.  36  when  he  seeth  that  (their)  power  is  gone 
Prov  20.  14  wdien  he  is  gone  his  way,  then  he  boast. 

Z.He  is  not,  there  is  not,  j*n  ayin. 

1  Ki.  20.  40  And  as  thy  servant  was  busy,  .he  was  g. 
Psa.  38.  10  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  also  is  gone  from 

4.To  go  in,  Ni3  bo. 

Num.  7.  89  when  Moses  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle 

1  Sa.  20.  41  as  soon  as  the  lad  was  gone,  David  arose 

Jer.   44.    8  land  of  Egypt,  whither  ye  be  gone  to  d. 

44. 14  which  are  gone  into  the  land  of  Egypt  to 

44.  28  that  are  gone  into  the  land  of  Egypt  to 

5. To  remove,  n?3  galah. 

Isa.   24.  11  is'darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land  is  g. 
Q.To  go  on,  T|?n  halah. 

Gen.  31.  30  now,  (though)  thou  wonkiest  needs  be  g. 

34.  17  we  take  our  daughter,  and  we  will  lie  g. 
1  Sa.  14.  17  Number  now,  and  see  who  is  gone  from  \ 
1  Ki.22.  13  the  messenger  that  was  gone  to  call  Mi. 
Prov.  7.  ig  For  the  goodman,  .is  gone  a  long  journey 
Song  2.  11  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  (and)  gone 

6.    1  Whither  is  thy  beloved  gone,  O  thou  fa. 
Isa.   46.    2  but  themselves  are  gone  into  captivity 
Jer.     2.  23  I  am  not  polluted,  I  have  not  gone  after 

9.  10  the  fowl,  .and  the  beast,  .they  are  gone 
Lam.  1.    5  her  children  are  gone  into  captivity  before 

1. 18  my  young  men  are  gone  into  captivity 
Eze.  37.  21  among  the  heathen,  whither  they  be  gone 
Hos.    9.   6  lo,  they  are  gone  because  of  destruction 

l.To  be  gone,  "f$\  kalak,  2, 

rsa.109.  :-3  I  am  gone  like  the  shadow  when  it  decl. 

S.To  go  ov,  sfe  yalak. 

Gen.  28.    7  Jacob  obeyed .  .and  was  gone  to  Padan-a. 
42.  33  leave  one  of  your  brethren.. and  lie  gone 
Exodi2.  32  Also  take,  .as  ye  have  said,  and  be  gone 


GONE 


42; 


GOOD 


2  Sa.   3.  22  sent  him  away,  and  he  was  gone  in  peace 
3.  23  hath  sent  him  away,  and  he  is  gone  in  pe. 
3.  24  hast  sent  him  away,  and  he  is  quite  gone? 
1  Ki.  13.  24  when  he  was  gone,  a  lion  met  him  by  the 
18.  12  it  shall  come  to  pass..  I  am  gone  from  thee 
Job   19.  10  He  hath  destroyed  me.  .and  I  am  gone 
Jer.     5.  23  this  people .  .they  are  revolted  and  gone 
15.   6  saith  the  Lord,  thou  art  gone  backward 
Lam.  1.   6  they  are  gone  without  strength  before 
9.  To  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  .1*05  natah. 

Psa.  73.    2  But  as  for  me,  my  feet  were  almost  gone 

10.7*0  go  in,  W3  bo. 

EX01I33.    8  until  he  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle 
Num.  7.  89  when  Moses  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle 
Jer.   44.  14,  28  which  are  gone  into  the  laud  of  Eg. 

11. To  go  over  or  beyond,  ~g.jr  abar. 

Kum  13  32  through  which  we  have  gone  to  search  it 
Psa.  42.  7  thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are  gone  over 
Song  5.    6  had  withdrawn  himself,  (and)  was  gone 

GONE  ('round)  about,  to  be  — 

To  go  or  set  round,  *]|2i  naqaph,  5. 

Job     1.    5  when  the  days  of.  .feasting  were  gone  ah. 

Isa.    15.    8  the  cry  is  gone  round  about  the  borders 

GONE  aside,  to-be  — 

To  turn,  be  turned  aside,  "flD  sur. 

Psa.  14.    3  They  are  all  gone  aside,  they  are  (all)  to. 
GONE  away,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  pressed,  estranged,  TH  zur,  2. 

Isa.      1.    4  children,  .they  are  gone  away  backward 

2.  To  move,  wander,  yu  nua. 

Job  28.   4  they  are  dried  up,  they  are  gone  away 

3.  To  go  on,  *|b;  yalak. 

JudgiS.  24  Ye  have  taken. .and  ye  are  gone  away 
4..  To  turn  aside,  "nd  sur. 

Mai.    3.   7  ye  are  gone  away  from  mine  ordinances 
GONE  back,  to  be  — 
To  turn  back,  2\v?  shnb. 

Ruth  1.  15  thy  sister  in  law  is  gone  back  unto  her 
GONE  out,  that  which  is  — 
An  out  going,  nsid  motsa, 

Deut  23.  23  That  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  lips  thou 
GONE  out,  thing  — 
Out  going,  Nyio  motsa. 

Psa.  89.  34  noralterthe  thing  (that  is)goneoutofniy 
GONE  away  far,  to  be  — 
To  oj  far  off,  prn  rachaq. 

Eze.  44.  10  the  Levites  that  are  gone  away  far  from 
GOOD  — 
l.Kind,  Tpn  ckasid. 

Mic.    7.    2  The  good  (man)  is  perished  out  of  the  ea. 
2.Good,  nn  tob. 

Ezra  5  17  Now  therefore,  if . .good  to  the  king,  let 
2. Good,  nia  tob. 

Gen.    1.   4  And  God  saw  the  light,  that  (it  was)  good 
1. 10,  12,  18,  21,  25  and  God  saw  that  it  (was)  g. 

1.  31  God  saw.  .and,  behold,  (it  was)  very  good 
-  2.   9  pleasant  to  the  sight  and  good  for  food 

2.  9  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and 
2. 12  the  gold  of  that  land  (is)  good :  there 

2. 17  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 

2. 18  God  said,  (It  is)  not  good  that  the  man 

3.  5  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil 
3.  6  woman  saw  that  the  tree  (was)  good  for 
3.  22  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and 

15.  15  thou  shalt  be  buried  in  a  good  old  age 

18.  7  fetched  a  calf  tender  and  good,  and  gave 

19.  8  and  do  ye  to  them  as  (is)  good  in  your  ey. 

24.  50  we  cannot  speak  unto  thee  bad  or  good 

25.  8  died  in  a  good  old  age,  an  old  man,  and 

26.  29  we  have  done  unto  thee  nothing  but  good 

27.  9  fetch  me  from  thence  two  good  kids  of 
30.  20  God  hath  indued  me  (with)  a  good  dowry 
31. 24,  29  that  thou  speak  not.  .either  good  or 

40.  16  baker  saw  that  the  interpretation  was  g. 

41.  5  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up.  .rank  and  go. 
41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one . .  full  and  go. 
41.  24  the  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  good  e. 
41. 26  The  seven  good  kine  (are)  seven  years 
41.  26  and  the  seven  good  ears  (are)  seven  yea. 
41.  35  all  the  food  of  those  good  years  that  come 
44.    4  Wherefore  have  ye  rewarded  evil  for  go.? 

49.  j$  he  saw  that  rest  (was)  good,  and  the  land 

50.  20  God  meant  it  unto  good,  to  bring  to  pass 
Exod.  3.    3  unto  a  good  land  and  a  large,  unto  a  land 

18.  17  The  thing  that  thou  doest  (is)  not  good 
lev.  27. 10  a  good  for  a  bad,  or  a  bad  for  a  good 

27. 12  shall  value  it,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad 

27. 14  shall  estimate  it,  whether  it  be  good  orb. 

27.  33  He  shall  not  search  whether  it  be  good  or 
Nuniio.  29  come  thousand  we  will  do  thee  good 

13.  iy  the  land . .  whether  it  (be)  good  or  bad 

14.  7  The  land,  .(is)  an  exceeding  good  land 
24.  13  to  do.  .good  or  bad  of  mine  own  mind 

Deut.  1.  14  The  thing  which  thmi  hast  spoken  (is) 
1.  25  a  good  land  which  the  Lord  out  God 
1. 35  there  shall  not  one.  .see  that  good  land 
1.  39  had  no  knowledge  between  good  and  evil 

3.  25  see  the  good  land  that  (is)  beyond  Jordan 

4.  2i  that  I  should  not  go  in  unto  that  good  land 
4.  22  ye  shall  go  over,  and  possess  that  good 
6.  c3  thou  shalt  do.  .right  and  good  in  the  s;g. 


Deut.  6. 

18 

6. 

=4 

8. 

7 

8. 

10 

9- 

6 

10. 

13 

11. 

17 

12. 

28 

26. 

11 

28. 

12 

30. 

9 

30. 

9 

T        V3°- 

'5 

Josh,  q 

-5 

21. 

4.5 

=3- 

13 

=3 

■4 

23. 

15 

=3- 

15 

23. 

if) 

Judg.  8. 

32 

9- 

11 

10. 

IS 

18. 

9 

19. 

24 

Ruth  2 

22 

1  Sa.    1. 

23 

14. 

30 

14- 

40 

15- 

9 

19. 

4 

19. 

4 

=4- 

17 

29. 
aSa    3 


*3- 
14 

14 

*5- 
15- 
16. 
17- 
17- 
iS. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
24. 
1  KJ.    1. 


r4 
14, 

21. 


i  Ch.  4. 
16. 

19. 


~    29- 

2  Cm   5- 

6. 

7- 


xg. 

24. 

Ezra    3. 
7- 


Neh. 


mayest  go  in  and  possess  the  good  land 
to  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  for  our  good 
thy  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  good  land 
for  the  good  land  which  he  hath  given 
thy  God  giveth  thee  not  this  good  land  to 
which  I  command  thee  this  day  for  thy  g.? 
ye  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good  land 
when  thou  doest.  .good  aud  right  in  the 
thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every  good  (thing) 
Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  his  good  trea. 
and  in  the  fruit  of  thy  land,  for  good 
Lord  will  again  rejoice  over  thee  for  g. 
I  have  set  before  thee . .  life  and  good,  and 
as  it  seemeth  good  and  right  unto  thee  to 
There  failed  not  ought  of  any  good  thing 
until  ye  perish  from  off  this  good  land 
not  one  thing  hath  failed  of  all  the  good 
as  all  good  things  are  come  upon  you 
from  off  this  good  land  which  the  Lord 
shall  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good  la. 
died  in  a  good  old  age,  and  was  buried  in 
forsake  my  sweetness,  and  my  good  fruit 
do  thou  unto  us  whatsoever  seemeth  g. 
seen  the  land,  and,  behold,  it  (is)  very  g. 
with  them  what  seemeth  good  unto  you 
good,  my  daughter,  that  thou  go  out  with 
Do  what  seemeth  thee  good ;  tarry  until 
no  good  report  that  I  hear :  ye  make  the 
Lord  :  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good 
ye  shall  do  with  us  all  that  seemeth  good 
I  will  teach  you  the  good  and  the  right 
Do  whatsoever  seemeth  good  unto  thee 
people  said.  .Do  what  seemeth  good  unto 
the  failings,  and  the  lambs,  and  all .  .good 
Jonathan  spake  good  of  David  unto  Saul 
his  works  (have  been)  to  thee-ward  very  g. 
thou  hast  rewarded  me  good,  whereas  I 
Lord  reward  thee  good  for  that  thou  hast 
a  woman  of  good  understanding,  and  of  a 
we  come  in  a  good  day :  give,  I  pray  thee 
the  men  (were)  very  good  unto  us,  and 
and  he  hath  requited  me  evil  for  good 
according  to  all  the  good  that  he  hath 
This  thing  (is)  not  good  that  thou  hast  d. 
thy  coming  in  with  me  in  the  host  (is)  g. 
I  know  that  thou  (art)  good  m  my  sight 
seemed  good  to  Israel,  and  that,  .seemed 
Lord  do  that  which  seemeth  him  good 
And  Absalom  spake  .neither  good  nor 
so  (is)  my  lord  the  king,  to  discern  good 
good  for  me  (to  have  been)  there  still 
See,  thy  masters  (are)  good  and  right 
let  lrini  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto 
Lord  will  requite  me  good  for  his  cursing 
The  couusel .  .(is)  not  good  at  this  time 
Lord  had  appointed  to  defeat  the  good 
He  (is)  a  good  man.  and  conieth  with  g 
carry  over.,  and  to  do  what  he  thought  g. 
do  therefore  (what  is)  good  in  tldne  eyes 
can  I  discern  between  good  and  evil? 
do  to  him  what  shall  seem  good  unto 
do.  .that  which  shall  seem  good  unto 
take  and  offer  up  what  (seemeth)  good 
thou  (art)  a  valiant  man,  and  bringest  g 
The  saying  (is)  good  :  as  my  lord  the  king 
saidst.  .The  word  (that)  1  have  heard  (is)g. 
that  I  may  discern  between  good  and  bad 
that  thou  teach  them  the  good  way  whe. 
hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  his  good 
answer  them,  and  speak  good  words  to 
because  in  him  there  is  found  (some)  good 
he  shall  root  up  Israel  out  of  this  good  1. 
if  it  seem  good  to  thee,  I  will  give  thee 
he  doth  not  prophesy  good  concerning 
the  words  of  the  prophets  (declare)  good 
I  pray  thee,  .speak  (that  winch  is)  good 
he  would  prophesy  no  good.. but  evil? 
and  shall  fell  every  good  tree,  and  stop 
mar  every  good  piece  of  land  with  stones 
on  every  good  piece  of  land  cast  every 
wells  of  water,  and  felled  all  the  good 
do  thou  (that  which  is)  good  in  thine  eyes 
and  have  done,  .good  in  thy  sight 
Good  (is)  the  word  of  the  Lord  which 
they  found  fat  pasture  and  good,  and  the 
give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for  (he  is)  g. 
let  the  Lord  do.  .good  in  his  sight 
let  my  lord  the  king  do.  .good  in  his  eyes 
that  ye  may  possess  this  good  land,  and 
he  died  in  a  good  old  age,  full  of  days 
praised  the  Lord,  (saying).  For  (lie  is)  g 
when  thou  hast  taught  them  the  good 
praised  the  Lord,  (saying).  For  (he  is)  g. 
please  them,  and  speak  good  words  to 
Asa  did.  .good  and  right  in  the  eyes 
for  he  never  prophesied  good  unto  me 
the  words  of  the  prophets  (declare)  good 
be  like  one  of  theirs,  and  speak  thou  good 
he  would  not  prophesy  good  unto  me.  but 
there  are  good  things  found  in  thee 
and  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good 
because  he  had  done  good  in  Israel,  both 
saying,  The  good  Lord  pardon  every  ons 
that  taught  the  g  od  knowledge  of  the  L. 
wrought . .  good  ami  right  and  truth  before 
because,  .good,  for  his  mercy  (endureth) 
according  to  the  good  hand  of  his  God 
by  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  us 
upon  all  them  for  good  that  seek  him 
according  to  the  good  hand  of  my  God 
of  the  hand  of  my  God  which  was  good 
strengthened  their  hands  for  (this)  good 


Neh.  5.  9  It  (is)  not  good  that  ye  do  :  ought  ye  not 
5.  19  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good,  (acco.) 
9.  i3gavest.  .good  statutes  and  commandments 
9.  20  Thou  gavest  also  thy  good  spirit  to  instr. 

13.  31  Remember  me,  O  my  God,  for  good 
Esth.  3.  11  to  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to 

7.  9  Murdecai,  who  had  spoken  good  for  the 

8.  17  and  gladness,  and  a  feast  and  a  good  day 

9.  19  gladness  and  feasting,  and  a  good  day 

9.  22  was  turned. .  from  mourning  into  a  good 

Job     2.  10  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God 

7.    7  remember,  .mine  eye  shall  no  more  see  g. 

9.  25  my  days.,  they  flee  away,  they  see  no  good 

22.  18  he  filled  their  houses  with  good,  .but  the 

22.  21  be  at  peace  :  thereby  good  shall  come 

30.  26  When  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  came 

34.    4  let  us  know  among  ourselves  what  (is)  g. 

Psa,    4.    6  many  that  say,  Who  will  show  us.  .good? 

14.  1,  3  (there  is)  none  that  doeth  good 

25.  _8  Good  and  upright  (is)  the  Lord  :  therefo. 
34.  ~8  0  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  (is)  good 
34.  10  they  that  seek,  .shall  not  want  any  good 
34.  12  man.  .loveth.  .days,  that  he  may  see  go.  ? 

34.  14  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  seek 

35.  12  They  rewarded  me  evil  for  good,  (to)  the 

36.  4  he  setteth  himself  in  a  way  (that  is)  not  g. 

37.  3  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good ;  (so)  shalt 

37.  27  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good  ;  and  dwell 

38.  20  They  also  that  render  evil  for  good  are 

38.  20  because  I  follow  (the  thing  that)  good  (is) 

39.  2  I  held  my  peace,  .from  good  ;  and  my 
45.  1  My  heart  is  inditing  a  good  matter :  I 
52.    3  Thou  lovest  evil  more  than  good . .  lying 

52.  9  I  will  wait,  .for  (it  is)  good  before  thy 

53.  1,  3  (there  is)  none  that  doeth  good 

54.  6  I  will  praise  thy  name,  0  Lord,  for.  .go. 
69.  16  Hear  me.  .for  thy  loving  kindness  (is)  good 
73.  1  Truly  God  (is)  good  to  Israel, (even)  to  such 
73.  28  But  (it  is)  good  for  me  to  draw  nearto  G. 

84. 11  no  good,  .will he  withhold  from  them 

85. 12  Yea,  the  Lord  shall  give,  .good;  and  our 
86.    5  For  thou,  Lord,  (art)  good,  and  ready  to 

86. 17  Show  me  a  token  for  good ;  that  they  wh. 
92.    1  good  (thing)  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord 

200.    5  1'or  the  Lord  (is)  good;  his  mercy  (is)  ever. 

103.  5  Who  satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  good,  .thy 

104.  28  thou  openest  thine  hand,  they  are  filled 
106.    1  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for.  .good 

106.  5  That  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen 

107.  1  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for.  .good 
109.    5  they  have  rewarded  me  evil  for  good,  and 
109.  21  because  thy  mercy  (is)  good,  deliver  thou 
in.  10  a  good  understanding  have  all  they  that 
112.    5  A  good  man  showeth  favour,  aud  lendeth 

118.  1,  29  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for.  .go. 

119.  39  Turn  away,  .for  thy  judgments  (are)  good 
119.  68  Thou  (art)  good,  aud  doest  good  :  teach 
119.  71  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted 
119.  122  Be  surety  for  thy  servant  for  good  :  let 
122.    9  Because  of  the  house.  .1  will  seek  thy  g. 
125.   4  O  Lord,  unto  (those  that  be)  good,  and 
133.    1  how  good  and  how  pleasant  (it  is)  for  hr. 

135.  3  Praise  the  Lord  ;  for  the  Lord  (is)  good 

136.  1  O  give  thanks  unto  the  LORD  ;  for.  .good 
143.  10  thou  (art)  my  God :  thy  spirit  (is)  good 
145.   9  The  Lord  (is)  good  to  all ;  and  his  tender 
147.    1  for.  .good  to  sing  praises  unto  our  God 

Prov.  2.   9  Then  shalt  thou  understand,  .every  good 

2.  20  That  thou  mayest  walk  in  the  way  of  good 

3.  4  good  understanding  in  the  sight  of  God 

3.  27  Withhold  not  good  from  them  to  whom 

4.  2  I  give  you  good  doctrine,  forsake  ye  not 
11.  23  The  desire  of  the  righteous  (is)  only  good 

11.  27  He  that  diligently  seeketh  good  procure th 

12.  2  A  good  (man)  obtain eth  favour  of  the  L. 
12.  14  A  man  shall  be  satisfied  with  good  by  the 

12.  25  the  heart  of  man.  .a  good  word  maketh 

13.  2  A  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  (his) 
13.  15  Good  understanding  giveth  favour :  but 
13.  21  but  to  the  righteous  good  shall  be  repaid 

13.  22  A  good  (man)  leaveth  an  inheritance  to 

14.  14  a  good  man  (shall  be  satisfied)  from  him. 
14.  19  The  evil  bow  before  the  good  ;  and  the 

14.  22  mercy  and  truth,  .to  them  that  devise  g. 

15.  3  The  eyes,  .beholding  the  evil  and  the  g. 

15.  23  and  a  word,  .in  due  season,  how  good 
15-  30  a  good  report  maketh  the  bones  fat 

16.  20  He  that  handleth.  .wisely  shall  find  good 

16.  29  and  leadeth  him  into  the  way.  .not  good 

17.  13  Whoso  rewardeth  evil  for  gocd,  evil  shall 
17.  20  that  hath  a  froward  heart  tlndeth  no  go. 

17.  26  to  punish  the  just  (is)  not  good,  (nor)  to 

18.  5  (It  is)  not  good  to  accept  the  person  of 

18.  22  (Whoso)  findeth  a  wife  findeth  a  good 

19.  2  soul  (be)  without  knowledge,  (it  is)  not  g. 

19.  8  keepeth  understanding  shall  find  good 

20.  23  and  a  false  balance  (is)  not  good 

24.  13  My  son,  eat  thou  honey,  because  (it  is)g. 
24.  23  (It  is)  not  good  to  have  respect  of  persons 

24.  25  and  a  good  blessing  shall  come  upon 

25.  25  so  (is)  good  news  from  a  far  country 
25.  27  (It  is)  not  good  to  eat  much  honey  ;  so 
28. 10  but  the  upright  shall  have  good  (things) 
2S.  21  To  have  respect  of  persons  (is)  not  good 
31. 12  She  will  do  him  good  and  not  evil  all 

31. 18  perceiveth  that  her  merchandise  (is)  go. 
Eccl.  2.    3  till  I  might  see  what  (was)  that  good 

2.  24  he  should  make  his  soul  enjoy  good  in 
2.  26  (God)  giveth  to  a  man  that  (is)  good  in 

2.  26  may  give  to  (him  that  is)  good  before  God 
3. 12  I  know  that  (there  is)  no  good  in  them 

3.  12  to  rejoice,  and  to  do  good'in  his  life 


GOOD 


428 


GOOD 


Eecl.   3.  13  and  enjoy  the  good  of  all  his  labour,  it 
4.    8  do  I  labour,  and  bereave  my  soul  of  go.  ? 

4.  9  they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  labour 
5. 18  (it  is)  good  and  comely  (for  one)  to  eat 

5.  18  to  enjoy  the  good  of  all  his  labour  that 

6.  3  his  soul  be  not  filled  with  good,  and  also 
6.    6  thousand  years,  .yet  hath  he  seen  no  go. 

6.  12  knoweth  what  (is)  good  for  man  in  (this) 
7. 11  Wisdom  (is)  good  with  an  inheritance 

7.  18  (It  is)  good  that  thou  shouldest  take  hold 
7.  20  just  man.  .that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth 
9.  2  to  the  good  and  to  the  clean,  and  to  the 
9.  2  as  (is)  the  good,  so  (is)  the  sinner  ;  (and) 
9.  18  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good 

11.    6  or  whether  they  both  (shall  be)  alike  go. 

12. 14  whether  (it  be)  good,  or  whether  (it  be) 
Song  1.  3  of  the  savour  of' thy  good  ointments  thy 
Isa.     5.  20  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil 

7.  15,  16  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the  good 

38.  3  have  done  (that  which  is)  good  in  thy 

39.  8  Good  (is)  the  word  of  the  Lord  which 
52.   7  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tiding3 
55.   2  eat  ye  (that  which  is)  good,  and  let  your 
65.    2  which  walketh  in  a  way  (that  was)  not  g. 

Jer.  5.  25  sins  have  withholden  good  (things)  from 
6. 16  where  (is)  the  good  way,  and  walk  there. 
8. 15  We  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  (came) 
14. 11  Pray  not  for  this  people  for  (their)  good 

14. 19  we  looked  for  peace,  and  (there  is)  no  g. 

17.  6  shall  not  see  when  good  cometh  ;  but 

18.  10  I  will  repent  of  the  good  wherewith  I 

18. 20  Shall  evil  be  recompensed  for  good  ?  for 
18. 20  stood  before  thee  to  speak  good  for  them 

21.  10  for  evil,  and  not  for  good,  saith  the  Lord 
24.    2  One  basket  (had)  very  good  figs,  (even) 
24.    3  the  good  figs,  very  good  ;  and  the  evil 
24.    5  Like  these  good  figs,  .will  I  acknowledge 
24.    5  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  for  (their)  go. 
24.    6  I  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  good 

26. 14  with  me  as  seemeth  good  and  meet  unto 
29. 10  and  perform  my  good  word  toward  you 
29.  32  neither  shall  he  behold  the  good  that  I 
32.  39  the  good  of  them,  and  of  their  children 

32.  42  all  the  good  that  I  have  promised  them 

33.  9  hear  all  the  good  that  I  do  unto  them 
33.  11  the  Lord  (is)  good  ;  for  his  mercy  (endu.) 

33.  14  I  will  perform  that  good  thing  which  I 

39.  16  upon  this  city  for  evil,  and  not  for  good 

40.  4  If  it  seem  good  unto  thee  to  come  with 
40.    4  whither  it  seemeth  good  and  convenient 
42.    6  Whether  (it  be)  good,  or  whether  (it  be) 

44.  27  watch  over  them  for  evil,  and  not  for  go. 
Lam.  3.  25  Lord  (is)  good  uuto  them  that  wait  for 

3.  26  (It  is)  good  that  (a  man)  should  both  hope 
3.  27  (It  is)  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the 
3.  38  the  mouth,  .proceedeth  not  evil  and  go.? 
Eze.  17.    8  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  great  waters 

18.  18  (that)  which  (is)  not  good  among  his  peo. 
20.  25  I  gave  them,  .statutes  (that  were)  not  g. 

24.  4  (even)  every  good  piece,  the  thigh,  and 

34.  14  I  will  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  and 
34.  14  there  shall  they  lie  in  a  good  fold,  and 
34.  18  you  to  have  eaten  up  the  good  pasture 
36.  31  your  doings  that  (were)  not  good,  and 

Hos.   4.  13  the  shadow  thereof  (is)  good  :  therefore 

8.  3  hath  cast  off  (the  thing  that  is)  good 
Amos  5.  14  Seek  good,  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live 

5. 15  love  the  good,  and  establish  judgment 

9.  4  eyes  upon  them  for  evil,  and  not  for  go. 
Mic.    1.  12  inhabitant,  .waited  carefully  for  good 

3.  2  Who  hate  the  good,  and  love  the  evil 

6.  8  He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man,  what  (is)  g. 
Xah.  1.  7  The  Lord  (is)  good,  a  strong  hold  in  the 
Zech.  1.  13  (with)  good  words  (and)  comfortable  wo. 

11.  12  If  ye  think  good,  give  (me)  my  price  ;  and 
Mai.   2. 17  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  (is)  good  in  the 

A.Oood,  goodness,  good  thing,  3?Q  t»h. 

Gen.  45.  18  give  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

45.  20  good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  (is)  your's 
Deut.  6.  11  houses  full  of  all  good  (things),  which 
Ezra   9. 12  eat  the  good  of  the  land,  and  leave  (it) 
Neh.  9.  36  the  fruit  thereof  and  the  good  thereof 
Job  21.  16  Lo,  their  good  (is)  not  in  their  hand 
Psa.119.  66  Teach  me  good  judgment  and  knowled. 

123.    5  thou  shalt  see  the  good  of  Jerusalem  all 
Isa.     1.  19  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  la. 

5. Equity,  ban  fit,  fnfl  kishron. 

Bccl.  5.  11  what  good  (is  there)  to  the  owners  the. 

G.Might,  with  mighty  iMp  meod. 

Deut.  2.    4  take  ye  good  heed  unto  yourselves  there. 

4.  15  Take  ye  therefore  good  heed  unto  yours. 
Josh. 23.  11  Take  good  heed  therefore  unto  yoursel. 

7.Guod,  ayaB6s  agathos. 

Matt.  5.  45  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good 

7.  11  If  ye.  .know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
7.  17  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit 

7.  18  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 

12.  35  A  good  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of 
19. 16  Good  Master,  what,  .shall  I  do,  that  I 

19.  17  Why  callest  thou  me  good  P.  .none  g 1 

20. 15  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good  ? 

22.  10  as  many  as  they  found,  both  bad  and  go. 

25.  21,  23  Well  don.-  .good  and  faithful  servant 
Markm.  17  Good  Muster,  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may 

10.  iS  Why  callest  thou  me  good?,  none  good 
Luke  6.  45  A  -noil  man  cut  of  the  good  treasure  of 

8.  8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  sprang  up 
8. 15  which  in  an  honest  and  good  heart,  having 

10.  42  Mary  hath  chusen  that  good  part,  which 


Luken.  13  If  ye.  .know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
iS.  18  Good  Master,  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit 
18  19  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?  none  (is)  go. 
19.  17  he  said.  .Well,  thou  good  servant :  beca. 
23.  50  Joseph,  a  counsellor,  .a  good  man,  and 

John  5.  29  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resu. 
7.  12  tor  some  said,  He  is  a  good  man :  others 

Acts   9  36  this  woman  was  full  of  good  works  and 

11,  24  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy 
23.    1  I  have  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before 

Horn.  2.  10  to  every  man  that  worketh  good,  to  the 

3.  8  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come  ? 

5.  7  for  a  good  man  some  wou.d  even  dare  to 

7. 12  the  commandment  holy,  ana  just,  and  g. 

7.  19  For  the  good  that  I  would  I  do  not :  but 

8.  28  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 

9.  11  neither  having  done  any  good  or  evil,  that 

12.  2  that  ye  may  prove  what  (is)  that  good 

12.  21  Be  not  overcome,  .overcome  evil  with  g. 

13.  3  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but 
13.  4  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good 
14. 16  Let  not  then  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of 
15.    2  Let  every  one  of  us  please,  .for.  .good  to 

2  Co.  5.  10  to  that  he  hath  done,  .whether,  .good  or 
9.    8  that  ye . .  may  abound  to  every  good  work 
Gal.    6.  10  let  us  do  good  unto  all.  .especially  unto 
Eph.    2.  10  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works 

4.  29  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying 
Phil.  1.  6  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  iu 
Col.     1. 10  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  in. 

1  Th.  3.    6  ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us  always 

2  Th.  2.  16  consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace 

217  stablish  you  iu  every  good  word  and  work 

1  Ti.    1     5  and  (of)  a  good  conscience,  and  (of)  faith 

1  19  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience 

2.  10  But  which  becometh  women.. with  good 

5.  10  have  diligently  followed  every  good  work 

2  Ti.    2.  21  vessel,  .prepared  unto  every  good  work 

3.  17  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works 
Titus  1.  16  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate 

2.  5  discreet,  chaste,  keepers  at  home,  good 
2. 10  Not  purloining,  but  showing  all  good 

3.  1  to  obey,  .to  be  ready  to  every  good  work 
Heb.  13.  21  Make  you  pertect  in  every  good  work 
Jas.      1.  17  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift 

3.  17  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without 
1  Pe.  2.  18  not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also 
3.  10  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days 
3.  11  Let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do  good ;  let 
3.  16  Having  a  good  conscience  ;  that,  whereas 
3.  16  that  falsely  accuse  yourgood  conversation 

3.  21  the  answer  of  a  gooa  conscience  toward 

S.Life,  means  of  life,  (Mos  bios, 

1  Jo.   3.  17  whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and  seeth 
9.  Well,  good,  ev  eu. 

Marki4.    7  whensoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good 
10. Beautiful,  pleasing,  good,  naKdv  halon. 

Horn.  7  2r  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present 
Heb.   5.  14  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 
Jas.     4. 17  to  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  do. 
11. Beautiful,  pleasing,  good,  kol\6s  kalos. 

Matt.  3.  10  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good 
5  16  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and 
7  17  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit ;  but  a 
7.  18  neither,  .a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good 
7.  19  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 

12.  33  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit  good 

13.  8  other  fell  into  good  ground,  and  brought 
13.  23  he  that  received  seed  into  the  good  ground 
13.  24  a  man  which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field 
13.  27  didst  not  thou  so\v:good  seed  in  thy  field  ? 
13.  37  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the  Son 
13.  38  the  good  seed  are  the  children  of  the 

13.  48  gathered  the  good  into  vessels,  but  cast 
17.    4  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  :  if  thou 
26.  10  she  hath  wrought  a  good  work  upon  me 
26.  24  it  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had 

Mark  4.    8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  did  yield 

4.  20  these  are  they  which  are  sown  on  good 
9.    5  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here :  and 
9.  50  Salt  (is)  good ;  but  if  the  salt  have  lost 

14.  6  said,  .she  hath  wrought  a  good  work  on 
14.  21  good  were  it  for  that  man  if  he  had  never 

Luke  3.    9  which  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is 

6.  38  good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken 

6.  43  a  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt 

6.  43  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit 
8. 15  But  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they 

9.  33  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here :  and 
14.  34  Salt  (is)  good  :  but  if  the  salt  have  lost 

John  2.  10  saith.  .Every  man.  .doth  set  forth  good 
2.  10  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now 
10.  11  I  am  the  good  shepherd :  the  good  shep. 
10.  14  I  am  the  good  shepherd,  and  know  my 
10.  32  Many  good  works  have  I  showed  you 
10.  33  For  a  good  work  we  stone  thee  not;  but 

Rom.  7.  16  I  consent  unto  the  law  that  (it  is)  good 
14.  21  good  neither  to  eat  ilesh,   nor  to  drink 

1  Co.   5.    6  Yourglorying(is)not  good.  Know  ye  not 

7.  1  (It  is)  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  wo. 
7.  8  it  is  good  for  them  if  they  abide  even  as 
7.  26  I  suppose  therefore  that  this  is  good  for 
7.  26  (T  say),  that  (it  is)  good  for  a  man  so  to 

Gal.     4.  18  But.  .good  to  be  zealously  affected  alwa. 
1  Ti.    1.    S  we  know  that  the  law  (is)  good,  if  a  man 

1.  iS  thou  by  them  uiiiihtest  war  a  good  warf. 

2.  3  this  (is)  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight 

3.  1  desire  the  office,  .he  desireth  a  good  work 
3.    7  he  must  have  a  good  report  of  them  wh. 

3. 13  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  degree,  ami 


:Ti. 


4.    4  every  creature  of  God  (is)  good,  and  no. 
4.   6  thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  C. 

4.  6  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good  doctr. 

5.  4  for  that  is  good  and  acceptable  before  G. 
5.  10  Well  reported  of  for  good  works ;  if  she 

5.  25  Likewise  also  the  good  works,  .are  maui. 

6.  12  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  ja 
6.  12  hast  professed  a  good  profession  before 
6.  13  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  a  g. 
6. 1 8  that  they!may,be  rich  in  good  works,  ready 
6.  19  a  good  foundation  against  the  time  to 

2  Ti.    1.  14  That  good  thing  which  was  committed 

2.    3  endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Je. 

4.    7  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished 

Titus  2.    7  showing  thyself  a  pattern  of  good  works 

2.  14  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works 

3.  8  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works 
3.    8  These  things  are  good  and  profitable  unto 

3.  14  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses 
Heb.   6.    5  And  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God 

10.  24  to  provoke  unto  love  and  to  good  works 
13.  18  for  we  trust  we  have  a  good  conscience 
Jas.     3.  13  let  him  show  out  of  a  good  conversation 
1  Pe.    2.  12  they  may  by.  .good  works,  which  they 

4.  io  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace 

12.  Well,  fairly,  beautifully,  tcaXws  kalos. 

Matt.  5.  44  [do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray] 
Luke  6.  27  Love  your  enemies,  do  good  to  them  wh. 

13.  Useful,  profitable,  xpyGTos  chrestos. 

1  Co  15.  33  evil  communications  corrupt  good  maun. 
li.  Usefulness,  kindness,  xpwroVfls  chrestotes. 

Rom.  3. 12  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one 
[See  also  Advice,  courage,  do,  heed,  liking,  piece,  proper, 
think,  tidings,  way,  what.] 

GOOD,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  good,  well,  3'ib  tob. 

1  Sa.  20.  12  behold,  (if  there  be)  good  toward  David 
Job   10.    3  (Is  it)  good  unto  thee  that  thou  shouldest 
13.   9  Is  it  good  that  he  should  search  you  out 

2.  To  be  or  become  good,  na;  yatab. 

Gen.  41.  37  the  thing  was  good  in  the  eyes  of  Phara. 

3.  To  be  xirosperous,  profitable,  n'py  tsaleach. 

Jer.  13.  10  as  this  girdle,  which  is  good  for  nothing 
4. To  be  strong,  have  strength,  iVyuoj  ischuo. 

Matt.  5.  13  it  is  thenceforth  good  for  nothing,  but  to 
5. To  bear  or  carry  together,  conduce,  avfxtyspw  sum. 

Matt. 19.  10  If  the  case.. be  so.. it  is  not  good  to 
GOOD,  can  do  — 
To  2^'ofit,  "?y;  yaal,  5. 

Job   15.    3  speeches  wherewith  he  can  do  no  good? 
GOOD  courage,  to  he  of  — 
To  be  or  become  strong  or  courageous,  f'DK  amats. 

Deut  31.  6,  7,  23  Be  strong,  and  of  a  good  courage 

Josh.  1.    6,  9,  18  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage 
10.  25  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage  :  for  thus 

1  Ch.22.  13  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage  ;  dread 
28.  20  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage  and  do  (it) 

GOOD  deed  — 

1.  Kindness,  ipn  eliesed. 

Neh.  13.  14  wipe  not  out  my  good  deeds  that  I  have 

2.  Good,  3iB  tob. 

Neh.   6.  19  they  reported  his  good  deeds  before  me 

GOOD,  to  do  — 

l.To  do  good,  3ia  tob,  5. 

Numio.  29  come,  .with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good 
Psa.119.  68  Thou  (art)  good,  and  doest  good:  teach 
125.   4  Do  good,  0  Lord,  unto  (those  that  be)  go 
Jer.   32.  41  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good 
'l.To  do  good,  na;  yatab,  5. 

Gen.  32.  12  I  will  surely  do  thee  good,  and  make  thy 
Lev.  5.  4  to  do  good,  whatsoever  (it  be)  that  a  man 
Deut.  8. 16  to  do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  end 

28.  63  the  Lord  rejoiced  over  you  to  do  you  go. 
30.    5  he  will  do  thee  good,  and  multiply  thee 
Josh  24.  20  after  that  he  hath  done  you  good 
Judgi7. 13  Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  will  do  me  g. 
Job    24.  21  and  doeth  not  good  to  the  widow 
Psa.  36.    3  hath  left  off  to  be  wise,  (and)  to  do  good 
51.  18  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  uuto  Ziou 
Prov.17.  2?  A  merry  heart  doeth  good  (like)  a  medici. 
Isa.   41.  23  dogood,ordoevil,thatwemaybedismay. 
Jer.    4.  22  but  to  do  good  they  have  no  knowledge 
10.    5  neither  also  (is  it)  in  them  to  do  good 
13.  23  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil 
32.  40  not  turn  away  from  them,  to  do.  .good 
Mic.    2.    7  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly 
Zeph.  1.  12  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil 

3.  To  do  good,  ayaOoepydw  agatkoergeo. 

1  Ti.    6  18  That  they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in 

4.  To  do  good,  ayadoiroteco  agathopoieo. 

Mark  3.   4  it  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  sabbath  days 
Luke  6.  9  the  sabbath  days  to  do  good,  or  to  do  ev. 
6.  33  if  ye  do  good  to  them  which  do  good  to 
6.  35  do  good,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing 
Acts  14.  17  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heav. 

3  Jo.        11  He  that  doethgood  is  of  God  :  but 

6.  To  work  veil,  confer  benefits,  evepyerea)  euergeieo. 
Arts  ro.  38  who  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing 

(3.  Well  doing,  euirotta  cupoiia. 

Heb.  13.  16  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not 


GOOD 


429 


GOODS 


COOD  health  — 
Peace,  DiS^  shalom. 

Gen.43,  28  father  (is)  in  good  health,  he(is)  yet  alive 

GOOD,  to  make  - 

l.To  do  good,  dq;  yatab,  5. 

Jer.   18.  11  audmakeyourwaysandyourdoingsgood 

%.To  cause  to  'rise,  confirm,  Dip  gum,  5. 

N1UU23.  19  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ? 

S.  To  recompense,  dtw  shalam,  '3. 

Exod2i.  34  The  owner  of  the  pit  shall  make  (it)  good 
22.  11,  15  and  he  shall  not  make  (it)  good 
22.  13  shall  not  make  good  that  which  was  torn 
22. 14  it  be  hurt,  .he  shall  surely  make  it  good 

Lev.  24.  18  he  that  killeth  a  beast  shall  make  it  good 

GOOD  pleasure  — 

l.Good  will  or  pleasure,  Jiin  ratson. 

Psa.  51.  18  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Zion :  build 

2.  Good  pleasure,  evdoKla  eudokia. 

Eph.   1.    5  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  wi. 

1.    9  according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he 

Phil.   2.  13  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  (his)  good  pleas. 

2  Th.  1.  11  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of.  .goodness 

GOOD,  to  seem  or  think  — 
l.To  be  or  seem  good,  3ia  too. 

1  Ch.13.    2  If  (it  seem)  good  unto  you,  and  (that  it 
Esth.  5.    4  If  (it  seem)  good  unto  the  king,  let  the 

2.  To  be  or  become  good,  3a*  yetab. 

Ezra  7.  18  whatsoever  shall  seem  good  to  thee,  and 
Z.To  be  or  go  right,  ~V"T  yasliar. 

Jer.  18.    4  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  make  (it) 
GOOD  speed,  to  send  — 
To  cause  to  meet,  rnp  qarah,  5. 

Gen.  24.  12  send  me  good  speed  this  day,  and  show 
GOOD  success,  to  have  — 
To  cause  to  act  icisely,  bier  sakal,  5. 

Josh.  1.    8  and  then  thou  shalt  have  good  success 
GOOD  thing  — 
l.Good,  goodness,  good  thing,  3?u  tub. 

Gen.  45.  23  asses  laden  with  the  good  things  of  Egy. 

2  Ki.  8.   9  of  every  good  thing  of  Damascus,  forty 

2. Good  thing,  ayaOov  agatlum. 

Matt.  7.  11  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him  ! 

12.  34  how  can  ye,  being  evil,  speak  good  things? 

12.  35  of  the  heart,  bringeth  forth  good  tilings 

19. 16  what  good  thing  shall  I  do,  that  I  may 
Luke  1.  53  hath  tilled  the  hungry  with  good  things 

16.  25  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good  things 
John  1.  46  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazar. 
Rom.  7.  18  know  that  in  me.  .dwelleth  no  good  thing 

10.  15  and  bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things  ! 
Gal.    6.   6  unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things 
Eph.   6.    8  that  whatsoever  good  thing  any  man  do. 
Phil.         6  of  every  g.  thing  which  is  in  you  in  Christ 
Heb.   9.  11  an  high  priest  of  good  things  to  come 

10.    1  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come 

3.  Good,  beautiful,  kolXov  Izalon. 

Gal.     4.  18  zealously  affected  always  in  (a)  good  (thi.) 

Heb.  13.   9  For  (it  is)  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be 
GOOD  men,  lover  of  — 
Lover  or  friend  of  good  men,  (piXaya9os  philagathos. 

Titus  1.    8  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy 
GOOD  place,  in  a  — 
Well,  pleasantly*  uaXoss  kah~>s. 

Jas.    2.    3  and  say.  .Sit  thou  here  iu  a  good  place 
GOOD  things,  teacher  of  — 
Teacher  of  good,  KaAoSiSacr/caAos  kalodidaslcalos. 

Titus  2.    3  not  false,  .teachers  of  good  things 
GOOD,  that  which  is  — 
1.  That  which  is  good,  to  ayadov  to  agathon. 

Luke  6. 45  heart  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  good 

Rom.  7.  13  Was  then  that  which  is  good  made  death 
7..13  working  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  go. 

12.  9  is  evil ;  cleave  to  that  which  is  good 

13.  3  Do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt 
16. 19  have  you  wise  unto  that  which  is  good 

1  Th.  5. 15  but  ever  follow  that  which  is  good,  both 
1  Pe.  3. 13  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good? 

3  John   1 1  that  which  is  evil,  but  that  winch  is  good 

2. That  which  is  beautiful,  rb  tca.\6v  to  halon. 
Kom.  7.  18  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not 
1  111.  5.  21  all  things :  hold  fast  that  which  is  good 

GOOD,  the  thing  wluch  is  — 

That  which  is  good,  rb  ayaBov  to  agathon. 

Eph.   4.  28  with  (his)  hands  the  thing  which  is  good 
GOOD  tidings,  to  bring  — 
To  tell  good  news,  evayyeXl^oftai  euaygelizomai. 

Luke   2.  10  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy 

1  Th.  3.   6  brought  us  good  tidings  of  your  faith  and 
GOOD  way  off,  a  — 
To  put  far  of,  prn  raclmq,  5. 

Gen.  21.  16  went,  and  sat  her  down,  .a  good  way  off 
GOOD  way,  a  — 
To  put  far  of,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

JudgiS.  22  when  they  were  a  good  way  from  the  h. 


GOOD  while  — 

1.  A  gain,  yet,  while,  any  more,  "iiy  od. 

Gen.  46. 19  he  fell . .  and  wept  on  his  neck  a  good  wh. 
2.Sufficient  days,  rgj.4pas  tKavds  hemeras  hikanas. 

Acts  18.  18  Paul,  .tarried.,  yet  a  good  while,  and  then 
GOOD  words  — 
Courteous  language,  xpyvraXoyia  chrestologia. 

Rom  16.  18  by  good  words  and  fair  speeches  deceive 
GOOD  WILL  — 
l.Good  pleasure  or  will,  |isri  ratson. 

Deut  33. 16  the  good  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  the  b. 

Mai.    2.  13  or  receiveth  (it)  with  good  will  at  your 
2.Good pleasure,  euBoKia  eudokia. 

Luke  2.  14  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men 

Phil.    1.  15  Some  indeed  preach  Christ,  .of  good  will 
Z.Good  trill,  evvoia  eunoia. 

Eph.    6.    7  With  good  will  doing  service,  as  to  the  L. 
GOODLIER  — 
Good,  aiu  tob. 

*i  Sa.   9.   2  not  among  the  children  of  Israel  a  good. 
GOODLIEST  — 
Good,  nio  tob. 

1  Sa.   8. 16  your  goodliest  young  men,  and  your  asses 

1  Ki.  20.    3  thy  children .  .the  goodliest,  (are)  miue 
G00DUNES3  — 

Kindness,  kindliness,  "icrr  chesed. 

Isa.  40.    6  all  the  goodliness  thereof  (is)  as  the  flow. 
GOODLY  — 
1.  Honourable,  shining,  t^in  addir. 

Eze.   17.  23  and  bear  fruit,  and  be  a  goodly  cedar 
^.Honourable  or  shining,  tin  eder. 

Zech.11. 13  a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  th. 
3. Honourable  or  shining,  rrnN*  addereth. 

Eze.   17.    8  It  was  planted . .  that  it  might  be  a  goodly 
4.  Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  lin  hadar. 

Lev.  23.  40  ye  shall  take,  .the  boughs  of  goodly  trees 
5. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  *iiri  liod. 

Zech.  10.    3  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  hi 
6. Desire,  -TOn  chemdah. 

2  Ch.36. 10  with  the  goodly  vessels  of  the  house  of 

7.  Desires,  desirable  objects,  n'n^q  chamudoth. 

Gen.  27.  15  Rebekah  took  goodly  raiment  of  her  eld. 

8.  To  be  good,  nte  tob. 

Kum  24.    5  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  O  Jacob.,  thy  t. 
9.Good  {of  form),  (iN'hi)-Dia  tob  [toar). 

Exod.  2.    2  when  she  saw  him  that  he  (was  a)  goodly 
Deut.  3.  25  land,  .that  goodly  mountain,  and  Leba. 
6.  10  to  give  thee  great  and  goodly  cities,  which 
8. 12  and  hast  built  goodly  houses,  and  dwelt 
Josh.  7.  21  When  I  saw.,  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment 
1  Sa.   9.    2  Saul,  a  choice  young  man,  and  a  goodly 
16.  12  of  a  beautiful  countenance,  and  goodly 

1  Ki.    1.    6  and  he  also  (was  a)  very  goodly  (man) 
Joel    3.    5  have  carried  into  your  temples  my  goodly 

10.  Desirable  thing,  iDrja  machmad. 

2  Ch.36. 19  destroyed  all  the  goodly  vessels  thereof 
11. Appearance,  HN"p  mareh. 

2  Sa.  23.  21  And  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  goodly  man 
12. Beauty,  ornament,  ~in?  peer. 

Exod39.  28  an(i  goodly  bonnets  (of)  fine  linen,  and 
1Z. Beauty,  desire,  "2?  tsebi. 

Jer.     3.  19  a  goodly  heritage  of  the  hosts  of  nations  V 
14.  Beauty,  ~]$y>  sheplier. 

Gen.  49.  21  a  hind  let  loose  :  he  giveth  goodly  words 
lb. Fair  of  form,  "ixh  ns?  yepheh  thoar. 

Gen.  39.    6  Joseph  was  (a)  goodly  (person),  and  well 

Jer.  11. 16  A  green  olive  tree,  .(and)  of  goodly  fruit 

16.  Good,  beautiful,  vaX6s  T-mIos 

Matt  13.  45  a  merchant  man  seeking  goodly  pearls 
Luke  21.    g  how  it  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones 

17 '.Bright,  shining,  Xay.-rro6<;  lampros. 

Jas.     2.    2  a  man  with  a  gold  ring  in  goodly  apparel 
Rev.  18.  14  all  things  which  were  dainty  and  goodly 

lS.God,  of  might,  %  el. 

Psa.  80. 10  the  boughs .  /were  like)  the  goodly  cedars 

19. Rattling  wing.%  ostriclies,  O^n  renanim. 

Job   39.  13  (Gavest  thou)  the  goodly  wings  unto  the 

20.ro  be  fair,  beautiful,  good,  ~i9«r  shaphar 

Psa.  16    6  The  lines  are  fallen ...  I  have  a  goodly  h. 
GOODLY,  to  make  -  - 
To  do  or  make  good,  aio  tob,  5. 

Hos.  10.    1  his  land  they  have  made  goodly  images 
GOOD  MAN"  — 
l'.A  mow,  t?'N  ish. 

Prov.  7.  19  the  good  man  (is)  not  at  home,  he  is  gone 
2.House  despot,  master  of  the  house,  o*Ko5eo-7roT???. 

Luke22.  1 1  And  ye .  -  say  unto  the  good  man  of  the  h. 
GOOD  MAN  of  the  house  — 
House  despot,  master  of  the  house,  ohcoBecnr6rr)s. 

Matt2o.  11  murmured  against  the  good  man  of  the  h. 
24.  43  if  the  good  man  of  the"liouse  had  known 


Marki4.  14  say  ye  to  the  good  man  of  the  house,  The 
Luke  12.  39  if  the  good  man  of  the  house  had  known 
GOODNESS  — 

I.  Kindness,  "ipn  chesed. 

Exod 34.    6  Lord  God.  .abundant  in  goodness  and 
2  Ch.32.  32  the  acts  of  Hezekiah,  and  his  goodness 

35.  26  rest  of  the  acts  of  Josiah,  and  his  goodn. 
Psa.  33.    5  earth  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord 

52.    t  the  goodness  of  God  (endureth)  continua. 
107.    8,  15,  21,  31  praise  the  Lord  (for)  his  good. 

144.  2  My  goodness,  and  my  fortress  ;  my  high 
Prov 20.  6  will  proclaim  everyone  his  own  goodness 
Hos.    6.    4  your  goodness  (is)  asamormug  cloud,  aud 

2. Good,  goodness,  3ia  tob. 

Exod  18.    9  Jethro  rejoiced  for  all  the  goodness  which 
Num.  10.  32  what  goodness  the  Lord  shall  do  unto  us 
Judg.  8.  35  according  to  all  the  goodness  which  he 
2  Sa.    7.  28  thou  hast  promised  this  goodness  unto 
1  Ki.    8.  66  for  all  the  goodness  that  the  Lord  had 

1  Ch.17.  26  hast  promised  this  goodness  unto  thy  ser. 

2  Ch.  6.  41  and  let  thy  saints  rejoice  in  goodness 

7.  io  for  the  goodness  that  the  Lord  had  sho. 

Psa.  16.    2  Thou  (art)  my  Lord  :  my  goodness,  .not 

21.    3  preventest.  .with  the  blessings  of  goodn. 

23.    6  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all 

65.  11  Thou  crowuest  the  year  with  thy  goodn. 

68. 10  thou,  O  God,  hast  prepared  of  thy  goodn. 

107.    9  and  filleth  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness 

Jer.  33.    9  fear  and  tremble  for  all  the  goodness,  and 

Hos.  10.    1  according  to  the  goodness  of  his  land  they 

Z.Good,  goodness,  good  thing,  nto  tub. 

Exod33.  19  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before  thee 
Neh.    9.  25  delighted  themselves  in  thy  great  goodn. 
9-  35  thy  gveat  goodness  that  thou  gavest  them 
Psa.  25.    7  remember  thou  me  for  thy  goodness' 

27.  13  unless  I  had  believed  to  see~the  goodness 
31. 19  how  great  (is)  thy  goodness,  which  thou 
65.    4  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  thy  house 

145.  7  utter  the  memory  of  thy  great  goodness 
Isa.  63.  7  the  great  goodness  toward  the  house  of 
Jer.     2.    7  fruit  thereof  and  the  goodness  thereof 

31.  12  flow  together  to  the  goodness  of  the  L. 

31.  14  shall  be  satisfied  with  my  goodness,  saith 
Hos.    3.    5  fear  the  LORD  and  his  goodness  in  the 
Zech.  9.  17  how  great  (is)  his  goodness,  and  how  gre. 
4. Goodness,  ayad^xrvvq  agathosune. 

Rom  15.  14  ye  also  are  full  of  goodness,  filled  with  - 
Gal.  5.  22  long  suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith 
Eph.  5.  9  all  goodness  and  righteousness  aud  truth 
2  Th.  1.  11  all  the  good  pleasure  of  (his)  goodness 

5.  Usefulness,  benignity,  xpwvT6r7)s  chrestotes. 
Rom.  2.    4  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodness 

11.  22  Behold  therefore  the  goodness  and  seve. 
11.  22  goodness,  if  thou  continue  in  (his)  good. 

6.  Useful,  benign,  xpv^r6s  chrestos. 

Rom.  2.   4  that  the  goodness  of  God  Ieadeth  thee 
GOODS  — 
1. Strength,  f\tt  on. 

Job  20. 10  and  Ms  hands  shall  restore  their  goods 
2.Forrce,  wealth,  b)rj  chayil; 

Nuni3i.   9  and  all  their  flocks,  and  all  then-  goods 
o.Good,  good  thing,  aia  tob. 

Deut  28.  11  Lord  shall  make  thee  plenteous  in  goods 

Eccl.  5.  1 1  When  goods  increase,  they  are  increased 

4.  Good,  goodness,  good  thing,  3ia  tub. 

Gen.  24.  10  the  goods  of  his  master  (were)  in  lus  h. 
Neh.   9.  25  possessed  houses  full  of  all  goods,  wells 
Job  20.  21  therefore  shall  no  man  look  for  his  goods 

5.  Work,  business,  npN7p  melakah. 

Exod22.   8,  it  put  his' hand  unto  his  neighbour's  go. 

6.  Riches,  tvealth,  ypli  niksin. 

Ezra   6.   8  of  the  king's  goods,  (even)  of  the  tribute 
7.  26  confiscation  of  goods,  or  to  imprisonment 
7. Getting,  acquisition,  |;:p  qinyan. 

Eze.  3S.  12  which  have  gotten  cattle  and  goods,  that 
38.  13  to  take  away  cattle  and  goods,  to  take  a 
&, Substance,  goods,  ts»W]  rekush. 

Gen.  14.  11  took  all  the" goods  of  Sodom  and  Gomor. 
14. 12  they  took  Lot.  .and  his  goods,  and  depa. 
14. 16  he  brought  back  all  the  goods,  and  also 
14.  16  and  his  goods,  and  the  women  also,  and 
14.  21  Give  me.  .and  take  the  goods  to  thyself 
31.  18  his  goods  which  he  had  gotten,  the  cattle 
46.    6  their  goods,  which  they  had  gotten  in 
Numi6.  32  (apperta.)  unto  Korah,  and  all  (their)  g. 
35.    3  for  their  goods,  and  for  all  their  beasts 
2  Ch  21.  14  children,  and  thy  wives,  and  all  thy  g. 
Ezra    1.    4,  6  with  gold,  and  with  goods,  and  with  bea. 
9.  Good,  good  thing,  ayaOos  agathos. 

Lukei2.  18  will  I  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  my  goods 
12. 19  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years 
10. Essence,  substance,  ovaia  ousia. 

Lukeis.  12  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  (to  me) 

II.  Vessel,  instrument,  o-ksvos  skeuos. 

Matti2.  29  how  can  one  enter,  .and  spoil  his  goods 

Mark  3.  27  No  man  can  enter,  .and  spoil  his  goods 
12.  TJie  things  existing,  ra  inrdpxovra  ta  huparcho. 

Matt24.  47  shall  make  him  ruler  over  all  his  goods 
25.  14  servants,  and  delivered  unto  them  his  g. 

Luken.  21  keepeth  his  palace,  his  goods  are  in  pea. 
16.    1  unto  him  that  he  had  wasted  his  goods 
19.   8  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor 


GOODS 


430 


GOVBRNOES 


i  Co.  13.    3  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  (the  poor) 
Heb.io.  34  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goods 

IS. Existence,  substance,  v-n-ap^ts  huparxis. 

Acts   2. 45  And  sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and 
GOODS,  to  be  increased  with  — 
To  be  rich,  wealthy,  ir\ovrea  plouieo. 

Rev.   3.  17  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need 

GOODS,  thy  — 

The  things  belonging  to  thee,  ra  ad  ta  sa. 

Luke  6.  50  taketh  away  thy  goods  ask  (them)  not  aga. 

GOPHER  — 

Gopher,  cedar,  cypress,  fir  wood,  i?a  gopher. 

Gen.   6.  14  Make  thee  an  ark  of  gopher  wood;  rooms 
GORE,  to  — 
To  push,  gore,  n::  nagach. 

Exod2i.  28  ox  gore  a  man  or  a  woman,  that  they  die 
21.  31  Whether  he  have  gored  a  son,  or  have  g. 

GORGEOUS  — 

Bright,  shining,  \ai-nrp6s  lampros. 

Luke23. 11  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe,  and  sent 
GORGEOUSLY,  most  — 
Perfection,  Vi*???  miklol. 

Eze.  23.  12  captains,  .rulers  clothed  most  gorgeously 
GORGEOUSLY  apparelled,  they  which  are  — 
VJwse  in  splendid  garments,  61  £v  ifiario'/j.^  eVSo^&j 
vTrdpxovTeshoienhiinatisindendoxdhuparchontes. 

Luke  7.  25  they  which  are  gorgeously  apparelled,  and 

GO'-SHEN.f^. 

;.  The  name  of  a  part  of  Egypt  where  the  Israelites 
dwelt  during  their  sojourn  there.  It  is  usually  called 
the  "  land  of  Goshen  "  but  also  simply  Gosheu.  "The 
land  of  Rameses  "  seems  (Gen.  47.  n)  to  have  been 
another  name  for  Goshen,  unless  it  be  simply  a  district 
or"  it.  From  Gen.  45.  10  it  appears  to  have  been  a 
territory  near  the  palace  of  Joseph's  Pharaoh,  who  was 
of  the  15th  Egyptian  dynasty,  and  resided  part  of  the 
year  at  Memphis,  and  during  harvest  time  at  Avaris, 
on  the  Bubastite  or  Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile. 
Goshen  was  pro"bably  the  extreme  province  of  Egypt 
towards  Canaan  (Gen.  46.  28,  29,  and  33,  34). 

Gen.  45. 10  And  thou  shalt  dwell  in  the  land  of  G. 

46.  28  he  sent  Judah.  .to  direct  his  face  unto  G. 

46.  28  and  they  came  into  the  land  of  G. 

46.  29  went  up  to  meet  Israel  His  father,  to  G. 

46.  34  that  ye  may  dwell  iu  the  land  of  G.:  for 

47.  1  and,  behold,  they  (are)  in  the  land  of  G. 
47.    4  let  thy  servants  dwell  in  the  land  of  G. 
47.    6  in  the  land  of  G.  let  them  dwell :  and  if 
47.  27  And  Israel  dwelt . .  in  the  country  of  G. 
50.    8  little  ones,  .they  left  in  the  land  of  G. 

Exod.  8.  22  I  will  sever  in  that  day  the  land  of  G. 

g.  26  Only  in  the  land  of  G. .  .was  there  no  hail 

2.  A  district  in  southern  Canaan,  between  Gaza  and 
Gibeon,  and  part  of  the  maritime  plain  of  Judah. 

Josh. 10.  41  And  Joshua  smote,  .all  the  country  of  G. 
11. 16  So  Joshua  took,  .all  the  land  of  G.,  and 

3.  A  town  in  the  mountains  of  Judah. 

Josh.15.  51  And  G.,  and  Holon,  and  Giloh  ;  eleven 
GOSPEL  — 
Good  news,  tidings,  word,  evayycktov  euaffgelioii. 

Matt.  4.  23  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and 
9-  35  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and 

24. 14  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached 
26.  13  Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be  preach. 

Mark  1.  1  beginning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
1.  14  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  of 
1.  15  at  hand  :  repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gos. 

8.  35  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  and  the  gospel's 
10.  29  or  lands,  for  my  sake,  and  the  gospel's 

13.  10  the  gospel  must  first  be  published  among 

14.  9  Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be  preached 

16. 15  [and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature] 
Acts  15.   7  Gentiles,  .should  hear  the  word  of  the  g. 

20.  24  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
Rom.  1.    1  Paul,  .separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God 

1.  9  whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit  in  the  gospel 
1. 16  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ 

2.  16  by  Jesus  Christ  according  to  my  gospel 
10.  16  But  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the  gospel 
ti.  28  As  concerning  the  gospel,  .enemies  for 

15.  16  ministering  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the 
15.  19  I  have  fully  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ 

15.  29  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  [the  gospel  of]  C. 

16.  25  to  stablish  you  according  to  my  gospel 

1  Co.   4.  15  I  have  begotten  you  through  the  gospel 

9. 12  lest  we  should  hinder  the  gospel  of  Christ 

9.  14  preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gos. 
9. 18  I  may  make  the  gospel  of  Cln-ist  without 
g.  18  that  I  abuse  not  my  power  in  the  gospel 
9. 23  this  I  do  for  the  gospel's  sake,  that  I  mi. 

15.    1  I  declare  unto  you  the  gospel  which  I  pr. 

2  Co.    2.  12  I  came  to  Troas  to  (preach)  Christ's  gos. 

4.  3  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that 
4.  4  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ 
8. 18  whose  praise  (is)in  the  gospel  throughout 
9.  13  professed  subjection  unto  the  gospel  of  C. 

10.  14  to  you  also  tn  (preaching)  the  gospel  of  C. 

11.  4  or  another  gospel,  which  ye  have  not  ace. 
11.    7  because  I  have  preached  to  you  the  gos. 

Gal.    1.   6  are.  .removed  from  him.  .unto  another  g. 
1.    7  and  would  pervert  the  gospel  of  Christ 
1.  11  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of  me  is 


Gal.     2.    2  that  gospel  which  I  preach  among 

2.  5  that  the  truth  of  the  gospel  might  contiu. 
2.    7  that  the  gospel  of  the  uncircumeision  was 

2.  14  not.  .according  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel 
Eph.    1.  13  after  that  ye  heard,  .the  gospel  of  your 

3.  6  of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  the  gospel 

6.  T5  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  pe. 
6.  19  to  make  known  the  mystery  [of  the  gospel] 
Phil.  1.  5  Eor  your  fellowship  in  the  gospel  from 
1.  7  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel 
1.  12  rather  unto  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel 
1.  17  that  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel 
1.  27  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ 

1.  27  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  gos. 

2.  22  a  son.  .he  hath  served  with  me  in  the  go. 

4.  3  women  which  laboured  with  me  in  the  g. 
4.  15  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  when 

Col.     1.    5  in  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  ' 

1.  23  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  g. 

1  Th.  1.    5  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word 

2.  2  to  speak  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  with 
2.  4  allowed,  .to  be  put  in  trust  with  the  gos. 
2.   8  not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our 

2.  9  we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God 

3.  2  fellow  labourer  in  the  gospel  of  Christ 

2  Th.  1.    8  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jes. 

2.  14  Whereunto  he  called  you  by  our  gospel 

1  Ti.    1.  11  According  to  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 

2  Ti.    1.    8  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel 

1. 10  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel 
2.    8  raised  from  the  dead  according  to  my  go. 
Phm.      13  ministered,  .in  the  bonds  of  the  gospel 
1  Pe.  4.  17  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God? 
Rev.  14.   6  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach 

GOSPEL,  to  preach  before  the  — 

To  tell  good  news  before  hand,  Trpo€vayye\i£op,cu. 

Gal.     3.   8  preached  before  the  gospel  unto  Abraham 
GOSPEL  (of),  to  preach  the  — 
To  tell  good  news,  zvayyzXi(op.ai  euaggelizoinai. 
Luke  4.  18  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel 
9.    6  preaching  the  gospel,  and  healing  every 
20.    1  as  he  taught,  .and  preached  the  gospel 
Rom.  1. 15  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you 
10. 15  of  them  that  [preach  the  gospel  of  peace] 
15.  20  so  have  I  strived  to  preach  the  gospel 

1  Co.    1.  17  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  gospel 

g.  16  though  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  have  noth. 
g.  16  woe  is  unto  me,  if  I  preach  not  the  gos.! 
g.  18  that,  when  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  may 

2  Co.  10.  16  To  preach  the  gospel  in  the  (regions)  be. 
Gal.     1.    8  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than 

1.  9  If  any.. preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you 
4. 13  I  preached  the  gospel  unto  you  at  the 

GOSPEL  into  or  unto,  to  preach  the  — 
To  tell  good  news,  evayye\i£o/j.at  euaygeh'zoviai. 
Acts  8.  25  preached  the  gospel  in  many  villages  of 
14.    7  And  there  they  preached  the  gospel 
14.  21  when  they  had  preached  the  gospel  to 
16. 10  called  us  for  to  preach  the  gospel  unto 
1  Pe.  1. 12  them  that  have  preached  the  gospel  unto 

GOSPEL,  to  be  preached  by  the  — 

To  tell  good  news,  <=va,yy€\l£ofj.ai  euaygelizomai. 
1  Pe.  1.  25  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you 

GOSPEL  is  preached  to  or  unto,  the  — 

To  tell  good  ?iews,  eucryyeAifoueu  euaggelizomai. 
Luke  7.  22  to  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached 
Heb.   4.    2  For  unto  us  was  the  gospel  preached,  as 

1  Pe.    4.    6  for  tins  cause  was  the  gospel  preached 

GOSPEL  preached  to,  to  have  the  — 

To  tell  good  news,  svayy€\l£olu.ai  euaggelizomai. 

Matt.  n.  5  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them 
GOTTEN,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  gathered,  ^dn  asaph,  2. 

2  Sa.  17. 13  Moreover  if  he  be  gotten  into  a  city,  then 

2.  To  be  given,  }ru  nathan,  6. 

Job  28. 15  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall 

3.  To  draw  away,  aizoffTrdta  apospao. 

Acts  21.    1  that  after  we  were  gotten  from  them 
GOTTEN  hastily,  to  be  — 
To  be  abhorred,  got  by  abhorred  means,  *7n3  bachal,  4, 

Prov.20.  21  An  inheritance  (may  be)  gotten  hastily 
GOURD  — 
l.Gourd,  palma  chrisii,  JVj?,j?  qiqayon. 

Jon.    4.   6  the  Lord  God  prepared  a  gourd,  and 

4.  6  So  Jonah  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gou. 
4.   7  and  it  smote  the  gourd  that  it  withered 
4.    9  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  go.  ? 
4.  10  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the  gourd,  for  the 

2.  Knobs,  gourds,  wild  cucumbers,  nyips  paqquoth. 

2  Ki.  4.  39  gathered  thereof  wild  gourds  his  lap  full 
GOVERN,  to  — 
l.To  bind  up,  gird,  E^rj  chabash. 

Job  34.  17  Shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  govern? 
2.7*0  lead  forth,  nm  nachah,  5. 

Psa.  67.   4  and  govern  the  nations  upon  earth.    Sel. 
S.To  do,  make,  work,  use,  n?y  asah. 

1  Ki.21.    7  Dost  thou  now  govern  the  kingdom  of  I.  ? 
GOVERNMENT  — 
l.Bule,  "7V1??  memshalah. 

Isa.   22.  21  I  will  commit  thy  government  into  his 


^.Princely power,  rnp'O  misrah. 

Isa.    9.    6  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  should. 
9.    7  Of  the  increase  of  (his)  government  and 
S.A  steering,  jnloling,  directing,  Kv&epvnais  luber. 

1  Co.  12.  28  helps,  governments,  diversities  of  tongues 
^.Lordship,  poioer,  KvptorTjs  kuriotes. 

2  Pe.  2.  10  walk  after  the  flesh,  .and  depise  govern, 
GOVERNOR  — 

l.A  leader,  F]Vk,  fj&N  alluph. 

Zech.  9.    7  he  shall  be  as  a  governor  in  Judah,  and 
12.   5  the  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their 
12.   6  In  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of 
2.To  grave,  decree,  ppn  chaqaq. 

Judg.  5.    9  My  heart  (is)  toward  the  governors  of  Is. 

3.  To  decree,  p$n  chaqaq,  Sa. 

Judg.  5.  14  out  of  Macliir  came  down  governors,  and 

4.  To  rule,  Lc;o  mashal. 

Gen.  45.  26  he  (is)  governor  over  all  the  land  of  Egy. 

2  Ch.  23.  20  the  governors  of  the  people,  and  all  the 

Psa.  22.  28  and  he  (is)  the  governor  among  the  nat. 

Jer.  30.  21  their  governor  shall  proceed  from  the 
5. Leader,  one  going  before,  VJ3  nagid, 

2  Ch.28.  7  and  Azrikam  the  governor  of  the  house 
Q.One  lifted  up,  prince,  k^j  nasi. 

2  Ch.  1.    2  to  every  governor  in  all  Israel,  the  chief 

7.  Governor,  captain,  viceroy,  nrja  jpeckah. 

1  Ki.io.  15  and  of  the  governors  of  the  country 

2  Ch.  9.  i4governorsofthecountry,broughtgoldanl 
Ezra  8.  36  to  the  governors  on  this  side  the  river 
Neh.  2.    7  given  me  to  the  governors  beyond  the  ri. 

2.  9  I  came  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river 

3.  7  unto  the  throne  of  the  governor  on  this 
5.  14  to  be  their  governor  in  the  land  of  Jud. 

5. 14  have  not  eaten  the  bread  of  the  governor 

5. 15  the  former  governors,  .were  chargeable 
5.  18  required  not  I  the  bread  of  the  governor 

12.  26  in  the  days  of  Xehemiah  the  governor 
Esth.  3.  12  governors  that  (were)  over  every  province 
Hag.  1.    r,  14  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of  Jud. 
2.    2  son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of  Judah,  and 

2.  21  Speak  to  Zerubbabel,  governor  of  Judah 
Mai.    1.   8  offer  it  now  unto  thy  governor ;  will  he 

8.  Governor,  captain,  viceroy,  nr;3  pechah. 

Ezra  5.    3,  6  Tatnai,  governor  oil  this  side  the  river 

5.  14  Sheshbazzar,  whom  he  had  made  govern. 

6.  6  Now.  .Tatnai,  governor  beyond  the  river 
6.  7  let  the  governor,  .build  this  house  of  G. 
6. 13  Then  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the 

9. Overseer,  insp?cto7*,  ~\'$3paqid. 

Jer.  20.  1  who  (was)  also  chief  governor  in  the  hou. 
10. Read,  prince,  chief,  captain,  f@  sar. 

1  Ki.  22  26  unto  Anion  the  governor  of  the  city,  and 

2  Ki.  23.  8  the  gate  of  Joshua  the  governor  of  the 

1  Ch.24.    5  governors  of  the  sanctuary,  and  govern. 

2  Ch.18.  25  carry  him  back  to  Anion  the  governor 
11. Ruler,  ^W  shallit. 

Gen.  42.  6  Joseph  (was)  the  governor  over  the  land 
12,-Ethnarch,  ruler  of  a  people,  46i>dpxr)s  etlmarch. 

2  Co.  11.  32  the  governor  under  Aretasthe  king  kept 
13. To  make,  lead,  guide  straight,  eudvvw  euthunO 

Jas.  3.   4  turned,  .whithersoever  the  governor  list. 

14.  Leader, guide, one  going  before,  rryzp.&v  hegemon. 
Matt.  10.  iS  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governors 

27.   2  delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate  the  gov. 
27. 11  stood  before  the  governor  :  and  the  gov. 

27. 14  insomuch  that  the  governor  marvelled 

27. 15  the  governor  was  wont  to  release  unto 
27.  21  The  governor  answered  and  said  unto  th. 

27.  23  [the  governor  said,]  Why,  what  evil  hath 
27  27  Then  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  J. 

28.  14  And  if  this  come  to  the  governor's  ears 
Luke2o.  20  unto  the  power  and  authority  of  the  gov. 
Acts  23.  24  and  bring . .  safe  unto  Felix  [the  governor] 

23.  26  unto  the  most  excellent  governor  Felix 
23  33  and  delivered  the  epistle  to  the  governor 

23.  34  when  the  governor  had  read,  .he  asked  of 

24.  1  who  informed  the  governor  against  Paul 
24.  10  after  that  the  governor  had  beckoned 
26.  30  the  king  rose  up,  and  the  governor,  and 

1  Pe.  2. 14  Or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them  that  are 

15.  To  lead,  guide,  go  before,  7]y 4ofj.ai  hegeemai. 
Matt.  2.  6  for  out  of  thee  shall  come  a  Governor 
Acts  7.  10  he  made  him  governor  over  Egypt  and 

16. House  manager,  oIkovo^ios  oikonomos. 

Gal.    4.    2  is  under  tutors  and  governors  until  the 
GOVERNOR,  to  be  — 
To  go  before,  be  leader  or  guide,  r^yefioyevco. 

Luke  2.    2  made  when  Cyrenius  was  governor  of  S. 

3.  1  Tontius  Pilate  being  governor  of  Judea 
GOVERNOR  of  the  feast  — 

Chief  of  a.  trikUnium,  apx^piKXivos  architriklinos. 

John  2.    8  and  bear  unto  the  governor  of  the  feast 
2.    g  the  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  brid. 
GOVERNOR,  chief  — 
Leader,  one  going  before,  T3J  nagid. 

1  Ch.29.  22  Solomon,  .and  anointed  (him),  .the  chief  g. 
GOVERNORS  — 
Prefects,  j'j^p  signin. 

Dan.   2.  48  chief  of  the  governors  over  all  the  wise 


GOZAN 


431 


GRAPE 


Dan  3.  2  the  princes,  the  governors,  and  the  capt. 
3.  3  Then  the  princes,  the  governors,  and  cap. 
3/27  the  princes,  governors,  and  captains,  and 
6.    7  the  governors,  and  the  princes,  the  coun. 

go'-zan,  ma  food. 

The  English  version  makes  this  name  appear  to  he  a 
river ;  though  it  was  evidently  not  a  river  but  a 
country.  Gozau  was  a  place  to  which  Israel  was  earned 
away  by  Pul,  Tiglath-Pileser,  and  Shalmaneser  (possibly 
Sargon).  It  was  perhaps  identical  with  the  Gctum- 
nitis  of  Ptolemy,  and  the  Mygdonia  of  other  writers. 
The  river  Habor  (now  Khabour),  watered  and  drained 
it  as  the  great  Mesopotamian  affluent  of  the  Euphrates. 
2KJ.17.    6  and  placed.,  in  Habor  (by)  the  river  of  G. 

18,  11  put  them .  .in  Habor  (by)  the  river  of  G. 

19.  12  G.,  and  Haran,  and  Rezeph,  and  the 

1  Ch.  5.  26  Hara,  and  to  the  river  G.,  unto  this  day 
Isa.   37. 12  G.,  and  Haran,  and  E-ezeph,  and  the 

GRACE  — 

1.  Grace,  favour,  jn  clien. 

Gen.   6.   3  Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
19. 19  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

32.  5  sent,  .that  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight 

33.  8  to  find  .grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 
33.  10  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

33.  15  let  me  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

34.  11  Let  me  find  grace  in  your  eyes,  and  what 
39.   4  Joseph  found  grace  in  Ins  sight,  and  he 
47.  25  let  us  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 
47.  29  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 
50.    4  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  your  eyes 

Sxod33.  12  and  thou  hast  also  found  grace  in  my 
33.  13  if'I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  show 
33.  13  know,  .that  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight 

33.  16  thy  people  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight  ? 
33. 17  thou  hast  found  grace  iu  my  sight,  and  I 

34.  9  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 
Nuni32.  5  if  we  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  let 
Judg.  6.  17  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 
Ruth  2.    2  after  (him)  in  whose  sight  I  shall  find  gr. 

2.  10  Why  have  I  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

1  Sa.   1. 18  Let  thine  handmaid  find  grace  in  thy 

20.    3  that  I  have  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 
27.   5  If  I  have  now  found  grace  in  thine  eyes 

2  Sa.  14.  22  that  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my 

16.    4  (that)  I  may  find  grace  iu  thy  sight,  my 
Esth.  2.  17  she  obtained  grace  and  favour  in  his  sight 
Psa.  45.    2  grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips  :  therefore 

84.  11  the  Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory  :  no 
Prov.  1.    9  For  they . .  an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy 

3.  22  life  unto  thy  soul,  and  grace  to  thy  neck 

3.  34  Surely,  .he  giveth  grace  unto  the  lowly 

4.  9  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament  of  grace 
22. 1 1  (for)  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king  (shall 

Jer.  31.    2  The  people,  .found  grace  in  the  wilder. 
Zech.  4.    7  shoutings,  (crying),  Grace,  grace  unto  it  1 
12.  10  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications 

2. Grace,  supplication  for  grace,  n3r?$  techinnah. 
Ezra   9.    S  now  for  a  little  space  grace  hath  been 

3.  Gracefulness,  comeliness,  evirpiireia  eupr&peia. 

Jas.     1. 11  the  grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  perisheth 

4.  Grace,  graciousness,  x°-PiS  charis. 

Luke  2.  40  an'd  the  grace  of  God  was  upon  him 
John  1.  14  dwelt  among  us.  .full  of  grace  and  truth 
1.  16  And  of  his  fulness,  .aud  grace  for  grace 
1.  17  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ 
Acts    4.  33  the  apostles,  .great  grace  was  upon  them 
11.  23  when  he  came,  and  had  seen  the  grace  of 
13. 43  persuaded .  .to  continue  in  the  grace  of  G. 
14.    3  gave  testimony  unto  the  word  of  his  grace 

14.  26  been  recommended  to  the  grace  of  God 

15.  11  that  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
ig.  40  being  recommended. .  unto  the  grace  of  G. 
18.  27  them . .  which  had  believed  through  grace 
20.  24  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
20.  32  to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able 

Rom.  1.    5  By  whom  we  have  received  grace  and  ap. 
1.    7  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our  F. 

3.  24  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through 

4.  4  is  the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but 

4.  16  (it  is)  of  faith,  that  (it  might  be)  by  grace 

5.  2  access.. into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand 
5. 15  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace 
5. 17  they  which  receive  abundance  of  grace 
5.  20  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more 

5.  21  even  so  might  grace  reign  through  right. 

6.  1  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may 
6.  14,  15  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace 

11.  5  remnant  according  to.  .election  of  grace 
11.  6  if  by  grace,  then  (is  it)  no  more  of  works 
11.    6  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.    But 

11.  6  (it  be)  of  works,  [then  is  it  no  more  grace] 

12.  3  through thegracegiven  unto  ine,  to  every 
12.    6  according  to  the  grace  that  is  given  to 
15. 15  of  the  grace  that  is  given  to  me  of  God 

16.  20  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
16.  24  [The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ] 

1  Co.   1.    3  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  G. 

1.    4  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  j'ou  by 

3.  10  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  unto  me 
10.  30  if  I  by  grace  be  a  partaker,  why  am  I  evil 
15.  10  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am :  and  his  g. 

15.  10 1,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with 

16.  23  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

2  Co.   1.    2  Grace  (be)  to  you  and  peace  from  God 

1.  12  but  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  have  had  our 

4.  ig  that  the  abundant  grace  might  through 
6.    1  ye  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain 
8.    1  we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  of  God 


2  Go.    8.   6  also  finish  in  you  the  same  grace  also 
S.    7  (see)  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also 

8.  9  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
8. 19  chosen,  .to  travel  with  us  with  this  grace 

9.  8  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  toward 
9.  14  for  the  exceeding  grace  of  God  in  you 

12.    9  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ;  for  my 
13. 14  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
Gal     1.    3  Grace  (be)  to  you  and  peace  from  God  the 
1.    6  the  grace  of  Christ  unto  another  gospel 

1.  15  who  separated,  .and  called  (me)  by  his  g. 

2.  9  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given  unto 
2.  21  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God :  for 

5.  4  by  the  law ;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace 

6.  iS  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 
Eph.  1.    2  Grace  (be)  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God 

1.   6  To  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace 

1.  7  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace 

2.  5  together  with  Christ,  by  grace  ye  are  sav. 
2.   7  show  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace  in 

2.  S  by  grace  are  you  saved  through  faith ,  and 

3.  2  dispensation  of  the  grace  of  God  which 
3.   7  according  to  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  God 

3.  8  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace  given 

4.  7  But  unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace 
4.29  it  may  minister  grace  unto  the  hearers 
6. 24  Grace  (be)  with  all  them  that  love  our  L. 

Phil.   1.   2  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God 
1.    7  ye  all  are  partakers  of  my  grace 
4.  23  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

Col.     1.   2  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God 
1.    6  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth 

3.  16  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the 

4.  6  Let  your  speech  (be)  ahvay  with  grace 

4.  18  Remember  my  bonds.    Grace  (be)  with 

1  Th.  1.    1  Grace  (be)  iinto  you,  and  peace,  from  G. 

5.  28  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

2  Th.  1.   2  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God  our 

1.  12  grace  of  our  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 

2.  16  consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace 

3.  18  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

1  Ti.    r.  2  Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from  God  our 

1.  14  grace  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  abunda. 

6.  21  Grace  (be)  with  thee.    Amen 

2  Ti.    1.    2  Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from  God  the 

1.  9  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace 

2.  1  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

4.  22  [Grace  (be)  with  you.     Amen] 

Titus  1.    4  Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from  God  the 
2. 11  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation 

3.  7  being  justified  by  his  grace,  we  should 
3. 15  Grace  (be)  with  you  all.    Amen 

Phm.       3  Grace  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God  our 
25  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 
Heb.   2.   9  by  the  grace  of  God  should  taste  death 

4.  16  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace 
4,  16  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need 

10.  29  done  despite  unto  the  spirit  of  grace? 
12.  15  lest  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 

12.  28  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve 

13.  9  that  the  heart  be  established  with  grace 
13.  25  Grace  (be)  with  you  all.    Amen 

Jas.     4.   6  But  he  giveth  more  grace.   Wherefore  he 

4.  6  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble 

1  Pe.    1.    2  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  be  multiplied 

1.  10  of  the  grace  (that  should  come)  unto  you 
1.  13  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to 
3.    7  being  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life 
4. 10  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God 

5.  5  For  God.  .giveth  grace  to  the  humble 

5. 10  the  God  of  all  gracp,  who  hath  called  us 
5.  12  the  true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  stand 

2  Pe.   1.    2  Grace  and  peace  be  multiplied  unto  you 

3.  18  grow  in  grace,  and  (in)  the  knowledge  of 
2  Jo.         3  Grace  be  with  you,  mercy,  (and)  peace 
Jude        4  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousuess,  and 
Rev.    1.    4  Grace  (be)  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  him 
22.  21  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

GRACIOUS  — 

1. Grace,  favour,  j~  chert. 

Prov.n.  16  A  gracious  woman  retaineth  honour;  and 
Eccl.  10. 12  words  of  a  wise  man's  mouth  (are)  graci. 

%Gracious,  parr  cliannun. 

Exod22.  27  that  I  will  hear;  for  I  (am)  gracious 

34.    6  merciful  and  gracious,iong  suffering  and 

2  Ch.30.    9  Lord  your  God  (is)  gracious  and  merciful 

Neh,    9.  17  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and 

9.  31  for  thou  (art)agracious  and  merciful  God 

Psa.  86.  15  a  God  full  of  compassion,  and  gracious 

103.   S  The  Lord  (is)  merciful  and  gracious,  slow 

in.   4  the  Lord  (is)  gracious,  and  full  of  comp. 

112.    4  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion,  and  ri. 

116.   s  Gracious(is)  theLoRD,  and  righteous ;  yea 

145.   8  The  Lord  (is)  gracious,  and  full  of  comp. 

Joel    2.  13  for  he  (is)  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to 

Jon,    4.    2  for  I  knew  that  thou  (art)  a  gracious  God 

Z.Grace,  graciousness,  x^pts  charis. 

Luke  4.  22  and  wonderedat  thegraciouswords which 

4.  Useful,  kind,  xpvo'ros  chresios. 

1  Pe.  2.   3  If.  .ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  (is)  gra. 
GItACIOUS,  to  be  — 

l.To  grace,  be  gracious,  jJrt  chanan. 

Gen.  43.  29  said,  God  be  gracious  unto  thee,  my  son 
Exod33.  T9  wil*  1je  gracious  to  whom  I  will  be  grac. 
Nuru.  6.  25  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  unto 

2  Eli.  13.  23  Lord  was  gracious  unto  them,  and  had  c. 
Job  33.  24  Then  he  is  gracious  unto  him,  and  saith 
Psa.  77.    9  Hath  God"  forgotten  to  be  gracious?  hath 


Isa.   30.  18  wait,  that  he  may  be  gracious  unto  you 
30.  19  he  will  be  very  gracious  unto  thee  at  the 
33.    2  0  Lord,  be  gracious  unto  us ;  we  have 
Amos  5. 15  Lord  God  of  hosts  will  be  gracious  unto 
Mai.    1.   9  beseech  God  that  he  will  be  graciousunto 

2.  To  be  gracious,  pn  chanan,  2. 

Jer.  22.  23  how  gracious  shalt  thou  be  when  pangs 
GRACIOUS  to,  to  be  — 
To  be  gracious,  act  graciously,  pn  chanan,  3. 

2  Sa.  12.  22  God  will  be  gracious  to  me,  that  the  child 
GRACIOUSLT  — 
Good,  aia  tob. 

Hos.  14.    2  receive  (us]1  graciously :  so  will  werender 
GRACIOUSLY,  to  deal,  or  give  — 
To  be  gracious,  JJH  chanan. 

Gen.  33.    5  children  which  God  hath  graciously  given 
33.  11  God  hath  dealt  graciously  with  me,  and 

GRAFT  in  or  into,  to  — 

To  engraft,  stick  in,  eytcevrpLCo)  egkentrizo. 

Rom  11.  17  thou,  .wert  grafted  in  among  them,  and 
11. 19  broken  off.  that  I  might  be  graffed  in 
11.  23  And  they  also,  .shall  be  grafted  in 
11.  23  for  God  is  able  to  graft  them  iu  again 
11.  24  and  wert  graffed  contrary  to  nature  into 
n.24  how  much  more  shall  these . .  be  graffed  hi 
GRAIN  — 
A  kernel,  grain,  seed,  kSkkos  kokkos. 

Matt  13.  31  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  grain 

17.  20  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  se. 

Mark  4.  31  (It  is)  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which 

Lukei3-  19  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which 

17.   6  If  ye  had  faith  asa  grain  of  mustard  seed 

1  Co.  15.  37  not  that  body  that  shall  be,  but  bare  gr. 

GRAIN,  least  — 

Grain,  pebble,  Ths  tseror. 

Amos  9.   9  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the 
GRANDMOTHER  — 
Mamma,  grandmother,  fxafifxi]  mamme. 

2  Ti.    1.    5  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother 
GRANT  — 

Grant,  permission,  jvah  Hshyon. 

Ezra   3.    7  according  to  the  grant  that  they  had  of  C. 

GRANT,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  come  in,  toa  bo,  5. 

1  Ch.  4.  10  God  granted  him  that  which  he  requested 

2. To  give,  jni  nathan. 

Lev.  25.  24  ye  shall  grant  a  redemption  for  the  land 
Ruth  1.  9  The  Lord  grant  you  that  ye  may  find  rest 
1  Sa.    1.  17  the  God  of  Israel  grant. . thy  petition  that 

1  Ch.21.  22'  Grant  me  the  place  of  (tins)  threshing  flo. 

21.  22  thou  shalt  grant  it  me  for  the  full  price 

2  Ch.12.   7  but  I  will  grant  them  some  deliverance 
Ezra    7.    6  and  the  king  granted  Mm  all  his  request 
Neh.    1.  11  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this  man 

2.    8  the  king  granted  me,  according  to  the  go. 

Esth.  5.    8  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  petition 

8.  ti  "Wherein  the  king  granted  the  Jews  which 

Job    6.    8  that  God  would  grant,  .the  tiling  that  I 

Psa.  20.    4  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart 

85.   7  Show  us  thy  mercy,  .grant  us  thy  salva. 

140.    8  Grant  not,  0  Lord,  the  desires  of  the  wi. 

3.  To  do,  make,  work,  use,  njjfjj  asah. 

Job  10.  12  Thou  hast  granted  me  life  and  favour 

4.  To  give,  b~i$a>fjLi  didomi. 

Markio.  37  Grant  unto  us  that  we  may  sit,  one  on 
Luke  1.  74  That  he  would  grant  unto  us,  that  we  * 
Acts    4.  29  grant  unto  thy  servants,  that  with  all 

11.  18  Then  hath  God  also  unto  the  Gentiles  gr. 

14.    3  granted  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  by 
Rom  15.    5  grant  you  to  be  like  minded  one  toward 
Eph.    3.  16  That  he  would  grant  you,  according  to 
2  Ti.    1.  18  The  Lord  grant  unto  him  that  he  may 
Rev.    3.  21  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to 

19.   8  And  to  her  was  granted  that  she  should 

5.  To  sag,  speak,  til-nov  eipon. 

Matt  20.  21  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit 

6.  To  grant  as  a  favour,  x^pKo^cll  charizomai. 

Acts   3. 14  desired  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto 
GRANT  graciously,  to  — 
To  be  gracious,  give  grace,  favour,  ]in  chanan. 

Psa.119.  29  way  of  lying,  and  grant  me  thy  law  graci. 
GRANTED,  to  be— 
l.To  give,  \tyxnathan. 

2  Ch.  1.  i2T"\Visdom  and  knowledge  (is)  granted  unto 

Prov  10.  24  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted 
2.To  be  given,  jrq  nathan,  2. 

Esth.  5.   6  What  (is)  thy  petition  ?.  .it  shall  be  gran. 
7.    2  "What(is)  thy  petition.. it  shall  be  granted 

9. 12  what  (is)  thy  petition . .  it  shall  be  granted 

9. 13  let  it  be  granted  to  the  Jews  which  (are) 
GRAPE  — 

A  part,  single  berry,  b"is  peret. 

Lev.  19. 10  neither  shalt  thou  gather  (every)  grape  of 
GRAPE,  tender  — 
Tender  flower,  the  bulb%  iicd  semadar. 

Song  2.  13  the  vines  (with)  the  tender  grape  give  a 
2. 15  the  vines  :  for  our  vines  (have)  tender  gr. 
7. 12  let  us  see  if.  -the  tender  grape  appear 


URAPE 


432 


GRAVEN 


CS1PE  gatherer  — 
/';  cut  off,  gather,  is"3  batsar. 

Jer.     6.    9  turn  back  thine  hand  as  a  grape  gatherer 
49.    9  If  grape  gatherers  come  to  thee,  would 

Obad.       5  if  the  grape  gatherers  came  to  thee 
GRAPE  gleanings,  gleaning  of  grapes  — 
Gleanings,  rn^?y  oleloth. 

Judg.  3.    2  (Is)  not  the  gleaning  of  the  grapes  of  Ep. 

Mic.    7.    1  I  am.  .as  the  grape  gleanings  of  the  viut. 

GRAPES  — 

1:  Gleanings,  riv?yy  oleloth. 

Obad.        5  came,  .would  they  not  leave  (some)  gra.? 

2.Grape,  D^y  enab. 

Gen.  40. 11 1  took  the  grapes,  and  pressed  them  into 

49. 11  and  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes 
Lev.  25.    5  neither  gather  the  grapes  of  thy  vine  und. 
Kum,  6.    3  any  liquor  of  grapes,  nor  eat  moist  grapes 

13.  20  the  time  (was)  the  time  of  the  first  ripe  g. 

13.  23  cut.  .a  branch  with  one  cluster  of  grapes 
Deut  23.  24  thou  mayest  eat  grapes  thy  fill  at  thine 

32.  14  thou  didst  drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  g. 

32.  32  their  grapes  (are)  grapes  of  gall,  their  cl. 
Nell. 13.  15  as  also  wine,  grapes,  and  figs,  and  all 
Isa.  5.  2,  4  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes 
-Ter.  8.  13  no  grapes  on  the  vine,  nor  figs  on  the  fig 
Hos.  9.  10  I  found  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  wildern. 
Amos  9.  13  the  treader  of  grapes  him  that  soweth 

'•i.  Cluster  of  grapes,  ara^vKi}  staphule. 

Matt.  7.  16  Do  men  gather  [grapes]  of  thorns,  or  figs 

Luke  6.  44  nor  of  a  bramble  bush  gather  they  grapes 

Rev.  14.  18  and  gather,  .fur  her  [grapes]  are  fully  ripe 
GRAPES,  gleaning  — 
( lleanings,  n'lS^y  oleloth. 

Isa.    17.   6  Yet  gleaning  grapes  shall  be  left  in  it,  as 
24.  13  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  the  vintage 

Jer.  49.   9  would  they  not  leave .  .gleaning  grapes  ? 
GRAPES,  ripe  — 
Grape,  iiy.  enab. 

Gen.  40.  10  clusters  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  grapes 
GRAPES,  wild  — 
Bad  grajies,  dtn^  beushim. 

Isa.     5.   2  looked  . .  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes  ' 
5.   4  wherefore . .  brought  it  forth  wild  grapes  ? 
GRASS  — 
l.Tender  grass,  H'Sn  dcshc. 

Gen.    1. 11  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass,  the  herb 
1.  i2  And  the  earth  brought  forth  grass.,  herb 

Job     6.    5  Doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  hath  gr.? 

Isa,    15.    6  the  grass  faileth,  there  is  no  green  thing 

Jer.  14.    5  and  forsook  (it),  because  there  was  no  gr. 
'2. Hay,  grass,  herb,  TXp  chat-sir. 

1  Ki.  18.    5  we  may  find  grass  to  save  the  horses  and 

2  Ki.  19.  26  the  grass  on  the  house  tops,  and .  .blasted 
Job  40.  15  Behold  now  behemoth,  .he  eateth  grass 
Psa.  37.    2  they  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like  the  grass 

90.    5  in  the  morning,  .like  grass  (which)  grow. 

103.  15  man,  his  days  (are)  as  grass ;  as  a  flower 

104.  14  He  causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cat. 
129.  6  Let  them  be  as  the  grass  (upon)  the  house 
147.    8  who  maketh  grass  to  grow  upon  the  mou. 

Isa.   35.    7  where  each  lay . .  grass,  with  reeds  and  ru. 
37.  27  the  grass  ou  the  house  tops,  and.  .blasted 
40.    6  All  flesh  (is)  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness 
40.    7  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth 
40,    7  bloweth  upon  it :  surely  the  people  (is)  g. 
40.    8  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth 
44.    4  they  shall  spring  up.  .among  the  grass 
51.  12  the  son  of  man.  .shall  be  made,  .grass 

'■'•.Green  herb  or  grass,  p"v  yereq. 

Nuni22.   4  as  the  ox  licketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field 

4.  Herb,  grass,  3i£>jj  eseh. 

Deut.n.  15  I  will  send  grass  in  thy  fields  for  thy  cat. 
29.  23  nor  any  grass  groweth  therein,  like  the 
32.    2  distil,  .as  the  showers  upon  the  grass 
2  Ki.19.  26  they  were  (as)  the  grass  of  the  field,  and 
Job     5.  25  thine  offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  earth 
Psa.  72.  16  city  shall  flourish  like  grass  of  the  earth 
92.    7  When  the  wicked  spring  as  the  grass,  and 
102.   4  My  heart  is  smitten . .  withered  like  grass 
102.  11  like  a  shadow.  .1  am  withered  like  grass 
106.  20  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  grass 
Prov  19.  12  but  his  favour  (is)  as  dew  upon  the  grass 
Isa.   37.  27  they  were  (as)  the  grass  of  the  field,  and 
Jer.    14.    6  their  eyes  did  fail,  because,  .no  grass 
Amos  7.    2  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating  the  grass 
Mic.    5.    7  as  the  showers  upon  the  grass,  that  tarri, 
Zech  10.    1  and  give,  .to  every  one  grass  in  the  field 

5.J7c?'8,  grass,  sy&r/soh. 

Dan.   4.  15  with  the  beasts  in  the  grass  of  the  earth 
4.  25,  32  they  shall  make  thee  to  eat  grass  as 

4.  33  was  driven  from  men,  and  did  eat  grass 

5.  21  they  fed  him  with  grass  like  oxen,  and 

G.  Fodder,  grass,  x^pTOs  chortos. 

Matt.  6.  30  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field 

14.  19  the  multitude  to  sit  down  on  the  grass 
Mark  6.  39  to  make  all  sit  down .  .upon  the  green  gr . 
Lukei2.  28  If  then  God  so  clothe  the  gras*,  which  is 
John  6.  10  Now  there  was  much  grass  in  the  place 
Jas.     1.  10  as  the  flower  of  the  grass  he  shall  pass 

1.  11  it  withereth  the  grass,  and  the  flower 
i  Pe.    1.  24  all  flesh  (is)  as  grass,  .as  the  flower  of  gr. 
1.  24  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  fcher. 


Rev.    8.    7  fire,  .and  all  green  grass  was  burnt  up 
9.    4  that  they  should  not  hurt  the  grass  of 
GRASS,  at  — 
Grassing,  n^h  dosha. 

Jer.  50. 1 1  ye  are  growu  fat  as  the  heifer  at  grass 
GRASS,  tender  — 
1. Tender  grass,  k^i  deshe. 

2  Sa.  23.   4  the  tender  grass  (springing)  out  of  the  ea. 

Prov  27.  25  the  tender  grass  showeth  itself,  and  herbs 
2. Tender  grass,  xmdethe. 

Dan.    4.  15,  23  leave .  .in  the  tender  grass  of  the  field 
GRASSHOPPER  — 

1.  Locust,  nanx*  arbeh. 

Judg,  6.   5  they  came  as  grasshoppers  for  multitude 

7.  12  lay  along  in  the  valley  like  grasshoppers 

Job   39.  20  Canst  thou  make  him  afraid  as  a  grassh.? 

Jer.  46.  23  because  they  are  more  than  the  grasshop. 

2.  Locust,  grasshoppter,  aia  gob. 

Amos  7.    1  he  formed  grasshoppers  in  the  beginning 

3 .Grasshopper,  3;n  chagab. 

Lev.  11.  22  ye  may  eat.  .the  grasshopper  after  his 
Numi3.  33  we  were  iu  our  own  sight  as  grasshoppers 
Eccl.12.    5  and  the  grasshopper  shall  be  a  burden 
Isa.   40.  22  the  inhabitants  thereof  (are)  as  grasshop. 

GRASSHOPPER,  great  — 

Locust,  grasshopper,  nia  gob. 

Nah.  3. 17  thy  captains  as  the  great  grasshoppers 

GRATE  — 

A  grate,  anything  twisted  or  woven,  133J?  milcbar. 

^xod27.    4  thou  shalt  make  for  it  a  grate  of  network 

35. 16  altar  of  burnt  offering,  with  his  brasen  g. 

38    4  he  made  for  the  altar  a  brasen  grate  of  n. 

38.    5  cast  four  rings  for  the  four  ends  of  the  g. 

38.  30  the  brasen  altar,  and  the  brasen  grate  for 

39.  39  The  brasen  altar,  and  his  grate  of  brass 

GRAVE  — 

l.Heap,  prayer,  *y$  bei. 

Job  30.  24  will  not  stretch  out.  .hand  to  the  grave 
%Grave,  rTTDp  qeburah. 

>en.  35.  20  And  Jacob  set  a  pillar  upon  her  grave 

35.  20  that  (is)  the  pillar  of  Rachel's  grave  unto 
Eze.  32.  23  her  company  is  round  about  her  grave 
32.  24  all  her  multitude  rouud  about  her  grave 

3.  Grave,  "i?i?.  qeber. 

Gen.  50.  5  in  my  grave  which  I  have  digged  for  me 
Exodi4.  11  Because,  .no  graves  in  Egypt,  hast  thou 
Numig.  16  touchet'ii-.a  bone  of  a  man,  or  a  grave 

19.  18  touched,  .one  slain,  or  one  dead,  or  a  gr. 
2  Sa.    3.  32  the  king,  .wept  at  the  grave  of  Abner 

19.  37  by  the  grave  of  my  father  and  of  my  mo. 

1  Ki.  13.  30  And  he  laid  his  carcase  in  his  own  grave 

14.  13  mourn,  .for  he  only,  .shall  come  to  the  g. 

2  Ki.  22.  20  thou  shalt  be  gathered  into  thy  grave  in 

23.  6  cast  the  powder  thereof  upon  the  graves 
2  Ch.34.    4  strowed  (it)  upon  the  graves  of  them  that 

34.  28  thou  shalt  be  gathered  to  thy  grave  in 
Joh     3.  22  are  glad,  when  they  can  find  the  grave? 
5.  26  Thou  shalt  come  to  (thy)  grave  in  a  full 
10. 19  been  carried  from  the  womb  to  the  grave 
17.    1  my  days  are  extinct,  the  graves,  .for  me 
21.  32  Yet  shall  he  be  brought  to  the  grave,  and 
Psa.  88.   5  like  the  slain  that  lie  in  the  grave,  whom 

88. 11  Shall  thy .  .kindness  be  declared  in  the  g.? 
Isa.   14.  19  thou  art  cast  out  of  thy  graves  like  an  ab. 

53.    9  he  made  his  grave  with  the  wicked,  and 
65.    4  Which  remain  among  the  graves,  and 
Jer.     8.    1  bring  out  the  bones,  .out  of  their  graves 

20.  17  that  my  mother  might  have  been  my  gr. 
26.  23  cast  his  dead  body  into  the  graves  of  the 

Eze.  32.  22  Jus  graves  (are)  about  him  :  all  of  them 
32.  23  Whose  graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  the 
32.  25,  26  her  graves  (are)  round  about  him  :  all 
37.  12  O  my  people,  I  will  open  your  graves 

37. 12  'cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves 
37.  13  when  I  have  opened  your  graves,  O  my 
37.  13  and  brought  you  up  out  of  your  graves 
39. 11  I  will  give  unto  Gog  a  place  there  of  gr. 

Nah.   1.  14  I  will  make  thy  grave;  for  thou  art  vile 

A..The  unseen  state,  ViNi?  sheol. 

Gen.  37.  35  I  will  go  down  into  the  grave  unto  my  son 

42.  38  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  g. 

44. 29  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  g. 

44.  31  down  the  grey  hairs. .  with  sorrow  to  the  g. 

1  Sa.    2.    6  he  bringeth  down  to  the  g.,  and  bringeth 

1  Ki.    2.    6  hoar  head  go  down  to  the  grave  in  peace 

2.    9  bring  thou  down  to  the  grave  with  blood 

Job     7.    9  he  that  goeth  down  to  the  grave  shall 

14. 13  O  that  thou  wouldest  hide  me  in  the  gr. 
17.  13  If  I  wait,  the  grave  (is)  mine  house  :  I 

21.  13  and  iu  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave 

24.  19  (so  doth)  the  grave  (those  which)  have 
Tsa.    6.    5  in  the  grave  who  shall  give  thee  thanks  ? 

30.  3  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  the  grave 

31.  17  the  wicked,  .let  them  be  silent  in  the  g. 

49. 14  Like  sheep  they  are  laid  in  the  grave  ;  d. 
49. 14  their  beauty  shall  consume  in  the  grave 
49.  15  redeem  my  soul  from  the  power  of  the  g. 

88.  3  and  my  life  draweth  nigh  unto  the  grave 

89.  48  deliver  his  soul  from  the  hand  of  the  g.? 
141.    7  Our  bones  are  scattered  at  the  grave's 

Prov.  1.  12  Let  us  swallow  them  up  alive  as  the  grave 

30. 16  The  grave  ;  and  the  barren  womb,  the 
Eccl.  9.  10  no  work,  .in  the  grave,  whither  thou  go. 
Song   8.   6  jealousy  (is)  cruel  as  the  grave :  the  coals 


Isa.    14.  11  Thy  pomp  is  brought  down  to  the  grave 

38. 10  I  said.  .1  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the  gr. 

38.  18  For  the  grave  cannot  praise  thee,  death 

Eze.  31.  15  In  the  day.  .he  went  down  to  the  grave 

Hos.  13.  14  ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the  gra. 

13.  14  0  grave,  I  will  by  thy  destruction  :  rep. 

b.Corrupttion,  nrty  shachath. 

Job  33.  22  Yea,  his  soul  draweth  near  unto  the  gra. 
Q.Hades,  the  unseen  state,  aSns  hades. 

1  Co.  15.  55  O  death .  .[O  gr.,]  where  (is)  thy  victory? 
7.Memoaal,  grave,  fxi/rj/xa  mnema. 

Uev.  11.    9  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  put  ing. 
^.Memorial,  grave,  \xvn\xCiov  mnemeion. 

Matt27.  52  the  graves  were  opened;  and  many  bodies 

27.  53  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrec. 
Luken.  44  for  ye  are  as  graves  which  appear  not 
John  5.  28  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his 

11.  17  he  had  (lain)  in  the  grave  four  days  aire. 
11.  31  She  goeth  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there 

11.  38  Jesus  therefore,  .cometh  to  the  grave.  It 

12.  17  when  he  called  Lazarus  out  of  his  grave 
GRAVE  clothes  -  - 

Bandages,  Keipiai  keiriai. 

Johnn.  44  bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave  clothes 
GRAVE  — 
Venerable,  reverend,  grave,  ae/ivos  semnos. 

1  Ti.    3.    8  Likewise . . the  deacons,  .grave,  not  dou. 
3. 11  Even  so.  .wives,  .grave,  not  slanderers 

Titus  2.    2  That  the  aged  men  be  sober,  grave,  tern. 

GRAVE,  to  — 

l.To  grave,  decree,  ppn  chaqaq. 

Isa.   22.  16  that  graveth  an  habitation  for  himself  in 
49.  16  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of 

2.  To  grave,  cut  or  hew  out,  7pa  pasal. 

Hab.   2. 18  that  the  maker  thereof  hath  graven  it 

3.  To  open  up,  t\t&  pathach,  3. 

Exod28     9  grave  on  them  the  names  of  the  children 

28.  36  grave  upon  it.  .the  engravings  of  a  signet 

1  Ki.  7.  36  lie  graved  cherubim,  lions,  and  palm  tr. 

2  Ch.  2.  14  to  grave  any  manner  of  graving,  and  to 

3.  7  gold :  and  graved  cherubim  on  the  walls 
i.Graving,  rnn?  pittuach. 

2  Ch.  2.    7  that  can  skill  to  grave  with  the  cunning 
GRAVEL  — 
1. Gravel,  halved  stone,  ]"$n  chaisats. 

Prov2o.  17  but.  .his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  grav. 
2.Boivels,  gravel,  nj;p  maah. 

Isa.  48.  19  the  offspring  of  thy  bowels  like  the  gra. 
GRAVEL  stone  — 
Halved  stone,  gravel,  j'jfrt  chatsats. 

Lam.  3.  16  hath,  .broken  my  teeth  with  gravel  ston. 
GRAVEN  — 
l.To  plow,  grave,  devise,  irin  charash. 

Jer.  17.    1  graven  upon  the  table  of  their  heart,  and 

2.  To  grave,  plotc,  devise,  niri  charath. 

Exod32.  16  the  writing  of  God,  graven  upon  the  tab. 

3.  To  be  opened  up,  nns  pathach,  4. 

Exod39.   6  graven,  assignets  are.  .with  the  names 

i.SomMhing graven, sculptured,  x°-PayiJ-a-c^aragma- 
Acts  17.  29  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device 

GRAVEN,  to  be  — 

To  be  hewn,  3*n  chatseb,  2. 

Job   19.  24  That  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen 
GRAVEN,  are  — 
Gra  ving,  h;pd  pittuach. 

Exod39-   6  as  signets  are  graven,  with  the  names  of 
GRAVEN  image  — 
l.Graven,  cut  or  hewn  image,  ?D3 2Jesel. 

Exod2o.    4  Thou  shalt  not  make. . any  graven  image 

Lev.  26.    1  Ye  shall  make  you  no  idols  nor  graven  im. 

Deut.  4.  16,  23  and  make  you  a  graven  image 

4.  25  and  make  a  graven  image,  .the  likeness 

5.  8  Thou  shalt  not  make  thee .  .graven  image 
27. 15  man  that  maketh.  .graven  or  molten  im. 

Judg'17.    3  to  make  a  graven  image,  and  a  molten  i. 

17.  4  who  made  thereof  a  graven  image  and  a 
18. 14  teraphim,  and  a  graven  image,  and  a  m. 
18. 17  took  the  graven  image,  and  the  ephod 

18.  20  and  the  teraphim,  and  the  graven  imago 
18.  30  children  of  Dan  set  up  the  graven  image 
18.  31  they  set  them  up  Micah's  graven  image 

2  Ki.  21.  7  he  set  a  graven  image  of  the  grove  that 
Psa.  97.  7  Confounded  be  all.  .that  serve  graven  i. 
Isa.  40.  19  The  workman  melteth  a  graven  image 
40.  20  cunning  workman  to  prepare  a  graven  i. 
42.  17  that  trust  in  graven  images,  that  say  to 
44.  9  They  that  make  a  graven  image  (are)  all 
44.  10  or  molten  a  graven  image  (that)  is  profit. 
44.  15  he  maketh  it  a  graven  image,  and  faileth 

44.  17  he  maketh  a  god,  (even)  his  graven  image 

45.  20  that  set  up  the  wood  of  their  graven  im. 
48.    5  my  graven  image,  and  my  molten  image 

Jer.   10.  14  founder  is  confounded  by  the  graven  im 

51. 17  founder  is  confounded  by  the  graven  im. 

Nah.    1.  14  I  cut  off  the  graven  image  and  the  molt. 

Hab.   2.  18  What  proflteth  the  graven  image  that  the 

2.  Graven,  cut  or  hewn  images,  O'rp?  pesilim. 
Deut.  7.    5  and  burn  their  graven  images  with  fire 


GRAVING 


433 


GREAT 


Psa. 
Isa. 


Jer. 


Deut.  7.  25  The  graven  images  of  their  gods  shall  ye 

12.  •  3  ye  shall  hew  down  the  graven  images  of 
2  Ki.  17.  41  and  served  their  graven  images,  both 
2  Cii.33.  19  set  up  groves  and  graven  images,  before 

m.    7  had  beaten  the  graven  images  into  pow. 

,_.  58  moved,  .to  jealousy  with  their  graven  im. 

10.  10  whose  graven  images  did  excel  them  of  J. 

2t.   9  all  the  graven  images  of  her  gods  he  hath 

30.  22  defile.. the  covering  of  thy  graven  imag. 

42.   8  Lord,  .neither  my  praise  to  graven  ima. 
8.  19  they  provoked  me . .  with  their  graven  im. 

50.  38  it  (is)  the  land  of  graven  images,  and  they 

51.  47  I  will  do  judgment  upon  the  graven  im. 
51.  52  I  will  do  judgment  upon  her  graven  im. 

Hos.  11.    2  and  burnt  incense  to  graven  images 
Mic.    1.    7  all  the  graven  images  thereof  shall  be 
5. 13  Thy  graven  images  also  will  I  cut  off,  and 

GRAVING  — 

1.  Graving.  carving,  nyV{?P  miqlaath. 

1  Ki.  7.  31  upon  the  mouth  of  it  (were)  gravings  with 
2.Graving,  rnna pittuach. 

2  Ch.  2. 14  to  grave  any  manner  of  graving,  and  to 
Zech.  3.   9  I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof,  saith 

GRAVING  tool  — 

Graven  tool,  pen,  onrt  clieret. 

Exod32.   4  fashioned  it  with  a  graving  tool,  after  he 
GRAVITY  — 
Venerableness,  gravity,  aefivorns  seinnotes. 

1  Ti.    3.   4  his  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity 

Titus  2.    7  (showing)  un corruptness,  gravity,  sincer. 
GRAY  or  GREY  hairs  — 
Old  age,  gray  hairs,  ny'cr  sebah. 

Gen.  42.  38  then  shall  ye  bring  down  my  grey  hairs 
44.  29  ye  shall  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with 
44.  31  thy  servants  shall  bring  down  the  grey  h. 

Deut  32.  25  the  suckling,  .with  the  man  of  grey  hairs 

Hos.    7.    9  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him 
GRAY  or  GREY  headed  — 
I. Aged,  gray  headed,  Tiy  sib. 

Job   15. 10  both  the  grey  headed  and  very  aged  men 
2X)ld  age,  gray  hairs,  nn'iy  sebah. 

Psa.  71. 18  Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  greyheaded 

Prov  20.  29  and  the  beauty  of  old  men  (is)  the  grey  h. 
GRAY  or  GREY  headed,  to  be  — 
To  be  old,  gray  headed,  2^  sib. 

1  Sa.  12.    2  and  I  am  old  and  grey  headed;  and,  beh. 
GREASE  — 
Fat,  nj>ri  cheleb. 

Psa.  1 19.  70  Their  heart  is  as  fat  as  grease;  (but)  I 
GREAT  — 

1.  Juncture,  joining,  "ritN  atstsil. 

Eze.  41.    8  foundations,  .a  full  reed  of  six  great  cub. 

2.  Master,  hyz  baal. 

Prov  18.   9  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster 

3.  Border,  h\2%  gebid. 

Josh'is.  47  unto  the  river  of  Egypt,  and  the  great  sea 
4.Great,  Vita  gadol. 

Gen.    1. 16  God  made  two  great  lights ;  the  greater 
1  21  God  created  great  whales,  and  every  liv. 
10. 12  And  Resen.  .the  same  (is)  a  great  city 
12.    2  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  I 

12. 17  plagued  Pharaoh . .  with  great  plagues  be. 
15. 12  an  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him 
15.  14  shall  they  come  out  with  great  substance 
15.  18  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates 

17.  20  Ishmael.  .1  will  make  him  a  great  nation 

18.  18  shall  surely  become  a  great  and  mighty 
19. 11  smote  the  men.  .both  small  and  great 
so.   9  brought  on  me  and  on  my  kingdom  a  g. 
21.    8  Abraham  made  a  great  feast  the  (same)  day 

21. 18  Arise,  .for  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation 
27.  34  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter  c. 
29.  2  and  a  great  stone,  .upon  the  weU's  mouth 
39.  9  how  then  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness 
41.  29  there  come  seven  years  of  great  plenty 
43.  7  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  deliverance 
46.  3  for  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  na. 
50.  10  with  a  great  and  very  sore  lamentation 

Exod.  3.    3  I  will,  .turn  aside,  and  see  this  great  si. 

6.  6  I  will  redeem  you.  .with  great  judgments 

7.  4  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  by  great  judg. 
11.   3  the  man  Moses(was)  very  great  in  the  land 

11.  6  there  shall  be  a  great  cry  throughout  all 

12.  30  and  there  was  a  great  cry  in  Egypt ;  for 
14.  31  Israel  saw  that  great  work  which  the  L. 
18.  22  every  great  matter  they  shall  bring  unto 
32. 10  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation 
32.  11  with  great  power,  and  with  amightyhand 
32.  21  thou  hast  brought  so  great  a  sin  upon  th.? 
32.  30  Ye  have  sinned  a  great  sin  :  and  now  I 
32.  31  this  people  have  sinned  a  great  sin,  and 

Nunii3.  28  and  the  cities  (are)  walled,  (and)  very  gr. 

34.   6  ye  shall  even  have  the  great  sea  for  a  bo. 

34.    7  from  the  great  sea  ye  shall  point  out  for. 

Deut.  1.    7  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates 

1.  17  shall  hear  the  small  as  well  as  the  great 

1.  19  we  went  through  all  that  great  and  ter. 

1.  28  the  cities  (are)  great  and  walled  up  to  h. 

2.  7  thy  walking  through  this  great  wilderness 
2. 10,  21  a  people  great,  and  many,  and  tall,  as 
4.   6  Surely  this  great  nation  (is)  a  wise  and 

4.    7,  8  For  what  nation  (is  there  so)  great 
4.  32  whether  there  hath  been,  .as  this  great 

55 


Deut.  4.  34  by  great  terrors,  according  to  all  that  the 
4. 36  upon  earth  he  showed  thee  his  great  fire 
5.  22  of  the  thick  darkness,  with  a  great  voice 

5.  25  this  great  fire  will  consume  us  :  if  we 

6. 10  to  give  thee  great  and  goodly  cities,  which 

6.  22  Lord  showed,  .wonders,  great  and  sore 
7. 19  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes 

8. 15  Who  led  thee  through  that  great  and 
9.  1  cities  great,  and  fenced  up  to  heaven 
9.    2  A  people  great  and  tall/the  children  of 

10.  17  Lord  of  lords,  a  great  God,  a  mighty,  and 
10. 21  that  hath  done  for  thee  these  great  and 

11.  7  your  eyes  have  seen  all  the  great  acts  of 

18.  16  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any 
25.  13  not  have,  .divers  weights,  a  great  and  a 

25.  14  not.  .divers  measures,  a  great  and  a  small 

26.  5  became  there  a  nation,  great,  mighty,  and 

26.  8  with  great  terribleness,  and  with  signs 

27.  2  thou  shalt  set  thee  up  great  stones,  and 

28.  59  great  plagues,  and  of  long  continuance 

29.  3  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes 
29.    3  the  signs,  and  those  great  miracles 

29.  24  what  (meaneth)  the  heat  of  this  great  a.  ? 

29.  28  in  anger,  and  in  wrath,  and  in  great  indi. 
34.  12  in  all  the  great  terror  which  Moses  show. 

Josh.  1.  4  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates 
1.  4  unto  the  great  sea  toward  the  going  down 
6.    5  the  people  shall  shout  with  a  great  shout 

6.  20  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  shout 

7.  9  and  what  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  great  na  ? 

7.  26  they  raised  over  him  a  great  heap  of  sto. 

8.  29  and  raise  thereon  a  great  heap  of  stones 

9.  1  in  all  the  coasts  of  the  great  sea  over 

10.    2  because  Gibeon  (was)  a  great  city,  as  one 
10.  10  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter  at  Gi. 

10. 11  the  Lord  cast  down  great  stones  from 

10. 18  Roll  great  stones  upon  the  mouth  of  the 
10.  20  of  slaying  them  with  a  very  great  slaug. 

10.  27  and  laid  great  stones  in  the  cave's  mouth 

14. 12  and  (that)  the  cities  (were)  great  (and) 

14.  15  (Arba  was)  a  great  man  among  the  Ana. 
15. 12  And  the  west  border  (was)  to  the  great 

15.  47  andthegreat  sea,  and  the  border  (thereof) 
17. 17  Thou,  .hast  great  power  :  thou  shalt  not 

22.  10  an  altar  by  Jordan,  a  great  altar  to  see  to 

23.  4  inheritance . .  unto  the  great  sea  westward 

23.  9 Lord  hath  driven  out.  .great  nations  and 
24. 17  which  did  those  great  signs  in  our  sight 

24.  26  took  a  great  stone,  and  set  it  up  there 
Judg.  2.    7  who  had  seen  all  the  great  works  of  the 

5.  15  divisions  of  Reuben,  .great  thoughts  of 

5. 16  divisions  of  Reuben,  .great  searchings  of 

11.  33  smote  them,  .with  a  very  great  slaughter 
15.    8  smote  them  liip  and  thigh  with  a  great 

15.  18  Thou  hast  given  this  great  deliverance 

16.  s  and  see  wherein  his  great  strength  (lieth) 
16.   6,  15  wherein  thy  great  strength  (lieth) 

16.  23  to  offer  a  great  sacrifice  unto  Dagon  their 
21.   5  they  had  made  a  great  oath  concerning 

1  Sa.   2.  17  the  sin  of  the  young  men  was  very  great 

4.   5  all  Israel  shouted  with  a  great  shout,  so 
4.    6  What,  .the  noise  of  this  great  shout  in 
4.  10  and  there  was  a  very  great  slaughter 

4.  17  there  hath  been,  .a  great  slaughter 

5.  9  against  the  city,  with  a  very  great  destr. 

5.  9  the  men  of  the  city  both  small  and  great 

6.  9  he  hath  done  us  this  great  oil  :  but  if 
6.  14  and  sto<  I  there,  where . .  a  great  stone 

6. 15  the  ark.,  and  put  (them)  on  the  great  stone 
6. 18  even  unto  the  great  (stone  of)  Abel,  whe. 

6.  19  had  smitten,  .the  people  with  a  great  si. 
7. 10  Lord  thundered  with  a  great  thunder  on 

12.  16  stand  and  see  this  great  thing,  which 
12.  22  will  not  forsake  his  people  for  his  great 
14.  20  (and  there  was)  a  very  great  discomfiture 
14.  33  he  said,  .roll  a  great  stone  unto  me  tins 
14.  45  who  hath  wrought  this  great  salvation  in 

17.  25  the  king  will  enrich  him  with  great  riches 

19.  5  Lord  wrought  a  great  s  "  -ation  for  all, I. 

19.  8  and  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter 
19  22  came  to  a  great  well  that  (is)  in  Sechu 

20.  2  my  father  will  do  nothing,  either  great  or 
23.   5  David . .  smote  them  with  a  great  slaughter 

25.  2  the  man  (was)  very  great,  and  he  had 

30.  2  they  slew  not  any,  either  great  or  small 

30. 16  because  of  all  the  great  spoil  that  they 

30. 19  neither  small  nor  great,  neither  sons  nor 

2  Sa.    5. 10  David  went  on,  and  grew  great,  and  the 

7.  9  and  have  made  thee  a  great  name 

7.   9  like  unto  the  name  of  the  great  (men)  that 

18.  7  there  was  there  a  great  slaughter  that 
18.   9  went  under  the  thick  boughs  of  a  great 

18. 17  cast  him  into  a  great  pit  in  the  wood 

18. 17  laid  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  upon  him 

18.  29  I  saw  a  great  tumult,  but  I  knew  not 

19.  32  had  provided,  .for  he  (was)  a  very  great 

20.  8  When  they  (were)  at  the  great  stone 

23. 10,  12  and  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  victory 
1  KI  1.  40  rejoiced  with  great  joy,  so  that  the  ea. 
3.    4  Gibeon.  .for  that  (was)  the  great  high 
3.    6  Thou  hast  showed .  .my  father  great  mer. 
3.    6  thou  hast  kept  for  him  this  great  kindn. 
4.13  threescore  great  cities  with  walls  and 
5.  17  they  brought  great  stones,  costly  stones 
7.    9  on  the  outside  toward  the  great  court 

7.  10  great  stones,  stones  of  ten  cubits,  and" 
7. 12  the  great  court  round  about  (was)  with 

8.  42  they  shall  hear  of  thy  great  name,  and  of 
8.  65  all  Israel  with  him,  a  great  congregation 

10.  18  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory 
18.  45  clouds  and  wind,  and  there  was  a  great 
19. 11  a  great  and  strong  wind  rent  the  mount. 


t  Ki.  2c 


*Ch 


Neh. 


26. 
28. 
28. 
3°- 
30- 
31- 
34- 
34- 
36. 
I  3- 
9- 
9- 


Esth. 


Job     1. 

3- 

Psa.  2i. 

47- 

48. 

57- 
76. 
77- 
86. 
86. 
95- 
96. 
99. 

99- 
104. 
104. 

108. 
in. 
"5- 
135- 
136. 
136. 
136. 
I38. 
145- 
145- 
147. 


13  Hast  thou  seen  all  this  great  multitude 
21  slew  the  Syrians  with  a  great  slaughter 
28  will  I  deliver  all  this  great  multitude 

31  Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  save 

27  their  was  great  indignation  against  Isr. 

8  to  Shunem,  where  (was)  a  great  woman 
38  Set  on  the  great  pot,  and  seethe  pottage 

1  Naanian.  .was  a  great  man  with  his  mas. 
13  (if)  the  prophet  had  bid  thee . .  great  thing 
23  And  he  prepared  great  provision  for  them 

25  And  there  was  a  great  famine  in  Samaria 

6  noise  of  horses,  .the  noise  of  a  great  host 
13" a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing.'1 
19  for  I  have  a  great  sacrifice  (to  do)  to  Ba. 
15  Upon  the  great  altar  burn  the  morning 

21  and  Jeroboam,  .made  them  sin  a  great 

36  with  great  power.and  a  stretched  out  aim 

19  Thus  saith  the  great  king,  the  king  of  A. 

28  Hear  the  word  of  the  great  king,  the  ki. 

13  for  great  (is)  the  wTath  of  the  Lord  that 

2  and  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great 

26  from  the  fierceness  of  his  great  wrath 

9  every  great  (man's)  house  burnt  he  with 
26  And  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great 

14  Lord  saved  (them)  by  a  great  deliverance 

22  until,  .a  great  host,  like  the  host  of  God 

25  great  (is)  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  pr. 
8  and  hast,  made  great  wars :  thou  shalt 

8  as  well  the  small  as  the  great,  the  teach. 
13  cast  lots,  as  well  the  small  as  the  great 

1  young  and  tender,  and  the  work  (is)  gre. 

9  David  the  king  also  rejoiced  with  great 
22  And  did  eat  and  drink,  .with  great  glad. 

8  Thou  hast  showed  great  mercy  unto  Da. 
10  for  who  can  judge  this  thy  people,  .gre.? 

5  the  house  which  I  build  (is)  great ;  for  g. 

9  for  the  house,  .(shall  be)  wonderful  great 
9  the  great  court,  and  doors  for  the  court 

32  from  a  far  country  for  thy  great  name's 
8  all  Israel  with  him,  a  very  great  congre. 

17  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory 

13  small  or  great,  whether  man  or  woman 

14  they  made  a  very  great  burning  for  him 
30  Fight  ye  not  with  small  or  great,  save 

14  with  a  great  plague  will  the  Lord  smite 

15  to  shoot  arrows  and  great  stones  withal 
5  carried  away  a  great  multitude  of  them 
S  who  smote  him  with  a  great  slaughter 

21  kept  the  feast,  .seven  days  with  great  gl. 

26  So  there  was  great  joy  in  Jerusalem  :  for 
15  to  give,  .as  well  to  the  great  as  to  the  s. 
21  great  (is)  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is 

30  and  all  the  people,  great  and  small 

18  all  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  great 
'11  all  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  shout 

7  (have)  we  (been)  in  a  great  trespass  unto 

13  evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great  trespass 

3  The  remnant,  .(are)  in  great  affliction  and 

5  the  great  and  terrible  God,  that  keepeth 
10  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  great 

27  over  against  the  great  tower  that  lieth 

14  remember  the  Lord,  .great  and  terrible 

1  there  was  a  great  cry  of  the  people,  and 
7  And  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  them 

3  I  (am)  doing  a  great  work,  so  that  I  can. 

4  Now  the  city  (was)  large  and  great ;  but 

6  And  Ezra  blessed  the  Lord,  the  great  G. 

12  send  portions,  and  to  make  great  mirth 

17  And  there  was  very  great  gladness 
18,  26  and.  .wrought  great  provocations 

25  delighted  themselves  in  thy  great  good. 
32  our  God,  the  great,  the  mighty,  and  the 

37  they  have  dominion,  .we  (are)  in  great  d. 

31  Then  I.  .appointed  two  great  (compan.) 
43  Also  that  day  they  offered  great  sacrifi. 
43  God  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great 

5  he  had  prepared  for  him  a  great  chamber 
27  to  do  all  this  great  evil,  to  transgress 

5  made  a  feast,  .both  unto  great  and  small 

20  husbands  honour,  both  to  great  and  sm. 

18  the  king  made  a  great  feast  unto  all  his 

3  great  mourning  among  the  JewTs,  and 

15  with  a  great  crown  of  gold,  and  with  a 

4  Mordecai  (was)  great  in  the  king's  house 
3  great  among  the  Jews,  and  accepted  of 

19  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the  wilde. 
19  The  small  and  great  are  there ;  and  the 

5  His  glory  (is)  great  in  thy  salvation 

2  (he  is)  a  great  King  over  all  the  earth 

1  Great  (is)  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  p. 
10  thy  mercy  (is)  great  unto  the  heavens 

1  In  Judah  (is)  God  known ;  his  name  (is)  g. 

13  who  (is  so)  great  a  God  as  (our)  God  ? 

10  thou  (art)  great,  and  doest  wondrous  th.? 
13  great  (is)  thy  mercy  toward  me ;  and 

3  Lord  (is)  a  great  God,  and  a  great  King 

4  the  Lord  (is)  great,  and  greatly  to  be  pr. 

2  Lord  (is)  great  in  Zion  ;  and  he  (is)  high 

3  Let  them  praise  thy  great,  .name  ;  and 
25  this  great  and  wide  sea,  wherein  (are) 
25  innumerable,  both  small  and  great  beasts 

4  thy  mercy  (is)  great  above  the  heavens 

2  The  works  of  the  LORD  (are)  great,  sought 
13  He  will  bless  them . .  small  and  great 

5  For  I  know  that  the  Lord  (is)  great,  and 

4  To  him  who  alone  doeth  great  wonders 

7  To  him  that  made  great  lights  :  for  his 
17  To  him  which  smote  great  kings  :  for  his 

5  they  shall  sing,  .for  great  (is)  the  glory  of 

3  Great  (is)  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  pr. 

8  Lord  (is),  .slow  to  anger,  and  of  great 

5  Great  (is)  our  Lord,  and  of  great  power 


GREAT 


434 


GREAT 


Prov  ig.  19  A  man  of  great  wrath  shall  suffer  punis. 

25.    6  and  stand  not  in  the  place  of  great  (men) 
Eccl.  9.  13  This  wisdom  have  I  seen,  .and  it  (seemed) 

9.  14  and  there  came  a  great  king  against  it 
0  9.  14  besieged  it,  and  built  great  bulwarks  aga. 

10.    4  for  yielding  pacifleth  great  offences 
Isa.     5.   9  desolate,  .great  and  fair,  without  inhabi. 

8.  1  Take  thee  a  great  roll,  and  write  in  it 

9.  2  The  people . .  have  seen  a  great  light :  they 
12.    6  great  (is)  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the 
27.    1  Lord  with  his  sore  and  great  and  strong 
27.  13  the  great  trumpet  shall  be  blown,  and 

29.  6  with  earthquake,  and  great  noise,  with 
34.    6  a  great  slaughter  in  the  land  of  Idumea. 
36.    4  Thus  saith  the  great  king,  the  king  of  A. 
36.  13  Hear  ye  the  words  of  the  great  king,  the 
54.   7  but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather 

Jer.    4.    6  I  will  bring  evil  from  the  north,  and  a  gr. 

5.  5  I  will  get  me  unto  the  great  men,  and  will 

6.  1  evil  appeareth  out  of  the  north,  and  great 
6. 22  a  great  nation  shall  be  raised  from  the 

io.    6  Lord  ;  thou  (art)  great,  and  thy  name  (is) 

10.  22  a  great  commotion  out  of  the  north  cou. 

11.  16  with  the  noise  of  a  great  tumult  he  hath 
14. 17  my  people  is  broken  with  a  great  breach 

16.  6  Both  the  great  and  the  small  shall  die  in 
16. 10  hath  the  Lord  pronounced  all  this  great 
21.  5  in  anger,  and  in  fury,  and  in  great  wrath 
21.  6  And.  .they  shall  die  of  a  great  pestilence 
z2.   8  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this  great  city  ? 

25. 14  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve 

25.  32  a  great  whirlwind  shall  be  raised  up  from 

26.  19  Thus  might  we  procure  great  evil  against 

27.  5  by  my  great  power  and  by  my  outstretc. 

27.  7  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve 

28.  8  against  great  kingdoms,  of  war,  and  of 

30.  7  Alas  !  for  that  day  (is)  great,  so  that  none 

31.  8  a  great  company  shall  return  thither 

32.  1 7  by  thy  great  power  and  stretched  out  arm 
32.  18  The  Great,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Lord  of 
32. 19  Great  in  counsel,  and  mighty  in  work 
32.  21  with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great 
32.  37  in  mine  anger,  and  in  my  fury,  and  in  g. 

32.  42  Like  as  I  have  brought  all  this  great  evil 

33.  3  show  thee  great  and  mighty  things,  which 
36.    7  great  (is)  the  anger  and  the  fury  that  the 

43.  9  Take  great  stones  in  thine  hand,  and  hide 

44.  7  Wherefore  commit  ye . .  great  evil  against 

44. 15  a  great  multitude,  even  all  the  people 
44.  26  I  have  sworn  by  my  great  name,  saith  the 
48.    3  A  voice  of  crying,  .spoiling  and  great 
50.   9  an  assembly  of  great  nations  from  the 
50.  22  A  sound  of  battle,  .and  of  great  destruc. 

50.  41  and  a  great  nation,  and  many  kings  shall 

51.  54  great  destruction  from  the  laud  of  the  C. 
51.  55  and  destroyed  out  of  her  the  great  voice 
52. 13  all  the  houses  of  the  great,  .burned  he 

Lam.  2.  13  for  thy  breach  (is)  great  like  the  sea  ;  who 
Eze.     1.   4  a  great  cloud,  and  a  fire  infolding  itself 

3.  12  I  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  a  great  rush. 

3. 13  the  wheels,  .a  noise  of  a  great  rushing 

8.  6  the  great  abominations  that  the  house 

9.  9  The  iniquity,  .(is)  exceeding  great,  and 

17.  3  A  great  eagle  with  great  wings,  long  wi. 
17.    7  another  great  eagle  with  great  wings  and 
17.    9  without  great  power  or  many  people  to 
21.  14  it  (is)  the  sword  of  the  great.,  slain,  which 
25. 17  I  will  execute  great  vengeance  upon  them 

29.  3  the  great  dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst 
29.  18  to  serve  a  great  service  against  Tyrus 
36.  23  I  will  sanctify  my  great  name,  which  was 
37. 10  and  stood  up.  .an  exceediug  great  army 
38. 13  take  away  cattle  and  goods,  to  take  a  gr. 
38.  15  a  great  company,  and  a  mighty  army 

38. 19  in  that  day.  .shall  be  a  great  shaking  in 
39. 17  a  great  sacrifice  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 
47. 10  as  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  exceeding 
47.  15  from  the  great  sea,  the  way  of  Hethlon 
47.  19  (in)Kadesh,  the  river  to  the  great  sea 

47.  20  The  west  side  also,  .the  great  sea  from 

48.  28  (and)  to  the  river  toward  the  great  sea 
Dan.    8.  8  when  he  was  stroug,  the  great  horn  was 

8.  21  the  great  horn  that  (is)  between  his  eyes 

9.  4  0  Lord,  the  great  and  dreadful  God 
9.  12  by  bringing  upon  us  a  great  evil :  for 

10.   4  as  I  was  by  the  side  of  the  great  river 

10.  7  a  great  quaking  fell  upon  them,  so  that 

10.  8  I  was  left  alone,  and  saw  this  great  visi. 
xi.  13  with  a  great  army  and  with  much  riches 

11.  25  stir  up  his  power,  .with  a  great  army 
11.  25  with  a  very  great  and  mighty  army 

11.  28  Then  shall  ho  return,  .with  great  riches 

11.  44  he  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury  to  des. 

12.  1  the  great  prince  which  standeth  for  the 
Hos.  1.  11  come  up.  .for  great,  .the  day  of  Jezreel 
Joel    2. 11  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  great  and  very 

2.  25  my  great  army  which  I  sent  among  you 

2.  31  before  the  great  and  the  terrible  day  of 
Amos  6.  11  he  will  smite  the  great  bouse  with  brea. 
Jon.    i.    2  Arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city,  and 

1    4  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea 
1.  12  I  know  that  for  my  sake  this  great  tern. 
1.  17  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow 
3     2  Arise,  go  unto  Nineveh,  that  great  city 

3.  3  Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  city  of 

4.  11  should  not  I  spare  Nineveh,  that  great 
Mic.    7.    3  the  great  (man),  he  uttereth  his  mischiev. 
Nah.    1.    3  LoKD(is)slowtoanger,andgreatin power 
Zeph.  1.  10  and  a  great  crashing  from  the  hills 

1.  14  The  great  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near,  (it 
Zech.  1.  14  Iamjealousfor.-Zionwithagreat  jealou. 
.;.    7  Who  (art)  thou,  O  great  mountain?  before 


Zech. 


Mai. 


12  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of  ho. 
2  I  was  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy 
2  and  I  was  jealous  for  her  with  great  fury 
4  (and  there  shall  be)  a  very  great  valley 
ii,  11  my  name  (shall  be)  great  among  the 
14  I  (am)  a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord  of  ho. 

4.  5  before  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dread. 

5.  Great,  by*  gadel. 

2  Ch.17.  12  And  Jehoshaphat  waxed  great  exceeding. 
Eze.  16.  26  the  Egyptians  thy  neighbours,  great  of 

6.  Great  or  rolled  stone,  bbz  gelal. 

Ezra   5.    8  which  is  builded  with  great  stones,  and 

6.  4  tliree  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of 

7.  To  commit  fornication,  n\\zanah, 

Hos.    1.   2  the  land  hath  committed  great  whoredom 

8.  To  be  pained,  b*n,  bin  chid,  chil. 

Eze.  30. 16  Sin  shall  nave  great  pain  and  No  shall  be 

9. To  give  honour,  make  heavy,  "133  kabed,  3. 

Num  24. 11  I  thought  to  promote  thee  unto  great  h. 

10.  Heavy,  honourable,  ~Q3  Imbed. 

Gen.  50.    9  chariots  and  horsemen , .  a  very  great  co. 

1  Ki.   3.   9  who  is  able  to  judge  this  thy  so  great  a 

10.  2  she  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  very  great 

2  Ki.  6.  14  sent,  .horses,  and  chariots,  and  a  great 

18.  17  sent,  .with  a  great  host  against  Jerusalem 
2  Ch.  9.   1  with  a  very  great  company,  and  camels 
Isa.  32.   2  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary 

36.    2  sent . .  unto  king  Hezekiah.  with  a  great 

11.  Might,  with  might,  Tfep  meod. 

Deut.  3  5  All. . besides unwalled towns agreat many 
Judgi2.  2  I  and  my  people  were  at  great  strife  with 
2  Sa.  12.  30  the  spoil  of  the  city  in  great  abundance 

24.  14  I  am  in  a  great  strait :  let  us  fall  now  into 
1  Ki.  10.  11  brought  in  from  Ophir  great  plenty  of 

11. 19  Hadad  found  great  favour  in  the  sight  of 

1  Ch.21.  13  I  am  in  a  great  strait :  let  me  fall  now 

2  Ch.  4.  18  Solomon  made  all  these  vessels  in  great 

g.  9  of  spices  great  abundance,  and  precious 
Job  35.  15  yet  he  knoweth  (it)  not  in  great  extremity 
Isa.   47.   9  for  the  great  abundance  of  thine  enchant. 
Zech  14.  14  silver,  and  apparel,  in  great  abundance 

12.1ncrease,  abundance,  ns/ja  marbeh. 

Isa.   33.  23  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  divided 
13.  To  make  despised,  |'W  naats,  3. 

2  Sa.  12.  14  thou  hast  given  great  occasion  to  the  en. 
14. Mighty,  crsy  atsum. 

N1U1132.    1  Gad  had  a  very  great  multitude  of  cattle 
15.  To  do,  make,  np'V  asah. 

1  Sa.  26.  25  thou  shalt  both  do  great  (things),  and  also 
IG. Abundant,  much,  31  rab. 

Gen.  6.   5  that  the  wickedness  of  man  (was)  great  in 

7.  11  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  broken  up 

13.  6  their  substance  was  great,  so  that  they 

18.  20  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great 
26.  14  he  had . .  herds,  and  great  store  of  servants 

Numn.  33  smote  the  people  with  a  very  great  plague 

14.  18  LORD(is)longsuffering,andof  greatmercy 
Josh.  10.  11  Lord  cast  down  great  stones  from  heaven 

11.  8  chased  them  unto  great  Zidon,  and  unto 
17.  14  seeing  I  (am)  a  great  people,  forasmuch  as 
17. 15  If  thou  (be)  a  great  people,  .get  thee  up 
17. 17  Thou  (art)  a  great  people,  and  hast,  .power 

19.  28  Hammon,  and  Kanah.  .unto  great  Zidon 
:2.  17  see  that  your  wickedness  (is)  great,  which 
to.  13  afar  off,  a  great  space  (being)  between 
3.  22  and  brought  in  a  great  spoil  with  them 

24.  14  his  mercies  (are)  great :  and  let  me  not 
1  Ki.  3.    8  people  which  thou  hast  chosen,  a  great 

5.  7  hath  given,  .awisesonoverthisgreatpeo. 

19.  7  because  the  journey  (is)  too  great  for  thee 

1  Ch.21. 13  very  great  (are)  his  mercies  :  but  let  me 

2  Ch.13.    8  ye  (be)  a  great  multitude,  and.  .with  you 
13. 17  Abijah..  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter 

15.  5  great  vexations  (were)  upon  all  the  inhab. 

20.  12  we  have  no  might  against  this  great  com. 

20.  15  Be  not  afraid.,  byreason  of  this  great  mul. 

21.  3  their  father  gave  them  great  gifts  of  silver 
21. 15  great  sickness  by  disease  of  thy  bowels 
24.  25  for  they  left  him  in  great  diseases 
28.  13  our  trespass  is  great,  and.  .fierce  wrath 

Ezra  10.    1  a  very  great  congregation  of  men  and  wo. 

Neb.  9.  17  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and 
9.  31  for  thy  great  mercies'  sake  thou  didst  not 
9.  35  in  thy  great  goodness  that  thou  gavest 

Esth.  1.  20  throughout  all  his  empire,  for  it  is  great 

Job     1.    3  she  asses,  and  a  very  great  household 

5.  25  shalt  know  also  that  thy  seed  (shall  be)  g. 

22.  5  (Is)  not  thy  wickedness  great  ?  and  thine 
31.  25  If  I  rejoiced  because  my  wealth  (was)  gr. 
31.  34  Did  I  fear  a  great  multitude,  or  did  the 

38.  21  or  (because)  the  number  of  thy  days  (is)  g.? 

39.  11  trust  him,  because  his  strength  (is)  great? 
19.  11  in  keeping  of  them  (there  is)  great  reward 

13  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great  trans. 

25  My  praise,  .of  thee  in  the  great  congreg. 

ii  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity;  for  it  (is)  g. 

:q  how  great  (is)  thy  goodness,  which  thou 
6  in  the  floods  of  great  waters  they  shall 

18  I  will  give  thee  thanks  in  the  great  cong. 
C  thy  judgments  (are)  agreat  deep:  OLord 
g  I  have  preached  righteousness  in  the  gr. 

40.  10  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation 
2  mount  Zion.  .the  city  of  the  great  King 

11  great  (was)  the  company  of  those  that 


[Sa. 
?Sa. 


Tsa. 


19. 
22. 

25- 

31- 
32. 
35- 
36. 
40. 


68. 

71. 20  which  hast;  showed  me  great  and  sore 


119. 

*35- 
144. 
145. 
147. 
Prov  13. 
14. 


*3- 
16. 

23- 

3°- 


Psa.    77.  19  thy  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  thyfoot. 
78.  15  and  gave . .  drink  as . .  the  great  depths 
107,  23  They,  .that  do  business  in  great  waters 
119.  156  Great  (are)  thy  tender  mercies,  O  Lord 
119.  162  I  rejoice,  .as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil 
165  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  thy 
10  Whosmote  great  nations,  and  slew  mighty 
7  deliver  me  out  of  great  waters,  from  the 
7  shall,  .utter  the  memory  of  thy  great  go. 
5  of  great  power  :  his  understanding  (is) 
7  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet  (hath)  gr. 
29  slow  to  wrath  (is)  of  great  understanding 
16  than  great  treasure,  and  trouble  therewi. 
22.    1  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches 

26.  10  The  great  (God),  that  formed  all.  .both 
28.  12  When  righteous,  .do rejoice,  (there  is)gr. 
28.  16  that  wanteth  understanding  (is),  .a  great 

Eccl.  2.  21  This  also  (is)  vanity  and  agreat  evil 
8.   6  the  misery  of  man  (is)  great  upon  him 

10.  6  Folly  is  set  in  great  dignity,  and  the  rich 
Isa.     6.  12  a  great  forsaking  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

4  The  noise,  .like  as  of  a  great  people 
14  glory  of  Moab.  .with  all  that  great  mul. 
3  And  by  great  waters  the  seed  of  Sihor 
25  waters  in  the  day  of  the  great  slaughter 
51. 10  dried  the  sea,  the  waters  of  the  great  de. 
53.  12  will  I  divide  him  (a  portion)  with  the  gr. 
54. 13  and  great  (shall  be)  the  peace  of  thy  chil. 
63.    7  the  great  goodness  toward  the  house  of  I. 
Jer.   13.   9  will  I  mar.  .the  great  pride  of  Jerusalem 
41. 12  and  found  him  by  the  great  waters  that 
51.  55  when  her  waves  do  roar  like  great  waters 
Lam.  1.    1  she  (that  was)  great  among  the  nations 
3.  23  new  every  morning  :  great  (is)  thy  faith. 
Eze.    1.  24  like  the  noise  of  great  waters,  as  the  vo. 
17.    5  he  placed  (it)  by  great  waters,  .set  it  (as) 
17.    8  It  was  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  great  w. 

17. 17  with(his)mightyarmyand  great  company 
24.  12  her  great  scum  went  not  forth  out  of  her 
26. 19  the  deep,  .and  great  waters  shall  cover 

27.  26  Thy  rowers  have  brought  thee  into  great 
31.   6  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations 

31.  7  Thus  was  he .  .his  root  was  by  great  wa. 
31. 15  the  floods,  .and  the  great  waters  were 

32.  13  the  beasts  thereof  from  beside  the  great 
38.  4  a  great  company  (with)  bucklers  and  sh. 
47.   9  there  shall  be  a  very  great  multitude  of 

Dan.    9.  18  for  our  right.,  but  for  thy  great  mercies 

11.  3  that  shall  rule  with  great  dominion,  and 
11.  5  his  dominion  (shall  be)  a  great  dominion 
11. 10  shall  assemble  a  multitude  of  great  fore. 
it.  11  and  he  shall  set  forth  a  great  multitude 

Hos.   9.    7  multitude  of  thine  iniquity,  and  the  great 
Joel    2.   2  a  great  people  and  a  strong ;  there  hath 
2.  11  for  his  camp  (is)  very  great :  for  (he  is) 

2.  13  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and 

3.  13  fats  overflow :  for  their  wickedness  (is)  g. 
Amos  3.    9  and  behold  the  great  tumults  in  the  mid. 

3.  15  and  the  great  houses  shall  have  am  end 

6.  2  from  thence  go  ye  to  Haraath  the  great 

7.  4  it  devoured  the  great  deep,  and  did  eat 
Jon.    4.    2  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and 
Hab.  3.  15  didst  walk  through .  .the  heap  of  great  w. 
Zech  14.  13  a  great  tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be 

17.  Abundant,  much,  3"]  rab. 

Ezra  4.  10  whom  the  great  and  noble  Asnapper  br. 
5.  8  to  the  house  of  the  great  God,  which  is 
5. 11  which  a  great  king  of  Israel  builded  and 

Dan.  2.  31  This  great  image,  whose  brightness  (was) 
2.  35  and  the  stone,  .became  a  great  mountain 
2. 45  the  great  God  hath  made  known  to  the 

4.  30  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have 

5.  1  Belshazzar  the  king  made  a  great  feast 

7.   2  the  f  our  winds . .  strove  upon  the  great  sea 

18. Abundance,  multitude,  3T  rob. 

2  Ch.24.  24  the  Lord  delivered  a  very  great  host  into 

30.  13  there  assembled,  .a  very  great  congreg. 
Job  23.    6  Will  he  plead  against  me  with  (his)  great 

30. 18  By  the  great  force,  .is  my  garment  chan. 
36.  iS  then  a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee 

Psa.  33.  17  neither  shall  he  deliver.. by  his  great 
Prov  16.    S  a  little  with  righteousness,  than  great  re. 
Lam.  1.    3  because  of  affliction,  and  because  of  great 
Eze.  28.   "5  By  thy  great  wisdom ..  by  thy  traflic  hast 

19.  To  cause  to  be  abundetnt,  H3"J  rabah,  5. 

Gen.  15.    1  I  (am)  thy  shield,  .thy  exceeding  great 
Neh.  4.    1  he  was  wroth,  and  took  great  indignation 

4.  iq  The  work  (is)  great  and  large,  and  we  are 
Eccl.   1. 16  my  heart  had  great  experience  of  wisdom 

2.   7  I  had  great  possessions  of.  .cattle  above 

20.  Abundant,  very  great,  3n:n  rctbrab. 

Dan.  2.  48  and  gave  him  many  great  gifts,  and  made 
4.  3  How  great(are)  his  signs !  and  how  mighty 
7.  3  four  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  sea 
7.  7  it  had  great  iron  teeth  :  it  devoured  and 
7.  11  because  of  the  voice  of  the  great  words 
7.  17  These  great  beasts,  which  are  four,  (are) 
2l.Great,  much,  m-any,  Wi?  saggi. 

Job  36.  26  Behold,  God  (is)  great,  and  we  know  (him) 
2'2.Grcat,  much,  many,  K*a&  saggi. 

Dan.   2.   6  receive  of  me  gifts  and  rewards  and  great 
2.  31  Thou,  .sawest,  and,  behold,  agreat  image 
4. 10  a  tree,  .and  the  height' thereof  (was)  gre. 
23. God,  mighty  one,  7X  el. 

Psa.  36.   6  Thy  righteousness  (is)  like  the  great  mo. 
24.GW,  cnSx  e/nhim. 

Gen.  30.   8  With  great  wrestlings  have  I  wrestled 
1  Sa.  14. 15  quaked  :  so  it  was  a  very  great  trembling 


GREAT 


435 


GREAT 


25. Conceiving*  pregnant,  rrjn  harah. 

Jer.  20.  17  been  my  grave,  and  her  womb,  .always  g. 

26. Heat,  ,_!p  chori. 

Exod.11.   8  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh  in  a  great  an. 
2  Ch.  25. 10  and  they  returned  home  in  great  anger 

27.  Bitter,  T9  mar. 

Isa.  38. 17  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness 

2S.  Evil,  VI  ra. 

Hos.  10. 15  do  unto  you  because  of  your  great  wick. 

29.  Coming  or  reaching  to,  sufficient,  Ik<zv6s  hikanos. 
Markio.  46  his  disciples  and  a  great  number  of  peo. 
Acts  22.    6  there  shone  from  heaven  a  great  light 

30.  Fiery  much,  \iav  lian. 

Mark  1.  35  rising  up  a  great  while  before  day,  he 

31. Great,  /xeyas  megas. 

Matt.  2.  10  they  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great  joy 
4. 16  The  people,  .in  darkness  saw  great  light 
5.  19  the  same  shall  be  called  great  in  the  ki. 
5.  35  Jerusalem ;  for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great 

7.  27  and  it  fell :  and  great  was  the  fall  of  it 

8.  24  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea 

8.  26  rebuked,  .the  sea ;  and  there  was  a  great 

15.  28  O  woman,  great  (is)  thy  faith  :  be  it  unto 

20.  26  whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,  let 
22.  36  which  (is)  the  great  commandment  in 
22.  38  This  is  the  first  and  great  commandment 
24.  21  For  then  shall  be  great  tribulation,  such 
24. 24  and, shall  show  great  signs  and  wonders 
24.  31  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet 

27.  60  he  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of 

28.  2  And,  behold,  there  was  a  great  earthqu. 
28.    8  they  departed,  .with  fear  and  great  joy 

Mark  4. 32  and  shooteth  out  great  branches  ;  so  that 
4.  37  And  there  arose  a  great  storm  of  wind 

4.  39  the  wind  ceased,  and  there  was  a  great 

5.  11  there  was .  .a  [great]  herd  of  swine  feeding 
5.42  astonished  with  a  great  astonishment 

10.  43  but  whosoever  will  be  great  among  you 
.    13.    2  Seest  thou  these  great  buildings  ?  there 

16.  4  stone  was  rolled  away  :  for  it  was  veryg. 
Luke  1.  15  he  shall  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

1.  32  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the 
2. 10  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy 

4.  25  when  great  famine  was  throughout  all 

4.  38  wife's  mother  was  taken  with  a  great  fev. 

5.  29  Levi  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own 

6.  49  and  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great 

7.  16  That  a  great  prophet  is  risen  up  among 

8.  37  to  depart,  .for  they  were  taken  with  gre. 

9.  48  he  that  is  least,  .the  same  shall  be  great 

13.  19  and  it  grew,  and  waxed  a  [great]  tree 

14.  16  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper,  and 
16.  26  between  us.  .there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed 

21.  11  great  earthquakes  shall  be  in  divers  pla. 
21.  11  and  great  signs  shall  there  be  from  heav. 
21.  23  there  shall  be  great  distress  in  the  land 
24.  52  and  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great 

John  6.  18  the  sea  arose,  by  reason  of  a  great  wind 
7.  37  In  the  last  day,  that  great  (day)  of  the 
21. 11  drew  the  net  to  land  full  of  great  fishes 
Acts    2.  20  before  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the 
4.  33  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles  witn. 

4.  33  and  great  grace  was  upon  them  all 

5.  5  great  fear  came  upon  all  them  that  heard 

5.  11  And  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  church 

6.  8  Stephen,  .did  great  wonders  and  miracles 

7.  11  there  came  a  dearth,  .and  great  affliction 

8.  1  there  was  a  great  persecution  against 
8.   2  and  made  great  lamentation  over  him 
8.    8  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city 
8.  10  This  man  is  the  great  power  of  God 

10. 11  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet  knit  at  the 

11.  5  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet,  let  down 
11.  28  that  there  should  be  a  great  dearth 

15.  3  they  caused  great  joy  unto  all  the  breth. 
16. 26  And  suddenly  there  was  a  great  earthqu. 
19.  27  that  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  D. 
19.  28  saying,  Great  (is)  Diana  of  the  Ephesians 
19.  34  cried  out.  Great  (is)  Diana  of  the  Ephesi. 
19.  35  is  a  worshipper  of  the  great  goddess  Dia. 
23.  9  And  there  arose  a  great  cry  :  and  the 
26.  22  witnessing  both  to  small  and  great,  say. 

Rom.  9.  2  That  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continu. 
1  Co.  16.  9  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto 
Eph.   5.  32  This  is  a  great  mystery  :  but  I  speak 

1  Ti.    3.  16  And  without  controversy  great  is  the  my. 

6.    6  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain 

2  Ti.  2.  20  in  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vess. 
Titus  2.  13  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God 
Heb.    4.  14  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  high 

10. 35  which  hath  great  recompence  of  reward 
13.  20  Lord  Jesus,  that  great  shepherd  of  the  sh. 
Jude        6  reserved.,  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great 
Rev.    1.  10  heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a 

2.  22  that  commit  adultery  with  her  into  great 

6.  4  and  there  was  given  unto  him  a  great 
6. 12  there  was  a  great  earthquake  ;  and  the 
6. 17  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come ;  and 

7.  14  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation 

8.  8  as  it  were  a  great  mountain  burning 

8.  10  there  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven,  burn. 

9.  2  a  smoke . .  as  the  smoke  of  a  [great]  furna. 
9. 14  which  are  bound  in  the  great  river  Euph. 

11.    8  dead  bodies,  .in  the  street  of  the  great 

11. 11  great  fear  fell  upon  them  which  saw 

11. 12  they  heard  a  great  voice  from  heaven  say. 

11. 13  the  same  hour  was  there  a  great  earthq. 


Rev.  11.  15  and  there  were  great  voices  in  heaven 
11. 17  thou  hast  taken  to  thee  thy  great  power 
1 1.  18  them  that  fear  thy  name,  small  and  great 

11.  19  thunderings,  and  an  earthquake,  and  gr. 

12.  i  there  appeared  a  great  wonder  in  heaven 
12.  3  behold  a  great  red  dragon,  having  seven 
12.    9  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  that  old 

12.  12  having  great  wrath,  because  he  knoweth 
12. 14  were  given  two  wings  of  a  great  eagle 

13.  2  his  power,  and  his  seat,  and  great  auth. 
13.  13  he  doeth  great  wonders,  so  that  he  mak. 

13.  16  he  caused  all,  both  small  and  great,  rich 

14.  2  I  heard,  .as  the  voice  of  a  great  thunder 
14.    8  Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen,  that  great  city 

14.  19  cast  (it)  into  the  great  wiue  press  of  the 

15.  1  I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and 

15.  3  Great  and  marvellous  (are)  thy  works,  L. 

16.  1 1  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple 
16.  9  And  men  were  scorched  with  great  heat 
16.  12  poured  out  his  rial  upon  the  great  river 
16.  14  to  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  A. 
16. 17  there  came  a  [great]  voice  out  of  the  tern. 
16.  18  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  such  as 
16.  18  so  mighty  an  earthquake,  (and)  so  great 
16.  19  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  pa. 
16.  iq  great  Babylon  came  in  remembrance  bef. 
16.  21  there  fell  upon  men  a  great  hail  out  of 

16.  21  for  the  plague  thereof  was  exceeding  gr. 

17.  1  the  judgment  of  the  great  whore  that 
17.    5  Mystery,  Babylon  The  Great,  The  Mother 
17.    6  when  I  saw  her,  I  wondered  with  great 

17.  18  the  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  that  gr. 

18.  1  came  down  from  heaven,  having  great 
18.    2  [Babylon  the  great  is  fallen,  is  fallen,  and] 
18.  10  that  great  city  Babylon,  that  mighty  city 

18. 16  Alas,  alas,  that  great  city,  that  was  clot. 
18.  18  What  (city  is)  like  unto  this  great  city ! 
18. 19  Alas,  alas,  that  great  city,  wherein  were 
18.  21  angel  took  up  a'stone  like  a  great  millst. 

18.  21  Thus  with  violence  shall  that  great  city 

19.  1  I  heard  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in 
19.    2  he  hath  judged  the  great  whore,  which 

19.  5  and  ye  that  fear  him,  both  small  and  gr. 

19. 17  together  unto  the  supper  of  the  great  G. 

19. 18  (both)  free  and  bond,  both  small  and  gr. 

20.  1  having  the  key.  .and  a  great  chain  in  his 

20.  11  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that 
20. 12  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand 

21.  3  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  say. 
21.  10  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  to  a  gr. 
21.  10  and  showed  me  that  [great]  city,  the  holy 
21.  12  And  had  a  wall  great  and  high,  (and)  had 

32.il/any,  numerous,  iroXvs  2>olus. 

Matt.  2.  18  lamentation,  and  weeping,  and  great  mo. 

4.  25  there  followed  him  great  multitudes  of 

5.  12  for  great  (is)  your  reward  in  heaven  :  for 
8.    1  When  he  was  come  down .  .great  multitu. 

8.  18  when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about 

12.  15  great  multitudes  followed  him,  and  he 
T3.    2  great  multitudes  were  gathered  together 

14.  14  Jesus  went  forth,  and  saw  a  great  ruulti. 

15.  30  great  multitudes  came  unto  him,  having 

19.  2  And  great  multitudes  followed  him  ;  and 
ig.  22  sorrowful :  for  he  had  great  possessions 

20.  29  from  Jericho,  a  great  multitude  followed 
24.  30  coming  in  the  clouds . .  with  power  and  gr. 
26.  47  and  with  him  a  great  multitude  with  sw. 

Mark  3.    7  a  great  multitude  from  Galilee  followed 

3.  8  they  about  TjTe  and  Sidon,  a  great  mul. 

4.  1  there  was  gathered  unto  him  a  great  m. 

9.  14  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  them 
10.  22  grieved  :  for  he  had  great  possessions 

13.  26  coming  in  the  clouds  with  great  power 

14.  43  and  with  him  a  [great]  multitude  with  sw. 
Luke  2.  36  she  was  of  a  great  age,  and  had  lived 

5.  6  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude  of  fishes 
5. 15  great  multitudes  came  together  to  hear 

5.  29  there  was  a  great  company  of  publicans 

6.  17  and  a  great  multitude  of  people  out  of 
6.  23  for,  behold,  your  reward  (is)  great  in 

6.  35  your  reward  shall  be  great,  and  ye  shall 
jo.  2  The  harvest  truly  (is)  great,  but  "the  lab. 
14.  25  there  went  great  multitudes  with  him 

21.  27  coming  in  a  cloud,  with  power  and  great 
23.  27  there  followed  him  a  great  company  of 

John  5.    3  In  these  lay  a  [great]  multitude  of  impot. 
6.   2  a  great  multitude  followed  him,  because" 

6.  5  Jesus . .  saw  a  great  company  come  unto 
Acts    6.    7  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obe. 

n.  21  a  great  number  believed,  and  turned 
14.    1  that  a  great  multitude  of  the  Jews  and 
17.   4  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  great  multitude 

21.  40  And  when  there  was  made  a  great  silence 

22.  28  With  a  great  sum  obtained  I  this  freedom 

23.  10  And  when  there  arose  a  great  dissension 

24.  2  Seeing  that  by  thee  we  enjoy  great  quiet. 

24.  7  with  great  violence  took  (him)  away  out 

25.  23  Agrippa  was  come,  aud  Bemice,  with  gr. 
28.    6  but  after  they  had  looked  a  great  while 
28.  29  [and  had  great  reasoning  among  themsel.] 

2  Co.  3. 12  Seeing,  .we  use  great  plainness  of  speech 

7.  4  Great  (is)  my  boldness  of  speech  toward 

7.  4  great  (is)  my  glorifjing  of  you  :  I  am  fill. 

8.  2  How  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction  the 
8.  22  upon  the  great  confidence  which,  .in  you 

Eph.  2.  4  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us 
Col.  4. 13  that  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for  you,  and 
1  Th.  2.  17  endeavoured,  .to  see  your  face  with  great 
1  Ti..  3. 13  great  boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  in  C. 
Phm.  7  we  have  great  joy  and  consolation  in  thy 
Heb.  10.  32  in  which,  .ye  endured  a  great  fight  of  affl. 


Rev.  7.  9  After  this  I  beheld,  and  lo,  a  great  mul. 
19.  6  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  m. 
[See  also  Delight,  do,  drought,  flame,  forces,  grasshop- 
per, hailstones,  how,  lion,  man,  mercies,  owl,  pain, 
power,  so,  stature,  teeth,  toe,  very,  while  to  come, 
wonders.] 

GREAT,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  mighty,  strong,  133  gabar. 

Psa.103.  11  great  is  Ins  mercy  toward  them  that  fear 
117.    2  For  his  merciful  kindness  is  great  toward 

2.  To  be  or  become  great,  Si3  gadal. 

Gen.  4S.  19  he  also  shall  be  great ;  but  truly  his  you. 
Kumi4.  17  let  the  power  of  my  Lord  be  great,  acco. 
2  Sa.    7.  22  Wherefore  thou  art  great,  O  Lord  God 
Job     2.  13  for  they  saw  that  (his)  grief  was  very  gr. 
Psa.  92.    5  how  great  are  thy  works,  .thy  thoughts 

104.    1  thou  art  very  great ;  thou  art  clothed 
Eccl.  2.    9  So  I  was  great,  and  increased  more  than 
Mic.    5.    4  for  now  shall  he  be  great  into  the  ends 
Zech  12.  11  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mour. 

3.  To  be  bony,  substantial,  U'4'4  atsam. 

Psa.  139. 17  thy  thoughts..  0  God!  how  great  is  the 
GREAT  as  would  contain  — 
House,  ]V3  bayith.         ** 

1  Ki.  iS.  32  as  great  as  would  contain  two  measures 
GREAT,  to  become  — 

l.To  be  or  become  great,  "?ia  gadal. 

Gen.  24.  35  he  is  become  great :  and  he  hath  given 
26.  13  the  man.  .grew  until  he  became  very  gr. 

Jer.     5. 27  therefore  they  are  become  great,  and  wax. 
2.  To  become  great,  ?na  gadal,  5. 

Dan.   8.    4  did  according  to  his  will,  and  became  g. 
GREAT  with  child  — 
Pregnant,  eynvos  ejjkuos. 

Luke  2.   5  his  espoused  wife,  being  great  with  child 
GREAT  (cattle)  — 
Oxen,  herd,  cattle,  *:j32  baqar. 

Eccl.  2.    7  possessions  of  great  and  small  cattle  above 
GREAT  curse  — 
A  thing  devoted,  avaBe^a  anathema. 

Acts  23. 14  We  have  bound  ourselves  under  a  great  c. 
GREAT  deal,  the  more  a  — 
Much  more,  iroWw  fxaXXov  pollu  mallon. 

Markio.  48  he  cried  the  more  a  great  deal,  (Thou) 

GREAT  deal,  so  much  the  more  a  — 

More  exceedingly,  paWov  Trepiaaorepov  mallon pe. 

Mark  7.  36  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal  they  pub. 
GREAT  estate,  to  come  to  — 
To  become  great,  "?ia  gadal,  5. 

Eccl.  1. 16  Lo,  I  am  come  to  great  estate,  and  have 
GREAT,  exceeding  — 
Greatest,  jxeyio-TOs  megis-tos. 

2  Pe.  1.   4  given.,  exceeding  great  and  precious  pr. 
GREAT  (fear)  — 

Fear,  ~t~s  pachad. 

Psa.  14.    5  There  were  they  in  great  fear  :  for  God 
GREAT,  to  give  — 
To  cause  to  be  great,  ^na  gadal,  5. 

Psa.  iS.  50  Great  deliverance  giveth  he  to  his  king 
GREAT  hail  (stones)  — 
Hail,  ice,  »^a?y  elgabish. 
*>*  Eze.  13.  11  and  ye,  O  great  hailstones,  shall  fall 

13.  13  and  great  hailstones,  in  (my)  fury,  to  co. 
3S.  22  and  great  hailstones,  fire,  and  brimstone 
GREAT,  how  — 
l.How  great  (a  degree),  ?;Aikos-  helikos. 

Jas.     3.   5  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth 
2.How  great  (a  degree),  tttiXIkos  pelikos. 

Heb.    7.    4  consider  how  great  this  man  (was),  unto 
Z.H010  great  {a  quantity),  iroVos  posos. 

Matt.  6.  23  be  darkness  :  how  great  (is)  that  darkn. ! 
GREAT  lord—       • 
Warrior,  knight,  u'hy  shalish. 

Eze  23.  23  great  lords  and  renowned,  all  of  them 
GREAT,  to  make  — 
l.To  make  great,  biz  gadal,  3. 

Gen.  i2.   2  I  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  name  gr. 

1  Ch.29.  12  in  thy  hand  (it  is)  to  make  great,  and  to 
Eze.  31.   4  The  waters  made  him  great,  the  deep  set 

2. To  cause  to  be  great,  Sij  gadal,  5. 

Eccl.  2.    4  I  made  me  great  works  ;  I  builded  me  ho. 
Eze.  24.    9  I  will  even  make  the  pile  for  fire  great 

3. To  make  great  or  abundant,  nnn  rabah,  5. 

Judg  20.  38  that  they  should  make  a  great  flame  with 

2  Sa.  22. 36  and  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great 
Psa.  iS.  35  and  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great 

GREAT  man  — 

l.A  man,  £:,n  ish. 

Isa.     2.  9  the  great  man  humbleth  himself :  there. 

2.  Great  one,  Vna  gadol. 

2  Sa.   3.  38  there  is  a  prince  and  a  great  man  fallen 
2  Ki.io.    6  with  the  great  men  of  the  city,  which 
io.  11  all  his  great  men,  and  his  kinsfolks,  and 


GREAT 


436 


GREATLY 


i  Ch.17.    8  name  of  the  great  men  that  (are)  in  the 
Neh.  11. 14  Zabdiel,  the  son  of  (one  of)  the  great  men 
Provi8.  16  man's  gift,  .bringeth  him  before  great  men 
Nah.  3.  10  and  all  her  great  men  were  bound  in  ch. 

3.  Great,  mighty,  elder,  31  rab. 

Job  32.   9  Great  men  are  not  (always)  wise ;  neither 

4.  Great  ones,  magnates,  fxeyio-raves  megistanes. 

Rev.    6.  15  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men 
18.  23  thy  merchants  were  the  great  men  of  the 

GREAT  man,  to  make  a  — 
To  make  great,  nyi  rebah,  3. 

Dan.  2.  48  Then  the  king  made  Daniel  a  great  man 

GREAT,  man  of  — 

Great,  ^'la  or  Via  garol  or  gadol. 

Prov  19!  T9  A  man  of  great  wrath  shall  suffer  punis. 

GREAT  matter  — 
Great,  Vna  gadol. 

Psa.131.    1  neither  do  I  exercise  myself  in  great  ma. 

GREAT  measure  — 

Abundantly,  by  measure,  why  shalish. 

Psa.  80.    5  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  mea. 

GREAT  number  — 

1.  Heaviness,  weight,  ~ob  kobed. 

Nah.    3.    3  a  multitude  of  slain,  and  a  great  number 
2. Abundance,  21  rob. 

2  Ch.30.  24  a  great  number  of  priests  sanctified  them 
GREAT  number  of  — 
Coming  or  reaching  to,  sufficient,  tKav6s  hikanos. 

Markio.  46  with  his  disciples  and  a  great  number  of 
GREAT  one,  (some)  — 
1.  Great,  mighty,  3i  rab. 

Isa.  19.  20  shall  send  them  a  saviour,  and  a  great  one 
2. .-4  certain  great  one,  tis  /xiyas  tis  megas. 

Acts    8.    9  givingoutthathimselfwassomegreatone 
3.  The  great  ones,  ot  fj.eya.Koi  hoi  megaloi. 

Markio.  42  their  great  ones  exercise  authority  upon 
GREAT  owl  — 
Owl,  crane  or  heron,  ibis,  f\W?_  yanshupth. 

Lev.  11. 17  and  the  cormorant,  and  the  great  owl 

Deuti4. 16  The  little  owl,  and  the  great  owl,  and  the 
GREAT,  to  show  — 
To  make  great,  magnify,  (j.eya\vvco  megahmo. 

Luke  1.  58  heard  how  the  Lord  had  showed  great 
GREAT,  so  — 
l.So  great  (a  degree),  reKtKovros  telikoutos. 

2  Co.  1.  10  Who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  death 

Heb.   2.    3  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  g. 

Jas.    3.    4  Behold,  .the  ships,  which  though,  .so  g. 

2.*?o  great  (a  quantity),  too-ovtos  tosoutos. 

Matt.  8.  10  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not 

15.  33  much  bread,  .as  to  fill  so  great  a  multit.? 
Luke  7.    9  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not 
Heb.  12.    1  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud 
Rev.  18.  17  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to 

GREAT,  they  that  are  — 

The  great  ones,  oi  fj.eya.K01  hoi  megaloi. 

Matt. 20.  25  they  that  are  great  exercise  authority 
GREAT  thing  — 
1.  Great,  Vila  gadol. 

2  Ki.  8.   4'  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  all  the  great  things 

Job     5.    9  Which  doeth  great  things  and  unsearch. 

9.  10  Which  doeth  great  things  past  finding  out 

37.    5  great  things  doeth  he,  which  we  cannot 

Psa.  7r.  19  who  hast  done  great  things  :  0  God,  who 

106.  21  which  had  done  great  things  in  Egypt 
Jer.  45.    s  And  seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself  ? 

I.Greatness,  nVna,  nVna  gedullah,  gedulah. 

2  Sa.    7.  21  hast  thou  done  all  these  great  things,  to 

7.  23  and  to  do  for  you  great  things  and  terrible 

1  Ch.,17.  19  done,  .making known  all  (these)  great  th. 

3.  Myriad,  greatness,  W3"i,  13"]  ribbo. 

Hos.    8.  12  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of 

4.  Very  great,  3T31  rabrab. 

Dan.    7.    8  eyes,  .and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things 

5.  Great  thing,  /xeya  mega. 

1  Co.  9.  11  great  thing  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal 

2  Co.11.  15  Therefore  (it  is)  no  great  thing  if  his  min. 
Rev.  13.    5  given  unto  him  a  mouth  speaking  great  th. 

6.  The  great  things,  tu  fj.eya.Ke7a  ta  megaleia. 

Luke  1.  49  that  is  mighty  hath  done  to  me  [great  th.] 
GREAT  (things),  to  do  — 
To  make  great,  Via  gadal,  5. 

1  Sa.12.  24  consider  how  great  (things)  he  hath  done 

Psa.  126.  23  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  them 

Joel    2.  20  come  up,  because  he  hath  done  great  thi. 

2.  21  Fear  not.  .for  the  Lord  will  do  great  thi. 

GREAT  things,  how  — 

How  great  {a  quantity),  Haos  hosos. 

Mark  5.  19  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for 
5.  20  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done  for  him 
Luke  8.  39  show  how  great  things  God  hath  done 
8. 39  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done  unto 
Acts    9.  16  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  must 


GREAT  things,  very  — 
Very  great,  3"iai  rabrab. 

Dan.    7.  20  and  a  mouth  that  spake  very  great  things 

GREAT  (things),  what  — 

l.How  great  (a  degree),  tjKIkos  helikos. 

Col.     2.    1  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have 

2.How  great  (a  quantity),  Hcros  hosos. 

Mark  3.   8  when  they  had  heard  [what  great  things] 

GREAT  toes  — 

Thumbs  of  the  foot,  D;??i  rru'n?  behonoth  raglayim. 

Jude   1.    6  and  cut  off  his  thumbs  and  his  great  toes 

1.    7  their  thumbs  and  their  great  toes  cut  off 

GREAT,  very  — 

l.To  give  honour,  weight,  122  kdbed,  3. 

Numsa,  17  I  will  promote  thee  unto  very  great  lion. 

I.V&ry  much  or  numerous,  TrdfxiroKvs  pampolus. 
Mark  8.    1  In  those  days  the  multitude[beingveryg.] 

3. Most,  irKeTaros  pleistos. 

Matt  21.   8  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their  gar. 

GREAT,  to  wax  — 

1.7*0  be  or  become  great,  Via  gadol. 

Gen.  19.  13  because  the  cry  of  them  is  waxen  great 
26.  13  the  man  waxed  great,  and  went  forward 
Eze.  16.    7  and  thou  hast  increased  and  waxen  great 
Dan.    8.    9  a  little  horn,  which  waxed  exceeding  gr. 

8. 10  And  it  waxed  great . .  to  the  host  of  heaven 

2.  To  make  or  become  great,  Via  gadal,  5. 

Dan.    8.    8  Therefore  the  he  goat  waxed  very  great 
GREATER  — 

1.  Great,  Vila  gadol. 

Gen.  1.  16  the  greater  light  to  rule  the  day,  and  the 
4. 13  My  punishment  (is)  greater  than  I  can  be. 
39.  9  none  greater  in  this  house  than  I ;  neither 
Exodi8. 11  I  know  that  the  Lord  (is)  greater  than  all 
Nunii4-  12  thee  a  greater  nation  and  mightier  than 
Deut.  1.  28  The  people  (is)  greater  and  taller  than  we 

4.  38  nations,  .greater  and  mightier  than  thou 
9.    1  to  possess  nations  greater  and  mightier 

11.  23  shall  possess  greater  nations  and  mightier 
Josh.  10.  2  because  it  (was)  greater  than  Ai,  and  all 
2  Sa.  13.  15  greater  than  the  love  wherewith  he  had 

13.  16  greater  than  the  other  that  thou  didst 

2  Ch.  3.    5  the  greater  house  he  ceiled  with  fir  tree 
Esth.  9.    4  for.  .Mordecai  waxed  greater  and  greater 
Eze.     8.  6,  13, 15  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations 

43. 14  from  the  lesser  settle . .  to  the  greater  set. 
Hag.  2.    9  The  glory  of  this.. house  shall  be  greater 

2.  To  go  mi,  3V1  halak. 

1  Ch.n.    9  So  David  waxed  greater  and  greater  :  for 

3. Many,  great,  3i  rab. 

Deut.  7.    1  nations  greater  and  mightier  than  thou 
9.  14  a  nation  greater  and  mightier  than  they 
Dan. 11.  13  set.  .a  multitude  greater  than  the  former 
Amos  6.   2  their  border  greater  than  your  border  ? 

4.  Greater,  fietfaepos  meizoteros. 

3  John     4  I  have  no  greater  ioy  than  to  hear  that 

^.Greater,  fj.ei{a>v  meizon. 

Matt.  11. 11  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than  John 

11.  11  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater 
12  7  in  this"\place  is  (one)  greater  than  the  tern. 
23.  17  whether  is  greater,  the  gold,  or  the  tern. 
23.  19  whether  (is)  greater,  the  gift,  or  the  altar 

Mark  4.  32  it  groweth  up,  and  becometh  greater 

12.  31  There  is  none  other  commandment  grea. 
Luke  7.  28  there  is  a  not  greater  prophet  than  John 

7  28  least  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is  greater 
12  18  I  will  pull  down  my  barns,  and  build  gr. 
22  27  whether  (is)  greater,  he  that  sitteth  at 
John  4. 12  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Jacob 

5.  20  he  will  show  him  greater  works  than 

5.  36  I  have  greater  witness  than  (that)  of  Jo. 
8.  53  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Abrah. 

10.  29  My  Father,  which  gave  (them)  me,  is  gr. 

13.  16  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord 
13. 16  neither  he  that  is  sent  greater  than  he 

14.  12  and  greater  (works)  than  these  shall  he 

14.  28  Father :  for  my  Father  is  greater  than  I 

15.  13  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that 
15. 20  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord 
19.  11  he  that  delivered  me  unto  thee  hath  the  g. 

1  Co.  14.   5  greater  (is)  he  that  prophesieth  than  he 
Heb.   6.  13  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he 

6. 16  men  verily  swear  by  the  greater ;  and  an 

9. 11  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle 

11.  26  Esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater 
Jas.     3.    1  we  shall  receive  the  greater  condemnat. 

2  Pe.  2.  11  angels,  which  are  greater  in  power  and 

1  Jo.  3.  20  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  know. 

4.  4  because  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than 

5.  9  the  witness  of  God  is  greater  :  for  this 

6.  More  abundant,  Trepiao-OTepos  2)er'sso^eros- 
Matt  23.  14  (therefore  ye  shall  receive  the  greater] 
Mark  12.  40  these  shall  receive  greater  damnation 
Luke  20.  47  the  same  shall  receive  greater  damnation 

7 .More,  something  mm^e^Keiwv  pleion,  irKeovpleon. 
Matt  12.  41  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas  (is) 

12.  42  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  (isV 
Luke[i.  31  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  (is) 

11.  32  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas  (is) 
Acts  15.  28  to  lay  upon  you  no  greater  burden  than 


GREATER  part,  the  — 

The  more  part,  the  majority,  01  irKeiovs  hoi pleious. 
1  Co.  15.    6  of  whom  the  greater  part  remain  unto 

GREATER  things  — 
Greater,  fietfav  meizon. 

John  1.  50  thou  shall  see  greater  things  than  these 

GREATER,  to  be  (much)  — 

l.To  be  or  become  great,  Via  gadal. 

Gen.  41.  40  only  in  the  throne  will  I  be  greater  than 
48.  19  his  younger  brother  shall  be  greaterthan 

Lam.  4.    6  is  greater  than  the  punishment  of  the  sin 

2.  To  be  great,  nni  rabah. 

1  Sa.  14.  30  had  there  not  been  now  a  much  greater 
Job  33.  12  I  will  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater 

GREATEST  — 

1. Great,  large,  fxeyas  megas. 

Acts    8.  10  they  all  gave  heed,  from  the  least  to  the 
Heb.    8. 11  shall  know  me  from  the  least  to  the  gre. 

2.  Greater,  larger,  fiel(uv  meizon. 

M  att.  1 3.  32  when  it  is  grown,  it  is  the  greatest  among 
18.    1  Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  h.  ? 

18.  4  the  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of 

23. 11  he  that  is  greatest  among  you  shall  be 
Mark  9.  34  had  disputed,  .who  (should  be)  the  grea. 
Luke  9.  46  a  reasoning,  .which  of  them  should  be  g. 

22,  24  which  of  them  should  be  accounted  the  g. 
22.  26  he  that  is  greatest  among  you,  let  him 
1  C0.13. 13  these  three ;  but  the  greatest  of  these  (is) 

S.Great,  Vila  gadol. 

1  Ch.12.  14  an  hundred,  and  the  greatest  over  a  tho. 

Job     1.    3  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the 

Jer.    6.  13  from  the  least  of  them  even  unto  the  gr. 

8. 10  every  one  from  the  least  even  unto  the  g. 

31. 34  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the  greatest 

42.    1,8  people  from  the  least  even  unto  the  g. 

44. 12  shall  die,  from  the  least  even  unto  the  g. 
Jon.   3.    5  from  the  greatest  of  them  even  to  the 

GREATEST  part  — 
Multitude,  rrsip  marbith. 

1  Ch.12.  29  the  greatest  part  of  them  had  kept  the 
GREATLY  — 
1. Might,  1N0  meod. 

Gen.    7.  18  and  were  increased  greatly  upon  the  ea. 

19.  3  he  pressed  upon  them  greatly  ;  and  they 
24.  35  Lord  hath  blessed  my  master  greatly 

32.  7  Then  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid  and  distr. 
Exodig.  18  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  greatly 
Numn.  10  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  great. 

14.  39  told . .  Israel :  and  the  people  mourned  g. 

Deuti7.  17  neither  shall  he  greatly  multiply  to  him. 

Josh  10.    2  they  feared  greatly,  because  Gibeon  (was) 

Judg.  2. 15  for  evil . .  and  they  were  greatly  distressed 

6.    6  Israel  was  greatly  impoverished  because 

1  Sa.  11.    6  upon  Saul,  .and  his  anger  was  kindled  g. 

11. 15  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  rejoiced  greatly 
12.  18  all  the  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord 

16.  21  he  loved  him  greatly;  and  he  became  his 

17.  11  all  Israel.. were  dismayed,  and  greatly 
28.  5  he  was  afraid,  and  his  heart  greatly  tie. 
30.    6  David  was  greatly  distressed  ;  for  the 

2  Sa.  10.    5  sent,  .because  the  men  were  greatly  ash. 

12.    5  David's  anger  was  greatly  kindled  again. 
24.  10  I  have  sinned  greatly  in  that  I  have  done 
1  Ki.  2.  12  Solomon,  .his  kingdom  was  established  g. 
5.    7  when  Hiram  heard,  .he  rejoiced  greatly 

18.  3  Now  Obadiah  feared  the  LORD  greatly 

1  Ch.16.  25  great  (is)  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  pr. 

19.  s  sent,  .for  the  men  were  greatly  ashamed 
21.    8  David  said  unto  God,  I  have  sinned  grea. 

2  Ch.25.  10  their  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against  J. 

33.  12  humbled  himself  greatly  before  the  God 
Job     8.    7  yet  thy  latter  end  should  greatly  increase 
Psa.  21.    1  in  thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  he  re.! 

38.    6  I  am  troubled  ;  I  am  bowed  down  greatly 

47.  9  shields,  .(belong)  unto  God  :  he  is  greatly 

48.  1  Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  pra. 
78.  59  he  was  wroth,  and  greatly  abhorred  Isr. 
96.    4  For  the  Lord  (is)  great,  and  greatly  to  be 

105.  24  he  increased  his  people  greatly,  and  made 
107.  38  He  blesseth.  .that  they  are  multiplied  g. 
109.  30  I  will  greatly  praise  the  Lord  with  my 
112.  1  delighteth  greatly  in  his  commandments 
116.  10  therefore  have  I  spoken:  I  was  greatly 
119.  51  The  proud  have  had  me  greatly  in  deris. 
145.  3  Great  (is)  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  pr. 
Jer.     g.  19  we  are  greatly  confounded, because  we  ha. 

20.  11  they  shall  be  greatly  ashamed  ;  for  they 
Eze.  20.  13  and  my  sabbaths  they  greatly  polluted 
Obad.       2  I  have  made  thee  small .  .thou  art  greatlj 
Zeph.  1.  14  (it  is)  near,  and  hasteth  greatly,  (even)the 
Zech.  9.   9  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion ;  sh. 

2. Much,  abundant,  mighty,  great,  31  rab. 

Psa.  62.    2  my  defence  ;  I  shall  not  be  greatly  moved 
65.    9  thou  greatly  enrichest  it  with  the  river 
89.    7  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assem. 

3. Abundance,  multitude,  greatness,  21  rob. 

1  Ch.  4.  38  the  house  of  their  fathers  increased  gre. 

4.  To  make  many  or  great,  H3i  rabah,  5. 

Gen.   3. 16  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and 

5. Great,  much,  many,  ny&  saggi. 

Dan.    5.   9  Then  was  king  Belshazzar  greatly  troub. 


GREATLY 


437 


GRIEF 


6.  Shame,  n*^3  bosheth. 

Isa.  42. 17  they  shall  be  greatly  ashamed,  that  trust 

I.Joy,  S*a  gil. 

Prov23-  24  The  father  of  the  righteous  shall  greatly 

8.  Very  wiwcA,  exceedingly,  \iav  lian. 

Matt  27.  14  insomuch  that  the  governor  marvelled  g. 
2  Ti.    4.  15  for  he  hath  greatly  withstood  our  words 

2  John     4  I  rejoiced  greatly  that  I  found  of  thy  ch. 

3  John     3  I  rejoiced  greatly  when  the  brethren  ca. 

d.Greatly,  /xeyaKcas  megalos. 

Phil.   4.  10  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,  that  now 

10.  Much,  many,  tto\vs  polus. 

Mark  5. 23  besought  him  greatly,  saying,  My  little 
5.  38  and  seeth . .  them  that  wept  and  wailed  g. 
12.  27  God  of  the  living :  ye  therefore  do  greatly 
1  Co.  16. 12  I  greatly  desired  him  to  come  unto  you 

11. Exceedingly,  greatly,  tr<p6Spa  sphodra. 

Matt  27.  54  they  feared  greatly,  saying,  Truly  this 
Acts   6.    7  the  disciples  multiplied  in  Jerusalem  g. 

l%Withjoy}  xaP%  chara. 

John  3.  29  rejoiceth  greatly  because  of  the  bridegr. 

GREATLY  (feared),  thing  — 
Fear,  ins  pachad. 

Job     3.  25  the  thing  which  I  greatly  feared  is  come 

GREATLY  rejoice,  to  — 

To  sing,  cry  aloud,  \r\  ranan,  3. 

Psa.  71.  23  My  lips  shall  greatly  rejoice  when  I  sing 
GREATNESS  — 
1. Great,  fni  gadol. 

Exodis.  16  by  the  greatness  of  thine  arm  they  shall 
%Greatness,  n^nj,  n^rij  gedulah,  gedullah. 

1  Ch.17.  19  hast  thou  done  all  this  greatness,  in  ma. 

17.  21  to  make  thee  a  name  of  greatness  and 
29.  11  Thine,  O  Lord,  (is)  the  greatness,  and 
Esth  10,   2  the  declaration  of  the  greatness  of  Mor. 
Psa.  71.  21  Thou  shalt  increase  my  greatness,  and 
145.    3  the  Lord  . .  his  greatness  (is)  unsearchable 
145.   6  thy  terrible  acts  :  and  I  will  declare  thy  g. 

3. Greatness,  7na  godel. 

Num.14.  19  according  unto  the  greatness  of  thy  me. 
Deut.  3.  24  hast  begun  to  show  thy  servant  thy  grea. 
5.  24  hath  showed  us  his  glory,  and  his  great. 
9.  26  thou  hast  redeemed  through  thy  greatn. 
11.   2  Lord  your  God,  his  greatness,  his  mighty 
32.    3  the  Lord  :  ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our 
Psa.  79.  11  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  power 
150.    2  praise  him  according  to  his  excellent  gre. 
Eze.  31.    2  Whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  greatness  ? 
31.    7  Thus  was  he  fair  in  his  greatness,  in  the 
31. 18  and  in  greatness  among  the  trees  of  Ed. 

4.  Increase,  abundance,  rvarjD  marbith. 

2  Ch.  9.  6  the  one  half  of  the  greatness  of  thy  wisd. 
5. Abundance,  multitude,  greatness,  21  rob. 

Exodis.    7  in  tne  greatness  of  thine  excellency  thou 
Neh.  13.  22  spare  me  according  to  the  greatness  of 
Psa.  66.    3  through  the  greatness  of  thy  power  shall 
Prov.  5.  23  in  the  greatness  of  his  folly  he  shall  go 
Isa.   40.  26  all  by  names  by  the  greatness  of  his  mi. 
57.  10  Thou  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy 
63.    1  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength? 
Jer.  13.  22  For  the  greatness  of  thine  iniquity  are 

6.  Greatness,  13"!  rebu. 

Dan.    4.  22  thy  greatness  is  grown,  and  reacheth  unto 
7.  27  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the 

7.  To  be  many,  abundant,  rn-j  rabak. 

2  Ch.24.  27  the  greatness  of  the  burdens  (laid)  upon 
^.Greatness,  fxeyeOo?  niegethos. 

Eph.  1.  19  what  (is)  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his 
GREAVES  — 
Frontlet,  nn^O  mitschah. 

1  Sa.  17.   6  greaves  of  brass  upon  his  legs,  and  a  tar. 
GRE'-CIA,  GREECE,  ]v  yavan,  'E\\ds,  liellas. 
A  country  of  southern  Europe  lying  E.  of  Italy  and  W. 
of  Asia  Minor,  the  Isles  of  the  Ionian  Archipelago ; 
called  Javan  in  Hebrew. 

Dan.   8.  21  And  the  rough  goat  (is)  the  king  of  G. 

10.  20  when  I  am  gone,  .the  prince  of  G.  shall 

11.  2  shall  stir  up  all  against  the  realm  of  G. 
Zech.  9.  13  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,  O  G. 
Acts  20.    2  gone  over  those  parts,  .he  came  into  G. 

GRECIANS— 

l.Sons  of  the  Javanim,  D'ivrr'.is  bene-hayyevanim. 

Joel    3.  6  children.. haveye  sold  unto  the  Grecians 

I.Hellenist,  a  Jew  born  out  of  Canaan,  'E\\t)i>htttis. 

Acts    6.    1  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecians 

9.  29  spake . .  and  disputed  against  the  Grecians 

11.  20  spake  unto  [the  Grecians],  preaching  the 

GREEDILY  — 

Desire,  hinj-i  taavah. 

Prov  21*  26  He  coveteth  greedily  all  the  day  long 
GREEDINESS  — • 
A  having  or  desiring  more,  ir\eove£la  pleonexia. 

Eph.  4. 19  to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness 
GREEDY  — 
1. Dishonest  gain,  yxa  betsa. 

Prov.  1. 19  the  way  of  every  one  that  is  greedy  of  g. 
i«j.  27  He  that  is  greedy  of  gain  troubleth  his 


2.Strong  of  soul,  t?35  Tj>  az  nepkesh. 

Isa.   56. 11  greedy  dogs  (which)  can  never  have  eno. 
GREEDY,  to  be  — 
To  have  a  desire,  f]p3  Jcasaph. 

Psa.  17. 12  Like  as  a  lion,  .is greedy  of  his  prey,  and 
GREEK  — 

l.A    native  of  Greece,  not  a  Jew  or   barbarian, 
"EKKr\v  Hellen. 

Johni2.  20  there  were  certain  Greeks  among  them 

Acts  14.    1  a  great  multitude.,  of  the  Greeks  believed 
16.    1  Jewess,  and  believed,  .his  father,  .a  Gre. 

16.  3  they  knew  all  that  his  father  was  a  Greek 

17.  4  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  great  multitude 

18.  4  and  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks 

18.  17  Then  all  [the  Greeks]  took  Sosthenes,  the 
19. 10  all.  .heard  the  word,  .both  Jews  and  Gr. 

19.  17  this  was  known  to  all  the  Jews  and  Gr. 

20.  21  Testifying  both  to  the  Jews,  and.  .Greeks 
si.  28  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  temple,  and 

Rom.  1.  14  I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  to 
1.  16  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek 
10.  12  no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  G. 

1  Co.    1.  22  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks 

1.  23  Christ  crucified,  .unto  the  [Greeks]  fool. 

1.  24  them  which  are  called,  both  Jews  and  G. 
Gal.     2.    3  Titus,  who  was  with  me,  being  a  Greek 

3.  28  There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  there  is 
Col.    3. 11  Where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew 

2.  Greek,  Grecian,  'EW-nvtttSs  Hellenikos. 

Rev.    9. 11  but  in  the  Greek  tongue  hath  (his)  name 

Z.A  Greek  female,  'EWijvis  HeUenis. 

Mark  7.  26  The  woman  was  a  Greek,  a  Syrophenician 
Acts  17. 12  also  of  honourable  women  which  were  G. 

£.1)1  Greek,  'EW-nviari  Hcllenisti. 

Acts  21.  37  chief  captain,  .said,  Canst  thou  speak  G.? 
GREEK,  in  — 
In  Greek,  'EW-nvLart  Hellenisti. 

Johnig.  20  it  was  written  in  Hebrew,  (and)  Greek 
GREEK,  of  — 
Greek,  Grecian,  'E\\t}vik6s  Hellenikos. 

Luke23.  38  [in  letters  of  Greek,  and  Latin,  aud  Heb.] 
GREEN  — 

1.  Tender  grass,  neh  deshe. 

Psa.  23.    2  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pas. 

2.  Green,  green  herb,  p*v  yaraq. 

2  Ki.19.  26  (as)  the  green  herb,  (as)  the  grass  on  the 
Isa.   37.  27  (as)  the  green  herb,  (as)  the  grass  on  the 

Z.Green  herb,  greenness,  p"V  yereq. 

Gen.    1.  30  every  green  herb  for  meat :  and  it  was 
9.    3  as  the  green  herb  have  I  given  you  all 
Psa.  37.   2  they  shall  soon,  .wither  as  the  green  herb 

i.Cotton,  DS")3  karpas. 

Esth.  1.    6  white,  green,  and  blue  (hangings)  fasten. 

5.  Moist,  fresh,  nh  lack. 

Gen.  30.  37  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar,  and 
Judgi6.    7  If  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  withs 

t6.   8  seven  green  withs  which  had  not  been 
Eze.  17.  24  have  dried  up  the  green  tree,  and  have 

20.  47  and  it  shall  devour  every  green  tree  in 

6.  Wet,  ab"i  ratob. 

Job     8. 16  He  (is)  green  before  the  sun,  and  his  b. 

7 '.Flourishing,  fresh,  ]\VS1  raanan. 

Deut  12.    2  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every  green 

1  Ki.14.  23  they  also  built  them,  .under  every  green 

2  Ki.  16.    4  and  on  the  hills,  and  under  every  green 

17. 10  set.  .up  images,  .under  every  green  tree 
2  Ch.28.    4  on  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree 
Job   15.  32  his  time,  and  his  branch  shall  not  be  gr. 
Psa.  37.  35  and  spreading  himself  like  a  green  bay  t. 
52.   8  I  (am)  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house 
Song   1.  16  thou  (art)  fair,  .also  our  bed  (is)  green 
Isa.  57.    5  with  idols  under  every  green  tree,  slaying 
Jer.     2.  20  and  under  every  green  tree  thou  wander. 
3.    6  she  is  gone,  .under  every  green  tree,  and 
3. 13  to  the  strangers  under  every  green  tree 
11. 16  A  green  olive  tree,  fair .  .of  goodly  fruit 
17.   2  their  altars  and  their  groves  by  the  green 
17.   8  heat  cometh,  but  her  leaf  shall  be  green 
Eze.    6.  13  under  every  green  tree,  and  under  every 
Hos.  14.  8  I  (am)  like  a  green  fir  tree.    From  me  is 

8. Pale  green,  x^wpos  chloros. 

Mark  6.  39  make  all  sit  down,  .upon  the  green  grass 
Rev.   8.   7  trees,  .and  all  green  grass,  was  burnt  up 

9.Wef,  moist,  vypSs  hugros. 

Luke23.  31  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree 
GREEN  thing  — 
1. Green  thing,  pin;  yaroq. 

Job  39.   8  and  he  searcheth  after  every  green  thing 
2. Greenness,  green  herb,  p*v  yereq. 

Exodio.  15  there  remained  not  any  green  thing  in  ~ 

Isa.   15.    6  the  grass  faileth,  there  is  no  green  thing 
Z.Pale  green,  x^-wptfy  chloros. 

Rev.  9.   4  neither  any  green  thing,  neither  any  tree 
GREENISH  — 
Green,  yellow,  pl\)T.  yeraqraq. 

Lev.  13.  49  if  the  plague  be  greenish  or  reddish  in 
14. 37  hollow  strakes,  greenish  orreddish,  which 


GREENNESS  — 
Greenness,  budding,  3N  eb. 

Job     8.  12  Whilst  it  (is)  yet  in  his  greenness,  .not 
GREET,  to  — 

1. To  wishpeace,  salute,  D1S7  nby  shalam  shalom. 
1  Sa.  25.   5  go  to  Nabal,  and  greet  him  in  my  name 
2.To  draw  to  self,  clasp,  embrace,  ao-jrd£oftat  aspa. 
Rom  16.    3  Greet  Priscilla  and  Aquila  my  helpers  in 
16.    6  Greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour 
16.   8  Greet  Amplias  my  beloved  in  the  Lord 
16.  11  Greet  them  that  be  of  the  (household)  of 

1  Co.16.20  All  the  brethren  greet  you.   Greet  ye  one 

2  Co.  13. 12  Greet  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 
Phil.   4.  21  The  brethren  which  are  with  me  greet 
Col.     4.  14  Luke,  the.  .physician,  and  Demas,  greet 

1  Th.  5.  26  Greet  all  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss 

2  Ti.    4.  21  Eubulus  greeteth  thee,  and  Pudens,  and 
Titus  3. 15  Greet  them  that  love  us  in  the  faith 

1  Pe.   5. 14  Greet,  .one  another  with  a  kiss  of  charity 

2  Jo.       13  The  children  of  thy  elect  sister  greet  thee 

3  Jo.        14  friends  salute  thee.   Greet  the  friends  by 
GREETING  — 

l.Draiving  to  self ,  salutation,  ao"ira(Tfj.6s  aspasmos. 
Mattz3.   7  greetings  in  the  markets,  and  to  be  called 
Luke  1 1.  43  for  ye  love,  .greetings  in  the  markets 
20.  46  which,  .love  greetings  in  the  markets 

2.  To  rejoice,  be  of  good  cheer,  xaha  chairo. 

Jas.     1.    1  James,  .to  the  twelve  tribes,  .greeting 
GREETING,  (send)  — 
To  rejoice,  be  of  good  cheer,  xaipia  chairo. 

Acts  15.  23  elders,  .(send)  greeting  unto  the  brethr. 
23.  26  Lysias  unto.  .Felix  (sendeth)  greeting 
GREW  — 
Becoming  great,  biz  gadel. 

Gen.  26.  13  the  man.  .grew  until  he  became  very  gre. 

1  Sa  2.  26  the  child  Samuel  grew  on,  and  was  in  fa. 
GREW  upon,  that  which  — 
Shoot, plant,  nax  tsemach. 

Gen.  19.  25  overthrew,  .that  which  grew  upon  the  gr. 
GREW,  where  it  — 
Shoot,  plant,  roy  tsemach. 

Eze.  17.  10  shall  wither  in  the  furrows  where  it  grew 
GREY  head  (ed)  — 
Greyness,  na*fc*  sebah. 

Psa.  71.  18  Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  greyheaded 

Prov.  20.  29  and  the  beauty  of  old  men  (is)  the  grey  h. 
GREY  HOTJND  — 
Stag,  girt  in  the  loins,  n^np  vrjl  zarzir  mothnayim. 

Prov. 30.  31  A  grey  hound;  an  lie  goat  also  ;  and  aki. 
GRIEF  — 
l.To  become  sick,  weak,  pained,  nhn  chalah,  2. 

Isa.   17. 11  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate 

I.Sickness,  weakness,  pain,  ^n  choli. 

Isa.   53.    3  a  man  of  sorrows.. acquainted  with  grief 

53.    4  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 

Jer.     6.  7  before  me  continually  (is)  grief  and  wou. 

10. 19  Truly  this  (is)  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it 

3. Sorrow,  affliction,  |*u;  yagon. 

Psa.  31.  10  my  life  is  spent  with  grief,  and  my  years 
Jer.  45.  3  for  the  Lord  hath  added  grief  to  my  sor. 

4. Pain,  3N3  keeb. 

Job     2. 13  for  they  saw  that  (his)  grief  was  very  gre. 
16.    6  Though  I  speak,  my  grief  is  not  asswaged 

5. Sadness,  provocation,  anger,  Dys  kaas. 

1  Sa.    1.  16  out  of  the  abundance  of  my.  .grief  have 
Psa.    6.    7  Mine  eye  is  consumed  because  of  grief 

31.  9  Lord,  .mine  eye  is  consumed  with  grief 
Prov.17.  25  A  foolish  son  (is)  a  grief  to  his  father 
Eccl.  1.  18  in  much  wisdom  (is)  much  grief ;  and  he 
2.  23  his  days  (are)  sorrows . .  his  travail  grief 

6. Sadness,  provocation,  sadness,  by?  kaas. 

Job     6.    2  Oh  that  my  grief  were  throughly  weighed 

7. Pain,  3iN3!?  makob. 

2  Ch.  6.  29  when  every  one  shall  know,  .his  own  gr. 
Psa.  69.  26  they  talk  to  the  grief  of  those  whom  thou 

8.  Bitterness,  Tnp  mor  ah. 

Gen.  26.  35  Which  were  a  grief  of  mind  unto  Isaac 

9.  Stumbling  block,  n^spuqah. 

1  Sa.  25.  31  That  this  shall  be  no  grief  unto  thee,  nor 
lO.Evil,  in  ra. 

Jon.    4.   6  a  shadow,  .to  deliver  him  from  his  grief 

ll.Grief,  grievance,  \virf}  lupe. 

1  Pe.  2. 19  for  conscience  toward  God  endure  grief 
GRIEF,  to  cause  or  put  to  — 

1.  To  afflict,  grieve,  na;  yagah,  5. 

Lam.  3.  32  But  though  he  cause  grief,  yet  will  he 
2.7b  make  sick,  nSn  chalah,  5. 

Isa.     53. 10  he  hath  put  (him)  to  grief :  when  thou 

3.  To  grieve,  afflict,  \vireoj  lupeo. 

2  Cor.  2.    5  if  any  have  caused  grief,  he  hath  not  gr. 
GRIEF,  with  — 

To  groan,  sigh,  gtsv6.£<i)  stenazd. 

Heb.  13. 17  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and  not  with  g. 


GRIEVANCE 


438 


GROUND 


GRIEVANCE  — 

Labour,  perverseness,  misery,  bzy  amal. 

Ilab.  i.    3  dost  thou.,  cause  (rae)  to  behold  grievance? 

GRIEVE,  to  — 

l.To  grieve,  21  n  adab,  5. 

1  Sa,   2.  33  to  consume  thine  eyes,  and  to  grieve  th. 

2.  To  be  pained,  S*n,  Vin  chul,  chil. 

Jer.     5.    3  thou  hast  stricken . .  but  they  have  not  g. 

3.  To  burn,  be  wroth,  .tti  charah. 

1  Sa.    15.  11  it  grieved  Samuel ;  and  he  cried  unto 
4.7b  afflict,  grieve,  na;  yagah,  3. 

Lam.  3.  33  he  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve 
5.7*y  be  or  become  weary,  m6  laah,  2. 

Prov.  26.  15  it  grieveth  him  to  bring  it  again  to  his 
6.7*0  grieve, -2xy  atsab. 

1  Ch.  4.    10  keep,  .from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve 

7. To  grieve,  2%%  atsab,  5. 

Psa.  78. 40  How  oft  did  they,  .grieve  him  in  the  de. ! 

8.  To  grieve,  afflict,  \vir4u  lupeo. 

2  Co.  2.    5  he  hath  not  grieved  me,  but  in  part ;  that 
Eph.  4.  30  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  where. 

GRIEVED,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  pa  in  self,  become  pained,  rn,  Sm  chul,  chil,  7a. 

Esth.  4.    4  Then  was  the  queen  exceedingly  grieved 

2.  To  be  sick,  weak,  r\bn  chalah. 

Isa.  57.  10  hast  found ..  therefore  thou  wast  not  gr. 
3.7*0  become  sick,  weak,  rhn  chalah,  2. 

Amos  6.  6  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of 
4.7*o  sJww  self  violent,  f\pn  chamets,  7. 

Psa.  73.  21  Thus  my  heart  was  grieved,  and  I  was  p. 

5.7*0  be  evil,  m;  yara. 

Deut  15.  10  thine  heart  shall  not  be  grieved  when  th. 
t  Sa.    1.    8  why  is  thy  heart  grieved?  (am)  not  I  be. 
Ken.    2.  10  it  grieved  them  exceedingly  that  there 
13.    8  it  grieved  me  sore :  therefore  I  cast  forth 

6.7*0  be  pained,  n*o  kaah,  2. 

Dan  n.  30  he  shall  be  grieved,  and  returu,  and  have 

7.  To  be  sad,  angry,  Dys  kaas. 

Psa  112.  10  The  wicked  shall  see  (it),  and  be  grieved 
8.7*0  be  pierced,  N"J?  kera,  2. 

Dan.    7.  15  I  Daniel  was  grieved  in  my  spirit  in  the 

9.  Tn  he  or  become  weary,  ns?  laah. 

Job     4.    2  to  commune  with  thee,  wilt  thou  be  gri. 

10.  7*0  be  bitter,  "nip  marar. 

1  Sa.  30.    6  the  soul  of  all  the  people  was  grieved 

11.  7*0  be  grieved,  solicitous,  D3JJ  again. 

Job  30. 25  was  (.not)  my  soul  grieved  for  the  poor? 
12.7*0  grieve,  3K«  atsab. 

Isa.   54.    6  as  a  woman  forsaken,  and  grieved  in  spi. 

13.7b  be  grieved,  2xy  atsab,  2. 

Gen.  45.    5  be  not  grieved  nor  angry  with  yourselves 

1  Sa.  20.    3  Let  not  Jonathan  know  this,  lest  he  be  g. 

20.  34  for  he  was  grieved  for  David,  because  his 

2  Sa.  19.    2  how  the  king  was  grieved  for  his  son 
Neb..    S.  11  the  day  (is)  holy;  neither  be  ye  grieved 

14.7*0  grieve  self,  2xy  atsab,  7. 

(Jen.  34.    7  the  men  were  grieved,  and  they  were 
15.7*0  loathe,  be  weary  of,  aip  qui. 

Psa.  95,  10  Forty  years  long  was  I  grieved  with  (this) 

16.7*o  show  self  weary  of,  tHp  gut,  7a. 

Psa.  1 19,  158  I  beheld  the  transgressors,  and  was  gri. 
139.  21  am  not  I  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up 

17. 7*o  be  vexed,  weary,  pp  guts. 

Exod.  1.  12  they  were  grieved  because  of  the  children 

18.7*0  be  or  become  short,  "iSR  qatsar. 

Judg  10.  16  his  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  Is. 

19.  7*o  labour  through,  grieve  self,  ZiaTroueaj  diapon. 
Acts    4.    2  Being  grieved  that  they  taught  the  peo. 
16.  18  Paul,  being  grieved,  turned  and  said  to 

%0.To  grieve,  afflict,  \vtt4w  lupeo. 

Mark  10.  22  And  he  was  sad.  .and  went  away  grieved 
John2t.  17  Peter  was  grieved  because  he  said  unto 
Rom  14.  15  if  thy  brother  be  grieved  with  (thy)  meat 
2  Co.   2.    4  not  that  ye  should  be  grieved,  but  that 

21.  7*o  grieve  at  the  same  time,  o-uKKvireco  sulluped. 
Mark  3.  5  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their 

GRIEVED  with,  to  be  — 

To  be  grieved  at,  feel  disgust  at,  irpo(rox^Cw  pros. 
Heb.   3.  10  I  was  grieved  with  that  generation,  and 
3.  17  with  whom  was  he  grieved  forty  years? 

GRIEVED,  to  have  sorely  — 
7b  make  bitter,  -no  marar,  3. 

Gen.  49.  23  The  archers  have  sorely  grieved  him,  and 
GRIEVED  or  GRIEVETH,  it  — 

l.To  grieve  self,  ayy  atsab,  7. 

Gen.   6.    6  made  man.  .and  it  grieved  him  at  his  he. 

2.  7*o  be  hitter,  "no  marar. 

Ruth  1.  13  for  it  grieveth  me  much  for  your  sakes 
GRIEVING  — 
To  cause  pain,  2x2  kaab,  5. 

Eze.  28.  24  there  shall  be  no  more,  (any)  grieving 


GRIEVOUS  (to  be)  — 

l.To  pain,  be  pained,  *rn,  bm  chul,  chil,  5. 

Psa.  10.    5  His  ways  are  always  grievous  ;  thy  judj. 
2.To  pain  self  S*n,  Sm  chul,  chil,  7a. 

Jer.  23. 19  a  whirlwind . .  even  a  grievous  whirlwind 
3.7*o  become  sick,  weak,  nbn  chalah,  2. 

Jer.  10.  19  Woe  is  me.  .my  wound  is  grievous:  but 
14.  17  is  broken,  .with  a  very  grievous  blow 
30. 12  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  .thy  wound  (is)  grie. 

Nah.   3.  19  (There  is)  no  healing,  .thy  wound  is  gre. 

4. 7*o  be  evil,  jn;  yara. 

Gen.  21. 11  the  thing  was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's 

21.  12  Let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thyJsight,  beca. 

Isa.  15.   4  Moab.  .his  life  shall  be  grievous  unto  him 

5. 7*o  be  weighty,  heavy,  122  kabed. 

Gen.  12. 10  for  the  famine  (was)  grievous  in  the  land 
41.  31  not  be  known . .  for  it  (shall  be)  very  gri. 
50.  11  This  (is)  a  grievous  mourning  to  the  Egy. 
Exod.  8.  24  there  came  a  grievous  swarm  (of  flies) 
9.    3  (there  shall  be)  a  very  grievous  murrain 
9.  18  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  very  grievous  hail 
9.  24  fire  mingled  with  the  hail,  very  grievous 
10. 14  in  all  the  coasts  of  Egypt :  very  grievous 
6.7*0  be  powerful,  grievous,  yvp  marats,  2. 

1  Ki.  2.    8  which  cursed  me  with  a  grievous  curse  in 

7.7*o  turn  aside,  ~an  sur. 

Jer.  6.  28  They  (are)  all  grievous  revolters,  walking 
S.Grievous  thing,  grieving,  aitjg  etseb. 

Prov.  15.  1  wrath  :  but  grievous  words  stir  up  anger 
9.  Sharpness,  ny^  qasheh. 

1  Ki.12.    4  make  thou  the  grievous  service  of  thy  fa. 

2  Ch.io.   4  ease  thou  somewhat  the  grievous  servit. 
Isa.    21.   2  A  grievous  vision  is  declared  unto  me  ;  the 

10.Evil,  in  ra. 

Prov.  15.  10  Correction  (is)  grievous  uuto  him  that  for. 

Eccl.  2.  17  the  work  that  is  wrought,  .(is)  grievous 
11, Sicknesses,  diseases,  n^Snn  tachaluim. 

Jer.  16.   4  They  shall  die  of  grievous  deaths  ;  they 
12.  Weighty,  heavy,  f3apvs  barus. 

Acts  20.  29  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you 
25.    7  laid  many  and  grievous  complaints  again. 

1  Jo.   5.    3  and  his  commandments  are  not  grievous 

13.0/ grief  Kvtttjs  lupes. 

Heb.  12.  11  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous 
lLSlothful,  tedious,  ownpSs  okneros. 

Phil.  3.  1  To  write,  .to  me  indeed  (is)  not  grievous 
15. Evil,  painful,  irksome,  irovwpSs  poneros. 

Rev.  16.    2  there  fell  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore 

GRIEVOUS  to  be  borne  — 

Hard  to  be  borne,  o'va&do'TaKTos  dusbastakos. 

Matt23.    4  heavy  burdens  [and  grievous  to  be  borne] 
Luken.  46  lade.,  with  burdens  grievous  to  be  borne 

GRIEVOUS,  to  make  — 

7*o  make  sharp,  n^n  qashah,  5. 

1  Ki.12.    4  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous  :  now 

2  Ch.10.    4  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous :  now 

GRIEVOUS  things  — 
Ancient,  stiff,  PFJJ  o.thaq. 

Fsa.  31.  18  which  speak  grievous  things  proudly  and 

GRIEVOUSLY  — 

l.Sin,  xpn  chet. 

Lam.  1.   8  Jerusalem  hath  grievously  sinned;  there. 

1.  Transgression,  bv$  maal. 

Eze.  14. 13  sinneth  against  me  by  trespassing  griev. 
3. Bitterness,  rebellion,  rfjD  marah. 

Lam.  1.  20  is  turned,  .for  I  have  grievously  rebelled 
i.Greatly,  vehemently,  §etvu>?  deinds. 

Matt.  8.   6  sick  of  the  palsy,  grievously  tormented 

§. Badly,  evilly,  ko.kw$  kakos. 

Matt  15.  22  my  daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a 

GRIEVOUSLY,  to  fall  — 

To  pain,  be  in  pain,  Tin,  Trj  chul,  chil. 

Jer.  23.  19  it  shall  fall  grievously  upon  the  head  of 

GRXEVOUSNESS  — 

1.  Weight,  heaviness,  *ub  kobed. 

Isa.  21.15  they  fled . .  from  the  grievousness  of  wrath 
2.LaJ>our,  perijerseness,  misery,  bipy  amal. 

Isa.    10.    1  Woe  unto  them  that.,  write  grievousness 
GRIND,  to  — 
l.Mill,  millstone,  pnu  techon. 

Lam.    5.  13  They  took  the  young  men  to  grind,  and 

2.7*"  grind,  |r$  taction. 

Exod32.  20  took  the  calf .  .and  ground  (it)  to  powder 
Niimii.    8  gathered  (it),  and  ground  (it)  in  mills,  or 
Dent.  9.  21  I  took,  the  calf.. (and)  ground  (it)  very 
Judgi6.  21  and  he  did  grind  in  the  prison  house 
Job  31.  10  let  my  wife  grind  unto  another,  and  let 
Isa.     3.  15  and  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor  ?  saith  the 
47.   2  Take  the  mill  stones,  andgrind  meal :  un 

3. To  grind,  ak^dec  alitho. 

Matt24.  41  Two  (women  shall  be)  grinding  at  the  m. 
Luke  1 7.  35  Two  (women)  shall  be  grinding  together 


GRIND  to  powder  — 

To  disperse,  scatter,  Anc/xaw  likmao. 

Matt  21.  44  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind  him  to  powder 
Luke2o.  18  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind  him  to  powder 

GRINDER  — 

7*o  grind,  jntp  tachan. 

Eccl.  12.    3  the  grinders  cease,  because  they  are  fe 
GRINDING  — 
Grinding,  n:nti  tachanah. 

Eccl.  12.    4  when  the  sound  of  the  grinding  is  low 
GRISLED  — 
Gristed,  "Via  barod. 

Gen.  31.  10,  12  rams..ringstraked,  speckled,  and  gri. 

Zech.  6.    3  in  the  fourth  chariot  grisled  and  bay  ho. 
6.    6  the  grisled  go  forth  toward  the  south  co. 

GROAN,  to  — 

l.I*o  sigh,  rnx  anach,  2. 

Joel    1.  18  How  do  the  beasts  groan  !  the  herds  of 

2. 7*o  groan,  pJX,  anaq. 

Jer.  51.  52  through,  .her  land  the  wounded  shall  gr. 

3.7*0  groan,  pui  naaq. 

Job   24. 12  Men  groan  from  out  of  the  city,  and  the 
Eze.  30.  24  he  shall  groan  before  him.  .with  the  gro. 

4.7*0  snort,  be  deeply  moved,  €/j.@pip.a6/j.ai  cmlyrim. 
Johnn.  33  he  groaned  in  the  spirit,  and  was  troubled 

11.  38  Jesus,  therefore,  again  groaning  in  him. 

5.7*0  groan,  sigh,  arevd^w  stenazo. 

Rom.  8.  23  even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves 
2  Co.  5.   2  in  this  we  groan,  earnestly  desiring  to  be 

5.  4  we  that  are  in  (this)  tabernacle  do  groan 
GROAN  together,  to  — 

7*o  groan  or  sigh  together,  avarevdfa  sustenazo. 

Rom.  8.  22  whole  creation  groaneth.  .in  pain  togeth. 
GROANING  — 
1. Sighing,  nyix  anachah. 

Job  23.    2  my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  groaning 

Psa.    6.    61  am  weary  with  my  groaning  ;  all  the 
38.   q  Lord,  .my  groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee 
102.   "5  By  reason  of  the  voice  of  my  groaning 
2.  Groaning,  ."iqjn  anaqah. 

Psa.  102.  20  To  near  the  groaning  of  the  prisoner;  to 
Z.Groaning,  nptKi  neaqah. 

Exod  2.  24  God  heard  their  groaning,  and  God  rem. 

6.  5  I  have  also  heard  the  groaning  of  the  c. 
Judg.  2.  18  it  repented  the  Lord  because  of  their  g. 
Eze.  30.  24  groan,  .with  the  groanings  of  a  deadly 

■^.Groaning,  sighing,  <rT€vayfj.6$  stenagmos. 

Acts    7.  34  I  have  heard  their  groaning,  and  am  come 

Rom.  8.  26  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be 
GROPE,  to  — 
l.To  feel,  grope,  draw  nigh,  C'tfa  gashash,  3. 

Isa.   59.  10  We  grope,  .like  the  blind,  and  we  grope 
2.7*0  search,  grope,  e^d  mashash,  3. 

Deut  28.  29  shall  grope  at  noon  day.  as  the  blind  gr. 

Job     5.  14  and  grope  in  the  noon  day  as  in  the  night 

12.  25  They  grope  in  the  dark  without  light 

GROSS,  to  wax  — 

To  make  fat  or  thick,  waxvvio  pachuno. 

Matt  13.  15  For  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross,  and 
Acts  28.  27  the  heart  of  this  people  is  waxed  gross 

GROUND  — 

l.Soil,  ground,  <-tn"iN  adamah. 

Gen.    2.    5  and  (tliere  was)  not  a  man  to  till  the  gr. 
2.   6  and  watered  the  whole  face  of  the  ground 
2.    7  formed  man  (of)  the  dust  of  the  ground 

2.  9  out  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  made  to 
2. 79  out  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  formed 
3. 17  cursed  (is)  the  ground  for  thy  sake ;  in 

3.  19  till  thou  return  unto  the  ground  ;  for  out 

3.  23  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  he  was 

4.  2  sheep,  but  Cain  was  a  tiller  of  the  ground 
4.    3  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground 
4.  10  the  voice,  .crieth  unto  me  from  the  gr. 

4.  12  When  thou  tillest  the  groud,  it  shall  not 

5.  29  because  of  the  ground,  .the  Lord  hath 

7.  23  which  was  upon  the  face  of  the  ground 

8.  8  were  abated  from  off  the  face  of  the  gr. 
8.  13  and,  behold,  the  face  of  the  ground  was 
8. -2i  I  will  not  again  curse  the  ground  any 

19.  25  and  that  which  grew  upon  the  ground 
Exod.  3.    s  place  whereon  thou  standest  (is)  holy  gr 
8.  21  and  also  the  ground  whereon  they  (are) 
Lev.  20.  25  living  thing  that  creepeth  on  the  ground 
Num  16.  31  that  the  ground  clave  assunder.  .under 
Deut.  4.  iS  of  anything  that  creepeth  on  the  ground 
28.    4  the  fruit  of  thy  ground,  and  the  fruit  of 
28.  11  plenteous,  .in  the  fruit  of  thy  ground,  in 

1  Sa.  20.  31  as  the  son  of  Jesse  liveth  upon  the  ground 

2  Sa.  17.  12  light  upon  him  as  the  dew  fallethonthe  g. 
1  Ki.   7.  46  did  the  king  cast  them,  in  the  clay  gro. 

1  Ch.27.  26  the  work  of  the  field  for  tillage  of  the  gr. 

2  Ch.  4.  17  in  the  clay  ground  between  Succoth  and  Z, 
Keh.  10.  35  to  bring  the  first  fruits  of  our  ground,  and 

10.  37  the  tithes  of  our  ground  unto  the  Levites 

Job     5.   6  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  g. 

Psa.  105.  35  and  devoured  the  fruit  of  their  ground 

Isa.   28.  24  doth  he  open  and  break  the  clods,  of  hisg.V 

30.  23  that  thou  shalt  sow  the  ground  withal 

30.  24  the  young  asses  that  ear  the  ground  shall 


GROUND 


439 


GROW 


Jer.  7.  20  be  poured  out.  .upon  the  fruit  of  the  gr. 
14.-  4  the  ground  is  chapt,  for  there  was  no  rain 
25.  33  the  slain . .  shall  be  dung  upon  the  ground 

Hos.    2.  iS  (with)  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground 

Hag.   1.  11  upon  (that)  which  the  ground  bringeth  f. 

Mai;    3.  11  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your  gro. 

2.Earth,  (nx  erets. 

Gen.  iS.    2  ran.  .and  bowed  himself  toward  the  gro. 
19.    1  bowed  himself  with  his  face  toward  the  g. 
33.   3  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times 
38.    9  that  he  spilled  (it)  on  the  ground,  lest  that 
44.  14  and  they  fell  before  him  on  the  ground 
Exod.  9.  23  hail,  and  the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  gr. 
Deut  15.  23  thou  shalt  pour  it  upon  the  ground  as  w. 
28.  56  to  set.  .her  foot  upon  the  ground  for  del. 
■Judg.  4.  21  fastened  it  into  the  ground .  .so  he  died 
6.  39  and  upon  all  the  ground  let  there  be  dew 
6.  40  God  did  so.  .there  was  dew  on  all  the  gr. 

13.  20  and  fell  on  their  faces  to  the  ground 
Buth  2.  10  bowed  herself  to  the  ground,  and  said 

1  Sa.    3.  19  did  let  none  of  his  words  fall  to  the  gro. 
5.   4  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  ground  before 

14.  32  took  sheep,  .and  slew  (them)  on  the  gro. 
14.  45  there  shall  not  one  hair,  .fall  to  the  gro. 
20. 41  David,  .fell  on  his  face  tto  the  ground 

25.  23  Abigail,  .bowed  herself  to  the  ground 

26.  7  his  spear  stuck  in  the  ground  at  his  bol. 
28.  14  he  stooped  with  (his)  face  to  the  ground 

2_Sa.  2.  22  wherefore  should  I  smite  thee  to  the  gr.? 
8.  2  with  a  line,  casting  them  down  to  the  gr. 
14.  14  as  water  spilt  on  the  ground,  which  can. 
14.  22  Joab  fell  to  the  ground  on  his  face,  and 
14.  33  bowed  himself  on  his  face  to  the  ground 
18.  11  didst  thou  not  smite  him  there  to  the  g.? 
20. 10  and  shed  out  his  bowels  to  the  ground 

24.  20  bowed  himself,  .on  his  face  upon  the  gr. 
1  KX  1.  23  bowed  himself,  .with  his  face  to  the  gro. 
c  Ki.  2.  15  bowed  themselves  to  the  ground  before 

4.  37  bowed  herself  to  the  ground,  and  took  up 

1  Ch.21.  21  bowed,  .to  David  with,  .face  to  the  gro. 

2  Ch.  7.    3  they  bowed,  .with  their  faces  to  the  gro. 
Job     1.  20  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  and  worship. 

2.  13  So  they  sat  down  with  him  upon  the  gro. 
16.  13  he  poureth  out  my  gall  upon  the  ground 

18.  io  The  snare  (is)  laid  for  him  in  the  ground 
39.  24  He  swalloweth  the  ground  with  fierceness 

Psa.  74.  7  the  dwelling  place  of  thy  name  to  the  g. 
89.  39  hast  profaned  his  crown,  .to  the  ground 
89.  44  and  cast  his  throne  down  to  the  ground 
107.  35  He  turneth.  .dry  ground  into  water-spr. 
143.  3  hath  smitten  my  life  down  to  the  ground 
147.  6  he  casteth  the  wicked  down  to  the  ground 
Isa.     3.  26  and  she.  .desolate,  shall  sit  upon  the  gr. 

14. 12  (how)  art  thou  cut  down  to  the  ground 
21.   9  her  gods  he  hath  broken  unto  the  ground 

25.  12  bring  to  the  ground,  (even)  to  the  dust 

26.  5  he  layeth  it  low.  .to  the  ground  ;  he  brin. 
29.  4  And  thou,  .shalt  speak  out  of  the  ground 
29.  4  thy  voice  shall  be . .  out  of  the  ground,  and 
47.  1  0  virgin  daughter  of  B.,  sit  on  the  grou. 
51.  23  thou  hast  laid,  thy  body  as  the  ground 
53.    2  shall  grow  up . .  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  gr. 

Jer.  14.    2  the  gates,  .they  are  black  unto  the  grou. 

Lam.  2.    2  he  hath  brought,  .down  to  the  ground 
2.    9  Her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  ground  ;  he 
2.  10  The  elders . .  of  Zion . .  sit  upon  the  ground 
2.  10  virgins,  .hang  down  their  heads  to  the  g. 
2.  21  The  young  and  the  old  lie  on  the  ground 

Eze.  12.    6  cover  thy.  .that  thou  see  not  the  ground 

12.  12  that  he  see  not  the  ground  witrt(his)eyes 

13.  14  bring  it  down  to  the  ground,  so  that  the 

19.  12  she  was  cast  down  to  the  ground,  and  the 

19. 13  she  (is)  planted.. in  a  dry  and  thirsty  gr, 
24.    7  she  poured  it  not  upon  the  ground,  to 
26.  11  thy.  .garrisons  shall  go  down  to  the  gro. 

26. 16  they  shall  sit  upon  the  ground,  and  shall 

28. 17  I  will  cast  thee  to  the  ground,  I  will  lay 
38.  20  and  every  wall  shall  fall  to  the  ground 
41.  16  from  the  ground  up  to  the  windows,  and 
41. 20  From  the  ground  unto  above  the  door 
43.  14  And  from  the  bottom  (upon)  the  ground 

Dan.  8.  5  an  he  goat  came,  .and  touched  not  the 
8.  7  cast  him  down  to  the  ground,  and  stam. 
8.  10  it  cast  down,  .of  the  stars  to  the  ground 
8. 12  and  it  cast  down  the  truth  to  the  ground 
8.  18  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my  face  toward  the  g. 
10.  g  on  my  face,  and  my  face  toward  the  gro. 
io.  15  I  set  my  face  toward  the  ground,  and  I 

Amos  3.  14  horns,  .shall  be  cut  off,  and  fall  to  the  g. 

Obad.       3  Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground? 

Zech.  8. 12  the  ground  shall  give  her  increase,  and 

^.Portion,  fields  1&1  chelqaJi. 

2  Sa.  23.  12  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  ground,  and 
4.^1  cutting,  ploughing,,  t^'irt  charish. 

1  Sa.  8. 12  to  ear  his  ground,  and  to  reap  his  harvest 

5. Dust,  ~\5il  aphar. 

Job  14.   8  and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  ground 

6. Field,  plain,  n~fy  sadeh. 

Josh.24.  32  a  parcel  of  ground  which  Jacob  bought 
1  Sa.  14.  25  and  there  was  honey  upon  the  ground 
1  Ch.n.  13  where  was  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of  bar. 

YJsoil,  land.,  777  ge. 

Matt.  10.  29  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  [on  the  ground] 

13.    8  other  fell  into  good  ground,  and  brought 

13.  23  that  received  seed  into  the  good  ground 

15.  35  he  commanded,  .to  sit  down  on  the  gro. 

Hark  4.    8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  did  yield 

4.  20  are  they  which  are  sewn  on  good  ground 


Mark  4.  26  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  gro. 
8.    6  lie  commanded,  .to  sit  down  on  the  gro. 
9. 20  fell  on  the  ground,  and  wallowed  foam. 
14.  35  fell  on  the  ground,  and  prayed  that,  if 
Luke  8.    8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  sprang  up 
8. 15  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they,  which 
13.    7  cut  it  down  ;  why  cumbereth  it  the  gro.  ? 
22.  44  [drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  gro.] 
John  8.    6  [and  with  (his)  finger  wrote  on  the  grou.J 
8.    8  [he  stooped  down,  and  wrote  on  the  gro.] 
12. 24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  gr. 
Acts    7.  33  place  where  thou  standest  is  holy  grou. 
8. Ground,  bottom,  tScupos  edaj)hos. 

Acts  22.    7  I  fell  unto  the  giound,  and  heard  a  voice 
9. Basis,  foundation,  ISpaiayta  hedraioma. 

1  Ti.  3.  15  God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth 
10.  Space,  place,  x^Pa  chdra. 

Luke  12. 16  The  ground  of  a  certain  rich  man  brought 
GROUND,  to  lay  even  with  the  — 
To  lay  on  Hie  ground,  level,  i8a<plfa  edapfiizo. 

Lukeig.  44  shall  lay  thee  even  with  the  ground,  and 
GROUND,  on  or  to  the  — 
On  the  ground  or  earth,  x^at  chamaU 

John  9.    6  he  spat  on  the  ground,  and  made  clay  of 
18.    6  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  gro. 
GROUND,  parcel  or  piece  of  — 

1.  Spot,  place,  x(a?^ov  chorion. 

John  4.    5  to  the  parcel  of  ground  that  Jacob  gave 

2.  Field,  aypos  agros. 

Lukei4. lS  I  have  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and  I 
GROUND,  to  — 
To  lay  a  foundation,  6ep.e\tow  themelioo. 

Eph.    3,  17  ye,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love 

Col.     1.  23  If  ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded  and 
GROUNDED  — 
Any  thing  founded,  rnc'D  musadah. 

Isa.  30.  32  every  place  where  the  grounded  staff  shall 
[See  also  Corn,  dry  fallow,  parched.] 
GROVE  — 
\~A  tamarisk,  S^N  eshel. 

Gen.  21. 33  planted  a  grove  in  Eeer-sheba,  and  called 
2.  A  shrine,  ■"n'^x,  -tj^n  asherah. 

Exod34. 13  But  ye  shall,  .cut  down  their  groves 

Deut.  7.    5  cut  down  their  groves,  and  burn  their 
12.   3  break  their  pillars,  and  burn  their  groves 

16.  21  Thou  shalt  not  plant  thee  a  grove  of  any 
Judg.  3.    7  did  evil,  .and  served  Baalim  and  the  gr. 

6.  25  Take,  .and  cut  down  the  grove  that  (is) 
6. 26  a  burnt  sacrifice  with  the  wood  of  the  gr. 
6. 28  the  grove  was  cut  down  that  (was)  by  it 
6.  30  because  he  hath  cut  down  the  grove  that 

1  Ki.14. 15  because  they  have  made  their  groves,  pr. 

14.  23  built  them  high  places,  and  images.and  g. 

15. 13  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a  grove 
j6.  33  Ahab  made  a  grove  ;  and  Ahab  did  more 
18.  19  the  prophets  of  the  groves  four  hundred 

2  Ki.13.    6  there  remained  the  grove  also  in  Samaria 

17. 10  they  set  them  up  images  and  groves  in 
17. 16  made  a  grove,  and  worshipped  all  the 

18.  4  brake  the  images,  and  cut  down  the  gr. 
ex.   3  made  a  grove,  as  did  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
21.    7  he  set  a  graven  image  of  the  grove  that 
23.    4  vessels .  .made  for  Baal,  and  for  the  grove 
23.    6  he  brought  out  the  grove  from  the  house 
23.    7  where  the  women  wove  hangings  for  the  g. 

23. 14  brake,  .the  images,  and  cut  down  the  gr. 
23.  15  burned  the  high  place . .  and  burned  the  g. 

2  Ch.14.   3  brake,  .the  images,  and  cut  down  the  gr. 
15. 16  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a  grove 

17.  6  took  away  the  high  places  and  groves 

19.  3  in  that  thou  hast  taken  away  the  groves 

24. 18  And  they,  .served  groves  and  idols  :  and 
31.    1  brake  the  images,  .and  cut  down  the  gr. 

33.  3  reared  up  altars  for  Baablm,  and  made  g. 

33. 19  set  up  groves  and  graven  images,  before 

34.  3,  4  and  the  groves,  and  the  carved  images 
34.    7  had  broken  down  the  altars  and  the  gro. 

Isa.    17.   8  respect,  .either  the  groves  or  the  images 
27.    9  the  groves  and  images  shall  not  stand 

Jer.   17.   2  remember  their  altars  and  their  groves 

Mie.   5.  14  I  will  pluck  up  thy  groves  out  of  the 
GROW,  to  — 
l.To  be  or  become  great,  bin  gadal. 

Gen.  21.   8  And  the  child  grew,  and  was  weaned  :  and 

21. 20  he  grew,  and  dwelt  in  the  wilderness 
25.  27  the  boys  grew  ;  and  Esau  was  a  cunning 

Exod.  2.  10  the  child  grew,  and  she  brought  him 
Judgi3.  24  the  child  grew,  and  the  Lord  blessed 
1  Sa.  2.  2t  the  child  Samuel  grew  before  the  LORD 
3. 19  Samuel  grew,  and  the  Lord  was  with 

l.To  increase  greatly  {as  fish),  nni  dagah. 

Gen.  48. 16  let  them  grow  into  a  multitude  in  the 

3.  To  go  on,  ^b;  yalak. 

Jer.   12.   2  they  grow,  yea,  they  bring  forth  fruit 

4.  To  go  out  or  forth,  r$;  yatsa. 

Job  31.  40  Let  thistles  grow  instead  of  wheat,  and 

5.  To  be  or  become  jinn,  ps;  yatsaq. 

Job  38.  38  When  the  dust  groweth  into  hardness 
6. To  go  up,  nhy  alah. 

Deut  29.  23  it  is  not  sown,  .nor  any  grass  groweth 


Isa.    53.    2  he  shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a  tender 
Eze.  47.  12  on  this  side  and  on  that  side,  shall  grow 
7. To  be  fruitful,  niQ  parah. ' 

Gen.  47.  27  Israel,  -grew,  and  multiplied  exceedingly 
Isa.    11.    1  and  a  Eranch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots 

8.  To  flourish,  break  forth,  m$  p&rach. 

Lev.  13.  39  it  (is)  a  freckled  spot  (that)  groweth  in 
Hos.  14.    5  he  shall  grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth 
14.    7  they  shall  revive  (as)  the  corn,  andgrowas 

9.  To  break  or  burst  forth,  y\3  pa/rats. 

Exod. 1.  12  But.. the  more  they  multiplied  and  grew 

10.  To  shut  or  spring  forth,  nby  tsamach. 

Gen.    2.    5  and  every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew 
Exod  10.    5  shall  eat  every  tree  which  groweth  foryou 
Job     8.  19  and  out  of  the  earth  shall  others  grow 
Eze.  1 7.    6  it  grew,  and  became  a  spreading  vine  of 

11.  To  become  great,  ny~t  rebah. 

Dan.  4. 11  The  tree  grew,  and  was  strong,  and  the 
4. 20  The  tree  that  thou  sawest,  which  grew 

12.  To  become  great,  rfajp  sagah. 

Psa.  92. 12  he  shall  grow  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 
13.7b  become  great,  ali?  sega. 

Ezra  4.  22  why  should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of 
li.To  increase,  grow  up,  av£dvai  auxano. 
Matt.  6.  2S  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they  grow 

13.  32  when  it  is  grown,  it  is  the  greatest  amo. 

Luke  1.  So  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  spi. 

2. 40  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  spi. 

12.  27  Consider  the  lilies  how  they  grow :  they 

13.  19  it  grew,  and  waxed  a  great  tree  ;  and  the 
Acts    7.  17  the  people  grew  and  multiplied  in  Egypt 

12.  24  But  the  word  of  God  grew  and  multipL 
19.  20  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and 
Eph.   2.  21  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord 

1  Pe.   2.    2  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  ther. 

2  Pe.  3. 18  grow  in  grace,  and  (in)  the  knowledge  of 

15.  To  begin  to  be,  become,  yivofxai  ginomai.   . 
Matt  21. 19  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward 
Acts    5.  24  they  doubted.. whereunto  this  would  gr. 

16.  To  come  or  go,  epxo/xat  erchomai. 

Mark  5.  26  was  nothing-bettered,  but  rather  grew 

GROW  again,  to  — 

To  shoot  or  spring  vp,  riD^t  tsamach,  3. 

Judg  16.  22  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  again 

GROW  exceedingly,  to  — 

To  increase  exceedingly,  inrepav^dfoj  huper auxano. 
2  Th.  1.    3  because  that  your  faith  groweth  exceed. 

GROW,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  shoot  or  spring  up,  rev  tsamach,  5. 
Psa.  104.  14  He  causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cat. 

GROW  long,  to  — 

To  send  forth,  njS*  shalach,  3. 

Eze.  44.  20  nor  suffer  their  locks  to  grow  long;  they 

GROW,  to  make  (to)  — 

l.To  make  great,  nourish,  Via  gadal,  3. 

Jon.    4. 10  hast  not  laboured,  neither  madest  it  grow 
2.  To  cause  to  shoot  or  spring  up,  n££  tsamach,  5. 

Gen,    2.    9  out  of  the  ground  made.  .God  to  grow 

2  Sa.  23.    5  (my)desire.althouglxhemake(it)nottog. 

Psa.  147.    8  who  maketh  grass  to  grow  upon  the  mo. 

Z.To  cause  to  grow,  Mb  sug,  Sa. 

Isa.  17.  11  In  the  day.,  make  thy  plant  to  grow,  and 

GROW  (of  selves),  such  things  as  — 

Self-sown  grain,  spontaneous  growth,  n*3d  saphidch. 
2  Ki.  19.  29  thisyearsuch  things  asgrow  of  themselves 
Job  14.  ig  thou  washest  away  the  things  which  grow 
Isa.  37.  30  eat  (this)  year  such  as  groweth  of  itself 

GROW  to  an  end,  to  — 

To  incline,  decline,  ~:n  chanah. 

Judgig.   9  behold,  the  day  groweth  to  an  end ;  lodge 
GROW  together,  to  — 
To  increase  together,  o-vvav^avaj  sunauxand. 

Matti3.  30  Let  both,  grow  together  until  the  harvest 
GROW  up,  to  — 

1.  To  rise,  triumph,  nxa  gaah. 

Job     8. 11  Can  the  rush  grow  up  without  mire?  can 

2.  To  be  or  become  great,  grow  vp,  bin  gadal. 
Judg  1 1.    2  his  wife's  sons  grew  up,  and  they  thrust 
2  Sa.  12.    3  it  grew  up  together  with  him,  and  with 

Z.To  change,  pass  on,  f^n  cluilaph. 

Psa.  00.    5  (they  are)  like  grass  (which)  groweth  up 
90.   6  themorningitfiourisheth.andgrowethup 

4.  To  increase,  IMS  push. 

Mai.   4.    2  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves 
5. To  shoot  or  spring  up,  n~>*  tsamach. 

Zech.  6.  12  he  shall  grow  up  oui.  of  his  place,  and  he 
6.T0  become  great,  rr^i  rabah. 

Job  39.   4  Their  young  ones,  .grow  up  with  corn 

7.  To  draw  out  or  off,  pass  on,  change,  *fr$  shalaph. 

Psa.129.   6  grass,  .withereth  afore  it  groweth  up 

8.  To  go  vp,  avafiaivto  anabaino. 

Mark  4.   7  the  thorn3  grew  up,  and  choked  it,  and 
4.  32  when  it  is  sown,  it  groweth  up,  and  bee. 


GROW 


440 


GUTTER 


9.  To  increase,  av£dva>  auxano. 

Eph.   4.  15  may  grow  up  into  him  in  all  things,  wh. 
10.  To  lengthen,  grow  up,  /j.7}kvv(i)  mekuno. 

Mark  4.  27  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he 
GROW  up,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cause  to  shoot  or  spring  up,  nsy  tsamach,  5. 

Jer.  33.  15  will  I  cause  the  Branch,  .to  grow  up  un. 
GROWETH  of  its  own  accord  or  of  itself,  which  — 
Self-sown  grain,  spontaneous  growth.  n*2D  saphiach. 

Lev.  25.    5  That  which  groweth  of  its  own  accord  of 
25.  11  neither  reap  that  which  groweth  of  itself 

GROWN,  to  be  — 

I. To  be  or  become  great,  Via  gadal. 

Gen.  38.  11  Remain,  .till  Shelah  my  son  be  grown 

38.  14  she  saw  that  Shelah  was  grown,  and  she 
Exod.  2.  11  it  came  to  pass,  .when  Moses  was  grown 
Ruth  1.  13  Would  ye  tarry,  .till  they  were  grown? 

2  Ki.  4.  18  when  the  child  was  grown,  it  fell  on  a 

2.  To  shoot  or  spring  up,  roy  tsamach,  3. 

2  Sa.  10.    5  Tarry  .  .until  your  beards  be  grown,  and 

1  Ch.19.    5  Tarry .  .until  your  beards  be  grown,  and 
Eze.  16.    7  thine  hair  U  grown,  whereas  thou  (wast) 

3.  To  be  or  become  great,  rt^ri  rebah. 

Dan.    4.  22  It  (is)  thou,  0  king,  that  art  grown  and 
4.  22  thy  greatness  is  grown,  and  reacheth 
4.  33  till  his  hairs  were  grown  like  eagles'  (fe). 

GROWN  fat,  to  be  — 
To  increase,  ens  push. 

Jer.  50. 11  because  ye  are  grown  fat  as  the  heifer  at 
GROWN  over,  to  be  — 
Togo  up,  rhj  alah, 

Prov  24.  31  And,  lo,  it  was  all  grown  over  with  thorns 
GROWN  up  — 
Standing  corn,  stalk,  riDf?  qamah. 

2  Ki.  19.  26  and  (as  corn)  blasted  before  ft  be  grown  up 
Isa.  37.  27  and  (as  corn)  blasted  before  it  be  grown  up 

GROWN  up,  to  be  — 

\.To  be  or  become  great,  Via  gadal. 

1  Ki.  12.    8,  10  the  young  men  that  were  grown  up 
Ezra  9.    6  our  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heav. 

2.To  become  great,  be  nourished,  *?ia  gadal,  4. 
Psa.144.  12  (may  be)  as  plants  grown  up  in  their  yo. 

3.  To  shoot  or  spring  up,  nr?>*  tsamach. 

Lev.  13.  37  if .  .there  is  black  hair  grown  up  therein 
GROWN  up,  not  — 
Late,  behind,  not  grown  up,  S'SK  aphil. 

Exod.  9.  32  wheat  and  the  rye . .  (were)  not  grown  up 
GROWTH,  latter  — 
Scattering,  latter  growth,  £;£7  leqesli. 

Amos  7.     1  of  the  shooting  up  of  the  latter  growth 
7.    1  the  latter  growth  after  the  king's  mowi. 

GRUDGE,  to  — 

l.To  murmw,  p?,  Ji1?  lun,  Un. 

Psa.  59.  -15  wander. .  and  grudge  if  they  be  not  satis. 
2. To  groan,  sigh,  o-rzvafa  stenazo. 

Jas.    5.   9  Grudge  not  one  against  another,  brethren 
GRUDGE,  to  bear  — 
To  keep  anger,  *iuj  natar. 

Lev.  19.  18  Thou  shalt  not.  .bear  any  grudge  against 
GRUDGING  — 
Grudging,  murmuring,  yoyyvapos  gnygusmos. 

1  Pe.  4.    9  Use  hospitality  one  to  another  without  [g.] 
GRUDGINGLY  — 

Out  of  grief,  £k  Avwws  ek  lupes. 

2  Co.   9.  7  not  grudgingly,  or  of  necessity :  for  God 
GUARD  — 

hSlaughterei;  butcher,  n^ta  tabbach. 

Gen.  37.  36  Egypt  unto  Potiphar.  .captain  of  thegua. 

39.  1  captain  of  the  guard,  an  Egyptian  bought 

40.  3  in  the  house  of  the  captain  of  the  guard 

40.  4  the  captain  of  the  guard  charged  Joseph 
4r.  10  in  ward  in  the  captain  of  the  guard's  ho. 

41.  12  servant  to  the  captain  of  the  guard  ;  and 
2  Ki.25.    8,  11,  20  Nebuzar-adan,  captain  of  the  gu. 

25.  ro  that  (were)  with  the  captain  of  the  guard 
25.  12  the  captain  of  the  guard  left  of  the  poor 
25.  15  silver,  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  away 
25.  18  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Seraiah  the 
Jer  39.  9, 10, 1 1, 13  Nebuzar-adan . .  captain  of  the  g. 
40.  1  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  let  him  go 
40.    2  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Jeremiah 

40.  5  So  the  captain  of  the  guard  gave  him 

41.  10  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  committed 
43.  6  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  left  with 
52.  12  came  Nebuzar-adan,  captain  of  the  guard 
52.  14  that  (were)  with  the  captain  of  the  guard 
52. 15  captain  of  the  guard  carried  away  captive 
52.  16  the  captain  of  the  guard  left  (certain)  of 
52.  19  silver,  took  the  captain  of  the  guard  away 
52.  24  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Seraiah  the 
52.  26  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  them,  and 
52.  30  the  captain  of  the  guard  carried  away  c. 

Dan.    2.  14  to  Arioch  the  captain  of  the  king's  guard 
2.Guard,  ny^c'p  mishmaath. 

2  Sa.  23.  23  three  :  and  David  set  him  over  his  guard 
1  Ch.  1 1.  25  three  :  and  David  set  him  over  his  guard 


3.  Watch,  "ID^D  mishmar. 

Neh.  4.  22  that  in  the  night  they  may  be  a  guard  to 

4.  23  the  men  of  the  guard  which  followed  me 

Eze.  38.    7  prepare,  .and  be  thou  a  guard  unto  them 

4.  To  run,  pn  ruts. 

1  Ki.14.  27  unto  the  hands  of  the  chief  of  the  guard 

14.  28  was  (so)  that  the  guard  bear  them,  and 
14.  28  brought  them  back  into  the  guard  cham. 

2  Ki.io.  25  Jehu  said  to  the  guard  and  to  the  capta. 

10.  25  the  guard  and  the  captains  cast  (them) 

11.  4  with,  the  captains  and  the  guard,  and  br. 
11.  6  a  third  part  at  the  gate  behind  the  guard 
11. 11  the  guard  stood,  every  man  with  his  we. 

11.  13  when  Athaliah  heard  the  noise  of  the  g. 
11. 19  the  guard,  and  all  the  people  of  the  land 
11. 19  came  by  the  way  of  the  gate  of  the  guard 

2  Ch.12.  10  to  the  hands  of  the  chief  of  the  guard 

12.  11  entered,  .the  guard  came  and  fetched 
12.  11  brought  them  again  into  the  guard  cha. 

GUD  GO'-DAH,  rnin;i  incision. 

A  station  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  near  Ezion- 
geber  between  Mosera  and  Jotbath  :  perhaps  the  same 
as  Hor-nagidgad  in  Num.  33.  32,  33. 

Deut  10.    7  From  thence  they  journeyed  unto  G. 
10.    7  and  from  G.  to  Jotbath,  a  land  of  rivers 

GUEST  — 

1.  To  call,  invite,  *c$  qara. 

1  Ki.  1.  41,  49  and  all  the  guests  that  (were)  with 
Prov,  9.  18  that)  her  guests  (are)  in  the  depths  of 
Zeph.  1.    7  prepared  a  sacrifice,  he  hath  bid  his  guests 

2. To  be  laid  up,  received  as  a  guest,  av&KGtpat. 
Matt22.  10  and  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  gu. 
22. 11  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests 

GUEST,  to  be  — 

To  loose  doxon,  rest,  KaraXvw  kataluo.         * 
Luke  1 9.    7  to  be  guest  with  a  man  that  is  a  sinner 

GUEST  CHAMBER  — 

Place  for  resting,  khan,  Kar&Kvpa  kataluma. 

Marki4.  14  Where  is  theguest  chamber,  where  I  shall 
Luke22.  1 1  Where  is  the  guest  chamber,  where  I  shall 

GUIDE  — 

1. Leader,  chief,  f|Vk,  r^x  alluph. 

Psa.  55.  13  thou, 'a  man  mine  equal,  my  guide,  and 
Prov.  2. 17  Which  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  youth 
Jer.     3.    4  My  father,  thou  (art)  the  guide  of  my  y.? 
Mio.   7.   5  put  ye  not  confidence  in  a  guide ;  keep 

2.  Captain,  ruler,  judge,  PVR  qatsin. 

Prov.  6.    7  Which  having  no  guide,  overseer,  or  ruler 
d.Guide,  conductor,  dbnyvs  hodegos. 

Matt23-  16  Woe  unto  you,  (ye)  blind  guides,  which 

23.  24  (Ye)  blind  guides,  which  strain  at  a  gnat 
Acts  1.  16  which  was  guide  to  them  that  took  Jesus 
Rom.  2.  19  thou  thyself  art  a  guide  of  the  blind,  a 

GUIDE,  to  — 

l.To  make  or  declare  happy,  1£;n  ashar,  3. 

Prov.23. 19  be  wise,  and  guide  thine  heart  in  the  way 

2.  To  cause  to  tread,  TT?  darak,  5. 

Psa.  25.  9  The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment;  and 

3.  To  counsel,  ry;  yaats. 

Psa.  32.   8  shall  go  :  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine  eye 

4.To  sustain,  fna  kul,  Sa. 

Psa.  1 12.   5  he  will  guide  his  affairs  with  discretion 
5. To  lead,  drive,  arrj  nahag,  3. 

Psa.  78.  52  guided  them  in  the  wilderness  like  a  flock 

6.  To  lead,  tend,  Snj  nahal,  3. 

Exodis.  13  thou  hast  guided,  .in  thy  strength  unto 

2  Ch.32.  22  Lord  saved,  .and  guided  them  on  every 
Psa.  31.  3  for  thy  name's  sake  lead  me,  and  guide 
Isa.   49.  10  by  the  springs  of  water  shall  he  guide 

51.  18  none  to  guide  her  among  all  the  sons 

7. To  lead  forth,nm  netchah. 

Isa.  5S.  11  Loup  shall  guide  thee  continually,  and 

8.  To  lead  forth,  nm  nachah,  5. 

Job  31.18  I  have'guided  her  from  my  mother's  wo. 

38.  32  or  canst  thou  guide  Arcturus  with  his  s.? 
Psa.  73.  24  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy  counsel 

78.  72  guided  them  by  the  skilfuluess  of  his  ha. 
Prov  11.    3  The  integrity  of  the  upright  shall  guide 

9.  To  guide  straight,  KarevQvvw  kateuthuno. 
Luke  1.  79  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace 

10.  To  show  the  way,  guide,  dUnyw  hodegeo. 
John  :6.  13  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth 
Acts    8.  31  How  can  I,  except  some  man.,  guide  me 

GUTDE,  to  be  — 

To  lead,  anj  nahag,  3. 

Psa.  48. 14  this  God.  .he  will  bo  our  guide,  .unto  de. 
GUILE  — 
1. Deceit,  riD*ip  mirmah. 

Psa.  34.  i3Keep..fromevil..thylipsfromspeakingg. 
55.  11  deceit  and  guile  depart  not  from  her  str. 

2.Craftiness,  subtiUy,  nip"]jj  ormah. 

Exodsi.  14  if  a  man  come,  .to  slay  him  with  guile 
3. Deceit,  sloth,  .Tpi  remiyi/ah. 

Psa.  32.   2  the  man.  .in  whose  spirit  (there  is)nogu. 

4. Bait,  guile,  S6\os  dolos. 

John  1.  47  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  jruile  ! 


2  Co.i2. 16  But.  .being  crafty,  I  caught  you  with  gu. 
1  Th.  2.    3  For  our  exhortation  (was)  not.  .in  guile 

1  Pe.  2.    1  laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and 

2.  22  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
3. 10  and  his  lips  that  they  speak  no  guile 
Rev.  14.   5  in  their  mouth  was  found  no  [guile] :  for 

GUILTINESS  — 

Guilt-,  c*^n  asham.  * 

Gen.  26.  10  shouldest  have  brought  guiltiness  upon 

GUILTLESS  — 

1. Innocent,  free,  acquitted,  'pj  naqi. 

Nuni32.  22  shall  return,  and  be  guiltless  before  the 
Josh.  2.  19  bis  blood,  .upon  his  head,  and  we.  .guilt. 

2  Sa.    3.  28  and  my  kingdom  (are)  guiltless  before 

14.   9  and  the  king  and  his  throne  (be)  guiltless 

2.  Without  a  crime,  guiltless,  ava'ntos  anailios. 

Matt  12.  7  ye  would  not  have  condemned  the  guilt. 
GUILTLESS,  to  be  — 
To  be  innocent,  free,  n[j:  naqah,  2. 

Num.  5.  31  Then  shall  the  man  be  guiltless  from  ini. 

1  Sa.  26.   9  against  the  LORD'S  anointed,  and  be  gui.? 

GUILTLESS,  to  hold  — 

To  declare  innocent,  npj  naqah,  3. 

Exod2o.    7  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  ta. 
Deut.  5. 11  Lord  will  not  hold  (him)  guiltless  that 
1  Ki.   2.    9  Now  therefore  hold  him  not  guiltless 

GUILTY  — 

1.  Guilty,  □'^x  ashem. 

Gen.  42.  21  We  (are)  verily  guilty  concerning  our  br. 
Ezra  10.  19  guilty,  (they  offered)  a  ram  of  the  flock 

2.  Wicked,  yy~i  rasha. 

Num  35.  31  for  the  life  of  a  murderer,  which  (is)  gui. 

3.  Under  justice,  vwAo'ikos  hupodikos. 

Rom.  3.  19  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  G. 
GUILTY,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  guilty,  Db;n  asham. 

Lev.    4.  13,  22  which  should  not  be  done,  and  are  g. 

4.  27  which  ought  not  to  be  done,  and  be  gui. 

5.  2  he  also  shall  be  unclean,  and  guilty 

5.   3  when  he  knoweth.  .then  he  shall  be  gui. 
5.    4  then  he  shall  be  guilty  in  one  of  these 

5.  5  it  shall  be,  when  he  shall  be  guilty  in 
5. 17  though  he  wist  (it)  not,  yet  is  he  guilty 

6.  4  because  he  hath  sinned,  and  is  guilty 
Num.  5.   6  against  the  Lord,  and  that  person  be  gu. 
Judg  21.  22  ye  did  not  give,  .(that)  ye  should  be  guil. 

2.  To  owe,  be  indebted,  6<pelKu>  ophe.Uo. 

Matt 23. 18  swearethby  the  gift,  .upon  it,  he  is  guilty 

GUILTY  of  — 

Held  in,  subject  to,  ivovos  enochos. 

Matt  26.  66  What  thins  ye  ? . .  He  is  guilty  of  death 
Mark  14.  64  all  condemned  him  to  be  guilty  of  death 
1  Co.  11.  27  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Jas.     2. 10  yet  offend  in  one . .  he  is  guilty  of  all 

GUILTY,  to  become,  be  found,  hold  self  — 

To  be  guilty,  □¥*«  asham. 

Prov  30. 10  lest  he  curse  thee,  and  thou  be  found  guil. 
Eze.  22.  4  Thou  art  become  guilty  in  thy  blood  that 
Zech  1  r.    5  hold  themselves  not  guilty  :  aud  they  that 

GULF  — 

A  chasm,  rent,  xd-o'/xa  chasma. 

Lukei6.  26  between  us.  .there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed 
GU'-NI,  'jia  protected. 

1.  A  son  of  Naphtali,  founder  of  the  family  of  the 
Gunites.     B.C.  1697. 

Gen.  46.  24  Jahzeel,  and  G.,  and  Jezer,  and  Shillem 
Num  26.  48  sons  of  Naphtali . .  of  G.,  the  family  of  the 
1  Ch.  7.  13  Jahziel,  and  G.,  and  Jezer,  and  Shallum 

2.  Father  of  Abdiel  a  chief  man  of  Gad.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  5. 15  Ahi  the  son  of  Abdiel,  the  son  of  G. 
GU-NITES,   »jug 

The  family  of  Giuai,  son  of  Naphtali. 

Num 26.  48  Naphtali.  .of  Guni,  the  family  of  the  G. 
GUR,  TH  dwelling,  lion's  whelp. 
"The  going  up  to  Gut"  (i.e.  "the  Ascent  or  steep  of 
Gur"  or  of  the  lion's  whelp),  a  rising  ground  at  which 
Ahaziah  was  slain  by  Jehu.     It  was  at  Ibleani,  between 
Jezreel  and  Beth-haggan,  the  present  Jenin. 

2  Ki.   9.  27  (And  they  did  so)  at  the  going  up  to  G. 
GUR  BA'-AL,  Vys-m  divelling  of  Baal. 

A  place  between  Canaan  and  the  Arabian  peninsula. 

2  Ch.26.    7  against  the  Arabians  that  dwelt  in  G.-b. 
GUSH  out,  to  — 
1 .  To  flow,  issue,  3"  zuh. 

Psa.  78.  20  smote  the  rock,  that  the  waters  gushed  o. 
105.  41  opened  the  rock,  and  the  water  gushed  o. 

Isa.   48.  21  clave  the  rock,  .the  waters  gushed  out 

2.Toflow,  S\i  nazal. 

Jer.    9.  i8and  our  eyelids  gush  out  with  waters 

3.  To  shed,  or  pour  out,  "%$y  shrtphak, 

1  Ki.  18.  28  cut  themselves,  .till  the  blood  gushed  o. 

4.  To  pour  out  or  forth,  £kxvvw  ekchuno. 

Acts    1. 18  he  burst,  .and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out 
GUTTER  — 
1.  Waterspout,  Tffl?  Isinnor.   * 

2  Sa.  5.    8  Whosoever  gettetk  up  to  the  gutter,  and 


HA 


441 


HAGAB 


2. Gutter,  trough,  vrnrahat. 

Gen.  30.  38  he  set  the  rods,  .in  the  gutters  in  the  w. 
30.  41  Jacob  laid  the  rods.,  in  the  gutters,  that 


HA  — 

He-ah,  nxn  heach. 

Job  39I  25  He  saith  among  the  trumpets,  Ha,  ha  ! 

HA-A-HASH-TA'-RI,  nj^nxrr  the  courier. 
The  Ahashtarite,  a  man  or  a  family  descended  from 
Ashur  father  of  Tekoa,  by  his  second  wife  Naarah. 
B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  4.    6Naarahbare..Hepher,audTerneni,andH. 
HA-BA'-IAH,  HJ3D  Jah  is  protection. 
The  Bene-Chabajati  were  among  the  sons  of  the  priests 
who  returned  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  6r  the  children  of  H.,  the  children  of  Koz 

Neh.  7.    63  And  of  the  priests :  the  children  of  H. 
HA-BAK'-KITK,  piparj  love's  embrace. 
A  prophet  in  Judah  whose  parentage,  birthplace,  and 
era  are  unrecorded.    b".C.  626. 

Hab.  1.    1  The  burden  which  H.  the  prophet  did  see 
3.    1  A  prayer  of  H.  the  prophet  upon  Shigio. 
HA-BA-ZLN'-IAH,  rt*3?3n. 

The  head  of  the  family  of  the  Rechabites.  His  descen- 
dant Jaazeniah  was  chief  among  them  in  the  days  of 
Jeremiah.    B.C.  660. 

Jer-    35-    3  the  son  of  Jeremiah,  the  son  of  H.,  and 
HABERGEON  — 
l.Coat  of  mail  n*")?>  shiryah. 

Job  41.  26  the  spear,  the  dart,  nor  the  habergeon 
2.Coat  of  mail,  p*TJ  shiryon. 

2  Ch.26.  14  spears,  and  helmets,  and  habergeons,  and 

Neh.   4.  16  the  sliields,  and  the  bows,  and  the  haber. 

3.-4  Unen  coat  of  mail,  iX"inn  tacliara. 

Exod28.  32  as  it  were  the  hole  of  an  habergeon,  that 
39.  23  And . .  an  hole . .  as  the  hole  of  an  habergeon 
HABITABLE  part  — 
Fruitful  or  habitable  place,  73PI  tebel. 

Prov.  8.  31  Rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  his  e. 
HABITATION  — 
1.  Place  of  sojourn,  habitation,  m-13  geruth. 

Jer.  41.  17  habitation  of  Chimham,  which  is  by  Beth. 
^.Habitation,  *?3T,  bM]  zebul. 

2  Ch.  6.    2  I  have  built  an  house  of  habitation  for 

Isa.   63.  15  behold  from  the  habitation  of  thy  holi. 

Hab.  3.  11  sun.  .moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation 

S.Toicer,  rrva  tirah. 

Psa.  69.  25  Let  their  habitation  be  desolate,  .let 
A.To  sit  doxon  or  still,  dwell,  3#;  yashab. 

Psa.  33.  14  From  the  place  of  his  habitation  he  look. 

Jer.     9.    6  Thine  habitation  (is)  in  the  midst  of  dec. 

Obad.        3  whose  habitation  (is)  high  ;  that  saith  in 

5. Seat,  dioelling  place,  3i?iD  moshab. 

Gen.  36. 43  according  to  their  habitations  in  the  land 

Exodi2.  20  in  all  your  habitations  shall  ye  eat  unlea, 

35.   3  shall  kindle  no  fire  throughout  your  hab. 

Lev.  13.  46  dwell  alone  ;  without  the  camp,  .his  hab. 

23.  17  Ye  shall  bring  out  of  your  habitations  two 

Numi5.    2  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  your  ha. 

1  Ch.    4. 33  These,  .their habitations,  and  their  gene. 

7.  28  their  possessions  and  habitations.. Beth. 

Psa.  107.    7  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habitation 

107.  36  that  they  may  prepare  a  city  for  habitati. 

132.  13  the  Lord,  .hath  desired  (it)  for  his  habit. 

Eze.    6. 14  make,  .desolate,  .in  all  their  habitations 

6. Fixed  place,  base,  }i3i3  makon. 

Psa.  89.  14  Justice  and  judgment  (are)  the  habitation 
97.   12  righteousness  and  judgment  (are)  the  h. 
7. Preparation,  birth,  habitation,  rn*30  mekurah. 

Eze.  29.  14  return,  .into  the  land  of  their  habitation 
8. Espoused,  rnso  mekcrah. 

Gen.  49.  5  Instruments  of  cruelty  (are  in)  their  hab. 
9. Habitation,  pys  maon. 

Deut26. 15  Look  down  from  thy  holy  habitation,  from 

1  Sa.    2.  29  which  I  have  commanded  (in  my)  habit. 

2.  32  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  (in  my)  habitat. 

1  Ch.  4.  41  and  the  habitations  that  were  found  there 
Psa.  26.    8  I  have  loved  the  habitation  of  thy  house 

68.  s  A  father,  .(is)  God  in  his  holy  habitation 
71.  3  Be  thou  my  strong  habitation,  whereunto 
91.   9  hast-imade.  .the  most  high,  thy  habitation 

Jer.  25.  30  and  utter  his  voice  from  his  holy  habita. 

Zech.  2.  13  for  he  is  raised  up  out  of  his  holy  habit. 
10. Habitation,  rrjiya  meonah. 

Jer.  21.  13  or  who  shall  enter  into  our  habitations  ? 

11.  Settled  dwelling  place,  }|^p  mishkan. 

2  Ch.29.    6  turned  away  their  faces  from  the  habita. 
Psa.  78.  28  let  (it)fall .  .round  about  their  habitations 

132.    5  an  habitation  for  the  mighty  (God)  of  Ja. 
Isa.   22.  16  graveth  an  habitation  for  himself  in  a 
54.    2  stretch  forth  the  curtains  of  thine  habit. 

12.  Settled  dwelling  place,  |3^0  mishlcan. 

Ezra  7.15  God  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  (is)  in  Jer. 
lo.Comely  or  resting  place,  nxj  naah. 

Psa.  74.  20  dark  places  of  the  earth  are  full  of  the  h. 

56 


Jer.    9. 10  and  for  the  habitations  of  the  wilderness 
25.  37  the  peaceable  habitations  are  cut  down 
Lam.  2.    2  Lord  hath  swallowed  up  all  the  habitat. 
Amos  1.   2  the  habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall 

H.Comely  or  resting  place,  nu  navah. 

Job     8.    6  make  the  habitation  of  thy  righteousness 

15.  Comely  or  resting  place,  rm  naveh. 

Exod  15.  13  guided,  .in  thy  strength  unto  thy  holy  h. 
2  Sa.  15.  25  and  show  me  (both)  it  and  his  habitation 
Job  5.  3  the  foolish .  .suddenly  I  cursed  his  habit. 
5. 24  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habitation,  and  shalt 
18.  15  brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his  h. 
Prov.  3.  33  but  he  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just 
Isa.   27.  10  the  habitation  forsaken,  and  left  like  a 

32.  18  my  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  ha. 

33.  20  thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  h. 

34.  13  an  habitation  of  dragons,  .a  court  for  owls 

35.  7  in  the  habitation  of  dragons,  where  each 
Jer.    10.  25  and  have  made  his  habitation  desolate 

25.  30  he  shall  mightily  roar  upon  his  habitation 
31.  23  The  Lord  bless  thee,  O  habitation  of  jus. 
33.  12  shall  be  an  habitation  of  shepherds  caus. 
49.  19  come,  .against  the  habitation  of  the  str. 

49.  20  shall  make  their  habitations  desolate 

50.  7  Lord,  the  habitation  of  justice,  even  the 
50. 19  I  will  bring  Israel  again  to  his  habitation 
50.  44  come  up.  .unto  the  habitation  of  thi.  str. 
50.  45  shall  make  (their)  habitation  desolate 

16.Setiled  dioelling  place,  }3:?  sheken. 

Deut  12.    5  unto  his  habitation  shall  ye  seek,  and 
17. Fold,  €irav\ts  epaulis. 

Acts    1.  20  Let  his  habitation  be  desolate,  and  let  no 
18.  Place  of  habitation,  Ka.ToiKrjT7}piov  katoiketerion. 

Eph.    2.  22  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God 

Rev.  18.    2  Babylon,  .is  become  the  habitation  of 

19. .-1  dioelling  house,  KaroiKia  katoikia. 

Acts  17. 26  determined,  .the  bounds  of  their  habita. 
20. Habitati 'on,  oIkt)tt)plov  oiketerion. 

Jude       6  angels  which . .  left  their  own  habitation 
21.  Tent,  tabernacle,  GRnv-i)  skene. 

Lukei6.   9  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  h. 
HABITATION,  to  have  — 
l.To  settle  doion,  rest,  ]yy  shaken. 

Psa.104.  12  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  have  their  habit. 
2.  To  settle  down,  rest,  ]iy  sliekan. 

Dan.   4.  21  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  had  their  habit. 
HABITATION,  to  prepare  an  — 
To  make  to  rest,  mi  navah,  5. 

Exod.  15.  2  my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  him  an  hab. 
HA'-BOR,  -n^n  united. 

The  affluent  of  the  Euphrates  called  by  Strabo,  Ab- 
horras ;  by  Isidore,  Aburas ;  and  by  Pliny  and  Ptolemy, 
Chaboras.  It  still  bears  the  name  of  Khabour,  which 
was  inserted  in  an  Assyrian  inscription  in  the  9th 
century  before  our  era.    See  Chebar. 

2  Ki.  17.    6  placed  them  in .  .Habor  (by)  the  river  of 
18.  11  put  them .  .in  H.  (by)  the  river  of  Gozan 

1  Ch.  5.  26  brought  them  unto.  .H.,  and  Hara,  and 

HA-CHAL'-IAH,  n;b^u  Ja&  w  hidden. 
Father  of  Nehemiah  the  Tirshatha.     B.C.  476. 

Neh.    1.  1  The  words  of  Nehemiah  the  son  of  H. 
10.    1  those  that  sealed  (were),  .the  son  of  H. 

HA-CHf-T.AH,  nVsq  drought. 

A  hill  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph, 
facing  the  Jeshimon  (i.e.  waste  and  barren)  district. 
1  Sa.  23.  19  H.,  which  (is)  on  the  south  of  Jeshimon? 
26.    3  And  Saul  pitched  in  the  hill  of  H.,  which 

HACH-MO'-NI,  U'lDpn  tlie  wise. 

The  father  of  Jehiei  who  was  a  companion  of  the  sons 

of  David.     B.C.  1080. 

1  Ch.27.  32  Jehiei  the  sou  of  H.  (was)  with  the  king's 

HACH-MO-NTTE,  'ilMTja, 

That  is,  the  "son  of  Hachmoni"  (according  to  1  Ch.27. 
32),  where  it  is  rightly  translated.     See  Tachmonite. 
1  Ch.n.  it  Jashobeam,  an  H.,  the  chief  of  the  capt. 

TTATI  — 

There  is,  tliere  are,  VI  yesh. 

Gen.  39.   4  and  all  (that)  he  had  he  put  into  his  hand 
39.   5  in  his  house,  and  over  all  that  he  had 
39.  5  all  that  he  had  in  the  house,  and  in  the 
Ezra  10.  44  and  (some)  of  them  had  wives  by  whom 
[See  also  Abomination,  charge  of.] 
HAD,  to  be  — 
To  become,  begin  to  be,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Acts  25.  26  that,  after  examination  had,  I  might  have 
TTAT)  no,  when  as  yet  he  — 
He  not  having,  ouk  ovtos  avr$  ouk  ontos  auto. 

Acts    7.    5  would  give  it  to  him.  .when,  .he  had  no 
HAD  not  — 
If  not,  "hh  lule. 

Psa.  106.  23  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  stood  before 
HA'-DAD,  -nn  mighty. 

1.  A  son  of  Bedad,  king  of  Edom.     See  HADAR.  B.C.  1500. 

Gen .  36.  35  H.  the  son  of  Bedad . .  reigned  in  his  stead 

36.  36  H.  died,  and  Samlah.  .reigned  in  his  ste. 

1  Ch.  1.  46  H.  the  son  of. Bedad.  .reigned  in  his  stead 

1.  47  when  H.  was  dead,  Samlah.  .reigned  in 


2.  An  Edomite  of  the  royal  family  who  lived  in  the  time 
of  Solomon.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  1 1. 14  And  the  Lord  stirred  up . .  H.  the  Edomite 
11.  17  H.  fled,  .to  go  into  Egypt.  .H.  (being)  yet 
11.  19  H.  found  great  favour  in  the  sight  of  Ph. 
11.  21  H.  heard  in  Egypt  that  David  slept  with  his 
11.  21  H.  said  to  Pharaoh,  Let  me  depart,  that  I 
11.  25  besides  the  mischief  that  H.  (did) :  and  he 

3.  A  son  of  Ishinael,  and  grandson  of  Abraham.  B.C.  1840. 

1  Ch.i.  30  Mislima,  andDumah,  Massa,  H.,  andTema 

4.  The  last  of  the  early  kings  of  Edom.  This  name 
should  be  Hadar.  In  his  childhood  he  escaped  the 
massacre  under  Joab  in  which  his  father  seems  to  have 
fallen.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  1.  50  when  Baal-hanan  was  dead,  H.  reigned  in 

1.  51  H.  died  also.    And  the  dukes  of  Edom 

HA-DAD-E'-ZER,  ii^iin  mighty  is  the  help. 
The  king  of  the  Aramite  state  of  Zobah,  who  was  de- 
feated by  David  and  driven  across  the  Euphrates.    See 

HADAREZER.      B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    8.    3  David  smote  also  H.,  the  son  of  Rehob 

8.  5  Syrians  of  Damascus  came  to  succour  H. 
8.  7  And  David  took  the  shields  of  gold . .  of  H. 
8.  8  fromBetah,audfromBerothai,citiesofH. 
8.  9  that  David  had  smitten  all  the  host  of  H. 
8.  10  because  he  had  fought  against  H. .  .for  H. 
8.  12  of  Amalek,  and  of  the  spoil  of  H.,  son  of 

1  Ki.  11.  23  which  fled  from  his  lordH.  king  of  Zobah 
HA-DAD-RIM-'MON,  psi-nn  Hadad  ofRimnwn. 

A  place  in  the  valley  of  Megiddo  in  Issachar  where 
Josiah  died, not  farfromJezreel;  now  called  Rumma  neh. 
Zech.  12.  1 1  as  the  mourning  of  H.  in  the  valley  of  M. 
HA'-DAR,  liq  enclosing,  fire  God,  ~nq  powerfid. 

1.  A  son  of  Ishmael  and  grandson  of  Hagar.    B.C.  1840. 

Gen.  25.  15  H.,  and  Tenia,  Jetur,  Naphish,  and  Ked. 

2.  The  8th  and  last   of  the  ancient   kings  of  Edom. 

B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  39  Baal-hanan.  .died,  and  H.  reigned  in  his 
HA-DAR-E'-ZER,  WTJO  Hader  is  help. 
The  king  of  Aram-zooah,  sometimes  called  Hadadezer, 
which  see.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.  10.  16  H.  sent,  and  brought  out  the  Syrians  that 

10.  16  Shobach  the  captain  of  the  host  of  H. 

10.  19  all  the  kings  (that  were)  servants  to  H. 
1  Ch.18.   3  David  smote  H.  king  of  Zobah  unto  H. 

18.  5  the  Syrians  of  Damascus  came  to  help  H. 
18.  7  And  David  took  the  shields  of  gold . .  of  H. 
18.  8  from  Tibhath,  and  from  Chun,  cities  of  H. 
1*.    9  David  had  smitten  all  the  host  of  H.  king 

18.  10  because  he  had  fought  against  H. .  .forH. 

19.  16  captain  of  the  host  of  H.  (went)  before 
19.  19  when  the  servants  of  H.  saw  that  they 

HA-DA'-SHAH,  n$nn  new. 

A  town  of  Judah  iu  the  maritime  low  country,  near 

Go/no,  three  miles  from  Beth-horon. 

Josh  15.  37  Zenan,  and  H.,  and  Migdal-gad 
HA-DAS'-SAH,   ngnn  myrtle. 

The  eaidier  name  of  Esther  the  cousin  of  Mordecai. 
She  became  the  wife  of  Ahasuerus  (Xerxes).     B.C.  518. 

Esth.  2.    7  And  he  brought  up  H.,  that  (is)  Esther 
HA-DAT'-TAH,  nnnn  new. 

An  appellation  of  Razor  in  Judah— not  a  separate  city 
as  the  Common  Version  has  it. 

Josh  15.  25  Hazor,  H.,  and  Kerioth,  (and)  Hezron 
HA'-DLD,  inn  pieak,  sharp. 

A  city  of  Benjamin  near  Lod  and  Ono,  now  called 
&l-H.aditheh,  about  three  miles  E.  of  Lydd  or  Lod. 

Ezra    2.  33  The  children  of  Lod,  H.,  and  Ono,  seven 

Neh.    7.  37  The  children  of  Lod,  H.,  and  Ono,  seven 

11.  34  H.,  Zeboim,  Neballat 
HAD'-LAI,  -h-m  lax. 

An  Ephraimite,  father  of  Amasa  who  was  one  of  the 
chiefs  of  the  tribe  in  the  reign  of  Pekah.     B.C.  742. 

2  Ch.28.  12  Amasa  the  son  of  H.,  stood  up  against 
HA-DO'-RAM,  orinn  Hadar  is  high. 

1.  A  son  of  Joktan  of  the  family  of  Shem.     B.C.  2210. 

Gen.  10.  27  And  H.,  and  Uzal,  and  Diklah 
1  Ch.  1.  21  H.  also,  and  Uzal,  and  Diklah 

2.  A  son  of  Tou,  king  of  Hamath  in  the  time  of  David. 

1  Ch.18.  10  He  sent  H.  his  son  to  king  David,  to  en. 

3.  The  intendant  of  taxes  under  David,  Solomon,  and 
Rehoboam,  who  lost  his  life  at  the  revolt  at  Shechem. 
In  1  Kings  4.  6,  the  name  is  given  in  the  longer  form 
Adoniram ;  in  Samuel  as  Adoram  (2  Sa.  20.  24).  B.o.  975. 

2  Ch.io.  18  Rehoboam  sent  H.  that  (was)  over  the  tr. 
HAD'-RACH,  TTt<3  periodical  return. 

Perhaps  this  name  is  derived  from  Hadar.  It  was  a 
district  of  Syria,  but  mentioned  only  once.  Some  think 
that  Hadrach  is  the  name  of  the  Syrian  god  of  the  sea- 
sons, or  of  a  king  called  after  him,  and  having  Damas- 
cus as  his  capital. 

Zech.  9.    1  the  burden . .  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  H. 
HAFT  — 
An  haft,  shaft,  3X2  nitstsab. 

Judg.  3.  22  And  the  haft  also,  went  in  after  the  blade 
HA'-GAB,  3jn  bent. 

The  Bene-hagab  were  among  the  Nethinim  who  re- 
turned with  Zerubbabel  to  Jerusalem.  This  name  is 
omitted  in  Nehemiah's  list.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  46  The  children  of  H.,  the  children  of  Shal. 


HAGABAH 


442 


HALF 


HA-GA'-BAH,  N33Q,  nnan. 

Another  returned  Nvethinim  exile.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  45  children  of  Lebanah,  the  children  of  H. 

Neh.    7.  48  children  of  Lebana,  the  children  of  H. 

HA'-GAR,  "on,  'Ayap  vandering. 

Sarai's  Egyptian  handmaid  who  became  the  mother  of 

Ishmael  by  Abram.     See  Agar.     B.O.  1914. 

Gen.  16.    1  had  an  handmaid,  .whose  name  (was)  H. 
16.    3  And  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  took  H. .  .and 
16.    4  And  he  went  in  unto  H.,  and  she  conce. 
16.    8  And  he  said,  B...  Sarai's  maid,  whence  c. 
16. 15  And  H.  bare  Abram  a  son 
16.  15  Abram  called  his  sun's  name,  which  H. 
16.  16  when  H.  bare  Ishmael  to  Abram 
21.   9  Sarah  saw  the  sou  of  H.  the  Egyptian 
21.  14  a  bottle  of  water,  and  gave  (it)  unto  H. 
21.  17  the  angel  of  God  called  to  H.  out  of  hea. 
21.  17  and  said  unto  her,  What  aileth  thee,  H.  ? 
25.  12  Abraham's  son,  whom  H. ..bare  unto  A. 

HAG-E-RITE,  njrT. 

A  patronymic  of  Jaziz  whom  David  set  over  his  flocks. 

B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.27.  31  And  over  the  flocks  (was)  Jaziz  the  H. 

HAG-A-RITES,  HAG-A-RENES,  D'xnjn. 

A  people  upon  whom  the  Reubenites  made  war  in  the 

time  of  Saul.     They  were  W.  of  the  Jordan,  and  E.  of 

Gilead. 

1  Ch.  5.  10  the  days  of  Saul,  .made  war  with  the  H. 
5.  19  they  made  war  with  the  H.,  with  Jetur 

5.  20  and  the  H.  were  delivered  into  their 
Psa.  83.   6  The  tabernacles,  .of  Moab,  and  the  H. 

HAG'-GAI,  'an  festive. 

The  tenth  in  order  of  what  "are  called  the  minor 
prophets,  and  the  first  of  those  that  prophesied  after 
the  captivity. 

Ezra    5.    1  H.  the  prophet,  .prophesied  unto  the  Je. 

6.  14  prospered  through  the  prophesying  of  H. 
Hag.    1.    1  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  H.  the 

1.   3  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  H. 
1.  12  Joshua,  .obeyed,  .the  words  of  H.  the 

1.  13  Then  spake  H.  the  Lord's  messenger  in 

2.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  H. 
2.  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  H.  the  prophet 
2.  13  Then  said  H.,  If  (one  that  is)  unclean 

2.  14  Then  answered  H..  and  said,  So  (is)  this 
2.  20  again  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  H. 

HAG-GE'-RI,  nan  wanderer. 

The  father  of  Mibhar,  one  of  David's  heroes.    B.C.  1040. 
1  Ch.ti.  38  brother  of  Nathan,  Mibhar  the  son  of  H. 

EAG-GI,  'an  festive. 

The  second  son  of  Gad,  founder  of  the  Haggites.    B.C. 

1670.    The  same   name  precisely  is   appUed    to   the 

family. 

Gen.  46.  16  sons  of  Gad ;  Ziphion,  and  H.,  Shuni 
Num  26.  15  of  H. ,  the  family  of  the  Haggites :  of  Shuni 

HAG-GI'-AH,  n;an. 

A  descendant  of  Merari  the  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1035. 

1  Ch.  6.  30  Shiniea  his  son,  H.  his  son,  Asaiah  his 
HAG-GITES,  *ann  the  Haggile. 

The  posterity  of  Haggi  the  second  son  of  Gad.  B.C. 
1670. 

Num  26. 15  of  Haggi,  the  family  of  the  H. :  of  Shuni 
HAG'-GITH,  n^n  festive. 

A  wife  of  king  David  and  mother  of  his  fourth  son 
Adunijah.     B.C.  1045. 

2  Sa.    3.    4  And  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  H. 
1  Ki.    1.    5  Then  Adonijah  the  son  of  H.  exalted 

1.  11  Hast  thou  not  heard  that  A.  the  son  of  H. 

2.  13  Adonijah  the  son  of  H.  came  to  Bath-sh. 
1  Ch.    3.    2  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  H. 

HA'-I,  *yn  haaij  the  heap. 

This  is  the  form  in  which  Ai  appears  in  the  first 

instance  in  the  Common  Version.     This  arises  from  the 

translators  having  expressed  the  definite  article  (ha), 

with  which  Ai  is  variably  accompanied,  in  the  Hebrew 

text.    It  was  a  city  of  Benjamin  E.  of  Beth-el.     See 

AI. 

Gen.  12.    8  Beth-el  on  the  west,  and  H.  on  the  east 
13.    3  at  the  beginning,  between  Beth-el  and  H. 

HALL  — 

I.IIail,  TJ3  barad. 

Exod.  9. 18  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  very  grievous  h. 
9.  19  hail  shall  come  down  upon  them,  and 
9.  22  that  there  may  be  hail  in  all  the  land  of 
9.  23  Lord  sent  thunder  and  hail,  and  the  fire 

9.  23  Lord  rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 
9.  24  there  was  hail,  and  fire  mingled  with  the 
9.  25  the  hail  smote  throughout  all  the  land 
9.  25  theiiail  smote  every  herb  of  the  field 

9.  26  in  the  land  of  Goshen . .  was  there  no  hail 
9.  28  there  be  no . .  mighty  thunderings  and  h. 
9. 29  cease,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  h. 
9.  33  the  thunders  and  hail  ceased,  and  the 
9.  34  when  Pharaoh  saw  that  the  rain  and  the  h. 

10.  5  which  remaineth  unto  you  from  the  hail 
10.  12  eat  every  herb  of  the  land . .  all  that  the  h. 
10. 15  fruit  of  the  trees  which  the  hail  had  lc. 

Job  38.  22  or  hast  thou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  h.? 
Tsa.  1 3.  12,  13  hail  (stones)  and  coals  of  fire 

78.  47  He  destroyed  then'  vines  with  hail,  and 
78.  48  He  gave  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  hail 
105.  32  He  gave  them  hail  for  rain,  .flaming 
148.   S  Fire,  and  hail ;  snow,  and  vapour;  stormy 


Isa.    28.   2  as  a  tempest  of  hail,  .a  destroying  storm 

28.  17  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of 
Hag.  2. 17  I  smote  you  with  blasting,  .and  with  ha. 

2. Hail,  xaAa^a  chalaza. 

Rev.   8.    7  there  followed  hail  and  fire  mingled  with 

11.  19  and  there  were  lightnings,  .and  great  h. 
16.  21  there  fell  upon  men  a  great  hail  out  of  h. 
16.  21  men  blasphemed  God  because  of.  .the  h. 

HAIL,  to  — 

1.  To  hail,  send  hail,  "ns  barad. 

Isa.  32.  19  When  it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on  the 
2.To  rejoice,  be  of  good  cheer,  ^a/pco  chairo. 

Matt.26.  49  and  said,  Hail,  Master  !  and  kissed  him 
27.  29  mocked  him,  saying,  Hail,  King  of  the  J. ! 

Markis.  iS  began  to  salute  him,  Hail,  King  of  the  J.! 

Luke    1.  28  Hail  !.  .highly  favoured,  the  Lord  (is) 

John  19.    3  And  said,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  !  and 
HALL,  all  — 
To  rejoice,  be  of  good  cheer,  x^p^  chairo. 

Mattes.   9  behold,  Jesus  met  them,  saying,  All  ha. ! 

HATT.  STONE  — 

Stone  of  hail,  nn3  f?N  eben  barad. 

Josh.  10.  11  more  which  died  with  hail  stones  than 
Isa.  30.  30  (with) scattering,  and  tempest,  andhail  st. 

HALR  — 

l.A  lock  of  hair,  ilW  dallah. 

Song  7.   5  and  the  hair  of  thine  head  like  purple 

2.Se2)aration,  chaplet,  ~\n  nezer. 

Jer.    7.  29  Cut  off  thine  hair,  .and  cast  (it)  away,  and 

3. Hair,  nyg*  saar. 

Isa.  7.  20  shave,  .the  head,  and  the  hair  of  the  feet 

•L.Hair,  n^'ty  sear. 

Lev.  13.    3  the  hair  in  the  plague  is  turned  white 
13.   4  and  the  hair  thereof  be  not  turned  white 
13.  10  and  it  have  turned  the  hair  white,  and 
13.  20  skin,  and  the  hair  thereof  be  turned  wh. 
13.  21  and,  behold,  .no  white  hairs  therein 
13. 25  the  hair  in  the  bright  spot  be  turned  wh. 
13.  26  no  white  hair  in  the  bright  spot,  and  it 
13.  30  in  it  a  yellow  thin  hair  ;  then  the  priest 
13.  31  no  black  hair  in  it;  then  the  priest  shall 
13.  32  and  there  be  in  it  no  yellow  hair,  and  the 
13. 36  the  priest  shall  not  seek  for  yellow  hair 

13.  37  and,  .there  is  black  hair  grown  up  therein 

14.  8  shave  off  all  his  hair,  and  wash  himself 
14.    9  he  shall  shave  all  his  hair  off  his  head 
14.    9  even  all  his  hair  he  shall  shave  off :  and 

Num.  6.    5  let  the  locks  of  the  hair  of  his  head  grow 

6.  18  take  the  hair  of  the  head  of  his  separat. 
Judgi6.  22  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  again 
2  Sa.  14.  26  lie  weighed  the  hair  of  his  head  at  two  h. 
Ezra  9.    3  I.  .plucked  off  the  hair  of  my  head  and 
Song   4.    1  thy  hair  (is)  as  a  flock  of  goats,  that  app. 

6.  5  thy  hair  (is)  as  a  flock  of  goats  that  app. 
Eze.  16.    7  thine  hair  is  grown,  whereas  thou  (wast) 

5.Hair,  njjp  sear. 

Dan.    3.  27  nor  was  an  hair  of  their  head  singed 

4.  33  till  his  hairs  were  grown  like  eagles' 

7.  9  and  the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  pure 

Q.Hair,  nnjJ.^  saarah. 

Judg2o.  16  every  one  could  sling  stones  at  an  hair 

1  Sa.  14. 45  there  shall  not  one  hair  of  his  head 

2  Sa.  14.  11  shall  not  one  hair  of  thy  son  fall  to 

1  Ki.  1.  52  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  him  fall  to  the 
Job     4. 15  a  spirit  passed,  .the  hair  of  my  flesh  sto. 
Psa.  40.  12  more  than  the  hairs  of  mine  head 
69.   4  are  more  than  the  hairs  of  mine  head 

7.  Hair,  [wool,  feathers),  6pl£  thrix. 

Matt.  3.    4  same  John  had  his  raiment  of  camel's  h. 

5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  b. 
10.  30  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  num. 

Mark  1.    6  .John  was  clothed  with  camel's  hair,  and 

Luke  7. 38  and  did  wipe,  .with  the  hairs  of  her  head 

7. 44  and  wiped  (them)  with  the  hairs  of  her  h. 

12.  7  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  num. 
21,  18  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  your  head  per. 

Johnn.    2  Mary  which,  .wiped  his  feet  with  her  h. 

12.  3  Then.  .Mary,  .wiped  his  feet  with  her  h. 
Acts  27.  34  there  shall  not  an  hair  fall  from  the  head 
1  Pe.  3.  3  not  be  that  outward,  .of  plaiting  (the  h.] 
Rev.    1.  14  His  head  and .  .hairs. .  white  like  wool,  as 

9.   8  they  had  hair  as  the  hair  of  women,  and 

S.JIair  (of  the  head),  K6fi7]  home. 

1  Co.  11. 15  a  glory,  .for.  .hair  is  given  her  for  a  cover. 
HATR,  broidered — 
Folded  or  braided  hair,  wX^yfia  plegma. 

1  Ti.    2.   9  nor  with  broidered  hair,  or  gold,  or  pea. 
HATR  to  be  fallen  off  — 
To  brjjeeted,  polished,  plucked  off,  BIO  moral,  2. 

Lev.  13.  40  the  man  whose  hair  is  fallen  off  his  head 

13.  41  he  that  hath  his  hah*  fallen  off  freni  the 
HAER,  to  pluck  off  — 

To  peel,  polish,  pluck  of,  0*19  marat. 

Neh.  13.  25  plucked  off  their  hair,  and  made  them 
Isa.   50.   6  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  h. 

HAIR,  to  have  long  — 

To  have  or  let  the  hair  arm'-  I  ring,  KOf.ia.00  komao. 
1  Co.  11.  14  man  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame  unto  h. 
11.  15  if  a  woman  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  glory 


HATR,  -well  (set)  — 
Wreathed  or  curled  work,  TVgQQ  miqsheh. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  well  set  hair  baldness ;  and 
HALR,  of  — 
Made  of  hair,  hairy,  rpixwos  trichinos. 

Rev.    6.  12  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair 
HAIRY  — 
1. Hairy,  Yjfljf  sair. 

Gen.  27.  11  Esau  my  brother  (is)  a  hairy  man,  and  I 

27.  23  his  hands  were  hairy,  as  his  brother  Esa. 
2. Hair,  T$?  sear. 

Gen.  25.  25  the  first  came  out  red,  all  over  like  an  h. 
Psa.  63.  21  the  hairy  scalp  of  such  an  one  as  goeth 
3.  Owner  of  hair,  n;;b-  bj£3  bo.al  scar. 

2  Ki.    1.    S  hairy  man,  and  girt  with  a  girdle  of  lea. 

HAK-KA'-TAN,  fB&n  the  little  one. 

The  father  of  Johanan  who  was  chief  of  the  Bene- 

Azgad  returned  exiles  with  Ezra.     B.C.  538.    The  name 

is  simply  Katan,  "little,"  with  the  definite    article 

prefixed. 

Ezra   8.  12  the  son  of  H.,  and  with  him  an  hundred 
HAK'-KOZ,  ppn  the  nimble. 

A  priest,  the  chief  of  the  7th  course  in  the  service  of 
the  sanctuary  as  appointed  by  David.  B.C.  1015.  In 
Ezra  2.  61,  and  Neh.  3.  4,  21,  the  name  occurs  as  that  of 
a  family  of  priests,  the  prefix  in  these  passages  being 
taken  correctly  as  the  definite  article.  Hence  the  name 
appears  as  Koz,  which  see. 

1  Ch.24. 10  The  seventh  to  LT.,  the  eighth  to  Abijah 

HA-KU'-PHA,  N3ipq  incitement. 

The  Bene-Chupha    were  among    the    Nethinini    who 

returned  from  Babylon  with  Zeruhbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  51  the  children  of  H.,  the  children  of  Harh. 

Neh.   7. 53  the  children  of  H.,  the  children  of  Harh. 
HA'-LAH,  rhn. 

Probably  this  is  a  different  place  from  the  Calah  of 
Gen.  10..  11  ;  but  it  may  be  identified  with  the  Chalcitis 
of  Ptolemy,  which  is  described  as  between  Anthemusia 
and  Gauzanitis.  The  name  seems  to  remain  in  the 
modern  Gla,  a  large  mound  on  the  Upper  Khabour 
above  its  confluence  with  the  Jerujer.  Hither  a  por- 
tion of  the  Israelites  were  transported  by  Shalnianeser. 
B.C.  721. 

2  Ki.  17.    6  and  placed  them  in  H.  and  in  Habor 

18.  11  and  put  them  in  H.  and  in  Habor 

1  Ch.  5.  26  and  brought  them  unto  H.,  and  Habor 
HA'-LAK,  phn  the  smooth  (mountain). 
A  mountain'  named  as  the  southern  limit  of  Joshua's 
conquests,  but  which  has  not  yet  been  identified. 

Josh. 11.  17  from  the  mount  H.,  that  goeth  up  to  S. 
12.    7  unto  the  mount  H.,  that  goeth  up  to  Seir 
HALE,  to  — 
l.To  draw  or  drag  down  <>r  along,  Karaavpco  kata. 

Luke  1 2. 58  lest  he  hale  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  j. 
l.To  draw  or  drag,  aiipw  suru. 

Acts   8.   3  and  haling  men  and  women,  committed 
HALF— 
1.  Half,  ■middle,  'sn,  ^n  chetsi,  chalsi. 

Exod24.    6  Moses  took  half  of  the  blood,  and  put 

24.  6  half  of  the  blood  he  sprinkled  on  the  al. 

25.  10,  17  two  cubits  and  a  half,  .the  length 
25.  10,  17  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth 

25.  10,  23  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  the. 

26.  12  the  half  curtain  that  remaineth  shall  ha. 
26. 16  a  cubit  and  a  half,  .the  breadth  of  one 

36.  21  the  breadth  of  a  board  one  cubit  and  a  h. 

37.  1,  6  two  cubits  and  a  half,  .the  length  of  it 
37.    i,  6  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  of 
37.    1,  10  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  of 

Numi2.  12  of  whom  the  flesh  is  half  consumed  when 
15.    9  of  flour  mingled  with  half  an  bin  of  oil 
15.  10  bring  for  a  drink  offering  half  an  bin  of 

28.  14  drink  offering's  shall  be  half  an  bin  of  w. 
32.  33  unto  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  the  son 
34. 13  unto  the  nine  tribes,  and  to  the  half  tri. 
34  14  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  have  received 
34.  15  two  tribes  and  the  half  tribe  have  recei. 

Deut.  3.  12  half  mount  Gilead.  and  the  cities  thereof 

3.  13  of  Og,  gave  I  unto  the  half  tribe  of  Man. 

29.  8  to  the  Gadites,  and  to  the  half  tribe  of  M. 
Josh.  1.  12  to  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  spake  Jos. 

4.  12  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  passed  over 
8.  33  half  of  them  over  against  mount  Gerizini 
8.  33  and  half  of  them  over  against  mount  E. 

12.  2  from  half  Gilead,  even  unto  the  river  J. 
12.    5  and  the  Maachathites,  and  half  Gilead 

12.  6  the  Gadites,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manas. 

13.  7  the  nine  tribes,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Ma. 
13.  25  and  half  the  laud  of  the  children  of  Am. 
13.  29  Moses  gave,  .unto  the  half  tribe  of  Man. 

-13.  29  was.  .of  the  half  tribe  of  the  children  of 
13.  31  And  half  Gilead,  and  Ashtaroth.  and  Ed. 

13.  31  to  the  one  half  of  the  children  of  Machir 

14.  2  for  the  nine  tribes,  and  (for)  the  half  tri. 
14.  3  and  an  half  tribe  on  the  other  side  Jor. 
18.  7  ("lad,  and  Reuben,  and  half  the  tribe  of 
21.  5  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  ten  ci. 

21.  6  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  in  Bas. 
2i.  27  out  of  the  (other)  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 

22.  1  the  Gadites.  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manas. 
22.  7  Now  to  the  (one)  half  of  the  tribe  of  Ma. 
22.   7  unto  the  (other)  half  thereof  gave  Joshua 


HALF 


443 


HAMATH 


Josh  22.  9  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  returned,  and 
22  io  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  built  there  an 
22.  ii  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  have  bui. 
22.  13  and  to  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  into 
22. 15  and  to  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  unto  " 
22!  21  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  answered  and 

1  Sa.  14.  14  within  as  it  were  an  half  acre  of  land 

2  Sa.  10.    4  shaved  off  the  one  half  of  their  beards 

18.  3  neither  if  half  of  us  die,  will  they  care  for 

19.  40  the  king,  and  also  half  the  people  of  Is. 

1  Ki.   3.  25  give  half  to  the  one,  and  half  to  the  other 
7.  31  mouth,  .(was)  round,  .a  cubit  and  an  half 
7.  32  height  of  a  wheel  (was)  a  cubit  and  half 
7.  35  a  round  compass  of  half  a  cubit  high :  and 

10.  7  and,  behold,  the  half  was  not  told  me 
13.    S  If  thou  wilt  give  me  half  thine  house,  I 
16.  21  half  of  the  people  followed  Tibni  the  son 
16.  21  to  make  him  king ;  and  half  followed  0. 

1  Ch.  2.  52  Shobal.  .had  sons;  Haroeh. .  half  of  the  M. 

2.  54  and  half  of  the  Manahethites,  the  Zorites 
5.  18  the  Gadites,  and  half  the  tribe  of  Mana. 
5.  23  children  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 

5.  26  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  and  bro. 

6.  61  the  half  (tribe)  of  Manasseh,  by  lot,  ten  c. 

6.  71  out  of  the  family  of  the  half  tribe  of  Ma. 
12.  31  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  eighteen  th. 
12.  37  and  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  with 

26.  32  made  rulers  over,  .the  half  tribe  of  Man. 

27.  20  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh ;  Joel  the  son 
27.  21  Of  the  half,  .of  Manasseh  in  Gilead;  Iddo 

2  Ch.  9.  6  one  half  of  the  greatness  of  thy  wisdom 
Neh.  3.  9,  12,  16,  17,  18  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of 

4.    6  wall  was  joined  together  unto  the  half 
4. 16  half  of  my  servants  wrought  in  the  work 
4.  16  the  other  half  of  them  held  both  the  sp. 

4.  21  half  of  them  held  the  spears  from  the 
12.  32  Hoshaiah,  and  half  of  the  princes  of  Ju. 

12.  3S  and  the  half  of  the  people  upon  the  wall 
i2.  40  and  I,  and  the  half  of  the  rulers  with  me 

13.  24  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  of  Ash. 
Esth.  5.    3  be  even  given  thee  to  the  half  of  the  ki. 

5.  6  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom  it  shall  be  pe. 

7.  2  be  performed . .  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom 
Eze.   16.  51  Neither  hath  Samaria  committed  half  of 

40.  42  cubit  and  an  half  long . .  a  cubit  and  an  h. 

43.  17  and.  the  border  about  it. .  half  a  cubit ;  and 
Dan.  12.  7  for  a  time,  times,  and  an  half;  and  when 
Zech  14.    2  half  of  the  city  shall  go  forth  into  capti. 

14.  4  half  of  the  mountain  shall  remove  toward 
14.  4  the  north,  and  hah!  of  it  toward  the  south 
14.   8  half  of  them  toward.,  former  sea.and  half 

%Balf>  n^m  mechetsah. 
Num.  31.  36  the  half,  .the  portion  of  them  that  went 
31.  43  the  half  (that  pertained  unto)  the  congr. 

3. Half,  n*xna  machatsith. 

Exodso.  13  This  they  shall  give,  .half  a  shekel  after 
30. 13  an  half  shekel  .the  offering  of  the  Lord 

30.  15  poor  shall  not  give  less,  than  half  a  she. 
38.  26  A  bekah  for  every  man.  .half  a  shekel 

Lev.  ~  6.  20  half  of  it  in  the  morning,  and  half  thereof 
NUOT31.  29  Take,  .of  their  half,  and  give,  .unto  Elea. 

31.  30  of  the  children  of  Israel's  half,  thou  shalt 
31.  42  of  the  children  of  Israel's  half,  which  M. 
31.  47  of  thechildren  of  Israel's  half,  Moses  took 

Josh  2i.  25  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh, Taanach 
1  Ki.  16-  9  Zimri,  captain  of  half  (his)  chariots,  con. 
1  Ch.  6.  61  left  of  the  family,  .out  of  the  half  tribe 

6.  70  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh ;  Aner 

^.Middle,  midst,  315  taveh. 

Deut.  3.  16  even  unto  the  river  Arnon  half  the  valley 

5. Half,  TffXMrv  hemisu. 

Mark  6.  23  I  will  give  (it)  thee,  unto  the  half  of  my 
Luke  19.  8  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor 
Rev.  11.    9  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and  anh. 

11.  11  after  three  days  and  an  half  the  spirit  of 

12.  14  nourished  for  a  time,  and  times,  and  ha. 

HALF  dead  — 

Half  dead,  7]fj.idaur)s  hemiihanes. 

Luke  10.  30  wounded,  .departed,  leaving.,  half  dead 
HALF  hour,  the  space  of — 
Half  an  hour,  fifiie&ptov  hemiorion,  T^fxwpov 

Rev.    8.    1  silence,  .about  the  space  of  half  an  hour 
HALF,  to  live  out  — 
To  halve,  nyn  ckaisah. 

Psa.  55.  23  deceitful  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their 
HALF  so  much  — 
Half,  rrsnio  machatsith. 

Exod  30."  23  Take . .  of  sweet  cinnamon  half  so  much 
HAL'-HIIL,  ironfall  of  hollows. 
A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah  beside  Beth-zur  and 
Gedor,  N.  of  Hebron,  and  about  four  miles  distant  from 
it.    The  name  is  said  to  be  still  unchanged,  others 
write  it  Hulhal. 

Josh.15.  58  H.,  Beth-zur,  and  Gedor 
HA'-LI,  -bn. 

A  town  on  the  boundary  of  Asher,  named  between 
Helkath  and  Beten  ;  but  nothing  more  is  known  of  its 
situation. 

Josh.  19.  25  And  their  border  was  Helkath,  and  H. 

TTATX  — 

Open  court,  av\rj  mile. 

Markis.  16  the  soldiers  led  him  away  into  the  hall 
Luke22.  55  had  kindled  a  fire  in  the  midst  of  the  h. 


HALL,  common  — 

Praetor's  house  or  office,  TrpcuTci>piovprailorion.(Lat.) 
Matt  27.  27  took  Jesus  into  the  common  hall,  and  g. 
HALLOW  — 
l.To  set  apart,  v~\$  qadesh,  3. 

Exod2o.  ii  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath  day,  and  hallo. 
29.  1  to  hallow  them,  to  minister  unto  me  in 
40.  9  shalt  hallow  it,  and  all  the  vessels  thereof 
Lev.  16.  19  hallow  it  from  the  uncleanuess  of  the  ch. 
22.  32  Israel :  I  (am)  the  Lord  which  hallow 
25.  10  ye  shall  hallow  the  fiftieth  year,  and  pro. 
Num.  6.  11  and  shall  hallow  his  head  that  same  day 

1  Ki.   8.  64  The  same  day  did  the  king  hallow  the 

2  Ch.  7.    7  Solomon  hallowed  the  middle  of  the  co. 
Jer.   17.  22  hallow  ye  the  sabbath  day,  as  I  comma. 

17.  24  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  to  do  no  work 

17.  27  to  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  and  not  to.,  b. 
Ezra  20.  20  hallow  my  sabbaths  ;  and  they  shall  be  a 

44.  24  my  laws,  .they  shall  hallow  my  sabbaths 

2.To  set  apart,  v~tQ  qadesh,  5. 

Exod28.  38  Israel  shall  hallow  in  all  their  holy  gifts 

Lev.  22.    2  which  they  hallow  unto  me :  I  (am)the  L. 

22.    3  the  children  of  Israel  hallow  unto  the  L. 

Num.  3.  13  I  hallowed  unto  me  all  the  first  born  in  I. 

1  Ki.  9.    3  I  have  hallowed  this  house  which  thou 

9.    7  house,  which  I  have  hallowed  for  my  na. 

2  Ch.36.  14  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  he  had  hal. 

3.  To  set  apart,  hallow,  sanctify,  a.y  tafa  hagiazo. 
Matt.  6.  9  pray  ye  :  Our  Father.  .Hallowed  be  thy 
Luken.    2  say,  Our  Father.  .Hallowed  be  thy  name 

HALLOWED  — 

A  setting  apart,  separation,  BHp  qodesh. 

1  Sa.  21.   4  there  is  hallowed  bread;  if  the  young 

21.   6  So  the  priest  gave  him  hallowed  (bread) 
HALLOWED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  set  apart,  Bhp  qadash. 

Exod2g.  21  he  shall  be  hallowed,  and  his  garments 
Nunii6.  37  take  up  the  censers,  .for  they  are  hallowed 
16.  3S  therefore  they  are  hallowed :  and  they 

2. To  be  or  become  set  apart,  ani3  qadesh,  2. 

Lev.  22.  32  I  will  be  hallowed  among  the  children  of 
HALLLOWED  part  — 
What  is  set  apart,  vy$?  miqdash. 

NumiS.  29  (even)  the  hallowed  part  thereof  out  of  it 
HALLOWED  things  — 
What  is  set  apart,  separation,  tn'p  qodesh. 

Lev.  12.    4  she  shall  touch  no  hallowed  thing,  nor 
19.    8  he  hath  profaned  the  hallowed  thing  of 

Num.  5.  10  every  man's  hallowed  things  shall  be  his 

18.  8  heave  offerings  of  all  the  hallowed  things 
DeutaG.  13  I  have  brought  away  the  hallowed  things 

2  Ki.12.  18  Jehoash.  .took  all  the  hallowed  things 

12. 18  Iris  own  hallowed  things,  and  all  the  gold 
HA-LO'-HESH,  HAL-LO'-HESH,  tyni^n  the  whisperer. 

1.  Father  of  Shallum  who  ruled  over  part  of  Jerusalem 
and  helped  to  rebuild  the  wall.     B.C.  475. 

Neh.    3.  12  unto  him  repaired  Shallum  the  son  of  H. 

2.  One  or  a  family  that  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehe- 
miah.    B.C.  475. 

Neh.  10.  24  H.,  Pileha,  Shobek 

HALT  — 

Lame,  crippled, xwAos  cholos. 

Matt  18.    8  better,  .to  enter  into  life  halt  or  maimed 
Mark  9.  45  better  for  thee  to  enter  halt  into  life 
Lukei4.  21  bring  in  hither  the  poor,  .and  the  halt 
John  5.   3  great  multitude,  .of  blind,  halt,  withered 

HALT,  to  — 

l.To  leap, pass  over,  np9 ^>asach. 

1  Ki.  18.  21  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions? 

2. To  halt,  y^y  tsala. 

Gen.  32.  31  the  sun  rose,  .and  he  halted  upon  his 
Mic.    4.   6  will  I  assemble  her  that  halteth,  and  I 
4.    7  I  will  make  her  that  halted  a  remnant 
Zeph.  3. 19  I  will  save  her  that  halteth,  and  gather 

Z.IIalting,  J&s  tsela. 

Psa.  38. 17  For  I  (am)  ready  to  halt,  and  my  sorrow 

HALTING  — 
Halting,  J^s,  y1?^  tsela. 

Jer.  20. 10  All  my  familiars  watched  for  my  halting 
HAM,  err  multitude. 

Here  Chedorlaomer  smote  the  Zuzim.  If  these  people 
were  the  Zamzummim,  Ham  must  have  been  in  what 
was  afterwards  the  land  of  the  Ammonites.  Hence 
Ham  may  be  but  another  name  of  their  chief  strong- 
hold Rabbah,  now  Amman.  Others  think  it  is  the 
modern  Humeimath  one  mile  above  Rabba,  the  ancient 
Ar-moab,  on  the  Roman  road. 

Gen.  14.    5  smote,  .the  Zuzims  in  H.,  and  the  Emims 

HAM,  en  sioarthy,  dark  coloured. 
1.  The  youngest  son  of  Noah,  and  father  of  Canaan.  The 
Egyptian  word  Kem,  Egypt=Ham,  as  an  adjective, 
means  "  black  "  and  "  warm."   His  sons  were  Cush  and 
Mizraim,  Phut  and  Canaan.    Ham  was  the  only  son  of 
Noah  after  whom  a  country  was  named.     B.C.  2348. 
Gen.    5.  32  and  Noah  begat  Shem,  H.,  and  Japheth 
6.  ro  Noah  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  B,,  and  J. 
7. 13  Shem,  and  H.,  and  Japheth,  the  sons  of 
9.  18  the  sons  of  Noah,  .were Shem,  and  H. 
q.  18  and  H.  (is)  the  father  of  Canaan 
9.  22  H. .  .saw  the  nakedness  of  his  father 


3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 

5.  10 

5-  " 

5-i- 
5-  14 

6.  4 


Gen.  10.    1  generatiousofthesonsofNoah;Shem,H. 
10.    6  the  sons  of  H.  ;  Cush,  and  Mizraim,  and 
10. 20  These  (are)  the  sons  of  H.,  after  their 
1  Ch.  1.    4  Noah,  Shem,  H.,  and  Japheth 

1.    8  The  sons  of  H. ;  Cush,  and  Mizraim 
2.  The  patronymic  of  his  descendants. 

1  Ch.  4.  40  for  (they)  of  H.  had  dwelt  there  of  old 
Psa.  78.  51  (their)  strength  in  the  tabernacles  of  H. 

105.  23  and  Jacob  sojourned  in  the  land  of  H. 

105.  27  showed  his.  .wonders  in  the  land  of  H. 

106.  22  Wondrous  works  in  the  land  of  H.,  (and) 

HA'-MAN,  jprr  celebrated  Haman,  Horn. 

The  chief  minister  or  vizier  of  Ahasuerus  (Xerxes). 
B.C.  510.  After  the  failure  of  his  plot  to  cut  off  all 
the  Jews  in  the  empire  of  Persia  he  wras  hanged  on  the 
gallows  which  he  had  erected  for  Mordecai.  He  is 
called  the  Agagite,  as  signifying  that  he  was  of  Amale- 
kitish  descent :  but  in  the  LX5  he  is  called  a  Macedonian 
in  Esth.  9.  24  (cf.  3.  1),  and  a  Persian  by  Sulpicius 
Severus. 

Esth.  3.    1  Afterthese. . did k.  Ahasuerus  promote H. 
all  the  king's  servants,  .reverenced  H. 
they  told  H.,  to  see  whether  Mordecai's 
when  H.  saw.  .then  was  H.  full  of  wrath 
wherefore  H.  sought  to  destroy  all  the  J. 
they  cast  Pur,  that  (is),  the  lot,  before  H. 
H.  said  unto  king  Ahasuerus,  There  is  a 
king  took  his  ring,  .and  gave  it  unto  H. 
the  king  sail  unto  H.,  The  silver (is)giv. 
all  that  H.had  commanded, unto  the  king's 
And  the  king  and  H.  sat  down  to  drink 
the  money  that  H.  had  promised  to  pay 
let  the  king  and  H.  come  this  day  unto 
the  king  said,  Cause  H.  to  make  haste 
So  the  king  and  H.  came  to  the  banquet 
let  the  king  and  H.  come  to  the  banquet 
Then  went  H.  forth  that  day  joyful  and 
when  H.  saw  Mordecai  in  the  king's  gate 
Nevertheless  H.  refrained  himself,  and 
H.  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches,  and 
H.  said  moreover,  Yea,  Esther.,  did  let 
the  thing  pleased  H.;  and  he  caused  the 
Now  H.  was  come  into  the  outward  court 
said.  .Behold,  H.  standeth  in  the  court 
So  H.  came  in.     And  the  king  said  unto 
H.  thought  in  his  heart,  To  whom  would 
H.  answered  the  king,  For  the  man  whom 
Then  the  king  said  to  H.,  Make  haste 
Then  took  H.  the  apparel  and  the  horse 
but  H.  hasted  to  his  house  mourning 
H.  told  Zeresh  his  wife  and  all  his  friends 
and  hasted  to  bring  H.  unto  the  banquet 
1  So  the  king  and  H.  came  to  banquet  with 
6  The  adversary  and  enemy  (is)  this.  .H. 

6  Then  H.  was  afraid  before  the  king  and 

7  H.  stood  up  to  make  request  for  his  life 

8  H.  was  fallen  upon  the  bed  whereon  Est. 

8  As  the  word  went  out . .  they  covered  H.  's 

9  gallows,  .which  H.  had  made  for  Morde. 
9  the  gallows,  .standeth  in  the  house  of  H. 

0  So  they  hanged  H.  on  the  gallows  that 

1  did . .  Ahasuerus  give  the  house  of  H. . .  un. 
8.   2  his  ring,  which  he  had  taken  from  H. 

8.  2  Esther  set  Mordecai  over  the  house  of  H. 
8.  3  besought,  .to  put  away  the  mischief  of  H. 
8.   5  the  letters  devised  by  H.  the  son  of  Ha. 

8.  7  I  have  given  Esther  the  house  of  H.,  and 
9. 10  ten  sons  of  H.  the  son  of  Hammedatha 
9. 12  The  Jews  have  slain,  .the  ten  sons  of  H. 

9.  13  let  H.'s  ten  sons  be  hanged  upon  the  gal. 
9.  14  given,  .and  they  hanged  H.'s  ten  sons 

9.  24  Because  H. .  .had  devised  against  the  Je. 

HA'-MATH,  HE'-MATH,  n;pn  defenced,  walled.. 
A  city  of  Upper  Syria  in  the  valley  of  the  Orontes, 
about  midway  between  its  source  (near  Baalbek)  and 
the  bend  which  it  makes  at  Jisrhadid.  The  Hama- 
thites  were  a  Hamitic  race  and  are  included  among  the 
desendants  of  Canaan  (Gen.  10.  18.) 

Numi3.  21  So  they  went  up.  .as  men  come  to  H. 

34.   8  shall  point  out.  .unto  the  entrance  of  H. 

Judg.  3.   3  Baal-hermon  unto  the  entering  in  of  H. 

2  Sa.    8.    9  Toi  king  of  H.  heard  that  David  had  sm. 

1  Ki.  8.  65  from  the  entering  in  of  H.  unto  the  river 

2  Ki.  14.  25  from  the  entering  of  H.  unto  the  sea  of 

14.  28  how  he  recovered  Damascus,  and  H. .  .for 
17.  24  the  king  of  Assyria  brought,  .from  H. 

17.  30  and  the  men  of  H.  made  Ashima 

18.  34  Where(are)  the  gods  of  H.,  and  of  Arpa.? 

19.  13  Where  (is)  the  king  of  H.,  and  the  king 
23.  33  Pharaoh-nechoh  put  him  in  bands,  .in.  .E 
21.  21  slew  them  at  Riblah  in  the  land  of  H. 

5  Shihor  of  Eg37>t.  .unto  the  entering  of  H. 

3  David  smote  Hadarezer.  .unto  H.,  as  he 
9  Tou  king  of  B..  heard  how  David  had  sm. 
8  from  the  entering  in  of  H.  unto  the  river 

4  the  store  cities,  which  he  built  in  H. 

10.  9  (is)  notH.  as  Arpad?  (is)  not  Samaria  as 

11.  11  his  people,  which  shall  be  left,  from.  .H. 

36. 19  Where  (are)  the  gods  of  H.  and  Arphad 

37.  13  Where  (is)  the  king  of  H.,  and  the  king  of 

Jer.   39.   5  they  brought  him  up.  .to  Riblah  in.. H. 
49.  23  Concerning  Damascus.   H.  is  confounded 
52.   9  they  took  the  king . .  to  Riblah  in . .  H. 
52.  27  put  them  to  death,  .in  the  land  of  H. 

Eze.  47.  16  H.,Berothah,  Sibraim,  which  (is)  between 

47. 16  border  of  Damascus,  and  the  border  of  H. 

47. 17  north  northward  and  the  border  of  H. 

47.  20  border,  till  a  man  come  over  against  H. 

48.  1  of  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as  one  goeth  to  H 


6. 
6.  6 
6.  6 
6.  7 
6. 10 
6.  11 

6.  12 

6.13 

6. 14 

7.  6 
7.  6 
7-  7 
7-  8 
7-  8 
7- 

7- 
7- 


1  Cll.13. 

18. 

18. 

2CI1.   7. 

8. 

Isa. 


HAMATHITB 


444 


HAND 


Eze.  48.    1  of  Damascus  northward,  to  the  coast  of  H. 
Amos  6.    2  and  from  thence  go  ye  to  H.  the  great 
6. 14  shall  afflict,  .from  the  entering  in  of  H. 
Zech.  9.    2  And  H.  also  shall  border  thereby 

HA-MATH-ITE,  'Jnpn  belonging  to  Hamath. 

The  patronymic    of  "certain  descendants    of  Canaan 

dwelling  on  the  extreme  north  of  Palestine. 

Gen.  10.  18  Arvadite,  and  the  Zernarite,  and  the  H. 

1  Ch.  1. 16  Arvadite,  and  the  Zemarite,  and  the  H. 

HA-MATH  ZO'-BAH,  unis  nan. 

The  fuller  name  of  Hamath.  It  is  called  by  the  Greeks 
Eplphania:  but  it  is  probably  not  Hamath  the  Great, 
being  distinguished  from  it  by  the  suffix  Zobah;  as 
Ramath-G Head  is  distinguished  from  Kamah  in  Benja- 
min. 

2  Ch.  8.    3  Solomon  wenttoH.,  and  prevailed  against 
HAM'-MATH,  nan  warm  sp>rings. 

A  fortified  city  in  "the  territory  allotted  to  Naphtali,  one 
mile  from  Tiberias.  Its  name  indicates  that  it  con- 
tained the  "  hot  baths"  of  Tiberias.  Josephus  calls  it 
Emmaus,  a  village  not  far  from  Tiberias,  where  Ves- 
pasian encamped  before  Tiberias.  The  Hammam,  at 
present  four  in  number,  still  send  up  their  hot  sulphu- 
reous waters  (1440  Fahr.),  at  a  spot  rather  more  than 
a  mile  S.  of  the  modern  town,  Tubariyeh,  at  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  city. 

Josh.  19.  35  the  fenced  cities.  .Ziddim,  Zer,  and  H. 

HAM-ME-DA'-THA,  NHTBri  given  by  Horn. 

The  father  of  Haman  the  Agagite  at  the  court  of  Ahasu- 

erus  (  Xerxes)  king  of  Persia.  B.C.  550. 

Esth.  3.    1  promote  Hainan  the  son  of  H.  the  Agagite 
3.  10  and  gave  it  uuto  Hamau  the  son  of  H. 

8.  5  letters  devised  by  Haman  the  son  of  H. 

9.  10  ten  sons  of  Haman  the  son  of  H. .  .slew 
9.  24  the  son  of  H. .  .had  devised  against  the 

HAM-ME'-LECH,  T^srr  the  king. 

Though  this  is  given  in  the  Common  Version  as  a  proper 
name,  it  might  and  perhaps  ought  to  have  been  trans- 
lated as  the  ordinary  Hebrew  word  for  "  the  king"  ;i.e., 
in  the  first  case  Jehoiakim,  and  in  the  latter  Zedekiah. 
Jer.  36.  26  king  commanded  Jerahmeel  the  son  of  H. 

38.  6  the  dungeon  of  Malchiah  the  son  of  H. 

HAMMER  — 

^.Hammer,  hammering,  n^n  halmuth. 

Judg.  5.  26  She  put  her  hand,  .to  the  workmen's  ha. 

2.  Hammer,  niagO  maqqabah. 

1  Ki.  6.  7  there  was  neither  hammer  nor  ax.  .heard 
Isa.  44.  12  fashioneth  it  with  hammers,  and  worketh 
Jer.  10.   4  they  fasten  it  with  nails  and  with  ham.  1 

Z.Hammer,  n^a  maqqebeth. 

Judg.  4.  21  Then  Jael.  .took  an  hammer  in  her  hand 
4. Hammer,  ^'tsD  jxtttish. 

Isa.   41.    7  he  that  smootheth  (with)  the  hammer 

Jer.   23.  29  a  hammer  (that)  breaketh  the  rock  in  pi. 
50.  23  How  is  the  hammer,  .cut  asunder  and 
5.HatcIiets,  clubs,  nis1?'?  kelappoth. 

Psa.  74.  6  now  they  break  down . .  with  axes  and  h. 
HAM-MO-LE'-KETH,  nsySn  the  queen. 
Daughter  of  Machir  and  sister  of  Gilead  the  grandson 
of  Manasseh.  One  of  her  children  was  Abi-ezer,  from 
whose  family  sprang  the  great  judge  Gideon.  She  may 
have  ruled  over  a  portion  of  the  land  belonging  to 
Gilead;  and  hence  her  name.    B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  7. 18  sister  H.  bare  Ishod,  and  Abiezer,  and  M. 
HAM'-MON,  pan  Iwt  spring. 

1.  A  city  of  Aslier,  not  far  from  Zidon-rabbah,  or 
"  Great  Zidon".  It  may  be  Ilamid,  about  ten  miles 
from  Tyre,  and  near  the  coast. 

Josh.  19.  28  Rehob,  and  H.,  and  Kanah.  .unto  great 

2.  A  city  allotted  to  the  Levites  out  of  the  tribe  of 
Naphtali,  and  answering  to  the  cities  (or  city)  called 
llammath  and  Hammath-dor. 

1  Ch.  6.  76  with  her  suburbs,  and  H.  with  her  sub. 
HAM-MOTH  DOR  INI  nbn. 

A  city  of  Naphtali  allotted  to  the  Gershonite  Levites, 
and  appointed  a  city  of  refuge.  It  is  perhaps  identical 
with  Hamutath.  In  t  Chr.  6.  76,  the  name  is  Banv- 
mon. 

Josh  21.  32  H.-d.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Kartan  with 
HA-MO'-NAH,  njion  multitude. 

The  place  in  or  near  which  the  multitudes  of  Gog  are 
to  be  buried,  after  the  great  slaughter,  and  which  is  to 
derive  its  name  from  that  circumstance. 

Eze.  39. 16  also  the  name  of  the  city  (shall  be)  H. 
HA  MON  GOG,  313  j'lon  multitude  by  Gog. 
A  glen  previously  known  as  the  "  ravine  of  thepassen- 
,  gers  on  the  E.  of  the  Sea,"  after  the  burial  there  of  Gog 
and  all  his  multitude. 

Eze.  39.  11  and  they  shall  call  (it),  The  valley  of  H.-g. 

39.  15  have  buried  it  in  the  valley  of  H.-g. 

HA'-MOR,  nion  large  jackass. 

The  figure  employed  by  Jacob  for  Issachar;  also  a 
HiviteorHorite,  who.^at  the  return  of  Jacob  into  Pales- 
tine, was  prince  of  the  city  of  Shechem,  and  father  of 
Shecnem  whose  treatment  of  Dinah  brought  destruction 
to  himself  and  all  his  kindred  and  city.  The  name  in 
the  Cnek  form  is  Emmor,  and  Abraham  is  said  to  have 
bought  his  sepulchre  from  the  sons  of  Emmor.  B.C.  1739. 
Gen.  33. 19  at  the  hand  of  the  children  of  H. 


Gen.  34.    2  when  Shechem  the  son  of  H. .  .saw  her 
34.   4  Shechem  spake  unto  his  father  H.,  saying 
34.    6  H.  the  father  of  Shechem  went  out  unto 
34.    8  And  H.  communed  with  them,  saying 
34.  13  sons  of  Jacob  answered  Shechem  and  H. 
34.  18  their  words  pleased  H.,and  Shechem,  H.'s 
34.  20  H.  and  Shechem.  .came  unto  the  gate  of 
34.  24  unto  H.,  and  unto  Shechem  his  son,  hear. 
34.  26  they  slew  H.  and  Shechem  his  son  with 
Josh.  24.  32  which  Jacob  bought  of  the  sons  of  H.  the 
Judg  g.  28  Serve  the  men  of  H.  the  father  of  Shechem 

HA-MTJ'-EL,  Sxisn  God  is  a  sun. 

A  son  of  Mishiua,  a  Simeonite,  of  the  family  of  Shaul. 

B.C.  1200. 

1  Ch.  4,  26  the  sons  of  Mishma ;  H.  his  son,  Zacchur 
HA'-MTJL,  ^Snplty. 

The  younger  son  of  Pharez  Bon  of  Judah  by  Tamar. 
He  was  the  head  of  the  Hamulite  family.    B.C.  1650. 

Gen.  46.  12  the  sons  of  Pharez  were  Hezron  and  H. 

Num26.  21  of  H.,  the  family  of  the  Hamulites 

1  Ch.  2.  5  The  sons  of  Pharez;  Hezron,  and  H. 
HA-MU-LITES,  ^isn  belonging  to  Hamul. 

The  descendants  of  Hamul  son  of  Pharez. 
NUIU26.  21  of  Hamul,  the  family  of  the  H. 

HA-MTJ'-TAl,  ^BIDQ  God  is  fresh  life;  loin  to  the  dev). 
A  daughter  of  Jeremiah  of  Libnah,  one  of  king  Josiah's 
wives,  and  mother  of  Jehoahaz  and  Mattaniah  or 
Zedekiah.  In  the  last  two  texts  the  name  is  given  as 
Ilamital,  which  the  LXX.  adopts  throughout,  b.c.  600. 

2  Ki.  23.  31  his  mother's  name  (was)  H.,  the  daughter 

24.  18  his  mother's  name(was)H.,  the  daughter 
Jer.  52.    1  his  mother's  name(was)  H.  the  daughter 

HA-NAM'-EEL,  "?Npjn  gift  or  grace  of  God. 
Son  of  Shallum  and  cousin  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet 
who  purchased  a  field  from  him  in  full  assurance  that 
it  would  ultimately  prove  a  good  investment.    B.C.  590. 
Jer.   32.    7  H.  the  son  of  Shallum  thine  uncle,  shall 
32.    8  H.,  mine  uncle's  son,  came  to  me  in  the 
32.    9  I  bought  the  field  of  H.,  my  uncle's  son 
32. 12  in  the  sight  of  H.  mine  uncle's  (son) 
HA'-NAN,  fin  merciful. 

1.  A  son  of  Shashak,  a  descendant  of  Benjamin.  B.C. 
1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  23  And  Abdon,  and  Zichri,  and  H. 

2.  A  son  of  Azel  a  Eenjamite,  through  Saul.    B.C.  860. 

1  Ch.  8.  38  Azel  had  six  sons.  -Azrikam,Bocheru..H. 
9.  44  Azel  had  six  sons. .  Azrikam,  Bochern.  .H. 

3.  Son  of  JIaachah,  one  of  the  heroes  of  David's  guard. 

B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  11. 43  H.  the  son  of  Maachah,  and  Joshaphat 

4.  A  Nethinim  returned  captive  with  Zerubbabel.  B.C. 
536. 

Ezra.  2.  46  children  of  Shalmai,  the  children  of  H. 
Neh.  7.  49  children  of  H.,  the  children  of  Giddel 

5.  A  Levite  who  assisted  Ezra  when  he  read  the  law. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.  8.    7  H. . .  caused  the  people  to  understand  the 

6.  A  Levite  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah 
and  the  people.    [Perhaps  the  same  as  No.  5].   B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10. 10  their  brethren,  Shebaniah,  Hodijah.  .H. 
13.  13  next  to  them  (was)  H.  the  son  of  Zaccur 

7.  A  chief  (or  the  patronymic  of  a  family)  who  sealed  the 
covenant  with  Nehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  22  Pelatiah,  H.,  Anaiah 

8.  Another  of  the  chiefs  on  the  same  occasion. 

Neh.  10.  26  And  Aliijah,  H.,  Anan 

9.  An  officer  in  the  Lord's  house  whose  sons  had  a 
chamber  in  the  temple.  He  was  son  of  Igdaliorhic. 
B.C.  600. 

Jer.  35.   4  into  the  chamber  of  the  sons  of  H.,  the 

HA-NAN'-EEL,  Snug  God  is  graciotis. 
Hananeel  was  the  builder  of  the  tower  near  the  Sheep- 
gate  of  Jerusalem. 

Neh.  3.    1  they  sanctified  it,  unto  the  tower  of  H. 
12.  39  the  tower  of  H.,  and  the  tower  of  Meah 
Jer.  31.  38  from  the  tower  of  H.  unto  the  gate  of  the 
Zech,  14.  10  the  tower  of  H.unto  the  king's  wine  pre. 
HA-NA'-NI,  U:n  gracious. 

1.  One  of  the  sons  of  Heman,  David's  seer  and  head  of 
the  1 8th  course  of  the  service  of  the  Sanctuary.  B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.25.  4  Of  Heman.  .Hananiah,  H.,  Eliathah,  Gid. 

25.  25  H. . .  his  sons,  and  his  brethren . .  twelve 

2.  A  seer  who  rebuked  Asa  for  buying  off  Benhadad 
king  of  Syria.    B.C.  941. 

2  Ch.  16.   7  at  that  time  H.  the  seer  came  to  Asa  king 

3.  The  father  of  Jehu  the  seer  who  testified  against 
Baasha  and  Jehoshaphat.    B.C.  930. 

1  Ea.16.   1  the  word,  .came  to  Jehu  the  son  of  H. 

16.    7  by  the  hand  of.  .Jehu  the  son  of  H.  came 
s  Ch.19.    2  Jehu  the  son  of  H.  the  seer  went  out  to 

20.  34  written  in  the  book  of  Jehu  the  son  of  H. 

4.  A  priest  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  20  of  the  sons  of  Imiuer  ;  H,,  and  Zebadiah 

5.  A  brother  of  Nehemiah  who  returned  from  Jerusalem 
to  Susa  and  was  afterwards  made  governor  of  Jerusalem 
under  Nehemiah.    B.C.  446. 

Neh.    1.    2  That  H.,  one  of  my  brethren,  came,  he 
7.   2  I  gave  my  brother  H. . .  charge  over  Jeru. 


6.  A  priest  and  musician  who  assisted  in  the  ceremonial 
of  purifying  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  36  his  brethren,  Shemaiah.  .Judah,  H.,  with 

HA-NANT'-IAH,  l.T^n,  n^jq  Jah  is  gracious. 

1.  A  son  of  Heman  the  singer  and  chief  of  the  16th 
course  of  the  24  into  which  the  28S  Levite  musicians 
were  divided  by  king  David.  Heman's  sons  were  espe- 
cially employed  to  blow  the  horns.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  sons  of  Heman.  .H.,  Hanani,  Eliathah 

25.  23  H. .  .his  sons,  and  his  brethren,  .twelve 

2.  A  chief  captain  of  king  Uzziah's  army.     B.C.  810. 

2  Ch.26.  11  under  the  hand  of  H.,  (one)  of  the  king's 

3.  The  father  of  Zedekiah,  one  of  the  princes  in  the  reign 
of  Jehoakim  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  630. 

Jer.  36.  12  sat.  .the  son  of  H.,  and  all  the  princes 

4.  Son  of  A2ur,  a  Benjamite  of  Gibeon  and  false  prophet 
in  the  reign  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah.  B.C.  595.  In 
this  year  he  withstood  Jeremiah  the  prophet. 

Jer.  28.    1  H.  the  son  of  Azur  the  prophet,  .spake 
28.    5  prophet  Jere.  said  unto  the  prophet  H. 
28.  10  H. .  .took  the  yoke  from  off.  .Jeremiah's 
28. 11  H.  spake  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people 
28.  12  after.  .H.  the  prophet  had  broken  the 
28.  13  Go  and  tell  H.,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  L. 
28. 15  Then  said  the  prophet  Jeremiah  unto  H. 

28. 15  Hear  now,  H.  ;  The  Lord  hath  not  sent 

28. 17  So  H.  the  prophet  died  the  same  year,  in 

5.  Grandfather  of  Irijah,  the  captain  of  the  ward  at  the 
gate  of  Benjamin.  He  arrested  Jeremiah  on  a  charge 
of  deserting  to  the  Chaldsens.    B.C.  596. 

Jer.  37.  13  Irijah,  the  son  of  Shelemiah.  .son  of  H. 

6.  Son  of  Shashak  and  head  of  a  Beujamite  house.  B.C. 
1340. 

1  Ch.  8.  24  And  H.,  and  Elam,  and  Antothijah 

7.  The  Hebrew  name  of  Shadrach,  who  was  of  thehonse 
of  David.    B.C.  607. 

Dan.  1.  6  these  were,  of  the  children  of  Judah.. H. 
1.  7  of  Belteshazzar  ;  and  to  H.,  of  Shadrach 
1.  11  prince  of  the  eunuchs  had  set  over..H. 

1.  19  among . .  all  was  found  none  like  Daniel,  H. 

2.  17  Daniel,  .made  the  thing  known  to  H. 

8.  A  son  of  Zerubbabel  in  the  ancestry  of  Jesus.'  B.C. 
500. 

1  Ch.  3.  19  sons  of  Zerubbabel ;  Meshullam,  and  H. 

3.  21  And  the  sons  of  H. ;  Pelatiah,  and  Jesai. 

9.  A  son  of  Bebai,  who  returned  with  Ezra  from  Babylon. 
B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  28  the  sons  also  of  Bebai ;  Jehohanan,  H. 

10.  An  apothecary  and  priest.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.    8  Next  unto  him  also  repaired  H.  the  son 

11.  One  that  repaired  a  portion  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem 
with  Hanun.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.  30  After  him  repaired  H.  the  son  of  Shele. 

12.  A  ruler  of  the  palace  at  Jerusalem  under  Nehemiah. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.    7.    2  I  gave . .  Hanani,  and  H. . .  charge  over  J. 

13.  An  individual  or  family  that  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  23  Hoshea,  H.,  Hashub 

14.  A  priest  in  the  time  of  Jehoiakim.    B.C.  630. 

Neh.  12.  12  the  chief  of  the  fathers,  .of  Jeremiah,  H. 
12.  41  the  priests.  .Zechariah,  (and)  H.,  with 

HAND  — 

l.Palm  cf  the  hand,  n,3N  eheph. 

Job  33.    7  neither  shall  my  hand  be  heavy  upon 
2.  Hand,  "i;  yad. 

Gen.    3.  22  now,  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  take 

4.  11  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thy  hand 

5.  29  concerning  our  work  and  toil  of  our  han. 

8.  9  then  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  her 
g.    2  into  your  hand  are  they  delivered 

9.  5,  5  at  the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I  require 
9.    51  at  the  hand  of  man ;  at  the  hand  of  every 

14.  20  delivered  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand 
14.  22  I  have  lift  up  mine  hand  unto  the  Lord 
16.    6  Behold,  thy  maid  (is)  in  thy  hand  ;  do  to 
16.    9  and  submit  thyself  undeijher  hands 
16.  12  his  hand  (will  be)  against  every  man,  and 
16.  12  every  man's  hand  against  him  ;  and  he 
19.  10  the  men  put  forth  their  hand,  and  pulled 

19. 16  the  men  laid  hold  upon  his  hand,  and 
19.  16  the  hand  of  his  wife,  and  upon  the  hand 

21. 18  Arise,  .and  hold  him  in  thine  hand  ;  for 

21.  30  seven  ewe  lambs  shalt  thou  take  of  my  h. 

22.  6  he  took  the  fire  in  his  hand,  and  a  knife 
22.  10  And  Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand 
22.  12  Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither 
24.  2  Put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thi. 
24.  9  the  servant  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh 
24.  10  the  goods  of  his  master(were)  in  his  hand 
24.  18  and  let  down  her  pitcher  upon  her  hand 
24.  22  two  bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten  (shek.\ 
24.  30  and  bracelets  upon  his  sister's  hands,  and 

24.  47  and  I  put.  .the  bracelets  upon  her  hands 

25.  26  and  his  hand  took  hold  on  Esau's  heel 
27. 16  And  she  put  the  skins,  .upon  his  hands 
27.  17  the  bread. .  into  the  hand  of  her  son  Jacob 
27.  22  but  the  hands  (are)  the  hands  of  Esau 
27.  23  his  hands  were  harry,  as.  .Esau's  hands 

30.  35  and  gave  (them)  into  the  hand  of  his  sons 

31.  29  It  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  you 
31.  39  of  my  hand  didst  thou  require  it,  (whet.) 
32. 11  the  hand  of  my  brother,  from  the  hand 


HAND 


445 


HAND 


Exod.: 


32- 

33- 
33- 
35- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
40. 
41. 
4i- 
41. 
•41. 
42. 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 
46. 
47- 
48. 
48. 
48. 
48. 
49- 
49- 
,49- 
.2. 

3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


13  took  of  that  which  came  to  his  hand  a 
16  he  delivered,  .into  the  hand  of  his  serv. 
10  then  receive  my  present  at  my  hand  ;  for 

19  at  the  hand  of  the  children  of  Hanior 
4  strange  gods  which  (were)  in  their  hand 

21  and  he  delivered  him  out  of  their  hands 

22  Shed  no  blood .  .and  lay  no  hand  upon 
22  he  might  rid  him  out  of  their  hands,  to 
«7  and  let  not  our  hand  be  upon  him  ;  for 
18  she  said,  .thy  staff  that  (is)  in  thine  hand 

20  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  friend 

20  receive  (his)  pledge  from  the  woman's  h. 
28  to  pass,  .that  (the  one)  put  out  (his)  hand 

28  and  bound  upon  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread 

29  as  he  drew  back  his  hand,  that,  behold 

30  that  had  the  scarlet  thread  upon  his  hand 

1  bought  him  of  the  hands  of  the  Ishmeel. 

3  the  Lord  made  all.  .to  prosper  in  his  ha. 

4  and  all  (that)  he  had  he  put  into  his  ha. 
6  he  left  all  that  he  had  in  Joseph's  hand 

8  committed  all  that  he  hath  to  my  hand 
12,  13  left  his  garment  in  her  hand,  and  fled 

22  committed  to  Joseph's  hand,  .the  prison. 

23  looked  not  to  any  thing,  .under  his  hand 

11  And  Pharaoh's  cup  (was)  in  my  hand:  and 

13  shalt  deliver  Pharaoh's  cup  into  his  hand 
35  lay  up  corn  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh 
42  Pharaoh  took  off  his  ring  from  his  hand 
42  put  it  upon  Joseph's  hand,  and  arrayed 
44  without  thee  shall  no  man  lift  up  his  ha. 
37  deliver  him  into  my  hand,  and  I  will  bri. 

9  of  my  hand  shalt  thou  require  him  :  if  I 

12  And  take  double  money  in  your  hand 

12  the  money,  .ca^ry  (it)  agaiu  in  your  hand 
15  they  took  double  money  in  their  hand 

21  we  have  brought  it  again  in  our  hand 

22  we  brought  down  in  our  hands  to  buy  fo. 
26  the  present  which  (was)  in  their  hand 
17  the  man  in  whose  hand  the  cup  is  found 

4  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  ey. 

29  put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  ttii. 

14  upon  Manasseh's  head,  guiding  his  hands 
17  his  right  hand  upon  the  head  of  Ephraim 
17  he  held  up  his  father's  hand,  to  remove 
22  I  took  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite 

8  thy  hand  (shall  be)  in  the  neck  of  thine  e. 

24  the  arms  of  his  hands  were  made  strong 
24  by  the  hands  of  the  mighty  (God)  of  Ja. 
19  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  shep. 

8  deliver  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egy. 

19  not  let  you  go,  no,  not  by  a  mighty  hand 

20  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  and  smite  E. 

2  What  (is)  that  in  thine  hand  ?  And  he 
4  Put  forth  thine  hand . .  he  put  forth  his  ha. 
6  Put  now  thine  hand  into  thy  bosom.  And 
6  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom  :  and  when 

6  behold,  his  hand  (was)  leprous  as  snow 

7  Put  thine  hand  into  thy  bosom  again 

7  he  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom  again 

13  by  the  hand  (of  him  whom)  thou  wilt 
17  thou  shalt  take  this  rod  in  thine  hand 

20  and  Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  his  h. 

21  those  wonders.  .1  have  put  in  thine  hand 

21  to  put  a  sword  iu  their  hand  to  slay  us 
1  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  let  them  go 
1  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  drive  them 

4  that  I  may  lay  my  hand  upon  Egypt 

5  when  I  stretch  forth  mine  hand  upon  E. 

15  the  rod.  .shalt  thou  take  in  thine  hand 
17  smite  with  the  rod  that  (is)  in  mine  hand 

19  stretch  out  thine  hand  upon  the  waters 

5  Say  unto  Aaron,  Stretch  forth  thine  hand 

6  And  Aaron  stretched  out  his  hand  over 
17  Aaron  stretched  out  his  hand  with  his 

3  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thy  cattle 

15  now  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  that  I 

22  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  toward  heaven 
12  Stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  land  of 

21  Stretch  out  thine  hand  toward  heaven 

22  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  h. 
it  eat  it ;  (with),  .your  staff  in  your  hand 

3  by  strength  of  hand  the  Lord  brought 

9  be  for  a  sign  unto  thee  upon  thine  hand 
9  with  a  strong  hand  hath  the  Lord  brou. 

14,  16  By  strength  of  hand  the  Lord  brou. 

16  it  shall  be  for  a  token  upon  thine  hand 

8  the  children,  .went  out  with  an  high  ha. 
16,  26  stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  sea 
21,  27  Moses  stretched,  .his  hand  over  the 

30  saved-  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians 

9  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  dest. 

17  O  Lord,  (which)  thy  hands  have  establi. 

20  Miriam . .  took  a  timbrel  in  her  hand  ;  and 

3  died  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  land 
5  thy  rod . .  take  in  thine  hand,  and  go 

9  stand,  .with  the  rod  of  God  in  mine  hand 

11  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand,  that  Isra 
it  and  when  he  let  down  his  hand,  Amalek 

12  But  Moses' hands  (were)  heavy ;  and  they 

12  stayed  up  his  hands,  .and  his  hands  were 
9,  10  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians 

10  delivered,  .out  of  the  hands  of  Pharaoh1. 
10  from  under  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians 

13  There  shall  not  an  hand  touch  it,  but  he 
13  but  God  deliver  (him)  into  his  hand ;  then 
16  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  he  shall 
20  with  a  rod,  and  he  die  under  his  hand  By 
24  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for; 

4  If  the  theft  be  certainly  found  in  his  ha 
8,  11  put  his  hand  unto  his  neighbour's  go. 
1  put  not  thine  hand  with  the  wicked  to  be 

31  inhabitants  of  the  land  into  your  hand 


15- 
16. 
16. 
22. 
24. 
25- 
25- 
26. 
26. 
Num.  4. 

4- 
4- 
*• 
5- 
5- 
6. 
7- 


Exod24.  11  upon  the  nobles,  .he  laid  not  liis  hand 
29.  10,  15,  19  shall  put  their  hands  upon  the  he. 

29.  20  and  upon  the  thumb  of  their  right  hand 
29. 25  thou  shalt  receive  them  of  their  hands 

30.  19,  21  shall  wash  their  hands  and  their  feet 
32.    4  And  he  received  (them)  at  their  hand 

32.  11  with  great  power,  and  with  a  mighty  ha  ? 
32.  15  two  tables  of  the  testimony,  .in  his  hand 
32.  19  cast  the  tables  out  of  his  hands,  and  brake 
34.    4  took  in  his  hand  the  two  tables  of  stone 

34.  29  the  two  tables  of  testimony  in  Moses'  ha. 

35.  25  all  the  women . .  did  spin  with  their  hands 
35.  29  commanded  to  be  made  by  the  hand  of 
38.  21  by  the  hand  of  Ithamar,  son  to  Aaron  the 
40.  31  washed  their  hands  and  their  feet  there. 

Lev.    1.    4  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of 
2,  8,  13  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head 
4  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,  and 
15  elders . .  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  he. 
24,  29,  33  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head 

30  His  own  hands  shall  bring  the  offerings 
14,  18,  22  laid  their  hands  upon  the  head  of 

23  put  (it),  .upon  the  thumb  of  his  right  ha. 

24  upon  the  thumbs  of  their  right  hands 

36  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  M. 

22  Aaron  lifted  up  his  hand  toward  the  pe. 
11  spoken  unto  them  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
14,  17,  25,  28  upon  the  thumb  of  his.  .hand 
32  hand  is  not  able  to  get  (that  which  per.) 
11  and  hath  not  rinsed  his  hands  in  water 
21  Aaron  shall  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the 
21  send  (him)  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man 

25  Neither  from  a  stranger's  hand  shall  ye 
14  that  heard,  .lay  their  hands  upon  his  he. 

14  or  buyest  (ought)  of  thy  neighbour's  ha. 
28  remain  in  the  hand  of  him  that,  .bought 
25  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy 
46  in  mount  Sinai  by  the  hand  of  Moses 

28  under  the  hand  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  A. 

37  commandment  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand 
45  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of  M. 
49  they  were  numbered  by  the  hand  of  Mo. 
18  the  priest  shall  have  in  his  hand  the  bitter 

25  shall  take.,  out  of  the  woman's  hand,  and 
21  besides  (that)  that  his  hand  shall  get :  ac. 

8  under  the  hand  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  A. 

10  shall  put  their  hands  upon  the  Levites 
i2  the  Levites  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the 

23  commandment  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand 
13  commandment  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand 
23  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short?  thou 
23  commanded  you  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
40  the  Lord  said  to  him  by  the  hand  of  M. 

11  Moses  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  with  his 

20  with  much  people,  and  with  a  strong  ha. 

2  wilt. .  deliver  this  people  into  my  hand 

26  taken  all  his  land  out  of  his  hand,  even 
34  for  1  have  delivered  him  into  thy  hand 

7  the  rewards  of  divination  in  their  hand 
23  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand :  and  the  ass 

29  I  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 

31  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand :  and  he 
7  when  Phinehas.  .took  a  javelin  in  his  ha. 

iS  Take. .Joshua,  .and  lay  thine  hand  upon 
23  he  laid  his  hands  upon  him,  and  gave  him 

23  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  M. 

6  and  the  trumpets  to  blow  in  his  hand 

1  with  their  armies  under  the  hand  of  Mo. 

3  Israel  went  out  with  an  high  hand  in  the 

18  Or  (if)  he  smite  him  with  an  hand  weap. 

21  Or  in  enmity  smite  him  with  his  hand 
25  deliver,  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  revenger 
13  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  M. 

25  they  took  of  the  fruit,  in  their  hands 

27  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Amorites 

7  blessed  thee  in  all  the  works  of  thy  hand 

15  the  hand  of  the  LORD  was  against  them 

24  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Sihon  the 

30  that  he  might  deliver  him  into  thy  hand 

2  I  will  deliver  him.  .into  thy  hand  ;  and 

3  Lord  our  God  delivered  into  our  hands 

8  out  of  the  hand  of  the  two  kings  of  the 
24  show,  .thy  greatness,  and  thy  mighty  ha. 

28  shall  serve  gods,  the  work  of  meu's  hands 
34  wonders,  aud  by  war,  and  by  a  mighty  h. 
15  brought  thee  out.  .through  a  mighty  ha. 

8  shalt  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  thine  h. 

21  brought  us  out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  h. 

8  Lord  brought  you  out  with  a  mighty  ha. 

8  from  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 

19  the  mightyhand,  and  the  stretched  out 
24  he  shall  deliver  their  kings  into  thine  h. 
17  the  might  of  (mine)  hand  hath  gotten  me 
15  two  tables  of  the  covenant,  .in  my  two  h. 
17  tables,  and  cast  them  out  of  my  two  ha. 

26  brought,  .out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  ha. 

10.  3  up.  .having  the  two  tables  in  mine  hand 

11.  2  your  God,  his  greatness,  his  mighty  hand 
11. 18  and  bind  theni-for  a  sign  upon  your  hand 

12.  6  heave  offerings  of  your  hand,  and  your 
12.    7  rejoice  in  all  that  ye  put  your  hand  unto 
12. 11  the  heave  offering  of  your  hand,  and  all 
12.  17  offerings,  or  heave  offering  of  thine  hand 

12.  18  in  all  that  thou  puttest  thine  hands  unto 

13.  9  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put 
13.   9  and  afterwards  the  hand  of  all  the  people 

13.  17  nought  of  the  cursed  thing  to  thine  hand 

14.  25  bind  up  the  money  in  thine  hand,  and 

14.  29  bless  thee  in  all  the  work  of  thine  hand 

15.  3  with  thy  brother  thine  hand  shall  release 
15.  7  nor  shut  thine  hand  from  thy  poor  brot. 
15.   8  thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  unto  h. 


27. 
27. 
27, 
3*- 
33> 
33 
35. 
35> 
35 
36. 
Deut.  1. 


Josh. 


Deut  15.  10  and  in  all  that  thou  puttest  thine  hand 

15.  11  Thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  unto 

16.  10  a  tribute  of  a  freewill  offering  of  thine  h. 
16. 15  bless  thee .  .in  all  the  works  of  thine  ha. 

17.  7  The  hands  of  the  witnesses  shall  be  first 
17.  7  and  afterward  the  hauds  of  all  the  people 
19.  5  his  hand  fetcheth  a  stroke  with  the  ax  to 
19.  12  deliver  hini  into  the  hand  of  theavengerof 

19.  21  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for  f. 

20.  13  thy  God  hath  delivered  it  into  thine  hand 
2i.    6  shall  wash  their  hands  over  the  heifer 

21.  7  Our  hands  have  not  shed  this  blood,  nei. 
si.  10  God  hath  delivered  them  into  thine  hand 

20  in  all  that  thou  settest  thine  hand  to  in 

25  thou  mayest  pluck  the  ears  with  thine  h. 
1  give  (it)  in  her  hand,  and  send  her  out  of 

3  giveth  (it)  in  her  hand,  and  sendeth  her 
19  may  bless  theeiu.  .the  work  of  thine  hand 
ii  out  of  the  hand  of  him  that  smiteth  him 

11  putteth  forth  her  hand,  and  taketh  him 

4  priest  shall  take  the  basket  out  of  thine  h. 

8  brou.  us.  .out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  h. 
15  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  craftsman 

8,  20  all  that  thou  settest  thine  hand  unto 

12  and  to  bless  all  the  work  of  thine  hand 
32  and  (there  shall  be)  no  might  in  thine  h. 

9  thee  plenteous  in  every  work  of  thine  h. 

29  to  anger  through  the  work  of  your  hands 

27  lest  they  should  say,  Our  hand  (is)  high 

39  neither,  .that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand 

40  I  lift  up  my  hand  to  heaven,  and  say,  I 

41  If.  .mine  hand  take  hold  on  judgment,  I 

3  all  his  saints  (are)  in  thy  hand :  and  they 
7  let  his  hands  be  sufficient  for  him ;  and 

11  Bless,  .and  accept  the  work  of  his  hands 
9  for  Moses  had  laid  his  hands  upon  him 

12  And  in  all  that  mighty  hand,  and  in  all 
19  blood,  .on  our  head,  if  (any)  hand  be  upon 
24  Lord  hath  delivered  into  our  hands  all 

24  That  all.  .might  know  the  hand  of  the  L. 

13  a  man.  .with  his  sword  drawn  iu  his  hand 
2  See,  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Jericho 
7  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Amor. 

1  I  have  given  into  thy  hand  the  king  of  A. 

7  Lord  your  God  will  deliver  it  into  your  h. 
18  Stretch  out  the  spear  that  (is)  in  thy  hand 
iS  for  I  will  give  it  into  thine  hand.   And  J. 

18  stretched  out  the  spear,  .in  his  hand  to. 

19  as  soon  as  he  had  stretched  out  his  haud 

26  Joshua  drew  not  his  hand  back,  where. 

25  And  now,  behold,  we  (are)  in  thine  hand 

26  delivered  them  out  of  the  haud  of  the  c. 

6  Slack  not  thy  hand  from  thy  servants 

8  for  I  have  delivered  them  into  thine  hand 
19  God  hath  delivered  them  into  your  hand 

30  Lord  delivered  it  also,  .into  the  hand  of 
32  Lord  delivered  Lachish  into  the  hand  of 

8  Lord  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  I. 

2  as  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of 
2  whereof  I  spake  unto  you  by  the  hand  of 

5  not  deliver  the  slayer  up  into  his  hand 

9  not  die  by  the  hand  of  the  avenger  of  b. 
2,  8  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  Mo. 

44  Lord  delivered . .  enemies  into  their  hand 
9  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of 

31  children  of  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
8  I  gave  them  into  your  hand,  that  ye  mi. 

10  Balaam,  .so  I  delivered  you  out  of  his  ha. 

11  and  I  delivered  them  into  your  hand 
2  I  have  delivered  the  land  into  his  hand 

4  delivered . .  the  Perizzites  into  their  hand 
35  the  hand  of  the  house  of  Joseph  prevail. 

14  into  the  hands  of  spoilers  that  spoiled 

14  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  their  enem. 

15  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  them 

16  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  spoiled  them 

18  out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies  all  the 

23  neither  delivered  he  them  into  the  haud 
4  commanded  their  fathers  by  the  hand  of 

8  and  he  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Chus. 

10  of  Mesopotamia  into  his  hand  ;  and  his  h. 
15  Ehud,  .a  Benjamite,  a  man  left  handed 

21  Ehud  put  forth  his  left  hand,  and  took 

28  your  enemies  the  Moabites  into  your  ha. 
30  So  Moab  was  subdued,  .under  the  hand 

2  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Jabin 

7  and  I  will  deliver  him  into  thine  hand 

9  shall  sell  Siserainto  the  hand  of  a  woman 
14  Lord  hath  delivered  Sisera  into  thine  h. 
21  Then  Jael.  .took  an  hammer  in  her  hand 

24  the  hand  of  the  children  of  Israel  prosp. 
26  She  put  her  hand  to  the  nail,  and  her 

1  them  into  the  hand  of  Midian  seven  years 

2  the  hand  of  Midian  prevailed  against  Isr. 
9  I  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  E. 
9  out  of  the  hand  of  all  that  oppressed  you 

21  the  end  of  the  staff  that  (was)  in  his  hand 
36,  37  thou  wilt  save  Israel  by  mine  hand 
2  me  to  give  the  Midiauitesinto  their  hand 

2  saying,  Mine  own  hand  hath  saved  me 

6  the  number  that  lapped,  .their  hand  to 

7  and  deliver  the  Midianites  into  thine  h. 

8  So  the  people  took  victuals  in  their  hand 

9  for  I  have  delivered  it  into  thine  hand 

11  afterward  shall  thine  hands  be  strength. 

14  into  his  hand  hath  God  delivered  Midian 

15  Lord  hath  delivered  into  your  hand  the 

16  he  put  a  trumpet  in  every  man's  hand 

19  brake  the  pitchers  that  (were)  in  then-  h. 

20  and  held  the  lamps  in  their  left  hands 
20  and  the  trumpets  in  their  right  hands  to 

3  God  hath  delivered  into  your  hands  the 


24. 

24. 

24. 

Judg.  1, 


HAND 


446 


HAND 


Judg.  8.    6, 15  Are.  .ZebahandZabnunna.  .in thine h. 

3.  7  delivered  ZebahandZalmuuna  into  mine  h. 
8.  22  thou  liast  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of 

8.  34  out  of  the  hands  of  all  their  enemies  on 

9.  16  according  to  the  deserving  of  his  hands 
9.  17  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  Midian 
9.  29  to  God  this  people  were  under  my  hand  ! 

9.  48  Abimeleeh  took  an  ax  in  his  hand,  and 
10.   7  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines 

10.  7  into  the  hands  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

10. 12  cried,  .and  I  delivered  you  out  of  their  h. 

11.  21  Sihon  and  all  his  people  into  the  hand  of 
11.  30  the  children  of  Amnion  into  mine  hands 

11.  32  and  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  his  h. 

12.  2  called. .ye  delivered  me  not  out  of  their  h. 

12.  3  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  my  hand 

13.  t  Lord  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of 
13.    5  deliver  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Ph. 

13.  23  received,  .a  meat  offering  at  our  hands 

14.  6  and  (lie  had)  nothing  in  his  hand  :  hut 

15.  12  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  the  Philis. 

15. 13  bind  thee,  .and  deliver  thee  into  their  h, 
15.  14  and  his  bands  loosed  from  off  his  hands 
15.  15  put  forth  his  hand  and  took  it,  and  slew 
15. 17  he  cast  away  the  jawbone  out  of  his  hand 
15.  18  given  this  great  deliverance  into  the  hand 

15.  18  and  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  uncircum.? 

16.  18  came  up.  .and  brought  money  in  their  h. 
16.  23  delivered  Samson  our  enemy  into  our  h. 
16.  24  Our  god  hath  delivered  into  our  hands 

16.  26  said  unto  the  lad  that  held  him  by  the  h. 

17.  3  the  silver,  .from  my  hand  for  my  son,  to 

18.  10  for  God  hath  given  it  into  your  hands 

18.  19  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy  mouth,  and  go 

19.  27  and  her  hands  (were)  upon  the  threshold 

20.  28  Go  up.  .1  will  deliver  them  into  thine  h. 
Ruth  1.  13  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  out  against 

4.  5  What  day  thou  huyest  the  field  of  the  h. 
4.   9  that  I  have  bought  all.  .of  the  hand  of  N. 

1  Sa.   2.  13  with  a  flesh  hook  of  three  teeth  in  his  h. 

4.  8  out  of  the  hand  of  these  mighty  gods? 

5.  4  the  palms  of  his  hands  (were)  cutoff  upon 
5.    6  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  upon 

5.  7  his  hand  is  sore  upon  us,  and  upon  Dagon 
5.    9  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  the  city 

5.  11  the  hand  of  God  was  very  heavy  there 

6.  3  known,  .why  his  hand  is  not  removed 
6.    5  peradventure  he  will  lighten  his  hand 

6.  9  then  we  shall  know  that  (it  is)  not  his  h. 

7.  3  he  will  deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
7.  8  he  will  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 
7.  13  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  the  P. 
7.  14  did  Israel  deliver  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
9.  8  I  have  here  at  hand  the  fourth  part  of  a 
9.  16  he  may  save  my  people  out  of  the  hand 

10.  4  which  thou  shalt  receive  of  their  hands 
10.  18  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Eg. 

10.  18  and  out  of  the  hand  of  all  kingdoms,  (and) 

11.  7  sent  (them),  .by  the  hands  of  messengers 

12.  3  of  whose  hand  have  I  received  (any)  bribe 
12.  4  neither,  .taken  ought  of  any  man's  hand 
12.  5  that  ye  have  not  fouud  ought  in  my  baud 
12.  9  he  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Sisera,  ca. 
12.    9  and  into  the  hand  of  the  Philistines 

12.  9  and  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Moab 
12.  10  deliver  us  out  of  the  baud  of  our  enemies 

12.  11  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  your  en. 
12. 15  then  shall  the  hand  of  the  Lord  be  again. 

13.  22  neither  sword  nor  spear  found  in  the  ha. 
14. 10  hath  delivered  them  into  our  hand  :  and 

14.  12  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  Israel 
14.  13  And  Jonathan  climbed  up  upon  his  hands 
14.  19  and  Saul  said.  .Withdraw  thine  hand 

14.  26  no  man  put  his  hand  to  his  mouth  :  for 
14.  27  the  end  of  the  rod.  .in  his  hand,  and  dip. 
14.  27  and  put  his  hand  to  his  mouth ;  and  his 
14.  37  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  I. 
14.  43  the  end  of  the  rod  that  (was)  in  mine  ha. 
14.  48  out  of  the  hands  of  them  that  spoiled 
16.  16  that  he  shall  play  with  his  hand,  and  thou 

16.  23  took  an  harp,  and  played  with  his  hand 

17.  22  left  Ilia  carriage  in  the  hand  of  the  keeper 
17.  37  he  will  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  this 
17.  40  he  took  his  staff  in  his  hand,  and  chose 
17.  40  his  sling  (was)  in  his  hand  :  and  lie  drew 
17.  46  will  the  Loud  deliver  thee  into  mine  ha. 
17.  47  and  he  will  give  you  into  our  hands 

17.  49  David  put  his  hand  in  his  bag,  and  took 
17.  50  (there  was)  no  sword  in  the  hand  of  Da. 

17.  57  the  head  of  the  Philistine  in  his  hand 

18.  10  and  David  played  witli  his  hand,  as  at 
18.  10  and  (there  was)  a  javelin  in  Saul's  hand 
18.  17  Let  not  mine  hand  be  upon  him,  but 

i8.  17  let  the  hand  of  the  Philistines  be  upon  h. 
18.  21  that  the  hand  of  the  Philistines  may  be 

18.  25  make  David  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  Phil. 

19.  9  his  hand  :  and  David  played  with  (his)  h. 

20.  16  require  (it)at  the  hand  of  David's  enemies 

21.  3  Now  therefore  what  is  under  thine  hand  ? 
21.  3  give(me)five  (loaves  0f)  bread  in  mine  hand 
21.  4  no  common  bread  under  mine  hand  ;  but 
21.    8  is  there  not  here  under  thine  hand  spear 

21.  13  and  feigned  himself  mad  in  their  hands 

22.  6  now  Saul,  .having  his  spear  in  his  hand 
22.  17  because  their  hand  also  (is)  with  David 

22.  17  would  not  put  forth  their  hand  to  fall 

23.  4  deliver  the  Philistines  into  thine  hand 
23.   6  came  down  (with)  an  ephod  in  his  hand 
23.    7  God  hatjl  delivered  him  into  mine  hand 
23.  11  Will  the  men.  deliver  me.,  into  his  hand? 
23.  i2  me  and  my  men  into  the  hand  of  Saul  ? 
23. 14  but  God  delivered  him  not  into  his  hand 


i  Sa.  23.  16  Jonathan,  .strengthened  his  hand  in  God 
23.  17  the  hand  of  Saul,  .shall  not  fiud  thee 

23.  20  to  deliver  him  into  the  king's  hand 

-4.    4  deliver  thine  enemy  into  thinehand,  that 

24.  6  to  stretch  forth  mine  hand  against  him 
24.  10  delivered  thee  to  day  into  mine  hand  in 
24.  10  not  put  forth  mine  hand  against  my  lord 
24.  it  see  the  skirt  of  thy  robe  in  my  hand :  for 
24.  11  evil  nor  transgression  in  mine  hand,  and 
24.  12,  13  but  mine  hand  shall  not  be  upon  thee 
24.  15  plead,  .and  deliver  me  out  of  thine  hand 
24.  18  the  Lord  had  delivered  me  into  thine  h. 

24.  20  Israel  shall  be  established  in  thine  band 

25.  8  give . .  whatsoever  conieth  to  thine  hand 
25.  26  from  avenging  thyself  with  thine  owu  h, 
25.  33  from  avenging  myself  with  mine  own  ha. 

25.  35  So  David  received  of  her  hand  (that) 
-5-  39  of  my  reproach  from  the  hand  of  Nabal 

26.  8  delivered  thine  enemy  into  thine  hand 
26.  9  who  can  stretch  forth  his  hand  against 
26.  11  that  I  should  stretch  forth  mine  hand 
26.  18  have  I  done  ?  or  what  evil  (is)  in  mine  h.? 
2"6.  23  for  the  Lord  delivered  thee  into  (my)  h. 

26.  23  but  I  would  not  stretch  forth  mine  hand 

27.  1  now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  Saul 

27.  1  despair,  .so  shall  I  escape  out  of  his  hand 

28.  17  hath  rent  the  kingdom  out  of  thine  hand 
28.  19,  19  deliver,  .into  the  hand  of  the  Philis. 
30. 15  nor  deliver  me  into  the  hands  of  my  mas. 
30.  23  and  delivered  the  company,  .into  our  ha. 

2  Sa.    1.  14  to  stretch  forth  thine  hand  to  destroy  the 

2.  7  now  let  your  hands  be  strengthened,  and 

3.  8  not  delivered  theeinto  the  hand  of  David 
3.  12  and,  behold,  my  hand  (shall  be)  with  thee 
3.  18  saying,  By  the  hand  of  my  servant  David 
3.  18  save . .  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines 
3.  18  and  out  of  the  hand  of  all  their  enemies 

3.  34  Thy  hands  (were)  not  bound,  nor  thy  feet 

4.  1  his  hands  were  feeble,  and  all  the  Israel. 

4.  11  shall  I  not.  .require  his  blood  of  your  h. 
4. 12  and  cut  off  their  hands  and  their  feet,  and 

5.  19  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  mine  hand '! 
5.  19  deliver  the  Philistines  into  thine  hand 
8.    1  took,  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines 

10.    2  to  comfort  him  by  the  hand  of  his  serv. 

10.  10  he  delivered  into  the  hand  of  Abishai  his 

11.  14  wrote  a  letter,  .and  sent  (it)  by  the  hand 

12.  7  I  delivered  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  Saul 
12. 25  he  sent  by  the  hand  of  Nathan  the  prop. 

13.  5  that  I  may  see  (it),  and  eat  (it)  at  her  ha. 
13.   6  in  my  sight,  that  I  may  eat  at  her  hand 
13. 10  Bring  the  meat.,  that  Imayeatof  thine  h. 

13.  19  laid  her  hand  on  her  head,  and  went  on 

14.  19  (Is  not)  the  hand  of  Joab  with  thee  in  all 

15.  s  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  him,  and 

16.  8  delivered  the  kingdom  into  the  hand  of 
16.  21  then  shall  the  hands  of  all.  .be  strong 
18.    2  a  third  part . .  under  the  hand  of  Joab 
18.    2  a  third  part  under  the  hand  of  Abishai 
18.    2  a  third  part  under  the  hand  of  Ittai  the 
18.  12  put  forth  mine  hand  against  the  king's 
18.  28  that  lifted  up  their  hand  against  my  lord 
20.    9  Amasa  Ivy  the  beard  with  the  right  hand 
20.  10  took  no  heed  to  the  sword,  .in  Joab's  h. 

20.  21  hath  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  king 

21.  9  he  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  G. 
21.  20  a  man.  .that  had  on  every  hand  sixfing. 

21.  22  fell  by  the  baud  of  David,  and  by  the  ha. 
22. 21  according  to  the  cleanness  of  my  hands 

22.  35  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war ;  so  that  a 

23.  6  because  they  cannot  be  taken  with  hands 
23.  10  until  his  hand  was  weary,  aud  his  hand 
23.  21  and  the  Egyptian  had  a  spear  in  his  hand 

23.  21  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  Egyptian's  h. 

24.  14  let  us  fall  now  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
24. 14  and  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man 
24.  16  when  the  angel  stretched  out  his  hand 
24.  16  said.  .It  is  enough  ;  stay  now  thine  hand 
24.  17  Let  thine  hand,  I  pray  thee,  be  against 

1  Ki.  2.  25  king  Solomon  sent  by  the  hand  of  Benai. 
2.  46  the  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand 
8. 15  and  hath  with  his  hand  fulfilled  (it),  say. 
8.  24  hast  fulfilled  (it)  with  thine  hand,  as  (it  is) 
8.  42  For  they  shall  hear,  .of  thy  strong  hand 
8.  53  as  thou  spakest  by  the  hand  of  Moses  thy 
8.  56  which  he  promised  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
11.  12  I  will  rend  it  out  of  the  hand  of  thy  son 
11.  26  even  he  lifted  up  (his)  hand  against  the 
11.  27  the  cause  that  he  lifted  up  (his)  hand 
ir.  31  I  will  rend  the  kingdom  out  of  the  hand 
11.  34  not.  .the  whole  kingdom  out  of  his  hand 
11.  35  I  will  take  the  kingdom  out  of  his  son's  h. 
13.   4  that  he  put  forth  his  hand  from  the  altar 
13.   4  And  his  hand,  .dried  up,  so  that  he  could 
13.    6  that  my  hand  may  be  restored  me  again 

13.  6  the  king's  hand  was  restored  him  again 

14.  18  which  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  his  serv. 

14.  27  unto  the  bauds  of  the  chief  of  the  guard 

15.  18  delivered  into  the  hand  of  his  servants 

16.  7  also  by  the  hand  of  the  prophet  Jehu  the 

16.  7  provoking  him . .  with  the  work  of  his  ha. 

17.  11  Bring  me.  .a  morsel  of  bread  in  thine  h. 

18.  9  wouldest  deliver  thy  servant  into  the  ha. 
18.  46  And  the  hand  of  the  LORD  was  on  Elijah 
20.  6  they  shall  put  fit)  in  their  hand,  and  take 
20.  13  I  will  deliver  it  into  thine  hand  this  day 
20.  28  deliver  all  this,  .multitude  into  thine  ha. 
20.  42  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  (thy)  hand  a  mau 
22.  3  take  it  not  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of 
22.  6,  15  Lord  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  hand 
22.  12  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  king's  hand 

22. 34  Turn  thine  hand,  and  carry  me  out  of 


2  Ki.  3.  10,  13  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  Mo. 
3.  11  which  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  Eli. 
3.  15  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him 

3.  iS  deliver  the  Moabites  also  into  yoitr  hand 

4.  29  take  my  staff"  in  thine  hand,  and  go  thy 
5. 11  and  strike  his  hand  over  the  place,  and 

5.  t8  he  leaueth  on  my  baud,  and  I  bow  myse. 
5.  20  in  not  receiving  at  his  hands  that  which 

5.  24  he  took  (them)  from  their  hand,  and  besto. 

6.  7  And  be  put  out  his  hand,  and  took  it 

7.  2  a  lord  ou  whose  hand  the  king  leaned 

7.  17  appointed  the  lord  on  whose  hand  he  le. 

8.  8  Take  a  present  in  thine  hand,  and  go,  meet 

8.  20,  22  Edom  revolted  from  under  the  hand 
g.    1  take  this  box  of  oil  in  thine  hand,  and  go 

9.  7  avenge  the  blood,  .at  the  hand  of  Jezebel 
9.  23  Joram  turned  his  hands,  and  fled, and  said 
q,  35  and  the  feet,  and  the  palms  of  (her)  hands 

10.  15  give,  .thine  hand.     And  he  gave,  .his  ha. 

10.  24  men  whom  I  have  brought  into  your  ha. 

11.  8  every  man  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand 
11.  11  every  man  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand 

11.  16  And  they  laid  hands  on  her;  and  she  went 
12. 11  gave  the  money,  .into  the  hands  of  them 

12.  15  the  men  into  whose  hand  they  delivered 

13.  3  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  Hazael 
13.    3  aud  into  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad  the  son 
13.    5  they  went  out  from  under  the  hand  of  the 
13.  16  Put  thine  hand  upon,  .he  put  his  hand 
13.  16  Elisha  put  his  hands  upon  the  king's  ha. 
13.  25  took  again  out  of  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad 

13.  25  cities  which  he  had  taken  out  of  the  hand 

14.  5  as  the  kingdom  was  confirmed  in  his  hand 
14.  25  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  his  servant  Jonah 

14.  27  he  saved  them  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam 

15.  19  hand,  .to  confirm  the  kingdom  in  his  hand 
17.  7  from  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of 
17.  20  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  spoilers 

17.  39  deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of  all  your 

18.  29  not  be  able  to  deliver  you  out  of  his  hand 
18.  30  shall  not  lie  delivered  into  the  hand  of 
18.  33  delivered  at  all  his  land  of  the  band  of 
18.  34  they  delivered  Samaria  out  of  mine  hand? 
18.  35  delivered  their  country  out  of  mine  hand 

18.  35  should  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  mine  ha.? 

19.  10  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 
19.  14  HezeKiah  received  the  letter  of  the  hand 
19.  18  nogods,butthe  work  of  men'shands,wood 
19. 19  save  thou  us  out  of  his  hand,  that  all  the 
21. 14  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  their  ene. 
22.    5  let  them  deliver  it  into  the  hand  of  the 
22.    7  money  that  was  delivered  into  their  hand 
22.   9  into  the  hand  of  them  that  do  the  work 
22. 17  provoke  me.  .with,  .works  of  their  hand 

1  Ch.  4. 10  that  thine  hand  might  be  with  me,  and 
5. 10  with  the  Hagarites,  who  fell  by  their  hand 

5.  20  Hagarites  were  delivered  into  their  hand 

6.  15  carried,  .by  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar 

11.  23  in  the  Egyptian's  hand  (was)  a  spear  like 
11.  23  plucked  the  spear  out  of .  .Egyptian's  hand 
13.   9  TJzza  put  forth  his  baud  to  hold  the  ark 

13.  10  he  put  his  hand  to  the  ark  :  and  there  he 

14.  10  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  mine  hand  ? 
14.  10  for  I  will  deliver  them  iuto  thine  hand 
14.  11  broken  in  upon  mine  enemies  by  mine  h. 
16.    7  into  the  hand  of  Asaph  and  his  brethren 

18.  1  towns  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines 

19.  11  unto  the  hand  of  Abishai  his  brother,  and 

20.  8  fell  by  the  hand  of  David,  and  by  the  h. 
21. 13  let  me  fall  now  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord 

21.  13  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man 
21.  15  said.  .It  is  enough,  stay  now  thine  hand 
21.  16  having  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  stret. 

21.  17  Let  thine  baud,  I  pray  thee,  O  Lord  my 

22.  iS  inhabitants  of  the  land  into  mine  hand 
25..  2  under  the  hands  of  Asaph,  which  proph. 
25.    3  under  the  hands  of  then*  father  Jeduthun 

25.  6  these  (were)  under  the  hands  of  then"  fa. 

26.  28  (it  was)  under  the  hand  of  Shelomith,  and 

28.  19  understand  in  writing  by  (bis)  hand  upon 

29.  5  (to  be  made)  by  the  hands  of  artificers 
29.    8  by  the  hand  of  Jehiel  the  Gershonite 

29.  12  hand  (is)  power  and  might;  and  in  thine  h. 

29.  16  this  store,  .(cometh)  of  thine  hand,  and 

2  Ch.  6.    4  who  hath  with  his  hands  fulfilled  (that) 

6.  15  hast  fulfilled  (it)  with  thine  hand,  as  (it 

6.  32  thy  mighty  hand,  and  thy  stretched  out 

8.  18  sent  him,  by  the  hands  of  his  servants 

10.  15  which  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  Ahijah  the 

12.  5  I  also  left  you  in  the  hand  of  Shishak 

12.  7  out  upon  Jerusalem  by  the  hand  of  Shis. 
12. 10  to  the  bauds  of  the  chief  of  the  guard 

13.  8  kingdom . .  in  the  hand  of  the  sons  of  D. 
13.  16  and  God  delivered  them  into  their  hand 

15.  7  let  not  your  hands  be  weak :  for  your  wo. 

16.  7  king  of  'Syria  escaped  out  of  thine  hand 

16.  8  Lord,  he  delivered  them  into  thine  hand 

17.  5  Lord  stablished  the  kingdom  in  his  hand 

18.  5  God  will  deliver  (it)  into  the  king's  hand 
18.  11  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  hand  of  the  king 

18. 14  they  shall  be  delivered  into  your  hand 
18.  33  Turn  thine  hand,  that  thou  mayest  carry 
20.    6  and  in  thine  bund  (is  there  not)  power  and 
21. 10  under  the  hand  of  Judah  unto  this  day 
21. 10  did  Libnah  revolt  from  under  his  hand 

23.  7  every  man  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand 
23.  10  every  man  having  his  weapon  in  his  ha. 
23.  15  they  laid  hands  on  her :  and  when  she  was 

23.  18  by  the  hand  of  the  priests  the  Levites 

24.  11  was  brought,  .by  the  band  of  the  Levites 
24.  24  delivered  a.. great  host  into  their  hand 

25. 15  deliver  their  own  people  out  of  thine  ha.? 


HAND 


447 


HAND 


2CI1.25. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 

32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32. 
32. 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
36. 


Ezra 


Neh. 


Esth. 


Job 


26. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
3°- 
3°- 


20  deliver  them  into  the  hand  (of .  .enemies) 
11  account  by  the  hand  of  Jeiel  the  scribe 

11  under  the  hand  of  Hananiah,  (one)  of  the 
13  under  their  hand  (was)  an  army,  three 

19  (had)  a  censer  in  his  hand  to  burn  incense 
5  him  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Syria 
5  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Israel,  who 
9  he  hath  delivered  thein  into  your  hand 

23  and  they  laid  their  hands  upon  them 

12  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  one  heart 

16  (they  received)  of  the  hand  of  the  Levites 

13  (were)  overseers  under  the  hand  of  Con. 

13  to  deliver  their  lands  out  of  mine  hand? 

14  could  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine  hand 

14  be  able  to  deliver  you  out  of  mine  hand  ? 

15  out  of  mine  hand,  and  out  of  the  hand  of 
15  your  God  deliver  you  out  of  mine  hand? 

17  delivered  their  people  out  of  mine  hand 
17  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine  hand 

19  (which  were)  the  work  of  the  hands  of  m. 
22  saved,  .from,  the  hand  of  Sennacherib  the 
22  and  from  the  hand  of  all  (other),  and 

5  and  the  ordinances  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
9  of  the  hand  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim 

10  they  put  (it)  in  the  hand  of  the  workmen. 
17  the  hand  of.  .overseers,  and  to  the  hand 

25  provoke  me.  .with,  .the  works  of  their  ha. 

6  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of  M. 

11  sprinkled  (the  blood)  from  their  hands 

17  he  gave  (them)  all  into  his  hand 

6  strengthened  their  hands  with  vessels  of 

8  by  the  hand  of  Mithredath  the  treasurer 

4  weakened  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Ju. 
22  to  strengthen  their  hands  in  the  work  of 

6  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God  upon 

9  to  the  good  hand  of  his  God  upon  him 
28  the  hand  of  the  Lord  my  God  (was)  upon 
iS  by  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  us 

22  The  hand  of  our  God  (is)  upon  all  them 

26  even  weighed  unto  their  hand  six  hundr. 
31  the  hand  of  our  God  was  upon  us,  and 
33  by  the  hand  of  Meremoth  the  son  of  TJ. 

2  the  hand  of  the  princes  and  rulers  hath 

7  into  the  hand  of  the  kings  of  the  lands 

19  they  gave  their  hands  that  they  would  put 
10  thou  hast  redeemed,  .by  thy  stroug  hand 

8  according  to  the  good  hand  of  my  God 

18  I  told  them  of  the  hand  of  my  God  which 
18  So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  (this) 

17  with  one  of  his  hands  wrought  in  the  wo. 

5  the  fifth  time  with  an  open  letter  in  his  h. 

9  Their  hands  shall  be  weakened  from  the 
9  Now  therefore,  (0  God,)  strengthen  my  h. 

6  Amen,  Amen,  with  lifting  up  their  hands 

14  and  laws,  by  the  hand  of  Moses  thy  serv. 

24  and  thou,  .gavest  them  into  their  hands 

27  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  who  vex. 

27  saved  them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  ene. 

28  leftest  thou  them  in  the  band  of  their  en. 
30  into  the  hand  of  the  people  of  the  lands 
24  at  the  king's  hand  in  all  matters  concer. 

21  if  ye  do  (so)  again,  I  will  lay  hands  on  you 
21  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  Ahasuer. 

6  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Morde. 
9  to  the  hands  of  those  that  have  the  char. 

10  the  king  took  his  ring  from  his  hand,  and 
2  the  golden  sceptre  that  (was)  in  his  hand 
2  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  Ahasuer. 
9  be  delivered  to  the  hand  of  one  of  the  ki. 

7  because  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the  Jews 

2  to  lay  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt 
10  but  on  the  spoil  laid  they  not  their  hand 

15  but  on  the  prey  they  laid  not  their  hand 

16  but  they  laid  not  their  hands  on  the  prey 

10  Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands 

11  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch 

12  ouly  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  h. 

5  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  aud  touch 

6  he  (is)  in  thine  hand ;  but  save  Ins  life 

3  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  weak  ha. 

12  so  that  their  hands  cannot  perform,  .ent. 
15  But  he  saveth.  .from  the  hand  of  the  m. 

18  he  woundeth,  and  his  hands  make  whole 
9  that  he  would  let  loose  his  hand,  and  cut 

23  Or,  Deliver  me  from  the  enemy's  hand? 

23  oi",  Redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mig.? 

24  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wick. 
33  (that)  might  lay  his  hand  upon  us  both 

7  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  thine  hand 

8  Thine  hands  have  made  me,  and  fashion. 

14  If  iniquity  (be)  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far 

6  into  whose  hand  God  bringeth  (abundant.) 

9  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  this? 

10  In  whose  hand  (is)  the  soul  of  every  living 

15  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of  thine  hand 
23  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  his  hand 

25  he  stretcheth  out  his  hand  against  God 

11  turned  me  over  into  the  hands  of  the  wi. 
3  who  (is)  lie  (that)  will  strike  hands  with 
9  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  be  strong. 

21  for  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me 

10  and  his  hands  shall  restore  their  goods 

22  every  hand  of  the  wicked  shall  come 

5  be  astonished,  and  lay.  .hand  upon.  .mo. 

16  Lo,  their  good  (is)not  in  their  hand :  the 

13  his  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked  serpe. 

11  I  will  teach  you  by  the  h.  of  God  :  (that) 
22  spare  :  he  would  fain  flee  out  of  his  hand 

9  He  putteth  forth  his  hand  upon  the  rock 

20  and  my  bow  was  renewed  in  my  hand 

2  whereto  (might)  the  strength  of  their  h. 

21  with  thy  strong  hand  thou  opposest  thy. 


Job  30.  24  Howbeit  he  will  not  stretch  out  (his)  hand 
31.  21  If  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  against  thef. 
25  and  because  mine  hand  had  gotteu  much 

27  or  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my- hand 

19  for  they  all  (are)  the  work  of  his  hands 

20  mighty  shall  be  taken  away  without  hand 
7  givest.  .or  what  receiveth  he  of  thine  ha.? 

7  He  sealeth  up  the  hand  of  every  man 
4  I  will  lay  mine  hand  upon  my  mouth 

6  dominion  over  the  works  of  thy  hands 

12  Arise,  0  Lord  ;  0  God,  lift  up  thine  hand 
14  mischief,  .to  requite  (it)  with  thy  hand 

14  From  men  (which  are)  thy  hand,  O  Lord 
title,  his  enemies,  and  from  the  hand  of  Saul 
20,  24  according  to  the  cleanuess  of  my  ha. 
34  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  so  that  a 

8  Thine  baud  shall  find  out  all  thine  ene. 

16  the  wicked,  .pierced  my  hands  and  my 

10  In  whose  hands  (is)  mischief,  and  their 
2  when  I  lift  up  my  hands  toward  thy  holy 

4  give  them  after  the  work  of  their  hands 

5  they  regard  not.  .the  operation  of  his  h. 
5  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit :  thou 
8  not  shut  me  up  into  the  hand  of  the  ene. 

15  My  times  (are)  in  thy  hand :  deliver  me 
15  from  the, hand  of  mine  enemies,  and  from 

4  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon 

11  let  not  ihe  hand  of  the  wicked  remove 

24  for  the  Lord  upholdeth  (him  with)  his  h. 
33  The  Lord  will  not  leave  him  in  his  hand 

2  fast  in  me,  and  thy  hand  presseth  me  sore 

10  I  am  consumed  by  the  blow  of  thine  hand 
2  didst  drive  out  the  heathen  with  thy  hand 

20  He  hath  put  forth  his  hands  against  such 
2  ye  weigh  the  violence  of  your  hands  in 
31  Ethiopia  shall  soon  stretch  out  her  h. 

4  Deliver  me.  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  wic. 
23  thou  hast  holden  (me)  by  my  right  hand 

11  Why  withdrawest  thou  thy  hand,  even 
8  For  in  the  baud  of  the  Lord  (there  is)  a 

5  none  of  the  men .  .have  found  their  hands 

20  a  flock  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron 
42  They  remembered  not  his  hand,  (nor)  the 
61  and  his  glory  into  the  enemy's  hand 

17  Let  thy  hand  be  upon  the  Man  of  thy 

14  turned  my  hand  against  their  adversaries 

4  rid  (them)  out  of  the  hand  of  the  -wicked 

5  and  they  are  cut  off  from  thy  hand 

13  strong  is  thy  hand,  (and)  high  is  thy  right 

21  With  whom  my  hand  shall  be  established 

25  I  will  set  his  hand  also  in  the  sea,  and  his 
48  deliver  his  soul  from  the  hand  of  the  g.? 
17  establish,  .the  work  of  our  hands  upon  ns 
17  yea,  the  work  of  our  hands  establish  thou 

4 1  will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  hands 

4  In  his  hand  (are)  the  deep  places  of  the 

5  he  made  it ;  and  his  hands  formed  the 

7  and  we  (are),  .the  sheep  of  his  hand.  Tod. 
10  delivereth . .  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

25  and  the  heavens  (are)  the  work  of  thy  h. 

28  thou  openest  thine  hand,  they  are  filled 
10  he  saved,  .from  the  hand  of  him  that  ha. 
10  redeemed  them  from  the  hand  of  the  ene. 

26  he  lifted  up  his  hand  against  them,  to 

41  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the  heathen 

42  brought  into  subjection  under  their  hand 
2  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy 

27  That  they  may  know  that  this  (is)  thy  h. 
7  The  works  of  his  hands  (are)  verity  and 

4  Their  idols  (are),  .the  work  of  men's  hand 
7  They  have  hands,  but  they  handle  not 

73  Thy  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned 
173  Let  thine  hand  help  me  :  for  I  have  ch. 

5  the  Lord  (is)  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  h. 
2  (look)  unto  the  hand  of  their  masters,(and) 

2  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand  of  her  in. 

3  lest  the  righteous  put  forth  their  hands 

4  As  arrows,  .in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  man 
2  Lift  up  your  hands  (in)  the  sanctuary,  and 

15  The  idols.,  (are),  .the  work  of  men's  hands 

12  With  a  strong  hand,  and.  .stretched  out 

7  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thine  hand  against 

8  forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands 
10  Even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me,  and 

4  Keep  me.  .from  the  hands  of  the  wicked 

5  thy  works  ;  I  muse  on  the  work  of  thy  h. 

6  I  stretch  forth  my  hands  unto  thee  :  my 
1  the  Lord,  .which  teacheth  my  hands  to 

7  Send  thine  hand  from  above  ;  rid  me,  and 
7  deliver,  .from  the  hand  of  strange  child. 

ir  Rid  me.  .from  the  hand  of  strange  child. 

16  Thou  openest  thine  hand,  and  satisflest 
6  and  a  two  edged  sword  in  their  hand 

Prov.  1.  24  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  m. 
3.  27  it  is  in  the  power  of  thine  hand  to  do  (it) 
6.    5  as  a  roe  from  the  hand  (of  the  hunter) 
6.    5  as  a  bird  from  the  hand  of  the  fowler 
6.  to  slumber,  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to 
6.  17  tongue,  and  hands  that  shed  innocent  bl. 

10.  4  but  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich 

11.  21  (Though)  hand  (join)  in  hand,  the  wicked 

12.  14  tberecompence  of  a  man's  hands  shall  be 
12.  24  The  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule 
14.  1  foolish  plucketh  it  down  with  her  hands 
16  5  (though)  hand  (join)  in  hand,  he  shall  not 
17.  16  price  in  the  hand  of  a  fool  to  get  wisdom 
19. 24  A  slothful  (man)  hideth  his  hand  in  (his) 
21.  1  king's  heart  (is)  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
21.  25  desire,  .killeth  him  ;  for  his  hands 

33  slumber,  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to 
6  sendeth  a  message  by  the  hand  of  a  fool 

9  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  a  drunkard,  so 


31' 
3» 
34' 

34 

35. 
37' 
40. 

Psa.    8 


89. 
89. 

90. 
90. 

92. 

95- 
95- 
95- 
97- 

102. 

104. 

106. 

106. 

106. 

106. 

106. 

107. 

109. 

in. 

115- 

"5- 

119. 

119. 

121. 


127. 
134. 
I35- 
136. 
13S. 
13S. 

139- 
140. 

143- 
143- 
144* 
144. 
144. 
144. 

145- 
149. 


24. 
26. 
26. 


Song  5 
5 

1- 


Prov  26.  15  The  slothful  hideth  his  hand  in  (his)  bos 
30.  28  The  spider  taketh  hold  with  her  hands 

30.  32  if  thou  hast  thought  evil,  (lay)  thine  hand 

31.  19  She  layeth  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  and 
31.  20  She  reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  needy 
31.  31  Give  her  of  the  fruit  of  her  hands ;  and 

Eccl.  2.  11  I  looked  on.  .the  works,  .my  hands  had 
2.  24  I  saw,  that  it  (was)  from  the  hand  of  God 

4.  5  The  fool  foldeth  his  hands  together,  and 

5.  6  and  destroy  the  work  of  thine  hands? 
5. 14  and  (there  is)  nothing  in  his  hand 

5.  15  which  he  may  carry  away  in  his  hand 
7.  18  also  from  this  withdraw  not  thine  hand 

7.  26  snares  and  nets,  (and)  her  hands  (as)  ba. 
9.    1  the  wise,  .(are)  in  the  hand  of  God :  no 
9.  10  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do 

10.  18  through  idleness  of  the  hands  the  house 
6  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thine  hand 

4  My  beloved  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole 

5  and  my  hands  dropped  (with)  myrrh,  and 
14  His  hands  (are  as)  gold  rings  set  with  the 

1  the  work  of  the  hands  of  a.  .workman 
Isa.      1.  12  who  hath  required  this  at  your  hand,  to 
1.  15  will  not  hear:  your  hands  are  full  of  bl. 

1.  25  will  turn  my  hand  upon  thee,  and  purely 

2.  8  they  worship  the  work  of  their  own  hand 

3.  6  and  (let)  this  ruin  (be)  under  thy  hand 

3.  11  the  reward  of  his  hands  shall  he  given  him 
5.  12  neither  consider  the  operation  of  his  hand 

5.  25  stretched  forth  his  hand  against  them 
5. 25  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand  (is)  stret. 

6.  6  flew  one.  .having  a  live  coal  in  his  hand 

8.  11  the  Lord  spake  thus,  .with  a  strong  hand 

9.  12,  17,  21  but  his  hand  (is)  stretched  out  still 
10.  4  but  his  hand  (is)  stretched  out  still 

10.  5  staff  in  their  hand  is  mine  indignation 
10.  10  hand  hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  the  idols 

10. 13  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  (it) 
10.  14  my  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches 

10.  32  he  shall  shake  his  hand  (against)  the  mo. 

11.  8  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den 
11.  11  the  Lord  shall  set  his  hand  again  the 
11.  14  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  Edom  and  M. 

11. 15  shall  he  shake  lus  hand  over  the  river 
13.    2  shake  the  hand,  that  they  may  go  into 

13.  7  Therefore  shall  all  hands  be  faint,  and 

14.  26  this  (is)  the  hand  (that  is)  stretched  out 
14.  27  and  his  hand  (is)  stretched  out,  and  who 
17.   8  look  to  the  altars,  the  work  of  his  hands 
19.   4  give  over  into  the  hand  of  a  cruel  lord 

19. 16  shaking  of  the  hand  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
19.  25  Assyria  the  work  of  my  hands,  and  Israel 

22.  21  will  commit  thy  government  into  his  haud 

23.  11  He  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea 
25.  10  in  this  mountain  shall  the  hand  of  the 
25.  11  he  shall  spread  forth  his  hands  in  the 

25.  11  together  with  the  spoils  of  their  hands 

26.  11  thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not  see 

28.  2  cast  down  to  the  earth  with  the  hand 

29.  23  the  work  of  mine  hands,  in  the  midst  of  h. 
31.  3  the  Lord  shall  stretch  out  his  hand,  both 
31.   7  own  hands  have  made  unto  you  (for)  a 

34.  17  hand  hath  divided  it  unto  them  by  line 

35.  3  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  con. 

36.  15  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria 
36.  18  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria  1 
36. 19  they  delivered  Samaria  out  of  my  hand  ? 
36.  20  have  delivered  their  land  out  of  my  hand 

36.  20  should  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  my  hand? 

37. 10  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

37. 14  letter  from  the  hand  of  the  messengers 

37.  19  but  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and 
37.  20  our  God,  save  us  from  his  hand,  that  all 

40.  2  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double 

41.  20  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  done  this,  and 

42.  6  will  hold  thine  hand,  andwill  keep  thee 
43-  *3  0s)  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand 

44.  5  subscribe  (with)  his  hand  unto  the  Lord 

45.  9  makest  thou  ?  or  thy  work,  He  hath  no  h.? 

45. 11  concerningtheworkof  myhands  command 
45.  12  myhands,  have  stretched  out  the  heavens 

47.  6  I  have,  .given  them  into  thine  hand 

48.  13  Mine  hand  also  hath  laid  the  foundation 

49.  2  in  the  shadow  of  his  hand  hath  he  bid  me 

49.  22  I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  Gentiles 

50.  2  Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all,  that  it  can. 

50.  11  This  shall  ye  have  of  mine  hand  ;  ye  shall 

51.  16  covered  thee  in  the  shadow  of  mine  hand 

51. 17  which  hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord 

51. 18  (is  there  any)  that  taketh  her  by  the  hand 
51.  22  I  have  taken  out  of  thine  hand  the  cup 
51.  23  into  the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee 
53.  10  pleasure  of  the  Lord,  .prosper  in  his  ha. 

56.  2  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any 

57.  10  thou  hast  found  the  life  of  thine  hand 

59.  1  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,  that 

60.  21  work  of  my  hands,  that  I  maybe  glorified 
62.   3  Thoushalt.-beacrownofgloryinthehand 

64.  8  and  we  all  (are)  the  work  of  thy  hand 

65.  2  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day 

65.  22  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands 

66.  2  all  those  (things)  hath  mine  haud  made 

.    66.  14  the  hand  of  the  Lord  shall  be  known  to. 
Jer.     1.   9  the  Lord  put  forth  his  hand,  and  touched 

1.  16  worshipped  the  works  of  their  own  hands 

2.  37  thine  hands  upon  thine  head  :  for  the  L. 
6.  9  turn  back  thine  hand  as  a  grape  gatherer 
6.  12  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  the  inhabitants 
6. 24  our  hands  wax  feeble  :  anguish  hath 

10.  3  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  workman 
10.  9  the  work,  .of  the  hands  of  the  founder 


HAND 


448 


HAND 


Jer.  ii.  21  Prophesy  not.  .thou  die  not  by  our  hand 
15.  6  will  I  stretch  out  my  hand  against  thee 
15. 17  I  satalone,  because  of  thy  hand  :  for  thou 

15.  21  deliver  thee  outof  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

16.  21  cause  them  to  know  mine  hand  and  my 
18.    4  vessel,  .marred  in  the  hand  of  the  potter 

18.  6  the  potters's  hand,  so  (are)  ye  in  mine  h. 

19.  7  the  hands  of  them  that  seek  their  lives 
30.    4  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

20.  5  I  give  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies 

20.  13  soul  of  the  poor  from  the  hand  of  evil 
2i.    4  weapons  of  war  that  (are)  in  your  hands 
2i.    5  against  you  with  an  outstretched  hand 

21.  7  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 

21.  7  hand  of  their  enemies,  and  into  the  hand 
si.  10  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

si.  12  deliver.. out  of  the  hand  of  the  oppressor 

22.  3  deliver,  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  oppressor 
22.  24  were  the  signet  upon  my  right  hand,  yet 
22.  25  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  thy  life 
22.  25.the  hand  of  (them)  whose  face  thou  fear. 
22.  25  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Ba. 
22.  25  and  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans 

14  strengthen  also  the  hands  of  evil  doers 
6,  7  provoke  me . .  with  the  works  of  your  h. 

14  according  to  the  works  of  their  own  hands 

15  Take  the  wine  cup  of  this  fury  at  my  ha. 
17  Then  took  I  the  cup  at  the  Lord's  hand 
28  refuse  to  take  the  cup  at  thine  hand  to 
14  As  for  me,  behold,  I  (am)  in  your  hand 
24  the  hand  of  Ahikam.  .was  with  Jeremiah 

24  not  give  him  into  the  hand  of  the  people 
3  by  the  hand  of  the  messengers  which  come 
6  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  ki. 
8  until  I  have  consumed  them  by  his  hand 

3  By  the  hand  of  Elasah  the  son  of  Shaph. 
21  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 

6  every  man  with  his  hands  on  his  loins 
11  and  ransomed  him  from  the  hand  of  (him 
32  in  the  day.  .1  took  them  by  the  hand,  to 

3,  4,  36  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

4  shall  not  escape  out  of  the  hand  of  the  C. 
21  with  wonders,  and  with  a  strong  hand 
24,  25,  28,  43  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans 
28  iuto  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king 
30  provoked  me . .  with  the  work  of  their  hand 

13  pass  again  under  the  hands  of  him  that 

2  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of  the  king 

3  thou  shalt  not  escape  out  of  his  hand 
3  shalt.  .be  taken,  and  delivered  into  his  h. 

20  I  will  even  give  them  into  the  hand  of 

20  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  their  life 

21  hand  of  their  enemies,  and  into  the  hand 
21  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon's  army 

14  Take  in  thine  hand  the  roll  wherein  thou 

14  took  the  roll  in  his  hand,  and  came  unto 
17  thou  shalt  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of 

3  This  city  shall  surely  be  given  into  the  h. 

4  thus  he  weakeneth  the  hands  of  the  men 

4  and  the  hands  of  all  the  people,  in  speak. 

5  the  king  said,  Behold,  he  (is)  In  your  hand 

16  neither  will  I  give  thee  into  the  hand  of 
i3  then  shall  this  city  be  given  into  the  hand 
18,  23  thou  shalt  not  escape  out  of  their  hand 
19  lest  they  deliver  me  into  their  hand,  and 

23  shalt  be  taken  by  the  hand  of  the  king  of 

17  thou  shalt  not  be  given  into  the  hand 

4  the  chains  which  (were)  upon  thine  hand 

5  with  offerings  and  incense  in  their  hand 
11  save  you,  and  to  deliver  you  from  his  h. 

3  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Chalde. 
9  Take  great  stones  in  thine  hand,  and  hide 
;  8  provoke  me . .  with  the  works  of  your  hand 

25  and  fulfilled  with  your  hand,  saying,  We 
30  king  of  Egypt  into  the  hand  of  his  enem. 
30  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  his  life 
30  as  I  gave  Zedekiah  .into  the  hand  of  Ne. 

24  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the 

26  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  those 
26  and  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar 
26  and  into  the  hand  of  his  servants  ;  and 

3  shall  not  look  back,  .for  feebleness  of  h. 
37  upon  all  the  hands,  .cuttings,  and  upon 

15  Shout  against  her.  .she  hath  given  her  h. 
43  his  hands  waxed  feeble  :  anguish  took  h. 

7  Babylon,  .agolden  cup  in  the  Lord's  hand 

25  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  thee 
Lam.   1.    7  when  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the 

1.  10  The  adversary  hath  spread  out  his  hand 
1,  14  The  yoke,  .is  bound  by  his  hand  ;  they 
1.  14  Lord  hath  delivered  me  into  (their)  hand 

1.  17  Zion  spreadeth  forth  her  hands,  .none  to 

2.  7  he  hath  given  up  into  the  hand  of  the  en. 

2.  8  he  hath  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  d. 

3.  3  he  turneth  his  hand  (against  me)  all  the 

3.  64  Lord,  according  to  the  work  of  their  hand 

4.  2  pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  p. ! 
4.    6  overthrown,  .and  no  hands  stayed  on  her 

4.  10  The  hands  of  the  pitiful  women  have  so. 

5.  6  We  have  given  the  haud  (to)  the  Egypti. 
5.    8  none  that  doth  deliver . .  out  of  their  hand 

5.  12  Princes  are  hanged  up  by  their  hand:  the 
Eze.    1.    3  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  there  upon  him 

1.  8  And.  .the  hands  of  a  man  under  their  w. 

2.  9  I  looked,  behold,  an  hand  (was)  sent  unto 

3.  14  the  haud  of  the  Lord  was  strong  upon  me 
3. 18,  20  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand 
3.  22  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  there  upon  me 

6.  14  So  will  I  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  them 
7. 17  All  hands  shall  be  feeble,  and  all  knees 

7.  21  I  will  give  it  into  the  hands  of  the  stra. 
7.  27  the  hands  of  the  people  of  the  land  shall 


23- 
=5- 
=5- 
25- 
25- 
=5- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
3X" 
3*' 
33. 
32. 
32. 
32. 
32. 
32. 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34* 
34- 
34- 
36. 
36. 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
40. 
4i- 
42. 

43- 
43- 
44- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
46. 
49. 
46. 
46. 
47- 
48. 
5°- 
50. 
ST. 
51- 


Eze.    S. 


Dan. 


23- 
23- 

23- 
•23- 

23. 

=3- 

25. 

=5- 
25- 

25. 

25- 

27. 

28. 
28. 
30. 
30. 

SO- 
30. 
30. 
3i- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
36- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 


Hos. 


14. 

Joel    3. 

Amos  1. 
5- 
7- 
9- 

Mic.  2. 
5- 
5- 
5- 

Hab.  3.' 

3- 

Zeph.  1. 


1  the  hand  of  the  Lord  God  fell  there  upon 
3  lie  put  forth  the  form  of  an  haud,  and 

11  with  every  man  his  censer  in  his  hand 

1  (with)  his  destroying  weapon  in  his  hand 

2  every  man  a  slaughter  weapon  in  his  ha. 

7  cherub  stretched  forth  his  hand  from  be. 

8  the  form  of  a  man's  hand  under  then?  w. 

12  their  whole  body,  .and  their  hands,  and 
21  and  the  likeness  of  the  hands  of  a  man 

9  deliver  you  into  the  hands  of  strangers 

7  I  digged  through  the  wall  with  mine  hand 
9  mine  hand  shall  be  upon  the  prophets 

21  and  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hand 

21  they  shall  be  no  more  in  your  hand  to  be 

22  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked 

23  I  will  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hand 
9  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him,  and 

13  then  will  I  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon 
11I  put  bracelets  upon  thy  hands,  and  a 

27  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand  over  thee 
39  I  will  also  give  thee  into  their  hand,  and 
49  neither  did  she  strengthen  the  hand  of 

18  when,  lo,  he  had  given  his  hand,  and  ha. 

8  hath  withdrawn  his  hand  from  iniquity 
17  hath  taken  off  his  hand  from  the  poor 

5  In  the  day  when  I.  .lifted  up  mine  hand 

5  when  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  unto  them 

6  In  the  day.  .1  Ufted  up  mine  hand  unto 

15  Yet  also  I  lifted  up  my  hand  unto  them 

22  I  withdrew  mine  hand,  and  wrought  for 

23  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  unto  them,  also  in 
28,  42  (for)  the  which  I  lifted  up  mine  hand 

33  I  live,  .surely  with  a  mighty  hand,  and 

34  I  will  bring  you  out . .  with  a  mighty  hand 

7  all  hands  shall  be  feeble,  and  every  spirit 

11  furbished,  to  give  it  into  the  hand  of  the 
31  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  brutish  men 

14  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days 

9  into  the  hand  of  her  lovers,  into  the  hand 

28  I  will  deliver  thee  into  the  hand . .  into  the 
31  therefore  will  I  give  her  cup  into  thine  h. 
37  blood  (is)  in  their  hands,  and  with  their 
42  which  put  bracelets  upon  their  hands,  and 
45  (are)  adulteresses,  and  blood(is)  in  their  h. 

6  Because  thou  hast  clapped,  .hands,  and 

7  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  thee 

13  I  will  also  stretch  out  mine  hand1  upon 

14  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom  by  the  h. 

16  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  the  P. 

15  many  isles,  .the  merchandise  of  thine  h. 
9  a  man,  and  no  god,  in  the  hand  of  him 

10  Thou  shalt  die . .  by  the  hand  of  strangers 

10  to  cease  by  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar 

12  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 
12  makelthe  land  waste,  .by  the  hand  of  str. 
22  will  cause  the  sword  to  fall  out  of  his  h. 

24  And  I  will,  .put  my  sword  in  his  hand 

25  when  I  shall  put  my  sword  into  the  hand 

11  into  the  hand  of  the  mighty  one  of  the  h. 

6  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchman's  h. 

8  but  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thiue  hand 

22  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me  in  the 
10  and  I  will  require  my  flock  at  their  hand 
27  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  those 

3  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  against  thee 

7  thus saith.  .God  ;  I  have  lifted  up  mine  h. 
1  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me,  and 

17  and  they  shall  become  one  in  thine  hand 

19  the  stick,  .which  (is)  in  the  hand  of  Eph. 

19  stick,  and  they  shall  be  one  in  mine  hand 

20  the  sticks,  .shall  be  in  thine  hand  before 

12  to  turn  thine  hand  upon  the  desolate  pi. 
3  I  will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand 
3  thine  arrows  to  fall  out  of  thy  right  hand 

21  and  my  hand  that  I  have  laid  upon  them 

23  and  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  their  en. 

1  in  the  self  same  day  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
3  with  a  line  of  flax  in  his  hand,  and  a  me. 
5  in  the  man's  hand  a  measuring  reed  of 

12  therefore  have  I  lifted  up  mine  hand 
7  according  as  his  hands  shall  attain  unto 

3  when  the  man  that  had  the  line  in  his  h. 

14  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  unto  your 

2  Lord  gave  Jehoiakim.  .into  his  hand 

4  neither,  .that  could  deliver  out  of  his  h. 
7  none . .  could  deliver  the  ram  out  of  his  h. 

25  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand 
25  but  he  shall  be  broken  without  hand 

15  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  hand 
10  And,  behold,  an  hand  touched  me,  wliich 

10  set  me  upon,  .the  palms  of  my  hands 

11  the  multitude  shall  begiven  intohishand 

16  land,  which  by  hishand  shall  be  consumed 

41  these  shall  escape  outof  hishand.  .Edom 

42  He  shall  stretch  forth  his  hand  also  upon 
10  and  none  shall  deliver  her  out  of  miue  h. 

5  he  stretched  out  his  hand  with  scorners 

7  the  balances  of  deceit  (are)  in  his  hand 

3  neither  will.  .say.  .to  the  work  of  our  h. 

8  into  the  hand  of  the  children  of  Judah 

8  and  I  will  turn  mine  hand  against  Ekron 
19  leaned  his  hand  on  the  wall,  and  a  ser. 

7  Lord  stood,  .with  a  plumb  line  in  his  h. 
2  into  hell,  thence  shall  mine  hand  take 
1  because  it  is  in  the  power  of  their  hand 

9  Thine  hand  shall  be  lifted  up  upon  thine 

12  I  will  cut  off  witchcrafts  out  of  thine  ha. 

13  no  more  worship  the  work  of  thine  hands 
16  they  shall  lay.  .hand  upon.. mouth,  their 

4  he  had  horns  (coming)  out  of  his  hand 
10  the  deep,  .lifted  up  his  hands  on  high 

4  I  will  also  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  J. 


13- 

*3- 
14. 


Mai. 


Zeph.  2.  13  he  will  stretch  out*his  haud  against  the 

2.  15  every  one.  .shall  hiss,  (and)  wag  his  hand 

3.  16  it  shall  be  said  to.  .Zion,  Let  not  thine  h. 
Hag.    2.  14  so  (is)  every  work  of  their  hands ;  and 

2.  17  I  smote  you.,  in  all  the  labours  of  your  h. 
Zech.  2.   1  a  man  with  a  measuring  line  in  his  hand 
2.   9  I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon  them,  and 

4.  9  The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the 
4.    9  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it ;  and  thou 

4.  10  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the  hand  of  Z. 
8.    4  every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for 

8.  9  Let  your  hands  be  strong,  ye  that  hear  . 
8. 13  fear  not,  (but)  let  your  hands  be  strong 

n.    6  into  his  neighbour's  hand,  and  into  the  h. 

11.  6  and  out  of  their  hand  I  will  not  deliver 

6  What  (are)  these  wounds  in  thine  hands  ? 

7  I  will  turn  mine  hand  upon  the  little 
13  on  the  hand  of  his  neighbour,  and  his  h. 

14.  13  shall  rise  up  against  the  hand  of  his  nei. 
1.  10  neither,  .accept  an  offering  at  your  hand 

1.  13  should  I  accept  this  of  your  hand?  saith 

2.  13  receiveth  (it)  with  good  will  ,at  your  hand 

Z.Hand ',  X  yad. 

Ezra    5.   8  and  this  work.,  prospereth  in  their  hands 

5.  12  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  Nebuch. 
6. 12  people  that  shall  put  to  their  hand  to 

7.  14  the  law  of  thy  God  which  (is)  in  thine  h. 

7.  25  wisdom  of  thy  God  that  (is)  in  thine  haud 

Dan.   2.  34  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out  without  hand 

2.  38  the  fowls,  .hath  he  given  into  thine  hand 

2.  45  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hand 

3.  15  God  that  shall  deliver  you  out  of  my  ha.  ? 

3.  17  he  will  deliver  (us)  out  of  thine  hand,  O 

4.  35  none  can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him 

5.  s  same  hour  came,  .fingers  of  a  man'shand 
5.   5  the  king  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that 

5.  23  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  (is),  and 

5.  24  Then  was  the  part  of  the  hand  sent  from 

7.  25  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand  until  a 

i.Palvi  {of  the  hand),  sole  (of  the  foot),  *]3  kajih. 

Gen.  20.  5  in  the.  .innocency  of  my  hands,  have  I 
31.  42  God  hath  seen,  .the  labour  of  ray  hands 
40. 11  and  I  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand 
40.  21  and  he  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand 

Exod.  4.    4  (Caught  it,  and  it  became  a  rod  in  his  hand 

9.  29  I  will  spread  abroad  my  hands  unto  the 
9.  33  spread  abroad  his  hands  unto  the  Lord 

29.  24  in  the  hands  of  Aaron,  and  in  the  hands 
33.  22  will  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  I 
33.  23  1  will  take  away  mine  hand,  and  thou 
Lev.     8.  27  upon  Aaron's  hands,  and  upon  his  sons'  h. 

8.  28  Moses  took  them  from  off  their  hands 
14.  16  finger  in  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  left  hand 
14.  17  of  the  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  hand 
14.  18  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  priest's  hand  he 
14.  27  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  left  hand  seven  t. 
14.  28  priest,  put  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  hand 
14.  29  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  priest's  hand 

Num.  5.  18  put  the  offering  of  memorial  in  her  hand 

6.  19  shall  put.  .upon  the  hands  of  the  Nazar. 
24.  10  he  smote  his  hands  together  :  and  Balak 

Deut  25.  12  thou  shalt  cut  off  her  hand,  thine  eye 
Judg.  6.  13  delivered  us  into  the  hands  of  the  Midi. 
6.  14  thou  shalt  save  Israel  from  the  hand  of 
8.    6,  15  (Are)  the  hands  of  Zebah  and  Zalmu. 

12.  3  I  put  my  life  in  my  hands,  and  passed 
14.    9  he  took  thereof  in  his  hands,  and  went 

1  Sa.    4.    3  may  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  ene. 

19.    5  he  did  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  slew 

28.  21  I  have  put  my  life  in  my  hand,  and  have 

2  Sa.  14.  16  to  deliver  his  handmaid  out  of  the  hand 

18.  12  a  thousand  (shekels)  of  silver  in  minehand 

18.  14  he  took  three  darts  in  his  hand,  and  th. 

19.  9  The  king  saved  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our 

19.  9  and  he  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of 
22.    1  out  of  the  hand  of  all.  .out  of  the  hand 

1  Ki.  8.  22  and  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  heaven 

8.  38  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  this  house 

8.  54  from  kneeling  on  his  knees  with  his  hand 
18.  44  a  little  cloud  out  of  the  sea,  like  a  man's  h. 

2  Ki.   4.  34  And  he.  .put.  .his  hands  upon  his  hands 

11.  12  they  clapped  their  hands,  and  said,  God 
16.   7  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  S. 
16.    7  and  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Israel 
18.  21  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it :  so 

20.  6  city  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

1  Ch.12.  17  seeing  (there  is)  no  wrong  in  mine  hands 

2  Ch.  6.  12  And  he  stood,  .and  spreadforth  his  hands 

6.  13  and  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  heaven 

6.  29  shall  spread  forth  his  hands  in  this  house 

30.  6  that  are  escaped  out  of  the  hand  of  the  k 
32.  11  shall  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  ki. 

Ezra  8.  31  he  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of  the  ene. 

9.  5  spread  out  my  hands  unto  the  Lord  my 
Job     9.  30  and  make  my  hands  never  so  clean 

10.  3  shouldest  despise  the  work  of  thine  hands 

11.  13  and  stretch  out  thine  hands  toward  him 

13.  14  Wherefore  do  I.  .put  my  life  in  mine  h.? 
13.21  Withdraw  thine  hand  far  from  me  ;  and 
16. 17  Not  for.  .injustice  in  mine  hands  :  also 
22.  30  it  is  delivered  by  the  pureness  of  thine  h. 
27.  23  (Men)  shall  clap  their  hands  at  him,  and 

29.  9  The  princes,  .laid  (their)  hand  on  their 

31.  7  if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  mine  hands 
41.    8  Lay  thine  hand  upon  him,  remember  the 

7.  3  0  Lord,  .if  there  be  iniquity  in  my  hands 
9.  16  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his  owu  hands 

18.  <i(te.  delivered  him  from  the  hand  of  all  his 
24.  4  He  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  h. 
26.    6  I  will  wash  mine  hands  in  innocency  :  " 


Psa. 


44.  20  or  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange 


HAND 


449 


HANDFULS 


Psa.  47. 

n- 

73 
78 


91. 
98. 

119. 
119. 
12S. 
129. 
139. 
141. 

Prov.  6. 

6. 

10. 


Jer. 


Lam. 


Eze. 


21. 
22. 

Jon.    3. 
Mic.   4. 

7- 
Nah.  3. 
Hag.  1. 


1  0  clap  your  hands,  all  ye  people ;  shout 

4  the  hand  of  the  unrighteous  and  cruel  m. 
i3  I  have,  .washed  my  hands  in  innocency 
72  guided  them  by  the  skilfulness  of  his  ha. 

6  his  hands  were  delivered  from  the  pots 

9  I  have  stretched  out  my  hands  unto  thee 

12  They  shall  hear  thee  up  in  (their)  hands 
8  Let  the  floods  clap  (their)  hands  :  let  the 

48  My  hands  also  will  I  lift  up  unto  thy  com. 
109  My  soul  (is)  continually  m  my  hand 

2  thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of  thine  hands 

7  Wherewith  the  mower  filleth  not  his  hand 

5  beset  me.  .and  laid  thine  haud  upon  me 

2  the  lifting  up  of  my  hands  (as)  the  even. 
1  thou  hast  stricken  thy  hand  with  a  stran. 

3  thou  art  come  into  the  hand  of  thy  friend 

4  beco.  poor  that  dealeth  (with)  a  slack  h. 

18  A  man  void  of  understanding  striketh  h. 
26  Be  not  thou,  .of  them  that  strike  hands 

13  and  worketh  willingly  with  her  hands 
16  with  the  fruit  of  her  hands  she  planteth 

19  the  spindle,  and  her  hands  hold  the  dist. 

20  She  stretcheth  out  her  hand  to  the  poor 
15  when  ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will 

4  while  it  is  yet  in  his  hand  he  eateth  it  up 

15  shaketh  his  bauds  from  holding  of  bribes 

6  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it :  so 
6  city  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

16  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  (my)  hands 

12  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap,  .hands 
3  your  hands  are  defiled  with  blood,  and 

6  and  the  act  of  violence  (is)  in  their  hands 
3  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  G. 

31  spreadeth  her  hands.  .Woe  (is)  me  now  I 

7  I  have  given,  .into  the  hand  of  her  ene. 

21  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  terri. 
15  All  that  pass  by  clap .  .hands  at  thee;  they 
19  lift  up  thy  hands  toward  him  for  the  life 
4 1  lift  up  our . .  hands  unto  God  in  the  heaven 
11  Smite  with  thine  hand,  and  stamp  with 

14  prophesy,  and  smite,  .hands  together 

17  I  will  also  smite  mine  hands  together 
24  ye.  .come,  .ye  shall  he  taken  with  the  h. 

13  I  have  smitten  mine  hand  at  thy  dishon. 

7  When  they  took  hold  of  thee  by  thy  haud 

8  from  the  violence  that  (is)  in  their  hands 

10  shall  redeem  thee  from  the  hand  of  thine 
3  That  they  may  do  evil  with  both  hands 

19  all  that  hear,  .shall  clap  the  hands  over 

1 1  a  drought . .  upon  all  the  labour  of  the  haud 


5. Hand  (and  arm),  xetP  ck&ir. 

Matt.  3.  12  Whose  fan  (is)  in  his  hand,  and  he  will 

4.  6  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up 

5.  30  if  thy  right  hp.nd  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 
8.    3  Jesus  put  forth  (liis)  hand,  and  touched 

8.  15  he  touched  her  hand,  and  the  fever  left 

9.  18  come  and  lay  thy  hand  upon  her,  and 
9.  25  went  in,  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  and 

12.  10  there  was  a  man  which  had  (his)  haud 
12.  13  Then  saith  he.  .Stretch  forth  thine  hand 
- 12.  49  he  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  his 

14.  31  Jesus  stretched  forth  (his)  hand,  and  ca. 

15.  2  they  wash  not  their  hands  when  they  eat 
15.  20  to  eat  with  uuwashen  hands  defileth  not 

17.  22  shall  be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  men 

18.  8  if  thy  haud  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut 

18.  8  rather  than  having  two  hands  or  two  feet 

19.  13  that  he  should  put  (his)  hands  on  them 
19.  15  he  laid  (his)  hands  on  them,  and  depart. 
22.  13  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  hini 
26.  23  He  that  dippeth  (his)  hand  with  me  in 
26.  45  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 
26.  50  Then  came  they,  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus 

26.  51  stretched  out  (his)  hand,  and  drew  his 

27.  24  he  took  water,  and  washed  (his)  hands 
Mark  1.  31  he  came  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  and 

1. 41  Jesus. .  putforth(his)hand,  and  touched  h. 
3.  1  was  a  man  there  which  had  a  withered 
3.  3  unto  the  man  which  had  the  withered  h. 
3.  s  saith  unto  the  man,  Stretch  forth  thine  h. 
3.  5  his  hand  was  restored  whole  as  the  other 
5.  23  come  and  lay  thy  hands  on  her,  that  she 

5.  41  he  took  the  damsel  by  the  hand,  and  said 

6.  2  such  mighty  works  are  wrought  by  his  h.  ? 

6.  5  save  that  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few 

7.  2  with  defiled  that  is. .  with  unwashen  hands 
7.    3  except  they  wash  (their)  hands  oft,  eat 
7.    5  but  eat  bread  with  unwashen  hands  ? 

7.  32  they  beseech  him  to  put  his  hand  upon 

8.  23  he  took  the  blind  man  by  the  hand,  and 
8.  23  put  his  hands  upon  him,  he  asked  him  if 

8.  25  he  put  (lus)  hands  again  upon  his  eyes,  and 

9.  27  Jesus  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  lifted 
9.  31  The  Son  of  man  is  delivered  into  the  hand 
9.  43  if  thy  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off  :  it  is 
9.  43  than  having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell 

10.  16  put  (Iris)  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed 

14.  41  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  |the  hands 

14.  46  they  laid  their  hands  on  him,  and  took 

16. 18  [they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and] 

Luke  1 .  66  And  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him 

1.  71  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us 

1.  74  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  our 

3.  17  Whose  fan  (is)  in  his  hand,  and  he  will 

4.  11  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up 
4.  40  he  laid  his  bands  on  every  one  of  them 

5. 13  he  put  forth  (his)  hand,  and  touched  him 
6.    1  did  eat,  rubbing  (them)  in  (their)  hands 
6.    6  was  a  man  whose  right  hand  was  wither. 
6.    8  to  the  man  which  had  the  withered  hand 
6.  *o  Stretch  forth  thy  hand.    And  he  did  *  > 

57 


23 


24, 
24 
24, 

John  3 
7- 
7 


Acts 


Rom  1 
1  Co. 


16. 
2  Co.  1 1. 
Gal.     3 


Eph. 

Col. 

iTh. 

2TI1. 

iTi. 


2Ti. 
Phm. 
Heb. 


Jas. 
iPe 
1  Jo. 
Rev. 


10  his  hand  was  restored  whole  as  the  other 
54  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  called,  saying 
44  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  men 
62  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plo. 

13  he  laid  (his)  hands  on  her"  and  imniedi. 
22  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shots  on  (his) 
19  the  same  hour  sought  to  lay  hands  on 
12  they  shall  lay  their  hands  on  you,  and 
21  the  hand  of  him  that  betrayeth  me  (is) 
53  ye  stretched  forth  no  hands  against  me 
46  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  s. 

7  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  sinful  men 

39  Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is 

40  [he  showed  them  (his)  hands  and  (his)  ft.] 
50  he  lifted  up  his  hands,  and  blessed  them 

.  35  and  hath  given  all  things  into  his  hand 
.  30  no  man  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his  h. 

44  taken  him ;  but  no  man  laid  hands  on  h. 

28  neither,  .auy  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand 
.  29  able  to  pluck  (them)  out  of  my  Father's  h. 
.  39  take  him :  but  he  escaped  out  of  their  h. 
.  44  bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave  clothes 
.    3  had  given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and 
.   9  feet  only,  but  also  (my)  hands  and  (ray) 
,  20  showed  unto  them  (his)  hands  aud  his  side 
.  25  see  in  his  hands  the  print  of  the  nails 
,  25  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not 
.  27  behold  my  hands  ;  and  reach  hither  thy  h. 
.  18  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  hands,  and 
23  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain 
7  he  took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  lifted 
3  they  laid  hands  on  them,  and  put  (them) 
.  2S  to  do  whatsoever  thy  hand  and  thy  coun. 

30  By  stretching  forth  thine  hand  to  heal 
.  12  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were  many 
.  iS  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles,  and  put 
,    6  had  prayed,  they  laid  (their)  hands  on  th. 

25  that  God  by  his  hand  would  deliver  them 
.  35  deliverer  by  the  hand  of  the  Angel  which 
.41  rejoiced  in  the  works  of  their  own  hands 

50  Hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  things'? 

17  Then  laid  they  (their)  hands  on  them,  and 

18  through  laying  on  of  the  apostles'  hands 

19  on  whomsoever  I  lay  hands,  he  may  rec. 
12  and  putting  (liis)  hand  on  him,  that  he  m. 
17  putting  his  hands  on  him,  said,  Brother 

41  he  gave  her  (his)  hand,  and  lifted  her  up 
21  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them :  and 

30  to  the  elders  by  the  hands  of  Barnabas 

1  the  king  stretched  forth  (liis)  hands  to  vex 
.    7  And  his  chains  fell  off  from  (his)  hands 
.  11  delivered  me  out  of  the  hand  of  Herod 
17  beckoning  unto  them  with  the  hand  to 
3  laid  (their)  hands  on  them,  they  sent  (th.) 

11  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  thee,  and 

16  beckoning  with  (liis)  hand,  said,  Men  of 
3  and  wonders  to  be  done  by  their  hands 

25  Neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands 

6  when  Paul  had  laid(his)hands  upon  them 
11  special  miracles  by  the  hands  of  Paul 

26  they  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with  ha. 

33  And  Alexander  beckoned  with  the  hand 

34  hands  have  ministered  unto  my  necessit. 
11  bound  his  own  hands  and  feet,  and  said 

11  deliver  (him)  into  the  hands  of  the  Gent. 

27  stirred,  .the  people,  and  laid  hands  on 
40  beckoned  with  the  hand  unto  the  people 
19  the  chief  captain  took  him  by  the  hand 

7  [with,  .\iolence  took  (hini)..  out  of  ourh.] 

1  Paul  stretched  forth  the  hand,  and  ans. 

3  came  a  viper,  .and  fastened  on  his  hand 

4  saw  the  (venomous)  beast  haug  on  his  h. 

5  and  laid  liis  hands  on  him,  and  healed 

17  delivered  .'.into  the  hands  of  the  Romans 
21  I  have  stretched  forth  my  hands  unto  a 

12  And  labour,  working  with  our  own  hands 

15  I  am  not  the  hand,  I  am  not  of  the  body 
21  the  eye  cannot  say  unto  the  hand,  I  have 

21  salutation  of  (me)  Paul  with  mine  own  h. 
33  down  by  the  wall,  and  escaped  his  hands 
19  (it  was)  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand 
11  have  written  unto  you  with  mine  own  h. 

28  working  with  (liis)  hands  the  thing  which 

18  The  salutation  by  the  hand  of  me  Paul 

11  and  to  work  with  your  own  hands,  as 

17  The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  h. 

5  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  wrath  and 

14  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery 

22  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither 

6  in  thee  by  the  putting  on  of  my  hands 

19  I  Paul  have  written  (it)  with  mine  own  h. 
10  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  thine  hands 

7  [didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  ban.] 

2  of  layingon  of  hands,  and  of  resurrection 
9  I  took  them  by  'the  hand  to  lead  them  out 

31  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God 

12  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and 

8  Cleanse  (your)  hands,  (ye)  sinners;  and 

6  Humble  yourselves,  .under  themightyh. 

1  our  hands  have  handled,  of  the  Word  of 

16  he  had  in  liis  right  hand  seven  stars ;  aud 

17  he  laid;  his  right  [hand]  upon  me,  saying 
5  he.  .had  a  pair  of  balances  in  his  hand 

9  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  ha. 

4  ascended  up.  .out  of  the  angel's  hand 

20  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands 

2  he  had  in  his  hand  a  little  book  open:  and 

5  the  angel,  .lifted  up  his  hand  to  heaven 

8  in  the  hand  of  the  angel  which  standeth 
10  the  little  hook  out  of  the  angel's  hand 

16  to  receive  a  mark  in  their  right  hand,  or 

9  (his)  mark  in  his  forehead,  or  in  his  hand 


Rev.  14.  14  having,  .in  his  hand  a  sharp  sickle 

17.    4  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of 

19.  2  and  hath  avenged  the  blood . .  at  her  hand 

20.  1  angel . .  having . .  a  great  chain  in  his  hand 
20.   4  neither. . received i^his) mark,  .in  their  ha. 

HAND,  at  — 

l.jVear,  aiijj  qarob. 

Deut32.  35  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  (is)  at  hand 
Isa.   13.    6  for  the  day  of  the  LORD  (is)  at  hand ;  it 
Jer.  23.  23  (Am)  I  a  God  at  hand,  saith  the  Lord 
Joel.  1. 15  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  at  hand,  and 
Zeph.  1.    7  for  the  day  of  the  LORD  (is)  at  hand :  for 

2.Night  iyyvs  eggus. 

Matt 26.  18  The  Master  saith,  My  time  is  at  hand ;  I 
John  2.  13  the  Jews'  passover  was  at  hand;  and  Je. 
7.  2  the  Jews'  feast  of  tabernacles  was  at  hand 
Phil.  4.  5  known  unto  all  men.  The'Lord  (is)  at  h. 
Rev.    1.    3  keep  those  things . .  for  the  time  (is)  at  h. 

22. 10  he  saith  unto  me.  .the  time  is  at  hand 

HAND,  to  be  at  hand  — 

l.To  be  near,  3-13  qarab. 

Gen.  27.  41  The  days  of  mourning . .  are  at  hand ;  then 
Deut  15.    9  saying,  .the  year  of  release,  is  at  hand 
Eze.  12.  23  The  days  are  at  hand,  and  the  effect  of 

2. To  he  or  come  near,  3*i|j  qarab,  3. 

Eze.  36.   8  people  of  Israel ;  for  they  are  tX  hand  to 
Z.To  be  or  come  nigh,  iyyifa  eggizo. 

Matt.  3.    2  Repent . .  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand 

4.  17  Repent,  .thekingdomof  heaven  is  at  hand 

10.    7  saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand 

26.  45  behold,  the  hour  is  at  hand,  and  the  Son 

26.  46  behold,  he  is  at  hand  that  doth  betray  me 

Mark  1.  15  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand:  repent 

14.  42  go ;  lo,  he  that  betrayeth  me  is  at  hand 

Rom  13.  12  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand 

1  Pe.   4.   7  But  the  end  of  all  tilings  is  at  hand  :  be 

i. To  place  in,  or  upon,  iviaTn/ju  enistemi. 

2  Th.  2.    2  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at  hand 

5.  To  place  or  set  over,  l(pifxrrtfj.t  epkistemi. 

2  Ti.    4.    6  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand 
HAND,  (some)  to  lead  by  the  — 

1.  To  lead  by  the  hand,  x^'paywyew  cheiragogeo. 
Acts   9.    8  they  led  him  by  the  hand,  and  brought 

22. 11  being  led  by  the  hand  of  them  that  were 

2.0newho  leads  by  the  hand,  ^eipaywyds  cheirag. 

Acts  13.  11  seeking  some  to  lead,  him  by  the  hand 
HAND,  out  of  — 
To  kill,  :nn  harag. 

Numii.  15  kill  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  hand,  if  I  have 
HAND,  to  take  in  — 
To  put  hand  o?i,  undertake,  iirtxeipew  epicheireo. 

Luke   1.    1  many  have  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in 
HAND,  with  one's  own  — 
With  one's  own  hand,  avroxeip  autocheir. 

Acts  27. 19  cast  out  with  our  own  hands  the  tackling 
HAND  BREADTH,  hand  broad  — 
\.Hand  breadth,  n?u  tephach. 

1  Ki.  7.  26  it  (was)  an  hand  breadth  thick,  and  the 

2  Ch    4.    5  the  thickness  of  it  (was)  an  hand  breadth 
Psa.  39.    5  thou  hast  made  my  days  (as)  an  hand  br. 

2.Hand  breadth,  n%b  tophach. 

Exod25.  25  a  border  of  an  hand  breadth  round  about 

37.  12  a  border  of  an  handbreath  round  about 
Eze.  40.    5  reed  of  six  cubits,  .and  an  hand  breadth 
40.  43  within  (were)  hooks,  an  hand  broad,  fast. 
43.  13  The  cubit  (is)  a  cubit  and  an  hand  breadth 
[See  also  Broken  handed,  left,  left  handed.] 
HANDFUL  — 
I. Palm  of  the  hand,  ^3  kaph. 

Lev.    g.  17  and  took  an  handful  thereof,  and  burnt 

2.  Sheaf ,  YDJJ  amir. 

Jer.    9.  22  as  the  handful  after  the  harvest  man,  and 

3. Handful,  expansion,  superabundance,  nsspissah. 

Psa.  72. 16  There  shall  be  an  handful  of  corn  in  the 

LSandful,  closed  hand,  j'c'p  qomets. 

Gen.  41.  47  the  earth  brought  forth  by  handfuls 
Lev.    6.  15  he  shall  take  of  it  his  handful,  of  the 

$. Handful,  hollow  of  the  hand,  b$?  shoal. 

1  Ki.  20.  10  if.  .dust  of  Samaria,  .suffice  for  handfuls 
Eze.  13.  19  handfuls  of  bailey  and.  .pieces  of  bread 

6. Fulness  of  the  two  fists,  n\^n  \fos  melo  chophna. 
Exod.  9.    8  Take,  .handfuls  of  ashes  of  the  furnace 

7. Fulness  of the  palm  of the  hand,  *]3  i&amelo  caph. 
Eccl.  4.    6  Better  (is)'an  handful  (with)  quietness 
1  Ki.  17.  12  but  an  handful  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  and  a 

S.Fulness  of  the  closed  hand,  PS'p  K^P  melo  qomets. 
Lev.    2.    2  take  thereout  his  handful  of  the  flour 
Lev.    5.  12  and  the  priest  shall  tftke  his  handful  of 

HANDFUL,  to  take  an  — 

To  take  a  handful,  pop  qamats. 

Num.  5.  26  the  priest  shall  take  an  handful  of  the 

HANDFULS  — 

Heaps,  dtos  tsebathim. 

Ruth  2.  16  let  fall.,  (some)  of  the  handfuls  of  purpose 


HANDKERCHIEFS 


450 


H ANOCH 


HANDKERCHIEFS  — 

yapkin,  handkerchief,  vovliaptov  soudarion.   {Lat.) 

Acts  19.  12  brought  unto  the  sick  handkerchiefs  or 
HANDLE  — 
Handle,  *]3  kaph. 

Song   5.    5  dropped,  .myrrh,  upon  the  handles  of  the 

HANDIE,  to  — 

1-  To  lay  hold,  Tn«  achaz. 

2  Ch.25.    5  that  could  handle  spear  and  shield 

2.  To  feel,  touch,  «ho  mush,  5. 

Psaiis.   7  They  have  hands,  but  they  handle  not 

-3.  To  draw  out,  WO  mashak. 

Judg   5.  14  they  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  writer 

l.To  set  in  array,  T1'>1  arah. 

1  Ch.  12.    S  that  could  handle  shield  and  buckler 
5.  To  handle,  bpSD-i  taphas. 

Gen.    4.  21  of  all  such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ 

Jer.     2.    3  they  that  handle  the  law  knew  me  not 

46.    9  Libyans,that  handle.  .Lydians.thathandl. 

50.  16  Cut  off.  .him  that  handleth  the  sickle  in 

Eze.  27.  29  And  all  that  handle  the  oar,  the  mariners 

38.    4  great  company,  .all  of  them  handling  sw. 

Amos  2.  15  Neither  shall  he  stand  thathandleth  the 

6. To  touch,  diyydvw  thiggano. 

Col.     2.  21  Touch  not ;  taste  not ;  handle  not 
7.  To  feel,  grope,  handle,  tyy]\a<pa.u>  pselaphao. 

Lukeaj.  39  handle  me.  .for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh 

1  Jo.    1.    1  our  hands  have  handled,  of  the  word 

HANDLE  deceitfully,  to  — 
To  tae  deceit,  b*o\6co  doloo. 

2  Co.    4.    2  nor  handling  the  word  of  God  deceitfully 
HANDLED,  to  be  — 

To  catch  or  handle  with  the  palm,  ^55  b?n  taphas. 
Eze.  2t.  iz  to  be  furbished,  that  it  may  be  handled 
HANDMAID  — 

3.  Hand  maid,  10%  amah. 

Exod23. 12  the  son  of  thy  handmaid  and  the  stranger 
Judg  19.  19  also  for  me,  and  for  thy  handmaid,  and 
Ruth  3.    9  she  answered,  I  (am)  Ruth  thine  handm. 

3.    9  spread,  .thy  skirt  over  thine  handmaid 
1  Sa.   1.  11  look  on  the  affliction  of  thine  handmaid 
1.  n  remember,  .and  not  forget  thine  handm. 
1.  11  wilt  give  unto  thine  handmaid  a  man  ch. 
1. 16  Count  not  thine  handmaid  for  a  daughter 
=25.  24  let  thine  handmaid,  I  pray  thee,  speak 
25.  24  and  hear  the  words  of  thine  handmaid 
25.  25  I  thine  handmaid  saw  not  the  young  men 
25.  28  forgive  the  trespass  of  thine  handmaid 
25.  31  dealt  well .  .then  remember  thine  handm. 
25.  41  Behold,  (let)  thine  handmaid  (be)  a  serv. 
j?  Sa     6.  20  eyes  of  the  handmaids  of  his  servants,  as 
14.  15  will  perforin  the  request  of  his  handmaid 
14. 16  to  deliver  his  handmaid  out  of  the  hand 
20.  17  Hear  the  words  of  thine  handmaid.     And 

1  Ki.    1.  13  Didst  not  thou,  .swear  unto  thine  hand. 

1.  17  My  lord,  thou  swarest.  .unto  thine  hand. 

3.  20  she  arose,  .while  thine  handmaid  slept 
Tsa.  86.  16  turn,  .and  save  the  son  of  thine  handm. 

116.  16  truly  I  (am),  .the  son  of  thine  handmaid 

2.  Maid  servant,  nr;rp;  shiphchah. 

Gen.  16.  1  and  she  had  an  handmaid,  an  Egyptian 
25.  12  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  Sarah's  handmaid 
29.  24  gave.  .Zilpah  his  maid  (for)  an  handmaid 

29.  29  gave.  .Bilhah  his  handmaid  to  be  her 

30.  4  she  gave  him  Bilhah  her  handmaid  to 
33.    1  divided  the  children.. unto  the  two  hand. 

33.  2  he  put  the  handmaids  and  their  children 
35.  25  And  the  sous  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's  handm. 
35.  26  And  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  handmaid 

Ruth  2.  13  hast  spoken  friendly  unto  thine  handm. 

2  Sa.    1.  18  Let  thine  handmaid  find  grace  in  thy 

25.  27  which  thine  handmaid  hath  broughtjunto 
28,  21  thine  handmaid  hath  obeyed  thy  voice 
28.  22  also  unto  the  voice  of  thine  handmaid 

2  Sa.  14.    6  thy  handmaid  had  two  sons,  and  they 
14.    7  family  is  risen  against  thine  handmaid 
14.  12  Let  thine  handmaid,  .speak  (one)  word 
14. 15  thy  handmaid  said,  I  will  now  speak  unto 
14.  17  Then  thine  handmaid  said,  The  word  of 
14. 19  put.  .words  in  the  mouth  of  thine  hand. 

2  Ki.   4.    2  Thine  handmaid  hath  not  any  thing  in 

4.  16  Nay.  do  not  lie  unto  thine  handmaid 
Prov  30.  23  an  handmaid  that  is  heir  to  her  mistress 
Isa.    14.    2  possess  them,  .for  servants  and  handm. 
Jer.    34.  11  caused  the  servants  and  the  handmaids 

34. 11,  v6  brought  them  into  subjection .  .for  h. 

34.  16  every  man  his  handmaid,  whom  he  had 
Joel    2.  29  upon  the  servants  and.  .the  handmaids 

\. Female  slave  or  servant,  SovAti  doule. 
Luke   1.  38  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord ;  be  it 

SAND  MAIDEN — 

l.Maid  servant,  7V)%P  shiphchah. 

Gen.  33.  6  Then  the  handmaidens  came  near,  they 
Ruth  2.  13  not  like  unto  one  of  thine  handmaidens 

£.  Pc  n  tie  slave  or  servant,  SovAtj  doule. 

Luke  1.  48  regarded  the  low  estate  of  Ids  handmaiden 
Acts    2.  [8  011  my  handmaidens  I  will  pour  out  iu 

HANDS  on,  to  lay  — 

2 ,  To  ext  rcise  "power,  Kpareoi  hrateo. 

ilattiS.  28  he  laid  hands  on  him,  and  took  (him)  by 
2\>  46  when  they  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him 


2.  To  hold  fast,  seize,  witifa  piazo. 

John  8.  20  no  man  laid  hands  on  him;  for  his  hour 

HANDS,  ma^e  by  or  with  — 
Made  by  hands,  ^ipof^oi-qros  cheiropoietos. 
Marki4.  58  this  temple  that  is  made  with  hands 
Acts    7.  48  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands 
17.  24  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands 
Eph.    2.  11  Circumcision  in  the  flesh  made  by  hands 
Heb.   9.  11  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands 
9.  24  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands 

HANDS,  not  made  with  (or  without)  — 

yot  made  by  hands,  ax^tpoTroirjTos  acheircpoietos. 
Marki4.  58  I  will  build  another  made  without  hands 
2  Co.  5.  1  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
Col.    2. 1 1  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands 

HANDS,  (both)  — 

Both  hands,  n::rn  chophnayim. 

Lev.  16. 12  hands  fuU  of  sweet  incense  beaten  small 
Eccl.  4.    6  than  both  the  hands  full  (with)  travail 
Eze.  10.    2  fill  thine  hand  with  coals  of  fire  from 
10.    7  into  the  hands  of  (him  that  was)  clothed 

HAND  STAFF  — 

A  staff  of  the  hand,  i;  Vi??  maqqel  yad. 

Eze  39.    9  set  on  fire  and  burn . .  the  hand  staves,  and 
HAND  WRITING  — 
Written  by  the  hand,  x*lpuypa<P0V  cheirographon. 

Col.    2.  n.Blottingoutthehandwritingof  ordinances 

HANDY  "WORK  — 

Work  of  the  hand,  t  Tyo$£  maasch  yad. 

Psa.  19.    1  and  the  firmament  showeth  his  handywork 
HA'-NES,  D:n  Mercury. 

A  place  in  Egypt.  It  is  improbable  that  it  was  the 
Heracleopolis  Magna  in  the  Heptanomis;  but  must 
likely  it  was  identical  with  Tahpanes,  Daphne,  a 
fortified  town  on  the  eastern  frontier  of  Egypt. 

Isa.   30.    4  at  Zoan,  and  his  ambassadors  came  to  H. 
HANG,  to  — 
l.To  hang  up,  disjoint,  J7£  yaga,  5. 

2  Sa.  21.   9  hanged  them  in  the  lull  before  the  LORD 
2.  To  give,  put,  fro  nathan. 

Exod26.  32  shalt  hang  it  upon  four  pillars  of  shittim 

3. To  spread  out,  rrjD  sarach. 

Esod26.  12  the  half  curtain,  .shall  hang  over  the 
26. 13  it  shall  hang  over  the  sides  of  the  taber. 

4.  To  hang  up,  wfr$  tola. 

2  Sa.  21. 12  where  the  Philistines  had  hanged  them 

5.  To  hang  up,  rh^  talah. 

Gen.  40.  19  Pharaoh,  .shall  hang  thee  on  a  tree  ;  and 

40.  22  But  he  hanged  the  chief  baker  :  as  Joseph 

41.  13  so  it  was;  me  he  restored . .  him  he  hanged 
Deut  21.  22  put  to  death,  and  thou  hang  him  on  a 
Josh.  8.  29  the  king  of  Ai  he  hanged  on  a  tree  until 

10.  26  slew  them,  and  hanged  them  on  five  trees 
2  Sa.    4.  12  hanged  (them)  up  over  the  pool  in  Hebron 

21.  12  where  the  Philistines  had  hanged  them 
Esth.  6.    4  to  speak  unto  the  king  to  hang  Mordecai 

7.    9  Then  the  king  said.  Hang  him  thereon 

7.  10  So  they  hanged  Haman  on  the  gallows 

8.  7  him  they  have  hanged  upon  the  gallows 

9.  14  and  they  hanged  Hainan's  ten  sons 
Job  26.  7  He.. hangeth  the  earth  upon  nothing 
Psa. 137.  2  We  hanged  our  harps  upon  the  willows 
Song  4.  4  whereon  there  hang  a  thousand  bucklers 
Isa.    22.  24  they  shall  hang  upon  him  all  the  glory 
Eze.  15.  3  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any  vessel  thereon? 

6. To  hang  up,  n^n  talah,  3. 

Eze.  27. 10  they'hangedthe  shield  and  helmet  in  thee 

27.  11  they  hanged  their  shields  upon  thy  walls 
7. To  hang  up  or  mi,  Kpe/idvvvfii,  KpepLaoi. 

MattiS.    6  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 

22.  40  On  these  two  commandments  hang  all 
Luke23.  39  one  of  the  malefactors  which  were  hanged 
Acts   5. 30  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree 

10.  39  whom  they  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree 

28.  4  saw  the  (venomous)  beast  hang  on  his  hand 
Gal.     3.  13  Cursed  (is)  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 

HANG  down,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  down,  let  down,  tv  yarad,  5. 

Lam.  2. 10  the  virgins,  .hang  down  their  heads  to 
2.To  let  down  beside,  irapi^fxt pariemi. 

Heb.  12. 12  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and 
HANG  in  doubt,  to  — 
To  hang  up,  R75  tala. 

DeutzS.  66  thy  life  shall  hang  in  doubt  before  thee 
HANG  self,  to  — 
l.To  strangle  self,  P'^  chanaq,  2/ 

2  Sa.  17.  23  Ahithophel.  .hanged  himself,  and  died 
2.  To  strangle  self ,  airdyx0^-0-1  "po'lchomai. 

Matt27.    5  departed,  and  went  and  hanged  himself 
HANG  up,  to  — 
l.To  hang  up,  disjoint,  yp'  yaqa,  5. 

N111U25.    4  Take  all  the  heads,  .and  hang  them  up 

2  Sa.  ax.   6  we  will  hang  them  up  unto  the  Lord  in 
2. To  give,  jru  nathan. 

Exod26.  33  And  thou  shalt  hang  up  the  veil  under 
40.    8  and  hang  up  the  hanging  at  the  court 


HANGED  (up),  to  be  — 
l.To  be  hanged  or  disjointed,  yp;  yaqa,  6. 
2  Sa.  si.  13  the  hones  of  them  that  were  hanged 

2.7*0  hang  up,  ."dp  talah. 

Deut  21.  23  for  he  that  is  hanged  (is)  accursed  of  God 
2  Sa.  18.  10  Behold,  I  saw  Absalom  hanged  in  an  oak 
Esth.  5. 14  that  Mordecai  may  be  hanged  thereon 

9.  13  and  let  Hainan's  ten  sons  be  hanged  upon 
9.  25  that  he  and  his  sons  should  be  hanged 

3.  To  be  hanged  up,  rtS$  talah,  2. 

Esth.  2.  23  therefore  they  were  both  hanged  on  a 
Lam.  5. 12  Princes  are  hanged  up  bj  their  hand 

4.  To  smite,  hang  up,  N*rp  mecha,  2. 

Ezra    6.  n  being  set  up,  let  him  be  hanged  thereon 
HANGED  about,  to  be  — 
To  lie  around,  izepinetixai  perikeimai. 

Mark  9.  42  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 

Lukei  7.    2  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 
HANGING  — 
1. Houses,  c*B2  bottim. 

2  Ki.  23.    7  the  women  wove  hangings  for  the  grove 
2,A  hanging,  ^co  masak. 

Exod26.  36  thou  shalt  make  an  hanging  for  the  door 

26.  37  thou  shalt  make  for  the  hanging  five  piL 
27. 16  an  hanging  of  twenty  cubits,  (of)  blue 

35. 15  the  hanging  for  the  door  at  the  entering 

35.  17  and  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  court 

36.  37  an  hanging  for  the  tabernacle  door  (of) 

38.  18  the  hanging  fur  the  gate  of  the  court  (was) 

39.  38  and  the  hanging  for  the  tabernacle  door 

39.  40  and  the  hanging  for  the  court  gate,  his 

40.  5  the  hanging  of  the  door  to  the  tabernacle 
40.    8  and  hang  up  the  hanging  at  the  court 
40.  28  he  set  up  the  hanging  (at)  the  door  of  the 
40.  33  set  up  the  hanging  of  the  court  gate.  So 

Num.  3.  25  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 

3.  31  the  hanging,  and  all  the  service  thereof 

4.  25  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  tabernac. 
4.  26  the  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  gate  of 

Z. Hangings,  cy^p  qelaim. 

Exod27.    9  hangings  for  the  court  (of)  fine  twined 

27.  11  (be)  hangings  of  an  hundred  (cubits)  long 
27. 12  (shall  be)  hangings  of  fifty  cubits 

27.  14  hangings  of  one  side  (of  the  gate  shall) 
27.  15  the  other  side  (shall  be)  hangings  fifteen 
35.  17  The  hangings  of  the  court,  his  pillars 
38.    9  hangingsof  the  court  (were  of)  tine  twined 
38.  12  west  side  (were)  hangings  of  fifty  cubits 
38.  14  The  hangings  of  the  one  side  (of  the  gate) 
38.  15  that  hand,  (were)  hangings  of  fifteen  cub 

38. 16  the  hangings  of  the  court  round  about 

38.  18  answerable  to  the  hangings  of  the  court 

39.  40  The  hangings  of  the  court,  his  pillars 
Num.  3.  26  the  hangings  of  the  court,  and  the  cur. 

4.  26  And  the  hangings  of  the  court,  and  the  h. 

i.To  hang,  .-dp  talah 

Josh.  10.  26  they  were  hanging  upon  the  trees  until 
HAN'-NAH,  fl|n  grace. 

One  of  Elkanah  s  two  wives,  and  mother  of  Samuel  the 
prophet,  while  she  also  herself  was  a  prophetess,  as  is 
proved  by  the  prophecy  contained  in  her  hynin  of 
thanksgiving  forthe  birth  of  her  son.  It  is  in  the  high- 
est order  of  prophetic  poetry.  It  contains  the  first  de- 
signation of  the  "Messiah,"  under  that  name  B.C. 
1171. 

1  Sa.    1.    2  two  wives;  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  H. 
1.    2  Peninnah  had  children,  but  H.  hadnochil. 
1.    5  But  unto  H.  he  gave  a  worthy  portion 
1.    5  for  he  lovedH. :  but  the  LORD  had  shut 
1.    8  H,  why  weepest  thou?  and  why  eatest 
1.    9  H.  rose  up  after  they  had  eaten  in  Shiloh 
1.  13  H.,  she  spake  in  her  heart ;  only  her  lips 
1.  15  H.  answered  and  said,  No,  my  lord;  I  (am) 
1,  19  Elkanah  knew  H.  his  wife  ;  and  the  Lord 
1.  20  the  time  was  come  about  after  H.  had 

1.  22  H.  went  not  up ;  for  she  said  unto  her  h. 

2.  1  H.  prayed,  and  said,  My  heart,  .in  the  L. 
2.  21  the  Lord  visited  H,  so  that  she  conceived 

HAN-NA'-THON,  pnjn  dedicated  to  grace. 

A  city  of  Zebulun  at  a  point  apparently  on  the  northern 

boundary,  now  called  Hannah. 

Josh  19. 14  compasseth  it  on  the  north  side  to  H. 
HAN-NT'-EL,  ^N'jn  God  is  gracious. 

1.  A  son  of  Ephod  who,  as  prince  of  Mauasseh,  assisted 
in  the  division  of  the  land.  In  the  Hebrew  text  his 
name  is  identical  with  that  of  Haniel  (No.  2).  B.C.  1452. 

Num  34.  23  for  the  tribe,  .of  Manasseb,  H.  the  son  of 

2.  A  son  of  Ulla,  a  prince  and  hero  of  Asher. 

1  Ch.  7.  39  the  sons  of  Ulla ;  Arab,  and  H.,  and  Re. 
HA'-NOCH,  HE'-NOCH,  Tjian  dedicated. 
1.  The  third  of  the  children  of  Midian  and  a  grandson 
of  Abraham  by  Eeturah.     In  the  parallel  list  in  1  Ch.  1. 
33,  the  name  is  Ilenoch  (as  above).    B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.    4  And  the  sons  of  Midian ;  Ephah.  .and  H. 

1  Ch.  1.  33  And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;  Ephah.  .and  H. 
■2.  The  eldest  sou  of  Reuben,  and  founder  of  the  family 
of  the  Hanochites.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.    9  sons  of  Reuben  ;  H.,  and  Thallu,  and  H. 

Exod  6.  14  The  sons  of  Reuben.  ,H.,  and  Pallu,  Hez. 

Num 26.    5  the  children  of  Reuben ;  H. .  .the  family 

1  Ch.  5.    3  The  sons,  .of  Reuben.  H.,  and  Pallu,  Ee 


HANNOCHITES 


451 


HARDEN 


3.  The  son  of  Jared,  a  descendant  of  Seth,  is  ouce  thus 
named..  In  Genesis  his  name  is  given  Enoch.  B.C. 
3382-3017. 

1  Ch.  1.    3  H.,  Methuselah,  Lainech 
HA-NO-CHTTES,  ojn  belonging  to  Chanok. 

A  family  whose  founder  was  Hanoch,  the  eldest  son  of 
Reuben.    B.C.  1700. 

Num  26.    5  Hanoch.  .the  family  of  the  H.  :  of  Pallu 
HA'-NTTN,  pjn  gracious. 

1.  Son  of  Nahash,  king  of  Amnion,  who  dishonoured  the 
ambassadors  of  David  and  involved  the  Ammonites  in 
a  disastrous  war.    B.C.  1037. 

2  Sa.  10.    t  died,  and  H.  his  son  reigned  in  Ms  stead 

10.  2  said  David,  I  will  show  kindness  unto  H. 
10.  3  the  princes  of..  Amnion  said  unto  H.  their 
10.  4  Wherefore  H.  took  David's  servants,  and 
1  Ch.19.  2  David  said,  I  will  show  kindness  unto  H. 
19.  2  servauts  of  David  came,  .to  H.,  to  comfort 
ig.  3  priuces  of.  .Amnion  said  to  H.,Thinkest 
19.  4  Wherefore  H.  took  David's  servants,  and 
19.    6  H. .  .sent  a  thousand  talents  of  silver  to 

2.  A  son  of  Zalaph  who  assisted  in  the  repair  of  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem  on  the  E.  side.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  30  H.  the  sixth  son  of  Zalaph,  another  piece 

3.  A  man,  who,  with  the  people  of  Zanoah,  repaired  the 
ravine  gate  in  the  wall  of  Jerusalem.     B.C.  445. 

Neli.    3.  13  The  valley  gate  repaired  H.,  and  the  in. 
HAP  — 
Chance,  event,  n~l$z?  miqreh. 

Ruth  2.  3  her  hap  was  to  light  on  a  part  of  the 
HAFH-RA'-IM,  ansq  double  {two)  ivells,  or  two  pits. 
A  city  of  Issachar  next  to  Shunem.  About  six  miles 
N.E.  of  Lejjun  and  two  miles  W.  of  Solam  (the  ancient 
Shunem)  stands  the  village  of  el-A/ulek,  which  may  be 
the  representative  of  Chapharaim,  the  Arabic  Ain  hav- 
ing been  substituted  for  the  Hebrew  Cketh. 

Josh  19. 19  And  H.,  and  Shihon,  and  Anaharath 
HAPLY  (if)  — 
l.If,  that,  wS,  &  lu. 

1  Sa,  14.  30  if  haply  the  people  had  eaten  freely 
%  If  then,  el  apa  ei  ara. 

Markn.  13  if  haply  he  might  find  any  thing  thereon 

3.  If then,  et  apaye  ei  arage. 

Acts  17.  27  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  him,  and 

HAPLY,  lest  — 

l.Lest  ever,  at  any  time,  fx-fjTroTe  mepote. 

Lukei4.  29  Lest  hapl;,  after  he.,  laid  the  foundation 
Acts   5.  39  lest  haply  ye  be  found  even  to  fight 

'l.Lest  by  any  way  or  means,  yA\itws  viepos. 

2  Co.  9.   4  Lest  haply  if  they  of  Macedonia  come 
HAPPEN,  to  — 

l.To  meet,  happen,  befall,  n^N  anah,  4. 

Prov  12.  21  There  shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just 
2.To  be,  -rri  hayah. 

1  Sa.  6.    9  it  (was)  a  chance  (that)  happened  to  us 
3.7*0  come  to,  touch,  jm  naga,  5. 

Eccl.  8.  14,  14  it  happeneth  according  to  the  work  of 

4.  To  meet,  happen,  &np  qara. 

Jer.  44.  23  this  evil  is  happened  unto  you,  as  at  this 
5. To  meet,  happen,  n~\pt'qarah,  2. 

2  Sa.    1.   6  I  happened  by  chance  upon  mount  Gilhoa 
Q.To  become,  begin  to  be,  yivo/xai  ginomai. 

"Rom  11.  25  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel 
7.  To  go  or  come  tip  together,  ffvfj.(3aiva>  sumbaino. 
Markio.  32  tell,  .what  things  should  happen  unto  him 
Luke24.  14  of  all  these  things  which  had  happened 
Acts    3.  10  at  that  which  had  happened  unto  him 

1  Co.  10. 11  things  happened  unto  them  for  ensamples 
t  Pe.  4.  12  some  strange  thing  happened  unto  you 

2  Pe.  2.  22  it  is  happened  unto  them  according  to 
HAPPEN  to  be,  to  — 

To  meet,  happen,  come,  *X~®  qara,  2. 

2  Sa.  20.    1  there  happened  to  be  there  a  man  of  Be. 
HAPPEN  (to  or  unto),  to  — 
To  meet  happen,  come,  rrijj  qarah. 

1  Sa.28. 10  punishment  happen  to  thee  for  this  thing 

Esth.  4.    7  told  him . .  all  that  had  happened  unto  him 

Eccl.  2. 14  also  that  one  event  happeneth  to  them 
2.  15  it  happeneth  even  to  me ;  and  why  was  I 
9. 11  but  time  and  chance  happeneth  to  them 

Isa.  41.  22  and  show  us  what  shall  happen  :  let  them 
HAPPENETH  — 
Chance,  event,  rripa  miqreh. 

Eccl.  2.  15  As  it  happeneth  to  the  fool,  so  it 
HAPPY,  HAPPIER  — 
l.To  be  happy,  ic'x  ashar,  4. 

Prov.  3.  18  and  happy  (is  every  one)  that  retaineth 

^.Happiness,  IVR  osher. 

Gen.  30.  13  Happy  am  I,  for  the  daughters  will  call 
3.  Happiness,  *"$$%  ashre. 

Deut33.  29  Happy  (art)  thou,  O  Israel :  who  (is)  like 

1  Ki.  to.    8  Happy  (are)  thy  men,  happy  (are)  these 

2  Ch.  9     7  Happy  (are)  thy  men .  .happy  (are)  these 
Job     5.  17  happy  (is)  the  man  whom  God  correcteth 
Psa.127.    5  Happy  (is)  the  man  that  hath  his  quiver 


Psa.  128.  2  happy  (shalt)  thou  (be),  and  (it  shall  be) 
137.  8  happy  (shall  he  be)  that  rewardeth  thee 
137.  9  Happy  (shall  he  be)  that  taketh  and  das. 
144.  15  Happy  (is)  that)  people  that  is  in  such  a 
144.  15  happy  (is  that)  people  whose  God  (is)  the 
146.  5  Happy  (is  he)  that  (hath)  the  God  of  Jacob 
Prov.  3.  13  Happy  (is)  the  man  (that)  findeth  wisdom 
14.  21  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor,  happy  (is)  he 
16.  20  whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  happy  (is)  he 

28.  14  Happy  (is)  the  man  that,  feareth  alway 

29.  18  but  hethat  keepeththelaw,  happy  (is)he 

A\.Happy^  fxaKapLos  makarios. 

John  13.  17  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them 
Acts  26.  2  I  think  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  bee. 
Rom  14.  22  Happy  (is)  he  that  condenineth  not  him. 
1  Co.  7.  40  she  is  happier  if  she  so  abide,  after  my 
1  Pe.  3.  14  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  happy  (are 
4.  14  If  ye  be  reproached,  .happy  (are  ye) 

HAPPY,  to  be  — 

To  be  at  rest,  safe,  'by,  ?hy  shalah,  shalav. 

Jer.  12.    1  (wherefore)  are  all  they  happy  that  deal 
HAPPY,  to  call  or  count  — 
l.To  declare  happy,  ~)Wi$  ashar,  3. 

Hal.    3. 15  we  call  the  proud  happy ;  yea,  they  that 
%To  declare  happy,  /xaKaplfa  makarizo. 

Jas.     5.  11  Behold,  we  count  them  happy  which 
HA'-RA,  K"in  hill  country. 

A  place  utterly  unknown  unless  it  is  identified  with 
Haran  or  Charran,  the  city  of  Mesopotamia  to  which 
Abraham  came  from  Ur.  Haran  was  known  to  the 
ancients  as  Carrhae.  Hence  we  may  conclude  that  a 
portion  of  the  Israelites  carried  off  by  Pul  and  Tiglath- 
pileser  were  settled  in  Harran  on  the  Belik,  while  the 
greater  number  were  conveyed  to  Chabora. 

1  Ch.  5.  26  H.,  and  to  the  river  Gozan,  unto  t]iis  day 
HA-RA'-DAH,  ni-\n  terror. 

A  desert  station,  the  twentieth  encampment  of  the 
Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  ninth  from  Sinai. 
Its  position  is  still  unknown. 

Num33.  24  from  mount  Shapher,  and  encamped  in  H. 
33.  25  they  removed  from  H.,  and  pitched  in  M. 
HA'-RAN,  Jin,  \nn,  prri  strong,  enlightened. 

1.  The  third  son  of  Terah,  Abraham's  father,  and  hence 
the  youngest  brother  of  Abram.  He  had  three  children, 
Lot,  and  two  daughters,  viz.,  Milcah  who  married  her 
uncle  Nahor,  and  Iscah  of  whom  we  have  the  name 
only,  though  by  Josephus  and  others  she  is  held  to  be 
identical  with  Sarah.    B.C.  1990. 

Gen.  11.  26  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat.  .H. 
11.  27  Terah  begat  Ab.,  Nahor,  and  H.;  and  H. 
11.  28  H.  died  before  his  father  Terah  in  the 
11.  29  Nahor's  wife,  Milcah,  the  daughter  of  H. 
11.  31  Lot  the  son  of  H.  his  son's  son,  and  Sarai 

2.  A  Gershonite  Levite  in  David's  time,  and  one  of  the 
family  of  Shimei.    B.C.  1015, 

1  Ch.23.   9  sons  of  Shimei ;  Shelomith.  .and  H.,  three 

3.  Charan. — A  son  of  Caleb  the  spy,  by  his  concubine, 
Ephah;  he  had  a  son  named  Gazez.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  2.  46  bare  H.,  and  Moza,  and  Gazez  :  and  H. 

4.  Charan. — The  place  to  which  Abram  with  his  family 
migrated  from  Ur,  and  where  the  descendants  of  his 
brother  Nahor  established  themselves.  Hence  Haran 
(i.e.,  Charan)  is  called  "  the  city;  of  Nahor."  It  was  in 
Padan-aram,  which  is  the  cultivated  district  at  the  foot 
of  the  lulls,  a  beautiful  district  which  lies  between'the 
Khabour  and  the  Euphrates.  (See  Padan-aram).  About 
midway  in  the  district  is  a  town  still  called  Haran, 
which  seems  to  have  held  its  name  through  all  changes, 
and  is  the  Haran  or  Charran  of  Scripture.  Till  a  recent 
date  the  people  of  Harran  retained  the  Chaldean 
language,  and  the  worship  of  the  Chaldean  deities. 
Harran  is  upon  the  Belik  (the  ancient  Bilicjyps),  a 
small  affluent  of  the  Euphrates,  and  which  falW  into  it 
at  nearly  30°  E.  longitude.  It  was  famous  among  the 
Romans  as  being  near  the  scene  of  the  defeat  of  Crassus. 
In  the  N.T.  the  name  is  given  as  Charran. 

Gen.  11. 31  and  they  came  unto  H.,  and  dwelt  there 

11.  32  and  Terah  died  in  H. 

12.  4  five  years  old  when  he  departed  out  of  H. 
12.    5  and  the  souls  that  they  had  gotten  in  H. 

27.  43  arise,  flee  thou  to  Laban  my  brother  to  H. 

28.  10  Jacob  went.  .froniBeer-sheba.  .toward  H. 

29.  4  whence  (be)  ye?  And  they  said,  Of  H.  (are) 

2  Ki.  19.  12  Gozan,  and  H.,  and  Rezeph,  and  the  ch. 
Isa.  37.  12  Gozan,  and  H.,  and  Rezeph,  and  the  ch. 
Eze.  27.  23  H.,  and  Canneh,  and  Eden,  the  merchant. 

These  passages  may  not  all  refer  to  the  same  place. 

HA-RA-RITE,  nnrr,  '"n^C*  T!3B  mountaineer. 
Thought  to  denote  a  native  of  the  hill-country  of  Judah 
or  Epliraim.     B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23. 11  after  him.  .Shammah..sonof  AgeetheH. 

23.  33  Shammah  the  H. .  .son  of  Sharar  the  H. 
1  Ch.11.  34  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shage  the  H. 

11.  35  Ahiam  the  son  of  Sacar  the  H.,  Eliph. 

HAR-B0'-NA,HAR-B0'-NAH,nfu-)n,Nyi!i*inas5-^rn'er. 
Third  of  the  seven  eunuchs  or  chamberlains  that  served 
Ahasuerus  (Xerxes),  king  of  Persia.    B.C.  510. 

Esth.  1.  10  On  the  seventh  day.  .he  commanded.  .H. 
7.    9  H.,  one  of  the  chamberlains,  said  before 

HARD  — 

1. Strong,  \nx,  frfs*  ethan. 

Prov  13. 15  hut  the  way  of  transgressors  (is)  hard 


2.  Weighty,  heavy,  122  kabed. 

Eze.    3.    5,  6  strange  speech  and  of  an  hard  language 
3. To  be  wonderful,  k^s  pala,  2. 

2  Sa.  13.    2  Amnon  thought  it  hard  for  him  to  do  any 
k.Sharp,  hard,  myp  qasheh. 

Exod.  1.  14  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard  bondage 
18.  26  the  hard  causes  they  brought  unto  Moses 

Deut^e.    6  afflicted .  .and  laid  upon  us  hard  bondage 

2  Sa.    3.  39  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  (be)  too  hard  for  me 

Isa.    14.    3  from  the  hard  bondage  wherein  thou  wast 
5. Hard  to  please,  dvaKoAos  duskolos. 

Markio.  24  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in 
6. Dried  up,  stiff,  aKXwpos  skleros. 

Matt 25.  24  I  knew  thee  that  thou  art  an  hard  man 

John  6.  60  This  is  an  hard  saying;  who  can  hear  it? 

Acts    9.    5  [hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks] 
26.  14  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks 

Jude       15  their  hard  (speeches)  which  ungodly  sin- 
[See  also  Follow,  go,  lie,  pursue.] 
HARD,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  firm,  pa;  yatsctq. 

Job  41.  24  hard  as  a  piece  01  tli^*  nether  (millstone) 
2.To  be  sharp  or  hard,  np'p  qashah. 

Deut.  1.  17  the  cause  that  is  too  tii  d  for  you,  bring: 
HARD,  to  arise... too  — 
To  be  wonderful,  nbs  pala,  2. 

Deut  17.   8  arise  a'matter  too  hard  for  t'(  »e  in  judg. 
HARD  by  — 
l.Xear,  hxx  etsel. 

1  Ki.  21.    1  hard  by  the  palace  of  Ahab  king  of  Sari. 
2.0ver  against,  nay  mnmah. 

Lev.    3.   9  shall  lie  take  off  hard  by  the  back  bone  " 
HARD  hearted  — 
Hard  or  sharp  of  heart,  ih  ne>p  qeslie  leb. 

Eze.  3.    7  all.. Israel  (are) impudent  and  hard  hear. 
HARD  (labour),  to  have  or  be  in — 

1.  To  sharpen,  or  be  sharply  pained,  nt^p  qashah,  3. 
Gen.  35.  16  Rachel  travailed,  and  she  had  hard  lab. 

2.  To  sharpen,  o)'  be  sharply  pained,  n^p  qashah,  5. 

Gen.  35. 17  when  she  was  in  hard  labour,  that  the 
HARD  to  be  understood  or  uttered  — - 
Hard  to  be  understood,  dvcrvoTjTos  dusnoetos. 

2  Pe.   3. 16  some  things  hard  to  be  under,  Heb.  5.  n 
HARD  question  — 

Acute  saying,  hidden  thing,  rrvrj  chidah. 

1  Ki.  10.    1  she  came  to  prove  him  with  hard  questions 

2  Ch.  9.    1  came  to  prove  Solomon  with  hard  quesS. 

HARD,  to  seem  — 

To  be  sharp  or  hard,  nrp  qashah. 

Deut  15.  18  It  shall  not  seem  hard  unto  thee  when 
HARD  sentences  — 
Acute  saying,  hidden  thing,  ]ynfc*  achidan. 

Dan.    5.  12  showing  of  hard  sentences,  and  dissolving 
HARD  thing,  to  (ask)  a  — 
To  make  sharp  or  hard,  nyfj  qashah,  5. 

2K1.    2.  10  Thou  hast;asked  a  hard  thing:  (neverth.) 
HARD  things  — 
1. Ancient,  stiff,  prij;  athaq. 

Psa.  94.    4  shall  they  utter  (and)  speak  hard  things  ? 
2.  Sharpness,  stiffness,  n^p  qasJieh. 

Psa.  60.   3  Thou  hast  showed  thy  people  hard  things 
HARD,  to  be  too  — 
To  be  wonderful,  aiB  pala-,  2. 

Gen.  iS.  14  Is  any  "thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord?  At  the 

Jer.  32.  17  (and)  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  thee 
32.  27  is  there  anything  too  hard  for  me? 
HARDEN,  to  — 
l.To  strengthen,  harden,  fox  amats,  3. 

Dent  15.    7  thou  shalt  not  harden  thine  heart,  nor 

2  Ch.36.  13  hardened  his  heart  from  turning  untoj 

2.  To  be  or  become  strong,  pin  chazaq. 

Exod  7. 13  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  that  he  heark. 

3.  To  strengthen,  harden,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

Exod  4.  21  I  will  harden  his  heart,  that  he  shall  not 
9.  12  the  Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh. 

10.  20,  27  But  the  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  h. 

11.  10  the  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  so 
14.    4  And  I  will  harden  Pharaoh's  heart,  that 
14.   8  the  Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh 
14. 17  I  will  harden  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians 

Josh  11.  20  it  was  of  the  Lord  to  harden  their  hearts 

i.To  make  heavy,  iveighty,  or  hard,  *U|  kabed,  3. 
1  Sa.    6.    6  Wherefore  then  do  ye  harden  your  hearts 
6.    6  as  the  Egyptians . .  hardened  their    earts  ? 

5.  To  make  heavy,  hard,  *n3  kabed,  5. 

Exod.  8.  15  he  hardened  his  heart,  and  hearkened  not 

8.  32  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  at  this  time 

9.  34  hardened  his  heart,  he  and  his  servants 
10.    1  I  have  hardened  his  heart,  and  the  heart 

6.  To  make  strong,  hard,  impudent,  HI?  azaz,  5. 

Prov  21.  29  A  wicked  man  hardeneth  his  face  :  but 
7.To  make  sharp,  hard,  nc!p  qashah,  5. 

Exod.  7.    3  will  harden  Pharaoh's  heart,  and  multiply 
Deut.  2.  30  thy  God  hardened  his  spirit,  and  made 


- 


HARDEN 


45:2 


HARP 


2  Ki.17. 14  would  not  hear,  but  hardened  their  necks 
Neh.  9. 16  dealt  proudly,  and  hardened  their  necks 
9.  17  but  hardened  their  necks,  and  in  their 
9.  29  hardened  their  neck,  and  would  not  hear 
Job     9.    4  who  hath  hardened  (himself)  against  him 
Psa.  95.    8  Harden  not  your  heart,  as  in  the  provo. 
rrov.28.  14  he  that  hardenefh  his  heart  shall  fall  into 
29.    1  often  reproved, hardeneth  (his)neck,  shall 
Jer.     7.  26  hardened  their  neck  :  they  did  worse 

19.  15  because  they  have  hardened  their  necks 
S.To  harden,  ntfR  qashach,  5. 

Isa.    63.  17  (and)  hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear  ? 
9. To  make  hard  or  callous,  ircapow  poroo. 

Mark  8.  17  he  saith.  .have  ye  your  heart  yet  harde.  - 
J  ohm  2.  40  He  hath,  .hardened  their  heart ;  that  they 
10.  To  make  dry  or  stiff,  o-KKnpvvw  skleruno. 
Rom.  9.  18  Therefore,  .whom  he  will  he  hardeneth 
Heb.  3.   8,  15  Harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the  pro. 
4.    7  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  heart 

HARDEN  self,  to  — 

To  exalt,  tread  upon,  "D?  salad,  3. 

Job     6.  10  yea,  I  would  harden  myself  in  sorrow  :  let 
HARDENED  — 
To  be  heavy,  "Q3  leaded. 

Exod.  7. 14  Pharaoh's  heart  (is)  hardened,  he  refuseth 

HARDENED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  or  become  strong,  hard,  pin  chazaq. 

Exod.  7.  22  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened,  neither 

8.  19  and  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened,  and 

9.  35  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  hardened,  nei. 

2.  To  be  or  become  heavy,  ~D3  kabed. 

Exod.  9.    7  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  hardened,  and 
Z.To  harden,  nw$  qashach,  5. 

Job  39.  16  She  is  hardened  against  her  young  oues 
4.  To  be  or  become  strong,  *]pn  teqeph. 

Dan.   5  20  his  mind  hardened  in  pride,  he  was  dep. 
5. To  make  hard  or  callous,  irwpom  poroo. 

Mark  6.  52  considered  not.  .for  their  heart  was  bar. 
6.  To  make  hard  or  stiff,  <rK\npvvw  skleruno. 

Acta  19.   9  when  divers  were  hardened,  and  believed 

Heb.   3.13  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the 

HARDER  — 

Strong,  pin  chazaq. 

Eze.  3.  *  9  As  an  adamant  harder  than  flint  have  I 

HARDER,  to  make  — 

To  strengthen,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

Jer.     5.    3  have  made  their  faces  harder  than  a  rock 

HARDLY  — 

I.Sard  to  please,  8v(tk6\ws  duskolos. 

Matt  19.  23  rich  man  shall  hardly  enter  into,  .heaven 
Markio.  23  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 
Lukei8.  24  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 

2.  With  labour,  pain  or  trouble,  ^6yts  mogis. 
Luke  9.  39  bruising  him,  hardly  departeth  from  him 

3.  With  toil  and  fatigue,  1x6X1?  molis. 

Acts  27.   8  hardly  passing  it,  came  unto  a  place  which 
HARDLY  bestead  — 
To  be  or  become  hardened  or  sharpen ed,ny$  qashah,2. 

Isa.    8.  21  pass  through  it  hardly  bestead  and  hung, 
HARDLY,  would  — 
To  harden,  sharpen,  n^p  qashah,  5. 

Exod. 13.  15  when  Pharaoh  would  hardly  let  us  go 
HARDNESS  — 
l.Straitncss,  hardness,  psiD  mutsaq. 

Job  38.  38  When  the  dust  groweth  into  hardness 
2. Hardness,  callousness,  wcapcoo-is  porosis. 

Mark  3.    5  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts 
3. Dryness,  hardness,  rrK\np6r7]s  sklerotes. 

Rom.  2.    5  after  thy  hardness  and  impenitent  heart 
HARDNESS  of  heart  — 
Dryness  or  stiffness  of  heart,  <TK\npOKaphia  sklero. 

Matt  19.    8  because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts 

Markio.   5  For  the  hardness  of  your  heart  he  wrote 
16.  14  with  their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart 

HARDNESS,  to  endure  — 

To  suffer  evil,  KaKoiraOtw  kakopatheo. 

2  Ti.    2.    3  endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier  of  J. 

HARE  — 

A  hare,  rnp*<  arnebeth. 

Lev.  11. T  6  the  hare,  because  he  cheweth  the  cud,  but 
Deut.14.  7  the  hare,  and  the  coney  ;  for  they  chew 

HA'-REPH,  *nn  early  born. 

A  son  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hur,  and  father  of  Beth-gader. 

In  Ezra  2.  18,  and  Nell,  7.  24,  Hariph  occurs.     B.C.  1450. 
i  Ch.  2.  51  H.  the  father  of  Beth-gader. 

HA'-RETH,  n-in  thicket 

A  piece  of  forest  land  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah.' 

1  Sa.  22.    5  departed,  and  came  into  the  forest  of  H. 
HAR-HA'-IAH,  n;q-in,  ^^n  Jah  is  protecting. 
Father  of  Tzziel  who  repaired  a  part  of  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem  after  Nehemiah  returned  from    Shushan. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.    3.    8  Next,  .him  repaired  Vzziel  the  son  of  H. 


HAR'-HAS,  Drnn  glitter,  splendour. 
Grandfather  of  Shallum,  the  husband  of  Huldah  the 
prophetess,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Josiah,  king  of 
Judah.     B.C.  700. 

2  Ki.22. 14  Tikvah,  the  son  of  H.,  keeper  of  the  ward. 
HAR'-HTJR,  "urnn  nobility,  distinction. 
A  Nethiuim  who  returned  from  exile.  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  51  children  of  Hakupha,  the  children  of  H. 

Neh.   7.  53  children  of  Hakupha,  the  children  of  H. 

HA'-RIM,  D"in  snub-nosed. 

1.  A  priest  who  had  charge  of  the  third  division  in  the 
duties  of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.    8  The  third  to  H.,  the  fourth  to  Seorim 
Ezra    2.  39  children  of  H.;a  thousand  and  seventeen 
10.  21  of  the  sons  of  H.;  Maaseiah,  and  Elijah 
Neh.  3.  11  Malchijah  the  son  of  H.,  and  Hashub  the 
This  may  rather  refer  to  No.  4. 
Neh.  7.  42  children  of  H.,  a  thousand  and  seventeen 

2.  A  place  in  Judah  or  Benjamin,  or  rather  a  family  of 
Bene-karim  which  returned  from  exile. 

Ezra    2.  32  children  of  H.,  three  hundred  and  twenty 
Neh.   7.  35  children  of  H.,  three  hundred  and  twenty 

3.  One  whose  descendents  took  strange  wives.  B.C. 
536. 

Ezra  10.  31  the  sons  of  H. ;  Eliezer,  Ishijah,  Malchiah 

4.  One  that  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah,  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.  10.    5  H.,  Meremoth,  Obadiah 

5.  A  family  that  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  27  Malluch,  H.,  Baanah 

6.  Perhaps  the  same  as  No.  4. 

Neh.  12.  15  of  H.,  Adna;  of  Meraioth,  Helkai 
HA'-RLPH,  Fpn,  rprj  early  born. 

1.  A  hundred  and  twelve  of  the  .Bene -hariph  returned 
from  the  captivity  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  537. 

Neh.    7.  24  children  of  H.,  an  hundred  and  twelve 

2,  The  head  of  a  family  of  Jews  that  sealed  the  covenant 
with  Nehemiah.  B.C.  442.  In  Ezra  (2.  18)  this  man  is 
ciUled  Jorah.  Several  MSS.  (as  well  as  the  Arabic 
and  Syriae  versions)  have  Jodah. 

Neh.  10.  19  H.,  Anathoth,  Nebai 
HARLOT  — 

l.To  commit  fornication,  go  a  ivhoring,  njj  zanah. 

Gen.  34.  31  he  deal  with  our  sister  as  with  an  harlot  ? 

Lev.  2i.  14  A  widow,  .(or)  an  harlot,  these  shall  he 

Josh.  2.    1  they  went,  and  came  into  an  harlot's  ho. 

6.  17  only  Rahab  the  harlot  shall  live,  she  and 

6.  22  Go  into  the  harlot's  house,  and  bring  out 

6.  25  Joshua  saved  Rahab  the  harlot  alive,  and 

Judg.n.  1  Now  Jephthah.  .(was)  the  son  of  an  harlot 

16.    1  went  Samson  to  Gaza,  and  saw.  .an  harlot 

1  Ki.  3.  16  Then  came,  .two  women  (that  were) harl. 

Prov.  7.  10  a  woman  (with)  the  attire  of  an  harlot 

29.    3  but  he  that  keepetli  compauy  with  harlots 
Isa.      1.  21  How  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  bar.  ! 
23.  15  after  the  end.,  shall  Tyre  sing  as  an  harlot 
23.  16  thou  harlot  that  hast  been  forgotten 
Jer.    5.    7  and  assembled . .  in  the  harlots'  houses 
Eze.  16.  31  and  hast  not  been  as  an  harlot,  in  that 
16.  35  Wherefore,  O  harlot,  hear  the  word  of 
Joel    3.    3  have  given  a  boy  for  an  harlot,  and  sold 
Mic.    1.    7  for  she  gathered  (it)  of  the  hireof  an  bar. 
1.    7  they  shall  return  to  the  hire  of  an  harlot 
Nah.  3.   4  whoredoms  of  the  well  favoured  harlot 
2.0ne  set  apart,  ni^np  qedeshah. 

Gen.  38.  21  Where  (is)  the  harlot  1 . .  There  was  no  liar. 

38.  22  the  men.  .said,  .there  was  no  harlot  in 
Hos.    4.  14  for  themselves,  .sacrifice  with  harlots 

3. One  sold,  a  seller,  fornicator,  tr6pvrj  pome. 
Matt  21.  31  That  the  publicans  and  the  harlots  go 
21.  32  the  publicans  and  the  harlots  believed 
Lukeis.  30  hath  devoured  thy  living  with  harlots 
1  Co.  6.  15  and  make  (them)  the  members  of  an  ha.  ? 
6.  16  he  which  is  joined  to  an  harlot  is  one  bo. 
Heb.  11.  31  By  faith  the  harlot  Rahab  perished  not 
Jas.     2.  25  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by  wo. 
Rev.  17.    5  The  mother  of  [harlots]  and  abominations 

HARLOT,  to  be  or  play  the  — 
To  commit  fornication,  go  a  whoring,  hit  zanah. 
Gen.  38.  15  he  thought  her  (to  be)  an  harlot ;  because 
38.  24  thy  daughter  in  law  hath  played  the  bar. 
Jer.     2.  20  thou  wanderest,  playing  the  harlot 

3.    1  hast  played  the  harlot  with  many  lovers 
3.   6  gone  up.  .and  there  hath  played  the  bar. 
3.    8  but  went  and  played  the  harlot  also 
Eze.  16.  15  playedst  the  harlot  because  of  thy  renown 
16.  16  and  playedst  the  harlot  thereupon 
16.  28  thou  hast  played  the  harlot  with  them 
16.  41  causethee  to  cease  from playingthe  harlot 
23.    5  Aholah  played  the  harlot  when  she  was 
23.  19  played  the  harlot  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
23.  44  in  unto  a  woman  that  playeth  the  harlot 
Hos.   2.    5  their  mother  hath  played  the  harlot ;  she 

3.  3  thou  shalt  not  play  the  harlot,  and  thou 

4.  15  Though  thou,  Israel,  play  the  harlot 

HARM  — 

\. Evil,. VI  ra. 

Gen.  31.  52  thou  shalt  not  pass  over  this,  .for  harm 
Num35.  23  (was)  not  his  enemy,  neither  sought  hish. 
Prov.  3.  30  Strive  not.  .if  he  have  done  thee  no  harm 
Jer.  39.  12  look  well  to  him,  and  do  him  no  harm 


2.An  evil  thing,  jn  ">;n  dabar  ra. 

2  KJ.  4.  41  And  there' was  no  harm  in  the  pot 
3.  Anything  out  of  place,  6.tottos  atopos. 

Acts  28.    6  and  saw  no  harm  come  to  him,  they  cha. 

4. Bad,  ko,k6s  kakos. 

Acts  16.  28  Do  thyself  no  harm  ;  for  we  are  all  here 
28.    5  he  shook  off  the  beast,  .and  felt  no  harm 

5. Evil,  TTOvj}p6s  poyieros. 

Acts  28.  21  neither,  .showed  or  spake  any  harm  of 
Q.Harm,  injury,  damage,  \jBpts  hubris. 

Acts  27.  21  and  to  have  gamed  this  harm  and  loss 
HARM,  to  (do)  — 

1.  To  do  evil,  jrv  yara. 

2  Sa.  20.    6  Sheba.  .do  us  more  harm  than  (did)  Abs. 

2.  To  afflict,  do  evil,  yjri  raa. 

1  Sa.  26.  21  I  will  no  more  do  thee  harm,  because  my 
1  Ch.16.  22  Touch  not.  .and  do  my  prophets  no  harm 
Psa.  105.  15  Touch  not.  .and  do  my  prophets  no  harm 

3.  To  treat  badly,  natcSa)  kakoo. 

1  Pe.    3. 13  who  (is)  he  that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be 
HARM  he  hath  done  — 
To  miss  the  mark,  do  wrong,  sin,  Ken  chata. 

Lev.    5.  16  barm  that  he  hath  done  in  the  holy  thing 
HARMLESS  — 
l.iVo^  bad,  harmless,  &ko.kos  akakos. 

Heb.    7.  26  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  siun. 
2. Harmless,  unmixed,  aKtpatos  akeraios. 

Matt  10.  16  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves 

Phil.  2.  15  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harmless,  the  s. 

har-ne'-pher,  isnn. 

A  son  of  Zopher  of  the  tribe  of  Asher.      B.C.  1570. 

1  Ch.   7.  36  sons  of  Zophah ;  Suah,  and  H.,  and  Shual 

HARNESS  - 

1. Armour,  p&i,  pt£>.!  nesheq. 

2  Ch.  9.  24  harness,  and  spices,  horses,  and  mules,  a 
2.  Coat  of  mail,  ]\"W  shiryan. 

1  Ki.22.  34  smote,  .between  the  joints  of  the  harness 

2  CI1.18.  33  smote.. between  the  joints  of  the  harness 

HARNESS,  to  — 

To  bind,  harness,  "ipx  asar. 

Jer.  46.    4  Harness  the  horses;  and  get  up,  ye  horse. 
HARNESSED  — 
Armed,  girded,  DTDn  chamushim. 

Ex0di3.  18  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  harnessed 
HA'-ROD,  Tin  terror',  trembling. 

The  well  of  Harod  was  a  fountain  by  which  Gideon  and 
his  army  encamped  before  the  rout  of  the  Midianites. 
It  is  now  the^i'tt  Jalud;  and  ",the  Hill  of  Moreh "  is 
the  Jabel  Duhy.  Harod  was  in  Manasseh  W.  of  the 
Jordan,  in  the  plain  of  Jezreel  at  Gilboa. 

Judg.  7.    1  rose  up . .  and  pitched  beside  the  well  of  H. 
HA-ROD-ITE,  Hiq  belonging  to  Harod. 
Patronymic  of  two  of  David's  warrior  guard,— Shammah 
and  Elika.     In  1  Chron.  11.  27  the  name  is  Harorite. 
'    2  Sa.  23. 25  Shammah  the  H.,  Elika  the  H. 
HA-RO'-EH,  n^i'in  the  seer. 

A  son  of  Shobal,  father  of  Kirjath-jearim,  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah.    B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  2.  52  had  sons;  H. .  .half  of  the  Manahethites 
HA-RO-RITE,  >-n")D  belonging  to  Haror. 
Patronymic  of  Shammoth,  one  of  David's  valiant  men. 
It  is  a  variation  of  Harodite. 

1  Ch.n.  27  Shammoth  the  H.,  Helez  the  Pelonite 
HA  RO'-SHETH,  nEhq  forest. 

"  Harosheth  of  the  Gentiles"  (so  called  from  the  mixed 
races  that  inhabited  it),  was  a  city  of  Galilee  in  the  N. 
of  the  land  of  Canaan,  supposed  to  have  stood  on  the 
W.  coast  of  the  lake  Merom  (el-Ilutth)  from  winch  the 
Jordan  issues  in  an  unbroken  stream.  Harosheth  was 
the  residence  of  Sisera,  captain  of  J^bin  king  of  Canaan, 
whose  capita]  Hazor  lay  N.W.  of  it.  No  trace  of  the 
site  has  as  yet  been  found. 

Judg.  4.  2  Sisera,  which  dwelt  in  H.  of  the  Gentiles 
4.  13  from  H.  of  the  Gentiles  unto  the  river  of 
4.  16  Barak  pursued  after  the  chariots.  .untoH. 

HARP  — 

I. Harp,  1133  kinnor. 

Gen.    4.  21  of  all  such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ 
31.  27  and  with  songs,  with  tabret,  and  with  h.  ? 

1  Sa.  10.    5  tabret,  and  a  pipe,  and  a  harp,  before 

16.  16  a  man,  (who  is)  a  cunning  player  on  an  h. 
16.  23  took  an  harp,  and  played  with  his  hand 

2  Sa,  6.  5  harps,  and  on  psalteries,  and  on  timbrels 
1  Ki.io.  12  harps  also  and  psalteries  for  singers 

1  Ch.13.   8  with  harps,  and  with  psalteries,  and  with 

15. 16  psalteries  and  harps  and  cymbals,  sound. 
15.  21  with  harps  on  the  Sheminith  to  excel 

15.  28  making  a  noise  with  psalteries  and  harps 

16.  s  Jeiel  with  psalteries  and  with  harps ;  but 
25.    1  who  should  prophesy  with  harps,  with 
25.    3  who  prophesied  with  a  harp,  to  give  thanks 
25.    6  harps,  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 

2  Ch.  5.  12  having  cymbals,  and  psalteries,  and  harps 

9.  11  and  harps  and  psalteries  for  siugers  :  and 
20.  28  to  Jerusalem  with  psalteries  and  harps 
29.  25  with  harps,  according  to  the  commandm. 
Neh,  12.  27  (with)  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  with  harps 


HARF 


453 


HASTE 


Job  21.  12  They  take  the  timbrel  and  harp,  and  , 

ao.  31  My  harp  also  is  (turned)  to  mourning,  and 
Psa.  33.    2  Praise  the  Lord  with  harp  :  sing  unto  h. 
43.    4  upon  the  harp  will  I  praise  thee,  O  God 
49.    4  I  will  open  my  dark  saying  upon  the  harp 
57     8  awake,  psaltery  and  harp  :  I  (myself)  will 
71.  22  unto  thee  will  I  sing  with  the  harp,  0 
81.    2  bring,  .the  pleasant  harp  with  the  psaltery 
o2!  3  upon  the  harp  with  a  solemn  sound 
08    5  unto  the  Lord  with  the  harp  ;  with  theh. 
108.    2  Awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  (myself)  will 
137.   2  We  hanged  our  harps  upon  the  willows 
147.    7  sing  praise  upon  the  harp  unto  our  God 

149.  3  praise  him  with  the  psaltery  and  harp 

150.  3  praises  unto  him  with . .  timbrel  and  harp 
Isa.     5. 12  the  harp  and  the  viol,  the  tabretandpipe 

16. 11  bowels  shall  sound  like  an  harp  for  Moab 
23. 16  Take  an  harp,  go  about  the  city,  thou 
24.    8  The  mirth .  .the  joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth 
30.  32  (it)  shall  be  with  tabrets  and  harps  :  and 
Eze.  26.  1^  sound  of  thy  harp  shall  be  no  more  heard 

2.Harp,  Dhnp,  cnn'p  qitharos,  qathros. 

Dam  3.  '5  hear  the  sound  of  the  cornet,  flute,  harp 
3. 7, 10, 15  cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery 

3.  Harp,  KiOapa  kithara. 

1  Co.  14.    7  giving  sound,  whether  pipe  or  harp,  exc. 
Rev.    5.    S  having  every  one  of  them  harps,  andgol. 

14.  2  voice  of  harpers  harping  with  their  harps 

15.  2  stand  on  the  sea.,  having  the  harps  of  God 

HARP,  to  — 

To  use  the  Harp,  Kidapifa  kitharizo. 

1  C0.14.  '7  how  shall  it  be  known  what  is.  .harped? 
Rev.  14.    2  I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with 

HARPER  — 

One  who  plays  upon  a  harp  or  guitar,  KtdaptoSos. 

Rev.  14,    2  I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with 

18.  22  the  voice  of  harpers,  and  musicians,  and 

HARROW  — 
Pike,  pin  charits. 

2  Sa.  12.  31  put  (them)  under  saws,  and  under  harrows 
1  Ch.20.    3  cut  (them)  with  saws,  and  with  harrows 

HARROW,  to  — 

To  level,  harroio,  ~vfy  sadad,  3. 

Job    39. 10  or.  will  he  harrow  the  valleys  after  thee? 
HAR'-SHA,  Mann  artificer. 

The  children  of  Hasha  were  anion?  the  Nethinini  who 
returned  with  Zerubbabel  from  exile.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.52  children  of  Mehida,  the  children  of  H. 

Neh.  7  54  children  jf  Mehida,  the  children  of  H. 

HART  — 

A  hart,  h;x  ayyal. 

Deuti2.  15  as  of  the  roebuck,  and  as  of  the  hart 

12.  22  Even  as  the  roebuck  and  the  hart  is  eaten 

14.  5  The  hart,  and  the  roebuck,  and  the  fallow 

15.  22  alike,  as  the  roebuck,  and  as  the  hart 

1  EX  4.  23  an  hundred  sheep,  beside  harts,  and  roe. 

Psa.  42.    1  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  broo. 

Song  2.  9  My  beloved  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 
2.  17  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon 
8.  14  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spices 

Isa.   35.    6  Then  shall  the  lame  (man)  leap  as  an  hart 

Lam.  1.    6  become  like  harts  (that)  find  no  pasture 

HA'-RTJM,  D"in  elevated. 

Father  of  Aharhel  a  descendant  of  Coz,  from  Caleb  sou 

of  Hur.     B.C.  1430. 

1  Ch.  4.    8  and  the  families  of  Aharhel  the  son  of  H. 
HA-RTJ'-MAPH,  npnrr. 

Neh.    3.  10  next . .  them  repaired  Jedaiah  the  son  of  H. 
HA-RTJ-PHITE,  HA-RI-PHTTE,  'snn,  sy^J\. 
Shephatiahu,  a  Korhite  who  joined  David  at!Ziklag.  B.C. 
1048. 

1  Ch.12.   5  and  Shemariah,  and  Shephatiah  the  H. 

HA'-RTJZ,  p~in  industrious. 

Father     of    Meshullemeth,    Manasseh's    queen,    and 

mother  of  Amon  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  698. 

2  Ki.  21.  19  (was)  Meshullemeth,  the  daughter  of  H. 
HARVEST  — 

X. Reaping,  TSjJ  qatslr. 

Gen.    8.  22  seed  time  and  harvest,  .shall  not  cease 
30.  14  Reuben  wentin  the  days  of  wheat  harvest 
45.    6  (there  shall)  neither  (he)  earing  nor  liar. 

Exod23  16  the  feast  of  harvest,  the  first  fruits  of  thy 
34.  21  earing  time  and  in  harvest  thou  shalt 
34.  22  of  the  first  fruits  of  wheat  harvest,  and 

Lev.  19.    q  when  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  land 
19.    9  neither,  .gather  the  gleanings  of  thy  bar. 
23. 10  and  shall  reap  the  harvest  thereof,  then 
23.  10  sheaf  of  the  first  fruits  of  your  harvest 
23.  22  when  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  land 
23.  22  neither,  .gather  any  gleaning  of  thy  bar. 
25.   5  groweth  of  its  own  accord  of  thy  harvest 

Deut24.  19  When  thou  cuttest  down  thine  harvest 

Josh   3.  15  Jordan  overfloweth.  .all  the  time  of  har. 

Judg  15,    1  in  the  time  of  wheat  harvest,  thatSamson 

Ruth  1.  22  came,  .in  the  beginning  of  barley  harvest 
2.  21  until  they  have  ended  all  my  harvest 
2.  23  end  of  barley  harvest  and  of  wheat  harvest 

1  Sa.    6.  13  reaping  their  wheat  harvest  in  the  valley 

8.  12  and  (will  set  them),  .to  reap  his  harvest 
12. 17  (Is  it)  not  wheat  harvest  to  day?  I  will 

2  Sa.  21.    9  were  put  to  death  in  the  days  of  harvest 

21.   9  in  the  begiuning  of  barley  harvest 


2  3a.  21.  10  from  the  beginning  of  harvest  until  water 

23.  13  came  to  David  in  the  harvest  time  unto 
Job     5.    5  Whose  harvest  the  hungry  eateth  up,  and 
Prov.  6.   8  (and)  gathereth  her  food  in  the  harvest 
10.    5  he  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  is  a  son  that 
20.   4  shall  he  beg  in  harvest,  and  (have)  noth. 

25.  13  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest 

26.  1  As  suow  in  summer,  and  as  rain  in  harvest 
9.    3  they  joy.  .according  to  the  joy  in  harvest 

16.  9  thy  summer  fruits,  and  for  thy  harvest,  is 

17.  11  the  harvest  (shall  be)  a  heap  in  the  day 

18.  4  like  a  cloud  01"  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest 
18.  5  afore  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is  perfect 
23.    3  the  harvest  of  the  river,  (is)  her  revenue 

5.  17  they  shall  eat  up  thine  harvest,  and  thy 

5.  24  reserveth.  .appointed  weeks  of  the  harv. 
8.  20  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended 

50.  r6  handleth  the  sickle  in  the  time  of  harvest 

51.  33  and  the  time  of  her  harvest  shall  come 

6.  11  O  Judah,  he  hath  set  an  harvest  for  thee 
.  11  because  the  harvest  of  the  field  is  perish. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Hos. 
Joel 


3.  13  Put  ye  in  the  sickle ;  for  the  harvest  is 
Amos  4.   7  yet  tluee  mouths  to  the  harvest :  and  I 

2.Reaping,  dtpurjxos  therismos. 

Matt.  9.  37  The  harvest  truly  (is)  plenteous,  but  the 

9.  38  Pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 

9.  38  will  send  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest 

13.  30  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest 

13.  30  in  the  time  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  the 

13.  39  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world ;  and 

Mark  4.  29  in  the  sickle,  because  the  harvest  is  come 

Lukeio.    2  The  harvest  truly  (is)  great,  but  the  lab. 

10.    2  pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 

10.    2  would  send  forth  labourers  into  his  harv. 

John  4.  35  four  months,  and  (then)  cometh harvest? 

4.  35  for  they  are  white  already  to  harvest 
Rev.  14.  15  to  reap;  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is 

HARVEST  man  — 

1.  Reaping,  reaper,  TSjj  qatsir. 

Isa.   17.    5  when  the  harvest  man  gathereth  the  corn 

2.  To  reap,  shorten,  "is  [J  qatsar. 

Jer.     9.  22  as  the  handful  after  the  harvest  mau,  and 
HA-SAD'-IAH,  nnpn  Jah  is  kind. 
A  son  of  Zerubbabel  and  descendant  of  Jehoiakim,  king 
of  Judah.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  3.  20  Hashubah.  .Ohel,  and  Berechiah,  and  H. 
HA-SE-NTJ'-AH,  nNjpn  the  violated. 
A  Benjamite  of  one  of  the  chief  families.     The  name  is 
really  Senuah,  the  definite  article  being  prefixed. 

1  Ch.  9.    7  Sallu.  .the  sou  of  Hodaviah,  theson  of  H. 
HA-SHAB'-IAH,  rrzi^n,  W;5»n  Jah  is  associated. 

1.  A  Merarite  Levite,  son  of  Amaziah  in  the  line  of 
Ethan  the  singer.     B.C.  1150. 

1  Ch.    6.  45  The  son  of  H.,  the  son  of  Amaziah,  the 

2.  Another  Merarite  Levite.     B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  9. 14  Shemaiah . .  the  son  of  H.,  of  the  sons  of  M. 

3.  The  fourth  of  the  six  sons  of  Jeduthun,  who  played 
the  harp  in  the  sanctuary, and  had  charge  of  the  twelfth 
course.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    3  sons  of  Jeduthun..  Zeri.  .H.,and  Mattith. 

4.  A  descendant  of  Hebron  son  of  Kohath.     B.C.  1015 

1  Ch.26.  30  of  the  Hebronites,  H.  and  his  brethren 

5.  A  son  of  Kemuel  who  was  prince  of  the  Levites  in  the 
time  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  17  Of  the  Levites,  H.  the  son  of  Kemuel :  of 

6.  Another  Levite,  a  chief  of  his  tribe,  and  assisted  king 
Josiah  at  his  great  passover  fea3t.     B.C.  623. 

2  Ch.35.   9  Conaniah  also,  and  Shemaiah.  .and  H. 

7.  A  Merarite  Levite  who  accompanied  Ezra  from  Baby- 
lon.   B.C.  457. 

Ezra    8.  19  H.,andwithhim  Jeshaiahofthesonsof  M. 

8.  A  chief  of  the  priests  of  the  family  of  Kohath.  B.C. 
457- 

Ezra    8.  24  of  the  chief?  of  the  priests  Sherebiah,  H. 

9.  A  ruler  of  half  the  environs  of  Keilah.  He  repaired 
a  portion  of  the  wall  under  Nehemiah.     B.C.  457. 

Neh.   3.  17  Next  unto  him  repaired  H.,  the  ruler  of 

10.  A  Levite  that  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah. 
(Perhaps  the  same  man  as  in  Neh.  12.  24). 

Neh.  10.  ti  Micha,  Rehob,  H. 

11.  Another  Levite,  son  of  Bunni.     B.C.  470. 

Nell.  11.  15  Shemaiah.  .the  son  of  H.,  the  son  of  Bu. 

12.  Another  Levite,  son  of  Mattaniah  and  an  attendant 
at  the  temple.     B.C.  457. 

Neh.  11.  22  I'zzi. .the  son  of  H.,  theson  of  Mattaniah 

13.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Hilkiab  in  the  days  of  Joia- 
kim  son  of  Jeshua.    B.C.  623. 

Neh.  12.  21  Of  Hilkiah,  H. ;  of  Jedaiah,  Nathaneel 

14.  A  chief  Levite  appointed  for  thanksgiving  after  the 
return  from  Babylon  [same  as  No.  12?]. 

Neh.  12.  24  the  chief  of  the  Levites  :  H.,  Sherebiah 
HA  SHAB'-NAH,  m^rj  Jah  is  a  friend. 
A  chief  of  the  people  that  sealed  the  covenant  with 
Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  25  Rehum,  H.,  Maaseiah 

HA-SHAB-NI'-AH,  n;:=-j'~  Jah  is  a  friend. 
1.  His  son  Hat  tush  helped  to  repair  the  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  480. 

Neh.   3. 10  next . .  him  repaired  Hattush  the  son  of  H. 


2.  A  Levite  who  officiated  at  the  great  fast  under  Ezra 
and  Nehemiah  when  the  covenant  was  sealed.     B.C. 

445-  , 

Neh.    9.    5  Then  the  Levites,  Jeshua,  and.X    Sh. 

KASH-BAD'-ANA  HASH-BAD-DA'-NA,  nriatfn. 

A  man  who  stood  by  Ezra  on  the  left  while'he  "read  the 

law  to  the  people.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    8.    4  on  his  left  hand,  Pedaiah.  .and  H.t  Zech. 
HA'-SHEM,  cvn  shining. 
Father  of  several  of  David's  valiant  guard.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  34  sons  of  H.  the  Gizonite,  Jonathan  the  son 
HASH-MO'-NAH,  nfi-jn,  fruitfidness. 
A  station  of  the  Israelites  next  before  Moseroth  near 
Mount  Hor.    It  was  the  twenty-fifth  in  the  wilderness 
and  the  fourteenth  from  Sinai. 

Nuni33.  29  went  from  Mithcah,  and  pitched  in  H. 
33.  30  they  departed  from  H.,  and  encamped  at 
HA'-SHTTB,  HAS'-SHTIB,  3;y;n  associate. 

1.  Father  of  Shemaiah  a  descendant  of  Merari.  The 
Common  Version  has  omitted  the  doubling  of  the  letter 
&  ;  the  name  is  identical  with  that  elsewhere  correctly 
given,  H asshub.     B.C.  480. 

1  Ch.  9.  14  of  the  Levites;  Shemaiah  the  son  of  H. 
Neh.  11.  15  of  the  Levites  :  Shemaiah  the  son  of  H. 

2.  A  son  of  Pahath  Moab  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem.    B.C.  480. 

Neh.  3.  11  H.  the  son  of  Pahath-Moab,  repaired  the 

3.  Another  who  assisted  at  another  part  of  the  wall. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  23  repaired  Benjamin  and  H.  over  against 

4.  A  head  of  a  family  who  sealed  the  covenant  with 
Nehemiah. 

Neh.  10.  23  Hoshea,  Hananiah,  H. 
HA-SHTJ'-BAH,  nnc:n  association. 
A  son  of  Zerubbabel  and  descendant  of  Jehoiakim,  king 
of  Judah.     B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  3.  20  AndH.,  and  Ohel,  and  Berechiah,  and  Ha 
HA'-SHUM,  Ctrn  shining. 

1.  His  descendants  returned  with  Zerubbabel  from 
Babylon.    B.C.  636. 

Ezra   2.  19  children  of  H.,  two  hundred  twenty  and 
10.  33  Of  the  sons  of  H.;  Mattenai,  Mattathah 
Neh.   7.  22  children  of  H.,  three  hundred  twenty  ana 

2.  A  priest  who  stood  beside  Ezra  while  he  read  the  law 
to  the  people.    B.C.  445. 

Neh,  8.   4  and  on  his  left  band,  Pedaiah.  .and  H. 

3.  The  head  of  a  family  that  sealed  the  covenant  with 
Nehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.io.  18  Hodijah,  H.,  Bezai 
HAS'-RAH,  rnpn  sjrtcndot'r. 
Another  form  of  Harhas  (2  Kings  22.  14),  whichsee. 

2  Ch.34.  22  Shallum .  .the  son  of  H., keeper  of  the  ward, 
HAS  SE-NA'-AH,  nxipn  the  thorn  hedge. 

The  Bene-has-senaah  rebuilt  the  fish  gate  when  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem  was  repaired.  The  name  is  no  doubt 
identical  with  the  Senaah  of  Ezra  2.  35  and  Neh.  7.  38, 
having  the  definite  article  prefixed.  It  may  have  some 
connection  with  the  cliff  Se7ich  of  1  Sam.  14.  4. 

Neh.    3.    3  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons  of  H.  build,  who 
HAST  — 
There  is,  there  are,  ej;  yesh. 

2  Ki.  4.    2  tell  me,  what  hast  thou  in  the  house  ? 
Job  33.  32  If  thou  hast  any  thing  to  say,  answer  me 
Prov.  3.  28  Say  not.  .Go.  .when  thou  hast  it  by  thee 
HASTE  — 
l.?*o  make  haste,  isn  chaph-az. 

2  Ki.  7.  15  the  Syrians  had  cast  away  in  their  haste 
Psa.  31.  22  For  I  said  in  my  haste,  I  am  cut  off  from 
116.  11  I  said  in  my  haste,  All  men  (are)  liars 

2. Haste,  ptsn  chippazon. 

Exodi2.  11  ye  shall  eat  it  in  haste  :  it  (is)  the  Lord's 
Deuti6.  3  thou  earnest  forth  out  of.  .Egypt  in  haste 
Isa.  52. 12  For  ye  shall  uot  go  out  with  haste,  nor 

3.  Haste,  enrovdr}  spoude. 

Mark  6.  25  she  came  in.  .with  haste  unto  the  king 
Luke  1.  39  and  went  into  the  hill  country  with  haste 

HASTE,  to  — 

1.7*0  hasten,  2wss,  px  uts. 

Exod.  5.  13  And  the  taskmasters  hasted  (them)  say. 
Josh  10.  13  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a  whole  day 
Provig.    2  he  that  hasteth  with  (his)  fee*  sinueth 

2.7*0  be  troubled,  hastened,  ■???  bahel,  2. 

Prov28.  22  He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  (hath)  an  evil 

3. Tn  haste,  take  trouble,  ?rj3  bahel,  5. 

Esth,  6.  14  hasted  to  bring  Haman  unto  the  banquet 

4.  To  hasten,  p>ress,  r|"T  dachaph,  2. 

2  Ch.26.  20  yea,  himself  hasted  also  to  go  out,  beca. 
Esth.  6. 12  but  Haman  hasted  to  his  house  mourning 

5.7*0  make  haste,  Pin  ehush. 

1  Sa.  20.  38  Jonathan  cried.  .Make  speed,  haste,  stay 
Job  31.    s  or  if  my  foot  hath  hasted  to  deceit 
Psa.  22.  19  O  my  strength,  haste  thee  to  help  me 
Hab.    1.   8  shall  fly  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth  to  eat 

6.7*.    make  haste,  t^n  ehush,  5. 

Judg2o.  37  And  the  liers  in  wait  hasted,  and  ruslie 


HASTE 


454 


HATE 


7.  To  hasten,  Tpn  chaphaz. 

Job  40.  23  he  drinketh  up  a  river,  (and)  hasteth  not 

8.  To  dash,  hasten,  Bfl'B  tits. 

Job     9.  26  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth  to  the  prey 

9.2*0  make  haste,  "inn  mahar,  3. 

Gen.  18.  7  fetched  a  calf,  .and  he  hasted  to  dress  it 
19.  22  Haste  thee,  escape  thither  ;  for  I  cannot 
24.  18  and  she  hasted,  and  let  down  her  pitcher 

24.  20  And  she  hasted,  and  emptied  her  pitcher 
45.  9  Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my  father,  and  say 
45-  13  ye  shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father 

Josh.  4.  10  and  the  people  hasted  and  passed  over 
8.  14  that  they  hasted,  and  rose  up  early,  and 
8.  19  the  ambush.,  hasted  and  set  the  city  on  fire 

1  Sa.  17.  48  David  hasted,  and  ran  toward  the  army 

23.  27  Haste  thee,  and  come  ;  for  the  Philistines 

25.  23  she  hasted,  and  lighted  off  the  ass,  and  fell 
25.  34  except  thou  hadst  hasted  and  come  tome. 
25.  42  And  Abigail  hasted,  and  arose,  and  rode 
28.  24  she  hasted,  and  killed  it,  and  took  flour 

2  Sa.  19.  16  Shimei.  .hasted  and  came  down  with  the 

1  Ki.  20.  41  And  he  hasted,  and  took  the  ashes  away 

2  Ki.  9.  13  they  hasted,  and  took  every  man  his  gar. 
Prov.  7.  23  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the  snare,  and  know. 
Jer.   48.  16  near  to  come, and  his  affliction  hastethfast 

V:,  Hasting,  "ino  maker. 

Zeph.  1.  14  The  great  day  of  the  LORD,  .hasteth  grei 

1\.  To  pant,  swallow  up,  *|i<^  shaaph. 

Eccl.  1.    5  and  hasteth  to  his  place  where  he  arose 

12.  To  hasten,  tnrtvSw  speudo. 

Acts  20.  x6  for  he  hasted,  if  it  were  possible  for  him 

HASTE  away,  to  — 

To  be  hastened,  T^n  chaphaz,  2. 

Psa.  48.    5  they  were  troubled,  (and)  hasted  away 
104.   7  at.  .voice  of  thy  thunder  they  hasted  aw. 

HASTE,  to  cause  to  make  — 
To  cause  to  make  haste,  hasten,  "lflH  mahar,  3. 
Esth.  5.    5  Cause  Haman  to  make  haste,  that  he  may 

HASTE,  in  or  with  — 

1.  Haste,  iVn?  behilu. 

Ezra   4.  23  they  went  up  in  haste  to  Jerusalem  unto 

2.To  be  hastened,  brtfl,  behal,  4. 

Dan.  2.  25  brought.  .Daniel  before  the  king  in  haste 
3  24  the  king  was  astonied,  and  rose,  .in  haste 
6.  19  king . .  went  in  haste  unto  the  den  of  lions 

2.To  hasten,  "ins  mahar,  3. 

Exodio.  16  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron  in  h. 

12.  33  send  them  out  of  the  land  in  haste;  for 

4.  To  hasten,  o-7reu5a>  speudo. 

Luke  2.  16  they  came  with  haste,  and  found  Mary  and 

HASTE,  to  make  — 

\.To  hasten, press,  pN  uts. 

Prov28.  20  he  that  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not 

2.  To  hasten,  ^3  bachel,  3. 

2  Ch.  35.  21  for  God  commanded  me  to  make  haste 

%.Toflee,  rri3  barach. 

Song  8.  14  Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like 
4.7V>  make  haste,  C'ln  chush. 

Deut32.  35  the  things  that  shall  come.. make  haste 
Job  20.  2  to  answer,  and  for  (this)  I  make  haste 
Psa.  38.  22  Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord  my  salva. 
40.  13  deliver.. 0  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  me 
70.  5  make  haste  unto  me,  0  God  :  thou  (art) 
119.  60  I  made  haste,  and  delayed  not  to  keep 
141.    1  Lord,  I  cry  unto  thee  :  make  haste  unto 

5.  To  make  haste,  wn  chush,  5. 

Isa.  28.  16  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste 

6.  To  make  haste,  trn  chish. 

Psa.  71.  12  O  God..  0  my  God,  make  haste  for  my  help 

7. To  hasten,  75n  chaphaz. 

2  Sa.   4.    4  Ci  metopass.asshemadehastetofiee.that 

8.7*0  be  hastened,  T£jn  chaphaz,  2. 

1  Sa.  23.  26  David  made  haste  to  get  away  for  fear  of 

9.  To  make  haste,  inp  mahar,  3. 

Gen.  24.  46  she  made  haste,  and  let  down  her  pitcher 

43.  30  Joseph  made  haste  ;  for  his  bowels  did 
Exod34.    8  And  Moses  made  haste,  and  bowed  his  h. 
Judg.  9.  48  make  haste,  (and)  do  as  I  (have  done) 

13.  to  And  the  woman  made  haste,  and  ran  and 
1  Sd.    9.  12  make  haste,  .for  he  came  to  day  to  the 

25.  18  Abigail  made  haste,  and  took  two  bund. 
Esth.  6.  10  Make  haste,  .take  the  apparel  and.  .horse 
rrov  1.  16  their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  make  haste  to 
Isa.  49.  17  Thy  children  shall  makehaste;  thydestro. 

59.    7  they  make  haste  to  shed  innocent  blood 
Jer.     9.  18  let  them  make  haste,  and  take  up  a  wail. 
Nab.  2.    5  they  shall  make  haste  to  the  wall  thereof 
3.0. To  hasten,  (nrevSw  sp&U&o. 

Luke  19.   5  Znculieus,  make  haste,  and  come  down 

19.    6  And  he  made  haste,  and  came  down,  and 
Acts  22.  t.8  Make  haste,  and  get  thee  quickly  out  of 
-HASTE,  to  require  — 

'To  be  urgent,  poj  nachats. 

*      1  3a,  21.   S  because  the  king's  business  required  haste 


HiSTE  unto,  to  — 

To  haste,  urge  on,  o-irevSoj  speudo. 

2  Pet.   3.  12  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  G. 
HASTEN,  to  — 
l.To  hasten,  press,  pN  uts,  5. 

Gen.  19.  15  then  the  angels  hastened  Lot,  saying,  Ar. 

Jer.  17.  16  I  have  not  hastened  from  (being)  a  pastor 

2.7*0  haste,  c;:n  chush. 

Eccl.  2.  25  who  else  can  hasten  (hereunto),  more  than 

3.7*0  make  haste,  win  chush,  5. 

Psa.  55.    8  I  would  hasten  my  escape  from  the  windy 

Isa.     5.  19  Let  him  make  speed,  (and)  hasten  his  work 

60.  22  I  the  Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  time 

4.7*o  hasten,  spread,  "irtD  mahar. 

Psa.  16.   4  (that)  hasten  (after)  another  (god) :  their 

5.7*0  make  haste,  "inp  mahar,  3. 

Gen.  18.    6  Abraham  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  S. 

1  Ki.22.    9  Hasten  (hither)  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah 

2  Ch.24.    5  Go  out.  .and  see  that  ye  hasten  the  matter 

24.    5  Howbeit  the  Levites  hastened  (it)  not 
Isa.   51.  14  The  captive  exile  hasteneth  that  he  may 

6.7*0  watch,  *ip*^  shaqad. 

Jer.     1.  12  for  I  will  hasten  my  word  to  perform  it 
HASTENED,  to  be  — 
1.7*o  be  troubled,  hastened,  *?rra  bahel,  4. 

Esth.  8.  14  the  posts,  .being  hastened  and  pressed 
2.  7*o  press,  ^n'n  dachaph. 

Esth.  3.  15  being  hastened  by  the  king's  command. 
HASTILY  — 

1.  Hastily,  speedily,  trrp  maker. 

Judg.  2.  23  left,  .without  driving  them  out  hastily 
Prov  25.    8  Go  not  forth  hastily  to  strive,  lest,  .what 

2.  Haste,  speed,  nnnp  meherah. 

Judg.  9.  54  he  called  hastily  unto  the  young  man  his 

3.7*o  make  haste,  in.p  mahar,  3. 

1  Sa.  4.  14  And  the  man  came  in  hastily,  and  told  E. 
1  Ki.20.  33  Now  the  men.  .did  hastily  catch  (it) :  and 

LQuickly,  shortly,  rax*™  tacheos. 

John  n.  31  saw  Mary,  that  she  rose  up  hastily  and 

HASTILY,  to  bring  or  be  gotten  — 
l.Tobe  hastened,  Snp  bahel,  4. 

Prov  20.  21  An  inheritance  (may  be)  gotten  hastily  at 

2.  7*o  cause  to  run,  p"i  ruts,  5. 

Gen.  41.  14  brought  him  hastily  out  of  the  dungeon 
HASTING  — 
Hasty,  hasting,  YHS  mahir. 

Isa.    16.   5  seeking  judgment,  and  hasting  righteou. 
HASTY  — 
1.7*0  hasten,  press,  pK  uts. 

Prov  21.    5  but  of  every  one  (that  is)  hasty,  only  to 
29.  20  Seest  thou  a  man  (that  is)  hasty  in  his  w. 

2.  7*o  be  urgent,  f\s,n  chatsaph,  5. 

Dan.   2.  15  Why  (is)  the  decree  (so)  hasty  from  the  k. 

3. Hasty,  speedy,  nna  maker,  2. 

Hab.   1.    6  Glial  leans,  (that)  bitter  and  hasty  nation 
4.  7*o  be  wroth,  *]$$  qatsaph. 

Prov  14.  29  but  (lie  that  is)  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  fol. 

HASTY,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  hastened,  Vrrs  bahal,  2. 

Eccl.  8.    3  Be  not  hasty  to  go  out  of  his  sight :  stand 

2.7*o  haste,  ^3  bahal,  3. 

Eccl.   7.    9  Be  not  hasty  in  thy  spirit  to  be  angry  :  for 

3.  To  make  haste,  "ins  mahar,  3. 

Eccl.   5.    2  and  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter 
HASTY  fruit  — 
First  fruit,  *ii23  bikkur. 

Isa.    28.    4  the  hasty  fruit  before  the  summer;  which 

HA-STT'-PHA,  HASH-TT'-PHA,  MS^n,  Nfltorj,  nakedness. 

A  Nethinim  family  that  returned  from  exile.     In   the 

Common    Version  of    Nehemiah    7.  26  the    name  is 

inaccurately  given  as  Hashupha. 

Ezra  2.  43  children  of  H.,  the  children  of  Tabbaoth 
Neh.    7.  46  children  of  Ziha,  the  children  of  H., the  ch 

HAT  — 

Turban,  tAsia  karhda. 

Dan.    3.  21  these  men  were  bound  in  their,  .hats,  and 
HA'-TACH,  -JP0. 

A  chamberlain"  eunuch    in  the  court  of    Ahasuerus 
(Xerxes)  in  immediate  attendance  on  Esther.     B.C.  510. 

Esth.  4.    5  Then  called  Esther  for  H.,  (one)  of  the 
4.    6  So  H.  went  forth  to  Mordecai  unto  the 
4.    9  H.  came  and  told  Esther  the  words  of  M. 
4.  to  Again  Esther  spake  unto  H.,  and  gave  him 
HATCH,  to  — 
1.7*o  cleave,  rend,  hatch,  y$i  baqa. 

Isa.    34.  15  There  shall  thegreat  owl.  .hatch,  and  ga. 
2.7*0  cleave,  rend,  hatch,  yp|  baqa,  3. 

Isa.    59.    5  They  hatch  cockatrice's  eggs,  and  weave 
3.7*0  bear,  bring  forth,  "17;  yalad. 

Jer.   17.  11  partridge  sitteth  (on  eggs),  and  hatcheth 


HATE,  to  - 

1.7*0  hate, 

Gen.  27. 

49. 

50. 
Job  16. 
Psa.  55. 

2. To  hate, 

Gen.  24. 

26. 

37- 

37- 

ExodiS. 

20. 

Lev.  19. 
26. 

Deut.  4. 
5- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


24 

30 

Josh.  20 

Judg 1 1 


13- 

19. 

22. 

t  Ki 

77 

sCh 

l8. 

It). 

Esth 

9 

Job 

y- 

8. 

34- 

.tsa. 

5 

25- 

26. 

31' 

34- 
35' 
38. 
41. 
45' 
50. 
69. 
69. 
86. 

97< 
101 
105. 
106. 
106. 


119 
120. 
129. 
139. 
139. 


Prov. 


Eccl. 


Isa. 


61. 

dfi. 

Jer. 

12. 

Eze. 

44 
16 

16. 

23- 

Hos 

3S- 
9- 

op2)ose,  db'^'  satam. 

41  Esau  hated  Jacob  because  of  the  blessing 
23  archers  have  sorely  grieved,  .and  hated 
15  Joseph  will  peradventure  hate  us,  and 

9  teareth  (me)  in  his  wrath,  who  hateth  me 

3  cast  iniquity,  .and  in  wrath  they  hate  me 
xi'-;'  sane. 

60  possess  the  gate  of  those  which  hate  them 
27  Wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate 

4  hated  him,  and  could  not  speak  peaceably 
5,  8  and  they  hated  him  yet  the  more 

21  men  of  truth,  hating  covetousness ;  and 

5  and  fourth  (generation)  of  them  that  hate 

5  If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him  that  hateth  thee 
17  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine 

17  they  that  hate  you  shall  reign  over  you 

42  hated  him  not  in  times  past ;  and  that 

9  fourth  (generation)  of  them  that  hate  me 

10  repayeth  them  that  hate  him  to  their  face 

10  he  will  not  be  slack  to  him  that  hateth  h. 

15  will  lay  them  upon  all  (them)  that  hate 
31  for  every  abomination,  .which  he  hateth 

22  image  ;  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hateth 

4  neighbour,  .whom  he  hated  not  in  time 

6  inasmuch  as  he  hated  him  not  in  time 

11  if  any  man  hate  his  neighbour,  and  lie  in 
13  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto  her,  and  hate  her 

16  unto  this  man  to  wife,  and  he  hateth  her 
3  (if)  the  latter  husband  hate  her,  and  write 

7  on  them  that  hate  thee,  which  persecuted 

5  unwittingly,  and  hated  him  not  beforeti. 

7  Did  not  ye  hate  me,  and  expel  me  out  of 

16  Thou  dost  but  hate  me,  and  lovest  me  not 
2  thought  that  thou  hadst  utterly  hated  her 

15  Amnon  hated  her  exceedingly  ;  so  that 

15  hatred  wherewith  he  hated  her  (was)  gr. 
22  Absalom  hated  Amnon,  because  he  had 

6  lovest  thine  enemies,  .hatest  thy  friends 

18  He  delivered  me.  .from  them  that  hated 

8  I  hate  Jhim ;  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  go. 

7  I  hate  him  ;  for  he  never  prophesied  good 

2  love  them  that  hate  the  Lord?  therefore 
,    1  Jews  had  rule  over  them  that  hated  them 

5  did  what  they  would  unto  those  that  hated 
22  They  that  hate  thee  shall  be  clothed  with 

17  Shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  govern? 
5  thou  hatest  all  workers  of  iniquity 

13  trouble  (which  I  suffer)  of  them  that  hate 

5  him  that  loveth  violence  his  soul  hateth 

.  17  He  delivered  me.  .from  them  which  hated 

8  hand  shall  find  out  those  that  hate  thee 

.  19  many  ;  and  they  hate  me  with  cruel'  hat. 

.    5  have  hated  the  congregation  of  evil  doers 

6  hated  them  thatregardlyingvanities:  but 
21  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  desolate 

.  19  (neither)  let  them  wink,  .that  hate  me 
,  io  that  hate  me  wrongfully  are  multiplied 
,    7  that  hate  me  whisper  together  against  me 
.    7  lovest  righteousness,  and  hatest  wicked. 
.  17  thou  hatest  instruction,  and  castest  my 
.    4  They  that  hate  me  without  a  cause  are 
.  14  me  be  delivered  from  them  that  hate  me 
17  they  which  hate  me  may  see  (it),  and  be 
to  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil :  he 

3  I  hate  the  work  of  them  that  turn  aside 
25  He  turned  their  heart  to  hate  his  people 

10  them  from  the  hand  of  him  that  hated 
41  and  they  that  hated  them  ruled  over  them 

7  I  see  (my  desire)  upon  them  that  hate  me 
104  therefore  I  hate  every  false  way 

113  hate  (vain)  thoughts :  but  thy  law  do  I 
128  to  be)  right ;  (and)  I  hate  every  false 
163  I  hate  and  abhor  lying  :  (but)  thy  law  do 

6  long  dwelt  with  him  that  hateth  peace 
5  confounded  and  turned  back  that  hate  Z. 

21  Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  Lord,  .and  am  not 

22  I  hate  them  with  perfect  hatred  ;  I  count 

22  How  long.. will,  .fools  hate  knowledge? 

29  they  hated  knowledge,  and  did  not  choose 

12  How  have  1  hated  instruction,  and  my  he. 

16  six  ('.hings)  doth  the  Lord  hate ;  yea,  se. 

13  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  to  hate  evil 

13  evil  way,  and  the  froward  mouth,  do  I  h. 
"  Reprove  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  hate  thee 

15  and  he  that  hateth  suretyship  is  sure 

1  but  he  that  hateth  reproof  (is)  brutish 
5  A  righteous  (man)  hateth  lying :  but  a 
24  He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth  lus  son 
10  (and)  he  that  hateth  reproof  shall  die 
27  but  he  that  hateth  gifts  shall  live 

7  the  brethren  of  the  poor  do  hate  him  ;  h. 

17  lest  he  be  weary  of  thee,  and  (so)  hate 

24  He  that  hateth  dissembleth  with  his  lips 
20  A  lying  tongue  hateth  (those  that  are) 

16  he  that  hateth  covetousness  shall  prolong 
10  The  blood  thirsty  hate  the  upright:  but 
24  partner  with  a  thief  hateth  his  own  soul 

17  I  hated  life  ;  because  the  work  that  is 

18  I  hated  all  my  labour  which  I  had  taken 

8  A  time  to  love,  and  a  time  to  babe  ;  a  time 

14  and  your  appointed  feasts  my  soul  hateth 
S  I  hate  robbery  for  burnt  offering  ;  and  I 

5  Your  bretlircn  that  hated  you,  that  cast 
8  it  crieth  out.  .therefore  have  I  hated  it 

4  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hate 

27  unto  the  will  of  them  that  hate  thee,  the 
37  with  all(them)thatthou  hast  hated;  I  will 

28  into  the  hand  (of  them)  whom  thou  hatest 

6  thou  hast  not  hated  blood,  even  blood 

15  I  hated  them  :  for  the  wickedness  of  their 


9.    8 


HATED 


455 


HAVE 


Amos  5.  10  They  hate  him  that  rebuketh  iu  the  gate 
5.  15  Hate  the  evil,  and  love  the  good,  and 

5.  21  I  hate,  I  despise  your  feast  days,  and  I 

6.  8  abhor  the  excellency,  .hate  his  palaces 
Mic.    3.    2  Svho  hate  the  good,  and  love  the  evil 
Zech.  8.  17  these  (are  things)  that  I  hate,  saith  the 
Mai.    1.   3  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  mountains  and 

2.  16  Lord.  .  saith,  that  he  hateth  putting  away 

3.  To  hate,  Rf?  sane,  3. 

Xuniio.  35  let  them  that  hate  thee  flee  before  thee 
Deut  32.  41  and  will  reward  them  that  hate  me 

33.  11  smite.. the  loius  of  them,  .that  hate  him 
2  Sa.  22.  41  that  I  might  destroy  them  that  hate  me 
Job  31.  29  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  hated  me 
Psa.  18.  40  that  I  might  destroy  them  that  hate  me 
44.    7  and  hast  put  them  to  shame  that  hated 
44.  10  they  which  hate  us  spoil  for  themselves 
55.  12  neither  (was  it)  he  that  hated  me  (that) 
68.    1  let  them,  .that  hate  him  flee  before  him 
83.    2  that  hate  thee  have  lifted  up  the  head 
89.  23  willbeat.  .and  plague  them  that  hate  him 
139.  21  O  Lord,  that  hate  thee?  and  am  not  I 
Prov.  8.  36  all  they  that  hate  me  love  death 

4.  To  hate,  xii?  sene. 

Dan.   4. 19  the  dream  (be)  to  them  that  hate  thee 

5. Hatred,  n$$r  shinah. 

Deut.  i.  27  the  Lord  hated  us,  he  hath  brought  us 
9.  28  he  hated  them,  he  hath  brought  them 

6.  7'o  hate,  filo-eco  miseo. 

Matt.  5.  43  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy 

5.  44  [do  good  to  them  that  hate  you],  and  pray 

6.  24  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other 
10.  22-  be  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name's  sake 
24.    9  hated  of  all  nations  for  my  name's  sake 
24.  10  shall  betray,  .and  shall  hate  one  another 

Marki3.  13  be  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name's  sake 
Luke  1.  71  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us 
6.  22  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you 

6.  27  But  I  say . .  do  good  to  them  which  hate  you 

14.  26  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife 

16.  13  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other 
19. 14  his  citizens  hated  him,  and  sent  a  message 
2i.  17  be  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name's  sake 

John  3.  20  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth.  .light 

7.  7  The  world  cannot  hate  you  ;  but  me  it  h. 
i2.  25  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall 

15.  18  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  me 
15.  ig  chosen  you.  .therefore  the  world  hateth 
15.  23  He  that  hateth  me  hateth  my  Father  also 
15.  24  now  have  they,  .bated  both  me  and  my 
15.  25  written.  .They  hated  me  without  a  cause 

17.  14  world  hath  hated  them,  because  they  are 
Rom.  7.  15  that  do  I  not ;  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I 

9.  13  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  I  hated 
Eph.  5.  29  For  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh 
Titus  3.  3  living  iu  malice,  .(and)  hating  one  another 
Heb.    1.   9  loved  righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity 

1  Jo.    2.    9,  11  He  that,  .hateth  his  brother,  is  in  da. 

3  13  Marvel  not.  .if  the  world  hate  you 

3  15  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murd. 

4.  2c  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his 
Jude  23  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the 
Rev.    2.   6  thou  hatest  the  deeds,  .which  I  also  hate 

2. 15  that  hold  the  doctrine. .  [which  thing  I  h.] 
17.  16  And  the  ten  horns,  .shall  hate  the  whore 

HATED,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  hate,  xiy  sane. 

Gen.  29.  31  when  the  Lord  saw  that  Leah  (was)  hated 
29.  33  Because  the  Lord  hath  heard.  .1  (was)  h. 

Deut  21.  15  two  wives,  one  beloved,  and  another  ha. 
21.  15  (both)  the  beloved  and  the  hated 
21.  16  first  born  before  the  son  of  the  hated 
21.  17  he  shall  acknowledge  the  son  of  the  hated 

2  Sa.  5.  8  the  blind,  (that  are)  hated  of  David's  soul 
Isa.  60. 15  thou  hast  been  forsaken  and  hated 

2.  To  be  hated,  Nj'?  sana,-  2. 

Provi4. 17  and  a  man  of  wicked  devices  is  hated 

14.  20  The  poor  is  hated,  .of  his  own  neighbour 

3.  One  hated,  &*iy  sani. 

Deut  21.  15  the  first  born  son  be  hers  that  was  hated 
HATEFUL,  (to  be)  — 
1. To  be  hated,  xiy  sane. 

Psa.  36.    2  until  his  iniquity  be  found  to  be  hateful 

2.  To  hate,  fitaeaj  miseo. 

Rev.  18.   2  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird 

3. Hated,  abominated,  crruryT}r6s  stugetos. 

Titus  3.    3  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  (and) 
HATEFULLY  — 
Hatred,  rrtu"B>  sinah. 

Eze.  23.  29  And  they  shall  deal  with  thee  hatefully 
HATER  — 
To  hate,  k#  sane,  3. 

Psa.  81. 15  haters  of  the  Lord  should  have  submitted 
HATH  — 
] .  Unto,  -bx  el. 

Gen.  47. 18  my  lord  also  hath  our  herds  of  cattle 

2.T)iere  is,  there  are,  ty;.  yesh. 

Gen.  39.  8  he  hath  committed  all .  .he  hath  to  my  h. 
2  Ch.25.  8  God  hath  power  to  help,  and  to  cast  down 
Job  38.  28  Hath  the  rain  a  father?  or  who.  .the  dro. 
Mai.    1.  14  deceiver,  which  hath  in  Ins  fluck  a  male 


HATH  it,  he  that  — 

Its  owners,  v^jj?  bealav. 

Provi6.  22  a*  well  spring  of  life  unto  him  that  hath  it 
17.    8  stone  in  the  eyes  of  him  that  hath  it 

Eccl.io.  20  and  that  which  hath  wings  shall  tell  the 

HATH  (life)  — 

Soul,  breath,  w$}  nephesh. 

Gen.    1.  20  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and 

HATH,  that  — 
Owner,  ^hjiZ  baalah. 

1  Sa.  28^  '7,  7  a  woman  that  hath  a  familial'  spirit 

HATH,  such  things  as  one  — 

The  present  things,  Ta  irdpoi/ra  ta  paronta. 

Heb.  13.    5  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have  :  for 
KATH,  that  one  — 
l.My  things,  ra  ijxd  ta  etna. 

Luke  15.  31  And  he  said..  Son.,  all  that  I  have  is  thine 
'2.  The  things  beside  one,  to  irapa.  t-'cpara. 

Mark  5.  26  had  spent  all  that  she  had,  and  wasnoth. 
3.  Thepresent  things,rh  vwdpxovra  ta  huparchonto. 

Matt  19.  21  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor 

Lukei2.  33  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms  ;  provide 
12.  44  will  make  Mm  ruler  over  all  that  he  hath 
14.  33  of  you  that  forsaketh  not  all  that  he  hath 
HA'-THATH,  nnn  bruised. 

A  son  of  Othniel"  the  Kenazite  and  judge  of  Israel, 
through  Caleb  son  of  Hur.    B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  4.  13  and  Seraiah  :  and  the  sons  of  Othniel ;  H. 
HA-TT-PHA,  ND'pn. 

The  -Bent'-Hatipha  were  among  the  Nethinira  that  re- 
turned from  Babylon.     B.C.  636. 

Ezra    2.  54  children  of  Neziah,  the  children  of  H. 

Neh.   7.  56  children  of  Neziah,  the  children  of  H. 

HA-TI'-TA,  Na'pn  exploration. 

A  porter  or  gate  keeper  of  the  temple  whose  descen- 
dants returned  from  the  exile.     B.C.  636. 

Ezra    2.  42  children  of  Akkub,  the  children  of  H. 

Neh.    7.  45  children  of  Akkub,  the  children  of  H. 

HATRED  — 

1.  Enmity,  nn'N  ebah. 

Eze.  25. 15  vengeance,  .to  destroy  (it)  for  the  oldha. 
35.    5  Because  thou  hast  had  a  perpetual  hatred 

2. Hatred,  <*i£cb,,o  mastemak. 

Hos.    o.    7  for.  .thine  iniquity,  and  thegreat  hatred 
9.    8  ways,  (and)  hatred  in  the  house  of  his  God 
a. Haired,  nx3t?  sinah. 

Num  35.  20* But  if  he  thrust  him  of  hatred,  or  hurl 

2  Sa.  13.  15  that  the  hatred  wherewith  he  hated  her 
Psa.  25.  19  many  ;  and  they  hate  me  with  cruel  ha. 

109.    3  compassed  me  about,  .with  words  of  ha. 

109.    5  they  have  rewarded  me .  .hatred  for  my 

139.  22  I  hate  them  with  perfect  hatred ;  I  count 

Prov  10.  12  Hatred  stirreth  up  strifes:  but  love  cov. 

10.  18  He  that  hideth  hatred  (with)  lying  lips 

15. 17  than  a  stalled  ox  and  hatred  therewith 

26.  26  hatred  is  covered  by  deceit,  his  wicked. 

Eccl.  9.    1  no  man  knoweth  either  love  or  hatred 

9.   6  their  hatred,  and . .  envy,  is  now  perished 
Eze.  35. 11  hast  used  out  of  thy  hatred  against  tliem 

4. Enmity,  e^Qpa  echthra. 

Gal.    5.  20  Idolatry,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  em. 
HAT'-TIL,  S'tan  decaying. 

The  Btmc-Hattil  were  among  the  children  of  Solomon's 
slaves  who  returned  from  exile.     B.C.  636. 

Ezra  2.  57  children  of  Shephatiah,  the  children  of  H. 

"Neli.   7.  59  children  of  Shephatiah,  the  children  of  H. 

HAT'-TTJSH,  mm  contender. 

1.  A  descendant  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  perhaps  a  son 
of  Shechaniah,  in  the  4th  or  5th  generation  from 
Zerubbabel.    B.C.  465. 

1  Ch.  3.  22  and  the  sons  of  Shemaiah ;  H.,  and  Igeal 

2.  A  descendant  of  David  who  went  up  from  Babylon 
with  Ezra  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes.  In  .Neh.  12.  2  he 
is  said  to  have  returned  with  Zerubbabel. 

Ezra  S.    2  Daniel :  of  the  sons  of  David ;  H. 
Neh.    3.  10  next  unto  him  repaired  H.  the  son  of  Hash. 
10.   4  H.,  Shebaniah,  Malluch 

3.  A  priest  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  636. 

Nell.  12.    2  Amariah,  Malluch,  H. 
HAUGHTILY  — 
Loftiness,  HDii  romak. 

Mic.    2.    3  neither  shall  ye  go  haughtily  :  for  this 
HAUGHTINESS  — 
1. Rising,  excellency,  niKa  gaavah. 

Isa.-  13. 11  lay  low  the  haughtiness  of  the  terrible 
16.  6  his  haughtiness,  and  his  pride,  and  his 

2.  Loftiness,  cnram. 

Isa.     2. 11  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  bowed  d. 

2. 17  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  made  low 

Jer.  48.  29  his  pride,  and  the  haughtiness  of  his  hea. 

HAUGHTY  — 

1.  Height,  haughtiness,  P133  gobah. 

Prov  16.  18  Pride.,  and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall 
2. High,  haughty,  ?':?,  sP^a  gaboah. 

Isa.   10.  33  henm  down,  and  the  haughty  shall  be  h. 


3. Haughty,  ~i*n;  yahir. 

Prov  21.  24  Proud  (and)  haughty  scorner  (is)  his  name 
A. Height,  high  place,  d'vid   marom. 

Isa.   24.    4  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish: 

5. Loftiness,  lofty,  en  rum. 

2  Sa.  22.  28  but  thine  eyes  (are)  upon  the  haughty 

HAUGHTY,  to  be  — 

To  be  high  or  haughty,  F133  gabah. 

Psa.  131.  1  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine 
Prov  18.  12  Before  destruction  the  heart,  .is  haughty 
Isa.  3.  16  Because  the  daughters  of  Zion  are  haughty 
Eze.  16.  50  werehaughty.andcommittedabominatioa 
Zeph.  3.  3i  thou  shalt  no  moie  be  haughty  because  of 

HAUNT  — 
Foot,  hi"]  regel. 

1  Sa.  23.  22  see  his  place  where  his  haunt  is,  (and} 

EAUNT,  to  —  " 

To  sit  down  or  still,  3p;  yashab. 

Eze.  26. 17  cause  their  terror,  .on  all  that  haunt  it ! 
HAUNT,  to  be  wont  to  — 
To  go  habitually,  or  up  and  down,  tqx  halaJe,  7. 

1  Sa.  30.  3 1  where  David . .  and  his  men  were  wont  to  h. 

HAU'-RAN,  pin  cave  district. 

The  modern  Haurdn  and  the  Greek  province  of  Auran- 

itis,  S.  of  Damascus,  W.  of  Golan  and  Bashan,  E.  of 

Trachonitis  (now  Ledsha),  and  once  called  Auranitis. 

In  Ezekiel  it  includes  Golan  and  Bashan  W.  of  the 

Jordan. 

Eze.  47. 16  Hazar-hatticon .  .(is)  by  the  coast  of  H.  ' 
47. 18  the  east  side  ye  shall  measure  from  H, 
HAVE  — 
There  is,  there  are,  &t  yesh. 

Gen.  T3.  9  Esau  said,  I  have  enough,  my  brother' 
33.  11  Take.. my  blessing,  .because  I  have  eno. 

43.  7  The  manaskod  us.  .have  ye  (another)  b.  ? 

44.  19  saying,  Have  ye  a  father,  or  a  brother  ? 
44.  20  We  have  a  father,  an  old  man,  and  a  child 

Ruth  1.  12  If  I  should  say,  I  have  hope,  (if)  I  should 

2  Sa.  19.  28  what  right,  .have  I  yet  to  cry  any  more 

1  Ki.  17.  12  I  have  not  a  cake,  but  an  handful  of  meal 

1  Ch.  29.    3  I  have  of  mine  own  proper  good,  of  gold 

2  Ch.  16.   9  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  have  wars 
Eccl.  4.    9  they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  labour 
Isa.    43.    S  Bring  forth,  .the  deaf  that  have  ears" 
Jer.    41.   8  we  have  treasures  in  the  field,  of  wheat 

IIAYE,  to  — 

I.  There  is,  tliere  are,  'ivx  ithi. 

Ezra    4.  16  by  this  means  thou  shalt  have  no  portion 
Dan.    2.  30  for  (any)  wisdom  that  I  have  more  than 
3.  25  I  see  four  men  loose.,  and  they  have  no  h. 

2.0wigr,  *7*3  baal. 

EceL  7. 12  wisdom  giveth  life  to  them  that  have  it 
Isa.  41. 15  new  sharp  threshing  instrument  having 
Dan.   8.  20  The  ram.  .having  (two)  horns  (are)  the 

3.  To  be,  Kin  hava. 

Dan.   6.  "2  and  the  king  should  have  no  damage 

4.  To  inherit,  hm  nachal. 

NuniiS.  23  a  statute,  .that.,  they  have  no  inheritance 
18.  24  I  have  said.. they  shall  have  no  inherit  a_ 

5.2*0  go  or  come  in,  «i3  bo. 

Gen.  43.  23  Peace  (be)  to  you.  .1  had  your  money 
Job      6.    S  Oh  that  I  might  have  my  request;  and 

Q.To  be  to,  b  nin  havah  le. 

Eccl.    2.  92  what  hath  man  of  all  his  labour,  and  of 
7.  To  be  to,  ^  rvn  hayah  le. 

Gen.  11.    3  they  had  brick  for  stone,  .slime  had  they 
8.7*0  complete,  finish,  nhs  kalah,  3. 

Gen.  43.    ■>  when  they  had  eaten  up  the  corn  which 
9.Tb  be  founa,  x^&matsa,  2. 

Deut.  21. 17  him  a  double  portion  of  all  that  he  hath 
10.7*0  give,  ]ro  nathan. 

Neh.  13.    4  Eliashib  the  priest,  having  the  oversight 

II.  To  place,  set,  dv,  D'b  sum,  sim. 

Ezra  10.  44  (some) . .  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  eft. 
[See  also  Abomination,  appetite,  assurance,  bitterness^ 
can, "charge,  compassion,  damage,  deeply,  delight,  deri- 
sion,desire,  do,  dominion, done,  end,  enough,  experience, 
favour,  fellowship,  fouled,  good  success,  habitation, 
hair  fallen  off,  hard  (labour),  heat,  hoofs,  hope,  horns, 
hunger,  indignation,  inheritance,  intelligence,  issue, 
joy,  knowledge,  lack,  loss,  maintenance,  many,  mastery, 
mercy,  mercy  upon,  more,  need,  need  of,  occasion,  over., 
oversight,  pain,  part,  pity,  pity  upon,  pleasure,  plenty, 
possession,  power,  profit,  respect,  rest,  rule,  running 
issue,  secret,  sent  back,  shadow,  sorrow,  superfluous, 
tithes,  understanding,  vent,  well,  wholly.] 
12.7*o  interchange,  avri^dWcc  antiballd. 

Luke24.  17  (are)  these  that  ye  have  one  to  another 
13.7*o  hold  off  or  away,  awexw  apeclw. 

Matt.  6.    2,  5,  16  say  unto  you,  They  have  their  rew. 

Phil.   4.  iS  I  have  all,  and  abound  :  I  am  full,  having 

14.7*0  become,  begin  to  be,  yivofxat  ginamri. 

Matt  18. 12  If  a  man  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  one 
Acts  15.    2  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  dissension 
1  Co.  4.   5  then  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God. 

15.7*0  be,  el  fit  eimi.  , 

Matt  ig.  22  sorrowful :  for  he  had  great  possessions 


Matt  19. 
Mark  5. 


Luke 


14. 
John  1  a. 

Acts.  4. 
7- 


Rom.  g. 


HAVE 


27  followed  thee ;  what  shall  we  have  there. 
25  which  had  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  years 

22  went,  .grieved :  for  he  had  great  possession 

23  he  shall  have  whatsoever  he  saith 

24  What  things,  .ye  desire,  .ye  shall  have 

7  they  had  no  child,  because  that  Elisabeth 

14  thou  shalt  have  joy  and  gladness ;  and 
32>  33>  34  what  thank  have  ye?  for  sinners 

41  a  certain  creditor  which  had  two  debtors 

42  For  he  had  one  only  daughter,  about  tw. 

43  a  woman,  having  an  issue  of  blood  twelve 
13  We  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two 
39  she  had  a  sister  called  Mary,  which  also 

24  which  neither  have  storehouse  nor  barn 
10  shalt  thou  have  worship  in  the  presence 
39  ye  have  a  custom,  that  I  should  release 
32  his  own  ;  but  they  had  all  things  common 

44  Our  fathers  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness 
21  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter 

15  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation  for 
10  for  I  have  much  people  iu  this  city 

25  that  by  this  craft  we  have  our  wealth 

9  the  same  man  had  four  daughters,  virgins 
23  Do  therefore  this.  .We  have  four  men 
2  .  9.  9  ;  1  Co.  9.  16  ;  Rev.  22.  14. 


*5- 
17- 


18. 


IQ.Mi/,  mine,  ra  2/j.a  t*  ema. 

"Lukeis.  31  And  he  said,  .all  that  I  have  is  thine 

1  /.  To  have,  e^cu  echo. 

Matt.  3.    4  John  had  his  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  and 
3.    9  not  to  say.  .We  have  Abraham  to  (our)  f. 
3. 14  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and 
5.  23  that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against  thee 

5.  46  love  them  which  love .  .what  reward  have 

6.  1  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  Father  which 

6.  8  what  things  ye  have  need  of  before  ye  ask 

7.  29  he  taught  them  as  (one)  having  authority 

8.  9  under  authority,  having  soldiers  under  me 
8.  20  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of 

8.  20  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his) 

9.  6  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive 
g.  36  scattered,  .as  sheep  having  no  shepherd 

11.  15  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 

11.  18  nor  drinking,  and  they  say,  He  hath  a 

12.  10  was  a  man  which  had  (his)  Hand  withered 

12.  11  What  man.  .shall  have  one  sheep,  and 

13.  5  places,  where  they  had  not  much  earth 
13.    5  because  they  had  no  deepness  of  earth 
13.    6  they  had  no  root,  they  withered  away 
13.    9  AVho  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
13. 12  -whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given 
13.  12  but  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall 
13.  12  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  he  hath 
13.  21  Yet  nath  he  not  root  in  himself,  but  dur. 
13.  27  thy  field?  from  whence  then  hath  it  tares? 
13-  43  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 

13.  44  selleth  all  that  he  hath,  and  buyeth  that 

13.  46  and  sold  all  that  lie  had,  and  bought  it 

14.  4  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her 

14.  17  have  here  but  five  loaves,  and  two  fishes 

15.  30  having  with  them  (those  that  were)  lame 
15.  32  now  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to  eat 

.  34  saitli  unto  them,  How  many  loaves  have 
.  20  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard 
~>  than  having  two  hands  or  two  feet  to  be 
9  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire 
18.  25  as  he  had  not  to  pay,  his  lord  commanded 

18.  25  his  wife  and  children,  and  all  that  he  had 

19.  16  shall  I  do,  that  [I  may  have]  eternal  life  ? 
19.  21  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven  ;  and 
21.  3  ye  shall  say,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them 
21.  21  If  ye  have  faith,  and  doubt  not,  ye  shall 

21.  28  A  (certain)  man  had  two  sons ;  and  he 
22. 12  in  hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment? 
22  24  If  a  man  die,  having  no  children,  his 

22.  25  having  no  issue,  left  his  wife  unto  his 
22.  28  whose .  .shall  she  be .  .they  all  had  her 
25.  25  lo,  (there)  thou  hast  (that  is)  thine 

25.  28  give  (it)  unto  him  which  hath  ten  talents 
25.  29  unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given 
25.  29  but  from  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken 

25.  29  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath 

26.  7  a  woman  having  an  alabaster  box  of  very 
26.  11  For  ye  have  the  poor  always  with  you 
26.  11  but  me  ye  have  not  always 

26.  65  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses? 

27.  16  they  had  then  a  notable  prisoner,  called 
27.  65  Ye  have  a  watch :  go  your  way,  make  (it) 

Mark  1.  22  he  taught  them  as  one  that  had  authority 
2.  10  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forg. 
2.  17  They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the 
2.  19  [as  they  have  the  bridegroom  with  them] 

2.  25  when  he  had  need,  and  was  an  hungered 

3.  1  a  man  there  which  had  a  withered  hand 
3.  3  unto  the  man  which  had  the  withered  h. 
3.  10  for  to  touch  him,  as  many  as  had  plagues 
3.  15  to  have  power  to  heal  sicknesses,  and  to 
3.  22  He  hath  Beelzebub,  and  by  the  prince  of 
3.  26  divided,  he  cannot  stand,  but  hath  an  end 
3.  29  hath  never  forgiveness  but  is  in  danger 

3.  30  they  said,  He  hath  an  nnclean  spirit 

4.  s  stony  ground,  where  it  had  not  much  earth 
4.    s  because  it  had  no  depth  of  earth 

4.  6  because  it  had  no  root,  it  withered  away 
4.  9  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
4.  17  have  no  root  in  themselves,  and  so  eudu. 
4.  23  any  man  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
4.  25  he  that  hath,  to  him  shall  lie  given  ;  and 
4.  25  he  that  hath  not,  from  him  shall  lie  taken 
4.  25  shall  be  takan  even  that  which  he  hath 
4.  40  he  said . .  how  is  it  that  ye  have  no  faith  ? 


Mark  5 


T4 
14, 
14 
Luke  3 
3 
3 


John 


456 


3  Who  had  (his)  dwelling  among  the  tombs 

15  see  him  that . .  [had]  the  legion,  sitting,  and 
18  lawful  for  thee  to  have  thy  brother's  wife 

34  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd 
36  buy.  .bread  :  [for  they  have  nothing  to  eat] 

38  saith . .  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ?  go  and 

16  any  man  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
25  young  daughter  had  an  unclean  spirit 

1  the  multitude,  .having  nothing  to  eat 

2  been . .  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to  eat 

5  he  asked  them,  How  many  loaves  have 

7  they  had  a  few  small  fishes  :  and  he  bless. 

14  neither  had  they  in  the  ship  with  them 

16  saying,  (It  is)  because  we  have  no  bread 

17  Why  reason  ye  because  ye  have  no  bread? 
17  have  ye  your  heart  yet  hardened  ? 

iS  Having  eyes,  see  ye  not?  and  having  ear? 

17  brought,  .my  son,  which  hath  a  dumb  sp. 

43  than  having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell 
45  having  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  hell,  into 
47  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell 
50  Have  salt  in  yourselves,  and  have  peace 
2r  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the 

21  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven  :  and 

23  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 

3  say  ye  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 
13  seeing  a  fig  tree  afar  off  having  leaves 

22  Jesus,  .saith  unto  them,  Have  faith  in  G. 
25  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  any 

6  Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  welllie. 

23  whose  wife,  .for  the  seven  had  her  to  wife 

44  of  her  want  did  cast  in  all  that  she  had 
3  woman  having  an  alabaster  box  of  oint. 

7  For  ye  have  the  poor  with  you  always 

7  do  them  good  :  but  me  ye  have  not  alway 

8  not  to  say.  .We  have  Abraham  to  (our)  f. 
11  He  that  hath  two  coats,  let  him  impart 
11  to  him  that  hath  none  ;  and  he  that  hath 
2^  which  had  a  spirit  of  an  unclean  devil 

40  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  diseases 

24  Son  of  man  hath  power  upon  earth  to  fo. 
8  to  the  man  which  had  the  withered  hand 
8  under  authority,  having  under  me  soldiers 

33  drinking  wine  ;  and  ye  say,  He  hath  a  d. 

40  Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee 
42  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly 

8  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
13  these  have  no  root,  which  for  a  while 

18  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given 
18  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  lie 

18  taken  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have 

27  a  certain  man,  which  had  devils  long  time 

3  he  said,  .neither  have  two  coats  a  piece 
11  and  healed  them  that  had  need  of  healing 
58  Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  of  the  air 

58  Son  ol  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his)  h. 

5  Which  of  you  shall  have  a  friend,  and 

6  and  I  have  nothing  to  set  before  him  ? 

36  (be)  full  of  light,  having  no  part  dark,  the 

4  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do 

5  after  he.  .hath  power  to  cast  into  hell 

17  I  have  no  room  where  to  bestow  my  fru. 

19  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years 
50 1  have  a  baptism'to  be  baptized  with ;  and 

6  had  a  fig  tree  planted  in  his  vineyard 
n  had  a  spirit  of  infirmity  eighteen  years 

18  go  and  see  it :  I  pray  thee  have  me  excu. 

19  prove  them  :  I  pray  thee  have  me  excused 

35  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
4  What  man  of  you,  having  an  hundred 

8  what  woman,  having  ten  pieces  of  silver 
11  And  he  said,  A  certain  man  had  two  sons 

1  a  certain  rich  man  which  had  a  steward 

28  I  have  five  brethren ;  that  he  may  testify 

29  They  have  Moses  and  the  Prophets ;  let 

6  ye  had  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed 

7  having  a  servant  plowing  or  feeding  cattle 
22  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  distribute 

22  thou  shalt  have  ti'easure  in  heaven  :  and 

24  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 
17  have  thou  authority  over  ten  cities 

24  and  give  (it)  to  him  that  hath  ten  pounds 

25  said  unto  him.  Lord,  he  hath  ten  pounds 

26  unto  every  one  which  hath  shall  be  given 
26  from  him  that  hath  not,  even  that  he  ha. 

31  say.  .Because  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 

34  And  they  said,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  him 
24  Whose  image  and  superscription  hath  it? 

28  IE  any  man's  brother  die,  having  a  wife 
33  whose,  .is  she?  for  seven  had  her  to  wife 

4  hath  cast  in  all  the  living  that  she  had 

36  he  that  bath  a  purse,  let  him  take  (it) 

36  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his 

37  for  the  things  concerning  mehave  an  end 

39  and  see ;  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and 
39  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have 

41  he  said  unto  them.  Have  ye  here  any  m.  ? 
3  motherof  Jesus  saith.  .They  haveno  wine 

15  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life 

16  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life 

29  He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom 
36  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting 

11  thou  hast  nothing  to  draw  with,  and  the 
11  whence  then  hast  thou  that  living  water? 

17  woman  answered  and  said,  I  have  no  bus. 

17  Jesus  said,  .well  said,  I  have  no  husband 

18  For  thou  hast  had  five  husbands;  and  he 
10  he  whom  thou  now  hast  is  not  thyhusba. 

32  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of 
44  prophethath  no honouriuhisown country 

2  a  pool.  .Bethesda,  having  five  porches 

5  had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight  years 


HAVE 


John  5.  7  Ihavenoman,  whenthe  water  is  troubled 
5.  24  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 
5.  26  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath 
5.  36  I  have  greater  witness' than  (that)  of  John 
5.  38  ye  have  not  his  word  abiding  in  you  :  for 
5.  39  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life 
5.  40  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  life 

5.  42  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  you 

6.  9  which  hath  five  barley  loaves,  and  two 
6.  40  believeth  on  him,  may  have  everlasting 
6.  47  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life 

6.  53  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you 
6.  54  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life 

6.  68  thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life 

7.  20  hast  a  devil :  who  goeth  about  to  kill  thee 

8.  6  [that  they  might'have  to  accuse  him] 
8.  12  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life 

8.  26  I  have  many  things  to  say  and  to  judge 

8.  41  said  they,  .we  have  one  Father,  (even)  G. 

8.  48  thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and  hast  a  devil  ? 

8.  49  I  have  not  a  devil ;  but  I  honour  my  Fa. 

8.  52  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  devil.     Abrah. 

g.  41  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin 
10.  10  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have 
10.  16  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold 
10. 18  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have 
10.  20  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad  ;  why  hear 
12.    6  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put  the. 
i2.    8  always  ye  have  with  you  ;  but  me  ye  have 
12.  35  Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  dark. 
12.  36  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the  light 

12.  48  rejecteth  me.  .hath  one  that  judgeth  him 

13.  8  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me 
13.  29  because  Judas  had  the  bag,  that  Jesus 
13.  29  that  we  have  need  of  against  the  feast 

13.  35  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another 

14.  21  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and 

14.  30  the  prince  of  this  world,  .hath  nothing 

15.  13  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that 
15.  22  they  had  not  had  sin  :  but  now  they  have 

15.  24  none  otherman  did,  they  had  not  hadsin 

16.  T2  I  have  yet  many  things'to  say  unto  you 
16.  15  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine 
16.  21  woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow 
16.  22  And  ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow :  but 

16.  33  have  peace.     In  the  world  ye  shall  have 

17.  5  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world 

17.  13  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves 

18.  10  Peter  having  a  sword  drew  it,  and  smote 

19.  7  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought 
19.  10  I  have  power  to  crucify  thee,  and  have 
19.  11  he  that  delivered,  .hath  the  greater  sin 

19.  15  answered,  We  have  no  king  but  Cesar 

20.  31  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name 

21.  5  saith  unto  them,  Children,  have  ye  any 
Acts    2.  44  were  together,  and  had  all  things  comm. 

2.  43  parted,  .to  all  (men),  as  every  man  had 

2.  47  and  having  favour  with  all  the  people 

3.  6  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee  :  In  the  name 

4.  35  unto  every  man  according  as  he  had  need 

14  he  hath  authority  from  tne  chief  priests 
31  Then  had  the  churches  rest  throughout 

5  and  they  had  also  John  to(their)minister 
9  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed 
21  hath  in  every  city  them  that  preach  him 

18  shorn (his)headinCenchrea.  .hehadavow 
13  to  call  over  them  which  had  evil  spirits 
38  if  Demetrius,  .have  a  matter  against  any 
23  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on  them 
17  for  he  hath  a  certain  thing  to  tell  him 
iS  man.  .who  hath  something  to  say  unto 
10  asked.  .What  is  that  thou  hast  to  tell  me? 
20  have  nothing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy 

15  have  hope  toward  God,  which  they  them. 

16  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence 

19  and  object,  if  they  had  ought  against  me 
23  let  (him)  have  liberty,  and  that  he  should 
16  accused  have  the  accusers  face  to  face 
19  But  had  certain  questions  against  him  of 
26  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  write  unto  my 
26  after.  .1  might  have  somewhat  to  write 

9  others,  .which  had  diseases  in  the  island 
28.  19  that  I  had  ought  to  accuse  my  nation  of 
28.  29  and  had  great  reasoning  among  themse. 
Rom.  1.  13  that  I  might  have  some  fruit  among  you 
2. 14  when  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law 
2.  14  these,  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  unto 
2.  20  which  hast  the  form  of  knowledge  and  of 

4.  2  he  hath,  .to  glory  ;  but  not  before  God 

5.  1  [we  have]  peace  with  God  through  our  L. 

5.  2  By  whom  also  w-e  have  access  by  faith 

6.  21  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those  things 
6.  22  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the 
8.   9  Now  if  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Ch. 

8.  23  which  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  spirit 

9.  21  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  chiy 
to.    2  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal 
12.   4  For  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  body 
12.    4  and  all  members  have  not  the  same  office 

12.  6  Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to 

13.  3  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the  same 

14.  22  Hast  thou  faith  ?  have  (it)  to  thyself  bef. 

15.  4  that  we  through  patience .  .might  have  h. 
15.  17  I  have  therefore  whereof  I  may  glory 

15.  23  having  no  more  place,  .and  having  a  great 
1  Co.  2.  16  instruct  him?  But  we  have  the  mind  of 
4.    7  what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  rec.  ? 

4.  15  though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instructors 

5.  1  reported.,  that  one  should  have  bis  father's 

6.  1  Dare  any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against 
6.  4  If  then  ye  have  judgments  of  tilings  per. 
6.  19  which  ye  have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your 


>Co. 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Phil. 


.  Th. 


2Th. 
i  Ti. 


:Ti. 


Titus  i 

rhm. 

Heb.  2 
3' 

4 
4 


HAVE 


2  have  his  own  wife,  and  let  every  woman 
7  every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God 

12  If  any  brother  hath  a  wife  that  helieveth 

13  the  woman  which  hath  an  husband  that 

25  concerning  virgins  I  have  no  command. 

28  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  flesh  :  but 

29  they  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they 

.  ^7  having  no  necessity,  but  hath  power  over 

.  40  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  spirit  of  God 

1  Now.  .we  know  that  we  all  have  knowle. 

10  if  any  man  see  thee  which  hast  knowledge 

4  Have  we  not  power  to  eat  and  to  drink? 

5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister 

6  Or.  .have  not  we  power  to  forbear  work. 
17  if  I  do  this  thing  willingly,  I  have  a  rew. 

4  having(his)head covered, dishonoureth  his 
10  ought  the  woman  to  have  power  on  (her) 

16  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  chu 
22  have  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  to  drink  in  ? 

22  or  despise,  .and  shame  them  that  have 

12  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  many  mem. 

21  I  have  no  need  of  thee.  .1  have  no  need 

23  our  uncomely  (parts)  have  more  abund. 

24  our  comely  (parts)  have  no  need  :  but 

30  Have  all  the  gifts  of  healing  ?  do  all  speak 

1  Though  I  speak,  .and  have  no  charity,  I 

2  though  I  have,  .prophecy,  .though  I  have 

2  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  nothing 

3  and  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  not. 

26  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a  doctrine,  hath  a 

26  hath  a  revelation,  hath  an  interpretation 

31  I  protest  by  your  rejoicing  which  I  have 
34  for  some  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God 

9  we  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves 
15  come,  .that  ye  might  have  a  second  ben. 

3  lest,  when  I  came,  I  should  have  sorrow 

4  the  love  which  I  have  more  abundantly 

13  I  had  no  rest  in  my  spirit,  because  I  fou. 

4  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God 

12  Seeing  then  that  we  have  such  hope,  we 
1  Therefore,  seeing  we  have  this  ministry 

7  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels 

13  We  having  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  acco. 

1  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not 
12  that  ye  may  have  somewhat  to.. them 

10  as  have  nothing,  and  (yet)  possessing  all 
i  Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly 

5  our  flesh  had  no  rest,  but  we  were  troub. 

1 1  a  performance . .  out  of  that  which  ye  have 

12  (it  is)  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  h. 
12  (and)  not  according  to  that  he  hath  not 

8  that  ye,  always  having  all  sufficiency  in 

6  having  in  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  diso. 

15  having  hope,  when  your  faith  is  increased 
4  our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus 

22  Abraham  had  two  sons  ;  the  one  by  a 

27  children  than  she  which  hath  an  husband 

4  then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself 
10  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let 

7  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through 
12  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 

18  through  him  we  both  have  access  by  one 

12  In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access 

25  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that 

5  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of 
27  a  glorious  'church,  not  having  spot,  or 

7  because  I  have  you  in  my  heart ;  inasm. 

23  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with 
30  Having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw 

2  having  the  same  love,  (being)  of  one  ace. 
20  For  I  have  no  man  like  minded,  who  will 
27  lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow 

4  Though  I  might  also  have  confidence 

9  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which 

17  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensam. 

14  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his 
1  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have 

23  Which  things  have  indeed  a  show  of  wis. 

13  If  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any 

1  knowing  that  ye  also  have  a  Master  in  h. 
13  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for  you,  and  them 
9  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto 

6  that  ye  have  gbod  remembrance  of  us  al. 

12  and  (that)  ye  may  have  lack  of  nothing 

13  not,  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope 

1  But.  .ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto 
9  Not  because  we  have  not  power,  but  to  ■ 
4  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all 

7  he  must  have  a  good  report  of  them  wh. 

8  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is 

4  if  any  widow  have  children  or  nephews 
12  Having  damnation,  because  they  have 

16  If  any  man  or  woman  that  believeth  have 

2  they  that  have  believing  masters,  let  them 

8  having  food  and  raiment  let  us  be  there. 
16  Who  only  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in 

3  I  have  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers 

19  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  The  Lord 

5  Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying 

6  having  faithful  children,  not  accused  of 
8  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of 
5  which  thou  hast  toward  the  Lord  Jesus 

7  we  have  great  joy  and  consolation  in  thy 

14  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of 
3  builded.  .hath  more  honour  than  the  house 

14  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  High  P. 

15  we  have  not  an  high  priest  which  cannot 
12  ye  have  need  that  one  teach  you  again 
7.2  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  milk 

14  those  who  by  reason  of  use  have  their  sen. 

18  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who 
iQ  Which .  .we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul 

58 


457 


Heb.   7.    3  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end 
7.    s  have  a  commandment  to  take  tithes  of 
7.   6  and  blessed  him  that  had  the  promises 
7.  24  this(man).  .hath  an  unchangeable  priest. 

7.  28  maketh  men  high  priests  which  have  infi. 

8.  1  We  have  such  an  High  Priest,  who  is  set 

8.  3  that  this  man  have  somewhat  also  to  offer 

9.  1  the  first,  .had  also  ordinances  of  divine 
9.   4  Which  had  the  golden  censer,  and  the  ark 
9.   4  wherein  (was)  the  golden  pot  that  had  m. 

ro.  1  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  good  things 
10.  2  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of 
to.  19  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to 
10.  34  that  ye  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  an 
10.  35  which  hath  great  recompeuce  of  reward 

10.  36  ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye 

11.  10  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  founda. 

11.  15  And  truly.. they  might  have  had  opport. 

12.  9  we  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which 

12.  28  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve 

13.  10  We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no 
13.  14  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but  wre 
13.  iS  we  trust  we  have  a  good  conscience,  in 

Jas.  1.  4  let  patience  have  (her)  perfect  work,  that 
2.  1  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ch. 
2.  14  though  a  man  sayhe  hath  faith,  and  have 
2.  17  Even  so  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead 

2.  18  Thou  hast  faith,  and  I  have  works 

3.  14  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  strife  in  your 

4.  2  Ye  lust,  and  have  not.  .ye  have  not,  bee. 

1  Pe.  2.  12  Having  your  conversation  honest  among 

3.  16  Having  a  good  conscience  ;  that,  whereas 
.4.    8  above  all  things  have  fervent  charity  am. 

2  Pe.  1.  19  We  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of  proph. 

2.  14  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  and  that 
2.  14  an  heart  they  have  exercised  with  covetous 
1  John  1.    3  that  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us 
1.    6  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with 
1.    7  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and 

1.  8  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive 

2.  1  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  J. 
2.  7  an  old  commandment  which  ye  had  from 
2.  20  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  holy  one,  and 
2.  23  [the  same  hath  not  the  Father  :  (but  he] 

2.  28  when  he  shall  appear,  we  may  have  con. 

3.  3  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him 

3. 15  ye  knowthat  no  murderer  hath  eternal  I. 
3.  17  But  whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and 

3.  17  and  seeth  his  brother  have  need,  and  sh. 

3.  21  (then)  have  we  confidence  toward  God 

4. 16  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  ha. 

4.  17  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 
4. 18  love  casteth  out  fear  :  because  fear  hath 

4,  21  And  this  commandment  have  we  from 
5. 10  He  that  believeth.  .hath  the  witness  in 

5.  12  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life  ;  (and) 

5.  12  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
5.  13  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal 
5. 14  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him 
5.  15  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that 

3  John     5  that  which  we  had  from  the  beginning 

9  Whosoever  transgresseth .  .hath  not  God 
9  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son 

12  Having  many  tilings  to  write  unto  you,  I 
3  John     4  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that 

13  I  had  many  things  to  write,  but  I  will 
Jude       19  These  be.  .sensual,  having  not  the  spirit 
Rev.    1.  16  And  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars 

1.  18  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death 

2.  3  and  hast  patience,  .laboured,  and.  .not  f. 
2.  4  Nevertheless  I  have,  .against  thee,  beca. 
2.  6  this  chou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds 
2.    7,  11,  17,  29  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  h. 

2. 10  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  days :  be 
2.  12  which  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  two  e. 
2.  14,  20  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  be. 
2.  14  thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doc. 
2.  15  So  hast  thou  also  them  that  hold  the  do. 
2.  18  who  hath  Ms  eyes  like  unto  a  flame  of  fire 
2.  24  as  many  as  have  not  this  doctrine,  and 

2.  25  that  which  ye  have,  .hold  fast  till  I  come 

3.  1  he  that  hath  the  seven  spirits  of  God,  and 
3.    1  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest 

3.  4  Thou  hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis 
3.    6,  13,  22  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear 
3.    7  he  that  hath  the  key  of  David,  he  that 
3.    8  thou  hast  a  little  strength  and  hast  kept 
3.  11  hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no 

3.  17  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich,  .and  have  need  of 

4.  4  [and  they  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of] 
4.    7  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  man,  and 

4.  8  the  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  wi. 

5.  6  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes,  which 

5.  8  having  every  one  of  them  harps,  and  go. 

6.  2  he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  bow ;  and  a  cr. 

6.  5  he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  pair  of  balances 

7.  2  having  the  seal  of  the  living  God  ;  and 

8.  3  stood  at  the  altar,  having  a  golden  censer 
8.   6  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  tr. 

8.  9  which  were  in  the  sea,  and  had  life,  died 

9.  3  as  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have  power 
o.  4  those  men  which  have  not  the  seal  of  G. 
9.  8  they  had  hair  as  the  hair  of  women,  and 
9.  9  they  had  breastplates,  as  it  were  breastp. 
9.  id  they  had  tails  like  unto  scorpions,  and 

9. 11  they  had  a  king  over  them,  .the  angel  of 
9.  11  in  the  Greek  tongue  hath  (his)  name  Ap. 
g.  14  to  the  sixth  angel  winch  had  the  trumpet 
9.  17  them  that  sat  on  them,  having  breastpla. 
g.  19  like  unto  serpents,  and  had  heads,  and 

10.  2  And  he  had  in  his  hand  a  little  book  open 

11.  6  These  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it 


HAVE 


Rev.  11.   6  and  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them 
is.    3  having  seven  heads  and  ten  hor?     and 
12.    6  where  she  hath  a  place  prepare      f  God 
12.  12  the  devil  is  come  down  unto  yi        aving 
12.  12  he  knoweth  that  he  hath  but  a  showtime 

12.  17  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ 

13.  1  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and 
13.    9  If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let  him  hear 

13. 11  he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  sp. 
13. 14  which  had  the  wound  by  a  sword,  and 
13.  17  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or  the  name 

13.  18  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  count 

14.  1  having  his  Father's  name  written  in  their 
14.   6  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach 
14.  11  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,  who  wo. 
14. 14  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and 
14.  17  another  angel,  .he  also  having  a  sharp  si. 

14.  18  another  angel,  .which had  power  over  fire 
ia..  iS  cried,  .to  lain  that  had  the  sharp  sickle 

15.  1  angels  having  the  seven  last  plagues 

15.    2  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  G. 

15.  6  seven  angels,  .having  the  seven  plagues 

1 6.  2  the  men  which  had  the  mark  of  the  beast 

16.  9  God,  which  hath  power  over  these  plagues 

17.  1  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  vi. 
17.   3  beast,  .having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
17.   4  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of 
17.    7  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten  ho. 
17.    9  And  here  (is)  the  mind  which  hath  wisd. 

17.  13  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give  their 

18.  1  I  saw  another  angel.,  having  great  power 

18.  19  were  made  rich  all  that  had  ships  in  the 

19.  10  thy  brethren  that  have  the  testimony  of 

19. 12  hehad  a  name  written,  that  no  man  knew 

19.  16  he  hath  on  (his)  vesture  and  on  his  thigh 

20.  1  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit  and 
20.    6  Blessed  and  holy  (is)  he  that  hath  part 

20.  6  on  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power 

21.  9  the  seven  angels,  which  had  the  seven  v. 
21.  11  Having  the  glory  of  God  :  and  her  light 
21.  12  And  had  a  wall  great  and  high,  (and)  had 
21.  14  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundat. 
21.  15  he  that  talked  with  me  had  a  golden  reed 
21.  23  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither 

IS. To  hold  down,  Karexco  katecho. 

John  5.    4  [madewholeofwhatsoeverdiseasehehad] 

19.7b  take,  receive,  Xafj.fia.voj  lambano. 

Marki2.  22  And  the  seven  [had  her,  and]  left  no  seed 
Acts  25.  16  and  have  licence  to  answer  for  himself 
Heb.  1 1.  36  others  had  trial  of.  .mockings  and  scour. 

20.  To  receive  again,  fieTaAaiJ.f3a.vci>  metalambano. 
Acts  24.  25  when  I  have  a  convenient  season  I  will 

lJtl.  To  hegi 'n,  possess,  have,  virapx^  huparcho. 
Acts    3.    6  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none  ;  but  such  as 
4.  37  Having  land,  sold  (it),  and  brought  the 

HAVE,  can  — 

1.7b  know,  be  acquainted  with,  jn;  yacla. 

Isa.  56.  1 1  ^greedy  dogs  (which)  can  never  have  eno. 

2.7b  have,  %xm  who. 

John  1 9.  11  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  (at  all)  ag: 

HAVE  (a  dream),  to  — 

To  see  (a  vision),  x»q  chaza. 

Dan.    7.    1  Daniel 'had  a  dream  and  visions  of  his  h. 

HAVE  away,  to  — 

7b  cause  to  go  or  pass  over  or  beyond,  *uy  abar,  5. 
2  Ch.35.  23  said.  .Have  me  away ;  for  I  am  sore  wo. 

HAVE  forth  or  out,  to  — 

7b  cause  to  go  out,  nyt  yatsa,  5. 

2  Sa.  13.  9  And  Amnon  said,  Have  out  all  men  from 
2  Ej.ii.  15  Have  her  forth  without  the  ranges  :  and 
2  Ch.23.  14  Have  her  forth  of  the  ranges ;  and  whoso 

HAVE  here,  to  — 

To  be  found,  present,  vyc  matsa,  2. 

1  Sa.   9.    8  I  have  here  at  hand  the  fourth  part  of  a 

HAVE  1  inheritance)  to  — 
1.7b  inherit,  h~i  nuchal. 

Josh  17.   6  thedaughters..  had  an  inheritance  among 
2.  To  fall,  "?33  naphol 

Eze.  47.  22  they  shall  have  inheritance  with  you  am 

HAVE  (knowledge^,  to  — 

7b  know,  be  acquainted  with,  VTr  yada. 

Prov.17.  27  He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  wo. 
30.   3  wisdom,  nor  have  the  knowledge  of  the 

HAVE  on.  to  — 

To  go  in,  envelope,  clothe,  ivSvoj  enduo. 

Matt  22.  11  a  man  which  had  not  on  a  wedding  gar. 

Eph.    6.  14  having  on  the  breastplate  of  righteous. 

HAVE  (possession)  to  — 

7b  be  kept  or  held  fast,  irx  achaz,  2. 

Gen.  47.  27  they  had  possessions  therein,  and  grew 
Nuni32.  30  they  shall  have  possessions  among  you 

HAVE  ^sufficient),  to  — 

To  have,  ex0*  echo. 

Lukei4.  28  whether  he  ha7e  (sufficient)  to  finish  (it)? 

HAVE  (understanding^,  to  — 

7b  know,  be  acquainted  with,  VTr  yada. 

Job   38.    4  I  laid . .  declare,  if  thou  hast  understand. 


HAVE 


453 


HE 


HAVE  nothing  to  do  -with,  to  — 
Nothing  to  tliee  and  to,  /t^Se?  aol  ical  t<£  meden. 
Matt  27.  19  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just 
HAVE  to  do  with,  to  — 

What  to  me  and  to  theet  ri  efioi  «cu  col  ?  ti  craoi. 
Matt.  8.  29  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus 
Mark  1.  24  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  thou  Jesus 
5.  7  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus.  .Son 
Luke  4.  34  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee.  .Jesus  of 
8.  28  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus.  .Son 
John  2.    4  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee? 

HAVE  to  do,  with  whom  we  — 

Of  whom  we  are  speaking,  -n-pbs  hv  fjfuv  6  \6yos. 

Heb.    4.  13  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do 
HAVEN  — 
1, Shore,  h:(ven,  *pn  choph. 

Gen.  49.  13  Zebulun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the 
49.  13  and  he  (shall  be)  for  an  haven  of  ships 
2.  Haven,  refuge,  lino  machoz. 

Psa.107.  30  so  he  bringeth  thein  unto  their  desired  h. 
3. Haven,  refuge,  \ifi-qv  limen. 

Acts  27.  12  because  the  haven  was  not  commodious 
27. 12  Phenice..an  haven  of  Crete,  and  lieth 

HAVENS,  FAIR,  Ka\ol  Aleves  Kaloi  Lhnenes. 
A  haven  at  the  S.  of  Cape  Salmone  in  Crete. 

Acts  27.    8  came  untoaplacewhichiscalledtheF.H. 
HA-VI'-LAH,  n^irj  circle,  district 

1.  A  son  of  Cash,  and  descendant  of  Ham.     B.C.  2290. 

Gen.  10.  7  the  sons  of.Cush  ;  Seba,  and  H.,  andSa. 
1  Ch.  1.   g  the  sons  of  Cush ;  Seba,  and  H.,  and  Sa. 

2.  A  son  of  Joktan  and  descendant  of  Shem.    B.C.  2240. 

Gen.  10.  29  And  Ophir,  and  H.,  and  Jobab  :  all  these 
i  Ch.  i.  23  And  Ophir,  and  H.,  and  Jobab.    All  these 

3.  The  land  of  Chwalissi  W.  of  Ural  (?). 

Gen    2  11  which  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  H. 

4.  A  district  E.  of  Amalek. 

Gen.  25.  10  they  dwelt  from  H.  unto  Shur,  that  (is) 
1  Sa.  15.    7  And  Saul  smote  the  Amalekites  from  H. 

HAVOC  of,  to  make  — 

To  treat  outrageously,  Kv^aivofxai  htmainomm. 

Acts  S.  3  As  for  Saul,  he  made  havoc  of  the  church 
HA'-VOTH  JA'-IR,  TKJ  ni"  villages  of  J  air. 
Certain  villages  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  in  Gilead  or 
Bishan.  These  villages  were  taken  by  Jair  son  of 
Manasseh,  and  Gilead  was  allotted  to  his  tribe,  while 
he  named  the  villages  after  himself  Havotk-jair.  In 
Deut.  3.  14  it  is  stated  that  Jair  "  took  all  the  tract  of 
Argob  unto  the  boundary  of  the  Geshurite  and  the 
Maachathite, and  called  them  after  his  own  v&meBashan- 
havotk-jair." 

Num32.  41  took  the  small  towns,  .and  called  them  H. 

Deut.  3,  14  called  them  after  his.  .name,  Bashan-h.-g. 

Judgio.    4  thirty  cities,  which  are  called  H.-J.  unto 

HAWK  — 

Hawk,  p  nets. 

Lev.  n.  16  the  cuckoo,  and  the  hawk  after  his  kind 
Deuti4.  15  the  cuckoo,  and  the  hawk  after  his  kind 
Job   39.  26  Doth  the  hawk  fly  by  thy  wisdom.,  stretch 

HAWK,  night  — 

Old,  swalloio,  cuckoo,  Dsnri  tachmns. 

Lev.  11.  16  And  the  owl,  and  the  night  hawk,  and 
Deut  14.  15  And  the  owl,  and  the  night  hawk,  and 

HAY  — 

l.IIay,  grass,  leek,  Tin  chatsir. 

Prov.27.  25  The  hay  appeareth,  and  the  tender  grass 
Isa.    15.   6  the  hay  is  withered  away,  the  grass  fail. 

2.  Fodder,  grass,  hay,  x&PT0S  chortos. 

1  Co.  3. 12  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble 

HA-ZA'-EL,  sx;ri,  ^snjD  Ood  sees. 
A  king  of  Damascus  who  reigned  from  8S6  to  840  B.C. 
He  stood  in  a  high  official  capacity  at  Ben-hadad's 
court,  and  was  sent  by  the  latter  to  Elisha  (when  he 
visited  Damascus)  to  ask  whether  he  would  recover 
from  the  malady  from  which  he  was  suffering.  Elisha's 
answer  was  that  Benhadad  might  recover,  but  would 
certainly  die.  When  Hazael  returned  he  murdered  his 
master  and  naurped  the  tin-one.  Elijah  had  anointed 
him  as  king  of  Syria.    B.C.  906. 

1  Ki.19.  15  Go,  return,  .anoint  H. .  .king  over  Syria 

19. 17  him  thatescapeth  the  sword  of  H.  shall 

2  Ki.  8.    8  the  king  said  unto  H.,  Take  a  present  in 

8.    9  So  H.  went  to  meet  him,  and  took  a  pre. 
8.  12  H.  said.  Why  weepeth  my  lord  ?  And  he 
S.  13  H.  said,  But  what !  (is)  thy  servant  a  dog 
8.  it  he  died  :  and  H.  reigned  in  his  stead 
8.  28  he  went  with  Joram.  .to  the  war  against  H. 

8.  29  when  he  fought  against  H.  king  of  Syria 

9.  14  Joram  had  kept  Ram.-gil. .  .because of  H. 
9.  15  when  he  fought  with  H.  king  of  Syria 

10.  32  H.  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  of  Israel 
12.  17  II.  ..went  up.. and  11.  set  his  face  to  go 

12.  18  sent  (it)  to  H.  king  of  Syria  :  and  he  went 

13.  3  he  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  II. 
13.    3  into  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad  the  son  of  H. 
13.  22  II.  king  of  Syria  oppressed  Israel  all  the 
13.  24  S>i  II.  king  of  Syria  died  ;  and  Ben-hadad 
13.  2  s  "lit  of  the  band  of  Ben-hadad  the  sun  of  If. 

2  Ch.22.    5  to  war  against  H.  king  of  Syria  at  Kamoth 
22.   6  Raman,  when  he  fought  with  H.  king  of 
Amos  1.    4  1  will  send  a  fire  into  the  house  of  II. 


HA-ZA'-IAH,  n;in  Jah  is  seeing. 

A  man  of  Judafr  of  the  family  of  the  Shilonites,  or 

descendants  of  Shelah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.n.    5  the  son  of  Cobhozeh,  the  son  of  H.,  the 

HA-ZAR  AD'-DAR,  "HK  "KH. 

A  place  on  the  S.   boundary  of  the  promised   land, 

between    Kadesh-Barnea    and    Azmon.      The    name 

appears  in  the  shorter  form  of  Addar  (or  Adar,  in  Josh. 

i5-3). 

Num  34.   4  shall  go  on  to  H.,  and  pass  on  to  Azmon 

HAZARD,  to  — 

T<>  girt  over,  TTapabtdai/j.1  paradidomi. 

Acts  15.  26  Men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives  for 

HA-ZAR  E'-NAN,  |ry  Txq  court  of  the  fountains. 
The  spot  at  which  the  N.  and  E.  boundaries  of  the  pro- 
mised land  meet.  The  place  has  been  identified  with 
the  modern  Ruryetein{>'  the  two  cities"),  a  village  more 
than  60  miles  E.N.E.  of  Damascus.  Here  are  large 
fountains,  the  only  ones  in  that  vast  region. 

Num  34.    9  and  the  goings  out  of  it  shall  be  at  H. 

34.  10  ye  shall  point  out  your  east  border  from  H. 
Eze.  47.  17  the  border  from  the  sea  shall  be  H.,  the 
[In  this  passage  the  name  is  given  Hazar-enonA 
48.    1  H.,  the  border  of  Damascus  northward,  to 

HA-ZAR  GAD'-DAH,  n*na  i>*n  court  of  Gad. 
A  town  in  the  S.  district  of  Jiidah,  near  Heshmon,  but 
not    identified  with    any  modern    site.     Some    think 
Jarrah  near  Moladah  (El-Milk)  is  the  modem  site. 
Josh.  15.  27  And  H.,  and  Heshmon,  and  Beth-palet 

HA'-ZAR  HAT-TI'-CON,  jOTiri  -iyn  middle  Hazar. 
A  place  specified  as  on  the  boundary  of  Hauran,  and 
named  by  Ezekiel  (47.  16)  as  one  of  the  ultimate  bound- 
aries of  the  land. 

Eze.  47.  16  H.,  which  (is)  by  the  coast  of  Hauran 

HA-ZAR-MA'-VETH,  rn£-]yn  court  of  death. 
The  third  in  order  of  the  sons  of  Joktan  of  the  family  of 
Shem.  B.C.  2210.  The  name  is  preserved  in  the  Arabic 
Hadramaict  and  Radrununvt,  the  appellation  of  a 
province  and  ancient  people  of  southern  Arabia.  This 
identification  of  the  settlement  of  the  descendants  of 
Joktan  is  accepted  by  most  Biblical  scholars.  It  rests 
not  only  on  the  ccurrence  of  the  name,  but  is  supported 
by  the  fact  that  Joktan  settled  in  the  Yemen,  along  the 
S.  coast  of  Arabia;  by  the  physical  characteristics  of  the 
people  of  this  region,  and  by  the  identification  of  the 
name  of  several  others  of  Joktan's  sons.  The  province  of 
lladramawt  is  E.  of  the  modern  Yemen ;  anciently 
the  limits  of  the  latter  province  embraced  almost  the 
whole  of  the  S.  of  the  peninsula,  extending  to  the  dis- 
tricts of  Shihr  and  Mahrak.  Its  capital  is  Shibdm,  a 
very  ancient  city,  whose  chief  ports  are  Mirbdt,  Zafdri, 
and  Kisheem,  from  which  in  ancient  times  a  great  trade 
was  carried  on  with  India  and  Africa. 

Gen.  10.  26  Almodad,  and  Sheleph,  and  H.,  and  Jer. 

1  Ch.    1.  20  Almodad,  and  Sheleph,  and  H.,  and  Jerah 

HA'-ZAR  SHTJ'-AL,  fepw  TsQfox  or  jacked  village. 
A  town  in  the  south  of  Judah,  between  Hazar-gaddah 
and  Beer-sheba.     The  modern  Saweh  is  at  or  about  the 
right  spot,  and  may  be  a  corruption  of  the  old  name. 

Josh. 15.  28  And  H.,  and  Beer-sheba.  and  Bizjothjah 
19.    3  And  H.,  and  Balah,  and  Azem 

1  Ch.   4.  2S  dwelt  at  Beer-sheba,  and  Moladah,  and  H. 

Neb.  11.  27  And  at  H..  .and  (in)  the  villages  thereof 

HA-ZAR  STJ'-SAH,  (or  Su'-sim),  ddid  ^n  horse  village. 
A  city  in  the  extreme  south  of  Judah,  and  allotted  to 
Simeon  ;  it  stood  near  Beth-marcaboth,  another  city  of 
Simeon. 

Josh.  19.    5  And  Ziklag,  and  Beth-marcaboth,  and  H. 

1  Ch.  4.  31  And  at  Beth-marcaboth,  and  H.,  and  at  Be. 

HAZEL  — 

Hazel,  vh  I ■'-.. 

Gen.  30.  37  Jacob  took,  .of  the  hazel  and  chestnut 

HA-ZE-LEL-PO'-NI,  'itafr^yp  protection  ofthefaa  of. 

Sister  of  the  sons  of  Etam  in  the  genealogies  of  Judah.  I 
B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.   4.    3  and  the  name  of  their  sister  (was)  H. 

HA-ZE'-RTJff,  rr^n  villages,  courts. 
A  district  in  the  S.  of  Canaan  near  Gaza,  inhabited  in 
ancient  times  by  the  Avim  (or  Avvim),  a  tribe  that 
tented  over  the  S.W.  of  Palestine,  and  are  said  to  have 
lived  in  villages  (Hazerim)  as  far  as  Gaza  (Deut.  2.  23) 
before  their  expulsion  by  the  Caphtorim. 

Deut.  2.  23  And  the  Avims  which  dwelt  in  H. 
HA-ZE'-ROTH,  nnvn  cowfe,  villages. 
The  station  of  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  next  to 
Kibroth-Hattavah,  and  perhaps  recognisable    in  the 
Arabic  Hudhera,  which  is  about  eighteeu  hours'  journey 
from  Sinai  on  the  road  to  Akabah. 

Num  11.  35  from  Kibroth  unto  II. ;  and  abode  at  H. 
12.  16  afterward  the  people  removed  from  H. 
33.  17  And  they  departed,  .and  encamped  at  H. 
33.  iS  they  departed  from  II.,  and  pitched  in 

Deut.  1.    1  T'aran,  and  Tophel,  and  Laban,  and  H. 

HA-ZE-ZON  TA'-MAR,  *vrn  JSsrj  row  of  palms. 
The  ancient  name  of  En-gcrfi.    The  Amorites  were 
dwelling  in  Razezon-tamar  when  the  four  kings  (Gen. 
14.  7)  made  their  incursion  ami  fought  their  successful 

1  »attle  with  the  five  kings.  The  name  is  interpreted  by 
Gcscnius  as   "the  pruning  or  felling  of  the  palm  ;" 


Jerome  calls  it  Urbs  palrnarum.  This  may  have  been 
the  "  city  of  palm  trees  "  (Judg.  1.  16). 

Gen.  14.    7  smote . .  the  Amorites,  that  dwelt  in  H. 

2  Ch.20.    2  behold,  they  (be)  in  H.,  which  (is)  En-gedi 
HA-ZTZ-EL,  Sx'm  God  is  seeing. 
A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Shimei  or  Shimi  in  the  time 
of  David.     This  was  the  younger  branch  of  the  Ger- 
shonites.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  9  sons  of  Shimei ;  Shelomith,  and  H.,  and 
HA'-ZO,  im  vision,  seer. 

A  son  of  Nahor  by  Milcah.  Ins  wife.  The  name  has  not 
been  perpetuated  in  either  territory  or  posterity,  B.C. 
1800.  But  he  must  be  placed  in  Ur  (of  the  Chaldees), 
or  the  adjacent  countries.  Chazene  by  the  Euphrates  - 
in  Mesopotamia,  or  Chazene  in  Assyria,  is  suggested  by 
Bunsen. 

Gen.  22.  22  Chesed,  and  H.,  and;  Pildash,  and  Jidlaph 
HA'-ZOR,  "nxg  enclosed. 

1.  A  fortified  city  allotted  to  Naphtali.  It  was  between 
Raman  and  Kadesh  on  the  high  ground  overlooking 
Lake  Merom.  It  is  now  Khurubeh,  "  the  ruins,"  near 
Kedesh  and  Lake  Hideh.  Jabin  was  its  king,  and  it 
was  the  chief  city  of  the  whole  of  North  Palestine, 
"  the  head  of  all  thoseikingdoms  "  (Josh.  n.  10).  Hazcr 
was  the  only  city  burnt  by  Joshua. 

Josh.  11.  1  when  Jabin  king  of  H.  had  heard  (those 
11.  10  Joshua  at  that  time  turned,  .and  took H. 
11.  10  H. .  .was  the  head  of  all  those  kingdoms 
11.  11  they  smote,  .and  he  burnt  H.  with  fire 

11.  13  Israel  burned  none  of  them,  save-H.  only 

12.  19  king  of  Madon,  one  ;  the  king  of  H.,  one 
19.  36  And  Adamah,  and  Ramah,  and  H. 

Judg.  4.  2  Jabin  king  of  Canaan,  that  reigned  in  H. 
4.  17  peace  between  Jabin  the  king  of  H.  and 

1  Sa.  12.    9  hand  of  Sisera,  captain  of  the  host  of  H. 

2  Ki.  15.  29  took.  .H.,  and  Gilead,  and  Galilee,  all  the 
2  A  city  in  the  extreme  south  of  Judah,  named  next  in 
order  to  Kedesh  (Josh.  15.  23). 

Josh  15.  23  And  Kedesh,  and  H.,  and  Ithnan 

1  Ki.    9.  15  and  H.,  and  Megiddo,  and  Gezer 

3.  Hazor-Hadattah,  "new  Bazor,"  another  of  the 
southern  towns  of  Judah. 

Josh  15.  25  and  Kerioth,  (and)  Hezron,  which  (is)  H. 

4.  A  place  in  which  the  Benjamites  resided  after  their 
return  from  captivity.  It  was  N.  of  Jerusalem,  and 
not  far  distant  from  it.  Probably  identical  with  Baal- 
hazor. 

Neh.  11.  33  H.,  Ramah,  Gittaim 

5.  A  name  given  to  certain  countries  in  the  E.  of  Arabia. 

Jer.  49.  28  and  concerning  thekingdoms  of  H.,  which 
49.  30  Flee,  get  you  far  off .  .ye  inhabitants  of  H. 
49.  33  And  H.  shall  be  a  dwelling  for  dragons 

HA-ZOR  HA-DAT'-TAH,  niynq  "ii*n  neiocourt  orvillagc. 
A  city  of  Judah  near  Kerioth."  (See  No.  3,  under  Hazor.) 

Josh  15.  25  Hazor  Hadattah,  and  Kerioth,  (and)  H. 
HE  — 
I. A  man,  any  one,  e^n  ish. 

Prov.28.  22  He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  (hath)  an  evil 
29.    1  He  that,  being  often  reproved,  hardeneth 
29.   4  but  he  that  receiveth  gifts  overthroweth 

2.He  himself,  wn  hu. 

Gen.    4.    4  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of 

Isa.     9.  15  ancient  and  honourable,  he  (is)  the  head 

9.  15  the  prophet  that  teacheth  lies,  he  (is)  the 

3.  This  one,  nr  zeh. 

Exodis-   2  Lord,  is  become  my  salvation  :  he  (is) 

4.  Who  ?  he  ivho,  V  Ttti. 

2  Sa.  20. 11  He  that  favoureth  Joab,  and  he  that  (is) 

5. Soul,  breathing  thing,  irs^  nejihesh. 

Psa.  105. 1 8  Whose  feet  they  hurt . .  he  was  laid  in  iron 

6.  The  hand,  t  yacl. 

Lev.  5.  7,  11  And  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring. .  then 
7. He,  he  himself  avros  autos. 

Matt.  1.  21  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins 
3.  11  he  that  conieth  after  me  is  mightier  than 
8.  24  covered  with  the  waves :  but  he  was  asleep 
12.    3  when  [he]  was  an  hungered,  and  they  that 
14.    2  This  is  John  the  Baptist :  he  is  risen  from 
16.  20  should  tell  no  man  that  he  was  Jesus  the 
21.  27  he  said  unto  them,  Neither  tell  I  you  by 
25.  17  And  likewise,  .[he]  also  gained  other  t" 
Mark  1.    8  but  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  HolyG. 
2. 25  And  he  said  unto  them,  Have  ye  never 

2.  25  what  David  did.  .he,  and  they  that  were 

3.  13  called,  .whom  he  would  :  and  they  came 

4.  27  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  how 
4.  3S  he  was  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship,  asl. 
6. 16  said.  It  is  John,  .[helis  risen  from  the  dead 
6.  45  unto  Bethsaida,  while  he  sent  away  the 

6.  47  midst  of  the  sea,  and  he  alone  on  the  land 

7.  36  the  more  [he]  charged  them,  so  much  the 

8.  29  he  saith  unto  them.  But  whom  say  ye  that 
12.  21  [neither  left  he  any  seed  :  and  the  third] 
14.  15  lie  will  show  you  a  large  upper  room  fur. 

Luke  1.  17  he  shall  go  before  him  in  the  spirit  and 

1.  22  he  beckoned  unto  them,  and  remained 

2.  28  Then  took  he  him  up  in  his  arms,  and 

3.  15  mused,  .whether  he  were  the  Christ,  or 

3.  10  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

4.  15  he  taught  in  their  synagogues,  being  glo. 

4.  30  he  passing  through  the  midst  of  them 

5.  1  of  God,  he  stood  by  the  lake  of  Gennesaret 
5.  14  he  charged  him  to  tell  no  man  :  but  go 


HE 


459 


HEAD 


iS. 
Acts  7. 
10. 
14. 
16, 


Eph. 


Luke  5.  16  he  withdrew  himself  into  the  wilderness 

5.  17  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  as  he  was 

6.  8  he  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  to  the 
6.  20  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  on  bis  disciples,  and 

6.  35  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and  (to) 
7."  5  loveth  our  nation,  and  he  hath  built  us  a 
8.   1  that  he  went  throughout  every  city  and 
8.  22  that  he  went  into  a  ship  with  his  disciples 
8.  37  he  went  up  into  the  ship,  and  returned 

8.  41  and  [he]  was  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue:  and 
S.  54  he  put  them  all  out,  and  took  her  by  the  h. 

9.  51  hestedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jerusal. 
jo.  3S  that. he  entered  into  a  certain  village  ;  and 
ir.  17  But  he,  knowing  their  thoughts,  said  unto 
11.  28  But  he  said,  Yea  rather,  blessed  (are)  they 
15.  14  when . .  had  spent  all . .  he  began  to  be  in 

'  16.  24  he  cried  and  said,  Father  Abraham,  have 

17.  11  he  passed  through  the  midst  of  Samaria 

18.  39  should  hold  his  peace :  but  he  cried  so 

19.  9  forasmuch  as  he  also  is  a  son  of  Abraham 

22.  41  he  was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a 

23.  9  qnestioned  with  him  in  many  words ;  but 

24.  21  he  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel 
24.  25  Then  he  said  unto  them,  O  fools,  and  slow 
24.  28  he  made  as  though  he  wouldhavegone  f. 

24.  31  knew  him  ;  and  he  vanished  out  of  their 
John  1.  27  [Heitis,]  whocomingafterme.ispreferred 

2.  12  went  down  to  Capernaum,  he,  and  his  m. 
2.  25  should  testify,  .for  he  kDew  what  was  in 

7.  10  then  went  he  also  up  unto  the  feast,  not 
9.  21  he  is  of  age,  ask  him ;  [he]  shall  speak  for 

1 2. 49  he  gave  me  a  commandment,  what  I  should 
10  the  Father,  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth 

1  into  the  which  he  entered  and  his  discip. 
15  So  Jacob,  .died,  he,  and  our  fathers 
42  that  it  is  [he]  which  was  ordained  of  God 

12  .Mercurius,  because  he  was  chief  speaker 
33  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway 

17.  25  seeing  lie  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath 

20.  35  how  he  said,  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 

25.  6  changed  their  minds,  and  said  that  he  was 
14  he  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one 

4.  11  he  gave  some,  apostles  ;  and  some,  prop, 
g.  23  as  Christ,  .and  he  is  the  saviour  of  the 
g.  27  That  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glo. 
1.  17  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all 
1.  18  And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  chu. 

1.  18  that  in  all-he  might  have  the  pre-emin. 
5  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he  shall  be 

10  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  works 

13  God  cannot,  .neither  tempteth  he  any 
7  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the 

2  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  and 

2.  25  this  is  the  promise  that  he  hath  promised 

3.  24  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  him.     And 

4.  10  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son 
4.  13  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us,  beca. 
4.  15  confess.  .God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in 
4.  19  We  love  him,  because  [he]  first  loved  us 
3.  20  come . .  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with 

14.  17  angel  came,  .he  also  havinga  sharp  sickle 

17.  ir  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  even  he  is 
19.  15  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

Tg.  15  he  treadeth  the  wine  press  of  the  fiercen. 

21.  7  I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  Son 

8. That  person,  there,  zKelvos  ekeinos, 

John  1.  tS  the  only  begotten  Son.  .he  hath  declared 

2.  2 1  But  he  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body 

3.  30  He  must  increase,  but  I  (must)  decrease 

4.  25  I  know  that  Messias  cometh.  .when  he  is 

5.  19  what  things  soever  he  doeth,  these  also 
5.  35  He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light:  and 
5.  38  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  Mm  ye  believe  not 

5.  46  ye  would  have  believed  me  :  for  he  wTote 

6.  29  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  se. 

7.  11  the  Jews  sought  him.. said,  Where  is  he? 

8.  42  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  he  sent  me 

8.  44  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning 

9.  9  others  (said),  .is  like  him :  (but)  he  said 
9. -it  He  answered  and  said  A  man  that  is  cal. 
9.  12  then  said  they  unto  him,  Where  is  he? 
9.  25  He  answered  and  said,  whether,  .asinner 
9.  36  He  answered  and  said.  Who.  .Lord,  that 
9.  37  Thou  hast  both  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  th. 

13.  25  He  then  lying  on  Jesus'  breast  saith  unto 
13.  26  He  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop,  when 

13.  30  He  then  having  received  the  sop  went 

14.  21  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth 

14.  26  he  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring 

15.  26  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  .he  shall 

16.  8  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
16.  13  Howbeit  when  he,  the  spirit  of  truth,  is 
16.  14  He  shall  glorify  me.  .shall  receive  of  mine 
18. 17  Art  not  thou  also  (one).  .He  saith,  I  am 

18.  25  Art  not  thou  also  (one).  .He  denied  (it) 

19.  21  but  that  he  said,  I  am  king  of  the  Jews 
Acts    3.  13  when  [lie]  was  determined  to  let  (him)  go 
2  Co.  10.  iS  For  not  he  that  commandeth  himself  is 

2  Ti,    2.  13  If  we  believe  not,  (yet)  he  abideth  faithful 
1  Jo.   2.    6  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as  fie 
3.    3  every  man.  .purifieth  himself,  even  as  he 
3.    s  ye  know  that  he  was  manifested  to  take 
3.    7  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous 

3.  16  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us :  and 

4.  17  because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world 

9.  This  one  here,  tJSe  hade. 

Luke  16.  25  now  [he]  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  torm. 
lU.  This  person  here,  outos  houtos. 

Mattis.  22»  23  that  received  seed,  .is  he  that  heareth 
27.  58  He  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body 


Col. 


Heb. 


Jas. 
1  Jo, 


Rev, 


Luke  1.  32  He  shall  be  great, and  shall  be  called  the 

19. *  2  was  the  chief,  .and  [he]  was  r.  20.  28,  30. 

23.  22  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  ?  I  have  fou. 

23.  35  let  him  save  himself,  if  he  be  Christ,  the 

John  1.  41  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon 

4.  47  When  he  heard  that  Jesus  was  come  out 

6.  42  how  is  it  cheu  that  [he]  saith,  I  came  down 

6.  46  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the  Father 

6.  71  for  he  it  was  that  should  betray  him,  be. 

7.  35  Whither  will  he  go,  that  we  shall  not  find 
18.  30  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  would 

Acts    3.  10  they  knew  that  it  was  he  which  sat  for 

4.  9  impotent  man,  by  what  means  he  is  made 
7.  36  He  brought  them  out,  after  that,  .had 

9.  15  for  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear 
9.  20  preached  Christ,  .that  he  is  the  Son  of  G. 
10.  6  He  lodgeth  with  one  Simon  a  tanner 
10.  6  [he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to] 
10.  32  he  is  lodged  in  the  house  of .  .Simon  a  ta. 
10.  36  peace  by  Jesus  Christ :  he  is  Lord  of  all 

17.  24  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  ear. 

18.  26  he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue 
Rom.  8.   9  have  not  the  spirit,  .he  is  none  of  his 
Jas.     1.  23  he  is  like  unto  a  man  beholding  his  natu. 

1.  25  [he]  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a 

1  Jo.   2.  22  he  is  autichrist,  that  denieth  the  Father 

2  John     9  abideth.  .he  hath  both  the  Father  and 
11. Any  one,  a  certain  one,  rts  tis. 

Acts    4.  35  unto  every  man  according  as  he  had  need 
Heb.  10.  28  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without 

HE  also  — 

Even  that  one,  naicelpos  kakeinos. 

Johni4.  12  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also;  and 
Acts    5.  37  he  also  perished;  and  all.  .as  many  as 

2  Ti.    2.  12  if  we  deny  (him),  he  also  wiU  deny  us 

HE  himself  — 

l.He  himself,  avrSs  autos. 

Lukeio.    1  city  and  place,  whither  he  himself  would 
John  6.    6  for  he  himself  knew  what  he  would  do 

6.  15  he  departed  again  into  a  mountain  hims. 

7.  4  and  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  known  ope. 
Acts    2.  34  he  saith  himself,  The  Lord  said  unto  my 

18.  19  he  himself  entered  into  the  synagogue 

19.  22  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  season 
1  Co.   2.  15  he  that  is  spiritual,  .he  himself  is  judged 

3.  15  he  himself  shall  be  saved;  yet  so  as  by 
Heb.   2.  iS  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being 

5.  2  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infimi. 

3  John   10  neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  bret. 
Rev.  19.  12  a  name,  .that  no  man  knew  but  he  him. 

2.This  one  himself,  avrSs  outos  autos  houtos  gen. 
Acts  25.  25  he  himself  hath  appealed  to  Augustus 

3.  One's  self,  himself,  lavr6v  heautou. 

Luke23-    2  saying  that  he  himself  is  Christ  a  king 
Acts  25.   4  that  he  himself  would  depart  shortly 

EE  that  — 

1.  If  any  one,  el"  tis  ei  tis. 

Rev.  13.  10  He  that  leadeth  into  captivity  shall  go 
13. 10  he  that  killeth  with  the  sword  must  be 

l.He  who,  c6s  Jws. 

Mattio.  38  he  that  taketh  not  his  cross,  and  laiioweth 
Mark  3.  29  he  that  shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy 

4.  25  For  he  that  hath,  .and  he  that  hath  not 
9.  40  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part 

3.  TT7i0  at  least,  oVye  osge. 

Rom.  S.  32  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  deli. 

4.  Whoever,  oarts  hoslis. 

Matt23.  12  he  that  shall  humble  himself  shall  be  ex. 

HE,  (even  he, )  and  — 

Even  that  one,  KaK<-?vos  kakeinos. 

Luke  1 1.    7  And  he  from  within  shall  answer  and  say 
22.  12  And  he  shall  show  you  alarge  upper  room 

John  6.  57  ;  7.  29  ;  19.  35.  » 

And  he,  6  Be  ho  de. 

Matt.  2.  21  And  he  arose,  and  took  tlie;  12.  11 
HE  be  — 
There  is,  there  are,  E>:  yesh. 

1  Sa.  23.  23  if  he  be  in  the  land,  that  I  will  search 
HE  goat  — 

l.He  goat,  vigorous,  "nns?  atlud. 

Xum.  7.  17  five  rams,  five  he  goats,  five  lambs  of  the 
[So  in  verse  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.) 

7.  88  the  rams  sixty,  the  he  goats  sixty,  the 
Isa.     1.  11  I  delight  not  in  the  blood,  .of  he  goats 
Jer.  50.    8  and  be  as  the  he  goats  before  the  flocks 
51.  40  bring  them  down  like,  .rams  with  he  go. 
Eze.  34. 17  judge,  .between  the  rams  and  the  he  go. 

2.  A  young  he  goat,  hairy,  t?^  tsaphir. 

2  Ch.29.  21  seven  he  goats,  for  a  sin  offering  for  the 
Ezra  8.  35  twelve  he  goats  (for)  a  sin  offering:  all 
Dan.   8.   S  Therefore  the  he  goat  waxed  very  great 

3. Hairy  one  of  the  goats,  d^j?  YS?  tscjihir  izzim. 

Ezra  6.  17  twelve  he  goats,  according  to  the  number 

Dan.   8.   5  an  he  goat  came  from  the  west,  on  the 
HE  is  — 
There  is,  !?:.  yesh. 

1  Sa.    9. 12  and  said,  He  is;  behold  (he  is)before  you 
HEAD  — 
I. Poll,  scull,  rtaSa  gulgoleth. 

1  Ch.io.  10  fastened  his  head  in  the  temple  of  Dagon 


Lev. 


2. Pillow,  bolster,  ni?K"i3  meraashoth. 

1  Ki.19.  6  a  cruse  of  water  at  his  head  :  and  he  did 
3.  Head,  trip.  resh. 

Dan.  2.  2S  the  visious  of  thy  head  upon  thy  bed,  are 
2.  32  This  image's  head  (was)  of  fine  gold,  his 

2.  38  made  thee  ruler.  .Thou  (art)  this  head  of 

3.  27  nor  was  an  hair  of  their  head  singed 

4.  5  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me 
4.  10  the  visions  of  mine  head  in  my  bed  ;  I 

4.  13  I  saw  in  the  visions  of  my  head  upon  my  bed 
7.    1  Daniel  had  a  dream  and  visions  of  his  h. 
7.    6  the  beast  had  also  four  heads ;  and  doniin. 
7.    9  the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  pure  wool 
7.  15  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me 

7.  20  of  the  ten  horns  that  (were)  in  his  head 
i.Head,  wvhrosk. 

Gen.    2.  10  it  was  parted,  and  became  into  four  heads 
3.  15  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt 
40.  13,  19  Yet.  .shall  Pharaoh  lift  up  thine  head 
40.  16  (I  had)  three  white  baskets  on  my  head 
40. 17  eat  them  out  of  the  basket  upon  my  head 
40.  20  he  lifted  up  the  head  of  the  chief  butler 

47.  31  Israel  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head 

48.  14  Ephraim's  head,  .upon  Manasseh's  head 
48.  17  his  right  hand  upon  the  head  of  Ephraim 
48.  17  from  Epliraiin's  head  unto  Manasseh's  h. 

48.  18  father,  .put  thy  right  hand  upon  his  head 

49.  26  they  shall  be  on  the  head  of  Joseph,  and 
Exod.6.  14  These  (be)  the  heads  of  their  father's  ho. 

6.  25  these  (are)  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the 

12.  9  but  roast  (with)  fire  ;  his  head  with  his 

18.  25  Moses,  .made  them  heads  over  the  people 
26.  24  above  the  head  of  it  unto  one  ring  :  thus 
29.    6  thou  shall  put  the  mitre  upon  his  head 
29.    7  pour  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  anoint  him 
29.  io,  15,  19  shall  put  their  hands  upon  the  h, 

29.  17  put.  .unto  his  pieces,  and  unto  his  head 
36.  29  coupled  together  at  the  head  thereof,  to 

1.    4  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of 

1.   8  lay . .  the  head .  -  in  order  upon  the  wood 

1.  12  his  pieces,  with  Iris  head  and  his  fat :  and 

1.  15  the  priest  shall . .  n  ring  off  his  head,  and 

3.  2,  8,  13  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head 

4.  4  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,  and 

4. 11  with  his  h^ad,  and  with  his  legs,  and  his 
4.  15  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the 

4.  24,  29,  33  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head 

5.  8  and.  wring  off  his  head  from  his  neck,  but 

8.  9  he  put  the  mitre  upon  Ins  head ;  also  upon 
8.  12  And  he  poured,  .oil  upon  Aaron's  head 
8.  14,  18,  22  laid  their  hands  upon  the  head  of 

8.  20  Moses  burnt  the  head,  and  the  pieces,  and 

9.  13  with  the  pieces  thereof,  and  the  head 
10.    6  And  Moses  said.  .Uncover  not  your  heads 

13.  12  the  plague  from  his  head  even  to  his  foot 
13.  29  If  a  man.  .have  a  plague  upon  the  head 
13.  30  (even)  a  leprosy  upon  the  head  or  beard 
13.  40  the  man  whose  hair  is  fallen  off  his  head 
13.  41  from  the  part  of  his  head  toward  his  face 
13.  44  a  leprous  man .  .his  plague  (is)  in  his  head 

13.  45  clothes  shall  be  rent,  and  his  head  bare 

14.  9  he  shall  shave  all  Ins  hair  off  his  head 
14.  18,  29  upon  the  head  of  him  that  is  to  be 
16.  21  shall  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the  head 

16.  21  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat 

19.  27  shall  not  round  thelcorners  of  your  heads 
2i.    5  shall  not  make  baldness  upon  their  head 
2i.  10  upon  whose  head  the.  .oil  was  poured 
21.  10  shall  not  uncover  his  head,  nor  rend  his 

24,  14  let  all.  .lay  their  hands  upon  his  head 
Xum.  1.    4  every  one  head  of  the  house  of  his  fathers 

1.  16  princes,  .heads  of  thousands  in  Israel 

5.  18  priest  shall,  .uncover  the  woman's  head 

6.  5  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head 
6.  5  shall  let  the  locks  of  the  hair  of  his  head 
6.  7  consecration  of  his  God  (is)upon  his  head 
6.  9  hath  defiled  the  head  of  his  consecration 
6.  9  then  he  shall  shave  his  head  in  the  day 
6.  11  and  shall  hallow  his  head  that  same  day 
6. 18  And  the  Nazarite  shall  shave  the  head  of 

6.  18  and  shall  take  the  hair  of  the  head  of  his 

7.  2  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers,  who 

8. 12  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  heads  of 

10.  4  heads  of  the  thousands  of  Israel,  shall 
13.    3  those  men  (were)  heads  of  the  children  of 

17.  3  the  head  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

25.  4  Take  all  the  heads  of  the  people,  and  ha. 
25.  Tg  he  (was)  head  over  a  people,  (and)  of  a  c. 

30.  1  Moses  spake  unto  the  heads  of  the  tribes 
Deut.  1.  15  and  made  them  heads  over  you,  captains 

5.  23  the  heads  of  your  tribes,  and  your  elders 
21.  12  shall  shave  her  head,  and  pare  her  nails 
28.  13  the  Lord  shall  make  thee  the  head,  and 
28.  23  thy  heaven  that  (is)  over  thy  head  shall 
28.  44  he  shall  be  the  head,  and  thou  shalt  be 
33.    s  the  heads  of  the  people  (and)  the  tribes 
33.  16  come  upon  the  head  of  Joseph,  and  upon 
33.  21  he  came  with  the  heads  of  the  people 
Josh.  2.  19  blood  (shall  be)  upon  his  head,  .on  our  h. 

7.    6  and  the  elders,  .put  dust  upon  their  he. 

11.  10  was  the  head  of  all  those  kingdoms 
1  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes  of 
;i  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes  of 

1  came  near  the  heads,  .unto  the  heads 
21,  30  heads  of  the  thousands  of  Israel 

2  for  their  elders,  and  for  their  heads,  and 
1  for  their  heads,  and  for  their  judges,  and 

26  smote  Sisera,  she  smote  off  his  head,  when 

7.  25  brought  the  heads  of  Oreb  and  Zeeb  to  G. 

8.  28  so.  .they  lifted  up  their  heads  no  more 

9.  53  cast  a.  .millstone  upon  Abimelech's  head 


14. 
19. 


23. 

24. 

Jlldg.  5. 


HEAD 


460 


HEAL 


Judy.  9.  57  evil,  .did  God  render  upon  their  heads 

10.  18  shall  be  head  over  all  the  inhabitants  of 

11.  8  be  our  head  overall  the  inhabitants  of  G. 
11.    9  And  Jephthah  said,  .shall  I  be  your  head? 

11.  n  the  people  made  him  head  and  captain 

1  ?.    5  no  razor  shall  come  on  lus  head  :  for  the 
16.  13  weavest  the  seven  locks  of  my  head  with 
16.  17  hath  not  come  a  razor  upon  mine  head 
16.  ig  to  shave  off  the  seven  locks  of  his  head 

16.  22  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  again 
e  Sa.    1.  11  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head 

4.  12  his  clothes  rent,  and.  .earth  upon  his  he. 

5.  4  head  of  Dagon  and  both  the  palms  of  ln> 
10.    1  took  a  vial.. and  poured  (it)  upon  his  he. 

14.  45  there  shall  not  one  hair  of  his  head  fall 

15.  17  the  head  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  the 

17.  5  an  helmet  of  brass  upon  his  head,  and  he 
17.  38  he  put  an  helmet  of  brass  upon  his  head 
17.  46  smite  thee,  and  take  thine  head  from  thee 
17.  51  David,  .slew  him,  and  cut  off  his  head 
17.  54  David  took  the  head  of  the  Philistine,  and 

17.  57  the  head  of  the  Philistine  in  his  hand 
25.  39  wickedness  of  Nabal  upon  his  own  head 

28.  2  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  for  ever 

29.  4  (should  it)  not  (be)  with  the  heads  of  these 
31.   9  they  cut  off  his  head,  and  stripped  off  his 

2  Sa.    1.   2  his  clothes  rent,  and  earth  upon  his  head 
1.  10  took  the  crown  that  (was)  upon  his  head 

1.  16  David  said.  .Thy  blood  (be)  upon  thy  head 

2.  16  caught  every  one  Ids  fellow  by  the  head 

3.  8  Abner.  .said,  (Am)  I  a  dog's  head,  which 
3. 29  Let  it  rest  on  the  head  of  Joab,  and  on  all 

4.  7  beheaded  him,  and  took  his  head,  and  gat 
4.  8  they  broughtthe  head  of  Ish-bosheth  unto 
4.  8  Behold  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth  the  son  <>t 
4.  12  but  they  took  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth 

12.  30  took  their  king's  crown  from  off  his  head 

12.  30  stones  :  and  it  was  (set)  on  David's  head 

13.  19  Tamar  put  ashes  ou  her  head,  and  rent  h. 

13.  19  laid  her  hand  on  her  head,  and  went  on 

14.  26  when  he  polled  his  head,  for  it  was  at 

14.  26  he  weighed  the  hair  of  his  head  at  two 

15.  30  as  he  went  up,  and  had  his  head  covered 
15.  30  all  the  people,  .covered  every  man  his  h. 

15.  32  with  his  coat  rent,  and  earth  upon  his  h. 

16.  9  let  me  go  over,  .and  take  off  his  head 

18.  9  his  head,  caught  hold  of  the  oak,  and  he 
20.  21  his  head  shall  be  thrown  to  thee  over  the 
20.  22  they  cut  off  the  head  of  Sheba  the  son  of  B. 
22.  44  hast  kept  me  (to  be)  head  of  the  heathen 

1  Ki.    2.  32  shall  return  his  blood  upon  his  own  head 
2.  33  head  of  Joab,  and  upon  the  head  of  his 
2.  37  thy  blood  shall  be  upon  thine  own  head 
2.  44  return  thy  wickedness  upon  thine,  .head 
8.    1  all  the  heads  of  the  tribes,  the  chief  of 

8.  32  bring  his  way  upon  his  head  ;  and  justi. 
20.  31  let  us.  .put.  .ropes  upon  our  heads,  and 
20.  32  So  they,  .(put)  ropes  on  their  heads,  and 

2K1.    2.    3,  5  take,  .thy  master  from  thy  head  today? 
4.  19  he  said  unto  his  father,  My  head,  my  h.! 

6.  25  until  an  ass's  head  was  (sold)  for  fourscore 
6.  31  if  the  head  of  Elislia  the  son  of  Shaphat 

6.  32  hath  sent  to  take  away  mine  head? 

9.  3  take,  .oil,  and  pour  (it)  on  his  head,  and 
9.    6  he  poured  the  oil  ou  his  head,  and  said 
9.  30  she  painted  her  face,  and  tired  her  head 

10.  6  take  ye  the  heads  of.  .your  master's  sons 
10.  7  put  their  heads  in  baskets,  and  sent  him 
10.    8  brought  the  heads  of  the  king's  sons 

19.  21  Jerusalem  hath  shaken  her  head  at  thee 
25.  27  did  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of 

1  Ch.  5.  24,  24  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

7.  2,  40  heads  of  their  father's  house 

7.    7,  o  heads  of  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 

7.  11  All  these,  .by  the  heads  of  their  fathers 

8.  6,  13  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  inhabitants 
8.  10  These  (were)  his  sons,  heads  of  the  fathers 

8.  28  These  (were)  heads  of  the  fathers,  by  their 

9.  13  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers,  a  tho. 
10.  9  they  took  his  head,  and  his  armour,  and 
12.  19  He  will  fall .  .to  (the  jeopardy  of)  our  he. 
12.  32  the  heads  of  them  (were)  two  hundred 

20.  2  David  took  the  crown,  .from  off  his  head 
20.  2  it  was  set  upon  David's  head  :  and  he  br. 
29.  11  and  thou  art  exalted  as  head  above  all 

2  (h.  3.  16  put  (them)  on  the  heads  of  the  pillars;  and 

5.  2  and  all  the  heads  of  the  tribes,  the  chief 
b.  23  recompensing  his  way  upon  his  own  head 

28.  12  of  the  heads  of  the  children  of  Ephraim 
Ezra    9.    3  plucked  off  the  hair  of  my  head  and  of 

9.  6  our  iniquities  are  increased  over  (our)  h. 
Neb  4.  4  turn  their  reproach  upon  their  own  head 
Eath.  2.  17  he  set  the  royal  crown  upon  her  head 

6.  8  the  crown  royal  which  is  set  upon  his  h. 

6.  12  house  mourning,  and  having  his  head  'co. 
9.  25  should  return  upon  his  own  head,  and 

Joli    t.  20  Then  Job  arose,  .and  shaved  his  head,  and 
2  12  and  sprinkled  dust  upon  their  heads  to. 

10.  15  (yet)  will  I  not  lift  up  my  head.  I  (am) 
16.   4  I  could  heap  up  words,  .and shake mirj    b 

19.  9  He  hath,  .taken  the  crown  (from)  my  h. 

20.  6  and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds 

29.  3  When  his  candle  shined  upon  my  head 
41.    7  Canst  thou  fill,  .his  head  with  fish  Bpears? 

Psa.     3.    3  my  glory,  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  head 

7.  16  mischief  shall  return  upon  his  own  head 
18.  43  hast  made  me  the  head  of  the  heathen  :  a 
2i.    3  settest  a  crown  of  pure  gold  on  his  head 

22.  7  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  h. 

23.  5  thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil ;  inv  cup 

24.  7,  9  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates  Lifl  up 
27.    6  now  shall  mine  head  be  Lifted  up  above 


Tsa.    38.    4  mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  mine  head 
40.  12  they  are  more  than  the  hairs  of  mine  he. 
44.  14  a  shaking  of  the  head  among  the  people 
60.    7  Ephraim  also  (is)  the  strength  of  mine  h. 
66.  i2  hast  caused  men  to  ride  over  our  heads 

68.  21  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  his  enemies 

69.  4  are  more  than  the  hairs  of  mine  head 
74.  13  thou  brakest  the  heads  of  the  dragons 
74.  14  Thou  brakest  the  heads  of  leviathan  in 
83.    2  they  that  hate  thee  have  lifted,  .the  head 

id8.  8  Ephraim .  .(is)  the  strength  of  mine  head 
109.  25  looked  upon  me  they  shaked  their  heads 
no.  6  he  shall  wound  the  heads  over  manycou. 
no.  7  drink,  .therefore  shall  he  lift  up  the  head 
n8.  22  is  become  the  head  (stone)  of  the  corner 
133.  2  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  head 
140.    7  thou  hast  covered  my  head  in  the  day  of 

140.  9  the  head  of  those  that  compass  me  about 

141.  5  oil,  (which)  shall  not  break  my  head  :  for 
Prov.  1.    9  an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy  head,  and 

4.  9  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament  of 

10.  6  Blessings  (are)  upon  the  head  of  the  just 

11.  26  blessing  (shall  be)  upon  the  head  of  him 
25.  22  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head,  and 

Eccl.  2.  14  The  wise  man's  eyes  (are)  in  his  head  ;  but 

9.  8  and  let  thy  head  lack  no  ointment 
Song   2.   6  His  left  hand  (is)  under  my  head,  and  his 

5.  2  for  my  head  is  filled  with  dew,  (and)  my 
5.  n  His  head  (is  as)  the  most  fine  gold  ;  his 

7.    5  Thine  head  upon  thee  (is)  like  Carxnel,  and 

7.  5  hair  of  thine  head  like  purple  :  the  king 

8.  3  His  left  baud  (should  be)  under  my  head 
Isa.      1.    5  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and.  .heart  faint 

1.  6  even  unto  the  head  (there  is)  no  soundn. 
7.  8  For  the  head  of  Syria  (is)  Damascus,  and 
7.  8  head  of  Damascus  (is)  Bezin  ;  and  within 
7.  9  head  of  Ephraim . .  and  the  head  of  Sam. 
7.  20  the  head,  and  the  hair  of  the  feet :  and  it 
9. 14  will  cut  off  from  Israel  head  and  tail 

9.  15  The  ancient  and  honourable,  he  (is)  the  h. 

15.  2  on  all  their  heads  (shall  be)  baldness,  (and) 
19.  15  work,  .whicli  the  head  or  tail,  .may  do 
28.    1  which  (are)  on  the  bead  of  the  fat  valleys 

28.  4  which  (is)  on  the  head  of  the  fat  valley 
35.  10  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads  :  they 
37.  22  daughter,  .hath  shaken  her  head  at  thee 
51.  n  everlasting  joy  (shall  be)  upon  their  head 

51.  20  they  lie  at  the  head  of  all  the  streets,  as 

58.  5  (is  it)  to  bow  down  his  head  as  a  bulrush 

59.  17  and  an  helmet  of  salvation  upon  his  head 
Jer.     2.  37  and  thine  hands  upon  thine  head  :  for 

9.  1  Oh  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine 
14.  3  they  were  ashamed,  .and  covered  their  h. 
14.  4  were  ashamed,  they  covered  their  heads 
18.  16  every  one  that  passeth.  .shall,  .wag his h. 
22.  6  Thou  (art)  Gilead.  .(and)  the  head  of  L. 
23. 19  grievously  upon  the  head  of  the  wicked 
30.  23  fall  with  pain  upon  the  head  of  the  wic. 
48.  37  For  every  head  (shall  be)  bald,  and  every 

52.  31  lifted  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of 
Lam.  2.  10  they  have  cast  up  dust  upon  their  heads 

2.  10  the  virgins,  .hang  down  their  heads  to 

2.  15  they,  .wag  their  head  at  the  daughter  of 

3.  54  Waters  flowed  over  mine  head ;  (then)  I 
5.  16  The  crown  is  fallen  (from)  our  head  :  woe 

Eze.     1.  22  upon  the  heads  of  the  living  creature 
1.  22  stretched  forth  over  their  heads  above 
1.  25,  26  the  firmament  that  (was)  over  their  h. 
5.    1  cause  (it)  to  pass  upon  thine  head  and 

7.  18  faces,  and  baldness  upon  all  their  heads 

8.  3  took  me  by  a  lock  of  mine  head  ;  and  the 

9.  10  will  recompense  their  way  upon  their  h. 

10.  1  that  (was)  above  the  head  of  the  cherubim 
10.  n  whither  the  head  looked  they  followed  it 
n.  21  recompense  their  way  upon  their  own  h. 
13.  18  kerchiefs  upon  the  head  of  every  stature 

16.  12  and  a  beautiful  crown  upon  thine  head 
16.  25  thy  high  place  at  every  head  of  the  way 
16.  31  eminent  place  in  the  head  of  every  way 

16.  43  will  recompense  thy  way  upon  (thine)  h. 

17.  19  it  will  I  recompense  upon  his  own  head 
21.  19  chose  (it)  at  the  head  of  the  way  to  the 

21.  21  stood,  .at  the  head  of  the  two  ways,  to 

22.  31  have  I  recompensed  upon  their  heads 

23.  15  in  dyechattire  upon  their  heads,  all  of  them 

23.  42  and  beautiful  crowns  upon  their  heads 

24.  23  And  your  tires  (shall  be)  upon  your  heads 
27.  30  and  shall  cast  up  dust  upon  their  heads 

29.  18  every  head  (was)  made  bald,  and  every 
32.  27  laid  their  swords  under  their  heads  ;  but 
42.  12  a  door  in  the  head  of  the  way,  (even)  the 
44.  18  shall  have  linen  bonnets  upon  their  heads 
44.  20  Neither  shall  they  shave  their  heads,  nor 
44.  20  grow  long ;  they  shall  only  poll  their  hea. 

Dan.    1. 10  ye  make  (me)  endanger  my  head  to  the 
Ilos.    1.  n  appoint  themselves  one  head,  and  they 
Joel    3.    4,  7  return  your  recompence  upon  your.  .h. 
Amos  2.    7  of  the  earth  on  the  head  of  the  poor 

8.  10  I  will  bring,  .baldness  upon  every  head 

9.  1  and  cut  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them 
Obad.      15  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head 
Jon.     2.    5  the  weeds  were  wrapped  about  my  head 

4.  6  that  it  might  be  a  shadow  over  lus  head 
4.    8  the  sun  beat  upon  the  head  of  Jonah,  that 

Mic.    2.  13  and  the  Lord  on  the  head  of  them 

3.  1  Hear,  I  pray  you,  O  heads  of  Jacob,  and 
3.  9  Hear  this.,  ye  heads  of  the  house  of  Jacob 
3. 11  The  heads  thereof  judge  for  reward,  and 

Halt.  3.  13  thou  woundest  the  head  out  of  the  house 
3. 14  with  his  staves  the  head  of  his  villages 

Zech.  1.  21  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head  :  but 
3.    5  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head 


Zech.  3.    5  So  they  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head 
6.  n  set  (them)  upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the 

5.  The  head,  fce<pa\7)  kajjhale. 

Matt.  5.  36  Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  be. 
6.  17  when  thou  fastest,  anoint  thine  head,  and 

8.  20  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his)  h. 

10.  30  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered 
14.    8  Give  me.  .John  Baptist's  head  in  a  char. 
14.  11  his  head  was  brought  in  a  charger,  and 
21.  42  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor. 

26.  7  poured  (it)  on  his  head,  as  he  sat  (at  meat) 

27.  29  they  put  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  a  reed 
27.  30  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head 
27.  37  set  up  over  his  head  Ids  accusation  writ. 
27.  39  And  they,  .reviled  him,  wagging  their  he. 

Mark  6.  24  she  said,  The  head  of  John  the  Baptist 
6.  25  give  me.  .in  a  charger  the  head  of  John 
6.  27  and  commanded  his  head  to  be  brought 

6.  28  brought  his  head  in  a  charger,  and  gave 
12.  10  stone,  .is  become  the  head  of  the  corner 

14.  3  brake  the  box,  and  poured  (it)  on  his  head 

15.  19  they  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a  reed 
15.  29  they,  .railed  on  him,  wagging  their  heads 

Luke  7.  3G  did  wipe  (them)  with  the  hairs  of  her  head 

7.  44  wiped  (them)  with  the  hairs  of  her  head 
7.  46  My  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint 
9. 58  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his)  h. 

12.    7  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered 

20.  17  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor.? 
21. 18  shall  not  an  hair  of  your  head  perish 

21.  28  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads  ;  for 
Johni3.   9  Lord,  not  my  feet  only  but  also  (my),  .he. 

19.    2  a  crown  of  thorns,  aud  put  (it)  on  his  head 

19.  30  he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost 

20.  7  And  the  napkin,  that  was  about  his  head 

20.  12  two  angels,  .sitting,  the  one  at  the  head 
Acts   4.  n  which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner 

18.    6  Your  blood  (be)  upon  your  own  heads  ;  I 
18.  18  having  shorn  (his)  head  in  Cenchrea  :  for 

21.  24  that  they  may  shave  (their)  heads  :  and  all 
27.  34  shall  not  an  hair  fall  from  the  head  of  any 

Roni  12.  20  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head 
1  Co.  11.    3  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  Christ ;  and 

11.  3  the  head  of  the  woman,  .and  the  head 
n.    4  (his)  head  covered,  dishonoureth  his  head 

11.  5  head  uncovered,  dishonoureth  her  head 
n.    7  man  indeed  ought  not  to  cover  (his)  head 
n.  10  power  on  (her)  head  because  of  the  angels 

12.  21  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  ho 
Eph.   1.  22  gave  him  (to  be)  the  head  overall  (things) 

4.  15  into  him.  .which  is  the  head,  (even)  Christ 

5.  23  For  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife 
5.  23  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church 

Col.     1.  18  he  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  church 

2.  10  is  the  head  of  all  principality  and  power 

2.  19  not  holding  the  Head,  from  which  all  the 

1  Pe.  2.    7  the  same  is  made  the  head  of  the  corner 

Rev.    1.  14  His  head  and.  .hairs  (were)  white  like  w. 

4.    4  they  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold 

9.  7  on  their  heads  (were)  as  it  were  crowns 
9. 17  theheads  of  the  horses  (were)  as  the  heads 
9. 19  like  unto  serpents,  and  had  heads,  and 

10.  1  and  a  rainbow  (was)  upon  his  head,  and 

12.  1  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars 

12.  3  great  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads  and 

12.  3  tenhorns.andsevencrowusuponhisheads 

13.  1  beast,  .having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
13.  1  npon  his  heads  the  name  of  blasphemy 

13.  3  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were  wounded 

14.  14  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and 
17.    3  beast,  .having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
17.    7  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 

17.  9  The  seven  heads  are  seven  mountains,  on 

18.  19  they  cast  dust  on  their  heads,  and  cried 

19.  12  and  on  his  head  (were)  many  crowns  ;  and 

HEAD,  wound  in  the  — 

To  bring  to  a  head,  KecpaKaiou  kephalaioo. 

Mark  1 2.  4  cast  stones,  and  wounded  (him)  in  the  h. 
\Sec  also  Ox  head,  bald,  cow,  crown,  grey,  hoar,  hoary, 
top.] 

HEAD  (of  a  hatchet  or  spear)  — 
X.Iron,  ?ns  barzel. 

Deut  19.  5  and  the  head  slippeth  from  the  helve,  and 
2.  Flame,  blade,  ronS,  n:srr?  lehdbahj  lahebeth. 

1  Sa.  17.  7  spear's  head  (weighed)  six  hundred  shek. 
HEAD  BANDS  — 

Bands,  girdle,  c^^'p  gwhshwrim. 

Isa.      3.  20  the  head  bands,  and  the  tablets,  and  the 
HEADLONG,  to  cast  down  — 
To  cast  down  a  precipice,  KaraKprjfjivt^a  katakretti. 

Luke  4.  2g  that  they  might  cast  him  down  headlong 
HEADLONG,  to  fall  — 
To  fall  forward^  irpvv^s  ytvofjtat  prenes  ginomai. 

Acts  1.  18  falling  headlong,  he  burst  asunder  in  the 
HEAD  STONE  — 

Stone  of  the  head\  njF«*i  jnN  eoen  roshah. 

Zech.  4.    7  and  lie  shall  bring  forth  the  head  stone 
HEADY  — 
Walling  forward}  TrpoTrerrjs  propetes. 

2  Ti.  3.  4  heady,  high  minded,  lovers  of  pleasiin.  s 
HEAD,  to  — 

I. To  heal,  repair,  N3*i  rapha. 

Gen.  20. 17  and  God  healed  Abimelech,  and  his  wife 
Exodis.  26  for  I  (am)  the  LORD  that  healeth  thee 


HEALED 


461 


HEAR 


Numi2.  13  Heal  her  now,  O  God,  I  beseech  thee 

Deut32.  39  and  I  make  alive;  I  wound,  and  I  heal 

2  Ki.20-  5  I  have  seen  thy  tears  :  behold,  I  will  heal 
20.    8  the  sign  that  the  Lord  will  heal  me,  and 

2  Ch.  7.  14  forgive  their  sin,  aud  will  heal  their  land 
30.  20  Lord  hearkened,  .and  healed  the  people 

Psa.  6.  2  O  Lord,  heal  me ;  for  my  bones  are  vexed 
30.  2  I  cried  unto  thee,  and  thou  hast  healed 
41.  4  Lord-,  be  merciful  unto  me :  heal  my  soul 
60.  2  heal  the  breaches  thereof  ;  for  it  shaketh 
103.  3  Who  forgiveth.  .who  healeth  all  thy  dis. 
107.  20  He  sent  his  word,  aud  healed  them,  and 
147.   3  He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bin. 

Eccl.  3.   3  A  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  heal ;  a  time 

Isa.    19.  22  he  shall  smite  and  heal  (it) :  and  they  shall 
19.  22  be  entreated  of  them,  and  shall  heal  them 
30.  26  and  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  wound 
57. 18  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him 
57.  19  saith  the  Lord  ;  and  I  will  heal  him 

Jer.  3.  22  Return,  .(and)  I  will  heal  your  backslid. 
3c.  17  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the 
1 7.  14  Heal  me,  O  Lord  . .  save  me,  aud  I  shall  be 

Lam.  2.  13  thy  breach  (is)  great . .  who  can  heal  thee  ? 

Hos.    5.  13  yet  could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you 

6.  1  he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us ;  he  hath 

7.  1  When  I  would  have  healed  Israel,  then 
ii.   3  but  they  knew  not  that  I  healed  them 

14.  4  I  will  heal  their  backsliding,  I  will  love 

2. To  heal,  N3"i  rapha,  3. 

2  Ki.  2.  21 1  have  healed  these  waters;  there  shall 
Jer.    6.  14  They  have  healed  also  the  hurt  (of  the 

8.  1 1  they  have  healed  the  hurt  of  the  daughter 
51.   9  We  would  have  healed  Babylon,  but  she 

Eze.  34.    4  neither  have  ye  healed  that  which  was 
Zech.11.  16  nor  heal  that  that  is  broken,  norfeedthat 

3.  To  make  thoroughly  sound  or  whole,  dtaa&fa. 

Luke  7.    3  that  he  would  come  and  heal  his  servant 

4.  With  a  vieio  to  healing,  ds  Xmtiv  eis  iasin. 
Acts    4.  30  By  stretching  forth  thine  hand  to  heal 

5.  To  attend  to,  heal,  6spaTT€va>    therapeuo. 

Matt.  4.  23  healing  all  manner  of  sickness  and  all 
4. 24  that  had  the  palsy  ;  and  he  healed  them 
8.    7  saith  unto  him,  I  wiU  come  and  heal  him 

8.  16  and  he.  .healed  all  that  were  sick 

9.  35  healing  every  sickness  and  every  disease 
10.    1  to  heal  all  manner  of  sickness,  and  all 
10.   8  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise 
12.  10  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  days? 
12.  15  followed  him,  and  he  healed  them  all 

12.  22  he  healed  him,  insomuch  that  the  blind 
14. 14  with  compassion.. and  he  healed  their  sick 

15.  30  cast  them,  .at  Jesus'  feet ;  and  he  healed 
19.    2  followed  him  ;  and  he  healed  them  there 

21.  14  the  lame  came  to  him.  .and  he  healed  them 
Mark  1.  34  lie  healed  many  that  were  sick  of  divers 

3.    2  he  would  heal  him  on  the  sabbath  day 
3.  10  he  had  healed  many  ;  insomuch  that  they 

3.  15  to  have  power  [to  heal]  sickness,  and  to 
6.  5  upon  a  few  sick  folk,  and  healed  (them) 
6.  13  many  that  were  sick,  and  healed  (them) 

Luke  4.  23  this  proverb,  Physician,  heal  thyself 

4.  40  on  every  one  of  them,  and  healed  them 

5.  15  to  be  healed  by  him  of  their  infirmities 

6.  7  whether  he  would  heal  on  the  sabbath  d. 
6.  18  with  unclean  spirits  :  and  they  were  he. 

8.  2  healed  of  evil  spirits  and  infiraiities 

5.  43  physicians,  neither  could  be  healed  of  any 

9.  6  preaching,  .and  healing  every  where 
10.    9  heal  the  sick  that  are  therein  ;  and  say 

13.  14  Jesus  had  healed  on  the  sabbath  day,  and 

13. 14  in  them  therefore  come  and  be  healed 

14.  3  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  day? 
Acts    4.  14  man  which  was  healed  standing  with  them 

5. 16  sick  folks,  .they  were  healed  every  one 

8.  7  palsies,  and  that  were  lame,  were  healed 
28.   9  others,  .which  had  diseases,  .werehealed 

Rev.  13.  3  his  deadly  wound  was  healed  :  aud  all  the 
13.  12  first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was  heal. 

6.  To  heal,  tdo/xai  iaomai. 

Matt.  S.  8  but  speak,  .and  my  servantshall  be  heal. 
8. 13  servant  was  healed  in  the  self  same  hpur 

13.  15  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them 
Mark  5.  29  felt,  .that  she  was  healed  of  that  plague 
Luke  4.  18  [hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted] 

5. 17  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  (present)  to  h. 
6. 17  and  to  be  healed  of  their  diseases 

6.  19  virtue  out  of  him,  and  healed  (them)  all 

7.  7  but  say.  .and  my  servant  shall  be  healed 
8. 47  and  how  she  was  healed  immediately 

9.  2  preach  the  kingdom,  .and  to  heal  the  sick 
9.  11  and  healed  them  that  had  need  of  healing 
9.  42  healed  the  child,  and  delivered  him  again 

14,  4  took(him),  and  healed  him,  and  let  him  go 

17. 15  when  he  saw  that  he  was  healed,  turned 

22.  51  And  he  touched  his  ear,  and  healed  him 
Julm  4. 47  that  he  would  come  down,  and  heal  his  son 

5.  13  And  [he  that  was  healed]  wist  not  who  it 
1 2.  40  and  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them 
Acts    3.  11  manwhich[washealed]heldPeterand Jo. 
10.  38  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the 
28.   8  and  laid  his  hands  on  him,  and  healed  liim 
28.  27  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them 
Hub.  12. 13  which  is  lame,  .let  it  rather  be  healed 
Jas.    5.  16  pray,  .for  another,  that  ye  may  be  healed 
1  Pe.  2. 24  by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed 

7.  To  make  sound,  or  ivhole,  (r<££w  sozo. 

Mark  5.  23  thy  hands  on  her,  that  she  may  be  healed 
Luke  8.  36  he.  .possessed  of  the  devils  was  healed 
Acts  14.   9  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed 


HEALED,  to  be  — 

1.2*0  /teal,  be  healed,  ndt  rapha. 

Isa.     6. 10  and  understand . .  and  convert,  and  be  he. 

2.2"o  be  or  become  healed,  N3"i  rapha,  2. 

Lev.  13.  18  The  flesh,  .was  a  boil,  and  is  healed 

13.  37  the  scall  is  healed,  he  (is)  clean  :  and  the 

14.  3  plague  of  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  leper 
14.  48  house  clean,  because  the  plague  is  healed 

Deut28.  27  itch,  whereof  thuu  canst  not  be  healed 
28.  35  a  sore  botch  that  cannot  be  healed,  from 

1  Sa.    6.    3  ye  shall  be  healed,  and  it  shall  be  known 

2  Ki.  2.  22  So  the  waters  were  healed  unto  this  day 
ISii-    53-    5  an<i  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed 

Jer.  15.  18  incurable,  (which)  refuseth  to  be  healed  ? 
17.  14  I  shall  be  healed  ;  save  me,  and  I  shall 
51.   8  take  balm,  .if  so  be  she  may  be  healed 
51.    9  she  is  not  healed;  forsake  her,  and  let  us 

Eze.  47.  8  (being)  brought,  .the  waters  shall  be  he. 
47.  9  they  shall  be  healed  ;  and  every  thing  shall 
47.  11  and  the  marishes  thereof  shall  not  be  h. 

3.  To  let  self  be  healed,  ndi  rapha,  7. 

2  Ki.  8.  29  Jorani  went  back  to  be  healed  in  Jezreel 

g.  15  Joram  was^returued  to  be  healed  in  Jez. 

2  Ch.22.    6  And  he  returned  to  be  healed  in  Jezreel 

4.2Y<  give  healing  remedies,  n'iNi)")  jm  nathan  reph. 

Eze.  30.  21  it  shall  not  be  bound  up  to  be  healed,  to 
HEALED,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  lieal,  cause  to  be  healed,  tesn  rapha,  3. 

Exod2i.  19  shall  cause  (hini)  to  be  thoroughly  healed 
HEALER  — 
To  bind  up,  gird,  V2%  chabash. 

Isa.     3.    7  I  will  not  be  an  healer  ;  for  in  my  house 
HEALING  — 
1.  Weakening,  nns  kehah. 

Nah.   3.  19  (There)  is  no  healing  of  thy  bruise  ;  thy 
2. Healing,  n?io  marpe. 

Jer.  14.  19  (there  is)  no  healing  for  us?  we  looked 
14.  19  the  time  of  healing,  and  behold  trouble  ! 

Mai.    4.    2  the  Sun.  .arise  with  healing  in  his  wings 
3.  What  7'aises  up,  strengthens,  n?yn  tealah. 

Jer.   30.  13  bound  up  :  thou  hast  no  healing  medici. 
4. Attendance,  healing,  depairela  therapeia. 

Luke  9.  11  and  healed  them  that  had  need  of  heal. 

Rev.  22.    2  (were)  for  the  healing  of  the  nations 
5. Healing,  Xay.<x  iama. 

1  Co.  12.    9  the  gifts  of  healing  by  the  same  spirit 

12. 28  theu  gifts  of  healings,  helps,  and  govern. 
12.  30  Have  all  the  gifts  of  healing  ?  do  all 

6. Healing,  tcuns  iasis. 

Acts    4.  22  on  whom  this  miracle  of  healing  was  sh. 

HEALTH  — 

1. Lengthening,  prolongation,  n:ns*,  ront?  arukah, 
Isa.  58.    8  thine  health  shall  spring  forth  speedily 
Jer.    8.  22  why  then  is  not  the  health  of  the  daugh. 
30. 17  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee,  and  I 
33.   6  I  will  bring  it  health  and  cure,  and  I 

2. Safety,  Tty\W\  yeshuah. 

Psa.  42. 11  the  health  of  my  countenance,  aud  my  G. 
43.   5  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  myG. 

3. Healing,  n?1D  marpe. 

Prov.  4.  22  For  they  (are),  .health  to  all  then*  flesh 
12.  18  but  the  tongue  of  the  wise  (is)  health 
13. 17  but  a  faithful  ambassador  (is)  health 
16.  24  sweet  to  the  soul,  and  health  to  the  bones 
Jer.     8.  15  for  a  time  of  health,  and  behold  trouble  ! 
i.Healing,  rUNEH  riphuth. 

Prov.  3.    8  It  shall  be  health  to  thy  navel,  aud  mar. 
5. Peace,  completeness,  n^y?  sJudoin. 

2  Sa.  20.   9  Joab  said.  .(Art)  thou  in  health,  my  bro.? 
6.  Soundness,  safety,  awrnpia  soteria. 

Acts  27.  34  this  is  for  your  health  :  for  there  shall 
HEALTH,  to  be  in  — 
To  be  in  health,  vytaivoi  hugiaino. 

3  John  2  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in  health 

HEAP  — 

]  .Heap,  h\  gal. 

Gen.  31.  46  heap  :  and  they  did  eat  there  upon  the  h. 
31.  48  This  heap  (is)  a  witness  between  me  and 
31.  51  Behold  this  heap,  and  behold  (this)  pillar 
31.  52  This  heap  (be)  witness,  and  (this)  pillar 
31. 52  I  will  not  pass  over  this  heap  to  thee 
31.  52  over  this  heap  and  this  pillar  unto  me 

Josh.  7.  26  a  great  heap  of  stones  unto  this  day 

8.  29  and  raise  thereon  a  great  heap  of  stones 

2  Sa.  18.  17  laid  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  upon  him 

■2  Ki.19.  25  to  lay  waste,  .cities  (into)  ruinous  heaps 

Job  8.  17  Hisrootsarewrappedabouttheheap,(and) 
15.  28  houses,  .which  are  ready  to  become  heaps 

Isa.  25.  2  thou  hast  made  of  a  city  an  heap  ;  (of)  a 
37.  26  lay  waste,  .cities  (into)  ruinous  heaps 

Jer.  9. 11  I  will  make  Jerusalem  heaps,  (and)  a  den 
51.  37  Babylon  shaL!  become  heaps,  a  dwelling 

Hos.  12.  11  as  heaps  in  the  furrows  of  the  fields 

2.  Mass,  ncn  clwmer. 

Exod.  8. 14  they  gathered  them  together  upon  heaps 
Hab.  3.15  walk . .  (through)  the  heap  of  great  w  aters 

3.  Heap  (of  ruins),  *yp  mei. 

Isa.  17.    1  a  city,  and  it  shall  be  a  ruinous  heap 


A:.  Heap,  mound,  wall,  ~ii  ned. 

Exodis.    8  the  floods  stood  upright  as  an  heap,  (and) 
Josh.  3.  13  aud  they  shall  stand  upon  an  heap 

3.  16  upon  an  heap  very  far  from  the  city  Adam 
Psa.  33.    7  the  waters  of  the  sea  together  as  an  heap 

78.  13  he  made  the  waters  tu  stand  as  an  heap 
Isa.  17.  11  the  harvest  (shall  be)  a  heap  in  the  day 

5. Heap  (of  ruins),  *y  i. 

Psa.  79.    1  they  have  laid  Jerusalem  on  heaps 
Jer.  26.  18  andJerusalemshallbecomeheaps.andthe 
Mic.    1.    6  will  make  Samaria  as  an  heap  of  the  field 
3. 12  and  Jerusalem  shall  become  heaps,and  the 
Q.Heap,  "91^  aremah. 

Ruth  3.    7  fie  down  at  the  end  of  the  heap  of  corn 

2  Ch.31.    6  of  holy  things . .  aud  laid  (them)  by  heaps 

31.    7  began  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  heaps 

31.   8  and  the  princes  came  and  saw  the  heaps 

31.    9  Hezekiah  questioned. ".concerning  the  h. 

Neh.   4.    2  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  heaps  of  the 

Song  7.    2  an  heap  of  wheat  set  about  with  lilies 

Jer.  50.  26  cast  her  up  as  heaps,  and  destroy  her  ut. 

Hag.    2. 16  (one)  came  to  an  heap  of  twenty  (meas.) 

7 .Mound,  heap,  hillock,  Sfi  tel. 

Deut  13.  16  it  shall  be  an  heap  for  ever ;  it  shall  not 
Josh   8.  2S  burnt  Ai,  and  made*it  an  heap  for  ever 
Jer.  30. 18  city  shall  be  builded  upon  her  own  heap 
49.    2  Rabbah.  .shall  be  a  desolate  heap,  and 

HEAP,  to  — 

l.To  2>ut,  put  down,  nnn  chathah. 

Prov  25.  22  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  his  k. 

2.  To  add,  n3D  saphah,  5. 

Deut  32.  23  I  will  heap  mischiefs  upon  them  ;  I  will 

3.7b  heap  up,  ~nx  tsabar. 

Hab.    1.  10  for  they  shall  heap  dust,  and  take  it 

i.To  jiress  togetly     (with  the  fingers),  |'5i?  qabats. 

Hab.   2.    5  gat'  jreth.  .and  heapeth  uuto  him  all 
5. To  make  mu   .,  multiply,  ran  rabah,  5. 

Eze.  24.  10  Leap  on  wood,  kindle  the  fire,  consume 

6.  To  heap  up  upon,  £irio-(i>peva>  episoreud. 

2  Ti.    4.    3  shall  they  heap  to  themselves  teachers 

7.  To  heap  up,  o-apeva?  soreuo. 

Rom. 12.  20  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of 
HEAP  up,  to  — 

1.  To  join,  associate,  or  lieap  together,  "uri  cJiabar,  5. 
Job   16.    4  I  could  heap  up  words  against  you,  and 

2.  To  gather  or  heap  up,  dj3  kanas. 

Eccl.   2.  26  to  gather  and  to  heap  up,  that  he  may  g. 

3.  To  heap  up,  -13:*  tsabar. 

Job  27.  16  Though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and 
Psa.  39.  6  he  heapeth  up  (riches),  and  knoweth  not 
Zech.  9.    3  Tyrus.  .heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and 

4.  To  place,  set,  put,  D'c*,  Wa  sum,  sim. 

Job  36. 13  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heap  up  wrath 
HEAP  treasure  together,  to  — 
To  treasure  up,  Qnaavpifa  thesaurizo. 

Jas.    5.    3  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together  for  the 
HEAPS  (high)  — 

l.TwofoldhecipsiC]rn^n^ncha?norcha??im'athayim. 
Judg  15.  16  heaps  upon  heaps,  with  the  jaw  of  an  ass 
2.Heaps,  ens?  tsibburim. 

2  Ki.  10.    3  And  he  said,  Lay  ye  them  in  two  heaps 
3.  High  heaps  (as  way  marks),  D,_tn^pi  tamrurim. 

Jer.  31.  21  Set.  .up  way  marks,  make  thee  high  heaps 
BEAR  — 
Hearing,  jm  J?£ty  sliema  ozen. 

Psa.  18.  44  As  soon  as  they  hear  of  me,  they  shall 
HEAR,  to  — 
1.  To  give  ear,  |in  azan,  5. 

Psa.133.  17  They  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not,  neither 
140.    6  hear  the  voice  of  my  supplications,  O  L. 
2. To  answer,  respond,  niyanah. 

1  Sa.    7.   9  and  Samuel  cried,  .and  the  Lord  heard 
8. 18  the  Lord  will  not  hear  you  in  that  day 
1  Ki.  iS.  26  called  on  the  name  of  Baal . .  0  Baal,  hear 

18.  37  Hear  me,  0  Lord,  hear  me ;  that  this  p. 
Job   30.  20  I  cry  unto  thee,  and  thou  dost  not  hear 
Psa.     3.    4  he  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  hill.     Selah 
4.    1  Hear  me  when  I  call,  O  God  of  my  right. 
13.   3  Consider  (and)  hear  me,  0  Lord  my  God 
17.   6  for  thou  wilt  hear  me,  0  God :  incline 
20.    1  The  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble 
20.    6  he  will  hear  him  from  lii-s  holy  heaven 
20.    9  LORD  :  let  the  King  hear  us  when  we  call 
22.   2  I  cry  in  the  day  time,  but  thou  hearest 
22.  21  for  thou  hast  heard  me  from  the  horns  of 
34.   4  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me,  and 
38.  15  do  I  hope  :  thou  wilt  hear,  0  Lord  my  G. 
55.    2  Attend  unto  me,  and  hear  me  :  I  niourn 
60.    5  save  (with)  thy  right  hand,  and  hear  me 
69.  13  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy  hear  me 
6g.  16  Hear  me,  0  Lord  ;  for  thy  loving  kindu. 
69.  17  for  I  am  in  trouble  :  hear  me  speedily 
86.    1  Bow  down  thine  ear,  0  Lord,  hear  me 

118.  21  I  will  ^raise  thee  :  for  thou  hast  heard 

119.  26  I.  .declared  my  ways,  and  thou  heardest 

119.  145  hear  me,  0  Lord:  I  will  keep  thy  statutes 

120.  1  I  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me 
143.    7  Hear  me  speedily,  0  Lord  ;  my  spirit  fa. 

Isa.  41.  17  Lord  will  hear  them,  (I)  the  God  of  Israel 


HEAR 


462 


HEAR 


Isa.    49.    8  In  an  acceptable  time  have  I  heard  thee 
Hos.    2.  21  in  that  day,  I  will  hear,  saith  the  Lord 
2.  21  I  will  hear  the  heavens,  and  they  shall 

2.  22  earth  shall  hear,  .and  they  shall  hear  Je. 
14.    8  I  have  heard  (him),  and  observed  trim :  I 

Jon.  2.  2  I  cried,  .unto  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me 
Mic.  3.  4  he  will  not  hear  them :  he  will  even  hide 
Zech  10.    6  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God,  and  will  hear 

13.  9  they  shall  call  on  my  name,  and  I  will  h. 

3.  Hearing,  yew  shema. 

Hos.    7.  12  chastise,  .as  their  congregation  hath  he 

4.  To  hear,  "py  shennea. 

Gen.    3.   8  And  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  LORD  G. 

3.  10  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden 

4.  23  hear  my  voice ;  ye  wives  of  Lamech.hear. 

14.  14  Abram  heard  that  his  brother  was  taken 

16.  11  because  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy  affliction 

17.  20  as  for  Ishmael,  I  have  heard  thee :  Behold 

18.  10  Sarah  heard  (it)  in  the  tent  door,  which 
si.    6  (so  that)  all  that  hear  will  laugh  with  me 
21.  17  God  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad ;  and  the 
ax.  17  for  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad 
21.  26  didst  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  heard  I 
23.    6  Hear  us,  my  lord :  Thou  (art)  a  mighty  p. 
23.    8  hear  me,  and  entreat  for  me  to  Ephron 
23,  11  Nay,  my  lord,  hear  me  :  the  field  give  I 

23.  13  I  pray  thee,  hear  me  :  I  will  give  thee 

24.  30  when  he  heard  the  words  of  Rebekah  his 
24.  52  when  Abraham's  servant  heard  their  w. 
27.    5  Rebekah  heard  when  Isaac  spake  to  Esau 
27.   6  I  heard  thy  father  speak  unto  Esau  thy 
■2-j.  34  when  Esau  heard  the  words  of  his  father 
29. 13  when  Laban  heard  the  tidings  of  Jacob 

29.  33  Because  the  Lord  hath  heard  that  I  (was) 

30.  6  God  hath  judged  me,  and  hath  also  heard 

31.  1  And  he  heard  the  words  of  Laban's  sons 
34.    5  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  defiled  Dinah  his 

34.  7  came  out  of  the  field  when  they  heard  (it) 

35.  22  Reuben,  .lay  with  Bilhah  .and  Israel  he. 
37.  6  Hear,  I  pray  you,  this  dream  which  I  have 
37.  17  for  I  heard  them  say,  Let  us  go  to  Dothan 
37.  21  Reuben  heard  (it),  and  he  delivered  hini 
39.  15  when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice 
39.  iq  when  his  master  heard  the  words  of  his 

41.  15  I  have  heard  say  of  thee,  .thou  canst  un. 

42.  2*1  have  heard  that  there  is  corn  in  Egypt 
42.  21  when  he  besought  us,  and  we  would  not 

42.  22  Spake  I  not  unto  you . .  and  ye  would  noth. 

43.  25  they  heard  that  they  should  eat  bread 
45.    2  he  wept . .  aud  the  house  of  Pharaoh  heard 
49.    2  Gather  yourselves  together,  and  hear,  ye 

Exod.  2.  15  when  Pharaoh  heard  this  thing,  he  sought 

2.  24  God  heard  their  groaning,  and  God  rem. 

3.  7  and  have  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of 

4.  31  when  they  heard  that  the  Lord  had  visit. 
6.    5  I  have  also  heard  the  groaning  of  the  c. 

6.  12  how  then  shall  Pharaoh  hear  me,  who 

7.  16  behold,  hitherto  thou  wouldest  not  hear 

15.  14  The  people  shall  hear,  (and)  be  afraid 

16.  7  for  that  he  heareth  your  murmurings 

16.    8  the  Lord  heareth  your  murmurings  which 
16.    9  Lord  :  for  he  hath  heard  your  murmur, 
16.  12  I  have  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  chi. 
iS.    1  heard  of  all  that  God  had  done  for  Moses 

19.  9  that  the  people  may  hear  when  I  speak 

20.  19  Speak  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  hear 
22.  23  and  they  cry.  .1  will  surely  hear  then  cry 
22.  27  when  he  crieth  unto  me,  that  I  will  hear 

32. 17  when  Joshua  heard  the  noise  of  the  peo. 

32. 18  but  the  noise  of  (them  that)  sing  do  I  hear 
33.   4  when  the  people  heard  these  evil  tidings 

Lev.    5.    1  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swear. 

10.  20  And  when  Moses  heard  (that),  he  was  c. 
24.  14  let  all  that  heard  (him)  lay  their  hands 

Num.  7.  89  he  heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking  unto 
9.   8  I  will  hear  what  the  Lord  will  command 

11.  1  the  Lord  heard  (it) ;  and  his  anger  was 

11.  10  Then  Moses  heard  the  people  weep  thro, 

12.  2  spoken  also  by  us  ?  And  the  Lord  heard 
12.    6  Hear  now  my  words  :  If  there  be  a  prop. 
14.  13  Then  the  Egyptians  shall  hear  (it),  for 
14.  14  they  have  heard  that  thou,  Lord,  (art) 
14.  15  the  nations  which  have  heard  the  fame 
14.  27  I  have  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  chi. 
16.    4  when  Moses  heard  (it),  he  fell  upon  his  f. 
16.   8  Moses  said.  .Hear,  I  pray  you,  ye  sons  of 
20.  10  Hear  now,  ye  rebels  ;  must  we  fetch  you 
20.  16  he  heard  our  voice,  and  sent  an  angel 
22. 36  when  Balak  heard  that  Balaam  was  come 

23.  18  Rise  up,  Balak,  and  hear  ;  hearken  unto 

24.  4,  16  He  hath  said,  which  heard  the  words 
30.  4  And  her  father  hear  her  vow,  and  her 
30.  5  father  disallow  her  in  the  day  that  he  h. 
30.  7,  11  her  husband  'heard  (it),  and  held  his 
30.  7,  14  held  his  peace,  .in  the  day  that  he  he. 
30.  8  disallowed  her  on  the  day  that  he  heard 
30.  12  utterly  made  them  void  on  the  day  he  h. 
30.  15  make  them  void  after  that  he  hath  heard 
33.  40  heard  of  the  coming  of  the  children  of  I. 

Dent.  1.  16  Hear,  .between  your  brethren,  and  judge 
1. 17  ye  shall  hear  the  small  as  well  as  the  gr. 
1.  17  too  hard.,  bring  (it)  unto  me,  and  I  willh. 

1.  34  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  words  and 
x.  43  ye  would  not  hear,  but  rebelled  against 

2.  25  who  shall  hear  report  of  thee,  and  shall 

3.  26  Lord  was  wroth,  .and  would  uot  hear  me 

4.  6  which  shall  hear  all  these  statutes,  and 
4.  10 1  will  make  them  hear  my  words,  that 
4.  12  ye  heard  the  voice  of  the  words,  but  saw 
4.  28  which  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  eat,  nor 
f  33  Did. .  people  hear  the  voice,  .as  thou.  ,h. 


Deut.  4.  36  Out  of  heaven  he  made  thee  to  hear  his 

4.  36  thou  heardest  his  words  out  of  the  midst 

5.  1  Hear,  0  Israel,  the  statutes  and  judgments 
5.  23  when  ye  heard  the  voice  out  of  the  midst 
5.  24  we  have  heard  his  voice  out  of  the  midst 
5.  25  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God 
5.  26  that  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  living  G. 
5.  27  hear  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  say 
5.  27  speakthou.  .andwewillhear(it),anddo(it) 
5.  28  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  words,  when 

5.  28  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  the  words  of 

6,  3  Hear  therefore,  0  Israel,  and  observe  to 
6,    4  Hear,  O  Israel  :  The  Lord  our  God  (is) 

9.  1  Hear,  0  Israel :  Thou  (art)  to  pass  over 
9.    2  thou  hast  heard.  .Who  can  stand  before 

12,  28  Observe  and  hear  all  these  words  which 

13.  11  all  Israel  shall  hear,  and  fear,  and  shall 

13.  12  If  thou  shalt  hear,  .in  one  of  thy  cities 
17.    4  And  it  be  told  thee,  and  thou  hast  heard 

17.  13  all  the  people  shall  hear,  aud  fear,  aud 

18.  16  Let  me  not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the  L. 

19.  20  those  which  remain  shall  hear,  and  fear 

20.  3  Hear,  0  Israel ;  ye  approach  this  day  un. 

21.  21  stone  him.  .and  all  Israel  shall  hear,  and 
26.  7  Lord  heard  our  voice,  and  looked  on  our 
29.    4  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,  unto  this  d. 

29.  19  when  he  heareth  the  words  of  this  curse 

30.  17  heart  turn  away,  so  that  thou  wilt  not  h. 

31.  12  that  they  may  hear,  and  that  they  may 

31.  13  their  children,  .may  hear,  and  learn  to 

32.  1  and  hear,  O  earth,  the  words  of  my  mouth 

33.  7  Hear,  Lord,  the  voice  of  Judah,  and  bring 
Josh.  2.  10  we  have  heard  how  the  Lord  dried  up  the 

2.  11  as  soon  as  we  heard,  .our  hearts  did  melt 

3.  9  Come  Irither,  and  hear  the  words  of  the  L. 

5.  1  heard  that  the  Lord  had  dried  up"  the  w. 

6.  5  when  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

6.  20  when  the  people  heard  the  sound  of  the 

7.  9  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  hear 
9.    1  when.. the  Hivite,  and  the  Jebusite,  he. 
9.    3  heard  what  Joshua  had  done  unto  Jericho 
9.    9  we  have  heard  the  fame  of  him,  and  all 
9.  it  they  heard  that  they  (were)  their  neighb. 

10.  1  when  Adoni-zedek.. heard  how  Joshua 

11.  1  when  Jabin  king  of  Hazor  had  heard 

14.  12  thou  heardest  in  that  day  how  the  Ana. 

22.  1 1  the  children  of  Israel  heard  say,  Behold 
22.  12  when  the  children  of  Israel  heard,  .the 
22.  30  heard  the  words  that  the  children  of  Re. 
24.  27  it  hath  heard  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 

Judg.  5.    3  Hear,  0  ye  kings;  give  ear,  0  ye  princes 
5.  16  to  hear  the  bleatings  of  the  flocks?  Eor 
7.  11  thou  shalt  hear  what  they  say ;  and  after. 
7. 15  when  Gideon  heard  the  telling  of  the  dr. 
9.  30  when  Zebul .  .heard  the  words  of  Gaal  the 

9.  46  all  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  he. 
14.  13  Put  forth  thy  riddle,  that  we  may  hear  it 
20.    3  the  children  of  Benjamin  heard  that  the 

Ruth  1.    6  she  had  heard  in  the  country  of  Moab  h.- 
2.    8  Hearest  thou  not,  my  daughter?  Go  not 

1  Sa.   2.  22  heard  all  that  his  sons  did  unto  all  Israel 

2.  23  I  hear  of  your  evil  dealings  by  all  this  peo. 

2.  24  for  (it  is)  no  good  report  that  I  hear:  ye 

3.  9  say,  Speak,  Lord  ;  for  thy  servant  heareth 
3.  10  answered,  Speak ;  for  thy  servant  heareth 

3.  11  both  the  ears  of  every  one  that  heareth 

4.  6  when  the  Philistines  heard  the  noise  of 
4. 14  when  Eli  heard  the  noise  of  the  crying 
4. 19  when  she  heard  the  tidings  that  the  ark 
7.    7  when  the  Philistines  heard  that  the  child. 

7.  7  when  the  children  of  Israel  heard  (it),  they 

8.  21  Samuel  heard  all  the  words  of  the  people 
11.  6  came  upon  Saul  when  he  heard  those  tid. 
13.  3  Jonathan  smote,  .and  the  Philistines  he. 
13.    3  Saul  blew,  .saying,  Let  the  Hebrews  hear 

13.  4  all  Israel  heard  say  (that)  Saul  had  smit. 

14.  22  they  heard  that  the  Philistines  fled,  even 

14.  27  Jonathan  heard  not  when  his  father  cha. 

15.  14  and  the  lowing  of  the  oxen  which  I  hear? 

16.  2  if  Saul  hear  (it),  lie  will  kill  me.     And 

17.  11  When  Saul  and  all  Israel  heard  these  w. 
17.  23  spake,  .the  same  words  :  and  David  hea. 
17.  28  Eliab  his  eldest  brother  heard  when  he 
22.    1  his  brethren  aud  all  his  father's  house  h. 
22.    6  When  Saul  heard  that  David  was  discov.^ 
22.    7  Hear  now,  ye  Benjamites ;  will  the  son  of 

22.  12  And  Saul  said,  Hear  now,  thou  son  of  A. 

23.  10  thy  servant  hath  certainly  heard  that  S. 
23.  11  come  down,  as  thy  servant  hath  heard? 

23.  25  when  Saul  heard . .  he  pursued  after  David 

24.  9  Wherefore  hearest  thou  men's  words,  sa. 

25.  4  David  heard  in  the  wilderness  that  Nabal 
25.    7  now  I  have  heard  that  thou  hast  shearers 

25.  24  and  hear  the  words  of  thine  handmaid 
25-  39  when  David  heard  that  Nabal  was  dead 

26.  19  let  my  lord  the  king  hear  the  words  of 
31.  11  heard  of  that  which  the  Philistines  had 

2  Sa.    3.  28  afterward  when  David  heard  (it),  he  said 

4.  1  when  Saul's  son  heard  that  Abner  was  d. 

5.  17  when  the  Philistines  heard  that  they  had 
5.  17  David  heard,  .and  went  down  to  the  hold 
5.  24  when  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  going 

7.  22  according  to  all  that  we  have  heard  with 

8.  9  When  Toi  king  of  Hamath  heard  that  D. 

10.  7  when  David  heard  of  (it),  he  sent  Joab 

11.  26  heard  that  Uriah  her  husband  was  dead 

13.  21  when  king  David  heard  of  all  these  things 

14.  16  the  king  will  hear,  to  deliver  his  handm. 

15.  3  but.  .no  man.  .of  the  king  to  hear  thee 
15.  10  As  soon  as  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  tru. 
15.  35  what  thing  soever  thou  shalt  hear  out  of 
1 5.  36  send  uuto  me  every  thing  that  ye  can  hear 


2Sa.  16.  21  all  Israel  shall  hear  that  thou  art  abhorred 
17.    5  and  let  us  hear  likewise  what  he  saith 

17.  9  that  whosoever  heareth  it  will  say,  There 

18.  s  all  the  people  heard  when  the  king  gave 

19.  2  the  people  heard  say  that  day  how  the 
*9-  35  cau  I  ne;,r  aDV  more  the  voice  of  singing 

20.  16  Hear,  hear  !  say,  I  pray  you,  unto  Joab 
20.  17  Hear  the  words . .  And  he  answered,  I  do  h. 
22.    7  he  did  hear  my  voice  out  of  his  temple 
22.  45  as  soon  as  they  hear,  they  shall  be  obed. 

1  Ki.  1.  11  Hast  thou  not  heard  that  Adunijah  the 
1.  41  Aclonijah,  and  all  the  guests,  .heard  (it) 
1.  41  when  Joab  heard  the  sound  of  the  trum. 

1.  45  Tlris  (is)  the  noise  that  ye  have  heard 

2.  42  saidst.  .The  word  (that)  I  have  heard  (is) 

3.  28  all  Israel  heard  of  the  judgment  which 

4.  34  there  came  of  all  people  to  hear  the  wis. 

4.  34  all  kings .  which  had  heard  of  his  wisdom 

5.  1  he  had  heard  that  they  had  anointed  him 

5.  7  when  Hiram  heard  the  words  of  Solomon 

6.  7  hammer  nor  ax  (nor)  any  tool  of  iron  h. 
8.  30  hear  thou,  .and  whenthouhearest, forgive 
8.  32  hear  thou  in  heaven,  and  do,  and  judge 
8.  34,  36  hear  thou  in  heaven,  and  forgive  the 
8.  39,  43  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling  pi. 
8.  42  they  shall  hear  of  thy  great  name,  aud  of 

8.  45,  49  hear  thou  in  heaven  their  prayer  and 

9.  3  I  have  heard  thy  prayer  and  thy  supplicat. 
10.  1  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fa. 
10.  6  It  was  a  true  report  that  I  heard  in  mine 
10.  7  wisdom,  .exceedeth  the  fame  which  I  he. 
10.    8  Happy  (are)  thy  men.  .that  hear  thy  wis. 

10.  24  all  the  earth  sought  to  Solomon,  to  hear 

11.  21  when  Hadad  heard  in  Egypt  that  David 

12.  2  when  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat.  .heard 

12.  20  when  all  Israel  heard  that  Jeroboam  was 

13.  4  when  king  Jeroboam  heard  the  saying  of 

1 3.  26  that  brought  him  back  from  the  way  heard 

14.  6  when  Ahrjah  heard  the  sound  of  her  feet 

15.  21  when  Baasha  heard,  .lie  left  oft'  building 

16.  16  the  people,  .encamped  heard  say,  Zimri 

17.  22  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  Elijah  ;  and  the 
19-.  13  when  Elijah  heard,  .lie  wrapped  his  face 
20.  12  when  (Ben-hadad)  heard  this  message,  as 

20.  31  we  have  heard  that  the  kings  of  the  house 

21.  15  when  Jezebel  heard  that  Naboth  was  sto. 
21.  16  when  Ahab  heard  that  Naboth  was  dead 

21.  27  when  Ahab  heard  those  words,  .he  rent 

22.  19  Hear  thou  therefore  the  word  of  the  Lord 
2  Ki.    3.  21  whenalltheMuabitesheardthatthekirgs 

5.  8  when  Elisha  the  man  of  God  had  heard 

6.  30  when  the  king  heard  the  words  of  the  w. 

7.  1  Elisha  said,  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 

9.  30  when  Jehu  was  come.  .Jezebel  heard  (of 
11.  13  when  Athaliah  heard  the  noise  of  the  g. 
14.  11  But  Amaziah  would  not  hear.    Therefore 

17. 14  they  would  not  hear,  but  hardened  their 

18.  12  and  would  not  hear  (them),  nordo(them) 

18.  28  Hear  the  word  of  the  great  king,  the  king 

19.  1  when  king  Hezekiah  heard,  .he  rent  his 
19.   4  It  may  be  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hear  all 
19.    4  words  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  he. 
19.    6  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words,  .thou  hast  h. 
19.    7  he  shall  hear  a  rumour,  and  shall  return 
19.    8  he  had  heard  that  he  was  departed  from 
19.    9  when  he  heard  say  of  Tirhakah  king  of  E. 
19.  11  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of  Assy. 
19.  16  Lord,  bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear ;  open 
19.  16  hear  the  words  of  Sennacherib,  which 
19.  20  (That)  which  thou  hast  prayed.  .1  have h. 

19.  25  Hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago.  .1  have  d. 

20.  5  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy 
20.  12  he  had  heard  that  Hezekiah  had  been 
20.  16  Isaiah  said.  .Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 
21. 12  whosoever  heareth  of  it,  both  his  ears 
22.  11  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of 
22.  18  (As touching)the  words,  .thou  hast  heard 
22.  19  when  thou  heardest  what  I  spake  against 

22.  19  I  also  have  heard  (thee),  saith  the  Lord 

5.  23  heard  that  the  king  of  Babylon  had  made 

1  Ch.io.  11  heard  all  that  the  Philistines  had  done  to 

14.    8  heard  that  David  was  anointed  king  over 

14.  8  David  heard,  .and  went  out  against  them 

14. 15  when  thou  shalt  hear  a  sound  of  going 

17.  20  according  to  all  that  we  have  heard  with 

18.  9  when  Tou  king  of  Hamath  heard  how  D. 

19.  8  when  David  heard,  .he  sent  Joab,  and  all 
28.    2  Hear  me,  my  brethren,  and  my  people 

2  Ch.  6.  21  hear  thou,  .and  when  thou  hearest,  forg. 

6.  23  hear  thou  from  heaven,  and  do,  and  judge 
6.  25,  27  hear  thou  from  the  heavens,  and  forg. 
6.  30  hear  thou  from  heaven  thy  dwelling  place 
6.  33,  39  hear  thou  from  the  heavens,  .from  thy 

6.  35  heai-  thou  from  the  heavens  their  prayer 

7.  12  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  and  have  chosen 
7. 14  then  will  I  hear  from  heaven,  and  will 

9.    1  when  the  queen  of  sheba  heard  of  the 
9.    5  (It  was)  a  true  report  which  I  heard  in 
9.    6  (for)  thou  exceedest  the  fame  that  I  heard 
9.    7  Happy,  .thy  servants,  which. hear  thy w. 
9.  23  to  hear  Iris  wisdom,  that  God  had  put  in 

10.  2  when  Jeroboam  the  sun  of  Nebat.  .heard 
13.  4  Hear  me,  thou  Jeroboam,  and  all  Israel 

15.  2  Hear  ye  me,  Asa,  and  all  Judah  and  Benj. 

15.  8  when  Asa  heard  these  words,  and  the  pr. 

16.  5  it  came  to  pass,  when  Baasha  heard  (it) 
18.  18  Therefore  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  ;  I 

20.  9  (when)  evil  cometh . .  thou  wilt  hear  and  h. 
20.  20  Hear  me,  O  Judah,  and  ye  inhabitants  of 
20.  29  whentheyhadheard  that  the  Lord  fought 

23.  12  when  Athaliah  heard  the  noise  of  the  pe. 
25.  :o  But  Amaziah  would  not  hear ;  for  it  (ca). 


HEAR 


2  Ch.jS.  ii  hear  me  therefore,  and  deliver  the  captiv. 
29.  5  Hear  me,  ye  Levites  ;  sanctify  now  your. 
33. 13  heard  his  supplication,  and  brought  him. 
34.  19  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of 
34,  26  (concerning)  the  words  which  thou  hast  h. 
34.  27  when  thou  heardest  his  words  against 
34.  27  I  have  even  heard  (thee)  also,  saith  the 

Ezra    4.    1  heard  that  the  children  of  the  captivity 
9.    3  when  I  heard  this  thing,  I  rent  my  garm. 

Neb.    1.    4  iteameto  pass,  when  I  heard  these  words 

1.  6  that  thou  mayest  hear  the  prayer  of  thy 

2.  xo.Tobiah  the  servant,  the  Ammonite,  heard 
2. 19  But  when .  .Geshem  the  Arabian,  heard 
4.    1  when  Sanballat  heard  that  we  builded 

4.    4  Hear,  0  our  God ;  for  we  are  despised 
4.    7  beard  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were 
4.  15  when  oui' enemies  heard  that  it  was  known 

4.  20  In  what  place,  .ye  hear  the  sound  of  the 

5.  6  I  was  very  angry  when  I  heard  their  cry 
6. 16  all  our  enemies  heard,  .and  all  the  heath. 
8.    2  and  all  that  could  hear  with  understand. 

8.  9  all  the  people  wept,  when  they  heard  the 

9.  9  and  heardeet  their  cry  by  the  Red  sea 

9.  27,  sStheycried.  .thou  heardest.  .fromheav. 

9.  29  hardened  their  neck,  and  would  not  hear 

13.   3  when  they  had  heard  thejlaw,  that  theys. 

Esth.  1.  iS  which  have  heard  of  the  deed  of  the  queen 

Job     2.  11  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  of  all  this 

3.  18  they  hear  not  the  voice  of  the  oppressor 

4.  16  (there  was)  silence,  and  I  heard  a  voice 

5.  27  hear  it,  and  know  thou  (it)  for  thy  good 
13.    1  mine  ear  hath  heard  and  understood  it 
13.    6  Hear  now  my  reasoning,  and  hearken  to 
13.  17  Hear  diligently  my  speech,  and  my  decl. 

15.  8  Hast  thou  heard  the  secret  of  God  ?  and 
15. 17  I  will  show  thee,  hear  me  ;  and  that.  .1 

16.  2  I  have  heard  many  such  things  :  miserab. 

20.  3  I  have  heard  the  check  of  my  reproach 

21.  2  Hear  diligently  my  speech  ;  and  let  this 

22.  27  he  shall  hear  thee,  and  thou  shalt  pay  thy 

27.  9  Will  God  hear  his  cry  when  trouble  com. 

28.  22  We  have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with 
2g.  11  When  the  ear  heard  (me),  then  it  blessed 
31.  35  Oh  that  one  would  hear  me  I  behold,  my 
33.    1  Wherefore,  Job,  I  pray  thee,  hear  my  spe. 

33.  8  and  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  (thy)  words 

34.  2  Hear  my  words,  0  ye  wise  (men);  and  give 
34.  16  If  now.  .understanding,  hear  this;  heark. 
34.  2S  and  he  heareth  the  cry  of  the  afflicted 
35. 13  Surely  God  will  not  hear  vanity,  neither 
37.  2  Hear  attentively  the  noise  of  his  voice 
42.  4  Hear,  I  beseech  thee,  and  I  will  speak  :  I 
42.   5  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the 

Psa.     4.    1  Hear  me  when  I  call,  0  God  of  my  right. 
4.    1  have  mercj  upon  me,  andhearmy  prayer 

4.  3  the  Lord  will  hear  when  I  call  unto  him 

5.  3  My  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  morning 

6.  8  Lord  hathheard  the  voice  of  my  weeping 
6.   9  Lord  hath  heard  my  supplication ;  the  L. 

10.  17  thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  humble 

17.  1  Hear  the  right,  O  LORD,  attend  unto  my 

17.  6  incline  tliine  ear  unto  me . .  hear  my  spee. 

18.  6  he  heard  my  voice  out  of  his  temple,  and 
18.  44  As  soon  as  they  hear  of  me,  they  shall  obey 
22.  24  but  when  he  cried  unto  him,  he  heard 

27.  7  Hear,  O  Lord.  .1  cry  with  my  voice  :  ha. 

28.  2  Hear  the  voice  of  my  supplications  when 
28.    6  because  he  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my 

30. 10  Hear,  0  Lord,  and  have  mercy  upon  me 
31.  13  For  I  have  heard  the  slander  of  many 
31.  22  thou  heardesC  the  voice  of  my  supplication 
34.    2  the  humble  shall  hear  (thereof),  and  be 
34.   6  Tins  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard 
34. 17  cry,  and  the  Lord  heareth,  and  deliver. 

38. 13  But  I,  as  a  deaf  (man),  heard  not ;  and 

38. 14  Thus  I  was  as  a  man  that  heareth  not 

39.  12  Hear  my  prayer,  0  LORD,  and  give  ear 

40.  1  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry 
44.    1  We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  0  God,  our  f. 

48.  8  As  we  have  heard,  so  have  we  seen  in  the 

49.  1  Hear  this,  all.  .people ;  give  ear,  all.  .in. 

50.  7  Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I  will  speak  ;  O 

54.  2  Hear  my  prayer,  0  God  ;  give  ear  to  the 

55.  17  Evening,  and  morning,  .he  shall  hear  my 
55.  19  God  shall  hear,  and  afflict  them,  even  he 
59.  7  swords  (are)  in  their  lips :  for  who . .  doth  h.  ? 
ox.  1  Hear  my  cry,  O  God  ;  attend  unto  my  pra. 
61.    5  For  thou,  0  God,  hast  heard  my  vows 

62. 11  twice  have  I  heard  this,  that  power,  .unto 

64.  1  Hear  my  voice,  0  God,  in  my  prayer :  pre. 

65.  2  O  thou  that  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee 

66.  16  Come,  .hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I 
66.  18  If  I  regard  iniquity.  .Lord  will  not  hear 
66.  19  verily  God  hath  heard . .  he  hath  attended 
69.  33  the  Lord  heareth  the  poor,  and  despiseth 
78.  3  Which  we  have  heard  and  known,  and 
78.  21  Therefore  the  Lord  heard . .  and  was  wroth 
78.  59  When  God  heard,  .he  was  wroth,  and  gr. 
81.  5  I  heard  a  language  (that)  I  understood  not 
8t.    8  Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I  will  testify  unto 

84.  8  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  hear  aayjprayer:  give 

85.  8  I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak 
92.  11  mine  ears  shall  hear,  .of  the  wicked  that 

94.  9  He  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  h.? 

95.  7  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice 

97.  8  Ziou  heard,  and  was  glad ;  and  the  daug. 
102.  1  Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  let  my  cry 
102.  20  To  hear  the  groaning  of  the  prisoner ;  to 
106.  44  regarded  their  affliction,  when  he  heard 

115.  6  They  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not;  noses 

116.  1 1  love  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  heard 
119.  149  Hear  my  voice,  according  unto  thy  loving 


4G3 


Psa.  130.    2  Lord,  hear  my  voice  ;  let  thine  ears  be 
132.    6  we  heard  of  it  at  Ephratah ;  we  found  it 
138.    4  when  they  hear  the  words  of  thy  mouth 
141.    6  they  shall  hear  my  words ;  for  they  are 
143.    1  Hear  my  prayer,  0  Lord,  give  ear  to  my 
145.  19  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  will  save 
Prov.  1.    5  A  wise  (man)  will  hear,  and  will  increase 
1.    8  My  son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father 
4.    1  Hear,  ye  children,  the  instruction  of  a  f. 

4.  10  Hear,  0  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings 

5.  7  Hear  me  now  therefore,  0  ye  children,  and 
8.  6  Hear ;  for  I  will  speak  of  excellent  things 
8.  33  Hear  instruction,  and  be  wise,  and  refuse 
8.  34  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  heareth  me,  wa. 

13.    1  A  wise  son .  .a  scorner  heareth  not  rebuke 
13.    8  but  the  poor  heareth  not  rebuke 
15.  29  buthe  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  righteous 
15,  31  The  ear  that  heareth  the  reproof  of  life 
15.  32  he  that  heareth  reproof  getteth  underst. 

18.  13  that  answereth  a  matter  before  he  heareth 

19.  20  Hear  counsel,  audreceive  instruction, that 
xg.  27  Cease,  ray  son,  to  hear  the  instruction . .  to 

20.  12  The  hearing  ear,  and  the  seeing  eye,  the 

21.  28  the  man  that  heareth  speaketh  constantly 
22. 17  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the  words 
23.  19  Hear  thou,  my  son,  and  be  wise,  and  gui. 
25.  10  Lest  he  that  heareth.  .put  thee  to  shame 
29.  24  he  heareth  cursing,  and  bewrayeth  (it) 

Eccl.  5.    1  be  more  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  the  s. 
7.    5  (It  is)  better  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the 
7.    5  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  song  of  fools 
7.  21  no  heed,  .lest  thou  bear  thy  servant  curse 
12.  13  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole 

Isa.     1.    2  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth 
1. 10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of  S. 

15  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I  will  not 

8  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying 

9  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  understand  not ;  and 
10  hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand 

13  Hear  ye  now,  0  house  of  David ;  (Is  it)  a 
6  have  heard  of  the  pride  of  Moab . .  very  p. 
3  and  when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet,  hear  ye 

10  that  which!  have  heard  of  the  Lord  of  h. 

16  have  we  heard  songs,  .glory  to  the  right. 

12  this.,  refreshing:  yet  they  would  not  hear 

14  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scornful 

22  I  have  heard  from  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

23  hear  my  voice ;  hearken,  and  hear  my 

18  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words 
9  children,  .will  not  hear  the  law  of  the  L. 

19  when  he  shall  hear  it,  he  will  answer  thee 
21  tliine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee 

3  the  ears  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken 
9  hear  my.voice,  ye  careless  daughters;  give 

13  Hear,  ye.  .afar  off,  what  I  have  done  ;  and 
1  Come  near,  ye  nations,  to  hear  ;  and  he. 
1  let  the  earth  hear,  and  all  that  is  therein 

13  Hear  ye  the  words  of  the  great  king,  the 
1  came  to  pass,  when  king  Hezekiah  heard 

4  thy  God  will  hear  the  words  of  Eabsha. 

4  words  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  he. 

6  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words,  .thou  hast  h. 

7  he  shall  hear  a  rumour,  and  return  to  his 

5  he  had  heard  that  he  was  departed  from  L. 
9  And  he  heard  say  concerning  Tirhakah 
9  when  he  heard,  .lie  sent  messengers  to  H. 

1 1  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of  Assyria 

1 7  Incline  thine  ear,  0  Lord,  and  hear . .  hear 
26  Hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago.  .1  have 

5  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thv 
1  he  had  heard  that  he  had  been  sick,  and 

5  said.  .Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
21  Have  ye  not  known?  have  ye  not  heard? 
28  Hast  thou  not  known,  hast  thou  not  he. 
26  yea,  (there  is)  none  that  heareth  your,  wo. 

18  Hear,  ye  deaf;  and  look,  ye  blind,  that 

20  opening  the  ears,  but  he  heareth  not 

23  will  hearken,  and  hear  for  the  time  to  c.? 

9  or  let  them  hear,  and  say,  (It  is)  truth 
1  Yet  now  hear,  0  Jacob  my  servant ;  and 

8  Therefore  hear  now  this,  thou,  .given  to 
1  Hear  ye  this,  O  house  of  Jacob,  which  are 

6  Thou  hast  heard,  see  all  this  ;  and  will 

7  before  the  day  when  thou  heardest  them 

8  thou  heardest  not;  yea,  thou  knewest  not 

14  All  ye,  assemble  yourselves,  and  hear 
16  Come  ye  near  unto  me,  hear  ye  this  ;  I  h. 

4  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as  the  learned 

21  Therefore  hear  now  this,  thou  afflicted 

15  which  they  had  not  heard  shall  they  con. 

3  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live  ;  and  I  will 

1  neither  Ms  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot  hear 

2  hid  (his)  face  from  you,  that  he  will  not  h. 

4  have  not  heard,  nor  percieved  by  the  ear 

12  when  I  spake,  ye  did  not  hear  ;  but  did 

24  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear 

4  when  I  spake,  they  did  not  hear  :  but 

5  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  that  tremb. 
8  Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing  ?  who  hath 

19  the  isles . .  that  have  not  heard  my  fame 
Jer.    2.   4  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  house 

19  because  thou  hast  heard,  .the  sound  of 
21  How  long  shall  I.  .hear  the  sound  of  the 
31  I  have  heard  a  voice  as  of  a  woman  in 
21  Hear  now  this,  0  foolish  people,  and 
21  see  not  ;*whieh  have  ears,  and  hear  not 

10  aud  give  warning,  that  they  may  hear  ? 

18  Therefore  hear,  ye  nations,  and  know 

19  Hear,  O  earth  :  behold,  I  will  bring  evil 
24  We  have  heard  the  fame  thereof  :  our 

2  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  (ye  of)  J. 

13  aud  I  spake  unto  you.  .but  ye  heard  not 


HEAR 


Jer.     7.  16  Therefore  pray  not.  .1  will  not  hear  thee 

8.  6  I  hearkened  and  heard,  (hut)  they  spake 

9.  10  neither  can  (men)  hear  the  voice  of  the 
9.  20  Yet  hear  the  word  of  the  LORD,  O  ye 

10.  1  Hearyetheword  which  theLoHDspeaketh 

11.  2,  6  Hear  ye  the  words  of  this  covenant 
11.  10  refused  to  hear  my  words  ;  and  they  went 

11.  14  for  I  will  not  hear(them)  in  the  time  that 

13. 10  evil  people,  which  refuse  to  hear  my  wo. 

13. 11  and  for  a  glory  :  but  they  would  not  hear 

13. 15  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear;  be  not  proud  :  for 

13.  17  But  if  ye  will  not  hear  it,  my  soul  shall 

14.  12  When  they  fast,  I  will  not  hear  their  cry 
17.  20  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  kings 

17.  23  that  they  might  not  hear,  nor  receive 

18.  13  Ask.  .the  heathen,  who  hath  heard  such 

19.  3  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  kings  of 
19.    3  which  whosoever  heareth,  his  ears  shall 

19.  15  that  they  might  not  hear  my  words 

20.  1  Now  Pashur.  .heard  that  Jeremiah  prop. 
20  10  For  I  heard  the  defaming  of  many,  fear 

20. 16  and  let  him  hear  the  cry  in  the  morning 

21.  11  touching,  .(say),  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the 

22.  2  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  king  of  J. 
22.  5  if  ye  will  not  hear  these  words,  I  swear 
22.  21  (but)  thou  saidst,  I  will  not  hear :  this 

22.  29  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 

23.  18  and  hath  perceived  and  heard  his  word  ? 

23. 18  who  hath  marked  his  word,  and  heard 
23.  25  I  have  heard  what  the  prophets  said 

25.    4  hearkened,  nor  inclined  your  ear  to  hear 

25.  8  Because  ye  have  not  heard  my  words 

26.  7  all  the  people  heard  Jeremiah  speaking 
26.  10  When  the  princes  of  Judah  heard  these 
26. 1 1  prophesied . .  as  ye  have  heard  with  your  e. 
26.  12  prophesy,  .all  the  words  that  ye  have  h. 
26.  21  and  all  the  princes,  heard  his  word^.the 
26.  21  but  when  Urijah  heard  it,  he  was  feafr  ] 

28.  7  hear  thou  now  this  word  that  I  sp  f      SI 
2S.  15  Hear  now,  Hananiah  ;  The  Lord  hath  not 

29. 19  but  ye  would  not  hear,  saith  the  Lord 

29.  20  Hear  ye  therefore  the  word  of  the  LORD 

30.  5  We  have  heard  a  voice  of  trembling,  of 

31.  10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  nations 
31.  18  I  have  surely  heard  Ephraim  bemoaning 

33.  9  which  shall  hear  all  the  good  that  I  do 

34.  4  Yet  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  Zede. 

34. 10  when  all  the  princes,  .heard  that  every 

35.  17  I  have  spoken,  .but  they  have  not  heard 

36.  3  the  house  of  Judah  will  hear  all  the  evil 

36. 11  When  Michaiah.  .bad  heard  out  of  the 
36.  13  all  the  words  that  he  had  heard,  when 
36. 16  when  they  had  heard  all  the  words,  they 
36.  24  were  not  afraid . .  that  heard  all  these  wo. 

36.  25  to  the  king,  .but  he  would  not  hear  them 

37.  5  when  the  Chaldeans . .  heard  tidings  of 

37.  20  Therefore  hear  now,  I  pray  thee,  0  my 

38.  1  heard  the  words  that  Jeremiah  had 

3S.    7  when  Ebed-melech .  .heard  that  they  had 
38.  25  if  the  princes  hear  that  I  have  talked 

40.  7,  n  heard  that  the  king  of  Babylon  had 

41.  11  heard  of  all  the  evil  that  Ishmael  the  sou 

42.  4  the  prophet  said  unto  them,  I  have  heard 
42.  14  nor  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  nor 
42.  15  now  therefore  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 

44.  24  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  Judah 
44. 16  Therefore  hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 
46.  12  The  nations  have  heard  of  thy  shame 

48.  5  enemies  have  heard  a  cry  of  destruction 

45.  29  We  have  heard  the  pride  of  Moab,  he  is 

49.  14  I  have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Lord 
49.  20  Therefore  hear  the  counsel  of  the  LORD 

49.  23  for  they  have  heard  evil  tidings  :  they  are 

50.  43  king  of  Babylon  hath  heard  the  report  of 

50.  45  Therefore  hear  ye  the  counsel  of  the  Lord 

51.  51  because  we  have  heard  reproach  :  shame 
Lam.  1.  iS  hear,  I  pray  you,  all  people,  and  behold 

1.  21  They  have  heard  that  I  sigh  ;  (there  is) 
1.  21  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  trouble 
3.  56  Thou  hast  heard  my  voice  ;  hide  not  thi. 
3.  61  Thou  hast  heard  their  reproach,  0  Lord 
Eze.     1.  24  I  heard  the  noise  of  their  wings,  like  the 

1.  28  and  I  heard  a  voice  of  one  that  spake 

2.  2  that  I  heard  him  that  spake  unto  me 

2.    5  they,  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether 
2.    7  shalt  speak . .  whether  they  will  hear,  or 

2.  8  son  of  man,  hear  what  1  say  unto  thee 

3.  10  receive  in  thine  heart,  andhearwith thine 
3.  11  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they 
3.  12  and  I  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  a  great 

3. 17  therefore  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth 
3.  27  He  that  heareth,  let  him  hear  ;  and  he 
6.   3  Ye  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word 

8. 18  though  they  cry .  .(yet)  will  I  not  hear 

12.  2  they  have  ears  to  hear,  and  hear  not :  for 

13.  2  say  thou  unto  them.  .Hear  ye  the  word 
13.  19  byyoiu-lyiugtomypeoplethathear(yom) 
16.  35  Wherefore,  0  harlot,  hear  the  word  of 

18.  25  Hear  now,  0  house  of  Israel ;  Is  not  my 

19.  4  The  nations  also  heard  of  him ;  he  was 

20.  47  say  to  the  forest.  .Hear  the  word  of  the 
25.  3  say  unto  the  Ammonites,  Hear  the  word 
33.  4  whosoever  heareth  the  sound  of  the  tru. 
33.  5  He  heard  the  souud  of  the  trumpet,  and 
33.  7  thou  shalt  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth 
33.  30  and  hear  what  is  the  word  that  cometh 
33.  31  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do 

33.  32  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them 

34.  7  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 

34.  9  O  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word  of  the  L. 

35.  12  I  have  heard  all  thy  blasphemies  which 
35- 13  your  words  against  me :  I  have  heard 


HEAR 


464 


HEAR 


Uos. 
Joel 


Obad. 

Jon. 

Mic. 


Nah. 


Eze.  36.    1  Ye  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of 

36.  4  ye  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of 

37.  4  O  ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 
40.    4  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with 

43.  6  I  heard  (him)  speaking  unto  me  out  of 

44.  5  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with 
Dan.  8.  13  Then  I  heard  oue  saint  speaking,  and  an. 

8.  16  I  heard  a  man's  voice  between  (the  banks) 

9.  17  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  servant 
9.  iS  O  my  God,  incline  thine  ear,  and  hear 
9.  19  O  Lord,  hear ;  O  Lord,  forgive  ;  O  Lord 

10.  9  Yet  heard  I  the  voice  of  his  words  :  and 
10.  9  when  I  heard  the  voice  of  his  words,  then 
12.    7  And  I  heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen 

2.  8  I  heard,  but  I  understood  not :  then  said 

4.  1  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children  of 

5.  1  Hear  ye  this,  6  priests  ;  and  hearken,  ye 

1.  2  Hear  this,  ye  old  men,  and  give  ear,  all 
Amos  3.    1  Hear  this  word  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

3.  13  Hear  ye,  and  testify  in  the  house  of  Jacob 

4.  1  Hear  this  word,  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  that 

5.  1  Hear  ye  this  word  which  I  take  up 
5.  23  I  will  not  hear  the  melody  of  thy  viols 
7.  16  therefore  hear  thou  the  word  of  the  Lord 

4  Hear  this,  O  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy 
1  We  have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Xord 

2.  2  cried  I,  (and)  thou  heardest  my  voice 

1.  2  Hear,  all  ye  people ;  hearken,  O  earth,  and 

3.  1  Hear,  I  pray  you,  O  heads  of  Jacob,  and 
3.   9  Hear  this,  I  pray  you,  ye  heads  of  the  h. 

5.  15  and  fury,  .such  as  they  have  not  heard 

6.  1  Hear  ye  now  what  the  Lord  saith ;  Arise 
6.  1  contend  thou,  .aud  let  the  hills  hear  thy 
6.    2  Hear  ye,  O  mountains,  the  Lord's  contr. 

6.  9  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed 

7.  7  I  will  wait,  .my  God  will  hear  me 
3.  19  all  that  hear  the  bruit  of  thee  shall  clap 

r.  1.    2  long  shall  I  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not  hear  ! 

^c     3.   2  O  Lord,  I  have  heard  thy  speech,  (and) 

3. 16  \Yheu  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled;  my 

Zeph.  2.    8  I  have  heard  the  reproach  of  Moab,  and 

Zech.  1.    4  but  they  did  not  hear,  nor  hearken  unto 

3.   8  Hear  now,  O  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou 

7.  n  stopped  their  ears,  that  they  should  not  h. 

7.  12  lest  they  should  hear  the  law,  and  the  w. 

7.  13  they  would  not  hear,  .and  I  would  not  h. 

8.  9  ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words  by 
8.  23  for  we  have  heard  (that)  God  (is)  with  you 

Mai.   2.    2  If  ye  will  not  hear,  and  if  ye  will  not  lay 
3. 16  heard  (it),  and  a  book  of  remembrance 

5.  To  cause  to  be  heard,  yew  shamea,  5. 

Dent  30.  12,  13  bring  it  unto  us,  that  we  may  hear  it 

6.  To  hear,  57017  shema. 

Dan.    3.    5,  15  at  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the 

3.  7  when  all  the  people  heard  the  sound  of 
3. 10  every  man  that  shall  hear  the  sound  of 
5.  14  I  have  even  heard  of  thee,  that  the  spirit 
5.  16  I  have  heard  of  thee,  that  thou  canst  ma. 

5.  23  which  see  not,  nor  hear,  nor  know  :  and 

6.  14  Then  the  king,  when  he  heard  (these)  w. 
7. To  give  ear,  hearken,  hear,  o.kovo>  akouo. 

Matt.  2.    3  When  Herod  the  king  had  heard  (these  t.) 

2.  9  When  they  had  heard  the  king,  they  de. 
2. 18  In  Kama  was  there  a  voice  heard,  lamen. 
2.  22  But  when  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did 

4.  12  Now  when  Jesus  had  heard  that  John  was 

5.  21,  27  ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  by  them 
5-  33-  38,  43  ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  s. 

7.  24  whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine 

7.  26  every  one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of 

8.  10  When  Jesus  heard  (it),  he  marvelled,  and 
9. 12  But  when  Jesus  heard,  .he  said  unto  them 

10. 14  whosoever  shall  not.  .hear  your  words 

10.  27  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear.  .preach  ye  upon 

11.  2  when  John  had  heard  in  the  prison  the 
11.    4  show  John.,  those  things  wliich  ye  do  hear 
1 1.    5  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear 

11.  15  He  that  hath  ears  [to  hear],  let  him  hear 

12.  19  neither  shall  any  man  hear  his  voice  in 
12.  24  when  the  Pharisees  heard  (it)  they  said 

12.  42  for  she  came,  .to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Sol. 

13.  9  Who  hath  ears  fto  hear],  let  him  hear 
13.  ^"hearing,  they  hear  not,  neither  do  they 
13.  14  By  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not 
13.  15  hear  with  (their)  ears,  and  should  under. 
13. 16  blessed  are.  .your  ears,  for  they  hear 

13.  17  and  have  not  seen  (them) ;  and  to  hear 
13.  17  (things)  wliich  ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard 
13.  18  Hear  ye  therefore  the  parable  of  the  sow. 
13.  19  When  any  one  heareth  the  word  of  the 
13.  20  the  same  is  he  that  heareth  the  word,  and 
13.  22,  23  that  received  seed,  .is  he  that  heareth 

13.  43  Who  hath  ears  [to  hear],  let  him  hear  —  - 

14.  1  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  Came  of 
14.  13  When  Jesus  heard.. he  departed  thence 

14.  13  when  the  people  had  heard,  .they  follow. 
15. 10  and  said  unto  them,  Hear,  and  understa. 

15.  12  were  offended,  after  they  heard  this  say. 
17.    5  This  is  my  beloved  Son.  .hear  ye  him 

17.  6  And  when  the  disciples  heard  (it),  they 

18.  15  if  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained 

18.  16  But  if  he  will  not  hear,  .take  with  thee 

19.  22  when  the  young  man  heard  that  saying 

19.  25  When  his  disciples  heard  (it),  they  were 

20.  24  when  the  ten  heard  (it),  they  were  moved 

20.  30  when  they  heard  that  Jesus  passed  by 

21.  16  said  unto  him,  Hearest  thou  what  these 
21.  33  Hear  another  parable  :  There  was  a  cert. 

21.  45  when  thechief  priests  and  Pharisees  had 

22.  7  But  when  the  king  [heard] . .  he  was  wroth 
28.  22  When  they  had  heard,  they  marvelled 


Matt  22.  33  when  the  multitude  heard . .  they  were  as. 
22.  34  when  the  Pharisees  had  heard  that  he  had 
24.    6  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars 

26.  65  behold,  now  ye  have  heard  his  blasphe. 

27.  13  Hearest  thou  not  how  many  things  they 
27.  47  Some,  .when  they  heard,  .said,  This  (man) 

Murk  2.  17  When  Jesus  heard  (it),  he  saith  uuto  them 

3.  8  when  they  had  heard  what  great  things 
3. 21  when  his  friends  heard . .  they  went  out  to 

4.  9,  23  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  h. 
4.  12  hearing  they  may  hear,  and  not  underst. 
4.  15  but,  when  they  have  heard,  Satan  cometh 
4.  16  who,  when  they  have  heard  the  word,  im. 
4.  18  sown  among  thorns;  such  as  hear  the  wo. 
4.  20  such  as  hear  the  word,  and  receive  (it) 

4.  23  If  any  man  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 
4.  24  he  saith  unto  them,  Take  heed  what  ye  h. 
4. 24  unto  you  that  hear  shall  more  be  given 

4.  33  spake  he.  .as  they  were  able  to  hear  (it) 

5.  27  When  she  had  heard  of  J  esus,  came  in  the 

5.  36  As  soon  as  Jesus  heard  the  word  that  was 

6.  2  and  many  hearing  (him)  were  astonished 

6. 11  whosoever  shall  not.  .hear  you,  when  ye 
6.  14  And  king  Herod  heard  (of  him);  for  his 
6.  16  But  when  Herod  heard  (thereof,)  he  said 
6.  20  when  he  heard  him,  he . .  heard  him  gladly 
6.  29  when  his  disciples  heard. .  they  came  and 

6.  55  those  that  were  sick,  where  they  heard  he 

7.  16  If  any  man  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him  he. 
7.  25  For  a.  .woman,  .heard  of  him,  and  came 

7.  37  he  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the 

8.  18  and  having  ears,  hear  ye  not?  and  do  ye 

9.  7  saying,  This  is  my  beloved  Son  :  hear  him 
10.  41  when  the  ten  heard  (it),  they  began  to  be 

10.  47  when  he  heard  that  it  was  Jesus  of  Naza. 

11.  14  No  man  eat  fruit.  .And  his  disciples  heard 

11.  18  the  scribes  and  chief  priests  heard  (it),  and 

12.  28  came,  and  having  heard  them  reasoning  to 
12.  29  Hear,  O  Israel ;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one 

12.  37  And  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly 

13.  7  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours 

14.  11  when  they  heard  (it),  they  were  glad,  and 
14.  58  We  heard  him  say,  I  will  destroy  this  tern. 

14.  64  Ye  have  heard  the  blasphemy :  what  think 

15.  35  And  some  of  them,  .when  they  heard  (it) 

16.  11  [when  they  had  heard  that  he  was  alivel 
Luke  1.  41  when  Elisabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  M. 

1.  58  her  neighbours  and  her  cousins  heard  how 

1.  66  And  all  they  that  heard  .  .laid  (them)  up 
2. 18  all  they  that  heard  (it)  wondered  at  those 

2.  20  for  all  the  things  that  they  had  heard  and 
2.  46  both  hearing  them,  and  asking  them  que. 

2.  47  all  that  heard  him  were  astonished  at  his 
4.  23  whatsoever  we  have  heard  done  in  Cape. 

4.  28  all  they  in  the  synagogue,  when  they  heard 

5.  1  as  the  people  pressed  upon  him  to  hear  the 

5.  15  great  multitudes  came  together  to  hear 

6.  17  which  came  to  hear  him,  and  to  be  healed 
6.  27  I  say  unto  you  which  hear,  Love  your  en. 
6.  47  Whosoever  cometh  to  me,  and  heareth 

6.  49  he  that  heareth,  and  doeth  not,  is  like  a 

7.  3  when  he  heard  of  Jesus,  he  sent  unto  him 
7.    9  When  Jesus  heard  these  things,  he  marv. 
7.  22  tell  John  what,  .ye  have  seen  and  heard 
7.  23  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  the  deaf  hear,  the 

7.  29  all  the  people  that  heard,  .and  the  publi. 

8.  8  cried,  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  h. 
8.  10  and  hearing  they  might  not  understand 

8. 12  Those  by  the  way  side  are  they  that  hear 
8.  13  on  the  rock(are  they),  wliich,  when  they  h. 
8.  14  when  they  have  heard,  go  forth,  and  are 
8.  15  having  heard  the  word,  keep(it),  andbring 
8.  18  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear :  for  w. 
8.  21  my  brethren  are  these  which  hear  the  w. 

8.  50  when  Jesus  heard,  .he  answered  him,  sa. 

9.  7  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  all  that  was 
9.  9  who  is  this  of  whom  I  hear  such  things  ? 
9.  35  saying,  This  is  ray  beloved  Son  :  hear  him 

10.  16  He  that  heareth  you  heareth  me  ;  and  he 
10.  24  many,  .have  desired  to.  .hearthose  things 
10.  24  which  ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard  (them) 

10.  39  also  sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  heard  his  word 

11.  28  blessed  (are)  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God 

11.  31  for  she  came,  .to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Sol. 

12.  3  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken . .  shallhe  heard 

15  Andwhenoneof  them. .  heard  these  things 

35  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear 

1  the  publicans  and  sinners  for  to  hear  him 

25  as  he  came,  .he  heard  music  and  dancing 

2  How  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  thee  ?  give  an 
14  the  Pharisees  also,  .heard  all  these  things 
29  They  have,  .the  prophets  ;  let  them  hear 
31  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets 

6  Lord  said,  Hear  what  the  unjust  judge 

22  when  Jesus  heard  these  things,  he  said 

23  when  he  heard  this,  he  was  very  sorrow. 

26  they  that  heard,  .said,  Who  then  can  be 

36  hearing  the  multitude  pass  by,  he  asked 
11  as  they  heard  these  things,  he  added  and 
48  the  people  were  very  attentive  to  hear  him 

16  And  when  they  heard . .  they  said,  God  for. 
o  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  commot. 

38  all  the  people  came  early. ,  for  to  hear  him 
71  for  we  ourselves  have  heard  of  his  own  m. 
6  When  Pilate  heard  of  Galilee,  he  asked 
8  because  he  had  heard  many  tilings  of  him 

37  the  two  disciples  heard  him  speak,  and 
1.  40  One  of  the  two  which  heard  John  (speak) 

3.  8  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but 
3.  29  which  standeth  and  heareth  him,  rejoice. 

3.  32  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard,  thathe  tes. 

4.  1  how  the  Pharisees  had  heard  that  Jesus 


John 


John  4.  42  for  we  have  heard,  .ourselves,  and  know 
4. 47  When  he  heard  that  Jesus  was  come  out 
5.  24  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth 
5.  25  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the 
5.  25  Son  of  God;  and  they  that  hear  shall  live 

4.  28  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voi. 

5.  30  as  I  hear,  I  judge  :  and  my  judgment  is 

5.  37  Yehaveneitherheardhisvoiceatanytime 

6.  45  Every  man  therefore  that  hath  heard,  and 
6.  60  Many  therefore,  .when  they  had  heard 

6.  60  This  is  an  hard  saying  ;  who  can  hear  it? 

7.  32  The  Pharisees  heard  that  the  people  mur. 
7.  40  Many  of  the  people,  .when  they  heard  this 

7.  51  Dothourlawjudge.  man  before  it  hear  h. 

8.  9  [they  which  heard,  .being  convicted  by] 
8.  26  I  speak .  those  things  which  I  have  heard 
8.  40  told . .  the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  of  G. 
8.  43  (even)  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  v. ■■  rd 
8.  47  He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God's  words 

8.  47  ye  therefore  hear . .  not,  because  ye  are  not 

9.  27  I  have  told  you  already,  and  ye  did  not  h. 
9.  27  wherefore  would  ye  hear  (it)  again?  will  ye 
9.  31  Now  we  know  that  God  heareth  not  sin. 
9.  31  if  any  man.  .doeth  his  will,  him  he  hear. 
9.  32  was  it  not  heard  that  any  man  opened  the 
9.  35  Jesus  heard  that  they  had  cast  him  out 
9.  40  the  Pharisees  which  were  with  him  heard 

10.  3  the  sheep  hear  his  voice  :  and  he  calleth 
10.  8  robbers  :  but  the  sheep  did  not  hear  them 
10.  16  them  also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall  h. 
10.  20  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad  ;  why  hear  ye 

10.  27  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them 

11.  4  When  Jesus  heard,  .he  said.  This  sickness 
11.  6  When  he  had  heard  therefore  that  he  was 
11.  20  as  soon  as  she  heard  that  Jesus  was  com. 
11.  29  As  soon  as  she  heard,  .she  arose  quickly 
11.  41  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard 

11.  42  And  I  knew  that  thou  hearest  me  always 

12.  12  when  they  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming 
12.  18  that  they  heard  that  he  had  done  this  m. 
12.  29  people  therefore  that  stood  by,  and  heard 
12.  34  We  have  heard  out  of  the  law  that  Christ 

12.  47  if  any  man  hear  my  words,  ami  believe  not 
14.  24  the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not  mine,  but 
14.  28  Y'e  have  heard  how  I  said  unto  you,  I  go 
15. 15  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my  Father 
16.  13  whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  (that)  shall  he 
18.  21  ask  them  which  heard  me,  what  I  have 

18.  37  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  hearethmy 

19.  8,  13  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  sa. 
2t.    7  Now  when  Simon  Peter  heard  that  it  was 

Acts  1.  4  promise,  .which,  (saith he),  yeha\e  heard 
2.  6  every  man  heai'd  them  speak  in  lis  own 
2.  8  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  ton. 
2.  11  we  do  hear  them  speak  in  our  tongues  the 
2.  22  Y'e  men  of  Israel,  hear  these  words,  Jesus 
2.  33  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  h. 

2.  37  Now  when  they  heard .  .they  were  pricked 
-3.  22  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things  whatsoever 

3.  23  every  soul,  which  will  not  hear  that  pro. 

4.  4  many  of  them  which  heard  the  word  bel. 
4.  20  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard 

4.  24  when  they  heard  that,  they  lilted  up  their 

5.  5  Ananias  hearing  these  words  fell  down 
5.    5  fearcame  on  all  them  that  heard  these  th. 
5.  11  and  upon  as  many  as  heard  these  things 
5.  21  when  they  heard,  .they  entered  into  the 
5.  24  when  the  high  priest,  .heard  these  things 

5.  33  When  they  heard,  .they  were  cut.  .and  to. 

6.  11  We  "have  heard  him  speak  blasphemous  w. 

6.  14  we  have  heard  him  say,  that  this  Jesus  of 

7.  12  when  Jacob  heard  that  there  was  corn  in 
7.  34  I  have  heard  their  groaning,  and  am  come 
7.  37  A  prophet,  .like  unto  me;  him  shall  [ye  h.] 

7.  54  When  they  heard  these  things,  they  were 

8.  6  hearing  and  seeing  the  miracles  wliich  he 
8.  14  Now  when  the  apostles,  heard  that  Sam. 

8.  30  Philip  ran  thither,  .and  heard  him  read 

9.  4  and  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul 
g.    7  the  men.  .stoodspeechless,hearingavoice 
9. 13  Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man 
9.  21  all  that  heard,  .were  amazed,  and  said 

9.  38  disciples  had  heard  that  Peter  was  there 
10.  22  to  send  for  thee,  .and  to  hear  wordsof  thee 
10.  33  tohearallthingsthatarecommaudedthee 

10.  44  Ghost  fell  on  all  them  which  heard  the  word 
jo.  46  For  they  heard  them  speak  with  tongues 

11.  1  the  apostles,  .heard that  the  Gentiles  had 
11.  7  I  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  me,  Arise,  P. 
11.  18  When  they  heard  these  things,  they  held 

13.  7  Paulus.  .desired  to  hear  the  word  of  God 
13.  44  whole  city  together  to  hear  the  word  ofG. 

13.  48  when  the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were 

14.  9  The  same  heard  Paul  speak  :  who  stedfast. 

14.  14  when  the  apostles,  Barnabas  and  Paul,  h. 

15.  7  should  hear  the  word  of  the  Gospel,  and 

15.  24  Forasmuch  as  we  have  heard,  that  certain 

16.  14  a  certain  woman,  .heard  (us) :  whose  he. 

16.  38  they  feared,  when  they  heard  tha;  tic:,' 

17.  S  they  troubled  the  people,  .when  they  h. 
17.  21  but  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new  t. 
1 7.  32  when  they  heard  of  the  resurrection  of  the 

17.  32  otherssaid.  We  will  hear  thee  again  of  this 

18.  8  many  of  the  Corinthians  hearing  believed 

18.  26  whom  when  Aquilla  and  PriscUla  had  h. 

19.  2  We  have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether 
19.  5  When  they  heard .  .they  were  baptized  in 
19. 10  so  that  all  they  which  dwelt  in  Asiaheard 
19.  26  Moreover  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone 
19.  28  when  they  heard .  .they  were  full  of  wrath 
21.  12  when  we  heard  these  things,  both  we,  and 
21  20  when  they  heard  . .  they  glorified  the  Lo,  d 


HEAR 


465 


HEARKEN 


Acts  21.  22  for  they  will  hear  that  thou  art  come 
22.    i  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hear  ye  my 
22.    2  when  they  heard  that  he  spake  in  the  H. 
22.    7  and  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  me,  Saul 
22.   9  they  heard  not  the  voice  of  him  that  spake 

22. 14  and  shouldest  hear  the  voice  of  his  mouth 
22.  15  witness,  .of  what  thou  hast  seen  and  he. 

22.  26  When  the  centurion  heard,  .he  went  and 

23.  16  when  Paul's  sister's  son  heard  of  their  ly. 

24.  4  I  pray  thee  that  thou  wouldest  hoar  us  of 

24.  22  when  Felix  [heard  these  things],  having 
2-4.  24  and  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in  C. 

25.  22  said.  .1  would  also  hear  the  man  myself 

25.  22  To  morrow,  said  he,  thou  shalt  hear  him 

26.  3  wherefore  I  beseech  thee  to  hear  me  pa. 
26.  14  I  heard  a  voice  speaking  unto  me,  and 
26-  29  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day,  were 

28. 15  when  the  brethren  heard  of  us,  they  ca. 
28.  22  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  thin 
28.  26  Hearing  ye  shall  Vear,  and  shall  not  and. 
28.  27  and  hear  with  (their)  ears,  and  understand 
28.  28  unto  the  Gentiles  and.  .thay  will  hear  it 

Rom  10.  T4  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  h. 
to.  14  and  how  shall  they  hear  without  a  prea.? 

10.  18  But  I  say,  Have  they  not  heard?    Yes 

11.  8  given  them,  .ears  that  they  should  not  h. 
15.  21  they  that  have  not  heard  shall  understand 

1  Co.  2.    g  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 

it.  18  I  hear  that  there  be  divisions  among  you 

2  C0.12.   4  and  heard  unspeakable  words,  which  it  is 

12.  6  that  which  he  seeth  me.  .or.  .heareth  of 
Gal.     1.  13  ye  have  heard  of  my  conversation  in  time 

1.  23  they  had  heard  only,  that  he  which  per. 
4.  21  Tell  me.  .[do  ye  not  hear!  the  law? 
Eph.    1.  13  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the 
1,  15  after  1  heard  of  your  faith  in  the  Lord  .f. 

3.  2  If  ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation  of  the 

4.  si  If  so  be  that  ye  have  heard  him,  and  have 
Phil.    1.  27  or  else  be  absent,  I  may  hear  of  ycur  aha. 

1.  30  ye  saw  in  me,  (and)  now  hear  (to  be)  in 

2.  26  that  ye  had  heard  that  he  had  been  sick 
4.   9  Those  things,  which  ye  have  both,  .heard 

Col.  t.  4  Siuce  we  heard  of  your  faith  in  Christ  J. 
t.  6  since  the  day  ye  heard . .  and  knew  the  gr 
1.    9  we  also.,  since  the  day  we  heard  (it),  do  not 

1.  23  hope  of  the  gospel,  which  ye  have  heard 
2  Th.  3.  1  r  For  we  hear  that  there  are  some  which  w. 

1  Ti.    4.  16  both  save  thyself,  and  them  that  hear  thee 

2  Ti.    t.  13  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  of 

2.  2  And  the  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of 
4.  tj  and  (that)  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear 

Phm.        5  Hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith,  which  thou 

Heb.   2.    1  heed  to  the  things  which  we  have  heard 

?..    3  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  thatheard 

3.  7  Wherefore.  .To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  vo. 
3. 15  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 

3.  16  For  some,  when  they  had  heard,  did  pro. 

4.  2  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard 

4.  7  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 
12.  19  which  (voice)  they  that  heard  entreated 

Jas.     1.  19  let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to 

5.  11  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  .lob,  and 

2  Pe.  1.  18  this  voice  which  came  from  heaven  ws  h. 
1  Jo.  1.    r  which  we  have  heard,  which  we  haveseen 

t.    3  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  decl. 

1.  5  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  of  h. 

2.  7.  24,  24  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beg. 

2.  18  as  ye  have  heard  that  autichrist  shall  come 

3.  n  this  is  the  message  that  jre  have  heard  from 

4.  3  whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come 
4.  5  of  the  world,  and  the  world  heareth  them 
4.    6  of  God:  he  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us 

4.  6  he  that  is  not  of  God  heareth  not  us 

5.  14  that,  if  we  ask  anything,  .he  heareth  us 
5. 15  And  if  we  know  that  he  hear  us,  whatso. 

-2.  John     6  That,  as  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning 

3  John     4  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that 
Rev.   1.    3  they  that  bear  r,he  words  of  this  prophecy 

1.  10  and  heard  behind  me  a  great  v^_  ^s  of 
9.  ■/.  it,  17,  29  He  that  hath  an  car,  let  him  h. 
3.  3  [Remember  therefore  how  thou  hast,  .h.l 
3.    6.  13,  22  He  that  hath  an  ear;  let  him  hear 

3.  2c  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  aud  open  the 

4.  i  the  first  voice  which  1  heard  (was)  as  it 

5.  it  I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  round 

5.  13  and  all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying 

6.  1  I  heard,  as  it  were  the  noise  of  thunder 
6-    3>  5>  7  I  heard  the.  .beast  say,  Come  and  see 

6.  6  I  heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four  b. 

7.  4  I  heard  the  number  of  them  which  were 

8.  13  and  heard  an  angel  flying  through  the 

9.  13  I  heard  a  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the 
9.  16  horsemen,  .and  I  heard  the  number  of 

9.  20  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk 
10.    4  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto 

10.  S  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven  spake 

11.  12  they  heard  a  great  voice  from  heaven  sa. 
12. 10  And  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  heaven 

13.  9  If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let  him  hear 

14.  2,  13  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven 

14.  2  I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with 
16.  1  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple 
16.  5  I  heard  the  angel  of  the  waters  say,  Thou 
16.  7  I  heard  another  out  of  the  altar  say,  Even 
iS.  4  I  heard  another  voice  from  heaven, saying 
19.  1  I  heard  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in  h. 
19.   6  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  mul. 

21.  3  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying 

22.  8  And  I  John  saw  these  things,  and  heard 
22.  8  And  when  I  had  heard  and  seen,  I  fell  d. 
22.  17  And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come 

22.  18  I  testify  unto  every  man  that  heareth  the 

59 


8.  To  hear  thoroughly,  BiaKova)  diakoud. 

Acts  23.  35  I  will  hear  thee,  said  he,  when  thine  ac. 

9.  To  give  ear  to,  hearken  to,  etvatcova}  eisakouo. 

Matt.  6.  7  they  shall  be  heard  for  their  much  speak. 
Luke  1.  13  Fear  not,  Zacharias  :  for  thy  prayer  is  h. 
Acts  10.  31  And  said,  Cornelius,  thy  prayer  is  heard 

1  Co.  14.  21  yet  for  all  that  will  they  not  hear  me 
Heb.   5.    7  strong  crying,  .and  was  heard  in  that  he 

10.  To  give  ear,  hear,  hearken  unto,  etraKovo)  epak. 

2  Co.    6.    2  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted,  and 
11.7V)  hearken  unto,  i-7raicp6ao/j.at  epakroaomai. 

Acts  16.  25  sang  praises.,  and  the  prisoners  heard  the. 
HEAR,  to  cause  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  liear,  n'y£i;:rt  hashmauth. 

Eze.  24.  26  to  cause  (thee)  to  hear  (it)  with  (thine) 

2.  To  give  attention,  2&Q  qashab,  5. 

Psa.  10. 17  Lord,  .thou  wilt  cause  thine  ear  to  hear 

3.  To  cause  to  liear,  yes*  shamea,  5. 

Psa.  143.    8  Cause  me  to  hear  thy  loving  kindness  in 

Song  S.  13  the  companions  hearken,  .cause  me  to  h. 

Jer.   18.    2  there  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear  my  words 
23.  22  andhad  caused  mypeople  to  hear  mywords 

Eze.  36.  15  Neither  will  I  cause  (men)  to  hear  in  thee 
HEAR,  to  let  — 
To  cause  to  hear,  yjp£>  shamea,  5. 

Song  2.  14  let  me  hear  thy  voice ;  for  sweet  (is)  thy 
HEAR,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  liear,  yip^  shamea,  5. 

Deut.  4.  10  I  will  make  them  hear  my  words,  that they 
4.  36  Out  of  heaven  he  made  thee  to  hear  his  v. 

2  Ki.   7.   6  had  made,  .the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise  of 

Psa.  51.   3  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness ;  that 

HEAR  tell,  to  — 

To  liear,  yc?>  shamea. 

N'um  2i.    1  king  Arad .  .heard  tell  that  Israel  came 
HEAR  before,  to  — 
To  hear  before  or  formerly,  irpoaKovv  proakoud. 

Col.     r.    s  whereof  ye  heard  before  in  the  word  of 
HEAR,  to  neglect  to  — 
To  hear  amiss,  disregard,  wapaKovco  pa/rakouo. 

Matt  18.  17  if  he  shall  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  (it) 
18. 17  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him 
HEARD  — 
To  be.  heard,  »p2>  shamea,  2. 

Eccl.  9.  16  the  poor  man's,  .words  are  not  heard 
9.  17  The  words  of  wise  (men  are)  heard  in 
HEARD,  -which...  — 
Hearing,  the  thing  heard,  a/co^  akoe. 

1  Tli.    2. 13  received  the  word  of  God  which  ye  heard 
HEARD,  to  be  — 

1.  To  he  answered,  responded  to,  naj;  anah,  2. 
Job   19.    7  I  cry  out  of  wrong,  but  I  am  not  heard 
Prov2i.  13  he  also  shall  cry.  .but  shall  not  be  heard 

2.  To  be  heard,  yp£>  shamea,  2. 

Gen.  45.  16  fame  thereof  was  heard  in  Pharaoh's  ho. 
Exod28.  35  his  sound  shall  be  heard  when  he  goeth 
Deut.  4.  32  whether  there,  .hath  been  heard  like  it 
1  Sa.    1.  13  she  spake,  .but  her  voice  was  not  heard 
17.  31  when  the  words  were  heard  which  David 

1  Ki.   6.    7  (nor)  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house 

2  Ch.30.  27  their  voice  was  heard,  and  then-  prayer 
Ezra   3.  13  people  shouted,  .the  noise  was  heard  afar 
Neh.    6.    1  when Sanballat.. heard thatlhadbuilded 

12.  43  so  that  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard 
Esth.  2.    S  when  the  king's  commandment,  .was  he. 
Job   26.  14  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him 

37.    4  will  not  stay  them  when  his  voice  '*  hea. 
Psa.  19.    3  nor  language  (where)  their  voice  1^  -oth. 
Song  2.  12  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land 
Isa.   15.   4  their  voice  shall  be  heard  (even)  unto  J. 

60.  iS  Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy 

65.  19  weeping  shall  be  no  more  heard  in  her 
Jer.     3.  21  A  voice  was  heard  upon  the  high  places 
6.    7  violence  and  spoil  is  heard  in  her 

8.  to  The  snorting  of  his  horses  washeard  from 

9.  19  For  a  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  out  of  Z. 
31.  15  A  voice  washeard  in  Ramah,  lamentation 
33.  10  Again  there  shall  be  heard  in  this  place 

49.  21  the  noise  thereof  was  heard  in  the  Red  s. 

50.  46  and  the  cry  is  heard  among  the  nations 

51.  46  for  the  rumour  that  shall  be  heard  hi  the 
Eze.  10.   5  And  the  sound,  .was  heard  (even)  to  the 

19.   9  his  voice  should  no  more  be  heard  upon 

26.  13  sound  of  thy  harp  shall  be  no  more  heard 

Dan.  10.  12  thy  words  were  heard,  and  I  am  come  for 

Nah.   2.  13  of  thy  messengers  shall  no  more  be  heard 

HEARD,  to  cause  to  be  — 

1.  To  give,  cause  or  rouse  attention,  n^R  qasluib,  5. 
Isa.   10.  30  Lift  up  thy  voice,  .cause  it  to  be  heard 

2.  To  cause  to  liear,  VX?'?  sliamea,  5. 

Psa.  76.    8  Thou  didst  cause  judgment  to  be  heard 
Isa.  30.  30  cause  his  glorious  voice  to  be  heard,  and 

42.    2  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the 
Jer.  48.   4  little  ones  have  caused  a  ct"  j    be  heard 
49.   2  I  will  cause  an  alarm,  .tu  »e  neard  in  R. 
Eze.  27.  30  cause  their  voice  to  be  heard  against  thee 

HEARD,  to  let  be  — 

l.To  be  heard,  yog*  shamea,  2. 

Exod23-  13  neither  let  it  he  heard  out  of  thy  mouth 
Jer.    iS.  22  Let  a  cry  be  heard  from  their  houses 


2.  To  cause  to  hear,  yjpv  shamea,  5. 

Judg  18.  25  Let  not  thy  voice  be  heard  among  us,  lest 

HEARD,  to  make  to  be  — 

To  cause  to  be  heard,  yo^*  shamea,  5. 

2  Ch.  5.  13  to  make  one  sound  to  be  heard  in  praising 
Psa.  66.  8  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  heard 
Isa.  58.    4  to  make  your  voice  to  be  heard  on  high 

HEARER  — 

l.To  give  ear,  liear,  liearken,  aicovco  akoud. 

Eph.    4.  29  it  may  minister  grace  unto  the  hearers 
2  TI.    2.  14  no  profit,  0mt)  to  the  subverting  of  the  h. 

'2.A  hearer,  aKpoarrts  akroates. 

Rom.  2.  13  For  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  (are)  just 
Jas.     1.  22  aud  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your  own 
1.23  For  if  any  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and 
1.  25  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer 
HEARING  — 
l.Ear,  |1N  ozen.     . 

Deuts'i.  11  thou  shalt  read  this,  .in  their  hearing 
2  Sa.  18.  12  for  in  our  hearing  the  king  charged  thee 
Job  33.    8  Surely  thou  hast  spoken  in  mine  hearing 
Eze.    9.    5  to  the  others  he  said  in  mine  hearing.  Go 
10.  13  it  was  cried  unto  them  in  my  hearing 

2.  Hearing,  yc^p  mishma. 

Isa.   11.    3  neither  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his 

3. Attention,  -i^p.  qesheb. 

2  .Ki.     4  31  but(there  was)  neither  voice  nor  hearing 

4.  To  hear,  y?v>  shamea. 

Prov.28.    9  turneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the 
Eccl.    1.    S  satisfied,  .nor  the  ear  filled  with  hearing 
Isa.   21.    3  T  was  bowed  down  at  the  hearing  (of  it) 

33.  1.5  that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing  of 
Amos  S.  11  but  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord 

5.  Hearing,  y©;?  shema. 

Job  42.    5  I  iiave  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  cf 
^.Hearing,  the  thing  heard,  b.KO-h  akoe. 

Matti3.  14  By  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not 
Acts  23.  26  Hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  unci. 
Rom.  10.  17  faith  (cometh)  by  hearing,  and  hearing 
1  Co.  12.  17  where,  .the  hearing?  if  the  whole,  .hear. 
Gal.  3.  2,  5  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of 
Heb-  5.  11  many  things,  .seeing  ye  are  dull  of  hear. 
2Pe.    2.    8  in  seeing  and  hearing,  vexed  (Iris)  righte. 

7.  Thorough  knowledge,  Sta-y^axm  diagnosis. 
Acts  25.  21  to  be  reserved  unto  the  hearing  of  A. 

HEARING,  to  be  dull  of  — 

To  hear  heavily,  j3apecos  clkovw  bareos  akouo. 
Matt  13.  15  and  (their)  ears  are  dull  of  hearing,  and 
Acts  28.  27  and  their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing,  and 

HEARING,  place  of  — 

Place  of  hearing,  court  room,  cucpoarnpiov  akroate. 
-  Acts  25.  23  and  was  entered  into  the  place  of  hearing 

HEARKEN,  to  — 

l.To  give  ear,  [in  azan,  5.  ■ 

Nuni  23.  18  hearken  unto  me,  thou  son  of  Zippor 
Job     9.  16  believe  that  he  had  hearkened  unto  my 

33.  1  Job,  I  pray  tnee.  .hearken  to  all  my  wor. 

34.  16  hearken  to  the  voice  of  my  words 

37.  14  Hearken  unto  this,  O  Job :  stand  still,  and 

2.  To  attend,  be  attentive,  ivp,  qashab. 

Isa.     32.    3  the  ears  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken 
Z.To  give  attention,  3'jpr  qashab,  5. 

1  Sa.  15.  22  better . .  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams 

2  Ch.  20.  15  Hearken  ye,  all  Judah,  and  ye  inhabitants 

33.  10  to  his  people ;  but  they  would  not  hearken 
Neh.   9.  34  nor  hearkened  unto  thy  commandments 
Job    13.    6  and  hearken  to  the  pleadings  of  my  lips 
Psa.     5.    2  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry,  myloiig 
Prov.29. 12  If  a  ruler  hearken  to  lies,  all  his  servants 
Song  8.  13  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice 
Isa.   21.    7  he  hearkened  diligently  with  much  heed 

28.  23  Give  ye  ear.  .hearken,  and  hear  my  speech 

34.  1  and  hearken,  ye  people :  let  the  earth  hear 
42.  23  willhearkeu,  andhearforthe  time  to  come'.' 

48.  18  0  that  thou  hadst. hearkened  to  my  com. 

49.  1  hearken,  ye  people,  from  far ;  The  Lokd 
51.    4  Hearken  unto  me,  my  people;  and  give  ear 

Jer.     6.  10  and  they  cannot  hearken  :  behold,  the  w. 

6.  17  Hearken .  .But  they  said,  AVe  will  not  he. 

6.  19  they  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  words 

8.  6  I  hearkened  and  heard,  (but)  they  spake 
Dan.  o-  19  0  Lord,  hearken  and  do ;  defer  not,  for 
Hos.  5.  t  hearken,  ye  house  of  Israel ;  aDd  give  y 
Mic.  1.  2  hearken,  0  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is 
Zech.  1.    4  they  did  not  hear,  nor  hearken  unto  me 

7. 11  But  they  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled 
Mai.    3. 16  and  the  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  (it) 

i.To  hear,  liearken,  yet?  shamea. 

Gen.    3.  17  Because  thou  hast  hearkened  unto  the  v. 
16.    2  And  Abram  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  S. 
21.  12  hearken  unto  her  voice  ;  for  in  Isaac  shall 
23.  15  My  lord,  hearken  unto  me  :  the  land  (is) 
23.  16  And  Abraham  hearkened  unto  Ephron 
30.  17  God  hearkened  unto  Leah,  and  she  cone. 
30.  22  God  hearkened  to  her,  and  opened  her 
34.  17  But  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  us,  to  be 
34.  24  unto . .  his  son,  hearkened  all  that  went  out 
39.  10  he  hearkened  not  unto  her,  to  lie  by  her 
49.   2  aud  hearken  unto  Israel  your  father 

Exod.  3.  18  And  they  shall  hearken  to  thy  voice :  and 
4.  1  they  will  not  believe  me,  nor  hearken  unt  ■> 
4.    8,  9  if  they  will  not  believe . .  neither  hearken 


HEARKEN 


4:6Q 


HEART 


Exod.  6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


J5- 

1 6. 

18. 

18. 
Lev.  26. 

26. 

26. 

26. 
NU11114. 


Deut. 


Josh. 


Judg 


9  hearkened  not  unto  Moses  for  anguish  of 

12  Israel  have  not  hearkened  unto  me ;  how 
30  and  how  shall  Pharaoh  hearken  unto  me  ? 

4  But  Pharaoh  shall  not  hearken  unto  you 

13  that  he  hearkened  not  unto  them  ;  as  the 
22  neither  did  he  hearken  unto  them  ;  as  the 
15,  19  hearkened  not  unto  them  ;  as  the  Lo. 
12  hearkened  not  unto  them  ;  as  the  LORD  h. 

9  Pharaoh  shall  not  hearken  unto  you  ;  that 

26  If  thou  wilt  diligently  hearken  to  the  vo. 

20  Notwithstanding  they  hearkened  not  uuto 
19  Hearken  now  unto  my  voice,  I  will  give 

24  So  Moses  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  his 

14  But  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me,  and 

18  And  if  ye  will  not  yet  for  all  this  hearken 

21  And  if  ye.  .will  uot  hearken  unto  me  ;  I 

27  if  ye  will  not  for  all  this  hearken  unto  me 

22  and  have  not  hearkened  to  my  voice 
3  And  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  I. 

45  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  to  your  voice 
1  Now  therefore  hearken,  O  Israel,  unto  the 

12  if  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments,  aud  keep 

19  But  the  Lord  hearkened  unto  me  at 

23  ye  believed  him  not,  nor  hearkened  to 
10  Lord  hearkened  unto  me  at  that  time  also 

13  if  ye  shall  hearken  diligently  unto  my 

3  Thou  shalt  not  hearken  unto  the  words  of 

8  Thou  shalt  not . .  hearken  unto  him ;  neith. 

18  shalt  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

5  Only  if  thou  carefully  hearken  unto  the 

12  and  will  not  hearken  unto  the  priest  that 

14  these  nations,  .hearkened  unto  observers 

15  a  Prophet,  .unto  him  ye  shall  hearken 

19  whosoever  will  not  hearken  unto  my  words 
18  chastened  him,  will  not  hearken  unto  th. 

5  the  Lord  thy  God  would  not  hearken  unto 

14  I  have  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
17  keep  his  statutes . .  and  to  hearken  unto  his 

9  Take  heed,  and  hearken, 0  Israel ;  this  day 

1  if  thou  shalt  hearken  diligently  unto 

2  if  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the 

13  if  that  thou  hearken  unto  the  cominandm. 

15  if  thou  wilt  not  hearken  unto  the  voice  of 
45  because  thou  heai-kenedst  not  unto  the 
10  If  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the 

9  the  children  of  Israel  hearkened  unto  him 
17  According  as  we  hearkened  unto  Moses 

17  so  will  we  hearken  unto  thee  :  only  the 

18  and  will  not  hearken  unto  thy  words  in 

14  Lord  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  a  man 
10  But  I  would  not  hearken  unto  Balaam 
17  they  would  not  hearken  unto  their  judges 

20  and  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  voice 

4  know  whether  they  would  hearken  unto 
7  Hearken  unto  me . .  that  God  may  hearken 

17  but  the  king  of  Edom  would  not  hearken 

28  Howbeit  the  king,  .hearkened  not  unto 
9  God  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Mauoah 

25  But  the  men  would  not  hearken  to  him 

13  But.  .Benjamin  would  not  hearken  to  the 
25  they  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice  of 

7  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  people  in 
9  Now  therefore  hearken  unto  their  voice 

22  Hearken  unto  their  voice,  and  make  them 
1 1  have  hearkened  unto  your  voice  in  all 
1  hearken  thou  unto  the  voice  of  the  words 

6  Saul  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  Jonat. 
35  I  have  hearkened  to  thy  voice,  and  have 

21  and  have  hearkened  unto  thy  words  wh. 

22  hearken  thou  also  unto  the  voice  of  thiue 

23  and  he  hearkened  unto  their  voice.  So  he 

24  who  will  hearken  unto  you  in  this  matter? 

18  and  he  would  not  hearken  unto  our  voice 

14  he  would  not  hearken  unto  her  voice 

16  But  he  would  uot  hearken  unto  her 

23  to  hearken  unto  the  cry  and  to  the  prayer 

29  that  thou  mayest  hearken  unto  the  prayer 

30  hearken  thou  to  the  supplication  of  thy 
52  to  hearken  unto  them  in  all  that  they  c. 
38  if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto  all  that  I  com. 

15  Wherefore  the  king  hearkened  not  unto 
id  when  all  Israel  saw  that  the  king  heark. 

24  They  hearkened  therefore  to  the  word  of 
20  So  Ben-hadad  hearkened  unto  king  Asa 

8  said.  .Hearken  not  (unto  him),  nor  cons. 

25  he  hearkened  unto  their  voice,  and  did 
28  said.  Hearken,  ( »  people,  every  one  of  you 

6  and  (if)  ye  will  hearken  unto  my  voice 
4  and  the  Lord  hearkened  untohim  ;  for  he 

9  the  king  of  Assyria  hearkened  unto  him 
40  Howbeit  they  did  not  hearken,  but  they 

31  Hearken  not  to  Hezekiah  :  for  thus  saith 

32  and  hearken  not  unto  Hezekiah,  when  he 
13  Hezekiah  hearkened  unto  them,  and  sho. 

9  But  they  hearkened  not:  and  Manasseh 
13  because  our  fathers  have  not  hearkened 

19  to  hearken  unto  the  cry  and  the  prayer 

20  to  hearken  unto  the  prayer  which  thy  se. 
6.  21  Hearken  therefore  unto  the  supplications 

10.  15  So  the  king  hearkened  not  unto  the  people 
10. 16  that  the  king  would  not  hearken  unto 
16.    4  And  Ben-hadad  hearkened  unto  king  Asa 
18.  27  And  he  said,  Hearken,  all  ye  people 
24.  17  princes,  .theu  the  king  hearkened  unto 
25. 16  and  hast  not  hearkened  unto  my  counsel 
30.  20  And  the  Lord  hearkened  to  Hezekiah 
35.  22  and  hearkened  not  unto  the  words  of  N. 
Neh.   9.  16,  29  hearkened  not  to  thy  commandments 
13.  27  Shall  we  then  hearken  unto  you  to  do  all 
Esth.  3.    4  and  he  hearkened  not  unto  them,  that 
J«»i»     ,.-.  10  Therefore  I  said,  Hearken  to  me  ;  I  also 
33.  31  Mark  well,  O  Job;  hearken  unto  me:  hold 


[Sa. 


aSa.  1 


[Ki. 


»  Ch. 


Job 


Psa. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


=5- 
25. 
=5- 
26. 
26. 
26. 


33.  33  If  not,  hearken  unto  me  :  hold  thy  peace 

34.  10  Therefore  hearken  unto  me,  ye  men  of 
34.  34  and  let  a  wise  man  hearken  unto  me 
34.  11  Come,  ye  children,  hearken  unto  me;  I  will 

45.  10  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider,  and 
58.    5  Which  will  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of 
81.   8  0  Israel,  if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto  me 
Si.  11  But  my  people  would  not  hearken  to  my 
81.  13  Oh  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto 

103.  20  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word 
106.  25  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
Prov.  1.  33  whoso  hearkeneth  unto  me  shall  dwell 

7.  24  Hearken  unto  me  now  therefore,  0  ye 

8.  32  Now  therefore  hearken  unto  me,  Oye  ch. 
12.  15  he  that  hearkeneth  unto  counsel  (is)  wise 
23.  22  Hearken  unto  thy  father  that  begat  thee 
36.  16  Hearken  not  to  Hezekiah ;  for  thus  saith 

46.  3  Hearken  unto  me,  O  house  of  Jacob,  and 
46.  12  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  stout  hearted,  that 
48.  12  Hearken  unto  me,  O  Jacob  and  Israel,  my 
51.  1  Hearken  to  me,  ye  that  follow  after  right. 
51.  7  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  that  know  righteo. 
55.    2  hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and  eat  ye 

7.  24  But  they  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined 
7.  26  Yet  they  hearkened  not  unto  me,  nor  inc. 
7.  27  but  they  will  not  hearken  to  thee  :  thou 
11.  11  Behold.  .1  will  not  hearken  unto  them 

16.  12  that  they  may  not  hearken  unto  me 

17.  24  if  ye  diligently  hearken  unto  me,  saith 

17.  27  But  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me  to 

18.  19  hearken  to  the  voice  of  them  that  cont. 
23.  16  Hearken  not  unto  the  words  of  the  prop. 

3  I  have  spoken,  .but  ye  have  not  hearke. 

4  but  ye  have  not  hearkened,  nor  inclined 
7  Yet  ye  have  not  hearkened  unto  me,  saith 

3  If  so  be  they  will  hearken,  and  turn  every 

4  If  ye  will  not  hearken  to  me,  to  walk  in 

5  To  hearken  to  the  words  of  my  servants 

26.  5  and  sending  (them),  but  ye  have  not  he. 

27.  9  Therefore  hearken  not  ye  to  your  proph. 
27.  14  hearken  not  unto  the  words  of  the  prop. 
27.  16  Hearken  not  to  the  words  of  your  prop. 
27.  17  Hearken  not  unto  them  ;  serve  the  king 
29.    8  neither  hearken  to  your  dreams  which  ye 
29.  12  pray  unto  me,  and  I  will  hearken  unto 
29.  19  they  have  not  hearkened  to  my  words 
32.  33  have  not  hearkened  to  receive  instruction 
34,  14  but  your  fathers  hearkened  not  unto  me 

34.  17  Ye  have  not  hearkened  unto  me,  in 

35.  13  instruction  to  hearken  to  my  words  ?  saith 

35. 14  have  spoken,  .but  ye  hearkened  not  unto 

35.  15  inclined  your  ear,  nor  hearkened  unto  me 
35. 16  this  people  hath  not  hearkened  unto  me 

36.  31  I  have  pronounced,  .but  they  hearkened 

37.  2  did  hearken  unto  the  words  of  the  Lord 
37.  14  he  hearkened  not  to  him :  so  Irijah  took 

38. 15  counsel,  wilt  thou  not  hearken  unto  me? 
44.  16  we  will  not  hearken  unto  thee 

44.  5  they  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their 
3.    6  they  would  have  hearkened  unto  thee 
3.    7  Israel  will  not  hearken  unto  thee  ;  for 

3.  7  they  will  not  hearken  unto  me  :  for  all 
>o.    8  rebelled . .  and  would  not  hearken  unto  me 
20.  39  (also),  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me:  but 

9.  6  hearkened  unto  thy  servants  the  prophets 
9. 17  they  did  not  hearken  unto  him  :  and  they 
1.   4  they  did  not  hear,  nor  hearken  unto  me 

5. To  give  ear,  hearken,  hear,  anovw  akouo. 

Mark  4.    3  Hearken ;  Behold,  there  went  out  a  sower 

7.  14  Hearken  unto  me  every  one  (of  you),  and 

Acts    4.  19  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than  unto  God 

7.  2  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hearken  ;  The 
15.  13  saying,  Men  (and)  brethren,  hearken  unto 

Jas.     2.    5  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren,  Hath  not 

6.  To  hearken  a  little,  viraKovw  hupakouo. 

Acts  12.  13  a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named  Rhoda 

HEARKEN  to  or  unto,  to  — 
l.To  give  ear,  ]ix  azan,  5. 

Gen.   4.  23  ye  wives  of  Lamech,  hearken  unto  my  sp. 
2.  To  obey  authority,  wttdapxcw pe££h>a>rcheo. 

Acts  27.  21  ye  should  have  hearkened  unto  me,  and 
3. To  receive  in  the  ear,  give  ear  to,  evwri^ojxai  enot. 

Acts    2.  14  known  unto  you,  and  hearken  to  my  wo. 
HEARKENING  — 
To  hear,  »p^  shamea. 

Psa.  103.  20  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word 
HEART  — 
1.  The  heart,  Sa  bat. 

Han.   6. 14  set  (his)  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him 

%The  heart,  ih  leb. 

Gen.    6.    5  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart 

6.  6  repented.,  aud  it  grieved  him  at  his  heart 

8.  21  the  Lord  said  in  his  heart,  I  will  not 

8.  21  imagination  of  man's  heart  (is)  evil  from 

17.  17  said  in  his  heart.  Shall  (a  child)  lie  born 

18.  5  and  comfort  ye  your  hearts ;  after  that  ye 
24. 45  before  I  had  done  speaking  in  mine  heart 
27.  41  and  Esau  said  in  his  heart,  The  days  of 
42.  28  their  heart  failed  (them),  and  they  were 

45.  26  Jacob's  heart  fainted,  for  he  believed  them 
Exod.  4.  14  seeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in  his  heart 

4.  21  I  will  harden  his  heart,  that  lie  shall  not 

7.  3  will  harden  Pharaoh 'sheart,  and  multiply 
7.  13  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  that  lie  heark. 
7.  14  Pharaoh's  heart  (is)  hardened,  he  refuseth 
7.  22  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened, neither  did 
7.  23  neither  did  he  set  his  heart  to  this  also 


Eze. 


Dan. 
Hos. 
Zech. 


10, 


15  he  hardened  his  heart,  and  hearkened  not 

19  and  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened,  and  he 
32  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  at  this  time 

7  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  hardened,  and  he 

12  the  Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  Phaiaoh 

14  send  all  my  plagues  upon  thine  heart 

34  hardened  his  heart,  he  and  his  servants 

35  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  hardened, neither 

1  I  have  hardened  his  heart,  and  the  heart 

20  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  so  that 
27  the  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  and 
10  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  so  that 

4  I  will  harden  Pharaoh's  heart,  that  he 

8  the  Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh 

17  will  harden  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians 

8  were  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  sea 

2  that  giveth  it  willingly  with  his  heart 

29  breastplate  of  judgment  upon  his  heart 

30  they  shall  be  upon  Aaron's  heart  when  he 

30  judgment  of  the  children .  .upon  his  heart 

6  the  hearts  of  all  that  are  wise  hearted 

5  whosoever  (is)  of  a  willing  heart,  let  him 

21  every  one  whose  heart  stirred  him  up 
26  the  women  whose  heart  stirred  them  up 
29  whose  heart  made  them  willing  to  bring 

34  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  teach 

35  Them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  of  heart 
2  in  whose  heart  the  Lord  had  put  wisdom 

2  every  one  whose  heart  stirred  him  up  to 

7  wdierefore  discournge  ye  the  heart  of  the 

9  discouraged  the  heart  of  the  children 

65  shall  give  thee,  .there  a  trembling  heart 

4  hath  not  given  you  an  heart  to  perceive 

19  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart 

20  was  of  the  Lord  to  harden  their  hearts 

8  brethren,  .made  the  heart  of  the  people 

9  heart  (is)  toward  the  governors  of  Israel 

15  Reuben  (there  were)  great  thoughts  of  h. 

16  (there  were)  great  searchings  of  heart 

3  their  hearts  inclined  to  follow  Abimelech. 

15  when  thine  heart  (is)  not  with  me?  thou 

17  told  her  all  his  heart,  and  said  unto  her 

18  saw  that  he  had  told  her  all  his  heart 

18  Come . .  for  he  hath  showed  me  all  his  he. 

25  when  their  hearts  were  merry,  that  they 

20  the  priest's  heart  was  glad  ;  and  he  took 

5  Comfort  thine  heart  with  a  morsel  of  bread 

6  Be  content,  .and  let  thine  heart  be  merry 

22  as  they  were  making  their  hearts  merry 

7  his  heart  was  merry,  he  went  to  lie  down 
13  Now  Hannah,  she  spake  in  her  heart 

1  My  heart  rejoiceth  in  the  LORD  ;  mine  h. 

13  for  his  heart  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God 
6  as  the  Egyptians,  .hardened  their  hearts  ? 
9  God  gave  him  another  heart :  and  all  those 

26  a  baud  of  men,  whose  hearts  God  had  tou. 

32  Let  no  man's  heart  fail  because  of  him 
5  David's  heart  smote  him,  because  he  had 

31  nor  offence  of  heart  unto  my  lord,  either 

36  and  Nabal's  heart  (was)  merry  within  him 

37  his  heart  died  within  him,  and  he  became 
1  And  David  said  in  his  heart,  I  shall  now 

5  he  was  afraid,  and  his  heart  greatly  trem. 

16  and  she  despised  him  in  her  heart 

21  according  to  thine  own  heart,  hast  thou 

27  hath  thy  servant  found  in  his  heart  to  pr. 

28  Mark  ye  now  when  Amnon's  heart  is  mer. 

33  let  not  my  lord,  .take  the  thing  to.  .heart 
1  that  the  king's  heart  (was)  toward  Absa. 

6  so  Absalom  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men 

13  The  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel  are  after  A. 
10  whose  heart  (is)as  the  heartof  alion,  sha. 

14  thrust  them  through  the  heart  of  Absalom 

19  that  the  king  should  take  it  to  his  heart 

10  And  David's  heart  smote  him  after  that 

9  Give,  .thy  servant  an  understanding  hea. 
1 2  lo,  I  have  given  thee  a  wise . .  heart ;  so  th. 

29  God  gave  Solomon,  .largeness  of  heart 

23  that  walk  before  thee  with  all  their  hea. 

66  went  unto  their  tentsjoyfnlandgladof  h. 
3  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually 

24  his  wisdom,  which  God  hath  put  in  his  h. 

3  and  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart 

26  Jeroboam  said  in  his  heart,  Now  shall 

27  then  shall  the  heartof  this peopleturnag. 
33  month,  .he  had  devised  of  his  own  heart 
37  thou  hast  turned  their  heart  back  again 

7  Arise,  .eat  bread,  and  let  thine  heart  be  m. 
.  26  he  said  unto  him,  Went  not  mine  heart 

1 1  Therefore  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Syria 
.  24  and  the  arrow  went  out  at  his  heart,  and 

4  money  that  cometh  into  any  man's  heart 

10  and  thine  heart  hath  lifted  thee  up 
3  with  all  (their)  heart  and  all  (their)  soul,  to 

33  (they  were)  not  of  double  heart 
12.  38  the  rest  also  of  Israel  (were)  of  one  heart 
15.  29  and  she  despised  him  in  her  heart 
16. 10  let  the  heart  of  them  rejoice  that  seek 
17.  19  according  to  thine  own  heart,  hast  thou 

28.  9  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  with 

29.  9  because  with  perfect  heart  they  ottered 

>  Ch.  6.  u  that  walk  before  thee  with  all  their  hea. 

6.  38  return  to  thee  with  all  their  heart  and 

7.  10  glad  and  merry  in  heart  for  the  goodness 
7.  11  all  that  came  into  Solomon's  heart  to  make 
7.  16  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually 
9.  23  his  wisdom,  that  God  hail  put  in  his  hea. 

12.  14  because  he  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek 
17.    6  his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  of  the 
25.  19  and  thine  heart  lifteth  thee  up  to  boast 
26. 16  his  heart  was  lifted  up  to  (his)  destruction 
29.  31  and  as  many  as  were  of  a  free  heart,  bur. 


14. 

14. 

14- 
15- 
25- 
28. 
28. 
28. 
3i- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
Num32. 

32- 
Deut  28. 

29, 

29. 
Josh  11. 

14. 
Judg.  5. 

5- 
5- 
9- 

16. 

16. 

16. 

16. 

16 

18. 

19. 

19. 

19, 
Ruth  3. 
iSa.    1. 


17- 
24. 

25- 
25- 

25- 

27. 

28. 

2Sa.    6. 

7- 
7- 
13- 
13- 
14. 
15- 
*5- 
17- 
18. 
19. 
24. 
x  Ki.  3. 
3- 


2  Ki.  5. 
6 
9- 
12, 

14 

23 

1  Ch.12. 


HEART 


4U7 


HEART 


2  Ch.30. 
32. 

Ezra  6. 

7- 


Esth. 


Job 


Psa. 


26. 
27. 

27- 
27. 
28. 
aS. 
32- 
33- 

33- 
34- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
39- 
40. 
40. 
41. 
44. 
44. 
45- 
45- 
49. 
51- 
5i. 
53- 
55- 
55- 
57- 
58. 
61. 
62. 
64. 
64- 
66. 
69. 
74- 
78- 
78. 
81. 
84. 
94- 
97- 

T02. 

105. 

105. 

T07. 

io3. 


119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119 


12  was  to  give  them  one  heart  to  do  the  com. 

25  for  his  heart  was  lift-  "  ap  :  therefore 

26  humbled  liiniself  lof  the  pride  of  his  he. 
22  turned  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

27  put  (such  a  thing)  as  this  in  the  king's  h. 
.  2  this  (is)  nothing  (else)  but  sorrow  of  heart 
.  12  what  my  God  hath  put  iu  my  heart  to  do 

S  thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart 

5  my  God  put  into  mine  heart  to  gather 

10  when  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with 
9  Then  went  Hainan  forth,  .with  a  glad  h. 

6  Now  Hamau  thought  in  his  heart,  To  wh. 

5  that  durst  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so  ? 
17  thou  shouldest  set  thine  heart  upon  hi  in  ? 

10  and  utter  words  out  of  their  heart  ? 

13  If  thou  prepare  thine  heart,  and  stretch 
24  He  taketh  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of 
i2  'Why  doth  thine  heart  carry  thee  away? 

4  thou  hast  hid  their  heart  from  understa. 
i5  For  God  maketh  ray  heart  soft,  and  the  A. 
13  I  caused  the  widows  heart  to  sing  for  joy 

,    7  and  mine  heart  walked  after  mine  eyes 
9  If  mine  heart  have  been  deceived  by  a 

27  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  enticed,  or 
3  My  words  (shall  be  of),  .my  heart ;  and 

14.  If  he  set  his  heart  upon  nian.(if)  he  gather 

13  But  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heap  up  wrath 
1  At  this  also  my  heart  trembleth,  and  is 

24  respecteth  not  any  (that  are)  wise  of  heart 

24  His  heart  is  as  tirm  as  a  stone ;  yea,  as  h. 

7  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart,  more 
jo  of  God,  which  saveth  the  upright  in  heart 

1  I  will  praise  (thee) . .  with  my  whole  heart 

6  He  hath  said  in  his  heart,  I  shall  not  be 

11  He  hath  said  in  bis  heart,  God  hath  for. 

13  he-  hath  said  in  his  heart,  Thou  wilt  not 

17  thou  wilt  prepare  their  heart,  thou  wilt 

2  they  may.  .shoot  at  the  upright  in  heart 

2  (and)  with  a  double  heart,  do  they  speak 

5  my  heart  shall  rejoice  in  thy  salvation 

I  The  fool  Hath  said  in  his  heart,  (There  .  s) 
9  Therefore  my  heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory 

3  Thou  hast  proved  mine  heart ;  thou  hast 

8  The  statutes,  .rejoicing  the  heart:  theco. 

14  Let.  .the meditation ofmy heart.be accept. 
2  Thou  hast  given  him  his  heart's  desire 

14  my  heart  is  like  wax ;  it  is  melted  in  the 

2  O  Lord,  .try  my  reins  and  ray  heart 

3  my  heart  shall  not  fear ;  though  war  sho. 
8  my  heart  said  unto  thee,  Thy  face.  Lord 

14  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart :  wait 

7  my  heart  trusted  in  him,  and  I  am  helped 

7  therefore  my  heart  greatly  rejoiceth ;  and 

II  shout,  .all  (ye  that  are)  upright  in  heart 

11  the  thoughts  jf  his  heart  to  all  generati. 

15  He  fashioneth  their  hearts  alike  ;  he  con, 
21  For  our  heart  shall  rejoice  in  him;  becau. 
tS  nigh  unto  thera  that  are  of  a  broken  hea. 

25  Let  them  not  say  in  their  hearts,  Ah  !  so 
1  the  wickeefsaith  within  my  heart  (that  th.) 

10  thy  righteousness  to  the  upright  in  heart 

4  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart 
15  sword  shall  enter  into  their  own  heart 

31  The  law  of  his  God  (is)  in  his  heart;  none 

8  by  reason  of  the  disqtiietness  of  my  heart 
10  My  heart  panteth,  my  strength  faileth  me 

3  My  heart  was  hot  within  me ;  while  I  was 
10  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart ;  I 

12  they  are  more,  .therefore  tny  heart  faileth 

6  his  heart gathereth  iniquity  to  itself  ;(wh.) 

18  Ourheart  is  not  turned  back,  neitherhave 
21  for  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart 

1  My  heart  is  inditing  a  good  matter :  I 

5  Thine  arrows  (are)  sharp  in  the  heart  of 

3  and  the  meditation  of  my  heart  (shall  be) 
10  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God ;  and 
17a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou 

1  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  (There  is) 

4  My  heart  is  sore  pained  within  me  ;  and 

21  but  war  (was)  in  his  heart:  hiswordswere 

7  My  heart  is  fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fix. 

2  Yea,  in  heart  ye  work  wickedness  ;  ye  w. 
2  when  my  heart  is  overwhelmed  :  lead  me 

10  if  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  (upon) 

6  both  the  inward  (thought) . .  and  the  heart 

10  and  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  glory 
iS  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord 
20  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart,  and  I  am 

8  They  said  in  then-  hearts,  Let  us  destroy 
8  a  generation  (that)  set  not  their  heart  ar. 

37  For  their  heart  was  not  light  with  him 
12  gave  them  up  unto  their  own  hearts'  lust 

2  my  heart  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the 
15  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  follow  it 

11  and  gladness  forthe  upright  in  heart 

4  My  heart  is  smitten,  and  withered  like 

3  let  the  heart  of  them  rejoice  that  seek 
25  He  turned  their  heart  to  hate  Iris  people 

12  he  brought  down  their  heart  with  labour 

1  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed  ;  I  will  sing 

22  and  my  heart  is  wounded  within  me 

7  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord 

8  His  heart  (is)  established,  he  shall  not  be 

2  (and  that)  seek  him  with  the  whole  heart 

10  With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee 

11  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  that  I 

32  run.  .when  thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart 
34  I  shall  observe  it  with  (my)  whole  heart 
36  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies 
5S  I  entreated,  .with  (ray)  whole  heart :  be 

69  will  keep  thy  precepts  with  (my)  whole  h. 

70  Their heartisasfatas grease ;  (but)Idelig. 


Psa.  1 19. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 

138. 
140. 
141. 
143- 
147. 
Prov.  2. 

3- 
3- 


23- 

23. 

23- 
23- 
23. 
24. 
24. 
25- 

2-. 
26. 
26. 


Eccl. 


80  Let  my  heart  be  sound  in  thy  statutes 
in  for  they  (are)  the  rejoicing  of  my  heart 
112  I  have  inclined  mine  heart  to  perform 
145  I  cried  with  (ray)  whole  heart ;  hear  me 
161  my  heart  standeth  in  awe  of  thy  word 
1  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine 

1  I  will  praise  thee  with  my  whole  heart 

2  Which  imagine  mischiefs  in  (their)  heart 
4  Incline  not  my  heart  to  (any)  evil  thing 

4  Therefore . .  my  heart  within  me  is  desola. 

3  healeth  the  broken  hi  heart,  and  bindeth 

2  (and)  apply  thine  heart  to  understanding 
10  When  wisdom  entereth  into  thine  heart 

1  let  thine  heart  keep  my  commandments 

3  write  thera  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart 

5  Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart 

4  Let  thine  heart  retain  my  words  :  keep  ray 
23  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence  ;  for 

12  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  de. 
14  Frowardness  (is)  in  his  heart,  he  deviseth 

18  An  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  imaginati. 
21  Bind  them  continually  upon  thine  heart 

3  write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart 

10  there  met  him  a  woman,  .subtil  of  heart 
25  Let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  ways 

5  ye  fools,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  heart 
8  The  wise  in  heart  will  receive  command. 

20  the  heart  of  the  wicked  (is)  little  worth 
20  They  that  are  of  a  froward  heart  (are)  ab. 

29  fool  (shaU  be)  servant  to  the  wise  of  heart 

8  but  he  that  is  of  a  perverse  heart  shall  be 

20  Deceit  (is)  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imag. 
23  the  heart  of  fools  proclaimeth  foolishness 

25  Heaviness  in  the  heart  of  man  maketh 

12  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick  :but 
to  The  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness;  and 

13  Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful 

14  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled  with 

30  A  sound  heart  (is)  the  life  of  the  flesh  :  but 
33  Wisdom  resteth  in  the  heart  of  him  that 

7  but  the  heart  of  the  foolish  (doeth)  not  so 
13  A  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  count e. 

13  but  by  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is 

14  The  heart  of  hiin.  .seeketh  knowledge  :but 

15  he  that  is  of  a  merry  heart  (hath)  a  con. 
28  heart  of  the  righteous  studieth  to  answer 
30  The  light  of  the  eyes  rejoiceth  the  heart 

1  The  preparations  of  the  heart  in  man,  and 
5  Every  one  (that  is)  proud  in  heart  (is)  an 

9  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way  :  but  the 

21  The  wise  in  heart  shall  be  called  prudent 
23  The  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  his  mouth 

16  get  wisdom,  seeing  (he  hath)  no  heart  (to 

20  He  that  hath  a  froward  heart  findeth  no 

22  A  merry  heart  doeth  good  (like)  a  medic. 

2  but  that  his  heart  may  discover  itself 
12  Before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is 

1 5  The  heart  of  the  prudent  get  teth  kno wled . 

3  and  his  heart  fretteth  against  the  Lord 

21  (There  are)  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart 
5  Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  (is  like)  deep 
9  I  have  made  my  heart  clean,  I  am  pure 

1  The  king's  heart  (is)  in  the  hand  of  the 

4  A.n  high  look,  and  a  proud  heart,  (and) 

11  He  that  loveth  pureness  of  heart,  (for/ 
15  Foolishness  (is)  bound  in  the  heart  of  a 

17  apply  thine  heart  nnto  my  knowledge 
7  drink,  saith  he . .  but  his  heart  (is)  not 

12  Apply  thine  heart  unto  instructiou,  and 

15  My  son,  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  my  heart 
17  Let  not  thine  heart  envy  sinners  :  but 

ig  be  wise,  and  guide  thine  heart  in  the  way 

26  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart,  and  let  thine 
33  thine  heart  shall  utter  perverse  things 

2  For  their  heart  studieth  destruction,  and 
17  let  not  thine  heart  be  glad  when  he  stum. 

3  and  the  heart  of  kings  (is)  unsearchable 
20  he  that  singeth  songs  to  an  heavy  heart 

23  Burning  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  (are  like 

25  (there  are)  seven  abominations  in  his  he. 
q  Ointment  and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart 

11  My  sou,  be  wise,  and  make  my  heart  glad 

19  As  in  water,  .so  the  heart  of  man  to  man 

I  x  he  that  hardeneth  his  heart  shall  fall  into 

26  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool 

I I  heart  of  her  husband  doth  safely  trust  in 

13  I  gave  my  heart  to  seek  and  search  out 

16  I  communed  with  mine  own  heart,  say. 

16  my  heart  had  great  experience  of  wisdom 

1 7  I  gave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom,  and  to 

1  I  said  in  mine  heart,  Go  to  now,  I  will 

3  I  sought  in  mine  heart  to  give  myself  unto 
3  yet  acquainting  mine  heart  with  wisdom 

10  I  withheld  not  my  heart  from  any  joy 
jo  for  my  heart  rejoiced  in  all  my  labour 
15  Then  said  I  iu  my  heart,  As  it  happeneth 
15  Then  I  saidin  my  heart,  that  thisalso(is) 

20  I  went  about  to  cause  my  heart  to  despair 

22  of  the  vexation  of  his  heart,  wherein  he 
2^  his  heart  taketh  not  rest  in  the  night 

11  also  he  hath  set  the  world  in  their  heart 

17  I  said  in  mine  heart,  God  shall  judge  the 

1 8  I  said  in  mine  heart  concerning  the  estate 

2  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  (any 
20  God  answereth  (him)  in  the  joy  of  his  h. 

2  aud  the  living  will  lay  (it)  to  his  heart 

3  for  by  the  sadness.,  the  heart  is  made  bet. 

4  heart  of  the  wise  (is)  in  the  house  of  mo. 
4  but  the  heart  of  fools  (is)  in  the  house  of 
7  man  mad ;  and  a  gift  destroyeth  the  heart 

22  oftentimes  also  thine  own  heart  knoweth 
25  applied  mine  heart  to  know,  and  to  search 


Song  3, 
5- 


29, 
32- 
33- 
35- 
38- 
42. 

44- 
44. 
47- 
47- 
51- 
57- 
57- 
S7- 
57- 
59- 
6* 
63- 
65. 
6S- 
66. 
Jer.  3. 
3- 
3- 


3- 

5- 

Eze.    6." 


26  the  woman  whose  heart  (is)snares  and  nets 

5  a  wise  man's  heart  discerneth  both  time 
9  and  applied  my  heart  unto  every  work 

11  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is 

16  I  applied  mine  heart  to  know  wisdom,  and 

1  For  all  this  I  considered  hi  mine  heart,  ev. 

3  also  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  lull  of 
7  and  drink  thy  wine  with  a  merry  heart 

2  A  wise  man's  heart,  .but  a  fool's  heart 

9  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  the  days  of  thy 
9  walk  in  the  ways  of  thine  heart,  and  in  the 

10  Therefore  remove  sorrow  from  thy  heart 

11  in  the  day  of  the  gladness  of  his  heart 

2  I  sleep,  but  my  heart  waketh  :  (it  is)  the 

6  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart,  as  a 
10  Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  aud 

5  heart  shall  cry  out  for  Moab ;  his  fugitive 
13  have  removed  their  heart  far  from  me 

6  and  his  heart  will  work  iniquity,  to  prac. 
iS  Thine  heart  shall  meditate  terror.  Where 

4  Say  to  them  (that  are)  of  a  fearful  heart 

3  how  I  have  walked . .  with  a  perfect  heart 

25  it  burned  him,  yet  he  laid  (it)  not  to  heart 

19  And  none  considereth  in  his  heait.neither 

20  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside 

7  didst  not  lay  these  (things)  to  thy  heart 

10  thou  hast  said  in  thine  heart,  I  (am),  and 

7  the  people  in  whose  heart  (is)  my  law 
1  perisheth,  and  no  man  layeth  (it)  to  heart 

11  and  hast  not.  .laid  (it)  to  thy  heart  i  have 
15  and  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite 

17  went  onfrowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart 

13  utteringfrom  the  heart  words  of  falsehood 

4  For  the  day  of  vengeance  (is)  in  mine  hea. 
17  Lord,  why  hast  thou. .  hardened  cm  heart 

14  my  servants  shall  sing  for  joy  of  heart, but 
14  ye  shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  heart,  and  shall 

14  when  ye  see(this),  your  heart  shall  rejoice- 

10  not  turned  unto  me  with  her  whole  heart 

15  give  your  pastors  according  to  mine  heart 
17  after  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heai  t 

9  the  heart  of  the  king .  .and  the  heart  of  the 
14  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness,  that 
iS  because  it  reacheth  unto  thine  heart 

19  I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart ;  my  heart 

23  this  people  hath  a  revolting,  .heart ;  they 

24  in  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart,  and 
31  (them)  not,  neither  came  it  into  my  heart 
iS  I  would  comfort  myself,  .my  heart  (is)  fai. 
14  after  the  imagination  of  their  own  heart 

26  the  house . .  (are)  uncircumcised  in  the  he. 

8  in  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart 

20  O  Lord  . .  that  triest  the  reins  and  the  heat 
3  seen  me,  and  tried  mine  heart  toward  thee 

1 1  desolate,  because  no  man  layeth  (it)  to  he. 
10  walk  in  the  imagination  of  their  heart,  and 

14  they  prophesy,  .the deceit  of  their  heart 

12  walk.,  after  the  imagination  of  his  evil  he. 

1  (it  is)  graven  upon  the  table  of  their  heart 

5  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lorb- 

9  The  heart  (is)  deceitful  above  all  (things) 
10  1  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  (I)  try  the  re. 
12  will,  .do  the  imagination  of  his  evil  heart 

9  was  in  mine  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut 
1 2  seest.the  reins  and  the  heart,  let  me  see  thy 
1 7  But  thine  eyes  and  thine  heart  (are)  not 

9  Mine  heart  within  me  is  broken  because  of 

16  they  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  heart,(and> 

17  after  the  imagination  of  his  own  heart,  No 

20  have  performed  the  thoughts  of  his  heart 
zb  Ho«  long  shall(this) be  in  the  heart  of  the 
26  prophets  of  the  deceit  of  their  own  heart 

7  I  willgive  themanheart  to  know  me,  that 
7  return  unto  me  with  their  whole  heart 

21  for  who  (is)  this  that  engaged  his  heart  to 
24  have  performed  the  intents  of  his  heart 

21  set  thine  heart  toward  the  highway,  (even) 
33  write  it  in  their  hearts ;  and  will  be  their 
39  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  one  way 
41  I  will  plant  them . .  with  my  whole  heart 
29  his  pride,  and  the  haughtiness  of  his  heart 
36  mine  heart  shall  sound  for  Moab  like  pipes 
36  and  mine  heart  shall  sound  like  pipes  for 
41  mighty  men's  hearts,  .as  the  heart  of  aw. 

16  pride  of  thine  heart,  Othou  that  dwellest 

22  heart  of  the  mighty . .  be  as  the  heart  of  a 

20  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me ;  for  I  h- 
22  my  sighs  (are)  many,  and  my  heart  (is)  f, 

18  Their  heart  cried  unto  the  Lord,  O  wall  of 

19  pour  out  thine  heart  like  water  before  the 
65  Give  thera  sorrow  of  heart,  thy  curse  unto 

15  The  joy  of  our  heart  is  ceased ;  our  dance 

17  For  this  our  heart  is  faint ;  for  these  (th.), 
9  I  am  broken  wjth  then  whoiish  heart 

19  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  I  will  put 
19  take  the  stony  heart,  .give  them  an  heart 

21  whose  heart  walkethaftertheheart  of  their 

2  them  that  prophesy  out  of  their  own  heart 
17  which  prophesy  out  of  their  own  heart 

22  ye  have  made  the  heart  of  the  righteous 

3  have  set  up  then-  idols  in  their  heart,  and 
4,  7  setteth  up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  and 

5  I  may  take . .  Israel  in  their  own  heart 
31  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit 

16  polluted . .  for  their  heart  went  after  their 
7  every  heart  shall  melt,  and  all  hands  shall 

15  that  (their)  heart  may  faint,  and  (their) 
14  Can  thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine 
2  Because  thine  heart  (is)  lifted  up, and  thour 
2  though  thou  set  thine  heart  as  the  heart. 

6  Because  thou  hast  set.. as  the  heart  of  G_ 

17  Thine  heart  was  lifted  up  because  of  thy; 


HEART 


46S 


HEART 


J3- 
*3- 


Eze.  32.    9  I  will  also  vex  the  hearts  of  many  people 
33.  31  their  heart  goeth  after  their  covetousness 
36.  26  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a 
36.  26  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your 

36.  26  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh 
40.    4  set  thine  heart  upon  all  that  I  shall  show 
44.    7  strangers,  uncircumcised  in  heart,  and 
44.    9  No  stranger,  uncircumcised  in  heart,  nor 

Dan.    1.    8  But  Daniel  purposed  in  his  heart  that  he 
10. 12  first  day  that  thou  didst  set  thine  heart  to 

Hos.    4.  11  wine  and  new  wine  take  away  the  heart 
7.    6  they  have  made  ready  their  heart  like  an 
7.  11  Ephraim  also.,  without  heart :  they  call 
7.  14  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  heart 

10.  2  Their  heart  is  divided ;  now  shall  they  be 

11.  8  Mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  rep. 
6  they  were  filled,  and  their  heart  was  ex. 
8  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and  there 

Obad.  "    3  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee 
3  that  saith  in  his  heart,  Who  shall  bring 
Nah.    2.  10  and  the  heart  melteth,  and  the  knees  sm. 
Zeph.  3.  14  be  glad  and  rejoice  with  all  the  heart 
-Zeeh.  7.  12  they  made  their  hearts  (as)  an  adamant 
io.    7  their  heart  shall  rejoice,  .heart  shall  rej. 

12.  5  the  governors,  .shall  say  in  their  heart 
Mai.    ?.    «  and  if  ye  will  not  lay  (it)  to  heart,  to  give 

2.    2  already,  because  ye  do  not  lay  (it)  to  heart 
4.    6  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to 
4.    6  the  children,  and  the  heartof  the  children 

3.  The  heart,  nS  leb. 

Dan.    7.  28  in  me :  but  I  kept  the  matter  in  my  heart 

4.  The  heart,  lib  lebab. 

Gen.  20.    5  in  the  integrity  of  my  heart,  and  innocency 

20.    6  didst  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart 
Exodij.    5  heart  of  Pharaoh  and" of  his  servants  was 
Lev.  19.  17  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine  heart 
26.  36  I  will  send  a  faintnessinto  their  hearts  in 
26.  41  if  then  their  uncircumcised  hearts  be 
Nun-115.  so  ye  seek  not  after  your  own  heart  and  your 
Deut.  i.  28  our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  heart 
2.  30  and  made  his  heart  obstinate,  that  he  mi. 
4.  "9  lest  they  depart  from  thy  heart  all  the 
4.  29  if  thou  seek  him  with  all  thy  heart  and 

4.  39  consider  (it)  in  thine  heart,  that  the  Lord 

5.  29  O  that  there  was  such  an  heart  in  them 

6.  5  shalt  love  the  Lord  .with  all  thine  heart 

6.  6  And  these  words,  .shall  be  in  thine  heart 

7.  17  If  thou  shalt  say  in  thine  heart,  These 

8.  2  toknowwhat(was)in  thine  heart,  whether 
■8.    5  Thou  shalt  also  consider  in  thine  heart 

8.  14  Then  thine  heart  be  lifted  up,  and  thou 

8.  17  And  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  My  power 

9.  4  Speak  not  thou  in  thine  heart,  after  that 
o    5  or  for  the  uprightness  of  thine  heart,  dost 

10. 12  and  to  serve  the  Lord,  .with  all  thy  heart 

10.  16  Circumcise,  .the  foreskin  of  your  heart 

11.  13  and  to  serve  him  with  all  your  heart  and 
11.  16  that  your  heart  be  not  deceived,  and  ye 

11.  18  lay  up  these  my  words  in  your  heart  and 

13.  3  love  the  Lord,  .with  all  your  heart  and 
15.    7  thou  shalt  not  harden  thine  heart,  nor 
15.   9  there  be  not  a  thought  in  thy  wicked  he. 

15.  10  and  thine  heart  shall  not  be  grieved  when 
17.  17  that  his  heart  turn  not  away :  neither  sh. 

17.  20  That  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up  above  his 

18.  21  And  if  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  How  shall 

19.  6  while  his  heart  is  hot,  and  overtake  him 

20.  3  let  not  your  hearts  faint ;  fear  not,  and 
20.    8  brethren's  heart  faint  as  well  as  his  heart 
26.  16  keep  and  do  them  with  all  thine  heart 
28.  28  shall  smite  thee  with . .  astonishment  of  h. 
28.  47  servedst  not.  .with  gladness  of  heart,  for 

28.  67  for  the  fear  of  thine  heart  wherewith  thou 

29.  18  whose  heart  turneth  away  this  day  from 

29.  19  that  he  bless  himself  in  his  heart,  saying 

30.  2  I  command  thee,  .with  all  thine  heart,  and 
30.  6  will  circumcise  thine  heart,  and  the  heart 
30.  6  to  love  the  Lord  .  .with  all  thine  heart 
30.  10  turn  unto  the  Lord,  .with  all  thiue  heart 
30.  14  But  the  word  (is)  very  nigh .  .in  thy  heart 
30.  17  But  if  thine  heart  turn  away,  so  that  thou 

37.  46  Set  your  hearts  unto  all  the  words  which 
Josh.  2.  11  hearts  did  melt,  neither  did  there  remain 

5.  1  that  their  heart  melted,  neither  was  the. 
7.    s  wherefore  the  hearts  of  the  people  melted 

14.  7  brought  him  word .  .as  (it  was) in  mine  h. 

22.  5  to  serve  him  with  all  your  heart,  and  with 

23.  14  ye  know  in  all  your  hearts,  and  in  all 

24.  23  incline  your  heart  unto  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
Judgi9.    8  Comfort  thine  heart,  I  pray  thee.     And 

19.   9  lodge  here,  that  thine  heart  may  be  merry 

1  Sa,    1.    8  why  is  thy  heart  grieved  ?  (am)  not  I  bet. 

2. 35  which  (is)  in.mine  heart  and  in  my  mind 

6.  6  Wherefore  then  do  ye  harden  your  hearts 

7.  3  If  ye  do  return,  .with  all  your  hearts 

7.    3  and  prepare  your  hearts  unto  the  Lord 
9.  19  and  will  tell  thee  all  that  (is)  in  thine  he. 

12.  20  but  serve  the  Lord  with  all  your  heart 

12.  24  and  serve  him  in  truth  with  all  your  heart 

13.  14  sought  him  a  man  after  his  own  heart 

14.  7  Do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart :  turn  thee 
14.   7  I  (am)  with  thee  according  to  thy  heart 

16.  7  outward,  .but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  h. 

17.  28  and  the  naughtiness  of  thine  heart;  for 
21.  12  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his  heart 

2  Sa.    7.    3  Go,  do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart ;  for  the 

19.  14  the  heart  of  all  the  men  of  Judah,  even 
1  Ki.  2.    4  to  walk,  .with  all  their  heart  and  with  all 

2.  44  all  the  wickedness  which  thine  heart  is 

3.  6  and  in  uprightness  of  heart  with  thee;  and 
8. 17  it  was  In  the  heart  of  David  my  father  to 


1  Ki.  8. 


>  Ki.i 


*  Ch. 


=5- 

29. 
29. 
30. 

32. 

34- 

34- 

„         36. 

Eze.  7. 
Neh.  9. 
Job     1. 


17- 

22. 

27. 

Psa.    4. 

13- 
15- 
20. 
22. 
24. 

25- 

28. 
3*- 
62. 
69. 
73- 
73- 
73- 
73- 
73- 
73- 
77- 
78. 
78. 
84. 
86. 
86. 
90, 
95- 
95- 

101. 

101. 

IOI. 

104. 
104. 
109. 
III. 

119. 

„  J39- 
Pro  v.  4, 

6. 
Eccl.  9. 
Isa.     1. 

6. 

7- 

9- 


18  Whereas  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build  an 

18  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart 

38  which  shall  know,  .his  own  heart,  and  sp. 

39  whose  heart  thou  kno  west;  for  thou,  (even) 
39  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of 
48  return  unto  thee  with  all  their  heart,  and 
58  That  he  may  incline  our  hearts  unto  him 
61  Let  your  heart  therefore  be  perfect  with 

4  in  integrity  of  heart,  and  in  uprightness 
2  she  communed,  .of  all  that  was  in  her  lie. 

2  (for)  surely  they  will  turn  away  your  lie. 
4  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  other 

4  heart  was  not  perfect,  .as  (was)  the  heart 
9  because  his  heart  was  turned  from  the  L. 

8  and  who  followed  me  with  all  his  heart 

3  heart  was  not  perfect,  .as  the  heart  of  D. 

14  nevertheless  Asa's  heart  was  perfect  with 

15  heart  right,  as  my  heart  (is)  with  thy  h.  ? 

30  hast  done,  .all  that  (was)  in  mine  heart 

31  took  no  heed  to  walk,  .with  all  his  heart 
3  how  I  have  walked,  .with  a  perfect  heart 

19  Because  thine  heart  was  tender,  and  thou 

25  that  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart 
17  mine  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you  :  but  if 
38  All  these  men . .  came  with  a  perfect  heart 

2  Do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart ;  for  God  (is) 
19  Now  set  your  heart  and  your  soul  to  seek 

2  I  (had)  in  mine  heart  to  build  an  house  of 

9  searcheth  all  hearts,  and  understandeth  all 
17  I  know  also . .  that  thou  triest  the  heait 

17  in  the  uprightness  of  mine  heart  I  have 

18  keep  this  for  ever  in . .  the  heart  of  thy  pe. 

18  and  prepare  their  heart  unto  thee 

11  Because  this  was  in  thine  heart,  and  thou 

7  it  was  in  the  heart  of  David  my  father  to 

8  Forasmuch  as  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build 

8  didst  well  in  that  it  was  in  thine  heart 
30  and  render  unto  every  man.  .whose  heart 

30  for  thou  only  knowest  the  hearts  of  the  ch . 

1  she  communed . ,  of  all  that  was  in  her  hea. 

1 6  such  as  set  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord  G. 

12  toseektheLoRDGod.  with  all  their  heart 
1 5  for  they  had  sworn  with  all  their  heart,  and 

17  nevertheless  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect 

9  behalf  of  (them)  whose  heart  (is)  perfect 

3  and  hast  prepared  thine  heart  to  seek  God 
9  saying,  Thus  shall  ye  do.  .with  a  perfect  h. 

33  the  people  had  not  prepared  their  hearts 

9  who  sought  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart 

2  did.  .right,  .but  not  with  a  perfect  heart 

10  Now  (it  is)  in  mine  heart  to  make  a  coven. 

34  the  Levites  (were)  more  upright  in  heart  to 

19  prepareth  his  heart  to  seek  God,  the  Lord 

21  bedid(it)  with  all  hisheart,  and  prospered 

31  he  might  know  all  (that  was)  in  his  heart 
27  Because  thine  heart  was  tender,  and  thou 

31  and  his  statutes,  with  all  his  heart,  and  wi. 

13  hardened  hisheart  from  turning  unto  the 

10  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law 
8  Andfoundest  hisheart  faithful  before  th. 

5  sinned,  and  cursed  God  in  then'  hearts 

4  (He  is)  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  streng. 
13  these  (things)  hast  thou  hid  in  thine  heart 

1 1  broken  off,  (even)  the  thoughts  of  my  heart 

22  and  lay  up  his  words  in  thine  heart 

6  my  heart  shall  not  reproach  (me)  so  long 
4  commune  with  your  own  heart  upon  your 
2  (having)  sorrow  in  my  heart  daily?  how  lo. 

2  and  speaketh  the  truth  in  his  heart 

4  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart 

26  shall  praise,  .your  heart  shall  live  forever 

4  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  heart 

17  The  troubles  of  my  heart  are  enlarged 

3  peace .  .but  mischief  (is)  in  their  hearts 

24  he  shall  strengthen  your  heart,  all  ye  that 
8  ye  people,  pour  out  your  heart  before  him 

32  and  your  heart  shall  live  that  seek  God 

1  good . .  (even)  to  such  as  are  of  a  clean  heart 

7  they  have  more  than  heart  could  wish 
13  Verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  (in)  vain 
21  my  heart  was  grieved,  and  I  was  pricked  in 
26  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth  :  (but)  God 
26  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion 

6  I  commune  with  mine  ownheart;  and  my 

18  they  tempted  God  in  their  heart,  by  asking 
72  according  to  the  integrityofhis  heart;  and 

5  thee;  in  whose  heart  (are)  the  ways  (of  t.) 

11  0  Lord,  .unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name 

12  I  will  praise  thee.,  with  all  my  heart ;  and 
12  that  we  may  apply  (our)  hearts  unto  wis. 

8  Harden  not  your  heart,  as  in  the  provoca. 
10  It  (is)  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  heart 

2  walk  within  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart 

4  A  froward  heart  shall  depart  from  me 

5  him  that  hath  .  .a  proud  heart  will  not  I 
15  wine  (that)maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man 

15  and  bread  (which)  strengtheneth  man's  h. 

16  lie  might  even  slay  the  broken  in  heart 

1  will  praise  the  Lord  with  (my)  whole  heart 

7  praise  thee  with  uprightness  of  heart :  and 

23  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart 
.  21  keep  them  in  the  midst  of  thine  heart 

25  Lust  not  after  her  beauty  in  thiue  heart 

3  madness  (is)  in  their  heart  while  they  live 
5  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  f. 

10  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  con. 

2  his  heart  was  moved,  and  the  heart  of  his 

9  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of  heart 

7  neither  doth  his  heart  think  so ;  but  (tt  is) 
7  in  his  heart  to  destroy  and  cut  off  nations 
12  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart 
7  be  faint,  and  every  man's  heart  shall  melt 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Dan. 


14.  13  For  thou  hast  said  in  thine  heart,  I  will 
19.    1  heart  of  Egypt  shall  melt  in  the  midst  of 
21.    4  Myheartpanted,  tearfulness  affrighted  me 

30.  29  gladness  of  heart,  as  when  one  goeth  with 
32.    4  heart  also  of  the  rash  shall  understand 
47.   8  that  sayest  in  thine  heart,  I  (am),  and  no. 
49.  21  Then  shalt  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  Who 
60.    5  and  thine  heart  shall  fear,  and  he  enlarged 

4.  4  take  away  the  foreskins  of  your  heart,  ye 

5.  24  Neither  say  they  in  their  heart,  Let  us 
13.  22  if  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  Wherefore  co. 

15.  16  and  thy  word  was.  .rejoicingof  mineheart 
29.  13  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart 
32.  40  but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts 

51.  46  lest  yourheart  faint,  and  ye  fear  for  the 

Lam.  3.  41  Let  us  lift  up  our  heart  with  (our)  hands 

Eze.     3.  10  all  my  words,  .receive  in  thine  heart,  and 

?8.    s  and  thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy 

28.    6  Because  thou  hast  set  thine  heart  as  the 

31.  10  and  his  heart  is  lifted  up  in  his  height 
36.    5  with  the  joy  of  all  (their)heart,  with  des. 

8.  25  and  he  shall  magnify  (himself)  in  his  heart 
11.  12  his  heart  shall  be  lifted  up  ;  and  he  shall 
11.  27  both  these  kings'  hearts  (shall  be)  to  do 
11.  28  heart  (shall  be)  against  the  holy  covenant 
Hos.    7.    2  they  consider  not  in  their  hearts  (that)  I 
Joel    2.  12  Turn  ye  (eveu)  to  me  with  all  your  heart 
2. 13  reud  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments 
Zeph.  1.  12  that  say  in  their  heart,  The  Lord  will  not 
2.  15  that  said  in  her  heart,  I  (am),  and  (there 
Zech.  7.  10  none  of  you  imagine  evil,  .in  your  heart 

8.  17  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hearts 

5. The  'heart,  331?  lebab. 

Dan.    2.  30  mightiest  know  the  thoughts  of  thy  heart 
4.  16  Let  his  heart  be  changed  from  man's 

4.  16  and  let  a  beast's  heart  be  given  unto  him 

5.  20  But  when  his  heart  was  lifted  up,  and  his 
5.  21  and  his  heart  was  made  like  the  beasts 
5.  22  thou,  .hast  not  humbled  thine  heart,  tho. 
7.    4  made  stand . .  and  a  man's  heart  was  given 

6. Heart,  nib  libbah. 

Psa.     7. '  9  the  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts  and 

125.    4  to  (them  that  are)  upright  in  their  hearts 

Prov.15.  11  how  much  more  then  the  hearts  of  the  ch. 

17.  3  for  gold  :  but  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts 

21.  2  eyes  :  but  the  Lord  pondereth  the  hearts 

24.  12  doth  not  he  that  pondereth  the  heart  con. 
Isa.  44.  18  their  hearts,  that  they  cannot  understand 
Eze.  16.  30  How  weak  is  thine  heart,  saith  the  Lord 

7. Soul,  breath,  trsa  nephesh. 

Exod23.  9  for  ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger,  seeing 
Lev.  26.  16  consume  the  eyes,  and  cause  sorrow  of  h. 
Deut  24.  15  for  he  (is)  poor,  and  setteth  his  heart  upon 

1  Sa.   2.  33  consume  thine  eyes,  and  to  grieve  thine  h. 

2  Sa.    3.  21  may  est  reign  over  all  that  thine  heart 
Psa    10.    3  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  heart's  desire 
Prov.23.   7  For  as  he  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  (is)  lie 

28.  25  He  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  stirreth  up  str. 

31.  6  wine  unto  those  that  be  of  heavy  hearts 
Jer.  42.  20  For  ye  dissemble  in  your  hearts,  when  ye 
Lam.  3.  51  Mine  eye  affecteth  mine  heart  because  of 
Eze.  25.    6  and  rejoiced  in  heart  with  all  thy  despite 

25.  15  with  a  despiteful  heart,  to  destroy  (it)  for 
27.  31  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitterness  of  heart 

Hos.    4.    8  and  they  set  their  heart  on  their  iniquity 

$.  Covered-  part,  *)?^  sel'ri. 

Job    38.  36  who  hath  given  understanding  to  the  h.'? 

Q. Bowels,  Q'Jjp  meim. 

Psa.  40.  8  O  my  God.  .thy  law  (is)  within  my  heart 

10.  Centre,  midst,  x^  qereb. 

Jer.    9.  8  peaceably,  .but  in  heart  he  layeth  his  wait 

11,  The  heart,  xaptia  kardia. 

Matt.  5.    8  Blessed  (are)  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they 

5.  28  hath  committed  adultery-  in  his  heart 

6.  21  where  your  treasure  is,  there . .  your  heart 

9.  4 "Wherefore  think  ye  evil  in  your  hearts? 

11.  29  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart:  and  ye 

12.  34  for  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
12.  35  out  of  the  good  treasure  [of  the  heart] 

12.  40  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth 

13.  15  For  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross 
13.  15  and  should  understand  with  (their)  heart 
13.  19  catcheth.  .that  which  was  sown  in  his  h. 
15.  8  with  (their)  lips  ;  hut  then*  heart  is  far  fr. 
15.18  But  those  things,  .come  forth  from  the  h. 
15.  19  For  outof  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts 

18.  35  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every 

22.  37  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 
24. 48  if  that  evil  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart 

Mark  2.   6  sitting  there,  and  reasoning  in  their  hea. 

2.  8  Whyreason  ye  these  things  in  your  hearts? 

3.  5  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts 
4. 15  [taketh  away  the  word . .  sown  in  their  he.  ] 

6.  52  considered  not.  .for  their  heart  was  har. 

7.  6  with  (their)  lips,  but  their  heart  is  far  from 
7. 19  Because  it  entereth  not  into  his  heart 

7.  21  outof  the  heart  of  men,  proceed  evil  tho. 

8.  17  saith.  .have  ye  your  heart  yet  hardened? 

11.  23  shall  not  doubt  in  his  heart,  but  shall 

12.  30  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 
12.  33  to  love  him  with  all  the  heart,  and  with 

Luke  1.  17  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the 
1.  51  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  hearts 

1.  66  And  all  they,  .laid  (them)  up  in  their  hea. 

2.  19  But  Mary,  .pondered  (them)  in  her  heart 
2.  35  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be 

2.  51  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in  her  heart 

3.  15  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  John 


HEART 


469 


HEATHEN 


Luke  5.  22  said.. What  reason  ye  in  your  hearts? 

6.  45  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart  hri. 
6.  45  [out  of  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart  briu] 

6.  45  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  his  mouth 
S.  12  taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts 

8.  15  in  an  honest  and  good  heart,  having 

9.  47  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  heart,  took 

10.  27  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 
12. 34  where  your  treasure  is  there,  .your  heart 
12.  45  But  and  if  that  servant  say  in  his  heart 
16. 15  but  God  knoweth  your  hearts  :  for  that 
21.  14  Settle  (it)  therefore  in  your  hearts,  not  to 
2i.  34  lest  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  overchar. 
24.  25  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all 
24.  32  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us,  while 
24.  38  and  why  do  thoughts  arise  in  your  hearts? 

John  i2.  40  He  hath  ..hardened  their  heart;  that  they 

12.  40  nor  understand  with  (their)  heart,  and  be 

13.  2  the  devil  having  now  put  into  the  heart 

14.  1  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  :  ye  believe 
14.  27  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let 
16.   6  unto  you,  sorrow  hath  filled  your  heart 
16.  22  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no 

Acts    2.  26  Therefore  did  my  heart  rejoice,  and  my 
2.  37  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said 
2.  46  did  eat  then*  meat  with  gladness . .  of  heart 

4.  32  multitude,  .wereof  one  heart. . neither  sa. 

5.  3  why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  to 
5.  4  why  hast  thou  conceived,  .hi  thine  heart  ? 

7.  23  it  came  into  his  heart  to  visit  his  brethren 
7.  39  in  their  hearts  turned  back  again  into  Eg. 
7.  51  uncircunicised  in  heart  and  ears,  ye  do 

7.  54  they  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and  theygna. 

8.  21  for  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  G. 
8.  22  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine  heart  may 
8.  37  [If  thou  believest  with . .  thine  heart,  thou] 

11.  23  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  el. 

13.  22  I  have  found  David . .  after  mine  own  heart 

14.  17  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness 

15.  9  no  difference. . purifying  their  hearts  by  f. 

16.  14  whose  heart  the  Lord  opened,  that  she  att. 
21.  13  mean  ye  to  weep  and  to  break  mine  heart  ? 
28.  27  For  the  heart  of  this  people  is  waxed  gro. 
28.  27  understand  with  (their)  heart,  and  should 

Rom.  1.  21  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened 

1.  24  through  the  lusts  of  their  own  hearts,  to 

2.  5  after  thy  hardness  and  impenitent  heart 
2.  15  "Which  show  the  work,  .in  their  hearts 

2.  29  and  circumcision  (is  that)  of  the  heart,  in 

5.  5  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by 

6.  17  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart  that  form 

8.  27  he  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knoweth  wh. 

9.  2  That  I  have  great  heaviness . .  in  my  heart 
iq.  1  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for 
10.  6  Say  not  in  thine  heart,  Who  shall  ascend 
10.  8  The  word  is  nigh  thee . .  and  in  thy  heart 
10.  9  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God 
10.  10  For  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  ri. 
16.  18  and  fair  speeches  deceive  the  hearts  of 

1  Co.    2.    9  neitherhave  entered  into  the  heart  of  man 

4.    5  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts 

7.  37  he  that  standeth  stedfast  in  his  heart 

7.  37  and  hath  so  decreed  in  his  heart  that  he  w. 
14.  25  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made 

2  Co.  1.  22  giventheearnestofthe  spirit  in  our  hearts 

2.  4  and  anguish  of  heart  I  wrote  unto  you 

3.  2  V'e  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts 
3.   3  of  stone,  but  in  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart 

3.  15  Moses  is  read,  the  veil  is  upon  their  heart 

4.  6  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  (give)  the 

5. 12  which  glory  in  appearance,  and  not  in  he.' 
6. 11  our  mouth  is  open  unto  you,  our  heart  is 

7.  3  ye  are  in  our  hearts  to  die  and  live  with 

8.  16  put  the  same  earnest  care  into  the  heart  of 
g.    7  Every  man.,  as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart 

Gal.     4.    6  sent  forth  the  spirit. .into  your  hearts,  c. 
Eph.   3.  17  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith 

4.  18  because  of  the  blindness  of  their  heart 

5.  19  making  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord 

6.  5  in  singleness  of  your  heart,  as  unto  Christ 
6".  22  and  (that)  he  might  comfort  your  hearts 

Phil.  1.    7  I  have  you  in  my  heart ;  inasmuch  as  both 
4.    7  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through 

Col.     2.   2  That  their  hearts  might  be  comforted 
3.  15  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts 
3.  16  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the  L. 

3.  22  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing  God 

4.  8  know  your  estate,  and  comfort  your  he. 

1  Th.  2.    4  but  God,  which  trieth  our  hearts 

2.  17  being  taken  from  you.  .not  in  heart,  end. 

3. 13  he  may  stablish  your  hearts  unblameable 

2  Th.  2.  17  Comfort  your  hearts,  and  stablish  you  in 

3.  5  the  Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love 

1  Ti.    1.    5  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  (of)  a  go. 

2  Ti.    2.  22  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart 
Heb.  3.    8,  15  Harden  nut  your  hearts,  as  in  the  pro. 

3.  10  They  do  alway  err  in  (then')  heart ;  and 

3.  12  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart 

4.  7  if  ye  uill  hear,  .harden  not  your  hearts 
4.  12  and  (is)  a  discerner.  .of  the  heart 

8.  10  and  write  them  in  their  hearts  ;  and  I  will 
10.  16  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  hearts,  and  in 
10.  22  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  in  full 
10.  22  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 
13.  9  For  (it  is)  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be 
Jas.     1.  26  but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this  man's 

3. 14  But  if  ye  have  bitter,  .strife  in  your  hearts 

4.  8  and  purify  (your)  hearts,  (ye)  double  min. 

5.  5  ye  have  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day 
5.    8  Be  ye  also  patient ;  stablish  your  hearts 

1  Pe.  1.  22  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  ferve. 
3.    4  (let  it  be)  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart, in 


1  Pe.  3.  15  But  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts 

2  Pe.  1.  19  and  the  day  star  arise  in  your  hearts 

2.  14  an  heart  they  have  exercised  with  covet. 
1  Jo.  3.  19  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  him 

3.  20  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater 
3.  so  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things 
3.  21  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not 

Rev.    2.  23  he  which  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts 

17.  17  For  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil 

18.  7  for  she  saithinherheartjsit  a  queen, and 

12.  Soul,  life,  tyvxh  psuche. 

Eph.  6.    6  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart 
HEART,  hardness  of  — 
Dryness  or  hardness  of  heart,  o"K\i7poKap5/a  skier. 

Matt  19.    8  Moses  because  <A  the  hardness  of  your  h. 

Markio.    5  For  the  hardness  of  your  heart  he  wrote 
16.  14  with  their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart 
HEART,  which  knoweth  the  — 
Heart  knotting,  Kap§ioyvw<jrr)$  kardiognosies. 

Acts   1.  24  Lord,  which  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  (men) 

15.  8  God,  which  knoweth  the  hearts,  bare  them 
HEARTED  — 

I. Heart,  lb  Zeb. 

Exod2S.  3  shalt  speak  unto  all  (that  are)  wise  hearted 
35.  10  every  wise  hearted  among  you  shall  come 
35.  22  and  women,  as  many  as  were  willing  hea. 

35.  25  the  women  that  were  wise  hearted  did  spin 

36.  1  every  wise  hearted  man,  in  whom  the  Lord 
36.  2  every  wise  hearted  man,  in  whose  heart  the 
36.    8  every  wise  hearted  man  among  them  that 

Psa.  76.    5  The  stout  hearted  are  spoiled,  they  have 

Isa.  24.    7  Ianguisheth,  all  the  merry  hearted  do  sigh 

46. 12  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  stout  hearted,  that 

61.    1  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken  hearted,  to 

Eze.     2.   4  impudent  children,  and  stiff  hearted.  I  do 

3.    7  the  house,  .(are)  impudent  and  hard  hea. 

2.Heart,  2ih  lebab. 

Deut  20.    8  What  man . .  fearful  and  faint  hearted  ?  let 

Isa.     7.   4  neither  be  faint  hearted  for  the  two  tails  of 
3. Heart,  KapSia  kardia. 

Luke  4.  iS  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken  hearted,  to 
HEARTH  — 
\.A  stove,  riN  ach. 

Jer.  36.  22  (a  fire)  on  the  hearth  burning  before  him 
36.  23  into  the  fire  that  (was)  on  the  hearth 
36. 23  in  the  fire  that  (was)  on  the  hearth 

2. Pan,  ivsj  kiyyor. 

Zech.12.   6  like  an  hearth  of  fire  among  the  wood 

3. Burning,  ija*iD  moqed. 

Psa.  102.    3  and  my  bones  are  burned  as  an  hearth 

HEARTH,  from  the  — 
To  burn,  "ip;  yaqad. 

Isa.    30.  14  a  sherd  to  take  fire  from  the  hearth,  or 
HEAR  TILT  — 
Out  of  tlie  soul,  Sk  tyvxvs  ek  psuches. 

Col.  3.  23  do  (it)  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not 
HEARTS  (men's)  failing  from  fear  — 
To  breathe  away,  airo^vxa  apopsucho. 

Luke2i.  26  Men's  hearts  fairing  them  for  fear,  and  for 
HEARTY — 
Soul,  breath,  e^  nephesh. 

Prov.27.  9  the  sweetness  of  a  man's  friend  by  hearty 

HEAT  — 

l.Heat,  an  chom. 

Gen.  8.  22  culdandheat.andsummerandwinter.and 
iS.    1  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day 

1  Sa.  11.  11  and  slew  the  Ammonites  until  the  heat  of 

2  Sa.  4.  v  came  about  the  heat  of  the  day  to  the 
Job  24.19  Drought  and  heat  consume  the  snowwater 
Isa.   18;    4  dwelling  place  like  a  clear  heat  upon 

18.    4  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest 
Jer.  17.    8  shall  not  see  when  heat  cometh,  but  her 
51.  39  In  their  heat  I  will  make  their  feasts 

l.Heat,  nan  ehammah. 

Psa.  i9.T  6  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof 

B.Heat,  fury,  nen  chemah. 

Eze.  3. 14  iu  bitterness,  in  the  heat  of  my  spirit 

4.  Drought,  anh  choreb. 

Job  30.  30  and  my  bones  are  burnt  with  heat 
Isa.    4.   6  a  shadow  in  the  day  time  from  the  heat 
25.   4  a  shadow  from  the  heat,  when  the  blast 
25.   5  as  the  heat  in  a  dry  place;  (even)the  heat 
Jer.  36.  30  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  day  to  the  heat 

5. Heat,  fury,  **in  chart. 

Deut. 29.  24  what  (meaneth)  the  heat  of  this  great  an. 

6.  Heat,  mirage,  yvp  sharab. 

Isa.  49.  10  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them 

7.  Warmth,  heat,  depfxy  therme. 

Acts  28.    3  there  came  a  viper  out  of  the  heat,  aud 

S.Heat,  Kavfxa  kauma. 

Rev.   7. 16  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor  any  heat 

16.  9  men  were  scorched  with  great  heat,  and 

9, Burning,  heat,  Kavawv  kauson. 

Matt.  20.  12  have  borne  the  burdenandheatoftheday 
Luke  12.  35  ye  say,  There  will  be  heat ;  and  it  cometh 


HEAT,  burning  — 

Bunting,  heat,  Kavixcci/  kauson. 

Jas.    1.  11  is  no  sooner  risen  with  a  burning  heat 
HEAT,  with  fervent  — 
To  be  set  on  fire,  bum,  Kava-oofxai  koAtsoomai. 

2  Pe.  3. 10, 12  elements  shall  melt  with  a  fervent  heat 
HEAT,  to  — 
l.To  heat,  nix  aza. 

Dan.  3. 19  they  should  heat  the  furnace  one  seven 
3. 19  times  more  than  it  was  wont  to  be  heated 
2. To  be  burning,  *iya  baar. 

Hos.  7.    4  as  an  oven  heated  by  the  baker,  (who)  cease. 
HEAT,  to  get  — 
l.To  be  or  become  warm,  c?rr  chamam. 

1  Ki.  1.    2  that  my  lord  the  king  may  get  heat 
2.  To  be  or  become  warm,  en;  yacham. 

1  Ki.  1.    1  covered  him  with  clothes,  .but.  .gat  no  h. 
HEAT,  to  have  — 

T'o  be  or  become  warm,  Den  chamam. 

Eccl.  4.  11  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  heat 
HEATH  — 
1. Naked  or  destitute  object,  TgViJ7  aroer. 

Jer.  48.    6  and  be  like  the  heath  in  the  wilderness 
2.Naked  or  destitute  object,  ijpH  arar. 

Jer.  17.    6  he  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the  desert 
HEATHEN  — - 
l.A  tuition,  'ia  got. 

Lev.  25. 44  of  the  heathen  that  are  round  about  you 
26.  33  I  will  scatter  you  among  the  heathen,  and 
26.  38  ye  shall  perish  among  the  heathen,  and 
26.  45  I  brought . .  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen 
Deut.  4.  27  shall  be  left  few  in  number  among  the  h. 

2  Sa.  22.  44  hast  kept  me  (to  be)  head  of  the  heathen 

22.  50  thanks  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  among  the  hea. 
2  Ki.  16.    3  to  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

17.  8  And  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  heathen 
17.  11  as  (did)  the  heathen  whom  the  Lord  car. 

17.  15  went  after  the  heathen  that  (were)  round 
21.   2  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

1  Ch.16.  24  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen 

16.  35  deliver  us  from  the  heathen,  that  we  may 

2  Ch.20.    6  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen '! 

28.    3  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

33.    2  like  unto  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

33.    9  to  do  worse  than  the  heathen,  whom  the 

36.  14  after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 

Ezra    6.  21  the  filthiness  of  the  heathen  of  the  land 

Neh.    5.    8  the  Jews,  which  were  sold  unto  the  hea. 

5.    9  the  reproach  of  the  heathen  our  enemies 

5.  17  from  among  the  heathen  that  (are)  about 

6.  6  is  reported  among  the  heathen,  and  Gas. 
6.  16  the  heathen  that(were)about  us  saw(these) 

Psa.  2.  1  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the  people 
2.  8  give.,  the  heathen  (for)  thine  inheritance 
9.  5  Thou'hast  rebuked  the  heathen,  thou  hast 
9.  15  The  heathen  are  sunk  down  in  the  pit 
9. 19  let  the  heathen  be  judged  in  thy  sight 
10. 16  the  heathen  are  perished  out  of  Iris  land 
iS.  43  thou  hast  made  me  the  head  of  the  heath. 

18.  49  I  give  thanks.  .0  Lord,  among  the  heathen 
33.  10  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to 
44.  2  didst  drive  out  the  heathen  with  thy  hand 
44. 11  and  hast  scattered  us  among  the  heathen 
44.  14  Thou  makest  us  a  byword  among  the  hea. 
46.    6  The  heathen  raged,  the  kingdoms  were  in. 

46.  10  I  will  be  exalted  among  the  heathen,  I 

47.  8  God  reign eth  over  the  heathen  :  God  sit. 
59.    5  0  Lord,  .awake  to  visit  all  the  heathen 
59.    8  shalt  have  all  the  heathen  in  derision 

78.  55  He  cast  out  the  heathen  also  before  them 

79.  1  heathen  are  come  into  thine  inheritance 
79.  6  Pour  out  thy  wrath  upon  the  heathen 
79. 10  Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say,  Where 
79.  10  let  him  be  known  among  the  heathen  in 
So.  8  hast  cast  out  the  heathen,  and  planted  it 
04.  10  He  that  chastiseth  the  heathen,  shall  not 
96.  3  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen,  his 
96.  10  Say  among  the  heathen,  .the  Lord  reign. 
98.    2  openly  showed  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen 

102.  15  heathen  shall  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord 

105.  44  gave  them  the  lands  of  the  heathen :  and 

106.  35  But  were  mingled  among  the  heathen,  and 
106.  41  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the  heathen 
106.  47  gather  us  from  among  the  heathen,  to  g. 
no.    6  He  shall  judge  among  the  heathen,  he  sh. 
in.    6  give  them  the  heritage  of  the  heathen 
115.    2  Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say,  Where 
126.    2  then  said  they  among  the  heathen,  The  L. 
135.  15  The  idols  of  the  heathen  (are)  silver  and 
149.    7  To  execute  vengeance  upon  the  heathen 

Isa.    16.    8  the  lords  of  the  heathen  have  broken  down 
Jer.     9.  16  will  scatter  them  also  among  the  heathen 
10.    2  Learn  not  the  way  of  the  heathen,  and  be 
10.   2  for  the  heathen  are  dismayed  at  them 

10.  25  Pour  out  thy  fury  upon  the  heathen  that 
18.  13  Ask  ye  now  among  the  heathen,  who  hath 
49.  14  an  ambassador  is  sent  unto  the  heathen 
49.  15  I  will  make  thee  small  among  the  heathen 

Lam.  1.   3  she  dwelleth  among  the  heathen,  she 

1.  10  she  hath  seen  (that)  the  heathen  entered 
4.  15  they  said  among  the  heathen,  They  shall 
4.  20  Under  his  shadow,  .live  among  the  heath. 

Eze.     7.  24  I  will  bring  the  worst  of  the  heathen 

11.  12  done  after  the  manners  of  the  heathen 
11.  i'j  have  cast  them  far  off  among  the  heathen 


HEATHEN 


470 


HEAVEN 


Eze    12.  16  all  their  abominations  among  the  heathen 
16.  14  went,  .among  the  heathen  for  thy  beauty 
20.    9,  14  not  be  polluted  before  the  heathen 
20.  22  be  polluted  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen 
20.  23  I  would  scatter  them  among  the  heathen 
20.  32  will  be  as  the  heathen,  as  the  families 
20.  41  be  sanctified  in  you  before  the  heathen 
-22.    4  I  made  thee  a  reproach  unto  the  heathen 
22.  15  I  will  scatter  thee  among  the  heathen 

22.  16  in  thyself  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen 

23.  30  hast  gone  a  whoring  after  the  heathen 
25.  7  deliver  thee  for  a  spoil  to  the  heathen 
25.    S  Judah  (is)  like  unto  all  the  heathen 

28.  25  sanctified,  .in  the  sight  of  the  heathen 

30.  3  it  shall  be  the  time  of  the  heathen 

31.  11  hand  of  the  mighty  one  of  the  heathen 
31.  17  under  his  shadow  in.  .midst  of  the  heathen 
34.  28  shall  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the  heathen 

34.  29  bear  the  shame  of  the  heathen  any  more 
36.    3  possession  unto  the  residue  of  the  heathen 
36.    4  derision  to  the  residue  of  the  heathen 
36.    5  spoken  against  the  residue  of  the  heathen 
36.    6  ye  have  borne  the  shame  of  the  heathen 
36.    7  the  heathen  that  (are)  about  you ,  they  shall 
36.  15  hear . .  the  shame  of  the  heathen  any  more 
36.  19  I  scattered  them  among  the  heathen,  and 
36.  20  they  entered  unto  the  heathen,  whither 
36.  21  Israel  had  profaned  among  the  heathen 
36.  22  which  ye  have  profaned  among  the  heathen 
36.  23  which  was  profaned  among  the  heathen 

35.  23  the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

36.  24  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  heathen 
36.  30110.  .reproach  of  famine  among  the  heathen 

36.  36  the  heathen  that  are  left  round  about 

37.  21  children  of  Israel  from  among  the  heathen 

37.  28  the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord 

38.  16  the  heathen  may  know  me,  when  I  shall 

39.  7  the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lo. 
39.  21  among  the  heathen,  and  all  the  heathen 
39.  23  the  heathen  shall  know  that  the  house  of 
39.  28  be  led  into  captivity  among  the  heathen 

Joel    2.  17  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  them 

2.  19  make  you  a  reproach  among  the  heathen 

3.  11  come,  all  ye  heathen,  and  gather  yoursel. 
3.  12  Let  the  heathen  be  wakened,  and  come  up 
3.  12  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen  round  about 

Amos  9.  12  the  heathen,  which  are  called  by  my  name 

Obad.       1  an  ambassador  is  sent  among  the  heathen 

2  I  have  made  thee  small  among  the  heathen 

15  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near . .  all  the  heathen 

16  shall  all  the  heathen  drink  continually 
M3c.    5.  15  in  anger  and  fury  upon  the  heathen,  such 
Bab.  1.    s  Behold  ye  among  the  heathen,  andregard 

3. 12  thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  anger 
Zepfa.  2.  11  every  one.  .all  the  isles  of  the  heathen 
Bag.    2.  22  strength  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen 
.Zech.  1.  15  displeased  with  the  heathen  (that  are)  at 

8.  13  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  heathen,  O  h. 

9.  10  and  he  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen 
14.  14  the  wealth  of  all  the  heathen  round  about 

14.  18  the  Lord  will  smite  the  heathen  that  co. 
Mai.    1.  11  my  name  (shall  be)  great  among  the  hea. 

1.  14  my  name  (is)  dreadful  among  the  heathen 

^.Xation,  idvos  eth/nos. 

Acts  4.  25  Why  did  the  heathen  rage,  andthepeople 
2  Co. 11.  26  (in)  perils  by  the  heathen,  (in)  perils  in  the 
1  ■ .!  1      i.  16  that  I  might  preach  him  among  the  hea. 

2.  9  we  (should  go)  unto  the  heathen,  and  they 

3.  8  would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith 

^T}iosehelongingtothenations,oiiQviKoihoietJinikoi 

Matt.  6.    7  use  not  vain  repetitions,  astheheathen(do) 
HEATHEN  man  — 
Belonging  to  the  nations,  e6vac6s  ethnikos. 

Matt  18.  17  be.  .as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican 
HEAVE,  to  — 
To  make  high,  lift  up  high,  on  rum,  5. 

Num  15.  20  as  (ye  do)  the.  .offering,  .shall  ye  heave 
18.  30  ye  have  heaved  the  best  thereof  from  it 
18.  32  ye  have  heaved  from  it  the  best  of  it 
HEAVE  offering  — 
^  heaved  up  offering,  nciiiji  terumah. 

Exod2g.  27  the  shoulder  of  the  heave  offering,  which 

29.  28  be  Aaron's,  .for  it  (is)  an  heave  offering 
29.  28  it  shall  be  an  heave  offering  from  the' 
29.  28  (even)  their  heave  offering  untothe  LORD 

iLer.    7.  14  (for)anheaveofferinguntotheLoRD,(and) 

7.  32  unto  the  priest  (for)  an  heave  offering  of 

Jsumij.  19  offer  up  an  heave  offering  unto  the  Lord 

15.  20  offer  up  a  cake,  .(for)  an  heave  offering 
15.  20  heave  offering  of  the  threshing  floor,  so 
15.  21  an  heave  offering  in  your  generations 
18.    8  the  charge  of  mine  heave  offerings  of 
18.  11  the  heave  offering  of  their  gift,  with  all 
18.  19  All  the  heave  offerings  of  the  holy  things 
iZ.  24  offer  (as)  an  heave  offeringunto  the  Lord 
18.  26  ye  shall  offer  up  an  heave  offering  of 

18.  27  heave  offering  shall  be  reckoned  unto 3011 
18.  28  ye  also  shall  offer  an  heave  offering 
18.  28  Lord's  heave  offering  to  Aaron  the  priest 
18.  29  offer  every  heave  offering  of  the  Lord 
31.  29  give,  .(for)  an  heave  offering  of  the  Lord 
31.  41  tribute,  (which  was)  the  Lord's  heave  off. 

Deuti2.    6  heave  offerings  of  your  hand,  and  your 
12.  11  the  heave  offering  of  your  hand,  and  all 
12.  17  offerings,  or  heave  offering  of  thine  hand 
HEAVE  (shoulder)  — 
^i  heaved  wp  offering,  n^np  terumah. 

Xev.    7.  34  the  heave  shoulder  have  I  taken  of  the 


Lev.  10.  14  heave  shoulder  shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place 

10.  15  The  heave  shoulder  and  the  wave  breast 
Num.  6.  20  with  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder 

HEAVED  up,  to  be  — 

To  be  made  or  lifted  uj)  high,  Din  rum,  6. 

Exod29.  27  which  is  heaved  up,  of  the  ram  of  the  con. 
HEAVEN  — 
1. Rolling  cloud,  7473  galgal. 

Psa.  77. 18  voice  of  thy  thunder  (was)  in  the  heaven 
2.  Their  cloud,  pn&  shachaq. 

Psa.  89.    6  who  in  the  heaven  can  be  compared  unto 
89.  37  and  (as)  a  faithful  witness  in  heaven 

3. Heavens,  {heaved  up  things),  n%$  shamayim. 
Gen.    1.    1  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth 

1.  8GodcalledthefirmamentHeaven.  Andthe 
1.  9  the  waters  under  the  heaven  be  gathered 
1.  14,  15  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven 
1.  17  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven 
1.  20  may  fly . .  in  the  open  firmament  of  heaven 

6.  17  to  destroy  all  flesh .  .from  under  heaven 

7.  11  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened 
7.  19  hills  that  (were)  under  the  whole  heaven 

7.  23  creeping  things,  and  the  fowl  of  the  hea. 

8.  2  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  stopped 

8.  2  and  the  rain  from  heaven  was  restrained 

11.  4  a  tower  whose  top  (may  reach)  unto  hea. 

14.  19,  22  high  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  ea. 

15.  s  Look  now  toward  heaven,  and  tell  the  St. 

19.  24  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven 

21.  17  angel  of  God  called  to  Hagar  out  of  heaven 

22.  11  angel,  .called  unto  him  out  of  heaven 
22. 15  angel,  .called  unto  Abraham  out  of  heaven 
22. 17  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and  as 
24.    3  the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  God  of  the 
24.    7  The  Lord  God  of  heaven,  which  took  me  f. 

26.  4  seed  to  multiply  as  the  stars  of  heaven 

27.  28  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and 

27.  39  and  of  the  dew  of  heaven  from  above 

28.  12  and  the  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven :  and 
28. 17  of  God,  and  this  (is)  the  gate  of  heaven 
49.  25  bless  thee  with  blessings  of  heaven  above 

Exod.  9.    8  let  Moses  sprinkle  it  toward  the  heaven  in 

9.  10  and  Moses  sprinkled  it  up  toward  heaven 
9.  22  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  toward  heaven 
9.  23  stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  heaven 

10.  21  Stretch  out  thine  hand  toward  heaven 
10.  22  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  heaven 

16.  4  I  will  rain  bread  from  heaven  for  you  ;  and 

17.  14  remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under  hea. 

20.  4  any  likeness  (of  any  thing)  that  (is)  in  hea. 
20. 1 1  (in)  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and 
20.  22  that  I  have  talked  with  you  from  heaven 

24.  10  and  as  it  were  the  body  of  heaven  in  (his) 

31.  17  for  (in)  six  days  theLoRD  made  heaven  and 

32.  13  multiply  your  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven 
Lev.  26.  19  I  will  make  your  heaven  as  iron,  and  your 
Deut.  1.  10  ye  (are)  this  day  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for 

1.  28  cities  (are)  great  and  walled  up  to  heaven 

2.  25  nations  (that  are)  under  the  whole  heaven 

3.  24  for  what  God  (is  there )in  heaven  or  in  earth 
4. 1 1  burned  with  fire  unto  the  midst  of  heaven 
4. 19  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven 
4. 19  (even)  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldest  be 

4.  19  unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven 
4.  26  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against 
4.  32  (ask)  from  the  one  side  of  heaven  unto  the 
4.  36  Out  of  heaven  he  made  thee  to  hear  his 

4.  39  God  in  heaven  above,  and  upon  the  earth 

5.  8  likeness  (of  any  thing)  that  (is)  in  heaven 

7.  24  destroy  their  name  from  under  heaven 
9.    1  cities  great,  and  fenced  up  to  heaven 

9.  14  blot  out  their  name  from  under  heaven 
10.  14  the  heaven,  and  the  heaven  of  heavens,  (is) 

10.  22  hath  made  thee  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for 

11.  11  (and)  drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heaven 
11.  17  he  shut  up  the  heaven, that  there  be  no  rain 
11.  21  as  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth 

17.    3  or  any  of  the  host  of  heaven,  which  I  have 

25.  19  thou  shalt  blot  out.  .from  under  heaven 

26.  15  Look  down . .  from  heaven,  and  bless  thy  p. 
28.  12  the  heaven  to  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land 
28.  23  thy  heaven  that  (is)  over  thy  head  shall  be 
28.  24  from  heaven  shall  it  come  down  upon  thee 

28.  62  whereas  ye  were  as  the  stars  of  heaven 

29.  20  shall  blot  out  his  name  from  under  heaven 

30.  4  be  driven  out  unto  the  utmost,  .of  heaven 
30.  12  It(is)not  in  heaven,  thatthoushouldestsay 
30.  12  Wiu^  shall  go  up  for  us  to  heaven,  and  bring 

30.  19  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  this  day 

31.  28  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  against 

32.  40  For  I  lift  up  my  hand  to  heaven,  and  say 

33.  13  for  the  precious  thingsof  heaven, forthed. 
33.  26  (who)  rideth  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help 

Josh.  2.  11  Godinheavenabove.and  in  earth  beneath 

8.  20  smoke  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  heaven 
10.  11  Lord  cast  down  great  stones  from  heaven 
10.  13  the  sun  stood  still  in  the  midst  of  heaven 

Judg.  5.  20  They  fought  from  heaven ;  the  stars  in 
13.  20  when  the  flame  went  up  toward  heaven 

20.  40  flame  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  heaven 

1  Sa.    2.  10  out  of  heaven  shall  he  thunder  upon  them 

5.  12  and  the  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  heaven 

2  Sa.  18.    9  he  was  taken  up  between  the  heaven  and 

21.  10  water  dropped  upon  them  out  of  heaven 

22.  8  the  foundations  nfheaven  moved  andshook 
_  22.  14  The  Lord  thundered frnmheaven,  and  the 

1  Ki.  8.  22  and  spread  forth  Ma  hands  toward  heaven 
8.23  (there  is)no  God  like  thee,  in  heaven  above 
8.  27  heaven,  and  heaven  of  heavens,  cannot 


:  Ch.2 


!  Ch. 


1  Ki.  8.  30,  32,  34,  36,  39,  43,  45,  49  hear  thou  in  hear. 

8.  35  WhenheavL'hisshutup.andthereisnora. 
8.  54  kneeling,  .withhishandsspreaduptohea. 

1 8.  45  that  the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and 

22.  19  all  the  host  of  heaven  standing  by  him 

2  Ki.    1.  10, 12  let  fire  come  down  fromhearen,andco. 

1.  10  And  there  came  down  fire  from  heaven 
1.  12  the  fire  of  God  came  down  from  heaven 

1.  14  Behold,  there  came  fire  down  from  heaven 

2.  1  the  Lord  would  take  up  Elijah  into  heaven 
n.  11  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven 
7.  2  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven 
7.  19  the  Lord  should  make  windows  in  heaven 

14.  27  blot  outthename.  .from  under  heaven :  b. 

17.  16  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and  ser. 

19.  15  O  Lord,  .thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth 
21.    3  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and  ser. 

21.  5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 

23.  4  the  grove,  and  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 
23.    5  the  planets,  and  to  all  the  host  of  heaven 

16  stand  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven 
26  he  answered  him  from  heaven  by  fire  upon 

1 1  for  all  (that  is)  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  e. 
6  the  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 

12  Blessed  (be) the  Lord,  .that  made  heaven 
6.  13  and  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  heaven 
6.  14  (there  is)  no  God  like  thee  in  the  heaven 
6.  18  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
6.  21  hear  thou . .  from  heaven ;  and  when  thou 
6.  23,  27,  30  Then  hear  thou  from  heaven,  and 
6.  25,  33,  35,  39  Then  hear  thou  from  the  heaven 

6.  26  When  the  heaven  is  shut  up,  and  there  is 

7.  1  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consu. 

7. 13  If  I  shut  up  heaven  that  there  be  no  rain 

7. 14  then  willl  hear  from  heaven,  and  will  for. 

18.  18  all  the  host  of  heaven  standing  on  his 

20.  6  O  LORD  God . .  (art)  not  thou  God  in  heaven? 
28.   9  in  a  rage  (that)  reacheth  up  unto  heaven 
30.  27  their  prayer  came  (up.  .even)  unto  heaven 
32. 20  son  of  Amoz,  prayed  and  cried  to  heaven 
33.    3" worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 
33.    5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 

36.  23  hath  the  Lord  God  of  heaven  given  me 
Ezra    1.    2  The  Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me 
Neh.    1.    4  and  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven 

1.    5  O  Lord  God  of  heaven,  the  great  and  tend. 

1.  9  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  heaven 

2.  4  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven 

2.  20  The  God  of  heaven,  he  will  prosper  us 
9.   6  hast  made  heaven,  the  heaven  of  heavens 
9.   6  and  the  host  of  heaven  worshippeth  theo 
9. 13  and  spakest  with  them  from  heaven,  and 

9. 15  gavest  them  bread  from  heaven  for  their 
9.  23  Their  children  also,  .as  the  stars  of  hea. 
9.  27  thou  heardest  (them)  from  heaven  ;  and 
9.  28  thou  heardest  (them)  from  heaven  ;  and 

Job  1.  16  The  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from  heaven,  and 
2.  12  sprinkled 'dust  upon  'their  heads  towardh. 
11.  8  (It  is)  as  high  as  heaven ;  what  canst  thou 
16.  19  Also  now,  behold,  my  witness  (is)  in  hear. 
20.  27  The  heavens  shall  reveal  his  iniquity 

22.  12  (Is)  not  God  in  the  height  of  heaven?  and 
22  14  and  he  walketh  in  the  circuit  of  heaven 
26.  11  pillars  of  heaven  trembleand  are  astonish. 
28.  24  (and)  seeth  under  the  whole  heaven 

35. 11  maketh  as  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  heaven? 

37.  3  He  directeth  it  under  the  whole  heaven 

38.  29  and  the  hoary  frost  of  heaven,  who  hath 
38.  33  Knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven? 
38.  37  or  who  can  stay  the  bottles  of  heaven 
41.  11  (whatsoever  is)  under  the  whole  heaven  is 

Psa.   11.    4  the  Lord's  throne  (is)  in  heaven :  his  eyes 
14.    2  The  Lord  looked  down  from  heaven  upon 

19.  6  going  forth  (is)  from  the  end  of  the  heaven 

20.  6  he  will  hear  him  from  his  holy  heaven 
33.  13  The  Lord  looketh  from  heaven  ;  he  beh. 
53.  2  God  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the 
57.  3  He  shall  send  fron  heaven,  and  save  me 
69.  34  Let  the  heaven  and  earth  praise  him,  the 
73.  25  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  (but  thee)?  and 
76.  8  cause  judgment  to  be  heard  from  heaven 
78.  23  above,  and  opened  the  doors  of  heaven 
78.  24  and  had  given  them  of  the  corn  of  near. 

78.  26  caused  an  east  wiud  to  blow  in  the  heaven 

79.  2  given  (to  be) meat  unto  the  fowls  of  then. 

80.  14  look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold,  and 
85.  11  righteousness  shall  look  downfrom  heaven 
89.  29  and  his  throne  as  the  days  of  heaven 

102.  19  from  heaven  did  the  LORDbehold  the  earth 

103.  11  For  as  the  heaven  is  high  above  the  earth 

104.  12  By  them  shall  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  h. 

105.  40  satisfied  them  with  the  bread  of  heaven 
107.  26  They  mount  up  to  the  heaven,  they  go  d. 
113.    6  to  behold  (the  things  that  are)inheaven 
115.  15  of  the  Lord  which  made  heaven  and  earth 
115.  16  The  heaven,  (even)  the  heavens,  (ai'e)  the 
119.  89  O  LORD,  thy  word  is  settled  in  heaven 
121.    2  the  Lord,  which  made  heaven  and  earth 
124.    8  of  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven  and  earth 

134.  3  Lord  that  made  heaven  and  earth  Jjless 

135.  6  (that)  did  he  in  heaven,  and  in  earth,  in 

136.  26  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  heaven :  for 
139.    8  Ifl  ascend  upinto  heaven,  thou  (art)  there 

146.  6  Which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea 

147.  8  Who  covereth  the  heaven  with  clouds,  who 

148.  13  his  glory  (is)  above  the  earth  and  heaven 
Frov.23.    s  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward  heaven 

25.    3  The  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for 
30.    4  Who  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven,  or 
Eccl.  1.  13  all  (things)  that  are  done  under  heaven 

2.  3  which  they  should  do  under  the  heaven  all 

3.  1  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  the  heaven 


HEAVEN 


471 


HEAVEN 


Eccl.    5.    2  for  God  (is)  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon  ea. 
Isa.    13.    5  They  come  from . .  the  end  of  heaven 

13.  10  the  stars  of  heaven  and  the  constellations 

14.  12  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Luc. 
14.  13  I  will  ascend  unto  heaven,  I  will  exalt  my 
34.  4  all  the  host  of  heaven  shall  be  dissolved 
34-  5  For  my  sword  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven 
37.  16  O  Lord,  .thou  hast  made  heaven  and  ea. 
40.  12  and  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span,  and 
55.  10  and  the  snow-  from  heaven,  and  retumeth 
63. 15  Look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from 
66.    1  The  heaven  (is)  my  throne,  and  the  earth 

Jer.     7.  iS  to  make  cakes  to  the  queen  of  heaven 

7.  33  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 

8.  2  the  host  of  heaven,  whom  they  have  loved 
8.    7  Yea,  the  stork  in  the  heaven  knowethher 

10.    2  be  not  dismayed  at  the  sigus  of  heaven 

15.  3  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  beastsof 

16.  4  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  heaven 

19.  7  give  to  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 
19.  13  burned  incense  unto  all  the  host  of  hea. 
23.  24  do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the 

31.  37  If  heaven  above  can  be  measured,  and  the 

32.  17  thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth 

33.  22  As  the  host  of  heaven  cannot  be  number 
33-  25  appointed  the  ordinances  of  heaven  and 

34.  20  be  for  meat  unto  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 
44.  17  to  burn  incense  unto  the  queen  of  heaven 
44.  18,  25  to  burn  incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven 
44.  19  we  burnt  incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven 
49.  36  winds  from  the  four  quarters  of  heaven 
51.   9  for  her  judgment  reaeheth  unto  heaven 
51.  15  hath  stretched  out  the  heaven  by  his  und. 
51.  48  Then  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  all 
51.  53  Babylon  should  mount  up  to  heaven,  and 

lam. "2.    1  cast  down  from  heaven  unto  the  earth  the 

3.  50  Lord)  look  dou  u,  and  behold  from  heaven 

4.  19  are  swifter  than  the  eagles  of  the  heaven 
£ze.    8.    3  spirit  lifted  me  up  between  the.  .heaven 

29.  5  given  thee  for  meat.,  to  the  fowls  of  the  h. 
31.    6  All  the  fowls  of  heaven  made  their  nests 

31.  13  shall  all  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  remain 

32.  4  will  cause  all  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  to 
32.    7  I  will  cover  tlie  heaven,  and  make  the 
32.    8  Allthebrightlights  ofheaven  will  I  make 
38.  20  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  beasts  of 

Dan.   8.    3  came  up.,  toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven 

8.  10  waxed  great,  (even)  to  the  host  of  heaven 

9.  12  for  under  the  whole  heaven  hath  not  been 

11.  4  divided  toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven 

12.  7  he  held  up  his  right  hand,  .unto  heaven 
Hos.    2.  iS  with  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  (with)  the 

4.  3  with  the  fowls  of  heaven ;  yea,  the  fishes 
7.  12  bring  them  down  as  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 

Amos  9.  2  though  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  thence 
9.  6  he  that  buildethhis  stories  in  the  heaven 
Jon.  1.  9  the  God  of  heaven,  which  hath  made  the 
jfah.  3.  16  multiplied,  .above  the  stars  ofheaven:  the 
Zeph.  1:    3  I  will  consume  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 

1.  5  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven  upon  the 
Hag.  1.  10  Therefore  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  f. 
Zech.  2.    6  spread,  .as  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven 

5.  9  the  ephah  between  the  earth  and  the  heav. 
Mai.    3. 10  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of  heaven 

&.ffeavens,  {heaved  up  tilings),  j*a?J  shemayin. 
Ezra  5. 1  r  We  are  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven 

5.  12  fathers  had  provoked  the  God  of  heaven 

6.  9  the  burnt  offerings  of  the  God  ofheaven 

6.  10  offer,  .sweet  savours  unto  the  God  of  hea. 

7.  12,  2:  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven 
7.  23  commanded  by  the  God  of  heaven,  let  it 
7.  23  done  for  the  house  of  the  God  of  heaven 

Ban.    2.  18  would  desire  mercies  of  the  God  ofheaven 

2.  19  Then  Daniel  blessed  the  God  of  heaven 
2.  28  But  there  is  a  God  in  heaven  that  reveal. 
2.  37  for  the  God  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a 
2.  38  and  the  fowls  of  theheavenhathhegiven 
2.  44  shall  the  God  of  heaven  setup  akingdoni 

4. 11  and  the  height  thereof  reached  unto  heav. 

4. 12  fowls  of  the  heaven  dwelt  in  the  boughs 
4.  13,23  watcherandanholyone.  .from  heaven 
4.  15,  23  let  it  be  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 
4.  20  whose  height  reached  unto  the  heaven 

4.  21  whose  branches  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 
4.  22  reaeheth  unto  heaven,  and  thy  dominion 
4.  25  they  shall  wet  thee  with  the  dew  of  heaven 
4.  31  therefella  voice  from  heaven,  (saying),  O 
4.  33  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dewof'heaven 
4.  31  lifted  up  mine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  mine 
4.  35  doeth..his  will  in  the  army  of  heaven 

4.  37  extol  and  honour  the  King  of  heaven,  all 

5.  21  his  body  was  wet  with  thedew  of  heaven 

5.  23  lifted  up.  .against  the  Lord  of  heaven 

6.  27  worketh  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven  and 
*    7.    2  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven  strove  upon 

7.  13  Son  of  man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven 
7.  2;  of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven 

5. Heaven,  sky,  air.  ovpavos  ouranos. 

Matt.  3.    2  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand 

3. 17  lo  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  This  is  my 

4.  17  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand 

5.  3,  10  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
5.  12  great  (is)  your  reward  in  heaven :  for  so 
5.  16  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
5.  18  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or 

5.  19  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
5.  19  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
5.  20  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into . .  heaven 
5.  34  neither  by  heaven ;  for  it  is  God's  throne 
5.  45  children  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 


Matt.  5.  48  even  as  your  Father  [which  is  in  heaven] 
6.  1  have  no  reward  of  your  Father,  .in  heaven 
6.  9  Our  Father  which,  art  in  heaven,  Hallowed 
6.  10  Thy  willbedone  in  earth,  as  (it  is) in  heav. 

6.  20  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven 

7.  11  shall  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give 
7.  21  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
7.  21  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
8. 11  shall  sit  down.,  in  the  kingdom  ofheaven 

10.  7  saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand 
io-  321  33  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

11.  11  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
11. 12  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence 
11.  23  which  art  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt  be 

1 1.  25  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  beca. 

12.  50  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

13.  11  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  [of  heaven] 
13.  24  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  unto  a 

13.  31  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  grain 
J3-  33>  44»  45»  47>  52  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 

14.  19  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed,  and  br. 
16.  1  he  would  show  them  a  sign  from  heaven 
16. 17  but  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

16. 19  give,  .the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
16.  19  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven 
16.  19  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven 
iS.    1  Who  is.  .greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heav. 
iS.    3  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
18.  4  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
18. 10  in  heaven  then1  angels  do  always  behold 
18. 10  the  face  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
18. 14  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
18.  iS  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven 
18.  18  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven 
18. 19  be  done . .  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

18.  23  kingdom  of  heaven  likened  unto  a  certain 

19.  12  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake 
19. 14  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

19.  21  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven ;  and 

19.  23  hardly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

20.  1  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man 
11.  25  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  it?  from  h. 

21.  25  If  we  shall  say,  From  heaven ;  he  will  say 

22.  2  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a 

22.  30  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven 

23.  9  one  is  your  Father,  [which  is  in  heaven] 
23.  13  shutupthekingdomof  heaven  against  men 

23.  22  he  that  shall  swear  by  heaven,  sweareth 

24.  29  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the 
24.  30  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven 

24.  30  Son  of  mancominginthecloudsof  heaven 
24.  31  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other 
24.  3s  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my 

24.  36  not  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  my  Father 

25.  1  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten 

26.  64  power,  and  comingin  the  clouds  of  heaven 
28.  2  angel  of  the  Lord  descended  from  heaven 
28.  18  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in 

Mark  1.  n  there  came  a  voice  from  heaven,  (saying) 

6.  41  he  looked  up  to  heaven,  and  blessed,  and 

7.  34  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  sighed,  and  saith 

8.  11  seeking  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven,  temp. 

10.  21  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven:  and 

11.  25  your  Father  also  which  is  in  heaven  may 
11.  26  [neither,  .your  Father  which  is  in  heaven] 
ix.  30  The  baptism  of  John,  was  (it)  from  heaven 

11.  31  If  we  shall  say,  From  heaven ;  he  will  say 

12.  25  are  as  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven 

13.  25  the  stars  of  heaven  shall  fall,  and  the 
13-  25  powers  that  are  in  heaven  shall  be  shaken 
13  27  the  earth  to  the  uttermost  part  of  heaven 
13.31  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away;  but  my 

13.  32  no  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven 

14.  62  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
16. 19  [he  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat] 

Luke  2. 15  were  gone  away  from  them  into  heaven 
3.  21  it  came  to  pass,  .the  heaven  was  opened 

3.  22  avoicecamefrom  heaven,  which  said.  Thou 

4.  25  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years  and  six 
6.  23  your  reward  (is)  great  in  heaven  :  for  in  the 

9.  16  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed  them,  and 
9.  54  we  command  fire  to  come  down  from  he. 

10.  15  Capernaum,  which  art  exalted  to  heaven 
10.  18  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven 
10.  20  because  your  names  are  written  in  heaven 

10.  21  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that 

11.  2  [Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  Hallow.] 
11.    2  [will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in  earth] 

11. 16  others.,  sought  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven 
15-    7  joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner 

15.  18,  21  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven 

16. 17  is  easier  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass 
17.  24  lighteneth  out.  .one  (part)  under  heaven 
17.  24  shineth  unto  the  other(part)under heaven 

17.  29  it  rained  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven 
iS.  13  lift  up  so  much  as  (his)  eyes  unto  heaven 

18.  22  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven :  and 

19.  38  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 
=0.    4  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it  from  heaven 

20.  5  If  we  shall  say,  From  heaven ;  he  will  say 

21.  11  great  signs  shall  there  be  from  heaven 
21.  26  for  the  powers  of  heaven  shall  be  shaken 

21.  33  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away;  but  my 

22.  43  [appealed  an  angel  unto  him  from  heaven] 
24.  51  [parted  from  them, and  carried,  .into  hea.] 

John  1.  32  spirit  descending  from  heaven  like  a  dove 
1.  51  ye  shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels 
3.  13  heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from  he. 
3.  13  (even)  the  Son  of  man  [which  is  in  heaven] 
3.  27  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven 
3.  31  he  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  above  all 
6.  31  He  gave  them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat 


John  6.  32  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread  from  hea, 
6.  32  giveth  you  the  true  bread  from  heaven 
6.  33  is  he  which  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and 
6.  38  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  mine 
6.  41  the  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven 
6.  42  that  he  saith,  I  came  down  from  heaven? 
6.  50  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from  hea. 
6.  51  living  bread  which  came  down  from  hea. 

6.  58  that  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven 
12.  28  Then caiuethereavoicefroni heaven, (say.) 
17.    1  lifted  up  lus  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said 

Acts    1.  10  stedfastly  toward  heaven  as  he  went  up 
1.  1 1  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven  ?  this 
1.  11  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven 

1.  11  come,  .as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven 

2.  2  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven  as  of  a 
2.    5  men,  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven 

2.  19  I  will  show  wonders  in  heaven  above,  and 

3.  21  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the  times 

4.  12  there  is  none  other  name  under heaven 
4.  24  God,  whichhast  made  heaven,  and  earth 

7.  42  gave  them  up  to  worship,  .host of  heaven 
7. 49  Heaven  (is)  my  throne,  and  earth  (is)  my 
7.  55  looked  up  stedfastly  into  heaves,  and  saw 
9.    3  shined  round  about,  .a  light  from  heaven 

10.  11  saw  heaven  opened,  and  a  certain  vessel 

10.  16  vessel  was  received  up  again  into  heaven 

11.  5  letdown  from  heaven  by  four  corner's 

11.  9  the  voice  answered  me  again  from  heaven 
11. 10  and  all  were  drawn  up  again  into  heaven 

14.  15  which  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  thesea 
17.  24  seeing,  .he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 
22.    6  there  shone  from  heaven  a  great  light 

Bom.  1.  18  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven 
10.    6  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven?  that  is,  to 

1  Co.   8.    5  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  astherebe 

15.  47  the  second  man  (is)  the  Lord  from  heaven 

2  Co.   5.    2  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven 

12.  2  suchan  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven 
Gal.  r.  8  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other 
Eph.    1.  10  which  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  on 

3.  15  Of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  "nd 
6.   9  knowing  that  your  Master,  .is  in  heaven 

Phil.   3.  20  our  conversation  is  in  heaven ;  from  when. 

Col.     1.   5  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven 
1.  16  all  things  created  that  are  in  heaven 
1.  20  be)  things  in  earth,  or  tilings  in  heaven 
1.  23  to  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven 

4.  1  that  ye  also  have  a  Master  in  heaven 

1  Tli.  1.  jo  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he 

4.  16  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout 

2  Tli.  1.    7  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven 
Heb.   9.  24  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appearin  the 

10.  34  have  [in  heaven]  a  better  and  an  enduring: 
12.  23  first  born,  which  are  written  in  heaven 
12.  25  away  from  him  that  (speaketh)  from  heav. 
12.  26  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also  heaven 
Jas.     5.  12  neither  by  heaven,  neither  by  the  earth 

5.  iS  and  the  heaven  gave  rain,  and  the  earth 

1  Pe.  1.    4  anmheritance..reservedinheavenforyon 

1.  12  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heav. 

3.  22  Who  is  gone  into  heaven,  and  is  on  the 

2  Pe.    1.  iS  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we  heard 
1  Jo.    5.    7  are  three  that  bear  record  in  [heaven] 
Kev.    3.  12  cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  my  God 

4.  1  adoor(was)openedinheaven:andthefirst 

4.  2  a  throne  w;as  set  in  heaven,  and  (one)  sat 

5.  3  no  man  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  neither 

5.  13  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on 
6. 13  the  stars  ofheaven  fell  unto  the  earth 

6.  14  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it 

8.  1  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the 
S.  10  aud  there  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven 

9.  1  a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto  the  earth 
10.    1  another  mighty  angel  come,  .from  heaven 
10.    4  heard  a  voice  fromheavensayinguntorue 
10.    5  the  angel,  .lifted  up  his  hand  to  heaven 
10.    6  who  created  heaven,  and  the  things  that 

10.  8  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven  spake 

11.  6  These  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it 
11. 12  great  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  them 
11.  12  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  a  cloud 
11.  13  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven 

11.  15  there  were  great  voices  in  heaven,  saying 

11.  iq  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven 

12.  1  appeared  a  great  wonder  in  heaven 

12.  3  there  appeared  another  wonderinheaven 
12.  4  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven,  and 
12.  7  there  was  war  in  heaven:  Michael  and  his 
12.    8  neither  was  their  place  found,  .in  heaven 

12.  10  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  heaven 

13.  6  tabernacle,  and  them  that  dwell  in  heaven 

13.  13  hemakethfire  comedown  from  heaven  on 

14.  2  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the  voice 
14.  7  worship  him  that  made  heaven,  and  earth 
14.  13  heard  a  voice  fromheaven  saying  untome 

14.  17  came  out  of  the  temple  which  isinheaven 

15.  1  I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and 

15.  5  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in  heaven 

16.  11  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven  because  of 
16. 17  great  voice  out  of  the  temple  [of  heaven] 
16.  21  fell  upon  men  a  great  hail  out  ofheaven 
18.  1  saw  anotherangel  come  down  from  heaven 
iS.  4  I  heard  another  voice  from  heaven,  saying 
iS.    5  her  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven,and  God 

18.  20  Rejoice  over  her,  (thou)heaven,  and  (ye) 

19.  1  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in  heaven 
19.  11  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white 

19.  14  thearniies(whichwere)inheavenfollowed 

20.  1  I  saw  an  angel  come  down  from  heaven 
20.  9  fire  came  down  from  God  out  ofheaven 
20. 11  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away;  and 


HEAVEN 


472 


H  hi  x>  Jqj  rt 


Rev.  21.  i  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  :  for 
21.  i  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  were 
21.  2  coining  down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  pre. 
21.  3  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  [heaven]  saying 
21.  io  city,  .descending  out  of  heaven  from  God 
HEAVEN,  from  — 
From  heaven,  ovpavSQzv  ouranothen. 

Acts  14.  17  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful 

26.  13  Isa  win  the  way  a  light  from  heaven,  above 

HEAVEN,  in  — 

Heavenly,  in  or  on  heaven,  iivovpavin^  epouranios. 

Phil.  2.  10  of  (things)  in  heaven,  and  (things)  in  ea. 
HEAVEN,  midst  of  — 
Mill  heaven,  y.€aovpdi/7}y.a  vicsouranema. 

Rev.  8.  13  angel  flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven 

14.  6  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of  he. 

19.  17  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of  hea. 

HEAVENLY  — 

l.OiU  of  heaven,  e£  ovpavov  ex  ouranou. 

Luke  1 1.  13  how  much  more  shall  (your)  heavenly  F. 
2. Heavenly \in  or  on  heaven,  i-rrovpai/ios  epouranios. 

JIatt.18.  35  So  likewise  shall  my  [heavenly]  Father  do 

1  Co.  15.  48  heavenly,  such  (are)they  also  that  (are)h. 

15.  49  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly 
Eph.    1.  20  set.  .at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly 

2  Ti.   4.  18  will  preserve  (me)  unto  his  heavenly  kin. 
Hob.  3.    1  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,  consi. 

6.  4  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were 
11. 16  now  they  desire  a  better.. that  is, an  hea. 
12.  22  are  come  unto,  .the  heavenly  Jerusalem 

3. Heavenly,  ovpavios  ouranios. 

.Matt.  6.  14  your  heavenly  Father  will  also  forgive  you 
6.  26  the  fowls,  .yet  your  heavenly  Fatherfeed 
6.  32  your  heaveuly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  ha. 

15.  13  Every  plant,  which  my  heavenly  Father  h. 
Luke  2.  13  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising 
jVcts  26. 19  was  not  disobedient  unto  the  heaveuly  vi. 

HEAVENLY  (places)  — 

The  hcavenlies,  tcl  iirovpavLa  la  epourania. 

Eph.  1.    3  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  (places)  in 

2.  6  sit  together  in  heaveuly  (places)  iu  Christ 

3.  10  and  powers  in  heavenly  (places)  might  be 

HEAVENLY  things  — 

Tlie  things  in  heaven,  ra  eirovpduia  ta  epourania. 

John  3.  12  believe,  if  I  tell  you  (of)  heavenly  things? 

Heb.  8.  5  the  example  and  shadow  of  heavenly  thi. 
9.  23  but  the  heavenly  things  themselves  with 

HEAVENS  — 

1.  Mixed  cloud,  ng-i^.  arabah. 

Psa    68.    4  extol  him  that  ridethupon  the  heavens  by 
^.Dropping  clouds,  d,3,"!J/i  emphim. 

Isa.     5.  30  the  light  is  darkened  iu  the  heavens  the. 
3. Heavens,  the  heaved  up  things,  c*"*^  shamayim. 

Gen.  2.  1  Thus  the  heaveus  and  the  earth  were  fin. 
2.  4  the  generations  of  the  heavens  and  of  the 
2.    4  Lord  God  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens 

Deut  10.  14  the  heaven  of  heavens,  (is)  the  Lord's  thy 

32.  1  Give  ear,  0  ye  heavens,  and  I  will  speak 

33.  28  Israel,  .his  heavens  shall  drop  down  dew 
Judg.  5.  4  the  heavens  dropped,  the  clouds  also  dr. 
2  Sa.  22. 10  He  bowed  the  heavens  also,  and  came  down 
1  Ki.   8.  27  andheavenof  heavens,cannotcontainthee 

1  Ch.16.  26  (are)  idols :  but  the  Lord  made  the  heavens 

16.  31  Let  the  heavens  be  glad,  and  let  the  earth 

27.  23  increase  Israel  like  to  the  stars  of  the  he. 

2  Ch.  2.    6  seeing  the . .  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con. 

6.  18  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  thee 

6-  25i  33>  35»  39  Then  hear  thou  from  the  heav. 

Ezra   9.    6  ourtrespassisgrownup  unto  the  heavens 

N"eh.  9.    6  the  heaven  of  heavens,  with  all  their  host 

Job     9.   8  Which  alone  spreadeth  out  the  heavens 

14.  12  till  the  heavens  (be)  no  more,  they  shall 

*5- 15  yea,  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  sight 

20.  6  Though  his  excellency  mount  up  to  theh. 
26. 13  By  his  spirit  he  hath  garnished  the  heav. 

35.  5  Look  unto  the  heavens,  and  see  ;  and  be. 
Psa.    2.    4  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh 

8.    1  who  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens 

8.    3  When  I  consider  thy  heavens,  the  work  of 

18.    9  He  bowed  the  heavens  also,  and  came  do. 

18.  13  The  Lord  also  thundered  in  the  heavens 

19.  1  Theheavensdeclarethegloryof  God  ;  and 
33.   6  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens 

36.  5  Thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  (is)  in  the  heavens 
50.   4  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  from  above 
50.    6  the  heavens  shall  declare  his  righteousness 
57.    5  Be  thou  exalted,  O  God,  above  the  heav. 
57. 10  For  thy  mercy  (is)  great  unto  the  heavens 
57.  11  Be  thou  exalted,  OGod,  above  the  heavens 
68.    8  the  heavens  also  dropped  at  the  presence 
68.  33  To  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens  of  h. 
73.   9  They  set  their  mouth  against  the  heavens 
89.    2  shalt  thou  establish  in  the  very  heaveus 
89.    5  And  the  heavens  shall  praise  thy  wonders 
89.  11  The  heavens  (are)  thine,  the  earth  also(is) 
96.    5  (arc)  id  )ls  :  but  the  LORD  made  the  heav. 

96.  11  Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and  let  the  earth 

97.  6  The  heavens  declare  his  righteousness, and 

102.  25  and  the  heavens  (arc)  the  work  of  thy  ha. 

103.  19  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the  h. 

104.  2  who  Btretchest  out  the  heavens  like  a  cu. 
108.  4  For  thy  mercy  (is)  great  above  the  heavens 
108.  5  Be  them  exalted,  O  God,  above  the  heav. 
113.  4  Lord  (is)  high .  .his  glory  above  the  heav. 


Psa.  1 15.  3  But  our  God  (is)  in  the  heavens  :  he  hath 
115. 16  the  heavens,  (are)  the  Lord's  :  butthe  ea. 
123.  1  Unto  thee.  .0  thou  that  dwellest  in  theh. 
136.  5  To  him  that  by  wisdom  made  the  heavens 
144.  5  Bow  thyheaveus,  0  Lord,  and  come  down 
148.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord  from  the  heavens :  pr. 
148.  4  Praise  him,  ye  heavens  of  heavens,  and  ye 
148.    4  and  ye  waters  that  (be)  above  the  heavens 

Prov.  3.  19  byunderstanding.  .established theheaven 

8.  27  When  he  prepared  the  heavens,  I  (was) 
Jsa.     1.   2  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth 

13. 13  Therefore  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and 
34.  4  the  heavens  shall  be  rolled  together  as  a 
40.  22  that  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  as  a  curt. 
42.  5  he  that  created  the  heavens,  and  stretch. 
44.  23  Sing,  O  ye  heavens ;  for  the  Lord  hath 

44.  24  that  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens  alone 

45.  8  Drop  down,  ye  heavens,  from  above,  and 
45.  12  I.  .have,  .stretched  out  the  heavens,  and 
45.  18  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  the  he. 

48.  13  and  my  right  hand  hath  spanned  the  he. 

49.  13  Sing,  O  heavens;  and  be  joyful,  0  earth 

50.  3  I  clothe  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and 

51.  6  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and  look 
51.  6  for  the  heavens  shall  vanishaway  like  sm. 
51.  13  the  Lord.. hath  stretched  forth  the  heav. 
51.  16  that  I  may  plant  the  heavens,  and  lay  the 
55.    9  For  (as)  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the 

64.  1  Oh  that  thou  wouldesfc  rend  the  heavens 

65.  17  For,  behold,  I  create  new  heavens,  and  a 

66.  22  For  as  the  new  heavens,  and  the  new  earth 
Jer.     2.  12  Be  astonished,  O  ye  heavens,  at  this,  and 

4.  23  I  beheld,  .the  heavens,  and  they  (had)  no 
4.  25  and  all  the  birds  of  the  heavens  were  fled 
4.  28  For  this  shall,  .the  heavens  above  be  black 

9.  10  both  the  fowl  of  the  heavens  and  thebea. 
10.  12  stretchedout  the  heaven  by  his  discretion 
10.  13  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heavens,  and 
14.  22  or  can  the  heavens  give  showers?  Art  not 
51.  16  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heaveus;  and 

Lam.  3.  41  lift  up  our  hearts,  .unto  God  in  the  heav. 
3.  66  destroy  them,  .from  under  the  heavens  of 
Eze.     1.    1  the  heavens  were  opened, and  I  saw  visions 
Hos.    2.  21 1  will  hear  the  heavens,  and  they  shall 
Joel   2. 10  the  heavens  shall  tremble :  the  sun  and 

2.  30  I  will  show  wonders  in  the  heavens  and 

3.  16  andtheheavens  andtheearth  shall  shake 
Hah.  3.  3  His  glory  covered  the  heavens,  and  the 
Hag.   2.    6  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth 

2.  21  saying,  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the 
Zech.  6.    5  These  (are)  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens 

8.  12  the  heavens  shall  give  their  dew;  and  I 
12.    1  which  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and 

A. Heavens,  {heavedup  things),  ]\^v  shemayin. 
Jer.    10.  11  The  gods  that  have  not  made  the  heaven 
10.  1 1  they  shall  perish . .  from  under  these  heav. 
Dan.   4.  26  shalthave known  thatthe heavens  do  rule 
5.  Heavens,  skies,  obpavoi  ouranoi. 

Matt.  3.  16  and,  lo,  the  heavenswere  opened  unto  him 

24.  29  and  the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be 
Mark  1.  10  he  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  spir, 
Lukei2.  33  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not 
Acts  2.  34  For  David  is  not  ascended  into  the  heav. 
7.  56  Behold,  I  see  the  heaveus  opened,  and  the 
2  Co.  5.  1  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  hea. 
Eph.  4.  10  far  above  allheavens,  that  he  mightfillall 
Heb.    1.  10  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  thine  hands 

4.  14  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the 

7.  26  High  Priest,  .made higher  than  the  heav. 

8.  1  set  on.. the  throne  of  the  majesty  in  theh. 

9.  23  the  patternsof  things  in  the  heavensshou. 
2  Pe.  3.   5  that  by  the  word  of  God  the  heavens  were 

3.  7  the  heavens  and  the  earth  which  are  now 
3. 10  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away 
3.  12  wherein  the  heavens  beingonfire  shall  be 
3.  13  we.  .look  for  new  heavensand  anewearth 

Rev.  12.  12  Therefore  rejoice,  (ye)  heavens,  and  ye 
HEAVIER  — 
Weighty,  heavy,  "ns  kabed. 

Prov  27.    3  but  a  fool's  wrath  (is)  heavier  than  them 

HEAVIER,  to  be  — 

To  be  heavy,  weighty,  133  kabad. 

Job     6.    3  it  would  be  heavier  than  the  sand  of  the 
23.    2  to  day.  .my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  gr. 

HEAVILY  — 

l.Heav-iness,  weight,  ri"i33  kebeduth. 

Exodi4.  25  they  drave'them  heavily :  so  that  the  Eg 

2.7*0  be  black,  mourning,  -nn  qadar. 

Psa.  35.  14  I  bowed  down  heavily,  as  one  that  mour. 

HEAVILY,  to  lay  — 

T<>  make  heavy  or  weighty,  133  Imbed,  5. 

Isa.  47.   6  upon  the  ancient  hast  thou,  .heavily  lf.id 
HEAVINESS  — 
1.  Sorrow,  fear,  njxn  deagah. 

Prov.12.  25  Heaviness  in  the  heart  of  man  maketh  it 
'J..  Weakness,  nns  kehah. 

Isa.   61.    3  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heavi. 
•I. Face,  aspect,  O^spanim. 

Job     9.  27  I  will  leave  off  my  heaviness,  and  comfort 
i.Lamentatioii,  mo/wrning,  n;:Nn  taaniyyah. 

Isa.   29.    2  and  there  shall  be  heaviness  and  sorrow 
5. Affliction,  sorrow,  nam  tugah. 

Psang.  28  My  soul  melteth  for  heaviness:  strengthen 


Prov  10.    \  a  foolish  son  (is)  the  heaviness  of  his 

14.  13  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  (is)  heaviness 
G. Affliction,  humiliation,  IV3J/FI  taanith. 

Ezra   9.    5  I  arose  up  from  my"  heaviness;  and, having 

7.  Dejection  0/  tlie  eye,  KaTT)<peia  koMpheia. 

Jas.     4.    9  be  turned  to  mourning,  and. . joy  toheav. 

8.  Grief,  Ai/Tnfr  lupe. 

Rom.  9.   2  I  have  great  heaviness  aud  continual 

2  Co.  2.    1  that  I  would  not  comeagain  to  you  in  he 
HEAVINESS,  to  be  full  of  — 
l.To  be  feeble,  mortal,  vu  nush. 

Psa.  69.  20  and  I  am  full  of  heaviness :  and  I  looked 
l.To  be  very  heavy,  faint,  aS-ny-ovtw  ademoneo. 

Phil.    2.  26  For  he  longed,  .and  was  full  of  heaviness 
HEAVINESS,  to  be  in  — 
To  be  grieved,  \vireofiat,  lupcomai. 

1  Pe.    1.    6  ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold 
HEAVY  — 
1. Heavy,  weighty,  "D|  kabed. 

Exod  17.  12  But  Moses'  hands  (were)  heavy ;  and  they 
18.  18  for  this  thing  (is)  too  heavy  for  thee;  thou 

1  E.i.  12.    4  and  his  heavy  yoke  which  he  put  upon  us 

12.  11  my  father  did  lade  you  with  a  heavy  yoke 

2  Ch.io.    4  and  his  heavy  yoke  that  he  put  upon  us 

10.  11  my  father  put  a  heavy  yoke  upon  you,  I 

Psa.  38.    4  mine  iniquities . .  as  an  heavy  burden  they 
'2. Heaviness,  133  kobed. 

Prov  27.    3  A  stone  (is)  heavy,  and  the  sand  weighty 

Isa.   30.  27  and  the  burden  (thereof  is)  heavy:  his  lips 
Z.A  bar,  yoke,  no'iD  motah. 

Isa.  58.   6  to  undo  the  heavy  burdens,  and  to  let  the 
A.  Bitter,  ID  mar. 

Prov  31.   6  wine  unto  those  that  be  of  heavy  hearts 
5,  Sulky,  sour,  "ip  sar. 

1  Ki.  20.  43  went  to  his  house  heavy  and  displeased 
21.   4  Ahab  came  into  his  house  heavy  and  dis. 
Q.Sharp,  hard,  nt^f?  qasheh. 

1  Ki.  14.    6  for  I  (am)  sent  to  thee  (with)  heavy  (tid.) 
7. Evil,  Jn  ra. 

Prov  25.  20  he  that  singeth  songs  to  an  heavy  heart 
8. Heavy,  weighty,  fiapvs  barus. 

Matt  23.    4  For  they  bind  heavy  burdens  and  grievous- 
HEAVY,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  heavy,  weighty,  133  kabed. 

1  Sa.    4.  18  for  he  was  an  old  man,  and  heavy.  And  he 

5.    6  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  upon  them 
5.  11  the  hand  of  God  was  very  heavy  there 

2  Sa.  14.  26  because  (the  hair)  was  heavy  on  him,  til. 
Neh.  5.  18  because  the  bondage  was  heavy  upon  this 
Job  33.  7  neither  shall  my  hand  be  heavy  upon  thee 
Psa.  32.    4  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon 

38.    4  For  mine  iniquities,  .they  are  too  heavy 
Isa.   24.  20  the  transgression  thereof  shall  be  heavy 
59.    1  neither  his  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot  hear 

2.  To  be  heavy,  weighed  down,  papeoy.cu  bareoviai. 
Matt  26.  43  asleep  again  :  for  their  eyes  were  heavy 
Marki4.  40  for  their  eyes  were  [heavy],  neither  wist 
Luke  9.  32  Peter  and  they,  .were  heavy  with  sleep 

HEAVY,  to  be  very  — 

To  be  very  heavy,  faint,  aZ-qyovew  ademoneo. 

Matt  26.  37  and  began  to  be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy 
Marki4.  33  began  to  be  sore  amazed,  and  to  be  very  h. 

HEAVY,  to  make  — 

To  make  heavy,  ~Q3  kabed,  5. 

1  Ki.  12.  10  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  but 

12.  14  My  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  and  I 

2  Ch.io.  10  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  but  make 

10.  14  My  father  made  your  yoke  heavy,  but  I 
Isa.     6.  10  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes 
Lam.  3.    7  cannot  get  out :  he  hath  made  my  chain  h. 

HEAVY,  (to  be)  too  — 

Heavy,  weighty,  "Q3  kabed. 

Numii.  14  I  am  not  able,  .because  (it  is)  too  heavy 

HE'-BER,  *nj;  shoot,  production,  shoot. 

l.Head  of  a  family  in  the  tribe  of  Gad. 

1  Ch.  5. 13  Jorai,  and  Jachan,  and  Zia,  and  H.,  seven 

'2.  A  son  of  Shashak  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin. 
1  Ch.  S.  2-  And  Ishpan,  and  H.,  and  Eliel 

HE'-BER,  inn,  -gn,  "an,  'E£ep  companion. 

1.  A  son  of  Eeriali  the  son  of  Asher.    B.C.  1640. 

Gen.  46.  17  and  the  sons  of  Beriah  ;  H.,  and  Makhiel 
NU11126.  45  Of  the  sons  of  Beriah  ;  of  H.,  the  family 
1  Ch.  7.  31  And  the  sons  of  Beriah  ;  H..  and  3£alchiel 
7.  32  And  H.  begat  Japhlet,  and  Shomer,  and 
Luke  3.  35  Phalec,  which  was  (the  son)  of  H.,  which 

2.  The  husband  of  Jael  who  killed  Sisera.  He  was  a 
Kcnite,  while  Sisera  was  captain  of  Jabin's  army.  B.C. 
1360. 

Judg.  4.  11  H.  the  Kenite.  .of  the  children  of  Hobab 
4.  17  fled.,  to  the  tent  of  Jael  the  wife  of  H. 
4.  17  peace  between  Jabin.  .and  the  house  of  H. 

4.  21  Then  Jael  H.'s  wife  took  a  nail  of  the  tent 

5.  24  Blessed,  .shall  Jael  the  wife  of  H.  the  K. 

3.  A  son  of  Ezra,  apparently  of  the  family  of  Caleb  son 
of  Jephunneh.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  18  And  his  wife.  .bare.  .H.  the  father  of  Soc. 

4.  A  son  of  Elpaal,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.  17  and  Meshullam,  and  Hezeki,  and  H. 


HBBBRITES 


473 


HE  EL 


HE-BE-RITES,  ""nil  belonging  to  Heber. 

A  family  descended  from  Heber,  a  descendant  of  Beriah 

son  of  Aslier.     B.C.  1640. 

Nuni26. 45  of  Heber,  the  family  of  the  H. :  of  Malchiel 
HE'-BREW,  *"UJ>  'EQpaTos  belonging  io  Eber, 

1.  Patronymic  of  Abraham  and  his  offspring. 

Gen.  14.  13  there  came  one.  .and  told  Abram  the  H. 
39.  14  he  hath  brought  in  an  H.  unto  us  to  mock 
39.  1 7  The  H.  servant . .  came  in  unto  me  to  mock 

40. 15  I  was  stolen,  .out  of  the  laud  of  the  H. 
41.  12  And.  .there  with  us  a  young  man,  an  H. 
43.  32  Egyptians  might  uot  eat  bread  with  the  H. 

Exod.  1.  15  the  king  of  Egypt  spake  to  the  H.  ruidw. 

1.  16  ye  do  the  office  of  a  midwife  to  the  H.  wo. 
1. 19  the  H.  women  (are)  not  as  the  Egyptian 
■?..    6  she . .  said,  This  (is  one)  of  the  H.  's  children 

2.  7  Shall  I  go  and  call,  .a  nurse  of  the  H.  wo. 
2. 11  he  spied  an  Egyptian  smiting  an  H.,  one  of 

2.  13  behold,  two  men  of  the  H.  strove  together 

3.  18  The  Lord  God  of  the  H.  hath  met  with  us 
5.    3  The  God  of  the  H.  hath  met  with  us 

7.  16  The  Lord  God  of  the  H.  hath  sent  me  unto 
9.    1,  13  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  the  H. 
10.    3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  the  H. 

21.  2  If  thou  buy  an  H.  servant,  six  years  he 
Deut  15.  12  if.  .an  H.  man,  or  an  H.  woman,  be  sold 

1  Ra.   4.   6  What . .  the  noise . .  in  the  camp  of  the  H.? 

4.  9  that  ye  be  not  servants  unto  the  H.,  as 
13.    3  Saul  blew  the  trumpet,  .saying,  Let  the  H. 
13.    7  And  (some)  of  the  H.went  over  Jordan  to 

13.  19  Lest  the  H.  make  (them)  swords  or  spears 

14.  11  the  H.  come  forth  out  of  the  holes  where 
14.  21  Moreover  the  H. .  .(turned)  to  be  with  the 
29.  '3  Then  said  the  princes.  .What  (do)theseH. 

Jer.  34.   9  every  man  should  let.  .an  H.  or  an  Hebr. 

34. 14  let  ye  go  every  man  his  brother  an  H. 
Jon.    i.    9  And  he  said  uuto  them,  I  (am)  an  H. 
Acts    6.    1  murmuring  of  the  Grecians  against  the  H. 

2  Co. 11.  22  Are  they  H.?  so  (am)  I.     Are  they  Israe.? 
Phil.  3.    5  Circum.  the  eighth  day.  .an  H.  of  the  H. 

2.  The  language  spoken  by  the  Jews  in  Palestine  in  the 
time  of  Christ.  It  might  more  accurately  have  been 
called  Syro-Chaldee,  being  a  mixture  of  the  Aramaean 
of  Daniel  and  Ezra  with  the  ancient  Hebrew.  The 
Syriac  Peshito  and  the  Chaldee  Targum  of  Onkelos  are 
its  substantial  representatives.  In  the  schools  of  the 
Rabbis  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  an  attempt 
was  made  to  return  to  the  Hebrew  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  may  be  seen  in  the  Mishnak,  &c. 

Acts  21.  40  he  spake  unto  (them)  in  the  H.  tongue 

22.  2  they  heard  that  he  spake  in  the  H.  tongue 
26.  14  I  heard  a  voice  speaking,  .in  the  H.  ton. 

HEBREW  (tongue),  in  the  — 
Hebraistic,  'E^paiarl  Hebraisti. 

John  5.    2  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  B. 

19.  13  the  Pavement,  but  in  the  Hebrew,  Gabb. 

19.  17  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew,  Golgotha 

19.  20  it  waswrittenin  Hebrew,(and)  Greek,  (and) 
Rev.    9.  11  whose  name  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  (is)  Ab. 

16. 16  a  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  A. 
HEBREW,  (of)  — 

Hebraic,  'Etfpai'/co's  Hcbraikos. 

Luke23.  38  in  letters  of  Greek.and  Latin,  and  Hebrew 
HEB'-RON,  pT3K,  J^nford,  company. 

1.  A  city  of  Ash  er  near  Rehob,  called  also  Abdon  (which 
see).    Properly  Ebron. 

Josh.19.  28  H.,  and  Rehob,  and  Hammon,  and  Kanah 

2.  A  city  of  Judah,  22  miles  S.  of  Jerusalem,  in  a  rocky 
but  fertile  district ;  it  was  also  called  Kirjath-arba,  anil 
now  JEl-khulil. 

Gen.  13.  18  in  the  plain  of  Mature,  which  (is)  in  H. 

23.  2,  19  the  same  (is)  H.  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
35.  27  which  (is)  H.,  where  Abraham  and  Isaac 
37.  14  So  he  sent  him  out  of  the  vale  of  H.,  and 

!Numi3.  22  ascended  by  the  south,  and  came  unto  H. 

13.  22  H.  wras  built  seven  years  before  Zoan  inE. 
Josh  10.    3  Adoni-zedek.  .sent  unto Hoham  king  of  H. 

10.  5  Therefore . .  the  king  of  H. . .  encamped  be. 
10.  23  did  so,  and  brought  forth . .  the  king  of  H  ■ 
10.  36  And  Joshua  went  up  from  Eglon .  .unto  H. 

10.  39  as  he  had  done  to  H.,  so  he  did  to  Debir 

11.  21  cut  off  the  Anakims.  fromH.,  from  Debir 
12  10  The kingof  Jerusalem,  one;  thekingofH. 

14.  13  Joshua,  .gave  unto  Caleb.  .H.  for  an  inh. 
14. 14  H.  therefore  became  the  inheritance  of  C. 

14.  15  the  name  of  H.  before  (was)  Kirjath-arba 
15. 13  Caleb,  .he  gave.  .Arba.  .which  (city  is)  H. 

15.  54  Humtah,  and  Kirjath-arba,  which  (is)  H. 

20.  7  appointed.  .Kirjath-arba,  which  (is)  H. 

21.  11  they  gave  them.  .Arba.  .which  (city  is)  H. 
21.  13  they  gave  to  the  children  of  Aaron.  ,H. 

JuJg.  1.  jo  against  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  H. 
1.  10  now  the  name  of  H.  before  (was)  Kirjath. 

1.  20  they  gave  H.  unto  Caleb,  as  Moses  said 

16.  3  up  to  the  top  of  an  hill,  that  (is)  before  H. 

1  Sa.  30.  31  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  H.,  and  to  all 

2  Sa.  2.    1  Whither  shall  I  go  up  ?  And  he  said.  .H. 

2.  3  and  they  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  H. 

2.  11  David  was  king  in  H. .  .seven  years  and 

2.  32  and  they  came  to  H.  at  break  of  day 

3.  2  And  unto  David  were  sons  born  in  H. 
3.    5  These  were  born  to  David  in  H. 

3.  19  to  speak  in  the  ears  of  David  in  H. 

3.  20  So  Abner  came  to  David  to  H.,  and  twenty 

3.  22  but  Abner  (was)  not  with  David  in  H. 

3.  27' when  Abner  was  returned  to  H.,  Joab 

4.  1  Saul's  son  heard . .  Abner  was  dead  in  H. 
4.    8  brought  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth . .  t  >  1! . 

60 


2  Sa.  4.  12  and  hanged  (them)  up  over  the  pool  in  H. 

4.  12  buried  (it)  in  the  sepulchre  of  Abner  in  H. 

5.  1  Then  came  all  the  tribes . .  to  David  unto  H. 
5.    3  elders  of  Israel  came  to  the  king  to  H. 

5.  3  king  David  made  a  league  with  them  in  H. 
5.    5  In  H.  he  reigned  over  Judah  seven  years 

5.  13  took,  .wives,  .after  he  was  come  from  H. 
15.  7  which  I  have  vowed  unto  the  Lord,  in  H 
15.  9  Go  in  peace.  So  he  arose,  and  went  to  H. 
15.  10  then  ye  shall  say,  Absalom  reigneth  in  H . 

1  Ki.  2.  11  seven  years  reigned  he  in  H.,  and  thirty 

1  Ch.  3.   1  the  sons . .  which  were  born  unto  him  in  H. 

3.  4  (These)  six  were  born  unto  him  in  H ;  and 

6.  55  they  gave  them  H.  in  the  land  of  Judah 
6.57  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave.  .H.,(thec.) 

11.    1  all  Israel  gathered,  .to  David  unto  H. 
11.   3  came  all  the  elders,  .to  the  king  to  H. 

11.  3  David  made  a  covenant  with  them  in  H. 

12.  23  the  bands,  .ready,  .came  to  David  to  H. 
12.  38  these,  .came  with  a  perfect  heart  to  H. 
29.  27  seven  years  reigned  he  in  H.,  and  thirty 

2  Ch.n.  10  Zorah,  and  Aijalon,  andH  ,  which  <are)  in 

3.  A  son  of  Kohath,  the  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1600. 

Exod.  6.  18  And  the  sons  of  Kohath.  .H.,  and  Vzziel 

Num.  3.  19  And  the  sons  of  Kohath.  .H.,  and  Tzziel 

1  Ch.  6.    2  And  the  sons  of  Kohath.  ,H.,  and  Uzziel 

6. 18  And  the  sons  of  Kohath.  .H.,  and  LTzziel 

23.  12  The  sons  of  Kohath .  .H.,  and  Vzziel,  four 

23.  19  Of  the  sous  of  H. ;  Jeriah  the  first,  Araa. 

4.  The  patronymic  of  Mareshah  a  descendant  of  Caleb 
the  son  of  Hezron.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  2.  42  the  sons  of  Mareshah  the  father  of  H. 

2. 43  And  the  sons  of  H. ;  Korah,  and  Tappuah 
15.    9  Of  the  sons  of  H.;  Eliel  the  chief,  and  his 
HE-BRO-NITES,  '.rnin,  'ran. 

Patronymic  of  the  family  of  Hebron  the  son  of  Kohath. 
B.C.  1600. 

Num.  3.  27  And  of  Kohath.  .the  family  of  the  H. 

26.  58  families  of  the  Levites.  .family  of  the  H. 
1  Ch.26.  23  Of  the  Amramites.  .the  Izharites,  the  H. 
26.  30  the  H.,  Hashabiah  and  his  brethren,  men 
26.  31  Among  the  H.  (was)  Jerijah  the  chief 
26.  31  among  the  H.,  according  to  the  geuerat. 
HEDGE  — 

1.  Hedge,  fold,  Ti3  gader. 

Psa.  80.  12  Why  hast  thou.,  broken  down  her  hedges 
Eccl.io.    8  whoso  breaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent 
Eze.  13.    5  neither  made  up  the  hedge  for  the  house 
22.  30  that  should  make  up  the  hedge,  and  stand 

'l.Hedge,  fold,  Triis  gederah. 

1  Ch.  4.  23  those  that  dwelt  among  plants  and  hedges 
Psa.  89.  40  Thou  hast  broken  down  all  his  hedges 
Jer.  49.    3  lament,  and  run  to  and  fro  by  the  hedges 
Nah.  3.  17  which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day 

3. Hedge,  roiiwa  mesukah. 

Provi5.  19  the  slothful  (man  is)  as  an  hedge  of  thorns 
Isa.     5.    5  I  will  take  away  the  hedge  thereof,  and 

4.-4  hedge,  <ppayfj.6s  phragmos. 

Marki2.    1  set  an  hedge  about  (it),  and  digged  (a 
Luke  14.  23  Go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges 

HEDGE,  to  — 

To  hedge  about,  *na  gadar. 

Lam.  3.    7  He  hath  hedged  me  about,  that  I  camiut 

HEDGE  in,  to  — 
To  shut  up,  cover  in,  359  saJcak,  5. 
Job     3.  23  to  a  man.  .whom  God  hath  hedged  in? 

HEDGE,  to  make  an  — 

To  make  a  fence,  Tpb  suh,  5. 

Job      1.  10  Hast  not  thou  made  an  hedge  about  him 

HEDGE  round  about,  to  — 

To  put  a  Jiedge- around,  ■neptTiOnfJ.i  (ppa.yfj.6y. 
Matt  21.  33  and  hedged  it  round  about,  and  digged  a 

HEDGE  up,  to — 

To  hedge  up,  Tps>  suk. 

Hos.    2.    6  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns,  and 

HEED,  to  give  — 

To  give  attention,  3£;p  qashab,  5. 

Prov.17.    4  A  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  lips 

Jer.    18.  iS  let  us  not  give  heed  to  any  of  his  words 

18.  19  Give  heed  to  me,  O  Lord,  and  hearken  to 

HEED  to,  to  give  — 

To  hold  toward,  irpoa4xu>  proseclio. 

Acts    8.  10  To  whom  they  all  gave  heed,  from  the  least 
1  Ti.    1.    4  Neither  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless 

4.  1  givingheedtoseducingspirits.anddoctri. 
Titus  1.  14  Not  giving  heed  to  Jewish  fables,  and 

HEED,  to  give  good  — 
To  give  car,  fix  azan,  3. 

Eccl.12.    9  he  gave  good  heed,  and  sought  out,  (and) 
HEED,  much  — 
Attention,  3^  qesheb. 

Isa.  21.    7  he  hearkened  diligently  with  much  heed 
HEED,  to  take  — 
l.To  be  warned,  "irn  zehar. 

Ezra    4.  22  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this 

2.  To  observe  silently,  rOD  sakath,  5. 

Deut  27.    9  Take  heed,  and  hearken,  0  Israel ;  this  day 
Z.To  give  the  heart,  ^h  jra  nathan  leb. 

Eccl.  7.  21  Also  take  no  heed  unto  all  words  that  are 


4.  To  see,  nxn  raah. 

1  Ch.  28.  10  Take  heed  now  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  chosen 

2  Ch.  19.    6  Take  heed  what  ye  do  :  for  ye  judge  not 

5.  To  watch,  observe,  "Up^  shamar. 

Num  23.  12  Must  I  not  take  heed  to  speak  that  which 
Josh  22.    5  take  diligent  heed  to  do  the  commandme. 

1  Ki.   2.    4  If  thy  children  take  heed  to  their  way,  to 

8.  25  that  thy  children  take  heed  to  their  way 

2  Ki.  10.  31  But  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law 

1  Ch.22.  13  if  thou  takest  heed  to  fulfil  the  statutes 

2  Ch.  6.  16  so  that  thy  children  take  heed  to  then  way 

19.    7  take  heed,  and  do  (it):  for(thereis)noiniq. 

33.  8  they  will  take  heed  to  do  all  that  I  have 
Psa.  39.    1 1  will  take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin 
Hos.    4. 10  they  have  left  off  to  take  heed  to  the  LORD 

6.  To  be  watchful,  Tpp  shamar,  2. 

Gen.  31.  24  Take  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob 
31.  29  Take  thou  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jac. 

Exodio.  28  Get  thee  from  me,  take  heed  to  thyself 
19.  12  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  (that  ye)  go  (not) 

34.  12  Take  heed  to  thyself,  lest  thou  make  a  cov. 
Deut.  4.    9  Only  take  heed  to  thyself,  and  keep  thy  so. 

4.  1 5  Take  ye  therefore  good  heed  unto  yourselv. 
4.  23  Take  heed  unto  yourselves,  lest  ye  forget 

1 1.  16  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  that  your  heart  be 

12.  13,  19,  30  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou 

24.  8  Takeheedintheplagueofleprosy.thatth. 
Josh  23.  11  Take  good  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves 

1  Sa.  19.    2  take  heed  to  thyself  until  the  morning 

2  Sa.  20.  10  But  Amasatooknoheedtotheswordthat 
Job  36.  21  Take  heed,  regard  not  iniquity  :  for  this 
Isa.     7.    4  Take  heed,  and  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  neither 
Jer.     9.    4  Take  ye  heed  every  one  of  his  neighbour 

17.  21  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  and  bearnoburd. 
Mai.   2. 15  Therefore  take  heed  to  your  spirit,  and  let 

2. 16  therefore  take  heed  to  your  spirit,  that  ye 

7.  To  look,  look  on  or  to,  $\4irw  blepo. 

Matt  24.    4  Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you 
Mark  4.  24  he  saith  unto  them,  Takeheedwhat  ye  hear 

13.  5  Take  heed  lest  any  (man)  deceive  you 
13.  23  But  take  yeJieed :  behold,  I  have  foretold 
13.  33  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray :  for  ye 

Luke  8.  1 S  Take  heed  therefore  how  yehear:  forwho. 
21.    8  Take  heed  that  ye  be  not  deceived  :  for 

1  Co.   3.  10  let  every  man  take  heed  how  he  buildeth 

8.    9  take  heed,  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty 

10.  12  Wherefore  let  him.  .take  heed  lest  he  fall 

Gal.    5.  15  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one 

Col.     4.  17  Takeheedto  the  ministry  which  thou  hast 

Heb.   ?  »•>  Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any  of 

S.  To  see,  see  to,  opa.cc  hoi'ao. 

Matti6.   6  Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 

18.  io  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  the:  e 
Mark  S.  15  Take  heed,  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
Lukei2.  15  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness 
Acts  22.  26  Take  heed  what  thou  doest :  for  this  man. 

9.  To  hold  toward,  irpoaix03  prosecho. 

Matt.  6.    1  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  alms  before 

2  Pe.   1. 19  whereunto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed 

10.  To  look  at  or  on,  mark,  <tkoit£<c  skopeo. 
Luken.  35  Take  heed  therefore  that  the  light  which 

HEED,  taking  — 

To  watch,  observe,  Tp$  shamar. 

Psa.  1 19.    9  By  taking  heed  (thereto)  according  to  thy 
HEED  unto  self,  to  take  — 
To  be  watchful,  "fay  shamar,  2,. 

Deut.  2.    4  take  ye  good  heed  unto  yourselves  therefo. 
HEED  to,  to  take  — 
l.To  look,  look  on  or  at,  (BAeVw  blepo. 

Marki3-    9  But  take  heed  to  yourselves:  forthey  shall 

Col.     4.  17  Take  heed  to  the  ministry  which  thou  hast 
2.  To  hold  toward,  irpoar^x^  proseclio. 

Lukei7.    3  Take  heed  to  yourselves  :  If  thy  brother 
21.  34  take  heed  to  yourselves,  lest  at  any  time 

Acts  5.  35  Ye  men  of  Israel,  take  heed  to  yourselves 
HEED  to,  to  give  the  more  earnest  — 
To  hold  the  more  toward,  ■KepMraoTtpois  irpoa^x^1- 

Heb.    2.    1  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to 
HEED  unto,  to  give  — 
l.To  hold  upon,  eire'xw  epecho. 

Acts    3.    5  gave  heed  unto  them,  expecting  to  rece. 
l.To  hold  toward,  trpoaix^  l^rosecho. 

Acts    8.    6  the  people  with  one  accord  gave  heed  un. 
HEED  unto,  to  take  — 
l.To  hold  upon,  eVe'xw  epecho. 

1  Ti.    4.  16  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the 

2.  To  hold  toward,  irpoaix^  prosechd. 

Acts  20.  28  Take  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves,  and 
HEEL  — 
l.The  heel,  2$])  aqeb. 

Gen.    3.  15  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel 

25.  26  his  band  took  hold  on  Esau's  heel ;  and 
49.  17  that  biteth  the  horse  heels,  so  that  his 

Job  18.    9  The  gin  shall  take  (him)  by  the  heel,  (and) 
Psa.  41.    9  hath  lifted  up  (his)  heel  against  me 

49.    5  the  iniquity  of  my  heels  shall  compass  n:e 
Jer.   13.  22  discovered,  (and)  thy  heels  made  bare 
2. A  root,  W"yer  shoresh. 

Job   13.  27  settlest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my  feet 

3.  The  heel,  -rrrepva  pierna. 

Johni3.  18  He.  .hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me 


HEEL 


474 


HELL 


HEEL,  to  take  by  the  — 

To  circumvent,  lake  by  the  heel,  np;>  aqab. 

Hos.  12.    3  took  his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the  womb 
HE'-GE,  HE'-GAI,  K3JT,  'jn,  ^n. 

Chief  chamberlain  of  Ahasuerus,  king  of  Persia.    B.C. 
518. 

Estli.  2.    3  unto  the  custody  of  H.  the  king's  chamb. 
2.    8  were  gathered.,  to  the  custody  of  H. 
2.    8  Esther  was  brought . .  to  the  custody  of  H. 
2.  15  she  required  nothing  but  what  H.  ,.app. 
HEIFER  — 
l.Ueifer,  nhty  eglah. 

Gen.  15.  V  Take  me  an  heifer  of  three  years  old,  and 
Deut  21.   3  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  an  heifer 
21.    4  shall  bring  down  the  heifer  unto  a  rough 
21.   4  shall  strike  off  the  heifer's  neck  there  in 
21.   6  shall  wash  their  hands  over  the  heifer 
Judg  14.  18  If  ye  had  not  ploughed  with  my  heifer,  ye 
t  Sa.  16.    2  Take  an  heifer  with  thee,  and  say,  I  am 
Isa.    15.    5  unto  Zoar,  an  heifer  of  three  years  old 
Jer,  46.  20  Egypt  (is  like)  a  very  fair  heifer,  (but) 

48.  34  uttered,  .(as)  an  heifer  of  three  years  old 

50.  11  ye  are  grown  fat  as  the  heifer  at  grass 
Hos.  10. 11  Ephraim  (is  as)  an  heifer  (that  is)  taught 

%  Cotv,  kine,  •'hs  pctrah. 

Num  19.    2  they  bring  thee  a  red  heifer  without  spot 
1:9.    s  (one)  shall  burn  the  heifer  in  his  sight 
19.    6  the  midst  of  the  burning  of  the  heifer 
19.    9  shall  gather  up  the  ashes  of  the  heifer 

19.  10  he  that  gathereth  the  ashes  of  the  heifer 
Hos.    4.  16  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer :  now 

3. A  tamed  heifer,  Sdp.a\is  damalis. 

Heb.    9.  13  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean 
HEIGHT  — 
1. Height,  highplacc,  n£3  bamah. 

Isa.    14.  14  ascend  above  the  heights  of  the  clouds 
2.To  make  high  or  lofty,  naa  gabah,  5. 

Isa.     7.  11  either  in.  .depth,  or  in  the  height  above 
Z.Loftiness,  P133  gobah. 

1  Sa.  17.    4  whose  height  (was)  six  cubits  and  a  span 

2  Ch.  3.  4  and  the  height  (was)  an  hundred  and  tw. 
Job  22. 12  (Is)  not  God  in  the  height  of  heaven  ?  and 
Eze.  19.  11  and  she  appeared  in  her  height  with  the 

31.  10  and  his  heart  is  lifted  up  in  his  height 
31.  14  their  trees  stand  up  in  their  height 
41.    8  also  the  height  of  the  house  round  about 
Amos  2.    9  height  (was)  like  the  height  of  the  cedars 

4. Lofty,  n"U3  gaboah. 

1  Sa.  16.    7  Look  not.  .on  the  height  of  his  stature 

5. High  place,  Diio  marom. 

2  Ki.  19.  23  come  up  to  the  height  of  the  mountains 
Psa.102. 19  down  from  the  height  of  his  sanctuary 

14S.    1  Praise  ye  the  Lord,  .in  the  heights 
Isa.    37.  24  I  come  up  to  the  height  of  the  mountains 

37.  24  will  enter  into  the  height  of  his  border 
Jer.  31.  12  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Zion 

49.  16  thou,  .that  boldest  the  height  of  the  hill 

51.  53  she  should  fortify  the  height  of  her  stren. 
Eze.  17.  23  In  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel 

20.  40  in  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel 

6.  Stature,  height,  noip  qomah. 

Gen.    6. 15  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cubits 
Exod.25.  10,  23  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  thereof 
27.  1  the  height  thereof  (shall  be)  three  cubits 
27.  18  height  five  cubits  (of)  fine  twined  linen 

30.  2  two  cubits  (shall  be)  the  height  thereof 
37.  1  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  of  it 
37.  10  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  thereof 

37.  25  two  cubits  (was)  the  height  of  it ;  the  h. 

38.  1  and  three  cubits  the  height  thereof 

38.  18  the  height  in  the  breadth  (was)  five  cubits 

1  Ki.  6.    2  and  the  height  thereof  thirty  cubits 

6.  20  twenty  cubits  in  the  height  thereof  :  and 

6.  26  height  of  the  one  cherub  (was)  ten  cubits 

7.  2  the  height  thereof  thirty  cubits,  upon 

7.  16  height  of  the  one  chapiter  (was)  five  cub. 
7.  16  the  height  of  the  other  chapiter  (was)five 
7.  23  his  height  (was)  five  cubits  ;  and  a  line  of 
7.  27  and  three  cubits  the  height  of  it 
7.  32  height  of  a  wheel  (was)  a  cubit  and  half  a 

2  Ki.25.  17  The  height  of  the  one  pillar  (was)  eighteen 

25.  17  the  height  of  the  chapiter  three  cubits 
2  Ch.  4.    1  he  made,  .ten  cubits  the  height  thereof 

4.  2  five  cubits  the  height  thereof ;  and  a  line 
Jer.  52.  21  the  height  of  one  pillar  (was)  eighteen  cu. 

52.  22  the  height  of  one  chapiter(was)  five  cubits 
Eze.  31.    5  Therefore  his  height  was  exalted  above  all 

31. 10  and  his  heart  is  lifted  up  in  his  height 

31.  14  trees,  .exalt  themselves  for  their  height 
40.   5  breadth . .  one  reed ;  and  the  height  one  reed 

7.  Head,  »»n  rosh. 

Job    22. 12  behold  the  height  of  the  stars,  how  high 

8.  Height,  loftiness.  DVirw?». 

Prov.  25.    3  The  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for 
Ezra   6.    3  the  height  therefore  threescore  cubits 
Dan.    3.    1  an  image . .  whose  height  (was)  threescore 
4.  10  a  tree . .  and  the  height  thereof  (was)  great 
4.  11  the  height  thereof  reached  unto  heaven 
4.  20  whose  height  reached  unto  the  heaven,  and 
Q.Wttgeneas,  nrarj  ramuth. 

Eze.  32.    5  will  lay.,  and  fill  the  valleys  with  thy  hei. 
10. Height,  vtyos  hupsos. 

Eph.  3.  18  what  (is)  the  breadth,  .and  depth,  and  he. 
.Rev.  ai.  16  the  breadth,  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal 


11. High  thing  or  place,  v\j/wp.a  hupsoma. 

Horn.  8.  39  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  erea. 
HEIGHT,  to  raise  up  to  a  great  — 
To  make  high  or  lofty,  n?3  gabah,  5. 

2  Ch.  33.  14  raised  it  up  to  a  very  great  height,  and 
HEINOUS  crime  — 
Wicked  thought  or  device,  nst  zimmah. 

Job  31. 11  For  this  (is)  an  heinous  crime ;  yea,  it  (is) 

HEIR  — 

1 .  To  possess,  occupy,  succeed,  en;  yarash. 

Gen.  15.    3  and,  lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  heir 
2  So*  14.    7  and  we  will  destroy  the  heir  also :  and  so 
Jer.   49.    1  Hath  Israel  no  sons?  hath  he  no  heir?  why 
49.    2  then  shall  Israel  be  heir  unto  them  that 
Mic.    1.  15  Yet  will  I  bring  an  heir  unto  thee,  0  inh. 
2.0ne  who  receives  a  lot  or  portion,  K\npov6fxos. 
Matt 21.  38  This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him 
Marki2.    7  This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him 
Luke2o.  14  This  is  the  heir :  come,  let  us  kill  him 
Rom.  4. 13  that  he  should  be  the  heir  of  the  world 
4. 14  For  if  they  which  are  of  the  law  (be)  heirs 
8.  17  And  if  children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God 
Gal.     3.  29  aud  heirs  according  to  the  promise 

4.    1  say,  (That)  the  heir,  as  long  as  he  is  a  child 

4.    7  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ 

Titus  3.    7  we  should  be  made  heirs  according  to 

Heb.    1.    2  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things' 

6.  17  willing,  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  prom. 

11.    7  became  heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is 

Jas.     2.    5  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which  he  hath  p. 

HEIR  (of),  to  be  — 

1.  To  possess,  occupy,  succeed,,  ch;  yarash. 

Gen.  15.  4  saying,  This  shall  not  be  thine  heir;  but 
15.    4  he  that  shall  come,  .shall  be  thine  heir 
31.  10  for  the  son .  .shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son 
Prov. 30.  23  an  handmaid  that  is  heir  to -her  mistress 
Jer.   49.    2  unto  them  that  were  his  heirs,  saith  the 

2.To  receive  a  lot  or  portion,  nXvpovofUw  kleronomeo. 
Gal,  4.  30  for  the  son . .  shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son 
Heb.    1.  14  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation? 

HEIR  together,  or  with  — 

One  receiving  a  lot  with  (another),  auyK\y]pov6fxo$. 
Heb.  11.   9  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  promise 
1  Pe.  3.    7  and  as  being  heirs  together  of  the  grace 

HEIR,  fellow  or  joint  — 

One  receiving  a  lot  with  (another),  crvyKX-qpovofxos. 
Rom.  8.  17  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ 
Eph.    3.    6  That  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow  heirs 

HEL'-AH,  rn^n  tenderness. 

A  wife  of  Asher,  a  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur 

fromJudab.     B.C.  1560. 

1  Ch.  4.    s  the  father  of  Tekoa  had  two  wives,  H.  and 

4.    7  the  sons  of  H.  (were)  Zereth,  and  Jezoar 

HE'-LAffi,  07*0,  DSOrj, 

A  place  E.  of  the  Jordan,  but  W.  of  the  Euphrates. 
Perhaps  it  is  identical  with  Atamatha,  on  the  W.  of 
the  Euphrates,  near  Nicephorium. 

2  Sa.  10. 16  they  came  to  H. ;  andShobach.  .(went)be. 

10.  17  and  passed  over  Jordan,  and  came  to  H. 

HEL'-BAH,  rr^n  fertility. 

A  town  in  the  tribe  of  Asher,  near  Achzib. 

Judg.  1.  31  did  Asher  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of.  .H. 
HEL'-BON,  ftifyn  fruitful. 

A  city  celebrated  in  ancient  times  for  the  quality  of  its 
wiue.  It  still  bears  its  ancient  name  Ilelbon  and  is  a 
village  within  a  few  miles  of  Damascus  and  still  cele- 
brated for  producing  the  finest  grapes  in  the  country. 
The  Arab;e  name  Ualbitn  contains  the  Hebrew  equiva- 
lents exactly. 

Eze.  27.  i8thymerch.nnt..inthe\vineofH.,and\vhitew. 
HELD  — 


To  he  hidden,  Nrtn  chaba,  2. 

Job  29.  10  nobles  held  their  peace,  and  their  tongue 
HELD  in,  to  he  — 
To  curb,  d1?^  balatoi. 

Psa.  32.    9  whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  bit  and 
HEL'-DAI,  '"n^n  enduring. 

1.  The  12t.l1  captain  for  the  monthly  service  in  the  sanc- 
tuary. He  was  descended  from  Othniel  aud  is  called 
"  the  Netophathite."    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  15  The..(captain)for  the  twelfth  month.  .11. 

2.  An  Israelite  who  returned  from  captivity  and  to 
whom  special  honour  was  given.  In  verse  14  his  name 
appears  to  be  changed  to  Ilelcin.     B.C.  519. 

Zech.  6.  10  Take  of  (them  of)  the  captivity,  .of  H. 

HE'-LEB,  ajo/of,  or  ifr. 

One  of  David's  valiant'  men,  from  Netophah,  S.E.  of 

Jerusalem,    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  29  H.  the  son  of  Baanah,  a  Netophathite 

1  Ch.11.  30  H.  the  son  of  Baanah  the  Netophathite 

HE'-LED,  ibn.      The  same  as  Heleb. 

1  Ch.n.  30  H.  the  son  of  Baanah  a  Netophathite 

HE-LEE,  p$>n  portion. 

Second  son  of  Gilead,  and  founder  of  the  family  of  the 

Helekites,   descended  from    Manasseh,  Joseph's  sun. 

B.C.  1560. 

Num.a6.  30  of  H.,  the  family  of  the  Helekites 

J  ush.  1 7.    2  for  the  children  of  H.,  and  for  the  children 


HEL-E-KITES,  ^hn. 

Descendants  of  He'lek,  son  of  Gilead  of  the  tribe  of 

Manasseh. 

Nuni26.  30  of  Gilead.  .of  Helek,  the  family  of  the  H. 
HE'-LEM,  D^rt  strength. 

1.  One  mentioned  among  the  descendants  of  Asher, 
through  Heber  son  of  Beriah.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.   7.  35  the  sons  of  his  brother  H.  ;  Zophah,  and 

2.  Person  mentioned  only  once,  and  apparently  the  same 
as  Ueldai  in  verse  10  of  the  same  chapter.     B.C.  519. 

Zech.  6.  14  the  crowns  shall  be  to  H.,  and  to  Tobijah 
HE'-LEPH,  r\in  place  of  rushes. 

A  border  town  of  Naphtali.  It  is  now  probably  BectUf 
an  ancient  site  nearly  due  E.  of  Rets  Abyad,  and  W.  of 
Kades,  on  the  edge  of  a  ravine  which  probably  formed 
part  of  the  boundary  between  Asher  and  Naphtali. 

Josh.19.  33  their  coast  was  from  H. .  .unto  Lakuni 
HE'-LEZ,  pjflj,  j'^n,  p'-n  strength. 

1.  The  Pelonite,  one  of  the  thirty  of  David's  guard. 
Paltite  in  2  Sa.  23.  26  is  likely  a  corruption.  He  was  an 
Ephraimite,  and  captain  of  the  7th  monthly  course. 
B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  26  H.  the  Paltite,  Ira  the  son  of  Ikkesh  the  T. 
1  Ch.ii.  27Shammoth  the  Harorite,  H.  the  Pelonite 

27.  10  seventh,  .for  the  seventh  month  (was)  H. 

2.  A  man  of  Judah  and  son  of  Azariah,  a  descendant  of 
Jerameel  of  the  great  family  of  Hezron.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  2.  39  Aud  Azariah  begat  H.,  and  H.  begat  Ele. 
HE'-LI,  'HAf,  'HAi. 

The  father  of  Joseph,  the  husband  of  Mary  and  real 
brother  of  Jacob  the  father  of  the  Virgin  Mary  herself. 
This  name  in  the  Hebrew  is  identical  with  that  of  Eli 
the  high  priest. 

Luke  3.  23  son  of  Joseph,  which  was  (the  son)  of  H. 
HEL'-KAI,  *p  -r\  Jah  is  a  portion. 
A  priest  of  the  family  of  Meraioth  or  Meremoth,  who 
was  living  in  the  geueration  following  the  return  from 
Babylon  under  Zerubbabel.     See  Hilkiah.    B.C.  500. 

Iseh.  12.  15  Of  Harim,  Adna;  of  Meraioth,  H. 

hel'-Kath,  np?n,  nj^rj  portion. 

The  town  at  the  starting  point  of  the  tribe  of  Asher's 
boundary ;  and  allotted  to  the  Gershonite  Levites.  Some 
identify  it  with  the  modern  Yerka,  8  miles  E,  of  Akka. 
In  1  Ch.  6.  75,  Hukok  is  substituted  for  Helkath. 

Josh  19.  25  their  border  was  H.,  and  Hali,  andBeten 
31.  31  H.  with  her  suburbs,  andRehob  with  her 

HEL-KATH  HAZ-ZTJ'-RIM,  Dnxn  rtpSn  field  of  rocks. 
A  smooth  piece  of  ground,  close  to  the  pool  of  Gibeon, 
where  Joab's  men  had. a  fight  with  Abner's,  which  ended 
in  the  death  of  the  selected  combatants,  and  brought 
on  a  general  battle. 

2  Sa.    2.  16  wherefore  that  place  was  called  H.,  which 

HELL  — 

l.Tlie  unseen  state,  bSHf  sheol. 

Deut  32.  22  and  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell,  and 
2  Sa.  22.  6  The  sorrows  of  hell  compassed  me  about 
Job   11.    8  what  canst  thou  do?  deeper  than  hell 

26.  6  Hell(is)naked  before  him,  and  destruction 
Psa.    9.  17  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  (and) 

16. 10  For  thou  fl  ilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell 
18.    5  The  sorrows  of  hell  compassed  me  about 
55.  15  (aiul)  let  them  go  down  quick  into  hell :  for 
86.  13  delivered  my  soul  from  the  lowest  hell 
116.    3  and  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me 
139.    8  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  thou 
Prov.  5.    5  down  to  death ;  her  steps  take  hold  on  h. 
7.  27  Her  house  (is)  the  way  to  hell,  going  down 
9.  18  knoweth.  .her  guests  (are) in  the  depths  of 
15.  11  Hell  and  destruction  (are)  before  the  Lord 

15.  24  that  he  may  depart  from  hell  beneath 
23.  14  beat,  .and  shalt  deliver  his  soul  from  hell 

27.  20  Hell  and  destruction  are  never  full ;  so 
Isa.      5.  14  Therefore  hell  hath  enlarged  herself,  and 

14    9  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee  to 
14.  15  Yet  thou  shalt  be  brought  down  to  hell,  to 

28.  15  and  with  hell  are  we  at  agreement ;  \i  lien 
28.  18  your  agreement  with  hell  shall  not  stand 
57.    9  and  didst  debase  (thyself  even)  unto  hell 

Eze.  31,  16  when  I  cast  him  down  to  hell  with  them 

31.  17  They  also  went  down  into  hell  with  him 

32.  21  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  hell 
32.  27  which  are  gone  down  to  hell  with  their 

Amos  9.    2  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence  shall 
Jon.    2.    2  out  of  the  belly  of  hell  cried  I,  (and)  thou 
Ilab.    2.    5  whoenlargethhisdesireashell,and(is)as 
2. Hades,  the  unseen  world,  £877?  hades. 

Matt  1 1.  23  thou,  .shalt  be  brought  down  to  hell:  for 

16.  18  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it 
Luke  10.  15  And  thou,  .shalt  be  thrust  down  to  hell 

16.  23  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  tor. 
Acts    2.  27  thou  wiltnotleave  my  soul  in  hell, neither 
2.  31  that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither 
Rev.,   t.  18  I.  .have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death 
6.    8  I  looked .  .and  Hell  followed  with  him 
20.  13  death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead 
20.  14  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake 

3.  Valley  ofHinnom,  Gehinnafyitwa  geenna. 
Matt.  5.  22  shall  say.  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire  . 

5.  29,  30  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  intuh. 
10.  28  him  which  is  able  to  destroy,  .body  in  hell 
t8.    9  having  two  eyes  to  lie  cast  into  hell  fire 
23.  15  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  your. 
23-  33  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnatu  u  of  hell? 


HELL 


475 


HEMLOCK 


Mark  9.  43  than  having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell 
9.  45  than  having  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  hell 
9.  47  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire 

Lukei2.   5  hath  power  to  cast  into  hell ;  yea,  I  say 

Jas.     3.    6  the  tongue,  .and  it  is  set  on  fire  of  hell 
HELL,  to  cast  down  to  — 
To  send  into  Tartarus,  raprapda)  tartaroo. 

2  Pe.  2.   4  but  cast  (them)  down  to  hell,  and  deliver. 
HELM  — 
An  oar,  rudder,  -mjBd\iov  pedalion. 

Jas.    3.   4  they  turned  about  with  a  very  small  helm 
HELMET  — 
l.Helmet,  V3S3  koba. 

1  Sa.  17.    50iad)anhelmetofbrassuponhishead     id 

2  Ch.  26.  14  Uzziah  prepared  for  them . .  helmets, a  h. 
Isa.  59.  17  an  helmet  of  salvation  upon  his  head  tnd 
Jer.  46.  4  stand  forth  with  (your)  helmets ;  fv  -»ish 
Eze.  27.  10  they  hanged  the  shield  and  helmet  in  thee 

38.    5  Persia.,  all  of  them  with  shield  and  helmet 

2. Helmet,  yaip  qoba. 

1  Sa.  17.  38  he  put  an  hulmet  of  brass  upon  hie  head 
Eze.  23.  24  shall  set.,  shield  and  helmet  round  about 

^.Something  around  the  head,  iveptKs<pa\aia  perik. 
Eph.   6.  17  take  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the  sw. 

1  Th.  5.    S  and  for  an  helmet  the  hope  of  salvation 
HE'-LON,    pn  strong. 

Father  of  Eliab,    chief  man  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun, 
at  the  taking  of  the  census  in  the  wilderness  at  Sinai. 

B.C.    1520. 

Num.  1.   9  Of  Zebulun*  Eliab  the  son  of  H. 

2.    7  Eliab  the  son  of  H. . .  captain  of  the  chil. 
7.  24  On  the  third  day  Eliab  the  son  of  H. .  .(did 
7.  29  this,  .the  offering  of  Eliab  the  son  of  H. 
10.  16  over  the  host,  .(was)  Eliab  the  son  of  H. 
HELP  — 
1. Safety,  n^'ty*  yeshuah. 

2  Sa.  10.  n  be  too  strong  for  me,  then  thou  shalt  help 
Psa.     3.    2  whichsay..(Thereis)nohelpforhim  inG-. 

42.    5  praise  him  (for)  the  help  of  his  countena. 
2.Relpt  **iTy  ezer. 

Gen.    2'.  18  I  will  make  him  an  help  meet  for  him 

2.  20  there  was  not  found  a  help  meet  for  him 

Exodi8.    4  God  of-my  father,  (said  he,  was)  mine  help 

Deut33-    7  be  thou  an  help  (to  him)  from  his  enemies 

33.  26  (who)  rideth  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help 

33.  29  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  shield  of  thy  Kelp 

Psa.  20.    2  Send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary,  and 

33.  20  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord:  he  (is)  our  help 

70.    5  thou  (art)  my  help  and  deliverer;  0  Lord 

89.  19  I  have  laid  help  upon  (one  that  is)  mighty 

115.   9,  10,  n  the  Lord  :  he  (is)  their  help  and  th. 

121.    1  unto  the  hills,  from  whence  cometh  my  h. 

121.    2  My  help  (cometh)  from  the  Lord,  which 

124.    8  Our  help  (is)  iu  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who 

146.    5  that  (hath)  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help 

Isa.   30.    5  nor  be  an  help  nor  profit,  but  a  shame,  and 

Eze.  12.  14  all  that  (are)  about  him  to  help  him,  and 

Dan.  11.  34  they  shall  lie  holpen  with  a  little  help :  but 

Hos.  13.    9  destroyed  thyself ;  butinme(is)thinehelp 

Z.Help,  i-nij-,  rnij;  ezrath,  ezrah. 

Judg.  5.  23  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the 
Job     6. 13  (Is)  not  my  help  in  me?  and  is  wisdom  d. 
31.  21  I  have  lifted  up.  .when  I  saw  my  help  in 
Psa.  22. 19  Lord  :  0  my  strength,  haste  thee  to  help 
27.    9  thou  hast  been  my  help  ;  leave  me  not 
35.    2  Take  hold  of  shield,  .stand  up  for  mine  h. 
38.  22  Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord  my  salva. 
40.  13  to  deliver  me  :  O  Lord,  make  haste  to  h. 
40.  17  thou  (art)  my  help  and  my  deliverer ;  m. 
44.  26  Arise  for  our  help,  and  redeem  us  for  thy 
46.    1  God  (is),  .a  very  present  help  in  trouble 
60.  11  Give  us  help  from  trouble  :  for  vain  (is) 
63.    7  Because  thou  hast  beeu  my  help,  there. 

70.  1  O  God.  .make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord 

71.  12  not  far.  .0  my  God,  make  hasterformyh. 
94.  17  Unless  the  LORD  (had  been)  myhelp,  my 

108.  12  Give  us  help  from  trouble :  for  vain  (is) 
Isa.   10.    3  to  whom  will  ye  flee  for  help  ?  and  where 
20.    6  whither  we  flee  for  help  to  be  delivered 
31.    1  Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  h. 
31.    2  against  the  help  of  them  that  work  iniq. 
Jer.  37.    7  Pharaoh's  army,  which  is  come  forth  to  h. 
Lam.  4.  17  our  eyes  as  yet  failed  for  our  vain  help 

4.  Safety,  .Tj/lBte  teshuah. 

1  Sa.  11.  9  (that  time)  the  sun  be  hot,  ye  shall  have  h. 
1  Ch.19.  12  then  thou  shalt  help  me  :  but  if  the  chil. 
Psa.  60.  11  from  trouble  :  for  vain  (is)  the  help  of  m. 

108.  12  from  trouble :  for  vain  (is)  the  help  of  m. 

146.    3  in  the  son  of  man,  in  whom  (there  is)  no  h. 

5. A  helping,  supporting,  avTiXTi-tyts  antilepsis. 

1  C0.12,  28  God  hath  set  some  in  the  church,  .[helps] 
Q.Help,  succour,  |8o7)0eia  boeth-eia. 

Acts  27.  17  when  they  had  taken  up,  they  used  helps 
7. Help,  aid,  assistance,  eiriKovpia  epikouria. 

Acts  26.  22  Having  therefore  obtained  help  of  God,  I 
HELP,  to  — 
\.To  strengthen,  pin  chazak,  3. 

2  Ch.  29.  34  their  brethren  the  Levites  did  help  them 
2.To  make  strong,  pin  cMzak,  5. 

Job     8.  20  not  cast  away . .  neither  will  he  help  the 
Z.To  save,  give  safety,  $*??.'  yasha,  5. 

Exod.  2.  n  Moses  stood  t:p  and  helped  them,  and 


2  Sa.  10.  11  too  strong,  .then  I  will  come  and  help 
10.  19  the  Syrians  feared  to  help  the  children  of 
14.    4  and  did  obeisance,  and  said,  Help,  O  king 

2  Ki.  6.  2(3  there  cried  a  woman  unto  him,  saying,  H. 
6.  27  the  Lord  do  not  help . .  whence  shall  I  help 

1  Ch.ig.  12  too  strong  for  thee,  then  I  will  help  thee 

19.  19  neither  would  the  Syrians  help  the  child. 

2  Ch.20.    9  we.  .cry  .then  thou  wilt  hear  and  help 
Psa.  i2.   1  Help,  Lord  ;  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth 

116.    6  I  was  brought  low,  and  he  helped  me 

4.  To  lift  up,  Nr'5  *wwa,  3. 

Ezra  1.  4  let  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  with  si. 
Esth.  9.    3  and  officers  of  the  king,  helped  the  Jews 

5.  To  leave,  3*$  azab. 

Exod.23  5  to  help  them;  thou  shalt  surely  help  with 

6.  To  help,  ITS'  azar. 

Gen.  49.  25  the  God  of  thy  father,  who  shall  help  thee 
Deut.32.38  let-them  riseup  and  help  you,  (and)be  your 
Josh.  1.  14  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour,  and  help 
10.    4  Come  up  unto  me,  and  help  me,  that  we 
10.    6  come  up  to  us  quickly,  and  save  us,  aud  h. 

10.  33  Horam  king  of  Gezer  came  up  to  help  La. 
1  Sa.  7.  12  saying,  Hitherto  hath  the  LORD  helped  us 
1  Ki.  1.'  7  and  they  following  Adonijah  helped  (him) 

20. 16  the  thirty  and  two  kings  that  helped  him 

1  Ch.12. 17  If  yebecomepeaceablyuntometohelpme 

12. 18  peace  (be)  unto  thee.  .forthyGodhelpeth 

12. 19  but  they  helped  them  not :  for  the  lords 
12.  21  theyhelped  David  against  the  band  (of  the) 
12.  22  day  by  day  there  came  to  David  to  help 
15. 26  when  God  helped  the  Levites  that  bare 

18.  5  the  Syrians  of  Damascus  came  to  help  H. 

22. 17  commanded  all  the  princes  of  Israel  toh. 

2  Ch.14. 11  nothing  with  thee  to  help,  .help us,  0  Lo. 

r8.  31  Jehosaphat  cried  out,  and  the  Lord  hel. 

19.  2  Shouldest  thou  help  the  uugodly,  and  lo. 

20.  23  every  one  helped  to  destroy  another 

25.  8  for  God  hath  power  to  help,  and  to  cast 

26.  7  God  helped  him  against  the  Philistines 
26.  13  made  war.  .to  help  the  king  against  the 
28. 16  send  unto  the  kings  of  Assyria  to  help  him 
28.  23  I  sacrifice  to  them,  that  they  may  help  me 
32.  3  He  took  counsel,  .and  they  did  help  him 
32.   8  hut  with  us  (is)  the  Lord  our  God  to  help 

Ezra   8.  22  band  of  soldiers  and  horsemen  to  help  us 
10. 15  and  Shabbethai  the  Levite  helped  them 

Job  26.    2  How  hast  thou  helped  (him  that  is)  with. 
29. 12  delivered .  .(him  that  had)  none  to  help 

Psa.  22.  11  trouble  (is)  near  ;  for  (there  is)  none  to  h. 
37. 40  Lord  shall  help  them,  and  deliver  them 
46.  s  God  shall  help  her,  (and  that)  right  early 
79.  9  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for  the 
86.  17  because  thou,  Lord,  hast  holpen  me,  and 
107.  12  they  fell  down,  and  (there  was)  none  to  h. 
109.  26  Help  me,  O  Lord  my  God  :  O  save  me  ac. 

118.  7  taketh  my  part  with  them  that  help  me 
118. 13  Thou  hast  thrust,  .but  the  Lord  helped 

119.  86  they  persecute  me  wrongfully ;  help  thou 
119.  173  Let  thine  hand  help  me :  for  I  have  cho. 
119.  175  Let  my  soul  live,  .let  thy  judgmentshelp 

Isa.   30.    7  the  Egyptians  shall  help  in  vain,  and  to 
31.   3  hothl.e  thathelpeth  shall  fall,  andhethat 
41.    6  They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour ;  and 
41.  10  I  will  strengthen  thee ;  yea,  I  will  help 
41.  13  saying  unto  thee,  Fear  not ;  I  will  help 
41.  14  I  will  help  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  and  thy 
44.  2  Thus  saiththe  Lord  .  .(which)will  help  thee 

49.  8  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I  helped  thee 

50.  7  the  Lord  God  will  help  me ;  therefore 
50.    9  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  help  me ;  who 
63.    5  I  looked,  and  (there  was)  none  to  help 

Lam.  1.  7  when  her  people  fell.. none  did  help  her 
Eze.  32.21  the  midst  of  hell  with  them  that  help  him 
Dan.  10.  13  Michael,  .came  to  help  me;  and  I  remain. 

11.  45  come  to  his  end,  and  none  shall  help  him 
Zech.  1.  15  and  they  helped  forward  the  affliction 

7. To  give  help,  1$  azar,  5. 

2  Ch.23.  23  the  gods  of  the  kings  of  Syria  help  them 
S.Help,  rrilj/,  .tjij;,  ezrah,  ezrath. 

2  Ch.28.21  unto  the  king  of  Assyria :  but  he  helped 
9.  To  call,  cry,  tOTp  qara. 

Psa.  59.   4  (my)  fault :  awake  to  help  me,  and  behold 
10. Arm,  ifni  zeroa. 

Psa.  83.   8=  they  have  holpen  the  children  of  Lot.  Se. 
1 1.  To  take  hold  over  again,  assist,  a.VTiXa/j.fid'vofj.a.L. 

Luke  1.  54  He  hath  holpen  his  servant  Israel,  in  re. 
12.To  help,  (3o7]6iecq  boetlieo. 

Matt  15.  25  worshipped  him,  saying,  Lord,  help  me 

Mark  g.  22  have  compassion  on  us,  and  help  us 

9.  24  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief 

Acts  16.    9  saying,  Come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  h. 

21.  28  Crying  out,  Men  of  Israel,  help :  This  is 
Rev.  12.  16  the  earth  helped  the  woman;  and  the  ear. 

13.  With  a  view  to  hety,  els  fioyBcLav  eis  boetheian. 
Heb.    4.  16  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of 

14. To  lake  holdout  the  same  time,  crv\Xan$di/cc  sul. 
Luke  5.    7  that  they  should  come  and  help  them 
Phil.    4.    3  help  those  women  which  laboured  with 

15.  To  throw  together,  assist,  o-v/j.&d\\o/j.aL  sumhal. 
Acts  iS.  27  who.  .helped  them  much  which  had  bel. 

16.  To  take  hold  with  one,  avvavTiXafAfSdvoixat  sun. 
Lukeio.  40  bid  her  therefore  that  she  help  me 
Rom.  8.  26  the  spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities 

[See  Lift  up  again.] 


Job 
Psa. 


Jer. 


HELP  together,  to  — 

To  work  a  little  together,  avvuirovpyeoo  sunupourgeo, 

2  Co.  1.  11  Ye  also  helping  together  by  prayer  for 
HELP  up,  to  — 
To  cause  to  rise  up,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Deut  22.    4  thou  shalt  surely  help  him  to  lift  (them)  up 

Eccl.  4.  10  for  (he  hath)  not  another  to  help  him  up 
HELP  with,  to  — 
To  ivork  with,  or  together,  cwepyica  sunerged. 

1  Co.ic.  16  and  to  every  one  that  helpeth  with  (us) 
HELPED,  to  be  — 
To  be  helped,  i]jj  azar,  2. 

1  Ch.  5.  20  they  were  helped  against  them,  and  the 

2  Ch.26.  15  he  was  marvellously  helped,  till  lie  was 
Psa.  28.    7  my  heart  trusted  in  him,  and  I  am  helped 
Dan. 11.  34  they  shall  be  holpen  with  a  little  help 

HELPER,  (fellow)  — 

1 .  To  help,  "it;;  azar. 

2  Ki.14.  26"  nor  any  left,  nor  any  helper  for  Israel 

1  Ch.12.    1  among  the  mightymen,  helpersofthewar 
12.  18  untothee,  and  peace  (be)  to  thinehelpers 

9.  13  the  proud  helpers  do  stoop  under  him 
30.  13  they  set  forward,  .they  have  no  helper 
10.  14  thou  art  the  helper  of  the  fatherless 
30.  io  havemercyuponme:  Lord,  be  thou  my  h. 
54.    4  Behold,  God  (is)  mine  helper :  the  Lord  (is) 
72.  12  thepooralso,  and  (him)  that  hath  no  helper 
47.    4  cut  off  from  Tyj-us  and  Zidon  every  helper 
Eze.  30.   8  (when)  all  her  helpers  shall  be  destroyed 

2.  Help,  n~j-y,  rri!£  ezrah,  ezrath. 

Nah.   3. "  9  Put  and  Lubim  were  thy  helpers 

3.  Helper,  fio-nOos  boethos. 

Heb.  13.   6  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  (is)  my  help. 

4.  Fellow  or  joint  worker,  cruvepyds  sunergos. 

Rom  16.    3  Greet  Priscilla  and  Aquila  my  helpers 
16.    9  Salute  Urbane  our  helper  in  Christ,  and 

2  Co.  1.  24  but  are  helpers  of  your  joy  8.  23 ;  3  Jo.  8. 

HELPING  — 

1. Safety,  n%\&)  yeshuah. 

Psa.  22.    1  far  from  helping  me.  .the  words  of  my 

2.  To  support,  ijJP  sead,  5. 

Ezra  5.    2  with  them,  .the  prophets  of  God  helping 

HELVE  — 
Wood,  yn  ets. 

Deut  19.    5  the  head  slippeth  from  the  helve,  and 
HEM  — 
l.Hem-,  skirt,  train,  ?*.&  shut. 

Exod28. 33  upon  the  hem  of  it . .  round  about  the  hem 
28.  34  upon  the  hem  of  the  robe  round  about 
39.  24  they  made  upon  the  hems  of  the  robe  po. 
39.  25  the  pomegranates  upon  the  hem  of  the 
39.  26  round  about  the  hem  of  the  robe  to  min. 

2. Border,  Item,  KpdvweBov  kraspedon. 

Matt.  9.  20  and  touched  the  hem  of  his  garment 

14.  36  they  might  only  touch  the  hem  of  his  ga. 

HE'-MAM,  crrr  raging. 

A  son  of  Lotan  the  eldest  son  of  Seir.    In  1  Ch.  1.  39 

the  name  is  given  as  Homam,  the  correct  form;  which 

see. 

Gen.  36.  22  the  children  of  Lotan  were  Hori  and  H. 
HE'-MAH,  \vn  faithful. 
1.  A  son  of  Zerah  the  son  of  Jacob.     B.C.  1640. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  he  was  wiser  than  all  men;  than. .H., and 
1  Ch.  2.  6  thesonsof  Zerah.  .H.,and  Calcol,  andD, 
1.  Son  of  Joel  and  grandson  of  Samuel  the  prophet,  a 
Kohathite.  Hewascalled  "the  singer"  (i.e.  musician,) 
and  was  the  first  of  the  three  chief  Levites  to  whom  was 
entrusted  the  conduct  of  the  vocal  and  instrumental 
music  of  the  sanctuary  in  David's  time. 

1  Ch.  6.  33  of  the  sons  of  the  Kohathites ;  H.  a  singer 

15. 17  So  the  Levites  appointed  H.  the  son  of  J. 

15.  19  So  the  singers,  H.,  Asaph,  and  Ethan 

16.  41, 42  with  them  H. and  Jeduthan, and  the  rest 
25.    1  to  the  service  of  the  sons  of.  .H.,  and  of 
25.    4  Of  H.;  the  sons  of  H.;  Bukkiah,  Mattan. 
25.    5  All  these  (were)  the  sons  of  H.  the  king's 
25.    5  God  gave  to  H.  fourteen  sons  and  three 
25.    6  according  to  theking's  order  to  A..  .andH. 

2  Ch.  5.  12  all  of  them,  .of  H...  arrayed  in  white  linen 

29. 14  of  the  sons  of  H.;  Jehiel,  and  Shimei 
35.  15  according  to  the  command,  of  D. .  .and  H. 
Psa.  83.  title.  Maschil  of  H.  the  Ezrahite 

HE'-MATH,  mn  warmth. 

1.  Anotherform  of  the'name  Ha  math,  but  not  warranted 
by  the  Hebrew,  which  gives  Hammath. 

Amos  6.  14  afflict  you  from  the  entering  in  of  H.  unto 

2.  A  person  or  place  mentioned  in  the  genealogical  lists 
of  Judah  as  the  original  of  the  Kenites  and  the  father 
of  the  house  of  Rechab. 

1  Ch.  2.  55  These  (are)  the  Kenites  that  came  of  H. 
HEM'-DAN,  f^?n  pleasant. 

Eldest  son  of  Dishon,  son  of  Anah,  the  Horite.  In  1  Ch. 
1.  4ithenameis.HawraH,  which  in  the  Common  Version 
is  given  as  Amram,  instead  of  Chamran.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  26  children  of  Dishon ;  H.,  and  Eshban,  and 
HEMLOCK  — 
l.Wormu'ood,  ruj;?  laanah. 

Amos  6. 12  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into  hemlock. 


HEN 


476 


HERE 


2. Poisonous  herb,  venom,  e'n'h  rosh. 

Hos.  10.   4  judgment  springoth  up  as  hemlock  in  the 

HEN,  [n  grace, 

A  son  of  Zephaniah,  apparently  the  same  that  is  called 

Josmh  in  verse  io.    B.C.  519. 

Zech.  6. 14  the  crowns  shall  be  to.  .H.  the  son  of 

HEN  — 

Fowl,  hen,  opvis  amis. 

Matt  23.  37  as  alien  gathereth  her  chickens  under  (h.) 
Lukei3.  34  as  a  hen  (doth  gather)  her  brood  under(li.) 

HE'-NA,  yjrt  low  land. 

A  chief  city  that  had  been  reduced  by  the  Assyrian 
kings  shortly  before  the  time  of  Sennacherib.  On  the 
Euphrates,  not  far  from  Sippara,  now  (Mosiab),  is  an 
ancient  town  called  Ana  or  Anah,  which  is  perhaps  the 
site  of  the  ancient  Hena. 

2Ki.  18.  34  where  (are)  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim,  H. 
ig.  13  Where  (is)  thekingof.  .Sepharvaim, of  H. 

Isa.  37.  13  Where  (is)  the  king  of .  .Sepharvaim,  H. 
HE  NA'-DAD,  Tip  Hadad  is  gracious. 
The  head  of  a  Levite  family  that  aided  in  rebuilding  the 
temple  under  Jeshua.    B.C.  480. 

Ezra    3.    9  sons  of  H. . .  their  sons  and  their  brethren 

Nell.  3.  18  After  him  repaired.  .Bavai  the  son  of  H. 
3.  24  After  him  repaired  Binnui  the  son  of  H. 
10.    9  the  Levites.  .Binnui  of  the  sons  of  H^  K 

HENCE,  (from)  — 

1 .  From  this,  n;o  mizzeh. 

Gen.  37. 17  the  man  said,  They  are  departed  hence 

2.  From,  this  or  that  place,  ivi  eidei*  entculhen. 

Matt. 17.  20  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove  [h.l 
Lukei^.  iif'et  thee  out,  and  depart  hence  ',4.  9  ;  16.26 
Jehu  2.  16  Take  ttese  tilings  hence;  make  not  my 
7     3  said  unto  him.  Depart  hence,  and  go  into 
14.  31  that  the  world  .  .let  us  go  hence,  18.  36. 
Jils.     4.    1  (come  they)not  hence,  (even)of  your  lusts 
Z.  After  these,  uetd  ra-vras  meta  tautas. 

Acts    1.    5  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days  hence 
[See  also  Get,  from.] 
HENCEFORTH  — 
I.Tel,  still,  -iiu  od. 

Nunn8.  22  Neither  must  the  children  of  Israel  hence. 

2.Nov>,  nnu  atlah. 

2  Ch.16.   9  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  have  wars 

3.  To  add,  cause  to  add,  <ip;  yasaph,  5. 

Gen.   4.  12  it  shall  not  henceforth  yield  unto  thee 

4  From  'now,  a-rru  aprt  apo  arli. 

Matt23  39  Ye  shall  not  see  me  henceforth,  till  ye 
26  29  I  will  not  drink  henceforth  of  this  Jo.14.7. 

5.  What  is  left,  remainder,  Kolttov  loipon. 

■>  Ti.    4.   8  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  cro. 

6..V0  more,  not  again,  finKeri  meketi. 

Acts    4.  17  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  name 

7..\'"»\  to  vvv  to  nun. 

Luke  1,  48  behold,  from  henceforth  all  generations 

5.  10  Fear  not;  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  cat. 

12.  S2  from  henceforth  there  shalt  be  five  inone 

Acts  18.'  6  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gentiles 

2  Co.   5.  16  henceforth  know  we  no  man  after  the  flesh 

HENCEFORTH  .no  more  — 
Vet,  still,  en  eti. 

2  Co.  5. 16  yetnowhenceforthknowwe(hini)nomore 

HENCEFORTH,  from  — 

].Fiom  now,  airdpri  aparti. 

Rev.  14.  13  which  die  in  the  Lord  [from  henceforth] 

2.  What  is  left,  remainder,  too  Aoittou,  rb  AonrdV. 
Gal.  6.  17  Prom  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me 
Heb.  :o.  13  From  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies 

HENCEI ORTH ...  not  — 

1  .Vo  more,  not  again,  ixvkcti  meketi. 

Rom.  6.  6  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin 
2  Co.  5.  15  should  not  henceforth  live  unto  themsel. 
Eph.    4.  17  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other  Gent. 

2. No  more,  not  again,  o-Wti  onheti. 

John  15.  15  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants  ;  for 
HENCEFORWARD  — 
1,  Yonder,  beyond,  henceforth,  njon  halah. 

N  inn  1 5.  23  and  henceforward  among  your  generations 
2. No  more,  not  again,  fj-nxert  meketi. 

Matt2i.  19  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward  for 
HE'-PHER,  "isri  a  digging,  a  well. 
1.  The  youngest  son  of  Gilead,  and  head  of  the  family 
of  the  Hepberites.  B.C.  1600.  Hepher  was  the  father 
of  Zelophehad  whose  daughters  first  raised  the  question 
of  the  right  of  a  woman  having  no  brother  to  hold  her 
father's  property. 

NU11126.  32  and  (of)  H.,  the  family  of  the  Hepheritcs 
27.    1  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad,  the  son  of  H. 

Josh  17.    2  There  was  also  (a  lid)  for.  .children  of  H. 
'  17.    3  Zelophehad,  tlie  son  of  H... had  no  sons 

•2.  The  second  son  of  Naarah  one  of  Ashur's  two  wives. 
Tekoa  was  founded  by  Asliur  in  Judah's  genealogy. 
B.o.  1500. 

1  Ch.  4.    6  Naarah  bare  him  Almzani,  and  II  .  and  T. 


3.  A  Mecherathite,  one  of  the  thirty  heroes  of  David's 
guard.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  36  H.  the  Mecherathite,  Ahijah  the  Pelonite 

4.  A  royal  city  of  the  Canaanites  on  the  W.  of  the  Jor- 
dan ;  so  also  was  the  "laud  of  Hepher,"  one  of  Solo- 
mon's commissariat  districts.  It  lay  below  Dor,  near 
Sochoh,  to  the  S.  of  the  centre  of  Palestine. 

Josh.  12.  17  The  king  of  Tappuah,  one  ;  thekingof  H. 

1  Ki.    4.  10  to  him . .  Sochoh,  and  all  the  laud  of  H. 

HE-PHER-ITES,  "!Cn  belonging  to  Chepher. 
The  family  of  Hepher  son  of  Gilead. 

Nuni  26.  32  and  (of)  Hepher,  the  family  of  the  H. 

HEPH-ZI'-BAH,  a3"'x?n  my  delight  is  in  her. 

1.  The  wife  of  Hezekiah  and  mother  of  Manasseh  king 

of  Judah.    B.C.  710. 

2  Ki.  21.    1  Manasseh.  .his  mother's  name  (was)  H. 
2  A  name  to  be  borne  by  Jerusalem  when  restored. 

Isa.   62.   4  thou  shalt  be  called  H.,  and  thy  laud  B. 

HER  — 

l.Soul,  breath,  desire,  e>94  nephesh. 

Jer.     2.  24  suufl'eth  up  the  wind  at  her  pleasure 
'2.  He,  she,  it,  ain6s  autos. 

Matt.|i.  20  that  which  isjeonceived  in  her  is  of  theHoly 
Z.He,  she,  it,  a\n6s  (gen.)  autos. 

Matt.  1.  25  she  had  brought  forth  her  first  born  son 
2.  18  Rachel  weeping  (for)  her  children,  and 
n.  19  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children 
14.    8  she,  being  before  instructed  of  her  mother 
14.  11  the  damsel :  and  she  brought  (it)  to  her 

20.  20  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  with  her 
24.  29  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and 

Mark  6.  24  she  went  forth,  and  said  unto  her  mother 

6.  28  and  the  damsel  gave  it  to  her  mother 

7.  26  would  cast  forth  the  devil  out  of  her  daugh. 
7,  30  when  she  was  come  to  her  house,  she  found 

10.  12  if  a  woman  shall  put  away  her  husband 

12.  44  she  of  her  want  did  east,  .(even)  all  her 

13.  24  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light 

13.  28  When  her  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  putteth 
Luke  1.  36  hath  also  conceived  a  son  in  her  old  age 

2.  7  she  brought  forth  her  first  bom  son,  and 
2.  19  Mary  kept,  .and  pondered  (them)  in  her 
2.  36  had  lived . .  seven  years  from  her  virginity 
2.  51  his  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in  her  he. 
7.  35  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children 
7.  38,  44  wipe  (them)  with  the  hairs  other  head 

10.  38  woman namedMarthareceivedhiniintoh. 
12.  53  mother  in  law  against  her  daughter  in  law 
12.  53  daughter  in  law  against  hermotherinlaw 

21.  '4  but  she  of  her  penury  hath  cast  in  all 
John  4.  28  The  woman  then  left  her  water  pot,  and 

11.  2  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair,  whose  brot. 

11.  28  called  Mary  her  sister  secretly,  saying 
T2.    3  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair:  and  the  ho. 

Acts   9.  40  she  opened  her  eyes  ;  and  when  she  saw  P. 

16.  16  which  brought  her  masters  much  gain  by 
Gal.    4.  25  now  is,  aud  is  in  bondage  with  her  children 
Jas.     5.  18  and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit 
Rev.   2.  21  I  gave,  .to  repentof  her  fornication;  and 

6.  13  even  as  a  fig  tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs 
12. 14  fly  into  the  wilderness,  into  her  place,  w. 

12.  16  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallow. 

14.  8  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  fornication 

17.  4  cup  in  her  hand  full  of  ..her  fornication 

17.  5  And  upon  her  forehead  (was)  a  name  wr. 

18.  7  for  she  saith  in  her  heart,  I  sit  a  queen 

19.  2  did  corrupt  the  earth  with  her  fornication 

21.  2  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husba. 

22.  2  yielded  her  fruit  every  month  :  and  the 

i.This  one,  o'Ctos  (ace.)  hontos,  -rairnv 

Rev.  12.  15  cause  her  to  be  carried  away  of  the  flood 

HER,  as  for  — 
She,  K'nhi. 

Eze.  30.  18  asfor  her,  a  cloud  shall  cover  her,  and  her 

HER  own  (self)  — 

l.He,  she,  it,  aiiros  (gen.)  autos. 

Luke  1.  56  three  months,  and  returned  to  her  own  h. 

2. Of  himself,  one's  own,  eavrov  heautou. 

Acts   7.  21  tookhimup.anduourishedliimforherown 
Matt.  9.  2i ;  23. 37  ;  Luke  13.  34  ;  1  Co.  11.  5,  1  Th.  2.  7 

HERALD  — 

Crier,  herald,  1'na  Imroz. 

Dan.   3.   4  Then  an  herald  cried  aloud,  To  you  it  is  e. 

HERB  — 

1. Shining  herb,  rriin  arah. 

2  Ki.  4.  39  went  out  into  the  field  to  gather  herbs 
Isa.  26.  19  for  thy  dew  (is  as)  the  dew  of  herbs,  and 

2. Shining  herb,  nix  or. 

Isa.    18.   4  like  a  clear  heat  upon  herbs,  (and)  like  a 

3.  Grass,  tender  grass,  Nt^'j  deshe. 

2  Ki.  19.  26  (as)  the  green  herb,  (as)  the  grass  on  the  h. 
Psa.  37.   2  For  they  shall,  .wither  as  the  green  herb 
Isa.   37.  27  they  were,  .(as)  the  green  herb,  (as)  the 
66.  14  and  your  bones  shall  flourish  like  an  herb 

4.  Hay,  grass,  *vyn  chatsir. 

Job     8. 12  it  withereth  before  any  (other)  herb 

Z.Green  herb,  p"v  yaraq. 

Dent  1 1.  10  sowest  thy  seed . .  as  a  garden  of  herbs 
1  Ki.  21.    2  that  I  may  have  it  for  a  garden  of  herbs 
Prov.15.  17  Better  (is)  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is 


6.  Herb,  3b>y  eseb. 

Gen.    1 .'  1 1  the  herb  yielding  seed,  (and)  the  fruit  tree 
1.  12  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  kind,  and 
1.  29  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed 

1.  30  (I  have  given)  every  green  herb  for  meat 

2.  5  and  every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew 

3.  18  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  herb  of  the  field 
9.    3  even  as  the  green  herb  have  I  given  you 

Exod.  9.  22  upon  every  herb  of  the  field,  throughout 

9.  25  the  hail  smote  every  herb  of  the  field,  and 
10.  12  eat  every  herb  of  the  land,  (even)  all  that 
10.  15  they  did  eat  every  herb  of  the  land,  and 
10.  15  or  in  the  herbsof  the  field,  through  all  the 

Psa.io4.  14  herb  for  the  service  of  man  ;  that  he  may 

105.  35  did  eat  up  all  the  herbs  in  their  land 
Prov  27.  25  and  herbs  of  the  mountains  are  gathered 
Isa.   42. 15  I  will,  .dry  up  all  their  herbs;  and  I 
Jer.    12.    4  How  long  shall,  .the  herbs  of  every  field 

7. Herbage,  grass,  fioravn  botane. 

Heb.   6.    7  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them  by 

8.  Garden  herbs,  Aaxapov  lachanon. 

Matt  13.  32  it  is  the  greatest  among  herbs,  and  beco. 
Mark  4.  32  becometh  greater  than  all  herbs,  and  sho. 
Luke  1 1.  42  tithe  mint  and  rue,  and  all  manner  of  he. 
Rom.  14.    2  another,  who  is  weak,  eateth  herbs 

HERB,  tender  — 

Tender  grass,  nbh  deshe, 

Deut32.  2  asthesmallrainuponthetenderherb.aiicl 
Job    38.  27  and  to  cause  the  bud  of  the  tender  herb 

HERD  — 

l.Oxen,  herd,  cattle,  ">i}3  baqar. 

Gen.  13.  s  Lot  also,  .had  flocks,  and  herds,  and  tents 
18.  7  Abraham  ran  unto  the  herd,  and  fetched  a 
24.  35  he  hath  given  him  flocks,  and  herds,  and 

26.  14  For  he  had.,  possession  of  herds,  and  great 

32.  7  he  divided . .  the  flocks,  and  herds,  and  the 

33.  13  the  flocks  and  herds  with  young  (are)  with 
43.  10  thy  flocks,  and  thy  herds,  and  all  that  thou 

46.  32  they  have  brought,  .their  herds,  aud  all 

47.  1  their  herds,  .are  come  out  of  the  laud  of 
47.  17  for  the  cattle  of  the  herds,  and  fortheasses 
50.    8  their  herds,  they  left  in  the  laud  of  Goshen 

Exod.  10.    9  with  our  flocks  and  with  our  herds  will 

10.  24  let  your  flocks  and  your  herds  be  stayed 
12.  32  take  your  flocks  and  your  herds,  as  ye 
12.  38  and  flocks  and  herds,  (even)  very  much 

34.  3  neither  let.  .herds  feed  before  that  niour. 
Lev     1.    2  ye  shall  bring  your  offering,  .of  the  herd 

1.    3  offering  (be)  a  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  herd 
3.    1  if  he  offer  (it)  of  the  herd  ;  whether  (it  lie) 

27.  32  concerning  the  tithe  of  the  herd,  or  of  the 
Num.  11. 22  Shall  the  flocks  and  the  herds  be  slain 

15.  3  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord,  of  the  herd 
Deut.  8. 13  (when)  thy  herds  and  thy  flocks  multiply 

12.    6  ye  shall  bring . .  firstlings  of  your  herds 
12.  17  mayest  not  eat.  .firstlings  of  thy  herds 
12.  21  thou  shalt  kill  of  thy  herd  and  of  thy 
14.  23  thou  shalt  eat.  .firstlings  of  thy  herds 
15. 19  the  firstling  males  that  come  of  thy  herd 

16.  2  Thou  shalt  therefore  sacrifice .  .the  herd 

1  Sa.  11.   5  Saul  came  after  the  herd  out  of  the  field 

30.  20  David  took  all  the  flocks  and  the  herds 

2  Sa.  12.    2  The  rich  (man)  had  exceeding  many.  .he. 

12.  4  and  he  spared  to  take  of.  .his  own  herd 

1  Cll.27.  29  over  the  herds,  .and  over  the  herds  (that 

2  Ch.32.  29  he  provided  him.  .herds  in  abundance ;  for 
Isa.  65. 10  the  valley  of  Achor  a  place  for  the  herds 
Jer.  3.24  For  shame  hath  devoured . .  their  herds 

5. 17  they  shall  eat  up  thy  flocks  and.  .herds 
31.12  for  the  young  of  the  flock  and  of  the  herd 
Hos.    5.    6  shall  go  with  their  flocks  and.. herds 
Jon.   3.    7  Letneither..herdnorflock,tasteany thill", 
Hab.  3. 17  and  (there  shall  be)  no  herd  in  the  stall ; 

2. Acquisition,  2>ossession,  rupp  rniqneh. 

Gen.  47. 18  my  lord  also  hath  our  herds  of  cattle 

2. Flock,  drove,  herd,  "OS!  eder. 

Prov. 27.  23  Be  thou  diligent.  .look  well  to  thy  herds 
Joel    1. 18  the  herds  of  cattle  are  perplexed,  because 

A.  Herd,  drove,  ayzAr}  agele. 

Matt.  8.  30  there  was  a  good  way  off  from  them  an  h. 

8.  31  suffer  us  to  go  away  into  the  herd  of  swine 

8.  32  they  went  into  the  [herd  of]  swine  :  and 

'  8.  32  the  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down 

Mark  5.  n  there  was  there ..  a  great  herd  of  swine 

5.  13  the  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place 

Luke  8.  32  And  there  was  there  an  herd  of  many  sw. 

8.  33  the  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place 

HERDKLAN  — 
l.Herdman,  ip)3  boqer. 

Amos  7.  14  but  I  (was)anherdnian,andagatherai-of 

2.Herdman,  slice})  master,  ip):  noqed. 

Amos  1.    1  Amos,  who  was  among  theherdmenof  T. 

3.  To  feed,  nip,  raah. 

Gen.  13.    7  the  herdmen  of  Abram's.  .and  the  herd. 

13.  8  between  my  herdmen  and  thy  herdmen 
26.  20  the  herdmen.  .did  strive  with,  .herdmen 

1  Sa.  21.   7  an  Edomite,  the  cliiefest  of  the  herdmen 

HERE  — 

I.Here,  now,  NiSN,  1SX  epho. 

EXOC133.  16  wherein  shall  it  be  known  here  that  I  and 

2. Here,  hither,  cSn  halom. 

Gen.  16.  13  Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him  that 
Judg  20.    7  ye  (are)  all  children  of  Israel ;  give  here 


HERE 


477 


HERODIANS 


3. Here,  hither,  n$n  henuah. 

Gen.  21.  23  therefore  swear  unto  rue  here  by  God 

4.  In  this  '{place),  mg,  ma  5«3seA. 

Exod24.  14  Tarry  ye  here  for  U3,  until  we  come  again 

1  Sa.  21.    g  take  (it),  .(there  is)  no  other  save  that  h. 

5.  Thus,  here,  now,  na  fcoA. 

Gen.  31.  37  set  (it)  here  before  my  brethren  and  thy 
N  urn  23.  15  he  said  unto  Balak,  Stand  here  by  thy 

2  Sa.  18.  30  said  (unto  him),  Turn  aside,  (and)  stand  h. 

G.Here,  KB po. 

Job  38.  11  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed 

7  Mere,  Ss  po,  ns  poh. 

Gen.  19.  12  said  unto  Lot,  Hast  thou  here  any  besides? 

Isa.   22.  16  hast  thou  here,  and  whom  hast  thou  here 

22.  16  tiiou  hast  hewed  thee  out  a  sepulchre  h. 

S.Here,  there,  avrov  autou. 

Matt  26.  36  saith  unto  the  disciples,  Sit  ye  here,  while 

9. Hither,  here,  ii>dd8e  enthade. 

Luke24.  41  he  said  unto  them,  Have  ye  here  any  m.? 
Acts  16.  28  Do  thyself  no  harm ;  for  we  are  all  here 

25.  24  both  at  Jerusalem,  and  (also)  here,  crying 

lO.Here,  £5e  hode. 

Matt  12.  41  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas  (is)  he. 

12.  42  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  (is)h. 
14.    S  said,  Give  me  here  John  Baptist's  head 
14.  17  they  say  unto  him,  We  have  here  but  five 

16.  28  I  say  unto  you,  There  be  some  standing  h. 

17.  4  to  be  here  :  if  thou  wilt,  letus  make  here 
20.    6  saith . .  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle? 
24.    2  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone 
24.  23  if  any  man  shall  say  unto  you,  Lo,  here 

26.  38  Then  saith  he  unto  them,  .tarry  ye  here 
28.    6  He  is  not  here  ;  for  he  is  risen,  as  he  said 

Mark  6.   3  are  not  his  sisters  here  with  us?  And  they 

8.  4  can  a  man  satisfy  these,  .with  bread  here 
.9.    1  That  there  be  some  of  them  that  stand  h. 

9.  5  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  :  and 

13.  21  if  any  man  shall  say  to  you,  Lo,  here  (is) 

14.  32  and  he  saith  to  his  disciples,  Sit  ye  here 
14.  34  And  saith  unto  them,  .tarry  ye  here,  and 

16.  6  he  is  risen ;  he  is  not  here  :  behold  the 
Luke  4.  23  whatsoever  we  have  heard,  .do  also  here 

9.  12  Send  the  multitude  away,  .for  we  are  here 
9. 27  of  a  truth,  there  be  some  standing[here] 
9.  33  Master.it  is  good  forustobehere:  and  let 

11.  31  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  (is)  h. 

11.  32  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonas(is)here 

17.  21  Neither  shall  they  say,  Lo  here!  or,  lo  there! 
17.  23  they  shall  say  to  you,  See  here!  or,  see  there 
22.  38  they  said,  Lord,  behold,  here  (are)  two  swo. 
24.    6  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen  :  remember  how 

John  6.  9  There  is  a  lad  here,  which  hath  five  barley 
11.  21  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  mybrother 
11.  32  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother 
Acts  g.  14  And  here  he  hath  authority  from  the  chief 
Col.  4.  9  They  shall  make  known  unto  you.  .here 
Heb.   7.    8  And  here  men  that  die  receive  tithes;  but 

13.  14  For  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but 
Jas.  2.  3  Sit  thou  [here]  in  a  good  place . .  or  sit  here 
Rev.  13.  10  Here  is  the  patience  and  the  faith  of  the 

13. 18  Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  under. 

14.  12  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints :  [here] 
17.    9  Andhere(is)the  mind  which  hath  wisdom 

[See  Have,  present,  stand.] 
HERE,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  found,  KJO  matsa,  2. 

Gen.  19. 15  take,  .thy  two  daughters,  which  are  here 
2.  To  be  beside,  present,  irdpztfxt  pareimi. 

Acts  24. 19  Who  ought  to  have  been  here  before  thee 
HERE  present,  to  be  — 
To  be  beside,  present,  irdpet/j.t  pareimi. 

Acts  10.  33  therefore  are  we  all  herepresenfcbeforeG. 
HERE,  to  be  all  — 
To  be  finished,  done,  osn  tamam. 

1  Sa.  16. 1 1  Samuel  said  unto  Jesse,  Are  here  all  (thy) 
HERE  and  there,  to  be  — 
To  be  sjirinkled,  pi]  zaraq. 

Hos.   7.    9  yea,  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him 
HEREAFTER  — 
1. Behind,  backward,  "iinx  acJior. 

Isa.   41.  23  Show  the  things  that  are  to  come  hereafter 
2.  Behind,  last,  furthest,  "inN  achar. 

Eze.  20.  39  serve  ye  everyone  his  idols,  and  hereafter 
2. After  this,  Jt  nny  achare  den. 

Dan.  2. 29  what  should  come  to  pass  hereafter ;  and  he 
2.  4s  what  shall  come  to  pass  hereafter :  and 

4.  From  now,  henceforth,  air'  &pn  op  arti. 

Matt  26.  64  Jesus  saith . .  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the 
John  1.  51  I  say  unto  you,  [Hereafter]  ye  shall  see 

5.  Yet,  still,  in  eti. 

Johui4.  30  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you 
6.2Vb  more,  yet  again,  fi-nicin  meketi. 

Markn.  14  No  man  eat  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for  ever 
( .  From  now,  henceforth,  airo  rov  vvv  apo  ton  nun, 

Luke22.  69  Hereafter  shall  the  Son  of  man  sit  on  the 
B.  After  these,  fxera  ravra  meta.  tauta. 

John  13.   7  not  now  ;  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter 

Rev.    i.  19  and  the  things  which  shall  be  hereafter 
4.    1  show  thee  things  which  must  be  hereafter 
q.  12  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  hcrcaf. 


Only  herein  will  the  men  consent  unto  us 
eV  toutoi  en  touto. 
7  herein  is  that  saying  true.  One  soweth,and 


Acts  : 
2  Co. 
1  Jo. 


9- 
13- 


Gal. 
2  Pe. 


HEREBY  — 

l.In  or  by  this,  nNT3  bezoth. 

Gen.  42.  15  Hereby  ye  shall  be  proved  :  By  the  life  of 

2.  Out  of  this,  4k  tovtov  ek  ton  ton. 

1  Jo.   4.    6  Hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  truth,  and 

3.  In  this,  iv  rovrco  en  touto. 

1  Co.  4.    4  yet  am  I  not  hereby  justified  :  but  he  that 
1  Jo.   2.    3  hereby  we  do  know  that  we  know  him 

2.  5  whoso  keepeth  his  word . .  hereby  know  we 

3.  16  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  (of  Godj,  bee. 
3.  19  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth 

3.  24  hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us 

4.  2  Hereby  know  ye  the  spirit  of  God.    Every 
4.  13  Herebyknowwethatwedwellinhim,  ana 

HEREIN—" 

l.In  or  by  this,  nx>3  bezoth. 

Gen.  34 
2.1n  this, 
John  4 

30  herein  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  ye  know 
8  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear 
16  herein  do  I  exercise  myself,  tohave  always 
10  herein  I  give  (my)  advice  :  for  this  is  expe. 
10  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but 

4.  17  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we 

HEREOF  — 
l.This,  ai/T7j  haute. 

Matt.  9.  26  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all  that  land 
2, This,  ovros  {ace.)  houtos. 

Heb.    5.    3  by  reason  hereof  he  ought,  as  for  the  peo. 
HE-RES,  Dnn  heat,  sun. 

Mount  Heres  hear  Aijalon  on  the  borders  of  Judah  and 
Dan,  inhabited  by  Amorites. 

Judg.  1.  35  the  Amorites  would  dwell  in  mount  H.  in 
HE'-RESH,  ann  work,  silence. 

The  head  of  a  Levite  family  and  attached  to  the  staff  of 
the  tabernacle.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9. 15  Bakbakkar,  H..  and  Galal,  and  Mattan. 
HERESY  — 
Choice,  opinion,  sentiment,  atpeo'is hairesis. 

Acts  24.  14  that  after  the  way  which  they  call  heresy 
Co.  1 1.  19  For  there  must  be  also  heresies  among  you 

5.  20  variance .  .wrath,  strife, 'seditions, heresies 
2.    x  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable  heresies 

HERETIC,  that  is  an  — 

Opinionative  person,  heretic,  atperiKds  hairetikos. 

Titus  3. 10  A  man  that  is  an  heretic  after  the  first  and 
HERETOFORE  — 

1.  Yesterday,  ?ion  temol. 

Exod.  4.  10  I  (am)  not  eloquent,  neither  heretofore 
5.    7  straw  to  make  brick,  as  heretofore  :  let 
5.    8  bricks,  which  they  did  make  heretofore 
5.  14  both  yesterday  and  to  day,  as  heretofore  ? 
Josh.  3.    4  ye  have  not  passed  (this)  way  heretofore 
Ruth  2.  11  people  which  thou  knewest  not  heretofore 

2.  Yesterday,  third  day,  DtP7a>  ViDnx  ethmol  shilshom. 

1  Sa.   4.    7therehathnotbeensuchathingheretofore 
HEREUNTO  — 
With  a  view  to  this,  els  touto  eis  touio. 

1  Pe.   2.  21  hereunto  were  ye  called  ;  because  Christ 
HEREWITH  — 
In,  by,  or  with  this,  nwa,  nxi?  bazoth,  bezoth. 

Eze.  16.  29  and  yet  thou  wast  not  satisfied  herewith 

Mai.    3.  10  prove  me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord 

HERITAGE  — 

1. Possession,  n&-r:  yerushshah. 

Psa.  61.    5  thou  hast  given  (me)  the  heritage  of  those 
2. Possession,  n^'-iiD  morashah. 

Exod.  6.    8  I  will  give  it  you  for  an  heritage  :  I  (am) 
3. Inheritance,  npry  nachalah. 

Job  20.  29  theheritage  appointed  unto  him  by  God 

27.  13  the  heritage  of  oppressors,  (which)  they 

Psa.  94.    5  They  break,  .and  afflict  thine  heritage 

111.    6  that  he  may  give  them  the  heritage  of  the 

127.   3  Lo,  children  (are)  an  heritage  of  the  Lord 

135.  12  their  land  (for)  an  heritage,  an  heritage 

136.  21  And  gave  their  land  for  an  heritage  :  for 
136.  22  an  heritage  unto  Israel  his  servant :  for 

49.  8  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate  heritages 
54.  17  This  (is)  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the 
58.  14  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob  thy 

2.  7  and  made  mine  heritage  an  abomination 

3.  19  give  thee,  .a  goodly  heritage  of  the  hosts 
12.  7  I  have  left  mine  heritage  ;  I  have  given 
12.  8  Mine  heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  lion  in  the 
12.  9  Mine  heritage  (is)  unto  me  (as)  a  speckled 
12.  15  will  bring,  .every  man  to  his  heritage,  and 
17.    4  shalt  discontinue  from  thine  heritage 

50.  1 1  0  ye  destroyers  of  mine  heritage,  because 
2. 17  and  give  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach 
3.  2  for  my  people  and  (for)  my  heritage  Israel 
2.  2  they  oppress . .  even  a  man  and  his  heritage 
7.  14  the  flock  of  thine  heritage,  which  dwell 
7.  iS  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  herit. 
1.    3  laid  his  mountains  and  his  heritage  waste 

^.Inheritance,  rbni  nachalath. 

Psa.  16.    6  lines' are  fallen,  .yea,  I  have  a  goodly  he. 
5.  Lot,  allotment,  KAypos  kleros. 

1  Pe.    5    3  Neither  as  being  lords  over(God's)  herit. 


Isa 


Jer. 


Joel 
Mic. 

Mai. 


HERITAGE,  to  take  as  an  — 
To  have,  take  or  give  inheritance,  Srrj  nachal. 
Psa.119.  in  testimonies  have  I  taken  as  an  heritage 

HER'-MAS,  "Epjxas  Mercury,  interpreter. 
A  person  to  whom  Paul  sends  greeting  in  his  epistle  to 
the  Romans.     The  name  is  Greek,  as  well  as  the  other 
four  mentioned  in  the  verse. 

Rom  16.  14  Salute.  .H.,  Patrobas,  Hermes,  and  the 
HER'-MES.  'Ep/ifjs  Mercury,  interpreter. 
A  Christian  Greek  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  saluta- 
tion. 

Rom  16.  14  Salute.  .Hernias,  Patrobas,  H.,  and  the 

HER-MO-GE'-NES,  "E.pp.oyzvn$. 

A  person  who  had  turned  away  from  Paul  in  his  latest 

extremities. 

2  Ti.  1.  15  turned  away.,  of  whom  are  Phygel.  and  H. 
HER'-MON,  )iD"in  prominent,  rugged. 
A  mountain  in  the  X.  eastern  border  of  Palestine,  over 
against  Lebanon,  adjoining  the  table-land  of  Bashan. 
It  stands  at  the  southern  end,  and  is  the  culminating 
point  of  the  range  of  Antilibanus,  towering  high  above 
the  ancient  city  of  Dan  and  the  sources  of  the  Jordan. 
It  still  retains  its  name  Harmun  or  Hermttn,  The 
Amorites  called  it  Shenir,  and  the  Zidouiaus  Sirion.  In 
Deut.  4.  48  it  is  called  Sion,  which  must  not  be  con- 
founded with  Zion  (Zi-yon). 

Deut.  3.    8  from  the  river  of  Arnon  unto  mount  H. 

3.  9  (Which)  H.  the  Sidonians  call  Sirion,  and 

4.  48  Aroer.  .unto  mount  Sion,  which  (is)  H. 
Josh  11.    3  the  Hivite  under  H.  in  the  land  of  Mizpeh 

11.  17  in  the  valley  of  Lebanon,  under  mount  H. 

12.  1  from  the  river  Arnon  unto  mount  H.,  and 

12.  5  reigned  in  mount  H. , and  in  Salcah,  and  in 

13.  5  from  Baal-gad  under  mount  H.  unto  the 

13.  11  all  mount  H.,  and  all  Bashan  unto  Salcah 
1  Ch.  5.  23  increased  from  Bashan .  .unto  mount  H. 
Psa.  89.  12  Tabor  and  H.  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name 

133.    3  As  the  dew  of  H. .  .that  descended  upon 
Song  4.    8  look.,  from  the  top  of  Shenir  and  H.,  from 

HER-MO-NITES,  D'JiDirr. 

The  inhabitants  at  the  N.  of  Naphtali  and  Manasseh  on 

Mount  Hermon. 

Psa.  42.   6  I  remember  thee  from  the  land . .  of  the  H. 

HE'-ROD,  'Hpwh"T)S. 

1.  Son  of  Antipater,  procurator  of  Judea  under  Julius 
Cresar  and  king  under  Augustus,  and  was  designated 
Herod  the  Great.     B.C.  47 — A.D.  2. 

Matt.  2.  1  Jesus  was  born,  .in  the  days  of  H.  the  king 
2.  3  When  H.  the  king  had  heard,  .he  was  tro. 
2.  7  Then  H. .  .enquired  of  them  diligently  wh. 
2. 12  warned,  .that  they  should  not  return  to  H. 
2.  13  H.  will  seek  the  young  child  to  destroy 
2.  15  And  was  there  until  the  death  of  H. :  that 
2.  16  Then  H. .  .slew  all  the  children  that  were 
2.  19  when  H.  was  dead,  .an  angel,  .appeareth 

2.  22  did  reign . .  in  the  room  of  his  father  H. ,  lie 
Luke  1.    5  There  was,  in  the  days  of  H. . .  a  certain  pi 

2.  Herod  Antipas,  son  of  Herod  the  Great  by  Matthace, 
a  Samaritan,  became  tetrarch  of  Galilee  andPersea  :  but 
banished,  A.D.  41. 

Matti4.    1  At  that  time  H.  the  tetrarch  heard  of 

14.  3  H.  had  laid  hold  on  John,  and  bound  him 
14.    6  But  when  H.'s  birthday  was  kept 

14.    6  the  daughter  of  Herodias.  .pleased  H. 

Mark  6.  14  king  H.  heard,  .and  he  said,  That  John 
6.  16  when  H.  heard .  .he  said,  It  is  John,  whom 
6.  17  H.  himself  had  sent  forth  and  laid  hold 
6.  18  John  had  said  unto  H.,  It  is  not  lawful  for 
6.  20  H.  feared  John,  knowing  that  he  was  a 
6.  21  H.,  on  his  birthday,  made  a  supper  to  his 
6.  22  daughter  of  the  said  Herodias. .  pleased  H. 
8. 15  Take  heed,  beware  of  the  leaven,  .of  H. 

Luke  3.    1  and  H.  being  tetrarch  of  Galilee,  and  bis 
3. 19  H.  the  tetrarch,  being  reproved  by  him  for 

3.  19  and  for  all  the  evils  which  H.  had  done 

8.  3  Joannathewifeof  Chuza  H.'s  steward,  and 

9.  7  H.  the  tetrarch  heard  of  all  that  was  done 
g.    9  And  H.  said,  John  have  I  beheaded  :  but 

13.  31  Get  thee  out,  and  depart  hence:  forH.  will 
23.  7  soon  as  he  knew  that  he  belonged  unto  H.  's 
23.  7  he  sent  him  to  H.,  who  himself  also  was 
23.  8  when  H.  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding  glad 
23.  11  H.  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at  nought 
23.  12  Pilate  and  H.  wrere  made  friends  together 
23.  15  No,  nor  yet  H. :  for  I  sent  you  to  him ;  and 
Acts  4.  27  both  H. .  .and  the  people  of  Israel,  were 
13.    1  Manaen . .  had  been  brought  up  with  H. 

3.  The  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great,  and  the  son  of  Aris- 
tobulus  and  Berenice.  He  was  Herod  Agrippa  I.  In 
A.D.  37  Caligula  gave  him  the  governments  of  the 
tetrarchs  Philip  and  Lysanias  with  other  marks  of  royal 
favour.     He  died,  A.D.  44. 

Acts  12.  1  H.  the  king  stretched  forth,  .hands  to  vex 
12.  6  And  when  H.  would  have  brought  him  forth 
12.  11  hath  delivered  me  out  of  the  hand  of  H. 
12.  19  when  H.  had  sought  forhim,  and  foundh 
12.  20  [H.]  was  highly  displeased  with  them  of 
12.  21  H.,  arrayed  in  royal  apparel,  sat  upon  his 
23.  35  commanded  him  to  be  kept  in  H.'s  judg. 

HE-RO-DI-ANS,  'Wpwo'iavoi. 

A  political  Jewish  party  that  favoured  Greek  customs. 

Matt?2.  t6 sentoutuntohimtheirdis^JpleswiththeH. 

Mark  3.    6  the  Pharisees,  .took  counFel  with  the  H. 
12. 13  they  send  unto  him  1  ertain  of  the.  .H.,  to 


HBRODIAS 


478 


HEZEKIAH 


HE-RO-DI'-AS,  'HptaSias. 

A  daughter  of  Aristobulus,  son  of  Herod  the  Great.  She 
was  married  to  her  uncle,  Philip,  but  left  hiin  for  his 
brother  Herod  the  tetrareh  of  Galilee. 

Matt  14.    3  and  put  (him)  in  prison  for  H.'s  sake,  his 

14.    6  the  daughter  of  H.  danced  before  them,  and 

Mark  6.  17  bound  him  in  prison  for  H.'s  sake,  bis  bro. 

6.  19  Therefore  H.  had  a  quarrel  against  him 

6.  22  when  the  daughter  of  the  said  H.  came  in 

Luke  3.  19  being  reproved  by  him  for  H.  his  brother 

HE  RO-DI'  ON,  'HpwSiW. 

A  Christian  of  Rome  and  a  kinsman  of  Paul. 

Rom  16.  11  Salute  [H.]  my  kinsman.  Greet  them  that 

HERON  — 

Heron,  rr*>JM  anapltah. 

Lev.  ir'.  19  the  heron  after  her  kind,  and  the  lapwing 
Deut  14  iS  the  heron  alter  her  kind,  and  the  lapwing 

HERSELF  — 

l.Soul,  self,  breath,  vp}  nephesh, 

Isa.     5.  14  hell  hath  enlarged  herself,  and  opened 

2.0/ himself,  one's  own,  eavrov  heautou. 

Matt.  9.  21  said  within  herself,  If  I  may  but  touch 
Luke   1.  24  Elizabeth  conceived,  and  hid  herself  five 
Rev.    2.  20  which  calleth  herself  a  prophetess,  to  te. 

18.  7  How  much  she  hath  glorified  [herself] 

19.  7  and  his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready 

HE'-SED,  iDn  kindness. 

The  Father  of  one  of  Solomon's  commissariat  officers,  in 

Aruboth,  in  Judah      B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  4.  10  The  sou  of  H.,  in  Aruboth ;  to  him  (perta.) 
HESH'-BON,  p3^0  stronghold. 

A  Levitical  city  of  Reuben  and  Gad.  It  first  belonged 
to  Moab  and  then  to  Amnion,  and  was  N.  of  the  lower 
part  of  the  Arnon.  "  The  ruins  of  Eesbdn,  twenty  miles 
h.  :i  the  Jordan  on  the  parallel  of  the  N.  end  of  the 
Dead  Seamark  the  site. 

Nuni2i.  25  Israel  dwelt  in..  H.,  and  inall  the  villages 
21. 26  H.  (was)  the  city  of  Sihon  the  king  of  the 
zi.  27  Come  into  H.,  let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  built 
21.  28  For  there  is  a  fire  gone  out  of  H.,  a  flame 
21.  30  H.  is  perished  even  unto  Dibon,  and  we 
21.  34  do  to  him  as  thou  didst  uuto  Sihon.  .atH. 
32.  3  H.,  and  Elealeh,  and  Shebam,  and  Nebo 
32.  37  the  children  of  Reuben  built  H.,  and  Ele. 
Deut.  1.    4  After  he  had  slain  S. .  .which  dwelt  in  H. 

2.  24 1  have  given  into  thine  hand  S . .  king  of  H. 

2.  26  I  sent  messengers .  .unto  Sihon  king  of  H. 

2.  30  Sihonkingof  H.  would  not  let  us  pass  by 


3- 
3- 
4- 
29. 

Josh.  9. 


*3- 
*3- 


judg 


Neh.  9. 
Song  7. 
Isa.    15. 


Jer. 


16. 
16. 


:  as  thou  didst  unto  S.  .which  dwelt  at  H. 

6  as  we  did  unto  Sihon  king  of  H.,  utterly 
.  46  in  the  land  of  Sihon.  .who  dwelt  at  H. 

7  Sihon  the  king  of  H. . .  came  out  against  us 
10  all  that  he  did  to.  .Sihon  king  of  H.,  and 

2  S.  king  of  the  Amorites,  who  dwelt  in  H. 
5  Gilead,  the  border  of  Sihon  king  of  H. 
10  all  the  cities  of  Sihon . .  which  reigned  in  H. 
17  H.,  and  all  her  cities  that  (are)  in  the  plain 
13.  21  kingdom  of  Sihon..  which  reigned  in  H.s 
13.  26  from  H.  uuto  Ramath-mizpeh,  and  Beta 
13.  27  rest  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  H. 
21.  39  H.  with  her  suburbs,  Jazer  with  her  sub. 
511.  19  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon.  .king  of  H. 
11.  26  While  Israel  dwelt  in  H.  and  her  towns 
1  Ch.  6.  81 H.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Jazer  with  her 
.  22  they  possessed . .  the  land  of  the  king  of  H. 
4  thine  eyes  (like)  the  fish  pools  in  II.,  by  the 
\  H.  shall  cry,  and  Elealeh:  their  voice  shall 

8  the  fields  of  H.  languish. .the  vineof  Sib. 

9  I  will  water  thee  with  my  tears,  OH.,  and 
2  in  H.  they  have  devised  evil  against  it 

48.  34  From  the  cry  of  H. . .  unto  Elealeh . .  unto 
48.  45  they  that  fied  stood  under  the  shadow  of  H. 

48.  45  a  fire  shall  come  forth  out  of  H.,  and  a  fl. 

49.  3  Howl,  0  H.,  for  Ai  is  spoiled  :  cry,  ye  da. 

HESH'-MON,  i'lD^n  fruitfulmass. 
A  town  in  the  extreme  south  of  Judah,  between  Mola- 
dah  and  Reersheba.    It  is  perhaps  the  same  as  Azmon 
(Num.  34.  4). 

Josh  15.  27  Hazar-gaddah,  and  H.,  andReth-palet 

HETH,  nn  terrible. 

A  second  son  of  Canaan,  ancestor  of  the  Hittites.    B.C. 

2200. 

Gen.  10.  15  Canaan  begat  Sidon  his  first  born,  and  n 

23.    3  Abraham,  .spake  unto  the  sons  of  H.,  say. 

23.    5  the  children  of  H.  answered  Abraham, say. 

23.    7  Abraham. .bowed. .to  the  children  of  H. 

23.  10  Ephron  dwelt  among  the  children  of  H. 

23.  10  in  the  audience  of  the  children  of  H. 

23.  16  had  named  in.  .audience  of  the  sons  of  H. 

23.  18  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  H.  25.10 

23.  20  made  sure  unto  Abraham,  .by.  sous  of  H. 

27. 46  I  am  weary . .  because  of . .  daughters  of  H . 

27.  46  if  Jacob  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  H. 

49.  32  purchase,  .(wag)  from  the  children  of  H. 
1  Ch.  1. 13  Canaan  begat  Zidou  his  first  born,  and  H. 

HETH'-LON,  ;^rn  lurking  place,  stronghold. 
A  place  in  the  northern  border  of  the  promised  land. 
The  "way  of  Sethlon"ia  the  pass  at  the  N.  end  of 
Lebanon  from  the  const  of  the  Mediterranean  to  the 
great  plain  of  Hameth,  and  is  hence  identical  with  the 
"entrance  of  Hameth  "  (Num.  34.  8,  &c.) 

Eze.  .17  15  great  sea,  the  way  of  H.,  as  men  go  to  7,. 
48.    1  north  end  to  the  coast  of  the  way  of  II. 


HEW,  to  — 

1.7b  cut,  hew,  carve,  Dun  chatab. 

Deut  19.    5  into  the  wood  with  his  neighbour  to  hew 

2. To  hew,  dig,  ^n  chatseb. 

1  Ch.22.    2  and  he  set  masons  to  hew  wrought  stones 
.  Ch.  2.    2  and  fourscore  thousand  to  hew  in  the 
Prov.  9.    1  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars 
Isa.   10.  15  against  him  that  heweth  therewith 
Jer.     2.  13  hewed  them  out  cisterns,  broken  cisterns 
Hos.    6.   5  Therefore  have  I  hewed  (them)  by  the  pro. 

3.  To  cut  {off  or  down),  m|  Jcarath. 

1  Ki.  5.   6  they  hew  me  cedar',  .can  skill  to  hew  ti. 
Jer.    6.   6  the  Lord  of  hosts  said,  Hew  ye  down  tr. 

4.7b  grave,  "70S  pasal. 

Exod34.    1  the  Lord  said.  .Hew  thee  two  tables  of 

34.    4  he  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto 
Deut  10.    1  the  Lord  said.  .Hew  thee  two  tables  of 

10.    3  I . .  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto 
1  Ki.  5.  iS  Hiram's  builders  did  hew  (them),  and 

5. To  hew  (stone),  \arofiea  latomeo. 

Matt  27.  60  which  he  had  hewn  out  in  the  rock  :  and 
Mark  15.  46  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre  which  was  hewn 

HEW  down,  to  — 

1.  To  cut  dozen,  TJ3  gedad. 

Dan.  4.  14  Hew  down  the  tree,  and  cut  off  his  branc. 
4.  23  saying,  Hew  the  tree  down,  and  destroy 

2.  To  cut  dozen,  off,  asunder,  yna  gada. 

Isa.   10.  33  high  oues  of  stature  (shall  be)  hewn  down 
3.7b  cut  doion,  ynJ  gada,  3. 

De  at  12.    3  ye  shall  hew  down  the  graven  images  of 

4.  To  cut  [off  or  dozen),  n*3|  Jcarath. 

Isa.   44.  14  He  heweth  him  down  cedars,  and  taketh 

5.7b  cut  off,  €kk6tttq>  ekkopto. 

Matt.  3.  10  hringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  do. 

7.  19  hringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  do. 

Luke  3.    9  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  do. 

HEW  in  pieces,  to  — 

1.7b  cut  in  pieces,  nm  nathach,  3. 

1  Sa.  11.    7  a  yoke  of  oxeu,  and  hewed  them  in  pieces 
2.  To  hew,  *\ap  shasaph,  3. 

1  Sa.  15.  33  Samuel  hewed  Agag  in  pieces  before  the  L. 
HEW  out,  to  — 
7b  h&uji  dig,  n~sn  chatseb. 

Isa.   22. 16  hast  hewed  thee  out.,  that  heweth  him  out 
HEWED  — 
l.Hezvn  work,  rria  gazith. 

1  Ki.  5.  17  they  brought  great . .  hewed  stones,  to  lay 
2.  Hewn  work,  3*02  viachtseb. 

2  Ki.  12.  12  to  buy  timber  and  hewed  stone  to  repair 
HEWER  — 

1.  To  cut,  hew,  carve,  sun  chatab. 

Deut  29.  1 1  from  the  hewer  of  thy  wood  iinto  the  dra. 

Josh.  9.  21  let  them  be  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers 

9.  23  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  for 

9.  27  Joshua  made  them  that  day  hewers  of  w. 

2  Ch.  2.  10  I  will  give  to  thy  servants,  the  hewers  that 

Jer.  46.  22  and  come  against  her.,  as  hewers  of  wood 

2. 7b  hew,  dig,  nxn  chatseb. 

1  Ki.  5.  15  fourscore  thousand  hewers  in  the  mounta. 

2  Ki.12. 12  And  to  masons,  and  hewers  of  stone,  and 

1  Ch.22.  15  workmen  with  thee  in  abundance,  hewers 

2  Ch.  2. 18  fourscore  thousand  !,to  be)  hewers  in  the 

HEWN,  to  be  — 

1.7b  be  hewn,  digged,  33frj  chatseb,  4. 

Isa.   51.    1  look  unto  the  rock  (whence)  ye  are  hewn 

'l.JInni  work,  33f0B  machtseb. 

2  Ki.22.   6  to  buy  timber  and  hewn  stone  to  repair  the 
2  Ch.34.  11  to  buy  hewn  stone,  and  timber  for  coup. 

HEWN  in  stone  — 

Hewn  out  of  a  rock,  \a^€vros  laxeutos. 

Luke  23.  53  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre  that  was  hewn  in  st. 

HEWN  down,  to  be  — 

To  wither,  be  withered,  Ssp  qamal. 

Isa.   33.    9  Lebanon  is  ashamed  (and)  hewn  down;  Sh. 

HEWN  or  hewed  stone  — 
Hewn  work,  rru  gazith. 

Exod2o.  25  thou  shait  not  build  it  of  hewn  stone:  for 
1  Ki.  6.  36  he  built  the  inner  court,  .of  hewed  stone 
7.    9  according  to  the  measures  of  hewed  stones 
7.  11  after  the  measures  of  hewed  stones,  and 
7.  12  three  rows  of  hewed  stones,  and  a  row  of 
Isa.     9.  10  but  we  will  build  with  hewn  stones 
I, am.  3.    9  Hehathinclosedmywayswithhewnstone 
!  ,  <     40.  42  the  four  tables  (were)  of  hewn  stone  for 
Amos  5.  1 1  ye  have  built  houses  of  hewn  stone,  but  ye 
HEZ-E'-KI,  *pm  Jah  is  strength. 
A  son  of  Elpaal,  a  descendant  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  S.  17  Zehadiah, and  Meshullam, andH., andHe. 
HEZ-E-KI'-AH,  nT»pm,  ;n;p'n  Jah  is  strength. 

1.  Son  and  successor  of  Ahaz  on  the  throne  of  Judah. 

B.C.  724-697. 

2  Ki.16.  20  Ahaz  slept,  .and  H.  his  son  reigned  in  his 

18.    1  H.  the  son  of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah  began 
18.   9  it  came  to  pass  in  the.  .year  of  king  H. 
18. 10  in  the  sixth  year  of  H. . .  Samaria  was  taken 
18.  13  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  king  II.  did  Sen. 


2  K1.18.  14  H.  king  of  Judah  sent  to  the  king  of  Assy. 
18.  14  the  king  of  Assyria  appointed  unto  H.king 
18. 15  H.gave.  .all  the  silver/that  was)  found  ii_ 
18.  16  At  that  tune  did  H.  cut  off  (the  gold  from) 
18.  16  the  pillars  winch  H.  king  of  Judah  had 
18.  17  the  king.  .sent,  .to  king  H.  with  a  great 
18. 19  Speak  ye  now  to  H.,  Thus  saith  the  great 
18.  22  whose  high  places.  .H.  hath  taken  away 
18.  29  Thus  saith  the  king,  Let  not  H.  deceive 
18.  30  Neither  let  H.  make  you  trust  in  the  LORD 
18.  31  Hearken  not  to  H. :  for  thus  saith  the  king 
18.  32  hearken  not  unto  H.,  when  he  persuadelh 

18.  37  Then  came  Eliakim.  .and  Shebna.  .to  H. 

19.  1  when  king  H.  heard  (it),  that  he  rent  his 
19.  3  Thus  saith  H.,  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trou. 
19.  5  So  the  servants  of  king  H.  came  to  Isaiah 
19.  g  he  sent  messengers  again  unto  H.,  saying 
19.  10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  H.  king  of  Judah 
19.  14  H.  received  the  letter,  .and  read  it:  andH. 
19.  15  H.  prayed  before  the  Lord,  and  said,  0 

19.  20  Then  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  to  H. 

20.  1  In  those  days  was  H.  sick  unto  death  :  and 
20.    3  O  LORD,  remember.  And  H.  wept  sore 
20.    5  Turn  again,  and  tell  H.  the  captain  of  my 
20.    8  H.  said  unto  Isaiah,  What,  .the  sign  that 
20.  10  II.  answered.  It  is  a  light  thing  for  the 
20.  12  Eer. .  .sent  letters  and  a  present  unto  H. 
20.  12  for  he  had  heard  that  H.  had  been  sick 
20.  13  H.  hearkened  unto  them,  and  showed 

20. 13  there  was  nothing,  that  H.  showed  them 
20.  14  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king  H. 

20. 14  H.  said,  They  are  come  from  a  far  country 
20.  15  H.  answered,  All.  that  (are)  in  mine  house 
20.  16  Isaiah  said  untoH.,  Hear  the  word  of  the 
20.  19  Then  said  H.  unto  Isaiah,Good(is)the  word 
20.  20  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  H.,  and  all  his  might 

20.  21  H.  slept  with  his  fathers  :  and  Manasseh 

21.  3  the  high  places  which  H.  his  father  had 
iCh.   3.  13  Ahaz  his  son,  H.  his  son,  Manasseh  his 

4.  41  written  by  name  came  in  the  days  of  H. 
2  Ch.  28.  27  Ahaz  slept,  .and  H.  his  son  reigned  in  his 
29.    1  H.  began  to  reign  (when  he  was)  five  and 
29.  18  Then  they  went  in  to  H.  the  king,  and 
29.  20  H.  the  king  rose  early . .  and  went  up  to  the 
29.  27  H.  commanded  to  offer  the  burnt  offering 
29.  30  H.  the  king,  .commanded  the  Levites  to 
29.  31  H.  answered  and  said,  Now  ye  have  con. 

29.  36  H.  rejoiced,  and  all  the  people,  that  God 

30.  1  H.  sent  to  all  Israel  and  Judah,  and  wrote 
30.  18  H.  prayed  forthem,  saying,  The  good  LORD 
30.  20  Lord  hearkened  to  H.,  and  healed  the 
30.  22  H.  spake  comfortably  unto  all  the  Levites 

30.  24  H. . .  did  give  to  the  congregation  a  thousa. 

31.  2  And  H.  appointed  the  courses  of  the  pri. 
31.    8  when  H.  and  the  princes  came  and  saw 
31.    9  H.questionedwiththepriests.. concerning 
31.  11  Then  H.  commanded  to  prepare  chambers 
31.  13  overseers,  .atthe  commandment  of  H.  the 

31.  20  thus  did  H.  throughout  all  Judah,  and 

32.  2  when  H.  saw  that  Sennacherib  was  come 
32.    8  rested  themselves  upon  the  words  of  H. 
32.   9  Sennacherib . .  send  his  servants . .  unto  H. 
32.  11  Doth  not  H.  persuade  you  to  give  over 
32.  12  Hath  not  the  sameH.  taken  away  his  high 
32.  15  Now  therefore  let  not  H.  deceive  you,  nor 
32.  16  And  his  servants  spake  yet.  .against. .  H. 
32.  17  so  shall  not  the  God  of  H.  deliver  his  pe. 
32.  20  H.  the  king,  .prayed  and  cried  to  heaven 
32.  22  Thus  the  Lord  saved  H.  and  the  inhabit. 
32.  23  many  brought,  .presents  to  H.  king  of  J. 
32.  24  In  those  days  H.  was  sick  to  the  death 
32.  25  H.  rendered  not  again  according  to  the 
32. 26  H.  humbled  himself  for  the  pride  of  hish. 
32.  26  the  wrath,  .came  not.  .in  the  days  of  H. 
32.  27  H.  had  exceedingmuch  riches  and  honour 
32.  30  H.  also  stopped . .  And  H.  prospered  in  all 
32.  32  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  H.,  and  his 

32.  33  H.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  buried 

33.  3  the  high  places  which  n.  his  father  had 
Prov  25.    1  whichthe  men  of  H.  king  of  Judah  copied 
Isa.      1.    1  which  he  saw  concerning.  .Ahaz,  (and)  H. 

36.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  the.  .year  of  king  H. 
36.    2  the  king  of  Assyria  sent,  .unto  king  H. 
36.    4  Say  ye  now  to  H.,  Thus  saith  the  great  k. 
36.    7  and  whose  altars  H.  hath  taken  away,  and 
36.  14  Thussaith  the  king,  LetnotH.  deceive  you 

36. 15  Neither  let  H.  make  you  trust  in  the  Lord 
36.  16  Hearken  not  to  H. ;  for  thus  saith  the  king 
36.  18  lest  H.  persuade  you,  saying,  The  LORD 

36.  22  Then  came  Eliakim.  .and  Shebna.  .to  H. 

37.  1  it  came  to  pass,  when  king  H.  heard  (it) 
37.  3  Thus  saith  H.,  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  tro. 
37.  5  So  the  servants  of  king  H.  came  to  Isaiah 
37.  9  when  he  heard(it),he  sent  messengers  to  H. 
37.  10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  H.  king  of  Judah 
37.  14  H.  received theletter.  .andreadit:  andH. 
37. 15  And.  H.  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  saying 

37.  21  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  unto  H.,  say. 

38.  1  In  those  days  was  H.  sick  unto  death 
38.    2  Then  H.  turned  his  face  toward  the  wall 
38.   3  Remember.  .0  Lord,  .and  H.  wept  sore 
38.    5  Go  and  say  to  H.,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
38.   9  The  writing  of  H.  king  of  Judah,  when  he 

38.  22  H.  also  had  said.  What  (is)  the  sign  that  I 

39.  1  Merodach.  .sent  letters  and  a  present  to  H. 
39.  2  H.  was  glad  of  them,  and  showed  them  the 
39.  2  there  was  nothing,  .that  H.  showed  them 
39.  3  ThencamelsaiahtheprophetuntokingH. 
39.  3  H.  said,  They  are  come  from  afar  country 
39.  4  II.  answered,  All  that  (is)  iu  mine  house 
39.  5  Then  said  Isaiah  to  H.,  Hear  the  word  of 
39.    8  Then  said  H.  to  Isaiah,  Good  (is)  the  word 


48 1 


HIGHER 


.ig  praise  to  thy  name,  O.thou  most  high 
/  through  the  mercy  of  the  most  high  he 

46.  4  (place)  of  the  tabernacles  of  the  most  high 

47.  2  For  the  Lord  most  high  (is)  terrible  ;  (he 
50.'  14  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the  most  high  1 
57.   2  I  will  cry  unto  God  most  high ;  unto  God 
73.  11  and  is  there  knowledge  in  the  most  high  ? 

77.  10  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  most  high 

78.  17  by  provoking  the  most  high  in  the  wilder. 
78.  56  tempted  and  provoked  the  most  high  God 

82.  6  all  of  you  (are)  the  children  of  the  most  h. 

83.  iS  thou,  .(art)  the  most  high  overall  th&earth 
91.    1  in  the  secret  place  of  the  most  high  shall 

91.  9  thou  hast  made.  .(even)themosthigh,thy 

92.  1  sing  praises  unto  thy  name,  O  most  high 
107. 11  contemned  the  counsel  of  the  most  high 

Isa.   14.  14  clouds  :  I  will  be  like  the  most  high 
Lam.  3.  35  turn  aside . .  before  the  face  of  the  most  h. 
3.  38  Out  of  the  mouth  of  the  most  high  proce. 

5. High,  uppermost,  most  high,  |V?JJ  elyon. 

Dan.   7.  18'  the  saints  of  the  most  liigh  shall  take 

7.  22  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  most  high 
7.  25  speak  (great)  words  against  the  most  high 
7.  27  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  most  high 

6.HigJiest,  most  high,  vxj/kttos  hupsistos. 

Mark  5.  7  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  the  most  high  God  ? 
Luke  8.  28  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  God  most  high?  I 
Acts  7.  48  Howbeit  the  most  high  dwelleth  not  in  t. 
16.  17  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  mosth. 
Heb.  7.  1  priest  of  the  most  high  God,  who  met  A. 
HIGH,  on  — 

I. Above,  upward,  onward,  nVyD^n^yn^p^yap,  h%&. 
Exod25-  20  shall  stretch  forth  (their)  wings  on  high 
37.   9  cherubim  spread  out  (their)  wings  on  high 
39.  31  to  fasten  (it)  on  high  upon  the  mitre;  as 

1  Ch.14.    2  for  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  high 

2  Ch.20.  19  to  praise.. with  a  loud  voice  on  high 

34.    4  theimages,  that(were)onhighabovethem 
2. High  place  or  person*  on  high,  D'na  marom. 
2  Ki.19.  22  lifted  up  thine  eyes  on  high?  (even)  against 
Job     5. 11  To  set  upon  high  those  that  be  low ;  that 

16.  19  now,  behold,  .my  record  (is)  on  high 

31.  2  inheritance  of  the  Almighty  from  on  high 

39.  iS  What  time  she  lifteth  up  herself  on  high 
Psa.     7.    7  for  their  sakes.  .return  thou  on  high 

68.  18  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast 
75.    5  Lift  not  up  your  horn  on  high :  speak 

93.  4  The  Lord  on  high  (is)  mightier  than  the 
Isa.    22.  16  heweth  him  out  a  sepulchre  on  high 

24.  18  the  windows  from  on  high  are  open,  and 
24.  21  shall  punish  the  host,  .(that  are)  on  high 
q6.    5  bringeth  down  them  that  dwell  on  high 

32.  15  spirit  be  poured  upon  us  from  on  high 

33.  5  is  exalted  ;  for  he  dwelleth  on  high  :  he 
33.  16  He  shall  dwell  on  high  ;  his  place  of  defe. 
37.  23  lifted  up  thine  eyes  on  high?  (even)  against 

40.  26  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold 
58.   4  to  make  your  voice  to  be  heard  on  high 

Jer.  25.  30,  The  Lord  shall  roar  from  on  high,  and 
Hab.   2.    9  that  he  may  set  his  nest  on  high,  that  he 

3.  Above,  bn  al. 

2  Sa.  23.    1  the  man  (who  was)  raised  up  on  high,  the 
i.IUgh,  %i,ppermost,  most  high,  f'v?^  elyon. 

Deut28.    1  the  Lord  thy  God  will  set  thee  on  high 
5. Head,  top,  wt^  rosh. 

1  Ki.  21.   9,  12  set  Naboth  on  high  among  the  people 
6.  On  high,  on  rom. 

Hab.  3  10  the  deep.,  lifted  up  his  hands  on  high 
7. To  lift  vp,  exalt,  on  rum,  Sa. 

2  Sa.  22.  49  thou  also  hast  lifted  me  up  on  high  above 

8.  On  high,  eV  v$t]\o?s  en  h1    velois. 

Heb.   1.    3  on  the  right  hi       jf  the  majesty  on  high 

9.  Height,  (els)  v^/os  (eis)  hupsos. 

Luke  1.  78  the  day  spring  from  on  high  hath  visited 
24.  49  untilye  be  enduedwith  power  from'onhigh 

Eph.   4.    8  When  he  ascended  up  on  high,  he  led  cap. 
HIGH,  to  dwell  on  — 
To  go  high  to  dwell,  nnijo  Ptna  gahah  laslmbeth,  5. 

Psa.113.   5  Who  (is)  like  ,T.  our  God,  who  dwelleth  on  h. 
HIGH  ones  — 

1.  High  place  or  person,  Drio  marom. 

Isa.    24.  21  Lord  shall  punish  the  host  of  the  high  0. 

2.  To  be  high,  exalted,  tall,  on  rum. 

Isa.  10.  33  the  high  ones  of  stature  (shall  he)  hewn 
HIGH  place  — 
1. High  place,  height,  .133  bamah. 

Lev.  26.  30  I  will  destroy  your  high  places,  and  cut 
Num2i.28  (and)the  lords  of  the  high  places  of  Arnon 
22.  41  brought  him  up  into  the  high  places  of  B. 
33.  52  and  quite  pluck  down  all  their  high  places 
Dent32. 13  He  made  him  ride  on  the  high  places  of 
33.  29  thou  shalt  tread  upon  their  high  places 

1  Sa.   3. 12  for.  .a  sacrifice,  .to  day  in  the  high  place 

9.  13  before  he  go  up  to  the  high  place  to  eat 
9.  14  Samuel  came . .  to  go  up  to  the  high  place 
9.  19  go  up  before  me  unto  the  high  place  ;  for 
9. 25  when  they  were  come  down  from  the  h.  p. 
10.  5  prophets  coming  down  frornthehigh  place 
10.  13  had  made  an  end . .  he  came  to  the  high  p. 

2  Sa.   1. 19  beauty  of  Israel  is  slain  upon  thy  high  pi. 

1.  25  O  Jonathan,  .slain  in  thine  high  places 
22.  34  He.  .setteth  me  upon  my  high  places 
1  Ki.  3.   2  Only  the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places 

61 


i  KL  3.    3  he  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  high  pi. 
3.   4  Gibeon.  .for  that  (was)  the  great  high  pi. 

11.  7  Then  did  Solomon  build  an  high  place  for 

12.  31  he  made  an  house  of  high  places,  and 

12.  32  he  placed  in  B.  the  priests  of  the;high  pi. 

13.  2  shall  he  offer  the  priests  of  the  high  places 

13.  32  against  all  the  houses  of  the  high  places 
13. 33  priests  of  the  high  places,  .of  the  high  pi. 

14.  23  they  also  built  them  high  places,  and 

15.  14  But  the  high  places  were  not  removed 

22.  43  the  high  places,  .yet  in  the  high  places 
2  Ki.  12.    3  But  the  high  places,  .in  the  high  places 

14.  4  high  places,  .incense  on  the  high  places 

15.  4  high  places,  .still  on  the  high  places 

15.  35  high  places,  .still  in  the  high  places 

16.  4  and  burnt  incense  in  the  high  places,  and 

17.  9  built  them  high  places  in  all  their  cities 
17. 11  they  burnt  incense  in  all  the  high  places 
17.  29  put  (them)  in  the  houses  of  the  high  pla. 

17.  32  of  the  high  places,  .houses  of  the  high  p. 

18.  4  He  removed  the  high  places,  and  brake 
18. 22  he  whose  high  places  and  whose  altars  H. 
21.    3  he  built  up  again  the  high  places  which 

23.  5  to  burn  incense  in  the  high  places  in  the 
23.  8  high  places,  .brake  down  the  high  places 
23.  g  priests  of  the  high  places  came  not  up  to 
23. 13  the  high  places  that  (were)  before  Jerusa. 
23.  15  high  place  which  Jeroboam  the  son  of  He. 
23.  15  high  place,  .and  burned  the  high  place 
23. 19  all  the  houses  also  of  the  high  places  that 
23.  20  he  slew  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places 

1  Ch.16.  39  in  the  high  place  that  (was)  at  Gibeon 

21.  29  at  that  season  in  the  high  place  at  Gibeon 

2  Ch.  1.   3,  13  to  the  high  place  that  (was)  at  Gibeon 

11. 15  ordained  him  priests  for  the  high  places 

14.  3,  5  he  took  away,  .the  high  places,  and 

15.  17  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away  out 
17.  6  he  took  away  the  high  places  and  groves 
20.  33  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away ;  for 

21. 11  he  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  of 
28.  4  He .  .burnt  incense  in  the  high  places,  and 
28.  25  he  made  high  places  to  bum  incense  unto 

31.  1  threw  down  the  high  places  and  the  altars 

32. 12  taken  away  his  high  places  and  his  altars 
33.  3  For  he  built  again  the  high  places  which 
33. 17  did  sacrifice  still  in  the  high  places,  (yet) 

33.  19  the  places  wherein  he  built  high  places 

34.  3  from  the  high  places,  and  the  groves,  and 
Psa.  18.  33  and  setteth  me  upon  my  high  places 

78.  58  provoked  him.  .with  their  high  places 
Isa.  15.  2  He  is  gone  up  to.  .the  high  places,  to  we. 
16. 12  that  Moab  is  weary  on  the  high  place 
36.  7  whose  high  places . .  Hezekiah  hath  taken 
58.  14  to  ride  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth 
Jer.  7.  31  they  have  built  the  high  places  of  Tophet 
17.    3  thy  high  places  for  sin,  throughout  all 

19.  5  They  have  built  also  the  high  places  of 
26.  18  mountain  of  the  house  as  the  high  places 

32.  35  they  built  the  high  places  of  Baal,  which 

48.  35  him  that  offereth  in  the  high  places,  and 
Eze.    6.    3  and  I  will  destroy  your  high  places 

6.  6  the  high  places  shall  be  desolate  ;  that 

16.  16  and  deckedst  thy  high  places  with  divers 

20.  29  What  (is)  the  high  place  whereunto  ye  go? 
36.    2  Aha  !  even  the  ancient  high  places  are 
43.   7  nor  by  the  carcases,  .in  their  high  places 

Hos.  10.    8  The  high  places  also  of  Aven,  the  sin  of  I. 
Amos  4.  13  treadeth  upon  the  high  places  of  the  ear. 

7.  9  the  high  places  of  Isaac  shall  be  desolate 
Jlic.    1.    3  tread  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth 

1.    5  and  what  (are)  the  high  places  of  Judah? 

3. 12  mountain  of  the  house  as  the  high  places 
Hab.   3. 19  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high  places 
I.High  place  or  person,  Di~i!p  marom. 

Judg.  5.  iS  the  death  in  the  high  places  of  the  field 
Job    25.    2  he  maketh  peace  in  his  high  places 
Prov.  8.   2  She  standeth  in  the  top  of  high  places,  by 

9.  14  on  a  seat  in  the  high  places  of  the  city 

3. Pit,  iT-iy  tsariach. 

1  Ra.  13.   6  the  people  did  hide,  .in  high  places,  and 
A.High  place,  heh  ramah. 

Eze.  16.  24  hast  made  thee  an  high  place  in  every  st. 
16.  25  Thou  hast  built  thy  high  place  at  every 
16.  31  makest  thine  high  place  in  every  street 
16.  39  shall  break  down  thy  high  places :  they 

5. Exposed  place,  *sy  slwphi. 

Nuni23.    3  I  will  go.  .And  he  went  to  an  high  place 
Isa.   41. 18  I  will  open  rivers  in  high  places,  and 

49.  9  their  pastures  (shall  be)  in  all  high  places 
Jer.     3.   2  Lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  the  high  places 

3.  21  A  voice  was  heard  upon  the  high  places 
4. 11  A  dry  wind  of  the  high  places  in  the  wil. 
7.  29  take  up  a  lamentation  on  high  places 
12. 12  The  spoilers  are  come  upon  all  high  places 
14.   6  wild  asses  did  stand  in  the  high  places 

6.  On  or  in  heaven,  iwovpcivtos  epouranios. 

Eph.  6. 12  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  (places) 
HIGH  priest  — 
1.  The  head  priest,  i?N"irr  jrts  kohenharosh. 

2  Ch.24. 11  the  high  priest's  officer  came  and  emptied 
2. Priest,  fcpeiis  kiereus. 

Acts    5.  24  when  the  [high  priest]  and  the  captain  of 
3.  Chief  priest,  &px^p^vs  archiereus. 

Matt26.    3  unto  the  palace  of  the  high  priest,  who 
26.  51  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and 
26.  57  led  (him)  away  to  Caiaphas  the  high  priest 
36.  58  followed,  .unto  the  high  priest's  pfJace 


Matt  26.  62  the  high  priest  arose,  and  said 
26.  63  the  high  priest  answered  and  ? 
26.  65  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  c 
Mark  2.  26  in  the  days  of  Abiathar  the  hi 
14.  47  smote  a  servant  of  the  high  pr 
14.  53  they  led  Jesusawayto  the  high  \ 
14.  54  even  into  the  palace  of  the  higL 
14.  60  the  high  priest  stood  up  in  the  m 
14.  61  Again  the  high  priest  asked  him, 
14.  63  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clo 
14.  66  cometh  oneofthe  maidsof  theh 
Luke  3.   2  Annas  andCaiaphasbeingthehij. 
22.  50  smote  a  servantof  the  high  priest 
22.  54  brought  him  into  the  high  priest 
Johnn.  49  being  the  high  priest  that  same  . 
11.  51  but  being  high  priest  that  year,h 
18.  10  smote  the  high  priest's  servant, 
18. 13  Caiaphas,  which  was  the  high  pr 
18. 15  the  high  priest,  .palace  of  the  big 
18.  16  which  was  known  unto  the  high  pr. 
18. 19  The  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  01 
18.  22  saying,  Answerest  thou  the  high  pi 
18.  24  Annas  had  sent  him.  .unto,  .the  hi) 
i3.  26  One  of  the  servants  of  thehigh  priest. 
Acts    4.    6  Annas  the  high  priest,  andCaiapha 
5.  17  Then  the  high  priest  rose  up,  andal 
5.  21  the  high  priest  came,  and  they  that 
5.  27  council:  and  the  high  priest  asked  t 
7.    1  Then  said  the  high  priest,  Are  these  ti 
9.    1  And  Saul,  .went  unto  the  high  prie 

22.  5  As  also  the  high  priest  dothbear  rr 

23.  2  the  high  priest  Ananias  commande 
23.    4  they.. said,  Revilest  thou  God's  Iv 

23.  5  I  wist  not . .  that  he  was  the  hig' 

24.  1  Ananiasthehighpriestdescend 

25.  2  the  high  priest  and  the  chief  01 
Heb.   2. 17  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high 

3.  1  consider  the  apostle  and  high  pi 

4.  14  that  we  have  a  great  high  pries 

4.  15  we  have  not  an  high  priest  whi 

5.  i  every  high  priest  taken  from  ai, 

5.  5  not  himself  to  bemadeanhighp 

5. 10  Called  of  God  an  high  priest  after  l- 

6.  20  made  an  high  priest  for  ever,afteiti 

7.  26  For  such  an  high  priest  became  u. 
7.  27  needethnot  daily,  as  those  high  prie 

7.  28  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  whii 

8.  1  We  have  such  anhighpriest,whoisset 

8.  3  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offergi 

9.  7  intothesecond(went)thehighpriestal< 

9. 11  ButChristbeingcomeanhighpriestofg< 
9.  25  as  the  high  priest  entereth  into  the  h( 

13.  11  into  the  sanctuary  by  the  high  priest 
HIGH,  to  set  (up)  on  — 
1  To  lift  up,  exalt,  on  rum,  Sa. 

Eze.  31.   4  the  deep  set  him  up  on  high  with  her 
2.  To  malce  high,  set  on  high,  "2$y  sagab,  3. 

Psa.  69.  29  let  thy  salvation,  O  God,  set  me  up  01 
91.  14  I  will  set  him  on  high,  because  he  ha 
107.  41  Yet  setteth  he  the  poor  on  high  from 
HIGH  thing  —  - 
High  thing,  mj/oj/ia  hupsdma. 

2  Co.  10.  5  Casting  down . .  every  high  thingthatv. 
HIGH,  things  too  — 
To  be  wonderful,  nhs  pala,  2. 

Psa. 131.    1  neither  do  I  exercise,  .in  things  too 
HIGH,  too  — 
To  be  high,  dvi  rum. 

Prov.24.   7  Wisdom  (is)  too  high  for  a  fool :  he 
HIGH,  very  — 
Above,  upward,  onward,  by_n  maal. 

Deut  28.  43  The  stranger,  .shall  get  up.  .very  ! 
HIGH  time  — 
Hour,  &pa  hora. 

Rom  13. 11  knowing  the  time,  that  now  (it  is1, 
HIGHER  — 
X.High,  -pa  gdboah. 

1  Sa.  9.  \  (he  was)  higher  than  any  of  the  p' 
Eccl.  5.  8  higherthanthehighest-.highertl 
Dan .   8.    3"one . .  higher  than  the  other,  and  tb 

2.  High,  uppermost,  most  high,  ]V7#  elyon. 

2  Ki.  15.  35  He  built  the  higher  gate  of  the  I 
Psa.  89.  27  I  will  make  him  (my)  first  born. 
Jer.  36. 10  Thenread  Baruch.  .inthehigher 
Eze.    9.    2  six  men  came  from  the  way  of  th 

3. Higher,  av&repov  andteron. 

Lukei4.  10  Friend,  go  up  higher :  then  shalt 

4.7To  Iwld  or  be  above,  virepexa  huperecho. 
Rom  13.    1  Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  th 

5.  High,  vTpi]\6s  huptselos. 

Heb.  7.  26  high  priest.,  made  higher  than  th 

HIGHER,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  high,  raa  gabah. 

1  Sa.  10.  23  when  he  stood . .  he  was  highei 
J°b  35-  5  behold  the  clouds.. are  highe 
Isa.   55.   9  the  heavens  are  higher,  .soar 

2. To  be  high,  lifted  up,  exalted,  DVi  rum 
Nuni24.  7  his  king  shall  be  higher  thaD 
Psa.  61.    2  lead  me  to  the  rock  (that)  is 

HIGHER  place  — 
l.Back,  upper  part,  arch,  33  gab. 
Eze,  43..  13  tins  (shall  be)  thehigherphv 


HIGHEST 


482 


■  d/ry place,  rrny,  'ivny  tsechichi,  tsechiach. 
13  on  the  higher  places,  I  even  set  the  people 

uppermost,  most  high,  ?v?u  elyon. 

>.  13  the  highest  gave  his  voice ;  hail . .  and  coals 
7.  5  and  the  highesthituselfshallestablishher 
vi.    7  the  lowest,  .to  the  highest  by  the  midst 

st,  most  high,  iiipHTTos  hupsistos. 

21.  9  Blessed  (is)  he . .  Hosanna  in  the  highest ! 

11. 10  Blessed  (be)  the.  .Hosanna in  the  highest 
1.  32  and  shall  he  called  the  Son  of  the  highest 
1.  35  the  power  of  the  highest  shall  overshadow 

1.  76  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  of  the  highest 

2.  14  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth 

6.  35  and  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  highest 

19.  38  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 

ST  branch  — 

gj  highest  branch,  nns^  tsammereth. 
.  17.    3  and  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar 
17.  22  I  will  also  take  of  the  highest  branch  of 

£EST  part  — 

I,  t-ip,  ti'NT  rosh. 

■ov.  8.  26  nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  w. 

IEST  places  — 

s  or  arches  of  the  high  place,  CMD  "93  gappe. 

)v.  9.    3  crieth  upon  the  highest  places  of  the  city 

a1  room  — 

tiding  place,  vpcoroKXiaia  2)rutoklisia. 
.   8  sit  not  down  in  the  highest  room  ;  lest  a 

'  seat  — 

foremost  seats,  TrpcoTOKaOeSpiaprotokathed. 

0.  46  the  scribes . .  love . .  the  highest  seats  in  the 

ISee  Displeased,  esteemed,  think]. 
Y,  very  — 

abundantly,  v-w\p  in  Trspi<r<rov  huper  ekpicriss. 
A\,  5 .13  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for 
ZGH  MINDED,  to  be  — 

0  think  high,  v^/7\\o(ppQviw  hvpsUlaphroneCu 
Horn.  11.  20  Well. .  [be  not  high  minded],  but  fear 
1  Ti.     6  17  Charge  them.. thattheybenothighmind. 

:ghness  — 

Rising,  excellency, pride,  niKa  gaavah. 

Isa.  13.    3  mighty  ones,  .them  that  rejoice  in  my  h. 

Lifting  up,  nxip  seeth. 

J  >b  31.  23  by  reason  of  his  highness  I  could  not  en. 

GHWAY  — 

Customary  path,  nix  orach. 

Judg.  5.    6  the  highways  were  unoccupied,  and  the 

r"7,  T(11  STT3  derek  derek. 

I 'cut.  2.  27  I  will  go  along  by  the  highway,  I  willnei. 

d  place,  pn  chuts. 
Vmos  5.  16  they  shall  say  in  all  the  highways,  Alas  ! 

aised  up  way,  highway,  n^pp  mesillah. 

runi2o.  19  said  unto  him,  We  will  go  by  the  highway 

udg2o.  31  in  the  highways,  of  which  one  goeth  up  to 

20.  32  draw  them  from  the  city  unto  the  highw. 

20.  45  they  gleaned  of  them  in  the  highways  five 

21.  19  on  the  east  side  of  the  highway  that  goeth 
'a.  6.  12  went  along  the  highway,  lowing  as  they 
ia.  20.  12  wallowed,  .in  the  midst  of  the  highway 

20.  12  he  removed  Amasaoutof  thehighwayinto 
20.  13  he  was  removed  out  of  the  highway,  all 

'i.  18.  17  which  (is)  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  fi. 

•v  16.  17  The  highway  of  the  upright  (is)  to  depart 

7.  3  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field 
11.  16  there  shall  be  an  highway  for  the  remnant 
19.  23  In  that  day  shall  there  be  an  highway  out 
33.    8  Thehighwaysliewaste.thewayfarmgman 
36.    2  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field 
40.    3  make  straight,  .a  highway  for  our  God 
49.  11  and  my  highways  shall  be  exalted 

62.  10  cast  up,  cast  up  the  highway;  gather  out 

31.  21  set  thine  heart  toward  the  highway,  (even) 

way,  TiSpp  maslul. 

35.    8  an  highway  shall  be  there,  and  a  way,  and 
,  oSos  hodos. 

1 22.  10  those  servants  went  out  into  the  highways 
kio.  46  Timeus,  sat  by  the  highway  side  begging 
e  14.  23  Go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges 

ways  of  the  ways,  Ste^Sous  twv  6Zujv  diex. 
;  22.   9  Go  ye  therefore  into  the  highways,  and  as 
N\  ]?,n  strong  place. 
ailed  in  Josh.  15.  51,  21.  15  Uolon)  belonging  to 
id  assigned  to  the  Levites. 
58  H.  with  her  suburbs,  Debir  with  her  sub. 
H,  in;pSn,  niphn  J  ah  is  protection. 
f-Eliakim  master  of  the  household  to  king 

B.C.  740. 

iS  the  son  of  H.,  which  (was)  over  the  house. 

26  Then  said  Eliakim  the  son  of  H.,  and  Sh. 

37  Then  came  Eliakim  the  son  of  H.,  which 

20  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  the  son  of  U. 
3  Then  came  forth  unto  him  Eliakim,  H.'s 
%  Then  c.ime  Eliakim  the  son  of  H.,  that 


2.  High  priest  in  the  time  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah. 
B.C.  650. 

2  Ki.  22.  4  Go  up  to  H.  tlie  high  priest,  that  he  may 
22.  8  H.  the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan  the 
22.  8  H.  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  and  he  read 
22.  10  H.  the  priest  hath  delivered  me  a  book 

22.  12  the  king  commanded  H.  the  priest,  and 

22. 14  So  H.  the  priest.. went  unto  Huldah  the 

23.  4  the  king  commanded  H.  the  high  priest 
23.  24  the  book  that  H.  the  priest  found  in  the 

1  Ch.  6. 13  Shallum  begat  H.,  and  H.  begat  Azariah 

9. 11  Azariah  the  son  of  H.,  the  son  of  Meshul. 

2  Ch.  34.    g  when  they  cameto  H.  the  high  priest,  they 

34.  14  H.  the  priest  found  a  book  of  the  law  of 
34.  15  H.  answered  and  said  to  Shaphan  the  scr. 

34. 15  And  H.  delivered  the  book  to  Shaphan 
34.  18  saying,  H.  the  priest  hath  given  me  a  book 
34.  20  the  king  commanded  H.,  and  Ahikam  the 

34.  22  H..  .went  to  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the 

35.  8  H .  and  Zechariah  and  Jehiel,  rulers  of  the 
Ezra  7.  1  Seraiah,  the  son  of  Azariah,  the  son  of  H. 
Jer.  29.    3  By  the  hand  of.  .Gemariah  the  son  of  H. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Merari,  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  650. 

1  Ch.  6.  45  flashabiah.  .son  of  Amaziah.the  son  of  H. 

4.  A  son  of  Hosah,  a  descendant  of  Merari,  and  a  gate 
keeper  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  time  of  David.  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26. 11  H.  the  second,  Tebaliah  the  third,  Zech. 

5.  A  priest  who  stood  by  Ezra  while  reading  the  hook  of 
the  law  to  the  people.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  8.  4  Anaiah,  and  Urijah,  and  H.,  and  Maaseiah 
21.  11  Seraiah  the  son  of  H.,  the  son  of  Meshul. 
12.    7  Sallu,  Amok,  H.,  Jedaiah.These(were)the 

12.  21  Of  H.,  Hashahiah ;  of  Jedaiah,  Nethaneel 

6.  A  priest  of  Anathoth,  and  father  of  Jeremiah  the 
prophet.    B.C.  650. 

Jer.     1.    1  The  words  of  Jeremiah  the  son  of  H.,  of 

HILL  — 

1.  Height,  hillock,  n^aa  gibah. 

Gen.  49.  26  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills 
Exodi7.    9  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the 

17.  10  and  Eur,  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill 
Nuni23.    9  from  the  hills  I  behold  him:  lo,  the  people 
Deut  1 2.    2  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree 

33.  15  for  the  precious  things  of  the  lasting  hills 
Josh.  5.    3  Joshua,  .circumcised,  .at  the  hill  of  the 

24.33  Eleazar.  .died;  andtheyburiedhimiuah. 
Judg.  7.  1  The Midianites were,  .bythehillof  Moreh 
i  Sa.  7.  1  into  the  house  of  Abinadab  in  the  hill,  and 
10.  5  After  that  thou  shaltcome  to  the  hill  of  G. 
10.  10  when  they  camethitherto  the  hill,  behold 
23.  19  Doth  not  David  hide,  .in  the  hill  of  Hach. 
26.  1  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  in  the  hill 
26.   3  Saul  pitched  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah 

2  Sa.  :2.  24  when  they  were  come  to  the  hill  of  Aiuni. 

2.  25  children  of  B. .  .stood  on  the  top  of  an  h. 

1  Ki.  14.  23  they  also  built,  .on  every  high  hill,  and 

2  Ki.  16.    4  he  sacrificed.. on  the  hills,  and  under  e. 

17.  10  they  set.  .groves  in  every  high  hill,  and 
2  Ch.28.    4  He  sacrificed  also.,  on  the  hills,  and  under 
Job  15.    7  or  wast  thou  made  before  the  hills  ? 
Psa.148.   9  Mountains,  and  all  hills  ;  fruitful  trees 
Prov.  8.  25  before  the  hills  was  I  brought  forth 
Song  2.    8  he  cometh.  .skipping  upon  the  hills 

4.  6  1  will  get  me.  .to  the  hill  of  frankincense 
Isa.     2.    2  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and 

2.  14  and  upon  all  the  hills  (that  are)  lifted  up 
10.  32  he  shall  shake  his  hand  against,  .the  hill 
30. 17  till  ye  he  left,  .as  an  ensign  on  an  hill 

30.  25  thereshall  be.  .upoueveryhighhill, rivers 

31.  4  to  fight  for  mount  Zion,  and  for  the  hill 
40.    4  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made  low 

40.  i2  Who  hath,  .weighed.,  the  hills  in  a  balance 

41.  15  Behold.. thou.. shalt  make  the  hills  as  ch. 

42.  15  I  will  make  waste  mountains  and  hills 
54.  10  the  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills 
55. 12  the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 
65.   7  fathers,  .blasphemed  me  upon  the  hills 

Jer.     2.  20  whenuponeveryhighhill..thouwanderest 

3.  23  Truly  in  vain,  .from  the  hills,  .the  mult. 

4.  24  they  trembled,  and  all  the  hills  moved  Ii. 

13.  27  I  have  seen. . abominations  on  the  hills 

16. 16  they  shall  hunt  them,  .from  every  hill 
17.  2  and  their  groves,  .upon  the  high  hills 
31.  39  measuring  line,  .upon  the  hilt  Gareb 

49.  16  thou.,  that  boldest  the  height  of  the  hill 

50.  6  they  have  gone  from  mountain  to  hill,  they 
Eze.    6.    3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GoD..tothe  hills 

6. 13  among  their  idols. _. upon  every  high  hill 
20.  28  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick 

34.  6  My  sheep  wandered . .  upon  every  high  hill 

34.  26  the  places  round  about  my  hill  a  blessing 

35.  8  in  thy  hills,  .shall  they  fall  that  are 

36.  4,  6  and  to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers,  and  to  the 
Hos.   4.  13  They  sacrifice,  .upon  the  hills,  under  oaks 

10.    8  they  shall  say.  .to  the  hills,  Fall  on  us 
Joel    3.  18  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  the 
AmoS9. 13  the  days  come,  .and  all  the  hills  shall  melt 
Mic.    4.    1  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and 

6.    1  Arise,  .and  let  the  hills  hear  thy  voice 
Nah.  1.    5  the  hills  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burned  at 
Hab.  3.    6  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow  :  his  ways 
Zeph.  1. 10  and  a  great  crashing  from  the  hills 

2.  Mount,  in  har. 

Gen.  7.  19  all  the  high  hills  that  (were)  under  the 
Exod24-  4  Moses,  .builded  an  altar  under  the  hill 
Num  14.  44  they  presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top 

14.  4-  the  Canaanites  which  dwelt  in  that  hill 
Deut.  1.    7  take  your  journey,  .in  the  hills,  and  in 


Deut.  1.  41  ye  were  ready  to  go  upi. 

1.  43  and  went  presumptuously  ut  .  ..„  menill 

8.  7  depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills 
11.  11  the  land,  whether  ye  go.  .(is)  a  land  of  h. 

Josh.  9.    1  when  ail  the  kings . .  in  the  hills,  and  in 
to.  40  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the  hills 

11.  16  Joshua  took  all  that  land,  the  hills,  and 

15.  9  the  border  was.  .from  the  top  of  the  hill 

17.  16  The  hHl  is  not  enough  for  us  :  and  all  the 

18.  13  the  border  descended,  .near  the  hill  that 
18.  14  the  border,  .compassed,  .from  the  hill 

21.  11  they  gave  them  the  city  of  Arba.  .in  the  h. 
24.  30  they  buried  him . .  on . .  side  of  the  hill  of 

Judg.  2.    9  they  buried  him . .  on  the . .  side  of  the  hill 

16.  3  Samson . .  carried  them . .  to  the  top  of  an  h. 
1  Sa.  25.  20  she  came  down  by  the  covert  of  the  hill 

26.  13  David,  .stood  on  the  top  of  an  hill  afar 
28  a.  13.  34  came  much  people  by  the  way  of  the  hill 
16.  13  Shimei  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  over 
2i.   9  they  hanged  them  in  the  hill  before  the 

1  Ki.  11.    7  Then  did  Solomon  build,  .in  the  hill  that 

16.  24  he  bought  the  hill,  .built  on  the  hill  1 
16.  24  after  the  name  of  Shemer,  owner  of  the  h. 
20.  23  Their  gods  (are)  gods  of  the  hills ;  there. 
20.  28  The  Lord  (is)  God  of  the  hills,  but  he  (is) 

22.  17  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  upon  the  hills 

2  Ki.    1.    9  and,  behold,  he  sat  on  the  top  of  an  hill 

4.  27  when  she  came  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  h. 
Psa.     2.    6  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  h. 

3.    4  I  cried,  .he  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  hill 
15.   1  Lord,  .who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill? 
18.    7  the  foundations  also  of  the  hills  moved 
24.   3  Who  shall  ascend  iuto  the  hill  of  the  L.? 

42.  6  will  I  remember,  .from  the  hill  Mizar 

43.  3  let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  holy  hill,  and 
68.  15  The  hill  of  God  (is  as)  the  hill  of  Bashan 
68.  15  an  high  hill  (as)  the  hill  of  Bashan 

68.  16  Why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hills?,  .the  hill.  .G. 
80.  10  The  hills  were  covered  with  the  shadow 
95.    4  the  strength  of  the  hills  (is)  his  also 

97.  5  The  hills  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence 

98.  8  floodsclap.  .letthehillsbejoyfultogether 

99.  9  Exalt  the  Lord,  .worship  at  his  holy  hill 
104.  10  He  sendeth  the  springs . .  run  among  the  h. 
104.  13  He  watereth  the  hills  from  his  chambers 
104.  18  The  high  hills  (are)  a  refuge  for  the  wild 
104.  32  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they  smoke 
121.    1  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills 

Isa.     5.  25  the  hills  did  tremble,  and  their  carcases 
7.  25  all  hills  that  shall  be  digged  with  the 

3.  Mount,  mountain,  ~nrr,  ~nrr  harar,  herer. 

Deut.  8.    9  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  brass 
Psa.  50.  10  (and)  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills 

4. Ascent,  going  up,  nhyo  maaleh. 

1  Sa.   9.  11  as  they  went  up  the  hill  to  the  city,  they 

5. Hill,  fiowos  bounos. 

Luke  3.   5  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  brought 

23.  30  shall  they  begin  to  say . .  to  the  hills,  Cover 

6.  Mount,  mountain,  6pos  oros. 

Matt.  5.  14  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid 
Luke  4.  29  led  linn  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon 

9.  37  when  they  were  come  down  from  the  hill 

7.  Horn j  promontory,  p£  qeren. 

Isa.     5.    1  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill 
HILL  country  — 
I.Hill,  hill  country \  "in  har. 

Josh  13.    6  the  inhabitants  of  the  hill  country  from 
2. Mountainous,  dpew6$  oreinos. 

Luke  1.  39  Mary,  .went  into  the  hill  country  with  h. 
1.  65  throughr  ^v  ill  the  hill  country  of  Judea 

HILLS,  little—  $ 

A  height,  hill,  nj??a  gibah. 

Psa.  65.  1 2  They  drop . .  and  the  little  Mils  rejoice  on 
72.  3  bring  peace.,  the  little  hills,  byrighteous. 
114.    4,  6  skipped  like  ranis,  .tittle  hills  like  la. 

HLL'-LEL,  7?rj  praised  greatly. 
Father  of  Abdon,  of  the  judges  of  Israel.    He  was  a 
native  of  Pirathon  in  Mount  Ephraini.    B.C.  1130. 
Judgi2.  13  after  him  Abdon  the  son  of  H.,  a  Pirath. 

12.  15  Abdon  the  son  of  H.  "the  Pirathonite  died 
Tmvr  — 

l.A  man,  ^*n  ish. 

Prov  19.   6  every  man  (is)  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth 

2.  He,  Kin  hu. 

Gen.   4.  a6  to  Seth,  to  him  also  there  was  born  a  son 

3.  Who,  V  mi. 

Eccl.   9.   4  to  hini  that  is  joined  to  all  the  living  there 

4.  Himself,    aitr6s,   aulost 

Matt.  8.  18  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about  him 
Mark  5.  30  kuowing . .  that  virtue  had  gone  out  of  him 
Lukei8.  40  to  be  brought  unto  him  :  and  when  he  was 

19.  15  these  servants  to  be  called  unto  him,  to 
John  1.  47  Jesus  saw  Nathanael  coming  to  him,  and 

6.    5  Jesus . .  saw  a  great  company  come  unto  h. 

Acts    5.  37  Judas.,  drew  away  much  people  after  him 

9.    4  he.  .heard  a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul 

23.    2  Ananias  commanded  them  that  stood  by  h. 

25.  21 1  commanded  him  to  be  kept  till  I  might 

Heb.  12.    2  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 

5.  Of  himself,  eavTov  heautou. 

Mark  14.  33  he  taketh  with  [him],  Lu.  9. 47:1  Co.  16.  2. 


,1 


1 


HIDE 


480 


HIGH 


17.  To  hide  away,  airoKovTrrw  apohrupto. 

Matt  n.  25  [thou  hast  hid]  these  things  from  the  w. 
25.  18  he  that  had  received  one.  .[hid]  his  lord's 
Lukeio.  21  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 
Eph.  3.  9  which  from  the  beginning . .  hath  been  hid 
Col.     1.  26  the  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from 

18. To  cover,  hide,  KaXv-mw  kalupto. 

2  Co.  4.    3  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that 
Jas.    5.  20  he  which  converteth  the  sinner,  .shall  h. 

19.  To  hide,  Kpvirrui  krupto. 

-Matt.  5.  14  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  h. 

13.  44  like  unto  treasure  hid.  .which,  .hehideth 
25.  25  I  was  afraid,  and  went  and  hid  thy  talent 

LukeiS.  34  this  saying  was  hid  from  them,  neither 
19.  42  know,  .but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine 
Col.    3.    3  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 
1  Ti.    5.  25  and  they  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid 
Heb.  11.  23  Moses,  when  he  was  born,  was  hid  three 
Rev.   2.  17  To  him.  .will  I  give,  .the  hidden  manna 
6.  15  the  kings  of  the  earth,  .hid  themselves  in 
6. 16  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 

20.  To  cove?-  beyond,  -KapaKaXvirrw  parakalupto. 
Luke  9.  45  it  was  hid  from  them,  that  they  perceived 

2\.Tocover  around,  irepiKpvirrw pei ikrupto. 

Luke  1.  24  Elisabeth  conceived,  and  hid  herself  five 

HIDE  in,  to  — 

To  hide  in,  4y<pvivT(t>  e§krupto. 

Matt  13.  33  which  a  woman  took  and  [hid]  in  three 

Lukei3-  2\  which  a  woman  took  and  [hid]  in  three 

{See  Flee.] 

HIDE  self,  to  — 

J. To  be  hidden,  xin  chaba,  2. 

Gen.    3. 10  he  said.  .1  was  afraid,  .and  I  hid  myself 
Josh.  10.  16  hid  themselves  in  a  cave  at  Makkedah 
Judg.  g.   5  yet  Jothani . .  was  left ;  for  he  hid  himself 

1  Sa.  10.  22  he  hath  hid  himself  among  the  stuff 

19.  2  abide  in  a  secret  (place),  and  hide  thyself 

2  Ch.iS.  24  when  thou  shalt  go.  .to  hide  thyself 
Job  29.    8  young  men  saw  me,  and  liid  themselves 
Dam  10.    7  so  that  they  fled  to  hide  themselves 
Amos  9.    3  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel 

2. To  be  hidden,  H2~t  chaba,  4. 

Job  24.   4  the  poor  of  the  earth  hide  themselves  to. 

3.  To  hide  self,  N2ri  chaba,  7. 

Gen.    3.    8  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from 
1  Sa.  13.    6  the  people  did  hide  themselves  in  caves 

14.  11  the  holes  where  they  had  hid  themselves 
14.  22  men  of  Israel  which  had  hid  themselves 
23.  23  lurking  places  where  he  hideth  himself 

1  Ch.21.  20  his  four  sons  with  him  hid  themselves 
-A.  To  hide,  .Tin  chabah. 

Isa.   26.  20  hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment 

5.  To  be  hidden,  rrsrj  chabah,  2. 

Josh.  2. 16  hide  yourselves  there  three  days,  until 

1  Ki.  22.  25  when  thou  shalt  go.  .to  hide  thyself 

2  Ki.    7.  12  gone  out  of  the  camp  to  hide  themselves 
Jer.   49.  10  he  shall  not  be  able  to  hide  himself  :  his 

6.  To  hide,  "iriD  sathar. 

Prov  22.    3  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself 

7.  To  be  hidden,  ttid  sathar,  2. 

Deut.  7.  20  hid  themselves  from  thee,  be  destroyed 
1  Sa.  20.    5  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  the  field  unto 
20. 19  the  place  where  thou  didst  hide  thyself 

20.  24  David  hid  himself  in  the  field  :  and  when 
1  Ki.  17.    3  hide  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith,  that 
Job   13.  20  then  will  I  not  hide  myself  from  thee 

34.  22  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  themselves 

Psa.  55.  12  then  I  would  have  hid  myself  from  him 
89.  46  wilt  thou  hide  thyself  for  ever?  shall  thy 

Prov'27.  12  foreseeth  the  evil,  (and)  hideth  himself 
28.  28  When  the  wicked  rise,  men  hide  thems. 

Isa.   28.  15  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves 

Jer.  23.  24  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places 

Amos  9.    3  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel 
S.  To  hide  self,  "iriD  sathar,  7. 

1  Sa.  23.  19  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  with  us  in 
26.    1  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  in  the  hill 

Psa.  54.  title.  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  with  us?: 

Isa.  45.  15  Verily  thou  (art)  a  God  thathidest  thyself 
Q.To  cover,  wrap  up,  *jbsj  aiaph. 

Job  23.   9  he  hideth  himself  on  the  right  hand,  that 
10.7*0  hide  self  chy  alam,  7. 

Deut22.   i,  4  and  hide  thyself  from  them :  thou  shalt 
22.    3  do  likewise :  thou  mayest  not  hide  thyself 

Psa.  55.    1  hide  not  thyself  from  my  supplication 

Isa.  58.    7  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own 
11. To  hide,  juy  tsaphan,  5. 

Psa.  56.   6  they  hide  themselves,  they  mark  my  steps 
12.  To  hide,  KpvTTTQ)  krupto. 

John  8.  59  Jesusludhimself.andwentoutoftheteni. 
12.  36  departed,  and  did  hide  himself  from  them 
HIDING  — 
Hiding,  jvnn  chebyon. 

Hab.  3.   4  and  there  (was)  the  hiding  of  his  power 
HIDING  place  — 
I. Hiding  place,  ton:?  machabe. 

Isa.  '32.    2  a  man  shall  be  asanhidingphu  „•  from  the 
-2.  Hiding  or  secret  place,  "inp  sether. 

Psa.  32.    7  Thou(art)myhjdingplace;  thou  shalt  pre. 
no.  114  Thou  (art)  myhidingplaceandmvshield 

Isa.    ;8. 17  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding  place 


HI'-EL,  iWQ  God  is  living. 

A  native  of  Bethel  who  rebuilt  Jericho  in  the  reign  of 
Ahab,  B.C.  918,  and  in  whom  was  fulfilled  the  curse 
pronounced  by  Joshua  (6.  26). 

1  Ki.i6.  34  In  his  days  did  H.  the  Beth-elite  build 

HI-E-RA'-PO-LIS,  '\ep6.'iTO\ts  priestly  city. 
A  city  of  Phrygia  20  miles  W.  of  Colosse  and  6  X.  of 
Laodicea  which  are  all  in  the  basin  of  the  Maunder. 
It  is  now  called  Fambulc-Kalessi. 

Col.    4. 13  that  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for.,  them  in  H. 

HIG-GA'-ION,  j'varr. 

This  word  occurs  three  times  in  the  book  of  Psalms ; 
and  from  the  multiplicity  of  interpretations  suggested,  it 
would  seem  to  have  two  meanings — one  of  a  general 
character  implying  "  thought,"  "reflection ;"  andanother 
in  Ps.  9.  17  and  92.  4  of  a  special  technical  nature, 
bearing  the  import  of  musical  sounds  or  signs  well 
known  in  the  age  of  David,  but  whose  import  cannot 
now  easily  be  determined. 

Psa.    9.  i6snared  in  the  work  of  Ins  own  hands.  H.  3. 
HIGH  (things)  — 
l.A  man,  k;,n  ish. 

Psa.  49.    2  Both  low  and  high,  rich  and  poor,  together 
'2.  Length,  ink  orek. 

2  Ch.  3. 15  two  pillars  of  thirty  and  five  cubits  high 
3.  High,  lofty,  naa  gabah. 

Psa.101.    5  him  that  hath  an  high  look  and  a  proud 
Eze.  31.    3  the  Assyrian(was)..ofanhighstature 
^.Height,  loftiness,  n^a  gobah. 

Job  11.   8  (It  is)  as  high  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou 

Eze.     1.  18  they  were  so  high  that  they  were  dreadful 

40.  42  a  cubit  and  a  half  broad,  and  one  cubit  h. 

5. High,  haughty,  933,  aba  gaboah. 

Gen.    7.  19  all  the  high  hills  that  (were)  under  the 
Deut.  3.   5  Ail  these  cities  (were)  fenced  with  high 
28.  52  until  thy  high  andfenced  walls  comedown 

1  Ki.t4-  23  on  every  high  hill,  and  under  every  green 

2  Ki.17.  10  images  and  groves  in  every  high  hill,  and 
Esth.  5.  14  agallowsbemadeoffiftycubitshigh,and 

7.  9  thegallow5,nftycubitshigh, which Haman 
Job  41.  34  He  beholdeth  all  high  (things) :  he  (is)  a 
Psa.  104.  18  The  high  hills  (are)  a  refuge  for  the  wild 
Eccl.12.  5  they  shall  be  afraid  of  (that  winch  is)high 
Isa.  2. 15  upon  every  high  tower,  and  upon  every 
30. 25  there  shall  be  upon  every  high  mountain 
40.  9  get  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain 
Jer.     2.  20  upon  every  high  hill  and  under  every 

3.    6  she  is  gone  up  upon  every  high  mountain 
17.    2  by  the  green  trees  upon  the  high  hills 
51.  58  her  high  gates  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
Eze.  17.  22  will  plant  (it)  upon  au  high  mountain  and 
17.  24  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,  have 

21.  26  Thus  saiththeLord.  .abase (himthat  is)h. 

40.  2  set  me  upon  a  very  high  mouutain,  by 

41.  22  The  altar  of  wood  (was)  three  cubits  high 
Dan.]  8.  3  and  the  (two)  horns  (were)  high ;  but  one 
Zeph.-i.  16  fenced  cities,  and  against  the  high  towers 

6. Heights,  summits,  D*3J33  gabnunnim. 

Psa.  68. 15  an  high  bill,  (as)  the  .hill  of  Bashan 

68. 16  Why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hills  ?  (tins  is)  the 

7. Great,  Vnj  gadol. 

Gen.  29.  7  Lo,  (it  is)  yet  high  day,  neither  (is  it)  time 
Lev.  2i.  10  the  high  priest  among  his  brethren,  upon 
Num.35.  25  in  it  unto  the  death  of  the  high  priest 

35.  28  high  priest,  .death  of  the  high  priest 
Josh  20.    6  until  the  death  of  the  high  priest  that  shall 
2  Ki.12.  10  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest  came  up 

22.  4  Go  up  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  that  lie 

22.  8  Hilkiah  the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan 

23.  4  king  commanded  Hilkiah  the  high  priest 
s  Ch.  34.  9  when  they  came  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest 
Neh.    3.  1  Eliashib  the  high  priest  rose  up,  with 

3.  20  of  the  house  of  Eliashib  the  high  priest 
13. 28  Joiada,  the  son  of  Eliashib  the  high  priest 
Hag.-  1.    1,  12,  14  Joshua.,  son  of  Josedech  the  high 

2.  2,  4  J  oshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  p. 
Zech.  3.    1  And  he  showed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest 

3.  8  Hear  now,  O  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou 
6.  11  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  pri. 

8. High  place,  or  person,  dvio  marom. 

Psa.  71. 19  Thy  righteousness  also,  O  God,  (is)  very  h. 
92.  8  But  thou,  Lord,  (art  most)  high  for  ever 
Isa.  57. 15  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  (place),  with 
Jer.  17.  12  A  glorious  high  throne  from  the  beginning 
Eze.  34.  14  upon  the  high  mountains  of  Israel  shall 
Obad  3  whose  habitation  (is)  high ;  thatsaithinh. 
Mic.    6.    6  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  3  shall  I 

9.  To  be  lifted  up,  n£j  nasa,  2. 

Isa.  30.  25  there  shall  be.,  upon  everj' high  hill,  rivers 
57.    7  Upon  a  lofty  and  high  mountain  hast  thou 

lO.Jfosi high,  ^$>  iUaL 

Dan.   4.    2  signs  and  wonders  that  the  high  God  hath 

11. High,  uppermost,  most  high,  |V?y  elyon. 

Deut26.  19  to  make  thee  high  above  ailnations  which 

1  Ki.  9.    8  at  this  house,  (which)  is  high,  every  one 

2  Ch.  7. 21  this  house,  which  is  high,  shall  be  an  asto. 

23.  20  they  came  through  the  high  gate  into  the 

27.    3  He  built  the  high  gate  of  the  "house  of  the 

Neh.    3.  25  which  hethoutfromtheking'shighhouse 

Psa.   78.  35  they  remembered . .  the  high  God  their  re. 

97.   9  thou.  Lord,  (art)  high  above  all  the  earth 

Jer.   20.    2  put  him  in  the  stocks,  .in  the  high  gate  of 


12.  Height,  stature,  -TD'tp  qomah. 

1  Ki.   6.  10  he  built  chambers.,  five  cubits  high  :  and 

6.  23  he  made  two  cherubim,  .ten  cubits  high 

7.  15  he  cast  two  pillars,  .eighteen  cubits  high 
7.  35  a  round  compass  of  half  a  cubit  high :  and 

2  Ch.  6.  13  a  brasen  scaffold ..  three  cubits  high,  and 

13.7*0  be  high,  enrwm. 

Exodi4.  8  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an  highh. 
>"um  33.  3  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an  highh. 
Deuti2.  2  nations  which,  .served,  upon  the  highm. 
Job    21.  22  seeing  he  judgeth  those  that  are  high 

38. 15  the  wicked,  .the  high  ami  shall  be  broken 
Psa.  18.  27  For  thou  wilt.,  bring  down  high  looks 

78.  69  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high  (palaces) . 

113.   4  The  Lord  (is)  high  above  all  nations,  (and) 

138.    6  Though  the  Lord  (be)  high,  yet  hath  he 

Isa.     2.  13  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  (that  are)  high 

2.  14  upon  all  the  high  mountains,  and  upon  all 

6.  1  the  LORD  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and 
57.  15  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  ODe  that 

Eze.    6.  13  round  about  their  altars,  upon  every  high 
17.  22  I  will  also  take .  .of  the  high  cedar,  and 
20.  28  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick 
34.    6  My  sheep  wandered.. upon  every  high  hill 

14.  Exaltation,  ddvi  romam. 

Psa.  149.    6  (Let)  the  high  (praises)  of  God  (be)  in  their 
15. To  be  high,  set  on  high,  3J"p  sagab,  2. 

Prov  18.  11  The  richman'swealth(is).  .asanhigh  wall 
Isa.  30. 13  swelling  out  in  a  high  wall,  whose  breaking 

16. To  be  high,  nsgi  shaphah,  2. 

Isa.    13.    2  Lift  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  highniomi. 

17. Height,  on  high,  on  rum. 

Prov  21.  4  An  high  look,  and  a  proud  heart,  (and)  the 
Isa.   10.  12  I  will  punish.,  the  glory  of  his  high  looks 

15.  Up>,  above,  high,  &vw  and. 

Phil.   3.  14  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  C.J. 

19.  Great,  p.eyas  megas. 

Johmg.  31  for  that  sabbath  day  was  an  high  day 
Heb.  10.  21  And.,  an  high  priest  over  the  house  of  God 

20. High,  v\\iy)\6s  hupselos. 

Matt.  4.  8  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high 
17.  1  bringeth  them  up  into  an  high  mountain 
Mark  9.  2  leadeth  them  up  into  an  high  mountain 
Luke  4.  5  [devil,  taking  him  up  into  an  highmoun.] 
Acts  13.  17  with  an  high  arm  brought  he  them  out  of 
Bom  12.  16  Mind  not  high  things,  but  condescend  to 
Heb.  7.  26  such  an  high  priest  became  us,  (who  is) 
Rev.  21.  10  he  carried  me.  .to  a  great  and  high  raou. 
21. 12  had  a  wall  great  and  high,  .had  twelve  g. 

[See  also  Captain,  exalt,  fort,  heaps,  minded,  most, 

sounding,  tower.] 

HIGH,  to  be  — 

l.Tobe  high,  lofty,  333  gabah. 

Psa. 103.  11  For  as  theheaven  is  high  above  the  earth 
Isa.  52. 13  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be  very  high 

'2. To  be  high,  exalted,  en  rum. 

Deut  32.  27  lest  they  should  say,  Our  hand  (is)  high 
Job  22. 12  the  height  of  the  stare,  how  high  they  are  ! 
Psa.  S9.  13  strong  is  thy  hand . .  high  is  thy  right  hand 
99.   2  The  Lord,  .he  (is)  high  above  all  people 

B.To  be  high,  set  on  high,  2:^  sagab,  2. 

Psa.  139.    6  knowledge,  .it  is  high,  I  cannot  (attain; 
HIGH  degree  — 
l.A  man,  c;,n  ish. 

Psa.  62.   9  Surely,  .men  of  high  degree  (are)  a  lie:  to 
2.Going  up,  ascent,  step,  "}1Lp  maalah. 

1  Ch.17.  17  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  d 
HIGH,  to  lift  up  on  — 

To  lift  up,  exalt,  en  rum,  Za. 

2  Sa.  22.  49  thou  also  hast  lifted  me  up  on  high  above 
HIGH,  to  make  — 

l.To  make  high,  go  up  high,  333  gabah,  0. 

;  Jer.  49. 16  though  thou,  .make  thy  nest  as  high  as 
2.  To  exalt,  lift  up,  en  rum,  5. 

Job  39.  27  Doth  the  eagle,  .make  her  nest  on  high  ? 
HIGH,  most  — 
l.High  place  or  person,  0ri3  marom. 

Psa.  56.    2  many.,  fight  against  me,  O  thou  most  high? 

2. Most  hight  above,  by,  bu  al. 

Hos.    7.  16  They  return,  (but)  not  to  the  most  high 
11.    7  though  they  called  them  to  the  most  high 

Z.Most  high,  'h?  illai. 

Dan.   3.  26  ye  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  come 
4.  17  the  living  may  know  that  the  most  high 
4.  24  this  (is)  the  decree  of  the  most  high,  wb. 
4.  25,  32  thou  know  that  the  most  high  ruleth  in 

4.  34  I  blessed  the  most  high,  and  I  praised 

5.  iS  O  thou  king,  the  most  high  God  gave  Ne. 
5.  21  till  he  knew  that  the  most  high  God  ruled 

7.  25  against  the  most  high,  .of  the  most  high 

4. High,  uppermost,  most  high,  |'v?Jg  elyon. 

Gen.  14. 18  he  (was)  the  priest  of  the  most  high  God 

14. 19  Blessed  (be)  Abram  of  the  most  high  God 

14.  20  blessed  he  the  most  high  God,  which  hath 

14.  22  I  have  lift  up  mine  hand  unto . .  most  high 

Num.24.  16  andknewthe  knowledge  of  the  most  high 

Deut 32.   8  Whenthemosthighdividedtothenatiors 

2  Sa.  22. 14  and  the  most  high  uttered  his  voice 

Psa.    7. 17  will  sing  praise  to.  .the  Lord  most  high 


HIGHEST 


482 


dry  place,  n'ny,  *n*tfs  tsechichi,  isechiach. 
13  on  the  higher  places,  I  evensetthepeople 


HE-R0-DI'_ 

A  daughter 

was  wajii&PP&rmost,  mow  /".'/",  p7u  clyon. 
brother  Ho.  13  the  highestgave  his  voice;  hail,  .and  coals 
Matt  1  7-   5  ilI1°-  *'ie  highest  himself  shall  establish  her 
r(i.    7  the  lowest,  .to  the  highest  by  the  midst 

Mark  g^  mosi  high,  fttyttfros  hupsisios. 

21.  9  Blessed  (is)  he..Hosanna  in  the  highest! 

r   ,      11. 10  Blessed  (be)  the.  .Hosannain  the  highest 

ljUKe    1.  32  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  highest 

HE  RO-L  i-  35  the  power  of  the  highest  shall  overshadow 

A  Christi  *•  76  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  of  the  highest 


Rom 


2.  14  Glory  to  God  id  the  highest,  and  on  earth 


6.  35  and  ye  shall  lie  the  children  of  the  highest 
HERON  ig.  38  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 
Heron 
Lev. 


'3T  branch  — 
te,  highest  branch,  TVj%%  tsammereth. 
..  17.    3  and  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar 
HERSE'    I?  22  1  will  also  take  of  the  highest  branch  of 

^'^rESTpart  — 

'  /,  top,  tftO  rash. 
2-  Oj  -ov.  8.  26  nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  w. 
Ma 

LulIEST  places  — 

Re\s  or  arches  of  the  high  place,  oiip  '33  gappe. 
jv.  9.    3  crietii  upon  the  highest  places  of  the  city 


HE    SED 

,pn  Vat]ie -lining  place,  Trpo)roK\t(rta  protoklisia. 

Aruboth  ii  ■    8  s'fc  not  down  m  *-ne  highest  room  ;  lest  a 

1  Ki.  4.'  seat  — 
HESK'  -BO  fore  most  seats,  TrpwTOKcideBptaprdtokathed. 
A  Levitica3-  46  t-he  scribes . .  love . .  the  highest  seats  in  the 

to  Moab  a 

raiV'tlth    ^ee  Disllleased'  esteemed,  think]. 
DeadSep*»  very  — 

$uwibunda/it.li/,  vnkp  in  iripKraov  hupcr  ekperiss. 

A\.  5.  13  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for 
£GH  MINDED,  to  he  — 

0  think  high,  u\\n)\o<ppovc<ti  hupselophroneo. 
Rom.  11.  20  Well,  [be  nut  high  minded],  but  fear 
1  Ti.     6  17  Charge  them,  .that  they  be  not  high  mind. 

:ghness  — 
^Rising,  excellency, pride,  nixa  gaavah. 

Isa.  13.    3  mighty  ones,  .them  that  rejoice  in  my  h. 

Lifting  up,  rixi:*  seeth. 

Job  31.  23  by  reason  of  his  highness  I  could  not  en. 

GHWAY  — 

htslomary  path,  n-\'a  orach. 
jfJudg.  5.    6  the  highways  were  unoccupied,  and  the 

P*yj  TJ3  113  derek  derek. 

Deut.  2.  27  I  will  go  along  by  the  highway,  I  will  nei. 
it  place,  pn  chuts. 

\.mos  5.  16  they  shall  say  in  all  the  highways,  Alas ! 
aised  up  way,  highway,  nj?pp  mesillah. 
fumso.  19  said  unto  him.  We  will  go  by  the  highway 
udg2o.  31  in  the  highways,  of  which  one  goetli  up  to 
JU<        20.  32  draw  them  from  the  city  unto  the  highw. 
20.  45  they  gleaned  of  them  in  the  highways  five 
1  CI       2j.  jg  on  the  east  side  of  the  highway  that  goeth 
Nen3a.    6.  12  went  along  the  highway,  lowing  as  they 
Songja.  20.  12  wallowed,  .in  the  midst  of  the  highway 
Isa.       20.  12  he  removed  Amasaoutof  the  highway  into 
20.  13  he  was  removed  out  of  the  highway,  all 
"i.  18.  17  which  (is)  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  fi. 
Jer.  .»v  16.  17  The  highway  of  the  upright  (is)  to  depart 
-.7-3  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field 
4   11.  16  there  shall  be  an  highway  for  the  remnant 
4   ig-  23  In  that  day  shall  there  be  an  highway  out 
4  33.    8  The  highways  lie  waste,the  wayfaring  man 
36.    2  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field 
40.    3  make  straight,  .a  highway  for  our  God 
49. 11  and  my  highways  shall  be  exalted 
62.  10  cast  up,  east  up  the  highway;  gather  out 
31.  21  set  thine  heart  toward  the  highway,  (even) 
''way,  T^Spa  masluL 
HETH,  nn/g.    8  au  highway  shall  he  there,  and  a  way,  and 
A  second  •  H(/f  Amftw# 

^         t22. 10  those  servants  went  out  into  the  highways 
Uen.  i'iiIO,  46  Timeus,  sat  by  the  highway  side  begging 

2  614.  23  Go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges 

z$waysrcf  the  ways,  $t€%68ovs  twv  6Buv  diex. 

2y  22.   9  Go  ye  therefore  into  the  highways,  and  as 

2N,  ]?'n  strong  place. 

"'ailed  in  Josh.  15,  51,  21. 15  Uolon)  belonging  to 


hesh'-: 

A  town  i 
dah  and  j 

(Nun.    34 
Josh 


23- 


id  assigned  to  the  Levites. 


23.  2 

27. 46  58  H.  with  her  suburbs,  Debir  with  her  sub 

=7-  i'h,  wphn,  rrp'rn  Jah  is  protection. 
,   49-      f  Eliakim  master  of  the  household  to  king 
lCh-  *-*3  b.o.  740. 
HETH'-LON,   18  the  son  of  IT.,  which  (was)  over  the  house. 
A  place  in  thzo  Then  said  Eliakim  the  son  of  H.,  and  Sh. 
The  "  way  of37  Then  came  Eliakim  the  son  of  H.,  which 
Lebanon  frontfo  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  the  son  of  II. 
treat  plain  of  13  Then  came  forth  unto  him  Eliakim,  H.'s 
"  entrance  of  Ea  Then  came  Eliakim  the  son  of  H.,  that 
Ezc.  47. 15  g 
48.    1  iii 


2.  High  priest  in  the  time  of  Josiah  king 
B.C.  650. 
2  Ki. : 


of  Judah. 


4  Go  up  to  H.  the  high  priest,  that  he  may 
8  H.  the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan  the 
8  H.  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  and  he  read 
22.  10  H.  the  priest  hath  delivered  me  a  book 
22.  12  the  king  commanded  H.  the  priest,  and 

22.  14  So  H.  the  priest,  .went  unto  Huldah  the 

23.  4  the  king  commanded  H.  the  high  priest 
23.  24  the  book  that  H.  the  priest  found  in  the 

1  Ch.  6. 13  Shallum  begat  H.,  and  H.  begat  Azariah 

9. 11  Azariah  the  son  of  H.,  the  son  of  Meshul. 

2  Ch.  34.    9  when  they  cameto  H.  the  high  priest,  they 

34.  14  H.  the  priest  found  a  book  of  the  law  of 
34.  15  H.  answered  and  said  to  Shaphan  the  scr. 
34. 15  And  H.  delivered  the  book  to  Shaphan 
34.  18  saying,  II.  the  priest  hath  given  me  a  book 
34.  20  the  king  commanded  H.,  and  Ahikam  the 

34.  22  H. .  .went  to  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the 

35.  8  H.  and  Zechaiiah  and  Jeluel,  rulers  of  the 
Ezra  7.  1  Seraiah,  the  son  of  Azariah,  the  son  of  H. 
Jer.  29.    3  By  the  hand  of.  .Gemariah  the  son  of  H. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Merari,  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  650. 

1  Ch.  6.  45  Hashabiah.  .son  of  Aniaziah.thesonofH. 

4.  A  son  of  Hosah,  a  descendant  of  Merari,  and  a  gate 
keeper  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  time  of  David.  B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.afi.  11  H.  the  second,  Tebaliah  the  third,  Zech. 

5.  A  priest  who  stood  by  Ezra  while  reading  the  book  of 
the  law  to  the  people.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  8.  4  Auaiah,  and  TJrijah,  and  H.,  and  Maaseiah 
21.  11  Seraiah  the  son  of  H.,  the  son  of  Meshul. 
12.  7  Sallu,  Amok,  H.,  Jedaiah.These(were)the 
12.  21  Of  H.,  Hashabiah ;  of  Jedaiah,  Nethaneel 

6.  A  priest  of  Anathoth,  and  father  of  Jeremiah  the 
prophet.    B.C.  650. 

Jer.    1.    1  The  words  of  Jeremiah  the  son  of  H.,  of 
KTT.L  — 
\.  Height, 

Gen.  49. 

Exodi7. 
X7- 

Num.23. 

Deut  12. 

Josh.  5, 
24. 
Judg.  7, 


hillock,  nyna  gibah. 

26  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills 
9  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the 

10  and  Hur,  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill 

9  from  the  hills  I  behold  him :  lo,  the  people 

2  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree 
15  for  the  precious  things  of  the  lasting  hills 

3  Joshua,  .circumcised,  .at  the  hill  of  the 
33  Eleazar.  .died;  and  they  buried  him  in  ah. 

,     1  The  Midianites  were . .  by  the  hill  of  Moreh 

1  Sa.    7.    1  into  the  house  of  Abinadab  in  the  hill,  and 

10.    5  After  that  thou  shalt  come  to  the  hillofG. 

10  when  they  came  thither  to  the  hill,  behold 

19  Doth  not  David  hide.. in  the  hill  of  Hach. 

1  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  in  the  hill 

3  Saul  pitched  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah 

24  when  they  were  come  to  the  hill  of  Amm. 

25  children  of  B. .  .stood  on  the  top  of  an  h. 
23  they  also  built,  .on  every  high  hill,  and 

4  he  sacrificed.. on  the  hills,  and  under  e. 

10  they  set.  .groves  in  every  high  hill,  and 
4  He  sacrificed  also,  .on  the  hills,  and  under 

7  or  wast  thou  made  before  the  hills  ? 
9  Mountains,  and  all  hills  ;  fruitful  trees 

25  before  the  hills  was  I  brought  forth 

8  he  cometh.  .skipping  upon  the  hills 

6  I  will  get  me.  .to  the  hill  of  frankincense 

2  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and 

14  and  upon  all  the  bills  (that  are)  lifted  up 
32  he  shall  shake  his  hand  against,  .the  hill 
17  till  ye  be  left,  .as  an  ensign  on  an  hill 

25  there  shall  be . .  upon  every  high  hill,  rivers 
4  to  fight  for  mount  Zion,  aud  for  the  hill 
4  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made  low 

12  Whohath..weighed..thehillsina  balance 

15  Behold,  .thou,  .shalt  make  the  hills  asch. 

15  I  will  make  waste  mountains  and  hills 
10  the  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills 

12  the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 

7  fathers,  .blasphemed  me  upon  the  hills 

20  when  upon  every  high  hill,  .thou  wanderest 

23  Truly  in  vain,  .from  the  hills,  .the  mult. 

24  they  trembled,  and  all  the  hills  moved  li. 

27  I  have  seen,  .abominations  on  the  hills 

16  they  shall  hunt  them,  .from  every  hill 

2  and  their  groves,  .upon  the  high  hills 
39  measuring  line,  .upon  the  hill  Gareb 
16  thou .  .that  holdest  the  height  of  the  hill 

6  they  have  gone  from  mountain  to  hill,  they 

3  Tims  saith  the  Lord  GOD.  .to  the  hills 

13  among  their  idols.,. upon  every  high  hill 

28  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick 
6  My  sheep  wandered . .  upon  every  high  hill 

26  the  places  round  about  my  hill  a  blessing 

8  in  thy  hills,  .shall  they  fall  that  are 
4,  6  and  to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers,  and  to  the 

13  They  sacrifice . .  upon  the  hills,  under  oaks 
10.    8  they  shall  say.  .to the  hills,  Fall  on  us 
Joel    3.  18  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  the 
Amos  9.  13  the  days  come,  .and  all  the  hills  shall  melt 
Mic.    4.    1  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and 

6.    1  Arise,  .and let  the  hills  hear  thy  voice 
Nah.  1.    5  the  hills  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burned  at 
Hab.  3.    6  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow  :  his  ways 
Zeph.  1. 10  and  a  great  crashing  from  the  hills 

%.  Mount,  "in  har. 

Gen.    7. 19  all  the  high  hills  that  (were)  under  the 
Exod24.    4  Moses,  .builded  an  altar  under  the  hill 
Num  14.  44  they  presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top 
14.  45  the  Cauaanites  which  dwelt  in  that  hill 
De,ut.  1.    7  take  your  journey .  .in  the  hills,  and  in 


=3- 

26. 

26. 

2  Sa.  -2. 

2. 

1  Ki.  14. 

2  Ki.  16. 

17- 
2  Ch.28. 
Job  15. 
Psa.148. 
Prov.  8. 
Song  2. 
4- 
Isa.     2. 


Hos. 


Deut.  1.  41  ye  were  ready  to  go  up  i. 

1.  43  aud  went  presumptuously  Uf— rrr^-LiitniU 

8.  7  depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills 
11.  11  the  land,  whether  ye  go.  .(is)  a  laud  of  h. 

Jo3h.  9.    1  when  all  the  kings,  .in  the  hills,  and  in 
to.  40  Joshua  smote  all  the  couutry  of  the  hills 

11.  16  Joshua  took  all  that  land,  the  hills,  and 

15.  9  the  border  was.  .from  the  top  of  the  lull 

17.  16  The  hHl  is  not  enough  for  us  :  and  all  the 

18.  13  the  border  descended,  .near  the  hill  that 
18.  14  the  border,  .compassed,  .from  the  hill 
21.  11  they  gave  them  the  city  of  Arba..in  the  h. 
24.  30  they  buried  him.  .on.  .side  of  the  hill  of 

Judg.  2.    9  they  buried  him . .  on  the . .  side  of  the  hill 

16.  3  Samson . .  carried  them . .  to  the  top  of  an  h. 

1  Sa.  25.  20  she  came  down  by  the  covert  of  the  hill 

26. 13  David,  .stood  on  the  top  of  an  hill  afar 

2  Sa.  13.  34  came  much  people  by  the  way  of  the  hill 

16. 13  Shimei  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  over 

21.  9  they  hanged  them  in  the  hill  before  the 

1  Ki.  11.    7  Then  did  Solomon  build,  .in  the  hill  that 
16.  24  he  bought  the  hill,  .built  on  the  hilli 
16.  24  after  the  name  of  Sbemer,  owner  of  the  h. 
20.  23  Their  gods  (are)  gods  of  the  hills ;  there. 
20.  28  The  Lord  (is)  God  of  the  hills,  but  he  (is) 

22.  17  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  upon  the  hills 
2IU.    i.    9  and,  behold,  he  sat  on  the  top  of  au  hill 

4.  27  when  she  came  to  the  man  of  God  to  theh. 

Psa.     2.    6  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  h. 

3.    4  I  cried,  .he  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  hill 

15.   1  Lord,  .who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill? 

18.  7  the  foundations  also  of  the  hills  moved 

24.  3  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  L.? 

42.  6  will  I  remember,  .from  the  hill  Mizar 

43.  3  let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  holy  hill,  aud 
68.  15  The  hill  of  God  (is  as)  the  hill  of  Bashan 
68.  15  an  high  hill  (as)  the  hill  of  Bashan 

68.  16  Why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hillsr.  .the  hill.  .G. 
80.  10  The  hills  were  covered  with  the  shadow 
g5.    4  the  strength  of  the  hills  (is)  his  also 

97.  5  The  hills  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence 

98.  8  floods  clap,  .let  the  hills  be  joyful  together 

99.  9  Exalt  the  Lord,  .worship  at  his  holy  hill 
104.  10  He  sendeth  the  springs,  .run  among  theh. 
104.  13  He  watereth  the  hills  from  his  chambers 
104.  18  The  high  hills  (are)  a  refuge  for  the  wild 
104.  32  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they  smoke 
121.    1  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills 

Isa.     5.  25  the  hills  did  tremble,  and  their  carcases 
7.  25  all  hills  that  shall  be  digged  with  the 

3. Mount,  mountain,  "inn,  inn  harar,  herer. 

Deut.  8.    9  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  brass 
Psa.  50.  10  (and)  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills 

A.  Ascent,  going  up,  iVfilQ  maalch. 

1  Sa.   9.  11  as  they  went  up  the  hill  to  the  city,  they 

5. Hill,  &ovv6$  bounos. 

Luke  3.    5  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  brought 

23.  30  shall  they  begin  to  say .  .to  the  hills,  Cover 

6.  Mount,  mountain,  Spos  oros. 

Matt.  5.  14  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid 
Luke  4.  29  led  him  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon 

9.  37  when  they  were  come  down  from  the  hill 

7. Horn,  promontory,  pp  qeren. 

Isa.     5.    1  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill 

TTTT-T.  country  — 

I.Hill,  hill  country,  in  har. 

Josh  13.    6  the  inhabitants  of  the  hill  country  from 
%Moxtntainous,  6peiv6s  oreinos. 

Luke  r.  39  Mary,  .went  into  the  hill  country  with  h. 
1.  65  through^  *J  "Jl  the  hill  country  of  Judea 

HILLS,  little—         fcetjf 
A  height,  hill,  nyna  gibah. 

Psa.  65.  12  They  drop,  .and  the  little  lulls  rejoice  on 
72.  3  bring  peace . .  the  little  hills,  by  righteous. 
114.   4,  6  skipped  like  rams,  .little  hills  like  la. 

HTL'-LEL,  ??fl  praised  greatly. 
Father  of  Abdon,  of  the  judges  of  Israel.    He  was  a 
native  of  Pirathon  in  Mount  Ephraim.    B.C.  1130. 
Judgi2.  13  after  him  Abdon  the  son  of  H.,  a  Tirath. 

12.  15  Abdon  the  son  of  H.  the  Pirathonite  died 

TTTM  — 

l.A  man,  &x  ish. 

Prov  19.    6  every  man  (is)  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth 

2.  He,  n\n  Mi. 

Gen.   4.  a6  to  Seth,  to  him  also  there  was  born  a  son 

3.  Who,  'p  mi. 

Eccl.   9.   4  to  him  that  is  joined  to  all  the  living  there 

4.  Himself,    aur6s,   autos. 

Matt.  8.  18  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about  him 
Mark  5.  30  knowing . .  that  virtue  had  gone  out  of  him 
LukeiB.  40  to  be  brought  unto  him  :  and  when  he  was 

19.  15  these  servants  to  be  called  unto  him,  to 
John  1.  47  JeBus  saw  Nathanael  coming  to  him,  and 

6.    5  Jesus . .  saw  a  great  company  come  unto  h. 

Acts    5.  37  Judas . .  drew  away  much  people  after  him 

9.    4  he.  .heard  a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul 

33.    a  Ananias  commanded  them  that  stood  by  h. 

25.  21  I  commanded  him  to  be  kept  till  I  might 
Heb.  12.    2  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 

5.  Of  himself,  eavrou  heautou. 

Mark  14.  33  he  taketh  with  [him],  Lu  9. 4711  Co.  16.  2. 


HIDE 


480 


HIGH 


17.  To  hide  away,  airoKovirTw  apokriqito. 

Matt  n.  25  [thou  hast  hid]  these  things  from  the  w. 
25.  18  he  that  had  received  one . .  [hid]  his  lord's 
Lukeio.  21  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 
Eph.  3.  9  which  from  the  beginning . .  hath  been  hid 
Col.     1.  26  the  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from 

18.  To  cover,  hide,  KaKvirrw  kalupto. 

2  Co.  4.    3  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that 
Jas.    5.  20  he  which  converteth  the  sinner,  .shall  h. 

19.  To  hide,  Kpinrrw  krupto. 

Matt.  5.  14  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  h. 

13.  44  like  unto  treasure  hid . .  which . .  he  hideth 
25.  25  I  was  afraid,  and  went  and  hid  thy  talent 

LukeiS.  34  this  saying  was  hid  from  them,  neither 
19.  42  know,  .but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine 
Col.    3.    3  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 
1  Ti.    5.  25  and  they  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid 
Heb.  11.  23  Moses,  when  he  was  born,  was  hid  three 
Rev.    2.  17  To  him.  .will  I  give,  .the  hidden  manna 
6.  15  the  kings  of  the  earth . .  hid  themselves  in 
6. 16  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 

ISO. To  cover  beyond,  irapaKaKv-mw  parakaZupto. 
Luke  9.  45  it  was  hid  from  them,  that  they  perceived 

0,1. To  cover  around,  TrepLtcpv-rrrQi  peiikrupto. 

Luke  1.  24  Elisabeth  conceived,  and  hid  herself  five 

HIDE  in,  to  — 

To  hide  in,  4ytpvwTQ>  egkrupto. 

Matt  13.  33  which  a  woman  took  and  [hid]  in  three 

Lukei3.  21  which  a  woman  took  and  [hid]  in  three 

iSee  Flee.] 

HIDE  self,  to  — 

I. To  be  hidden,  tqp  chaba,  2. 

Gen.    3. 10  he  said.  .1  was  afraid,  .and  I  hid  myself 
Josh.  10.  16  hid  themselves  in  a  cave  at  Makkedah 
Judg.  9,    5  yet  Jotham. .  was  left ;  for  he  hid  himself 

1  Sa.  10.  22  he  hath  hid  himself  among  the  stuff 

19.   2  abide  in  a  secret  (place),  and  hide  thyself 

2  Ch.18.  24  when  thou  shalt  go.  .to  hide  thyself 
Job  29.    8  young  men  saw  me,  and  hid  themselves 
Dan.  10.    7  so  that  they  fled  to  hide  themselves 
Amos  9.    3  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel 

2. To  be  hidden,  H2~t  chaba,  4. 

Job  24.   4  the  poor  of  the  earth  hide  themselves  to. 

3.  To  hide  self,  «nn  chaba,  7. 

Gen.    3.    8  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from 
1  Sa.  13,    6  the  people  did  hide  themselves  in  caves 

14.  11  the  holes  where  they  had  hid  themselves 
14.  22  men  of  Israel  which  had  hid  themselves 
23.  23  lurking  places  where  he  hideth  himself 

1  Ch.21,  20  his  four  sons  with  him  hid  themselves 

4.  To  hide,  run  chabah. 

Isa.  26.  20  hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment 

5.  To  be  hidden,  nnn  chabah,  2. 

Josh.  2.  16  hide  yourselves  there  three  days,  until 

1  Ki.  22.  25  when  thou  shalt  go.  .to  hide  thyself 

2  Ki.    7.  12  gone  out  of  the  camp  to  hide  themselves 
Jer.   49. 10  he  shall  not  be  able  to  hide  himself :  his 

6.  To  hide,  "iriD  sathar. 

Prov  22.    3  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself 

7.  To  be  hidden,  ino  sathar,  2. 

Deut.  7.  20  hid  themselves  from  thee,  be  destroyed 
1  Sa.  20.    s  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  the  field  unto 

20. 19  the  place  where  thou  didst  hide  thyself 

20.  24  David  hid  himself  in  the  field :  and  when 
1  Ki.  17.    3  hide  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith,  that 
Job   13.  20  then  will  I  not  hide  myself  from  thee 

34.  22  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  themselves 
Psa.  55.  12  then  I  would  have  hid  myself  from  him 

89.  46  wilt  thou  hide  thyself  for  ever?  shall  thy 
Prov  27.  12  foreseeth  the  evil,  (and)  hideth  himself 

28.  28  When  the  wicked  rise,  men  hide  thems. 
Isa.   28.  15  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves 
Jer.  23.  24  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places 
Amos  9.    3  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel 

8.  To  hide  self,  -inp  sathar,  7. 

1  Sa.  23.  19  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  with  us  in 
26.    1  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  in  the  hill 
Psa.  54.  title.  Doth  not  JJavid  hide  himself  with  us?: 
Isa.  45.  15  Verily  thou  (art)  a  God  thathidest  thyself 
9. To  cove?',  wrap  up,  rpy  ataph. 

Job  23.    9  he  hideth  himself  on  the  right  hand,  that 

10.  To  hide  self,  n^  alam,  7. 

Deut22.  1,  4  and  hide  thyself  from  them :  thou  shalt 
22.    3  do  likewise :  thou  mayest  not  hide  thyself 
Psa.  55.    1  hide  not  thyself  from  my  supplication 
Isa.   58.    7  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own 

11.  To  hide,  |5y  tsaphan,  5. 

Psa.  56.    6  they  hide  themselves,  they  mark  my  steps 

12.  To  hide,  Kpvirrco  krupto. 

John  8.  59  Jesus  hid  himself,  and  went  out  of  the  tern. 
12.  36  departed,  and  did  hide  himself  from  them 
HIDING  — 
Hiding,  j'rnn  chebyon. 

Hab.  3.   4  and  there  (was)  the  hiding  of  Ids  power 
HIDING  place  — 

1.  Hiding  place,  xnna  machabe. 

Isa.  '32.   2  a  man  shall  be  asanhidingphu .  from  the 

2.  Hiding  or  secret  place,  inp  sether. 

Psa,  32.    7  Thou  (art)  my  hiding  place;  thou  shalt  pre. 

no.  114  Thou  (art)  myhidingplaceandmvshield 

Isa.    ;8.  17  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding  place 


HI'-EL,  ^X'n  God  is  living. 

A  native  of  Bethel  who  rebuilt  Jericho  in  the  reign  of 
Ahab,  B.C.  918,  and  in  whom  was  fulfilled  the  curse 
pronounced  by  Joshua  (6.  26). 

1  Ki.16.  34  In  his  days  did  H.  the  Beth-elite  build 

KI-E-ItA'-PO-LIS,  'Icpcmohis priestly  city. 
A  city  of  Phrygia  20  miles  W.  of  Colosse  and  6  N.  of 
Laodicea  which  are  all  in  the  basin  of  the  Marauder. 
It  is  now  called  Pambuk-Kalessi. 

Col.     4. 13  that  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for . .  them  in  H. 

HIG-GA'-ION,  {'van. 

This  word  occurs  three  times  in  the  book  of  Psalms ; 
and  from  the  multiplicity  of  interpretations  suggested,  it 
would  seem  to  have  two  meanings — one  of  a  general 
character  implying  "thought,"  "reflection;"  andanother 
in  Ps.  g.  17  and  92.  4  of  a  special  technical  nature, 
bearing  the  import  of  musical  sounds  or  signs  well 
known  in  the  age  of  David,  but  whose  import  cannot 
now  easily  be  determined. 

Psa.    9. 16  snared  in  the  work  of  liis  own  hands.  H.  S. 
HIGH  (things)  — 
l.A  man,  te^N  ish. 

Psa.  49.    2  Both  low  and  high,  rich  and  poor,  together 
%  Length,  i|"iN  orek. 

2  Ch.  3. 15  two  pillars  of  thirty  and  five  cubits  high 
3.  High,  lofty,  nna  gabah. 

Psa.101.    5  him  that  hath  an  high  look  and  a  proud 
Eze.  31.    3  the  Assyrian  (was) .  .of  an  high  stature 
i. Height,  loftiness,  nja  gobah. 

Job   11.   8  (It  is)as  high  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou 

Eze.     1.  18  they  were  so  high  that  they  were  dreadful 

40.  42  a  cubit  and  a  hall  broad,  and  one  cubit  h. 

5.  High,  haughty,  ab|,  nisa  gaboah. 

Gen.    7.  19  all  the  high  hills  that  (were)  under  the 
Deut,  3.    5  All  these  cities  (were)  fenced  with  high 
28.  52  until  thy  high  and  fenced  walls  come  down 

1  KLT4.  23  on  every  high  hill,  and  under  every  green 

2  Ki.17. 10  images  and  groves  in  every  high  hill,  and 
Esth.  5.  14  a  gallowshemadeof fifty cubitshigh,  and 

7.  9  the  gallows, fiftycubits  high,  which  Haman 
Job  41.  34  He  beholdeth  all  high  (things):  he  (is)  a 
Psa.  104.  iS  The  high  hills  (are)  a  refuge  for  the  wild 
Eccl.  12.  5  they  shall  be  afraid  of  (that  which  is)  high 
Isa.  2. 15  upon  every  high  tower,  and  upon  every 
30. 25  there  shall  be  upon  every  high  mountain 
40.  9  get  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain 
Jer.     2.  20  upon  every  high  hill  and  under  every 

3.    6  she  is  gone  up  upon  every  high  mountain 
17.    2  by  the  green  trees  upon  the  high  hills 
51.  58  her  high  gates  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
Eze.  17.  22  will  plant  (it)  upon  an  high  mountain  and 
17.  24  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,  have 

21.  26  Thus  saith  the  Lord .  .abase  (him  that  is)h. 

40.  2  set  me  upon  a  very  high  mountain,  by 

41.  22  The  altar  of  wood  (was)  three  cubits  high 
Dan.)  8.  3  and  the  (two)  horns  (were)  high ;  but  one 
Zeph/i.  16  fenced  cities,  and  against  the  high  towers 

6. Heights,  summits,  D'apa  gabnunnvm. 

Psa.  68. 15  an  high  bill,  (as)  the  hill  of  Bashan 

68. 16  Why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hills  1  (this  is)  the 

7. Great,  hri$  gadol. 

Gen.  29.  7  Lo,  (it  is)  yet  high  day,  neither  (is  it)  time 
Lev.  21.  10  the  high  priest  among  his  brethren,  upon 
Nuni3s-  25  in  it  unto  the  death  of  the  high  priest 

35.  28  high  priest,  .death  of  the  high  priest 
Josh  20.    6  until  the/leath  of  the  high  priest  that  shall 
2  Ki.12. 10  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest  came  up 

22.  4  Go  up  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  that  he 

22.  8  Hilkiah  the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan 

23.  4  king  commanded  Hilkiah  the  high  priest 
7  Ch,  34.  9  when  they  came  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest 
Nell.    3.    1  Eliashib  the  high  priest  rose  up,  with 

3,  20  of  the  house  of  Eliashib  the  high  priest 
13.  28  Joiada,  the  son  of  Eliashib  the  high  priest 
Hag.    1.    1,  12,  14  Joshua,  .son  of  Josedech  the  high 

2.  2,  4  J  oshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  p. 
Zech.  3.    1  And  he  showed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest 

3.  8  Hear  now,  O  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou 
6.  11  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  pri, 

8. High  place,  or  person,  DriD  marom. 

Psa.  71. 19  Thy  righteousness  also,  O  God,  (is)  very  h. 
92.  8  But  thou,  Lord,  (art  most)  high  for  ever 
Isa.  57.  15  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  (place),  with 
Jer.  17.  12  A  glorious  high  throne  from  the  beginning 
Eze.  34.  14  upon  the  high  mountains  of  Israel  shall 
Chad  3  whose  habitation  (is)  high  ;  thatsaithiuh. 
Mic.     6.    6  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I 

9. To  be  lifted  up,  N'y:  nasa,  2. 

Isa.  30.  25  there  shall  be.,  upon  every  high  hill,  rivers 
57.    7  Upon  a  lofty  and  high  mountain  hast  thou 

10. Most  high,  ^y  illai. 

Dan.    4.    2  sigus  and  wonders  that  the  high  God  hath 

11. High,  uppermost,  most  high,  |V?y  elyon. 

Deut2<5.  19  to  make  thee  high  above  all  nations  which 

1  Ki.  9.    8  at  this  house,  (which)  is  high,  every  one 

2  Ch.  7.  21  this  house,  which  is  high,  shall  be  an  asto. 

23.  20  they  came  through  the  high  gate  into  the 

27.    3  He  built  the  high  gate  of  thehouse  of  the 

Neh,   3.  25  which  lieth  out  from  the  king's  high  house 

Psa.  78.  35  they  remembered.,  the  high  God  their  re. 

97.    9  thou.  Lord,  (art)  high  above  all  the  earth 

Jer.   20.    2  put  him  in  the  stocks . .  in  the  high  gate  of 


12.  Height,  stature,  no'ip  qomah. 

1  Ki.   6.  10  he  built  chambers,  .five  cubits  high :  and 

6.  23  he  made  two  cherubim,  .ten  cubits  high 

7.  15  he  cast  two  pillars,  .eighteen  cubits  high 
7.  35  a  round  compass  of  half  a  cubit  high  :  and 

2  Ch.  6.  13  a  brasen  scaffold.. three  cubits  high,  and 

13.  To  be  high,  enrwm. 

Exodi4.  8  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an  highh. 
Nuni33.  3  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an  highh. 
Deut,i2.  2  nations  which,  .served. .  upon  the  high  m. 
Job    21.  22  seeing  he  judge th  those  that  are  high 

38.  15  the  wicked.,  the  high  arm  shall  be  broken 
Psa.  18.  27  For  thou  wilt,  .bring  down  high  looks 

78.  69  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high  (palaces)  - 
113.    4  The  Lord  (is)  high  above  all  nations,  (and) 
138.    6  Though  the  Lord  (be)  high,  yet  hath  he 
Isa.     2.  13  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  (that  are)  high 
2.  14  upon  all  the  high  mountains,  and  upon  all 
6.    1  the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and 
57.  15  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  One  that 
Eze.    6.  1 3  round  about  their  altars,  upon  every  high 
17.  22  I  will  also  take,  .of  the  high  cedar,  and 
20.  28  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick 
34.    6  My  sheep  wandered,  .upon  every  high  hill 

li.Excdtation,  DDVi  romam. 

Psa.  149.    6  (Let)  the  high  (praises)  of  God  (be)  in  their 

15.ro  be  high,  set  on  high,  2fy  sagab,  2. 

Prov  18. 11  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is),  .as  an  high  wall 
Isa.   30.  13  swelling  out  inahighwall,  whose  breaking 

16.  To  be  high,  nzy  shaphah,  2. 

Isa.    13.    2  Lift  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  high  mown. 

17.  Height,  on  high,  on  rum. 

Prov  21.  4  An  high  look,  and  a  proud  heart,  (and)  the 
Isa.   10.  12  I  will  punish,  .the  glory  of  his  high  looks 

j  18. Up,  above,  high,  6,va>  and. 

Phil.   3. 14  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  C.J. 
19.  Great,  fieyas  megas. 

Johni9.  31  for  that  sabbath  day  was  an  high  day 
Heb.  10.  21  And.,  an  high  priest  over  the  house  of  God 

20. High,  v\l/yX6s  hupselos. 

Matt.  4.  8  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high 
17.  1  bringeth  them  up  into  au  high  mountain 
Mark  9.  2  leadeth  them  up  into  an  high  mountain 
Luke  4.  5  [devil,  taking  him  up  into  an  high  moun.] 
Acts  13. 17  with  an  high  arm  brought  "he  them  out  of 
Rom  12.  16  Mind  not  high  things,  but  condescend  to 
Heb.  7.  26  such  an  high  priest  became  us,  (who  is) 
Rev.  21.  10  he  carried  me.  .to  a  great  and  high  mou. 
2i.  12  had  awall  great  and  high.,  had  twelve  g. 

[See  also  Captain,  exalt,  fort,  heaps,  minded,  most, 

sounding,  tower.] 

HIGH,  to  be  — 

l.Tobe  high,  lofty,  P135  gabah. 

Psa.  103.  11  For  as  the  heaven  is  high  above  the  earth 
Isa.   52. 13  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be  very  high 

2. To  be  high,  exalted,  nn  rum. 

Deut  32.  27  lest  they  should  say,  Our  hand  (is)  high 

Job  22.  12  the  height  of  the  stars,  how  high  they  are  ! 

Psa.  89.  13  strong  is  thy  hand,  .high  is  thy  right  hand 
99.   2  The  Lord,  .he  (is)  high  above  all  people 
Z.To  be  high,  set  on  high,  21$?  sagab,  2. 

Psa.139.    6  knowledge,  .it  is  high,  I  cannot  (attain) 
HIGH  degree  — 
l.A  man,  t;;,x  ish, 

Psa.  62.   9  Surely,  .men  of  high  degree  (are)  a  lie :  tu 

%Going  up,  ascent,  step,  H/Sy?  maalah. 

1  Ch.17.  17  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  d 
HIGH,  to  lift  up  on  — 

To  lift  up,  exalt,  on  rum,  Za. 

2  Sa.  22.  49  thou  also  hast  lifted  me  up  on  high  above 
HIGH,  to  make  — 

l.To  make  high,  go  up  high,  aria  gabah,  5. 

[  Jer.  49. 16  though  thou,  .make  thy  nest  as  high  as 
2.  To  exalt,  lift  up,  on  rum,  5. 

Job  39.  27  Doth  the  eagle,  .make  her  nest  on  high  ? 
HIGH,  most  — 
l.High  place  or  person,  D'na  marom. 

Psa.  56.    2  many,  .fight  against  me,  O  thou  most  high? 
2. Most  high,  above,  b'4,  by  al. 

Hos.    7.  16  They  return,  (but)  not  to  the  most  high 
11.   7  though  they  called  them  to  the  most  high 
o.Most  high,  ^y  illai. 

Dan.   3.  26  ye  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  come 
4.  17  the  living  may  know  that  the  most  high 
4.  24  this  (is)  the  decree  of  the  most  high,  wb. 
4.  25,  32  thou  know  that  the  most  high  ruleth  in 

4.  34  I  blessed  the  most  high,  and  I  praised 

5. 18  O  thou  king,  the  most  high  God  gave  Ne. 

5.  21  till  he  knew  that  the  most  high  God  ruled 
7.  25  against  the  most  high,  .of  the  most  high 

4. High,  uppermost,  most  high,  |V?»  elyon. 

Gen.  14.  18  he  (was)  the  priest  of  the  most  high  God 

14. 19  Blessed  (be)  Abram  of  the  most  high  God 

1 4.  20  blessed  be  the  most  high  God,  which  hath 

14.  22  I  have  lift  up  mine  hand  unto . .  most  high 

Num.24.  16  and  knew  the  knowledge  of  the  most  higli 

Deut  32.    8  When  the  most  high  divided  to  the  nations 

2  Sa.  22. 14  and  the  most  high  uttered  his  voice 

Psa.    7.  17  will  sing  praise  to .  .the  Lord  most  high 


HIGHEST 


482 


'  dry 
13 


HE-RO-1 

A  dau- 
was  1 
trot' 
J 


HBZION 


479 


HIDE 


1 

HE- 

ACi 

I 

HE] 

He) 

I 

] 

HE1 

!••.' 

i 


HE 
The 
Aru 

he; 

Al 
to? 
par' 
h. 
De- 
iGH 
0  Hi 
Eo 
1  T 

:gh 

Ris 
Isa 
Lift 
Job 
GH^ 
his 
Jut 
Va 
Dei 

<t 
Inn 

aii 

rut 


4* 
40. 

HE  6- 
At.  - 
dah 
(Nu. 
J 

ml 

AH 


HETI 
A  pin. 
The  • 
Lebai 
great 
"enti 
Ez 


iCh. 


Jer.  15.    4  because  of  Manasseh  the  son'of  H.  king  of 

26.  18  Mieah.. prophesied  tnthedays  of  II   king 

26.  19  Did  H. .  .put  him  at  all  to  death?  did  he 

Hos.    1.    1  in  the  days  of  Uzziah.  .(and)  H.,  kings  of 

Mic.    1.    1  in  the  days  of  Jotham .  .and  H.,  kings  of 

2.  A  son  of  Neariah,  a  descendant  of  the  royal  family  of 
Judah.     B.C.  460. 

1  Ch.  3.  23  Aud.. sons  of  Neariah;  Elioenai,  and  H 

3.  The  same  name  is  found  in  Zephaniah,  though  it  is 
there  rendered  in  the  Common  Version  Ilizkiah.  B.C. 
640. 

Zeph.  1.    1  Gedaliah.  .son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of  H. 

4.  An  exile  that  returned  from  Babylon. 

Ezra  2.  16  children  of  Ater  of  H.,  ninety  and  eight 
Neh.  7.  21  children  of  Ater  of  H.,  ninety  and  eight 

HEZ'-ION,  jvm  vision* 

The  grandfather  of  Benhadad  king  of  Syria  in  the  time 

of  Asa  king  of  Judah.     B.C.  970. 

1  Ki.15,  18  H.f  king  of  Syria,  that  dwelt  in  Damascus 
HE'-ZIR,  Tin  returning  home. 

1.  A  priest,  leader  of  the  17th  monthly  course  in  the  time 
of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

x  Ch.24.  15  The  seventeenth  to  H.,  the  eighteenth  to 

2.  One  of  the  chiefs  that  sealed  the  covenant  with  Ne- 
hemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  20  Magpiash,  Meshullam,  H. 
HEZ'-RAI,  nyrij  nsn  blooming,  beautiful. 
A  Carmelite,  one  of  David's  thirty  heroes. 

2  Sa.  23.  35  H.  the  Carmelite,  Paarai  the  Arbite 
HEZ'-RO,  Pan  blooming. 

Supposed  to  be  the  same  as  the  preceding. 

1  Ch.11.  37  H.  the  Carmelite,  Naaraithe  son  of  Ezbai 
HEZ'-RON,  pzn,  j'n^n  blooming. 
l.Son  of  Pharez  and  grandson  of  Judah.     B.C.  1650. 
Gen.  46.  12  And  the  sons  of  Pharez  were  H.  and  Ham. 
Niin.126.    6  Of  H.,  the  family  of  the  Hezronites  :  of  C. 
26.  21  Of  H.,the  family  of  the  Hezronites:  of  H. 
Ruth  4.  iS  generations  of  Pharez:  Pharez  begat  H. 
4. 19  H.  begat  Ram,  and  Ram  begat  Ammin. 
5  The  sons  of  Pharez ;  H.,  and  Hamul 
9  The  sons  also  of  H.,  that  were  born  unto 
2.18  Caleb  the  son  of  H.  begat . .  of  Azubali  (his) 
2.  21  H.  went  in  to  the  daughter  of  Machir  the 
2.  24  after  that  H.  was  deadin  Caleb-ephratah 
2. 24  H.'s  wife,  bare  him  Ashur  the  father  of  T. 
2.  25  sons  of  Jerahmeel  the  first  born  of  H.  were 
4.    1  Pharez,  H.,  and  Carmi,  and  Hur,  and  Sho. 

2.  A  son  of  Reuben,  and  founder  of  the  family  of  the 
Hezronites.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.   9  Hanoch,  and  Phallu,  and  H.,  and  Carmi 
Exod.  6.  14  Hanoch,  and  Pallu,  H.,  and  Carmi 

1  Ch.  5.   3  Hanoch,  and  Pallu,  H.,  and  Carmi 

3.  A  town  on  the  S.  border  of  the  territory  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah  (called  Hazor  in  Josh.  15.  25). 

Josh  is.   3  passed  along  to  H.,  and  went  up  to  Adar 
15.  25  and  Kerioth,  (and)  H.,  which  (is)  Hazor 

HEZRONITES,  T"iynrr. 

A  family  that  sprang  from  Hezron  the  son  of  Reuben. 

Nuni26.   6  Of  Hezron,  the  family  of  the  Hezronites 

26.  21  of  nezron,  the  family  of  the  Hezronites 

HID,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  hidden,  ttin  chaba,  2. 

Josh.  10.  17  five  kings  are  fouud  hid  in  a  cave  at  Ma. 

10.  27  into  the  cave  wherein  they  had  been  hid 

2'Sa.  17.    9  he  is  hid  now  in  some  pit,  or  in  some  (other) 

Job     5.  21  Thou  shalt  be  hid  from  the  scourge  of  the 

2.  To  be  hidden,  «;n  chabah,  6. 

Isa.  42.  22  they  are  hid  in  prison  houses :  they  are  for 
3. To  hide  self,  N^n  chaba,  7. 

Deut33. 19  shall  suck,  .(of) treasures  hid  in  the  sand 

Josh.  7.  21  they  (are)  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of 

7.  22  (it  was)  hid  in  his  tent,  and  the  silver  under 

2  Ei.ii.    3  he  was  with  her  hid  in  the  house  of  the 
2  Ch.22.    9  they  caught  him,  for  he  was  hid  in  Sam. 

22.  12  he  was  with  them  hid  in  the  house  of  G. 
Job  20.  26  All  darkness  (shall  be)  hid  in  his  secret 
38.  30  The  waters  are  hid  as  (with)  a  stone,  and 

4. To  hide,  secret,  f?a  taman. 

Psa.  69.    5  0  God.  .my  sins  are  not  hid  from  thee 

139.  15  Mysubstance wasnothid  from  thee,  when 
Hos.  '5.    3  I  know  Ephraim,  and  Israel  is  not  hid 

5.  Tole  hid,  1-3  kachad,  2. 

Gen.    4. 14  from  thy  face  shall  I  be  hid  ;  and  I  shall 
6.7*0  be  hidden,  Tng  sathar,  2. 

Job     3.  23  to  a  man  whose  way  is  hid,  and  whom  G. 
19.    6  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof 
38.    9  Lord .  .ray  groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee 
40.  27  My  way  is  hid  from'theLoRD,  and  myjud. 
65. 16  ami  because  they  are  hid  from  mine  eyes 
16.  17  they  are  not  hid  from  my  face,  neither  is 
.  13.  14  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  mine  eyes 
Amos  9.   3  though  they  be  hid  from  my  sight  in  the 
Zeph.  ?.    3  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the 
7.Tohide  self,  become  hidden,  1,-1;  sathar,  7. 

Isa.   29.  14  and  the  understanding  of .  .shall  be  hid 
8.  To  be  hidden,  concealed,  D^y  alam,  2. 

Lev.    4.  13  the  thing  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  the  ass. 

5.    3,  4  and  it  be  hid  from  him  ;  when  he  kno. 

Num.  5.  13  and  it  be  hid  from  the  eves  of  her  husband 


Psa. 
Isa. 


Jer, 

Hos. 


1  Ki.io.    3  there  was  not  (any)  thing  hid  from  the  k. 

2  Ch.  9.  2  there  was  nothing  hid  from  Solomon  whi. 
Job  28.  21  Seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living 
Nan.  3.  11  thou  shalt  be  hid,  thou  also  shalt  seek 

9.  To  hide  or  conceal  self,  chy  alam,  7. 

Job     6. 16  reason  of  the  ice . .  wherein  the  snowis  hid 

10.  To  be  hidden,  laid  up,  fSy  tsaj)han,  2. 

Jer.    t6.  17  neither  is  their  iniquity  hid  from  mine  eyes 

11.7*0  hide,  lay  up,  (psy  tsaphin,  or)  J£jy  tsaphan. 
Psa,  17.  14  whose  belly  thou  fillest  with  thy  hid 
Hos.  13.  12  The  iniquity  of  Ephraim.  .his  sin  (is)  hid 

12.  H 'id  away,  airoKpvtyos  apokruphos. 

Luke  8. 17  neither,  .hid,  that  shall  not  be  known  and 
Col.     2.    3  Iu  whom  arehidallthetreasuresoftheG. 

13. Midden,  hid,  KpvirrSs  kruptos. 

Matt  10.  26  there  is  nothing . .  hid,  that  shall  not  be 
Mark  4.  22  there  is  nothing  hid,  which  shall  not  be 
Lukei2.    2  that  shall  not  be  revealed;  neither  hid 

14.  To  be  or  lie  hid,  \av6avoi  lanthano. 

Mark  7.  24  have  no  man  know  (it),  .he  could  not  be  hid 
Luke  S.  47  the  woman  saw  that  she  was  not  hid,  she  c. 
Acts  26.  26  none  of  these  thingsare  hidden  fromhim 
[See  Treasure.] 

HID,  (thing  that  is)  — 

Secret  or  hidden  thing,  nsSyn  iaalummah. 

Job  2S.  11  (the  thing  that  i's)hidbringeth  he  forth  to  1. 
HID'-DAI,  **t)  mighty,  chief. 

One  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men,  and  dwelt  in  the  hill  of 
Gaash    B.C.  1048.     In  1  Ch.  n.  32  he  is  called  Hurai. 

2  Sa.  23. 30  Benaiah  the  Pirathonite.  H.  of  the  brooks? 

HTD-DE'-KEL,  S?31  rapid. 

The  ancient  name  of  the  Tigris  and  the  river  of  Eden 
which  flowed  eastward  to  Assyria.  Digla  or  Diglath, 
has  been  a  name  of  the  Tigris  in  all  ages.  The  prefix 
hi  or  hai  "lively''  is  used  of  running  water,  Gen.  26. 19. 
The  name  now  in  use  iu  Mesopotamia  is  Dijleh.  But 
Digla  is  a  Semitic  corruption  of  Tigra,  which  is  the 
true  name  of  the  river,  and  means  in  Medo-persic  "an 
arrow."  In  the  inscriptions  of  Assyria,  however,  the 
name  is  Tiggar.     See  Tigris. 

Gen.    2. 14  the  name  of  the  third  river  (is)  H:  that 
Dan.  10.   4  I  was  by  the  side  of  the  great  river. .  H. 
HIDDEN  — 
1.7*0  hide,  secret,  jDp  taman. 

Job   3.  16  Or  as  an  hidden  untimely  birth  I  had  not 

2.  To  stop,  hide,  nnp  satham. 

Psa,  51,  "6inthehidden(part)thoushaltmakemeto 

3.  To  be  wonderful,  nSs  pala,  2. 

Deut3o-  11  this  commandment.,  (is)  not  hidden  from 
i.Hid,  hidden,  Kpuirros  kruptos. 

1  Pe.   3.   4  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  in  that  wh. 
5.  To  hide  away,  aTroKpvinw  apokrupto'. 

1  Co.   2.    7  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God . .  the  hidden 
HIDDEN,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  searched  out,  hidden,  i?$n  chaphas,  4. 

Prov.?S.  12  but  when  the  wicked  rise.amanis  hidden 

2.  7*o  be  hidden,  concealed,  D?y  alam,  2. 

Lev.    5.    2  (if)  it  be  hidden  from  him ;  he  also  shall  be 

3.  7*0  be  laid  up,  hidden,  jsy  tsaphan,  2. 

Job    15.  20  the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  theopp. 
24.   1  Why,  seeingtimes  are  not  hidden  from  the 
HIDDEN  one  — 
To  lay  up,  hide,  J5y  tsaphan. 

Psa.  83.    3  They.,  consulted  against  thy  hidden  ones 
HIDDEN  tiling  — 
l.Laid  up  or  hidden  things,  d'i^sq  matspunim. 

Obad.       6  (how)  are  his  hidden  things  sought  up  ! 
2.  Z*o  keep,  reserve,  1x1  natsar. 

Isa.  48.   6  I  have  showed  thee.. even  hidden  things 
Z.Hid,  hidden  thing,  KpvnTov  krupton. 

1  Co.  4.    5  both  will  bring  tolightthehidden  things  of 

2  Co.  4.    2  have  renounced  the  hidden  tilings  of  dis. 
HIDE  — 

Skin,  "fty  or. 

Lev.     8.  17  the  bullock,  and  his  hide,  his  flesh,  and 
9. 11  the  flesh  and  the  hide  he  burnt  with  fire 
HIDE,  to  — 
1.7*o  hide,  son  chaba,  5. 

Josh.  6.17,  25  because  shehidthemessengersthatwe 

1  Ki.18.   4  Obadiah  took,  .and  hid  them  by  fifty  in  a 

18.  13  I  hid  an  hundred  men  of  the  Lord's  proph. 

2  Ki.  6.  29  that  we  may  eat  him  ;  and  she  hath  hid  her 
Isa,   49.    2  in  the  shadow  of  his  hand  hath  he  hid  me 

2.To  darken,  keep  back,  withhold,  TjK;n  chashak,  5. 

Psa.  139.  12  darkness  hideth  not  from  thee;  buttheni. 
3.7*0  hide,  lay  up,  |B>*  tsaphan. 

Psa.  27.    5  Forin  the  time  of  troubleheshallhideme 

4.  To  be  hidden,  |£tp  taman,  2. 

Isa.     2.  10  hide  thee  in  the  dust,  for  the  fear  of  the  L. 
5.7*0  hide,  secret,  jca  taman. 

Gen.  35.  4  Jacob  hid  themunderthe  oak  which  (was) 
Exod.  2.  12  slew  the  Egyptian,  and  hid  him  in  t lie  sand 
Josh.  2.  6  hid  them with  the  stalks  of  flax,  whichshe 
Job    31.  33  by  hiding  mine  iniquity  in  my  bosom 

40.  13  Hide  them  in  the  dust  together,  .bind  their 


Psa.  9.  15  in  the  net  which  they  hid  is  their  own  foot 
35.  7  without  cause  have  they  hid  for  me  their 
35.  8  let  his  net  that  he  hath  hid  catch  himself 
140.    5  The  proud  have  hid  a  snare  for  me,  ant. 

Prov.19.  24  A  slothful  (man)  hideth  his  hand  in  (his) 
26.  15  The  slothful  hideth  his  hand  in  (his)  bosom 

Jer.  13.    4  go  to  Euphrates,  and  hide  it  there  in  a  hole 
13.    5  I  went,and  hid  it  by  Euphrates. as  the  Lord 
13.    6  which  I  commanded  thee  to  hide  there 
13.    7  girdle  from  the  place  where  I  had  hid  rfc 
18.  22  they  have  digged  a  pit  to  take  me,  and  hid 
43.    9  Take  great  stones  in  thine  hand,  and  hide 

43.  10  will  set.,  upon  these  stones  that  I  have  hid 

6.7*0  hide,  secret,  jep  taman,  5. 

2  Ki.  7.    8  and  went  and  hid  (it).,  and  went  and  hid 

7.7*0  cut  off,  hide,  "ins  kachad,  3. 

Gen.  47.  18  We  will  not  hide  (it)  from  my  lord,  how 
Josh.  7.  19  tell  me  now  what  thou  hast  done  ;  hide  (it) 

1  Sa.   3.  17  hide  itnotfromme..ifthouhide(any)thi. 

3.  18  Samuel  told  him  every  whit,  and  hid  noth. 

2  Sa.  14. 18  Hide  not  from  me,  I  pray  thee,  the  thing 
Job  15.  18  wise  men  have  told,  .and  have  not  hid  (it) 
Psa.  78.  4  We  will  not  hide  (them)from  their  children 
Isa.  3.  9  they  declare  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide 
Jer.   38. 14  I  will  ask  thee  a  thing ;  hide  nothing  from 

38.  25  hide  it  not  from  us,  aud  we  will  not  put 

8.7*0  cut  off,  hide,  ina  kachad,  5. 

Job  20. 12  sweet,  .(though)hehideitunderhistong. 

9.7*o  cover,  conceal,  ngs  kasah,  3. 

Gen.  18.  17  Shall  I  hidefromAbraham  that  thingwhich 
Job   33.  17  That  he  may.  .hide  pride  from  man 
Psa.  32.    5  mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid.  I  said,  I  will 
40.  10  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my 
143.    9  Deliver  me.  .1  flee  unto  thee  to  hide  me 
Prov  10.  18  He  that  hideth  hatred  (with)  lying  lips 
10.7*o  hide,  iriD  sathar,  3. 

Isa.   16.    3  hide  the  outcasts  ;  bewTay  not  him  that 

11.  7*o  hide,  "trip  sathar,  5. 

Exod.  3.  6  Moses  hid  his  face  ;  for  he  was  afraid  to 
Deut3i.  17  I  will  hide  my  face  from  them,  and  they 

31.  18  I  will  surely  hide  my  face  in  that  day  for 

32.  20  I  will  hide  my  face  from  them,  I  will  see 

1  Sa.20.    2  why  shonld  my  fatherhidethisthingfrom 

2  Ki.  11.  2  they  hid  him,  (even)  him  and  his  nurse,  in 
2  Ch.22.  11  So  Jehoshabeath .  .hid  him  from  Athaliah 
Job     3.  10  it  shut  not  up  the  doors,  .nor  hid  sorrow 

13.  24  Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face,  and  hoi. 
34.  29  and  when  he  hideth  (his)  face,  who  then 
Psa.  10.  :i  God  hath  forgotten  :  he  hideth  his  face 
13.    1  how  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from  me? 
17.    8  hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings 
22.  24  neither  hath  he  hid  his  face  from  him ;  but 
27.   5  in.  .his  tabernacle  shall  he  hide  me  ;  he 
27.    9  Hide  not  thy  face  (far)  from  me  ;  put  not 

30.  7  thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  (and)  I  was  trou. 

31.  20  Thou  shalt  hide  them  in  the  secret  of  thy 

44.  24  Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face,  .forgett. 
si-  9  Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out 
64.  2  Hide  me  from  the  secret  counsel  of  thew. 
6g.  17  hide  not  thy  face  from  thy  servant ;  fori 
88.  14  Lord.,  (why)  hidest  thou  thy  face  from 

102.    2  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me  in  the  day 
104.  29  Thou  hidest  thy  face,  they  are  troubled 
119.  19  hide  not  thy  commandments  from  me 
143.    7  liide  not  thy  face  from  me,  lest  I  be  like 
Isa.     8.  17  I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord,  that  hideth 
29.  15  Woe  unto  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide 

49.  2  a  polished  shaft ;  in  his  quiver  hath  he  h. 

50.  6  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting 

53.  3  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  him  ;  he 

54.  8  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 
57.  17  I  hid  me  and  was  wroth,  and  he  went  on 
59.  2  your  sins  have  hid  (his)  face  from  you,  that 
64.    7  thou  hast  hid  thy  face  from  us,  and  hast 

Jer.  33.  5  for  all. .  I  have  hid  my  face  from  this  city 
36.  26  to  take  Baruch.  .but  the  Lord  hid  them 

Eze.  39.  23  therefore  hid  I  my  face  from  them,  and 
39.  24  have  I  done  unto  them,  aud  hid  my  face 
39.  29  Neither  will  I  hide  my  face  any  more  from 

Mic.    3.    4  he  will  even  hide  his  face  from  them  at 

12.7*0  hide,  d^j;  alam,  5. 

Lev.  20.  4  if  the  people  of  the  land  do  any  ways  hide 
2  Ki.  4.  27  the  Lord  hath  hid  (it)  from  me,  and  hath 
Job  42.  3  Who  (is)  he  that  hideth  counsel  without 
Psa.  10.  1  (why)  hidest  thou  (thyself)  in  times  of  tr.  r 
Prov.  28.27  he  that  hideth  his  eyes  shall  have  many 
Isa.  1.  15  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  you ;  yea,  when 
Lam.  3.  56  hide  not  thine  ear  at  my  breathing,  at  my 
Eze.  22.  26  and  have  hid  their  eyes  from  my  sabbaths 

13.7*0  conceal,  c^j;  amam. 

Eze.  2S.  3  there  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide  from 
31.    8  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could  not  hide 

14.7*o  hide,  lay  up,  conceal,  }£)y  tsaphan. 

Exod.  2.  2  she  saw.  .he  (was)  a  goodly  (child),  she  hid 
Josh.  2.  4  the  woman  took  the  two  men,  and  hid  them 
Job   10.  13  these  (things)  hast  thou  hid  in  thine  heart 

17.  4  For  thou  hast  hid  their  heart  from  under. 
Psa. 119.  11  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  that 
Prov.  2.    1  if  thou  wilt  receive  my  words,  and  hide 

2-.  16  Whosoever  hideth  her  hideth  the  wind 

15.7*o  hide,  j5y  tsaphan,  5. 

Exod.    2.    3  when  she  could  not  longer  hide  him,  she 
Job     14. 13  O  that  thou  wouldest  hide  me  in  the  grave 
16.7*0  catcse  toffee,  remove  hastily,  du  nus,  5. 

Judg.  6.  11  Gideon  threshed  wheat. .  to  hide  (it)  from 


HIM 


483 


HINGE 


G.That  one,  ravra  tauta. 

Heb.  ii.  12  sprang  there  even  of  one,  and  Mm  as  go. 

7. Him,  tovtov  tawtion. 

Matt  27.  32  Simon . .  him  they  compelled  to  bear  his 
Luke  9.  26  of  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed 

12.  5  Fear  him.  .yea,  I  say  unto  you,  Fear  him 
20.  12  they  wounded  [him]  also,  and  cast(hini)o. 

20.  13  they  will  reverence,  .when  they  see  him 
John  5.    6  Jesus  saw  him  lie,  and  knew  that  he  had 

6.  27  Son.  .for  him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed 

21.  21  Peter  seeing  him  saith  to  Jesus,  Lord,  and 
Acts    2.  23  Him,  being  delivered  by  the  determinate 

5.  31  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  his  right  hand 
10.  40  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and 

13.  27  their  rulers,  because  they  knew  him  not 

15.  38  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with 

16.  3  Him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth .  .and 

17.  23  Whoni.  .ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  decl. 
1  Co.   2.    2  not  to  know . .  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him 

3. 17  If  any  man  defile  the  temple,  .[him]  shall 
Phil.   2.  23  Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send  presently 

8.  Of  this  one,  tovtov  toutou. 

John  9.  31  ifauyman.-doethhiswill, himheheareth 
Rev.  19.  20  the  beast  was  taken,  and  with  [him]  the 

9.  To  this  one,  tovtq>  touto. 

Lukeig.  19  said  likewise  to  him,  Be  thou  also  over 

John  5.  38  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  believe  not 
10.  3  To  him  the  porter  openeth  ;  and  the  sheep 
13.  24  Simon  Peter  therefore  beckoned  to  him 

Acts   4.  10  by  him  doth  this  man  stand  here  before 
10,  43  To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that 
13  39  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified 
25.    5  accuse,  .if  there  be  any  wickedness  hi  him 

1  Jo.    2.    4  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him 

2.    5  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected 

10.-4  male,  "91  zalcar. 

Nthd.31.  17  woman  that  hath  known . .  by  Iyinb-  with  h. 
31.  18  have  not  known  a  man  by  lying  with  him 

31.  35  that  had  not  known  man  by  lying  with  h. 

11. Hand,  v  yad. 

Judg.  9.  24  aided  him  in  the  killing  of  his  brethren 

12.  From,  ]Q  min. 

Ezra   7.  26  let  judgment  be  executed,  .upon  him 

13.£ye,  |*y  ayin. 

Gen.  27.  12  I  shall  seem  to  him  as  a  deceiver ;  and  I 
29.  20  they  seemed  unto  him . .  a  few  days,  for  the 
48.  17  when  Joseph  saw.  .it  displeased  him  :  and 

1  Sa.  3. 18  the  Lord  :  let.  .do  what  seeniethhim  good 

18.  Sand  the  saying  displeased  him;  audhesaid 
18.  20  they  told  Saul,  and  the  thing  pleased  him 

2  Sa  10.  12  Lord  do  that  which  seemeth  him  good 

24  22  and  offer  up  what  (seemeth)  good  unto  him 
1  Ki.  9  12  to  see  the  cities,  .and  they  pleased  him 
Esth    2.    9  the  maiden  pleased  him,  and  she  obtained 
Prov.24.  18  LesttheLORDsee(it)  and  it  displease  him 
Isa.   59.  15  and  it  displeased  him  that,  .uo  judgment 

14.  Face,  Wi$  panim. 

Gen.  32.  21  So  went  the  present  over  before  him :  and 
Exod.34     6  Lord  passed  by -before  him,  and  proclaim. 

1  Sa.  17.  24  all  the  men  of  Israel . .  fled  from  him 

18.  15  when  Saul  saw.  .he  was  afraid  of  him 

19.  8  David  went  out.  .and  they  fled  from  him 

2  Ki.  1.  15  the  angel . .  said . .  be  not  afraid  of  him 

2  Ch.14.  10  Asa  went  out  against  him,  and  they  set 

19.   2  Jehu,  .went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said  to 

Esth.  1.  19  let  there  go  a  royal  commandment  from  h. 

2.    9  And  the  maiden . .  obtained  kindness  of  h. 

Job    42.    8  Job  shall  pray  for  you  ;  for  him  will  I  ac. 

Psa.  17.  13  Arise.O  Lord,  disappoint  him,cast..  down 

15.  Heart,  midst,  2~)pf  qereb. 

1  Ki.17.  21  let  this  child's  soul  come  into  him  again 
17. 22  the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again 

HTJffi,  of  — 

Concerning  or  in  reference  to  this,  no  lazeh, 

1  Sa.  21. 11  did  they  not  sing  one  to  another  of  him  in 

HTM  that  is  — 
A  man,  t^x  ish. 

Lev.  15.  33  and  of  him  that  lieth  with  her  that  is  un. 

HTM  also,  and  him  — 

And  that  one,  kclkwos  kalceinos. 

Marki2.  4  and  at  him  they  cast  stones,  and  wounded 
12.    s  again  he  sent  another;  and  him  they  killed 

Luke2o.  1 t  another  servant :  and  they  beat  him  also 

HIMSELF  — 
l.He,  mh  hit. 

Nuni35.  19  The  revenger  of  blood  himself  shall  slay 

2.  Answer,  response,  ruK.0  maaneh. 

Provi6.   4  The  Lord  hath  made  all.,  for  himself;  yea 

Z.Soul,  breath,  t?sa  nephesh. 

1  Ki.  19.   4  he  requested  for  himself  that  he  might  die 
Job   18.   4  He  teareth  himself  in  his  anger  :  shall  the 

32.  2  he  justified  himself  rather  than  God 
Amos  6.   8  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  himself,  say. 

4.  Of  himself,  clvtov  hautou. 

John  9.  21  he  is  of  age  ;  ask.  .he  shall  speak  for  him. 

19.  12  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king  speak. 

Eph.   1.    5  Having  predestinated  us.,  to  himself,  ace. 

1.  9  pleasure  which  he  hath  purposed  in  him. 


Hcb.  0.  26  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself 
12.    3  consider  him  that  endured . .  against  him. 

5.  Of  himself,  eavrov  heaiUou. 

Matt  12.  26  he  is  divided  against  himself ;  how  shall 

12.  45  taketh  with  himself,  .other  spirits,  .th.h. 

13.  21  Yet  hath  he  not  root  in  himself, but  dureth 
16.  24  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross 
18.    4  shall  humble  himself  as  this  little  child 
23.  12  whosoever  shall  exalt  himself  shall  be 
23.  12  he  that  shall  humble  himself  shall  be 

27.  42  He  saved  others  ;  himself  he  cannot  save 
Mark  3.  26  if  Satan  rise  up  against  himself,  and  be 

5.  5  crying,  and  cutting  himself  with  stones 
5.  30  knowing  in  himself  that  virtue  had  gone 

8.  34  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross 
12.  33  to  love  (h*s)  neighbour  as  himself,  is  more 

15.  31  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save 
Luke  7.  39  he  spake  within  himself,  saying,  This  m. 

9.  23  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross 
9.  25  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  himself 

10.  29  he,  'willing  to  justify  himself,  said  unto 
11. 18  If  Satan  also  be  divided  against  himself 
11.26  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself 
12.  17  he  thought  within  himself,  saying,  What 

12.  21  he  that  layeth  up  treasure  for  himself 
14. 11  whosoeverexaltethhimself  shall  beabased 
14. 11  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted 

15. 17  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said,  How 

16.  3  the  steward  said  within  himself.  What 
18.    4  he  said  within  himself,  Though  I  fear  not 
18.  11  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  himself,  God 

18.  14  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased 
18. 14  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted 

19.  12  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom,  and  to 
23.    2  saying  that  he  himself  is  Christ  a  king 

23.  35  let  him  save  himself,  if  he  be  Christ,  the 

24.  12  [wouderiug  in  himself  at  that  which  was] 

24.  27  expounded,  .the  things  couceruing  [him.] 
John  2,  24  Jesus  did  not  commit  [himself]  unto  them 

5. 18  Ins  Father,  making  himself  equal  with  G. 
5.  iq  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but 
5.  26  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so 

5.  26  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself 
6. 61  Jesus  knew  iu  himself  that  his  disciples 

7.  18  He  that  speakethof  himself  seeketh  his 

8.  22  Then  said  the  Jews.  Will  he  kill  himself? 

11.  38  Jesus  therefore,  again  groaning  inhimself 

11.  51  this  spake  he  not  of  himself :  but  being 

13.  4  and  took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself 
13. 32  God  shall  also  glorify  him  in  himself 
16. 13  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself  ;  but 
19.    7  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God 
21.    1  Jesus  showed  himself  again  to  the 

21.   7  naked,  and  did  cast  himself  into  the  sea 
Act3    1.    3  he  showed  himself  alive  after  his  passion 

5.  36  Theudas,  boasting  himself  to  be  somebody 
S    9  giving  out  that  himself  was  some  great 

8.  34  speaketh..  of  himself,  or  of  some  other  m.? 

10.  1    Peter  doubted  in  liimself  what  this  vision 

12.  11  when  Peter  was  come  to  liimself,  he  said 

14.  17  he  left  not  Ihimself]  without  witness,  in 
16.  27  would  have  killed  himself,  supposing  that 
19.  31  not  adventure  himself  into  the  theatre 

25.  4  he  himself  would  depart  shortly  (thither) 

28.  16  Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself 
Rom  14.    7  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth  to  himself 

14.  12  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God 

14.  22  Happy(:  Jhethatcondemneth  nothitnself 

15.  3  Christ  pleased  not  himself ;  but,  as  it  is 

x  Co.  3.  18  Let  no  man  deceive  himself.    If  any  man 

11.  28  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him 
11.  29  eatethanddrinketh damnation  to  himself 
14.  4  in  an  (unknown)  tongue  edifieth  himself 
i*.  28  and  let  him  speak  to  himself,  and  to  God 

2  Co.  5.  i3  reconciled  us  to  liimself  by  Jesus  Christ 

5. 19  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not 
ia  7  man  trust  to  himself  that  he  is  Christ's 
10.    7  let  him  of  himself  think  this  again 

10. 18  he  that  commendeth  himself  is  approved 
Gal.     1.   4  Who  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he 

2. 12  he  withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fear. 
2.  20  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me 

6.  3  when  he  is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself 

6.  4  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself  alone 
Eph.   2.  15  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man 

5.    2  hath  given  himself  for  us  an  offering 
5.  25  lovedwthe  church,  andgave  himself  forit 
5.  27  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  church 
5.  28  He  that  loveth  his  wife  lo\eth  himself 
5.  33  every  one.  .love his  wife  even  as  himself 
Phil.  2.    7  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  andtook 

2.  8  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient 

3.  21  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself 
2  Th.  2.    4  sitteth.  .showing  himself  that  he  is  God 

1  Ti.    2.   6  Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be 

2  Ti.    2.  13  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself 

2.  21  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from  these 
Titus  2.  14  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 
2.  14  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people 
Heb.  1.  3  when  he  had  by[himself]  purged  our  sins 
5.  3  so  also  for  [himself],  to  offer  for  sins 
5.  4  no  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself  j 
5.    5  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made 

6. 13  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by  [himself! 

7.  27  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  himself 

9.  7  which  he  offered  for  himself,  and'(for)the 
g.  14  who.  .offered  himself  without  spottoGod 
9.  25  Nor.  .that  he  should  offer  himself  often 

Jas.     1.  24  he  beholdeth  liimself,  and  goeth  his  way 
1.  27  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world 
1  Jo.  3.    3  puxifieth  liimself,  even  as  he  is  pure 


i  Jo.   5.  10  He  that  believeth . .  hath  the  witness  in  h. 
5.  18  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  hinis. 

HIMSELF,  by  — 
Body,  bade  j  *]3  gaph. 

Exod2i.    3  came  in  by  himself.,  shall  go  out  by  him. 
21.  4  be  her  master's . .  he  shall  go  out  by  himself 

HIN  — 

Ilinijiquidmeasui c  —  12  logs,or  2&0cub.in.),\*n  hin. 
EX01I29.  40  the  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  beaten  oil 

29.  40  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  wine  (for)  a  drink 

30.  24  of  cassia  five,  .and  of  oil  olive  an  hin 
Lev.  19.  36  a  just  ephah,  and  a  just  hin,  shall  ye  have 

23. 13  (shall  be)  of  wine,  the  fourth  (part)  of  anh. 
Kumij.    4  mingled  with  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin 

15.    5  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  of  wine  for  a 
15.   6  mingled  with  the  third  (part)  of  an  hin  of 
15.    7  offer  the  third  (part)  of  an  hin  of  wine 
15.    9  of  flour  mingled  with  half  an  hin  of  oil 
15.  io  for  a  drink  offering  half  an  hin  of  wine 

28.  5  with  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  of  beaten 
2S.    7  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  for  the  one  lamb 

28. 14  half  an  hin.  .of  an  hin.  .of  an  hin  unto  a 
Eze.    4. 1 1  water  by  measure,  the  sixth  part  of  an  hin 

45.  24  for  a  ram,  and  an  hin  of  oil  for  an  ephah 

46.  5,  7,  1 1  aud  an  hin  of  oil  to  an  ephah 
46.  14  third  part  of  an  hin  of  oil,  to  temper 

HIND  — 

I. Hind,  i"p;n  ayyalah. 

Gen.  49*21  Naphtali  (is)  a  hind  let  loose :  he  giveth 
2  Sa.  22.  34  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hinds'  (feet);  and 
Job  39.  1  canst  thou  mark  when  the  hinds  do  calve 
Psa.  18.  33  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hinds'  (feet),  and 

29.  9  voice  of  the  Lord  maketh  the  hinds  to 
Song  2.    7  I  charge  you.  .by  the  hinds  of  the  field 

3.    5  I  charge  you.  .by  the  hinds  of  the  field 
Hab.   3.  19  he  will  make  my  feet  like  liinds'  (feet) 

2. Hind,  nV.is'  ayyeleth. 

Prov.  5.  "19  (be  as)  the  loving  hind  and  pleasant  roe 
Jer.   14.   5  Yea,  the  hind  also  calved  in  the  field,  and 

HINDER  — 

Behind,  last,  furthest,  j'nnN  acharon. 

Zech  14.    8  and  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea 
HINDER,  to  — 

1.  To  hinder,  delay,  "inx  achar,  3. 

Gen.  24.  56  And  he  said  unto  them,  Hinder  me  not 

2.  To  keep  back,  withhold,  darken,  Tj^n  chasak. 
Isa.   14.   6  he.  .Is  persecuted,  (and)  none  hindereth 

3.  To  with/told,  keep  back,  J^p  mana,  2. 
Num22. 16  Let  nothing.. liiuder  thee  from  coming 

4.  To  causa  to  go  back,  33»  shub,  5. 

Job     9.  12  Heboid,  he  taketh  away,  who  can  hinder 

5.  To  make  an  injury,  njjin  nyj;  asah  toah. 

Neh.    4.  £  fight  against  Jerusalem,  and  to  hinder  it 

6.  To  cut  up  or  back,  avaK^irra)  anakopto. 

Gal.    5.   7  who  [did  hinder]  you  that  ye  should  not 
7.7*o  give  an  interruption,  iyKowiiv  5i5o>ni  eykopen, 

1  Co.  g.  12  we  should  hinder  the  gospel  of  Christ 
S.To  cut  in,  interrupt,  cyitoirrw  etfkopto. 

Rom  15.  22  been  much  hindered  from  coming  to  you 

1  Th  2.18  have  come  unto  you.,  but  Satan  hindered 
9  To  cui  off,  iKKOTTTQ)  ekkopi'i. 

1  Fe.  3.    7  that  your  prayers  be  not  [hindered] 
10. To  hinder,  kuKvco  koluo. 

Luken.  52  them  that  were  entering  in  ye  hindered  1 
Acts   8.  36  See . .  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ? 

HINDER  end  — 

After,  hinder,  inx  achar. 

2  Sa.    2.  23  Abner  with  the  hinder  end  of  the  spear 
HINDER  part  (of  the  ship)  — 

l.Bach  or  hinder  part,  "iinx  achor. 

1  Ki.  7.  25  and  all  their  hinder  parts  (were}  inward 

2  Ch.  4.   4  and  ail  their  hinder  parts  (were)  inward 
Psa.  78.  66  he  smote  his  enemies  in  the  hinder  part 

I.End,  rear,  *)io  soph. 

Joel    2.  20  his  hinder  part  toward  the  utmost  sea 

3. Hinder  part,  stem,  irp&fiva  prumna. 

Mark  4.  38  he  was  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship 
Acts  27.  41  but  the  hinder  part  was  broken  with  the 

HINDERED,  to  be  — 

To  cease,  cause  to  cease,  702  betel. 

Ezra   6.    8  unto  these  men,  that  they  be  not  hindered 
HTNDERMOST,  HINDMOST  — 
1. Behind,  last,  furthest,  [ViqN  acharon. 

Gen.  33.  2  And  he  put.  .Rachel  and  Joseph  hinder. 
"    Num.  2.  31  shall  go  hindmost  with  their  standards 

2.  Furthest  part,  latter  end,  nnqN  acharith. 

Jer.   50.  12  the  hindermost  of  the  nations  (shall  be)  a 

HINDMOST,  to  smite  the  — 

To  smile  the  tail  or  rear,  211  zanab,  3. 

Deut  25. 18  smote  the  hindmost  of  thee,  (even)  all 
Josh.  10. 19  pursue . .  and  smite  the  hindmost  of  them 

HINGE  — 

1.  Hinge,  opening,  T&poth. 

1  id.  7.  50  the  hinges  (of)  gold,  (both)  for  the  doorg: 


HIGHEST 


HINNOM 


484 


HITHER 


'Z.  Hinge,  form,  Yy  (sir. 

Prov.26.14  (As)  the  door  turneth  upon  his  hinges,  so 

HIN'-NOM,  nan  gratis. 

A  person  of  whom  nothing  is  known  but  that  he  had  a 

sou  whose  name  is  not  given,  from  whom  a  valley  that 

lay  on  the  W.  and  S.W.  of  Jerusalem  was  named,  and 

in  which  human  sacrifices  and  filth  were  burnt.     See 

GEHINNA. 

Josh  15.    8  went  up  by  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
i5.    8  mountain  that  (lieth)  before  the  valley . .  H. 

18.  i6mountainthat(lieth)l>efore  the  valley.  -H. 
18. 16  and  descended  to  the  valley  of  H.,  to  the 

2  Ki.23.  10  Topheth . .  in  the  valley  of  .  children  of  H. 
2  Ch.28.    3  burnt  incense  in  the  valleyof  the  sonof  H. 
33.    6  through . .  fire  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
Neh.  11.  30  And  they  dwelt,  .unto  the  valley  of  H. 
Jer      7  31  which  (is)  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
7.  32  Tophet,  nor  The  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

19.  2  go  forth  unto  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
19.   6  Tophet,  nor  The  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

32.  35  which  (are)  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

HIP  — 

Leg,  limb,  thigh,  pitf  shoq. 

Judgi5.   8  he  smote  them  hip  and  thigh  with  a  great 

HI  RAH,  Tyn  distinction,  nobility. 

An  Adullamite,  the  "friend"  of  Judah.   B.C.  1727.   For 

"  friend"  the  LXX  and  Vulgate  read  ''shepherd. 

Gen.  38.    1  certain  Adullamite,  whose  name  (was)H. 
38.  12  went  up.  .he  and  his  friend  H.  the  Adul. 

HI'  RAM,  D*yOi  Dirn. 

1   A  king  of  Tyre  who  lived  on  most  friendly  alliance 

with  both  David  and  Solomon.    B.C.  1015. 

2  Sa.  5. 1 1  H.  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to  David 
1  Ki.  5.  1  H.  king  of  Tyre  sent.,  for  H.  was  ever  a  1. 
5.  2  And  Solomon  sent  to  H.,  saying 
5.  7  when  H.  heard  the  words  of  Solomon,  that 
5.  8  H.  sent  to  Solomon,  saying,  I  have  consi. 
5.  10  H.  gave  Solomon  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees 

5. 11  Solomon  gave  H.  twenty  thousand  meas. 
5.  11  thus  gave  Solomon  to  H.  year  by  year 

5.  12  there  was  peace  between  H.  and  Solomon 
5.  iS  Solomon's  builders  and  H.'sdidhew.  .and 
9.  11  H. .  .had  furnished  Solomon  with  cedar  t. 
9.  11  Solomon  gave  H.  twenty  cities  in  the  land 

9. 12  H.  came  out  from  Tyre  to  see  the  cities  w. 
9. 14  H.  sent  to  the  king  sixseore  talents  of  gold 
9.  27  H.  sent  in  the  navy  his  servants,  shipmen 

10.  11  the  navy  also  of  H.,thathroughtgold  from 
10.  22  king  had  at  sea  a  navy . .  with  the  navy  of  H. 

1  Ch.14.    1  H.  king  of  Tyre  sent  messsengers  to  David 

2  Ch.  2.  11  H.  the  king  of  Tyre  answered  in  writing 

2.  13  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man.  .of  H.  my  fa. 
8.   2  thecitieswhichH.hadrestoredtoSolomon 

8.  18  H.  sent  him,  by  the  hands  of  his  servants 

9.  10  the  servants  also  of  H. . .  brought  algum  t. 
9.  21  went  to  Tarshish  with  the  servants  of  H. 

2.  A  man  of  eminence  and  the  principal  architect  sent 
by  King  Hiram  to  Solomon.  In  Chronicles  he  is  called 
Huram,  where  also  he  has  the  title  Ab  (father  or 
master)  given  to  him.    See  Huram. 

1  Ki.'  7.  13  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  H.  out  of  Tyre 
7.  40  H.  made  the  lavers,  and  the  shovels 
7.  40  H.  made  an  end  of  doing  all  the  work 
7.  45  which  H.  made  to  king  Solomon  for  the  h. 

HIRE  — 

l.Oift,  hire,  Jjjin,  jjhn  ethnan. 

Deut2j.  18  Thou  shalt  not  bring  the  lure  of  a  whore 
Isa.   23.  17  and  she  shall  turn  to  her  hire,  and  shall 
23.  18  and  her  hire  shall  be  holiness  to  the  LORD 
Eze.  16.  31  as  an  harlot,  in  that  thou  scornest  hire 

16.  41  and  thou  also  shaltgive  no  hire  any  more 
Mic.    1.    7  the  hires  thereof  shall  be  burnt  with 

1.  7  she  gathered  (it)  of  the  hire  of  an  harlot 
1.    7  shall  return  to  the  hire  of  an  harlot 

2.  Price,  hire,  Ynlj  mechir. 

Mic.   3. 11  the  priests  thereof  teach  for  hire,  and 

Z.Hiret  wage,  price,  reward,  fare,  ~i3^  sakar. 

Gen.  30.  18  God  hath  given  me  my  hire,  because  I  h. 
30.  32  spotted  cattle,  .(of  such) shall  be  my  hire 

30.  33  it  shall  come  for  my  hire  before  thy  face 

31.  8  The  ringstraked  shall  be  thy  hire;  then 
Exod  22.  15  (be)  an  hired  (thing),  it  came  for  his  hire 
Deut  24.  15  At  his  day  thou  shalt  give  (him)  his  hire 

1  KI.    5.    6  unto  thee.  .1  give  hire  for  thy  servants 
Zech.  8.  10  no  hire  for  man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast 

4.Hire,  wage,  reward,  /ju<rd6$  misthos. 

Matt  20.    8  give  them  (their)  hire,  beginning  from  the 
Luke  10.    7  for  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire 
Jas.     5.   4  hire  of  the  labourers  which  have  reaped 

HIRE,  to  — 

l.To  hire,  yjd  sakar. 

Ezra   4.    5  And  hired  counsellors  against  them,  to 

2.  To  hire,  revmrd,  yj^  sakar. 

Gen.  30.  16  I  have  hired  thee  With  my  son's  mandra. 
Deut23.    4  they  hired  against  thee  Balaam  the  son 
Judg.  9.    4  Abimeleeh  hired  vain  and  light  persons 
18.    4  and  hath  hired  me,  and  I  am  his  priest 

2  Sa.  10.   6  sent  and  hired  the  Syrians  of  Beth-rehob 
2  Ki.   7.   6  the  king  of  Israel  hath  hired  against  us 

1  Ch.19.    6  to  hire  them  chariots  and  horsemen  out 
ig.   7  hired  thirty  and  two  thousand  chariots 


2  Ch.24.  12  hired  masons  and  carpenters  to  repair 
25.    6  He  hired  also  an  hundred  thousand  mig. 

Neh.    6.  12  for  Tobiah  and  Sanballat  had  hired  him 
6.  13  Therefore  (was)  he  hired,  that  I  should  be 
13.    2  hired  Balaam  against  them,  thatheshould 

Isa.  46.    6  and  weigh  silver.. (and)  hire  a  goldsmith 

3.  To  bribe,  reward,  iny  shachad. 
Eze.    16.  33  hirest  them,  that  they  may  come  unto  thee 

4.  To  give,  hire,  n;j?  tanah. 
Hos.    8.  10  they  have  hired  among  the  nations,  now 

5.  To  give,  hire,  njj-i  tanah,  5. 
Hos.    8.   9  by  himself :  Ephraim  hath  hired  lovers 

6.  To  hire,  (xiaBoofxai  misthoomai. 
Matt2o.    1  went,  .to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard 

20.   7  They  say . .  Because  no  man  hath  hired  us 

HIRE  out  selves,  to  — 
To  be  hired,  npb'  sakar,  2. 

x  Sa.    2.   5  (they),  .have  hired  out  themselves  for  b. 

HIRED  (man.  servant)  — 
l.One  hired,  TO'p  sakir. 

Exod  12.  45  an  hired  servant  shall  not  eat  thereof 
22.  15  if  it  (be)  an  hired  (thing),  it  came  for  hifi 

Lev.  22. 10  or  an  hired  servant,  shall  not  eat  (of)  the 
25.   6  thy  hired  servant,  and  for  thy  stranger 
25.  40  as  an  hired  servant,  (and)  as  a  sojourner 
25.  5c  according  to  the  time  of  an"  hired  servant 
25.  53  as  a  yearly  hired  servant  shall  he  be 

Deut  15.18  been  worth  a  double  hired  servant  (to  thee) 
24. 14  Thou  shalt  not  oppress  an  hired  servant 

Jer.   46.  21  her  hired  men  (are)  in  the  midst  of  her 

2. Hireling,  one  hired,  iiltrbtos  misthios. 

Lukei5-  17  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's 
15. 19  make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants 

Z.One  hired,  fxiaBtarSs   misthotos. 

Mark  1.  20  in  the  ship  with  the  hired  servants,  and 

i.Any  thing  hired,  fj.to-6co/xa  misthoma. 

Acts  28.  30  two  whole  years  in  his  own  hired  house 

HIRED,  that  is  — 
l.One  hired,  Y?'?  sakir. 

Lev.  19.  13  the  wages  of  him  that  is  hired  shall  not 
2.  }Mutt  is  hired,  Yvsiy  sekirah. 

Isa.     7  20  the  Lord  shave  with  a  razor  that  is  hired 

HIRELING  — 

l.One  hired,  Yrty  sakir. 

Job    7.    1  days  also  like  the  days  of  an  hireling? 
7.  2  hireling  looketh  for  (the  reward  of)  his 
14.    6  shall  accomplish,  as  an  hireling,  his  day 
Isa.  16.  14  three  years,  as  the  years  of  an  hireling 

21. 16  according  to  the  years  of  an  hireling 
Mai.    3.    5  that  oppress  the  hireling  in  (his)  wages 

2.  Hired  one,  hireling,  utaBaTos  misthotos. 

John  10.  12  he  that  is  an  hireling,  .not  the  shepherd 
10. 13  [hireling]  fleeth,  because  he  is  an  hireling 
HIS  — 
l.IIis,  of  him,  avroZ  hantou. 

Mattel.  21  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins 
2.IIis  own,  one's  own,  eavrou  heaiUou, 

Lukei  1.  21  When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  p. 

1,  12.  47  that  servant  which  knew  his  Lord's  will 

13.  19  which  a  man  took,  and  cast  into  his  gard. 

14.  26  hate  not  [his]  faxher,  and  mother,  and  wife 

15.  5  he  layeth  (it)  on  [his]  shoulders,  rejoicing 

1 5.  20  And  he  arose  and  came  to  [his]  father.  But 

16.  5.  So  he  called  every  one  of  his  lord's  debtors 

2.  19. 13  he  called  his  ten  servants,  and  delivered 
Rom.  5.  8  But  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us 
1  Co.  7.  37  decreed,  .that  he  will  keep  his  virgin,  do. 
2' Co.  3.  13  put  a  veil  over  [his]  face,  that  the  children 
Gal.  6.  8  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  11. 
Eph.   5.  28  He  that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself 

5.  33  let  every  one  of  you  so  love  his  wife  even 

1  Th.  2.  11  charged,  .you,  as  a  father  (doth)  his  chil. 
2.  12  who  hath  called  you  unto  his  kingdom  and 

4.  4  should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  s. 

2  Tli.  2.    6  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time 
Rev.  10.    7  as  he  hath  declared  to  his  servants  the  pr. 

Z.His  own  proper,  iZtos  idios. 

Matt  22.    5  went  their  ways,  one  to  his  farm,  another 
John  5.  18  but  said  also  that  God  was  his  Father 

1  Ti.   6.  15  Which  in  his  times  he  shall  show,  (who  is) 
Heb.    4.  10  he  also  hath  ceased.. as  God.. from  his 

2  Pe.   2.  16  But  was  rebuked  for  his  iniquity :  the  du. 
4.  Of  him,  tov  tou. 

Acts  17.  2S  have  said.  For  we  are  also  his  offspring 
[See  also  Acquaintances,  bring,  company]. 

HIS  own  — 

l.His,  of  him,  avrov  hautou. 

Mattie.  26  gain  the.  .world,  and  lose  his  own  soul? 
27.  60  laid  it  in  hisown  new  tomb,  which  he  had 

Mark  6.    1  went  out . .  and  came  into  his  own  country 

6.  4  without  honour,  but  in  his  own  country 
6.   4  among  his  own  kin,  and  in  his  own  house 

8.  36  gain  the.  .world,  and  lose  his  own  soul? 
Luke  1.  23  accomplished,  he  departed  to  his  own  ho. 

5.  25  departed  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God 
5.  29  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  house 

9.  26  when  he  shall  come  in  his  own  glory,  and 
18.    7  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own  elect,  which 

John  7.  53  And  every  man  went  unto  his  own  houso 


Acts  21.  11  bound  his  own  hands  and  feet,  and  said 
1  Co.  6.  14  will  also  raise  up  us  by  his  own  power 
Eph.    1.  11  worketh.  .after  the  council  of  his  own  will 

I.  20  and  set  (him)  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the 
Heb.   3.    6  Christ  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house  ;  whose 

4.  10  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  works 
Jas.     1.  26  but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this  man's 
1  Pe.  2. 24  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree 
Rev.    1.    5  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood 

2.  Of  one's  own,  kavTov  heautou. 

Lukei4.  26  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple 
Rom.  4.  19  he  considered  not  his  own  body  now  dead 

8.    3  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of 
1  Co.   7.   2  let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  let 
10.  24  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man 
Gal.     6.    4  let  every  man  prove  his  own  work,  and 
Eph..  5.  29  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh  ;  but 
Phil.    2.   4  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things 

Z.His  own  proper,  t8ios  idios. 

Matt.  9.    1  passed  over,  and  came  into  his  own  city 
25. 14  (who)  called  his  own  servants,  and  deliv. 
Markis.  20  put  [his  own]  clothes  on  him,  and  led  him 
Luke  2.   3  to  be  taxed,  every  one  into  [his  own]  city 

6.  41  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ? 

6. 44  For  every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit 
10.  34  set  him  on  his  own  beast,  and  brought  h. 
John  1. 11  He  came  unto  his  owu,  and  his  own  recei. 
1. 41  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon 
4.  44  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  coun. 
5. 43  if  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name 

7.  18  speaketh  of  himself  seeketh  his  own  glory 

8.  44  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own 
10.  3  and  he  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and 
10.  4  when  he  putteth  forth  his  own  sheep,  he 
13.  1  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world 
15. 19  the  world  would  love  his  own  :  but  beca. 
16.  32  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own 

19.  27  that  disciple  took  her  unto  his  own  (home) 
Acts    1.    7  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power 

1.  25  fell,  that  he  might  go  to  bis  own  place 

2.  6  heard  them  speak  in  his  own  language 

4.  32  thethings  which  he  possessed  was  his  own 

13.  36  after  he  had  served  his  own  generation 

20.  28  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood 
28.  30  two  whole  years  in  his  own  hired  house 

Rom.  8.  32  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but 

14.  4  to  his  own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth 
14.    5  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind 

1  Co.  3.   8  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward 

3.  8  reward,  according  to  his  own  labour 
6. 18  but  he.  .sinneth  against  his  own  body 

7.   4  husband  hath  not  power  of  his  own  body 
7.  37  hath  power  over  his  own  will,  and  hath 
9.    7  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ? 

II.  21  one  taketh  before  (other)  his  own  supper 
15. 23  every  man  in  his  own  order :  Christ  the 
15. 38  God  giveth.  .to  every  seed  his  own  body 

Gal.    6.    5  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden 

1  Ti.    3.   4  One  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house,  hav. 

3.    5  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  hou. 

5.  8  But  if  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  and 
Heb.   7.  27  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people's 

9. 12 ;  13.  12 ;  Jas.  x.  14 ;  2  Pe.  2.  22. 

4. Any  one,  rts  iis. 

Acts  11.  29  every  man  according  to  his  ability 

HIS  several  — 

Sis  own  proper,  tBtos  idios. 

Matt  25. 15  gave,  .according  to  his  several  ability 

HISS,  to  — 

To  hiss,  call,  pry?  sharaq. 

1  Ki.   9.    8  by  it  shall  be  astonished,  and  shall  hiss 
Job  27.  23  (Men),  .shall  hiss  him  out  of  his  place 
Isa.     5.  26  hiss  unto  them  from  the  end  of  the  earth 

7.  18  the  Loud  shall  hiss  for  the  fly  that  (is) 
Jer.   19     8  hiss  because  of  all  the  plagues  thereof 
49.  17  and  shall  hiss  at  all  the  plagues  thereof 
50. 13  astonished,  and  hiss  at  all  her  plagues 
Lam.  2.  15  hiss  and  wag  their  head  at  the  daughter 
2.  16  they  hiss  and  gnash  the  teeth  :  they  say 
Eze.  27.  36  The  merchants,  .shall  hiss  at  thee  ;  thou 
Zeph.  2.  15  every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  hiss 
Zech  10.    8  I  will  hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them 

HISSING  — 

1.  Hissing,  nip^iy,  npvv  shcruqoth. 

Jer.   18.  16  To  make  their  land,  .a  perpetual  hissing 

2.  Hissing,  np-i^  shereqah. 

2  Ch.29.    8  trouble,  to  astonishment,  and  to  hissing 
Jer.   19.    8  make  this  city  desolate,  and  an  hissing 

25.   9  and  an  hissing,  and  perpetual  desolations 
25.  18  an  hissing,  and  a  curse;  as  (it  is)  this  day 
29. 18  to  be  a  curse. .an  hissing,  and  a  reproach 
51.  37  And  Babylon  shall  become,  an  hissing 
Mic.    6.  16  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  an  hissing 

HIT,  to  — 
Tojmd,  Myo  matsa. 

1  Sa.  31.    3  archers  hit  him  ;  and  he  was  sore  worm. 
1  Ch.io.   3  the  archers  hit  him,  and  he  was  wounded 

HITHER  — 

l.IJere,  hither,  cbn  halom. 

Exod.  3.   5  Draw  not  nigh  hither  :  put  off  thy  shoes 
Judg  18.    3  said  unto  him,  Who  brought  thee  hither? 
Ruth  2. 14  At  meal  time  come  thou  hither,  and  eat 
1  Sa.  14.  36  said.  .Let  us  draw  near  hither  unto  God  ' 


HITHER 


485 


HOLD 


i  Sa.  14.  38  Draw  ye  near  hither  all  the  chief  of  the 
Psa.  73. 10  Therefore  his  people  return  hither ;  and 

Q.Here,  hither,  r\$n  hennah. 

Gen.  15.  xS  they  shall  come  hither  again :  for  the  in. 
2  Ki.   8.    7  saying,  The  man  of  God  is  come  hither 

Z.Here,  is,  nh po. 

1  Sa.  16. 11  we  will  not  sit  down  till  he  come  hither 

4. Hither,  here,  euddde  enthade. 

John  4. 15  thirst  not,  neither  come  hither  to  draw 
4-  16  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  come  hither 
Acts  17.    6  crying,  These,  .are  come  hither  also 

25. 17  when  they  were  come  hither,  without  any 

5. Hither,  here,  w5e  hode. 

Matt.  S.  29  art  thou  come  hither  to  torment  us  before 

14. 18  He  said,  Bring  them  hither  to  me 

17.  17  Jesus  answered.  .Bring  him  hither  to  me 

22. 12  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 

Markn.    3  and  straightway  he  will  send  him  hither 

Luke  9.  41  Jesus  answering  said .. Bring  thy  son  [hi.] 

14.  21  bring  in  hither  the  poor,  and  the  maimed 

19.  27  mine  enemies . . bring  hither,  andslay(th.) 
John  6.  25  they  said.  .Rabbi,  when  earnest  thou  hi.  ? 

20.  27  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my 
Acts    9.  21  came  hither  for  that  intent,  that  he  might 
Rev.    4.    1  Come  up  hither,  and  I  will  show  thee  th. 

11. 12  Come  up  hither.  And  they  ascended  up  to 
HITHER,  to  bring1  — 

To  cause  to  come  nigh,  vii  nagash,  5. 

1  Sa.  13.    9  Bring  hither  a  burnt  offering  to  me,  and 

14. 18  Saul  said.  .Bring  hither  the  ark  of  God 

14.  34  Bring  me  hither  every  man  his  ox,  and 

15.  32  Bring  ye  hither  to  me  Agag  the  king  of 
23.  9  he  said  to  Abiathar . .  Bring  hither  the  ep. 
30.   7  I  pray  thee,  bring  me  hither  the  ephod 

HITHER,  to  come  — 

To  come  nigh,  vii  nagash,  5. 

Josh.  3.    9  Come  hither,  and  hear  the  words  of  the  Lo. 
[See  Come  hither]. 
HITHER,  to  call  — 
To  call  for,  list axaXeo pat  metakaleomai. 

Acts  10.  32  call  hither  Simon,  whose  surname  is  Peter 
HITHERTO  — 
l.From  then,  from  that  time,  11*3  meaz. 

2  Sa.  15.  34  thy  father's  servant  hitherto,  so  (will)  I 

2.  Yonder,  beyond,  >"iN7n  halah. 

Isa.  18.   7  terrible  from  their  beginning  hitherto  ;  a 

3.  Unto  thus,  hitJierto,  ns  "ly  ad  koh. 

Exod.  7.  16  and,  behold,  hitherto  thou  wouldest  not 
Josh. 17. 14  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  h. 

4.  JJnto  thus,  hitherto,  n3"~ij;  ad  hah. 

Dan.    7.  28  Hitherto  (is)  the  end  of  the  matter.  As  for 
-5. Here,  hither,  rhr\  halom 

2  Sa.  7.  18  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto? 
1  Ch.17. 16  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto? 

6.  Unto  here,  hitherto,  n3n  iy  ad  hennah. 

Judgi6.  13  Hitherto  thou  hast  mocked  me,  and  told 

7.  Until  here  or  now,  &XP1  rod  Sevpo  achritou  deuro. 
Rom.  1. 13  I  purposed  to  come.,  but  was  let  hitherto 

8.  Until  now,  sous  apri  heos  arti. 

John  5."  17  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work 

16.  24  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  na. 
HITHERTO  not  — 

Xot  yet,  otfirtv  oupo. 

1  Co.  3.   2  for  hitherto  ye  were  not  able  (to  bear  it) 
HTT-TTTES,  *prj. 

The  descendants  of  Heth,  son  of  Canaan,  andinhabiting 
the  mountainous  country  of  Judah. 

Gen.  15.  20  theHittites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  R. 
23.  10  Ephron  the  H.  answered  Abraham  in  the 

25.  9  the  fieldof  Ephron  the  sonof  ZohartheH. 

26.  34  he  took.  .Judith. .  daughter  of  Beeri  the  H. 
26.  34  Bashemath  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  H. 
36.    2  Adah  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  H.,  and  A. 
49.  29  cave  that  (is)  in  the  fieldof  Ephron  the  H. 
49.  30  bought  with  thefieldof  Ephron  the  H.  for 

50. 13  possession  of  a  burying  place  of  E.  the  H. 
Exod. 3.    8,  17  the  Canaanites,  and  theH.,  and  the  A. 

13.   5  the  Canaanites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Am. 
23.  23  the  Amorites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Periz. 

23.  28  drive  out  the  Hivite . .  Cauaanite,  and . .  H. 

33.  2  the  Canaanite,  the  Amorite,  and  the  H. 

34.  11  the  Amorite,  and  the  Canaanite,  and  theH. 
Numi3.  29  the  H.,  and  the  Jebusites,  and  the  Amor. 
Deut.  7.    1  cast  out  many  nations  before  thee,  the  H. 

20.  17  the  H.,  and  the  Amorites,  the  Canaanites 
Josh.  1.   4  all  the  land  of  the  H.,  and  unto  the  great 
3. 10  drive  out.  .the  Canaanites,  and  theH.,  and 
9.   1  the  H.,  and  the  Amorite,  the  Canaanite 

11.  3  onthewest,and(to)the  Amorite.and the H. 

12.  8  the  H.,  the  Amorites,  and  the  Canaanites 

24.  11  the  Canaanites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Gir. 
Judg.  1.  26  the  man  went  into  the  land  of  the  H.,  and 

3.   5  Israel  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites,  H. ,  and 

1  Sa.  26.   6  Then . .  David . .  said  to  Ahimelech  the  H. 

2  Sa.  11.    3  of  Eliam,  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  H.  ? 

11.   6  David  sent . .  (saying),  Send . .  Uriah  the  H. 
11. 17  fell  (some)  of  the  people.  .andUriahtheH. 

11.  21,  24  Thy  servant  Uriah  the  H.  is  dead  also 

12.  9  Thou  hast  killed  Uriah  the  H.  with  the  s. 
12. 10  and  hast  taken  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  H. 
23-  39  Uriah  the  H. :  thirty  and  seven  in  all 


1  Ki.  g.  20  all  the  people,  .left  of  the  Amorites,  H. 

10.  29  so  for  all  the  kings  of  the  H.,  and  for  the 

11.  1  Ammonites,  Edomites,  Zidonians,  (and)  H. 

15.  5  save  only  iu  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  H. 

2  Ki.  7.    6  hath  hired  against  us  the  kings  of  the  H. 

1  Ch.n.  41  Uriah  the  H.,  Zabad  the  son  of  Alilai 

2  Ch.  1.  17  for  all  the  kings  of  the  H.,  and  for  the  k. 

8.  7(As  for)  all  the  people,  .left  of  the  H.,  and 
Ezra  "9.  1  of  the  Canaanites,  the  H.,  the  Perizzites 
Neh.  9.  8  to  give  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  the  H. 
Eze.  16.    3  father,  .an  Amorite.  .thy  mother  an  H. 

16.  45  yourmother.  .anH.,and  yourfatheranA. 
HIV-rTES,  ';-  villager,  midlander. 

This  word  in  the  original  Hebrew  is  always  in  the 
singular  number,  and  it  is  quite  uncertain  whether  it 
refers  to  a  progenitor  or  a  locality.  In  the-conimon 
English  version  it  is  sometimes  kept  in  the  singular,— 
the  "  Hivite."  The  Hivite  is  named  in  Gen.  10.  17  and 
1  Ch.  1.  15  as  descended  from  Canaan,  son  of  Ham.  It 
is  difficult  to  fix  their  locality ;  but  at  the  time  of 
Jacob's  return  to  Canaan  they  possessed  Shechem, 
Hamor  the  Hivite  being  the  prince  of  the  land.  They 
were  peaceful  and  commercially  inclined  (Gen.  10.  21, 
23,  28,  29). 

Gen.  10. 17  And  the  H.,  and  the  Arkite,  and  the  Sin. 

34.   2  when  Shechem  the  son  of  Hamor  the  H. 

36.   2  of  Anah  the  daughter  of  Zibeon  the  H. 
Exod.  3.    S,  x-j  the  Perizzites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  J. 

13.    5  the  Amorites,  and  the  H.,  ami  the  Jebus. 

23.  23  the  Canaanites,  the  H.,  and  the  Jebusites 

23.  28  which  shall  drive  out  the  H.,  the  Canaan. 

33.  2  I  will  drive  out  the.  .H.,  and  the  Jebusi. 

34.  11  the  Perrizzite,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Jebu. 
Deut.  7.    1  the  Perizzites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Jebu. 

20. 17  the  Perizzites,  the  H.,  and  the  Jebusites 
Josh.  3. 10  the  Hittites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Perizzi. 

9.  1  the  Perizzite,  the  H.,  and  the  Jebusite 
9.    7  And  the  men  of  Israel  said  unto  the  H. 

11.    3  and  (to)  the  H.  under  Hermon  in  the  land 

11.  19  save  the  H.,  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeon 

12.  8  the  Canaanites,  the  Perizzites,  the  H. 
24. 11  the  Girgashites,  the  H.,  and  the  Jebusite 

Judg.  3.    3  and  the  H.  that  dwelt  in  mount  Lebanon 
3.    5  Amorites,  and  Perizzites,  and  H.,  and  J. 
2  Sa.  24.    7  And  came . .  to  all  the  cities  of  the  H.,  and 
1  Ki.   9.  20  Hittites,  Perizzites,  H.,  and  Jebusites 

1  Ch.  1. 15  And  the  H.,  and  the  Arkite,  and  the  Sin. 

2  Ch.  8.   7  the  Perizzites,  and  the  H.,  and  the  Jebu. 

HLZ-KI'-AH,  rrpm  Jdh  is  strong. 
An  ancestor  of  Zephaniah  the  prophet.     In  the  Hebrew 
this  name  is  exactly  the  same  as  Hizkijah  and  Hezekiah. 
B.C.  640. 

Zeph.  1.  1  Gedaliah,  thesonof  Amariah,  thesonofH. 
HIZ-KT-JAH,  .Tpin  Jah  is  strong. 
The  Hebrew  of  this  name  is  identical  with  Hezekiah 
and  Hizikak  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  name 
should  be  taken  with  that  preceding  it,  as  .4£er-hizkijah, 
as  given  in  the  lists  of  those  that  returned  from  Baby- 
lon with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  638. 

Neh.  10. 17  Ater,  H.,  Azzur 
HO  !  — 
Hoi  {threatening,  grief  exlwrtation),  'in  hoi. 

Isa.   55.    1  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to 

Zech.  2.   6  Ho,  ho  !  (come  forth),  and  flee  from  the 

HOAR,  HOARY  frost  — 

Hoarfrost,  "lias  keplwr.    - 

Exod  16.  14  (as)  small  as  the  hoar  frost  on  the  ground 
Job  38.  29  hoary  frost  of  heaven,  who  hath  gendered 
Psa.  147.  16  he  scattereth  the  hoar  frost  like  ashes 

HOAR  (or)  HOARY  hair  or  head  — 

Age,  gray  headedness,  ft^'p  sebah. 

Lev.  19.  32  Thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head 
1  Ki.  2.  6  let  not  his  hoarhead  go  down  to  the  grave 
2.  9  his  hoar  head  bring  thou  down  to  the  gr. 
Prov  16.  31  The  hoary  head  (is)  a  crowu  of  glory,  (if) 
Isa.  46.  4  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  (you)  :  I  have 

HOARY,  to  be  — 

Age,  gray  headedness,  ny'y  sebah. 

Job  41. 32  (one)  would  think  the  deep  (to  be)  hoary 

HO'-BAB,  ruin  beloved. 

This  name  occurs  twice.  It  is  doubtful  whether  it 
means  the  father  in  law  of  Moses  or  his  son.  In  Num. 
10.  29  he  is  called  the  son  of  Raguel  (or  Reuel),  who  is 
identified  with  Jethro  in  Ezra  2.  18  compared  with 
3.  1,  &c.  The  words  of  Judg.  4.  n  are  in  favour  of 
Hobab's  identity  with  Jethro.  Yet  this  is  of  later  date 
and  a  more  casual  statement. 

Numio.  29  Moses  said  unto  H.,  the  son  of  Raguel 
Judg.  4. 11  the  children  of  H.,  the  father  in  law  of  M. 

HO'-BAH,  ruin  lurking  place. 

The  place  to  which  Abraham  pursued  the  kings  who 
had  pillaged  Sodom.  It  was  situated  to  the  N.  of 
Damascus.  Three  miles  N.  of  Damascus  there  is  a 
place  called  Masjad  Ibrahim,  the  "prayer  place  of 
Abraham  ;"  and  the  tradition  is  that  this  is  the  spot 
on  which  Abraham  thanked  God  after  his  victory. 
Behind  this  spot  there  is  a  cleft  in  the  rock  wherein 
according  to  tradition  the  patriarch  took  refuge  on  one 
occasion  from  the  giant  Nimrod.  Hobah  signifies 
"  hiding  place."  The  Jews  of  Damascus  hold  that  the 
village  of  JObar,  not  far  from  Buzzeh,  is  the  Hobah  of 
Scripture,  and  they  have  a  synagogue  there  dedicated 
to  Elijah. 

Gen.  14. 15' smote  them,  and  pursued  them  unto  H. 


HOD,  -iin  glory. 

A  son  of  Zophah,  a  descendant  of  Asher,    B.C.  1550. 
1  Ch;  7.  37  Bezer,  and  H.,  and  Shamma,  and  Shilshah 

HO-DA'-IAH,  Wi£rtnr,  Wt^fin  honourer  of  Jah. 

This  name  ought  to  be  given  as  Hodaviah  the  son  of 

Elioenai,  a  descendant  of  the  royal  line  of  Judah.    B.C. 

445- 

1  Ch.  3.  24  And  the  sons  of  Elioenai  (were)  H.,  and 
HO-DAV'-IAH,  rriiirr. 

1.  A  chief  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  on  the  E.  of  the 
Jordan.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  5.  24  H.,  and  Jahdiel.  .heads  of  the  house  of 

2.  The  son  of  Hassenuah  a  Benjamite.      B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.   7  Salluthe  son  of  Meshullam,  the  son  of  H. 

3.  A  Levite  and  founder  of  the  family  of  the  Bene-hoda- 
viah.  In  Neheniiah  the  name  is  Hodevah  (Neh.  7.  43), 
B.C.  638. 

Ezra    2.  40  of  the  children  of  H.,  seventy  and  four 
HO'-DESH,  win  new  moon. 
A  wife  of  Shaharaim,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.   9  he  begat  of  H  his  wife,  Jobab,  and  Zibai 
HO-DE'-VAH,  ni-firr,  n;nin  Jah  is  honour. 
A  Levite  family  that  returned    from  captivity  with 
Zerubbabel.    B.C.  638. 

Neh.   7. 43  of  the  children  of  H.,  seventy  and  four 

HO-DI'-AH,  or  HO-DI'-JAH,  nnin. 
1. The  wife  of  one  Ezra,  a  man  of  Judah;  she  is  the 
same  person  as  Jehudijah  in  1  Ch.  4.  18.    B.C.  1400. 
1  Ch.  4.  19  the  sons  of  (his)  wife  H.,  the  sister  of  Na. 

2.  A  Levite  in  the  time  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.   8.   7  H.,  Maaseiah,  Kelita,  Azariah,  Jozabad 
9.   5  H. . .  said,  Stand  up . .  bless  the  Lord  your 
io.  10  their  brethren,  Shebaniah,  H.,  Kelita,  Pel. 
10.  13  H.,  Bani,  Beninu 

3.  A  chief  of  the  people  under  Nehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10. 18  H.,  Hashum,  Bezai 

HOG'-LAH,  rnan  magpie. 

The  third  of  'the  five  daughters  of  Zelophehad.    The 

name  is  also  in  Beth-hoglah.    B.C.  1450. 

Num26.  33  Mahlah,  and  Noah,  H.,  Milcah,  and  Tirz. 
27.    1  Noah,  and  H.,  and  Milcah,  and  Tirzah 
36.  11  Mahlah,  Tirzah,  and  H.,  and  Milcah,  and 
Josh.  17.    3  Mahlah,  and  Noah,  H.,  Milcah,  aud  Tirzah 

HO'-HAXt,  Erin  Jah  protects  the  multitude. 
An  Amorite  king  of  Hebron,  and  one  of  the  five  kings 
captured  and  put  to  death  by  Joshua  in  the  cave  of 
Makkedah.    B.C.  1450. 

Joshio.   3  Adoni-zedek..sentuntoH.kingof Hebron 
HOISE  up,  to  — 
To  lift  vp,  i-Traipw  epaird. 

Acts  27.  40  hoised  up  the  mainsail  to  the  wind,  and 
HOLD  — 
1.  Stronghold,  fortified  place,  nyo  metsad. 

1  Ch.12.    8  separated,  .unto  David  into  the  hold  to 
12. 16  there  came  of  the  children,  .to  the  hold 

Jer.  51.  30  theyhave  remained  in  (then)  holds :  their 
2.Stronghold,  fortified  place,  rriticp,  rnisp  metsodah. 

1  Sa.22.    4  all  the  while  that  D*avid  was  in  the  hold 

22.  5  Abide  not  in  the  hold ;  depart,  and  get 
24.  22  and  his  men  gat  them  up  unto  the  hold 

2  Sa.   5.  17  David  hear-' .  .and  went  down  to  the  hold 

23.  14  David  (y  __n  in  an  hold,  and  the  gar. 
1  Ch.n.  16  And  Da.  _  ^wasjthen  in  the  hold,  and  the 
Eze.  19.  9  they  brought  liim  into  holds,  that  his  voice 

3. Pit,  cellar,  hole,  nny  tsariach.  ' 
Judg.  9.  46  they  entered  into  an  hold  of  the  house 

9.  49  set  the  hold  on  fire  upon  them  :  so  that 

^.Keeping,  rTjpnais  leresis. 

Acts   4.    3  put  (them)  in  hold  unto  the  nextday  :  for 
5.  Watch,  ward,  <pv\aKr)  phulake. 

Rev.  18.    2  the  hold  of  every  foul  spirit,  and  a  cage 
[See  Strong]. 
HOLD,  to  — 
l.To  lay  or  keep  hold  on,  Tnx  achaz. 

Ruth  3. 15  Bring  the  veil  that  (thou  hast). ,  and  hold 

1  Ch.13.    9  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  ark 

Job  17.    9  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way 

23.  11  My  foot  hath  held  his?teps,  his  way  have 

Psa.1  73.  23  thou  hast  holden  (me)  by  my  right  hand 

77.    4  Thou  boldest  mine  eyes  waking  :  I  am  so 

139. 10  Even  there,  .thy right  hand  shall  hold  me 

Eccl.  2.    3  to  lay  hold  on  folly,  till  I  might  see  what 

Song  3.    4  I  held  him,  andwouldnotlethimgo, until 

3.  8  They  all  hold  swords,  (being)  expert  in  w. 
Isa.  5.  29  lay  hold  of  the  prey,  and  shall  carry  (it) 
Eze.  41.    6  they  had  not  hold  in  the  wall  of  the  house 

2.To  bind,  npx  asar. 

Song  7.   5  the  king  (is)  held  in  the  galleries 

S.To  lay  or  keep  hold,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

Gen.  21. 18  hold  him  in  thine  hand;  for  I  will  make 
Exod.  9.   2  if  thou  refuse,  .and  wilt  hold  them  still 
Judg.  7.  20  held  the  lamps  in  their  left  hands,  and 
16.  26  unto  the  lad  that  held  him  by  the  hand 
Neh.   4.  16  other  half  of  them  held  both  the  spears 

4.  17  and  with  the  other  (hand)  held  a  weapon 
4.  21  half  of  them  held  the  spears  from  the 


: 


HOLD 


486 


HOLE 


Isa.  41.  13  God  will  hold  thy  right  hand,  saying  uuto 
42.  6  will  hold  thine  hand,  and  will  keep  thee 
45.    1  whose  right  hand  I  have  holden,  to  subdue 

Jer.     50.  42  They  shall  hold  the  bow  and  the  lance 
4. To  strengthen  self,  n~  chazakt  7. 

Dan.  10.  21  none  that  holdeth  with  me  in  these  things 

5. To  think,  reckon,  3w:n  chashab. 

Job    13.  24  Wherefore .  .boldest  me  for  thine  enemy? 

6.  To  contain,  comprehend,  ?13  kul,  5. 

2  Ch.  4.    5  received  and  held  three  thousand  baths 
Jer.     2.  13  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water 

7. To  keep  hold,  bis  qabal,  5. 

Exod36. 12  the  loops  held  one  (curtain)  to  another 

8.  To  stand,  Dip  qum. 

Job    41.  26  The  sword,  .that  layeth  at  him  cannot  h. 

9.  To  set,  put,  place,  Dip,  DIB"  sum,  sim. 

Psa.  66.   9  Which  holdeth  our  soul  in  life,  and  suffer. 

10.  To  hold,  uphold,  retain,  "sn  tamak. 
Prov  31.  19  and  her  hands  hold  the  distaff 

Amos  1.   5,  8  and  him  that  holdeth  the  sceptre  from 

11. To  catch,  keep  hold,  b'sn  taphas. 

Jer.  49.  16  thou,  .that  boldest  the  height  of  the  hill 
£ze.  30.  21  to  make  it  strong  to  hold  the  sword 

12.  To  have,  hold,  e^u  echo. 

Matt  21.  26  we  fear,  .for  all  hold  John  as  a  prophet 
Phil.    2.  29  Receive  him.  .and  [hold]  such  in  reputat. 

1  Ti.    1. 19  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience 

3.    9  Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure 
Rev.   6.   9  slain . .  for  the  testimony  which  they  held 

13.W&S,  i\v  en. 

Acts  14.  4  part  held  with  the  Jews,  and  part  with  the 
14.ro  hold  down  or  thoroughly,  kcltzx™  katccho. 

Rom.  1.  18  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness 
7.    6  law,  that  being  dead  wherein  we  were  h. 

Heb.   3.  14  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence 

15.  To  lay  hold  on,  Kparew  krated. 

Mark  7.    3  holding  the  tradition  of  the  elders 

7.    4  things . .  which  they  have  received  to  hold 
7.    8  hold  the  tradition  of  men,  (as)the  washing 

Luke  24.  16  their  eyes  were  holden  that  they  should 

Acts    2.  24  was  not  possible . .  he  should  be  holden  of 
3. 11  as  the  lame  man  which  was  healed  held 

Col.     2. 19  not  holding  the  Head,  from  which  all  the 

2  Th.  2.  15  hold  the  traditions  which  ye  have  been  t. 
Rev.    2.    1  These  tilings  saitb  he  that  holdeth  the  se. 

2. 14  thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doctri. 

2. 15  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicol. 
7.    1  holding  the  four  winds  of  the  earth,  that 

16.7*0  take,  receive,  \a.fx$avw  lambano. 

Matt  12.  14  the  Pharisees  went  out,  and  held  a  coun. 

17.  To  do,  make,  iroUtu  poied. 

Marki5.    1  the  chief  priests  held  a  consultation  with 

IS.  To  hold  at  the  same  time,  o~wexa>  sunecho. 

Luke22.  63  the  men  that  heldJesus  mocked  him,  and 
[See  Catch,  lay,  take  ;  also  Feast,  guiltless,  guilty,  inno- 
cent, peace,  tongue]. 

HOLD  back,  to  — 

1.  To  lay  or  keep  hold,  rnx  achat,  3. 

Job   26.   9  He  holdeth  back  the  face  of  his  throne 
2.7*0  keep  back,  withhold,  darken,  Tfc'n  chasak. 

2  Sa.  18. 16  people  returned.. for  Joab  held  back  the 
HOLD  by,  to  — 
To  lay  or  keep  hold,  Kpariw  kre<tc~>. 

Matt  28.   9  held  him  by  the  feet,  and  worshipped  him 
HOLD  fast,  to  — 
l.To  lay  or  keep  hold,  pip  chazak,  5. 

Job     2.   3  still  he  holdeth  fast  his  integrity,  although 

3.  15  he  shall  hold  it  fast,  but  it  shall  not  end. 

27.    6  My  righteousness  I  hold  fast,  and  will  not 

Jer.     8.    5  they  hold  fast  deceit,  they  refuse  to  return 
50.  33  all  that  took  them  captives  held  them  fast 
2.7*0  press,  crush,  holdfast,  ynb  lachats. 

2  Ki.  6.  32  shut  the  door,  and  hold  him  fast  at  the 
3.7*0  hold  over  against,  avr^xop-cu  antechomai. 

Titus  1.   9  Holding  fast  the  faithful  word  as  he  hath 

4.  7*o  hold  down  or  thoroughly,  Kare'xw  katecho. 

1  Th.  5.  21  Prove  all .  .hold  fast  that  which  is  good 
Heb.    3.    6  if  we  hold  fast  tbe  confidence  and  the  rej. 

10.  23  Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of.  .faith 

0.7*o  lay  or  keep  hold,  Kpai€0}  krateo. 

Matt  26.  48  shall  kiss,  that  same  ia  he  :  hold  him  fast 
Heb.    4.  14;  Rev.  2.  13;  2.  is;  s-  ii* 

6.  To  hare,  hold,  £xw  ccfid. 

2  Ti.   1.  13  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words 
7. To  watch,  observe,  keep,  rvjpiw  tereo. 

Rev.    3.    3  [Remember  therefore.,  and  hold  fast,and] 
HOLD  forth,  to  — 
To  hold  upon,  eVe'xw  epeclw. 

Phil,  2. 16  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life  ;  that  I  may 
HOLD  {a  feast),  to  — 
To  do,  make,  obsi  1  ve,  ~v7  asak* 

1  Ki.  8.  65  at  that  time  Solomon  held  afcast,  and  ;ill 
HOLD,  to  catch  — 
1,2*0  A'.-/  or  keep  hold,  iDy  achats. 

1  Ki.    1.  51  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar,  say. 


2.7*0  make  strong,  keep  hold,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

1  Ki.  1.  50  and  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 

2.  28  and  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 

HOLD  (on  or  upon),  to  lay  — 

1.  To  ley  hold,  iriN  achaz. 

2  Sa.  2.  21  lay  thee  hold  on  oneof  theyoung  men,  and 

2.7*o  lay  or  keep  hold,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

Gen.  19.  16  men  laid  hold  upon  his  hand,  and  upon 
Judgig.  29  laid  hold  on  his  concubine,  and  divided 

1  Sa.  15.  27  he  laid  hold  upon  the  skirt  of  his  mantle 

2  Ch.  7.  22  laid  hold  on  other  gods,  and  worshipped 
Prov.  3.  18  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  lay  hold  upon 
Isa.  56.   2  and  the  son  of  man  (that)  layeth  hold  on 
Jer.     6.23  They  shall  lay  hold  on  bow  and  spear;  they 
Zechi4. 13  shall  lay  hold  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his 

3.7*0  catch,  capture,  lay  or  keep  hold,  b'5n  tajihas. 

Dcut.21.  19  Then  shall  his  father,  .lay  hold  on  him 

22.  28  If  a  man  find  a  damsel.,  and  lay  hold  on 

1  Ki.  13.   4  put  forth  his  hand,  .saying,  Lay  hold  on 

4.7*o  lay  or  keep  hold,  eTTt\aiJ.$dvoy.ai  epilambano. 
Luke23-  26  laid  hold  upon  one  Simon,  a  Cyrenian 

1  Ti.   6.  12  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  whereunto  thou 

6. 19  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  life 

5.  To  lay  or  keep  hold,  Rparico  krated. 

Matt. 12. 11  will  he  not  layhold  on  it,  and  lift  (it)  out? 
14.    3  For  Herod  had  laid  hold  on  John,  and 
26.  55  sat  daily  with  you . .  and  ye  laid  no  hold  on 

26.  57  And  they  that  had  laid  hold  on  Jesus  led 
Mark  3. 12  theywentouttolay  hold  on  him:  for  they 

6.  17  laid  hold  upon  John,  and  bound  him  in 
12.  i2  they  sought  to  lay  hold  on  him,  but  feared 

14.  51  young  man.,  and  the  young  men  laid  h.  on 
Heb.  6.  1 3  fled,  .to  layhold  upon  the  hope  set  before 
Rev.  20.    2  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old  serp. 

HOLD  (of  on  or  upon),  to  take  — 

1.7*0  lay  hold,  inx  achaz. 

Gen.  25.  26  his  hand  took  hold  on  Esau's  heel ;  and 
Exodis.  14  take  hold  on  the  inhabitants  of  Palestina 

15.  15  trembling  shall  take  hold  upon  them  ;  all 
Deut32.  41  and  mine  hand  take  hold  on  judgment,  I 

2  Sa.  4.  10  I  took  hold  of  him,  and  slew  him  in  Zikl. 

6.    6  and  took  hold  of  it ;  for  the  oxen  shook  (it) 
Job  2t.    6  and  trembling  taketh  hold  on  my  flesh 
30.  16  days  of  affliction  have  taken  hold,  upon 
38. 13  it  might  take  hold  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 
Psa.  48.    6  Fear  took  hold  upon  them  there,  (and) 

119.  53  Horror  hath  taken  hold  upon  me  because 
Eccl.  7.  18  good  that  thou  shouldesttake  hold  of  this 
Song  7.    8  1  will  take  hold  of  the  boughs  thereof 
Isa.   13.   8  sorrows  shall  take  hold  of  them  ;  they 
21.    3  paDgs  have  taken  hold  upon  me,  as  the 

2.  To  take  or  keep  hold,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

2  Sa.   1.  11  Then  David  took  hold  on  his  clothes,  and 
13. 11  he  took  hold  of  her,  and  said  unto  her 

1  Ki.  9.   9  Becausethey.  .havetakenholduponother 

2  Ki.  2.  12  took  hold  of  his  own  clothes,  and  rent  th. 
Faa.  35.  2  Take  hold  of  shield  and  buckler,  and  sta. 
Isa.     4.    1  take  hold  of  one  man,  saying,  We  will  eat 

27.  5  Orlethim  take  hold  of  my  strength,  (that) 
56.  4  please  me,  and  take  hold  of  my  covenant 
56.  6  keepeth . .  and  taketh  hold  of  my  covenant 
64.    7  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  thee 

Jer.     6.  24  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  (and)  pain 
8.  21  astonishment  hath  taken  hold  on  me 
50.  43  anguish  took  hold  of  him,  (and)  pangs  as 
Zech.  8.  23  men  shall  take  hold,  .shall  take  hold  (of) 

3.7*o  reach,  attain,  overtake,  l&i  nasag,  5. 

Job  27.  20  Terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  waters,  a  te. 
Psa.  40.  12  mine  iniquities  have  taken  hold  upon  me 
69.  24  let  thy  wrathful  anger  take  hold  of  them 
Prov.  2.  19  neithertake  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  life 
Zech.  1.   6  did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fathers? 

4.7*0  turn  to  clasp,  nz*?  laphalh. 

Judg  16.  29  Samson  took  hold  of  the  two  middle  pil. 
5.7*0  remove,  Jpj  nasag,  5. 

Mie.    6.  14  thou  shalt  take  hold,  but  shalt  not  deliver 
6.7*0  let  receive,  cause  to  take,  ^3p  qahal,  5. 

Exod26.    5  that  the  loops  may  take  hold  one  of  ano. 
7.7*0  hold,  ujjhold,  retain,  "-]0n  tamak. 

Job  36.  i7  judgment  and  justice  take  hold  (on  thee) 

Prov.  5.    5  Her  feet  go  down,  .her  steps,  .hold  on  h. 
S.To  catch,  capture,  keep  hold,  L-jn  taphas. 

Isa.     3.   6  When  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  his  brother 

Eze.  29.   7  When  they  took  hold  of  thee  by  thy  band 
9. 7*o  catch,  cdptv/re,  keep  hold,  b'5n  taphas,  3. 

rrov.30.  28  The  spider  taketh  hold  with  her  hands 
10.7*0  take  hold  upon,  cTrtAap.fZdvop.ai  ejrilambano. 

Luke2o.  20  that  they  might  take  hold  of  his  words 
20.  26  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  words  before 
HOLD,  to  take  fast  — 
7""  make  strong,  take  or  keep  hoi,/,  pm  chazaq,  5. 

Prov.  4.  13  Take  fast  bold  of  instruction  ;  let  (her) 
HOLD  (one's)  peace,  to  — 
1.7'o  be  silent,  deaf,  tni  charash. 

Fsa.  39.  12  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my  tears :  for  I 
83.    1  hold  not  thy  peace,  and  be  not  still,  O  G. 
109.    1  Hold  not  thy  peace,  O  God  of  my  praise 

2.7*0  keep  silent,  trin  charash,  5. 

Gen.  24.  21  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace,  to  wit 
34.   5  Jacob  held  bis  peace  until  they  were  come 


Exodi4.  14  fight  foryou,  and  ye  shall  hold  yourpeace 
Isruni3o.  4  her  father  shallholdhis:peaceather;then 
30.  7  held  his  peace  at  her  in  the  day  that  he 
30.  11  husband  heard  (it),  and  held  his  peace  at 
30.  14  her  husband  altogether  hold  his  peace  at 
30.  14  held  his  peace  at  her  in  the  day  that  he 
JudgiS.  19  Hold  thy  peace,  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy 

1  Sa.  10.  27  despised  him . .  But  he  held  his  peace 

2  Sa.  13.  20  But  hold  now  thy  peace,  my  sister :  he(is) 
2  Ki.  is.  36  But  the  people  held  their  peace,  and  an. 
Neh.   5.    8  Then  held  they  their  peace,  and  found  no. 
Esth.  4.  14  if  thou  altogether  boldest  thy  peace  at 
Job   11.    3  Should  thy  lies  make  men  hold  their  peace? 

13.    5  that  ye  would  altogether  hold  your  peace! 

13.  13  Hold  your  peace,  let  me  alone,  that  I  may 
33.  31  hearken  unto  me  :  hold  thy  peace,  and  I 
33.  33  hold  thy  peace,  and  I  shall  teach  thee  wis. 

Prov  1 1.  12  man  of  understanding  holdeth  his  peace 
Isa.  36.  21  But  they  held  their  peace,  and  answered 
Jer.     4.  19  I  cannot  hold  my  peace,  because  thou  h. 

3.  To  keep  silence,  ciydco  sigao. 

Luke2o.  26  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  words  be. 
Acts  12.  17  beckoning  unto  them,  .toholdtheirpeace 
15. 13  after  they  had  held  theirpeace,  James 

1  Co.  14.  30  to  another,  .let  the  first  hold  his  peace 

4. 7*o  hold  oiie's  peace,  (riuirdu  siopad. 

Matt2o.  31  because  theyshould  hold  theirpeace:  but 

26.  63  Jesus  held  his  peace.  And  the  high  priest 

Mark  3.   4  lawful.,  to  kill?  But  they  held  their  peace 

9.  34  they  held  theirpeace :  for  bythe  way  they 

10.  48  charged  him  that  he  shouldhold  his  peace 

14.  61  he  held  his  peace,  and  answered  nothing 
Luke  18.  39  rebuked  him,  that  he  should  [hold  his  pea.] 

19.  40  that,  if  these  should  hold  their  peace,  the 
Acts  18.    9  Be  not  afraid,  .and  hold  not  thy  peace 

5.7*0  muzzle,  put  to  silence,  <pip.uco  phimoo. 

Mark  1.  25  saying,  Hold  thy  peace,  and  come  out  of  h. 
Luke  4.  35  saying,  Holdthypeace,  andcomeout  of  h. 

HOLD  to,  to  — 

7*o  hold  over  against,  avrcxofiat  antechomai. 
Matt.  6.  24  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other 
Luke  16. 13  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other 

HOLD  up,  to  — 

1.7*0  lift  up,  Njn  nasa. 

2  Sa.  2.  22  then  should  I  hold  up  my  face  to  Joab 

2.7*o  support,  "ijjd  saad. 

Psa.  18.  35  thyrighthandhathholdenmeup.andthy 
94.  18  My  f  oot  slippeth ;  thy  mercy,  .held  me  up 
119.  117  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe:  and 
3.7*0  lift  up,  exalt,  on  rum,  5. 

Exodi7.  11  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand,  that  Israel 
Dan.  12.    7  he  held  up  his  right  hand  and  his  left 

4.7*0  hold,  uphold,  retain,  359  tamak. 

Gen.  48.  17  he  held  up  his  father's  hand.toremove  it 
Psa.  17.    5  Hold  up  my  goings  in  thy  paths,  (that)  my 

5.7*0  make  to  stand,  '{o-ttjui  histemi. 

Rom  14.    4  he  shall  be  holden  up ;  for  God  is  able  to 
HOLD  out,  to  — 
7*o  extend,  hold  out,  bu>;  yashat,  5. 

Esth.  4. 11  the  king  shall  hold  out  the  golden  sceptre 
5.    2  the  king  held  out  to  Esther  the  golden 
8.   4  held  out  the  golden  sceptre  toward  Esther 

HOLD  upon,  to  get  or  take  — 
l.To  find,  n>'£  matsa. 

Psa.  116.   3  the  painp  of  hell  gat  ho.  upon  me:  I  found 
2.7*0  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  j*j  nasag,  5. 

Psa.  40. 12  mine  iniquities  have  taken  hold  upon  me 
HOLDEN,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  captured,  taken,  "i?^>  lakad,  2. 

Job.  36.    8  (and)  be  holden' in  cords  of  affliction 
2.  7*o  be  siq)ported,  tjpd  samak,  2. 

Psa.  71.  6  Bythee  have  Ibeen  holden..  from  the  womb 
3.7*o  do,  make,  rrpjj  asah,  2. 

2  Ki.23.  22  there  was  not  holden  such  a  passoverfrom 
23.  23  this  passover  was  holden  to  the  Lord  in 

4.7*o  be  held,  retained,  tj^r  tamak,  2. 

Prov.  5.  22  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins 
HOLDING  — 
7*0  hold,  retain,  7i»n  tamak. 

Isa.  33.  15  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  of  bribes 
HOLDING  in  — 
7*o  contain,  ?13  kul,  5. 

Jer.     6.  11  lam  weary  with  holding  in:  I  will  pour  it 
HOLE  — 
I. Hole,  hollowed  out  place,  "lin,  "lin  chor,  chur. 

1  Sa.  14.  11  the  Hebrews  come  forth  out  of  the  holes 

2  Ki.  12.  9  Jehoiada.  .bored  a  hole  in  the  lid  of  it 
Song  5.  4  My  beloved  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole 
Isa.    11.    8  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp 

42.  22  all  of  them  snared  in  holes,  and  they  are 
Eze.     8.    7  When  I  looked,  behold  a  hole  in  the' wall 
Nah.   2.  12  filled  his  holes  with  prey,  and  his  ileus 
Zech  14.  12  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their  holes 
2. Enclosure,  rrjapp  misgercth. 

Mic.    7.  17  they  shall  move  out  of  their  holes  like 

Z.Cave,  cavern,  den,  fcyip}  meoyrah. 

Isa.     2. 19  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks 


HOLES 


LHole,  nnjss  vutqqebeth. 

Isa.   51!    1  look,  .to  the  hole  of  the  pit  (whence)  ye 

5.  Hole,  cleft,  p*p3  Tietfiq. 

Isa.     7. 19  shall  rest,  .in  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  and 
Jer.   13.    4  and  hide  it  there  in  a  hole  of  the  rock 
16.  16  from  every  hill,  and  out  of  the  holes  of  the 

6. Mouth,  opening,  n$  peh. 

Exod28.  32  there  shall  he  an  hole  in  the  top  of  it,  in 
28.  32  woven  work  round  about  the  hole  of  it 
39.  23  (there  was)  an  hole  in  the  midst  of  the 
$g.  23  as  the  hole  of . .  round  about  the  hole,  that 

7.  Pit,  nra  pachath. 

Jer.  4S.  ?S  her  nest  in  the  sides  of  the  hole's  mouth 

8.  Hole,  burrow,  <paiAe6s pholeos. 

Matt.  8.  20  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the 
Luke  9.  58  Foxes  have  holes,  and  birds  of  the  air(h.) 

HOLES,  -with  — 

To  pierce,  3pj  naqab. 

Hag.   1.   6  wages  (to  put  it)  into  a  bag  with  holes 
HOLIER,  to  be  — 
To  be  set  apart,  separate,  vi$  qadesli. 

Isa.  65.   5  come  not  near  to  me;  for  I  am  holier  than 
HOLIEST  (of  all)  — 

1.  The  separate,  set  apart  objects,  ret  ay ta  ta  kagia. 

Heb-  9-    8  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was 
10. 19  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the 

2.  Holy  of  holies,  &7ia  ayicov  kagia  k-agidn. 

Heb.    9.    3  tabernacle  wh.  is  called  the  Holiest  of  all 
HOLILr  — 
Kindly,  graciously,  baitos  hosios. 

1  Th.    2.  10  how  holily .  .we  behaved  ourselves  among 
HOLINESS  — 

1. Separation,  place,  person  or  thing  set  apart,  E?np. 
Exodis.  ji  glorious  in  holiuess,  fearful  (in)  praises 
28.  36  and  grave  upon  it.  .Holiness  to  the  Lord 
39.  30  wrote  upon  it.  .Holiness  to  the  Lord 

1  Ch.16.  29  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holin. 

2  Ch.20.  21  should  praise  the  beauty  of  holiness,  as 

31.  18  they  sanctified  themselves  in  holiness 
Psa^  29.   2  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holin. 

30.   4  give  thanks  at  the  remenibran-ie  of  his  h. 

47.  8  God  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  holiness 

48.  1  praised.,  (in)  the  mountain  of  his  holiness 
60.   6  God  hath  spoken  in  his  holiness ;  I  will 
Sg.  35  Once  have  I  sworn  by  my  holiness  that  I 
93.    5  holiness  becometh  thine  house,  0  Lord 
96.   9  0  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holi. 
97. 12  give  thauks  at  the  remembrance  of  his  ho. 

108.    7  God  hath  spoken  in  his  holiness ;  I  will 

no.   3  in  the  beauties  of  holiness  from  the  womb 

Isa.  23. 18  and  her  hire  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord 

35.   8  and  it  shall  be  called,  The  way  of  holiness 

62.  9  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts  of  my  holiness 

63.  15  behold  from  the  habitation  of  thyiholiness 
63. 18  The  people  of  thy  holiness  have  possessed 

Jer.     2.   3  Israel  (was)  holiness  to  the  Lord  . .  the  first 

23.   9  and  because  of  the  words  of  his  holiness 

v  23  The  Lord  bless  thee,  O.  .mountain  of  ho. 

Amos  4.   a  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  his  holiness 

Obad       17  upon  mount  Zion.  .there  shall  be  holiness 

Zech.  14.  20  upon  the  bells . .  Holiness  unto  the  Lord 

14.  2 1  every  pot . .  in  Judah  shall  be  holiness  unto 

Mai.    2.  11  Judah  hath  profaned  the  holiness  of  the 

%  Separation,  sitting  apart,  ayLac/xus  hagiasmos. 
Roni.  6.  19  servants  to  righteousness  unto  holiness 

6.  22  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the 
1  Th.  4.   7  not.  .unto  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness 

1  Ti.    2.  15  if  they  continue  in.  .holiness  with  sobriety 
Heb. 12. 14  Follow  peace  with  all-  .holiness,  without 

3.  Separation,  setting  apart,  aytor-ns  hagiotes. 

Heb.  12. 10  that  (we)  might  be  partakers  of  his  holin. 
^.Separation,  setting  apart,  ay  icaffvvri  Jmgidsmie. 
Rom.  1.    4  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the 

2  Co.   7.    1  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God 

1  Th.   3.  13  unblameable  in  holiness  before  God,  even 

6. Reverence,  evtrefieta  eusebeia. 

Acts   3.  12  as  though  by  our  own  power  or  holiness 

6. Kindness,  graciousness,  oo-iorvs  hosiotes. 

Luke  1.    75  In  holiness  and  righteousness  before  him 
Eph.  4.  24  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holi. 

HOLINESS,  as  becometh  — 
Proper  to  priests,  tepoTrp^Trrjs  hieroprepes. 

Titus  2.   3  in  behaviour  as  becometh  holiness,  not 
HOLLOW  — 
X.Hollow,  q3  Jcaph. 

Gen.  32.  25  touched  the  hollow  of  his  thigh;  and  the  h. 

32.  32  the  hollow  of  the  thigh,  .touched  the  hoi. 
2.  To  be  hollow,  33£  nabob, 

Exod27-   8  Hollow  with  boards  shalt  thou  make  it:  as 

38.   7  he  made  the  altar  hollow  with  boards 
Jer.  52.  21  a  fillet  of  twelve  cubits,  .(it  was)  hollow 

HOLLOW  of  the  hand  — 
Handful,  Sffi  shoal. 

Isa.  40. 12  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and 
HOLLOW  place  — 
Hollow  places,  tripD  mahtesh. 

Judg  15. 19  God  clave  an  hollow  place  that  (was)  in 


487 

HOLLOW  strakes  — 

Hollow  strakes  or  places,  rnvisy^  sliekaaruroth. 

Lev.  14.  37  the  walls  of  the  house  with  hollow  strakes 
HO'-LON,  fyh,  ]Shh  strong  place. 

1.  A  city  in  Judah's  lot,  and  assigned  to  the  Levites. 
In  1  Ch.  6.  58  it  is  called  mien. 

Josh. 15.  51  Goshen,  and  H.,  and  Giloh;  eleven  cities 
21. 15  H.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Debir  with  her 

2.  A  city  of  Moab,  a  town  of  the  Mishor  or  level  downs 
E.  of  the  Jordan,  and  named  with  Jahazah,  Dibon  and 
other  known  places,  but  not  yet  identified :  probably 
Roron. 

Jer.  48.  21  upon  H.,  and  upon  Jahazah,  and  upon  M. 
HOLY  — 
l.Kind,  TDh  chasid. 

Deut  33.    8  Thummin  and  thy  Trim  (be)  with  thy  holy 

Psa.  86.    2  Preserve  my  soul,  for  I  (am)  hoi    :  O  thou 
145.  17  (is)  righteous,  .and  holy  in  all  his  works 
^.Separate,  set  apart,  tfnjj  qadosh, 

Exodig.   6  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation 

29.  31  and  seethe  his  flesh  in  the  holy  place 
Lev.    6. 16  shall  it  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place;  in  the 

6.  26  in  the  holy  place  shall  it  be  eaten,  in 

6.  27  whereon  it  was  sprinkled  in.  .holy  place 

7.  6  it  shall  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place :  it 

10. 13  ye  shall  eat  it  in  the  holy  place,  because 
11.  44  ye  shall  be  holy ;  for  I  (am)  holy :  neither 

11.  45  ye  shall  therefore  be  holy,  for  I  (am)  holy 
16.  24  wash  his  flesh  with  water  in.  .holy  place 

19.  2  be  holy :  for  I  the  LORD  your  God  (am)  h. 

20.  7  Sanctify  yourselves . .  and  be  ye  holy :  for  I 

20.  26  be  holy  unto  me ;  for  I  the  Lord  (am)  holy 

21.  6  Theyshallbeholyunto their  God,  and  not 
21.  7  take  a  wife,  .for  he  (is)  holy  unto  his  God 
si.    8  sanctify  him.  .he  shall  be  holy  unto  thee 

21.  8 fori  the  Lord,  wheh  sanctiiyyou, (arn)h. 
24.    9  they  shall  eat  it  in  viie  holy  place:  forit(is) 

Num.  5. 17  shall  take  holy  water  in  an  earthen  vessel 
6.  5  he  shall  be  holy,  (and)  shall  let  the  locks 
6.    8  the  days  of  Ms  separatioi  he  (is)  holy 

15.  40  do  all  my  commandments,  and  be  holy  un. 

16.  3  the  congregation  (are)  holy,  every  one  of 
16.  5  will  show  who  (are)  his,  and  (who  is)  holy 
16.    7  whom  the  Lord  doth  choose . .  (shall  be)  h. 

Dcut  7*  6  (art)  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  G. 
14.  2,  21  a.  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

23. 14  therefore  shall  thy  camp  be  holy :  that  he 
26. 19  be  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
28.   9  establish  thee  an  holy  people  unto  himself 

Josh.24. 19  he  (is)  an  holy  God ;  he  (is)  a  jealous  God 

1  Sa.   2.   2(Thereis)noneholyastheLORD:  for  (there 

6.  20  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  Lord  God? 

2  Ki.   4.  9  I  perceive  that  this  (is)  an  holy  man  of 

2  Ch.  35.    3  Levites.  .which  were  holy  unto  the  Lord 
!Neh.   8.   9  This  day  (is)  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  G. 

8.  10  for  (this)  day  (is)  holy  unto  our  Lord:  ne. 
8.  11  Hold  your  peace,  for  the  day  (is)  holy;  he. 

Psa.  22.  3  Bntthou(art)holy,(Othou)thatinhabitest 
46.  4  the  holy"  (place)  of  the  tabernacles  of  the 
65.  4  goodness  of  thy  house . .  of  thy  holy  temp. 
99.  3  Let  them  praise  thy . .  name ;  (for)  it  (is)  h. 
99.  5  Exalt  ye  the  LoRDourGod.  .(for)he(is)h. 
99.  9  Exalt  the  Lord.,  the  LORD  our  God  (is)  h. 
in.   9  He  sent,  .holy  and  reverend  (is)  his  name 

Prov.  9.  10  knowledge  of  the  holy  (is)  understanding 

30.  3  learned . .  nor  have  the  knowledge  of  the  h. 
Eccl.  8.  jo  come  and  gone  from  the  place  of  the  holy 
Isa.     4.    3  remaineth  in  Jerusalem,  shall  be  called  h. 

5.  16  God,  (that  is)  holy,  shall  he  sanctified  in 

6.  3  said,  Holy,  holy,  holy  (is)  the  Lord  of  h. 
57.  15  high  and  lofty  One.  .whose  name  (is)  holy 

57. 15  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  (place),  with 
58. 13  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  honourable 

Eze.  42.  13  there  shall  they  lay.  .for  the  place  (is)  h. 
Dan.   8.  24  shall  destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  pe. 

Z.Separate,  set  apart,  r^p  qaddish. 

Dan.  4.  8  and  in  whom  (is)  the  spirit  of  the  holy  g. 
4.    9  I  know  that  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  (is) 

4.  18  for  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  (is)  in  thee 

5.  11  in  whom  (is)  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods 

L  Separation,  separate  or  set  apart  object,  anp  qod. 
Exod  3.    5  place  whereon  thou  standest  (is)  holy  gr. 

12.  16  an  holy  convocation,  .an  holy  convocation 
15. 13  in  thy  strength  unto  thy  holy  habitation 
16.  23  the  rest  of  the  holy  sabbath  unto  the  Lo. 

22.  31  And  ye  shall  be  holy  men  unto  me:  neither 

26. 33  veil  shall  divide  unto  you  between  the  h. 
28.  2  thou  shalt  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron 
28.  4  they  shall  make  holy  garments  for  Aa-  >n 
28.  29,  35  when  he  goeth  in  unto  the  holy  (p"  ce) 
28.  3S  children,  .shall  hallow  in  all  their  r   iyg. 

28.  43  unto  the  altar  to  minister  in  the  holy  (p.) 

29.  6  thou  shalt.  .put  the  holy  crown  upon  the 
29.  29  the  holy  garments  of  Aaron  shall  be  his 
29.  30  when  he  cometh.  .to  minister  in  the  holy 

29.  33  shall  not  eat.  .because  they  (are)  holy 

20. 34  it  shall  not  be  eaten,  because  it  (is)  holy 

30.  25  thou  shalt  make  it  an  oil  of  holy  ointment 
30.  25  ointment . .  it  shall  be  an  holy  anointing  oil 
30.  31  This  shall  be  an  holy  anointing  oiluntome 
30.  32  it  (is)  holy,  (and)  it  shall  be  holy  unto  you 
30.  35  a  perfume,  .tempered  together,  pure.  .h. 

30.  37  it  shall  be  unto  thee  holy  for  the  Lord 

31.  10  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 
31.  11  anointing  oil,  and  sweet  incense  for  the  h. 
3s.  14  keep  the  sabbath .  .for  it  (is)  holy  unto  you 
31. 15  (is)  the  sabbath  of  rest,  holy  to  the  LORD 


HOLY 

Esod35.  ig  to  do  service  in  the  holy  (place),  the  holy 
35.  21  all  his  sendee,  and  for  the  holy  garments 

37.  29  he  made  the  holy  anointing  oil,  and  the 

38.  24  work  in  all  the  work  of  the  holy  (place) 

39.  1  the  holy  (place),  and  made  the  holy  gar. 
39.  30  the  plate  of  the  holy  crown  (of)  pure  gold 

39.  41  to  do  service  in  the  holy  (place),  and  the  h. 

40.  9  and  shalt  hallow  it.  .and  it  shall  be  holy 
40.  13  shalt  put  upon  Aaron  the  holy  garments 

Lev.    6.  30  to  reconcile  (withal)  in  the  holy  (place) 
8.    9  he  put  the  golden  plate,  the  holy  crown 
10.  10  put  difference  between  holy  and  unholy 
10.  17  not  eaten  the  sin  offering  in  the  holy  place 
10.  18  was  not  brought  in  within  the  holy  (place) 
10.  18  indeed  have  eaten  it  in  the  holy  (place) 

14.  13  the  burnt  offering,  in  the  holy  (place) :  for 
16.  2  come  notat  all  times  into  the  holy  (place) 
16.  3  Thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  holy  (pi. 
16.  4  He  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  coat,  and 
16.  4  these  (are)  holy  garments ;  therefore  shall 
16.  16  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  (place) 
16.  17  to  make  an  atonement  in  the  holy  (place) 
16.  20  an  end  of  reconciling  the  holy  (place) 

16.  23  put  on  when  he  went  into  the  holy  (place) 
16.  27  in  to  make  atonement  in  the  holy  (place) 
16.  32  the  linen  clothes, (even)  the  holy  garments 
16.  33  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  sanctuary 

19.  24  the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  holy,  to  praise 

20.  3  mysanctuary.andtoprofanemyholyname 
si.   6  do  offer  :  therefore  they  shall  be  holy 
si.  22  (both)  of  the  most  holy,  and  of  the  holy 
22.   2  they  profane  not  my  holy  name  (in  those 

22.  32  Neither  shall  ye  profane  my  holy  name 

23.  2,  37  shall  proclaim  (to  be)  holy  convocation 
'  23.    3  the  sabbath  of  rest,  an  holy  convocation 

23.    4  holy  convocations,  which  ye  shall  proclaim 
23-   7  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation  ;  ye 
23.    8  the  seventh  day  (is)  an  holy  convocation 
23.  20  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord  for  the  priest 
23.  21  it  may  be  an  holy  convocation  unto  ycu 
23.  24  blowing  of  trumpets,  an  holy  convocation 
23.  27,  36  shall  be  an  holy  convocation  unto  you 
23. 35  first  day  (shall  be)  an  holy  convocation 
25.  12  it  shall  be  holy  unto  you :  ye  shall  eat 
27.   9  all  that  (any  man)  giveth.  .shall  be  holy 
27.  10  it  and  the  exchange  thereof  shall  be  holy 
27. 14  his  house  (to  be)  holy  unto  the  Lord 
27.  21  shall  be  holy  unto  the  Lord,  as  a  field 
27.  23  that  day,  (as)  a  holy  thing  unto  the  LORD 
27. 30  all  the  tithe . .  (it  is)  holy  unto  the  LORD 
27.  32  the  tenth  shall  be  holy  unto  the  LORD 

27.  33  both  it  and  the  change  thereof  shall  be  h. 
Num.  6.  20  this  (is)  holy  for  the  priest,  with  the  vave 

18.  10  every  male  shall  eat  it :  it  shall  be  holy 
iS.  17  they  (are)  holy :  thou  shalt  sprinkle  their 

28.  7  in  the  holy  (place)  shall  thou  cause  the 
28.  18  In  the  first  day .  .an  holy  convocation;  ye 

28.  25,  26  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation ;  ye 

29.  1  ye  shall  have  an  holy  convocation;  ye 
29.    7  tenth,  .of  this  seventh  month  an  holy  con. 
29.  12  fifteenth,  .ye  shall  have  an  holy  convoca. 
31.    6  to  the  war,  with  the  holy  instruments,  and 
35.  25  priest,  which  w^as  anointed  with  the  holy 

Deut26. 15  Look  down  from  thy  holy  habitation,  from 
Josh.  5.  15  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest(is)h. 
1  Sa.  21.  5  and  the  vessels  of  the  young  men  are  holy 
1  Ki.  8.  4  all  the  holy  vessels,  .in  the  tabernacle,  ev 
8.  8  seen  out  in  the  holy  (place)  before  the  or 
8.  10  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the  holy   >.) 

1  Ch.16.  10  Glory  ye  in  his  holy  name  :  let  the  heart 

16.  35  that  we  may  give  thanks  to  thy  holy  name 

22.  19  to  bring . .  the  holy  vessels  of  God,  into  the 

23.  32  should  keep,  .the  charge  of  the  holy  (p.) 
29.  3  all  that  I  have  prepared  for  the  holy  ho. 
29. 16  to  build  thee  au  house  for  thine  holy  name 

2  Ch.  5.    5  all  the  holy  vessels  that  (were)  in  the  ta. 

5. 11  when  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the  h. 

8.  11  because  (the  places  are)  holy,  whereunto 

23.  6  they  shall  go  in,  for  they  (are)  holy  :  but 
29.    5  carry  forth  the  filthiness  out  of  the  holy 

29.  7  nor  offered  burnt  offerings  in  the  holy  (p.) 

30.  27  to  his  holy  dwelling  place,  .unto  heaven 
35.  3  Put  the  holy  ark  in  the  house  which  Sol. 
35.  5  stand  in  the  holy  (place),  according  to  the 
35.  13  but  the  (other)  holy  (offerings)  sod  they 

Ezra    8.  28  Ye  (are)  holy,  .the  vessels  (are)  holy  also 

9.  2  so  that  the  holy  seed  have  mingled  them. 
9.   8  to  give  us  a  nail  in  his  holy  place,  that 

Neh.    9.  14  madest  known  unto  them  thy  holy  sabb. 
10.  31  not  buy.  .on  the  sabbath,  or  on  the  holy 

10.  33  for  the  set  feasts,  and  for  the  holy  (tilings) 

11.  1  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem  the  holy 
11. 18  All  the  Levites  in  the  holy  city,  .two  hu. 

Psa.    2.  6  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill 

3.  4  and  he  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  hill 

5.  7  in  thy  fear  will  I  worship  toward  thy  holy 

ii,  4  The  LORD  (is)  in  his  holy  temple,  the  L. 

15.  1  Lord,  .who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill? 
20.  6  he  will  hear  him  from  his  holy  heaven 

24.  3  and  who  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place  ? 
28.    2  when  I  lift  up  my  hands  toward  thy  holy 
33.  21  because  we  have  trusted  in  his  holy  name 
43.    3  let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  holy  hill,  and 
51. 11  and  take  not  thy  holy  spirit  from  me 

68.  5  judge  of  the  widows  (is)  God  in  his  holy  h. 
68.  17  (is)  among  them,  (as  in)  Sinai,  in  the  holy 
79.  1  0  God.  .thy  holy  temple  have  they  defiled 
87.  1  His  foundation  (is)  in  the  holy  mountains 
89.  20  with  my  holy  oil  have  I  anointed  him 
98.  1  his  holy  arm,  hath  gotten  him  the  victory 
gg.  g  worship  at  his  holy  hill ;  for  the  Lord  our 
103.   1  all  that  is  within  me,  (bless)  his  holy  name 


' 


HOLY 


Psa.  105.    3  Glory  ye  in  his  holy  name :  let  the  heart  of 

105.  42  For  he  remembered  his  holy  promise,  (and) 

106.  47  Save  us.  .to  give  thanks  unto  thy  holy  na. 
138.    2  I  will  worship  toward  thy  holy  temple 
145.  21  let  all  flesh  bless  his  holy  name  for  ever 

Prov  20.  25  the  man  (who)  devoureth  (that  which  is)  h. 

Isa.  6.  13  theholy  seed  (shall  be) the  substance ther. 
11.  9  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy 
27.  13  shall  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount 
48.  2  For  they  call  themselves  of  the  holy  city 
52.  1  Awake,  awake.  .0  Jerusalem,  the  holy 
52.  10  The  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  arm  in 

56.  7  them  will  I  bring  to  my  holy  mountain 

57.  13  but  he.  .shall  inherit  my  holy  mountain 

58.  13  from .  .doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day 
62  12  The  holy  people,  The  redeemed  of  the  L. 
63.  to  they  rebelled,  and  vexed  his  holy  spirit 

63.  11  (is)  he  that  put  his  holy  spirit  within  h.? 
64. 10  Thy  holy  cities  are  a  wilderness,  Zion  is 

64.  11  Ourholyandourbeautifulhouse.whereour 

65.  1 1  ye  (are)  they . .  that  forget  my  holy  mount. 
65.  25  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy 
66. 20  shall  bring,  .to  my  holy  mountain  .rerusa. 

Jer.   11.  15  and  the  holy  flesh  is  passed  from  thee? 
25.  30  andutter  his  voice  from  his  holy  habitation 
31. 40  the  whole  valley,  .(shall  be)  holy  unto  the 

Eze.  20.  39polluteyemyholynamenomorewithyour 
20.  40  in  mineholymountain,  in  the  mountain  of 
22.  26  have  put  no  difference  between  the  holy 
28. 14  thou  wast  upon  the  holy  mountain  of  God 
36.  20  they  profaned  my  holy  name,  when  they  s. 
36.  21  But  I  had  pity  for  mine  holy  name,  which 
36.  22  but  for  mine  holy  name's  sake,  which  ye 
36.  38  As  the  holy  flock,  as  the  flock  of  Jerusalem 
39.  7  So  will  1  make  my  holy  name  known  in  the 
39.  7  I  will  not.. pollute  my  holy  name  any  more 
39.  25  and  will  be  jealous  for  my  holy  name 

42. 13  they  (be)  holy  chambers,  where  the  priests 

42.  14  not  go  out  of  the  holy . .  for  they  (are)  holy 

43.  7  my  holy  name,  shall  the  house  of  Israel  no 

43.  8  they  have  even  defiled  ray  holy  name  by 
44. 19  lay  them  in  the  holy  chambers.and  they 

44.  23  between  the  holy  and  profane,  and  cause 

45.  1  This(shall  be)holy  in  all  the  borders  thereof 
4  the  holy  (portion)  of  the  lands  shall  be  for 

6  long,  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy 

7  on  the  other  side  of  the  oblation  of  the  h. 
7  the  city,  before  the  oblation  of  the  holy 

46.  19  into  the  holy  chambers  of  the  priests,  whi. 
48.  10  And  for  them,  .shall  be  (this)  holy  oblat. 

48. 14  not  sell  of  it.  .(it  is)  holy  unto  the  Lord 
48. 18  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy  (po.) 
48.  20  ye  shall  offer  the  holy  oblation  four  squ. 
48.  21  of  the  holy  oblation.,  be  the  holy  oblation 

Dan.  9.  16  from  thy  city  Jerusalem,  thy  holy  moun. 
9.  20  my  supplication .  .for  the  holy  mountain 
9.  24  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  holy  city 
11. 28  and  his  heart,  .against  the  holy  covenant 
11.  30  against  the  holy  covenant .  .forsake  the  h. 

11.  45  the  seas  in  the  glorious  holy  mountain 

12.  7  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people 
Joel    2.    1  and  sound  an  alarm  in  my  holy  mountain 

3.  17  your  God  dwelling  in  Zion,  myholymoun. 

3.  17  then  shall  Jerusalem  be  holy,  and  there 
Amos  2.    7  That  paut.  .to  profane  my  holy  name 
Obad.      16  as  ye  have  drunk  upon  my  holy  monntain 
Jon.    2.    4  yet  I  will  look  again  toward  thy  holy  tem. 

2.  7  my  prayer  came,  .into  thine  holy  temple 
Mic.  1.  2  Lord  God.  .the  Lord  from  his  holy  temple 
Hab.  2.  20  But  the  Lord  (is)  in  his  holy  temple :  let 
Zeph.  3.  11  be  haughty  because  of  my  holy  mountain 
Hag.  2.  12  If  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his 
Zech.  2.  12  inherit  Judah  his  portion  in  the  holy  land 

2.  13  for  he  is  raised  up  out  of  his  holy  habit. 

8.   3  mountain  of  the  Lord  . .  the  holy  mountain 


45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 


5.  Separate. 
Matt.  4. 

7- 

24. 

25- 

27. 

Mark  6. 

8. 
Luke   1. 


9- 
John  1 7. 
Acts  3. 
4- 
4- 
6. 
7- 


Bom. 


16, 
t  Co.  3. 

7 


2  Co.  1 3. 
Eph.   1. 

2. 

5> 


set  apart,  holy,  aytos  hagios. 

5  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy  city 

6  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs 

15  see  the  abomination.,  stand  in  the  holy  p. 
31  and  all  the  [holy]  angels  with  him,  then 
53  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  unto 

20  knowing,  .he  was  a  just  man  and  an  holy 
38  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  the  holy  ang. 
49  For  he  that  is  mighty,  .holy  (is)  his  name 
70  As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  pr. 
72  and  to  remember  his  holy  covenant 

23  that  openeth  the  womb  shall  be  called  h. 

26  (in  his)  Father's,  and  of  the  holy  angels 

11  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own  n. 

21  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets  si. 

27  For  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  Je. 
30  may  be  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  ch. 

13  wordsagainst  this  holyplace.andthelaw 

33  place  where  thou  standest  is  holy  ground 

22  was  warned  from  God  by  an  holy  angel 

28  and  further.. hath  polluted  this  holy  pi. 
2  Which  he  had  promised,  .in  the  holy  scr. 

12  Wherefore  the  law  (is)  holy,  and  theco.h. 

16  if  the  first  fruit  (be)  holy,  the  lump  (is) 
16  if  the  root  (be)  holy,  so  (are)the  branches 

1  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God 

16  Salute  one  another  witli  an  holy  kiss.  The 

17  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  (temple)  ye 

14  children  unclean  ;  but  now  are  they  holy 

34  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  in  spirit 

20  Greet  ye  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 
12  Greet  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 

4  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  bef . 

21  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord 

5  now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  and 
27  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish 


Col. 

1  Th. 

2Ti. 
Heb. 
iPe. 


•  Pe. 


488 

1.  22  to  present  you  holy  and  unblameableand 
3.  12  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved 
5.  26  Greet  all  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss 
5.  27epistle  be  read  unto. .the  [holy]  brethren 
9  and  called  (us)  with  an  holy  calling,  not 
3.    1  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly 
1.  15  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy 

1.  16  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy 

2.  5  an  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual 

2.  9  ye  (are),  .an  holy  nation,  a  peculiarpeople 

3.  5  in  the  old  time  the  holy  women  also,  who 
18  when  we  were  with  him  in  the  holymount 

1.  21  [holy]  men  of  God  spake  (as  they  were)  mo. 

2.  21 ;  3.  2,  11 ;  Rev.  3.  7;  4.  8 ;  6.  10,  10,  10; 
11.  2  ;  [14.  10 ;]  18.  20 ;  20.  6 ;  21.  2,  10 ;  22.  6,  11,  19. 

6.  Priestly,  Upos  hieros  ra  UpUa  ta  heira. 

1  Co.  9. 13  they  which  minister  aboutholythings.live 

2  Ti.   3. 15  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures 

7.  Kind,  gracious,  '6<rtos  hosios. 

1  Ti.  2.  8  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  wrath  and 
Titus  1.  8  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate 
Heb.  7.  26(whois)holy, harmless, uudefiled,  separate 
Rev.  15.    4glorifythy  name?  for(thou)  only  (art)  [h.] 

HOLY,  to  he  — 

1.  To  be  separate,  set  apart,  ehR  qadesh. 

EXO1I29.  37  whatsoever  toucheth . .  altar  shall  be  holy 
30.  29  whatsoever  toucheth  them  shall  be  holy 
Lev.    6.  iS  every  one  that  toucheth.  .shall  be  holy 

6.  27  whatsover  shall  touch,  .shall  be  holy 
Hag.  2  12  hisskirtdo  touch  bread. .shall  it  beholy? 

2.  To  separate,  set  apart,  aytafa  hagiazo. 

Key  22  11  and  he  that  is.  .let  him  be  holy  still 

HOLY  day  — 

1. Separation,  separate  or  set  apart  object,  v^qodesh. 
Exod35.    2  there  shall  be  to  you  an  holy  day,  a  sab. 

%A  feast,  festival  lop  ri)  hcorte. 

Col.     2. 16  in  respect  of  an  holy  day,  or  of  the  new 

HOLY  day,  to  keep  — 

To  l-eep  or  celebrate  a  festival,  J3n  chagag. 

Psa.  42.   4  went  with  a  multitude  that  kept  holy  day 

HOLY  GHOST,  aytos  tryevfia  hagios  pneuma. 

Mat.  1.  18,  20;  3.  11;  12.  32;  28.  19;  Mark  1.  8;  3.  29; 

12.  36;  13.  11 ;  Luke  1.  15,  35,  41,  67 ;  2.  25,  26;  3.  16, 
22 ;  4.  1 ;  12.  10,  12  ;  John  1.  33;  [7.  39;]  14.  26;  20.  22; 
Acts  1.  2,  5,  8,  16;  2.  4,  33,  38;  4.  8,  31  ;  5.  3,  32;  6.  [3,] 
5;  7-  5i>  55;  8.  15,  17,  [18,3  19  ;  9.  17,  31  ;  10.  38,  44,  45, 
47  ;  11.  15,  16,  24  ;  13.  2,  4,  9,  52;  15.  8,  28;  16.  6;  19. 
2,  2,  6 ;  20.  23,  28 ;  21.  11 ;  28.  25 ;  Rom.  5.  5 1  Q-  *  ;  *4- 
17 ;  15.  13,  16 ;  1  Co.  2.  [13] ;  6.  19 ;  12.  3 ;  2  Co.  6.   6 ; 

13.  14  (13) ;  1  Th.  1.  5,  6 ;  2  Ti.  1.  14 ;  Titus  3.  5 ;  Heb. 
2.  4;  3.  7 ;  6.  4 ;  9.  8;  10.  15 ;  1  Pe,  1.  12;  2  Pe.  1.  21 ; 
[1  Jo.  5.  7;]  Jude  20. 

HOLY,  (thing  or  placel,  most  — 
l.Holy  of  holies,  D'tr^n  trip  qodeshhaqqodashiwi. 
Exod26.  33  between 'the  holy  (place)  and  the  most  h. 
26. 34  mercy  seat  upon  the  ark . .  in  the  most  holy 

29.  37  it  shall  be  an  altar  most  holy :  whatsoever 

30.  10  atonement,  .it  (is)  most  holy  unto  the  L. 
30.  29  sanctify.,  that  they  may  be  most  holy  :wh. 
30.  36  it  shall  be  unto  you  most  holy 

40. 10  sanctify,  .and  it  shall  be  an  altar  most  h. 
Lev.    2.    3,  10  a  tiling  most  holy  of  the  offerings  of 
6. 17  it  (is)  most  holy,  as  (is)  the  sin  offering 
6.  25  be  killed  before  the  Lord  :  it  (is)  most  h. 

6.  29  males . .  shall  eat  thereof :  it  ( is)  most  holy 
7     1  Likewise  this  (is)  the  law.  .it  (is)  most  h. 

7.  6  Every  male . .  shall  eat  thereof . .  it  (is)  m.  "h. 
10  12  eat  it  without  leaven,  .for  it  (is)  most  h. 
10. 17  seeing  it  (is)  most  holy,  and  (God)  hath 
T4. 13  (so  is)  the  trespass  offering :  it  (is)  most  h. 
24.  9  it  (is)  most  holy  unto  him  of  the  offerings 
27.  28  every  devoted  thing  (is)  most  holy  unto 

Num.  4.    4  service  of  the  sons,  .(about)  the  most  h. 
4. 19  when  they  approach  unto  the  most  holy 
18.    9  This  shall  be  thine  of  the  most  holy  thing 
18.    9  (shall  be)  most  holy  for  thee  and  thy  sons 
18  10  In  the  most  holy  (place)  shalt  thou  eat  it 

1  Ki.   6.  16  for  the  oracle,  (even)  for  the  most  holy  (p.) 

7.  50  the  doors  of  the  inner  house,  the  most  h. 

8.  6  brought  in  the  ark.  .to  the  most  holy  (p.) 

1  Ch.  6.  49  for  all  the  work  of  the  (place)  most  holy 

23.  13  that  he  should  sanctify  the  most  holy  th. 

2  Ch.  3.    8  he  made  the  most  holy  house,  the  length 

3. 10  in  the  most  holy  house  he  made  two  che. 

4.  22  theinnerdoorsthereforeforthemostholy 

5.  7  brought  in  the  ark . .  into  the  most  holy  (p.) 
Ezra  2.  63  should  not  eat  of  the  most  holy  things,  till 
Neh.  7.  65  should  not  eat  of  the  most  holy  things,  till 
Eze.  41.    4  said  unto  me,  This  (is)  the  most  holy  (pi.) 

43.  12  limit  thereof  round  about  (shall  be)  most  h. 
45.  3  be  the  sanctuary  (and)  the  most  holy  (pi.) 
48.  12  most  holy  by  the  border  of  the  Levites 

Dan.  9.  24  to  seal  up.  .and  to  anoiut  the  most  holy 

2.The  holy  things  of  the  holies,  D'cn^n  'chq  qodshe. 

Lev.  21.  22  bread,  .of  the  most  holy'  and  of  the  holy 

2  Ch.31.  14  oblations  of  the  Lord,  and  the  most  holy  t. 

Eze.  42.  13  the  priests . .  shall  eat  the  most  holy  things 

42.  13  there  shall  they  lay  the  most  holy  things 

44.  13  anyofmyholythings,  in  the  most  holy  (p.) 

3. Separate,  set  apart,  holy,  aytos  hagios. 

Jude      20  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  f . 


HOLY 

HOLY,  to  keep  — 

To  separate  or  set  apart,  ch£  qadesh,  3. 

Exod2o.   8  Remember  the  sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  h, 
HOLY  one  — 
I. Kind,  gracious,  Tpn  chasid. 

Psa.  16.  10  thou  suffer  thine  holy  one  to  see  corruption 
89. 19  thou  spakest  in  vision  to  thy  holy  one,  and 

2.  Separate  or  set  apart  one,  cnip  qadosh. 

2  Ki.  19.  22  (even)  against  the  holy  (one)  of  Israel 
Job      6.  10  not  concealed  the  words  of  the  holy  one 
Psa.  71.  22  with  the  harp,  0  thou  holy  one  of  Israel 
78.  41  Yea,  they,  .limited  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
89.  18  and  the  holy  one  of  Israel  (is)  our  King 
Isa.      1.    4  provoked,  .holy  one  of  Israel  unto  anger 
5.  19  let  the  counsel  of  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
5.  24  despised  the  word  of.  .holy  one  of  Israel 
10.  17  for  a  fire,  and  his  holy  one  for  a  flame 
10.  20  stay  upon  the  Lord,  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

12.  6  great  (is)  the  holy  one' of  Israel  in  the 
17.  7  have  respect  to  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
29.  19  shall  rejoice  in  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

29.  23  sanctify  the  holy  one  of  Jacob,  and  shall 

30.  11  cause  the  holy  one  of  Israel  to  cease  from 

30. 12  thus  saith  the  holy  one  of  Israel,  Because 

30.  15  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

31.  1  they  look  not  unto  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
37. 23  (even)  against  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

40. 25  or  shall  I  be  equal?  saith  the  holy  one 
41.  14  and  thy  redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
41.  16  (and)  shalt  glory  in  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
41.  20  the  holy  one  of  Israel  hath  created  it 
43-    3  God,  the  holy  one  of  Israel,  thy  saviour  :  I 
43.  14  Lord,  your  redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  I. 

43.  15  holy  one,  the  creator  of  Israel,  your  king 
45.  11  Lord,  the  holy  one  of  Israel,  and  his  m. 

47.  4  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name,  the  holy  one 

48.  17  Lord,  thy  Redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  Isr. 

49.  7  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  (and)  his  holy  one 
49.  7  (and)  the  holy  one  of  Israel,  and  he  shall 
54.  5  and  thy  Redeemer  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
55-  5  thy  God,  and  for  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
60.  9  to  the  holy  one  of  Israel,  because  he  hath 
60.  14  call  thee..  The  Zion  of  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

Jer.  50.  29  proud,  .against  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
51.    5  with  sin  against  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
Eze.  39.    7  that  I  (am)  the  Lord,  the  holyone  hi  Isr. 
Hos.  11.    9  the  holy  one  in  the  midst  of  thee :  and  I 
Hab.    1.  12  my  God, mine  holy  one?  weshall  not  die 

3.  3  and  the  holy  one  from  Mount  Paran.  Selah 

S.One  separate  or  set  apart,  E^p  qaddish. 

Dan.   4.  13,  23  an  holy  one  came  down  from  heaven 
4. 17  the  demand  by  the  word  of  the  holy  ones 

4.  Separate,  set  apart,  holy  aytos  hagios. 

Mark  1.  24  I  know,  .who  thou  art,  theholy  one  of  G. 
Luke.  4.  34  I  know .  .who  thou  art ;  theholy  one  of  G. 
Acts  3.  14  ye  denied  the  holy  one  and  the  just,  and 
t;Jo.    2.  20  ye  have  an  unction  from  theholy  one,  and 

5. Kind,  gracious,  oo-tos  Jiosios. 

Acts    2.  27  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  holy  one  to 

1 3.  35  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  thine  holy  one  to  see 

HOLY  place  — 

1. Place  separate  or  set  apart,  enpp  miqdash. 

Psa.  68.  35  (thou  art)  terrible  out  of  thy  holy  places 

Eze.  21.    2  drop  (thy  word)  toward  the  holy  places,  and 

45.   4  it  shall  be . .  an  holy  place  for  the  sanctuary 

2.  To  separate,  set  apart,  bh|3  qadesh,  3. 

Eze.    7.  24  and  their  holy  places  shall  be  defiled 

3, Separate,  set  apart,  holy,  aytov  hagion. 

Heb.  9.  12  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place 
9.  24  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands 
9.  25  high  priest  entereth  into  the  holy  place 

HOLY  thing  — 

l.Separation,separateorset  apart 'object, tshp  qodesh. 
Exod28.  38  may  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  holy  things 
Lev.     5. 15  and  sin . .  in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord 
5.  16  harm  that  he  hath  done  in  the  holy  thing 
22.    2  the  holy  things  of  the  children  of  Israel 
22.    3  goeth  unto  thelioly  things,  which  the  chil. 
22.    4  he  shall  not  eat  of  the  holy  things,  until 
22,    6  shall  not  eat  of  the  holy  things,  unless 
22.    7  and  shall  afterward  eat  of  the  holy  things 
22. 10  shall  no  stranger  eat^of)  the  holy  thing 
22.  10  servant,  shall  not  eat  (of)  the  holy  thing 
22.  12  not  eat  of  an  offering  of  the  holy  things 
22.  14  a  man  eat  (of)  the  holy  thing  unwittingly 
22.  14  give,  .unto  the  priest  with  the  holy  thing 
22.  15  they  shall  not  profane  the  holy  things  of 
22.  16  iniquity  when  they  eat  their  holy  things 
Num.  4.  15  but  they  shall  not  touch  (any)  holy  thing 

4.  20  to  see  when  the  holy  things  are  covered 

5.  9  every  offering  of  all  theholy  things  of  the 
18.  19  All  the  heave  offerings  of  the  holy  things 
18.  32  neither  shall  ye  pollute  the  holy  things  of 

Deut.12.  26  Onlythyholythings  which  thou  hast,  and 

1  Ch.23.  28  in  the  purifying  of  all  holy  things,  and  the 

2  Ch.31.  6  the  tithe  of  holy  things  which  were  conse. 
Neh.  10.  33  forthe  set  feasts,  and  for  the  holy  (things) 
Eze.  20.  40  of  your  oblations,  with  all  your  holy  things 

22.    8  Thou  hast  despised  mine  holy  things,  and 
22.  26  and  have  profaned  mine  holy  things :  they 

44.  8  have  not  kept  the  charge  of  mine  holy  th. 

44. 13  norto  come  near  to  any  of  my  holy  things 

%Separate  or  set  apart  object,  ayiov  liogion, 

Luke  1.  35  that  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  th. 


m*. 


HOLY 


489 


HONOUR 


HOLY  portion  — 

Separation,  separate  or  set  apart  object,  ishp  qodesh. 
Eze.  45.    1  oiler,  .unto  the  Lord,  an  holy  portion  of 

HO'-MAM,  DOin  raging. 

The- form  under  which  an  Edomite  name  appears, 
which,  in  Gen.  36.  22,  is  given  Hemam.  Gesenius 
considers  Homam  the  original  form.     B.C.  1760. 

1  Ch.  1.  39  And  the  sons  of  Lotan;  Hori,  and  H. 
HOME  — 
l.Tent,  bnx  ohel, 

Judg.  19    9  get . .  on  your  way,  that  thou  mayest  go  ho. 

2.1101136,  rra  bayith. 

Gen.  39. 16  laid  up . .  garment . .  until  his  lord  came  h. 

43.  16  Bring  (these)  men  home,  and  slay,  and  ma. 

43.  26  whenJosephcamehonie.theybroughthim 
Exod.  9. 19  beast  which,  .shall  not  be  brought  home 
Lev.  18.  9  born  at  home,  or  born  abroad . .  their  nak. 
Deut  24.  5  he  shall  be  free  at  home  one  year,  and  shall 
Josh.  2.  iS  all  thy  father's  household,  home  unto  thee 

1  Sa.  6.    7  and  bring  their  calves  home  from  them 

6.  10  and  shut  up  their  calves  at  home 

10.  26  Saul  also  went  home  to  Gibeah;  and  there 
24.  22  Saul  went  home  ;  but  David  and  his  men 

2  Sa.  13.   7  Then  David  sent  home  to  Tamar,  saying, 

1  Ki.   5.  14  a  month,  .in  Lebanon.. two  months  at  ho. 

2  Ki.  14.  10  glory,  .and  tarry  at  home  ;  for  why  should 
2  Ch.  25.  19  abide  now  at  home  ;  why  shouldest  thou 
Esth.  5. 10  when  he  came  home,  he  sent  and  called  for 
Psa.  63.  12  she  that  tarried  at  home  divided  the  spoil 
Prov.  7.  19  For  the  goodman  (is)  not  at  home,  he  is 

7.  20  (and)  will  come  home  at  the  day  appointed 
Eccl.  12.  5  because  man  goeth  to  his  long  home  ;  and 
Jer.  59.  14  that  he  should  carry  him  home :  so  he  dw. 
Lam.  1.  2oBehold,OLORD..at  home  (there is)  as de. 
Hag.  1.    9  when  ye  brought  (it)  home,  I  did  blow  up. 

3. Place,  nipo  maqom. 

1  Sa.   2.  20  And  they  went  unto  their  own  home 

2  Ch.25.  10  togohomeagain.  .andtheyreturnedhome 

4.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  312?  shub,  5. 

Judg.  ii.   9  If  ye  bring  me  home  again  to  fight  against 
Ruth  1.  21  Lord  hath  brought  me  home  again  empty 
2  Sa.  14. 13  the  king  doth  not  fetch  home  again  his 
Job   39.  i2thathewillbringhoniethyseed,andgather 

5. Middle,  midst,  Tiin,  qn  tok,  tavek. 

Deut  21. 12  thou  shalt  bring  her  home  to  thine  house 

Q.O)ie's  oW7i proper (house),X$tos(olKos)idios(oikos). 
Acts  21.   6  we  took  ship ;  and  they  returned  home 
1  Ti.    5.    4  let  them  learn  first  to  show  piety  at  home 

7»Hbuse,  household,  olhia  oikia. 

Matt.  8.   6  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy 

8, House,  Iioitsehold,  oTkos  oikos. 

Mark  5. 19  Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how 
Luke  15.    6  when  he  cometh  home, he  calleth  together 

1  Co.  it.  34  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him  eat  at  home 

14.  35  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  home :  for 

HOME,  their  own — 

Their  own,  eavrovs  (ace.)  heautous. 

John2o.  10  disciples  went,  .again  unto  [their own  h.] 
HOME,  to  he  at  — 
To  be  among  one's  people,  be  at  home,  ivZ-ofxea. 

2  Co.  5.    6  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body,  we  are 
HOME,  to  go  — 

To  turn  back,  3W  shub. 

1  Sa.  18.  2  would  let  him  no  more  go  home  to  his  f. 
HOME,  to  keep  at  home  — 
l.To  remain  at  home,  rm  navah. 

Hab.    2.    5  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at  home 
2.  Watching  or  keeping  the  house,  oinovpSs  oikouros, 

Titus  2.   5  [keepers  at  home],  good,  obedient  to  their 

HOME  again —  [See  Bring,  fetch.] 

HOME  horn  — 

1. Native,  indigenoxts,  aboriginal,  rniN  ezrach. 

Exodi2.  49  One  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home  born 

2. Born  in  the  house,  IV5  ~vh\  yelid  bayith. 

Jer.     2.  i4(is)heahomeborn(slave)?whyishe  spoil.? 

HOMES,  — 

Homer,  (a  dry  measu.re  =  10  ephahs),  Tph  chomer. 
Lev.  27. 16  an  homer  of  barley  seed  (shall  be  valued) 
Numn.  32  that  gathered  least  gathered  ten  homers 
Isa.     5. 10  seed  of  an  homer  shall  yield  an  ephah 
Eze.  45.  11  may  contain  the  tenth  part  of  an  homer 
45. 11  theephah  the  tenth  part  of  an  homer:  the 
45.  11  measure  thereof  shall  he  after  the  homer 
45.  13, 13  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer  of 
45.  14  the  cor,  (which  is)  an  homer  of  ten  baths 
45. 14  for  ten  baths  (are)  an  homer 
Hos.  3.   2  and  (for)  an  homer  of  barley,  and  an  half 

HOMER,  half  — 

Lethek,  (a  half  homer),  "i\rr?  letliek. 

Hos.   3.    2  of  barley,  and  an  half  homer  of  barley 

HONEST  (thing)  — 

1. Excellent,  koAos  kalos. 

Luke  8.  15  which  in  an  honest  and  good  heart,  having 
Rom  12.  17  Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of 

3  Co.   8.  21  Providing  for  honest  things,  not  only  in 
1  Pe.  2. 12  conversation  honest  among  the  Gentiles 

62 


2.  Venerable,  grave,  ae/xvos  semnos. 

Phil.  4.    8  whatsoever  things  (are)  honest  whatsoev. 
HONEST,  that  which  is  — 
That  which  is  excellent,  to  Ka\bv  to  kalon. 

2  Co.  13.    7  ye  should  do  that  which  is  honest,  though 
HONESTLY  — 
1. Decently,  becomingly,  evaxyfJ-di/cDs  euschemonos. 

Rom  13.  13  Let  us  walk  honestly  as  in  the  day ;  not 

1  Th.  4.  12  ye  may  walk  honestly  toward  them  that 

2. Excellently,  kclXoos  kalos. 

Heb.  13.  iS  in  all  things  willing  to  live  honestly 
HONESTY  — 
Gravity,  venerableness,  (t^ui/oVt;?  semnotes. 

1  Ti.    2.   2  peaceable  life  in.  .godliness  and  honesty 
HONEY  — 
1. Honey,  vyt  debash. 

Gen.  43.  11  a  little  honey,  spices,  and  myrrh,  nuts, and 

Exod.  3.    8,  17  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey 

13.  5  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  that 
16.  31  taste,  .(was)  like  wafersXmade)  with  honey 
33.   3  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey :  for 

Lev.    2. 11  norany  honey,  in  any  offering  of  the  Lord 

20.  24  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

NU11113.  27  it  floweth  with  milk  and  honey;  and  this 

14.  8  aland  which  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
16. 13,  14  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

Deut.  6.    3  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
8.    8  pomegranates,  .landuf  oil olive,and honey 
11.   9  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

26.  9,  15  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

27.  3  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
31  20  land,  .that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
32. 13  made  him  to  suck  honey  out  of  the  rock 

Josh.  5.    6  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
Judg  14.    8  bees  and  honey  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion 
14.    9  the  honey  out  of  the  carcase  of  the  lion 
14.  18  What  (is)  sweeter  than  honey  ?  and  what 

1  Sa.  14.  25  and  there  was  honey  upon  the  ground 

14.  26  the  honey  dropped ;  but  no  man  put  his 
14.  29  because  I  tasted  a  little  of  this  honey 
14.  43  I  did  but  taste  a  little  honey  with  the 

2  Sa.  17.  29  honey,  and  butter,  and  sheep,  and  cheese 

1  Ki.  14.    3  And  take . .  a  cruse  of  honey,  and  go  to  him 

2  Ki.  18.  32  a  laud  of  oil  olive  and  of  honey,  that  ye 
2  Ch.  31.    5  honey,  and.  .all  the  increase  of  the  field 
Job  20. 17  the  floods,  the  brooks  of  honey  and  butter 
Psa.  19.  10  sweeter  also  than  honey,  and  the  honey  c. 

81. 16  with  honey  out  of  the  rock  should  I  have 
119.  103  (yea,  sweeter)  than  honey  to  my  mouth 

Prov.24.  13  My  son,  eat  thou  honey,  because  (it  is) 
25.  16  Hast  thou  found  honey?  eat  so  much  as  is 
25.  27  (It  is)  not  good  to  eat  much  honey ;  so  for 

Song  4.  11  honey  and  milk  (are)  under  thy  toi./'ue 
5.    1  I  have  eaten  my  honey  comb  with  my  ho. 

Isa.     7.  15  honey  shall  he  eat,  that  he  may  know  to 
7.  22  honey  shall  every  one  eat  (that  is)  left  in 

Jer.  11.    5  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  a  (it) 
32.  22  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey 
41.    8  and  of  barley,  and  of  oil,  and  of  honey 

Eze.  3.  3  was  in  my  mouth  as  honey  for  sweetness 
16.  13  thou  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and 
16.  19  honey,  (wherewith)  I  fed  thee:  thou  hast 
20.   6,  15  land,  .flowing  with  milk  and  honey 

27. 17  and  Pannagj  and  honey,  and  oil,  and  balm 

2, Honey,  fie\i  meli. 

Matt.  3.    4  and  his  meat  was  locusts  and  wild  honey 
Mark  1.    6  and  he  did  eat  locusts  and  wild  honey 
Rev.  10.   9  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  sweet  as  honey 
10.  jo  it  was  in  my  mouth  sweet  as  honey :  and 
HONEY  COMB  — 
1, Dropping,  juice,  nDJ  nopheth, 

Prov.  5.    3  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  (as).,  honeyc. 
24. 13  honeycomb,  (which  is)  sweet  to  thytaste 
27.    7  The  full  soul  loatheth  an  honey  comb 
Song  4. 11  lips,0(my)spouse,drop(as)thehoney  co. 

2,Comb  of  honey,  cb^n  rny:  yarath  haddebash. 

1  Sa.  14.  27  dipped  it  in  an  honey  comb,  and  put  his 
Z.Comb  (of  honey),  ny;  yaar. 

Song  5.    1  Ihaveeatenmy'oneycomb withmyhoney 
^..Dropping  of  the  flouring s,  D'flli,  ri3J  nopheth  tsuph. 

Psa.  19. 10  sweeter  also  than  honey,  and  the  honeyc. 
5. A  flowing  of  honey,  wit*]**  tsuph  debash. 

Prov  16.  24  Pleasant  words  (are  as)  an  honey  comb 
Q.An  honeycomb,  fjutXHraiov  Kr\piov  melission  kerion. 

Luke24. 42  of  a  broiled  fish,  and  of  an  honey  comb 
HONOUR  — 
1. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  inn  hadar. 

1  Ch.16.  27  Glory  and  honour  (are)  in  his  presence 

Psa.    8.   5  hast  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honour 
145.    5  of  the  glorious  honour  of  thy  majesty 
149.    9  this  honour  have  all  his  saints.    Praise 

Prov3i.  25  Strength  and  honour  (are)  her  clothing 

2.  Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  inn  heder. 

Dan.   4.  36  honour  and  brightness  returned  unto  me 
5. 18  kingdom, andmajesty, andglory, andhon. 

3.  Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  WTin  hadarah. 

Provi4.  28  multitude  of  people(is)  the  king's  honour 
4. Honour,  beauty,  brilliancy,  "nn  hod. 

NUIU27.  20  shaitput(some)of  thine  honour  uponhim 
Psa.  21.    5  honour  and  majesty  hast  thoulaid  upon 
96.   6  Honour  and  majesty  (are)  before  him 
104.    1  thou  art  clothed  with  honour  and  majesty 


17' 
18, 
26. 
32 

Psa.    7, 

26. 

66. 

112 

Prov.  3. 


Eccl. 


Prov.  5.   9  Lest  thou  give  thine  honour  unto  others 
Dan.  11.  21  shall  not  give  the  honour  of  the  kingdom 
d.Preciousncss,  honour,  np*  yeqar. 

Esth.  1.   4  and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty 

1.  20  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands  honour 
6.  3  What  honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done 
6.   7,  9,  9,  11  the  kingdelighteth  to  honour 

6.    6  delight  to  do  honour  more  than  to  myself  ? 

8.  16  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy,  andhono. 

Psa.  49.  12  man  (being)  in  honour  abideth  not :  he  is 

49.  20  Man  (that  is)  in  honour,  and  understandeth 

6.Preciousness,  honour,  "ij£  yeqar. 

Dan.  2.   6  gifts  and  rewards  and  great  honour 

4.  30  power,  and  forthe  honourof  myrnajesty? 

7.  Weight,  heaviness,  honour,  i'U3  kabod. 

Gen.  49.  6  unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  benot 
Nuni24-  11  the  Lord  hath  kept  thee  back  from  honour 
1  Ki.   3. 13  also  given  thee,  .both  riches  and  honour 

1  Ch.17.  18  to  thee  for  the  honour  of  thy  servant? 

29.  12  richesandhonour(come)  of  thee,  and  thou 
29.  28  old  age,  full  of  days,  riches,  'nd  honour 

2  Ch.  1.  11  hast  not  asked  riches,  wealth,  t  honour 
12  give  thee  riches,  and  wealth,  cl  ^  honour 

5  and  he  hadriches  and  honourin  ab*    dance 

1  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundancv,  Mid 
18  neither  (shall  it  be)  for  thine  honour  from 
27  had  exceedii     much  riches  and  honour 
33  inhabitants .    lid  him  honour  at  his  death 

5  yea,  let  him.  .lay  mine  honourin  the  dust 

8  and  the  place  where  thine  honour  dwelleth 

2  Sing  forth  the  honour  of  his  name ;  make 

9  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  honour 
16  (and)  in  her  left  hand  riches  and  honour 
18  Riches  and  honour  (are)  wiu    ~^q  ;  (yea) 
16  A  gracious  woman  retaineth  ho^ur ;  and 
33  wisdom ;  and  before  honour  (is)  humility 
12  is  haughty,  and  before  honour  (is)  humil. 

3  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  strife 
21  findeth  life,  righteousness,  and  honour 

4  Byhumility.  .(are)riches,  honour,  and  life 
2  honour  of  kings  (is)  to  search  out  a  matter 

1  so  hononr  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool 

5  so  (is)  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool 
23  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit 

2  God  hath  given  riches,  wealth,  and  honour 
10.    1  is  in  reputation  for  wisdom  (and)  honour 

8. Beauty,  glory,  rnxr^i,  rnxDri  tipharah,  tipheretlu 
Deut  26.  19  in  praise,  and  in  name,  and  in  honour 
Judg.  4.    9  journey . .  shall  not  be  for  thine  honour 
Psa.  71.    8  (with)  thy  praise  (and  with)  thy  honour 
Jer.  33.   9  an  honour  before  all  the  nations  of  the 

9.  Glory,  S6^a  doxa. 

John  5.  41  I  receive  not  honour  from  men 

5.  44  which  receive  honour  one  of  another,  and 

5.  44  not  the  honour  that  (cometh)  from  God 

8.  54  my  honour  is  nothing  :  it  is  my  Father 

2  Co.  6.  8  By  honour  and  dishonour,  by  evil  report 
Rev.  19.    7  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  honour  to  him 

10.  Weight,  honour,  rtyA\  time. 

John  4.  44  prophethathnohonourinhisown country 
Acts  28.  10  Who  also  honoured  us  with  many  honours 
Rom.  2.    7  seekforgloryandhonourandimmortality 

2.  10  honour,  and  peace,  to  every  man  that  w 

9.  21  power,  .to  make  one  vessel  unto  honour 

12.  10  in  honour  preferring  one  another 

13.  7  fear  to  whom  fear;  honour  to  whom  honour 
1  Co.  12.  23  upon  these  we  bestow  more  abundant  ho. 

12.  24  abundanthonom-tothat(part)whichlack 
Col.    2.  23  not  in  any  honour  to  the  satisfying  of 
1  Th.  4.    4  to  possess,  .in  sanctification  and  honour 

1  Ti.    1.  17  (be)  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever 

5. 17  he  counted  worthy  of  double  honour 

6.  1  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  honour 
6. 16  to  whom  (be)  honour  and  power  everlasi. 

2  Ti.   2. 20  some  to  honour,  and  some  to  dishonour 

2.  21  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sancti. 
Heb.   2.    7  crownedst  him  with  glory  and  honour 

2.  9  Jesus . .  crowned  with  glory  and  honour 

3.  3  he  who  hath  builded.  .hath  more  honour 
5.  4  no  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself 

1  Pe.  1.    7  found  unto  praise  and  honour  and  glory 

3.  7  husbands,  .giving  honour  unto  the  wife 

2  Pe.  1. 17  he  received  from  God  the  Father  honour 
Rev.   4.   9  give  glory  and  honour  and  thanks  to  him 

4.  11  to  receive  glory  and  honour  and  power 
5. 12  Worthy,  .to  receive,  .honour,  and  glory 

5.  13  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  po. 

7.  12  honour,  and  power,  and  might,  (be)  unto 
19.    1  [honour],  and  power,  unto  the  Lord  our  G. 
21.  24  do  bring  their  glory  and  honour  into  it 
21.  26  bringtheglory[andhonour]  ofthenations 

HONOUR,  to  get  — 

To  be  or  become  Iwnoured  or  mighty,  133  kdbed.  2. 

Exodi4.  17  I  will  get  me  honour  upon  Pharaoh,  and 

14. 18  when  I  have  gotten  me  honour  upon  Ph. 

HONOUR,  to  — 

1.  To  honour,  -nrr  hadar. 

Lev.  19.  15  norhonourthepersonofthemighty:  (but) 
19.  32  Thou  shalt.  .honour  the  face  of  the  old 

2. To  honour,  Tin  hadar,  3. 

Dan.   4.  34  I  praised  and  honoured  him  that  liveth 
4.  37  Now  I . .  extol  and  honour  the  king  of  he. 

3.  To  make  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  *^3  kabed,  Z. 
Exod2o.  12  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother ;  that 


HONOUR 


490 


HOPE 


Deut.  5. 
Judg.  9. 

1  Sa.    2. 

2. 
15- 

2  Sa.  10. 
1  Ch.19. 
Psa.  15. 

^  9X* 
Prov.  3. 

14. 

Isa.  29. 

43- 
43- 
58. 

Lam.  1. 

Dan.  n. 
11. 

Mai.    1. 


Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  as  the 
wherewith  by  me  they  honour  God  and 
and  honuurest  thy  sons  above  me,  to  make 
for  them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour 
I  have  sinned  :  (yet)  honour  me  now,  I 
Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour 
Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour 
but  he  honoureth  them  that  fear  the  Lord 
I  will  deliver  him,  and  honour  him 
Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and 
he  that  honoureth  him  hath  mercy  on  the 
this  people . .  with  their  lips  do  honour  me 
The  beast  of  the  field  shall  honour  me 
neither  hast  thou  honoured  me  with  thy 
Shalt  honour  him,  not  doing  thine  own 
all  that  honoured  herdespiseher,  because 
in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  God  of 
and  a  god.  .shall  he  honour  with  gold 
A  sou  honoureth  (his)  father,  and  a  serv. 


4.  To  make  glorious,  8o£d{a>  doxazo. 

John  8.  54  Jesus  answered,  if  I  honour  myself,  my 
8.  54  it  is  my  Father  that  honoureth  me ;  of 

0.T0  make  heavy,  honour,  rifxaw  timao. 

Matt  15.  4  Honour  thy  father  and  mother :  and,  He 
15.  6  honour  not  his  father  or  his  mother,  (he) 
15.  8  honoureth  me  with  (their)  lips;but  their 
19. 19  Honour  thy  father  and  (thy)  mother;  and 

Mark  7.    6  Thispeoplehonourethmewith(their)lips 

7.  10  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother;  and 

10.  19  Defraud  not,  Honour  thy  father  and  moth. 
Lukei8.  20  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother 
John  5.  23  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  hon. 

5.  23  He  that  honoureth  not  the  Son  honoureth 

8.  49  I  honour  my  Father,  and  ye  do  dishonour 
12.  26  man  serve  me,  him  will  (my)  Father  hon. 

Acts  28.  10  Who  also  honoured  us  with  many  honours 
Eph.  6.  2  Honour  thy  father  and  mother;  which  is 
1  Ti.    5.    3  Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed 

1  Pe.   2. 17  Honour  all  (men).   Love  the  brotherhood 

2.  17  Fear  God.    Honour  the  king 

HONOUR,  without  — 

Without  honour,  iinho7ioured,  dri/xos  atimos. 

Matti3.  57  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  save  in 
Mark  6.    4  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  but  iu 

HONOUR,  to  do,  bring,  or  promote  to  — 
To  make  weighty,  heavy,  honoured,  "133  kabed,  3. 
Num.  22.  17  I  will  promote  thee  unto  very  great  hon. 

22.  37  am  I  not  able . .  to  promote  thee  to  honour  ? 
24.  11  I  thought  to  promote  thee  unto  great  ho. 

Judg  13.  17  sayings  come  to  pass  we  may  do  thee  ho.  ? 
Prov.  4.    S  she  shall  bring  thee  to  honour,  when  thou 

HONOUR,  to  come  to,  or  be  had  in  — 

1.  To  be  oi'  become  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  "133. 
Job    14.  21  His  sons  come  to  honour,  and  he  knoweth 

2.  To  be  or  become  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  133,  2. 

2  Sa.    6.  23  maid  servants.,  of  them  shall  I  be  had  in  h. 

HONOUR  self,  to  — 

To  reckon  self heavy,  weighty ,honoHred,~i23kabed,7 '. 
Prov.  12.   9  (is)  better  than  he  that  honoureth  himself 

HONOURABLE  — 

1. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  Tin  hod. 

Psa.  1 11.    3  His  work(is)  honourable  and  glorious;  and 

2.  To  be  or  become  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  "133,  2. 
Gen.  34.  19  he  (was)  more  honourable  than  all  the  h. 
Nuni22.  15  sent,  .princes.,  more  honourable  than  th. 

1  Sa.   9.   6  a  man  of  God,  and  (he  is)  an  honourable 

22. 14  goeth . .  and  is  honourable  in  thine  house  ? 

2  Sa.  23. 19  Was  he  not  most  honourable  of  three  ? 

23.  23  He  was  more  honourable  than  the  thirty 
1  Ch.  4.    9  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren 

11.  21  he  was  more  honourable  than  the  two,  for 
11.  25  he  was  honourable  among  the  thirty,  but 

Isa.     3.    5  and  the  base  against  the  honourable 

23.    8  whose  traffickers  (are)  the  honourable  of 
23.    9  bring  into  contempt  all  the  honourable  of 

3.  To  be  made  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,il$  kabed,  4. 
Isa.   58. 13  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  honour. 

4.  Weight,  heaviness,  honour,  1133  kabod. 

Isa.     5.  13  and  their  honourable  men  (are)  famished 

6.  Glorious,  in  glory,  ev8o£os  endoxos. 

1  Co.  4.  10  yc  (arc)  honourable,  but  we  (are)  despised 

6.  Well  fashioned,  sva'x'htJ-wv  euschemdu. 

M;irki5.  43  Joseph.. an  honourable  counsellor,  which 

Acts  13.  50  stirred  up  the  devout  and  honourable  w. 

17. 12  of  honourable  women  which  were  Greeks 

7.  Weighty,  honourable,  ri/itos  thnios. 

Heb.  13.    4  Marriage  (is)honourable  in  all,  and  theb. 
S.To  lift  tip  the  face,  D'JD  ifys  nasa  p>hanim. 

2  Ki.  5.  1  Naaman..  was  a  great  man.,  and  honour. 
Isa.     3.    3  the  honourable  man,  and  the  counsellor 

y.  15  The  ancient  and  honourable,  he  (is)  the  h. 

HONOURABLE,  less  — 

Without  honour,  or  Weight,  artfios  atimos. 
1  Co.  12.  23  which  we  think  to  be  less  honourable 

HONOURABLE,  more  — 

Honourable,  in  honour,  cvti/jlos  entimos. 

Luke  14.  8  lest  a  more  honourable  man  than  thou  be 


Isa. 
Jer. 
Eze. 

Mic. 


HONOURABLE,  to  be  — 

Tobeor  become  heavy, weighty, honour  ed,~^'2'3kabed,% 

Isa.  43.  4  thou  hast  been  houourable,  and  I  have 
HONOURABLE,  to  make  — 
To  make  honourable,  -nx  adar,  5. 

Isa.   42.  21  magnify  the  law,  and  make  (it)  honour. 
HONOURABLE  man  or  woman  — 
l.To  be  heavy,  weighty,  honourable,  "133  kabed,  2. 

Nah.   3.  10  and  they  cast  lots  for  her  honourable  men 

2.  Lifted  up  of  face,  D'jS  m&3  nesu  phanim. 

Job  22.    8  and  the  honourable  man  dwelt  in  it 
Z.  Precious,  rare,  *ijj;  yagar. 

Psa.  45.   9  (were)  among  thy  honourable  women 
HONOURED,  to  be  — 
1 .  To  be  or  become  honoured  or  adorned,  Tin  hadar,  2. 

Lam.  5.  12  the  faces  of  elders  were  not  honoured 
2.To  be  or  become  weighty,  heavy,  honoured.  T33,  2. 

Exodi4.    4  and  I  will  be  honoured  upou  Pharaoh,  and 

3.  To  be  made  weighty,  heavy,  honoured,  133  kabed,  4. 

Prov  13.  18  that  regardeth  reproof  shall  be  honoured 

27. 18  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  bono. 
4.7*0  make  glorious,  So£tL(w  doxazo. 

1  Co.  12.  26  or  one  member  be  honoured,  all  the  me. 
HOOD  — 

A  hood,  diadem,  *]*jy  tsaniph. 

Isa.     3.  23  the  fine  linen,  and  the  hoods,  and  the  ve. 
HOOF  — 
Hoof,  npn§  parsak. 

Exod  10.  26  there  shall  not  an  hoof  be  left  behind :  for 
Lev.  11.   3  Whatsoever  parteth  the  hoof,  and  is  clo. 
11.   4  divide  the  hoof,  .divideth  not  the  hoof 
11.    5  And  the  coney.,  divideth  not  the  hoof ;  he 
11,   6  cheweth  the  cud,  but  divideth  not  the  h. 
11.   7  the  swine,  though  he  divide  the  hoof,  and 
11,  26  of  every  beast  which  divideth  the  hoof 
Deut  14..    6  every  beast  that  parteth  the  hoof,  and  cl. 
14.   7  the  cloven  hoof,  .but  divide  not  the  hoof 
14.    8  the  swine,  because  it  divideth  the  hoof 
5.  28  their  horses'  hoofs  shall  be  counted  like 
47,    3  noise  of  the  stamping  of  the  hoofs  of  his 
26. 1 1  With  the  hoofs  of  his  horses  shall  he  tread 
32.  13  neither  shall,  .the  hoofs  of  beasts  trouble 
4. 13  I  will  make  thy  hoofs  brass;  and  thoush. 

HOOFS,  to  have  — 

To  divide,  have  hoofs,  ens  paras,  5. 

Psa.  69.  31  ox  (or)  bullock  that  hath  horns  and  hoofs 
HOOK  — 
l.Reed,  JiD^x  agmon. 

Job  41.    2  Canst  thou  put  an  hook  into  his  nose?  or 
2.1/ook,  peg,  11  vav. 

Exod26.  32  their  hooks  (shall  be  of)  gold,  upon  the 
26. 37  their  hooks  (shall  be  of)  gold :  and  thou 
27.  10,  11  the  hooks  of  the  pillars  and  their  fill. 
27.  17  their  hooks  (shall  be  of)  silver,  and  their 
36.  36  their  hooks  (were  of)  gold  ;  and  he  cast 
36.  38  five  pillars  of  it  with  their  hooks :  and  he 
38-  10, 11, 12, 1 7  the  hooks  of  the  pillars  and  their 

38. 19  their  hooks  (of)  silver,  and  the  overlaying 
38.  28  he  made  hooks  for  the  pillars,  and  overl. 

3. Hook,  chain,  ring  (fornosc),  Tin,  nn  chachi,  chach. 

2  Ki.  19*28  therefore  I  will  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose 
Isa.  37.  29  therefore  will  I  put  my  hook  iu  thy  nose 
Eze.  29.  4  But  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy  jaws,  and  I 

38.   4  I  will . .  put  hooks  into  thy  jaws,  and  I  will 

4. Angle,  hook,  -Tpn  chahkah. 

Job  41.    1  Canst  thou  draw.,  leviathan  with  an  hook? 
5. Thorn,  hook,  njy  isinnah. 

Amos  4.    2  that  he  will  take  you  away  with  hooks 
6.  Double  hooks,  D'lji?^  shephattayim,. 

Eze.  40. 43  within  (were)  hooks,  .fastened  round 
7. A  hook,fishing  hook,  6,yKiarpov  agkistron. 

Matt  17.  27  cast  an  hook,  and  take  up  the  fish  that 
HOOK,  fish  — 
Thorn,  fish,  hook,  nan  yd  sir  dugah. 

Amos  4.  s  he  will  take,  .your  posterity  with  fish  h. 
[See  also  Pruning  hook.] 

HOPE  — 

l.Conftdence,  rm  bctach. 

Psa.  16.   9  Therefore,  .my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  h. 
2.Confidence,  pn&3  bittachon. 

Eccl.  9.   4  joined  to  all  the  living  there  is  hope  :  for 
^.Confidence,  folly,  *?D3  kesel. 

Job     8.  14  Whose  hope  shall  he  cut  off,  and  whose 
31.  24  If  I  have  made  gold  my  hope,  or  have 

Psa.  78.   7  That  they  might  set  their  hope  in  God,  and 

<i. Confidence,  na3p  mibtach. 

Jer.  17.    7  Blessed  (is)  the  man.  .whose  hope  the  L. 
5. Refuge,  npnp  machseh. 

Jer.  17.  17  Be  not  a  terror  unto  me :  thou  (art)  my  h. 

Joel   3.  16  the  Lord  (will  be)  the  hope  of  his  people 

6. Expectation,  rnpp  miqvak. 

Ezra  10.    2  there  is  hope  in  Israel  concerning  this 
Jer.  14.    8  O  the  hope  of  Israel,  the  saviour  thereof 

17.  13  O  Lord,  the  hope  of  Israel,  all  that  fors. 

50.   7  even  the  LORD,  the  hope  of  their  fathers 


26. 
27 


Rom. 


7. Hope,  waiting,  ~cb  seber. 

Psa.  1 19. 116  and  let  me  not  be  ashamed  of  my  hope 

146.  5  his  help,  whose  hope  (is)  in  the  Loud  his 

8. Hope,  expectation,  rhrpn  tocheleth. 

Job  41.    9  Behold,  the  hope  of  him  is  in  vain  :  shall 

Psa.  39.    7  Lord,  what  wait  I  for  ?  my  hope  (is)  in  thee 

Prov  10.  28  The  hope  of  the  righteous  (shall  be)  glad. 

11.    7  and  the  hope  of  unjust  (men)  perisheth 

13. 12  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick :  but 

Lam.  3.  18  My  strength  and  my  hope  is  perished  from 

9.Ho2)e,  expectation,  nipn  tiqrah. 

Ruth  1.  12  I  have  hope,  (if)  I  should  have  an  husband 

Job     4.    6  thyhope,  and  the  uprightness ot  thy  ways? 

5.  16  the  poor  hath  hope,  and  iniquity  stoppeth 

7.  6  My  days,  .are  spent  without  hope 

8.  13  and  the  hypocrite's  hope  shall  perish 
11.  18.  shalt  be  secure,  because  there  is  hope 

11.  20  hope  (shall  be  as)  the  giving  up  of  the 

14.  7  there  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down 
14. 19  and  thou  destroyest  the  hope  of  man 

17.  15  where  (is)  now  my  hope?  as  for  my  hope 
19.  10  mine  hope  hath  he  removed  like  a  tree 
27.    8  what(is)thehopeof  the  hypocrite, though 
Psa.  71.    5  thou  (art)  my  hope,  O  Lord  Gc  ):  (thou  art) 
Prov.  19.  iS  Chasten  thy  son  while  there  is  hope,  and 
26. 12  (there  is)  more  hope, of  a  fool  than  of  him 
29.  20  (there  is)  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him 
Jer.  31.  17  there  is  hope  in  thine  end,  saith  the  Lord 
Lam.  3.  29  in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope 
Eze.  19.   5  her  hope  was  lost,  then  she  took  another 
37.  11  Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost 
Hos.    2.  15  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope 
Zech.g .  12  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope 

10.  Hope,  eAiris  elpis. 

Acts  2.  26  moreover  also  my  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope 
16.  19  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone 

23.  6  of  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead 

24.  15  have  hope  toward  God,  which  theythemse 
26.    6  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God  unto 

7  For  which  hope's  sake,  king  Agrippa,  lam 
20  all  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was  then 
20  for  the  hope  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with 
18  Who  against  hope  believed  in  hope,  that 
5.    2  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God 
5.    4  patience, experience;  and  experience.hope 
5.    5  hope  maketh  not  ashamed ;  because  the 
8. 20  him  who  hath  subjected  (the  same)  in  h. 
8.  24  hope :  but  hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope 

12.  12  Rejoicing  in  hope;  patient  in  tribulation 

15.  4  that  we  through  patience .  .might  have  h. 
15-  13  the  God  of  hope  fill .  .ye  may  abound  in  h. 

10  he  that  ploweth  should  plow  in  hope;  and 
10  [in  hope  should  be  partaker  of  his  hope] 
13  abideth  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  these  th. 

7  our  hope  of  you(is)stedfast,  knowing,  that 
12  Seeing  then  that  we  have  such  hope,  we 
15  having  hope,  when  your  faith  is  increased 

5  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by 
iS  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling 
12  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world 

4  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling 
20  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  (my)  hope 

5  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven 
1.  23  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel 
1.  27  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory 

1.  3  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

2.  19  For  what  (is)  our  hope, or  joy,  orcrownof 
4. 13  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope 

5.  8  and  for  an  helmet  the  hope  of  salvation 
2.  16  consolation  good  hope  through  grace 

1  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (which  is)  our  hope 

2  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that 

2.  13  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the 

3.  7  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life 
3.    6  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end 

6.  11  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end 

6.  18  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us 

7.  19  but  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope  (did) 
1.    3  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope 
1.  21  that  your  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God 
3. 15  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  with 
3.   3  And  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him 

HOPE,  to  — 

l.To  be  confident,  trust,  lean  on,  na3  baiach. 

Job    6.  20  wer«  confounded  because  they  had  hoped 

2.  To  stay,  "?in  chul 

Lam.  3.  26  (a  man)  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait 

3.7"  wait  withhojye,  7$  yachal,  3. 

Job     6. 11  What(is)my  strength,  that  I  shouldhope? 
Psa.  31,  24  courage,  .all  ye  that  hope  in  the  Lord 
33.  18  upon  them  that  hope  in  his  mercy 
33. 22  be  upon  us,  according  as  we  hope  in  thee 
71. 14  But  I  will  hope  continually,  and  will  yet 
ng.  43  for  I  have  hoped  in  thy  judgments 
119.  49  upon  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope 
119.  74  glad,  .because  I  have  hoped  in  thy  word 
1 19.  81  My  soul  f  ainteth .  -  (but)  I  hope  in  thy  word 
119.  ii4Thou(art)..myshield:  I  hope  in  thy  wo. 
119. 147  prevented,  .and  cried  ;  I  hoped  in  thy  wo. 

130.  7  Let  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord:  for  with  the 

131.  3  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth 

147.  11  pleasure,  .in  those  that  hope  in  his  mercy 
Eze.  13.    6  to  hope  that  they  would  confirm  the  word 

i.To  wait  with  hope,  ^n;  yachal,  5. 

Psa.  38. 15  in  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  hope:  thouwilthear 
42.  5,  11  hope  thou  in  God;  for  I  shall  yet  praise 
43-   5  hope  in  God ;  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him 


I  (Jo 

9 

9- 

I?- 

iCo 

I. 

3- 

10. 

Gal. 

s- 

Eph. 

I. 

2. 

4- 

riu! 

1. 

Col. 

z. 

[Th. 


sTh.  : 
jTi.  : 
Titus 


Heb. 


:Te. 


[  Jo. 


HOPE 


491 


HORSE 


Fsa.130.   5  soul  doth  wait,  in  his  word  do  I  hope 
Lam.  3.  24  ray  portion,  .therefore  will  I  hope  in  him 
5.To  hope,  wait,  look  for,  T3£  sabar,  3. 

Esth.  9.  1  enemies  of  the  Jews  hoped  to  have  power 
Psa.119.  166  Lord,  I  have  hoped  fur  thy  salvation,  and 
Isa.   3S.  iS  they  that  go.  .cannot  hope  for  thy  truth 

6.  To  hope,  forcja  elpizo. 

Luke  6.  34  lend  (to  them)  of  whom  ye  hope  to  receive 
23.    8  lie  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done 

Acts  24.  26  He  hoped  also  that  iuoneyshould  have  been 
26.    7  Unto  which,  .our  twelve  tribes,  .hope  to 

1  Co.  13.    7  hopeth  all  tilings,  endureth  all  things 

2  Co.  8.  5  not  as  we  hoped,  but  first  gave  their  own 
Phil.    2.  23  Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send  presently 

1  Ti.  3.  14  write  I.  .hoping  to  come  unto  thee  shortly 
i  Pe.   1.  13  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be 

HOPE,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  lean  or  trust,  rvJO  balach,  5. 

Psa.  22.    9  thou  didst  make  me  hope  (when  I  was) 

%To  cause  to  wait  with  hope,  hn\  yachal,  3. 

Psa.119.  49  uponwhich  thou  hast  causedme  to  hope  for 
Eze.  13.   6  they  have  made  (others)  to  hope  that  they 

HOPE,  to  have  — 

l.To  take  refuge,  trust,  nort  chasah. 

Prov.14.  32  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death 

l.To  wait  with  hope,  hn-r  yachal,  5. 

Lam. 3.    21  I  recall  to  my  mind,  therefore  havelhope 
3.  To  hope,  eKirifa  elpizo. 

1  C0.15. 19  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ 
HOPE  for,  to  — 
To  hope,  ikirifa  elpizo. 

Rom.  8.24  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for 
8.  25  But  if  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  (then) 

HOPE  for  again,  to  — 

To  hope  away  from,  airehirifa  apelpizo. 

Luke  6.  35  do  good,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing  a. 
HOPE,  to  be  no  — 
To  be  desperate,  despairing,  e>n;  yaash,  2. 

Isa.  57. 10  saidst  thou  not,  There  is  no  hope :  thou  h. 

Jer.    2.  25  but  thou  saidst  There  is  no  hope:  no;  for 
18. 12  And  they  said,  There  is  no  hope :  but  we 
HOPED  for,  thing  — 
To  hope,  £\iri(w  elpizo. 

Heb.  n.    1  faith  is  the  substance  of  tilings  hoped  for 

HOPH'-NI,  tisn  strong. 

A  son  of  Eli  the  high  priest  and  Judge.    B.C.  1141. 
1  Sa.    1.    3  And  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  H.  andPhinehas 
2.  34  that  shall  come  upon  thy  two  sons,  on  H. 
4.    4  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  H.  and  Phinehas 

4.  ri  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  H.  and  Phinehas,  were 
4.  17  thy  two  sons  also,  H.  and  Phinehas,  are 

EOR,  *iin,  in  mountain. 

The  "mountain  of  mountains, "  on  which  Aaron  died. 

It  was  on  the  boundary  liue  of  the  land  of  Edom,  and 

was  the  next  halting  place  of  the  Israelites  after  Kadesh  ; 

they  quitted  it  for  Zalmonah,  on  the  way  to  the  Red 

Sea. 

Xuni  20.  22  the  children  of  I. . .  came  unto  mount  H. 

20.  23  spake  unto  Moses  and  Aaron  in  mount  H. 

20.  25  Take  Aaron  and  Eleazar.  .unto mount  H. 

20.  27  they  went  up  into  mount  H.  in  the  sight 

21.  4  theyjourneyed  frommount  H.  by  the  way 
Deut32.  50  as  Aaron  thy  brother  died  in  mount  H. 

HO'-RAH,  Qnn  elevated. 

A  king  of  Gezer  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  of  the  S.W. 

part  of  Palestine.    B.C.  1451. 

Josh.  10.  33  H.  king  of  Gezer  came  up  to  help  Lachish 

HO'-REB,  rnh  waste. 

The  range  of  mountains  of  which  Sinai  is  the  chief. 
Serbal  is  now  understood  to  be  the  range,  and  Jabel- 
Musa,  ( "mount  of  Moses")  to  be  Sinai.     See  Sinai. 
Exod.  3.    1  and  came  to  the  mountain  of  God.  .to  H. 
17.    6  I  will  stand,  .there  upon  the  rock  in  H. 
33.   6  Israelstripped themselves,  .by.  .mountH. 
Deut.  1.   2- eleven  days*.  .fromH.bythewayof  mount 
1.   6  The  Lord  our  God  spake  unto  us  in  H. 
1.  19  when  we  departed  from  H.,  we  went  tlir. 
4. 10  stoodest  before  the  Lord  thy  God  in  H. 
4. 15  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  H.  out  of  the 

5.  2  Lord  . .  God  made  a  covenant  with  us  in  H. 
9.   8  Also  in  H.  ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath 

18. 16  thou  desiredst  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  H. 
29.    1  the  covenant  thathe  made! with  them  in  H. 

1  Ki.   8.    9  two  tables . .  which  Moses  put  there  at  H. 

19.    8  forty  days  and  forty  nights  unto  H.  the 

2  Ch.  5.  io'two  tables  which  Moses  put.  .at  H.  when 
Psa. 106.  19  They  made  a  calf  in  H.,  and  worshipped 
Mai.    4.    4  which  I  commanded  unto  him  in  H.  for 

HO'-REM,  Dip  fortress. 

A  fortified  place  in  the  territory  of  Naphtali,  named 
with  Iron  and  Migdalel.  It  is  now  called  Hurah,  near 
Yarun,  on  a  Tell  at  the  S.  end  of  the  Wady-el-Ain.  . 

Josh  19.  38  Iron,  and  Migdal-el,  H.,  and  Beth-anath 
HOR  HA-GID'-GAD,-inarr  in  hill  nftlie  cleft. 
A  desert  station  where  the  Israelites  encamped ;  pro- 
bably the  same  as  Gudgodah  (Deut.  10.  7). 

Num33-  32  And  they  removed,  .and  encamped  at  H. 
33-  33  they  went  from  H.,  and  pitched  in  Jotb. 


HO'-RI,  *"ih,  nin  free,  noble. 

1.  A  Horite,  the  son  of  Lotan,  son  of  Seir.    B.C.  1780. 

Gen.  36.  22  And  the  children  of  Lotan  were  H.  and  H. 
36.  30  these  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  H. 
[Here  it  has  the  article  prefixed,  and  is  precisely  the 
same  word  as  that  rendered  "the  Horites"  in  Gen.  36, 
21  and  29]. 

1  Ch.  1.  39  And  the  sons  of  Lotan ;  H.,  and  Honiara 

2.  A  Simeonite  whose  son  Shaphat  was  one  of  the  spies. 

B.C.  1450. 

Nunii3.   5  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  Shaphat  the  son  of  H. 

HO'-REM,  HORITES,  "inn,  D'-inn  troglodytes. 
The  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Mount  Seir,  probably 
related  to  the  Emim  and  Rephaim.  Their  excavated 
dwellings  are  still  found  in  hundreds  in  the  sandstone 
cliffs  and  mountains  of  Edom,  but  especially  at  Petra. 
Perhaps  they  are  referred  to  in  Job  30.  6,  7. 

Gen.  14.   6  the  H.  in  their  mount  Seir,  unto  El-paran 
36. 20  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Seir  the  H.,  who 
36.  21  these  (are)  the  dukes  of  the  H.,  the  chil. 

36.  29  These  (are)  the  dukes . .  of  the  H.  dukes 
Deut.  2.  12  TheH.  also  dwelt  in  Seir  before  time ;  but 

2.  22  when  he  destroyed  the  H.  from  before 

HOR'-MAH,  n;rm  fortress. 

Under  its  earlier  name  Zephath  it  was  the  chief  town 
of  the  king  of  a  Canaanitish  towu  on  the  S.  of  Palestine. 
After  its  reduction  by  Joshua  it  became  a  territory  of 
Judah,  but  belonged  to  Simeon  whose  territory  is  rec- 
koned as  part  of  the  former.  It  is  now  called  Es-Sii/a 
and  is  situated  in  the  gap  in  the  mountain  barrier  run- 
ning S.W.  aud  N.E.,  completing  the  plateau  of  southern 
Palestine.    See  Zephath. 

Numi4.  45  smote  them,  .discomfited  them,  .unto  H. 

21.  3  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  H. 
Deut.  1.  44  and  destroyed  you  in  Seir,  (even)  unto  H. 
Josh  12. 14  The  king  of  H.,one;  the  king  of  Arad,  one 

15.  30  And  Eltolad,  and  Chesil,  and  H. 
19.   4  And  Eltolad,  and  Bethul,  and  H. 

Judg.  1.  17  And  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  H. 
1  Sa.  30.  30  Aud  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  H.,  and  to 
1  Ch.  4.  30  And  at  Bethnel,  and  at  H.,  and  at  Ziklag 

HORN  — 

I. Horn,  j"3i3  qeren. 

Gen.  22. 13  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  horns :  and 
Exod27.   2  shalt  make  the  horns,  .his  horns  shall  be 

29. 12  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  with 
30.    2  the  horns  thereof  (shall  be)  of  the  same 
30.    3  sides . .  round  about,  and  the  horns  thereof 
30.  10  make  an  atonement  upon  the  horns  of  it 

37.  25  the  horns  thereof  were  of  the  same 

37.  26  sides,  .round  about,  and  the  homs  of  it 

38.  2  made  the  horns  thereof  on  the  four  corn. 
38.    2  the  horns  thereof  were  of  the  same :  and 

Lev.    4.    7,  18,  25,  30,  34  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 

8.  15  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  round 

9.  9  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  round 
16. 18  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and 

Deut33.  17  his  horns  (are  like)  the  horns  of  unicorns 
Josh.  6.    5  they  make  a  long  (blast)  with  the  ram's  h. 

1  Sa.    2.    1  mine  horn  is  exalted  in  the  Lord  ;  my  m. 

2. 10  he  shall,  .exalt  the  horn  of  his  anointed 

16.  1  Fill  thine  horn  with  oil,  and  go,  I  will 

16. 13  Samuel  took  the  horn  of  oil,  and  anointed 

2  Sa.  22.    3  the  hom  of  my  salvation,  my  high  tower 
r  Ki.    1.  39  took  an  horn  of  oil  out  of  the  tabernacle 

1.  50,  51  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 

2.  28  and  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 

22.  11  son  of  Chenanah  made  him  horns  of  iron 

1  Ch.25.    5  All  these  (were),  .to  lift  up  the  horn.  And 

2  Ch.18.  10  Zedekiah..hadmadehinihornsofiron,and 
Job    16.  15  I  have,  .defiled  my  horn  in  the  dust 
Psa.  18.    2  horn  of  mysalvation,(and)myhigh  tower 

22.  21  heard  me  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorns 
75.    4  and  to  the  wicked,  Lift  not  up  the  horn 
75.   5  Lift  not  up  your  horn  on  high:  speak  (not) 
75.  10  the  horns  of  the  wicked . .  the  horns  of  the 
89.  17  in  thy  favour  our  horn  shall  be  exalted 
89.  24  and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be  exalted 
92.  10  But  my  horn  shalt  thou  exalt  like,  .an 
ii2.   9  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  honour 
118.  27  cords,  (even)  unto  the  homs  of  the  altar 
132.  17  There  will  I  make  the  horn  of  David  to  b. 
148.  14  He  also  exalteth  the  horn  of  his  people 
Jer.  17.    1  is)  graven,  .upon  the  horns  ofyouraltars 
48.  25  The  horn  of  Moab  is  cut  off,  and  his  arm 
Lam.  2.    3  cut  off  in  (his)  fierce  anger  all  the  horn  of  I, 
2.  17  hath  set  up  the  horn  of  thine  adversaries 
Eze.  27. 15  (for)  a  present  horns  of  ivory  and  ebony. 
29.  21  horn  of  the  house  of  Israel  to  bud  forth 
34.  21  pushed  all  the  diseased  with  your  horns 
43.  15  the  altar  and  upward  (shall  be)  four  horns 
43.  20  put  (it)  on  the  four  horns  of  it,and  on  the 
Dan.  8.    3  which  had  (two)  horns :  and  the  (two)  hor. 
8.    5  goat(had)  a  notable  horn  between  his  eyes 
8.    6  he  came  to  the  ram  that  had  (two)  horns 
8.    7  and  smote  the  ram,  and  brake  his  two  h. 
8.    8  great  horn  was  broken ;  and  for  it  came 
8.    9  out  of  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  h. 
8.  20  ram  which  thou  sawest  having  (two)  horns 
8. 21  the  great  horn  that  (is)  between  his  eyes 
Amos  3.  14  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be  cut  off,  and 

6.  13  Have  we  not  taken  to  us  horns  by  our  own 

Mio.    4.  13  Arise,  .for  I  will  make  thine  horn  iron 

Hab.   3.    4  he  had  horns  (coming)  out  of  his  hand 

Zech.  1.  18  lifted  I  up  mineeyes.  .behold/four  horns 

1. 19,  21  These  (are)  the  horns  which  have  sea. 

1.  21  cast  out  the  horns.,  which  lifted  up.,  horn 


2. Horn,  pj3  qeren. 

Dan.  7.  7  behold  a  fourth  beast,  .and  it  had  ten  h. 
7.  8  considered  the  horns . .  another  little  horn 
7.  8  three  of  the  first  horns,  .hi  this  horn  (\v.) 
7.  11  voice  of  the  great  words  which  the  horn 
7.  20  of  the  ten  horns,  .even  (of)  that  horn  that 
7.  21  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints 
7.  24  the  ten  horns  out  of  this  kingdom  (are) 

Z.Horn,  i<4pas  ko'as. 

Luke  1.  69  hath  raised  up  an  horn  of  salvation  for 
Rev.   5.    6  lamb . .  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes 
9.  13  a  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  golden 

12.  3  dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 

13.  1  ten  horns,  and  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns 
13.  11  he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  sp. 
17.  3  beast,  .having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
17.  7  wliich  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
17. 12,  16  And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest 

HORN,  ink  — 

Ink  horn,  nop.  qeseth. 

Eze.    9.   2  clothed  with  linen,  with  a  writer's  ink  horn 
9.    3  which  (had)  the  writer's  ink  horn  by  his 
9. 11  clothed  with  linen,  which(had)  the  inkh. 
[See  also  Ram's  horn.] 
HORNET  — 
Hornet,  loasp,  n^-ix  tsirah. 

Exod23.  28  will  send  hornets  before  thee,  which  shall 
Deut.  7.  20  the  Lord,  .will  send  the  hornet  among 
Jos:  24. 12  I  sent  the  hornet  before  you,  which  drave 

HORNS,  to  have  — 

To  have  or  use  horns,  pp  qaran,  5. 

Psa.  69.  31  ox  (or)  bullock  that  hath  horns  and  hoofs 

HO  RO-NA'-IM,  D'j'in  double  caves. 

A  town  of  Moab  named  with  Zoar  and  Luhith,  but  no 

clue  has  been  found  to  its  exact  site. 

Isa.    15.    5  in  the  way  of  H.  they  shall  raise  up  a  cry 

Jer.  48.    3  A  voice  of  crying,  .from  H.,  spoiling  and. 

48.    5  in  the  going  down  of  H.  the  enemies  have 

48.  34  from  Zoar . .  unto  H. . .  heifer  of  three  years 

HO-RO-NITE,  tflfT. 

A  native  of  Horonaim  Sanballat  who  opposed  Nehe- 
miah  in  the  restoration  of  Jerusalem.  Furst  derives  it 
from  fieth-horon. 

Neh.   2. 10  "When  Sanballat  the  H. . .  heard . .  it  grieved 
2. 19  when  Sanballat  the  H.,  and  Tobiah.  .he. 

13.  28  son  in  law  to  Sanballat  the  H.:  therefore 

HORRIBLE  (thing)  — 

1.  Horror,  heat,  112^7]  zalaphah. 

Psa.  11.   6  fire  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tern. 

2.  Wasting,  desolation,  noise,  |"ik^  shaon. 

Psa.  40.   2  He  brought  me  up . .  out  of  an  horrible  pit 

3.  Vile,  horrible,  fnyp  shaarur. 

Jer.  23. 14  I  have  seen  also . .  an  horrible  thing :  they 

i.  Vile,  horrible,  '1*Tg.»  shaaruri. 

Jer.   18.  13  the  virgin,  .hath  done  a  very  horrible  th. 

Hos.    6.  10  I  have  seen  an  horrible  thing  in.  .Israel 
HORRIBLY  — 
Fear,  fright,  trembling, ■  "lye*  saar. 

Eze.  32. 10  their  kings  shall  be  horribly  afraid  for  thee 
HORRIBLY  afraid,  to  be  — 
To  he  whirled  away,  ~\$p  saar. 

Jer.    2. 12  be  horribly  afraid,  be  ye  very  desolate 
HORROR  — 
1.  Terror,  riD'N  emah. 

Gen.  15. 12  an  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him 
2.Horror,  heat,  najfpj  zalaphah. 

Psa.119.  53  Horror  hath  taken  hold  upon  me  because 
3.  Trembling,  horror,  fright,  rris?5 pallatsuth. 

Psa.  55.    5  upon  me,  and  horror  hath  overwhelmed 

Eze.     7.  18  horrorshallcoverthem;  and  shame  (shall 

HORSE  — 

l.A  horse,  d^d  sus. 

Gen.  47. 17  gave  them  bread  (in  exchange)  for  horses 

49.  17  an  adder,  .that  biteth  the  horse  heels,  so 
Exod  9.   3  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon .  .the  horses 

14.  9  all  the  horses  (and)  chariots  of  Pharaoh 

14.  23  all  Pharaoh's  horses,  his  chariots,  and  his 

15.  1,  21  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown 
15.  19  For  the  horse,  .went  in  with  his  chariots 

Deutn.    4  what  he  did.  .unto  their  horses,  and  to 
17.  16  he  shall  not  multiply  horses  to  himself 

17.  16  totheendthatheshouldmultiplyhorses 
20.    1  AVhen  thou,  .seest  horses  and  chariots 

Josh.  n.    4  went . .  with  horses  and  chariots  very  many 
11.    6  thou  shalt  hough  their  horses,  and  burn 
11.    9  Joshua,  .houghed  their  horses  and  burnt 

2  Sa.  15.    1  Absalom  prepared,  .chariots  and  horses 

1  Ki.  4.  26  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of  horses  for  his 

4.  28  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses  and 
10.  25  horses,  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by  year 
10.  28  Solomon  had  horses  brought  out  of  Egypt 
10.  29  and  an  horse"  for  an  hundred  and  fifty 

18.  5  may  find  grass  to  save  the  horses,  .alive 
20.    1  thirty  and  twokingswithhim.and  horses 
20.  20  king  of  Syriaescaped  on  an  horse  with  the 
20.  21  smote  the  horses  and  chariots,  and  slew 
20.  25  horse  for  horse,  and  chariot  for  chariot 
22.   4  people  as  thy  people,  my  horses  as  thy  h. 

2  Ki.   2. 11  a  chariot  of  fire,  and  horses  of  fire,  and 

3.   7  as  thy  people,  (and)  my  horses  as  thy  ho. 


HORSEBACK 


-192 


HOST 


3  Ki.  5.    9  Naanian  came  with  his  horses  and.  .clia. 
6.  14  Therefore  sent  he  thither  horses,  and  eh. 

6.  15  host  compassed  the  city  both  with  horses 
6. 17  behold,  the  mountain  (was)  full  of  horses 

7.  6  a  noise  of  chariots,  and  a  noise  of  horses 
7.  7  left  their  tents,  and  their  horses,  and  their 
7.  10  horses  tied,  and  asses  tied,  and  the  tents 
7.  13  take . .  five  of  the  horses  that  remain,  which 
7.  14  They  took  therefore  two  chariot  horses 
9.  33  her  blood  was  sprinkled-  .on  the  horses 

10.  2  (there  are)  with  you  chariots  and  horses 

11.  16  way  by  the  which  the  horses  came  into  the 
14.  20  they  brought  him  on  horses;  and  he  was 
18.  23  I  will  deliver  thee  two  thousaud  horses,  if 
23.  11  he  took  away  the  horses  that  the  kings  of 

2  Ch.  1.  16  Solomon  had  horses  brought  out  of  Egypt 
1.  17  and  an  horse  for  an  hundred  and  fifty 
9.  24  horses,  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by  year 
9.  25  had  four  thousand  stalls  for  horses  and 
9.  28  they  brought  unto  Solomon  horses  out  of 
23.  15  come  to  the  entering  of  the  horse  gate  by 

25.  28  brought  him  upon  horses,  and  buried  him 
Ezra  2.  66  Their  horses  (were)  seven  hundred  thirty 
Neh.   3.  28  From  above  the  horse  gate  repaired  the 

7.  68  Their  horses,  seven  hundred  thirty  and  six 
Esth.  6.  8  and  the  horse  that  the  king  rideth  upon 
6.  9  let  this  apparel  and  horse  be  delivered  to 
6.  10  haste,  (and)  take  the  apparel  and  the  horse 
6.  11  Then  took  Hainan  the  apparel  and  the  n. 
Job   39. 18  she  scorneth  the  horse  and  his  rider 

39. 19  Hast  thou  given  the  horse  strength?  hast 
Psa.  20.    7  Some  (trust)  in  chariots,  and  some  in  hor. 

32.  9  Be  ye  not  as  the  horse,  (or)  as  the  mule 

33.  17  An  horse  (is)  a  vain  thing  for  safety :  nei. 
76.    6  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  dead  si. 

147.  10  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  the  hor. 
Prov.21.  31  horse  (is)  prepared  against  the  day  of  b. 

26.  3  A  whip  for  the  horse,  a  bridle  for  the  ass 
Eccl.  10.    7  I  have  seen  servants  upon  horses,  and 
Isa.     2.    7  their  land  is  also  full  of  horses,  neither 

5.  28  their  horses' hoofs.,  counted  like  flint,  and 

30.  16  ye  said,  No;  for  we  will  flee  upon  horses 

31.  1  and  stay  on  horse3,  and  trust  in  chariots 
31.    3  their  horses  flesh,  and  uot  spirit.  When 
36.    8  I  will  give  thee  two  thousand  horses,  if 
43.  17  bringeth  forth  the  chariot  and  horse,  the 
63.  13  led  them,  .as  an  horse  in  the  wilderness 
66.  20  xipon  horses,  .hi  chariots,  and  in  litters 

Jer.     4. 13  his  horses  are  swifter  than  eagles.    Woe 

5.  8  They  were  (as)  fed  horses  in  the  morning 

6.  23  they  ride  upon  horses,  set  in  array  as  men 
8.    6  as  the  horse  rusheth  into  the  battle 

8.  16  The  snorting  of  his  horses  was  heard  from 
12.    5  then  how  canst  thou  contend  with  horses? 

17.  25  kings,  .riding  in  chariots  and  on  horses 

22.  4  kings,  .riding  in  chariots  and  on  horses 
31.  40  unto  the  corner  of  the  horse  gate  toward 
46.   4  Harness  the  horses ;  and  get  up,  ye  horse. 
46.   9  Come  up,  ye  horses ;  and  rage,  ye  chariots 
50.  37  A  sword  (is)  upon  their  horses,  and  upon 

50.  42  they  shall  ride  upon  horses,  (every  one) 

51.  21  I  break  in  pieces  the  horse  and  his  rider 
51.  27  cause  the  horses  to  come  up  as  the  rough 

Eze.  17. 15  might  give  him  horses  and  much  people 

23.  6,  12  captains  and.  .horsemen  riding  upon 

23. 20  and  whose  issue  (is  like)  the  issue  of  hor. 
23.  23  captains.. all  of  them  riding  upon  horses 
26.  7  from  the  north,  withhorses,  and.,  chariots 
26.  10  By  reason  of  the  abundance  of  his  horses 
26.  11  With  the  hoofs  of  his  horses  shall  he  tread 
27. 14  They . .  traded  in  thy  fairs  with  horses  and 
38.   4  all  thine  army,  horses  and  horsemen,  all 

38.  15  people,  .all  of  them  riding  upon  horses 

39.  20  with  horses  and  chariots,  with  mighty  men 
Hos.    1.    7  will  not  save  them,  .by  horses,  nor  by 

14.   3  we  will  not  ride  upon  horses ;  neither  will 

Joel    2.  4  The  appearance  of  them  (is)  as.  .of  horses 

Amos  2.  15  neither  shall  lie  that  rideth  the  horse  de. 

4.  10  have  taken  away  your  horses ;  and  I  have 

6. 12  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock?  will  (one) 

Mic.    5.  10  I  will  cut  off  thy  horses  out  of  the  midst  of 

Nah.  3.    2  The  noise,  .of  the  prancing  horses,  and 

Hab.   1.    8  horses  also  are  swifter  than  the  leopards 

3.    8  that  tlioudidst  ride  upon  thinehorses,(and) 

3.  15  walk  through  the  sea  with  thine  horses 

Hag.    2.  22  horses  and  their  riders  shall  come  down 

Zech.  1.    8  and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse 

1.    8  behind  him  (were  there)  red  horses,  spec. 

6.    2  red  horses.  .111  the  second .  .black  horses 

6.    3  white  horses . .  in  the  fourth . .  bay  horses 

6.    6  The  black  horses,  .go  forth  into  the  north 

9. 10  I  will  cut  off.  .the  horse  from  Jerusalem 

10.    3  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in  the  ba. 

10.    s  the  riders  on  horses  shall  be  confounded 

12.    4  will  smite  every  horse  with  astonishment 

12.   4  and  will  smite  every  horse . .  witli  blindness 

14.  15  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  horse,  of  the 

14.  20  shall  there  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses 

2.  A  horse,  'iinros  hippos. 

Jas.     3.    3  put  bits  in  the  horses'  mouths,  that  they 

Rev.   6.    2  I  saw,  and  behold  a  white  horse :  and  he 

6.    4  there  went  out  another  horse  (that  was) 

6.    5  I  beheld, and  lo  a  black  horse :  and  be  that 

6.    8  I  looked,  and  behold  a  pale  horse :  and  lna 

9.  7  like  unto  horses  prepared  unto  battle  ;  and 
9.   9  as  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses 
9.  17  the  horses  .  .and  the  heads  of  the  horses 

14.  20  blood  came,  .even  unto  the  horse  bridles 

18.  13  horses,  and  chariots,  and  slaves,  and  souls 

19.  11  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white  horse 

15.  14  the  armies.,  followed  him  upon  white  ho. 


Rev.  19.  18  That  ye  may  eat . .  the  flesh  of  horses,  and 

19.  19  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the  h. 
ig.  21  the  sword  of  him  that  sat  upon  the  horse 

HORSEBACK,  (to  bring)  on  — 

I.  A  horse,  did  $u$. 

Esth.  8.  10  sent  letters  by  posts  on  horseback,  (and) 
2.Riding  on  a  liorse,  did  351  rokcb  sits. 

2  Ki.  9.  18  there  went  one  on  horseback  to  meet  him 
9. 19  Then  he  sent  out  a  second  on  horseback 

Z.To  cause  to  ride,  3yi  rakab,  5. 

Esth.  6.  9  bringhimonhorsebackthroughthestreet 
6.  11  brought  him  on  horseback  through  the  st. 

HORSE  HOOFS  — 

Morse  heel,  D'D  spy.  aqeb  sus. 

Judg.  5. 22  Then  were  the  horse  hoofs  broken  by  the 
HORSE  LEACH  — 
Leech,  njfhli  alukah. 

Prov3o.  15  The  horse  leach  hath  two  daughters,  (cry.) 

HORSEMAN  — 

1. Horseman,  w-^parash. 

Gen.  50.   9  there  went  up . .  both  chariots  and  horsem. 
Exodi4.    9  his  horsemen  and  his  army.,  overtookthem 

14.  17, 18  upon  his  chariots,  and  upon  his  horse. 

14.  23  (even)  all  Pharoah's  horses . .  aDd  his  hors. 

14.  26  the  waters  may  come,  .upon  their  horse. 

14.  28  covered  the  chariots,  and  the  horsemen 

15.  19  went  in .  .with  his  horsemen  into  the  sea 
Josh  24.    6  Egyptians  pursued,  .with,  .horsemen  unto 

1  Sa.    8. 11  He  will  take  your  sons,  .(to  be)  his  horsem. 

13.    5  six  thousand  horsemen,  and  people  as  the 

2  Sa.    8.    4  And  David  took,  .seven  hundred  horsem. 

10.  18  David  slew,  .forty  thousand  horsemen, and 

1  Ki.    1.    5  he  prepared  him  chariots  and  horsemen 

4. 26  And  Solomon  had.  .twelve  thousand  hor. 
9. 19  cities  for  his  chariots,  and . .  horsemen,  and 
9.  22  and  rulers  of  his  chariots,  and  his  horse. 

10-  26 Solomon  gathered,  .chariots  and  horsem. 

10.  26  and  twelve  thousand  horsemen,  whom  he 

20.  20  escaped  on  au  horse  with  the  horsemen 

2  Ki.   2.  12  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen 

13.  7  Neither  did  he  leave,  .but  fifty  horsemen 
13.  14  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  ther. 

18.  24  and  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for.  .horsem.? 

1  Ch.18.    4  David  took,  .seven  thousand  horsemen 

19.  6  silver  to  hire . .  chariots  and  horsemen  out 

2  Ch.  1.  14  Solomon  gathered  chariots  and  horsemen 

1  14  he  had.  .twelve  thousandhorsemen,  which 
8.   6  the  cities  of  the  horsemen,  and  all  that  S. 

8.  9  and  captains  of  his  chariots  and  horsemen 

9.  25  And  Solomon  had.  .twelve  thousand  hor. 
i2,    3  With,  .threescore  thousand  horsemen :  a. 

16.  8  with  very  many  chariots  and  horsemen? 
Ezra    8.  22  horsemen  to  help  us  against  the  enemy 
Neh.    2.    9  sent  captains  of  the  army  and  horsemen 
Isa.    21.    7  he  saw  a  chariot  (with)  a  couple  of  horse. 

21.  9  chariot  of  men,  (with)  a  couple  of  horse 

22.  6  bare  the  quiver  with  chariots  of.,  horsem. 

22.  7  horsemen  shall  set  themselves  in  array  at 

25.  28  because  he  will  not.  .bruiseit  (with)hish. 
31.  1  trust,  .in  horsemen,  because  they  are  very 
36.   9  and  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for . .  horsemen  ? 

Jer     4.  29  the  noise  of  the  horsemen  and  bowmen 

46.   4  get  up,  ye  horsemen,  and  stand  forthwith 
Eze.  23.   6,  i2captainsand.  .horsemen  riding  upon  h. 

26.  7  with  horsemen,  and  companies,  and  much 
26. 10  walls,  .shake  at  the  noise  of  the  horsemen 
27. 14  traded,  .with  horses  and  horsemen  and 
38.    4  horses  andhorsemen,  all  of  them  clothed 

Dan.  1 1. 40  with  horsemen,  and  with  many  ships ;  and 
Hos.   1.    7  will  not  save  them  by  how.  .norbyhorsem. 
Joel    2.    4  and  as  horsemen,  so  shall  they  run 
Nah.  3.    3  The  horseman  lifteth  up.  .the.. sword 
Hab.  1.   8  their  horsemen  shall  spread.,  their  horse. 

2.A  rider,  33*1  rakkab. 

2  Ki.   9. 17  Take  an  horseman,  and  sendtomeetthem 

3,0mier  of  a  horse,  tr}9  ?ys  baal  parash. 

2  Sa.  1.  6  chariots  and  horsemen  followed  hard  after 
4. Horseman,  cavalry,  Ittkik6v  Mppikon. 

Rev.  9. 16  thenumberof  the  army  of  the  [horsemen] 
5. Horseman,  Iwttsvs  hippeus. 

Acts  23.  23  horsemen  threescore  andten.andspearm 

23.  32  they  left  the  horsemen  to  go  with  hini,and 
HORSES,  company  of  — 

A  mare,  hdid  susah. 

Song  1.  9  a  company  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's  chariots 
HO'-SAH,  nz'n  refuge. 

1.  A  city  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  and  the  next  land  mark 
on  the  boundary  to  Tyre. 

Josh  19.  29  and  the  coast  turneth  toH. ;  and  the  out. 

2.  A  Levite  selected  by  David  to  be  one  of  the  first  door- 
keepers to  the  ark  after  its  arrival  in  Jerusalem.  B.C. 
1042. 

1  Ch.16.  38  Ohed-edom  also  the  son  of  Jeduthun.  .H. 

26.  10  Also  H.,  of  the  children  of  Merari,  had  sons 

26.  1 1  all  the  sons  and  brethren  of  H. . .  thirteen 

26. 16  To  Shuppim  and  H. .  .westward,  with  the 

HOSANNA  — 

Save,  we  pray  thee  /  {Ilch.  Nj-ytr'in)  wo-awd. 

Matt2i.    9,  15  saying,  Hosanna  to  the  son  of  David 

21.   9  name  of  the  Lord  !  Hosanna  in  the  highest 
Mark  1 1.    9  Hosanna  !  Blessed  (is)  he  that  cometh  in 


Marku.  10  Blessed  (be)  the  kingdom..  Hosanna  in  the 
Johni2.  13  Hosanna :  Blessed  (is)  the  King  of  Israel 

HO-SE'-A,  ytfin  Jah  is  help. 

The  first  of  what  are  commonly  called  the  "minor  pro- 
phets," as  they  appear  in  the  English  Bible.    The  name 
in  the  Hebrew  is  Hoshea.     He  prophesied  B.C.  784-725. 
Hos.    1.    1  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  unto  H- 

x.    2  beginning  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  H. 

1.   2  Lord  said  to  H.,  Go,  take  unto  thee  a  wife 
HOSEN  — 

Fine  upper  garment,  t?9?,  &1&$petesh,  pattish. 

Dan.  3.  21  wereboundih  their  coats,  theirhosen,  and 
HO-SHA'-IAH,  rry^in. 

1.  A  man  who  led  the  princes  of  Judah  in  the  proces- 
sion in  the  ceremony  of  the  dedication  of  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  32  after  them  went  H.,  and  half  of  the  princes 

2.  Father  of  Jezaniah  or  Azariah,  a  man  of  note  in  the 
time  of  Nebuchadnezzar.    B.C.  610. 

Jer.  42.    1  Jezaniah  the  son  of  H.,  and  all  the  people 
43.    2  Then  spake  Azariah  the  son  of  H.,  and  J. 

HO-SHA -MA,  yp^in  Jah  is  hearer. 

A  son  of  Jeconiah  or  Jehoiachin,  the  last  but  one  of  the 

kings  of  Judah.    B.C.  580. 

1  Ch.  3. 18  Shenazar,  Jecamiah,  H.,  and  Nedabiah 
HO-SHE'-A.  or  OSHEA,  ychn  Jah  is  help. 

1.  The  original  name  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun.  In 
Num.  33.  8  it  is  given  Oskea.    B.C.  1450. 

Deut32.  44  Moses  came  and  spake,  .he  and  H.  the  son 

2.  The  ruler  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  in  David's  time. 
B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  20  Of  the  children  of  Ephraim,  H.  the  son  of 

3.  The  nineteenth,  last,  and  best  king  of  Israel.  B.C. 
729-720;  and  was  subdued  and  imprisoned  by  Sargon 
king  of  Assyria. 

2  Ki.  15.  30  H.  the  son  of  Elah  made  a  conspiracy  ag. 

17.    1  began  H.  the  son  of  Elah  to  reign  in  Sa. 
17.    3  H.  became  his  servant,  and  gave  him  pr. 
17.   4  king  of  Assyria  found  conspiracy  in  Ho. 

17.  6  In  the  ninth  year  of  H.  the  king  of  Assy. 

18.  1 ;  18.  9  ;  18.  10. 

4.  A  Jew  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah. 

Neh.  10.  23  H.,  Hananiah,  Hashub. 

HOSPITALITY  — 

Love  of  strangers,  hosjiitality ,  (ptXo^eviajjhUoxenia. 
Rom  12.  13  Distributing.. given  to  hospitality 

HOSPITALITY,  given  to,  lover  of,  use . — 

Lover  of  strangers, hospitable,  tpiKo^evos  philoxenos. 
1  Ti.  3.  2  of  good  behaviour,  given  to  hospitality,  apt 
Titus  1.  8  a  lover  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  good  men 
1  Pe.  4.   9  Use  hospitality  one  to  another  without 

HOST  — 

1.  Strength,  wealth,  anny,  force,  .n  chayil. 

Exodi4.    4  I  will  be  honoured,  .upon  all  his  host;  that 
14.  17  I  will  get  me  honour  upon .  .all  his  host 

14.  28  and  covered,  .all  the  host  of  Pharaoh 

15.  4  Pharaoh's,  .host  hath  he  cast  into  the  sea 
Nimi3i.  14  was  wroth  with  the  officers  of  the  host 

1  Sa.  14.  48  he  gathered  an  host,  and  smote  the  Am. 

17.  20  as  the  host  was  going  forth  to  the  fight 

2  Sa.    8.   9  had  smitten  all  the  host  of  Hadadezer 

24.    2  the  king  said  to.  .the  captain  of  the  host 
24.   4  and  against  the  captains  of  the  host 

24.  4  Joab  and  the  captains  of  the  host  went 

1  Ki.  15.  20  the  captains  of  the  hosts  which  lie  had 

20.    1  Ben-haded .  .gathered  all  his  host  togeth. 

2  Ki.   6.  14  Therefore  sent  he  thither,  .a  great  host 

6.  15  behold,  an  host  compassed  the  city  both 

7.  6  of  horses,  (even)  the  noise  of  a  great  host 
9.   5  thecaptainsof  the  host  (were)  sitting;  and 

11.  15  commanded,  .the  officers  of  the  host,  and 

25.  1  Nebuchadnezzar,  .came,  he,  and  all  his  h. 

1  Ch.18.  9  heard  how  David  had  smitten  all  the  host 

2  Ch.14.    9  with  an  host  of  a  thousand  thousand,  and 

16.  7  therefore  is  the  host . .  escaped  out  of  thine 
16.    8  Were  not  the  Ethiopians,  .a  huge  host 
23. 14  the  captains,  .that  were  set  over  the  host 
24.  23  the  host  of  Syria  came  up  against  him 
24.  24  delivered[a  very  great  host  into  their  hand 

26.  11  Uzziah  had  an  host  of  fighting  men,  that 
Psa.  33.  16  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude  of  an  host 

136. 15  But  overthrew  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the 

^.Strength,  wealth,  army,  force,  h'n  chet. 

2  Ki.  18.  17  with  a  great  host  against  Jerusalem :  and 
Obad.      20  captivity  of  this  host  of  the  children  of 

Z.Camp,  encampment,  runs  macJumeh. 

Gen.  32.    2  This  (is)  God's  host :  and  he  called  the 
Exod  14.  24  looked  unto  the  host,  .troubled  the  host 

16.  13  and.  .the  dew  lay  round  about  the  host 
Deut.  2.  14  were  wasted  out  from  among  the  host,  as 

2.  15  to  destroy  them  from  among  the  host 
23.    9  When  the  host  goeth  forth  against  thine 

Josh.  1.  11  Pass  through  the  host,  and  command  the 

3.  2  that  the  officers  went  through  the  host 

8.  13  all  the  host  that  (was)  on  the  north  of  the 

10.  5  went  up,  they  and  all  their  hosts,  and  en. 

11.  4  they  and  all  their  hosts  with  them,  much 

18.  9  came,  .to  Joshua  to  the  host  at  Shiloh 
Judg.  4.  15  Lord  discomfited  Sisera.  .and  all  (his)  ho. 

4.  16  after  the  host,  .all  the  host  of  Sisera  fell 
7.    1  so  that  the  host  of  the  Midianites  were  on 
7.    S  host  of  Midian  was  beneath  him  in  the 
7.   9  Arise,  get  thee  down  unto  the  host ;  for 


HOST 


Judg.  7.  10  with  Phurah  thy  servant  down  to  the  host 
7.  11  be  strengthened  to  go  down  unto  the  host 
7.  11  of  the  armed  men  that  (were)  in  the  host 
*  7.  13  a  cake .  .tumbled  into  the  host  of  Midian 
7. 14  into  his  band . .  God  delivered . .  all  the  host 
7.  15  the  host  of  Israel,  .the  host  of  Midian 
7.  21  and  all  the  host  ran,  and  cried,  and  fled 
7.  22  throughout  all  the  host :  and  the  host  fled 

8. 10  and  their  hosts,  .all  the  hosts  of  the 

8. 11  and  smote  the  host :  for  the  host  was 

8. 12  took,  .and  discomfited  all  the  host 

1  Sa.  11. 11  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  host  in 

14. 15  there  was  trembling  in  the  host,  in  the 
14. 19  that  the  noise  that  (was)  in  the  host  of  the 

17.  46  the  carcases  of  the  liost  of  the  Philistines 
28.    5  when  Saul  saw  the  host  of  the  Philistines 

28.  19  Lord  also  shall  deliver  the  host  of  Israel 

29.  6  and  thy  coming  in  with  me  in  the  host  (is) 

2  Sa.    5.  24  go  out.. to  smite  the  host  of  the  Philistines 

23.  16  three,  .men  brake  through  the  host  of  the 

1  Ki.22.  34  carry  me  out  of  the  host ;  for  I  am  woun. 

22. 36  went  a  proclamation  throughout  the  host 

2  Ki.   3.    9  and  there  was  no  water  for  the  host,  and 

6.  24  Ben-hadad . .  gathered  all  his  host,  and 

7.  4  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the  Syrians  :  if 
7.  6  the  Lord  had  made  the  host,  .to  hear  a 
7.  14  the  king  sent  after  the  host  of  the  Syrians 

1  Ch.f9.  19  fathers,  (being)  over  the  host  of  the  Lord 

11. 15  the  host  of  the  Philistines  encamped  in  the 
11. 18  brake  through  the  host  of  the  Philistines 
12.  22  (it  was)  a  great  host,  like  the  host  of  God 
14. 15  gone  forth,  .to  smite  the  host  of  the  Phil. 

14.  16  they  smote  the  host  of  the  Philistines  from 

2  Ch.  14.  13  destroyed  before  the  Lord,  and.  .his  host 

18.  33  thou  mayest  carry  me  out  of  thehost;  for 
Psa.  27.   3  Though  an  host  should  encamp  against 
Eze.    1.  24  voice  of  speech,  as  the  noise  of  an  host 

4.  Host,  warfare,  service,  toy  tsaba. 

Gen.   2.    1  were  finished,  and  all  the  host  of  them 

21.  22,  32  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  host 
Exodis.  41  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out  from 
Num.  1.  52  and  every  man . .  throughout  their  hosts 

2.  4,  6,  8,  11,  13,  15,  19,  21,  23,  26,  28,  30  his  h. 
2. 32  of  the  camps,  throughout  their  hosts,  (we.) 
4.    3  all  that  enter  into  the  host,  to  do  the  wo. 

10. 14  over  his  host  (was)  N'ahshon  the  son  of  A. 
10.  15,  16,  19,  20,  23,  24,  26,  27  over  the  host  of 
10.  18,  22,  25  and  over  his  host  (was) 

3T.  48  which  (were)  over  thousands  of  the  host 
Deut.  4. 19  stars,(even)all  thehostof  heaven, should. 

17.    3  worshipped,  .any  of  the  host  of  heaven 
Josh.  5. 14  captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  ami  now 
5. 15  captain  of  the  Lord's  host  said  unto  Josh. 
Judg.  4.    2  the  captain  of  whose  host  (was)  Sisera 
1  Sa.    1.    3  and  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts  in 
1. 11  vowed  a  vow,  and  said,  0  Lord  of  hosts 
4.   4  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
12.    9  Sisera,  captain  of  the  host  of  Ilazor,  and 
14. 50  the  captain  of  his  host  (was)  Abner,  the 

15.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

[So  in  2  Sa.  7.  8;  1  Ch.  17.  7';  Isa.  3.  15";  Jer.  6.  9:7.  3, 
21;  g.  7,  15,  17;  11.  22;  16.  9;  19.  3,  11,  15 ;  23.  15,  16; 
25.  8,  27,  28,  29,  32  ;  26. 18 ;  27.  4,  19,  21 ;  28.  14 ;  29.  4,  8, 
17,  21;  31.  23;  32.  14,  15;  33.  12;  35. 13,  17,  18,  19;  39. 
16 ;  42. 15,  18 ;  43. 10;  44.  2 ;  44.  1  r,  25  ;  49.  7 ;  50.  18,  33 ; 
S1-  33>  58;  Hag.  1.  5,  7;  2.  6,  11;  Zech.  1.  3,  4,  14,  17; 
7.  8;  3.  7;  8.  2,  4,  6,  14,  19,  20,  23;  Mai.  1.  4.] 

1  Sa.  17. 45  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 

17.  55  said  unto  Abner,  the  captain  of  the  host 
26.    5  the  son  of  Ner,  the  captain  of  his  host 

2  Sa.   2.   8  the  son  of  Xer,  captain  of  Saul's  host 

3.  23  all  the  host  that  (was)  with  him  were*eome 
5. 10  and  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  (was)  with  him 

6.  2  called  by  the  name  of  The  Lord  of  hosts 
6. 18  blessed,  .in  the  nameof  theLORDof  hosts 

7.  26  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  the  God  over  Israel 

7.  27  thou,  O  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of  Israel,  hast 

8.  16  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  (was)  over  the  host 
10.    7  Joab,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mighty  men 
10.  16  captain  of  the  host  of  Hadarezer  (went) 
io.  18  smote  Shobach  the  captain  of  their  host 
17.  25  Amasa  captain  of  thehost  instead  of  Joab 

19.  13  if  thou  be  not  captain  of  the  host  before 

20.  23  Joab  (was)  over  all  the  host  of  Israel :  and 

1  Ki.   1. 19  priest,  and  Joab  the  captain  of  the  host 

1.  25  the  captains  of  the  host,  and  Abiathar 

2.  5  the  two  captains  of  the  hosts  of  Israel 
2.  32  the  host  of  Israel,  .of  the  host  of  Judah 
2-  35  put  Benaiah.  .in  his  room  over  the  host 

4.  4  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (was)  over  the  host 
11. 15,  21  Joab  the  captain  of  the  host  was 

16.  16  made  Omri,  the  captain  of  the  host,  king 

18. 15  (As)  the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth,  before  whom 
19. 10,  14  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

22.  19  host  of  heaven  standing  by  him  on  his 

2  Ki.  3. 14  (As)the  Lord  of  hosts  lheth,  before  whom 

4.  13  the  king,  or  to  the  captain  of  the  host? 

5.  1  captain  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  Syria 

17.  16  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 

21.  3  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 
21.   s  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 

23.  4  the  grove,  and  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 
23.  5  the  planets,  and  to  all  the  host  of  heaven 
25.  19  the  principal  scribe  of  the  host,  which 

1  Ch.  11.  9  for  the  Lord  of  hosts  (was)  with  him 
12. 14  of  the  sons  of  Gad,  captains  of  the  host 
12.  21  mightymen..and  were  captains  in  the  host 

17.  24  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  the  God  of  Israel 

18.  15  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  (was)  over  the  h. 

19.  8  Joab,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mighty  men 


493 


1  Ch.19.  iS  Shophach  the  captain  of  the  host 

25.  1  the  captains  of  the  host  separated  to  the 

26.  26  the  captains  of  the  host,  had  dedicated 

27.  3  chief  of  all  the  captains  of  the  host  for 

27.  5  third  captain  of  the  host,  .(was)  Benaiah 

2  Ch.18.  18  the  host  of  heaven  standing  on  his  right 

26.  14  throughout  all  the  host,  shields,  andspears 

28.  9  he  went  out  before  the  host  that  came  to 
33.    3  and  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven 
33.    5  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven 
33.  11  the  captains  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  A. 

Neh.  9.    6  heaven  of  heavens,  with  all  their  host,  the 
9.    6  the  host  of  heaven  worshippeth  thee 

Psa.  24. 10  The  Lord  of  hosts,  he  (is)  the  king  of  glory 
33.  6  all  the  host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  his 
46.  7,  11  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  with  us;  theGodof 
48.  8  seen  in  the  city  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in 
59.  5  Thou  therefore,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  the 
69.  6  that  wait  on  thee,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  be 
80.  4  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  thou 
80.  7  Turn  us  again,  O  God  of  hosts,  and  cause 
80. 14  Keturn,  we  beseech  thee,  0  God  of  hosts 
80.  19  Turn  us  again,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  cause 
84.  1  amiable  (are)  thy  tabernacles,  0  Lord  of  h. ! 
84.  3  O  Lord  of  hosts,  my  king,  and  my  God 
84.   8  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  hear  my  prayer:  give 

84. 12  0  Lord  of  hosts,  blessed  (is)  the  man  that 
8g.    8  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  who  (is)  a  strong  L. 

103.  21  Bless  ye  the  LORD,  all  (ye)  his  hosts ;  (ye) 

108.  11  wilt  not  thou,  0  God,  go.  .with  our  hosts? 

148.    2  all  his  angels :  praise  ye  him,  all  his  hosts 

Isa.     1.   9  Except  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  left  unto  us 

1.  24  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  mighty  One  of  Isr. 

2. 12  the  day  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  (shall  be) 

3.    1  behold,  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  doth 

5.    7  For  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is) 

5.   9  In  niiue  ears  (said)  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Of 

5.  16  But  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  exalted  in 

5.  24  cast  away  the  law  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 

6.  3  Holy,  holy.holy(is) theLoRDofhosts:  the 
6.  s  formineeyeshaveseen..theLoRDofhosts 
8.  13  Sanctify  theLORDofhostshimself  ;and(l.) 

8.  18  from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  whichdwelleth  in 

9.  7  zealoftheLoRD  of  hosts  will  perform  this 
9.  13  neither  do  they  seek  the  Lord  of  hoBts 

9.  19  Through  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  is 
10.  16  Therefore  shall  the.  .Lord  of  hosts,  send 
10.  23  For  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a 
10.  24  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  O  my 
10.  26  Lord  of  hosts  shall  stir  up  a  scourge  for  him 
10.  33  the  Lord  of  hosts,  shall  lop  the  bough 

13.  4  Lord  of  hosts  mustereth  the  host  of  the 

13. 13  in  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  in 

14.  22  I  will  rise  up.  .saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
14.  23  I  will  sweep  it.  .saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
14.  24  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sworn,  saying,  Surely 
14.  27  For  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed,  and 

17.  3  be  as  the  glory,  .saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

18.  7  present  be  brought  unto  the  Lord  of  ho. 

18.  7  place  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 

19.  4  rule.,  saith  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts 
19.  12  know  what  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purp. 
19.  16  shaking  of  the  hand  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 

19. 17  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  he 

19. 18  five  cities,  .swear  to  the  Lord  of  hosts 
19.  20  for  a  witness  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts  in 
19.  25  "WTioni  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  bless,  say. 
21. 10  which  I  have  heard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
22.    5  of  perplexity  by  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  in 
22.  12  did  the  Lord  GODof  hosts  call  to  weeping 

22. 14  revealed  in  mine  ears  by  the  Lord  of  hosts 

22. 14  till  ye  die,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

22. 15  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  Go,  get 

22.  25  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  shall 

23.  9  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed  it,  to 

24.  21  Lord  shall  punish  the  host  of  the  high 

24.  23  when  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  m. 

25.  6  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto  all 
28.   5  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  be  for 
28.  22  I  have  heard  from  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

28.  29  This,  .cometh  forth  from  the  Lord  of  ho. 

29.  6  visited  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  with  thunder 
31.  4  so  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  come  down  to 
31.  5  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  defend  Jerusalem 
34.  4  the  host  of  heaven . .  all  their  host  shall 
37.  16  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of  Israel,  that  dwellest 
37.  32  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  do  this 

39.  5  said.  .Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 

40.  26  that  bringeth  out  their  host  by  number 

44.  6  and  his  redeemer  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  I 

45.  12  and  all  their  host  have  I  commanded 
45. 13  not  for  price,  .saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

47.  4  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name,  the  holy 

48.  2  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name 

51. 15  roared :  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name 
54.   5  thy  maker.  .The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  na. 

Jer.  2.  19  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 
3. 19  a  goodly  heritage  of  the  hosts  of  nations? 
5. 14  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  Because 
6.  6  For  thus  hath  the  Lord  of  hosts  said,  H. 
8.  2  the  host  of  heaven,  whom  they  have  loved 
8.    3  have  driven  them,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

10. 16  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name 

11.  17  the  LoRDof  hosts,  that  planted  thee,  hath 
11.  20  0  Lord  of  hosts,  that  judgest  righteously 
15.  16  called  by  thy  name,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts 
19. 13  burned  incense  unto,  .the  host  of  heaven 
20. 12  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triest  the  righteous 
23. 36  living  God,  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  our  God 
27. 18  make  intercession  to  the  Lord  of  hosts 

28.  2  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  G. 

29.  25  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  G. 


HOST 


Jer.   30.    8  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
31.  35  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name 
32. 18  Great,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts 
33.  11  Praise  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  for  the  Lord 
33.  22  As  the  host  of  heaven  cannot  be  number. 
38. 17  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts 
44.    7  the  God  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel 
46.  10  the  day  of  the  Lord  GoD.of  hosts 
46.  10  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  hath  a  sacrifice 
46.  18  the  king,  whose  name  (is)  The  Lord  of  h 
46.  25  The  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  saith 

48.  1  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I 
48. 15  the  king,  whose  name  (is)  The  Lord  of  h 

49.  s  Behold . .  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  from 

49.  26  cut  off  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hos. 

50.  25  work  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  in  the  land 

50.  31  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts :  for  thy  day  is 
50. 34  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name :  he  shall 

51.  3  and  spare  ye  not.  .destroy  ye.  .all  her  h. 
51.  5  of  his  God,  of  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  though 
51. 14  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sworn  by  himself 
51.  19  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name 

51.  57  the  King,  whose  name  (is)  The  Lord  of  h. 

52.  25  and  the  principal  scribe  of  the  host,  who 
Dan.    S.  10  waxed  great,  (eveD)  to  the  host  of  heaven 

8.  10  and  it  cast  down  (some)  of  the  host  and  of 
8.  11  Yea.  .even  to  the  prince  of  thehost,  and  by 
8.  12  an  host  was  given  (him)  against  the  daily 

8.  13  and  the  host  to  be  trodden  under  foot? 
Hos.  1 2.   5  Even  the  Lord  God  of  hosts ;  the  Lord  (is) 
Amos  3. 13  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  hosts 

4. 13  The  Lord,  The  God  of  hosts,  (is)his  name 
5.  14  the  God  of  hosts,  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye 

5. 15  Lord  God  of  hosts  will  be  gracious  unto 

5. 16  the  God  of  hosts,  the  Lord,  saith  thus 

5.  27  the  Lord,  whose  name  (is)  The  God  of  h. 

6.  8  saith  the  Lord  the  God  of  hosts,  I  abhor 

6.  14  saith  the  Lord  the  God  of  hosts ;  and  they 

9.  5  Lord  God  of  hosts  (is)  he  that  toucheth  the 
Mic.  4.  4  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  spoken 
Nah.   2. 13  I  (am)  against  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  h. 

3.    5  I  (am)  against  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  h. 
Hab.   2.  13  Behold,  (is  it)  not  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
Zeph.  1.    5  them  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven 

2.    9  (as)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God 

2. 10  against  the  people  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
Hag.    1.    2  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying 

1.   9  Why?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.    Because 

1.  14  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  their  G. 

2.  4  I  (am)  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
2.    7  fill,  -with  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
2.    8  the  gold  (is)  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
2.   9  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  and  in  this  place 
2.   9  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ' 
2.  23  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  will 
2.  23  have  chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

Zech.  1.   3  Turn  ye  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
1.    3  will  turn  unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  ho. 
1.   6  Like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  thought  to  do 
1. 12  0  Lord  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  thou  not 

1.  16  be  built  in  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and 

2.  9,  11  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me 

3.  9  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  I  will  remove 
3. 10  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  shall 

4.  6  but  by  my  spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

4.  9  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto 

5.  4  bring  it  forth,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

6. 12  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying 
6. 15  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto 

7.  3  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  to 
7.  4  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
7.  9  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying 
7. 12  words  which  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent 

7. 12  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of  host3 

7.  13  I  would  not  hear,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

8.  1  theword  oftheLoRD  ofhosts  came(tome) 
8.   3  and  the  mountain  of  the  LORD  of  hosts 
8.    6  in  mine  eyes  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

8.    9  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  was  laid 
8.  11  the  former  days,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
8.  14  provoked  me.  .saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and 
8.  18  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  unto 
8.  21  Let  us  go.  .to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  I 

8.  22  shall  come  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  in 

9.  15  The  Lord  ofhosts  shall  defend  them ;  and 
10.   3  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited  his  flock 

12.  5  strength  in  the  Lord  of  hosts  their  God 

13.  2  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  ofhosts,  (that 

13.  7  Awake,  0  sword,  .saith  the  Lord  ofhosts 

14.  16,  17  to  worship  the  king,  the  Lord  of  hosts 
14.  21  shall  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts 
14.  21  no  more,  .in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  ho. 

Mai.    1.    6  saiththe  LoRDofhostsunto  you,  Opriests 
1.    8  accept  thyperson?  saith  the  Lord  ofhosts 
1 .    9  will  he  regard . .  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
1.  10  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  ofhosts 

1.  11  (shall  be)  great,  .saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

1. 13  ye.  .snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

1. 14  I  (ani)a  great  king,  saith  theLoRDofhosts 

2.  2  unto  my  name,  saitli  the  Lord  of  hosts 
2.   4  be  with  Levi,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

2.  7  he  (is)  the  messenger  of  the  LORD  ofhosts 
2.   8  covenant  of  Levi,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

2.  12  offereth  an  offering  unto  the  LoRDofhosts 
2. 16  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts :  therefore  take 

3.  1  he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
3.  5  and  fear  not  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
3.  7  willreturnunto  you, saith  the  LORD'ofho. 
3. 10  prove  me  now . .  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
3.  11  time  in  the  field,  saith  the  LoRDofhosts 
3.  12  delightsome  land,  saith  the  LoRDofhosts 
3.  14  mournfully  before  the  Lord  of  hosts? 


HOSTAGE 


494 


HOUSE 


Mai.  3.  17  shall  be  mine,  aaith  the  Loud  of  hosts,  in 
4.    1  burn  them  up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
4.    3  I  shall  do  (this),  saith  the  LORD  of  hosts 

5.. I  stranger,  host,  |eVos  xenos. 

Rom  16.  23  Gaius  mine  host,  and  of  the  whole  church 

6.0newhoreceivesall}innkeeper,  ■ko.vZuxsvs pandoc. 
Luke  10.  35  two  pence,  and  gave  (them)  to  the  host 

7. Army,  host,  arpartd  slratia. 

Luke  2.  13  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising 
Acts    7.  42 gave  them  up  to  worship  the  host  of  hea. 

HOSTAGE  — 

Son  of  sureties,  pledges,  n'nnyn-ja  ben  taaruboth. 
2  Ki.  14.  14  he  took.,  hostages,  and  returned  to  Sam. 
2  CI1.25,  24  hostages  also,  and  returned  to  Samaria 

HOT  — 

1.7k  heat,  rrjN,  sis  aza,  azah. 

Dan.  3.  22'thefu'rnaceexceedinghot,the  flame  of  the 

2.  Fire,  vx  esh. 

Lev.  13.  24  in  the  skin  whereof  (there  is)  a  hot  burn. 

o.IXot,  warm,  Dn  chain. 

Josh.  9.  12  This  our  bread  we  took  hot  (for)  our  pro. 

4.  Meat ,  tin  chom. 

1  Sa.  21.   6  to  put  hot  bread  in  the  day  when  it  was 

5.  Fervent,  (earSs  zestos. 

Rev.  3  .  15  art  neither  cold  nor  hot . .  cold  or  hot 
3. 16  because  thou  art.  .neither  cold  nor  hot 
[See  also  Thunderbolts.] 
HOT  displeasure  — 
Heat,  fury,  poisorij  non  chemah. 

Deut.  9. 19  I  was  afraid  of  the  anger  and  hot  displea. 

Psa.    6.    1  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hotdispleasure 

38.    1  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure 

HOT,  to  be  or  wax  —   . 

1. 1  feat,  tin  chom. 

1  Sa.  11.  9  Tomorrow,  by  (that  time)  the  sunbe  hot 
Neh.  7.  3  thegates..beopened  until  the  sun  be  hot 
Job     6. 17  when  it  is  hot,  they  are  consumed  out  of 

2.  To  be  or  become  warm,  u<pn  chamam. 

Exodi6.  21  and  when  the  sun  waxed  hot,  it  melted 
Psa.  39.    3  My  heart  was  hot  within  me;  while  I  was 

3.  To  be  or  become  warm,  ovn  chamam,  2. 

Hos.    7.    7  They  are  all  hot  as  an  oven,  and  have 
4. To  burn,  be  wroth,  rrtn  charah. 

Exod22.  24  my  wrath  shall  wax  hot,  and  I  will  kill 
32.  10  my  wrath  may  wax  hot  against  them,  and 
32.  11  doth  thy  wrath  wax  hot  against  thy  people 
32.  19  Moses"  anger  waxed  hot,  and  he  cast  the 
32.  22  Let  not  the  anger  of  my  lord  wax  hot 
.ludg.  2.  14,  20  auger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Is. 
3.    8  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel 
6.  39  Let  not  thine  anger  be  hot  against  me 

10.  7  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel 

5.  To  be  warm,  hot,  on;  yacham. 

Deut  19.    6  pursue  the  slayer,  while  his  heart  is  hot 
Eze.  24.  11  the  brass  of  it  may  be  hot,  and  may  burn 

HOT  iron,  to  he  seared  with  a  — 
To  brand,  cause  to  burn  in,  KavrnpidCai  kauteriazd. 
1  Ti.    4.   2  havingtheirconscieuceseared  withahoti. 

HO'-THAM,  cnin  determination. 

1.  A  son  of  Heber  of  the  family  of  Beriah  of  the  tribe  of 
Asher.     B.C.  164a. 

1  Oh.  7.  32  Heber  begat  Japhlet,  and  Shomer,  and  H. 

2.  An  Aroerite  whose  two  sons  Shama  and  Jehiel  were 
among  David's  worthies.  B.C.  1048.  Hothanfov  Hotham 
is  an  error  since  the  English  Version  of  A.D.  1611. 

1  Ch.n.  44  Shama  and  Jehiel  the  sons  of  H.  the  Ar. 
HO-THIR,  iTnn  abundance. 

Thirteenth  son  of  Heman  "  the  king's  seer."  He  was  a 
Kohathite  and  had  charge  of  the  twenty-first  course  in 
the  service  of  the  tabernacle.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  Joshbekashah,  Mallothi,  H.,  (and)  Mali. 

25.  28  The  one  and  twentieth  to  H. .  .his  sons 

HOTLY  —  [See  Pursue.  ] 

HOTTEST  — 

To  bz  strong,  pin  chazalc. 

2  Sa.  11.  15  in  the  fore  front  of  the  hottest  battle 
HOUGH  to  — 

To  root  out,  ip^  agar,  3. 

Josh.  1 1.   6  thou  shalt  hough  their  horses,  and  burn. 

11.  9  he  houghed  their  horses,  and  burnt  their 
2  Sa.    8.    4  David  houghed  all  the  chariot  (horses) 

1  Ch.18.    4  David  also  honghed  all  the  chariot_(horses) 
HOUR  — 
I.Look,  glance,  hour,  nj$  shaah. 

Dan.   3.    6  the  same  hour  be  cast  into  the  midst  of 

3.  15  ye  shall  be  oast  the  same  hour  into  the 
4  19  Belteshazzar,  was  astonied  for  one  hour 

4.  33  The  same  hour  was  the  thing  fulfilled 

5.  5  In  the  same  hour  came  forth  fingers  of  a 
%Hourt  liipa  hora. 

Matt.  8.  13  servant  was  healed  in  the  self  same  hour 
9.  22  the  woman  was  made  whole  from  that  h, 
10.  19  [it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour] 
15.  28  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that.  .h. 
17. 18  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  hour  1 


Matt  20.  3  he  went  out  about  the  third  hour,  and  saw 
20.  5  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  hour 
20.  6  about  the  eleventh  [hour]  he  went  out,  and 
20.  9  that  (were  hired)  about  the  eleventh  hour 
20. 12  These  last  have  wrought  (but)  one  hour 
24.  36  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  (man) 
24.  42  know  not  what  [hour]  your  Lord  doth  come 
24.  44  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son 

24.  50  and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of 

25.  13  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  man  coiueth 

26.  40  What !  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  h.  ? 
26.  45  take  (your)  rest :  behold,  the  hour  is  at  h. 

26.  55  In  that  same  hour  said  Jesus  to  the  mul. 

27.  45  from  the  sixth  hour . .  unto  the  ninth  hour 
27.  46  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a 

Marki3.  n  whatsoever,  .be  given  you  in  that  hour 

13.  32  of  that  day  and  (that)  hour  knoweth  no 

14.  35  if  it  were  possible,  the  hour  might  pass 
14.  37  Simon,  .couldest  not  thou  watch  one  hour? 

14.  41  it  is  enough,  the  hour  is  come  ;  behold 
35.  25  was  the  third  hour,  and  they  crucified  him 

15.  33  the  sixth  hour,  .until  the  ninth  hour 

15.  34  at  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud 
Luke  7.  21  [the  same]  hour  he  cured  many  of  (their) 

10.  21  In  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and 
12.  12  teach  you  in  the  same  hour  what  ye  ought 
12.  39  had  known  what  hour  the  thief  would  c. 
12. 40  cometh  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not 

12.  46  and  at  an  hour  when  he  is  not  aware,  and 
20.  19  the  same  hour  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him 
22.  14  when  the  hour  was  come,  he  sat  down,  and 
22.  53  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  dark. 

22.  59  about  the  space  of  one  hour  after,  anoth. 

23.  44  the  sixth  hour,  .until  the  ninth  hour 

24.  33  they  rose  up  the  same  hour,  and  returned 
John   1.  39  and  abode,  .for  it  was  about  the  tenth  h. 

2.  4  Jesus  saith . .  Woman . .  mine  hour  is  not 
4.    6  sat  thus,  .(and)  it  was  about  the  sixth  h. 
4.  21  Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour  cometh,  w. 
4.  23  But  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when 
4.  52  the  hour,  .at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  ■ 

4.  53  at  the  same  hour  in  the  which  Jesus  said 

5.  25  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the 
5.  28  for  the  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all 

7.  30  no  man  laid . .  because  his  hour  was  not 

8.  20  no  man  laid,  .for  his  hour  was  not  yet  e. 

11.  9  Are  there  not  twelve  hours  in  the  day? 

12.  23  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  man 

12.  27  save  me  from  this  hour,  .unto  this  hour 

13.  1  when  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come 

16.  21  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour-  is  come 
16.32  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea  is  now  come 

17.  1  Father,  the  hour  is  come  ;  glorify  thy  Son 
19.  14  it  was . .  about  the  sixth  hour  :  and  he  saith 
19.  27  from  that  hour  that  disciple  took  her  unto 

Acts    2.  15  seeing  it  is  (but)  the  third  hour  of  the  day 

3.  1  went,  .into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  pr. 
5.    7  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after,  wh. 

10.  3  evidently,  about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day 
10.  9  Peter  went  up . .  to  pray  about  the  sixth  h. 
10.  30  Four  days  ago  I  was  fasting  until  this  h. 
10.  30  at  the  ninth  [hour]  I  prayed  in  my  house 
16.  18  And  he  came  out  the  same  hour 
16.  33  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night 
19.  34  about  the  space  of  two  hours  cried  out,  G. 

22.  13  And  the  same  hour  I  looked  up  upon  him 

23.  23  Make  ready . .  at  the  third  hour  of  the  night 
1  Co.   4.  11  Even  unto  this  present  hour  we.  .hunger 

15.  30  And  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  ho.? 
Gal.  2.  5  we  gave  place . .  no,  not  for  an  hour ;  that 
Rev.    3.    3  thou  shalt  uot  know  what  hour  I  will  co. 

3.  10  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  tempta. 

9.  15  which  were  prepared  for  an  hour,  and  a 
1. 13  the  same  [hour]  was  there  a  great  earthq. 

4.  7  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come :  and 

7.  12  but  receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with 

8.  10  for  in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come 
8. 17  For  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to 
8.  19  Alas,  .for  in  one  hour  is  she  made  desol. 

HOUR,  half  an  — 

Half  an  hour,  ■ij/j.iwpiov  hemiorion. 

Rev.    8.    1  silence,  .about  the  space  of  [half  an  hour] 

HOUR,  this  — 
Noiv,  &prt  artL 

1  Co.   8.    7  unto  this  hour  eat  (it)  as  a  thing  offered 

HOUSE  — 

1.  House,  household,  rvs  bayith. 


Gen. 


1  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark 

1  Get  thee,  .from  thy  father's  house,  unto 
15  the  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's  ho. 

17  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  and  his  house 
14  his  trained  (servants),  born  in  his  own  h. 

2  steward  of  my  house  (is)  this  Eliezer  of  D.? 

3  and,  lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  h. 

12  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or  bought 

13  He  that  is  born  in  thy  house,  and  he  that 
23  and  all  that  were  born  in  his  house,  and 
23  male  among  the  men  of  Abraham's  house 
27  the  men  of  his  house,  born  in  the  house 

•2  turn  in.  .into  your  servant's  house,  and 

3  turned  in.  .andenteredintohishouse.;and 

4  menof  Sodom,  compassed  the  house  round 

10  pulled  Lot  into  the  house  to  them,  and 

11  the  men  that  (were)  at  the  door  of  the  h. 
13  caused  me  to  wander  from  my  father's  h. 

18  all  the  wombs  of  the  house  of  Abimelech 
2  eldest  servant  of  his  house,  that  ruled  over 
7  which  took  me  from  myfather'shouse,  and 

23  is  their  room  (in)  thy  father's  house  for  us 


Cen.  24 
24- 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
30. 

31- 
3i- 

3i- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
36. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
40. 


41. 
41. 

42. 
42. 
43- 
43* 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 

44- 
44. 
45- 
45- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
49. 
47- 
SO- 
SO- 
50. 
50- 
Exod.  1. 


Lev. 


27  Lord  led  me  to  the  house  of  my  master's 

28  ran,  and  told  (them  of)  her  mother's  house 

31  for  I  have  prepared  the  house,  and  rouiu 

32  man  came  into  the  house :  and  he  ungir. 
38  But  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  father's  house 

40  thou  shalt  take  a  wife,  .of  my  father's  h. 
13  raiment-  .which (were)  with  her  in  the  h. 

2  to  the  house  of  Bethuel  thy  mother's  fa. 
17  this  (is)  none  other  but  the  house  of  God 

21  So  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house 

22  this  stone,  .shall  be  God's  house :  and  of 

13  kissed  him,  and  brought  him  to  his  house 
30  when  shall  I  provide  for  mine  own  house 

14  or  inheritance  for  us  in  our  father's  house? 

30  thou  sore  longedst  after  thy  father's  house 

41  Thus  have  I  beeu  twenty  years  in  thy  h. 

17  Jacob,  .built  him  an  house,  and  made  bo. 
19  more  honourable  than  all  the  house  of  his 
26  and  took  Dinah  out  of  Shechem's  house 

29  and  spoiled  even  all  that  (was)  in  the  ho. 

30  and  I  shall  be  destroyed,  I  and  my  house 

6  Esau  took,  .all  the  persons  of  his  house 
11  Remain  a  widow  at  thy  father's  house,  till 
11  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  her  father's  h. 

2  he  was  in  the  house  of  his  master  the  E. 

4  and  he  made  him  overseer  over  his  house 

5  he  had  made  him  overseer  in  his  house 

5  the  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian's  house  for 

5  all  that  he  had  in  the  house,  and  in  the 

8  wotteth  not  what  (is)  with  me  in  the  house 

9  (There  is)  none  greater  in  this  house  than 
11  went  iuto  the  house  to  do  his  business 

1 1  none  of  the  men  of  the  house  there  within 
14  she  called  unto  the  men  of  her  house,  and 

3  in  the  house  of  the  captain  of  the  guard 

7  with  him  in  the  ward  of  Ins  lord's  house 
14  But  think,  .and  bring  me  out  of  this  ho. 

10  ward  in  the  captain  of  the  guard's  house 
40  Thou  shalt  be  over  my  house,  and  accor. 
51  forget,  .my  toil,  and  all  my  father's  house 
19  be  bound  in  the  house  of  your  prison 

19  carry  corn  for  the  famine-  of  your  houses 
16  he  said  to  the  ruler  of  his  house,  Bring 
1 7, 24  man  brought  the  men  into  Joseph's  ho. 

18  they  were  brought  into  Joseph's  house 

19  of  Joseph's  house . .  the  door  of  the  house 

26  brought  him  the  present,  .into  the  house 

1  he  commanded  the  steward  of  his  house 

8  out  of  thy  lord's  house  silver  or  gold? 

14  his  brethren  came  to  Joseph's  house ;  for 

2  Egyptians  and  thehouseof  Pharaohheard 
8  lord  of.  .his  house,  and  a  ruler  throughout 

16  fame  thereof  was  heard  in  Pharaoh's  ho. 

27  the  souls  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  which 

31  his  brethren,  and  unto  his  father's  house 

31  and  my  father's  house,  which  (were)  in  the 
14  brought  the  money  into  Pharaoh's  house 

4  Joseph  spake  unto  the  house  of  Pharaoh 

7  elders  of  his  house,  and  all  the  elders 

8  the  house  of  Joseph,  and  his  brethren 

8  his  father's  house :  only  their  little  ones 
22  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he  and  his  father's  house 

21  feared  God,  that  he  made  them  houses 

1  there  went  a  man  of  the  house  of  Levi 

22  and  of  her  that  sojourneth  in  her  house 

14  These . .  the  heads  of  their  fathers'  houses 

23  Pharaoh  turned  and  went  into  his  house 

3  shall  go  up  and  come  into  thine  house 

3  into  the  house  of  thy  servants,  and  upon 

9  destroy .  .frogs  from  thee  and  thy  houses 

11  from  thy  houses,  and  from  thy  servants 
13  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  houses,  out  of 

21  into  thy  houses :  and  the  houses  of  the 

24  swarm  (of  flies)  into  the  house  of  Pharaoh 
24  (into)  his  servants'  houses,  and  into  all 

20  and  his  cattle  flee  into  the  houses 

6  they  shall  fill  thy  houses,  and  the  houses 

6  the  houses  of  all  the  Egyptians ;  which 

3  house  of(their)fathers.  .lamb  for  an  house 

4  his  neighbour  next  unto  his  house  take 

7  and  on  the  upper  door  post  of  thehouses 

13  for  a  token  upon  thehouses  where  ye(are) 

15  shall  put  away  leaveu  out  of  your  houses 
19  there  be  no  leaven  found  in  your  houses 

22  shall  go  out  at  the  door  of  his  house 

23  to  come  in  unto  your  houses  to  smite  (you) 
27  houses  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt 
27  smote  the  Egyptians.,  delivered  ourhous. 

30  not  ahousewhere(therewas)notonedead 
46  In  one  house  shall  it  be  eaten ;  thou  shalt 
46  of  the  flesh  abroad  out  of  the  house 

3  from  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage 

14  out  from  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 

31  And  the  house  of  Israel  called  the  name 
3  Thus  shaltthou  say  to  the  house  of  Jacob 

2  brought  thee,  .out  of  the  house  of  bondage 

17  Thou  shalt  notcovet  thy  neighbour's  house 

7  and  it  be  stolen  out  of  the  man's  house 

8  the  master  of  the  house  shall  be  brought 
19  bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
26  bring  unto  the  house  of  the  LoRDthyGod 
38  in  the  sight  of  all  the  house  of  Israel 

6  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  bewail  the 

34  a  house  of  the  land  of  your  possession 

35  he  that  owneth  the  house  shall  come  and 

35  (there  is)  as  it  were  a  plague  in  the  house 

36  shallcommand  that  they  empty  the  house 
36  that  all  that  (is)  in  the  house  beuotmade 

36  the  priest  shall  go  in  to  see  the  house 

37  the  walls  of  the  house  with  hollow  strakes 

38  of  the  house  to  the  door  of  the  house 
38  and  shut  up  the  house  seven  days 


HOUSE 


495 


HOUSE 


Lev.  14.  39  be  spread  in  the  walls  of  the  house 
14.  41  he  shall  cause  the  house  to  be  scraped 
14.  42  other  mortar,  aud  shall  plaster  the  house 

24.  43  break  out  in  the  house,  afterthathehath 
14.  43  after  he  hath  scraped  the  house,  and  after 
14.  44  (if)  the  plague  be  spread  iu  the  house 

14.  44  it  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy  in  the  house :  it 
14. 45  he  shall  breakdown  the  house,  the  stones 
14.  45  shall  break  down,  .the  mortar  of  the  house 
14.  46  he  that  goeth  into  the  house  all  the  while 
14.  47  he  that  lieth  in  the  house  shall  wasli  his 
14.  47  he  that  eateth  in  the  house  shall  wash  his 
14.  48  the  house,  after  the  house  was  plastered 
14. 48  the  priest  shall  pronounce  the  house  clean 
14.  49  shall  take  to  cleanse  the  house  two  birds 
14.  51  water,  and  sprinkle  the  house  seven  times 
14.  52  he  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  blood 
14.  53  make  an  atonement  for  the  house :  and  it 
14.  55  the  leprosy  of  a  garment,  and  of  a  house 

16.  6,  11  atonement  for  himself,  and.  .his  house 

17,  3,  8,  10  (there  be)  of  the  house  of  Israel 
22.  11  he  that  is  born  in  his  house  :  they  shall 
22.  13  is  returned  unto  her  father's  house,  as 
22.  18  Whatsoever  (he  be)  of  the  house  of  Israel 

25.  29  sell  a  dwelling  house  in  a  walled  city 
25.  30  house  that  (is)  in  the  walled  city  shall 
25.  31  the  houses  of  the  villages  which  have  no 
25.  32  houses  of  the  cities  of  their  possession 
25.  33  the  house  that  was  sold,  and  the  city  of 
22.  33  the  houses  of  the  cities  of  the  Levites 

14  his  house  (to  he)  holy  unto  the  Lord 

15  he  that  sanctified  . .  will  redeem  his  house 
2  by  the  house  of  their  fathers 

,  20, 22,  24,  26,  2S,  30,  32,  34,  36, 38,  40,  42,  45]. 

4  every  one  head  of.  .house  of  Iris  fathers 
44  each  one  was  for  the  house  of  his  fathers 

2  with  the  ensign  of  their  father's  house 
32  numbered,  .by  the  house  of  their  fathers 
34  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 
15  of  Levi  after  the  house  of  their  fathers 

20  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 
24,  30,  35  chief  of  the  house  of  the  father 

2,  29,  40,  42  by  the  house  of  their  fathers 
22  throughout  the  houses  of  their  fathers 
34,  46  and  after  the  house  of  their  fathers 
38  and  by  the  house  of  their  fathers 

2  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers,  who 

7  not  so,  who  (is)  faithful  in  all  mine  house 
32  houses,  and  all  the  men  that  (appertained) 

2,  2  according  to  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 

3  the  head  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 
6  according  to  their  fathers'  houses,  (even) 

8  the  rod  of  Aaron  for  the  house  of  Levi 

1  thy  father's  house  with  thee,  shall  bear 
ii,  13  every  one  that  is  clean  in  thy  house 
29  they  mourned,  .all  the  house  of  Israel 
18  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold 

13  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold 

14  of  a  chief  house  among  the  Simeonites 

15  a  people,  (and)  of  a  chief  house  hi  Midian 

2  throughout  their  fathers'  house,  all  that 

3  (being)  in  her  father's  house  in  her  youth 

10  if  she  vowed  in  her  husband's  house,  or 

16  yet)  in  her  youth  in  her  father's  hous 

18  We  will  not  return  unto  our  houses,  until 
14,  14  according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers 

6  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 

21  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour's  house 

7  talk,  .when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house 

9  write  them  upon  the  posts  of  thy  house 

1 1  houses  full  of  all  good  (firings),  which  thou 

12  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 

8  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house  of  bond  men 
26  bring  an  abomination  into  thine  house 
12  built  goodly  houses,  and  dwelt  (therein) 
14  laud  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 

19  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house,  and  wh. 

20  write . .  upon  the  door  posts  of  thine  house 

5  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house  of  bondage 
10  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 
16  he  loveth  thee  and  thine  house,  because 

1  dwellest  in  their  cities,  and  in  their  houses 
5  "What  man  (is  there)  that,  .built  a  new  h. 
5  let  him  go  and  return  to  his  house,  lest 
6,  7,  8  let  him  go  aud  return  unto  his  house 

12  thou  shalt  bring  her  home  to  thine  house 

13  shall  remain  in  thine  house,  and  bewail 

2  thou  shalt  bring  it  unto  thine  own  house 
8  When  thou  buildest  a  new  house,  then 

22.  8  thou  bring  not  blood  upon  thine.house 
22.  21  damsel  to  the  door  of  her  father's  house 
22.  21  to  play  the  whore  in  her  father's  house 
23. 18  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God  for 
24.  1  give  (it),  .and  send  her  out  of  his  house 
24.  2  when  she  is  departed  out  of  his  house 
24.    3  and  sendeth  her  out  of  his  house ;  or  if 

24.  10  not  go  into  his  house  to  fetch  his  pledge 

25.  9  that  will  not  build  up  his  brother's  house 
25.  10  house  of  him  that  hath  his  shoe  loosed 

25.  14  not  have  in  thine  house  divers  measures 
26. 11  hath  given  unto  thee,  and  unto  thine  house 

26.  13  the  hallowed  things  out  of  (mine)  house 
28.  30  thou  shalt  build  an  house,  and  thou  shalt 

Josh.  2.  1  came  into  an  harlot's  house,  named  Rahab 
2.  3  men . .  which  are  entered  into  thine  house 
■2. 12  also  show  kindness  unto  my  father's  house 
2. 15  for  her  house  (was)  upon  the  town  wall 
2. 19  the  doors  of  thy  house  into  the  street,  his 
2. 19  whosoever  shall  be  with  thee  in  the  house 
6. 17  and  all  that  (are)  with  her  in  the  house 
6.  22  Go  into  the  harlot's  house,  and  bring  out 
6.  24  the  treasury  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 


27. 

XT  27' 

Num.  1 
[So  also  1 


26. 

3°' 
3° 
3°. 
32- 
34- 

Pent.  5. 
5. 

6. 
6, 

e. 

6. 

7- 
7 


22. 

22. 


Josh.  9. 
9- 
*7- 


Judg. 


Ruth 


r  Sa. 


12  hot  (for)  our  provision  out  of  our  houses 
23  drawers  of  water  for  the  house  of  my  God 
17  Joshua  spake  unto  the  house  of  Joseph 

5  the  house  of  Joseph  shall  abide  in  their 

6  unto  his  own  house,  unto  the  city  from 

45  Lord  had  spoken  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
14  of  each  chief  house  a  prince  throughout 

14  each  one(was)anheadof  the  house  of  their 

15  as  forme  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the 
17  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  house  of  bondage 

22  the  house  of  Joseph,  they  also  went  up 

23  house  of  Joseph  sent  to  descry  Beth-el 
35  hand  of  the  house  of  Joseph  prevailed 

17  Hazor  and  the  house  of  Heber  the  Kenite 

8  you  forth  out  of  the  house  of  bondage 

15  and  I  (am)  the  least  in  my  father's  house 
27  a  snare  unto  Gideon,  and  to  his  house 

29  Jerubbaal . .  went  and  dwelt  in  his  own  h. 

35  Neither  showed  they  kindness  to  the  house 

1  family  of  the  house  of  his  mother's  father 

4  silver  out  of  the  house  of  Baal-berith 

5  he  went  unto  his  father's  house  at  Ophrah 

6  gathered  together,  and  all  the  house  of 

16  dealt  well  with  Jerubbaal  and  his  house 

18  risen  up  against  my  father's  house  this  d. 

19  with  Jerubbaal  and  with  his  house  this 

20  men  of  Shechem,  and  the  house  of  Millo 

20  let  fire  come,  .from  the  house  of  Millo 

27  went  into  the  house  of  their  god,  and  did 

46  an  hold  of  the  house  of  the  god  Berith 

9  to  fight,  .against  the  house  of  Ephraim 

3  shalt  not  inherit  in  our  father's  house 

7  and  expel  me  out  of  my  father's  house  ? 
31  cometh  forth  of  the  doors  of  my  house  to 

34  Jephthah  came  to  Mizpeh  unto  his  house 

1  will  burn  thine  house  upon  thee  with  fire 
15  burn  thee  and  thy  father's  house  with  fire 
19  and  he  went  up  to  his  father's  house 

21  and  he  did  grind  in  the  prison  house 

25  called  for  Samson  out  of  the  prison  house 

26  the  pillars  whereupon  the  house  standeth 

27  Now  the  house  was  full  of  men  and  women 

29  middle  pillars  upon  winch  the  house  stood 

30  the  house  fell  upon  the  lords,  and  upon 

31  all  the  house  of  his  father  camedown,  and 

4  and  they  were  in  the  house  of  Micah 

5  the  man  Micah  had  an  house  of  gods,  and 

8  to  mount  Ephraim,  to  the  house  of  Micah 

12  became  his  priest,  and  was  in  the  house 

2  to  the  house  of  Micah,  they  lodged  there 

3  When  they  (were)  by  the  house  of  Micah 

13  And  they,  .came  unto  the  house  of  Micah 

14  know  that  there  is  in  these  houses  an  ep. 

15  came  to  the  house  of  the  young  man  the 
15  unto  the  house  of  Micah,  and  saluted  him 

18  went  into  Micah's  house,  and  fetched  the 

19  be  a  priest  unto  the  house  of  one  man,  or 

22  when  they  were  a  good  way  from  the  ho. 
22  in  the  houses  near  to  Micah's  house  were 
26  he  turned  and  went  back  unto  his  house 
31  all  the  time  that  the  house  of  God  was  in 

2  went  away  from  him  unto  her  father's  h. 

3  she  brought  him  into  her  father's  house 
15  no  man  that  took  them  into  his  house  to 
1 8  going  to  the  house  of  the  LORD ;  and  there 

18  no  man  that  receiveth  me  to  house 

21  So  he  brought  him  into  his  house,  and  g. 

22  the  men.  .beset  the  house  round  about 
22  and  spake  to  the  master  of  the  house,  the 

22  the  man  that  came  into  thine  house,  that 

23  the  man,  the  master  of  the  house,  went 

23  seeing . .  this  man  is  come  into  mine  house 

26  of  the  man's  house  where  her  lord  (was) 

27  opened  the  doors  of  the  house,  and  went 
27  fallen  down  (at)  the  door  of  the  house,  and 

29  when  he  was  come  into  his  house,  he  took 
5  and  beset  the  house  round  about  upon  me 
8  neither  will  we  any  (of  us)  turn  into  his  h. 

8  Go,  return  each  to  her  mother's  house  :the 

9  each  (of  you)  in  the  house  of  her  husband 
7  that  she  tarried  a  little  in  the  house 

11  the  woman  that  is  come  into  thine  house 

1 1  which  two  did  build  the  house  of  Israel :  and 

12  let  thy  h'use  be  like  the  house  of  Pharez 
7  went  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  so  she 

19  came  to  their  house  to  Ramah:  and  Elka. 
21  the  man  Elkanah,  and  all  his  house,  went 

24  brought  him  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord 

11  And  Elkanah  went  to  Ramah  to  his  house 
27  Bid  I  plainly  appear  unto  the  house  of  thy 

27  when  they  were  in  Egypt,  in  Pharaoh's  h.? 

28  did  I  give  unto  the  house  of  thy  father 

30  I  said  indeed,  (that)  thy  house,  and  theh. 

31  cut  off.  .the  arm  of  thy  father's  house 

32  shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  thine  house 

33  the  increase  of  thine  house  shall  die  in 

35  I  will  build  him  a  sure  house  ;  and  he 

36  every  one  that  is  left  in  thine  house 

12  which  I  have  spoken  concerning  his  house 

13  I  will  judge  his  house  for  ever  for  the 

14  I  have  sworn  unto  the  house  of  Eli,  that 

14  the  iniquity  of  Eli's  house  shall  not  be 

15  opened  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
2  they  brought  it  into  the  house  of  Dagon 
5  nor  any  that  come  into  Dagon's  house 

1  brought  it  into  the  house  of  Abinadab  in 

2  house  of  Israel  lamented  after  the  LORD 

3  Samuel  spake  unto  all  the  house  of  Israel 

17  there  (was)  his  house  ;  and  there  he  judged 

18  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  the  seer's  ho. 

20  on  thee,  and  on  all  thy  father's  house? 

25  the  people  away,  every  man  to  his  house 


1  Sa.  15. 

17- 


:Sa. 


3- 

3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7* 
7- 
7- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
11. 


13- 
13- 
*3- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
15- 
15- 
26. 
16. 
16. 
16. 

*7- 
17. 

17- 
19. 
19. 


34  Saul  went  up  tohis  house  to  Gibeah  of  Saul 
25  and  make  his  father's  house  free  in  Israel 

2  him  go  no  more  home  to  his  father's  house 

10  he  prophesied  in  the  midst  of  the  house 
9  he  sat  in  his  house  with  his  javelin  in  his 

11  also  sent  messengers  unto  David's  house 

15  cut  off  thy  kindness  from  my  house  for 

16  made  (a  covenant)  with  the  house  of  Da. 
15  shall  this  (fellow)  come  into  my  house? 

1  brethren  and  all  his  father's  house  heard 

11  son  of  Ahitub,  and  all  his  father's  house 

14  bidding,  and  is  honourable  m  thine  house? 

15  servant,  (nor)  to  all  the  house  of  my  fath. 

16  Ahimelech,  thou,  and  all  thy  father's  ho. 

22  of  all  the  persons  of  thy  father's  house 

18  David  abode . .  Jonathan  went  to  his  house 
21  destroymyname  outof  myfather's  house 

1  and  buried  hini  in  his  house  at  Ramah 

6  peace  (be)  to  thine  house,  and  peace  (be) 

28  will  certainly  make  my  lord  a  sure  house 

35  Go  up  in  peace  to  thine  house ;  see,  I  have 

36  he  held  a  feast  in  his  house,  like  the 

24  the  woman  had  a  fat  calf  in  the  house,  and 
9  to  publish  (it  in)  the  house  of  their  idols 

10  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  Ashtaroth 

12  for  thehouseof  Israel;  because  they  were 

4  David  king  over  the  house  of  Judah 

7  the  house  of  Judah  have  anointed  me  king 

10  But  the  house  of  Judah  followed  David 

11  king  in  Hebron  over  the  house  of  Judah 
1,  6  between  the  house  of  Saul  and  the  ho. 
1  house  of  Saul  waxed  weaker  and  weaker 
6  Abnermade  himself  strong  for  the  house 

8  do  show  kindness  this  day  unto  the  house 

10  translate  the  kingdom  from  the  house  of 

19  seemed  good  to  the  whole  house  of  Benj. 

29  Let  it  rest,  .on  all  his  father's  house;  and 
29  let  there  not  fail  from  the  house  of  Joab 

5  and  came,  .to  the  house  of  Ish-bosheth 

6  came  thither  into  the  midst  of  the  house 

7  when  they  came  into  the  house,  he  lay  on 

1 1  slain . .  in  his  own  house  upon  his  bed  ? 

8  the  lame  shall  not  come  into  the  house 
1 1  and  masons  :  and  they  built  David  an  ho. 

3,  4  brought  it  out  of  the  house  of  Abinadab 
5,  15  David  and  all  the  house  of  Israel 

10  into  the  house  of  Obed-edom  the  Gittite 

11  the  ark.  .continued  in  the  house  of  Obed. 

12  hath  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  and 

12  from  thehouseof  Obed-edom  into  the  city 
19  the  people  departed  every  one  to  his  ho. 
21  before  thy  father,  and  before  all  his  house 

1  when  the  king  sat  in  his  house,  and  the 

2  See  now,  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedar 

5  Shalt  thou  build  me  an  house,  .to  dwell 

6  Whereas  I  have  not  dwelt  in  (any)  house 

7  Why  build  ye  not  me  an  house  of  cedar? 

11  telleth  thee  that  he  will  make  thee  an  house 

13  He  shall  build  an  house  for  my  name ;  and 

16  And  thinehouseand  thy  kingdom  shall  be 

18  what  (is)  my  house,  that  thou  hast  brough 

19  hast  spoken  also  of  thy  servant's  house 

25  concerning  his  house,  establish  (it)  for  ever 

26  let  the  house  of  thy  servant  David  be 

27  saying,  I  will  build  thee  an  house;  therefore 
29  to  bless  the  house  of  thy  servant,  that 
29  house  of  thy  servant  be  blessed  for  ever 

1  yet  any  that  is  left  of  the  house  of  Saul 

2  (there  was)  of  the  house  of  Saul  a  servant 

3  (Is)  there  not  yet  any  of  the  house  of  Saul 

4  he  (is)  in  the  house  of  Machir,  the  son  of 

5  fetched  him  out  of  the  house  of  Machir 

9  that  pertained  to  Saul  and  to  all  his  house 

12  all  that  dwelt  in  the  house  of  Ziba  (were) 

2  walked  upon  the  roof- of  the  king's  house 

4  purified,  .and  she  returned  unto  her  ho. 

8  Go  down  to  thy  house,  and  wash  thy  feet 

8  Uriah  departed  out  of  the  king's  house 

9  slept  at  the  door  of  the  king's  house  with 
9  But  Uriah,  .went  not  down  to  his  house 

10  saying,  Uriah  went  not  down  unto  his  ho. 

10  didst  thou  not  go  down  unto  thine  house '. 

11  shall  I  then  go  into  mine  house,  to  eat 

13  went  out.  .but  went  not  down  to  his  ho. 
27  David  sent  and  fetched  her  to  his  house 

8  gave  thee  thy  master's  house,  and  thy 
8  and  gave  thee  the  house  of  Israel  and  of 

10  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  hous 

11  evil  against  out  of  thine  own  house,  and  I 

15  Nathan  departed  unto  his  house.  And  the 

17  the  elders  of  his  house  arose,  and  (went) 

20  and  came  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
20  then  he  came  to  his-own  house ;  and  when 

7  Go  now  to  thy  brother  Amnon's  house,  and 

8  Tamar  went  to  her  brother  Amnon's  house 

20  desolate  in  her  brother  Absalom's  house 

8  Go  to  thine  house,  and  I  will  give  charge 

9  iniquity  (be)  on  me,  and  on  my  father's  hou. 
24  Let  him  turn  to  his  own  house,  and  let 
24  Absalom  returned  to  his  own  house,  and 
31  came  to  Absalom  unto  (his)  house,  and 

16  king  left  ten  women.. to  keep  the  house 
35  thou  shalt  hear  out  of  the  king's  house 

3  To  day  shall  the  house  of  Israel  restore 

5  a  man  of  the  family  of  the  house  of  Saul 
8  all  the  blood  of  the  house  of  Saul,  in 

21  which  he  hath  left  to  keep  the  house 

18  came  to  a  man's  house  in  Bahurim,  which 
20  servants  came  to  the  woman  to  the  house 

23  and  gat  him  home  to  his  house,  tohis  city 
5  Joab  came  into  the  house  of  the  king,  and 

11  last  to  bring  the  kins  back  to  the  house  ? 


HOUSE 


49G 


HOUSE 


>  Sa.  19.  11  is  come  to  the  king,  (even)  to  his  house 
19.  17  the  servant  of  the  house  of  Saul,  and  his 
19.  20  first  this  day  of  all  the  house  of  Joseph 
19.  28  all  (of)  my  father's  house  were  but  dead 

19.  30  come  again  in  peace  unto  his  own  house 

20.  3  David  came  to  his  house  at  Jerusalem ;  and 

20.  3  whom  he  had  left  to  keep  the  house,  and 
ax.    i  for  (his)  bloody  house,  because  he  slew 

21.  4  silver  nor  gold  of  Saul,  nor  of  his  house 

23.  5  Although  my  house  (be)  not  so  with  God 

24.  17  against  me,  and  against  my  father's  house 
t  Ki.    1.  53  Solomon  said  unto  him,  Go  to  thine  house 

2.  24  who  hath  made  me  an  house,  as  he  prom. 
2.  27  concerning  the  house  of  Eli  in  Shiloh 
2.  31  from  me,  and  from  the  house  of  my  father 
2.  33  upon  his  house,  and  upon  his  throne,  shall 

2.  34  buried  in  his  own  house  in  the  wilderness 
2!  36  Build  thee  an  house  in  Jerusalem,  and 

3!    1  of  building  his  own  house,  and  the  house 

3.  2  no  house  built  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord 
3-  17  I  and  this  woman  dwell  in  one  house  ;  and 
3.  17  delivered  of  a  child  with  her  in  the  house 
3.  18  in  the  house,  save  we  two  in  the  house 

3  my  father  could  not  build  an  house  unto 
5  I  purpose  to  build  an  house  unto  the  name 
5  he  shall  build  an  house  unto  my  name 

17  stones,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  house 

18  timber  and  stones  to  build  the  house 

1  he  began  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord 

2  the  house  winch  king  Solomon  built  for 

3  the  porch  before  the  temple  of  the  house 
6.   3  according  to  the  breadth  of  the  house 
6.    3  (was)  the  breadth  thereof  before  the  house 
6.    4  for  the  house  he  made  windows  of  narrow 

5  against  the  wall  of  the  house  he  built 

5  (against),  .walls  of  the  house  round  about 

6  (in  the  wall)  of  the  house  he  made  narrow. 

6  not  be  fastened  in  the  walls  of  the  house 

7  the  house,  when  it  was  in  building,  was 

7  (nor)  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house 

8  (was)  in  the  right  side  of  the  house :  (and) 

9  he  built  the  house,  and  finished  it ;  and 
9  covered  the  house  with  beams  and  boards 

10  he  built  chambers  against  all  the  house 
10  rested  on  the  house  with  timber  of  cedar 
12  this  house  which  thou  art  in  building 
:4  Solomon  built  the  house,  and  finished  it 
15  he  built  the  walls  of  the  house  within 
6. 15  the  floor  of  the  house,  and  the  walls  of 
6.  15  covered  the  floor  of  the  house  with  planks 
6.  16  twenty  cubits  on  the  sides  of  the  house 
6.  17  the  house,  that  (is),  the  temple  before  it 
6.  18  the  cedar  of  the  house  within  (was)  carved 
6.  19  oracle  he  prepared  in  the  house  within 
6.  21  overlaid  the  house  within  with  pure  gold 
6.  22  the  whole  house  he  overlaid  with  pure  gold 
6.  22  until  he  had  finished  all  the  house  :  also 
6.  27  set  the  cherubim  within  the  inner  house 
6.  27  one  another  in  the  midst  of  the  houBe 
6.  29  carved  all  the  walls  of  the  house  round 
6.  30  floor  of  the  house  he  overlaid  with  gold 
6.  37  foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  laid 

6.  38  was  the  house  finished  throughout  all  the 

7.  1  wasbuildinghis  own  house  thirteen  years 

1  But  Solomon,  .finished  all  his  house 

2  also  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
8  house  where  he  dwelt  (had)  another  court 
8  made  also  an  house  for  Pharaoh's  daughter 

12  the  inner  court  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
2  inner  court.. and  for  the  porch  of  the  house 
39  live  bases  on  the  right  side  of  the  house 
39  five  on  the  left  side  of  the  house :  and  he 
7.  39  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  house 
7.  40,  45,  51  made,  .for  the  house  of  the  Lord 
7.  48  that  (pertained)  unto  the  house  of  the  Lo. 
7. 50  (both)  for  the  doors  of  the  inner  house 
7.  50  for  the  doors  of  the  house,  (to  wit),  of  the 

7.  51  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

8.  6  into  the  oracle  of  the  house,  to  the  most 
8.  10  the  cloud  filled  the  house  of  the  LORD 
8.  11  glory,  .had  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord 
8.  13  surely  built  thee  an  house  to  dwell  in,  a 
8.  16  I  chose  no  city  out.  .to  build  an  house 
8.  17  house  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of 
8.  18  build  an  house  unto  my  name,  thou  didst 
8.  19  thou  shalt  not  build  the  house;  but  thy 
8.  19  he  shall  build  the  house  unto  my  name 
8.  20  house  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of 
8  27  much  less  this  house  that  I  have  builded! 
8.  29  be  open  toward  this  house  night  and  day 
8.  31  come  before  thine  altar  in  this  house 
8.  33  make  supplication  unto  thee  in  this  house 
8.  38  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  this  house 
8.  42  he  shallcomeand  pray  toward  this  house 
8.  43  they  may  know  that  this  house,  which 
8.  44,  48  house  that  I  have  built  for  thy  name 
8.  63  Isi-ael  dedicated  the  house  of  the  Lord 
8.  64  that  (was)  before  the  house  of  the  Lord 


1  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  ho. 
3  hallowed  this  house  which  thou  hast  built 
7  this  house,  which  I  have  hallowed  for  my 


8  thishouse,  (which)  is  high,  every  one  that 
8  done  this  unto  this  land,  .to  this  house? 
10  when  Solomon  had  built  the  two  houses 
10  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  ho. 
.  15  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  his  own  house 
.  24  herhouse  which  (Solomon)  had  built  for 
25  before  the  Lord.  So  he  finished  the  house 
4  wiadom,  and  the  house  that  he  had  built 
10.    5  he  went  up  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord 
10.  12  house  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  king's  ho. 
jo.  17,  21  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 


c  Ki.  11.  18  gave  him  an  house,  and  appointed  him 
11.  20  whom  Taphenes  weaned  in  Pharaoh's  ho. 
11.  28  all  the  charge  of  the  house  of  Joseph 

11.  38  build  thee  a  sure  house,  as  I  built  for  D. 

12.  16  see  to  thine  own  house,  David.   So  Israel 

12. 19  against  the  house  of  David  unto  this  clay 

12. 20  none  that  followed  the  house  of  David  but 
12.  21  he  assembled  all  the  house  of  Judah,  with 
12.  21  to  fight  against  the  house  of  Israel,  to 
12.  23  unto  all  tne  house  of  Judah  and  Benjamin 
12.  24  return  every  man  to  his  house ;  for  this 
12.  26  the  kingdom  return  to  the  house  of  David 
12.  27  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem 

12.  31  he  made  an  house  of  high  places,  and  made 

13.  2  shall  be  born  unto  the  house  of  David 
13.    8  If  thou  wilt  give  me  half  thine  house,  I 
13.  18  Bringhim  back  with  thee  into  thine  house 
13.  19  did  eat  bread  in  his  house,  and  drank  water 
13.  32  the  houses  of  the  high  places  which  (are) 

13.  34  became  sin  unto  the  house  of  Jeroboam 

14.  4  came  to  the  house  of  Ahijah.  ButAhijah 
14.    8  the  kingdom  away  from  the  house  of  David 
14.  10  bring  evil  upon  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
14.  10  away  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam 

14. 12  get  thee  to  thine  own  house ;  (and)  when 

14. 13  (some)  goodthing.  .in  the  house  of  Jerobo. 
14.  14  cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam  that  day 
14.  26  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
14.  26  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house;  he  even 
14.  27  which  kept  the  door  of  the  king's  house 

14.  28  the  king  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
15. 15  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  silver,  and 
15. 18  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
15. 18  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 

15.  27  son  of  Ahijah,  of  the  house  of  Issachar 

15.  29  he  smote  all  the  house  of  Jeroboam ;  he 

16.  3  of  Baasha,  and  the  posterity  of  his  house 
16.    3  will  make  thy  house  like  the  house  of 
16.   7  against  his  house,  even  for  all  the  evil 
16.    7  in  being  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam ;  and 
16.    9  the  house  of  Arza,  steward  of  (his)  house 
16.  11  he  slew  all  the  house  of  Baasha :  he  left 
16.  12  did  Zimri  destroy  all  the  house  of  Baasha 
16.  18  went  into  the  palace  of  the  king's  house 
16.  18  king's  house,  and  burnt  the  king's  house 

16.  32  an  altar  for  Baal  in  the  house  of  Baal 

17.  15  and  she.  .and  her  house,  did  eat  (many) 
17.  17  the  mistress  of  the  house,  fell  sick ;  and 

17.  23  down  out  of  the  chamber  into  the  house 

18.  3  which  (was)  the  governor  of  (his)  house 
18. 18  thyfather'shouse,  in  that  ye  have  forsaken 
20.    6  shall  search  thine  house,  and  the  houses 
20.  31  kings  of  the  house  of  Israel  (are)  merciful 

20.  43  went  to  his  house  heavy  and  displeased 

21.  2  it  (is)uear  unto  my  house  :  and  I  willgive 
21.    4  came  into  his  house  heavy  and  displeased 
21.  22  will  make  thine  house  like  the  house  of 
21.  22  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahijah 

21.  29  days  will  I  bring  the  evil  upon  his  house 

22.  17  let  them  return  every  man  to  his  house  in 
22.  39  and  the  ivory  house  which  he  made,  and 

2  Ki.   4.    2  tell  me,  what  hast  thou  in  the  house? 
4.    2  handmaid  hath  not  anything  in  the  house 
4.  32  when  Elisha  was  come  into  the  house,  be. 

4.  35  Then  he  returned,  and  walked  in  the  ho. 

5.  '9  stood  at  the  door  of  the  house  of  Elisha 
5.  18  when  mymastergoeth  into  the  house  ofK. 
5.  18  I  bow  myself  in  the  house  of  Rimmon 

5.  24  bestowed  (them)  in  the  house  :  and  he  let 

6.  32  Elisha  sat  in  his  house,  and  the  elders  sat 

7.  11  and  they  told  (it)  to  the  king's  house  within 

8.  3  to  cry  unto  the  king  for  herhouse  and  for 
8.  s  cried  to  the  king  for  her  house  and  for  her 
8.  18  And  he  walked . .  as  did  the  house  of  Ahab 
8.  27  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  house  of  Aliab 

8.  27  he  (was)  the  son-in-law  of  the  house  of  A. 

9.  6  he  arose,  and  went  into  the  house ;  and  he 
9.  7  thou  shalt  smite  the  house  of  Ahab  thy  m. 
9.  8  For  the  whole  house  of  Ahab  shall  perish 
9.  9  I  will  make  the  house  of  Ahab  like  the  ho. 
9.  9  like  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahijah 
g.  27  he  fled  by  the  way  of  the  garden  house 

10.  3  Look,  .and  fight  for  your  master's  house 
10.  5  he  that  (was)  over  the  house,  and  he  that 
10.  10  Lord  spake  concerning  the  house  of  Ahab 
10. 11  slew  all  that  remained  of  the  house  of  Ah. 
10.  12  ashe(was)attheshearinghouseintheway 
10.  14  slew  them  at  the  pit  of  the  shearing  house 
10.  21  And  they  came  into  the  house  of  Baal;  and 
10.  21  the  house  of  Baal  was  full  from  one  end 
10.  23  And  Jehu  went,  .into  the  house  of  Baal 
10.  25  and  went  to  the  city  of  the  house  of  Baal 
10.  26  brought,  .the  images  out  of  the  house  of 
10.  27  brake  down  the  house  of  Baal,  and  made 

10.  30  hast  done  unto  the  house  of  Aliab  accord. 

11.  3  he  was  with  her  hid  in  the  house  of  the  L. 
11.   4  brought'them  to  him  into  the  house  of  the 
11.    4  took  an  oath  of  them  in  the  house  of  the 
11.    5  be  keepers  of  the  watch  of  the  king's  ho. 
11.    6  so  shall  ye  keep  the  watch  of  the  house 
11.    7  they  shall  keep  the  watch  of  the  house  of 
11.  15  Let  her  not  be  slain  in  the  house  of  theL. 
11.  16  way.  .horses  came  into  the  khig's  house 
11.  18  went  into  the  house  of  Baal,  and  brake  it 
11.  18  appointed  officers  over  the  house  of  the 
11. 19  they  brought  down  the  king  from  the  ho. 
11. 19  by  the  way  of  the  gate,  .to  the  king'shou. 

11.  20  slew  Athaliah.  .(beside)  the  king's  house 

12.  4  cometh.  .to  bring  into  the  house  of  theL. 
12.  5  let  them  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house 
12.  6  had  not  repaired  the  breaches  of  the  ho. 
12.    7  Why  repair  ye  not  the  breaches  of  the  h.? 


!  Ki.  12.    7  but  deliver  it  for  the  breaches  of  the  ho. 
12.    8  neither  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  ho. 
12.    9  on  the  right  side  as  one  cometh  into  the  h. 
12.  9,  13  brought  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
12. 10  the  money,  .found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
12.  11  that  had  the  oversight  of  the  house  of  the 
12.  n  that  wrought  upon  the  house  of  the  Lord 
12.  12  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house  of  the 
12.  12  all  that  was  laid  out  for  the  house  to  rep. 
12.  13  there  were  not  made  for  the  house  of  the  L. 
12.  14  and  repaired  therewith  the  house  of  the  L. 
12.  18  in  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
12.  18  and  in  the  king's  house,  and  sent  (it)  to  H. 
12.  20  servants,  .slew  Joashin  the  house  of  Millo 
6  not  from  the  sinsof  the houseof  Jeroboam 
14  the  vessels,  .found  in  the  house  of  the  L. 
14  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house 
5  was  a  leper,  .and  dwelt  in  a  several  house 
5  Jothamthe  king's  son  (was)  over  the  house 
25  in  the  palace  of  the  king's  house,  with  Ar. 
35  He  built  the  higher  gate  of  the  house  of 
8  gold,  .found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
8  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house 
14  brasen  altar,  .from  the  fore  front  of  the  h. 
14  from  between  the  altar  and  the  house  of 
18  the  covert,  .they  had  built  in  the  house 
18  turned  he  from  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
21  For  he  rent  Israel  from  the  house  of  Da. 
29,  32  in  the  houses  of  the  high  places  which 
ia.  15  all  the  silver,  .found  in  the  house  of  the 

18.  15  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house 

19.  1  Hezekiah.  .went  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
19.  14  Hezekiah  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
19.  30  the  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house 

19.  37  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch 

20.  1  Set  thine  house  in  order ;  for  thou  shalt 
20.    5,  8  go  up  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord 

20.  13  showed  them  all  the  house  of  his  precious 
20.  13  the  house  of  his  armour,  and  all  that  was 
20.  13  there  was  nothing  in  his  house,  nor  in  all 
20. 15  said,  What  have  they  seen  in  thine  house? 
20.  15  All.  .that  (are)  in  mine  house  have  they 

20.  17  all  that  (is)  in  thine  house,  and  that  wh. 

21.  4  he  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
21.    5  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
21.   7  he  set  a  graven  image,  .in  the  house,  of 
21.    7  In  this  house,  and  in  Jerusalem,  which  I 
21.  13  and  the  plummet  of  the  house  of  Ahab 
21.  18  was  buried  in  the  garden  of  his  own  house 

21.  23  the  servants . .  slew  the  king  in  his  own  h. 

22.  3  the  king  sent  Shaphan.  .to  the  house  of 
22.    4  silver,  .brought  into  the  house  of  the  Lo. 
22.    s,  q  that  have  the  oversight  of  the  house  of 
22.    5  the  work  which  (is)  in  the  house  of  the  L. 
22.    5  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house 

22.  6  to  buy.  .hewn  stone  to  repair  the  house 
22.    8  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the  h. 

22.  9  the  money  that  was  found  in  the  house 

23.  2  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
23.  2  of  the  book.,  found  in  the  houseof  the  L. 
23.  6  he  brought  out  the  grove  from  the  house 
23.  7  he  brake  down  the  houses  of  the  sodom. 
23.  7  that  (were)  by  the  house  of  the  Lord,  where 
23.  11  at  the  entering  in  of  the  house  of  the  L. 
23.  12  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lo. 
23.  19  all  the  houses  also  of  the  high  places  that 
23.  24  book  that  Hilkiah . .  found  in  the  house 

23.  27  I  have  removed.,  the  house  of  which  I  sa. 

24.  13  all  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

24.  13  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 

25.  9  And  he  burnt  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
25.  9  and  the  king's  house,  and  all  the  houses 
25.  9  every  great  (man's)  house  burnt  he  with 
=5- 13  pillars  of  brass,  .in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
25. 13  the  brazen  sea.  .in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
25.  16  Solomon  had  made  for  the  house  of  the  L. 

:  Ch.  2.  54  The  sons  of  Salma . .  the  house  of  Joab,  and 
2.  55  Hemath,  thefatherofthehouseof  Bechab 
4.  21  families  of  the  house,  .of  the  house  of  A. 

4.  38  the  house  of  their  fathers  increased  grea. 
5. 13  their  brethren,  of  the  house  of  their  fath. 
5. 15  Guni,  chief  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

5.  24,  24  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fathers 

6.  31  set  over  the  service  of  song  in  the  house 
6.  32  until  Solomon  had  built  the  house  of  the 

6.  48  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  house  of 

7.  2  sons  of  Tola . .  heads  of  then?  father's  house 
7.  4  with  them . .  after  the  house  of  their  fath. 
7.   7,  q  heads  of  the  house  of  (their)  fathers 

7.  23  Beriah,  because  it  went  evil  with  his  ho. 

7.  40  All  these,  .heads  of  (their)  father's  house 

9.   9  chief  of  the  fathers  in  the  house  of  their 

9.  11  son  of  Ahitub,  the  ruler  of  the  houseof  G. 

9.  13  brethren,  heads  of  the  house  of  their  fath. 

9.  13  for  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of 

9. 19  his  brethren,  of  the  house  of  his  father 

9.  23  the  oversight  of  the  gates  of  the  house  of 

9.  23  the  house  of  the  tabernacle,  by  wards 

9.  26  the  chambers  and  treasures  of  the  house 

9.  27  they  lodged  round  about  the  house  of  G. 

10.   6  Saul  died . .  and  all  his  house  died  together 

10.  10  they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  their 

12.  28  of  his  father's  house  twenty  and.  two  cap. 

12.  29  had  kept  the  ward  of  the  house  of  Saul 

12.  30  famous  throughout  the  house  of  their  fa. 

13.  7  they  carried  the  ark. .  out  of  the  house  of 
13.  13  carried  it  aside  into  the  house  of  Obed-e. 
13.  14  the  ark  of  God  remained .  .in  his  house 

13.  14  the  LORD  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom 

14.  1  masons  and  carpenters,  to  build  him  an  h. 

15.  1  made  him  houses  in  the  cityof  David,  and 
15.  25  to  bring  up  the  ark.  .out  of  the  house  of 


HOUSE 


497 


HOUSE 


r6. 

'7- 
l7- 
*7- 
17- 
*7- 
'7- 


:  Ch.i6.  43  And  all.  .departed  every  man  to  his  house 
'.  43  and  David  returned  to  bless  hiB  house 
i  came  to  pass,  of  David  sat  in  his  house 
i  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedars,  but  the  ark 

4  Thou  shalt  not  build  me  an  house  to  dw. 

5  For  I  have  not  dwelt  in  an  house  since 

6  Why  have  ye  not  built  me  an  house  of  cedar 
,.  io  tell  thee.,  the  Lord  will  build  thee  an  ho. 

17.  12  He  shall  build  me  an  house,  and  I  will 
17.  14  I  will  settle  him  in  mine  house  and  in  my 
17.  16  Who  (am)  I .  .and  what  (is)  mine  house 
17.  17  thou  hast,  .spoken  of  thy  servant's  house 
17.  23  concerning  thy  servant,  and.  .his  house 
17.  24  (let) the  house  of  David,  .(be)  established 
17.  25  hast  told,  .thou  wilt  build  him  an  house 
17.  27  let  it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy 
21. 17  be  on  me,  and  on  my  father's  house;  but 
22.   1  This  (is)  the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and 
22.  2  he  set  masons,  .to  build  the  house  of  God 
22.   5  the  house  (that  is)  to  be  builded  for  the  L. 
22.    6  charged  him  to  build  an  house  for  the  L. 
22.   7  it  was  in  my  mind  to  build  an  house  unto 
22.   8  thou  shalt  not  build  an  house  unto  my 
22.  10  He  shall  build  an  house  for  my  name 

22.  11  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  ashc 
22. 14  I  have  prepared  for  the  house  of  the  Lord 
22. 19  into  the  house  that  is  to  be  built  to  the 

23.  4  to  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the 

23. 11  reckoning,  accordingto(their)father's  ho. 
23. 24  sons  of  Levi  after  the  house  of  their  fath. 
23.  24,  2S,  32  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  L. 

23.  28  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of  G. 

24.  4  sixteen  chief  men  of  the  house  of  (their) 
24.  4  eight,  .according to  the  house  of  their  fa, 
24. 19  in  their  service  to  come  into  the  house  of 

24.  30  of  the  Levites  after  the  house  of  their  fa. 

25.  6  for  song  (in)  the  house  of  the  Lord,  with  c. 

25.  6  foriheserviceofthehouseof  God,  accord. 

26.  6  ruled  throughout  the  house  of  their  father 

26. 12  to  minister  in  the  house  of  the  LORD 

26. 13  according  to  the  house  of  then-  fathers 
26.  15  and  to  his  sons  the  house  of  Asuppim 
26.  20  over  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  God,  and 
26.  22  overthe  treasures  ofthehouseof  the  Lord 
25.  27  did  they  dedicate  to  maintain  the  house  of 
28.   2  I  (had)  in  mine  heart  to  build  an  house  of 

3  Thoushaltnotbuildanhouse  formyname 

4  chose  me  before  all  the  house  of  my  father 
4  the  house  of  Judah  the  house  of  my  father 

6  he  shall  build  my  house  and  my  courts 
.  10  chosen  thee  to  build  an  house  for  the  san. 

2S.  11  of  the  porch,  and  of  the  houses  thereof 
2$.  12  of  the  courts  of  the  house  of  the  LoRD.and 
28.  12  of  the  treasuries  of  the  house  of  God,  and 
28. 13,  20  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
28.  13  vessels  of  service  in  the  house  of  the  L. 

28.  21  forallthe  service  of  thehouseof  God :  and 

29.  2  I  have  prepared . .  for  the  house  of  my  G. 
3  I  have  set  my  affections  to  the  house  of 
3  I  have  given  to  the  house  ef  ray  God,  over 

3  all  that  I  have  prepared  for  the  holy  ho. 

4  silver,  to  overlay  the  walls  of  the  houses 

7  gave  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 
3  to  the  treasure  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

29.  16  to  build  thee  an  house  for  thine  holy  na. 
2  Ch.  2.  1  to  build  an  house  for  the  name  of  the  Lo. 
2.  1  of  the  Lord,  and  an  house  for  his  kingdom 
2.  3  cedars  to  build  him  an  house  to  dwell  th. 
2.  4  I  build  au  house  to  the  name  of  the  LORD 
2.  5  house  which  I  build  (is)  great ;  for  great 
2.  6  who  is  able  to  build  him  anhouse,  seeing 
2.  6  that  I  should  build  him  an  house,  save 
2.   9  for  the  house  which  I  am  about  to  build 

2.  12  build  an  h  :>use  for  the  Lord,  and  an  h. 

3.  1  Then  Solomon  began  to  build  the  house 

3  was  instructed  for  the  building  of  the  hou. 

4  according  to  the  breadth  of  the  house 
j  the  greater  house  he  ceiled  with  fir  tree 

6  he  garnished  the  house  with  precious  st. 

7  He  overlaid  also  the  house,  the  beams 

8  he  made  the  most  holy  house,  the  length 
8  according  to  the  breadth  of  the  house 

.  10  in  the  most  holy  house  he  made  two  che. 

1,  12  reaching  to  the  wall  of  the  house 

j  he  made  before  the  house  two  pillars  of 

.  11  finished  the  work,  .for  the  house  of  God 

4. 16  their  instruments .  .for  the  house  of  the  L. 

4. 19  all  the  vessels  that  (were  for)  the  house  of 

4.  22  the  entry  of  the  house,  the  inner  doors 

4.  22  and  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  temple 

5.  1  that  Solomon  made  for  the  house  of  the  L. 
5.  1  among  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  God 
5.    7  unto  his  place,  to  the  oracle  of  the  house 

5.  13  house  was  filled  with  a  cloud . .  the  house 
5. 14  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  house 

6.  2  I  have  built  an  house  of  habitation  for 
6.   5  I  chose  no  city . .  to  build  an  house  in,  that 
6.    7  to  build  au  house  for  the  name  of  the  L. 
6.    8  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build  an  house  for 
6.   9  thou  shalt  not  build  the  house ;  but  thy 
6.    9  he  shall  build  the  house  for  my  name 
6.  10  have  built  the  house  for  the  name  of  the 
6.  18  much  less  this  house  which  I  have  built ! 
6.  20  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open  upon  this  h. 
6.  22  the  oath  come  before  thine  altar  in  this  h, 
6.  24  make  supplication  before  thee  in  this  ho. 
6.  29  shall  spread  forth  his  hands  in  this  house 
6.  32  if  they  come  and  pray  in  this  house 
6.  33  that  this  house,  which  I  have  built,  is  cal. 

6.  34,  38  house  which  1  have  built  for  thy  name 

7.  1  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house 
7-    2  the  priests  could  not  enter  into  the  house 

63 


23. 

28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 


29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 


-Ch. 


2  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the.  .house 

3  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  upon  the  house 
5  So  the  king.,  dedicated  the  house  of  God 
7  the  court  that  (was)  before  the  house  of 

11  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  h. 

11  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  in  his  own  h. 

12  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  an  house 
16  now  have  I  chosen  and  sanctified  this  ho. 
ro  and  this  house,  which  I  have  sanctified  for 
21  this  house,  winch  is  high,  shall  be  an  as. 
21  done  thus  unto  this  land,  and  unto  this  h. 

1  built  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  his  own  h, 
11  unto  the  house  that  he  had  built  for  her 
1 1  My  wife  shall  not  dwell  in  the  house  of  D. 
16  the  day  of  the  foundation  of  the  house  of 
16  (So)  the  house  of  the  Lord  was  perfected 

3  when  the  queen . .  had  seen . .  the  house  that 

4  bywhich  he  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
11  terraces  to  the  house  of  tne  Lokd,  and  to 
16,  20  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 

16  (and)  now,  David,  see  to  thine  own  house 
19  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house  of  David 

1  he  gathered  of  the  house  of  Judah  and  L\ 

4  return  every  man  to  his  house ;  for  this 
9  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

9  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house ;  he 

10  that  kept  the  entrance  of  the  king's  house 

1 1  when  the  king  entered  into  the  house  of  the 
18  hehrought  into  the  house  of  God  the  things 

2  house  of  the  Lord  and  of  the  king's  house 

10  was  wroth . .  and  put  him  in  a  prison  house 
14  according  to  the  house  of  theirfathers  :  of 

16  return,  .every  man  to  his  house  in  peace 
1  the  king,  .returned  to  his  house  in  peace 

11  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  Judah,  forallthe 

5  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  before  the  new 
9  before  tins  house . .  thy  name  (is)  in  this  ho. 

28  with,  .trumpets  into  thehouseof  the  Lord 

6  like  as  did  the  house  of  Ahab :  for  he  had 

7  Lord  would  not  destroy  the  house  of  David 

13  like  to  the  whoredoms  of  the  house  of  A. 

13  hast  slain  thy  brethren  of  thy  father's  ho. 

17  the  substance . .  found  in  the  king's  house 

3  He  also  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  house 

4  he  did  evil,  .like  the  house  of  Ahab :  for 

7  had  anointed  to  cut  off  the  house  of  Ahab 

8  was  executing  judgment  u*pon  the  house 

9  So  the  house  of  Anaziah  had  no  power  to 
10  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house  of  Judah 

1 2  he  was  with  them  hid  in  the  house  of  God 

3  made  a  covenant  with  the  kingin  the  house 

5  a  third  part  (shall  be)  at  ticking's  house 

5  in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

6  let  none  come  into  the  house  of  the  LORD 

7  whosoever.,  cometh  into  the  house,  he  sho. 
9  shields . .  which  (were)  in  the  house  of  God 

12  she  came  to  the  people  unto  the  house  of 

14  said,  Slay  her  not  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

15  of  the  horse  gate  by  the  kind's  house,  they 

17  all  the  people  went  to  the  house  of  Baal 

18  the  offices  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  by  the 
iS  had  distributed  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

19  he  set  the  porters  at  the  gates  of  the  house 

20  brought  down  the  king  from  the  house  of 

20  through  the  high  gate  into  the  king's  house 

4  Joash  was  minded  to  repair  the  house  cf 

5  money  to  repair,  .house  of  your  God  from 
7  had  broken  upthe  house  of  God;  and  also 
7  the  dedicated  things  of  the  houseof  the  L. 
S  without  at  the  gate  of  the  house  of  the  Lo. 

12  of  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
12  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  also 

1 2  as  wrought. .to  mend  the  house  of  the  Lord 

13  they  set  the  house  of  God  in  his  state,  and 

14  whereof  were  made  vessels  for  the  house 

14  they  offered  burnt  offerings  in  the  house 

16  both  toward  God,  and  toward  his  house 
iS  they  left  the  house  of  the  LORD  God  of 

21  stoned  him.  .in  the  court  of  the  house  of 
27  and  the  repairing  of  the  house  of  God 

5  captains,  .according  to  the  houses  of.  .fa. 
24  all  the  vessels  that  were  found  in  the  ho. 
24  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  the  ho. 

19  before  the  priests  in  the  house  of  the  Lo. 
21  and  dwelt  in  a  several  house,  .a  leper 

21  he  was  cut  off  from  the  house  of  the  Lord 
21  Jotham  his  son  (was)  over  the  king's  ho. 
3  He  built  the  high  gate  of  the  house  of  the 
7  slew. .  Azrikam  the  governor  of  th.  house 
21  a  portion  (out)  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
21  and  (out)  of  the  house  of  the  king,  and  of 
24,  24  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 

24  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  LORD 
3  opened  the  doors  of  the  houseof  the  Lord 
5  sanctify  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  your 

15  and  came,  .to  cleanse  the  house  of  the  L. 

16  the  inner  part  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

16  into  the  court  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

17  they  sanctified  the  house  of  the  Lord  in 
iS  We  have  cleansed  all  the  house  of  the  L. 

20  Hezekiah .  .went  up  to  the  house  of  the  L. 

25  he  set  the  Levites  in  the  house  of  the  Lo. 
31  bring,  .offerings  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
35  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  was 

1  they  should  corae  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 

15  brought,  .offerings  into  the  house  of  the 
10  Azariah  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of  Z. 

10  to  bring  the  offeriugs  into  the  house  of  the 

11  to  prepare  chambers  in  the  house  of  the 

1 3  and  Azariah  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 

16  that  entereth  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 

17  the  genealogy  of  the  priests  by  the  house 


Ezra 


>  Ch.  31.  21  in  the  service  of  the  house  of  God,  and  in 

32.  21  when  he  was  come  into  the  house  of  his. 

33.  4  he  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
33.  5  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
33.  7  he  set  a  carved  image . .  in  the  house  of  G. 
33.  7  Ln  this  house,  and  in  Jerusalem,  which  I 
33.  15  and  the  idol  out  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
33. 15  in  the  mount  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
33.  20  they  buried  him  in  his  own  house :  and  A. 

33.  24  And  his  servants .  slew  him  in  his  own  h. 

34.  8  when  he  had  purged  the  land,  and  the  ho. 
^4.    8  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord  his  God 
34.   9,  14  money  that  was  brought  into  the  ho. 
34.  10  workmen  that  had . .  oversight  of  the  house 
34. 10  that  wrought  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
34. 10  gave  it.  .to  repair  and  amend  the  house 
34.  11  to  floor  the  houses  which  the  kings  of  J. 
34.  15  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the  h. 
34.  17  the  monej  that  wasfouud  in  the  house  of 
34.  30  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
34.  30  book,  .that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the 

2  to  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

3  Put  the  holy  ark  in  the  house  which  Sol. 

4  prepare,  .by  the  houses  of  your  fathers 
8  rulers  of  the  house  of  God,  gave  unto  the 

21  hut  against  the  house  wherewith  I  have 
7  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  to  B. 
10  with  thegoodly  vessels  of  the  house  of  the 
14  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  he 

17  slew,  .with  the  sword  in  the  houseof  their 
i3  all  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  great 

18  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

19  they  burnt  the  house  of  God,  and  brake  d. 
23  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house 

.  2  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house 
.  3  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
.  4  freewill  offering  for  thehouseof  God  that 
.  5  to  go  up  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord 
.  7  brought  forth  the  vessels  of  the  house  of 
.  7  and  had  put  them  in  the  house  of  his  gods 
.r36  of  the  house  of  Jeshua,  nine  hundred  se. 
.  59  they  could  not  show  their  fathers'  house 
,  68  when  they  came  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 
.  68  offered  freely  for  the  house  of  God  to  set 
.  8  of  their  coming  unto  the  house  of  God  at 
.  8  to  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the 
,  9  to  set  forward  the  workmen  in  the  house 
,  11  because  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  the 
,  12  ancient  men,  that  had  seen  the  first  house 
,  12  when  the  foundation  of  this  house  was  laid 
.  3  Ye  have  nothing  to  do . .  to  build  an  house 
.  22  in  the  work  of  the  house  of  God,  the  God 
.  27  to  beautify  the  house  of  the  Lord  which 
.  17  bring  unto  us  ministers  for  the  house  of 
.  25  the  offering  of  the  house  of  our  God,  wh. 
.  29  in  the  chambers  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
.  30  to  Jerusalem,  unto  the  house  of  our  God 
.  33  weighed  in  the  house  of  our  God  by  the  h. 
.  36  they  furthered  the  people,  and  the  house 
.  9  to  set  up  the  house  of  our  God,  and  to 
.  1  casting  himself  down  before  the  house  of 
.  6  Ezra  rose  upfrom  before  the  house  of  God 
.  9  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the  house 
.  16  chief  of  the  fathers,  after  the  house  of  their 
,  6  both  I  and  my  father's  house  have  sinned 
.  8  the  palace  which(appertained)to  the  house 
.    8  and  for  the  house  that  I  shall  enter  into 

10  repaired  Jedaiah.  .over  against  his  house 
16  repaired  Xeheniiah.  .unto  the  house  of  the 
20,  21  the  door  of  the  house  of  Eliashib 

21  even  to  the  end  of  the  house  of  Eliashib 
23  After  him  repaired,  .over  against  their  h. 

23  After  him  repaired  Azariah.. by  his  house 

24  from  the  house  of  Azariah  unto  the  turn. 

25  which  lieth  out  fromtheking'shighhouse 

28  repaired. . every  oneoveragainst Ins  house 

29  repaired  Zadok . .  over  against  his  house 
14  and  fight  for.  .yourwives,andyour houses 
16  the  rulers,  .behind  all  the  house  of  Judah 

3  Wehavemortgagedourlands.  .andhouses 

11  Restore,!  pray  you,  to  them.,  their  houses 
13  God  shake  out  every  man  from  Ins  house 
10  I  cameuutothehouseofShemaiahtheson. 

10  Let  us  meet  together  in  the  house  of  God 

3  and  everyone(tobe)overagaiDsthishouse 

4  therein,  and  the  houses(w-ere)not  builded 
39  the  house  of  Jeshua,  nine  hundred  seventy 
61  they  could  not  show  their  fathers'  house 
16  in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  God,  and  in 
25  possessed  houses  full  of  all  goods,  wells 

32  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  our  God 

33  (for)  all  the  work  of  the  house  of  our  God 

34  lots .  .to  bring  (it)  into  the  house  of  ourG. 

34  after  the  houses  of  our  fathers,  at  times 

35  And  to  bring.,  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord 

36  to  bring  to  the  house  of  ourGod,  unto  the 

36  priests  that  minister  in  the  house  of  our 

37  to  the  chambers  of  the  house  of  our  God 

38  the  tithe  of  the  tithesunto  the  house  of  our 

38  to  the  chambers,  into  the  treasure  house 

39  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God 

11  Seraiah.  .(was)  the  ruler  of  the  house  of 

12  their  brethren  that  did  the  work  of  the  ho. 
16  the  outward  business  of  the  house  of  God 

22  singers . .  over  the  business  of  the  house  of 
29  from  the  house  c  f  Gilgal,  and  out  of  the  f . 
37  above  the  house  of  David,  even  unto  the 

40  So  stood  the  two.,  in  the  house  of  God,  and 
4  of  the  chamber  of  the  house  of  our  God 
7  chamber  in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  G. 
9  brought  I  again  the  vessels  of  the  house 

11  and  said,  Why  is  the  house  of  Godforsaken! 


>'eh. 


HOUSE 


498 


HOUSE 


9-    4- 


Neh.  13.  14  that  I  have  done  for  the  house  of  my  God 
JSsth.  1.    8  appointed  to.  .the  officers  of  his  house 

1.    9  women  (in)  the  royal  house  which  (belo.) 

1.  22  every  man  should  hear  rule  in  his.  .house 

2.  3  the  house  of  the  women,  unto  the  custody 
2.    8  was  brought  also  unto  the  king's  house 
2.    q  to  be  given  her,  out  of  the  king's  house 
2.    9  the  best  (place)  of  the  house  of  the  women 
2.  1 :  before  the  court  of  the  women's  house,  to 

2.  13,  house  of  the  women  unto  the  king's  house 
2.  14  into  the  second  house  of  the  women,  to  the 
2.  16  unto  king  Ahasuerus  into  his  house  royal 

13  thou  shalt  escape  in  the  king's  house  more 
[4  thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed;  and 
1  king's  house,  over  against  the  king's  house 

1  house,  over  against  the  gate  of  the  house 
4  the  outward  court  of  the  king's  house 

2  Haman  hasted  to  his  house  mourning,  and 

3  force  the  queen . .  before  me  in  the  house  ? 
g  gallows . .  standeth  in  the  house  of  Haman 

1  give  the  house  of  Haman,  the  Jews'  enemy 

2  set  Mordecai  over  the  house  of  Haman 
7  I  have  given  Esther  the  house  of  Haman 

Mordecai  (was)  great  in  the  king's  house 
Job     1.    4  his  sons  went  and  feasted  (in  their)  houses 
1.  10  about  his  house,  and  about  all  that  he 

1.  13,  iS  eating,  .in  their  eldest  brother's  house 
1. 19  smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house,  and 

3.  15  who  filled  their  houses  with  silver 

4. 19  less  (in)  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of  clay 

7.  10  He  shall  return  no  more  to  his  house 

8.  15  He  shall  lean  upon  his  house,  but  it 

15.  2S  in  houses  which  no  man  inhabiteth,  which 
17.  13  the  grave  (is)  mine  house:  I  have  made  my 

19.  15  They  that  dwell  in  mine  house,  and  my 

20.  19  taken  away  an  house  which  he  builded  not 

20.  28  The  increase  of  his  house  shall  depart 

21.  9  Their  houses  (are)  safe  from  fear,  neither 
21.  21  what  pleasure  (hath) he  in  his  house  after 

21.  28  say,  Where  (is)thehouseoftheprince?and 

22.  18  he  filled  their  houses  with  good  (things) 
24.  16  In  the  dark  they  dig  through  houses,  (wh.) 
27.  18  He  buildeth  his  house  as  a  moth,  and  as 
30.  23  and  (to)  the  house  appointed  for  all  living 

38.  20  know  the  paths  (to)  the  house  thereof? 

39.  6  Whose  house  I  have  made  the  wilderness 
42.  11  did  eat  bread  with  him  in  his  house  :  and 

Psa.    5.   7  willcome(into)thyhouseinthemultitude 

23.  6  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever 

26.  8 1  have  loved  the  habitation  of  thy  house 

27.  4  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all 

30.  title,  (at)  the  dedication  of  the  house  of  David 

31.  2  rock,  for  an  house  of  defence  to  save  me 
36.    8  satisfied  with  the  fatness  of  thy  house 
42.    4  I  went  with  them  to  the  house  of  God 
45.  10  forget,  .own  people,  and  thy  father's  house 
49.  11  (that)theirhouse3(shallcontinue)forever 

49.  16  when  the  glory  of  his  house  is  increased 

50.  9  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house 
52.  title  David  is  come  to  the  house  of  Ahime. 
52.   8  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house  of  G. 
55.  14  walked  unto  the  house  of  God  in  company 
59.  title,  and  they  watched  the  house  to  kill  him 

65.  4  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  thy  house 

66.  13  I  will  go  into  thy  house  with,  .offerings 
69.    9  the  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up 
84.    3  Yea,  the  sparrow  hath  found  an  house 
84.    4  Blessed  (are)  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house 
84.  10  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  my  God 

92.  13  Those  that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the 

93.  5  holiness  become th  thine  house,  O  Lord 
98.    3  and  his  truth  toward  the  house  of  Israel 

101.  2  walk  within  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart 
101.  7  deceit  shall  not  dwell  within  my  house :  he 
104.  17  (as  for)  the  stork,  the  fir  trees  (are)  her  h. 
103.  21  He  made  him  lord  of  his  house,  and  ruler 

112.  3  Wealth  and  riches  (shall  be)  in  his  house 

113.  9  He  maketh  the  barren  woman  to  keep  h. 

114.  1  house  of  Jacob  from  a  people  of  strange 
115. 10  0  house  of  Aaron,  trust  in  the  Lord  :  he 
115. 12  The  Lord,  .will  bless  the  house  of  Israel 

115.  12  he  will  bless  the  house  of  Aaron 

116. 19  In  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  in  the 
118.   3  Let  the  house  of  Aarou  now  say,  that  his 

118.  26  we  have  blessed  you  out  of  the  house  of 

119.  54  have  been  my  songs  in  the  house  of  my 
122.    1  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
122.    5  set  thrones,  .the  thrones  of  the  house  of 
122.    9  Becauseof  thehouse  of  the  Lord  our  God 

127.  1  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they 

128.  3  fruitful  vine  by  the  sides  of  thine  house 
132.    3  not  come  into  the  tabernacle  of  my  house 

134.  1  which  by  night  stand  in  the  house  of  the 

135.  2  Ye  that  stand  in  thehouse  of  the  Lord,  in 
135.    2  in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  our  God 
135.  19  Bless  the  Lord,  0  house  of  Israel.  .0  house 
135.  20  Bless  the  Lord,  O  house  of  Levi :  ye  that 

Prov.  1. 13  we  shall  fill  our  houses  with  spoil 

2.  18  For  her  house  inelineth  unto  death,  and 

3.  33  curse,  .(is)  in  the  house  of  the  wicked 

5.   8  and  come  not  nigh  the  door  of  her  house 

5.  10  thy  labours  (be)  in  the  house  of  a  stranger 

6.  31  shall  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house 

7.  6  For  at  the  window  of  my  house  I  looked 
7.    8  Passing,  .he  went  the  way  to  her  house 

7.  11  stubborn;  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  house 

7.  27  Her  house  (is)  the  way  to  hell,  going  down 

-  (g.    1  Wisdom  hath  builded  her  house,  she  hath 

9.  14  she  sitteth  at  the  door  of  her  house,  on 
11.  29  He  that  fcroubleth  his  own  house  shall 
T2.    7  the  home  of  the  righteous  shall  stand 
14.    1  Every  wise  woman  buildeth  her  house 


Prov.  14.  ti  house  of  the  wicked  shall  be  overthrown 
15.    6  In  the  house  of  the  righteous  (is)  much 
13.  25  Lord  will  destroy  the  house  of  the  proud 
15.  27  He  that  is  greedy,  .troubleth  his  own  ho. 
17.    1  an  house  full  of  sacrifices  (with)  strife 
17.  13  evil  shall  not  depart  from  his  house 
19.  14  House  and  riches  (are)  the  inheritance  of 
21.    9  with  a  brawling  woman  in  a  wide  house 

21.  12  considereth  the  house  of  the  wicked 

24.    3  Through  wisdom  is  an  house  builded,  and 

24.  27  Prepare,  .and  afterwards  build  thine  ho. 

25.  17  Withdraw  thy  foot  from,  .neighbour's  ho. 
25.  24  with  a  brawling  woman  and  in  a  wide  ho. 
27. 10  neither  go  into  thy  brother's  house  in  the 

30.  26  yet  make  they  their  houses  in  the  rocks 
Eccl.  2.    4  builded  me  houses;  I  planted  me  viney. 

2.  7  maidens,  and  had  servants  born  in  my  h. 
5.  1  when  thou  goest  to  the  house  of  God,  and 
7.  2  house  of  mourning  than  to  go  to  the  house 
7.    4  The  heart  of  the  wise  (is)  in  the  house  of 

7.  4  heart  of  fools  (is)  in  the  house  of  mirth 
10.  18  through  idleness  of  the  hands  the  house 

12.  3  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall  tremble 
Song  1.  17  The  beams  of  our  house  (are)  cedar,  (and) 

2.  4  He  brought  me  to  the  banqueting  house 

3.  4  I  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's  house 

8.  2  bring- thee  into  my  mother's  house,  (who) 
8.    7  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love 

Isa.     2.    2  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be 
2.   3  let  us.  .to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob 
2.    5  O  house  of  Jacob,  come  ye,  and  let  us  walk 

2.  6  forsaken  thy  people  the  house  of  Jacob 

3.  6  his  brother,  of  the  house  of  his  father 

3.    7  in  my  house  (is)  neither  bread  nor  clothing 
3. 14  the  spoil  of  the  poor  (is)  in  your  houses 
5.    7  For  the  vineyard .  .(is)  the  house  of  Israel 
5.    8  Woe  unto  them  that  join  house  to  house 

5.  9  many  houses  shall  be  desolate,  (even)  gr. 

6.  4  cried,  and  the  house  was  filled  with  smoke 
6. 11  the  houses  without  man,  and  the  land  be 

7.  2  it  was  told  the  house  of  David,  saying 

7.  73  O  house  of  David  ;  (Is  it)  a  small  thing  for 

7.  17  upon  thy  father's  house,  days  that  have 

8.  14  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel 
8.  17  liideth  his  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob 

10.  20  such  as  are  escaped  of  the  house  of  Jacob 

13.  16  their  houses  shall  be  spoiled,  and  their 

13.  21  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures 

14.  1  they  shall  cleave  to  the  house  of  Jacob 
14.    2  the  house  of  Israel  shall  possess  them  in 
14.  17  opened  not  the  house  of  his  prisoners  ? 
14.  18  lie  in  glory,  every  one  in  his  own  house 

22.  8  the  armour  of  the  house  of  the  forest 
22.  10  the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  houses 
22.  15  (even)  unto  Shebna,  which  (is)overtheh. 
22. 18  (shall  be)  the  shame  of  thy  lord's  house 
22.  21  shall  be  a  father,  .to  the  house  of  Judah 
22.  22  the  key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I  lay 
22.  23  a  glorious  throne  to  his  father's  house 

22.  24  all  the  glory  of  his  father's  house,  the 

23.  1  there  is  no  house,  no  entering  in  :  from 

24.  10  every  house  is  shut  up,  that  no  man  may 
29.  22  concerning  the  house  of  Jacob,  Jacob 

31.  2  arise  against  the  house  of  the  evil  doers 

32.  13  all  the  houses  of  joy  (in)  the  joyous  city 

36.  3  Hilkiah's  son,  which  was  over  the  house 

37.  1  and  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 

37.  14  went  up  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
37.  31  that  is  escaped  of  the  house  of  Judah 

37.  38  he  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Msr. 
'   38.    1  Set  thine  house  in  order  :  for  thou  shalt 

38.  20  we  will  sing,  .in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

38.  22  I  shall  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  ? 

39.  2  the  house  of  his  precious  things,  the 

39.    2  all  the  house  of  his  armour,  and  all  that 
39.    2  there  was  nothing  in  his  house,  nor  in 
39.    4  What  have  they  seen  iu  thine  house  ?  And 
39.   4  All  that  (is)  in  mine  house  have  they  seen 
39.    6  all  that  (is)  in  thine  house,  and  (that) 
42.    7  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison  house 
42.  22  they  are  hid  in  prison  houses :  they  are 
44.  13  figure,  .that  it  may  remain  in  the  house 
46.    3  Hearken  unto  me,  O  house  of  Jacob,  and 
46.   3  the  remnantof  thehouse  of  Israel,  which 
48.    1  O  house  of  Jacob,  which  are  called  by  the 
56.    5  unto  them  will  I  give  in  mine  house  and 
56.    7  make  them  joyful,  in  my  house  of  prayer 
56.    7  called  an  house  of  prayer  for  all  people 
58.    1  and  show . .  the  house  of  Jacob  their  sins 
58.    7  the  poor  that  are  cast  out  to  thy  house? 
60.    7  and  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  glory 

63.  7  great  goodness  toward  the  house  of  Israel 

64.  11  our  beautiful  house,  where  our  fathers 

65.  21  theyshall  build  houses,  andinhabit(them) 

66.  1  where(is)thehouse  thatyebuild  untoiue? 
66.  20  an  offering,  into  the  house  of  the  LORD 

Jer.     2.   4  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  house  of  Jacob 

2.  4  all  the  families  of  the  house  of  Israel 

2. 26  so  is  the  house  of  Israel  ashamed ;  they 

3.  18  house  of  Judah  shall  walk  with  the  house 
3.  20  treacherously  with  me,  0  house  of  Israel 
5.  7  assembled . .  by  troops  in . .  harlots'  houses 
5.  11  the  house  of  Isiv.el  and  thehouse  of  Judah 
5.  15  will  bring  a  nation.  .0  house  of  Israel 

5.  20  Declare  this  in  the  house  of  Jacob,  and 

5.  27  so  (are)  their  houses  full  of  deceit :  there. 

6.  12  their  houses  shall  be  turned  unto  others 

7.  2  Stand  in  the  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 
7.  10  stand  before  me  in  this  house,  which  is 
7. 11  Is  this  house,  which  is  called  by  my  name 
7.  14  Therefore  will  I  do  unto  (this)  house 

7.  30  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  my  name 


Jer.     9.  26  the  house  of  Israel  (are)  uncircumcised  in 

10.  1  Lord  speaketh  unto  you, 0  house  of  Israel 
1 1. 10  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah 

11.  15  What  hath  my  beloved  to  do  in  mine  ho. 

11.  17  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  of  the  house 

12.  6  the  house  of  thy  father,  even  they  have 
12.    7  I  have  forsaken  mine  house,  I  have  left 

12.  14  pluckout  the  house  of  Judah  from  among 

13.  11  whole  house  of  Israel  and  the  whole  house 
16.    5  Enter  not  into  the  house  of  mourning 

16.  8  not  also  go  into  the  house  of  feasting 

17.  22  out  of  your  houses  on  the  sabbath  day 

17.  26  sacrifices,  .unto  the  house  of  the  Lord 

18.  2  go  down  to  the  potter's  house,  and  there 
18.    3  I  went  down  to  the  potter's  house ;  and 
18.    6  0  house  of  Israel,  cannot  I  do  with  you 
18.    6  so  (are)  ye  in  mine  hand,  0  house  of  Israel 

18.  22  Let  a  cry  be  heard  from  their  houses 

19.  13  the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  houses 
19.  13  the  houses  upon  whose  roofs  they  have 

19.  14  he  stood  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house 

20.  1  chief  governor  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
20.    2  winch  (was)  by  the  house  of  the  Lord 

20.  6  all  that  dwell  in  thine  house,  shall  go 

21.  11  touching  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah 

21. 12  O  house  of  David,  thus  saith  the  Lord 

22.  1  Go  down  to  the  house  of  the  king  of  Jud. 
22.  4  enter  in  by  the  gates  of  tlxis  house  kings 
22.  5  that  this  house  shall  become  a  desolation 
22.    6  the  Lord  unto  the  king's  house  of  Judah 

22. 13  buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness 

22.  14  build  me  a  wide  house  and  large  chambers 

23.  8  wluch  led  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel 
23.  11  in  my  house  have  I  found  their  wicked. 
23.  34  will  even  punish  that  man  and  his  house 
26.    2  Stand  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house 
26.    2  which  come  to  worship  in  the  Lord's  ho. 
26.    6  Then  will  I  make  this  house  like  Shiloh 
26.    7  these  words  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

26.  9  This  house  shall  be  like  Shiloh,  and  this 
26.  9  against  J  eremiah  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
26.  10  king's  house  unto  the  house  of  the  LORD 
26.  12  sent  me  to  prophesy  against  this  house 

26.  18  the  mountain  of  the  house  as  the  high 
27. 16  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  now 

27.  18,  21  house  of  the  Lord,  and  (in)  the  house 

28.  1  spake  unto  me  in  the  house  of  the  LORD 
28.  3  all  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house  that 
28.    5  that  stood  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

28.  6  to  bring,  .the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house 

29.  5,  28  Build  ye  houses,  and  dwell  (in  them) 
29.  26  be  officers  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  for 
31.  27  sow  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  house 

31.  31  house  of  Israel,  and  with  the  house  of  I. 
31-  33  I  wiU  make  with  the  house  of  Israel 

32.  2  which  (was)  in  the  king  of  Judah's  house 
32.  15  Houses  and  fields  and  vineyards  shall  be 
32.  29  burn  it  with  the  houses  upon  whose  roofs 

32.  34  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  name 

33.  4  concerning  the  houses  of  this  city,  and 
33.  4  concerning  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  I. 
33.  11  sacrifice,  .into  the  house  of  the  Lord 

33.  14  the  house  of  Israel,  and  to  the  house  of 
33-  17  upon  the  throne  of  the  house  of  Israel 

34.  13  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bond  men 
341  15  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  my  name 

35.  2  Go  unto  the  house  of  the  Eechabites,  and 
35.   2  bring  them  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
35.    3  and  the  whole  house  of  the  Bechabites 
35.   4  brought  them  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
35.    5  I  set  before  the  sons  of  the  house  of  the 
35.    7  K  either  shall  ye  build  house,  nor  sow  seed 

35.  9  Nor  to  build  houses  for  us  to  dwell  in 
35. 18  said  unto  the  house  of  the  Bechabites 

36.  3  It  may  be  that  the  house  of  Judah  will 
36.    5 1  cannot  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
36.    6  in  the  Lord's  house  upon  the  fasting  day 
36.    8  words  of  the  Lord  in  the  Lord's  house 
36.  10  Then  read  Bai-uch . .  in  the  house  of  the  L. 
36.  10  entry  of  the  new  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 

36. 12  he  went  down  into  the  king's  house,  into 

36.  22  the  king  sat  in  the  winter  house,  in  the 

37.  15,  20  in  the  house  of  Jonathan  the  scribe 

37.  17  the  king  asked  him  secretly  in  his  house 

38.  7  one  of  the  eunuchs,  .in  the  king's  house 
38.  8  went  forth  out  of  the  king's  house,  and 
38.  11  went  into  the  house  of  the  king  under  the 

38. 14  entry  that  (is)  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
38.  17  and  thou  shalt  live,  and  thine  house 

38.  22  that  are  left  in  the  king  of  Judah's  house 

38.  26  cause  me  to  return  to  Jonathan's  house 

39.  8  burned  the  king's  house,  and  the  houses 
41.   5  to  bring  (them)  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 
43.    9  the  entry  of  Pharaoh'shouseinTahpanhes 
43.  12  fire  in  the  houses  of  the  gods  of  Egypt 
43.  13  the  houses  of  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians 
48.  13  house  of  Israel  was  ashamed  of  Beth-el 

51.  51  into  the  sanctuaries  of  the  Lord's  house 

52. 13  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  h. 
52. 13  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  all  the  houses 

52.  17  pillars  (were)  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
52.  17  sea  that  (was)  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
52.  20  Solomon  had  made  in  the  house  of  theL. 

Lam.  2.    7  made  a  noise  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
5.    2  turned  to  strangers,  our  houses  to  aliens 

Eze.    2.    5  forbear,  for  they  (are)  a  rebellious  house 
2.    6  afraid,  .though  they  (be)  a  rebellious  ho. 

2.  8  not.  .rebellious  like  that  rebellious  house 

3.  1  and  go  speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
3.    4  get  thee  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  and 

3.  5  (art)  not  sent . .  (but)  to  the  house  of  Israel 
3.    7  the  house  of  Israel  will  not  hearken  unto 


HOUSE 


499 


HOUSE 


Eze.    3.    7  tlie  house  of  Israel  (are)  impudent  and  h. 
3.   9  fear  them  not.  .they  (be)  a  rebellious  ho. 
3. 17  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
3!  24  said . .  Go,  shut  thj'self  within  thine  house 

3.  26,  27  for  they  (are)  a  rebellious  house 

4.  3  (shall  be)  a  sign  to  the  house  of  Israel 
4!   4,  5  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel 

4.  6  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  house 

5.  4  come  forth  into  all  the  house  of  Israel 

6.  n  evil  abominations  of  the  house  of  Israel ! 

7.  24  the  heathen .  .3hall  possess  their  houses 
3.    1  I  sat  in  mine  house,  and  the  elders  of 

8.  6  that  the  house  of  Israel  committeth  here 
8.  10  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  pourtrayed 
S.  11,  12  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  Israel 

3.  14  the  door  of  the  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 

8.  16  into  the  inner  court  of  the  Lord's  house 
8. 17  Is  it  a  light  thing  to  the  house  of  Judah 
g.    3  gone  up.  .to  the  threshold  of  the  house 

9.  6  ancientnienwhich(were)before the  house 
9.  7  Defile  the  house,  and  fill  the  courts  with 
9.   9  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  and 

10.  3  stood  on  the  right  side  of  the  house  when 
10.    4  the  threshold  of  the  house ;  and  the  house 

10.  iS  from  off  the  threshold  of  the  house,  and 
10. 19  door  of  the  east  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 

11.  1  unto  the  east  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 
11.    3  let  us  build  houses :  this  (city  is)  the 

11.  5  Thus  have  ye  said,  0  house  of  Israel :  for 
11. 15  the  house  of  Israel  wholly,  (are)  they  unto 

12.  2  dwellest  in.  .midst  of  a  rebellious  house 
12.  2  hear  not :  for  they  (are)  arebellioushouse 
12.    3  though  they  (be)  a  rebellious  house 

12.    6  set.  .(for)  a  sign  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
12.    9  the  house  of  Israel,  the  rebellious  house 
12. 10  the  house  of  Israel  that  (are)  among  them 
12.  24  divination  within  the  house  of  Israel 
12  25  in  your  days,  0  rebellious  house,  will  I 

12.  27  (they  of)  the  house  of  Israel  say,  The 

13.  5  neither  made  up  the  hedge  for  the  house 

13.  9  in  the  writingof  the  houseof  Israel,neither 

14.  4  Every  man  of  the  house  of  Israel  that 
14.   5  I  may  take  the  house  of  Israel  in  their 
14.    6  say  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith 
14.    7  every  one  of  the  house  of  Israel,  or  of  the 
14.  11  the  houseof  Israel  may  go  no  more  astray 

16.  41  they  shall  burn  thine  houses  withfire,  and 

17.  2  speak  a  parable  unto  the  house  of  Israel 

17. 12  Say  now  to  the  rebellious  house,  Know  ye 

18.  6,  15  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel 
iS.  25  0  house  of  Israel;  Is-not  my  way  equal 
t8.  29  Yet  saith  the  house  of  Israel,  The  wray  of 
iS.  29  0  house  of  Israel,  arenot  mywaysequal? 
18.  30  I  will  judge  you,  0  house  of  Israel,  every 
18.  31  for  why  wall  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel? 
20.    5  hand  unto  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Jacob 

20. 13  the  house  of  Israel  rebelled  against  me 
20.  27  speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  and  say 
20.  30  say  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith 
20.  31  I  be  enquired  of  by  you,  0  house  of  Israel? 
20.  39  house  of  Israel,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God 
20.  40  all  the  house  of  Israel,  all  of  them  in  the 
20.  44  your  corrupt  doings,  O  ye  house  of  Israel 

22.  18  the  house  of  Israel  is  to  me  become  dross 

23.  39  have  they  done  in  the  midst  of  mine  house 

23.  47  slay,  .and  burn  up  their  house  with  fire 

24.  3  a  parable  unto  the  rebellious  house,  and' 

24.  21  Speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith 

25.  3  against  the  house  of  Judah,  when  they  we. 
25.    8  Behold,  the  house  of  Judah  (is)  like  unto 

25.  12  hath  dealt  against  the  !iouse  of  Judah  by 

26.  12  they  shall,  .destroy  thy  pleasant  houses 

27. 14  They  of  the  house  of  Togarmah  traded  in 
28.  24  a  pricking  brier  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
28.  25  have  gathered  the  house  of  Israel  from  the 

28.  26  shall  build  houses,  and  plant  vineyards 

29.  6  been  a  staff  of  reed  to  the  house  of  Israel 
29.  16  no  more  the  confidence  of  the  house  of  I. 
29.  21  horn  of  the  house  of  Israel  to  bud  forth    ■ 
33.   7  set. .  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
33.  10  speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel . .  saying 
33. 11  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ? 
33.  20  0  ye  house  of  Israel,  I  will  judge  you  every 

33.  30  the  walls,  and  in  the  doors  of  the  houses 

34.  30  they,  .the house  of  Israel,  (are)  my  people 

35.  15  the  inheritance  of  the  house  of  Israel,  bee. 

36.  10  all  the  house  of  Israel,  (even)  all  of  it :  and 
36.  17  when  the  house  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their 
36.  21  which  the  house  of  Israel  had  profaned 
36.  22  Therefore  say  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
36.  22  do  not  (this)  for  your  sakes,  0  house  of  Isr. 
36.  32 be  ashamed  and  confounded.  .0  house  of 
36.  37  be  enquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel 

37. 11  these  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel 
37. 16  (for)  all  the  house  of  Israel  his  companions 

38.  6  the  house  of  Togarmah  of  the  north  quar. 

39. 12  seven  months  shall  the  housD  of  Israel  be 

39.  22  So  the  house  of  Israel  shall  know  that  I 
39.  23  shall  know  that  the  hous^  of  Israel  went 
39.  25  mercy  upon  the  whole  !\ouse  of  Israel,  and 

39.  29  my  spirit  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  saith 

40.  4  declare  all  that  thou  seest to  the  house  of 
40.   5  behold  a  wall  on  the  outside  of  the  house 
40.  45  the  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  house 
40.  47  and  the  altar  (that  was)  before  the  house 

40.  48  he  brought  me  to  the  porch  of  the  house 

41.  5  After  he  measured  th2  wall  of  the  house 
41.  5, 10  round  about  the  house  on  every  side 
41.  6  into  the  wall  which  (was)  of  the  house  for 
41.  6  they  had  not  hold  in  the  wall  of  the  house 
41.  7  for  the  winding  about  of  the  house  went 
41.   7  upward  round  about  the  house  :  therefore 


Eze.  41.    7  breadth  of  the  house  (was  still)  upward 
41.   8  I  saw  also  the  height  of  the  house  round 
41.  13  So  he  measured  the  house,  an  hundred  :. 
4t.  14  Also  the  breadth  of  the  face  of  the  hou^e 
41. 17  even  unto  the  inner  house,  and  without 
41.  19  made  through  all  the  house  round  about 
41.  26  and  (upon)  the  side  chambers  of  the  house 
42. 15  made  an  end  of  measuringthe  inner  house 
43.   4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  house 
43.   5  and . .  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house 
43.    6  speaking  unto  me  out  of  the  house  ;  and 
43.    7  shall  the  house  of  Israal  no  more  defile 
43.  10  show  the  house  to  the  house  of  Israel,  that 
43.  11  show  them  the  form  of  the  house,  and  the 
43.  12  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  house ;  uponthetop 

43.  21  burn  it  in  the  appointed  place  of  the  house 

44.  4  way  of  the  north  gate  before  the  house 
44.    4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  of 
44.    5  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
44.    s  mark  well  the  entering  in  of  the  house 
44.'  6  thoushaltsay.  .tothehouseofIsrael,Thus 
44.   6  0ye  house  of  Israel,  let  it  suffice  you  of 
44.    7  to  be  in  my  sanctuary,  .(even)  my  house 
44.  11  of  the  house,  and  ministering  to  the  house 
44. 12  caused  the  house  of  Israel  to  fall,  into  in. 
44. 14  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  house,  for  all 
44.  22  maidens  of  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel 

44.  30  cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  thine  house 

45.  4  it  shall  be  a  place  for  their  houses,  and 
45.  5  the  Levites,  the  ministers  of  the  house 
45.  6  it  shall  be  for  the  whole  house  of  Israel 
45.  8  give  to  the  house  of  Israel  according  to 
45.  17  in  all  solemnities  of  the  house  of  Israel 
45.  17  make  reconciliation  for  the  house  of  Israel 
45.  19  put  (it)  upon  the  posts  of  the  house,  and 

45.  20  simple :  so  shall  ye  reconcile  the  house 

46.  24  the  ministers  of  the  house  shall  boil  the 

47.  1  hebroughtme.  .untothedoorofthehouse 
47.  1  out  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  house 
47.    1  the  forefront  of  the  house  (stood)  toward 

47.  1  from  the  right  side  of  Ihe  house,  at  the 

48.  21  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  house  (shall  be) 
Dan.    1.    2  with  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  G. 

1.  z  he  carried  into . .  the  house  of  his  god ;  and 
1.  3  brought .  -  into  the  treasure  house  of  his  g. 
Hog.  1.  4  olood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house  of  Jehu 
1.  4  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  the  house 
1.  6  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Israel ;  but 
1.  7  I  will  have  mere,  pon  the  house  of  Judah 
5.  1  and  hearken,  ye  i±  juse  of  Israel ;  and  give 
5.  1  house  of  the  king ;  for  judgment  (is)  tow. 
5.  12  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  as  rottenness 

5.  14  as  a  young  iion  to  the  house  of  Judah  :  I 

6.  10  seen  an  horrible  thing  in  the  house  of  Is. 

8.  1  as  an  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord 

9.  4  shall  not  come  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
9.  8  asnare.  .(and)  hatred  in  thehouse  of  his  G. 
9.  15  I  wall  drive  them  out  of  mine  house,  I  will 

11. 11  will  place  them  in  their  houses,  saith  the 
11.  12  house  of  Israel  with  deceit :  but  Judah. 
Joel    1.    9  is  cut  off  from  the  houseof  the  Lord;  the 
1.  13  withholden  from  the  house  of  your  God 

1. 14  (into)  the  house  of  the  Lord  your  God,  and 

1.  x6  and  gladness  from  thehouse  of  .our  God  i- 

2.  9  they  shall  climb  up  upon  the  houses  ;  they 
3. 18  a  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the  house 

Amos  1.    4  I  will  send  a  fire  into  thehouse  ofHazael 

1.  5  holdeth  the  sceptre  from  the  house  of  E. 

2.  8  they  drink  the  wine,  .(in)  the  house  of 

3. 13  Hear  ye:  and  testify  in  the  house  of  Jacob 

3.  15  the  winter  house  with  the  summer  house 
3.  15  and  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish,  and 

3. 15  the  great  houses  shall  have,  an  end,  saith 
5.    1  (even)  a  lamentation,  O  house  of  Israel 
5.   3  that. .shall  leave  ten,  to  the  houseof  Isr 
5.   4  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
5.    6  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  in  the  house 

5. 11  ye  have  built  houses  of  hewn  stone,  but 
5.  19  went  into  the  house,  and  leaned  his  hand 

5.  25  Have  ye  offered,  .sacrifices.  .0 house  of 

6.  1  Woe.  .to  whom  thehouse  of  Israel  came  ! 
6.    9  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  one  house,  that 
6. 10  of  the  house,  .by  the  sides  of  the  house 
6.  11  smite  the  great  house,  .the  little  house 

6.  14  "will  raise  up  againstyouanation,  0  house 

7.  9  I  will  rise  against  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
7. 10  against  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  house  of 
7.  16  drop  not  (thy  word)  against  the  house  of 
9.  8  "will  not  utterly  destroy  the  house  of  Jacob 
9.    9  I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among  all 

Obad.  1.  17  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  posse. 
1. 18  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire,  and  the  h. 

1.  iS  horn,:  of  Esau  for  stubble,  and  they  shall 
1. 18  not  be  (any)  remaining  of  thehouse  of  E. 

Hie.    1.    5  for  the  sins  of  the  house  of  Israel.  What 
1. 10  in  the  house  of  Aphrah  roll  thyself  in  the 

1. 14  the  houses  of  Achzib  (shall  be)  a  lie  to  the 
2-   2  they  covet . .  houses,  and  take  (them)  away 

2.  2  so  theyoppressamanandhis  house,  even 
2.    7  0  (thou  that  art)  named  The  house  of  Ja. 

2.  9  cast  outfromtheirpleasanthouses;  from 

3.  1  ye  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  (Is  it) 
3.    9  house  of  Jacob,  and  princes  of  the  house 

3.  12  mountain  of  thehouse  as  the  high  places 

4.  1  mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  shall 
4.  2  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob ;  and  he 
6.   4  redeemed,  .out  of  the  house  of  servants 

6.  10  wickedeness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked 

6. 16  and  all  the  works  of  the  house  of  Ahab 

7.  6  a  man's  enemies  (are),  .of  his  own  house 
Nab.  1. 14  out  of  the  house  of  thy  gods  will  I  cut  off 
Hab.  2.   9  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house 


Hab.   2.  10  Thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house 

3.  13  woundedst  the  head  out  of  the  house  of 

Zeph.  1.    9  whichfultheirma3ter3'houseswith..dec. 

1.  13  their  houses  a  desolation,  .build  houses 

2.  7  be  for  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah 
2.    7  in  the  houses  of  Askelon  shall  they  lie 

Hag.  1.  2  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  bu. 
1.  4  dwell  in  your  ceiled  houses,  and  this  ho. 
1.  8  bring  wood,  and  build  the  house ;  and  I 
1.   9  Because  of  mine  house  that  (is)  waste,  and 

1.  9  ye  run  every  man  unto  his  own  house 

1. 14  did  work  in  the  h<  use  of  the  Lord  of  ho. 

2.  3  you  that  saw  this  house  in  her  first  glory? 
2.    7  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith  the 

2.  9  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  gr. 
Zech.  1. 16  my  house  shall  be  built  in  it,  saith  the  L. 

3.  7  then  thou  shalt  also  judge  my  house,  and 

4.  9  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this  house ;  his 

5.  4  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief 
5.  4  and  into  the  house  of  him  that  aweareth, 
5.   4  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house 

5.  11  To  build  it  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar 

6.  10  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah 

7.  2  When  they  had  sent  unto  the  house  of  G. 

7.  3  the  priests  which  (were)  in  the  house  of 
8    9  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

8.  13  0  house  of  Judah,  and  house  of  Israel ;  so 

8.  15  to  do  well,  .to  the  house  of  Judah :  fear 
8. 19  to  the  house  of  Judah  joy  and  gladness 

9.  8  I  will  encamp  about  mine  house  because 
10.  3  hath  visited  his  flock  the  house  of  Judah 
10.  6  strengthen  the  house,  .save  the  house  of 
11. 13  cast  them  to  the  potter  in  the  house  of  the 
12.  4  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah 
12.  7  that  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David  and 
12.  8  the  house  of  David  (shall  be)  as  God,  as 
12.  10  And  I  wall  pour  upon  the  house  of  David 

12.  12,  12,  13  the  family  of  the  house  of 

13.  1  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David 

13.  6  I  was  wounded  (in)  the  house  of  my  friends 

14.  2  the  houses  rifled,  and  the  women  ravished 
14.  20  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like 
14.  21  no  more.,  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  ho. 

Mai.    3. 10  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house 

2.House,  rrs  bayith. 

Ezra  4.  24  Then  ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  God 
5.  2  Jeshua.  .began  to  build  the  house  of  God 
5.  3,  9  commanded  you  to  build  this  house,  and 
5.    8  to  the  house  of  the  great  God,  which  is 

5. 11  Wcbuild  the  house  that  was  builded  these 

5. 12  who  destroyed  this  house,  and  carried  the 
5.  13  Cyrus  made  a  decree  to  build  this  house 

5. 14  the  vessels  also,  .ofthe  houseof  God,  which 

5. 15  the  house  of  God  be  builded  in  his  place 
5.  16  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  God. 
5. 17  search  made  in  the  king's  treasure  house 

5.  17  to  build  this  house  of  God  at  Jerusalem 

6.  1  search  was  made  in  the  house  df  the  rolls 
6.  3  a  decree  (concerning)  the  houseof  God  at 
6.  3  Let  the  house  be  builded,  the  place  where 
6.  4  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  king's  house 
6.  5  silver  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  which 
6.  5  place,  and  place  (them)  in  the  house  of  G. 
6.  7  Let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  alone 
6.  7  let  the  governor,  .build  this  house  of  God 
6.  8  for  the  building  of  this  house  of  God ;  that 
6.  11  let  timber  be  pulled  down  from  his  house 
6.  11  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  this 
6.  12  this  house  of  God  which  (is)  at  Jerusalem 
6.  15  this  house  was  finished  on  the  third  day 

6.  16  kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God 
6. 17  at  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God  an 

7.  16  offering  willingly  for  the  house  of  their  G. 
7. 17  offer  them  upon  the  altar  of  the  house  of 
7. 19  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  thy  God. 

7.  20  be  needful  for  the  house  of  thy  God 
7.  20  bestow(it)  out  of  the  king's  treasure  house 
7.  23  diligently  done  for  the  house  of  the  God  of 
7.  24  or  ministers  of  this  house  of  God,  it  shall 
Dan.  2.  5  and  your  houses  shall  be  made  a  dunghill 
2. 17  Then  Daniel  went  to  his  house,  and  made 

3.  29  and  their  houses  shall  be  made  a  dunghill 

4.  4  I  Xebuchadnezzar  was  at  rest  in  mine  h. 

4.  30  I  have  built  for  the  house  of  the  kingdom 

5.  3  of  the  temple  of  the  house  of  God  which 
5. 10  the  queen,  .came  into  the  banquet  house 

5.  23  brought . .  vessels  of  his  house  before  thee 

6.  10  he  went  into  his  house ;  and,  his  windows 

3. Comely  place,  habitation,  n^  no.ah. 

Psa.  S3. 12  Let  us  take  to  ourselves  the  houses  of  G. 

bHouse,  place  of  habitation,  oIktit-^piov  oiketerion, 
2  Co.   5.    2  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven 

5. House,  household,  family,  retainers,  oUia  oikia. 
Matt.  2.  11  And  when  they  were  come  into  the  house 
5.  15  giveth  light  unto  all  that  are  in  the  house 

7.  24  wise  man,  which  built  his  house  upon  a 

7.  25,  27  the  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon  that  h.  * 
7!  26  man,  which  built  his  house  upon  the  sand. 

8.  14  when  Jesus  was  come  into  Peter's  house 
9. 10  as  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in  the  house,  behold 

9.  23  when  Jesus  came  into  the  ruler's  house 
9.  2S  "when  he  was  come  into  the  house,  the 

10. 12  And  when  ye  come  into  an  house,  salute 
10.  13  thehouse  be  worthy,  let  your  peace  come 
10. 14  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house  or  city 
12.  25  every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself 

12.  29  a  strong  man's  house,  and  spoil  his  house 

13.  1  The  sameday  went  Jesusout  of  thehou=« 
13.  36  Then  Jesus,  .■went  into  the  house :  andhis 


HOUSE 


500 


HOW 


Matt  13, 

17 
19. 

=3- 

24. 
24. 
26. 

Mark.  1. 


6. 

6. 

7- 

9- 
10, 
10. 
10. 
12. 
13- 
13- 
13- 
14. 

Luke  4. 

5- 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7* 
7- 
7- 
S. 


John  , 


Acts 


16. 

17- 

18. 

18. 
t  Co.  11: 

16. 
(Co.  5. 

•  Ti.    2.' 

3- 

>  John 


57  in  his  own  country,  and  in  his  own  house 
.  25  when  lie  "was  come  into  the  house,  Jesus 
29  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  houses,  or 

14  [ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a  pr.] 
17  come  down  to  take  anything  out  of  his  h. 

43  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be 
6  when  Jesus  was  in  Bethany,  in  the  house 

29  they  entered  into  the  house  of  Simon  and 

15  as  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in  hishouse,  manyp. 
25  if  a  house  be  divided.,  that  house  cannot 
27  a  strong  man's  house,  and  spoil,  .his  ho. 

4  among  his  own  kin,  and  in  his  own  house 
10  what  place  soever  ye  enter  into  an  house 

24  entered  into  an  house,  and  would  have  no 

33  and,  being  in  the  house,  he  asked  them 
10  in  the  house  his  disciples  asked  him  again 

29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 

30  he  shall  receive . .  now  in  this  time,  houses 
40  Which  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a 
15  the  [h.]..to  take  any  thing  out  of  his  ho. 

34  a  man  taking  afar  journey,  who  left  his  h. 

35  ye  know  not  when  the  master  of  the  house 

3  being  in  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon 
38  And  he  arose,  .and  entered  into  Simon's  h. 
29  Levi  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  h. 

48  which  built  an  house,  .beat,  .upon  thath. 

49  built  an  house . .  and  the  ruin  of  that  house 

6  when  he  was  now  not  far  from  the  house 

36  he  went  into  the  Pharisee's  [house],  and 

37  (Jesus)  sat  at  meat  in  the  Pharisee's  house 

44  I  entered  into  thine  house,  thou  gavest 
27  neither  abode  in.  .house,  but  in  the  tombs 
51  when  he  came  into  the  house,  he  suffered 

4  whatsoever  house  ye  enter  into,  there  abide 

5  into  whatsoever  house  ye  enter,  first  say 

7  in  the  same  house  remain,  eating  and  dr. 

7  Go  not  from  house  to  house 

8  sweep  the  house,  and  seek  diligently  till 

25  he  came  and  drew  nigh  to  the  house,  he 

31  his  stuff  in  the  house,  let  him  not  come 
29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 
47  Which  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a 

10  follow  him  into  the  house  where  he  ente. 
n  shall  say  unto  the  goodman  of  the  house 
53  and  himself  believed,  and  his  whole  house 
35  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever 

31  Jews,  .which  were  with  her  in  the  house 
3  the  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of 

2  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions 
34  possessors  of  lands  or  houses  sold  them 

11  enquire  in  the  house  of  Judas  for  (one) 
17  entered  into  the  house;  and  putting  his 

6  a  tanner,  whose  house  is  by  the  sea  side 
17  men .  .had  made  enquiry  for  Simon's  ho. 

32  lie  is  lodged  in  the  house  of  (one)  Simon 

11  already  come  unto  the  house  where  I  was 

12  to  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother  of  John 
32  they  spake,  .to  all  that  were  in  his  house 

5  assaulted  the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought 

7  entered  into  a  certain  (man's)  house,  nam. 
7  whose  house  joined  hard  to  the  synagogue 

22  have  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  to  drink  in 

15  ye  know  the  house  of  Stephanas,  that  it 

1  if  our  earthly  house  of  (this)  tabernacle 

1  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal 

20  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels 

6  are  they  which  creep  into  houses,  and 
10  receive  him  not  into  (your)  houses,  neither 


'.House,  oIkos  oikos. 
Matt.  9.   6  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thine  house 
9.    7  And  he  arose,  and  departed  to  his  house 

10.  6  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel 

11.  8  wear  soft  (clothing)  are  in  king's  houses 

12.  4  he  entered  into  the  house  of  God,  and  did 
12.  44  return  into  my  house  from  whence  I  came 
15.  24  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel 
21. 13  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of 
23-  38  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate 

Mark  2.    1  it  was  noised  that  he  was  in  the  house 

2.  11  Arise .  .and  go  thy  way  into  thine  house 
2. 26  How  he  went  into  the  house  of  God  in  the 

3.  19  And  Judas,  .and  they  went  into  an  house 
5.  38  the  house  of  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue 
7.  17  entered  into  the  house  from  the  people 

7.  30  when  she  was  come  to  her  house,  she 

8.  3  send  them  away  fasting  to  their,  .houses 

8.  26  And  he  sent  him  away  to  his  house,  say. 

9.  28  when  he  was  come  into  the  house,  Ins 
11.  17  My  house  shall  be  called. .  house  of  prayer 

Luke  1.  23  that,  .he  departed  to  his  own  house 

1.  27  a  man  whose  name  was  Joseph,  of  the  h. 
1.  33  he  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for 
■     1.  40  entered  into  the  house  of  Zacharias,  and 
1.  56  And  Mary,  .returned  to  her  own  house 

1.  69  an  horn,  .in  the  house  of  his  servant  David 

2.  4  because  he  was  of  the  house  and  lineage 
5.  24  takeup  thy  couch,  and  go  unto  thine  house 

5.  25  departed  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God 

6.  4  How  he  went  into  the  house  of  God,  and 
7. 10  returning  to  the  house,  found  the  servant 
8.  39  Return  to  thine  own  house,  and  show  how 
8.  41  besought.,  that  he  would  come  into  his  h. 
9. 61  farewell  which  are  at  home  at  my  house 

10.   5  And. .first  say,  Peace  (be)  to  this  house 

10.  38  named  Martha  received  him  into  her  ho. 
11.17  and  a  house  (divided)  against  a  house  fal. 

11.  24  will  return  unto  my  house  whence  I  came 

12.  39  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken 
12.  52  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  divided] 
*3-  35  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  des. 
14.   1  as  he  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the 


Lukei4-  23  compel,  .to  come  in,  that  my  house  may 
16.    4  they  may  receive  me  into  their  houses 
16.  27  thou  wouidest  send  him  to  my  father's  h. 

18.  14  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified 

19.  5  Zaccheus.  .to  day  I  must  abide  at  thy  ho. 
19.  9  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house 
19.  46  My  house  is  the  house  of  prayer :  but  ye 
22. 54  brought  him  into  the  high  priest's  [house] 

John  2.  16  make  not  my  Father's  house  an  house  of 
2.  17  The  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up 
.  53  [And  every  man  went  unto  his  own  house] 


Acts 


ii.  20  Martha,  .went,  .but  Mary  sat.  .inthehou. 


2  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  sit. 
36  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly 
7.  10  he  made  him  governor  over . .  all  his  house 
7.  20  nourished  up  in  his  father's  house  three 
7.  42  O  ye  house  of  Israel,  have  ye  offered  to  me 
7.  47  But  Solomon  built  him  an  house 
7.  49  what  house  will  ye  huild  me  ?  saith  the  L. 
10.  2  one  that  feared  God  with  all  his  house 
10.  22  to  send  for  thee  into  his  house,  and  to  hear 

10.  30  at  the  ninth  hour  I  prayed  in  my  house 

11.  12  and  we  entered  into  the  man's  house 
11.  13  how  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  his  house 
11.  14  whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be 
16.  15  come  into  my  house,  and  abide  (there) 
16.  31  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  ana  thy  house 
16.34  when  he  had  brought  them  into  his  house 

18.  8  believed  on  the  Lord  with  all  his  house 

19.  16  so  that  they  fled  out  of  that  house  naked 
21.    8  we  entered  into  the  house  of  Philip  the  ev. 

Rom  16.  5  Likewise . .  the  church  that  is  in  their  house 
1  Co.  16. 19  with  the  church  that  is  in  their  house 
Col.  4.  15  Salute,  .the  church  which  is  in  hishouse 
3.  4  One  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house,  having 
3.  5  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how 
3.  12  ruling  their  children  and  their  own  houses 
3.  15  to  behave  thyself  in  the  house  of  God 
1.  16  The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of  0. 
1.  11  who  subvert  whole  houses,  teaching  things 


1  Ti. 


-Ti. 
Titus 


Phm.  2  fellow  soldier,  and  to  the  church  in  thy  h. 

Heb.    3.  2  as  also  Moses  (was  faithful)  in  all  his  house 

3.  3  as  he.  .hath  more  honour  than  the  house 

3.  4  For  every  house  isbuilded  hy  some  (man) 

3.  5  Moses  verily  (was)  faithful  in  all  hishouse 

3.  6  over  his  own  house ;  whose  house  are  we 

8.  8  the  house  of  Israel  and  with  the  house  of 

8.  10 ;  10.  21 ;  11.  7 ;  1  Pe.  2.  5 ;  4.  17. 

HOUSE,  at  thy  — 

With  tliee,  Trpbs  <ri  jwos  sc, 

Matt.26. 18  I  will  keep  the  passovcr  at  thy  house 
HOUSE,  draught  — 
Outgoings,  nix^e  motsaoth,  or  n'tN^no  macJutraoth. 

2  Ki.  10.  27  and  make  it  a  draught  house  unto  this  day 
H0US3  to  house,  from  — 
l.From.  house  to  house,  /cot'  oJkov  kaf  oikon. 

Acts    2.  46  and  breaking  bread  from  house  to  house 
20.  20  taught  you  publicly,  .from  house  to  house 
2.The  houses,  r&s  oiV/as  fas  oikias. 

1  Ti.  5. 13  wandering  about  from  house  to  house  ;  and 
HOUSE,  in  or  into  every  — 
From  house  to  house,  Karoltcov  kaV  oikon. 

Acts    5.  42  in  every  house,  they  ceased  not  to  teach 
8.    3  entering  into  every  house,  and  haling  men 

HOUSE,  goodman  or  master  of  the  — 
House  despot  or  ruler,  olKoSto-rroTTis  oikoclespotes. 
Matt  10.  25  If  they  have  called  the  master  of  the  house 
20.  11  murmured  against  the  goodman  of  the  h. 
24.  43  if  the  goodman  of  the  house  had  known 
Marki4.  14  say  ye  to  the  good  man  of  the  house,  The 
Lukei2.  39  if  the  goodman  of  the  house  had  known 

13.  25  When  once  the  master  of  thehouseisrisen 

14.  21  Then  the  master  of  the  house,  being  angry 

HOUSE,  to  guide  the  — 

To  be  a  house  despot  or  ruler,  onco5ecr7roTea>  oikod. 
1  Ti.   5.  14  women  marry,  bear  children,  guide  the  h. 
HOUSE,  hired  — 
What  is  hired,  fila9w/j,a  mislJwma. 

Acts  28.  30  dwelt  two  whole  years  in  lus  own  hiredh. 
HOUSE,  those  of  his  own  — 
Belonging  to  the  house,  olne'ios  otkeios. 

1  Ti.    5.    8  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house 
HOUSE,  with  all  his  — 
With  all  his  household,  irauoiKi  pavoiki. 

Acts  16.  34  rejoiced,  believing  in  God  with  all  his  ho. 
HOUSEHOLD  — 
1. House,  household,  rvs  bayith. 

Gen.  18.  19  he  will  command,  .hishousehold  after  h. 
31.  37  what  hast  thou  found  of  all'thyhouseho. 
35.  2  Then  Jacoh  said  unto  his  household,  and 
42.  33  take  (food  for)  the  famine  of  your  house. 
45.  11  lest  thou,  and  thy  household,  and  all  that 
45. 18  take  yourfather, and  your  households.and 
47.  12  nourished.,  all  his  father's  household,  with 
47.  24  for  them  of  yvuir  households,  and  for  food 
Exod.  1. 1  every  man  and  his  household  came  with 

12.    4  if  the.household  be  too  little  for  the  lamb 
Lev.  16.  17  made  an  atonement,  .for  his  household 
NumiS.  31  shall  cat  it  in  every  place,  ye  and  your  ho. 
Deut.  6.  22  and  upon  all  hishousehold,  before  oureyes 

11.  6  swallowed  them  up,  and  their  households 

12.  7  ye  and  your  households,  wherein  the  Lo. 

14.  26  thou  shalt  rejoice,  thou,  and  thine  hous. 

15.  20  Thou  shalt  eat.  .thou"  and  thy  household 


Josh.  2.  18  thy  father's  household,  home  unto  thee 

6.  25  her  father's  household,  and  all  that  she 

•  7.  14  shall  come  by  households ;  and  the  house 

7.  18  And  he  brought  his  household  man  by  man 
Judg.  6.  27  because  he  feared  his  father's  household 

18.  25  lose  thy  life,  with  the  lives  of  thy  house. 

1  Sa.  25.  17  against  our  master,  and  against  all  his  ho. 

27.   3  he  and  his  men,  every  mau  with  his  hous. 

2  Sa.    2.    3  bring  up,  every  man  with  his  household 

6.  11  Lord  blessed  Obed-edom,  and  all  his  ho. 

6.  20  Then  David  returned  to  bless  his  houshold 

15.  16  the  king  went  forth,  and  all  his  household 

16.  2  The  asses  (be)  for  the  king's  household  to 
17-  23  Pl]t  his  household  in  order,  and  hanged 

19.  18  a  ferry  boat  to  carry  over  the  king's  hou. 
19.  41  have  brought  the  king  and  his  household 

1  Ki.  4.    6  And  Ahishar(was)overthehousebold;  and 

4.  7  victuals  for  the  king  and  his  household 

5.  9  my  desire,  in  givingfoodfor  my  household 
5.  ii  measures  of  wheat  (for)  foodto  hishouse. 

11.  20  Genubath  was  in  Pharaoh's  household 

2  Ki.   7.    9  that  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king'shouse. 

8.  1  Arise,  and  go  thou  and  thine  household 
8.    2  went withherhousehold, andsojourned 

18. 18,  37  Eliakim.  .which  (was)  over  thehouse. 

19.  2  Eliakim,  which  (was)  over  the  household 
1  Ch.24.  6  one  principal  household  being  taken  for 
Neh.  13.  8  I  cast  forth  all  the  household  stuff  of  T. 
Prov.27.  27  for  the  food  of  thy  household,  and  (for) 

31.  15  giveth  meat  to  her  household,  and  a  port. 
31.  21  She  is  not  afraid  of  thesnowforherhouseh. 
31.  21  allherhousehold(are)clothed  with  scarlet 
-\i.  27  looketh  wellto  the  ways  of  her  household 
Isa.  36.  22  Eliakim .  .that  (was)  over  the  household 
37.    2  Eliakim,  who  (was)  over  the  household,and 

'2. Service,  household,  •t^j>:  abuddah. 

Job     1.3  a  very  great  household ;  so  that  this  man 

^.Service,  household,  d^pairela  therapeia. 

Matt24.  45  his  lord  hath  maderulerover  his[house.] 
Lukei2.  42  lord  shall  make  ruler  over  his  household 

4. Household,  oltcla  oikia. 

Phil.  4.  22  chiefly  they  that  are  of  Cesar's  household 
5. House,  household,  oIkos  oikos. 

Acts  16.  15  when  she  wasbaptized.andher  household 

1  Co.   1. 16  I  baptized  alsothe  household  of  Stephanas 

2  Ti.    4.  19  Salute  Prisca  and  Aquila.and  the  househo. 

HOUSEHOLD,  of  the  — 

Belonging  to  the  house,  olnelos  oikcias. 

Gal.     6.  10  especially  unto  them  who  are  of  the  ho. 

Eph.  2. 19  fellow  citizens,  .and  of  the  household  of 

HOUSEHOLD  servant  — 

Household  servant,  domes'lt'e,  ohUrns  oiketcs. 

Acts  10.    7  he  called  two  of  his  household  servants 
HOUSEHOLD,  they  of  the  — 
Belonging  to  the  house,  oIki<zk6s  oikiakos. 

Matt  10.  25  how  much  more,  .themof  hishousehold? 
10.  36  a  man's  foes  (shall  be)  they  of  his  own  h. 

HOUSEHOLDER  — 

House  despot  or  ruler,  oiKoBecnruTws  oikodespotes. 
Matti3.  27  the  servants  of  the  householder  cameand 
13.  52  is  like  unto  a  mau.  .an  householder  which 

20.  1  is  likeuntoaman.  .an householder, which 

21.  33  There  was  a  certain  householder,  which 
HOUSES,  desolate  — 

Forsaken  habitations,  niJip'rN  almanoth. 

Isa.    13.  22  wild  beasts . .  shall  cry  in  their  desolate  h. 
[See  aho'Roof,  shearing,  summer.] 
HOUSE  TOP  — 
l.-Roof,  top,  2^un<x.cU,  33  gag. 

2  Ki.  19.  26  they  were,  .(as)  the  grass  on  the  house  tops 

Psa.  102.    7  am  as  a  sparrow  alone  upou  the  house  top 

129.    6  them  be  as  the  grass  (upon)  the  house  top 

Prov  21.    9  (It  is) . .  to  dwell  in  a  corner  of  the  house  top 

25.  24  (Itis).  .todwellinacornerof  the  housetop 

Isa.  22.    1  thou  art  wholly  gone  up  to  the  house  tops  ? 

37.  27  they  were,  .(as)  the  grass  on  the  house  t. 

Jer.   48.  38  lamentation,  .upon  all  the  house  tops  of 

Zeph.  1.    5  worship  the  host  of  heaven  upon  the  h.  t. 

^.Building,  ScS/m  ddma. 

Matt  10.  27  what  ye  hear.,  preach  ye  upon  the  house  t. 
24.  17  Let  him  which  is  on  the  house  top  not  co. 
Mark  1 3.  15  let  him  that  is  ou  the  house  top  not  go 
Luke  5.  19  they  went  upon  the  house  top,  and  let 

12.  3  shall  be  proclaimed  upon  the  house  tops 

17.  31  he  which  shall  be  upon  the  house  top,  and 
Acts  10.    9  Peter  went  up  upon  the  house  top  to  pray 

HOW?  — 

I. Where  ?  how?  >'  e. 

Jer.    5.   7  How  shall  I  pardon  thee  for  this?  thy  ch. 

2.  Hoio?  how,  TN  ek. 

Gen.  44.  34  how  shall  I  go  up  to  my  father,  and  the 
Judg  16.  15  How,  canst  thou  say,  I  love  thee,  when 

3Mow  ?  hou\  nn'X  ek-ah. 

Deut.  1. 12  How  can  I  myself  alone  hear  your  cumb. 

7.  17  These  uatious..  how  can  I  dispossess  them? 

i.How  ?  how,  ra>N  ekakah. 

Esth.  8.   6  how'can  I  endure?.,  or  how  can  I  endure? 
Song  5.   3  how  shall  I  put  it  on?.,  how  shall  I  defile 

5. Hoio?  how,  irtos pos. 

Matt.  6.  28  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they 
7.   4  Or  how  wilt  thou  say  to  thy  brother,  Let 


HOW 


Mattio.  19. take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  sp. 
12.  4  How  heentered  into  the  ho  use  of  God,  and 
12.  26  divided,  .how  shall  then  his  kingdom  st.? 
12.  29  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strong  man's  h. 
12.  34  how  can  yef  being  evil,  speakgood things? 
16. 11  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  that 

21.  20  How  soon  is  the  fig  tree  withered  away ! 

22.  12  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 
22.  43  How  then  doth  David  in  spirit  call  him  L. 

22.  45  If  David  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his 

23.  33  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell  ? 
26.  54  how  then  shall  the  scriptures.be  fulfilled 

Hark  2.  26  [How]  he  went  into  the  house  of  God  in 

3.  23  and  said . .  How  can  Satan  cast  out  Satan  ? 

4.  13  and  how  then  will  ye  know  all  parables? 

4.  40  Why  are  ye  so  fearful?  how  is  it  that  ye 

5.  16  told  them  how  it  befell  to  him  that  was 

8.  21  said.  .How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand? 

9.  12  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  that 
10.  23  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 

10.  24  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches 

11.  18  and  sought  how  they  might  destroy  him 

12.  35  Howsaythe  scribes  that  Christ  is  the  son  of 
12. 41  beheld  how  the  people  cast  money  into  the 
14.  1  scribes  soughthowtheymighttakehim  by 
14. 11  sought  how  he  mightconveniently  betray 

Luke  1.  34  Howshallthisbe,seeingIknownotanian? 

6.  42  Either  how  canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother 
8.  18  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear:  for  w. 

10.  26  What  is  written  in  the  law  ?  how  readest 

11.  18  how  shall  his  kingdom  stand?  because  ye 

12.  11  take  ye  no  thought  how  or  what  thing  ye 
12.  27  Consider  the  lilies  how  they  grow :  they 
12.  50  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished! 
i  2.  56  how  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time  ? 
14.  7  when  he  marked  how  they  chose  out  the 
18.  24  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 
20. 41  How  say  they  that  Christ  is  David's  son? 
20.  44  calleth  him  Lord,  how  is  he  then  his  son? 
22.  2  scribes  sought  how  they  might  kill  him 
22.    4  how  he  might  betray  him  unto  them 

John  3.    4  How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old? 
3.    9  and  said  unto  him,  How  can  these  things 

3.  12  how  shall  ye  believe,  if  I  tell  you  (of) 

4.  9  How  is  it  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest 

5.  44  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  honour 

5.  47  writings,  how  shall  ye  believe  my  words  ? 
6  42  how  is  it  then  that  he  saith,  I  came  down 

6.  52  How  can  this  man  give  us  (his)  flesh  to  eat 

7.  15  How  know,  this  man  letters,  having  never 

8.  33  how  sayest  thou,  Ye  shall  be  made  free  ? 

9.  10  said,  .unto  him,  Howwere  thine  eyes  op.? 
9.  15  asked  him  how  he  had  received  his  sight 
9. 16  Howcanamanthatisasinnerdosuchmir. 
9.  19  wasborn blind?  howthendoth  henowsee? 
9.  26  What  did  he.  .how  opened  he  thine  eyes? 

11.  36  said  the  Jews,  Behold  how  he  loved  him  ! 

12.  34  how  sayest  thou,  The  Son  of  man  must  be 
14.    5  we  know  not.  .and  how  can  we  know  the 

14.  9  how  sayest  thou  (then),  Show  us  the  Path. 
Acts    2.    8  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue 

4.  21  finding  nothing  how  they  might  punish 

8.  31  How  can  I,  except  some  man  should  guide 

9.  27  how  he  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  way,  and 
9.  27  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  Damascus 

11.  13  he  showed  us  howhe  had  seen  anangelin 

12.  17  how  the  Lord  had  brought  him  out  of  the 

15.  36  visit  our  brethren . .  (and  see)  how  they  do 
Rom.  3.    6  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world? 

4. 10  How  was  it  then  reckoned?  when  lie  was 

6.  2  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live 
8.  32  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely 

10  14  [How]  then  shall  they  call  on  him  in  wh. 
10.  14  [how]  shall  they  believe  in  him  of  whom 
10.  14  [how]  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher? 
10. 15  [how]  shall  they  preach  except  they  be 
3  Co.    3.  to  let  every  man  take  heed  how  hebuildeth 

7.  32  he . .  careth . .  [how]  he  may  please  the  L. 
7.  33  he. . careth .  .[how]  he  may  please  (his)  w. 
■/.  34  careth.  .[how]  she  may  please  (her)husb. 

14.    7  how  shall  it  be  known  what  is  piped  or 
14.    9  howshall  it  be  known  whatis  spoken?  for 

14.  16  how  shall  he  that  occupieth  the  room  of 
15. 12  how  say  some  among  you  that  there  is  no 

15.  35  How.  .the  dead  raised  up  ?  and  with  what 


12  CO. 

Gal. 
Col. 
iTh. 


3.  8  How  shall  not  the  ministration  of  thesp. 

4.  9  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  begg. 
4.   6  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every  man 

1.  9  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve 
4.    1  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  God 

2  Til.  3.    7  yourselves  know  how  ye  ought  to  follow 
1  Ti.    3.    5  how  shall  he  take  care  of  the  church  of  G.? 

3.  15  thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest  to 
Eeb.  2.  3  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great 
1  Jo.   3.  17  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him? 

4.  20  [how]  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not 
Rev.    3.    3  Remember.. how  thou  hast  received  and 

6.  Wherefore,  why,  what,  how  ?  ris  tis. 

Matt  iS.  12  How  think  ye  ?  If  a  man  have  an  hundred 
Mark  2.  16  [How  is  it]  that  he  eateth  and  drinketh 
Luke   1.  62  made  signs . .  how  he  would  have  him  cal. 

2.  49  How  is  it  that  ye  sought  me?  wist  ye  not 
16.    2  How  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  thee?  give 

Johni4.  22  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself 
Acts    5.    9  How  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to 
1  Co.  7.  16  or  how  knowest  thou,  O  man,  whether 

^    14.  26  How  is  it  then,  brethren?  when  ye  come 
Epn.   6.  21  ye  also  may  know  my  affairs,  (and)  how  I 

HOW  — 

I. That  which,  i»n  nx  eth  aslier. 

Gen.  30.  29  knowest  how  I  have  served  thee,  and  how 


501 

2,Hoio  ?  ^n  hek. 

1  Ch.13.  12  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God  (home) 
Dan.  10.  17  how  can  the  servant  of  this  my  lord  talk 

Z.That,  *3  hi. 

Josh.  10.    1  king,  .had  heard  how  Joshua  had  taken 

4.  Wherefore  1  yno  maddua. 

Exod.  2. 18  How  (is  it  that)  ye  are  come  so  soon  to  day? 

5.  What  ?  what  I  what,  no  mah. 

Kum23.    S  How  shall  I  curse,  whom  God  hath  not 

6.  How?  according  to  what  I  nsg  kammah. 

Gen.  47.    8  Pharaoh  said  unto  Jacob,  How  old  (art) 

7.  What  ?  what,  na  meh. 

2  Sa.    1.    4  How  went  the  matter?  I  pray  thee,  tell 

8. According  as,  ko.6u>s  Jcathos. 

Acts  15.  14  Simeon  had  declared  how  God  at  the  first 

9. How,  that,  so  that,  Zttqjs  hopos. 

Matt  12.  14  against  him,  how  they  might  destroy  him 

22.  15  how  they  might  entangle  him  in  (his)  talk 

Mark  3.    6  took  counsel .  how  they  might  destroy  h. 

Luke24.  20  And  how  the  chief  priests  and  our  rulers 

10.  That,  oTtholi. 

Luke  1.  58  her  cousins  heard  how  the  Lord  had  sh. 

21.  5  how  it  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones 
John  4.    1  the  Lord  knew  how  the  Pharisees  had  h. 

12.  19  Perceiveyehowyeprevailnothing? behold 

14.  28  Ye  have  heard  how  I  said  unto  you,  I  go 

Acts  14. 27  howhe  had  opened  the  door  of  faith  unto 

20.  35  how  he  said,  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
Gal.     4.  13  Ye  know  how  through  infirmity  of  the 
Phni.       19  albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest 
Jas.     2.  22  Seest  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  his 
Rev.   2.   2  how  thou  canst  not  bear  them  which  are 

11.  How,  as,  &s  hos. 

Mark  4.  27  the  seed..growup,  he  knowethnot  how 

12.  26  [how]  in  the  bush  God  spake  unto  him 
Luke  6.    4  [How]  he  went  into  the  house  of  God,  and 
8.  47  declared,  .how  she  was  healed  immediat. 

22.  61  Peter  remembered-  .howhe  had  said  uuto 
23-  55  beheld  the  sepulchre,  and  how  his  body 
24.    6  remember  [how]  he  spake  unto  you  when 
24.  35  how  he  was  known  to  them  in  breaking  of 

Acts  10.  28  Ye  know  how  that  it  is  an  unlawful  thing 

10.  38  HowGod  anointedjesusofls'azareth  with 

11.  16  the  word  of  the  Lord,  how  that  he  said 
20.  20  how  I  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profit. 

Rom.  10.  15  How  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that 
11.  2  how  he  niaketh  intercession  to  God  agai. 
11.  33  howunsearchable(are)hisjudgments,and 

2  Co.  7. 15  how  with  fear  and  trembling  ye  received 

1  Th.  2.  10  Ye  (arejwltnesses,  and  God  (also),  how  h. 
2.  11  As  ye  know  how  weexhorted  ;  Phil.i.  8. 
HOW  great  (things) 
l.Whatt  what!  TO  mah. 

Dan.   4.    3  How  great  (are)  his  signs  !  and  how  mig 
2.How  much,  '6cos  hosos. 

Mark  5.  19  tell  them  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath 
5.  20  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done  for  him 

Luke  8.  39  show  how  great  things,  .how  great  things 

Acts  9.  16  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  roust 
S.  How  great,  tjkIkos  hclikos,  Jas.  3.  3, 
4. How  great,  irnAi/cos  pelikos. 

Heb.   7.    4  consider  how  great  this  man  (was),  unto 
5. How  great,  how  much,  -noaos posos. 

Matt.  6.  23  be  darkness,  howgreat  (is) that  darkness  ! 
HOW  greatly  — 
As,  how,  &s  hos. 

Phil.  1.   8  how  greatly  I  long  after  you.,  in  the  bow. 
HOW  it  will  go  -with  — 
The  things  concerning,  ra  irepl  ta  peri. 

Phil.  2.  23  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with 
HOW  large  — 
How  great,  tttjXlkos  pelikos. 

Gal.     6.  11  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written 
HOW  long  — 
1. According  to  what,  naa  kammah. 

Job     7. 19  How  long  wilt  thou  nrt  depart  from  me 
2. Till  when,  ews  vore  heos  pote. 

Matt  17.  17  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you?  how  longs. 

Mark  9.  19  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you  ?  how  long  s. 

Luke  9.  41  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you,  and  surfer 

Johnio.  24  How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?  If 

Rev.   6.  10  How  long,  0  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou 
Z.Hoie  great,  how  much,  irSaos  2}osos. 

Mark  9.21  How  long  is  it  ago  since  this  came  unto  h.? 
4.  Till  when  ?  n^x-ny,  jx"iy  ad-an,  ad-anah. 

Job     S.    2  How  long  wilt  thou  speak  these  (things)? 
18.    2  How  long  (will  it  be  ere)  ye  make  an  end 
5. Till  what  t  TO"ijj  ad-mah. 

Psa.     4.  2  how  long  (will  ye  turn)  my  glory  into  s.  ? 
74.  9  neither.. amongusanythatknowethhowlo. 
HOW  many  (things')  — 
l.How  much,  oaos  hosos. 

2  Ti.    1.  iS  in  how  many  things  he  ministered  unto 
2.  How  great,  how  much,  no  cros  posos. 

Matt  15.  34  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  How  many  loaves 
16.  9  remember,  .how  many  baskets  ye  tookup? 
16.  10  thousand,  and  how  many  baskets  ye  took 


HOWL 

Matt  27.  13  Hearest  thou  not  how  many  things  they 
Mark  6.  3S  saith.  .How  many  loaves  have  ye?  go  and 

8.    5  he  asked  them,  How  many  loaves  have  ye? 

8.  19,  20  how  many  baskets  full  of  fragments 

15.  4  ho  wmany  things  they  witness  against  thee 
Luke  15.  17  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's  h. 
Acts  2i.  20  seest,  brother,  how  many  thousands  of  J. 

HOW  many  soever  they  he  — 

As  they  aud  as  they,  Drni  ona  kahem  ve-kahem. 

2  Sa.  24.    3  unto  the  people,  howmanysoeverthey  he 
HOW  mighty  — 
What'?  what!  nsmah. 

Dan.    4.    3  how  mighty  (are)  his  wonders  !  his  king. 
HOW  much  — 
l.Hoiv  much,  oaos  Jwsos. 

Acts    9.  13  how  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints 
-    Heb.    8.    6  by  how  much  also  he  is  the  mediator  of 

Rev.  18.    7  How  much  she  hath  glorified  herself,  and 
2.How  great,  how  much,  ttocos  posos. 

Matt.  7.  11  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which 

10.  25  how  much  more,  .them  of  his  household? 
12.  12  How  much  then  is  a  man  better  than  a  s.? 

Luke  11.  13  how  much  more  shall  (your)  heavenly  F. 
12.  24  how  much  more  are  ye  better  than  the  f.? 

12.  28  how  much  more,  .you,  Oye  of  little  faith? 

16.  5  said..Howmuchowestthouuntomylord? 
16.    7  Then  said  he.  .And  how  much  owest  thou? 

Rom  11.  12  the  fall  of  them,  .how  much  more  their 

11.  24  how  much  more  shall  these,  which  be  the 
Phra.  16  how  much  more  unto  thee,  both  in  the  flesh 
Heb.^  9.  14  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ 

"io.  29  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose 
3.  What,  ris  tis. 

Lukei9-  15  know  how  much  every  man  had  gained 
HOW  much,  less,  more,  rather  then  — 
1. Also ,  *]X  aph. 

Job     4.  19  How  much  less  (in)  them  that  dwelfYA'-'X?^- 
2.Also  that,  '3  *]K  aph  ki. 

i  Sa.  14.  30  How  much  more,  if  haply  the  people  had 

1  Ki.  8.  27  how  much  less  this  house  that  I  have  built 

2  Ki.   5.  13  how  much  rather  then,  when  he  saith  to 
Z.Not  at  all  tlien,  much  more  then,  {X7]tl  ye  meti  ge. 

1  Co.  6.   3  howmuch  more  things  that  pertain  to  this 
HOW  oft  or  often  — 
1. According  to  what,  nca  kammah. 

Psa.  7S.  40  How  oft  did  they  provoke  him  in  the  w. 
2,How  oft,  icoaaKis  posakis. 

Matt  18.  21  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me 
23  37  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  ch. 

Lukei3.  34  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  ch. 
HOW  that  — 
Thai,  ort  hoti. 

Matti2.  5  how  that  on  the  sabbath  days  the  priests 
16.  12  Then  understood  they  how  that  he  bade 
it.  21  how  that  he  must  go  into  Jerusalem,  and 

Luke  7.  22  [how  that]  the  blind  see,  the  lame  walk 

Acts    7.  25  would  have  understood  how  that  God  by 

13.  32  how  that  the  promise  which  was  made 
15.   7  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while  ago  God 
20.  35  howthat  solabouringye  ought  to  support 

Rom.  7.    1  Know  ye  not.,  how  that  the  law  hath  dom. 

1  Co.    1.  26  how  thatnotmany  wise  men  after  the  flesh 

10.    1  how  that  all  our  fatherswereunderthecl. 
15.    3  howthatChrist  died  for  our  sins  according 

2  Co.  8.    2  How  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction  the 

12.  4  Howthat  he  was  caught  up  into  paradise 

13.  5  how  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  you,  except  ye 
Gal.    1.  13  how  that  beyond  measure  I  persecuted 
Eph.  3.    3  How  that  by  revelation  he  made  known 
Heb.  i2.  17  ye  know  how  that  afterward,  when  he  w. 
Jas.     2.  24  Ye  see  then  how  that  by  works  a  man  is 
Jude         5  how  that  the  Lord,  having  saved  thepeo. 

18  How  that  they  told  you  there  should  be 
HOWBEIT  — 
l.But,  truly,  yet,  chut  ulam 

JudgiS.  29  howbeit  the  name  ofthe  city  (was)  Laish  at 
2,  Only,  tjx  ah. 

1  Sa.    8.    9  howbeit  yet  protest  solemnly  unto  them 
Z.Bnd,  no  more,  no  further,  only,  dbn  ephes. 

2  Sa.  12.  14  Howbeit,  because  by  this  deed  thou  hast 
i.So,  such,  this,  1 3  ken. 

2  Ch.32.  31  Howbeit  in  (the  business  of)  the  ambass. 
5. Only,  surely,  nevertheless,  pi  raq. 

1  Ki.  11.  13  Howbeit  I  will  not  rendaway  all  the  kin. 

6.  But,  save,  howbeit,  a\\d  alia. 

John  7.  27  Howbeit  we  know  this  man  whence  he  is 
Acts  7.  48  Howbeit  the  most  high  dwelleth  not  in  t. 
1  Co.  8.    7  Howbeit.  .not  in  every  man  that  knowle. 

14.  20  howbeit  in  malice  be  ye  children,  but  in 

15.  46 ;  Gal.  4.  8 ;  1  Ti.  1.  16 ;  Heb.  3.  16. 

7.  But,  Be  de. 

John.  6.  23  Howbeit  there  came  other  boats  from  T. 

8.  Yet,  nevertheless,  fxevroi  mentoi. 

John  7.  13  Howbeit  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for 
HOWL,  to  — 
l.To  howl,  ^;  yalal,  5. 

Isa.   13.   6  Howl  ye  ;  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  at 
t  14.  31  Howl,  0  gate;  cry,  O  city;  thou,  whole 
15.    2  Moab  shall  howl  over  Kebo,  and  over  M. 


HOWL 


502 


HUNDRED 


Isa.    15.    3  everyone  shall  howl,  weeping  abundantly 
i5.    7  Moab  howl  for  Moab,  every  one  shall  ho. 
23.    i,  14  Howl,  ye  ships  of  Tarshish  :  for 
23.    6  Pass  ye  over  to  Tarshish ;  howl,  ye  inha. 
65.  14  servants,  .shall  howl  for  vexation  of  spirit 

Jer  4.  8  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  lament  and  howl 
25.  34  Howl,  ve  shepherds,  and  cry;  and  wallow 

47.  2  all  theinhabitants  of  the  laud  shall  howl 

48.  20  howl  and  cry;  tell  ye  it  in  Arnon,  that  M. 
48.  31  Therefore  will  I  howlfor  Moab.andl  will 

48.  39  They  shall  howl . .  How  is  it  broken  down  ! 

49.  3  Howl,  O  Heshbon,  for  Ai  is  spoiled  :  cry 
51.   8  Babylon  is  suddenly  fallen,  .howl  for  her 

Eze.  21.  12  Cry  and  howl,  son  of  man  ;  for  it  shall  be 

30.    2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Howl  ye,  Woe 

Hos.    7.  14  cried,  .when  they  howled  upon  their  beds 

Joel    1.    5  howl,  all  ye  drinkers  of  wine,  because  of 

1.  1 1  howl,  O  ye  vine  dressers,  for  the  wheat  and 

1.  13  howl,  ye  ministers  of  the  altar ;  come,  lie 

Mic.    1.    8  Therefore  I  will  wail  and  howl,  I  will  go 

Zeph.  1.  11  Howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  M„ktesh,  for  all 

Zechn.    2  Howl,  fir  tree;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen;  be. 

11.    2  howl,  O  ye  oaks  of  Bashan  ;  for  the  forest 

2.To  howl,  o\o\v(q}  ololuzd. 

Jas.     5.    1  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come 
HOWL,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  howl,  V1?;  yalal,  5. 

Tsa.  52.  5  they  that  rule  over  them  make  them  to  h. 
HOWLING  — 
1. Holding,  77\  yelel. 

Deut  3*2. 10  found  him.  .in  the  waste  howling  wilde. 

2.  Howling,  rbh\  yelalah. 

Isa.    15.    8  ttie  howling  thereof  unto,  .and  the  howl. 

Jer.  25.  36  and  an  howling  of  the  principal  of  the  fl. 

Zeph.  i.  10  an  howling  from  the  second,  and  a  great 

Zech.  11.    3  a  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds ;  for 
HOWLINGS,  to  he  — 
To  {Cause  to)  howl,  hh]  yalal,  5. 

Ami  13  8.    3  the  songs  of  the  temple  shall  be  bowlings 
HOWSOEVER  — 
1.  All  that  which,  i^n  Si)  kol  aslter. 

Zeph.  3.    7  howsoever  I  punished  them :  but  they  rose 
%Only,  surely,  nevertheless,  pi  raq. 

Judg  19.  20  howsoever'(let)  all  thy  wants  (lie)upon  me 

3.  Let  it  be  what,  nip"*!^  ychi-mah. 

■2  Sa.  18.  22  howsoever,  let  me,  I  pray  thee,  also  run 
HUGE  — 
Abundance,  multitude,  greatness,  31  rob. 

2  Ch.16.    8  Werenot  the  Ethiopians,  .a  huge  host 
HUK'-KOK,  p'pn,  p'p^n  ditch. 

A  place  on  the  boundary  of  Naphtali.  It  is  now  called 
Yakulc,  a  village  in  the  mountains  of  Naphtali,  W.  of 
the  upper  end  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  about  seven  mile3 
S.S.W.  ofSre/ed.andattheheadof  Wady-el-Amud.  The 
Jews  have  an  ancient  tradition  that  Habakkuk's  tomb 
was  here. 

Josh  19.  34  the  coast,  .goeth  out  from  thence  to  H. 
HU'-KOK,  p'pm  ditch. 

A  name  of  a  city  in  Asher  which  is  substituted,  in  1  Oil. 
6.  75,  for  Uelkath  in  Josh.  21.  31. 

x  Ch.  6.  75  H.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Rehob  with  her 

HTJL,  Sin  circle. 

Second  son  of  Aram  and  grandson  of  Shem  the  son  of 

Noah.  B.C.  2200.  In  1  Ch.  1.  17  he  is  made  a  son  of  Shem. 

Gen.  10.  23  the  children  of  Aram ;  Uz,  and  H.,  and  G. 

1  Ch.  1.  17  and  Uz,  and  H.,  and  Gether,  and  Meshech 

HUL'-DAH,  rrhn  weasel. 

A  prophetess  in  the  time  of  king  Josiah,  who  consulted 

her  on  the  book  of  the  law  found  by  Hilkiah.     B.C.  641. 

2  Ki.  22.  14  Hilkiah  the  priest,  .went  unto  H.  the  pr. 
2  Ch.34.  22  And  H. .  .went  to  H  the  prophetess,  the 

HUMBLE  (person)  — 

1.  Humble,  afflicted,  poor,  ljj;,  'jy  ani,  anav. 

Psa.     9.  :2  he  forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  humble 
10.12  Arise,  O  Lord.,  forget  not  the  humble 
10.  17  thou  bast  heard  the  desire  of  the  humble 
34.    2  the  humble  shall  hear  (thereof).and  be  glad 
69.  32  The  humble  shall  see  (this,  and)  be  glad 

%Low  or  humble,  Scy  shaphal. 

Prov.16.  19  Better(itistobe)of  an  humble  spirit  with 

29.  23  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  iu  spirit 

Isa.    57.  15  humble  spirit,  to  revive  the  spirit  of  the  h. 

Z.Bent  down  of  eyes,  humble,  o*ry  ngJ  shacli  enayim. 

Job  22.  29  lifting  up ;  and  he  shall  save  the  humble  p. 

4. Low,  lowly,  ra-jretvos  tapcinos. 

Jas.     4.    6  saith,  God.  .giveth  grace  unto  the  humble 
1  IV'.  5.    5  for  God.  .giveth  grace  to  the  humble 
HUMBLE,  to  — 
1.7*0  afflict,  humble,  njy  anah,  3. 

Deut.  8.  2  to  humble  thee,  .to  prove  thee,  to  know 
8.  3  he  humbled  thee,  and  suffered  thee  to  h. 
8.  16  that  he  might  humble  thee,  and  that  lie 

21.  14  shalt  not.  .because  thou  host  humbled  her 

22.  24  because  he  hath  humbled  his  neighbour's 
22.  29  because  he  hath  humbled  her,  he  may  nut 

Judg  10.  24  humble  ye  them,  and  do  with  them  what 
Psa.  35.  13  I  humbled  my  soul  with  fasting;  and  my 
Eze.  22.  10  in  thee  have  they  humbled  her  that  was 
22.  11  auotherin  thee..humbljd  his  sister,  his 


2.  T<~>  make  low  or  humhle,  S?-^  shaphel,  5 

Psa.113.  6  Who  humbleth  (himself)  to  behold  (the  tin. 

Z.To  males  low  or  humble,  b$y  sJh'phal,  5. 

Dan.   5.  22  thou,  .hast  not  humbled  thine  heart,  tho. 

4.  To  make  low,  raireLvoca  tapeinoo. 

Matt  18.    4  Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble  hims. 

23.  12  he  that  shall  humble  himself  shall  be  ex. 
Luke  14.  11  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted 

18.  14  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted 
2  Co.  12.  21  lest,  .my  God  will  humble  me  among  you 
Phil.   2.    8  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient 

HUMBLE  self,  to  — 

1.  To  be  or  become  humbled,  yja  kana,  2. 

1  Ki.  21.  29  Seest  thou  how  Ahab  humbleth  himself 

21.  29  Because  he  humbleth  himself  before  me 

2  Ki  22.  19  thou  hasthumbled  thyself  before  the  Lopd 
2  Ch.  7.  14  If  my  people,  .shall  humble  themselves 

12.   6  princes,  and  the  king  humbled  thenisel. 
12.    7  when  the  Lord  saw  that  they  humbled  the. 
12.    7  saying,  They  have  humbled  themselves 
12.  12  when  he  humbled  himself,  the  wrath  of 
30.  n  humbled  themselves,  and  came  to  Jerusa. 

32.  26  Hezekiah  humbled  himself  for  the  pride  of 

33.  12  humbled  himself  greatly  before  the  Godof 
33.  23  And  humbled  not  himself  before  the  Lord 

33.  23  as  Manasseh  his  father  had  humbled  him. 

34.  27  and  thou  did  t  humble  thyself  before  God 
34.  27  humbiedst  thyself  before  me,  and  didst 
36.  12  humbled  not  himself  before  Jeremiah  the 

2.  To  be  or  become  humbled,  rty>!  anah,  2. 

Exodio.   3  How  long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  thy. 

3.  To  trample  on  self,  D5TJ  raphas,  7. 

Prov.  6.    3  humble  thyself,  and  make  sure  thy  friend 

4.  To  bow,  nnts»  shachrich. 

Pl  '„  10.  10  humbleth  himself,  that  the  poor  may  fall 
5.7V  be  or  become  low  or  humble,  Sair  shapliel. 

Isa.   2.    9  the  great  man  humbleth  himself :  therefore 

6.  To  make  low  or  humble,  Sd^:  shaphel,  5. 

Jer.   13.  18  Humble  yourselves,  sit  down:  for  your 

7.  To  make  self  low,  Ta,Treiv6ofxai  tapeinoomai. 
Jas.     4.  10  Humble  yourselves  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

1  Pe.   5.    6  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the 

HUMBLED,  to  be  — 

1.7V)  be  bruised,  humbled,  kzr  daka,  4. 

Jer.  44..  10  They  are  not  humbled,  .unto  this  day 
2.7b  be  or  become  humbled,  yJ3  kana,  2. 

Lev.  26.  41  if.  .their  uucircumcised  hearts  he  humbl. 

2  Ch.33.  19  and  set  up  groves,  .before  he  was  humb. 

3.  To  bow  down,  rnc>  shuach,  5. 

Lam.  3.  20  still  in  remembrance,  and  is  humbled  in 

4.  To  be  or  become  tow  or  humble,  Sb^  shaphel. 

Isa.     2.  11  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  humbled 
5. 15  and  the  mighty  man  shall  he  humbled 
5. 15  and  Ihe  eyes  of  the  lofty  shall  be  humbled 
10.  33  Behold,  .and  the  haughty  shall  be  humb. 

HUMBLENESS  of  mind  — 

Lowliness  of  mind,  TaTr?tuo<ppoavwn  tapeinophros. 

Col.     3. 12  Put  on  therefore,  .humbleness  of  mind 
HUMBLY  — 
To  be  lowly,  humble,  prepared,  yjy  tsana,  5. 

Mic.    6.   8  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with 
HUMBLY  beseech,  to  — 
To  bow  down  self,  nny  shachah,  7. 

2  Sa  16     4  I  humbly  beseech  thee.  .1  may  find  grace 
HUMILIATION  — 
Lowliness,  raTreiuuxTts    tapeinosis. 

Acts   8.  33  In  his  humiliation  his  judgment  was  taken 

HUMILITY  — 

1. Humility,  gentleness,  affliction,  rm&  anavah. 

Prov  15.  33  of  wisdom ;  and  before  honour  (is)  hum! 

iS.  12  is  haughty,  and  before  honour  (is)humil. 

C2.  4  By  humility,  .the  fear  of  the  Lord,  (are) 

%Lowliness  of  mind,  1 air eivocppo a vvn tapeinophros. 

CoL     2.  18  iu  a  voluntary  humility  and  worshipping 

2.  23  and  humility,  an&neglecting  of  the  body 

1  Pe.    5.    5  Yea,  all.  .be  clothed  with  humility ;  for 

HUMILITY  of  mind  — 

Lowliness  of  mind.,  rarrrtwotypoavvn  tapeinophros. 
Acts  20  19  Serving  the  Lord  with  all  humility  of  m. 

HUM'-TAH,  naon  enclosed  place. 

A  city  of  Judah  in  the  hill  country  next  to  Hebron. 
Josh  15.  54  H,.  and  Kirjath-arba,  which  (is)  Hebron 

HUNDRED  — 

I.  A  cubit,  nox  ammah. 

Eze.  42.  t6  five  hundred  reeds,  with  the  measuring 

2.ITundrcd,  hno  meah. 

Gen.    5.    3  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years 
5.    4  the  days  of  Adam,  .were  eight  hundred 
5.    5  nine  hundred  and  thirty  years  :  and  he 
5.    6  Seth lived  an  hundred  and  five  years,  and 
5.    7  eight  hundred  and  seven  years,  and  begat 
5.    8  nine  hundred  and  twelve  years  :  and  be 
5.  10  :  ght  hundred  and  fifteen  years,  and  begat 
5  it  n.   e  hundred  and  five  years-  and  he  died 
5.  13  eight  hundred  and  forty  years,  and  begat 
5.  14  nine  hundred  and  ten  years :  and  he  died 


23- 
23- 
23- 
25- 

25. 

32- 
32- 
32- 
33- 
33- 
35- 
45- 
47 
47- 
50. 
5°- 
Exod.  6. 

6. 

6. 


18. 
27. 
27. 
27- 
30 
SO- 
SO- 
38 
38. 

?:• 
38. 
38. 


38. 
38. 

Lev.  26. 
Num.  1. 


eight  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  begat 
eight  hundred  ninety  and  five  years,  and 
And  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two 
lived  after  he  begat  Enoch  eight  hundred 
were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  twoyears :  and 
And  Enoch  walked  with  God . .  three  hund. 
were  three  hundred  sixty  and  five  years 
lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  seven  years 
lived . .  seven  hundred  eighty  and  two  years 
were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  nine  years 
lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two  years, and 
lived,  .five  hundred  ninety  and  five  years 
were  seven  hundred  seventy  and  seven  y. 
Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old  :  and  N. 
days  shall  be  an  hundred  and  twenty  years 
the  ark  (shall  be)  three  hundred  cubits 
Xoah  (was)  six  hundred  years  old  when  the 
upon  the  earth  an  hundred  and  fifty  days 
after  the  end  of  the  hundred  and  fifty  days 
Noah  lived  .  three  hundred  and  fifty  years 
days,  .were  nine  hundred  and  fifty  years 
Shem  (was)  an  hundred  years  old,  and  b. 
Shem  lived . .  five  hundred  years,  and  begat 
,  15  lived,  .four  hundred  and  three  years, 
Eber  lived . .  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 
Peleg  lived,  .two  hundred  and  nine  years 
lieu  lived,  .two  hundred  and  seven  years 
Serug  lived,  .two  hundred  years,  and  beg 
lived . .  an  hundred  and  nineteen  years,  and 
days,  .were  two  hundred  and  five  years 
(servants) ..  three  hundred  and  eighteen 
they  shall  afflict  them  four  hundred  years 
unto  him  that  is  an  hundred  years  old? 
Abraham  was  an  hundred  years  old  when 
hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  years  old 
(is  worth)  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver 
four  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  current 
an  hundred  threescore  and  fifteen  years 
an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  years 
meet  thee,  and  four  hundred  men  with 
Two  hundred  she  goats,  and  twenty  he  g. 
two  hundred  ewes,  and  twenty  rams 
Esau  came,  and  with  him  four  hundred 
a  field,  .for  an  hundred  pieces  of  money 
days,  .were  an  hundred  and  fourscore  y. 
he  gave  three  hundred  (pieces)  of  silver 
The  days,  .(are)  an  hundred  and  thirty  y. 
age . .  was  an  hundred  forty  and  seven  years 
and  Joseph  lived  an  hundred  and  ten  years 
died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  years  old 
(were)  an  hundred  thirty  and  seven  years 
(were)  an  hundred  thirty  and  three  years 
an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  years 
hundred  thousand  on  foot  (that  were)meii 
(was)  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 
end  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 
he  took  six  hundred  chosen  chariots,  and 
,  25  rulers  of  hundreds,  rulers  of  fifties.and 
of  ,-    hundred  cubits  long  for  one  side 
be)  hangings  of  an  hundred  (cubits)  long 
The  length,  .(shall  be)  an  hundred  cubits 
of  pure  myrrh  five  hundred  (shekels),  and 
(even )two  hundred  and  fifty  (shekels),  and 
calamus  two  hundred  and  fifty  (shekels) 
of  cassia  five  hundred  (shekels),  after  the 
of)  fine  twined  linen,  an  hundred  cubits 
(the  hangings  were)  an  hundred  cubits 
seven  hundred  and  thirty  shekels,  after 
the  silver,  .(was)  an  hundred  taleuts,  and 
a  thousand  seven  hundred  and  threescore 
for  six  hundred  thousand  and  three 
thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty(men) 
of  the  hundred  talents  of  silver  were  cast 
an  hundred  sockets  of  the  hundred  talent  ? 
of  the  thousand  seven  hundred  seventyand 
two  thousand  and  four  hundred  shekels 
shall  chase  an  hundred,  and  an  hundred 
forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 
fifty  and  nine  thousand  andthrue  hundred 
and  five  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty 
and  fourteen  thousand  and  six  hundred 
fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hundred 
fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  four  hundred 
(were)  forty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
thirty  and  two  thousand  and  two  hundred 
thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundred 
and  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred 
forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 
fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundred 
all  they. .were  six  hundred  thousand  and 
three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty 
and  fourteen  thousand  and  six  hundred 
fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hundred 
fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  four  hundred 
(were)an  hundred  thousand  and  fourscore 
thousand  and  six  thousand  and  four  bun. 
forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 
fifty  and  nine  thousand  and  three  hundred 
and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  fifty 
(were)  an  hundred  thousand  and  fifty  and 
one  thousand  and  four  hundred  and  fifty 
(were)  forty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
thirty  and  two  thousand  and  twohundred 
thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hund. 
All.. of  the  camp.. (were)  an  hundredth. 
eight  thousand  and  an  hundred,  through. 
and  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred 
forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 
fifty  ami  three  thousand  and  fourhundr. 
All  they,  .(were)  an  hundred  thousand  and 
fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  six  hundred 
all  those.. (were)  six  hundred  thousand  and 


HUNDRED 


503 


HUNDRED 


Num.  2.  32  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty 
3,  22  (were)  seveu  thousand  and  five  hundred 
3.  2S  (were)  eight  thousand  and  six  hundred 
3.  34  (were)  six  thous.iud  and  two  hundred 
3.  43  two  hundred  and  threescore  and  thirteen 
3.  46  two  hundred  and  threescore  and  thirteen 

3.  50  a  thousand  three  hundred  and  threescore 

4.  36  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty 

4.  40  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  thirty 
4.  44  were  three  thousand  and  two  hundred 
4.  48  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fourscore 
7;  13  whereof  (was)  an  hundred  and  thirty  (sh.) 
[So  in  verse  19,  25,  31,  37,  43)  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79,  S5.] 
7.  85  two  thousand  and  four  hundred  (shekels) 
7.  85  gold,  .(was)  anhundred  and  twenty  (she.) 
11.  21  people,  .(are)  six  hundred  thousand  foot. 
i'6.    2  two  hundred  and  fifty  princes  of  the 
16.  17  bring  ye.  .two  hundred  and  fifty  censers 
16.  35  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  offered 
ifi.  43  were  fourteen  thousand  and  seven  hund. 

25.  7  thousand  and  seven  hundred  and  thirty 

26.  10  fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 

25.  14  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  two  huud. 

26.  iS  families . .  forty  thousand  and  five  hund. 
26.  22  and  sixteen  thousind  and  fi'e  hundred 
26.  25  aud  four  thousand  and  three  hundred 
26.  27  threescore  thousand  and  five  hundred 
26.  34  fifty  and  two  thousand  and  seven  hund. 
26.  37  thirty  and  two  thousandand  five  hundred 
26.  41  forty  and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred 
26. 43  and  four  thousand  and  four  hundred 

26.  47  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundr. 
26.  50  forty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundred 
26.  51  children  of  Israel,  six  hundred  thousand 

26.  51  and  a  thousand  seven  hundred  and  thirty 
31.  14  captains  over  hundreds,  which  came'from 
31.  28  one  soul  of  five  hundred,  (both)  of  the 
31.  32  hundred  thousand  and  seventy  thousand 
31.  36  three  hundred  thousand  and  seven  and 
31.  36  thirty  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 
31.  37  six  hundred  and  threescore  aud  fifteen 
31.  39  (were)  thirty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
31.  43  hundred  thousand  and  thirty  thousand 
31.  43  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 
31.  45  thirty  thousand  asses  and  five  hundred 
31.  48,  szof  thousandSjand  captains  of  hundreds 
31.  52  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty  shekels 
31.  54  captains  of  thousands  and  of  hundreds 

33.  39  Aaron  (was)  an  hundred  and  twenty  and 
Deut.  1.  15  captains  overhuudreds,  and  captains  over 

22.  19  in  an  hundred  (shekels)  of  silver,  and 
31.    2  I  (am)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  old 

34.  7  Moses  (was)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years 
Josh.  7.  21  two  hundred  shekels  of  sil  er  andawedge 

24.  29  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  years  old 

24.  32  bought,  .for  an  hundred  pieces  of  silver 
Judg.  2.    8  died,  (being)  an  huulred  and  ten  yearsold 

3. 31  winch  slew  of  the  Philistines  six  hundred 
4,    3,  13  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron,  and 
7.    6  them  that  lapped,  .were  three  hundred 
7.    7  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped  will 
7.    8  retained  those  three  hundred  men.   And 
7.  16  divided  the  three  hundred  men  (into)  til. 
7.  19  the  hundred  men  that  (were)  with  Mm 

7.  22  the  three  hundred  blew  the  trumpets,  and 

8.  4  the  three  hundred  men  that  (were)  with 
8.  10  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men 

8.  26  thousand  and  seven  hundred  (shekels)  of 
11.  26  dwelt  in  Heshbon.  .three  hundred  years? 

15.  4  went  and  caught  three  hundredfoxes,  and 

16.  5  give  thee,  .eleven  hundred  (pieces)  of  sil. 

17.  2,  3  The  eleven  hundred  (shekels)  of  silver 

17.  4  mother  took  two  hundred  (shekels)  of  si. 

18.  11  hundred  men  appointed  with  weapons  of 
i8.  16  the  six  hundred  men  appointed  with  their 

18. 17  six  hundred  men  (that  were)  appointed 
20.    2  hundred  thousand  footmen  that  drew  sw. 
20.  10  And  we  will  take  ten  men  of  an  hundred 
20.  10  anhundred  of  a  thousand,  and  a  thousand 
20.  15,  16  seven  hundred  chosen  men] 

20.  i7rfourhuudredthousand  menthatdrew  sw. 
■  20.  35  and  five  thousand  and  an  hundred  men 

20. 47  six  hundred  men  turned  and  fled  to  the 

21.  12  four  hundred  young  virgins,  that  had  kn. 
1  Sa.  11.    8  children  of  Israel  were  three  hundred  th. 

13.  15  present  with  him,  about  six  hundred  men 

14.  2  the  people,  .(were)  about  six  hundred  m. 

15.  4  two  hundred  thousand  footmen,  and  ten 

17.  7  head(weighed)>ixhundred  shekelsofiron 

18.  25  an  hundred  foreskins  of  the  Philistines 
18.  27  slew  of  the  Philistines  two  hundred  men 

22.  2  were  with  him  about  four  hundred  men 

22.  7  captains  of  thousauds,  and.  .of  hundreds 

23.  13  and  his  men.  .(which  were)  about  six  hu. 

25.  13  about  four  hundred  men ;  and  two  hund. 
25.  18  took  two  hundred  loaves,  and  two  bottles 
25.  18  and  an  hundred  clusters  of  raisins,  and 

23. 18  two  hundred  cakes  of  fig3,  and  laid  (them) 

27.  2  the  six  hundred  men  that  (were)  with  him 

29.  2  passed  on  by  hundreds  and  by  thousands 

30.  9  the  six  hundred  men  that  (were)  with  him 
30.  10  heandfourhundredmen  :  for  two  hundred 
30.  17  four  hundred  young  men,  which  rode  upon 
30.  21  David  came  to  the  two  hundred  men,  wh. 

c  Sa.    2.  31  three  hundred  and  threescore  men  died 
3.  14  an  hundred  foreskins  of  the  Philistines 
8.   4  and  seven  hundred  horsemen,  and  twenty 
8.    4  res^ved  of  them  ;for)  an  hundred  chariots 
10.  18  (of)  seven  hundred  chariots  of  the  Syrians 

14.  26  at  two  hundred  shekels  after  the  king's 

15.  11  went  two  hundred  men  out  of  Jerusalem 
15.  18  six  hundred  men  which  came  after  him 


23 

24, 

=4 
Ki  4. 

5' 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
8, 

9' 
9- 


2Ki.  3. 
3' 
4. 


19. 

23. 

.  Ch   4. 

5- 
5- 

5- 
7- 
7- 
7- 

8. 

9' 
9' 
9' 
9' 


>Ch. 


1  upon  them  two  hundred  (loaves)  of  bread 
1  hundred  bunches  of  raisins,  and  an  hun. 
1  and  set  captains.,  of  hundreds  over  them 

4  the  people  came  out  by  hundreds,  aud  by 
16  three  hundred  (shekels)  of  brass  in  weight 

5  (lift  up  his  spear)  against  eight  hundred 

18  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  hundred 
9  eight  hundred  thousand  valiant  men  that 
9  the  men.  .(were)  five  hundred  thousand 

23  hundred  sheep,  beside  harts,  and  roebucks 
16  three  thousand  and  three  hundred,  which 

1  in  the  four  hundred  and  eightieth  year 

2  the  length  thereof  (was)  an  hundred  cubits 
20  the  pomegranates  (were)  two  hundred,  in 

42  four  hundred  pomegranates  for  the  two 
62  and  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sh. 

23  five  hundred  and  fifty,  which  bare  rule 

20  gold,  four  hundred  and  twenty  talents 
10  'Xi  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold 

14  six  hundred  threescore  and  six  talents  of 
16  made  two  hundred  targets  (of)  beaten  gold 

16  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  g  Id  went  to  one 

17  (made)  three  hundred  shields  (of)  beaten 
26  had  a  thousand  and  four  hundred  chariuts 
29  went.. for  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  silver 
29  an  horse  for  an  hundred  and  fifty  :  and  so 

3  he  had  seven  hundred  wives,  princesses 

3  three  hundred  concubines  :  and  his  wives 

21  £  j  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand 

4  jhadiah  took  an  hundred  prophets,  and 
13  hid  an  hundred  men  of  the  Lord's  proph. 

19  prophets  of  Baal  four  hundred  and  fifty 

19  the  prophets  of  the  groves  four  hundred 

22  prophets  (are)  four  hundred  and  fifty  men 

15  they  were  two  hundred  an  1  thirty  two 

29  slew.. an  hundred  thousand  footmen  in 

6  prophets  together,  about  four  hundred 

4  an  hundred  thousand  lambs,  and  an  hun. 
26  took,  .seven  hundred  men  that  drew  sw. 

43  should  I  set  this  before  an  hundred  men? 
4, 19 rulers  over  hundreds,  with  Lhe  captains 
9  captains  over  the  hundreds  did  according 

10  to  the  raptains  over  hundreds  did  the 

15  conmanded  the  captains  of  the  hundreds 

13  br(.Kt  down  the  wall . .  four  hundred  cubits 

14  appointed,  .three  hundred  talents  of  siver 

35  an  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand 

33  tribute  of  an  huudred  talents  of  silver 

42  five  hundred  men,  went  to  mount  Seir 

iS  thousand  seven  hundred  and  threescore 

21  of  sheep  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 

21  they  took  away,  .men  an  hundred  thous. 

2  two  and  twenty  thousand  and  six  hundred 
9  (was)  twenty  thousand  and  two  hundred 

11  thousand  and  two  hundred  (soldiers),  fit 
40  sons,    nd  sons'  sons,  an  hundred  and  fifty 

6  and  their  brethren,  six  hundred  and  ninety 
9  brethren .  .nine  hundred  and  fifty  and  six 

13  thousand  and  seven  hundred  and  threes. 

22  porters,  .(were)  two  hundred  and  twelve 

11  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  hundred 

20  lifting,  .his  spear  against  three  hundred 

14  oneof  theleast(was)overanhundred,  and 

24  (were)  six  thousand  aud  eight  hundred 

25  men.. seven  thousand  and  one  hundred 

26  of  Levi,  four  thousand  and  six  hundred 

27  (were)  three  thousand  and  seven  hundred 

30  twenty  thousand  and  eight  hundred 

32  the  heads  of  them  (were)  two  hundred;  and 
35  twenty  and  eight  thousand  and  six  hund. 
37  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand 
1  the  captains  of  thousands  and  hundreds 

5  and  his  brethren  an  hundred  and  twenty 

6  and  his  brethren  two  hundred  and  twenty 

7  and  his  brethren  an  hundred  and  thirty 

3  the  chief,  and  his  brethren  two  hundred 
10  and  his  brethren  an  hundred  and  twelve 

4  but  reserved  of  them  an  hundred  chariots 

3  an  hundred  times  so  many  more  as  they 

5  an  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew  sword 

5  Judah  (was)  four  hundred  tlireescore  aud 

25  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold  by  weight 

14  an  hundred  thousand  talents  of  gold,  and 

7  was  two  hundred  fourscore  and  eight 

26  the  captains  over  thousands  and  hundreds 
30  a  thousand  and  seven  hundred,  (were) 
32  thousand  and  seven  hundred  chief  fathers 

1  captains  of  thousands  and  hundreds,  and 

1  and  captains  over  the  hundreds,  and  the 

6  the  captains  of  thousands  and  of  hundreds 

7  and  one  hundred  thousand  talents  of  iron 

2  captains  of  thousands  and  of  hundreds 

14  hadathousand  and  four  iiundred  chariots 
t;  chariot  for  six  hundred  (shekels)of  silver 
1 7  an  horse  for  an  hundred  and  fifty :  and  so 

2  thousand  and  six  hundred  to  oversee  them 
17  and  they  were  found  an  hundred  and  fifty 
17  and  three  thousand  and  six  hundred 
iS  six  hundred  overseers  to  set  the  people 

4  and  theheight  (was)  an  hundred  and  twen. 

5  gold,  (anion  *ing)  to  six  hundred  talents 
t6  made  anhundred  pomegranates,  and  put 

8  And  he  made  an  hundred  basins  of  gold 
13  hundred  pomegranates  on  the  two  wreaths 

12  with  them  anhundred  and  twenty  priest3 
5  and  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sh. 

10  two  hundred  and  fifty,  that  bare  rule  over 

1 3  four  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  gold 

9  an  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold 
13  hundred  and  threescore  and  six  talents  of 

15  made  two  hundred  targets  (of)  beaten  gold 
15  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  beaten  gold  went 


2  Ch.  9.  16  hundred  shields  (made  he  of)  beaten  gold 
9.  16  three  hundred  (shekels)  of  gold  wont  to 

11.  1  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  chosen 

12.  3  twelve  hundred  chariots,  and  threescore 

13.  3  (even)four  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 
13.    3  with  eighthundred  thousand  chosen  men 

13.  17  fell,  .five  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 

14.  8  out  of  Judah  three  hundred  thousand  ;  and 
14.    8  two  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand :  alt 

14.  9  with  an  host . .  and  three  hundred  chariots 

15.  11  hundred  oxen  aud  seven  thousand  sheep 
17.  11  seven  thousand  and  seven  hundred  rams 
17.  11  seven  thousand  and  seven  hundred  he  goa. 

17. 14  men  of  valour  three  hundred  thousand 

17.15  with,  .two  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand 

17. 16  two  hundred  thousand  mighty  men  of  va. 

17.17  with  bow  and  shield  two  hundred  thousand 

17.  18  an  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  ready 

18.  5  gathered,  .of  prophets  four  hundred  men 
23.    1  took  the  captains  of  hundreds,  Azariah 
23.    9  delivered  to  the  captains  of  hundreds. 

23. 14  brought  out  the  captains  of  hundreds 
23.  20  he  took  the  captains  of  hundreds,  and  the 

24. 15  an  hundred  and  thirty  years  old  (was  he) 
25 ■   5  captains  over  hundreds,  according  to  the 
25.    5  three  hundred  thousand  choice  (men,  able) 
25.    6  hired  also  an  hundred  thousand  mighty 
25.   6  hired . .  for  an  hundred  talents  of  silver 
25.    9  what  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents 

25.  23  brake  down  the  wall,  .four  hundred  cub.- 

26.  12  men.  .(were)  two  thousand  and  six  hund. 
26. 13  three  hundred  thousand,  and  seven  thou.. 

26.  13  five  hundred,  that  made  war  with  mighty 

27.  s  same  year  an  hundred  talents  of  silver 

28.  6  slew,  .hundred  and  twenty  thousand  in 

28.  S  of  their  brethren  two  hundred  thousand 

29.  32  hundred  rams;  (and)  two  hundred  lambs 
29-  33  six  hundred  oxen  and  three  thousand  sh. 
35,   8  hundred  (small  cattle),  and  three  hundred 

35.  9  (small  cattle),  and  five  hundred  oxen 

36.  3  an  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  a  talent 
Ezra    1.  10  of  a  seconol  (sort)  four  Iiundred  and  ten 

1.  11  (were)  five  thousand  and  four  Iiundred ,  - 

2.  3  two  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 
2.  4  children,  .three  hundred  seventy  rnd  two 
2.  5  of  Arab,  seveu  hundred  seventy  and  five 
2.  6  two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twelve 
2.    7  a  thousand, *wo  hundred  fifty  and  four 

2.    8  of  Zattu,  nine  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.    9  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and  threescore 
2.  10  of  Eani,  six  hundred  forty  and  two 
2.  11  of  Eebai,  six  hundred  twenty  and  three 
2.  12  a  thousand  two  hundred  twenty  and  two 
2.  13  of  Adonikam,  six  hundred  sixty  and  six 
2.  15  of  Adin,  four  hundred  fifty  and  four 
2.  17  of  Bezai,  three  hundred  twenty  and  three 
2. 18  children  of  Jorah,  an  hundred  and  twelve 
2.  19  Hashum,  two  hundred  twenty  and  three 
2.  21  Beth-lehem,an  hundred twentyand  three 
2.  23-»Anathoth,  an  hundred  twenty  and  eight 
2.  25  Beeroth,  seven  hundred . ,  forty  and  three 
-2.  26  and  Gaba,  six  hundred  twenty  and  one 
2.  27  men  of  Michmas,  an  Iiundred  twenty  and 
2.  28  and  Ai,  two  hundred  twenty  and  three 
2.  30  of  Magbish,  an  hundred  fifty  and  six 
2.  31  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
2.  32  of  Harim,  three  hundred  and  twenty 
2.  33  anol  Ono,  seven  hundred  twenty  and  five 
2.  34  of  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.  35  three  thousand  anol  six  hundred  and  thi 
2.  36  Jeshua,  nine  hundred  seventy  and  three 
2.  3S  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty  and  seven 
2.  41  of  Asaph,  an  hundred  twenty  and  eight 
2.  42  (in)  all  an  hundred  thirty  and  nine 
2.  58  (were)  three  hundred  ninety  and  two- 
2.  60  of  Nekoda,  six  hundred  fifty  and  two 
2.  64  thousand  three  hundred  (anol)  threescore 
2.  65  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and  seven 
2.  65  two  hundred  singing  men  and  singing  w. 
2.  66  Their  horses  (were)  seven  hundred  thirty 
2.  66  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  five 
2.  67  Their  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  fi. 
2.  67  asses,  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
"2.  69  They  gave,  .onehundred  priests' garments 
8.    3  with  him.  .of  the  males  an  hundred  and 
8.    4  Elihoenai.  .with  him  two  hundredjnales 
8.    5  Jahaziel,  and  with  him  three  hundred  ma. 
8.    9  with  him  two  hundred  and  eighteen  males 
8.  10  with  him  an  hundred  and  threescore  males 
8.  12  and  with  him  an  hundred  and  ten  males 
8.  20  two  hundred  and  twenty  Nethinims:  all 
8.  26  six  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  silver 
8.  26  and  silver  vessels  an  hundred  talents 
8.  26  (and)  of  gold  an  hundred  talents 
Neh.  5.  17  my  table  an  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  Jews 
7.    S  two  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 
7.   9  Shephatiah,  three  hundred  seventy  and 
7.  10  children  of  Arab,  six  hundred  fifty  and  two- 
7.  11  two  thousand  and  eight  hundred(and)eig. 
7.  is  Elam,  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and 
7.  13  children  of  Zattu,  eight  hundred  forty  and 
7.  14  children  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and  th. 
7.  15  children  of  Binnui,  six  hundred  forty  and 
7.  16  children  of  Bebai,  six  hundred  twenty  and 
7.  17  two  thousand  three  hundred  twenty  and 
7.  18  Adonikam,  six  hundred  threescore  andse. 
7.  20  children  of  Adin,  six  hundred  fifty  and  fi. 
7.  22  of  Hashum,  three  hundred  twenty  and  ei. 
7. 23  of  Bczai,  three  hundred  twenty  and  four 
7.  24  children  of  Hariph,  an  hundred  and  twe. 
7.  26  The  men.  .an  hundred  fourscore  and  eight 
7.  27  Anathoth,  an  hundred  twenty  and  eight 


HUNDRED 


504 


HUEAI 


Neh.    7.  29  Beeroth,  seven  hundred  forty  and  three 
7.  30  of  Raman  and  Gaba,  six  hundred  twenty 
7.  31  of  Michnias,  an  hundred  and  twenty  and 
7.  32  men  of..Ai,  an  hundred  twenty  and  three 
7.  34  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
7.  35  children  of  Harim,  three  hundred  and  tw. 
7.  36  of  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty  and  five 
7.  37  and  Ono,  seven  hundred  twenty  and  one 
7.  38  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty 
7-  39  priests,  .nine  hundred  seventy  and  three 
7.  41  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty  and  seven 
7.  44  The  singers,  -an  hundred  forty  and  eight 
7.  45  The  porters . .  an  hundred  thirty  and  eight 
7.  60  All.. (were)  three  hundred  ninety  and  two 
7.  62  The  children,  .six  hundred  foity  and  two 
7.  66  forty  and  two  thousand  three  hundred  and 
7.  67  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and 
7.  67  two  hundred  forty  and  five  singing  men 
7.  68  Their  horses,  seven  hundred  thirty  and  six 
7.  68  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  five 
7.  69  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  five 
7.  69  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty 
7.  70  five  hundred  and  thirty  priests'  garments 

7.  71  two  thousand  and  two  hundred  pound  of 
11.  6  four  hundred  threescore  and  eight  valiant 
11.  8  afterhim. .  nine  hundred.twenty  and  eight 
11.  12  (were)  eight  hundred  twenty  and  two 

11.  13  his  brethren,  .two  hundred  forty  and  two 
11.  14  their  brethren,  .an  hundred  twenty  and 
11.  18  Levites.  .two  hundred  fourscore  and  four 

11.  19  porters,  .(were)  an  hundred  seventy  and 
Esth.  1.    1  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  provi, 

t.    4  many  days,  .an  hundred  and  fourscore 

8.  9  an  hundred  twenty  and  seven  provinces 

9.  6  Jews  slew  and  destroyed  five  hundred 
9.  12  The  Jews  have  slain,  .five  hundred  men 
9.  15  and  slew  three  hundred  men  at  Shushan 
6.  30  the  hundred  twenty  and  seven  provinces 

Job      1.    3  five  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  and  five  hun. 
42.  16  After  this  lived  Job  an  hundred  and  forty 

Prov  17.  10  more,  .than  a  hundred  stripes  into  a  fool 

EccL  6.    3  If  a  man  beget  an  hundred(children),and 
c'.  i2  though  a  sinner  do  evil  an  hundred  times 

Song  8.  12  those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two  hun. 

Isa.  37.  36  a  hundred  and  fourscore  aud  five  thous. 
65.  20  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old 
65.  20  the  sinner,  .an  hundred  years  old,  shall 

Jer.  52.  23  pomegranates. , an  hundred  round  about 
52.  29  eight  hundred  thirty  and  two  persons 
52.  30  seven  hundred  forty  and  five  persons 
52.  30  all.  .(were)  four  thousand  and  six  hundred 

Eze.     4.  5,  9  three  hundred  and  ninety  days 

40.  19  hundred  cubits  eastward  and  northward 
40.  23,  27  from  gate  to  gate.. an  hundred  cubits 

40.  47  an  hundred  cubits  long,  and  an  hundred 

41.  13  an  hundred  cubits  long.,  an  hundred  cub. 
41.  14  Also  the  breadth,  .an  hundred  cubits 

41.  15  an  hundred  cubits,  with  the  inner  temple 

42.  2  Before  the  length  of  an  hundred  cubits 
42.    8  before  the  temple(were)an  hundred  cubits 
42.  16,  17,  18,  19  He  measured,  .five  hundred 
42.  20  five  hundred,  .long,  and  five  hundred  br. 
45.    2  five  hundred,  .with  five  hundred,  .square 
45.  15  one  lamb  out  of  the  flock,  out  of  two  hu. 
48.  16,  16,  16,  16  four  thousand  and  five  hund. 
48.  so,  32,  33,  34  four  thousand  and  five  hundred 
48.  17,  17,  17,  17  and  toward.. two  hundred  and 

Dan.  8.  14  Unto  two  thousand  and  three  hundred  d. 

12.  11  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days 

12.  12  three  hundred  and  five  and  thirty  days 
Amos  5.   3  (by)  a  thousand  shall  leave  an  hundred 

5.  3  went  forth  (by)  an  hundred  shall  leave 

3.  Hundred,  nxip  meah. 

Ezra    6.  17  And  offered. .an  hundred  bullocks 

6.  17  two  hundred  rams,  four  hundred  lambs 

7.  22  Unto  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  to 
7.  22  an  hundred  measures  of  wheat,  aud  to  an 
7.  22  hundred  hatha  of  wine,  and  to  an  hundred 

Dan.    6.    1  an  hundred  and  twenty  princes,  which 

A. Hundred,  etcarSv  hekaton. 

Matt  18.  12  If  a  man  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  one 

18.  28  servants,  which  owed  him  an  hundred 

Mark  4.    8  thirty,  and  some  sixty,  and  some  an  hund. 

4.  20  thirty  fold,  some  sixty,  and  some .  .hund. 

Luket5.    4  What  man  of  you,  having  an  hundred  sh. 

16.    6  And  lie  said,  An  hundred  measures  of  oil 

16.    7  And  he  said,  An  hundred  measures  of 

John  19.  39  and  aloes,  about  an  hundred  pound  (we.) 

21.  11  fishes,  an  hundred  and  fifty  and  three 
Acts    1.  15  together  were  about  an  hundred  and  tw. 
Hev.    7.    4  an  hundred  (and)  forty  (and)  four  thous. 
14.    1  an  hundred  -orty  (and)  four  thousand 
14.    3  the  hundred  (and)  forty  (and)  four  thou, 
ax.  17  an  hundred  (and)  forty  (and)  four  cubits 
HUNDRED,  five  — 
Five  hundred,  irevTatc6(rtot  pentafoosioi. 

Luke  7.41  oneowedflvehundred  pence,  and  the  other 
1  C0.15.    6  he  was  seen  of  above  five  hundred  bretli, 

HUNDRED,  four  — 

Four  hundred,  rerpaicuo-ioi  tdrahosim. 

Acts.   5.  36  men,  about  four  hundred,  joined  themse. 
7.   6  and  entreat  (them)  evil  four  hundred  ye. 

13.  20  judges  about  the  space  of  four  hundred 
Gal.     3.  17  law,  which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty 

[See  Six,  three,  two.] 
HUNDRED  thousand  thousand  — 
Myriads  of  myriads,  /j,vpid$es  fivpi&Hws. 

Rev.    9. 16  (were)  two  hundred  thousand  thousand 


HUNDRED  years  old  — 

Hundred  years  of  age,  kKarovTair-r)s  hekatontaetes. 
Rom.  4.  19  when  he  was  about  an  hundred  years  old 
HUNDRED  TOLD  — 

1. Hundred  steps,  times,  D'pj;?  nxp  meah  pheatnim. 
2  Sa.24.    3  how  many  soever  they  be,  an  hundred  fold 

2.  Hundred  measures,  n*~!J$  nisip  meah  shearim. 
Gen.  26.  1 2  received  in  the  same  year  an  hundred  fold 

Z. Hundred  fold, hKaTovro,TrXa(riwv  hecatontaplasion. 
Matt  19.  29  shall  receive  an  hundred  fold,  and  shall 
Markio.  30  he  shall  receive  an  hundred  fold  now  in 
Luke  8.    8  sprang  up,  and  bare  fruit  an  hundredfold 

•i. Hundred,  ckcltou  hekaton. 

Matt  13.    8,  23  some  an  hundredfold,  some  sixty  fold 
HUNDREDTH  — 
Hundred,  nxp  meah. 

Gen.    7.  11  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life 

8.  13  in  the  six  hundredth  and  first  year,  in  the 
Neh.    5.  11  the  hundredth  (part)  of  the  money,  and 

HUNDREDS,  by  — 

By  hundreds,  a  hundred  each,  avd  Ikcst-oV  ana  hek. 
Mark  6.  40  sat  down  in  ranks,  [by  hundreds],  .fifties 

HUNGER  — 

1. Hunger,  famine,  nyi  raab. 

Exod.x6.  3  to  kill  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger 
Deut.2S.  4S  in  hunger, and  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness 
32.  24  burnt  with  hunger,  and  devoured  with  bur. 
Neh.  9.  15  bread  from  heaven  for  their  hunger,  and 
Jer.  38.  9  he  is  like  to  die  for  hunger  in  the  place 
Lam.  2.  19  thy  young  children,  that  faint  for  hunger 
4.  9  are  better  than  (they  that  be)slain  with  h. 
Eze.  34.  29  they  shall  be  no  more  consumed  with  hu. 

^.Hunger,  famine,  Aliaos  limos. 

Lukeis.  17  have  bread  enough,  .and  I  perish  with  h. 
2  Co.  ix.  27  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  c. 
Rev.    6.    8  to  kill  with  sword,  and  with  hunger,  and 

HUNGER,  to  (have  or  suffer)  — 

1.  To  hunger,  be  hungry,  3yn  raeb. 

Psa.  34.  10  The  young  lions  do  lack,  and  suffer  hunger 
Prov  19.  15  sleep ;  and  an  idle  soul  shall  suffer  hunger 
Isa.  49.  10  They  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst ;  neither 
Jer.  42.  14  nor  have  hunger  of  bread;  and  there  will 

2.  To  hunger,  ireivd    peinao. 

Matt.  5.    6  Blessed  (are)  they  which  do  hunger  and 

21.  18  as  he  returned  into  the  city,  he  hungered 
Luke  4.    2  when  they  were  ended,  he  afterwards  hu. 

6.  21  Blessed,  .that  hunger  now  :  for  ye  shall 
6.  25  Woe  unto  you  that  are  full !  for  ye  shall  hu. 
John  6.  35  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger 
Rom. 12.  20  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him ;  if  he 
1  Co.  4.  11  we  both  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  are  naked 

11.  34  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him  eat  at  home 
Rev.  7.  16  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst 

HUNGER,  to  suffer  to  — 

To  cause  or  suffer  to  be  hungry,  D""i  raeb,  5. 

Deut.  8.   3  suffered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed  thee  with 

HUNGER  BITTEN  — 
Hungry,  famished,  nyn  raeb. 

Job    x8. 12  His  strength  shall  be  hunger  bitten,  and 
HUNGERED,  to  be  an  — 
To  hunger,  weivaco  peinao. 

Matt.  4.  2  he  had  fasted .  .he  was  afterward  an  hung. 
z2.    1  his  disciples  were  an  hungered,  and  began 

12.  3  what  David  did,  when  he  was  an  hungered 
25.  35  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat 
25.  37  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered,  and 
25.  42  I  was  an  hungered,  andyegave  .e  no  meat 
25.  44  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered,  or  athirst 

Mark  2.  25  when  he  had  need,  and  was  an  hungered 
Luke  6.    3  what  David  did,  when  himself  was  an  hu. 

HUNGRY  — 

1. Hungry,  famished,  nyi  raeb. 

1  Sa.  2.    5  hungry  ceased  :  so  that  the  barren  hath 

2  Sa.  17.  29  The  people  (is)  hungry,  aud  weary,  and 

2  Ki.  7.  12  They  know  that  we  (be)  hungry ;  therefore 
Job     5.   5  Whose  harvest  the  hungry  eateth  up,  and 

22.  7  thou  hast  withholden  bread  from  the  h. 
24.  10  they  take  away  the  sheaf  (from)  the  hun. 

Psa  107.  5  Hungry  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in' 
107.  9  and  filleth  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness 
107.  36  there  he  maketh  the  hungry  to  dwell,  that 
146.    7  which  giveth  food  to  the  hungry.    The  L. 

Prov. 25.  21.  If  thine  enemy  be  hungry,  give  him  bread 
27.    7  to  the  hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing  is 

Isa.     8.  21  pass  through  it  hardly  bestead  and  hun. 

9.  20  snatch  on  the  right  hand,  and  be  hungry 
29.  8  It  shall  even  be  as  when  an  hungry  (man) 
32.  6  to  make  empty  the  soul  of  the  hungry 
44. 12  yea,  he  is  hungry,  and  his  strength  faileth 
58.  7  (Is  it)  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry 
58.  10  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry,  and 

Eze.  18.    7,  16  hathgiven  his  bread  to  the  hungry,  and 

2. To  hunger,  ireivd'jo  peinao. 

Luke  1^  53  He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  good  things 

HUNGRY,  to  be  — 

l.To  hunger,  be  hungry,  famished,  3«"i  raeb. 
Psa.  50.  12  If  I  were  hungry,  I  would  not  tell  thee 
Prov.  6.  30  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  hungry 
Isa.     8.  21  when  they  shall  be  hungry,  they  shall  fret 
65- 13  i»y  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be  hun. 


2.  To  hunger,  ireivdoj  peinao.    * 

Markn.  12  when  they  were  come  from  B.,  he  was  h. 
1  Co.  11.  21  and  one  is  hungry,  and  another  is  drunken 
Phil.   4.  12  both  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to 

HUNGRY,  very  — 

Very  hungry,  Trp6o"K$ivo$  prosp>einos. 

Acts  10.  iobecameveryhungry,andwouldhaveeaten 

HUNT,  to  — 

1.  To  hunt,  lie  in  wait,  iriy  tsadah. 

1  Sa.  24.  11  not  sinned,  .yet  thou  huntest  my  soul  to 

2.  To  hunt,  lie  in  wait,  l?s  tsud. 

Gen.  27.    5  Esau  wentto  the  field  to  hunt  (for)  venison 
Lev.  17.  13  hunteth  and  catcheth  any  beast  or  fowl 
Job   10.  16  Thouhuntestmeas  afiercelion ;  and  again 

3S.  39  Wilt  thou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  lion,  or 
Psa.  140.  11  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  tooverth. 
Prov.  6.  26  the  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the  precious 
Jer.  16.  16  they  shall  hunt  them  from  every  mountain 
Lam.  4.  18  They  hunt  our  steps,  that  we  cannot  go  iu 
Mic.    7.    2  they  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a 

Z.To  hunt,  TW  tsud,  3«. 

Eze.  13.  18  make  kerchiefs  upon  the  head,  .to  hunt 
13.  18  Will  ye  hunt  the  souls  of  my  people,  and 
13.  20  wherewith  ye  there  hunt  the  souls  to  make 
13.  20  the  souls  that  ye  hunt  to  make  (them)  fly 

4.  To  pursue,  fp")  radaph. 

1  Sa.  26.  20  when  one  doth  hunt  a  partridge  in  the  m. 
HUNTED,  to  be  — 
A  hunting,  object  for  hunting,  n^isp  metsudah. 

Eze.  13.  21  shall  be  no  more  in  your  hand  to  be  hunt. 
HUNTER  — 
1. Hunter,  1;S  tsayyad. 

Jer.   16.  16  after  will  I  send  for  many  hunters,  and 

^.Hunting,  T5>  tsayid. 

Gen,  10.  9  He  was  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord 
10.  9  Nimrod  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  L. 
25.  27  Esau  was  a  cunning  hunter,  a  man  of  the 

HUNTING,  (to  take  in)  — 

Hunting,  Tx  tsayid. 

Gen.  27.  30  Esau  his  brother  came  in  from  his  hunting 
Prov  12.  27  roasteth  not  that  which  he  tookinhunthig 

HU'-PHAM,  D?in  protected. 

A  son  of  Benjamin,  founder  of  the  family  of  the  Hu- 
phamites.  B.C.  1670.  In  Gen.  46.  21,  and  1  Ch.  7.  12,  the 
name  is  given  Huppim. 

Num26.  39  of  H.,  the  family  of  the  Huphamites 
HU-PHA-BIITES,  'Dfl^n. 

The  patronymic  of  a  familj  that  sprang  from  the  pre- 
ceding. 

Nuni26.  39  of  Hupham,  the  family  of  the  H. 
HUP'-PAH,  nsn  protection. 

A  priest  in  the  time  of  David  who  had  charge  of  the 
13th  of  the  24  courses  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary. 

B.C.    1015. 

1  Ch.24.  13  The  thirteenth  to  H.,  the  fourteenth  to 
HUP'-PIM,  D*sn  protection. 

Head  of  a  Benjamite  family;  he  was  either  a  son  of 

Bela  or  of  Ir  or  Iri,  one  of  Bela's  five  sons.     B.C.  1670. 

Gen.  46.  21  Ehi,  and  Rosh,  Muppim,  and  H.,  and  Ard 

1  Ch.   7.  12  Shuppim  also,  and  H.,  the  children  of  Ir 

7. 15  Machir  took  to  wife  (the  sister)  of  H.  and 

HUR,  -nnfree,  noble. 

1.  A  man  who  with  Aaron  stayed  up  the  hands  of  Moses 
at  Rephidim  during  the  battle  with  Amalek.  The 
Jewish  tradition  is  that  he  was  the  husband  of  Miriam 
and  the  grandfather  of  Bezaleel.     B.C.  1491. 

Exodi7.  10  Moses,  Aaron,  and  H.,  went  up  to  the  top 
17.  12  Aaron  and  H.  stayed  up  his  bands,  the 
24. 14  Aaron  and  H.  (are)  with  you;  if  any  man 
•2.  A  son  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hezrou. 

Exod3i.  2  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  H.,  of 
35.  30  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  H.,  of 
38.  22  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  H.,  of 

1  Ch.  2.  19  Caleb  took.  .Ephrath,  which  bare  him  H. 

2.  20  And  H.  begat  Uri,  and  Uri  begat  Bezaleel 

2  Ch.  1.    5  that  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  H. 

3.  The  fourth  of  the  five  kings  of  Midian  that  were  slain 
with  Balaam.     B.C.  1452. 

Nuni3i.  8  Evi,  and  Rekem,  and  Zur,  and  H.,  and  R. 
Josh. 13.  21  Evi,  and  Rekem,  and  Zur,  and  H.,andR. 

4.  A  commissariat  officer  of  Solomon  in  Mount  Ephraim. 
B.C.  1014. 

1  Ki.   4.    8  these . .  their  names :  The  son  of  H. ,  in 

5.  The  father  of  Caleb  and  eldest  son  of  Ephratah.  B.C. 
1490. 

1  Ch.  2.  50  These  were  the  sonsof  Caleb  theson  of  H. 
4.    4  These,  .the  sons  of  H. .  .the  father  of  Bet. 

6.  A  son  of  Judah';  but  really  a  member  of  a  different 
generation.    B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.  4.    1  sons  of  Judah . .  Carmi,  and  H.,  and  Sho. 

7.  The  ruler  of  half  of  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Nehe- 
miah.     B.C.  460. 

Neh.  3.   9  next.. repaired  Rephaiah  the  son  of  H. 

HU'-RAI,  "Jin  free,  noble. 

One  of  David's  guard  from  the  torrents  of  Gaash.  B.C. 
1048.  In  2  Sa.  23.  30  the  r  is  changed  to  rf.,  and  the 
name  given  there  is  Iluklai. 

1  Ch,n.  32  H.  of  the  brooks  of  Gaash,  Abiel  the  Arb. 


HURAM 


505 


HUSHAH 


HU'-RAH,  crtm  noble,  free. 

1.  Son  of  Bela  son  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1670. 

1  Ch.  8.    5  And  Gera,  and  Shephuphan,  and  H. 

2.  The  king  of  Tyre,  who  is  called  Hiram  in  28a.  5.  u. 
B.C.  1015. 

2  Ch.  2.    3  Solomon  senttoH.  thekingof  Tyre,  saying 

2. 12  H.  said  moreover,  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord 

3.  The  Tyrian  artificer  employed  by  Solomon. 

2  Ch.  4. 11  H.  made  the  pots..  H.finished  the  work  that 
4. 16  all  their  instruments,  didH.  his  father  m. 

BTU'-RI,  '"Jin  linen  weaver. 

The  father  of  Abihail  a  chief  man  in  the  time  of  Gad. 

B.C.    1240. 

1  Ch.  5.  i4These..  the  children  of  Abihail  the  son  of  H. 
HURL,  to  — 
To  cast  {away,  down,  off,  out),  f\hy  shalak,  5. 

Num. 35.  20  hurl  at  him  by  laying  of  wait,  that  he  die 
HURL  as  a  storm,  to  — 
To  frightm,  ~\U%r  sear,  3, 

Job  27.  21  and  as  a  storm  huiieth  him  out  of  his  place 
HURT  — 
l.A  thing,  133  dabar. 

1  Sa.  20.  21  peace  to  thee,  and  no  hurt,  (as)  the  LORD 

2.  Injury,  rntt  chabulah. 

Dan.   6.  22  also  before  thee,  O  king,  have  I  done  uo  h. 

3.  Bruise,  nnizn,  n*j)3n  chabburah,  chaburah. 

Gen.   4.  23  for  I  have  slain . .  a  young  man  to  my  hurt 
A.  Hurt,  "?3n  chabal. 

Dan.    3.  25  walking  in.  .the  fire,  and  they  have  no  h 

5.  Hurt,  b^U  chabal. 

Dan.    6.  23  no  manner  of  hurt  was  found  upon  him 

6.  To  cause  loss,  pn  nezaq,  5. 

Ezra    4.  22  why  should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of 

7.  Evil,  jn  ra. 

Gen.  26.  29  That  thou  wilt  do  113  no  hurt,  as  we  have 
31 .  29  It  is  in . .  my  hand  to  do  you  hurt :  but  the 

1  Sa.  24.    9  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt? 

2  Sa.  iS.  32  all  that  rise  against  thee  to  do  (thee)  hurt 
aKl  14. 10  why  shouldest  thou  meddle  to  (thy)  hurt 
2  Ch.25.  19  why  shouldest  thou  meddle  to  (thine)  hu. 
Esth.  9.  2  to  lay  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt 
Psa.  35.    4  brought  to  confusion  that  devise  my  hurt 

35.  26  confusion  together  that  rejoice  at  mine  h. 
38.  12  they  that  seek  my  hurt  speak  mischievous 
41.    7  hate  me . .  against  me  do  they  devise  my  h. 

70.  2  and  put  to  confusion,  that  desire  my  hurt 

71.  13  Let  them  be  confounded,  .that  seek  my  h. 
71.  24  are  brought  unto  shame,  that  seek  my  h. 

EccL  5.  13  kept  for  the  owners  thereof  to  their  hurt 

8.    9  oneman  rulethoverauother  to  his  own  h. 

Jer.     7.    6  neither  walk  after  othergods  toyourhurt 

24.  9  I  will  deliver  them . .  for  (their)  hurt,  (to) 

25.  7  provoke  me  to  anger,  .to  your  own  hurt 
38.   4  man  seekethnot  the  welfare . .  but  the  hurt 

8.  To  do  or  suffer  evil,  yjfj  raa,  5. 

Psa.  15.   4  sweareth  to  (his  own)  hurt,  andchangeth 
9. Fracture,  breaking,  breach,  TOP,  ~qf  slieber. 

Jer.     6.  14  They  have  healed  also  the  hurt,  .of  myp. 
8.  11  they  have  healed  the  hurt  of  the  daughter 

8.  21  For  the  hurt . .  of  my  people  am  I  hurt ;  I 

10.  19  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt !  my  wound  is  griev. 
10. Reproach,  injury,  vfipts  hubris. 

Acts  27.  10  this  voyage  will  be  with  hurt  and  much 
HURT,  to  (do)  — 

1.  To  destroy,  injure,  bin  chabal,  3. 

Dan.    6.  22  that  they  have  not  hurt  me:  forasmuch  as 

2.  To  cause  to  blush,  put  to  shame,  dSs  kalam,  5, 

1  Sa.  25.  7  now  thy  shepherds,  .we  hurt  them  not 

3.  To  smite,  plague,  *j3  j  nagaph. 

Exod2i.  22  If  men  strive,  and  hurt  a  woman  with  c. 
21.  35  if  one  man's  ox  hurt  another's,  that  he  die 

4.  To  afflict,  n|y  anah,  3- 

Psa.io5.  iS  Whose  feet  they  hurt  with  fetters:  he  was 

5.  To  inspect,  ips  paqad. 

Isa.  27.   3  lest  (any)  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and 
G.  To  do  or  suffer  evil,  treat  ill,  afflict,  VTl  raa,  5. 
Gen.  31.    7  your  father..  God  suffered  him  not  to  hurt 
Nunn6.  15  not  taken.,  neither  havelhurtone  of  them 
Josh  24,  20  he  will  turn  and  do  you  hurt,  and  consume 
Isa.   11.    9  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  allniy 
65.  25  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my 
Jer.  25.    6  provoke  me  not . .  and  I  will  do  you  uo  hurt 

7.  To  do  wrong,  injustice,  afiticeta  adikeo. 

Lukeio.  19  and  nothing  shall  by  any  means  hurt  you 

Rev.    2.  n  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of 

6."  6  and  (see)  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the 

7.    2  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and 

7.    3  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor 

9.  4  they  should  not  hurt  the  grass  oftheearth 
9.  10  their  power  (was)  to  hurt  men  five  months 
9.  19  and  had  heads,  .with  them  they  do  hurt 

11.  5,  5  And  if  any  man  will  hurt  them 
S.To  disable,  weaken,  hurt,  tfAcnrru  blapto. 

Marki6.  18  [if  they  drink,  it  shall  not  hurt  them] 
Luke  4.  35  he  came  out  of  him,  and  hurt  him  not 

9.  To  do  evil,  use  badly,  k<xk6w  kakou. 

Acts  i3  10  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee 
(54 


HURT,  to  be  — 

I. To  be  caused  to  blush,  put  to  shame,  nhs  kalam,  6. 
1  Sa.  25.  15  we  were  not  hurt,  neither  missed  we  any 

2.  To  be  grieved,  nzy  atsab,  2. 

Eccl.  10. 9  Whoso  removeth  stones  shall  he  hurt  there. 

S.To  be  broken,  destroyed,  hurt,  "ny  shabar,  2. 
Exod22.  10  If .  .it  die,  or  be  hurt,  or  driven  away,  no 
22.  14  if  a  man  borrow,  .and  it  be  hurt,  or  die 

4.  To  be  broken,  hurt,  "xy$  shabar,  6. 

Jer.      8.  21  For.  .the  daughter  of  my  people  am  I  h. 
HURTFUL  — 
l.To  cause  loss,  pn  nezaq,  5. 

Ezra   4.  15  hurtful  unto  kings  and  provinces,  and  that 
2.Evil,  in  ra. 

Psa.  144.  10  delivereth . .  his  servant  from  the  hurtful  s. 
3. Disabling,  weakening,  hurtful,  fika&tpos  blab. 

1  Ti.    6.    9  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  dr 
HURTING  — 
To  do  or  suffer  evil,  treat  ill,  afflict,  yjT3  Taa,  5. 

1  Sa.  25.  34  which  hath  keptmebackfromhurtingthee 
HUSBAND  — 
l.A  man,  bj'N  ish. 

Gen.   3.    6  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her 

3.  16  thy  desire  (shall  be)  to  thy  husband,  and  he 
16.  3  gave  her  to  her  husband  Abrani  to  be  Ms 
29.  32  now  therefore  my  husband  will  love  me 

29.  34  Now  this  time  will  my  husband  be  joined 

30.  15  small  matter  that  thou  h^sttakeumyhus.? 
30.  18  because  I  have  given  my  maiden  to  my  hu. 
30.  20  now  will  my  husband  dwell  with  me,  beca. 

Lev.  19.  20  a  bondmaid,  betrothed  to  an  husband 
2i.    3  for  hissister.  .which  hath  hadno  husband 
2i.    7  take  a  woman  put  away  from  her  husband 
Xum.  5.  13  and  it  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  her  husband 
5.  19,  20,  29  goneaside(toauother)insteadof 
5.  20  some  man.  .with  thee  besides  thine  husb. 
5.  27  and  have  done  trespass  against  her  husb. 
30.    6  if  she  had  at  all  an  h.-sband  when  she 
30.    7,  1 1  her  husband  heard  (it),  and  held  his  p. 
30.   8  if  her  husband  disallowed  her  on  the  day 
30.  10  if  she  vowed  in  her  husband's  house,  or 
30.  12  if  her  husband  hath  utterly  made  them 
30.  12  her  husband  hath  made  them  void  ;  and 

30.  13  her  husband  may  establish  it,  or  her  hu. 
30. 14  if  her  husband  altogether  hold  his  peace 

Deut22.  23  If  a  damsel,  .be  betrothed  unto  an  husb. 
24.    3  And  (if  j  the  latter  husband  hate  her,  and 

24.  3  or  if  the  latter  husband  die,  which  took 

25.  11  draweth  near  for  to  deliver  her  husband 
28.  56  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  the  husband 

Judgi3-    6  the  woman  came  and  told  her  husband 

13.  9  Manoah  her  husband  (was)  not  with  her 

13. 10  the  woman,  .ran,  and  showed  her  husband 

14.  15  Entice  thy  husband,  that  he  may  declare 

19.  3  her  husband  arose,  and  went  after  her,  to 

20.  4  the  Luisband  of  the  woman  that  was  slain 
Ruth  1.    3  Naomi's  husband  diet' ;  and  she  was  left 

1.    5  was  left  of  her  two  s~ns  and  her  husband 
1.    9  each  (of  yon)  in  the   .ouse  of  her  husband 
1.  12  for  I  am  too  old  to  have  an  husband 
1. 12  (if)  I  should  have  an  husband  also  to  night 

1.  13  would  ye  stay  for  them  from  having  hu.? 

2.  1  And  Naomi  had  a  kinsman  of  her  husba. 
e.  11  hast  done,  .since  the  death  of  thine  hus. 

1  Sa.    t.    8  Then  said  Elkanah  her  husband  to  her,  H. 

1.  22  wentnotup;  forshe  said  unto  her  husband 

1.  23  Elkanah  her  husband  said  unto  her,  Do 

2.  19  when  she  came  up  with  her  husband  to 

4.  19.  21  that  her  fathcrin  law  andherhusbaud 
25. 19  But  she  told  no!  her  husband  Nabal 

2  Sa.    3.  16  her  husband  went  with  her  along  weeping 

11.  26  heard  that  Uriah  her  husband  was  dead 
14.    5  widow  Toman,  and  mine  husband  is  dead 
14.    7  shall  not  leave  to  my  husband,  .name  nor 
2  Ki.  4.    1  Thy  servant  my  husband  is  dead ;  and 

4.    9  she  said  unto  her  husband,  Behold  now,  I 

4.  14  she  hr      n    child,  and  her  '  usbund  is  old 

4.  22  she  culled  l   to  her  husband,  and  :aid,  S. 

4.  26  (is  it)  well  wi'h  thy  husband,  (is  *  >     .11 

Jer.     6.  11  the  h  sband  with  the  wife  :hall  be  taken 

Eze.  16. 32  tak:th  strangers  instead  of  h  r  husband  ! 

16.  45  that  loatheth  her  husband  and  her  child. 

44.  25  for  sister  that  hath  h  d  no  husband,  they 

Hos.    2.    2  she  (is)  not  my  wife,  acither  (am)  I  her  h. 

2.    7  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband 

2.  A  man,  Bfatc  enosh. 

Ruth  1.  n  sons,  .that  they  may  be  your  husbands? 
Jer.   29.   6  give  your  daughters  to  husbands,  that  they 
Eze.  16.  45  loathed  their  husbands  and  their  children 

3. Lord,  master,  owner,  possessor,  h%2  baal. 

Exod2i.  22  as  the  woman's  husband  will  lay  upon  him 
Deut22.  22  lying  with  a  woman  married  to  an  husb. 
24.  4  Her  former  husband,  which  sent  her  away 
2  Sa.  11.  26  was  dead,  she  mourned  for  her  husband 
Esth.  1.  17  they  shall  despise  their  husbands  in  their 
1.  20  all  the  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands  h. 
Prov  12.    4  A  virtuous  woman  (is)  a  crown  to  her  h. 

31. 11  The  heart  of  her  husband  doth  safely  trust 

31.  23  Her  husband  is  known  in  the  gates,  when 
31.  28  her  husband  (also),  and  he  praiseth  her 

Joel    1.    8  Lament  like  a  virgin,  .for  the  husband  of 

4.  Son-in-law,  bridegroom,  husband,  jnn  chathan. 
Exod.  4.  25  Surely  a  bloody  husband  (art)  thou  to  me 
4.  26  she  said,  A  bloody  husband,  .because  of 


5. Friend,  SH  Tea. 

Jer.     3.  20  a  wife  treacherously  departeth  from  her  h. 
6. A  man,  a.vi\p  aner. 

Matt.  1.  16  Jacob  begat  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary 

1.  19  Joseph  her  husband,  being  a  just  (man) 
Mark  10.  12  if  a  woman  shall  put  away  her  husband 
Luke  2.  36  had  lived  with  an  husband  seven  years 

16.  18  her  that  is  put  away  from  (her)  [husband] 
John  4.  16  saith . .  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  come  h. 

4.  17  I  have  no  husband .  .well  said,  Ihavenoh. 
4. 18  hast,  .five  husbands,  .is  not  thy  husband 

Acts    5.   9  feet  of  them  which  have  buried  thy  hus. 

5.  10  the  young  men.  .buried  (her)  by  her  hus. 
Rom.  7.    2  is  bound  by  the  law  to  (her)  husband  so 

7.  2  husband  be  dead,  .the  law  of  (her)  husb. 
7.    3  while(her)husbandliveth..ifherhusband 

1  Co.  7.    2  let  every  woman  have  her  own  husband 

7.  3  Let  the  husband,  .the  wife  unto  the  hus. 
7.  4  but  the  husband,  .the  husband  hath  not 
7.  10  Let  not  the  wife  depart  from  (her)  husband 
7.  11  to  (her)  husband  :  and  let  not  the  husband 
7.  13  the  woman  which  hath  an  husband  that  b. 
7.  14  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by 
7. 14  and  the.,  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  [husband] 
7.  16  O  wife,  whether  thou  shalt  save  (thy)  h.? 
7.  34  careth..  how  she  may  please  (her)  husband 
7.  39  as  her  husband  liveth;  but  if  her  husband 
14.  35  let  them  ask  then-  husbands  at  home :  for 

2  Co.  1 1.  2  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that 
Gal.  4.  27  more  children  than  she  which  hath  an  h. 
Eph.   5.  22  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own  husba. 

5.  23  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  even 
5  24  so  (let)  the  wives  (be)  to  their  own  husb. 
5.  25  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ 
5.  33  the  wife  (see)  that  she  reverence  (her)  h. 

Col.  3.  18  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own  husba. 
3.  19  Husbands,  love  (your)  wives,  and  be  not 

1  Ti.  3.  2  the  husband  of  one  wife,  vigilant,  sober,  of 
3.  12  Let  the  deacons  be  the  husbands  of  one 

Titus  1.    6  If  any  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one 

2.  5  obedient  to  their  own  husbands,  that  the 

1  Pe.  3.    1  in  subjection  to  your  own  husbands;  that. 

3.  5  being  in  subjection  unto  t1  _;r  own  husb. 
3.    7  Likewise,  ye  hjjzTsssSeAa;  dwell  with  (them) 

Rev.  21.    2  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  hus. 

HUSBAND,  to  be  or  have  an  — 

1 . To  rule,  possess,  have,  marry,  S^3  baal. 

Deut  21.  13  shalt  go  in  unto  her,  and  be  her  husband 
Jer.  31.  32  although  I  was  an  husband  unto  them 
Isa.  54.    5  For  thy  Maker  (is)  thine  husband;  The  L. 

2.  One  under  a  man,  viravdpos  hiqmndros. 

Rom  7.    2  For  the  woman  which  hath  an  husband  is 

HUSBAND,  loving  one's  — 

Lover  of  a  husband,  (pikavh'pos  philandros. 

Titus  2.   4  to  love  their  husbands,  to  love  their  ch 

HUSBANDMAN-  - 

1. Husbandman,  ploughvian,  *i2X  ikkar. 

2  Ch.26.  10  husbandmen.,  and  vine  dressers  in  the 
Jer.  31.  24  there  shall  dwell  in  judah.  .husbandmen 

51.  23  the  husbandman  and  his  yoke  of  oxen 
Joel    1.  11  Be  ye  ashamed,  0  ye  husbandmen;  howl 
Amos  5.  16  they  shall  call  the  husbandmen  to  niour. 

2.To  be  an  husbandman,  313,  nr  yagab,  guh. 

2  Ki.  25. 12  left,  .(tobe)vinedressersand husbandmen 
Z.A  man  of  the  ground  or  soil,  npTjj  c;,n  ish  adam. 

Gen.    9.  20  Noah  began  (to  be)  an  husbandman,  and 
4.  To  serve,  till,  13JJ  abad. 

Zech  13.    5  I  (am)  no  prophet,  I  (am)  an  husbandman 
^.Cultivator  of  the  soil,  yewpy6s  georgos. 

Matt  21.  33  let  it  out  to  husbandmen,  and  went  into 
21.  34  he  sent  his  servants  to  the  husbandmen 
21.  35  thehusbandmen  tuok  his  servants,  and 
21.  38  when  the  husbandmen  saw  the  son,  they 
21.  40  what  will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen? 
21.  41  will  let  out  (his)  -vineyard  unto  other  hu. 

Markia     1  let  it  out  to  husbandmen,  and  went  into 
12.   2  to  the  husbandmen,  .from  the  husband. 
12.    7  those  husbandmen  said  amongthemselves 
12.    9  He  will  come  and  destroy  the  husbandmen 

Luke2o.  9  let  it  forth  to  husbandmen,  and  went  into 
20.  10  to  thehusbandmen.  .but  thehusbandmen 
20.  14  when  the  husbandmen  saw  him,  they  rea. 
20.  16  He  shall  come  and  destroy  these  husband 

Johnij.    1  I  am  the  true  vine.,  my  Father  is  the  hu. 

2  Ti.    2.    6  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  must  be 

Jas.     5.    7  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious 

HUSBANDRY  — 

1.  Ground,  soil,  TO1N  adamah. 

2  Ch.26.  10  Also  "he  built  towers ..  for  he  loved  husba. 
^.Cultivation  of  the  soil,  yecopyiov  georgion. 

1  Co.   3.   9  For.. ye  are  God's  husbandry.. God's  bui. 

HUSBAND"S  brother  — 
Husband's  brother,  Dn;  ydbam. 

Deut  25.  5  her  husband's  brother  shall  go  in  unto  h. 
25.    7  My  husband's  brotherrefuseth  to  raise  up 

HUSBAND'S  brother,  to  perform  the  duty  of  — 

To  marry  a  deceased  brothers  widow,  D3;  ydbam,  3, 

Deut  25.    5,  7  perform  the  duty  of . .  husband's  brother 
HU'-SHAH,  nz"-r\  haste. 

A  son  of  Ezerof  the  tribe  of  Judah.    B.C.  1450.     It  may 
be  the  name  of  a  place,  or  the  patronymic  of  a  family. 

1  Ch.  4.   4  father  of  Gedor,  and  Ezer  the  father  of  H. 


HUSHAI 


506 


IDBASH 


HU'-SHAI,  ';;;n  quick. 

A  n  inhabitant  of  Eric,  and  the  friend  of  David  in  assist- 
ing to  counteract  ahd  overthrow  the  counsels  of  Ahi- 
thophel.     B.C.  1024. 

2  Sa.  15.  32  H.  the  Arehite  came  to  meet  him  with 

15.  37  So  H.,  David's  Mend,  came  into  the  city 
16. 16  H. .  .David's  friend,  was  come  unto  Absa. 

16.  16  H.  said  unto  Absalom,  God  save  the  king 
16.  17  Absalom  said  to  H.,  (Is)  this  thy  kindness 

16.  18  H.  said  unto  Absalom,  Nay ;  but  whom 

17.  5  Then  said  Absalom,  Call  now  H.  the  Arc. 
17.  6  when  H.  was  come  to  Absalom,  Absalom 
17.  7  And  H.  said  unto  Absalom,  The  counsel 
17.  S  For,  said  H.,  thou  knowest  thy  father  and 
17.  14  The  counsel  of  H.  the  Arehite  (is)  better 
17.  15  Then  said  H.  untoZadok  and  toAbiathar 

1  Ki.   4.  16  Baanah  the  son  of  H.  (was)  in  Asher  and 
1  Ch.27.  33  H.  the  Arehite .. the  king's  companion 

HU'-SHAM,  D:;"n,  D^n  hasting. 

A  Temanite  who  became  king  of  Edom.     B.C.  1500. 
Gen.  36.  34  H.  of  the  land  of  Temaui  reigned  in  his 
36.35  H.  died,  and  Hadad.  .reigned in  his  stead 

1  Ch.  1.  45  H.  of  the  land  of  the  Temanites  reigned 

1.  46  when  H.  was  dead,  Hadad.  .reiguedinhis 
HTJ-SHA  THTTE,  "ftyn. ' 

The  patronymic  of  the  family  of  Hushah  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah. 

2  Sa.  21. 18  then  Sibbechai  the  H.  slew  Saph,  which 

23.  27  Ahiezerthe  Anethothite,MebunuaitheH. 
1  Ch.11.  29  Sibbecai  the  H.,  Hai  the  Ahothite 

20.   4  which  time  Sibbechai  the  H.  slew  Sippai 
27.  1 1  for  the  eighth  month  (was)  Sibbecai  the  H. 

HTj'-SHIM,  D'trn,  D^n,  wvpm  hasting. 

1.  Bon  of  Dan.  B.C.  16S0.  In  Num.  26.  42  the  name  is 
changed  to  Shuham. 

Gen.  46.  23  And  the  sons  of  Dan ;  H. 

2.  The  son  of  Aher  the  Benjamite.     B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.  12  children  of  Ir,  (and)  H.,  the  sons  of  Aher 
— 3J)ne  of  the  two  wives  of  Shaharaim,  and  the  mother  of 
two  of  his  sots.     B.C.   1400.    Ahitxib  is  Abitub  in  the 
Hebrew. 

1  Ch.  8.    8  Shaharaim .  .H.  and  Baara  (were)  his  wives 

S.  11  And  of  H.  he  begat  Alutub,  and  Elpaal 
HUSK  — 
l.Hitsk,  jt  zag. 

Num.  6.    4  nothing,  .from  the-kernelseventothehu. 
2. Sack,  bag,  husk,  JT7j?x  tsiqlon. 

2  Ki.  4.  42  and  full  ears  of  corn  in  the  husk  thereof 
2.  Pod,  carob  pod,  Kepdriov  Iteration. 

;Lukei5.  16  with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat 

HTJZ,  X^V  firm. 

This  name  is  elsewhere  given  as  Uz,  the  eldest  son  of 

Nahor  and  Milcah.    See  Buz,  Uz. 

Gen.  22.  21  H.  his  first  born,  and  Buz  his  brother,  and 
HUZ'-ZAB,  3tf?  established. 

The  "  Zab  country,"  or  fertile  tract  of  Assyria  E.  of  the 
Tigris,  drained  by  the  upper  aud  lower  Zab  rivers  (Zab 
Ala  aud  Zab  A  $foiy~t\ieA-d  tab-fine  of  the  geographers, 
This  was  the  most  fertile  and  valuable  part  of  Assyria, 
and  might  well  stand  for  Assyria  itself,  with  which 
Pliny  and  Ammianus  identify  it.  Zeb  (as  applied  to  the 
rivers)  is  very  ancient,  being  found  in  the  great  inscrip- 
tion of  Tiglath-Pileser  I.,  which  belongs  to  the  middle 
of  the  12th  century  B.C. 

Nah.  2.    7  H.  shall  be  led  away  captive,  she  shall  he 
HY-MF.-NE'-TJS,  'T/azvcuos  nuptial. 
One  who  had  fallen  into  various  errors  and  excommuni- 
cated by  Paul. 

1  Ti.    1.  20  Of  whom  is  H.  and  Alexander;  whom  I 

2  Ti.    2.17  a  canker :  of  whom  is  H.  and  Philetus 
HYMN  — 

Hymn,  song  of  praise,  vfxvos  hnmnos. 

Eph.    5.  ig  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs 

Col.    3. 16  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs 
HYMN,  to  sing  a  — 
To  sing  a  song  of  praise,  v/j.v4a>  hummed. 

Matt26.  30  when  they  had  sung  an  hymn,  they  went.' 
HYPOCRISY  — 
l.Profanatioji,  fjjh  choneph. 

Isa.   32.   6  to  practise  hypocrisy,  and  to  ntter  error 

2. Hypocrisy,  dissimulation,  virdttpLo-ts  hupokrisis. 
Matt23.  28  within  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniq, 
Markis.  15  he,  kuowingtheir  hypocrisy,  said  unto  th, 
Lukei2.  1  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hy. 
1  Ti.  4.  2  Speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy ;  having  their 
1  Pe  2.  1  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil  spea. 
HYPOCRITE  — 
1. Pro/an-,  f\X}  chaneph. 

Job     8.  13  aud  the  hypocrite's  hope  shall  perish 

13.  16  for  an  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  him 

15.  34  For  the  congregation  of  hypocrites  (shall) 

17.    8  shall  stir  up  himself  against  the  hypocr. 

20.    5  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  (but)  fora  mom.? 

27.    8  what(is)thehopeof  the  hypocrite,  though 

36.  13  But  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heap  upwrath 

Prov  11.    9  An  hypocrite  with  (his)  mouth  destroyeth 

Isa.      9.  17  every  one  (is)an  hypocrite  and  an  evildoer 

33.  14  fearfulness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites 

2.Aprofane  man,  t]in  din  adam  chaneph. 

Job    34.  30  That  the  hypocrite  reign  not,  lest  the  peo. 


3. Hypocrite,  actor,  viroKpn-rjs  hupokrites. 

Matt.  6.    2  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  synagogues  and 
6.    5  thou  shalt  not  be  as  the  hypocrites  (are) 

6.  16  when  ye  fast,  be  not,  as  the  hypocrites,  of 

7.  5  Thou  hypocrite,  first  cast  out  the  beam  out 
15-    7  hypocrites,  well  did  Esaias  prophesy  of 
16.   3  [hypocrites],  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the 
22. 18  Jesus,  .said,  Why  tempt  ye  me.  .hypocr.? 
23.  13,  15,  23,  26,  27,  29Woeuntoyou.  .hypocrites 

23.  14  [Woe  unto  you.  .Pharisees,  hypocrites!] 

24.  51 -appoint.. his  portion  with  the  hypocrites 
Mark  7.  6  Well  hath  Esaias  prophesiedof  you  hypo. 
Luke  6.  42  Thou  hypocrite,  cast  out  first  the  beam 

11.  44  [Woe  unto  you. .  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  for] 

12.  56  hypocrites,  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the 

13.  15  hypocrite,  dothnot  each  one  of  you  on  the 
HYPOCRISY,  without  — 

Without  hypocrisy  or  dissimulation,  avvTrSitpiros. 
Jas.    3.  17  without  partiality,  aud  without  hypocrisy 

HYPOCRITICAL  — 

Profane,  f)in  chaneph. 

Psa.  35. 16  With  hypocritical  mockers  in  feasts,  they 
Isa.   10.    6  I  will  send  him  against  an  hypocritical 

HYSSOP  — 

1, Hyssop,  organy,  :mx  ezob. 

Exodi2.  22  ye  shall  take  a  bunch  of  hyssop,  and  dip 
Lev.  14.    4,  49andcedarwood,andscarlet,andhyssop 

14.  6  cedar  wood,  and  the  scarlet,  and  the  hyssop 
14.  51  cedarwood,  and  the  hyssop,  and  the  scar. 
14.  52  with  the  cedarwood,  and  with  the  hyssop 

Numig.    6  take  cedar  wood,  and  hyssop,  and  scarlet 

19.  18  shall  take  hyssop,  and  dip  (it)  in  the  water 

1  Ki.  4.  33  the  hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall 

Psa.  51.    7  Purge  mewithhyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean 

I.Hyssopi,  vffcoiiros  hussojjos. 

Johnig.  29  a  sponge  with  vinegar,  andput(it)uponh. 
Heb.   9. 19  he  took . .  hyssop,  and  sprinkled . .  the  book 


1./,  I  myself  ,  niK,  kjn  etna,  anah. 

Ezra   6.  12  I  Dariushavemadeadecree;  Ietitbedone 

7.  21  I  Artaxerxes  the  king,  do  make  a  decree 
Dan.    2.    8  I  know  of  certainty  that  ye  would  gain  the 

2. 23  I  thank  thee,  and  praise  thee,  O  thou  God 

3.  25  He  answered  and  said,  Lo,  I  see  four  men 

4.  4  I  Nebuchadnezzar  was  at  rest  in  mineho. 
4.    7  and  I  told  the  dream  before  them ;  but 

4.  9  I  know  that the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods(is) 
4. 18  This  dream  I  king  Nebuchadnezzar  have 
4.  30  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built 
4.  34  at  the  end  of  the  days  I  Nebuchadnezzar 
4.  37  Now  I  Nebuchadnezzar  praise  and  extol  1 
5. 16  I  have  heard  of  thee,  that  thou  canst  make 
7. 15  I  Daniel  was  grieved  in  my  spirit  in  the 

'2.1,  I  myself  ag  ant. 

Gen.  6.  17  I.  .do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the  ea. 
9  12  This  (is)  the  token  of  the  covenant  which  I 

3.7,  I  myself,  *2te  anoki. 

Gen.   3. 10  because  I  (was)  naked;  aud.  .hid  myself 
4.7,  7  myself,  iyc*>  ego. 

Matt.  3.  11 1  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  re. 
[This  word  occurs  350  times  so  translated.] 

0.  Me,  4 fie  eme- 

John  3.  30  He  must  increase,  but  I  (must)  decrease 
■9.    4  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent 

6. To  me,  i/xol  emoi. 

Acts  21.  37  And.  .he  said.  .May  I  speak  unto  thee  ? 

22.   6  as  I  made  my  journey,  and  was  come  nigh 
Rom.  7.  21  that,  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  pre. 
Gal.    6.  14  But  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save 

7. And  I,  I  also,  >eayct>  kago. 

Acts  26.  29  such  as  1  am,  except  these  bonds 
2  Co.11. 16  as  a  fool  receive  me,  that  I  may  boost 
Gal.    4.  12  for  I  (am)  as  ye  (are) :  ye  have  not  injured 
1  Th.  3,    5  For  this  cause,  when  I  could  no  longer 

8. Me,  /xe  me. 

Matt  1 6. 13  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  man 
16.  15  He saith  unto  them,  .whom  say  ye  that  I 
26.  32,  35;  Mark  8.  27,  29;  10.  [36];  14.  28,  31 ; 
Luke  2.  49;  4.  43;  9.  18,  20;  10.  35;  it.  18;  13.  33;  19  5, 
27;  22. 15 ;  John  10.16  ;  Acts  11. 15  ;  13.  [25];  16.  30;  18 
[21];  19.  21,  21 ;  22.  17  ;  25.  10;  Rom.  15.  16,  19 ;  2  Co.  2. 
3,  13 ;  7,  7  ;  12.  21 ;  Gal.  4.  18  ;  Eph.  6.  20 ;  Phil.  1.  7 ; 
Col.  4.  4. 

9.  To  me,  pol  moi. 

Acts  3.  6  Peter  said,  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none 
18.  10  to  hurt  thee  :  for  I  have  much  people  in 

21.  37  he  said  unto  the  chief  captain,  May  I  sp. 

22.  6  as  I  made  my  journey,  and  was  come  ni. 
22.  27  that,  when  I  was  come  again  to  Jerusalem 
26.  29  altogeth.  such  as  I  am,  except  these  bonds 

Rom.  7.  10  the  commandment.  .1  found  (to  be)  unto 
9.    2  That  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continual 

1  Co.  5.  12  For  what  have  I  to  do  to  judge  them  also 
9.  16  I  have  nothing  to  glory  of :  for  necessity 

10.  Of  me,  pov  mou. 

Matt  3.  11  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than  I 
Mark  1,    7  There  cometh  one  mightier  than  I  after 
Luke  3.  16  one  mightier  than  I  cometh,  the  latchet 
22.  53  "When  I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple 
,1ohui4.  28  rejoice,  .for  my  Father  is  greater  than  I 


Acts  22. 17  while  I  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a 

24.  20  any  evil,  .while  I  stood  before  the  council 

25.  15  About  whom,  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem 

1  Co.  4.  iS  some  are  puffed  up,  as  though  I  would  uot 

2  Ti.    1.  12  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  commit. 
Heb.  8.   9  when  I  took  them  by  the  hand  to  lead 

11.  My  heart,  '21?  libbi. 

Neh.    5.    7  Then  I  consulted  with  myself,  and.  .reb- 
Vl.Before  me,  %"$.  qodamai. 

Dan.  4.    2  I  thought  it  good  to  show  the  signs  and 
6.  26  I  make  a  decree,  That  in  every  dominion 
{See  also  And,  even,  so.] 
I  also  — 
And  I,  1  also,  Kay<a  kago. 

Matt.  2.    8  that  I  may  come  and  worship  him  also 

[See  also  10.  32,  33 ;  16.  18  ;  21.  24 ;  Mark.  n.  [29] ;  Luke 

20.  3;  Rom.  3.  7;  2  Co.  11.  18,  21;  Eph.  1.  15;  Phil.  2. 

19  ;  Rev.  2.  6 ;  3. 10 ;  Acts  10.  26.] 

[See  Even.] 

I  AM  THAT  I  AM,  or  I  AM,  n.;nx  -igte  n*ny  or  n^K. 
A  name  indicating  rather  the  unsearcfiableness  of' God 
than  his  mere  existence,  as  commonly  supposed. 
Exod.  3. 14  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  Am  that  I  Am 
3.  14  Thus  shalt  thou  say.  .1  Am  hath  sentmc 

I  in  likewise  — 

And  I,  I  also,  Kaycb  kago. 

Matt2i.  24  I  in  likewise  will  tell  you  by  whatautho. 
I  have  — 
There  is,  there  are,  tr  yesh. 

Gen.  33.    9  Esau  said,  1  have  enough,  my  brother 
33. 1 1  Take,  I  pray  thee . .  because  I  have  enough 

Rutfi.  1.  12  If  I  should  say,  I  have  hope,  (if)  I  should 

1  Ki.  17. 12  I  have  not  a  cake,  but  an  handful  of  meal 

1  Ch.29.    3  I  have  of  mine  own  proper  good,  of  gold 

I  would  — 

If  O  that,  >h  lu. 

Gen.  30.  34  I  would  it  mightbe  according  to  thy  word 
NU11122.  29  I  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 

LB'-HAR,  irn»  chooser. 

A  son  of  David,  born  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  1030. 

2  Sa.   5.  15  I.  also,  and  Elishua,  and  Nepheg,  and  Ja. 

1  Ch.  3.    6  I,  also,  and  Elishama,  and  Eliphelet 

14.    5  And  I.,  and  Elishua,  and  Elpalet 

IE-LE'-AM,  □#??*  place  of  victory. 
A  city  of  Manasseh,  but  in  the  territory  of  either  Issa- 
char  or  Asher  (Josh.  17.  n).  It  was  near  the  modern 
Jenivi,  at  the  place  to  the  N.  of  it,  now  called  Jelama. 
Josh.  1 7. 11  Manasseh  had..  I.  and  her  towns,  and  the 
Judg.  1.  27  nor  the  inhabitants  of  I.  and  her  towns 

2  Ki.  9.  27  at  the  going  up  to  Gur,  which  (is)  by  I. 

LB  NE'-IAH,  njp;  Jah  is  builder. 
A  son  of  Jeroham  a  Benjamite  and  a  chief  man  of  the 
tribe  in  the  first  settlement  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  480. 
1  Ch.  9.    8  I.  the  son  of  Jeroham,  and  Elah  the  son 

IB  NI'-JAH,  n;2T  Jahis  builder. 

A  Benjamite  whose  offspring  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.    B.C. 

480. 

1  Ch.  9.    8  Shephathiah.  .son  of  Reuel,  the  son  of  I. 

LT3-RI,  'liy  2}asser  over,  Hebrew. 

A  Merarite  in  the  time  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  27  Beno,  and  Shoham,  and  Zaccur,  and  I. 
IB'-ZAN,  Ipx  splendid. 

A  native  of  Bethlehem  and  a  judge  of  Israel  for  seven 
years,  after  Jephthah.  He  had  thirty  sons  and  thirty 
daughters  ;  and  having  taken  home  thirty  wives  for  his 
sons,  he  sent  out  his  daughters  to  as  many  husbands. 
His  Bethlehem  was  that  in  the  tribe  of  Zebulon. 

Judg  12.    8  after  him  I.  of  Beth-lehem  judged  Israel 
12.  10  Then  died  I.,  and  was  buried  at  Beth-le. 
ICE  — 
Cold,  frost,  ice,  chrystal,  nnp,  rn'p  qorach,  qerach. 

Job.    6.  16  Which  are  blackish  by  reason  of  the  ice 
38.  29  Out  of  whose  womb  came  the  ice?  and 

Psa.  147. 17  He  casteth  forth  his  ice  like  morsels :  who 

I-CHA' '-B0D,  Tinrr'N  where(is)  the  ko7iourtingloriou$. 
Son  of  Phinehas  and  grandson  of  Eli.     B.C.  1141. 

1  Sa.    4.  21  she  named  the  child  I.  saying,  The  glory 

14.    3  Ahiah,  the  son  of  Ahitub,  I.'s  brother,  the 

I-CO-Nl'-TJM,  'Ikuviov. 

The  modern  Konieh,  on  the  central  plateau  of  Asia 
Minor,  towards  the  W.  and  not  far  to  the  N.  of  the 
Taurus  chain.  This  level  district  was  anciently  called 
Lycaonia  (or  "  domain  of  Jove"). 

Acts  13.  51  they  shook  off  the  dust,  .and  came  unto  I. 

14.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  I.,  that  they  went  both 

14.  19  there  came.  .Jews  from  Antioch  and  I. 

14.  21  they  returned  again  to  Lystra,  and  (to)  I. 

16.    2  by  the  brethren  that  were  at  Lystra  and  I. 

2  Ti.    3.  11  which  came  unto  me  at  Antioch,  at  I.,  at 

EO-A'-LAH,  h|?xt  memorial  of  God. 

A  town  of  Zebulun;  probably  Kellah-al-chire,  six  miles 

S.W.  of  Semuniyeh,  about  three  miles  S.  of  Beit-lahm. 

Josh.  19.  15  Nahallal,  and  Shimron,  and  1.,  and  Beth. 
ED'-BASH,  ubT  stout,  corptdent. 
One  of  the  three  sons  of  Abi-etam,  among  the  families 
of  Judah.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   4.    3  father  of  Etam ;  Jezreel,  and  Ishnia.  .1. 


IDDO 


50" 


IF 


ED'-DO,  nt  festal,  opportune. 

Father  of  Aliinadab,  one  of  Solomon's  commissariat 

officers.    B.C.  1014. 

1  Ki.  4. 14  Ahinadab  the  son  of  I.  (had)  Mahanaini 

XD'-DO,  i"!  favourite. 

1  A.  descendant  of  Gershom,  son  of.  Levi.  In  verse  41 
the  name  is  Adaiah,  where  it  is  seen  that  he  was  an 
ancestor  of  Asaph  the  seer.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  6.  21  Joah  his  son,  I.  his  son,  Zerah  Ins  son,  J. 
2.  A  son  of  Zechariah  of  the  tribe  of  Mauasseh  E.  of 
Jordan,  in  the  time  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  21  Of  the  half  (tribe)  of  Manasseh.,1.  the  son 
ID '-DO,  *$!,  i~>:,  toy  festal,  opportune. 

A  seer  that  denounced  the  wrath  of  God  against  Jero- 
boam the  son  of  Xebat.    B.C.  y6o. 

2  Ch.  9.  29  and  in  the  visions  of  I.  the  seer  against 

12. 15  in  the  book . .  of  I.  the  seer  concerning  ge.? 
13.  22  (are)  written  in  the  story  of  the  prophet  I. 

ID '-DO,  N'";',  VnjJ  festal,  opportune. 

1.  Ancestor  of  Zechariah  the  prophet.  "  B  C.  600. 

Ezra    5.    1  Zechariah  the  son  of  I.,  prophesied  unto 

6. 14  the  prophet  and  Zechariah  the  son  of  I. 
Zech.  1.    i,  7  Barachiah,  the  son  of  I.,  the  prophet 

2.  A  priest  who  returned  from  Babylon.     B.C.  576. 

Neh.  i?.    4  I.,  Giunetho,  Abijah 

12. 16  Of  I.,  Zechariah ;  of  Ginnethon,  Meshul. 

ID'-DO,  Vix  honourable. 

Chief  of  those  that  assembled  at  Casiphia  at  the  time 
of  the  2nd  niigratio:i  from  Babylon  in  the  reign  of 
Artaxerxes  Longimanus    B.C.  45S.    He  was  a  Netliinim. 

Ezra    8.  17  I  sent  them  with  commandment  unto  I. 
8. 17  I  told  them  what  they  should  say  unto  I.* 
IDLE  — 
l.Deceit,  sloth,  n*£n  remiyyah. 

Prov  19. 15  sleep ;  and  an  idle  soul  shall  suffer  hunger 
2.To  be  feeble,  idle,  remiss,  ns-i  rajjJiah,  2. 

Exod.  5     8  they  (be)  idle ;  therefore  they  cry,  saying 
5.  17  Ye  (are)  idle,  .idle :  therefore  ye  say,  Let 

Z.Tdle,  unprofitable,  apySs  argos. 

Matti2.  36  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall 
20.   3  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market 
20.    6  went  out,  and  found  others  standing  [idle] 
20.    6  saith.  .Why  stand  yehere  all  the  day  idle  ? 

1  Ti.    5.  13  they  learn  (to  be)  idle,  .and  not  only  idle 

IDLE  tale  — 

Idle  tall:,  Aypos  leros. 

Luke24. 11  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales 
IDLENESS  — 
l.Sloth,  ni!?¥H  atsluth. 

Prov.31.  27  She.  .eateth  not  the  bread  of  idleness 
~2.Loioness,  idleness,  nV7B&  shiphluth. 

Eccl.  10. 18  through  idleness  of  the  hands  the  house 
Z.To  cause  to  rest  or  be  quiet,  ap^  shaqat,  5. 

Eze.  16.  49  abundance  of  idleness  was  in  her  and  in  h. 
IDOL  — 
1. Iniquity,  vanity,  jyx  aven. 

Isa.  66.  3  burnetii  incense,  (as  if)  he  blessed  an  idol 
2.Terror,  object  of  terror,  .TO's  email. 

.  Jer.  50.  38  graven  images,  and  they  are  mad  upon 
Z.  Mighty  one,  a  god,  hx  el. 

Isa.  57.   5  Enflaming  yourselves  with  idols  under 
i.Xo,'r/ht,  a  thing  of  nought,  idol,  tir  eh'l. 

Lev.  19.   4  Turn  ye  not  unto  idols,  nor  make  to  your. 

26.    1  Ye  shall  make  you  no  idols  nor  graven 
1  Ch.  16.  26  For  all  the  gods  of  the  people  (are)  idols 
Psa.  g5.    5  For  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  (are)  idols 

97.    7  that  boast  themselves  of  idols:  worship 
Isa.     2.   S  Their  land  also  is  full  of  idols ;  they  wor. 
2.  18  And  the  idols  he  shall  utterly  abolish 
2.  20  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold 
10.  10  hand  hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  the  id. 
10. 11  as  I  have  done  unto  Samaria  and  her  idols 
19.    1  the  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  Ins 
19.    3  they  shall  seek  to  the  idols,  and  to  the 
31.   7  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold 
Eze.  30.  13  I  will  also  destroy  the  idols,  and  I  will 
Hab.  2.  1 8  that . .  trusteth  therein,  to  make  dumb  id.  ? 
Zech.ir.  17  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the 

5.  Horror,  a  cause  of  trembling,  Jwrror,  fright,  n^2p. 

1  Ki.  15.  13  because  she  had  made  au  idol  in  a  grove 

15.  13  Asa  destroyed  her  idol,  and  burnt  (it)  by 

2  Ch.15.  16  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a  grove 

15.  16  Asa  cut  down  her  idol,  and  stamped  (it) 
G.Figur>,  idol,  Vpp,  V20  semel. 

2  Ch.33.    7  he  set  a  carved  image,  the  idol  which  he 
33. 15  he  took  away,  .the  idol  out  of  the  house 

7*Grief,  a  cause  of  grief ,  yxy  atsab. 

1  Sa.  31.   9  to  publish  (it  in)  the  house  of  their  idols 

1  Ch.io.    9  to  carry  tidings  unto  their  idols,  and  to 

2  Ch.24.  18. served  groves  and  idols :  and  wrath  came 
Psa.  106.  36  they  served  their  idols  which  were  a  snare 

106.  38  whom  they  sacrificed  unto  the  idols  of  C. 

115.    4  Their  idols  (are)  silver  and  gold,  the  work 

135. 15  The  idols  of  the  heathen  (are)  silver  and 

Isa.   10.  11  Shall  Inot..dotoJerusalemand  heridols 

46.    1  their  idols  were  upon  the  beasts,  and  upon 

Jer.  50.    2  her  idols  are  confounded,  her  images  are 

Eos.   4.  17  Ephraim  (is)  joined  to  idols:  let  him  alone 

8.   4  of.  .their  gold  have  they  made  them  idols 


Eos.  13.  2  have  made  them,  .idols  according  to  their 

14.  S  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols? 

Mic.    1.  7  all  the  idols  thereof  will  I  lay  desolate:  for 

Zech  13.  2  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols  out  of 

8.  Grief,  a  cause  of  grief,  asj?  etseb. 

Jer.  '22.  28  this  man  Cohian  a  despised  broken  idol  ? 
9. Grief,  a  cause  of  grief,  ayy  otseb. 

Isa.  48.   s  Mine  idol  hath  done  them,  and  my  graven 
10.  Form,  idol,  TS  tsir. 

Isa.   45.  16  goto  confusion,  .(that  are)  makers  of  idols 
11. Idol,  image,  et5wAo^  eidolon. 

Acts    7.  41  offered  sacrifice  unto  the  idol,  and  rejoice. 
T5.  20  that  they  abstain  from  pollutions  of  idol3 

Rom.  2.  22  thou  that  abhorest  idols,  dost  thou  com. 

1  Co.  8.    4  we  know  that  an  idol  (is)  nothing  in  the 

"  8.  7  for  some  with  conscience  of  the  idol  unto 
10. 19  [What  say  I  then?  that  the  idol  is  any  th.] 
12.    2  carried  away  uuto  these  dumb  idols,  even 

2  Co.  6. 16  what,  .hath  the  temple  of  God  with  idols? 
1  Th.  1.  9  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve 
1  Jo.  5.  21  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols 
Rev.   9.  20  they  should  nut  worship  devils,  and  idols 

IDOL,  thing  offered  (in  sacrifice)  to  cr  unto  an  — 
What  is  sacrificed  to  am  idol,  ethwKoBvToveidolothv,. 
Acts  15.  29  ye  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  idols,  and 

21.  25  keep  themselves  from  (things)offeredtoi. 
1  Co.   S.    1  Now  as  touching  things  offered  unto  idols 

8.    4  things  that  are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  i. 
8.    7  some . .  eat  (it)  as  a  thing  offered  unto  an  i. 

8. 10  to  eat  those  things  which  are  offered  to  i. 
10. 19  that  which  is  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols 
10.  28  This  is  [offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols],  eat 

Rev.    2.  14  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,  and  to 
2  20  and  to  eat  tilings  sacrificed  unto  idols 

IDOLATER  — 

Worshipper  of  idols,  elSwAoAzTpys  cidololatres. 

1  Co.  5.  10  covetous,  or  extortioners,  or  with  idolat 

5. 11  if  any.  .that  is  calleda  brother  be.  .au  id. 
6.   9  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  no  ad 

10.  7  X  either  be  ye  idolaters,  as . .  some  of  them 
Eph.  5.  5  nor  covetous  man,  who  is  an  idolater,  h. 
Rev.  21.    8  idolaters,  and  all  liars,  shall  have  their 

22.  15  without  (are)  dogs,  .and  idolaters,  and 
IDOLATROUS  priests  — 

S  rvants3  ascetics,  □'"!£?  Jsemarim. 

2  Ki.  23.   5  he  put  down  the  idolatrous  priests,  whom 
IDOLATRY  — 

1. Healers,  nourUhers,household  idols,  C2"W  teraph. 
1  Sa.  15.  23  stubbornness  (is  as)  iniquity  and  idolatry 

2.  Worship  of  idol i,  eldcoXoXarpeta  eidololatreia. 
1  Co.  10.  14  Wherefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  i. 
Gal.     5.  20  Idolatry,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance 
Col.     3.    5  evil.. and  coveteousness,  which isidolatry 
1  Pe.   4.    3  banquetings,  and  abominable  idolatries 

IDOLATRY,  wholly  given  to  — 

Full  of  idols,  KareiBcoAos  Jcateidolos. 

Acts  17. 16  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  to  id. 

IDOL'S  temple  — 

Place  of  an  idol,  elSaXeTov  eidoleion. 

1  Co.   8. 10  see  thee,  .sit  at  meat  in  the  idol's  temple 

IDOLS  — 

1.  What  are  rolled  about,  large  idols,  wb&zgiUulim. 
Lev.  26.  30  cast,  .upon  the  carcases  of  your  idols,  and 
Deut.29.  17  seen  their  abominations,  and  their  idols 

1  Ki  15. 12  removed  all  the  idols  that  his  fathers  had 

21.  26  he  did  very  abominably  in  following  idols 

2  Ki  17.  12  they  served  idols,  whereof  the  LORD  had 

21. 11  hatlimade  Judah  also  to  sin  with  his  idols 

21.  21  served  the  idols  thathisfatherserved,  and 

23.  24  the  idols,  and  all  the  abominations  that 
Jer.  50.  2  her  idols  are  confounded,  her  images  are 
Eee.    6.   4  will  cast  down  your  slain . .  before  your  i. 

6.    5  lay  the  dead  carcases,  .before  their  idols 

6.    6  and  your  idols  may  be  broken  and  cease 

6.    9  eyes,  which  go  a  whoring  after  their  idols 

6.  13  when  their  slain,  .shall  be  among  their  i. 

6.  13  they  did  offer  sweet  savour  to  all  then-  i. 

8.  10  all  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  pour. 

14.    3  these  men  have  set  up  their  idols  in  their 

14.    4  settethup  his  idols,  .multitude  of  his  idols 

14.    5  all  estranged  from  me  through  their  idols 

14.    6  Repent,  aud  turn,  .from  your  idols  ;  and 

14.    7  setteth  up  his  idols  iu  his  heart,  and  put. 

i5.  36  with  all  theidols  of  thy  abominations,  and 

18.    6,  15  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of-  Israel 

iS.  12  hath  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  the  idols,  hath 

20.    7  defile  not  yourselves  with  the  idols  of  Eg. 

20.    8  neither  did  they  forsake  the  idols  of  Egypt 

20. 16  sabbaths:  for  their  heart  went  after  their  i. 

20.  18  I  said,  .nor  defile  yourselves  with  their  i. 

20.  24  and  their  eyes  were  after  their  fathers'  i. 

20.  31  ye  pollute  yourselves  with  all  your  idols 

20.  39  everyone  his  idols,  .and  with  your  idols 

22.  3  maketh  idols  against  herself  to  defile  her. 

22.  4  hast  defiled  thyself  in  thine  idols  which 

23.  7  with  all  their  idols  she  defiled  herself 
23.  30  because  thou  art  polluted  with  their  idols 
23.  37  with  their  idols  have  they  committed  ad. 
23.  39  they  had  slain  their  children  to  their  idols 
23:  49  and  ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  idols 
30.  13  I  will  also  destroy  the  idols,  and  I  "ill 
33.  25  Ye.  .lift  up  your  eyes  towards  your  idols 
36.  18  for  their  idols  (wherewith)  they  had  poll. 
^6.  25  and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I  cleanse  you 


Eze.  37.  23  any  more  with  their  idols,  nor  with  their 
44.  10  went  astray  away  from  me  after  their  id. 
44.  12  they  ministered  unto  them  before  their  i. 
2.1tnages  (of  the  sun),  cr?n  hainvianim  . 

2  Ch  34.    7  cut  down  all  the  idols  throughout  all  the 
Z. Healers,  nourishers,  household  gods,  D'srvi  teraph. 
Zech.  10.    2  For  the  idols  have  spoken  vanity,  and  Hie 
IDOLS,  ahominable — 
Abominable  or  detestable  thing,  }'*P'j-shiqquts. 

2  Ch.15.    8  Put  away  the  abominable  idols  out  of  all 
I-DTJME'-A,  bins,  'iSovuala  territory  of  Edom. 
The  Greek  form  "of  the  name  of  Edom,  the  "field  of 
Edom,"  or  Mount  Beir  ("  rugged  ")  whose  original  inha- 
bitants were  called  Sorites  from  Hori  the  grandson  of 
Seir,  also  because  that  name  (Hori)  was  descriptive  of 
their  name  as  troglodites  or  dwellers  in  caves.    See 
Edom. 
Isa.    34.    5  behold,  it  shall  come  down  upon  I.,  and 
34.    6  hath,  .a  great  slaughter  in  the  land  of  I. 
Eze.  35. 15  shalt  be  desolate,  O  mount  Seir,  and  all  I. 
36.    5  have  I  spoken  against,  .all  I.,  which  have 
Mark  3.    8  from  I.,  and  (from)  beyond  Jordan;  and 
IF  — 
l.Or,  if,  iN  0. 

Lev.  26.  41  if  then  their  un circumcised  hearts  be  hu. 
"Uf  cs  irn. 

Gen.    4.    7  If  thou  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  ace? 
43.   9  if  I  bring  liim  not  unto  thee,  and  set  him 

3. According  as,  when,  "ib\v3  kaasher. 

Gen.  43.  14  If  I  be  bereaved  (of.  .children),  lam  ber. 
4.7/,  lo,  though,  whether,  or,  surely,  fn  hen. 

2  Ch.  7.  13  If  I  shut  up  heaven  that  there  be  no  rain 
7. 13  or  if  I  command  the  loeusts  to  devour  the 

Ezra   5. 17  if.  .good  to  the  king,  let  there  be  search 

Lan.   2     5  if  ye  will  not  make  known  unto  me  the 

3. 15  if  ye  be  ready  that  at  what  time  ye  hear 
3. 17  If  it  be  (so),  our  God  whom  we  serve  is 

4.  27  if  it  may  be  a  lengthening  of  i'ny  tranqu.  - 

5. 16  now  if  thou  canst  read  Hhe  writing,  and 

5. That,  because,  "3  hi. 

Gen.       4.  24  IfCainshallbeavengedsevenfold,  truly 

6.  Though,  if,  0  that,  nh  lu. 

2  Sa.  19.    6  I  perceive/that  if  Absalom  had  lived,  and 

1.0  that,  if,  &lu. 

Judg.  8. 19  if  ye  had  saved  them  alive,  I  would  not 
13.  23  Lf  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us,  he 
Job    16.    4  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  stead,  I 
Eze.  14.  15  If  I  cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through 
Mic     2.  11  II  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  false. 

8. If  not,  unless,  "hih  lule. 

Psa  124.  1, 2  If  (it  had  not  been)  the  Lord  who  was  on 
9. Heel,  consequence,  because,  seeing,  3j3*  eqeb. 

Deut.  7.  12  if  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments,  and 

10.  If,  elei. 

Matt.  4.    3  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that 

4.  6  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  d. 

5.  29  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 
5  30  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 

6.  23,  30;  7.  11 ;  8.31;  10.  25;  11,  14,  21,  23;  12. 

7,  26,  27,  28;  14.  28;  17.  4;  18.  8,  9;  19.  10,  17,  si;  22. 
45;  23.  30;  24.  24,  43;  26.  24,  39,42;  27.40,  [42,343. 

Mark  3.  26;  9.  23;  11. 13,  25,  [26];  13.  22;  14.  21,  35; 

15-  44- 

Luke  4.  3,  9;  6.  32;  7.  39;  9.  23;  10.  13;  11.  13, 19,  20, 
36;  12.  26,  28,  39,  49  ;  16.  11, 12,  31 ;  17.  6;  19.  42;  22.  42; 

23-  3i.  35»  [37,  393- 

John  1.  25;  3.  12;  4.  10;  5.  47;  7.  4,  23;  8.  19,  39,  42 
46;  9.  41;  10.  24,  35,  37,  38;  11.  12  ;  21,  I32];  13.  14,  17 
32;  14.  7,  28;  15.  18,  19,  20,  20;  18.  8,  23,  23,  36;  20.  15. 

Acts  4.  9 ;  5.  39;  8.  22,  [37];  13.  15;  16.  15;  17.  27;  18. 

34,  T5'.    *9-  38>  39;     2°-  l6'>  23.  9;  25-  "»  "!  27-  39- 

Rom.  3.  3,  5,  7;  4.  2,  14;  5.  io,  15,  17;  6.  5,  8;  7.  16, 
20;  8.  9,  10,  11 ;  13.  13,  17,  25,  31 ;  9.  22;  11.  6,  [6,]  12,  15, 
16,  16,  17,  18,  21,  24;  12.  18;  14.  15;  15.  27. 

1  Co.  3.  12;  6.  2;  7.  9,  15,  36;  8.  2,  3,  13;  9.  2,  11, 11, 
12,  17, 17;  10.  27,  30;  11.  6,  6,  16,  31,  34;  12.  17,  17,  19; 
14-  35.  38;  15-  2.  12,  13,  14,  16,  17,  19,  29,  32,  32. 

2  Co.  2.  2,  5;  3..  7,  9,  n;  5.  [14];  8.  12;  11.  4,  30. 

Gal.  1.  10;  2.  14,  17.  18,  21;  3.  18,  21,  29;  4.  7,  i5;-5. 

11.  15,  iS,  25;  6.  3;  Phil.  1.  22;  Col.  2.  20;  3.  1;  1  Th.  4. 
14 ;  2  Th.  3.  14;  1  Ti.  3.  5;  5. 4,  8,  10,  10, 10,  10,  10;  2  TL 
2.  11,  12,  12,  13;  Phile.  17,  iS. 

Heb.  2.  2  ;  4.  3,  5,  8;  7.  n;  8.  4,  7;  9.  13;  n.  15;  12. 

[7*]  8,  25;  Jas.  1.  5,  26;  2.  S,  9,  11;  3.  14;  4.  11 ;  1  Pe.  1. 

6,  17,  19,  20,  20,  22;  3.  17;  4.  14,  16,  17,  18;  2  Pe.  2.  4, 

20 ;  1  Jo.  2.  19 ;  3.  13 ;  4.  n ;  5.  9. 

11. If  indeed,  erye  eige. 

Eph.   3.   2  If  ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation  of  the 
Col.     1.  23  If  ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded  and 

12.  If  also,  even  if,  el  teal  ei  koA. 

Luke  11.  iS  If  Satan  also  be  divided  against  himself 

1  Co.   4.    7  now  if  thou  didst  receive  (it),  why  dost 

7.  21  but  if  thou  raayest  be  made  free,  use  (it) 

2  Co.  4.    3  if  our  gospel  be  bid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that 

11.  15  no  great  thing  if  his  ministers  alsobetra. 

13.7/,  en-e  cite. 

1  Co. 14.  27  If  any  man  speak  in  an  (unknown)  tongue 
14.//",  iav  ean. 

Matt.  4.    9  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me 
5.  13  if  the  salt  have  lost hissavour,  wherewith 
5.  23  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there 


IP 


508 


IMAGE 


Matt.    5-  46  if  yelovethem  which  love  you,  what  rewa. 

5.  47  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do 

6.  14, 15, 22,  23;  7.  [9,  10];  8.  2;  9. 21;  10.  13, 13;  12. 
11;  15.  14;  16.  26;  17.  20;  18.  12,  15,  15,  16,  17,  I7j  19, 
35;  21.  3,  21,  24,  25,  26;  22.  24;  24.  23,  26,  48;  28.  14. 

Mark  1.  40;  3.  24,  25;  4.  [26J;  7.  n  ;  8.  3,  [36];  9.  43,  45, 
47,  50;  10.  12;  n.  3,  31,  [32];  12.  19;  13.  21;  14.  31. 

Luke4.  7;  5. 12;  6.  33,  [34];  10.  6;  rx.  [12];  12.  [38];  14.  34; 
15.8;  16.30;  17.  3,3,  4  519.  31.  [40];  20.  5,28;  22.  67,  68; 
John  3.  12;  5.  31,  43;  6.  51  j  7.  17,  37;  8.  16,  24,  31,  36, 
5ij  52.  54»  [55];  9-  22,  31  I  IO*  9>  "■  9»  10>  4°>  48,  57 i  I2- 
24,  26,  26,  32,  47 ;  13,  8,  17,  35 ;  14.  3>  I4.  I5>  23  5   I5-  6»  7> 

10,  14;  16.  7,  7;  19.  12;  21.  22,  23,  25. 

Acts  5.  3859.  2:26.  5;  Horn.  2., 25,  25,  2617.  2,  3,  3;  10. 
9;  11.22,23;  12.20,20;  13.  4;  *4*  23;  I5-24;  1  Co.  4. 
19;  5.  11;  6.  4;  7.  8,  11,  28,  28,  36,  39,  40;  8.  8,  8,  10;  9, 
16;  10.  28;  11.  14,  15;  12.  15,  16;  14.  6,  8,  11,  14,  23,  24, 
28,  30;  16.  4,  7,  10;  2  Co.  5.  1 ;  9.  4;  13.  2. 

Gal.  5.  2;  6.  1;  Col.  3.  13;  4-  10;  1  Th.  3.  [8];  1  Ti.  1.  8; 
2.  15;  2T1.  2.  5,  21;  Heb.  3.  6,  7,  14,  15;  4.  756.  3;  10. 
38;  13.  23;  Jas.  2.  2,  15,  17;  4.  15;  5.  19;  1  Pe.  3.  13;  1 
Jo.  1.  6,  7,  8,  9,  10;  2.  t,  3,  15,  24,  29;  3.  20,  21;  4.  12, 
20;  5.  [14,]  15.  16;  3  Jo.  10;  Rev.  3.  3,  20;  22.  18,  19. 

15.  If  also,  eav  Kai  ean  kai. 

Gal.    6.    1  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fa. 

16 .If  eavwep  eanper. 

Heb.   3.    6  [if]  we  hold  fast  the  confidence  and  the 
3.  14  made  partakers  of  Christ,  if  we  hold  the 
6.    3  And  this  will  we  do,  if  God  permit 
[See  also  Also,  and.] 
IF  a  or  any  (man,  thing)  aught  — 
If  any  one,  e't  tis  ei  tis. 

Matt  16.  24-If  any  (man) will  come  after  me,  let  him 

Mark  4.23;  7.  16;  8.  23;  9.  22,  35;  Luke  14.  26;  19. 

8  ;  Acts  24.  19,  [20] ;  25.  5 ;  Rom.  13.  9 ;  1  Co.  3.  14, 15,  17, 

18;  7.  12;  14.  37;  16.  22;  2  Co.  2.  10 ;  5.  17;  7.  14;  10.  7; 

11,  20,  20,  20,  20,  20;  Gal.  1.  9;  Phil.  2.  1,  1,  1,  1 ;  3.  4, 
15;  4.  8,  8;  2  Th.  3'.  10 ;  1  Ti.  1,  10;  3.  1 ;  5.  16;  6-  3; 
Tit.  1.  6;  Jas.  1.  23;  3.2;  1  Pe.  3.  1 ;  4.  n,n;2Jo.io; 
Rev.  it.  5, [5];  13.9;  14.9;  Luke9--23;  Rom.  8.9;  1  Co. 

.  3-  i2lJ7.  56  ;  8.  2,  3  ;  10.  27  ;  11.  16, 34;  14-38  ;  2 Co.  2.  5; 
Gal.  6.  3;  2  Th.  3.  14;  1  Ti.  3.  5;  5.  4,  8;  Jas.  1.  5,  26. 
IF  by  any  means  — 
If  any  how,  ei  irua  ei  pos. 

Acts  27. 12  If  by  any  means  they  might  attain  to  Ph. 

Rum.  1.  10;  11.  14;  Phil.  3.  11. 

IF,  and  — 
//;  eav  ean. 

John  6.  62  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  ascend 
IF  also,  also  if  — 

1.  If  also,  but  if  also,  el  Kai,  or  el  Be  real  ei  de  kai. 

Luken.  18  If  Satan  also  be  divided  against  himself 
2  Co. 11. 15  if  his  ministers  also  be  transformed  as  the 

2. Also  if,  even  if  nav  kan. 

Matt 21.  21  but  also  if  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain 
IF... but  — 
If,  even  if,  k<xv  kan. 

Mark  5.  28  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes,  I  shall  lie 
6.  56  if  it  were  but  the  border  of  his  garment 
TF  haply  — 
0  that,  if,  h  hi. 

1  Sa.  14.  30  if  haply  the  people  had  eaten  freely  to  day 
IF,  moreover  — 

If  QN  im. 

2  Sa.  17. 13  Moreover  if  he  be  gotten  into  a  city,  then 
IF  not,  (and)  — 

\  If  not,  unless,  xhv?  lule. 

Judgi4.  18  If  ye  had  not  ploughed  with  my  heifer 

2.  But  if  not,  el  8e  ^77  or  fx^ye  ei  de  mege. 

Luke  10.    6  rest  upon  it:  if  not,  it  shall  turn  to  you 
13.    9  and  if  not.  .after  that  thou  shalt  cut  it 
John  14.    2  many  mansions;  if  (it  were)  not  (so),  I  w. 

3. If  not,  el  fx)}  ei  vie. 

John  a.  33  If  this  man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do 
.    [See  also  15.  22,  24;  18.  30;  Acts  26.  32.] 
4.  If  not,  eav  fxfy  can  me. 

Matt.  6.  15  But  if  ye  forgive  not  men  their  trespasses 
[See  also  Matt.  10.  13 ;  18.  16,  35  ;  John  8.  24 ;  13.  8 ;  15.  6  ; 

16.  7;  Rom.  11.  23  ;  1  Co.  8.  8;  9.  16;  14.  11,  28;  Jas.2. 
1-;  1  Jo.  3.  21 ;  Rev.  3.  3.] 

IF  otherwise  — 

But  if  not,  el  5e  wye  ei  de  mege. 

Luke  5.  36  if  otherwise,  then  both  the  newmaketh  a 
2  Co.  11.  16  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me,  that 

IF  p  era '.1  venture  — 

Lest  at  any  time,  fi-ffirore  inepote. 

2  Ti.    2.  25  if  God  peradventure  will  give  them  repc. 

IF  so  — 

If  ihv  ean. 

Matt.18.  13  if  so  be  that  he  find  it,  verily  I  say  unto 

XF  so  be  — 

If  so  he,  it  may  65,  unless,  'S*M,  *bt<  ula. 

Josh. 14.  12  if  so  be  the  Lord  (will*  he)  with  me,  then 
IIos.    8.    7  if  so  be  it  yield,  the  strangers  shall  swall. 

IF  so  be  (that)  — 

1.//',  if  indeed,  if  at  least, eiye  eige. 

2  Co.    5.    3  [U  so  he  that]  being  clothed  we  shall 
Eph.   4.  21  if  so  be  that  ye  have  heard  him,  and  have 


2.  If  so  be,  elirep  (apa)  eiper  (ara). 

Rom.  8.    9  if  so  be  that  the  spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you 
8.  17  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  (him),  that  we 
1  Co.  15.  15  whom  he  raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that  the 

1  Pe.    2.    3  [if  so  be]  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  (is) 

IF  some  — 

Jf  any  one,  el  tis  ei  tis. 

Rom  11.  17  And  if  some  of  the  branches  be  broken  off 

IF  that  — 

l.If,  or,  whether,  to,  surely,  jn  hen. 

Ezra   4.  13  Be  it  known  now  unto  the  king,  that  if 
4.  16  We  certify  the  king,  that  if  the  city  be 
2.  If  also,  el  Kat  ei  kai. 

Phil.  3. 12  if  that  I  may  also  apprehend  that  forwh. 

IF  yet  — 

If,  if  indeed,  efye  Kai  eige  kai. 

Gal.     3.   4  so  many  tilings  in  vaiii?  if  (it  be)  yet  in  vain 

XG'-AL,  bw  deliverer. 

1.  Son  of  Joseph  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar ;  one  of  the 
spies  sent  from  Kadesh  to  search  the  land.    jj.c.  1491. 

Nuni  13.    7  Of  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  I.  the  son  of  Jo. 

2.  One  of  David's  guard,  and  son  of  Nathan  of  Zobah. 
In  1  Ch.  11.  38  he  is  called  Joel  the  brother  of  Nathan. 
Igeal  is  identical.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  36  I.  the  son  of  Nathan  of  Zobah.  Bani  the 

IG-E'-AL,  hjftl  deliverer. 

This  name  in  the  original  Hebrew  is  identical  with  the 
preceding  Igal.  He  was  a  son  of  Shemaiah  a  descen- 
dant of  the  royal  house  of  Judah. 

1  Ch.  3.  22  and  the  sonsofShemaiah;Hattush,andI. 
IG-DAL'-IAH,  in;W  Jah  is  great. 
Properly  Igdaljaku. '    He  was  father  of  Hanan,  who  had 
a  chamber  in  the  temple  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah.  B.C. 
640. 

Jer.  35.   4  Ilanan,  the  son  of  I.,  a  man  of  God,  which 

IGNOMINY  — 

Shame,  confusion,  |i?jj  qalon. 

Prov.18.    3  also  contempt,  and  with  ignominy  repro. 
IGNORANCE  — 

1.  Error,  (-wandering,  going  astray),  rnaip  shegagah. 
Lev.    4.    2  If  a  soul  shall  sin  through  ignorance 

4.  22  done.. through  ignorance  (against) any  of 

4.  27  if  any  one.  .sin  through  ignorance,  while 

5.  15  If  a  soul,  .sin  through  ignorance,  in  the 
5.  18  concerning  his  ignorance  wherein  he  erred 

Nunii5.  24  if  (ought)  be  committed  by  ignorance  wi. 
15.  25  it  shall  be  forgiven  them ;  for  it  (is)  igno. 
15.  25  sin  offering  before  the  Lord,  for  their  ign. 
15.  26  seeing  all  the  people  (were)  in  ignorance 
15.  27  if  any  soul  sin  through  ignorance,  then 
15.  28  when  he  sinneth  by  ignorance  before  the  L. 
15.  29  onelawforhim  that  sinneth  through  igno. 

2.  Ignorance,  want  of  knowledge,  ayvoia  agnoia. 

Acts.  3.  17  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  (it) 
17.  30  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked 
Eph.  4.  18  alienated,  .through  the  ignorance  that  is 
1  Pe.    1. 14  according  to  the  former  lust3  in  your  ig. 

3. Ignorance*  want  of  knowledge,  ayvcoala  agnosia. 
1  Pe.  2. 15  put  to  silence  the  ignoranceof  foolish  men 

IGNORANCE,  to  sin  (ignorantly  or)  through  — 
1.7*0  err,  go  astray,  22$  shagag. 

Numi5.  28  atonement  for  the  soul  that  sinneth  ignor. 
2.  To  err,  go  astray,  na^  shagah. 

Lev.    4.  13  if  the  whole  congregation . .  sin  through  ig. 

IGNORANT,  to  be  — 

l.Not  to  know,  jn;  ab  lo  yada. 

Psa.  73.  22  So  foolish  (was)  I,  and  ignorant:  I  was  (as) 

Isa.   56.  10  they  are  all  ignorant,  they  (are)  all  dumb 

63.  16  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  I. 

2.7*0  be  ignorant,without  A-nowledge,  ayvoem  agnoeo. 

Rom  10.   3  they  beingignorantof God'srighteousness 

11.  25  I  would  not.. that  ye  should  be  ignorant 

1  Co.  10.    1  I  would  not  that  ye  should  be  ignorant 

14.  38  if  any  man  be  ignorant,  let  him  be  ignor. 

2  Co.   2.  11  advantage,  .for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his 
1  Th.  4. 13  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  br. 

IGNORANT  — 

1.7*0  be  ignorant,  without  knowledge,  ayvoeta. 
Rom.  1. 13  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant,  brethren 

1  Co.  12.   1  brethren,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant 

2  Co.  1.   8  we  wouldnot,  brethren,  have  you  ignorant 
Heb.  5.    2  Who  can  have  compassion  ontheignorant 

2. A  private  person,  plebeian,  ISk*>tt}s  idioles. 

Acts    4.  13  that  they  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men 

IGNORANT  of,  to  be  — 

7*o  be  or  lie  hid,  \ai>6dva>  lanthano. 

2  Pe.  3.    5  For  this  they  willingly  are  ignorant  of 

3.    8  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing,  that  one 

IGNORANTLY  — 

1.  Without  knowledge,  njn  73  bell  daath. 

Deut  19.   4  Whoso  killeth  his  neighbour  ignorantly 

2. 7*o  be  ignorant,  without  knowledge,  ayvoew  agnoeo. 
Acts  17.  23  Whom  therefore  ye  ignorantly  worship 
1  Ti.    j.  13  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  (it)  ign. 


I'-XJff,  C">y  circles,  heaps. 

1.  The  contracted  form  of  Ije-Abarim,  the  37th encamp- 
ment of  the  Israelites  after  leaving  Egypt,  and  the  26th 
from  Sinai. 

Nuni33.  45  they  departed  from  I.,  and  pitched  in  D. 

2.  A  town  in  the  extreme  S..  of  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  29  Baalah,  and  L,  and  Azem 

I-JE  A-BA'-RUffl,  □'"inj/rt  ^$  heaps  of  the  further  region 
One  of  the  later  halting-places  of  Israel  as  they  were 
approaching  Palestine.  It  was  on  the  S.  E.  boundary 
of  the  territory  of  Moab,  in  the  Midbar,  i.e.,  the  uncul- 
tivated wilderness.    See  Abariai. 

Nuni2i.  11  journeyed  from  Oboth,and  pitched  at  I.,  in 
33.  44  they  departed  from  Oboth, and pitchedin  I. 

I-'JON,  J'vy  heap. 

A  town  of  Naphtali  in  the  N.  of  Palestine.  It  is  now 
called  Merj  Ayun,  and  is  a  few  miles  N.W.  of  the  site 
of  Dan. 

1  Ki.15.  2oBen-hadad  hearkened,  .and  smote  I.,  and 

2  Ki.15.  29  came  Tiglath-pileser.  .and  took  I.,  andA. 
2  Ch.16.   4  they  smote  I.,  and  Dan,  and  Abel-maim 

IK'-KESH,  tf,T  subtile. 

Father  of  Ira  the  Tekoite,  one  of  David's  thirty  valiant 

men.     B.C.  1070. 

2  Sa.23.  26  Helez  the  Paltite,  Ira  the  son  of  I.  the  T. 

1  Ch.n.  28  Ira  the  son  of  I.  the  Tekoite,  Abi-ezerthe 
27.   9  The  sixth  (captain  .was)  Ira  the  son  of  I. 

I'-LAI,  ,!ry  elevated. 

An  Aholiite  and  one  of  the  heroes  of  David's  guard. 

B.C.  1048.    In  2  Sam.  23.  28  he  is  called  Zalmon. 

1  Ch.11.  29  Sibbecai  the  Hushathite,  I.  the  Ahohite 
ILL  — 
I. Evil,  j>-]  ra. 

Gen.  41.    3  other  kine.  .ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed 

41.   4  the  ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed  kine  did 

41.  19  poor  and  very  ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed 

41.  21  they  (were)  still  ill  favoured,  as  at  the  be. 

Deut  15.  21  if .  .lame,  or  blind,  (or  have)  any  ill  blem. 

Isa.     3.  11  Woe  unto  the  wicked !  (it  shall  be)  ill 

2.  To  be  evil,  VVJ  raa. 

Jer.  40.   4  if  it  seem  ill  unto  thee  to  come  with  me 

Z.Evil,  KaK6s  kakos. 

Rom  13.  10  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour :  th. 

ILL,  to  deal  or  behave  self  — 

To  do  or  suffer  evil,  treat  ill,  J?""i  raa,  5. 

Gen.  4.    6  Wherefore  dealt  ye  (so)  ill  with  me,  (as) 
Mic.    3.    4  as  they  have  behaved  themselves  ill  in 

TT.T.  favoured  — 

Evil,  jn  ra. 

Gen.  41.  20  the  lean  and  ill  favoured  kine  did  eat  up 
41.  27  the  seven  thin  and  ill  favoured  kine  that 

ILL,  to  go  — 

7*o  be  evil,  jn;  yara. 

Job   20.  26  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  left  in  hist. 
Psa.  106.  32  so  that  it  went  ill  with  Moses  for  their  sake 

ILL  savour  — 

Stench,  n:n*  tsachanah. 

Joel    2.  20  his  ill  savour  shall  come  up,  because  he  h. 

ILLUMINATE,  to  — 

7*o  make  or  give  light,  (purifa  j^hotizo. 

Heb.  10.  32  after  ye  were  illuminated,  ye  endured  a  gr. 

LL-LY-RI'-CTJIH,  AKKvpiKov. 

An  extensive  district  lying  along  the  E.  coast  of  the 
Adriatic,  from  Italy  on  the  N.  toEpirus  on  the  S.,  and 
contiguous  to  Moesia  and  Macedonia  on  the  E.  The 
Drilo  divided  it  into  Illyris  Barbara  on  the  N.  and 
IllyrisGnecaon  theS.  Within  these  limits  was  included 
Dalmatia,  which  name  was  ultimately  used  for  the  whole 
district. 

Rom.  15.  19  unto  I. ;  I  have  fully  preached  the  gospel 
THAGE  — 
I.  Any  thing  set  vp,2nllar  or  idol,  nn^,  matstsebah. 

Exod23,  24  Thou  shalt . .  quite  break  down  their  imag. 
34-  13  ye  shall  destroy  their  altars.break  their  i. 

Deut.  7,    5  breakdown  their  images,  and  cut  down  t. 

16.  22  Neither  shalt  thou  set  up  (any)  image 

1  Ki.14.  23  high  places,  and  images,  and  groves,  on 

2  Ki.  3.  2  he  put  away  the  image  of  Baal  that  his  f. 

10.  26  they  brought  forth  the  images  out  of  the  h. 
10.  27  they  brake  down  the  image  of  Baal,  andb. 

17.  10  they  set  up  images  and  groves  in  every  h. 

18.  4  brake  the  images,  and  cut  down  the  grow 
23.  14  he  brake  in  pieces  the  images,  and  tut  d. 

2  Ch.14.   3  brake  down  the  images,  and  cut  down  the 
31.    1  brake  the  images  in  pieces,  I  cut  down 
Jer.  43.  13  He  shall  break  also  the  images  of  Beth-s. 
Hos.    3.    4  without  an  image,  and  without  an  ephod 
10.    1  of  his  land  they  have  made  goodly  images 
10.    2  he  shall  break  down,  .shall  spoil  their  im. 
2. Imagery,  n'Sfc'O  maskith. 

Lev.  26.    1  neither  shall  ye  set  up  (any)  image  of  st. 
3. Figure,  idol,  *?£p,  S"p  s&rnel. 

Eze,    8.    3  the  seat  of  the  image  of  jealousy,  which 
8.    5  behold,  .this  image  of  jealousy  in  the  en. 
4. Grief  a  cause  of  grief \  3>*;*  aisab. 

2  Sa.    5.  21  there  they  left  their  images,  ;.;id  David  and 


IMAGE 


509 


IMPOSSIBLE 


5,  Image,  xhs  tselem. 

Gen.    i.  26  Letusmake  man  in  our  image,  after  ourl. 

1.  27  man  in  his . .  image,  in  the  image  of  God  c. 

5.  3  begat,  .in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image 
9.    6  shed :  for  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  m. 

Xum33.  52  destroy  all  their  molten  images,  and  quite 

1  Sa.   6.    5  make  images  of  your  emerods,  and  images 

6.  n  the  mice. .  and  the  images  of  their  emerods 

2  Ki.  11.  18  Ins  altars  and  his  images  brake  they  in  p. 
2  Ch.  23.  17  brake  his  altars  and  his  images  in  pieces 
Psa.  73.  20  0  Lord,  .thou  shalt  despise  their  image 
Eze.    7.  20  they  made . .  images  of  their  abominations 

16.  17  madest  to  thyself  images  of  men,  and  di. 

23.  14  images  of  the  Chaldeans  pourtrayed  with 

Amos  5.  26  your  images,  the  star  of  your  god,  which 

6. Image,  D7S,  ch$  tselem. 

Dan.    2.  31  Thou,  .sawest,  and,  behold,  a  great  image 

2.  31  This  great  image,  whose  brightness  (was) 
2. 32  Tins  image's  head  (was)  of  fine  gold,  his  b. 
2.  34  a  stone,  .smote  the  image  upon  his  feet 

2.  35  stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a  g. 

3.  1  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  made  an  image 
3.  2  to  come  to  the  dedication  of  the  image 
3.  3  unto  the  dedication  of  the  image  that  N. 
3.  3  they  stood  before  the  image  that  Nebuc. 
3.  5  ye  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden  im. 
3.  7  fell  down  (and)  worshipped  the  golden  i. 
3. 10  shall  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden  i. 
3. 12, 14,  iSnor  worship thegoldenimage  which 

3.  15  ye  fall  down  and  worship  the  image  which 

7 '.Similitude,  form,  lilceness,  K*0$  femunah. 

Job  4. 16  an  image  (was)  before  mine  eyes.. silence 
8.  Image,  likeness,  eiK&v  eikom. 

Matt  22.  20  "Whose  (is)  this  image  and  superscription  ? 

Marki2. 16  Whose  (is)  this  image  and  superscription  ? 

Luke2o.  24  Whose  image  and  superscription  hath  it? 

Roni.  j.  23  into  an  image  ruade;like  to  corruptible  man 
8.  29  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,  that 

1  Co.  11.    7  forasmuch  as  he  is  the  image  and  glory 

15.  49  the  image  of  the  earthy,  .image  of  the  li. 

2  Co.   3.  18  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  g. 

4.  4  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should 
Col.     1.  15  Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  the 

3.  10  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him 
Heb.  10.    1  not  the  very  image  of  the  things,  can 
Rev.  13.  14  that  they  should  make  an  image  to  the  b. 
13.  15  unto  the  image  of  the  beast,  that  the  im. 

13.  15  as  many  as  would  not  worship  the  image 

14.  9  If  any  man  worship  the  beast  and  Ids  im. 

14.  11  who  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  and 

15.  2  the  victory  over  the  beast,  and  over  his  i. 

16.  2  and  (upon)  them  which  worshipped  his  i. 

19.  20  and  them  that  worshipped  his  image 

20.  4  not  worshipped  the  beast,  neither  his  im. 

[See  also  Graven,  molten.] 
IMAGE,  carved  — 
1. Graven  object,  *?D3  pesel. 

Judg  18.  18  fetched  the  carved  image,  the  ephod.and 
2  Ch.33.    7  he  set  a  carved  image,  the  idol  which  he 
2.Graven  objects,  cr'rp?  pesillm. 

2  Ch.33.  2-  Anion  sacrificed  unto  all  the  carved  im. 
34.    3,  4  groves,  and  the  carved  images,  and  the 
IMAGE,  express  — 
Impressed  character,  xaP^^"hp  charakter. 

Heb.  1.    3  Who  being.,  the  express  image  of  his  pers. 
IMAGE,  standing  — 
A  nything  set  up,  nyxa  matstsebah. 

Lev.  26.    1  neither  rear  you  up  a  standing  image 
Hie.   5. 13  and  thy  standing  images  out  of  the  midst 
IMAGE  (work)  — 
Movable  work,  w$±vx  tsaatsuun. 

2  Ch.  3. 10  he  made  two  cherubim  of  image  work 
IMAGERY  — 
Imagery,  n'Sy'?  maskith. 

Eze.    8. 12  every  man  iu  the  chambers  of  his  imagery 
IMAGES  — 
1. Images  (of  the  sun),  D'jbtj  chammanim. 

Lev.  26.  30  I  will,  .cut  down  your  images,  and  east 
2CI1.14.    5  tookaway..thehighplacesandtheimages 
34.    4  the  images  that  (were)  on  high  above  them 
Isa.   17.   8  have  made,  either  the  groves  or  the  im. 

27.   9  the  groves  and  images  shall  not  stand  up 
Eze.    6.    4  your  images  shall  be  broken ;  and  I  will 
6.    6  your  images  may  be  cut  down,  and  your 
2.Realers,  nourishers,  Jwusehold  gods,  ca-jn  terap. 
Gen.  31. 10  Rachel  had  stolen  the  images  that  (were) 
31.  34  Rachel  had  taken  the  images,  and'puttheni 
31.  35  he  searched,  but  found  not  the  images 
1  Sa.  19. 13  Michal  took  an  image,  and  laid  (it)  in  the 
19.  16  behold,  .an  image  in  the  bed,  with  a  pil. 
1  KJ.  23.  24  the  images,  and  the  idols,  and  all  the  ab. 
Eze.  21.  21  he  consulted  with  images,  he  looked  in 
IMAGINATION  — 

1.  Formation,  imagination,  *ii'*  yetser. 

Gen.   6.    5  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his 

8.  21  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  (is)  evil 
Deut  31.  21  I  know  their  imagination  which  they  go 
1  Ch.28.    9  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the 
29.  18  keep  this  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of 

2.  Stubbornness,  nnn^  slieriruth. 

Deut  29.  19  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart 

Je/.     3.  17  after  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart 

7. 24  in  the  imagination  of  their  evil  heart,  and 


Jer.  9  14  after  the  imagination  of  their  own  heart 
11.  8  every  one  iu  the  imagination  of  their  evil 
13. 10  walk  in  the  imagination  of  their  heart 
16.  12  ye  walk  every  one  after  the  imagination 
18.  12  we  will  every  one  do  the  imagination  of 
23.  17  after  the  imagination  of  his  own  heart 

3. Thought,  device,  rcc^TO  machashebeth. 

Prov.  6.  18  An  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  imaginat. 
Lam.  3.  60, 61  (and)  all  their  imaginations  against  me 

i. Reasoning,  Sia\oyio-fx6s  dialogismos. 

Rom.  1.  21  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and 
5. Mind,  understanding,  Sidvota  dianoia. 

Luke  1.  51  he  hath  scattered  the  proud  in  the  iniag. 

6. Reasoning,  \oyi<r/j.6s  logismos. 

2  Co.io.   5  Casting  down  imaginations,  and  every 
IMAGINE,  to  — 
1.7*0  meditate,  utter,  mutter,  rtin  hagah. 

Psa.    2.    1  Why  do . .  the  peopleimagine  a  vain  thing? 
38.  12  and  they,  .imagine  deceits  all  the  day  lo. 
2.  To  devise,  purpose,  E2T  zamam. 

Gen.  ir.    6  nothing,  .which  they  have  imagined  to  do 
Z.To  grave,  devise,  ivork,  v~n  charash. 

Prov  12.  20  Deceit  (is)  in  the  heart  of  them  that  ima. 
4.  To  think,  devise,  reckon,  3c:n  chashab. 

Jub     6.  26  Do  ye  imagine  to  reprove  words,  and  the 

Psa.  10.    2  taken  in  the  devices  that  they  have  ima. 

21.  11  For.  .they  imagined  a  mischievous  device 
140.    2  Which  imagine  mischiefs  in .  .heart :  con. 

Xah.    1.  11  There  is.  .come  out  of  thee,  that  iniagin. 

■gtich.  7. 10  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  against  his  b. 

let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hearts 

5.7*0  think,  ~devise^<^'yih  ^V  chashab,  3. 

Hos.    7.  15  yet  do  therim,a?ine  mischlef  against  me 
Nah.    1.    g^Tiatdoyeima^^^SainsttheLORD? 

6.7*0  care  for,  meditate,  peXerav  md<&'5- . 

Acts    4.  25  Why  did . .  the  people  imagine  vaXh  1  1  lv°s: 
[See  also  Mischief,  wrongfully.] 

IM'-LA,  IM'-LAH,  nhp%  nbo)  fulfilling. 
Progenitor  of  Michaiah,  who  was  consulted  by  Ahab 
and  Jehoshaphat  before  their  expedition  to  Ramoth- 
gilead.    B.C.  930. 

1  Ki.22.    8(Thereis)yetoneman,"MicaialithesonofI. 

22.  9  said,  Hasten  (hither)  Micaiahthe  son  of  I. 

2  CI1.18.   7  the  same  (is)  Michaiahthe  son  of  I.  And 

18.   8  said,  Fetch  quickly  Micaiah  the  son  of  I. 

mi-MA-NTT-EL,  ^N»ay  God  {is)  with  us. 
A  symbolic  name  given  to  the  child  who  was  announced 
to  Ahaz  and  the  people  of  Judah  as  the  sign  that  God 
would  give  them  deliverance  from  their  enemies.  Mat- 
thew applies  it  similarly  to  Jesus  the  Messiah.  See 
Emmanuel  (Matt.  1.  23). 

Isa.     7.  14  virgin  shall  conceive,  and . .  call  his  name  I. 
8.    S  wings  shallfillthebreadthofthyland.OI. 
IMMEDIATELY  — 
l.From  that  very  (hour),  efavTTJs  exautes. 

Acts  10.  33  Immediately  therefore  I  sent  to  thee ;  and 
11.  11  immediately  there  were  three  men  already 
21.  32  Who  immediately  took  soldiers  and  cen. 
2.  Directly,  straightway,  zvOeccs  euiheos. 

Matt.  4.  22  they  immediately  left  the  ship  and  their 
8.  3  And  immediately  his  leprosy  wascleansed 
14.  31  immediately  Jesus  stretched  forth  (his)  h. 
20.  34  immediately  their  eyes  received  sight,  and 
24.  29  Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those 
26.  74  began  he  to  curse . .  And  [immediately]  the 
Mark  1.  31  [immediately]  the  fever  left  her,  and  she 

1.  42  [immediately]  the  leprosy  departed  from 

2.  8  [immediately]  when  Jesus  perceived  in  his 
2.  12  immediately  he  arose,tookup  the  bed,  and 
4.  5  [immediately]  it  sprangjup,  because  it  had 
4.  15  Satan  cometh  [immediately],  and  taketh 
4.  16  [immediately]  receive  it  with  gladness 

4.  17  affliction.. ariseth..[immediately]theyare 

4.  29  [immediately]  he  putteth  in  the  sickle,  be. 

5.  2  [immediately]  there  met  him  out  of  the 

5.  30  Jesus,  [immediately]  knowing  in  himself 

6.  27  [immediately]  the  king  sent  an  executioner 
6.  50  [immediately]  he  talked  with  them,  and 

10.  52  [immediately]  he  received  Ids  sight,  and 
14.  43  [immediately],while  he  yet  spake,  come.  J. 
Luke  5. 13  immediately  the  leprosy  departed  from 
6.  49  [immediately]  it  fell;  and  the  ruin  of  that 

12.  36  that,  .they  may  open  unto  him  immedia. 
John  5.    9  immediately  the  man  was  made  whole,  and 

6.  2i  immediately  the  ship  was  at  the  land 

13.  30  He .  .went  [immediately]  out :  and  it  was 
18.  27  Peter  then  denied  again:  and  immediately 

Acts  9. 18  immediately  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it 
9.  34  make  thy  bed.    And  he  arose  immediately 
16. 10  immediately  we  endeavoured  to  go  into 
17.  10  the  brethren  immediately  sent  away  Paul 
17. 14  then  immediately  the  brethren  sentaway 
Gal.     1.  16  immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh 
Rev.   4.   2  immediately  I  was  in  the  Spirit:  and, be. 
3.Directly,  straightway,  evdvs  cuthu.s. 

Mark  1.  12  immediately  the  spirit  driveth  liiniinto 

1.  2S  [immediately]  Ins  fame  spread  abroad  thr. 
John2i.   3  They,  .entered  into  a  ship  [immediately] 
A. Presently,  along  with  the  matter,  Trapaxpypa. 
Luke  1.  64  his  mouth  was  opened  immediately,  and 

4.  39  immediately  she  arose  and  ministered  unto 

5.  25  immediately  he  rose  up  before  them,  and 


Luke  8.  44  immediately  her  issue  of  blood  stanched 
8.  47  declared,  .how  she  was  healed  immediate. 
13.  13  immediately  she  was  made  straight,  and 

18.  43  immediately  he  received  his  sight,  and 

19.  11  the  kingdom  of  God  should  immediately 
22.  60  immediately,  while  he  yet  spake,  the  cock 

Acts   3.    7  immediately  his  feet  and  ancle  bones  rec. 
12.  23  immediately  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote 
13. 11  immediately  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and 
16.  26  immediately  all  the  doors  were  opened 
LM'-MER,  "i*3N  projecting  ;  prominent. 

1.  Name  of  a  family  of  priests  who  gave  their  name  to 
the  16th  course  of  the  temple  service.  B.C.  536.  See 
Emaier. 

1  Ch.  9. 12  the  son  of  Meshillemith,the  son  of  I. 
Ezra   2.  37  The  children  of  L,  a  thousand  fifty  and 

10.  20  of  the  sons  of  I.;  Hanani  and  Zebadiah 
Neh.  7.  40  The  children  of  I.,  a  thousand  fifty  and 

11. 13  the  son  of  Meshillemoth,  the  son  of  I. 

2.  A  priest  in  the  time  of  David  to  whom  the  charges  of 
the  sanctuary  were  assigned  by  lot.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  14  The  fifteenth  to  Bilgah,  the  sixteenth  to  I. 

3.  One  who  returned  without  a  genealogy  from  Babylon. 
B.C.  536.    But  it  may  be  the  name  of  a  place. 

Ezra  2.  59  they  which  went  up  from  Tel-melah..I. 
Neh.   7.  61  Teldiaresha,  Cherub,  Addon,  and  I. 

4.  The  father  of  Zadok.     B.C.  536. 

Neh.  3.  29  After  them  repaired  Zadok  the  son  of  I. 

5.  A  priest  in  Jeremiah's  time.     B.C.  630. 

Jer.  20.    1  Now  Pashur  the  son  of  I.  the  priest,  who 
IMMORTAL  — 
Incorrup>tible,  &(pQapros  aphthartos. 

i  Ti.    1.  17  Now  unto  the  king  eternal,  immortal, in. 
IMMORTALITY  — 
l.Deathlessness,  aOavao-la  athanasia. 

1  C0.15.  53  and  thismortal(must)put  on  immortality 
15.  54  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality 

1  Ti.    6.  16  Who  only  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in 

^Incorruption,  atydapcrla  ajihtliarsia. 

*"  "i.  2.    7  seek  for  dory  and  honour  -  ^-v1**1      .   ,. 
1'-'  '."■''/,  ,p  h^+ii  '  S7 .  t''-,n"r  VU.  --and  immortality 


2  Ti.    i".'i%^..^riruugiit"Me and  immortality  to  light 
TTVrMTTTA-RTT.TT-v-   IMMUTABLE  — 
Unchangeable,  immutable,  a^rdO^ros  ametathetos. 

Heb.  6.  17  to  show,  .the  immutability  ol  his  counsel 
6. 18  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which 
ES'-NA,  y:p*  withdrawing. 

A  son  of  Helem,  an  Asherite  and  prince  of  the  tribe. 
B.C.  1690. 

1  Ch.  7.  35  sons  of  Ms  brother  Helem;  Zophah,  and  I. 
IM'-NAH,  np'  prosperity. 

1.  The  first  born  of  Asher.  In  Gen.  46.  17  the  name  is 
given  as  Jimnah  in  the  Common  Version,  though  iden- 
tical with  the  present.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  30  The  sons  of  Asher ;  I.,  and  Isuah,  and  I. 

2.  Kore  Ben-Imnah  assisted  in  the  reformation  effected 
by  Hezekiah.     B.C.  740. 

2  Ch.31. 14  And  Kore  the  son  of  I.  the  Levite,  the  p. 
IMPART,  to  — 

1.7*0  apportion,  phn  chalaq. 

Job  39.  17  neither  hath  he  imparted  to  her  understa. 
2. 7*o  give  a  share  of,  fierab'lStofj.t  metoxlidomi. 

Luke  3 .  1 1  let  him  impart  to  him  that  hath  none ;  an  d 
Rom.  1.  11  thatl  may  impart  unto  you  some  spiritual 
1  Th.    2.    S  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto 
IMPEDIMENT  in  his  speech,  having  an  — 
One  who  speaks  with  difficulty,  fxoyt\d\os  mogilalos. 
Mark  7.  32  [one  that,  .had  an  impediment  in  liissp.] 
IMPENITENT  — 

Without  a  change  of  mind,  a/xGrauovros  ametanoe. 
Rom.  2;   s  after  tiiy  hardness  and  impenitent  heart 
IMPERIO  TJS  — 
Ruling,  domineering,  ns^  shaUcteth. 

Eze.  16.  30  the  work  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman 
IMPLACABLE  — 
Implacable,  irrceonciteable,  6.airovZos  aspondos. 

Rom.  1.  31  without  natural  affection,  [implacable] 
IMPLEAD,  to  — 
To  call  into  (court),  eyKaKeca  egkateo. 

Acts  19.  3S  the  craftsmen,  .let  them  implead  one  an. 
rMPORTTTNITY  — 
Barefacedness,  avaiSeta  analdeia. 

Luke  1 1.    8  because  of  his  importunity  he  willriseand 
IMPOSE,  to  — 
7*o  impose,  cast,  throw,  n£i  remah. 

Ezra  7.  24  to  impose  toll,  tribute,  or  custom,  upon 
IMPOSED,  to  be  — 
To  lie  upon,  iiriKetfiai  epiikeimai, 

Heb.  9.  10  carnal  ordinances,  imposed . .  until  the 
IMPOSSIBLE  — 

1. Powerless,  weak,  impossible,  aZvvaros  adunatos. 
Matti9.  26  With  men  this  is  impossible ;  but  with  G. 
Markio.  27  With  men  (it  is)  impossible,  but  not  with 
LukeiS.  27  The  things  whichare  impossiblewith  men 
Heb.  6.  4  For.  .impossible  for  those  who  were  once 
6.  1 8  in  which  (it  was)  impossible  for  God  to  lie 
11.   6  But  without  faith  (it  is)  impossible  to  pie. 


IMPOSSIBLE 


510 


IN 


%Not  tobe  received  or  accepted,  avevSenros  emend. 
Lnkei7.    i  It  is  impossible  but  that  offences  will 

IMPOSSIBLE,  to  be  — 

To  be  fwwerless,  weak,  impotent,  adwarev  aduna. 
Matt 1 7.  20  and  nothing;  shall  be  impossible  unto  you 
Luke  1.  37  For  with  God  nothing  shall  be  impossible 

IMPOTENT  (folk  or  man)  — 

1. Powerless,  weak,  impotent,  aSvuaros  adunatos. 

Acts  14.    8  there  sat  a  certain  man  at  Lystra,  impo. 
2.To  be  without  strength,  affOevew  astheneo. 

John  5.    3  In  these  lay  a.,  multitude  of  impotent  folk 

5.  7  The  impotent  man  answered  him,  Sir,  I 
3.  Without  strength,  aadeuns  asthenes. 

Acts   4.   g  the  good  deed  done  to  the  impotent  man 
IMPOVERISH,  to  — 
To  make  poor,  s^gn  rashash,  Za. 

Jer.     5.  17  they  shall  impoverish  thy. fenced  cities 
IMPOVERISHED,  to  be  — 
l.To  become  lean,  poor,  thin,  weak,  T?y  dalal,  2. 

Judg.  6.    6  Israel  was  greatly  impoverished  because 
2.7V)  be  impoverished,  low,  \2D  sakan,  4. 

Isa.    40.  20  He  that  (is)  so  impoverished  that  he  hath 
3.  To  be  made  poor,  &&n  rashash,  4. 

Mai.    1.    4  Whereas  Edomsaith,  We  are  impoverish. 
IMPRISON,  to  — 
To  imprison,  <pv\a;ct£a>  phvZaJdzo. 

Acta  22.  19  Lord}  they  know  that  I  imprisoned  and 

IMPRISONMENT  — 

1.  Band,  fetter,  "nox  esur. 

Ezra    7.  26  confiscation  of  goods,  or  to  imprisonment 

2.  Watch,  imprisonment,  (pv\a.Kr\  phulake. 

2  Co.   6.    5  In  stripes,  in  imprisonments,  in  tumults 
Heb.  11.  36  yea,  moreover  of  bonds  and  imprisonm. 

IMP  ITDENT  — 

l.To  ?)<■-:/>-  strong,  harden,  frj,  azaz,  5. 

Prov.  7. 13  (and)  wjth  an  impudent  face  said  unto  him 
2.  Strong  of  forehead,  nxn  pin  chazaq  rnetsach. 

Eze.    3.    7  all  the  house  of  Israel  (are)  impudent  and 
Z.Sharp  of  face,  n'j?  npj}  qesheh  phanim. 
"Eze.     2.    4  For.,  impudent  children,  and  stiffhearted 

IMPUTE,  to  — 

l.To  think,  devise,  reckon,  nt^n  chashab. 

2  Sa.  19.  19  Let  not  my  lord  impute  iniquity  unto  me 
Psa.  32.  2  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iuiqu. 

2.  To  put,  place,  set,  Dty,  Mb  sum,  sim. 

1  Sa.  22.  15  Let  not  the  king  impute  (any)  tiling  unto 

3.  To  bring  into  account,  iWoyecc  ellogeo. 

Rom.  5.  13  sin  is  not  imputed  when  there  is  no  law 
i.To  count,  account,  reckon,  \oyi£o}j.at  logizomai. 

Rom.  4.  6  unto  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness 
4.  8  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute 
4.  11  that  righteousness  niightbe  imputedunto 
4.  22  therefore  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  right. 
4.  23  his  sake  alone,  that  it  was  imputed  to  him 
4.  24  for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed 

2  Co.   5.  19  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them 
Jas.     2.  23  it  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteousness 

IMPUTED,  to  be  — 

To  be  reckoned,  3B»n  chashab,  2. 

Lev.    7.  18  neither  shall  it  be  imputed  unto  him  that 
17.    4  blood  shall  be  imputed  unto  that  man 

IM'-RAH,  n-i^  height  of  Jah. 

A  chief  of  the  tribe  of  Asher.  and  one  of  the  family  of 

Zophah.    B.C.  .1570. 

1  Ch.  7.  36  The  sons  of  Zophah  ;  Suah.  .and  I. 
IM'-RI,  hdm  projecting. 

1.  A  man  of  Juda'h  through  the  family  of  Pharez.    B.C. 
536. 

1  Ch.  9.    4  the  son  of  Omri,  the  son  of  L,  the  son  of 

2.  A  progenitor  of  Zaccur,  one  of  Neheniiah's  assistants 
in  rebuilding  the  wall.    B.C.  470. 

Neh.   3.   2  next  to  them  builded  Zaccur  the  son  of  I. 
IN  — 

1.  Unto,  to,  *?ii  el. 

Gen.     8.  21  the  LoitPsaidinhis  heart,  I  willnotagain 

2.  With,  m  eth. 

Gen.    6.  14  rooms  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark,  and 

Z.In,  iD3  bemo. 

Is:t.   44.  16  He  burnetii  part  thereof  in  the  fire;  with 
4,1.  19  I  have  burnt  part  of  it  in  the  fire ;  yea 

4. Sufficiency,  for,  1  dai, 

Jer.   51.  58  labour  in  vain,  and  the  folk  in  the  fire 

5. From,  out  of,  Jp  min. 

Gen.  21. 15  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and 

6.  On,  over,  above,  *?"  at. 

Gen.    1.  20  may  fly  above  the  earth  in  the  open  firm. 
Ezra   5.  15  let  the  house  of  God  be  builded  in  his  pi. 

6.  7  let.  .build  this  house  of  God  in  his  place 
Dan.    3.  16  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  matter 

3.  28  delivered  his  servants  that  trusted  in  him 

4.  8  But  at  the  last  Daniel  came  in  before  mo 
4.  10  Thus  (were)  the  visions  of  mine  head  in 
4.  29  he  walked  in  the  palace  of  the  kingdom 


Dan.   4.  36  I  was  established  in  my  kingdom,  and 

5.  9  his  countenance  was  changed  in  him,  and 

6.  4  neither  was  there  any.  .fault  found  in  him 

7.  28  my  countenance  changed  in  me  :  but  I 

7.  With,  Dj;  im. 

Deut.  8.    5  Thou  shalt  also  consider  in  thine  heart 

8.  With,  1BJ?  immad. 

Job  29.' 20  My  glory  (was)  fresh  in  me,  and  my  bow 
9. According  to  the  mouth  of,  "z)1  lephi. 

Hos.  10.  i2  reap  in  mercy  ;  break  up  your  fallow  gr. 
10.  Inner  part,  within,  ns^?  penimah. 

2  Ch.29.  18  they  went  in  to  Hezekiah  the  king,  and 
11.7/t  the  heart,  midst,  3"3£3  beqercb. 

Gen.  45.    6  For  these  two  years,  .the  famine,  .in  the 

Exod23.  21  Beware  of  him.  .for  my  name  (is)  in  him 

Deut  19.  10  That  innocent  blond  be  not  shed  in  thy  1. 
29.  11  thy  stranger  that  (is)  in  thy.  camp,  from 

Josh.  6.  25  she  dwelleth  in  Israel  (even)  unto  this  day 

1  Ki.    3.  28  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  (was)  in  him 
Isa.     7.  22  shall  every  one  eat  (that  is),  .in  the  land 

12.  Under,  nnw  tachath. 

Job  30.  14  in  the  desolation  they  rolled  themselves 
13. Between,  \ '2  ben. 

Exodi2.  6  congregation,  .shall  kill  it  in  the  evening 
14./>i  the  hand  of,  t?  bey  ad. 

Neh.   9.  30  testifiedst.  .by  thy  spirit  in  thy  prophets 

15.  Over  against,  ill?  leneged, 

2  Sa.  22.  25  according  to  my  cleanness  in  his  eye  sight 

16.  In  the  middle,  middle,  ^n^i  bethavek. 

Gen.  37.    7  we  (were)  binding  sheaves  in  thp  Sold, and 
41  48  round  about  every  city  laid  lie  up  in  the 
Exod3g.    3  to  work  (it)  in  the  biue,  and  in  the  purple 

39.    3  and  in  the  scarlet,  and  in  the  fine  linen 
Lev.  n.  33  whatsc&ver  (is)  in  it  shall  be  unclean ;  and 
Niuni3.  32  trie  people  that  we  saw  in  it  (are)  men  of 
1  Ki.   6.  19  the  oracle  he  prepared  in  the  house  within 

1  Oh. 11.  22  also  he  went  down  and  slewa  lion  in  a  pit 
Eze.  14.  14  Though.  .Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  were  in 

14.  16  (Though)  these  three  men  (were)  in  it,  (as) 
14.  18  Though  these  three  men  (were)  in  it,  (as) 
14.  20  Though  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  (were)  in 

17.  Up  in,  among,  avd  ana. 

Rev.  7.  17  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  th. 
lS.From,  cwro'  apo. 

2  Th.  2.   2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or 

19.  Until,  &xph  &XPls  achri,  achris. 

Acts.20.    6  and  came  unto  them  to  Troas  in  five  days 

20.  Through,  dia(gen.)  dia. 

Matt 26.  61  able  to  destroy,  .and  to  build  it  in  three 
Acts  16.    9  And  a  vision  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  night 
2  Co.  5.  10  every  one  may  receive  the  things,  .[in] 
t  Th.  4.  14  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God 

1  Ti.   2. 15  she  shall  be  saved  in  child  bearing,  if 
Heb.   7.    9  Levi . .  who  receiveth  tithes,  payed  tithe^in 

13.  22  for  I  have  written,  .unto  you  in  few  words 

2  Pe.  3.   5  standing  out  of  the  water  and  in  the  wa. 

21. Into,  to,  at,  els  cis. 

Matt.  2.  23  he  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  Nazar. 

4.  13  he  came  and  dwelt  in  Capernaum,  which 
10.    9  Provide  neither  gold,  .nor  brass  in  your 
10.  27  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear.  .preach  ye  upon 
10.  41  in  the  name  of  aprophet.  .in  the  name  of 

10.  42  whosoever  shall  give,  .in  the  name  of  a 
12. 18  my  beloved,  [in]  whom  my  soul  is  well  pi. 
13.  30  and  bind  them  [in]  bundles  to  burn  them 
13.  33,  which  a  woman  took  and  hid  in  three  m. 
18.    6  one  of  these  little  ones  which  believe  in 
18.  20  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there 

26.  67  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffet 

27.  51  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 

28.  19  teach  all  natious,  baptizing  them  in  the 
Mark  1.   9  Jesus,  .was  baptized  of  John  in  Jordan 

2.    1  and  it  was  noised  that  he  was  [in]  the  house 
5. 14  and  told  (it)  in  the  city,  and  in  the  coun. 

5.  34  Daughter,  .go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of 

6.  8  that  they  should  take . .  no  money  in . .  pu. 
9.  42  one  of  (these)  little  ones  that  believe  [in] 

11.  8  garments  [in] the  way  .strawed.. [in]  the  w. 
13.    9  and  in  the  synagogues  ye  shall  be  beaten 

13.  16  let  him  that  is  in  the  field  not  turn  back 

14.  20  (It  is)  one.  .that  dippeth  with  me  in  the 

14.  60  the  high  priest  stood  up  in  the  midst,  and 

15.  38  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 
Luke  1.  20  words,  which  shall  be  fulfilled  in  their  s. 

1.  44  thy  salutation  sounded  in  mine  ears,  the 

2.  28  Then  took  he  him  up  in  his  arms,  and  bl. 
4.  3s  when  the  devil  had  thrown  him  in  the  m. 

6.  8  Rise  up,  and  stand  forth  in  the  midst. 

7.  1  ended  all  his  sayings  in  the  audience  of 

7.  50  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace 

8.  34  and  told  (it)  in  the  city  and  in  the  country 
8.  48  thyfaithhathmadetheewhole;goiu peace 

11.  7  my  children  are  with  me  in  bed ;  I  cannot 
11.  33  No  man..putteth  (it)  in  asccret  place 

13.  21  which  a  woman  took  and  hid  in  three  mea. 

14.  8  sit  not  down  in  the  highest  room ;  lest  a 
14. 10  go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  room ;  that 

16.  8  the  children  of  this  world  are  in  their  g. 
21.  14  Settle (it)itherefore  [in] yourhearts,  not  to 

21.  37  at  night  he  went  out,  and  abode  in  the  m. 

22.  19  is  given,  .this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 
John  1.  iS  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  b. 

2.  23  many  believed  in  his  name,  when  they  3. 

3.  15,  16  whosoever believcth[iu]liimshouldnot 


John  3.  18  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the 
5.  45  there  is(one).  .(even)  Moses,  in  whom  ye 

7.  5  For  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in  h. 
9.    7  Go,  wash  in  the  pool  of  Siloani,  which  is 

11.  25  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were 
11.  26  whosoever,  .believeth  in  me  shall  never 

11.  52  that  also  he  should  gather  together  in  one 

12.  36  believe  in  the  light,  that  ye  may  be  the  c. 

14.  1  ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me 

17.  23  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one;  and 

19.  13  in  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pavement,  but 

20.  7  but  wrapped  .together  in  a  place  by  itself 
20. 19  came  Jesus  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and 
20.  26  came  Jesus,  .and  stood  in  the  midst,  and 

Act3    2.  27  thou  will  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neit. 

2.  31  that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither 

4.  3  laid  hands  on  them,  and  put.  .in  hold  unto 

8.  16  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lo. 
8.  23  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and 

10.  43  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive 

12.  4  he  put  (him)  in  prison,  and  delivered  (him) 

13,  29  they  took,  .and  laid  (him)  in  a  sepulchre 

16.  24  thrust,  .and  made  their  feet  (fast  in  the  s. 

17.  21  theAthenians.  .spenttheirti'nieinnothing 

18.  21  [keep  this  feast  that  comethin  Jerusalem] 

19.  5  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  L. 
19.  22  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  season 
23. 11  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jerusalem 
24.  24  and  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in  Ch. 
26. 18  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  in  me 

Rom.  8.  18  with  the  glory  whir-b  shall  be  revealed  in 

10,  14  call  on  hini  m  whom  they  have  not  beli.? 
;i.  &  uod  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unbelief 

1  Co    1.  13  or  were  ye  baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul? 

1.  15  say  that  I  had  baptized  in  mine  own  name 
8.    6  of  whom  (are)  all  things,  and  we  in  him 

11.  24  Take,  eat.  .this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 
11.  25  as  oft  as  ye  drink  (it),  in  remembrance  of 

15.  54  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  vict. 

2  Co.    1.  5  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  us,  so 

1.  10  in  whom  we  trust  that  lie  will  yet  deliver 
i.  21  he  which  stablisheth  us  with  you  in  Christ 
8.  6  he  would  also  finish  in  you  the  same  grace 
8.  22  the  great  confidence  which  (I  have)  in  you 

10.  16  To  preach  the  gospel  in  the  (regions)  bey. 

11.  3  corrupted  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in  C. 
Gal.     2.  16  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ 

3.  17  that  was  confirmed  before  of  God[in]Christ 

5.  10  I  have  confidence  in  you  through  the  Lord 

6.  4  rejoicing  in  himself  alone,  and  not  in  an. 
Eph.    1.  10  That  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness 

3.  16  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man 

4.  13  Till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith 
Fhil.    1.    5  For  your  fellowship  in  the  gospelfrom  the 

2.  16  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I 
2.  16  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain 
2.  22  as  a  son .  .he  hath  served  with  me  in  the 

Col.     1.  10  and  increasing  [in]  the  knowledge  of  God 

2.  5  and  the  steadfastness  of  your  faith  in  C. 

3.  10  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image 

1  Th.  4.  17  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air:  and  so  shall 

2  Th.  2.  4  so  that  he  as  God  sitteth  in  the  temple  of 
1  Ti.  6.  9  lusts,  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and- 
Phm.  6  good  thing  which  is  in  you  in  Christ  Jesus 
Heb.  11.  9  By  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  pro. 
Jas.    3.   3  put  bits  in  the  horses'  mouths,  that  they 

1  Pe.   1.    8  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  (him)  not  * 

1.  21  Who.  .do  believe  in  God.  .hope  might  be  in 

2  Pe.   1.    8  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1.  17  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
1  Jo.  5.  8  and  the  blood :  and  these  three  agree  in 
Rev.    1.  11  What  thou  seest,  write  in  a  book,  and  send 

6.  15  themselves  in  the  dens  and  in  the  rocks 
11.    9  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  put  in 
13.    6  he  opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy  against 
17.  17  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his 

22.  Out  of,  Ik  ek. ' 

Luke  1 1.  6  a  friend  of  mine  in  Ins  journey  is  come  to 
Rev.    3. 18  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in 

23.7n,  eV  en. 

Matt.  1.  20  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of  the  Holy  G. 

2,  1  when  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem  of  J. 
2.  2  we  have  seen  Ins  star  in  the  east,  and  are 
2.  5  they  said  unto  him,  In  Bethlehem  of  Ju. 
2.  9  the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the  east,  went 
2.  16  children  that  were  in  Bethlehem,  and  in 
2. 18  In  Rama  was  there  a  voice  heard,  lameu. 

2.  19  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth . .  to  Joseph  in 

3.  1  In  those  days  came  John,  .preaching  in 
3.   3,  6,  12,  17;  4.  13,  16, 16,  21,  23;  5.  12,  15, 16, 

19,  19,  25,  28,  45,  [48];  6.  1,  2,  2,  4,  4,  s,  5,  6,  6,  9,  10, 18, 
18,  20,  23,  29;  7.  3,  3,  4,  11,  15,  21,  22 ;  8.  10,  11,  [13,]  24, 
32;  9.  4,  10,  31,  33,  35;  10.  11,  15,  16,  17,  19,  20,  23,  27, 
27,  28,  32,  33 ;  11.  1,  2,  6,  8,  8,  ii,  16,  2r,  21,  21,  23,  23, 
24;  12.  5,  5,  19,  [21,]  32,  32,  36,  40,  40,  41,  42,  50  ;  13.  3,  10, 

13.  T9»  2r»  z4,  27,  3°i  31*  32)  34.  35.  4°.  43»  44.  54>  57.  57- 

57 ;  14.  2,  3,  10,  33 ;  15.  32,  33 ;  16.  17, 19,  19,  27,  28 ;  17. 
5,  22 ;  18.  1,  2,  4,  6,  10,  10,  14,  18,  18,  19,  20 ;   19.  21,  28 ; 

20.  3,  17,  21;  21.  8,  8,  9,  9,  12,  14,15,  22,  28,  32,  33,  41,42, 
42;  22.  15,  16,  28,  30,  30,  36,  43;  23.  6  7,  [9,]  30,  30,  34,  39; 
24.  14,  15,  16,  18,  19,  26,  26,  30,  38,  40,  45,  48,  50,  50;  25. 
4.  i3>  [18,]  25,  31,  36,  39,  43,  44;  26.  6,  6,  13, 23,  29,  55,  55, 
69  ;  27.  [5,]  40,  60,  60 ;  28.  iS. 

'Mark  1.  2,3,4,  5,  9,  11,  13,  19,  20,  23,  [39,  45];  2.  6,  8 
15,  20;  3.  23;  4.  1,  2, 11,  [15,]  17,28,  36;  5.5  5,  13,20,  27, 
30,  30;  6.  2,  4,  4,  [11,]  14,  17,  27,  29,  47,  48,  51,  56;  8.  t 

14,  26,  38,  38  ;  9.  33,  36,  41,  50;  10.  [10,]  21,  30,  30,  32,  37, 
52;  11.  9,  [10,]  10,  15,  23,  25,  [26,127;  12.  11,23,  5»  26,  35, 
38,  38,  38.  391  J3-  ">  Mi  17.  24,  25,  26,  32;  14.  3,  3,  25, 
[30.]  49i  66  I  "S-  7>  [29.]  4i»  46  ;  16.  [12,  17.] 


IN 


511 


IN 


Luke  r.  5,  6,  7,-8,  17,  18,21,  22,25,  26,  31,36,  39,41,44, 
66,  69,  75,  79,  So ;  2.  1,  7,  7,  8,  n,  12,  14,  16,  19,  21,  23,  24, 
25.29,  34>  [33,] 43.  44.  46,46,  5i;  3-i,  2,4,4,15,17,20,22; 

4.  2,  5,  14,  15,  20,  21,  23,  [23,]  24,  25,  25,  27,  28,  33,  [44];  5. 

7.  12,  22, 29, 35 ;  6.  12,  12,  23,  23,  41,  41,  42,  42,  42 ;  7.  9, 
21,  23,  25,  25,  28,  32,  37,  37 ;  8-  IO>  r3>  *5>  27>  27  J  9-  I2> 

26,  31,  36,  57  ;  10.  7,  9,  12,  13,  13,  13,  20,  20,  21,  26 ;  11. 

1,  [2,  2,]  2i,  31,  32,  35,  43,  43  ;  12.  1.  3,  3,  3, 12,  15,  27,  28, 
33,  38,  38,  42,  45,  46,  52,  58  ;  13.  4,  [4,]  6,  10,  14,  14,  19,  26, 

28,  29,  35 ;  14.  15 ;  15,  4,  7,  25 1  l6-  io,  iO)  10,  10,  iT,  12, 

23,  23,  23,  24,  25  ;  17.  6,  [24,]  26,  26,  28,  31,  31,3  1,  [36] ;  iS. 

2,  3,  22,  30,  30 ;  19.  17,  20,  30,  36,  38,  38,  38,  42,  44,  45,  47  ; 
20.  1,  33,  42,  46,  46,  46 ;  21.  6,  19,  21,  21,  21,  23,  25,  27,  37, 
38 ;  22. 16,  20,  28, 30, 37,  [44,]  53,  55 ;  23.  4,  9, 14,  19,  22,  29, 
31,  31,  4°,  43,  53;  24-  4»  6>  £l80  l8>  I0»  27>  35,  35,  36,  38,  44. 
49' 53- 

John  1.  1,  2,  4,  5,  10,  23,  28,  45,  47;  2.  1,  11,  14,  19,  20, 
23,  [23,]  25 ;  3.  [13,]  14,  21,  23 ;  4.  14,  20,  20,  21,  23,  24, 31, 

37,  44,  53  >  5-  3,  I3,  *4>  26>  26,  z8.  35,  38>  39,  42,  43-  43  5  6- 
10,  31,  45,  49,  53,  56,  5<>>  59>  59-  6l  >  7-  r>  r>  4,  9,   IO>   l3 

28,  37 ;  8.  L3,  3,  5,  9],  12, 17,  20,  23,  21,  24,  24,  31,  35,  37, 
44,  44  J  9-  3.  5,  3°,  34  J  i°-  23,  23,  25,  34,  38,  38  ;  11.  6,  9, 

10,  10,  17,  20,  24,  30,  31,  38,  56 ;  12.  13,  25,  35,  46,  48 ;  13. 
i>  31,  [32,]  32  ;  14.  2,  10,  10, 10,  11,  ti,  13, 13,  14, 14, 17,  20, 

20,  20,  26,  30 ;  15.  2,  4,  4,  4,  4,  5,  5,  6,  7,  7,  8,  9,  10, 10, 11, 16, 
25;  16.23,23,24,25,25,26,33,33;  17-10, 11, 11,  [12,]  12,13, 
13,  2r,  21,  21,  23,  23,  26,  26;  18.  20,  20,  20,  26,  38;  19.  4, 
6,  41,  41,  41 ;  20.  12,  25,  30. 

Acts  1.  7,*8,  [8,]  10,  15,  15,  20,  20 ;  2.  17,  18,  19,  22,  46 ; 

3,  6,  26;  4.  7,  [12,324;  5.  4,4,12,18,20,22,25,  25,34,37,  42; 
6. 1,  1,  7, 15";  7.  2,  2,  4,  5,  6,  7,  [12,]  16,  17,  20,  20,  22,  [22,] 

29,  30,  30, 34,  35, 36,  36,  36,  38,  38, 38, 41,  41,  42,  42,  44,  48  ; 

8.  8,  9,  21,  33 ;  9.  10,  11,  [12,]  17,  20,  21,  25,  27,  27,  29,  37, 
37,  43;  10.  1,  3,,i2,  17,  30,  30,  32,  35,  39,  [39,]  48;  n.  5,  5, 

13,  22,  26,  27,  29 ;  12.  5,  7 ;  13.  5,  17, 18,  19,  33,  35,  40,  41 ; 

14.  1,  15,  16,  25 ;  15.  21,  35 ;  16.  3,  6,  12,  18,  32,  36 ;  17 

11,  16,  17,  17,  22,  24,  24,  28,  31,  31 ;  18.  4,  9,  10,  18,  24, 
26 ;  19.  9,  16,  21,  39 ;  20.  8,  10,  16 ;  21.  27,  29 ;  22.  3,  3, 
17,  17;  23.  6,  9,  35;  24.  12,  12,  [14,]  18,  [20];  25.  5;  26.  10, 

21,  26 ;  27.  21,  27,  31,  37 ;  28.  7,  g,  n,  n,  18,  30. 

Horn.  1.  2,  7,  9,  17, 18,  19,  21,  27,  27,  [28];  2.  1,  12,  15, 
16,  19,  20,  28,  29 ;  3.  4,  16,  24,  25 ;  4.  io,  10,  10,  10 ;  5.  2, 

3,  5,  11,  13,  17 ;  6.  2,  4,  12,  [12] ;  7.  5,  5,  6,  6,  8,  17,  18,  18, 
20,  23,  23 ;  8.  1,  2,  3,  3,  3,  4,  8,  9,  9,  9,  io,  11,  11,  37,  39 ; 

9.  1,  1,  7,  17,  25,  26,  [28,]  33  ;  10.  C,  8,  8, 9  ;  12. 4,  5  ;  13.  9, 
13 ;  14.  5,  17,  iS,  22 ;  15.  13,  13,  23,  27,  29,  30,  31 ;  16.  2, 
s,  3,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  [12,]  13,  22. 

1  Co.  1.  2,  2,  5,  5,  6,  7,  8,  io,  10,  2i,  30,  31 ;  2.  3,  3,  3,  4,  5, 

5,  7,  11,  13;  3.  1,  16,  18,  19,  21,  4.  2,  6,  10,  15,  15,  17,  17, 
17/20,  20,  2i;5-  4,5,9;  6.  4, 11, 19,  20,  [20] ;  7.   15,  17,  18, 

20,  20,  22,  24, 24, 37,  37, 39 ;  8. 4,  5,  7, 10;  9.  1,  2,  9,  18,  24; 

10.  2,  2,  5,  8,  25 ;  11.  ir,  13,  18,  217  22,  25;  12.  6,  18,  25, 
28;  14.  10,  19,  19,  21,  25,  28,  33,  34,  35;  15. 1,  17,   18,  19, 

19,  22,  22,  23,  28,  31,  41,  42,  42,  43,  43,  43,  43,  52,  52,  58 ; 
16.  11,  13,  19.  24. 

2  Co.  1. 1,  4,  6,  8,  9,  12,  12,  14,  19,  20,  [20,]  22;  2.  1,  10, 

14,  14,  15,  15,  17;  3.2,3,  3,  [7,  9,]  10,  14;  4.  2,4,6,6,7,  10, 

10,  11,  12,  12;  5.  1,  2,  4,  6,  11, 12,  17,  19,  21 ;  6.  2,  3,  4,  4,  4, 
A>  4>  5,  5,  5,  5,  5,  5,  IS, I2, 16;  7. 1,  3,  9,  11,  [11,]  14, 16, 16 ;  8. 
2.  7,  7,  10,  18,  20,  22;  9. 3,  4,  8,  11 ;  10.  3,  6,  14,  16,  17;  11.  6 
9, 10, 10,  12,  17,  23,  23,  23,  23,  25,  26,  26,  26,  [27,]  27,  27,  27, 

27,  32,  33 ;  12.  2,  2,  3,  5,.g,  9, 10,  10,  10,  10,  10,  12,  [12,]  19 ; 

*3-  3.  3.  U.l  5,5-- 
Gal.  1.  13,  14,  14,  16,  22,  24;  2.4,  20,  20;  3.  8,  10,  10, 

12,  19,  26,  28;  4. 14,  18,  19,  25;  5.  6,  14,  14;  6.  1,  1,  6,  12, 

*3>  *4,  [15^  J7- 

Eph.  1. 1,  3,  [3,]  4,  4,  6,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  [10,]  io,  11, 12, 13, 
13, 15, 17, 18,  20 ,20,  2i,  21,  23 ;  2.  2,  2,  3,  4,  6,  6,  7,  7,  10,  10, 

11,  11,  12,  13,  15,  15, 15, 16,  21,  21  22 ;  3.  3,  4,  [5,]  6,  9,  10, 
11, 12,  15,  17,  17,  20,  21;  4.  2,  3,  4,  6,  15,  16,  16,  17,  17, 18, 

21,  24;  5.  2,  5,  8,  9,  18,  19,  20,  21,  24;  6.  [1,]  4,  5,  9,  10,  10, 

12,  13,  18,  20,  20,  21,  24. 

Phil.  1.- 1,  4,  6,  7,  7,  8,  9,  13/13,  14,  iS,  20,  20,  22,  [24,]  26, 
27,  28,  30,  30;  2.  1,  5,  5,  6,  7, 12, 12,  13,  [15,3  15,  19,  24,  29; 
3-  T>  3,  3>  4,  4,  6,  9,  14,  19,  20;  4.  1,  2,  3,  3,  4,  6,  9,  10,  11, 
12,  15,  16,  10,  21. 

Col.  1.  2,  4,  5,  5,  6,  6,  6,  8,  9,  10,  12,  14,  16,  18,  19,  20, 

22,  24,  24,  27,  28,  28,  29;  2.  1,  2,  3,  6,  7,  [7,]  9,  10,  11,  11, 
12,  12,  [13,]  15,  16,  16,  16, 18,  20,  23,  23;  3.  3,  4,  7,  7,.  11. 

15,  15,  16,  16,  17,  17,  18,  22;  4.  1,  2,  5,  7,  12;  12,  13,  13, 
15,  16,  17. 

1  Th.  1.  1,  5,  5,  5,  5,-6,  7,  8,  8 ;  2.  2,  3,  13,  14,  14 ;  3-  2, 

8,  13;  4.  4,  5,  6,  10,  16,  17;  5.  2,  4,  12,  13,  18,  18. 

2  Tli.  1.  1,  4,  4,  4,  8,  10,  10, 10,  12,  12 ;  2.  6,  [10,  12,]  17  ; 
3-  4,  6,  17- 

1  Ti.  1.  2, 4, 13, 14,  16 ;  2.  2,  2,  [7,]  7, 9, 11, 12,  14, 15;  3.  4, 

9,  11,  13.  13,  15,  16,  16,16;  4.1,  2,  12,  12,  12,  [12,]  12,  12, 
14;  5.  17;  6.  17,  [17,]  18. 

2  Ti.  1. 1,  3.  5,  5,  5,  6,  9, 13, 13, 14,  15,  17   18  ;  2.  1,  1   7, 

9,  10,  20,  25 ;  3. 1,  12,  14,  15,  16 ;  4.  5. 
Titus  1.  5,  13 ;  2.  3,  7,  9,  10,  12 ;  3.  3,  15. 
Phm.  6,  8,  10,  13,  16,  16,  20,  20,  23. 

Heb.  2.  8,  12,  18;  3.  2,  5,  8,  8,  11,  12,  12,  15, 17;  4.  3,  5, 
7 ;  5-  6,  7 ',  6.  17.  18 ;  7.  10 ;  8.  j,  5,  9,  9,  13  ;  9.  2,  4,  23 : 

10.  3,  7,  22,  32,  [34,  34,]  38  ;  11.  9,  18,  19,  [26,3  37,  37,  [3S]  > 
12.  23  ;  13.  3,  4,  9.  18,  21,  21. 

Jas.  1.  6,  8,  9,  10,  11,  23,  25,  27;  2.  2,  2,  4,  5,  10,  16;  3. 
2,  14,  18;  4.  1,  5,  16;  5.  5,  14. 

1  Pet.  1.  4,  5,  6, 11,  14,  15, 17,  22;  2.  [6,]  6, 12,  22,  24;  3. 

4,  J5,  15,  !6, 19,  20;  4.  [1,]  2,  3,  4,  11,  19;  5.  6,  9,  14. 

2  Pet.  1. 4, 12, 13, 18,  19,  19 ;  2. 10,  12,  13,  18 ;  3.  1,  [10,] 
10,  10,  11,  13,  14,  16,  16,  16,  18. 

1  John  1.  5,  6,  7,  7,  8,  10;  2.  4,  5.  5,  6,  8,  8,  9,  9, 10,  10, 
it,  11,  14,  15,  15,  16,  24,  24,  24,  [24,327,27,  28;  3.  5,6/9, 
10,14,15,  17,  24,  24,  24;  4.  2,  [3,33,4,  4,  9,  10,  12,  12,  13, 
i3»  15,  15,  16,  16, 16,  17, 17/17, 18, 18;  5.  [7,  8,]  10,  11,  19, 

20,  20. 

2  John  1.  2,  3,  4,  6,  7,  9,  9 ;  3  John  1,  3, 4 ;  Jude  10, 12, 
[18,3  20,  21.  Rev.  1. 6,  4,  5, 9,  [9,]  9,  10,  [11,]  i3l  15,  16, 16 ; 
2.  1, 1,  7, 12,  [13,]  18,  24 ;  3. 1, 4,  4,  5,  7, 12,  21,  21;  4.  1,  2,  2, 
4. 6 ;  5,  3,  6,  6, 13, 13 ;  6.  5,  6  :  7.  9,  14, 15  ;  8. 1,  9 ;  9.  6,  10, 
11  17, 19,  [19];  10.  2, 6,  6,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10;  11,  1,  [6,]  12, 13, 15, 


[19,]  19  ;i2.  1,  3,  7,  8,  10,  12;  13.  6,  8,  12;  14.  5,  6, 13,  14, 17; 
15. 1,  1, 5 ;  16.3 ;  17.  3,  4;  18.  6,  7,  8,  [io,J  19,  19,  22,  22,  22, 
[23,]  23,  24  ;  19.  1,  11,  14, 17, 17  ;  20.  6,  8,  12,  13,  13,  15  ; 
21.  8,  '10,  [14,]  22,  [23,  24,]  27;  22.  2,  3,  18,  19. 

24.0ft,  upon,  over,  eVi  {gem..)  epi. 

Matt.  2  22  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did  reign  [in]  Ju. 
4.  6  and  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee 
6.  10  Thj  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
iS.  16  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witn. 

19.  28  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  thr. 
2i.  19  when  he  saw  a  fig  tree  in  the  way,  he  came 

23.  2  The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sitin  Moses' 

24.  30  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  po. 
26.  64  sitting,  .and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  hea. 
28.  18  power  is  given  unto  mo  in  heaven  and  in 

Mark  4. 31  seed,  which  when  it  is  sown  in  the  earth 

4.  31  [is  less  than  all  the  seeds  that  be  in  the] 

8.  4  satisfy,  .with  bread  here  in  the  wilderness? 

12.  14  but  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth  :  Is 
T2.  26  howin  the  bush  God  spake  unto  him,  say. 

Luke  4.  11  And  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee 
5. 18  men  brought  in.  a  bed  a  man  which  was 
6.  17  he  came  down  with  them,  and  stood  in  the 
11.    2  [Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in  ea.] 

17.  34  that  night  shall  be  two  (men)  in  one  bed 
21.  23  there  shall  be  great  distress  in  the  land 

Johnig.  13  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat  down  in  the 
Acts    8.  28  sitting  in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  pi*. 

20.  9  there  sat  in  a  window  a  certain  young  m. 
Rom.  1.    9  make  mention  of  you  always  in  my  pray. 

1  Co,  8.    5  called  gods,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth 

2  Co.  13.    1  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
Eph,  1.  16  thanks ..  making  mention  of  you  in  my  p. 
Col.     1.  16  that  are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth 

1.  20  whether,  .things  in  earth,  or  things  in  h. 
1  Th.  1.    2  making  mention  of  you  in  our  prayers 

1  Ti.  6.  17  nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the 
Phm,  4  making  mention  of  thee,  .in  my  prayers 
Heb.  1.    2  Hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by 

8=  10  write  them  in  their  hearts  :  and  I  will  be 
10. 16  nrylaws..[in3  their  minds  will  I  write  them 
t  Pe    1.  20  was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for  you 

2  ^e.  3.    3  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers 
Rev.    z.  20  starswhichthousawest[in]my  right  hand 

5. 13  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the 
g.    4  have  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  forehe. 

11.   8  there  dead  bodies  (shall  lie)  in  the  street 

13.  16  in  their  right  hand,  or  [in]  their  foreheads 

14.  1  Father's  name  written  in  their  foreheads 
14.   9  and  receive  (his)  mark  in  his  forehead,  or 

-  18  17  all  the  companyin  ships,  and  sailors,  and 
22."  4  and  his  name  (shall  be)  in  their  foreheads 

2o.0n,  upon,.over,  4ttI  (dot.)  epi. 

Matt  13.  14  [iu]  them  is  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Esa. 
14.   8  Give  me.. John  Baptist's  head  in  a  char. 
14. 11  his  head  was  brought  in  a  charger,  and 
18    5  shall  receive  one  such  little  child  in  my 
24.   5  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I 

Mark  4.  38  he  was  [in]  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship,  asl. 

5.  33  knowing  what  was  done  [in]  her,  came  and 

6.  25  give  me  by  and  by  in  a  charger  the  head 

6.  28  brought  his  head  in  a  charger,  and  gave 
6. 55  began  to  carry  about  in  beds  those  that 

9.  37  shall  receive  one  of  such  children  in  my 
9.  39  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my 

10.  24  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches 

13.  6  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I 
Luke  1.  47  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  saviour 

9.  48  Whosoever  shall  receive  this  child  in  my 
9.  49  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 

18.  g  certain  which  trusted  in  themselves  that 

21.  8  many  shall  comeinmyname,  saying,  lam 
24.  47  that  repentance,  .should  be  preached  in 

Acts   2.  26  moreover  also  my  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope 

2.  38  be  baptised  every  one  of  you  [in]  the  name 
3. 11  the  people  ran  together  unto  them  in  the 
4. 17  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  name 

4.  iS  they.. commanded  them  not  to.. teach  in 

5.  28  that  ye  should  not  teach  in  this  name?  and 
5.  40  commanded  that  they  should  not  speak  in 

14.  3  therefore  abode  they  speaking  boldly  in 
Rom  4.  18  Who  against  hope  believed  in  hope,  that 

5.  2  By  whom  also  we .  .rejoice  in  hope  of  the 
S.  20  him  who  hathsubjected(thesame)inhope 

15.  12  a  root  of  Jesse,  .in  him  shall  the  Gentiles 
t  Co.  9  10  ploughinhope.  .hethrttthrashethinhope 

13.   6  Rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth 
a  Co.  1.    4  Who  convforteth  us  in  all  our  tribulation 
1.   9  not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in  God  which 

3. 14  the  same  veil  untaken  away  in  the  read. 

7.  4  I  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  tr'bulat. 
7.  7  wherewith h.  was  corufortedin  you,  when 
7. 13  we  were  comforted  in  your  comfort:  yea 
g.  14  long,  .for  the  exceeding  grace  of  God  in 

1  Th.  3.    7  we  were  comforted  over  you  in  all  our 
1  Ti.    4.  10  suffer  reproach,  because  we  trust  in  the 
Titus  1.    2  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God.  that 
Phm.       7.  we  have  great  joy  and  consolation  in  thy 
Heb.    2.  13  And  again,  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him  Aud 

9.  10  only  in  meats  and.  drinks,  and  divers  wa. 

g.  26  but  now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath 

1  Jo.   3.    3  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him 
Rev.,  22.  16  to  testify  unto  you.  these  things  [in]  g.  4. 

26.0/1,  upon,  over,  4-kI  (ace.)  epi. 

Matt  27.  29  they  put.,  a  reed  [in]  his  right  hand:  and 

27.  43  He  trusted  [in]  God:  let  him  deliver  him 

Marki5.    1  [in]  the  morningthe  chief  priests  held  a  c. 

Acts   9. 42  was  known . .  and  many  believed  in  the  L. 

-  27.  20  when  neither  sun  nor  starsLin  many  days 

2  Co.   2.   3  I  ought  to  rejoice;  having  confidence  in 


Phm. 
Heb.  : 


1  Ti.    5.  5  she  that  ia  a  widow  indeed.,  trusteth  in  G. 

1  Pe.   3.  5  the  holy  women  also,  who  trusted  [in]  God 

Rev.    2.  17  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which 

5.  1 1  saw  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on 

14.  9  If  any  man  rece've  (his)  mark,  .in  his  hand 
17.  8  names  were  not  written  in  the  book  of  life 
20.  1  an  angel . .  having. .  a  great  chain  in  his  h. 
20.  4  neither  had  received  (his)  mark,  .in  their 

27.  Through,  throughout,  over  against,  Kara  (occ.). 
Matt  1.  20  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in 

2.  12,  22  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream' 

2. 13,  19  of  the  Lord  appeareth  to  Joseph  in  a  d. 
27.  19  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day  in  ad. 
Luke  6.  23  in  the  like  manner  did  theirfathers  unto 

15.  14  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land 
Acts    3.  13  denied  him  in  the  presence  of  Pilate,  when 

3.  22  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things  whatsoever 

11.  1  the  apostles  and  brethren  that  were  in  J. 
13.    1  Now  there  were  in  the  church  that  was 
15.  23  brethren  which  are  of  the  Gentiles  in  An. 

15.  36  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren  in 
17.  22  I  perceive  that  in  all  things  ye  are  too  sup. 

24.  12  neither  raising  up  the  people,  .nor  in  the 
24. 14  all  things  which  arc  written  in  the  law  and 

25.  3  And.  .laying  wait  in  the  way  to  kill  him 

26.  11  I  punished  them  oft  in  every  synagogue 
26.  13  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light  from  heaven,  ab. 

Rom.  5.    6  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly 

16.  5  Likewise .  .the  church  that  is  in  their  ho. 

1  Co,  14.  40  Let  all  things  be  done  decentlyandinor. 

16.  19  Aquilla.  .with  the  church  that  is  in  their 

2  Co.  10.    1  who  in  presence  (am)base  among  you,  but 
Col.     3.  20  Children,  obey. .  parents  in  all  things:  for 

3.  22  Servants,  obey  in  all  things,  .masters  ac. 

4.  15  Salute.,  the  church  which  is  in  his  house 
2  Archippus.  .and  to  the  church  in  thy  ho. 

10  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid  the 

2.  17  in  all  things  it  behoved  him  to  be  made 

3.  8  Harden  not  your  hearts,  as.  .iu  the  day 

4.  15  but  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  (we 
9.   9  in  which  were  offered  both  gifts  and  sac. 

11. 13  These  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received 

28.  With,  among,  juera  (gen.)  meta. 

Marki4.  62  sitting,  .and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  he. 
Acts  15.  33  they  were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  brefc. 
29. By,  with,  trapd  (dat.)  para. 

Rom.11.  25  lest  ye  should  be  wise  in  your  ownconcei. 

12.  16  Mind  not.  .Be  not  wise  in  your  own  con. 

30.  Around,  round  about,  irepi  (axe")  peri. 

Titus  2.  7  In  all  things  showing  thyself  a  pattern  of 
Zl.Toward,  irp6s  (ace.)  pros. 

Lukei2.  3  and  that  which  ye  have  spoken  iu  the  ear 
24.  12  [wondering  in  himself  at  that  which  was] 

1  Jo.  5.  14  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him 

32.  Under,  vw6  (ace.)  hupo. 

Acts    5.  21  entered  into  the  temple  early  in  the  morn. 

33.  Within,  eo-cc  eso. 

Matt26.  5S  But  Peter,  .went  in,  and  sat  with  the  ser. 
[See  also  Abide,  abundance,  act,  admiration,  adultery, 
afliiction,  arms,  array,  awe,  behalf,  bondage,  bonds, 
break,  breaking,  bring,  bringing,  brought,  call,  cast, 
charge,  clothed,  come,  conference,  continue,  cut,  danger, 
derision,  distress,  end,  entangle,  enter,  entering,  en- 
trauce,  execution,  fear,  gather,  go,  graff,  hedge,  held, 
holding,  keep,  lie,  lodge,  more,  no,  order,  pool, 
pour,  put,  rend,  rejoice,  ride,  run,  shut,  sleep,  sport, 
spring,  step,  straight,  swim,  take,  tear,  took,  thrust, 
trouble,  turn,  vain,  walk,  wrap,  write.] 

IN,  all  that  is  — 

Fulness,  N'Vp  inelo. 

Isa,    34.    4  let  the  earth  hear,  and  all  that  is  therein 
42. 10  go  down  to  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  therein 
Jer.     8.  16  devoured  the  land,  and  all  that  is  in  it 

47.    2  overflow  the  land,  and  all  that  is  therein 
Eze.  12.  19  may  be  desolate  from  all  that  is  therein 
30.  12  all  that  is  therein,  by  the  hand  of  Strang. 
Amos  6.    8  deliver  up  the  city  with  all  that  is  therein 
Mic.    1.   2  hearken,  O  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is 
IN  a  place  — 
On,  upon,  over,  eirl  (gen.)  epi. 

Markn.   4  a  colt  tied  by  the  door  without  in  a  place 
IN  among  — 
Into,  to,  at,  eis  eis. 

Acts  14.  14  Paul,  .raninamongthe people,  crying  out 
20.  29  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you 
Iff  at  — 
Into,  to,  at,  et?  eis. 

Matt  15.  17  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth  go. 

IN  every  — 

Through,  throughout,  over  against,  /caret  (ace.)  hata. 

Acts  14.  23  had  ordained  them  elders  in  every  church 

15.  2i  For  Moses  of  old  time  hath  in  every  city 

20.  23  that  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in  every 

IN  it  — 

There,  cy  sham. 

2  Ch.  6. 11  hi  it  have  I  put  the  ark,  wherein  (is)  the 
IN  (no)  wise  — ■ 

To  put  to  death,  mn  muth,  5. 

1  Ki.  3.  26,  27  give  her  the  living  child,  and  in  no  w. 
IN  presence,  (to  be)  — 

1.  To  see,  a^n  raah. 

2  Ki.25. 19  of  them  that  were  in  the  king's  presence 


IN 


512 


INCREASE 


2.Before,  ZinrpoaQsv  emprosthen. 

i  Th.  2.  ig  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
IN  respect  of  — 
Through,  throughout,  over  against,  nar&  (ace.)  kata. 

Phil.  4.  11  Nut  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want :  fori 

IN  sight  of  — 

Before,  i'XTrp-xrQev  emprosthen, 

1  Th.  1.    3  in  the  sight  of  G.;  Matt.  11.26;  Lu  10.21 
IN , . .  stead  — 

Tn  behalf  of,  virep  (gen.)  huper. 

2  Co. 5.  20  we  pray,  .in  Christ's  stead, beye reconcil. 
Phm.     13  that  in  thy  stead  he  might  have  ministered 

[See  also  Instead.] 

IN  that  — 

1.  Because,  '5  hi. 

Deut3i.  18  in  that  they  are  turned  unto  other  gods 

2. On,  upon,  because,  "?y  al. 

Gen.  31.  20  unawares,  .in  that  he  told  him  not  that 
3.  That,  because,  oVt  hoti. 

Rom.  5.    8  in  that,  while  we  werej'et  sinners,  Christ 
IN  that  they  — 
Whosoever,  oar  is  hostis. 

Acts  17. 11  in  that  they  received  the  word  with  all 
IN  the  days  of  — 
On,  upon,  over,  &wl  (gen.)  epi. 

Mark  2.  26  went  into  the  house  of  God  in  the  days  of 

Acts  it.  28  which  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Claudius 
IN  the  time  of  — 
On,  upon,  over,  iiri  (gen.)  epi. 

Luke  4.  27  ma*y  lepers  were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of 
IN  unto  — 
Into,  to,  at,  sU  eis. 

Luke  21.  4  these  have  of  their  abundance  cast  in  unto 

Acts  19.  30  when  Paul  would  have  entered  in  unto 
IN  (where)  — 
About,  concerning,  irepi  (gen.)  peri. 

Luke  1.    4  things,  wherein  thou  hast  been  instructed 
INASMUCH  as  — 
1.  Because,  *?  hi, 

Dent  19.   6  inasmuch  as  he  hated  him  not  in  time  past 
2. In  that. ..not,  VftaS  lebilti. 

Ruth  3.  10  inasmuch  as  thou  folio  weds  t  not  young 
^.Inasmuch  as,  as  long  as,  z<p''6<jov  eph  hoson. 

Matt25>  40  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  (it)  unto  one  of 
25. 45  Iuasmuch  as  ye  did  (it)  not  to  one  of  the 

Rom  1 1.  13  inasmuch  as  I  am  the  apostle  of  the  Gen. 

4. According  as,  tca.96  katho. 

1  Pe.  4. 13  inasmuch  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's 
5. Inasmuch  as,  as,  Kafl'  ocoy  kath  hoson. 

Heb.  3.    3  inasmuch  as  he  who  bath  builded  the  house 
7.  20  And  inasmuch  as  not  without  an  oath 
INCENSE  — 
1. Frankincense,  ruin?  lebonoh. 

Isa.   43. 23  an  offering,  nor  wearied  thee  with  incense 
60.   6  they  shall  bring  gold  and  incense  ;  and 
66.   3  he  that  burnetii  incense,  (as  if)  he  blessed 
Jer.     6.  20  To  what  purpose  cometh  there  to  me  in. 
17.  26  bringing  burnt  offerings,  .and  incense 
41.    5  with  offerings  and  incense  iu  their  hand 

2.1ncense,  perfume,  rvjiEp,  qetorah. 

Deut33.  10  they  shall  put  incense  before  thee,  and 

3.  To  be  perfumed,  nap  aatar,  6. 

Mai.    1.  11  in  every  place  incense  (shall  be)  offered 

4.  Incense,  perfume,  Tgp  qitter. 

Jer.  44.  21  The  incense  that  ye  burnt  in  the  cities 
§. Incense,  perfume,  rnbp  qetoreth. 

Exod25.    6  spices  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  sweet  in. 
30.    1  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  to  burn  incense 
30.    7  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  sweet  incense 
30.   8  a  perpetual  incense  before  the  Lord  thr. 
30.   9  Ye  shall  offer  no  strange  incense  thereon 

30.  27  and  his  vessels,  and  the  altar  of  incense 

31.  8  all  his  furniture,  and  the  altar  of  incense 
35.  8  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  the  sweet  ince. 
35.  15  the  incense  altar,  .and  the  sweet  incense 

35. 28  the  anointing  oil,  and  for  the  sweet  ince. 
37.  25  be  made  the  incense  altar(of)  shittim  wo. 

37. 29  he  made,  .the pure  incense  of  sweet  spices 

39.  38  the  anointing  oil,  and  the  sweet  incense 

40.  s  shalt  set  the  altar  of  gold  for  the  incense 
40.  27  he  burned  sweet  incense  thereon ;  as  the 

Lev.  to.    1  put  incense  thereon,  and  offered  strange 

16. 12  hands  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten  small 

16. 13  he  shall  put  the  incense  upon  the  fire  be. 
16.  13  that  the  cloud  of  the  incense  may  cover 

Sum.  4. 16  sweet  incense,  and  the  daily  meat  offering 

7.  14  spoon  of  ten  (shekels)  of  gold,  full  of  inc. 

7.  20  spoon  of  gold  of  ten  (shekels),  full  of  inc. 

7.  26  golden  spoon  of  ten  (shekels),  full  of  inc. 
[So  also  v.  32,  38,  44,  50,  56,  62,  68,  74,  80.] 

7.  86  golden  spoons  (were)  twelve,  full  of  incense 
16.  7  and  put  incense  in  them  before  the  Lord 
16.  17  put  incense  in  them,  and  bring  ye  before 
16. 18  laid  incense  thereon,  and  stood  in  the  door 
16.  35  consumed  the.. men  that  offered  incense 
16.  40  come  near  to  offer  iucense  before  the  Lo. 
16.  46  put  on  incense,  and  go  quickly  unto  the 
16.47  put  on  incense,  and  made  an  atonement 


1  Sa.  2.  28  to  burn  incense,  to  wear  an  ephod  before 

1  Ch.  6.  49  his  sons  offered,  .on  the  altar  of  incense 

28.  18  the  altar  of  incense  refined  gold  by  weight 

2  Ch.  2.    4  to  burn  before  him  sweet  incense,  and 

13.  1 1  burn  . .  burnt  sacrifices  and  sweet  incense 
26.  16  to  burn  incense  upon  the  altar  of  incense 
26.  19  the  priests,  .from  beside  the  incense  altar 

29.  7  they,  .have  not  burnt  incense  nor  offered 
Psa.  66.  15  I  will  offer  unto  thee.,  the  incense  of  rams 

141.    2  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth,  .(as)  incense 
Isa.      1.  13  incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me  ;  the 
Eze.     8. 11  censer.,  and  a  thick  cloud  of  incense  went 
16.  18  thou  hast  set  mine  oil  and  mine  incense 
23.  41  whereupon  thou  hast  set  mine  incense 

6.  Incense,  perfume,  6u/xia/j.a  thumiama. 

Luke  1.  10  people  were  praying,  .at  the  time  of  inc. 
1.  11  angel,  .on  the  right  side  of  the  altar  of  i. 
Rev.    8.    3  there  was  given  unto  him  much  incense 
8.   4  the  smoke  of  the  incense . .  ascended  up 
INCENSE,  altars  for  — 
Incense  altars,  nViBpD  meqatteroth. 

2  Ch.  30. 14  and  all  the  altars  for  incense  took  they 
[See  also  Burn,  burning  offer,  offering,  sweet.] 
INCENSED,  to  be  — 
To  be  displeased,  heated,  rqrj  cha/rah,  2. 

Isa.   41.  11  all  they  that  were  incensed  against  thee 
45.  24  all  that  are  incensed  against  him  shall 
INCLINE,  to  — 

1.  To  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  way,  doum,  n|SJ  natah. 
Judg.  9.  3  their  hearts  inclined  to  follow  Abimelech 
Psa.  40.    1  and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my 

119.  112  I  have  inclined  my  heart  to  perform  thy 

2.7*0  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  away,  npj  natah,  5. 
Josh.24.  23  incline  your  heart  unto  the  Lord  God  of 
1  Ki.  S.  58  That  ye  may  incline  our  hearts  unto  him 
Psa.  17.    6  thou  wilt  hear  me,  O  God  :  incline  thine 
45.  10  Hearken,  O  daughter,  .and  incline  thine 
49.    4  I  will  incline  mine  ear  to  a  parable  ;  I 
71.    2  Deliver,  .incline  thine  ear  uuto  me,  and 
78.    1  incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my  mo. 
88.    2  Let  my  prayer  come  before  thee  :  incline 
102.    2  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me . .  incline  thine 
116.    2  he  hath  inclined  his  ear  unto  me,  theref. 
119.  36  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies 
141.    4  Incline  not  my  heart  to  (any)  evil  thing 
Prov.  4.  20  My  son .  .incline  thine  ear  unto  my  saying 
5.  13  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that  instr. 
Isa.  37.  17  Incline  thine  ear,  O  Lord,  and  hear;  open 
55.   3  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me  ;  hear 
J  er.     7.  24  they  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear 
7.  26  they  hearkened  not  unto  me,  nor  inclined 
11.    8  they  obeyed  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear 
17.  23  they  obeyed  not,  neither  inclined  their 
25.   4  ye  have  not  hearkened,  nor  inclined  your 

34.  14  fathers  hearkened  not  unto  me  neither  in 

35.  15  ye  have  not  inclined  your  ear,  nor  hear. 
44.    5  they  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear 

Dan.    9.  18  O  my  God,  incline  thine  ear,  and  hear 
3.  To  cause  to  attend,  32^  qashab,  5. 

Prov.  2.    2  So  that  thou  incline  thine  ear  into  wisd. 
i.To  be  bowed  down,  incline,  mt?  shuach. 

Prov.  2. 18  her  house  inclineth  unto  death,  and  her 
INCLOSE,  to  — 
l.To  make  a  hedge  or  wall,  ~nz  gadar. 

Lam.  3.   9  He  hath  inclosed  my  ways  with  hewn  st. 

2.  To  set  round,  compass,  p]ps  naqaph,  5. 

Psa.  22. 16  the  assembly  of  the  wicked  have  inclosed 

3.  To  bind,  fashion,  "us  tsur. 

Song  8.    9  we  will  inclose  her  with  boards  of  cedar 

4.  To  enclose  together,  shut  up,  <rvyK\e(cD  suykleio. 

Luke  5.   6  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude  of  fishes 
INCLOSE  round,  to  — 
To  compass,  encircle,  TTJ3  kathar,  3. 

Judg2o.  43  they  inclosed  the  Benjamites  round  about 

INCLOSED  — 

l.To  nail,  bolt,  ^>»3  naal. 

Song  4.  12  A  garden  inclosed  (is)  my  sister,  (my)  sp. 
2.  To  be  turned  round,  surrounded,  33p  sabab,  6. 

Exod39.    6  they  wrought  onyx  stones  inclosed  in  ouc. 
39.  13  inclosed  in  ouches  of  gold  in  their  inclos. 
2>.To  shut  up  or  in,  I3p  sagar. 

Psa.  17. 10  they  are  inclosed  in  their  own  fat :  with 
INCLOSING  — 
Fillings,  settings,  nN*?0  milluah. 

Exod28.  20  they  shall  be  sett  in  gold  in  their  inclosings 
39. 13  inclosed  in  ouches  of  gold  in  their  inclos. 
LNCONTINENCY  — 
Incontinence,  want  of  authority,  atcpatrta  akrasia. 

1  Co.  7.    5  that  Satan  tempt  you  not  for  your  incon. 
INCONTINENT  — 

Incontinent,  without  strength,  anparvis  akrates. 

2  Ti.  3.      3  truce  breakers,  false  accusers,  incontin. 
INCORRUPTIBLE  — 

Incorruptible,  &$0apTos  aphtlmrtos. 

1  Co.  9.  25  obtain  a  corruptible  crown,  but  we  an  in. 

15,  52  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and 

1  Pe.    1.    4  To  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  und. 

1.  23  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorrupt. 


TNCORRT/PTION  — 

Incomqjtion,  atyQapaia  aphtharsia. 

1  Co.  15.  42  It  is  sown  in  corruption,  .raised  in  inenr. 

15.  50  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorrup! 

15.  53  For  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorru. 

15.  54  whentliiscorruptibleshallhaveputonin. 

INCREASE  — 

1. Increase,  produce,  "?o:  yebul. 

Lev.  26.   4  the  land  shall  yield  her  increase,  and  the 
26.  20  for  your  laud  shall  not  yield  her  increase 
Deut  32.  22  shall  consume  the  earth  with  her  increase 
Judg.  6.    4  destroyed  the  increase  of  the  earth, till  thou 
Job   20.  28  The  increase  of  his  bouse  shall  depart,  (and 
Psa.  67.  6  (Then)  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase 
78.  46  He  gave  also  their  increase  unto  the  cater 
85.  12  and  our  land  shall  yield  her  increase 
Eze.  34.  27  the  earth  shall  yield  her  increase,  and 
Zech.  8.  12  thegroundshallgiveherinerLuscandthe 
2. Increase,  abundance,  na-jD  marbeh. 

Isa.     9.    7  Of  the  increase  of  (his)  government  and 

3. Increase,  abundance,  multitude,  greatness,  rva-io. 

Lev.  25.  37  Thou  shalt  not.  .lend  him.  .victuals  fori. 

1  Sa.   2.  33  all  the  increase  of  thy  house  shall  die  in 
£.Fcetus,  what  is  cast  forth,  "U»  sheger. 

Deut.  7.  j^,  he  will  also  bless,  .'the  increase  of  thy  kine 
28.    4,  18  the  increase  of  thy  kine,  and  the  flocks 

28.  51  the  increase  of  thy  kine,  or  flocks  of  thy 
5.  Increase,  fruit,  .1x1351  tebuah. 

Gen.  47.  24  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  increase,  that 
Lev.  19.  25  that  it  may  yield  unto  you  the  increase 
25.  7  for  thy  cattle,  .shall  all  the  increase  ther. 
*  25.  12  ye  shall  eat  the  increase  thereof  out  of  the 

25.  20  we  shall  not  sow,  nnr  gather  in  cur  incr. 
XuniiS.  30  the  increase  of  the.,  floor.,  the  increase  of 
Deut  14.  22  Thou  shalt  truly  tithe  all  the  increase  of 

14.  28  bring  forth  all  the  tithe  of  thine  increase 
16.  15  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thine  increase 

26.  12  of  tithing  all  the  tithes  of  thine  inerease 

2  Ch.31.    5  first  fruits,  .of  all  the  increase  of  the  field 

32.  28  Storehouses  also  for  the  increase  of  corn 
Neb..   9.  37  it  yieldeth  much  increase  unto  the  kings  ■ 
Job    31.  12  (is)  a  fire  (that),  .would  root  outallminei. 
Psa.  107.  37  vineyards,  which  may  yield  fruits  of  inc. 
Prov.  3.   9  with  the  first  fruits  of  all  thine  increase 
14.-  4  much  increase  (is)  by  the  strength  of  the 
18.  20  with  the  increase  of  his  life  shall  he  be  f. 
Eccl.  5.  10  nor  he  that  loveth  abundance  with  incr. 
Isa.  30.  23  and  bread  of  the  increase  of  the  earth 
Jer.     2.    3  Israel  (was) . .  the  first  fruits  of  his  increase 
Eze.  48.  18  the  increase  thereof  shall  be  for  food  unto 
G. Increase,  fruit,  nnH?i  tenubah. 

Deut32.  13  that  he  might  eat  the  increase  of  the  fields 
Eze.  36.  30  I  will  multiply.. the  increase  of  the  field 
7.  Increase,  M3TJB  tarbuth. 

Num.  32.  14  ye  are  risen  up.,  an  increase  of  sinful  men 
8. Increase,  rv3~m  tarbith. 

Lev.  25.  36Takethounousuryofhim,orincrease:but 
Eze.    18.    8  neither  hath  taken  any  increase,  (that) 
18.  13  forth  upon  usury,  and  hath  taken  increase 
18.  17  hathnot  received  usury  nor  increase,  hath 

22.  12  thou  hast  taken  usury  and  increase,  and 
9. Increase,  atifyo-is  qvxesis. 

Eph.  4.  16  maketh  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  ed. 

Col.     2.  19  the  body .  .increaseth  with  the  increase 
[See  Vineyards.] 
INCREASE,  to  — 
l.To  strengthen,  harden,  rex  amats,  3. 

Psov.24.    5  yea,  a  man  ot  knowledge  increaseth  she. 

2.  To  rise,  triumph,  nxa  gaah. 

Job    10.  16  For  it  increaseth.     Thou  huntest  me  (as) 

3.  To  make  great,  !?na  gadal,  5. 

Isa.    9.  3  Thou  hast . .  not  increased  the  joy :  they 
4. To  add,  increase,  qp;  yasaph. 

Isa.  26.  15  Thouhast  increased,  thou  hast  increased 

29.  19  The  meek  also  shall  increase,  .joy  in  the 

5.  To  be  added,  *|p;  yasaph,  2 

Prov.n.  24  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  increas. 

6.  To  add,  increase,  *jp;  yasaph,  5. 

Ezraio.  10  taken,  .to  increase  the  trespass  of  Israel 
Prov.  1.    5  A  wise  (man)  will  hear,  and  will  increase 
g.   9  teach,  .and  he  will  increase  in  learning 
9'.  11  and  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be  increas. 
16.  21  the  sweetness  of  the  lips  increaseth  lear. 

23.  28  and  increaseth  the  transgressors  among 
Eccl.  1.  18  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth 

2.    9  I  was  great,  and  increased  more  than  all 

Eze.     5. 16  I  will  increase  the  famine  upon  you,  and 

23.  14  she  increased  her  whoredoms :  for  when 

l.To  bring  forth,  increase,  3U  nub. 

Psa.  62.  10  if  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  (upiit 
S.To  go  up,  n!?u  alah. 

1  Ki.22.  35  the  battle  increased  that  day;  and  the  k 

2  Ch.18.  34  the  battle  increased  that  day:  howbeit 
Tsa.  74.  23  the  tumult,  .against  thee  increaseth  con. 
Eze.  41.    7  and  so  increased  (from)  the  lowest,  .to 

9.  To  make  or  cause  to  be  fruitful,  iris  parah,  5. 

Psa.  105.  24  he  increased  his  people  greatly ;  and  m. 
10. Many,  much,  abundant,  great,  mighty,  Ti  rah. 

1  Sa.14.  19  the  noise,  .went  on  and  increased  :  and  S. 

2  54.15. I2  tbe  people  increased  continually  with  A. 


INCREASE 


513 


INFINITE 


ll.To  break  forth,  up,  in,  ys  parats. 

Gen.  30.  43  the  man  increased  exceedingly,  and  had 
1  Ch.  4.  38  the  house  of  their  fathers  increased  grea. 
Hos.    4.  10  they,  .shall  not  increase ;  because  they  h. 

12.  To  be  or  become  many,  run  rabah. 

Gen.   7. 17  the  waters  increased,  and  hare  up  the  ark 

Dent.  6.    3  that  ye  may  increase  mightily,  as  the  L. 

7.  22  lest  the  beasts  of  the  field  increase  upon 

1  Ch.  5.  23  they  increased  from  Bashan  unto  Eaal-h. 

Prov  28.  28  but  when  they  perish,  the  righteous  incr. 

29.  16  wicked  are  multiplied,  transgression  inc. 

Eccl.  5.  11  "When  goods  increase .  .whabgood  (is  there) 

Jer.  23.    3  and  they  shall  be  fruitful  and  increase 

Eze.  16.    7  thou  hast  increased  and  waxen  great,  and 

36.  11  they  shall  increase  and  bring  fruit :  and  I 

Dan.  12.    4  shall  run.  .and  knowledge  shall  be  incre. 

Z^ch  10.    8  they  shall  increase  as  they  have  increased 

1  o.  To  multiply,  make  abundant,  n^n  rabah,  3. 
Judg.  9.  29  he  said  to  Abimeleeh,  Increase  thine  army 
Psa.  44.  12  Thou  sellest..aud  dost  not  increase,  .hj 

]  4.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  abound,  ruri  rabah,  5. 
Lev.  25.  16  thou  shalt  increase  the  price  thereof,  and 

1  Ch.27.  23  Lord  had  said  he  would  increase  Israel 
Job  10.  17  and  increasest  thine  indignation  upon  me 
Psa.  71.  21  Thou  shalt  increase  my  greatness,  and 
Prov  13.  11  he  thatgathereth  by  labour  shall  increase 

22.  16  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase 

28.    8  He  that  by  usury,  .increaseth  his  substance 

Eccl.  6.  1 1  there  be  many  things  that  increase  vanity 

Isa.   40.  29  to  (them  that  have)  no  might  he  increaseth 

51.    2  fori  called  him  alone,  .and  increased  him 

57.   9  didst  increase  thy  perfumes,  and  didst 

Lam.  2.    5  hath  increased  in  the  daughter  of  Judah 

Eze.   16.  26  hast  increased  thy  whoredoms,  to  provoke 

28.    5  by  thy  traffic  hast  thou  increased  thy  ric. 

36.  29  I  will  call  for  the  corn,  and  will  increase 

36.  37  I  will  increase  them  with  men  like  a  flock 

Dan.  11.  39  whom  he  shall  acknowledge  (and)increase 

Hos.  10.    1  he  hath  increased  the  altars;  according 

12.    1  he  daily  increaseth  lies  and  desolation 
Amos  4.    9  yourfigtreesandyourolivetreesincreased 
Hab.  2.    6  Woe  to  him  that  increaseth  (that  which  is) 
1 5.  To  make  great,  magnify,  nyy  saga,  5. 

Job    12.  23  He  increaseth  the  nations,  and  destroyeth 
~\.&.To  be  or  become  great,  njb*  sagah. 

Job     8.    7  yet  thy  latter  end  should  greatly  increase 
17.  To  become  great,  rn^  sagah,  5. 

Psa.  73. 12  prosper  in  the  world ;  they  increase  (in) 
lS.7*o  increase,  grow,  av^dveo  auxano. 

Mark  4.  8  yield  fruit  that  sprang  up  and  [increased] 
John  3.  30  He  must  increase,  but  I  (must>  decrease 
Acts    6.    7  word  of  God  increased  ;  and  the  number 

2  Co.   9.  10  increase  the  fruits  of  your  righteousness 

10.  15  having  hope,  when  your  faith  is  increased 
Col.     1.  10  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God 

2.  19  body,  .increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God 

19.7*0  be  over  and  above,  irepio-asvco  2)erisseub~. 
Acts  16.    5  And .  .the  churches . .  increased  in  number 

1  Th.  4.  10  beseech,  .that  ye  increase  more  and  more 

20.7*0  stnke  forward,  ttpokStttco  prokopto. 

Luke  2.  52  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature 

2  Ti.    2. 16  for  they  will  increase  unto  more  ungodli. 

'21.  To  put  toward,  add  to,  wpoari8r)fxt  frroslithemi. 

Lukei7.    5  And  the  apostles  said .  .Increase  our  faith 
INCREASE,  to  give  the  — 
To  increase,  give  increase,  av^dvw  auxano. 

1  Co.  3.    6  Apollos  watered ;  but  God  gave  the  incr. 

3.  7  any  thing,  .but  God  that  giveth  the  incre. 
INCREASE  abundantly,  to  — 

To  t  'em,  bring  forth  abundantly,  ptf  sharats. 

Exod.  1.    7  the  children  of  Israel ..  increased  abund. 
INCREASE  in  strength,  to  — 
To  strengthen,  put  power  in,  ivduva^a)  endunamod. 

Acts    9.  22  Saul  increased  the  more  in  strength, and  c. 
IRCREASE,  ta  make  to  — 
To  m  ike  or  cause  to  abound,  TrKeovdfa  pleonazo. 

1  Th.  3.  12  the  Lord  make  you  to  increase  and  abound 
TNCItEASE  more  and  more,  to  — - 
To  add,  t]$l  yasaph,  5. 

Psa.  115. 14  Lord  shall  increase  you  more  and  more 
INCREASED,  to  be  — 

1.  7*o  be  or  become  mighty,  bony,  strong,  Day  atsam. 
Jer.     5.    6  because,  .their  backslidings  are  increased 

15.    8  Their  widows  are  increased  to  me  above 

30. 14  thine  iniquity,  .thy  sins  were  increased 

30. 15  thy  sins  were  increased,  I  have  done  these 

2.  To  be  or  become  fruitful,  rri£  pa/rah. 

Exod23.  30  until  thou  be  increased,  and  inherit  the  1. 
Jer.     3. 16  when  ye  be  multiplied  and  increased  in 

o.  To  break  forth,  up,  in,  p3  parats. 

Gen.  30.  30  and  it  is . .  increased  unto  a  multitude ;  and 
Job     1.  10  and  his  substance  is  increased  in  the  land 

4. Abundance,  multitude,  greatness,  Ti  rob. 

Hos.   4.    7  they  were  increased,  so  they  sinned  against 
5.7*0  be  many,  multiplied,  ayi  rabab. 

Psa.     3.   1  Lord,  how  are  they  increased  that  trouble 

4.  7  time,  .their  corn  and  their  wine  increased 
Eccl.  5.  11  they  are  increased  that  eat  them:  and 

65 


6.7*0  be  many,  multiplied,  nyj  rabah. 

Gen.    7.  18  the  waters,  .were  increased  greatly  upon 
Psa.  49.  16  when  the  glory  of  his  house  is  increased 
Ezra   9.    6  for  our  iniquities  are  increased  over 
Jer.   29.   6  that  ye  may  be  increased  there,  and  not 
Dan. 12.    4  shallruu.  .and  knowledge  shall  be  increas. 

INCREASED  with  goods,  to  be  — 

Z'o  be  or  wax  rich  or  wealthy,  irAoureco  plouteo. 
Rev.   3.  17  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and 

INCREDIBLE  thing  — 

Xot  to  be  believed,  &-mcrTos  apistos. 

Acts  26.   8  Why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  iucred. 

INCURABLE  — 

1.7*o  be  sickly,  mortal,  desperate,  tyjx  ayiash. 

Job    34.    6  my  wound  (is)  incurable^vithouttrausgre. 

Jer.  15.  iS  Whyis  my  pain,  .andmy  wound  incurable 

30.  is  Thy  bruise  (is)  incurable,  .thy  wound  (is) 

30.  15  thy  sorrow  (is)incurableforthe  multitude 

Mic.    1.    9  wound  (is)  incurable;  for  it  is  come  unto  I. 

2.  There  is  no  healing,  x3~id  px  en  marpe. 

2  Ch.21.  18  Lord  smote  him.  .with  an  incurable dise. 
INDEBTED,  to  he  — 
7*o  be  indebted,  b<pzi\co  ophcilo. 

Luken.    4  we  also  forgive  everyone  that  is  indebted 
INDEED  — 
\.But,  verily,  Ssx  abal. 

Gen.  17.  19  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bearthee  a  son  indeed 

2  Sa.  14.    5  (am)  indeed  a  widow  woman,  and  mine  h. 

'2, Surely,  truly,  indeed,  rupx  omnah. 

Gen.  20.  12  indeed  (she  is)  iny  sister;  she  (is)  the  da. 
Josh.  7.  20  Indeed  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  G. 

3.  Surely,  truly,  indeed,  Dipx  omnam. 

Job   19.    4  be  it  indeed  (that)  I  have  erred,  mine  er. 

19.  5  If  indeed  ye  will  magnify.,  against  me,  and 
■i.Surely,  truly,  indeed,  E:px  umnam. 

Kuni22.  37  am  I  not  able  indeed  to  promote  thee  toh. 

1  Ki.  8.  27  But  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the  earth ? 
Psa.  58.    1  Do  ye  indeed  speak  righteousness,  O  con.? 

5.  Truly,  ahwdais  alelhos. 

John  1.  47  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no 

4.  42  we.  .know  that  this  is  indeed  the* Christ 

6.  55  ismeat[indeed,]audmybloodisdrink  in. 

7.  26  Do  the  rulers  know  indeed  that  this  is  the 

8.  31  continue,  .(then)  are  ye  my  disciples  ind. 

6.  But,  aWd  alia. 

2  Co. 1 1.    1  bear  with  me.  .and  indeed  bear  with  me 
7. For,  ydp  gar. 

Rom.  8.    7  for  it  is  not  subject,  .neither  indeed  can 
1  Th.  4. 10  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren 
8. Indeed,  {jl4v  men. 

Matt.  3. 11  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  waterunto  rep. 

13.  32  Which  indeed  is  theleast  of  all  seeds ;  but 

20.  23  Ye  shall  drink  indeed  of  my  cup,  and  be 
23.  27  like  unto  wdiited  sepulchres,  which  indeed 
26.  41  spirit  indeed  (is)  willing,  but  the  flesh  (is) 

Mark  1.    8  1  [indeed]  have  baptized  you  with  water 

10.  39  Ye  shall  [indeed]  drink  of  the  cup  that  Id. 

14.  21  The  Son  of  man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  is  wr. 
Luke  3. 16  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water ;  but  one 

11.  48  they  indeed  killed  them,  and  ye  build  th. 
23.  41  we  indeed  justly ;  for  we  receive  the  due 

Acts  4.  16  that  indeed  a  notable  miracle  hath  been 
11.  16  John  indeed  baptized  with  water  ;  but  ye 
22.   9  they  that  were  with  me  saw  indeed  the 

Rom.  6.  1 1  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto 
14.  20  All  things  indeed  (are)  pure  ;  but  (it  is) 

1  Co.  11.    7  a  man  indeed  ought  not  to  cover  (his)  h. 

2  Co.  8.  17  indeed  he  accepted  the  exhortation ;  but 
Phil.    1.  15  Some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy 

3.    1 ;  Col.  2.  23  ;  1  Pe.  2.  4. 

9.  And,  icol'l  kai,  Mark  9.  13;  Phil.  2.  27. 

IQ.Certainly,  uvrccs  onlos. 

Marki  1.  32  counted  John,  that  he  was  a  prophet  ind. 
Luke  24.  34  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  hath  appe. 
John  8.  36  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  ind. 
1  Ti.    5.    3  Honour  widows  that  arc  widows  indeed 

5.  5  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed,  and  desolate 
5.  16  it  may  relieve  them  that  are  widows  ind. 

[See  also  Neither.] 
IN-DI-A,  rfrj. 

This  country  "'as  the  limit  of  the  territories  of  Ahasuerus 
in  the  east,  as  wras  Ethiopia  in  the  west.  The  names  in 
Herodotus  are  similarly  connected.  The  Hebrew  form 
Hoddu  is  an  abbreviation  of  Honadu,  which  is  identi- 
cal with  the  names  of  the  Indies,  Hindu,  or  Slndhu,  as 
well  as  with  the  ancient  name  of  the  country  Hapta- 
Hendu,  as  it  appears  in  the  Vendidad.  The  India  of 
the  book  of  Esther  is  the  Punjab,  and  perhaps  Sind,  i.e., 
the  India  which  Herodotus  described  as  forming  part 
of  the  Persian  empire  under  Darius,  and  the  India  con- 
quered by  Alexander  the  Great. 

Esth.  1.    1  Ahasuerus  which  reigned  from  I.  even 
8.    9  provinces  which  (are)  from  I.  unto  Ethio. 
INDIGNATION  — 
1. Indignation,  insolence,  ny]  zaam. 

Psa.  69.  24  Pouroutthine'indignationuponthem.aud 

78. 49  the  fierceness  of  his  anger,  wrath,  and  in. 

102.  10  Because  of  thine  indignation  and  thy  wr. 

Isa.  10.    5  the  staff  in  their  hand  is  mine  indignation 

10.  25  the  indignation  shall  cease,  and  mine  an. 


Isa.  13.  5  Lord,  and  the  weapons  of  his  indignation 
26.  20  hide  thyself.. until  the  indignation  be  over 
30.  27  his  lips  are  full  of  indignation,  and  his  t. 

Jer.   10.  10  nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  his  ind. 
15.  17  for  thou  hast  filled  me  with  indignation 
50.  25  hath  brought  forth  the  weapons  of  his  in. 

Lam.  2.    6  hath  despised  in  the  indignation  of  his  a 

Eze.  21.  31 1  will  pour  out  mine  indignation  upon 
22.  24  nor  rained  upon  in  the  day  of  indignation 
22.  31  have  I  poured  out  mine  indignation  upon 

Dan.  8.  19  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the  indig. 
11.  36  shall  prosper  till  the  indignation  be  acco. 

Nab.   1.    6  Who  can  stand  before  his  indignation  ?  and 

Hal).   3.  12  Thou  didst  march  through'the  land  in  in. 

Zeph.  3.    S  to  pour  upon  them  mine  indignation,  .all 

2.  To  be  indignant,  insolent,  Dy?  zaam. 

Isa.   66.  14  and  (Ms)  indignation  toward  his  enemies 

Z. Wrath,  rage,  raging,  f\£izaa,ph. 

Isa.  30.  30  show . .  with  the  indignation  of  (his)  anger 
Mic.    7.    9  I  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord 

i.  Heat,  fury,  nvn  chemah. 

Esth.  5.   9  he  was  full  of  indignation  against  Horde. 

5. Anger,  sadness,  provocation,  irya  kaas. 

Job   10.  17  and  increasest  thine  indignation  upon  me 

6.  Wrath,  *\x%  qetseph. 

Deut29.  28  Lord  rooted  them  out.  .in  great  iudigna. 
2  Ki.  3.  27  there  was  great  indignation  against  Israel 
Isa.   34.    2  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  all 

7. Indignation,  ayavaKT-nvts  aganaktesis. 

2  Co.  7. 11  indignation, yea.. fear, yea.. vehement de. 

S.Zeal,  tyKos  zelos. 

Acts  5.  17  rose  up.  .and  were  filled  with  indignation 
Heb.io.  27  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour  the 

9.  Wrath,  0u/j.6s  thumos. 

Rom.  2.    8  obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and 
10. Anger,  hpyf\  orye. 

Rev.  14.  10  without  mixture  into  the  cup  of  his  indig. 
INDIGNATION,  to  have,  be  moved  with  — 
1.7*0  have  indignation,  ayavaKreco  aganakteo. 

Matt  20.  24  they  were  moved  with  indignation  against 
26.    8  when  his  disciples  saw  (it),  they  had  ind. 

Mark  1 4.    4  there  were  some  that  had  indignation  with 

2.7*0  be  indignant,  insolent,  nyr  zaam. 

Dan.  11.  30  have  indignation  against  the  holy  coven. 

Zech.  1.  12  against  which  thou  hast  had  indignation 

Mai.    1.   4  people  against  whom  the  Lord  hath  ind. 
INDIGNATION,  to  take  — 
7*o  be  angry,  sad,  cys  kaas. 

Neh.  4.    1  he  was  wroth,  and  took  great  indignation 
INDIGNATION,  with — 
7*0  have  indignation,  ayai/aKrio}  aganakteo. 

Lukei3.  14  ruler  of  the  synagogue  answered  with  in. 
INDITE,  to  — 
7*o  bubble  up,  bring  forth,  indite,  urn  rachash. 

Psa.  45.    1  My  heart  is  inditing  a  good  matter:  I  sp. 
INDUSTRIOUS  — 
A  doer  of  work,  npkbo  ii'pj;  oseh  melakah. 

1  Ki.11.  28  seeing  the  young  man  that  he  was  indus. 
INEXCUSABLE  — 
Without  apology  or  excuse,  auairo\6ynros  anapolog. 

Rom.  2.    i  thou  art  inexcusable,  0  man,  whosoever 
INFAMOUS  — 
Unclean  or  defiled  of  name,  cp;n  nxDp  Umeath  hash. 

Eze.  22.  5  near.. shall  mock  thee,  .infamous.. much 
INFAMY  — 
Evil  account  or  report,  n|n  dibbah. 

Prov  25.  10  put  thee  to  shame,  and  thine  infamy  turn 

Eze.  36.    3  taken  up  in  the  lips,  .and  (are)  an  infamy 
INFANT  — 
1. Suckling  infant,  Sly  id. 

Isa.  65.  20  There  shall  he  no  more  thence  an  infant 
2. Suckling,  infant,  hhw,  hh'w  olel,  olal. 

1  Sa.  15.    3  slay  both  man  and  woman,  infant  and  su. 
Job      3.  16  not  been  ;  as  infants  (which)  never  saw 
Hos.  13.  16  their  infants  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces 

o.Babe,  infant,  &pe<po$  brephos. 
_:  Luke  18.  15  they  brought  unto  him  also  infants,  that 
INFERIOR  — 
l.Low,  lower,  jnx.  ara. 

Dan.  2.  39  after '. .  shall  arise  another  kingdom  inferior 
2.Tofall,  hz'i  naphal. 

Job  12.  3  I  (am)  not  inferior  to  you  :  yea,  who  kno. 
13.    2  do  I  know  also:  I  (am)  not  inferior  unto 

INFERIOR,  to  be  — 

7*o  be  less,  worse,  inferior,  yTrdopai  hettaomai. 

2  Co.  12.  13  what  is  it  wherein  ye  were  inferior  to 
INFIDEL  — 

Xot  believing,  &wkttos  apistos. 

a  Co.  6.  15  or  what,  .he  that  belie veth  with  an  hind. 
1  Ti.    5.    8  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  in. 

INFINITE  — 

l.Xo  number,  "is?1?  j'x  en  mispar. 

Psa.  147.   5  of  great  power :  his  understanding  (is)  in 


INFIRMITY 


514 


INHABITED 


2.Xo  end,  |'p  j'N  en  qets. 

Job  22.    5  wickedness  great  .thine  iniquities  infinite? 

Z.No  end,  fisp  ]*y  e?i  qetseh. 

Nah.   3.    9  Ethiopia  and  Egypt.,  strength  and..infin. 
INFIRMITY  — 
1.7V>  oe  5u7.-,  menstruous,  fivn  dawk. 

Lev.  12.    2  to  the  days  of  the  separation  for  herinfi. 

2.  To  sicken,  appease,  weaken,  n^n  chalah,  3. 
Psa.  77.  10  And  I  said,  This  (is)  my  infirmity,  .the 

Z.Sickness,  disease,  n^nv  machaleh. 

Prov  iS.  14  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infir. 

i.Weakness,  arrOeveia  astheneia. 

Matt.  8.  17  Himselftookourinfirniities,andbare(our) 
Luke  5.  15  to  be  healed  by  him  of  their  infirmities 
8.    2  which  had  been  healed  of.  .infirmities 
13.  11  there  wasawoman  which  had  a  spirit  of  in. 
13. 12  Woman,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  infir 
John  5.    5  which  had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight  y. 
Rom.  6.  19  because  of  the  infirmity  of  your  flesh:  for 
8.  26  Likewise  the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infir. 
2  Co.  11.  30  glory  of  the  things  which  concern  mine  in. 
12.    5  of  myself  I  will  not  glory,  but  in  mine  in. 
12.    9  will  I  rather  glory  in  my  infirmities,  that 
12.  10  Therefore  I  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in 
Gal.     4.  13  Ye  know  how  through  infirmity  of  the  fl.? 
1  Ti.    5.  23  for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often  in. 
Heb.    4. 15  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirm. 
5.    2  that  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  in. 
7.  28  law  maketh.  .high  priests  which  have  in 
5.  Weakness,  aa-divntxa  asthenema, 

Rom  15.    1  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak 
6. Sickness,  disease,  v6<ros  nosos. 

Luke  7.  21  in  the  same  hour  he  cured  many  of.  .inf. 
INFLAMMATION  — 
1. Burning,  inflammation,  ngj^  dalleqeth. 

Deut  28.  22  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with..aninflaniin. 

2. Burning,  inflammation,  n3"iy  tsarebeth- 

Lev.  13.  28  for  it  (is)  an  inflammation  of  the  burning 
INFLAME,  to  — 
To  cause  to  bum,  inflame,  phy  dalaq,  5. 

Isa.     5. 11  continue  until  night,  (till)  wine  inflame 
INFLUENCES  — 
Sweet  influences,  friN&D  maadannoth. 

Job  38.  31  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  P. 
INFOLDING  — 
To  take,  receive,  or  catch  oneself,  npS  laqach,  7. 

Eze.     1.    4  a  great  cloud,  and  a  fire  infolding  itself 
INFORM,  to  — 
1.7*0  consider,  discern,  f'3  bin. 

Dan.  9.  22  he  informed  (me),  and  talked  with  me,and 
2.7*0  show,  direct,  teach,  nyr  yarah,  5. 

Deut  17.  10  to  do  according  to  all  that  they  inform 

3.  To  make  manifest,  €/j.<pavlfa  emphanizo. 

Acts  24.  1  Tertiuius,  who  informed  the  governor  ag. 
25.  2  chief  of  the  Jews  informed  him  agaiust  P. 
25.  15  priests  and  the  elders  of  the  Jews  infor. 

4.  To  sound  throughout,  teach  fully,  KaTTixea  katech. 

Acts  21.  21  they  are  informed  of  thee,  that  thou  tea. 

21.  24  whereof  they  were  informed  concerning 

INGATHERING  — 

Juf/'i/hering,  *]DN,  rj'pN  asiph. 

Exod23.  16  the  feast  of  ingathering,  .in  the  end  of  th« 
34.  22  the  feast  of  ingathering  at  the  year's  end 

INHABIT,  to  — 

1 ,  To  sit  down  or  still,  inhabit,  dwell,  2Z'i  yashab. 
Gen.  36.  20  These,  .the  sons  of  Seir  the  Horite,  who 
Num.35.  34  Defile  not.  .the  land  which  ye  shall  inn. 
Judg.  1.  17  they  slew  the  Canaanites  that  inhabited 
1.  21  did  not  drive  out  the  Jebusites  that  inha. 
1  Oh.  5.  9  eastward  he  inhabited  unto  the  entering 
Job    15.  28  in  houses  which  no  maninhabite Hi,  which 

22.  3  (O  thou)  that  inhabitest  the  praises  of  I. 
42.  11  the  villages  (that)  Kedar  doth  inhabit:  let 

44.  26  Thou  shalt  be  inhabited ;  and  to  the  cities 

45.  18  he  formed  it  to  be  inhabited  :  I  (am)  the  L. 
65.  21  they  shall  build  houses,  and  inhabit,  .and 
65.  22  They  shall  not  build,  and  another  inhabit 
'48.  18  Thou  daughter  that  dost  inhabit  Dibon 

Eze.  33.  24  they  that  inhabit  those  wastes  of  the  land 
Amos  9.  14  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and  in, 
Zeph.  j.  13  they  shall  also  build  houses,  but  notiuh. 
Zech.  7.    7  when  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  and  in 

7.    7  when . .  inhabited  the  south  and  the  plain? 

2.7*0  rest,  dwell,  inhabit,  tabernacle,  ]yy  shaken. 
Prov.io.  30  but  the  wicked  shall  not  inhabit  the  earth 
Isa.   57.  15  J»hus  saiththe  high  and  lofty  One  that  in. 
Jer.   17.    6  shall  inhabit  the  parched  places  in  the  w. 

INHABITANT  — 

1.7*0  sojni/rn,  *fl3  pur. 

Job  28.  4  The  flood  breaketh  out  from  the  inhabit 
2.7*0  dwell,  "OT  dur. 

Dan.  4.  35  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  (are)repu. 
4.  35  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and . .  the  inhabita. 

3.7*0  sit  still,  or  down,  dwell,  inhabit,  3#;  yashab. 

Gen.  19.  25  he  overthrew.. all  the  inhabitants  of  the 

34.  30  to  make  me  to  stink  among  the  inhabita. 

50.  11  when  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  the  Ca. 


Psa. 
Isa. 


Jer. 


Exodis.  14  sorrow  shall  take  hold  on  the  inhabitants 
15.  15  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  shall  melt  away 
23.  31  I  will  deliver  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
34.  12,  15  lest  thou  make  a  covenant  with  the  in. 

Lev.  18.  25  and  the  land  itself  vomiteth  out  her  inn. 
25.  10  proclaim  liberty,  .unto  all  the  inhabitants 

Numi3.  32  land  that  eateth  up  the  inhabitants  ther. 

14.  14  they  will  tell  (it)  to  the  inhabitants  of  this 

32.  17  because  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

33.  52  ye  shall  drive  out  all  the  inhabitants  of 
33.  55  if  ye  will  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants 

Deut  13.  13  have  withdrawn  the  inhabitants  of  their 

13.  15  Thou  shalt  surely  smite  the  inhabitants 
Josh.  2.   9  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  faint  bee. 
2.  24  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  do  faint 

7.  9  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  hear 

8.  24  made  an  end  of  slajing  all  the  inhabita. 

8.  26  utterly  destroyed  all  the  inhabitants  of  Ai 

9.  3  when  the  inhabitants  of  Gideon  heard 
9.  11  our  elders  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  our 
9.  24  to  destroy  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

10.  1  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeou  had  made  peace 

11.  19  save  the  Hivites,  the  inhabitants  of  Gib. 
13.   6  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  hill  country 

15.  15  he  went  up  thence  to  the  inhabitants  of 
15.  63  As  for  the  Jebusites,  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
17.    7  the  border  went  along,  .unto  the  inhabi. 
17.  11  the  inhabitants  of  Dor.  .the  inhabitants  of 
1 7.  1 1  the  inhabitants  of  Taanach . .  the  inhabit. 

Judg.  1.  11  he  went  against  the  inhabitants  of  Debir 
1.  19  could  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the 
1.  27  nor  the  inhabitants  of  Dor  and  her  towns 
1.  27  the  inhabitants  of  Iblaini.  .the  inhabita. 
1.  30  the  inhabitants  of  Kitron,  nor  the  inhab. 
1.  31  the  inhabitants  of  Accho,  nor  the  inhabi. 
1.  32  the  Caananites,the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
1.  33  inhabitants  of  Beth-shemesh,  nor  the  in. 

1.  33  inhabitants  of  the  land,  .the  inhabitants 

2.  2  ye  shall  make  no  league  with  the  inhabi. 
5. 23  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof 

10.  18  he  shall  be  head  overall  the  inhabitants 

11.  8  be  our  head  over  all  the  inhabitants  of  G . 
n.  21  Aniorites  the  inhabitants  of  that  country 

20.  15  besides  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeah,  which 

21.  9  none  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-gilead 
21.  10  Go  and  smite  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-g. 

21.  12  they  found  among  the  inhabitants  of  Ja. 
Ruth  4.    4  Buy  (it)  before  the  inhabitants,  and  before 

1  Sa.    6.  21  they  seut  messengers  to  the  inhabitants 

23.  5  So  David  saved  the  inhabitants  of  Keilah 
27.    8  for  those,  .of  old  the  inhabitants  of  the  1. 

31.  11  when  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-gilead  h. 

2  Sa.  5.    6  the  Jebusites,  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

1  Ki.  21.  11  who  were  the  inhabitants  in  his  city,  did 

2  Ki.  19.  26  their  inhabitants  were  of  small  power 

22.  16  will  bringevil..  upon  the  inhabitants  there. 

22.  19  what  I  spake,  .against  the  inhabitants  th. 

23.  2  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  with  him 

1  Ch.  8.    6,  13  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  inhabitants 

8.  13  who  drove  away  the  inhabitants  of  Gath 

9.  2  the  first  inhabitants  that  (dwelt)  in  their 

11.  4  the  Jebusites.  .the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
11.  5  And  the  inhabitants  of  Jebus  said  to  Da. 
22.  18  he  hath  given  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

2  Ch  15.    5  great  vexations,  .upon  all  the  inhabitants 

20.    7  didst  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  this  1. 
20. 15  Hearken  ye,  all  Judah,  and  ye  inhabitants 
20.  18  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  fell  before 
20.  20  Hear  me,  O  Judah,  and  ye  inhabitants  of 
20.  23  stood  up  against  the  inhabitants  of  mount 

20.  23  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  the  inha. 

21.  11  caused  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  c. 
21. 13  hast  made  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of 

22.  1  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  made  Aha. 
32. 22  Lord  saved  Hezekiah  and  the  inhabitants 

32.  26  he  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  so 

32.  33  all  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa. 

33.  9  So  Manasseh  made  Judah  and  the  Inhabit. 

34.  24  I  will  bring  evil,  .upon  the  inhabitants 
34.  27  against  this  place,  and  against  the  inha. 
34.  28  bring  upon  tliis  place,  and  upon  the  inh. 
34.  30  the  king  went  up . .  and  the  inhabitants  of 
34.  32  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  did  accord. 
35. 18  Josiah.  .and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 

Ezra    4.    6  an  accusation  against  the  inhabitants  of 

Neh.   3.  13  The  valley  gate  repaired . .  the  inhabitants 

7.    3  appoint  watches  of  the  inhabitants  of  Je. 

9.  24  thou  subduedst  before  them  the  inhabit. 

Psa.  33.    8  let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  stand 

33.  14  he  lookethupon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 

49.    1  give  ear,  all  (ye)  inhabitants  of  the  world 

75.    3  The  earth  and  all  the  inhabitants  thereof 

83.    7  the  Philistines  with  the  inhabitants  of  T. 

Isa.     5.    3  now,  O  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and  men 

5.   9  many  houses  shall  be'desolate.  .without  in. 

6. 11  Until  the  cities  be  wasted  without  inha. 

8. 14  and  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jer. 

9.    9  Ephraim,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria 

10.  13  I  have  put  down  the  inhabitants  like  a 
10.  31  inhabitants  of  Gebini  gather  themselves 

12.  6  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Z. 
18.    3  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world,  and  dw. 

20.  6  the  inhabitant  of  this  isle  shall  say  in  that 

21.  14  inhabitants  of  the  landof  Tenia  brought 

22.  21  he  shall  be  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of 

23.  2  Be  still,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle ;  thou 

23.  6  Tarshish  ;  howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  is. 

24.  1  scattereth  abroad  the  inhabitants  thereof 
24.    5  earth  also  is  defiled  under  the  inhabitants 
24.    6  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  burned 
24. 17  (are)  upon  thee,  0  inhabitant  of  the  earth 
26.    9  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  right. 


Isa.   26.  18  have  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  fallen 
26.  21  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  for 

37.  27  their  inhabitants  (were)  of  small  power 

38.  11  I  shall  behold  man  no  more  with  the  inh. 
40.  22  the  inhabitants  thereof  (are)  as  grassho. 
42.  10  Sing,  .the  isles,  and  the  inhabitants  ther. 
42.  11  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock  sing,  let 
49.  19  too  narrow  by  reason  of  the  inhabitants 

Jer.  1.  14  shall  break  forth  upon  all  the  inhabitants 
2. 15  his  cities  are  burned  without  inhabitant 
4.  4  ye  men  of  Judah  and  inhabitants  of  Jer. 
4.  7  cities  shall  be  laid  waste,  without  an  inh. 
6.  12  I  will  stretchout  my  hand  upon  the  inh. 
8.  1  the  bones  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
9. 11 1  will  make,  .desolate,  without  an  inhab. 
10.  17  Gatherup  thy  wares.  .0 inhabitant  of  the 

10.  18  I  will  sling  outthe  inhabitants  of  the  land 

11.  2  and  speak,  .to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa. 
11.  9  A  conspiracy  is  found,  .among  the  inhab. 
11.  12  Then  shall  the.  .inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
13-  13  I  "'ill  till  all  the  inhabitants  of  this  land 
13.  13  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  with  dr. 
17.  20  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  that  enter 

17.  25  Then  shall  there  enter.,  the  inhabitants  of 

18.  11  speak,  .to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 

19.  3  0  kings  of  Judah,  and  inhabitants  of  Jeru. 
19.  12  Thus  vvilll  do.. to  the  inhabitants  thereof 
21.    6  I  will  smite  the  inhabitants  of  this  city 

21.  13  I  (am)  against  thee,  O  inhabitant  of  the 

22.  23  O  inhabitant  of  Lebanon,  that  makestthy 

23.  14  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  as  Gomorrah 
25.  2  the  prophet  spake . .  to  all  the  inhabitants 
25.    9  will  bring  them,  .against  the  inhabitants 

25.  29  I  will  call  for  a  sword  upon  all  the  inhab. 
•            25.  30  shall  give  a  shout,  .against  all  the  inhab. 

26.  9  this  city  shall  be  desolate  without  an  inh. 
26.  15  bring  innocent  blood,  .upon  the  inhabita. 

32.  32  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the  inhabitants  of 

33.  10  without  man,  and  without  inhabitant,  and 

34.  22  the  cities,  .a  desolation  without  an  inha. 

35.  13  Go  and  tell  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the  inh. 

35.  17  I  will  bring,  .upon  all  the  inhabitants  of 

36.  31  I  will  bring,  .upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jer. 
42.  18  hath  been  poured  forth  upon  the  inhabit. 
44.  22  land. .without  an  inhabitant,  as  at  this  day 
46.    8  I  will  destroy  the  city  and  the  inhabitants 

46.  19  shall  be  waste  and  desolate  without  an  in. 

47.  2  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall. howl 
48. 19  O  inhabitant  of  Aroer,  stand  by  the  way 

48.  43  the  snare,  (shall  be)  upon  thee,  O  inhabit. 

49.  8  Flee  ye,  turnback,  dwell  deep,  0  inhabit. 
49.  20  that  he  hath  purposed  against  the  inhab. 

49.  30  get'you  far  off,  dwell  deep,  O  ye  inhabit  an. 

50.  21  Go  up.  .against  the  inhabitants  of  Pekod 
50.  34  that  he  may.  .disquiet  the  inhabitants  of 

50.  35  A  sword  (is) . .  upon  the  inhabitants  of  B. 

51.  12  done  that  which  he  spake  against  the  in. 
51.  24  I  will  render,  .to  all  the  inhabitants  of  C. 
51.  29  to  make  the  land  of  B. .  .without  an  inha. 
51-  35  upon  Babylon,  shall  the  inhabitant  of  Zi. 
51.  35  ily  blood'upon  the  Inhabitants  of  Chald. 
51.  37  Babylon  shall  become  heaps. .  without  ani. 

Lam.  4.  12  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  would  not 
Eze.  11. 15  they  unto  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Jerus. 

12. 19  Thus  saitli  the  Lord  God  of  the  inhabita. 

15.    6  so  will  I  give the  inhabitantsof  Jerusalem 

26.  17  she  and  her  inhabitant?,  which  cause  their 

27.  8  inhabitants  of  Zidon  and  Arvad  were  thy 
27.  35  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  isles  shall  be 
29.    6  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  shall  know  that 

Dan.   9.    7  to  the  men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  inhabita. 

Hos.    4.    1  LORD  hath  a  controversy  with  the  inhab. 

Joel    1.    2  give  ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  land 
.1. 14  gather  the  elders,  .all  the  inhabitants  of 
2.    1  let  all  the  inhabitantsof  the  land  tremble 

Amos  1.    5  I  will,  .cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  the 

1.    8  I  will  cut  off  the  inhabitant  froniAshdod 

Jlic.  1.  11  Fassye  away,  thou  inhabitant  of  Saphir 
1.  11  inhabitant  of  Zaanan  came  not  forth  in 
1.  12  inhabitant  of  Maroth  waited  carefully  for 
1 .  13  O  thou  inhabitant  of  Lachish,  bind  the  ch. 
1.  15  bring  an  heir  unto  thee,  0  inhabitant  of  M. 
6.  12  the  inhabitants  thereof  have  spoken  lies 
6.  16  I  should  make,  .the  inhabitants  thereof 

Zeph.  1.    4  stretch  out  mine  hand,  .upon  all  the  inh. 

1.  11  Howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  Maktesh,  for  all 

2.  5  Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  coast 

2.  5  destroy  thee,  that  there  shall  be  no  inha. 

3.  6  there  is  no  man,  that  there  is  none  inhabi. 
Zech.  8.  20  there  shall  conic  people,  and  the  inhabit. 

8.  21  the  inhabitants  of  one  (city)  shall  go  to 

11.  6  I  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the 

12.  5  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (shall  be) 
12.    7  the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
12.    8  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  defend  the  in. 

12.  10  I  will  pour,  .upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jer. 

13.  1  a  fountain  opened,  .to  the  inhabitants  of 

L Inhabitant,  neighbour,  j?v:  shaken. 

Job    26.    5  from  under  the  waters,  and  the  inhabit. 

Isa.   33.  24  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick 

Hos.  10.    5  inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall  fear  because 
5. Sitter,  inhabitant,  dweller,  3gftn  toshab. 

1  Rii7.    1  Elijah  the  Tisbite.. of  the  inhabitants  of 

6.  7*o  settle  down,  dwell,  KaroiKGw  katoikeo. 

Rev.  17.    2  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have  been 

INHABITED,  to  be  — 

1.7*o  sit  stilt  or  down,  inhabit,  dwell,  2y;  yashab. 
Isa.    13.  20  It  shall  never  be  inhabited,  neither  shall 
Isa.    45. 18  he  formed  it  to  be  inhabited  :  I  (am)  the 


INHABITED 


515 


INHERITANCE 


Jer.    17.    6  parched  places .  .a  salt  land  and  not  mil. 
50. 13.it  shall  not  he  inhabited,  but  it  shall  be 
50. 39'  and  it  shall  be  no  more  inhabited  for  ever 

Eze.  26.  20  bring  thee  down,  .that  thou  be  not  inhab. 
29. 11  neither  shall  it  be  inhabited  forty  years 
36.  35  desolate  and  ruined  citie's.  .are  inhabited 

Zech.  2.   4  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  (as)  towns 
9.    5  Gaza,  and  Askkelon  shall  not  be  inhabited 
i2.    6  shall  be  inhabited  again  in  her  own  place 
14. 10  it  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  inhabited  in  her 
14.  it  but  Jerusalem  shall  be  safely  inhabited 

2.  To  be  dwell  i?i,  inhabited,  iv\  yashab,  2. 

Exodi6.  35  manna,  .until  they  came  to  aland  inhabi. 
Jer.    6.    8  I  make  thee  desolate,  a  land  not  inhabit. 

22.   6  a  -wilderness,  .cities  (which)  are  not  inha. 
Eze.  12.  20  the  cities  (that  are)  inhabited  shall  be  laid 

26.  17  How  art  thou  destroyed  (that  wastVinhab. 

26.  19  city,  like  the  cities  that  are  not  inhabited 

36.  10  the  cities  shall  be  inhabited,  and  the  wa. 
38.  12  the  desolate  places  (that  are  now)  inhab. 

3. To  be  caused  to  be  dwelt  in,  3^;  yashab,  6. 

Isa.    44.  26  saith  to  Jerusalem,  Thou  shall  be  inhab. 

4.  To  rest,  tabernacle,  \3$  shaken. 

Jer.  46.  26  afterward  it  shall  be  inhabited,  as  in  the 

INHABITED,  to  make  to  be  — 
To  cause  to  inhabit,  or  be  inhabited,  3^;  yashab,  5. 
Isa.    54.   3  and  inake  the  desolate  cities  to  be  inhab. 

INHABITED,  not  — 

Separation,  a  cutting  off,  rrTia  gezerah. 

lev.   16.  22  ail  their  iniquities  unto  a  land  not  inha. 

INHABITED  place  — 
Seat,  site,  3p;iD  moshab. 

Eze.  34. 13  in  all  the  inhabited  places  of  the  country 

INHABITEES  (of)  — 

To  settle  down,  dwell,  KarotKeco  katoikeo. 

Rev.    8.  13  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to  the  [inhabitcrs]  of  the 
12.  12  "Woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth  and  of 

INHABITING  the  wilderness  — 
Inhabitants  of  the  dry  places,  D*$  isiyyim. 

Psa.  74. 14  meat  to  the  people  inhabiting  the  wilder. 

INHERIT,  to  — 

l.To  occupy,  possess,  en;  yarash. 

Gen.  15.    7  brought  thee,  .to  give  thee  this  landito  i. 

15.  8  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit 
28.    4  that  thou  mayest  inherit  the  land  wherein 

Lev.  20.  24  Ye  shall  inherit  their  land,  and  I  will  give 

25.  46  take  them . .  to  inherit  (them  for)  a  posse. 

Deut.  2.  31  begin  to  possess,  that  thou  mayest  inherit 

16,  20  that  thou  mayest  live  and  inherit  the  land 
Psa.  25.  13  dwell . .  and  his  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth 

37.  9  those  that  wait,  .shall  inherit  the  earth 
37.  11  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth,  and  sh. 
37.  22  blessed  of  him  shall  inherit  the  earth ;  and 
37.  29  The  righteous  shall  inherit  the  land,  and 
37.  34  he  shall  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  land 

105.  44  and  they  inherited  the  labour  of  the  peo. 
Isa.    54.    3  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles,  and 

57.  13  possess,  .and  shall  inherit  my  holy  mou. 

60.  21  they  shall  inherit  the  land  for  ever,  the 

65.   9  mine  elect  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  serva. 
Jer.    8. 10  their  fields  to  them  that  shall  inherit 

49.    1  why.  .doth  their  king  inherit  Gad,  and 
Eze.  33.  24  Abraham  was  one,  and  he  inherited  the 

2.  To  have,  take  or  give  inheritance,  "?rn  nachal. 
Exod23.  30  until  thou  be  increased,  and  inherit  the 
32.  13  all  this  land,  .and  they  shall  inherit  (it) 
N111U26.  55  according  to  the  names,  .they  shall  inh. 

32.  19  we  will  not  inherit  with  them  on  yonder 
35.   8  according  to  his  inheritance  which  he  in. 

Deut  19.  14  which  thou  shalt  inherit  in  the  land  that 
Josh  ii.  1  which  the  children  of  Israel  inherited  in 
Judgu.  2  Thou  shalt  not  inherit,  .ourfather's  house 
Psa.  69.  36  The  seed  also  of  his  servants  shall  inherit 

82.    8  Arise,  .for  thou  shalt  inherit  all  nations 
Prov.  3.  35  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory :  but  shame 

11.  29  He  that  troubleth  his.,  house  shall  inherit 

14.  18  The  simple  inherit  folly  :  but  the  prudent 
Jer.  16.  19  Surely  our  fathers  have  inherited  lies 
Eze.  47.  14  ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well  as  another 
Zech.  2. 12  Lord  shall  inherit  Judah  his  portion  in 

3.2*0  take  or  leave  an  inheritance,  hni  nachal,  7. 
Nuni  32.  18  until  the  children  of  Israel  have  inherited 

33.  54  to  the  tribes  of  your  fathers  ye  shall  inh. 

34.  13  This  (is)  the  land  which  ye  shall  inherit 
Eze.  47. 13  This,  .the  border  whereby  ye  shall  inherit 

i. Inheritance,  rfani  nachalah. 

Num  18.  24  tithes'.  .1  have  given  to  the  Levites  to  in. 
Josh  17. 14  given  me .  .one  lot  and  one  portion  to  inh. 

5. To  obtain  by  lot,  KXnpovofxioi  kleronomeo. 

Matt.  5.    5  Blessed,  .for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth 
19.  29  receive . .  and  shall  inherit  everlasting  life 
25.  34  inherit  the  kingdom preparedforyoufrom 
Markio.  17  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  inherit  eternal 
Luke  10.  25  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
iS.  18  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
1  Co.  6.    9  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the 
6.  10  Nor  thieves . .  shall  inherit  the  kingdom 

15.  50  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  king. 
15.  50  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorrup. 

Gal.    5.  21  they,  .shallnotinheritthekingdomof  God 


Heb.  6. 12  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit 
12.  17  when  hewould  have  inherited  the  blessing 

1  Pe.  3.  9  knowing . .  that  ye  should  inherit  a  blessing 
Rev.  21.    7  He  that  overcome th  [shall  inherit]  alithi. 

INHERIT,  to  cause,  give,  or  make  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  occupy  or fiossess,  vyr  yarash,  5. 

2  Ch.20.  11  possession,  which  thou  hast  given  us  to  in. 
2.  To  cause  to  inherit,  give  inheritance,  br\i  nachal,  5. 

Deut.  1.  38  Joshua,  .he  shall  cause  Israel  to  inherit 

3.  28  he  shall  cause  them  to  inherit  the  land 

12.  10  land.  .Lord  your  God  giveth  you  to  inh. 

19.    3  land . .  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  to  inhe. 

21.  16  when  he  maketh  his  sons  to  inherit  (that) 

31.  7  and  thou  shalt  cause  them  to  inherit  it 

1  Sa.  2.  8  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory 
Prov.  8.  21  cause  those  that  love  me  to  inherit  subst. 
Isa.  49.  8  to  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate  heritages 
Jer.   12.  14  I  have  caused  my  people  Israel  to  inherit 

INHERITANCE  — 

l.Portian,  p?n  chelek. 

Psa.  16.   s'Lord  (is)  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance 

2.Possession,thingorplccceocc2i2necl,rif~i'iye-nishshah. 
Judg2i.  17  an  inheritance  for  them  that  be  escaped 
Jer.  32.    8  the  right  of  inheritance  (is)  thine,  and  the 

3. A  ptossession,  thing  or  place  occupied,  n^niD  mor. 
Deut  33.  4  a  law.  .the  inheritance  of  the  congregat. 
Eze.  33.  24  saying,  .the  land  is  given  for  inheritance 

i.Inheritance,  rhnz  'nachalah. 

Gen.  31.  14  yet  any  portion  or  inheritance  for  us  in 

48.  6  name  of  their  brethren.in  their  inherita. 
Exodi5.  17  plant  them  in  the  mountain  of  thine  inh. 
Num  16.  14  or  given  us  inheritance  of  fields  and  vine. 

18.  20  I  (am)  thy  part  and  thine  inheritance 

18.  21  all  the  tenth  in  Israel  for  an  inheritance 

18.  23,  24  the  children  of  I.  they  have  no  inhe. 

18.  26  which  I  luve  given  you.  .for  your  inheri. 

26.  53  the  land  shall  be  divides  for  an  inherita. 

26.  54  g've  the  more  inheritance,  .the  less  inh. 

26  54  t  -  every  one  shall  his  inheritance  be  given 

26.  62  because  uhere  was  no  inheritance  given 

27.  7  give  them  a  possession  of  an  inheritance 
27.    7  thou  shalt  cause  the  inheritance  of  their 
27.    8  cause  his  inheritance .  .unto  his  daughter 
27.    9,  io,  11  ye  shall  give  his  inheritance  unto 
32. 18  have  inherited  every  man  his  inheritance 

32.  19  because  our  inheritance  is  fallen  to  us  on 

32.  32  that  the  possession  of  our  inheritance  on 

33.  54  the  more  inheritance,  .give  the  less  inhe. 

34.  2  land  that  shall  fall  unto  you  for  an  inhe. 

34.  14,  1 5  the  half  tribe.,  have  received  their  inh. 

35.  2  that  they  give  unto  the  Levites,  of  the  in. 

35.  8  give,  .unto the  Levites  accordingtohisin. 

36.  2  to  give  the  land  or  an  inheritance  by  lot 
36.  2  to  give  the  inheritance  of  Zelophehad  our 
36.  3  their  inheritance  be  taken  from  the  inhe. 
36.  3  shall  be  put  to  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe 
36.  3  shall  it  be  taken  from  the  lot  of  our  inner. 
36.  4  their  inheritance  be  put  unto  the  inherit. 
36.  4  inheritance  be  taken  away  from  the  inh. 
36.  7  So  shall  not  the  inheritance . .  remove  from 
36.  7  shall  keep  himself  to  the  inheritance  of 
36.  8  everydaughter,thatpossessethaninlierit. 
36.  8  may  enjoy  every  man  the  inheritance  of 
36.  9  Neither  shall  the  inheritance  remove  from 
36.  9  shall  keep  himself  to  his  own  inheritance 
36.  12  their  inheritance  remained  in  the  tribe  of 

Deut.  4.  20  to  be  unto  him  a  people  of  inheritance,  as 
4.  21  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  (for)  an  in. 
4.  38  to  give  thee  their  land  (for)  an  inheritance 
9.  26,  29  people  and  thine  inheritance,  which 
10.  9  Levi  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with 
10.  9  Lord  (is)  Ms  inheritance,  according  as  the 
12.   9  to  the  inheritance  which  the  Lord  your 

12.  12  as  he  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with 

14.  27,  29  he  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with 

15.  4  God  giveth  thee  (for)  an  inheritance  to 
18.  1  shall  have  no  part  nor  inheritance  with 
j8.  1  they  shall  eat  the  offerings,  .and  his  inh. 
18.  2  shall  they  have  no  inheritance  among 

18.  2  LoRD(is)  their  inheritance,  as  he  hath  said 

19.  10  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  (for)  an  inner. 
19. 14  they  of  old  time  have  set  in  thine  inherit. 
20. 16  thy  God  dothgivethee(for)aninheritance 
21.  23  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  (for)  an  inheri. 

[So  in  24.  4  ;  25   ig  ;  26  1.] 
29.    8  we  took  their  land,  and  gave  itfor  an  inh. 
32.  9  For.  .Jacob  (is)  the  lot  of  his  inheritance 
Josh.11.  23  Joshua  gave  it  for  an  inheritance  unto  I. 

13.  6  only  divide  thou  it  by  lot.  .for  an  inherit. 
13.  7  divide  this  land  for  an  inheritance  unto 
13.  8  and  the  Gaditeshavereceivedtheirinher. 
13. 14  unto  the  tribe  of  Levi  he  gave  none  inher. 
13. 14  sacrifices .  .made  by  fire  (are)  their  inherit. 
13.  23  This  (was)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 
13.  28  This  (is)the  inheritanceof  the  children  of 

13.  33  unto.  iLevi  Moses  gave  not  (any)  inherit. 
13. 33  Lord  God  of  Israel  (was)  their  inheritance 

14.  2  By  lot  (was)  their  inheritance,  as  the  LORD 
14.    3  Eor  Moses  had  given  the  inheritance  of 
14.    3  unto  the  Levites  he  gave  none  inheritance 

14.  9  the  land .  .shall  be  thine  inheritance,  and 

14. 13  gave  unto  Caleb ,  .Hebron  for  an  inherit. 

14.14  Hebron,  .became  the  inheritance  of  Caleb 

15.  20  This  (is)  theinheritance  of  the  tribe  of  the 

16.  5  even  the  border  of  their  inheritance  on 
16.    8  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  the 

16.  9  among  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of 

17.  4  to  give  us  an  inheritance  among  our  br. 


Josh.  17.  4  he  gave  them  an  inheritance  among  the 
18.  2  which  had  not  yet  received  their  inherit. 
18.  4  describe  it  according  to  the  inheritance 
18.  7  the  priesthood  of  the  Lord  (is)  their  inhe. 
iS.  7  have  received  their  inheritance  beyond  J. 
iS.  20  This  (was)  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

18.  28  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of 

19.  1  their  inheritance  was  within  the  inherit, 
19.  2  they  had  in  their  inheritance  Beer-Sheba 
19.  8  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  the 
19.  9  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  Simeon 
19.  9  Simeon  had . .  within  the  inheritance  of  the 
19. 10  the  border  of  their  inheritance  was  unto 
19.  16  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of 
J9-  23>  3i*  39-  48)  This  (is)  the  inheritance  of  the 
19.  41  the  coast  of  their  inheritance  was  Zorah 
19. 49  the  children  of  Israel  gave  an  inheritance 

19.  51  These(are)the  inheritances,  whichEleazor 
21.   3  gave  unto  theLevites  out  of  their  inherit. 

23.  4  to  be  an  inheritance  foryour  tribes,  from  J. 

24.  28  let  the  people . .  every  man  unto  his  inher  - 
24. 30  they  buried  him  in  the  border  of  his  inh... 
24. 32  it  became  the  inheritance  of  the  children 

Judg.  2.    6  went  every  man  unto  his  inheritance  to 
2.   9  they  buried  him  in  the  border  of  liis  inh. 
18.    1  Danites  sought  them  an  inheritance  to 
18.    1  inheritance  had  not  fallen  unto  them  am.  . 

20.  6  all  the  country  of  the  inheritance  of  Israel 

21.  23  they  went  and  returned  unto  their  inher. 
21.  24  they  went  at.  .every  man  to  his  inheritance 

Ruth  4.    5, 10  to  the  name  of  the  dead  upon  his  inheri. 
4.    6  I  cannot . .  lest  I  mar  mine  own  inheritance 

1  Sa.  10.    1  anointed  thee,  .captain  over  his  inherit.? 

26.  19  from  abiding  in  the  inheritance  of  the  L. 

2  Sa.  14.  16  destroy  me  and  my  son . .  out  of  the  inher. 

20.    1  neither  have  we  inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jv 

20.  19  why  wilt  thou  swallow  up  the  inheritance 

21.  3  that  ye  may  bless  the  inheritance  of  theL. 

1  KX    8.  36  thou  hast  given  to  thy  people  for  an  inh. 

8.  51  For  they  (be)  thy  people,  and  thine  inhe. 

8.  53  separate  them,  .(to  be)  thine  inheritance 
12.  16  neither,  .inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse 
2i.    3  that  I  should  give  the  inheritance  of  my  f. 
21.    4  I  will  not  give  thee  the  inheritance  of  my 

2  EX  21.  14  I  will  forsake  the  remnant  of  mine  inhe. 

1  Ch.16.  18  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  inhe. 

2  Ch.  6.  27  thou  hast  given  unto  thy  people  for  an  in. 

10.  16  and.  .none  inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse 
Neh.  11.  20  all  the  cities  in  Judah,  every  one  in  hisim 
Job    31.    2  inheritanceof  the  Almighty  from  on  high? 

42. 15  their  father  gave  them  inheritance  among 
Psa.     2.    8  I  shall  give.. the  heathen,  .thine  inherit. 

28.  9  Save  thy  people,  and  bless  tlune  inherit. 
33. 12  people,  .he  hath  chosen  for  his  own  inhe. 
37.  iS  and  their  inheritance  shall  be  for  ever 
47.  4  He  shall  choose  ourinheritance  for  us,  the 
68.  9  whereby  thou  didst  confirm  thine  inheri. 
74.  2  the  rod  of  thine  inheritance,  .thou  hast 
78.  55  divided  them  an  inheritance  by  line,  and 
78.  62  He.  .was  wroth  with  his  inheritance 

78.  71  feed  Jacob  his  people,  and  Israel  his  inh. 

79.  1  O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into  thine  in. 
94. 14  neither  will  he  forsake  his  inheritance 

105.  11  the  landof  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  inheri 

106.  5  that  I  may  glory  with  tlune  inheritance 
106.  40  insomuch  that  he  abhorred  his  own  inhe- 

Prov  17.    2  shall  have  part  of  the  inheritance  among 
19. 14  House  and  riches  (are)  the  inheritance  of 
20.  21  An  inheritance,  .gotten  hastily  at  the  be. 
Eccl.  7.  11  Wisdom  (is)  good  with  an  inheritance;  and 
Isa.    19.  25  saying,  Blessed  (be).  .Israel  mine  inheri. 
47.    6  I  have  polluted  mine  inheritance,  and  g. 
63.  17  thy  servant's  sake,  the  tribes  of  thine  inh. 
Jer.  10, 16  and  Israel  (is)  the  rod  of  his  inheritance 
12. 14  mine  evil  neighbours,  that  touch  the  inhe. 
16.  18  they  have  filled  mine  inheritance  with  the 
51.  19  and  (Israel  is)  the  rod  of  his  inheritance 
Lam.  5.    2  Oui-inheritance  is  turned  tostrangers,  our 
Eze.  35.  15  As  thou  didst  rejoice  at  the  inheritance 
36.  12  thou  shalt  be  their  inheritance,  and  thou 
44.  28  it  shall  be  unto  them  for  an  inheritance 

44.  28  I  (am)  their  inheritance :  and  ye  shall  give 

45.  1  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  the  land  for  inheri. 

46. 16  the  inheritance  thereof  shall  be  his  sons' 

46. 16  it(shallbe)theirpossessionbyinheritance 

46. 17  if  he  give  a  gift  of  his  inheritance  to  one 

46.  17  his  inheritance  shall  be  his  sons'  for  them. 

46. 18  prince  shall  not  take  of  the  people's  inlu 

47.  14  and  this  land  shall  fall  unto  you  for  inh. 
47.  22  ye  shall  divide  it  by  lot  for  an  inheritance 
47.  22  they  shall  have  inheritance  with  you  am. 

47.  23  there  shall  ye  give  (him)  his  inheritance. 

48.  29  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  unto . .  Israel  for  in. 

5.  What  is  obtained  by  lot,  possession,  KKypovofxia* 
Matt2i.  38  come,  .and  let  us  seize  on  his  inheritance 
Marki2.  7  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance  shall 
Lukei2.  13  speak,  .that  he  divide  the  inheritance 

20. 14  let  us  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  may 
Acts    7.   5  he  gave  him  none  inheritance  in  it,  no,  not 

20.  32  to  give  you  an  inheritance  among  all  them 
Gal.  3.  18  For  if  the  inheritance  (be)  of.  .law,  (it  is) 
Eph.  1.  14  Which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance 
1.  18  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inher. 
5.  5  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of 
Col.  3.  24  ye  shall  receive  the  reward  of  the  inheri 
Heb.   9.  15  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inh. 

11.  8  which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  inh.. 
1  Pe.    1.   4  To  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  und. 

6. A  lot,  possession,  K\yjpos  kleros. 

Acts  26.  18  inheritance  among  them  which  are  sane. 
Col.     1.  12  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inh. 


INHERITANCE 


516 


INIQUITY 


INHERITANCE,  to  distribute  for  — 
To  give  inheritance,  "?ru  nachal,  3. 

Josh  13.  32  which  Moses  did  distribute  for  inheritance 
14.    1  Joshua,  .distributed  for  inheritance  to 
INHERITANCE,  to  divide  (by  or  for)  — 
\.To  have  or  give  inheritance,  ?ru  nachal. 

Num34.  18  of  every  tribe,  to  divide  the  land  by  inhe. 

Josh,  19.  49  made  an  end  of  dividing  the  land  for  iuh. 

2.  To  give  inheritance,  hni  nachal,  3. 

NU11134,  29  the  Lord  commanded  to  divide  the  inhe. 
Josh  19.  51  divided  for  an  inheritance  by  lot  in  Shiloh 

3.  To  cause  to  inherit,  Sm  nachal,  5. 

Deut  32.    8  Most  High  divided  to  the  nations  their  in. 
Josh.  1.    6  shalt  thou  divide  for  an  inheritance  the 

4.  To  take  or  leave  an  inheritance,  bni  nachal,  7. 

Num33-  54  ye  shall  divide  the  land  by  lot  for  an  iuh. 
INHERITANCE,  to  five  (for)  — 
To  cause  to  inherit,  hni  nachal,  5. 

Jer.    3. 18  to  the  land  that  I  have  given  for  an  inhe. 

Eze.  46. 18  he  shall  give  his  sons  inheritance  out  of 

INHERITANCE,  to  have  — 

To  have  or  give  inheritance,  bni  nachal. 

NumiS.  20  Thou  shalt  have  no  inheritance  in  their 
18.  23  that  among.  .Israel  they  have  no  inheri. 

18.  24  among.  .Israel  they  shall  have  no  inheri. 
Josh. 17.    6  the  daughters  of  Manasseh  had  an  inhe. 

19.  9  the  children  of  Simeon  had  their  inheri. 

INHERITANCE,  to  leave  (for)  — 

1,  To  causeto  occupy, possessor succeed,  vyryarash,  5. 
Ezra  9.  12  leave  (it)  for  an  inheritance  to  your  chil. 

2.  To  cause  to  inherit,  give  inheritance,  *?ni  nachal,5. 

1  Ch.28.    8  leave  (it)  for  an  inheritance  for  yourchil. 
Prov.13.  22  A  good  (man)  leaveth  an  inheritance  to  his 

INHERITANCE,  to  obtain  (by)  — 

To  obtain  by  lot,  possess,  K\Tjpoi/Qfx4a>,  K\np6oi. 
Eph.   1. 11  In  whom  also  [we  have  obtained  an  inh.] 
Heb.   1.    4  as  he  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a  more 

INHERITANCE,  to  take  (as  or  for  an)  — 

1.  To  have  or  give  inheritance,  ?rtf  nachal. 
Exod34.   9  pardon . .  our  sin,  and  take  us  for  thine  in. 
Josh.  16.   4  Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  took  their  inher. 

2.  To  give  inheritance,  ^ni  nachal,  3- 

Eze.  22. 16  thou  shalt  take  thine  inheritance  in  thy. 

3.  To  take  or  leave  an  inheritance,  bni  nachal,  7. 
Lev.  25.  46  ye  shall  take  them  as  an  inheritance  for 

INHERITOR  — 

To  occupy,  possess,  uyr  yarash,  5. 

Isa.   65.    9  out  of  Judah  an  inheritor  of  my  mount. 

rNiairiTY  — 

\. Iniquity,  vanity,  |ix  aven. 

Num.23.  21  He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  ne. 

1  Sa.  15.  23  stubbornness  (is  as) iniquity  and  idolatry 

Job  4.  8  Even .  .they  that  plow  iniquity . .  reap  the 
it.  14  If  iniquity  (be)  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far 
2i.  19  God  lay  eth  up  his  iniquity  for  his  children 
31.  3  strange  (punishment)  to  the  workers  of  in.? 
34.  8  goeth  in  company  with  the  workers  of  in. 
34.  22  where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide 
36.  10  commandeth  that  they  return  from  iniq. 
36.  21  Take  heed,  regard  not  iniquity:  for  this 

Tsa.     5.    5  not  stand,  .thou  hatest  all  workers  of  in. 

6.  8  Depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity 

7.  14  hetravaileth  with  iniquity,  and  hath  con. 
14.    4  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  know. 

28.  3  with  the  workers  of  iniquity,  which  speak 
36.    3  The  words  of  his  mouth  (are)  iniquity  and 
36.  12  There  are  the  workers  of  iniquity  fallen 
41.    6  heart  gathereth  iniquity  to  itself ;  (when) 
53.   4  Have  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowledge? 

55.  3  they  cast  iniquity  upon  me,  and  in  wrath 

56.  7  Shall  they  escape  by  iniquity?  in.  .anger 
59.  2  Deliver  me  from  the  workers  of  iniquity 
64.  2  from  the  insurrection  of  the  workers  of  in. 
66. 18  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord 
92.  7  when  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  do  flourish 
92.  9  the  workers  of  iniquity  shall  be  scattered 
94.  4  the  workers  of  iniquityboastthemselves? 
94.  16  will  stand,  .  against  theworkersofiniquity 
94.  23  he  shall  bring  upon  them  their  own  iniq. 

119. 133  let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over 
125.  5  lead  them  forth  with  the  workers  of  iniq. 
141,  4  wicked  works  with  men  that  work  iniquity 
141.  9  and  the'gins  of  the  workers  of  iniquity 
Prov.io.  2.)  but  destruction.,  to  the  workers  of  iniqu. 
19.  28  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  devoureth  iniqu. 
21. 15  but  destruction,  .to  the  workersof  iniqu. 
Isa.     1. 13  (it  is)  iniquity,  even  the  solemn  meeting 

29.  20  and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are  cut  off 

31.  2  against  the  help  of  them  that  work  iniqu* 

32.  6  his  heart  will  work  iniquity,  to  practise 
59.  4  conceive  mischief,  and  bring  forth  iniquity 
59.  6  their  works  (are)  works  of  iniquity,  and 
59.  7  their  thoughts  (are)  thoughts  of  iniquity 

Hos.    6.   8  Gilead  (is)  a  city  of  them  that  work  iniq. 
12. 11  iniquity  (in)  Gilead?  surely  they  are  van. 

Mic.    2.    1  Woe  to  them  that  devise  iniquity,  .work 

Hab.    1 ,    3  Why  dost  thou  show  me  iniquity,  and 
2. Mischief,  calamity,  desire,  njrj  havvah. 

Psa    94.  20  Shall  the  throne  of  iniquity  have  fellows. 
^.Perversity,  perv&rseness,  S$,  S»iy  avel,  evel. 

Pent  32.    4  a  God  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity,  just 


Job  34.  10  Far  be  it  from,  .the  Almighty,  .iniquity 
34.  32  If  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more 

Psa.  7.  3  Lord  my  God.  .if  there  be  iniquity  in  my 
53.    1  corrupt,  .and  have  done  abominable  iniq. 

Jer.  .  2.    5  What  iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in 

Eze.    3.  20  When  a  righteous  (man)  doth,  .commit  in. 
18.  >8  hath  withdrawn  his  hand  from  iniquity 
18/24  when  the  righteous . .  committeth  iniquity 
18.  26  committeth  iniquity,  and  dieth  in  them 
18.  26  for  his  iniquity  that  he  hath  done  shall  he 
28.  iS  hast  defiled  thy  sanctuaries,  .by  the  iniq. 
33.  13  if  he.  .commit  iniquity,  all  Ins  righteous. 
33. 13  for  his  iniquity  that  lie  hath  committed 
33.  15  walk,  .without  committing  iniquity ;  he 

33.  18  When  the  righteous,  .committeth  iniqui. 

^.Perversity,  N;iy  ivya. 

Dan.   4.  27  break  off.  .thine  iniquities  by  showing 
5.Perverseness,  perversity,  rrViu.  avlah. 

2  Ch.19.    7  for  (there  is)  no  Iniquity  with  the  Lord 
Job    6.  29  Return,  I  pray  you,  let  it  not  be  iniquity 
6.  30  Is  there  iniquity  in  my  tongue?  cannot 
15.  16  man,  which  drinketh  iniquity  like  water? 
22.  23  thou  shalt  put  away  iniquity  far  from  thy 
36.  23  or  who  can  say,  Thou  hast  wrought  iniq,? 
Fsa.  37.    1  envious  against  the  workersof  iniquity 
107.  42  and  all  iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth 
119.    3  They  also  do  no  inicitiity  :  they  walk  in 
125.    3  righteous  put  forth  their  hands  unto  ini. 
Prov22.    8  He  that  soueth  iniquity  shall  reap  vanity 
Eze,  28  15  Thou  (wast)  perfect,  .till  iniquity  is  found 
Hos.  10.  13  ye  have  reaped  iniquity  ;  ye  have  eaten 
Mic.    3.  10  They  build  up.  .Jerusalem  with  iniquity 
Hab.   2.  12  Woe  to  him  that,  .stablishethacitybyin.! 
Zeph.  3.    5  The  just  Lord,  .not  do  iniquity:  every 
3. 13  The  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniq 
Mai     2.    6  iniquitywas  not  found  in  his  lips :  he 

6.Perverseness,  perversity,  nViu  olah. 

Job     5.  16  So  the  poor  hath  hope,  and  iniquity  stop. 

Psa.  64.  6  They  search  out  iniquities ;  they  accom. 
7 .  Perversity,  |iu  avon. 

Gen.  15.  16  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  (is)  not  yet  full 
19  15  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of 
44.  16  God  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of  thy 

Exod2o.  5  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
28.  38  may  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  holy  firings 
28.  43  that  they  bear  not  iniquity,  and  die 

34.  7  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and 
34.  7  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
34.   9  pardon  our  iniquity  and  our  sin,  and  take 

Lev.    5.    1  if  he  do  not  utter,  .he  shall  bear  his  iniq. 

5. 17  yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniq. 

7. 18  the  soul  that  eateth  of  it  shall  bear  his  in. 
10.  17  hath  given  it  you  to  bear  the  iniquity 
16. 21  confess  over  him  all  the  iniquities  of  the 
16  22  the  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all  their  in. 

17.  16  nor  bathe  his  flesh,  .shall  bear  his  iniqu. 

18.  2q  I  do  visit  the  iniquitythereof  upon  it,  and 

19.  8  that  eateth  it  shall  bear  his  iniquity,  be. 

20.  17  sister's  nakedness;  he  shall  bear  his  iniq 
20.  19  his  near  kin  :  they  shall  bear  their  iniq, 
22. 16  or  suffer  them  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  tr. 
26.  39  shall  pine  away  in  their  iniquity  in  your 
26.  39  in  the  iniquities  of  their  fathers  shall  they 
26.  40  shall  confess  their  iniquity,  and  the  iniq. 
26.  41,  43  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  in. 

Num.  5.  15  ottering,  .bringing  iniquity  to  remembra. 
5.  31  Then  shall  the  man  be  guiltless  from  ini. 
5.  31  and  this  woman  shall  bear  her  iniquity 

14.  18  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression,  and 
T4. 18  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
14. 19  Pardon,  I  beseech  thee, the  iniquity  of  this 
14-  34  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear  your  iniqu. 

15.  31  that  soul  shall  utterly  be  cut  off ;  his  ini. 
18.    1  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  sanctuary 
18.    1  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  your  priesthood 
18.  23theLevites..they  shall  bear  their  iniquity 
30. 15  if  he  shall,  .then  he  shall  bear  her  iniqu. 

Deut.  5.  9  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
19. 15  shall  not  rise  up  against  a  man  for  any  in. 

Josh.  22. 17  (Is)  the  iniquity  of  Peor  too  little  for  us 
22.  20  that  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniqu. 

1  Sa.  3. 13  will  judge,  .for  the  iniquity  which  he  kn. 

3.  14  the  iniquity  of  Eli's  house  shall  not  be  p. 
20,  1  What  have  I  done?  what  (is)  mine  iniquity? 
20.  6  if  there  be  in  me  iniquity,  slay  me  thyself 
25.  24  Upon  me,  my  lord .  .me  (let  this)  iniquity 

2  Sa.  14.    9  My  lord,  O  king,  the  iniquity  (be)  on  me 

14.  32  if  there  be  (any)  iniquity  in  me,  let  him 
ig.  19  Let  not  my  lord  impute  iniquity  unto  me 
22.  24  and  have  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity 
24.  10  Lord,  take  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  serv. 
1  Ch.21.  8  do  awayihe  iniquity  of  thy  servant ;  for 
Ezra  9.    6  our  iniquities  are  increased  over  (our)  he. 

9.  7  for  our  iniquities  have  we.ourkings,  (and) 
9. 13  God  hast  punished  us  less  than  our  iniqu . 

Xch.  4.    5  cover  not  their  iniquity,  and  let  not  their 
9.    2  confessed  their  sins,  and  the  iniquities  of 
Job     7.  *2i  why  dost  thou  not.  .take  away  mine  in. 

10.  6  That  thou  enquirest  after  mine  iniquity 

10.  14  thou  wilt  not  acquit  me  from  mine  miqu. 

11.  6  God  exacteth  of  thee  (less)  than  thine  in. 
13.  23  How  many  (are)  mine  iniquities  and  sins? 

13.  26  makest  me  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my 

14.  17  transgression,  .thou  se west  up  mine  iniq. 

15.  5  thy  mouth  uttereth  thine  iniquity,  and 
20.  27  The  heaven  shall  reveal  his  iniquity  ;  and 
22.  5  (Is)  not  thy  wickedness  great,  .thine  iniq. 
31.  11  this  (is)  a  heinous  crime ;  yea,  it(is)an  :n. 
31.  28  This  also  (were)  an  iniquity  (to  be  punis. 
31.  33  covered. .by  hiding  mine  iniquity  in  i.iy' 


Job   33.    9  I  (am)  innocent ;  neither  (is  there)  iniqu. 
Psa.  18.  23  upright.. I  kept  myself  from  mine  iniqu. 
25.  11  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity ;  for  it  (is) 

31.  10  my  strength  faileth  because  of  mine  iniq, 

32.  2  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iniqu. 
32.    5  mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid.    I  said,  I 
32.    5  and  thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin 
36.    2  until  his  iniquity  be  found  to  be  hateful 
38.    4  mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  mine  head 

38.  18  I  will  declare  mine  iniquity  ;  I  will  be 

39.  11  When  thou,  .dost  correct  man  for  iniqui. 

40.  12  mine  iniquities  have  taken  hold  upon  me 

49.  5  the  iniquity  of  my  heels  shall  compass  mo 
51.  2  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity 
51.  5  Behold, I  was'shapenininiquity;  andmsin 
51.  9  Hide  thy  face . .  blot  out  all  mine  iniquities 
65.  3  Iniquities  prevail  against  me.  .ourtransg. 
69. 27  Add  iniquity  unto  their  iniquity:  and  let 

78,  38  But  he.  .full  of  compassion,  forgave,  .ini. 

79.  8  0  remember  not  against  us  former  iniqu. 
85.    2  Thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniquity  of  thy  pe. 

89.  32  Then  will  I  visit,  .their  iniquity  with  stri. 

90.  8  Thou  hast  set  our  iniquites  before  thee 
103-  3  "Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities  ;  who 
103.  10  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniqui. 
106.  43  and  were  brought  low  for  theiriniquity 
107. 17  and  because  of  their  iniquities,  are  affiic. 
109.  14  Let  the  iniquity  of  his  fathers  be  remein. 
130.  3  If  thou,  Lord,  shouldest  mark  iniquities 
130.    8  he  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all  his  iniq. 

Prov.  5.  22  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked 

16.    6  By  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is  purged 

Isa.     1.    4  Ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  in. 

5. 18  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  iniquity  with 

6.    7  thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin 

13. 11  I  will  puuish.  .the  wicked  for  their  iniq. 

14.  21  slaughter,  .for  the  iniquity  of  their  fata. 

-    22.  14  Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged 

26. 21  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  for.  .i. 

27.    9  this,  .shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  bepurg. 

30. 13  Therefore  this  iniquity  shall  be  to  you  as 

33. 24  dwell  therein  (shall  be)  forgiven  (their)  in. 

40.    2  cry  unto  her.  .that  her  iniquity  is  pardo. 

43.  24  thou  hast  wearied  me  with  thine  iniquit. 

50.  1  for  your  iniquities  have  ye  sold  yourself 
53.    5  bruised  for  our  iniquities  :  the  chastisem. 
53.   6  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us 
53.  it  justify  many;  for  he  shall  bear  their  jniq. 
57.  17  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was 
59.   2  your  iniquities  have  separated  between 
59.   3  your  fingers  with  iniquities  ;  your  lips 
59.  12  and  (as  for)  our  iniquities,  we  know  them 
64.   6  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us 
64.    7  hast  consumed  us,  because  of  our  iniqu. 

64.  9  neither  remember  iniquity  for  ever  :  beh. 

65.  7  Your  iniquities,  and  the  iniquities  of  your 
Jer.     2. 22  thine  iniquity  is  marked  before  me,  saith 

13  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity,  that 
25  Your  iniquities  have  turned  away  these 
10  They  are  turned  back  to  the  iniquities  of 

22  For  the  greatness  of  thine  iniquity  are  thy 

7  Lord,  though  our  iniquities  testify  against 
10  he  will  now  remember  their  iniquity,  and 
20  We  acknowledge,  .the  iniquity  of  our  fa. 
10  or  what  (is)  our  iniquity  ?  or  what  (is)  our 

17  neither  is  their  iniquity  hid  from  mine 

18  first  I  will  recompense  their  iniquity  and 

23  forgive  not  their  iniquity,  neither  blot  out 

12  that  nation,  saith  the  Lord,  for  their  ini. 
14,  15  for  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquity 

30  every  one  shall  die  for  his  own  iniquity 
34  I  will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  I  will 
iS  recompeusest  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers 

8  I  will  cleanse  them  from  all  their  iniqui. 

8  I  will  pardon  all  their  iniquities,  whereby 

3  I  may  forgive  their  iniquity  and  their  sin 

31  his  seed  and  his  servants  for  their  iniquity 
20  the  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for 

6  be  not  cut  off  in  her  iniquity ;  for  this(is) 

14  and  they  have  not  discovered  thine  iniq. 

6  the  punishment  of  the  iniquity  of  the  d. 

13  the  iniquities  of  her  priests,  that  have 
22  The  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is'  ace. 

22  he  will  visit  thine  iniquity,  O  daughter 

7  our  fathers,  .we  have  born  their  iniquities 

18  the  same  wicked  (man)  shall  die  in  his  i. 

19  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity ;  but  thou  hast 

4  laythe  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon 

4  shalt  lie  upon  it  thou  shalt  bear  their  in. 

5  I  have  laid  upon  thee  the  years  of  their  L 

5  so  shalt  thou  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

6  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquityof  the  house  of 
1 7  That  they  may . .  consume  away  for  their  i. 
13  strengthen  himself  in  the  iniquity  of  his 

16  all.,  mourning,  every  one  for  his  iniquity 

19  it  is  the  stumbling  block  of  theiriniquity 

9  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  and  J. 
3  put  the  stumbling  block  of  their  iniquity 
4,  7  the  stumbling  block  of  his  iniquity 

10  shall  bear  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity 
49  this  was  the  iniquity  of  thy  sister  Sodom 

17  he  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  his  fa 

18  hisfather.  .evenhe  shall  die  in  hisiniquit.s 

19  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

20  The  sou  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

20  neither  shall  the  father  bear  the  iniquity 
30  Repent.,  so  iniquity  shall  notbeyourruiii 

23  he  will  call  to  remembrance  the  iniquity 

24  ye  have  made  your  iniquity  to  be  remein. 

25  day  is  come,  when  iniquity  (shall  have) 
29  come,  when  their  iniquity  (shall  have)  an 
23  but  ye  shall  pine  away  for  your  iniquities 


Lam. 


3- 
5- 

11. 

J3- 

14. 

14. 

14. 

16. 

16. 

16. 

18. 

25- 

3°- 
3*- 
31. 

32- 

33- 

33- 

36. 

36. 

50. 

51- 
2. 
4- 
4> 
4 
4 
5. 
■  3> 
3< 
4 
4 
4. 
4- 
4- 
4> 
7- 
7- 
7- 
9- 

14. 

14. 

14. 

16. 

18. 

18. 

18. 

18. 

18. 


INIQUITY 


517 


INSTANTLY 


Eze.  28.  iS  by  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquities.by  the 
29.  16  whieh;bringeth.  .iniquity  to  remembrance 

32.  27  then*  iniquities  shall  lie  upon  their  bones 

33.  6  he  is  taken  away  in  his  iniquity;  but  his 
33.  8  that  wicked  (ni:m)sha]l  die  in  his  iniquity 
33.    9  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity;  but  thou  h. 

35.  5  in  the  time  (that  their)  iniquity  (had)  an 

36.  31  lor  your  iniquities  and  for  your  abomiua. 
36.  33  I  shalljhave  cleansed  you  from  allyourLin. 
39.  23  Israel  went  into  captivity  for  their  iniq. 

43.  10  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  iniquities 

44.  10  the  Levites.  .they  shall  even  bear,  their  i. 
44.  12  and  caused.  .Israel  to  fall  into  iniquity 
44.  12  therefore,  .they  shall  bear  their  iniquity 

Dan.  9.  13  thatwemightturufromouriniquities,and 
9.  10  for  our  sins,  and  for  the  iniquities  of  our 
9.  24  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  n  nd  to 

Hos.  4.  8  and  they  set  their  heart  on  their  iniquity 
5.    5  shall  Israel  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  ini. 

7.  1  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  was  discovered 

8.  13  now  will  he  remember  their  iniquity,  and 

9.  7  for  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquity,  and 
9.    9  he  will  remember  their  iniquity,  he  will 

12.  8  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  none  iniqu. 

13.  12  The  iniquity  of  Ephraim  (is)  bound  up;  his 

14.  1  return,  .for  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  ini. 
14.  2  Take  away  all  iniquity,  and  receive,  .gra. 

Ames  3.    2  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities 
Hie.    7. 18  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  ini. 

7.  19  he  will  subdue  our  iniquities  ;  and  thou 
Zech.  3.   4  I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass  from 

3.   9  I  will  renicive  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in 
Mai.   2.   6  and  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity 

S.  Perversity,  rrpy  alvah. 

Hos.  10.    9  the  battle,  .against  the  children  of  iniqu. 
9. Labour,  misery,  *?n;;  amal. 

Hab.  1.  13  and  canst  not  look  on  iniquity ;  wherefore 

10.  Wrong,  wickedness,  yen  resha, 

Eccl.  3.  16  the  place  of  righteousness,  (that)  iniquity 

11.  Word  or  matter  of  perversity,  p$j  "n"i  debar  avon. 
Psa.  65.    3  Iniquities  prevail  against  me.  .our  trans. 

12.  Unrighteousness,  wrong  doing,  ab"iKr}fia  adikema. 
Rev.  iS.    5  and  God  hath  remembered  her  iniquities 

13. Unrighteousness,  wrong,  afiitcla  adikia. 

Lukei3.  27  depart  from  me,  all  (ye)  workers  of  iniqi. 
Acts    1.  18  purchased  a  field  with  the  reward  of  ini. 

8.  23 1  perceive,  .thou  art  in.  .the  bond  of  ini. 

1  Co.  13.    6  Rejoice th  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in 

2  Ti.    2.  19  And,  let  every  one.  .depart  from  iniquity 
Jas.     3.    6  the  tongue  (is)  a  fire,  a  world  of  iniquity 

l-i.Laiolessness,  ai/ofxia  ccnomia. 

Matt.  7.  23  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity 
3  3. 41  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do  in. 

23.  28  within  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniqu. 

24.  12  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of 
Rom.  4.    7  Blessed  (are)  they  whose  iniquities  are 

6.  19  to  uncleanness  and  to  iniquity  unto  iniq. 

2  Th.  2.    7  the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work 

Titus  2.  14  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity 

Heb.    1.   9  hast  loved  righteousness,  and  hated  iniq. 

8. 12  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more 

10.  17  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember  no 

15. Transgression  of  law,  irapauofxia  paranomia. 
2  Pe.  2.  16  was  rebuked  for  his  iniquity  :  the  dumb 

lQ.Evil,  wickedness,  irovnpla poneria. 

Acts    3.  26  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his  i. 

INiaTJITY,  punishment  of  — 

Iniquity,  punishment  of  iniquity,  jij;  avon. 

Lev.  26.  41,  43  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  ini. 

Lam.  4.    6  the  punishment  of  the  iniquity  of  the  da. 

4.  22  the  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  acco. 

Eze.  14.  10  they  shall  bear  the  punishment  of  their  i. 

INIQUITY,  to  commit  — 

l.To  do  perversely,  n$  avah. 

Dan.   9.   5  We  have  sinned,  and  have  committed  in. 

2.  To  do  perversely,  cause  perversity,  nij;  avah,  5. 
2  Sa.    7.  14  If  he  commit  iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him 
Psa.  106.    6  we  have  committed  iniquity,  we  have  done 
Jer      9.    5  (and)  weary  themselves  to  commit  iniqu. 

lnjoln,  to  — 

1.  To  give  in  charge,  eureWofxat  entellomai. 

Heh.   9.  20  testament  which  God  hath  injoined  unto 

2.  To  set  in  order  -upon,  iirtrdo-o-w  epitasso. 

Phm.        8  bold . .  to  injoin  thee  that  which  is  conven. 
INJURE,  to  — 
To  do  injustice,  wrong,  injury,  oBi/cew  adikeo. 

Gal.    4. 12  Brethren,  .ye  have  not  injured  me  at  all 
INJURIOUS  — 
Despiteful,  insulting,  v$olo-ttis  hubristes. 

1  Ti.    1.  13  Who  was  before,  .injurious :  but  I  obtain 
INJUSTICE  — 

Violence,  wrong,  injury,  czn  chamas. 

Job  16.  17  Not  for.  .injustice  in  mine  hands :  also 
INK  — 
Link,  \**iz  deyo. 

Jer.  36.  iS  answered . .  I  wrote  (them)  with  ink  in  the 
I.Tnk,  fie\dv  melan. 

2  Co.  3.    3  written  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  spirit 
2John     3,  T2  I  would  not  (write)  with  paper  and  ink 

3  John     13  I  will  not  with  ink  and  pen  write  unto 


INK  HORN  — 

Ink  horn,  npf3  qeseth. 

Eze.    9.    2  clothed  with  linen,  with  a  writer's  inkhorn 
9.   3  which  (had)  the  writer's  inkhorn  by  his 
9.  11  clothed  with  linen,  which  (had)  theinkh. 
INN—  ' 

l.Lodging,  place  for  passing  the  night,  |i?o  maton. 

Gen.  42.  27  opened . .  to  give  Ins  ass  provender  in  the  i. 

43.  21  it  came  to  pass,  when  we  came  to  the  inn 

Exod.  4.  24  it  came  to  pass  by  the  way  in  the  inn,  that 

2.Guest  chamber,  KaraKv/xa  kataluma. 

Luke  2.    7  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  inn 

3. Inn,  general  receiving  house,  TravSox^ov pando. 

Lukeio.  34  brought  him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of 
INNER  — 
1.  Inner,  'JD*J9  penimi. 

1  Ki.    6. 27  he  set  the  cherubim  within  the  inner 

6.  3b  he  built  the  inner  court  with  three  rows 


7- 
7- 

1  Ch.28. 

2Ch.  4. 

Esth.  4. 

Eze. 


2  both  for  the  inner  court  of  the  house  of 
50  for  the  doors  of  the  inner  house,  the  most 
1 1  pattern . .  of  the  inner  parlours  thereof,  and 
22  the  inner  doors  thereof  for  the  most  holy 

1  shall  com"  unto  the  king  into  the  inner 
1  stood  in  the  inner  court  of  the  king's  ho. 

3  to  the  door  of  the  inner  gate  that  looketh 
16  he  brought  me  into  the  inner  court  of  the 

10.    3  and  the  cloud  filled  the  inner  comt 
40.  15  unto  the  face  of  the  porch  of  the  inner 
40.  19  unto  the  forefront  of  the  inner  court  with. 
40.  23  the  gate  of  tho  inner  court  (was)  over  ag. 
40.  27  a  gate  in  the  inner  court  toward  the  south 
40.  28  he  brought  mo  to  the  inner  court  by  the 
40.  32  brought  me  into  the  inner  court  toward 
40.  44  And  without  the  inner  gate  (were)  the 

40.  44  chambers  of  the  singers  in  the  inner  court 

41.  15  with  the  iuner  temple  and  the  porches  of 

41.  17  To  that  above  the  door,  even  unto  the  in. 

42.  3  twenty  (.cubits)  which  (were)  for  the  inner 

42.  15  he  had  made  an  end  of  measuring  the  in. 

43.  5  So  the  spirit,  .brought  me  into  the  inner 

44.  17  when  they  enter  in  at  the  gates  of  the  in. 
44.  t 7  they  minister  in  the  gates  of  the  inner 
44.  21  drink,  .when  they  enter  into  the  inner 

44.  27  unto  the  :"nuer  court,  to  minister  in  the 

45.  19  the  posts  of  the  gate  of  the  inner  court 

46.  1  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  that  looketh 
2.  Within,  inner,  (-coo  es~>. 

Eph.   3.  16  strengthened  with  might,  .in  the  inner 
3. Inner,  innermost,  £<ra>Tepos  esOteros. 

Acts  16.  24  thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison,  and 
INNER  chamber  — 
Inner  chamber,  Tin  cheder. 

1  Ki.20.  30  came  into  the  city,  into  an  inner  chamber 

23.  25  when  thon  shaltgo  into  an  inner  chamber 
a  Ki.  9.    2  go  in . .  and  carry  him  to  an  inner  chamber 

2  Ch.18.  24  when  thou  shaltgo  into  an  inner  chamber 
INNER  part— 

Inner  part,  D*j3  panim, 

2  Ch.29. 16  the  priests  went  into  the  inner  part  of  the 
INNERMOST  part  — 
Inner  part,  Tirr  cheder. 

Prov  18.    8  down  into  the  innermost  parts  ofthe  belly 

26.  22  go  down  into  the  innermost  parts  of  the 

INNOCENCY  — 
l.Purity,  Wzafai. 

Dan.  6.  22  as  before  him  inncc:ncy  was  found  in  me 
2. Innocence,  cleanness,  p'£?  uigqayon. 

Gen.  20.   5  and  innocemy  of  my  hands,  have  I  done 

Psa.  26.  6  I  will  wash  mine  hands  in  innocency :  so 
73. 13  vain,  and  washed  my  hands  in  innocency 

Hos.   8.    5  how  long,  ere  they  attain  to  innocency  ? 
EINOCENT  — 
\. Gratuitous,  Djn  chinnam. 

1  Ki.  2.  31  thou  mayest  take  away  the  innocent  blood 
2.Safe,  covered,  ^n  chaph. 

Job  33.    9  I  (am)  innocent ;  neither.. iniquity  in  me 
3. Innocent,  clean,  free,  acquitted,  "py  naqU 

Exod  23.    7  the  innocent  and  righteous  slay  thou  not 

Deut  19.  10  That  innocent  blood  be  not  shed  in  thy  1. 
19. 13  thou shalt put  away,  .innocent blood  from 
21.    8  lay  not  innocent  blood  unto  thy  people  of 

21.  9  shalt  thou  put  away  the.  .innocent  blood 

27.  25  taketh  reward  to  slay  an  innocent  person 

1  Sa.  19.    5  wilt  thou  sin  against  innocent  blood,  to 

2  Ki.21.  16  Manassehshed  innocent  blood  very  much 

24.    4  also  for  the  innocent  blood  that  he  shed 

24.      4  he  filled  Jerusalem  with  innocent  blood 

4.   7  who  (ever)  perished,  being  innocent?  or 

9.  23  he  will  laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  innocent 

17.    S  the  innocent  shall  stir  up  himself  against 

22.  19  and  the  innocent  laugh  them  to  scorn 
22.  30  Heshalldeliverthe  island  of  the  innocent 
27.  17  and  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  silver 

8  in  the  secret  places  doth  he  murder  the  in. 

15.    5  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  innocent 

94.  21  righteous,  and  condemn  the  innocent  bl. 

to6.  38  And  shed  innocent  blood,  .the  blood  of 

Prov.  1.  11  let  us  lurk  privily  for  the  innocent  with. 

6. 17  a  lying  tongue,  and  hands  that  shed  inno. 

Isa.   59.    7  they  make  haste  to  shed  innocent  blood 

Jer.     2.  34  the  blood  of  the  souls  of  the  poor  innoc. 

7.    6  and  shed  not  innocent  blond  in  this  place 

19.   4  have  filled  this  place  with  the  blood  of  in. 


Job 


Psa. 


Jer.  22.    3  neither  shed  innocent  blood  in  this  place 
22.  17  for  to  shed  innocent  blood,  and  foroppr. 

26.  15  ye  shall  surely  bring  innocent  blood  upon 
Jon.    1. 14  lay  not  upon  us  innocent  blood  :  for  thou 

4. Innocent,  clean,  K'pj  naqi, 

Joel    3.  19  they  have  shed  innocent  blood  in  their  la. 
5. Innocent,  guiltless,  aOuos  athoos. 

Matt  27.   4  [in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  bl] 

27.  24  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just 
INNOCENT,  to  be  — 

To  be  innocent,  clean,  free,  acquitted,  npi  naqah,  2. 
Psa.  19.  13  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great  trans. 
Prov.  6.  29  whosoever  toucheth  her  shall  not  be  inno. 

28.  20  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  inno. 
Jer.    2.  35  Yet  thou  sayest,  Because  I  am  innocent 

INNOCENT,  to  hold  — 

To  declare  innocent,  n^i  naqah,  3. 

Job     9.  28  I  know  that  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  inno. 
INNUMERABLE  — 
\.Xo  number,  without  number,  TEpa  j*x  enmispar. 

Job   21.  33  di'aw.  .as  (there  are)  innumerable  before 

Psa.  40.  12  For  inuumeral.de  evils  have  compassed  me 
104.  25  sea,  wherein  (are)  things  creeping  innum. 

Jer.  46.  23  more  than  the  grasshoppers,  and.  .innu. 

2.Not  to  be  numbered,  ai/apid/j.r}TOS  anarithmetos. 
Heb.  11.  12  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  shore  in. 
[See  also  Company,  multitude.] 

INORDINATE  love  or  affection  — 
1. Doling  love,  n3:»  agabah. 

Eze.  23.  11  she  was  more  corrupt  in  her  inordinate  1. 
'2.  Affection,  suffering,  lust,  irdQos  pathos. 

Col.    3.   5  uncleanness,  inordinate  affection,  evil  co. 
INQUISITION  to  be  made  — 
To  be  sought  or  searched  out,  u;j23  baqash,  4. 

Esth.  2.  23  when  inquisition  was  made  of  the  matter 
INQUISITION,  to  make  — 
To  seek,  inquire,  require,  crn  darash. 

Deutig.  18  the  judges  shall  mahe  diligent  inquisition 

Psa.     9.  12  Whenhemaketh  inquisition  for  blood,  he 
INSCRIPTION  — 
-1  writing  above,  iiriypdcpa)  epigro.phd. 

Acts.17.  23  For.  .1  found  an  altar  with  this  inscript. 
INSIDE — 
House,  within,  rvs  bayith. 

1  Ki.  6.  15  covered  (them)  on  the  inside  with  wood 
INSOMUCH  as  — 

So  that,  cSo-re  hoste. 

Acts    1. 19  insomuch  as  that  field  is  called  in  their 
INSOMUCH  that  — 

1.  With  a  view  to  which,  els  eis. 

2  Co.  8.    6  Insomuch  that  we  desired  Titus,  that  as 

2.  So  tluit,  &are  hoste. 

Matt.  8.  24  insomuch  that  the  ship  was  covered  with 
12.  22  he  healed  him,  insomuch  that  the  blind 
13  54  insomuch  that  they  were  astonished,  and 
15.  31  Insomuch  that  the  multitude  wondered 
24.  24  insomuch  that,  if  (it  were)  possible,  they 
27.  14  insomuch  that  the  governor  marvelled 

Mark  1.  27  insomuch  that  they  questioned  among 

1.  45  insomuch  that  Jesus  could  no  more  open. 

2.  2  insomuch  that  there  was  no  room  to  rec. 
2. 12  insomuch  that  they  were  all  amazed,  and 

3.  10  insomuch  that  they  pressed  upon  him  for 
9.  26  insomuch  that  many  said,  He  is  dead 

Lukeis.    1  insomuch  that  they  trode  one  upon  anot. 

Acts    5.  15  Insomuch  thatthey  brought  forth  thesick 

2  Co.  1.    8  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life 

Gal.    2. 13  insomuch  that  Barnabas  also  was  carried 
INSPIRATION  — 
Breath,  nD^J  ncshamah. 

Job   32.    8  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth 
INSPIRATION  of  God,  given  by  — 
God-breathed,  6e67ruevaros  theopneustos. 

2  Ti.    3.  16  All  scripture.,  given  by  inspiration  of  God 
INSTANT  — 
1. Moment,  instant,  s?n  rega. 

Jer.   18.    7,  9  (Atwhat)instantlshallspeakconcerni. 
2.  Hour,  &pa  hora. 

Luke   2.  38  she  coming  in  that  instant  gave  thanks 
INSTANT,  at  an  — 
An  instant,  j/rs  petha. 

Isa.  29.    5  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  instant  suddenly 
30.  13  breaking  cometh  suddenly  at  an  instant 

INSTANT,  to  be  — 

l.To  lie  upon,  iirineiixai  epikeimai. 

Luke23.  23  they  were  instant  with  loud  voices,  requ. 

2.  To  place  upon,  £<p[(TTrifJ.t  ephistemi. 

2  Ti.    4.    2  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season  ;  repr. 

INSTANT,  to  continue  — 

To  persevere,  continue  in,  TrpoarKapTtpeo) proskarte. 

Rom. 12.  12  Rejoicing  in  hope.. continuing  instant  in 
INSTANTLY  — 
1. Intently,  it/  suriveia  en  ekteneia. 

Acts  26.    7  Unto  which,  .our  twelve  tribes,  instantly 


INSTEAD 


518 


INTERCESSION 


2.Hastily,  spc:Jily,  o-Kovdaius  spoudaios. 

Luke  7.    4  when  they  came,  .they  besought  him  ins. 
INSTEAD,  in  the  stead  of  — 
1   Udder,  instead  of,  nnJii  tacliath. 

Gen.    2.  21  and  closed  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof 

4.  25  another  seed  instead  of  Abel,  whom  Cain 
22.  13  a  burnt  offering  in  the  stead  of  his  son. 

30.  2  (Am)  I  in  Go'd's  stead,  who  hath  withheld 
44.  33  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the  lad 

Exod29.  30  that  son  that  is  priest  in  his  stead  shall 
Lev.  16.  32  priest.. to  minister.. in  his  father's  stead 
Xum.  3.  12  instead  uf  all  the  first  born  that  openeth 
3.  41,  45  instead  of  all  the  first  born  among  the 
3.  41,  45  the  cattle  of  the  Levites  instead  of 

5.  19  (with  another)  instead  of  thy  husband 

5.  20,  29  aside  (to  another)  instead  of  thy  husb. 

5.  20,  29  aside  (to  another)  instead  of  her  husb. 

8.  16  instead  of  such  as  open  every  womb,  (even 

32.  14  ye  are  risen  up  in  your  father's  stead,  an 

Deut.  2.  12,  23  destroyed,  .and  dwelt  in  their  stead 

2.  21,  22  succeeded  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  s. 
10.   6  Eleazar  his  son  ministered,  .in  his  stead 

Josh.  5.    7  children,  (whom)  he  raised  up  in  their  ste. 
Judg.  15.    2  take  her.  I  pray  thee,  instead  of  her 
2  Sa.  16.    8  of  Saul,in  whose  stead  thouhast  reigned 
17.  25  Amasa  captain  of  the  hust  instead  of  Joab 

1  Ki.  1.  30  he  shall  sit  upon  my  throne  in  my  stead 

1.  35  he  shall  be  king  in  my  stead  :  and  I  have 

3.  7  servant  king  instead  of  David  my  father 
14.  27  Rehoboam  made  in  their  stead  brasen  sh. 

2  Ki.17.  24  in  the  cities  of  Samaria  instead  of  the 

1  Ch.  5.  2z  dwelt  iu  their  steads  until  the  captivity 
Esth.  ?..    4  the  maiden.,  be  queen  instead  of  Vashti 

2.  17  and  made  her  queen  instead  of  Vashti 
Job    16.    4  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  stead,  I 

31.  40  grow  instead  of  wheat,  and  cockle  instead 
34.  24  He  shall,  .set  others  in  their  stead 

Psa.  45.  16  Instead  of  thy  fathersshallbethy  children 
Prov.  n.    8  and  the  wicked  cometh  in  his  stead 
Eccl.  4.  15  child  that  shall  stand  up  in  his  stead 
Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  sweet  smell  there  shall  be  stink 

3.  24  instead  of  a  girdle  a  rent ;  and  instead  of 
3.  24  and  instead  of  a  stomacher  a  girding  of 
3.  24  sackcloth  ;  (and)  burning  instead  of  bea. 

55.  13  Instead  of  the  thorn . .  instead  of  the  brier 
:Eze.  16.  32  taketh  strangers  instead  of  her  husband 
2.  For,  in  behalf  of,  vnep  (gen.)  huper. 

1  Co.  5.  20  we  pray  (you),  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  re. 
Phni.       13  that  in  thy  stead  he  might  have  minister. 

INSTRUCT,  tD  — 

1.7b  consider,  discern,  attend,  |'2  bin,  5. 

Isa.   40.  14  instructed  him,  and  taught  him  in  the 
Dan.  11.  33  they  that  understand,  shall  instruct  many 

2.  To  cause  to  understand,  j'3  bin;  Za. 

Deut. 32.  10  he  led  him  about,  he  instructed  him,  he 

3.  Reprover,  instructor,  ts;  yissor. 

Job  40.    2  Shall  he  that  contendeth . .  instruct  (Mm)? 

4.  To  chasten,  instruct,  ~id;  yasar,  3. 

Deut.  4.  36  to  hear  his  voice,  that  he  might  instruct 
Job     4.  3  thou  hast  instructed  many,  and  thou  hast 
Psa.  16.    7  my  reins  also  instruct  me  in  the  night 
Isa.     8.  11  instructed  me  that  I  should  walk  in  the 
28.  26  his  God  doth  instruct  him  to  discretion 

5.  To  show,  direct,  rrv  yarah,  5. 

2  Ki.  12.    2  his  days  wherein  Jehoiada. .  instructed 

6.  To  teacli,  *i?7  lamad,  3. 

Prov.  5. 13  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that  instr. 
Song  8.    2  my  mother's  house,  (who)  would  instruct 

7.  To  cause  to  act  wisely 'j  73£  sakal,  5. 

Neb.  9.  20  Thou  gavest.  .thy  good  spirit  to  instruct 
Psa.  32.    8  I  will  instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the 

8.  To  sound  throughout,  instruct,  Karrjx^  kateched. 

Luke  1.  4  those  things,  wherein  thou  hast  been  ins. 
Acts  18.  25  This  man  was  instructed  in  the  way  of  the 
Rom.  2.  18  excellent,  being  instructed  out  of  the  law 
9.Tomakcadiscipleor  learner,  (xaQ-qr  tout  matheteuG. 
Matti3.  52  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is 

10.  To  nurture  as  a  child,  instruct,  TrcuSeuoj  jxiid-mG. 
2  Ti.    2.  25  In  meekness  instructingthuse  thatoppose 

11.  To  cause  to  go  up  or  unite  together,  avfj.$L$afa. 

1  Co.   2.  16  mind  of  the  Lurd,  that  lie  may  instruct 
INSTRUCT  before,  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  upbefore,  7rpo&i(!id£a>  probibazo. 

Matt  14.    8  she,  being  before  instructed  of  her  mother 
INSTRUCTED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  become  known,  yv  yada,  2. 

Jer.  31. 19  after  that  I  was  instructed,  I  smote  upon 

2.  To  be  founded,  instructed,  "ip;  yasad,  6. 

2  Ch.  3.    3  Solomon  was  instructed  for  the  building 
3.7V)  be  chastised,  instructed,  id;  yasar,  2. 

Psa.     2.  10  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth 
Jer.     6.   8  Be  thou  instructed,  O  Jerusalem,  lest  my 
4.  To  be  taught,  ^h  lamad,  4. 

1  Ch.25.    7  their  brethren  that  were  instructed  in  the 

3.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  hy?  sakal,  5. 

Prov.21.  11  when  the  wise  is  instructed,  he  receiveth 
'3  T->  initiate  into  mysteries,  /iueoi  mueo. 

Phil.    4.  12  in  all  things  I  am  instructed  both  t'   be 


INSTRUCTION  — 

1.  Chastisement,  instruction,  "iD-D  musar. 

Psa.  50.  17  Seeing  thou  hatest  instruction,  and  cast. 

Prov.  1.  2  To  know  wisdom  and  instruction ;  toper. 
1.  3  To  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom,  jus. 
1.  7  (but)  fools  despise  wisdom  and  instruction 
1.  8  My  son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father 
4.    1  Hear,  ye  children,  the  Instruction  of  a  f. 

4.  13  Take  fast  hold  of  instruction ;  let  (her)  not 
5. 12  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  niyh. 

5.  23  He  shall  die  without  instruction  ;  and  in 

6.  23  reproofs  of  instruction  (are)  the  way  of  life 
8.  10  Receive  ray  instruction.aud  not  silver;  and 
8.  33  Hear  instruction,  and  be  wise,  and  refuse 

10.  17  He.  .the  way  of  life  that  keepeth  instruc. 

12.  1  Whoso  loveth  instruction  loveth  knowled. 

13.  1  Awiseson(heareth)his  father's  instruction 
13. 18  Poverty . .  to  him  that  refuseth  instruction 
15.    5  A  fool  despiseth  his  father's  instruction 
15. 32  He  that  refuseth  instruction  despisethhis 

15.  33  The  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  instruction 

16.  22  well  spring,  .but  the  instruction  of  fools 
19.  20  Hearcounsel,andreceiveinstruction,that 
19.  27  Cease,  my  son,  to  hear  the  instruction 

23. 12  Apply  thine  heart  unto  instruction,  and 

23.  23  wisdom,  and  instruction,  and  understand. 

24.  32  Ilookedupon(it,  and)  received  instruction 
Jer.  17.  23  that  they  might  not  hear,  norreceive  ins. 

32.  33  they  have  not  hearkened  to  receive  inst. 

35. 13  Will  ye  not  receive  instruction  to  hearken 
Eze.  5.  15  an  instruction  and  an  astonishment  unto 
Zeph.  3.   7  I  said,  Surely,  .thou  wilt  receive  instruc. 

2.  Instruction,  ~icb  mosar. 

Job  33. 16  openeth  the  ears  of  men . .  sealeth  their  in. 

3. Nurture,  instruction,  iraiSeia  paideia. 

2  Ti.   3. 16  profitable . .  for  instruction  in  righteous. 

INSTRUCTOR  — 

1.  To  whet,  sharpen,  tra?  latash. 

Gen.    4.  22  an  instructor  of  every  artificer  in  brass 

2.Child  conductor,  waiBaywyos  paidagogos. 

1  Co.  4. 15  though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instructors 

3.  One  who  nurtures  or  instr  nets,  ira.ih'evTiis  ptaideut. 

Rom.  2.  20  An  instructor  of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of 

INSTRUMENT  — 

1.  Vessel,  instrument,  75  keli. 

Gen.  49.   5  instruments  of  cruelty . .  their  habitations 
Exodss.   9  the  pattern  of  all  the  instruments  thereof 
Num.  3.    8  they  shall  keep  all  the  instruments  of  the 
4. 12  shall  take  all  the  instruments  of  minis. 
4.  26  and  all  the  instruments  of  their  service 
4.  32  with  all  their  instruments,  and  with  all 

4.  32  by  name  ye  shall  reckon  the  instruments 
7.    1  and  all  the  instruments  thereof,  both  the 

31.  6  with  the  holy  instruments,  and  the  trum. 
35.  16  if  he  smite  him  with  an  instrument  of  iron 

1  Sa.    8.  12  his  instruments  of  war,  and  instruments 

2  Sa.  24.  22  and  (other)  instruments  of  the  oxen  for 
1  Ki.19.  21  boiled  then-  flesh  with  the  instruments 

1  Ch.  9.  29  to  oversee  the  vessels  and  alltheinstrum. 

12.  33  expert  in  war,  withall  instrumentsofwar 
12.  37  with  all  manner  of  instruments  of  war  for 

15.  16  the  singers  with  instruments  of  music 

16.  42  and  with  musical  instruments  of  God 
23-   5  praised  the  Lord  with  the  instruments 
28. 14  all  instruments  of  all  manner  of  service 

28.  14  for  all  instruments  of  silver  by  weight 
28. 14  all  instruments  of  every  kind  of  service 

2  Ch.  4.  16  the  flesh  hooks,  and  all  their  instruments 

5.  1  all  the  instruments,  put  he  among  the 

5.  13  with  the  trumpets,  and  cymbals,  and  ins. 
7.    6  Levites  also  with  instruments  of  music  of 

23.  13  also  the  singers  with  instruments  of  mu. 

29.  26  the  Levites  stood  with  the  instruments  of 

29.  27  wich  the  instruments  (ordained)  by  David 

30.  21  (singing)  with  loud  instruments  unto  the  L. 
34. 12  all  that  could  skill  of  instruments  of  mu. 

Neh.  12.  36  with  the  musical  instruments  of  David  the 
Psa.  7.  13  He  hath  also  prepared  for  him  the  instr. 
Isa.   32.    7  instruments  also  of  the  churl  (are)  evil 

54.  16  bringeth  forth  an  instrument  for  Ins  work 
Eze.  40.  42  whereupon  also  they  laid  the  instruments 
Amos  6.  5  invent  to  themselves  instruments  of  music 
Zech  11.  15  Take,  .the  instruments  of  a  foolish  sheph. 

2.  Weapons,  armour,  &VAa  hoplcu. 

Rom.  6.  13  instruments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin 

6.  13  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God 
[See  also  Musical,  threshing,  ten  strings.] 

INSTRUMENT  of  musio  — 
1.A  trichord,  V'by  shali'sh. 

1  Sa.  18.   6  came  out.  .with  instruments  of  music 

2.  Things  for  driving  away  cure,  food,  table,  |irn. 
Dan.   6.  iS  neither  were  instruments  of  music  brou. 

INSTRUMENT,  to  sing  to  the  stringed  — 
To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  }ii  nag an t  3. 
Isa.  38.  20  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed  in. 

INSTRUMENT,  stringed  — 

I. Music  or  song  for  a  stringed  instrument,  MJ'JX 
Hab.  3.  19  To  the  cliief  singer  on  my  stringed  instr. 

Z.Stringed  instrument,  D?|Q  minnim. 

Psn  150    4  praise  him  with  stringed  instruments  and 


INSTRUMENTS,  player  on  — 

1.  To  2)ipe,  play  on  instruments,  hhn  chdlal. 

Psa.  87.    7  As  well  the  singers  as  the  players  on  ins. 

2.  To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  jjj  nagan. 
Psa.  68.  25  theplayersoninstnunents(followed)after 

INSURRECTION  — 

1.  Assembly,  company,  nt^ri  rigshah. 

Psa.  64.    2  from  the  insurrection  of  the  workers  of 

2.  A  standing  up,  uprising,  ardans  stasis. 

Mark  15.    7  who  had  committed  murder  in  the  insur. 
INSURRECTION  against,  to  make  — 
1.7*0  lift  up  self,  ttyt?  nesa,  4. 

Ezra  4.  19  of  old  time  hath  made  insurrection  against 
2.To  place  on  against,  KarecpiaTn^  katephistemi. 

Acts  18.  12  the  Jews  made  insurrection.,  against  Paul 
INSURRECTION  with,  to  make  — 
An  aider  or  abetter,  crvaTaataaTTjs  sustasiastes. 

Markis.    7  them  that  [had  made  insurrection  with] 
INTEGRITY  — 
I.  Perfection;  integrity,  simplicity,  tin  torn. 

Gen.  20.    5  in  the  integrity  of  my  heart,  .have  I  done 
20.   6  I  know  that  thou  didst  this  in  the  integ, 

1  Ki.   9.   4  in  integrity  of  heart,  and  in  uprightness 
Psa.     7.    8  and  according  to  mine  integrity,  .in  me 

25.  21  Let  integrityand  uprightness  preserve  me 

26.  1  I  have  walked  in  mine  integrity :  I  have 

26.  11  as  for  me,  I  will  walk  in  mine  integrity 
41. 12  as  for  me,  thou  upholdest  me  in  mine  in. 
78.  72  So  he  fed  them  according  to  the  integrity 

Prov  19.    1  Better,  .the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  int. 
20.    7  The  just  (man)  walketh  in  his  integrity 

^.Perfection,  integrity,  n*R  tummah. 

Job     2.    3  stillheholdethfasthisintegrity.although 
2.   9  said.  .Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integ.? 

27.  5  till  I  die  I  will  not  remove  mine  integrity 
31.   6  weighed,  .that  God  may  know  mine  inte. 

Prov  11.    3  The  integrity  of  the  upright  shall  guide 

INTELLIGENCE,  to  have  — 

To  cause  to  understand,  j'2  bin,  5. 

Dan.  11.  30  have  intelligence  with  them  that  forsake 

INTEND,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  t?n  amar. 

Exod  2. 14  Intendest  thou  to  kill  me,  as  thou  killedst 
Josh  22.  33  did  not  intend  to  go  up  against  them  in 

2  Ch.28.  13  ye  intend  to  add.  .to  our  sins  and  to  our 
2.7*o  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  mpi  natah. 

Psa.  a  1. 11  they  intended  evil  against  thee ;  they  im. 

3.7*0  will,be  m inded,  counselled,  {5ov\o}j.ai  boidomar. 

Acts    5.  28  intend  to  bring  this  man's  blood  upon  us 

12.    4  intending  after  Easter  to  bring  him  forth 

4.  To  vsill,  wish,  0eAo>  thdo.    . 

Luke  14.  28  which  of  you,  intending  to  build  a  tower 
5.7*0  be  about,  jueAAo)  mello. 

Acts    5.  35  take  heed  to  yourselves  what  ye  intend  to 
20.  13  unto  Assos,  there  intending  to  take  in. P. 
INTENT  — 
\. Order,  condition,  intent,  sake,  -titi  dibrah. 

Dan.    4. 17  to  the  intent  that  the  living  may  know 
2. Device,  nr*\2  mezimmah. 

Jer.  30.  24  until  he  have  performed  the  intents  of  his 
3. Intent,  intention,  ynind,  ivvoia  ennoia. 

Heb.    4. 12  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents 
4.  Word,  matter,  thing,  Xoyos  logos. 

Acts  10.  29  I  ask.  .for  what  intent  ye  have  sent  for 
INTENT  (that),  to.  the  or  for  that  — 
l.In  order  to,  JJJD7  lemaan. 

Eze.  40.   4  for  to  the  intent  that  I  might  show  (them) 
2. For  the  purpose  of,  "IT3£39  lebaabur. 

2  Sa.  17.  14  to  the  intent  that  the  Lord  might  bring 
3. To  this  thing,  ets  tovtc  eis  touto. 

Acts   9.  21  came  hither  for  that  intent,  that  he  might 
4.  With  a  view  to,  els  eis. 

1  Co.  10.   6  to  the  intent  we  should  not  lust  after  evil 
5. That,  so  that,  'ha.  hina. 

Johnn.  15  I  was  not  there,  to  the  intent  ye  may  bel. 

Eph.   3.  10  To  the  intent  that  now  unto  the  priucip. 

6. For  what  ?  Trpbs  rlpros  ti. 

John  13.  28  no  man.  .knew  for  what  intent  he  spake 
INTERCESSION  — 
A  meeting  b  tween,  intercession,  ivrzvfys  enteuxis. 

1  Ti.    2.    i  that,  .intercessions,  .be  made  for  all  men 
INTERCESSION,  to  make  — 
1.2b  come  or  foil  upon,  meet,  yiB'paga, 

Jer.     7.  16  neither  make  intercession  to  me  :  for  I 
27.  18  let  them  now  make  intercession  to  the  L. 

2.  To  cause  to  come  or  fall  upon,  mret,  y:s  paga,  5. 
Isa.    53.  12  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors 
Jer.  36.  25  had  made  intercession  to  the  king  that  he 

3.7*0  meet  with,  come  be t ween,  intercede,  et/rvyxdi'w. 

Rom.  S.  27  because  he  maketh  intercession  for  the 

8.  34  Christ . .  who  also  maketh  intercession  for 

11.    2  how  he  maketh  intercession  to  God  agai. 

Heb.   7.  25  ever  livetli  to  make  intercession  forthem 


INTERCESSION 


519 


INVENTED 


INTERCESSION  for,  to  make  — 
To  meet  with, in  behalf  'of 'one,  irn epevrvyxafto  huper. 
Rom.  8.  26  the  spirit  itseli  niaketh  intercession  for 

INTERCESSOR  — 

To  cause  to  come  or  fall  upon,  meet,  yap  paga,  5. 

Isa.   59.  16  wondered  that  (there  was)  no  intercessor 
INTERMEDDLE,  to  — 
l.To  intermeddle,  mix  up  self,  J>7|  gala,  7. 

Prov  18.  1  seeketh  (and)  intermeddleth  with  all  wi, 
2.  To  7nix  up  self  with  something,  Tijj  arab,  7. 

Prov.  14.  10  a  stranger  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his 
INTERMISSION  — 
Cessation,  rnisn  haphugah. 

Lam.  3.  49  ce'aseth  not,  without  any  intermission 
INTERPRET,  to  — 
l.To  interpret,  explain,  ins  patlutr. 

Gen.  40.  22  hanged . .  as  Joseph  had  interpreted  to  th. 
41.  8  none  that  could  interpret  them  unto  Ph. 
41.  12  and  he  interpreted  to  us.  .he  did  interpret 
41.  13  as  he  interpreted  to  us,  so  it  was ;  me  he 
41.  15  none  that  can  interpret  it ..  to  interpret  it 

%To  interpret  or  explain  thoroughly,  Bupfxvuevai. 

1  Co.  12.  30  all  speak  with  tongues  ?  do  all  interpret  ? 

14.  5  except  he  interpret,  that  the  church  may 
14.  13  Wherefore  let  him.  .pray  that  he  may  in. 
14.  27  and  (that)  by  course;  and  let  one  interpr. 

Z.To  interpret  or  explain,  eppTjuevco  hermeneuo. 

John   1.  3Swhichistosay,[beinghiterpreted,]iIaster 
INTERPRETATION  — 
1. Sweetness,  moral,  interpretation,  n^?D  melitsak. 

Prov.  1.    6  To  understand  a  proverb,  and  the  interp. 

2.  Interpretation,  explanation,  -ks'S  peslier. 

Eccl.  8.    1  who  knoweth  the  interpretation  of  a  thing 

3. Interpretation,  explanation,  "i#?  ]jeshar. 

Dan.  2.  4  tell,  .the  dream,  and  we  will  show  the  in. 
2.  5  the  dream,  withjthe  interpretation'thereof 
2.  6  if  ye  show  the  dream,  and  the  interprets. 
2.  6  showme  the  dream,  and  the  interpretation 
2.  7  and  we  will  show  the  interpretation  of  it 
2.  9  that  ye  can  show  me  the  interpretation 
2.  16  that  he  would  show  the  king  the  interpr. 
2. 24  I  vrill  show  unto  the  king  the  interpreta. 
2.  25  that  will  make  known . .  the  interpretation 
2.  26  the  dream  which  I  have  seen,  and  the  in. 
2.  30  that  shall  make  known  the  interpretation 
2.  36  we  will  tell  the  interpretation  thereof  be. 
2.  45  the  dream  (is)  certain,  and  the  interpret. 
4.  6  they  might  make  known  unto  me  the  int. 
4.  7  they  did  not  make  known  unto  me  the  in. 
4.  9  my  dream . .  and  the  interpretation  thereof 
4.  18  declare  the  interpretation  thereof,  foras. 
4.  18  not  able  to  make  known  unto  me  the  int. 
4.  19  let  not  the  dream,  or  the  interpretation 
4.  19  the  interpretation  thereof  to  thine  enem. 

4.  24  This  (is)  the  interpretation,  O  king,  and 

5.  7  and  show  me  the  interpretation  thereof 
5.  8  nor  make  known  to  the  king  the  interpr. 
5. 12  let  Daniel  be  called.,  he  will  show  the  in. 
5.  15  and  make  known  unto  me  the  interpreta. 
5.  15  but  they  could  notshow  the  interpretation 
5.  16  that  thou  canst  make  interpretations 

5.  i5  and  make  known  to  me  the  interpretation 
5.  17  and  make  known  to  him  the  interpretation 
5.  26  This  (is)  the  interpretation  of  the  thing 
7.  16  So  he  told  me,  and  made  me  know  the  in. 

4:.To  interpret,  explain,  "iri3  pathar. 

It^->.  40.  16  When  the  chief  baker  saw  that  the  inter. 
5. Interpretation.,  explanation,  pins  pithron. 

Gen.  40.  5  each  man  according  to  the  interpretation 
40.    8  (Do)  not  interpretations  (belong)  to  God? 

40.  12,  18  This  (is)  the  interpretation . .  The  three 

41.  11  dreamed  each  man  according  to  the  inte. 

6.Afracture,breaking,interpretation,i2v,ii¥sh€ber. 
Judg.  7. 15  heard  the  telling  of  the  dream,  and  the  in. 

7.  Unloosing,  itrtXvcris  epilusis. 

2  Pe.  1.  20  no  prophecy . .  is  of  any  private  interpret 
S.Tnterpretation,  explanation,  kpiinvzla  hermeneia. 

i  Co.  12. 10  to  another  the  [interpretation]  of  tongues 

14.  26  every  one  of  you.  .hath  an  interpretation 
INTERPRETATION,  to  be  by  — 

1.  To  interpret,  explain,  ep/x^veuw  hermeneuo. 
John   1.  42  Cephas,  which  is  by  interpretation,  A 

9.    7  Siloam,  which  is  by  interpretation,  Sent 
neb.    7.    2  first  being  by  interpretation  King  of  righ. 

2.  To  be  interpreted,  explained,  fxedep/x-qvevo/xat. 

Acts  13.    8  sorcerer,  for  so  is  his  name  by  interpreta. 

3.  To  interpret  or  explain  fully,  dnp/j.7}vevw  dierm. 

Acts   9.  36  Tabitha,  which  by  interpretation  is  called 
INTERPRETED,  to  be  — 
l.To  cast  over,  interpret,  explain,  03")n  targem. 

Ezra    4.    7  written,  .and  interpreted  in  the  Syrian 
2.To  be  interpreted,  or  explained,  fxeOepfx-qvevofxat. 

Matt.  1.  23  Emmanuel,  which  being  interpreted,  is,G. 

Mark  5.  41  Talitha  cumi,  which  is,  being  interpreted 

15.  22  Golgotha jWhich  is,  beinginterpreted,  The 
15.  34  Eloi. .  which  is,  beinginterpreted,  Mj  God 

John  1.  41  Messias,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the  C. 
Acts    4.  36  Barnabas,  which  is,  being  interpreted, The 


INTERPRETER  — 

l.To  treat  as  a  scorner  or  foreigner,  p?  luts,  5. 
Gen.  42.  23  for  he  spake  unto  them  by  an  interpreter 
Job   33.  23  an  interpreter,  one  among  a  thousand,  to 

l.To  interpret,  explain,  ins  pathar. 

Gen.  40.    8  a  dream,  and  (there  is)  no  interpreter  of 
3. One  who  interpretsor  explains fully,d  it  pp.riv£VT7)s. 

1  Co.  14.  28  if  there  be  no  [interpreter],  let  him  keep 
INTERPRETING  — 

To  interpret,  explain,  ip$  peshar,  3. 

Dan.   5. 12  interpreting  of  dreams,  and  showing  of 

INTO  — 

l.To,  unto,  *?x  el. 

Gen.    6. 18  thou  shalt  come  into  the  ark,  thou,  and 

2.  With,  near,  at,  even,  by,  nx  eth. 

Exod3Q.    3  they  did  beat  the  gold  into  thin  plates,  and 

3.  Into,  ids  bemo. 

Job  37.    8  Then  the  beasts  go  into  dens,  and  remain 

4.  Unto,  is?  ad. 

Judg  11.  19  Let  us  pass.,  through  thy  land  into  my 

5. Middle,  midst,  T]in  tavek. 

Deut  23. 11  sun  is  down,  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 

6.  Unto,  up  to,  &XP1  achrL 

Acts  20.    4  thereaccompanied  him  into  Asia,  Sopater 

7. Into,  to,  at,  els  eis. 

Matt.  2. 11  when  they  were  come  into  the  house, they 
2. 12  they  departed  into  their  own  country  an. 
2.  13  flee  into  Egypt,  and  be  thou  there  until  I 
2.  14  When  he  arose  he  took,  .and  departed  into 
2.  20  Arise . .  and  go  into  the  land  of  Israel :  for 
2.  21  he  arose,  .and  came  into  the  land  of  Israel 
2.  22  he  turned  aside  into  the  parts  of  Galilee 

Matt.  3.  10,  12;  4.  1,  5,  8,  12,  18;  5.  1,  20,  25,  2g,  30; 

6.  6,  13,  26,  30 ;  7.  19,  21 ;  8.  5,  12,  14,  23,  28,  31,  32,  32, 
33  ;  9.  1,  1,  17,  17,  23,  26,  28,  38;  10.  5,  5,  11,  12,  23;  11. 
7  ;  12.  4,  9,  11,  29,  44  ;  13.  2,  30,  36, 42,  47, 48,  50,  54 ;  14. 
13*  15)  22,  23,  32>  [34L  35;  15-  ">  *4»  J7>  *7>  21.29,  39J  l6- 
13 ;  17. 1,  15,  15,  22,  25 ;  18.  3,  8,  8,  9,  9,  30 ;  19.  1, 17,  23, 
24 ;  20.  1,  2,  4,  7 ;  21.  2,  10,  12,  17,  18,  21,  23,  31 ;  22.  ip, 
13;  24.  38;  25.  21,23,  3°>  4*.  4^>  46)  26.  18,  30,  32,  41, 
45,  52,  71 ;  27.  6,  27,  53 ;  28.  7,  10,  11,  16,  16. 

Mark  1.  12,  14,  21,  21,  29,  35,  38,  45;  2.  i,  n,  22,  [22,] 
26 ;  3.  1,  13,  19,  27  ;  4.  1, 37 ;  5.  1,  12,  12, 13,  13,  18 ;  6.  1, 

10,  31,  32,  36,  45,  46,  51,  56;  7.  15,  17,  18,  19,  19,  19,  24, 
24.  33  ;  8.  10,  10,  [13J  26,  27  ;  9.  2,  22,  22,  25,  28,  31,  42,  43, 
[43,]  43,  45.  U5.]  45.  47.  47;  i°-  1,17.23,24,25;  11.  2,  2,  ir, 

11,  23;  12.  41,  43;  13.  [15];  14.  13,  16,  26,  28,  38,  41,  54, 
68  ;  15.  41 ;  16.  5,  7,  [12,  15,  19.] 

Luke  1.  9,  39,  39,  40,  79 ;  2.  3,  4,  15,  27,  39 ;  3.  3,  9,  17 ; 
4.  [1,  5,]  14,  16, 37, 38,  42  ;  5. 3,  4, 19,  37,  38 ;  6.  4,  6, 12,  38, 
39;  7.  1,  11,  24,  36,  44;  8.  22,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33,  33,  37, 
41,  51  ;  9.  10,  12,  28,  34,  44,  44,  52 ;  10.  1,  2,  5,  8,  10,  10, 
38,  38 ;  11.  4 ;  12.  5,  28,  58 ;  13.  19 ;  14.  1,  5,  21,  23  ;  15. 
13,  15;  16.  4,  9,  16,  22,  28;  17.  2,  12,  27;  18.  10,  24,  25; 
19.  12,  30,  45  ;  21.  1,  21,  24 ;  22.  3, 10,  io,  33,  40,  46,  54,  66 ; 
23-  [i9>]  25>  46;  24.  7,  26,  [51]. 

John  1.  9,  43 ;  3.  4,  5,  17,  19,  22,  24 ;  4.  3, 14,  28,  38,  43, 
45,  46,  47,  54 ;  5.  7,  24 ;  6.  3, 14,  15,  17,  21,  22, 22  ;  7.  3,  14 ; 
8.  [2] ;  9.  39 ;  10.  1,  36,  40 ;  11.  7,  27,  30,  54 ;  12.  24,  46  ; 
13-  2»  3)  5>  27»  x5-  6»  l&-  tI3.]2o,  21,  28  ;  17.  18, 18;  18.  1, 
11,  15,  28,  33,  37;  19.  9,  17;  20.  6,  11,  25,  25,  27;  21.  3,  7, 

Acts  1.  11,  11,  11,  13;  2.  20,  20,  34 ;  3.  1,  2,  3,  8 ;  5.  21 ; 

7.  3,  4,  9,  [15,]  16,  34,  39,  55  ;  8. 38 ;  9.  6,  8, 17,  39 ;  10.  16, 
22,  24  ;  11.  8,  10,  12  ;  12.  17  ;  13.  14;  14. 1,  20,  22,  25;  16.  9, 
10,  15,  19,  23,  24,  34,  37,  [40] ;  17.  10;  18.7,18,19,27;  19. 

8.  22,  29,  31 ;  20.  i,  2,  3,  18;  21.  3,  8,  11,  26,  28,  29,  34, 
37,  38  ;  22.  4,  10,  ii,  23,  24  ;  23.  10, 16,  20,  28 ;  25.  23 ;  27. 
1,  6,  17,  30,  38,  39,  41 ;  28.  5,  17,  23. 

Rom.  1.  26  ;  5.  2,  12  ;  6.  3,  3,  4 ;  8.  21 ;  10.  6,  7,  18 ;  11. 
24  ;  15.  24,  28. 

1  Co.  12.  13,  [13] ;  14  9. 

2  Co.  1.  16 ;  2. 13 ;  7.  5 ;  n.  13, 14;  12. 4  ;  Gal.  1.  17,  21 ; 
3.  27;  4.  6;  Eph.  4.  9,  15  ;  Col.  1.  13;  2  Th.  3.  5,  5;  1  Ti. 
1.  3,  i2,  15 ;  3.  6,  7 ;  6  7,  9 ;  2  Ti.  3.  6 ;  Heb.  1.6;  3.  n, 
18 ;  4.  1,  3,  3,  5,  io,  11 ;  6. 19  ;  8. 10  ;  9. 6, 7,  12,  24,  24,  25  ; 
io-  5.  3 J .  "•  8 ;  13.  11;  Jas.  1.  25  ;  4.  13 ;  5.  4,  12;  1  Pe. 
1.  12 ;  2.  9  ;  3.  22  ;  2  Pe.  1.  1 1 ;  1  Jo.  4.  1,  9 ;  2  Jo.  7,  10 ; 
Jude4;  Rev.  2.  10,  22,  22 ;  5.  6;  8.  5,  8 ;  12.  6,  9,  14, 
14;  13.  10;  14. 19, 19;  15.  8;  16.  16,  [17,]  19;  17.  3,  8,  11; 
18.  21;  19.  20;  20.  3,  10,  14,  15;  21.  24,  26,  27;  22  14. 
8. In,  into,  it/  en. 

Mark  1.  16  he  saw  Simon,  .casting  a  net  into  the  sea 
Luke  5.  16  he  withdrew  himself  into  the  wilderness 

23.  42  remember  me  when  thou  comest  [into]  thy 
John  3.  35  and  hath  given  all  things  into  his  hand 

5.  4  [angel  went  down  at  a  certain  season  into] 
Acts  7.  45  into  the  possession  of  the  Gentiles,  whom 
Rom.  1.  23  intoanimagemadeliketocorruptibleman 

1.  25  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 

2  Co.  8. 16  put  the  same  earnest  care  into  the  heart 
Gal.    1.    6  removed  from  him  that  called  you  into 

1  Ti.    3.  16  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into 

9.  On,  upon,  over,  eiri  (gen.)  epi. 

Mark  4.  26  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  gro. 
Heb.  10.  16  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  hearts,  and 

10.0)i,  upon,  over,  iirt  (ace.)  epi. 

Matt  13.    8  other  fell  into  good  ground,  and  brought 
13.  20  that  received  the  seed  into  stony  places 
13.  23  he  that  received  seed  into  the  good  ground 
18.  12  goethintothe  mountains,  and  seekeththat 
22.   9  Go  ye  therefore  into  the  highways,  and 

24.  16  let  them  which  be  in'Tudea  flee  [into]  the 
Mark  6.  53  they  came  into  the  land  ofGennesaret,  and 
Lukeig.    4  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore  tree  to  see 


Luketg.  23  gavest  not  thou  my  money  into  the  bank 

Acts  7.  23  it  came  into  his  heart  to  visit  his  brethren 
9.  11  Arise,  and  go  into  the  street  which  is 

1  Co.  2.  9  neither  haveentered  into  the  heart  of  man 
11.  20-  When  ye  come  together  therefore  into  one 
14.  23  the  whole  church  be  come  together  b_to 

Rev.  11,  11  life  from  God  entered  [into]  them 

11. Doam,  down  throughout,  Kara,  (ace.)  kata. 
Acts    5. 15  brought  forth  the  sick  [into]  the  streets 
16.    7  they  assayed  to  go  [into]  Bithynia:  but  the 

12. JVithin,  €<rw  eso. 

Mark  1 4.  54  even  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest 
15. 16  the  soldiers  led  hini  away  into  the  hall 

13.  Under,  vtt6  (ace.)  hupo. 

Jas.  5. 12  Swear  not.  .lest  ye  fall  into  condemnation 
[See  also,  Ashes,  bear,  beat,  bondage,  bring,  captivity, 
carrying, "east,  come,  contempt,  desolation,  enter,  enter- 
ing, entrance,  fall,  foolishness,  get,  go,  graft",  joy,  lead, 
look,  scatter,  sleep,  snare,  spread,  subjection,  take.] 

ENTREAT  or  ENTREAT,  to  — 

l.To  smooth  down,  appease,  weaken,  n~>nchalah,  3. 
1  Ki.  13.  6  Intreat  now  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
Psa.  45.  12  rich  among  the  people  shall  intreat  thy 

119.  58  I  intreated  thy  favour  with  (my)  whole 
Prov  19.    6  Many  will  intreat  the  favour  of  the  prince 

2.  To  be  gracious,  entreat  grace  or  favour,  J  jn  ch  anan. 

Job   19.  17  though  I  intreated  for  the  children's  (sake) 

3.  To  show  self  gracious,  \in  chanan,  7. 

Job   19.  16  I  called,  .intreated  hini  with  my  mouth 

4.2*0  entreat  abundantly,  iny  athar. 

Gen.  25.  21  Isaac  intreated  the  Lord  for  his  wife 
Exod.  8.  30  Moses  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  and  intre. 
io.  18  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  and  intreated 
Judg  13.   8  Then  Manoah  intreated  the  Lord,  and 

5.2t>  make  abundant  intreaty,  "irjSJ  athar,  5. 

Esod.  8.  8  Entreat  the  Lord,  that  he  may  take  away 
8.  9  Glory  over  me :  when  shall  I  entreat  for 
8.  28  I  will  let  you  go . .  only . .  entreat  for  me 

8.  29 1  will  entreat  the  Lord  that  the  swarms 

9.  28  Entreat  the  Lord,  for  (it  is)  enough,  that 
10.  17  entreat  the  Lord  your  God,  that  he  may 

Q.To  come  or  fall  upon,  meet,  yispaga. 

Gen.  23.    8  intreat  for  me  to  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar 
Ruth  1. 16  Intreat  me  not  to  leave  thee,  (or)  to  retu. 

7.  To  cause  to  come  or  fall  upon,  meet,  y;3  paga,  5. 

Jer.  15. 11  verily  I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  entreat 
%.To  cast  self  down,  bhs  palal,  7. 

1  Sa.    2.  25  if  a  man  sin.  .who  shall  intreat  for  him? 

9.  To  ask,  ipwrdoi  erotao. 

Phil.   4.    3  I  intreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow,  help 

10.  To  ask,  crave  a  little,  rrapaireo^at  paraiteomai.. 
Heb.  12. 19  they  that  heard  intreated  that  the  word 

11. To  call  for,  entreat,  irapaxaXea  paraJcaleo. 
Lukei5.  28  therefore  came  his  father  out,  and  intre. 

1  Co.    4.  13  Being  defamed,  we  intreat :  we  are  made 
iTi.     5.    1  Rebuke  not  an  elder,  but  intreat  (him)  as 

INTREATED,  to  be  — 

2*o  be  abundantly  intreated,  iny  athar,  2. 

Gen.  25.  21  the  Lord  was  intreated  of  him,  and  Reb. 

2  Sa.  21.  14  after  that  God  was  intreated  for  the  land 

24.  25  SotheLoRDwasintreated  for  the  land,  and 

1  Ch.  5.  20  he  was  intreated  of  them;  because  they 

2  Ch.33.  13  he  was  intreated  of  him,  and  heard  his  s. 

33.  19  (how  God)  was  intreated  of  him,  and  all 
Ezra    8.  23  besought.  .God.  .and  he  was  intreated  of 
Isa.    19.  22  he  shall  be  intreated  of  them,  and  shall 

INTREATED,  easy  to  be  — 

Easily  persuaded,  evTrstO-fjs  eupeithes. 

Jas.     3.  1 7  easy  to  be  intreated,  full  of  mercy  and 
INTREATY  — 
1. Supplication  for  grace,  DUUrp  tachanunim. 

Prov  18.  23  The  poor  useth  intreaties ;  but  the  rich 
2.A  calling  for,  alongside  of,  entreaty,  TrapaKK-qatT. 

2  Co.    8.   4  Praying  us  with  much  intreaty  that  we 
INTRUDE  into,  to  — 
To  go  or  tread  in  upon,  £fj.@aTevw  embateuo. 

Col.     2. 18  intruding  into  those  things  which  he  hath 
INVADE,  to  — 
l.To  cut,  assault,  ""3  gucl. 

Hab.  3.  16  when  he  cometh  up.  .he  will  invade  them 

2.2*0  strip,  tov?3  pashat. 

1  Sa.  23.  27  for  the  Philistines  have  invaded  the  laud 

27.    8  David,  .invaded  the  Geshurites,  and  the 
30.    1  that  the  Amalekites  had  invaded  the  south 

2  Ch.28.  18  The  Philistines  also  had  invaded  the  cities 

3.  To  come  or  go  in,  tV2  bo. 

2  Ki.  13.  20  bands  of  the  Moabites  invaded  the  land 
2  Ch.2n.  10  whom  thou  wouldest  not  let  Israel  invade 

INVASION,  to  make  an  — 

To  strip,  tt?'2  £>rts/ifc£. 

1  Sa.  30/14'We  made  aninvasion  (upon)  the  south  of 
INVENT,  to  — 

2*0  think,  devise,  design,  2vn  chashab. 

Amos  6.    5  invent  to  themselves  instruments  of  music 
INVENTED  — 
Device,  design,  n3p;qc  machashebeth. 

2  Ch.26.  15  engines,  invented  by  cunning  men,  to  bo 


INVENTIONS 


520 


ISAAC 


INVENTIONS  — 

1. Devices,  designs,  rruat^n  chishshebonoth. 

Eccl,  7.  29  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions 

2. A  doing,  deed,  T}%p  maalal. 

Psa.  106.  29  they  provoked,  .to  anger  with  their  inve. 
106.  39  went  a  whoring  with  theirown  inventions 

Z. Doing,  deed,  n^w  alilah. 

Psa.  99.    8  though  thou  tookest  vengeance  of  their  i. 

INTENTIONS,  witty  — 
Device,  .-rain  mezimmah. 

Prov.  8.'  12  and  (hid  outknowledge  of  witty  inventions 

INVENTOR  — 

One  who  finds  out  (something)  more,  4<pevp€TT)$, 

Rom.  1.  30  inventors  of  evil  things,  disobedient  to  p. 
INVISIBLE  — 
Unseen,  aSparos  aoratos. 

Rom.  1.  20  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  crea. 

Col.     1.  15  Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  the 
1.  16  visible  and  invisible,  whether,  .thrones 

1  Ti.    1.  17  unto  the  king  eternal,  immortal,  invisible 

Heb.  it.  27  he  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible 

invite,  to  — 
To  call,  trpT  qara, 

1  Sa.    9.  24  since  I  said,  I  have  invited  the  people.  So 

2  Sa.  13.  23  and  Absalom  invited  all  the  king's  sons 
Esth.  5.  12  tomorrow  ami  invited  unto  her  also  with 

INWARD,  INWARDS  — 

1.  House,  within-,  rT3  bayith. 

Exod28.  26  which  (is)  in  the  side  of  the  ephod  inward 

39. 19  which  (was)  on  the  side  of  the  ephod  inw. 

2  Sa.   5.    9  built  round  about  from  Millo  and  inward 

1  Ki.    7.  25  oxen,  .and  all  their  hinder  parts  (were)  i. 

2  Ch.  3.  13  they  stood . .  and  their  faces  (were)  inward 

4.   4  oxen,  .and  all  their  hinder  parts  (were)  i. 
Eze.  40.   9  porch,  .and  the  porch  of  the  gate  (was)  i. 
1. Secret,  assembly,  counsel,  "rio  sod. 

Job  19.  19  All  my  inward  friends  abhorred  me  ;  and 
B.Inner  part,  within,  u^panim. 

Eze.  40.  16  and  windows  (were)  round  about  inward 
41.  3  Then  went  lie  inward,  and  measured  the 

4.  Inner  part,  within,  vpu?  penimi. 

Eze.  42.    4  walk  of  ten  cubits  breadth  inward,  a  way 

5.  Heart,  middle,  midst,  3"ij3  qereb. 

Exod29. 13,  22  the  fat  that  covereth.  the  inwards,  and 
29. 17  wash  the  inwards  of  him,  and  his  legs,  and 
Lev.    1.    9  his  inwards  and  his  legs  shall  he  wash  in 
1.  13  he  shall  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs 

3.  3,  9,  14  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards 
3-    3.  9>  14  all  the  fat  that  (is)  upon  the  inwards 

4.  8  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards,  and 
4.   8  all  the  fat  that  (is)  upon  the  inwards 
4.  11  with  his  legs,  and  his  inwards,  and  his 

7.  3  rump,  and  the  fat  that  covereth  the  inw. 
8. 16,  75  all  the  fat  that  (was)  upon  the  inwards 

8.  21  he  washed  the  inwards  and  the  legs  in  w. 

9.  14  he  did  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs,  and 
Psa.  64.    6  the  inward,  .of  every  one.  .and  the  heart 

6.  Within,  taw  esd. 

Rom.  7.  22  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inw. 

7 '.From  within,  iawQev  esothen. 

2  Co.  4.  16  yet  the  [inward]  (man)  is  renewed  day  by 
INWARD  affection — 
Bowels,  o-TrXayxva  spUuJchna. 

2  Co. 7. 15  his  inward  affection  is  more  abundant  tow. 
INWARD  (fret)  — 
A  hollow  fretting,  corrosion,  nnna  peclietheth. 

Lev.  13.  55  shalt  burn  it  in  the  fire  ;  it  (is)  fret  inw. 
INWARD  part  or  thought  — 
\. Inner  jxtrt,  Tin  chedcr. 

Prov.  20. 27  searching  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly 
20.  30  so.  .stripes  the  inward  part  of  the  belly 

2.  Covered,  concealed  parts,  reins,  nino  tuchoth. 

Job  38.  36  Who  hath  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  p.  ? 

Psa.  51.    6  thou  desirest  truth  in  the  inward  parts 
3. Heart,  middle,  midst,  2"jp  qereb. 

Psa.    5.  9  their  inward  part  (is)  very  wickedness;  their 
49. 11  Their  inward  thought  (is,  that)  their  ho. 

Isa.    16.  11  and  mine  inward  parts  for  Kir-haresh 

Jer.   31. 33  I  will  put  my  law  in  their  inward  parts 
A.Feoi/i  within,  MtrwOev  esothen. 

Luke  1 1.  39  your  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and 
INWARDLY  — 
1.  Heart,  middle,  midst.  Tip  qereb. 

Psa.  62.  4  they  bless,  .but  they  curse  inwardly.  Sel. 
2.1n  the  hidden  or  concealed  part,  iv  t$  Kpvtny. 

Rom.  2.  29  But  he  (is)  a  Jew,  which  is  one  iuwardly 
Z.From  within,  errwOei'  esothen. 

Matt.  7.  15  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves 
IPH-E-DE-IAH.  ti?'  Jah  is  freeing. 
A  son  of  Shashak,  a  Benjamite ;  a  chief  of  the  tribe,  aud 
residing  in  Jerusalem.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  25  And  I.,  and  Penuel,  the  sons  of  Shashak 

IR,  Ttf,  TV  watcher. 

A  Benjamite,  the  father  of  Machir.     B.C.  1670. 

x  Ch.  7.  12  Shup.  also,  and  Hup.,  the  children  of  I. 


I'-RA,  tfTg  watcher. 

1.  A  priest  to  David,  and  named  among  his  great  officers. 

B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  20.  26  I.  also  the  Jairite  was  a  chief  ruler  about 

2.  Ira  the  Ithrite  (or  Jathrite),  one  of  David's  guard. 

B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  38  I.  an  Ithrite,  Gareb  an  Ithrite 

1  Ch.n.  28  I.  the  sou  of  Ikkesh  the  Tekoite,  Abi-ezer 

27.    9  The  sixth  (captain ..  was)  I.  the  son  of  I. 

3.  Anothermemberof  David's  guard, — a  Tekoite  and  son 
of  Ikkesh.  He  was  leader  of  the  6th  monthly  course  of 
the  24,000,  priests  appointed  by  David.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  26  Helez  the  Paltite,  I.  the  son  of  Ikkesh  the 
1  Ch.u.  40 1,  the  Ithrite,  Gareb  the  Ithrite 

I'-RAD,  TTJ7. 

Son  of  Enoch  and  grandson  of  Cain.    B.C.  3840. 

Gen.    4.  18  And  unto  Enoch  was  born  I.:  and  I.  begat 
I'-RAM,  D-VJJ. 
A  duke  of  Edom  of  the  family  of  Esau.    B.C.  1470. 

Gen.  36.  43  Duke  Magdiel,  duke  I.:  these  (be)  the  du. 

1  Ch.  1.  54  Duke  Magdiel,  duke  I.     These  (are)  the 
I'-RI,  *TJ£  dah  is  watcher. 
A  son  of  Bela  son  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1670. 

1  Ch.  7.    7  And  the  sons  of  Bela ;  Ezbon.  .and  I.,  five 
TR-I'-JAH,  n';N"i;  Jah  is  seeing. 

A  captain  of  the  guard  in  Jerusal  em,  who  met  Jeremiah 
at  the  gate  of  Benjamin  and  led  hini  back  to  the  princes. 
B.C.  600. 

Jer.  37.  13  captain .  .(was)there,  whose  name  (was)  I. 
37.  14  I.  took  Jeremiah,  and  brought  him  to  the 

ER-NA'-HASH,  »rrrY"  serpent  city  ;  magic  city. 

A  descendant  of  Chelub  from  Judah  through  Caleb  son 

of  Hur :  or  it  may  be  a  city. 

1  Ch.  4. 12  Eshton  begat.  .Tehinnah  the  father  of  I. 

ER'-ON,  fwev  place  of  terror. 

A  city  of  Naphtali,  probably  now  Yaritn,  between  En- 

hazor  and  Migdal-el. 

Josh.  19.  38 1.,  and  Migdal-el,  Horem,  and  Beth-anath 

IRON  — 

I.Iron,  7H2  barzel. 

Gen.    4.  22  an  instructor  of  every  artificer  in.  .iron 

Lev.  26.  19  I  will  make  your  heaven  as  iron,  and  your 

N 1111131.  22  the  brass,  the  iron,  the  tin,  and  the  lead 

35. 16  if  he  smite  him  with  an  instrument  of  i. 

Deut.  3.  11  his  bedstead  (was)  a  bedstead  of  iron  ;  (is) 

4.  20  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  iron  furnace 

8.   9  a  land  whose  stones  (are)  iron,  and  out  of 

27.  5  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  (any)  iron,  .upon 

28.  23  the  earth  that  (is)  under  thee  (shall  be)  i. 
28. 48  he  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  neck 
33.  25  Thy  shoes  (shall  be)  iron  and  brass ;  and 

Josh.  6.  19  silver,  .gold, and  vessels  of  brass  and  iron 

6.  24  the  vessels  of  brass  and  of  iron,  theyput 

8.  31  over  which  no  man  hath  lift  up  (any)  iron 

17.  iG  all  the  Canaanites.  .have  chariots  of  iron 

17.  18  Canaanites,  thoughtheyhavechariotsofi. 

22.  8  and  with  iron,  and  with  very  much  raim. 
Judg.  1.  19  could  not.,  because  they  had  chariots  of  i. 

4.    3,  13  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron 

1  Sa.  17.    7  head(weighed)  six  hundred  shekels  of  iron 

2  Sa.  12. 31  under  harrows  of  iron,  and  under  axes  of  i. 

23.  7  fenced  with  iron  and  the  staff  of  a  spear 

1  Ki.  6.   7  (nor)  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house 

8.  51  forth,  .from  the  midst  of  the  furnace  of  i. 
22. 11  Zedekiah.  .made  him  horns  of  iron :  and 

2  Ki.  6.    6  cast  (it)  in  thither ;  and  the  iron  did  swim 

1  Ch.20.    3  saws,  and  with  harrows  of  iron,  and  with 

22.  3  David  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  the 
22.  14  of  brass  and  iron  without  weight ;  for  it  • 

22. 16  of.  .the  silver,  and  the  brass,  and  the  iron 

29.  2  iron  for  (things)  of  iron,  and  wood  for 
29.   7  and  one  hundred  thousand  talents  of  iron 

2  Ch.  2.    7  in  silver,  and  in  brass,  and  in  iron,  and  in 

2.  14  skilful  to  work  in  gold,  and.  .in  iron,  in 

18.  10  Zedekiah.  .had  made  him  horns  of  iron 

24.  12  such  as  wrought  iron  and  brass  to  mend 
Job    19.  24  That  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen 

20.  24  He  shall  flee  from  the  iron  weapon,  (and) 
28.    2  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  brass 

40. 18  of  brass ;  his  bones  (are)  like  bars  of  iron 
41.  27  He  esteemeth  iron  as  straw,  .brass  as  ro. 

Psa.  2.  9  Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 
105.  18  they  hurt  with  fetters :  he  was  laid  in  iron 
107. 10  Such  as  sit.  .bound  in  affliction  and  iron 
107. 16  For  he  hath,  .cut  the  bars  of  iron  in  sun. 
149.   8  To  bind.,  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron 

Prov  27.  17  Iron  sharpeneth  iron  ;  so  a  man  sharpen. 

Eccl. 10. 10  If  the  iron  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet 

Isa.   10.  34  he  shall  cut  down  «he . .  thickets  with  iron 
45.   2  I  will,  .cut  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron 
48.    4  thy  neck  (is)  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  brow 

60. 17  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  .for  stones  iron 
Jer.     1. 18  I  have  made  thee  this  day.  .an  iron  pillar 

6.  28  (they  are)  brass  and  iron  ;  they  (are)  all 
11.   4  I  brought  them  forth,  .from  the  iron  fur. 
15.  12  Shall  iron  break  the  northern  iron  and  the 
17.    1  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  .the point  of  a 

28. 13  but  thou  shalt  make  for  them  yokes  of  ir. 

28. 14  I  have  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  the  neck 
Eze.     4.   3  Moreover  take  thou  unto  thee  an  iron  p. 

4.    3  set  it.  .a  wall  of  iron  between  thee  and 
22.  18  all  they  (are)  brass,  and  tin,  and  iron,  and 
22. 20  (As)  they  gather  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron 
27.  12  with  silver,  iron,  tin  and  lead,  they  traded 

27. 19  bright  iron,  cassia,  and  calamus,  weie  in 


Amos  1.  3  threshed,  .threshing  instruments  of  iron 
Mic.    4. 13  I  will  make  thine  horn  iron,  and  I  will 
2. Iron,  hpB  parzel. 

Dan.  2.  33  His  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron,  and 
^  2.  34  upon  his  feet  (that  were)  of  iron  and  clay 
2.  35  Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the 
2.  40  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron 
2. 40  forasmuch  as  iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and 
2.  40  as  iron  that  breaketh  all  these,  shall  it  br. 
2.  41  part  of  potter's  clay,  and  part  of  iron,  the 
2.  41  shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength  of  the  iron 
2.  41  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry  c. 
2.  42  the  toes  of  the  feet  (were)  part  of  iron 
2. 43  whereas  thou  sawest  iron  mixed  with  miry 
2. 43  not  cleave . .  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with 
2.  45  it  break  in  pieces  the  iron,  the  brass,  the 
4*  151  23  with  a  band  of  iron  aud  brass,  in  the 
5.  4  praised  the  gods,  .of  iron,  of  wood,  and 
5.  23  hast  praised  the  gods  of.  .iron,  wood,  and 
7.  7  it  had  great  iron  teeth :  it  devoured  and 
7. 19  whose  teeth  (were  of)  iron,  aud  his  nails 

Z.Made  of  iron,  aiBrjpeos  sidereos. 

Acts  12.  10  they  came  uuto  the  iron  gate  that  leadeth 

Rev.    2.  27  And  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

9.    9  they  had  breastplates,  as  it  were,  .of  iron 

12.    5  was  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iroii 

ig.  15  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

4.  Iron,  vlBvpos  sideros. 

Rev.  18.  12  allmannervesselsof.  .brass,  and  iron,  and 
IRONS,  barbed  — 
A  pointed  weapon,  dart,  nib*  siikkah. 

Job  41.  7  Canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  barbed  irons  2 
ER-PE'-EL,  H'?-v  God  (is)  healer,  or  restored  by  God. 
A  city  of  Benjamin. 

Josh.  18.  27  And  Rekem,  and  I., -and  Taralah 
IR  SHE'-MESH,  b^etY"  city  of  the  sun. 
A  city  of  Dan,  probably  identical  with  Beth-shemesh, 
but  certainly  connected  with  Mount  Heres,  "the  mount 
of  the  sun." 

Josh.  19.  41  the  coast.,  was  Zorah,  and  Eshtaol;and  I. 
I'-RTJ,  ITy  watch. 

Eldest  son  of  Caleb,  the  spy.  This  name  is  probably 
Ir,  the  u  being  the  conjunction  "and,"  and  belonging 
to  the  following  name.    B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  4.  15  sons  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh;  I. 
IS  — 
There  is,  he,  she,  or  it  is,  wi  yesh. 

Gen.  28.  16  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place  ;  and  I 

Judgi8.  14  Do  ye  know  that  there  is  in  these  houses 

1  Sa.    9.  11  found,  .and  said  unto  them,  Is  the  seer 

2  Ki.  3.  12  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  him.  So  the 

10.  15  Is  thine  heart  right,  as  my  heart  (is)  with 
2  Ch.  25.   9;  Job  9.  33;  Mic.  2  1. 
To  be  in,  Zi/tt/xt  eneimi. 

Gal.    3.  28,  28,  28;  Col.  3.  11 ;  Jas  1.  17 
IS,  that  which,  thing  as  it  — 
Substance,  ira^n  tushiyyah. 

Job   11.    6  secrets,  .(they  are)  double.to  that  wh.  is 
26.  3  thou  plentifully  declared  the  thiugas  it  is? 

IS  to  say,  that  — 
That  is,  0  i<m  ho  esti. 

Mark  7.  11  Corban,  that  is  to  say,  a  gift,  by  whatso. 
IS'-AAC,  pn>':,  pr/s?;  'ItraaK,  laughter. 
The  son  born  to  Abraham  by  Sarah  in  the  hundredth 
year  of  his  age,  at  Gerar,  B.C.  1896.  At  the  age  of 
twenty-five  he  was  directed  to  be  sacrificed  by  his  father. 
When  forty  years  old  he  married  hin  cousin  Rebekah, 
by  whom,  when  sixty  years  of  age,  he  had  two  sons, 
Esau  and  Jacob.  He  died  at  Hebron  aged  180,  and  was 
buried  by  his  two  sons  in  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  beside 
his  father.    B.C.  1716. 

Geu.  17.  19  and  thou  shalt  callhisname  I.:  and  I  will 
17.  21  my  covenant  will  I  establish  with  I, 
21.    3  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his  son..  I. 
21.   4  Abraham  circumcised  his  sou  I.  being  ei. 
21.    5  old  when  his  son  I.  was  born  unto  him 
21.    8  feast  the  (same)  day  that  I.  was  weaned 
21.  10  shallnotbeheir'withmyson,(even)with  I. 

21.  12  for  in  I.  shall  thy  seed  be  called 

22.  2  thy  son,  thine  only(son)!.,  w  bom  thou  lo. 
22.  3  his  young  men  witli  him,  and  I.  his  son 
22.  6  took  the  wood,  .and  laid  {it)  upon  I.  his  son 
22.  7  I.  spake  unto  Abraham  his  father,  and  said 
22.  9  bound  I.  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar 
24.  4  shalt  go.  .and  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  I. 
24. 14  (that)  thou  bast  appointed  for  thy  servant  I. 
24.  62  I.  came  from  the  way  of  the  well  Lahai-roi 
24.  63  I.  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field  at 
24.  64  when  she  saw  I.,  she  lighted  off  the  camel 
24.  66  servant  told  I.  all  things  that  he  had  done 
24.  67  I.  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah's 

24.  67  I.  was  comforted  after  his  mother's  (de.)' 

25.  s  And  Abraham  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  I. 
25.  6  sent  them  away  from  I.  his  son,  while  he 
25.  9  I.  and  Ishmael  buried  him  in  the  cave  of 
25.  11  God  blessed  his  son  I. ;  and  I.  dwelt  by  the 
25.  19  of  I.,  Abraham's  son.  Abraham  begat  I. 
25.  20  I.  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took  Reb. 
25.  21  I.  entreated  the  LORDforhis  wife,  because 
25.  26  I.  (was)  threescore  years  old  when  she  b. 

25.  28  I.  luved  Esau,  because  lie  did  eat  of  (his) 

26.  1  And  I.  went  unto  Abinulcch  king  of  the 
26.    6  And  I.  dwelt  in  Gerar 

*6.   3  I.  (was)  sporting  witii  Rebekah  his  wife 


ISAIAH 


521 


ISH    TOB 


Gen.   26.    9  Abiraelech  called  I.,  and  said,  Behold.  01" 
26.    9  I.  said  unto  him,  Because  I  said,  Lestldi- 

26.  12  I.  sowed  in  that  laud,  and  received  in  the 

27.  16  Abiraelech  said  unto  I.,  Go  from  us;  for 
26.  17  I.  departed  thence,  and  pitched  his  tent 
26.  18  I.  digged  again  the  wells  of  water  which 
26. 19  I.'s  servants  digged  in  the  valley,  and 
26.  20  theherdmen.  .did  strive  with  I.'s  herdmen 
26.  25  and  there  I.'s  servants  digged  a  well 

25.  27  I.  said  unto  them,  Wherefore  come  ye  to 

26.  31 1,  sent  them  away,  and  they  departed  from 
26.  32  I.'s  servants  came,  and  told  him  concern. 

26.  35  a  grief  of  mind  unto  I.  and  to  Rebekah 

27.  1  I.  was  old,  and  his  eyes  were  dim,  so  that 
27.    5  Kebekah  heard  when  I.  spake  to  Esau 
24. 20 1,  said  unto  his  son,  How  (is  it)  that  thou 
27.  21  I.  said  unto  Jacob,  Come  near,  I  pray  thee 
27.  22  Jacob  went  near  unto  I.  his  father;  and 
27.  26  I.  said  unto  him,  Come  near  now,  and  kiss 
27.  30  as  I.  had  made  an  end  of  blessing  Jacob 
27.  30  out  from  the  presence  of  I.  his  father 
27.  32  I.  his  father  said  unto  him,  Who  (art^  thou? 
27.  33  I.trembledveryexceedingly.andsaid.W.? 
27.  37  I.  answered  and  said  unto  Esau,  Behold,  1 
27.  39  I.  his  father  answered  and  said  unto  him 

27.  46  Rebekah  said  to  I. ,  I  am  weary  of  my  life 
26.    1  I.  called  Jacob,  and  blessed  him,  and  ch. 

28.  5  I.  sent  away  Jacob:  and  he  went  to  Padan. 
2S.    6  I.  had  blessed  Jacob,  and  sent  him  away 

28.  8  the  daughters  of  Canaan  pleased  not  I.  his 
28. 13  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God  of  I. 
31.  18  for  to  go  to  I.  his  father  in  the  land  of  Can. 
31.  42  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  fear  of  I. 

31.  53  Jacob  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  father  I. 

32.  g  And  Jacob  said,  0. .  .God  of  my  father  I. 
35.  12  And  the  laud  which  I  gave  Abraham  and  I. 
35.  27  And  Jacob  came  unto  I.  his  father  unto 
35.  27  which  (is)  Hebron,  where  Abraham  and  I. 
35.  2S  the  days  of  I.  were  an  hundred  and  four. 
35. 29  I.  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died,  and  was 
46.    1  offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  I.  his 

48.  15  before  whom  my  fathers  Abraham  and  I. 
48. 16  the  name  of  my  fathers  Abraham  and  I. 

49.  31  there  they  buried  I.  and  Rebekah  his  wife 

50.  24  land  which  he  sware  to  Abraham,  to  I. 
Exod.  2.  24  God  remembered  his  covenant  with.  .1. 

3.    6  Moreover  he  said,  I  (am),  .the  God  of  I. 
3.  15  God  of  I. .  .hath  sent  me  unto  you  :  this 

3.  16  the  God  of.  .1.,  and  of  Jacob,  appeared 

4.  5  the  God  of  I.,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,  hath 
6.   3  And  I  appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto  I. 
6.    8  I  did  swear  to  give  it  to  Abraham,  to  I. 

32.  13  Remember  Abraham,  I.,  and  Israel,  thy 

33.  1  land  which  I  sware  unto  Abraham,  to  I. 
Lev.  26.  42  will  I  remember,  .my  covenant  with  I., and 
Nuni32.  11  shall  see  the  land  which  I  sware  unto.  .1. 
Deut.  1.    8  LoRDswareuntoyourfathers,Abraham,I. 

6.  10  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers,  to.  .1. 
9.    5  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fathers,  Abraham,  I. 
9.  27  Remember  thy  servants,  Abraham,  I.,  and 

29.  13  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers,  to.  .1.,  and 

30.  20  sware  unto  thy  fathers,  to  Abraham,  to  I. 

34.  4  I  sware  unto  Abraham,  unto  I.,  and  unto 
Josh.24.    3  and  multipled  his  seed,  and  gave  him  I. 

24.    4  And  I  gave  unto  I.  Jacob  and  Esau  :  and 

1  Ki.iS.  36  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  I.,  and  of  Israel 

2  Ki.13.  23  because  of  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  I. 

1  Ch.  1.  28  The  sons  of  Abraham  ;  I.,  and  Ishmael 

x.  34  And  Abraham  begat  I.,  The  sons  of  I. ;  E. 
16.  16  (Even  of  the  covenant),  .of  his  oath  unto  I. 
29.  18  0  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  I.,  and  of  Israel 

2  Ch.30.   6  turn  again  unto  the  Lord  God  of.  .1.,  and 
Psa.  105.   9  made  with  Abraham,  and  his  oath  unto  I. 
Jer.   33.  26  (to  be)  rulers  over  the  seed  Abraham,  I. 
Amos  7.   9  And  the  high  places  of  I.  shall  be  desolate 

7.  16  dropnot  (thy  word)againstthehouseof  I. 
Matt.  1.    2  Abraham  begat  I.;  and  I.  begat  Jacob;  and 

8. 11  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  I.,  and 
22.  32  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  I. 
Marki2.  26  (am)  the  Godof  Abraham,  andtheGodofl. 
Luke  3.34  (theson)of  Jacob,  which  was  (the  son)of  I. 
13.  28  when  ye  shall  see  Abraham,  and  L,  and 
20.37  wnen  he  calleth  the  Lord,  .the  God  of  I. 
Acts    3.  13  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  I.,  and  of  J. 
7.    8  (Abraham)  begat  I.,  and  circumcised  him 
7.    8  and  I.  (begat)  Jacob  ;  and  Jacob  (begat) 
7.  32  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  I. 
Rom.  9.    7  but,  In  I.  shall  thy  seed  be  called 

9.  10  R.  also  had  conceived  by.  .our  father  I. 
Gal.     4.  28  .Now  we.  .as  I.  was,  are  the  children  of 
Heb.  ti.    9  dwelling  in  tabernacles  witli  I.  and  Jacob 
11. 37  Abraham,  when  he  was  tried,  offered  upl. 
11.  18  said,  That  in  I.  shall  thy  seed  be  called 
11.  20  By  faith  I.  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau  cone. 
Jas.     2.  2i  he  had  offered  I.  his  son  upon  the  altar? 

I-SA'-IAH,  }rry^::  Jah  (is)  helper. 
The  son  of  Amoz,  of  whom  nothing  else  is  known,  but 
who  must  not  be  confounded  with  Amos  the  prophet. 
The  duration  of  Isaiah's  ministry  must  have  been  about 
sixty  years.    B.C.  759-690. 

2  Ki.19.    2  And  he  sent  Eliakim..to  I.  the  prophet 

19.   5  the  servants  of  king  Hezekiah  came  to  I. 

?o.   6  1.  said  unto  them,  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  your 

19.  20  Then  I.  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  to  Hezekiah 

20.  1  And  the  prophet  I.  the  son  of  Amoz  came 
co.  4  afore  I.  was  gone  out  into  the  middle  court 
20.  7  I.  said.  Take  a  lump  of  figs.  And  they  took 
20.  8  Hezekiah  said  unto  I.,  What  (shall  beHhe 
20.  9  I.  said,  This  sign  shalt  thou  have  of  the  L. 
20.  11  I.  the  prophet  cried  unto  the  Lord;  and 
20.  14  Then  came  I.  the  prophet  unto  king  H. 

66 


2  Ki.20.  16  I.  said  unto  Hezekiah,  Hear  the  word  of 
20.  19  said  Hezekiah  unto  I.,  Good  (is) the  word 

2  Ch.26.  22  acts  of  Uzziah..did  I.  the  prophet.,  write 
32.  20  the  prophet  I. .  .prayed  and  cried  to  hea. 
32.  32  they  (are)  written  in  the  vision  of  I.  the 

Isa.  1.  1  The  vision  of  I.  the  son  of  Amoz,  which  he 
2.  1  The  word  that  I.  the  son  of  Amoz  saw  con. 
7.  3  Then  said  the  Lord  uuto  I.,  Go  forth  now 
13.  1  The  burden  of  Babylon,  which  I.  ..did  see 
20.  2  At  the  same  time  spake  the  Lord  by  I.  the 
20.  3  I.  hath  walked  naked  and  barefoot  three 
37.  2hesent  Eliakim.  .unto  I.  the  prophet,  11. e 
37.  5  So  the  servants  of  king  Hezekiah  came  to  I. 
37.    6  I.  said  unto  them,  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto 

37.  21  Then  I.  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  unto  Ile:.e. 
3S.    1  I.  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz,  came  unto 

38.  4  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  I. 

38.  21  I.  had  said,  Let  them  take  a  lump  of  figs 

39.  3  Then  came  I.  the  prophet  unto  king  Hez. 
39.  5  Then  said  I. .  .Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 
39.    8  Then  said  Hezekiah  to  I.,  Gocd  (is)  the 

IS'-CAH,  n?p:  Jah  (is)  looking. 

A  daughterof  Haran  the  brother  of  Abram.     She  was 

sister  of  Milcah  and  Lot.     In  the  Jewish  traditions  as 

found  in  Josephus,  she  is  identified  with  Sarai.    B.c 

1898. 

Gen.  11.  29  the  father  of  Milcah,  and  the  father  of  I. 

IS  CA-RI'-OT,  'lo-KapKvrris  man  of  Kerioth  (?). 
He  is  sometimes  called  "the  son  of  Simon"  Tins  name 
has  received  various  interpretations,  e.g.,  it  has  been 
derived  from  Kerioth  (Josh.  15.  25)  in  the  tribe  of  Judah  ; 
from  Kartha,  in  Galilee  (Eartan,  Josh.  21.  32) ;  from 
icapaiides,  date  groves  near  Jerusalem  and  Jericho; 
from  Scortea,  a  "  leathern  apron,"  applied  to  him  as  the 
bearer  of  the  bag,  i.e.,  "Judas  with  the  apron;"  and 
from  the  Hebrew  Ancara,  strangling  (angina),  given  him 
after  his  death.  He  was  that  apostle  and  disciple  who 
betrayed  his  Master.    See  Judas  (Iscariot). 

ISH'-BAH,  n?^;  appeaser. 

Father  of  Eshtemoa  in  the  line  of  Judah.  A  probable 
conjecture  is  that  he  was  son  of  Mered  by  his  Egyptian 
wife  Bithiah.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 17  and  she  bare.  .1.  the  father  of  Eshtemoa 

ISH'-BAK,  p?J]  free, 

A  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah,  and  progenitor  of  a  tribe 

in  northern  Arabia.     Their  locality  may  have  been  in 

the  valley  of  Sabd-c  or  Sibak  in  the  Dahnd,  a  fertile  and 

extensive  tract  in  Nejdin  the  high  laud  of  Arabia,  in  the 

N".  E.  of  it  and  on  the  borders  of  the  great  desert.     B.C. 

1853. 

Gen.  25.    2  she  bare  him  Zimran.  .and  L,  and  Shuah 

1  Ch.  1.  32  she  bare  Zimran.  .Midiau,  and  L,  and  S. 

ISH-BI  BE -NOB,  3n  '3-?:  dweller  on  the  mount. 
A  son  of  Rapha  one  of  the  race  of  the  Philistine  giants. 
He  attacked  David  in  battle  but  was  slain  by  Abishal. 
B.C.  1019. 

2  Sa.  21. 16  and  I.,  which  (was)  of  the  sons  of  the  g. 

ISH  BO'-SHETH,  nfi'&x  man  of  shame. 
A  son  of  Saul,  made  king  over  Israel  by  Abner,  but  at 
last  murdered  in  his  bed.     B.C.  1048. 
I       2  Sa.    2.   8  But  Abner.. took  I.  the  son  of  Saul,  and 
2,  10  I.,  Saul's  son,  (was)  forty  years  old  when 

2.  12  the  servants  of  I.,  .went  out  from  Maha. 
2. 15  twelve,  .which  (pertained)  to  I.  the  3.  7. 

3.  8  was  Abner  very  wroth  for  the  words  of  I. 
3. 14  And  David  sent  messengers  to  I.,  Saul's 

3.  15  And  I.  sent,  and  took  her  from  (her)hus. 

4.  5  came .  .to  the  house  of  I.,  who  lay  on  a  bed 
4.  8  they  brought  the  head  of  I.  unto  David  to 
4.  8  Behold  the  head  of  I.  the  son  of  Saul  th. 
4.  12  they  took  the  head  of  I.,  and  buried  (it) 

ISH'-I,  *yv-.  my  help, 

1.  A  son  of  Appaim,  a  descendant  of  Pharez  son  of 
Judah.    B.C.  1420. 

1  Ch.  2.  31  sons  of  Appaim ;  I.    And  the  sons  of  I. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb  the  spy.  B.C. 
1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 20  the  sons  of  I.  (were)  Zoheth  and  Ben-zo 

3.  One  of  the  Simeonites  who  led  their  tribe  against 
Amalek.    B.C.     740. 

1  Ch.  4.  42  and  Tephaiah,  and  Uzziel,  the  sons  of  I. 

4-  One  of  the  heads  01  Manasseh  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan. 

B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.   5.  24  their  fathers,  even  Epher,  and  I.,  and  E. 

I'-SHI,  'p"N  my  husband. 

A  symbolic  name  which  God's  people  were  to  give  to 

him  when  they  returned  to  him. 

Hos.   2.  16  saith  the  Lord,  (that)  thou  shalt  callmel. 

ISH-I'-AH,  IS-SHI'-AH,  ISH-I'-JAH,  tb!;  Jah  exists. 

1.  The  5th  of  the  five  sons  of  Izrahiah  ;  one  of  the  heads 
of  Issachar  in  the  time  of  David. 

1  Ch.  7.    3  Michael,  and  Obadiah,  and  Joel,  I.,  five 

2.  A  descendant  of  Moses.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  21  of  the  sous  of  Rehabiah,  the  first  (was)  I. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Levi.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  25  brother  ofMichah(was)!.-.  of  the  sons  oil. 

4.  One  of  the  Bene-Harim  who  had  married  a  strange 
woman.     B.C.  445- 

Ezra  10.  31  the  sons  of  Harim  ;  Eliezer,  I.s  Malel.iah 


ESH'-MA,  KDf;  high,  elevated. 

A  aescendant  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hur.     B.C.  i.;oo. 

1  Ch.  4.    3  of  Etam  ;  Jezreel,  and  I.,  and  Idbast  :  and 

ISH-MA'-EL,  btfySW]  God  (is)  hearing. 
1.  Son  of  Abraham  by  Hagar  Sarah's  maid.  When 
Ishraael  was  born  Abraham  was  eighty-six  years  of 
age  (B.C.  1911),  and  dwelling  in  the'plain  of  Mamre. 
Ishmael  was  circumcised  at  the  age  of  thirteen  years 
along  with  his  father  and  his  servants.  A  promise  was 
given  by  God  that  Ishmael  should  beget  twelve  princes 
and  become  a  great  nation.  He  met  Isaac,  once  at  least 
after  being  sent  away,  at  the  burial  of  Abraham  then* 
father.     He  died  aged.  137  years.    B.C.  1774. 

Gen.  16. 11  bear  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  I. ;  be. 
16.  15  called  his  son's  name,  which  Hagar  bare  I. 

16.  16  fourscore  and  six.  .when  Hagar  bare  I.  to 

17.  18  Abraham  said,  .that  I.  might  live  before 
17.  20  as  for  I.,  I  have  heard  thee :  Eehold,  I 
17.  23  Abraham  took  I.  his  son,  and  all  that  were 
17.  25  I.  his  son  (was)  thirteen  years  old  when 
17.  26  was  Abraham  circumcised,  and  I.  his  son 
25     9  his  sons  Isaac  and  I.  buried  him  in  the 
25.  12  Now  these  (are)  the  generations  of  I.,  A. 
25.  13  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  I.,  by 
25.  13  the  first  born  of  I.,  Nebajoth;  and  Kedar 
25.  16  These  (are)  the  sons  of  I.,  and  these  (are) 
25.  17  these  (are)  the  years  of  the  life  of  I.,  an 
28.    9  Then  went  Esau  unto  I.,  and  took  unto 
28.    9  Mahalath  the  daughter  of  I.,  Abraham's 

36.  3  Bashemath,  I.'s  daugher,  sister  of  Nebaj. 

1  Ch.  1.  28  The  sons  of  Abraham  ;  Isaac,  and  I. 

1.  29  Thefirst  bomofI.,Nebaioth  ;  then  Kedar 
1.  31  Je. .  .Kedemah.     These  are  the  sons  1 1  I. 

2. A  descendant  of  Zebadiah  who  was  ruler  of  tic 
house  of  Judah  in  Jehoshaphat's  time.     B.C.  880. 

2  Ch.19.  11  Zebadiah  the  son  of  I.,  the  ruler  of  the 
3.  A  son  of  Azel  a  Benjamite,  of  Saul's  family.    B.C.  880. 

1  Ch.  8.  38  whose names(are)  these,  Azrikam.  .and  I. 
9.  44  whose  names  (are)  these,  Azrikam . .  and  I. 

*  .One  of  the  captains  of  hundreds  who  assisted  in  rais- 
ing Joash  to  the  throne.     B.C.  878. 

■?.  Ch.23.  1  and  I.  the  son  of  Jehohanan,  and  Azariah 
5  A  priest  who  had  taken  a  foreign  wife.     B.C.  450. 

Ezra  10.  22  of  the  sons  of  Pashur.  .Maaseiah,  I.,[Neth. 

6.  Son  of  Nethaniah.  His  vile  acts  and  character  are 
fully  given  by  Jeremiah.     B.C.  588. 

aKi.  25.  23  there  came  to  Gedaliah.  .even  I.  the  son 

25.  25  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah.  .of  the  seed  royal 

Jer.  40.    8  they  came  to  Gedaliah .  .even  I.  the  son  of 

40.  14  Baalis.  .hath  sent  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah 

40.  15  Let  me  go.  .and  I  will  slay  I.  the  son  of  N. 

40.  16  Thoushalt  not.  .thouspeakest  falsely  of  I. 

41.  1  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah . .  of  the  seed  royal 
41.    2  Then  arose  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah,  and 
41.    3  I.  also  slew  all  the  Jews  that  were  with 
41.    6  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  went  forth  from 
41.    7  that  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  slew  them 
41.    8  were  found  among  them  that  said  unto  I. 
41.    9  Now  the  pit  wherein  I.  had  cast  all  the 
41.    9  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  filled  it  with  (th. 
41.  10  I.  carried  away  captive  all  the  residue  of 
41.  10  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  carried  them  away 
41.  11  the  evil  that  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  had 
41.  12  took  all  the  men,  and  went  to  fight  with  I. 
41.  13  all  the  people  which  (were)  with  I.  saw  J. 
41.  14  all  the  people  that  I.  had  carried  away 
41.  15  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  escaped  from  Jo. 
41.  16  remnant,  .whom  he  had  recovered  from  I. 
41.  18  I.  the  son  of  Nethaniah  had  slain  Gedaliah 

ISH-MA-EL-ITE,  ISH-ME-EL-ITE,  ^S&V:. 
Patronymic  of  the  tribes  descended  from  Ishmael.     In 
Gen.  37  28  they  seem  to  be  r.lso  called  Midianites. 
Gen.  37.  25  behold,  a  company  of  I.  came  from  Gilead 

37.  27  Come,  and  let  us  sell  him  to  the  I.,  and 
37.  28  they,  .sold  Joseph  to  the  I.  for  twenty 
39.    1  Potiphar . .  bought  him  of  the  hands  of  thel. 

Judg.  8.  24  had  golden  ear  rings,  because  they(were)I. 
1  Ch.  2  17  the  father  of  Amasa  (was)  Jether  the  I. 

27.  30  Over  the  camels  also  (was)  Obil  the  I.:  and 
Psa.  83.    6  The  tabernacles  of  Edom,  and  the  I.  ;  of 

ISH-MA'-IAH,  liTy^:''  Jah  (is)  hearing. 

A  prince  of  Zebuluii  in  David's  reign.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.27.  19  OfZebuhm;  I.thesonof  Obadiah:  of  Nap. 
ISH-ME'-RAI,  H'?^:  Jah  («)  keeper. 
A  descendant  of  Benjamin,  and  one  of  the  chief  men  of 
the  tribe.    B.C.  1400. 

'  1  Ch.  8.  18  I.  also,  and  Jezliah,  and  Jobab,  the  sons 
I'-SHOD,  Tirc'N  man  of  honour. 

Properly  Ish-hod.  One  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  on  the 
E.  of  the  Jordan,  and  son  of  Hammoleketh,  "the 
queen."  From  his  near  relationship  to  Gilead  he  was 
probably  an  influential  person.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7.  18  his  sister  Hammoleketh  bare  I.,  and  Al 
ISH'-PAN,  \&?*jirm,  strong. 
A  son  of  Shasliak,  a  chief  Benjamite.  B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  22  And  I.,  and  Heber,  and  Eliel 

ISH  TOB,  3iu  &%  man  of  Tob. 

A  small  state  that  formed  part  of  Aram.  It  was  here 
that  Jephthah  fled  when  thrust  out  by  his  brethren. 
B.C.  1 1 50. 

2  Sa.  10.    6  sent  and  hired,  .of  I.  twelve  thousand 

10.    S  I.,  and  Maacah  (were)  by  themselves  in 


ISHUAH 


522 


ISRAEL 


ISH-TJ  -AH,  I-StT'-AH,  nig*;  self-answering  or  satis. 
The  second  son  of  Asker,  B.C.  1680.  In  1  Ch.  7.  30,  the 
orthography  is  Isuah  in  the  Common  Version,  though  it 
is  identical  with  the  Hebrew  word  in  Gen.  46.  17. 

Gen.  46.  17  the  sons  of  Asher  ;  Jimnah,  and  I.,  and 
1  Ch.  7.  30  sons  of  Asher ;  Imnah,  and  I.,  and  Ishuai 
ISH'-UI,  ISH-TJ'-AI,  IS'-TJI,  JES-TJI,  n#. 

1.  The  third  son  of  Asher,  and  founder  of  the  family  of 
the  Jesxiites.     B.C.  1680. 

Gen.  46.  1 7  sons  of  Asher ;  Jimnah,  and  Ishuah,  and  I. 
Num.26.  44  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jesuites  :  of  Ber. 
1  Ch.  7.  30  sons  of  Asher  ;  Imnah,  and  Isuah,  and  I. 

2.  Second  son  of  Sanl  by  his  wife  Ahiuoam.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa.  14.  49  the  sons  of  Saul  were  Jonathan,  and  I, 
ISLAND,  isle  — 
1.  Isle ,  sea  coast,  \x  i. 

Gen.  10.   5  By  these  were  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles 
Esth.io.    1  upon  the  land,  and.  .the  isles  of  the  sea 
Job  22.  30  He  shall  deliver  the  island  of  the  innocent 
Psa.  72.  10  kings  of  Tarshish  and  of  the  isles  shall 

97.    1  rejoice;  let  the  multitude  of  isles  be  glad 

Isa.   11. 11  fi'om  Hamath,  and.,  the  islands  of  the  sea 

20.    6  the  inhabitant  of  this  isle  shall  say  in  that 

23.    2  Be  still,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle;  thou 

23.  6  Tarshish  ;  howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle 

24.  15  Lokd  God  of  Israel  in  the  isles  of  the  sea 

40.  15  he  taketh  up.the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing 

41.  1  Keep  silence  before  me,  0  islands;  and 

41.  5  The  isles  saw  (it),  and  feared;  the  ends 

42.  4  judgment,  .and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his 
42.  10  Sing,  .the  isles,  and  the  inhabitants  there. 
42.  12  Let  them,  .declare  his  praise  in  the  islands 
42.  15  I  will  make  the  rivers  islands,  and  I  will 

49.  1  Listen,  0  isles,  unto  me ;  and  hearken,  ye 
51.    5  the  isles  shall  wait  upon  me,  and  onmine 

59.  18  to  the  islands  he  will  repay  recompence 

60.  9  Surely  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me,  and  the 
66.  19  isles  afar  off,  that  have  not  heard  my  fa. 

Jer.     2.  10  For  pass  over  the  isles  of  Chittim,  and 

25.  22  kings  of  the  isles  which  (are)  beyond  the 
31.  10  and  declare  (it)  iu  the  isles  afar  off,  and 

50.  39  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands  shall 
Eze.  26.  15  Shall  not  the  isles  shake  at  the  sound  of 

26.  18  Now  shall  the  isles  tremble  in  the  day  of 

26.  18  the  isles  that(are)in  the  sea  shall  be  too. 

27.  3  a  merchant  of  the  people  for  many  isles 
27.    6  benches  (of)  ivory . .  out  of  the  isles  of  Ch. 
27.    7  blue  and  purple  from  the  isles  of  Elishah 
27.  15  manyisles.  .the  merchandise  of  thine  baud 
27.  35  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  isles  shall  be 
39.    6  them  that  dwell  carelessly  in  the  isles 

Dan.  11.  18  After  this  shall  he  turn,  .unto  the  isles 

Zeph.  2. 11  every  one  from  his  place,  .all  the  isles  of 
%Isle,  a  small  island,  v-na-lov  niision. 

Acts  27.  16  running  under  a  certain  island  which  is 
Z.Island,  vriaos  nesos. 

Acts  13.    6  when  they  had  gone  through  the  isle  unto 

27.  26  Howbeit  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain  is. 

28.  1  tbey  knew  that  the  island  was  called  M. 
28.  7  possessions  of  the  chief  man  of  the  island 
28.  9  others,  .which  had  diseases  in  the  island 
28. 11  in  a  ship,  .which  had  wintered  in  the  isle 

Rev.    1.    9  was  in  the  isle  that  is  called  Patmos,  for 
6.  14  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved 
x6.  20  every  island  fled  away,  and  the  mountains 
ISLAND,  wild  beast  of  the  — 
Those  inhabiting  the  islands,  D'^x  iyyim. 

Isa.   13.  22  the  wild  beasts  of  the  island  shall  cry  in 

34. 14  shall . .  meet  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  is. 

Jer.  50.  39  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands  shall 

IS-MACH'-IAH,  -n;?^p:  Jah  (is)  supporter. 

An  overseer  of  the  dedicated  things  at  the  temple  in 

the  time  of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.  31. 13  I.,  and  Alahath.  .(were)  overseers  under 
IS-MA'-IAH  n$9«b  Jah  (is)  hearing. 
A  Gibeonite  warrior  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.    He 
was  among  the  thirty  valiant  men,  and  over  them. 

1  Ch.  12.    4  I.  the  Gibeonite,  a  mighty  man  among 
IS'-PAH,  n^Jvrm,  strong. 
A  son  of  Beriah  the  Beujamite.     B.C.    1400. 

1  Ch.  8. 16  Michael,  and  I.,  and  Joha,  the  sons  of  B. 
IS-RA'-EL,  ^fjjp!  'l<rpaT)\  ruling  with  God. 
1.  The  new  name  given  to  Jacob.  B.C.  1739. 

Gen.  32.  2S  name  shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob,  but  I. 
35.  10  shall  not  be  called  any  more  Jacob,  but  I. 
35.  10  be  thy  name  :  and  he  called  his  name  I. 
35.  21 1,  journeyed,  and  spread  his  tent  beyond 
35.  22  it  came  to  pass,  when  I.  dwelt  in  that  land 
35.  22  Iteuben  went  and  lay  with  Billah.  .and  I. 
37.  3  Now  I.  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his 
37.  13  I.  said.  .Do not  thy  brethren  feed  (then.) 

42.  5  the  sons  of  I.  came  to  buy  (corn)  among 

43.  6  I.  said,  Wherefore  dealt  ye  (so)  ill  with 
43.    8  Judah  said  unto  I.  his  father,  Send  the 
43. 11  their  father!,  said  unto  them,  If  (it  must 
45.  21  the  children  of  I.  did  so  :  and  Joseph 

45.  28  I  said,  fit  is)  enough  ;  Joseph  my  son  (is) 

46.  1  I.  took  Ins  journey  with  all  that  he  had 
46.    2  God  spake  unto  I.  in  the  visions  of  the 
46.    5  and  the  sons  of  I.  carried  Jacob  their  fat. 
46.    8  these  (are)the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 
46.  29  Joseph,  .went  up  to  meet  I.  his  father,  to 

46.  30  I.  said  unto  Joseph,  Now  let  medio,  since 

47.  27  I.  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  cou. 
47-  29  And  the  time  drew  nigh  that  I.  must  die 


Gen.  47.  31  And  I.  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head 
48.  2  I.  strengthened  himself,  and  sat  upon  the 
48.  8  I.  beheld  Joseph's  sons,  and  said,  Who 
48.  10  Now  the  eyes  of  I.  were  dim  for  age,  (so 
48.  11I.  said  unto  Joseph,  I  had  not  thought  to 
48.  13  Ephraim  in  his  right  hand  toward  I.'sleft 
48..  13  Manasseh  in  Ins  left  hand  toward  I. 's  right 
48.  14  I.  stretched  out  his  right  hand,  and  laid 

48.  21  I.  said  unto  Joseph,  Behold,  I  die;  but 

49.  2  Gatheryourselvestoget. .  hearken  unto  I. 

50.  2  commanded . .  the  physicians  embalmed  I. 
Exod.  1.  1  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 

1.  7  children  of  I.  were  fruitful,  and  increased 
6.  14  The  sons  of  Reuben  the  first  born  of  I. 

32.  13  Remember  Abraham, Isaac,  and  I., thyser. 
Num.  1.  20  And  the  children  of  Reuben,  I.'s  eldest 

26.  5  Reuben,  the  eldest  son  of  I.  :  the  children 
JudgiS.  29  of  Dan  their  father,  who  was  born  unto  I. 
1  Ki.  18.  31  the  word,  .came,  saying,  I.  shall  be  thy 

18.  36  let  it  be  known . .  that  thou  (art)  God  in  I. 
2KL  17.  34  the  children  of  Jacob,  whom  he  named  I. 

1  Ch.  1.  34  The  sons  of  Isaac  ;  Esau,  and  I. 

2.  1  These  (are)  the  sons  of  I.  ;  Reuben,  Sime. 
5.  1  Now  the  sons  of  Reuben,  the  first  born  of  I. 
5.    1  given  unto  the  sons  of  Joseph  the  son  of  I. 

5.  3  The  sons,  .of  Reuben  the  first  born  of  I. 

6.  38  of  Kohath,  the  sou  of  Levi,  the  son  of  I. 

7.  29  dwelt  the  children  of  Joseph  the  son  of  I. 
29.  10  Blessed  (be)  thou,  Lord  God  of  I.  our  fa. 
29.  18  0  Lord  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  of  I. 

2  Ch.30.    6  Ye  children  of  I.,  turn  again  unto  the  L. 
Ezra    8.  iS  of  Mahli,  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son  of  I. 

2.  The  nation  that  sprang  from  Jacob  and  the  land  in 

which  they  dwelt. 

Gen.  32.  32  Therefore  the  children  of  I.  eat  not  (of) 
34.  7  he  had  wrought  folly  in  I.,  in  lying  with 
36.  31  reigned  any  king  over  the  children  of  I. 

48.  20  In  thee  shall  I.  bless,  saying,  God  make 

49.  7  I  will  divide  them . .  and  scatter  them  in  I. 
49.  16  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the  tribes  of  I. 
49.  24  thence  (is)  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  I. 

49.  28  All  these  (are)  the  twelve  tribes  of  I.  :  and 

50.  25  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  I. 
Exod.  1.    9people  of  the  children  of  I.  (are),  .mighti. 

1. 12  were  grieved  because  of  the  children  of  I. 
i-  13  Egyptians  made  the  children  of  I.  toserve 
2.  23  the  children  of  I.  sighed  by  reason  of  the 

2.  25  God  looked  upon  the  children  of  I.,  and 

3.  9  behold,  the  cry  of  the  children  of  I.  is  co. 
3.  10  thou  mayest  bring,  .the  children  of  I.  out 
3.  11  I  should  bring  forth  the  children  of  I.  out 
3.  13  Behold.  .1  come  unto  the  children  of  I. 
3.  14,  15  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  I. 
3.  16  Go,  and  gather  the  elders  of  I.  together 

3.  18  thou  shalt  come,  thou  and  the  elders  of  I. 

4.  22  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I.  (is)  my  son,  (even) 
4.  29  gathered,  .the  elders  of  the  children  of  I. 

4.  31  the  Lord  had  visited  the  children  of  I. 

5.  1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Let  my  p. 
5.    2  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  to  let  I.  go? 

5.  2  I  know  not  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  let  I.  go 
5. 14,  15,  19  the  officers  of  the  children  of  I. 

6.  5  heard  the  groaning  of  the  children  of  I. 
6.  6  Wherefore  say  unto  the  children  of  I.,  I 
6.    9  Moses  spake  so  unto  the  children  of  I. 

6.  1 1  that  he  let  the  children  of  I.  go  out  of  his 
6.  12  the  children  of  I.  have  not  hearkened  unto 
6.  13  gave  them  a  charge  unto  the  children  of  I, 
6.  13  bring  the  children  of  I.  out  of  the  land 
6.  26  Bring  out  the  children  of  I.  from  the  land 

6.  27  to  bring  out  the  children  of  I.  from  Egypt 

7.  2  that  he  send  the  children  of  I.  out  of  his 
7.  4  bring  forth . .  my  people  the  children  of  I. 
7.  5  when  I . .  bring  out  the  children  of  I.  from 
9.  4  Lord  shall  sever  between  the  cattle  of  I. 
9.  4  nothing  die . .  (that  is)  the  children's  of  I. 
9.  6  of  the  cattle  of  the  children  of  I.  died  not 
9.  26  where  the  children  of  I.  (were),  was  there 
9.  35  neither  would  he  let  the  children  of  I.  go 

10.  20  that  he  would  not  let  the  children  of  I. 

10.  23  all  the  children  of  I.  had  light  in  their  d. 

11.  7  against,  .the  children  of  I.  shall  not  a  dog 
11.    7  a  difference  between  the  Egyptians  and  I. 

11.  10  he  would  not  let  the  children  of  I.  go  out 

12.  3  Speak  ye  unto  all  the  congregation  of  I. 
12.  6  the  congregation  of  I.  shall  kill  it  in  the 
12.  15  day,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  I. 

12.  19  cut  off  from  the  congregation  of  I.,  whet. 
12.  21  Then  Moses  called  for  all  the  elders  of  I. 
12.  27  passed  over  the  houses  of  the  children  of  I. 
12.  28  children  of  I.  went  away,  and  did  as  the 
12.  31  Rise  up.  .both  ye  and  the  children  of  I. 
12.  35  children  of  I.  did  according  to  the  word 
12.  37  children  of  I.  journeyed  from  Rameses 
12.  40  Now  the  sojourning  of  the  children  of  I. 
12.42  to  be  observed  of  all  the  children  of  I.  in 
12.  47  All  the  congregation  of  I.  shall  keep  it 
12.  50  Thus  did  all  the  children  of  I. ;  as  the  L. 

12.  51  Lord  did  bring  the  children  of  I.  out  of 

13.  2  openeth  the  womb  among  the  children  of  I. 
13.  18  children  of  I.  went  up  harnessed  out  of 

13.  19  he  had  straitly  sworn  the  children  of  I. 

14.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  that  they 
14.  3  For  Pharaoh  will  say  of  the  children  of  I. 
14.  5  said,  Why  have  we . .  let  I.  go  from  serving 
14.  8  he  pursued  after  the  children  of  I. :  and 
14.  8  children  of  I.  went  out  with  an  high  band 
14. 10  the  children  of  I.  lifted  up  their  eyes,  and 
14. 10  and  the  children  of  I.  cried  out  unto  the 
14.  15  speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  that  they 
14.  16  and  the  children  of  I.  shall  go  on  dry 

14.  19  angel,  .which  went  before  the  camp  of  I. 


Exodi4. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
15- 
*5- 
15- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
17- 
*7- 
17- 
*7- 
17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 


19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
20. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
=5- 

25- 

27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 

3°- 

30- 

3°- 

3<* 

3*- 

31. 

31- 

32. 

32- 

32. 

33- 

33- 

34- 

34- 

34- 

34. 

34 

34' 

35- 

35- 

35- 

36. 

39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
40. 


Lev. 


20  camp  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  camp  of  I. 
22  children  of  I.  went  into  the  midst  of  the 
25  said,  Let  us  flee  from  the  face  of  I. ;  for 

29  But  the  children  of  I.  walked  upon  dry 

30  Thus  the  Lord  saved  I.  that  day  out  of 

30  I.  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea 

31  I.  saw  that  great  work  which  the  Lord 
1  Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of  I. 

19  but  the  children  of  I.  went  on  dry  (tand) 
22  So  Moses  brought  I.  from  the  Red  Sea 
1,  2,  9,  10  congregat  ion  of  the  children  of  I. 

3  children  of  I.  said  unto  them,  Would  to 
6  and  Aaron  said  unto  all  the  children  of  I. 
12  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  I. 

15  when  the  children  of  I.  saw  (it),  they  said 
17  And.the  children  of  I.  did  so,  andgatliered 
31  house  of  I.  called  the  name  thereof  Man. 
35  children  of  I.  did  eat  manna  forty  years 

1  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

5  Go . .  and  take  with  thee  of  the  elders  of  I. 

6  Moses  did . .  in  the  sight  of  the  elders  of  I. 

7  because  of  the  chiding  of  the  children  of  I. 

8  Then  came  Amalek,  and  fought  with  I.  in 

11  Moses  held  up  his  hand,  that  I.  prevailed 
1  heard  of  all  that  God  had  done,  .for  I.  Ins 
1  that  the  Lord  had  brought  I.  out  of  Egypt 

8  told,  .all  that  the  Lord  had  done.,  for  I. 'a 

9  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  had  done  to  I. 

12  and  Aaron  came,  and  all  the  elders  of  I. 
25  Moses  chose  able  men  out  of  all  I.,  and 

1  the  children  of  I.  were  gone  forth  out  of 

2  in  the  wilderness :  and  there  I.  camped 

3  Thus  shalt  thou,  .tell  the  children  of  I. 
6  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  I. 

22  thou  shalt  say  unto  the  children  of  I.,  Ye 

1  Come  up.  .and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  I. 

4  builded.  .according  to  the.  .tribes  of  I. 

5  he  sent  young  men  of  the  children  of  I. 
9  Then  went  up . .  seventy  of  the  elders  of  I. 

10  they  saw  the  God  of  I.:  and  (there  was) 

11  upon  the  nobles  of  the  children  of  I.  he 
17  fire,  .in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  I. 

2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  that  they 
22  I  will  give  thee .  .unto  the  children  of  I. 

20  thou  shalt  command  the  children  of  I.,  that 

21  a  statute  for  ever  on  the  behalf  of.  .1. 

1  take,  .from  amongthe  children  of  I.,  that 
9  and  grave,  .the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 

11  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  I.:  thou 

12  stones  of  memorial  unto  the  children  of  I. 
21  be  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 

29  shall  bear  the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 

30  bear  the  judgment  of  the  children  of  I. 
38  holy  things,  which  the  children  of  I.  shall 
28  by  a  statute,  .from  the  children  of  I.;  for 

28  an  heave  offering  from  the  children  of  I. 
43  there  I  will  meet  with  the  children  of  I. 
45  I  will  dwelVamong  the  children  of  I.,  and 

12  thou  takest  the  sum  of  the  children  of  I. 

16  the  atonement  money  of  the  children  of  I. 
16  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  I.  before 

31  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying 

13  Speak  thou  also  unto  the  children  of  I. 

16  Wherefore  the  children  of  I.  shall  keep 

17  sign  between  me  and  the  children  of  I. 
4,  8  These  (be)  thy  gods,  0  I.  which  brou. 

20  and  made  the  children  of  I.  drink  (of  it) 
27  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Put  every 

5  Say  unto  the  children  of  I.,  Ye  (are)  a  st. 

6  the  children  of  I.  stripped  themselves  of 

23  menchildren  appear  before.  .theGod  of  I. 
27  have  made  a  covenant  with  thee  and  with  I. 

30  when  Aaron  and  all  the  children  of  I.  saw 

32  afterward  all  the  children  of  I.  came  nigh 

34  came  out,  and  spake  unto  the  children  of  I. 

35  the  children  of  I.  saw  the  face  of  Moses 
1,  4,  20  the  congregation  of  thechildrenof  I. 

29  children  of  I.  brought  a  willing  offering 

30  Moses  said  unto  the  children  of  I.,  See 

3  the  offering  which  the  children  of  I.  had 

6  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 

7  for  a  memorial  to  the  children  of  I.;  as  the 

14  the  names  of  the  children  of  I.,  twelve 
32  children  of  I.  did  according  to  all  that  the 
42  so  the  the  children  of  I.  made  all  the  wo. 

36  the  children  of  I.  went  onward  in  all  their 
38  fire,  .in  the  sight  of  all  the  house  of  I. 

2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 

2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying,  If 

13  if  the  whole  congregation  of  I.  sin  through 
23,  29  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying 
34  have  I  taken  of  the  children  of  I.  from  off 
34  by  a  statute. .  from  among  the  children  of  I. 
36  to  be  given  them  of  the  children  of  I.,  iu 
38  he  commanded  the  children  of  I.  to  offer 

1  Moses  called  Aaron,  .and  the  elders  of  I. 

3  unto  the  children  of  I.  thou  shalt  speak 
6  let  your  brethren,  the  whole  house  of  I. 

11  that  ye  may  teach  the  children  of  I.  all 

14  of  the  sacrifices,  .of  the  children  of  I. 

2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying,  Th. 
2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying,  If 
2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 

31  Thus  shall  ye  separate  the  children  of  I. 
5  of  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

16  of  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  I. 

17  atonement.  ,for  all  the  congregation  of  I. 
19  from  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  I. 

21  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  I. 

34  make  an  atonement  for  the  children  of  I. 
2  his  sens,  and  unto  all  the  children  of  I. 
3,  8,  10,  13  man  (there  be)  of  the  house  of  I, 


ISRAEL 


523 


ISRAEL 


Lev.  17.    s  children  of  I.  may  bring  their  sacrifices 
17. 12  Therefore  I  said  unto  the  children  of  1. 
I?.  14  I  said  unto  the  children  of  I.,  Ye  shall 
18.    2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 
ig.    2  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 
20.    2  Again,  thou  shalt  say  to  the  children  of  I. 

20.  2  I  ,  or  of  the  strangers  that  sojourn  in  I. 

21.  24  his  sons,  and  unto  all  the  children  of  I. 

22.  2  from  the  holy  things  of  the  children  of  I. 
22.  3  the  children  of  I.  hallow  unto  the  LORD 
22.  15  the  holy  things  of  the  children  of  I. 

22. 18  his  sons,  and  unto  all  the  children  of  I. 
22.  18  the  house  of  I.,  or  of  the  strangers  in  I. 

22.  32  will  be  hallowed  among  the  children  of  I. 

23.  2,  10  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 
23.  24,  34  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying 
23.  43  made  the  children  of  I.  to  dwell  in  booths 

23.  44  Moses  declared  unto  the  children  of  I.  the 

24.  2  Command  the  children  of  I.,  that  they 
24.    8  (being  taken)  from  the  children  of  I.  by  an 
24.  10  son.  .went  out  among  the  children  of  I. 
24.  10  a  man  of  I.  strove  together  in  the  camp 
24.  15  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  I. 
24.  23  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  I.,  that 

24.  23  children  of  I.  did  as  the  Lord  commanded 
25.-  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 

25.  33  their  possession  among  the  children  of  I. 
25.  46  over  your  brethren  the  children  of  I.  ye 

25.  55  unto  me  the  children  of  I.  (are)  servants 

26.  46  made  between  him  and  the  children  of  I. 

27.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  L,  and  say 
27.  34  commanded  Moses  for  the  children  of  I. 

Num.  1.   2  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 
1,    3  all  that  are  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in  I. 
1.  16  These  (were)  the.,  heads  of  thousands  in  I. 
1.  44  and  the  princes  of  I.,  (being)  twelve  men 
1. 45  that  were  numbered  of  the  children  of  I. 
1.  45  that  were  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in  I. 
1.  49  the  sum  of  them  among  the  children  of  I. 
k  52  the  children  of  I.  shall  pitch  their  tents 
1.  53  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

1.  54  the  children  of  I.  did  according  to  all  that 

2.  2  Every  man  of  the  children  of  I.  shall 

2.  32  which  were  numbered  of  the  children  of  I. 

2.  33  not  numbered  among  the  children  of  I. 
2. 34  the  children  of  I.  did  according  to  all  that 

3.  8  keep,  .the  charge  of  the  children  of  I. 
3.   9  given  unto  him  out  of  the  children  of  I. 

3. 12  Levites  from  among  the  children  of  I. 

3.  12  openeth  the  matrix  among . .  children  of  I. 

3. 13  hallowed  unto  me  all  the  first  born  in  I. 
3.  38  for  the  charge  of  the  children  of  I. ;  and 
3,  40  of  the  males  of  the  children  of  I.  from 

3. 41,  42,  45  first  born  among  the  children  of  I. 
3.  41  among  the  cattle  of  the  children  of  I. 

3.  46,  50  of  the  first  born  of  the  children  of  I. 

4.  46  and  Aaron  and  the  chief  of  I.  numbered 

5.  2  Command  the  children  of  I.,  that  they  put 
5.  4  the  children  of  I.  did  so,  and  put  them  out 
5.  4  as  the  Lord  spake . .  did  the  children  of  I. 
5.  6  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  When  a  man 
5.   9  all  the  holy  things  of  the  children  of  I. 

5.  12  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 

6.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 
6.  23  ye  shall  bless  the  children  of  I.,  saying 

6.  27  shall  put  my  name  upon  the  children  of  I. 

7.  2  theprinces  of  I., heads  of  the  house  of  their 

7.  84  when  it  was  anointed,  by  the  princes  of  I. 

8.  6,  14  Levites  from  among  the  children  of  I. 
8.    9  assembly  of  the  children  of  I.  together 
8.  10  the  children  of  I.  shall  put  their  hands 
8.  11  (for)  an  offering  of  the  children  of  I. 

8.  16  unto  me  from  among  the  children  of  I. 
8.  16,  17,  18  firstborn  of  all  the  children  of  I. 
8.  19  I.,  to  do  the  service  of  the  children  of  I. 
8.  19  make  an  atonement  for  the  children  of  I. 
8.  19  the  children  of  I.,  when  the  children  of  I. 
8.  20  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

8.  20  so  did  the  children  of  I.  unto  them 

9.  2  the  children  of  I.  also  keep  the  passover 
9.    4  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  I.,  that 
9.    5  according  to  all.  .did  the  children  of  I. 
9.    7  appointed  season  among,  .children  of  I.  ? 
9.  ro  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.  saying,  If 

9. 17  after  that  the  children  of  I.  journeyed 
9.  17  the  children  of  I.  pitched  their  tents 

9. 18  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed,  and  at 

9. 19  the  children  of  I.  kept  the  charge  of  the 
9. 22  the  children  of  I.  abode  in  their  tents 

10.  4  (which  are)  heads  of  the  thousands  of  I. 
10. 12  the  children  of  I.  took  their  journeys  out 
10.  28  (were)the  journeyingsof  the  children  of  I. 
10.  29  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning  I. 

10.  36  Return .  .unto  the  many  thousands  of  I. 

11.  4  the  children  of  I.  also  wept  again,  and 
11.  16  Gather,  .seventy  men  of  the  elders  of  I. 
11. 30  gat.  .into  the  camp,  he  and  the  elders  of  I. 
13.    2  Canaan,  which  I  give,  .the  children  of  I. 
13.    3  those  men  (were)  heads  of  thechildrenof  I. 
13.  24  grapes  which  the  children  of  I.  cut  down 
13.  26  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

13.  32  an  evil  report,  .unto  the  children  of  I. 

14.  2  the  children  of  I.  murmured  against  Mos. 
r4.    5  of  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 
14.    7  unto  all  the  company  of  the  children  of  I. 
14.  10  appeared,  .before  all  the  children  of  I. 
14.  27  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  I. 

14.  39  sayings  unto  all  the  children  of  I.;  and  the 

15.  2,  18,  38  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and 
15.  26  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I.  v.  25 
15.  29  him  that  is  born  among  the  children  of  I. 
15*  32  the  children  of  I.  were  in  the  wilderness  ' 


Num  16.   2  with  certain  of  the  children  of  I.,  two 
16.    9  (but )  a  small  thing,  .the  God  of  I.  hath 
16.    9  separated  you  from  the  congregation  of  I. 
16.  25  rose  up.  .and  the  elders  of  I.  followed 
16.  34  I.  that  (were)  round  about  them  fled  at  the 
16.  38  shall  be  a  sign  unto  the  children  of  I. 
16.  40  (To  be)  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  I. 

16.  41  the  children  of  I.  munuured  against  Mo. 

17.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  take 
17.    5  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  I. 

17.  6  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and 
17.   9  before  the  Lord  unto,  .the  children  of  I. 

17.  12  the  children  ofil. "spake  unto  Moses,  saying 

18.  5  no  wrath  any  mure  upon  thechildren  of  I. 
18.  6  the  Levites  from  among  the  children  of  I. 
18.    8  the  hallowed  things  of  the  children  of  I. 

18. 11  the  wave  offerings  of  the  children  of  I. 
18. 14  Every  thing  devoted  in  I.  shall  be  thine 
18. 19  the  children  of  I.  offer  unto  the  Lord 
18.  20  thine  inheritance  amongthechildrenpfL 
18.  21  all  the  tenth  in  I.  for  an  inheritance' 

18.  22  Neither  must  the  children  of  I.  henceforth 
18.  23,  24  among  the  children  of  I.  they  have  no 
18.  24  the  tithes  of  the  children  of  I.,  which 
18.  26  When  ye  take  of  the  children  of  I.  the 
18.  28  which  ye  receive  of  the  children  of  I. 

18.  32  the  holy  things  of  the  children  of  I. 

19.  2  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  that  they 
19.  9  for  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 
19. 10  it  shall  be  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and 

19.  13  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  I.  :  bee?  use 

20.  1  Then  came  the  children  of  I.,  (even)  the 

20. 12  sanctify  me  in  the  eyes  of .  .children  of  I. 

20. 13  the  children  of  I.  strove  with  the  Lord 
20.  14  Thus  saith  thy  brother  I.,  Thou  knowest 
20.  19  the  children  of  I.  said  unto  him,  We  will 
20.  21  to  give  I.  passage  through  his  border 
20.  21  wherefore  I.  turned  away  from  him 

20.  22  the  children  of  I. ,  (even)  the  whole  congre. 
20.  24  which  I  have  given  unto  the  children  of  I. 

20.  29  they  mourned . .  (even)  all  the  house  of  I. 

21.  1  that  I.  came  by  the  way  of  the  spies 

21.    1  he  fought  against  I.,  and  took  (some)  of 
21.    2  I.  vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  If 
21.    3  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  I.,  and 
2r.    6  bit  the  people;  andmuchpeopleofl.  died 
21.  10  the  children  of  I.  set  forward,  and  pitched 
21.  17  I.  sang  this  song,  Spring  up,  O  well;  sing 
21.  21 1,  sent  messengers  unto  Sihonkingofthe 
21.  23  not  suffer  I.  to  pass  through  his  border 
2i.  23  but  Silion.  .went  out  against  I.  into  the 
21.  23  he  came  to  Jahaz,  and  fought  against  I. 
21.  24  I.  smote  him  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
21.  25  And  I.  tookallthese cities:  andl.dweltin 

21.  31  Thus  I. dwelt  in  the  land  oftheAmorites 

22.  1  thechildren  of  I.  set  forward,  and  pitched 
22.    2  saw  all  that  I.  had  done  to  the  Amorites 

22.  3  distressed  because  of  the  children  of  I. 

23.  7  Come,  curse  me  Jacob,  and  come,  defy  I. 
23.  10  and  the  number  of  the  fourth  (part)  of  I.  ? 
23.  21  neither  hath  he  seen  perverseness  in  I. 
23.  23  neither  (is  there)  any  divination  against  I. 

23.  23  it  shall  be  said  of  Jacob  and  of  I.,  What 

24.  1  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bless  I. 
24.    2  Balaam  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  he  saw  I. 
24.    5  How  goodly  are . .  thy  tabernacles,  O  I. ! 
24.  17  a  sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  I.,  and  shall 

24.  18  Edom  shall  be  a  possession .  .and  I.  shall 

25.  1 1,  abode  in  Shittim,  and  the  people  began 
25.  3  I.  joined  himself  unto  Baal-peor :  and  the 
25.  3  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  I. 
25.  4  fierce  anger . .  may  be  turned  away  from  I. 
25.  5  Moses  said  unto  the  judges  of  I.,  Slay  ye 
25.  6  one  of  the  children  of  I.  came  and  brou. 
25.  6  ail  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 
25.  8  he  went  after  the  man  of  I.  into  the  tent 
25.   y  thrust,  .them  through,  the  man  of  I. 

25.    8  plague  was  stayed  from  the  children  of  I. 

25. 11  turned  my  wrath . .  from  the  children  of  I. 

25.  11  I  consumed  not  the  children  of  I.  in  my 
25. 13  made  an  atonement  for  the  children  of  I. 

26.  2  Take  the  sum  of  all.  .the  children  of  I. 
26.   2  Take,  .all  that  are  able  to  go  to  war  in  I. 
26.   4  the  Lord  commanded . .  the  children  of  I. 
26.  51  numbered  of  the  children  of  I.,  six  hun. 
26.  62  not  numbered  among  the  children  of  I. 
26.  62  no  inheritance  given,  .the  children  of  I. 
26.  63  priest,  who  numbered  the  children  of  I. 

26.  64  when  they  numbered  the  children  of  I. 

27.  8  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  I. 
27.  11  shall  be  unto  the  children  of  I.  a  statute 

27. 12  which  I  have  given|untothe  children  of  I. 
27.  20  that  all.  .the  children  of  I.  may  be  obed. 

27.  21  (both)  he,  and  all  the  children  of  I.  with 

28.  2  Command  the  children  of  I.,  and  say  unto 

29.  40  Moses  told  the  children  of  I.  according  to 

30.  1  Moses  spake,  .concern,  the  children  of  I. 

31.  2  Avenge  the  children  of  I.  of  the  Midian. 
31.    4  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  I.,  shall  ye 
31.    5  were  delivered  out  of  the  thousands  of  I. 
31.    9  children  of  I.  took  (all)  the  women . .  cap. 
31.  12  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  I. 

31. 16  these  caused  the  cl  ildren  of  I. .  .to  com. 
31.  30,  42  And  of  the  children  of  I.'s  half 

31.  47  Even  of  the  children  of  I.'s  half,  Moses 

31.  54  a  memorial  for  the  children  of  I.  before 

32.  4  Lord  smote  before  the  congregation  of  I. 
32.    7  discourage,  .heart  of  the  children  of  I. 
32.    9  discouraged  the  heart  of  the  children  of  I 

32. 13  the  Lord's  anger  was  kindled  against  I. 
32.  14  to  augment,  .anger  of  the  Lord  toward  T. 

32. 17  go  ready  armed  before  the  children  of  I. 


KUDI32.  18  until  the  children  of  I.  have  inherited 
32.  22  shall  return,  and  be  guiltless  before.  .1. 

32.  28  the  chief  fathers,  .of  the  children  of  I. 

33.  1  journeys  of  the  children  of  I.,  which  went 
33.  3  children  of  I.  went  out  with  an  high  hand 
33.  5  the  children  of  I.  removed  from  Rameses 
33.  38  children  of  I.  were  come  out  of  the  land 
33. 40  heard  of  the  coming  of  the  children  of  I. 

33.  51  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 

34.  2  Command  the  children  of  I.,  and  say  unto 
34. 13  Moses  commanded  the  children  of  I.,  say 

34.  29  to  divide,  .unto  the  children  of  I.  in  the 

35.  2  Command  the  children  of  I.,  that  they 
35.    8  of  the  possession  of  the  children  of  I. 

35. 10  Speak  unto  the  children  of  I.,  and  say 
35.  15  for  the  children  of  I.,  and  for  the  Strang. 

35.  34  I  the  Lord  dwell  among  thechildren  of  I. 

36.  1  the  chief  fathers  of  the  children  of  I. 
36.    2  inheritance  by  lot  to  the  children  of  I. 
36.    3  of  the  (other)  tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 
36.    4  when  the  jubilee  of  the  children  of  I.  shall 
36.    5  commanded  the  children  of  I.  according 
36.    7  not  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  I. 
36.   7  every  one  of  the  children  of  I.  shall  keep 
36.    8  an  inheritance  in  any  tribe  of  the  child,  of  I. 
36.   8  that  the  children  of  I.  may  enjoy  every 
36.   9  every  oneof  the  tribes  of  the  children  ofl. 
36.  13  Lord  commanded.,  unto  the  children  of  I. 

Deut.  1.  1  the  words  which  Moses  spake  unto  all  I. 
1.  3  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  I.,  ace. 
1.  38  encourage  him ;  for  he  shall  cause  I.  to 
2. 12  as  I.  did  unto  the  land  of  his  possession 
3. 18  pass  over  armed  before,  .thechildrenof  I. 
4.  1  hearken,  O  I.,  unto  the  statutes  and  unto 
4.  44  which  Moses  set  before  the  children  of  I. 
4. 45  which  Moses  spake  unto  the  children  of  I. 

4.  46  whom  Moses  and  the  children  of  I.  smote 

5.  1  And  Moses  called  all  I.,  and  said  unto 

5.  r  Hear,  O  I.,  the  statutes  and  judgments 

6.  3  Hear  therefore,  0  I.,  and  observe  to  do 
6.   4  Hear,  O  I.:    The  Lord  our  God  (is)  one  L. 
9.    1  Hear,  O  I. :  Thou  (art)  to  pass  over  Jordan 

10.  6  the  children  of  I.  took  then*  journey  from 
10. 12  I.,  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require. 

11.  6  substance  that(was)..inthemidstofallL 

13. 11  all  I.  shall  hear,  and  fear,  and  shall  do 
17.  4  certain . .  such  abomin.  is  wrought  in  I. 
17.  12  and  thou  shalt  put  away  the  evil  from  I. 

17.  20  he,  and  his  children,  in  the  midst  of  I. 

18.  1  shall  have  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  I. 

18.  6  come  from  any  of  thy  gates  out  of  all  I. 

19.  13  away  (the  guilt  of)  innocent  blood  from  I. 

20.  3  Hear,  0  I.;  ye  approach  this  day  unto  ba. 

21.  8  Be  merciful,  0  Lord,  unto  thy  people  I. 
21.    8  lay  not  innocent  blood  unto.  .I.'s  charge 

21.  21  put  evil  away,  .all  I.  shall  hear,  and  fear 

22.  19  brought,  .an  evil  name  upon  a  virgin  of  I. 
22.  21  she  hath  wrought  folly  in  L,  to  play  the 
22.  22  so  shalt  thou  put  away  evil  from  I. 

23. 17  of  I.,  nor  a  sodomite  of  the  sons  of  I. 

24.  7  any  of  his  brethren  of  the  children  of  I. 

25.  6  that  his  name  be  not  put  out  of  I. 

25.   7  to  raise  up  unto  his  brother  a  name  in  I. 

25.  10  his  name  shall  be  called  in  I.,  The  house 

26.  15  bless  thy  people  I.,  and  the  land  which 

27.  1  And  Moses  with  the  elders  of  I.  comman. 
27.   9  Israel, saying, Take  heed,  and  hearken,  0 1. 
27.  14  say  unto  all  the  men  of  I.  with  a  loud 
29.    1  the  children  of  I.  in  the  land  of  Moab 
29.    2  Moses  called  unto  all  I.,  and  said  unto 

29. 10  and  your  officers,  (with)  all  the  men  of  I. 
29.  21  unto  evil  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  L.accordi. 
31.    1  went  and  spake  these  words  unto  all  I. 
31.   7  said  unto  him  in  the  sight  of  all  I.,  Be 
3r.    9  delivered  it.  .unto  all  the  elders  of  I. 

31.  11  When  all  I.  is  come  to  appear  before  the 

31. 11  thou  shalt  read  this  law  before  all  I.  in 
31. 19  for  you,  and  teach  it  the  children  of  I. 
31.  19  witness  for  me  against  the  children  of  I. 
31.  22  Moses,  .wrote,  .taught  it  the  children  of  I. 
31.  23  thou  shalt  bring  the  children  of  I.  into 

31.  30  in  the  ears  of  all  the  congregation  of  I. 

32.  8  accordingto.  .number  of  the  children  ofl. 
32.  45  end  of  speaking  all  these  words  to  all  I. 
32.  49  unto  the  children  of  I.  for  a  possession 
32.  51  among  the  children  of  I.  at  the  waters  of 
32.  51  ye  sanctified  me  not  in  the  midst  of.  .1. 

32.  52  the  land  which  I  give  the  children  of  I. 

33.  1  the  man  of  God  blessed  the  children  ofU. 
33.    s  the  tribes  of  I.  were  gathered  together' 
33.  10  teach  Jacob  thy  judgments,  and  I.  thy  law 
33.  21  he  executed,  .his  judgments  with  I. 

33.  28  I.  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone  :  the 

33.  29  Happy  (art)  thou,  O  I.  :  who  (is)  like  unto 

34.  8  the  children  of  I.  wept  for  Moses  in  the 
34.   9  the  children  of  L  hearkened  unto  him 
34.  10  not  a  prophet  since  in  I.  like  unto  Moses 

34. 12  which  Moses  showed  in  the  sight  of  all  I. 
Josh.  1.    2  give  to  them,  (even)  to  the  children  of  I. 

2.  2  in  hither  to  night  of  the  children  of  I. 

3.  1  to  Jordan,  he  and  all  the  children  of  I. 
3.    7  to  magnify  thee  in  the  sight  of  all  I. 

3.   9  Joshua  said  unto  the  cliildren  ofl.,  Come 

3.  12  take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  tribes  of  I. 

4.  4  whom  hehad  prepared  of  the  children  of  I. 
4.    5,  s  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 

4.    7  memorial  unto  the  children  of  I. 
4.    8  childrenof  I.  did  soasJoshuacnmmanded 
4.  12  passed  overarmed  beforethe  children  ofl. 
4. 14  magnified  Joshua  in  the  sight  of  all  I. 
4.  21  he  spake  unto  the  children  of  I.,  saying 
4.  22  I.  came  over  this  Jordan  on  dry  land 


ISRAEL 


524 


ISRAEL 


Josh.  5. 
5- 
5- 
5- 

5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


1  dried  up  the  waters  of  Jordan,  .before.  .1. 
1  any  more,  because  of  the  children  of  I. 
3  circumcise  again  the  children  of  I.  the 
3  circumcised  the  children  of  I.  at  the  hill 
6  the  children  of  I.  walked  forty  years  in 

10  the  children  of  I.  encamped  inGilgal,  and 

12  neither  had  the  children  of  I.  manna  any 
1  shut  up  because  of  the  children  of  I. 

18  make  the  camp  of  I.  a  curse,  and  trouble 

23  and  left  them  without  the  camp  of  I. 
25  and  shedwellethinl.  (even)unto  thisday 

1  the  children  of  I.  committed  a  trespass 

I  was  kindled  against  the  children  of  I. 
6  fell  to  the  earth .  .he  and  the  elders  of  I. 
8  when  I.  turncth  their  backs  before  their 

11  I.  hath  sinned,  and  they  have  also  trans. 

12  the  children  of  I.  could  not  stand  before 

13  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  (There  is) 

13  accursed  thing  in  the  midst  of  thee,  O  I. 

15  and  because  he  hath  wrought  folly  in  I. 

16  brought  I.  by  their  tribes;  and  the  tribe 

19  give^I  pray,  .glory  to  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

20  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
2^  Joshua,  and  unto  all  the  children  of  I. 

24  all  I.  with  him,  took  Achau  the  son  of  Z. 

25  I.  stoned  him  with  stones,  and  burned 
8.  10  went  up,  he  and  the  elders  of  I.,  before 

8.  14  and  the  men.  .went  out  against  I.  to  battle 
8.  15 1,  madeasif  they  were  beaten  before  them 
8.  17  not  a  man  left,  .that  went  not  out  after  I. 
8.  17  left  the  city  open,  and  pursued  after  I. 
8.  21  all  I.  saw  that  the  ambush  had  taken  the 
8.  22  so  they  were  in  the  midst  of  I.,  some  on 
8.  24  when  I.  had  made  an  end  of  slaying  all 
8.  27  spoil  of  that  city,  I.  took  for  a  prey  unto 
8.  30  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  God  of  I.  in 
8.  31  As  Moses,  .commanded  the  children  of  I. 
8.  32  wrote  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  I. 
8.  33  all  I. .  .stood  on  this  side  the  ark  and  on 
8.  33  commanded . .  should  bless  the  people  of  I. 

8.  35  read  not  before  all  the  congregation  of  I. 

9.  2  to  tight  with  Joshua  and  with  I.,  with  one 
9.  6  said  unto  him,  and  to  the  men  of  I.,  We 
9.  7  men  of  I.  said  unto  the  Hivites,  Pcradven. 
9.  17  the  children  of  I.  journeyed,  and  came 

9. 18  children  of  I.  smote  them  not,  because  the 

9.  18  princes,  .had  sworn,  .by  the  Lord  God.  .1. 

9.  19  sworn  unto  them  by  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

9.  26  and  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of.  .1. 
10.  1  inhabitants,  .had  made  peace  with  I.,  and 
10.   4  hath  made  peace,  .with  the  children  of  I. 

10. 10  Lord  discomfited  them  before  I.,  and  slew 

10. 11  came  to  pass,  as  they  fled  from  before  I. 
10.  it  whom  the  children  of  I.  slew  with  the 
10.  12  the  Amorites  before  the  children  of  I.,  and 
10.  12  said  in  thesightof  I.,  Sun,  stand  thou  still 
10.  14  hearkened,  .for  the  Lord  fought  for  I. 
10.  15  Joshua  returned,  and  all  I.  with  him,  unto 
10.  20  Joshua  and  the  children  of  I.  had  made 
10. 21  moved,  .against  any  of  the  children  of  I. 
10.  24  that  Joshua  called  for  all  the  men  of  I. 
10.  29;  31,  34  Joshua  passed,  .and  all  I.  with  him 
10.  30  delivered  it  also,  .into  the  hand  of  I. ;  and 
10.  32  Lord  delivered  Lachish  into  the  hand  of  I. 
10.  36  Joshua  went  up  from  Eglon,  and  all  I. 
10.  38,  43  And  Joshua  returned,  and  all  I.  with 
10.  40  destroyed,  .as  the  Lord  God  of  I.  comin. 

10.  42  because  the  Lord  God  of  I.  fought  for  I. 
ir.    5  and  pitched  together,  .to  fight  against  I. 

11.  6  will  I  deliver  them  up  all  slain  before  I. 
11.   8  Lord  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  1. 

11. 13  I.  burned  none  of  them,  save  Hazor  only 
n. 14  the  children  of  I.  took  for  a  prey  unto 

11.  16  So  Joshua  took,  .the  mountain  of  I.,  and 
11.  19  that  made  peace  with  the  children  of  1. 
1 1.  20  that  they  should  come  against  I.  in  battle 
11.  21  and  cut  off  ..from  all  the  mountains  of  I. 
11.  22  none,  .left  in  the  land  of  the  children  of  I. 

11.  23  Joshua  gave  it  for  an  inheritance  unto  I. 

12.  1  the  kings,  .which  the  children  of  I.  smote 
12.   6  Then  did  Moses,  .and  the  children  of  I. 
12.    7  kings,  .which  Joshua  and  the  children  of  I. 

12.  7  which  Joshua  gave  unto  the  tribes  of  I. 

13.  6  I  drive  out  from  before  the  children  of  I. 
13.  13  children  of  I.  expelled  not  the  Geshurites 
13.  14  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  God  of  I.  made  by 
13.  22  the  soothsayer,  did  the  children  of  I.  slay 

13.  33  the  Lord  God  of  I.  (was)  their  inheritance 

14.  1  which  the  children  of  I.  inherited  in  the 
14.  1  heads  of  the.  .tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 
14.    5  Lord  commanded .  .so  the  children  of  I. 

14. 10  while.  .1.  wandered  in  the  wilderness:  and 

14. 14  lie  wholly  followed  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

17.  13  when  the  children  of  I.  were  waxen  strong 

18.  1  the  children  of  I.  assembled  together  at 
18.  2  there  remained  among  the  children  of  I. 
18.    3  Joshua  said  unto  the  children  of  I.,  How 

18.  10  divided  the  land  unto  the  children  of  I. 

19.  49  the  children  of  I.  g:ive  an  inheritance  to 

19.  51  fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 

20.  2  Speak  to  the  children  Of  I.  saying.  Appoint 

20.  9  appointed  for  all  the  children  of  I.,  and 
2i.  1  fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 
2r.    3  children  of  I.  gave  unto  the  Lcvites  out  of 

21.  8  children  of  I.  gave  by  lot  unto  the  Levitcs 
1.  41  within  the  possession  of  the  children  of  I. 

21.  43  the  Lord  gave  unto  I.  all  the  land  which 

21.  45  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  the  house  of  T. 

22.  9  departed  from  the  children  of  I.  out  of  S. 

I I  children  of  I.  beard  say.  Behold,  the  chi. 

22. 11  Jordan,  at  the  passage  of  the  children  of  [. 
22.  12  the  children  of  I.  heard  (of  it),  the  whole 


Josh. 22.  12  children  of  I.  gathered  themselves  toget. 
22. 13  children  of  I.  sent  unto  the  children  of  R. 
22.  14  a  prince  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
22.  14  of  their  fathers  among  the  thousands  of  I. 
22.  16  ye  have  committed  against  the  God  of  I. 
22.  18  be  wroth  with  the  whole  congregation  of  I. 
22.  20  wrath  fell  on  all  the  congregation  of  I. 
22.  ei  said  unto  the  heads  of  the  thousands  of  I. 
22.  22  he  knoweth,  and  I.  he  shall  know ;  if  (it) 
22.  24  What  have  ye.  .with  the  Lord  God  of  I.? 
22.  30  heads  of  the  thousands  of  I.  which  (were) 
22.  31  ye  have  delivered  the  children  of  I.  out 
22.  32  the  land  of  Cauaau,  to  the  children  of  I. 
22.  33  the  thing  pleased  the  children  of  I. ;  and 

22.  33  children  of  I.  blessed  God,  and  did  not 

23.  1  after  that  the  Lord  had  given  rest  unto  I. 

23.  2  Joshua  called  for  I.,  (and)  for  their  elders 

24.  1  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  I.  to  Shechem 
24.  1  called  for  the  elders  of  I.,  and  for  their 
24.  2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I. ,  Your  f  ath. 
24.  9  and: warred  against  I.,  and  sent  ami  called 
24.  23  incline  your  heart  unto  the  Lord  G  od  of  I. 
24.  31 1,  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua 
24.  31  works  of  the  Lord,  that  he  had  done  for  I. 
24.  32  children  of  I.  brought  up  out  of  Egypt 

Judg.  1.    1  the  children  of  I  asked  the  Lord,  saying 

1.  28  when  I.  was  strong,  that  they  put  the 
2     4  these  words  unto  all  the  children  of  I. 

2    6  the  children  of  I.  went  every  man  unto  his 

2.  7  great  works  of  the  Lord  that  he  did  for  I. 
2.  10 nor.  .the  works  which  he  had  done  for  I. 
211  the  children  of  I.  did  evil  in  the  sight 

2  14,  20  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  I. 
2.  22  I  may  prove  I.,  whether  they  will  keep  the 

1  which  the  Lord  left,  to  prove  I.  by  them 

2  generations  of  the  children  of  I.  might 

4  they  were  to  prove  I.  by  them,  to  know 

5  children  of  I.  dwelt  among  the  Canaanites 

7  the  children  of  I.  did  evil  in  the  sight 

8  the  auger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  I. 

8  children  of  I.  served  Chushau-rishathaim 
9,  15  the  children  of  I.  cried  unto  the  Lord 

9  raised  up  a  deliverer  to  the  children  of  I. 

10  he  judged  I  ,  and  went  out  to  war:  and 
12  the  children  of  I.  did  evil  again  in  the 

12  strengthened  Eglon  the  king,  .against  I. 

13  wentand  smote  L,  and  possessed  the  city 

14  the  children  of  I.  served  Eglon  the  v  15 
27  the  children  of  I.  went  down  with  himironi 

30  was  subdued  that  day  underthe  baud  of  I. 

31  after  him  was  Shanigar.  .also  delivered  I. 

1  the  children  of  I.  again  did  evil  in  the 

3  the  children  of  I.  cried  unto  the  Lord 

3  he  mightily  oppressed  the  children  of  I. 

4  And  Deborah . .  she  judged  I.  at  that  time 

5  the  children  of  I.  came  up  to  her  for 

6  Hath  not  the  Lord  God  of  I.  commanded 

23  the  king  of  Canaan  before  the  children  of  I. 

24  the  children  of  I.  prospered,  and  prevailed 

2  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of  I. 

3  I  will  sing  (praise)  to  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

5  that  Sinai  from  before  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

7  they  ceased  in  I.,  until  that  I  Deborah 

7  I  arose  a  mother  in  I. 

8  or  spear  seen  among  forty  thousand  in  I.? 

9  My  heart  (is)  towards  the  governors  of  I. 

11  (the  inhabitants)  of  his  villages  in  I. 

1  the  children  of  I.  did  evil  in  the  sight 

2  the  hand  of  Midian  prevailed  against  I. 

2  the  children  of  I.  made  them  the  dens 

3  when  I.  had  sown,  that  the  Midianitesca. 

4  left  no  susteuance  for  I.,  neither  sheep 

6  I.  was  greatly  impoverished  because  of 
6,  7  the  children  of  I.  cried  unto  the  Lord 
8  sent  a  prophet  unto  the  children  of  I. 
8  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  I  brought 

14  thou  shalt  save  I.  from  the  hand  of  the 

15  wherewith  shall  I  save  I,?  behold,  my  fam. 
36,  37  thou  wilt  save  I.  hymine  hand,  as  thou 
2  lest  I.  vaunt  themselves  against  me,  saying 
8  he  sent  all  (the  rest  of)  I.  every  man  unto 

14  of  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash,  a  man  of  I. 

15  and  returned  into  the  host  of  I.,  and  said 
23  the  men  of  I.  gathered  themselves  togeth. 
22  the  men  of  I,  said  unto  Gideon,  Rule  thou 

.  27  I.  went  thither  a  whoring  after  it  :  which 
.  28  Midian  subdued  before  the  children  of  I. 
.  33  the  children  of  I.  turned  again,  and  went 
.  34  the  children  of  I.  remembered  not  the  L. 
.  35  the  goodness  winch  he  had  showed  unto  I. 
.  22  Abimelech  had  reigned  three  years  over  I. 
.  55  the  men  of  I.  saw  that  Abimelech  was 
.    1  after  Abimelech  there  arose,  to  defend  I. 
.    2  he  judged  I.  twenty  and  three  years,  and 
.    3  and  judged  I.  twenty  and  two  years 
.   6  the  children  of  I.  did  evil  again  in  the 
.    7  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  I. 
.    8  I.  eighteen  years,  all  the  children  of  I. 
.   9  to  fight,  .so  that  I.  was  sore  distressed 
.  10  the  children  of  I.  cried  unto  the  Lord 
.  11  the  Lord  said  unto  the  children  of  I. 
.  15  the  children  of  I.  saiit  unto  the  Lord 
.  16  his  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  I. 
.  17  the  children  of  I.  assembled  themselves 
.4,  5  the  children  of  A  mmon[made  war  against  I. 
.  13  I.  took  away  my  land,  when  they  came  up 
.  15  I.  took  not  away  the  land  of  Moab,  northe 
.  16  I.  came  up  from  Egypt,  and  walked  thro. 
.  17  I.  sent  messengers  unlo  the  king  of  Edom 
.  17  would  nut  (consent) :  and  I.  abode  in  Ka. 
.  19  I.  sent  messengers  untoSihon  king  of  the 
.  19  I.  said  unto  him,  Let  us  pass,  we  uray  thee 


'3- 
*3- 

14. 

15- 
16. 
17. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
i9- 


Judgn.  20  trusted  not  I.  to  pass  through  his  coast 
11.  20  pitched  in  Jahaz,  and  fought  against  I. 
11.  21  the  Lord  God  of  I.  delivered  Sibon  and  all 
11.  21  into  the  hand  of  I.,,  .so  I.  possessed  all    fi 
11.  23  the  Lord  God  of  I.  hath  dispossessed  the 
11.  23  the  Amorites  from  before  his  people  I. 
11.  25  did  he  ever  strive  against  I.,  or  did  he 
1 1.  26  I.  dwelt  in  Heshbon  and  her  towns,  and  in 
11.  27  children  of  I.  and  the  children  of  Amnion 
11.  33  were  subdued  before  the  children  of  I. 
1 1.  39  she  returned . .  And  it  was  a  custom  in  I. 

1 1.  40  the  daughters  of  I.  went  yearly  to  lament 

12.  7  Jephthah  judged  I.  six  years.  Then  died 
12.  8  after  him  Ibzan  of  Betridehem  judged  I. 
12.    9  and  he  judged  I.  seven  years 

12. 11  Elon.  .judged  I.;  and  he  judged  I.  ten 
12.  13  the  son  of  Hillel,  a  Pirathouite,  judged  I. 
12.  14  and  he  judged  I.  eight  years 

1  the  children  of  I.  did  evil  again  in  the 

5  he  shall  begin  to  deliver  I.  out  of  the 
4  the  Philistines  had  dominion  over  I. 

.  20  judged  I.  in  the  days  of  the  Philistines 
.  31  buried  him.  .And  he  judged  I.  twenty 

6  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  in  I. 
1  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  in  I. 

,    1  fallen  unto  them  among  the  tribes  of  I, 
.  19  a  priest  unto  a  tribe  and  afamily  in  I.? 
.    1  when  (there  was)  no  king  in  I.,  that  there 
.  12  stranger,  that(is)not  of  thechildren  of  I. 
.  29  and  sent  her  into  all  the  coasts  of  I. 
.  30  the  children  of  I.  came  up  out  of  the  land 
.    1  all  the  children  of  I.  went  out,  and  the 
.   2  the  tribes  of  I.,  presented  themselves  in 
,   3  the  children  of  I.  were  gone  .then  said  1. 
.    6  all  the  country  of  the  inheritance  of  I. 
.   6  have  committed  lewdness  and  folly  in  I. 
.   7 ye  (are)  all  children  of  I.;  give  here  your 
.  10  ten  men.  .throughout  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
.  10  the  folly  that  they  have  wrought  in  I. 
.  11  the  men  of  I.  were  gathered  against  the 
.  12  the  tribes  of  I.  sent  men  through  all  the 
.  13  put  them  to  death,  and  put  away  evil  from 
.  13  voice  of  their  brethren  the  children  of  I. 
.  14  out  to  battle  against  the  children  of  I. 
.  17  menofl.,  besidesBenjamin,  were  v.  18.  19. 
.  20  the  men  of  I.  went  out  to  battle  against 
.  20  the  men  of  I.  put  themselves  in  array  to 
.  22  the  people,  the  men  of  I. ,  encouraged  them. 
.  23  thechildren  of  I.  went  up  and  wept  before 
.  24  the  children  of  I.  came  near  against  the 
.  25  down  to  the  ground  of  the  children  of  I. 
.  26  the  children  of  I.,  and  all  the  people 
.  27  the  children  of  I.  entpured  of  the  LORD 
.  29  I.  set  liers  in  wait  round  about  Gibeah 
.  30  the  children  of  I.  went  up  against  the 
.  31  began  to  smite,  .about thirty  men  of  I. 
.  32  the  children  of  I.  said,  Let  us  flee,  and 
i.  33  the  men  of  I.  rose  up  out  of  their  place 
.  33  the  liers  in  wait  of  I.  came  forth  out  of 
1.  34  ten  thousand  chosen  men  out  of  all  I. 
,  35  Benjamin  before  I.:  and  the  children  of  I. 
.  36  the  men  of  I.  gave  place  to  the  Benjamites 
.  38  an  appointed  sign  between  the  men  of  I. 
1.  39  men  of  I.  retired  in  the  battle,  Benjamin 
'.  39  B.  began  to  smite  (and)  kill  of  themenof  I. 
.  41  when  the  men  of  I.  turned  again,  the  men 
•.  42  turned  (their  backs)  before  the  men  of  I. 
p,  48  the  menof  I.  turned  again  upou  the  child. 
.    1  the  men  of  I.  had  sworn  in  Mizpeh,  saying 
.    3  God  of  I.,  why  is  this  come  to  pass  in  I. 
.   3  should  be  to  day  one  tribe  lacking  in  I.? 
.    5  And  thechfldrenof  I.  said,  Who  (is  there) 
.    5  the  tribes  of  I.  that  came  not  up  with 
.    6  children  of  I.  repented  them  for  Benjamin 
.    6  There  is  one  tribe  cut  off  from  I.  this 
.    8  What  one  (is  there)  of  the  tribes  of  I.  that 
.  15  LORD  had  made  a  breach  in  the  tribes  of  I. 
.  17  that  a  tribe  be  not  destroyed  out  of  I. 
.  18  for  the  children  of  I.  have  sworn,  saying 
.  24  the  children  of  I.  departed  thence  at  that 
.  25  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  in  I. 
!.  12  reward  be  given  thee  oftheLORDGodof  I. 

4.    7  in  former  time  in  I.  concerning  redeeming 

4.    7  and  this  (was)  a  testimony  in  I. 

4.  11  which  two  did  build  the  house  of  I. 

4.  14  kinsman.thathisnamemaybefaniousml. 

1.  17  the  God  of  I.  grant  (thee)  thy  petition 

2.  22  heard  all  that  his  sons  did  unto  all  I. 
2.  28  I  chose  him  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
2.  20  offerings  made  by  fire  of.. children  of  I.? 
2.  29  of  all  the  offerings  of  I.  my  people  ? 
2.  30  the  Lord  God  of  I.  saith,  I  said  indeed 

2.  32  all  (the  wealth)  which  (God)  shall  give  I. 

3.  11  I  will  do  a  thing  in  I.,  at  which  both  the 

3.  20  I.  from  Dan  even  to  Beer-sheba,  knew  that 

4.  1  the  word  of  Samuel  came  to  all  I.  Now  I. 
4.  2  against  I. :  and  when  they  joined  battle,  I. 
4.  3  the  elders  of  I.  said.  Wherefore  hath  the 
4.  5  I.  shouted  with  a  great  shout,  so  that  the 
4.  10  I.  was  smitten,  and  they  fled  every  man 
4.  10  there  fell  of  I.  thirty  thousand  footmen 
4.  17  I.  is  fled  before  the  Philistines,  and 

.  iS  he  died.  .And  he  judged  I.  forty  years 
.  21,  22  The  glory  is  departed  from  I.:  because 

7  The  ark  of  the  God  of  I.  shall  not  abide 

8  shall  we  do  with  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I.? 
S  Let  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I.  be  carried 
8  they  carried  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I.  about 

.  10  brought  about  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I.  to 
.  11  Send  away  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I.,  and 

3  If  ye  send  away  the  ark  of  the  God  of  I. 

5  ye  shall  give  glory  unto  the  God  of  I. 


Ruth 


iSa. 


ISRAEL 


525 


ISRAEL 


i  Sa, 


2  the  house  of  I.  lamented  after  the  Lord 

3  Samuel  spake  unto  all  the  house  of  I. 

4  the  children  of  I.  did  put  away  Baalim  and 

5  Gather  all  I.  to  Mizpeh,  and  I  will  pray 

6  Samueljudged  the  children  of  I. in  Mizpeh 

7  the  children  of  I.  were  gathered  together 
7  up  against  I.  And  when  the  children  of  I. 
S  the  children  of  I.  said  to  Samuel,  Cease 

g  Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  I.  ;  and 
io  Philistines  drew  near  to  battle  against  I. 
io  and  they  were  smitten  before  I. 
ii  men  of  I.  went  out  of  Mizpeh,  and  pursued 

13  they  came  no  more  into  the  coast  of  I. 

14  had  taken  from  I.  were  restored  to  I. 
14  the  coasts  thereof  did  I.  deliver  out  of 

14  there  was  peace  between  I.  and  the  Am. 

15  Samuel  judged  I.  all  the  days  of  his  life 

16  he  w^ent.  .and  judged  I.  in  all  those  places 

17  there  he  judged  I. ;  and  there  he  built  an 

1  that  he  made  his  sons  judges  over  I. 

4  elders  of  I.  gathered  themselves  together 
22  Samuel  said  unto  the  men  of  I.,  Go  ye 

2  (there  was)  not  among  the  children  of  I. 

.  9  in  I.,  when  a  man  went  to  enquire  of  God 

16  anoint.,  (to  be)  captain  over  my  people  I. 

20  on  whom  (is)  all  the  desire  of  I.?  (Is  it) 

21  of  the  smallest  of  the  tribes  of  I.?  and 
tS  And  said  imto  the  children  of  I.,  Thus 

18  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  I  brought  up  I. 
20  caused  all  the  tribes  of  I.  to  come  near 

2  and  lay  it  (for)  a  reproach  upon  all  I. 

3  send  messengers  unto  all  the  coasts  of  I. 

7  seut  (them)  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  I. 

8  children  of  I.  were  three  hundred  thous. 
13  the  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation  in  I. 

15  and  all  the  men  of  I.  rejoiced  greatly 

1  And  Samuel  said  unto  all  I.,  Behold,  I 

1  and  when  he  had  reigned  two  years  over  I. 

2  Saul  chose  him  three  thousand  (men)  of  I. 

4  all  I.  heard  say  (that)  Saul  had  smitten  a 

4  I.  also  was  had  in  abomination  with  the 

5  gathered.,  together  to  fight  with  I.,  thirty 

6  men  of  I.  saw  that  they  were  iu  a  strait 

13  established  thy  kingdom  upon  I.  for  ever 

19  smith  found  throughout  all  the  land  of  I. 
12  hath  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  I. 
iS  was  at  that  time  with  the  children  of  I. 

22  the  men  of  I.  which  had  hid  themselves  iu 

23  the  Lord  saved  I.  that  day :  and  the  battle 

24  the  men  of  I.  were  distressed  that  day :  for 
37  wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  I.? 

39  the  Lord  liveth,  which  saveth  I.,  though 

40  Then  said  he  unto  all  I.,  'Be  ye  on  one  side 

41  Saul  said  unto  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Give 
45  hath  wrought  this  great  salvation  in  I.? 

47  Saul  took  the  kingdom  over  I.,  and  fought 

48  delivered  I.  out  of  the  hands  of  them  that 

1  thee  (to  be)  king  over  his  people,  over  I. 

2  I  remember  (that)  which  Amalek  did  to  I, 
6  showed  kindness  to  all  the  children  of  I. 

17  I.,and  the  LoRDanointedthee  kingoverl.? 
26  hath  rejected  thee  from  being  king  over  I. 

28  hath  rent  the  kingdom  of  I.  from  thee  this 

29  the  strength  of  I.  will  not  lie  nor  repent 

30  the  elders  of  my  people,  and  before  I. ,  and 
35  repented  that  he . .  made  Saul  king  over  I. 

1  I  have  rejected  Mm  from  reigning  over  I. 

2  the  men  of  I.  were  gathered  together,  and 

3  I  stood  on  a  mountain  on  the  other  side 
8  cried  unto  the  armies  of  I.,  and  said  unto 

10  I  defy  the  armies  of  I.  this  day ;  give  me 
11I.  heard  those  words  of  the  Philistine 

19  the  men  of  I.,  (were)  in  the  valley  of  Elah 
21 1,  and  the  Philistines  had  put  the  battle 

24  the  men  of  I.,  when  they  saw  the  man 

25  the  men  of  I.  said,  Have  ye  seen  this  man 
25  to  defy  I.  is  he  come  up  :  and  it  shall  be 

25  and  make  his  father's  house  free  in  I. 

26  taketh  away  the  reproach  from  I.  ?  for 

45  the  God  of  the  armies  of  I.,  whom  thou 

46  earth  may  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  I. 

52  men  of  I.  and  of  Judah  arose,  and  shout. 

53  the  children  of  I.  returned  from  chasing 

6  the  women  came  out  of  all  cities  of  I. 

16  I.  and  Judah  loved  David,  because  he  we. 

18  what  (is)  my  life,  (or)  my  father's  family 
5  LORD  wrought  a  great  salvation  for  all  I. 

12  O  Lord  God  of  I.,  when  I  have  sounded 

10  Lord  God  of  L,  thy  servanthath  certain. 

11  0  Lord  God  of  I.,  I  beseech  thee,  tell  thy 

17  thou  shalt  be  king  over  I.,  and  I  shall  be 
2  three  thousand  chosen  men  out  of  all  I. 

14  After  whom  is  the  king  of  I.  come  out  ? 

20  the  kingdom  of  I.  shall  be  established  in 
30  and  shall  have  appointed  thee  ruler  over  I. 
32  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  which  sent 
34 (as)  the  Lord  God  of  I.  liveth,  which  hath 

2  three  thousand  chosen  men  of  I,, with,  him 

15  who  (is)  like  to  thee  in  I.  ?  wherefore  then 
20  the  king  of  I.  is  come  out  to  seek  a  flea 

1  to  seek  me  any  more  in  any  coast  of  I. 

12  made  his  people  I.  utterly  to  abhor  him 
1  together  for  warfare,  to  fight  with  I. 

3  all  I.  had  lamented  him,  and  buried  him 

4  Saul  gathered  all  I.  together,  and  they 

19  the  Lord  will  also  deliver  I.  with  thee 
19  Lord  also  shall  deliver  the  host  of  I. 

3  the  servant  of  Saul  the  king  of  I.,  which 
25  and  an  ordinance  for  I.  unto  this  day 
1  fought  against  I. :  and  the  men  of  I.  fled 

7  the  men  of  I.  that  (were)  on  the  other  side 
7  saw  that  the  men  of  I.  fled,  and  that  Saul 


1  Ki. 


.    3  said . .  Out  of  the  camp  of  I.  am  I  escaped 

.  12  people  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  house  of  I. 

.  19  The  beauty  of  I.  is  slain  upon  thy  high 

.  24  daughters  of  I.,  weep  over  Saul,  who  clo. 

.    9  Ephraim . .  over  Benjamin,  and  over  all  I. 

.  10  fortyyears.  .when  he  began  to  reign  over  I. 

.  17  Abner  was  beaten,  and  the  men  of  I.,  be. 

.  28  pursued  after  I.  no  more,  neither  fought 
to  set  up  the  throne  of  l)avid  over  I.,  and 
with  thee,  to  bring  about  all  1.  unto  thee 
had  communication  with  the  elders  of  I. 
I  will  save  my  people  I.  out  of  the  hand 
also  to  speak,  .all  that  seemed  good  to  I. 
will  gather  all  I.  unto  my  lord  the  king 
I.,  understood  that  day,  that  it  was  not  of 
and  a  great  man  fallen  this  day  in  I.  ? 
Then  came  all  the  tribes  of  I.  to  David 
he'^iat  leddest  out  and  broughtest  in  I. 
I.,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  captain  over  I. 
elders  of  I.  came  to  the  king  to  Hebron 
and  they  anointed  David  king  over  I. 
thirty  and  three  years  over  all  I.  and 
the  Lord  had  established  him  king  overl. 
exalted  his  kindgom  for  his  people  I. 
that  they  had  anointed  David  king  over  I. 
gathered  together  all.  .chosen  (men)  of  I. 
the  house  of  I.  played  before  the  Lord  on 
the  house  of  I.  brought  up  the  ark  of  the 
among  the  whole  multitude  of  I.,  as  well 
How  glorious  was  the  king  of  I.  to  day 
ruler  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  over  I. 
brought  up  the  children  of  I.  out  of  Egypt 
I  have  walked  with  all  the  children  of  I. 
L,  whom  I  command,  to  feed  my  people  I. 
I  took . .  to  be  ruler  over  my  poeple,  over  1. 
I  will  appoint  a  place  for  my  people  I. 
commanded  judges,  .over  my  people  I. 
L,  whom  God  went  to  redeem  for  a  people 
I.  (to  be)  a  people  unto  thee  for  ever, 
The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  the  God  over  I. :  and 
thou,  0  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of  I.,  hast  re. 
And  David  reigned  over  all  I.;  and  David 
he  chose  of  all  the  choice  (men)  of  I.,  and 
saw  that  they  were  smitten  before  I.,  they 
he  gathered  all  I.  together,  and  passed 
the  Syrians  fled  before  I.  ;  and  David  slew 
smitten  before  I. ,  they  made  peace  with  I. 
Joab,  and  his  servants  withhim,  and  all  I. 
I.,  and  Judah,  abide  in  tents  ;  and  my  1. 
Thus  saith  the. -GODof  I.,  Kingoverl. 
gave  thee  the  house  of  I.  and  of  Judah;  and 
but  I  will  do  this  thing  before  all  I.,  and 
no  such  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  I.:  do 
thou  shalt  be  as  one  of  the  fools  in  I. 
in  all  I.  there  was  none  to  be  so  much 
Thy  servant  (is)  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  I. 
on  this  manner  did  Absalom  to  all  I.  that 
Absalom  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  I. 
sent  spies  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
hearts  of  the  men  of  I.  are  after  Absalom 
To  day  shall  the  house  of  I.  restore  me 
men  of  L,  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  Ahith. 
tins  people,  and  all  the  men  of  L,  choose 
I.  shall  hear  that  thou  art  abhorred  of  thy 
And  Absalom  went  in.  .in  the  sight  of.  .1. 
pleased  Absalom . .  and  all  the  elders  of  I. 
I.  knoweth  that  my  father  (is)  a  mighty 
all  I.  be  generally  gathered  unto  thee 
I.  bring  ropes  to  that  city,  and  we  will 
the  men  of  I.  said,  The  counsel  of  Hushai 
counsel  Absalom  aud  the  elders  of  I. ;  and 
he  and  all  the  men  of  I.  with  him 
So  I.  and  Absalom  pitched  in  the  land  of 
people  went  out  into  the  field  against  I. 
the  people  of  I.  were  slain  before  the  serv. 
thepeople  returned  from  pursuing  after  I. 
and  all  I.  fled  every  one  to  his  tent 
for  I.  hath  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 
at  strife  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
11  the  speech  of  all  I.  is  come  to  the  king 
22  auy  man  be  put  to  death  this  day  in  I.  ? 

22  I  know  that  I  (am)  this  day  king  over  I.  ? 

40  the  king,  and  also  half  the  people  of  I. 

41  the  men  of  I.  came  to  the  king,  and  said 

42  the  men  of  Judah  answered  the  men  of  I. 

43  the  men  of  I.  answered  the  men  of  Judah 
43  fiercer  than  the  words  of  the  men  of  I. 

1  and  said . .  every  man  to  his  tents,  O  I. 

2  every  man  of  I.  went  up  from  after  David 

14  through  all  the  tribes  of  I.  unto  Abel,  and 
19  them  that  are)  peaceable,  .faithful  in  I. 

19  to  destroy  a  city  and  a  mother  in  I. :  why 

23  Now  Joab  (was)  over  all  the  host  of  I. :  and 
2  Gibeonites  (were)  not  of  the  children  of  I. 
2  the  children  of  I.  had  sworn  unto  them 

2  his  zeal  to  the  children  of  I.  and  Judah 

4  neither  for  us  shalt  thou  kill  any.  .in  I. 

5  from  remaining  in  any  of  the  coasts  of  I. 

15  the  Philistines  had  yet  war  again  with  I. 
17  that  thou  quench  not  the  light  of  I. 

21  And  when  he  defied  I.,  Jonathan  the  son 
1  David,  .the  sweet  psalmist  of  I.,  said 

3  the  Rock  of  I.  spake  to  me,  He  that  nil. 
9  and  the  men  of  I.  were  gone  away 

1  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  I. 

2  Go  now  through  all  the  tribes  of  I.,  from 

4  Joab . .  went . .  to  number  the  people  of  I. 
9  there  were  in  I.  eight  hundred  thousand 

15  the  Lord  sent  a  pestilence  upon  I.,  from 
25  entreated . .  the  plague  was  stayed  from  I. 

3  damsel  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  I.,  and 

20  the  eyes  of  all  I.  (are)upon  thee,  that  tbcu 


1  Ki.  1.  30 1  sware  unto  thee  by  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
1.  34  the  prophet  anoint  him  there  king  over  I 
1.  35  him  to  be  ruler  over  I.  and  over  Judah 

1.  48  Blessed (be)theLoRDGodof  I.,whidihath 

2.  4  not  fail  thee,  .a  man  on  the  throne  of  I. 
2.   s  did  to  the  two  captains  of  the  host  of  I. 
2. 11  the  days  that  David  reigned  over  l.(were) 
2.  15  I.  set  their  faces  on  me,  that  I  should 

2.  32  captain  of  the  host  of  I.,  and  Amasa  tl  e 

3.  28  I.  heard  of  the  judgment  which  the  king 

4.  1  So  king  Solomon  was  king  over  all  I. 

4.  7  Solomon  had  twelve  officers  over  all  I. 

5.  13  Solomon  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  I. ;  aud 

6.  1  after  the  children  of  I.  were  come  out  uf 
6.   1  the  fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign  over  I. 

6. 13  of  I.,  and  will  not  forsake  my  people  I. 
8.    1  Solomon  assembled  the  elders  of  1.,  and 
8.    1  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  children  of  I. 
8.   2  the  men  of  I.  assembled  themselves  unto 
8.    3  the  elders  of  I.  came,  and  the  priests 

8.  5  the  congregation  of  I.,  that  were  assem. 
8.   9  made  (a  covenant)  with  the  children  of  I. 

8. 14  of  L,  and  all  the  congregation  of  I.  stood 
8.  15  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  which 

8.  16  I  brought  forth  my  people  I.  out  of  Egypt 
8.  16  chose  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
8. 16  but  I  chose  David  to  be  over  my  people  T. 
8. 17,  20  house  for.,  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

8. 20  and  sit  on  the  throne  of  I.,  as  the  LORD 
8.  22  presence  of  all  the  congregation  of  I.,  and 
8.  23  Lord  God  of  I.,  (there  is)  no  God  like  thee  ' 
8.  25  Lord  God  of  I.,  keep  with  thy  servant  D. 
8.  25  in  my  sight  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  I.  ;  so 
8.  26  OGod  of  I.,  let  thy  word,  I  pray  thee,  be 
8.  30  of  thy  servant,  and  of  thy  people  I.,  when 
8.  33  When  thy  people  I.  is  smitten  down  bef. 
8.  34  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  I.,  and  bring 
8.  36  sin  of  thy  servants,  and  of  thy  people  I. 
8.38  (made)by  any  man,  (or)  by  all  thy  people  I. 
8.  41  a  stranger,  that  (is)  not  of  thy  people  I. 

8.  43  to  fear  thee,  as  (do)  thy  people  I. ;  and  that 
8.  52  and  unto  the  supplication  of  thy  people  I. 
8.  55  and  blessed  all  the  congregation  of  I.  with 
8.  56  that  hath  given  rest  unto  his  people  I.,  ac. 
8.  59  he  maintain,  .the  cause  of  his  people  I.  at 
8.  62  king,  and  all  I.  withhim,  offered  sacrifice. 
8  63  all  the  children  of  I.  dedicated  the  house 
S.  65  Solomon  held  a  feast,  and  all  I.  with  him 

8.  66  goodness  that  the  Lord  had  done .  .for  I. 

9.  5  I  will  establish  the  throne,  .upon  I.  for 
9.   5  not  fail  thee  a  man  upon  the  throne  of  I. 
9.    7  Then  will  I  cut  oft  I.  out  of  the  land  which 
9.    7  I.  shall  be  a  proverb  and  a  byword  among 
9.  20  all.  .which (were)  not  of  the  children  of  I. 

9. 21  the  children  of  I.  also  were  not  able  utterly 
9.  22  of  the  children  of  I.  did  Solomon  make  no 

10.    9  to  set  thee  on  the  throne  of  I.:  because  the 

10.  9  Lord  loved  I.  for  ever,  therefore  made  lie 

11.  2  Lord  said  unto  the  children  of  I.,  Yeshall 
11.  9  heart  was  turned  from  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
11.  16  six  months  did  Joab  remain,  .with  all  I. 
11.  25  he  was  au  adversary  to  I.  all  the  days  of 
11.  25  andhe  abhorred  I.,  and  reigned  overSyria 
11.  31  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.,  Behold 
11.  32  the  city  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  all . .  I. 
11.  37  thou  shalt  reign,  .and  shall  be  kingoverl. 
11.  38  I  will  be  with  thee,  .and  will  give  I.  unto 

11.  42  Solomon  reigned  in  Jerusalem  over  all  I. 

12.  1  all  I.  were  come  to  Shechem  to  make  him 
12.    3  Jeroboam  and  all  the  congregation  of  I. 
12.  16  I.  saw  that  the  king  hearkened  not  unto 
12. 16  What  portion  have  we.  .to  your  tents,  0  J. 

12. 16  now  see.  .So  I.  departed  unto  their  tents 

12. 17  the  children  of  I.  which  dwelt  in  the  cit. 
7  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Forasmuch 
7  and  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  I. 

13  good  thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

21  did  choose  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I.,  to 

24  Lord  cast  out  before  the  children  of  I. 

30  Because  of  the  sins,  .which  he  made  I. 

13  in  provoking  the  Lord  God  of  I.  v.  26.  33. 

1  (As)  the  LORD  God  of  I.  liveth,  before  whom 

14  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  The 
36  be  known  this  day  that  thou  (art)  God  in  I. 
53  provoked  to  angerthe  Lord  God  of  I.,  ace. 
12  My  father,  my  father  !  the  chariot  of  I. 

6  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  I  have  an. 

31  to  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

25  He  restored  the  coast  of  I.  from  the  ent. 

4  the  children  of  I.  did  burn  incense  to  it 

5  He  trusted  hi  the  Lord  God  of  I.;  so  that 

15  OLORDGodof  I.,  which dwellest (between) 
20  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I. ,  (That)  which 

22  lifted  up . .  (e  ven)against  the  holy  (one)  of  I. 

2  the  LORD  cast  out  before  the  children  of  1. 

7  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  tribes  of  I.,  will  I 
S  Neither  will  I  make  the  feet  of  I.  move 
9  LORD  destroyed  before  the  childreu  of  T. 

12  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD  of  1. 
i5  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Tell  the 
18  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Tell  the 

13  which  Solomon  the  king  of  I.  had  builded 
22  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged  I. 
13  which  Solomon  king  of  I.  had  made  in 

:  Ch,  1. 43  (any)  king  reigned  over  the  children  of  I. 
2.  7  Achar,  thetroublerofl.,  who  transgressed 
4. 10  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of  I.,  saying.  Oh 

5.  26  God  of  I.  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  lid  king 

6.  49  to  make  au  atonement  fori.,  according  to 
6.  64  children  of  I.  gave  to  the  Levitts  (these) 
o.    1  So  all  I.  were  reckoned  by  genealogies 

10.    1  Now  the  Philistines  fought  against  I.;  and 


:Ki. 


21. 
22. 
22. 

23- 

23- 
24. 


wmSi 


ISRAEL 


52G 


ISRAEL 


2  Ch.ior  i  men  of  I.  fled  from  before  the  Philistines 
10.  7  the  men  of  I.  that  (were)  in  the  valley  saw 
ir.  i  Then  all  I.  gathered  themselves  to  David 
ii.  2  he  that  leddest  out  and  broughtest  in  I. 
ii.  2  thyGodsaid.  .Thoushaltfeedmypeoplel. 
ii.  2  and  thon  shalt  he  ruler  over  my  people  I. 
ii.  3  Therefore  came  all  the  elders  of  I.  to  the 
ii.  3  they  anointed  David  kingoverl., according 
ii.  4  David  and  all  I.  went  to  Jerusalem,  which 
ii.  io  who  strengthened  themselves  with,  .all  I. 
ii.  io  king,  according  to  the  word,  .concerningl. 
12.  32  to  know  what  I.  onght  to  do  ;  the  heads  of 
12.  38  to  Hebron,  to  make  David  king  over  all  I. 
12.  38-the  rest  also  of  I.  (were)  of  one  heart  to 

12.  40  sheep  abundantly ;  for(therewas)  joy  in  I. 

13.  2  David  said  unto  all  the  congregation  of  I. 
13.    2  ourbrethren.-leftinallthelaudof  I.,  and 
13.    5  So  David  gathered  all  I.  together,  from 
13.    6  David  went  up,  and  all  I.,  to  Baalah,  (that 

13.  8  David  and  all  I.  played  before  God  with 

14.  2  Loan  had  confirmed  him  king  over  I. ;  for 
14.   2  lifted  up  on  high,  because  of  his  people  I. 

14.  8  that  David  was  anointed  kiug  over  all  I. 

15.  3  David  gathered  all  I.  together  to  Jerusal. 
15.  12  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
15. 14  bring  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
15.  25  the  elders  of  I.,  and  the  captains  over 

15.  28  I.  brought  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

16.  3  he  dealt  to  every  one  of  I.,  both  man  and 
16.   4  to  thank  and  praise  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
16. 13  ye  seed  of  I.  his  servant,  ye  children  of 
16.  17  (and)  to  I.  (for)  an  everlasting  covenant 
16.  35  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  I.  for  ever 

16.  40  written  in  the  law.  .which  he  command.  I. 

17.  5  day  that  I  brought  up  I.  unto  this  day 
17.  6  Wheresoever  I  have  walked  with  all  I. 
17.  6  spake  I  a  word  to  any  of  the  judges  of  I. 
17.  7  thou  shouldest  be  ruler  over  my  people  I. 
17.  9  I  will  ordain  a  place  for  my  people  I.,  and 
17  10  command,  judges  (to  be)  over  my  people  I. 
17.  21  nation  in  the  earth  (is)  like  thy  people  I. 
17.  22  thy  people  I.  didst  thou  make  thine  own 

17.  24  Lord,  .(is)  the  God  of  I.,  (even)  a  G.  to  I. 

18.  14  David  reigned  over  all  I.,  and  executed 
19. 10  he  chose  out  of  all  the  choice  of  I.,  and 

19.  16  that  they  were  put  to  the  worse  before  I. 
19.  17  he  gathered  all  I.,  and  passed  over  Jordan 

19.  18  the  S3Tians  fled  before  I. ;  and  David  slew 
19. 19  that  they  were  put  to  the  worse  before  I. 

20.  7  when  he  defied  I.,  Jonathan  the  son  of 

21.  1  against  I.,  and  provoked  David  tonumb.  I. 
2i.  2  number  I.  from  Beer-sheba  even  to  Dan 
21.  3  why  will  lie  be  a  cause  of  trespass  to  I.  ? 
21.  4  and  went  throughout  all  I.,  and  came  to 
21.  7  God  was  displeased,  .therefore  he  smote 
21. 12  destroying  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  I. 

21.  14  pestilence  upon  I.  :  and  there  fell  of  I. 

22.  1  this^isVthe  altar  of  the  burnt  offering  for  I. 
22.  2  the  strangers  that  (were)  in  the  land  of  I. 
22.  6  to  build  an  house  for  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
22.    9  peace  and  quietness  unto  I.  in  his  days 

22.  to  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  over  I.  for  ever 

22. 12  give  thee  charge  concerning  I.,  that  thou 

22. 13  the  Lord  charged  Mos.  with  concerning  I. 
22. 17  Davidalsocommandedalltheprincesofl. 

23.  1  he  made  Solomon  his  son  king  over  I. 
23.    2  gathered  together  all  the  princes  of  I. 
23.  25  The  Lord  God  of  I.  hath  given  rest  unto 
24. 19  as  the  Lord  God  of  I.  had  commanded 
26.  29  sons(were)fortheoutwardbusiness  overl. 

26.  30  (were)  officers  among  them  of  I.  on  this 

27.  1  the  children  of  I.  after  their  number,  (to; 
27.  16  Furthermore  over  the  tribes  of  I.  :  the 
27.  22  These  (were)  the  princes  of  thetribes'of  I. 
27.  23  the  Lord  had  said  he  would  increase  I. 

27.  24  there  fell  wrath  for  it  against  I. ;  neither 

28.  1  David  assembled  all  the  princes  of  I.,  the 
28.   4  the  Lord  God  of  I.  chose  me  before  all 
28.    4  chose  me . .  to  be  king  over  I.  for  ever :  for 
28.    4  he  liked  me  to  make  (me)  king  over  all  I. 
28.    5  upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom,  .over  I. 

28.  8  in  the  sight  of  all  I.  the  congregation  of 

29.  6  the  chief,  .and  princes  of  the  tribes  of  1. 
29.  21  and  sacrifices  in  abundance  for  all  I. 

29.  23  sat  on  the  throne,  .and  all  I.  obeyed  him 
29.  25  magnified  Solomon,  .in  the  sight  of  all  I. 
29.  25  had  not  been  on  any  king  before  him  in  I. 
29.  26  David  t lie  son  of  .Jesse  reigned  over  all  I. 
29.  27  time  that  he  reigned  over  I.  (was)  forty 
29.  30  the  times  that  went  over  him,  and  over  I. 
2  Ch.  1.  2  Solomon  spake  unto  all  I.,  to  the  captains 
1.   2  to  every  governor  in  all  I.,  the  chief  of 

1.  13  Then  Solomon  came,  .and  reigned  over  I. 

2.  4  This  (is  an  ordinance)  for  ever  to  I. 

2. 12  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  that  ma. 
2.  17  the  strangers  that  (were)  in  the  land  of  I. 
5.    2  Solomon  assembled  the  elders  of  I.,  and 
5.    2  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  children  of  I. 
5.    3  all  the  men  of  I.  assembled  themselves 
5.   4  tiie  elders  of  I.  came ;  and  the  Levites 

5.    6  the  congregation  of  I.  that  were  assembl. 

5.  10 made  (a  covenant) 'with  the  children  of  I. 

6.  3  I.  :  and  all  the  congrcgrntion  of  I.  stood 
6.  4  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  who  hath 
6.    5  chose  no  city  among  all  the  tribes  ofU. 

6.  5  any  man  to  be  a  ruler  over  my  people  I. 
6.  6  have  chosen  David  to  beovcrmypeoplel. 
6.  7,  10  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

6. 10  am  set  on  the  throne  of  I.,  as  the  Lord 

6. 11  that  he  made  with  the  children  of  I. 
6.  12  presence  of  all  the  congregation  <>f  I. 

5. 13  kneeled    before  all  the  congregation  of  I. 


2  Ch.  6.  14  Lord  God  of  I.,  (there  is)  no  God  like  thee 
6.  16  0  Lord  God  of  I.,  keep  with  thy  servant 
6.  16  a  man.  .to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  I.;  yet 
6.  17  O  Lord  God  of  I.,  let  thy  word  be  verified 
6.  21  thy  servant,  and  of  thy  people  I.,  which 
6.  24  thy  people  I.  be  put  the  worse  before 
6.  25  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  I.,  and  bring 
6.  27  sin  of  thy  servants,  and  of  thy  people  I. 
6.  29  made  of  any  man,  or  of  all  thy  people  I. 
6.  32  stranger,  which  is  not  of  thy  peoplel.,  but 

6.  33  fear  thee,  as  (doth)  thy  people  I.,  and  may 

7.  3  children  of  I.  saw  how  the  fire  came  down 
7.  6  sounded  trumpets  before  them,  and  all  I. 
7.    8  I.  with  him,  a  very  great  congregation 

7.  10  David,  and  to  Solomon,  and  to  I.  hispeo. 

7.  18  not  fail  thee  a  man  (to  be)  ruler  in  I. 

8.  2  caused  the  children  of  I.  to  dwell  there 
8.  7  and  the  Jebusites,  which  (were)  not  of  I. 
8.    8  whom  the  children  of  I.  consumed  not 

8.    9  of  the  children  of  I.  did  Solomon  make  no 

8.  11  dwellinthehoussof  David  kingof  I.,beca. 

9.  8  God  loved  I.,  to  establish  them  for  ever 
9.  30  Solomon  reigned  in  Jerusalem  over  all  I 

10.    1  to  Shechem  were.  .1.  come  to  make  him 
10.    3  I.  came  and  spake  to  Rehoboam,  saying 
10.  16  I.  (saw)  that  the  king  would  not  hearken 
10.  16  every  man  to  your  tents,  O  I.  :  (and)  now 
10.  16  So  all  I.  went  to  their  tents 

10.  17  children  of  I.  that  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  J. 

11.  3  Speak  unto,  .all  I.  in  Judah  and  Benjamin 

11.  16  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I.  such  as  set  their 

12.  1  he  forsook  the  law  of  the  LORD,  and  all  I. 

12.  6  the  princes  of  I.  and  the  king  humbled 
12. 13  hadchosenout  of  all  the  tribes  of  I.,  to  put 

13.  5  Lord  God  of  I.  gave  the  kingdom  over  I. 
15.  3  I.  (hath  been)  without  the  true  God,  and 
15.  4  turn  unto  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  and  sought 
15. 13  whosoever  would  not  seek..  Lord  God  of  I. 

19.  8  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  I.,  for  the 

20.  7  (who)drive  out.  .before  thypeoplel.,  and 
20.  10  whom  thou  wouldest  not  let  I.  invade 
20. 19  to  praise  the  Lord  God  of  I.  with  a  loud 
20.  29  Lord  fought  against  the  enemies  of  I. 

23.  2  chief  of  the  fathers  of  I.,  and  they  came 

24.  5  gather  of  all  I.  money  to  repair  the  house 
24.    6  of  the  LORD,  and  of  the  congregation  of  I. 
24.    9  Moses,  .(laid)  upon  I.  in  the  wilderness 
24.  16  he  had  done  good  in  I.,  both  toward  God 
28.    3  had  cast  out  before  the  children  of  I. 

28.  23  they  were  the  ruin  of  him,  and  of  all  I. 

28.  27  into  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings  of  I. 

29.  7  burnt  offerings,  .unto  the  God  of  I. 

29.  10  make  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
29.  24  to  make  an  atonement  for  all  I.  :  for  the 

29.  24  sin  offering  (should  be  made)  for  all  I. 

30.  1,  5  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
30.  5  to  make  proclamation  throughout  all  I. 
30.   6  children  of  I.,  turn  again  unto  the  Lord 

30.  26  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David  king  of  I. 

31.  1  all  I.  that  were  present  went  out  to  the 
31.    1  the  children  of  I.  returned,  every  man  to 
31.    5  the  children  of  I.  brought  in  abundance 

31.  8  they  blessed  the  Lord,  and  his  people  I. 

32.  17  also  letters  to  rail  on  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

33.  2  had  cast  out  before  the  children  of  I. 
33.    7  I  have  chosen  before  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
33.    8  will  I  any  more  remove  the  foot  of  I. 
33.    9  had  destroyed  before  the  children  of  I. 
33.  16  commandedJudah..  serve. -LonDGod  of  I. 
33.  18  that  spake  to  him  in  the  name  of.. God  of  I. 

33.  18  written)  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  I. 

34.  7  the  idols  throughout  all  the  land  of  I. 
34.  23  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Tell  ye  the 
34.  25  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.  (concerning) 
34.  33  that  (pertained) to  the  children  of  I.,  and 

34.  33  made  all  that  were  present  in  I.  to  serve 

35.  3  said  unto  the  Levites  that  taught  all  I. 
35.    3  the  son  of  David  king  of  I.  did  build 

35-    3  now  the  LORD  your  God,  and  his  people  I. 
35.    4  according  to.  .writing  of  David  king  of  I. 
35. 17  the  children  of  I.  that  were  present  kept 
35.  18  was  no  passover  like  to  that  kept  in  I. 
35.  iS  neither  did  all  the  kings  of  I.  keep  such 
35.  iS  Judah  and  I.  that  were  present,  and  the 

35.  25  day,  and  made  them  an  ordinance  in  I. 

36.  13  heart  from  turning  unto.  .Lord  God  of  I. 
Ezra  1.    3  and  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

2.  2  The  numberof  the  men  of  the  people  of  I, 
2.  59  and  their  seed,  whether  they  (were)  of  I. 

2.  70  dwelt  in  their  cities,  and  all  I.  in  their 

3.  1  and  the  children  of  I.  (were)  in  the  cities 
3.  2  builded  the  altar  of  the  God  of  I.,  to  offer 
3.  10  after  the  ordinance  of  David  king  of  I. 

3.  11  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever  toward  I. 

4.  1  builded  the  temple  unto.  .Lord  God  of  I. 
4.    3  the  rest  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  I. 

4,  3  we.  .will  build  unto  the  LORD  God  of  I. 

5.  1  prophesied,  .in  the  name  of  the  God  of  I. 

5.  11  which  a  great  king  of  I,  builded  and  set  up 
6  14  to  the  commandment  of  the  God  of  I. 

6.  16  the  children  of  I.,  the  priests,  and  the 
6.  17  for  a  sin  offering  for  all  I.,  twelve  he. 

6.  17  according  to.  .number  of  the  tribes  of  1. 
6.  21  the  children  of  I.,  which  were  come  again 
6.  21  had  separated,  .to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

6.  22  work  of  the  house  of  God,  the  God  of  I. 

7.  6  law.  .which  the  LORD  God  of  I.  had  given 
7.  7  there  went  up  (some)  of  the  children  of  I. 
7.  10  and  to  teach  in  I.  statutes  and  judgments 
7. 11  of  the  Lord,  and  of  his  statutes  to  I. 

7.  13  all  they  of  the  people  of  I.,  and  (of)  his 
7.  15  counsellors,  .offered  unto  the  God  of  I. 


Ezra   7.  28  I  gathered  together  out  of  I.  chief  men 
8.  25  his  lords,  and  all  I.  (there)  present,  had 
8.  29  the  Levites,  and  chief  of  the  fathers  of  I. 
8.  35  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  God  of  I. 

8.  35  twelve  bullocks  for  all  I.,  ninety  and  six 

9.  1  The  people  of  I. .  .have  not  separated  th. 
9.    4  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  God  of  I. 

9. 15  O  Lord  God  of  I.,  thou  (art)  righteous 
10.  1  there  assembled  unto  him  out  of  I.  a  very 
10.  2  yet  now  there  is  hope  in  I.  concerning 
10.  5  Then  arose  Ezra . .  and  all  I. ,  to  swear  that 
10.  10  have  taken,  .to  increase  the  trespass  of  I. 
10.  25  Moreover  of  I.:  of  the  sons  of  Parosh;  R. 
Neh.  1.    6  I  pray . .  for  the  children  of  I.  thy  servants 

1.    6  confess  the  sins  of  the  children  of  I.,  wh. 

2. 10  to  seek  the  welfare  of  the  children  of  I. 

7.   7  number,  .of  the  men  of  the  people  of  I. 

7.  61  could  not  show,  .whether  they  (were)  of  I. 

7.  73  the  Nethinims,  and  all  I.,  dwelt  in  their 

7.  73  seventh  month,  .the  children  of  I.  (were) 

8.  1  law.,  which  the  Lord  had  commanded. .  I. 
8.  14  the  children  of  I.  should  dwell  in  booths 

8.  17  that  day  had  not  the  children  of  I.  done 

9.  1  children  of  I.  were  assembled  with  fasti. 
9.    2  seed  of  I.  separated  themselves  from  all 

10.  33  sin  offerings  to  make  an  atonement  for  I. 

10.  39  children  of  I. .  .shall  bring  the  offering  of 

11.  3  I.,  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  the 

11.  20  residue  of  I.,  .(were)  in  all  the  cities  of  J. 

12.  47  all  I.  in  the  days  of  Zerubbabel..  gave  the 

13.  2  Because  they  met  not  the  children  of  I. 
13.    3  separated  from  I.  all  the  mixed  multitu. 
13.  18  yet  ye  bring  more  wrath  upon  I.  by  prof. 
13.  26  Did  not  Solomon  king  of  I.  sin  by  these 

13.  26  God  made  him  king  over  all  I.:  neverthe. 
Psa.    14.   7  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  I.  (were  come) 

14.  7  Jacob  sliaU  rejoice,  (and)  I.  shall  be  glad 
22.    3  (O  thou)  that  inhabitest  the  praises  of  I. 
22.  23  and  fear  him,  all  ye  the  seed  of  I. 

25.  22  Redeem  I.,  O  God,  out  of  all  his  troubles 
41. 13  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I.  from  ev. 
50.  7  0  I.,  and  I  will  testify  against  thee  :  I 
53.  6  Oh  thatthe  salvation  of  I.  (werecome)out 
53.  6  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  (and)  I.  shall  be  glad 
59.  5  Lord  God  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I.,  awake 
68.  8  (was  moved)  at  the  presence  of .  .the  G.  of  I. 
68.  26  Bless  ye  God.  .from  the  fountain  of  I. 
68.  34  his  excellency  (is)  over  I.,  and  his  streng. 

68.  35  the  God  of  I.  (is)  he  that  giveth  strength 

69.  6  let  not  those . .  be  confounded . .  0  God  of  I. 
71.22  unto  thee  will  I  sing.,  thou  holy  one  of  I. 
72. 18  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  I. 
73.  1  Truly  God  (is)  good  to  I.,  (even)  to  such 
76.  1  (is)  God  known  ;  his  name  (is)  great  in  I. 
78.  5  For  he.  .appointed  a  law  in  I.,  which  he 
7S.  21  Jacob,  and  anger  also  came  up  against  I. 
78.  31  God .  .smote  down  the  chosen  (men)  of  I. 
78.  41  theyturned.. and  limited  the  holy  one  of  I. 
78.  55  made  the  tribes  of  I.  to  dwell  in  their  te. 
78.  59  God  heard  (this),  he.  .greatly  abhorred  I. 
78.  71  he  brought  him  to  feed . .  I.  his  inheritance 

80.  1  O  Shepherd  of  I.,  thou  that  leadest  Jose. 

81.  4  For  this  (was)  a  statute  for  I.,  (and)  a  law 
81.    8  will  testify .  .0  I.,  if  thou  wilt  hearken 
81. 11  would  not  hearken,  .and  I.  would  none 
81.  13  hearkened  unto  me,  (and)  I.  had  walked 
83.    4  that  the  name  of  I.  may  be  no  more  in  r. 
89. 18  our  defence  ;  and  the  holy  one  of  I.  (is) 
98.   3  hath  remembered . .  toward  the  house  of  I. 

103.    7  made  known .  .unto  the  children  of  I. 
105.  10  confirmed,  .to  I.  (for)  an  everlasting  cov. 
105.  23  I.  also  came  into  Egypt ;  and  Jacob  sojo. 
206.  48  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I.  from  ev. 
114.    1  When  I.  went  out  of  Egypt,  the  house  of 

114.  2  Judah  was  his  sanctuary,  (and)  I.  his  do. 

115.  9  O  I.,  trust  thou  in  the  Lord:  he(is)  their 
115.  12  he  will  bless  the  house  of  I.;  he  will  ble. 
118.    2  Let  I.  now  say,  that  his  mercy  (endureth) 

121.  4  he  that  keepeth  I.  shall  neither  slumber 

122.  4  the  tribes  go  up . .  unto  the  testimony  of  I. 

124.  1  the  Lord  who  was  onourside,  now  may  I. 

125.  s  Lord  shall  lead,  .peace  (shall  be)upon  I. 

128.  6  children's  children,  (and)  peace  upon  I. 

129.  i  afflicted  me  from  my  youth,  may  I.  now 

130.  7  Let  I.  hope  in  the  Lord  :  for  with  the  L. 

130.  8  he  shall  redeem  I.  from  all  his  iniquities 

131.  3  Let  I.  hope  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth 
135.   4  Lord  hath  chosen.  .1.  for  his  peculiar  tr. 
135- 12  gave  their  land  (for),  .an  heritage  unto  I. 
135. 19  Bless  the  Lord,  0  house  of  I.:  bless  the 
136. 11  brought  out  I.  from  among  them :  for 
136. 14  made  1.  to  pass  through  the  midst  of  it 
136. 22  an  heritage  unto  I.  his  servant :  for  his 
147.    2  he  gathereth  together  the  outcasts  of  I. 

147.  19  his  statutes  and  his  judgments  unto  I. 

148.  14  of  the  children  of  I.,  a  people  near  unto 

149.  2  Let  I.  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him  :  let 
Prov.  1.    1  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David,  king  of  I. 
Eccl.  1. 12  the  preacher  was  king  over  I.  in  Jerusal. 
Song  3.    7  men  (are)  about  it,  of  the  valiant  of  I. 
Isa.     1.  3  (but)  I.  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  not 

1.   4  provoked  the  holy  one  of  I.  unto  anger 
1.  24  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  mighty  one  of  I. 

4.  2  comely  for  them  that  are  escaped  of  I. 

5.  7  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  .(is)  the  house  of  I. 
5.  19  let  the  counsel  of  the  holy  one  of  I.  draw 
5.  24  despised  the  word  of  the  holy  one  of  I. 

8. 14  rock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of  I. 
8. 18  for  wonders  in  I.  from  the  Lord  of  hosts 
9.    8  sent  a  word.. and  it  hath  lighted  upon  I. 
9.  12  and  they  shall  devour  I.  with  open  mouth 
9.  14  Lord  will  cut  off  from  I.  head  and  tail 


ISRAEL 


527 


ISRAEL 


Jer. 


17  the  light  of  I.  shall  be  for  a  fire,  and 

20  the  remnant  of  I.,  and  such  as  are  escaped 

20  stay  upon  the  Lord,  the  holy  one  of  I.,  in 

22  thy  people  I.  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 
12  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  I.,  and 

16  like  as  it  was  to  I.  in  the  day  that  he 
6  great  (is)  the  holy  one  of  I.  in  the  midst 
r  will  yet  choose  I.,  and  set  them  in  their 

2  the  house  of  I.  shall  possess  them  in  the 

3  be  as  the  glory  of  the  children  of  I. 

6  branches  thereof,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

7  shall  have  respect  to  the  holy  one  of  I. 
9  they  left  because  of  the  children  of  I. 

24  that  day  shall  I.  be  the  third  with  Egypt 

25  work  of  my  hands,  and  I.  mine  inheritance 

10  heard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

17  for  the  Lord  God  of  I.  hath  spoken  (it) 
15  name  of  the  LORD  God  of  I.  in  the  isles 

6  I.  shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face 
12  gathered  one  by  one,  O  ye  children  of  I. 

19  poor,  .shall  rejoice  in  the  holy  one  of  I. 

23  sanctify,  .and  shall  fear  the  God  of  I. 

11  cause  the  holy  one  of  I.  to  cease  from 

12  thus  saith  the  holy  one  of  I.,  Because  ye 

15  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  holy  one  oil. 
29  into  the  mountain . .  to  the  mighty  one  of  I. 

1  but  they  look  not  unto  the  holy  one  of  I. 
.  6  unto  (him  from)  whom  the  children  of  I. 

16  0  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of  I.,  that  dwellest 

21  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Whereas 

23  voice,  .(even)  against  the  holy  one  of  I. 
27  sayest  thou,  O  Jacob,  and  speakest,  0  I. 

8  thou,  I.,  (art)  my  servant,  Jacob  whom  I 
14  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob.,  ye  men  of  I. 
14  Lord,  and  thy  redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  I. 

16  (and)  shalt  glory  in  the  holy  one  of  I. 

17  (I)  the  God  of  I.  will  not  forsake  them 

20  and  the  holy  one  of  I.  hath  created  it 

24  Who  gave  Jacob  for  a  spoil,  and  I. to  the 
1  thus  saith . .  he  that  formed  thee,  0 1.,  v.  3. 

14  the  Lord,  your  redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  I. 

15  the  Lord,  your  holy  one,  the  creator  of  I. 

22  but  thou  hast  been  weary  of  me,  0  I. 

25  Jacob  to  the  curse,  and  I.  to  reproaches 
j  Jacob  my  servant;  and  I.,  whom  I  have 

5  and  surname  (himself)  by  the  name  of  I. 

6  Thus  saith  the  LORD  the  King  of  I.,  and 

21  Remember.these,  O  Jacoband  I.;  for  thou 
■21  O  I.,  thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  me 

23  redeemed  Jacob,  and  glorified  himself  in  I. 

3  that  I . .  which  call(thee) . .  (am)the  God  of  I. 

4  For  Jacob  my  servant's  sake,  and  I.  mine 

11  the  Lord,  the  holy  one  of  I.,  and  his  ma. 

15  (art)  a  God  that  hidest  thyself,  0  God  of  I. 
17  (But)  I.  shall  be  saved  in  the  Lord  with 
25  In  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  I.  be 

3  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  I.,  which  are 

13  place  salvation  in  Zion  for  I.  my  glory 

4  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name,  .holy  one  of  I. 
1  Jacob,  which  are  called  by  the  name  of  I. 

1  make  mention!  of  the>Godof  I.,  (but)  not,  in 

2  and  stay  themselves  upon  the  God  of  I. 

12  Hearken  unto  me,  O  Jacob  and  I., my  called 
17  the  Lord,  thy  redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  I. 

3  Thou  (art)  my  servant,  0  I.,  in  whom  I 

5  Though  I.  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall  I  be 

6  raise,  .and  to  restore  the  preserved  of  I. 

7  Lord,  the  Redeemer  of  I.,  (and)  his  holy 

7  that  is  faithful,  (and)  the  holy  one  of  T. 
12  and  the  God  of  I.  (will  be)  your  rereward 

5  thy  redeemer  the  holy  one  of  I.;  The  God 
5  the  holy  one  of  I.;  for  he  hath  glorified 

8  God  which  gathereth  the  outcasts  of  I. 

9  thy  God,  and  to  the  holy  one  of  I. 

14  The  city.  .The  Zion  of  the  holy  one  of  I. 
7  the  great  goodness  toward  the  house  of  I. 

16  ignorant  of  us,  aud  I.  acknowledge  us 
20  the  children  of  I.  bring  an  offering  in  a 

3  I.  (was)  holiness  unto  the  LORD,  (and)  the 
4:  and  all  the  families  of  the  house  of  I. 

14  (Is)  I.  a  servant?  (is)  he  a  home  born  (slave)? 

20  dealt  treacherously  with  me,  O  house  of  I. 

21  (and)  supplications  of  the  children  of  I. 
23  Lord  our  God  (is)  the  salvation  of  I. 

1  If  thou  wilt  return,  0  I.,  saith  the  Lord 

15  a  nation  upon  you  from  far,  0  house  of  I. 
9  throughly  glean .  .remnant  of  I.  as  a  vine 

3,  21  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

12  I  did.  .for  the  wickedness  of  my  people  I. 

15  thussaiththeLoRDof  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

10.    1  the  LORD  speaketh  unto  you,  O  house  of  I. 

10.  16  I.  (is)  the  rod  of  his  inheritance.  TheLoRD 

11.  3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.;  Cursed  (be) 

12.  14  I  have  caused  my  people  I.  to  inherit 
13. 11  to  cleave  unto  me  the  whole  house  of  I. 

13.  12  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.,  Every  bot. 

14.  8  the  hope  of  I.,  the  saviour  thereof  in 

16.   9  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
16.  14,  15  that  brought  up  the  children  of  I. 
17. 13  O  Lord,  the  hope  of  I.,  all  that  forsake 
18.    6  0  houseof  I.,  caunotl  do  with  you  as  this 
18.    6  so  (are)  ye  hi  mine  hand,  0  house  of  I. 
18. 13  virgin  of  I.  hath  done  a  very  horrible 
I9-  3.  *5  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
21.    4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.;  Behold,  I 
23.   2  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.  against  the 
23.    7  which  brought  up  the  children  of  I.  out 
23.    S  which  led  the  seed  of  the  house  of  I.  out 

23.  13  prophesied,  .and  caused  my  people  I.  to 

24.  5  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.;  Like 
25. 15  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  I.  unto  me 

25.  27  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 


Jer.  27 

28 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30' 
30 


51 
Lam.  2 


4,  21  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

2  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
14  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

4,  8,  21  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
23  they  have  committed  villany  in  I.,  and 
25  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

2  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  God  of  I. ,  saying 

3  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  my  peo. 

4  words  that  the  LORD  spake  concerning  I. 
10  neither  be  dismayed,  O  I.:  for,  lo,  I  mil 

1  I  be  the  God  of  all  the  families  of  I. 

2  (even)  I. ,  when  I  went  to  cause  him  to  rest 
4  thou  shalt  be  built,  O  virgin  of  I.:  thou 

7  0  Lord,  save  thy  people,  the  remnant  of  I. 

9  I  am  a  father  to  I.,  and  Ephraim  (is)  my 
10  lie  that  scattered  I.  will  gather  him,  and 
21  virgin  of  I  ,  turn  again  to  these  thy  cities 
23  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
33  that  I  will  make  with  the  house  of  I. 

36  the  seed  of  I.  also  shall  cease  from  being 

37  I  will  also  cast  off  all  the  seed  of  I. 
14,15  Thus  saith  theLORD  of  hosts.the  Godof  I. 

20  Which  hast  set  signs  and  wonders,  .in  I. 

21  hast  brought  forth  thy  people  I  out  of 
30  children  of  I.  and  the  children  of Judah 
36  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.,  concerning 

4  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.,  concerning 
7  captivity  of  Judah,  and  the  captivity  of  I. 

14  which  I  have  promised  unto  the  house  of  I. 
17  to  sit  upon  the  tin-one  of  the  houseof  I. 

2,  13  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I. 
13,  17,  iS,  19  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

2  that  I  have  spoken  unto  thee  against  I. 

7  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.;  Thus 
17  the  Lord,  the  Godof  hosts,  the  God 'of  I. 

16  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
9  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.,  unto 

15,  18  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

10  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
7  the  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

11,25  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

2  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  I.,  unto 
25  the  God  of  I.,  saith  ;  Behold,  I  will  punish 
27  be  not  dismayed,  O  I.  :  for,  behold,  I  will 

1  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 
27  was  not  I.  a  derision  unto  thee  ?  was  he 

1  Hath  I.  no  sons?  hath  he  no  heir?  why  (th.) 

2  then  shall  I.  be  heir  unto  them  that 

4  the  children  of  I.  shall  come,  they  and 

17  I.  (is)  a  scattered  sheep  ;  the  lions  have 

18  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

19  I  will  bring  I.  again  to  his  habitation 

20  the  iniquity  of  I.  shall  be  sought  for 

29  against  the  Lord,  against,  .holy  one  of  I. 

5  I.  (hath)  not  (been)  forsaken,  nor  Judah 
5  filled  with  sin  against  the  holy  one  of  I. 

33  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  I. 

49  Babylon  (hath  caused)  the  slain  of  I.  to 

1  cast  down  from  heaven . .  the  beauty  of  I. 

3  He  hath  cut  off.  .all  the  horn  of  I. 

5  hath  swallowed  up  I.,  he  hath  swallowed 

3  I  send  thee  to  the  children  of  I.,  to  a 

1  and  go  speak  unto  the  house  of  I. 

4  get  thee  unto  the  house  of  I.,  and  speak 

5  thou  (art)  not  sent . .  (but)  to  the  house  of  I. 
7  the  house  of  I.  will  nothearken  unto  thee 

7  house  of  I.  (are)  impudent  and  hard  hear. 
17  made  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  I . 

3  This  (shall  be)  a  sign  to  the  house  of  I. 
13  thus  shall  the  children  of  I.  eat  their 

4  fire  come  forth  into  all  the  house  of  I. 

2  set  thy  face  toward  the  mountains  of  I. 
■3  Ye  mountains  of  I.,  hear  the  word  of  the 

5  the  dead  carcases  of  the  children  of  I. 

11  the  evil  abominations  of  the  house  of  I  ! 

2  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  the  land  of  I. 

4  the  glory  of  the  God  of  I.  (was)  there 

6  great  abominations  that  the  house  of  I. 

10  the  idols  of  the  house  of  I.,  pourtrayed 

11  men  of  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  I. 

12  ancients  of  the  house  of  I.  do  in  the  dark 

3  the  glory  of  the  God  of  I.  was  gone  up 

8  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  residue  of  I. 

19  the  glory  of  the  God  of  I.  (was)  over  them 

20  creature  that  I  saw  uuder  the  God  of  I. 

5  Thus  have  ye  said,  0  house  of  I.:  for  I. 
10  I  will  judge  you  in  the  border  of  I.  ;  and 

13  thou  make  afull  end  of  the  remnant  of  I.? 

15  the  house  of  I.  wholly,  (are)  they  unto 
17  and  I  will  give  you  the  land  of  I. 

22  the  glory  of  the  God  of  I.  (was)  over  them 

6  set  thee  (for)  a  sign  unto  the  house  of  I. 

9  hath  not  the  house  of  I.,  the  rebellious 
10  all  the  house  of  I.  that  (are)  among  them 
19  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  .of  the  land  of  I. 

22  that  proverb  (that)  ye  have  in  the  laud  of  I. 

23  shall  no  more  use  it  as  a  proverb  in  I. 

24  flattering  divination  within,  .house  of  I. 
27  (they  of)  the  house  of  I.  say,  The  vision 

2  against  the  prophets  of  I.  that  prophesy 

4  0  I.,  thy  prophets  are  like  the  foxes  in 

5  made  up  the  hedge  for  the  house  of  I.  to 
9  written  in  the  writing  of  the  house  of  I. 
9  neither  shall  they  enter,  .the  land  of  I. 

16  prophets  of  I.,  which  prophesy  concerning 
1  came  certain  of  the  elders  of  I.  unto  me 

4  Everyman  of  the  house  of  I.  that  setteth 

5  take  the  house  of  I.  in  their  own  heart 

6  say  unto  the  house  of  I.,  Thus  saith  the 

7  For  every  one  of  the  house  of  I.,  or  of 

7  the  stranger  that  sojouxueth  in  I.,  which 


Eze.  14. 

i4. 

*7- 

17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
19. 
19. 


9  destroy  him  from  the  midst  of  my  peoplel. 

11  house  of  I.  may  go  no  more  astray  from 
2  and  speak  a  parable  unto  the  house  of  I. 

23  In  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  I.  will  I 

2  this  proverb  concerning  the  land  of  I. 

3  any  more  to  .use  this  proverb  in  I. 

6, 15  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of  I. 
25  O  house  of  I.  ;  Is  not  my  way  equal?  are 
29  Yet  saith  the  house  of  I.,  The  way  of  the 

29  house  of  I.,  are  not  my  ways  equal?  are 

30  I  will  judge  you,  0  house  of  I.,  every  one 

31  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  I.  ? 
1  a  lamentation  for  the  princes  of  I. 

9  nomore  be  heard  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 

1  certain  of  the  elders  of  I.  came  to  enquire 
3  speak  unto  the  elders  of  I.,  and  say  unto 

5  In  the  day  when  I  chose  I.,  and  lifted  up 

13  the  house  of  I.  rebelled  against  me  in 

27  speak  unto  the  house  of  I.,  and  say  unto 

30  say  unto  the  house  of  I.,  Thus  saith  the 

31  shall  I  be  enquired  of  by  you.  .houseof  I.? 

38  they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  of  I. 

39  O  house  of  I.,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

40  in  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  I.,  saith 
40  there  shall  all  the  house  of  I.,  all  of 

42  I  shall  bring  you  into  the  land  of  I.,  into 
44  to  your  corrupt  doings,  O  ye  house  of  I. 

2  and  prophesy  against  the  land  of  I. 

3  say  to  the  land  of  I.,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 

12  it  (shall  be)upon  all  the  princes  of  I. 

25  thou,  profane  wicked  prince  of  I.,  whose 
.  6  the  princes  of  I.,  every  one  were  in  thee 
,18  the  house  of  I.  is  to  me  become  dross  :  all 

21  Speak  unto  the  house  of  I. ,  Thus  saith  the 

3  against  the  land  of  I. ,  when  it  waa  desolate 

6  all  thy  despite  against  the  land  of  I. 

14  vengeance,  .by  the  hand  of  my  people  I. 

24  a  pricliing  brier  unto  the  house  of  I. 

25  When  I  shall  have  gathered  the  house  of  I. 

6  been  a  staff  of  reed  to  the  house  of  I. 

16  the  confidence  of  the  house  of  I.,  which 
21  the  horn  of  the  house  of  I.  to  bud  forth 

7  set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  I. 

10  speak  unto  the  house  of  I. ;  Thus  ye  speak 

11  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  I.  ? 

20  ye  house  of  I.,  I  will  judge  you  every 

24  inhabit  those  wastes  of  the  land  of  I. 

28  the  mountains  of  I.  shall  be  desolate 

2  Son.  .prophesy  against  the  shepherdsofl. 
2  Woe  (be)  to  the  shepherds  of  I.  that  do 

13  feed  them  upon  the  mountains  of  I.  by 

14  upon  the  high  mountains  of  I.  shall  then* 

14  shall  they  feed  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 
30  they,  (even)  the  house  of  I.,  (are)  my  peo. 

5  hast  shed  (the  blood  of)  the  children  of  I. 

12  hast  spoken  against  the  mountains  of  I. 

15  at  the  inheritance  of  the  house  of  I.,  bee. 

1  prophesy  unto  the  mountains  of  I.,  and 
1,  4  mountains  of  I. ,  hear  the  word  of  the  L. 

6  Prophesy,  .concerning  the  land  of  I.,  and 

8  O  mountains  of  I.,  ye  shall  shoot  forth 
8  yield  your  fruit  to  my  people  of  I. ;  for 

10  multiply  men  upon  you,  all  the  house  of  I. 
12  men  to  walk  upon  you,  (even)  my  people  I. 

17  when  the  house  of  I.  dwelt  in  their  own 

21  which  the  houseof  I.  hadprofanedamong 

22  Therefore  say  unto  the  house  of  I.,  Thus 
22  I  do  not  (this)  for  your  sakes,  O  house  of  I. 

32  ashamed,  .for  your  own  ways,  0  houseof  I. 
37  I  will,  .be  enquired  of  by  the  house  of  I. 

1 1  these  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  I. :  be. 

12  come  up . .  and  bring  you  into  the  land . .  I. 

16  For  Judah,  and  for  the  children  of  I.  his 
19  tribes  of  I.  his  fellows,  and  will  put  them 

21  I  will  take  the  children  of  I.  from  among 

22  make  them  one  nation  in  the  land,  .of  I. 

28  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  I. 

8  the  mountains  of  I.,  which  have  been  al. 
14  In  thatday  when  niypeopleof  I.  dwelleth 

16  thou  shaltcomeupagainstmypeopleof I. 

17  spoken,  .by  my  servants  the  prophets  of  I. 

18  when  Gog  shall  come  against  the  land  of  I. 

19  shall  be  a  great  shaking  in  the  land  of  I. 

2  will  bring  thee  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 

4  Thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 

7  make ..  known  in  the  midst  of  my  people  I. 
7  shall  know  that  I  (am) . .  the  holy  one  in  I. 

9  they  that  dwell  in  the  cities  of  I.  shall  go 

1 1  give  unto  Gog  a  place . .  of  graves  in  I. ,  the 

12  seven  months  shall  the  house  of  I.  be  bu. 
17  a  great  sacrifice  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 

22  So  the  house  of  I.  shall  know  that  I  (am) 

23  house  of  I.  wfint  into  captivity  for  their 

25  have  mercy  upon  the  whole  house  of  I. 

29  poured  out  myspirit  upon  the  house  of  I. 
2  brought  he  me  into  the  land  of  I.,  and  set 
4  declare  all.  .thou  seest  to  the  house  of  I. 
2  the  glory  of  the  God  of  I.  came  from  the 
7  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  I. 

7  my  holy  name,  shall  the  house  of  I.  no 
10  show  the  house  to  the  house  of  I.,  that 

2  God  of  I.,  hath  entered  in  by  it,  therefore 
6  thou  shalt. say.  .to  the  house  of  I. 
6  O  ye  house  of  I.,  let  it  suffice  you  of  all 
9  stranger  that  (is)  among  the  children  of  I. 
10  when  I.  went  astray,  which  went  astray 
12  caused  the  house  of  I.  to  fall  into  iniquity 
22  maidens  of  the  seed  of  the  house  of  I.,  or 

28  and  ye  shall  give  them  no  possession  in  I. 

29  every  dedicated  thing  in  I.  shall  be  theirs 
6  it  shall  be  for  the  whole  house  of  I. 

8  In  the  land  shall  be  his  possession  in  L 


ISRAEL 


528 


ISRAEL, 


Eze.  45.    8  land  shall  they  give  to  the  house  of  I.  ac. 
45.    9  Let  it  suffice  you,  0  princes  of  I.  :  remove 
4j.  15  out  of  the  fat  pastures  of  I.,  for  a  meat 
45.  16  give  this  oblation  for  the  prince  in  I. 
45.  17  in  all  solemnities  of  the  house  of  I. :  he 
45.  17  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  house  of  I. 
47.  13  land,  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  I. 
47.  18  from  tiie  land  of  I.  (by)  Jordan,  from  the 
47.  21  this  land.. according  to  the  tribes  of  I. 

47.  22  the  country  among  the  children  of  I. ;  they 
'     47.  22  have  inheritance,  .among  the  tribes  of  I. 

48,  it  went  not  astray  when  the  children  of  I. 
48.  19  they,  .serve  it  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
48.  29  shall  divide  by  lot  unto  the  tribes  of  I. 
40.  31  gates,  .after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  I. 

Dan.    1.    3  should  bring  (certain)  of  the  children  of  I. 

9.   7  men  of  Judah.  .and  unto  all  I.,  (that  are) 

9.  11  Yea,  all  I.  have  transgressed  thy  law,  even 

9. 20  and  confessing . .  the  sin  of  my  people  I. 
Hos.    1.    1  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash,  king  of  I. 

1.   4  and  will  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom,  .of  I. 

1.    5  break  the  bow  of  I.  in  the  valley  of  Jezr. 

1.    6  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  1. 

1. 10  number  of  the  children  of  I.  shall  be  as 
1  love  of  the  Lord  toward  the  children  of  I. 

4  children  of  I.  shall  abide  many  days  with. 

5  Afterward  shall  the  children  of  I.  return 
1  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  .children  of  I. 

15  Though  thou,  I.,  play  the  harlot,  (yet)  let 

6  For  I.  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer 

1  Hear  ye  this,  .ye  house  of  I. ;  and  give  ye 
3  I  know  Ephraim,  and  I.  is  not  hid  from 
3  thou  committest  whoredom,  (and)  I.  is 
5  pride  of  I.  doth  testify  to  his  face  :  there. 
5  shall  I.  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  iniquity 
9  among  the  tribes  of  I.  have  I  made  known 

6.  10  seen  an  horrible  thing  in  the  house  of  I. 
6. 10  there  (is)  the  whoredom  of  Ephraim,  I.  is 

7.  1  When  I  would  have  healed  I.,  then  the 

7.  10  pride  of  I.  testifleth  to  his  face  :  and  they 

8.  2  I.  shall  cry  unto  me,  My  God,  we  know 
8.  3  I.  hath  cast  off  (the  thing  that  is)  good 
8.  6  Eor  from  I.  (was)  it  also  :  the  workman 
8.    8  I.  is  swallowed  up  :  now  shall  they  be 

8.  14  Fori,  hath  forgotten  his  maker,  and  bail. 

9.  1  Rejoice  not,  0  I.,  for  joy,  as  (other)  peo. 
9.  7  I.  shall  know  (it) :  the  prophet  (is)  a  fool 
9.  10  found.  I.  like  grapes  in  the  wilderness;  I 

10.  1  I.  (is)  an  empty  vine, he  bringeth  forth  fr. 
10.  6  and  I.  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  counsel 
10.    8  the  sin  of  I.,  shall  be  destroyed  :  the  thorn 

10.  9  0  I.,  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  G. 
10. 15  in  a  morning  shall  the  king  of  I.  utterly 

11.  1  When  I.  (was)  a  child,  then  1  loved  him 

11.  8  (how)  shall  I  deliver  thee,  I.?  how  shall  I 
it.  12  and  the  house  of  I.  with  deceit:  but  Jud. 
12. 12  I.  served  for  a  wife,  and  for  a  wife  he  kept 

12.  13  by  a  prophet  the  Lord  brought  I.  out  of 

13.  1  he  exalted  himself  in  I.  ;  but  when  he 

13.  9  O  I.,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself ;  but  in 

14.  1  0  I.,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  for 
14.    5  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  I.  :  he  shall 

2.  27  shall  know  that  I  (am)  in  the  midst  of  I. 

3.  2  will  plead  with  them .  .(for)  my  heritage  I. 
3.  16  (will  be),  .the  strength  of  the  children  of  I. 
1.    1  lie  saw  concerning  I.  in  the  days  of  Uzziah 

1.  1  nf  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  I. 

2.  6  For  three  transgressions  of  I.,  and  for  four 

2.  11  (Is  it)  not  even  thus,  O  ye  children  of  I.  ? 

3.  1  Hear  this  word.  .0  children  of  I.,  against 
3. 12  so  shall  the  children  of  I.  be  taken  out 

3.  14  I  shall  visit  the  transgressions  of  I.  upon 

4.  5  this  liketh  you,  0  ye  children  of  I.,  saith 
4.  12  Therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  O  I. 

4.  12  (and),  .prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O  I. 

5.  1  which  I  take  upagainstyou.  .Ohouseof  I. 
5.    2  The  virgin  of  I.  is  fallen ;  she  shall  no 

5.  3  hundred  shall  leave  ten,  to  the  house  of  I. 
5.  4  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  house  of  I. 

5.  25  offered  unto  me  sacrifices.  .0  house  of  I.? 

6.  1  of  the  nations,  to  whom  the  house  of  I. 

6.  14  will  raise  up.  .a  nation,  Ohouseof  I.,  saith 

7.  8  a  plumb  line  in  the  midst  of  my  people  I. 
7.    9  the  sanctuaries  of  I.  shall  be  laid  waste 
7.  10  Amaziah.  .sent  to  Jeroboam  king  of  I. 

7. 10  conspired  against  thee  in  the  midst  of . .  T. 
7.  11  I.  shall  surely  be  led  away  captive  out  of 
7.  15  unto  me,  Go,  prophesy  unto  my  people  I. 

7.  16  Thou  sayest.  Prophesy  not  against  I.,  and 
'7. 17  I.  shall  surely  go  into  captivity  forth  of 

8.  2  end  is  come  upon  my  people  of  I. ;  I  will 

9.  7  (Are)  ye  not  as  children . .  O  children  of  I.? 
.    9.   7  Have  not  I  brought  up  I.  out  of  the  land 

9.    9  I  will  sift  the  house  of  I.  among  all  nat. 

9.  14  bring,  .the  captivity  of  my  people  of  I. 
Obad.      20  captivity  of  this  host  of  the  children  of  I. 
Mi'\     t.    5  for  the  sins  of  the  house  of  I.  What  (is) 

1.  13  for  the  transgressions  of  I.  were  found  in 

1.  14  houses,  .(shall  be)  a  lie  to  the  kings  of  I. 

1.  15  shall  come  unto  Adullam  the  glory  of  I. 

2.  12  I  will  snrely  gather  the  remnant  of  I. 

3.  1  Hear,  .ye  princes  of  the  house  <<f  I.  ;  (Is 
3.    8  to  declare  unto  Jacob,  .and  to  I.  his  sin 
3.    9  Hear  this.  .ye.,  princes  of  the  In -use  of  I. 
5.    1  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  I.  with  a  rod 
5.   2  unto  me  (that  is)  to  be  ruler  in  1   ;  whose 

5.  3  then  the  remnant,  .shall  return  unto.. I. 

6.  2  hath  a  controversy .  .he  will  ph-  d  with  I. 

2  hath  turned  away,  .as  the  excellency  of  I. 
o  (as)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  .the God  of  I. 

1  j  The  remnant  of  I.  shall  not  do  iniquity 
i4  Sing,  0  daughter  of  Zion  ;  shout,  O  I.;  be 


Joel 


Amos 


Zeph.  3 
Zech.  9. 

Mai.    x. 


-Nali. 
Zeph 


10. 
15 

19, 

27. 

27, 

Mark  1 2. 

Luke  1. 


15  the  king  of  I. .  .(is)  in  the  midst  of  thee 
1  all  the  tribes  of  I.,  (shall  be)  toward  the  L. 
1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  fori. 
1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  I. 

5  will  be  magnified  from  the  border  of  I. 

16  the  God  of  I.,  saith  that  he  hnteth  putting 

4  I  commanded  unto  him  in  Horebfor  all  I. 

6  a  Governor,  that  shall  rule  my  people  I. 

20  Saying,  Arise,  .and  go  into  the  land  of  I. 

21  And  he  arose.,  and  came  into  the  land  of  I. 
10  havenotfound  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  I. 

33  saying,  It  was  never  so  seen  in  I. 
6  go  rather  to  the.  .sheep  of  the  house  of  I. 

23  not  have  gone  over  the  cities  of  I.,  till 

24  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  I. 

31  wondered,  .and  they  glorified  theGodofl. 

28  shall  sit.  .judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  I. 
9  whom  they  of  the  children  of  I.  did  value 

42  If  he  be  the  king  of  I.,  let  him  now  come 

29  Hear,  O  I.;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord 

32  Let  Christ  the  king  of  I  descend  now  from 
16  the  children  of  I.  shall  he  turn  to  the  L. 
54  He  hath  holpen  his  servant  I.,  in  rememb. 
68  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  I. ;  for  he 
80  till  the  day  of  his  showing  unto  I. 

25  devout,  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  I. 
32  A  light,  .and  the  glory  of  thy  people  I. 

34  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in  I. :  and 
25  many  widows  were  in  I.  in  the  days  of  E. 
27  many  lepers  were  in  I.  in  the  time  of  E. 

9  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  hi  I. 

30  and  sit.  .judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  I. 

21  been  he  which  should  have  redeemed  I. 

31  but  that  he  should  be  made  manifest  to  I. 
49  art  the  Son  of  God ;  thou  art  the  king  of  I. 
10  Art  thou  a  master  of  I.,  and  knowest  not 
13  Blessed  (is)  the  king  of  I.  that  cometh  in 

6  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  I.? 

22  Ye  men  of  I. ,  hear  these  words ;  Jesus  of 

36  Therefore  let  all  the  house  of  I.  know  as. 
12  Ye  men  of  I  ,  why  marvel  ye  at  this?  or 

8  said  unto  them,'  Ye  rulers,  .elders  [of  I.] 
10  Be  it  known  unto,  .all  the  people  of  I. 

27  Gentiles,  and  the  people  of  I.,  were  gath. 
21  all  the  senate  of  the  children  of  L,  and 
31  give  repentance  to  I.,  and  forgiveness  of 

35  Ye  men  of  I.,  take  heed  to  yourselves 

23  into  his  heart  to  visit,  .children  of  I. 

37  Moses  which  said  unto  the  children  of  I. 
42  0  ye  house  of  I.,  have  ye  offered  to  me 

15  bear  my  name  before,  .the  children  of  I. 

36  word.  .(God)  sent  unto  the  children  of  I. 

16  Men  of  I.,  and  ye  that  fear  God,  giveand. 

17  God  of  this  people  [of  I.]  chose  our  fathers 

23  hath  God.  .raised  unto  I.  a  Saviour,  Jesus 

24  first  preached .  .to  all  the  people  of  I. 

28  Crying  out,  Men  of  L,  help :  This  is  the 

20  for  the  hope  of  I.  I  am  bound  with  this 

6  For  they  (are)  not  all  I.  which  are  of  I. 
27  Esaias  also  crieth  concerning  I.,  Though 
27  children  of  I.  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  a 
31  But  I.,  which  followed  after  the  law  of 

1  [my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  fori.] 
19  But  I  say,  Did  not  I.  know,?  First  Moses 

21  But  to  I.  lie  saith,  All  day  long  I  have 

2  he  maketh  intercession  to  God  against  I. 

7  I.  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  seek. 

25  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  I.,  until 

26  so  all  I.  shall  be  saved :  as  it  is  written 

18  Behold  I.  after  the  flesh  :  are  not  they 
7,  13  that  the  children  of  I.  could  not  stedf. 

16  peace  (be)  on  them . .  and  upon  the  I.  of 
12  being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  I. 

5  Circumcise,  .of  the  stock  of  I.,  (of)  the 

8  make  a  new  covenant  with  the  house  of  I. 
10  that  I  will  make  with  thehouse  of  I.  after 

11.  22  of  the  departing  of  the  children  of  I. ;  and 
Rev.    2.  14  a  stumblingblock  before  the  children  of  I. 

7.    4  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 
2T.  12  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  I. 

3.  On  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  (1  EX  12.  1-9)  B.C.  975, 
Canaan  was  divided  into  the  two  kingdoms  of  Israel  and 
Jttdah.  The  former  lasted  from  975  till  721  B.C.  In 
974  J  eroboarn  sets  up  the  two  golden  calves,  1  Ki.  12.28,29; 
m  956  Ahijah  denounces  Jeroboam,  1  Ivi.  14.  7;  in  953 
Nadab  is  slain,  1  Ki.  15.  27;  in  940  the  king  of  Syria 
invades  Israel,  2  Ch.  16.  4 ;  in  929  confusion  prevails  in 
Israel,  1  Ki.  16.  9-20;  in  918  Jericho  is  rebuilt,  16.  34; 
in  910  Elijah  destroys  the  priests  of  Baal,  18.  40 ;  in  901 
the  Syrians  are  miraculously  defeated  ;  in  895  Elijah'  is 
translated,  2  Ki.  2.  11;  in  8g4  Elisha  heals  Naaman ; 
in  893  he  performs  various  miraclesf;  in  802  the  king  of 
Syria  besieges  Samaria,  2  Ki.  6.  24  ;  iii  Soi  Elisha  restores 
the  Shunamite's  son,  4.  32-35  ;  111  8S5  Hazael  kills  the 
king  of  Syria,  8.  15;  in  850  Jonah  goes  to  Nineveh, 
Jonah  1.  2;  2.  4;  in  847  Israel  oppressed  by  the  king 
of  Syria,  2  Ki.  8.  3  :  in  842  is  delivered  from  him,  13.  5  ; 
in  838  invaded  by"  Moab,  Elisha  dies  ;  in  822  Jeroboam 
II.  restores  the  territory  of  Israel,  2  Ki.  14.  25  ;  in  793 
Amos  prophesies;  111784  interregnum  of  11  years;  in  771 
Bui  invades  Israel ;  2  Ki.  15.  19  ;  in  740  Tiglath-pileser 
carries  off  captives,  15.  29  ;  in  725  the  captivity  of  ten 
tribes  foretold;  in  723  Samaria  besieged  by  Shalmanezer, 
18.  9  ;  in  721  the  ten  tribes  carried  off  into  Assyria,  17-  6. 
1  Ki.  4.  20  Judah  and  I.  (were)  many,  2  Sa.  24.  1. 

4.  25  Judah  and  I.  dwelt  safely,  every  man  un. 

12.  18  all  I.  stout  il  him  with  stones,  that  he  died 
12,  19  So  I.  rebelled  against  the  house  of  David 
12.  20  all  I.  heard  that  Jeroboam  was  come  again 
T2.  20  they  sent,  .and  made  him  king  overall  I. 
12.  21  warriors,  to  tight  against  the  house  of  I. 


John 


Acts 


3- 
4- 
4- 

4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
7 
7- 
7- 
9- 
10. 

13- 
13- 
13- 
13- 
21. 
28. 

Rom.  9. 
9- 
9- 
9- 


1  Co.  10. 

2  Co.  3. 
Gal.  6. 
Eph.  2 
Phil.  3. 
Heb.    8. 


1  Ei.12._24  against  your  brethren  the  children  of  I. 
12.  28  behold  thy  gods,  O  I.,  which  brought  thee 
12.  33  ordained  a  feast  unto  the  children  of  I. 
14.  10  (and)  him  that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  I. 
14. 13  all  I.  shall  mourn  for  him,  and  bury  him 
14.  14  the  Lord  shall  raise  him  up  a  king  over  I. 
14.  15  For  the  Lord  shall  smite  I.,  as  a  reed  is 
14.  15  he  shall  root  up  I.  out  of  this  good  land 
14.  16  he-shall  give  I.  up  because  of  the  sins  of 
14.  16  Jeroboam,  who  didsin,  and.  .made  I.  to 
14.  18  all  I.  mourned  for  him,  according  to  the 

14.  19  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  king  of  I. 

15.  9  the  twentieth  year  of  .1  eroboarn  king  of  I. 
15.  16  war  between  Asa  and  Baasha  king  of  I. 
15.  17  Baasha  king  of  I.  went  up  against  Judah 
15.  19  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of  I. 
15.  20  sent  the  captains.. against  the  cities  of  I. 
15.  25  the  son  of  Jeroboam  began  to  reign  over  I. 
15.  25  And  Nadab.  .reigned  over  I.  two  years 
15.  26, 34  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  I.  to  sin 
15.  27  Nadab  and  all  I.  laid  seige  to  Gibbethon 
15.  30  which  he  sinned,  and  which  he  made  I. 
15.  30  he  provoked  the  Lord  God  of  I.  to  anger 
15.  31  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  king  of  I? 
15.  32  war  between  Asa  and  Baasha  king  of  I. 

15.  33  the  son  of  Ahijah  foreign  over  aU  I.  in 

16.  2  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  I.;  and 
16.  2  hast  made  my  people  I.  to  sin,  to  provoke 
16.  5,  14,  20,  27  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I,? 
16.  S  Elan  the  son  of  Baasha  to  reign  over  I. 
16.  13  by  which  they  made  I.  to  sin,  in  provoking 
16.  16  all  I.  made  Omri,  the  captain  of  the  host 
16.  16  king  over  I.  that  day  in  the  camp 

16.  17  went  up  from  Gibbethon,  and  all  I.  with 
16.  19  in  his  sin  which  he  did,  to  make  I.  to  sin 
16.  21  the  people  of  I.  divided  into  two  parts 
16.  23  began  Omri  to  reign  over  I.,  twelveyears 
16.  26  in  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  I.  to  sin 
16.  29  began  Ahabthe  son  of  Omri  to  reign  over  I. 
16.  29  the  son  of  Omri  reigned  over  I.  in  Samaria 
16.  33  God  of  I.  to  anger  than  all  the  kings  of  I. 
18.  17  Ahabsaid.  .(Art)  thou  he  that  troubleth  I. 
18. 18  I  have  not  troubled  I.;  but  thou  and  thy 
18.  19  gathertomealll.untomountCarmel.and 

18.  20  Ahab  sent  unto  all  the  children  of  I.,  and 

19.  10  children  of  I.  have  forsaken  thy  covenant 
19.  14  children  of  I.  have  forsaken  thy  covenant 
19.  16  Jehu.. shalt  thou  anoint  (to  be)  king  over  I. 

19.  18  I  have  left  (me)  seven  thousand  in  I.,  all 

20.  2  hesentmessengerstoAhabkingof  I.  into 
20.   4,  11  And  the  king  of  I.  answered  and  said 
20.    7  king  of  I.  called  all  the  elders  of  the  land 
20.  13  there  came  a  prophet  unto  Ahab  king  of  I. 
20.  15  the  people,  (even)  all  the  children  of  I. 
20. 20  the  Syrians  lied  ;  and  I.  pursued  them;  and 
20.  21  king  of  I.  went  out,  and  smote  the  horses 
20.  22  the  prophet  came  to  the  king  of  I.,  and 
20.  26  and  went  up  to  Aphek,  to  fight  against  I. 
20.  27  children  of  I.  were  numbered,  and  were 
20.  27  the  children  of  I.  pitched  before  them 
20.  28  spake  unto  the  king  of  I.,  and  said,  Thus 
20.  29  the  children  of  I. ■._ slew  of  the  Syrians  an 
20.  31  heard  that  the  kings  of  the  house  of  I. 
20. 31  let  us,  I  pray,  .go  out  to  the  king  of  I. 
20.  32  came  to  the  king  of  I.,  and  said,  Thyser. 
20.  40  the  king  of  I.  said  unto  him,  So  (shall)  thy 
20.  41  the  king  of  I.  discerned  him  that  he  (was) 

20.  43  the  king  of  I.  went  to  his  house  heavy 

21.  7  Dost  thou  now  govern  the  kingdom  of  I..' 
21. 18  go  down  to  meet  Ahab  king  of  I.,  which 
21.  21  and  him  that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  I. 
21.  22  provoked  (me)  to  anger,  and  made  I.  to 

21.  26  Lord  cast  out  before  the  children  of  I. 

22.  1  contin.  without  war  between  Syria  and  I. 
22.  2  king  of  Judah  came  down  to  the  king  of  I. 
22.    3  the  king  of  I.  said  unto  his  servants,  Know 
22.    4,  5  Jehoshaphat  said  to  the  king  of  I. 

22.    6  king  of  I.  gathered  the  prophets  together 
22.    8  king  of  I.  said  unto  Jehoshaphat,  (There) 
22.    9  the  king  of  I.  called  an  officer,  and  said 
22. 10,  29  the  king  of  I.  and  Jehoshaphat  the 
22. 17  I  saw  all  I.  scattered  upon  the  hills,  as 
22. 18,  30  the  king  of  I.  said  unto  Jehoshaphat 
22.  26  the'kingofI.said,TakeMicaiah,audcarry 
22.  30  the  king  of  I.  disguised  himself,  and  went 
22.  31  saying,  Fight,  .only  with  the  king  of  I. 
22  32  that  they  said,  Surely  it  (is)  the  king  of  I 
22.  33  perceived  that  it  (was)  not  the  king  of  I. 
22.  34  smote  the  king  of  I.  between  the  joints 
22.  39  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I.? 
22.  41  in  the  fourth  year  of  Ahab  king  of  1. 
22.  44  Jehoshap.  made  peace  with  the  king  of  I. 
22.  51  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reien  over  I.  in 
22.  51  Ahaziah.  .reigned  two  years  over  I. 
22.  52  the  son  of  Ncbat,  who  made  I.  to  sin 
2  Ki.    1.    1  Moab  rebelled  against  I.  after  the  deat.li 
1.    3,  6,  i6notbecause(thereis)notaGodinI. 
1.  i3  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I.? 
3.    1  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign  over  I.  in 
3.    3  the  son  of  Kebat,  which  made  I.  to  sin 
3.   4  rendered  unto  the  king  of  I.  an  hundred 
3.    5  the  king,  .rebelled  against  the  king  of  1. 
3.   6  Jehoram  went  out.  .and  numbered  all  I. 
3.    9  the  king  of  I.  went,  and  the  king  of  Jud. 
3.  10  the  king  of  I.  said,  Alas  !  that  the  LORD 
3.  11  one  of  the  king  of  I.'s  servants  answered 
3.  12  the  king  of  I.  and  Jehoshaphat  the  king 
3. 13  Elisha  said  unto  the  king  of  I.,  What  have 
3. 13  the  king  of  I.  said  unto  him,  Nay  :  for  the 
3.24  And  when  they  came  to  the  camp  of  I. 
3.  27  there  was  great  indignation  against  I. 
5.    2  brought  away  captive  cut  of  the  land  of  I. 


ISRAELITE 


529 


ISSUE 


aKi. 


*3- 
*3- 
*3- 
*3- 
13- 
13* 
13- 
*3- 
*3- 
13- 
*3- 
13- 
13- 
*3- 
13- 
J3- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14, 
14. 
14 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14, 
15' 
15 


15- 
*5- 
IS- 
*5- 
*5- 
25- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
*7- 
17- 
17. 
*7- 
*7- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
*7- 
18. 
18. 


1  Ch    5 

9- 


4  said  the  maid  that  (is)  of  the  laud  of  I. 

5  I  will  send  a  letter  unto  the  king  of  I. 

6  he  brought  the  letter  to  the  king  of  I. 

7  when  the  king  of  I.  had  read  the  letter 

8  that  the  king  of  I.  had  rent  his  clothes 
8  shall  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  I. 

12  Abana.  .better  than  all  the  waters  of  I.? 

15  (there  is)  no  God  iu  all  the  earth,  hut  in  I. 

8  the  king  of  Syria  warred  against  I.,  and 

9  the  man  of  God  sent  unto  the  king  of  I. 

10  the  king  of  I,  sent  to  the  place  which  the 

1 1  show  me  which  of  us  (is)  forthe  king  of  I.? 

12  prophet  that  (is)  in  I.,  telleth  the  kingof  I. 
21  the  king  of  I.  said  unto  Elisha,  when  he 
23  bands,  .came  no  more  into  the  land  of  I. 
26  king  of  I.  was  passing  by  upon  the  wall 

6  the  king  of  I.  hath  hired  against  us  the 

13  they  (are)  as  all  the  multitude  of  I.  that 

12  that  thou  wilt  do  unto  the  children  of  I. 
16,  25  of  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab  king  of  I. 
iS  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  I. 
26  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  Omri  king  of  I. 

3,12  saith . .  I  have  anointed  thee  king  over  I. 
6  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  (even)  over  I. 
8  and  him  that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  I. 

14  Joram .  .kept  Ramoth-gilead,  he  and  all  I. 

21  Joram  king  of  I.  and  Ahaziah  king  of  Ju. 

28  Thus  Jehu  destroyed  Baal  out  of  I. 

29  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  I.  to  sin 

30  thy  children . .  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  I. 

31  the  sins  of  Jeroboam,  which  made  I.  to  sin 

32  those  days  the  Lord  began  to  cut  I.  short 
32  Hazael  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  of  I. 
34  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I.? 
36  time  that  Jehu  reigned  over  I.  in  Samaria 

1  the  son  of  Jehu  began  to  reign  over  I.  in 

2  the  son  of  Nebat,  which  made  I.  to  sin 

3  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  I. 

4  he  saw  the  oppression  of  I.,  because  the 

5  the  Lord  gave  I.  a  saviour,  so  that  they 

5  the  children  of  I.  dwelt  in  their  tents,  as 

6  Jeroboam,  who  made  I.  sin,  (but)  walked 

8,  12  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I.? 

10  began  J  ehoash . .  to  reign  over  I.  in  Sama. 

11  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  I. 

13  was  buried  iu  Samaria  with  the  kings  ofl. 

14  the  king  of  I.  came  down  unto  him,  and 

14  chariot  of  I.,  and  the  horsemen  thereof ! 

16  he  said  to  the  king  of  I.,  Put  thine  hand 

18  hesaid unto  the  king  of  I.,  Smite  upon  the 

22  king  of  Syria  oppressed  I.  all  the  days  of 

25  beat  him,  and  recovered  the  cities  of  I. 
1  year  of  Joash  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  I. 

8  the  son  of  Jehoahaz,  son  of  Jehu,  king  of  I. 

9  the  king  of  I.  sent  to  Amaziah  king  of  J. 

11  Jehoash  king  of  I.  went  up  ;  and  he  and 

1 2  Judah  was  put  to  the  worse  before  I. ;  aud 

13  king  of  I.  took  Amaziah  king  of  Judah 
15,  28  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I.? 

16  was  buried  in  Samaria  with  the  kings  of  I. 

17  of  Jehoash,  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  I. 

23  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  I.  began  to  reign 

24  the  sou  of  Nebat,  who  made  I.  to  sin 

25  restored  the  coast  of  I.  from  the  entering 

26  the  Lord  saw  the  affliction  of  I.,  (that  it 

26  shut  up,  nor  any  left,  norany  helper  for  I. 
2  7  he  would  blot  out  the  name  of  I.  from  under 

28  recovered  Damascus,  and  Hamath . .  for  I. 

29  with  his  fathers,  (even)  with  the  kings  of  I. 
1  and  seventh  year  of  Jeroboam  king  of  I. 
8  son  of  Jeroboam  reign  over  I.  in  Samaria 

9,  18,  24,  28  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  I.  to  s. 
11,  15,  21,  26,  31  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  I. 

12  Thy  sons  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  I.  "unto 
17  Menahem  the  son  of  Gadito  reign  over  I. 

20  Menahem  exacted  the  money  of  I.,  (even) 
23  the  son  of  Menahem  began  to  reign  overl. 

27  the  son  of  Renialiah  began  to  reign  over  I. 
29  In  the  days  of  Pekah  king  of  I.  came 

32  of  Pekah  the  son  of  Remaliah  kingof  I. 
3  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  I. 

3  cast  out  from  before  the  children  of  I. 

5  Pekah  son  of  Remaliah  king  of  I.  came 

7  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  I.,  which 

1  son  of  Elah  to  reign  in  Samaria  over  I. 

2  as  the  kings  of  I.  that  were  before  him 

6  carried  I.  away  into  Assyria,  and  placed 

7  the  children  of  I,  had  sinned  against  the 

8  the  children  of  I.,  and  of  the  kings  of  I. 

9  And  the  children  of  I.  did  secretly  (those) 

13  the  Lord  testified  against  I.  and  against 
iS  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  I.,  and  re. 

19  in  the  statutes  of  I.  which  they  made 

20  the  Lord  rejected  all  the  seed  of  I.,  and 

21  he  rent  I.  from  the  house  of  David;  and 

21  Jeroboam  drave  I.  from  following  the  L. 

22  the  children  of  I.  walked  in  all  the  sins 

23  the  Lord  removed  I.  out  of  his  sight,  as 

23  So  was  I.  carried  away  out  of  their  own 

24  placed  (them),  .instead  of  the  child,  of  I. 

I,  9  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah  king  of  I. 

4  the  children  of  I.  did  burn  incense  to  it 

10  (is)  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  king  of  I. 

11  the  king  of  Assyria  did  carry  away  I.  un. 

3  made  a  grove,  as  did  Ahab  king  of  I. ;  and 

15  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  I.  to  sin,  had 
19  the  kings  of  I.  had  made  to  provoke  (the 
22  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged  I. 
27  also  out  of  my  sight,  as  I  have  removed  I. 
17  and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  king  of  I. 

I I,  were  reckoned  by  genealogies ;  and,  be. 

5  (they  of)  I.  were  a  thousand  thousand  and 

67 


17- 
18. 
18. 


2  Ch.io.  18  the  children  of  I.  stoned  him  with  stones 

10.  19  I.  rebelled  against  the  house  of  David 

11.  1  which  were  warriors,  to  fight  against  I. 
11.    3  and  to  all  I.  in  Judah  and  Benjamin, saying 
11.  13  the  Levites  that  (were)  in  all  I.  resorted 
11.  16  after  them  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
13.    4  said,  Hear  me,  thou  Jeroboam,  and  all  I. 

13. 12  children  of  I.,  fight  ye  not  agaiust  the 
13.  15  that  God  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  I.  before 
13.  16  the  children  of  I.  fled  before  Judah :  and 
13. 17  there  fell  down  slain  of  I,  five  hundred 
13.  iS  the  children  of  I.  were  brought  under  at 
15.    9  they  fell  to  him  out  of  I.  in  abundance 

15.  17  high  places  were  not  taken  away  out  of  I. 

16.  1  Baasha  king  of  I.  came  up  against  Judah 
16.  .3  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of  I. 

16.  4  s"ent . .  captains . .  against  the  cities  of  I. 
16. 11  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  I. 

17.  1  and  strengthened  himself  against  I. 
4  and  walked,  .not  after  the  doings  of  I. 

3  Ahab  king  of  I.  said  unto  Jehoshaphat 

4  And  Jehoshaphat  said  unto  the  king  of  I. 

18.  5  king  of  I.  gathered  together  of  prophets 
18.    7  thekingofl.saiduntoJehoshaphat, (There 
18.    8  king  of  I.  called  for  one  (of  his)  officers 
18.  9,  28  the  kingof  I.  and  Jehoshaphat  king 

18. 16  see  all  I.  scattered  upon  the  mountains 

18. 17  the  king  of  I.  said  to  Jehoshaphat,  Did  I 
18. 19  Who  shall  entice  Ahab  king  of  I.,  that  he 
18.  25  thekiug  of  I.  said,  Take  ye  Micaiah,  and 
18.  29  the  king  of  I.  said  unto  Jehoshaphat,  I 
iS.  29  the  king  of  I.  disguised  himself ;  and  they 
18.  30  Fight  ye.  .save  only  with  the  king  of  I. 
18.  31  thattheysaid,It(is)thekingofI.  Therefo. 
18.  32  perceived  that  it  was  not  the  king  of  I. 
18.  33  smote  the  king  of  I.  between  the  joints 
18.  34  the  king  of  I.  stayed  (himself)  up  in  (his) 
20.  34  mentioned  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  I. 

20.  35  king.,  join  himself  with  Amaziah  king  of  I. 

21.  2  (were)  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  I. 
21.    4  and  slew,  .(divers)  also  of  the  princes  of  I. 

21.  6  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  I. 
2i.  13  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  I. 

22.  5  with  Jehoramthesonof  Ahab  kingof  I.  to 
25.   6  thousand  mighty  men  of  valour  out  of  I. 
25.   7  let  not  the  army  of  I.  go  with  thee 

25.  7  forthe  Lord  (is)  not  with  I.  ..all  the  childr. 
25.   9  which  I  have  given  to  the  army  of  I.  ? 

25. 17  of  Jehoahaz,  the  son  of  Jehu,  king  of  I. 
25.  18  Joash  king  of  I.  sent  to  Amaziah  king  of 
25.  21  Joash  the  king  of  I.  went  up  ;  and  they 
25.  22  Judah  was  put  to  the  worse  before  I.,  and 
25.  23  the  kingof  I.  took  Amaziah  kingof  Judah? 
25.  25  death  of  Joash,  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  I. 
25.  26  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  I.  ? 

27.  7  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  I.  and  Judah 

28.  2  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of  I. 
28.  5  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  I. 
28.    8  the  children  of  I.  carried  away  captive  of 

28. 13  and  (there  is)  fierce  wrath  against  I. 

28.  19  brought  Judah  low  because  of.  .king  of  I. 
28.  26  in  the  book  of  the  kiugs  of  Judah  and  I. 
30.  1  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  God  of  I. 
30.  6  children  of  I.,  turn  again  unto  the  Lord 
30. 21  the  children  of  I.  that  were  preseut  at 

30.  25  the  congregation.,  that  came  out  of  I.,  and 
30-  25  strangers  that  came  out  of  the  land  of  I. 

31.  6  (concerning)  the  children  of  I.  and  Judah 
32. 32  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  I. 

33.  18  written)  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  I. 

34.  9  the  remnant  of  I.,  and  of  all  Judah  and 

34.  21  for  them  that  are  left  in  I.  and  in  Judah 

35.  18  was  no  passover  like  to  that  kept  in  I. 

35. 18  neither  did  all  the  kings  of  I.  keep  such 

35.  27  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  I.  and  Judah 

36.  8  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  I.  and  Judah 
Isa.  7.  1  king  of  I.,  went  up  toward  Jerusalem  to 
Jer.    2.  26  As  the  thief .  .is  the  house  of  I.  ashamed 

2.  31  Have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto  I.  ?  a  land 

3.  6  Hast  thou  seen  (that)  which  backsliding  I. 
*  whereby  backsliding  I.  committed  adult. 

backsliding  I.  hath  justified  herself  more 
12  Return,  thou  backsliding  I.,  saith  the  Lo. 
8  house  of  Judah.  .walkwiththe  house  of  I. 
11  the  house  of  I.  and  the  house  of  Judah 
26  house  of  I.  (are)  uncircumcised  in  the  heart 
11.  10  the  house  of  I.  and  the  house  of  Judah 
11. 17  for  the  evil  of  the  house  of  I.,  and  of  the 

23.  6  shall  he  saved,  and  I.  shall  dwell  safely 

31.  27  I  will  sow  the  house  of  I.  and  the  house 
31. 31  make  a  new  covenant  with  the  house  of  I. 

32.  30  children  of  I.  and  the  children  of  Judah 
32.  32  Because  of  all  the  evil  of  the  children  of  I. 
41.   9  had  made  for  fear  of  Baasha  king  of  I. 
48. 13  house  of  I.  was  ashamed  of  Beth-el  their 
50.  33  the  children  of  I.  and  the  children  of 

Eze.    4.    4  lay  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  I.  upon  it 

4.  5  thou  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  I. 
9.    9  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  I.  and  Judah 

27. 17  and  the  land  of  I., 'they  (were)  thy  merch. 

37.  16  J  udah,  and  (for)  all  the  children  of  I.  his 
44.  15  the  children  of  I.  went  astray  from  me 

Hos.    1 .    1  Jeroboam  theson  of  Joash,  kingof  1. ,  v .  1 1 

Zech.  1.  19  have  scattered  Judah,  I.,  and  Jerusalem 

8.  13  O  house  of  Judah,  aud  house  of  I. ;  so  will 

11.  14  the  brotherhood  between  Judah  and  I. 

Mai.    2. 11  an  abomination  is  committed  in  I.  and  in 

IS-RA-EX-ITE,  ISRAELITISH,  ^Tfc",  'Wlft  n^"#--, 

One  belonging  to  the  tribes  of  Israel. 

Esod.  9.   7  was  not  one  of  the  cattle  of  the  I.  dead 


Lev.  23.  42  all  that  are  I.  born  shall  dwell  in  booths 
24.  10  theson  of  an  I.  woman,  whose  father  (was) 
24.  10  this  son  of  the  I.  (woman)  and  a  man  of 

24.  11  the  I.  woman's  son  blasphemed  the  name 
Nuni25.  14  the  name  of  the  I.  that  was  slain,  (even) 
Josh.  3.  17  the  I.  passed  over  on  dry  ground,  until 

8/24  the  I.  returned  unto  Ai,  and  smote  it  with 
13.    6  divide  thou  it  by  lot  unto  the  I.  for  an 
13.- 13  Maachathites  dwell  among  the  I.  until  tins 

Judg2o.  21  destroyed  down  to  the  ground  of  the  I. 

1  Sa.    2. 14  they  did  in  Shiloh  unto  all  the  I.  that 

13.  20  the  I.  went  down  to  the  Philistines,  to 

14.  21  they  also  (turned)  to  be  with  the  I.  that 

25.  1  the  I.  were  gathered  together,  and  lame. 


:Sa. 


7- 
1  Ch.    g. 
John 
Horn.  9. 


1  the  I.  pitched  by  a  fountain  which  (is)  in 

1  were  feeble,  and  all  the  I.  were  troubled 
25  an  I.,  that  went  in  to  Abigail  the  daugh. 
24  the  I.  rose  up  and  smote  the  Moabites,  so 

3  they  (are),  .as  all  the  multitude  of  the  I. 

2  first  inhabitants  that  (dwelt,  .were) the  I. 
47  Behold  an  I.  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile  ! 

4  Who  are  I.;  to  whom  (pertaineth)  the  ad. 

11.  1 1  also  am  an  I.,  of  theseed  of  Abraham 
2  Co.  11.  22  Are  they  I.?  so  (am)  I.  Are  they  the  seed 

IS-SA'-CHAR,  ~\yj?",.,'l<rax(ip,  bearing  hire,  reward. 
1.  The  invariable  form  of  the  name  in  Hebrew  is  Isascar, 
but  the  Masorites  have  pointed  it  so  as  to  supersede  the 
second  s.  He  was  the  ninth  sou  of  Jacob  and  the  fifth 
by  Leah.  Of  Issachar  as  an  individual  not  a  word  is  re- 
corded after  his  birth.    B.C.  1746. 

Gen.  30.18  given  me  my  hire.,  she  called  his  name  I. 

35.  23  and  Levi,  and  Judah,  and  I.,  and  Zebulun 

46.  13  the  sons  of  I.;  Tola,  and  Phuvah,  and  Job 

49.  14 1.(is)  a  strong  ass  crouching  down  between 

Exod.  1.    3  I.,  Zebulun,  and  Benjamin 

1  Ch.  2.    1  Simeon,  Levi,  and  Judah,  I.,  and  Zebulun 

7.    1  thesousofI.(were)Tola,  andPuah,  Jashub 

2  The  tribe  that  was  descended  from  Issachar,  as  well 
as  that  allotment  of  Canaan  which  they  inherited. 
Num.  1.    8  Of  I.;  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Zuar 

1.  28  Of  the  children  of  I.,  by  their  generations 

1.  29  numbered  of  them,  (even)  of  the  tribe  of  I. 

2.  5  pitchnextuntohun(shallbe)thetribeofI. 
2.  5  (shall  be)  captain  of  the  children  of  I.  (was) 
7. 18  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Zuar,  prince  of  I. 

10. 15  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  I.  (was) 
13.  7  Of  the  tribe  of  I.,  Igal  the  son  of  Joseph 
26.  23  (Of)  the  sous  of  I.,  after  their  families :  (oO 
26.  25  These  (are)  the  families  of  I.  according  to 
34.  26  prince  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  I. 

Deut.27.  12  and  Judah,  and  I.,  and  Joseph,  and  Beu. 
33.  18  in  thy  going  out ;  and,  I.,  in  thy  tents 

Josh  17. 10  Asher  on  the  north,  and  in  I.  ou  the  east 
17.  11  Manasseh  had  in  I.  and  in  Asher,  Beth. 
19.  17  lot  came  out  to  I.,  for  the  children  of  I. 
19.  23  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  I.  according 
21.    6  out  of  the  families  of  the  tribe  of  I.,  and 
21.  28  out  of  the  tribe  of  I.,  Kishon  with  her 

Judg.  5.  15  princes  of  I.  (were)  with  Deborah  ;  even  I. 
10.    1  son  of  Puah,  the  son  of  Dodo,  a  man  of  I. 

1  Ki.  4.  17  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Paruah  in  I. 

15  27  the  son  of  Ahijah,  of  the  house  of  I.,  con. 

1  Ch.  6.  62  out  of  the  tribe  of  I.,  and  out  of  the  tribe 

6.  72  out  of  the  tribe  of  I.  ;  Kedesh  with  her 

7.  5  brethren  among  all  the  families  of  I.  (we.) 

12.  32  the  children  of  I.,  (which  were  men)  that 
12.  40  (even)  unto  I.  and  Zebulun  and  Naphtali 
27. 18  of  David  :  of  I.,  Omri  the  son  of  Michael 

2  Ch.30.  iS  I.,  and  Zebulun,  had  not  cleansed  them. 
Eze.  48.  25  east  side  unto  the  west  side,  I.  a  (portion) 

48.  26  by  the  border  of  I.,  from  the  east  side 
48.  33  Simeon,  one  gate  of  I.,  one  gate  of  Zebulun 
Rev.  7.  7  OfthetribeofI.(were)sealedtwelvethou. 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of 
Issachar :— Abez,  Anaharath,  Anem,  Aphek,  Beth- 
pazzez,  Beth-shemesh,  Chesulloth,  En-gannim,  En- 
haddah,  Haphraim,  Harod,  Jarmuth,  Jezreel,  Kedesh, 
Megiddo,  Rabbith,  Shahazimah,  Shikon,  Shunem,  &c. 
3.  A  son  of  Meslielemiah  and  a  porter  of  the  tabernacle 
in  David's  time.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.26.    5  sLxth,  I.  the  seventh,  Peulthai  the  eighth 
ISSTJE  — 
l.A  flowing,  2M  zob. 

Lev.  15.   2  a  running.,  (because  of)  his  issue  he  (is) 
15.   3  this  shall  be  his  uncleanuess  in  his  issue 
15.   3  whether  his  flesh  run  with  his  issue,  or 
15.   3  his  flesh  be  stopped  from  his  issue,  it  (is) 
15.  13  when  he.  .is  cleansed  of  his  issue ;  then  he 
15.  15  shall-makeanatonementforhim.  .hisissuo 
15.  19  her  issue  in  her  flesh  be  blood,  she  shall 
15.  25  all  the  days  of  the  issue  of  her  unclean. 
15.  26  whereon  she  lieth  all  the  days  of  her  issue 
15.  28  if  she  be  cleansed  of  her  issue,  then  she  s. 
15.  30  atonement,  .for  the  issue  of  her  unclean. 

^.Flowing,  issue,  no~u  zirmah. 

Eze.  23.  20  and  whose  issue  (is  like)  the  issue  of  horses 

Z.Birth,  what  is  born,  nnpiD  moledeth. 

Geu.  48.    6  And  thy  issue,  which  thou  begettest  after 

^.Fountain,  lipp  maqor. 

Lev.  12.   7  she  shall  be  cleansed  from  the  issue  of  her 

5.  Issue,  produce,  niyay  tsephioth. 

Isa.   22  34  the  offspring  and  the  issue,  all  vessels  of 

6.  Outgoings,  rruxyin  totsaoth. 

Psa.  68.  20  untoGoDtheLord(belong)theissueBirom 
Prov.  4.  23  keep  thy  heart . .  out  of  it  (are)  the  issues 


ISSUE 


530 


IZRI 


15- 
15- 

15- 
15- 
15- 


7. A  running,  issue,  jtutrts  rhusis. 

Marks.  25  a  certain  woman,  which  had  an  issue  of 
LukeS.  43  a  woman,  having  an  issue  of  blood  twelve 

8.  44  immediately  her  issue  of  blood  was  stanched 

8. Seed,  cwepfia  sperma. 

Matt  22.  25  having  no  issue,  left  his  wife  unto  his  br. 
ISSUE,  to  — 
l.To  go  forth,  issue,  ~\n  negad,  3. 

Dan.   7.  ro  a  fiery  steam  issued  and  came  forth  from 

2. To.  pass  out,  £KTropsvofj.at  ekporeuomai. 

Rev.   9.  17  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire  and  smoke 
9.  18  brimstone,  which  issued  out  of  their  mo. 
ISSUE  of  blood,  to  be  diseased  with  — 
To  run  with  blood,  at/j.opf>o€(a  haimorrhceo. 

Matt.  9.  20  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood  twelve 
ISSUE,  to  have  a  (running)  — 
To  flow,  issue,  an  zub. 

Lev.  15.    2  "When  any  man  hath  a  running  issue  out 
4  whereon  he  lieth  that-hath  the  issue  is 

6  thing  whereon  he  sat  that  hath  the  issue 

7  toucheth  the  flesh  of  him  that  hath  the  i. 

8  if  he  that  hath  the  issue  spit  upon  him 

9  saddle . .  he  rideth  upon  that  hath  the  issue 
11  whomsoever  he  toucheth  that  hath  the  i. 

15. 12  vessel,  .he  toucheth  which  hath  the  issue 

15. 13  when  he  that  hath  an  issue  is  cleansed  of 
15.  19  And  if  a  woman  have  an  issue,  (and)  her, 
15.  25  if  a  woman  have  an  issue  of  her  blood 
15.  32  This  (is)  the  law  of  him  that  hath  an  issue 
15.  33  and  of  him  that  hath  an  issue,  of  the  man 
22.   4  What  man  soever,  .hath  a  running  issue 

Num.  5.    2  every  one  that  hath  an  issue,  and  whoso. 
2  Sa.    3.  29  one  that  hath  an  issue,  or  that  is  a  leper 

ISSUE  out  or  from,  to  — 

Togo  forth  or  out,  ttyr  yatsa. 

Josh.  8.  22  the  other  issued  out  of  the  city  against 
2  Ki.  20.  18  thy  sons  that  shall  issue  from  thee,  which 
Job    38.    8  when  it  brake  forth,  .it  had  issued  out  of 
Isa.  39.    7  of  thy  sons  that  shall  issue  from  thee 
Eze.  47.    1  waters  issued  out  from  under  the  thresh. 
47.    8  These  waters  issue  out  toward  the  east 
47.  12  their  waters  they  issued  out  of  the  sanct. 

IT— 

l.IIe,  it,  nm  hu. 

Gen.   3.    6  and  that  it  (was)  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and 

2.  She,  it,  n\i  hi. 

Gen.  19.  20  this  city  (is)  near  to  flee  unto,  and  it  (is) 
Dan.    2.  44  set  up  a  kingdom,  .and it  shall  stand  for 
7.    7  and  it  (was)  diverse  from  all  the  beasts 

3.  They,  on  hem. 

Psa.  38.  10  the  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  also  is  gone 

4.  This,  mcf  zoth. 

Numji4.  35  I  will  surely  do  it  unto  all  this  evil  cong. 

iCh.27.  24  because  there  fell  wrath  for  it  against  Is. 
5. This,  r\\zeh. 

G  en.  yz.  29  Wheref ore  (is)  it  (that)  thou  dost  ask  after 
6.This,  ni  zoh. 

Eccl.  2.    2  I  said . .  mad ;  and  of  mirth,  What  doeth  it 

7.  Her  face,  rnp  paneha. 

Exodus.  37  that  they  may  give  light  over  against  it 

8.  He,  he  himself,  avr6s  autos. 

Matt2o.  1 1  enquire  who  in  it  is  worthy ;  and  there 
John  8.  44  own :  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it 

9.  That  one,  iKtwos  ehcinos. 

1  Jo.  5.  16  sin . .  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it 
10. This  one,  ovtos  houtos. 

Mark  6.  16  Lit  is]  John,  whom  I  beheaded :  he  is  risen 

11. By  this,  iv  ravrr}  en  taute  ;  ravrvv  tauten. 
Heb.  ir.   2  For  by  it  the  elders  obtained  a  good  rep. 

12.  This,  that,  rovro  touto. 

Matt  12.  11  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath  day 
Mark  5.  43  charged  them,  .no  man  should  know  it 

14.    5  For  it  might  have  been  sold  for  more  than 
LukeiS.  36  And  hearing,  .he  asked  what  it  meant 
Heb.  13. 17  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and  not  with  gr. 

Id. Of  this,  of  that,  tovtov  toutou. 

John    6.  61  knew,  .that  liis  disciples  niurniured  at  it 
IT,  of  — 
Of  him,  of  it,  avrov  autou. 

Rev.    8. 12  the  day  shone  not  for  a  third  part  of  it 
IT  be— 
l.It  is,  there  is,  'fi'x  iihai. 

Ezra  5.  17  whether  it  be  (so),  that  a  decree  was  made 
2.  It  is,  there  is,  C",  yesh. 

Gen.  23.    8  If  it  be  your  mind  that  I  should  bury  my 

1  Sa.  14.  39  though  it  be  in  Jonathan  my  son,  he  shall 

2  Ki.  9.  15  Jehu  said,  If  it  be  your  minds,  .let  none 

10. 15  If  it  be,  give,  .thine  hand.     And  he  gave 

IT  is  — 

It  is,  there  is,  v\  yesh. 

Gen.  31.  29  It  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  you 
2  K1.10.  15  And  Jehonadab  answered,  It  is.    If  it  be 

IT  was  — 

It  is,  there  is,  v*  yesh. 

Num.  g.  aoAncUsG}  It  was,  when  the  cloud  was  a  few 

9.  31  And  (so)  it  was,  when  the  cloud  abode  fr. 


TTAT.TAN",  'iTaXi/co?  belonging  to  Italy. 

Acts  10.    1  centurion  of  the  band  called  the  Italian 

ITALY,  }\ra\(a. 

The  country  of  which  Rome  is  the  capital ;  it  has  the 
Alps  on  the  N.,  the  Mediterranean  on  the  S.,  Gulf  of 
Venice  oh  the  E.,  and  B'rance  and  the  Mediterranean  on 
the  W.  In  2450  B.C.  the  mythic  reign  of  Saturn  is  said 
to  begin;  in  1710  a  colony  of  Arcadians,  under  GSnotrus, 
settle  in  Italy  and  found  the  state  of  Magna  Graecia  ; 
in  1293  a  Pelasgian  colony  passes  from  Greece  into 
Italy  ;  in  1253  Evander  leads  an  Arcadian  colony  into 
Italy;  in  1240  Latinus  reigns;  in  1181  ^Eneas  arriving, 
founds  Lavinia ;  in  1152  Ascanius  builds  AlbaLonga; 
in  895  Tiberinus  being  defeated,  drowns  himself  in  the 
Albiila,  whence  called  the  Tiber;  in  753  (April  21), 
Romulus  founds  Rome;  in  A.i>.  476  Odoacer  abolishes 
the  W.  empire,  and  founds  the  Gothic  kingdom  of 
Italy. 

Acts  i3.    2  lately  come  from  I.,  with  his  wife  Priscilla 
27.    1  determined  that  we  should  sail  into  I. 

27.  6  found  a  ship  of  Alexandria  sailing  into  I. 
Heb.  13.  24  Salute  all  them.  .They  of  I.  salute  you 

ITCH— 

Heat,  ytm,  itch,  D^rt  clieres. 

Deut2?.  27  emerods,  and  with  the  scab,  and  with  the  i. 
ITCHING,  to  have  — 
To  itch,  KUT)6o/j.aL  knethomai. 

2  Ti.   4.    3  shall  they  heap,  .teachers,  having  itching 
I- THAI,  vvx  being,  existing. 

One  of  David's  thirty  valiant  men.  In  2  Sam.  23.  29  he 
is  called  Ittai.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  31 1,  thesonof  Ribai  of  Gibeah, (that  perta.) 
I-THA'-MAR,  IDfl'K. 
The  youngest  son  of  Aaron.    B.C.  1491. 

Exod  6.  23barehimNadab,andAbihu,Eleazar,andI. 

28.  1  and  Abihu,  Eleazar  and  I.,  Aaron's  Sons 
38.  21  by  the  hand  of  I.,  son  to  Aaron  the  priest 

Lev.  10.    6,  12  unto  Aaron,  and.  .Eleazar  and  unto  I. 

10.  16  he  wasangry  with  Eleazar  andl.,  the  sons 
Num.  3.   2  the  first  born,  and  Abihu,  Eleazar,  and  I. 

3.  4  I.  minisiered  in  the  priest's  office  in  the 

4.  28  their  charge  (shall  be)  underthe  hand  of  I. 
4.  33  under  the  hand  of  I.  the  son  of  Aaron  the 

7.  8  the  hand  of  I.  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 
26.  60  bornNadab  and  Abihu,  Eleazar  and  I. 

1  Ch.  6.    3  Aaron  ;  Nabab.  .Abihu,  Eleazar,  and  I. 

24.  1  of  Aaron;  Nadab.  .Abihu,  Eleazar,  and  I. 
24.  2  Eleazar  and  I.  executed  the  priest's  office 
24.  3  Ahimelech  of  the  sons  of  I.,  according  to 
24.  4  there  were  more,  .than  of  the  sous  of  I. 
24.  4  eight  among  the  sons  of  I.  according  to 
24.  5  the  sons  of  Eleazar,  and  of  the  sons  of  I. 
24.  6  taken  for  Eleazar,  and  (one)  taken  for  I. 
Ezra  8.  2  of  the  sons  of  I.  ;  Daniel :  of  the  sons  of 
I-THI'-EL,  *?XTr«  God  is. 

1.  A  Benjamite,  the  son  of  Jesaian.     B.C.  536. 

Neh.  11.    7  Maaseiah,  thesonof  I.,  the  son  of  Jesaiah 

2.  One  of  the  two  persons  to  whom  Agar  delivered  his 
discourse. 

Prov.30.    1  the  man  speak  unto  I.,  even  unto  I.  and 
ITH'-MAH,  njprr  purity. 

A  Moabite,  and'oneof  the  thirty  valiantmen  of  David's 
guard.    B.C.  1048. 

j  Ch.n.  46  the  sons  of  Elnaam,  and  I.  the  Moabite 
ITH'-NAN,  j:n'  strong  jrtace. 

A  town  in  the  extreme  S.  of  Judah,  on  the  borders  of 
the  desert  if  not  actually  in  it. 

Josh  15.  23  And  Kedesh,  and  Hazor,  and  I. 
ITH'-RA,  K"W  excellence. 

The  father  of  Absalom's  captain  Amasa.  B.C.  1048. 
He  is  called  also  Jether  (1  Kings  2.  5). 

2  Sa.  17.  25  a  man's  son  whose  name  (was)  I.,  an  Isra. 
ITH'-RAN,  prr  excellent. 

1.  A  son  of  Dishon  (or  Dishan),  son  of  Seir  the  Horite. 
B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  26  Hemdan,  and  Eshban,  and  I.,  and  Cheran 
1  Ch.  1.  41  Amram,  and  Eshban,  and  I.,  and  Cheran 

2.  A  son  of  Zophah  an  Ashorite.     B.C.  1550. 

1  Ch.  7.  37  Shamma,  and  Shilshah,  and  I.,  and  Beera 
ITH-RE'-AM,  cjprj:  remnant  of  tlie people. 

Sixth  son  of  David  by  his  wife  Eglah.  He  was  born  at 
Hebron.  Eglah  was  Michal,  and  died  iu  giving  birth  to 
Ithream.     B.C.  1046. 

2  Sa.    3.    5  And  the  sixth,  I.,  by  Eglah,  David's  wife 

1  Ch.  3.    3  fifth,  Shephatiah  of  Abital ;  the  sixth,  I. 

ITH  RITES, "njy  belonging  to  Jether. 
The  patronymic  of  the  family  of  Jether.  The  designa- 
tion of  two  of  the  members  of  David's  guard — Ira  and 
Gareb — who  belonged  to  Judah.  Those  heroes  may 
have  come  from  Jattir  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  where 
David  had  friends. 

2  Sa.  23.  38  Ira  an  I.,  Gareb  an  I. 

1  Ch.  2.  S3  the  I.,  and  the  Puhites,  and  the  Shuma. 

11.  40  Ira  the  I.,  Gareb  the  I. 
ITSELF,  (of)  — 

l.This,  r\]zeh. 

Psa.  63.    8  Sinai  itself,  .at  the  presence  of  God,  the 
:!//<•,  he  himself,  avros  autos. 

Rom.  8.  16  the  spirit  itself  beafeth  witness  with  our 

8.  21  the  creature  itself  also  shall  be  delivered 
8.  26  the  spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for 


1  Co.  11.  14  Doth  not  even  nature  [itself]  teach  you,  th. 
3  John    12  hath  good  report  of  all.  .of  the  truthitself 

3. Of  one's  own,  eavrov  heautou. 

Matt.  6.  34  shall  take  thought  for  the  things  of  itself 
12.  25  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  b. 
12.  25  every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself 

Mark  3.  24  if  a  kingdom  be  divided  against  itself,  that 
3.  25  if  a  house  be  divided  against  itself,  that 

Luken.  17  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is 

John  15.    4  As  the  branch  caunot  bear  fruit  of  itself 

Erh.   4.  16  makethincreascuntotheedifyingof  itse. 

Rom  14.  14  that  (there  is)  nothing  unclean  [of  itself] 
ITSELF,  by  — 
Apart,  x<*>pts  churis. 

John  20.    7  but  wrapped  together  in  a  place  by  itself 
ITSELF,  dead  of  — 
Fallen  thing,  carcase,  dead  body,  n?3j  nebelah. 

Eze.  44.  31  of  any  thing  that  is  dead  of  itself,  or  torn 
ITSELF,  diethof— [See  Dieth  of,  groweth  of  itself.] 
UTAH  KA'-ZLN,  f^p  nny  kindred  of  the  extremity. 
A  landmark  of  the  boundary  of  Zebulun,  near  Gath- 
hepher  (Gattah-hepher). 

Josh  19.  13  thence  passeth  on  along  on  the  east  to . .  I. 
IT'-TAI,  'Fix  being,  living. 

1.  The  Gittite  (or  inhabitant  of  Gath).  a  Philistine  in 
David's  army  when  he  fled  from  Jerusalem  in  Absalom's 
rebellion.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  15. 19  Then  said  the  king  to  I.  the  Gittite,  Wh. 

15.  21  I.  answered  the  king,  and  said,  (As)  the  L. 

15.  22  David  said  to  I.,  Go  and  pass  over.  And  I. 
18.    2  a  third  part  uuder  the  hand  of  I.  the  Git. 

18.  5  king  commanded  Joab  and  Abishai  and  I. 
iS.  12  the  king  charged  thee  and  Abishai  and  I. 

2.  A  son  of  Ribai,  a  valiant  Benjamite  in  David's  army. 
He  is  called  Ithai  in  1  Ch.  ti.  31. 

2  Sa.  23.  29  I.  the  son  of  Ribai  out  of  Gibeah  of.  .Be. 

I-TTT-RE'-A,  "Irovpata  Itura?a. 

A  small  province  in  the  N.W.  border  of  Palestine  lying 
along  the  base  of  Mount  Herrnon.  It  probably  derived 
its  name  from  Jetur  a  son  of  Ishmael.  The  tribe  of 
Manasseh  having  conquered  it,  dwelt  in  the  laud,  and 
increased  from  Bashan  unto  Baal-hermon. 

Luke  3.  1  his  brother  Philip  tetrarch  of  I.  and  of 
I'-VAH,  n>y  hamlet,  or  the  god  Iva,  sky. 
A  district  in  Babylonia  conquered  by  the  Assyrians  near 
Cuthah,  probably  identical  with  Sit, — the  Is  of  Hero- 
dotus on  the  Euphrates  between  Sippara  (Sepharvaim) 
and  Anah  (Hena),  with  which  it  was  politically  united 
before  the  time  of  Sennacherib.  It  is  probably  the 
Ahava  of  Ezra  8.  15.     See  Ava  or  Avva. 

2K1.  18.  34  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim,  Hena,  and  I.? 

19.  13  (is)  the  king  of  Hamath.  .Hena,  aud  I.? 
Isa.   37.  13  (is)  the  king  of  Hamath..  Hena,  audi.? 

IVORY  — 

1.^4  tooth,  ivory,  ]&  shen. 

1  Ki.  10.  18  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and 

22.  39  the  ivory  house  which  he  made,  and  all 

2  Ch.  9.  1 7  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and 
Psa.  45.    8  out  of  the  ivory  palaces,  whereby  they 
Song  5.  14  (is  as)  bright  ivory  overlaid  (with)  sapph. 

7.    4  thy  neck  (is)  as  a  tower  of  ivory :  thine 
Eze.  27.    6  have  made  thy  benches  (of)  ivory,  .out  of 

27. 15  brought  thee,  .a  present  horns  of  ivory 
Amos  3.  15  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish,  and  the 

6.    4  That  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch 

2.ElcphanVs  tooth,  ivory,  D,?ru?'  shenhabbim. 

1  Ki.io.  22  bringing  gold,  and  silver,  ivory,  and  apes 

2  Ch.  9.  21  bringing  gold,  and  silver,  ivory,  and  apes 

Z.Made  of  ivory,  eXetyavTwos  elephantinos. 

Rev.  18.  12  all  manner  vessels  of  ivory,  and  all  man. 
IZ'-HAR,  Izehar,  TTT3P  shining. 
A  son  of  Kohath,  and  grandson  of  Levi.    B.C.  1491. 

Exod.  6. 18  sons  of  Kohath  ;  Amram,  and  I.,  aud  He. 
6.  21  the  sons  of  I.;  Korah,  and  Nepheg,  and  Z. 

Num.  3.  19  And  the  sons  of  Kohath.  .Amram,  and  I. 

16.  1  Korah,  the  son  of  I.,  the  son  of  Kohath 

1  Ch.  6.  2  sons  of  Kohath;  Amram,  I.,  and  Hebron 
6.  18  the  sons  of  Kohath  (were)  Amram,  and  I. 
6.  38  The  sou  of  I.,  the  son  of  Kohath,  the  son 

23.  12  The  son  of  Kohath ;  Amram,  I.,  Hebron 
23. 18  Of  the  sons  of  I. ;  Shelomith  the  chief 

IZ-HAR-ITES,  nn^  belonging  to  Izhar. 

The  family  of  Izhar  son  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi. 

Num.  3.  27  of  Kohath  (was).,  the  family  of  the  I.,  and 

1  Ch.24.  22  Of  the  I.;  Shelomith:  of  the  sons  of  Shelo. 

26.  23  Of  the  Amramites,  (and)  the  I.,  the  Heb. 

26.  29  Of  the  I.,  Chenaniah  and  his  sons  (were) 

IZ-RAH'-IAH  n;rnr  Jah  (is)  appearing. 

A  grandson  of  Tola  son  of  Issachar.    B.C.  1600.    See 

Jezrahiah. 

1  Ch.  7.    3  sons  of  Fzzi ;  I. :  and  the  sons  of  I. ;  Mic. 

IZ-RAH-ITE,  nir. 

The  patronymic  of  Shamhuth,  one  of  David's  thirty 

valiant  men.     B.O.  1048. 

1  Ch.27.    8  for  the  fifth  month  (was)  Shamhuth  the  I. 

IZ'-RI,  *TS  creator,  former. 

Perhaps  the  same  as  Zen'  (1  Ch.  35.  3),  a  Levite  set  over 

the  service  of  song  by  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25. 11  fourth  to  I.,  (he),  his  sons,  and  his  breth 


JAAKAN 


531 


JACOB 


JA-A'-KAN,  Ja-Ican,  ]d'J_l  intelligent. 

He  is  called  Akan  in  Gen".  36.  27 ;  a  son  of  Ezer  son  of 

Sell'.    B.C.  17S0. 

Dent  10.   6  from  Beeroth  of  the  children  of  J.  to  Mo. 

1  Ch.  1.  42  sons  of  Ezer ;  Bilhan,  and  Zavan,  (and)  J. 
JA'-A-KO'-BAH,  na'pa:  to  Jacob. 
A  descendant  of  Simeon,  third  son  of  Jacob.    B.C.  1048. 

■1  Ch.  4.  36  Elioenai,  and  J.,  and  Jeshohaiah,  and  A. 
JA-A'-LA,  Ja-a'-lah,  ttfe,  nSj/.:  elevation. 
A  servant  of  Solomon  whose  descendants  returned  from 
exile  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  56  The  children  of  J.,  the  children  of  Darkon 

Neh.  7.  58  The  children  of  J.,  the  children  of  Darkon 

JAA'-LAM,  uhy:. 

A  sou  of  Seir  by  Aholibaniah,  daughter  of  Anah.     B.C. 

1740. 

Gen.  36.   5  Aholibamah  bare  Jeush,  and  J.,  and  Ko. 

36.  14  she  bare  to  Esau  Jeush,  and  J.,  and  Korah 

36. 18  duke  Jeush,  duke  J.,  duke  Korah :  these 

1  Ch.  1.  35  The  sons  of  Esau.  .Jeush,  and  J.,  and  K. 

JAA'-NAI,  'jV:  answerer. 

A  Gadite  that  dwelt  iu  Baashan.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5.  12  Joel  the  chief,  .and  J.,  and  Shaphat  in  B. 
JA-A-RE  O-RE'-GEM,  crus*  n jr  foresters. 

The  father  of  Elhananwho  killed  the  brother  of  Goliath 
of  Gath.  B.C.  1080.  Oreglm,  "weavers,"  ought  not  to 
be  a  part  of  the  name.    In  1  Ch.  20.  5  he  is  called  Jair. 

2  Sa.  21.  19  where  Elhanan  the  son  of  J.,  a  Bethlehe. 
JA-A'-SATJ,  V;*J/;,  V£-  maker. 

One  of  the  family  of  Bani  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife 
after  the  captivity.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  37  Mattaniah,  Mattenai,  and  J. 
JA-A-SI'-EL,  Jasiel,  ^N'ti'j;.:  God  is  maker. 

1.  One  of  David's  valiant  men.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.  11. 47  Eliel,  and  Obed,  and  J.  the  Mesobaite 

2.  A  son  of  Abner,  Saul's  cousin.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  21  son  of  Zechariah:  of  Benjamin;  J.  the  son 
JA-A-ZAN'-IAH,  -n^is:,  rrjix;  Jah  is  hearing. 

1.  A  Jewish  captain,  and  a  Maachathite.    B.C.  588. 

2  Ki.  25.  23  J.  the  son  of  a  Maachathite,  they  and  their 

2.  A  chief  Rechabite.     B.C.  600. 

Jer.   35.   3  Then  I  took  J.  the  son  of  .Jeremiah,  the 

3.  A  visionary  exciting  to  idolatry.    B.C.  594. 

Eze.    8.  11  in  the  midst  of  them  stood  J.  the  son  of 

4.  A  wicked  prince  of  Judah  seen  in  vision  by  Ezekiel. 

B.C.  594. 

Eze.  ir.  1  among  whom  I  saw  J.  the  son  of  Azur,  and 
JA-A'-ZER,  JA'-ZER,  it y::,  •)}]?:  fortified. 
A  city  in  Gilead,  wrested  from  the  Ammonites,  allotted 
to  Gad,  and  given  to  the  Levites.  It  afterwards  fell  to 
Moab,  and  was  celebrated  for  its  wine.  It  is  now  in 
ruins,  and  called  Szir  six  hours  from  Heshbon,  and  four 
from  Rabbah. 

Nuni2i.  32  Moses  sent  to  spy  out  J.,  and  they  took 
32.   1  when  they  saw  the  land  of  J.,  and  the 
32.   3  Ataroth,  and  Dibon,  and  J.,  and  Ninirah 
32. 35  And  Atroth,  Shophan,  and  J.,  and  Jogbe. 
Josh  13.  25  their  coast  was  J.,  and  all  the  cities  of  G. 

21.  39  Heshbon  with  her  suburbs,  J.  with  her 

2  Sa.  24.    5  midst  of  the  river  of-Gad,  and  toward  J. 

1  Ch.  6,  81  Hesbon  with  her  suburbs,  and  J.  with  her 

26.  31  there  were  found,  .mighty  men.  .at  J.  of 

Isa.   16.   8  they  are  come  (even)  unto  J.,  they  wand. 

16.    9  I  will  bewail  with  the  weeping  of  J.  the 
Jer.  48.  32  will  weep  for  thee  with  the  weeping  of  J. 
48.  32  they  reach  (even)  fco  the  sea  of  J. :  the  sp. 
JA-A-ZI-I'AH,  i.TTjr  Jah  is  determining. 
A  descendant  of  Merari  in  the  days  of  Solomon.    B.C. 

IOIO. 

1  Ch.24. 26  Mahli  and  Mushi :  the  sons  of  J. ;  Beno 
24.  27  The  sons  of  Merari  by  J. ;  Beno,  and  Sho. 

JA-A-ZI'-EX,  Vx'|£:  God  is  determining. 

A  Levite  in  the  time  of  David.    B.C.  1015.    He  is  called 

Aziel  in  1  Ch.  15.  20. 

1  Ch.15. 18  Zechariah,  Ben,  and  J.,  and  Shemiramoth 
JA'-BAL,  Vn;  moving. 
A  son  of  Adah,  one  of  Lamech's  wives.    B.C.  3870. 

Gen.    4.  20  Adah  bare  J.:  he  was  the  father  of  such 
JAB'-BOK,  pin;  running,  flowing. 
A  small  brook  rising  in  the  hills  of  Bashan,  forming 
the  bnrder  of  Amnion  towards  Israel,  opposite  Shechem, 
and  falling  into  the  Jordan  midway  between  the  Dead 
Sea  and  the  Sea  of  Tiberias.    Now  called  Wady  Zerka. " 

Gen.  32.  22  he  rose  up.  .and  passed  over  the  ford  J. 

Nuni2i.  24  and  possessed  his  land  from  Arnon  unto  J. 

Deut.  2.  37  earnest  not.  .unto  any  place  of  the  river  J. 
3. 16  the  border  eveu  unto  the  river  J.,  (which 

Josh  12.    2  Sihon.. ruled.,  even  unto  the  river  J. 

Judgn.  13  Israel  took  away  my  land,  .even  unto  J. 
11.  22  they  possessed  all  the  coasts.,  even  unto  J. 
JA'-BESH,  ir'?;  dry  place. 
1.  The  abbreviated  name  of  Jabesh-Gilead. 

1  Sa.  11.    1  all  the  men  of  J.  said  unto  Nahash,  Make  a 
11.   3  the  elders  of  J.  said  unto  him ;  Give  us 
11.   5  they  told  him  the  tidings  of  the  men  of  J. 


1  Sa.  11.   9  canie'andshowed(it)tothe  men  of  J.;  and 
11.  io"  Therefore  the  men  of  J.  said,  To  morrow 

31. 12  All  the  valiant  men  arose.,  and  came  to  J. 

31. 13  they,  .buried  (them)  under  a  tree  at  J. 

1  Ch.io.  12  They  arose,  .and  brought  them  to  J. 

10.  12  and  buried  their  bones  under  the  oak  in  J. 
2.  The  father  of  Shallum  who  slew  Zechariah  and  reigned 
iu  his  stead.     B.C.  810. 

2  Ki.15.  10  Shallum  the  son  of  J.  conspired  against  him 

15. 1 3  Shallum  the  son  of  J.  began  to  reign  in  the 

15. 14  Menahem. . smote  Shall umthe  son  of  J.  in 
JA-BESH  GIL'-EAD.  1j£a  ea;  or  tr?;. 

A  city  in  Gad,  on  a  river  of  the  same  name,  near  Beth- 
shean,  six  miles  from  Pella  towards  Gerasha.  Its  name 
is  preserved  in  the  Wady  Jabes  (or  I'abes),  which  enters 
the  Jordan  below  Bethshan  and  Scythopolis.  Perhaps 
Ed-Deir  on  the  S.  of  the  Wady  still  marks  its  site. 
Judg2i.    8  behold,  there  came,  .to  the  camp  from  J. 

21.   9  (there  were)  none  of  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

21.  10  Go  and  smite  the  inhabitants  of  J.  with 

21.  12  And  they  found  among . .  inhabitants  of  J. 

21.  14  they  had  saved  alive  of  the  women  of  J. 

1  Sa.  11.   1  the  Ammonite . .  encamped  against  J. :  and 

11.  9  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto  themenof  J.,  Tom. 

31. 11  when  the  inhabitants  of  J.  heard  of  that 

2  Sa.   2.   4  the  men  of  J.  (were  they)  that  buried  Sa. 

2.    5  David  sent  messengers  unto  the  men  of  J. 

21. 12  took,  .the  bones.,  from  the  men  of  J.,  wh. 
1  Ch.io.  11  J.  heard  all  that  the  Philistines  had  done 

JA'-BEZ,  |'2y:  height. 

1.  A  city  of  Judah ;  but  not  yet  identified. 

1  Ch.  2.  55  families  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt  at  J. 

2.  The  head  of  a  family  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.    B.C.  1444. 

1  Ch.  4.   9  J.  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren 

4.   9  his  mother  called  his  name  J.,  saying,  Be. 
4. 10  J.  called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying,  Oh 

JA-BLN,  j'2;  intelligent. 

1.  A  king  of  Hazor,  defeated  by  Joshua  near  the  Lake 
Merom.    B.C.  1450. 

Josh.  1 1.    1  when  J.  king  of  Hazor  had  heard  (those 

2.  Another  king  of  Hazor,  who  oppressed  Israel  for 
twenty  years ;  and  whose  army  was  defeated  by  Deborah 
and  Barak,     b.  C.  1316. 

Judg.  4.  2  the  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  J. 
4.  7  I  will  draw  unto  thee,  .the  captain  of  J.'s 
4. 17  (there  was)  peace  between  J.  the  king  of 
4.  23  God  subdued  on  that  day  J.  the  king  of  C. 
4.  24  Israel  prospered,  and  prevailed  against  J. 
4.  24  until  they  had  destroyed  J.  king  of  Canaan 

Psa.  83.   9  as  (to)  Sisera,  as  (to)  J.,  at  the  brook  of  EI. 
JAB-NE'-EL,  Vx:?;  God  is  builder. 

1.  A  city  in  the  S.W.  of  Judah,  now  called  Jebna,  one 
hour  X. W.  of  Akar  or  Ekron. 

Josh.15.  11  and  the  border,  .went  out  nnto  J.;  and 

2.  A  border  city  of  Naphtali  S.  of  .the  Sea  of  Galilee  ;  it 
is  called  Jamnia  or  Jam/iih  by  Josephus. 

Josh.  19.  33  And  their  coast  was  from . .  J.,  unto  Lakum 
JAB'-NEH,  ?U3:  building. 

A  Philistine  city  between  Joppa  and  Ashdod,  afterwards 
called  Jamnia  or  Jamneia,  240  stadia  from  Jerusalem, 
and  12  miles  from  Diospolis  on  the  Mediterranean,  now 
called  Jebna,  2  miles  from  the  sea  shore. 

2  Ch  26.   6  the  wall  of  J.,  and  the  wall  of  Ashdod,  and 
JA'-CHAN,    \3Sll  afflicting. 

The  head  of  a  Gadite  family.    B.C.  1100. 

1  Ch.  5. 13  and  Jorai,  and  J.,  and  Zia,  and  Heber,  sev. 
JA'-CHTN,  pp;  founding. 

1.  A  son  of  Simeon.    B.C.  1700.   Called  Jareb  r  Ch.  r.  24. 

Gen.  46.  10  and  J.,  and  Zohar,  andShaul  the  son  of  a 
Exod.  6.  15  and  J.,  and  Zohar,  and  Shaul  the  son  of  a 
Nuni26.  12  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jachinites 

2.  The  name  of  a  pillar  in  Solomon's  temple. 

1  Ej.  7.  21  rightpillar,  and  called  the  name  thereof  J. 

2  Ch.  3.  17  called  the  name  of  that  on.  .right  hand J. 

3.  A  priest  in  Jerusalem  after  the  captivity.     B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9. 10  the  priests  ;  Jedaiah,  and  Jehoiarib,  and  J. 
Neh.11. 10  the  priests  :  Jedaiah  the  son  of  Joiarib,  J. 

4.  A  head  of  one  of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Aaron. 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24. 17  The  cneand  twentieth  to  J.,  the  two  and 
JA-CHI-NITE,  yyyTr}the  Jachinite. 
The  patronymic  of  the  family  of  Jachin,  a  Srmeonite. 

Num26.  12  of  Jachin,  the  family  of  the  J. 
JACINTH,'  or  of  JACINTH  — 
Jacinth,  vattivQos  huakinthos^  haKivBivos  ImwMnthi. 

Rev.  9. 17  having  breastplates  of  fire,  and  of  jacinth 
21.  20  the  eleventh,  a  jacinth  ;  the  twelfth,  an 

JA'-COB,  3"pJ£!,  following  after,  suppla?iter, *  laKafi. 
1.  The  second  son  of  Isaac  and  ILebekah,  and  a  twin 
brother  of  Esau.    B.C.  1770. 

Gen.  25.  26  on  Esau's  heel ;  and  his  name  was  called  J. 
25.  27  and  J.  (was)  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  tents 

28  Isaac  loved  Esau . .  but  Rebekah  loved  J. 

29  J.  sod  pottage  :  and  Esau  came  from  the 

30  Esau  said  to  J.,  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee,  with 

31  J.  said,  Sell  me  this  day  thy  birth  right 
33  J.  said,  Swear  to  me  this  day;  and  he  sware 

25.  33  and  he  sold  his  birth  right  unto  J. 
25.  34  J-  gave  Esau  bread  and  pottage  of  lentiles 
27.    6  Rebekah  spake  unto  J.  her  son,  saying 
27. 11  J.  said  to  Rebekah  hismother,  Behold,  E. 


25 


25 


Gen.  27. 15  and  put  them  upon  J.  her  younger  son 
27.  17  and  the  bread .  .into  the  hand  of  her  son  J. 
27.  19  J.  said  unto  his  father,  I  (am)  Esau  thy 
27.  21  Isaac  said  unto  J . ,  Come  near,  I  pray  thee 
27.  22  J.  went  near  unto  Isaac  his  father ;  and 
27.  22  The  voice  (is)  J.'s  voice,  but  thehands(are) 
27.  30  had  made  an  end  of  blessing  J.,  and  J. 
27.  36  Is  not  he  rightly  named  J.?  for  he  hath 
27.  41  Esau  hated  J.  because  of  the  blessing 
27.  41  are  at  hand  ;  then  will  I  slay  my  brother  J. 

27.  42  called  J.  her  younger  son,  and  said  unto 
27. 46  if  J.  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Heth 

28.  1  Isaac  called  J.,  and  blessed  him,  and  char. 
28.  5  Isaac  sent  away  J.:  and  he  went  to  Padan 
28.  5  brother  of  Rebekah,  J.'s  and  Esau's  moth. 
28.  6  Esau  saw  that  Isaac  had  blessed  J.,  and 
28.  7  J.  obeyed  Ms  father  and  his  mother,  and 
28.  10  J.  went  out  from  Beer-sheba  and  went 

16  J.  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  said 
iS  J.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,'  and  took 
20  J.  vowed  a  vow,  saying.  If  God  will  be 
1  J.  went  on  his  journey,  and  came  into  the 
4  J.  said  unto  them,  My  brethren,  whence 
10  J.  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of  Laban  his 

10  J.  went  near,  and  rolled  the  stone  from 

11  J.  kissed  Rachel,  and  lifted  up  his  voice 

12  J.  told  Rachel  that  he  (was) her  fathers 

13  heard  the  tidings  of  J.  his  sister's  son 

1 5  Laban  said  unto  J. ,  Because  thou  (art)  my 

18  J.  loved  Rachel ;  and  said,  I  will  serve 

20  J.  served  seven  years  for  Rachel ;  and 

21  J.  said  unto  Laban,  Give  (me)  my  wife,  for 
28  J.  did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week :  and 

1  Rachel  saw  that  she  bare  J.  no  children 

1  said  unto  J.,  Give  me  children,  or  else  I 

2  J.'s  anger  was  kindled  against  Rachel 

4  handmaid  to  wife :  and  J.  went  in  uuto 

5  And  Bilhah  conceived,  and  bare  J.  a  son 
7  conceived  again,  and  bare  J.  a  second  son 

9  Zilpah  her  maid,  and  gave  her  J.  to  wife 

10  And  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  J.  a  son 

12  And  Zilpah,  Leah'smaid,  bare  J.  asecond 

16  J.  came  out  of  the  fieid  in  the  evening 

17  she  conceived,  and  bare  J.  the  fifth  son 

19  conceived  again,  and  bare  J.  the  sixth  son 
25  J.  said  unto  Laban,  Send  me  away,  that  I 
31  J.  said,  Thou  shalt  not  give  me  anything 

36  journey  betwixt  himself  and  J.:  and  J. 

37  J.  took  him  rods  of  greeu  poplar,  and  of 

40  J.  did  separate  the  lambs,  and  set  the  faces 

41  J.  laid  the  rods  before  the  eyes  of  the 

42  feebler  were  Laban's,  and  the  strongerJ.'s 

1  J.  hath  taken  away  all  that  (was)  our  fa.  ' 

2  J.  beheld  the  countenance  of  Laban,  and 

3  the  Lord  said  unto  J.,  Return  unto  the 

4  J.  sent  and  called  Rachel  and  Leah  to  the 

1 1  angel . .  spake  unto  me  in  a  dream,  (say.),  J. 

17  J.  rose  up,  and  set  his  sons  and  his  wives 

20  J.  stole  away  unawares  to  Laban  the  Sy. 

22  told  Laban  on  the  third  day  that  J. .  .fled 
24,  29  thou  speak  not  to  J.  either  good  or 

25  Laban  overtook  J.     Now  J.  had  pitched 

26  Laban  said  to  J.,  What  hast  thou  done 

31  J.  answered  and  said  to  Laban,  Because  I 

32  J.  knew  not  that  Rachel  had  stolen  them 

33  Laban  went  into  J.'s  tent,  and  into  Lean's 
36  J.  was  wroth. .  chode  with  Laban :  and  J. 

43  And  Laban  answered  and  said  unto  J. 

45  J.  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  up  (for)  a  pillar 

46  J.  said  imto  his  brethren,  Gather  stones 

47  Jegar-saha-dutha:  but  J.  called  it  Galeed 
51  Laban  said  to  J.   Behold  this  heap,  and 

53  J.  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac 

54  J.  offered  sacrifice  upon  the  mount,  and 

1  J.  went  on  his  way,  and  the  angels  of  God 

2  when  J.  saw  them,  he  said,  This  (is)  God's 

3  J.  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Esau 

4  J.  saith  thus,  I  have  sojourned  with  Lab. 

6  the  messengers  returned  to  J.,  saying,  We 

7  J.  was  greatly  afraid  and  distressed :  and 
9  J.  said,  O  God  of  my  father  Abraham,  and 

18  (They  be)  thy  servant  J.'s;  it  (is)  a  present 
20  J.  (is)  behind  us.     For  he  said,  I  will  ap. 

24  J.  was  left  alone  ;  and  there  wrestled  a 

25  the  hollow  of  J.'s  thigh  was  out  of  joint 

27  said.  .What (is)  thy  name?  Andhesaid,  J. 

28  Thy  name  shall  be  called  no  more  J.,  but 

29  J.  asked  (him),  and  said,  Tell  (me),  I  pray 

30  J.  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel 
32  he  touched  the  hollow  of  J.'s  thigh  in 

1  J.  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and 

10  J.  said,  Nay,  I  pray  thee,  if  now  I  have 
17  J.  journeyed  to  Succoth,  and  built  him  an 
iS  J.  came  to  Shalem  a  city  of  Shechem 

1  daughter  of  Leah,  which  she  bare  unto  J. 

3  soul  clave  unto  Dinah  the  daughter  of  J. 

5  J.  heard  that  he  had  defiled  Dinah  his 

5  J.  held  his  peace  until  they  were  come 

6  went  out  unto  J.  to  commune  with  him 

7  the  sons  of  J.  came  ont  of  the  field  when 
7  wrought  folly,  .in  lying  with  J.'s  daugh. 

13  the  sons  of  J.  answered  Shechem  and  H. 

19  he  had  delight  in  J.'s  daughter:  and  he 
25  that  two  of  the  sons  of  J.,  Simeon  and  L. 
27  The  sons  of  J.  came  upon  the  slain,  and 
30  J.  said  to  Simeon  and  Levi,  Ye  have  tro. 

1  God  said  unto  J.,  Arise,  go  up  to  Beth-el 

2  J.  said  unto  his  household,  and  to  all 

4  they  gave  unto  J.  all  the  strange  gods 

4  J.  hid  them  under  the  oak  which  (was) 

5  they  did  not  pursue  after  the  sons  of  J. 

6  J.  came  to  Luz,  which  (is)  in  the  land  of 


28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
.29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30. 
3°- 
3°- 
30. 


so- 
So- 
3°- 
30- 
30. 
30. 
30. 
30. 
So- 
SO- 
So- 
3°- 
3i- 
3i* 
31- 
31- 
31- 


JACOB 


532 


JASDA1 


Gen.  35 

35< 
35< 
35 
35 
35 
35' 
35 
35' 
35 
36- 
37- 
37' 
37- 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
45. 
45- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
47- 
47- 
47- 
'47- 
47- 
47- 
48. 
48. 
49. 
49. 
49. 
49. 
49. 
5°- 

Exod.  1. 


9  God  appeared  unto.T.  again,  when  he  came 

10  J. .  .name  shall  not  be  called  any  more  .f. 

14  J.  set  up  a  pillar  in  the  place  where  he 
.  15  J.  called  the  name  of  the  place  where  I ;. 

20  J.  set  a  pillar  upon  her  grave :  that  (is) 

22  Now  the  sons  of  J.  were  twelve 

23  J.'s  first  bom,  and  Simeon,  and  Levi,  and 

26  these  (are)the  sons  of  J.,  winch  were  born 
.  27  J.  came  unto  Isaac  his  father  unto  Mamre 
.  29  died .  .and  his  sons  Esau  and  J.  bulled 

6  and  went,  .from  the  face  of . .  J. 

1  J.  dwelt  in  the  land  wherein  his  father 

2  These  (are)  the  generations  of  J.    Joseph 
34  J.  rentliis  cIothes,:and  put  sackcloth  upon 

1  J.  saw  that  there  was  corn  in  Egypt,  J. 

4  Benjamin.  .J.  sent  not  with  his  brethren 
29  they  came  unto  J.  their  father  unto  the 

36  J.  their  father  said  unto  them,  Me  have 
25  and  came  into. .  Canaan  unto  J.  their  fat. 
20  .l.'s  heart  fainted,  for  he  believed  them 

27  the  spirit  of  J.  their  father  revived 

2  in  the  visions  of  the  night,  and  said,  J.,.T. 

5  And  J.  rose  up  from  Beer-sheba 

5  the  sons  of  Israel  carried  J.  their  father 

6  into  Egypt,  J.,  and  all  his  seed  with  him 
8  into  Egypt,  J.  and  his  sons:  Reuben,  J.'s 

15  sons,  .which  she  bare  unto  J.  in  Padan-a. 

18  these  she  bare  unto  J.,  (even)  sixteen  so. 

19  The  sons  of  Rachel,  J.'s  wife  ;  Joseph 

22  the  sons  of  Rachel,  which  were  born  to  J. 

25  she  bare  these  unto  J.:  all  the  souls  (we.) 

26  the  souls  that  came  with  J.  into  Egypt 

26  besides  J.'s  sons'  wives,  all  the  souls  (we.) 

27  the  souls  of  the  house  of  J.,  which  came 

7  Joseph  brought  in  J.  his  father,  and  set 

7  him  before  Pharaoh :  and  J.  blessed  Pha. 

8  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  How  old  (art) 

9  J.  said  unto  Pharaoh,  The  days  of  the 

28  J.  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen 
28  the  whole  age  of  J.  was  an  hundred  forty 

2  (one)  told  J.,  and  said,  Behold,  thy  son  J. 

3  J.  said  unto  Joseph,  God  Almighty  appe. 

1  J.  called  unto  his  sons,  and  said,  Gather 

2  hear,  ye  sons  of  J.;  and  hearken  linto  Is. 

7  I  will  divide  them  in  J.,  and  scatter  them 

24  strong  by.  .hands of  the  mighty  (G.)of  J. 

33  J.  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  his 
24  he  sware  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  J. 

1  every  man  and  his  household  came  with  J. 

5  souls  that  came  out  of  the  loins  of  J. 
24  with  Abraham,  with  Isaac,  and  with  J. 

6  I  (am).  .God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  J. 

15  and  the  God  of  J.,  hath  sent  me  unto  you 

16  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  J. 
5  and  the  God  of  J.,  hath  appeared  unto 

3  appeared  unto  Abraham . .  Isaac,  and . .  J. 

8  to  give  it  to'Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  J. 

3  Thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the  house  of  J.,  and 
1  I  sware  unto  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  J. 

42  Then  will  I  remembermy  covenant  with  J. 

1 1  sware  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and.  .J. 
8  unto  your  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  J. 

10  fathers,  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  J. 
5  unto  thy  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  J. 

27  Remember  thy  servants,  Ah.  Isaac,  and  J. 
13  fathers,  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  J. 

20  fathers,  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  aud  to  J. 

4  sware  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and.  .J. 
4  I  gave  unto  Isaac  J.  and  Esau :  and  I  gave 

4  J.  and  his  children  went  down  into  Egypt 
32  a  parcel  of  ground  which  J.  bought  of  the 

8  When  J.  was  come  into  Egypt,  and  your 

23  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  J. 
.  2  J.'s  brother?  saiththe  Lord;  yet  Iloved  J. 
,*"  2  Isaac  begat  J. ;  and  J.  begat  Judas  and 
.  n  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  J. 
.  32  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  J.  ? 
.  26  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  J.? 
.  33  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  J.  for  ever 

34  Which  was  (the  son)  of  J., which  was  (the 

28  J.,  and  all  the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom 

37  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  J. 

5  of  ground  that  J.  gave  to  his  son  Joseph 

6  J.'s  well  was  there.  Jesus  therefore,  being 

12  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  J.,  which 

13  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  J. 

8  and  Isaac  (begat)  [J.] ;  and  J.  (begat)  the 

12  J.  heard  that  there  was  corn  in  Egypt,  he 

14  called  his  father  [J.]  to  (him),  and  all  his 

15  J.  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  died,  he, and 
32  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  J. 
46  to  find  a  tabernacle  for  the  God  of  J. 

13  J.  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  I  hated 
26  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  J. 

9  dwelling  in  tabernacles  with  Isaac  and  J. 
20  Isaac  blessed  J.  and  Esau  concerning  th. 

11.  21  J.,  when  he  was  a  dying,  blessed  both  the 

2.  The  father  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary. 

Matt.  1.  15  Eleazar  begat  Matthan.  .Matthan  begat  J. 
1.  16  J.  begat  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary,  of 

The  descendants  of  Jacob  ;— the  Israelites. 
Num23-    7  Come,  curse  me  J.,  and  come,  defy  Israel 
23.  10  Who  can  count  the  dust  of  J.,  anil  the 
23.21  He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  J.,  neither 
23.  23  (there  is)  no  enchantment  against  J.,  ne. 

23.  23  time  it  shall  be  said  of  J.  and  of  Israel 
34.   5  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  O  J.,  (and)  thy 
24. 17  there  shall  come  a  Star  out  of  J.,  and  a 

24.  19  Out  of  J.  shall  come  he  that  shall  have 
Deut  32.   9  J.  (is)  the  lot  of  Ins  inheritance 


3- 
3- 

3- 

4- 
6. 
6. 
19. 

33- 

Lev.  26. 

Num.  3  2. 

Deut.  1. 

6. 

9- 

9- 

29. 

3°- 

34- 
Josh  24. 

24. 

24. 
1  Sa.  12. 
2K1. 13, 
Mai.  1 
Matt.  1 


Mark: 

Luke 

3- 
*3- 
20. 

John  4. 
4- 
4- 
3- 
7- 
7- 
7 
7- 
7- 
7- 

Rom.  9. 


Acts 


Heb.  11 


Deut  33. 
33- 
33- 

2  Sa.  23. 

1  Ki.  18. 

2  Ki.  17. 
1  Ch.16. 

16. 
Psa.  14. 


24. 
44- 
46. 

47- 
53- 
59- 
75- 
76. 

77- 
78. 
78. 

78. 

79- 

81. 

81. 

84. 

85. 

87. 

94. 

99. 
105. 
105. 
105. 
114. 
114. 
132. 
132. 
*35- 
146. 
147. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


14. 
14. 
*7- 
27- 
27. 
29. 
29. 
40. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
42. 

43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
45- 
45- 
46. 


Eze. 


Hos. 


4  the  inheritance  of  the  congregation  of  J. 
10  They  shall  teach  .1.  thy  judgments,  ami 

25  the  fountain  of  J.  (shall  be)  upon  a  land 
1  the  anointed  of  the  God  of  J.,  and  the 

31  number  of  the  tribes  of  the  sons  of  J. 
34  the  Lord  commanded  the  children  of  J. 
13  ye  children  of  J.,  his  chosen  ones 
17  hath  confirmed  the  same  to  J.  for  a  law 
7  J.  shall  rejoice,  (and)  Israel  shall  be  glad 

I  the  name  of  the  God  of  J.  defend  thee 
23  the  seed  of  J.,  glorify  him ;  and  fear  him 

6  that  seek  him,  that  seek  thy  face,  O  J. 
4  King,0  God :  command  deliverances  for  J. 
7,  11  with  us;  the  God  of  J.  (is)  our  refuge 

4  for  us,  the  excellency  of  J.,  whom  he  loved 
6  J.  shall  rejoice,  (and)  Israel  shall  be  glad 

13  let  them  know  that  God  ruleth  in  J.  unto 
9  But.. I  will  sing  praises  to  the  God  of  J. 

6  O  God  of  J.,  both  the  chariot  and  horse 

15  thy  people,  the  sons  of  J.  and  Joseph 

5  For  he  established  a  testimony  in  J.,  and 
21  a  fire  was  kindled  against  J.,  aud  anger 
71  he  brought  him  to  feed  J.  his  people,  and 

7  they  have  devoured  J.,  and  laid  waste  his 
1  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  God  of  J. 

4  for  Israel,  (and)  a  law  of  the  God  of  J. 

8  hear  my  prayer :  give  ear,  0  God  of  J. 

1  thou  hast  brought  back  the  captivity  of  J 

2  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  J. 

7  neither  shall  the  God  of  J.  regard  (it) 

4  executest  judgment,  .righteousness  in  J. 

6  his  servant,  ye  children  of  J.  his  chosen 
10  confirmed  the  same  unto  J.  for  a  law,  (and) 
23  and  J.  sojourned  in  the  land  of  Ham 

i  the  house  of  J.  from  a  people  of  strange 

7  the  Lord,  at  the  presence  of  the  God  of  J. 

2  (and)  vowed  unto  the  mighty  (God)  of  J. 

5  an  habitation  for  the  mighty  (God)  of  J. 

4  Lord  hath  chosen  J.  unto  himself,  (and) 

5  (he)  that  (hath)  the  God  of  J.  for  his  help 

19  He  showeth  his  word  unto  J.,  his  statutes 

3  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  J. 

5  0  house  of  J.  "come  ye  and  let  us  walk  in 

6  hast  forsaken  thy  people  the  house  of  J. 
17  that  hideth  his  face  from  the  house  of  J. 

8  The  Lord  sent  a  word  into  J. ,  and  it  hath 

20  such  as  are  escaped  of  the  house  of  J. 

21  remnant  shall  return,  .the  remnant  of  J. 
1  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  J.,  and  will 
1  and  they  shall  cleave  to  the  house  of  J. 

4  the  glory  of  J.  shall  be  made  thin,  and 
6  cause  them  that  come  of  J.  to  take  root 

9  shall  the  iniquity  of  J.  be  purged  ;  and 

22  J.  shall  not  now  be  ashamed,  neither  shall 

23  sanctify  the  holy  one  of  J.,  and  shall  fear 

27  Why  sayest  thou,  O  J.,  and  speakest,  O 

8  J.  whom  I  have  chosen,  the  seed  of  Abra. 

14  Fear  not,  thou  worm  J.,  (and)ye  men  of  I. 

21  your  strong  (reasons),  saith  theKing  of  J. 

24  Who  gave  J.  for  a  spoil,  and  Israel  to  the 
1  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  0  J. 

22  thou  hast  not  called  upon  me,  O  J. ;  but 

28  have  given  J.  to  the  curse,  and  Israel  to 

1  hear,  O  J.  my  servant ;  and  Israel,  whom 

2  Fear  not,  O  J.,  my  servant  ;  and  thou,  J. 

5  another  shall  call  (himself )  by . .  namex>f  J. 
21  Remember  these,  0  J.  and  Israel ;  for 

23  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  J.,  and  glorified 

4  For  J.  my  servant's  sake,  and  Israel  mine 

19  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  J.,  Seek  ye  me 

3  O  house  of  J.  and  all  the  remnant  of  the 
1  Hear  ye  this,  O  house  of  J.,  which  are 

12  Hearken  unto  me,  O  J.  and  Israel,  my 

20  The  Lord  hath  redeemed  lus  servant  J. 

5  (be)  his  servant,  to  bring  J.  again  to  hhn 

6  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  J. 

26  and  thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  J. 

1  show  my  people,  .the  house  of  J.  their 
14  feed,  .with  the  heritage  of  J.  thy  father 
20  jhem  that  turn  from  transgression  in  J. 

16  thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  J. 

9  I  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of  J.,  and 

4  0  house  of  J.,  and  all  the  families  of  the 
20  Declare  this  in  the  house  of  J.,  aud  pub!. 

16  The  portion  of  J.  is  not  like  them  :  for 

25  they  have  eaten  up  J.,  and  devoured  him 

7  it  (is)  even  the  time  of  J.'s  trouble.     But 

10  fear  thou  not,  O  my  servant  J.,  saith  the 

10  J.  shall  return,  and  shall  be  in  rest,  and 
iS  bring  again  the  captivity  of  J.'s  tents 

7  Sing  with  gladness  for  J.,  and  shout  among 

II  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  J.,  and  ransom. 

26  Then  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of  J. 

26  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  J. 

27  fear  not  thou,  O  my  servant  J.,  and  be  not 

27  J.  shall  return,  and  be  in  rest  and 

28  Fear  thou  not,  O  J.  my  servant,  saith  the 
19  The  portiou  of  J.  (is)  not  like  them  ;  for 

17  the  Lord  hath  commanded  concerning  J. 

2  swallowed  up  all  the  habitations  of  J. 

3  he  burned  against  J.  like  a  flaming  fire 

5  lifted  up  mine  hand  unto  the  seed  of.  .J. 
25  land  that  I  have  given  to  my  servant  J, 
25  land  that  I  have  given  unto  J.  my  servant 
25  Now  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  J. 

11  shall  plow,  (and)  J.  shall  break  his  clods 
2  and  will  punish  J.  according  to  his  ways 

12  And  J.  fled  intojjthe  country  of  Syria  ;  and 
.  13  testify  in  the  house  of  J.,  saith  the  Lord 

8  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  J.,  aud  hate  his 
2  by  whom  shall  J.  arise?  for  lie  (is) small 
5  by  whom  shall  J.  arise  ?  for  he  (is)  small 


Amos  8.  7  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  J. 
9.    8  will  not  utterly  destroy  the  house  of  J. 

Obad.  9, 10  For  (thy)  violence  against  thy  brother  J. 
17  house  of  J.  shall  possess  their  possessions 
iS  the  house  of  J.  shall  be  a  fire,  and  the 

Mic.    1.    5  For  the  transgression  of  J.  (is)  all  this 

1.  5  What  (is)  the  transgression  of  J.  ?  (is  it) 

2.  7  (thou  that  art)  named  The  house  of  J.,  is 

2.  12  I  will  surely  assemble,  O  J.,  all  of  thee 

3.  1  Hear,  I  pray  you,  O  heads  of  J.,  and  ye 
3.    8  to  declare  unto  J.  his  transgression,  ami 

3.  9  Hear,  I  pray .  .ye  heads  of  the  house  of  J. 

4.  2  let  us  go . .  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  J. 

5.  7  the  remnant  of  J.  shall  be  in  the  midst 
5.   8  remnant  of  J.  shall  be  among  the  Gentiles 
7.  20  Thou  wilt  perform  the  truth  to  J.,  (and) 

Nan.  2.    2  Lord  hath  turned,  .the  excellency  of  J. 
Mai.    2.  12  the  seholar,  out  of  the  tabernacles  of  J. 

3.  6  therefore  ye  sons  of  J.  are  not  consumed 
JA'-DA,  yv  knowing. 

A  grandson  of  Jerahmeel  the  son  of  Hezron.   B.C.  1450. 

i-Ch.  2.  28  the  sons  of  Onam  were  Shammai,  and  J. 
2.  32  the  sons  of  J.  the  brother  of  Shammai ;  J. 
JA'-DATT,  n;,  "T  favourite,  friend. 
This  name  is  correctly  Jaddai.     One  of  the  family  of 
Nebo  who  had  married  a  strange  wife.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  43  Zabad,  Zebina,  J.,  and  Joel  Benaiah 
JAD-DTJ'-A,  yn;  very  favouring. 

1.  A  Levite  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Kehemiah.  B.C. 
445- 

N"eh.  10.  21  Meshezabeel,  Zadok,  J. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Jeshuathe  high  priest  at  the  end  of 
the  captivity.     B.C.  520. 

Neh.  12.  11  Joiada  begat  Jonathan, and  Jonathan. .J. 
12.  22  The  Levites,  in  the  days  of.  .J.,  (were)  re. 
JA'-DON,  fir  judging. 

One  that  helped  to  repair  the  wall  of  Jerusalem.  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.  3.  7  next  unto  them  repaired .  .J.  the  Merono. 
JA-'EL,  Sy;  chamois. 

The  wife  of  Heber  the  Xenite  who  treacherously  killed 
Sisera.    B.C.  1316. 

Judg.  4. 17  fled  away  on  his  feet  to  the  tent  of  J.  the 

4.  18  J.  went  out  to  meet  Sisera,  and  said  unto 
4. 21  J.,Heber'swife,took  a  nail  of  thetent,and 

4.  22  J.  came  out  to  meet  him,  and  said  unto 

5.  6  in  the  days  of  J.,  the  highways  were  uno. 

5.  24  Blessed  above  women  shall  J.  the  wife  of 
JA'-GrUR.,  ")«;  dwelling. 

A  town  in  the  S.  part  of  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  Judah. 

Josh.15.  21  uttermost  cities.. Kabzeel,  and  Eder..J. 
JAH,  n;  An  abbreviation  of  Jehovah. 

Psa.  68.   4  extol  him.  ,hy  his  name  J.,  and  rejoice 
JA'-HATH,  nir,  nn;  comfort,  revival. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Shobal  the  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  4.    2  Reaiah  the  son  of  Shobal  begat  J. ;  and  J. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Gershom,  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  6.  20  Of  Gershom ;  Libni  his  son,  J.  his  son,  Z. 

6.  43  The  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Gershom,  the  son 

3.  A  descendant  of  Gershom,  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23. 10  And.  .sons of  Shimei(were)J.,Zina,and  J. 

23.  11  J.  was  the  chief,  and  Zizahthe  second 

4.  A  descendant  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  24.  22  Shelomoth :  of  the  sons  of  Shelomoth :  J. 

5.  A  descendant  of  Merari  the  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  634. 

2  Ch.  34. 12  the  overseers  of  them  (were)  J.  and  Obad. 
JA'TTAZJA-HA'-ZA.JA-HA'-ZAHJAH'-ZAH.fn^nyrt;. 
A  Levitical  city  in  Reuben  where  Sihon  king  of  the 
Amorites  had  been  conquered.    B.C.  1452. 

Num2i.  23  he  came  to  J.,  and  fought  against  Israel 

Josh. 13.  18  And  J.,  and  Kedemoth,  and  Mephaath 
21.  36  out  of  the  tribe  of  Keuben .  .J.  with  her 

Judgn.  20  and  pitched  in  J.,  and  fought  against  Isr. 

Isa.    15.    4  their  voice  shall  be  heard  (eveu)  unto  J. 

Jer.  48.  21  upon  Holon,  and  upon  J.,  and  upon  Mep. 
48.  34  From  the  cry  of  Heshbon.  .(even)  unto  J. 

[Jos.  21.  36,  37  are  wanting  in  the  Hebrew  text.] 
JA-HAZ'-IAH,  n;|CC  Jah  reveals. 

One  who  was  employed  to  enumerate  those  who  had 
taken  strange  wives  during  the  captivity  or  after  the 
return.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10. 15  Asahel  and  J. .  .were  employed  about  this 
JA'-HA-ZI'-EX,  ^X'lrr  God  reveals. 

1.  One  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    4  Jeremiah,  and  J.,  and  Johanan,  and  Joz. 

2.  A  priest  who  assisted  in  bringing  up  the  ark  from  the 
house  of  Obed-edom.    B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.16.    6  Benaiah  also  and  J.  the  priests  with  tru. 

3.  A  son  of  Hebron  the  Kohathite.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  J9  Amariah  the  second,  J.thethird.andJeka. 

24.  23  Amariah  the  second,  J. the  third,  Jekabme. 

4.  A  Levite  that  encouraged  Jehoshaphat's  army  against 
the  Moabites.    B.C.  896. 

2  Ch.20.  14  Then  upon  J.  the  son  of  Zechariah,  the  son 

5.  A  chief  man  whose  son  returned  with  Ezra  from 
Babylon.    B.C.  487. 

.Ezra   8.    5  the  son  of  J.,  and  with  him  three  hund. 
JAH'-DAI,  W  leader,  guide. 
One  of  the  family  of  Caleb  the  spy.     B.C.  1500 

1  Ch.  2.  47  And  the  sons  of  J. ;  Regem,  and  Jothani 


JAHDIEL 


■533 


JASHUB 


JAH-DI'-EL,  Sxnrr  union  of  God. 

T*he  head  of  a  family  of  tlie  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  E. 

of  the  Jordan.    B.C.  771. 

1  Cta."  5.  24  Hodaviah,  and  J.,  mighty  men  of  valour 

JAH -DO,  Vngc  union. 

Son  of  Buz  ttie  Gadite  and  father  of  Jeshishai.   B.C.  1450. 
1  Ch.  5. 14  son  of  Jeshishai,  the  son  of- J.,  the  son  of 

JAH-LE'-EX,  ^n:  God  waits. 

A  son  of  Zebulun— the  third  of  the  three.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  14  And  the  sons  of  Zebulun ..  Elon,  and  J. 

Kuni26.  26  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jahleelites 

JAH-LE-E  LITES,  ^N^n;. 
A  family  of  Zebulunites  founded  by  Jahleel. 
Num26.  26  of  Jahleel,  the  family  of  the  J. 

JAH'-MAI,  VgtR  Jah  protects. 

A  son  of  Tola  son  of  Issachar,  Jacob's  ninth  son  and  fifth 

by  Leah.    B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.  7.   2  And  the  sonsof  Tola..Jeriel,andJ.,andJ. 

JAH'-ZAH,  nyr/j  trodden  down. 

A  city  of  Reuben,  but  afterwards  assigned  to  the  Levites. 

It  is  called  also  Jahaz,  Jahaza,  Jahazah. 

1  Ch.  6.  78  out  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben.  .J.  with  her 
JAH-ZE'-EL,JAH-ZI'-EL,  Sn^Sk^ie  God  apportions. 
A  son  of  Naphtali  the  sixth  son  of  Jacob,  but  his  second 
by  Bilhah.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  24  the  sons  of  Naphtali ;  J.,  andGuni,  and  J. 

Nuni26.  48  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jahzeelites :  of  G. 

1  Ch.  7.  13  The  sons  of  Naphtali ;  J.,  and  Guni,  and  G. 

JAH-ZE-I-LITES,  ^SCC 

The  patronymic  of  a  family  of  Naphtalites  whose 
founder  was  Jahzeel. 

NU11126.  48  of  JalizecT.  *he  family  of  the  J.  :  of  Guni 
JAH-ZE'-RAH,  rnirr  Jah  protects. 
A  priest  of  the  family  of   Inimer  whose  descendants 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem.    B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  9.  12  Adiel,  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Meshullam 
JAILOR  — 
Guard  of  a  prison,  8<=a[xo(pv\a£  desmophulax. 

Acts  16.  23  charging  the  jailor  to  keep  them  safely 
JA'-ER,  tx;  Jah  enlightens. 

1.  A  man  descended  from  Judah  through  his  father 
Segub,  and  from  Manasseh  through  his  mother  the 
daughter  of  Machir.  B.C.  1452.  By  Moses  he  is  called 
"  son  of  Manasseh"  (Num.  32.  41 ;  Deut.  3.  14).  In  i  Ch. 

2.  23  he  is  called  a  "  son  of  Machir  the  father  of  Gilead." 

Num32.  41  J. .  .went  and  took  the  small  towns  thereof 
Deut.  3.  14  J. .  .took  all  the  country  of  Argob  unto 
1  Ki.  4. 13  to  him  (pertained)  the  towns  of  J.  the  son 
1  Ch.  2.  22  J.,  who  had  three  and  twenty  cities  in  the 

2.  A  Gileadite  judge  of  Israel  between  Tola  and 
Jephthah.  He  judged  Israel  twenty-three  years.  He 
may  have  been  a  descendant  of  No.  1.    B.C.  1180. 

Judg  10.    3  after  him  arose  J. .  .and  judged  Israel  tw. 
ro.   5  And  J.  died,  and  was  buried  in  Camon 

3.  Used  briefly  for  Hayoth  J  air,  which  see. 

Josh  13.  30  and  all  the  towns  of  J.,  which  (are)  in  B. 
1  Ch.  2.  23  took  Geshur.  .Aram,  with  the  towns  of  J. 

4.  A  Benjamite  whose  son  Mordecai  was  Esther's  cousin. 

B.C.  550. 

Esth.  2.    5  whose  name  (was)  Mordecai,  the  son  of  J. 
JA'-ER,  "Vy;  forest 

The  father  of  Elhanan  who  slew  Lachrai  the  brother  of 
Goliath.  B.C.  1080.  In  2  Sa.  21.  19  he  is  called  Jaare- 
Oregim. 

1  Ch.20.   5  the  son  of  J.  slew  Lahmi  the  brother  of  G. 
JA-I-RTTE,  *Vi£. 

The  patronymic  of  Jair's  (No.  1)  descendants. 

2  Sa.  20.  26  Ira  also  the  J.  was  a  chief  ruler  about  D. 
JAI'-RTTS,  'idzipos. 

A  ruler  of  a  synagogue  in  a  town  of  Galilee  near  the 

lake  of  Tiberias. 

Mark  5.  22  And,  behold,  there  cometh  one.  .[J.]  by 
Luke  8.  41  behold,  there  came  a  mannamed  J.,  and 

JA'-KEH,  .-||T  hearkening. 

The  father  of  Agur  who  wrote  the  thirtieth  chapter  of 

the  Book  of  Proverbs.    B.C.  1000. 

Prov  30.    1  The  words  of  Agur  the  son  of  J. ,  (even)  the 

JA'-KTTVr,  n*p;  a  setter  up. 

1.  Son  of  Shimhi,  a  Benjamite.     B.  C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8. 19  And  J.,  and  Zichri,  and  Zabdi 

2.  A  head  of  a  family  of  the  Aaronites.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24. 12  The  eleventh  to  Eliashib,  the  twelfth  to  J. 
JA'-LON,  \h"r  Jah  abides. 
A  son  of  Ezra  through  Caleb  the  spy.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 17  Jether,  and  Mered,  and  Epher,  and  J. 
JAM'-BRES,  'lafx&pjjs. 

Probably  an  Egyptian  magician  at  the  court  of  Pharaoh. 
He  is  mentioned  along  with  Jannes  by  the  apostle  Paul 
as  having  withstood  Moses.    B.C.  1491. 

2  Ti.    3.   8  as  Jannes  and  J.  withstood  Moses,  so  do 
JAMES,  y\a.Ka$os. 

1.  A  son  of  Zebedee  and  brother  of  John  the  apostle. 
Matt.  4.  21  J.  (the  son)  of  Zebedee,  and  John  his  br. 
10.   2  J.  (the  son)  of  Zebedee,  and  John  his  br. 


1  Matti7.  1  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  J.,  and  John  his  bro. 
Mark  1.  19  he  saw  J.  the  (son)  of  Zebedee,  and  John 
1.  29  the  house  of  Simon  and  Andrew,  with  J. 
3.  17  J.  the  (son)  of  Zebedee,  and . .  brother  of  J. 
5. 37  Peter,  and  J.,  and  John  the  brother  [of  J.] 
9.  2  taketh  (with  liim)  Peter,  and  J.,  and  John 
30.  35  J.  and  John,  the  sons  of  Zebedee  come 
10. 41  to  be  much -displeased  with  J.  and  John 

13.  3  J.  and  John  and  Andrew  asked  him  priv. 

14.  33  he  taketh  with  him  Peter  and  J.  and  John 
Luke  5.  10  so  (was)  also  J.  and  John,  the  sons  of  Ze. 

6. 14  J.  and  John,  Philip  and  Bartholomew 

8.  51  J.  and  John,  and  the  father  and  the  mot. 

9.  23  he  took  Peter  and  John  and  J.,  and  went 
9.  54  when  his  disciples  J.  and  John  saw  (this) 

Acts    1.  13  J.,  and  John,  and  Andrew,  Philip,  and  T. 

12.    2  he  killed  J.  the  brother  of  John  with  the 

Gal.    2.  12  before  that  certain  came  from  J.,  he  did 

2.  A  son  of  Alpheus. 

Matt  10.    3  J.  (the  son)  of  Alpheus,  and  Lebbeus 
Mark  3. 18  J.  the(son)of  Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and 
Luke  6. 15  J.  the  (son)  of  Alpheus,  and  Simon  called 
Acts    1.  13  J.  (the  son)  of  Alpheus,  and  Simon  Zelo. 

3.  The  brother  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Matt  13.  55  brethren,  J.,and  Joses,  and  Simon,  and  J.? 
Mark  6.  3  of  J.,  and  Joses,  and  of  Juda,  and  Simon 
Gal.    1.  19  saw  I  none,  save  J.  the  Lord's  brother 

4.  The  son  of  Mary.     He  is  also  called  the  Little. 

Matt  27.  56  Mary  the  mother  of  J.  and  Joses,  and  the 
Markis.  40  Mary  the  mother  of  J.' the  less  and  16.  1. 
Luke  24. 10  Mary  the  (mother)  of  J.,  and  other  (wo. 

5.  James  the  brother  of  the  apostle  Jude. 

Luke  6. 16  (the  brother)  of  J.,  and  Judas  Iscariot 
Acts  12. 17  Go  show  these  things  unto  J.,  and  to  the 
15. 13  J.  answered,  saying,  Men  (and)  brethren 
21.  18  Paul  went  in  with  us  unto  J. ;  and  all  the 
1  Co.  15.  7  he  was  seen  of  J.  ;  then  of  all  the  apostles 
Gal.  2.  9  J.,  Cephas,  and  John,  who  seemed  to  be 
Jas.  1.  1  J.,  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Jude        1  brother  of  J.,  to  them  that  are  sanctified 

JA'-MIN,  pp;  right  hand,  prosperity. 

1.  A  son  of  Simeon  the  second  son  of  Jacob.      B.C. 
1700. 

Gen.  46.  10  J.,  and  Ohad,  and  Jachin,  and  Zohar,  and 
Esod.6.  15  J.,  and  Ohad,  and  Jachin,  and  Zohar,  and 
Num26.  12  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jaminites  :  of  Ja. 
1  Ch.  4.  24  (were)Neniuel,  and  J.,  Jarib,  Zerah,(and) 

2.  A  descendant  of  Hezron,  son  of  Pharez.    B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2.  27  sons  of  Ram.  .were  Maaz,  and  J.,  and  E. 

3.  A  priest  who  explained  the  law  to  the  people  when 
Ezra  read  it.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    8.    7  J.,  Akkub,Shabbethai,  Hodijah,Maaseiah 
JA-HZN-ITES,  T?:. 
The  family  of  Jamin,  son  of  Simeon. 

Nuni26.  12  of  Jamin,  the  family  of  the  J.:  of  Jachin 
JAM'-LECH,  l\b^l  Jah  rules. 
A  princely  descendant  of  Simeon.     B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  34  And  Moshobab,  and  J.,  and  Joshah  the 
JANGLING,  vain  — 
Vain  discoitrse,  fxaraioXoyia  mataiologia. 

1  Ti.    1.   6  some,  .have  turned  aside  unto  vain  jang. 
JAN-'NA,  'lavva. 

An  ancestor  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary  the  mother 
of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  24  (the  son)  of  [J.],  which  was  (the  son)  of  J. 
JAN'-NES,  'lavvTJs. 
One  who,  with  Jambres,  withstood  Moses. 

2  Ti.    3    8  as  J.  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses,  so  do 
JA-NO'-AH,  nia;  resting  place. 

A  city  in  the  N.  of  Naphtali,  near  Abel-be th-maachah. 

2KL  15.  29  tookljon,  and  Abel-beth-maachah,  and  J. 
JA-NO'-HAH,  nrh:;. 

A  city  between  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  ;  perhaps  the 
same  as  the  preceding. 

Josh  16.    6  the  border,  .passed  by  it  on  the  east  to  J. 
16.    7  it  went  down  from  J.  to  Ataroth,  and  to 
JA'-NTTM,  D*r,  DUr*  propagation. 
A  city  in  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  53  And  J.,  and  Beth-tappuah,  and  Aphekah 
JA'-PHETH,  ns*  the  extender,  or  fair. 
The  second  son  of  Noah,  whose  descendants  spread  over 
the  N.  and  W.  regions  of  the  earth.  B.C.  2448.  He  is 
probably  the  original  of  Japetus  whom  the  Greeks  con- 
sidered as  the  ancestor  of  the  human  race. 

Gen.    5.  32  and  Noah  begat  Shem,  Ham,  and  J. 

6.  10  Noah  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and  J. 

7.  13  Ham,  and  J.,  the  sonsof  Noah, 'and  Noah's 
9.  18  sonsof  Noah,  .were  Shem,.  .Ham,  and  J. 
9.  23  J.  took  a  garment,  and  laid  (it)  upon  both 
9.  27  God  shall  enlarge  J.,  and  he  shall  dwell 

10.    1  of  the  sons  of  Noah ;  Shem,  Ham,  and  J. 
10.    2  sons  of  J.;  Gomer,  and  Magog,  and  Madai 
10. 21  Unto  Shem.  .the  brother  of  J.  the  elder 
1  Ch.  1.   4  Noah,  Shem,  Ham,  and  J. 

1 .    5  The  sons  of  J. ;  Gomer,  Magog,  and  Madai 
JA-PHI'-A,  ys;  high. 

1.  The  Amorite  king  of  Lachish  who  was  defeated  by 
Joshua  at  Gibeon.     B.C.  1451. 

Josh.  to.    3  unto  J.  king  of  Lachish,  and  unto  Debir 


2.  A  town  near  Carmel  between  Accho  and  Crosarea  on 
the  coast  (Sykamenos). 

Josh.  19.  12  goeth  out  to  Daberath,  andgoethup  to  J. 

3.  A  son  born  to  David  after  he  began  to  reign  at  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    5.  15  Ibharalso,  and  Elishua,  andNepheg..J. 
1  Ch.  3.    7  And  Nogah,  and  Nepheg,  and  J 

14.  6  And  Nogah,  and  Nepheg,  and  J. 

JAPH'-LET,  a^£:  Jah  causes  to  escape. 

A  grandson  of  Beriah,  son  of  Asher.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  32  Heber  begat  J.,  and  Shomer,  and  Hotham 

7.  33  sons  of  J. ;  Pasach,  and  Bimhal,  and  Ash. 

7.  33  These  (are)  the  children  of  J. 

JAPH-LE'-TI,  'to1??;. 

A  place  unknown ;  perhaps  Bethpalet. 

Josh.  16.  3  goeth  down  westward  to  the  coast  of  J. 

JA'-PHO,  is;  high. 

A  city  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  be- 
longed to  the  Philistines,  and  bordered  on  the  territory 
of  the  Danites.  It  is  now  called  Jafa  (or  Joppa),  150 
stadia  from  Antipatris,  6  miles  W.  of  Rama,  and  10 
hours  from  Jerusalem  at  the  W.  end  of  the  mountain 
road. 

Josh.  19.  46  and  Rakkon,  with  the  border  before  J. 

JA'-RAH,  HTy:  unveiler. 

A  son  of  Ahaz  of  the  family  of  Saul  the  Benjamite. 

B.C.  960.    He  is  Jehoadah  in  1  Ch.  8.  36. 

1  Ch.  g.   42  And  Ahaz  begat  J. ;  and  J.  begat  Alem. 

JA'-REB,  yv  contender,  avenger. 
An  appellation  of  a  king  of  Ashur. 

Hos.    5.  13  then  went  Ephraim.. and  sent  to  kingJ. 
10.   6  be  also  carried,  .(for)  a  present  to  king  J. 

JA'-RED,  JE'-RED,  TV,  tv  'IapeS,  descending. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Seth  and  son  of  Mahalaleel.  B.C. 
3544-2682. 

Gen.    5. 15  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat  J. 
5. 16  Mahalaleel  lived  after  he  begat  J.  eight 
5.  18  J.  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two  years 
5. 19  J.  lived  after  he  begat  Enoch  eight  nun. 
5.  20  the  days  of  J.  were  nine  hundred  sLxty 

1  Ch.  i.    2  Kenan,  Mahalaleel,  J. 

2.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  37  Enoch,  which  was  (the  son)  of  [J.],  which 

JA-RES-I'AH,  ^1'^y^.l  Jah  gives  a  couch. 
A  son  of  Jerohaml  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  27  J.,  and  Elian,  and  Zichri.  .sons  of  Jeroh. 

JAR'-HA,  yrrr. 

An  Egyptian  servant  and  husband  of  Ahlai  the  daughter 

of  Sheshan.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  34  a  servant,  an  Egyptain,  whose  name.  .J. 
2.  35  gave  his  daughter  to  J.  his  servant  to 
JA'-RIB,  3*r  striving. 

1.  A  son  of  Simeon,  B.C.  1720;  called  Jachin'mGen.  46. 
io,  and  Exod.  6.  15. 

1  Ch.  4.  24  (were)Nemuel,andJamin,J...Zerah,(and) 

2.  A  chief  man  who  accompanied  Ezra  to  Jerusalem. 
B.C.  457- 

Ezra    2.  16  for  J.,  and  for  Elnathau,  and  for  Nathan 

3.  A  priest  who  had  married  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  457. 
Ezra  10. 18  Maaseiah  and  Eliezer,  and  J.,  andGeda. 

JAE/-MTJTH,  nttrp  height. 

1.  A  city  in  Judah,  formerly  belonging  to  the  Amorites, 
whose  king  was  slain  by  Joshua.  It  is  now  called 
Tarmulc,  2  miles  from  Beitnetif  or  10  from  Beit-gibrin. 

Josh.io.    3  unto  Piram  king  of  J.,  and  unto  Japhia 
10.    5  the  king  of  J.,  the  king  of  Lachish,  the 
10.  23  the  king  of  J.,  the  king  of  Lachish,  (and) 
12.  11  The  king  of  J.,  one;  the  king  of  Lachish 

15.  35  J.   and  Adullam,  Socoh,  and  Azekah 
Neh.  11.  29  at  En-rimmon,  and  at  Zareah,  and  at  J. 

2.  A  Levitical  city  in  Issachar,  called  also  Remeth  (Josh. 
19.  21),  and  Remoth  (1  Ch.  6.  73). 

Josh.21.  29  J.  with  her  suburbs,  En-  gammin  with  her 

JA-RO'-AH,  nh;  new  moon. 
A  descendant  of  Gad.    B.C.  1270. 

1  Ch.  5. 14  Abihail  the  son  of  Huri,  the  son  of  J. 

JA'-SHEN,  \S'\  shining. 

The  father  of  one  of  David's  worthies.    B.C.  1085. 

2  Sa.  23.  32  Eliahba  the  Shaalbonite,  of  the  sons  of  J. 
JA'-SHER,  "V;  upright. 

A  book  of  songs  celebrating  the  glory  of  Israel. 

Josh.io.  13  (Is)  not  this  written  in  the  book  of  J.? 

2  Sa.    1.  18  behold,  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  J. 
JA-SHO'-BEABT,  DW3$;  the  people  return. 

1.  Son  of  Zabdiel  a  Hachmonite  and  one  of  David's  cap- 
tains.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11. 11  J.,  an  Hachmonite,  the  chief  of  the  cap. 
27.   2  for  the  first  month  (was)  J.  the  son  of 

2.  A  Korahite  descended  from  Kohath. 

1  Ch.12.  6  Azareel,  and  Joezer,  and  J.,  the  Korhites 

JA'-SHTTB,  atei;,  j*ty;  turning  back. 
1.  The  third  of  the  four  sons  of  Issachar.    B.C.  1692. 
~"  Nuni26.  24  Of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jashubites  :  of 
1  Ch.  7.    1  (were)  Tola,  and  Puah,  J.,  and  Shimron 


JASHUBI    LBHBM 


534' 


JBHALELEBL 


2.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife  in  exile.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  29  Malluch,  and  Adaiah,  J.,  and  Sheal,  and 
JA-SHXT-BI  LE'-HEM,  □  ; )  g^r  turningback  to  Bethle. 
A  descendant  of  Shelah,  sou  of  Judah.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Oh.  4.  22  Saraph . .  had  the  dominion  in  Moab,  and  J. 
JA-SHUB-ITES,  '2-s;. 
The  family  of  Jashub,  son  of  Issachar. 

Nuni26.  24  Of  Jashub,  the  family  of  the  J.:  of  Shimron 

JA'-SON,  -laawv  healing. 

1.  A  believer  in  Thessalonica  hospitable  to  Paul  and 
Silas. 

Acts  17.    5  assaulted  the  house  of  J.,  and  sought  to 
17.    6  they  drew  J.  and  certain  brethren  unto 
17.    7  Whom  J.  hath  received  :  and  these  all  do 
17.   9  when  they  had  taken  security  of  J.,  and 

2.  A  kinsman  of  Paul  whose  salutation  Paul  sent  to  Rome. 

Rom  16.  21  J.,  and  Sosipater,  my  kinsmen,  salute  you 
JASPER  — 
LJasper,  nD^;  yashepheh. 

Exod28.  20  fourth  row,  a  beryl,  and  an  onyx,  and  a  j. 

39. 13  fourth  row,  a  beryl,  an  onyx,  and  a  jasper 
Eze.  2S.  13  the  jasper,  the  sapphire,  the  emerald,  and 

2. Jasper,  'laairis  iaspis. 

Rev.   4.    3  he  that  sat  was  to  look  upon  like  a  jasper 
21. 11  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal 
^1. 18  the  building  of  the  wall  of  it  was  (of)  jas. 
21. 19  The  first  foundation  (was)  jasper;  the  se. 

JATH-NI'-EL,  h^'iryl  God  is  giving. 

A  son  of  Meshelemiah  of  the  house  of  Asaph  or  Ebiasaph 

(1  Chr.  9.  19).    He  was  a  gatekeeper  at  the  tabernacle. 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.   2  the  second,  Zebadiah  the  third,  J.  the  fo. 

JAT'-TIR,  TJT  wide. 

A.  Levitical  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah.  Now  called 

Attlr,  S.  of  Hebron. 

Josh. 15.  48  in  the  mountains,  Shamir,  and  J.,  and 

21. 14  J.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Eshtemoa  with 
1  Sa.  30.  27  Ramoth,  and  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  J. 
1  rli.  6.  57  and  J.,  and  Eshtemoa,  with  their  suburbs 

JA'-VAN,  jr." 

1.  The  fourth  son  of  Japheth.    B.C.  2298. 

Gen.  10.    2  J.,  and  Tubal,  and  Meshech,  and  Tiras 

10.   4  the  sons  of  J.;  Elishah,  and  Tarshish,  K. 

1  Ch.  1.    5  and  J.,  and  Tubal,  and  Meshech,  and  Tiras 

1.    7  the  sons  of  J.;  Elishah,  and  Tarshish,  K. 

2.  His  decendants  and  their  lands,  Ionia,  Macedonia, 
Greece,  Syria,  &c. 

Isa.   66.  19  (to)  Tubal,  and  J.,  (to)  the  isles  afar  off 

3.  A  city  in  S.  Arabia,  Yemen,  whither  the  Phenicians 
traded.    It  is  perhaps  the  same  as  Uzal. 

Eze.  27.  13  J.,  Tubal,  and  Meshech,  they  (were).. me. 
27.  19  J.  going  to  and  fro  occupied  in  thy  fail's 
JAVELIN  — 
l.Spear,  javelin,  rnq  chanith. 

1  Sa.  18. 10  and  (there  was)  a  javelin  in  Saul's  hand 
18. 11  Saul  cast  the  javelin ;  for  he  said,  I  will  s. 
19.  .9  as  he  sat  in  his  house  with  his  javelin  in 

19.  10  Saul  sought  to  smite  David,  .with  the  ja. 
19. 10  and  he  smote  the  javelin  into  the  wall 

20.  33  And  Saul  cast  a  javelin  at  him  to  smite 

2.Javelin,  spea/r,  dart,  no'i  romach. 

Num25.    7  Phinehas..  rose.,  and  took  a  javelin  in 
JAW,  jaw  bone,  jaw  teeth  — 
1 .  Cheek,  cheek  bone,  Tj?  lechi. 

Judg  15.  15  he  found  a  new  jaw  bone  of  an  ass,  and 

15.  16  With  the  jaw  bone  of  an  ass,  heaps  upon 

15.  16  with  the  jaw  of  an  ass  have  I  slain  a-tho. 

15.  17  he  cast  away  the  jaw  bone  out  of  his  hand 

15.  19  clave  an  hollow  place  that  (was)  in  the  j. 

Job    41-   2  canst  thou,  .bore  his  jaw  tlu-ough  with  a 

Isa.   30.  23  a  bridle  in  the  jaws  of  the  people,  causing 

Eze.  29.    4  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy  jaws,  and  I  will 

38.  4  I  will . .  put  hooks  into  thy  jaws,  and  I  will 
Hos.  11.   4  they  that  take  off  the  yoke  on  their  jaws 

2.Jau\  rnp?n  matqoach. 

Psa.  22. 15  my  tongue  cleaveth  to  my  jaws;  and  thou 
Z.Jaw  teeth,  niy^np  methallcoth. 

Job   29.  17  I  brake  the  jaws  of  the  wicked,  aud  pluc. 

Prov.30. 14  their  jaw  teeth  (as)  knives,  to  devour  the 

JA'-ZIZ,  Pt;  shining. 

The  chief  shepherd  of  the  royal  flocks  in  the  time  of 

David.    B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.27.  31  And  over  the  flocks  (was)  J.  the  Hagcrite 
JEALOTJS  — 
l.Z'irfoits,  jealous,  Nip  qanna. 

Exodao.    5  I  the  Loud  thy  God  (am)  a  jealous  God 
34.  14  Lord,  whoso  name  (is)  Jealous,  (is)  a  jea. 

Deut.  4.  24  thy  God  (is)  a  consuming  flre.  .a  jealous  G. 

5.  9  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  (am)  a  jealous  God 

6.  15  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  jealous  God  among 

2.Zealous,  jealous^  &"■>?  qanno. 

Josh  24.  19  be  (is)  a  jealous  God  ;  he  will  not  forgive 
Nah.  1.   2  God  (is)  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth 

JEALOTJS,  to  be  — 

To  be  zealous,  jealous,  x:$  qana,  3. 

Num.  5.  14  ho  be  jealous  of  his  wife,  and  she  be 
5. 14  he  be  jealous  of  his  wife,  and  she  be  not 


Num.  5.  30  he  be  jealous  over  his  wife,  and  shall  set 

1  Ki.  19. 10,  14  I  have  been  very  jealous  for  the  Lord 
Eze.  39.  25  and  will  be  jealous  for  my  holy  name 
Joel    2. 18  Then  will  the  Lord  be  jealous  for  his  land 
Zech.  1.  14  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Zion 

8.   2  I  was  jealous  for  Zion . .  I  was  jealous  for 

JEALOTJS  over,  to  be  — 
To  be  zealous,  ^ijK6qi  zeloo 

2  Co.  1 1.  2  For  I  am  jealous  over  you  with  godly  jeal. 

JEALOUSY  — 

1.  Zeal,  jealousy,  n^ig  qinah. 

Num.  5.  14,  14  the' spirit  of  jealousy  come  upon  him 

5. 15  it  (is)  an  offering  of  jealousy,  an  offering 

5.  18  the  offering,  .which  (is)the  jealousy  offer. 

5.  as  the  priest  shall  take  the  jealousy  offering 

5.  29  This  (is)  the  law  of  jealousies,  when  a  wife 

5.  30  Or  when  the  spirit  of  jealousy  cometh  upon 

25  11  that  I  consumed  not . .  Israel  in  my  jealou. 

Deut2g.  20  his  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  man 

Psa.  79.    5  How  long,  .shall  thy  jealousy  burn  like 

Prov.  6.  34  For  jealousy  (is)  the  rage  of  a  man  ;  there. 

Song   8.    6  jealousy  (is)  cruel  as  the  grave  :  the  coals 

Isa.   42.  13  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war 

Eze.    8.   3  where  (was)  the  seat  of  the  image  of  jeal. 

8.    5  at  the  gate,  .this  image  of- jealousy  in  the 

16.  38  I  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and  jealousy 

16. 42  my  jealousy  shall  depart  from  thee,  and 

23.  25  I  will  set  my  jealousy  against  thee,  and 

36.   5  Surely  in  the  fire  of  ray  jealousy  have  I 

36.  6  Behold,  I  have  spoken  in  my  jealousy  and 

38. 19  in  my  jealousy  (and)  in  the  fire  of  my  wr. 

Zeph._  1. 18  land  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire  of  his  j. 

'  3.    8  shall  be  devoured  with  the  fire  of  my  jeal. 

Zech.  1 .  14  I  am  jealous . .  for  Zion  with  a  great  jealou. 

8.  2  I  was  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy 

2. Zeal,  fijAos  zelos, 

2  Co.  11.    2  I  am  jealous  over  you  with  a  godly  jealo. 
JEALOUSY,  to  move  or  provoke  to  — 
l.To  make  zealous  or  jealous,  nift  qana,  3. 

Deut  32.  21  They  have  moved  me  to  jealousy  with 
1  Ki.  14.  22  they  provoked  him  to  jealousy  with  their 

2.To  cause  zeal  or  jealousy,  nift  qana,  5. 

Deut  32. 16  They  provoked  him  to  jealousy  with  stra. 

32.  21  and  I  will  move  them  to  jealousy  with 
Psa.  78.  58  moved  him  to  jealousy  with  their  graven 

0.T0  cause  zeal  or  jealousy,  njp  qanah,  5. 

Eze.  8.  3  seat  of  the  image,  .which  provoketh  to  j. 
4.  To  make  very  zealous  or  jealous,  irapa&hoeo. 

Rom  10. 19  Moses  saith,  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy 
11. 11  salvation.. to  provoke  them  to  jealousy 

1  Co.  10.  22  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy?  are 

JE-A-TE'-RAI,  nr>w  steadfast. 

A  descendant  of  Gershoni  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1250. 

1  Ch.  6.  21  Iddo  his  son,  Zerah  his  son,  J.  his  son 
JE-BE-RECH-I'AH,  ^n;?"^  Jah  is  blessing. 
The  father  of  Zechariah.    B.C.  770. 

Isa.     8.    2  the  priest,  and  Zechariah  the  son  of  J. 
JE'-BTJS,  JE-BTJ'-SI,  'pn;,  on*  trodden  dozen. 
The  city  afterwards  called  Jerusalem. 

Josh.iS.  16  to  the  valley  of  Hinnon,  to  the  side  of  J. 

18.  28  J.,  which  (is)  Jerusalem,  Gibeath,  (and) 
Judgi9.  10  and  came  over  against  J.,  which  (is)  Jer. 

19.  11  when  they  (were)  by  J.,  the  day  was  far 

1  Ch.11.   4  Israel  went  to  Jerusalem,  which  (is)  J. 

.11.    5  the  inhabitants  of  J.  said  to  David,  Thou 

JE-BTJ-S1TES,  'po;  belonging  to  Jehus. 
The  descendants-  of  a  son  of  Canaan,  son  of  Ham.   They 
dwelt  chiefly  around  Jerusalem,  which  they  held  till 
the  time  of  David. 

Gen.  10. 16  the  J.,  and  the  Amorite,  and  the  Girgas. 

15.  21  Canaanites,  aud  the  Girgashites,  and.  .J. 

Exod.  3.    8,  17  Perizzites,  and  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 

13.    s  the  Amorites,  and  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 

23.  23  and  the  Canaanites,  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 

33.  2  and  the  Perizzite,  the  Hivite,  and  the  J. 
34. 11  the  Perizzite,  and  the  Hivite,  and  the  J. 

Numi3-  29  J.,  and  the  Amorites,  dwell  in  the  moun. 
Deut.  7.    1  the  Perizzites,  and  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 

20.  17  the  Perizzites,  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 
Josh.  3.  10  Girgashites,  and  the  Amorites,  and  the  J. 

9.  1  the  Hivite,  and  the  J.,  heard  (thereof) 

11.  3  the  J.  in  the  mountains,  and  (to)  the  Hi. 

12.  8  the  Perizzites,  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 
15.    8  border  went,  .unto  the  south  side  of . .  J. 
15. 63  the  J.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the 
15.  63  the  J.  dwell  with  the  children  of  Judah 
24. 11  the  Girgashites,  the  Hivites,  and  the  J. 

Judg.  1.  21  J.  that  inhabited  Jerusalem ;  but  the  J. 
3.    s  Amorites,  and  Perizzites,  and  Hivites.  .J. 
ig.  11  let  us  turn  in  into  this  city  of  the  J.,  and 

2  Sa.  5.   6  his  men  went  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  J. 

5.   8  smiteth  the  J.,  aud  the  lame  and  the  bli. 

24.  16  by  the  tlu-eshing  place  of  Araunah  the  J. 
24.  18  in  the  threshing  floor  of  Araunah  the  J. 

1  Ki.  9.  20  J.,  which  (were)  not  of  the  children  of  I. 

1  Ch.  i.  14  J.  also,  and  the  Amorite,  and  the  Girga. 

11.    4  where  the  J.  (were),  the  inhabitants  of 
11.    6  Whosoever  smiteth  the  J.  first  shall  lie 

21.  15,  18,  2S  the  threshing  floor  of  Oman  the  J. 

2  Ch.  3.    1  in  the  threshing  floor  of  Oman  the  J. 

8.  7  and  the  J.,  which  (were)  not  of  Israel 

Ezra   9.  1  the  J.,  the  Ammonites,  the  Moabites,  the 

Neh.  9.  8  Perizzites,  and  the  J.,  and  the  Girgashites 

Zech.  9.  7  as  a  governor  in  Judah,  and  Ekrou  as  a  J. 


JE-CA-MI'-AH,  n;Cj3% 

A  son  of  Neri.     B.c!  580.     See  Jekamiah. 

1  Ch.  3. 18  and  Shenazar,  J.,  Hoshama,  and  Nedab 
JE-CHOL-I'AH,  infrg  Jah  is  able. 

A  woman  of  Jerusalem,  and  mother  of  Azariah  (or 
Uzziah)  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  810. 

2  Ki.  15.    2  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  J.  of  Jeru. 
2  Ch.26.    3  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  J.  of  Jeru. 

JE-CHON-I'AS,  n^xovias— See  Jechoniah. 
Matt.  1.  11  Josias  begat  J.  and  his  brethren 

1.  12  J.  begat  Salathiel ;  and  Salathiel  begat 
JE-CON-I'AH,  n;^,  vrt$y\  Jah  {is)  establishing. 
The  altered  form  of  Jehoiachin  the  last  but  one  of  the 
kings  of  Judah.    In  Matt.  1.  n,  12,  it  is  Jeconias.    B.C. 

599- 

1  Ch.  3.  16  of  Jehoiakim :  J.  his  son,  Zedekiah  his  son 
3.  17  And  the  sons  of  J.;  Assir,  Salathiel  his  s. 
Esth.  2.    6  had  been  carried  away  with  J.  king  of  J. 
Jer.  24.    1  J.  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 

27.  20  J.  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  the  king  of  Jud. 

28.  4  J.  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 

29.  2  J.  the  king,  and  the  queen,  and  the  eun. 
JE-DA-I'AH,  n;T  Jah  is  praise. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Simeon.    B.C.  1080. 

1  Ch.  4.  37  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Shimri,  the  son 

2.  One  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall  of  Jerusalem- 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.  3.  10  And  next  unto  them  repaired  J.  the  son 
JE-DA-I'AH,  rvyv  Jah  (is)  knowing. 

1.  A  priest  in  Jerusalem,  some  of  whose  descendants 
came  up  from  Jerusalem.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  9.  10  the  priests  ;  J.,  and  Jehoiarib,  and  Jac. 

24.  7  came  forth  to  Jehoiarib,  the  second  to  J. 
Ezra  2.  36  the  children  of  J.,  of  the  house  of  Jeshua 
Neh.    7.  39  the  children  of  J.,  of  the  house  of  Jeshua 

2.  A  priest  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Neh.  11.  10  the  priests :  J.  the  son  of  Joiarib,  Jachin 

12.    6  Shemaiah,  Joiarib,  J. 

12.  19  And  of  Joiarib,  Mattenai ;  of  J.,  Uzzi 
Zech.  6.  10  of  Tobijah,  and  of  J.,  which  are  come 

6.  14  to  J.,  and  to  Hen  the  son  of  Zephaniah 

3.  Another  priest  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C. 
536- 

Neh.  12.    7  Sallu,  Amok,  Hilkiah,  J.   These  (were) 
12.  21  Of  Hilkiah,  Hashabiah  ;  of  J.  Nethaneel 

JE-DI-A'-EL,  bx^T.  God  knows. 

1.  A  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1700.    Also  called  Ashbel. 

1  Ch.  7.  6  of  Benjamin  ;  Bela,  and  Becher,  and  J. 

7.  10  The  sons  also  of  J. ;  Bilhan :  and  the  sons 
7. 11  these  the  sons  of  J.,  by  the  heads  of  their 

2.  The  son  of  Shimri,  one  of  David's  valiant  guard  of 
thirty.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  45  J.  the  son  of  Shimri,  and  Joha  his  brother 

3.  A  warrior  that  joined  David  hi  Ziklag.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.12.  20  J.,  and  Michael,  and  Jozabad,  and  Elihu 

4.  Son  of  Meshelemiah  a  descendant  of  Korah.     B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.26.  2  And  the  sons  of  Meshelemiah  (were).  .J. 
JE-DI'-DAH,  htt  beloved. 

The  wife  of  Anion  and  mother  of  Josiah,  kings  of  Judah. 
B.C.  641. 

2  Ki.  22.  1  his  mother's  name  (was)  J.,  the  daughter 
JE-DI-DI'-AH,  n;Ti;  Jah  is  a  friend. 

The  name  given  to  Solomon  by  Nathan  through  the 
word  of  the  Lord.    B.C.  1015. 

2  Sa.  12.  25  he  called  his  name  J.,  because  of  the  L. 
JE-DTJ'-THUN,  pniT,  pnT  a  choir  of  praise. 
A  Levite  chief  singer  in  the  temple.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  9. 16  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  Galal,  the  son  of  J. 

16.  38  Obed-edom  also  the  son  of  J.,  and  Hosah 
16. 41  And  with  them  Heman  and  J.,  and  the 
16.  42  Heman  and  J. .  .And  the  sons  of  J.  (were) 

25.  1  the  sons  of  Asaph,  and  of  Heman,  and  of  J. 
25.   3  Of  J.:  the  sons  of  J.;  Gedaliah,  andZeri 
25.    3  six,  under  the  hands  of  their  father  J. 
25.   6  according  to  the  king's  order  to  Asaph,  J. 

2  Ch.  5. 12  all  of  them  of  Asaph,  of  Heman,  of  J.,  with 

29. 14  and  of  the  sons  of  J.;  Shemaiah  andUzziel 
35.  15  according  to  the  commandment  of ..  J.  the 

Neh.  xi.  17  of  Shammua,  the  son  of  Galal,  the  son  of  J. 

Psa.  39.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  (even)  to  J.,  A  . 
62  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  to  J.,  A  Psalm 
77.      ,,    To  the  chief  Musician,  to  J.,  A  PBalm 

JE-E'-ZER,  -iilTN,  contracted  from  "W^n. 

A  son  of  Gilead,  grandson  of  Manasseh.    B.C.  1450.    See 

Abiezar. 

Nuni26.  30  (of)  J.,  the  family  of  the  J.;  of  Helek,thef. 
JE-EZ-ER-ITES,  '""J^X. 

The  patronymic  of  a  family  that  sprang  from  Jeezer  the 
son  of  Gilead. 

N1U1126.  30  of  Jeezer,  the  family  of  the  J.:  of  Helek 
JE-GAR  SA-HA-DTJ'-THA,  Kn;-in;;'  *i]*  heap  oftesti. 
The  name  given  by  Laban  to  the  heap  of  stones  that 
Jacob  called  Galced.     B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  31. 47  And  Laban  called  it  J. :  but  Jacob  called 
JE-HAL-EL'-EEL,  Jrhalvkl,  *?N^n^  God  is  praised. 
1.  A  descendant  of  Judah  through  Caleb  the  spy.  B.C. 
1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  16  And  the  sous  of  J.jZiph,  andZiphah.Tiria 


JBDEIAH 


535 


JEHOEAM 


2.  A  descendant  of  Merari  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah. 
B.C.  756. 

2  Ch.29.  i2Abdi,  and  Azariah  the  son  of  J.:  and  of  the 

JEE-DE-I'AH,  W^K  union  of  J  ah. 

1.  The  son  of  Shubael  a  descendant  of  Levi  in  David's 
time.    B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.  24.  20  Amram ;  Shubael :  of  the . .  of  Shubael ;  J. 

2.  An  overseer  of  the  asses  in  the  time  of  David.    B.C. 
1020. 

1  Ch.27.  30  and  over  the  asses  (was)  J.  the  Meronot. 

JE-HEZ-E'-KEL,  h$$[T\\  God  is  strong. 

One  of  the  priests  to  whom  the  charges  of  the  sanctuary 

were  distributed  by  lot  in   the  time  of  David.    B.C. 

1015. 

1  Ch.  24.  16  nineteenth  to  Pethahiah . .  twentieth  to  J. 

JE-HI'-AH,  n;n:  Jah  (is)  living. 

A  Levite  gatekeeper  of  the  ark  when  brought  from  the 

house  of  Obed-edora.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.15.  24  Obed-edom  and  J.  (were)  door  keepers  for 

JE-HI'-EL,  Wrr,  h^m\  God  is  living. 

1.  A  Levite  singer  in  the  tabernacle  in  David'3  time. 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  l8»  2°  an<i  Sheniiramoth,  and  J.,  and  Unni 
16,   s  Sheniiramoth,  and  J.,  and  Mattithiah,  and 

2.  A  Gershonite.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.23.  8  The  sons  of  Laadan;  the  chief  (was)  J.,  and 
29.    8  gave  (them),  .by  the  hand  of  J.  the  Ger. 

3.  A  companion  of  David's  sons.    B.C.  1030. 

1  Ch.27.  32  J-  •  -so11  °f  Hachmoni  (was)  with  the  king's 

4.  A  son  of  Jehoshaphat,  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  889. 

2  Ch.  21.    2  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat,  Azariah,  and  J. 

5.  A  son  of  Heman  the  singer  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah. 
B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29.  *4  And  of  the  sons  of  Heman ;  J.  andShimei 

6.  A  Levite  set  over  the  dedicated  things  in  the  days  of 
Hezekiah.    B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.31. 13  And  J.,  and  Azaziah,  and  Nahath,  andA. 

7.  A  chief  priest  in  the  days  of  Josiah.    B.C.  623. 

2  Ch.35.    8  Hilkiah  and  Zechariah  and  J.,  rulers  of  the 

S.  The  father  of  Obadiah  who  returned  from  exile  with 
Ezra.    B.C.  458. 

Ezra    8.   9  Obadiah  the  son  of  J.,  and  with  him  two 

9.  The  father  of  Shecbaniah  who  first  acknowledged  the 
guilt  of  taking  strange  wives.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.    2  Sheehaniah  the  son  of  J.,  (one)  of  the  sons 

10.  A  priest  who  bad  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  457. 
Ezra  10.  21  and  Elijah,  and  Shemaiah,  and  J.,  and  Fz. 

11.  A  man  of  Elam's  family  who  had  done  the  same 
thing,    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  26  and  J.,  and  Abdi,  and  Jeremoth,  and  Eli. 

JE-HI-E'-U,  '^N'lr. 

A  son  of  Laadan  the  Gershonite,  set  over  the  treasures 

of  the  sanctuary  in  the  time  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.  21  sons  of  the  Gershonite  Laadan.  .(were)  J. 

26.  22  The  sons  of  J.;  Zetham,  and  Joel  his 

JE-HIZ-KI'-AH,  in^pTfr  Jah  is  strong. 

A  son  of  Shallum,  and  a  strong  opponent  of  making  his 

brethren  slaves  in  the  days  of  Ahaz.    B.C.  742. 

2  Ch.  28.  12  J.  the  son  of  Shallum,  and  Amasa  the  son 

JE-HO-A'-DAH,  rnjjin;  Jah  unveils. 

Son  of  Ahaz,  the  great  grandson  of  Jonathan,  Saul's 

son.     B.C.  940.    Called  also  Jarah. 

1  Ch.   8.  36  J.  begat  Ale'meth,  and  Azniaveth,  and  Z. 

JE-HO-AD'-DAM"  ]?yi<T  Hyi'T  Jah  gives  delight. 
The  mother  of  Amaziah  and  wife  of  Joash,  kings  of 
Judah.    B.C.  830. 

2  Ki.  14.    2  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  J.  of  Jeru. 
2  Ch.  25.    1  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  J.  of  Jeru. 

JE-HO-A'-HAZ,  inso.TJ  inxv  Jah  tipholds. 

1.  A  son  of  Jehu  and  father  of  Joash,  kings  of  Israel. 
B.C.  885. 

2  Ki.io.  35  And  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

13.    1  J.  the  son  of  Jehu  began  to  reign  over 
13.   4  J.  besought  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  hea. 
13.    7  Neither  did  he  leave  of  the  people  to  J. 
13,    8  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that 
13.   9  J.  slept  with  his  fathers ;  and  they  buried 
13.  10  began  Jehoash  the  son  of  J.  to  reign  over 
13. 22  king,  .oppressed  Israel  all  the  days  of  J. 
13.  25  the  son  of  J.  took  again  out  of  the  hand 

13.  25  which  he  had  taken  out  of  the  hand  of  J. 

14.  1  In  the  second  year  ofJoash  son  of  J.  king 
14.    8  the  son  of  J.,  son  of  Jehu,  king  of  Israel 
14.  17  death  of  Jehoash,  son  of  J.,  king  of  Israel 

2  Ch.25.  17  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Jehu,  king  of  I. 
25.  25  death  of  Joash,  son  of  J.  king  of  Israel 

2.  A  son  of  Josiah  who  was  deposed  by  Pharaoh  Necho. 
B.C.  610.    Called  also  Shallum. 

2  Ki.  23.  30  the  people  of  the  land  took  J.  the  son  of 
23.  31  J.  (was)  twenty  and  three  years  old  when 
23.  34  turned  his.  .to  Jehoiakim,  and  took  J.  aw. 

2  Ch.36.  1  the  people  of  the  land  took  J.  the  son  of 
36.  2  J.  (was)  twenty  and  three  years  old  when 
36.   4  Necho  took  J.  his  brother,  and  carried  him 


3.  The  son  and  successor  of  Jehoram  and  father  of 
Joash,  kings  of  Judah.    B.C.  885.  Called  also  Akaziak. 
2  Ch.21. 17  there  was  never  a  son  left  him,  save  J. 
25.  23  took,  .the  son  of  Joash,  the  son  of  J. 

JE-HO'-ASH,  tfjaT,  C-NV  Jah  supjjorts, 

1.  Son  of  Ahaziah  and  father  of  Amaziah,  all  kings  of 
Judah.    B.C.  850. 

2  Ki.  11.  21  Seven  years  old  (was)  J.hvhen  he  began  to 
12.    1  In  the  seventh  year  of  Jehu,  J.  began  to 
12.   2  J.  did  (that  winch  was)  right  in  the  sight 
12.    4  J.  said  to  the  priests,  All  the  money  of 
12.   6  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  king  J. 
12.    7  J.  called  for  Jehoiada  the  priest,  and  the 

12.  18  J.  king  of  Judah  took  all  the  hallowed 
14.  13  took,  .the  son-of  J.,  the  son  of  Ahaziah 

2.  The  son  and  successor  of  Jehoahaz  on  the  throne  of 
Israel.  He  was  father  of  Jeroboam  II.  See  Joash. 
B.C.  840. 

2  Ki.  13. 10  began  J.  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  to  reign  over 

13.  25  J.  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  took  again  out 

14.  8  Amaziah  sent  messengers  to  J.,  the  son  of 
14.  9  J.  the  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king 
14. 11  J.  king  of  Israel  went  up.  .he  and  Amaz. 
14.  13  J.  king  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king  of 

14. 15  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.  which  he  did 

14. 16  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 

14. 17  And  Amaziah . .  lived  after  the  death  of  J. 

JE-HO-HA'-NAN,  JJpi'T  Jah  is  gracious.. 

1.  A  Kohathite  gatekeeper  of  the  tabernacle  in  David's 
reign.    B.C.  1015 

1  Ch.26.    3  Elam  the  fifth,  J.  the  sixth,  Elioenai  the 

2.  A  chief  captain  of  Judah  in  the  days  of  Jehoshaphat. 

B.C.  900. 

2  Ch.17. 15  next  to  him  (was)  J.  the  captain,  and  with 

3.  Father  of  Ishmael,  a  captain  that  aided  Jehoiada. 
B.C.  878. 

2  Ch.23.    T  au(*  Ishmael  the  son  of  J.,  and  Azariah 

4.  A  son  of  Bebai  who  had  taken  a  strange- wife.    B.C. 

457- 

Ezra  10.  28  Of  the  sons  also  of  Bebai ;  J.,  Hananiah 

5.  A  priest  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12. 13  Of  Ezra,  Meshullam;  of  Amariah,  J. 

6.  A  singer  at  the  purification  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  42  Eleazar,  and  Uzzi,  and  J.,  and  Malchijah 

JE-HOI-A'-DA,  yviiT,  yv'V  Jah  knows. 

1.  The  father  of  Benaiah'  one  of  David's  officers.  B.C. 
1048. 

2  Sa.  8.  1 8  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  (was  over)  both  the 

'**       20.  23  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  (was)  over  the  Che. 

S^3.  20  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. . .  slew  two . .  men  of 

23.  22  These  (things)  did  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 

1  Ki.  1.    8  Zadok  the  priest,  and  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 

1.  26  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. .  .hath  he  not  called 

1.  32  Call  me.  .Benaiah the  son  of  J.  And  they 

1.  36  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  answered  the  king 

1.  38  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. .  .brought  him  to  G. 

1.  44  the  king  hath  sent . .  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 

2.  25  sent  by  the  hand  of  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 
2.  29  Then  Solomon  sent  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 
2.  34  So  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  went  up,  and 

2.  35  kingput  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  in  his  room 
2.  46  the  king  commanded  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 
•4.    4  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  (was)  over  the  host 

1  Ch.11.  22  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.,  .had  done  many 

11.  24  These  (things)  did  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 
18.  17  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  (was)  over  the  Che. 
27.   s  third  captain.,  (was)  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 

2.  The  high  priest  who  made  Joash  king.    B.C.  87S. 

2  Ki.11.    4  J.  sent  and  fetched  the  rulers  over  hund. 

11.  9  captains . .  did . .  all  (things)  that  J.  the  pr. 
11.   9  took  every  man  his  men.  .and  came  to  J. 

11.  15  But  J.  the  priest  commanded  the  captains 
11. 17  J.  made  a  covenant  between  the  Lord  and 

12.  2  days  wherein  J.  the  priest  instructed  him 
12.  7  Then  king  Jehoash  called  for  J.  the  priest 
12.    9  But  J.  the  priest  took  a  chest,  and  bored 

2  Ch  22. 11  wife  of  J.  the  priest,  .hid  him  from  Atha. 
23.  1  in  the  seventh  year  J.  strengthened  hims. 
23.  8  all  things  that  J.  the  priest  had  comman. 
23,  8  for  J.  the  priest  dismissed  not  the  courses 
23.  9  J.  the  priest  delivered  to  the  captains 
23.  11  J.  and  his  sons  anointed  him,  and  said 
23. 14  Then  J.  the  priest  brought  out  the  capt. 
23. 16  J.  made  a  covenant  between  him,  and  be." 

23.  18  J.  appointed  the  offices  of  the  house  of  the 

24.  2  Joash  did.  .right,  .all  the  days  of  J.  the 
24.   3  J.  took  for  him  two  wives  ;  and  he  begat 
24.   6  the  king  called  for  J.  the  chief,  and  said 
24.  12  J.  gave  it  to  such  as  did  the  work  of  the- 
24.  14  brought  the  rest  of  the  money  before.  .J. 

24. 14  offered,  .continually  all  the  days  of  J. 

24. 15  But  J.  waxed  old,  and  was  full  of  days 
24.  17  after  the  death  of  J.  came  the  princes  of 
24.  20  spirit,  .came  upon  Zechariah  the  son  of  J. 
24.  22  kindness  which  J.  his  father  had  done  to 

.  24.  25  for  the  blood  of- the  sons  of  J.  the  priest 

3.  A  leader  of  the  Aaronites  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag. 

B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.12.  27  J.  (was)  the  leader  of  the  Aaronites,  and 

4.  Son  of  Benaiah,  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  third  of  David's 
counsellors.  .  B.C.  1030. 

1  Ch.27.  34  after  Ahithophel  (was)  J.  the  son  of  Ben. 


5.  One  of  the  family  of  Pascach  who  repaired  a  gate  of 
Jerusalem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  3.    6  the  old  gate  repaired  J.  the  son  of  Paseah 

6.  A  priest  in  Jerusalem  before  the  exile,  but  displaced 
by  Zephaniah.     B.C.  600. 

Jer.  29.  26  hath  made  thee  priest  in  the  stead  of  J.  the 

JE-HO-IA'-CHTN,  pjtfn;,  p;r  Jah  establishes. 

A  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  01  Judah.    He  was  set  on  the 

throne  by  Nebuchadnezzar.    B.C.  606. 

2  Ki.  24.   6  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

24.  8  J.  (was)  eighteen  years  old  when  he  began 
24. 12  J.  the  king,  .went  out  to  the  king  of  Bab. 

24. 15  And  he  carried  away  J.  to  Babylon,  and 

25.  27  thirtieth  year  of  the  captivity  of  J.  king 
25.  27  he.  .did  lift  up  the  head  of  J. .  .out  of  pr. 

2  Ch.36.    8  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

36.    9  J.  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he  began  to 
Jer.   52.  31  thirtieth  year  of  the  captivity  of  J.  king 
52.  31  Evil-merodach.  .lifted  up  the  head  of  J. 
Eze.    1.    2  which  (was)  the  fifth  year  of  king  J.'s  cap. 
JE-HO-IA'-KTTYT,  E'pn.T  Jah  sets  up. 
The  name  given  by  Pharaoh-Necho  to  Eliakim  son  of 
Josiah  king  of  Judah,  whom  he  made  king  instead  of 
Jehoahaz.    B.C.  610-600. 

2  Ki.  23.  34  Pharaoh-nechoh .  .turned  his  name  to  J. 
23-  35  J-  gave  the  silver  and  the  gold  to  Pharaoh 

23.  36  J.  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old  when  he 

24.  1  and  J.  became  his  servant  three  years 
24.    5  the  acts  of  J. .  .(are),  .written  in  the  book 
24.    6  J.  slept  with  his  fathers :  and  Jehoiachin 
24. 19  he  did.  .according  to  all  that  J.  had  done 

1  Ch.   3. 15  second  J.,  the  third  Zedekiah,  the  fourth 

3.  16  the  sonsof  J.  ;  Jeconiah  his  son,  Zedekiah 

2  Ch.36.   4  the  king  of  Egypt . .  turned  his  name  to  J. 

36.    5  J.  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old  when  he 
36.   8  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.,  and  his  abomina. 
Jer.     1.   3  It  came  also  in  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of 
22.  iS  thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  J.  the  son 
22.  24  though  Coniah  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

24.  1  Jeconiah  the  sou  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

25.  1  in  the  fourth  year  of  J.  the  son  of  Josiah 

26.  1  In  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  J.  the 
26.  21  J.  the  king,  with  all  his  mighty  men,  and 
26  22  J.  the  king  sent  men  into  Egypt,  (namely) 

26.  23  brought  him  unto  J.  the  king  ;  who  slew 

27.  1  In  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  J.  the 

27.  20  away  captive  Jeconiah  the  son  of  J. 

28.  4  Jeconiah  the  son  of  J.  long  of  Judah,  with 

35.  1  in  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of  Josiah  kiug 

36.  1  in  the  fourth  year  of  J.  the  son  of  Josiah 
36.    9  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fifth  year  of  J. 

36.  28  which  J.  the  king  of  Judah  hath  burnt 
36.  29  thou  shalt  say  to  J.  king  of  Judah,  Thus 
36.  30  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

36.  32  the  book  which  J. . .  of  Judah  had  burnt 

37.  1  reigned  instead  of  Coniah  the  son  of  J. 

45.  1  of  J.  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah 

46.  2  of  J.  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah 

52.    2  he  did.  .according  to  all  that  J.  had  done 
Dan.  1.    1  third  year  of.  .reign  of  J.  king  of  Judah 
1.    2  the  Lord  gave  J.  king  of  Judah  into  his 

JE-HO-IA'-EIB,  3n;'in;  Jah  contends. 

1.  A  priest  in  Jerusalem.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  10  the  priests;  Jedaiah,  and  J.,  and  Jachin 

2.  The  head  of  an  Aaronite  family  when  David  allotted 
the  charges  of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.   7"the  first  lot  came  forth  to  J    the  second 
JE-HO-NA'-DAB,  3ljta»  Jah  is  liberal. 

A  son  of  Kechab.    b'.c.  S84.    See  Jonadab. 

2  Ki.  10.  15  lighted  on  J.  the  son  of  Kechab  (coming) 

10.  15  J.  answered,  It  is.  If  it  be,  give  (me)  thine 
10.  23  Jehu  went,  and  J.  the  son  of  Kechab,  into 
JE-HO-NA'-THAN,  fraiiT  Jah  gives. 

1.  An  overseer  of  the  storehouses  in  the  days  of  David. 

B.C.  1030. 

1  Ch.27.  25  m  *ne  castles,  (was)  J.  the  son  of  TJzziah 

2.  ALevite  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  with  his  princes  to  teach 
the  people.    B.C.  912. 

2  Ch.  17.    8  Sheniiramoth,  and  J.,  and  Adonijah,  and 

3.  A  priest  in  the  days  of  Joiakimon  of  Jeshua.     B.C. 
536.    He  is  called  Jonathan  in  Neh.  12.  35. 

Neh.  12.  18  Of  Bilgah,  Shammua;  of  Shemaiah,  J. 
JE-HO'-RAM,  CTirv  Jah  is  high. 

1.  A  son  of  Jehoshaphat  who  succeeded  him  on  the 
throne.    B.C.  S93-885.    See  Joram. 

1  Ki.22.  50  and  Jehoram  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

2  Ki.  1.  17  J.  -the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  Judah 

8.  16  J.  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  Judah 
8.  25  did  Ahaziah  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 
8.  29  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah  went  down 
12.  18  J.,  and  Ahaziah,  his  fathers,  kings  of  Jud. 
2  Ch.21.    1  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
21.    3  the  kingdom  gave  he  to  J.,  because  he 
21.    4  when  J.  was  risen  up  to  the  kingdom  of 

21.  5  J.  (was)  thirty  and  two  years  old  when  he 
2i.  9  J.  went  forth  with  his  princes,  and  all 

21. 16  the  LORD-  stirred  up  agaiust  J.  the  spirit 

22.  1  Ahaziah  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah  rei. 
22.    6  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah  went  down 
22.  11  daughter  of  king  J.,  the  wife  of  Jehoiada 

2.  A  Son  of  Ahab,  slain  by  Jehu.    B.C.  896-884. 

2  Ki.  1.  17  J.  reigned  in  his  stead  in  the  second  year 
3.    1  J.  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign  over 
3.   6  J.  wentout  of  Samaria  the  same  time,  and 


JEHOSHABEATH 


53C 


JBMUEL 


2  Ki.  9.  24  smote  J.  between  his  arms,  and  the  arrow 

2  Ch.22.    5  went  with  J.  the  son  of  Ahab  king  of  Is. 

22.   6  down  to  see  J.  the  son  of  Ahab  at  Jezreel 

22.    7  he  went  out  with  J.  against  Jehu  the  son 

3.  A  priest  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  with  Elishama  to  teach 
Judah.    b.o.  900. 

2  Ch.17.    8  and  with  them  Elishama  and  J.,  priests 

JE-HO-SHAB'-EATH,  nyaznn;  Jah  makes  oath. 
A  daughter  of  Jehoram,  king  of  Judah.    She  concealed 
Joash  son  of  Ahaziah.    B.C.   885.    In  2  K.  1.  2  she  is 
called  Jehosheba. 

2  Ch.22. 11  J.,  the  daughter  of  the  king,  took  Joash 
22. 11  J.,  the  daughter  of  king  Jehorain,  the 

JE-HO-SHA'-PHAT,  BSfipin;  Jah  is  judge. 

1.  David's  recorder.     B.C.  1030. 

2  Sa.    8.  16  and  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud(was) 
20.  24  and  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud  (was) 
1  Ki.  4.    3  scribes ;  J.  the  son  of  Ahilud,  the  recorder 
1  Ch.18.  15  and  J.  the  son  of  Ahilud,  recorder 

2.  A  commissariat  officer  of  Solomon's.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  4.  17  J.  the  son  of  Paruah  in  Issachar 

3.  A  son  of  Asa  who  succeeded  his  father  as  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  900. 

1  Ki.15.  24  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

22.    2  J.  the  king  of  Judah  came  down  to  the 
22.    4  he  said  unto  J.,  Wilt  thou  go  with  me  to 
22.    4  J.  said  to  the  kingof  Israel,  I  (am)  as  thou 
22.    5  J.  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  Enquire 
22.    7  J.  said,  (Is  there)  not  here  a  prophet  of 
22.    8  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  J.,  (There  is) 
22.    8  And  J.  said,  Let  not  the  king  say  so 
22.  10  the  king  of  Israel  and  J. . .  sat  eacli  on  his 
22. 18  the  kingof  Israel  said  unto  J.,  Did  I  not 
22.  29  the  king  of  Israel  and  J.  the  king  of  Jud. 
22.  30  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  J.,  I  will 
22.  32  the  captains  of  the  chariots  saw  J.,  that 
22.  32  to  fight  against  him :  and  J.  cried  out 
22.  41  And  J.  the  son  of  Asa  began  foreign  over 
22. 42  J.  (was)  thirty  and  five  years  old  when  he 
22.  44  And  J.  made  peace  with  the  king  of  Israel 
22.  45  acts  of  J.,  and  his  might  that  he  showed 
22.  48  J.  made  ships  of  Tharshish  to  go  to  Ophir 
22.  49  Then  said  Ahaziah.  .son  of  Ahab  unto  J. 
22.  49  Let  my  servants  go  with,  .but  J.  would  not 
22. 50  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
22.  51  the  seventeenth  year  of  J.  kingof  Judah 

2  Ki.  1.  17  Jehoram  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

3.    1  the  eighteenth  year  of  J.  king  of  Judah 
3.    7  sent  to  J.  the  king  of  Judah,  saying,  The 
3.  11  J.  said,  (Is  there)  not  here  a  prophet  of 
3.  12  J.  said, The  word  of  the  Lc-RDis  with  him 
3.  12  J.  and  the  king  of  Edom  went  down  to 
3.  14  regard  the  presence  of  J.  the  king  of  Ju. 
8.  16  J.  (being)  then  king  of  Judah,  Jehoram 
8.  16  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah  began  to  reign 
12.  18  J.,  and  Jehoram,  and  Ahaziah,  his  fathers 

1  Ch.  3.  10  Abia  his  son,  Asa  his  son,  J.  his  son 

•    2  Ch.17.    J  Anti  J-  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead,  and 
17.    3  the  Lord  was  with  J.,  becausehe  walked 
17.    5  Judah  brought  to  J.  presents ;  and  lie  had 
17.  10  so  that  they  made  no  war  against  J. 
17. 11  (some)  of  the  Philistines  brought  J.  pre. 

17.  12  J.  waxed  great  exceedingly ;  and  he  built 

18.  1  J.  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance 
18.  3  king  of  Israel  said  unto  J.  king  of  Judah 
18.  4  J.  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  Enquire 
18.  6  J.  said,  (Is  there)  not  here  a  prophet  of 
18.  7  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  J.,  (There  is) 
18.  7  And  J.  said,  Let  not  the  king  say  so 

18.    9  the  king  of  Israel  and  J  king  of  Judah 
18.  17  the  king  of  Israel  said  to  J.,  Did  I  not 
18.28  and  J. the  kingof  Judah  went  up  to  Ram. 
18.  29  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  J.,  I  will 
18.  31  the  captains  of  the  chariots  saw  J.,  that 

18.  31  J.  cried  out,  and  the  Lord  helped  him;  and 

19.  1  J.  the  king  of  Judah  returned  to  his  house 
19.    2  said  to  king  J.,Shouldest  thou  help  the 
19.    4  J.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  :  and  he  went  out 

19.  8  in  Jerusalem  did  J.  set  of  the  Levites    . 

20.  1  the  Ammonites,  came  agaiust  J.  to  battle 
20.    2  therecame  somethattoldJ.,sayingThere 
20.   3  J.  feared,  and  set  himself  to  seektheLoRD 
20.   5  J.  stood  in  the  congregation  of  Judah  and 
20. 15  thou  king  J.,  Thussaith  the  Lord  unto 
20.  18  J.  bowed  his  head  with  (Ins)  face  to  the 
20. 20  J.  stood  and  said,  Hear  me,  O  Judah,  and 
20.  25  J.  and  his  people  came  to  take  away  the 
20.  27  J.  in  the  fore  front  of  them,  to  go  again 
20.  30  the  realm  of  J.  was  quiet;  for  his  God  gave 
20.  31  J.  reigned  over  Judah;  He  (was)  thirty  and 
20.  34  the  acts  of  J.,  first  and  last,  behold,  they 
20.  35  And  after  this  did  J.  king  of  Judah  join 

20.  37  Eliezer.  .prophesied  agaiust  J.,  saying 

21.  1  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
2r.    2  he  had  brethren  the  sons  of  J.,  Azariah 

21.  2  these(were)  the  sons  of  J.  king  of  Israel 
2i.  12  not  walked  in  the  ways  of  J.  thy  father 

22.  9  he  (is)  the  son  of  J.,  who  sought  the  Lord 

4.  The  father  of  .lebu  who  conspired  against  Joram  son 
of  Ahab  king  of  Israel.     B.C.  900. 

2  Ki.  n.   2  look  out  there  Jehu  the  sou  of  J.,  the  son 

9. 14  the  son  of  J.  the  son  of  Ninishi  conspired 

6.  A  priest  who  assisted  in  bringing  the  ark  from  Obed- 
edom.      B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.15.  24  J.,  and  Nethaneel,  and  Amasai,  and  Zee. 


6.  A  valley  E.  of  Jerusalem,  between  it  and  the  Mount 
of  Olives. 

Joel    3.    2  will  bring  them  down  into  the  valley  of  J. 
3.  12  come  up  to  the  valley  of  J.  :  for  there  will 

JE-HO-SHE'-BA,  i'ash.T  Jah  makes  oath. 
The  daughter  of  Joram  king  of  Judah.     She  concealed 
her   nephew   Joash   to    prevent  his    being    slain  by 
Athaliah.     See  Jehoshabeath.     B.C.  885. 

2  Ki.11.  2  J.,  the  daughter  of  king  Joram,  sister  of 
JE-HO-SHU'-A,  SHfTliT  Jah  saves. 

A  name  sometimes  given  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  (or 
Non).    B.C.  1451. 

Num.13.  *6  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son  of  Nun,  J. 

1  Ch.  7.  27  Non  his  son,  J.  his  son 

JE-HO'-VAH,  .-tin?  the  existing  one. 
The  incommunicable  name  of  the  God  of  Israel.    In  the 
Common  Version  of  the  English  Bible  it  is  generally, 
though  improperly,  translated  by  "the  Lord,'  which  see. 
Exod.  6.    3  but  by  my  name  J.  was  I  not  known  to 
Psa.  83.  18  thou,  whose  name  alone  (is)  J.,  (art)  the 
Isa.    12.    2  J.  (is)  my  strength  and  (my)  song  ;  he  also 
26.   4  in  the  Lord  J.  (is)  everlasting  strength 

JE-HO-VAH  JTR'-EH,  n#v  nin;  Jehovah  willprovide. 
A  place  in  Jerusalem  afterwards  called  Marian. 

Gen.  22.  14  Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  J. 
JE-HO-VAH  NIS'-SL,  '01  njn;  Jehovah  is  my  tanner. 
An  altar  erected  by  Moses  'to  commemorate  the  defeat 
of  the  Amalekites.    B.C.  1491. 

Exod  1 7.  15  an  altar,  and  called  the  name  of  it  J. 
JE-HO-VAH  SHA'-LOm",  ciSc;  njT  Jehovah  is  peace. 
An  altar  built  by  Gideon.     B.C.  1256. 

Judg.  6.  24  altar  there  unto  the  Lord,  and  called  it  J. 
JE-HO-ZA'-BAD,  linn*:  Jah  endows. 

1.  The  son  of  Shomer  or  Shimrith  from  Moab.    He  was 
one  of  those  that  slew  Jehoash.    B.C.  839. 

2  Ki.  12.  21  son  of  Shimeath,  and  J.  the  son  of  Shomer 
2  Ch.24.  26  and  J.  the  son  of  Shimrith  a  Moabitess 

2.  A  son  of  Obed-edom,  a  Koratliite  gatekeeper.     B.C. 

1040.  r  5 

1  Ch.26.   4  J.  the  second,  Joah  the  thy.- J,  and  Sacar 

3.  A  Benjamite,  chief  captain  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  900. 

2  Ch.17.  18  next  him  (was)  J.,  and  with  him  an  hun. 
JE-HO-ZA'-DAK,  pTfirrt  Jah  is  fast. 

The  grandson  of  Hilkiah  who  was  high  priest  at  the 
exile.    B.C.  5S8. 

1  Ch.  6. 14  Azariah  begat  Seraiah.  .Seraiah  begat  J. 
6. 15  And  J.  went  (into  captivity),  when  the  L. 
JE'-HTJ,  N5.*r  Jah  is  he. 

1.  A  son  of  Hanani,  the  prophet  who  announced  the 
Lord's  wrath  against  Baasha  king  of  Israel.    B.C.  930. 

1  Ki.  16.    1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  J.  the  son 

16.    7  by  the  hand  of  the  prophet  J.  the  son  of 
16. 12  he  spake  against  Baasha  by  J.  the  prophet 

2  Ch.19.   2  J.  the  son  of  Hanani  the  seer  went  out  to 

20.  34  written  in  the  book  of  J. .  .son  of  Hanani 

2.  The  son  or  grandson  of  Nimshi.     He  was  anointed  by 
Elijah  as  king  in  the  room  of  Ahab.     B.C.  884-856. 

1  Ki.  19.  16  J.  the  son  of  Nimshi  shalt  thou  anoint 

19,  17  escapeth  the  sword  of  Hazael  shall  J.  slay 
19.  17  him  that  escapeth  from  the  sword  of  J. 

2  Ki.  9.    2  look  out  there  J.  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat 

9.  5  J.  said,  Unto  which  of  all  us  ?  And  he  said 
g.  11  J.  came  forth  to  the  servants  of  his  lord 
9.  13  and  blew  with  trumpets,  saying,  J.  is  king 

9. 14  J.  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ni. 

9. 15  J.  said,  If  it  be  your  minds,  (then)  let  none 
9.  16  J.  rode  in  a  chariot,  and  went  to  Jezreel 
9.  17  he  spied  the  companyof  J.  as  he  came, and 
9. 18  J.  said,  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace? 
9.  19  J.  answered,  What  hast  thou  to  do  with 
9.  20  the  driving  (is)  like  the  driving  of  J.  the 
9.  21  they  went  out  against  J.,  and  met  him  in 
9.  22  Joram  saw  J. .  .he  said,  (Is  it)  peace,  J.? 
9. 24  J.  drew  a  bow  with  his  full  strength,  and 
9.  27  J.  followed  after  him,  and  said,  Smite  him 
9.  30  when  J.  was  come  to  Jezreel,  Jezebel  he. 
9.  31  J.  entered  in  at  the  gate,  she  said,  (Had) 

10.    1  J.  wrote  letters,  and  sent  to  Samaria,  unto 
10.   5  sent  to  J.,  saying,  We  (are)  thy  servants 

10. 11  J.  slew  all  that  remained  of  the  house  of 
ig.  13  J.  met  with  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah  king 
10. 18  J.  gathered  all  the  people  together,  and 
10. 18  Baal  a  little,  (but)  J.  shall  serve  him  much 
10.  19  J.  did  (it)  in  subtilty,  to  the  intent  that 
10.  20  J.  said,  Proclaim  a  solemn  assembly  for 
10.  21  J.  sent  through  all  Israel :  and  all  the 
10.  23  J.  went,  and  Jehonadab  the  son  of  itec. 
10.  24  J.  appointed  four  score  men  without,  and 
10.  25  J.  said  to  the  guard  and  to  the  captains 
10.  28  Thus  J.  destroyed  Baal  out  of  Israel 

10.  29  J.  departed  not  from  after  them,  (to  wit) 
10.  30  the  Lord  said  unto  J.,  Because  thou  hast 
10.  31  J.  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of  the 
10.  34  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he  did,  and 
10.  35  J.  slept  with  his  fathers  :  and  they  buried 
10.  36  the  time  that  J.  reigned  over  Israel  in 

12.  1  In  the  seventh  year  of  J.,  Jehoash  began 

13.  1  the  son  of  J.  began  to  reign  over  Israel 

14.  8  son  of  Jehoahaz.  sun  nf  .1.,  king  of  Israel 

15. 12  word  of  the  Lord  which  he  spake  unto  J. 
2  Ch.22.    7  he  went  out  with  Jehoram  against  J.  the 

22.   8  J.  was  executing  judgment  upon  the  house 


2  Ch.22.    9  they  caught  him.  .and  brought  him  to  J. 

25. 17  sou  of  Jehoahaz,  the  son  of  J.,  king  of  I. 

Hos.    1.   4  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house  of  J. 

3.  A  son  of  Obed  and  descendant   of   Hezron.     B.C. 
*355- 

1  Ch.  2.  38  And  Obed  begat  J.,  and  J.  begat  Azariah 

4.  A  son  of  Josibiah,  a  Simeonite.    B.C.  850. 

1  Ch.  4.  35  J.  the  son  of  Josibiah,  the  son  of  Seraiah 

5.  A  Benjamite  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    3  and  Berachah,  and  J.  the  Antothite 

JE-HTJB'-BAH,  n^rr,  n^n  Jah  conceals. 

A  descendant  of  Shamer,  an  Asherite.     B.C.  1610. 

1  Ch.  7.  34  sons  of  Shamer ;  Ahi,  and  Rohgah,  J.,  and 

JE-HTJ'-KAL,  JTJ'-CAl,  S?i.T,  biv  Jah  is  able. 

A  son  of  Shelemiah,  sent  by  Zedekiah  to  Jeremiah  to 

entreat  his  prayers  for  the  people.    B.C.  590. 

Jer.  37.    3  the  king  sent  J.  the  son  of  Shelemiah,  and 
38.    1  J.  the  son  of  Shelemiah,  and  Pashux  the 

JE'-HTJD,  "in;  honourable. 

A  city  of  Dan,  near  Bene-berak. 

Josh  19.  45  And  J.,  and  Bene-berak,  and  Gath-rimmon 

JE-HTJ'-DI,  nin;  a  Jew. 

One  employed  by  the  princes  of  Judah  to  bring  Baruch 

before  them.     B.C.  606. 

Jer.  36. 14  the  princes  sent  J.  the  son  of  Nethaniah 
36.  21  the  king  sent  J.  to  fetch  the  roll :  and  he 
36.  21  J.  read  it  in  the  ears  of  the  king,  and  in 
36.  23  when  J.  had  read  three  or  four  leaves,  he 

JE-HTJ-DI'-JAH,  .Tin;  the  Jewess. 

The  wife  of  Ezra,  and  a  descendant  of  Judah  through 

Caleb  the  spy.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 18  J.  bare  Jered  the  father  of  Gedor,  and  H. 

JE'-HTJSH,  ehy;  collector. 

A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Saul.    B.C.  860. 

1  Ch.  8.  39  J.  the  second,  and  Eliphelet  the  third 

JE-I'-EL,  JE-HI'-E1,  ^x'V'j  ^wy;  God  snatches-aioay. 

1.  A  chief  Reubenite.     B.C.  1200. 

1  Ch.  5.    7  brethren,  .(were)  the  chief,  J.,  and  Zech. 

2.  A  Benjamite,  the  father  of  Gibeon,  progenitor  of 
Saul.    B.C.  1 180. 

1  Ch.  9.  35  father  of  Gibeon,  J.,  whose  wife's  name 

3.  One  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  44  Shama  and  J. .  .sons  of  Hothan  the  Aro. 

4.  A  Levite  gatekeeper  and  singer  in  David's  reign.    B.C. 
1040. 

1  Ch.15.  18  and  Mikneiah,  and  Obed-edom,  and  J. 

15.  21  J.,  and  Azaziah,  with  harps  on  the  Shem. 

16.  5  J.,  and  Shemiramoth  and  Jehiel,  and  Ma. 

5.  A  Levite  of  the  sons  of  Asaph.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Ch.20.  14  son  of  J.,  the  sou  of  Mattaniah,  a  Levite 
G.  A  principal  scribe  or  recorder  of  king  Uzziah.  B.C. 
810. 

2  Ch.26. 11  their  account  by  the  hand  of  J.  the  scribe 

7.  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Elizaphan  in  the  time  of 
Hezekiah.     B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29.  13  of  the  sons  of  Elizaphan ;  Shiniri  and  J. 

8.  A  chief  Levite  in  the  days  of  Josiah  of  Judah.    B.C. 
623. 

2  Ch.35.   9  J.,  and  Jozabad,  chief  of  the  Levites,  gave 

9.  A  son  of  Adonikam  who  returned  with  Ezra.     B.C. 
458. 

Ezra    8.  13  J.,  and  Shemaiah,  and  with  them  threesc. 

10.  One  of  the  family  of  Nebo  who  had  married  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  43  J.,  Mattithiah,  Zabad,  Zebina,  Jadan,  and 

JE-KAB-ZE'-El,  ^Nsnp:  God  gathers. 
A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  near  Edom.     See  Eabzeel. 
Neh.  11.  25  and  at  J.,  and  (in)  the  villages  thereof 

JE-KAM'-EAM,  Dj^p^  standing  of  the  people. 
A  son  of  Hebron,  grandson  of  Levi.    B.C.  1015. 
1  Ch.23.  19  Jahaziel  the  third,  and  J.  the  fourth 
24.  23  Jahaziel  the  third,  J.  the  fourth 

JE-KAM-I'AH,  n;cp;  Jah  is  standing. 

A  descendant  of  Jerahmeel,  grandson  of  rharez.     B.C. 

1280. 

1  Ch.  2.  41  Shallam  begat  J.,  and  J.  begat  Elishama 

JE-KTJ-THT-EL,  Siorrtp;  God  is  mighty. 

A  son  of  Ezra,  a  descendant  of  Caleb  the  spy.     B.O. 

1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  18  father  of  Socho,  and  J. .  .father  of  Zanoah 

JE-Ml'-MA,  7i^P\ -j  pure,  fortunate,  day. 

The  eldest  of  the  three  daughters  born  to  Job  after  his 

restoration  to  health  and  prosperity.    B.C.  1520. 
Job  42. 14  he  called  the  name  of  the  first,  J.;  and 

JE-MU'-EL,  Sforr  God  is  light. 

A  son  of  Simeon.     B.C.  1700.  In  Num.  26.  12,  and  1  Ch. 

4.  24,  the  name  is  Nemuel. 

Gen.  46.  10  J.,  and  Jaruin,  andOhad,  and  Jachin.and 
Exod.  6. 15  J.,  aud  Janiin,  and  Ohad,  and  Jachin,  and 


JEOPARD 


537 


JERICHO 


JEOPARD,  to  — 

To  reproach  {i.e\  despise)  tliesoul,  wsi  *"pn  charaph. 

Judg.  5.  18  jeoparded  their  lives  unto  the  death  in 
JEOPARDY,  to  put  life  in,  or  to  go  in  — 
To  go  on  with  Vie  soul,  #333  =i?r?  halak  benephesh. 

2  Sa.  23.  17  men  that  went  in  jeopardy  of  then*  lives? 

1  Ch.n.  19  men  that  have  put  then'  lives  in  jeopardy? 

JEOPARDY,  to  he  or  stand  in  — 
To  he  in  danger  or  peril ',  KivSwevco  kinduneuo. 
Luke  8.  23  and  they  were  filled . .  and  were  in  jeopar. 

1  Co.  15.  30  And  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  hour? 
JEPH'-THAH,  JEPH'-THAE,  nns:  an  op2Joser,'U<p8de. 
A  Gileadite  judge  of  Israel.  He  delivered  it  from  the 
Ammonites.  B.C.  1150.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Heb. 
11.  32  he  is  called  Jephthce. 

Judg  11.    1  J.  the  Gileadite  was  a  mighty  man  of  val. 
11.    1  the  son  of  an  harlot :  and  Gilead  begat  J. 
ir.   2  they  thrust  out  J.,  and  said  unto  him 
11.    3  J.  fled  from  his  brethren,  and  dwelt  in 
11.    3  there  were  gathered  vain  men  to  J. 
ix.   5  went  to  fetch  J.  out  of  the  land  of  Tob 
11.   6  they  said  unto  J.,  Come,  and  be  our  cap. 
11.    7  J.  said  unto  the  elders  of  Gilead,  Bid 
11.   8, 10  And  the  elders  of  Gilead  said  unto  J.,Th. 
11.    9  J.  said  unto  the  elders  of  Gilead,  If  ye 
11.  11  J.  went  with  the  elders  of  Gilead,  and 
11.  11  J.  uttered  all  his  words  before  the  Lord 

11. 12  J.  sent  messengers  unto  the  king  of  the 
ix.  13  king,  .answered  unto  the  messengers  of  J. 
11.  14  J.  sent  messengers  again  unto  the  king 
11.  15  Thus  saith  J.,  Israel  took  not  away  the 
11.  28  not  unto  the  words  of  J.  which  he  sent  ' 
11.  29  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  J.,  and 
11.  30  J.  vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  said 
11.  32  J.  passed  over  unto  the  children  of  Aram. 
11.  34  J.  came  to  Mizpeh  unto  his  house,  and 

11.  40  lament  the  daughter  of  J.  the  Gileadite 

12.  1  said  unto  J.,  Wherefore  passedst  thou 
12.    2  J.  said  unto  them,  I  and  my  people  were 
12.   4  J.  gathered  together  all  the  men  of  Gilead 
12.    7  J.  judged  Israel  six  years.     Then  died  J. 

2  5a.  12.  11  sent  Jerubbaal,  and  Bedan,  and  J.,  and 
Heb.  11.  32  (of)  Barak,  and  (of)  Samson,  and  (of)  J. 

TE-PHTJN'-NEH,  n^,  appearing. 

1.  A  man  of  the  tribeof  Judah,  and  father  of  Caleb  the 
spy.    B.C.  1500. 

Nunii3.    6  Of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 
14.   6  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 
14.  30  the  son  of  J.,  and  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun 
14.  38  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 
26.  65  the  son  of  J.,  and  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun 
32.  12  son  of  J.  the  Kenezite,  and  Joshua  the 
34.  19  Of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 
Deut.  1.  36  Save  Caleb  the  son  of  J.;  he  shall  see  it 
Josh.  14.    6  the  son  of  J.  the  Kenezite  said  unto  him 
14.  13  gave  unto  Caleb  the  son  of  J.  Hebron 
14.  14  the  inheritance  of  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 

15. 13  unto  Caleb  the  sou  of  J.  he  gave  a  part 
21.  12  fields.,  gave  they  to  Caleb  the  son  of  J.  for 

1  Ch.  4.  15  sons  of  Caleb  the  son  of  J.;  Iru,  Elah.and 
6.  56  fields . .  they  gave  to  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 

2.  An  Asherite,  head  of  a  family.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.  38  the  sons  of  Jether  ;  J.,  and  Pispah,  and 
JE'-RAH,  m;  moon. 
A  son  of  Joktan  of  the  family  of  Shem.    B.C.  2210. 

Gen.  10.  26  Joktan  begat  Almodad.  .and  J. 

1  Ch.  1.  20  Joktan  begat  Almodad,  and  S. .  .and  J. 
JE-RAH-ME'-EL,  SkQITi*  @°d  **  'merciful.. 

1.  A  son  of  Hezron,  grandson  of  Judah.    B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  2.    9  sons  also  of  Hezron.  .J.,  and  Ram,  and 

2.  25  the  sons  of  J.  the  first  born  of  Hezron  were 
2.  26  J.  had  also  another  wife,  whose  name(was) 
2.  27  sons  of  Ram  the  first  born  of  J.  were  Maaz 
2.  33  Peleth,andZaza,  These  were  the  sons  of  J. 
2.  42  Now  the  sons  of  Caleb  the  brother  of  J. 

2.  A  son  of  Kish,  a  Merarite.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  29  Concerning  Kish  :  the  son  of  Kish  (was)  J. 

3.  An  officer  of  Jehoiakim,  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  606. 

Jer.  36.  26  the  king  commanded  J.  the  son  of  Ham. 
JE-RAH-ME-E-LITES,  ^xprrv. 
The  family  of  Jerahmeel,  son  of  Hezron. 

1  Sa.  27.  10  against  the  south  of  the  J.,  and  against 
30.  29  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  the  cities  of  the  J. 
JE'-RED,  TV  loiv,flowing. 

A  son  of  Ezra  a  descendant  of  Caleb  the  spy.  B.C. 
1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 18  his  wife  Jehudijah  bare  J.  the  father  of 
JE-RE'-MAI,  \2T  Jcth  is  high. 

One  of  the  family  of  Hashum  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  33  0fthesonsofHashum..J.,Manasseh,(and) 
JE-RE-Brr-AH,  i.td-i%  ,TB*v,  Jah  is  high  lUpe/xlas. 

1.  An  inhabitant  of  Libnah,  whose  daughter  Hamutal 
was  the  wife  of  Josiah  and  mother  of  Jehoahaz,  kings 
of  Judah.    B.C.  660. 

2  Ki.  23. 31  name  (was)  Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  J. 

24.  18  name  (was)  Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  J. 
Jer.  52.    1  name  (was)  Hamutal  the  daughter  of  J. 

2.  A  Manassehite,  head  of  a  family.    B.C.  800. 

i  Ch.  5.  24  Azriel,  and  J.,  and  Hodaviah,  and  Jahdiel 

3.  One  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.   4  and  J.,  and  Jahaziel,  and  Johanan,  and  J. 

68 


4.  A  Gadite  who  also  joined  David  at  Ziklag. 

1  Ch.12.  10  Mishniannah  the  fourth,  J.  the  fifth 

5.  Another  Gadite  that  also  joined  David  there. 

1  Ch.T2.  13  J.  the  tenth,  Machbanai  the  eleventh 

6.  Son  of  Hilkiah.  The  prophet  from  Anathoth  in  the 
days  of  Josiah.  B.C.  628.  He  was  of  the  line  of  Abi- 
athar. 

2  Ch.35.  25  J.  lamented  for  Josiah ;  and  all  the  singing 

36.  12  humbled  not  liimself  before  J.  the  prophet 
36.  21  To  fulfil  the  word,  .by  the  mouth  of  J. 
36.  22  the  word  of  the  Lord.,  by  the  mouth  of  J. 

Ezra    1.    1  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  J. 

Jer.  1.  1  The  words  of  J.  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  of  the 
1.  11  saying,  J.,  whatseest  thou?  And  I  said, I 
7.  1  The  word  that  came  to  J.  from  the  Lord 
11.  1  The  word  that  came  to  J.  from  the  Lord 
14.  1  The  word,  .that came  to  J.  concerningthe 
18.    1  The  word  which  came  to  J.  from  the  Lord 

18.  18  Come,  and  let  us  devise  devices  against  J. 

19.  14  Then  came  J.  from  Tophet,  whither  the  L. 

20.  1  Now  Pashur.  .heard  that  J.  prophesied 
20.  2  Then  Pashur  smote  J.  the  prophet,  and 
20.    3  that  Pashur  brought  forth  J.  out  of  the 

20.  3  Then  said  J.  uuto  him,  The  Lord  hath  nut 

21.  1  The  word  which  came  unto  J.  from  the 
21.    3  Then  said  J.  unto  them,  Thus  shall  ye  say 

24.  3  Then  said  the  Lord.  .Whatseest  thou,  J.? 

25.  1  word  that  came  to  J.  concerning  all  the 

25.  2  which  J.  the  prophet  spake  unto  all  the 
25. 13  which  J.  bath  prophesied  against  all  the 

26.  7  all  the  people  heard  J.  speaking  these 
26.   8  when  J.  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  aL 
26.   9  all  the  people  were  gathered  against  J.  in 
26. 12  Then  spake  J.  unto  all  the  princes,  and 
26.  20  prophesied,  .according  to  all  the  wordsof  J. 

26.  24  hand  of  Ahikam..son  of  Shaphani..withJ. 

27.  1  came  this  word  unto  J.  from  the  Lord 

28.  5  Then  the  prophet  J.  said  unto  the  prophet 
28.  6  Even  the  prophet  J.  said,  Amen  :  the  Lord 

28. 10  took  the  yoke  from  off  the  prophet  J.'s 

28. 11  And  the  prophet  J.  went  his  way 

28. 12  Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  J. 
28. 12  prophet  had  broken  the  yoke  from  off.  .J. 

28.  15  Then  said  the  prophet  J.  unto  Hananiah 

29.  1  letter  that  J.  the  prophet  sent  from  Jer. 
29.  27  therefore  why  hast  thou  not  reproved  J. 

-   29.  29  priest  read  this  letter  in  the  ears  of  J.  the 

29.  30  Then  came  the  word  of  the  LORD  unto  J. 

30.  1  The  word  that  came  to  J.  from  the  Lord 
32.  1  The  word  that  came  to  J.  from  the  Lord 
32-.  2  J.  the  prophet  was  shut  up  in  the  court 
32.  6  J.  said,  The  word  of  the  LORD  came  unto 

32.  26  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  J. 

33.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  J.  the 
33. 19  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  J.,  saying 

33.  23  Moreoverthe  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  J. 

34.  1  The  word  which  came  unto  J.  from  the  L. 
34.  6  Then  J.  the  prophet  spake  all  these  words 
34.    8  (This  is)  the  word  that  came  unto  J.  from 

34.  12  Therefore  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  J. 

35.  1  The  word  "which  came  unto  J.  from  the  L. 

35. 12  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  J. 

35. 18  J.  said  unto  the  house  of  the  Rechabites 

36.  1  this  word  came  unto  J.  from  the  Lord 
36.    4  Then  J.  called  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah 
36.    4  Baruch  wrote  from  the  mouth  of  J.  all 
36.    5  J.  commanded  Baruch,  saying,  I  (am)  shut 
36.    8  And  Baruch . .  did  according  to  all  that  J. 
36. 10  read  Baruch  in  the  book  the  words  of  J. 

36. 19  Go,  hide  thee,  thou  and  J.;  and  let  no 
36.  26  to  take  Baruch  the  scribe,  and  J.  the  pro. 
36,  27  Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  J. 
36.  27  words . .  Baruch  wrote  at  the  mouth  of  J. 
36.  32  Then  took  J.  another  roll,  and  gave  it  to 

36.  32  who  wrote  therein,  from  the  mouth  of  J. 

37.  2  words,  .which  he  spake  by  the  prophet  J. 
37.  3  the  king  sent  Jehucal.  .to  the  prophet  J. 
37.  4  Now  J.  came  in  and  went  out  among  the 
37.  6  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  the  prophet  J. 
37.  12  Then  J.  went  forth  out  of  Jerusalem  to  go 
37.  13  and  he  took  J.  the  prophet,  saying,  Thou 
37.  14  Then  said  J. .  .1  fall  not  away  to  the  Cha. 
37.  14  Irijahtook  J.,  and  brought  him  tothepri. 
37-  15  Wherefore  the  princes  were  wroth  with  J. 
37. 16  When  J.  was  entered  into  the  dungeon 
37.  16  and  J.  had  remained  there  many  days 
37.  17  Is  there  (any)  word  from  the  Lord  ?  And  J. 
37.  iS  Moreover  J.  said  unto  king  Zedekiah 

37.  21  that  they  should  commit  J.  into  the  court 

37.  21  Thus  J.  remained  in  the  court  of  the  pris. 

38.  1  Pashur.  .heard  the  words  that  J.  had  sp. 
38.  6  Then  took  they  J.,  and  cast  him  into  the 
38.  6  they  let  down  J.  with  cords . .  so  J.  v.  9. 
38.  7  Ebed-melech . .  heard  that  they  had  put  J. 
38.  10  Take .  .hence  thirty  men . .  and  take  up  J. 
38.  1 1  took  the  men . .  and  let  them  down . .  to  J. 
38.  12  Ethiopian  said  unto  J. ..And  J.  did  so 

38. 13  So  they  drew  up  J.  with  cords,  and  took 
38. 13  J.  remained  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
38.  14  Then  Zedekiah.  .took  J. ..unto  him  into 
38.  14  the  king  said  unto  J.,  I  will  ask  thee  a  th. 
38.  15  Then  J.  said  unto  Zedekiah,  If  I  declare 
38.  16  Zedekiah  the  king  sware  secretly  unto  J. 
38.  17  Then  said  J.  unto  Zedekiah,  Thus  saith 
38.  19  Zedekiah  the  king  said  unto  J.,  I  am  af. 
38.  20  But  J.  said,  They  shall  not  deliver  (thee) 
38.  24  Then  said  Zedekiah  unto  J.,  Let  no  man 
38.  27  Then  came  all  the  princes  unto  J.,  and 
38.  28  So  J.  abode  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
39. 11  Nebuchadr. .  .gave  charge  concerning  J. 


Jer.  39.  14  they  sent,  and  took  J.  out  of  the  court  of 
39. 15  Now  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  J. 
40.  1  The  word  which  came  to  J.  from  the  Lord 
40.  2  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  J.,  and  said 
40.  6  Then  went  J.  unto  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A. 
42.  2  said  unto  J.  the  prophet,  Let,  we  beseech 
42.  4  Then  J.  the  prophet  said  unto  them,  I 
42.    5  Then  they  said  to  J.,  The  Lord  be  a  true 

42.  7  that  the  word  of  the  Lokd  came  unto  J. 

43.  1  J.  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  unto  all 
43.    2  Then  spake  Azariah.  .unto  J.,  Thou 

43.    6  J.  the  prophet,  and  Baruch  the  son  of  N. 

43.  8  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  J. 

44.  1  word  that  came  to  J.  concerning  all  the  J. 
44.  15  all  the  women  that  stood  by.  .answered  J. 
44.  20  Then  J.  said  unto  all  the  people,  to  the 

44.  24  Moreover  J.  said  unto  all  the  people,  and 

45.  1  The  word  that  J.  the  prophet  spake  unto 

45.  1  these  words  in  a  book  at  the  mouth  of  J. 

46.  1  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  to  J.  the 

46. 13  word  that  the  Lord  spake  to  J.  the  prop. 

47.  1  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  J.  the  pr. 

49.  34  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  J.  the  pr. 

50.  1  word  that  thfi  Lord  spake,  .by  J.  the  pr. 

51.  59  which  J.  the ,     phet  commanded  Seraiah 
51.  60  J.  wrote  in  a  book  all  the  evil  that  should 
51.  61  J.  said  to  Seraiah,  When  thou  comest  to 
51.  64  Thus  far  (are)  the  words  of  J. 

Dan.  9.   2  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  J.  the  pro. 
Matt.  2. 17  that  which  was  spoken  by  J.  the  prophet 

16. 14  Elias ;  and  others,  J.,  or  one  of  the  prop. 
27.    9  that  which  was  spoken  by  J.  the  prophet 

7.  A  priest  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.    2  Seraiah,  Azariah,  J. 

12.    1  of  Shealtiel,  and  Jeshua  :  Seraiah,  J.,  E. 

12.  12  fathers:  of  Seraiah,  Meraiah ;  of  J.,  Ha. 

12.  34  Judah,  and  Benjamin . .  Shemaiah,  and  J. 

S.  A  descendant  of  Jonadab,  son  of  Rechab.    B.C.  600. 

Jer-  35-  3  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Habazaniah,  and 
JE-RE'-MOTH,  niDn^  rnDT  elevation. 

1.  A  son  of  the  Benjamite  Beriah.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.  14  And  Aliio,  Shashak,  and  J. 

2.  One  of  the  Elams  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 
B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  26  and  Jehiel,  and  Audi,  and  J.,  and  Eliah 

3.  One  of  the  family  of  Lattu  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  27  Mattaniah,  and  J.,  and  Zabad,  and  Aziza 
JE-RI'-AH,  JE-RI'-JAH,  ^jt,  nn*Jah  is  foundation. 
A  descendant  of  Hebron,  grandson  of  Levi,  in  the  days 
of  David.    B.C.  1030. 

i  Ch.23.  19  J.  the  first,  Amariah  the  second,  Jahaziel 
24.  23  J.(... first),  Amariah  the  second,  Jahaziel 
26.  31  Among  the  Hebronites  (was)  J.  the  chief 

JE-RT-BAI,  *3T  Jcth  contends, 

A  valiant  man  of  David's  guard.     B.C.  104S. 

1  Ch.n.  46  J.  and  Joshaviah,  the  sons  of  Elnaam 

JE-RI'-CHO,  in~r,  inn*,  -inn"  fragrant,  'Ieptx^- 
A  famous  city  of  Benjamin  in  the  plain  and  on  the  W. 
of  the  Jordan,  twenty-five  miles  N.E.  of  Jerusalem. 
It  is  now  called  Er  Kiha.  It  was  taken  by  Joshua 
1451  B.C.,  and  rebuilt  918  B.C.  by  Hiel.  It  is  also  called 
"the  city  of  palm  trees,"  and  was  reduced  by  Vespasian, 
A.D.  68. 

Num22.    1  plains  of  Moab  on  this  side  Jordan  (by)  J. 

26.  3,  63  the  plains  of  Moab,  by  Jordan  (near)  J. 

31.  12  of  Moab,  which  (are)  by  Jordan  (near)  J. 

33.  48,  50  the  plains  of  Moab,  by  Jordan  (near)  J 

34. 15  on  this  side  Jordan  (near)  J.  eastward 

35.  1  iu  the  plains  of  Moab  by  Jordan  (near)  J. 

36.  13  in  the  plains  of  Moab  by  Jordan  (near)  J. 
Deut  32.  49  the  land  of  Moab,  that  (is)  over  against  J. 

34.  1  the  top  of  Pisgah,  that(is)over  against  J. 
34.    3  the  plain  of  the  valley  of  J.,  the  city  of 

Josh.  2.    1  Go  view  the  land,  even  J.  And  they  went 
2.    2  it  was  told  the  king  of  J.,  saying,  Behold 

2.  3  And  the  king  of  J.  sent  unto  Rahab,  say. 

3.  16  the  people  passed  over  right  against  J. 
4. 13 forty  thousand.. passed.. the  plains  of  J. 
4. 19  encamped  inGilgal,  iu  the  east  borderof  J. 
5.  10  and  kept  the  passover..in  the  plains  of  J. 

5.  13  when  Joshua  was  by  J.,  that  he  lifted  up 

6.  1  J.  was  straitly  shut  up  because  of  the 
6.    2  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  J.,  and  the 
6.  25  messengers  which  Joshua  sent  to  spy.. .J". 

6.  26  that  riseth  up  and  buildeth  this  city  J. 

7.  2  Joshua  sent  men  from  J.  to  Ai,  which  (is) 

8.  2  as  thou  didst  unto  J.  and  her  king :  only 
.9.    3  what  Joshua  had  done  unto  J.  and  to  Ai 

10.    1  as  he  had  done  to  J.  and  her  king,  so  he 
to.  28  and  he  did.  .as  he  did  unto  the  king  of  J. 
10.  30  but  did.  .as  he  did  unto  the  king  of  J. 

12.  9  The  king  of  J.,  one ;  the  king  of  Ai,  which 

13.  32  on  the  other  side  Jordan,  by  J.,  eastward 
16.    1  fell  from  Jordanby  J.  unto  the  waterof  J. 
16.    1  to  the  wilderness  that  goeth  up  from  J. 
16.    7  and  came  to  J.,  and  went  out  at  Jordan 
18.  12  the  border  went  up  to  the  side  of  J.  on 
18.  21  according  to  their  families  were  J.,  and 
20.    8  the  other  side  Jordan  by  J.  eastward,  they 
24.  11  and  came  unto  J.:  and  the  men  of  J.fought 

2  Sa.  10.   5  Tarry  at  J.  until  your  beards  be  grown 

1  Ki.  16.  34  his  days  did  Hiel  the  Beth-elite  build  J. 

2  Ki.  2.    4  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  J.    And  he 
2.   4  I  mil  not  leave  thee.    So  they  came  to  .7. 
2.   5  sons  of  the  prophets  that  (were)  at  J.  cam  u 


JERIEL 


538 


JERUSALEM 


2  Ki.  2.  15  sons  of.  .prophets,  .(were)  to  view  at  J. 
2.  18  they  came  again  to  Mm,  forlie  tarried  at  J. 
25.    5  overtook  Mm  in  the  plains  of  J. :  and  all 

1  Ch.  6.  78  on  the  other  side  Jordan  by  J.,  on  the 

ig.    5  Tarry  at  J.  until  your  beards  be  grown 

2  Ch.28.  15  brought  them  to  J.,  the  city  of  palm  trees 
Ezra    2.  34  The  children  of  J.,  three  hundred  forty 
Neh.   3.    2  And  next  unto  him  budded  the  men  of  J. 

7.  36  The  children  of  J.,  three  hundred  forty 
Jer.  39.  5  overtookZedekiahinthe  plainsof  J.  :  and 
52.  8  overtook  Zedekiah  in  the  plains  of  J.  ;  and 
Matt  20.  29  as  they  departed  from  J.,  a  great  multit. 
Markio.  46  they  came  to  J. :  andas  he  wentout[of  J.] 
Luke  10.  30  certain  (man)  went,  .from  Jerusalem  to  J. 

18.  35  as  he  was  come  nighuuto  J.,  a  certain  blind 

19.  1  And  (Jesus)  entered  and  passed  through  J. 
Heb.  11.  30  the  walls  of  J.  fell  down,  after  they  were 

JE-RI'-EL,  Vx,"i;  foundation  of  God. 
A  son  of  Tola,  soil  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.    2  J.,  and  Jahmal, and  Jibsam,  and Shemuel 
JE-RI'-MOTH,  JER-E'-MOTH,  rno'-p,  niD,"i<  elevation. 

1.  A  son  of  Bela,  son  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.   7  and  Uzzi,  and  Uzziel,  and  J.,  and  Iri,  five 

2.  A  son  of  Becher,  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.    8  and  J.,  and  Abiah,  and  Anathoth,  and  A. 

3.  A  valiant  man  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.   B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    5  and  J.,  and  Bealiah,  and  Shemariah,  and 

4.  A  son  of  Mushi,  grandson  of  Levi.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  23  sons  of  Mushi ;  MaMi,  and  Eder,  and  J. 
24.  30  sons  also  of  Mushi ;  Mahli,  and  Eder.. J. 

5.  A  son  of  Heman,  appointed  by  David  for  the  service 
of  song.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  J.,  HanaMah,  Hanani,  Eliathah,  Ciddalti 

6.  A  ruler  in  Naphtali  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.27.  19  Obadiah  :  of  Naphtali;  J.  theson  of  Azriel 

7.  A  son  of  David,  not  elsewhere  mentioned.    B.O.  1015. 

2  Ch.11.  iS  daughter  of  J.  the  son  of  David  to  wife 
JE-Rl'-OTH,  niy"?*  tremulousness. 

A  wife  or  concubine  of  Caleb  son  of  Hezron.     B.C.  1580, 
1  Ch.  2.  18  (children)  of  Azubah  (Ms)  wife,  and  of  J. 

JE-ROB-O'-AM,  n^nn;  enlarger. 
1.  A  son  of  Nebat  from  Zereda  in  Manasseh.    He  became 
the  first  king  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel.     B.C.  970. 
1  Ki.  11.  26  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  an  Ephrathite  of  Zer. 

11.  28  J.  (was)  a  mighty  man  of  valour :  and  So. 

11.  29  at  that  time  when  J.  went  out  of  Jerusa. 

11.  31  he  said  to  J.,  Take  thee  ten  pieces  ;  for 

11.  40  Solomon  sought  therefore  to  kill  J. :  and  J. 

12.  2  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  was  yet  in  Egypt 
12.    2  for  he  was  fled,  .and  J.  dwelt  in  Egypt 
12.    3  J.  and  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  came 
12.  12  J.  and  all  the  people  came  to  Rehoboam 
12.  15  Lord  spake  by  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  unto  J. 
12.  20  all  Israel  heard  that  J.  was  come  again 
12.  25  J.  built  Shechem  in  mount  Ephraim,  and 
12.  26  J.  said  in  his  heart.  Now  shall  the  king. 

12.  32  J.  ordained  a  feast  in  the  eighth  month 

13.  1  and  J.  stood  by  the  altar  to  burn  incense 
13.    4  J.  heard  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 

13.  33  J.  returned  not  from  his  evil  way,  but 
12.  34  this  thing  became  sin  unto  the  house  of  J. 

14.  1  that  time  Abijah  the  son  of  J.  fell  sick 
14.    2  J.  said  to  his  wife,  Arise,  I  pray  thee,  and 
14.    2  thou  be  not  known  to  be  the  wife  of  J. 
14.   4  J.'s  wife  did  so,  and  arose,  and  went  to 
14.    5  the  wife  of  J.  cometh  to  ask  a  thing  of 
14.   6  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  J.  ;  why  feignest 
14.   7  tell  J.,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
14.  10  the  house  of  J.,  and  will  cut  off  from  J. 
14.  10  take  away  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  J. 
14.  11  Him  that  dieth  of  J.  in  the  city  shall 

14.  13  for  he  only  of  J.  shall  come  to  the  grave 
14.  13  (some)  good  thing,  .in  the  house  of  J. 
14. 14  who  shall  cut  off  the  house  of  J.  that  day 
14.  16  give  Israel  up  because  of  the  sins  of  J. 
14.  17  J.'s  wife  arose,  and  departed,  and  came 
14. 19  the  acts  of  J.,  how  he  warred,  and  how  he 
14.  20  the  days  which  J.  reigned  (were)  two  and 

14.  30  war  between  Rehoboam  and  J.  all  (their) 

15.  1  eighteenth  year  of  king  J.  the  son  of  Ne. 
15.  6  there  was  war  between  Rehoboam  and  J. 
15.  7  Andtherewas  war  between  Abijam  and  J. 
15.  9  the  twentieth  year  of  J.  king  of  Israel 
15.  25  the  son  of  J.  began  to  reign  over  Israel 
15.  29  smote  all  the  house  of  J. ;  he  left  not  to  J. 
15.  30  Because  of  the  sins  of  J.  which  he  sinned 

15.  34  walked  in  the  way  of  J.,  and  in  his  sin 

16.  2  thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  J.,  and 
16.    3  like  the  house  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 

16.    7  provoking  Mm.  .in  being  like,  .house  of  J. 
16. 19  walking  in  the  way  of  J.,  and  in  his  sin 
16.  26  in  all  the  way  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  and 
16.  31  walk  in  the  sins  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 
21.  22  like  the  house  of  J.  the  sou  of  Nebat 
2a.  52  in  the  way  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  who 
a  Ki.  3.    3  unto  the  sins  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 
9.   9  like  the  house  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 
10.  29  (from)  the  sins  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  who 
10.  31  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  J.,  which 
13.   2  followed  the  sins  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 
13.   6  departed  not  from  the  sins  of.  .house  of  J. 

13.  11  from  all  the  sins  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 

14.  24  from  all  the  sins  of  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 

15.  9,  18,  24  from  the  sins  of  J.  thesonofNebat 
15.  28  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  J.  the 


2  Ki.17.21  they  made  J.  the  son  of  Nebat  king:  and  J. 

17.  22  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  J.  which  he  did 

23.  15  the  high  place  which  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 
2  Ch.  9.  29  visions  of  Iddo  the  seer  against  J.  the 

10.    2  when  J.  the  sou  of  Nebat,  who  (was)  in  E. 

10.    2  came  to  pass . .  that  J.  returned  out  of  E. 

10.    3  J.  and.  .Israel  came  and  spake  to  Rehob. 

10.  12  J.  and  all  the  people  came  to  Rehoboam 

10.  15  by  the  hand  of  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  to  J. 

11.  4  obeyed . .  returned  from  going  against  J. 
11. 14  J.  and  his  sons  had  cast  them  off  from 

12.  15  wars  between  Rehoboam  and  J.  contin. 

13.  1  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  J.  began 
13.    2  And  there  was  war  between  Abijah  and  J. 
13.    3  J.  also  set  the  battle  in  array  against 

13.  4  and  said,  Hear  me,  thou  J.,  and  all  Israel 
13.  6  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  the  servant  of  Solomon 
13.  8  golden  calves,  wMch  J.  made  you  for  gods 
13. 13  But  J.  caused  an  ambushment  to  come  ■ 
13.  15  God  smote  J.  and  all  Israel  before  Abijah 
13.  19  Abijah  pursued  after  J.,  and  took  cities 

13.  20  Neither  did  J.  recover  strength  again  in 
2.  A  son  of  Joash  or  Jehoash  the  grandfather  of  Jehu. 
B.O.  825. 

2  Ki.13.  13  J.  sat  upon  his  throne :  and  Joash  was 

14.  16  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

14.  23  J.  the  son  of  Joash  king  oi  Israel  began 
14.  27  saved . .  by  the  hand  of  J.  the  son  of  Joasli 
14.  28  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he  did,  and 

14.  29  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  (even)  with  the 

15.  1  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  J.  king  of 
15.    8  did  Zachariah  the  son  of  J.  reign  over 

1  Ch.  5.  17  All  these  were  reckoned,  .in  the  days  of  J. 
Hos.    1.    1  and  in  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of  Joash 
Amos  1.    1  in  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of  Joash  king 
7.    9  I  will  rise  against  the  house  of  J.  with 
7.  10  priest  of  Beth-el  sent  to  J.  king  of  Israel 
7.  11  J.  shall  die  by  the  sword,  and  Israel  shall 

JE-RO'-HAM,  Dnr  loved. 

1.  A  Levite,  the  grandfather  of  Samuel.     B.C.  1190. 

1  Sa.   1.    1  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Elihu,  the  son  of 
1  Ch.  6.  27  Eliab  his  son,  J.  his  son,  Elkanah  his  son 

6.  34  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Eliel,  the  son  of  Toah 

2.  The  head  of  a  Benjamite  family.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  27  Jaresiah . .  Eliah,  and  Zichri,  the  sons  of  J. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Benjamin  m  Jesusalem.    B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  9.    8  the  son  of  J.,  and  Elah  the  son  of  Uzzi 

4.  A  priest  whose  son  Adaiah  lived  in  Jerusalem  after 
the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9. 12  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Pashur,  the  son 
Neh.  11.  12  the  son  of  J. /the  son  of  Pelaliah,  the  son 

5.  One  whose  two  sons  joined  David  at  Ziklag.     B.O.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    7  Joelah,  andZebadiah.  .sons  of  J.  of  Gedor 

6.  The  father  of  Azareal,  prince  of  Dan  in  the  days  of 
David.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.  27.  *2  Of  Dan;  Azareel  the  son  of  J.  These  (were) 

7.  The  father  of  Azariah,  who  helped  Jehoiada  to  set 
Joash  on  the  throne  of  Judah.    B.C.  800. 

2  Ch.23.    *  the  son  of  J.,  and  Ishmael  the  son  of 

JE-RTTB-BA'-AL,  Sy?-;;  contender  with  Baal. 
The  namegivento  Gideon  by  hisfather  Joash.    B.C.  1256. 
Judg.  6.  32  he  called  him  J.,  saying.  Let  Baal  plead 

7.  1  J.,  who  (is)  Gideon,  and  all  the  people  that 

8.  29  J.  the  son  of  Joash  went  and  dwelt  in  his 

8.  35  showed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of  J. 

9.  1  the  son  of  J.  went  to  Shechem  unto  his 
9.  2  the  sons  of  J.,  (which  are)  threescore  and 
9.  s  slew  his  brethren  the  sons  of  J.,  (being) 
g.  5  Jotham  the  youngest  son  of  J.  was  left 

9.  16  ye  have  dealt  well  with  J.  and  his  house 
9. 19  have  dealt  truly  and  sincerely  with  J. 
9.  24  (done)  to  the  three  score  and  ten  sons  of  J. 
9.  28  (Is)  not  (he)  the  son  of  J.?  and  Zebul  his 
9.  57  came  the  curse  of  Jotham  the  son  of  J. 

1  Sa.  12.  11  And  the  Lord  sent  J.,  and  Bedan,  and  J. 

JE  RTJB-BE'-SHETH,  n^an;  contender  with  tlie  idol. 
Another  name  of  Gideon,  given  to  him  by  those  who 
wished  to  avoid  pronouncing  the  name  of  Baal  in  the 
former  name.    Compare  Ishbosheth  with  Eshbaal,  &c. 

2  Sa.  11.  21  Who  smote  Abimelech  the  son  of  J.?  did 
JE-RU'-EL,  Sn?t  foundation  of  God. 

A  wilderness  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  west  of  the  hill  of  Ziph. 

2  Ch.20. 16  of  the  brook,  before -the  wilderness  of  J. 
JE-RTJ-SA'-LEM,  D^IT,  O^lT,  DW^T,  D^T  'lepo- 

<r6\vfj.a,  -iraK^fiy  possession  of  peace. 
A  city  of  t be  Amorites  called  Jebus,  on  the  N.  of  Judah, 
but  counted  to  Benjamin;  it  is  15  miles  from  Jordan 
and  Salt  Sea,  and  31  from  the  Mediterranean;  it  was 
built  on  four  hills— Zion,  Acra,  Moriah,  and  Bezetha; 
it  was  surrounded  on  the  E.,  W.,  and  S.  by  a  valley, 
which  was  environed  with  hills;  it  had  three  walls  with 
towers,  and  was  about  4$  miles  in  circumference.  It 
was  first  taken  by  Judah,  Judg.  r.  8,  but  only  in  part,  v. 
21,  and  finally  by  David,  B.C.  1049,  2  Sa.  5.  6;  during 
1011-1004  its  temple  was  built;  in  070  it  was  plundered 
by  Shishak ;  and  in  SS4  by  the  Philistines  and  Arabs  in 
the  days  of  Jehoram;  in  80S  by  the  Israelites;  in  710 
besieged  by  Sennacherib;  in  610  taken  by  Pharoah- 
Necho;  in  598  plundered  by  Nebuchadnezzar;  in  588 
rebels  against  him;  in  587  the  temple  was  burnt;  in  538 
Cyrus  encourages  its  rebuilding;  in  515  it  is  dedicated; 
in  445  Nehemiah  rebuilds  the  wall;  in  332  it  is  visited 
by  Alexander  the  Great;  in  320  captured  by  Ptolemy 
Sater;  in  302  annexed  to  Egypt;  in  170  its  walls  razed 


by  Antiochus  Epiphanes ;  in  63  taken  by  Pompey ;  in  44 
its  walls  rebuilt  by  Antipater,  father  of  Herod  the  Great : 
on  Sept.  8.,  A.D.  70,  it  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans ;  in, 
1 30  rebuilt  by  Hadrian ;  in  335  Constant ine  founded  the 
Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre;  in  614  taken  by  the 
Persians ;  in  637  by  the  Saracens ;  in  1076  by  the  Turks ; 
in  ioqS  assigned  to  Egypt ;  in  1090  taken  by  the  Crusaders ; 
in  1187  by  Saladin ;  in  1228  assigned  to  the  Christians ; 
in  1243  takeD  by  the  Carizmians ;  in  1 51 7  by  the  Ottomans ; 
in  1832  assigned  to  Egypt;  and  in  1841  to  Turkey. 
Josh. 10.    1  when  Adoni-zedek  king  of  J.  had  heard 
10.    3  "king  of  J.  sent  unto  Hoham  king  of  Hebron 
10.    5  Therefore . .  the  king  of  J. . .  went  up . .  and 
10.  23  the  king  of  J.,  the  king  of  Hebron,  the  king 
12.  10  The  king  of  J.,  one  ;  the  king  of  Hebron 
15.    8  south  side  of  the  Jebusite;  the  same  (is)  J. 
15.  63  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  the  children  of 
15.  63  dwell  with  the  cMldren  of  Judah  at  J. 

18.  28  and  Jebusi,  which  (is)  J.,  Gibeath,  (and) 
Judg.  1.    7  they  brought  him  to  J.,  and  there  he  died 

1.    8  children  of  Judah  had  fought  against  J. 
1.  21  drive  out  the  J  ebusites  that  inhabited  J. 

1.  21  dwell  with  the  children  of  Benjamin  in  J. 
19. 10  and  came  over  against  Jebus,  which  (is)  J. 

1  Sa.  17.  54  David  took  the  head,  .and  brought  ittoJ. 

2  Sa.    5.    5  in  J.  he  reigned  thirty  and  three  years 

5.  6  Ms  men  went  to  J.  unto  the  Jebusites,  the 
5.  13  took,  .more  concubines  and  wives  out  of  J. 
5.  14  of  those  that  were  born  unto  Mm  in  J. 

8.  7  took  the  shields,  .and  brought  them  to  J. 

9.  13  Mephibosheth  dwelt  in  J.;  for  he  did  eat 

10.  14  from  the  children  of  Amnion,  .came  to  J. 
.    11.    1  But  David  tarried  still  at  J. 

11.  12  Uriah  abode  in  J.  that  day  and  the  morr. 

12.  31  David  and  all  the  people  returned  unto  J. 
14.  23  went  to  Geshur,  and  brought  Absalom  to  J. 

14.  28  Absalom  dwelt  two  full  years  in  J.,  and 

15.  8  the  Lord  shall  bring  me  again  indeed  to  J. 
15.  11  withAbsal.  went  two  hundred  men.  .of  J. 
15.  14  all  his  servants  that  (were)  with  him  at  J. 
15.  29  Abiathar  carried  the  ark  of  Godagainto  J. 

15.  37  into  the  city,  and  Absalom  came  into  J. 

16.  3  he  abidethat  J. :  for  he  said,  To  day  shall 

16.  15  men  of  Israel,  came  to  J.,  and  Ahithoph. 

17.  20  could  not  find  (them),  they  returned  to  J. 

19.  19  day  that  my  lord  the  king  went  out  of  J. 
19.  25  when  he  was  come  to  J.  to  meet  the  king 
19.  33  with  me,  and  I  will  feed  thee  with  me  in  J. 

19.  34  that  I  should  goup  with  the  king  unto  J.? 

20.  2  clave  unto  their  Mug,  from  Jordan . .  to  J. 
20.    3  David  came  to  his  house  at  J.  ;  and  the 
20.    7  they  went  out  of  J.,  to  pursue  after  Sheba 

20.  22  And  Joab  returned  to  J.  unto  the  king 
24.   8  they  came  toJ.  at  the  end  of  nine  months 
24.  16  stretched .  .his hand  upon  J.  to  destroy  it 

1  Ki.  2.  11  thirty  and  three  years  reigned  he  in  J. 

2.  36  Build  thee  an  house  in  J.,  anddwell  there 
2.  38  And  Shimei  dwelt  in  J.  many  days 

2.  41  Shimei  had  gone  from  J.  to  Gath,  and  was 

3.  1  the  house . .  and  the  wall  of  J.  round  about 
3.  15  he  came  to  J.,  and  stood  before  the  ark  of 

8.  1  children  of  Israel,  unto  king  Solomon  hi  J. 

9.  15  the  wall  of  J.,  and  Hazor,  and  Megiddo 
9.  19  that  which  Solomon  desired  to  build  in  J. 

10.    2  she  came  to  J.  with  a  very  great  train 
10.  26  whom  he  bestowed ..  with  the  king  at  J. 

10.  27  the  king  made  silver  (to  be)  in  J.  as  stones 

11.  7  high  place,  .in  the  hill  that  (is)  before  J. 
11.  13  and  for  J.'s  sake,  which  I  have  chosen 
11.  29  time  when  Jeroboam  went  out  of  J.,  that 
11.  32  for  J.'s  sake,  the  city  which  I  have  chosen 
11.  36  may  have  a  light  alway  before  me  in  J. 

11.  42  the  time  that  Solomon  reigned  in  J.  over 

12.  18  get  Mm  up  to  his  chariot,  to  flee  to  J. 

12.  21  when  Rehoboam  was  come  to  J.,  he  asse. 
12.  27  sacrifice  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  at  J. 
12.  28  It  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  J. 
14.  21  he  reigned  seventeen  years  in  J.,  the  city 

14.  25  Shishak  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against  J. 

15.  2  Three  years  reigned  he  in  J.  :  and  his 
15.   4  diu  the  Lord  his  God  give  him  a  lamp  in  J. 
15.    4  set.  .his  son  after  him,  and  to  establish  J. 
15.  10  And  forty  and  one  years  reigned  he  in  J. 
22.  42  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  J. 

2  Ki.  8.  17  and  he  reigned  eight  years  in  J. 

8.  26  he  reigned  one  year  inJ.  And  his  mother's 

9.  28  servants  carried  him  in  a  chariot  to  J. 
12.    1  forty  years  reigned  he  in  J.    And  his 
12.  17  and  Hazael  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  J. 
12.  18  sent(it)  to  Hazael.  .he  went  away  from  J. 
14.    2  and  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  J. 
14.    2  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jehoaddan  of  J. 
14.  13  came  to  J.,  and  brake  down  the  wall  of  J. 
14.  19  they  made  a  conspiracy  against  him  in  J. 

14.  20  he  was  buried  at  J.  with  his  fathers  in 

15.  2  J.  Andhismother'sname.  .Jecoliabof  J. 
T5-  33  he  reigned  sixteen  years  in  J.  And  his 

16.  2  reigned  sixteen  years  in  J.,  and  did  not 
16.    5  Pekah..kingof  Israel  came  up  to  J.  to 

18.  2  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  J. 
18.  17  against  J.,  .they  went  up.  and  came  to  J. 

18.  22  J.,  Yeshall  worship  before  this  altar  in  J.f 
iS.  35  Lord  should  deliver  J.  out  of  mine  hand? 

19.  10  J.  shall  not  be  delivered  into  the  hand 
19.  21  the  daughter  of  J.  hath  shaken  her  head 
19.  31  out  of  J.  shall  go  forth  a  remnant,  and 
2*.    1  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  J.  And  his 

21.  4  the  Lord  said,  In  J.  will  I  put  my  name 
21.    7  in  J.,  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  tribes 

21. 12  I  (am)  bringing  (such)evil  upon  J.  and  J. 
21.  13  I  will  stretch  over  J.  the  lincof  Samaria 

21. 13  and  I  will  wipe  J.  as(aman)wipethadish 


JERUSALEM 


539 


JERUSALEM 


2K1.  21.  16  he  had  filled  J.  from  one  end  to  another 
21. 19  reigned  two  years  in  J.  And  his  mother's 

22.  1  and  he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in  J. 
22. 14  she  dwelt  in  J.  in  the  college ;  and  they 

23.  1  unto  him  all  the  elders  of  Judah  and  of  J. 
23.   2  the  inhabitants  of  J.  with  him,  and  the 
23.   4  he  burned  them  without  J.  in  the  fields  of 
23.   5  Judah,  and  in  the  places  round  about  J. 
23.    6  from  the  house  of  the  Lord,  without  J. 
23.   9  came  not  up  to  the  altar  of  the  Lord  in  J. 
23.  13  high  places  that  (were)  before  J.,  which 
23.  20  bnrued  men's  bones,  .and  returned  to  J. 
23.  23  this  passover  was  holden  to.  .Lord  in  J. 
23.  24  were  spied  in  the  land  of  Judah  and  in  J. 
23.  27  will  cast  off  this  city  J.  which  I  have 

23.  30  brought  him  to  J.,  and  buried  him  in  his 
23.  31  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  J.  And  his 
23.  33  put  him.  .that  he  might  not  reign  in  J. 

23.  36  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  J.  And  his 

24.  4  he  filled  J.  with  innocent  blood ;  which 
24.   8  and  he  reigned  in  J.  three  months.    And 
24.    8  Nehushta,  the  daughter  of  Elnathan  of  J. 
24.  10  the  servants,  .came  up  against  J.,  and 
24.  14  he  carried  away  all  J.,  and  all  the  princes 
24.  15  (those)  carried  he  into  captivity  from  J. 
24.  18  andhe  reigned  eleven  years  in  J.  Andhis 

24.  20  it  came  to  pass  in  J.  and  Judah,  until  he 

25.  1  his  host,  against  J  ,  and  pitched  against 
25.  8  a  servant  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  unto  J. 
25.    9  houses  of  J.,  and  every  great  (man's) 

25.  10  brake  down  the  walls  of  J.  round  about 

1  Ch.  3.   4  in  J.  he  reigned  thirty  and  three  years 

3.    5  these  were  born  unto  him  in  J. :  Shiniea 
6.  10  in  the  temple  that  Solomon  built  in  J. 
6. 15  the  Lord  carried  away  Judah  and  J.  by 
'6.  32  had  built  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  J. 
8.  28  (were),  .chief  (men).     These  dwelt  in  J. 

8.  32  also  dwelt  with  their  brethren  in  J. 

9.  3  in  J.  dwelt  the  children  of  Judah,  and 
9.  34  These  chief  fathers,  .dwelt  at  J. 

11.  4  Israel  went  to  J.,  which  (is1)  Jebus,  where 
14.   3  And  David  took  more  wives  at  J.:  and  D. 

14.  4  names  of  (his)  children  which  he  had  in  J. 

15.  3  David  gathered  all  Israel  together  to  J. 

18.  7  took  the  shields,  .and  brought  them  to  J. 

19.  15  entered  into  the  city.  Then  Joab  came  to  J. 

20.  1  David  tarried  at  J.  And  Joab  smote  Rab. 

20.  3  David  and  all  the  people  returned  to  J. 

21.  4  went  throughout  all  Israel,  and  cameto  J. 
21. 15  And  God  sent  an  angel  unto  J.  to  destroy 
21.  16  sword  in  his  hand  stretched  out  over  J. 
23.  25  people,  that  they  may  dwell  in  J.  for  ever 

28.  1  men,  and  with  all  the  valiant  men,  unto  J. 

29.  27  thirty  and  three  (years)  reigued  he  in  J. 

2  Ch.  1.    4  for  he  had  pitched  a  tent  for  it  at  J. 

1. 13  the  high  place  that  (was)  at  Gibeon  to  J. 

1.  14  which  he  placed,  .with  the  king  at  J. 

1. 15  the  king  made  silver  and  gold  at  J.  (as 

2.  7  men  that  (are)  with  me  in  Judah  and  in  J. 

2. 16  to  Joppa,  and  thou  shalt  carry  it  up  to  J. 

3.  1  house  of  the  Lord  at  J.  in  mount  Moriah 

5.  2  Solomon  assembled  the  elders,  .unto  J. 

6.  61  have  chosen  J.,  that  my  name  might  be 

8.  6  all  that  Solomon  desired  to  build  in  J. 

9.  1  prove  Solomon  with  hard  questions  at  J. 
9.  25  the  chariot  cities,  and  with  the  king  at  J. 
9.  27  the  king  made  silver  in  J.  as  stones,  and 
9.  30  And  Solomon  reigned  in  J.  over  all  Israel 

10.  18  to  get  him  up  to  his  chariot,  to  flee  to  J. 

11.  1  when  Rehoboam  was  come  to  J.,  he  gath. 
11.    5  Rehoboam  dwelt  in  J.,  and  built  cities  for 

11.  14  Levites  left,  .and  came  to  Judah  and  J. 
ti.  16  such  as1  set  their  hearts,  .came  to  J.,  to 

12.  2,  9  Shishak  king  of  Egypt  came . .  against  J. 
12.    4  he  took  the  fenced  cities,  .and  came  to  J. 
12.   5  that  were  gathered  together  to  J.  because 
12.    7  shall  not  be  poured  out  upon  J.  by  the 
12. 13  Rehoboam  strengthened  himselfinJ., and 

12.  13  and  he  reigned  seventeen  years  hi  J.,  the 

13.  2  He  reigned  three  years  in  J.  His  mother's 
14. 15  carried  away  sheep,  .and  returned  to  J. 

15. 10  they  gathered  themselves  together  at  J. 
17.  13  men  of  war,  mighty  men  of  valour,  .in  J. 
19.    1  returned  to  his  house  in  peace  to  J. 

19.  4  Jehoshaphat  dwelt  at  J. :  and  he  went  out 
19.    8  in  J.  did  Jehoshaphat  set  of  the  Levites 

19.  8  controversies,  when  they  returned  to  J. 

20.  5  stood  in  the  congregation  of  Judah  and  J. 
20. 15  inhabitants  of  J.,  and  thou  king  Jehosh. 

20. 17  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  with  you.  .J". 

20. 18  the  inhabitants  of  J.  fell  before  the  Lord 
20. 20  Hear  me,  O  Judah.  .ye  inhabitants  of  J. 
20.  27  every  man  of  Judah  and  J.,  and  Jehosh. 
20.  27  to  go  again  to  J.  with  joy ;  for  the  Lord 
20.  28  they  came  to  J.  with  psalteries  and  harps 

20.  31  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  J. 

21.  5  Jehoram .  .reigned  eight  years  in  J". 

21. 11  caused  the  inhabitants  of  J.  to  commit 
21. 13  hastmadeJudahand  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

21.  20  he  reigned  in  J.  eight  years,  and  departed 

22.  1  the  inhabitants  of  J.  made  Ahaziah  his 

22.  2  he  reigned  one  year  in  J.    His  mother's 

23.  2  went  about  in  Judah.  .they  came  to  J. 

24.  1  he  reigned  forty  years  in  J.   His  mother's 
•  24.    6  out  of  Judah  and  out  of  J.,  the  collection 

24.   9  a  proclamation  through  Judah  and  J. 
24.  18  wrath  came  upon  Judah  and  J.  for  this 

24.  23  they  came  to  Judah  and  J. ,  and  destroyed 

25.  1  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  J. 
25.    1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jehoaddan  of  J. 
25.  23  to  J.,  and  brake  down  the  wall  of  J.  from 
25.  27  they  made  a  conspiracy  against  htm  in  J. 


2  Ch.26.    3  and  he  reigned  fifty  and  two  years  in  J. 
26.    3  mother's  name  also  (was)  Jecoliah  of  J. 

26.  9  built  towers  in  J.  at  the  corner  gate,  and 
26. 15  he  made  in  J.  engines,  invented  bycunn. 

27.  1  reigned  sixteen  years  in  J.     His  mother's 

27.  8  to  reign,  and  reigned  sixteen  years  in  J. 

28.  1  he  reigned  sixteen  years  in  3.:  but  he  did 
28.  10  keep  under  the  children  of  Judah  and  J. 
28.  24  he  made  him  altars  in  every  corner  of  J. 

28.  27  they  buried  him  in  the  city,  (even)  in  J. 

29.  1  he  reigned  nine  and  twenty  years  in  J. 

29.  8  wrath  of  the  Lord  wasupon  Judah  and  J. 

30.  1  should  come  to  the  house  of  the  L.  at  J. 
30.  2  the  congregation  in  J.,  to  keep  the  pass. 
30.  3  people  gathered  themselves  together  to  J. 
30.  5  passover  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  at  J. 
30. 11  Zebulun  humbled  themselves,  .cameto  J. 
30. 13  there  assembled  at  J.  much  people  to  ke. 
30.  14  took  away  the  altars  that  (were)  in  J. 
30.  21  children  of  Israel  that  were  present  at  J. 
30.  26  there  was  great  joy  in  J.:  for  since  the 

30.  26  since  the  time . .  was)  not  the  like  in  J. 

31.  4  commanded  the  people  that  dwelt  in  J. 

32.  2  that  he  was  purposed  to  fight  against  J. 
32.   9  king  of  Assyria  send  his  servants  to  J. 
32.   9  unto  all  Judah  that  (were)  at  J.,  saying 
32.  10  Whereondoye  trust,  that  ye  abide,  .in  J.? 
32.  12  and  commanded  Judah  and  J.,  saying 
32.  18  the  people  of  J.  that  (were)  on  the  wall 
32.  19  they  spake  against  the  God  of  J.,  as  aga. 
32. 22  saved  Hezekiah  and  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
g2.  23..many  brought  gifts  unto  the  Lord  to  J. 
32.  25  wrath  upon  him,  and  upon  Judah  and  J. 
32.  26  (both)  he  and  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  so 

32.  33  the  inhabitants  of  J.  did  him  honour  at 

33.  1  and  he  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  J. 
33.   4  had  said,  In  J.  shall  my  name  be  for  ever 
33.   7  in  J.,  which  I  have  chosen  before  all  the 
33.   9  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  J.  to  err 
33.  13  brought  him  again  to  J.  into  his  kingdom 
33. 15  mount  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  in  J. 

33.  21  began  to  reign,  .reigned  two  years  in  J. 

34.  1  and  he  reigned  in  J.  one  and  thirty  years 
34.    3  purge  Judah  and  J.  from  the  high  places 
34.    5  burnt  the  bones,  .cleansed  Judah  and  J. 
34.    7  he  had  broken  down,  .he  returned  to  J. 
34.   9  delivered  the  money . .  they  returned  to  J. 
34.  22  she  dwelt  in  J.  in  the  college ;  and  they 
34.  29  together  all  the  elders  of  Judah  and  J. 
34.  30  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  and  the  priests,  and 
34.  32  he  caused  all  that  were  present  in  J.  and 

34.  32  the  inhabitants  of  J.  did  according  to 

35.  1  Josiah  kept  a  passover.  .the  Lord  in  J. 
35. 18  were  present,  and  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
35.  24  and  they  brought  him  to  J.,  and  he  died 

35.  24  all  Judah  and  J.  mourned  for  Josiah 

36.  1  made  him  king  in  his  father's  stead  in  J. 
36.   2  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  J. 

36.   3  the  king  of  Egypt  put  him  down  at  J.,  and 
36.    4  Eliakim  his  brother  king.  .Judah  and  J. 
36.    5  reigned  eleven  years  in  J.:  and  he  did 
36.    9  reigned  three  months  and  ten  days  in  J. 
36'.  10  Zedekiah  his  brother,  .over  Judah  and  J. 
36.  11  Zedekiah.  .reigned  eleven  years  in  J. 
36.  14  of  the  Lord  which  he.  .hallowed  in  J. 
36.  19  brake  down  the  wall  of  J.,  and  burnt  all 
36.  23  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house  in  J. 
Ezra    1.    2  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house  at  J. 

1.    3  and  let  him  go  up  to  J.,  which  (is)  in  Ju. 

1.  3  house  of  the  Lord  God.  .which  (is)  in  J. 

1.    4  offering  for.  .house  of  God  that  (is)  in  J. 

1.    5  build,  .house  of  the  Lord  which  (is)  in  J. 

1.    7  Nebuchadnezzar,  .brought  forth  out  of  J. 

1.  11  were  brought  up  from  Babylon  unto  J. 

2.  1  came  again  unto  J.  and  Judah,  everyone 

2.  68  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  (is)  at  J. 

3.  1  gathered  themselves,  .as  one  man  to  J. 
3.    8  their  coming  unto  the  house  of  God  at  J. 

3.  8  were  come  out  of  the  captivity  unto  J. 

4.  6  against  the  inhabitants  of  Judah  and  J*. 
4.    8  the  scribe  wrote  a  letter  against  J.  to 
4.  12  came  up  from  thee . .  are  come  unto  J. 

4.  20  There  have  been  mighty  kings  alsoover  J. 
4.  23  they  went  up  in  haste  to  J.  unto  the  Jews 

4.  24  work  of  the  house  of  God  which  (is)  at  J. 

5.  1  unto  the  Jews  that  (were) in  Judah  and  J. 
5.  2  to  build  the  house  of  God  which  (is)  at  J. 
5. 14  took  out  of  the  temple  that  (was)  in  J. 

5.  15  carry  them  into  the  temple  that  (is)  in  J. 

5.  16 foundation pf.  .house of  G.  which (is)in  J. 

5. 17  decree . .  to  build  this  house  of  God  at  J. 

6.  3  decree  (concerning)  the  house  of  God  at  J. 
6.    5  took,  .out  of  the  temple  which  (is)  at  J. 
6.    5  brought  again  unto. .  temple  which  (is)  at  J. 

6.  9  appointment  of  the  priests  which  (are)  at  J . 

6. 12  destroy  this  house  of  God  which  (is)  at  J. 

6. 18  for  the  service  of  God,  which  (is)  at  J. 

7.  7  the  porters,  and  the  Nethinims,  unto  J. 
7.  8  he  came  to  J.  in  the  fifth  month,  which 
7.   9  first  (day)  of  the  fifth  month  came  he  to  J. 

7. 13  of  their  own  free  will  to  go  up  to  J.,  go 

7. 14  enquire  concerning  Judah  and  J.,  accord. 
7.  15  God  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  (is)  in  J. 
7.  16,  17  the  house  of  their  God  which  (is)  in  J. 

7. 19  (those)  deliver  thou  before  the  God  of  J. 

7.  27  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  (is)  in  J. 

8.  29  at  J.,  in  the  chambers  of  the  house  of  the 
8.  30  to  bring  (them)  to  J.,  unto  the  house  of 
8.  31  twelfth  (day)  of.  .first  month,  to  go  unto  J. 

8.  32  we  cameto  J.,  and  abode  there  three  days 

9.  9  and  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Judah  and  in  J. 
10.   7  made  proclani  ation  throughout  J.  and  J. 


Ezra  10.   7  should  gather  themselves  together  unto  J. 

10.  9  together  unto  J.  within  three  days.    It 
Neh.  1 .    2  asked  them  concerning  the  Jews . .  and . .  J. 

1.  3  the  wall  of  J.  also  (is)  broken  down,  and 

2. 11  So  I  came  to  J.,  and  was  there  three  days 

2.  12  my  God  had  put  in  my  heart  to  do  at  J. 
2. 13  viewed  the  walls  of  J. ,  which  were  broken 
2.  17  J.  (lieth)  waste,  and  the  gates  thereof  are 
2.  17  let  us  build  up  the  wall  of  J.,  that  we  be 

2.  20  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memorial,  in  J. 

3.  8  and  they  fortified  J.  unto  the  broad  wall 

3.  9  son  of  Hut,  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  J. 

3. 12  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  J.,  he  and 

4.  7  heard  that  the  walls  of  J.  were  made  up 
4.   8  (and)  to  fight  against  J.,  and  to  hinder  it 

4.  22  everyone  with  his  servant  lodge  within  J. 

6.  7  appointed  prophets  to  preach  of  thee  at  J. 

7.  2  the  ruler  of  the  palace,  charge  over  J. 
7.  3  Let  not  the  gates  of  J.  be  opened  until 
7-   3  appoint  watches  of  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

7.  6  came  again  to  J.  and  to  Judah,  everyone 

8. 15  proclaim  in  all  their  cities,  and  in  J. 

11.  1  And  the  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt  at  J. 
11.    1  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  J.  the  holy  city 
n.    2  willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwell  at  J. 
11.   3  chief  of  the  province  that  dwelt  in  J. 

11.    4  at  J.  dwelt  (certain)  of  the  children  of 
11.   6  the  sons  of  Perez  that  dwelt  at  J.  (were) 

11.  22  The  overseer  also  of  the  Levites  at  J.  (was) 

12.  27  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  of  J.,  they 
12.  27  to  bring  them  to  J.,  to  keep  the  dedication 
12.  28  out  of  the  plain  country  round  about  J. 
12.  29  hadbuilded  them  villages  round  about  J. 

12.  43  that  the  joy  of  J.  was  heard  even  afar  off 

13.  6  in  all  this  (time)  was  not  I  at  J.:  for  in 
13.    7  I  came  to  J.,  and  understood  of  the  evil 

13. 15  they  brought  into  J.  on  the  sabbath  day 

13. 16  sold,  .unto  the  children  of  Judah,  and  in  J. 
13. 19  the  gates  of  J.  began  to  be  dark  before 
13.  20  merchants,  .lodged  without  J.  onceortw. 

Esth.  2.    6  Who  had  been  carried  away  from  J.  with 
Psa.  51. 18  Do  good .  .build  thou  the  walls  of  J. 
68.  29  Because  of  thy  temple  at  J.  shall  kings 
79.    1  they  defiled ;  they  have  laid  J.  on  heaps 
79.    3  have  they  shed  like  water  round  about  J. 
102.  21  To  declare  the  name.,  and  his  praise  in  J. 
116.  19  in  the  midst  of  thee,  O  J.   Praise  ye  the 
122.    2  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  J. 
122.    3  J.  is  builded  as  a  city  that  is  compact 
122.    6  Pray  for  the  peace  of  J. :  they  shall  pros. 
125.    2  (As)  the  mountains  (are)  round  about  J. 
128.    5  thou  shalt  see  the  good  of  J.  all  the  days 
135.  21  Lord  out  of  Zion,  which  dwelleth  at  J. 
137-    5  0  J-j  let  my  right  hand  forget  (hercunn.) 
137.    6  if  I  prefer  not  J.  above  my  chief  joy 
137.    7  the  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of  J. ;  who 
147.    2  The  Lord  doth  build  up  J.:  he  gathereth 
147. 12  Praise  the  Lord,  0  J.;  praise  thy-God,  O 
Eccl.   1.    1  the  Preacher,  the  sou  of  David,  king  in  J. 

1.  12  I  the  Preacher  was  king  over  Israel  in  J. 

1. 16  all  (they)  that  have  been  before  me  in  J. 
i.    7  above  all  that  were  in  J.  before  me 

2.  9  more  than  all  that  were  before  me  in  J. 
Song  1.    5  black,  but  comely,  0  ye  daughters  of  J. 

2.  7  I  charge  you,  0  ye  daughters  of  J.,  by  th 

3.  5  I  charge  you,  O  ye  daughters  of  J.,  by  th 
3.  10  paved  (with)  love,  for  the  daughters  of  J. 

5.  8  I  charge  you,  O  daughters  of  J.,  if  ye  find 
5. 16  and  this  (is)  my  friend,  O  daughters  of  J. 

6.  4  (art)  beautiful,  O  my  love,  .comely  as  J. 

8.  4  I  charge  you,  O  daughters  of  J.,  that  ye 
Isa.     1.    1  which  he  saw  concerning  Judah  and  J. 

2.    1  that  Isaiah . .  saw  concerning  Judah  and  J. 

2.  3  the  law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  J. 

3.  1  doth  take  away  from  J.  and  from  Judah 

3.  8  For  J.  is  ruined,  and  Judah  is  fallen ;  be. 

4.  3  (lie  that)  remaineth  in  J.,  shall  be  called 
4.    3  one  (that  is)  written  among  the  living  in  J. 

4.  4  Lord  . .  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  J. 

5.  3  now,  O  inhabitants  of  J. .  .judge,  I  pray 

7.  1  went  up  toward  J.  to  war  against  it,  but 
8. 14  and  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

10. 10  graven  images  did  excel  them  of  J.  and 

10. 11  Shall  I  not.  .so  do  to  J.  and  her  idols 

10.  12  his  whole  work  upon  mount  Zion  and  on  J. 
10.  32  shake  his  hand  (against)  .the  hill  of  J. 
22.  10  And  ye  have  numbered  the  houses  of  J. 
22.  21  shall  be  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
24.  23  Lord  . .  shall  reign  in  mount  Zion,  and  in  J. 
27. 13  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at  J. 
28.  14  men,  that  rule  this  people  which  (is)  in  J. 

30.  19  the  people  shall  dwell  in  Zion  at  J.  :  thou 

31.  5  As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord.,  defend  J. 
31.  9  whose  fire  (is)  in  Zion,  andhis  furnace  in  J. 
33.  20  thine  eyes  shall  see  J.  a  quiet  habitation 
36.  2  king . .  sent  Rabshakeh  from  Lachish  to  J. 
36.    7  said  to  Judah  and  to  J.,  Ye  shall  worship 

36.  20  the  Lord  should  deliver  J-  out  of  my  ha. 

37.  10  J.  shall  not  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the 
37.  22  daughter  of  J.  hath  shaken  her  head  at 
37.  32  out  of  J.  shall  go  forth  a  remnant,  and 
40.   2  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  J.,  and  cry  unto 

40.  9  0  J.,  that  bringest  good  tidings,  lift  up 

41.  27  I  will  give  to  J.  one  that  bringeth  good 
44.  26  that  saith  to  J.,  Thou  shalt  be  inhabited 
44.  28  saying  to  J.,  Thou  shalt  be  built ;  and  to 
51. 17  O  J.,  which  hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of  the 
52.  1  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  J.,  the 
52.  2  sit  down,  O  J. :  loose  thyself  from  the  ba. 
52.  9  sing  together,  ye  waste  places  of  J.:  for 
52.  9  comforted  his  people, .  .hath  redeemed  J. 
62.   1  for  J.'s  sake  I  will  not  rest,  until  the 


JERUSALEM 


540 


JERUSALEM 


Isa,  62. 

62. 

64. 

65. 

65- 

66. 

66. 

66. 
Jer.     1. 


T3' 

13' 
13- 
14. 
1  + 
15 
15- 
17- 
17- 
17. 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
22. 
23- 
23- 
24. 
24. 
=5- 

25- 

26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 

2g. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
32- 
32- 
32* 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
^5- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
39- 
39- 
40. 
42. 
44. 

44- 
44. 
44. 
5i- 
5i- 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52- 
52- 

52. 


6  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  0  J. 

7  and  till  he  make  J.  a  praise  in  the  earth 
10  Zion  is  a  wilderness,  J.  a  desolation 

18  I  create  J.  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a 

19  I  will  rejoice  in  J.,  and  joy  in  my  people 
10  Rejoice  ye  with  J.,  and  be  glad  with  her 

13  comfort  you.  .ye  shall  be  comforted  in  J. 

20  upon  swift  beasts,  to  my  holy  mountain  J. 
3  the  carrying  away  of  J.  captive  in  the 

15  throne  at  the  entering  of  the  gates  of  J. 

2  cry  in  the  ears  of  J.,  saying,  Thus  saith 
17  they  shall  call  J.  the  throne  of  the  Lord 

17  unto  it,  to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  J. 

3  saith  the  Lord  to  the  men  of  JudahandJ. 

4  ye  men  of  Judah  and  inhabitants  of  J. 

5  publish  in  J.;  and  say,  Blow  yethetrum. 

10  hast  greatly  deceived  this  people  and  J. 

11  shall  it  lie  said  to  this  people  and  to  J. 

14  0  J.,  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness 

16  publish  against  J.,  (that)  watchers  come 
1  ye  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of  J. 

1  gather  yourselves  to  flee  out  of.  .J.,  and 

6  cast  a  mount  against  J.  :  this  (is)  the  city 

8  Be  thou  instructed,  0  J.,  let  my  soul  de. 

17  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of  J.? 

34  from  the  streets  of  J.,  the  voice  of  mirth 

1  the  bones  of  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  out  of 

5  Why  (then)  is  this  people  of  J.  slidden 
11I  will  make  J.  heaps,  (and)  a  den  of  dra. 

2  men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

6  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of  J. 

9  A  conspiracy,  .among,  .inhabitants  of  J. 

12  inhabitants  of,  J.  go  and  cry  unto  the  gods 

13  (according  to)  *.  number  of  the  streets  of  J. 
9  pride  of  Judah,  and  the  great  pride  of  J. 

13  prophets,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
27  O  J.  1  wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean  ?  when 

2  Judah  mourneth.  .the  cry  of  J.  is  gone  up 
16  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  streets  of  J. 

4  be  removed . .  for  (that)  which  he  did  in  J. 

5.  who  shall  have  pity  upon  thee,  O  J.?  or 

19  Go  and  stand,  .in  all  the  gates  of  J. 

20  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  that  enter  in  by 

21  bear,  .nor  bring  (it)  in  by  the  gates  of  J. 

25  men  of  Judah,  and.  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

26  from  the  places  about  J.,  and  from  the 

27  even  entering  in  at  the  gates  of  J.  on  the 

27  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  J.,  and  it 
11  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  saying,  Thus  saith 

3  0  kings  of  Judah,  and  inhabitants  of  J. 

7  the  counsel  of  Judah  and  J.  in  this  place 

13  the  houses  of  J.,  and  the  houses  of 

19  drawnandcastforth  beyond  the  gates  of  J. 

14  I  have  seen  also  in  the  prophets  of  J.  an 

15  from  the  prophets  of  J.  is  profaneness 

1  with  the  carpenters  and  smiths,  from  J. 

8  the  residue  of  J.,  that  remain  in  this  land 

2  of  Judah,  and  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

18  J.,  and  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  the  kings 

18  J.  shall  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain 

3  of  the  messengers  which  come  to  J.  unto 

18  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah,  and  at  J. 

20  away  captive  Jeconiah.  .from  J.  to  Baby. 

20  captive,  .all  the  nobles  of  Judah  and  J. 

21  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah  and  of  J. 
1  the  prophet  sent  from  J.  unto  the  residue 

1  carried  away  captive  from  J.  to  Babylon 

2  princes  of  Judah  and  J.,  and  the  carpeu. 
2  and  the  smiths,  were  departed  from  J. 

4  to  be  carried  away  from  J.  unto  Babylon 
20  whom  I  have  sent  from  J.  to  Babylon 
25  letters,  .unto  all  the  people  that  (are) at  J. 

2  the  king  of  Babylon's  army  besieged  J. :  and 
32  men  of  Judah,  and  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
44  in  the  places  about  J.,  and  hi  the  cities 

10  in  the  streets  of  J.,  (that  are)  desolate 
13  in  the  places  about  J.,  and  in  the  cities 

16  J.  shall  dwell  safely :  and  this  (is  the  name) 
1  fought  against  J.,  and  against  all  the 

6  words  unto  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  in  J. 

7  king  of  Babylon's  army  fought  against  J. 

8  with  all  the  people  that  (were)  at  J. 

19  the  princes  of  J.,  the  eunuchs,  and  the 

11  let  us  go  to  J.  for  fear  of  the  army  of 
11  for  fear  of  the  army,  .so  we  dwell  at  J. 
13  men  of  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

17  upon  all  inhabitants  of  J.  all  the  evil 

9  proclaimed  a  fast,  .to  all  the  people  in  J. 
9  that  camo  from  the  cities  of  Judah  unto  J. 

^1  upon  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  and  upon  the 

5  Chaldeans  that  besieged  J.  heard  tidings 
5  Chaldeans . .  heard . .  they  departed  from  J. 

11  army.  .Chaldeans  was  broken  up  from  J. 

12  Jeremiah  went  forth  out  of  J.  to  go  into 

28  J.  was  taken  :  and  he  was  (there)  when  J. 
1  Nebuchadnezzar . .  and . .  army  against  J. 

8  with  fire,  and  brake  down  the  walls  of  J. 
1  were  carried  away  captive  of  J.  and  Judah 

18  poured  forth  upon  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
■2  all  the  evil  that  I  have  brought  upon  J. 

6,  21  of  Judah  and  in  the  streets  of  J. 

9  land  of  Judah  and  in  the  streets  of  J.  ? 

13  as  I  have  punished  J.,  by  the  sword  v.  17. 

35  My  blood  upon  the  inhabitants,  .shall  J. 
50  renumber,  .andlet  J.  come  iuto  your  mind 

1  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  J.     And 

3  it  came  to  pass  in  J.  and  Judah,  till  he 

4  came,  he  and  all  his  army,  against  J.,  and 

12  tif tli month.  .cameNebuzar-adan.  .into  J. 

13  the  houses  of  J.,  and  all  the  houses  of  the 

14  brake  down  all  the  walls  of  J.  round  about 

29  carried  away  captive  from  J.  eight  hund. 


Lam.  1 


Dan. 


Joel 


Obad. 
Mic.    ] 


3 
3 
4 
4 

Zeph.  1 


Zech. 


Mai. 


Matt.  2. 
2. 
3 
4 
5 
15 


7  J.  remembered  in  the  days  of  her  affliction 

8  J.  hath  grievously  sinned ;  therefore  she 
17  J.  is  as  a  menstruous  woman  among  them 
10  the  virgins  of  J.  hang  down  their  heads 

13  shall  I  liken  to  thee,  O  daughter  of  J.? 

15  and  wag  their  head  at  the  daughter  of  J. 
ie  should  have  entered  into  the  gates  of  J. 

1  and  pourtray  upon  it  the  city,  (even)  J. 

7  shall  set  thy  face  toward  the  siege  of  J. 

16  I  will  break  the  staff  of  bread  in  J. :  and 

5  This  (is)  J. :  I  have  set  it  in  the  midst  of 

3  brought  me  in  the  visions  of  God  to  J. 

4  midst  of  the  city,  through  the  midst  of  J. 

8  in  thy  pouring  out  of  thy  fury  upon  J.  ? 

15  unto  whom  the  inhabitants  of  J.  have 

10  This  burden  (concerneth)the  prince  in  J. 

19  the  Lord  God  of  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

16  which  prophesy  concerning  J.,  and  which 

21  I  send  my  four  sore  judgments  upon  J. 

22  the  evil  thatlhavebroughtuponJ.,  (even) 

6  so  will  J  give  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

2  Son.  .cause  J.  to  know  her  abominations 

3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  J. ;  Thy 
12  the  king  of  Babylon  is  come  to  J.,  and 

2  set  thy  face  toward  J.,  and  drop  (thy  w.) 

20  may  come . .  to  Judah  in  J.  the  defenced 
22  his  right  hand  was  the  divination  for  J. 
ig  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  J. 

4  names ;  Samaria(is)  Aholah,  and  J.  Ahol. 
2  set  himself  against  J.  this  same  day 

2  that  Tyrus  hath  said  against  J.,  Aha!  she 

21  one  that,  .escaped  out  of  J.  came  unto  me 
38  as  the  flock  of  J.  in  her  solemn  feasts 

1  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon  unto  J. 

2  taken  out  of  the  temple  which  (was)  in  J. 

3  temple  of  the  house  of  God . .  (was)  at  J. 
to  windows,  .open  in  his  chamber  toward  J. 

2  seventy  years  in  the  desolations  of  J. 

7  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  and  unto  all  Israel 
12  not  been  done  as  hath  been  done  upon  J. 
16  thy  fury  be  turned  away  from  the  city  J. 
16  J.  and  thy  people  (are  become)  a  reproach 
25  to  build  J.  unto  the  Messiah  the  Prince 
32  J.  shall  be  deliverance,  as  the  Lord 

1  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  J. 

6  the  children  of  J.  have  ye  sold  unto  the 

16  out  of  Zion,  and  utter  his  voice  from  J. 

17  then  shall  J.  be  holy,  and  there  shall  no 

20  and  J.  from  generation  to  generation 

2  from  Zion,  and  utter  his  voice  from  J. 

5  and  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  J. 

11  entered,  .his  gates,  .and  cast  lots  upon  J. 
20  the  captivity  of  J.,  which  (is)  in  Sepharad 

1  which  he  saw  concerning  Samaria  and  J. 

5  high  places  of  Judah?  (are  they)  not  J.  ? 

9  unto  the  gate  of  my  people,  (even)  to  J. 

12  came  down  from  the  Lord  unto,  .gate  of  J. 
10  Zion  with  blood,  and  J.  with  iniquity 

12  J.  shall  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain 

2  of  Zion,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  J. 

8  kingdom  shall  come  to  the  daughter  of  J. 

4  Judah,  and  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
12  I  will  search  J.  with  candles,  and  punish 

14  rejoice  with  all  the  heart,  .daughter  of  J. 
16  shall  be  said  to  J.,  Fear  thou  not ;  (and) 
12  how  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  on  J. 

14  I  am  jealous  for  J.  and  for  Zion  with  a 
16  I  am  returned  to  J.  with  mercies  :  my  h. 

16  a  line  shall  be  stretched  forth  upon  J. 

17  yet  comfort  Zion,  and  shall  yet  choose  J. 
19  which  have  scattered  Judah.Israel,  and  J. 

2  meas"ure  J.,  to  see  what  (is)  the  breadth 
4  J.  shall  be  inhabited  (as)  towns  without 
12  And  the  Lord,  .shall  choose  J.  again 

2  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  J.  rebuke  thee 

7  J.  was  inhabited  and  in  prosperity,  and 

3  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  J. :  and  J.  shall 

4  old  women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  J.,  and 

8  they  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  J. ;  and 

15  I  thought  in  these  days  to  do  well  unto  J. 

22  shall  come  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  J. 

9  shout,  0  daughter  of  J.:  behold,  thy  King 
10  chariot  from  E.,  and  the  horse,  from  J. 

2  I  will  make  J.  a  cup  of  trembling  unto 

2  siege  both  against  Judah  (and)  against  J. 

3  that  day  will  I  make  J.  a  burdensome  st. 

5  The  inhabitants  of  J.  (shall  be)  my  stren. 

6  J.  shall  be  inhabited  again,  .(even)  in  J. 

,   7  the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of  J.  do  not 

8  the  Lord  defend  the  inhabitants  of  .1. 

9  all  the  nations  that  come  against  J. 

10  upon  the  inhabitants  of  J.,  the  spirit  of 

11  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning  in  J.,  as 

1  fountain  opened,  .to  the  inhabitants  of  J. 

2  gather  all  nations  against  J.  to  battle 

4  mount  of  Olives,  which  (is)  before  J.  on 
8  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  J.;  half 

10  a  plain  from  Geba  to  Rimmon  south  of  J. 

11  but  J.  shall  be  safely  inhabited 

.  12  the  people  that  have  fought  against  J. 
14  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  J.:  and  the  we. 
,  16  of  all  the  nations  which  came  against  J. ' 
.  17  not  come  up  of  (all) the  families,  .unto  J. 

21  Yea,  every  pot  in  J.  and  in  Judah  shall 
11  abomination,  .committed  in  Is.  and  in  J. 

.    4  Then  shall  the  offering  of  Judah  and  J. 
1  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  J. 

3  he  was  troubled,  and  all  J.  with  him 

5  Then  went  out  to  him  J.,  and  all  Judea 
25  (from)  J.,  ami  (from)  Judea,  and  (from) 

.  35  neither  by  J.;  for  it  is  the  city  of  the 
,.    1  scribes  and  Pharisees,  which  were  of  J. 


Matt  16.  21  must  go  unto  J.,  and  suffer  many  things 
20. 17  And  Jesus  going  up  to  J.  took  the  twelve 

20.  18  we  go  up  to  J.;  and  the  Son  of  man  shall 

21.  1  they  drew  nigh  unto  J.,  and  were  come  to 
21.  10  when  he  was  come  into  J.,  all  the  city 
23-  37  0  J.,  J.,  (thou)  that  killest  the  prophets 

Mark  1.    5  all  the  land  of  Judea,  and  they  of  J.,  and 
3.    8  from  J.,  and  from  Idumsea,  and  (from) 

3.  22  the  scribes  which  came  down  from  J.  said 
7.   1  certain  of  the  scribes,  which  came  from  J. 

10.  32  they  were  in  the  way  going  up  to  J.;  and 

10.  33  we  go  up  to  J. ;  and  the  son  of  man  shall 

11.  1  when  they  came  nigh  [to  J.],  unto  Bethph. 
11.  11  Jesus  entered  into  J.,  and  into  the  temple 
11.  15  they  cume  to  J.:  and  Jesus  went  into  the 
11.  27  they  come  again  to  J.:  and  as  he  was  w. 
15.  41  women  which  came  up  with  him  unto  J. 

Luke  2.  22  they  brought  him  to  J.,  to  present  (him) 
2.  25  there,  .a  man  in  J.,  whose  name  (was)  S. 
2.  38  all  them  that  looked  for  redemption  in  J. 
2.  41  his  parents  went  to  J.  every  year  at  the 
2.  42  they  went  up  [to  J.]  after  the  custom  of  the 
2.  43  the  child  Jesus  tarried  behind  in  J. ;  and 
2.  45  they  turned  back  again  to  J.,  seeking  him 

4.  9  And  he  brought  him  to  J.,  and  set  him 

5.  17  of  every  town  of  Galilee,  and  Judea,  and  J. 

6.  17  people  out  of  all  Judea  and  J. ,  and  from 
9.  31  decease  which  he  should  accomplish  at  J. 
9.  51  he  stedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  J. 

9.  53  his  face  was  as  though  he  would  go  to  J. 
jo.  30  A  certain  (man)  went  down  from  J.  to  Jer. 
13.  4  sinners  above  all  men  that  dwelt  in  J.? 
13.  22  went.. teaching,  and  journey,  toward  [J.] 
13.  33  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  J. 
13.  34  0  J.,  J.,  which  killest  the  prophets,  and 

17.  11  as  he  went  to  J.,  that  he  passed  through 

18.  31  we  go  up  [to  J.],  and  all  things  that  are 

19.  11  becausehewas  nigh  toJ., and  because  they 
19.  28  he  went  before,  ascending  up  to  J. 

21.  20  when  ye  shall  see  J.  compassed  with  arm. 
21.  24  J.  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles 
23.    7  who  himself  also  was  at  J.  at  that  time 

23.  28  Daughters  of  J.,  weep  not  forme,  but  weep 

24.  13  which  was  from  J.  (about)  threescore  fur. 
24. 18  Art  thou  only  a  stranger  in  J.,  and  hast 
24.  33  and  returned  to  J.,  and  found  the  eleven 
24.  47  among  all  nations,  beginning  at  J. 

24.  49  tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  [J.], until  ye  be  endued 
24.  52  and  returned  to  J.  with  great  joy 
John  1.  19  priests  and  Levites  from  J.  to  ask  him 

2. 13  passoverwasathand.  .Jesus  went,  .to  J. 

2.  23  he  was  in  J.  at  the  passover,  in  the  feast 

4.  20  J.  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to  wors. 

4.  21  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  J. 

4.  45  the  things  that  he  did  at  J.  at  the  feast 

5.  1  feast  of  the  Jews ;  and  Jesus  went  up  to  J. 
5.    2  there  is  at  J. ,  by  the  sheep  (market),  a  pool 

7.  25  Then  said  some  of  them  of  J.,  Is  not  this 

10.  22  it  was  at  J.  the  feast  of  the  dedication 
11. 18  Bethany  was  nigh  unto  J.,  about  fifteen 

1 1.  55  and  many  went  out  of  the  country  up  to  J. 

12.  12  they  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming  to  J. 
Acts    1.    4  they  should  not  depart  from  J.,  hut  wait 

1.    8  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me  both  in  J. 

1.  12  Then  returned  they  unto  J.  from  the  mo. 

1. 12  which  is  from  J.  a  sabbath  day's  journey 
1. 19  it  was  known  unto  all  the  dwellers  at  J. 

2.  s  there  were  dwelling  at  J.  Jews,  devout 
2.  14  (ye)  that  dwell  at  J.,  he  this  known  unto 
4.    6  andasniany..weregatheredtogetheratJ. 

4.  16  (is)  manifest  to  all  them  that  dwell  in  J. 
5. 16  (out)  of  the  cities  round  about  unto  J. 

5.  28  ye  have  filled  J.  with  your  doctrine,  and 

6.  7  the  disciples  multiplied  in  J.  greatly ;  and 

8.  1  persecution  against,  .which  was  at  J. 

8.  14  the  apostles  which  were  at  J.  heard  that 
8.  25  returned  [to  J.],  and  preached  the  gospel 
8.  26  the  way  that  goeth  down  from  J.  unto  Ga. 

8.  27  an  eunuch . .  had  come  to  J.  for  to  worship 

9.  2  he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  J. 

9. 13  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints  at  J. 
9.  21  which  called  on  this  name  in  J.,  and  came 
9.  26  when  Saul  was  come  to  J.,  he  assayed  to 
9.  28  with  them  coming  in  and  going  out  at  J. 

10.  39  both  in  the  land  of  the  Jews,  and  in  J. 
1/.    2'  when  Peter  was  come  up  [to  J.],  they  that 

11.  22  the  ears  of  the  church  which  was  [in  J.] 

11.  27  in  these  days  came  prophets  from  J. 

12.  25  Barnabasand  Saul  returned  from  J.,  when 

13.  13  John  departing  from  them  returned  to  J. 
13.  27  they  that  dwell  at  J.,  and  their  rulers 
13.  31  which  cameup with himfroniGalilee  toJ. 
15.    2  should  go  up  to  J.  unto  the  apostles  and 

15.  4  And  when  they  were  come  to  J.,  they  were 

16.  4  the  apostles  and  elders  which  were  [at  J.] 

18.  21  [I  must. . keep  thisf east  that  cometh  in  J.] 

19.  21  Paulpurposedinspirit..togo[toJ.], saying 

20.  16  hasted,  .to  be  [at  J.]  the  day  of  Pentecost 

20.  22  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  J.,  not  know. 

21.  4  who  said,  .thatlhe  should  not  go  up  [to  J.  ] 
21. 11  So  shall  the  Jews  at  J.  bind  the  man  that 
21.  12  and  they,  .besought  him  nottogoup  to  J. 
21. 13  die  at  J.  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

21.  15  took  up  our  carriages,  and  went  up  [to  J.] 
21. 17  And  when  we  were  come  to  J.,  the  bretli. 
2i.  31  tidings  came,  .that  all  J.  was  in  an  uproar 

22.  5  bring  them  which  were,  .bound  unto  J. 
22.  17  when  I  was  come  again  to  J.,  even  while 
22.  18  get  thee  quickly  out  of  J.:  for  they  will 
23. 11  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  J.,  so  must 

24.  11  twelve  days  since  I  went  up  to  J.  for  to 

25.  1  three  days  he  ascended  from  Cesarea  to  J. 


JERUSHA 


541 


JESUS 


Acts  25.  3  he  would  send  for  him  to  J.,  laying  wait 
25.  7  the  Jews  which  came  down  from  J.,  stood 
25.  9  Wilt  thou  go  up  to  J. ,  and  there  be  judged 
25.  1 5  when  I  was  at  J. ,  the  chief  priests  and  the 
25.  20  I  asked  (hi™)  whether  he  would  go  to  J. 

25.  24  have  dealt  with  me,  both  at  J.,  and  (also) 

26.  4  at  the  first  among  mine  own  nation  at  J. 
26. 10  Which  tiling  I  also  did  in  J. :  and  many  of 
26.  20  and  at  J.,  and  throughout  all  the  coasts 

28. 17  yet  was  I  delivered  prisoner  from  J.  into 
Rom  15. 19  from  J.,  and  round  about  unto  Illyricum 

15.  25  I  go  unto  J.  to  minister  unto  the  saints 
15.  26  contribution'for  the.. saints  which  are  at  J. 
15.  31  that  my  service  which  (I  have)  for  J.  may 

1  Co.  16.    3  I  send  to  bring  your  liberality  unto  J. 
Gal.     1.  17  Neither  went  I  up  to  J.  to  them  wluch 

1.  18  I  went  up  to  J.  to  see  Peter,  and  abode 

2.  1  I  went  up  again  to  J.  with  Barnabas,  and 
4.  25  niountSinai  in  Arabia,  and  answereth  to  J. 
4.  26  But  J.  which  is  above  is  free,  which  is  the 

Heb.  12.  22  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  J. 

Rev.  3. 12  of  the  city  of  my  God,  (which  is)  new  J. 
21.  2  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new  J.,  coming 
21.  10  and  showed  me  that  great  city,  the  holy  J. 

JE-RTJ'-SHA,  N»»T,  nmi;  possession. 

The  daughter  of  Zadok  and  wife  of  Uzziah,  and  mother 

of  Jotham,  kings  of  Judah.    B.c.  760. 

2  Ki.15.  33  his  mother's  name  (was)  J-,  the  daughter 
2  Ch.27.    1  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  J.,  the  dau. 

JE-SA-I'AH,  JE-SHA-tAH,'.!^*^;,  n;yr;  Jah  is  Iielper. 

1.  A  grandson  of  Zerubbabel..    B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  3.  21  the  sons  of  Hananiah  ;  Pelatiah,  and  J. 

2.  A  son  of  Jeduthun,  and  one  appointed  to  the  service 
of  song.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    3  Zeri,  and  J.,  Hashabiah,  and  Mattithiah 
'  25. 15  eighth  to  J.,  (he),  his  sons,  and  hisbrethr. 

3.  A  grandson  of  Eliezer,  son  of  Moses,  and  ancestor  of 
Shelomith.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.  25  J.  his  son,  and  Jorani  his  son,  and  Zichri 

4.  One  of  the  familyof  Elamthatreturned  with  Ezra.  B.C. 

447- 

Ezra    8.    7  J.  the  son  of  Athaliah,  and  with  hinisev. 

5.  A  Merarite  who  joined  Ezra.     B.C.  447. 

Ezra    8.  19  and  with  him  J.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  his 

6.  A  Benjamite  whose  posterity  dwelt  in  Jerusalem. 
B.C.  447- 

Neh.    ir.    7  Maaseiah,  the  son  of  Ithiel,  the  son  of  J. 
JE-SHA'-NAH,  7\$\  ancient. 
A  city  near  Bethel  and  Ephrpimou  the  N.  of  Benjamin. 

2  Ch.13.  19  J.  with  the  towns  thereof,  and  Ephraim 
JE-SHAR-E'-LAH,  n^x-itr?  of  JeshareL 

A  Levite  who  presided  over  the  service  of  song.    B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.25.  J4  The  seventh  to  J.,  (he),  bis  sons,  and  his 
JE-SHEB-E'-AB,  2xt#i  seat  of  the  father. 
The  head  of  the  14th  course  of  the  priests  in  the  service 
of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1015. 

z  Ch.24.  13  thirteenth  to  Huppah,  the  fourteenth  to  J. 
JE'-SHER,  t^:  Tightness. 
A  son  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hezron.    B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  2.  18  sons(are)  these;  J.,  andShobab,  and  Ard. 
JE- SHI'- HON,  \b'V\,  pB;^  a  waste,  a  desert. 

1.  A  place  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  on  the  E.  of  Jordan. 

Num2i.  20  the  top  of  Pisgah,  which  looketh  toward  J. 
23.  28  the  top  of  Peor,  that  looketh  toward  J. 

2.  A  place  in  the  desert  of  Judah  on  the  W.  of  Jordan. 

1  Sa.23.  24  of  Maon,  in  the  plain  on  the  south  of  J. 
26.    1  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  (which  is)  before  J.? 
JE-SHT-SHAI,  *&*&]  Jah  is  ancient. 
An  ancestor  of  a  Gadite  family.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  5.  14  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Jahdo,  the  son  of  B. 
JE-SHO-HA-IAH,  n;n"iB^  humbled  by  Jah. 
A  descendant  of  Simeon.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  36  J.,  and  Asaiah,  and  Adiel,  and  Jesimiel 
JE-SHTJ'-A,  JE-SHTJ'-AH,  &v:  Jah  is  help. 

1.  A  priest  of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  24. 11  The  ninth  to  J.,  the  tenth  to  Shecaniah 
Ezra    2.  36  of  the  house  of  J.,  nine  hundred  seventy 
Neh.   7.  39  of  the  house  of  J.,  nine  hundred  seventy 

2.  A  Levite  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.    He  managed  the 
tithes.    B.C.  720. 

2  Ch.31.  15  J.,  aud  Shemaiah,  Amariah,  and  Shecan. 
Ezra  2. 40  children  of  J., and  Kadniiel,of  the  children 
Neh.    7.  43  The  Levites  :  the  children  of  J.,  of  Kad. 

3.  A  priest  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.    2  J.,  Nehemiah,  Seraiah,  Eeelaiah,  Morde. 

3.  2  Then  stood  up  J.  the  son  of  Jozadak,  and 
3.    8  J.  the  son  of  Jozadak,  and  the  remnant  of 

3.  9  Then  stood  J.  (with)  his  sons  and.  .breth. 

4.  3  J. ,  and  the  rest  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers 

5.  2  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  J.  the  son  of  Jozadak 

10. 18  of  the  sons  of  J.  the  son  of  Jozadak,  and 
Neb..  7.    7  J.,  Nehemiah,  Azariah.Raamiah,  Nahama. 

12.    1  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  J. 
12.    7  and  of  their  brethren  in  the  days  of  J. 
32. 10  And  J.  begat  Joiakim,  Joiakirn  also  begat 
12.  26  (were)  in  the  days  of  Joiakim  the  son  of  J. 

4.  The  father  of  Jozabad  the  Levite  that  weighed  the 
vessels  of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra   8.  33  with  them  (was)  Jozabad  the  son  of  J. 


5.  A  son  of  Pahath-Moab  whose  descendants  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.    6  the  children  of  J.  (and)  Joab,  two  thous. 
Neh.    7. 11  the  children  of  J.  and  Joab,  two  thousand 

6.  The  father  of  Ezer  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall. 

B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  19  next  to  him  repaired  Ezer  the  son  of  J. 

7.  A  Levite  who  explained  the  law  to  the  people  when 
Ezra  read  it.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    8.    7  Also  J.,  and  Bani,  and  Sherebiah,  Jamin 

9.  4  of  the  Levites,  J.,  and  Bani,  Kadmiel,  Sh. 

9.    5  Then  the  Levites,  J.,  and  Eadmiel,  Bani 

12.    8  Moreoverthe  Levites:  J.,Binnui,  Kadm. 

12.  24  Sherebiah,  and  J.  the  son  of  Kadmiel 

8.  The  name  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  is  in  one  passage 
thus  spelt.    B.C.  1491. 

Neh.    8.  17  since  the  daj-s  of  J.  the  son  of  Nun  unto 

9.  The  son  of  Azariah,  a  Levite,  who  sealed  the  cove- 
nant.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.    9  J.  the  son  of  Azaniah,  Binnui  of  the  sons 

10.  A  city  of  Benjamin,  near  Moladah. 

Neh.  11.  26  at  J.,  and  at  Moladah  and  at  Beth-phe. 
JE-SHU'-RUN,  JE-STJ'-RTJN,  \VW)  tlie darling  upright, 
A  poetical  appellation  of  the  people  of  Israel. 

Deut32. 15  J.  waxed  fat,  and  kicked :  thou  art  waxen 
33.   5  he  was  king  in  J.,  when  the  heads  of  the 
33.  26  (There  is)  none  like  unto  the  God  of  J. 
Isa.  44.    2  Fear  not.. thou,  J.,  whom  I  have  chosen 

JE-SI'-AH,  in;;?",  nyj:  Jah  exists. 

1.  One  that  joined  Da\id  at  Ziklag.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    6  J.,  and  Azareel,  and  Joezer,  and  Jashob. 

2.  A   Kohathite    descendant    of    ITzziel.      B.C.    1015. 
Called  also  lsshiah. 

1  Ch.23.  20  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  Micah  the  first,  and  J. 
JE-SI-MI'-EL,  VnoV?  God  sets. 
A  descendant  of  Simeon.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  36  and  Asaiah,  and  Adiel,  and  J.,  and  Bena. 

JES'-SE,  '£",  'Ua-aal  Jah  exists. 

Sou  of  Obed  and  father  of  David,  and  grandson  of  Boaz 

and  Ruth.    B.C.  1120. 

Rutli  4.  17  he  (is)  the  father  of  J.,  the  father  of  David 
4.  22  And  Obed  begat  J.,  and  J.  begat  David 

1  Sa.  16.    1  I  will  send  thee  to  J.  the  Beth-lehemite 

16.   3  And  call  J.  to  \he  sacrifice,  and  I  will 
16.    5  he  sanctified  J.  and  his  sons,  and  called 
16.    8  J.  called  Abinadab,  and  made  him  pass 
16.    9  Then  J.  made  Shanimah  to  pass  by.   And 
16. 10  J.  made  seven  of  his  sons  to  pass  before 

16. 10  And  Samuel  said  unto  J.,  The  Lord  hath 
16.  11  And  Samuel  said  unto  J.,  Are  here  alHthy) 

16. 11  Samuel  said  unto  J.,  Send  and  fetch  him 
16. 18  I  have  seen  a  son  of  J.  the  Beth-lehemite 
16.  19  Saul  sent  messengers  unto  J.,  and  said 
16.  20  J.  took  an  ass  (laden)  with  bread,  and  a 

16.  22  Saul  sent  to  J.,  saying,  Let  David,  I  pray 

17. 12  of  that  Ephrathite.  .whose name  (was)  J. 

17. 13  three  eldest  sons  of  J.  went  (and)  follow. 
17. 17  J.  said  unto  David  Ins  son,  Take  now  for 

17.  20  and  took,  and  went,  as  J.  had  commanded 
17.  58  son  of  thy  servant  J.  the  Beth-lehemite 
20.  27  Wherefore  cometh  not  the  son  of  J.  to 
20.  30  chosen . .  son  of  J.  to  thine  own  confusion 
20.  31  as  long  as  the  son  of  J.  liveth  upon  the 
22.  7  will  the  son  of  J.  give  every  one  of  you 
22.    8  son  hath  made  a  league  with  the  son  of  J. 

22.  9  said,  I  saw  the  son  of  J.  coming  to  Nob 
22. 13  consp.  against  me,  thou  and  the  son  of  J. 
25.  10  and  who  (is)the  son  of  J.?  There  be  many 

2  Sa.  20.    1  neither  have . .  inheritance  in  the  son  of  J. 

23.  1  the  son  of  J.  said,  and  the  man  (who  was) 
1  KX12.  16  0iave  we)  inheritance  in  the  son  of  J.:  to 

1  Ch.  2.  12  And  Boaz  begat  Obed,  and  Obed  begat  J. 

2.  13  J.  begat  his  first  born  Eliab,  and  Abina. 

10.  14  turned  the  kingdom  unto  David . .  son  of  J. 
12.  18  Thine  (are  we),  .on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  J. 
29.  26  David  the  son  of  J.  reigned  over.  .Israel 

2  Ch.io.  16  (wehave)noneinheritancein  the  son  of  J. 

11.  18  Abihail.  .daughter  of  Eliab  the  son  of  J. 
Psa.  72.  20  The  prayers  of  David  the  son  of  J.  are 
Isa.   11.    1  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  J. 

11.  10  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  root  of  J.. 
Matt.  1.    5  Booz  begat  Obed  of  Ruth.  .Obed  begat  J. 
1.   6  J.  begat  David  the  king ;  and  David  the 
Luke  3.  32  Which  was  (the  son)  of  J.,  which  was 
Acts  13.  22  I  have  found  David  the  (son)  of  J.,  a  man 
Rom  15.  12  There  shall  be  a  root  of  J.,  and  he  that 

JES'-STJI,  *v&]  Jah  is  satisfied. 

A  descendant  of  Asher.    B.C.  1700.    See  Iskui. 

Nuni26.  44  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jesuites :  of  Beriah 
JESTING  — 
Pleasantry,  cvrpairtXia  eutrapelia. 

Eph.    5.    4  nor  jesting,  which  are  not  convenient 

JE-STJ-ITES,  T^'l1- 

The  family  of  the  preceding  Jesui. 

Num26!  44  of  Jesui,  the  family  of  the  J.:  of  Beriah 
JE'-STJS,.'Ii) ao v$,  from  Heb.  JME^  saviour. 
1.  The  son  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  a  descendant  of  Abraham 
through  David  of  the  tribe  of  Judah, the  long  promised 
and  long  expected  Messiah,  born  in  Bethlehem-Ephra- 
tah,  and  crucified  in  Jerusalem.    A.D.  29. 

Matt.  1. 16  Mary,  of  whom  was  born  J.,  who  is  called 
t.  21  thou  shalt  call  his  name  J.;  for  he  shall 


Matt. 


25  first  born  son  :  and  he  called  his  name  J. 

1  J.  was  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judea,  in 
13  Then  cometh  J.  from  Galilee  to  Jordan 

15  J.  answering  said  unto  him,  Surfer  (it  to 

16  J. ,  when  he  was  baptized,  went  up  straight. 

1  Then  was  J.  led  up  of  the  spirit  into  the 
7  J.  said  unto  him,  Itis  written  again,  Thou 

10  Then  saith  J.  unto  him,  Get  thee  hence,  S. 

12  [J.]  had  heard  that  John  was  cast  into 

17  J.  began  to  preach,  and  to  say,  Repent 

18  [J.,]  walking  by  the  sea  of  Galilee, saw  two 
23  And  [J.l  went  about  all  Galilee,  teaching 

28  when  J.  had  ended  these  sayings,  the  pe. 

3  And  [J.]  put  forth  (his)  hand,  and  touched 

4  J.  saith  unto  him,  See  thou  tell  no  man 

5  when  [J.]  was  entered  into  Capernaum 

7  [J.]  saith  unto  hirn,  I  will  come  and  heal 
10  When  J.  heard  (it),  he  marvelled,  and 

13  J.  said  unto  the  centurion,  Go  thy  way 

14  when  J.  was  come  into  Peter's  house,  he 
10  when  J.  saw  great  multitudes  about  hini 

20  J.  saith  unto  him,  The  foxes  have  holes 
22  J.  said  unto  him,  Follow  me;  and  let  the 

29  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  [J.,]  thou 

34  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet  J. ;  and 

2  J.,  seeing  their  faith,  said  imto  the  sick 

4  J., knowing  the  irthoughts,  said,  Wherefore 
9  as  J.  passed  forth  from  thence,  he  saw  a 

10  as  J.  sat  at  meat  in  the  house,  behold 

12  when  [J.]  heard  (that),  he  said  unto  them 

15  J.  said  unto  them,  Can  the  children  of  the 

19  J.  arose,  and  followed  him,  and  (so  did) 

22  J.  turned  hirn  about ;  and  when  he  saw 

23  J.  came  intqJfehe  ruler's  house,  and  saw 

27  And  when  J.  departed  thence,  two  blind 

28  J.  saith  unto  them,  Believe  ye  that  I  am 

30  J.  straitly  charged  them,  saying,  See  (that) 

35  J.  went  about  all  the  cities  and  villages 

5  These  twelve  J.  sent  forth,  and  coninian. 
1  J.  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  his 

4  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Go  and 

7  J.  began  to  say  unto  the  multitudes  cone. 
25  J.  answered  and  said,  I  thank  thee,  O  F. 

1  J.  went  on  the  sabbath  day  through  the 

15  when  J.  knew  (it.)  he  withdrew  himself 
25  [J.]  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  unto 

1  The  same  day  went  J.  out  of  the  house 
34  these  things  "spake  J.  unto  the  multitude 

36  [J.]  sent  the  multitude  away,  and  went 
51  [J.saith  unto  them, Have  ye  understood  all] 
53  when  J.  had  finished  these  parables,  he 
57  J.  said  unto  them,  A  prophet  is  not  with. 

1  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  fame  of  J. 

12  disciples,  .buried,  and  went  and  told  J. 

13  J.  heard  (of  it),  he  departed  thence  by 

14  [J.]  went  forth,  and  saw  a  great  multitude 

16  J.  said  unto  them,  They  need  not  depart 
22  [J.]  constrained  his  disciples  to  get  into 

25  [J-]  went  unto  them",  walking  on  the  sea 

27  J.  spake  unto  them,  saying,  Be  of  good 

29  he  walked  on  the  water,  to  go  to  J. 

31  J.  stretched  forth  (his)  hand,  and  caught 
1  Then  came  to  J.  scribes  and  Pharisees 

16  [J.]  said,  Are  ye  also,  .without  understa.? 

21  Then  J.  went  thence,  and  departed  into 

28  Then  J.  answered  and  said  unto  her,  0  wo. 

29  J.  departed  from  thence,  and  came  nigh 

30  cast  them  down  at  [J.]  feet ;  and  he  healed 

32  J.  called  his  disciples  (unto  him),  aud  said 
34  J.  saith  unto  them,  How  many  loaves  have 

6  J.  said  unto  them,  Take  heed  and  beware 

8  when  J.  perceived,  he  said  unto  them,  O 

13  J.  came  into  the  coasts  of  Cesarea  Philip. 

17  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Blessed 

20  tell  no  man  that  he  was  [J.]  the  Christ 

21  From  that  time  forth  began  J.  to  show 

24  Then  said  J.  unto  Iris  disciples,  If  any 

1  J.  taketh  Peter,  James,  and  John  Iris  br. 
4  Then  answered  Peter,  and  said  unto  J. 
7.  J.  came  and  touched  them,  and  said,  Ar.  _ 
8  lifted,  .their  eyes,  they  saw  no  man,  save  J. 

0  J.  charged  them,  saying,  Tell  the  vision 
11  [J.]  answered  and.  said  unto  them,  Elias 

17  Then  J.  answered  and  said,  O  faithless 

18  J.  rebuked  the  devil;  and  he  departed 

19  Then  came  the  disciples  to  J.  apart,  and 

20  [J.]  said  unto  them,  Because  of  3  our  unb. 

22  J.  said  unto  them,  The  Son  of  man  shall 

25  J.  prevented  hini,  saying.  What  thinkest 

26  J.  saith  unto  him,  Then  are  the  children 

1  At  the  same  time  camethe  disciples  unto  J. 

2  [J.]  called  a  little  child  unto  him,  and  set 

22  J.  saith  unto  him,  I  say  not  unto  thee 

1  (that)  when  J.  had  finished  these  sayings 

14  J.  said,  Suffer  little  children,  and  forbid 
1 3  J.  said,  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,  Thou 

21  J.  said  unto  him,  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect 

23  Then  said  J.  unto  his  disciples,  Verily 

26  J.  beheld  (them),  and  said  unto  them 

28  J.  said  unto  them,  Verily  I  say  unto  you 
17  J.  going  up  to  Jerusalem  took  the  twelve 

22  J.  answered  and  said,  Ye  know  not  what 
25  J.  called  them  (unto  him),  and  said,  Ye 
30  when  they  heard  that  J.  passed  by,  cried 
32  J.  stood  still,  and  called  them,  and  said 
34  J.  had  compassion  (on  them),  and  touched 

1  And  when  they  drew  nigh,  .then  sent  J. 
6  disciples  went,  and  did  as  J.  commanded 

11  This  is  J.  ..prophet  of  Nazareth  of  Galilee 

12  J.  went  into  the  temple  of  God,  and  cast 
16  J.  saith  unto  them,  Yea ;  have  ye  never 
21  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them.  Verily 


JESUS 


542 


JESUS 


=3- 

24. 
24. 
24. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 

a6. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 


Matt2i.  24  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  I  also 
21.  27  they  answered  J.,  and  said,  We  cannot 
21.  31  J.  saith  unto  them,  Verily  I  say  unto  you 

21.  42  J.  saitli  unto  them,  Did  ye  never  read  in 

22.  1  J.  answered  and  spake  unto  them  again 
22.  18  J.  perceived  their  wickedness,  and  said 
22.  29  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Ye  do 
22.  37  [J.]  said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  love  the 
22.  41  Pharisees  were  gathered  together,  J.  asked 

1  Then  spake  J.  to  the  multitude,  and  to 

1  3.  went  out,  and  departed  from  the  tern. 

2  [J.]  said  unto  them.  See  ye  not  all  these 
4  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Take 
1  when  J.  had  finished  all  these  sayings 

4  consulted,  .they  might  take  J.  hy  subtilty 

6  J.  was  in  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon 

10  When  J.  understood  (it),  he  said  unto  them 
17  the  disciples  came  to  J.,  saying  unto  him 

19  the  disciples  did  as  J.  had  appointed  them 
26  J.  took  bread,  and  blessed  (it),  and  brake 
31  Then  saith  J,  unto  them,  All  ye  shall  be 
34  .1.  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee 

36  Then  cometh  J.  with  them  unto  a  place 

49  he  came  to  J.,  and  said,  Hail,  Master  ! 

50  J.  said  unto  him,  Friend,  wherefore  art 

50  came  they,  and  laid  hands  on  J.,  and  took 

51  one  of  them  which  were  with  J.  stretched 

52  Then  said  J.  unto  him,  Put  up  again  thy 
55  that  same  hour  said  J.  to  the  multitudes 
57  they  that  had  laid  hold  on  J. led  (him)  away 
59  sought  false  witness  against  J.,  to  put 

63  But  J.  held  his  peace.     And  the  high  pri. 

64  J.  saith  unto  him,  Thou  hast  said  :  never. 
69  saying,  Thou  also  wast  with  J.  of  Galilee 
71  This  (fellow)  was  also  with  J.  of  Nazareth 
75  Peter  remembered  the  word  of  J.,  which 

1  counsel  against  J.  to  put  hira  to  death 
ii  And  J.  stood  before  the  governor:  and 

11  And  J.  said  unto  him,  Thou  sayest 

17  Barabbas,  or  J.  whieli  is  called  Christ? 

20  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  and  destroy  J. 

22  What  shall  I  do  then  with  J.  which  is 

26  when  he  had  scourged  J.,  he  delivered 

27  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  J.  into  the 

37  written.  This  is  J.  the  king  of  the  Jews 
46  J.  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli ! 
50  J.,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud 

54  they  that  were  with  him  watching  J.,  saw 

55  which  followed  J.  from  Galilee,  miniate. 

57  Joseph,  who.  .himself  was  J.  disciple 

58  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body  of  J. 

5  know  that  ye  seek  J.,  which  was  crucified 
9  J.  met  them,  saying,  All  hail !  And  they 

10  Then  said  J.  unto  them,  Be  not  afraid :  go 

16  a  mountain  where  J.  had  appointed  them 

18  J.  came  and  spake  unto  them,  saying,  All 
Mark  1.    9  J  came  from  Nazareth  of  Galilee,  and  was 

1. 14  J.  came  into  Galilee,  preaching 'the  gospel 
1.  17  J.  said  Unto  them,  Come  ye  after  me,  and 
1.  24  what  have  we  to  do  witli . .  J.  of  Nazareth  ? 
1.  25  J.  rebuked  him,  saying,  Hold  thy  peace 
1.  41  [J.,]"moved  with  compassion ;  put  forth 

1.  45  J.  could  no  more  openly  enter  into  the 

2.  5  When  J.  saw  their  faith,  he  said  unto  the 
2.  8  J.  perceived  in  his  spirit  that  they  so  rea. 
2.  15  it  came  to  pass,  that,  as  J.  sat  at  meat  is 
2.  15  sinners  sat  also  together  with  J.  and  his 
2.  17.  When  J.  heard  (it),  he  saitli  unto  them 

19  J.  said  unto  them,  Can  the  children . .  fast 

7  But  J.  withdrewhimself  with  his  disciples 

6  when  he  saw  J.  afar  off,  he  ran  and  wore. 

7  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  J.,  (thou) 

13  forthwith  [J.]  gave  them  leave.  And  the 
15  they  come  to  J.,  and  see  him  that  was 

19  Howbeit  [J.]  suffered  him  not,  but  saith 

20  to  publish,  .how  great  things  J.  had  done 

21  when  J.  was  passed  over  again  by  ship 
27  When  she  had  heard  of  J.,  came  in  the 
30  J. .  .turned  him  about  in  the  press,  and 
36  As  soon  as  J.  heard  the  word  that  was 

4  But  J.  said  unto  them,  A  prophet  is  not 
30  apostles  gathered  themselves,  .unto  J. 
34  [J.],  .was  moved  with  compassion  toward 
27  [J.j  said  unto  her,  Let  the  children  first 

1  [J.]  called  his  disciples  (unto  him),  and 

17  when  [J.]  knew  (it),  he  saith  unto  them 
27  J.  went  out,  and  his  disciples,  into  the 

2  after  six  days  J.  taketh  (with  him)  Peter 

4  with  Moses:  and  they  were  talking  with  J. 

5  Peter  answered  and  said  to  J.,  Master,  it 

8  they  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  J.  only 
23 "J.  said  unto  him.  .all  things  (are) possible 

23  J  saw  that  the  people  came  running  tog. 
27^111  J.  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  lifted 
39  But  J.  said,  Forbid  him  not :  for  there  is 

5  And  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  For 

14  But  when  J.  saw  (it),  he  was  much  displ. 
.  18  J.  said  unto  him,  Whycallest.  .me good? 

21  Then  J.,  beholding  him,  lovtd  him,  and 
23  And  .1.  looked  round  about,  andsaith  unto 
,  24  But  J.  answereth  again,  and  saith  unto 
.  27  J.,  looking  upon  them,  saith,  With  men 
,  29  J.  answered  and  said,  Verily  I  say  unto 
.  32  J.  went  before  them :  and  they  were  am. 
.  38  But  J.  said  unto  them.  Ye  know  not  what 
.  39  J.  said.  .Ye  shall  indeed  drink  of  the  cup 
.  42  But  J.  called  them  (to  him),  andsaith  unto 
.  47  when  he  heard  that  it  was  J.  of  Nazareth 
.  47  J.,  (thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me 
.  49  J.  stood  still,  and  commanded  him  to  be 
50  he,  casting  away  his  garment,  .came  to  J. 
.  51  J  answered  aud  said  unto  him,  What  wilt 


Mark  10, 


Luke 


52  J.  said  unto  him,  Go  thy  way  ;  thy  faith 

52  And  immediately  he.  .followed  [J. Jin  the 

6  they  said  unto  them  even  as  J.  had  com. 

7  they  brought  the  colt  to  J.,  and  cast  their 

11  [J.]  enteretLinto  Jerusalem,  and  into  the 

14  [J.j  answered  and  said  unto  it,  No  man 

15  [J.j  went  into  the  temple,  and  began  to . 
22  J.  answering  saith  unto  them,  Have  faith 
29  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  I  will 
33  they  answered  and  said  unto  J.,  We  can. 

33  J.  answering  saith  unto  them,  Neither  do 

17  J.  answering  said  unto  them,  Render  to 

24  J.  answering  said  unto  them,  Do  ye  not 

29  J.  answered  him,  The  first  of  all  the  com. 

34  when  J.  saw  that  he  answered  discreetly 

35  J.  answered  and  said,  while  he  taught  in 
41  [J.]  sat  over  against  the  treasury,  and  be. 

2  J.  answering  said  unto  him,  Seest  thou 

5  J.  answering  them  began  to  say.  Take 

6  J.  said,  Let  heralone ;  whytroubleyeher? 

18  J.  said.  .One  of  you  which  eateth  with  me 

22  [J.]  took  bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake  (it) 
27  J.  saith  unto  them,  All  ye  shall  be  offen. 

30  J.  saith  unto  him.  Verily  I  say  unto  thee 
4S  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Are  ye 

53  they  led  J.  away  to  the  high  priest:  and 
55  council  sought  for  witness  against  J.  to 
60  high  priest  stood  up.  .and  asked  J.,  saying 
62  J.  said,  I  am  :  and  ye  shall  see  the  Son 
67  said,  Arid  thou  also  wast  with  J.  of  Naz. 
72  Peter  called  to  mind  the  word  that  J.  said 

1  the  chief  priests,  .bound  J.,  and  carried 

5  But  J.  yet  answered  nothing ;  so  that  Pi. 

15  Pilate,  .delivered  J.,  when  he  had  scour. 
34  at  the  ninth  hour  J.  cried  with  a  loud  vo. 

37  J.  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave  up 
43  Joseph  of  Arimathea . .  craved .  .body  of  J. 

6  Ye  seek  J.  of  Nazareth,  which  was  cruci. 

31  bring  forth  a  son,  and.  .call  his  name  J. 
21  his  name  was  called  J.,  which  was  so  na. 

27  when  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  J. 
43  as  they  returned,  the  child  J.  tarried  be. 
52  J.  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and 

21  J.  also  being  baptised,  .the  heaven  was 

23  J.  himself  began  to  be  about  thirty  years 

1  J.,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  returned 
4  J.  answered  him,  saying,  It  is  written 

8  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Get  thee 

12  J.  answering  said  unto  him,  It  is  said 

14  J.  returned  in  the  power  of  the  spirit  into 

34  what  have  we  to  do  with . .  J .  of  Nazareth? 
3^  J.  rebuked  him,  saying,  Hold  thy  peace 

8  he  fell  down  at  J.  knees,  saying,  Depart 

10  J.  said  unto  Simon,  Fear  .not ;  from  hence. 

12  who,  seeing  J.,  fell  on  (his)  face,  andbeso. 

19  with  (his)  couch  into  the  midst  before  J. 

22  But  when  J.  perceived  their  thoughts,  he 
31  J.  answering  said  unto  them.  They  that 

3  J.  answering  them  said,  Have  ye  not  read 

9  Then  said  J.  unto  them,  I  will  ask  you  one 

11  and  commenced,  .what  they  might  do  to  J. 

3  when  he  heard  of  J.,  he  sent  unto  him  the 

4  when  they  came  to  J.,  they  besought  him 
6  J.  went  with  them.     And  when  he  was 

9  When  J.  heard  these  things,  he  marvelled 
19  sent  (them)  to  J.,  saying,  Art  thou  he  that 
22  [J.]  answering  said  unto  them,  Go  your 

40  J.  answering  said  unto  him,  Simon,  I  have 

28  When  he  saw  [J.],  he  cried  out,  and  fell 

25  What  have  I  do  with  thee,  J.,  (thou)  Son 
30  And  J.  asked  him,  saying,  What  is  thy 

35  came  to  J.,  and  found  the  man  out  of 

35  sitting  at  the  feet  of  J.,  clothed,  and  in 

38  be  with  him  :  but  [J.]  sent  him  away,  say. 

39  how  great  things  J.  had  done  unto  him 

40  when  J.  was  returned,  the  people  (gladly) 

41  he  fell  down  at  J.  feet,  aiulbesought  him 

45  J.  said,  Who  touched  me  ?  When  all  den. 

46  And  [J.]  said,  Somebody  hath  touched  me 
50  when  J.  heard  (it),  he  answered  him,  say. 
33  Peter  said  unto  J.,  Master,  it  is  good  for 

36  when  the  voice  was  past,  J.  was  found 

41  J.  answering  said.O  faithless  andperver. 

42  J.  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and  healed 

43  wondered  every  one  at.  .things  which[J.] 

47  J.,  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  heart 
50  J.  said  unto  him,  Forbid  (him)  not :  for 
58  And  J.  said  unto  him,  Foxes  have  holes 
60  [J.]  said  unto  him,  Let  the  dead  bury  their 
62  J.  said  unto  him  No  man,  having  put  his 

21  [J.]  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and  said,  I  thank 
79  he, willing  to  justify  himself,  said  unto  J. 
30  J.  answering  said,  A  certain  (man)  went 

37  said  J.  unto  him,  Go,  and  do  thou  likewise 
30  Mary,  which  also  sat  at  [J.]feet,  and  heard 

41  [J.]  answered  and  said  unto  her,  Martha 

2  [J.j  answering  said  unto  them,  Suppose  ye 
ic  when  J.  saw  her,  he  called  (her  to  him) 
14  that  J.  had  healed  on  the  Sabbath  day 

3  J.  answering  spake  unto  the  lawyers  and 

13  and  said,  J.,  Master,  have  mercy  on  us 
17  And  J.  answering  said,  Were  there  not 

16  J.  called  them  (unto  him),  and  said,  Suffer 
iq  J.  said  unto  him.  Why  callest  thou  me 

22  when  J.  heard  these  things,  he  said  unto 

24  when  J.  saw  that  he  was  very  sorrowful 

37  told  him,  that  J.  of  Nazareth  passethby 

38  J.,  (thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me! 
40  J.  stood,  and  commanded  him  to  bebrou. 

42  J.  said  unto  him.  Receive  thy  sight :  thy 
3  he  sought  to  see  J.  who  he  was ;  and  could 

5  when  J.  came  to  the  place,  he  looked  up 


Luke  19. 


22. 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
.  23. 
23- 
23- 

23- 
23- 
23- 

24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
John  1. 


9  J.  said  unto  him,  This  day  is  salvation 
35  they  brought  him  to  J.  :  aud  they  cast 

35  garments  upon  the  colt,  and  set  J.  thereon 
8  J.  said  unto  them,  Neither  tell  I  you  by 

34  J.  answeringsaid  unto  them, The  children 

47  that  was  called  Judas,  .drew  near  unto  J. 

48  But  J.  said  unto  him,  Judas,  betrayestthou 

51  J.  answered  and  said,  Suffer  ye  thus  far 

52  Then  J.  said  unto  the  chief  priests,  and 

63  the  men  that  held  [J.]  mocked  him,  and 
8  when  Herod  saw  J.,  he  wasexceediugglad 

20  Pilate  there  fore,  willing  to  release  J. , spake 

25  released . .  but  he  delivered  J.  to  their  will 

26  they  laid,  .that  he  might  bear  (it)  after  J. 

28  But  J.,  turning  unto  them,  said,  Daughters 
34  [Then  said  J.,  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for] 

42  he  said  unto  J.,  Lord,  remember  me  when 

43  [J.]  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee 

46  when  J.  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  he 

52  went  unto  Pilate .  .begged  the  body  of  J. 
3  they . .  found  not  the  body  of  the  Lord  [J.] 

15  J.  himself  drew  near,  and  went  with  them 
19  they  said  unto  him,  Concerning  J.  of  Na. 

36  [J.]  himself  stood  in  the  midst  of  them 

29  The  next  day  John  seeth  J.  coming  unto 

36  looking  upon  J.  as  he  walked,  he  saith 

37  two  disciples  heard . .  and  they  followed  J. 

38  Then  J.  turned,  and  saw  them  following 

42  he  brought  him  to  J.  And  when  J.  beheld 

43  The  day  following  [J.]  would  go  forth  into 

45  have  found.  .J.  of  Nazareth  the  son  of  J. 

47  J.  saw  Nathanael  coming  to  him,  and  saith 

48  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Before 
50  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Because 

1  Cana  of  Galilee,;  and  the  mother  of  J.  was 

2  bothj.  wascalled,andhisdisciples,  to  the 

3  the  mother  of  J.  saith  unto  him,  They  have 

4  J.  saith  unto  her,  Woman,  what  havelto 
7  J.  saith  unto  them,  Fill  the  water  pots 

11  This  beginning  of  miracles  did  J.  in  Cana 
13  passoverwas  at  hand;  andJ.  wentuptoJ. 
19  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Destroy 
22  and  they  believed, .  the  word  which  J.  had 
24  But  [J  )  did  not  commit  himself  unto  them 

2  The  same  came  to  J.  by  night,  and  said 

3  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Verily 

5  J.  answered,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
22  After  these  things  came  J.  andhisdiscip. 

1  the  Pharisee's  had  heard  that  J.  made 

2  Though  J.  himself  baptized  not,  but  his 

6  J.  therefore,  being  wearied,  .sat  thus  cr; 

7  J.  saith  unto  her,  Givenie  to  drink 

10  J.  answered  and  said  unto  her.  If  thou 
13  J.  answered  and  said  unto  her,  Whosoever 

16  [J.]  saith  unto  her,  Go,  call  thy  husband 

17  J.  said  unto  her,  Thou  hast  well  said,  I 

21  J.  saith  unto  her,  Woman,  believe  me 
26  J.  saith  unto  her,  I  that  speaketh  unto 

34  J.  saith  unto  them,  My  meat  is  to  do  the 

44  J.  himself  testified,  that  a  prophet  hath 

46  So  [J.]  came  again  into  Canaof  Galilee 

47  When  he  heard  that  J.  was  come  out  of  J. 

48  Then  said  J.  unto  him,  Except  ye  see  signs 
50  J.  saith  unto  him,  Go  thy  way ;  thy  son 
50  the  man  believed  the  word  that  J.  had 

53  in  the  which  J.  said  unto  him.  Thy  son 

54  This  (is)  again  the  second  miracle  (that)  J. 
1  there  was  a  feast,  .and  J.  went  up  to  Jer. 
6  When  J.  saw  him  lie.  .he  saith  unto  him 

8  J.  saith  unto  him,  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed 

13  for  J.  had  conveyed  himself  away,  amul. 

15  told  the  Jews  that  it  was  J.  which  had 

16  therefore  did  the  Jews  persecute  J.,  and 

17  But  J.  answered  them,  My  Father  worketh 
19  Then  answered  J.  and  said  unto  them 

1  After  these  things  J.  went  over  the  sea 

3  J.  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  there  he 

5  When  J.  then  lifted  up  (his)  eyes,  and  saw 

10  J.  said,  Make  the  men  sit  down.  N  ow  there 

1 1  J.  took  the  loaves  ;  and  when  he  had  given 

14  when  they  had  seen  the  miracles  that  [J.] 

15  J.  therefore  perceived  that  they  would 
17  it  was  now  dark,  and  J.  was  not  come  to 
19  they  see  J.  walking  on  the  sea,  and  draw. 

22  that  J.  went  not  with  his  disciples  into 
24  When  the  people  therefore  saw  that  J. 

24  they.. came  to  Capernaum,  seeking  for  J. 
26  J.  answered  them'and  said,  Verily,  verily 
29  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  This  is 

32  Then  J.  said  unto  them.  Verily,  verily, I  say 

35  J.  said  unto  them,  I  am  the  bread  of  life 

42  they  said,  Is  not  this  J.,  the  son  of  Joseph 

43  J.  therefore  answered  and  said  unto  them 
53  Then  J.  said  unto  them,  Verily,  verily, I  say 
61  J.  knew  iu  himself  that  his  disciples  mur. 

64  For  J.  knew  from  the  beginning  who  they 
67  Then  said  J.  unto  the  twelve.  Will  ye  also 
70  [J.]  answered  them,  Have  not  I  chosen 

1  After  these  things  J.  walked  in  Galilee 

6  Then  J.  said  unto  them,  My  time  is  not 
14  Now  about  the  midst  of  the  feast,  J.  went 

16  J.  answered  them,  and  said,  My  doctrine 
21  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them,  I  have 

25  Then  cried  J.  in  the  temple,  as-he  taught 

33  Then  said  J.  unto  them,  Yet  a  little  while 
37  J.  stood  and  cried,  saying,  If  any  man 

39  not  yet.  .because  that  J.  was  not  yetglor. 
50  he  that  came  to  J.  by  night,  being  one  of 

1  [J.  went  unto  the  mount  of  Olives.] 
6  [But  J.  stooped  down, and  with  (his)flnger] 
9. [J.  was  left  alone,  and  the  woman  stand.] 
10  [When  J.  had  lifted  up  himself,  and  saw] 


JESUS 


543 


JESUS    CHRIST 


John  8.  ii  [J.  said  unto  her,  Neither  do  I  condemn] 
8.  12  Then  spake  J.  again  unto  them,  saying,  I 
8.  14  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them.  Though 
8.  19  J.  answered,  Ye  neither  knowme,  nor  my 
8.  20  These  words  spake  [J.]  in  the  treasury,  as 
8.  21  Then  said  [J.]  again  unto  them,  I  go  my 
8.  25  J.  saith  unto  them.  Even  (the  same)  that 
8.  28  Then  said  J.  unto  them,  When  ye  have 
8.  31  Then  said  J.  to  those  Jews  which  believed 
8.  34  J.  answered  them,  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
8.  39  J.  saith  unto  them,  If  ye  were  Abraham's 
8.  42  J.  said  unto  them,  If  God  were  your  Father 
8.  49  J.  answered,  I  nave  n<  t  a  devil ;  but  I 
8.  54  J. answered, Iflhonourmyself.my  honour 
8.  58  J.  said  unto  them.  Verily,  verily,  I  say 

8.  59  but  J.  hid  himself,  and  went  out  of  the 
g.   3  J.  answered,  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned 

9.  11  A  man  that  is  called  J.  made  clay,  and 
9. 14  it  was  the  sabbath  day  when  J.  made  the 
9.  35  J.  heard  that  they  had  cast  him  out ;  and 
9.37  J.  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  both  seen  him 
9.  39  J.  said,  For  judgment  I  am  come  into 

g.  41  J.  said  unto  them,  If  ye  were  blind,  yesho. 

6  This  parable  spake  J.  unto  them :  but 

7  Then  said  J.  unto  them  again,  Verily 
10.  23  J.  walked  in  the  temple,  in  Solomon's  p. 

.  25  J.  answered  them,  I  told  you,  and  yebel. 
.  32  J.  answered  them,  Many  good  works  have 
.  34  J.  answered  them,  Is  it  not  written  in 
.    4  When  J.  heard  (that),  he  said.  This  sick. 
.    5  J.  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Laz. 
.   9  J.  answered,  Are  there  not  twelve  hours 
.  13  Howbeit  J.  spake  of  his  death  :  but  they 
1.  14  Then  said  J.  unto  them  plainly,  Lazarus 
1. 17  Then  when  J.  came,  he  found  that  he  had 
1.  20  Then  Martha,  as  soon  as  she  heard  that  J. 
.  21  Then  said  Martha  unto  J.,  Lord,  if  thou 
.  23  J.  saith  unto  her,  Thy  brother  shall  rise 
.  25  J.  said  unto  her,  I  am  the  resurrection 
.  30  Now  J.  was  not  yet  come  into  the  town 
.  32  Then  when  Mary  was  come  where  J.  was 
*■  33  When  J.  therefore  saw  her  weeping,  .he 
•  35  J-  wept 

.  38  J.  therefore,  again  groaning  in  himself 
.  39  J.  said,  Take  ye  away  the  stone.    Martha 
1.  40  J.  saith  unto  her,  Said  I  not  unto  thee 
1.  41  And  J.  lifted  up  (Ids)  eyes,  and  said,  Fath. 
1.  44  J.  saith  unto  them,  Loose  him,  and  let 
1.  45  Jews,  .had  seen  the  things  which  [J.] did 
1.  46  and  told  them  what  things  J.  had  done 
1.  51  he  prophesied  that  J.  should  die  for  that 
1.  54  J.  therefore  walked  no  more  openly  amo. 

1.  56  Then  sought  they  for  J.,  and  spake  among 

2.  1  J.,  six  days  before  the  passover,  came  to 
2.  3  Mary,  .anointed  the  feet  of  J.,  and  wiped 
2.  7  Then  said  J.,  Let  her  alone  :  against  the 
2.   9  they  came  not  for  J.  sake  only,  but  that 

2. 11  many  ofthe  Jews  went.,  and  believed  on  J. 

2. 12  they  heard  that  J.  was  coming  to  Jerusa. 
2. 14  And  J.,  when  he  had  found  a  young  ass 
2.  16  when  J.  was  glorified,  then  remembered 
2.  21  desired  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see  J. 
2.  22  and  again  Andrew  and  Philip  tell  J. 
2.  23  J.  answered  them,  saying,The  hour  is  come 
2.  30  J.  answered  and  said,  This  voice  came  not 
2.  35  Then  J.  said  unto  them,  Yetalittle  while 
2.  36  These  things  spake  J.,  and  departed,  and 

2.  44  J.  cried  and  said,  He  that  believeth  on 

3.  1  J.  knew  that  his  hour  was  come  that  he 
3  [J.]  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given 

3.    7  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  What  I 
3.   8  J.  answered  him,  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou 
3.  10  J.  saith  to  him,  He  that  is  washed  needeth 
3.  21  When  J.  had  thus  said,  he  was  troubled 
3.  23  leaning  on  J.  bosom  one.  .whom  J.  loved 
3.  25  He  then  lying  on  3.  breast  saith  unto 
3.  26  J.  answrered,  He  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give 
3,  27  Then  said  J.  unto  him,  That  thou  doest 
3.  29  some  (of  them)  thought,  .that  J.  had  said 
3.  31  Therefore,  when  he  was  gone  out,  J.  said 
3.  36  J.  answered  him,  Whither  I  go,  thou 

3.  38  J.  answered  him,  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy 

4.  6  J.  saith  unto  him,  I  am  the  way,  and  the 
4.   9  J.  saith  unto  him,  Have  I  been  so  long 
4.  23  J.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  If  a  man 
6.  19  Now  J.  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to 

6.  31  J.  answered  them,  Do  ye  now  .believe? 

7.  1  These  words  spake  J.,  and  lifted  up  his 

8.  1  When  J.  had  spokeu  these  words,  he  went 
8.   2  for  J.  ofttimes  resorted  thither  with  his 
8.   4  J.  therefore.,  went  forth,  and  said  unto 
8.    5  They  answered  him,  J.  of  Nazareth.  [J.] 
8.    7  WTtoni  seek  ye?  And  they  said,  J.  of  Naz. 
".    8  J.  answered,  I  have  told  you  that  I  am 

.  1 1  Then  said  J.  unto  Peter,  Put  up  thy  sword 
.  12  captain  and  officers  of  the  Jews  took  J. 
.  15  Simon  Peter  followed  J.,  and  (so  did) 
.  15  That  disciple.,  went  in  with  J.  into  the  p. 
.  19  The  high  priest  then  asked  J.  of  his  disc. 
.  20  J.  answered  him,  I  spake  openly  to  the 
.  22  one  of  the  officers,  .struck  J.  with  the  pa. 
.  23  J.  answered  him,  If  I  have  spoken  evil 
.8.  28  Then  led  they  J.  from  Caiaphas  unto  the 
18.  32  That  the  saying  of  J.  might  be  fulfilled 
18.33  Then  Pilate.,  called  J.,  and  said  unto  him 
18.  34  J.  answered  him,  Sayest  thou  this  thing 
18.  36  3.  answered,  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this 

18.  37  J.  answered,  Thousayest  thatlama  king 
19-  1  Then  Pilate  therefore  took  J.  and  scour. 

5  Then  came  J.  forth,  wearing  the  crown  of 

19.  g  saith  unto  J.,  Whence  art  "thou  \  But  J. 
19. 11  J.  answered,  Thou  couldest  have  no  power 


John  1 9. 


25' 

26. 

26. 

28, 

Eom.  3, 

4 


14. 

1  Co.   s 

6 


13  he  brought  J.  forth,  and  sat  down  in  the 

16  [And  they  took  J.,  and  led  (him)  away] 

18  crucified,  .on  either  side  one,  and  J.  in 

19  J.  of  Nazareth  the  king  of  the  Jews 

20  the  place  where  J.  was  crucified  was  nigh 

23  soldiers,  when  they  had  crucified  J.,  took 

25  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  J. his  mother 

26  When  J.  therefore  saw  his  mother,  and 

25  J.  knowing  that  all  things  were  now 

30  When  J.  therefore  had  received  the  vine. 
33  they  came  to  J.,  and  saw  that  he  was  dead 
38  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  being  a  disciple  of  J. 
38  that  he  might  take  away  the  body  of  [J.] 

38  He  came  therefore,  and  tookthe  body  of  J. 

39  which  at  the  first  came  to  [J.]  by  night 

40  Then  took  they  the  body  of  J.,  and  wound 
42  There  laid  they  J.  therefore,  because  of 

2  to  the  other  disciple  whom  J.  lovedt  and 
12  sitting,  .where  the  body  of  J.  had  lain 

14  J.  standing,  and  knew  not  that  it  was  J. 

15  J.  saith  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest 

16  J.  saith  unto  her,  Mary!  She  turned  hers. 

17  J.  saith  unto  her,  Touch  me  not ;  for  I  am 

19  came  J.  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and  saith 

21  Then  said  [J.]  to  them  again,  Peace  (be) 

24  Didymus,  was  not  with  them  when  J .  came 

26  (Then)  came  J.,  the  doors  being  shut,  and 

29  J.  saith  unto  him,  Thomas,  because  thou 

30  other  signs  truly  did  J.  iu  the  presence 

31  ye  might  believe  that  J.  is  the  Christ 

1  [J.]  showed  himself  again  to  the  disciples 
4  morning  was  now  come,  J.  stood  on  the 

4  but  the  disciples  knew  not  that  it  was  J. 

5  [J.]  saith  unto  them,  Children,  have  ye 

7  disciple  whom  J.  loved  saith  unto  Peter 

10  J.  saith  unto  them,  Bring  of  the  fish  which 

12  J.  saith  unto  them,  Come  (and)  dine.  And 

13  J.  then  cometh,  and  taketh  bread,  and 

14  J.  showed  himself  to  his  disciples  after 

15  J.  saith  to  Simon  Peter,  Simon,  (son)  of 

17  J.  saith  unto  him  Feed  my  sheep 

20  seeth  the  disciple  whom  J.  loved  following 

21  Peter  seeing  him  saith  to  J.,  Lord,  and 

22  J.  saith  unto  him,  If  I  will  that  he  tarry 

23  J.  said  not  unto  him,  He  shall  not  die ;  but 

25  many  other  things  which  J.  did,  the  which 

1  of  all  that  J.  began  both  to  do  and_  teach 

11  this  same  J.,  which  is  taken  up  from  you 
14  with  the  women,  andMary  themotherof  J. 

16  Judas .  .was  guide  to  them  that  took  J. 

21  that  the  Lord  J.  went  in  and  out  among  us 

22  J.  of  Nazareth,  a  man  approved  of  God 

32  J.  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  all  are 
36  God  hath  made  that  same  J.,  whom  ye 
13  God.  .hath  glorified  his  Son  J.;  whom  ye 

26  God,havingraiseduphisSon[J.,]senthim 

2  preached  through  J.  the  resurrection  from 

13  knowledge  of  them .  .they  had  been  with  J. 

18  speak  at  all  nor  teach  in  the  name  of  J. 

27  against  thy  holy  child  J.,  whom  thou  hast 
30  be  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  child  J. 

33  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  J. 
30  The  God  of  our  fathers  raised  up  J.,  whom 
40  they  should  not  speak  in  the  name  of  J. 

14  J.  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  this  place 
55  and  J.  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
59  and  saying,  Lord  J.,  receive  my  spirit 

16  were  baptized  in  the  name  ofthe  Lord  J. 
35  at  the  same,  .and  preached  unto  him  J. 

5  I  am  J.  whom  thou  persecutest.  (It  is) 

17  [J.,]  that  appeared  unto  thee  in  the  way  as 

27  preached  boldly  at  Damascus . .  name  of  J. 
29  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  [J.] 
38  God  anointed  J.  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy 
20  unto  the  Grecians,  preaching  the  Lord  J. 

23  hath  God . .  raised  unto  Israel  a  Saviour,  J. 
^  in  that  he  hath  raised  up  3.  again  ;  as  it 

3  this  J.,  whom  I  preach  unto  you,  is  Christ 

7  saying  that  there  is  another  king,  (ome)  J. 

18  [preached  unto  them  J.,  and  the  resur.] 

5  testified  to  the  Jews  (that)  J.  (was)  Christ 

28  showing  by.  .Scriptures  that  J,  was  Christ 
5  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  J. 

10  they . .  heardthe  word  of  the  Lord  [J. ,]  both 
i30f  the  Lord  J.,  saying.  We  abjure  you  by  J. 

15  J.  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know  ;  but  who  are 
17  and  the  name  of  the  Lord  J.  was  magnified 

24  which  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  J.,  to 
35  torememberthewordsof  the  Lord  J.,  how 

13  die  at  Jerusalem  for.. name  ofthe  Lord  J. 

8  I  am  J.  of  Nazareth,  whom  thou  persecu. 

19  J.,  which  was  dead,  whom  Paul  affirmed 

9  contrary  to  the  name  of  J.  of  Nazareth 
15  And  he  said,  lam  J.,  whom  thou  persecu. 

23  persuading  them  concerning  J.,  both  out 
26  the  justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  [J.] 

24  that  raised  up  J.  our  Lord  from  the  dead 

11  spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  J.  from  the 

9  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  J. 

14  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  J. 
5  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  [the  Lord  J.] 

11  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  J. 
23  J.  the  (same)  night  in  which  he  was  betr. 
3  that  no  man  speaking,  .calleth  J.  accursed 

3  no  man  can  say  that  J.  is  the  Lord,  but  by 
14  ye  also  (are)  ours  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  J. 

5  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  J.  sake 

10  of  the  Lord  J.,  that  the  life  also  of  J. 

1 1  death  for  J.  sake,  that  the  life  also  of  J. 
14  thathe  which  raised  up  the  Lord  J.  shall 
14  raise  up  us  also  by  J.,  and  shall  present 

4  if  he  that  cometh  preacheth  another  J. 


Gal.     6. 17  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  J. 

Eph.    1.  15  after  I  heard  of  your  faith  in  the  Lord  J. 

4.  21  been  taught  by  him,  as  the  truth  is  in  J. 

Phil.   2.  10  That  at  the  name  of  J.  every  knee  should 

2.  19  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  J.  to  send  Timothy 
Col.  3.  17  whatsoever  ye  do.  .(do)allin  the  name.  .J. 
x  Th.  1.  10  J.,  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to 

2. 15  We  both  killed  the  Lord  J.  and  their  own 
4.    1  we.,  exhort  (you)  by  the  Lord  J...  to  walk 
4.    2  commandments  we  gave  you  by  the  Lord  J. 
4.  14  For  if  we  believe  that  J.  died  and  rose 
4.  14  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  J.  will 
2  Th.  1.    7  when  the  Lord  J.  shall  be  revealed  from 
Phm.         5  which  thou  hast  toward  the  Lord  J.,  and 
Heh.  2.    9  But  we  see  J.,  who  was  made  alittle  lower 
4.  14  we  have  a  great  high  priest.  .J.  the  Son 

6.  20  J.,  made  an  high  priest  for  ever,  after 

7.  22  By  so  much  was  J.  made  a  surety  of  a 
10. 19  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  J. 
12.    2  Looking  unto  J.,  the  author  and  finisher 

12.  24  to  J.  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant 

13.  12  W'herefore  J.  also,  .suffered  without  the 
13.  20  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  J. 

2  Pe.    1.    2  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  J. 
1  Jo.  2.  22  but  he  that  denieth  that  J.  is  the  Christ? 

4.  15  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  J.  is  the  Son 

5.  1  Whosoever  believeth  that  J  is  the  Christ 
5.  5  but  he  that  believeth  that  J.  is  the  Son  of 

Eev.  14.  12  here  (are)  they  that  keep,  .the  faith  of  J. 
17.  6  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  J.:  and 
19. 10  thy  brethren  that  have  the  testimony  of  J. 

19.  10  the  testimony  of  J.  is  the  spirit  of  proph. 

20.  4  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  J. 
22. 16  I  J.  have  sent  mine  angel  to  testify  unto 
22.  20  come  quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  L.  J . 

2.  Jesus,  for  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun. 

Acts    7.  45  with  J.  into  the  possession  of  the  Gentiles 
Heb.  4.    8  For  if  J.  had  given  them  rest,  then  would 

3.  Jesus,  called  Justus,  a  Christian  who  was  with  Paul 
atPvome.and  with  him  sent  salutations  to  the  Colossians 

Col.     4. 1 1  J.,  which  is  called  Justus,  who  are  of  the 

JESTJS  CHRIST,  yl7}(Tovs  Xpiaros. 

Matt.  1.    1  The  book  of  the  generation  of  J.  ft,  the 
1.  18  birth  of  [J.]  C.  was  on  this  wise  :  When 
Mark  1.    1  of  the  gospel  of  J.  C,  the  Son  of  God 
John  1.  17  (but)  grace  and  truth  came  by  J.  C. 

17.    3  that  they  might  know  thee,  .and  J.  C. 
Acts    2.  3S  baptized  every  one.  .in  the  name  of  J.  C. 

3.  6  In  the  name  of  J.  C.  of  Nazareth  rise  up 

3.  20  shall  send  J.  C,  which  before  was  preach. 

4.  10  by  the  name  of  J.  C.  of  Nazareth,  .doth 

5.  42  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  J.  C. 

8.  12  preaching.,  concerning,  .the  name  of  J.  C. 

8.  37  said,  [I  believe  that  J.  C.  is  the  Son  of  God] 

9.  34  Eneas,  J.  C.  maketh  thee  whole  :  arise 

10.  36  which  (God)  sent.  .preachingpeacebyJ.C. 

11.  17  unto  us,  who  believed  on  the  Lord  J.  C. 
15.  11  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  J.  C.  we  sh. 

15.  26  hazarded,  .for  the  name  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
16. 18  I  command  thee  in  the  name  of  J.  C.  to 

16.  31  they  said,  Believe  on  the  Lord  J.  C,  and 
20.  21  Testifying,  .faith  toward  our  Lord  J.  C. 
28.  31  those  things  which  concern  the  Lord  J.  C. 

Kom.  1.  1  a  servant  of  J.  C,  called  (to  be)  an  apostle 
1.  3  Concerning  his  Son  J.  C.  our  Lord,  which 
1.  6  Among  whom  are  ye  also  the  called  of  J.  C. 
1.    7  peace  from  God  our  Father,  .the  Lord  J.  C. 

1.  8  1  thank  my  God  through  J.  C.  for  you  all 

2.  16  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  J.  C. 

3.  22  (which  is)  by  faith  of  J.  C.  unto  all  and 
5.    1  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  J.  C. 

5.  11  we  also  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  J.  C. 
5.  15  by  grace,  (which  is)  by  one  man,  J.  C. 
5. 17  they,  .shall  reign  in  life  by  one,  J.  C. 

5.  21  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  J.  C 

6.  3  so  mauy  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  J.  C. 
6.  11  alive  unto  God  through  J.  C,  our  Lord 

6.  23  gift  of  God  (is)  eternal  life  through  J.  C. 

7.  25  I  thank  God  through  J.  C.  our  Lord.  So 
13.  14  put  ye  on  the  Lord  J.  C,  and  make  not 
15.  6  glorify  God.  .the  Father  of  our  Lord  3.  C. 
15.  8  Now  I  say  that  [J.]  C.  was  a  minister  of 
15.  16  be  the  minister  of  J.  C.  to  the  Gentiles 
15.  17  whereof  I  may  glory  through  J.  C.  in  those 

15.  30  I  beseech  you.  .for  the  Lord  J.  C.'s  sake 

16,  18  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Lord  [J.]  C. 
16.  20  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with  you.  A. 
16.  24  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with  you  all.  A. 
16.  25  the  preaching  of  J.  C,  according  to  the 
16.  27  To  God  only  wise,  (be)  glory  through  J.  C. 

1  Co.    1.    1  called  (to  be)  an  apostle  of  J.  C.  through 

1.  2  call  upon  the  name  of  J.  C.  our  Lord,  both 

1.  3  God  our  Father,  and  (from)  the  Lord  J.  C. 

1.  4  grace  of  God  which  is  given  you  by  J.  C. 

1.  7  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  J.  C 

1.  8  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

1.  9  called  unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  J.  C 

1 .  10  beseech  you . .  by  the  name  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

2.  2  not  to  know  any  thing,  .save  J.  C,  and 
3. 11  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid  which  is  J.  C. 
5.   4  In  the  name  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  when  ye 
5.   4  spirit,  with  the  power  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

8.  6  one  Lord  J.  C,  by  whom  (are)  all  things 

9.  1  have  I  not  seen  J.  C.  our  Lord  ?  are  not  ye 

15.  57  giveth.. victory  through  our  Lord  J.  C. 

16.  22  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  [J.]  C,  let 
16.  23  The  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (lie)  with  you 

2  Co.    1.   1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  J.  C.  by  the  will  of  God 

1.  2  Grace  (be)  to  you.  .(from)  the  Lord  J.  C. 
1.   3  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  the  F. 


JESUS    CHRIS* 


S44 


JEW 


Eph. 


2  Co.  1. 19  J.  C,  who  was  preached  among  you  by  us 

4.  6  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  [J.]  C. 
5. 18  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  [J.]  C. 
8.   9  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  that 

it.  31  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  which 

13.    5  how  that  J.  C.is  in  you,  except  ye  be  rep.? 

13.  14  The  grace  of  the  Lord  J.  C,  and  the  love 

Gal.     1.    1  by  J.  C,  and  God  the  rather,  who  raised 

1.    3  Grace  (be)  to  you.  .(from)  our  Lord  J.  C. 

1.  12  taught  (it),  but  by  the  revelation  of  J.  C. 

2.  16  but  by  the  faith  of  J.  C,  even  we  have 

2.  16  believed  in  J.  C,  that  we  might  be 

3.  1  J.  C.  hath  been  evidently  set  forth,  cruci. 
3.  14  might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  J.  C. 
3.  22  promise  by  faith  of  J.  C.  might  be  given 

5.  6  in  J.  C.  neither  circumcision  availeth  any 

6.  14  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  by  - 
18  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with  your  sp. 

1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  J.  C.  by  the  will  of  G. 

2  Grace  (be)  to  you.  .(from)  the  Lord  J.  C. 
1.    3  Blessed  (be)  the  God.  .of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

1.  5  Having  predestinated  us . .  by  J.  C.  to  him. 

1. 17  That  the  God  of  our  Lord  J.  C. .  .may  give 

2.  20  J.  C.  himself  being  the  chief  corner(stone) 

3.  1  Paul,  the  prisoner  of  J.  C.  foryou  Gentiles 
3.    9  in  God,  [who  created  all  things  by  J.  C] 
3.  14  [bow  my  knees  unto. .  Father  of  our .  ..J.C.] 

5.  20  thanks,  .in  the  name  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

6.  23  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  J.  C. 
6.  24  Grace  (be)  with  all  them  that  love..  J.  C. 

rhil.  1.  1  Paul  and  Timotheus,  the  servants  of  J.  C 
1.  2  Grace  (be)  unto  you .  .(from)  the  Lord  J.  C. 
1.  6  he.  .will  perform  (it)  until  the  day  of  J.  C. 
1.  8  I  long  after  you  all  in  the  bowels  of  J.  C. 
1.  11  the  fruits,  .which  are  by  J.  C,  unto  the 
j.  19  through,  .the  supply  of  the  spirit  of  J.  C. 

1.  26  rejoicing  may  be  more  abundant  in  J.  C. 

2. 11  every  tongue  should  confess  that  J.  C.  (is) 

2.  21  all  seek,  .not  the  things  which  are  J.  C.'s 

3.  20  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  J.  C. 

4.  23  The  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with  you 
Col.     1.    1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  J.  C.  bythe  will  of  God 

1.  2  [Grace  (be)  uuto  you . .  from . .  the  Lord  J.C.] 
1.    3  thanks  to.  .the  Father  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

1  Til.  1.    1  in  God  the  Father  and  (in)  the  Lord  J.  C. 

1 .    1  [Grace  (be)  unto  you . .  from . .  the  Lord  J.  C.  ] 

1.  3  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  J.  C,  in  the 

2.  19  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  at  his 

3.  11  and  our  Lord  J.  C,  direct  our  way  unto 
3.  13  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  with  all 

5.  9  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  J.  C. 
5.  23  blameless  unto . .  coming  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
5. 28  The  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with  you 

2  Th.  1.    1  in  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  J.  C. 

1.  2  Grace  unto  you.. peace,  from.. Lord  J.  C. 
1.  8  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
1.  12  That  the  name  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  may  be 

1.  12  according  to  the  grace  of.  .the  Lord  J.  C. 

2.  1  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  and  (by) 

2.  14  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
2. 16  Now  our  Lord  J.  C.  himself,  and  God 

3.  6  command  you.  .in.,  name  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

3. 12  command  and  exhort  by  our  Lord  J.  C. 

3. 18  The  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with  you 
1  Ti.    1.    1  an  apostle  of  J.  C.  by  the  commandment 

1.    2  Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from.  .J.  C. 
1. 16  J.  C.  might  show  forth  all  long  suffering 
.     4.    6  thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  J.  C,  no. 

5.  21  charge  (thee)  before  God,  and  the  L.  J.  C. 

6.  3  (even)  the  words  of  our  Lord  J.  C,  and 
6.  14  until  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  J.  C.  by  the  will  of  G. 
10  made  manifest  by  the  appearing  of.  .J.  C. 

3  endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier  of  J.  C. 

8  Remember  that  J.  C. . .  was  raised  from 
1  I  charge,  .before  God,  and  the  Lord  J.  C. 

22  The  Lord  [J.]  C.  (be)  with  thy  spirit.    Gr. 
1  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  J.  C. 

4  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  J.  C. 
13  glorious  appearing  of.  .our  Saviour  J.  C. 

6  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  J.  C. 
1  Paul,  a  prisoner  of  J.  C,  and  Timothy 
3  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  J.  C. 

9  being,  .now  also  a  prisoner  of  J.  C. 
25  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  C.  (be)  with'?your  sp. 
10  through  the  otferiug  of  the  body  of  J.  C. 

8  J.  C.  the  same  yesterday,  and  to  day,  and 
21  is  well  pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  J.  C. 

1  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  J.  C,  to 

1  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 

1  Peter,  an  apostle  of  J.  C.,to  the  strangers 
1.   2  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  J.  C:  Gra. 
1.   3  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
1.    3  by  the  resurrection  of  J.  C.  from  the  de. 
i.    7  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  J.  C. 

1.  13  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  J.  C. 

2.  5  offer,  .sacrifices,  acceptable  to  G.  by  J.  C. 

3.  21  save  us.  .by  the  resurrection  of  J.  C. 

4.  11  that  God,  .may  be  glorified  through  J.  C. 
a  Pe.    1.    1  a  servant  and  an  apostle  of  J.  C,  to  them 

1.  1  righteousness  of  God  and  our  Saviour  J.  C. 
1.  8  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
1.  11  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  J.  C. 
x. 14  even  as  our  Lord  J.  C.  hath  showed  me 
1.  16  the  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
2. 20  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  J.  C. 
3. 18  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  J.  C. 

3  Jo.    1.    3  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  J.  C. 

1.  7  blood  of  J.  C. .  .cleanseth  us  from  all  sin 

2.  1  we  havejan  advocate  with  the  Father,  J.  C. 
3. 23  should  believe  on  the  name  of  liisSon  J.  0. 
4.   2  Every  spirit  that  coufesseth  that  J.  C.  is 


2  Ti.  1. 
1. 
2. 
2. 

4- 
4- 

Titus  1. 
1. 
2. 

Phm.  3' 

Heb.  10, 

13- 

T       I3' 
Jas.    1. 

2. 

1  Pe.  1. 


1  Jo.  4.    3  every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  J.  C. 

5.    6  he  that  caiue  by  water  and  blood.  .J.  C. 
5.  20  him  that  is  true,  (even)  in  his  Son  [J.]  C. 

2  John     3  Grace  be  with  you.  .from  the  Lord  J.  C. 

7  who  confess  not  that  J.  C.  is  come  in  the 
Jude         1  Jude,  the  servant  of  J.  C,  and  brother 
1  to  them  that  are . .  preserved  in  J.  C. ,  (and) 
4  denying  the.  .Lord  God,  and  our  L.  J.  C. 
17  spoken  beiore  of  the  apostles  of.  .J.  C. 
21  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  J.  C. 
Rev.    1.    1  The  revelation  of  J.  C,  which  God  gave 
1.    2  Who  bare  record,  .of  the  testimony  of  J.  C. 
1.    5  And  from  J.  C,  (who  is)  the  faithful  wit. 
1.    9  and  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  [J.]  C. 

1.  9  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  of  J.  C. 
12.  17  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  J.  C. 

22.  21  The  grace  of  our  Lord  J.  0.  (be)  with  you 
JE'-THER,  in:  pre-eminent. 

1.  Gideon's  first  born  son.    B.C.  1249. 

Judg.  8.  20  he  said  unto  J.  his  first  born,  Up,  (and) 

2.  An  Ishmaelite,  the  father  of  David's  nephew  Amasa. 
B.C.  1048. 

1  Ki.  2.    5  and  unto  Amasa  the  son  of  J.,  whom  he 

2.  32  Amasa  the  son  of  J.,  captain  of  the  host 
1  Ch.2.  17  the  father  of  Amasa  (was)  J.  the  Islimeel. 

3.  A  son  of  Jerahmeel,  son  of  Hezron.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  32  J.,  and  Jonathan :  and  J.  died  without  ch. 

4.  A  son  of  Ezra,  a  descendant  of  Caleb  the  spy.  B.C.1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  17  the  sons  of  Ezra  (were)  J.,  and  Mered 

5.  A  descendant  of  Asher.     B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  7.  38  the  sons  of  J.;  Jephunneh,  and  Pispah 
JE'-THETH,  nrj;  subjection. 

A  duke  or  prince  of  Edomof  the  family  of  Esau.  B.C.  1470. 
Gen  36.  40  duke  Timnah,  duke  Alvah,  duke  J. 
1  Ch.  1. 51  were;  duke  Timnah,  duke  Aliah,  duke  J. 
JETH'-LAH,  rhy  height. 
A  border  city  of  Dan,  now  called  Shilta. 

Josh  19.  42  And  Shaalabbin,  and  Ajalon.  and  J. 
JETH'-RO,  i-ur  pre-eminence. 

The  father  in  law  of  Moses,  and  a  priest  of  Midian.  B.C. 
1500  In  Exod.  4.  18  the  name  is  Jether,  but  the  Com- 
mou  Version  gives  Jethro.  In  Exod.  2.  18  he  is  called 
Reuel;  and  in  Num.  to.  29  we  have  Reuelin  the  Hebrew, 
but  Raguel  in  the  Common  Version. 

Exod  .3.    1  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  J.  his  father  in 
4. 18  Moses  went  and  returned  to  J.  his  father 
4.  iS  And  J.  said  to  Moses,  Go  in  peace 
18.    1  J.,  the  priest  of  Midian,  Moses'  father  in 
18.    2  J.,  Moses'  father  in  law,  took  Zipporah 
18.    5  J.,  Moses'  father  in  law,  came  with  his 
18.    6  I.  thy  father  in  law  J.  am  come  unto  thee 
18-    9  J.  rejoiced  for  all  the  goodness  which  the 
18. 10  J.  said,  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  who  hath 
18. 12  J.,  Moses'  father  in  law,  took  a  burnt  off. 
JE'-TUR,  -na% 

1.  A  son  of  Ishmael,  son  of  Hagar,  Abraham's  concubine. 
B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.  15  Hadar,  and  Tenia,  J.,  Naphish,  and  Kede. 
1  Ch.  1.  31  J.,  Naphish,  and  Kedemah.    These  are 

2.  The  tribe  that  sprang  from  Jetur. 

1  Ch.  5.  19  made  war  with  the  Hagarites,  with  J. 
JE-TJ'-EL,  Vnu"  snatching  away. 
A  descendant  of  Zerah,  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.   6  of  the  sons  of  Zerah ;  J.  and  their  brethren 
JE'-TJSH,  &$]  collector. 

1.  Esau's  son  by  Aholibamah.    B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  36.    5  And  Aholibamah  bare  J.,  and  Jaalam 
36.  14  and  she  bare  to  Esau  J.,  and  Jaalam,  and 
36. 18  sons  of  Aholibamah,  Esau's  wife ;  duke  J. 

1  Ch.  1.  35  The  sons  of  Esau ;  Eliphaz,  Reuel,  and  J. 

2.  Grandson  of  Jediael,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1630. 

1  Ch.  7.  10  the  sons  of  Bilhan ;  J.,  and  Benjamin 

3.  A  Gershouite  and  descendant  of  Shimei,  and  head  of 
a  family.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  10  sons  of  Shimei  (were)  Jahath,  Zina,  and  J. 

23.  11  but  J.  and  Beriah  had  not  many  sons 

4.  A  son  of  Rehoboam,  and  grandson  of  king  Solomon. 

B.C.  1000. 

2  Ch.11. 19  Which  bare  him  children;  J.,  and  Sham. 
JE'-TJZ,  j'^y;  counsellor. 

Son  of  Shatiaraim,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8. 10  J.,andShachia,  andMirma.  These  (were) 
JEW,  nirr. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Judah  ;  in  later  times  also  an  Israelite. 
In  2  Ki.  16.  6  this  appellation  is  applied  to  the  two 
tribes;  in  later  days  the  twelve  tribes.  Strictly  speak- 
ing, the  name  is  appropriate  only  to  the  subjects  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  two  tribes  after  the  separation  of  the 
ten  tribes,  B.C.  975.  In  603  Daniel  interprets  Nebu- 
chadnezzar's first  dream  ;  in  561  Evil-merodach  releases 
Jehoiachin  from  captivity ;  in  539  Daniel  interprets  the 
handwriting  to  Belshazzar ;  in  536  decree  of  Cyrus  in 
favour  of  the  Jews  ;  in  535  the  second  temple  founded  ; 
in  516  it  is  finished;  in  463  Artaxerxes  stops  the  rebuild- 
ing of  the  city  ;  in  458  he  marries  Esther ;  in  457  Ezra 
comes  ;  in  444  Nehemiah  becomes  governor ;  in  332 
Alexander  the  Great  enters  Jerusalem ;  in  320  Ptolemy 
Soter  storms  Jerusalem  ;  in  312  Antigonus  wrested 
Judea  from  Ptolemy  ;  in  2S5  the  Septuagint  translation 
begun  ;  in  203  Antiochus  the  Great  invades  Judea  and 
Phenicia ;  in  200  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees  arises ;  in 


199  the  country  is  recovered  by  the  Egyptian  general 
Scopas ;  in  198  Scopas  is  defeated;  in  170  Antiochus 
Epiphanes  massacres  40,000  in  Jerusalem  ;  in  16S  Apol- 
lonius  takes  Jerusalem  and  dedicates  the  temple  to 
Jupiter  Olympius;  in  165  Judas  Maccabaeus  rises  in 
arms;  in  163  Judas  made  governor;  in  160  he  makes 
the  first  treaty  with  the  Romans  ;  in  156  the  Syrians 
withdraw;  in  144  Jonathan  put  to  death;  in  130 
Hyrcanus  subdues  the  Idumeans  ;  in  95  the  Pharisees 
rebel ;  in  70  Hyrcanus  is  defeated  ;  in'63  Hyrcanus  is 
restored ;  in  54  Crassus  plunders  the  temple ;  in  40 
Aristobulus  poisoned  ;  in  42  Herod  marries  Man- 
arune;  in  40  the  Parthians  invade  Judea,  and  Herod  pro- 
claimed king  by  the  Romans ;  in  37  the  Romans  take 
Jerusalem ;  in  31  a  dreadful  earthquake ;  in  29  Mari- 
amne  put  to  death  ;  in  17  Herod  begins  to  rebuild  the 
temple  ;  on  Friday,  April  5th,  four  years  before  Uhe 
Common  Era,  Jesus  is  born. 

Esth.  2.    5  Shushan  the  palace  there  was  a  certain  J. 
3.   4  for  he  had  told  them  that  he  (was)  a  J. 
5. 13  I  see  Mordecai  the  J.  sitting  at  the  king's 
6.  10  do  even  so  to  Mordecai  the  J.,  that  sitteth 

8.  7  Esther  the  queen,  and  to  Mordecai  the  J. 

9.  29  Mordecai  the  J.,  wrote  with  all  authority 
9.  31  according  as  Mordecai  the  J. .  .had  enjoi. 

10.  3  Mordecai  the  J.  (was)  next  unto  king  Ah. 
Jer.  34.  9  none  should  serve  himself,  .a J. his  brot. 
Zech.  8.  23  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  J. 

'■lfcT,  pNT-T,  N'.^'T  yehudim,  'Ioi/Sa?ot. 

6  Rezin.  .recovered  Elath.  .anddrave  the  J. 
.  25  he  died,  and  the  J.  and  the  Chaldees  that 
,  18  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the  J.'s  sp. 
.  12  J.  which  came  up  from  thee  to  us  are  come 

23  they  went  up  in  haste,  .unto  the  J.,  and 
1  prophesied  unto  the  J.  that  (were)  in  Ju. 

5  But  the  eye . .  was  upon  the  elders  of  the  J. 

7  governorof  the  J.,  and  the  elders  of  the  J. 

8  what  ye  shall  do  to  the  elders  of  the  J.  for 

14  elders  of  the  J.  builded,  and  they  prosp. 
.  2  I  asked  them  concerning  the  J.  that  had 
.  16  neither  had  I  as  yet  told  it  to  the  J.,  nor 

1  took  great  indignation,  and  mocked  the  J. 

2  What  do  these  feeble  J.  ?  will  they  fortify 

12  when  the  J.  which  dwelt  by  them  came 
1  a  great  cry . .  against  their  brethren  the  J. 
8  have  redeemed  our  brethren  the  J.,  which 

17  an  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  J.  and  rulers 

6  thou  and  the  J.  think  to  rebel :  for  which 
23  In  those  days  also  saw  I  J.  (that)  had  mar. 

6  Haman  sought  to  destroy  all  the  J.  that 

10  took  his  ring,  .and  gave  it  unto,  .the  J.'s' 

13  cause  to  perish,  all  J.,  both  young  and  old 

3  (there  was)  great  mourning  among  the  J. 

7  to  pay  to  the  king's  treasuries  for  the  J. 
13  the  king's  house  was  more  than  all  the  J. 

.  14  shall  there,  .deliverance  arise  to  the  J. 

.  16  gather  together  all  the  J.  (that  are)  pres. 
13  If  Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  J.,  before 
1  give  the  house  of  Haman,  the  J.'s  enemy 
3  to  put  away  the  mischief,  .against  the  J. 
5  which  he  wrote  to  destroy  the  J.  which 

7  because  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the  J. 

8  Write  ye  also  for  the  J.,  as  it  liketh  you 

9  that  Mordecai  commanded  unto  the  J. ' 
9  and  to  the  J.  according  to  their  writing 

11  the  king  granted  the  J.  which  (were)  in 
13  that  the  J.  should  be  ready  against  that 

16  The  J.  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy 

17  J.  had  joy  and  gladness,  a  feast  and  a  good 

17  became  J.;  for  the  fear  of  the  J.  fell  upon 
1  the  enemies  of  the  J.  hoped  to  have  power 

1  the  J.  had  rule  over  them  that  hated  them 

2  the  J.  gathered  themselves  together  in 

3  officers  of  the  king  helped  the  J. :  because 

5  the  J.  smote  all  their  enemies  with  the 

6  the  J.  slew  and  destroyed  five  hundred  men 
io  the  enemy  of  the  J.,  slew  they;  but  on 

12  J.  have  slain  and  destroyed  five  hundred 

13  let  it  be  granted  to  the  J.  which  (are)  in 

15  J.  that  were  in  Shushan  gathered  thems. 

16  other  J.  that  (were)  in  the  king's  provinces 

18  J.  that  (were)  at  Shushan  assembled  tog. 

19  the  J.  of  the  villages  that  dwelt  in  the 

20  sent  letters  unto  all  the  J.  that  (were)  in 

22  wherein  the  J.  rested  from  their  enemies 

23  the  J.  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  begun 

24  of  all  the  J.,  had  devised  against  the  J. 

25  device,  which  he  devised  against  the  J. 

27  J.  ordained,  and  took  upon  them,  and 

28  days,  .should  not  fail  from  among  the  J. 
30  he  sent  the  letters  unto  all  the  J.,  to  the 

3  the  J.  (was)  next  unto  king  Ahasuerus,  and 
12  the  J.  that  sat  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
19  I  am  afraid  of  the  J.  that  are  fallen  to 

11  all  the  J.  that  (were)  in  Moab,  and  among 

12  the  J.  returned  out  of  all  places  whither 
15  the  J.  which  are  gathered  unto  thee  should 

3  also  slew  all  the  J.  that  were  with  him 

1  the  J."  which  dwell  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

28  the  seventh  year  three  thousand  J.,  and 
30  carried  away  captive  of  the  J.  seven  hun 

S  Chaldeans  canie  near,  and  accused  the  J. 
12  There  are  certain  J.  whom  thou  hast  set 

2  WTiere  is  he  that  is  born  king  of  the  J.? 
11  saying,  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  J.?  And 

29  mocked  him,  saying,  Hail,  king  of  the  J.! 
37  This  is  Jesus  the  king  of  the  J. 
15  reported  among  the  J.  until  this  day 

3  the  J.,  except  they  wash  (their)  hands  oft 
2  asked  him,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  J.  ? 
9  I  release  unto  you  the  King  of  the  J.? 


I.Jews,  D' 

2  Ki.16. 

25 

2  Ch.32, 

Ezra   4 

4 
5 
5 
6. 
6, 
6. 
Neh. 

4- 
4- 
4- 

5- 
5- 
5- 

6. 

*3> 
Esth.  3 

'  3' 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
6 


9 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9' 
9< 
9 
9< 
9' 
9' 
9' 
9 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9' 
9- 
9- 
10. 
Jer.  32. 
38. 


Dan.    3 

Matt.  2. 
27 
27 
27 
28 

Mark  7 
*5 
15 


JEWEL 


545 


JEZREEL 


Mark  1 5, 

15' 
15' 

Luke  7 

23- 

23. 

23- 

23- 

John   i. 


J3' 
13' 
J3 
14, 
14. 
14, 
M 
14. 
14. 
16, 
16. 
17' 
*7' 
17- 
*7- 
17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 


12  unto  (him)  whom  ye  call  the  King  of  the  J.  ? 

18  began  to  salute  him,  Hail,  King  of  the  J.  ! 
26  was  written  over,  The  King  of  the  J. 

3  he  sent  unto  him  the  elders  of  the  J. 

3  saying,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the' J.?  And 
,  37  thou  be  the  king  of  the  J.,  save  thyself 

38  superscription.  .This  is  the  King  of  the  J. 

51  (he  was)  of  Arimathsea,  a  city  of  the  J. 

19  when  the  J.  sent  priests  and  Levitesfrom 

6  the  manner  of  the  purifying  of  the  J. 

.  13  the  J.  passover  was  at  hand,  and  Jesus 
iS  Then  answered  the  J.  and  said  unto  liim 

20  Then  said  the  J.,  Forty  and  six  years  was 
1  man.  .named  Nicoclemus.  .arulerof  the  J. 

25  there  arose  a  question.. J.  about  purifying 
9  How  is  it  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest 
9  J.  have  no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans 

22  we  know  what. .for  salvation  is  of  the  J. 
1  there  was  a  feast  of  the  J. ;  and  Jesus  w. 

to  The  J.  therefore  said  unto  him  that  was 

15  told  the  J.  that  it  was  Jesus  which  had 

16  therefore  did  the  J.  persecute  Jesus,  and 
18  the  J.  sought  the  more  to  kill  hini,  because 

4  the  passover,  a  feast  of  the  J.  was  nigh 

41  The  J.  then  murmured  at  hirn,  because  he 

52  The  J.  therefore  strove  among  themselves 

1  Jewry,  because  the  J  sought  to  kill  him 

2  the  J.  feast  of  tabernacles  was  at  hand 
11  the  J.  sought  him  at  the  feast,  and  said 

13  spake  openly  of  him  for  fear  of  the  J. 
15  the  J.  marvelled,  saying,  How  knoweth 

35  Then  said  the  J.  among  themselves,  Wh. 
22  Then  said  the  J.,  Will  he  kill  himself? 
31  Then  said  Jesus  to  those  J.  whichbelieved 
48  Theft  answered  the  J.,  and  said  unto  him 
52  Then  said  the  J.  unto  him,  Now  we  know 
57  Then  said  the  J.  unto  him,  Thou  art  not 

18  the  J.  did  not  believe  concerning  him 

22  they  feared  the  J. :  for  the  J.  had  agreed 

19  a  division  therefore  again  among  the  J. 
24  Then  came  the  J.  round  about  him,  and 
31  the  J.  took  up  stones  again  to  stone  him 
33  The  J.  answered  him,  saying,  For  a  good 
~8  the  J.  of  late  sought  to  stone  thee ;  and 

19  the  J.  came  to  Martha  and  Mary,  to 
"31  The  J.  then  which  were  with  her  in  the 
33  the  J.  also  weeping  which  came  with  her 

36  Then  said  the  J.,  Behold  how  he  loved 
45  many  of  the  J.  which  came  to  Mary,  and 

54  Jesus . .  walked  no  more  openly  among . .  J. 

55  the  J.  passover  was  nigh  at  hand;  and 
9  the  J.  therefore  knew  that  he  was  there 

11  the  J.  went  away,  and  believed  on  Jesus 
33  I  said  unto  the  J.,  Whither  I  go,  ye  can. 

12  officers  of  the  J.  took  Jesus,  and  bound 

14  Caiaphas . .  he  which  gave  counsel  to  the  J. 

20  the  temple,  whither  the  J.  always  resort 
31  The  J.  therefore  said  unto  him,  It  is  not 
33  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  the  Kingof  the  J.? 

35  Pilate  answered,  Am  I  a  J.?  Thine  own 

36  I  should  not  be  delivered  to  the  J. :  but 

38  he  went  out  again  unto  the  J.,  and  saith 

39  I  release  unto  you  the  King  of  the  J.  ? 

3  said,  Hail,  King  of  the  J.  !  and  they  sm. 

7  The  J.  answered  him,  We  have  a  law,  and 

12  the  J.  cried  out,  saying,  If  thou  let  this 
14  and  he  saith  unto  the  J  ,  Behold  your  K. ! 

19  was,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  King  of  the  J. 

20  This  title  then  read  many  of  the  J. ;  for 

21  J,  to  Pilate,  Write  not,  The  King  of  the  J. 

21  but  that  he  said,  I  am  King  of  the  J. 
31  The  J.  therefore,  because  it  was  the 

3S  disciple.,  but  secretly  for  fear  of  the  J. 

40  spices,  as  the  manner  of  the  J.  is  to  bury 

42  because  of  the  J.  s  preparation  (day) ;  for 
19  disciples  were  assembled  for  fear  of.  .J. 

.    5  there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  J.,  de. 

10  and  strangers  of  Rome,  J.  and  proselytes 

22  confounded  the  J.  which  dwelt  at  Bama. 

23  And  after . .  the  J.  took  counsel  to  kill  him 
22  good  report  among  all  the  nation  of  the  J. 
28  for  a  man  that  is  a  J.  to  keep  company 
39  he  did  both  hi  the  land  of  the  J.,  and  in 
19  the  word  to  none  but  unto  the  J.  only 

3  he  saw  it  pleased  the  J.,  he  proceeded 

11  the  expectation  of  the  people  of  the  J. 

5  word  of  God  in  the  synagogues  of  the  J. 

6  false  prophet,  a  J.,  whose  name  (was)  B. 

42  [the  J.  were  gone  out  of  the  synagogue] 

43  the  J.  and  religious  proselytes  followed 
45  when  the  J.  saw  the  multitudes,  they 
50  J.  stirred  up  the  devout  and  honourable 

1  together  into  the  synagogue  of  the  J. 

1  a  great  multitude  both  of  the  J.  and  also 

2  the  unbelieving  J.  stirred  up  the  Gentiles 

4  part  held  with  the  J.,  and  part  with  the 

5  also  of  the  J.  with  their  rulers,  to  use 

19  (certain)  J.  from  Antioch  and  Iconiuni 

3  circumcised  hirn  because  of  the  J.  which 

20  These  men,  being  J.,  do  exceedingly  trou. 
.  1  to  Thessalonica.  .synagogue  of  the  J. 

5  the  J.  wliich  believed  not,moved  with  envy 
10  went  into  the  synagogue  of  the  J. 

13  when  the  J.  of  Thessalonica  had  knowle 

17  disputed  he  in  the  synagogue  with  the  J-. 
2  found  a  certain  J.  named  Aquila,  born  iu 
2  had  commanded  all  J.  to  depart  from  R. 

4  and  persuaded  the  J.  and  the  Greeks 

5  testified  to  the  J.  (that)  Jesus  (was)  Christ 

12  the  J.  made  insurrection  with  one  accord 

14  Gallio  said  unto  the  J.,  If  it  were  a  matter 
14  0  (ye)  J.,  reason  would  that  I  should  bear 

69 


Acts  18.  19  he. .  entered,  .and  reasoned  with  the  J. 
18.  24  certain  J.  named  Apollos,  born  at  Alexa. 

18.  28  For  he  mightily  convinced  the  J.,  (and 
19. 10  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  both  J. 

19.  13  certain  of  the  vagabond  J.,  exorcists,  took 
19  14  there  were  seven  sons  of  (one)  Sceva^  a  J. 

19. 17  this  was  known  to  all  the  J.  and  Greeks 
19.  33  drew  Alexander  out.  .J.  putting  him  for. 

19.  34  when  they  knew  that  he  was  a  J.,  allwith 

20.  3  the  J.  laid  wait  for  him,  as  he  was  about 
20.  19  befell  me  by  the  lying  in  wait  of  the  J. 

20.  21  Testifying  both  to  the  J.,  and  also  to  the 
2i.  11  So  shall  the  J.  at  Jerusalem  bind  the  man 

21. 20  thousands  of  J.  there  are  which  believe 

21. 21  thou  teachest  all  the  J.  which  are  among 
zi.  27  the  J.  which  wereof  Asia,  when  they  saw 

21.  39  I  am  a  man  (which  am)  a  J.  of  Tarsus,  (a 

22.  3  I  am  verily  a  man  (which  am)  a  J.,  born  in 
22. 12  having  a  good  report  of  all  the  J.  which 

22.  30  certainty  wherefore  he  was  accused  of . .  J. 
23. 12  certain  of  the  J.  banded  together,  and 

23.  20  The  J.  have  agreed  to  desire  thee  that 
23.  27  This  man  was  taken  of  the  J.,  and  should 

23.  30  how  that  [the  J.]  laid  wait  for  the  man 

24.  5  among  all  the  J.  throughout  the  world 
24.   9  the  J.  also  assented,  saying,  that  these 

24. 18  certain  J.  from  Asia  found  me  purified 

24.  27  FelLx,  willing  to  show  the  J.  a  pleasure 

25.  2  chief  of  the  J.  informed  him  against  Paul 
25.  7  the  J.  which  came  down  from  Jerusalem 
25.   8  Neither  against  the  law  of  the  J.,  neither 
25.   9  Festus,  willing  to  do  the  J.  a  pleasure 
25. 10  to  the  J.  have  I  done  no  wrong,  as  thou 
25. 15  the  elders  of  the  J.  informed  (me),  desir. 

25.  24  multitude  of  the  J.  have  dealt  with  me 

26.  2  the  things  whereof  I  am  accused  of  the  J. 
26.  3  customs  and  questions,  .are  among  the  J. 
26.   4  My  manner  of  life,  .know  all  the  J. 

26.    7  which ..  Agrippa,  I  am  accused  of  the  J. 
26.  21  the  J.  caught  me  in  the  temple,  and  went 
28. 17  Paul  called  the  chief  of  the  J.  together 

28. 19  But  when  the  J.  spake  against  (it),  I  was 
28.  29  [the  J.]  departed,  and  had  great  reasoning 

Rom.  1.  16  to  the  J.  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek 
2.    9  of  the  J.  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile 
2.  10  to  the  J.  first,  and  also  to  the  Gentile 
2.  17  thou  art  called  a  J.,  and  restest  in  the 
2.  28  For  he  is  not  a  J.  which  is  one  outwardly 

2.  29  Buthe  (is)  a  J.  whichis  one  inwardly;  and 

3.  iWhat  advantage  then  hath  J.  ?  or  what 
3.   9  have  before  proved  both  J.  and  Gentiles 
3.  29  (Is  he)  the  God  of  the  J.  only  ?  (ishe)  not 
9. 24  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the_,Gentiles 

10. 12  no  difference  between  the  J.  and  the  Gre. 
i  Co.  1.  22  the  J.  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek 
1.  23  unto  the  Jews  a  stumbling  block,  and  unto 
1.  24  them  which  are  called,  both  J.  and  Greeks 
9.  20  And  unto  the  J.  I  became  as  a  J.,  that 
9.  20 1  might  gain  the  J.;  to  them  that  are 
10. 32  neither  to  the  J.,  nor  to  the  Gentiles,  nor 
12.  13  whether  (we  be)  J.  or  Gentiles,  whether 
2  Co.  11.  24  Of  the  J.  five  times  received  I  forty 
Gal.    2. 13  the  other  J.  dissembled  likewise  with  him 
2. 14  I  said.  .If  thou,  being  a  J.,  livest  after  the 

2. 14  the  manner  of  the  G.,  and  not  as  do  the  J. 

2. 15  We  (who  are)  J.  by  nature,  and  not  sinners 
3.  28  There  is  neither  J.  nor  Greek,  there  is 

Col.    3. 11  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  J.,  circumcision 
1  Th.  2. 14  have  suffered,  .even  as  they  (have)  of.  .J. 
Rev.    2.    9  which  say  they  are  J.,  and  are  not,  but 
3.   9  wliich  say  they  are  J.,  and  are  not,  but 

JEWEL  — 
l.Ornument,  'nrychali. 

Song  7.    1  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  (are)  like  jewels 
2. Ornament,  ?vrbn  chelyah. 

Hos.    2.  13  she  decked  herself  with,  .her  jewels,  and 

Z. Vessel,  instrument,  "hi  keU. 

Gen.  24.  53  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and 
Exod.3.  22  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and 

11.  2  borrow,  .jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  g. 

12.  35  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and 
35.  22  brought,  .rings,  and  tablets,  all  jewels  of 

Xuni3i.  50  jewels  of  gold,  chains,  and  bracelets,  rings 

31.  51  took  the  gold  of  them.,  all  wrought  jewels 

1  Sa.    6.    8  put  the  jewels  of  gold,  which  ye  return 

6. 15  wherein  the  jewels  of  gold  (were),  and 

2  Ch.20.  25  precious  jewels,  which  they  stripped  off 

32.  27  treasuries  for.  .all  manner  of  pleasant  je. 
Job  28. 17  the  exchange  of  it  (shall  not  be  for)  jewels 
Prov  20.  15  the  lips  of  knowledge  (are)  a  precious  jew. 
Isa.  61.  10  as  a  bride  adorneth  (herself)  with  her  je. 
Eze.  16. 17  Thou  hast  also  taken  thy  fair  jewels  of 

16.  39  shall  take  thy  fair  jewels,  and  leave  thee 

23.  26  They  shall  also .  .take  away  thy  fair  jewels 

4.  A  ring  for  the  ear  or  nose,  du  nezem. 

Prov  11.  22  (As)  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout 

Isa.     3.  21  The  rings,  and  nose  jewels 

Eze.  16. 12 1  put  a  jewel  on  thy  forehead  a  and  ear  rings 

5-4  peculiar  treasure  or  property,  nV:p  scgullah. 
Mai.    3.  17  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels 

JEWESS — A  female  Jew,  'IouSafa  loudaia. 

Acts  16.    1  the  son  of  a  certain  woman,  which  was  a  J 

24.  24  with  his  wife  Drusilla,  which  was  a  J. 
JEW'-ISH,  JEWS',  nni-T  'IovSclikSs  belonging  to  a  J. 

2  Ki.18.  26  talk  not  with  us  in  the  J.  language  in 

18.  28  cried  with  aloud  voice  in  the  J.  language 
•  2  Ch.32.  18  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the  J.  sp. 


Neh.  13.  24 their  children ..  could  not  speak  in  the  J. 

Isa.   36.  11  speak  not  to  us  in  the  J.  language,  in  the 

36. 13  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the  J.  language 

Titusi.    14  Nofgivingheed  to  J. fables,  andcomman. 

JEWRY,  'lovHaia — See  Judea. 

Luke23-    5  teaching  throughout  all  J.,  beginning 
John  7.    1  he  would  not  walk  in  J.,  because  the  Jews 

JEWS,  to  become,  or  live  as  — 

l.To  become,  act,  or  show  self  a  Jew,  irr  yahad,  7. 
Esth.  8.17  many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became  J. 

2.  To  become,  act  as  a  Jew,  'IouScrf'^w  Iovdaizo. 

Gal.    2.  14  compellest.. Gentiles  to  live  as  do  the  J.'c 
JEWS,  as  do  the  — 
Judaically,  'lovSaucws  loudaikos. 

Gal.    2.  14  manner  of  Gentiles,  and  not  as  do  the  J. 
JEWS'  religion  — 
Judaism,  'lou5ai'o'luo'y  loudaismos. 

Gal.    1.  13  in  time  past  in  the  J.  religion,  how 
1.  14  profited  in  the  J.  religion  above  many 
JE-ZAN-I'AH,  v\y$  Jah  determines. 
A  captain  of  the  Jews,  generally  called  Jaazeniah,  who 
would  not  be  persuaded  to  serve  the  Chaldeans.    B.  c. 
588.    Called  also  Jaazeniah, 

Jer.  40.   8  and  J.  the  son  of  a  Maachathite,  they  and 
42.    1  and  J.  the  son  of  Hoshaiah,  and  all  the 

JE-ZE'-BEL,  S?rN,  'Iefa/3^\  without  cohabitation. 
A  daughter  of  Ethbaal,  king  of  the  Zidonians,  and  the 
wife  of  Aliab  and  mother  of  Jorani  kings  of  Israel.    B.C. 
884. 

1  Ki.16.  31  he  took  to  wife  J.,  the  daughter  of  Ethb. 

18.  4  when  J.  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord 
18. 13  what  I  did  when  J.  slew  the  prophets  of 
18. 19  the  prophets  of  the  groves . .  which  eat  at  J's 

19.  1  Ahab  told  J.  all  that  Elijah  had  done,  and 
19.   2  Then  J.  sent  a  messenger  unto  Elijah,  say. 
21.    5  But  J.  his  wife  came  to  him,  and  said  unto 
21.   7  J.  his  wife  said  unto  him,  Dost  thou  now 
21. 11  the  men  of  his  city,  .did  as  J.  had  sent 
21.  14  Then  they  sent  to  J.,  saying,  Naboth  is 
21. 15  when  J.  heard.  .J.  said  to  Ahab,  Arise 
21.  23  J... The  dogs  shall  eat  J.  by  the  wall  of  J. 
21. 25  none  like  unto  Ahab. .  whom  J.  his  wife 

2  Ki.  9.    7  I  may  avenge  the  blood . .  at  the  hand  of  J. 

9. 10  the  dogs  shall  eat  J.  in  theportion  of  Jez. 
9.  22  so  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother  J. 
9.  30  when  Jehu  was  come  to  Jezreel,  J.  heard 
9. 36  In  the  portion . .  dogs  eat  the  flesh  of  J. 
9.  37  the  carcase  of  J.  shall  be  as  dung  upon 
9.  37  (so)  that  they  shall  not  say,  This  (is)  J. 
Rev.   2.  20  because  thou  sufferest  that  woman  [J.] 

JE'-ZER,  ^.formation. 

The  third  son  of  Naphtali.    B.C.  1698. 

Gen.  46.  24  And  the  sons  of  Naphtali.  .Guni,  and  J. 

Nuni26.  49  Of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jezerites :  of  Shil. 

1  Ch.  7. 13  The  sons  of  Naphtali.  .Guni,  and  J.,  and 

JE-ZER-ITES,  H£. 

The  descendants  of  the  preceding  Jezer. 

Nuni26.  49  Of  Jezer,  the  family  of  the  J.:  of  Shillem 
JE-ZI'-AH,  n;r  Jah  unites. 
One  of  the  Parosh  family  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 

B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  25  of  the  sons  of  Parosh ;  Ramiah,  and  3. 
JE-ZI'-EL,  Sxir,  Sxt  God  unites. 
Son  of  Azmaveth  a  valiant  man  who  joined  David  at 
Ziklag  with  his  brother  Pelet.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.   3  and  J.,  and  Pelet,  the  sons  of  Azmaveth 

JEZ-LI'-AH,  nx,S]'  Jah  delivers. 

A  son  of  Elpaal  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8. 18  Ishnierai  also,  and  J.,  and  Jobab,  the  sons 
JE-ZO'-AR,  ins;,  "113x1  distinction. 
A  son  of  Helah,  wife  of  Ashur,  a  descendant  of  Caleb 
the  son  of  Hur.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  4.   7  And  the  sons  of  Helah  (were).  .J.,  and  E. 

JEZ-RAH-I'AH,  n;rnp  Jah  is  shining. 

The  overseer  of  those  singing  at  the  purification  of  the 

people.    B.C.  445.  See  Izrahiah. 

Neh.  12.  42  And  the  singers  sang  loud,  with  J.  (their) 

JEZ-RE'-EX,  Wnn>  W")?:  God  sotvs. 

1.  A  city  in  the  hili  country  of  Judah,  near  Jokdeam 
and  Zanoah. 

Josh. 15.  56  And  J.,  and  Jokdeam,  and  Zanoah 

1  Sa.  25.  43  David  also  took  Ahinoam  of  J. ;  and  they 

29.-  1  Israelites  pitched  by  a  fountain,  .in  J. 
29. 11  men  rose,  .the  Philistines  went  up  to  J. 

2.  A  city  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  but  belonging  to 
Manasseh,  between  Megiddo  and  Bethshean  near  Mount 
Gilboa;—  now  called  Zcrin  or  Serin. 

Josh.  19.  iS  their  border  was  toward  J.,  and  Chesul. 

2  Sa.    2.   9  made  him  king  over  Gilead.  .and  over  J. 

4.   4  the  tidings  came  of.  .Jonathan  out  of  J. 

1  Ki.  4.  12  Beth-shean.  .(is)  by  Zartanah  beneath  J. 

18.  45  great  rain.  And  Ahab  rode,  and  went  to  J. 
18.  46  and  ran  before  Ahab  to  the  entrance  of  J. 
21.  1  Jezreelitehadavineyard,which(was)in  J. 
21.  23  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the  wall  of  J. 

2  Ki.    8.  29  Jorani  went  back  to  be  healed  in  J.  of 

8.  29  down  to  see  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab  in  J. 

9.  10  shall  eat  Jezebel  in  the  portion  of  J. 

9. 15  Jorani  was  returned  to  be  healed  in  J.  of 


JEZREELITBS 


546 


JOASH 


2  Ki.   9.  15  out  of  the  city  to  go  to  tell  (it)  in  J. 

9.  16  Jehurode  in  a  chariot,  ami  went  to  J.;  for 
9.  17  there  stood  a  watchman  on  the  tower  in  J. 
9,  30  when  Jehu  was  come  to  J.,  Jezebel  heard 
9.  36  In  the  portion  of  J.  shall  dogs  eat  the 
9.  37  face  of  the  field  in  the  portion  of  J. 
.  10.    1  unto  the  rulers  of  J.,  to  the  elders,  and 
10.    6  come  to  me  to  J.  by  to  morrow  this  time 
10.    7  heads  in  baskets,  .sent  him  (them)  to  J. 
10.  11  that  remained  of  the  house  of  Ahab  in  J. 
2  Ch.22.    6  he  returned  to  be  healed  in  J.  because  of 
22.    6  down  to  see  Jehoram  the  sou  of  Ahab  at  J . 

3.  The  valley  or  plain  in  which  Jezreel  stood. 

Josh  17.  16  and  (they)  who  (are)  of  the  valley  of  J. 
Judg.  6.  33  went  over,  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of  J. 
Hos.    1.    5  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley  of  J. 

2.  22  shall  hear.,  the  oil;  and  they  shall  hear  J. 

4.  A  descendant  of  the  father  of  Etam.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.    3  J.,andlshma,  and  Idbash  :  and  thename 

5.  The  symbolic  name  of  the  eldest  son  of  Hosea  the 
prophet.    B.C.  780. 

Hos.    t.    4  Call  Ins  name  J. ;  for  yet  a  little  (while) 
C.  A  symbolic  name  of  Israel. 

Hos.    1.    4  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  J.  upon  the 
1.  11  for  great  (shall  be)  the  day  of  J. 

JEZ-KE-EL-ITES,  ,!?N>Hr. 

The  people  of  Jezreel  in  Issachar. 

1  Ki.  21.    1  the  J.  had  a  vineyard,  which  (was)  in  Je. 

21.    4  word  which  Naboth  the  J.  had  spoken  to 
21.   6  I  spake  unto  Naboth  the  J.,  and  said  unto 
21.    7  give  thee  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  the  J. 
21.  15  possession  of.  .vineyard  of  Naboth  the  J. 
21.  16  go  down  to  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  the  J. 

2  Eli.   9.  21  met  him  in  the  portion  of  Naboth  the  J. 

9.  25  the  portion  of  the  field  of  Naboth  the  J. 

JEZ-RE-EL-I-TESS,  rr^NJTlt:. 

A  female  inhabitant  of  Jezreel  (in  Judah).     B.C.  1050. 


:  Sa.  27. 


:  Ahhioam  the  J 
5  Ahinoam  the  J 


:Ch. 


and  Abigail  the  Carmel. 

and  Abigail  the  wife  of 
2  Ahinoam  the  J.,  and  Abigail,  Nabal's  wife 
2  first  born  was  Amnon,  of  Ahinoam  the  J. 
1  the  first  born  Amnon,  of  Ahinoam  the  J. 


JTB'-SAM,  uz'T  lovely  sweet 

A  son  of  Tola,  son  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.    2  J.,  and  Shemuel,  heads  of  their  father's 

JTD'-LAPH,  *\by.  melting  away. 
A  son  of  Nahor  and  nephew  of  Abraham.    B.C.  1870. 
Gen.  22.  22  and  Hazo,  and  Tildash,  and  J.,  and  Bet. 

JIM'-NAH,  JTM'-NA,  rup*  prosperity. 

The  first  born  son  of  Asher,  whose  descendants  were 

called  Jimnites.     B.C.  1690.     Called  Imnah  in  1  Ch.  7. 

3°- 

Gen.  46.  17  J.,  and  Ishuah,  and  Isni,  and  Beriah,  and 
Nuni  26.  44  of  J.,  the  family  of  the  Jimnites :  of  Jesui 

JIM-NITES,  il^VT. 

A   family  that  sprang  from  Jimnah  the  first  bom  of 

Asher. 

Num  26.  44  of  Jimna,  the  family  of  the  J. :  of  Jesui 
JTPH'-TAH,  r.r.r  h  -Baking  through. 
A  city  in  Judah,  near  Ashnah  and  Nezib. 

Josh  15.  43  And  J.,  and  Ashuah,  and  Nezib 

JIPH'-THAH-EL,  Sx-nFiD'  God  is  breaking  through. 
A  valley  in  Zebulun,  on  the  border  of  Asher  and  Zebu- 
luii,  now  called  Jefat. 

Josh  19.  14  outgoings  thereof  are  in  the  valley  of  J. 
19.  27  the  valley  of  J.  toward  the  north  side  of 
JO'-AB,  3KV  Jah  is  father. 

1.  David's  nephew,  the  son  of  his  sister  Zeruiah.  He 
became  a  most  overbearing  captain  in  his  uncle  David's 
army,    b.c.  1015. 

1  Sa.  26.  6  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah,  brother  to  J. 

2  Sa.   2. 13  J.  the  sun  of  Zeruiah,  and  the  servants  of 

2. 14  Abner  said  to  J.,  Let  the  young  men  now 
2.  14  play  before  us.  And  J.  said,  Let  them  arise 
2.  18  sons  of  Zeruiah  there,  J.,  and  Abishai,  and 
2.  22  should  I  hold  up  my  face  to  J.  thy  brot.T 
2.  24  J.  also  and  Abishai  pursued  after  Abner 
2.  26  Then  Abner  called  to  J.,  and  said^Shall 
2.  27  J.  said,  (As)  God  liveth,  unless  thou  hadst 
2.  28  J.  blew  a  trumpet,  and  nil  the  people 
2.  30  J.  returned  from  following  Abner :  and 

2.  32  J.  and  his  men  went  all  night,  and  they 

3.  22  servants  of  David  and  J. came  from  (pur.) 
3.  23  J.  and  all  the  host  that  (was)  with  him 

3.  23  they  told  J.,  saying,  Abner  the  bod  of  Nor 
3.  24  Then  J.  came  to  the  king,  and  said,  What 
3.  26  when  J.  was  come  out  from  David,  he  sent 
3.  27  J.  took  him  aside  in  the  gate  to  speak 
3.  29  Let  it  rest  on  the  head  of  J. ,  and  on  all 
3.  29  let  there  not  fail  from  the  house  of  J. 
3.  30  So  J.  and  Abishai  his  brother  slew 
->,.  31  David  said  to  J.,  and  to  all  the  people 
8.  16  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  (was)  over  the  host 
10.    7  he  sent  J.,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mighty 
10.    9  J.  saw  that  the  front  of  the  battle  was 
10.  13  J.  drewnigh,  and  thepeo.that(were)with 

10.  14  J.  returned  from  the  children  of  AmmoD 

11.  1  David  sent  J.,  and  his  servants  with  Mm 
11.  6  David  sent  to  J.,  (saying).  Send  me  Uriah 
11.    6  And  J.  sent  Uriah  to  David 

11.    7  David  demanded  (of  him) how  J.  did,  and 


2  Sa.  11.  11  J.,  and  the  servants  of  my  lord,  are  enca 
11.  14  David  wrote  a  letter  to  J.,  and  sent  (it)  by 
11.  16  when  J.  observed  the  city,  that  he  assigned 
11. 17  men  of  the  city  went,  .and  fought  with  J. 
11.  18  Then  J.  sent  and  told  David  all  the  things 
11.  22  showed  David  all  that  J.  had  sent  him  for 

11.  25  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  J  ,  Let  not  this 

12.  26  J.  fought  against  Kabbah  of  the  children 
12.  27  J.  sent  messengers  to  David,  and  said,  I 
14.    1  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  perceived  that  the 
14.    2  J.  sent  to  Tekoah,  and  fetched  thence  a 
14.    3  So  J.  put  the  words  in  her  mouth 

14.  19  (Is  not)  the  hand  of  J.  with  thee  in  all 
•  14. 19  J.,  he  bade  me,  and  he  put  all  these  words 
14.  20  hath  thy  servant  J.  donethis  thing  :  and 
14.  21  the  king  said  unto  J.,  Beholdnow,  I  have 
14.  22  J.  fell  to  the  gTound  on  his  face,  and 
14. 22  J.  said,  To  day  thy  servant  knoweth  that 
14.  23  J.  arose,  and  went  to  Geshur,  and  brought 
14.  29  Absalom  sent  for  J.,  to  have  sent  him  to 
14.  30  J.'s  field  is  nearmtne,  and  he  hath  barley 
14. 32  Then  J.  arose,  and  came  to  Absalom  unto 
14.  31  Absalom  answered  J.,  Behold,  I  sent  unto 
14.  33  J.  came  to  the  king,  and  told  him  :  and 
17.  25  Amasa  captain  of  the  host  instead  of  J. 

17.  25  Nahash,  sister  to  Zeruiah,  J.'s  mother 
18    2  David . .  a  third  part . .  under  the  hand  of  J. 

18.  2  part  under  the  hand  of  Abishai.  .J.'s  bro. 
18.  5  king  commanded  J.  and  Abishai  and  Ittai 
18.  10  and  told  J  ,  and  said,  Behold,  I  sawAbs. 
18.  11  J.  said  unto  the  man  that  told  him,  And 
18.  12  the  man  said  unto  J.,  Though  I  should 

18. 14  Then  said  J.   I  may  not  tarry  thus  with 

18. 15  ten  young  men  that  bare  J.'s  armour 

18. 16  J.  blew  the  trumpet,  and  the  people  retur. 
18. 26  after  Israel :  for  J.  held  back  the  people 
18.  20  And  J.  said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  not  bear 
iS.  21  Then  said  J.  to  Cushi,  Go  tell  the  king 
18.21  And  Cushi  bowed  himself  unto  J.,  and  ran 
18.  22  Then  said  Alvimaaz.  .yet  again  to  J.,  But 
18.  22  J.  said.  Wherefore  wilt  thou  run,  my  son 

18.  29  When  J.  seut  the  king's  servant,  and  (me) 

19.  1  it  was  told  J.,  Behold,  the  king  weepeth 

19.  5  J.  came  into  the  house  to  the  king,  and 
19. 13  before  me  continually  in  the  room  of  J. 

20.  7  there  went  out  after  him  J.'s  men,  and 
20.  8  J.'sgarmt-ntthathehad  put  on  was  girded 
20.  9  J.  said  to  Amasa,  (Art)  thou  in  health,  my 
20.  9  J.  took  Amasa  by  the  beard  with  the  right 
20.  10  heed  to  the  sword  that  (was)  in  J.'s  hand 
20.  10  J.  and  Abishai  his  brother  pursued  after 
20. 11  one  of  J.'s  men  stood  by  him,  and  said 
20. 1 1  He  that  favoureth  J. . .  (let  him  go)  after  J. 
20.  13  the  people  went  on  after  J.,  to  pursue 

20. 15  people  that  (were)  with  J.  battered  the 

20. 16  say,  I  pray  you,  Unto  J.,  Come  near  hither 
20.  17  the  woman  said,  (Art)  thou  J.?    And  lie 
20.  20  J.  answered  and  said,  Far  be  it,  far  be  it 
20.  21  the  woman  said  unto  J.,  Behold,  his  head 
ao.  22  cut  off  the  head .  .and  cast  (it)  out  to  J. 
20.  22  J.  returned  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  king 
20.  23  J.  (was)  over  all  the  host  of  Israel :  and 
23.  18  the  brother  of  J.,  the  sou  of  Zeruiah,  was 
23  24  the  brother  of  J.,  (was)  one  of  the  thirty 

23.  37  armour  bearer  to  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah 

24.  2  the  king  said  to  J.  the  captain  of  the 
24.   3  J.  said  unto  the  king,  Now  the  Lord  thy 
24.   4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  J.,  and 
24.   4  J.  and  the  captains  of  the  host  went  out 
24.    9  J.  gave  up  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the 

1  Ki.  1.   7  he  conferred1  with  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah 

1. 19  the  priest,  and  J.  the  captain  of  the  host 

1  41  when  J.  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

2.    5  what  J.  the  son  of  Zerukth  did  to  me,  (and) 

2. 22  the  priest,  and  for  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah 

2.  28  tidings  came  to  J. :  for  J.  had  turned  after 

2.  28  J .  fled  unto  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 

2.  29  it  was  tol  1  king  Salomon  that  J.  was  tied 

2.  30  saying,  Thus  said  J.,  and  thus  he  answered 

2.  31  take  away  the  innocent  blood,  which  J. 

2.  33  blood  shall,  .return  upon  the  head  of  J. 

11.  15  J.  the  captain  of  the  host  was  gone  up  to 

11.  16  For  six  months  did  J.  remain  there  with 

11.  21  Hadad  heard,  .that  J.  the  captain  of  the 

1  Ch.  2.  16  And  the  sous  of  Zeruiah  ;  Abishai,  and  J, 

11.    6  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  went  first  up,  and 

11.    8  round  about  :  and  J.  repaired  the  rest  of 

11.  20  Abishai  the  brother  of  J.,  he  was  chief  of 

11.  26  valiantmen..(were)Asahel..brotherof  J. 

11.  39  Naharai..  the  armour  bearer  of  J.  the  son 

18. 15  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  (was)  over  the  host 

19.    8  when  David  heard  (of  it),  he  sent  J.,  and 

19,  10  J.  saw  that  the  battle  was  set  against  him 

19.  14  So  J.,  .drew  near  before  the  Syrians  unto 

19.  15  entered  into  the  city.  Then  J.  came  to  J. 

20.  1  J.  led  forth  the  power  of  the  army,  and 

20.  1  And  J.  smote  Kabbah,  and  destroyed  it 

21.  2  David  said  to  J.,  and  to  the  rulers  of  the 
21.  3  J.  answered,  The  Lord  make  his  people 
21.  4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  J.:  wh. 
21.  4  J.  departed,  and  went  throughout  all  Is. 
21.  5  J.  gave  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the  pe. 
21.    6  for  the  king':  word  was  abominable  to  J. 

26.  28  all  that.  .J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah,  had  dedi. 

27.  7  fourth,  .(was)  Asahel  the  brother  of  J. 
27.  24  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  begau  to  number 
27.  34  the  general  of  the  king's  army  (was)  J. 

Psa.  60.  title.  J.  returned,  and  smote  of  Edom.  .twe. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of 
J  udah. 

1  Ch.  2.  54  Ataroth,  the  house  of  J.t  and  half  of  the 


3.  A  grandson   of  Kenaz,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.     B.C 
145°- 

1  Ch.  4.  14  and  Seraiah  begat  J.,  the  father  of  the 

4.  An  Israelite  whose  posterity  went  up  from  Babylon 
witli  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  538. 

Ezra    2.   6  of  the  children  of  Jeshua  (and)  J.,  two 
Neh.    7.  11  of  the  children  of  Jeshua  and  J.,  two  th. 

5.  One  whose  descendants  went  up  from  Babylon  with 
Ezra.     B.C.  458. 

Ezra    8.    9  Of  the  sons  of  J.;  Obadiah  the  son  of  Je. 

JO -AH,  nxv  Jah  is  brother. 

1.  A  son  of  Asaph  the  recorder  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah. 
B.C.  713. 

2  Ki.  18.  18,  37  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  J.  the  son  of 

18.  26  Then  said.  .J.  ..Speak,  I  pray  thee,  to  thy 
Isa.   36.    3  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  J.,  Asaph's  sou 
36.  11  Then  said  Eliakim  and  Shebna  and  J. 
36.  22  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  J.,  the  son  of  As. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Gershoni,  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  6.  21  J.  his  son,  Iddo  his  son,  Zerah  his  son,  J. 

2  Ch.29.  12  J.  the  son  of  Zhumah.  .Eden  the  sonof  J. 

3.  A  son  of  Obed-edom  (a  descendant  of  Kohath),  a  por- 
ter in  the  tabernacle.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.   4  J.  the  third,  andSacar  the  fourth,  andN. 

4.  A  Levite  commissioned  by  Josiahto  repair  the  house 
of  the  Lord.    B.C.  621. 

2  Ch.  34.   8  J.  the  son  of  Joahaz  the  recorder,  to  rep. 

JO-A'-HAZ,  inxv  Jah  kelps. 

Father  of  Joah  the  recorder  under  king  Josiah.    B.C. 

624. 

2  Ch.34.   8  Joah  the  son  of  J.  the  recorder,  to  repair 

JO-AN'-NA,  'lwavva,  ylu)dvva$. 

1.  A  female  disciple,  the  wife  of  an  officer  in  Herod's 
household. 

Luke  8.    3  And  J.  the  wife  of  Chuza  Herod's  steward 
24.  10  and  J.,  .told  these  things  unto  the  apostles 

2.  The  grandson  of  Zerubbabel,  an  ancestor  of  Joseph 
the  husband  of  Mary,  in  the  line  given  by  Luke. 

Luke  3.  27  Which  was  (the  sou)  of  [J.],  which  was  (the 

JO'-ASH,  E»SV,  Vi?  Jah  supports. 

1.  A  son  of  Becher,  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.  7.   8  the  sons  of  Becher;  Zemira,  and  J.,  and 

2.  Keeper  of  the  stores  of  oil  in  David's  time.    B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.27.  28  and  over  the  cellars  of  oil  (was)  J. 

3.  The  father  of  Gideon,  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh.   B.C.  • 
1250. 

Judg.  6.  11  under  an  oak.  that  (pertained)  unto  J. 
6.  29  Gideon  the  son  of  J.  hath  done  this  thing 
6.  30  Then  the  men  of  the  city,  .unto  J.,  Bring 
6.  31  J.  said  unto  all  that  stood  against  him 
7. 14  nothing  else  save  the  sword  of.  son  of  J. 
8. 13  Gideon  the  son  of  J.  retmned  from  battle 
8.  29  Jei  ubbaal  the  son  of  J.  went  and  dwelt  in 
8.  32  Gideon  the  son  of  J.  died  in  a  good  old 
8.  32  was  buried  iu  the  sepulchre  of  J.  his  fa. 

4.  A  son  of  Ahab,  king  of  Israel.    B.C.  896. 

1  Ki.  22.  26  and  carry  him  back . .  to  J.  the  king's  son 

2  Ch.18.  25  and  carry  him  back,  .to  J.  the  king's  son 

5.  A   son  of  Ahaziah,   king  of  Judah.    B.C.   850.    He 
called  also  Jekoask. 

2  Ki.  11.   2  But  Jehosheba.  .took  J.  the  son  of  Ahaz 
12. 19  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he 

12.  20  his  servants  arose .  .and  slew  J.  in  the 

13.  1  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  J.  the 
13. 10  In  the  thirty  and  seventh  year  of  J.  king 

14.  1  reigned  Amaziah  the  son  of  J.  king  of  J. 
14.    3  he  did  according  to  all  things  as  J.  his 
14.  17  Amaziah  the  son  of  J. ..lived  after  the 
14.  23  fifteenth  year  of  Amaziah  the  son  of  J. 

1  Ch.  3.  11  Joram  his  son,  Ahaziah  his  son,  J.  his  son 

2  Ch.22. 11  But  Jehoshabeath..took  J.  the  sonof  Ah. 

24.    1  J.  (was)  seven  years  old  when  he  be.  v.  2. 
24.    4  J.  was  minded  to  repair  the  house  of  the 
34.  22  Thus  J.  the  king  remembered  not  the  kin. 

24.  24  So  they  executed  judgment  against  J. 

25.  23  took  Amaziah  king  of  Judah,  the  son  of  J. 
25.  25  Amaziah  the  sonof  J.. .lived  afterthedeath 

6.  A" son  of  Jehoahaz,  and  grandson  of  Jehu.     B.C.  840. 

2  Ki.13.    9  slept.  .J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

13.  12  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he 
13.  13  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  .and  J.  was  bur. 
13.  14  J.  the  king  of  Israel  came  down  unto  him 

13.  25  three  times  did  J.  beat  him,  and  recovered 

14.  1  In  the  second  year  of  J.  son  of  Jehoahaz 
14.  23  Jeroboam  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Israel  be. 
14.  27  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  J. 

2  Ch.25.  17  Then  Amaziah..  seut  to  J.,  the  son  of  Jeh. 
25.  18  J.  king  of  Israel,  .to  Amaziah  king  of  Ju. 
25.  21  So  J.  the  king  of  Israel  went  up  ;  and  they 
25.  23  J. .  .took  Amaziah  king  of  Judah,  the  son 
25.  25  Amaziah .  .lived  after  the  death  of  J.,  son 
Hos.  1.  1  inthedaysof  Jeroboam  the  son  of  J., king 
Amos  1.    1  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  sou  of  J.  king 

7.  A  descendant  of  Shelah,  son  of  Judah.     B.C.  1200. 

1  Ch.  4.  22  J.,  and  Saraph,  who  had  the  dominion  in 
S.  The  second  in  command  of  those  that  joined  David  at 
Ziklag.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.   3  The  chief  (was)  Ahiezer,  then  J.,  the  sons 


JOATHAM 


547 


JOHN 


O-A'-THAM,  'IvddaiA. 
"A  progenitor  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary,  as  enumer- 
ated in  Matthew's  gospel. 

Matt.  i.   9  Ozias  begat  J.  ;  and  J.  begat  Achaz;  and 

JOB,  Ti'x,  ^lcti/3  hated. 

A  descendant  of  Aram,  son  of  Shem,  dwelling  in  Vz,  in 
the  N.  of  Arabia,  or  in  E.  of  Edom  and  Moab  ;  sup- 
posed to  have  been  contemporaneous  with  Abraham. 
The  Book  of  Job  was  probably  introduced  to  the  know- 
ledge of  Israel  by  Moses,  who  may  have  written  the 
introduction  (chap,  i.,  ii,)  and  the  conclusion  (xlii.  9-17). 
The  object  of  the  book  is  twofold,  to  show  first,  that 
true  religion. is  not  based  on  selfish  considerations,  or 
an  answer  to  the  question,  Does  Job  serve  God  for 
nought  ?  and  second,  that  temporal  calamities  are  not 
always  the  consequences  of  sin.  The  character  of  Job  is 
described  in  ch.  -i.  1-5;  his  first  trial  in  v.  5-  22 ;  his  second 
trial  in  ii.  r-10  ;  his  friends'  visit,  n-13  ;  his  complaint 
in  iii.  ;  Eliphaz's  remonstrance  in  iv.,  v.  ;  Job's  reply  in 
vi.  vii.  ;  Bildad's  remonstrance  in  viii.  ;  Job's  reply  in 
ix.  x.  ;  Zophar's  remonstrance  in  xi.  ;  Job's  reply  xii, 
xjdi.  xiv.  ;  Eliphaz  responds  in  xv.  ;  Job  refutes  him 
in  xvi.  xvii.  ;  Bildad  responds  in  xviii.  ;  Job  refutes 
him  in  xix.  ;  Zophar  responds  in  xx.  ;  Job  refutes  him 
in  xxi.  ;  Eliphaz  attacks  Job  in  xxii.  ;  Job  refutes  him 
in  xxiii.,  xxi  v. ;  Bildad  attacks  Job  in  xxv.  ;  Job  refutes 
him  in  xxvi.  xxxi.;  Elihu  interposes  in  xxxii.-xxxvii.; 
God  interposes  in  xxxviii.  xxxix,  xi.  1,  2  ;  Job  humbles 
himself  in  xl.  3-5  ;  God  resumes,  and  concludes  in  xl. 
6-xli.  ;  Job's  submission,  xlii.  1,  6  ;  his  friends'  submis- 
sion, 7-9;  his  latter  end,  10-17.  He  dies,  aged  about 
240  years. 


Job 


.    5  it  was  so.,  that  J.,  sent  and  sanctified  v.  1. 
.   5  J.  said,  It  may  be.  .Thus  did  J.  contmua. 
.   8  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  J.,  that 
.    9  Satan  answered,  .and  said,  Doth  J.  fear 
.  14  there  came  a  messenger  unto  J.,  and  said 
.  20  Then  J.  rose,  and  rent  his  mantle,  and 
:,  22  In  all  this  J.  sinned  not,  nor  charged  G. 
.    3  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  J.,  that 
!.    7  So  went  Satan  forth,  .and  smote  J.  with 
.  10  In  all  this  did  not  J.  sin  with  his  lips 
.  11  Now  when  J.'s  three  friends  heard  of  all 

1  After  this  opened  J.  his  mouth,  and  cursed 

2  J.  spake,  and  said 
1  J.  answered  and  said 

in  9.  1 ;  T2.  1 ;  16.  1 ;  19. 1 ;  21.  1 ;  23.  x  ;  26.  1.] 
1  Moreover  J.  continued  his  parable,  and 
1  Moreover  J.  continued  his  parable,  and 

.  40  Let  thistles  grow.  .The  words  of  J.  are 

1  So  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  J. 

2  against  J.  was  Ins  wrath  kindled,  because 

3  no  answer,  and  (yet)  had  condemned  J. 

4  Now  Elihu  had  waited  till  J.  had  spoken 
.  12  (ther.e  was)  none  of  you  that  convinced  J. 

1  Wherefore,  J.,  I  pray  thee  hear  my  spee. 
.  31  Mark  well,  0  J. ;  hearken  unto  me  :  hold 

5  Eor  J.  hath  said,  I  am  righteous :  and  God 
7  What  man  (is)  like  J.,  (who)  drinketh  up 

35  J.  hath  spoken  without  knowledge,  and 

.  36  My  desire  (is,  that)  J.  may  be  tried  unto 

16  Therefore  doth  J.  open  liis  mouth  in  vain 

14  Hearken  unto  this,  0  J. :  stand  still,  and 
1  Then  the  Loud  answered  J.  out  of  the 
1  Moreover  the  Lord  answered  J.,  and  said 
3  Then  J.  answered  the  Lord,  and.  said 

6  Then  answered  the  Lord  unto  J.  out  of 
1  Then  J.  answered  the  Lord,  and  said 

7  the  Lord  had  spoken  these  words  unto  J. 

7  ye  have  not  spoken,  .as  my  servant  J. 

8  take . .  seven  rams,  and  go  to  my  servant  J. 
8  my  servant  J.  shall  pray  for  you ;  for  him 

8  ye  have  not  spoken .  .like  my  servant  J. 

9  commanded  them  :  the  Lord,  .accepted  J. 
10  turned,  .captivity  of  J.,  .the  Lord  gave  J. 
12  So  the  Lord  blessed  the  latter  end  of  J. 

15  no  women . .  (so)  fair  as  the  daughters  of  J. 

16  After  this  lived  J.  an  hundred  and  forty 

17  So  J.  died,  (being)  old,  and  full  of  days 
14  Though  these,  .men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  J. 
20  Though  Noah,  Daniel,  and  J.,  (were)  in 
ri  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  J.,  and 

JOB,  n'r  returning. 

The  third  son  of  Issachar,  called  in  another  genealogy 

(Num.  26.  24)  Jashib,  and  (1  Ch.  7.  1)  Jashub.  B.C.  1692. 

Gen.  46. 13  the  sonsof  Issachar.  .Phuvah,  and  J.,  and 

JO'-BAB,  32V  howling. 

1.  A  son  of  Joktan  the  Shemite.    B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10.  29  Ophir,  and  Havilah,  and  J. :  all  these 
1  Ch.  1.  23  Ophir.and  Havilah,  and  J.  All  these  (were) 

2.  The  second  king  of  Edom,  and  son  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah. 
B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  33  J.  the  son  of  Zerah .  .reigned  in  his  stead 
36.34  J.  died,  andHusham.  .reigned  in  his  stead 
1  Ch.  1.  44  J.  the  son  of  Zerah.  .reigned  in  his  stead 
1.  45  when  J.  was  dead,  Husham.  .reigned  in 

3.  A  king  of  Madon,  a  Canaanitish  city  conquered  by 
Joshua.    B.C.  1450. 

Josh  ii.    1  came  to  pass,  .that  he  sent  to  J.  king  of 
i.  A  son  of  jShaharaim,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1350. 

t  Ch.  8.   9  he  begat  of  Hodesh  his  wife,  J.,  and  Zibia 
5.  A  son  of  Elpaal,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.  8. 18  Ishmerai  also,  and  Jezliah,  and  J.,  the 


3 
3' 
6 
[Also 
27. 
29. 
31 
32 
32 
32 
32 
32 
33 
33 
34 
34 
34 
34 
35- 
37' 
38. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
-  42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
Eze.  14. 
14. 
Jas.     5 


JO-CHE'-BED,  "nar  Jah  is  honour. 

The  wife  of  Anirain,  and  mother  of  Miriam,  Aaron,  and 

Moses.    B.C.  1560. 

Exod.  6.  20  Amram  took  hiui  J.  his  father's  sister  to 
Numa6.  59  the  name  of  Amram's  wife  (was)  J.,  the 

JO' -ED,  "Ijn*  Jah  is  witness. 

A  son  of  Pedaiah,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  520. 

Neh.  11.    7  Sallu  the  son  of  Meshullam,  the  son  of  J. 

JO'-EL,  Snv,  ylw7]\  Jah  is  God. 

1.  The  first  born  son  of  Samuel  the  prophet ;  called 
Vaskni  in  1  Ch.  6.  28.     B.C.  1112. 

1  Sa.    8.    2  Now  the  name  of  his  first  born  was  J.,  and 
1  Ch.  6.  33  Heman  a  singer,  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of 
15. 17  Levites  appointed  Heman  the  son  of  J. 

2.  A  Simeonite.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  35  J.,  and  Jehu  the  son  of  Josibiah,  the  son 

3.  The  father  of  Shemaiah,  a  Keubenite.     B.C.  1570. 

1  Ch.  5.    4  The  sonsof  J. ;  Shemaiah  his  son,  Gog  his 
5.   8  Azaz,  the  son  of  Shenia,  the  son  of  J.,  who 

4.  A  chief  Gadite.     B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5. 12  J.  the  chief,  and  Shapham  the  next,  and 

5.  A  Kohathite,  and  ancestor  of  Samuel  the  prophet. 

B.C.  1212. 

1  Ch.  6.  36  son  of  Elkanah,  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of 

6.  A  descendant  of  Tola,  son  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.    3  Michael,  and  Obadiah,and  J.,Ishiah,  five 

7.  One  of  David's  valiant  men  and  a  brother  of  Nathau. 

B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  38  J.  the  brother  of  Nathan,  Mibhar  the  son 

8.  A  Gershonite  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  7  J.  the  chief,  and  his.  .an  hundred  and  th. 
15.  11  Asaiah,  and  J.,  Shemaiah,  and  Eliel,  and 
23.    8  the  chief  (was)  Jehiel,  and  Zetham,  and  J. 

9.  A  Gershonite,  keeper  of  the  treasures  of  the  house  of 
the  Lord  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  26.  22  Zetham,  and  Joel  his  brother,  (which  were) 

10.  A  prince  of  Manasseh,  W.of  the  Jordan,  in  the  days 
of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  20  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh;  J.  the  son 

11.  A  Kohathite  that  aided  in  cleansing  the  temple  in  the 
days  of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29. 12  J.  the  son  of  Azariah,  of  the  sons  of  the 

12.  One  of  Nebo's  family  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife 
during  the  exile.  B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  43  Mattithiah,  Zabad,  Zebina,  Jadau.  .J.,  B. 

13.  A  son  of  Zichri,  and  overseer  of  the  Benjamites  in 
Jerusalem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh. 11.    9  J.  the  son  of  Zichri  (was)  their  overseer 

14.  Son  of  Pethuel,  and  prophet  in  the  days  of  Uzziah 
king  of  Judah.    B.C.  720. 

Joel    1.    1  word .  .that  came  to  J.  the  son  of  Pethuel 
Acts    2. 16  this  is  that  which  was  spoken  by.  .[J.] 

JO-E'-LAH,  nSxy'v  God  is  snatching. 

A  son  of  Jerohani  of  Gedor  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag. 

B.C.  105S. 

1  Ch.12.    7  J.  and  Zebadiah,  the  sons  of  Jerohani  of 
JO-E'-ZER,  -nj/v  Jah  is  help. 
A  Korhite  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag.     B.C.  105S. 

1  Ch.12.    6  Azareel,  and  J.,  and  Jashobeam,  the  K. 
JOG-BE' -HAH,  nirpr  height. 
A  place  in  Gad,  now  called  Kanuat. 

NUIU32.  35  And  Atroth,  Sliophan,  and  Jaazer,  and  J. 

Judg.  8.  1 1  dwelt  in  tents  on  the  east  of  Nobah  and  J. 

JOG'-LI,  "br  exiled. 

Father  of  Bukki  and  a  prince  of  Dan,  chosen  to  divide 

the  land  W.  of  the  Jordan.     B.C.  1530. 

Nuni34.  22  And  the  prince . .  Bukki  the  son  of  J. 
JO'-HA,  Nnv  Jah  is  living. 

1.  A  son  of  Beriah,  grandson  of  Shaharaim,  a  Eenjamite. 
B.C.  1350. 

t  Ch.  8.  16  Michael,  and  Ispah,  and  J. . .  sons  of  Beriah 

2.  One  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.ii.  45  son  of  Sliimri,  and  J.  his  brother,  the  Ti. 

JO-HA'-NAN,  }inv,  j^rn.T  Jah  is  gracious. 

1.  A  son  of  Kareah  or  Careah,  a  captain  of  the  Jews. 
B.C.  600. 

2  Ivi.25.  23  J.  the  son  of  Careah,  and  Seraiah  the  son 
Jer.  40.    8  J.  and  Jonathan  the  sons  of  Kareah,  and 

40.  13  J.  the  sou  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  captains 
40.  15  J.  the  son  of  Kareah  spake  to  Gedaliahin 

40.  16  the  son  of  Ahikam  said  unto  J.  the  son 

'  41,  11,  13  J.  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  capt. 

41.  14  returned,  and  went  unto  J. .  .of  Kareah 

15  son  of  Nethaniah  escaped  from  J.  with 

16  Then  took  J.  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all 

1  J.  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  Jezaniah  the 
8  Then  called  he  J.  the  son  of  Kareah,  and 

2  J.  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  proud 
4,  5  J.  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  capt. 

2.  The  eldest  son  of  Josiah,  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  610. 

1  Ch.  3. 15  the  first  born  J.,  the  second  Jehoiakim 
3/A  son  of  Elioenai.     B.C.  445. 

t  Ch.  3.  24  and  Akkub,  and  J.,  and  Dalaiah,  and  A. 
4.  A  grandson  of  Ahiniaaz,  father  of  Azariah,  a  Levite. 
B.C.     900. 

1  Ch.  6.  9  Ahiniaaz  begat  Azariah . .  Azariah  begat  J. 
6. 10  J.  begat  Azariah,  he  (it  is)  that  executed 


41. 
41. 

42. 
42. 

43- 
43- 


5.  A  valiant  man  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    4  Jahaziel..  J., and  JozabadtheGederathite 

6.  A  Gadite  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12. 12  J.  the  eighth,  Elzabad  the  ninth 

7.  An  Ephraimite  who  opposed  making  slaves  of  the 
captives  of  Judah,  in  Ahaz's  time.    B.C.  900. 

2  Ch.  28. 12  Azariah  the  son  of  J.,  Berechiah  the  son 

8.  A  returned  exile,  son  of  Hakkatan,  in  Artaxerxes' 
time.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra   8. 12  J.  the  sou  of  Hakkatan,  and  with  him  an 

9.  A  priest  who,  with  Ezra,  summoned  the  exiles  to  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  458. 

Ezra  10.   6  the  chamber  of  J.  the  sou  of  Eliashib 

10.  A  son  of  Tobiah  the  Ammonite,  and  husband  of 
Meshullam's  daughter.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  6. 18  J.  had  taken  the  daughter  of  Meshullam 

11.  A  priest  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  the  grandson  of  Jo- 
zadak.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  22  days  of  Eliashib,  Joiada,  and  J.,  and  Ja. 
12.  23  uutil  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of  Eliashib 

JOHN",  'Iwawns. 

1.  The  son  of  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth,  who  came  as  the 
forerunner  of  the  Messiah,  and  was  beheaded  by  Herod, 
tetrarch  of  Galilee,    a.d.  28. 

Matt.  3.    1  those  days  came  J.  the  Baptist,  preaching 
4  J.  had  his  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  and  a 
.  13  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee,  .unto  J. 
.  14  [J.]  forbad  him,  saying,  I  have  need  to  be 
,  12  had  heard  that  J.  was  cast  into  prison 
.  14  Then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  J.,  say. 
11.    2  J.  had  heard  in  the  prison  the  works  of 
11.    4  show  J.  again  those  things  which  ye  do 
11.    7  to  say  unto  the  multitudes  concerning  J. 
11.  11  not  risen  a  greater  than  J.  the  Baptist 

11. 12  from  the  days  of  J.  the  Baptist  until  now 
11.  13  prophets  and  the  law  prophesied  until  J. 
n.  18  J",  came  neither  eating  nor  chinking,  and 
14.  2  This  is  J.  the  Baptist:  lie  is  risen  from  the 
14.  3  Herod  had  laid  hold  on  J.,  and  bound  him 
14.  4  J.  said  unto  him,  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee 
14.  8  Give  me  here  J.  Baptist's  head  in  a  char. 
14. 10  And  he  sent,  and  beheaded  J.  in  the  prison 
16.  14  Some  (say  that  thou  art)  J.  the  Baptist 

17. 13  that  he  spake  unto  them  of  J.  the  Baptist 
21.  25  The  baptism  of  J.,  whence  was  it  ?  from 
21.  26  fear,  .people-;  for  all  hold  J.as  a  prophet 
21.  32  J.  came  unto  you  in.  .way  of  righteousness 

Mark  1.  4  J.  did  baptize  in  the  wilderness,  and  pre. 
1.  6  J.  was  clothed  with  camel's  hah',  and  with 
1.   9  came,  .and  was  baptised  of  J.  in  Jordan 

1.  14  after  that  J.  was  put  in  prison,  Jesus  came 
2. 18  the  disciples  of  J.  and  of  the  Pharisees 

2.  18  disciples  of  J.  and  of  the  Pharisees  fast 
6.  14  J.  the  Baptist  was  risen  from  the  dead 
6.  16  It  is  [J.,]  whom  I  beheaded  :  he  is  risen 
6. 17  laid  hold  upon  J.,  and  bound  him  in  prison 
6.  18  J.  had  said  unto  Herod,  It  is  not  lawful 
6.  20  Herod  feared  J.,  knowing  that  he  was  a 
6.  24  And  she  said,  The  head  of  J.  the  Baptist 

6.  25  in  a  charger  the  head  of  J.  the  Baptist 

8.  28  they  answered,  J.  the  Baptist :  but  some 
11.  30  The  baptism  of  J.,  was  (it)  from  heaven 
11.  32  (men)  counted  J.,  that  he  was  a  prophet 

Luke  1.  13  a  sou,  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  J". 

1.  60  and  said,  Not  (so);  but  he  shall  be  called  J. 
1.  63  saying,  His  name  is  J.  And  they  marvelled 

3.  2  the  word  of  God  came  unto  J.  the  son  of 
.  15  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  J.,  whether 
.  16  J.  answered,  saying  unto  (them)  all,  I  in. 
.  20  this  above  all,  that  he  shut  up  J.  in  prison 
.  33  Why  do  the  disciples  of  J.  fast  often,  and 
.  iS  disciples  of  J.  showed  him  of  aU  these 
.  19  J.  calling  (unto  him)  two  of  his  disciples 
.  20  J.  Baptist  hath  sent  us  unto  thee,  saying 

22  tell  J.  what  things  ye  have  seen  and  heard 

7.  24  when  the  messengers  of  J.,  .concerning  L 
7.  28  not  a  greater  prophet  than  J.  the  Baptist 
7.  29  being  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  J. 

7.  33  J.  the  Baptist  came  neither  eating  bread 

9.  7  of  some,  that  J.  was  risen  from  the  dead 
9.    9  J.  have  I  beheaded  :*but  who  is  this  of 

9.  19  They  answering  said,  J.  the  Baptist ;  but 
11.-  1  to  pray,  as  J.  also  taught  his  disciples 
16. 16  The  law  and  the  prophets  (were)  until  J. 
20.    4  The  baptism  of  J.,  was  it  from  heaven,  or 
20.   6  they  be  persuaded  that  J.  was  a  prophet 
John  1.    6  man  sent  from  God,  whose  name(was)  J. 
1. 15  J.  bare  witness  of  him,  and  cried,  saying 
1.  19  this  is  the  record  of  J.,  when  the  Jews 
1.  26  J.  answered  them,  saying,  I  baptize  with 
1.  28  beyond  Jordan,  where  J.  was  baptizing 
1.  29  [J.]  seeth  Jesus  coming  unto  him,  and 
1.  32  J.  bare  record,  sa3Tng,  I  saw  the  spirit 
1.  35  day  after,  J.  stood,  and  two  of  his  disciples 
1. 40  One"  of  the  two  which  heard  J.  (speak) 
3.  23  And  J.  also  was  baptizing  in  iEuon  near 
3.  24  For  J.  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison 
3.  25  a  question  between  (some)  of  J.  'sdisciples 
3.  26  they  came  unto  J.,  and  said  unto  him,  R. 

3.  27  J.  answered  and  said,  A  man  can  receive 

4.  1  made  and  baptized  more  disciples  than  J . 

5.  33  Ye  sent  unto  J.,  and  he  bare  witness  unto 
5.  36  I  have  greater  witness  than  (that)  of  J. 

10.  40  into  the  place  where  J.  at  first  baptized 
10.  41  J.  did  no  miracle :  but  all  things  that  J. 
Acts    1.    5  J.  truly  baptized  with  water ;  but  ye  shall 
1.  22  Beginning  from  the  baptism  of  J.,  unto 


JOIADA 


548 


JOfrAN 


Acts  10.  37  after  the  baptism  which  J.  preached 
ii.  16  J.  indeed  baptized  with  water  ;  but  ye 
13.  24  When  J.  had  first  preached  before  his 
13.  25  as  J.  fulfilled  his  course,  he  said,  Whom 

18.  25  he  spake,  .knowing  only  the  baptism  of  J. 

19.  3  Unto  what..  And  they  said,  Unto  J. 's  bap. 
19.   .4  J.  verily  baptized  with  the  baptism  of 

•2.  A  son  of  Zebedee  and  younger  brother  of  James,  and 
the  beloved  disciple  of  Christ. 

Matt.  4.  21  (the  son)  of  Zebedee,  and  J.  his  brother 
10.    2  James,  .son)  of  Zebedee,  and  J.  his  broth. 
17.    1  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James,  and  J.  his 
Mark  1.  19  the  (son)  of  Zebedee,  and  J.  his  brother 
1.  29  entered  intothe  house . .  with  James  and  J. 
3.  17  Jame3..and  J.  the  brother  of  James;  and 

5.  37  follow  him,  save  Peter,  and  James,  and  J. 
9.  2  taketh(withhim)  Peter,  and  James,  and  J. 
9.  38  J.  answered  him,  saying,  Master,  we  saw 

10.  35  James  and  J.,  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  come 
10.  41  began  to  be  much  displeased  with.  .J. 

13.  3  James  and  J.  and  Andrew  asked  him  pr. 

14.  33  taketh  with  him  Peter  and  James  and  J 
Luke  5.  10  also  James  and  J.,  the  sons  of  Zebedee 

6.  14  Simon.,  and.  .James  and  J.,  Philip  and  B 

8.  51  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save.  .J.  and  J. 

9.  28  after  these  sayings,  he  took  Peter  and  J. 
9.  49  J.  answered  and  said,  Master,  we  saw  one 
9.  54  when  his  disciples  James  and  J.  saw  (this) 

22.    8  he  sent  Peter  and  J.,  saying,  Go  and  pre. 

Acts    1.  13  where  abodehoth  Peter  and  James,  and  J. 

3.    1  Peter  and  J.  went  up  together  into  the 

3,   3  Who  seeing  Peter  and  J.  about  to  go  into 

3.    4  Peter,  fastening  his  eyes  upon  him  with  J. 

3.  11  the  lame  man  which  was  healed  held.  .J. 
4. 13  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  J. 

4.  19  Peterand  J.  answered  and  said  unto  them 
8.  14  when  the  apostles . .  heard . .  they  sent . .  J. 

12.    2  killed  James  the  brother  of  J.  with  the 
Gal.     2.    9  when  James,  Cephas,  and  J. .  .perceived 
Rev.    1.    1  he  sent  and  signified,  .unto  his  servant  J. 

1.    4  J.  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  A. 

1.    9  I  J.  who  also  am  your  brother,  and  com. 

21.  2  And  I  [J.]  saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusa. 

22.  8  And  I  J.  saw  these  things,  and  heard  (them) 

3.  A  kinsman  of  Annas  the  high  priest. 

Acts    4.    6  Annas  the  high  priest,  and  Caiaphas,  andJ. 

4.  A  son  of  Mary,  sister  of  Barnabas,  and  surnamed 
Mark,  which  see. 

Acts  12.  12  the  mother  of  J.,  whose  surname  was  M. 

12.  25  took  with  them  J.,  whose  surname  was 

13.  5  and  they  had  also  J.  to  (their)  minister 
13.  13  and  J.  departing'from  them  returned  to*J. 

15.  37  Barnabas  determined  to  take  with  them  J.. 

JO-IA'-DA,  JH;V  .Tali-  knows. 

A  descendant  of  Jeshua  the  priest  who  returned  with 

Zerubbabel.     B.C.  456.  See  Jehoiada. 

Neh.  12.  10  also  begat  Eliashib,  andEliashib  begat  J. 
12.  11  And  J.  begat  Jonathan,  and  Jonathan 

12.  22  days  of  Eliashib,  J.,  and  Johanan,  and 

13.  28  (one)  of  the  sons  of  J.,  the  son  of  Eliashib 

JO  IA'-KIM,  D'jTV  Jah  sets  up. 

The  son  of  Jeshua  the  priest  who  returned  with  Zerub- 
babel.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12. 10  And  Jeshua  begat  J.,  J.  also  begat  Elias. 
12.  12  in  the  days  of  J.  were  priests,  the  chief 
12.  26  These  (were)  in  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of  J. 

JO-IA'-RIB,  an;'v  Jah  contends. 

1.  One  whom  Ezra  sent  to  obtain  ministers  to  return 
with  him  to  Jerusalem.     B.C.  458. 

Ezra    8. 16  for  J.,  and  for  Elnathan,  men  of  unders. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Pharez  whose  family  dwelt  in  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  457. 

Neh.  11.    5  the  son  of  Adaiah,  the  son  of  J.,  the  son 

:i.  A  priest,  father  of  Jedaiah.    B.C.  445.    See  Jehoiarib. 

Neh.  11. 10  Of  the  priests :  Jedaiah  the  son  of  J.,  Jac. 

12.    6  Shemaiah,  and  J.,  Jedaiah. 

i2. 19  And  of  J.,  Mattenai;  of  Jedaiah,  Uzzi 

JOIN,  to  — 

I. To  be  chosen,  nn;  bachar,  4. 

Eccl.  9.    4  to  him  that  is  joined  to  all  the  living 

2.  To  sew  07' join  together,  mn  chut,  5. 

Ezra  4.  12  have  set  up  the  walls,  .and  joined  the 

3.  To  be  added,  f]D;  yasaph,  2. 

Exod.  1. 10  they  join  also  unto  our  enemies,  and  fight 
■i.Tn  cause  to  touch,  yai  naga,  5. 

Isa.  5.  8  Woe  unto  them  that  joiu  house  to  house 
~i.T<>  bring  near,  ann  qarab,  3. 

Eze.  37.  17  join  them  one  to  another  into  one  stick 

JOIN  (battled,  to  — 

1.7b  spre  id  out,  Bfoi  natash. 

1  8a.  4     2  when  they  joined  battle,  Israel  was  smit. 

!.'!'<•  set  in  array,  n,ny  arak. 

Gen.  14.   8  they  joined  battle  with  them  in  the  vale 
JOIN  hard  to,  to  — 
To  border  with,  (ruvo^iopiw  sunomoreo. 

Acts  iS.    7  whose  house  joined  hard  to  the  synagogue 
JOIN  (in)  affinity,  to  — 
To  join  self  in  marriage,  jnn  chathan,  7. 

2  Ch.18.    1  Now  Jehoshaphat.  .joined  affinity  with 
Ezra  9. 14  Should  we.  .join  in  affinity  with  the  peo. 


JOIN  self,  to  — 

1.  To  join,  become  companion,  nnn  chabar,  3. 

2  Ch.20.  36  he  joined  himself  with  him  to  make  ships 

2.  To  join  self  to,  nari  chabar,  7. 

2  Ch.20.  35  join  himself  with  Ahaziah  king  of  Israel 

20.  37  Because  thou  hast  joined  thyself  with  A. 

Dan.  11.    6  they  shall  join  themselves  together ;  for 

3.  To  be  joined,  nip  lavah,  2. 

Esth.  9.  27  all  such  as  joined  themselves  unto  them 
Isa.  56.    3  that  hath  joined  himself  to  the  Lord,  spe. 
56.   6  that  join  themselves  to  the  Lord,  to  serve 
Jer.  50.   5  Come,  and  let  us  join  ourselves  to  the  Lord 

4.  To  be  coupled,  yoked,  nay  tsamad,  2. 

NuiU25.   3  Israel  joined  himself  unto  Baal-peor:  and 
Psa.106.  28  They  joined  themselves  also  unto  Baal-p. 

5.7b  cleave  or  join  self  to,  tcoWdofxat  kollaomai. 
Luke  15.  15  he  went  and  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of 
Acts    5.  13  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to 

8.  29  Go  near,  and  joiu  thyself  to  this  chariot 

9.  26  he  assayed  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples 

6.  To  cleave  or  join  self  to,  Trpoo-KoWdo/xat  proskol. 

Acts    5.  36  men,  about  four  hundred,  [joined  thems.] 
JOIN  selves  together,  to  — 
To  join  self  to,  become  companion,  nrin  chabar,  7. 

Dan.  11.    6  they  shall  join  themselves  together;  for 
JOIN  together,  to  — 
1. To  join  together,  stir  up,  7|3D  sahah,  Sa. 

Isa.    9. 11  The  Lord  shall.,  join  his  enemies  together 
2.  To  yoke  together,  av^vyvvw  suzeagnuo. 

Matti9.   6  What  therefore  God  hath  joined  together 

Mark  10.    9  What  therefore  God  hath  joined  together 
JOIN  together,  to  perfectly  — 
To  adjust  perfect,  or  jit  thoroughly,  Karapri^w. 

1  Co.   1. 10  ye  beperfectlyjoinedtogetherin the  same 
JOINED,  to  be  — 
l.To  cleave  together,  be  adhering,  psn  dabeq,  4. 

Job  41. 17  They  are  joined  one  to  another,  they  stick 

2.  To  join,  be  joined,  n^n  chabar. 

Exod28.  7    the  two  shoulder  pieces  thereof  joined  at 

•    Eze.    j.   9  Their  wings,  .joined  one  to  another;  they 

1. 11  two.  .of  every  one.  .joined  one  to  another 

Hos.   4  17  Ephraim  (is)  joined  to  idols  :  let  him  alone 

3.  To  be  joined,  nrin  chabar,  4. 

Eccl.  9.    4  Fur  to  him  that  is  joined  to  all  the  living 
4.7b  rejoice,  be  joined,  become  one,  rnn  chadah. 

Job     3.   6  let  it  not  be  joined  unto  the  days  of  the 
5.7*o  be  united,  one,  nn;  yaehad. 
•llsa.    14  20  Thou  shalt  not  be  joined  with  them  in 

6.  To  be  joined,  n£  lavah,  2. 

Gen.  29.  34  Now'. will  my  husbandbe  joined  untome 
NumiS.  2  bring,  .that  they  may  be  joined  unto  thee 
18.  4  they  shall  be  joined  unto  thee,  and  keep 
Psa.  83.  8  Assur  also  is  joined  with  them  :  they  have 
Isa.  14.  1  the  strangers  shall  be  joined  with  them 
Zech.  2.  11  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord 

7.  To  be  added,  hdd  saphah,  2. 

Isa.    13. 15  every  one  that  is  joined,  .shall  fall  by  the 

8.  To  be  coupled,  yoked,  "ray  tsamad,  2. 

Num25-    5  his  men  that  were  joined  unto  Baal-peor 
9.7*o  be  joined,  bound  to,  ~)»f?  qatar. 

Eze.  46.  22  courts  joined  of  forty,  .long,  and  thirty 
10.7b  be,  become,  or  draw  near,  inn,  qarab. 

1  Ki.  20.  29  in  the  seventh  clay  the  battle  was  joined 
11. To  be  joined,  or  join  self  to,  KoWao/xat  Jcollaom. 

1  Co.  6.  16  know  ye  not  that  he  which  is  joined  to  an 

6.  17  he  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one 

12.7*o  be  joined,  or  join  self  to,  irpoffKoWdofiai. 

Eph.   5.  31  [shall  be  joined]  unto  his  wife,  and  they 
JOINED  together,  to  be  — 
1.7b  cleave,  adhere,  p:n  dabeq. 

Job  41.  23  flakes  of  his  flesh  are  joined  together 
2.7*o  join,  become  companion,  nan  chabar. 

Gen.  14.   3  All  these  were  joined  together  in  the  vale 
3.7b  be  joined,  n:in  chabar,  4. 

Exod28.    7  thereof ;  and  (so)  it  shall  be  joined  toget. 
4.7*o  be  bound,  joined,  ngJR  qashar,  2. 

Neh.    4.    6  all  the  wall  was  joined  together  unto  the 
JOINED  fitly  together,  to  he  — 
7b  lay  systematically  together,  avvapfxoXoyiw. 

Eph.   4.  16  whom  the  whole  body  fitly  joined  toge. 
JOINING  — 
1. Cleaving,  adhering,  pan  dabeq. 

2  Ch.  3. 12  joining  to  the'  wing  of  the  other  cherub 
2.Couplings,  n'nanp  mechabberoth. 

1  Ch.22.    3  prepared  iron.,  for  the  nails,  .for  the  join. 
JOINT  — 
1.  A  joining,  coupling,  pan  debeq. 

1  Ki.22.  34  smote,  .between  the  joints  of  the  harness 

2  Ch.18.  33  smote,  .between  the  joints  of  theharness 
2.Rounding,  pion  chammuq. 

Song  7.    1  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  (are)  like  jewels 
3..1  knot,  joint,  nap  qetar. 

Dan.    5.    6  so  that  the  joint3  of  his  loins  were  loosed 


4. A  joint,  fitting  together,  a<pri  haphe. 

Eph.  4.  16  compacted  by  that  which  every  joint  sup. 
Col.     2.  19  from  which  all  the  body  by  joints  and  ba. 

5.  A  joint,  fitting  together,  apfxSs  harmos. 

Heb.  4. 12  dividing  asunder,  .of  the  joints  and  mar. 
JOINT,  out  of  — 
Disjointed,  tottering,  nnj^D  muedeth. 

Prov  25. 19  (like)a  broken  tooth,  and'a  foot  out  of  joint 
JOINT,  to  be  out  of  — 
1.7b  be  disjointed,  alienated,  yp;  yaqa. 

Gen.  32.  25  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  was  out  of  joint 
2.7*o  separate  self,  become  separated,  i^Bparad,  7. 

Psa.  22. 14  all  my  bones  are  out  of  joint :' my  heart 
JOINT  heir  — 
One  who  is  heir  with  (another),  o-vyK\npov6fj.o$. 

Rom.  8.  17  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ 
JOK-DE'-AM,  D^np;  anger  of  the  people. 
A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah. 

Josh  15.  56  And  Jezreel,  and  J.,  and  Zanoah. 
JO'  KIM,  D'pv  Jah  sets  up. 
A  descendant  of  Shelah,  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  1200. 

i  Ch.  4.  22  And  J.,  and  the  men  of  Chozeba,  and  Jo. 
JOK-ME'-AM,  c^'Op;  standing  of  the  people. 
A  Levitical  city  of  Ephraim,  S.W.   of  Abel  Meholah, 
nearly  opposite  to  the  mouth  of  the  Jabbok. 

1  Ch.  6.  63  J.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Beth-horon  with 
JOK-NE'-AM,  c^p;  2)ossessimi  of  the  people 
1.  A  Levitical  city  of  Zebulun,  in  the  W.,  near  Mount 
Carmel. 

Josh.  12.  22  The  king  of  Kedesh,  one;  the  king  of  J. 
19.  11  and  reached  to  the  riverthat  (is)before  J. 
21.  34  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  J.  with  her 
•2.  Should  be  Jokmeam  in  Ephraim  (in  1  Ki.  4.  12),  or 
fClbzaim  (in  Josh.  21.  2). 

1  Ki.  4. 12  (even)  unto  (the  place  that  is)  beyond  J. 
JOK'-SHAN,  fy;p;  foioler. 

A  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah,  and  father  of  Sheba  and 
Dedan.    B.C.  1848. 

Gen.  25.    2  she  bare  him  Zimran,  and  J.,  and  Medau 
25.    3  J.  begat  Sheba  and  Dedan.    And  the  sons 

1  Ch.  1.  32  she  bare  Zimran,  and  J.,  and  Medan 
1.  32  And  the  sons  of  J. ;  Sheba,  and  Dedan 

JOK'-TAN,  }ap;  little. 

A  son  of  Eber,  of  the  family  of  Shem.     His  sons  were 

Almodad,  Sheleph,  Hazar-maveth,  and  Jerah.  B.C.  2210. 

Gen.  10.  25  divided ;  and  his  brother's  name  (was)  J. 

10.  26  J.  begat  Almodad,  and  Sheleph  and  Haz. 

10.  29  and  Jobab :  all  these  (were)  the  sons  of  J. 

1  Ch.  1.  19  Peleg.  .and  his  brother's  name  (was)  J. 

1. 20  J.  begat  Almodad.  .Sheleph,  and  Hazarm 
1.  23  Havilah,  and  Jobab.  .(were)  the  sons  of  J. 

JOK-THE'-EL,  nxnp;  God's  reicard  of  victory. 

1.  A  city  in  the  W.  of  the  plain  of  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  38  And  Dilean,  and  Mizpeh,  and  J. 

2.  A  name  given  by  Amaziah  to  Selah  or  Petra  in  Edom. 
B.C.  826. 

2  Ki.  14.    7  called  the  name  of  it  J.  unto  this  day 
JO-NA'-DAB,  anrr,  Tiring  Jah  is  liberal. 

1.  A  son  of  Shimeah,  David's  brother.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.  13.   3  J.,  the  sou  of  Shimeah,  David's  brother 
13.    5  J.  said  unto  him,  Lay  thee  down  on  thy 
13.  32  And  J.,  the  son  of  Shimeah,  David's  bro. 
13.  35  J.  said  unto  the  king,  Behold,  the  king's 

2.  The  son  of  Rechab,  whom  Jehu  took  with  him  to 
show  him  his  zeal  for  the  Lord.  B.C.  884.  See  Jeho- 
nadabi 

Jer.  35.   6  J.  the  son  of  Rechab  our  father  comman. 
35.    8  Thus  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  J.  the 
35.  10  To  all  that  J.  our  father  commanded  us 
35.  14  The  words  of  J.  the  son  of  Rechab,  that 
35.  16  the  sons  of  J.  the  son  of  Rechab  have 
35.  18  obeyed  the  commandment  of  J.  your  fa. 
35.  19  J.  the  son  of  Rechab  shall  not  want  a 
JO'-NAH,  niv  a  dove. 

The  son  of  Amittai,  of  Gath-Hepher  in  Zebulun,  in  the 
days  of  Jeroboam  II.   He  was  the  first  Hebrew  prophet 
or  missionary  sent  to  a  heathen  nation.    B.C.  825. 
2  Ki.  14.  25  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  his  servant  J. 
Jon.    1.    1  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  J.  the  son 
1.    3  J.  rose  up  to  flee  unto  Tarshish  from  the 
1.   5  J.  was  gone  down  into  the  sides  of  the 
1.    7  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  J. 

1.  15  they  took  up  J.,  and  cast  him  forth  into 
1.17  a  great  fish  to  swallow  up  J.    And  J.  was 

2.  1  J.  prayed  unto  the  Loud  his  God  out  of 
2. 10  and  it  vomited  out  J.  upon.the  dry  (land) 

3.  1  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  J.  the  seco. 
3.    3  J,  arose,  and  went  unto  Nineveh,  accord. 

3.  4  J.  began  to  enter  into  the  city  a  day's 

4.  1  it  displeased  J.  exceedingly,  and  he  was 
4.    5  J.  went  out  of  the  city,  and  sat  on  the 

4.  6  made  (it)to  come  up  over  J.,  that  it  might 

4.  6  So  J.  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd 

4.  8  the  sun  beat  upon  the  head  of  J.,  that  he 

4.  9  God  said  to  J.,  Doest  thou  well  to  be  an. 

JO'-NAN,  'lavdv,  'luvd/j.. 

An  ancestor  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Marythe  mother 

of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  30  Joseph,  whk.li  was  (the  son)  of  [J.],  which 


JONAS 


549 


JORDAN 


JO'-NAS,  JO'-NA,  'lwva$,fromHeb.  niv  orfr<m]$v. 

1.  The  Greek  form  of  the  Hebrew  Jonah. 

Matt  12.  39  given  to  it,  hut  the  sign  of  the  prophet  J. 
i2.  40  J.  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the 
12.  41  because  they  repented  at . .  preaching  of  J . 

12.  41  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  J.  (is)  here 
16.    4  no  sign,  .but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  J. 

Luken.  29  given  it,  but  the  sign  of  J.  (the  prophet) 
11.  30  J",  was  a  sign  unto  the  Ninevites,  so  shall 
11.  32  for  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  J. 
11.  32  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  J.  (is)  here 

2.  The  father  of  Peter  the  apostle.  In  one  passage  he 
is  called  Jona ;  and  in  one,  Peter  is  called  Barjona  (i.e. 
•"  Son  of  Jona"). 

John  1.  42  Thou  art  Simeonthe  son  of  J.:  thoushalt 
21. 15,  16,  17  Simeon,  (son)  of  J.,lovest  thou  me: 

JO-NATH  E-LEM  RE-CHO-KIM,  D'ph"]  Q^«  njl\ 

Psa.  56.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  Jonath-el. 
JO-NA'-THAN,  jnj'in;,  \r\iv  Jah  is  given. 

1.  A  LeVite,  son  of  Gershom,  and  priest  of  an  idol  in 
Mount  Ephraim.    B.C.  1406. 

JudgiS.  30  J.,  the  son  of  Gorshom,  the  son  of  Mana. 

2.  A  sou  of  king  Saul,  and  friend  of  David.  "With  his 
father  he  fell  in  battle  with  the  Philistines.    B.C.  1056. 

1  Sa.  13.    2  a  thousand,  .with  J.  in  Gibeah  of  Benja. 

13.  3  J.  smote  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines 
13.  16  J.  his  son,  and  the  people  (that  were)  pr. 

13.  22  with  Saul  aud  J.:  but  with  Saul  and.  .J. 

14.  1  J.  the  son  of  Saul  said  unto  the  young 
14.    3  And  the  people  knew  not  that  J.  wasgone 
14.    4'passages,  by  which  J.  sought  to  go  over 
14.   6  J.  said  to  the  young  man  that  bare  his 
34.    8  Then  said  J.,  Behold,  we  will  pass  over 
14.  12  the  men  of  the  garrison  answered  J.  and 
14. 12  J.  said  unto  his  armour  bearer,  Come  up 
14.  13  J.  climbed  up  upon  his  hands  and  upon 
14.  13  they  fell  before  J. ;  and  his  armour  bearer 
14.  14  that  first  slaughter,  which  J.  and  his  arm. 
14.  17  behold,  J.  and  his  armour  bearer  (were) 
14.  21  the  Israelites  that(were)  with  Saul  aud  J. 
14.  27  But  J.  heard  not  when  his  father  charged 
14,  29  Then  said  J.,  My  father  hath  troubled  the 
14.  39  though  it  be  in  J.  my  son,  he  shall  surely 
14.  40  I  and  J.  my  sou  will  be  on  the  other  side 
14.  41  Saul  and  J.  were  taken  :  but  the  people 
14.  42  Cast  (lots)  between  me  and  J.  ..And  J.  was 
14.  43  Saul  said  to  J.,  Tell  me  what  thou  hast 
14.  43  J.  told  him,  and  said,  I  did  but  taste  a 
14.  44  God  do  so.  .for  thou  shalt  surely  die,  J. 
14.  45  people  said  unto  Saul,  Shall  J.  die,  who 
14.  45  So  the  people  rescued  J.,  that  he  died  not 
14.  49  Now  the  sons  of  Saul  were  J.,  and  Ishui 

18.  1  the  soul  of  J. .  .and  J.  loved  him  as  his  own 
28.  3  Then  J.  and  David  madea  covenant,  bee. 
t8.  4  J.  stripped  himself  of  the  robe  that  (was) 

19.  1  Saul  spake  to  J.  his  son,  and  to  all  his  ser. 
19.  2  J.,  Saul's  son,  delighted  much  in  D.:  and  J. 
19.  4  J.  spake  good  of  David  unto  Saul  hisfath. 
19.  6  Saul  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  J.  :  and 
19.  7  J.  called  David,  and  J.  showed  him  all 

19.  7  J.  brought  David  to  Saul,  and  he  was  in 

20.  1  David,  .came  and  said  before  J.,  What 
20.  3  Let  not  J.  know  this,  lest  he  be  grieved 
■20.  4  Then  said  J.  unto  David,  Whatsoever  thy 
20.  5  David  said  unto  J.,  Behold,  to morrow(is) 
20.  9  J",  said,  Far  beit  from  thee  :  for  if  I  knew 

20. 10  Then  said  David  to  J.,  Who  shall  tell  me? 

20. 11  J.  said  unto  David,  Come,  andletusgo  out 

20. 12  J.  said  unto  David,  0  Lord  God  of  Israel 

20. 13  The  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  J. :  but 

20. 16  So  J.  made  (a  covenant)  with  the  house  of 

20. 17  J.  caused  David  to  swear  again,  because 

20. 18  Then  J.  said  to  David,  To  morrow  (is)  the 
20.  25  and  J.  arose,  andAbner  sat  by  Saul's  side 
20.  27  Saul  said  unto  J.  hisson,  Whereforecom. 
20.  28  J.  answered  Saul,  David  earnestly  asked 
20.  30  Then  Saul's  anger  was  kindled  against  J. 
20.  32  J.  answered  Saulhis  father,  and  said  unto 
20.  33  J-  knewthatit  was  determined,  .toslay  D. 
20.  34  So  J.  arose  from  the  table  in  fierce  anger 
20.  35  J.  went  out  into  the  field  at  the  time  app. 
20.  37  to  the  place  of  the  arrow  which  J.  had 
20.  37  J.  cried  after  the  lad,  and  said,  (Is)  not 
20.  38  J.  cried  after  the  lad.  .And  J.'slad  gath. 
20.  39  knew  not  any  thing  :  only  J.  and  David 
20. 40  J.  gave  his  artillery  unto  his  lad,  and  said 

20.  42  J.  said  to  David,  Go  in  peace,  forasmuch 
20. 42  he  arose  and  departed  :  and  J.  went  into 
23. 16  J.,Saul'sson,  arose,  and  went  to  David  into 
23. 18  David  abode  in  the  wood,  aud  J.  went  to 
31.    2  PhilistinesslewJ\,and  Abiuadab,  and  M. 

2  Sa.  1.   4  and  Saul  and  J.  his  son  are  dead  also 

1.   5  How  knowest  thou  that  Saul  aud  J.  his 
1. 12  theymourned.  .forSaul,  and  for  J.  his  son 
1.  17  David  lamented,  .over  Saul  and  over  J. 
1.  22  From  the  blood  of  the  slain.,  the  bow  of  J. 
1. 23  Saul  and  J.  (were)  lovely  and  pleasant  in 
1.25  0  J.,  (thou  wast)"slain  in  thine  high  places 
1.  26  I  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother  J. 
4.   4  J.,  .had  a.  son  (that  was)  lame  of  (his)  feet 
4.  4  the  tidings  came  of  Saul  and  J.  out  of  Jez. 
9.    1  that  I  may  show  him  kindness  for  J.'s 
9.   3  J.  hath  yet  a  son,  (which  is)  lame  on  (his) 
9.   6  Now  when . .  the  son  of  J. . .  was  come  unto 
9.   7  I  will  surely  show  thee  kindness  for  J.  thy 

21.  7  king  spared  Mephiboshcth,  the  son  of  J. 
21.   7  of  the  Lord's  oath  that  (was)  between..  J. 

21. 12  David  went  and  took,  .the  bones  of  J. 

21. 13  brought  up  from  thence,  .the  bones  of  J. 


2  Sa.  21.  14  the  bones  of.  .J.  his  son  buried  they  in 

1  Ch.  8.  33  Saul  begat  J.,  and  Malchi-shua,  and  Abin. 

8.  34  the  son  of  J.  (was)  Merib-baal ;  and  Mer. 

9.  39  Saul  begat  J.,  and  Malchi-shua,  and  Abi. 

9.  40  the  son  of  J.  (was)  Merib-baal :  and  Mer. 
10.   2  Philistines  slew  J.,  and  Abinadab,  and  M. 

3.  A  son  of  Abiathar,  a  high  priest  in  the  time  of  David. 

B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  15.  27  Ahimaaz  thy  son,  and  J.  the  son  of  Abia. 

15.  36  Behold,  (they  have)  there.  .J.,  Abiathar's 
17. 17  Now  J.  aud  Ahimaaz  stayed  by  En-rogel 
17.  20  they  said,  Where  (is)  Ahimaaz  and  J.? 

1  Ki.  i.  42  behold,  J.  the  son  of  Abiathar  the  priest 

1. 43  J.  answered  and  said  to  Adonijah,  Verily 

4.  A  son  of  Shimea,  David's  brother.    B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.  21  21  J.  the  son  of  Shimeah,  the  brother  of  Da. 

1  Ch.20.    7  J.  the  son  of  Shimea,  David's  brother 

5.  One  of  David's  valiant  men  and  son  of  Jashen  (or 
Shage  the  Hararite).   B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  32  Eliahba.  .of  the  sons  of  Jashen,  J". 

1  Ch.n.  34  sons  of  Hashem. .  J.  the  son  of  Shage  the 

6.  A'son  of  Jada,  grandson  of  Onam.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  32  the  sons  of  Jada . .  Jether,  and  J. :  and  Jet. 
2. 33  And  the  sons  of  J. ;  Peleth,  and  Zaza.  These 

7.  An  uncle  of  David.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.27.  32  J.,  David's  uncle,  was  a  counsellor  a  wise 

8.  The  father  of  Ebed  who  returned  with  Ezra.    B.C.  458. 

Ezra   S.    6  the  son  of  J.,  and  with  him  fifty  males 

9.  Son  of  Asahel,  and  employed  in  the  matter  of  the 
strange  wives.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  15  J.  the  son  of  Asahel  and  Jahaziah  the  son 

10.  A  descendant  of  Jeshua  the  high  priest.     B.C.  456. 
Neh.  12.  11  And  Joiada  begat  J.,  and  J.  begat  Jaddua 

11.  A  priest  descended  from  Melicu  or  Malluchi.  B.C. 
536. 

Neh. 12.  14  Of  Melicu,  J. ;  of  Shebaniah,  Joseph 

12.  A  priest  descended  from  Shemaiah,  in  the  days  of 
Joiaknn.  B.C.  445.  In  Neh.  12.  18  he  is  called  Jehona- 
than. 

Neh.  12.  35  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Shemaiah,  the  son 

13.  A  scribe  in  whose  house  Jeremiah  was  imprisoned. 
B.C.  589. 

Jer.  37. 15  in  prison  in  the  house  of  J.  the  scribe 

37.  20  cause  me  not  to  return  to  the  house  of  J. 

38.  26  would  not  cause  me  to  return  to  J.'s  house 

14.  A  son  of  Kareah  who  went  to  Gedaliah  the  governor. 
B.C.  588. 

Jer.  40.    8  and  Johanan  and  J.  the  sons  of  Kareah 
JOP'-PA,  taj,  'Iotttttj  height,   beauty. 
A  seaport  in  Dan,  150  stadia  from  Antipatris,  six  miles 
W.  of  Rama,  and  thirty-seven  miles  N.W.  of  Jerusalem. 
See  Japho;  and  now  called  Jafa. 

2  Ch.  2.  16  bring  it  to  thee  in  floats  by  sea  to  J. 
Ezra    3.    7  cedar  trees  from  Lebanon  to  the  sea  of  J. 
Jon.     1.    3  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee,  .and  went  down  to  J. 
Acts    9.  36  there  was  at  J.  a  certain  disciple  named 

9.  38  Lydda  was  nigh  to  J.,  and  the  disciples 
9.  42  it  was  known  throughout  all  J. ;  and  many 
9.  43  he  tarried  many  days  in  J.  with  one  Simon 

10.  s  now  send  men  to  J.,  and  call  for  (one)  S. 
10.    8  when  he  had  declared . .  he  sent  them  to  J. 

10.  23  certain  brethren  from  J.  accompanied  him 
10. 32  Send  therefore  to  J. ,  and  call  hither  Simon 

11.  5  I  was  in  the  city  of  J.  praying :  and  in  a 
11. 13  Send  men  to  J. ,  and  call  for  Simon,  whose 

JO -RAH,  iTJV  harvest-born. 

One  whose  descendants  returned  with  Zerubbabel  from 

exile.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  18  The  children  of  J.  an  hundred  and  twelve 
JO'-RAI,  -nY. 
A  Gadite,  head  of  a  family.     B  C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  5.  13  Sheba,  and  J.,  and  Jachan,  and  Zia.  aud 
JO'-RAM,  Q-iV,  ory,  D"iin;  Jah  is  high,  'lapdfx. 

1.  A  son  of  Toi,  king  of  Zobah.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    8. 10  Toi  sent  J.  his  son  unto  king  David,  to 

2  A  son  of  Jehoshaphat.  B.C.  893-885.  Called  also 
Jehoram. 

2  Ki.  8.  21  J.  went  over  to  Zair,  and  all  the  chariots 
8.  23  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he  did,  (are) 
8.  24  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
11.  «  the  daughter  of  king  J.,  sister  of  Ahaziah 

1  Ch.  3. 11  J.  his  son,  Ahaziah  his  son,  Joash  his  son 
Matt.  1.    8  and  Josaphat  begat  J.;  and  J.  begat  Ozias 

3.  A  son  of  Ahab;  called  also  Jehoram  (which  see). 
B.C.  896-884. 

2  Ki.  8.  16  in  the  fifth  year  of  J.  the  son  of  Ahab 

8.  25  In  the  twelfth  year  of  J.  the  son  of  Ahab 
8.  28  he  went  with  J.  the  son  of  Ahab  to  the 
8.  28  against  Hazael .  .the  Syrians  wounded  J. 
8.  29  J.  went  back  to  be  healed  in  Jezreel  of 

8.  29  to  see  J.  the  son  of  Ahab  in  Jezreel 

9.  14  son  of  Nimshi  conspired  against  J.  NowT. 

9. 15  J.  was  returned  to  be  healed  in  Jezreel 
9.  16  and  went  to  Jezreel ;  for  J.  lay  there 

9. 16  king  of  Judah  was  come  down  to  see  J. 
9.  17  J.  said  Take  an  horseman,  and  send  to 
9.  21  J  said,  Make  ready.    And  his  chariot  was 
9.  21  And  J.  king  of  Israel  and  Ahaziah  king  of 
9. 22  when  J.  saw  Jehu,  that  lie  said,  (Is  it) 

9.  23  J.  turned  his  hands,  and  fled,  and  said  to 
9,  29  in  the  eleventh  year  of  J.  the  son  of  Ahab 


4.  A  descendant  of  Eliezer  the  son  of  Moses.     B.C.  icoo* 
1  Ch.26.  25  J.  his  son . .  Zichri  his  son,  and  Shelomith 

JOR'-DAN,  \^yn  Hie  Jordan,  'lopfiavns. 
The  great  river  of  Palestine,  rising  from  two  springs  in 
the  valley  between  Lebanon  and  Hermon,  coming  forth 
from  a  hollow  S.  of  the  city  Dan-jaan.  The  upper 
spring  is  the  Hasbany,  which  rises  in  the  fountain  of 
Furr,  near  Hasbeiya,  twelve  miles  N.  of  Tell-el-kady. 
After  flowing  three  miles  through  the  valley  it  enters  a 
dark  defile  of  six  or  seven  miles,  after  which  it  enters 
into  a  marsh  of  ten  miles,  terminating  in  the  Lake 
Merom  or  Huleh.  About  twelve  miles  further  S.  it 
enters  the  Sea  of  Galilee  (fourteen  miles  long  and  seven 
broad,  and  653  feet  below  the  level  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean), and  issuing  from  its  S.E.  end,  flowing  on  with 
ever  increasing  force  till  it  falls  into  the  Salt  Sea,  1289 
feet  below  the  Mediterranean,  and  is  lost  in  intense 
evaporation.  The  whole  length  of  the  Jordan  is  only 
120  miles  in  a  direct  line,  but  in  its  windings  it  is  above 
240  miles.  N.  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  it  is  called  el- 
Urd&n,  and  S.  of  it  to  the  "Salt  Sea,  it  is  called  Es- 
Sahriat,  i.e.  "the  ford."  Israel  crossed  it,  B.C.  1451, 
and  Elijah,  B.C.  897-6. 

Gen.  13.  10  beheldallthe  plain  of  J.,  that  it  (was)  well 
11  Lotchose  him  all  the  plain  of  J.;  and  Lot 
10  with  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  J.,  and 

10  threshing  floor  of  Atad.  .(is)  beyond  J. 

11  called  Abel-mizraim,  which  (is)  beyond  J. 
Num  13.  29  dwell  by  the  sea,  and  by  the  coast  of  J. 

1  plains  of  Moabon  this  side  J.  (by)  Jericho 
3,  63  in  the  plains  of  Moab  by  J.  (near)  Je. 

12  plains  of  Moab,  which  (are)  by  J.  (near)  J. 
5  if  we  have,  .grace,  .bring  us  not  over  J. 

19  not  inherit  with  them  on  yonder  side  J. 

19  is  fallen  to  us  on  this  side  J.  eastward 

21  will  go  all  of  you  armed  over  J.  before 
29  children  of  Reuben,  .pass  with  you  over  J. 
32  inheritance  on  this  side  J.  (may  be)  ours 
48,50  the  plains  of  Moab,  by  J.  (near)  Jericho 
49  they  pitched  by  J.,  from  Beth-jcsimoth 
51  passed  over  J.  into  the  land  of  Canaan 

12  And  the  border  shall  go  down  to  J.,  and 
15  on  this  side  J.  (near)  Jericho  eastward 

1  in  the  plains  of  Moab  by  J.  (near)  Jericho 
10  be  come  over  J.  into  the  land  of  Canaan 
14  Ye  shall  give  three  cities  on  this  side  J. 

13  in  the  plains  of  Moab  by  J.  (near)  Jericho 
Deut.  1.    1  spake,  .on  this  side  J.  in  the  wilderness 

5  On  this  side  J.,  in  the  land  of  Moab 

29  I  shall  pass  over  J.,  into  the  land  whicli 
8  took,  .the  land  that  (was)  on  this  side  J. 

17  J.,  and  the  coast  (thereof),  from  Chinner. 

20  Lord  your  G  od  hath  given  them  beyond  J. 

25  see  the  good  land  that  (is)  beyond  J".,  that 
27  for  thou  shalt  not  go  over  this  J. 

21  sware  that  I  should  not  go  over  J.,  and 

22  I  must  not  go  over  J.:  but  ye  shall  go  over 

26  land  whereunto  ye  go  over  J.  to  possess  it 
41  Moses  severed  three  cities  on  this  side  J. 

46  On  this  side  J.,  in  the  valley  over  against 

47  the  Amorites,  which  (were)  on  this  side  J . 
49  the  plain  on  this  side  J.  eastward,  even 

1  Thou  (art)  to  pass  over  J.  this  day,  to  go 

30  (Are)  they  not  on  the  other  side  J.,  by  the 

31  ye  shall  pass  over  J.  to  go  in  to  possess 

10  (when)  ye  go  over  J . ,  and  dwell  in  the  land 

2  ye  shall  pass  over  J.  unto  the  land  which 

4  it  shall  be  when  ye  be  gone  over  J.,  (that) 

12  bless  the  people,  when  ye  are  come  over  J. 

18  thou  passest  over  J.  to  go  to  possess  it 

2  unto  me.  Thou  shalt  not  go  over  tins  J. 

13  land  whither  ye  go  over  J.  to  possess  it 
47  land  whither  ye  go  over  J.  to  possess  it 

Josh."i.    2  go  over  this  J.,  thou,  and  all  this  people 

11  ye  shall  pass  over  this  J.,  to  go  in  to 

14  land  which  Moses  gave  you  on  this  side  J. 

15  gave  you  on  this  side  J.  toward  the  sun 

7  pursued  after  them  the  way  to  J.  unto  the 

10  Amorites,  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  J. 
1  and  came  to  J.,  he  and  all  the  children  of 

8  the  water  of  J.,  ye  shall  stand  still  in  J. 

11  the  ark.  .passeth  over  before  you  into  J. 

13  in  the  waters  of  J.,  (that)  the  waters  of  J. 

14  removed  from  their  tents,  to  pass  over  J. 

15  they  that  bare  the  ark  were  come  unto  J. 

15  J.  overfloweth  all  his  banks  all  the  time 
17  stood  firm  on.  .ground  in  the  midst  of  J. 
17  all  the  people  were  passed  clean  over  J. 

1  all  the  people  were  clean  passed  over  J. 

3  Take  you  hence  out  of  the  midst  of  J.,  out 

5  Pass,  .before  the  ark.  .into  the  midst  of'J, 
7  the  waters  of  J.  were  cut  off  before  the 

7  when  it  passed  over  J.,  the  waters  of  J. 

8  took . .  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of  J. 

9  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  midst  of  J. 
10  For  the  priests,  .stood  in  the  midst  of  J. 

16  Command,  .that  they  come  up  out  of  J. 

17  commanded,  .saying,  Come  ye  up  out  of  J. 

18  priests,  .were  come,  .out  of  the  midst  of  J. 
iS  the  wTaters  of  J.  returned  into  their  place 

19  the  people  came  up  out  of  J.  on  the  tenth 

20  twelve  stones,  which  they  took  out  of  J. 

22  Israel  came  over  this  J.  on  dry  land 

23  dried  up  the  waters  of  J.  from  before  you 
1  which  (were)  on  the  side  of  J.  westward 
1  the  Lord  had  dried  up  the  waters  of  J. 
7  wherefore,  .brought  this  people  over  J. 
7  content  and  dwelt  on  the  other  side  J. ! 
1  the  kings  which  (were)  on  this  side  J.,  in 

10  kings  of . .  Amorites,  that  (were)  beyond  J. 
1  other  side  J.  toward  the  rising  of  the  sun 


JORIM 


550 


JOSEPH 


Joshi2.  7  Israel  smote  on  this  side  J.  on  the  west 
13.  8  which  Moses  gave  them,  beyond  J.  east. 
13. 23  border  of  the  children  of  Reuben  was  J. 
13.  27  J.  and  (his)  border,  (even)  unto  the  edge 
13. 27Chinnerethon  the  other  side  J.  eastward 

13.  32  on  the  other  side  J.,  by  Jericho,  eastward 

14.  3  an  half  tribe  on  the  other  side  J.:  but 
15-    5  (was)  the  salt  sea,  (even)  unto  the  end  of  J. 

15.  5  of  the  sea  at  the  uttermost  part  of  J. 

16.  1  lot  of  the  children  of  Joseph  fell  from  J. 

16.  7  and  came  to  Jericho,  and  went  out  at  J. 

17.  5  Gilead  and  Bashan.  on  the  other  side  J. 
18!    7  their  inheritance  beyond  J.  on  the  east 

18.  12  then'  border  on  the  north  side  was  from  J. 
18.  19  of  the  salt  sea  at  the  south  end  of  J. 

18.  20  J.  was  the  border  of  it  on  the  east  side 
19. 22  the  outgoings  of  their  border  were  at  J. 
19'  33  and  the  outgoings  thereof  were  at  J. 
10.  34  to  Judah  upon  J.  toward  the  sunrising 
20.    8  the  other  side  J.  by  Jericho  eastward ,  they 
22.   4whichMoses.  .gaveyouontheothersidej. 
22.    7  their  brethren  on  this  side  J.  westward 

22. 10  they  came  untotheborders  of  J.,that(are) 
22.  10  built  there  an  altar  by  J.,  a  great  altar 
22.  n  in  the  borders  of  J.,  at  the  passage  of 

22.  25  the  Loud  hath  made  J.  a  border  between 

23.  4  from  J.,  with  all  the  nations  that  I  have 

24.  8  Amorites,  which  dwelt  on  the  other  side  J. 

24. 11  ye  went  over  J.,  and  came  unto  Jericho 
Judg.  3.  28  and  took  the  fords  of  J.  toward  Moab,  and 

5.  17  Gilead  abode  beyond  J.:  and  why  did  Dan 
7.  24  take,  .the  waters  unto  Beth-barahand  J. 
7.  24  and  took  the  waters  unto  Beth-barah  and  J. 

7.  25  brought,  .to  Gideon  on  the  other  side  J. 

8.  4  Gideon  came  to  J.,  (and)  passed  over,  he 
10.    8  of  Israel  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  J. 

'10.   9  passed  over  J.  to  fight  also  against  Judah 
11. 13  from  Arnon  even  unto  Jabbok,  and  unto  J. 
ti.  22  and  from  the  wilderness  even  unto  J. 
12.    5  the  Gileadites  took  the  passages  of  J. 
12.    6  took,  and  slew  him  at  the  passages  of  J. 

1  Sa.  13.    7  (some  of)  the  Hebrews  went  over  J.  to  the 

31.    7  (they)  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  J.,  saw 

2  Sa.   2.  29  passed  over  J. ,  and  went  through . .  Bith. 

10. 17  he .  .passed  over  J.,  and  came  to  Helam 
17.  22  Then  David  arose .  .and  they  passed  over  J. 
17.22  not  one  of  them  that  was  not  gone  over  J. 
17.  24  Absalom  passed  over  J.,  he  and  all  the 

19.  15  king  returned,  and  came  to  J.  And  Jud. 
19.  15  meet  the  king,  to  conduct  the  king  over  J. 
19.  17  and  they  went  over  J.  before  the  king 
19.  iSShimei..  fell  down,  .as  he  was  come  over  J. 
19.  31  J.  with  the  king,  to  conduct  him  over  J. 
19.  36  will  go  a  little  way  over  J.  with  the  king 
19.  39  the  people  went  over  J.  And  when  the 

19.  41  brought.  .David's men  with  him,  over  J. 

20.  2  unto  their  king,  from  J.  even  to  Jerusalem 
24.    5  they  passed  over  J.,  and  pitched  in  Aroer 

1  Ki.  2.    8  he  came  down  to  meet  me  at  J.,  and  I 

7.  46  In  the  plain  of  J.  did  the  king  cast  them 
17.    3,  5  by  the  brook  Cherith,  that  (is)before  J. 

2  Ki.  2.   6  Tarry .  .for  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  J. 

2.    7  to  view  afar  off :  and  they  two  stood  by  J. 

2.  13  and  went  back,  and  stood  by  the  bank  of  J. 
5.  10  wash  in  J.  seven  times,  and  thy  flesh  shall 

5.  14  clipped  himself  seven  times  in  J.,  accord. 

6.  2"  Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  unto  J. ,  and  take 

6.  4  when  they  came  to  J.,  they  cut  down  wo. 

7.  15  they  wentafter  them  unto  J.;  and,  lo,  all 
10.  33  From  J.  eastward,  all  the  land  of  Gilead 

1  Ch.  6.  78  side  J.  by  Jericho,  on  the  east  side  of  J. 

12.  15  These  (are)  they  that  went  over  J.  in  the 
12.  37  on  the  other  side  of  J.,  of  the  Reubenites 
19.  17  passed  over  J.,  and  came  upon  them,  and 
26.  30  (were)  officers,  .on  this  side  J.  westward 

2  Ch.  4.  17  In  the  plain  of  J.  did  the  king  cast  them 
Job   40.  23  that  he  can  draw  up  J.  into  his  mouth 
Psa.  42.    6  will  I  remember  thee  from  the  land  of  J. 

114.   3  The  sea  saw  (it),  and  fled  :  J.  was  driven 
114.    5  thou  J.,  (that)  thou  wast  driven  back? 
Isa.     9.    1  sea,  beyond  J.,  in  Galilee  of  the  nations 
Jer.  12.    5  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  J.? 

49.  19  come,  .like  a  lion  from  the  swelling  of  J. 

50.  44  come,  .like  a  lion  from  the  swelling  of  J. 
Eze.  47.  18  from  the  land  of  Israel  (by)  J.,  from  the 
Zech.  11.    3  a  voice . .  for  the  pride  of  J.  is  spoiled 
Matt.  3.    5  Judea,  and  all  the  region  round  about  J. 

3.  6  were  baptized  of  him  in  J.,  confessin.; 

3.  13  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  J.  unto  John 

4.  15  the  sea,  beyond  J. .Galilee  of  the  Gentiles 

4.  25  Jer.,  and  (from)  Judea .  .(from)  beyond  J 
19.    1  came  into  the  coasts  of  Judea  beyond  J. 

Mark  1.    5  were  all  baptized  of  him  in  the  river  of  J 
1.    9  Jesus  came,  .and  was  bapti.  of  John  in  J. 

3.  8  Jerusalem, and. .Idumea.  .(from)  beyond  J. 
10.    1  coasts  of  Judea  by  the  farther  side  of  J. 

Luke  3.    3  And  he  came  into  all  the  country  about  J. 

4.  1  returned  from  J.,  and  was  led  by  the 
John   1.  28  These.,  were  done  in  Bethabara beyond  J. 

3.  26  he  that  was  with  theebeyond  J.,  to  whom 
10.  40  went  away  again  beyond  J.,  into  the  place 

JO'-RIM,  'iwpetV,  from  Bel .  DTirr?,  CTJV. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus  through  Mary. 

Luke  3,  29  J.,  which  was  (the  sou)  of  Matthat,  which 

JOR-KO'-AM,  c;'p-r  spreading  Hie  people. 

A  son  of  Raham.'a  descendant  of  Hebron  through  Caleb 

the  .spy;  or  a  city  in  Judah. 

1  Ch.  2.  44  Shema  begat  Raham  the  father  of  J. :  and 
70-SA'-PHAT,  'Iwtra^ar.     See  Jehoshaphat, 

Matt.  1.    S  Asa  begat  J.;  and  J.  begat  Joram  ;  and 


JO'-SE,.  'lus-ft,  from  Heb.  nfv. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus  through  Mary. 

Luke  3.29^Yhieh  was(theson)of[J.,]  which  was(the) 

JO-SE'-DECH,  p"i?in;  Jah  is  righteous. 
The  father  of  Jes'hua  the  priest  who  helped  to  rebuild 
the  altar  and  the  temple.    B.C.  588.    He  -is  also  called 
Jozadak  in  Ezra  3.  2,  8 ;  5.  2 ;  10.  iS ;  and  Neh.  12.  26. 

Hag.   1.    1  to  Joshua  the  son  of  J.  the  high  priest 
1.  12  the  son  of  J.,  the  high  priest,  with  all 

1.  14  the  spirit  of  Joshua  the  sou  of  J.,  the 

2.  2  Joshua  the  son  of  J.,  the  high  priest,  and 
2.    4  be  strong,  0  Joshua,  son  of  J. . .  high  priest 

Zech.  6.  11  upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the  son  of  J. 

JO'-SEPH,  f\QV  increaser,  'lwcH]<£. 

1.  The  eleventh  son  of  Jacob  and  first  of  Rachel.    B.C. 

1745-1635. 

Gen.  30.  24  she  called  his  name  J.;  and  said,  The  L. 
30.  25  when  Rachel  had  born  J.,  that  Jacob 
33.    2  children  after,  and  R,aehel  and  J.  hind. 
33.    7  after  came  J.  near  and  Rachel,  and  they 
35.  24  The  sons  of  Rachel ;  J.  and  Benjamin 
37.    2  J.,  (being)  seventeen  years  old,  was  feed. 
37.    2  and  J.  brought  unto  Ms  father  their  evil 
37.    3  Israel  loved  J.  more  than  all  his  children 
37.    5  J.  dreamed  a  dream,  and  he  told  (it)  his 
37.  13  Israel  said  unto  J.,  Do  not  thy  brethren 
37.  17  J.  went  after  Ins  brethren,  and  found  them 
37.  23  when  J.  was  come  unto  his  brethren,  that 
37.  23  they  stripped  J.  out  of  his  coat,  (his)  coa. 
37.  28  lifted  up  J.  out  of  the  pit,  and  sold  J.  to 
37.  28  and  they  brought  J.  into  Egypt 
37.  29  J.  (was)  not  in  the  pit ;  and  he  rent  his 
37.  31  they  took  J.'s  coat,  and  killed  a  kid  of 
37.  33  said.  .J.  is  without  doubt  rent  in  pieces 
39.    1  J.  was  brought  down  to  Egypt;  and  Poti. 
•     39.    2  LoRDwaswfth J.,andhe was  a  prosperous 
39.    4  J.  found  grace  in  his  sight,  and  he'served 
39.    5  blessed  the  Egyptian's  nous:  for  J.'s  sake 
39.    6  he  left  all  that  he  had  in  J.'s  hand ;  and 
39.    6  J.  was  (a)  goodly  (person),  and  well  favo. 
39.    7  his  master's  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  J. 
39. 10  as  she  spake  to  J.  day  by  day,  that  he 
39.  20  J.'s  master  took  him,  and  put  him  into 
39.  21  the  Lord  was  with  J.,  and  showed  him 

39.  22  the  keeper  of  the  prison  committed  to  J.'s 

40.  3  the  prison,  the  place  where  J.  (was)  bou. 
40.  4  captain  of  the  guard  charged  J.  with  them 
40.  6  J.  came  in  unto  them  in  the  morning,  and 
40.  8  J.  said  unto  them,  (Do)  not  interpretations 
40.  9  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  J.,  and 
40. 12  J.  said  unto  him,  This  (is)  the  interpreta. 
40.  16  he  said  unto  .J.,  I  also  (was)  in  my  dream 
40.  18  J.  answered.  .This  (is)  the  interpretation 
40. 22  he  hanged,  .as  J.  had  interpreted  to  them 

40.  23  Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember  J. 

41.  14  Then  Pharaoh  sent  and  called  J.,and  they 

41.  15  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  I  have  dreamed 

41.  16  J. answered  Pharaoh,  saying,  (It  is)  not 

41.  17  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  In  my  dream, [behold 

41.  25  J.  said  unto  Pharaoh,  The  dream  of  Fha. 

41.  39  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  Forasmuch  as  God 

41.41  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  See,  I  have  set  thee 

41.  42  ring  from  his  hand,  and  put  it  upon  J.'s 

41.  44  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  I  (am)  Pharaoh 

41. 45  Pharaoh  called  J.'s  name  Zaphnath-paan. 

41.  45  And  J.  went  out  over  (all)  the  land  of  Eg. 

41.  46  J.  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  stood 

41.  46  J.  went  outfromthe  presence  of  Pharaoh 

41.  49  J.  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 

41.  50  And  unto  J.  were  born  two  sons  before 

41.  51  And  J.  called  the  name  of  the  first  born 

41.  54  began  to  come,  according  as  J.  had  said 

41.  55  said.  .Go  unto  J. ;  what  he  saith  to  you 

41.  56  J.  opened  all  the  storehouses,  and  sold 

41.  57  came  into  Egypt  to  J.  for  to  buy  (com) 

42.  3  J.'s  ten  brethren  went  down  to  buy  corn 
42.    4  J.'s  brother,  Jacob  sent  not  with  his 
42.    6  J.  (was)  the  governor  over  the  land,  (and) 
42.    6  J.'s  brethren  came,  and  bowed  down 
42.    7  J.  saw  his  brethren,  and  he  knew  them 
42.    8  J.  knew  his  brethren,  but  they  knew  not 
42.    9  J.  remembered  the  dreams  which  he  dre. 
42.  14  J.  said  unto  them,  That  (is  it)  that  I  spa. 
42.  18  J.  said  unto  them  the  third  day,  This  do 
42.  23  they  knew  not  that  J.  understood  (them) 
'42.  25  J.  commanded  to  fill  their  sacks  with  corn 

42.  36  J.  (is)  not,  and  Simeon  (is)  uo#t,  and  ye 

43.  15  went  down  to  Egypt,  and  stood  before  J. 
43.  16  when  J.  saw  Benjamin  with  them,  he  said 
43.  17  And  the  man  did  as  J.  bade ;  and 
43.  17,  24  the  man  brought  the  men  into  J.'s  h. 
43. 18  they  were  brought  into  J.'s  house ;  and 
43.  19  came  near  to  the  steward  of  J.'s  house 
43.  25  they  made  ready  the  present  against  T. 
43.  26  when  J.  came  home,  they  brought  him 

43.  30  J.  made  haste ;  for  his  bowels  did  yearn 

44.  2  according  to  the  word  that  J.  had  spoken 
44.  4  J.  said  unto  his  steward,  Up,  follow  after 
44.  14  Judah  and  his  brethren  came  to  J.'s  house 

44.  15  J.  said  unto  them,  What  deed  (is)  this 
4^.    1  J.  could  not  refrain  himself  before  all 

45.  1  J.  made  himself  known  unto  his  brethren 
45.  3  J.  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  (am)  J. :  doth 
45.  4  J.  said  unto  his  brethren.  Come  near  to 
45.  4  I  (am)  J.  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold 
45.  9  Thus  saith  thy  son  J.,  God  bath  made  me 
45.  16  was  heard,  .saying,  J.'s  brethren  are  come 
45.  17  Pharaoh  said  unto  J.,  Say  unto  thy  breth. 


Geu.  45.  21  and  J.  gave  them  wagons,  according  to 
45.  26  J.  (is)  yet  alive,  and  he  (is)  governor  over 
45.  27  they  told  him  all  the  words  of  J.,  which 
45.  27  the  wagons  which  J.  had  sent  to  carry 

45.  28  J.  my  son  (is)  yet  alive  :  I  will  go  and  see 

46.  4  and  J.  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes 
46.  19  sons  of  Rachel,  Jacob's  wife;  J.,  and  Benj. 
46.  20  And  unto  J.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  were 
46.  27  sons  of  J.,  which  were  born  him  in  Egypt 
46.  28  he  sent  Judah  before  him  unto  J.,  to  dir. 
46. 29  J.  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  went  up 
46.  30  Israel  said  unto  J.,  Now  let  me  die,  since 

46.  31  J.  said  unto  his  brethren,  and  unto  his 

47.  1  J.  came  and  told  Pharaoh,  and  said,  My 
47.  5  Pharaohspake  unto  J.,  saying,  Thy  father 
47.  7  J.  brought  in  Jacob  his  father,  and  set 
47.  11  J.  placed  his  father  and  his  brethren,  and 
47. 12  J.  nourished  his  father,  and.his  brethren 
47.  14  J.  gathered  up  all  the  money  that  was 
47.  14  J.  brought  the  money  into  Pharaoh's  ho. 

47. 15  the  Egyptians  came  unto  J.,  and  said,  G. 

47. 16  J.  said,  Give  your  cattle ;  and  I  will  give 

47. 17  they  brought  their  cattle  unto  J. :  and  J. 
47.  20  J.  bought"all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  Pliar. 
47.  23  Then  J.  said  unto  the  people,  Behold,  I 
47.  26  J.  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  Egypt 

47.  29  he  called  his  son  J.,  and  said  unto  him 

48.  1  (one)  told  J.,  Behold,  thy  father  (is)  sick 
48.  2  thy  son  J.  cometh  unto  thee :  and  Israel 
48.  3  Jacob  said  unto  J.,  God  Almighty  appea. 
48.  8  Israel  beheld  J.'s  sons,  and  said,  Who 
48.  9  J.  said  unto  his  father,  They  (are)  my  sons 
48. 11  Israel  said  unto  J.,  I  had  not  thought  to 
48.  12  J.  brought,  them  out  from  between  his 
48.  13  J.  took  them  both,  Ephraim  in  his  right 
48.  15  he  blessed  J.,  and  said,  God,  before  whom 

48. 17  J.  saw  that  his  father  laid  his  right 

48. 18  J.  said  unto  his  father.  Not  so,  my  father 

48.  21  Israel  said  unto  J.,  Behold,  I  die  ;  but 

49.  22  J.  (is)  a  fruitful  bough,  (even)  a  fruitful 

49.  26  they  shall  be  on  the  head  of  J.,  and  on 

50.  1  J.  fell  upon  his  father's  face,  and  wept 
50.   2  J.  commanded  his  servants  the  physicians 
50.   4  J.  spake  unto  the  house  of  Pharaoh,  saying 
50.    7  J.  went  up  to  bury  his  father :  and  with 
50.   8  the  house  of  J.,  and  his  brethren,  and  his 
50. 14  J.  returned  into  Egypt,  he,  and  his  bxet. 
50.  15  J.'s  brethren  saw  that  their  father  was 
50.  15  said,  J.  will  peradventure  hate  us,  and 
50.  16  they  sent  a  messenger  unto  J.,  saying 
50. 17- So  shall  ye  say  unto  J.,  Forgive,  I  pray 
50.  17  And  J.  wept  when  they  spake  unto  him 
50.  19  J.  said  unto  them,  Fear  not ;  for  (am)  I 
50.  22  J.  dwelt  in  Egypt,  .and  J.  lived  an  hund. 
50.  23  J.  saw  Ephraims  children  of  the  third 
50.  23  children,  .were  brought  up  upon  J.'s  ku. 
50.  24  J.  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  die :  and  God 
50.  25  J.  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  Israel 
50.  26  So  J.  died,  (being)  an  huudred  and  ten  y. 

Exod.  1.  5  seventy  souls :  for  J.  was  in  Egypt  (aire.) 
1.  6  J.  died,  and  all  his  brethren,  and  all  that 
1.  8  arose  up  a  new  king,  .which  knew  not  J. 
13.  rg  Moses  took  the  bones  of  J.  with  him  :  for 

Num.  1.  10  the  children  of  J.:  of  Ephraim  ;  Elishama 
1.  32  the  children  of  J.  ,(uamely),  of  the  children 

13.  11  Of  the  tribe  of  J.,  (namely),  of  the  tribe  of 
26.  28  The  sons  of  J.  after  their  families  (were) 

26.  37  (are)  the  sons  of  J.  after  their  families 

27.  1  of  the  families  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  J. 

32.  33  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  J. 
34*23  The  prince  of  the  children  of  J. .  .Hanniel 
36.    1  fathers,  .of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  J." 
36.    5  The  tribe  of  the  sons  of  J.  hath  said  well 

36.  12  families  ofthe  sons  of  Manasseh.  .sonof  J. 
Deut27.  12  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  J.,  and  Benja. 

33-  13  °f  •!•  he  said,  Blessed  of  the  Lord  (be)  his 

33.  16  let  (the  blessing)  come  upon  the  head  of  J. 
Josh.  14.    4  children  of  J.  were  two  tribes,  Manasseh 

16.    1  the  lot  of  the  children  of  J.  fell  from 

16.  4  the  children  of  J.,  Manasseh  and  Ephraim 

17.  1  he  (was)  the  first  born  of  J. ;  (to  wit,)  for 
17.    2  male  children  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  J. 
17.  14  the  children  of  J.  spake  unto  Joshua,  say. 

17.  16  the  children  of  J.  said,  The  hill  is  not 
17. 17  Joshua  spake  unto  the  house  of  J.,  (even) 

18.  5  house  of  J.  shall  abide  in  their  coasts 
18.  11  children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of  J. 
24.  32  bones  of  J.,  which- the  children  of  Israel 
24.  32  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  J. 

Judg.  1.  22  the  house  of  J.,  they  also  went  up  against 
1.  23  the  house  of  J.  sent  to  descry  Beth-el 
1.  35  the  hand  of  the  house  of  J.  prevailed,  so 

2  Sa.  iq.  20  the  first  this  day  of  all  the  house  of  J. 

1  Ki.  n.  28  over  all  the  charge  of  the  house  of  J. 

1  Ch.  2.    2  J.,  and  Benjamin,  Naphtali,  Gad,  and  A. 
5.    1  birthright  was  given  unto  the  sons  of  J. 
5.    2  Jud.  prevailed,  .but.  .birthright (was)  J.'s 
7.  29  the  children  of  J.  the  son  of  Israel 

Psa.  77. 15  thy  people,  the  sons  of  Jacob  and  J. 

7S.  67  he'  refused  the  tabernacle  of  J.,  and  chose 

80.  1  thou  that  leadest  J.  like  a  flock  ;  thou 

81.  5  This  he  ordained  in  J.  (for)  a  testimony 
105.  17  He  sent  a  man  before  them,  (even)  J. 

Eze.  ^7.  16  For  J.,  the  stick  of  Ephraim,  and  (for)  all 

37.  10  T  will  take  the  stick  of  J.,  which  (is)  in 

47.  13  saith  the  Lord .  .J.. (shall  have  two)  port. 

48.  32  one  gate  of  J.,  one  gate  of  Benjamin,  one 
Amos  5.    6  he  break  out  like  fire  in  the  house  of  J. 

5.  15  will  be  gracious  unto  the  remnant  of  J. 

6.  6  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  J. 
Obad.     18;  Zech.  10.  6;  Jo  4.  5;  Ac.  7.  9,  i3>  i3» 

14,  iS  ;  Heb.  11.  21,  22  ;  Rev.  7.  8.  ■     . 


JOSES 


551 


JOSIAH 


2.  The  descendants  of  Joseph  son  of  Jacob. 

Deut33.  13  of  J.  he  said,  Blessed  of  the  Lord  (be)  his 

3.  The  father  of  Igal  of  Issachar,  one  of  the  spies  sent 
by  Moses  into  Canaan.    B.C.  1490. 

Numiq.    7  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  Igal  the  son  of  J. 

4.  A  son  of  Asaph.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.   2  J.,  and  Nethaniah,  and  Asarelah,  the  sons 
25.   9  the  first  lot  came  forth  for  Asaph  to  J. 

5.  A  man  of  the  family  of  Eani  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  42  Shallum,  Amariah,  (and)  J. 

6.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Shebaniah,  in  the  time  of 
Joiakim.    B.C.  530. 

Xeh.  12.  14  Of  Melicu,  Jonathan ;  of  Shebaniah,  J. 

7.  The  husband  of  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus. 

Matt.  1.  t6  Jacob  begat  J.  the  husband  of  Mary,  of 

1. 18  Mary  was  espoused  to  J.,  before  they  came 

1. 19  J.  her  husband,  being  a  just  (maa),  and 
1.  20  J.,  thou  son  of  David,  fear  not  to  take  unto 

1.  24  J.,  being  raised  from  sleep,  did  as  the  an. 
2. 13,  19  the  angel . .  appeareth  to  J.  in  a  dream 

Luke  1.  27  espoused  to  a  man  whose  uame  was  J. 

2.  4  J.  also  went  up  from  Galilee,  out  of  the 
2. 16  found  Mary  and  J.,  and  the  babe  lying 

2.  33  And  [J.]  and  liis  mother  marvelled  at 
2. 43  [and  J.  and  his  mother  knew  not  (of  it)] 

3.  23  being  as  was  supposed  the  son  of  J. 

4.  22  And  they  said,  Is  not  this  J.'s  son? 
John   1.  45  found.  .Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  son  of  J. 

6.4J2  -Is  not  this  Jesus,  the  son  of  J.,  whose 

8.  A  Jew  of  Arimathea,  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  in  whose 
sepulchre  the  body  of  Jesus  was  laid. 

Matt 27.  57  there  came  a  rich  man  of  Arimathea.  .J. 
27.  59  when  J.  had  taken  the  body,  he  wTappcd 
Markis.  43  J.  of  Arimathea,  an  honourable  counsel. 
Luke23.  50  (there  was)  a  man  named  J.,  a  counsellor 
Johnig.  38  J.  of  Arimathea,  being  a  disciple  of  Jesus 

9.  Ancestor  of  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  24  (the  son)  of  Janna.  .was  (the  son)  of  J. 

10.  Another  progenitor  of  Joseph  in  the  same  line. 
Luke  3.  26  Semei,  which  was  (the  sou)  of  J.,  wMch 

11.  A  third  and  more  remote  ancestor  of  Joseph  the 
husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  30  Juda,  which  was  (the  son)  of  J.,  which 

12.  A  disciple  nominated  with  Matthias  to  take  the 
place  of  Judas  Iscariot  among  the  apostles. 

Acts    1.  23  J.  called- Barsabas,  who  was  sumamed  J. 

JO'-SES.  '1(o<tj\s. 

1.  One  of  the  brethren  of  Jesus. 

Matt  13.  55  brethren,  James, and  J.,  and  Simon.. Ju.? 
Mark  6.   3  of  James,  and  J.,  and  of  Juda,  and  Sim.? 

2.  The  son  of  Mary,  probably  the  same  as  >~o.  1. 

Matt  27.  56  the  mother  of  James  and  J.,  and  the  mo. 
M  irk  1 5.  40  the  mother  of  James  the  less  and  of  J. 
15.  47  (the  mother)  of  J.  beheld  where  he  was 

3.  A  Levite  of  Cyprus,  Barnabas,  a  companion  of  Paul. 

Acts   4,  36  [J.],  .by  the  apostles  was  sumamed  Bar. 
JO'-SHAH,  rr^r  Jah  is  a  gift. 
A  descendant  of  Simeon.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  34  and  Jamlech,  and  J.  the  son  of  Amaziah 
JO-SHA'-PEAT,  -zzzv  Jah  judges. 
One  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  43  the  son  of  Maachah,  and  J.  the  Mithnite 
JO-SEAV-IAH,  n*iwr  Jah  is  equality. 
One  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.u.  46  Jeribai  and  J.,  the  sons  of  Elnaani,  and 
JOSH-BE-KA'-SHAH,  ~v;^-?;  seated  in  hardness. 
A  son  of  Heman,  David's  leader  of  song.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.   4  and  Eomamti-ezer,  J.,  Mallothi,  Hothir 

25.  24  The  seventeenth  to  J.,  (Tie),  his  sons,  and 

JO-SHTJ'-A,  JE-HO-SHU'-A,  J^irr,  j^m;  Jah  saves. 
1.  The  son  of  Nun  and  minister  and  successor  of  Moses. 
He  led.  Israel  over  the  Jordan  and  conquered  most  of 
the  land  and  gave  inheritance  iu  it  to  the  tribes  of 
Israel.  He  died  aged  no  years  and  was  buried  in 
Timnath-Serah  in  Mount  Ephraim,  B.C.  1427.  See  also 
Jehoshuah  and  Oshea. 

Exodi7.   9  Moses  said  unto  J.,  Choose  us  out  men 
17. 10  J.  did  as  Moses  had  said  to  him,  and  fou. 

17. 13  J.  discomfited  Amalek  and  his  people 

17. 14  Write ..  and  rehearse  (it)  in  the  ears  of  J. 

24. 13  "And  Moses  rose  up,  and  his  minister  J. 

32.  17  J.  heard  the  noise  of  the  people  as  they 

33.  n  his  servant  J.,  the  son  of  Nun,  a  young 
Xumii.  2S  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  the  servant  of  Moses 

13. 16  And  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son  of  X.,  J. 
14.   6  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  son  of 
14.  30  son  of  Jephunneh,  and  J.  the  son  of  Nun 
14. 38  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  son  of 

26.  65  son  of  Jephunneh,  and  J.  the  son  of  Nun 
27. 18  Take  thee  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  a  manin 

27.  22  took  J.,  and  set  him  before  ileazar  the 
32. 12  son  of  Jephunneh..  and  J.  the  son  of  Nun 
32.  28  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  and  the  chief  fathers 

34. 17  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  J.  the  son  of  Nun 
Deut.  1.  38  J.  the  son  of  Nuu,  which  standeth  before 

3.  21  I  commanded  J.  at  that  time,  saying,  Th. 

3. 28  charge  J.,  and  encourage  him,  and  stren. 
31.   3  J.,  he  shall  go  over  before  thee,  as  the 
31.    7  Moses  called  unto  J.,  and  said  unto  him 

31. 14  call  J.,  and  present  yourselves  in  the  tub. 


Deut3i, 
Josh.  1 


14  Moses  and  J.  went,  and  presented  them. 

23  lie  gave  J.  the  son  of  Kim  a  charge,  and 
9  J.  the  son  of  Xuu  was  full  of  the  spirit 
1  that  the  Lord  spake  unto  J.  the  son  of 

10  J.  commanded  the  officers  of  the  people 

12  to  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  spake  J. 

16  And  they  answered  J.,  saying,  All  that 

1  J.  the  son  of  Nun  sent^outof  Sliittim  two 

23  came  to  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  and  told  him 

24  they  said  unto  J.,  Truly  the  Lord  hath 

1  J.  rose  up  early  inthe  morning ;  and  they 

5  J,  said  unto  the  people,  Sanctify  yourse. 

6  J.  spake  unto  the  priests,  saying,  Take  up 

7  Lord  said  uuto  J.,  This  day  will  I  begin 
9  J.  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  Come 

10  And  J.  said,  Hereby  ye  shall  know  that 

1  that  the  Lord  spate  unto  J.,  saying 

4  Then  J.  called  the  twelve  men,  whom  he 

5  J.  said  unto  them,  Pass  over  before  the 

5  Children  of  Israel  did  as  J.  commanded 

8  twelve  stones,  .as  the  LORD  spake  unto  J. 

9  J.  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  midst  of 
10  Lord  commanded  J.  to  speak  unto  the 
10  accordingtoallthat  Moses  commanded  J. 

14  magnified  J,  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel 

15  And  the  LORD  spake  unto  J.,  saying 

17  J.  therefore  commanded  the  priests,  say. 
.  20  those  twelve  stones,  .did  J.  pitch  in  Oil. 

2  the  Lord  said  unto  J.,  Make  thee  sharp 

3  J.  made  him  sharp  knives,  and  circumci. 

4  this  (is)  the  cause  why  J.  did  circumcise 

7  their  children .  .J.  circumcised :  for  they 
9  And  the  Lord  said  uuto  0 .,  This  day  have 

13  when  J.  was  by  Jericho,  that  "he  lifted  up 

13  J.  went  unto  him,  and  said  unto  him,  (Art) 

14  J.  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth,  and  did 

15  captain  of  the  Lord's  host  said  uuto  J. 

15  Loose  thy  shoe  from  off .  .And  J.  did  so 
2  the  Lord  said  unto  J.,  See,  I  have  given 

6  J.  the  son  of  Nun  called  the  priests,  and 

8  when  J.  had  spoken  unto  the  people,  that 
10  J.  had  commanded  the  people,  saying,  Ye 

12  And  J.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

16  J.  said  unto  the  peopTe,  Shout  ,*  for  the  I.. 
22  But  J.  had  said  unto  the  two  men  that  had 

25  J.  saved  Itahab  the  harlot  alive,  and  her 

25  messengers  which  J.  sent  to  spy.  .Jericho 

26  J.  abjured  (them)  at  that  time,  sayiug,  C. 

27  LORD  was  with  J. ;  and  his  famewas(no.) 

2  J.  sent  men  from  Jericho  to  Ai,  which  (is) 

3  they  returned  to  J.,  and  said  unto  him 

6  J.  rent  his  clothes,  and  fell  to  the  earth 

7  J.  said,  Alas,  O  Lord  God,  wherefore  hast 
10  the  Lord  said  unto  J. ,  Get  thee  up ;  whe. 
16  J.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  bro. 

19  J.  said  unto  Achan,  My  son,  give,  I  pray 

20  Achan  answered  J.,  and  said,  Indeed  I 

22  J.  sent  messengers,  aud  they  ran  unto  the 

23  brought  them  unto  J.,  and  unto  all  the 

24  J.,  and  all  Israel  with  him,  took  Achan 

25  J.  said,  Why  hast  thou  troubled  us  ?  the  L. 

1  the  Lord  said  unto  J.,  Fear  not,  neither 
3  J.  arose,  and  all  the  people  of  war,  to  go 
3  J.  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty  men 

9  J.  therefore  sent  them  forth ;  and  they 

9  but  J.  lodged  that  nig'.it  among  the  people 
10  J.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  num. 

13  J.  went  that  night  into  the  midst  of  the 

15  J.  and  all  Israel  made  as  if  they  were 

16  pursued  after  J.,  and  were  drawn  away 
iS  the  Lord  said  unto  J.,  Stretch  out  the 

18  J.  stretched  out  the  spear  that  (lie  had) 

21  J.  and  all  Israel  saw  that  the  ambush  had 
23  king,  .took  alive,  and  brought  liim  to  J. 

26  J.  drew  not  his  hand  back,  wherewith  he 

27  word  of  the  Lord  which  he  commanded  J. 

23  J.  burnt  Ai,  and  made  it  an  heap  for  ever 

29  J.  commanded  that  they  should  take  Iris 

30  J.  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  God  of 

35  J.  read  not  before  all  the  congregation 

2  to  fight  with  J.  and  with  Israel,  with  one 

3  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeon  heard  what  J. 
6  they  went  to  J.  unto  the  camp  at  Gilgal 

3  said  unto  J.,  We  (are)  thy  servants.  AndJ. 
15  J.  made  peace  with  them,  and  made  a     ■ 

22  J.calledforthem.andhe  spake  unto  them 

24  they  answered  J.,  aud  said,  Because  it  was 
27  J.  made  them  that  day  hewers  of  wood  and 

1  Adoni-zedec.  .had  heard  how  J.  had  taken 

4  it  hath  made  peace  with  J.  and  with  the 

6  men  of  Gibeon  sent  unto  J.  to  the  camp 

7  So  J.  ascended  from  Gilgal,  he,  and  all  the 
3  the  Lord  said  unto  J..  Fear  them  not :  for 
9  J.  therefore  came  unto  them  suddenly 

i2  Then  spake  J.  to  the  Lord  in  the  day  when 
15,  38, 43  J.  returned,  and  all  Israel  with  liini 

17  it  was  told  J.,  saying,  The  five  kings  are 
iS  J  said,  Roll  great  stones  upon  the  mouth 

20  J.  aud  the  children  of  Israel  had  made  an 

21  the  people  returned  to  the  camp  to  J.  at 

22  Then  said  J.,  Open  the  mouth  of  the  cave 

24  brought  out  those  kings  unto  J.,  that  J. 

25  J.  said  unto  them,  Fear  not,  nor  be  dism. 

26  J.  smote  them,  and  slew  them,  andhanged 

27  J.  commanded,  aud  they  took  them  down 
2S  J.  took  Makkedah,  and  smote  it  with  the 

39  J.  passed  from  Makkedah,  and  all  Israel 

31  J.  passed  from  Libnah,  aud.  all  Israel  with 
^  J.  smote  him  and  his  people,  until  he  had 
34  J.  passed  unto  Eglon,  and  all  Israel  with 

36  J.  went  up* from  Eglon,  and.  .Israel  with 

40  J.  smote  all  the  country  of  the  hills,  and 


23- 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24 


Josh  10.  41  J.  smote  them  from  Kadesh-barnea  even 

10.  42  and  their  land  did  J.  take  at  one  time 

11.  6  Lord  said  unto  J.,  Be  not  afraid  because 
11.    7  J.  came,  and  all  the  people  of  war  with 
11.   9  J.  did  unto  them  as  the  Lord  bade  him 
11.  10  J.  at  that  time  turned  back,  and  took  II. 

11. 12  the  kings  of  them,  did  J.  take,  and  smote 
11.  13  none . .  save  Hazor  only ;  (that)  did  J.  burn 
11.  15  so  did  Moses  command  J.,  and  so  did  J. 
11.  16  J.  took  all  that  land,  the  hills,  and  all 
11.  iS  J.  made  war  a  long  time  with  all  those 
11.  21  that  time  came  J.,  and  cut  off  the  Anakim 
11.  21  J.  destroyed  them  utterly  with  their  cities 
it.  23  J.  took  the  whole  land,  according  to  all 

11.  23  J.  gave  it  for  an  inheritance  unto  Israel 

12.  7  which  J.  and  the  children  of  Israel  smote 

12.  7  which  J.  gave  unto  the  tribes  of  Israel 

13.  1  Now  J.  was  old  (and)  stricken  in  years 

14.  1  Eleazer  the  priest,  and  J.  the  son  of  Nun 

14.  6  the  children  of  Judah  came  unto  J.  in  G. 

14. 13  J.  blessed  him,  and  gave  unto  Caleb  the 

15.  13  according  to  the  commandment,  .to  J. 
17.   4  and  before  J.  the  son  of  Nun,  and  before 

17. 14  And  the  children  of  Joseph  spake  unto  J. 

17. 15  J.  answered  them,  If  thou  (be)  a  great 

17.  17  J.  spake  unto  the  house  of  Joseph,  (even) 

18.  3  J.  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  How 
18.    8  J.  chargedtheni  that  went  to  descri;  e  the 

18.  9  and  came  (again)  to  J.  to  the  host  at  Shi 
18. 10  J,  cast  lots,  .in  Shiloh..and  there 

19.  49  gave  an  inheritance  to  J.  the  son  of  Nun 

19.  51  Eleazer  the,  priest, and  J.-the  son  of  Nun 

20.  1  The  Lord  also  spake  unto  J.,  saying 

21.  1  tuitoJ.  thesonof  Nun,  anduntotheLtaiU 

22.  1  Then  J.  called  the  Reubenites,  and  the 
22.   6  So  J.  blessed  them,  and  sent  them  away 
22.    7  but  unto  the  (othei)  half  thereof  gave  J. 

22.  7  J.  sent  them  away  also  unto  their  tents 

23.  1  came  to  pass,  .that  J.  waxed  old  (and) 
2  J.  called  for  all  Israel,  (and)  for  their 

1  J.  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  She. 

2  J.  said  unto  all  the  people,  Thus  saiththe 
19  J.  said  unto  the  people.  Ye  cannot  serve 

:i  said  unto  J.,  Nay  ;  but  we  will  serve  the 
4. 32  J.  said  unto  the  people,  Ye  (are)  witnesses 

24.  24  said  unto  J.,  The  Lord  our  God  will  we 
24.  25  So  J.  made  a  covenant  with  the  people 
24.  26  J.  wrote  these  words  in  the  book  of  the 
24.  27  J.  said  unto  all  the  people,  Behold,  this 
24.  28  So  J.  Let  the  people  depart,  every  man 
24.  29  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  that  T 
24.  31  Israel  served  the  LORD  all  the  days  of  J. 
24.  31  all  the  days  of  the  elders  thatoverlived.J. 

Judg.  1.  1  Now  after  the  death  of  J.  it  came  to  pass 
2.  6  And  when  J.  had  let  the  people  go,  the 
2.  7  people  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  J. 
2.  7  the  days  of  the  elders  that  outlived  J. 
2.  8  J.  the  son  of  Nun.  .died,  (being)  an  hund. 
2.  21  of  the  nations  which  J.  left  when  he  died 
2.  23  neitherdelivered-themintothehandof  J 

1  Ki   16.  34  which  he  spake  by  J.  the  son  of  Nun 

2.  A  Beth-shemite,  in  the  days  of  Eli.    B.C.  1140. 

1  Sa.  6.  14  the  cart  came  into  the  field  of  J.,  a  Beth. 

6.  iS  unto  this  day  in  the  field  of  J.,  the  Beth. 

3.  The  governor  of  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Josiah, 

B.C.  640. 

2  Ki.23.    8  in  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  J.  the 

i.  The  son  of  Josedech  and  high  priest  at  the  rebuild- 
ing of  the  temple.    B.C.  520.   See  Jeskua. 

Hag.    1.    1,12, 14  J.,  the  son  of  Josedech  the  high  priest 
2.    2  to  J.  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest 

2.  4  be  strong,  0  J.,  son  of  Josedech,  the  high 
Zech.  3.    1  he  showed  me  J.  thehigh  priest  standing 

3.  3  Now  J.  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments 
3.  6  angel  of  the  LORD  protested  unto  J.,  say. 
3.  8  Hear  now,  0  J.  the  high  priest,  thou,  and 
3.  9  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  J.;  upon 
6.  11  set  (them)  upon  the  head  of  J.  the  son  of 

JO-SI'-AH,  i.TirN1,  n£W  Jah  supports  yloisrias. 
1.  A  son  of  Amon  king  of  Judah,  B.C.   642-611;  pro- 
phesied of  to  Jeroboam,  B.C.  970. 

1  EX  13.    2  be  born  unto  the  house  of  David,  J.  by 

2  Ki.21.  24  people,  .made  J.  his  son  kingin  his  stead 

21.  26  buried,  .and  J.  Ins  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

22.  1  J.  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he  began  to 

22.  3  iu  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  J.,  (that) 

23.  16  ?s  J.  turned  himself,  he  spied  the  sepulc. 
23. 19  to  provoke  (the  Lord)  to  anger,  J.  took 
23.  23  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  J., (wherein) 
23.  24  did  J.  put  away,  that  he  might  perform 
23.  23  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he  did 
23.  29  king  J.  went  against  him  ;  and  he  slew 
23.  30  Jehoahaz  the  son  of  J.,  and  anointed  him 
23.  34  the  son  of  J.  king  in  the  room  of  J. 

1  Ch.  3.  14  Amon  Ins  son,  J.  his  son 

3.  15  the  sons  of  J.  (were),  the  first  born  Joha. 

2  Ch.33.  25  people.. made  J.  his  son  kingin  hisstead 

34.    1  J.  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he  began  to 

34.  33  J.  took  away  all  the  abominations  out  of 

35.  1  Moreover  J.  kept  a  passover  unto  the  L. 
35.  7  J.  gave  to  the  people,  of  the  flock,  Iambs 
35. 16  according  to  the  commandment  of  king  J. 
35.  iS  keep  such  a  passover  as  J.  kept,  and  the 
35. 19  In  the  eighteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  J. 
35.  20  J  had  prepared  the  temple,  .and  J.  went 
35.  22  J.  would  not  turn  his  face  from  him,  but 
35.  23  the  archers  shot  at  king  J. :  and  the  king 
35.  24  all  Judah  and  Jerusalem  nioumed  for  J. 
35.  25  And  Jeremiah  lamented  for  J.;  and  all  the 


JOSIBIAH 


552 


JOY 


2  Ch.35.  25  the  singing  women  spake  of  J.  in  their 

35.  26  the  acts  of  J.,  andhis  goodness,  according 

36.  1  the  people,  .took  Jehoahaz  the  son  of  J. 
Jer.     1.    2  word  of  the  Lord  came  in  the  days  of  J. 

1.   3  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J. 

1.    3  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah  the  son  of  J. 

3.    6  said  also  unto  me  in  the  days  of  J.  the 
22. 11  touching  Sallum  the  son  of  J.  king  of 
22.  11  which  reigned  instead  of  J.  his  father 
22.  18  concerning  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king 
25.    1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

25.  3  From  the  thirteenth  year  of  J.  the  son  of 

26.  1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

35.  1  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

36.  1  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 
36.   2  from  the  days  of  J.,  even  unto  this  day 

36.  9  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

37.  1  the  son  of  J.  reigned  instead  of  Coniah 

45.  1  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

46.  2  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah 
Zeph.  1.  1  in  the  days  of  J.  the  son  of  Anion,  king  of 
Matt.  i.  10  Manasses  begat  Anion.  .Anion  begat  J. 

1.  11  J.  begat  Jechonias  and  his  brethren,  about 

2.  A  son  of  Zephaniah,  dwelling  in  Jerusalem.     B.C. 
519- 

Zech.  6.  10  into  the  house  of  J.  the  son  of  Zephaniah 
JO-SIB-I'AH,  n;5$v  Jah  causes  to  dwell. 
A  Simeonite.     B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  35  the  son  of  J.,  the  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son 

JO-SIPH-I'AH,  rr?pv  Jah  adds. 

The  father  of  a  chief  that  returned  from  exile  with  Ezra. 

B.C.  457. 

Ezra  8.  10  the  son  of  J.,  and  with  him  an  hundred 
JOT  — 
Smallest  letter  in  the  Gr.  and  Heh. 'alphabet,  lajra. 

Matt.  5.  18  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass 
JOT'-BAH,  rna;  excellent  for  water. 
A  place  in  Judah,  same  as  Juttah,  now  Jatah,  three 
miles  S.  of  Hebron,  and  two  miles  N.W.  of  el-Earmil. 

2  Ki.21.  19  Meshullemeth.  .daughter  of  Haruz  of  J. 
JOT-BA'-THAH,  JOT'-BATH,  nrot?;. 

The  29th  encampment  of  Israel  from  Egjrpt,  and  the 
1 8th  from  Sinai. 

Nuni33.  33  went  from  Hor-hagidgad,  andpitchedin  J. 
33.  34  removed  from  J., and  encamped  at  Ebron. 

Deutio-  7  from  Gudgodah  to  J.,  a  land  of  rivers  of 
JO'-THAM,  nnv  Jah  is  perfect. 

1.  Gideon's  youngest  son  who  escaped  from  Abimelech. 

B.C.  1209. 

Judg.  9.   s  J.  the  youngest  son  of  Jerubbaal  was  left 
9.    7  whentheytold(it)to  J., hewentandstood 
9.  21  J.  ran  away,  and  fled,  and  went  to  Beer 
9.  57  came  the  curse  of  J.  the  son  of  Jerubbaal 

2.  A  son  of  Azariah  (or  Uzziah),  king  of  Judah  and  father 
of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  750. 

2  Ki.15.  5  J.  the  king's  son  (was)  over  Uie  house,  jud. 
15.  7  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead ;  v.  30. 
15.  32  began  J.  the  son  of  Uzziah  king  of  Judah 
15.  36  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  that  he  did,  (are) 

15.  38  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 

16.  1  son  of  J.  king  of  Judah  began  to  reign 

1  Ch.  3.  12  Amaziah  his  son,  Azariah  his  son,  J.  his 

5.  17  genealogies  in  the  days  of  J.  king  of  Judah 

2  Oh. 26.  21  J.  his  son  (was)  over  the  king's  house,  jud. 

26.  23  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

27.  r  J.  (was)  twenty  and  Ave  years  old  when 
27.  6  J.  became  mighty,  because  he  prepared 
27.  7  the  acts  of  J.,  and  all  his  wars,  and  his 
27.  9  J.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  buried 

Isa.      1.    1  Uzziah,  J.,  Ahaz,  (and)  Hezekiah,  kings  of 

7.  1  in  the  days  of  Ahaz  the  son  of  J.,  the  son 
Hos.    1.    1  Uzziah,  J.,  Ahaz,  (and)  Hezekiah,  kings 
Mic.    1.    1  to  Micah  the  Morasthite  in  the  days  of  J. 

3.  A  son  of  Jahdai.    B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2. 47  and  J.,  and  Gesham,  and  Pelet,  and  Eph. 
JOTTRNEY  — 
I,  Way,  journey,  Iffi  dtrek. 

Gen.  24.  21  whether  the  Lord  had  made  his  journey 
30. 36  he  set  three  days'  journey  betwixt  himself 
31.  23  and  pursued  after  him  seven  days' journey 
Exod.3.  18  go.. three  days'  journey.. the  wilderness 
5.    3  go.  .three  days'  journey  into  the  desert 

8.  27  We  will  go  three  days'  journey  into  the 
>Tum.  9. 10  in  a  journey  afar  off,  yet  he  shall  keep  the 

9. 13  the  man  that  (is)  clean,  and  is  not  in  a  jour. 

10.  33  departed  from  the  mount,  .three  days'  j. 
IO-  33  went  before  them  in  the  three  days'  jour. 
11. 31  as  it  were  a  day's  journey  on  this  side,  and 

11.  31  as  it  were  a  day's  journey  on  the  other 
33.    8  went  three  days'  journey  in  the  wilderness 

Josh.  9. 11  Take  victuals  with  you  for  the  journey,  aud 
9. 13  becameold  byreason  of  the  verylongjour] 
Judg  4.  9  the  journey  that  thou  takest  shall  not  be' 
1  Sa.  15. 18  Lord  sent  thee  on  a  journey,  and  said,  Go 
9  Sa.  it.  10  Camest thou  not  from  (thy)  journey?  why 

1  Ki.  18.  27  or  lie  is  pursuing,  or  he  is  in  a  journey 

19.  4  he  himself  went  a  day's  journey  into  the 
19.    7  because  the  journey  (is)  too  great  for  thee 

2  Ki.  3.    9  they  fetched  a  compass  of  seven  days'  jo. 
Prov.  7. 19  For  the  goodman . .  is  gone  a  long  journey 

2. A  going  on,  walk,  journey,  ^no  mahalak. 
Neh.    2.   6  For  how  long  shall  thy  journey  bej?  and 
Jon.    3.    3  -was  a.  .great  city  of  three  days'  journey 
3.    4  began.to  enter  into  the  city  a  day's  journey 


3.Journey,  yps  massa. 

Gen.  13.   3  he  went  on  his  journeys  from  the  south 
Exodi7.    1  after  their  journeys,  accordingtothecom. 
40.36  Israel  went  onward  in  all  their  journeys 
40.  38  house  of  Israel,  throughout  all  their  jour. 
Kumio.    6  they  shall  blow  an  alarm  for  their  journ. 

10.  12  the  children  of  Israel  took  their  journeys 
33.    1  These  (are)  the  journeys  of  the  children 
33.   2  according  to  their  journeys  by  the  com. 
33.    2  these  (are)  their  journeys  according  to 

Deutio.  n  Arise,  take  (thy)journey  before  the  people 

4.  Way-faring,  journeying,  SSonropia  hodoiiJoria. 
John  4.    6  Jesus  therefore,  being  wearied  with. .jour. 

5.  Way,  686$  hodos. 

Matt  10. 10  Nor  scrip  for.  .journey,  neither  two  coats 
Mark  6.    8  they  should  take  nothing  for. .  journey 
Luke  2.  44  But  they,  .went  a  day's  journey ;  and  they 
9.    3  Takenothingfor.  .journey,  neither  staves 

11.  6  a  friend  of  mine  in  bis  journey  is  come  to 
Acts    1. 12  Olivet,  .from  Jerusalem  a  sabbath  day's  j, 

JOTTRNEY,  to  — 

l.To  lift  up,  remove,  journey,  yci  nasa. 

Gen.  11.    2  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  journeyed  from 

12.  9  Abram  journeyed,  going  on  still  toward 
13. 11  Lot  journeyed  east :  and  they  separated 
20.  1  Abraham  journeyed  from  thence  toward 
33. 17  Jacob  journeyed  to  Succoth,  and  built 
35.  5  they  journeyed  :  and  the  terror  of  God 
35.  16  they  journeyed  from  Beth-el ;  and  there 
35.  21  Israel  journeyed,  and  spread  his  tent  be. 

£xodi2.  37  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed  froniR. 
17.    1  Israel  journeyed  from  the  wilderness  of 
40.  37  they  journeyed  not  till  the  day  thatit  was 
Num.  9.  17  after  that  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed 
9.  18  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed,  and  at 
9. 19  Israel  kept  the  charge . .  and  journeyed 
9.  20  to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  j. 
9.  21  was  taken  up  in  the  morning,  then  they  j. 
9.  21  that  the  cloud  was  taken  up,  they  jour. 
9.  22  abode  in  their  tents,  and  journeyed  not 
'     9.  22  but  when  it  was  taken  up,  they  journeyed 
9. 23  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  j. 

10.  29  We  are  journeying  unto  the  place  of  which 

11.  35  the  people  journeyed  from  Kibrothdiat. 

12.  15  the  people  journeyed  not  till  Mirianiwas 

20.  22  the  whole  congregation,  journeyed  from 

21.  4  they  journeyed  from  mount  Hor  by  the 
21.  11  they  journeyed  from  Oboth,  and  pitched 
33.  22  they  journeyed  from  Rissah,  and  pitched 

Deut.io.    7  From  thencethey  journeyed  unto  Gudgo. 
Josh.  9.  17  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed,  and  came 

2.  To  lift  up  the  feet,  w}?Tl  N'ytt  nasa  raglayim. 

Gen.  29.    1  Jacob  went  on  his  journey,  and  came  in. 

3.  To  make  a  way,  progress,  Xi~\  rtip%  asah  derek. 
Judg.17.    8  to  the  house  of  Micah,  as  he  journeyed 

•i.To  journey,  65et/w  liodeuu. 

Lukeio.  33  acertainSamaritan,  aslie  journeyed,  came 

5. To  pass  on,  iropeuo/xai  p)oreuomai'. 

Acts    9.    3  as  he  journeyed,  he  came  near  Damascus 
26.  13  round  about  me  and  them  which  journey. 

JOTTRNEY,  to  bring  forward  on  one's  — 
To  send  forward,  TrpoTve/xTru  propempo. 

3  John     6  if  thou  bring  forward  on  their  journey 
JOTTRNEY,  to  go  on  one's  — 
To  pass  on  tlie  way,  SSonropew  hodoiporeo. 

Acts  10.    9  as  they  went  on  their  journey,  and  drew 
JOTTRNEY,  to  have  a  prosperous  — 
To  have  a  good  journey  or  passage,  evod6o/j.at  eaodo. 
Rom.  1.  10  I  might  have  a  prosperous  journey  by  the 
JOTTRNEY,  in  a  — 
To  pass  throughout,  Stairopevo/iat  diaporenomai. 

Rom  15.  24  for  1  trust  to  see  you  in  my  journey,  and 
JOTTRNEY,  to  make  or  take  a  — 
l.To  lift  up,  remove,  journey ,  ypj  nasa. 

Gen.  33.  12  Let  us  take  our  journey,  and  let  us  go,  and 

46.    1  Israel  took  his  journey  with  all  that  he 
Exodi3.  20  they  took  their  journey  from  Succoth 

16.  1  they  took  their  journey  from  Elim,  and 
Nuniio.  6  then  the  camps,  .shall  take  their  journey 
10.  12  the  children  of  Israel  took  their  journeys 
10.  13  they  first  took  their  journey  according  to 
33.  12  they  took  their  journey  out  of  the  wilder. 
Deut  1.    7  Turn  you,  and  take  your  journey,  and  go 

1.  40  take  your  journey  into  the  wilderness  by 

2.  1  we  turned,  and  took  our  journey  into  the 
2.  24  Rise  ye  up,  take  your  journey,  and  pass 

10.    6  the  children  of  Israel  took  their  journey 

2.  To  go  away  fromonCs people,hKohn\xio^  apodemeo. 

Matt 25.  15  ever  man.  .and  straightway  took  his  jour. 
Lukeis.  13  took  his  journey  into  a  far  country,  and 

3.  To  pass  on,  iropstiofiai  poreuomai. 

Acts  22.    6  it  came  to  pass,  that  as  I  made  my  journey 

Rom  15.  24  Whensoever  I  take  my  journey  into  Spain 
JOTTRNEY,  taking  a  fax  — 
Away  from  one1 's  people,  airSBn/xos  apodemos. 

Marki3.  34  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey,  who  left 
JOTTRNEY  with,  to  — 
T<>  journey  with,  ffwoSeuaj  sUnndeun. 

Acts    9.    7  the  men  which  journeyed  with  him  stood 


JOURNEYING  — 

1. Journey,  i'EC  massa. 

Nuniio.    2  use  them,  .forthe  journeying  of  the  camps 
10.  28  Thus  (were)  the  journeyings  of  the  child. 

2.  A  p>asshig  on,  journeying,  SSotwopia  hodoiporia. 

2  Co.  ii.  26  (In)  journeyings  often,  (in)  perils  of  wat. 
Z.To  make  apassage,  progress,  -koUw  iropsiav yyoieo, 

Lukei3_  22  teaching  and  journeyiug  toward  Jerusa. 

JOY  — 

I.Joy,  rejoicing,  V'3  gil. 

Psa.  43.  4  Then  will  I  go . .  unto  God  my  exceeding  j . 
Isa.  16.  10  gladness  is  taken  away,  and  joy  out  of  the 
Hos.    9.    1  Rejoice  not,  0  Israel,  for  joy,  as.  .people 

2.Joy,  rejoicing,  nb'2  gilah. 

Isa.   35,    2  It  shall,  .rejoice  even  with  joy  and  singing 

Z.Joy,  rrnn  chedvah. 

Ezra  6. 16  kept  the  dedication  of  thishouse..  with  joy 
Neh.  8. 10  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength 

i.Goodness,  350  tub. 

Isa.   65. 14  my  servants  shall  sing  for  joy  of  heart,  but 

Z.Joy,  rejoicing,  b'icO  masos. 

Job  8.  19  this  (is)  the  joy  of  his  way,  and  out  of  the 
Psa.  48.  2  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  (is)  mount  Zion 
Isa.   24.    8  mirth  of  tabrets.  .joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth 

32.  13  all  the  houses  of  joy  (in)  the  joyous  city 
32.  14  dens . .  a  joy  of  wild  asses,  a  pasture  of  flo. 

60.  15  I  will  make  thee,  .a  joy  of  many  generat. 

65.  18  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  j. 

66.  10  rejoice  for  joy  with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn 
Jer.  49.  25  city  of  praise  not  left,  the  city  of  my  joy ! 
Lam.  2.  15  that  (men)call.. The  joy  of  the  whole  earth 

5.  15  The  joy  of  our  heart  is  ceased  ;  our  dance 
Eze.  24.  25  the  joy  of  their  glory,  the  desire  of  their 

Q.Loud  cry,  proclamation,  singing,  fip  rinnah. 
Psa.  30.    5  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy 
42.    4  with  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  with  a 
126.    5  They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy 

7. Rejoicing,  joy,  gladness,  mirth,  nnzt?  simchah. 
1  Sa.  18.    6  to  meet  king  Saul,  with  tabrets,  with  joy 
1  Ki.   1.  40  rejoiced  with  great  joy,  so  that  the  earth 

1  Ch.12.  40 brought  bread,  .for (there  was)  joy  in  Isr. 

15.  16  sounding,  by  lifting  up  the  voice  with  joy 
15.  25  David . .  went  to  bring  up  the  ark . .  with  joy 

29.  9  David  the  king  also  rejoiced  with  great  j. 
29. 17  now  have  I  seen  with  joy  thy  people,  whi. 

2  Ch.20.  27  returned,  .to go  again  to  Jerusalem  withj. 

30.  26  So  there  was  great  joy  in  Jerusalem  :  for 
Ezra    3. 12  many.  .wept,  .many  shouted  aloud  for  joy 

3. 13  discern  the  noise  of  the  shout  of  joy  from 

6.  22  And  kept  the  feast,  .seven  days  with  joy 
Neh. 12.  43  God  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great  j. 

12.  43  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  even  afar 

Esth.  8.  17  the  Jews  had  joy  and  gladness,  a  feast  and 

9.  22  was  turned  unto  them  from  sorrow  to  joy 

9. 22  make  them  days  of  feasting  and  joy,  and 

Job   20.   5  and  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite.,  for  a  mom.? 

Psa.  16.  11  in  thy  presence  (is)  fulness  of  joy;  at  thy 

137.    6  1  prefer  not  Jerusal.  above  my  chief  joy 
Prov  12.  20  but  to  the  counsellors  of  peace  (is)  joy 

14.  10  stranger  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his  j. 
15. 21  Folly  (is)  joy  to  (him  that  is)  destitute  of 

15.  23  A  man  hath  joy  by  the  answer  of  his  mo. 
21. 15  (It  is)  joy  to  the  just  to  do  judgment:  but 

Eccl.  2.  10  I  withheld  not  my  heart  from  any  joy;  for 

2.  26  (God)giveth  to  aman.  .knowledge,  and  j. 

5.  20  God  answereth  (him)  in  the  joy  of  his  he. 

9.  7  Go  thy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with  joy,  and  d. 
Isa.     9.    3  Thou  hast,  .not  increased  the  joy  :  they  j. 

9.  3  before  thee  according  to  the  joy  in  harv. 
24.  11  all  joy  isdarkened,  the  mirth  of  thelandis 
29. 19  The  meek  also  shall  increase . .  joy  in  the  L. 
35.  10  songs,  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  he. 
51. 11  everlasting  joy  (shall  be)  upon  their  head 

51. 11  they  shall  obtain  gladness  and  joy  ;  (and) 

55. 12  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth 

61.  7  therefore,  .everlasting  joy  shall  be  unto 
66.    5  he  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and  they  shall 

Jer.  48.  33  joy  and  gladness  is  taken  from  the  plent. 
Eze.  36.  5  with  the  joy  of  all  (their)  heart,  with  des. 
Joel  i.  16  joy  and  gladness  from  the  house  of  our  G. 
Zeph.  3.  17  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy;  he  will 

S.Joy,  rejoicing,  gladness,  \\Wlp  sason. 

Esth.  8. 16  The  Jews  had  light,  gladness,  and  joy 

Psa.  51.  8  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness ;  (that) 
51. 12  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation 
105.  43  And  he  brought  forth  his  people  with  joy 

Isa.   12.   3  Therefore  with  joy  shall  ye  draw  water 
22.  13  behold  joy  and  gladness,  slaying  oxen  and 
35.  10  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and 
51.   3  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  therein 
61.    3  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment  of 

Jer.   15.  16  thy  word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoi. 

31.  13  I  will  turn  their  mourning  into  joy,  and 

33.  9  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  joy,  a  praise 
33.  n  The  voice  of  joy,  and  the  voice  of  gladness 

Joel  1.  12  because  joy  is  withered  away  from  the  sons 
Zech.  S.  19  shall  be  to  the  house  of  Judah  joy  and 

9. Shout,  shouting,  rrjpTB  teruah. 

Job  33.  26  he  shall  see  his  face  with  joy :  for  he  will 
Psa.  27.    6  I  offer  in  his  tabernacle  sacrifices  of  joy 

10.  Gladness,  joy,  ayaXhlaais  agalliasis. 

Luke  1.  44  lo.  .the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy 


JOY 


553 


JUDAH 


W.Gladness,  joy,  ^vtppoo-ivn  euphrosune. 

Acts    2.  28  shalt  make  uie  full  of  joy  with  thy  couu. 

\2.Joy,  xapz  chara. 

Matt  2.  io  they  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great  joy 
13  20  heareth  the  word,  ami  anon  with  joy  rece. 
i3  44  for  joy  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all  that 
25  2i  -3  servant,  .enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 
28    8' they,  .quickly,  .with  fear  and  great  joy 

Luke  1.  14  thou  shalt  have  joy  and  gladness;  and 

2  10  Hiring  you  good  tidings  of  greatjoy,  which 
8  13  when  they  hear,  receive  the  word  with  joy 
10.  17  the  seventy  returned  again  with  joy,  say. 
is  7  That  likewise  joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over 
15.  10  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God 
-4.  41  while  they  yet  believed  not  for  joy,  and 
24.  5-  and  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  greatjoy 

John  3.  29  rejoieeth  greatly.  .This  my  joy  therefore 

15.  ii  that  my  joy  might  remain,  .and.  .your  joy 

16.  20  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy 
16.  21  for  joy  that  a  man  is  horn  into  the  world 
16.  22  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from 

16.  24  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full 

17.  13  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves 
Acts    8.    8  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city 

13.  52  thedisciples  were  filled  with  joy  and  with 
15.    3  they  caused  great  joy  unto  all  the  breth. 
20.  24  so  that  I  might  finish  my  course  [with  joy] 
Rom  14.  17  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost 
15.  13  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
15.  32  That  I  may  come  unto  you  with  joy  by  the 
2  Co.  1.  24  are  helpers  of  your  joy  :  for  by  faith  ye 
2.   3  confidence,  .that  myjoyis(the  joy)  of  you 
7. 13  the  more  joyed  we  for  the  joy  of  Titus 
8.   2  the  abundance  of  their  joy  and  their  deep 
Gal.    5.  22  the  fruit  of  the  spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace 
Phil.   1.   4  Always.,  you  all  making  request  with  joy 

1.  25  you  all  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of 

2.  2  Fulfil  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  like  minded 
4.    1  beloved  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown 

1  Th.  1.    6  received  the  word ..  with  joy  of  the  H.  G. 

2. 10  For  what  (is)  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown 

2.  20  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy 

3.  9  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your 

2  Ti.    1.   4  to  see  thee.,  that  I  maybe  filled  with  joy 
Heb.  12.    2  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 

13. 17  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and  not  with 
Jas.     1.    2  My  brethren,  couut  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall 

4.  9  to  mourning,  and  (your)  joy  to  heaviness 

1  Pe.  1.  8  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
1.J0.    1.   4  these  things  write  we.  that  your  joy  may 

2  John   12  speak  face  to  face,  that  our  joy  may  be 

3  John     4  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that 

13.  Grace,  thankfulness,  xaP^s  charts. 

Phm.      7  we  have  great  (joy]  and  consolation  in  thy 
[See  also  Aloud,  shout  for,  sing  for,  skip  for.] 

JOY,  to  — 

l.To  leap,  rejoice,  joy,  be  joyful,  h»,  S'J  gil,  gul. 
Hab.   3.  18  yet . .  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation 
Zeph.   3.  17  The  Lord. .hewill  joy  overthee  with  sing. 

l.To  rejoice,  be  glad,  o'P,  wiiy  sus,  sis. 

Isa.  65. 19  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in 

3. To  shine,  rejoice,  joy,  be  glad,  n?\?  sameach. 
Psa.  21.    1  The  king  shall  joy  in  thy  strength,  O  L. 
Isa.     9.   3  they  joy  before  thee  according  to  the  joy 

i.  To  boast,  Kavxa.ou.a.1  kauchaoma.i. 

Rom.  5.  11  we  also  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Je. 

5.  To  rejoice,  joy,  yalpa  chairo. 

2  Co.   7. 13  exceedingly  the  more  joyed  we  for  the  j. 
Phil.    2.  17  if  I  be  offered.  .1  joy  and  rejoice  with 
2. 18  For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy  and 
Col.     2.    5  yet  am  I .  .joying  and  beholding  your  or. 
1  Th.  3.  9  wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sakes  before 

JOT,  to  leap  for  — 
To  leap,  o-KipTam  skirtao. 

Luke  6.  23  leap  for  joy:  for,  behold,  your  reward  (is) 

JOT,  exceeding  — 

Gladness,  joy,  a-yaW'tacts  agalliasis. 

Jude       24  is  able.. to  present  (you).,  with  exceeding  j. 
JOT,  to  break  forth  into  — 
To  break  forth,  nss  palsach. ' 

Isa.   52.   9  B.eak forth  into  joy,  sing  together,  ye 

JOT,  to  have  — 

l.To  shine,  rejoice,  joy,  be  glad,  nv'y  sameach. 

Pro  v.  17. 21  a  fool,  .the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no  joy 
23.  24  thafl  begetteth  a  wise  (child)  shall  have  j. 

Isa.     9. 17  Therefore  the  Lord  shall  have  no  joy  in 

2.  To  have  joy,  pleasure,  or  advantage,  ovivijfii,  uVnut. 

Phm.      20  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the  L. 
JOT,  with  exceeding  — 
To  be  glad,  ayaWtdai  agaUiao. 

1  Pe.   4.  13  ye  may  be  glad  also  with  exceeding  joy 
JOYFUL  — 
I. Good,  Tiu  tob- 

Eccl.  7.  14  In  the  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in 

'2. Singing,  niri  renana.h. 

Psa,  63.    5' my  mouth  shall  praise,  .with  joyful  lips 

3. Rejoicing,  np*?  sameach. 

1  Ki.  3.  56  went  unto  their  tents  joyful  and  glad  of 
Esth.  5.  9  Then  went  Hainan  forth  that  day  joyful 
Psa. 113.   g  (and  to  be)  a  joyful  mother  of  children 

70 


i.  With  joy,  xaPa  chara. 

2  Co.  7.    4  1  am  exceeding  joyful  in.,  our  tribulation 

JOYFUL,  to  be  — 

1.  To  leap,  rejoice,  joy,  be  joyful,  b'2,  ^'3  gul,  gil. 
Psa.  35.   9  my  suu.1  shall  be  joyful  in  the  Lord  :  it 

149.    2  let  the  children  of  Ziou  be  joyful  in  their 
Isa.  49. 13  Sing,  O  heavens ;  and  be  joyful,  0  earth 
61. 10  my  soul  shall  be  joyf ul  in  my  God ;  for 

2.  To  rejoice,  exult,  iSjj  alaz. 

Psa.  96.  12  Let  the  field  be  joyful,  and  all  that  (is) 
149.    5  Let  the  saints  bejoyful  iuglory  :  let  them 

3.  To  rejoice,  exult,  ipy  alats. 

Psa.    5.  n  let  them  also  that  love  thy  name  be  joyful 

4.  To  sing,  cry  aloud,  f  J"i  ranan,  3. 

Psa.  gu.   8  let  the  hills  be  joyful  together 
JOYFUL,  to  make  — 
To  make  joyf  id  or  glad,  no';?  sameach,  3. 

Ezra    6.  22  the  Lokd  had  made  them  joyful,  and  tur. 

Isa.  56.    7  make  them  joyful  in  my  house  of  prayer 

JOTFUL  noise,  to  make  a  — 
To  shout,  j;n  rua,  5. 

Psa.  66.    1  Make  a  joyf  ul  noise  unto  God,  all  ye  lands 
81.   1  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  God  of  Jacob 
95.   1  let  us  make  a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of 
95.   2  and  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  him  with 
98.   4  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  Lord,  all 
98.   6  make  a  joyful  noise  before  the  Lord,  the 
100.    1  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye 
JOTFTJL  sound  — 
Shout,  shouting,  n^nn  teruah. 

Psa.  S9.  15  Blessed . .  people  that  know  the  joyful  sou. 
JOTFUL  voice  — 
Singing,  nun  renanah. 

Job     3.    7  'that  night.,  letno  joyful  voice  come  there 

JOYFULLY  — 

1 .  To  see  life,  D'>rj  niyi  raah  chayyim. 

Eccl.  9.   9  Live  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou 

•2.  To  rejoice,  x<*ip<0  chairo. 

Lukeig.    6  and  came  down,  and  received  him  joyful. 

3.  With  joy,  /xera  X"pas  meta  eharas. 

Heb.  10.  34  took  joyfully  ths  spoiling  of  your  goods 

JOYFULNESS  — 

1.  Rejoicing,  joy,  gladness,  mirth,  nnpif  simchah. 

Deut28.  47  servedst  not  the  Lord  thy  God  with  joy. 

2.Joy,  x«P"  chara. 

Col.    1. 1 1  all  patience  and  long  suffering  with  joy. 
JOYOUS  — 
1. Rejoicing,  exulting,  vyn  alliz. 

Isa.   22.   2  a  tumultuous  city,  a- joyous  city :  thy 
23.    7  (Is)  this  your  joyous  (city),  whose  antiqu. 
32. 13  all  the  houses  of  joy  (in)  the  joyous  city 

2.  Of  joy,  xaP<is  eharas. 

Heb.  12.  11  no  chastening,  .aeemeth  to  be  joyous,  but 
JO-ZA'-BAD.  "mi"  Jah  endows. 

1.  A  Gederathite  in  Judah.  He  joined  David  in  Ziklag. 
B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.12.   4  and  Johanan,  and  J.  the  Gederathite 

2.  Two  men  of  Manasseh  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag. 

B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.12.  20  J. .  .and  Michael,  and  J.,  and  Elihu,  and 

3.  A  Levite  overseer  of  the  dedicated  things  in  the  days 
of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  724. 

2  Ch.31.  13  J.,  and  Eliel,  and  Ismachiah,  andMaliath 

4.  A  chief  of  the  Levites  in  Josiah's  time.     B.C.  623. 

2  Ch.35.   9  Jeiel  and  J.,  chief  of  the  Levites,  gave 

5.  A  son  of  Jeshua  who  was  employed  in  weighing  the 
vessels  of  the  sanctuary  brought  from  Babylon.  B.C. 
445- 

Ezra   8.  33  J.  the  son  of  Jeshua,  and  Noadiah  the  son 
C.  A  priest  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  457. 
Ezra  10.  22  Maaseiah,  Ishmael,  Nethaneel,  J.,  and 

7.  A  Levite  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  23  J.,  and  Shiniei,  audKelaiah,  the  same  (is) 

8.  A  Levite  interpreter  of  the  law  read  by  Ezra.  B.C. 
445- 

Neti.  8.    7  J.,  Hanan,  Pelaiah,  and  the  Levites,  cau. 

9.  A  chief  Levite  in  Jerusalem  after  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    16.  and  J.,  of  the  chief  of  the  Levites,  (had) 
JO-ZA'-CHAR,  1311'  Jah  remembers. 
The  son  of  Shime'ath  (a  Moabitess)  who  slew  Joash  or 
Jehoash  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  839. 

2  Ki.  12.  21  J.  the  son  of  Shimeath,  and  Jehozabad 
JO-ZA-'EAK,  pl>'V  Jah  is  great. 
A  priest,  the  father  of  Jeshua  who  returned  from  exile 
with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536.     He  is  called  Josedech  in 
Haggai  and  Zechariah. 

Ezra    3.   2  the  son  of  J.,  and  his  brethren  the  priests 
3;    8  the  son  of  J.,  and  the  remnant  of  their 
5.    2  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  Jeshua  the  son  of  J. 
10.  18  of  the  sons  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  J.,  and 

Neh.  12. 26  Joiakim  the  son  of  Jeshua,  the  son  of  J. 
JU'-BAL,  ^?v  playing,  nomad. 
A  son  of  Adah,  wife  of  Lamech,  a  descendant  of  Cain. 
B.C.  3504. 

Gen.   4.  21  his  brother's  name  (was)  J.:  he  was  the 


JUBILEE  — 

1.  Jubilee,  time  of  shouting  every  50th  year,  73V. 
Lev.  25. 10  it  shall  be  a  jubilee  unto  you  ;  and  ye 
25.  11  A  jubilee  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  unto 
25.  12  For  it  (is)  the  jubilee  ;  it  shall  be  holy 
25.  13  In  the  year  of  this  jubilee  ye  shall  return 
25.  15  the  number  of  years  after  the  jubileethou 
25  28  until  the  year  of  jubilee  :  and  in  the  jubi. 
25.  30  the  house.,  shall  not  go  out  in  the  jubilee 
25.  31  the  houses., they  shall  go  out  in  the  jubilee 
25.  33  shall  go  out  in  (the  year  of)  jubilee  :  for 
25.  40  shall  serve  thee  unto  the  year  of  jubilee 
25.  50  from  the  year,  .unto  the  year  of  jubilee 
25.  52  if . .  but  few  years  unto  the  year  of  jubilee 
25.  54  then  he  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of  jubilee 
27.  17  If  he  sanctify .  .field  from  the  year  of  jub. 
27.  18  if  he  sanctify  his  field  after  the  jubilee 
27.  18  remain,  even  unto  the  yearof  the  jubilee 
27.  21  the  field,  when  it  goeth  out  in  the  jubilee 
27.  23  unto  the  yearof  the  jubilee:  and  he  shall 
27.  24  In  the  year  of  the  jubilee  the  field  shall 
Num.  36.   4  when  tlie  jubilee  of  the  children  of  Israel 

2.Shmting,  shout,  blowing,  nunp  teruah. 

Lev.  25.   9  shalt  thou  cause  the  trumpet  of  the  jubi. 

JU'-CAL,  by  able. 

A  son  of  Shelemiah  and  prince  of  Judah,  adeadly  enemy 

of  Jeremiah.    B.C.  590. 

Jer.  38.    1  J.  the  son  of  Shelemiah,  and  Pashur  the 
JU'-BA,  JU'-DAH,  JU'-DAS,  rTWi;  praise. 

1.  The  fourth  son  of  Jacob  by  Leah.    B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  29.  35  she  called  his  name  J. :  and  left  bearing 
35.  23  and  Levi,  and  J.,  and  Issachar,  and  Zeb. 

37.  26  J.  said  uuto  his  brethren,  What  profit  (is 

38.  1  J.  went  down  from  his  brethren,  and  tur. 

33.  2  And  J.  saw  there  a  daughter  of  a  certain 
38.  6  J.  took  a  wife  for  Er  his  first  born,  whose 
38.  7  J.'s  first  born,  was  wicked  in  the  sight  of 
38.  8  J.  said  unto  Onan,  Go  in  unto  thy  brother's 

38. 11  Then  said  J.  to  Tarnar  liis  daughter  in  1. 
38.  12  daughter  of  Shuah,  J.'s  wife,  died ;  and  J . 
3S.  15  When  J.  saw  her,  he  thought  her  (to  be) 
38.  20  J.  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  friend 
3S.  22  he  returned  to  J.,  and  said,  I  cannot  find 
38.  23  J.  said,  Let  her  take  (it)  to  her,  lest  we  be 
38.  24  it  was  told  J.  saying,  Tarnar  thy  daughter 
38.  24  J.  said,  Bring  her  forth,  and  let  her  be 
38.  26  J.  acknowledged  (them),  and  said,  She 
43.   3  And  J.  spake  unto  him,  saying,  The  man 

43.  8  J.  said  unto  Israel  his  father,  Send  the 

44.  14  J.  and  Ins  brethren  came  to  J.'s  house 
44. 16  J.  said,  What  shall  we  say  unto  my  lordv 
44.  18  J.camenear  unto him.and  said,Ohmy lord 

46. 12  the  sons  of  J.;  Er  and  Onan,  and  Shelah 
46.  28  he  sent  J.  before  him  unto  Joseph,  to  di. 
49.    8  J.,  thou  (art  he)  whom  thy  brethren  shall 
49.   9  J.  (is)  a  lion's  whelp  :  from  the  prey,  my 

Exod.  1.   2  Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  and  J. 
NUUI26.  19  the  sons  of  J.  (were)  Er  and  Onan :  and  Er 
Ruth  4.  12  Pharez,  whom  Tamar  bare  unto  J.,  of 
1  Ch.  2.    1  Simeon,  Levi,  and  J.,  Issachar,  and  Zebu. 
2.  3  The  sons  of  J.;  Er,  and  Onan,  and  Shelah 
2.   3  the  first  born  of  J.,  was  evil  in  the  sight 
2.   4  Ail  the  sons  of  J.  (were)  five 
2. 10  begat  Nahshon,  prince  of  the  children  of  J. 
4.   1  The  sons  of  J.;  Pharez,  Hezron,  and  Canni 
4.  21  The  sons  of  Shelah  the  son  of  J.  (were) 

4.  27  family  multiply,  like  to  the  children  of  J. 

5.  2  J.  prevailed  above  his  brethren,  and  of 
9.    4  of  the  children  of  Pharez  the  son  of  J. 

"Nell.  11.  24  of  the  children  of  Zerah  the  son  of  J. 
Matt.  1.    2  and  Jacob  begat  J.  and  his  brethren 

1.   3  J.  begat  Phares  and  Zara  of  Thaniar;  and 
Luke  3.  33  son)  of  Phares,  which  was  (the  son)  of  J. 

2.  The  tribe  which  sprang  from  Judah,  and  applied  also 
to  the  territory  occupied  by  them. 

Gen.  49. 10  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  J.,  nor 
Exod3i.   2  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 

35.  30  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 

38.  22  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 
Num.  1.   7  Of  J.;  Nahshon  the  son  of  Amminadab 
1.  26  Of  the  children  of  J.,  by  their  generations 

1 .  27  numbered  of  them,  (even)  of  the  tribe  of  J. 

2.  3  shall  they  of  the  standaid .  .of  J.  pitch 
2.   3  (shall  be)  captain  of  the  children  of  J. 

2.  9  All  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp  of  J. 
7.  !•>  the  son  of  Amminadab,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 

10.  14  standard  of  the  camp  of  the  children  of  J. 
13     6  the  tribe  of  J.,  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephuu. 
26.  20  the  sons  of  J.  after  their  families  were 
26.  2'  These  (are)  the  families  of  J.  according 

34.  ig  the  tribeof  J.,  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh 
Deut->7  12  J.,  and  Issachar.  and  Joseph,  and  Benja. 

33.   7  And  this  (is  the  blessing)  of  J.:  and  he 

33.  7  Hear,  LORD,  the  voice  of  J.,  and  bring 

34.  2  all  the  land  of  J.,  unto  the  utmost  sea 
Josh.  7.    1  Zabdi,  the  son  of  Zerah,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 

7  16  rose  up  early.  .and:the  tribe  of  J.  was  taken 
7.  17  And  he  brought  the  family  of  J. ;  and  he 
7.  18  and  Achan .  .of  the  tribe  of  J.,  was  taken 

11.  21  and  cut  off .  .from  all  the  mountains  of.). 

14.  6  Then  the  children  of  J.  came  unto  Joshua 

15.  1  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  J.  by  their  fa. 
15. 12  This  (is)  the  coast  of  the  children  of  J. 
15.  13  he  gave  a  part  among  the  children  of  J. 
15.  20  the  inheritance,  .of  the  children  of  J. 

15.  21  cities  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  J. 
15.  63  the  children  of  J.  could  not  drive  them 
15.  63  Jebusites  dwell  with  the  children  of  J. 
18.   5  J.  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the  south 


JUDAH 


554 


JUDAH 


Josh.  1 8.  ii  between  the  children  of  J.  and  thechildr, 

18.  14  Kirjath-jearim,  a  city  ofthe  children  of  J. 

19.  1  within  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  J. 
19.    9  Out  of  the  portion  of  the  children  of  J. 
19.   9  the  part  of  the  children  of  J.  was  too 

19.  34  and  to  J.  upon  Jordan  toward  the  sunris. 

20.  7  which  (is)  Hebron,  in  the  mountain  of  J. 

21.  4  had  by  Lot  out  of  the  tribe  of  J.,  and  out 

21.  9  gave  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  chikh'enof  J. 
2i.  11  Hebron,  in  the  hill  (country)  of  J.,  with 

Judg.  1.    2  the  Lord  said.  J.  shall  go  up:  behold 

1.  3  J.  said  unto  Simeon  his  brother,  Come  up 
1.  4  J.  went  up;  and  the  Lord  delivered  the 
1.  8  the  children  of  J.  had  fought  against  Jer. 
1.  9  afterward  the  children  of  J.  went  down 
1.  10  J.  went  against  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt 
1.  16  went  up . .  with  the  children  of  J.  into  the 
1.  16  wilderness  of  J.,  which  (lieth)  in  the  south 
1.  17  J.  went  with  Simeon  his  brother,  and 

1.  18  Also  J.  took  Gaza  with  the  coast  thereof 
1. 19  the  Lord  was  with  J. ;  and  he  drave  out 

10.  9  passed  over  Jordan  to  fight  also  against  J. 
15.  9  Then  the  Philistines  went  up,  and  pitch. 
15. 10  the  men  of  J.  said,  Why  are  ye  come  up 
15.  11  three  thousand  men  of  J.  went  to  the  top 
17.  7  there  was  a  young  man.  .of  the  family  of  J. 
18. 12  they  went  up,  and  pitched,  .in  J.  :  wher. 
20. 18  And  the  Lord  said,  J.  (shall  go  up)  first 

Buth  r.    7  on  their  way  to  return  into  the  land  of  J. 

1  Sa.  11.    8  children  of  Israel,  .and  the  men  of  J. 

15.   4  Saul  gathered,  .ten  thousand  men  of  J. 
17.    1  gathered,  .at  Shochoh..(belongeth)  to  J. 

17.  52  men  of  Israel  and  of  J.  arose,  and,shout. 

18.  16  Hut  all  Israel  and  J.  loved  David,  becau. 

22.  s  depart,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  J. 

23.  3  nimsaid.  .Behold,  we  be  afraid  here  in  J. 

23.  23  search,  .throughout  all.  .thousands  of  J. 
27.  6  Ziklag  pertaineth  unto  the  kings  of  J. 
27. 10  David  said,  Against  the  south  of  J.,  and 
30.  14  upon  (the  coast)  which  (belongeth)  to  J. 
30.  16  that  they  had  taken,  .out  of  the  land  of  J. 
30.  26  he  sent  of  the  spoil  unto  the. elders  of  J. 

2  Sa.    1.  18  he  bade  them  teach  the  children  of  J. 

2.  1  Shall  I  go  up  iuto  any  of  the  cities  of  J.  ? 
2.   4  And  the  men  of  J.  came,  and  there  they 
2.    4  anointed  David  kiug  over  the  house  of  J. 
2.    7  house  of  J.  have  anointed  me  king  over 
2. 10  But  the  house  of  J.  followe  I  David 

2.  11  was  king  in  Hebron  over  the  house  of  J. 

3.  8  which  against  J.  do  show  kindness  this 
3.  10  and  to  set  up  the  throne  of  David  over. .  J. 
5.    5  he  reigned  over  J.  seven  years  and  six 

5.  5  reigned  thirty  and  three  years  overall. .  T. 

6.  2  people . .  (were)  with  him  from  Baale  of  J. 

11.  11  The  ark,  and  Israel,  and  J.,  abide  intents 

12.  8  gave  thee  the  house  of  Israel  and  of  J. 

19.  11  saying,  Speak  unto  the  elders  of  J.,  saying 
19.  14  he  bowed  the  heart  of  all  the  men  of  J. 
19. 15  J.  came  to  Gilgal,  to  go  to  meet  the  king 
19.  16  Shimei.  .came  down  with  the  men  of  J. 
19.  40  all  the  people  of  J.  conducted  the  king 
19.  41  Why  have,  .the  men  of  J.  stolen  thee 
19.  42  all  the  men  of  J.  answered  the  men  of  I. 
19.  43  men  of  Israel  answered  the  men  of  J. 

19.  43  words  of  the  men  of  J.  were  fiercer  than 

20.  2  but  the  men  of  J.  clave  unto  their  king 
20.   4  Assemble  me  the  men  oF  J.  within  three 

20.  5  So  Amasa  went  to  assemble  (the  men  of)  J. 

21.  2  slay  them  iu  his  zeal  to  the  children  of..  J. 

24.  1  he  moved,  .to  say,  Go,  number  Israel.  .J. 
24.    7  they  went  out  to  the  south  of  J.,  (even) 
24.    9  the  men  of  J.  (were)  five  hundred  thousa. 

1  Ki.   1.    9  and  all  the  men  of  J.  the  king's  servants 

1.  35  I  have  appointed  hinitobe  ruler,  .over  J. 

2.  32  and  Amasa.  .captain  of  the  host  of  J. 
4.  20  J.  and  Israel  (were)  many,  as  the  sand 

4. 25  J.  and  Israel  dwelt  safely,  every  man  under 

1  Ch.  6.  55  they  gave  them  Hebron  in  the  laud  of  J. 

6.  57  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave  the  cities  of  J. 
6.-65  gave  by  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of.  .J.,  and 

9.  3  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  the  children  of  J. 
12.  16  there  came  of  the  children  of.  .J. .  .unto 

12.  24  The  children  of  J.  that  bare  shield  and  sp. 

13.  6  to  Kirjath-jearim,  which  (belonged)  to  J. 
27. 18  Of  J.,  Klihn,  (one)  of  the  brethren  of  Da. 
28.   4  J.  (to  be)  the  ruler  ;  and  of  the  house  of  J. 

2  Ch.  2.    7  that  (are)  with  mein  J.  and  in  Jerusalem 

9.  11  none  such  seen  before  in  the  land  of  J. 
Ezra    1.    2  build,  .house  at  feru^aleni,  which  (is)  in  J. 
1.    3  let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  which  (is)  in  J. 
1.    5  chief  of  the  fathers  of  J.  and  Benjamin 

1.  8  numbered  them.. Sheshlta/.zar.  .print 3eof  J, 
4.    4  weakened  the  hands  of  the  people  of  J. 

4.  6  against,  .inhabitants  of  J.  and  Jer.  3.  9. 

5.  1  prophesied  unto  the  Jew-;  that  (were)  in  J. 

7.  14  to  enquire  concerning  J.  and  Jerusalem 
9.   9  to  give  us  a  wall  in  J.  and  in  Jerusalem 

10.  7  they  made  proclamation  throughout  .1. 

10.  o  men  of  J.  and  Benjamin  gathered  them. 
Neh.   t.   2  That  E...  came,  he  and  (certain)  men  of  J. 

2.  5  thou  wouldest  m-u<\  me  unto  J.,  unto  the 
2.   7  may  convey  me  over  till  I  come  into  J. 
4. 10  J.  said,  The  strength  of  the  bearers  of 

4.  16  rulers  (were)  behind  all  the  house  of  J. 

5.  14  to  be  their  governor  in  the  land  of  J. 

6.  7  (There  is)  a  king  in  J. :  and  now  shall  it 
6.  17  the  nobles  of  J.  sent  many  letters  unto 

6.  18  For  (there  were)  many  in  J.  sworn  unto 

7.  6  came  a-;iin  to  Jerusalem  and  to  J.   ■■-.    ■■ 

11.  3  in  the  cities  of  J.  dwelt  every  one  in  bis 
n.   -(  at  Jerusalem  dwelt,  .the  children  of  J. 
11.    4  Of  the  children  of  J.;  Athniah  the  son  of 


*3' 

13 

13- 
Estli.  2. 
1'sa.  48. 

60. 

63. 

68. 

6q. 

76. 

78. 


114, 
Matt.  2 

Luke  1 
Heb.   7, 


Rev. 


14. 
15- 
15- 


15. 


20  the  residue,  .(were)  in  all  the  cities  of  J. 
25  the  children  of  J.  dwelt  at  Kirjath-arba 
36  of  theLevites(were)divisions(in)  J., (and) 

31  I  brought  up  the  princes  of  J.  upon  the 

32  Hoshaiah,  and  half  of  the  princes  of  J. 
41  .T.  rejoiced  for  the  priests  and  for  the 
12  Then  brought  all  J.  the  tithe  of  the  corn 

1 5  those  days  saw  I  in  J.  (some)  treading  wine 

16  sold  on  the  sabbath  unto,  .children  of  J. 

17  I  contended  with  the  nobles  of  J.,  and 

6  been  carried  away  with  Jecouiah  king  of  J. 
11  let  the  daughters  of  J.  be  glad,  because 

7  strength  of  mine  head  ;  J.  (is)  my  lawgiver 
title.  D. . .  when  he  was  in  the  wilderness  of  J. 
27  the  princes  of  J.  (and)  their  council,  the 
35  save  Zion,  and  will  build  the  cities  of  J. 

1  In  J.  (is)  God  known  ;  his  name  (is)  great 
68  chose  the  tribe  of  J.,  the  mount  Zion  wh. 

5  the  daughters  of  J.  rejoiced  because  of 

8  the  strength  of  mine  head  ;  J.  (is)  my  law. 

2  J.  was  his  sanctuary.  .Israel  his  dominion 

6  And  thou,  Bethlehem,  (in)  the  land  of  J. 

6  art  not  the  least  among  the  princes  of  J. 
39  into  the  hill  country,  .into  a  city  of  J. 
14  is)  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  out  of  J. 

S  house  of  Israel  and  with  the  house  of  J. 
5  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  J.,  the  Root  of 

7.  5  Of  the  tribe  01  J.  (were)  sealed  twelve 

S.  After  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  the  kingdom  over 
which  Rehoboam  reigned  was  called  Judah. 

1  Ki.  12.  17  Israel  which  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  J. 

12.  20  none  that  followed  .".but  the  tribe  of  J. 
12.  21  he  assembled  all  the  house  of  J.,  with 
12.  23  king  of  J.,  and  unto  all  the  house  of  J. 
12. 27  their  lord,  (even)  unto  Rehoboam . .  of  J . 
12.  27  shall,  .go  again  to  Rehoboam  king  of  J. 

12.  32  feast,  .like  unto  the  feast  that  (is)  in  J. 

13.  1  there  came  a  man  of  God  out  of  J.  by 
13.  12  the  man  of  God  went  which  came  from  J. 
13. 14  thou  the  man  of  God  that  earnest  from  J.? 

13.  21  unto  the  man  of  God  that  came  from  J. 

14.  21  Rehoboam.  .son  of  Solomon  reigned  in  J. 

14.  22  J.  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and 
29  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 

1  eighteenth  year.. reigned  Abijamover  J. 

7  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 

9  in  the  twentieth  year,  .reigned  A... over  J. 
17  king  of  Israel  went  up  against  J.,  and" 
17  to  go  out  or  come  in  to  Asa  king  of  J. 

15. 22  Asa  made  a  pro  lama,  througitout  all  J. 

15.  23  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  \lngsof  J.? 

15.  25  in  the  second  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 
*5-  28,  33  in  the  third  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 

16.  8  twenty  and  sixth  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 
16.  io,  15  and  seventh  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 
16.  23  thirty  and  first  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 
16.  29  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 
19.    3  to  Beer-sheba,  which  (belongeth)  to  J. 
22.    2  king  of  J.  came  down  to  the  king  of  Isr. 
22.  10  ki.  of  Israel  and  Jehoshaphat ,  .king  of  J. 

22.  29  the  king  of  J.  went  up  to  Ramoth-gilead 

23.  41  the  son  of  Asa  began  to  reign  over  J.  in 
22.  45  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 
22.  51  seventeenth  year  of  Jehosha.  king  of  J. 

2  Ki.    1.  17  Jehoram  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  ki.  of  J. 
3.    1  eighteenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  J. 
3.  7  sent  to  Jehoshaphat  the  king  of  J.,  say. 
3.    9  and  the  king  of  J.,  and  the  king  of  Edom 
3.  14  presence  of  Jehoshaphat  the  king  ot  J. 
8. 16  Jehoshaphat  (being)  then  king  of  J.,Jeho. 

8.  16  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  J.  began  to 
8. 19  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  J.  for  David 
8.  20,  22  E.  revolted  from  under  the  hand  of  J. 

8.  23  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 
8. 25  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  J. 
8. 29  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  J.  went  down 

9.  16  king  of  J.  was  come  down  to  see  Joram 
9.  21  lvingof  Israel  and  Ahaziah  king  of  J.  went 
9.  27  when  Ahaziah  the  king  of  J.  saw  (this) 
9.  29  began  Ahaziah  to  reign  over  J. 

10.  13  with  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah  king  of  J. 
12.  18  king  of  J.  took  all  the  hallowed  things 
12.  iS  J.,  and  Ahaziah,  his  fathers,  kings  of  J. 

12.  19  book  of  the  chrouicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 

13.  1  of  Joash  the  son  of  Ahaziah  kiug  of  J. 
13.  10  thirty . .  seventh  year  of  Joash  king  of  J. 

13.  12  he  fought  against  Amaziah  king  of  J. 

14.  1  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  J. 
14.    9  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
14.  io  shouldest  fall,  (even)  thou,  and  J.  with 
14.  11  he  and  Amaziah  king  of  J.  looked  one  an. 
14.  11  at  Beth-shemesh,  which  (helnngeth)  to  J. 
14.  12  J.  was  put  to  the  worse  before  Israel ;  and 
14.  13  king  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
14.  15  how  he  fought  with  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
14.  17  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  J.  lived  after 
14.  iS  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 
14.  21  the  people  of  J.  took  Azariah,  which  (was) 
14.  22  built  Elath,  and  restored  it  to  J.,  after 
14.  23  of  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  J. 

14.  28  Dama. . .  Hamath,  (which  belonged)  to  J. 

15.  1  began  Azariah  son  of  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
15.   6  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 
15.    8  eighth  year  of  Azariah  king  of  j.  did 
15.  13  and  thirtieth  year  of  Uzziah  king  of  J. 
15.  17  and  thirtieth  year  of  Azariah  king  of  J. 
15.  23  the  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  king  of  J. 
15.  27  and  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  king  of  J. 
15.  32  began  Jotham  the  son  of  Uzziah  king  of  .T. 
15-  36  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.1 
15.  37  spud  against  J.  Re /in  the  king  of  Syria 


2  Ki.  16, 
16. 
17- 
17- 
*7; 
17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
19 
19. 


23. 
23- 
23- 
23. 
23- 
23- 

23' 

23- 

23' 

23 

23' 

23 

23' 

24. 

24. 
24, 

24 

24. 

25' 
25' 

25- 

Ch.2* 

5- 
6. 

9- 

21. 
10. 


2  Ch. 


1  son  of  Jotham  king  of  J.  began  foreign 
19  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 

I  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Ahaz  king  of  J. 
13  Israel  and  against  J.  by  all  the  prophets 

18  was  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  J.  only 

19  J.  kept  not  the  commandments  of  the  L. 
1  the  son  of  Ahaz  king  of  J.  began  to  reign 
5  none  like  him  among  all  the  kings  of  J. 

13  up  against  all  the  fenced  cities  of  J. 

14  king  of  J.  sent  to  the  king  of  Assyria  to 
14  appointed  unto  Hezekiah  king  of  J.  three 
16  which  Hezekiah  king  of  J.  had"  overlaid 
22  hath  said  to  J.  and  Jerusalem,  Ye  shall 
10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 
30  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house  of  J. 

20  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 

II  kiug  of  J.  hath  done  these  abominations 

11  hath  made  J.  also  to  sin  with  his  idols 

12  bringing  (such)  evil  upon  Jerusalem .  .J. 
16  besides  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  J.  to 
17,  25  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  ki.  of  J.! 

13  for  me,  and  for  the  people,  and  for  all  J. ; 

16  the  book  which  the  king  of  J.  hath  read 
iS  the  king  of  J.,  which  sent  you  to  enquire 

1  all  the  elders  of  J.  and  of  Jerusalem 

2  the  men  of  J.  and  all  the  inhabitants  of 
5  kings  of  J.  had  ordained  to  burn  incense 
5  in  the  high  places  in  the  cities  of  J.,  and 
8  all  the  priests  out  of  the  cities  of  J.,  and 

11  that  the  kings  of  J.  had  given  to  the  sun 

12  altars.,  which  the  kings  of  J.  had  made 

17  of  the  man  of  God,  which  came  from  .1. 
22  the  kings  of  Israel,  nor  of  the  kings  of  J. 
?4  spied  in  the  land  of  J.  and  in  Jerusalem 

26  his  anger  was  kindled  against  J.,  because 

27  I  will  remove  J.  also  out  of  my  sight,  as 

28  book  of. the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.'? 
2  sent  them  against  J.  to  destroy  it,  accor. 

,  3  the  commandment,  .came  (this)  upon  J. 
5  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  J.? 

12  the  kiug  of  J.  went  out  to  the  king  of 
.  20  came  to  pass  in  Jerusalem  and  J.,  until 

21  So  J.  was  carried  away  out  of  their  laud 

22  people  that  remained  in  the  land  of  J. 
27  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  J. 

27  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  J. 
.  41  came  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 

17  genealogies  in .  .days  of  Jotham  king  of  J. 
,  15  the  Lord  carried  away  J.  and  Jerusalem 

1  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  J. 
5  J.  (was)  four  hundred  threescore  and  ten 

17  of  Israel  that  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  J. 
.    1  gathered  of  the  house  of  J.  and  Benjamin 
.    3  king  of  J. ,  and  to  all  Israel  in  J.  and  Ben. 
.    5  Rehoboam.. built  cities  for  defence  in  J. 
.  10  (are)  in  J.  and  in  Benjamin  fenced  cities 
.  12  strong,  having  J.  and  Benjamin  on  his  side 
.  14  came  to  J.  and  Jerusalem :  for  Jeroboam 
.  17  they  strengthened  the  kingdom  of  J.,  and 
.  23  all  the  countries  of  J.  and  Benjamin),  unto 
.    4  the  feaced  cities  which  (pertained)  to  J. 
.    5  (to)  the  princes  of  J.,  that  were  gathered 
.  12  turned,  .and  also  in  J.  things  went  well 
.    1  Now.  .began  Abijah  to  reign  over  J. 

13  they  were  before  J.,  and  the  ambushment 

14  when  J.  looked  back,  behold,  the  battle 
.  15  of  J.  gave  a  shout :  and  as  the  men  of  J. 

15  smote,  .all  Israel  before  Abijah  and  J. 

16  the  children  of  Israel  fled  before  J.:  and 
iS  the  children  of  J.  prevailed,  because  they 

4  commanded  J.  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of 

5  he  took  away  out  of  all  the  cities  of  J. 

6  he  built  fenced  cities  in  J. :  for  the  laud 

7  he  said  unto  J.,  Let  us  build  these  cities 

8  Asa  had.. out  of  J.  three  hundred  thous. 
12  the  Ethiopians  before  Asa,  and  before  J. 

2  Hear  ye  me,  Asa,  and  all  J.  and  Benjamin 

8  out  of  all  the  land  of  J.  and  Benjamin 

9  he  gathered  all  J.  and  Benjamin,  and  the 
15  J.rejoicedattheoath:  for  they  had  sworn 

1  king  of  Israel  came  irp  against  J.,  and 

1  none  go  out  or  come  in  to  Asa  king  of  J. 

6  king  took  all  J.;  and  they  carried  away 

7  the  seer  came  to  Asa  king  of  J.,  and  said 
ii  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  J.  and  Israel 

2  of  J.,  and  set  garrisons  in  the  land  of  J. 

5  J.  brought  to  Jehoshaphat  presents  ;  and 

6  took . .  the  high  places  and  groves  out  of  J. 

7  to  Michaiah,  to  teach  in  the  cities  of  J. 
9  they  taught  in  J.,  and  (had)  the  book  of 
9  went  about  throughout  all  the  cities  of  J. 

10  of  the  lands  that  (were)  round  about  J. 

12  he  built  in  J.  castles,  and  cities  of  store 

13  be  had  much  business  in  the  cities  of  J. 

14  Of  J.,  the  captains  of  thousands  ;  Adnah 
10  put  in  the  fenced  cities  throughout.  .J. 

3  king  of  Israel  said  unto,  .king  of  .1.,  Wilt 
9  king  of  Israel  and  Jehoshaphat  king  of  J. 

28  the  King  of  J.  went  up  to  Ramoth-gilead 
1  the  king  of  J.  returned  to  his  house  in 

5  throughout  all  the  fenced  cities  of  J. 
n  SSebadiah.  .the  ruler  of  the  house  of  J. 

3  and  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  all  J. 

4  J.  gathered  themselves  together  to  ask 

4  out  of  all  the  cities  of  J.  they  came  to 

5  in  the  congregation  of  J.  and  Jerusalem 
13  J.  stood  before  the  Lord,  witli  their  little 

15  Hearken  ye,  all  .1.,  and  ye  inhabitants  .of 

17  see.  .salvation  of  the  LORD  with  you,  O  J. 

18  J.  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  fell 
20  O  J.,  and  ye  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 

22  children  of  Amnion. .  werecomea^ainst  J. 


JUDAH 


555 


JUDAH 


2  Ch. 20-  24-  when  J.  came  toward  the  watch  tower 
20. 27  they  returned,  every  man  of  J.  and  Jerus. 
20.  31  And  Jehoshaphat  reigned  over  J., (He  was) 

20.  35  after  this  did  Jehoshaphat  king  of  J.  join 

21.  3  precious  tilings,  with  fenced  cities  in  J. 
21.  S  revolted  from  under  the  dominion  of  J. 
2T.  10  revolted  from  under  the  hand  of  J.  unto 
21.  11  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  of  J. 
21. 11  commit  fornication,  and  compelled  J. 
2:.  12  father,  nor  in  the  ways  of  Asa  king  of  J, 
21  13  made- J.  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 

21.  17  they  came  up  into  J.,  and  brake  into  it 

22.  1  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  J",  reigned 
22.    6  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  J.  went  down 
22.    8  found  the  princes  of  J.,  and  the  sons  of 

22.  10  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house  of  J. 

23.  2  they  went  about  in  J.,  and  gathered  the 

23.  .  2  Levites  out  of  all  the  cities  of  J.,  and 
25.    8  all  J.  did  according  to  all  things  that 

24.  5  Go  out  unto  the  cities  of  J.,  and  gather 
24.   6  bring  in,  out  of  J.  and  out  of  Jerusalem 
24.   9  a  proclamation  through  J.  and  Jerusalem 
24. 17  after  the  death,  .came  the  princes  of  J. 
24.  18  wrath  came  upon  J.  and  Jerusalem  for 

24.  23  came  to  J.  and  Jerusalem,  and  destroyed 

25.  5  Amaziah  gathered  J.  together,  and  made 
25.  5  captains . .  throughout  all  J .  and  Benjamin 
25.  10  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against  J. 

25.  12  did  the  children  of  J.  carry  away  captive 
25.  13  fell  upon  the  cities  of  J.,  from  Samaria 
25.  17  Then  Amaziah  king  of  J.  took  advice,  and 
25.  18  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
25.  19  shouldest  fall,  (even)  thou,  and  J.  with 
25.  21  J.,  at  Beth-shemesh .  .(belongeth)  to  J. 
25.  22  J.  was  put  to  the  worse  before  Israel,  and 
25.  23  the  king  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
25.  25  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  J.  lived  after 
25.  26  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  J.  and  Israel  ? 

25.  2S  buried,  .with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  J. 

26.  1  people  of  J.  took  Uzziah,  who  (was)  sixteen 

26.  2  He  built  Eloth,  and  restored  it  to  J.,  after 

27.  4  he  built  citiesinthe  mountains  of  J.,  and 

27.  7  in  the  hook  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  J. 

28.  6  the  son  of  Bemaliah  slew  in  J.  an  hundr. 
28.  9  LORD  God  of  your  fathers,  .wroth  with  J. 
28. 10  purpose  to  keep  under  the  children  of  J. 

28. 17  the  Edomites  had  come  and  smitten  J. 
2S.  18  of  the  low  country,  and  of  the  south  of  J. 
28. 19  the  Lord  brought  J.  low  because  of  Ahaz 
28.19-he  made  J.  naked,  and  transgressed  sore 
28.  25  in  every  several  city  of  J.  he  made  high 

28.  26  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  J.  and  Israel 

29.  8  wrath  of  the  Lord  was  upon  J.  and  Jem. 

29.  21  kingdom,  and  for  the  sanctuary,  and  for  J. 

30.  1  Hezekiah  sent  to  all  Israel  and  J.,  and 
30.  6  his  princes  throughout  all  Israel  and  J. 
30. 12  in  J.  the  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them 
30.  24  king  of  J.  did  give  to  the  congregration  a 

30.  25  the  congregation  of  J.,  with  the  priests 
30. 25  the  strangers,  .that  dwelt  in  J.,  rejoiced 
3JL.    1  Israel,  .went  out  to  the  cities  of  J.,  and 

31.  1  the  altars  out  of  all  J.  and  Benjamin,  in 
31.   6  Israel  and  J.,  that  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  J. 

31.  20  thus  did  Hezekiah  throughout  all  J.,  and 
32..  1  entered  into  J.,  and  encamped  against 

32.  8  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 
32.  9  unto  Hezekiah  king  of  J.,  and  unto  all  J. 
32.  12  commanded  J.  and  Jerusalem,  saying,  Ye 
32.  23  brought,  .presents  to  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 
32.  25  wrath  upon  him,  and  upon  J.  and  Jerus. 
32.  32  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  J.  and  Israel 

32.  33  J.  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  did 

33.  9  Manasseh  made  J.  and  the  inhabitants  of 
'    33.  14  captains,  .in  all  the  fenced  cities  of  J. 

33.  16  and  commanded  J.  to  serve  the  Lord  God 

34.  3  in  the  twelfth  year  he  began  to  purge  J. 
34.    5  And  he.  .cleansed  J.  and  Jerusalem 

34.   9  remnant  of  Israel,  .of  all  J.  and  Benjamin 
34.  11  houses  which  the  kings  of  J.  had  destroy. 
34. 21  them  that  are  left  in  Israel  and  in  J. 
34.  24  they  have  read  before  the  king  of  J. 
34.  26  the  king  of  J.,  who  sent  you  to  enquire  of 
34.  29  gathered,  .all  the  elders  of  J.  and  Jerus. 

34.  30  men  of  J.,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusal. 

35. 18  all  J.  and  Israel  that  were  present,  and 

35.  21  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  .king  of  J.? 
35.  24  all  J.  and  Jerusalem  mourned  for  Josiah 

35.  27  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  J. 

36.  4,  10  his  brother  king  over  J.  and  Jerusalem 
36.    8  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  aud  J. 
36.  23  an  house  in  Jerusalem,  which  (is)  in  J. 

Ezra  2.    t  came  again  unto  Jerusalem  and  J.,  every 

4.  1  the  adversaries  of  J.  and  Benjamin  heard 

5.  1  prophesied  unto  the  Jews  that(were)in  J. 
7.  14  to  enquire  concerning  J.  and  Jerusalem 
9.   9  to  give  us  a  wall  in  J.  and  in  Jerusalem 

Proves.    1  the  men  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J.  copied 
Isa.     1.    1  which  he  saw  concerning  J.  and  Jerusal. 

1.  1  Jotharri,  Ahaz,  (and) Hezekiah, kingsof  J. 

2.  .1  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  saw  concerning  J. 

3.  1  from  J.  the  stay  and  the  staff,  the  whole 
3.  8-For  Jerusalem  is  ruined,  and  J.  is  fallen 
5.  3  men  of  J.,  judge,  I  pray  you,  betwixt  me 
5.  7  and  the  men  of  J.  his  pleasant  plant :  and 
7.  1  son  of  Jotham.  .son  of  Uzziah,  king  of  J. 
7.   6  Let  us  go  up  against  J.,  and  vex  it,  and 

7.  17  the  day  that  Ephraim  departed  from  J. 

8.  8  he  shall  pass  through  J.  ;  he  shall  overfl. 

9.  21  they  together  (shall  be)  against  J.  For  all 
11.  12  gather  together  the  dispersed  of  J.  from 
11.  13  the  adversaries  of  J.  shall  be  cut  off 

11.  13  Ephraim  shall  not  envy  J.,  and  J.  shall 


Isa.   19. 17  land  of  J.  shall  be  a  terror  unto  Egypt 
22.    8  he  discovered  the  covering  of  J.,  and 
22.  21  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  house  of  J. 
26.    1  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  the  land  of  J. 
36.    1  up  against  all  the  defenced  cities  of  J. 

36.  7  and  said  to  J.  and  to  Jerusalem,  Ye  shall 

37.  10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 

37.  31  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house  of  J. 

38.  9  The  writing  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J.,  when 
40.    9  say  unto  the  cities  of  J.,  Behold  your  God 
44.  26  to  the  cities  of  J.,  Ye  shall  be  built,  and 
48.    1  are  come  forth  out  of  the  waters  of  J. 
65.    9  out  of  J.  an  inheritor  of  my  mountains 

Jer.     1.    2  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Anion  king  of  J. 
1.    3  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
1.    3  of  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
1. 15  shall  come,  .against  all  the  cities  of  J. 

1.  18  against  thekihgs  of  J.,  against  the  princes 

2.  28  the  number  of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  0  J . 

3.  7  And  her  treacherous  sister  J.  saw  (it) 
3.   8  J.  feared  not,  but  went  and  plaj'ed  the 

3. 10  J.  hath  not  turned  unto  me  with  her  wh. 

3.  11  justified  herself  more  than  treacherous  J. 
3. 18  house  of  J.  shall  walk  with  the  house  of 

4.  3  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  men  of  J.  and 
4.  4  ye  men  of  J.  and  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
4.   s  Declare  ye  in  J.,  and  publish  in  Jerusalem 

4.  16  give  out  their  voice  against,  .cities  of  J. 

5.  11  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  J.  have 
5.  20  Declare  this,  .and  publish  it  in  J„  saying 
7.    2  (ye  of)  J.,  that  enter  in  at  these  gates  to 
7. 17  Seest.  .not  what  they  do  in  the  cities  of  J 
7.  30  the  children  of  J,  have  done  evil  in  my 

7.  34  I  cause  to  cease  from  the  cities  of  J. 

8.  1  bring  out  the  bones  of  the  kings  of  J. 

9. 11  and  I  will  make  the  cities  of  J.  desolate 

9.  26  J.,  and  Edoni,  and  the  children  of  Amra. 

10.  22  to  make  the  cities  of  J.  desolate,  (and)  a 

11.  2  and  speak  unto  the  men  of  J.,  and  to  the 
11.   6  Proclaim,  .these  words  in  the  cities  of  J. 
11.    9  conspiracy  is  found  among  the  men  of  J. 
11.  10  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  J.  have 
11.  12  Then  shall  the  cities  of  J.  and  inhabitants 
11.  13  number  of  thy  cities  were  thy  gods,  0  J. 
11.  17  house  of  Israel,  and  of  the  house  of  J. . 
12. 14  pluck  out  the  house  of  J.  from  among 
13.    9  this  manner  will  I  mar  the  pride  of  J. 
13.  11  house  of  Israel  and  the  whole  house  of  J. 

13.  19  J.  shall  be  carried  away  captive  all  of 

14.  2  J.  mourneth,  and  the  gates  thereof  lang. 
14. 19  Hast  thou  utterly  rejected  J.  ?  hath  thy 
15     4  Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J 
17.    1  The  sin  of  J.  (is)  written  with  a  pen 

17.  19  whereby  the  kings  of  J.  come  in,  and  by 
17.  20  ye  kings  of  J.,  and  all  J.,  and  all  the 
17.  25  men  of  J.,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa. 
17.  26  they  shall  come  from  the  cities  of  J.,  and 
iS.  it  speak  to  the  men  of  J.,  .to  the  inhabit. 
19.  3  kings  of  J.,  aud  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
19.    4  fathers  have  known,  nor  the  kings  of  J. 

19.  7  make  void  the  counsel  of  J.  and  Jerusalem 
19. 13  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  J.,  shall  be 

20.  4  I  will  give  all  J.  into  the  hand  of  the 

20.  5  the  treasures  of  the  kings  of  J.  will  I 

21.  7  I  will  deliver  Zedekiah  kiug  of  J.,  and 
2T.  11  And  touching  the  house  of  the  king  of  J. 

22.  1  Go  down  to  the  house  of  the  king  of  J 
22.    2  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  king  of  J. 
22.    6  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  king's  house  of  J. 
22. 11  Shallum  theson  of  Josiah  king  of  J.,  wh. 
22.  10  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  kiug  of  J. 
22.  24  though  Coniah..kingof  J.  were  the  signet 

22.  30  no  man . .  shall  pros. . .  ruling  anv  more  in  J. 

23.  6  In  his  days  J  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel 

24.  1  carried  away  captive  Jeconiab.  .king  of  J. 
24.  1  princes  of  J.,  with  the  carpenters  and  sm. 
24.    5  them  that  are  carried  away  captive  of  J 

24.  8  So  will  I  give  Zedekiah  the  king  of  J  ,  and 

25.  1  that  came . .  concerningall  thepeople  of  J 
25.    1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
25.    2  Jeremiah . .  spake  unto  all  the  people  of  J. 
25-    3  year  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Anion  king  of  J 

25.  18  Jerusalem,  and  the  cities  of  J. .  .to  make 

26.  1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
26.    2  Stand,  .and  speak  unto  all  the  cities  of  J. 
26. 10  When  the  princes  of  J.  heard  these  things 
26.  jS  prophesied  in  the  days  of.  .king  of  J  ,  and 

26.  18  spake  to  all  the  people  of  J., saying,  Thus 

26. 19  Did  Hezekiah  king  of  J-  and  all  J.  put  him 

27.  1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
27.    3  which  come  to  Jerusalem  unto . .  king  of  J. 
27.  12  I  spake  also  to  Zedekiah  king  of  J.  acco.1 
27  18  are  left  in.  .the  house  of  the  kiug  of  J. 

27. 20  king  of  J. .  .and  all  the  nobles  of  J.  and 

27.  21  remain .  .(in)  the  house  of  the  king  of  J. 

28.  1  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of.  .king  of  J. 
28.   4  I  will  bring  again..  Jeconiah..  king  of  J. 

28.  4  all  the  captives  of  J.,  that  went  iuto  Ba. 

29.  2  After,  .the  princes  of  J.,  .were  departed 
29.    3  whom  Zedekiah  king  of  J.  sent  unto  Bab. 

29.  22  a  curse  by  all  the  captivity  of  J.  which 

30.  3  that  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of . .  J. 
.     30.    4  words  that  the  Lord  spake  concerning . .  J. 

3T.  23  As  yet  they  shall  use  this  speech  in.  .J. 

31.  24  there  shall  dwell  in  J.  itself,  .husbandmen 
31  27  that  I  will  sow  the  house,  .of  J.  with  the 

31.  31  make  anew  covenant  with'the  house  of.  .J. 

32.  1  in  the  tenth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  J. 
32.    2  the  prison,  which  (was)  in  the  king  of  J.'s. 
32.    3  For  Zedekiah  king  of  J.  had  shut  him  up 
32.    4  Zedekiah  king  of  J.  shall  not  escape  out 
32.  30  For  the  children,  .of  J.  have  only  done 


Jer.   32.  32  of  all  the  evil,  .of  the  children  of  J.,  wh. 

32.  32  the  men  of  J.,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Je. 
32. 44  take  witnesses,  .in  the  cities  of  J.,  and  in 

33.  4  houses  of  the  kings  of  J.,  which  are  thro. 
33.    7  I  will  cause  the  captivity  of  J. .  .to  return 
33. 10  without  beast,  (even)  in  the  cities  of  J. 
33. 13  in  the  cities  of  J.,  shall  the  flocks  pass 
33.  14  which  I  have  promised . .  to  the  house  of  J. 

33.  16  Iu  those  days  shall  J.  be  saved,  and  Jer. 

34.  2  Go  and  speak  to  Zedekiah  king  of  J.,  and 
34.  4  Yet  hear  the  word . .  0  Zedekiah  king  of  J. 
34.  6  all  these  words  unto  Zedekiah  king  of  J.  in 
34.  7  against  all  the  cities  of  J.  that  were  left 
34.  7  these,  .cities  remained  of  the  cities  of  J. 
34.  19  The  princes  of  J.,  and  the  princes  of  Jer. 
34.  21  Zedekiah  king  of  J.,  .will  I  give  into  the 

34.  22  I  will  make  the  cities  of  J.  a  desolation 
33.    1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 

35.  13  Go  and  tell  the  men  of  J.,  and  the  inliab. 

35.  17  Behold,  I  will  bring  upon  J.,  .all  the  evil 

36.  i,  9  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
36.  2  that  I  have  spoken  unto  thee,  .against  J. 
36.  3  It  may  be  that  the  house  of  J.  will  hear 
36.  6  also  thou  shalt  read.. in  the  ears  of  all  J. 
36.  9  that  came  from  the  cities  of  J.  unto  Jeru 
36.  28  which  Jehoiakim  the  king  of  J.  hath  bur. 
36.  29  And  thou  shalt  say  to  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 
36.  30  saith  the  Lord  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 

36.  31  I  will  bring . .  upon  the  men  of  of  J.,  all 
36.32  book  which  Jehoiakim  king  of  J.  had  bu. 

37.  1  whom,  .king  of  Babylon  madekingin.  .J.. 

37.  7  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  the  king  of  J.,  that 

38.  22  women  that  are  left  in  the  king  of  J.'s  h. 

39.  1  In  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  J. 
39.  4  when  Zedekiah  the  king  of  J.  saw  them 
39.     6  king  of  Babylon  slew  all  the  nobles  of  J. 

39.  10  which  had  nothing,  in  the  land  of  J. 

40.  1  all- that  were  carried  away  captive  of . .  J, 
40.  5  hatb  made  governor  over  the  cities  of  J. 
40.  11  king  of  Babylon  had  left  a  remnant  of  J. 
40. 12  Even  all  the  Jews,  .came  to  the  land  of  J. 
40.  15  that  all  the  Jews,  .and  the  remnant  hi  J. 
42.  15  hear  the  word,  .ye  remnant  of  J.;  Thus 

42.  19  0  ye  remnant  of  J .;  Go  ye  not  into  Egypt 

43.  4  obeyed  not.  .to  dwell  in  the  land  of  J. 
43.    5  Johanan.  .took  all  the  remnant  of  J. 
43.    5  were  returned,  .to  dwell  in  the  land  of  J 

43.  9  Take  great  stones.,  in.  .sight  of.  .men  of  J. 

44.  2  I  have  brought,  .upon  all  the  cities  of  J. 
44.    6  my  fury,  .was  kindled  in  the  cities  of  J. 
44.    7  cut  off  from  you  man  and  woman . .  out  of  J 
44.    9  forgotten,  .wickedness  of  the  kings  of  J. 
44.    9  they  have  committed  in  the  land  of  J.,  and 
44.  11  set  my  face  against  you.  .to  cut  off  all  J. 
44.  12  I  will  take  the  remnant  of  J.,  that  have 
44.  14  none  of  the  remnant  of  J.,  which  are  gone 
44.  14  they  should  return  iuto  the  land  of  J. 
44.  17,  2i  in  the  cities  of  J.,  and  in  the  streets  of 
44.  24  Hear,  .all  J.  that  (are)  in  the  land  of  Eg. 
44.  26  all  J.  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

44. 26  be  named  in  the  mouth  of  any  man  of  J . 
44.  27  men  of  J.  that  (are)  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
44.  28  the  land  of  J.,  and  all  the  remnant  of  J. 

44.  30  I  gave  Zedekiah  king  of  J.  into  the  hand 

45.  1  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 

46.  2  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 

49.  34  beginning  of.  .reign  of  Zedekiah  king  of  J. 

50.  4  they  and  the  children  of  J.  together,  going 
50.  20  the  sins  of  J.,  and  they  shall  not  be  found 

50.  33  the  children  of  J.  (were)  oppressed  toge. 

51.  5  not  (been)  forsaken,  nor  J.  of  his  God 

51.  59  he  went  with  Zedekiah  the  king  of  J.  into 

52.  3  it  came  to  pass  in  Jerusalem  and  J.,  till 
52.  10  slew  also  all  the  princes  of  J.  in  Riblah 
52.  27  J.  was  carried  away  captive  out  of  his 
52.  31  of  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachin  Icing  of  J. 
52.  31  lifted.. the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  J. 

Lam.  1.   3  J.  is  gone  into  captivity  because  of 

1.  15  hath  trodden  the  virgin,  .daughter  of  J. 

2.  2  the  strong  holds  of  the  daughter  of  J. 

2.    5  increased  in  the  daughter  of  J.  mourning 

5.  11  They  ravished,  .maids  in  the  cities  of  J. 
Eze.    4.    6  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  J.  forty 

8.   1  the  elders  of  J.  sat  before  me,  that  the 

8.  17  Is  it  a  light  thing  to  the  house  of  J. 

a.   9  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israeland  J. 
21.  20  and  to  J.  in  Jerusalem  the  defenced 
25.    3  against  the  house  of  J.,  when  they  went 
25     8  house  of  J.  (is)  like  unto  all  the  heathen 
25.  12  Edoni  hath  dealt  against  the  house  of  J. 
27.  17  J.,  and  the  land  of  Israel,  they  (were)  thy 
37.  16  For  J.,  and  for  the  children  of  Israel  his 
37.  19  put  them  with  him .  .with  the  stick  of  J. 
48.    7  even  unto  the  west  side,  a  (portion  for)  J. 
48.    8  by  the  border  of  J.,  from  the  east  side 
48.  22  border  of  J.  and  the  border  of  Benjamin 
48.  31  of  Keuben,  one  gateof  J.,  one  gate  of  Levi 
Dan.    1.    t  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 
1.    2  gave  Jehoiakim  king  of  J  into  his  hand 

1.  6  the  children  of  J.,  Daniel,  Hananiah,  M. 

2.  25  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  captives  of  J. 
5. 13  of  the  children  of  the  captivity  of  J. 

6.  13  of  the  children  of  the  captivity  of  J, 

9.  7  to  tlie  men  of  J.,  and  to  the  inhabitants 
Hos.    1.    1  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz. . Hezekiah, ks.  of  J. 

i.  7  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  J.,  and 
1.  11  the  children  of  J.  .and  the  children  of 

4.  15  let  not  J.  offend ;  and  come  not  ye  unto 

5.  5  therefore.  .J.  also  shall  fall  with  them 

5.  10  princes  of  J.  were  like  them  that  remove 

5. 12  moth,  and  to  the  house  of  J.  as  rottenness 

5. 13  saw  his  sickness,  and  J.  (saw)  his  wound 


JUDAS 


356 


JUDGE 


Hos.    5.  14  as  a  your)  cc  lionto  the  house  of  J.:  I, (even) 

6.  4  O  J.,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee?  for  your 
6. 11  O  J.,  he  hath  set  an  harvest  for  thee,  when 

8. 14  J.  hath  multiplied  fenced  cities :  but  I 

10. 11  J.  shall  plow,  (and)  Jacob  shall  break  his 

11. 12  J.  yet  ruleth  with  God,  and  is  faithful 
12.    2  The  Lord  hath  also  a  controversy  with  J. 

Joel     3.    1  shall  bring  again  the  captivity  of  J.  and 
3.    6  The  children  also  of  J. .  .have  ye  sold  unto 
3.    8  sell,  .into  the  hand  of  the  children  of  J. 
3.  18  the  rivers  of  J.  shall  flow  with  waters 
3.  19  the  violence  (against)  the  children  of  J. 
3. 20  J.  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusalem 

Amos  1.    1  he  saw.  .in  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of  J. 
2.    4  For  three  transgressions  of  J.,  and  for 
2.    5  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  J.,  and  it  shall 

7.  12  flee  thee  away  into  the  land  of  J.,  and 
Obad.  12  have  rejoiced  over  the  children  of  J.  in 
Mic.    r.    ^  Jotham,  Ahaz,  (and)  Hezekiah,  kingsof  J. 

1.    5  what  (are)  the  higli  places  of  J.?  (are  they) 

1.   9  it  is  come  unto  J. ;  he  is  come  unto  the 

5.    2  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands  of  J. 

Nab.    1. 15  0  J.,  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy 

Zeph.  1.    1  days  of  Josiahtheson  of  Anion,  king  of  J. 

1.  4  I  will  also  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  J. 

2.  7  be  for  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  J. 
Hag.   1.    1,  14  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of  J. 

2.    2  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of  J.,  and 

2.  21  Speak  to  Zerubbabel,  governor  of  J.,  say. 

Zech.  1. 12  mercy  on  Jerusalem  and  on  the  cities  of  J. 

1.  19,  21  (are)  the  horns  which  have  scattered  J. 

1.  21  horn  over  the  land  of  J.  to  scatter  it 

2.  12  the  Lord  shall  inherit  J.  his  portion  in 

8.  13  O  house  of  J.,  and  house  of  Israel 

8. 15  unto  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  house  of  J. 

8.  19  be  to  the  house  of  J.  joy  and  gladness 

9.  7  he  shall  be  as  a  governor  in  J.,  and  Ekron 
9.  13  I  have  bent  J.  for  me,  filled  the  bow  with 

20.  3  hath  visited  his  flock  the  house  of  J. 
to.   6  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of  J.,  and  I 
11. 14  the  brotherhood  between  J.  and  Israel 
12.    2  both  against  J.  (and)  against  Jerusalem 
t2.    4  will  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  J. 
12.    5  the  governors  of  J.  shall  say  in  their 
12.   6  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of  J. 
12.    7  Lord  also  shall  save  the  tents  of  J.  flr3t 
12.    7  do  not  magnify  (themselves)  against  J. 
14.    5 earthquake  in.  .days  of  Uzziah  king  of  J. 
14. 14  J.  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem:  and  the 
14.  21  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  J.  shall  be 
Mai.    2.  11  J. .  .dealt  treacherously,  and  an  abomin. 
2. 11  J.  hath  profaned  the  holinessof  the  Lord 

3.  4  shall  the  offering  of  J.  and  Jerusalem 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  ;of  Judah  : 
Achzib,  Adadah,  Adar,  Adithaim,  Adoraim,  Adullam, 
Ain,  Amain,  Anab,  Anim,  Aphekah,  Arab,  Aroer,  Aru- 
both,  Ashan,  Ashdod,  Ashnah,  Athach,  Azal,  Azchah, 
Azem,  Azmaveth,  Baalah,  Bealoth,  Berachah,  Beth- 
anoth,  Beth-dagon,  Beth-ezel,  Beth-gader,  Beth-leheni 
Ephratah,  Beth-palet,  Beth-shemesh,  Beth-tappuah, 
Beth-zur,  Bizjothjah,  Boscath,  Cabbon,  Cain,  Caleb- 
Ephratah,  Carmel,  Chesalon,  Chezib,  Dannah,  Debir, 
Oilcan,  Eder,  Eglon,  Eltekou,  En-gannim,  Engedi, 
12  nam,  Ephes-dammim,  Ephron,  Eshean,  Eshtemoa, 
Etam,  Gederoth,  Gederothaim,  Gedor,  Gibeah,  Giloh, 
Gimzo,  Goshen,  Hadashah,  Halhul,  Hareth,  Hazar- 
addar,  Hazar-gaddah,  Hazezon-tamar,  Hazor,  Hadattah, 
Hebron,  Heshmon,  Hulon,  Humt  ill,  Ithnan,  Jim,  Jabez, 
Jabneel,  Jabneh,  Jagur,  Janam,  Jarmuth,  Jattir,  Je- 
kabzeel,  Jiphtah,  Jokdeam,  Joktheel,  Jorkeam,  Juttah, 
Karkaa,  Kedesh,  Keilah,  Kerioth,  Kinah,  Kirjath-arba, 
Kirjath-jearim,  Kirjath-saunah  or  -sepher,  Kithlish, 
Lachish,  Lahmain,  Lecah,  Libnah,  Lod,  Maarath, 
Madmen,  Makkcdah,  Mamre,  Maon,  Mareshah,  Me- 
konah,  Middin,  Migdal-gad,  Mizpah,  Naamah,  Nebo, 
Netophah,  Nezib,  Nibshan,  Rabbah,  Rachal,  Rechah, 
Rimmon,  Sansannah,  Saphir,  Secacah,  Seir,  Senaah, 
Shaaraim,  Shamir,  Slieba,  Shema,  Shieron,  Shilhim, 
Shocho,  Sorek,  Tappuah,  Tekoa,  Telaim,  Telern,  Tim- 
uah,  Zaanan,  Zauoah,  Zenan,  Zephathah,  Ziklag,  Zior, 
Ziph,  &c. 

4.  An  ancestor  of  Kadmiel  who  helped  to  rebuild  the 
temple.    B.C.  535. 

Ezra  3.  9  Kadmielandhissons,  the  sons  of  J.,toge. 
T>  A  Levite  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra  to.  23same(is)Kelita,  Pethahiah,  J.,andEliezer 

6.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Senuah ;  the  second  in  authority 
over  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah.     B.C.  446-434. 

Neh.  n.    0  J.  the  son  of  Senuah  (was)  second  over 

7.  A  Levite  who  came  up  with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Neh. 12.    8  J.,  (and)  Mattaniah,  (which  was)  over  the 

8.  A  prince  of  Judah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  34  J. .and  Benjamin,  and  Shemaiah,  and  Jer. 

0.  A  priest  and  musician.     B.C.  445. 

•Neh.  12.  36  J.,  Hanani,  with  the  musical  instruments 
JTJ'-DAS,  JU'-DA,  JUDE,  'lovSas. 

1.  A  disciple,  surnamed  Iscariot,  who  betrayed  his  Mas- 
ter and  then  hanged  himself. 

Matt  10.  4  and  J.  Iscariot,  who  also  betrayed  him 
26. 14  J.  Iscariot,  went  unto  the  chief  priests 
26.  25  .1.,  which  betrayed  him,  answered  and 

26.  47  J.,  one  of  the  twelve,  came,  and  with  him 

27.  3  J.,  which  had  betrayed  him,  when  he  saw 
Mark  3.  19  And  J.  Iscariot,  which  also  betrayed  him 

14.  10  J.  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  unto 
14.  43  cometh  J.,  one  of  the  twelve,  and  with 
Luke  6.  10  J.  Iscariot,  which  also  was  the  traitor 
22.    3  entered  Satan  into  .1.  surnamed  Iscariot 


Luke22.  47  J.,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  before  them 

22.  48  J.,  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a 
John  6.  71  He  spake  of  J.  Iscariot  (the  son)  of  Simon 

12.  4  J.  Iscariot,  Simon's  (son),  which  should 

13.  2  having,  .put  into  the  heart  of  J.  Iscariot 
13.  26  he  gave  (it)  to  J.  Iscariot,  (the  son)  of  S. 
13.29  because  J.  had  the  bag,  that  Jesus  had 
18.   2  J.  also,  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the 
18.    3  J.  then,  having  received  a  band  (of  men) 

18.  5  J.  also,  which  betrayed  him,  stood  with 
Acts    1.  16  spake  before  concerning  J.,  which  was 

1.  25  from  which  J.  by  transgression  fell,  that 

2.  One  of  the  brothers  of  Jesus. 

Matti3.  55  brethren,  James,  and  Joses,  and  Simon 
Mark  6.   3  of  James,  and  Joses,  and  of  J.,  and  Simon? 

3.  The  brother  of  James  and  writer  of  an  epistle  known 
by  his  name,  "  Jude." 

Luke  6. 16  And  J.  (the  brother)  of  James,  and  .  .Is. 
Acts    1.  13  SimonZelotes,  and  J.  (the  broth. )of  James 
Jude         1  J.,  the  servant  of  Jesus  Cluist,  and  brother 

4.  An  apostle  (not  Iscariot),  supposed  to  be  Lebbeus  or 
Thaddeus. 

Johni4.  22  J.  saith  unto  him,  not  Iscariot,  Lord 

5.  A  Galilean  who  stirred  up  sedition  shortly  after  the 
birth  of  Jesus. 

Acts    5.  37  rose  up  J.  of  Galilee  in  the  days  of  the 

6.  One  with  whom  Paul  lodged  in  StraightSt.,  Damascus. 

Acts    9.  11  enquire  in  the  house  of  J.  for  (one)  called 

7.  The  prophet  surnamed  Barsabas,  sent  with  Silas  to 
Antioch  by  the  Apostles,  to  convey  their  decree  regard- 
ing circumcision. 

Acts  15.  22  J.  surnamed  Barsabas,  and  Silas,  v.  32. 
8    Twoof  the  ancestors  of  Jesus,  Luke  3.  26,  30. 
15.  32  .).  and  Silas,  being  prophets  also  them.e. 

JTJ-DE'-A,  JEW'-RY,  TouSaux,  5. 

Another  name  or  form  of  the  name  of  the  land  of  Judah, 

which  see. 

Ezra  5.    8  we  went  into  the  province  of  J.,  to  the 
Dan.    5.  13  whom  the  king  my  father  brought  out  of  J.? 
Matt.  2.    1  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem  of  J.,  in  the 

2.  5  In  Bethlehem  of  J. :  for  thus  it  is  writteD 

2.  22  Archelaus  did  reign  in  J.  in  the  room  of 

3.  1  Baptist,  preaching  in  the  wilderness  of  J. 

3.  5  J.,  and  all  the  region  round  about  Jordan 

4.  25  and  (from)  J.,  and  (from)  beyond  Jordan 

19.  1  came  into  the  coasts  of  J.  beyond  Jordan 
24.  16  let  them . .  in  J.  flee  into  the  mountains 

Mark  1.    5  there  went  out  unto  Iiim  all  the  land  of  J. 
3.   7  great  multitude  from  Galilee.,  and  from  J. 

10.  1  cometh  into  the  coasts  of  J.  by  the  farther 
13.  14  them  that  be  in  J.  flee  to  the  mountains 

Luke  1.    5  was,  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  king  of  J.,  a 

1.  65  were  noised  abroad  throughout  all.  .J. 

2.  4  Josephalso  wentup  from  Galilee,  .into  J. 

3.  1  Pontius  Pilate  being  governor  of  J.,  and 

5.  17  which  were  come  out  of  every  town  of . .  J. 
6. 17  a  great  multitude  of  people  out  of  all  J. 
7. 17  tins  rumour,  .went  forth  throughout  all  J. 

21.  21  let  them  which  are  in  J.  flee  to  the  moun. 

23.  5  He  stirreth  up.  .teaching  throughout.  .J. 
John  3.  22  came  Jesus,  .into  the  land  of  J.;  and  th. 

4.  3  He  left  J.,  and  departed  again  into  Galilee 
4.  47  heard  that  Jesus  was  come  out  of  J.  into 
4.  54  when  he  was  come  out  of  J.  into  Galilee 
7.    1  forhe  wouldnotwalk  in  J.,  because  the  J. 

7.  3  Depart  hence,  and  go  into  J.,  that  thy  dis. 

11.  7  after  that  saith  he.  .Let  us  go  into  J.  again 
Acts    1.    8  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me.  .iu  all  J.,  and 

2.   9  the  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  in  J. 
2. 14  Ye  men  of  J.,  .be  this  known  unto  you,  and 

8.  1  were  all  scattered  abroad  throughout.  .J. 

9.  31  had  the  churches  rest  throughout  all  J. 

10.  37  which  was  published  throughout  all  J. 

11.  1  apostles  and  brethren  that  were  in  J.  heard 
11.  29  to  send  relief  unto  the  brethen..in  J. 
12. 19  And  he  went  down  from  J.  to  Cesarea,  and 

15.  1  certain  men  which  came  down  from  J. 
21.  10  there  came  down  from  J.  a  certain  prop. 
26.  20  and  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  J.,  and 
28.  21  We  neither  received  letters  out  of  J.  con. 

Rom  15.  31  That  I  may  be  delivered  from  them,  .in  J. 

2  Co.  1.  16  of  you  to  be  brought  on  my  way  toward  J. 

Gal.     1.  22  unto  the  churches  of  J.  which  were  in  Ch. 

1  Th.  2.  14  the  churches  of  God  which  in  J.  are  in  Ch. 
JUDGE  — 
1,A  judge,  discerncr,  |h  dayyan. 

1  Sa.  24. 15  Lord  therefore  be  judge,  and  judge  betw. 

Ezra.  7.  25  set  magistrates  and  judges,  which  may  ju. 

Psa.  68.    5  a  judge  of  the  widows,  (is)  God  in  his  holy 

1.A  judge,  sifter,  h'bs  palil. 

Exod2i.  22  and  he  shall  pay  asthe  judges  (determine) 
Deut.32.  31  even  our  enemies  themselves  (being)  jud. 
Job    31.  11  an  iniquity  (to  be  punished  by)  the  judge 

^.Judicial,  S?'7S  jictili. 

Job    31.  28  an  'iniquity  (to  be  punished  by)  the  judge 

4.  To  judge,  act  as  a  magistrate,  »S#J  shaphat 
Gen.  18.  25  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 
Exod.  2.  14  Who  made  thee  a  prince  and  a  judge  over 
Nuni25-    5  Moses  said  unto  the  judges  of  Israel,  Slay 
Deut.  1.  16  I  chargedyourjudgesat  that  time, saying 

16.  18  Judges  and  officers  sbalt  thou  make  thee 

17.  9  unto  the  judge  that  shall  he  in  those  days 
17.  12  will  not  hearken,  .unto  the  judge,  even 
19.  17  before  the  priests  and  the  judges  which 
19.  18  the  judges  shallmakediligent  inquisition 
21.    2  thy  elders  and  thy  judges  shall  come  fo 


Deut25.    2  that  the  judge  shall  cause  him  to  lie  do. 
Josh.  8.  33  all  Israel,  .and  their  judges,  stood  on  this 

23.  2  fortheir  judges,  and  for  their  officers,  and 

24.  1  for  their  heads,  and  for  their  judges,  and 
Judg.  2.  16  Lord  raised  up  judges,  which  delivered 

2. 17  yet  they  would  not  hearken  unto  their  j. 

2. 18  And  when  the  Lord  raised  them  up  judges 
2. 18  then  the  Lord  was  with  the  judge,  and  de. 
2.  18  delivered  them,  .all  the  days  of  the  judge 

2.  19  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  judge  was  dead 

11.  27  Lord  the  Judge  be  judge  this  daybetweeu 
Ruth  1.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  when  the  ju. 

1  Sa.   8.    1  that  he  made  his  sons  judges  over  Israel 

8.  2  Joel,  and . .  Abiah . .  judges  in\Beer-sheba 

2  Sa.   7. 11  I  commanded  judges,  .over  my  people  I. 

15.    4  Oh  that  I  were  made  judge  in  the  land 
2  Ki.  23.  22  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged  I. 

1  Ch,i7.   6  spake  I  a  word  to  any  of  the  judges  of  Is. 

17.  10  since  the  time  that  I  commanded  judges 
23.   4  six  thousand  (were)  officers  and  judges 
26.  29  Chenaniah  and  his  sons  (were),  .for. .  ju. 

2  Ch.   1.   2  to  the  captains,  .and  to  the  judges,  and 

19.    5  he  set  judges  in  the  land,  throughout  all 

19.    6  said  to  the  judges,  Take  heed  what  ye  do 

Ezra  10.  14  the  elders  of  every  city,  and  the  judges 

Job     9.  24  he  covereth  the  faces  of  the  judges  there. 

12. 17  away  spoiled,  and  maketh  the  judges  fo. 

23.  7  so  should  I  be  delivered,  .from  my  judge 
Psa.     2.  10  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth 

50.  6  shall  declare . .  for  God  (is)  judge  himself 
75.  7  God  (is)  the  judge :  he  putteth  down  one 
94.  2  Lift  up  thyself,  thou  judge  of  the  earth 
141.  6  When  their  judges  are  overthrown  in  st. 
148. 11  Kings.. princes,  and  all  judges  of  the  earth 
Prov.  8.  16  By  me  princes  rule,  .all  the  judges  of  the 
Isa.     1.  26  I  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  the  first,  and 

3.  2  the  man  of  war,  the  judge,  and  the  prop. 
33.  22  the  Lord  (is)  our  judge,  the  Lord  (is)  our 
40.  23  he  maketh  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  va. 

Dan.  9.  12  spake,  .against  our  judges  that  judged  us 
Hos.  7.  7  and  have  devoured  their  judges ;  all  their 
■  13.  10  and  thy  judges  of  whom  thou  saidst,  Give 
Amos  2.  3  I  will  cut  off  the  judge  from  the  midst  th. 
Mic.  5.  1  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with 
7.  3  the  judge  (asketh)  for  a  reward  ;  and  the 
Zeph.  3.    3  herjudges(are)eveningwolves;theygnaw 

b.A  judge,  judicial  functionary,  Sifcatrr^s  dilcastes. 
Lukei2.  14  Man,  who  made  me  [a  judge]  or  a  divider 
Acts  7.  27  Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge  over 
7.  35  Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge?  the 

6..-1  judge,  critic,  Kpn-qs  forties. 

Matt.  5.  25  deliver  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  judge 

12.  27  therefore  they  shall  be  your  judges 
Luken.  19  therefore  shall  they  be  your  judges 

12.  58  he  hale  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  judge 

18.  2  There  was  in  a  city  a  judge,  which  feared 
18.    6  Lord  said,  Hear  what  the  unjust  judge 

Acts  10.  42  ordained  of  God.  .the  judge  of  quick  and 

13.  20  after  that  he  gave,  .judges  about  the  spa. 
18.  15  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of  such  (matters) 

24.  10  thou  hast  been  of  many  years  a  judge 

2  Ti.  4.  8  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall 
Heb.  12.  23  to  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits 
Jas.     2.   4  and  are  become  judges  of  evil  thoughts? 

4.  11  thou  art  not  a  doer  of  the  law,  but  a  jud. 

5.  9  behold,  the  judge  staudeth  before  the  door 

JTjDGE,  to  — 

1.  To  judge,  discern,  },T)  din. 

Gen.  15. 14  also  that  nation,  .will  I  judge  :  and  after. 

30.  6  God  hath  judged  me,  and  hath  also  heard 
49. 16  Dan  shall  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the 

Deut  32.  36  Lord  shall  judge  his  people  and  repent 
1  Sa.  2.  10  Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the  earth 
Ezra  7.  25  judges,  which  may  judge  all  the  people 
Job    36.  31  For  by  them  judgeth  he  the  poeple;  he 
Psa.    7.   8  The  Lord  shall  judge  the  people 

9.  8  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness 
50.  4  He  shall  call . .  that  he  may  judge  his  peo. 
54.  1  Save  me,  0  God .  .judge  me  by  thy  stren. 
72.  2  He  shall  judge  thy  people  with  righteous. 
96. 10  the  Lord,  .shall  judge  the  people  right. 

no.   6  He  shall  judge  among  the  heathen,  he    " 

135.  14  the  Lord  will  judge  his  people,  and  he  will 

Isa.     3.  13  The  Lord,  .standeth  to  judge  the  people 

Jer.     5.  28  they  judge  not  the  cause,  the  cause  of  the 

22. 16  He  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy 

Zech   3.   7  thou  shalt  also  judge  my  house,  and  shalt 

2.  To  make  manifest,  reason,  reprove,  decide,  rp;,  5. 

Gen.  31.  37  here.. that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  both 

3.  To  judge,  sift,  execute  judgment,  ??$  palaZ,  3. 

1  Sa.  2.25  If  onemansin.. the  judgeshall  judge  him 
Eze.  16.  52  Thou  also,  which  hast  judged  thy  sisters 

4.  To  judge,  act  as  a  magistrate,  usy1  shaphat. 

Gen.  16.    5  said. .  the  LoRPjudgebetweenmeand  thee 

31.  53  the  God  of  their  father,  judge  betwixt  us 
Exod.  5.  21  Lord  look  upon  you,  and  judge ;  because 

18. 13  Moses  sat  to  judge  the  people  :  and  the  p. 

18.  16  I  judge  between  one  and  another,  and  I 

18.  22  let  them  judge  the  people  at  all  seasons 

18.  22  but  every  small  matter  they  shall  judge 

iS.  zr>  And  they  judged  the  people  at  all  seasons 

18.  26  every  small  matter  they  judged  themsel. 

Lev.  19.  15  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thy  nei. 

Num. 35.  24  the  congregation  shall  judge  between  the 

Deut.  1.  16  judge  righteously  between  (every)  man 

16.  iS  they  shall  judge  the  people  with  just  jud. 

25.  1  that  (the  judges)  may  judge  them  ;  then 
Judg.  3.  10  and  he  judged  Israel,  andwenl  out  to  war 


JUDGE 


557 


JUDGMENT 


Judg.  4.   4  Deborah . .  she  judged  Israel  at  that  time 
io.    2  And  he  judged  Israel  twenty  and  three 
10.'  3  and  judged  Israel  twenty  and  two  years 
11.27  Lorn)  the  Judge  be  judge  this  day  between 
12.   7  And  Jephthah  judged  Israel  six  years 
12.    8  after  hirii  Ibzan  of  Beth-lehem  judged  Isr. 
12.    9  and  he  judged  Israel  seven  years 
12.  11  a  Zebulonite,  judged  Israel;  and  he  judged 
12.  13  after  him  Abdon.  .a  Pirathonite,  judged 
12.  14  and  he  judged  Israel  eight  years 

15.  20  he  judged  Israel  in  the  days  of  thePhilist. 

16.  31  and  he  judged  Israel  twenty  years 

1  Sa.   3.  13  I  have  told  him  that  I  will  judge  his  house 

4.  18  And  he  had  judged  Israel  forty  years 

7.  6  Samuel  judged  the  children  of  Israel  inM. 
7.  15  Samuel  judged  Israel  all  the  days  of  his 
7.  16  went,  .and  judged  Israel  in  all  those  pla. 

7.  17  there  he  judged  Israel;  and  there  he  built 

8.  5  make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the 
8.  6  when  they  said,  Give  us  a  king  to  judge 
8.  20  that  our  king  may  judge  us,  and  go  out 

24. 12  Lord  judge  between  me  and  thee,  and 
24. 15  judge  between  me  and  thee,  and  see,  and 

1  Ki.  3.    9  to  judge  thy  people,  that  I  may  discern 

3.    9  who  is  able  to  judge  this,  .sogreatapeop.? 

3.  28  of  the  judgment  which  the  king  had  judg. 

7.  7  a  porch  for  the  throne  where  he  might  ju. 

8.  32  judge  thy  servants,  condemning  the  wick. 

2  Ki.  15.    5  over  the  house,  judging  the  people  of  the 

23.  22  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged 

1  Ch.  16.  33  Lord,  because  he  conieth  to  judge  the 

2  Ch.   1.  10  for  who  can  judge  this  thy  people,  (that 

1. 11  that  thou  mayest  judge  my  people,  over 

6.  23  judge  thy  servants,  by  requiting  the  wic. 

19.  6  ye  judge  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord 

20.  12  0  our  God,  wilt  thou  not  judge  them?  for 
26. 21  over  the  king's  house,  judging  the  people 

Job  2i.  22  seeing  he  judgeth  those  that  are  high 

22.  13  God.  .can  he  judge  through  the  darkclo.? 
Psa.    7.  8  judge  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  my  righ. 

7.  11  God  judgeth  the  righteous,  and  God  is 

9.  4  thou  satest  in  the  throne  judging  right 
9.   S  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness 

10.  18  To  judge  the  fatherless  and  the  oppressed 
26.    1  Judge  me,  0  Lord  ;  for  I  have  walked  in 

35.  24  Judge  me,  0  Lord  my  God,  according  to 

43.  1  Judge  me,  0  God,  and  plead  my  cause 
51.    4  thou  mightest.  .be  clear  when  thou  judg. 
58.    1  do  ye  judge  uprightly,  O  ye  sons  of  men  ? 
58. 11  verily  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  intheearth 
67.   4  for  thou  shalt  judge  the  people  righteou. 
72.    4  He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people 
75.    2  When  I  shall  receive.  .1  will  judge  uprig. 
82.   1  Godstandeth.  .he  judgeth  among  the  gods 
82.   2  How  long  will  ye  judge  unjustly,  and  ac. 
82.    8  Arise,  O  God,  judge  the  earth  :  for  thou 
96.  13  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth :  he  shall  j. 
98.    9  to  judge,  .righteousness  shall  lie  judge 

Prov  29.  14  The  king  that  faithf  Lilly  judgeth  the  poor 

31.    9  judge  righteously,  and  plead  the  cause  of 

Eccl.  3. 17  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the  w. 

Isa.     1.  17  judge  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow 

1 .  23  they  "judge  not  the  fatherless,  neither  dotli 

2.  4  he  shall  judge  among  the  nations,  and 

5.  3  men  of  Judah,  judge,  I  pray  you,  betwixt 

11.  3  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  his 
11.   4  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  poor 
16.    5  sit.  .in  the  taberuacle  of  David,  judging 
51.   5  mine  arms  shall  judge  the  people  :  the 

Jer.    5.  28  the  right  of  the  needy  do  they  not  judge 
ti.  20  0  Lord  of  hosts,  that  judgest  righteously 
Lam.   3.  59  0  Lord,  thou  hast  seen  my  wrong ;  judge 
Eze.    7.    3,  8  will  judge  thee  according  to  thy  ways 
7.  27  according  to  their  deserts  will  I  judge 
11.  10  will  judge  you  in  the  border  of  Israel 
11. 11  (but)  I  will  judge  you  in  the  border  of  Is. 
16.  38  I  will  judge  thee,  as  women  that  break 
18.  30  I  will  judge  you,  0  house  of  Israel,  every 

20.  4  Wilt  thou  judge  them,  .wilt  thou  judge 

21.  30 1  will  judge  thee  in  the  place  wdiere  thou 

22.  2  wilt  thou  judge,  wilt  thou  judge  the  bio. 

23.  24  they  shall  judge  thee  according  to  their 
23.  36  wilt  thou  judge  Aholah  and  Aholibah? 
23.  45  they  shall  judge  them  after  the  manner 
24. 14  according  to  thy  doings,  shall  they  judge 

33.  20  O  ye  house  of  Israel,  I  will  judge  you 
34. 17  I  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle,  betw. 

34.  20 1,  will  judge  between  the  fat  cattle  and 
34.  22  and  I  will  judge  between  cattle  and  cat 
35. 11  make  myself  known,  .when  I  have  judg. 

36.  19  and  according  to  their  doings  I  judged 

44.  24  they  shall  judge  it  according  to  my  jud. 
Dan.   9.  12  spake,  .against  our  judges  that  judged 
Joel    3. 12  there  will  I  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen 
Obad.     21  shall  come  up  on  mount  Zion  to  judge 
Mic.   3. 11  The  heads  thereof  judge  for  reward,  and 

4.  3  he  shall  judge  among  many  people,  and 

5.  To  judge  strictly,  afresh,  avaKpivo)  anakrino. 

1  Co.  2. 15  But  he  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  things 
2,  15  yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  man 
4.    3  that  I  should  be  judged  of  you.  .1  judge 
4.    4  but  he  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord 
14. 24  he  is  convinced  of  all.  he  is  judged  of  all 

6.  To  judge  thoroughly,  dtaKpivo)  diakrind. 

1  Co.  6.  s  that  shall  be  able  to  judge  between  hisb. 
11.  31  For  if  we  would  judge  ourselves, we  should 
14.  29  speak  two  or  three,  and  let  the  other  jud. 

7. To  account,  think,  T\yioy.a.i  tegeomai. 

neb. 11. 11  she  judged  him  faithful  who  had  promised 


17- 


24. 


.To  judge,  tcpivw  krino. 
Matt.  7.    1  Judge  not,  that  ye  bs  not  judged 

7.   2  withwhatjudgmentyejudge.yeshallbej. 

19.  28  shall  sit.  .judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Is. 

Luke  6.  37  Judge  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be  judged :  co. 

7.  43  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  rightly  jud. 

12.  57  even  of  yourselves  judge  ye  not  what  is  ri. 

19.  22  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee 

22.  30  and  sit.  .judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Isr. 

John  5.  22  For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath 

5.  30  as  I  hear,  I  judge :  and  my  judgment  is  j. 

7.  24  Judge  not  accord,  to  the  appearance,  but  j. 

7.  51  Doth  our  law  judge  (any)  man  before  it 

8. 15  Ye  judge  after  the  flesh ;  I  judge  no  man 

8. 16  yet  if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  true;  for 

8.  26  I  have  many  things  to  say  and  to  judge 
8.  50  there  is  one  that  seeketh  and  judgeth 

12.  47  if  any  man.  .believe  not,  I  judge  him  not 
12.  47  I  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save 

12.  48  hath  one  that  judgeth.  .the  same  shall  ju. 
16. 11  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged 
18.  31  Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to 

Acts  4.  19  Whetherit  be  right,  .tohearken. .  judgeye 
7.  7  And  the  nation,  .will  I  judge,  said  God 
13. 46  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting 
16.  15  If  ye  have  judged  me  to  be  faithful  to  the 
.  31  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world 
3  for  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after  the  law 
6  would  have  [judged]  according  to  our  law 
9  there  be  judged  of  these  things  before  me? 

25. 10  at  Cesar's ..  seat,  where  I  ought  to  be  jud. 

25.  20  go.  .and  there  be  judged  of  these  matters 

26.  6  I  stand  and  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the 
Horn.  2.    1  0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest 

2.    1  wherein  thou  judgest  another,  thou  con. 
2.    1  for  thou  that  judgest  doestthesamethings 
2.    3  man,  that  judgest  them  which  do  such 
2. 12  as  many  as.  .sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  j. 
2. 16  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men 

2.  27  shall  notuncircumcision.. judge  thee,  who 

3.  4  mightest  overcome  when  thou  /art  judged 
3.    6  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ? 

3.  7  more . .  why  yet  am  I  also  judged  as  a  si.? 
14.  3  let  not  him  which  eateth  not  ju.-him  that 
14.  4  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  another  man's 
14.  10  why  dost  thou  judge  thy  brother?  or  why 
14. 13  Let  us  not  therefore  judge  one  another 
14.  13  but  judge  this  rather,  that  no  man  put  a 

1  Co.  4.    5  Therefore  judge  nothing  before  the  time 

5.    3  For  I  verily,  .have  judged  already,  as 
5.  12  what  have  I  to  do  to  judge  them  also  that 
5.  12  do  not  ye  judge  them  that  are  within? 

5.  13  But  them  that  are  without  God  judgeth 

6.  3  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge 
6.    2  and  if  the  world  shall  be  judged  by  you 
6.    3  Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels? 

10.  15  I  speak  as  to  wise  men;  judge  ye  what  I 

10.  29  why  is  my  liberty  judged  of  another,  .co.? 
11. 13  Judge  in  yourselves :  is  it  comely  that  a 

11.  31  For  if  we  would,  .we  should  not  be  judg. 
11.  32  when  we  are  judged,  we  are  chastened 

2  Co.  5. 14  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  th. 
Col.     2.  16  Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you  in  meat 
2  Ti.    4.    1  who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 
Heb.  10.  30  And  again,  The  Lord  shall  judge  his  peo. 

13.  4  whoremongers  and  adulterers  Godwin  j. 
Jas.     2.  12  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty 

4.  11  and  judgeth  his  brother.,  judgeth  the  law 
4. 11  if  thou  judge  the  law,  thou  art  not  a  doer 
4.  12  one  law  giver.,  who  art  thou  that  judgest 

1  Pe.  1. 17  who.  .judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
2.  23  committed  (himself)  to  him  that  judgeth 
4.  5  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 
4.  6  they  might  be  judged  according  to  men 
Hev.  6. 10  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood 
11. 18  that  they  should  be  judged,  and  that  thou 
16.   5  and  shalt  be,  because  thou  hast  judged 

18.  8  strong  (is)  the  Lord  God  who  judgeth  her 

19.  2  he  hath  judged  the  great  whore,  which 

16. 11  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make 

20.  12  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things 
20.  13  they  were  judged  every  mau  according  to 

9.  Place  of  judgment,  Kpntipiov  kriterion. 

1  Co.   6.  ■  2  unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  matters? 

JUDGE,  to  be  a  — 

To  judge,  act  as  a  magistrate,  judge,  ess*  shaphaU 

Gen.  19.   9  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will,  .be  a  ju. 
JUDGED,  to  be  — 
l.Judgment,  as??  mishpat. 

Eze.  16.  38  as  women  that,  .shed  blood  are  judged 

2.  To  be  judged,  as£;  shaphat,  2. 

Psa.  9. 19  Arise,  .let  the  heathen  be  judged  in  thy 
37-  33  Lord  will  not . .  condemn  him  when  he  is  j. 
109.    7  When  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  be  con. 

3.  To  fall,  make  to  fall,  73J  naphal,  Sa. 

Eze.  28.  23  the  wounded  shall  be  judged  in  the  midst 
JUDGES  — 
1. Honourable  judges,  A  dar1  s  fire  priests,  N;"3TaiiR. 

Dan.   3.    2,  3  the  captains,  the  judges,  the  treasurers 

2.  Gods,  those  representing  the  supreme. power,  d'h^n. 
Exod2i.   6  his  master  shall  bringhim  unto  the  judges 

22.  S  master . .  shall  be  brought  unto  the  judges 
22.   9  come  before  the  judges . .  whom  the  judges 

3.  To  judge,  act  as  a  magistrate,  a?E>  shaphat,  3a. 

Job     9. 15  (but)  I  would  make  supplication  to  my  j. 


Isa. 
Dan. 


JUDGMENT  — 
l.Judgment,  |vn  dun. 

Job   19.  29  of  the  sword,  that  ye  may  know,  .a  judg. 

2.  Judgment,  y\  din. 

Ezra    7.  26  let  judgment  be  executed  speedily  upon 
Esth.  1.  13  manner  toward  all  that  knew  law  and  ju. 
Job  35.  14  judgment  (is)  before  him;  therefore  trust 
36.  17  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the 

36. 17  judgment  and  justice  take  hold  (on  thee) 
Psa.  76.    8  Thou  didst  cause  judgment  to  be  heard 
Prov  20.    8  A  king  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of  judg. 

"ti.    5  pervert  the  judgment  of  any  of  the  afflic. 

o.   2  To  turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment 

4.  37  whose  works  (are)  truth,  and  his  ways  ju. 

7. 10  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were 

7.  22  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the 

7.  26  the  judgment  shall  sit,  and  they  shall 

3.  Taste,  Dya  taavi. 

Psa.119.  66  Teach  me  good  judgment  and  knowledge 
LLong  robe,  IB  mad. 

Judg.  5. 10  ye  that  sit  in  judgment,  and  walk  by  the 
5.  Judgment,  as^p  mishpat. 

Gen.  18.  19  they  shall,  .do  justice  and  judgment ;  that 

Exod2i.    1  judgments  which  thou  shalt  set  before 

21.  31  according  to  this  judgment  shall  it  be 

23.  6  Thou  shalt  not  wrestthe  judgment  of  thy 

24.  3  Moses  came  and  told,  .all  the  judgments 
28. 15  thou  shalt  make  the  breastplate  of  judg. 
28.  29  the  breastplate  of  judgment  upon  his 
28.  30  thou  shalt  put  in  the  breastplate  of  judg. 
28.  30  shall  bear  the  judgment  of  the  children 

Lev.  18.    4  Ye  shall  domy  judgments,  and  keep  mine 

18.  5,  26  Ye  shall . .  keep  my  statutes,  and  my  j. 
r9-  !5>  35  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  jud. 

.  19. 37  all  my  statutes,  and  all  my  judgments 
20.  22  Ye  shall . .  keep  all  my  statutes . .  all  my  ju. 

25. 18  ye  shall  do  my  statutes,  and  keep  my  ju. 
26.  15  or  if  your  soul  abhor  my  judgments,  so 
26.  43  because  they  despised  my  judgments,  and 

26.  46  These  (are)  the  statutes  and  judgments 
N111U27.  11  it  shall  be  unto.  .Israel  a  statute  of  judg. 

27.  21  after  the  judgment  of  Urim  before  the  L. 
35.  12  stand  before  the  congregation  in  judgment 
35.  24  shall  judge,  .accorduigto  these  judgments 

35.  29  shall  be  for  a  statute  of  judgment  unto  you 

36.  13  commandments  and  the  judgments  which 
Deut.  1.  17  Ye  shall  not  respect  persons  in  judgment 

1. 17  the  judgment  (is)  God's :  and  the  cause 
4.    1  hearken,  .unto  the  statutes  and  unto..]. 
4.    5  I  have  taught  you  statutes  and  judgments 
4.    8  what  nation,  .that  hath  statutes  and  jud. 
4.  14  to  teach  you  statutes  and  judgments,  that 

4.  45  judgments,  which  Moses  spake  unto  the 

5.  1  Hear.O  Israel,  the  statutes  and  judgments 

5.  31  the  judgments,  which  thou  shalt  teach 

6.  1,  20  statutes,  and  the  judgments,  which 

7.  11  statutes,  and  the  judgments,  which  I 

7.  12  if  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments,  and 

8.  11  his  commandments,  and  his  judgments 

10.  iS  He  doth  execute  the  judgment  of  the  fat. 

11.  1  his  judgments,  and  his  commandments 

11.  32  todo  all  the  statutes  and  judgments  which 

12.  1  These  (are)  the  statutes  and  judgments 
16.  18  they  shall  judge  the  people  with  just  jud. 
16.  19  Thou  shalt  not  wrest  judgment;  thou 

8  arise  a  matter  too  hard  for  thee  in  judg. 

9  they  shall  show  thee  the  sentence  of  jud. 
1 1  to  the  judgment  which  they  shall  tell  thee 
17  Thou  shalt  not  pervert  the  judgment  of 

1  a  controversy,  .and  they  come  unto  judg. 
16  to  do  these  statutes  and  judgments :  thou 
26.  17  his  commandments,  and  his  judgments 

27. 19  Cursed  (be)  he  that  perverteth  the  judg. 
30.  16  to  keep,  .his  statutes,  and  his  judgments 
32.    4  his  ways  (are)  judgment :  a  God  of  truth 

32.  41  and  mine  hand  take  hold  on  judgment 

33,  10  They  shall  teach  Jacob  thy  judgments 
33.  21  justice  of  the  Lord,  and  his  judgments 

Josh  20.    6  stand  before  the  congregation  for  judg. 
Judg.4.     5  children  of  Israel  came  up  to  her  for  jud. 

1  Sa.   8.    3  and  took  bribes,  and  perverted  judgment 

2  Sa.  8. 15  David  executed  judgment  and  justice  unto 
15.  2  when  any  man.  .came  to  the  king  for  jud. 
15.    6  to  all  Israel  that  came  to  the  king  for  ju. 

22.  23  For  all  his  judgments  (were)  before  me 

1  Ki.  2.    3  his  commandments,  and  his  judgments 
3.  11  asked,  .understanding  to  discern  judgm. 
3.  28  all  Israel  heard  of  the  judgment  which 
3.  28  the  wisdom  of  God  (was)  in  him  ,to  do  j. 

6.  12  if  thou  wilt,  .execute  my  judgments,  and 

7.  7  he  made  a  porch,  .the  porch  of  judgment 

8.  58  his  statutes,  and  his  judgments,  which 

9.  4  wilt  keep  my  statutes  and  my  judgments 
10.   9  made  he  thee  king,  to  do  judgment  and 
"■  33  (to  keep)  my  statutes  and  my  judgments 
20  40  So  (shall)  thy  judgments  (be);  thyself  hast 

2  Ki. 25.   6  the  king.. and  they  gave  judgment  upon 

1  Ch.16.  12  his  wonders,  and  the  judgments  of  his 
16  14  our  God;  his  judgments  (are)  in  all.the 
18. 14  David  reigned.. and  executed  judgment 
22.  13  to  fulfil  the  statutes  and  judgments  which 

28.  7  to  do  my  commandments  and  my  judgm. 

2  Ch.  7.  17  shalt  observe  my  statutes  and  my  judgm. 
9.    8  made  he  thee  king  over  them,  to  do  jud. 

19.  6  for  the  Lord,  who  (is)  with  you  in  the  ju. 
10.  8  for  the  judgment  of  the  Lord,  and  for  con. 
19.  10  law  and  commandment,  statutesand  jud. 

Ezra   7.  10  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and  judgments 
Neh,|  1.   7  nor  the  statutes,  northejudgments,  which 


17- 

*7- 

17- 
24. 
25- 
26. 


JUDGMENT 


508 


JUDGMENTS 


Neh.  g.  13  right  judgments,  and  true  laws,  good  st. 

9.  29  but  sinned  against  thy  judgments,  which 
10.  29  and  do  all . .  his  judgments  and  his  statutes 

Job     8.   3  Doth  God  pervert  judgment?  or  doth  the 
9. 19  and  if  of  judgment,  who  shall  set  me  a 
9.  32  (and)  we  should  come  togetherin  judgm. 

14.    3  andhringest  me  into  judgment  -with  thee:1 

19.    7  I  am  not  heard  :  I  cry  aloud,  hut.  .no  ju. 

22.    4  reprove . .  will  he  enter  with  thee  into  ju.  ? 

27.    2  God  liveth,  (who)  hath  taken  away  my  ju. 

29.  14  my  judgment  (was)  as  a  robe  and  a  diad. 

32.  9  neither  do  the  aged  understand  judgment 
34.  4  Let  us  choose  to  us  judgment:  let  uskn. 
34.  5  Job  hath  said.  .God  hath  taken  away  my  j. 
34.  12  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert  judgm. 

34.  23  that  he  should  enter  into  judgment  with 
37.  23  excellent  in  power,  and  in  judgment,  and 
ao.    8  Wilt  thou  also  disannul  my  judgment? 

Psa.     1.    5  the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  the  judgm. 
7.    6  awake  for  me  (to)  the  judgment,  .thou 
g.    7  he  hath  prepared  his  throne  for  judgment 
9.  16  The  Loud  is  known  (by)  the  judgment 

10.  5  thyjudgments(are).  .aboveoutof  his  sight 
18. 22  all  his  Judgments  (were)  before  me,  and 
19.    9  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  (are)  true 

25.    9  The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment 

33.  5  He  loveth  righteousness  and  judgment 

35.  23  Stir  up  thyself,  andawake  to  ray  judgment 

36.  6  thy  judgments  (are)  a  great  deep :  0  Lord 

37.  6  bring  forth,  .thy  judgment  as  the  noon 
37.  28  the  Lord  loveth  judgment,  and  forsaketh 
37.  30  wisdom,  and  his  tongue  talketh  of  judg. 
48.  11  let.  .Judah  be  glad,  because  of  thy  judg. 
72.  1  Give  the  king  thy  judgments,  0  God,  and 
72.  2  He  shall  judge,  .thy  poor  with  judgment 
76.  9  When  God  arose  to  judgment,  to  save  all 
89.  14  Justice  and  judgment  (are)  the  habitation 
89.  30  If  his  children. .walk  not  in  my  judgments 
94.  15  But  judgment  shall  return  unto  righteou. 
97.  2  righteousness  and  judgment  (are)  the  hab. 
97.  8  rejoiced  because  of  thy  judgments,  0  Lord 
99.  4  The  king's  strength  also  loveth  judgment 
99.    4  thou  executest  judgment  and  righteous. 

101.  1  I  will  sing  of  mercy  and  judgment:  unto 
103.  6  The  Lord  executeth.  .judgment  for  all  that 
105.    5  his  wonders,  and  the  judgments  of  his 

105.  7  ourGod:  his  judgmeuts(are)m  all  the  earth 

106.  3  Blessed  (are)  they  that  keep  judgment 
in.  7  The  works  of  his  hands(are)  verity  and  j. 
119.  7  when  I  shall  have  learned  thy  righteous  j. 
119.  13  With  my  lips  have  I  declared  all  the  jud. 
ng.  20  longing,  .unto  thy  judgments  at  all  times 
119.  30  I  have  chosen,  .thy  judgments havellaid 
119.  39  Turn  away,  .for  thy  judgments  (are)  good 
119.  43  take  not.. for  I  have  hoped  in  thy  judgm. 
119.  52  I  remembered  thy  judgments  of  ohl.OLo. 
119.  62  I  will  rise.. because  of  thy  righteous  jud. 
119.  75  I  know,  0  Lord,  thy  judgmeuts*vare)  right 
119.  84  when  wilt  thou  execute  judgment  on  them 
119.  102  I  have  not  departed  from  thy  judgments 
119.  106  that  I  will  keep  thy  righteous  judgments 
119.  10S  Accept.  .0  Lord,  and  teach  me  thy  jud. 
ilq.  120  trembleth .  .and  I  am  afraid  of  thy  judg. 
119.  121  Ihavedone  judgment  and  justice:  leave 
119.  137  Righteous.,  and  upright  (are)  thy  judgm. 
119.  149,  156  quicken  me  according  to  thy  judg. 
119. 160  and  everyone  of  thyrighteous  judgments 
119.  164  praise.,  because  of  thyrighteous  judgm. 
119. 175  Let  my  soul  live.. let  thy  judgments  help 
122.  5  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  the 
143.    2  enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant 

146.  7  Which  executeth  judgment  for  the  oppr. 

147.  19  He  showeth.  .his  judgments  unto  Israel 
147.  20  his  judgments,  they  have  not  known  them 
149.    9  To  execute  upon  them  the  judgment  wri. 

Prov.  1.  3  To  receive  the  instruction  of.  .judgment 
2.  8  He  keepeth  the  paths  of  judgment,  and 
2.  9  righteousness,  and  judgment,  and  equity 
8.  20  I  lead  .in  the  midst  of  the  paths  of  jud. 
13.  23  there  is  (that  is)  destroyed  for  want  of  j. 

16.  10  his  mouth  transgresseth  not  in  judgment 

17.  23  taketbaiiift  .to  pervert  the  ways  of  judg. 

18.  5  not  good,  .to  overthrow  therighteousin  j. 

19.  28  An  ungodly  witness  scorneth  judgment 
21.    3  To  do  justice  and  judgment  (is)more  ace. 
21.    7  destroy.. because  they  refuse  to  do  judg. 
21.  15  Otis)  joy  to  the  just  to  do  judgment:  but 
24.  23  to  have  respect  of  persons  in  judgment 

28.  5  Evil  men  understand  not  judgment :  but 

29.  4  The  king  by  judgment  established  the 
29.  26  (every)man's  judgment(cometh)from  the 

Eccl.  3.  16  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of  judgment 
5.  8  violentperverting  of  judgment  and  justice 
8.   5  man's  heart  discerneth  both  time  and  ju. 

8.  6  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  and  judg. 

11.  9  for  all.  .God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment 

12.  14  God  shall  bringevery  work  into  judgment 
Isa.     1. 17  Learn  to  do  well;  seek  judgment,  relieve 

1.  21  it  was  full  of  judgment ;  righteousness 
1.  27  Zion  shall  be  redeemed  with  judgment 

3.  14  The  Lord  will  enter  into  judgment  with 

4.  4  by  the  spirit  of  judgment,  and  by  the  sp. 

5.  7  he  looked  for  judgment,  but  behold  opp. 
5. 16  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  exalted  in  judgment 

9.  7  to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with 
16.  5  judging,  and  seeking  judgment,  and  hast. 
26.  8  Yea,  in  the  way  of  thy  judgments,  OLord 
26.  9  for  when  thyjudgments(are)  in  the  earth 
28.  6  of  judgment  to  him  that  sitteth  in  judg. 
28.  17  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and 
30. 18  for  the  Lord  (is)  a  God  of  judgment 

32.    1  Behold .  .princes  shall  rule  in  judgment 


Isa.  32.  16  judgment  shall  dwell  in  the  wilderness 

33.  5  be  hath  filled  Zion  with  judgment  and 

34.  5  upon  thepeople  of  my  curse,  to  judgment 
40.  14  taught  him  in  the  path  of  judgment,  aud 

40.  27  my  judgmentis  passed  over  frommyGod? 

41.  1  speak  :  let  uscome  near  togetherto  judg. 

42.  1  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gen. 
42.    3  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth 
42.    4  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth 
49.    4  my  judgment  (is)  with  the  Lord,  and  ray 
51.   4  I  will  make  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a 

53.  8  He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  jud. 

54.  17  tongue  (that)  shall  rise  against  thee  inju. 
56.  1  Keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  justice  :  for 
59.  8  and  (there  is)  no  judgment  in  their  goings 
59.  9  Therefore  is  judgment  far  from  us,  neith. 
59.  11  we  look  for  judgment,  but  (there  is)  none 
59.  14  judgment  isturned  away  backward,  and 
59.  15  it  displeased  him  that  (there  was)  no  judg.- 
61.   8 1  the  Lord  love  judgment,  I  hate  robbery 

Jer.    1.  16  I  will  utter  my  judgments  against  them 

4.  2  The  Lord  liveth,  in  truth,  in  judgment 

5.  1  if  there  be .  .that  executeth  judgment 

5.    4  they  know  not.  .the  judgment  of  their G. 
5.    5  they  have  known,  .the  judgment  of  their 

7.  5  if  ye  throughly  execute  judgment  between 

8.  7  my  people  know  not  the  judgment  of  the 

9.  24  which  exercise  loving  kindness,  judgment 
10.  24  O  Lord,  correct  me,  but  with  judgment 
12.    1  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  (thy)  judgments 

21.  12  Execute  judgment  in  the  morning,  and 
»2.    3  Execute  ye  judgment  and  righteousness 

22.  15  Did  not  thy.  father.,  do  judgment  and  ju. 

23.  5  execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  ear. 
33.  15  execute  judgment  aud  righteousness  in 
39.    5  Hamath,  where  he  gave  judgment  upon 
48.  21  judgment  is  come  upon  the  plain  country 

48.  47  bring  again.  .Thus  far  (is) the  judgment 

49.  12  they  whose  judgment  (was)  not  to  drink 

51.  9  her  judgment  reacheth  unto  heaven,  and 

52.  9  Hamath ;  where  he  gave  judgment  upon 
Eze.     5.    6  she  hath  changed  my  judgments  into  wi. 

5,    6  they  have  refused  my  judgments  and  my 
5.    7  neither  have  kept  my  judgments,  neither 
5.    7  have  done  according  to  the  judgments  of 
5.    8  will  execute  judgments  in  the  midst  of 
n.  12  neitherexecutedmy  judgments,  but  have 
18.    8  hath  executed  true  judgment  between 
18.    9  Hath  walked .  .and  hath  kept  my  judgm. 
18. 17  hath  executed  my  judgments,  hath  walk. 
20.  11  and  showed  them  my  judgments,  which 
20.  13  and  they  despised  my  judgments,  which 
20.  16  Because  they  despised  my  judgments 
20.  18  neither  observe  their  judgments,  nor  de. 
20. 19  and  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them 
20.  21  neither  kept  my  judgments  to  do  them 
20.  24  they  had  not  executed  my  judgments,  but 
20.  25  judgments  whereby  they  should  not  live 
23.  24  I  will  set  judgment  before  them,  and  they 
23.  24  shall  judge  thee  according  to  their  judg. 
34.  16  I  will  destroy.  .1  will  feed  them  with  ju. 

36.  27  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments,  and  do 

37.  24  they  shall  also  walk  in  my  judgments 
39.  21  all  the  heathen  shall  see  my  judgment 

44.  24  they  shall  judge  it  according  to  my  judg. 

45.  9  execute  judgment  and  justice,  take  away 
Dan.  9.  5  from  thy  precepts  and  fnjm  thy  judgments 
Hos.    2.  19  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me .  .in  judgni. 

5.    1  judgment  (is)  toward  you,  because  ye  ha. 

5.  11  Ephraim  (is)  oppressed,  .broken  in  judg. 

6.  5  thy  judgments  (are  as)  the  light  (that) 

10.  4  judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in  the 
12.    6  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on 

Amos  5.  7  Ye  who  turn  judgment  to  wormwood,  and 
5.  15  establish  judgment  in  the  gate  :  it  may 
5.  24  let  judgment  run  down  as  waters,  and 
6. 12  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall,  and 

Mic.  3.  1  Hear.  .(Is it)  not  for  you  to  know  judgme.? 
3.  8  I  am  full,  .of  judgment,  and  of  might,  to 
3.    9  that  abhor  judgment,  and  pervert  all  equi. 

Hab.    1.    4  judgment  doth  never  go  forth,  .wrong  j. 
1,    7  their  judgment  and  their  dignity  shall 
1.  12  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained  them  for  judg. 

Zeph.  2.  3  ye  meek,  .which  have  wrought  his  judg. 
3.  5  every  morning  doth  he  bring  his  judgment 
3. 15  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy  judgments,  he 

Zech.  7.  9  Execute  true  judgment,  and  show  mercy 
8.  16  execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace 

Mai.    2.  17  When  ye  say.  .Where  (is)  the  God  of  ju.? 

3.  5  I  will  come  near  to  you  to  judgment ;  and 

4.  4  Remember  ye. .the  statutes  and  judgments 

6,Judgment}  <"H,75  pelilah. 

Isa.    16.    3  Take  counsel,  execute  judgment;  make 
7.  Judicial,  '^,L,5  pelili. 

Isa.   28.    7  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  (in)  judg. 
$.  Judgment,  uis*f  shephot. 

2  Ch.20.   9  sword,  judgment,  orpestilence,  orfamine 

Eze.  23.  10  for  they  had  executed  judgment  upon  her 

9.  To  judge,  act  as  a  magistrate,  U5£'  shaphat 

Eze.  44.  24  in  controversy  they  shall  stand  in  judg. 

10.  Word,  matter,  n:n  dabar. 

2  Ch.  19.   6  for  the  Lord,  who  (is)  with  you  in  the  ju. 
11. Perception, sense,intellige7ice,  oX<t.Qt)<tis  aisthesis. 
Phil.    1.    9  more  and  more  in  knowledge  and.  .judg. 
V2.Mind,  opinion,  sentence,  71/^77  gnome. 

1  Co.  1.  10  in  the  same  mind  and  in  the  same  judg. 
7.  25  I  give  my  judgment,  as  one  that  hath 
7.  40  she  is  happier  if  she  so  abide,  after  my  j. 


1S.A  judicial  sentence,  $iKaio>/u.a  dikaioma. 

Horn.  1.  32  Who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that 
Rev.  15.    4  0  Lord . .  thy  judgments  are  made  manifest 

W.Jusiice,  vengeance,  B'lkv  dike. 

Acts  25. 15  desiriug  (to  have)  [judgment]  against  him 

15. Day,  rj/xepa  hemera. 

1  Co.  4.    3  should  be  judged  of  you,  or  of  man's  jud. 

16.  Judgment,  Kpi^ia  krima. 

Matt. 7.    2  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  j. 
John  9.  39  For  judgment  I  am  come  into  this  world 
Acts  24.  25  as  he  reasoned  of.  .tempeiance,  and  jud. 
Rom.  2.   2  we  are  sure  that  the  judgment  of  God  is 

2.   3  thatthoushaltescapethejudgment  of  G.? 

5.  16  judgment  (was)  by  one  to  condemnation 
11.  33  how  unsearchable  (are)  his  judgments 
Gal.     5.  10  he  that  troubleth  you  shall  bear  his  jud. 
Heb.    6.    2  Of  the  doctrine  of  baptisms,  .and  of .  .jud. 

1  Pe.    4.  17  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God 

2  Pe.    2.    3  whose  judgment  now  of  a  long  time 
Rev.  17.    1  the  judgment  of  the  great  whore  that 

20.    4  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them :  and 

17 .Judgment,  upto-is  krisis. 

Matt.  5.  21,  2a  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment 

10.  15  shall  be  more  tolerable.,  in  the  day  of  ju. 

11.  22,  24  be  more  tolerable,  .at  the  day  of  jud. 

12.  18  and  he  shall  show  judgment  to  the  Gen. 
12.  20  till  he  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory 
12.  36  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  j. 
12.  41  men  of  Nineve  shall  rise  in  judgment 
12.  42  queen  of  the  soutli  shall  rise  up  in  the  j. 
23.  23  weightier  (matters)  of  the  law,  judgment 

Mark  6.  11  [shall  be  more  tolerable,  .in  the  day  of  j.] 
Lukeio.  14  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  at.  .ju. 

11.  31  queenof  thesouthshallriseupin  the  judg. 

11.  32  men  of  Nineve  shall  rise  up  in  the  judg. 

11.  42  pass  over  judgment  and  the  love  of  God 
John  5.  22  hath  committedall  judgment  unto  theSon 

5.  27  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute  jud. 
5.  30  my  judgment  is  just ;  because  I  seek  not 

7.  24  Judge  not.  .but  judge  righteous  judgment 

8.  16  if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  true  ;  for  I  am 

12.  31  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world:  now 
16.    8  aud  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment 
16. 11  Of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this 

Acts  8.  33  his  humiliation  his  judgment  was  taken 

2  Th.  1.    5  amanifesttokenof  therighteousjudgment 

1  Ti.  5.  24  are  open  beforehand,  going  before  to  ju. 
Heb.  9.  27  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment 

10.  27  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 
Jas.     2. 13  he  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy 
2.  13  and  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment 

2  Pe.  2.    4  delivered,  .to  be  reserved  unto  judgment 

2.  9  reserve  the  unjust  mi  to  the  day  of  judg. 

3.  7  reserved  unto  fire  against  the  day  of  jud 
1  Jo.  4.  17  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judg. 
Jude         6  reserved,  .unto  the  judgment  of  the  great 

15  Toexecute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  con. 

Rev.  14.    7  Eear.  .for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come 

16.    7  Lord,  .true  and  righteous  (are)  thy  judg. 

18.  10  Alas,  .in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come 

19.  2  For  true  and  righteous  (are)  his  judgments 

IS.  Place  of  judgment,  Kpir-hpiov  kriterion. 

1  Co.    6.    4  If  then  ye  have  judgments  of  things  per. 

JUDGMENT  hall,  hall  of  judgment  — 
Praetor  s  hall,  irpatrwpiov  pra.itorion. 

John  18.  28  Then  led  they  Jesus,  .unto  the  hall  of  ju. 
18.  2S  they,  .went  not  into  the  judgment  hall 
18.  33  Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment  hall 
ig;    9  And  went  again  into  the  judgment  hall 
Acts  23.  35  commandedhhntobekeptinH.'sjudg.  h. 

JUDGMENT  seat  — 

1. Foot  print,  tribunal,  firgm  bema. 

Matt27. 19  When  he  was  set  down  on  the  judgment's. 

J0I11119.  13  sat  down  in  the  judgment  seat  in  a  place 

Acts  18.  12  the  Jews. .brought  him  to  the  judgment  s. 
18.  16  he  drave  them  from  the  judgment  seat 
18. 17  and  beat  (him)  before  the  judgment  seat 
25.    6  next  day,  sitting  on  the  judgment  seat 
25.  10  I  stand  at  Cesar's  judgment  seat,  where  I 
25.  17  on  the  morrow  I  sat  on  the  judgment  seat 

Rom.14.  10  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ 

2  Co.  5.  10  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat 

2.  Place  of  judgment,  KptrTjpiov  krit^rion. 

Jas.     2.   6  and  draw  you  before  the  judgment  seats? 

JUDGMENT,  righteous  — 

Righteous  judgment,  StuaioKpitrta  dikaiokrisia. 
Rom.  2.   5  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  G. 

JUDGMENT,  to  do,  execute,  or  minister  — 
l.To judge,  pleads  strive,  decide,  ]"=]  din. 

Psa.    9.   8  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  the  people 
2.7*0  judge,  adjudge,  execute  judgment,  ^?S  palal,3. 

Psa.106.  30  executed  judgment:  and  (so)  the  plague 
Z.To  visit,  insp)ect,  i$p  ]mqad. 

Jer.  51.  47,  52  that  I  will  do  judgment  upon  the  gr. 

4.  To  he  judged,  do  judgment,  US£;  shaphat,  2. 
2  Ch.  22.  8  when  Jehu  was  executing  judgment  upon 

JUDGMENTS,  (judgment)  — 

Judgments,  magisterial  decisions,  Cprp'  slirphatim. 

Exod.  6.  6  with  a  stretched  out  arm .  .with  great  ju. 

7.    4  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  by  great  judgm. 


JUDITH 


559 


KABZEEL 


Exodi^.  12  against  all  the  gods.  .1  will  execute  judg. 

N urn  33.    4  upon  their  gods .  .the  Lord  executed  judg. 

2  Ch.24.-24  So  they  executed  judgment  against  Joash 

Prov  19.  29  Judgments  are  prepared  for  scorners,  and 

Eze.    5.  10  I  will  execute  judgments  in  thee,  and  the 

5.  15  when  I  shall  execute  judgments  in  thee 

11.    9  I  will  bring,  .and  will  execute  judgments 

14. 21  when  I  send  my  four  sore  judgments  upon 

16.  41  execute  judgments  upon  thee  in  the  sight 

25.  11  I  will  execute  judgments  upon  Moab  ;  and 

28.  22  when  I  shall  have  executed  judgments  in 

28.  26  when  I  have  executed  judgments  upon  all 

30. 14  will  set  fire,  .and  will  execute  judgments 

30. 19  Thus  will  I  execute  judgments  in  Egypt 

JU'-DITH,  nnw;  Jewess. 

A  daughter  of  Beeri  a  Hittite,  and  wife  of  Esau..  B.C. 
1796. 

Geu.  26.  34  Esau .  .took  to  wife  J.  the  daughter  of  E. 
JUICE  — 
Juice,  D'p^  asis. 

Song  S.    2  spiced  wine  of  the  juice  of  my  pomegran. 

JU-U-A,  'lov\ia. 

A  female  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sent  a  saluta- 
tion. 

Rom  16.  15  Salute  Plnlologus,  and  J.,  Nereus,  and  his 
JU-LI-TJS,  'lov\tos. 
A  centurion  in  whose  charge  Paul  was  sent  to  Rome. 

Acts  27.    1  delivered  Paul,  .unto  (one)  named  J.,  a 
27.    3  J.  courteously  entreated  Paul,  and  gave 
JUMP,  to  — 
To  skip,  dance,  ipi  raqad,  3. 

Nah.   3.    2  prancing  horses,  and  of  the  jumping  cha. 

TU-NI-A,  Aovvias. 

This  ought  to  be  Junias :  a  believer  andkinsman  of  Paul. 

Rom  16.    7  Salute  Andronicus  and  J.,  my  kinsmen 
JUNIPER  (tree)  — 
Jimijper,  broomy  crh  rothem. 
'  1  Ki.tg.    4  came  and  sat  down  under  a  juniper  tree 

19.  5  as  he  lay  and  slept  under  a  juniper  tree 
Job   30.    4  Whocutup..juniperroots(for)theirmeat 
Psa.120.    4  arrows  of  the  mighty,  with  coals  of  jimi. 

JTT-PI-TER,  Zeus  (i.e.  Zeus-pater),  father  Jove. 
The  chief  Greek  and  Roman  deity. 

Acts  14.  12  they  called  Barnabas,  J.;  and  Paul,  Mer. 
14.  13  Then  the  priest  of  J. .  .brought  oxen  and 

JUPITER,  -which  fell  down  from  — 
What  is  fallen  from  Zeus,  SioireTTjs  diopetes. 

Acts  19.  3s  of  the  (image)  which  fell  down  from  Jup.? 

JURISDICTION  — 

Authority,  privilege,  e^ovtrla  exousia. 

Luke  23.    7  knew  that  he  belonged  unto  Herod's  jur. 

JU-SHAB  HE'-SED,  iprj  zjcv  kindness  is  returned. 
A  son  of  Zerubbabel,  of  the  family  of  David.     B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  3.  20  Oh  el,  and  Berechiab,  and  Hasadiah,  J. 
JUST  — 

1. Right,  upright,  straight.  iir  yashar. 

Prov.29. 10  The  bloodthirsty  hate,  .but  the  just  seek 

■  2. Judgment,  DBipp  mishpat. 

Prov  16. 11  A  just  weight  and  balance  (are)  the  Lord's 

3.  Right,  righteous,  just,  rigid,  pvig  tsaddiq. 

Gen.  6.  9  Noah  was  a  just  man  (and)  perfect  in  his 
Deut.32.    4  and  without  iniquity,  just  and  right  (is)  he 

2  Sa.  23.  3  He  that  ruletliover  men  (must  be)  just,  ml. 
Neh.  9.  33  thou  (art)  just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon 
Job    12;    4  the  just  upright  (man  is)  laughed  to  scorn 

27. 17  He  may  prepare  (it),  but  the  just  shall  put 
34.  17  wilt  thou  condemn  him  that  is  most  just? 

Psa.  7.  9  establish  the  just :  for  the  righteous  God 
37.  12  The  wicked  plotteth  against  the  just,  and 

Prov.  3.  33  but  he  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just 
4.  iS  the  path'of  the  just  (is)  as  the  shining  light 
9.  9  teach  a  just  (man),  and  he  will  increase 
10.  6  Blessings  (are)  upon  the  head  of  the  just 
10.  7  The  memory  of  the  just  (is)  blessed :  but 
10.  20  The  tongue  of  the  just  (is  as)  choice  silver 

10.  31  The  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth  forth  wis. 

11.  9  through  knowledge  shall  the  just  be  del. 
12  13  lips :  but  the  just  shall  come  out  of  trouble 

12.  21  There  shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just 

13.  22  wealth  of  the  sinner  (is)  laid  up  for  the  just 
17. 15  and  he  that  condemneth  the  just,  even 

17.  26  Also  to  punish  the  just  (is)  not  good,  (nor) 

18.  17  first  in  his  own  cause  (seemeth)  just ;  but 

20.  7  The  just  (man)  walketh  in  his  integrity 

21. 15  (It  is)  joy  to  the  just  to  do  judgment :  but 

24. 16  For  a  just  (man)  falleth  seven  times,  and 
29.  27  unjust  man  (is)  an  abomination  to  the  j. 

Eccl.  7.  15  there  is  a  just  (man)  that  perisheth  in  his 
7. 20  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  that  doeth  go. 
8. 14  there  be  just  (men),  unto  whoni  it  happen. 

Isa.  26.  7  The  way  of  the  just,  .the  path  of  the  just 
29.  21  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought 
45.  21  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour,  .none  beside  me 

Lam.  4.  13  that  have  shed  the  blond  of  the  just  in  the 

Eze.  18.  5  if  a  man  be  just,  and  do  that  which  is  law. 
18.    9  he  (is)  just,  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the 

Hos.  14.    9  the  just  shall  walk  in  them  :  but  the  tra. 

Amos  5. 12  they  afflict  the  just,  they  take  a  bribe,  and 

Hab.   2.    4  not  upright,  .but  the  just  shall  livebyhis 


Zeph.  3.    5  The  just  Lord  (is)  in  the  midst  thereof 
Zech.  9.    9  he  (is)  just,  and  having  salvation  ;  lowly 

4.  Right,  righteous,  pys  tsedek. 

Lev.  19.  36  Just  balances,  just  weights,  a  just  ephah 

19.  36  a  just  hin,  shall  ye  have  :  I  (ami  the  Lord 
Deuti6.  iS  they  shall  judge  the  people  with  just  jud. 

16.  20  That  which  is  altogether  just  shalt  thou 
25. 15  thou  shalt  have  a  perfect  and  just  weight 
25. 15  a  perfect  and  just  measure  shalt  thou  have 
Eze.  45.  10  just  balances,  and  a  just  ephah,  and  a  just 

5. Finished,  perfect,  whole,  chy  shalem. 

Prov.  11.    1  the  Lord:  but  a  just  weight  (is)  his  delight 
6.Jiist,  righteous,  StKcuor  dikaios. 

Matt.  1.  19  Joseph  her  husband,  being  a  just  (man) 
5.  45  sendethrain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust 
13. 49  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  the  just 
27.  19  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just 
27.  24  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  [just] 
Mark  6.  20  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  an 
Luke  1.  17  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just 
2.  25  the  same  man  (was)  just  and  devout,  wait. 
14.  14  recompensed  at  the  resurrectiou  of  the  j. 
15-    7  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  just  per. 

20.  20  which  should  feign  themselves  just  men 
23.  50  Joseph  a  counsellor.,  a  goodman,  and  a  j. 

John  5.  30  my  judgment  is  just ;  because  I  seek  not 

Acts    3.  14  ye  denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just,  and 

7.  52  showed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  just  0. 

10.  22  Cornelius  the  centurion,  a  just  man,  and 

22.  14  see  that  Just  One,  and  shouldest  hear  the 

24. 15  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  unjust 

Rom.  1. 17  as  it  is  written;  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 

2.  13  For  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  (are)  just 

3.  26  that  he  might  be  just,  and  the  justifierof 
7. 12  the  commandment  holy,  and  just,  and 

Gal,    3.  11  evident,  for,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 
Phil.  4.    8  whatsoever  things  (are)  just,  whatsoever 
Col.    4.    1  give,  .that  which  is  just  and  equal ;  know. 
Titus  1.    8  a  lover  of  good  men. .  just,  holy,  temper. 
Heb.  10.  38  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith  :  but  if 

12.  23  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  pert 
Jas.     5.    6  Ye  have  condemned  (and)  killed  the  just 

1  Pe.   3. 18  suffered  for  sius,  the  just  for  the  unjust 

2  Pe.    2.    7  delivered  just  Lot,  vexed  with  the  filtby 

1  Jo.  1.  9  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  (our) 
Rev.  15.   3  just  and  true  (are)  thy  ways,  thou  King 

7.  In  justice,  according  to  justice,  evSttcos  endihos. 
Rom.  3.    8  good  may  come?  whose  damnation  is  just 
Heb.  2.    2  disobedience  received  a  just  recompence 
JUST,  to  be  — 
To  he  right,  righteous,  just,  pTi  tsadaq. 

Job     4. 17  Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just  than  God? 
9.  2  but  how  should  man  be  just  with  God  ? 
33.  12  Behold,  (hi)  this  thou  art  not  just :  I  will 
JUST,  that  which  is  altogether  — 
Right,  Tightness,  p"Bf  tsedeq. 

Deutio.  20  That  which  is  altogether  just  shalt  thou 
JUSTICE  — 
l.Judgmcnt,  Mfia'-p  mishpat. 

Job  36. 17  judgment  and  justice  take  hold  (on  thee) 
'2. Right,  Tightness,  prvt  tsedeq. 

Job     8.   3  or  doth  the  Almighty  pervert  justice? 
Psa.  89. 14  Justice  and  judgment  (are)  the  habitation 
119.  121  I  have  done  judgment  and  justice :  leave 
Prov.  1.    3  To  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom,  ju. 
8.  15  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  ju. 
Eccl.  5.    8  violent  perverting  of  judgment  and  just. 
Isa.  58.   2  they  ask  of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice 
59.   4  None  calleth  for  justice,  nor.  .pleadeth 
Jer.  31.  23  0  habitation  of  justice,  .mountain  of  ho. 
50.   7  against  the. Lord,  the  habitation  of  just. 

Z. Right,  Tightness,  njyis  tsedaqah. 

Gen.  18.  19  to  do  justice  and  judgment ;  that  the  Lo. 
Deut33.  2I  ue  executed  the  justice  of  the  Lord,  and 

2  Sa.  8. 15  judgment  and  justice  unto  all  his  people 
1  Ki.  10.   9  made  he  thee  king,  to  do  judgment  and  j. 

1  CI1.1S.  14  executed  judgment  and  justice  among  all 

2  Ch.  9.  8  king  over  them,  to  do  judgment  and  jus. 
Job  37.  23  and  in  judgment,  and  in  plenty  of  justice 
Prov2i.  3  To  do  justice  and  judgment  (is)  more  ace. 
Isa.     9.    7  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever 

56.    1  Keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  justice  :  for 
59.   9  neither  doth  justice  overtake  us :  we  wait 
59.  14  justice  standeth  afar  off :  for  truth  is  fal. 
Jer.  22. 15  and  drink,  and  do  judgment  and  justice 
23.    5  execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth 
Eze.  45.   9  execute  judgment  and  justice,  take  away 
JUSTICE,  to  do  — 
To  declare  right  or  just,  py$  tsadaq,  5. 

2  Sa.  15.   4  come  unto  me,  and  I  would  do  him  justice 
Psa.  82.    3  Defend.. do  justice  to  the  afflicted  and 
JUSTIFICATION  — 

l.Judiciai  sentence,  declaration  of  right,  diKaioj/ia. 
Rom.  5. 16  the  free  gift  (is)  of  many  offences  unto  j. 

2.A  setting  right,  St/cai'tocis  dikaiosis, 

Rom.  4.  25  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justification 
5.  18  (came)  upon  all  men  uuto  justification  of 

JUSTIFIED,  to  -be  — 

To  be  or  become  right,  p"]>"  tsadaq. 

Job    11.    2  and  should  a  manfullof  talk  be  justified? 
13.  18  Behold  now.  .1  know  that  I  shall  be  jus. 
25.    4  How  then  can  man  be  justified  with  God  ? 
Psa.  51.   4  that  thou  mightiest  be  justified  when 


Psa.143.    2  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justi. 
Isa.    43.    9  that  they  may  be  justified  :  or  let  them 
43.  26  declare  thou, that  thou  mayest  be  justified 
45.  25  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified 
JTTSTLFrER  — 
To  make  or  declare  right,  SucaiSu  dikaioo: 

Rom.  3.  26  the  justifler  of  him  which  believeth  in  J. 
JUSTIFY,  to  — 
l.To  make  or  declare  right,  piy  tsadaq,  3. 

Job    32.   2  because  he  justified  himself  rather  than 

33.  32  answer  me :  speak,  for  I  desire  to  justify 

Jer.     3. 11  backsliding  Israel  hath  justified  herself 

Eze,  16.  51  hast  justified  thy  sisters  in  all  thine  abo. 

16.52  shame,  in  that  thou  hast  justified  thy  sis. 

l.To  make  or  declare  right,  piy  tsadaq,  5. 

Exod23.    7  slay,  .not,  for  I  will  not  justify  the  wicked 
Deut25.    1  they  shall  justify  the  righteous,  and  con. 

1  Ki.  8.  32  justifying  the  righteous,  to  give  him  ace. 

2  Ch.  6.  23  and  by  justifying  the  righteous,  by  giving 
Job  27.    5  God  forbid  that  I  should  justify  you  :  till 

■  Prov  17. 15  He  that  justifleth  the  wicked,  and  he  that 

Isa.     5.  23  Which  justify  the  wicked  for  reward,  and 

50.    8  (He  is)  near  that  justifleth  me ;  who  will 

53. 11  shall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many 

3. To  malm  or  declare  right,  Slkcuow  dikaioo. 

•     Matt  11. 19  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children 

12.  37  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and 
Luke  7.  29  the  publicans,  justified  God,  being  bapti. 

7.  35  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children 
10.  29  he,  willing  to  justify  himself,  said  unto  J. 
16.  15  Ye  are  they  which  justify  yourselves  bef. 
18.  14  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified 

Acts  13.  39  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from 

13.  39  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by 
Rom.  2.  13  but  the  doers  of  the  law  shall  be  justified 

3.  4  That  thou  mightest  be  justified  in  thy  s. 
3.  20  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  hi  his  si. 
3.  24  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through 
3.  28  we  conclude  that  a  man  is  justified  by  fa. 

3.  30  Seeing  (it  is)  one  God  which  shall  justify 

4.  2  if  Abraham  were  justified  by  works,  he 

4.  5  believeth  on  him  that  justifleth  the  ung. 

5.  1  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 

5.  9  being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall 
8. 30  whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified 

8.  30  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified 
8.  33  charge  of  God's  elect?  (It  is)  God  that  ju. 

1  Co.  4.   4  am  I  not  hereby  justified  :  but  he  that  j. 

6.  11  are  justified  in  the  name  of  theLord  Jesus 
Gal.    2.  16  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by 

2.  16  that  we  might  be  justified  by  the  faith  of 
2.  16  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  j. 

2.  17  if,  while  we  seek  to  be  justified  by  Christ 

3.  8  God  would  justify  the  heathen  through  f. 
3.  11  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law  in  the 
3.  24  schoolmaster,  .that  we  might  be  justified 
5.    4  whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the  law 

1  Ti.    3.  16  justified  in  the  spirit,  seen  of  angels,  pre. 

Titus  3.    7  being  justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  be 

Jas.     2.  21  Was  Dot  Abraham  our  father  justified  by 

2.  24  how  that  by  works  a  man  is  justified,  and 

2.  25  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by  wo. 

JUSTIFY  self,  to  — 

To  be  or  become  right,  piy  tsadaq. 

Job     9.  20  If  I  justify  myself,  mine  own  mouth  shall 

JUSTLE  one  against  another,  to  ■*— 
To  run  to  and  fro,  pjjp  shaqaq,  7a. 

Nab.    2.    4  they  shall  justle  one  against  another  in 
JUSTLY  — 
l.Judgme.nt,  us;??  mishpat. 

Mic.    6.   8  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and 

2.  Justly,  btKalcos  dikaios. 

Luke23.  41  we  indeed  justly ;  for  we  receive  the  due 
1  Th.  2. 10  how  holily  and  justly  and  unblameably 

JUS'-TTJS,  'IoCo-tos. 

1.  A  surname  of  Joseph  or  Barsabas,  a  disciple  nomi- 
nated with  Matthias  to  succeed  Judas  Iscariot. 

Acts    1.  23  And  they  appointed  two.  .J.,  and  Matthias 

2.  A  believer  in  Corinth  with  whom  Paul  lodged. 

Acts  iS.   7  entered. . a  certain(man's)house,  named  J. 

3.  A  believing  disciple  in  Rome  fi*om  whom  Paul  sends 
a  salutation  to  the  church  at  Colosse. 

Col.  4. 11  Jesus,  which  is  called  J.,  who  are  of  the 
JUT'-TAH,  nav,  ns\ 

A  Levitical  city  in  Judah  ;   now  called  JxUta.      See 
Joibah. 

Josh  15.  55  Maou,  Carmel,  and  Ziph,  and  J. 

2i.  16  Ain  with  her  suburbs*  and  J.  with  her  su. 


KAB-ZE'-EL,  ^Nsap  God  gatliers. 

A  city  in  the  S.'E.  of  Judah,  now  called  Ain-el-arus. 

See  also  JeTcabzeel. 

Josh  15.  21  uttermost  cities.,  southward  were  K., and 
2  Sa.  23.  20  Benaiah.  .the  son  of  a  valiant  man,  of  K. 
1  Ch.11.  22  Benaiah.  .the  son  of  a  valiant  man  of  K. 


KADBSH 


560 


KEEP 


KA'-DESH,  tshjj  holy. 

The  same  as  En-mishpat  and  Eadesh-barnca ;  a  place 
in  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  between  Shur  and  Edom, 
or  in  the  N.  W.  of  the  Paran  desert,  or  the  wilderness 
of  Zin,  forming  the  S.  border  of  Canaan  and  the  W.  one 
of  Edom.  From  this  place  Moses  sent  out  spies,  and 
began  the  conquest  of  the  land.  It  was  afterwards 
called  the  Waters  of  Meribah.  Four  or  five  hours  to 
the  S.  E.  of  Beer-lahai-roi,  or  Hagar's  well,  between 
Bered  and  Kadesh,  is  a  place  Eudes  with  a  fountain, 
said  to  be  eleven  days  from  Sinai,  Deut.  i.  2, 

Gen.  14.    7  came  to  En-mishpat,  which  (is)  K.,  and 

16. 14  Beer-lahai-roi ;  behold,  (it  is)  between  K. 

20.    1  Abraham.. dwelled  between  K.  and  Shur 
Num.  13.  26  Came.,  unto  the  wilderness  of  Paran,to  K. 

20.    1  the  people  abode  in  K.;  and  Miriam  died 

20.  14  Moses  sent  messengers  from  K.  unto  the 

20.  16  behold,  we  (are)  in  K.,  a  city  in  the  utter. 

20.  22  the  whole  congregation  journeyed  from  K. 

27.  14  that  (is)  the  water  of  Meribah  in  K.  in  the 

33.  36  pitched  in  the  wilderness,  .which  (is)  K. 
I33. 37  they  removed  from  K.,  and  pitched  in  m. 

•Deut.  1.  46  80  ye  abode  in  K.  many  days,  according 

32.51  ye  trespassed, .at  the  waters  of  Meribah-K. 

Judgn.  16  Israel,  .walked  through.. and  came  to  K. 

11.  17  he  would  not.  .and  Israel  abode  in  K. 
Psa.  29.   8  The  Loud  shaketh  the  wilderness  of  K. 

"  Eze.  47.  19  to  the  waters  of  strife  (in)  K.,  the  river 
48.  28  the  waters  of  strife  (in)  K. . .  to  the  river  to. 

KA-DESH  BAR-NE'-EA,  %F\3  EHR. 
The  same  as  the  preceding. 

Num32.    8  when  I  sent  them  from  K".  B.  to  see  the 

34.  4  border,  .shall  be  from  the  south  to  K.  B. 
Deut.  1.    2  eleven  days'  (journey)from  H. .  .unto  K.B. 

1.  19  when  we  departed,  .we  came  to  K.  B. 

2.  14  the  space  in  which  we  came  from  K.  B. 
9.  23  when  the  Lord  sent  you  from  K.  B.,  saying 

Josh.  10.  41  Joshua  smote  them  from  K.B.  even  unto 
14.   6  Thou  knowest.  .the  Lord  said,  .in  K.B. 

14.  7  when  Moses . .  sent  me  from  K.  B.  to  espy 

15.  3  ascended  up   m  the  south  side  unto  K.  B. 

KiD-Ml'-EL,  ^'piQ  God  the  primeval. 

l.ALevite  whose  descendants  returned  from  Babylon 

with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  636. 

Ezra    2.  40  Levites :  the  children  of  Jeshua,  and  K. 

Neh.    7.  43  Levites :  the  children  of  Jeshua,  of  K. 

2.  One  apparently  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  who  assisted  in 
rebuilding  the  temple.     B.O.  545. 

Ezra    3.    9  K.  and  his  sous,  the  sons  of  Judah,  toge. 

3.  A  Levite  who  led  the  devotions  of  the  people.    B.C. 
545- 

Neh.   9.    4  Then  stood  up  upon  the  stairs.  .  K.,  She. 
9.    5  Then  the  Levites,  Jeshua,  and  K. .  .said 
10.    9  the  Levites:  both  Jeshua.  .Binnui.  .K. 
12.    8  K. .  .(and)Mattauiah.  .over the  thanksgiv. 

12.  24  Jeshua  the  son  of  K. .  .to  praise  (and)  to 

KAD-MON-ITES,  *ibi$  eastern. 

A  Phenician  tribe,  once  a  portion  of  the  Hivites,  N.  of 

Midian,  and  E.  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon. 

Gen.  15.  19  Kenites,  and  the  Kenizzites,  and  the  K. 

KAL'-LAI,  ^p  Jah  is  light. 

A  priest  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  grandson  of  Jozadak. 

B.C.  500. 

Neh.  12.  20  Of  Sallai,  K.;  of  Amok,  Eber 

KAN'- AH,  rup  a  reed,  or  possession. 

1 .  A  brook  between  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  ;  now  called 
Wady-Eanah. 

Josh.16.    8  The  border  went,  .unto  the  river  K.;  and 
1 7.    9  And  the  coast  descended  unto  the  river  K. 

2.  A  city  in  Asher  near  Hammon  and  Rehob,  not  far 
from  Sidon ;  now  called  Axn  Eanah. 

Josh.  19.  28  and  Hammon,  and  K.,  (even)  unto  great 

KA-RE'-AH,  CA-RE'-AH,  rnp  bald. 

The  father  of  Johanan,  a  captain  of  the  Jews  when 

Gedaliah  was  made  governor  by  Nebuchadnezzar.    B.C. 

588. 

2  Ki.25.  23  there  came.  .Johanan  the  son  of  C,  and 
Jer.  40.    8  Johanan  and  Jonathan  the  sons  of  K.,  and 
40. 13  Johanan  the  son  of  K.  ..came  to  Gedaliah 
40.  15  Johanan  the  son  of  K.  spake  to  Gedaliah 

40.  16  Gedaliah . .  said  unto  Johanan  the  son  of  K. 

41.  1 1  When  Johanan  the  son  of  K .  .heard  of  all 
41.  13  all  the  people,  .saw  Johanan  the  son  of  K. 

41.  14  people,  .went  unto  Johanan  the  son  of  K. 
41. 16  Then  took  Johanan  the  sou  of  K.,  and  all 

42.  1  and  Johanan  the  son  of  K. .  .came  near 

42,  8  Then  called  he  Johanan  the  son  of  K.,and 

43.  2  Then  spake.  .Johanan  the  sou  of  K.,  and 
43.  4  So  Johanan  the  son  of  K. .  .obeyed  not  the 
43.  5  But  Johanan  the  sou  of  K. .  .took  all  the 

KAR-KA'-A,  njfglp  deep  ground. 
A  city  on  the  S.  border  of  Judah. 

Josh  15.    3  up  to  Adar,  and  fetched  a  compass  to  K. 

KAR'-XOR,  1'p-ip  deep  ground. 

A  city  in  Gad,  E.  of  Jordan  ;  one  day's  journey  from 

Selah, 

Judg.  8.  10  Zeba  andZalmimna(\vere)inK.,and  their 
KAR'-TAH,  nn-)p  city, 
A  city  of  the  Levites  iu  Zebulun. 

Josh    1.  34  Jokneam  with  her  suburbs,  and  K.  with 


KAR'-TAN,  jrqp  double  city. 

A  Levitical  city  in  Naphtali ;  called  Eirjathaim  in  1  Ch. 

6.  76;  now  called  Eerkeah. 

Josh  21.  32  and  K.  with  her  suburbs ;  three  cities 
KAT'-TATH,  map  little. 

A  city  in  Zebulun,  near  Nahallal;  called  Eitron  in 
Judg.  1.  30.     Now  called  Sefiirieh. 

Josh  19.  15  K.,  and  Nahallal,  and  Shimron,  and  Ida. 
KE'-DAR,  "nj3  powerful. 

1.  One  of  the  sons  of  Ishmael,  the  son  of  Abraham  by 
Hagar.     B.C.  1840. 

Gen.  25.  13  first  born  of  Ishmael  Nebajoth;  and  K. 
1  Ch.  1.  29  first  born  of  Ishmael,  Nebaioth ;  then  K. 

2.  The  tribe  which  sprang  from  him,  and  their  territory 
in  the  desert  between  Arabia  Petrsea  and  Babylonia. 

Psa.120.    5  Woe  is  me.  .1  dwell  in  the  tents  of  K.! 
Song   1.    5  as  the  tents  of  K.,  as  the  curtains  of  Sol. 
Isa.   21. 16  Within  a  year,  .all  the  glory  of  K.  shall 
21.  17  the  children  of  K.,  shall  be  diminished 
42,  11  the  villages  (that)  K.  doth  inhabit:  let  the 
60.    7  All  the  flocks  of  K  shall  be  gathered  tog. 
Jer.     2.  10  send  unto  K.,  and  consider  diligently,  and 
49.  28  Concerning  K.,  and  concerning  the  king. 
49.  28  Arise  ye,  go  up  to  K.,  and  spoil  the  men 
Eze.  27.  21  Arabia,  and  all  the  princes  of  K.,theyoc. 
KE-DE'-KAH,  n»ip  eastern. 
Youngest  son  of  Ishmael.     B.C.  1820. 

Gen.  25.  15  Hadar,  and  Tenia,  Jetur,  Naphish,  and  K. 
1  Ch.1.31  Jetur,  Naphish,  and  K.  These  are  the  sons 
KE-DE'-MOTH,  niDiip  eastern  parts. 
1.  A  wilderness  in  the  E.  part  of  Reuben,  near  the  Arnon. 

Deut.  2.  26  sent  messengers  out  of .  .K.  unto  Sihon 
■2.  A  Levitical  city  of  Reuben,  near  Jahaza  and  Mephaath. 
Josh.13. 18  And  Jahaza,  and  K.,  and  Mephaath 

21.  37  K.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Mephaath  with 
1  Ch.  6.  79  K.  also  with  her  suburbs,  and  Mephaath 
KE'-DESH,  trip  holy. 

1.  A  city  of  the  Canaanites  near  the  N.  border,  its  king 
being  defeated  by  Joshua,  it  probably  became  part  of 
Naphtali. 

Josh. 12.  22  The  king  of  K.,  one;  the  king  of  Jokneam 
19.  37  And  K.,  and  Edrei,  and  En-hazor 

2.  Sometimes  called  Kedesh- Naphtali,  a  Levitical  city  of 
refuge  in  Naphtali ;  now  called  Eedes,  W.  of  the  Lake 
Merom. 

•losh  20.   7  They  appointed  K.  in  Galilee  in  mount 

21.  32  K.  in  Galilee  with  her  suburbs,  .a  city  of 
Judg.  4.    6  she  sent  and  called  Barak,  .out  of  K.  N. 

4.    9  Deborah  arose,  and  went  with  Barak  to  K. 

4.  10  Barak  called  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  to  K. 

4.  11  unto  the  plain  of  Zaanaim,which(is)by  K. 
e  Ki.  15.  29  Tiglath-pileser.  .took.  .K.,  and  Hazor 
1  Ch.  6.  76  K.  in  Galilee  with  her  suburbs,  and  Ham. 

3.  A  Levitical  city  in  Issachar,  elsewhere  called  Eishion 
or  Eishou,  now  Kison. 

1  Ch.  6.  72  K.  with  her  suburbs,  Daberath  with  her 
i.  A  city  of  Judah,  near  Hazor  and  Ithnan. 

Josh. 15.  23  And  K.,  and  Hazor,  and  Ithnan 
KEEP,  to  — 
l.Guard,  charge,  ward,  Tx'yy&'ft  mishviereth.    ■ 

Exodi2.   6  ye  shall  keep  it  up  until  the  fourteenth 

2.  To  do,  make,  serve,  *US>;  ahad. 

Ezra   6. 16  kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God 

3.  To  keep  back,  ?stj  atsal. 

Eccl.  2.  10  whatsoever  mine  eyes  desired  I  kept  not 
i.To darken,  keepback, spare,  withhold,  r\brn  chasak. 

1  Sa.  25.  39  hath  kept  his  servant  from  evil :  for  the  L. 
5.  To  shut,  restrain,  N73  kala. 

1  Sa.  25.  33  which  hast  kept  me  this  day  from  coming 
Q.To  toithhold,  keep  back,  y:D  mana. 

Job  20. 13  (Though)he..keepitstillwithinhismoiith 
7.  To  keep,  watch,  "iui  netar. 

Dan.  7.  28  As  for  me.. I  kept  the  matter  in  my  heart 
8.7*0  keep,  watch,  *iw  natar. 

Psa.  103.    9  neither  will  lie  keep  (his  anger)  for  ever 

Song  1.  6  (but)  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept 
8. 12  those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two  hu. 

Jer.     3.  12  I  (am)  merciful.  .1  will  not  keep  (anger) 

9.  To  keep,  7vaieh,  reserve,  i^i  natsar. 

Deut  32. 10  he  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  his  eye 

33.  9  observed  thy  word,  and  kept  thy  covenant 
Psa.  25. 10  mercy  and  truth  unto  such  as  keep  his 

34.  13  Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips 
78.    7  not  forget  the  works  of  God,  but  keep  his 

105.  45  might  observe  his  statutes,  and  keep  his 
119.  2  Blessed  (are)  they  that  keep  his  testimon. 
119.  22  Remove,  .for  I  have  kept  thy  testimonies 
119.  33  the  way.  .and  I  shall  keep  it  (unto)  the 
119.  34  Give  me  understanding,  and  I  shall  keep 
119.  56  This  I  had,  because  I  kept  thy  precepts 
T19.  69  I  will  keep  thy  precepts  with  (my)  whole 
119.  100  I  understand,  .because  I  keep  thy  prec. 
119,  115  I  will  keep  the  commandments  of  my  G. 
119. 129  wonderful :  therefore  doth  my  soulkeep 
119. 145  hear  me,  0  Lord  :  I  will  keep  thy  statu. 
14/.  3  Set  a  watch,  0  Lord,  .keep  the  door  of 
Prov.  2.    8  He  keepeth  the  paths  of  judgment,  and 

2.  11  preserve  thee,  understanding  shall  keep 

3.  1  but  let  thine  heart  keep  my  commandm. 
3,  ■o^  My  sou.  .keep  sound  wisdom  and  discre. 


Prov.  4.  6  preserve  thee  :  love  her,  and  she  shall  k. 
4.  13  let.,  not  go  1  keep  her;  for  she  (is)  thy  life 

4.  23  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence ;  for 

5.  2  and  (that)  thy  lips  may  keep  knowledge 

6.  20  My  son,  keep  thy  father's  commandment 
13.    3  He  that  keepeth  his  mouth  keepeth  his 
13.   6  Righteousness  keepeth  (him  that  is)  upr. 
16.  17  he  that  keepeth  his  way  preserveth  his 
24.  12  he  that  keepeth  thy  soul,  doth  (not)  he  k. 

27.  18  Whoso  keepeth  the  fig  tree  shall  eat  the 

28.  7  Whoso  keepeth  the  law  (is)  a  wise  son:  but 
Isa.   26.    ^  Thou  wilt  keep  (him)  in  perfect  peace 

27.    3  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it ;  I  will  water  it 
27.    3  lest  (any)  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  nightand 
42.    6  will  hold  thiue  hand,  and  will  keep  thee 
Nah.   2.    1  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  way,  make 

10.  To  do,  perform,  "Dj;  abad. 

Exodi3.    5  thoushalt  keep  this  servicein  this  month 

11.  To  do,  pe? form,  nyy  asah. 

Exodi2.  47  All  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  keep 
Num.  9.    2  Let  the  children  of  Israel  also  keep  the 
9.    3  ye  shall  keep  it  in  his  appointed  season 
9.    3  all- the  ceremonies  thereof,  shall  ye  keep 
9.    4  spake . .  that  they  should  keep  the  passover 
9.    5  they  kept  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth 
9.    6  could  not  keep  the  passover  on  that  day 
9.  10  he  shall  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord 
9.  1 1  at  even  they  shall  keep  it,  (and)  eat  it  with 
9.  12  ordinances  of  the  passover  theyshallkeep 
9.  13  forbeareth  to  keep  the  passover,  even  the 
9.  14  and  will  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lor  j> 
Deut.  5.  15  commanded  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath  day 
16.    1  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
16. 10  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  weeks  unto 
Josh.  5.  10  kept  the  passover  ou  the  fourteenth  day 
2  Ki.23.  21  Keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lokd  your 

1  Ch.  4.  10  that  thou  wouldest  keep  (me)  from  evil 

2  Ch.  7.    8  Solomon  kept  the  feast  seven  days,  and 

7.  9  they  kept  the  dedication  of  the  altar  seven 
30.    1  to  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  God 
30.    2  to  keep  the  passover  in  the  second  month 
30.   3  they  could  not  keep  it  at  that  time,  because 
30.    5  that  they  should  come  to  keep  the  pass. 
30.  13  to  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  in 
30.  21  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 
30.  23  whole  assembly  took  counsel  to  keep  other 
30.  23  and  they  kept,  .seven  days  with  gladness 
35.    1  Josiah  kept  a  passover  unto  the  Lord  in 
35.  16  to  keep  the  passover,  and  to  offer  burnt 
35.  17  kept  the  passover  at  that  time,  and  the 
35.  18  did.  .keep  such  a  passover  as  Josiah  kept 

Ezra  3.  4  They  kept  also  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  as 
6.  19  the  children  of  the  captivity  kept  the  pass. 
6.  22  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 

Neh.  8.  18  they  kept  the  feast  seven  days;  and  on  the 
9.  34  Neither  have . .  our  fathers,  kept  thy  law 

12.  27  to  keep  the  dedication  with  gladness,  both 
Esth.  3.    8  neither  keep  they  the  king's  laws :  there. 

9.  21  that  they  should  keep  the  fourteenth  day 

9.  27  that  they  would  keep  these  two  days  ace. 

Eze.    5.    7  neither  have  kept  my  judgments,  neitliei 

12.  To  keep  sabbath,  nsv*  shabath. 

Lev.  25.   2  then  shall  the  laud  keep  a  sabbath  unto 

13.  To  keep,  observe,  take  heed,  ~X2v  shamar. 

Gen.  2. 15  garden  of  Eden  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it 
3.  24  sword,  .to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life 
17.    9  Thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant  therefore 

17.  10  This  (is)  my  covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep 

18.  19  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do 
26.  5  Abraham  obeyed  my  voice,  and  kept  my  . 
28.  15  I  (am)  with  thee,  and  will  keep  thee  in  all 
28.  20  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  and  will 

30.  31  If  thou  wilt.. I  will  again  feed  (and)  keep 
41.  35  let  them  gather,  .and  let  them  keep  food 

Exodi2.  25  it  shall  come  to  pass,  .ye  shall  keep  this 

13.  10  Thou  shalt  therefore  keep  this  ordinance 

15.  26  If  thou  wilt,  .keep  all  his  statutes,  I  will 

16.  28  How  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my  command. 

19.  5  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice,  .and  keep  my  co. 

20.  6  that  love  me,  and  keep  my  commandme. 

21.  29  testified.,  and  he  hath  not  kept  him  in,  but 

21.  36  his  owner  hath  not  kept  him  iii;  he  shall 

22.  7  money  or  stuff  to  keep,  and  it  be  stolen  out 

22.  10  or  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  or  any  beast,  to  keep 

23.  15  Thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened 
23.  20  I  send  an  Angel  before  thee,  to  keep  thee 

31.  i3"Verilymy  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep:  forit(is) 
31.  14  Ye  shall  keep  the  sabbath  therefore ;  for 
31. 16  the  children  of  Israel  shall  keep  the  sab. 
34.  18  feast  of  unleavened  bread  shalt  thou  keep 

Lev.    8.  35  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  die 
1 8.    4  keep  mine  ordinances,  to  walk  therein 
18.  5,  26  Ye  shall  therefore  keep  my  statutes 

18.  30  Therefore  shall  ye  keep  mine  ordinance 

19.  3  keep  my  sabbaths:  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  G. 
19. 19  Ye  shall  keep  my  statutes.  Thou  shaltnot 

19.  30  Ye  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence 

20.  8  And  ye  shall  keep  my  statutes,  and  do 
20.  22  Ye  shall  therefore  keep  all  my  statutes 
22.    9  They  shall  therefore  keep  mine  ordinances 
22.  31  Therefore  shall  ye  keep  my  commandme. 

25.  18  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them ;  and  ye 

26.  2  Ye  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence 
26.    3  andkeepmyconimandments,  anddothem 

Num.  1.  53  the  Levites  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the} 
3.    7  they  shall  keep  his  charge,  and  the  charge 
3.    8  they  shall  keep  all  the  instruments  of  the 
3.  32  oversight  of  them  that  keep  the  charge 
6.  24  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee 
8.  26  to  keep  the  charge,  and  shall  do  no  service 


KEEP 


Num.  9.  19  the  children  of  Israel  kept  the  charge  of 
9.  '23  they  kept  the  charge  of  the  LORD,  at  the 
18.  3  they  shall  keep  thy  charge,  and  the  charge 
18.    4  keep  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  c. 

18.  5  ye  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 
18.    7  shall  keep  your  priest's  office  for  every 
31.  30  keep  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
31.  47  kept  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

Deut.  4.  2  that  ye  may  keep  the  commandments  of 
4.  6  Keep  therefore  and  do  (them) :  for  this  (is) 
4.    9  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget 

4.  40  Thoushalt  keep  therefore  his  statutes,  and 

5.  1  may  learn  them,  and  keep  and  do  them 
5.  ic  that  love  me  and  keep  my  commandments 
5.  12  Keep  the  sabbath  day  to  sanctify  it,  as 

5.  29  and  keep  all  my  commandments  always 

6.  2  to  keep  all  his  statutes,  and  his  comma. 

6.  17  Ye  shall  diligently  keep  the  commandm. 

7.  8  because  he  would  keep  the  oath  whieh  he 
7.  9  which  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  with 
7.    9  that  love  him  and  keep  his  commandm. 

7.  ii  Thou  shalt  therefore  keep  the  command. 
7. 12  if  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments,  and  keep 
7. 12  that  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  keep  unto 

8.  2  whether  thou  wouldest  keep  his  comma. 
8.    6  shalt  keep  the  commandments  of  the  L. 
8. 11  in  not  keeping  his  commandments,  and 

10.  13  To  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 

11.  1  keep  his  charge,  and  his  statutes,  and  his 
11.  S  Therefore  shall  ye  keep  all  the  comman. 
1 1.  22  For  if  ye  shall  diligently  keep  all  these  c. 
13.  4  fear  hini.and  keep  his  commaudments.and 
13. 18  to  keep  all  his  commandments  which  Ico. 
17.  19  to  keep  all  the  words  of  this  law  and  these 

19.  9  If  thou  shalt  keep  all  these  commandm. 
23.  23  gone  out.  .thou  shalt  keep  and  perform 
26.  16  thou  shalt  therefore  keep  and  do  them 
26.  17  to  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  commandm. 

26.  iS  and.  .shouldest  keep  all  his  commandm. 

27.  1  Keep  all  the  commandments  which  I  com. 

28.  9  if  thou  shalt  keep  the  commandments  of 

28.  45  to  keep  his  commandments  and  his  statu. 

29.  9  Keep  therefore  the  words  of  this  covenant 

30.  10  to  keep  his  commandments  and  his  statu. 
30.  16  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  com. 

Josh.  6.  18  in  anywise  keep,  .from  the  accursed  thing 

10.  18  Joshua  said,  .set  men  by  it  for  to  keep 
22.    2  Ye  have  kept  all  that  Moses  the  servant 
22.    3  have  kept  the  charge  of  the  commandm, 

22.  5  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  to  cleave 

23.  6  Be  ye . .  very  courageous  to  keep  and  to  do 
Judg.  2.  22  whether  they  wilf  keep  the  way  of  the  L. 

2.  22  as  their  fathers  did  keep  (it),  or  not 

1  Sa.    2.    9  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  saints,and  the 

7.  1  sanctified  Eleazar  his  son  to  keep  the  ark 
13.  13  thou  hast  not  kept  the  commandment  of 
13.  14  because  thou  hast  not  kept  (that)  which 
25. 21  Surely  in  vain  have  I  kept  all  that  this  (f .) 
26.  15  wherefore  then  hast  thounot  kept  thy  lord 
26.  16  because  ye  have  not  kept  your  master,  the 

2  Sa.  15.  16  the  king  left  ten  women,  .to  keep  the  house 

16.  21  which  he  hath  left  to  keep  the  house 

20.  3  whom  he  had  left  to  keep  the  house 

22.  22  I  have  kept  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  have 

22.  44  hast  kept  me  (to  be)  head  of  the  heathen 

1  Ki.  2.    3  And  keepthe  chargeof  theLoRDthy  God 

2.   3  to  walk  in  his  ways,  to  keep  his  statutes 

2.  43  Why  then  hast  thou  not  kept  the  oath  of 

3.  6  thou  hast  kept  for  him  this  greatkindness 
3.  14  to  keep  my  statutes  and  my  commandm. 
6.  12  keep  all  my  commandments  to  walk  in 
8.23  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  with  thy 

8.  24  Who  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  David 
8.  25  keep  with  thy  servant  David  my  father 
8.  58  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  his  statu. 

8.  61  to  keep  his  commandments,  as  at  this  day 

9.  4  (and)  wilt  keep  my  statutes  and  my  judg. 
9.    6  and  will  not  keep  my  commandments 

11. 10  kept  not  that  which  the  Lord  commanded 

11. 11  thou  hast  not  kept  my  covenant,  andmys. 

11.  34  because  he  kept  my  commandments  and 
it.  38  to  keep  my  statutes  and  my  commandm. 

13.  21  hast  not  kept  the  commandment  which 

14.  8  David,  who  kept  my  commandments,  and 
14.  27  which  kept  the  door  of  the  king's  house 
20.  39  Keep  this  man  :  if  by  any  means  he  be  m. 

2  Ki.  9.  14  Joram  had  kept  Ranioth-gilead,  he  and 

11.    6  so  shall  ye  keep  the  watch  of  the  house 

11.  7  they  shall  keep  the  watch  of  the  house  of 

12.  9  the  priests  that  kept  the  door  puttherein 

17.  13  keep  my  commandments  (and)  my  statut. 

17.  19  Also  Judah  kept  not  the  commandments] 

18.  6  kept  his  commandments,  which  th**  Lord 

23.  3  to  keep  Ms  commandments  and  '  L$  testi. 

1  Ch.io.  13  the  word  of  the  LORr  whic1    .e  kept  not 

12.  29  greatest  part  of  then  kept  the  ward 

22.  12  that  thou  mayest  keep  u»w       v  of  the  Lo. 

23.  32  they  should  keep  the  charge  of  the  tab. 

28.  8  keep  and  seek  for  all  the  commandments 

29.  18  keep  this  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of 
29.  19  to  keep  thy  commandments,  thy  testimo. 

2  Ch.  6.  14  whichkeepestcovenant,  and .  .mercyunto 

6,  15  Thou  which  hast  kept  with  thy  servant)!). 
6.  16  keep  with  thy  servant  David  my  father 

12. 10  that  kept  the  entrance  of  the  king's  house 

13. 11  we  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  out  God 
23.   6  all  the  people  shall  keep  the  watch  of  the 
34.  9  which  the  Levites  that  kept  the  doors  had 
34.  21  because  our  fathers  have  not  kept  the 
34.  31  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  his  test. 

Ezra   8.  29  Watch  ye,  and  keep  (them),  until  ye  weigh 
Neh.   1     5  that  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  for 

71 


5G1 


Keh.   1.    7  have  not  kept  the  commandments,  nor 
1.    9  and  keep  mycommandments,  and  do  them 
9.  32  God,  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy 
11. 19  their  brethren  thatJkept  the  gates.. an  hu. 

12.  45  kept  the  ward  of  their  God,  and  the  ward 

13.  22  they  should  come.,  keep  the  gates,  tosan. 
Esth.  2.  14  chamberlain,  which  kept  the  concubines 

b.  21  two.  .of  those  which  kept  the  door,  were 
Job    23.  11  his  way  have  I  kept,  and  not  declined 
Psa.  12.    7  Thou  shalt  keep  them,  0  Lord,  thou  shalt 
17.   4  by  the  word  of  thy  lips  I  have  kept  (me 
17.    8  Keep  me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye ;  hide 
18. 21  I  have  kept  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and 
19. 11  in  keeping  of  them  (there  is)  great  reward 
25.  20  O  keep  my  soul,  and  deliver  me :  let  me 
34.  20  He  keepeth  all  his  bones :  not  one  of  them 
37.  34  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  keep  his  way,  and 
39.    1  I  will  keep  my  mouth  witli  a  bridle,  while 
78.  10  They  kept  not  the  covenant  of  God,  and 
78.  56  Yet  they  tempted,  .and  kept  not  his  tes. 
89.  28  My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  everm. 
89.  31  If  they  break,  .and  keep  not  my  comma. 
91.  11  give  Ins  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep 
99.   7  they  kept  his  testimonies,  and  the  ordiu. 
103.  18  To  such  as  keep  his  covenant,  and  to  those 
106.    3  Blessed  (are)  they  that  keep  judgment 
119.    4  Thou  hast  commanded  .(us)  to  keep  thy 
119.    5  0  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep 
119.    8  1  will  keep  thy  statutes  :  0  forsake  me 
119.  17  with  thy  servant,  (that)  I  may  live,  and 
119.  44  So  shall  I  keep  thy  law  continually  for 
119.  55  I  have  remembered .  .and  have  kept  thy 
119.  57  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words 
119.  60  I.  .delayed  not  to  keep  thy  commandme. 
119. 63  I  (am)  a  companion,  .of  them  that  keep 
119.  67  I  went  astray  ;  but  now  have  I  kept  thy 
119.  83  so  shall  I  keep  the  testimony  of  thy  mo. 
119. 101  I  have  refrained,  .that  I  might  keep  thy 
119. 106  I  have  sworn,  .that  I  will  keep  thy  righ. 
119.  134  Deliver  me.  .so  will  I  keep  thy  precepts 
119. 136  run  down,  .because  they  keep  not  thy 
119. 146  save  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  testimonies 
119.  158  I.  .was  grieved  ;  because  they  kept  not 
119.  167  My  soul  hath  kept  thy  testimonies  ;  and 
119. 168  I  have  kept  thy  precepts  and  thy  testim. 
121.    3  he  that  keepeth  thee  will  not  slumber 
121.   4  Behold,  he  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neit. 
127.    r  exxept  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watch. 
132.  12  If  thy  children  will  keep  my  covenant  and 

140.  4  Keep  me,0  Lord,  from  the  hands  of  the 

141.  9  Keep  me  from  the  snares  (which)  they  have 
146.    6  Which  made  heaven . .  which  keepeth  truth 

Prov.  2.  20  That  thou  mayest.  .keep  the  paths  of  the 

3.  26  and  shall  keep  thy  foot  from  being  taken 

4.  4  Let  thine  heart  retain  my  words  :  keep  my 

4.  21  keep  them  in  the  midst  of  thine  heart 
6.  22  when  thou  sleepest,  it  shall  keep  thee 

6.  24  To  keep  thee  from  the  evil  woman,  from 

7.  1  My  son,  keep  my  words,  and  lay  up  my 
7.    2  Keep  my  commandments,  and  live ;  and 

7.  5  That  they  may  keep  thee  from  the  strange 

8.  32  for  blessed  (are  they  that)  keep  my  ways 
10.  17  He  (is  in)  the  way  of  life  that  keepeth  in. 
13.    3  He  that  keepetli  his  mouth  keepeth  his 
19.    8  he  that  keepeth  understanding  shall  find 

19.  16  He  that  keepeth  the  commandment  keep. 

21.  23  Whoso  keepeth  his  mouth  and . .  tongue  k. 

22.  5  he  that  doth  keep  his  soul  shall  be  far 
22.  18  a  pleasant  thing  if  thou  keep  them  within 

28.  4  such  as  keep  the  law  contend  with  them 

29.  18  but  he  that  keepeth  the  law,  happy  (is)  he 
Eccl.  3.    6  a  time  to  keep,  and  a  time  to  cast  away 

5.  1  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the 
8.  2  to  keep  the  king's  commandment,  and 
8.    5  Whoso  keepeth  the  commandment  shall 

12. 13  Fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments 
Isa.   26.    2  that  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth 

56.  1  Keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  justice  :  for 
56.  2  thatkeepeth  the  sabbath  from  polluting  it 
56.  2  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any  evil 
56.  4  unto  the  eunuchs  that  keep  my  sabbaths 
56.  6  every  one  that  keepeth  the  sabbath  from 
Jer.  3.  5  Will  he  reserve,  .forever?  will  he  keep  (it) 
16.  11  have  forsaken  me,  and  have  not  kept  my 
31.  ic  and  keep  him,  as  a  shepherd  (doth)  his 

35.  18  kept  all  his  precepts,  and  done  according 
Eze.  11.  20  and  keep  mine  ordinances,  and  do  them 

17. 14  by  keeping  of  his  covenant  it  might  stand 
18.  9  and  hath  kept  my  judgments,  to  deal  tie. 
18.  19  hath  kept  all  my  statutes,  and  hath  done 
18.  21  keep  all  my  statutes,  and  do  that  which 

20.  19  and  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them 
20.  21  neither  kept  my  judgments  to  do  them 

36.  27  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments,  and  do 

43.  11  that  they  may  keep  the  whole  form  there. 

44.  8  ye  have  not  kept  the  charge  of  mine  holy 
44.  15  that  kept  the  charge  of  my  sanctuary 
44. 16  minister  unto  me,  and  they  shall  keep  my 
44.  24  they  shall  keep  my  laws  and  my  statutes 
48.  11  which  have  kept  my  charge,  which  went 

Dan.   9.    4  and  to  them  that  keep  his  commandments 
Hos/12.    6  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on 

12.  12  Israel  served.,  and  for  a  wife  he  kept(sh.) 
Amos  1. 11  because,  .he  kept  his  wrath  for  ever 

2.  4  have  not  kept  his  commandments,  and 
Mic.  7.  5  keep  the  doors  of  thy  mouth  from  her 
Zech.  3.    7  if  thou  wilt  keep  my  charge,  then  thou 

3.  7  shalt  also  keep  my  courts,  and  I  will  give 
Mai.    2.    7  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge 

2.  9  according  as  ye  have  not  kept  my  ways 

3.  7  ye  are  gone  away,  .and  have  not  kept 
3. 14  what  profit  (is  it)  that  we  have  kept  his 


KEEP 

14.  To  lead,  bring,  £*yaj  ago. 

Matt  14.    6  when  Herod's  birth  day  [was  kept],  the  d. 

15.  To  feed,  &6<tko)  bosko. 

Matt,  a  33  they  that  kept  them  fled,  and  went  then* 

16.  To  keep  thoroughly,  Starwpta)  diatereo. 

Luke  2.  51  his  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in  her 
Acts  15.  29  from  which  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall 

17.  To  guard  thoroughly,  8ta<pv\d(r<T&  diaphulasso. 
Luke  4.  10  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep 

18.  To  have,  hold,  ex«  echo. 

Lukeig.  20  thy  pound,  which  I  have  kept  laid  up  in 

19.  To  He  down,  recline,  Kara-Keipac  katakeimai  eVi 
Acts    9.  33  JSueas,  which  had  kept  his  bed  eight  ye. 

20.  To  hold  fast,  Kare^o-  katecho. 

Luke  8.  15  having  heard  the  word,  keep  (it),  and 
1  Co.iT.    2  keep  the  ordinances,  as  I  delivered. .to 

21.  To  hold  firm,  Kparea  krateo. 

Mark  9.  10  And  they  kept  that  saying  with  themsel. 

22.  To  hold  near,  offer,  irap4x^  parecho. 

Acts  22.    2  they  kept  the  more  silence  :  and  he  saith 
23. To  do,  make,  iroteca  poieo. 

Matt26.  18  I  will  keep  the  passoverat  thy  house  with 
John  7. 19  and  (yet)  none  of  you  keepeth  the  law  ? 
Acts  18.  21  I  must  by  all  means  [keep]  this  feast  that 
Heb.  11.  28  Through  faith  he  kept  the  passover,  and 

24.  To  do,  practice,  Tvpaarrw  prasso. 

Rom.  2.  25  circumcision,  .profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the 

25.  To  keep  together,  avvTvpea  suntered. 

Luke  2. 19  Mary  kept  all  these  things,  and  pondered 

26.  To  keep,  watch,  observe,  rvpecc  tired. 

Mattig.  17  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  com. 
Mark  7.    9  reject,  .that  [ye  may  keep]  your  own  tradi. 
John  2.  10  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now 
S.  51  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never 
8.  52  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never 
8.  55  but  I  know  him,  and  keep  his  saying 
9. 16  because  he  keepeth  not  the  sabbath  day 
12.    7  against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath  she  k. 
14.  15  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments 
14.  21  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  k. 

14.  23  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words 
14. 24  He  that  loveth  me  not  keepeth  not  my 

15.  10  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall 
15.  10  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  commandm. 
15.  20  have  kept  my  saying,  they  will  keep  yours 
17.    6  unto  the  men.  .and  they  have  kept  thy 
17.  1 1  Holy  Father.keep  through  thine  own  name 
17. 12  I  kept  them  in  thy  name  :  those  that 

17.  15  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the 
Acts  12.    5  Peter  therefore  was  kept  in  prison  :  but 
12.   6  keepers  before  the  door  kept  the  prison 
15.    5  and  to  command,  .to  keep  the  law  of  Mo. 

15.  24  [be  circumcised, and  keep  the  law;  towh.] 

16.  23  charging  the  jailor  to  keep  them  safely 

24.  23  he  commanded  a  centurion  to  keep  Paul 

25.  4  that  Paul  should  be  kept  at  Cesarea,  aud 
25.  21  to  be  kept  till  I  might  send  him  to  Cesar 

1  Co.  7.  37  hath  so  decreed,  .that  he  will  keep  his 

2  Co.11.    9  I  have  kept  myself,  .and  (so)  will  I  keep 
Eph.   4.    3  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  sp. 

1  Ti.    5.  22  partaker  of  other  men's  sins  :  keep  thy* 

6. 14  That  thou  keep  (this)  commandment  with. 

2  Ti.    4.    7  I  have  finished  (my)  course,  I  have  kept 
Jas.     1.  27  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world 

2.  10  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and 
1  Jo.   2.    3  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandm. 
2.    4  He  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  keepeth 

2.  5  whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in  him  verily  is 

3.  22  because  we  keep  his  commandments,  and 
3.  24  he  that  keepeth  his  commandments  dwel. 
5.  2  we  love  God,  aud  [keep]  his  commandm. 
5.    3  that  we  keep  his  commandments :  and 

5.  18  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  hims. 
Jude        6  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate 

21  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  look. 
Rev.    1.    3  keep  those  things  which  are  written  there. 

2.  26  he  that  overcometh,  and  keepetli  my  wo. 

3.  8  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied 
3.  10  Because  thou  hast  kept.  .1  also  will  keep 

12.  17  which  keep  the  commandments  of  God 
14.  12  they  that  keep  the  commandments  of  God 
16.  15  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked 
22.    7  blessed  (is)  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of 
22.    9  them  which  keep  the  sayings  of  this  book 

27.  To  watch,  keep  icard,  guard,  (ppovp4a>  phroureo. 
Gal.  3. 23  we  were  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto 
Phil.  4.  7  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through 
1  Pe.   1.    5  WhoarekeptbythepowerofGodthrough 

28.  To  keep  guard,  watch,  ^uAao-o-o-  phulasso. 
Mattig.  20  All  these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
Luke  2.    8  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  night 

8.  29  he  was  kept  bound  with  chains  and  in  f. 
11.  21  When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his 

11.  28  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  keep 
18.  21  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up 

Johni2.  25  he  thathateth  his  life.,  shall  keep  it  unto 

17. 12  those  that  thou  gavest  m«  I  have  kept 
Acts    7.  53  have  received  the  law.  .and  have  not  kept 

12.  4  to  four  quaternions  of  soldierstokeephim 
16.    4  they  delivered  them  the  decrees  for  to  k. 

21.  24  also  walkest  orderly,  and  keepest  the  law 

22.  20  kept  the  raiment  of  them  that  slew  him 
23-  35  he  commanded  him  to  be  kept  in  Herod's 
2S.  16  dwell  by  himself  with  a  soldier  that  kept 


KEEP 


562 


KENITES 


Rom.  2.  26  Therefore  if  the  uncircumcision  keep  the 
Gal.  6.  13  they,  .who  are  circumcised  keep  the  law 
2  Th.  3.    3  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep  (you)  from 

1  Ti.    6.  20  keep  that  which  is  committed  to  thy  trust 

2  li.    1.  12  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that 

1.  14  keep  by  the  Huly  Ghost  which  dwelleth 

1  Jo.   5.  31  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols 
Jude       24  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you 
[Set  a     •  Alive,  bondage,  company  with,  holy,  holy  day, 
rank,   remembrance,  sabbath,  secret,  silence,  solemn 
feast,  watch.] 

KEEP  back,  to  — 

1.7*o  keep  back,  u-ithhold,  Tjbn  chasak. 

Gen.  39.  9  neither  hath  he  kept  back  anything  from 
Job  33.  18  Hekeepethbaek  his  soul  from  the  pit,  and 
Psa.  19.  13  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presum. 

2.7b  shut,  restrain,  n^3  kola. 

Isa,    43.    6  Give  up ;  and  to  the  south,  Keep  not  back 

3.  To  withhold,  keep  back,  V^  mana. 

Num  24.  11  the  Lord  hath  kept  thee  back  from  hou. 
1  Sa.  25.  34  which  hath  kept  me  back  from  hurting 
Jer.  42.    4  I  will  declare  (it)  unto  you  I  will  keep . .  b. 
48.  10  cursed  (be)  he  that  keepeth  back  his  sword 

4.  To  put  apart  for  self,  purloin,  vo<r<pi£ofiainosphi. 
Acts    5.    2  kept  back,  .oftheprice.hiswifealsobeing 

5.    3  and  to  keep  back,  .of  the  price  of  the  1.  ? 

5.  To  put  wider,  suppress,  uTroar4\\aj  hupostelto. 
Acts  20.  20  how  I  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profit. 

KEEP  bed,  to  — 
To  fall,  S3J  naphal. 

Exodzi.  18  fist,  and  he  die  not,  but  keepeth  (Ids)  bed 

KEEP  cattle,  to  teach  to  — 

To  acquire,  but/,  possess,  njj?  qanah,  5. 

Zech.13.    5  man  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  my 

KEEP  close,  to  — 

To  be  or  keep  silent,  mydw  sigao. 

Luke  9.  36  they  kept  (it)  close,  and  told  no  man  in 
KEEP  company,  to  — 
l.To  feed,  enjoy,  be  a  friend,  njn  raah. 

Prov  29.    3  he  that  keepeth  company  with  harlots 
2.  To  mix  up  self  together  with,  avvavafxlyvofxt. 

1  Co.    5.  11  I  have  written  unto  you  not  to  keep  co. 
KEEP,  to  be  delivered  to  — 
To  be  charged  with,  committed  to,  *ip3  paqad,  6. 

Lev.     6.    4  or  that  which  was  delivered  him  to  keep 
KEEP  fast,  to  — 
To  cleave,  adhere  to,  piwstte,  p3"j  dabeq. 

Ruth  2.  21  Thou  shalt  keep  fast  by  my  young  men 

2.  23  she  kept  fast  by  the  maidens  of  Boaz  to 
KEEP  a  (solemn)  feast  or  holy  day,  to  — 

To  keep  a  feast  or  festival,  un  chagag. 

Exod  12.  14  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast,  .ye  shall  keep  it 
23.  14  Three  times  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  unto 

Lev.  23.  39  ye  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven 

23.  41  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  se. 

■  Num  29.  12  ye  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven 

Deut  16.  15  Seven  days  shalt  thou  keep  a  solemn  feast 

Nah.    1. 15  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  vows 

Zech  14.  16,  18,  19  go  up.  .to  keep  the  feast  of  taber. 

Psa.  42.   4  I  went..withamultitudethatkeptholyd. 
KEEP  from,  to  — 
To  hinder,  restrain,  kojKvoj  koluo. 

Acts  27.  43  the  centurion,  .kept  them  from  (their) 
KEEP  house,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  sit  down,  or  still,  dioell,  a»;  yashab,  5. 

Psa.  113.   9  He  maketh  the  barren  woman  to  keep  h. 
KEEP  in,  to  — 
l.To  restrain,  nyj  shabach,  3. 

Prov  29.  11  a  wise  (man)  keepeth  it  in  till  afterwards 
2.  To  hold  together,  awix™  sunecho. 

Luke  19.  43  round,  and  keep  thee  in  on  every  side 
KEEP  in  memory,  to  — 
To  holdfast,  /care'xw  katechd. 

1  Co.  15.    2  if  ye  keep  in  memory  what  I  preached 
KEEP  in  store,  to  — 

To  treasure  up,  Orjaaupi^w  thesaurizo. 

2  Pe.  3.   7  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,  res. 
KEEP  (ones  self)  far,  to  — 

To  be  far  off,  pn~]  rachaq. 

Exod^a.   7  Keep  thee  far  from  a  false  matter;  and 
KEEP  secret,  to  — 
To  hear  keep  silent,  my  da.*  sigao. 

Rom  16.  25  which  was  kept  secret  since  the  world 
KEEP  secretly,  to  — 
T<>  hide,  lay  up,  fsy  tsaphan. 

Psa.     1  20  tli..u  shalt  keep  them  secretly  in  a  pavil. 
KEEP  self,  to  — 
1.7b  cleave  nr  adhere  to,  pni  dabeq. 

NU0136.    7,  9  every  one.  .shall  keep  himself  to  the 
ii.  To  h  kept,  preserved,  *v=v'  shwntair,  2. 

Deut  23.    9  then  keep  thee  from  every  wicked  thing 

1  Sa.2x.    4  if  the  young  men  have  kept  themselves 


3.7V)  keep  or  preserve  self,  T2V  shamar,  7. 

2  Sa.  22.  24  and  have  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity 
Psa.  18.  23  upright,  .andlkept  myself  from  mine  in. 
■i.  T<>  keep  guard,  watch,  <pv\d(r<ra>  phulasso. 

Acts  21.  25  save  only  that  they  keep  themselves  from 
KEEP  self  close,  to  — 
To  keep  in,  restrain,  "fitu  atsar. 

1  Ch.12.    1  while  he  yet  kept  himself  close  because 
KEEP  (sheep),  to  — 
To  feed,  keep  sheep,  niri  raah. 

Gen.  29.    9  came  with  her  father's  sheep ;  for  she  kept 
Exod.  3.    1  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  Jetliro  his  father. 
1  Sa.  16.  11  youngest,  and,  behold,  he  keepeth  thesh. 
17.  34  Thy  servant  kept  his  father's  sheep,  and 
25.  16  we  were  with  them  keeping  the  sheep 
KEEP  silence,  to  — 
l.To  be  silent,  deaf,  ty"in  eliarash. 

Psa.  32.    3  When  I  kept  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old 

35.  22  thou  hast  seen,  O  Lord:  keep  not  silence 

50.    3  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep  silence 

50.  21  These,  .hast thou  done,  and  I  kept  silence 

Isa.    41.    1  Keep  silence  before  me,  0  islands :  and 

2.7b  be  or  keep  silence,  atydas  sigao. 

Acts  15.  12  Then  all  the  multitude  kept  silence,  and 

1  Co.  14.  28  let  him  keep  silence  in  the  church ;  and 

14.  34  Let  your  women  keep  silence  in  the  chur. 
KEEP  still,  to  — 
To  keep  in,  restrain,  "ixj;  atsar. 

2  Ch.  22.    9  house  of  Ahaziah  had  no  power  to  keeps. 
KEEP,  that  which  was  delivered  to  — 

Store,  deposit,  f i~rf>9  piqqadon. 

Lev.    6.    2,  4  that  which  was  delivered  him  to  keep 
KEEP  under,  to  — 

1.  To  subdue,  force,  eqs  kabash. 

2  Ch.28. 10  ye  purpose  to  keep  under  the  children  of 
'2. To  keep  down,  press  under,  vTramidfa  hupopiazo. 

1  Co.  9.  27  I  keep  under  my  body,  and  bring  (it)  into 
KEEP  with  a  garrison,  to  — 

To  watch,  guard,  ippovpeai  phroured. 

2  Co. 11.  32  kept  the  city  of^the  Damascenes  with  a  gar. 
KEEPER  — 

l.To  keep,  watch,  ia:  natar. 

Song   1.   6  they  made  me  the  keeper  of  thevineyards 

8.  1 1  Solomon . .  let  out  the  vineyard  unto  keep. 

2. To  keep,  watch,  reserve,  "isa  natsar. 

Job    27. 18  and  as  a  booth  (that)  the  keeper  maketh 

3.  To  feed  sheep,  nyn  raah. 

Gen.    4.    2  Abel  was  a  keeper  of  sheep,  but  Cain  was 

4.  Prince,  captain,  chief,  -\y  sar. 

Gen.  39.  21  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper  of  the 
39.  22  the  keeper  of  the  prison  committed  to  J. 
39.  23  The  keeper  of  the  prison  looked  not  to  any 

5.7*0  keep,  observe,  preserve,  ~foy  shamar. 

Gen.   4.   9  said,  Iknow'not:  (Am)I  my  brother's  kee.? 

1  Sa.  17.  20  left  the  sheep  with  a  keeper,  and  took,  and 

17.  22  left  his  carriage  in  the  hand  of  the  keeper 
28.    2  T  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  for  ever 

2  Ki.11.    5  shall  even  be  keepersof  the  watch  of  the 

22.    4  which  the  keepers  of  the  door  have  gath. 

22.  14  the  son  of  Harhas,  keeperof  the  wardrobe 

23.  4  the  keepers  of  the  door,  to  bringforthout 
25. 18  the  second  priest,  and  the  three  keepers  of 

1  Ch.  9.  19  service,  keepers  of  the  gates  of  the  taber. 

9.  19  their  fathers,  .(were)  keepers  of  the  entry 

2  Ch.34.  22  the  son  of  Hasrah,  keeperof  the  wardrobe 
Neh.  2.    8  unto  Asaph  the  keeper  of  the  king's  for. 

3.  29  also  Shemaiah . .  the  keeper  of  the  east  gate 
Esth.  2.    3  king's  chamberlain,  keeper  of  the  women 
2.   8  thecustodyof  Hegai.keeperofthe  women 
2.  15  what,  .the  keeper'of  the  women.'appoint. 
6.   2  keepers  of  the  door,  who  sought  to  lay 
Psa.  121.    5  The  Lord  (is)  thy  keeper  ;  the  Lord  (is) 
Eccl.12.    3  In  the  day  when  the  keepersof  the  house 
Song   5.    7  keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my  veil 
Jer.     4.  17  As  keepers  of  a  field,  are  they  against  her 
35.    4  above  the  chamber  of.  .the  keeper  of  the 
52.  24  the  second  priest,  and  the  three  keepers 
Eze.  40.  45,  46  priests,  the  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the 
44.    8  ye  have  set  keepers  of  my  charge  in  my  s. 
44.  14  I  will  make  them  keepers  of  the  charge  of 
6.  Watchman,  guard,  <pu\a£  phulax. 

Acts    5  23  keepers  standing  without  before  the  doors 
12.   6  keepers  before  the  door  kept  the  prison 
12.  19  he  examined  the  keepers,  and  commanded 

7. To  keep,  watch,  observe,  T?mea>  tereo. 

Matt  28.   4  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  aid  shake,  and 
KEEPER  at  home  — 
One  who  keeps  his  own  hmise,  olnovpdi  oikouros. 

Titus  2.    5  discreet,  chaste,  keepers  at  home,  good 
KEEPER  of  the  prison  — 
Guard  of  a  prison,  5eo7ioc/)vA.a|  desmophulax. 

Acts  16. 27  the  keeper  of  the  prison  awaking  out  of 
16. 36  the  keeper  of  the  prison  told  this  saying 
KEEPING  — 

1.7b  keep,  watch,  reserve,  isj  natsar. 
Exod.  34.    7  Keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving 

2.  To  h'ep,  observe,  preserve,  i~y>  shamar. 

Num.  3.  28,  38  keeping  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 


Neh. 
Dan. 


•2.  25  keeping  the  ward  at  the  thresholds  of  the 
9.    4  keeping  the  covenant  and  mercy  to  them 

^.Keeping,  observing,  T-hpyjms  teresis. 

1  Co.  7.  19  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God 
KE-HE-LA'-THAH,  rrn^np  place  of  assembly. 
The  18th  encampment  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  7th 
from  Sinai. 

Nuni33.  22  journeyed  from  Rissah,  and  pitched  in  K. 
33.  23  they  went  from  K.  and  pitched  in  mount 
KEI'-LAH,  rhyp  inclosed. 

1.  A  city  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah,  towards  the  Philis- 
tines, near  Achub ;  now  Kila,  eight  miles  from  Eleu- 
theropolis. 

Josh.15.  44  K.,  and  Achzib,  andMareshah;  nine  cities 
1  Sa.  23.  1  the  Philistines  tight  against  K.,  and  they 
23.  .  2  Go  and  smite  the  Philistines,  and  save  K. 
23.  3  if  we  come  to  K.  against  the  armies  of  the 
23.  4  Arise,  go  down  to  K.;  for  I  will  deliver 
23.  5  David,  .went  to  K. .  .So  David  saved.  .K. 
23.  6  when  Ahiathar.  .fled  to  David  to  K..  .he 
«3.  7  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was  come  to  K. 
23.  8  Saul  called  all  the  people .  .go  down  to  K. 
23. 10  Saul  seeketh  to  come  to  K. ,  to  destroy  the 
23.  11  "Will  the  men  of  K.  deliver  me  up  into  his 
23.  12  Will  the  menof  K.  deliver  me  and  mymen 
23.  13  David  and  his  men.  .departed  out  of  K. 

23.  13  told  Saul  that  David  was  escaped  from  K 
Neh.   3.  17,  18  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  K. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Caleb,  son  of  Jephunneh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  19  K.  the  Garmite.,  and  Eshtemoa  the  Maach. 
KE-LA-I'AH,  r\^p.  Jah  is  light. 

A  Levite  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife  during  or 
after  the  captivity.    B.C.  456.    Called  also  Eelita. 

Ezra  10.  23  Also  of  the  Levites.  .K.,  the  same  (is)K. 
KE-LI'-TA,  NU^p£>ow?%,  littleness. 

1.  Same  as  Ketaiah.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  23  Kelaiah,  the  same  (is)  K.,  Pethahiah,  Ju. 

2.  A  priest  who  explained  the  law  when  read  by  Ezra. 

B.C.  456. 

Neh.   8.    7  K.,  Azariah,  Jozabad,  Hanan,  Pelaiah 

3.  ALevite  who  sealed  the  covenantmade  by  Nehemiah. 

B.C.  456. 

Neh.  10.  10  their  brethren,  Shebaniah,  Hodijah,  K. 
KE-MTJ'-EL,  hwcp  God  sta?ids,  or  rises. 

1.  The  third  son'of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother.    B.C.  1S00. 

Gen.  22.  21  Huzhis  firstborn.  .K.  trie  father  of  Aram 

2.  A  prince  or  chief  of  Epnraim,  one  of  those  appointed 
to  divide  the  land.     B.C.  1452. 

Num34.  24  prince,  .of  Ephraim,  K.  the  son  of  Shipht. 

3.  A  Levite,  the  father  of  Hashabiah  ruler  of  the  Levites 
in  David's  reign.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  17  Of  the  Levites;  Hashabiah,  the  son  of  K. 
KE'-NAN,  jrp  one  acquired  or  begotten. 
The  son  of  Enosh,  the  grandson  of  Adam.     B.C.  3679- 
2794.    Called  Cainan  in  Gen.  5.  g. 

1  Ch.  1.    2  K.,  Mahalaleel,  Jered 
KE'-NATH,  njp  possession. 

A  city  of  Bashan  in  Argob,  taken  from  the  Amorites  by 
Xobah,  a  Manassite,  and  called  after  him.  Now  called 
Eunawat. 

Num  32.  42  Nobah  went  and  took  K.,  and  the  villages 

1  Ch.  2.  23  And  he  took..K.,  and  the  towns  thereof 
KEN'-AZ,  KEN'-EZ,  up  side,  flank. 

1.  The  fourth  son  of  Eliphas  the  son  of  Esau.  B.C. 
1740. 

Gen.  36.  11  the  sons  of  Eliphas  were  Teman.  .and  K. 
36.  15  of  the  sons  of  Esau . .  duke  Zepho,  duke  K. 
1  Ch.  1.  36  The  sons  of  Eliphaz;  Teman,  and.. K. 

2.  A  duke  of  Edom.  B.C.  1470.  Perhaps  the  same  as  No.  1. 

Gen.  36.  42  Duke  K.,  duke  Teman,  duke  Mibzar 
1  Ch.  1.  53  Duke  K.,  duke  Teman,  duke  Mibzar 

3.  The  brother  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh,  and  father 
of  Othniel,  one  of  the  judges.     B.C.  1490. 

Josh  15.  17  Othniel  the  son  of  K.,  the  brother  of  Caleb 

Judg.  1.  13  Othniel  the  son  of  K.,  Caleb's  younger  b. 

3.    9  the  Lord  raised  up . .  Othniel  the  son  of  K. 

3.  11  And  Othniel  the  son  of  K.  died 

1  Ch.  4.  13  the  sons  of  K.;  Othniel,  and  Seraiah 

4.  A  grandson  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh.  B.C. 
1400. 

1  Ch  .4.15  sons  of  Caleb . .  sons  of  Elah,  even  K. 

KEN-E-ZITE,  *up  belonging  to  Kenez. 

The  patronymic  of  Jephunneh  the  father  (or  ancestor) 

of  Caleb.    B.C.  1490.    See  also  Eenizzites. 

Nuni32.  12  Save  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunueh  the  K. 

Josh  14.    6  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh  the  K.  said 
14. 14  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh  the  K.  unto 

KE-NITES,  Tp  belonging  to  Ken  or  Qen. 
One  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Palestine  in  the  time  of  Abra- 
ham :  apparently  destroyed  afterwards  by  the  Amorites, 
and  dispersed  among  the  Amalekites  in  the  S.  and  the 
Canaanites  in  the  N.     Perhaps  also  called  Midianites. 

Gen.  15. 19  The  K.,  and  the  Kenizites,  and  the  Kad. 

Nuni24.  21  he  looked  on  the  K.,  and  took  up  his 

24.  22  Nevertheless  the  K.  shall  be  wasted,  until 
Judg.  1.  16  the  children  of  the  K. .  .went  up  out  of 

4.  11  HebertheK. ..severed  himself  from  th&K. 
4. 17  the  tent  of  Jael  the  wife  of  Heberthe  K. 

4.  17  betwen  Jabin.  .and  the  house  of  H.  theK. 

5.  24  Blessed,  .shall  Jael.  .wife  ofHebertheK. 


KBNIZZITES 


563 


KILL 


i  Sa.  15.    6  Saul  said  unto  the  K.,  Go,  depart,  get 

15.  6  So  the  K.  deported  from  among  the  Am. 
27.  10  David  said,  Against  the  south  of.  .the  K. 
30.  29  to  (them)  which  (were)  iu . .  cities  of  tin-  K. 

1  Ch.    2.  55  These  (are)  the  K.  that  came  of  Hemath 

KE-NIZ-ZTTES,  V?  belonging  to  Kenaz. 

One  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Palestine,  named  between  the 

Kenites  in  the  S.  and  the  Kadmonites  in  the  N. 

Gen.  15  i9TheKemtes,andtheK.,audtheKadnion 
KEPT,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  or  remain  bound,  ipx  asar,  2. 

Gen.  42.  16  ye  shall  be  kept  in  prison,  that  .your  words 
I.Guard,  charge,  ward,  rn?v>?  mishmereth. 
Exod.  16.  23  lay  up  for  you  to  be  kept  until  the  morn. 

16.  32,  33anomer.  .be  kept  for  your  generations 
16.  34  laid  it  up  before  the  Testimony,  to  be  kept 

Num.  1 7. 10  to  be  kept  for  a  token  against  the  rebels 

19.  9  it  shall  be  kept  for  the  congregation  of 

3.  To  keep  in,  restrain)  "TC3J  atsar. 

t  Sa.  21.   5  Of  a  truth  women  (have  been)  kept  from 

4.  To  be  done,  rty%  asah,  2. 

2  Ch.35.  iS  there  was  no  passover  like  to  that  kept  in 

35.  19  the  reign  of  Josiah  wasthis  passover  kept 
5. To  set  or  be  set  apart,  ahg  qadesh,  7. 

Isa.   30.  29  a3  in  the  night,  .a  holy  solemnity  is  kept 
Q.To  keep,  preserve,  15#  shamar. 

1  Sa.  9.  24  unto  this  time  hath  it  been  kept  for  thee 
Eccl.  5.  13  riches  kept  for  the  owners  thereof  to  their 

7. To  be  kept,  observed,  TD^  shamar,  7. 

Mic.    6. 16  the  statutes  of  Omri  are  kept,  and  all  the 

8.  To  be.  wnhava. 

Dan.   5. 19  whom  he  would  he  kept  alive,  and  whom 

9. To  lead  or  bring  on,  &yw  ago. 

Matt.14.   6  when  Herod's  birthday  [was  kept,]  the 

KEPT  back,  to  be  — 

To  be  diminished,  withdrawn,  ynj  gara,  2. 

Num.  9.    7  wherefore  are  we  kept  back,  that  we  may 
KEPT  close,  to  be  — 
To  hide,  ino  sathar. 

Num.  5.  13  and  be  kept  close,  and  she  be  defiled,  and 

Job  28.  21  and  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air 
KEPT  secret,  to  be  — 
To  be  hidden,  ylvo fiat  a-xoKpvirTos  ginomaiapokrup. 

Mark  4.  22  neitherwas  anything  keptsecret,  but  that 

KERCHIEFS  — 

Veils,  kerchiefs,  nin^pp  mispachoth. 

Eze.  13.  18  make  kerchiefs  upon  the  head  of  every 
13.  21  Yourkerchiefs  also  will  I  tear,  and  deliver 

KE-REN  HAP'-PTJCH,  V^  jTfl  norn  f07^  paint* 
Theyoungest^daughter  of  Job,  born  after  his  trial.     B.C. 
1520. 

Job    42. 14  And  he  called  the  name . .  of  the  third  K. 
KE-RI'-OTH,  KTRIOTH,  nV-ip  cities,  hamlets. 
1.  A  city  in  the  E.  of  Judah,  now  Kurietem. 

J0SI115.  25  Hazor,  Hadattah,  and  K.,  (and)  Hezron 
2/ A  city  of  Moab,  now  Kureiat  or  Kuveiyah. 

Jer.  48.  24  And  upon  K.,  and  upon  Bozrah,  and  upon 
48.  41  K.  is  taken,  and  the  strongholds  are  sur. 

Amos  2.   2  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  K.;  and  M. 

KERNEL  — 

Kernels,  sour  grapes,  D's^pn  chartsannim. 

Num.  6.  4  nothing . .  from  the  kernels  even  to  the  husk 
KE'-ROS,  Dnp,  D'vp  bent. 

One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  to 
Jerusalem  with  Zerubbabel.    B.O.  636. 

Ezra  2.  44  The  children  of  K.,  the  childreu  ofSiaha 

Neh.  7.  47  The  children  of  K.,  the  children  of  Sia 
KETTLE  — 
Kettle,  basket,  "in  dud. 

1  Sa.  2. 14  he  struck  (it)  into  the  pan,  or  kettle,  or 
KE-TTT'-RAH,  rn^p  fragrance. 
Wife  of  Abraham  after  Sarah's  death.    B.C.  1853. 

Gen.  25.    1  Abrah.  took  a  wife,  and  her  name  (was)  K. 
25.    4  All  these  (were)  the  children  of  K. 

1  Ch.  1.  32  Now  the  sons  of  K,  Abraham's  concubine 
1.  33  All  these  (are)  the  sons  of  K. 
KEY  — 
l.Key,  opener,  nnsQ  maphteach. 

Judg.  3.  25  therefore  they  took  a  key,  and  opened 

Isa.   22.  22  the  key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I  lay 

2.-4  key,  KXels  kleis. 

Matti6.  19  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  king. 

Luken.  52  ye  have  taken  awaythe  key  of  knowledge 

Rev.    1.  18  behold  I.  .have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death 

3.    7  he  that  hath  the  key  of  David,  he  that  op. 

9.    1  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the  bottomless 

20.  1  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit  and 
KE-ZT*-A,  njrvp  cassia. 

The  second  daughter  of  Job,  horn  after  his  trial.    B.C. 
1520. 

Job  42. 14  And  He  called  the  name . .  of  the  second,  K. 
KE'-ZIZ,  pxp  border. 
A  valley  and  city  of  Benjamin. 

Josh  18.  21  and  Beth-hoglah,  and  the  valley  of  K. 


KIB-ROTH  HAT-TA-A'-VAH,  nwnn  n'n^p. 
The  12th  encampment  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  the  1st 
from  Sinai,  so  called  because  of  the  people  lusting  for 
flesh  while  there. 

Nunin.  34  And  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  K.-h. 

11.  35  the  people  journeyed  from  K.-h.  unto  H. 

33.  i6theyremov.  from.  .Sinai,  and  pitched  at  K. 

33.  17  And  they  departed  from  K.-h.,  and  enca. 
Deut.  9.  22  at  K.-h.,  ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath 

KLB-ZA'-IM,  D^p  double  gathering. 

A  Levitical  city  iii  Ephraim  ;  Jokneaia  ? 

Josh  21.  22  K.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Beth-horon  with 

KECK,  to  — 

l.To  kick,  bj£  baat 

Deut.32  15  Jeshurum  waxed  fat,  and  kicked:  thou  art 
1  Sa.    2.  29  Wherefore  kick  ye  at  my  sacrifice  and  at 

'l.To  kick  {with  the  heel),  Aatcrifa  laktizo. 

Acta    9.    5  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks 
26. 14  hard  for  thee  to  kick  agahist  the  pricks 
KID  — 
l.A  kid,  "izgedi. 

Gen.  27.  "q  fetch  me  from  thence  two  good  kids  of  the 

27.  16  she  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  the  goats 
38.  23  I  sent  this  kid,  and  thou  hast  nut  found 

Exod23.  19  Thoushaltnotseetheakid  in  his  mother's 

34.  26  Thoushalt  not  seethe  akidiu his  mother's 
Judg"i4.  6  he  rent  him  as  he  would  have  rent  a  Lid 
1  Sa.  10.    3  one  carrying  three  kids,  and  another  car 

2. A  kid  of  the  goats,  nvy  *"ia  gedi  izzi/n. 

Gen.  38.  17  said,  I  will  send(thee)  a  kid  from  the  flock 
38.  20  Judah  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  fri. 

Judg.  6.  19  Gideon  went  in,  and  make  ready  a  kid,  and 
13.  15  until  we  shall  have  made  ready  a  kid  for 
13. 19  Mauoah  took  a  kid  with  a  meat  offering 

15.  1  that  Samson  visited  his  wife  with  a  kid 

1  Sa.  16.  20  bread,  and  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  a  kid,  and 

3.  A  kid,  nna  gediyyah. 

Song  1.   8  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents 
Isa   11.    6  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid 

A.A  goat,  stro7ig  one,  Ty  ez. 

Deut.  j  4.  21  Thou  Shalt  not  seeth  a  kid  in  his  mother's 

1  Ki.  20.  27  before  them  like  two  little  flocks  of  kids 

5.^4  hid,  lutiry  one,  Yy'y  sair. 

Gen.  37.  31  killed  a  kid  of  the  goats,  and  dipped  the 

Lev.     4.  23  a  kid  of  the  goats,  a  male  without  blemish 

9.   3  Take  ye  a  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offer. 

16.  5  two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 

23.  19  ye  shall  sacrifice  one  kid  of  the  goats  for 
Nnm  7.  16  One  kid  of  the  goats  for  sin  offering 

So  in  v.  22,  28,  34,  40,  46,  52,  58,  64,  70,  76,  82. 
7.  87  the  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 

15.  24  and  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 

28.  15  one  kidof  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering  unto 

28.  30  one  kid  of  the  goats,  to  make  an  atonem. 

29.  5,  11,  16,  19,  25  one  kid  of  the  goats,  .a  sin 
Eze.  43.  22  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid  of  the  goats  without 

45.  23  a  kid  of  the  goats  daily,  .a  sin  offering 

6. Hairy  one,  kid,  rrvyi?  seirah. 

Lev.  4.  28  a  kid  of  the  goats,  a  female  without  blemish 
5.   6  a  lamb,  or  a  kid  of  the  goats,  for  a  siu  off. 

7. Sons  (i.e.  produce)  of  the  goats,  a'lyvi?  bene-izzi. 

2  Ch.35.    7  gave.. of  the  flocks,  lambs  and  kids,  all 
I  8.^4  hid,  €pi<pos  eriphos. 

Lukeis.  29  thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid,  that  I  might 

KIDNEYS  — 

Kidneys,  veins,  n'v?3  kelayoth. 

Esod29.  13,  22  the'  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is) 
Lev.    3.   4, 10,  15  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that 

3.  10,  15  the  caul  above  the  liver,  with  the  kid. 

4.  9  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  upon 
4.  9  the  caul  above  the  liver,  with  the  kidneys 
7,    4  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  on 

7.  4  thecaul.  .abovetheliver.withthekidneys 

8.  16,  25  liver,  and  the  two  kidneys,  and  their 

9.  10,  19  the  kidneys,  and  the  caul  above  the  li. 
Deut  32. 14  goats,  with  the  fat  of  kidneys  of  wheat 
Isa.   34.   6  made  fat.  .with  the  fat  of  the  kidneys  of 

KTD'-RON,  i'-n-ip  turbid. 

A  brook  running  through  the  valley  between  Jerusalem 

and  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  falling  into  the* Dead  Sea. 

Called  Cedron  in  John  18. 1. 

2  Sa.  15.  23  the  king,  .passed  over  the  brook  K.,  and 
[1  K.   2.  37  ;  15.  13  ;  2  Ki.  23.  4,  6,  6,  12 ;  2  Ch.  15.  16 ; 

29.  16  ;  30.  14 ;  Jer.  31.  40.] 

KILL,  to  — 

l.To  slay,  Tin  harag. 

Gen.  12. 12  will  kill  me,  but  they  will  save  thee  alive 

26.  7  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for  Reb. 

27.  42  comfort  himself,  (purposing)  to  kill  thee 
Exod.  2.  14  Intendestthou  to  kill  me,  as  thou  killedst 

22.  24  I  will  kill  you  with  the  sword ;  and  your 

Lev.  20.  16  thou  shalt  kill  the  woman,  and  the  beast 

Numn.  15  kill  me,  I  pray  thee,  outof  hand,  if  I  have 

22.  29  a  sword  in  mine  hand,  .nowwould  I  kill 

31.  i7Now..killeverymaleamongthelittleones 

31.  17  kill  every  woman  that  hath  known  man 

31.  19  whosoever  hath  killed  any  person,  and 

Deut  13.    9  thou  shalt  surely  kill  him  ;  thine  hand 

Judg.  9.  24  which  aided  him  in  the  killing  of  his  bre. 

16.  2  morning,  when  it  is  day,  we  shall  kill  him 
1  Sa.  16.  2  can  I  go?  if  Saul  hear  (it),  he  will  kill  me 

24. 10  bade  (rne)kill  thee ;  but(mine  eye)  spared 

24.  11  and  killed  thee  not,  know  thou  and  see 
24. 18  dealt  well,  .forasmuch  as.  .thou  killedst 


1  Ki.12.  27  they  shall  kill  me,  and  go  again  to  Reho. 
Esth.  3.  13  to  kill,  and  to  cause  to  perish,  all  Jews 
Job     5.    2"  wrath  killeth  the  foolish  man,  and  envy 
Eccl.  3.    3  A  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  heal ;  a  time 
2. To  slaughter,  nil)  zabach. 

Deuti2.  15  thoumayest  kill  and  eat  flesh  in  allthyg. 
12.  21  thou  shaltkill  of  thy  herd  and  of  thyflock 

1  Sa;  28.  24  she  hasted,  and  killed  it,  and  took  flour 

2  Ch.18.    2  Abab  killed  sheep  and  oxen  for  him  in 
Eze.  34.    3  ye  kill  them  that  are  fed . .  ye  feed  not  the 

Z.To pierce,  icound,  hhn  chalal. 

Judgco.  31  kill,  as  at  other  times,  in  the  highways 

20.  39  Benjamin  began  to  smite  (and)  kill  of  the 

4.  To  slaughter,  rna  tabach. 

Exod22.    1  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and  kill  it,  or  sell  it 
1  Sa.  25.  11  my  flesh  that  I  have  killed  for  my  shearers 
Pi-ov.  9.   2  She  hath  killed  her  beasts;  she  hath  min, 
Lam.  2.  21  hast  slain,  .thou  hast  killed,  .not  pitied 

5. To  put  to  death,  n'D  muth,  5. 

Exod.  1.  16  if  it  (be)  a  son,  then  ye  shall  kill  him:  but 

4.  24  the  Lord  met  him,  and  sought  to  kill  him 

16.  3  to  kill  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger 

17.  3  to  kill  us  and  our  children  and  our  cattle 

21.  29  that  he  bath  killed  a  man  or  a  woman 
Lev.  20.    4  And  if  the  people  of  the  land,  .kill  him 
Numi4-  15  thou  shalt  kill,  .this  people  as  one  man 

16.  13  to  kill  us  in  the  wilderness,  except  thou 
16.  41  saying,  Ye  have  killed  the  people  of  the 
Dent  32.  39  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive  ;  I  wound,  and  I 
Judgi3. 23  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us,  he 

15.  13  bind  thee  fast,  .but  surely  we  will  not  kill 

1  Sa.    2.    6  Lord  killeth,  and  maketh  alive  :  he  brin. 

19.  1  to  all  his  servants,  that  they  should  kill 
19.    2  saying,  Saulmy  father  seeketh  to  kill  thee 

19.  17  He  said . .  Let  me  go ;  why  should  I  kill 
30.  15  that  thou  wilt  neither  kill  me,  nor  deliver 

2  Sa.  13.  28  I  say  unto  you,  Smite  Amnion ;  then  kill 

14.    7  that  we  may  kill  him,  for  the  life  of  his- 

14.  32  if  there  be.  .iniquity  in  me,  let  him  kill' 
21.   4  neither  for  us  shalt  thou  kill  any  man  in 

21.  17  and  smote  the  Philistine,  and  killed  him 

1  Ki.n.  40  Solomon  sought  therefore  to  kill  Jeroboam 

16.  10  Ziniri  went  in  and  smote  him,  and  killed 

2  Ki.   5.    7  (Am)  I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive 

7.    4  the  Syrians,  .if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  but 

11.  15  him  that  folluweth  her  kill  with  the  sword 

15.  25  Pekah.  .killed  him,  and  reigned  in  his 

1  Ch.19.  18  killed  Shophach  the  captain  of  the  host 
Psa.  59  title,  sent,  and  they  watched  the  house  to  kill 
Prov.21.  25  The  desire  of  the  slothful  killeth  hini ;  for 
Isa    14.  30  I  will  kill  thy  root  with  famine,  and  he  sh, 

Q.To  smite,  cause  to  smite,  nil  nakah,  5. 

Gen.  4.  15  a  mark,  .lest  any  finding  him  should  kill 
37.  21  Reuben  heard,  .and  said,  Let  us  not  kill 

Lev.  24. 17  he  that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  beput 
24.  iS  he  that  killeth  a  beast  shall  make  it  good 
24.  21  he  that  killeth  a  beast,  he  shall  restore  it 
24.  21  he  that  killeth  a  man,  he  shall  be  put  to  d. 

Nuni35.  n  slayer,  .'which  killeth  any  person  at  una. 
35.  15  every  one  that  killeth  any  person  unawares- 
35.  30  Whoso  killeth  any  person,  the  murderer 

Deut.  19.    4  Whoso  killeth  his  neighbour  ignorantly 

Josh. 20.    3  the  slayer  that  killeth  (any)  person  unaw. 

20.  9  whosoever  killeth  (any)  person  at  unawa. 

1  Sa.  17.    9  If  he  be  able  to  fight  with  me,  and  to  kill 

17.  9  if  I  prevail  against  him,  and  kill  him,  then 
17.  25  the  man  who  killeth  him,  the  king  will  en. 
17.  26  What  shall  be  done  to  the  man  that  killeth 
17.  27  So  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  that  killeth 

2  Sa.  12.    9  Thou  hast  killed  Uriah  the  Hit  tit  e  with 

1  Ki.  16.    7  house  of  Jeroboam;  and  because  he  killed 

2  Ch.  25.    3  servants  that  had  killed  the  king  his  f  ath  . 

7.  To  go  round,  *|j33  naqaph. 

Isa  29.  1  addyeyeartoyear;  let  them  kill  sacrifices 
S.To  kill,  ^pT  qatal. 

Job  24.  14  The  murderer  rising  with  the  light  killeth. 
9. To  murder,  pierce,  nan  ratsach. 

Exod2o.  13  Thou  shalt  not  kill 

Nuni35.  27  and  the  revenger  of  blood  kill  the  slayer 

Deut.  4.  42  which  should  kill  his  neighbonr  unawares 

5.  17  Thou  shalt  not  kill 

1  Ki.  21.  19  Hast  thou  killed,  and  also  taken  possess. 
Hos.     4.  2  By  swearing,  and  lying,  and  killing,  and 

lO.To  slaughter,  kill,  on$>  shachat. 

Gen.  37.  31  took  Joseph's  coat,  and  killed  a  kid  of  tBe 
Exodi2.   6  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  kill  it  hi 

12.  21  take  you  a  lamb . .  and  kill  the  passover 
29.  11  thou  shalt  kill  the  bulIockbeforetheLoRH 
29.  20  Then  shalt  thou  kill  the  ram,  and  take  of 

Lev.  1.  5  he  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord 
1.  11  he  shall  kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar  no-. 
3.   2  killit(at)thedoorofthetabernacleofthe.- 

3.  8,  13  and  kill  it  before  the  tabernacle  of  the 

4.  4  he  shall . .  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord 
4.  24  and  kill  it  in  the  place  where  they  kill  the 
4.  33  the  place  where  they  kill  the  burnt  offer. 
7.  2  where  they  kill  the  burnt,  .shall  they  kill 
8. 19  And  he  killed  (it);  and  Moses  sprinkled 

14. 13  in  the  place  where  he  shall  kill  the  sin  off. 
14.  19  afterward  he  shall  kill  the  burnt  offering 
14.  25  he  shall  kill  the  lamb  of  the  tresspass  off. 
14.  50  he  shall  kill  the  one  of  the  birds  in  an 

16.  11  shall  kill  the  bullock  of  the  sin  offering- 

16.  15  Then  shall  he  kill  the  goat  of  the  sin  off. 

17.  3  that  killeth.  .in  the  camp,  or  that  killeth 

22.  28  ye  shall  not  kill  it  and  her  young  both  in 

2  Ch.sg.  22  So  they  killed  the  bullocks,  and  the  priests- 


KILLED 


5G4 


KINDLY 


2  Ch.29.  22  when  they  had  killed  the  rams,  .they  ki. 

29.  24  the  priests  killed  them,  and  they  made 

30.  15  Then  they  killed  the  passover  on  the  four. 
35.  1  they  killed  the  passover  on  the  fourteen. 
35.  6  So  kill  the  passover,  and  sanctify  yourse. 
35.  11  they  killed  the  passover,  and  the  priests 

Ezra    6.  20  killed  the  passover  for  all  the  children 
Isa.    66.    3  He  that  killeth  an  ox  (is  as  if)  he  slew  a 

11.  To  talxZ  axoay,  kill,  avaipew  anaireo. 

Luke22.    2  scribes  sought  how  they  might  kill  him 

Acts    7.  28  Wilt  thou  kill  me,  as  thou  didst  the  Egy. 

9.  23  And  after,  .the  Jews  took  counsel  to  kill 

9.  24  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to  kill 

is.    2  he  killed  James  the  brother  of  John  with 

16.  27  would  have  killed  himself,  supposing  that 

23.  15  we,  oreverhe  comenear,  are  ready  to  kill 

23.  21  natther  eat  nor  drink  till  they  have  killed 

23.  27  should  have  been  killed  of  them :  then 

25.  3  seud.  .laying  wait  iu  the  way  to  kill  him 
1*2.  To  kill  entirely,  airoKTiivta  apokteino. 

Mattio.  28  which  kill  the  body,  but  are  notable  tok. 

16.  21  killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third  day 

17.  23  they  shall  kill  him,  and  the  third  day  he 
21.  35  heat  one,  and  killed  another,  and  stoned 
21.  38  This  is  the  heir  ;  come,  let  us  kill  him 
23-  3+  (some)  of  them  ye  shall  kill  and  crucify 
23-  37  Jerusalem,  .thatkillest  the  prophets, and 

24.  9  shall  kill  you;  and  ye  shall  oe  hated  of  all 

26.  4  they  might  take  Jesus  by  subtilty,  and  k. 
Mark  3.    4  Is  it  lawful,  .to  save  life,  or  to  kill?  But 

6. 19  would  have  killed  him;  but  she  could  not 

8.  31  be  killed,  aud  after  three  days  rise  again 

9.  31  into  the  hands  of  men,  and  they  shall  kill 
9. 31  after  that  he  is  killed,  he  shall  rise  the 

10.  34  and  shall  spit  upon  him,  and  shall  kill 
12.    5  him  they  killed,  and  many  others.,  killing 
12.    7  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him 
12.    8  took  him,  and  killed,  .and  cast.. out  of 

Luke  1 1.  47  forye  build,  .and  your  fathers  killed  them 

11.  48  they  indeed  killed  them,  and  ye  build 

12.  4  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body 

12.  5  which  after  he  hath  killed  hath  power  to 

13.  31  and  depart  hence:  for  Herod  will  kill  thee 
13.  34  which  killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest 
20.  14  let  us  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  may 

20.  15  they  cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  k. 
John  5.  18  Jews  sought  the  more  to  kill  him,  because 

7.  1  would  not . .  because  the  Jews  sought  to  k. 
7.  19  Did  not  Moses.  .Why  go  ye  about  to  kill 
7.  20  people  answered . .  who  goeth  about  to  k. 

7.  25  said,  .is  not  this  he  whom  they  seek  tok.'? 

8.  22  Then  said  the  Jews,  Will  he  kill  himself 
8.  37  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  because  my  word  hath 

8.  40  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that 
16.    2  whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he 

Acts    3.  15  killed  the  prince  of  life,  whom  God  hath 

21.  31  as  they  went  about  to  kill  him,  tidings  c. 
23.  12  neither  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had  killed 

27.  42  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  pris. 
Rom  1 1.  3  Lord,  they  have  killed  thy  prophets,  aud 
2  Co.   3.    6  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  spirit  giveth 

1  Th.  2.  15  Who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus  and  their 
Rev.    2.  23  I  will  kill  her  children  with  death  ;  and 

6.  8  to  kill  with  sword,  and  with  hunger,  and 
6.  11  their  brethren,  that  should  be  killed  as 

9.  5  it  was  given  that  they  should  not  kill  them 
9.  18  was  the  third  part  of  men  killed,  by  the 
9.  20  the  rest  of  the  men,  which  were  not  killed 

11.    5  hurt  them,  he  must  in  this  manner  be  k. 
11.    7  the  beast,  .shall  overcome  them,  and  kill 

13.  10  he. that  killeth  with  the  sword  must  be  k. 
13. 15  would  uot  worship  the  image.,  should  be  k. 

l'-}.Tohandleiiolently,8iaxeipi(ofj.atdiacheirizoniai. 
Acts  26.  21  the  Jews  caught  me.  .and  went  about  tok, 
14.  To  slaughter,  sacrifice,  8vce  thud. 

Matt  22.    4  my  oxen  and . .  fatlings  (are)  killed,  and 
Marki4.  12  the  first  day.  .when  they  killed  the  pass. 
Luke  15.  23  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill,  .let 
15.  27  thy  father  hath  killed  the  fatted  calf,  be. 
15.  30  thou  hast  killed  for  him  the  fatted  calf 

22.  7  the  day . .  wheD  the  passover  must  be  killed 
J.  ihnio.  10  but  for  to  steal,  and  to  kill,  and  to  destroy 
Acts  10.  13 there camea voice. .Rise,  Peter; kill,  and 

15.7*0  slay,  kill,  wound,  <r<J>aTTa>  sphatto,  acpdfa. 
Rev.    6.    4  that  they  should  kill  one  another :  and 

16.  To  murder,  <povevw  phoneuo. 

ftftftt.  5.  21  Thou  shalt  not  kill,  .whosoever  shall  kill 
23-  31  ye  are  the  children  of  them  which  killed 
Markio.  19  [Do  not  kill),  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bear 
Luke  18.  20  Do  not  kill,  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bear  false 
Rom  13.  9  Thou  shalt  not  kill,  Thou  shalt  not  steal 
Jas.  2.  11  said,  Do  not  commit  adultery.  .Do  not  kill 
2.  11  if  thou  kill  thou  art  become  a  transgres. 

4.  2  ye  kill,  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot 

5.  6  Ye  have  condemned,  .killed the  just,  .he 
KILLED,  to  he  — 

l.To  be  killed,  jqn  harag,  4. 

Psa.  44,  22  for  thy  sake  are  we  killed  all  the  day  long 
2.7*o  slaughter,  tiny  shachat. 

Lev.    4.  15  the  bullock  shall  be  killed  before  the  L. 

14.  5  shall  command  that  one  of  the  birds  be  k. 

S.To  be  slaughtered,  any  shachat,  2. 

Lev.  6.  25  is  killed  shall  the  sin  offering  be  killed  be. 
14.  6  in  the  blood  of  the  bird,  .killed  over  the 
l.To  put  to  death,  6avar6<a  thanatoo. 

Rom.  8.  36  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long 

2  Co    6     q  behold,  we  live  ;  as  chastened,  aud  not  k 


KILLING  — 

l.To  murder,  ny"j  ratsach. 

Hos.  4.    2  By  swearing,  and  lying,  and  killing,  and 

2.  To  slaughter,  Bny  shachat. 

Isa,  22. 13  slaying  oxen  and  killing  sheep,  eating  fl. 

Z.A  slaughter,  no*n^  sliechitah. 

2  Ch.30.  17  the  Levites  had  the  charge  of  the  killing 
KTW,  (near  or  nigh)  — 
l.Xear  of  flesh,  "y?  iN'f  sheer  basar. 

Lev.  18.   6  shall  approach  to  any  that  isnear  of  kin 
25.  49  or  (any)  that  is  nigh  of  kin  unto  him  of  his 

2.  Flesh,  relation,  *iNi?  sheer. 

Lev.  20. 19  for  he  uncovereth  his  near  kin :  they  shall 
21.    2  But  for  his  kin  that  is  near  unto  him.  .for 
3. Of  the  same  race,  trvyywr}*  suygenes. 

Mark  6.    4  among  his  own  [kin],  and  in  his  own  house 
KI'-NAH,  nyp  smithy. 
A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  near  Dimonah. 

Josh.is.  22  And  K.,  aud  Dimonah,  and  Adadah 
KIND  (divers)  — 
1.  Species,  kind,  ]l  zan. 

2  Ch.16.  14  divers  kinds,  .prepared  by  the  apothecar. 

Dan.   3.    5  psaltery,  dulcimer,  and  all  kinds  of  mus. 

3.    7  sackbut,  psaltery,  and  all  kinds  of  music 

3.  io,  15  psaltery,  and  dulcimer,  and  all  kinds 

•2.  Kind,  species,  pi?  win. 

Gen.  1.  11  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  kind 
1.  12  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  kind,  aud  the 
1. 12  whose  seed  (was)  in  itself,  after  his  kind 
1.  21  after  their  kind,  and.  .fowl  after  his  kind 
1.  24  the  living  creature  after  his  kind,  cattle 
1.  24  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind :  and  it 
1. 25  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kiiad 
1.  25  cattle  after  their  kind,  and  every  thing 
1.  25  creepethupon  the  earth  after  his  kind:  and 
6.  20  Of  fowls  after  their  kind 

6.  20  and  of  cattle  after  their  kind,  of  every 

6. 20  creeping  thing  of  the  earth  after  his  kind 

7.  14  They,  and  every  beast  after  his  kind 
7.  14  and  all  the  cattle  after  their  kind 

7.  14  and  every  creeping  thing,  .after  his  kind 
7.  14  and  every  fowl  after  his  kind,  every  bird 

Lev.  11.  14  the  vulture,  and  the  kite  after  his  kind 
11.  15  Every  raven  after  his  kind 
11.  16  the  cuckoo,  and  the  hawk  after  his  kind 
11.  19  the  stork,  the  heron  after  her  kind,  and 
11.  22  ye  may  eat;  the  locust  after  his  kind,  and 
11.  22  and  the  bald  locust  after  his  kind 
11.  22  and  the  beetle  after  his  kind 
11.  22  and  the  grasshopper  after  his  kind 
11.  29  the  mouse,  and  the  tortoise  after  his  kind 

Deut  14.  13  the  kite,  and  the  vulture  after  his  kind 
14.  14  And  every  raven  after  his  kind 
14. 15  the  cuckow,  and  the  hawk  after  his  kind 
14. 18  the  stork,  and  the  heron  after  her  kind 

Eze.  47.  10  their  fish  shall  be  according  to  their  kinds 

3. Family,  nnspo  mishpachah. 

Gen.   8.  19  Every  beast . .  after  their  kinds,  went  fori  h 
Jer.  15.    3  I  will  appoint  over  them  four  kinds,  saith 

A. Kind,  species,  race,  yivos  genos. 

Matt  13.  47  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  of  every  kind 

17.  21  this  [kind]  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer 
Mark  9.  29  This  kind  can  come  forth  by  nothing  but 
1  Co.  12.  10  to  another,  .kinds  of  tongues;  to  another 

14.  10  These  are,  it  may  be,  so  many  kinds  of 

5. Nature,  <pvans  phusis. 

Jas.    3.    7  every  kind  of  beasts,  and  of  birds,  and  of 

KIND  — 

Useful,  beneficial,  xpyvrds  chrestos. 

Luke  6.  ^5  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and.  .the 
Eph.   4.  32  be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tenderhearted 

KIND,  to  be  — 

To  be  useful,  beneficial,  xpia-revo/xai  chresteuomai. 

1  Co.  13.   4  Charity  suffereth  long,  .is  kind  ;  charity 
KIND  of,  a  — 

^4  certain,  tis  tis. 

Jas.     1. 18  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of 
KINDLE,  to  — 
l.To  cause  brightness,  give  light,  "fiM  or,  5. 

Mai.    1.  10  neither  do  ye  kindle  (fire)  on  mine  altar 

2.  To  bum,  iy3  baar. 

2  Sa.  22.    9  fire,  .devoured :  coals  were  kindled  by  it 

22. 13  Through  the  brightness . .  were  coals . .  kin. 
Psa.     2.  12  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little 

18.  8  fire,  .devoured  :  coals  were  kindled  by  it 
106.  18  a  lire  was  kindled  iu  their  company;  the 

Isa.   30.  33  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  .doth  kindle  it 

43.    2  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee 
Jer.  44.    6  was  kindled  in  the  cities  of  Judah  and  in 

3.  To  make  to  burn,  itf?  baar,  3. 

EXOCI35.   3  Ye  shall  kindle  no  fire  throughout  your 
Isa.   50.  11  and  in  the  sparks  (that)  ye  have  kindled 
Jer.     7.  18  the  fathers  kindle  the  fire,  and  the  women 
Eze.  20.  48  shall  see  that  I  the  Lord  have  kindled  it 

4.  To  cause  to  burn,  tya  baar,  5. 

Exod22.    6  he  that  kindled  the  fire  shall  surely  make 

5.  To  burn,  pursue  hotly,  p?i  dcUag. 

Obad.     is  they  shall  kindle  in  them,  and  devour  them 


6.  To  cause  to  burn,  kindle,  pVi  dalaq,  5. 

Eze.  24.  10  Heap  on  wood,  kindle  the  fire,  consume 

7.  To  cause  to  burn,  n*iri  charah,  5. 

Job    19.  11  He  hath  also  kindled  his  wrath  against 

8.  To  kindle,  ~nn  charar,  Za. 

Prov  26.  31  so  (is)  a  contentious  man  to  kindle  strife 
9.7*o  kindle,  bum,  ny;  yatsath. 

Isa.  9.  18  shall  kindle  in  the  thickets  of  the  forest 
10.  To  kindle,  burn,  n*;  yatsath,  5. 

Jer.   11.  16  he  hath  kindled  fire  upon  it,  and  the  bra. 
17.  27  then  will  I  kindle  a  fire  in  the  gates  the. 
si.  14  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  forest  thereof 
43.  12  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  houses  of  the  g. 

49.  27  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  Damas. 

50.  32  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  his  cities,  and  it  sh. 
Lam.   4.  11  hath  kindled  a  fire  in  Zion,  and  it  hath  d. 
Eze.  20.  47  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  thee,  and  it  shall 
Amos  1.  14  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  Rabbah 

11.7b  burn,  kindle,  ija;  yaqad. 

Isa.  10. 16  under  his  glory  he  shall  kindle  a  buruiug 
12.7*0  set  on  fire,  burn,  vnb  lahat,  3. 

Job  41.  21  His  breath  kindleth  coals,  and  a  flame 
13.7*o  burn,  pws  nasaq,  5. 

Isa.  44.  15  yea,  he  kindleth  (it),  and  baketh  bread 
14.7*o  kindle,  be  kindled,  mjj  qadach. 

Isa.   50.  11  Behold/all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,  that  com. 

Jer.   17.    4  for  ye  have  kindled  a  fire  in  mine  anger 

15.7b perfume,  make  or  offer  perfume,  lup  qatar,  5. 

Jer.  33.  18  to  kindle  meat  offerings,  and  to  do  sacri. 
16.7*o  burn,  kindle,  "Tty  saraph. 

Lev.  10.  6  the  burning  which  the  Lord  hath  kindled 
17.7*0  light  up,  avairrw  anapto. 

Luke  12.  49  and  what  will  I,  if  it  be  already  kindled? 

Acts  28.    2  [they  kindled]  a  fire,  and  received  us  every 

Jas.     3.    5  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  ! 

18.7*0  light,  o7TTw  hapto. 

Luke  22.  55  when  [they  had  kindled]  a  fire  in  the  midst 
KINDLED,  to  be  — 
].7*o  burn,  rnn  charah. 

Gen.  30.    2  Jacob's  anger  was  kindled  against  Rachel 

39. 19  it  came  to  pass . .  that  his  wrath  was  kind . 

Exod  4. 14  the  angerofthe  Lord  was  kindled  against 

Numn.    1  the  Lord  heard,  .and  his  anger  was  kind. 

11.  10  the  angerofthe  Lord  was  kindled  greatly 

11.  33  the  wrath  of  theLoRDwaskindled  against 

12.  9  the  angerofthe  Lord  was  kindled  against 
22.  22  God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went 

22.  27  Balaam's  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  smote 

24.  10  Balak's  anger  was  kindled  against  Balaam 

25.  3  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  again. 
32.  10  the  Lord's  anger  was  kindl.  the  same  time 

Deut.  6.  15  the  anger  of  the  Lord.,  be  kindled  against 
7.   4  so  will  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be  kindled 

11.  17  the  Lord's  wrath  be  kindled  against  you 
29.  27  theangerof  the  Lord  was  kindledagainst 

17  Then  my  anger  shall  be  kindled  against 

1  theangerof  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

16  then  shall  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be  kind. 

30  Zebul  heard  the'words.  .his  anger^was  ki. 

19  his  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  went  up  to 

6  when  he  heard .  .his  auger  was  kindled 

17.  28  Eliab's  anger  was  kindled  against  David 

20.  30  Then  Saul's  anger  was  kindled  against  J. 

2  Sa.   6.    7  theangerof  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

12.  5  David's  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against 
24.    1  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

2  Ki.  13.    3  theangerof  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 

23.  26  his  anger  was  kindled  against  Judah,  bee. 

1  Ch.13.  10  the  angerof  theLoRDwaskindled  against 

2  Ch.25.  10  their  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against  J. 
2^.  15  anger  of  the  LoRDwaskindled  against  A. 

2  Then  was  kindled  the  wrath  of  Elihu  the 

2  against  Job  was  his  wrath  kindled,  becau. 

3  against  his  three  friends  was  his  wrath  ki. 
5  When  Elihu  saw.  .then  his  wrath  was  ki. 
7  My  wrath  is  kindled  against  thee,  and 

Psa.  106.  40  Therefore  was  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  kin. 
124.  3  when  their  wrath  was  kindled  against  us 
Isa.  5.  25  Therefore  is  the  anger  of  the  Lord  kind. 
Hos.  8.  s  mine  anger  is  kindled  against  them  :  how 
Zech.io.   3  Mine  angerwaskindled  against  the  shep. 

2.7b  be  kindled,  burned,  na;  yatsath,  2. 

2  Ki.22.  13  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  thatis  kindled  again. 
22.  17  my  wrath  shall  be  kindled  against  this 

3.7*0  be  burning,  yearning,  t?3  kamar,  2. 

Hos.  11.  8  Mine  heart.. my repentings are  kindled 
4.7*0  be  kindled,  pfctf  nasaq,  2. 

Psa.  78.  21  so  a  fire'  was  kindled  against  Jacob,  and 
5.  7*o  be  kindled,  rnjj  qadach. 

Deut  32.  22  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  anger,  and  shall 

Jer.  15.  14  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  anger,  (which) 

KINDLY  — 

1  .Kindness,  *ion  chescd. 

Gen.  24.  49  if  ye  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  my 

47.  29  deal  kindlyand  truly  with  me;  burymenot 
Josh.  2.  14  that  we  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with 
Ruth  1.    8  Lord  deal  kindly,  with  you,  as  ye  have 

1  Sa.  20.    8  thou  shalt  deal  kindly  with  thy  servant 

I.Oood,  y\2  tob. 

2  Ki.  25.  28  he  spake  kindly  to  him,  and  sethis  throne 
Jer.  52.  32  spake  kindly  unto  him,  and  set  his  throne 


Josh." 

Judg.  9. 

14. 

iSa. 


Job 


32- 
32- 
42. 


KINDLY 


565 


KING 


\ 


Z.To  the  heart,  ih'ty  al-leb. 

Gen.  34.    3helovedthedarasel,andspakekindlyunto 
50.  21  he  comforted  them,  and  spake  kindly  unto 
KINDLY  affectioned  — 
Loving  with  natural  affection,  <$>iX6(TTopyos  2)hilo. 

Rom  12.  10  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another  with 

KINDNESS  — 

\. Kindness,  "ipn  chesed. 

Gen.  20.  13  This  (is)  thy  kindness  which  thou  shalt 
21.  23  according  to  the  kindness  that  I  have  done 
24. 12  show  kindness  unto  my  master  Abraham 
24. 14  thou  hast  showed  kindness  unto  my  mas. 
40.  14  show  kindness,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me,  and 
Josh.  2.  12  since  I  have  showed  you  kindness,  that  ye 

2.  12  ye  will  also  show  kindness  unto  my  father 
Judg.  8.  35  Neither  showed  they  kindness  to  the  house 
Ruth  2.  20  who  hath  not  left  off  his  kindness  to  the 

3.  10  thou  hast  showed  more  kindness  in  the 

x  Sa.  15.  6  ye  showed  kindness  to.,  the  children  of  I. 
20. 14  show  me  the  kindness  of  the  Lord,  that  I 
20.  15  thou  shalt  not  cut  off  thy  kindness  from 

2  Sa.    2.    5  that  ye  have  showed  this  kindness  unto 

2.  6  Lord  show  kindness  and  truth  unto  you 

3.  8  which  against  Judah  do  show  kindness 

9.  1  that  I  may  show  him  kindness  for  Jonathan 
g.  3  that  I  may  show  the  kindness  of  God  unto 
g.  7  I  will  surely  show  thee  kindness  for  Jon. 
10.    2  I  will  show  kindness  unto  Hanun  the  son 

10.  2  as  his  father  showed  kindness  unto  me 
16.  17  (Is)  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend?  why 

1  Ki.  2.  7  show  kindness  unto  the  sons  of  Barzillai 
3.    6  thou  hast  kept  for  him  this  great  kindness 

1  Ch.19.   2  I  will  show  kindness  unto  Hanun  the  son 

ig.    2  because  his  father  showed  kindness  to  me 

2  Ch.  24.  22  the  king  remembered  not  the  kindness 
Neh.   g.  17  a  God.  .slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kind. 
Esth.  2.    9  pleased  him,  and  she  obtained  kindness 
Psa.  31.  21  he  hath  showed  me  his  marvellous  kind. 

141.    5  (it  shall  be)  a  kindness ;  and  let  him  rep. 
Prov  19.  22  The  desire  of  a  man  (is)  his  kindness :  and 

31.  26  and  in  her  tongue  (is)  the  law  of  kindness 
Isa.   54.    8  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  have  m. 

54. 10  my  kindness  shall  uot  depart  from  thee 
Jer.     2.    2  kindness  of  thy  youth,  the  love  of  thine 
Joel    2.  13  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and 
Jon.    4.    2  slow  to  auger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and 

'l.Good,  3i»  too. 

2  Sa.    2.    6  I  also  will  requite  you  this  kindness,  bee. 

3.  Love  of  mankind,  <pt\a.i/9pa)Tria  philanthropia. 

Acts  28.  2  barbarous  people  showed  us  no  little  kind. 
A. Usefulness,  beneficence,  xPrl(TT^Tri^  chrestotes. 
2  Co.  6.  6  by  long  suffering,  by  kindness,  by  the  H.  G. 
Eph.  2.  7  kindness  toward  us  through  Christ  Jesus 
Col.  3.  12  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness 
Titus  3.    4  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 

KINDNESS,-brotherly  — 

Love  of  the  brotherhood,  <pLAa$*A<pia  Philadelphia. 
2  Pe.   1.    7  godliness  brotherly  kindness,  .tobr.  kind. 
[See  also  Loving  kindness,  merciful.] 
KINDRED  — 

1.  Brother,  riN  ach. 

1  Ch.12.  29*0!  the  children  of  Benjamin,  the  kindred 

2,  Relationship,  nVxa  geullaJi. 

Eze.    11. 15  thy  brethren,  the  men  of  thy  kindred,  and 
3. Acquaintance,  nynin  modaath. 

Ruth  3.    2  And  now  (is)  not  Boaz  of  our  kindred 

4.  Birth,  kindred,  nn^D  moledeth. 

Gen.  12.    1  out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy  kindred 
24.   4  go  unto  my  country,  and  to  my  kindred 
24.    7  from  the  land  of  my  kindred,  and  which 
31.    3  Return,  .to  thy  kindred  ;  and  I  will  be 

31.  13  and  return  unto  the  land  of  thy  kindred 

32.  9  Return  unto  thy  country,  and  to  thy  kin. 
43.   7  The  man  asked  us  straitly.  .of  our  kindred 

Numio.  30  will  depart  to  mineown  land,  andto  myk. 

Esth.  2.  10  had  not  showed  her  people  nor  her  kind. 
2.  20  Esther  had  not.  .showed  her  kindred  nor 
8.    6  can  I  endure . .  the  destruction  of  my  k.  ? 

^.Family,  nr}%&?  mishjxtchah. 

Gen.  24.  38  go  unto  my  father's  house,  and  to  my  ki. 

24.  40  shalt  take  a  wife  for  my  son  of  my  kind. 

24.  41  when  thou  comest  to  my  kindred ;  and  if 
Josh.  6.  23  they  brought  out  all  her  kindred,  and  left 
Ruth  2.  3  Boaz,  who  (was)  of  t'he  kindred  of  Elime. 
.1  Ch.'i6. 28  Give  unto  the  Lord,  ye  kindreds  of  the 
Job  32.  2  Barachel  the  Buzite,  of  the  kindred  of  R. 
Psa.  22.  27  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  wot. 

96.    7  Give  unto  the  Lord,  0  ye  kindreds  of  the 

ft.Tlace,  yeuos  genos. 

Acts  4.   6  as  many  as"  were  of  the  kindred  of  the 

7. 13  Joseph's  kindred  was  made  known  unto 
7.  19  The  same  dealt  subtilely  with  our  kindred 

7.  Family,  tribe,  Ttwrpiapatria. 

Acts    3.  25  shall  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  be  ble. 

8.  The  same  race,  avyyevsia  sv.C/geyieia. 

Luke  1.  61  There  isnoneof  thy  kindred  that  is  called 
Acts    7.    3  out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy  kindred 

7. 14  all  his  kindred,  threescore  and  fifteen  souls 

9.  Tribe,  <pvXfi  phule. 

Rev.    1.  7  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  beca. 

5.  g  outof  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  pe. 

7.  g  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people 

11.  g  they  of  the  people  and  kindreds,  and  ton. 


Rev.  13.  7  over  all  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nati. 
14.    6  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  andpe. 
KXNE  — 
l.Ox,  steer,  *\hi<  eleph. 

Deut.  7. 13  the  increase  of  thy  kine,  and  the  flocks 
28.    4,  iS  the  increase  of  thy  kine,  and  the  flocks 
28.  51  the  increase  of  thy  kine,  or  flocks  of  thy 

2. Herd,  homed  cattle,  if?3  baqar. 

Deut  32. 14  Butter  of  kine,  and  milk  of  sheep,  with 
2  Sa.  17.  29  butter,  and  sheep,  and  cheese  of  kine,  for 

Z.Cow,  Iieifer,  ni3 parah. 

Gen.  32. 15  forty  kine,  and  ten  bulls,  twenty  she  asses 
41.    2  seven  well  favoured  kine  and  fat  fleshed 
3  seven  other  kine  came  up  after  them  out 

3  stood  by  the.  .kine  upon  the  brink  of  the 

4  the  ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed  kine  did 
41.    4  eat  up  the  seven  well  favoured  and  fat  k. 
41.  18  came  up  out  of  the  river  seveu  kine 
41.  ig  sevenotherkinecameupafterthem,  poor 
41.  20  And  the  lean  and  the  ill  favoured  kine 
41.  20  did  eat  up  the  first  seven  fat  kine 
41.  26Theseven  good  kine(are)  seven  years;  and 
41.  27  the  seven  thin  and  ill  favoured  kine  that 

7  make  a  new  cart,  and  take  two  milch  kine 
7  tie  the  kine  to  the  cart,  and  bring  their 
10  took  two  milch  kine,  and  tied  them  to  the 
12  the  kine  took  the  straight  way  to  the  way 
14  offered  the  kine  a  burnt  offering  unto  the 
1  Hear  this  word,  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  that 


41. 
41. 

41. 


t  Sa. 


6. 
6, 
6. 
6. 
6. 
Amos  4. 
KING  — 


14. 

14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 


1.  Messenger,  "ih^p  malalc. 

•  2  Sa.  11.    1  it  came  to  pass,  .at  the  time  when  kings 
I.King,  counsellor,  Tj^n  nxelek. 

Gen.  14.    1  in  the  days  of  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar 
1  Arioch  king  of  Ellasar,  Chedorlaomer 

1  king  of  Elam,  and  Tidal  king  of  nations 

2  made  war  with  Bera  king  of  Sodom,  and 
2  Birsha  king  of  Gomorrah,  Shinab  king  of 
2,  8  king  of  Zeboiim,  and  the  king  of  Bela 
5  the  kings  that  (were)  with  him,  and  smote 
8  there  went  out  the  king  of  Sodom,  and 

8  kingof  Gomorrah,  and  the  king  of  Admah 

9  the  king  of  Elam,  and  with  Tidal  king  of 
14.   9  and  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar,  and 

14.    g  Arioch  king  of  Ellasar ;  four  kings  with 
14.  10  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  fled 
14. 17  the  king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  meet  him 
14.  17  and  of  the  kings  that  (were)  with  him,  at 

14. 17  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  (is)  the  king's  dale 

14. 18  Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  brought  forth 
14.  21  the  king  of  Sodom  said  unto  Abram,  Give 
14. 22  Abram  said  to  the  king  of  Sodom,  I  have 
17.  61  will  make  nations  of  thee,  and  kings  sh. 
17.  16  I  will  bless  her.  .kings  of  people  shall  be 

20.  2  Abimelech  king  of  Gerar  sent  and  tookS. 
26.    1  Isaac  went  unto  Abiruelech  king  of  the 
26.    8  Abimelech  king  of  the  Philistines  looked 

35.  11  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thy  loins 

36,  31  these  (are)  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the 
36.  31  before  there  reigned  anyking  over  the  ch. 

39.  20  where  the  king's  prisoners  (were)  bound 
4.0.  1  (that)  the  butler  of  the  king  of  Egypt  and 
40     1  had  offended  their  lord  the  king  of  Egypt 

40.  5  the  butler  and  the  baker  of  the  king  of  E 

41.  46  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
Exod.  1,.    8  there  arose  up  anewkingoverEgy.,  which 

1.  1.5  the  king  of  Egypt  spake  to  the  Hebrew 
1.  i/not  as  the  kingof  Egypt  commanded 
1. 18  the  king  of  Egypt  called  for  the  midwives 
2. 23  it  came  to  pass,  .the  king  of  Egypt  died 
3. 18  thou  shalt  come,  .unto  the  king  of  Egypt 
3.  19  the  king  of  Egypt  will  not  let  you  go,  no 
5.   4  king  of  Egypt  said  unto  them,  Wherefore 
6. 11  Go  in,  speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
5. 13  gave  them  a  charge,  .unto  Pharaoh  king 
5.  27  which  spake  to  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
6. 2g  speak  thou  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
14.   5  And  it  was  told  the  king  of  Egypt  that 
14.   8  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
Xumso.  14  Moses  sent  messengers,  .unto  the  king  of 
20. 17  we  will  go  by  the  king's  (high)  way,  we 

21.  1  king  Arad  the  Canaauite,  which  dwelt  in 
21.  21  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon  kingof 
21.  22  we  will  go  along  by  the  king's  (high)  way 
21.  26  city  of  Sihon  the  king  of  the  Amorites 
21.  26  who  had  fought  against  the  former  king 
21.  29  into  captivity  unto  Sihon  king  of  the  Am. 
21.  33  Og  the  king  of  Bashan  went  out  against 

21.  34  do  to  him  as  thou  didst  unto  Sihon  king 

22.  4  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor  (was)  king  of  the 

22.  10  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  Moab 

23.  7  Balnk  the  king  of  Moab  hath  brought  me 
23.  21  and  the  shout  of  a  king  (is)  among  them 

7  aud  his  king  shall  be  higher  than  Agag 

8  they  slew  the  kings  of  Midian,  besides  the 
8  five  kings  of  Midian  :  Balaam  also  the 

33  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites 

32.  33  and  the  kingdom  of  Og  king  of  Bashan 

33.  40  king  Arad  the  Canaanite,  which  dwelt  in 
Deut.  1.   4  After  he  had  slain  Sihon  the  king  of  the 

1.  4  Og  the  king  of  Bashan,  which  dwelt  at  A. 

2.  24  Sihon  the  Amorite,  king  of  Heshbon,  and 
2.  26  unto  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon  with  words 

2.  30  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon  woidd  not  let  us 

3.  1  Og  the  king  of  Bashan  came  out  against 
3.    2  as  thou  didst  unto  Sihon  king  of  the  Am. 
3.    3  delivered.  .Og  also,  the  king  of  Bashan 
3.  6  as  we  did  unto  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon 

3.    8  out  of  the  hand  of  the  two  kings  of  the  A. 


24. 
31- 


Deut.  3.  11  For  only  Og  king  of  Bashan  remained  of 

3.  21  God  hath  done  unto  these  two  kings :  so 

4.  46  in  the  land  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites 

4.  47  the  land  of  Og  king  of  Bashan,  two  kings 
7.    8  from  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 

7.  24  shall  deliver  their  kings  into  thine  hand 
11.  3  which  he  did.  .unto  Pharaoh  the  king  of 
17.  14  I  will  set  a  king  over  me,  like  as  all  the 
17.  15  Thou  shalt  in  any  wise  set  (him)  king  over 
17.  15  among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set  king 
28.  36  thy  king  which  thou  shalt  set  over  thee 
2g.  7  the  king  of  Heshbon,  and  Og  the  king  of 
31.  4  as  he  did  to  Sihon  and  to  Og,  kings  of  the 
33.    s  he  was  king  in  Jeshurun,  when  the  heads 

Josh.  2.    2  And  it  was  told  the  king  of  Jericho,  say. 
2.    3  the  king  of  Jericho  sent  unto  Rahab,  say. 

2.  10  and  what  ye  did  unto  the  two  kings  of 

5.  1  it  came  to  pass,  when  all  the  kings  of  the 

5.  1  all  the  kings  of  the  Canaanites,  which 

6.  2  given  into  thine  hand  Jericho,  and  the  k. 

8.  1  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  the  king  of 
8.    2  And  thou  shalt  do  to  Ai  and  her  king 

8.    2  as  thou  didst  unto  Jericho  and  her  king 
8. 14  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  of  Ai  saw 
8.  23  And  the  king  of  Ai  they  took  alive,  and 

8.  29  the  king  of  Ai  he  hanged  on  a  tree  until 

9.  1  when  all  the  kings  which  (were)  on  this 
g.  10  all  that  he  did  to  the  two  kings  of  the  A. 
9.  10  to  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon,  and  to  Og  king 

10.    1  when  Adonizedek  king  of  Jerusalem  had 
10.    1  as  he  had  done  to  Jericho  and  her  king 
10.    1  so  he  had  done  to  Ai  and  her  king;  and 
10.   3  king  of  Jerusalem  sent  unto  Hoham  king 
10.    3  Piram  king  of  Jarmuth . .  unto  Japhia  king 
10.    3  and  unto  Debir  king  of  Eglon,  saying 
10.   5  Therefore  the  five  kings  of  the  Amorites 
i°«    5j  23  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  the  king  of  H. 
10.   5,  23  the  king  of  Jarmuth,  the  king  of  Lac. 
10.    5,  23  the  kingof  Eglon,  gathered  themselves 
10.    6  for  all  the  kings  of  the  Amorites  that  dw. 
10.  16  these  five  kings  fled,  and  hid  themselves 

10. 17  The  five  kings  are  found  hid  in  a  cave  at 
10.  22  bring  out  those  five  kings  unto  me  out  of 
10.  23  brought  forth  those  five  kings  unto  him 
10.  24  when  they  brought  out  those  kings  unto 
10.  24  your  feet  upon  the  necks  of  these  kings 
10.  2S  and  the  king  thereof  he  utterly  destroyed 
10.  28  and  he  did  to  the  king  of  Makkedah 

10.  28  as  he  did  unto  the  king  of  Jericho 
10.  30  delivered  it  also,  and  the  king  thereof 
10  30  unto  the  king  thereof  as  he  did  unto  the  k. 
10.  33  Then  Horam  king  of  Gezer  came  up  to 
10.  37  and  the  king  thereof,  and  all  the  cities 
10.  3g  he  took  it,  and  the  king  thereof,  and  all 
10.  39  so  he  did  to  Debir,  and  to  the  king  thereof 
10.  39  had  done  also  to  Libnah,  and  to  her  king 
10. 40  So  Joshua  smote  all . .  their  kings :  he  left 

10.  42  all  these  kings  and  their  land  did  Joshua 

11.  1  Jabinki.ofHazorhadheard(thosethings) 
11.  1  that  he  sent  to  Jobab  kingof  Madon, and 
11.  1  to  the  king  of  Shimron,  and  to  the  kingof 
11.  2  to  the  kings  that  (were)  on  the  north  of  the 
11.  5  when  all  these  kings  were  met  together 
11.  10  and  smote  the  king  thereof  with  the  sword 
11. 12  cities  of  those  kings,  and  all  the  kings  of 

11.  17  all  their  kings  he  took,  and  smote  them 

11. 18  made  war  a  long  time  with  all  those  kings 

12.  1  Now  these  (are)the  kings  of  the  land 

12.  2  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites,  who  dwelt  in 
12.  4  the  coa.  of  Og  king  of  Bashan,  (winch  was) 
12.  5  Gilead,  the  border  of  Sihon  king  of  Heshb. 
12.  7  these  (are)  the  kings  of  the  country  which 
12.  9  The  king  of  Jericho,  one;  the  king  of  Ai 
12.  10  The  king  of  Jerusalem,  one;  the  king  of 
12.  11  The  king  of  Jarmuth,  one  ;  the  kingof  L. 
12.  12  The  king  of  Eglon,  one ;  the  king  of  Gezer 
12.  13  The  king  of  Debir,  one ;  the  king  of  Ged. 
12.  14  The  king  of  Hormah,  one  ;  the  kingof  A. 
12.15  The  king  of  Libnah,  one  ;  the  king  of  Ad. 
12.  16  The  king  of  Makkedah,  one  ;  the  king  of 
12.  17  The  king  of  Tappuah,  one  ;  the  king  ofH. 
12.  18  The  king  of  Aphek,  one  ;  the  king  of  La. 
12.  19  The  king  of  Madon,  one ;  the  king  of  Ha. 
12.  20  The  king  of  Shimron-meron.  one ;  the  k. 
12.  21  The  king  of  Taanach,  one  ;  the  king  of  M. 
12.  22  The  king  of  Kedesh,  one ;  the  king  of  Jo. 
12.  23  The  king  of  Dor  in  the  coast  of  Dor,  one 
12.  23  the  king  of  the  nations  of  Gilgal,  one 

12.  24  The  king  of  Tirzah,  one :  all  the  kings  thi. 

13.  10  the  cities  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites 
13.  21  all  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Am. 
13.  27  the  rest  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of 
13.  30  all  the  kingdom  of  Og  king  of  Bashan,  and 
24.  9  Then  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  M. 
24.  12  (even)  the  two  kings  of  the  Amorites 

Judg.  1.    7  Threescore  and  ten  kings,  having  their 
3. 8,  10  Chushan-rishathaim  king  of  Mesopota. 
3. 12  strengthened  Eglon  the  king  of  Moab 

3.  14  served  Eglon  the  king  of  Moab  eighteen 
3.  15  sent  a  present  unto  Eglon  the  king  of  M. 
3.  17  he  brought  the  present  unto  Eglon  king 

3.  ig  I  have  a  secret  errand  unto  thee,  0  king 

4.  2  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Jabin  king  of 
4. 17  for  (there  was)  peace  between  Jabin  the  k. 
4.  23  God  subdued  on  that  day  Jabin  the  king 
4.  24  prevailed  against  Jabin  the  king  of  Can. 

4.  24  they  had  destroyed  Jabin  king  of  Canaan 

5.  3  Hear,  0  ye  kings ;  give  ear,  0  ye  princes 
5.  19  The  kings  came,  .then  fought  the  kings 
8.    5  after  Zebah  and  Zalmunna,  kings  of  Mid. 
8.  12  pursued,  .and  took  the  two  kings  of  Mid. 
8.  18  each  one  resembled  the  children  of  a  kin  j 


KING 


566 


KIN  G 


Judg  8. 
9- 
9- 
9- 


19. 

21, 

1  Sa,  2. 


22. 

•20.. 
22. 


26. 

26. 

26 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26, 

»7- 

27. 
28. 
25. 
29. 
aSa.   2, 


26  purple  raiment  that  (was)  on  the  kings  of 
6  and  went  and  made  Abimelech  king,  by 

8  went  forth  (on  a  time)  to  anoint  a  king 
15  If  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  over  you 
12,  13,  14,  28  the  king  of  the  children  of  A. 
17  sent  messengers  unto  the  king  of  Edom 
17  but  the  king"  of  Edom  would  not  hearken 

17  in  like  manner  they  sent  unto  the  king 
u,  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon  king 
19  the  king  of  Heshbon  ;  and  Israel  said 

25  than  Balak  the  sou  of  Zippor,  king  of  M.  ? 

6  I  u  those  days  (there  was)  no  kiug  in  Israel 

1  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  ill  Israel 

1  when  (there  was)  no  king  in  Israel,  that 

25  In  those  days  (there  was)  no  king  in  Israel 

ro  and  he  shall  give  strength  unto  his  kiug 

5  now  make  us  a  kiug  to  judge  us  like  all 

6  they  said,  Give  us  a  king  to  judge  us 

9  show  them  the  manner  of  the  king  that 

10  uuto  the  people  that  asked  of  him  a  king 

11  This  will  be  the  maimer  of  the  king  that 

18  cry  out  in  that  day  because  of  your  king 

19  Nay  ;  but  we  will  have  a  kiug  over  us 

20  that  our  king  may  judge  us,  and  go  out 

22  Lord  said.  .Hearken. .  and  make  them  a  k. 
19  have  said  unto  him,  (Nay),  but  set  a  king 

24  people  shouted,  and  said,  God  save  the  k. 

1  I  have  hearkened,  .aud  have  made  a  king 

2  uow,  behold,  the  king  walketh  before  you 
9  and  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Moab 

12  wheu  ye  saw  that  Nahash  the  king  of  the 
12  Nay;  but  a  king  shall  reign  over  us :  when 

12  when  the  Loud  your  God  (was)  your  king 
1-3  behold  the  king  whom  ye  have  chosen 

13  behold,  the  Loud  hath  set  a  king  over  you 

14  then  shall  both  ye  and  also  the  king  that 
17  wickedness  (is)  great. .  in  asking  you  a  k, 

19  have  added,  .(this)  evil,  to  ask  us  a  king 

25  shall  be  consumed,  both  ye  and  your  king 
47  against  the  kings  of  Zobah.and  against  the 

1  sent  me  to  anoint  thee  (to  be)  king  over 

8  he  took  Agag  the  king  of  the  Amalekites 

11  that  I  have  set  up  Saul  (to  he)  king  :  for 

17  the  Lord  anointed  thee  king  over  Israel? 

20  have  brought  Agag  the  king  of  Amalek 

23  he  hath  also  rejected  thee  from  (being)  k. 

26  hath  rejected  thee  from  being  king  over 
32  Bring  ye  hither  to  me  Agag  the  king  of 

1  have  provided  me  a  king  among  his  "sons 
25  king  will  enrich  him  with  great  riches 

55  (As)  thy  soul  liveth,  O  kiug,  I  cannot  tell 

56  the  kiug  said,  Enquire  thou  whose  son  the 
6  singing  aud  dancing,  to  meet  king  Saul 

18  that  I  should  be  son  in  law  to  the  king? 
22  Behold,  the  king  hath  delight  in  thee,  and 

22  now  therefore  be  the  king's  son  in  law 

23  (a)  light  (thing)  to  be  a  king's  son  in  law 

25  The  king  desireth  uot  any  dowry,  hut  an 
25-to  be  avenged  of  the  king's  enemies 

26  it  pleased  David  well  to  be  the  king's  son 

27  they  gave  them  in  full  tale  to  the  king 
27  that  he  might  be  the  king's  son  iu  law 

4  Let  not  the  king  sin  against  his  servant 

5  I  should  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king  at 

24  the  king  sat  him  down  to  eat  meat 

25  the  king  sat  upon  his  seat,  as  at  other 
29  therefore  he  cometh  not  unto  the  king's 

2  The  king  hath  commanded  me  a  business 
8  because  the  king's  business  required  haste 

10  David  arose,  .and  went  to  Achish  the  king 

11  (Is)  not  this  David  the  king  of  the  land.' 

12  was  sore  afraid  of  Achish  the  king  of  Gath 

3  said  unto  the  king  of  Moab,  Let  my  father 

4  brought  them  before  the  king  of  Moab 
11  king  sent,  .aud  they  caine.  .to  the  king 
14  Abimelech  answered  the  king,  and  said 

14  as  David,  which  (is)  the  king's  son  in  law 

15  Let  not  the  king  impute  (any)  thing  unto 

16  the  king  said,  Thou  shalt  surely  die,  Ah. 

17  the  king  said  unto  the  footmen  that  stood 

17  the  servants  of  the  king  would  not  put 

18  the  kiug  said  to  Doeg,  Turn  thou,  and  fall 
so  Now  therefore,  0  king,  come  down,  acco. 
20  (shall  he)  to  deliver  him  into  the  king's 

8  cried  after  Saul,  saying,  My  lord  the  king 
14  After  whom  is  the  king  of  Israel  conieo.'? 
36  he  held  a  feast,  .like  the  feast  of  a  king 

14  said,  Who  (art)  thou  (that)  criest  to  the  k.? 

15  hast  thou  not  kept  thy  lord  the  king? 

15  for  there  came  one.  .to  destroy  the  king 

16  now  see  where  the  king's  spear  (is),  and 

17  said,  (It  is)  my  voice,  my  lord,  0  king 

19  let  my  lord  the  king  hear  the  words  of 

20  king  of  Israel  is  come  out  to  seek  a  flea 

22  answered  and  said,  Behold  the  king's  sp. 
.■  iintn  Achish,  the  son  of  Maoch,  kingof  G. 

6  Ziklag  pertaineth  unto  the  kings  of  Judah 

13  the  king  said  uuto  her,  Be  not  afraid  :  fur 
3  the  servant  of  Saul  the  king  of  Israel 

8  against  the  enemies  of  my  lord  the  king? 
■i  there  they  anointed  David  king  over  the 

7  house  of  Judah  have  anointed  me  king 
u  the  time  that  David  was  king  in  Hebron 

3  the  daughter  of  Talmai,  king  of  Geshur 
1;  Bought  for  David  in  times  past  (to  h.e)a  king 
■1  gather  all  Israel  unto  my  lord  the  king 

23  AbiK-r  the  sou  of  Ner  came  to  the  king 
.,  Tlum.Toah  caine  t<>  the  king,  and  said 

31  And  king  David  (himself) followed  the 
I  ■  the  king  Lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept  at 
33  the  king  lamented  over  Aimer,  and  said 
o  aa  what  soever  the  king  did  pleased  all  the 


>  Sa.    3. 
3 


37  that  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  slay  Abner 

38  the  king  said  unto  his  servants,  Know 

39  I  (am)  this  day  weak,  though  anointed  k. 
8  said  to  the  king,  Behold  the  head  of  Ish. 
8  hath  avenged  my  lord  the  king  this  day  of 

2  in  time  past,  when  Saul  was  king  over  us 

3  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to  the  king  to  II. 
3  king  David  made  a  league  with  them  in 

3  and  they  anointed  David  king  over  Israel 
6  the  king  and  his  men  went  to  Jerusalem 

1 1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to  D. 

12  had  established  him  king  over  Israel,  and 

17  they  had  anointed  David  king  over  Israel 
12  it  was  told  king  David,  saying,  The  LORD 
16  saw  king  David  leaping  and  dancing  before 
20  How  glorious  was  the  kiug  of  Israel  to  day 

1  when  the  king  sat  in  Iris  house,  aud  the  L. 

2  thekingsaidunto  Nathan  the  prophet,  See 

3  Nathan  said  to  the  king,  Go,  do  all  that 

18  Then  went  king  David  in,  and  sat  before 
3  David  smote  also  Hadadezer.  .king  of  Z. 
5  came  to  succour  Hadadezer  king  of  Zohah 

8  king  David  took  exceeding  much  brass 

9  When  Toi  king  of  Harnath  heard  that  D. 

10  Then  Toi  sent  Jorani  his  sou  unto  king  D. 

11  Which  also  king  David  did  dedicate  unto 

12  Hadadezer,  son  of  Rehob,  king  of  Zohah 

2  the  king  said  unto  him,  (Art)  thou  Ziba? 

3  the  king  said,  (Is)  there  not  yet  any  of  the 

3  Ziba  said  unto  the  king,  Jonathan  hath 

4  the  king  said  unto  him,  Where  (is)  he  ? 

4  Ziba  said  unto  the  king,  Behold,  he  (is)  in 

5  Then  king  David  sent  and  fetched  him  out 
9  the  king  called  to  Ziba,  Saul's  servant,  and 

11  Then  said  Ziba  unto  the  king,  According 
1 1  all  that  my  lord  the  king  hath  commanded 
n  eat  at  my  table,  as  one  of  the  king's  sons 

13  he  did  cat  continually  at  the  king's  table 
1  the  king  of  the  children  of  Amnion  died 

5  the  king  said,  Tarry  at  Jericho  until  your 

6  and  of  king  Maacah  a  thousand  men,  and 

19  all  the  kings  (that  were)  servants  to  Had. 

1  at  the  time  when  kings  go  forth  to  (battle) 

2  walked  upon  the  roof  of  the  kiug's  house 
8  Uriah  departed  out  of  the  king's  house,  and 

8  followed  him  a  mess  (of  meat)  from  the  k. 

9  Uriah  slept  at  the  door  of  the  king's  house 

19  telling  the  matters  of  the  war  unto  the  k. 

20  And  if  so  be  that  the  king's  wrath  arise 
24  and  (some)  of  the  king's  servants  be  dead 

7  I  anointed  thee  kiug  over  Israel,  and  I 
30  he  took  their  king's  crown  from  off  his 

4  Why  (art)  thou,  (being)  the  king's  son 
6  and  when  the  king  was  come  to  see  him 
6  Amnion  said  unto  the  king,  I  pray  thee 
13  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  speak  unto  the  king 
18  for  with  such  robes  were  the  king's  dang. 

21  when  king  David  heard  of  all  these  things 

23  and  Absalom  invited  all  the  king's  sons 

24  And  Absalom  came  to  the  king,  and  said 

24  let  the  king,  I  beseech  thee,  and  his  serv. 

25  the  king  said  to  Absalom,  Nay,  my  son 

26  And  the  kiug  said  unto  him,  Why  should 

27  lie  let  Amnion  and  all  the  king's  sons  go 

29  all  the  king's  sons  arose,  and  every  man 

30  Absalom  hath  slain  all  the  king's  sons,  and 

31  Then  the  king  arose,  and  tare  his  garme. 

32  slain  all  the  young  men  the  king's  sons 

33  therefore  let  not  my  lord  the  king  take 
33  think  that  all  the  king'ssousare  dead 

35  said  unto  the  king,  .the  king's  sons  com. 

36  the  king's  sons  came .  .and  the  king  also 

37  Talmai,  the  son  of  Ammihud,  king  of  Ge. 
39  king  David  longed  to  go  forth  unto  Absa. 

1  perceived  that  the  king's  heart  (was)tow. 

3  come  to  the  king,  and  speak  on  this  man. 

4  spake  to  the  king.  .andsaid,Help,Oking! 

5  the  king  said  unto  her,  What  aileth  thee? 

8  the  king  said  unto  the  woman,  Go  to  thine 

9  said  unto  the  king,  My  lord,  0  king,  the 
9  and  the  king  and  histhrone  (be)  guiltless 

10  the  king  said,  Whosoever  saith  (ought) 

11  let  the  king  remember  the  Lord  thy  God 

12  speak  (one)  word  unto  my  lord  the  king 

13  for  the  king  doth  speak  this  thing  as  one 
13  in  that  the  king  doth  not  fetch  home  again 
15  speak  of  this  thing  unto  my  lord  the  king 
15  said,  I  will  now  speak  unto  the  king 

15  it  may  he  that  the  king  will  perform  the 

16  the  king  will  hear,  to  deliver  his  handm. 

17  The  word  of  my  lord  the  king  shall  now 

17  as  an  angel  of  God,  so(is)  my  lord  the  king 

18  the  kinganswered  and  said  unto  the  worn. 

18  woman  said,  Let  my  lord  the  king  now 

19  the  king  said,  (Is  not)  the  hand  of  Joab 
19  (As)thysoul  liveth,  mylord  the  king,  none 
19  from  ought  that  my  lord  the  king  hath 

21  the  king  said  unto  Joab,  Behold  now,  I 

22  aud  bowed  himself,  and  thanked  the  king 
22  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord,  Oking 
22  in  that  the  king  hath  fulfilled  the  request 
2.)  (be  king  said,  Let  him  turn  to  his  own 
24  Absalom' returned,  .and  saw  not  the  kind's 
26  hundred  shekels  after  the  king's  weight 

28  So  Absalom  dwelt,  .and  saw  not  the  king's 

29  to  have  sent  him  to  the  king;  but  he 

32  that  I  may  send  thee  to  the  king,  to  say 

32  now  therefore  let  me  see  the  king's  face 

33  So  Joab  came  to  the  king,  and  told  him 
33  he  came  to  the  king,  and  bowed  himself 
33  before  the  king:  and  the  king  kissed  Ah, 

2  when  any  man.  .came  to  the  king  for  jud. 


iSa. 


3  but  (there  is)  no  man  (deputed)  of  the  king 

6  to  all  Israel  that  came  to  the  king  for 

7  Absalom  said  unto  the  king,  I  pray  thee 
9  the  king  said  unto  him,  Go  in  peace 

15  the  king's  servants  said  unto  the  king 

1 5  whatsoever  my  lord  the  king  shall  appoint 

16  the  kiug  went  forth.  .And  the  kiug  left 

17  the  long  went  forth,  and  all  his  people 

18  six  hundred  men. .passed . .  before  the  king 

19  Then  said  the  king  to  Ittai  the  Gittite 

19  return  to  thy  place,  and  abide  with  the  king 
21  Ittai  answered  the  king,  and  said,  (As)  the 
21  (as)  my  lord  the  king  liveth,  surely  in  wh. 
21  place  my  lord  the  king  shall  be,  whether 
23  the  king  also  himself  passed  over  the  br. 
25  the  king  said  unto  Zadok,  Carry  back  the 
27  The  king  said  also  unto  Zadok  the  priest 

34  and  say.  .1  will  be  thy  servant,  O  king 

35  thou  shalt  hear  out  of  the  king's  house 
2  the  kiug  said  unto  Ziha,  What  meanest 

2  The  asses  (be)  for  the  king's  household  to 

3  the  king  said,  And  where  (is)  thy  master's 

3  Ziha  said  unto  the  kiug,  Behold,  he  abideth 

4  Then  said  the  king  to  Ziba,  Behold,  thine 

4  find  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord,  O  king 

5  when  king  David  came  to  Bahurim,  behold 

6  cast  stones,  .at  all  the  servants  of  king  D. 
9  Then  said  Abishai.  .unto  the  king,  Why 

9  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord  the  k.? 

10  the  king  said,  Wrhat  have  I  to  do  with  you 
14  the  king,  and  all  thepeoj.ile  that  (were) 
16  said.  .God  save  the  kiug,  God  save  the  k. 

2  shall  flee ;  and  I  will  smite  the  kiug  only 

16  lest  the  king  be  swallowed  up,  and  all  the 

17  and  they  went  and  told  king  David 

21  went  and  told  king  David,  and  said  unto 
2  the  king  said  unto  the  people,  I  will  surely 
4  the  king  said  unto  them,  What  seemeth 

4  the  king  stood  by  the  gate  side,  and  all 

5  the  king  commanded  Joab  and  Abishai 
5  when  the  king  gave  all.  .captains  charge 

12  forth  mine  hand  against  the  king's  son 

12  for  in  our  hearing  the  king  charged  thee 

13  for  there  is  no  matter  hid  from  the  king 

18  a  pillar,  which  (is)  in  the  king's  dale :  for 

19  Let  me  now  run  and  bear  the  king  tidings 

20  no  tidings,  because  the  king's  son  is  dead 

21  Go  tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen 

25  told  the  king.     And  the  king  said,  If  he 

26  And  the  kiug  said,  He  also  bringeth  tidings 

27  the  king  said,  He  (is)  a  good  man,  and 

28  Ahimaaz  called,  and  said  unto  the  king 
28  to  the  earth  upon  his  face  before  the  king 

28  lifted  up  their  hand  against  my  lord  the  k. 

29  the  king  said,  Is  the  young  man  Absalom 

29  When  Joab  sent  the  king's  servant,  and 

30  the  king  said  (unto  him), Turn  aside,  (and) 

31  Cushi  said,  Tidings,  my  lord  the  king :  for 

32  the  king  said  unto  Cushi,  (Is)  the  young 

32  The  enemies  of  my  lord  the  king,  and  all 

33  the  king  was  much  moved,  and  went  up 

1  the  king  weepeth  and  mourneth  for  Ab. 

2  people  heard  say  that  day  how  the  king 

4  the  king  covered  his  face,  and  the  kiug 

5  Joab  came  into  the  house  to  the  king,  and 
8  Then  the  king  arose,  and  sat  in  the  gate 

8  Behold,  the  king  doth  sit  in  the  gate 

8  And  all  the  people  came  before  the  king 

9  The  king  saved  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our 

10  not  a  word  of  bringing  the  king  back? 

11  king  David  sent  to  Zadok  and  toAbiatbar 

1 1  Why  are  ye  the  last  to  bring  the  king  back 

11  speech  of  all  Israel  is  come  to  the  king 

12  are  ye  the  last  to  bring  back  the  king? 

14  so  that  they  sent  (this  word)  unto  the  king 

15  So  the  kiug  returned,  and  came  to  Jordan 

15  go  to  meet  the  king,  to  conduct  the  king 

16  hasted  and  came  down,  .to  meet  king  D. 

17  and  they  went  over  Jordan  before  the  k. 

18  to  carry  over  the  king's  household,  and 

18  fell  down  before  the  king,  as  he  was  come 

19  said  unto  the  king.  Let  not  my  lord  imp. 
19  that  my  lord  the  king  went  out  of  Jems. 

19  that  the  king  should  take  it  to  his  heart 

20  to  go  down  to  meet  mylord  the  king 

22  know  that  I  (am)  this  day  king  over  Israel 

23  the  king  said.  .And  the  king  aware  unto 

24  came  down  to  meet  the  kiug,  and  had 

24  from  the  day  the  king  departed  until  the 

25  to  meet  the  king,  that  the  king  said  unto 

26  My  lord,  O  king,  my  servant  deceived  me 

26  I  may  ride  thereon,  and  go  to  the  king 

27  he  hath  slandei'ed.  .untomy  lord  the  king 

27  hut  my  lord  the  king  (is)  as  an  angel  of  G. 
20  but  dead  men  before  my  lord  the  king 

28  have  I  yet  to  cry  any  more  unto  thekipg? 

29  the  king  said  unto  him,  Why  spcakest 

30  Mephibosheth  said  unto  the  king,  Yea,  let 

30  forasmuch  as  my  lord  the  king  is  come 

31  went  over  Jordan  with  the  king,  to  cond. 

32  he  had  provided  the  king  of  sustenance 

33  the  king  said  unto  Barzillai,  Come  thou 

34  Barzillai  said  unto  the  king,  How  long 
34.  that  I  should  go  up  with  the  king  unto  J. 

35  be  yet  a  burden  unto  my  lord  the  king? 

36  a  little  way  over  Jordan  with  the  king 

36  why  should  the  king  recompense  it  me 

37  let  him  go  over  with  my  lord  the  king;  and 

38  the  kinganswered,  Chimham  shallgoover 

39  when  the  king  was  come  over,  the  king 

40  Then  the  king  went  on  to  Gilgal.  and  Ch. 
40  the  people  of  Judah  conducted  the  king 


KING 


567 


KING 


2  Sa.  19.  41  came  to  the  king,  and  said  uuto  the  king 
19.  41  have  brought  the  king  and  his  household 
19. 42  Because  the  king  (is)  near  of  kiu  to  us 
19.  42  have  we  eaten  at  all  of  the  king's  (cost?) 
19.  43  We  have  tea  parts  in  the  king,  and  we 

19.  43  not  be  fust  had  in  bringing  back  our  ki.  ? 

20.  2  the  men  of  Judah  clave  unto  their  king 
20.    3  and  the  king  took  the  ten  women  (his) 
20.   4  Then  said  the  king  to  Ainasa,  Assemble 
20. 21  hath  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  king 

20.  22  Joab  returned  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  king 

21.  2  the  king  called  the  Gibeonites,  and  said 
21.    5  they  answered  the  king,  The  man  that 
2i.    6  And  the  king  said,  I  will  give  (them) 

21.   7  the  king  spared  Mephibosheth,  the  son  of 

21.  8  the  king  took  the  two  sons  of  Rizpah  the 
21. 14  performed  all  that  the  king  commanded 

22.  51  (He  is)  the  tower  of  salvation  for  Ins  king 
24.    2  For  the  king  said  to  Joab  the  captain  of 
24.  3  Joab  said  unto  the  king,  Now  the  Lord 
24.    3  that  the  eyes  of  my  lord  the  king  may  see 
24.    3  why  doth  my  lord  the  king  delight  in  this 
24.    4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab,.and 
24.    4  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  king  to 
24.  9  Joab  gave  up  the  sum.  .unto  the  king?:  and 
24.  20  saw  the  king  and  his  servants  coming  on 
24.  20  bowed  himself  before  the  king  on  his  face 
24.  21  Wherefore  is  my  lord  the  king  come  to 
24.  22  Let  my  lord  the  king  take  and  offer  up 
24.  23  Araunah,  (as)  a  king,  give  unto  the  king 
24.  23  Araunah  said  unto  the  king,  The  Lord 
24.  24  the  king  said  vuto  Araunah,  Nay  ;  but  I 

1  Ki.  1.  1  king  David  was  old(aud)strieken  in  years 
1.  *2  Let  there  he  sought  for  my  lord  the  king 
1.  2  let  her  stand  before  the  Icing,  and  let  her 
1.  2  that  my  lord  the  king  may  get  heat 
1.  3  found  Abishag . .  and  brought  her  to  the  k. 
z.  4  cherished  the  king,  .but  the  king  knew 
i.  9  calledallhisbrethrenthe  king's  sons,  and 
1.    9  all  the  men  of  Judah  the  king's  servants 

1. 13  Go  and  get  thee  hi  unto  king  David,  and. 
1.  13  Didst  not  thou,  my  lord,  O  king,  swear 

1. 14  thou  yet  talkest  there  with  the  king,  I 

1.  15  Bath-sheba  went  in  unto  the  king  into  the 
1.  15  the  king  was  very  old ;  and  Abishag 
1.  15  the  Shunanimite  ministered  unto  the  king 
1. 16  did  obeisance  unto  the  king.    And  the  k. 
1.  iS  now,  my  lord  the  king,  thou  knowest  (it) 
1. 19  and  hath  called  all  the  sons  of  the  king 
1.  20  thou,  my  lord,  0  king,  the  eyes  of  all  Isr. 
*.  20,  27  sit  on  the  throne  of  my  lord  the  king 
1.  21  when  my  lord  the  king  shall  sleep  with 
1.  22  whilesheyet  talked  with  thekiug,  Nathan 
t.  23  they  told  the  king,  saying,  Behold  Nathan 
t.  23  when  he  was  come  in  before  the  king,  he 
1.  23  bowed  himself  before  the  king  with  his 
1. 24  My  lord,  O  king,  hast  thou  said,  Adonijah 
1.  25  and  hath  called  all  the  king's  sons,  and 
1.  25  they  eat.  .and  say,  God  save  king  Adonijah 
1. 27  Is  this  thing  done  by  my  lord  the  king 
1.  28  Then  king  David  answered  and  said,  Call 
1.  28  into  the  king's  presence . .  before  the  king 
1.  29  the  king  sware,  and  said,  (As)  the  LORD 
1.  31  to  the  king,  and  said,  Let  my  lord  king  D. 
1.  32  king  David  said,  Call  me  Zadok  the  priest 
1.  32  And  they  came  before  the  king 
1.  33  The  king  also  said  unto  them.  Take  with 
1. 34  let.  .the  prophet  anoint  him  there  king 
1.  34  blow  ye . .  and  say,  God  save  king  Solomon 
1/36  the  son  of  Jehoiada  answered  the  king 
1.  36  the  Lord  God  of  my  lord  the  king  say  so 
x  37  Lord  hath  been  with  my  lord  the  king 
1.  37  greater  than  the  throne  of  my  lord  king 
1.  38  caused  Solomon  to  ride  upon  king  David's 
1.  39  all  the  people  said,  God  save  king  Solomon 
1.  43  Verily  our  lord  king  David  hath  made  S. 
1.  44  the  king  hath  sent  with  him  Zadok  the 
1. 44  caused  him  to  ride  upon  the  king's  mule 
j.  45haveanointedhimkiuginGihon :  audthey 
t.  47  king's  servants  came  to  bless  our  lord  king 
1. 47  And  the  king  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed 
1.  4S  thus  said  the  king,  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord 
j.  51  Behold,  Adonijah  feareth  king  Solomon 
1.  51  Let  king  Solomon  swear  unto  me  to  day 
1.  53  So  king  Solomon  sent,  and  they  brought 

1.  53  came  and  bowed  himself  to  king  Solomon 

2.  17  Speak,  I  pray  thee,  unto  Solomon  the  ki. 

2. 18  Well ;  I  will  speak  for  thee  unto  the  king 
2.  ig  Bath-sheba  therefore  went  unto  king  Sol. 

2. 19  the  king  rose  up  to  meet  her,  and  bowed 
2. 19  caused  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the  king's  mo. 
2.  20  the  king  said  unto  her,  Ask  on,  my  mother 
2.  22  king  Solomon  answered  and  said  unto  his 
2.  23  king  Solomon  swear  by  the  Lord,  saying 
2.  25  kingSolomon  sent  by  the  hand  of  Benaiali 
2.  26  unto  Abiathar  the  priest  said  the  king,  G. 
2.  29  was  told  kingSolomon  that  Joab  was  fled 
2.  30  said  unto  him,  Thus  saith  the  king.  Come 
2. 30  And  Benaiah  brought  the  king  word  again 
2.  31  the  king  said  unto~him,  Do  as  he  hath  said 
2.  35  the  king  put  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
2.  35  Zadok  the  priest  did  the  king  put  in  the 
2.  36  the  king  sent  and  called  for  Shimei,  and 
2.  38  Shimei  said  unto  the  king,  The  saying 

2.  38  as  my  lord  the  king  hath  said,  so  will  thy 
2.  39  unto  Achish  son  of  Maachah  king  of  Gatii 
2.  42  the  king  sent  and  called  for  Shimei  and 
2. 44  The  king  said  moreover  to  Shimei,  Thou 
2.  45  king  Solomon  (shall  be)  blessed,  and  the 

2.  46  So  the  king  commanded  Benaiah  the  son 

3.  1  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
3.   4  the  king  went  to  Gibeon  to  sacrifice  there 


13  there  shall  not  be  any  among  the  kings 

16  came  there  two  women,  .unto  the  king 

22  Thus  they  spake  before  the  king 

23  Then  said  the  king,  TJie  one  saith,  This 

24  And  the  king  said,  Bring  me  a  sword 

24  And  they  brought  a  sword  before  the  king 

25  the  king  said,  Divide  the  living  child  in 

26  Then  spake  the  woman,  .unto  the  king, 

27  Then  the  king  answered  and  said,  Give 

28  judgment  which  the  king  had  judged 
28  they  feared  the  king  :  for  they  saw  that 

1  So  king  Solomon  was  king  over  all  Israel 
5  Zabud..  (was)  principal  otheer,(and)  the  k.'s 
7  which  provided  victuals  for  the  king  and 
19  king  of  the  Amorites,  and  of  Og  king  of 

24  over  all  the  kings  on  this  side  the  river 
27  provided  victual  for  king  Solomon,  and 

27  for  all  that  came  unto  kingSolomou's  table 
34  from  all  kings  of  the  earth,  which  had  hea. 

1  lliram  king  of  Tyre  sent  his  servants  unto 

1  heard  that  they  had  anointed  him  king  in 
13  king  Solomon  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  Isr. 

17  the  king  commanded,  and  they  brought 

2  the  house  winch  king  Solomon  built  for 

13  king  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  Hirani  out 

14  he  came  to  king  Solomon,  and  wrought  all 
40  that  he  made  kingSolomon  for  the  house 

45  wliich  Hiram  made  to  king  Solomon  for 

46  In  the  plain  of  Jordan  did  the  king  cast 
51  So  was  ended  all  the  work  that  king  Sol. 

,  1  unto  kingSolomon  in  Jerusalem,  that  they 
.    2  assembled  themselves  unto  king  Solomon 

5  king  Solomon,  and . .  the  congregation  of  I. 
14  the  king  turned  his  face  about,  and  blessed 
62  the  king,  and  all  Israel  with  him,  offered 

,  63  So  the  king  and  all  the  children  of  Israel 
,  64  The  same  day  did  the  king  hallow  the 
66  they  blessed  the  king,  and  went  unto  their 
.    1  when  Solomon  had  finished,  .the  king's 

10  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  ho 
■11  Hiram  the  king  of  Tyre  had  furnished  S. 

11  then  king  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty 

14  sent  to  the  king  sixscore  talents  of  gold 
.  15  the  reason  oi  the  levy  which  king  Solomon 

16  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  had  gone  up  and 
26  king  Solomon  made  a  navy  of  ships  in  E. 

28  fetched .  .gold . .  and  brought  (it)  to  king  S. 

3  was  not  (any)  thing  hid  from  the  king 

6  she  said  to  the  king.  It  was  a  true  report 
9  therefore  made  he  thee  king,  to  do  judg. 

10  she  gave  the  king  an  hundred  and  twenty 

10  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  to  king  Solomon 

12  the  king  made  of  the  almug  trees  pillars 

12  for  the  king's  house,  harps  also  and  psal. 

13  king  Solomon  gave  unto  the  queen  of  S. 

15  and  of  all  the  kings  of  Arahia,  and  of  the 

16  king  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets 

17  the  king  put  them  in  the  house  of  the 
iS  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and 

21  all  king  Solomon's  drinking  vessels  (were 

22  the  king  had  at  sea  a  navy  of  Tharshish 

23  So  kingSolomon  exceeded  all  the  kings  of 

26  and  with  the  king  at  Jerusalem 

27  the  king  made  silver  (to  be)  in  Jerusalem 

28  king's  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn 

29  kings  of  the  Hittites,  and  for  the  kings  of 

1  king  Solomon  loved  many  strange  women 

14  HadadtheEdomite :  he  (was)  of  the  king's 

18  they  came  to  Egypt,  unto  Pharoah  king  of 
23  fled  from  his  lord  Hadadezer  king  of  Zob. 
26,  27  he  lifted  up  (his)  hand  against  the  king 
37  thou  shalt  reign .  .and  shalt  be  king  over 
40  fled  into  Egypt,  uuto  Shishak  king  of  Eg 

2  fled  from  the  presence  of  king  Solomon 
6  king  Rehoboam  consulted  with  the  old 

12  as  the  king  had  appointed,  saying,  Come 

13  the  king  answered  the  people  roughly,  and 

15  the  king  hearkened  not  unto  the  people 

16  all  Israel  saw  that  the  king  hearkened  not 
16  people  answered  the  king,  saying,  What 
18  Then  king  Rehoboam  sent  Adoram,  who 
iS  king  Rehoboam  made  speed  to  get  hiniup 
23  the  son  of  Solomon,  king  of  Judah,  and 

27  unto  Rehoboam  king  of  Judah,  and  they 

28  Whereupon  the  king  took  counsel,  and 

4  when  king  Jeroboam  heard  the  saying  of 
6  the  king  answered  and  said  unto  the  man 

6  the  king's  hand  was  restored  him  again 

7  the  king  said  unto  the  man  of  God,  Come 

8  the  man  of  God  said  unto  the  king,  If  thou 

11  words  which  he  had  spoken  unto  the  king 
2  which  told  me  that  (I  should  be)  king  over 

14  the  Lord  shall  raise  hmi  up  a  king  overTsr. 
19,  29  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings 

25  in  the  fifth  year  of  king  Rehoboam,  (that) 

25  Shishak  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against 

26  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house ;  he 

27  king%ehoboam  made  in  their  stead  brasen 
27  which  kept  the  door  of  the  long's  house 
2S  when  the  king  went  into  the  house  of  the 

1  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Jeroboam 
*5-  7>  23-  31  thebookof  the  Chronicles  of  theki. 
15.  9  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Jeroboam  king 
15.  16,  32war  between"  Asa  and  Baasha  king  of  I. 
15. 17  Baasha  king  of  Israel  went  up  against  J. 
15. 17  to  go  out  or  to  come  in  to  Asa  kingof  Ju. 
15.  iS  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 
15.  18  king  Asa  sent  themtoBen-hadad,  the  son 
15.  18  Hezion,  king  of  Syria,  that  dwelt  atDama. 
15.  19  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of  Isr. 
15.  20  So  Ben-hadad  hearkened  unto  king  Asa 
15.  22  Jung  Asa  made  a  proclamation  throughout 


1  Ki.  15.  22  king  Asa  built  with  them  Geba  of  Benja. 
15.  25  in  the  second  year  of  Asa  king  of  Judah 

15.  28,,  33  in  the  third  yearpf  Asa  king  of  Judah 

16.  5,  14,  20,  27  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  k. 
16.  8  In  the  twenty  and  sixth  year  of  Asa  king 
16.  10,  15  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Asa  k. 
16.  16  conspired,  and  hath  also  slain  the  king 
16.  iS  went  into  the  palace  of  the  king's  house 
16.  18  burnt  the  king's  house  over  him  with  fire 
16.  23  In  the  thirty  and  first  year  of  Asa  kingof 
16.  29  in  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Asa  king 
16.  31  daughter  of  Ethbaal,  king  of  the  Zidoni. 
16.  33  than  all  the  kings  of  Israel  that  were  bef. 
19.  15  when  thou  comest,  anoint  Hazael  (tobe)k. 

19.  16  shalt  thou  anoint  (to  be)  king  over  Israel 

20.  1  the  king  of  Syria  gathered  all  his  host 
20.  1  (there  were)  thirty  and  two  kings  with  him 
20.  2  he  sent  messengers  to  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
20.  4  And  the  king  of  Israel  answered  and  said 
20.  4  My  lord,  Oking,  according  to  thy  saying 
20.  7  the  king  of  Israel  called  all  the  elders  of 
20.  9  Tell  my  lord  the  king,  All  that  thou  didst 
20.  11  the  king  of  Israel  answered  and  said,  Tell 
20.  r2  he  and  the  kings  in  the  pavilions,  that  he 
20. 13  there  came  a  prophet  unto  Ahab  king  of 
20.  16  the  kings,  the  thirty  and  two  kings  that 

20. 20  the  king  of  Syria  escaped  on  an  horse  with 

20. 21  the  king  of  Israel  went  out,  and  smote 
20.  22  the  prophet  came  to  the  king  of  Israel 
20.  22  the  king  of  Syria  will  come  up  against' 
20.  23  the  servants  of  the  king  of  Syria  said  unto 
20.  24  Take  the  kings  away,  every  man  out  of 
20.  28  spake  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  and  said 
20.  31  heard  that  the  kings,  .(are)  merciful  kings 
20.  31  go  out  to  the  king  of  Israel :  peradventure 
20.  32  came  to  the  king  of  Israel,  and  said,  Thy 
20.  38  and  waited  for  the  king  by  the  way,  and 
20.  39  the  king  passed  by,  he  cried  unto  the  king 
20.  40  And  the  kingof  Israel  said  unto  him,  So 
20.  41  the  king  of  Israel  discerned  him  that  he 

20.  43  the  king  of  Israel  went  to  his  house  heavy 

21.  1  hardbythepalaceof  Ahab  kingof  Samaria 
21.  10  Thou  didst  blaspheme  God  and  the  king 
si.  13  Naboth  did  blaspheme  God  and  the  king- 

21.  18  Arise,  go  down  to  meet  Ahab  king  of  Is. 
23.   2  the  king  of  Judah  came  down  to  the  king 

22.  3  the  king  of  Israel  said  uuto  his  servants 
22.  3  take  it  not  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  o£ 
22.  4  Jehoshaphat  said  to  the  king  of  Israel,  I 
22.  5  Jehoshaphat  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel 
22.  6  Then  the  king  of  Israel  gathered  the  pro. 
22.  6  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  hand  of  the  king 
22.  8  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  Jehoshaphat 
22.  8  Jehoshaphat  said,  Let  not  the  king  say  so 
22.  9  Then  the  king  of  Israel  called  an  officer 
22.  10,  29  the  kingof  Israel  and.  .the  king  of  J. 

22. 12  Lord  shall  deliver  (it)into  the  king's  hand 

22. 13  (declare)  good  unto  the  king  with  one 
22.  15  he  came  to  the  king.     And  the  king  said 
22. 15  shall  deliver  (it)  into  the  hand  of  the  king 
22.  16  the  king  said  unto  him,  How  many  times 
22. 18,  30  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  Jehosha. 
22. 26  the  king  of  Israel  said,  Take  Micaiah,  and 
22.  26  carry  him  back,  .to  Joash  the  king  s  son 
22.  27  Thus  saith  the  king,  Put  this  (fellow)  in 
22. 30  king  of  Israel  disguised  himself,  and  went 
22.  31  the  king  of  Syria  commanded  his  thirty 
22.  31  saying,  Fight,  .only  with  the  king  of  Isr. 
22.  32  they  said,  Surely  it  (is)  the  king  of  Israel 
22. 33  perceived  that  it  (was)  not  the  king  of  I. 
22.  34  smote  the  kingof  Israelbetween  the  joints 
22.  35  and  the  king  was  stayed  up  in  his  chariot 
22.  37  the  king  died,  .and  they  buried  the  king 
22.  39,  45  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
22.  41  in  the  fourth  year  of  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
22. 44  Jehoshaphat  made  peace  with  the  king  of 
22.  47  then  no  king  in  Edom :  a  deputy  (was)  k. 
22.  51  seventeenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of 

\  Ki.    1.    3  to  meet  the  messengers  of  the  king  of  S. 
1.    6  turn  aL;ain  unto  the  king  that  sent  you 
1.    9  man  ofGod, the  king  hath  said,  Come  down 
1.  11  thus  hath  the  king  said,  Come  downquic. 
1.  15  and  went  down  with  him  unto  the  king 
1.  17  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  Judah 
1.  iS  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
3.    1  eighteenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of  J. 
3.   4  Mesha  king  of  Moab  was  a  sheep  master 
3.    4  rendered  unto  the  king  of  Israel  an  hun. 
3.   5  king  of  Moab  rebelled  against  the  king  of 
3.    6  king  Jehoram  went  out  of  Samaria  the 
3.    7  sent  to  Jehoshaphat  the  king  of  Judah 
3.    7  The  king  of  Moab  hath  rebelled  against 
9king  of  Israel,  .king  of  Judah.  .king  of 
10  king  of  Israel  said,  Alas !  that  the  Lord 

10  hath  called  these  three  kings  together  to 

11  one  of  the  king  of  Israel's  servants  answ. 

12  the  king  of  Israel,  .and  the  king  of  Edom 

13  Elisha  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  What 
13  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  him,  Nay :  for 

13  the  Lord  hath  called  these  three  kings  to. 

14  the  presence  of  Jehoshaphat  the  king  of 
21  when  all  the  Moabites  heard  that  the  king 
23  This  (is)  blood :  the  kings  are  surely  slain 
26  when  the  king  of  Moab  saw  that  the  bat. 
26  to  break  through  (even)  unto  the  king  of 
13  wouldst  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  king,  or 

1  captain  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  Syria 
5  the  king  of  Syria  said,  Go  to,  go,  and  I 

5  will  send  a  letter  unto  the  king  of  Israel 

6  brought  the  letter  to  the  king  of  Israel 

7  when  the  king  of  Israel  had  read  the  let. 
S  had  heard  that  the  king  of  Israel  had  rent 


KING 


568 


KING 


2KJ.  5 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6 
6, 
6 
6. 
6 
6. 
6, 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 


8  seut  to  the  king,  saying,  Wherefore  hast 

8  the  king  of  Syria  warred  against  Israel 

9  man  of  God  sent  unto  the  king  of  Israel 
io  the  king  of  Israel  sent  to  the  place  which 
ii  Therefore  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Syria 
ii  show  me  which  of  us  (is)  for  the  king  of  I.? 
i2  said,  None,  my  lord,  O  king  :  hut  Elisha 
12  telleth  the  king  of  Israel  the  words  that 

21  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  Elisha,  when 
24  king  of  Syria  gathered  all  his  host,  and 
26  as  the  king  of  Israel  was  passing  by  upon 
26  there  cried  a  woman,  .saying,  Help.  .Ok. 
28  the  king  said  unto  her,  What  aileth  thee? 
30  when  the  king  heard  the  words  of  the 

2  a  lord  on  whose  hand  the  king  leaned 

6  the  king  of  Israel  hath  hired . .  the  kings 
6  and  the  kiugs  of  the  Egyptians,  to  come 
9  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king's  household 

11  they  told  (it)  to  the  king's  house  within 

12  the  king  arose  in  the  night,  and  said  unto 

14  the  king  sent  after  the  host  of  the  Syrians 

15  the  messengers  returned,  and  told  the  k. 
1 7  the  king  appointed  the  lord  on  whose  hand 
17  who' spake  when  the  king  came  down  to 
iS  the  man  of  God  had  spoken  to  the  king 

3  she  went  forth  to  cry  unto  the  king  for 

4  the  king  talked  with  Gehazi,  the  servant 

5  as  he  was  telling  the  king  how  he  had  rest. 
5  cried  to  the  king  for  her  house  and  for  her 

5  My  lord,  O  king,  this  (is)  the  women,  and 

6  when  the  king  asked  the  woman,  she  told 

6  king  appointed  unto  her  a  certain  officer 

7  and  Beu-hadad  the  king  of  Syria  was  sick 

8  the  king  said  unto  Hazael,  Take  a  present 

9  Thy  son  Ben-hadad  king  of  Syria  hath 

13  hath  showed  me  that  thou  (shalt  be)  king 
16,  25  of  Joram  the  son  of  Allah  king  of  Isr. 

16  Jehoshaphat  (being)  then  king  of Judah 
16  Jehoram  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of 
iS  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel 
20  Edom  revolted,  .and  made  a  king  over 

23  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
25,  29  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  J. 

26  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  Omri  king  of  I. 

28  to  the  war  against  Hazael  king  of  Syria 

29  king  Joram  went  back  to  be  healed  in  J. 
29  when  he  fought  against  Hazael  king  of  S. 
3,  12  I  have  anointed  thee  king  over  Israel 

6  I  have  anointed  thee  king  over  the  people 

14  he  and  all  Israel,  because  of  Hazael  king 

15  kiug  Joram  was  returned  to  be  healed  in 

15  when  he  fought  with  Hazael  king  of  Syria 

16  Ahaziah  king  of  Judah  was  come  down  to 
18,  19  Thus  saith  the  king, (Is  it)peace?  And 
2i  king  of  Israel  and  Ahaziah  king  of  Judah 

27  But  when  Ahaziah  the  king  of  Judah  saw 
34  and  bury  her ;  for  she  (is)  a  king's  daugh. 

4  Behold,  two  kings  stood  not  before  him 

6  Now  the  king's  sons,  (being)  seventy  per. 

7  they  took  the  king's  sons,  and  slew  seventy 

8  have  brought  the  heads  of  the  king's  sons 
13  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah  king  of  Judah 

13  to  salute  the  children  of  the  kingand  the 
34  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings  of 

2  Jehosheba,  the  daughter  of  king  Joram 

2  and  stole  him  from  among  the  king's  sons 

4  and  showed  them  the  king's  son 

5  be  keepers  of  the  watch  of  the  king's  ho. 

7  they  shall  keep  the  watch . .  about  the  king 

8  compass  the  king,  .be  ye  with  the  king 

10  did  the  priest  give  king  David's  spears 

11  the  guard  stood,  .round  about  the  king 

12  he  brought  forth  the  king's  son,  and  put 
12  clapped . .  hands,  and  said,  God  save  the  k. 

14  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  as  the  manner 
14  the  princes  and  the  trumpeters  by  the  k. 
:6  came  into  the  king's  house :  and  there 

17  between  the  Lord  and  the  king  and  the 
17  between  the  king  also  and  the  people 

19  they  brought  down  the  king  from  the  ho. 
19  the  gate  of  the  guard  to  the  king's  house 

19  And  lie  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  kings 

20  they  slew  Athaliah.  .(beside)  the  king's  h. 

6  in  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  king 

7  king  Jehoash  called  for  Jehoiada  the  pr. 
10  the  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest  came 

17  Hazael  king  of  Syria  went  up,  and  fought 
iS  And  Jehoash  king  of  Judah  took  all  the 

18  kings  of  Judah,  hail  dedicated,  and  his 

1 8  in  the  king's  house,  and  sent  (it)  to.,  king 

19  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  kings 
1  Joash  the  son  of  Ahaziah  king  of  Judah 

3  into  the  hand  of  Hazael  king  of  Syria 

4  because  the  king  of  Syria  oppressed  them 

7  for  the  kiug  of  Syria  had  destroyed  them 
8,  12  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings 

10  the  thirty  and  seventh  year  of  Joash  king 

12  he  fought  against  Amaziah  king  of  Judah 

13  was  buried  in  Samaria  with  the  kings  of 

14  Joash  the  king  of  Israel  came  down  unto 
16  he  said  to  the  king  of  Israel,  Put  thine  h. 
16  Elisha  put  his  bands  upon  the  king's  hand 
18  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  Smite  upon 

22  Hazael  king  of  Syria  oppressed  Israel  all 

24  Hazael  king  of  Syria  died ;  and  Ben-hadad 
1  of  Joash  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  Israel 

1  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah 

5  servants  which  had  slain  the  king  his  fat. 

8  son  of  Jehoahaz, 'son  of  Jehu,  king  of  Isr. 

9  the  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king 

1 1  Therefore  Jehoash  king  of  Israel  went  up 
11  he  and  Amaziah  king  of  Judah  looked 


>Ki. 


13  king  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king  of  Judah 

14  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house 

15  how  he  fought  with  Amaziah  king  of  Ju. 
15,  18,  28  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings 

16  was  buried  in  Samaria  with  the  kings  of 
17,  23  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Jud. 

17  Jehoash,  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  Israel 

22  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 

23  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Israel 
29  Jeroboam  slept,  .with  the  kings  of  Israel 

1  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel.  .Amaziah  king  of 
5  smote  the  king,  so  that  he  was  a  leper 
5  Jotham  the  king's  son  (was)  over  the  ho. 

6, 11, 15  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings 
8  In  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Azariahk. 

13  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  Uzziah  king  of 

17  In  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  Azariahk. 

1 2  Pul  the  king  of  Assyria  came  against  the 

20  give  to  the  kingof  Assyria :  so  the  king  of 
21,  26,  31,  36  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  k. 

23  In  the  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  king  of 

25  in  the  palace  of  the  king's  house,  with  Ar. 
27  the  two  aud  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  king 
29  In  the  days  of  Pekah  king  of  Israel  came 
29  Tiglath-pileser  king  of  Assyria,  and  took 
32  Pekah  the  son  of  Remaliah  king  of  Israel 

32  began  Jotham  the  son  of  Uzziah  king  of  J. 
37  Kezin  the  kiug  of  Syria,  and  Pekah  the 

1  Ahaz  the  son  of  Jotham  king  of  Judah 
3  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel 
5  Rezin  king  of  Syria  and  Pekah  son  of 

5  Remaliah  king  of  Israel  came  up  to  Jems. 

6  At  that  time  Hezen  king  of  Syria  recovered 

7  sent  messengers  to  Tiglath-pileserking  of 
7,  7  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of 

8  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house 

8  sent  (it  for)  a  present  to  the  king  of  A. 

9  the  king  of  Assyria  hearkened  unto  him 
9  for  the  king  of  Assyria  went  up  against  D. 

10  king  Ahaz  went . .  to  meet . .  king  of  Assyria 

10  king  Ahaz  sent  to  Urijah  the  priest  the 

11  according  to  all  that  king  Ahaz  had  sent 

1 1  Uri jah  the  priest  made  (it)  against  king  A . 

12  when  the  king  was  come  from  Damascus 

12  the  king  saw  the  altar:  and  the  king 

15  king  Ahaz  commanded  Urijah  the  priest 

15  Upon  the  great  altar  burn,  .the  king's 

16  according  to  all  that  king  Ahaz  comman. 

17  king  Ahaz  cut  oft"  the  borders  of  the  bases 

18  the  king's  entry  without,  turned  he  from 

18  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  the  king  of  As. 

19  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 

1  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah 

2  but  not  as  the  kings  of  Israel  that  were 

3  Against  him  came  up  Shalmaneserking  of 

4  the  king  of  Assyria  found  conspiracy  in  II. 
4  for  he  had  sent  messengers  to  So  king  of 
4  and  brought  no  present  to  the  king  of  A. 

4  therefore  the  king  of  Assyria  shut  him  up 

5  the  king  of  Assyria  came  up  throughout 

6  In  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  the  king  of  A. 

7  from  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 

8  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  which  they  had 

24  king  of  Assyria  brought  (men)  from  Bab. 

26  Wherefore  they  spake  to  the  king  of  Ass. 

27  Then  the  king  of  Assyria  commanded 

1  third  year  of  Hosea  son  of  Elahking  of  I. 
1  Hezekiah  the  son  of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah 
5  none  like  him  among  all  the  kings  of  Ju. 

7  he  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Assyria 

9  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of  king 
9  seventh  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah  king 
9  Shalmaneser  king  of  Assyria  came  up  ag. 

10  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  king  of  Israel 
n  the  king  of  Assyria  did  carry  away  Israel 

13  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  king  Hezekiah 

13  did  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  come  up 

14  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  sent  to  the  king 
14  And  the  king  of  Assyria  appointed  unto 

14  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  three  hundred 

15  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house 

16  king  of  Judah.  .gave  it  to  the  king  of  As. 

17  the  king  of  Assyria  sent,  .to  king  Hezek. 
iS  when  they  had  called  to  the  king,  there 

19  saith  the  great  king,  the  king  of  Assyria 

21  so  (is)  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  unto  all  that 
23  give  pledges  to  my  lord  the  king  of  Assy. 

28  Hear  the  word  of  the  great  king,  the  king 

29  Thus  saith  the  king,  Let  not  Hezekiah 

30  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of 

31  for  thus  saith  the  king  of  Assyria,  Make 

33  delivered,  .of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A.? 
36  king's  commandment  was,  saying,  Answer 

1  when  king  Hezekiah  heard  (it),  that  he 

4  whom  the  king  of  Assyria  his  master  hath 

5  servants  of  king  Hezekiah  came  to  Isaiah 

6  with  which  the  servants  of  the  king  of  A. 

8  found  the  king  of  Assyria  warring  against 

9  when  he  heard  say  ofTirhakah  king  of  Et. 
10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiali  king  of  J. 

10  not  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king 

11  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of  Assyria 
13  Where  (is)  the  king  of  Hamath,and  the  k. 

13  and  the  kingof  the  city  of  Sepharvaim,  of 

17  kings  of  Assyria  have  destroyed  the  nati. 

20  prayed  to  me  against  Sennacherib  king 

32  thus  saith  the  Loud  concerning  the  king 
36  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  departed 

6  deliver,  .out of  the  hand  of  the  kingof  A. 

12  kingof  Babylon,  sent  letters  auda  present 

14  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king 

1 8  shall  be  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of  the  kin: 


2  Ki.20. 


t  Ch. 


20  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings 
3  made  a  grove,  as  did  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
11  Because  Manasseh  king  of  Judah  hath 
17,  25  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  k. 
33  conspired,  .and  slew  the  king  in  his  own 

24  all  them  that  had  conspired  against  king 
3  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Josiah 

3  the  king  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah 

9  came  to  the  king  and  brought  the  king 

10  Shaphan  the  scribe  showed  the  king,  say. 

10  And  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  king 

11  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of  the 

12  the  kiug  commanded  Hilkiah  the  priest 
12  and  Asahiah  a  servant  of  the  king's,  saying 
16  all  the  words  of  the  book  which  the  king 

18  But  to  the  king  of  Judah,  which  sent  you 

20  And  they  brought  the  king  word  again 

1  the  king  sent,  and  they  gathered  unto  him 

2  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 

3  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  and  made  a  cov. 

4  the  king  commanded  Hilkiah  the  high  pr. 

5  whom  the  kings  of  Judah  had  ordained  to 

11  horses  that  the  kings  of  Judah  had  given 

12  which  the  kiugs  of  Judah  had  made,  and 

12  the  altars,  .did  the  king  beat  down,  and 

13  the  king  of  Israel,  .did  the  king  defile 

19  which  the  kings  of  Israel  had  made  to  pr. 

21  the  king  commanded  all  the  people,  say. 

22  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  nor  of  the  kings  of 

23  But  hi  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Josiah 

25  like  unto  him  was  there  no  kiug  before 

28  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 

29  king  of  Egypt  went  up  against  the  king 

29  kingJosiahwentagainsthim ;  and  he  slew 
1,  10,  11  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon 

5  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kiugs  of 
7  king  of  Egypt  came  not.  .for  the  kingof  B. 

7  all  that  pertained  to  the  king  of  Egypt 
12  king  of  Judah  went  out  to  the  king  of  B. 

12  the  king  of  Babylon  took  him  in  the  eighth 

13  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 
13  which  Solomon  king  of  Israel  had  made 

15  the  king's  mother,  and  the  king's  wives 

16  even  them  the  king  of  Babylon  brought 

17  And  the  king  of  Babylon  made  Mattaniah 

20  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  the  king  of  B. 

1  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon  came, he 

2  unto  the  eleventh  year  of  king  Zedekiah 

4  two  walls,  which  (is)  by  the  king's  garden 

5  pursued  after  the  king,  and  overtook  him 

6  So  they  took  the  king,  and  brought  him  up 
6  to  the  king  of  Babylon  to  Riblah;  and  they 

8  of  king  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon 

8  came,  .a  servant  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

9  he  burnt. .  the  king's  house,  and  all  the 

1 1  fugitives  that  fell  away  to  the  king  of  Ba. 

19  of  them  that  were  in  the  king's  presence 

20  brought  them  to  the  king  of  Babylon  to 

21  the  king  of  Babylon  smote  them,  andslew 

22  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon 

23  heard  that  the  king  of  Babylon  had  made 

24  dwell  in  the  land,  and  serve  the  kingof  B. 
27  captivity  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  Judah,  in 
27  Evil-merodach  king  of  Babylon,  .did  lift 

27  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  Judah  out 

28  his  throne  above  the  throne  of  the  kings 

30  continual  allowance  given  him  of  the  king 
43  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom 
43  before  (any)  king  reigned  over  the  child. 

2  Maachah  the  daughter  of  Talmaiking  of 
23  there  they  dwelt  with  the  king  for  his  wo. 
41  came  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Ju. 

6  whom  Tilgath-pilneserki.  of  Assyria  came 
17  in  the  days  of  Jotham  king  of  Judah,  and 
17  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel 

26  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Pul  king  of  Assy. 
26  the  spirit  of  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  As. 

1  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  J. 
iS  hitherto  (waited)  in  the  king's  gate  east. 

2  in  time  past,  even  when  Saul  was  ki.,  thou 

3  Therefore  came  all  the  elders,  .to  the  king 
3  and  they  anointed  David  king  over  Israel 

1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to  D. 

2  had  confirmed  him  king  over  Israel ;  for 

8  heard  that  David  was  anointed  king  over 

29  Michal.  .saw  king  David  dancing  and  pi. 
21  yea,  he  reproved  kings  fur  their  sakes 

16  David  the  king  came  and  sat  before  the 

3  David  smote  Hadarezer  king  of  Zobah 
5  came  to  help  Hadarezer  king  of  Zobah 

9  Tou  king  of  Hamath  heard  how  David  had 
9  smitten  all  the  host  of  Hadarezer  king  of 

10  He  sent  Hadoram  his  son  to  king  David 

11  Them  also  king  David  dedicated  unto  the 

17  sons  of  David  (were)  chief  about  the  king 
1  Xahash  the  kin;.:  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

5  the  king  said,  Tarry  at  Jericho  until  your 

7  the  kingof  Maachah  and  his  people  ;  who 
9  the  kings  that  were  come  (were)  by  them. 

1  at  the  time  that  kings  go  out  to  (battle) 

2  took  the  crown  of  their  king  from  off  his 

3  but,  my  lord  the  king,  (are)  they  not  all 

4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab 

6  for  the  king's  word  was  abominable  to  J. 

23  let  my  lord' the  king  do  (that  which  is) 

24  king  David  said  to  Oman,  Nay;  but  I 

6  Shemaiah.  .wrote  them  before  the  king 

31  in  the  preseuce  of  David  the  king,  and 

2  prophesied  according  to  the  order  of  the  k. 

5  the  sons  of  Heman  the  king's  seer  in  the 

6  according  to  the  king's  order  to  Asaph 
26  which  David  the  king,  and  the  chief  fat. 


KING 


569 


KING 


i  Ch.  26.  30  business . .  and  in  the  service  of  the  king 

26.  32  king  D.  made  rulers . .  for . .  affairs  of  the  k. 

27.  1  their  officers  that  served  the  king  iu  any 
27.  24  the  account  of  the  chronicles  of  king  D. 
27.  25  over  the  king's  treasures  (was)  Azmaveth 
27.  31  of  the  substance  which  (was)  king  David's 
27.  32  son  of  Hachmoni  (was)  with  the  king's 
27.  33  the  king's  counsellor,  .the  king's  compan. 

27.  34  the  general  of  the  king's  army  (was)  Joab 

28.  i  the  companies  that  ministered  to  the  king 
28.  2  all  the  substance  and  possession  of  the  k. 
28.   2  Then  David  the  king  stood  up  upon  his 

28.  4  chose  me.  .to  be  king  over  Israel  for  ever 

29.  1  David  the  king  said  unto  all  the  congreg. 
29.   6  with  the  rulers  of  the  king's  work,  offered 
29.    g  David  the  king  also  rejoiced  with  great 
29.  20  and  worshipped  the  Lord,  and  the  king 
29.  23  Solomon  sat . .  as  king  instead  of  David  his 
29.  24  and  all  the  sons  likewise  of  king  David 
29.  24  submitted  themselves  unto  Solomonthek. 
29.  25  as  had  not  been  on  any  king  before  him 
29.  29  Now  the  acts  of  David  the  king,  first  and 

:  Ch.  1.  12  such  as  none  of  the  kiugs  have  had  that 
1.  14  which  lie  placed,  .with  the  king  at  Jerus. 

1. 15  king  made  silver  and  gold  at  Jerusalem 

1. 16  the  king's  merchants  received  the  linen 

1.  17  kings  of  the  Hittites,  and  for  the  kings  of 

2.  3  Solomon  sent  to  Huram  the  king  of  Tyre 
2.  11  the  king,  .answered,  .he  hath  made  thee 
2.  12  hath  given  to  David  the  king  a  wise  son 
4.  11  the  work  that  he  was  to  make  for  king 

4.  16  did  Huram  his  father  make  to  king  Solo. 

4.  17  Iu  the  plain  of  Jordan  did  the  king  cast 

5.  3  assembled  themselves  unto  the  king  in 

5.  6  Also  king  Solomon,  and  all  the  congregat. 

6.  3  the  king  turned  his  face,  and  blessed  the 

7.  4  the  king  and  all  the  people  offered  sacri. 
7.  5  king  Solomon  offered.  .So  the  king  and  all 
7.  6  which  David  the  king  had  made  to  praise 

7.  11  Thus  Solomon  finished,  .the  king's  house 

8.  10  these  (were)  the  chief  of  king  Solomon's 

8. 11  not  dwell  in  the  house  of  David  king  of  I, 
8.  15  commandment  of  the  king  unto  the  prhi. 

8.  18  and  brought  (them)  to  king  Solomon 

9.  5  she  said  to  the  king,  (It  was)  a  true  report 
9.  8  kingfortheLoRD.  .therefore  made  he  thee 
9.  9  gave  the  king  an  hundred  and  twenty  ta. 
9.  9  spice  as  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  king  So. 
9.  11  the  king  made  .terraces,  .to  the  king's 

9.  12  king  Solomon  gave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba 

9. 12  which  she  had  brought  unto  the  king  So. 

9. 14  all  the  kings  of  Arabia,  and  governors  of 

9. 15  king  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets 
9.  16  the  king  put  them  in  the  house  of  the 

9. 17  Moreover  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of 
9.  20  all  the  drinking  vessels  of  king  Solomon 
9.  21  For  the  king's  ships  went  to  Tarshish  with 
9.  22  king  Solomon  passed  all  the  kings  of  the 
9.  23  the  kings  of  the  earth  sought  the  presence 
9. 25  whom  he  bestowed . .  with  the  king  at  Je. 
9.  26  he  reigned  over  all  the  kings  from  the 
9.  27  king  made  silver  in  Jerusalem  as  stones 
10.   2  from  the  presence  of  Solomon  the  king 
10.   6  king  Rehoboam  took  counsel  with  the  old 
10. 12  came  to  Rehoboam .  .as  the  king  bade,  say. 

10.  13  the  king  answered,  .and  king  Rehoboam 

10. 1 5  So  the  king  hearkened  not  unto  the  people 

10. 16  king  would  not.  .answered  the  king,  say. 

10. 18  Then  king  Rehoboam  sent,  .but  king  Re. 

11.  3  Speak  unto  Rehoboam . .  kingof  Judah.and 

12.  2  in  the  fifth  year  of  king  Rehoboam.  .king 
12.  6  the  princes  of  Israel  and  the  king  humbled 
12.  9  Shishak  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against  J. 
12.   9  took  away,  .the  treasures  of  the  king's 

12. 10  Instead  of  which  king  Rehoboam  made 
12.  10  that  kept  the  entrance  of  the  king's  house 

12. 11  when  the  king  entered  into  the  house  of 

12.  13  So  king  Rehoboam  strengthened .  .in  J. 

13.  1  Now  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Jer. 

15.  16  (concerning),  .the  mother  of  Asa  the  king 

16.  1  Baasha  king  of  Israel..  Asa  king  of  Judah 
16.  2  king's  house,  and  sent  to  Ben-hadad  king 
16.  3  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of  Is. 
16.  4  Ben-hadad  hearkened  unto  king  Asa,  and 
16.  6  Then  Asa  the  king  took  all  Judah ;  and 
16.  7  came  to  Asa  king  of  Judah,  and  said  unto 
16.  7  Because  thou  hast  relied  on  the  king  of  S. 
16.  7  therefore  is  the  host  of  the  king  of  Syria 
16.  11  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel 

17. 19  waited  on  the  king,  .whom  the  king  put 
18.    3  king  of  Israel  said  unto  Jehoshaphat  king 
18.    4  Jehoshaphat  said  unto  the  king  of  Israel 
18.    5  the  king  of  Israel  gathered  together  of 
18.    5  for  God  will  deliver  (it)  into  the  king's 
18.   7  the  kingof  Israel..  Let  not  the  king  say  so 
18.   8  the  king  of  Israel  called  for  one  (of  his) 
18.    9,  28  king  of  Israel  and  Jehoshaphat  king 

18. 11  shall  deliver  (it) into  the  hand  of  the  king 

18. 12  (declare)  g^od  to  theking  with  one  assent 
18.  14  when  he  was  come  to  the  king,  the  king 
18. 15  the  king  said  to  him,  How  many  times 
18.  17  the  king  of  Israel  said  to  Jehoshaphat 
18.  19  Who  shall  entice  Ahabkingof  Israel,  that 
18.  25  king  of  Israel  said,  Take  ye  Micaiah,  and 
18. 25  carry  him  back,  .to  Joash  the  king's  son 
18.  26  Thus  saith  the  king,  Putthis  (fellow)  in  the 
18.  29  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  Jehoshaphat 
18.  29  So  the  king  of  Israel  disguised  himself 
18.  30  the  king  of  Syria  had  commanded  the  cap. 
18.  30  Fight  ye  not.  .save  only  with  the  kingof  I. 
18.  31  that  they  said,  It  (is)  the  king  of  Israel 
18.  32  perceived  that  is  was  not  the  kingof  Isr. 


2  Oh.  18.  33  smote  the  king  of  Israel  bet  ween  the  joints 

18.  34  howbeit  thekingof  Israel  stayed  (himself) 

19.  1  Jehoshaphat  the  king  of  Judah  returned 
ig.  2  said  to  king  Jehoshaphat,  Shouldest  thou 
19. 11  and  Zebadiah.  .for  all  the  king's  matters 
20. 15  Hearken  ye.  .and  thou  king  Jehoshaphat 

20.  34  mentioned  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Is. 
20.  35  And  after  this  did  Jehoshaphat  king  of  J. 

20.  35  join  himself  with  Ahaziah  king  of  Israel 

21.  2  all  these(were)  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat  k. 
21.  6,  13  walked  inthewayof  the  kings  of  Israel 
21.   8  Edomites  revolted,  .made  themselves  a k. 

21.  12  nor  in  the  ways  of  Asa  king  of  Judah 
21. 17  substance  (that  was)  found  in  the  king's 
21. 20  but  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kiugs 

22.  1  Aha2iahthesonof  Jehoram  kingof  Judah 
22.  5  Ahab  king  of  Israel.. against Hazael  king 
22.  6  when  he  fought  with  Hazael  king  of  Syria 
22.  6  Azariah  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  Judah 
22.  11,  11  Jehoshabeath,  the  daughter  of  the  king 

22.  11  stole  him  from  among  the  king's  sons  that 

23.  3  made  a  covenant  with  the  king  in  the  ho. 
23.    3  the  king's  son  shall  reign,  as  the  LORD  hath 

5  And  a  third  part  (shall  be)  at  the  king's 
7  Levites  shall  compass  the  king  round  ab. 

7  but  be  ye  with  the  king  when  he  cometh 
9  and  shields,  that  (had  been)  king  David's 

10  along  by  the  altar.. by  the  king  round  ab. 

11  they  brought  out  the  king's  son,  and  put 
t  1  anointed  him,  and  said,  God  save  the  king 

12  the  people  running  and  praising  the  king 

13  the  king  stood  at  his  pillar  at  the  entering 

13  the  princes  and  the  trumpets  by  the  king 

15  entering  of  the  horse  gate  by  the  king's 

16  all  the  people,  and  between  the  king,  that 
20  brought  down  the  king,  .and  set  the  king 

20  through  the  high  gate  into  the  king's  house 

6  king  called  for  Jehoiada.  .and  said  unto 

8  at  the  king's  commandment  they  made  a 
11  chest  was  brought  imto  the  king's  office 

1 1  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest's  officer 

12  the  king  and  Jehoiada  gave  it  to  such  as 

14  the  rest  of  the  mouey  before  the  king  and 

16  in  the  city  of  David  among  the  kiugs,  bee. 

17  madeobeisance  to  the  king :  then  the  king 

21  at  the  commandment  of  the  king  in  the 

22  the  king  remembered  not  the  kindness 

23  sent  all  the  spoil  of  them  unto  the  king  of 
25  but.  .not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings 
27  in  the  story  of  the  book  of  the  kings 

3  slew  his  servants  that  had  killed  theking 

7  O  king,  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with 

16  Art  thou  made  of  the  king's  counsel  ?  for. 

17  Amaziah  king  of  Judah  took  advice,  and 

17  to  Joash.  .the  son  of  Jehu,  kingof  Israel 

18  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king  of  J. 
21  So  Joash  the  king  of  Israel  went  up ;  and 
21  (both)  he  and  Amaziah  king  of  Judah,  at 

23  king  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king  of  Judah 

24  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's~house,tha 

25  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah 

25  death  of  Joash,  son  of  Jehoahazkingof  I. 

26  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  I.? 
2  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 

11  hand  of  Hananiab,  (one)  of  the  king's  cap. 

13  army,  .to  help  the  king  against  the  enemy 

18  they  withstood  Vzziah  the  king,  and  said 
21  Czziah  the  king  was  a  leper  unto  the  day 
21  Jothamhisson(was)overthe  king'shouse 
23  in  the  field . .  which  (belonged)  to  the  kings 

5  He  fought  also  with  the  king  of  the  Am. 
7  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  J. 
2  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of  I. 
5  delivered  him  into  the  hand  of  the  king 

5  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Israel,  who 
7  Z.,  a  mighty  man . .  slew  Maaseiah  the  k.'s 
7  and  Elkanah  (that  was)  next  to  the  king 

16  did  king  Ahaz  send  unto  the  kings  of  As. 

19  brought  Judah  low  because  of  Ahaz  king 

20  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  Assyria  came  unto 

21  of  the  house  of  theking,  andoftheprinces 

21  and  gave  (it)  unto  the  king  of  Assyria:  but 

22  trespass  yet  more,  .this  (is  that)  king  A. 

23  Because  the  gods  of  the  kings  of  Syria 

26  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  Is. 

27  not  into  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings  of  I. 
15  according  to  the  commandment  of  the  k. 

18  Then  they  went  in  to  Hezekiah  the  king 

19  which  king  Ahaz  in  his  reign  did  cast 

20  Then  Hezekiah  the  king  rose  early,  and 

23  beforethe  kingaudthe  congregation ;  and 

24  the  king  commanded  (that)  the  burnt  off. 

25  Gad  the  king's  seer,  and  Nathan  the  pro. 
27  instruments  (ordained)  by  David  king  of 

29  the  king  and  all  that  were  present  with 

30  Hezekiah  the  king  and  the  princes  comm. 

2  For  the  king  had  taken  counsel,  and  his 
4  pleased  the  king  and  all  the  congregation 

6  theposts  went  with  the  letters  from  the  k. 
6  according  to  the  commandment  of  thek. 

6  escaped  out  of  the  hand  of  the  kings  of  A. 

12  to  do  the  commandment  of  the  king  and 
24  For  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  did  give  to 

26  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David  king  of  Isr. 

3  also  the  kiug's  portion  of  his  substance 

13  the  commandment  of  Hezekiah  the  king 
1  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  came,  and 

4  ^"hy  should  the  kings  of  Assyria  come 

7  be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for  the  king 

8  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah 

9  did  S.  king  of  Assyria  send,  .unto  Hezek. 
10  Thus  saith  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria 


25- 

25- 
25- 
25- 

26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 

a6. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
2S. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28 
28 
28. 
28 
29, 
29. 
29 
29. 
29, 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30. 


34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 


2  Ch.  32.  11  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of 

32. 20  Hezekiah  the  king,  and  the  prophetlsaiah 
32.  21  captains  in  the  camp  of  the  king  of  Assy. 
32.  22  from  the  hand  of  Sennacherib  the  king 
32.  23  and  presents  to  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah 

32.  32  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  Is. 

33.  11  the  captains  of  the  host  of  trtie  king  of  A. 
33. 18  in  the  book  of  the  kiugs  of  Israel 

33.  25  that  had  conspired  against  king  Amon 
34. 11  which  the  kings  of  Judah  had  destroyed 

34.  16  to  the  king,  and  brought  the  king  word 
34.  18  Then  Shaphan  the  scribe  told  the  king 
34. 18  And  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  king. 
34.  19  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of 
34.  20  kingcommanded. .  Asaiah  aser.  of  the  k.'s 
34.  22  and  (they)  that  the  king  (had  appointed) 
34.  24  which  they  have  read  beforethe  kingof  J. 
34.  26  as  for  the  king  of  Judah,  who  sent  you  to 
34.  28  So  they  brought  the  king  word  again 

34.  29  Then  the  king  sent  and  gathered  together 

34.  30  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  L. 
.  31  the  king  stood  hi  his  place,  and  made  a 

3  which  Solomon  the  son  of  David  king  of 

4  according  to  the  writing  of  David  king 
7  these  (were)  of  the  king's  substance 

.  10  according  to  the  king's  commandment 

35. 15  and  Heman,  and  Jeduthun  the  king's  seer 

35. 16  according  to  the  commandment  of  king  J. 
35. 18  neither  did  all  the  kings  of  Israel  keep 

35.  20  Necho  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against  Car. 

35. 21  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  thou  king  of 
35.23  the  archers  shot  at  king  Josiah:  and  thek. 

35.  27  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Ju. 

36.  3  the  king  of  Egypt  put  him  down  at  Jem. 
36.  4  king  of  Egypt  made  Eliakim  his  brother 
36.  6  came  up  Nebuchadnezzar  kingof  Babylon 
36.  8  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Ju. 
36.  10  king  Nebuchadnezzar  sent  and  brought 
36.  13  he  also  rebelled  against  king  Nebuchadn. 

36. 17  Therefore  he  brought  upon  them  the  king: 

36. 18  the  treasures  of  the  king,  and  of  his  prin. 
36.  22  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 

36. 22  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  Per. 
36.  23  Thus  saith  Cyrus  kingof  Persia,  All  thek. 

Ezra    1.    1  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 
1.    1  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  Per. 
1.   2  Thus  saith  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  The  Lord 
1-   7  Cyrus  the  king  brought  forth  the  vessels 

1.  8  Even  those  did  Cyrus  king  of  Persia  bring 

2.  1  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  of  Baby. 

3.  7  the  grant  that  they  had  of  Cyrus  king  of 

3. 10  after  the  ordinance  of  David  king  of  Isr. 

4.  2  since  the  days  of  Esar-haddon  king  of  As. 
4.  3  as  king  Cyrus  the  king  of  Persia  hath  co. 
4.   5  Cyruskingof  Persia.  .Dariuskingof  Persia 

4.  7  wrote,  .unto  Artaxerxes  kingof  Persia 

6.  22  turned  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

7.  1  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia 
7.  6  the  king  granted  him  all  his  request,  ac. 
7.  7  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  king 
7.   8  which  (was)  in  the  seventh  year  of  the  k. 

7. 11  copyoftheletter  that  the  king  Artaxerxes 
7.  27  (such  a  thing)  as  this  in  the  kings  heart 

7.  28  before  the  king,  .and  before  all  the  king's 

8.  1  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  the  king 

8.  22  For  I  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  king 
8.  22  because  we  had  spoken  unto  the  king,  sa. 
8.  25  which  the  king,  and  his  counsellors,  and 

8.  36  the  king's  commissions  unto  the  king's 

9.  7  and  for  our  iniquities  have  we,  our  kings 
9.   7  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  kings  of 

9.    9  unto  us  in  the  sight  of  the  kings  of  Persia 
Neh.   1.  11  For  I  was  the  king's  cup  bearer 

2.  1  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  theking 
2.  1  took  up  the  wine,  and  gave  (it)  unto  thek. 
2.  2  Wherefore  the  king  said  unto  me,  Why 
2.  3  said  unto  the  king.  Let  the  kiug  live  for 
2.  4  the  king  said  uuto  me,Forwhatdostthou 
2.  5,  7  I  said  unto  the  king,  If  it  please  the  king 
2.  6  the  king  said  unto  me . .  it  pleased  the  king 
2.  8  unto  Asaph  the  keeper  of  the  king's  forest 
2.  8  the  kinggrantedme,accordingtothegood 
2.   9  gave  them  the  king's  letters.  Now  the  king 

2. 14  Then  I  went  on . .  to  the  king's  pool :  but 

2.  iS  as  also  the  king's  words  that  hebadspoken 
2. 19  that  ye  do?  will  ye  rebel  against  theking? 

3. 15  of  the  poolof  Shiloahby  the  king's  garden 

3.  25  which  liethout  fromtheking'shigh  house 

5.  4  have  borrowed  money  for  the  king's  trib. 
5. 14  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  king 

6.  6  that  thou  mayest  be  their  king,  according 
6.    7  (Their  is)  a  king  in  Judah  :  and  now  shall 

6.  7  it  be  reported  to  the  king  according  to 

7.  6  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  of  Baby. 
9.  22  of  the  king  of  Heshbon,  and.  .of  Og  king 
9.  24  with  their  kings,  and  the  people  of  the 
9.  32  on  our  kings,  .since  the  time  of  the  kings 
9.  34  Neither  have  our  kings,  our  princes,  our 
9.  37  unto  the  kings  whom  thou  hast  set  over 

11.  23  For  (it  was)  the  king's  commandment  co. 

11.  24  at  the  king's  hand  in  all  matters  concern. 

13.   6  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Bab. 

13.   6  unto  the  king.. obtained  Heave  of  theking 

13.  26  Did  not  Solomon  king  of  Israel  sin  by  th. 

13.  26  among  many  nations  was  there  no  king 

13. 26  and  God  made  him  king  over  all  Israel 
Esth.  1.  2  the  king  Ahasuerus  sat  on  the  throne  of 
1.  5  the  king  made  a  feast  unto  all  the  people 
1.  5  the  court  of  the  garden  of  the  king's  pal. 
1.  7  according  to  the  state  of  the  king 
1.  8  the  king  had  appointed  to  all  the  officers 
1.   9  theroyal  house  v.hkh(belonged)to  king  A. 


KING 


570 


KING 


Esth.  i.  10  when  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry 
i.  10  served  in  the  presence  ol  Ahasuerus  the  k. 
i.  ii  To  bring  Yashti  the  queen  before  the  king 

1. 12  queen  Yashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king's 
i.  iz  therefore  was  the  king  very  wroth,  and 
i.  13  Then  the  king  said  to  the  wise  men,  which 

1. 13  for  so  (was)  the  king's  manner  toward  all 
1.  14  which  saw  the  king's  face,  (and)  which  sat 
x.  15  the  kingAhasuerusbythechamberlaiiis? 
1.  16  Memucan  answered  before  the  king  and 
1. 16  hath  not  done  wrong  to  the  king  only,  but 
1. 16  in  all  the  provinces  of  the  kingAhasuerus 
1.  17  The  king  Ahasuerus  commanded  Yashti 
1.  18  say  tliis  day  unto  all  the  king's  princes 
1. 19  If  it  please  the  king,  let  there  go  a  royal 
1. 19  That  Vashti  come  no  more  before  king  A. 
1. 19  and  let  the  king  give  her  royal  estate  unto 
1.  20  when  the  king's  decree  which  he  shall 

1.  21  the  saying  pleased  the  king,  .and  the  king 
1.22  he  sent  letters  into  all  the  king's  provinces 

2.  1  when  the  wrath  of  king  Ahasuerus  was 
2.    2  Then  said  the  king's  servants  that  minis. 
2.    2  be  fair  young  virgins  sought  for  the  king 
2.   3  let  the  king  appoint  officers  in  all  thepr. 
2.    3  custody  of  Hege  the  king's  chamberlain 
2.   4  let  the  maiden  which  pleaseth  the  king 
2.   4  the  thing  pleased  the  king ;  and  he  did 
2.   6  carried  away  with  Jeconiahkingof  Judah 
2.   6  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  of  Baby. 
2.   8  when  the  king's  commandment  and  his 
2.    8  Esther  was  brought  also  into  the  king's 
2.    9  meet  to  be  given  her,  out  of  the  king's 

2.  12  turn  was  come  to  go  in  to  king  Ahasueru3 
2.  13  Then,  .came (every) maiden  unto  the  king 
2.  13  house  of  the  women  unto  the  king's  hou. 
2.  14  custody  of  Shaashgaz  the  king's  chambe. 
2.  14  in  unto  thekingnomore,  except  the  king 
2.  15  was  come  to  go  in  unto  the  king,  shereq. 

2. 15  nothing  but  what  Hegai  the  king's  chain. 

2. 16  So  Esther  was  taken  unto  king  Ahasuerus 
2  17  the  king  loved  Esther  above  all  the  worn. 
2. 18  Then  the  king  made  a  greatfeastuntoall 

2. 18  according  to  the  state  of  the  king 

2. 19  then  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's  gate 

2. 21  sat  in  the  king's  gate,  two  of  the  king's 
2.  21  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  Ahasuerus 

2.  22  Esther  certified  the  king  (thereof)  in  Mor. 
e.  23  the  book  of  the  chronicles  before  the  king 

3.  1  After  these  things  did  king  Ahasuerus 
3.    2  king's  servants,  that  (were)  in  the  king's 
3.   2  for  the  king  had  so  commanded  concern. 
3.   3  the  king's  servants,  which  (were)  in  the 
3.    3  Why  transgresses t  thou  the  king's  comma. 
3.   7  in  the  twelfth  year  of  king  Ahasuerus 

3.  8  Haman  said  unto  king  Ahasuerus,  There 
3.  8  neither  keep  they  the  king's  laws :  there. 
3.  8  (is)  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer  them 
3.   9  If  it  please  the  king,  let  it  be  written  that 

3.  9  to  bring  (it)  into  the  king's  treasuries 

3. 10  the  king  took  his  ring  from  his  hand,  and 

3. 11  the  king  said  unto  Hainan,  The  silver  (is) 

3. 12  Then  were  the  king's  scribes  called  on  the 
3. 12  unto  the  king's  lieutenants,  and  to  the 

3. 12  in  the  name  of  king  Ahasuerus  was  it 

3. 12  written,  and  sealed  with  the  king's  ring 

3. 13  sent  by  posts  into  all  the  king's  provinces 
3. 15  being  hastened  by  the  king's  commandm. 
3. 15  the  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to  drink 

4.  2  came  even  before  the  king's  gate :  for  none 
4.  2  enter  into  the  king's  gate  clothed  with  sac. 
4.  3  whithersoever  the  king's  commandment 
4.  5  (one)  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  whom 
4.  6  unto  the  street,  .which  (was)  before  thek. 
4.  7  promised  to  pay  to  the  king's  treasuries 
4.    8  that  she  should  go  in  unto  the  king,  to 

4.  11  king's  servants,  andthe  people  of  the  king 
4.  11  shall  come  unto  the  king  into  the  inner 
4.  11  except  such  to  whom  the  king  shall  hold 
4.  11  not  been  called  to  come  in  unto  the  king 
4. 13  that  thou  shalt  escape  in  the  king's  house 

4.  16  and  so  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king,  which 

5.  1  of  the  king'shouse,  over  against  theking's 
5.  1  the  king  sat  upon  his  royal  throne  in  the 
5.  2  so,  when  the  king  saw  Esther  the  queen 
5.  2  the  king  held  out  to  Esther  the  golden  sc. 
5.  3  Then  said  the  king  unto  her,  What  wilt 
5.  4  If  (it  seem)  good  unto  the  king,  let  the  king 
5.  5  the  king  said.  .So  the  king  and  Hainan 
5.  6  the  king  said  unto  Esther  at  the  banquet 
5.  8  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  king,  and 
5.  8  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  petition 
5.  8  let  the  king  and  Haman  come  to  the  ban. 
5.  8  I  will  do  to  morrow  as  the  king  hath  said 
5.  9  when  Haman  saw  Mordecai  in  the  king's 
5.  11  wherein  the  king  had  promoted  him.  and 
5.  11  above  the  princes  and  servants  of  the  king 
5.  12  did  let  no  man  come  in  with  the  king 

5.  12  am  I  invited  unto  her  also  with  the  king 
5. 13  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's  g. 
5.  14  to  morrow  speak  thou  unto  the  king  that] 

5.  14  then  go  thou  in  merrily  with  the  king  unto 

6,  i  On  that  night  could  nut  the  king  sleep 
6.    1  and  they  were  read  before  the  king 

6.  2  two  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  the  keep. 
6.  2  who  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  Aha. 
6.  3  the  king  said,  What  honour  and  dignity 
6.  3  Then  said  the  king's  servants  that  minis. 
6.  4  And  the  king  said.  Who  (is)  in  the  court! 
6.  4  into  the  outward  court  of  the  king's  house 
6.  4  to  speak  unto  the  king  to  hang  Mordecai 
6.  5  the  king's  servants  said  unto  him.  Behold 
6.    5  And  the  king  said,  Let  him  come  in 


Esth.  6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
6. 
6, 
6. 
6, 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6, 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7 
7- 
7< 
7' 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7 
7- 
7- 


Job 


6  the  king  said  unto  him,  What  shall  be 
6  unto  the  man  whom  the  king  delighteth 

6  To  whom  would  the  king  delight  to  do  ho. 

7  Haman  answered  the  king,  For  the  man 
7,  9,  9,  11  whom  the  king  delighteth  to  hou. 

8  Let  the  royal  apparel,  .which  the  king 

8  the  horse  that  the  king  rideth  upon,  and 

9  to  the  hand  of  one  of  the  kiug'smost  noble 
10  Then  the  king  said  to  Haman,  Make  haste 
10  the  Jew,  that  sitteth  at  the  king's  gate 
12  Mordecai  came  again  to  the  king's  gate 
14  came  the  king's  chamberlain,  and  hasted 

1  So  the  king  and  Haitian  came  to  banquet 

2  the  king  said  agaiu  unto  Esther  on  the 

3  thy  sight,  0  king,  and  if  it  please  the  king 

4  could  not  countervail  the  king's  damage 

5  the  king  Ahasuerus  answered,  and  said 

6  Haman  was  afraid  before  the  king  and 

7  king,  arising  from  the  banquet  of  wine 

7  evil  determined  against  him  by  the  king 

8  the  king  returned  out  of  the  palace  garden 
8  Then  said  the  king,  Willheforcethequeen 

8  As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  mouth 

9  Harbonah.  .said  before  the  king,  Behold 
9  Mordecai,  who  had  spoken  good  for  the  k. 
9  Theu  the  king  said,  Hang  him  thereon 

10  Then  was  the  king's  wrath  pacified 
1  On  that  day  did  the  king  Ahasuerus  give 

1  and  Mordecai  came  before  the  king ;  for 

2  the  king  took  off  his  ring,  which  lie  had 
.   3  Esther  spake  yet  agaiu  before  the  king 

4  the  king  held  out  the  golden  sceptre  tow. 

4  So  Esther  arose,  and  stood  before  the  king 

5  If  it  please  the  king,  and  if  I  have  found 
5  and  the  thing(seem)  right  before  the  king 

5  which  (are)  in  all  the  king's  provinces 

7  Then  the  king  Ahasuerus  said  unto  Esther 

8  as  it  liketh  you,  in  the  king's  name,  and 
8  seal  (it)  with  the  king's  ring  :  for  the 

8  in  the  king's  name,  .with  the  king's  ring 
g  Then  were  the  king's  scribes  called  at 

io  he  wrote  in  the  king  Ahasuerus'  name 

10  sealed  (it)  with  the  king's  ring  ;  and  sent 

1 1  Wherein  the  king  granted  the  Jews  which 

12  in  all  the  provinces  of  king  Ahasuerus 

14  pressed  on  by  the  king's  commandment 

15  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  king  iu 

17  whithersoever  the  king's  commandment 
1  when  the  king's  commandment  and  Ids 
2,  20  all  the  provinces  of  the  king  Ahasuerus 

3  and  officers  of  the  king,  helped  the  Jews 

4  Mordecai  (was)  great  in  the  king's  House 

11  the  number,  .was  brought  before  the  king 

12  the  king  said  unto  Esther  the  queen,  The 

12  done  in  the  rest  of  the  king's  provinces  ? 

13  If  it  pleaseth  the  king,  let  it  be  granted 

14  the  king  commanded  it  so  to  be  done:  and 

16  other  Jews  that  (were)  in  the  king's  prov. 
25  But  when  (Esther)  came  before  the  king 

1  the  king  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the 

2  whereunto  the  king  advanced  him,  (are) 

2  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings 

3  Mordecai  the  Jew  (was)  next  unto  king  A. 
14  With  kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth 
iS  He  looseth  the  bond  of  kings,  and  girdeth 

24  prevail  against  him,  as  a  king  ready  to  the 
14  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  king  of  terrors 

25  and  dwelt  as  a  king  in  the  army,  as  one 

18  (Is  it  fit)  to  say  toaking,(Thouart)wicked? 
7  but  with  kings  (are  they)  on  the  throne 

34  he  (is)a  king  over  all  the  children  of  pride 
2  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and 

6  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill 
10  Be  wise  now  therefore,  0  ye  kings ;  be 

2  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry,  my  k. 

16  The  Lour  (is)  kiug  for  ever  and  ever :  the 

50  Great  deliverance  giveth  he  to  his  king 

q  Save,  Lord  :  let  the  king  hear  us  when 

1  The  king  shall  joy  in  thy  strength,  0  Lord 

7  For  the  King  trusteth  iu  the  Lord  ;  and 

7,  9  and  the  king  of  glory  shall  come  in 

8,  10  Who  (is)  this  king  of  glory?  The  Lord 
10  The  Lord  of  hosts,  he  (is)  the  king  of  gl. 

10  yea,  the  LORD  sitteth  king  for  ever 

16  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude 

4  Thou  art  my  king,  0  God  :  command  del, 

1  which  I  have  made  touching  the  king;  my 

5  sharp  in  the  heart  of  the  king's  enemies 

9  King's  daughters  (were)  among  thy  hono. 

1 1  So  shall  the  king  greatly  desire  thy  beauty 

13  The  king's  daughter  (is)  all  glorious  within 

14  shall  be  brought  unto  the  king  in  raiment 

15  they  shall  enter  into  the  king's  palace 

2  (he  is)  a  great  king  over  all  the  earth 

6  sing  praises  unto  our  king,  sing  praises 

7  For  God  (is)  the  king  of  all  the  earth:  sing 

2  (is)mountZion.  .the  city  of  the  great  king 
4  the  kings  were  assembled,  they  passed  by 
6  Thou  wilt  prolong  the  king's  life ;  (and) 

11  the  king  shall  rejoice  in  God  ;  every  one 

12  Kings  of  armies  did  flee  apace ;  and  she 
14  When  the  Almighty  scattered  kings  in  it 
24  the  goings  of  my  God,  my  king,  in  the 
29  because  of  thy  temple,  .shall  kings  bring 

1  Give  the  king.  .and.  .unto  the  king's  son 

10  The  kings  of  Tarshish.  .the  kings  of  Sheba 

11  Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him 

12  For  God  (is)  my  king  of  old,  working  sa. 
12  (lie  is)  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth 

3  O  Lord  of  hosts,  my  king,  and  my  God 

1  and  the  Holy  One  df  Israel  (is)  our  king 
27  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth 


Eccl. 


Psa.  95.    3  For  the  Lord  (is)  a  great.,  king  above  all 

98.  6  a  joyful  noise  before  the  Lord,  the  king 

99.  4  The  king's  strength  also  loveth  judgment 
102.  15  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  thy  glory 
105.  14  yea,  he  reproved  kings  for  their  sakes 
105.  20  The  king  sent  and  loosed  him ;  (even)  the 
105.  30  frogs .  in  the  chambers  of  their  kings 
no.    5  shall  strike  through  kings  in  the  day  of 
119.  46  speak  of  thy  testimonies  also  before  kings 
135.  10  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  mighty  k. 

135.  11  Sihon  king.. an dOg king  of  Baashan,  and 
136. 17  To  him  which  smote  great  kings  :  for  his 

136.  18  slew  famous  kings :  for  his  mercy  (endu.) 
136.  19  sihon  king  of  the  Amorites:  for  his  mercy 
136.  20  Og  the  king  of  Bashan :  for  his  mercy 
13S.  4  All  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  praise  thee 
144. 10  (It  is  he)  that  giveth  salvation  unto  kings 
145.    1  I  will  extol  thee,  my  God,  0  Kiug  ;  and  I 

148.  n  Kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  people ;  prin. 

149.  2  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  k. 
149.    8  To  "bind  their  kings  with  chains,  and  their 

Prov.  1.  1  Solomon  the  son  of  David,  king  of  Israel 
8. 15  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  j. 
14.  28  In  the  multitude  of  people  (is)  the  kiug's 
14. 35  The  king's  favour  (is)  toward  a  wise  serv. 
16.  10  A  divine  sentence  (is)  in  the  lips  of  the  k. 
16.  12  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wicked. 

16. 13  Righteous  lips  (are)  the  delight  of  kings 

16. 14  The  wrath  of  a  king  (is  as)  messengers  of 

16. 15  In  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance 

19.  12  The  king's  wrath  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a 

20.  2  fear  of  a  king  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion 
20.  8  A  king  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of  judg. 
20.  26  A  wise  kiug  scattereth  the  wicked,  and 
20.  28  Mercy  and  truth  preserve  the  kin'.; ;  and 
31.  1  The  king's  heart  (is)  in  the  hand  of  the  L. 
22. 11  (for)  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king  (shall 
22.  29  he  shall  stand  before  kings;  be  shall  not 
24. 21  My  son,  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  king 
25.    1  which  the  men  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah 

2  the  honour  of  kings  (is)  to  search  out  a 

3  and  the  hearts  of  kings  (is)  unsearchable 

5  Take  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  k. 

6  Put  not  forth,  .in  the  presence  of  the  king 

4  The  king  by  judgment  establisheth  the 
14  The  king  that  faithfully  judgeth  the  pool 

27  The  locusts  have  no  king,  yet  go  they  for. 
2S  spider  taketh  hold . .  and  is  in  king's  pala. 
31  a  king,  against  whom  (there  is;  no  rising 

1  The  words  of  king  Lemuel,  the  prophecy 

3  thy  ways  to  that  which  destroyeth  kings 

4  for  kings,  0  Lemuel,  (it  is)  not  for  kingsto 

1  the  Preacher,  the  son  of  David,  king  of  J. 
12  I  the  Preacher  was  king  over  Israel  in  J. 

8  the  peculiar  treasure  of  kings  and  of  the 

12  the  man  (do)  that  oometh  after  the  king 

13  a  wise  child  than  an  old  and  foolish  king 

9  the  king  (himself)  is  served  by  the  field 

2  I  (counsel  thee)  to  keep  the  king's  com. 
4  Where  the  word  of  a  king  (is,  there  is)  p. 

14  and  there  came  a  great  king  against  it,  and 

16  Woe  to  thee,  O  laud,  when  thy  king  (is)  a 

17  when  thy  king  (is)  the  son  of  nobles,  and 
20  Curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in  thy  thought 

4  The  king  hath  brought  me  into  his  cham. 
12  While  the  king  (sitteth)  at  his  table,  my 

9  King  Solomon  made  himself  a  chariot  of 

11  and  behold  king  Solomon  with  the  crown 

5  the  king  (is)  held  in  the  galleries 
1  iu  the  days  of  Vzziah,  Jotham.  .kings  of 
1  In  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  died  I  saw 
5  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  king,  theLORD 
1  the  days  of.  .Uzziah  king  of  Judah,  (that) 
1  king  of  Syria,  and.  .king  of  Israel,  went 

6  set  a  king  in  the  midst  of  it,  (even)  the  son 

16  land,  .shall be  forsaken  of  both  her  kings 

17  departed  from  Judah  ;  (even)  the  king  of 

20  by  the  king  of  Assyria,  the  head,  and  the 

4  shall  be  taken  away  before  the  king  of  A. 

7  (even)the  king  of  Assyria,  and  all  his  glory 
2 1  fret  themselves,  and  curse  their  king  and 

5  (Are)  not  my  princes  altogether  kings S 

12  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria 
4  take  up  this  proverb  against  Ihekingof  B. 
9  it  hath  raised  up.  .all  the  kingsof  the  na. 

iE  All  tli*  kings  of  the  nations,  (even)  all  of 

28  In  the  year  that  king  Ahaz  died  was  this 
4  a  fierce  king  shall  rule  over  them,  saith 

11  son  of  the  wise,  the  son  of  ancient  kings  ? 
1  when  Saigon  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  him 
4  So  shall  the  king  of  Assyria  lead  away  the 

6  to  he -delivered  from  the  king  of  Assyria 

15  according  to  the  days  of  one  kiug:  after 

21  and  the  kingsof  the  earth  upon  the  earth 
33  yea,  for  the  king  it  is  prepared :  he  hath 
~  1  a  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and 
17  Thine  eyes  shall  seethe  kinginhis  beauty 

22  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  (is)  our  king;  he 
1  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  king  Hezekiah 

1  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  came  up  ag. 

2  the  king  of  Assyria  sent .  unto  king  Ilez. 
4  Thus  saith  the  great  kiug,  the  king  of  A. 
6  so  (is)  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  to  all  that 

8  Live  pledges,  .to  my  master  the  king  of  A. 

13  Hear,  .the  words  of  the  great  king,  thek. 

14  Thus  saitli  the  king,  Let  not  Hezekiah 

15  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 

16  for  thus  saith  the  king  of  Assyria,  Make 
iS  bis  land  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  A. 
21  for  the  king's  commandment  was,  saying 

1  when  king  Hezekiah  heard  (it),  that  he 
4  whom  the  kiug  of  Assyria  his  master  hath 


Song  1. 


Isa 


KING 


571 


KING 


Isa.  37.  5  the  servants  of  king  Hezekiah  came  to  I. 
37.  6  the  servants  of  the  king  of  Assyria  have 
37.  8  found  the  king  of  Assyria  warring  against 
37.  g  heard  say  concerning  Tirhakah  king  of  E. 
37.  10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiah  king  of 
37.  10  given  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria 
37.  11  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of  Assyria 
37.  13  king  of  Hamath,  and  the  king  of  Arphad 
37. 13  the  king  of  the  city  of  Sepharvaim,  Hena 
37.  iS  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  laid  waste  all 
37.  21  prayed  to  me  against  Sennacherib  king  of 
37.  33  concerning  the  king  of  Assyria,  He  shall 

37.  37  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  departed 

38.  6  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Assyria :  and 

38.  9  The  writing  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah 

39.  1  king  of  Babylon,  sentletters  and  a  present 
39.  3  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king  Hezek. 
39.  7  he  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of  the  king  of  B. 
41.  2  called  him.  .and  made  (him) rule  over  k.? 
41.  21  bring  forth .  .saith  the  king  of  Jacob 

43. 15  Holy  One*  the  Creator  of  Israel,  your  king 

44.  6  Thus  saith  the  Lord  the  king  of  Israel 

45.  1 1  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open 
49.    7  kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also 
49.  23  kings  shall  be  thy  nursing  fathers,  and 
52.  15  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  lum 
57.   9  thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  ointment 
60.   3  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising 

60. 10  and  their  kiugs  shall  minister  unto  thee 

60. 1 1  thy  gates  shall  be  open .  (that)  their  kings 
60.  16  shalt  suck  the  breasts  of  kings :  and  thou 
62.   2  thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  thy  glory 

Jer.     1.    2  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon  king  of  Judah 
1.   3,  3  thesonof  Josiahkingof  Judah,  untothe 

1. 18  against  the  kings  of  Judah,  against  the 
2. 26  their  kings,  then-  princes,  and  their  priests 

3.  6  uuto  me  in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  king 

4.  9  the  heart  of  the  king  shall  perish,  and 

8.    1  shall  bring  out  the  bones  of  the  kings  of 

8. 19  (Is)  not  the  Lord  in  Zion  ?  (is)  not  her  king 
10.  7  Who  would  not  fear  thee,  0  king  of  nat.? 
10. 10  the  living  God,  and  an  everlasting  King 

1 3  the  kings  that  sit  upon  David's  throne 
iS  Say  unto  the  king  and  to  the  queen,  Hu. 
4  Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah  king  of  J. 

19  whereby  the  kingsof  Judah  come  in,  and 

20  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  kings 
25  Then  shall  there  enter . .  kings  and  princes 

3  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  kings 

4  nor  the  kings  of  Judah,  and  have  filled 

13  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  shall 

4  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and 

5  all  the  treasures  of  the  kings  of  Judah 

1  when  king  Zedekiah  sent  unto  lum  Pas. 

2  king  of  Babylon  maketh  war  against  us 
4  wherewith  ye  tight  against  the  king  of  B. 
7  I  will  deliver  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 

7  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 

10  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and 

1 1  touching  the  house  of  the'king  of  Judah 

1  Go  down  to  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah 

2  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  king  of  Ju. 

4  then  shall  there  enter,  .kings  sitting  upon 

6  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  king's  house 
11  Shallum  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah 
18  Jehoiakimthesonof  Josiahking  of  Judah 

24  Coniah  the  sou  of  Jehoiakim  long  of  Judah 

25  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 

5  and  a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and 
1  after  that  Xebuchadrezzar  king  of  Baby. 
1  Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 

8  So  will  I  give  Zedekiah  the  king  of  Judah 
1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiahkingof  Judah 
1  the  first  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 

3  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon  king  of  Judah 

9  Nebuchadrezzar  the  king  of  Babylon,  my 

11  these  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of  Bab. 

12  I  will  punish  the  king  of  Babylon,  and 

14  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve 

18  the  kings  thereof,  and  the  princes  thereof 

19  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and  his  servants 

20  all  the  kings,  .and  all  the  kings  of  the  land 
22  the  kings  of  Tyrus,  and  all  the  kings 
22  the  kings  of  the  isles  which  (are)  beyond 

25.  24  the  kings  of  Arabia,  and  all  the  kings  of 
25.  25  And  all  the  kings  of  Zimri,  and  all  the 
25.  25  kings  of  Elam,  and  all  the  kingsof  their. 
25. 26  all  the  kings  of  the  north,  far  and  near 

25.  26  thekingofSheshachshalldrinkafterthem 

26.  1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiahkingof  Judah 
26.  10  they  came  up  from  the  king's  house  unto 
26.  18  prophesied  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  kins 
26.  19  Did  Hezekiah  kiug  of  Judah  and  all  Judah 
26.  21  when. . the  king.-heard  his  words,  the  king 
26.  22  Jehoiakim  the  king  sent  men  into  Egypt 

26.  23  and  brought  them  unto  Jehoiakim  the  k. 

27.  1  Jehoiakim  the  sou  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah 
27.  3  to  the  kiugof  Edom,and  to^the  king  of  II. 
27.  3  king  of  the  Ammonites,  arid  to  the  king 
27.  3  and  to  the  king  of  Zidon,  by  the  hand  of 
27.  3  come  to  Jerusalem  unto  Zedekiah  king  of 
27.  6  intothehandof  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king 
27.  7  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve 
27.  8  which  will  not  serve . .  the  king  of  Babylon 
27.  8,  11,  12  under  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  Bah. 
27.  9,  14  Ye  shall  not  serve  the  king  of  Babylon 
27.  12  I  spake  also  to  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 
87,  13  that  will  not  serve  the  king  of  Babylon  ? 
27.  17  serve  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  live :  whe. 
27.  18,  21  (in)  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah 
27.  20  Whkii  3Sebiu-hadnezzar  king  of  Babylon 
27.  20  Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 


21. 
21. 


28. 
28. 

28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32. 
32. 
32- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
3^- 
36. 
36- 
3^- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
3$- 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38- 
38. 
38. 
38.. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 


1  the  reign  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah,  in 

2  I  have  brokeuthe  yoke  of  the  king  of  Ba. 

3  king  of  Babylon  took  away  from  this  place 

4  Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 
4  will  break  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

11  the  yoke  of  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Bab. 
14  may  serve  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Baby. 

2  After  that  Jeconiah  the  king,  and  the  qu. 

3  king  of  Judah  sent  unto,  .king  of  Babylou 
16  of  the  king  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne 

21  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 

22  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  roasted  in  the 
9  But  they  shall  serve.  .David  their  king 

1  in  the  tenth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Ju. 

2  then  the  king  of  Babylon's  army  besieged 

2  prison,  which  (was)  in  the  Icing  of  Judah's 

3  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  had  shut  him  up 
3,  4  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

4  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  shall  not  escape 

28  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 
32  their  kings,  their  princes,  their  priests 
36  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of 

4  concerning  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  J. 

1  when  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon 

2  Go  and  speak  to  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 

2  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and 

3  behold  the  eyes  of  the  king  of  Babylon 

4  hear  the  word . .  0  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 

5  the  former  kings  which  were  before  thee 

6  spake  all  these  words  unto  Zedekiah  king 

7  When  the  king  of  Babylon's  army  fought 

8  after  that  the  king  Zedekiah  had"  made  a 
21  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah,  and  his  princes 
21  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon's 

1  days  of  Jehoiakim  the  sou  of  Josiah  king 

11  when  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 
1,  o  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of 

12  Then  he  went  down  into  the  king's  house 

16  We  will  surely  tell  the  king  of  all  these 
20  they  went  in  to  the  king  into  the  court 

20  told  all  the  words  in  the  ears  of  the  king 

21  So  the  king  sent  Jehudi  to  fetch  the  roll 

21  and  Jehudi  read  it  in  the  ears  of  the  king 
2i  the  princes  which  stood  beside  the  king 

22  Now  the  king  sat  in  the  winter  house,  in 

24  the  king,  nor  any  of  his  servants  that 

25  had  made  intercession  to  the  king  that 

26  the  king  commanded  Jerahmeel  the  son 

27  after  that  the  king  had  burnt  the  roll,  and 
2S,  32  which  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah  hath 

29  thou  shalt  say  to  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 

29  The  king  of  Babylon  shall  certainly  come 

30  saith  the  Lord  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Jud. 
1  king  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Josiah  reigned 

1  Coniah.  .whom  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 
3  Zedekiah  the  king  sent  Jehucal  the  son 
7  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  the  king  of  Judah 

17  the  king  sent,  .and  the  king  asked  him 

17  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of 

18  Jeremiah  said  unto  king  Zedekiah,  What 

19  king  of  Babylon  shall  not  come  against 

20  hear  now,  I  pray  thee,  0  my  lord  the  king 

21  Then  Zedekiah  the  king  commanded  that 

3  he  given  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Bab. 

4  the  princes  said  unto  the  king,  We  beseech 

5  Zedekiah  the  king  said,  Behold,  he  (is)  in 
5  for  the  king  (is)  not  (he  that)tcan  do  (any) 

7  in  the  king's  house,  .the  king  then  sitting 

8  the  kiug's  house,  and  spake  to  the  king 

9  My  lord  the  king,  these  men  have  done 

10  Then  the  king  commanded  Ebed-melech 

1 1  went  into  the  house  of  the  king  under  the 
14  Zedekiah  the  king  sent,  .and  the  king  said 

16  the  king  sware  secretly  unto  Jeremiah 

17  go  forth  unto  the  king  of  Babylon's  prin. 

18  if  thou  wilt  not  go  forth  to  the  king  of  B. 

19  the  king  said  unto  Jeremiah,  I  am  afraid 

22  that  are  left  in  the  king  of  Judah's  house 

22  (shall  be)  brought  forth  to  the  king  of  B. 

23  shall  be  taken  by  the  hand  of  the  king  of 
25  Declare,  .what  thou  hast  said  unto  the  k. 

25  hide  it  not.  .what  the  king  said  unto  thee 

26  presented  my  supplication  before  the  king 

27  these  words  that  the  kinghad  commanded 
1  In  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Ju. 
1  came  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon  and 
3alltheprincesof  the  king  of  Babylon  came 

3  the  residue  of  the  princes  of  the  kingof  B. 

4  when  Zedekiah  the  king  of  Judah  saw  them 

4  by  the  way  of  the  king's  garden,  by  the 

5  brought  him  up  to  Nebuchadnezzar  king 

6  the  king  of  Babylon  slew.,  also  the  king  of 
S  the  Chaldeans  burnt  the  king's  house,  and 

11  king  of  Babylon  gave  charge  concerning 

13  and  all  the  king  of  Babylon's  princes 

5  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  hathmade  ^o. 

7  heard  that  the  kingof  Babylon  had  made 

0  serve  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  it  shall  be 
11  heard  that  the  king  of  Babylon  had  left  a 

14  certainly  know  that  Baalis  the  king  of  the 

1  the  princes  of  the  kiug,  even  ten  men  with 

2  whom  the  kingof  Babylon  had  made  gov. 
9  the  king  had  made  for  fearofBaasha  king 

10  the  king's  daughters,  and  all  the  people 
18  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  made  governor 

11  Be  not  afraid  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  of 

6  the  kiug's  daughters,  and  every  person 
10  send  and  take  Nebuchadrezzar  the  kingof 

9  and  the  wickedness  of  the  kings  of  Judah 
1 7  our  kings,  and  our  princes,  in  the  cities  of 
21  your  kings,  and  your  princes,  and  the  pe. 
30  give  Pharaoh -hophra  king  of  Egypt  into 


Jer.  44. 
44. 
45' 
46, 
46 
46. 
46 
46, 
46, 
46. 
46 
48. 
49. 
49. 
49 
49 
49 
49 
50 
5° 
50 
50 
5° 


5i' 
52 
52 
52 
52 
52 
52. 
52 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52- 

52- 

52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 
52. 

Lam.  2. 


Eze. 


Dan. 


30  I  gave  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  iuto  the 
30  haud  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 

1  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 

2  against  the  army  of  Pharaoh-necho  king 
2  Which  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Dabylon 

2  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  J  osiah  king  of  J. 
13  how  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 

17  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  (is  but)  a  noise 

18  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  king,  whose  name  is 

25  I  will  punish,  .their  kings;  even  Pharaoh 

26  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 
15  saith  the  King,  whose  name  (is)  The  Lord 

1  why  (then)  doth  their  king  inherit  Gad 

3  for'their  king  shall  go  into  captivity,  (and) 
28  which  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 

30  Nebuchadrezzar  kind  of  Babylon  hath 
34  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah  king 
38  will  destroy  from  thence  the  king  and 

17  first  the  king.. and  last  this,  .king  of  Ba. 

18  I  will  punish  the  king  of  Babylon  and 
18  as  I  have  punished  the  king  of  Assyria 
41  many  kings  shall  be  raised  up  from  the 
43  The  king  of  Babylon  hath  heard  the  report 
11  hath  raised  up  the  spiiit  of  the  kings  of 

28  with  the  kings  of  the  Medes,  the  captains 

31  to  show  the  king  of  Babylon  that  Ms  city 
34  the  king  of  Babylon  hath  devoured  me 
57  saith  the  King,  whose  name  (is)  The  LORD 
59  when  he  went  with  Zedekiah  the  king  of 

3  Zedekiah  rebelled  agaiustthe  king  of  B. 

4  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon  came 

5  besieged  mito  the  eleventh  year  of  king 

7  walls,  which  (was)  by  the  king's  garden 

8  theChaldeauspursued  after  the  king,  and 

9  Then  they  took  the  king,  and  carried  him 
9  up  to  the  king  of  Babylon  to  Biblah  in 

10  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Ze. 

11  the  king  of  Babylon  bound  him  in  chains 

12  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 

12  served  the  king  of  Babylon,  into  Jerusalem 

13  burned.,  the  king's  house  ;  and  all  the  ho. 
15  that  fell  to  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  the 
20  which  king  Solomon  Lad  made  in  the  ho. 

25  of  them  that  were  near  the  king's  person 

26  brought  them  to  the  king  of  Babylon  to 

27  the  king  of  Babylon  smote  them,  and  put 
31  year  of  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachinking 
31  Evil-merodachkingofBabylon  in  the  first 

31  lifted  up  the  head  of  Jehoiacliin  king  of 

32  set  bis  throne  above  the  throne  of  the  king 
34  continual  diet  given  him  of  the  king  of 

.   6  and  hath  despised .  .the  king  and  the  pr. 
.   9  her  king  and  her  princes  (are)  among  the 
.  12  longs  of  the  earth,  and  all  the  inhabitants 
.    2  which  (was)  the  fifth  year  of  king  Jehoia. 
.  27  The  king  shall  mourn,  and  the  prince  shall 
.  12  the  king  of  Babylon .  hath  taken  the  king 
.  16  hi  the  place  (where)  the  king  (dwelleth) 
.   9  and  brought  him  to  the  king  of  Babylon 
.  19  that  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon 
.  21  the  king  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  parting 
.   2  the  king  of  Babylon  set  himself  against 
.    7  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon,  a  king 
,  33  thou  didst  enrich  the  kings  of  the  earth 
.  35  their  kings  shall  be  sore  afraid,  they  shall 

12  take  up  a  lamentation  upon  the  king  of  T. 

17  I  will  lay  thee  before  kings,  that  they  may 
,    2  set  thy  face  against  Pharaoh  king  of  Eg. 

.    3  I  (am)  against  thee,  Pharaoh  king  of  Eg. 

18  king  of  Babylon  caused  his  army  to  serve 
.  19  unto  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon 

.  10  by  the  hand  of  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of 
.  21  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh  kiug 
22  Behold, I (am)against Pharaoh  kingof  E. 
24,  25  I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king 
25  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and 
.   2  Speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and 

2  take  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh  king 

.  10  their  kings  shall  be  horribly  afraid  of  thee 
11  The  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  shall 

29  There  (is)Edom,  her  kings,  and  all  her 

22  and  one  king  shall  be  king  to  them  all 
24  David  my  servant  (shall  be)  king  over 

7  (neither)  they,  nor  their  kings,  by  their 

7  nor  by  the  carcases  of  then'  kings  in  their 
9  the  carcases  of  their  kings  far  from  me 

,    1  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 

1  came  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Eabylon 

2  the  Lord  gave  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah 

3  the  king  spake  unto  Ashpenaz  the  master 

4  ability  in  them  to  stand  in  the  king's  pal. 

5  king  appointed . .  provision  of  the  king's 
5  that.. they  might  stand  before  the  king 

8  with  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat,  nor 
10 1  fear  my  lord  the  king,  who  hath  appoint. 
io"ye  make  (me)cndanger  my  head  to  the  k. 

13  that  eat  of  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat 
15  which  did  eat  the  portion  of  the  king's 

18  at  the  end  of  the  days  that  the  king  had 

19  king  communed,  .stood  they  before  the  k. 

20  in  all  matters,  .that  the  king  enquired 

21  continued  (even)  unto  the  first  year  of  k. 
2  the  king  commanded,  .to  show  the  king 

2  So  they  came  and  stood  before  the  king 

3  the  king  said  unto  them,  I  have  dreamed 

4  Then  spake  the  Chaldeans  to  the  king  in 
1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  king  Bel. 

20  thousawest having (two)hornsfare)  thek. 

21  the  rough  goat  (is)  the  king  of  Grecia:  and 
21  that  (is)  between  his  eyes(is)  the  first  king 

23  in  the  latter  time,  .a  king  of  fierce  coun. 
27  I  roseupj  anddidthe king'sbusiness;  and 


KING 


572 


KING 


Dan.    9.   6  which  spake  in  thy  name  to  our  kings,  our 
9.    8  to  our  kings,  to  our  princes,  and  to  our 

10.  1  In  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 
10. 13  I  remained  therewith  the  kings  of  Persia 

11.  2  there  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  Pe. 
xx.   3  a  mighty  king  shall  stand  up,  that  shall 
11.    5  the  king  of  the  south  shall  he  strong,  and 
it.    6  for  the  king's  daughter  of  the  south  shall 
11.   6  to  the  king  of  the  north  to  make  an  agree. 
11.    7  shall  enter  into  the  fortress  of  the  king 
11.    8  shall  continue  (more)years  than  the  king 
11.    9  So  the  king  of  the  south  shall  come  into 
11.  11  the  king  of  the  south .  .(even)  with  the  k. 

11. 13  For  the  king  of  the  north  shall  return 

11. 14  shall  many  stand  up  against  the  king 
11.  15  So  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come,  and 
11.  25  against  the  king  of  the  south  with  a  great 
11.  25  the  king  of  the  south  shall  he  stirred  up 
xt.  27  these  kings'  hearts  (shall  be)  to  do  misch. 
11.  36  the  king  shall  do  according  to  his  will 
n.40  shall  the  king  of  the  south  push  at  him 
11.  40  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come  against 

Hos.  1.  1  Jotham,  Ahaz,  (and)  Hezekiah,  kings  of  J. 
1.  1  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash,  king  of  Is. 
3.  4  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  king,  and 
3.  5  return,  and  seek.  .David  their  king;  and 
5.  1  give  ye  ear,  0  house  of  the  king ;  for  jud. 
5.  13  sent  to  king  Jareb :  yet  could  he  not  heal 
7  3  They  make  the  king  glad  with  their  wick. 
7.  5  In  the  day  of  our  king  the  princes  have 
7.   7  all  their  Icings  are  fallen :  (there  is)  none 

5.  10  sorrow,  .for  the  burden  of  the  king  of  pri. 
10.  3  We  have  no  king,  .what  then  should  a  k. 
10.  6  unto  Assyria  (for)  a  present  to  king  Jareb 
10.    7  her  king  is  cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the 

10.  15  in  a  morning  shall  the  king  of  Israel  utt. 

11.  5  the  Assyrian  shall  be  his  king,  because 

13. 10  I  will  be  thy  king.  .Give  me  a  king  and 

13. 11  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger,  and  took 
Amos  1.    1  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of  Judah,  and 

1.    1  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Isr. 

1.  15  their  king  shall  go  into  captivity,  he  and 

2.  1  lie  burned  the  bones  of  the  king  of  Edom 
7.    1  latter  growth  after  the  king's  mowings 
7. 10  sent  to  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel,  saying 
7.  13  for  it  (is)  the  king's  chapel,  and  it  (is)  the 

Jon.    3.    6  For  word  came  unto  the  king  of  Nineveh 

3.  7  by  the  decree  of  the  king  and  his  nobles 
Mic.    1.    1  Jotham,  Ahaz,  (and)  Hezekiah,  kings  of  J. 

1.  14  Achzib  (shall  be)  a  lie  to  the  kings  of  Is. 

2.  13  their  King  shall  pass  before  them,  and 

4.  9  (is  there)  no  king  in  thee  ?  is  thy  counsel. 

6.  5  remember  now  what  Balak  king  of  Moab 
Nah.   3.  iS  Thy  shepherds  slumber,  O  king  of  Assyria 
Hab.   1. 10  shall  scoff  at  the  kings,  and  the  princes 
Zeph.  1.    1  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon,  king  of 

1.    8  punish theprinces,  and theking'schildren 
3. 15  the  king  of  Israel,  (even)  the  Lord,  (is) 
Hag.   1.    1,  15  In  the  second  year  of  Darius  the  king 
Zech.  7.    1  in  the  fourth  year  of  king  Darius,  (that) 
9.    5  the  king  shall  perish  from  Gaza,  and  As. 
9.    9  thy  king  cometh  unto  thee :  he  (is)  just 
ti.    6  I  will  deliver,  .into  the  hand  of  his  king 
14.   5  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of 
14.   9  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth 
14.  10  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  king's  wine 
14.  16  shall  even  go  up.  .to  worship  the  king 
14.  17  toworshiptheking.theLORDofhosts.even 
Mai.   1. 14  for  I  (am)  a  great  king,  saith  the  Lord  of 

.  A  king,  counsellor,  N3?<?,  Tjpp  melek,  malka. 
Ezra  4.    8  wrote  a  letter,  .to  Artaxerxes  the  king  in 
4. 11  that  they  sent,  unto  Artaxerxes  the  king 
4.  12  Be  it  known  unto  the  king,  that  the  Jews 

4. 13  Be  it  known  now  unto  the  king,  that  if 
4.  13  shalt  endamage  the  revenue  of  the  kings 

4. 14  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the  king's  dishonour 
4.  14  therefore  have  we  sent  and  certified  the  k. 

4. 15  hurtful  unto  kings  and  provinces,  and  that 

4. 16  We  certify  the  king,  that  if  this  city  be  bu. 
4.  17  sent  the  king  an  answer  unto  Rehum  the 
4.  19  hath  made  insurrection  against  kings,  and 
4.  20  There  have  been  mighty  kings  also  over 

4.  22  damagifgrow  to  the  hurt  of  "the  kings? 

4. 23  when  the  copy  of  king  Artaxerxes'  letter 

4. 24  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius  king  of 

5.  6  letter  that  Tatnai. .  sent  unto  Darius  the  k. 
5.  7  written  tbus  ;  Unto  Darius  the  king,  all  p. 
5.    8  Be  it  known  unto  the  king,  that  we  went 

5. 11  which  a  great  king  of  Israel  builded  and 
5.  12  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  k. 
5.  13  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  kingof  Babylon 

5. 13  king  Cyrus  made  a  decree  to  build  this  h. 
5.  14  those  did  Cyrus  the  king  take  out  of  the 

5. 17  if  (it  seem)  good  to  the  king,  let  there  be 
5.  17  search  made  in  the  king's  treasure  house 

5.  17  a  decree  was  made  of  Cyrus  the  king  to 
5. 17  the  king  send  his  pleasure  to  us  concern. 

6.  1  Then  Darius  the  king  made  a  decree,  and 
6.    3  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king,  .the  king 

6.   4  the  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  king's 
6.   8  of  the  king's  goods,  (even)  of  the  tribute 
6.  10  pray  for  the  life  of  the  king,  and  of  his 

6. 12  destroy  all  kings  and  people  that  shall 

6.  13  according  to  that  which  Darius  the  king 

6. 14  Cyrus,  and  Darius,  and  Artaxerxes  king 

6.  15  the  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius  the  k 

7.  12  Artaxerxes,  king  of  kings,  unto  Ezra  the 
7.  14  Forasmuch  as  thou  art  sent  of  the  king 
7.  15  which  the  king  and  his  counsellors  have 
7.  20  bestow  (it)  tint  of  the  king's  treasure  house 
7.  21  I,  (even)  ]  Artaxerxes  the  king,  do  make 


Ezra    7.  23  against  the  realm  of  the  king  and  his  sons? 
7.  26  will  not  do  the  law  of  the  king,  let  judg. 

Dan.  2.    4  O  king,  live  for  ever  :  tell  thy  servants 
2.    5  The  king  answered  and  said  to  the  Chal. 
2.    7  Let  the  king  tell  his  servants  the  dream 
2.    8  king  answered  and  said,  I  know  of  certa. 
2.  10  The  Chaldeans  answered  before  the  king 
2. 10  There  is  not  a  man . .  can  show  the  king's 

2. 10  therefore  (there  is)  no  king,  lord,  nor  ruler 

2. 11  a  rare  thing  that  the  king  require th ;  and 

2. 11  that  can  show  it  before  the  king,  except 
2.  12  For  this  cause  the  king  was  angry  and 

2.  14  to  Arioch  the  captain  of  the  king's  guard 
2. 15  said  to  Arioch  the  king's  captain,  Why 

2. 15  decree  (so)  hasty  from  the  king?  Then  A. 
2.  16  desired  of  the  king  that  he  would  give 

2. 16  he  would  show  the  kingthe  interpretation 
2.  21  he  removeth  kings,  and  setteth  up  kings 
2.  23  made  knowu  unto  us  the  king's  matter 
2.  24  whom  the  king  had  ordained  to  destroy 
2.  24  before  the  king,  and  I  will  show  unto  the  k. 
2.  25  brought  in  Daniel  before  the  king  in  haste 
2.  25  that  will  make  known  unto  the  king  the 
2.  26  The  king  answered  and  said  to  Daniel 

2.  27  answered  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  and 
2.  27  secret  which  the  king. .show  unto  the  king 
2.  28  niaketh  known  to  the  king,  .what  shall 
2.  29  As  for  thee,  0  king,  thy  thoughts  came 
2.  30  make  known  the  interpretation  to  the  k. 
2.  31  Thou,  0  king,  sawest,  and,  behold,  a  great 
2.  36  tell  the  interpretation,  .before  the  kiug 
2.  37  Thou,  O  king,  (art)  a  king  of  kings :  for 
2.  44  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God 
2.  45  God  hath  made  known  to  the  king  what 
2.  46  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar  fell  upon  his 
2.  47  king  answered.  .Of  a  truth,  .a  Lord  of  k. 

2. 48  Then  the  king  made  Daniel  a  great  man 

2. 49  Then  Daniel  requested  of  the  king,  and 

2.  49  but  Daniel  (sat)  in  the  gate  of  the  king 

3.  1  king  made  an  image  of  gold,  whose  height 
3.  2  the  king  sent  to  gather  together  the  pri. 
3.  2  which  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  had  set 
3.  3,  7  that  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  had  set 
3.  s  that  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  hath  set 
3.  9  said  to  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  O  king 
3. 10  Thou,  0  king,  hast  made  a  decree,  that 

3. 12  these  men,  0  king,  have  not  regarded  thee 

3. 13  Then  they  brought  these  men  before  the  k. 
3. 16  said  to  the  king,  O  Nebuchadnezzar,  we 
3.  17  he  will  deliver,  .out  of  thine  hand,  0  king 
3. 18  be  it  known  unto  thee,  0  king,  that  we 
3.  22  the  king's  commandment  was  urgent,  and 
3.  24  the  king  was  astonied,  and  rose  up'in  haste 
3. 24  They  answered . .  unto  the  king,  True,  0  k. 
3.  27  captains,  and  the  king's  counsellors,  being 
3.  28  have  changed  the  king's  word,  and  yielded 

3.  30  the  king  promoted  Shadrach,  Meshach 

4.  1  the  king,  unto  all  people,  nations,  and 

4. 18  This  dream  I  king  Nebuchadnezzar  have 

4. 19  The  king  spake,  and  said,  Belteshazzar 
4.  22  It  (is)  thou,  O  king,  that  art  grown  and 
4.  23  the  king  saw  a  watcher  and  an  holy  one 
4. 24  This  (is)  the  interpretation,  O  king,  and 
4.  24  decree,  .which  is  come  upon  my  lord  the 
4.  27  O  king,let  my  counsel  beacceptableunto 
4.  28  this  came  upon  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar 

4. 30  The  king  spake,  and  said.Is  not  this  great  B. 
4.  31  While  the  word  (was)  in  the  king's  mouth 

4. 31  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  to  thee  it  is  spoken 

4.  37  and  extol  and  honour  the  king  of  heaven 

5.  1  the  king  made  a  great  feast  toathousand 
5.  2,  3  the  king,  and  his  princes,  his  wives,  and 
5.  5  plaster  of  the  wall  of  the  king's  palace 
5.  5  king  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote 
5.  6  the  king's  countenance  was  changed,  and 
5.  7  The  king  cried  aloud  to  bring  in  the  astro. 
5.  7  the  king  spake,and  said  to  thewise(men) 
5.    8  Then  came  in  all  the  king's  wise  (men) 

5.  8  nor  make  known  to  the  king  the  interpr. 
5.   9  ThenwaskingBelshazzargreatly  troubled 

5. 10  byreason  of  the  words  of  the  king  and  his 
5.  10  O  king,  live  for  ever  :  let  not  thy  thoughts 

5. 11  whom  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  .the  king 

5. 12  Daniel,  whom  the  king  named  Belteshaz. 

5. 13  Then  was  Daniel  brought. .before  the  king 
5. 13  the  king  spake  and  said  unto  Daniel,  (Art) 
5.  13  whom  the  king  my  father  brought  out  of 
5. 17  Daniel  answered  and  said  before  the  king 
5. 17  Iwill  read  the  writing  unto  the  king,  and 
5.  18  0  thou  king,  the  most  high  God  gave  N. 

5.  30  In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king 

6.  2  and  the  king  should  have  no  damage 

6.    3  king  thought  to  set  him  over  the  whole 
6.    6  to  the  king,  and  said  thus  unto  him,  King 
6.    7,  12  save  of  thee,  O  king,  he  shall  be  cast 
6.    8  O  king,  establish  the  decree,  and  sign  the 
6.    9  king  Darius  signed  the  writing  and  the 
u.  12  spake  before  thekingconcerningthe king's 
6.  12  The  king  answered  and  said.  The  thing  (is) 
6.  13  Then  answered  they.. before  the  king.That 
6. 13  regardeth  not  thee,  0  king,  nor  the  decree 
6.  14  the  king,  when  heheard  (these) words,  was 
6.  15  unto  the  king,  and  said  unto  the  king 
6.  15  Know,  O  king,  that  the  law  of  the  Medes 

6. 15  nor  statute  which  the  king  establisheth 
6.  16  kiug  commanded,  and  they  brought  Dan. 

6. 16  the  king  spake  and  said  unto  Daniel,  Thy 

6. 17  the  king  sealed  it  with  his  own  siguet 

6. 18  the  king  went  to  his  palace,  and  passed 

6. 19  the  king  arose  very  early  in  the  morning 
6.  20  kiug  spake  and  said  to  Daniel,  O  Daniel 
6. 21  said  Daniel  unto  the  king,  O  king,  live 


Dan.   6.  22  before  thee,  O  king,  have  I  done  no  hurt 
6.  23  Then  was  the  king  exceeding  glad  for  him 

6.  24  the  king  commanded,  aud  they  brought 
6. 25  king  Darius  wrote  unto  all  people,  nations 

7.  1  first  year  of  Belshazzar  king  of  Babylon 
7.17  kings,  (which)  shall  arise  out  of  the  earth 

7. 24  horns  out  of  this  kingdom  (are)  ten  kings 
7.  24  and  another,  .shall  subdue  three  kings 

i, Kingdom,  nplSo  melukah. 

Eze.  17.  13  hath  taken  of  the  king's  seed,  and  made 
Dan.    1.   3  and  of  the  king's  seed,  and  of  the  princes 

5. Kingdom,  nabpD  mainlahah. 

Anios  7.  13  it  (is)  the.  .chapel,  and  it  (is)  the  king's 
6.  A  king,  fiaaiXevs  basileus. 

Matt.  1.    6  begat  David  the  king ;  and  David  [the  k.] 
2.    1  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  king,  behold 
2.    2  Where  is  he  that  is  born  king  of  the  Jews 
2.   3  When  Herod  the  king  had  heard  (these) 
2.   9  they  had  heard  the  king,  they  departed 

5.  35  for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great  king 

10. 18  before  governors  and  kings  for  my  sake 
11.   8  they  that  wear  soft  (clothing)  are  in  [k.] 

14.  9  the  king  was  sorry :  nevertheless,  for  the 

17.  25  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  custom  or 

18.  23  likened  unto  a  certain  king,  which 

21.  5  thy  king  cometh  unto  thee,  meek,  and 

22.  2  is  like  unto  a  certain  king,  which 

22.   7  when  the  king  heard.,  he  was  wroth:  and 
22.  11  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests 
22.  13  Then  said  the  king  to  the  servants,  Bind 
25.  34  Then  shall  the  king  say  unto  them^on  his 
25.  40  the  king  shall  answer  and  say  unto"  them 

27. 11  saying,  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews? 
27.  29  mocked  him,  saying,  Hail,  king  of  the  J. 
27.  37  written,  This  is  Jesus  the  king  of  the  J. 
27.  42  If  he  be  the  king  of  Israel,  let  him  now 

Mark  6. 14  king  Herod  heard  (of  him) ;  for  his  name 

6.  22  the  king  said  unto  the  damsel,  Ask  of  me 

6. 25  straightway  with  haste  unto  the  king 

6.  26  the  king  was  exceeding  sorry ;  (yet)  for  his 
6.  27  king  sent  an  executioner,  and  commanded 

13.  9  before  rulers  and  kings  for  my  sake,  for 

15.  2  asked  him,  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews? 
15.  9  I  release  unto  you  the  king  of  the  Jews? 
15.  12  (him)  whom  ye  call  the  kiug  of  the  Jews 
15.  18  began  to  salute  him, 'Hail,  King  of  the  J.! 
15.  26  was  written  over,  The  king  of  the  Jews 
15.  32  Let  Christ  the  king  of  Israel  descend 

Luke  1.    5  in  the  days  of  Herod  the  king  of  Judea 
10.  24  kings  have  desired  to  see  those  things  w. 

14.  31  king,  going  to.  .war  against  another  king 

19.  38  king  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

21. 12  before  kings  and  rulers  formyname'ssake 

22.  25  kings  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  lordship 

23.  2  saying  that  he  himself  is  Christ  a  king  ? 
23.   3  saying,  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews? 
23.  37  If  thou  be  the  king  of  the  Jews,  save  thy. 
23.  38  and  Hebrew,  This  is  the  king  of  the  Jews? 

John  1. 49  Sou  of  God ;  thou  art  the  king  of  Israel 
6. 15  and  take  him  by  force,  to  make  him  a  k. 
12.  13  king  of  Israel  that  cometh  in  the  name 
12.  15  thy  king  cometh,  sitting  on  an  ass's  colt 
18.  33  and  said.  .Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews? 
18.  37  Pilate,  .said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  king 
18.  37  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  King 

18.  39  I  release  unto  you  the  king  of  the  Jews? 

19.  3  said,  Hail,  king  of  the  Jews !  and  they 
19.  12  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king  speak. 
19.  14  he  saith  unto  the  Jews,  Behold  your  k.! 
19.  15  Pilate  saith.  .Shall  I  crucify  your  king 
19.  15  priests  answered,  We  have  no  king  but  C 
19.  19  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  king  of  the  Jews 
19.  21  The  kingof  the  Jews.,  he  said,  I  am  king 

Acts  4.  26  The  kings  of  the  earth  stood  up,  and  the 

7.  10  wisdom  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh  king  ofE. 

7.  18  another  king  arose,  which  knew  not  Jos. 

9.  15  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  I. 

12.    1  the  king  stretched  forth  (his)  hands  to  vex 

12.  20  made  Blastus  the  king's  chamberlain  their 

13.  21  they  desired  a  king  :  and  God  gave  uuto 
13.  22  raised . .  unto  them  David  to  be  their  king 
17.  7  that  there  is  another  king,  (one)  Jesus 
25.  13  king  Agrippa  and  Bernice  came  unto  Ces. 
25. 14  Festus  declared  Paul's  cause  unto  the  ki. 
25.  24  king  Agrippa,  and  all  men  which  are  here 

25.  26  specially  before  thee,  Oking  Agrippa,  that 

26.  2  I  think  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  bee. 
26.  7  For  which  hope's  sake,  king  Agrippa,  lam 
26.  13  At  mid  day,  O  king,  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light 
26.  19  Whereupon,  0  king  Agrippa,  I  was  not 
26.  26  the  king  knoweth  of  these  things,  before 
26.  27  King  Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets 
26.  30  the  king  rose  up,  and  the  governor,  and 

2  Co.  11.  32  governor  under  Aretas  the  king  kept  the 

1  Ti.  1.  17  unto  the  king  eternal,  immortal,  invisible 
2.  2  For  kings,  and  (for)  all  that  are  in  autho. 
6. 15  Potentate,  the  king  of  kings,  and  Lord 

Heb.  7.  1  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  the  most  high  G. 
7.  1  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings 
7.  2  by  interpretation  king  of  righteousness 
7.  2  also  king  of  Salem,  which  is,  king  of  peace 
11.  23  were  not  afraid  of  the  king's  commandm. 
11.  27  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king :  for  he 

1  Pe.  2.  13  Submit,  .whether  it  be  totheking,  assup. 
2.  17  Love  the  brotherhood . .  Honour  the  king 

Rev.    1.    5  and  the  prince  of  the  Icings  of  the  earth 
1.   6  [kings]  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Fat. 
5. 10  made  us  unto  our  God  [kings]  and  priests 
6.  15  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men 
o.  11  they  had  a  king  over  them,  (which  is)  the 


KING 


573 


KINGDOM 


.Rev.  10  ii  peoples,  and  nations,  and  tongues,  and  ki. 

15.  3  just  and  true  (are)  thy  ways,  thou  king  of 
ifi.  12  the  way  of  the  kings  of  the  east  might  be 

16.  14  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and 

17.  2  With  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  have 
17.  10- there  are  seven  kings  :  five  are  fallen,  and 
17.  12  ten  horns  which  thou  sa  west,  are  ten  kings 
17.  12  receive  power  askings  one  hour  with  the 
17.  14  for  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings 

17.  18  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth 

18.  3  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  committed 

18.  9  kings  of  the  earth,  who  have  committed 

19.  16  a  name.  -King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords 
19. 18  That  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  kings,  and 
19.  ig  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  armies 
zi.  24  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory 

7.  To  rule  as  a  king,  fiaviXtvot  basileuo. 

1  Ti.    6.  15  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords 
KING,  to  be  — 
To  reign,  be  or  become  king,  ^7?  malak. 

1  Sa.  23.  17  shalt  be  king  over  Israel,  and  I  shall 

24.  20  know  well  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  king 

1  Ki.  1.    5  exalted  himself,  saying,  I  will  be  king 

1. 35  he  shall  be  king  in  my  stead :  and  I  have 

2  Ki.  9.  13  blew  with  trumpets,  saying,  Jehu  is  king 

KING,  to  he  made  — 

To  be  caused  to  reigu,  be  made  king,  i)?ip  malak,  6. 
Dan.   9.    1  made  king  over  the  realm  of  the  Chaldeans 
KING,  to  make,  set,  set  up  a  — 
To  cause  to  reign,  make  king,  ^Vo  malak,  5. 

Judg.  9.   6  went  and  made  Abimelech  king,  by  the 
9.  16  in  that  ye  have  made  Abimelech  king 
9. 18  king  over  the  men  of  Shechem,  because 
1  8a.  -  8.  22  Hearken  unto  their  voice,  and  make . .  a  k. 

11. 15  made  Saul  king  before  the  Lord  in  Gilgal 
12.    1  Behold,  I  have,  .made  a  king  over  you 

15. 11  that  I  have  set  up  Saul  (to  be)  king:  for 
15.  35  that  he  had  made  Saul  king  over  Israel 

■2  Sa.   2.   9  made  him  king  over  Gilead,  and  over  the 

1  Ki.    1.43  our  lord..  David  hath  made  Solomon  king 

3.  7  made  thy  servant  king  instead  of  David 
12.    1  were  come  to  Shechem  to  make  him  king 
12.  20  called . .  and  made  him  king  over  all  Israel 

16. 16  made  Omri,  the  captain  of  the  host,  king 
16. 21  Tibnithe  son  of  Ginath,  to  make  him  king 

2  Ki.   8.  2orevolted..andmadeakingoverthemselves 

10.    5  we  will  notmake  anyking :  dothou  (that) 

11. 12  and  they  made  him  king,  and  anointed 
14. 21  and  made  him  king  instead  of  his  father 

17.  21  made  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat  king 
21.  24  made  Josiah  his  son  king  in  his  stead 
23.  30  and  made  him  king  in  his  father's  stead 

23.  34  made  Eliakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  in 

24.  17  made  Mattaniah  his  father's  brother  king 

1  Ch.n.  10  to  make  him  king,  according  to  the  word 

12.  31  by  name,  to  come  and  make  David  king 
12.  38  to  make  David  king  over  all  Israel :  and 
12.  38  (were)  of  one  heart  to  make  David  king 
23.    1  he  madeSolomon  hisson  king  over  Israel 

28.  4  liked  me  to  make  (me)  king  over  all  Israel 

29.  22  they  made  Solomon  thesonof  David  king 

2  Ch.  1.    9  thou  hast  made  me  king  over  a  people 

"  1. 11  people,  over  whom  I  have  made  thee  king 

10.  1  to  S.  were  all  Israel  come  to  make  him  k. 

11.  22  brethren :  for  (lie  thought)  to  make  him  k. 

21.  8  Edomites  revolted .  .and  made  them,  a  k. 

22.  1  made  Ahaziah  his  youngest  son  king  in 

23.  11  (gave  him),  .testimony,  and  made  him  k. 
26.    1  made  him  king  in  the  room  of  his  father 
33.  25  people,  .made  Josiah  his  sou  king  in  his 
36.    1  made  him  king  in  his  father/s  stead  in 
36.   4  made  Eliakim  his  brother  king  over  Jud. 
36. 10  and  made  Zedekiah  his  brother  king  over 

Isa.     7.   6  set  a  king  in  the  midst  of  it,  (even)  the 
Jer.  37.    1  Nebuchadrezzar,  .made  king  in  the  land 
Eze.  17. 16  that  made  "him  king,  whose  oath  he  desp. 
Hos.    8.    4  They  have  set  up  kings,  but  not  by  me 

KINGDOM  — 

\. Kingdom.,  npl75  melukah. 

1  Sa.  10. 16  the  matter  of  the  kingdom,  whereof  Sam. 

10.  25  told  the  people  the  manner  of  the  king. 
11. 14  go  to  Gilgal,  and  renew  the  kingdom 
14.  47  Saul  took  the  kingdom  over  Israel,  and 

18.  8  and  (what)  can  he  have  more  hut  the  ki.? 

2  Sa.  16.   8  the  Lord  hath  delivered  the  "kingdom 

1  Ki.  1.  46  And.,  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  the  kingdom 
2. 15  Thou  knowest  that  the  kingdom  was 
2. 15  kingdom  is  turned  about,  and  13  become 
2. 22  ask  for  him  the  kingdom  also  ;  for  he  (is) 

11.  35  take  the  kingdom  out  of  his  son's  hand 
12. 21  to  bring  the  kingdom  again  to  Uehoboam 
21.    7  Dost  thou  now  govern  the  kingdom  of  Is. 

1  Ch.io.  14  turned  the  kingdom  unto  David  the  son 
Psa.  22.  28  the  kingdom  (is)  the  Lord's  ;  and  h&(is) 
Isa.  34. 12  shall  call  the  nobles  thereof  to  the  king. 
Eze.  16. 13  and  thou  didst  prosper  into  a  kingdom 
Obad.  zi  judge,  .the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's 
2. Kingdom,  «?Q  malku*. 

Dan.   2. 37  God  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a  kingdom 
2.  39  arise  another  kingdom  inferior  to  thee 
2.  39  another  third  kingdom  of  brass,  which 
2. 40  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as 
2.  41  part  of  iron,  the  kingdom  shall  be  divided 
2.  42  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly  strong,  and 
2. 44  shall  the  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom 
2.  44  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other  people 
2.  44  break,  .and  consume  all  these  kingdoms 

4.  3  his  king-lorn  (is)  an  everlasting  kingdom 


Dan.   4. 17,  25,  32  Most  High  rulefch  in  the  kingdom 
4.  18  the  wise  (men)  of  my  kingdom  are  not 
4.  26  thy  kingdom  shall  be  sure  unto  thee 
4.  29  in  the  palace  of  the  kingdom  of  Babylon 
4.  30  that  I  have  built  for  the  house  of  the  ki. 
4.  31  O  king.  .The  kingdom  is  departed  from 
4.  34  kingdom  (is)  from  generation  to  generation 
4.  36  for  the  glory  of  my  kingdom,  mine  honour 

4.  36  and  I  was  established  in  my  kingdom,  and 

5.  7  and  shall  be  the  third  ruler  in  the  king 

5. 11  There  is  a  man  in  thy  kingdom  in  whom 
5. 16  and  shalt  be.  .third  ruler  in  the  kingdom 
5.  18  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  father  a  kingd. 

5. 21  most  high  God  ruled  in  the  kingdom  of 
5.  26  God  hath  numbered  thy  kingdom,  and 

5.  28  Thy  kingdom  is  divided,  and  given  to  the 
5.  29  he  should  be  the  third  ruler  in  the  king 

5.  31  And  Darius  the  Median  took  the  kingdom 

6.  1  It  pleased  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom 
6.    1  which  should  be  over  the  whole  kingdom 
6.    4  against  Daniel  concerning  the  kingdom 
6.    7  All  the  presidents  of  the  kingdom,  the 

6.  26  every  dominion  of  my  kingdom  men 

6. 26  and  his  kingdom  (that)  which  shall  not  be 
7. 14  given  him  dominion,  .glory,  and  a  kingd. 
7. 14  and  his  kingdom  (that)  which  shall  not  be 
7. 18  take  the  kingdom,  and  possess  the  kingd. 

7. 22  caiue  that  the  saints  possessed  the  king. 

7.  23  shall  be  the  fourth  kingdom  upon  earth 
7.  23  which  shall  be  diverse  from  all  kingdoms 
7.  24  the  ten  horns  out  of  this  kingdom  (are) 

7. 27  And  the  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the 
7.  27  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole 
7. 27  whose  kingdom  (is)  an  everlasting  kingdom 

3.  Kingdom,  mD?a  malkuth. 

N1UU24.  7  higher,  .and  his  kingdom  shall  be  exalted 
1  Sa.  20.  31  shalt  not  be  established,  nor  thy  kingdom 
1  Ki.    2. 12  and  his  kingdom  was  established  greatly 

1  Ch.n.  10  who  strengthened  themselves,  .in  his  ki. 

12.  23  turn  the  kingdom  of  Saul  to  him,  accord. 
14.  2  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  high,  because 
17. 11  thy  seed,  .and  I  will  establish  his  kingdom 
17. 14  in  mine  house  and  in  my  kingdom  for  ever 
22. 10  establish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  over  I 
28.  s  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  of  the  LORD 
28.    7  I  will  establish  his  kingdom  for  ever,  if  he 

2  Ch.  1.    1  Solomon .  .was  strengthened  in  his  king. 

2.  1  And.,  to  build.,  an  house  for  his  kingdom 
7. 18  Then  will  I  stablish  the  throne  of  thy  ki. 
11. 17  So  they  strengthened  the  kingdom  of  Ju. 

12.  1  when  Rehoboani  had  established  the  kin. 
33. 13  brought,  .again  to  Jerusalem  into  his  ki. 
36.  20  until  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia 
36.  22  proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom 

Ezra    1.    1  proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom 
Neh.   9.  35  they  have  not  served  thee  in  their  king 
Esth.  1.    2  Ahasuerus  sat  on  the  throne  of  his  king. 
1 .    4  he  showed  the  riches  of  his  glorious  king, 

1 .  14  (and)  which  sat  the  first  in  the  kingdom 

2.  3  officers  iu  all  the  provinces  of  his  king. 

3.  6  throughout  the  whole  kingdom  of  Ahas. 
3.    8  dispersed . .  in  all  the  provinces  of  thy  ki. 
4. 14  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom 
5.  3  even  given  thee  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom 
5.   6  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom  it  shall  be  pe. 

7.  2  shall  be  performed,  .to  the  half  of  the  k. 
9.  30  twenty  and  seven  provinces  of  the  kingdom 

Psa.  45.   6  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom  (is)  a  right 
103. 19  The  Lord,  .his  kingdom  jnleth  over  all 

145. 11  They  shall  speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  king. 

145. 12  and  the  glorious  majesty  ot  his  kingdom 

145. 13  Thy  kingdom  (is)  an  everlasting  kingdom 
Eccl.  4. 14  (lie  that  is)  born  hi  his  kingdom  becometh 
Jer.  10.  7  and  in  all  their  kingdoms,  .none  like  unto 
Dan.   S.  22  four  kingdoms  shall  stand  np  out  of  the 

8.  23  in  the  lattertime  of  their  kingdom,  when 
10. 13  But  the  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia 
11.    4  his  kingdom  shall  be  broken,  and  shall 
11     4  his  kingdom  shall  be  plucked  up,  even 
11     9  king  of  the  south,  .come  into  (his)  kingd. 
11.  17  with  the  strength  of  his  whole  kingdom 
11.  20  shall  stand,  .(in)  the  glory  of  the  kingdom 
11.  2i  shall  not  give  the  honour  of  the  kingdom 
ir.  21  come.,  and  obtain  the  kingdom  by  flatter. 

4. Kingdom,  reign,  ns^pD  mamlakah. 

Gen.  10. 10  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel 

20.   9  thouhastbroughtonmeandonmykingd. 

Exodi9-    6  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests 

Niini32.  33  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amori. 

32.  33  the  kingdom  of  Og  king  of  Bashan,  the 
Deut.  3.   4  all. .  Argob,  the  kingdom  01  Og  in  Bashan 
3. 10  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan 
3. 13  all  Bashan .  .the  kingdom  of  Og,  gave  I 
3.  21  unto  all  the  kingdoms  whither  thou  pas. 
17.  18  when  he  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  k. 
17.  20  that  he  may  prolong  (his)  days  in  his  king. 
28.  25  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
Josh  11. 10  Hazor..  was  the  head  of  all  those  kingdoms 
1  Sa.  10. 18  out  of  the  hand  of  all  kingdoms . .  of  them 
13. 13  established  thy  kingdom  upon  Israel  for 

13.  14 thy  kingdom  shall  not  continue:  the  L. 
24.  20  the  kingdom  of  Israel  shall  be  established 
28. 17  hath  rent  the  kingdom  out  of  thine  hand 

2  Sa.  3.  10  translate  the  kingdom  from  the  house 

3.  28  I  and  my  kingdom  (are)  guiltless  before 
5.  12  exaltedhis  kingdom  for  hispeople Israel's 

7. 12  thy  seed . .  and  I  will  establish  his  kingdom 

7. 13  stablish  the  throne  of  hiskingdomforever 
7.  16  thy  kingdom  shall  be  established  forever 

1  Ki.  2.  46  the  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand 

4.  21  Solomon  reigned  over  all  kingdoms  from 


*3- 
13- 
14. 

17- 


Isa. 


1  Ki.  9.   5  I  will  establish  the  throne  of  thy  kingdom 

10.  20  there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  king. 
11. 11  I  will  surely  rend  the  kingdom  from  thee 
11. 13  I  wiUnotrendavvayallthekingdom;(butl 

11.  31  will  rend  the  kingdom  out  of  the  hand  01 

11.  34  I  will  not  take  the  whole  kingdom  out  o) 

12.  26  the  kingdom  return  to  the  house  of  David 

14.  8  rent  the  kingdom  away  from  the  house  of 
18. 10  there  is  no  nation  or  kingdom  whithermy 

18. 10  he  took  an  oath  of  the  kingdom  and  nafc. 

2  Ki.  14.    5  as  the  kingdom  was  confirmed  in  his  han<  I 

15.  19  with  him  to  confirm  the  kingdom  in  his 
19. 15  thou  art  the  God.  .of  all  the  kingdoms  of 

19.  19  that  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may 

1  Ch.16.  20  and  from  (one)  kingdom  to  another  people 

29. 11  thine  (is)  the  kingdom,  O  Lord,  and  thou 
29.  30  and  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  countr. 

2  Ch.  9. 19  there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  king. 

11.  1  might  bring  the  kingdom  again  to  Rehob. 

12.  8  the  service  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  countr. 
5  gave  the  kingdom  over  Israel  to  David  for 

8  ye  think  to  withstand  the  kingdom  of  the 
5  took  away,  .the  images  :  and  the  kingdom 
5  Lord  stablished  the  kingdom  in  his  hand 

17. 10  fear  of  ttie  Lord  fell  upon,  .the  kingdoms 

20.  6  rulest  (not)  thou  over  all  the  kingdoms  of 

20.  29  was  on  all  the  kingdoms  of  (those)  count. 

21.  3  the  kingdom  gave  he  to  Jehoram,  because 
pi,   4  was  risen  up  to  the  kingdom  of  his  father 

22.  9  Ahaziah  had  no  power  to  keep  still  the  k. 

23. 20  the  king  upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom 
25.  3  when  the  kingdom  was  established  to  him 
29.  21  for  a  sin  offering  for  the  kingdom,  and 

32. 15  no  god  of  any  nation  or  kingdom  was  able 
36-  23  All  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  hath  the  L. 

Ezra    1.   2  hath  given  me  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
Neh.   9.  22  thou  gavest  them  kingdoms  and  nations 
Psa.  46.   6  heathen  raged,  thekingdoms  were  moved 
68.  32  Sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
79.    6  the  kingdoms  that  have  not  called  upon 
102. 22  the  people,  .and  the  kingdoms,  to  serve 
105. 13  went,  .from  (one) kingdom  to  another  pe. 
135. 11  Bashan,  and  all  the  kingdoms  of  Canaan 
9.   7  the  throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  king. 

10. 10  hand  hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  the  id. 

13.  4  of  the  kingdoms  of  nations  gathered  tog. 
13.  19  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty  of  the 

14. 16  (Is)  this  the  man .  .that  did  shake  kingd. 
17.    3  the  kingdom  from  Damascus,  and  the 
19.    2  city  against  city,  .kingdom  against  king. 

23. 11  stretched  out  his  hand,  .shook  the  king. 

23. 17  commit  fornication  with  all  the  kingdoms 
37. 16  thou  (art)  the  God.  .of  all  the  kingdoms 
37.  20  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may  know  that 
47.    5  shalt  no  more  be  called  The  lady  of  king. 

60. 12  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve 
10  over  the  nations,  and  over  the  kingdoms 
15  families  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  north 

4  to  be  removed  into  all  kingdoms  of  the 

7  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  pluck  up,  and 

9  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  build  and  to  pi. 
9  to  be  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of 

26  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  winch  (are) 

8  the  nation  and  kingdom  which  will  not 
8  against  great  kingdoms,  of  war,  and  of  evil 

29. 18  to  be  removed  to  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
34.  1  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  of  his  dominion 
34.  17  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of  theea. 
49  28  concerning  the  kingdoms  of  Hazor,  which 
51.  ao  and  with"  thee  will  I  destroy  kingdoms 
51.  27  call  together  against  her  the  kingdoms  of 

Lam.  2.    2  hath  polluted  the  kingdom  and  the  prin. 
Eze.  17. 14  That  the  kingdom  might  be  base,  that  it 
29.  14  and  they  shall  be  there  a  base  kingdom 
29. 15  It  shall  be  the  basest  of  the  kingdoms 
■2  divided  into  two  kingdoms  any  more  at 
e  (be  they)  better  than  these  kingdoms?  or 
8  eyes  of  the  Lord,  .upon  the  sinful  kingdom 
4.    8  the  kingdom  shall  come  to  the  daughter 
3.    5  nakedness,  and  the  kingdoms  thy  shame 

3.  8  I  may  assemble  the  kingdoms,  to  pour 
2.  22  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms 
2.  22  strength  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen 

^.Kingdom,  n^SpD  mamlakvih. 

Josh.  13.  12  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan,  which  rei. 

13. 21  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amori. 
13.  27  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon 
13.  30  the  kingdom  of  Og  king  of  Bashan,  and 
13.  31  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan 

1  Sa.  15.  28  Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom  of  Israel 

2  Sa.16.    3  thehouseoflsraelrestoreme  the  kingdom 
Hos.    1 .   4  will  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  the  ho. 

^.Kingdom,  ^aai\cia  basileia. 

Matt.  3.   2  Repent  ye  :  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 

4.  8  showeth  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  wo. 
4.  17  Repent :  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 

4.  23  and  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom 

5.  3,  10  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

5. 19  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
5.  19  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  hea. 

5.  20  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingd. 

6.  10  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in 
6. 13  [thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and] 
6.  33  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his 
7. 21  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
8.  11  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  hea. 

8.  12  the  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast 

9.  35  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and 

10.  7  saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand 

11.  11  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
11. 12  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence 


Jer. 


27. 
28. 


37- 
Amos  6. 


Mic. 
Nali. 
Zeph. 
Hag. 


KINGDOM 


574 


KISH 


Matti2.  25  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is 
12.  26  Satan.,  how  shall  then  his  kingdom  stand? 

12.  28  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto 

13.  11  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
13.  19  any  one  heareth  the  word  of  the  kingdom 
13.  24  The  kingdom  "i  heaven  is  likened  unto  a 
13-  3*.  33^  44,  45.  47  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
13.  38  good  seed  are  the  children  of  the  kingdom 
13.41  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
13.  43  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of. 
13.  52  (is)  instructed  unto  thekingdomofheaven 
16. 19  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  key3  of  the  king. 
16.  28  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom 
18.  1  Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  h. 
18.  3  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  h. 
18.    4  the  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of 

18.  23  Therefore  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  like. 
19. 12  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake 

19.  14  Suffer,  .for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  he. 
19.  23  shall  hardly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  h. 

19.  24  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 

20.  1  the  kingdom  or"  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man 

20.  21  and  the  other  on  the  left,  in  thy  kingdom 

21.  31  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  hefore 

21.  43  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  he  taken  from 

22.  2  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  cer. 

23.  13  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against 

24.  7  kingdom  against  kingdom :  and  there  sh. 

24.  14  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  prea. 

25.  1  Then"  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  lik. 
25.  34  inherit  thekingdompreparedforyoufrom 
26.29  drink  it.  .with  yon  in  my  Father's  kingdom 

Mark  1.  14  preaching  the  gospel  [of  the  kingdom]  of 
1.  15  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand  :  repent  ye 

3.  24  And  if  a  kingdom  be  divided,  .that  king. 

4.  11  to  know  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of 
4.  26  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man  sh. 
4.  30  Whereunto  shall  we  liken  the  kingdom  of 
6.  23  give  (it)  thee,  unto  the  half  of  my  kingdom 
9.  1  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power 
9.  47  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  with 

10.  14  Suffer,  .for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God 
10.  15  Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom 
10.  23  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom 
10.  24  that  trust  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  king. 
10.  25  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
ii.  to  Blessed  (be)  the  kingdom  of  our  father  D. 

12.  34  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God 

13.  8  kingdom  against  kingdom;  and  there  sh. 

14.  25  that  I  drink  it  new  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

15.  43  which  also  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
Luke  1.  33  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end 

4.  5  showed  unto  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
4.  43  must  preach  the  kingdom  of  God  to  other 

6.  20  (ye)  poor :  for  yours  is  the  kingdom  of  G. 

7.  28  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is 

8.  1  the  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  of  God 

8.  10  knowthe  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God 

9.  2  sent  them  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 
9.  11  spake  unto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
9.  27  not  taste  of  death,  till  they  see  the  king. 
9. 60  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 
9.  62  No  man.  .looking,  .is  fit  for  the  kingdom 

10.  9,  11  The  kingdom  of  God  is  comenigh  unto 

11.  2  Thy  kingdom  come.    Thy  will  be  done 
11.  17  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  b. 
11. 18  how  shall  his  kingdom  stand?  because  ye 

11.  20  no  doubt  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon 

12.  31  seek  ye  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and  all  these 

12.  32  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  k. 

13.  18  Unto  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  like? 
13.  20  Whereunto  shall  I  liken  the  kingdom  of  G. 
13.  28  all  the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

13.  29  and  shall  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

14.  15  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  G. 

16. 16  since  that  time  the  kingdom  of  God  is  p. 
17.  20  when  the  kingdom  of  God  should  come 
17.  20  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with 

17.  21  behold,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you 

18.  16  Suffer,  .for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God 

18. 17  Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom 
18.  24  they  that  have  inches  enter  into  the  king. 
18.  25  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G. 

18.  29  or  children,  for  the  kingdom  of  God's  sake 

19.  11  kingdom  of  God  should  immediately  app. 
19.  12  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom,  and  to 
19.  15  having  received  the  kingdom,  then  he  c. 
21. 10  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom 

21.  31  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand 

22.  16  until  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
22.  18  not  drink,  .until  the  kingdom  of  God  shall 
22.  29  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father 

22.  30  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my  kingdom 

23.  42  remember,  .when  thoueomest  into  thy  k. 
23.  51  also  himself  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  G. 

John  3.  3  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom 
3.  5  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
18.  36  kingdomisnotof  this  world,  .mykingdom 

18.  36  but  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from  hence 
Acts    1.    3  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God 

1.  6  wiltthou.  .restoreagainthe  kingdom  to  I. 
8. 12  preaching  the  things  concerning  the  kin. 

14.  22  much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom 

19.  8  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  G. 

20.  25  I  have  gone  preaching  the  kingdom  of  G. 
28.  23  expounded  and  testified  the  kingdom  of 
28.  31  Preaehing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teach. 

Rom  14.  17  the  kingdom  of  G.»d  is  not  meat  and  drink 

x  Co.  4.  20  the  kingdom  of  God  (is)  not  in  word,  but 

6.  9,  10  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God 

1?  24  shall  have  delivered  upthe  kingdom  to  G. 

15.  50  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingd. 


Gal.     5.  21  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  king. 
Eph.   5.    5  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  C. 
Col.     1.  13  translated  (us)  into  the  kingdom  of  his 
4.  11  fellow  workers  unto  the  kingdom  of  God 

1  Th.  2.  12  hath  called  you  unto  his  kingdom  and  gl. 

2  Th.  1.    5  ye  may  be  counted  worthyof  the  kingdom 
2  Ti.    4.    1  dead  at  his  appearing  and  his  kingdom 

4.  18  preserve  (me)  unto  his  heavenly  kingdom 
Heb.  1.  S  of  righteousness  (is)  the  sceptre  of  thy  k. 
n.  33  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought 
12.  28  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  mo. 
Jas.  2.  5  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom 
2  Pe.  1.  11  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
Rev.    1.    9  and  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus 

11.  15  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become 

12.  10  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power 

16.  10  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  darkness 

17.  12  kings,  which  have  received  no  kingdom 
17. 17  to  agree,  and  give  their  kingdom  unto  the 

KING'S  (country)  — 

Kingly  dwelling,  pao-tKinos  basilikos. 

Acts  12.  20  their  country  was  nourished  by  the  king's 
KINGS'  COURT  — 
Kingly,  royal,  &a<ri\tiov  basileion. 

Luke  7.  25  which . .  live  delicately,  are  in  kings'  courts 
KING'S  DALE,  ^en  psy  emeq  hammeleh. 
The  valley  on  the  E.'of  Jerusalem,  afterwards  calledthe 
valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  through  which  the  Kidron  passes. 

Gen.  14.  17  the  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  (is)  the  K.d. 

2  Sa.  18  18  reared  up.  .a  pillar,  which  (is)  in  the  K.d. 

KING'S  POOL,  -leh  rn-15  herekath  hammelek. 

The  large  reservoir  on  the  W  side  of  Jerusalem.    Also 

called  the  Upper  or  Old  Pool  now  called  Birket-el- 

Mtanilla. 

Neh.   2.  14  Then  I  went  on .  .to  the  K.P. :  but 
Isa.     7.    3  at  the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  Upper  P. 
22.  11  made,  .a  ditch,  .for  the  water  of  the  O.P. 

KINGLY  — 

Kingdom,  \yf&  malku. 

Dan.   5.  20  he  was  deposed  from  his  kingly  throne 

KINSFOLK  — 

1.  To  free,  redeem,  7N3  goal. 

1  Ki.  16.  11  neither  of  his  kinsfolks  nor  of  his  friends 

2.  To  be  known,  VVr  yada,  4. 

2  Ki.io.  11  his  great  men,  and  his  kinsfolks,  and  his 
Z.Near,  3i"ip  qarob. 

Job  19. 14  My  kinsfolk  have  failed,  and  my  familiar 

i.One  of  the  same  race,ki?isman,avyyev7is  suygenes. 
Luke  2.  44  they  sought  him  among . .  kinsfolk  and  ac. 
21.  16  parents,  and  brethren,  and  kinsfolks,  and 
KINSMAN,  (next  or  near)  — 

1.  To  free,  redeem,  *?N3  gaal. 

Num.  5.    8  if  the  man  have  no  kinsman  to  recompe. 
Ruth  2.  20  The  man  (is)  near,  .one  of  our  next  kins. 

3.    9  spread  therefore,  .for thou  (art) a  near  k. 

3.  12  now  it  is  true  that  I  (am  thy)  near  kins. 

3.  12  howbeit  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than  I 

4.  1  the  kinsman  of  whom  Boaz  spake  came  by 
4.   3  he  said  unto  the  kinsman,  Naomi,  that  is 
4.    6  the  kinsman  said,  I  cannot  redeem  (it) 
4.   8  the  kinsman  said  unto  Boaz,  Buy  fit)  for 
4. 14  hath  not  left  thee  this  day  without  a  ki. 

2.  To  be  known,  jniD  or  jn;  yada,  4. 

Ruth  2.  1  Naomi  had  a  kinsman  of  her  husband's 
S.Feay;  niip  qarob. 

Psa.  38. 11  My  lovers,  .and  my  kinsmen  stand  afar 
4. Flesh,  relation,  ixy  sheer. 

NUIU27. 11  unto  Ins  kinsman  that  is  next  to  him  of 

5. One  of  the  samerace,kinsman,o-vyyswhs  suygenes. 
Lukei4.  12  neither  thy  kinsmen,  nor.  .neighbours 
Johni8.  26  being  (his)  kinsman  whose  ear  Peter  cut 
Acts  10.  24  called  together  his  kinsmen  and  near  fri 
Rom.  9.    3  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to 
16.    7  Salute  Andronieus  and  Junia,  my  kinsmen 
16. 11  Salute  Herodion  my  kinsman.     Greet 
16.  21  Lucius,  and  Jason,  and  Sosipater,  my  k. 

KINSMAN,  to  do  or  perform  the  part  of  a  — 
To  free,  redeem,  S>X3  gaol. 

Ruth  3.  13  if  he  will  perform,  .thepart  of  a  kinsman 
3.  13  well ;  let  him  do  the  kinsman's  part :  but 
3.  13  if  he  will  not  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman 
3.  13  then  will  I  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman  to 
KINSWOMAN  — 
1. Acquaintance,  one  known,  jniD  moda. 

Prov.  7  4  and  call  understanding  (thy)  kinswoman 
2. Flesh,  relation,  ixtp  sheer. 

Lev.  18.  12  father's  sister :  she  (is)  thy  father's  near  k. 
18. 13  for  she  (is)  thy  mother's  near  kinswoman 

3.  Flesh,  relation,  rnKip  shaarah. 

Lev.  18.  17  they  (are)  her  near  kinswomen :  it  (is)  wi. 
KIR,  Tp  wall. 

1.  An  Assyrian  district  between  the  Caspian  and  Black 
seas,  near  Elam,  on  the  river  Eur;  Gidtitan,  or  modern 
Georgia. 

2  Ki.  16.    9  carried(thepeopleof)itcaptivetoK.,  a.id 

Amos  1.    5  the  people.  .shallgointocaptivityuntoK. 

9.    7  Have  not  I  brought. .the  Syrians  from  K.? 

2.  The  inhabitants  of  the  district  so  called. 

Isa.   22.   6  Elam  bare  the  quiver,  .and  K.  uncovered 


KIR  of  Moab,  2W0"Tp.    See  Kir-haraseth, 

Isa.    15.    1  K.  of  Moab  is  laid  waste,  .brought  to  sil. 

EIR  HA-RA'-SETH  orHAR-E'-SETH,nynn  or  nbnn-Yp. 

A   fortified   city  of  Moab,  probably  the  same  as  Kir- 

haresk,  Kir-heres,  and  Kir  of  Moab  ;  now  Eerak,  three 

houi-s  S.E.  of  Ar. 

2  Ki.    3.  25  only  in  K.  left  they  the  stones  thereof 
Isa.    16.    7  for  the  foundations  of  K.  shall  ye  mourn 

KfR-HA'-RESH,  or  HE'-RES,  bnn  or  fcnrrvp. 
A  fortified  city  of  Moab.     Same  as  the  preceding. 

Isa.  16.  1 1  For  Moab,  and  mine  inward  parts  for  K. 

Jet.  48.  31  (mine  heart)  shall  mourn  for  the  men  of  K. 
48.  36  mine  heart  shall  sound,  .forthe  men  of  K. 

KLR'-JATK,  n:"ip  city. 
A  contraction  for  Eirjath-jearim, 
Josh.  18.  28  K.  ;  fourteen  cities  with  their  villages 

KLR-JA-THA'-IM,  KIR-IA-THA'-IM,  D^nnp. double  c. 

1.  A  city  of  Reuben  E.  of  the  Jordan,  four  miles  W.  of 
Medeba,  which  is  S.E.  of  Heshbon. 

Num  32.  37  And  the  children  of  Reuben  built.  ,K. 
Josh.  13.  19  And  K.,  andSibmah,  and  Zareth-shahar 
Jer.   48.    1  K.  is  confounded  (and)  taken ;  Misgab  is 
48.  23  And  upon  K.,  and  upon  Beth-gamul,  and 
Eze.  25.    9  I  will  open,  .the  glory  of  the  country .  .K. 

2.  A  Levitical  city  in  Naphtali ;  same  as  Eartan  ;  now 
Kerkarah. 

1  Ch.  6.  76  out  of.  .Naphtali.  .K.  with  her  suburbs 
KLR-JATH  AR'-BA,  yTix  rtnp  city  of  Arba. 
A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judea,  S.  from  Jerusalem, 
originally  the  city  of  Arba,  the  father  of  Anak  ;  after- 
wards called  Hebron. 

Gen.  23.    2  Sarah  died  in  K.-a. ;  the  same  (is)  Hebron 

Josh  14. 15  the  name  of  Hebron  before  (was)  K.-a. 
15.  54  Humtab,andK.-a.,  which  (is) Hebron,  and 
20.   7  K.-a.,  which  (is)  Hebron,  hi  the  mountain 

Judg.  1.  10  the  name  of  Hebron  before  (was)  K.-a. 

Neh.  11.  25(some)of..childrenof  JudahdweltatK.-a. 

KLR-JATH  A'-ELM,  DHU  nnp  city  of  forests. 
Same  as  Eirjath-jearim,  Eirjath-baal,  or  Baalah. 

Ezra  2.  25  The  children  of  K.-a.,  Chephirah,  and  B. 

KIR-JATH  BA'-AX,  ^M3  nnp  city  of  Baal. 
Same  as  Eirjath-jearim,  and  Baalah. 

Josh.  1 5. 60  K.-b.,  which  (is)  Kirjath-jearim,  and  Bab. 

18. 14  goings  out  thereof  were  at  K.-b.,  which 

KIR-JATH  HTT'-ZOTH,  nii'n  rrnp  city  of  the  out-places. 
The  residence  of  Balak,  king  of  Moab,  near  Bamoth- 
baal;  not  far  from  the  Anion.  Taken  by  Sihon,  then 
by  Israel. 

Num  22.  39  with  Balak,  and  they  came  unto  K.-h. 

KIR-JATH  JE-A'-RIM,  0*"$}  «!*lp  city  of  forests. 

1.  A  city  of  Judah  (formerly  of  the  Hivites)  on  the  con- 
fines of  Benjamin,  near  Beeroth  and  Chephirah ;  called 
also  Baalah,  Kirjath,  Ei)jath-baal,  and  Eirjath-arim. 
Now  called  Eurryet  el-Enab,  eight  miles  W.  of  Jeru- 
salem. 

Josh.  9. 17  Gibeon,  and  Chephirah.. Beeroth.  .K.-j. 
15.   9  border  was  drawn  to  Baalah.  .(is)  K.-j. 
1 5.  60  Kirjath-baal,  which  (is)  K.  -j. ,  and  Kabbah 
18.  14  Kirjath-baal,  which  (is)  K.-j.,  a  city  of 

18. 15  south  quarter  (was)  from  the  end  of  K.-j. 
JudgiS.  12  pitched  in  K.-j.,  in  Judah  :  wherefore 

18. 12  Mahaneh-dan.  .behold,  (it  is)  behind  K.-j. 
1  Sa.    6.  21  sent  messengers  to  the  inhabitants..  K.-j 
7.    1  the  men  of  K.-j.  came,  and  fetched  up 
7.    2  while  the  ark  abode  in  K.-j.,  that  the  time 

1  Ch.  1 3.    5  Israel . .  to  bring  the  ark  of  God  from  K.  -j 

13.  6  (that  is),  to  K.-j.,  which  rtielonged)to  Ju. 

2  Ch.  1.  4  ark  of  God.  .David  brought  up  from  K.-j. 
Neh.  7.  29  The  men  of  K.-j.,  Chephirah,  and  Beeroth 
Jer.  26.  20  the  son  of  Shemaiah  of  K.-j  ,  whopropb. 

2.  The  name  or  patronymic  appellation  of  a  descendant 
of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hur.    B.C.  650. 

1  Ch.  2.  50  the  sons  of  Caleb . .  Shobal  the  father  of  K. 
2.  52  Shobal  the  father  of  K.  had  sons;Haroeh 
2.  53  families  of  K.  ;  the  Ithrites,  and  the  Pu. 

KIR-JATH  SAN'-NAH,  n|D-n;-ip  city  of  instruction. 
A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah  one  hour  S.W.  of 
Hebron  ;  caUed  also  Debir,  and  now  De-wirban. 

Josh. 15.  49  And  Dannah,  and  K.,  which  (is)  Debir 
KIR-JATH  SE'-PHER,  "isp-nnp  city  of  books. 
Another  name  for  the  preceding,  and  showing  the  early 
rise  of  literature. 

Josh.15.  15  and  the  name  of  Debir  before  (was)  K. 
15.  16  He  that  smiteth  K.,  andtaketh  it,  to  him 

Judg.  1.  11  and  the  name  of  Debir  before  (was)  K. 

1.  12  He  that  smiteth  K.,  and  taketh  it,  to  him 

KISH,  e>'p  bow,  power. 

1.  A  Benjamite,  father  of  Saul  the  first  king  of  Israel. 

B.C.  1120.    (Same  as  Cis  in  Acts  13.  21.) 

1  Sa.   9.    1  a  man  of  Benjamin,  whose  name  (was)  K, 

9.  3  the  asses  of  K. . .  were  lost.  And  K.  said 
10.  11  this  (that)  iscome  unto  the  son  of  K.  ?  (Is) 
10.  21  Saul  the  son  of  K.  was  taken  :  and  when 

14.  51  K.  (was)  the  father  of  Saul ;  and  Ner  the 

2  Sa.  2i.  14  buried,  .in  the  sepulchre  of  K.  his  father 
1  Ch.  8.  33  Ner  begat  K. ,  and  K.  begat  Saul,  and  Saul 

o.  39  Ner  begat  K.,  and  K.  begat  Saul,  and  Saul 
12.  1  kept,  .close  because  of  Saul  the  son  of  K. 
26.28  all  that.. Saul  the  son  of  K... had  dedica. 


KISHI 


575 


KNOW 


2.  Another  Benjaniite,  son  of  Abi-Gibeon.     B.C.  ir8o. 

i  Ch.  3.  30  bis  first  bora  son  Abdou,  ami  Zur,  and  K 
9.  36  bis  firstborn  son&bdon,  then  Zur.andK. 

3.  A  Levite,  grandson  of  Mer&ri.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Cb.23.  21  Mushi.  The  sous  of  Mabli ;  Eleazar  ami  K. 

03  22  and  their  brethren  the  sons  of  K.  took 
24.  29  Concerning K.:  the  son  of  K.  (was)  Jemb. 

4.  Another  Levite  and  Merarite,  who  assisted  in  cleans- 
ing the  temple  in  Hezekiah's  time.    B.C.   726.    - 

2  Ch. 29.12  K.  the  son  of  Abdi,  and  Azariahthesonof  J. 

5.  A  Benjaniite,  ancestor  of  Slordecai,  the  cousin  of 
Queen  Esther.    B.C.  610. 

Esth  2.    5  son  of  Shimei,  the  son  of  K.,  a  Benjaniite 

Kl'-SHI,  'E^j?  bow  of  J  ah. 

A  Levite  of  the  Me'rari  famiiy,  whose  son  Ethan  was 
set  over  the  service  of  song.  B.C.  1015.  Called 
Kvshaiah  in  1  Ch.  15.  17. 

1  Ch.  6.  44  Ethan  the  son  of  K.,  the  son  of  Abdi,  the 

KISH'-ION,  KISH'-ON,  pvp  hard. 

A  Levitioal  city  in  Issachar,  near  Rahhith  and  Abez  ; 

called  Radish  in  1  Ch.  6.  72  ;  now  Kison. 

Josh.  19.  20  And  Kabbith,  and  K.,  and  Abez 

21.  28  K.  with  her  suburbs,  Dabareh  with  her 

KISH'-ON,  KIS'-ON,  lilS'p  winding,  binding. 

A  brook    rising  in  Mount    Tabor  and  flowing  nearly 

westward  into  the  Mediterranean,  near  the  northern 

base  of  Mount  Carniel.     Called  also  Koheifa,  and  now 

el-Makutta. 

Judg.4.    7  I  will  draw  unto  thee,  to  the  river  K.,  Sis. 
4.  73  from  Harosheth.  .unto  the  river  of  K. 
5. 21  river  of  K. .  .ancient  river,  the  river K. 

1  Ki.  18.  40  Elijah  brought  them  down  to  the  brook  K. 

Psa.  83.    9(to)Sisera,as(to)Jabin,  at  the  brook  ofK. 

KISS  — 

l.A  kiss,  kissing,  rrg^j  neshiqah. 

Prov  27.   6  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  (are)  deceitful 
Song  i.    2  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  lasses  of  his  111. 

2.^-1  kisS,  mark  of  friendship,  <pi\-nfxa  p>hilenia. 
Luke  7.  4$  Thou  gavest  me  no  kiss :  but  this  woman 

22.  48  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  k.? 
Horn  16.  16  Salute  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss.  The 

1  Co.  16.  20  Greet  ye  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 

2  Co. 13.  12  Greet  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 

1  Th.  5.  26  Greet  all  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss 
1  Pe.   5.  i4Greetyeoneanother  witha  kissof  charity 

KISS,  to  — 

1.2%  kiss,  touch,  p$i  nashaq. 

Gen.  27.  26  said.  .Come  near  now,  and  kiss  me,  my 
27.  27  he  came  near,  and  kissed  him  :  and  he 
29. 11  Jacob  kissed  Rachel,  and  lifted  up  his 
33.   4  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him  :  and 
48.  10  and  he  kissed  them,  and  embraced  them 
50.    1  Joseph  fell,  .and  wept  upon  him,  and  ki. 
Exod  4. 27  he  went,  and  met  him.  .and  kissed  him 

18.  7  Moses  went,  .and  did  obeisance,  and  kis. 
Ruth  1.   9  she  kissed  them :  and  they  lifted  up  their 

1. 14  Orpah  kissed  her  mother  in  law;  but  Ruth 

1  Sa.  10.   1  Samuel .  .poured  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  k. 

20.  41  they  kissed  one  another,  and  wept  one 

2  Sa.  14.  33  bowed  hiniself .  .and  the  king  kissed  Ah. 

15.   5  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  him,  and  k. 

19.  39  the  king  kissed  Barzillai,  and  blessed  him 

20.  9  Joab  took  Amasaby  the  beard . .  to  kiss  him 
1  Ki.  19. 18  and  every  mouth  which  hath  not  kissed 

19.  20  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  kiss  my  father  and 
Job   31.  27  enticed,  or  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  band 
Psa.  85.  10  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  (each 
Prov.  7.  13  So  she  caught  him,  and  kissed  him,  (and) 

24.  26  shall  kiss  (his) lips  that  giveth  a  right  ans. 

Song  1.    2  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  m. 

8.    1 1  would  kiss  thee ;  yea,  I  should  not  be  des. 

Hos.  13.    2  Let  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the  calves 

2.To  kiss,  touch,  pvi  nashaq,  3. 

Gen.  ?g.  13  kissed  liim,  and  brought  him  to  his  house 
31.  28  hastnotsurTeredmetokissmysonsandmy 
31.  55  Laban.  .kissed  his  sons  and  his  daughters 
45.  15  he  kissed  all  bis  brethren,  and  wept  upon 

Psa.    2.  12  Kissthe  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  per. 

2. To  kiss  thoroughly,  be  very  friendly,  Kara^txioi. 
Matt 26.  49  and  said,  Hail,  master;  and  kissed  him 
Marki4.  45  andsaitb, Master,  master;  and  kissed  him 
Luke  7.  38  kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed,  .with  the 
7.  45  this  woman,  .hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my 
15.  20  ran,  and  fell  ou  his  neck,  and  kissed  him 
Acts  20.  37  wept  sore,  and  fell  on  Paul's  neck,  and  k. 

4.7b  hiss-,  be  friendly,  <pt\4ai  phileo. 

Matt  26.  48  Whomsoever  I  shall  kiss,  that  same  is  he 
Mark  14.  44  Whomsoever  I  shall  kiss,  that  same  is  he 
Luke22.  47  Judas,  .drew  near  unto  Jesus  to  kiss  him 

KITE  — 

Kite,  vultwre,  n?K  ayyah. 

Lev.  11. 14  the  vulture,  and  the  kite  after  his  kind 
Deuti4- 13  the  glede,  and  the  kite,  and  the  vulture 

KITH'-LISH,  c1,L,ri3  separation. 
A  city  of  Judah,  near  Lahniam. 

Josh. 15.  40  And  Cabbon,  and  Lahmam,  and  K. 
KTT'-KON,  ji-pp  shortened,  little. 
A  city  of  Zebulun  held  by  the  Canaanites ;  same  as 
Kattntk  in  Josh.  19.  15  ;  now  called  Sefurich. 

Judg   1.  30  Neither,  .drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  K. 


KTT'-TIM,  en?. 

A  son  of  Javan,  son  of  Japheth.  B.C.  2200,  whose 
descendants  are  called  Chittim,  i.^.thepeopleof  Cyprus 
and  the  adjacent  coasts  and  islands. 

Gen.  10.   4  sons  of  Javan ;  Elishah,  and  Tarshish,  K. 

i  Ch.  1.    7  sons  of  Javan  ;  Elishah,  and  Tarshish,  K. 
KNEAD,  to  — 
To  kmad,  b>&  lush. 

Gen.  18.   6  knead  (it),  andmakecakesuponthehearth 

1  Sa.  28.  24  took  flour,  and  kneaded  (it),  and  did  bake 

2  Sa.  13.  8  kneaded  (it),  and  made  cakes  in  his  sight 
Jer.  7.  18  the  women  knead . .  dough,  to  make  cakes 
Hos.    7.    4  ceasethfroniraisingafterhehathkneaded 

KNEADING  TROUGH  — 

Kneading  trough,  n^x^o  mishereih. 

Exod.  S.    3  thine  ovens,  and  into  thy  kneading  trough 
i2.  34  their  kneading  troughs  being  bound  up  in 
KNEE  — 
l.Tiie  knee,  nr^-iN  arkubah. 

Dan.    5.    6  and  his  knees  smote  one  against  another 

2.  The  knee,  in3-  berek. 

Gen.  30.    3  she  shall  bear  upon  my  knees,  that  I  may 
48.  12  brought  them  out  from  between  his  knees 
50.  23  were^brought  up  upon  Joseph's  knees 
Deut2S.  35- The  Lord  shall  smite  thee  in  the  knees 
J  udg.  7.    5  that  boweth  down  upon  his  knees  to  drink 
7.   6  bowed  down  upon  their  kuees  to  drink 
16. 19  she  made  him  sleep  upon  her  knees ;  and 

1  Ki.   8.  54  from  kneeling  on  his  knees  with  his  hands 

18.  42  Elijah,  .put  his  face  between  his  knees 

19.  18  all  the  knees  which  have  not  bowed  unto 

2  Ki.   1.  13  came  and  fell  on  his  knees  before  Elijah 

4.  20  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon,  and.  .died 
2  Ch.  6.  13  kneeled  down  upon  his  knees  before  all 
Ezra  9.    5  I  fell  upon  my  knees,  and  spread  out  my 
Job     3. 12  Why  did  the  knees  prevent  me?  or  why 
4.    4  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  k. 
Psa.  109.  24  My  knees  are  weak  through  fasting;  and 
Isa-   35-    3  Strengthen  ye.  .confirm  the  feeble  knees 

45.  23  unto  meeveryknee  shall  bow,  every  tong. 

66.  i2  ye  shall  be.  .dandled  upon  (her)  knees 
Eze.    7. 17  and  all  knees  shall  be  weak  (as)  water 

21.   7  and  all  knees  shall  be  weak  (as)  water 

47.   4  brought  me.  .the  waters  (were)  to  the  kn. 
Dan.  6.  10  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a 

10.  10  which  set  me  upon  my  knees  and.  .the 
Nah.  2. 10  the  knees  smite  together,  and  much  pain 

3.  The  knee,  y6vv  gonu. 

Markis.  iq  and  bowing  (their)  knees  worshipped  him 
Luke  5.  8  fell  down  at  Jesus'  knees,  saying,  Depart 
Rom  11.    4  men,  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to.  .B. 

14.  11  every  knee  shall  bow  to  me,  and  every 
Eph.    3.  14  For  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  F. 
Phil.    2. 10  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should 
Heb.  12.  12  which  hang  down,  and  the  feeble  knees 

KNEEL  idown^,  to  — 

l.To  kneel,  boio  or  bend  the  knee,  X#  barak. 

2  Ch.  6. 13  kneeled  down  upon  his  knees  before  all 
Psa.  95.   6  come.. let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our 

2.7b  kneel,  boto  or  bend  the  knee,  ^n?  berak. 

Dan.    6.  10  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a 

3. To  put  the  knees  (down),  riSrjfit  ra.  ySuara. 
Luke 22.  41  he  was  withdrawn,  .kneeled  down,  and 
Acts    7.  60  he  kneeled  down,  and  cried  with  a  loud 
9.  40  Peter  put  them  all  forth,  and  kneeled  do. 

20.  36  he  kneeled  down,  and  prayed  with  them 

21.  5  kneeled  down  on  the  shore,  and  prayed 

4.  To  fall  down  on  tJie  knees,  yovvirer4ay  gonupeted. 
Matt.  17. 14  man,  kneeling  down  to  him,  and  saying 
Mark  1.  40  beseeching  him,  [and  kneeling  down]  to 

10.  17  there  came  one  running,  and  kneeled  to 

KNEEL  down,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  kneel,  bow  or  bend  the  knees,  Tp3  ftarak,5. 

Gen.  24.  11  he  made  his  camels  to  kneel  down  with. 
KNEELING  — 
To  bow  or  bend  tlie  knee,  jrja  kara. 

1  Ki.      8.  54  Solomon . .  arose . .  from  kneeling  on  his  k. 
KNIFE  — 

1.  Sword,  3*in  chereb. 

Josh.  5.   2  Make  thee  sharp  knives,  and  circumcise 

5.    3  Joshua  made  him  sharp  knives,  and  circ. 

1  Ki.18.  28  cut  themselves,  .with  knives  and  lancets 

Eze.    5.    1  take  thee  a  sharp  knife, take  thee  abarber's 

5.    2  take  a  third  part,  .smite  aboutit  with  a  k. 

2.Knife  (for  food),  riJ>3«G  maakeleth, 

Gen.  22.    6  and  he  took  the  fire  in  his  band,  and  a  k. 

22. 10  Abraham,  .took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son 

"  Judg.  19  29  he  took  a  knife,  and  laid  hold  on  his  con. 

Prov. 30.  14  then:  jaw  teeth  (as)  knives,  to  devour  the 

3. Knife,  spear,  V3&  sakkin. 

Prov.23.    2  put  a  knife  to  thy  throat,  if  thou  (be)  anian 
4. Knife,  i^rra  machalaph. 

Ezra     1. '  9  chargers  of  silver,  nine  and  twenty  knives 
KNIT,  to  he  — 
1. Altogether,  alike,  "iit  yachad. 

1  Cb.12.  17  mine  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you :  but  if 

2.  To  be  bound,  ic'p  qashar,  2. 

1  Sa.  18.    1  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the  soul 
Z.To  bind,  tie,  knit,  iea  deo. 

Acts  10.  n  a  great  sheet  [knit]  at  the  four  corners 


KNIT  together,  to  — 

l.A  companion,  associate,  "ori  chaber. 

Judg2o.  11  So  all  the  men.  .knit  together  as  one  man 

2. To  cause  to  go  up  together,  (rvftfZifidfa  sumbibazo. 

Col.    2,    2  be  comforted,  being  knit  together  in  love 
2. 19  knit  together,  increaseth  with  the  increa. 
KNOCK,  to  — 
l.To  beat,  knock,  psn  daphaq. 

Song  5.   2  the  voice  of  my  beloved  that  knocketh 

2.2*0  knock  (at  a  door),  Kpovco  krouo. 

Matt.  7.    7  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you 
7.    8  and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be  op. 
Luken.    9  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you 

11.  10  and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be  op. 

12.  36  that,  when  he  conieth  and  knocketh,  they 

13.  25  to  knock  at  the  door,  saying,  Lord,  Lord 
Acts  12.  13  as  Peter  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate 

12. 16  But  Peter  continued  knocking:  and  when 
Rev.    3.  20  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock 

KNOP  — 

1.  Capital  or  chapiter  of  a  column,  "fiflS3  kaphtor. 
Esod25.  31  his  knops,  and  his  flowers,  shall  be  of  the 
25.  33  a  knop  and  a  flower . .  a  knop  and  a  flower 
25.  34  almonds,  .their  knops  and  their  flowers 
25-  35>  35j  35  a  kuop  under  two  branches  of  the 
25.  36  Their  knops  and  their  branches  shall  be 
37.  17  his  bowls,  his  knops,  and  his  flowers,  were 
37.  iq  a  knop  and  a  flower,  .a  knop  and  a  flower 
37.  20  four  bowls  made  like  almonds,  his  knops 
37.  21,  21,  21  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the 

37.  22  Their  knops  and  their  bran  lies  were  of 

2.Knop>s,  gourds,  cucumber,  D'J/qs  peqaim. 

1  Ki.  6. 18  carved  with  knops  and  open  flowers :  all 
7.  24  knops  compassing  it,  ten  in  a  cubit,  com. 
7.  24  the  knops  (were)  cast  in  two  rows,  when 

KNOW  (by),  to  — 

l.To  understand,  p?  bin,  1,  5. 

Job   38.  20  that  thou  shouldest  know  the  paths  (to) 
2. Knowledge,  njn  daath. 

Job    10.    7  Thou  knowest  that  I  am  not  wicked ;  and 
13.   2  What  ye  know,  (the  same)  do  I.  .1  (am) 

Prov  29.    7  (but)  the  wicked  regardeth  not  to  know 

Isa.  48.   4  Because  I  knew  that  thou  (art)  obstinate 
58.   2  delight  to  know  my  ways,  as  a  nation  that 

Jer.  22.  16  (was)  not  this  to  know  me?  saith  the  Lord 

Z.To  know,  in;  yada. 

Gen.  3.  5  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat 
3.  5  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and 
3.    7  they  knew  that  they  (were)  naked  ;  and 

3.  22  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and 

4.  1  Adam  knew  Eve  his  wife ;  and  she  concei. 
4.    9  said,  I  know  not :  (Am)  I  my  brother's 

4.  17  Cain  knew  his  wife  ;  and  she  conceived 
4.  25  Adam  knew  his  wife  again ;  and  she  bare 
8. 11  Noah  knew  that  the  waters  were  abated 

9.  24  and  knew  what  his  younger  son  had  done 
12. 11 1  know  that  thou  (art)  a  fair  woman  to 
15.    8  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit 

15.  13  Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed  shall  be 
18.  19  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his 

18.  21  they  have  done,  .and  if  not,  I  will  know 

19.  5  bring  them,  .unto  us  that  we  may  know 

19.  8  I  have  two  daughters  which  have,  .known 

20.  6  I  know  that  thou  didst  this  in  the  integr. 
20.  7  know  thou  that  thou  shalt  surely  die,  thou 
22.  12  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing  thou 
24.  14  shall  I  know  that  thou  hast  showed  kind. 
24.  16  a  virgin,  neither  had  any  man  known  her 

27.  2  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  day  of  my  death 

28.  16  LORD  is  in  this  place ;  and  I  knew  (it)  not 

29.  s  Know  ye  Laban . .  And  they  said,  We  know 

30.  26  knowest  my  service  which  I  have  done 

30.  29  Thou  knowest  how  I  have  served  thee,  and 

31.  6  ye  know  that  with  all  my  power  I  have 
31.  32  Jacob  knew  not  that  Kachel  had  stolen 
33.  13  lord  knoweth  that  the  children  (are)  ten. 

38.  9  Onan  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be 
38.  16  knew  not  that  she  (was)  Ins  daughter  in  1. 

38.  26  And  he  knew  her  again  no  more 

39.  6  he  knew  not  ought  be  had,  save  the  bread 
42.  23  they  knew  not  that  Joseph  understood 
42.  33  Hereby  shall  I  know  that  ye  (are)  true 

42.  34  then  shall  I  know  that  ye  (are)  no  spies 

43.  7  could  we  certainly  know  that  he  woidd 

44.  27  Ye  know  that  my  wife  hare  me  two  (sons) 

47.  6  thou  knowest  (any)  men  of  activity  among 

48.  19  I  know  (it),  my  son,  I  know  (it) :  he  also 
Esod.  1.     8  new  king  over  Egypt,  which  knew  not  J. 

3.  7  heard  their  cry.  .for  I  know  their  sorrows 

4.  14  I  know  that  he  can  speak  well.    And  also 

5.  2  I  know  not  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  let 

6.  7  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  your  G. 

7.  s  Egyptians  shall  know  that  I(am)theLORD 

7.  17  In  this  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  L 

8.  10  thou'mayest  know  that  (there  is)nonelike 

8.  22  thou  mayest  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
9. 14  thoumayestknowthat(there  is)nonelike 

9.  29  thou  mayest  know  how  that  the  earth(is) 
9.  30  I  know  that  ye  will  not  yet  fear  the  Lord 

10.  2  that  ye  may  know  how  that  I  (ani)  the  L. 
10.    7  knowest  thou  not  yet  that  Egypt  is  des.  ? 

10.  26  we  know  not  with  what  we  must  serve  the 

11.  7  ye  may  know  how  that  the  Lord  doth  put 
14.  4  the  Egyptians  may  know  that  I  (am)  the 
za.  18  Egyptians  shall  knowthat  I(ani)theLoRD 

16.  6  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  hath  brought 


KNOW 


576 


KNOW 


Exodi6.  12  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  LORD  your  God 
18.  ii  I  know  that  the  Lord  (is)  greater  than  all 
23.    g  ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger,  seeing 
29.  46  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God 

31. 13  (ye)  may  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  that 
32. 22  thou  knowest  the  people,  that  they  (are) 
33.  5  that  I  may  know  what  to  do  unto  thee 
33. 12 1  know  thee  by  name,  and  thou  hast  also 
33.  13  I  may  know  thee,  that  I  may  find  grace 
33. 17  grace  iu  my  sight.  .1  know  thee  by  name 
36.    1  to  know  how  to  work  all  manner  of  work 

Lev.    5.    1  whether  he  hath  seen  or  known,  .if  he  do 

5.  3,  4  when  he  knoweth.  .then he  shall  begu. 

23.  43  That  your  generations  may  know  that  I 
Nam  10.  31  thou  knowest  how  we  are  to  encamp  in 

11.  16  whom  thou  knowest  to  be  the  elders  of 
14.31  they  shall  know  the  land  which  ye  have 
14.  34  and  ye  shall  know  my  breach  of  promise 
16.  28  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  hath  sent  me 

20. 14  Thou  knowest  all  the  travel  that  hath  bef . 
22. 19  that  I  may  know  what  the  Lord  will  say 
22.  34  I  knew  not  that  thou  stoodest  in  the  way 

24.  16  knew  the  knowledge  of  the  most  High 
31.  17  that  hath  known  man  by  lying  with  him 
31.  18  have  not  known  a  man  by  lying  with  him 
31.  35  that  had  not  known  man  by  lying  with  him 

Deut.  2.    7  knoweth  thy  walking  tlirough  this  great 

3.  19  your  cattle.  .1  know  that  ye  have  much 

4.  35  that  thou  mightest  know  that  the  Lord 
4.  39  Know  therefore  this  day,  and  consider 

7.  9  Know  therefore  that  the  Lord  thy  God 
7. 15  evil  diseases  of  Egypt,  which  thou  know. 

8.  2  to  know  what  (was)  in  thine  heart,  whet. 
8.    3  knewest  not,  neither  did  thy  fathers  know 

8.  16  with  manna,  which  thy  fathers  knew  not 

9.  2  whom  thou  knowest,  and  (oi  whom)  thou 

9.  24  rebellious,  .from  the  day  that  I  knew  you 
11.    2  And  know  ye  this  day  :  for  (I  speak)  not 
ii.   2  with  your  children  whichhave  notknown 
11. 28  after  other  gods,  which  ye  have  not  known 
13.    2  other  gods,  which  thou  hast  not  known 
13.  3  to  know  whether  ye  love  the  Lord  your 
13.  13  serve,  .gods,  which  ye  have  not  known 
i3.  21  How  shall  we  know  the  word  which  the 
20.  20  knowest  that  they  (be)  not  trees  for  meat 
22.   2  or  if  thou  know  him  not,  then  thou  shalt 
28.  33  a  nation  which  thou  knowest  not  eat  up 

28.  36,  6.J.  neither  thou  nor  thy  fathers  have  kn. 

29.  6  might  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  yourG. 
29.  16  ye  know  how  we  have  dwelt  in  the  land 
29.  26  gods  whom  they  knew  not,  and  (whom) 
31.  13  children,  which  have  not  known  (auyth.) 
31.  21  I  know  their  imagination  which  they  go 
31.  27  I  know  thy  rebellion,  and  thy  stiff  neck 

31.  29  know  that  after  my  death  ye  will  utterly 

32.  17  gods  whom  they  knew  not,  to  new  (gods 

33.  9  his  brethren,  nor  knew  his  own  children 

34.  6  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto  this 

34. 10  Moses,  whom  the  Lord  knew  face  to  face 
Josh.  2.    9  I  know  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the 

4  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  must 
7  they  may  know  that,  as  I  was  with  Moses 
10  shall  know  that  the  living  God  (is)  among 
24  people  of  the  earth  might  know  the  hand 
6  Thou  knowest  the  thing  that  the  Lord  said 
22  LORD,  .knoweth,  and  Israel  he  shall  know 

13  Know  for  a  certainty  that  the  Lord  your 

14  know  in  all  your  hearts,  and  in  all  your. 
31  which  had  known  all  the  works  of  the  L. 
10  which  knew  not  the  Lord,  nor  yet . .  works 

1  as  had  not  known  all  the  wars  of  Canaan 

2  the  generations,  .of  Israel  might  know  to 
2  at  the  least  such  as  before  knew  nothing 
4  to  know whetherthey  would  hearkenimto 

6.  37  then  shall  I  know  that  thou  wilt  save 
11.  39  which  he  had  vowed :  and  she  knew  no 
13.  x6  knew  not  that  he  (was)  an  angel  of  the  L. 

13.  21  knew  that  he  (was)  an  angel  of  the  Lord 

14.  4  mother  knew  not  that  it  (was)  of  the  Lord 

15. 11  Knowest  thou  not  that  the  Philistines  (are) 
17. 13  Now  know  I . .  the  Lord  will  do  me  good 
18.    5  we  may  know  whether  our  way  which  we 

18.  14  Do  ye  know  that  there  is  in  these  houses 

19.  22  Bring,  .the  man.  .that  we  may  know  him 

19.  25  and  they  knew  her,  and  abused  h?r  all  the 

20.  34  but  they  knew  not  that  evil  (was)  near 

21.  12  had  known  no  man  by  lying  with  any  male 
Ruth  2.  11  people  which  thou  knowest  not  heretofore 

3.  11  doth  know  that  thou  (art)  a  virtuous  wo. 

3.  18  until  thou  know  how  the  matter  will  fall 

4.  4  redeem  (it,  then)  tell  me  that  I  may  know 
1  Sa.    1.  19  Elkanah  knew  Hannah  his  wife ;  and  the. 

2. 12  Now  the  sons  of  Eli.  .knew  not  the  Lord 
3.  7  Samuel  did  not  yet  know  the  Lord,  neit. 
3.  13  judge.,  for  the  iniquity  which  he  knoweth 
3.  20  Israel  from  Dan  even  to  Beer-sheba  knew 
6.   9  we  shall  know  that  (it  is)  not  his  hand 

10.  11  all  that  knew  him  beforetime  saw  that 
14.   3  the  people  knew  not  that  Jonathan  was 
14. 38  know  and  see  wherein  this  sin  hath  been 
17.  28  I  know  thy  pride,  and  the  naughtiness  of 
17.  46  may  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  Israel 

17.  47  assembly  shall  know  that  the  Loud  saveth 

18.  28  knew  that  the  Lord  (was)  with  David, and 
20.  3  Thy  father  certainly  knoweth  that  I  have 
20.  3  Let  not  Jonathan  know  this,  lest  he  be  g. 
20.  9  for  if  I  knew  certainly  that  evil  were  deter. 
20.  30  do  not  I  know  that  thou  hast  chosen  the 
20.  33  Jonathan  knew  that  it  was  determined  of 
20.  39  knew  not.  .only  Jonathan  and  David  knew 
si.    2  Let  nomanknowanythingof  the  business 

22.  3  with  you,  till  I  know  what  God  will  do  for 


:  Sa. : 


Judj 


3- 

3- 

3- 

4- 

14. 

22. 

23- 

23- 

24. 

.  2. 

3- 

3- 

3- 

3- 


•Sa. 


Ki. 


2Ki. 


tCh.i 


>Ch. 


Neb. 


Esth. 


15  thy  servant  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  less 
17  because  they  knew  when  he  fled,  and  did 
22  I  knew  (it)  that  day,  when  Doeg  the  Edo. 

9  David  knew  that  Saul  secretly  practised 
1 7  be  king . .  that  also  Saul  my  father  knoweth 
22  know  and  see  his  place  where  his  haunt  is 

11  know  thou  and  see  that  (there  is)  neither 
20  know  well  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  king 
it  unto  men  whom  I  know  not  whence  they 

17  know  and  consider  what  thou  wilt  do 

12  no  man  saw  (it),  nor  knew  (it),  neither 

1  Know  thou  assuredly,  that  thou  shalt  go 

2  thou  shalt  know  what  thy  servant  can  do 

9  thou  knowest  what  Saul  hath  done,  how 

9  I  know  that  thou  (art)  good  in  my  sight 
5  How  knowest  thou  that  Saul  and  Jonat. 

26  knowest  thouuotthatitwillbe  bitterness 
25  Thou  knowest  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  that 

25  to  know  thy  going  out.  .and  to  know  all 

26  brought  him  again,  .but  David  knew  (it) 
38  Know  ye  not  that  there  is  a  prince  and  a 
20  for  thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy  servant 

16  a  place  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men 
20  knew  ye  not  that  they  would  shoot  from 
20  to  know  all  (things)  that(are)  in  the  earth 
22  thy  servant  knoweth  that  I  have  found 

11  and  they  went,  .and  they  knew  not  any 

8  thou  knowest  thy  father  and  his  men,  that 

10  knoweth  that  thy  father  (is)  amighty  man 
29  great  tumult,  but  I  knewnot  what  (it  was) 
20  thy  servant  doth  know  that  I  have  sinned 
22  know  that  I  (am)  this  day  king  over  Israel 
44  people  (which)  I  knew  not  shall  serve  me 

hat  I  may  know  the  number  of  the  people 

4  ministered  to  him,  but  the  king  knew  her 

11  reign,  and  David  our  lord  knoweth  (it)not? 

18  now,  my  lord  the  king,  thou  knowest  (it) 

5  thou  knowest  also  what  Joab  the  son  of 

9  knowest  what  thou  oughtest  to  do  unto 
15  Thou  knowest  that  thekingdom  was  mine 
32  slew  them,  .my  father  David  not  knowing 

37  thou  shalt  know  for  certain  that  thou 

42  Know  for  a  certain,  on  the  day  thou  goest 
44  Thou  knowest  all  the  wickedness  which 

7  child . .  I  know  not  (how)  to  go  out  or  come 

3  Thou  knowest  how  that  David  my  father 

6  thou  knowest  that  (there  is)  not  among  us 

38  which  shall  know  every  man  the  plague 

39  to  every  man.  .whose  heart  thou  knowest 
3g  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of 

43  people  of  the  earth  may  know  thy  name 
43  they  may  know  that  this  house,  which  I 
60  the  people,  .may  know  that  the  LoRD(is) 

2  that  thou  be  not  known  to  be  the  wife  of 
24  I  know  that  thou  (art)  a  man  of  God,  (and) 

12  Spirit,  .shall  carry  thee  whither  I  know  not 
37  people  may  know  that  thou(art)the  Lord 

13  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

28  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

3  Know  ye  that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  (is)  ours 
.  3,  5  Knowest  thou  that  the  Lord  will  take| 

3,  5  he  said,  Yea,  I  know  (it) ;  hold  ye  your 

1  knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear  the  L. 
39  and  shred  (them),  .for  they  knew  (them) 

S  shall  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  Isr. 

15  I  know  that  (there is)  no  God  in  all  the 

12  Theyknowthatwe(be)hungry ;  therefore 
12  Iknow  the  evil  that  thouwiltdo  unto  the 

11  Ye  know  the  man  and  his  communication 

10  Know  now  that  there  shall  fall  unto  the 
26,  26  know  not  the  manner  of  the  God  of 

19  may  know  that  thou  (art)  the  Lord  God 

27  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thy  going  out,  and 

32  understanding,  .to  know  what  Israel  ou. 
18  can  David  (speak)  more,  .thou  knowest 

2  number  of  them  to  me,  that  I  may  know 
9  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father,  and 

17  I  know  also,  my  God,  that  thou  triest  the 

8  know  that  thy  servants  can  skill  to  cut 

29  shall  know  his  own  sore  and  his  own  grief 

30  every  man.  .whose  heart  thou  knowest 

30  thou  only  knowest  the  hearts  of  the  chil. 

33  people  of  the  earth,  may  know  thy  name 
33  may  know  that  this  house,  which  I  have 

8  they  may  know  my  service,  and  the  serv. 
5  Ought  ye  not  to  know  that  the  Lord  God 

12  neither  know  we  what  to  do :  but  our  eyes 

16  know  that  God  hath  determined  to  destroy 

13  Know  ye  not  what  I  and  my  fathers  have 

31  he  might  know  all  (that  was)  in  his  heart 
.  13  Manassehknew  that  the  Lord  he  (was)  G. 

16  the  rulers  knew  not  whither  I  went,  or 

11  They  shall  not  know,  neither  see,  till  we 
.  10  knewest  that  they  dealt  proudly  against 
.  13  said  to  the  wise  men,  which  knew  the 

13  toward  all  that  knew  law  and  judgment 

.  1 1  to  know  how  Esther  did,  and  what  should 

5  and.  .to  know  what  it  (was),  and  why  it 

11  the  people  of  the  king's  provinces,  do  know 
.  14  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to 
.  24  know  that  thy  tabernacle  (shall  be)  in 
.  25  know  also  that  thy  seed  (shall  be)  great 

27  hear  it,  and  know  thou  (it)  for  thy  good 
.  9  we  (are  but  of)  yesterday,  and  know  not. 
.  2  I  know  (it  is)  so  of  a  truth :  but  how  sho. 
.  5  removeth  the  mountains,  and  they  know 
.  21  (were)  perfect,  (yet)  would  I  not  know  my 
.  2S  know  that  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  innocent 
.  13  hast  thou  hid.  .1  know  that  this  (is)  with 
.  6  Know  therefore  that  God  exacteth  of  thee 
8  deeper  than  hell ;  what  canst  thou  know? 

1 1  knoweth  vain  men :  he  seeth  wickedness 


Job  12. 
13- 
13- 

M. 
J5- 
15- 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


22. 
=3- 
23- 
=3- 
24. 
24. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
2g. 
3°- 
3*. 
32- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
42. 
42. 
1, 
4- 
9- 


31- 

35. 
35- 
36. 
37- 
39- 
39- 
40, 
41. 
44. 
46. 
5°- 
56. 
59- 
67 
69. 
69. 
71- 
73- 
73< 
74' 
78. 
78. 
79 
82. 
83. 
87- 
89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
94. 
95- 

100. 

101. 

103. 

104. 

109. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

*35- 

138. 

139- 
139- 
139- 
139- 
139- 
140. 
142. 
147. 
Prov.  i. 


5- 

7- 
9- 
■  9 
10, 
14, 
24. 
24. 
24, 
27. 


9  Who  knoweth  not  in  all  these  that  the 

2  (the  same)  do  I  know  also  :  I  (am)  not  in. 

18  Behold  now.  .1  know  that  I  shall  be  jus. 
21  sons  come  to  honour,  and  he  knoweth  (it) 

9  What  knowest  thou,  that  we  know  not? 
23  he  knoweth  that  the  day  of  darkness  is 

21  (is)  the  place  (of  him  that)  knoweth  not 

6  Know  now  that  God  hath  overthrown  me 

25  I  know  (that)  my  redeemer  liveth,  and 
29  that  ye  may  know  that  (there  is)  a  judg. 

4  Knowest  thou  (uot)  this  of  old,  since  man 

19  he  rewardeth  him,  and  he  shall  know  (it) 
27  Behold,  I  know  your  thoughts,  and  the 
13  How  doth  God  know  ?  can  he  judge  thro. 

3  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  ! 

5  I  would  know  the  words  (which)  he  would 
10  he  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take  :  (when) 

1  do  they  that  know  him  not  see  his  days  ? 
16  in  the  day  time :  they  know  not  the  light 

7  (There  is)  a  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth 
13  Man  knoweth  not  the  price  thereof;  nei. 
23  God  understandeth.  .he  knoweth.  .place 
16  the  cause  (which)  I  knew  not  I  searched 
23  I  know  (that)  thou  wiltbringme^to)death 

6  weighed.  .thatGodmay  kuow  mmeinteg. 

22  For  I  know  not  to  give  flattering  titles 

4  let  us  know  among  ourselves  what  (is)  good 
33  not  I :  therefore  speak  what  thou  knowest 
15  yet  he  knoweth  (it)not  in  great  extremity 

26  we  know  (him)  not,  neither  can  the  num. 

7  sealeth.  .that  all  men  may  know  his  work 

15  Dost  thou  know  when  God  disposed  them 

16  Dost  thou  know  the  balancings  of  thecl. 

5  Who . .  laid  the  measures,  .if  thou  knowest  ? 
18  of  the  earth  ?  declare  if  thou  knowest  it 
21  Knowest  thou  (it),  because  thou  wast  then 
53  Knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven  ? 

1  Knowest  thou  the  time  when  the  wild  g. 

2  or  knowestthou  the  time  when  they  bring 

2  I  know  that  thou  canst  do  every  (thing) 

3  too  wonderful  for  me,  which  I  knew  not 

6  the  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  right. 

3  know  that  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  him 

10  they  that  know  thy  name  will  put  their 

20  nations  may  know  themselves  (to  be  but) 
43  people  (whom)  I  have  not  known  shall 

6  know  I  that  the  Lord  savethhis  anointed 

7  thou  hast  known  my  soul  in  adversities 

11  laid  to  my  charge  (things)  that  I  knewnot 
15  gathered  themselves,  .and  I  knew  (it)not 

10  lovingkindness  unto  them  that  knovvthee 

18  The  Lord  knoweth  the  days  of  the  upright 

4  what  it  (is  ;  that)  I  may  know  how  frail  I 
6  and  knoweth  not  who  shall  gather  them 
9  not  refrained  my  lips,  OLord,  thou  know. 

11  By  this  I  know  that  thou  favourest  me 

21  for  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart 

10  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  (am)  God :  I 
11I  know  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains 

9  shall  mine  enemies  turn  back  :  this  I  k. 

13  let  them  know  that  Godruleth  in  Jacob 

2  That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  earth 

5  thou  knowest  my  foolishness  ;  and  my 

19  Thou  hast  known  my  reproach,  and  my 

15  all  the  day ;  for  I  know  not  the  numbers 

11  How  doth  God  know  ?  and  is  there  know. 

16  When  Ithought  to  know  this,  it  (was)too 
9  (is  there)  among  us  any  that  knoweth  how 

3  Which  we  have  heard  and  known,  and 

6  the  generation  to  come  might  know  (them 
6  the  heathen  that  have  not  known  thee 

5  know  not,  neither  will  they  understand 

18  That  (men)  may  know  that  thou,  whose 

4  will  make  mention .  .to  them  that  know 
15  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound 
11  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger? 

14  on  high,  because  he  bath  known  my  name 

6  A  brutish  man  knoweth  not ;  neither  doth 

11  The  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  man 
10  a  people,  .they  have  not  known  my  ways 

3  Know  ye  that  the  Lord  he  (is)  God :  (it  is) 

4  from  me:  I  will  not  know  a  wicked  (person) 
14  he  knoweth  our  frame;  he  remembereth 

19  for  seasons :  the  sun  knoweth  his  going 

27  That  they  may  know  that  this  (is)  thy  h. 
75  know,  O  Lord,  that  thy  judgments  (are) 
79  and  those  that  have  known  thy  testimonies 
125  give  me  understanding,  that  I  may  know 
152  have  known  of  old  that  thou  hast  founded 

5  I  know  that  the  Lord  (is)  great,  and  (that) 

6  he  respect,  .but  the  proud  he  knoweth 

1  Lord,  thou  hast  searched  me,  and  known 

2  knowest  my  downsitting  and  mine  upris. 
4  (but),  Io,  O  Lord,  thou  knowest  it  altoge. 

14  and  (that)  my  soul  kuoweth  right  well 

23  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my 

12  I  know  that  the  Lord  will  maintain  the 

3  was  overwhelmed,  .thou  knewest  my  path 

20  his)  judgments,  they  have  not  known 

2  know  wisdom  and  instruction ;  to  perceive 
1  Hear,  .and  attend  to  know  understanding 

19  the  wicked,  .they  know  not  at  what  they 
6  moveable,  (that)  thou  canst  not  know 

23  and  knoweth  not  that  it  (is)  for  his  life 

13  clamorous ;  (she  is)  simple,  and  knoweth 
18  he  knoweth  not  that  the  dead  (are)  there 
32  The  lips  of  the  righteous  know  what  is 
10  The  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness;  and 
12  If  thou  sayest,  Behold,  we  knew  it  not 

12  thatkeepeth  thy  soul,  doth  (not)  he  know 

22  and  who  knoweth  the  ruin  of  them  both  7 
1  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring 


KNOW 


KNOW 


Prov27. 

3° 
Eccl.    i 

2. 

3 
3' 
3- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


Song 
Isa. 


Jer. 


23  Be  thou  diligent  to  know  the  state  of  thy 

18  wonderful  forme,  yea,  four  which  I  know 
17  know  wisdom,  and  to  know  madness  and 

19  who  knoweth  whether  he  shall  be  a  wise 
12  I  know  that  (there  is)  no  good  in  them 

14  know  that  whatsoever  God  doeth,  it  shall 

21  Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of  man  thatgoeth 
5  hath  not  seen  the  sun,  nor  known  (any  th.) 

8  the  poor,  that  knoweth  to  walk  before  the 
12  knoweth  what  (is)  good  for  man  in  (this) 

22  thine  own  heart  knoweth  that  thou  thys. 
25  to  know,  and  to  search,  and  to  seek  out 

25  to  know  the  wickedness  of  folly,  even  of 
1  who  knoweth  the  interpretation  of  a  thing 

7  For  he  knoweth  not  that  which  shall  be 
12  I  know  that  it  shall  be  well  with  them 

16  When  I  applied  mine  heart  to  know  wis. 

17  though  a  wise  (man)  think  to  know  (it) 

1  no  man  knoweth  either  love  or  hatred 

5  know  that  they  shall  die:  but  the  dead  kn. 
.12  For  man  also  knoweth  not  his  time  :  as 

15  because  he  knoweth  not  how  to  go  to  the 

2  knowest  not  what  evil  shall  be  upon  the 
5  kuowestnot  what  (is)  the  way  of  the  spirit 

5  knowest  not  the  works  of  God  who  maketh 

6  thou  knowest  not  whether  shall  prosper 

9  know  thou  that  for  all  these  (things)  God 

5  If  thou  know  not,  0  thou  fairest  among 

3  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass 

3  Israel  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  not 

19  draw  nigh  and  come,  that  we  may  know 

15  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the 

16  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil 
9  the  people  shall  know,  (even)  Ephraim 

12  let  them  know  what  the  Lord  of  hosts 

21  Egyptians  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that 

15  they  say,  Who  seeth  us?and  who  knoweth 

20  kingdoms,  .may  know  that  thou  (art)  the 
28  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thy  going  out,  and 

21  Have  ye  not  known?  have  ye  not  heard? 
28  Hast  thou  not  known?  hast  thou  not  heard 

20  they  may  see,  and  know,  and  consider 

22  that  we  may.  .know  the  latter  end  of  them 

23  that  we  may  know  that  ye  (are)  gods :  yea 

26  Who  hath  declared,  .that  we  may  know? 

16  the  blind  by  a  way  (that)  they  knew  not 
16  them  in  paths  (that)  they  have  not  known 

25  it  hath  set  him  on  Are.  .yet  he  knew  not 

10  mayknowand  believeme,  and  understand 
19  shall  spring  forth ;  shall  ye  not  know  it? 

8  yea,  (there  is)  no  God ;  I  know  not  (any) 

9  they  see  not,  nor  know ;  that  they  may 

18  They  have  not  known  nor  understood:  for 

3  mayest  know  that  I  the  Lord,  which 

6  they  may  know  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 

4  surnamed  thee,  though  thou  hast,  .known 

5  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known 
8  neither  shall  I  know  the  loss  of  children 

n  thou  shalt  not  know  from  whence  it  riseth 

11  and  desolation,  .(which)  thou  shalt  not  k. 

6  hidden  things,  and  thou  didst  not  know 

7  thou  shouldest  say,  Behold,  I  knew  them 

8  thou  knewest  not ;  yea,  from  that  time 

8  I  knew  that  thou  wouldest  deal  very  tre. 
23  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

26  aU  flesh  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  (am) 

4  that  I  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word 
7  and  I  know  that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed 

7  Hearkennnto  me,  ye  that  know  righteous. 

6  mypeople shall  knowmy name:  therefore 

5  thou  knowest  not,  and  nations  (that)  kn. 

8  The  way  of  peace  they  know  not ;  and 

8  whosoever  goeth  therein  shall  not  know 

12  and  (as  for)  our  iniquities,  we  know  them 
16  thou  shalt  know  that  I  the  Lord  (am)  thy 

5  Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  belly  I  knew 

8  and  they  that  handle  the  law  knew  me 

19  know  therefore  and  see  that  (it  is)  an  evil 

23  in  the  valley,  know  what  thou  hast  done 

22  people  (is)  foolish,  they  have  not  known 
1  know,  and  seek  in  the  broad  places  ther. 

4  they  know  not  the  way  of  the  Lord,  (nor) 

5  they  have  known  the  way  of  the  Lord 

15  a  nation  whose  language  thou  knowest 

18  know,  O  congregation,  what  (is)  among 

27  that  thou  mayest  know  and  try  their  way 

9  walk  after  other  gods  whom  ye  know  not 

7  the  stork,  .knoweth  her  appointed  times 
7  people  know  not  the  judgment  of  the  L. 
3  and  they  know  not  me,  saith  the  Lord 

6  through  deceit  they  refuse  to  know  me 

16  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  have  known 

24  he  understandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that 

23  I  know  that  the  way  of  man  (is)  not  in 

25  fury  upon  the  heathen  that  know  thee  not 
Ig.LoRD  hath  given  me  knowledge,  .and  I  k. 

19  I  knew  not  that  they  had  devised  devices 

3  thou,  OLord,  knowestme ;  thouhastseen 

12  Do  we  not  certainly  know  that  every  bo. 
18  go  about  into  a  land  that  they  know  not 

14  pass,  .into  a  land  (which)  thou  knowest 

15  LORD,  thou  knowest :  remember  me,  and 

15  know  that  for  thy  sake  I  have  suffered  reb. 

13  I  cast  you.  .into  a  land  that  ye  know  not 

21  they  shall  know  that  my  name  (is)  The  L. 

4  enemies  in  the  land  which  fivou  knowest 

16  thou  knowest :  that  which  caiae  out  of 
9  and  desperately  wicked  :  who  tan  know 

.  23  knowest  all  their  counsel  against  me  to 
.    4  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  haveVnown 
.  28  are  cast  into  a  laud  which  they  knov  not 
.    7  I  will  give  them  an  heart  to  know  me,  Jiat 

73 


Jer.  26. 
29 
29, 
31 
32 
33 
36. 
33. 


23 

24. 

25 

25 

25 
25 
26. 
28 
28 
29. 
3°' 
32. 
32 
33 
33 
34 
34 
35 
35 
35> 
3& 
36. 
36. 
36. 
37 
37 
37 
37 
38 
38 
38 
39 
39- 
39' 
39' 
39 
Dan.  2 


Joel 


Amos  3 
3 

5 

Jon. 


15  know  ye  for  certain,  that,  if  ye  put  me  to 

11  I  know  the  thoughts  that  I  think  toward 

23  know,  and  (am)  a  witness,  saith  the  Lord 
34  Know  the  Lord  :  forthey  shall  all  know 

8  knew  thatthis  (was)  the  word  of  the  Lord 

3  and  mighty  things,  which  thou  knowest 
19 Go,  hide,  .and  let  no  man  know  where  ye 

24  Let  no  man  know  of  these  words,  and  thou 

14  Dost  thou  certainly  know  that  Baalis  the 

15  slay  Ishmael.  .and  no  man  shall  know  (it) 

4  he  had  slain  Gedaliah,  and  no  man  knew 

19  know  certainly  that  I  have  admonished 

22  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die  by I  he 

3  to  serve  other  gods,  whom  they  knew,    ot 

15  the  men  which  knew  that  their  wives,     1 

28  shall  know  whose  words  shall  stand,  m; 

29  ye  may  know  that  my  words  shall  surel, 
17  all  ye  that  know  his  name,  say,  How  is 

30  I  know  his  wrath,  saith  the  Lord  :  but 

5  shall  know  that  there  hath  been  a  prophet 
13  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken 

7  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

10  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord,  and 

13  Then  shall  ye  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

14  and  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

4  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

9  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  that  sm. 
27  and  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

20  and  I  knew  that  they  (were)  the  cherubim 

5  I  know  the  things  that  come  into  your 
10, 12  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
15,  16  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

20  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
9,  14,  21,  23  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the 

8  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

23  shall  know  that  I  have  not  done  without 
7  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord,  when 

62  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 

12  Know  ye  not  what  these  (things  mean)? 

21  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken 

24  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that 
7  knew  their  desolate  palaces,  and  he  laid 

12  they  might  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
20  ye  may  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  your 

26  that  they  might  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 
38  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
42,  44  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

5  all  flesh  may  know  that  I  the  Lord  have 

16  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

22  ye  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  pou. 
49  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
24,  27  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 

5  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
7  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lo. 

11,  17  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

14  they  shall  know  my  vengeance,  saith  the 

6  and  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

19  they  that  know  thee  among  the  people 
22,  23, 24,  26  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

6,9, 16,  21  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
8,  19,  25,  26  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lo. 

9  the  couutries  which  thou  hast  not  known 

15  then  shall  they  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 

29  Then  shall  they  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 
33  then  shall  they  know  that  a  prophet  hath 

27  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord,  when  I 

30  Thus  shall  they  know  that  I  the  Lord 

4,  12  thou  shalt  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 
9  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

15  and  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

11  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

23  the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 
36  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  build  the  ru. 
38  and  they  shall  know  that  I(am)the  Lord 

3  And  I  answered,  0  Lord  God,  thou  know. 
6,  13  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  L. 
14  ye  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  (it) 

28  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  Israel 
14  dwelleth  safely,  shalt  thou  not  know  (it)? 

16  the  heathen  may  know  me,  when  I  shall 
23  and  they  shall  know  that  I(am)theLoRD 

6  and  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord 

7  the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the 

22  the  house  of  Israel  shall  know  that  I  (am) 

23  the  heathen  shall  know  that  the  house  of 
28  they  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  their  God 

3  my  spirit  was  troubled  to  know  the  dream 

25  Know  therefore  and  understand,  (that) 

20  Knowest . .  wherefore  I  come  unto  thee  ? 
32  that  do  know  their  God  shall  be  strong 
38  a  god  whom  his  fathers  knew  not  shall 

8  she  did  not  know  that  I  gave  her  corn,  and 
20  betroth  thee . .  and  thou  shalt  know  the  L. 

3  know  Ephraim,  and  Israel  is  not  hid  from 

4  whoredoms . .  they  have  not  known  the  L. 

3  we  know,  (if)  we  follow  on  to  know  the  L. 

9  devoured  his  strength,  and  he  knoweth 
9  grey  hairs  are  here,  .yet  he  knoweth  not 

2  shall  cry  unto  me,  My  God,  we  know  thee 

4  they  have  made  princes,  and  I  knew  (it) 
7  Israel  shall  know  (it) :  the  prophet  (is)  a 

3  Ephraim.  .they  knew  not  that  I  healed 

4  thou  shalt  know  no  god  but  me;  for  (there) 

5  I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness,  in  the 
9  prudent,  and  he  shall  know  them  ?  for 

14  Who  knoweth  (if)  he  will  return  and  rep. 
27  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  in  the  midst  of 

17  shall  ye  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  your 
2  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families 

10  they  know  not  to  do  right,  saith  the  Lord 

12  I  know  your  manifold  transgressions  and 
7  know  for  whose  cause  this  evil  (is)  upon 


Jon. 


Mic.  3. 
4- 
6. 

Nah.    1. 

Zeph.  3. 

Zech.  2. 


1.  10  men  knew  that  he  fled  from  the  presence 

1.  12  know  that  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest 
4.   2  I  knew  that  thou  (art)  a  gracious  God,  and 

1  Hear.  .(Is  it)  not  for  you  to  know  judgm.? 
12  But  they  know  not  the  thoughts  of  the  L. 
5  ye  may  know  the  righteousness  of  the  L. 
7  and  he  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  him 
5  faileth  not ;  but  the  unjust  knoweth  no 
9  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent 

2.  it  thou  shalt  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts 

4.  5,  13  said.  .Knowest  thou  not  what  these  be 

4.    9  thou  shalt  know  that  the  LORD  of  hosts 

6.  15  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath 

7.  14  among  all  the  nations  whom  they  knew 
11. 11  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  me  k. 

Mai.    2.    4  know  that  I.  .sent  this  commandment 

i.To  know,  yy,  yeda. 

Ezra  4.  15  know,  that  this  city  (is)  a  rebellious  city 
7.  25  judge,  .all  such  as  know  the  laws  of  thy 
7.  25  and  teach  ye  them  that  know  (them)  not 

Dan.  2.  8  I  know  of  certainty  that  ye  would  gain 
2.  9  I  shall  know  that  ye  can  show  me  the  in. 
2.  21  knowledge  to  them  that  know  understa. 
2.  22  he  knoweth  what  (is)  in  the  darkness,  and 
2,  30  mightest  know  the  thoughts  of  thy  heart 
4.  9  I  know  that  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  (is) 
4.  17  the  living  may  know  that  the  most  high 
4.  25  till  thou  know  that  the  most  high  ruleth 
4.  26  shalt  have  known  that  the  heavens  do 

4.  32  until  thou  know  that  the  most  high  ruleth 

5.  21  he  knew  that  the  most  high  God  ruled  in 
5.  22  not  humbled,  .though  thou  knewest  all 

5.  23  gods . .  which  see  not,  nor  hear,  nor  know 

6.  10  Daniel  knew  that  the  writing  was  signed 

6.  15  Know,  0  king,  that  the  law  of  the  Medes 

5. To  know,  discern,  15a  nahwr,  3. 

Job    21.  29  Have  ye  not  asked . .  do  ye  not  know  their 

6.  To  discern,  ~D3  nokar,  5. 

Gen.  37.  32  know  now  whether  it  (be)  thy  son's  coat 
37.  33  he  knew  it,  and  said,  (It  is)  my  sons's  coat 
42.    7  he  knew  them,  but  made  himself  strange 
42.    8  knew  his  brethren,  but  they  knew  not  him 
JuclgiS.    3  they  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  man  the 
Ruth  3.  14  she  rose  up  before  one  could  know  another 
1  Sa.  26.  17  Saul  knew  David's  voice,  and  said,  (Is) 
1  Ki.  iS.    7  knew  him,  and  fell  on  his  face,  aud  said 
Job      2.  12  lifted  up  their  eyes,  .and  knew  him  not 

7.  10  neither  shall  his  place  know  him  any  more 
24.  13  they  know  not  the  ways  thereof,  nor  abide 
24.  17  if  (one)  know  (them,  they  are  in)  the  ter. 
34.  25  he  knoweth  their  works,  and  he  overtur. 

Bsa.103.  16  the  place  thereof  shall  know  it  no  more 
142.    4  but  (there  was)  no  man  that  would  know 

7.  To  know,  yiv&ffKO}  ginosko. 

att.  1.  25  knew  her  not  till  she  had  brought  forth 

6.  3  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand  doeth 

7.  23  willlprofess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you 
9.  30  charged  them ,  saying,  See  (that)  no  man  k. 

10.  26  is  nothing.  ,hid,  that  shall  not  be  known 
12.    7  if  ye  had  known  what  (this)  meaneth,  I 
12.  15  when  Jesus  knew(it),  he  withdrew  himself 

12.  33  corrupt :  for  the  tree  is  known  by(his)fr. 

13,  11  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the  mysteries 
24.  32  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye  know  that  sum. 
24.  33  know  that  it  is  near,  (even)  at  the  doors 
24.  39  knew  not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took 

24.  43  But  know  this,  that  if  the  good  man  of  the 

25.  24  I  knew  thee  that  thou  art  an  hard  man 
Mark  4.  n  to  [know]  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of 

4.  13  and  how  then  will  ye  know  all  parables 

5.  43  charged  them,  .that  no  man  should  know 

6.  38  when  they  knew,  they  say,  Five,  and  two 

7.  24  would  have  no  man  know  (it):  but  he  could 

8.  17  when  Jesus  knew  (it),  he  saith  unto  them 

9.  30  he  would  not  that  any  man  should  know 

12.  12  they  knew  that  he  had  spoken  the  parable 

13.  r8  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye  know  that  summer 
13.  29  So.  .knowthatitis  nigh,(even)atthe  doors 
15.  10  For  he  knew  that  the  chief  priests  had  de. 

15.  45  when  heknew(it)of  the  centurion,  he  gave 
Luke  1.  18  Wliereby  shall  I  know  this?  fori  am  an 

1.  34  How  shall  this  be,  seeing  I  know  not  a 

2.  43  Joseph  and  his  mother  knew  not  (of  it) 

6.  44  For  every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit 

7.  39  would  have  known  who  and  what  manner 

8.  10  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  G. 

8.  17  that  shall  not  be  known  and  come  abroad 

9.  11  the  people,  when  they  knew  (it),  followed 
10.  22  no  man  knoweth  who  the  Son  is,  but  the 
12.  2  For.  .neither  hid,  that  shall  not  be  known 
12.  39  And  this  know,  that  if  the  good  man  of  the 
12.  47  seivant,  which  knew  his  lord's  will,  and 
12.  48  he  that  knew  not,  and  did  commit  things 

16.  15  God  knoweth  your  hearts  :  for  that  which 

18.  34  neither  knew  they  the  things  which  were 

19.  15  know  how  much  every  man  had  gained  by 
19.  42  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least 
19.  44  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitat. 
21.  20  know  that  the  desolation  thereof  is  nigh 
21.  30  know  of  your  own  selves  that  summer  is 
21.  31  know  ye  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh 
24.  18  hast  not  known  the  things  which  are  come 
24.  35  was  known  of  them  in  breaking  of  bread 

John  1.  10  made  by  him,  and  the  worldknewhim  not 

1.  48  saith  unto  him,  Whence  knowest  thou  me? 

2.  24  commit  himself,  .because  he  knew  all  (men) 

2.  25  needed  not . .  for  he  knew  what  was  in  man 

3.  10  a  master,  .and  knowest  not  these  things? 

4.  1  the  Lord  knew  how  the  Pharisees  had  he. 


KNOW 


578 


KNOW 


John  4.  53  father  knew  that  (it  was)  at  the  same  hour 
5.   6  knew  that  he  had  Deennowalongtime(in 

5.  42  I  know  you,  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of 
7.  i7  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether 
7.  26  know  Indeed  that  this  is  the  very  Christ? 
7.  27  when  Christ  cometh  no  man  kuoweth 

7.  49  people  who  knoweth  not  the  law  are  cur. 

7.  51  hefore  it  hear  him,  and  know  what  he  d.? 

8.  28  then  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  (he),  and 
8.  32  And  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth 
8.  52  said. ,  Now  we  know  that  tliou  hast  a  devil 

8,  55  Yet  ye  have  not  known  him  ;  but  I  know 
10.  14  and  know  my  (sheep),  and  am  known  of 
10.  15  kuoweth  me,  even  so  know  I  the  Father 

"     10.  27  My  sheep.  .1  know  them,  and  they  follow 

10.  38  ye  may  know,  and  believe,  that  the  Father 
n.  57  if  an  v  man  knew  where  he  were,  he  should 

12.  g  the  Jews  therefore  knew  that  he  was  there 

13.  7  not  now;  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter 
13.  i_>  said.  -Know  ye  what  I  have  done  to  you? 
13.  28  knew  for  what  intent  he  spake  this  unto 

13,  35  By  this  shall  all.  .know  that  ye  are  my 

14.  7  If  ye  had  known  me,  [ye  should  have  kn.] 
14.    7  henceforth  ye  know  him,  and  have  seen 
14.    9  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip? 
14.  17  neither  knoweth  him:  but  ye  know  him 
14.  20  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  in  my  Father 

14.  31  that  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the 

15.  18  ye  know  that  it  hated  me  hefore  (it  hated) 

16.  3  they  have  not  known  the  Father,  nor  me 
16. 19  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask 
27.    3  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God 

17.  7  they  have  known  that  all  things  whatso. 
17.  8  J  known]  surely  that  I  came  out  from  thee 
17.  23  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me 
17.  25  not  known  thee:  but  I  have  known  thee 
17.  25  these  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me 
iq.  4  ye  may  know  that  I  lind  no  fault  in  him 
21.  17  thou  knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest 

Acts    1.    7  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons 
2.  36  ht  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly 

9,  24  But  their  laying  await  was  known  of  Saul 
17.  19  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine 
17.  20  would  know  therefore  what  these  things 
19.  15  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know;  but  who  are  ye? 

19.  35  what  man  is  there  that  knoweth  not  how 

20.  34  ye  yourselves  know,  that  these  hands  have 

21.  24  all  may  know  that  those  things,  whereof 

21.  34  could  not  know  the  certainty  for  the  turn. 

22.  14  thou  shouldest  know  his  will,  and  see 
22.30  would  have  known  the  certainty  wheref. 

23.  28  [known]  the  cause  wherefore  they  accused 
Bom.  1.  21  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  (him) 

2.  18  knowest  (his)  will,  .approvest  the  things 
3. 17  And  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known 

6.  6  Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified 

7.  1  for  I  speak  to  them  that  know  the  law 

7.  7  I  had  not  known  sin,  but  by  the  law:  for 
10. 19  Did  not  Israel  know '.'  First  Moses  saith 

11.  34  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord? 

1  Co.    1. 21  after.,  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God 

2.  8  none  of  the  princes,  .knew,  .had  they  kn. 
2.  14  neither  can  he  know  (them),  because  they 

2.  16  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord 

3.  20  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  the  wise 

4.  19  will  know,  not  the  speech  of  them  which 

8.  2  knoweth  nothing  yet  a3  he  ought  to  know 
8.    3  if  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  known 

13.    9  we  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in  part 

13.  12  I  know  in  part ;  but  then,  .even  as  also  I 

14.  7  shall  it  be  known  whatis  piped  or  harped? 
14.    9  how  shall  it  lie  known  what  is  spoken  ? 

2  Co.    2.    4  ye  might  know  the  love  which  I  have 

2.  9  I  might  know  the  proof  of  you,  whether 

3.  2  in  our  hearts,  known  and  read  of  all  men 

5.  16  though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the 
5.  16  now  henceforth  know  we  (him)  no  more 
5.  21  made  him  (to  lie)  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no 
8.    9  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ch. 

13.    6  I  trust  that  ye  shall  know  that  we  are  not 
Gal.     3.    7  Know  ye  therefore  that  they  which  are 

4.  9  ye  have  known  God,  or  rather  are  known 
Eph.    3.  19  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  k. 

5.  5  ye  know,  that  no  whoremonger,  nor  une. 

6.  22  ye  might  know  our  affairs,  and  (that)  he 
Phil.    2.  19  may  be  of  good  comfort,  when  I  know 

2.  22  ye  know  the  proof  of  him,  that,  as 

3.  10  That  I  may  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his 

4.  5  Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all 
Col.     .).    8  he  might  know  your  estate,  and  comfort 

1  Th.  3.    5  I  sent  to  know  your  faith,  lest  by  some 

2  Ti.    1.  t8  how.  .he  ministered,  -thou  knowest  very 

2. 19  seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his 

|,    1  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous 

Heb.  3.  10  alway  err.  .they  have  not  known  my  ways 

8.  11  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  Know  the 

10,  34  knowing  in  yourselves  that  ye  have  in 

1  j,  23  Know  ye  that  (our)  brother  Timothy  is  set 
Jas.     1.    3  Knowing  (this),  that  the  trying  of  your 

2.  20  But  wilt  thou  know,  O  vain  man,  that  fa. 

5.  20  Let  him  know,  that  he  which  converteth 
2  Pe.   1.  zo  Knowing  this  first,  that  no  prophecy  of 

3.  3  Knowing  this  first,  that  there  shall  come 
1  Jo.    2.    3  we  do  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep 

1.  4  He  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  keepeth 

2.  5  perfected  :  hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in 
2.  13,  14  known  him(thatis)fromthebeginning 
2.  13 1  write,  .because  ye  have  known  the  Fat. 
2.  18  Little  children,  .we  know  that  it  is  the  last 

2.  29  Tf  yc  know  that  he  is  righteous,  ye  know 

3.  1  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  kn. 
3.   C  sitiucth  hath  nut  seen  him,  neither  known 


1  Jo.   3.  19  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth 

3.  20  For.  .God  is  greater,  .and  knoweth  all  th. 

3.  24  hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by 

4.  2  Hereby  know  ye  the  spirit  of  God  :  Every 
4.  6  he  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us ;  he  that 
4.  6  Hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  truth,  and 
4.  7  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth 
4.  8  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for 
4.  13  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and 

4.  16  we  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that 

5.  2  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God 

5.  20  that  we  may  know  him  that  is  true;  and 

2  Jo.         1  but  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  tr. 
Rev.    2.  17  which  no  man  [knoweth]  saving  he  that 

2.  23  all  the  churches  shall  know  that  I  am  he 

2.  24  known  the  depths  of  Satan,  as  they  speak 

3,  3  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee 

3.  9  I  will  make  them,  to  know  that  I  have 

S.Knoimi,  yvcaaros  f/uostos. 

Acts  28.  22  know  that  everywhere  itisspoken  against 

9.  To  see,  have  seen,  known.,  olSa  oida. 

Matt.  6.    8  your  Father  knoweth  what  things  ye  have 

6.  32  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these 

7.  11  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 

9.    4  Jesus,  knowing  their  thoughts,  said,  Whe. 

9.  6  may  know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power 
12. 25  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  unto  them 
15.  12  Knowest  thou  that  the  Pharisees  were  off. 
20.  22  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.  Are  ye  able  to 
20.  25  Ye  know  that  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles 
22.  16  we  know  that  thou  are  true,  and  teachest 
22.  29  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor  the  power 
24.  36  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  (man) 
24.  42  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  come 

24.  43  if  the  good  man  of  the  house  had  known 

25.  12  said,  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you 
25.  13  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour 

25.  26  thou  knewest  that  I  reap  where  I  sowed 

26.  2  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is.  .the  pas. 
26.  70  denied,  .saying,  I  know  not  what  thou  sa. 
26.  72  denied  with  an  oath,  I  do  not  know  the 

26.  74  and  to  swear, (saying),  I  know  not  the  man 

27.  18  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered 

28.  s  for  I  know  that  ye  seek  Jesus,  which  was 
Mark  r.  24  I  know  thee  who  thou  art,  the  Holy  One 

1.  34  the  devils  to  speak,  because  they  knew  h. 

2.  10  may  know  thatthe  Son  of  man  bath  power 

4.  13  Know  ye  not  this  parable  ?  and  how  then 

4.  27  should  spring  aud  grow  up,  he  knoweth 

5.  33  knowing  what  was  done  in  her,  came  and 

6.  20  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  aud  an  h. 
10.  19  Thoukuowestthecommandments,  Do  not 
10.  38  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask  :  can  ye  drink 

10.  42  Ye  know  that  they  which  are  accounted 
12.  14  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and  carest 
T2.  15  he,  [knowing)  their  hypocrisy,  said  unto 

12.  24  ye  know  not  the  scriptures,  neither  the 

13.  32  of  that  day  and . .  hour  knoweth  no  man 
13.  33  and'  pray  :  for  ye  know  not  when  the  time 

13.  35  ye  know  not  when  the  master  of  the  house 

14.  68  knownot,  neither  understand  I  what  thou 
14.  71  I  know  not  this  man  of  whom  ye  speak 

Luke  4.  34  I  know  thee  who  thou  art ;  the  Holy  One  of 
4.  41  to  speak  :  for  they  knew  that  he  was  Chr. 
5.24  may  know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power 
6.    8  he  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  to  the 

8.  53  And  they  laughed,  .knowing  that  she  was 

9.  33  and  one  for  Elias  :  not  knowing  what  he 
9.  55  [know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of] 

11.  13  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  ch. 
n,  17  knowing  their  thoughts,  said  unto  them 

12.  30  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these  things 

12.  39  if  thegoodmanof  the  house  had  known  w. 

13.  25  and  say  unto  you,  I  know  not  whence  ye 
13.  27  I  tell  you,  I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are 

18.  20  Thou  knowest  the  commandments',  Do  not 

19.  22  Thou  knewest  that  I  was  an  austere  man 

20.  21  know  that  thousayest  and  teachest  rightly 
22.  34  thou  shalt  thrice  deny  that  thou  knowest 
22.  57  denied  him,  saying,  Woman,  I  know  him 
22.  60  Peter  said,  Man,  I  know  not  what  thou 
23-  34  [forgive  them  ;  for  they  knownot  what] 

John  1.  26  standeth  one  among  you,  whom  ye  know 

1.  31  knew  him  not:  but  that  he  should  be  m. 
i.  33  And  I  knew  him  not :  but  he  that  sent 

2.  9  was  made  wine,  aud  knew  not  whence  it 

2.  9  the  servants  which  drew  the  water  knew 

3.  2  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come 

3.  11  We  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify 

4.  10  If  thou  knewest  the  giftof  God,  and  who 
4.  22  Ye  worship  ye  know  not  what :  we  know 
4.  25  I  know  that  Messias cometh,  whichiscal. 
4.  32  said,  .1  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  known. of 

4.  42  and  know  that  this  is  indeed  the  Christ 

5.  32  know  that  the  witness  which  he  witness. 

6.  6  for  he  himself  knew  what  he  would  do 
6.  42  Jesus . .  whose  father  and  mother  weknow? 

6.  61  Jesus  knew  in  himself  that  his  disciples 
C.  64  Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning  who  they 

7.  15  How  knoweth  this  man  letters,  having 

7.  27  we  know  this  man  whence  he  is  :  hut  when 
7.  28  Ye  both  know  me,  and  ye  know  whence  I 
7.  28  he  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  know 

7.  29  I  know  him  :  for  I  am  from  him,  and  he 

8.  14  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go 
8.  19  answered.  Ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my 
8.  19  if  yehad  known  me,  ye  should  have  known 
8.  37  I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's  seed  ;  but 
8.  55  I  know  him:  and  if  I  should  say,  I  know 
8.  55  a  liar.. but  I  know  him,  and  keep  his  say 


John 


Rom 


Co 


iCo. 


Gal. 


^pb 


/ 


9.  12  said  they.  .Where  is  he?  He  said,  I  know 
9.  20  We  know  that  this  is  our  son,  and  that  lie 
9.  21  But  bywhatmeans  he  now  seeth,  weknow 

9.  21  or  who  hath  opened  his  eyes,  we  knownot 
9.  24  and  sa*id.  .we  know  that  this  man  isa  sin. 
9,  25  sinner  (or  no),  I  know  not :  one  thing  I  k. 
9.  29  We  know  that  God  spake  unto  Moses  :(as 
9.  29  this  (fellow),  we  know  not  from  whence 
g.  30  ye  know  not  from  whence  he  is,  and  (yet) 
9.  31  Now  we;know  that  God  heareth  not  sinners 

10.  4  sheep  follow  him  :  for  they  know  his  voice 

10.  5  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers 

11.  22  know,  that  even  now,  whatsoever  thou 
11.  24  I  know  that  he  shall  rise  again  in  the 
11. 42  And  I  knew  that  thou  hearest  me  always 

11.  49  said  unto  them,  Ye  know  nothing  at  all 

12.  35  in  darkness  knoweth  n«>t  whither  he  goeth 

12.  50  And  I  know  that  his  commandment  is  life 

13.  1  Jesus  knew  that  his  hour  was  come  that 
13.    3  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given 
13.    7  thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but  thou  shalt 
13.  11  he  knew  who  should  betray  him  ;  theref. 
13.  17  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if 

13.  18  I  know  whom  I  have  chosen  :  but  that  the 

14.  4  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  [ye  k.  | 

14.  5  Lord,  we  knownot.  .how  can  we  know  the 

15.  15  servant  kuoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth 

15.  21  because  they  know  not  him  that  sent  me 

16.  30  Now  are  we  sure  that  thou  knowest  all 
18.  2  Judas,  .which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  pi. 
18.    4  knowing  all  things  that  should  come  upon 

18.  21  ask  them .  .behold,  they  know  what  I  said 

19.  10  knowest  thou  not  that  I  have  power  to 
19.  28  Jesus  [knowing]  that  all  things  were  now 

19.  35  he  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye 

20.  2  we  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him 
20.    9  they  knew  not  the  scripture,  that  lie  must 
20.  1 3  Because . .  I  know  not  where  they  have  laid 

20.  14  saw  Jesus,  .and  knew  not  that  it  was  Je. 

21.  4  but  the  disciples  knew  not  that  it  was  J. 
21.  12  Who  art  thou?  knowingthat  it  was  the  L. 
ei.  15  Lord  ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee 

21.  16  Lord  ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee 
21.  17  And  he  said.  .Lord,  thou  knowest  all  th. 
21.  24  and  we  know  that  his  testimony  is  true 
2.  22  midst  of  you,  as  ye  yourselves  also  know 

2.  30  knowing  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  oath 

3.  16  made  this  man  strong,  whom  ye  see  and  k. 
5.  7  wife,  not  knowing  what  was  done,  came 
7.  18  Till  another  kingiirose,  which  knew  not  J. 

10.  37  word,  (I  say),  ye  know,  which  was  publish. 

1 2.  1 1  know  of  a  surety,  that  the  Lord  hath  sent 
16.    3  they  knew  all  that  his  father  was  a  Greek 

19.  32  the  more  part  knew  not  wherefore  they 

20.  22  not  knowing  the  things  that  shall  befall 
20.  25  I  know  that  ye  all,  among  whom  I  have 
20.  29  I  know  this,  that  after  my  departing  shall 
26.  27  King  Agrippa.  .  Iknowthatthoubelievest 

.  3.  19  we  know  that  what  things  soever  the  law 

5.  3  knowing  that  tribulatiunworketh  patience 

6.  9  Knowing  that  Christ  being  raised  from  the 

6.  16  Know  ye  not,  that  to  whom  ye  yield  you. 

7.  7  I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law  had 
7.  14  we  know  that  the  law  is  spiritual :  but  I 

7,  18  For  I  know  that  in  me  that  is,  in  my  flesh 

8.  22  we  know  that  the  whole  creation  groaneth 
8.  26  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as 
8.  27  knoweth  what  (is)  the  mind  of  the  spirit 
8.  28  we  know  that  all  things  work  together  for 

13.  11  knowing  the  time,  that  now  (it  is)  high 

14.  14  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  J. 

1.  16  besides,  I  know  not  whether  I  baptized 

2.  2  determined  not  to  know  any  thing  among 
2.  11  what  man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man" 
2.  ti  the  things  of  God  [knoweth]  no  man,  but 

2.  12  that  we  might  know  the  things  that  are 

3.  16  KnowyenotthatyearethetempleofGod 

5.  6  Know  ye  not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth 

6.  2  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  ju, 
6.  3  Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels  ? 
6.  9  Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall 
6.  15  Knowyenot  that  your  bodies  are  theme. 

6.  16  know  ye  not  that  lie  which  is  joined  to 

6. 19  know  ye  not  that  yourbody  is  the  temple 

7.  16  what  knowest  thou,  0  wife,  whether  thou 

7.  16  how  knowest  thou,  0  man,  whether  thou 

8.  1  Now.  .we  know  that  we  all  have  knowle. 
8.    2  if  any  man  think  that  [he  knoweth]  any 

8.  4  know  thatan  idol(is)nothingintbeworld 

9.  13  Do  ye  not  know  that  they  which  minister 
9.  24  Know  ye  not  that  they  which  run  in  a  race 

11.  3  I  would  have  you  know,  that  the  head  of 

12.  2  Ye  know  that  ye  were  Gentiles,  carng'j 

14.  11  if  I  know  not  the  meaning  of  then"v"^in 

15.  58  ye  know  that  your  labour  is  ngg  *.nat  it 

16.  15  ye  know  the  house  of  Step1;  ^^  of  tlie 
1.    7  knowing  that  as  yeag*£gj|£p  the  Lord 

4.  14  Knowing  that  he  w  .-  »  ™J  of\thU)tab. 

5.  1  know  th;it  if  unrt-',  !liy  Vi,l,0i,  h,« 
5.  6  knowing  that.  Ails ;  weave  atbomemthe 
5. 11  Knowing  therefore  the  terroi -of the  Lord 
?  16  henceforth  know  we  no  man  aftei  the  flesh 
o    2  I  know  the  forwardness  of  your  mm.    for 

1?.  11  because  I  love  you  not?  God  tooweth 

11.  31  T\ie  God  and  Father,  .knoweth  that  I  he 
a    *  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen y. 

la./  2   1  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell :  God  kn. 

19  '  .Tknew  such  a  man,  whether  in  the  body 
V  J  K 1,  «ingthatnmRii  is  not  justified  bythe 
I"  S  when  vek.u-wiu.tGud.yedidservneun  o 
1"  ,,  Ye  1  now  bow  through  infirmity  of  the  t. 
t    8  ye  n uiy  know  what  isthe  hope  of  his  call. 


\ 


KNOW 


579 


KNOWLEDGE 


Eph.  6.    8  Knowing  that  whatsoever  good  thing  any 
6.    9  knowing  that  your  Master  also  is  in  heaven 

6.  21  that  ye  also  may  know  my  atfairs,(and)  how 
Phil.    i.  17  knowing  that  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of 

1. 19  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation 
i,  25  I  know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with 
4.  12  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know 
4. 15  know  also,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  g. 
Col.     2.    1  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have 

3.  24  Knowingthat  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive 

4.  1  knowing  that  ye  also  have  a  Master  in  h. 
4.   6  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every 

1  Th.  1.    4  Knowing, brethren  beloved,  yourelection 

1.  5  as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  were 
2     1  yourselves,  .know  our  entrance  in  unto 

2.  2  as  ye  know,  at  Philippi,  we  were  bold  in 

2.  5  neither,  .used  . .  flattering  words,  as  ye  k. 
2. 11  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  comfor. 

3.  3  yourselves  know  that  we  are  appointed 

3.  4  told . .  even  as  it  came  to  pass  and  ye  kuow 

4.  2  ye  know  what  commandments  we  gave 
4.    4  every  one  of  you  should  know  how  to  pos. 

4.  5  even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know  not  God 

5.  2  yourselves  know  perfectly,  that  the  day  of 
5.  12  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you 

2  Th.    1.    8  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not 

2.  6  ye  know  what  withholdeth  that  he  might 

3.  7  For  yourselves  know  how  ye  ought  to  fol. 

1  Ti.    1.    8  we  know  that  the  law  (is)  good,  if  a  man 

1.    9  Knowing  this,  that  the  law  is  not  made 
3.    5  a  man  knownot  howtorulehisownhou.se 
3.  15  that  thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest 

2  Ti.    1.  12  for  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am 

1.  15  This  thou  knowest,  that  all  they  which 

2.  23  avoid,  knowingthat  they  do  gender  strifes 

3.  14  knowing  of  whom  thou,  .learned  (them) 
3.  15  And  that  from  a  child  thou  hast  known 

Titus  1.  16  They  profess  that  they  know  God ;  but  in 

3.  11  Knowingthat  he  that  is  such  is  subverted 
Phm.      21  knowing  that  thou  wilt  also  do  more 
Heb.    8.  11  for  all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to 

10.  30  we  know  him  that  hath  said,  Vengeance 
Jas.     3.    1  knowing  that  we  shall  receive  the  greater 

4.  4  know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the 

4.  17  to  hini  that  knoweth  todogood,anddoeth 

1  Pe.   1.  18  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with 

3.    9  [knowing]  that  ye  are  thereunto  called 

5.  9  knowing  that  the  same  afflictions  are  ac. 

2  Pe.    1.  12  you  always  in  remembrance,  .though  ye  k. 

1.  14  Knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  ort"  (this) 

2.  9  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the 

1  J.o.  2.  11  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth,  because 
2.  20  have  an  unction,  .and  ye  know  all  tilings 
2.  2i-ye  know  not  the  truth,  but  because  ye  k. 

2.  29  If  ye  know  that  he  is  righteous.,  every  one 

3.  2  we  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we 
3.    5  ye  know  that  he  was  manifested  to  take 
3.  14  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
3.  15  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal 
5. 13  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life 

5.  15  we  know  that  he  hear  us,  whatsoever  we 
5. 15  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that 
5.  18  We  know  that  whosoever  is  born  of  God 
5.  19  know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole 

5.  20  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and 

3  John    12  record ;  and  ye  know  that  our  record  is 
Jude        5  ye  once  knew  this,  how  that  the  Lord 

10  speak  evilof  those  things  which  they  know 
Rev.   2.    2  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and 

2.  g  I  know  thy  works,  and  tribulation,  and 
2. 13  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  dwell. 
2. 19  I  know  thy  works,  and  charity,  and  service 

3.  1  I  know  thy  works,  and  thou  hast  a  name 
3.  8  1  know  thy  works :  behold,  I  have  set  be. 
3. 15  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither 
3.  17  knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  and 

7.  14  And  I  said  unto  him,  Sir,  thou  knowest 
12. 12  he  knoweth  that  he  hath  but  a  short  time 
19.  12  he  had  a  name  written  that  no  man  knew 

IQ.To  know  about  or  fully,  in  iy  wdxritw  epiginosko. 
Matt  7.  16  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits.    Do 
7.  20  Wherefore  by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 

11.  27  and  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  F. 
ir.  27  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save 
17.  12  they  knew  him  not,  but  have  done  unto 

Mark  5.  30  knowing  in  himself  that  virtue  had  gone 

6.  33  many  [knew]  him,  and  ran  afoot  thither  out 

6.  54  And  when  they  were  come  out.  .they  knew 
Luke   1.    4  thoumightestknowthe  certainty  of  those 

7.  37  when  she  knew  that  (Jesus)  sat  at  meat 

23 .  7  as  he  knew  that  he  belonged  unto  Herod's 

24.  16  eyes  wereholden  that  they  should  not  k. 

24.  31  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  knew 
Acts    3.  io  they  knew  that  it  was  he  which  sat  for 

9.  30  when  the  brethren  knew,  they  brought 

12.  14  when  she  knew  Peter's  voice,  she  opened 
19.  34  when  they  knew  that  he  was  a  Jew,  all 
22.  24  know  wherefore  they  cried  so  against  him 
22.  29  afraid,  after  he  knew  that  he  was  a  Roman 

25.  10  done  no  wrong,  as  thou  very  well  knowest 

27.  39  wher  it  was  day,  they  knew  not  the  land 

28.  1  kne'    that  the  island  was  called  Melita 
Rom.  1.  32  Who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that 

1  Co.  13.  12  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known 

2  Co.  13.    5  Know  ye  not  your  own  selves,  how  that 
Col.     1.    6  since  the  day  ye .  .knew  the  grace  of  God 

1  Ti.   4.    3  of  them  which  believe  and  know  the  truth 

2  Pe.   2.  21  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness 

2.  21  after  they  have  known  (it),  to  turn  from 

11.  To  understand,  tTriarap.a.1  epistamaL 

Acts  10.  28  Ye  know  how  that  it  is  an  unlawful  thing 


Acts  15.    7  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while  ago  God 

18.  25  he  spake .  .knowing  only  the  baptism  of 

19.  15  answered  and  said . .  Paul  I  know ;  but  who 

19.  25  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  our  we. 

20.  18  Ye  know,  from  the  first  day  that  I  came 
22.  19  they  know  that  I  imprisoned  and  beat  in 
24. 10  I  kuow  that  thou  hast  been  of  many  years 
26.  26Forthekingknowethof  these tIiings,before 

1  Ti.  6.  4  He  is  proud,  knowing  nothing,  but  doting 
Heb.  11.  8  he  wentout,  not  knowing  whither  he  went 
Jas.  4.  14  Whereas  ye  know  not  what  (shall  be)  on 
Jude        10  but  what  they  know  naturally,  as  brute  b. 

12.  To  know,  Xaijfit  isemi. 

Acts  26.  4  My  manner  of  life  from  my  youth . .  know 
Heb.  12. 17  For  ye  know  how  that  afterward,  when  he 

13.  To  know  beforehand  or  formerly,  trpoyiv^o-Kta. 
Acts  26.    5  Which  knew  me  from  the  beginning,  if 

14.  To  know  together,  <rvvoi8a.  sunoida. 

1  Co.  4.    4  For  I  know  nothing  by  myself ;  yet  am  I 
KNOW,  to  cause,  let,  or  make  to  — 

1.7*0  make  to  know,  jn;  yada,  3. 

Job  38. 12  Hast  thou.,  caused  the  day  spring  to  know 
2.7*0  cause  to  know,  yv  yada,  5. 

ExodiS.  16  I  do  make  (them)  know  the  statutes  of  G. 
33. 12  thou  hast  not  let  me  know  whom  thou 

Dcut  8.    3  that  he  might  make  thee  know  that  man 

Josh.  4.  22  Then  ye  shall  let  your  children  know,  say. 

2  Sa.  7.  21  hast  thou  done  all . .  to  make  thy  servant  k. 
Job  13.  23  make  me  to  knew  my  transgression  and 
Psa.  39.    4  Lord,  make  me  to  know  mine  end,  and 

51,   6  and.  .thou  shalt  make  me  to  know  wisdom 

143.   8  cause  me  to  knowthe  way  wherein  I  sho. 

Prov.22.  21  That  I  might  make  thee  know  the  certai. 

Jer.  16.  21  behold,  I  will  this  once  cause  them  to  know 

16.  21  I  will  cause  them  to  know  mine  hand  and 
Eze.  16.    2  cause  Jerusalem  to  knowher  abominations 

20,  4  cause  them  to  knoiv  the  abominations  of 
Dan.    8. 19  I  will  niake  thee  know  what  shall  be  in 

3.  To  know,  VT:  yeda,  5. 

Dan.    7. 16  and  made  me  know  the  interpretation  of 
KNOW  before,  to  — 
To  know  beforehand,  Trpoytvd>o-K&>  proginosko. 

2  Pe.  3. 17  seeing  ye  know,  .before,  beware  lest  ye 
KNOW  fully,  to  — 
To  follow  alongside,  irapa.Ko\ovBew  parakoloutlieo, 

2  Ti.    3.  to  But  thou  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine 
KNOW  not,  to  — 
To  be  ignorant,  not  to  know,  ayvo4u>  agr.oeo. 

Acts  13.  27  because  they  knew  him  not,  nor  yet  the 

Koni.  2.    4  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God 

6.  3  know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were 

7.  1  Know  ye  not,  brethren,  .how  that  the  law 
KNOW  the  uttermost,  to  — 

To  know  thoroughly,  StaytvcCa-Kca  diaginosko. 

Acts  24.  22  I  will  know  the  uttermost  of  your  matter 
KNOW  well,  to  — 
To  know  about  or  fully,  iiriyivdoaKw  epiginosko. 

2  Co.    6.    9  As  unknown,  and  (yet)  well  known  ;  as 
KNOWLEDGE  — 
1,  Under standing,  nyz  binah, 

Prov.  2.   3  Yea,  if  thou  cricst  after  knowledge,  (and) 

Dan.    2. 21  knowledge  to  them  that  know  understa. 

^.Knowledge,  in  dea. 

Job  36.    3  I  will  fetch  my  knowledge  from  afar,  and 

37.  :6  works  of  him  winch  is  perfect  in  knowle.'? 

^.Knowledge,  njn  deah. 

1  Sa.    2.    3  for  the  LoRD(is)  a  God  of  knowledge,  and 
Job  36.   4  he  that  is  perfect  in  knowledge  (is)  with 
Psa.  73. 11  and  is  there  knowledgein  the  most  High? 
Isa.   11.   9  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge 
28.    9  Whom  shall  he  teach  knowledge  ?  and 
Jer.     3.  15  which  shall  feed  you  with  knowledge  and 

^.Knowledge,  njn  daath. 

Gen.   2.   9  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 
2.  17  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 

Exod3i.  3  in  understanding,  and  in  knowledge,  and 
35.  31  in  understanding,  and  in  knowledge,  and 

NUIU24.  16  and  knew  the  knowledge  of  the  most  H. 

Job   15.    2  Should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  knowledge 
21."  14  for  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy 
ci.  22  Shall  (any)  teach  God  knowledge  ?  seeing 
33.   3  and  my  lipsshall  utter  knowledge  clearly 
34-  35  J°b  hath  spoken  without  knowledge,  and 

35.  16  he  multiplieth  words  without  knowledge 

36.  12  obey  not.  .they  shall  die  without  knowle. 

38.  2  darkeneth  counsel  by  words  without  kno. 
42.    3  (is)  he  that  hideth  counsel  without  know. 

Psa.  19.    2  and  night  unto  night  showeth  knowledge 

94. 10  he  that  teacbeth  man  knowledge,  (shall 

119.  66  Teach  me  good  judgment  and  knowledge 

139.  9  (Such)  knowledge  (is)  too  wonderful  for 

Prov.  1.    4  To  give,  .to  the  young  man  knowledge 

1.    7  fear  of  the  LoRD(is)the  beginning  of  kn. 

1.  22  delight  in.  .scorning,  and  fools  hate  kno. 
1. 29  For  that  they  hated  knowledge,  and  did 

2.  5  Then,  .shalt  thou,  .find  the  knowledge  of 

2.  6  out  of  his  mouth  (cometh)  knowledge  and 
2. 10  and  knowledge  is  pleasant  unto  thy  soul 

3.  20  By  his  knowledge  the  depths  are  broken 
5.    2  and  (that)  thy  lips  may  keep  knowledge 

8.  9  (are)  all . .  right  to  them  that  find  knowle. 
8. 10  and  knowledge  rather  than  choice  gold 


Prov.  8.  12  find  out  knowledge  of  witty  inventions 
9.  10  knowledge  of  the  holy  (is)  understanding 

10.  14  Wise  (men)  lay  up  knowledge  :  but  the 

11.  9  through  knowledge  shall  the  just  be  del. 

13.  1  Whoso  loveth  instruction  loveth  knowle. 

12.  23  A  prudent  man  concealeth  knowledge  :  but 

13.  16  prudent  (man)  dealeth  with  knowledge 

14.  6  knowledge  (is)  easy  unto  him  that  under. 

14.  7  when  thou perceivest  not.  .the  lips  of  kn. 

14.  18  the  prudent  are  crowned  with  knowledge 

15.  2  The  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge 
15.  7  The  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  knowledge 
15.  14  hath  understanding  seeketh  knowledge 

17.  27  He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  words 

18.  15  heart  of  the  prudent  getteth  knowledge 

18.  15  and  the  ear  of  the  wise  seeketlLknowledge 

19.  2  Also . .  the  soul . .  without  knowledge . .  not 
19.  25  reprove,  .(and)  he  will  understand  know. 

19.  27  instruction .  .to  err  from  the  words  of  kn. 

20.  15  lips  of  knowledge  (are)  a  precious  jewel 

21. 11  wise  is  instructed,  he  receiveth  knowledge 
22.  12  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve  knowledge 
22.  17  and  apply  thine  heart  unto  my  knowledge 
22.  20  excellent  tilings  in  counsels  and  knowle. 

23. 12  and  thine  ears  to  the  words  of  knowledge 
24.  4  And  by  knowledge  shall  the  chambers  be 
24.  s  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  stre. 
30.    3  neither  learned . .  nor  have  the  knowledge 

Eccl    1.  16  great  experience  of  wisdom  and  knowledge 

1.  18  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth 

2.  21  labour  (is)  in  wisdom,  and  in  knowledge 
2.  26  givetb  to  a  man.. wisdom,  and  knowledge 

7.  12  but  the  excellency  of  knowledge  (is,  that) 
9.  10  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor 

12.    9  he  still  taught  the  people  knowledge;  yea 

Isa.     5.  13  captivity,  because  (they  have)  no  knowle. 

it.    2  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of 

32.  4  of  the  rash  shall  understand  knowledge 

33.  6  wisdom  and  knowledge  shall  be  the  stabi. 
40.  14  taught  him  kno wledge.and  showed  to  him 
44.  19  neither,  .knowledge  nor  understanding 
44.  25  wise,  .and  niaketh  their  knowledge  fool. 
47.  10  Thy  wisdom  and  thy  knowledge,  it  hath 
53.  11  by  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  serv. 

Jer.  10.  14  Every  man  is  brutish  in  (his)  knowledge 

51. 17  Every  man  is  brutish  by  (his)  knowledge 

Dan.    1.    4  cunning  in  knowledge,  and  understanding 

12.    4  shall  run .  .and  knowledge  shall  be  incre. 

Hos.    4.    1  no  truth, normercy, nor knowledgeofGod 

4.    6  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  kno. 

4.    6  because  thou  hast  rejected  knowledge,  I 

6.    6  knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt  offer. 

Mai.    2.    7  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowle. 

5.7*0  knoio,  yi;  yada. 

Prov. 24. 14  So  (shall)  the  knowledge  of  wisdom  (be) 

28.    2  but  by  a  man  of  understanding  (and)  kn. 

Hab.  2.  14  For  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  kno. 

6.  Knowledge,  jnp,  JHC  madda. 

2  Ch.  1.  10  Giveme  now  wisdom  and  knowledge,  that 

1.  11  but  hast  asked  wisdom  and  knowledge  for 

1.  12  Wisdom  and  knowledge  (is)  granted  unto 

Dau.   1.  17  God  gave  them  knowledge  and  skill  in  all 

7 '  .Knowledge,  jfud  manda. 

Dan.  2. 21  knowledge  to  them  that  know  understand. 
5. 12  an  excellent  spirit,  and  knowledge,  and 

8. Eye  sight,  j*y  aym. 

Num.15.  24  committed  by  ignorance  without  the  kn. 
9.  Understanding,  ^2$,  hity  sekel. 

2  Ch.30.  22  Levites  that  taught  the  good  knowledge 
10. Knowledge,  yveoo-ts  gnosis. 

Luke  1.  77  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  unto  his 
11.  52  ye  have  taken  away  the  key  of  knowledge 

Rom.  2.  20  which  hast  the  form  of  knowledge  and  of 

11.  33  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  G. 
15. 14  filled  with  all  knowledge,  able  also  to  ad. 

1  Co.     1.   5  enriched,  .in  all  utterance,  and  (in)  all  k. 

8.  r  Now.  .we  know  that  we  all  have  knowle. 
8.  1  Knowledge  puff eth  up,  but  charity  edifieth 
8.  7  Howbeit  (there  is)  not  in  every  man  that 
8.  10  For  if  any  man  see  thee  which  hast  know. 
8.  11  And  through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  w. 

12.  8  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the 

13.  2  understand  all  mysteries,  and  all  knowl. 

13.  8  whether,  .knowledge,  it  shall  vanish  away 

14.  6  knowledge,  or  by  prophesying,  or  by  doc. 

2  Co.    2. 14  maketh  manifest  the  savour  of  his  know. 

4.  6  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
6.   6  By  pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long  suffe. 

8.  7  faith,  and  utterance,  and  knowledge,  and 

10.  5  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  kno. 

11.  6  though,  .rude  in  speech,  yet  not  in  know. 
Eph.  3.  19  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowle. 
Phil.  3.  8  the  excellency  of  the  knowledgeof  Christ 
Col.     2.  3  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  k. 

1  Pe.   3.    7  dwell  with  (them) according  to  knowledge 

2  Pe.   1.    5  add  to  your  faith  virtue  ;  and  to  virtue  k. 

1.  6  to  knowledge  temperance  ;  and  to  temp. 
3. 1 8  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  J. 

11. Full  knowledge,  iirLyvwa-is  epigndsis. 

Bom.  1.  2S  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in.,  kn. 

3.  20  for  by  the  law  (is)  the  knowledge  of  sin 
10.    2  a  zeal  of  God  but  not  according  to  know. 

Eph.    1.  17  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him 

4.  13  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God 
Phil.  1.  9  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge 
Col.     1.    9  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will  in 

1. 10  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God 
3. 10  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image 


KNOWLEDGE 


580 


EOEHITBS 


i  Ti.    2.    4  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 
2  Ti.    3.    7  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
Heb.  10.  26  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge 
2  "Pe.   1.    2  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  J. 
1.    3  through  the  knowledge  of  him  that  hath 

1.  8  barren  nor  unfruitful  iu  the  knowledge 

2.  20  through  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 

12.  Understanding,  o-tVecris  sunesis. 

Eph.   3.    4  ye  may  understand  my  knowledge  in  the 

KNOWLEDGE,  not  — 

Ignorance,  without  knowledge,  ayvajtrta  agnosia. 

1  Co.  15.  34  for  some  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God 
KNOWLEDGE,  to  come  to  — 
To  be  caused  to  be  knmvn,  in;  yada,  6. 

Lev.    4. 23,  28  Or  if  his  sin .  .come  to  his  knowledge 
KNOWLEDGE,  to  give,  have,  or  take  — 
J, To  know,  yv  yada. 

Deut.  1.  39  had  no  knowledge  between  good  and  evil 

1  Sa.  23.  23  take  knowledge  of  all  the  lurking  places 
i  Ki.  9.  27  shipmen  that  had  knowledge  of  the  sea 

2  Ch.  8.  18  servants  that  had  knowledge  of  the  sea 
Neh.  10.  28  every  one  having  knowledge,  and  having 
Job  34.    2  and  give  ear  unto  me,  ye  that  have  know. 
Psa.  14.    4  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  kno.? 

53.    4  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  kno.  ? 

144.    3  what  (is)  man,  that  thou  takest  knowledge 

Prov  17.  27  He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  wo. 

30.  3 1  neither  learned . .  nor  have  the  knowledge 
Isa.     8.    4  For  before  the  child  shall  have  knowledge 

45.  20  they  have  no  knowledge  that  set  up  the 
58.    3  afflicted  our  soul . .  and  thou  takest  no  ku.  1 
Jer.     4.  22  but  to  do  good  they  have  no  kuowledge 

2.  To  cause  to  know,  JJT  yada,  5. 

Jer.  11. 18  the  Lord  hath  given  me  knowledge  (of  it) 
Z.To  discern,  i?J  nakar,  5. 

Ruth  2.  10  that  thou  shouldest  take  knowledge  of  me 
2.  19  blessed  be  he  that  did  take  knowledge  of 

4.  To  know,  ytvanrKco  ginosko. 

Acts  17.  13  when  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  had  kno. 

5.  To  see,  know,  olSa  oida. 

Acts  24.  22  having  more  perfect  knowledge  of  (that) 

6.  To  know  about  or  fully,  i-jriyu/uo-Koo  epiginosko. 

Matti4.  35  when themenofthatplace  had  knowledge 

Acts    4.  13  they  took  knowledge  of  them,  that  they 

24.   8  thyself  mayest  take  knowledge  of  all  these 

KNOWLEDGE,  endued  with  — 

Understanding,  intelligent,  iirurTTifMav  epist&mori, 

Jas.      3.  13  Who  (is)  a  wise  man  and  endued  witli  k. 
KNOWN  — 
l.To  know,  yv  yada. 

Deut.  1.  13  Take  you  'wise  men.  .known  among  your 

1.  15  So  I  took.. wise  ruen,audknown,and  made 

2.  To  be  or  become  or  he  made  known,  yv  yada,  4,6. 
Isa.   12.    5  he  hath  done  excellent  things :  this  (is)  k. 

Z. Known,  y wards  gnostos. 

John  18.  15  That  disciple  was  known  unto  the  high  p. 

18.  16  that  other  disciple,  which  was  known  unto 
Acts    1.  19  it  was  known  unto  all  the  dwellers  at  Je. 

2.  14  be  tliis  known  unto  you,  and  hearken  to 
4.  10  Be  it  known  unto  you  all,  and  to  all  the 
9.  42  it  was  known  throughout  all  Joppa;  and 

13.  38  Be  it  known  unto  you  therefore,  men .  .br. 
15.  18  [Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from] 

19.  j  7  And  this  was  known  to  all  the  Jews  and 
28.  28  Be  it  known  therefore  unto  you,  that  the 

4.Appare?it,  manifest,  <pavep6s  phaneros. 

Matt  12.  16  charged,  .they  should  not  make  him  kn. 
Mark  3.  12  charged,  .they  should  not  make  him  kn. 
Acts.  7.  13  Joseph's  kindred  was  made  known  unto 
KNOWN,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  known,  yv  yada,  2. 

Gen.  41.  21  it  could  not  be  known  that  they  had  eaten 

41.  31  the  plenty  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land 

Exod.  2.  14  feared,  and  said,  Surely  this  thing  is  known 

6.    3  by  my  name  Jehovah  was  I  not  known 

21.  36  Or  if  it  be  known  that  the  ox  hath  used  to 

33.  16  wherein  shall  it  be  known  here  that  I  and 

Lev.    4.  14  When  the  sin.  .is  known,  then  the  congr. 

Deut  21.    1  (and)  it  be  not  known  who  hath  slain  him 

Judgi6.    9  brake  the  withs.  .his  strength  was  notkn. 

Ruth   3.  14  Let  it  not  be  known  that  a  woman  came 

1  Sa.    6.    3  it  shall  be  known  to  you  why  his  hand  is 

2  Sa.  17.  19  spread  a  covering,  .the  thing  was  not  ku. 
1  Ki.  18.  36  let  it  be  known  this  day  that  thou  (art) 
Neh.    4.  15  when  our  enemies  heard  that  it  was  known 
Esth.  2.  22  tho  thing  was  known  to  Mordeeai,  who 
Psa.    9. 16  The  Lord  is  known  (by)  the  judgment 

48.    3  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge 

76.  1  In  Judah  (is)  God  known  ;  his  name  (is) 

77.  19  Thy  way . .  and  thy  footsteps  are  not  known 
79.  10  let  him  be  known  among  the  heathen  in 
88.  12  Shall  thy  wonders  be  known  in  the  dark? 

Prov  10.   9  he  that  perverteth  his  ways  shall  be  known 
12.  16  A  fool's  wrath  is  presently  known  :  but  a 

14.  33  but.  .in  the  midst  of  fools  is  made  known 

31.  23  Her  husband  is  known  in  the  gates,  when 
Eccl.  6.  10  ami  it  is  known  that  it  (is)  man  :  neither 
Isa.    19.  21  the  LORD  shall  be  known  to  Egypt,  and 

61.    9  their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the  Ge. 

66.  14  the  hand  of  the  Loud  shall  be  known  to 
Jer.  28.  9  the  prophet  ho  known  that  the  LORD  hath 
Eze.  36.  32  be  it  known  unto  you  :  be  ashamed  and 


Eze  38.  23  I  will  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many  nat. 
Nah..  3.  17  and  there  place  is  not  known  where  they 
Zech  14.    7  one  day  which  shall  be  known tothe  Lord 

2.  To  know,  VI]  yeda. 

Ezra    4.  12  Be  it  known  unto  the  king,  that  the  Jews 
4.  13  Be  it  known  now  unto  the  king,  that  if 
5.'  8  Be  it  known  unto  the  king,  that  we  went 

Dan.    3.  18  But  if  not,  be  it  known  unto  thee,  O  king 

3.  To  be  known,  "Oi  nakar,  2. 

Lam.  4.    8  They  are  not  known  in  the  streets  ;  their 

4.  To  make  self  known,  155  nakar,  7. 

Prov2o.  11  Even  a  child  is  known  by  his  doings,  whe. 
KNOWN,  to  he  fully  — 
To  bear  or  carry  fully,  w\vpo(popio}  pleropthoreo. 

2  Ti.   4.  17  by  me  the  preaching  might  be  fully  known 
KNOWN,  to  be  made  — 
To  make  self  known  again,  ai/ayvwpi£ofj.ai  anagno. 

Acts    7.  13  Joseph  was  made  known  to  his  brethren 
KNOWN,  to  make  (to  be)  — 
l.To  caiise  to  know,  jn;  yada,  5. 

1  Sa.  28.  15  that  thou  mayest  make  known  unto  me 

1  Ch.16.    8  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people 

17. 19  in  making  known  all  (these)  great  things 
Neh.  9.  14  madest  known  unto  them  thy  holy  sabbath 
Psa.  78.    5  that  they  should  make  them  known  to 

8g.    1  with  my  mouth  will  I  make  know  thy  fa. 

98.  2  Lord  hath  made  known  his  salvation :  his 
103.    7  He  made  known  his  ways  unto  Moses,  his 

105.  1  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people 

106.  8  that  he  might  make  his.  .power  to  bekn. 
145.  12  To  make  known  to  the  sons  of  men  his 

Prov.  1.  23  Turn.  .1  will  make  known  my  words  unto 
22.  19  I  have  made  known  to  thee  thisday,  even 

Isa.  38.  19  the  father  to  the  children  shall  make  kn. 
64.    2  to  make  thy  name  known  to  thine  adver. 

Eze.  39.    7  So  will  I  make  my  holy  name  known  in 

Hos.    5.    9  among  the  tribes  of  Israel  have  I  made  kn. 

Hab.    3.    2  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known ;  in 

2.  To  cause  to  know,  VT.  yeda,  5. 

Dan.  2.  5,  9  if  ye  will  not  make  known  unto  me  the 
2.  15  Then  Arioch  made  the  thing  known  to  D. 
2.  17  and  made  the  thing  known  to  Hananiah 
2.  23  hast  made  known  unto  me  now  what  we 
2.  23  thou  hast . .  made  known  unto  us  the  king's 
2.  25  will  make  known  unto  the  king  the  inter. 
2.  26  Art.  .able  to  make  known  unto  me  the  d. 
2.  28  maketh  known  to  the  king  Nebuchadne. 
2.  29  he  that  revealeth  secrets  maketh  known 
2.  30  that  shall  make  known  the  interpretation 

2.  45  the  great  God  hath  made  known  to  the  k, 

4.  6,  7,  18  make  known  unto  me  the  interpre. 

5.  8  nor  make  known  to  the  king  the  interpr. 
5.    15,  16  make  kuown  unto  me  the  interpreta. 

5.  17  and  make  known  to  him  the  interpretat. 

Z.To  make  known,  yvcoplfa  gndrizo. 

Luke  2.  15  which  the  Lord  hath  made  known  unto 
Johni5.  15  for  all  things.  .1  have  made  known  unto 
Acts  2.  28  Thou  hast  made  known  to  me  the  ways  of 
Rom.  9.  22  if  God,  willing,  .to  make  his  power  known 
9.  23  that  he  might  make  known  the  riches  of 
16.  26  made  known  to  all  the  nations  for  the  ob. 
Eph.    1.   9  Having  made  known  unto  us  the  mystery 

3.  3  How  that  by  revelation  he  made  known 

3.  s  Which  in  other  ages  was  not  made  known 
3. 10  might  be  known  by  the  church  the  mani. 
6. 19  to  make  known  the  mystery  of  the  gospel 

6.  21  Tychicus.  .shall  make  known  to  you  all 
Phil.  4.    6  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God 
Col.     1.  27  To  whom  God  would  make  known  what 

4.  9  They,  .make  known  unto  you  all  things 

2  Pe.  1.  16  when  we  made  known  unto  you  the  power 

KNOWN  abroad,  to  make  — 

To  make  known  throughout,  thoroughly,  b'layvwpifa. 
Luke  2.  17  they  made  known  abroad  the  saying  which 
KNOWN,  which  may  be  — 

That  which  may  be  known,  to  yvwardu  tognoston. 
Rom.  1.  19  Because  that  which  maybe  known  of  God 
KNOWN,  to  make  self  — 
l.To  be  or  become  knoivn,  jn;  tjada,  2. 

Ruth  3.    3  make  not  thyself  known  unto  theman,  un. 
Eze.  20.   5  made  myself  known  unto  them  in  the  land 
20.   9  in  whose  sight  I  made  myself  known  unto 
35. 11  I  will  make  myself  known  among  them 
2.  To  make  self  known,  VT,  yada,  7. 

Gen.  45.    1  while  Joseph  made  himself  known  unto 
Numi2.  6  Lord  will  make  myself  known  unto  him 
KO'-A,  yip. 

A  people  dwelling  between  Egypt  and  Syria,  named 
among  others  as  enemies  of  Jerusalem. 

Eze.  23  23  the  Chaldeans,  Fekod,  and  Shoa,  and  K. 
KO'-HATH,  nrrp  assembly. 

The  second  son  of  Levi,  and  ancestor  of  Moses;  died 
aged  133.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  11  sons  of  Levi;  Gershon,  K.,  and  Merari 
Exod.  6.  16  sous  of  Levi.  .Gershon,  and  K.,  and  Mer. 
6. 18  the  sons  of  K.;  Amram,  and  Izhar,  and 
6.  18  years  of  the  life  of  K.  (were)  an  hundred 
Num.  3.  17  by  their  names;  Gershon,  and  K.,  and  M. 
3.  19  the  sons  of  K.  by  their  families  ;  Amram 
3.  27  of  K.  (was)  the  family  of  the  Amramites 

3.  29  The  families  of  the  sons  of  K.  shall  pitch 

4.  2  Take  the  sum  of  tin;  sons  of  K.  from  am 


Num. '4.  "4  service  of-the  sons  of  K.  in  the  tabernacle 
4. 15  the  sons  of  K.  shall  come  to  bear  (it) :  but 
4.  15  burden  of  the  sons  of  K.  in  the  tabernacle 
7.    9  unto  the  sons  of  K.  he  gave  none ;  because 
16.    1  the  son  of  K.,  the  son  of  Levi,  and  Dathan 
26.  57  of  K.,  the  family  of  the  Kohathites :  of  M. 
26.  58  These  (are)  the  families.  .And  K.  begat 
Josh. 21.   5  the  rest  of  the  children  of  K.  (had)  by  lot 
21.  20  the  families  of  the  children  of  K.,  the 
21.  20  which  remained  of  the  children  of  K. 
21.  26  of  the  children  of  K.  that  remained 
1  Ch.  6.  1,  16  The  sons  of  Levi ;  Gershon,  K.,  and  Me. 
6.    2  the  sons  of  K.;  Amram,  Izhar,  and  Heb. 
6.  18  the  sons  of  K.  (were)  Gershom,  Kohath 
6.  22  The  sons  of  K. ;  Amminadab  his  son,  Ko. 
6.  38  the  son  of  K.,  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son  of 
6.  61  unto  thesons  of  K.,  (which  were)  left  of 
6.  66  residue)  of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  K. 
6.  70  family  of  the  remnant  of  the  sons  of  K. 

15.  5  Of  the  sons  of  K.;  Uriel  the  chief,  and  his 
23.  6  sons  of  Levi,  (namely),  Gershon,  K.,  and 
23.  12  sons  of  K.;  Amram,  Izhar,  Hebron,  and 

KO-HATH-ITES,  'rin^,  vinp  belonging  to  Kohath. 
The  descendants  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi. 

Num.  3.  27  these  (are)  the  families  of  the  K. 

3  30  of  the  father  of  the  families  of  the  K. 
4.  18  the  tribe  of  the  families  of  the  K. 
4.  34  the  sons  of  the  K.  after  their  families 
4.  37  were  numbered  of  the  families  of  the  K. 
10.  21  the  K.  set  forward,  bearing  the  sanctuary 
26.  57  Kohath,  the  family  of  the  K.:  of  Merari 
Josh  21.    4  lot  came  out  for  the  families  of  the  K. 

21. 10  (being)of  the  families  of  the  K.,  (who  were) 

1  Ch.  6.  33  of  the  sons  of  the  K. ;  Heman  a  singer,  the 

6.  54  sons  of  Aaron,  of  the  families  of  the  K. 
9.  32  of  their  brethren,  of  the  sons  of  the  K. 

2  Ch.20.  19  the  Levites,  of  the  children  of  the  K.,  and 

29.  12  of  the  sons  of  the  K.:  and  of  the  sons  of 
34. 12  of  the  sons  of  the  K.,  to  set  (it)  forward 
KO-LA-I'AH,  .T^ip  voice  of  Jah. 

1.  A  Benjamite,  some  of  whose  descendants  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem  after  the  exile.     B.C.  550. 

Neh.  11.    7  the  son  of  Pedaiah  the  son  of  K.,  the  son 

2.  Father  of  Ahab  who  suffered  death  for  falsely  pro- 
phesying the  deliverance  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon. 
B.C.  636. 

Jer.   29.  21  of  Ahab  the  son  of  K.,  and  of  Zedekiah 
KO-RAH,  rn'p  baldness. 

1.  A  son  of  Esau  by  Aholibamah.     B.C.  1780. 

Gen.  36.  5  Aholibamah  hare  Jeush,  and.  ,K. :  these 
36.  14  bare  to  Esau  Jeush,  and  Jaalam,  and  K. 
36.  18  duke  Jeush,  duke  Jaalam,  duke  K. :  these 

1  Ch.  1.  35  sons  of  Esau;  Eliphaz.. Jaalam,  and  K. 

2.  A  son  of  Elipnaz  the  son  of  Esau.    B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  36.  16  Duke  K.,duke  Gatam, (and) duke  Amalek 

3.  The  son  of  Izhar  the  grandson  of  Levi;  he  conspired 
with  Dathan  and  Abiram  against  Moses  and  Aaron. 

B.C.  1471. 

Exod.  6.  21  the  sons  of  Izhar ;  K.,and  Nepheg,  and 

6.  24  sons  of  K.;  Assir,  and  Elkanah,  aud  Abi. 
Numi6.    1  Now  K.,  the  sou  of  Izhar,  the  son  of  Ko. 

16.  5  spake  unto  K.,  and  unto  all  his  company 
16.   6  Take  you  censers,  K.,  and  all  his  company 
16.    8  Moses  said  unto  K.,  Hear,  I  pray  you,  ye 
16.  16  Moses  said  unto  K.,  Be  thou  and  all  thy 
16.  19  K.  gathered  all  the  congregation  against 
16.  24  Get  you  up  fromabout  the  tabernacle  ofK. 
16. 27  So  they  gat  up  from  the  tabernacle  of  K. 
16.  32  all  the  men  that  (appertained)  unto  K. 
16.  40  that  he  be  not  as  K.,  and  as  his  company 
16.  49  them  that  died  about  the  matter  of  K. 
26.   9  and  against  Aaron  in  the  company  of  K. 
26.  10  and  swallowed  them  up  together  with  K. 

26.  11  Notwithstanding  the  children  of  K.  died 

27.  3  against  the  Lord  in  the  company  of  K. 

1  Ch.  6.  37  of  Assir,  the  son  of  Ebiasaph,  the  son  of  K. 
9.  19  of  Kore,  the  son  of  Ebiasaph,  the  son  of  K. 

4.  A  son  of  Hebron,  son  of  Mareshah,  son  of  Caleb,  son 
of  Hezron.    B.C.  1560. 

1  Ch.  2.  43  the  sons  of  Hebron ;  K.,  andTappuah,  and 

5.  A  grandson  of  Kohath  son  of  Levi ;  ancestor  of  some 
of  the  sacred  musicians.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  6.  22.  The  sons  of  Kohath . .  K.  his  son,  Assir  his 

Psa.    42.  45,  title.  To  the  chief  musician,  .sons  of  K. 

44.  46.  title.  To  the  chief  musician,  .sons  of  K. 

47.  48.  49.  84.  85.  title.  Psalm  for  thesons  of  K. 

48.  title.  A  song  (and)  Psalm  for  the  sons  of  K. 
87.  88.  title.  A  Psalm  (or)  song  forthe  sons  of  K. 

KO'-RE,  Nip  crier,  reader. 

1.  A  Korahite  whose  son  Shalhrm  was  a  gate  keeper  at 
the  tabernacle.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  9.  19  Shallumthe  son  of  K.,  the  son  of  Ebiasaph 

26.  1  Meshelemiah  the  son  of  K.,  of  the  sons  of 
26.  19  of  the  porters  among  the  sons  of  K.,  and 

2.  A  Levite  set  over  the  free  will  offerings  hi  Hezekiah's 
reign.    B.C.  720. 

2  Ch.31.  14  K.  the  son  of  Imnah  the  Levite,  the  por. 
KOR-HITES,  KO-RA-THXTES,  KO-RA-HITES,  'nifj. 
Descendants  of  Korah,  the  grandson  of  Kohath;  twelve 
Psalms  are  ascribed  to  them.     B.C.  1475-1000. 

Exod  6.  24  Abiasaph:  these  (are)the  families  of  the  K. 

N 1111126.  5S  of  the  Mushites,  the  family  of  the  K.  And 

1  Ch.  9.  19  the  K.,  (were)  over  the  work  of  the  service 

9.  31  who  (was)  the  first  bom  of  Shallum  the  K. 

12.    6  Azareel. .  Joezer,  and  Jashobeam,  the  K 


KOZ 


581 


LACHISH 


i  Ch.26.    1  Of  the  K.  (was)  Meshelemiah.  .son of  Ko. 
2  Ch,2o.  19  of  the  eluldren  of  the  K.,  stood  up  to  pr. 

KOZ,  pprr  the  thorn. 

1.  A  priest  whose  descendants  returned  from  exile  with 
Zerubbabel,  but  lost  their  position  through  being  unable 
to  prove  their  descent.    B.C.  1015. 

Ezra    2.  61  children  of  K.,  the  children  of  Barzillai 
Neh.   7.  63  children  of  K.,  the  children  of  Barzillai 

2.  Ancestor  of  Meremoth,  who  repaired  portions  of  the 
wall  of  Jerusalem  in  Xehemiah  s  time.     B.C.  1430. 

Net.  3.    4,  21  Meremoth. .son  of  Urijah.  .son  of  K. 
KTT-SHA-I'AH,  \n\'4"p  bmo  of  Jah. 
A  Merarite,  called  Kishi  in  1  Ch.  4.  44 ;  father  of  a  chief 
singer  in  David's  reign.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch- 15. 17  the  sons  of  Merari. .  Ethan  the  son  of  K. 


LA-A'-DAH,  rriyb  set  time,  festival. 

Son  of  Shelah,  the  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  21  L.,  the  father  of  Mareshah,  and  the  fami. 

LA- A -DAN,  \$f*  festive-horn. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Ephraim  through  his  son  Beriah. 

B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  7.  26  L.  his  son,  Amnaihudhisson,  Elishamahis 

2.  A  descendant  of  Gershon  the  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1015. 
1  Ch.23.   7  Of  the  Gershonites  (were)  L.  and  Shimei 

23.    8  The  sons  of  L. ;  the  chief  (was)  JeMel,  and 

23.  9  These  (were)  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  L. 
26.  21  (As  concerning)  the  sons  of  L. ;  the  sons  of 

26.  21  Gershonite  L.,  chief  fathers,  (even)  of  L. 

LA'-BAN,  \zh  white, glorious. 

1.  Son  of  Bethuel,  brother  of  Rebekah,  and  father  of 
Rachel  and  Leah.    B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  24.  29  his  name  (was)  L. :  and  L.  ran  out  unto 

24.  50  L.  and  Bethuel  answered  and  said,  The 

25.  20  took  Rebekah . .  the  sister  to  L.  the  Syrian 

27.  43  arise,  flee  thou  to  L.  my  brother  to  Harau 

28.  2  the  daughters  of  L.  thy  mother's  brother 

28.  5  went  to  Padan-aram  unto  L.t  son  of  Bet. 

29.  5  said  unto  them,  Know  ye  L.  the  son  of  N.5 
29.  10  the  daughter  of  L.  his  mother's  brother 
29.  10  the  sheep  of  L.  his  mother's  brother,  that 
29.  10  watered,  .flock  of  L. his  mother's  brother 
29. 13  L.  heard  the  tidings  of  Jacob  his  sister's 
29.  13  And  he  told  L.  all  these  things 

29.  14  L.  said  to  him.  Surely  thou  (art)  ray  hone 

29. 15  L.  said  unto  Jacob,  Because  thou  (art)  my 

29. 16  L.  had  two  daughters  :  the  name  of  the  el. 
29. 19  L.  said,  (It  is)  better  that  I  give  her  to 
29.  21  Jacob  said  unto  L.,  Give  (me)  my  wife,  for 
29.  22  L.  gathered  together  all  the  men  of  the 
29.  24  L.  gave  unto  his  daughter  Leah  Zilpah  his 
29.  25  he  said  to  L.,  What  (is)  this  thou  hast  done 
29.  26  And  L.  said,  It  must  not  be  so  done  in  our 

29.  29  L.  gave  to  Rachel  his  daughter  Bilhah  his 

30.  25  Jacob  said  unto  L.,  Send  me  away,  that  I 
30.  27  L.  said  unto  him,  I  pray  thee,  if  I  have 
30.  34  L.  said,  Behold,  I  would  it  might  be  aceo. 
30.  36  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  L.'s  flocks 

30.  40  toward,  .all  the  brown  in  the  flock  of  L. 

30.  40  and  he  put  his  own  flocks,  .not  unto  L.'s 
20.  42  so  the  feebler  were  L.'s,  and  the  stronger 

31.  1  heard  the  word  of  L.'s  sons,  saying,  Jacob 
31.   2  Jacob  beheld  the  countenance  of  L.,  and 
31.  12  for  I  have  seen  all  that  L.  doeth  unto  thee 
31.  19  L.  went  to  shear  his  sheep :  and  Rachel 
31.  20  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to  L.  the  Syr. 
31.  22  it  was  told  L.  on  the  third  day  that  Jacob 
31.  24  God  came  to  L.  the  Syrian  in  a  dream  by; 
31. 25  Then  L.  overtook  Jacob,  .and  L.  with  his 
31.  26  L.  said  to  Jacob,  What  hast  thou  done 
31.  31  Jacob  answered  and  said  to  L.,  Because  I 
31.  33  L.  went  into  Jacob's  tent,  and  into  Leah's 
31.  34  L.  searched  all  the  tents,  but  found  (them) 
31.  36  chode  with  L. :  and  Jacob.. said  to  L.,Wliat 
31.  43  L.  answered  and  said  unto  Jacob,  (These) 
31.  47  L.  called  it  Jegar-saha-dutha :  but  Jacob 
31.  48  L.  said,  This  heap  (is)  a  witness  between 
31.  51  L.  said  to  Jacob,  Behold  tins  heap,  and 

31.  55  L.  rose  up  -  .and  L.  departed,  and  returned 

32.  4  I  have  sojourned  with  L.,and  stayed  there 
46.  18  sons  of  Zilpah,  whomL.  gave  to  Leah  his 
46.  25  which  L.  gave  unto  Rachel  his  daughter 

2.  One  of  the  stations  of  the  Israelites  after  crossing  the 
Red  Sea;  perhaps  the  same  as  Libnah. 

Deut.  1.    1  between  Paran,  and  Tophel,  and  L.,  and 
LABOUR  — 
l.Labour,  weariness,  V."V,  y^ffia. 

Gen.  31.  42  Godhathseenmineaffliction  and  the  lab. 

Deut.28.  33  The  fruit  of  thy  land,  and  all  thy  labours 

Keh.   5. 13  from  his  house,  and  from  his  labour,  that 

Job    39. 11  Wilt  thou  trust,  .wilt  thou  leave  thy  lab. 

39. 16  hardened,  .her  labour  is  in  vain  without 

Psa.  78.  46  He  gave  also. .their  labour  unto  the  locust 

109. 11  catch  all.  .and  let  the  strangers  spoil  his  I. 

128.   2  For  thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of  thine  h. 

Isa.  45.  14  The  labour  of  Egypt,  and  merchandise  of 

55-    z  your  labour  for  (that  which)  satisfleth  not  ? 

Jer.  '  3.  24  shame  hath  devoured  the  labour  of  our 

20.   5  all  the  labours  thereof,  and  all  the  prec. 

Eze.  23.  29  shall  take  away  all  thy  labour,  and  shall 


Hos.  12.    8  (in  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  none 
Hag.   1. 11  I  Cidled  for  a  drought.,  upon  all  the  labour 

2.77ie  hand,  "P  yad. 

Provi3. 11  hethatgathereth  by  labour  shall  increase 

3.  To  bear  a  child,  ih;  yalad. 

Gen.  35. 16  Rachel  travailed,  and  she  had  hard  labour 
35. 17  when  she  was  in  hard  labour,  that  the 

i.M'ork,  ii3»6lp  melakah. 

Neh.  4.  22  may  be  a  guard  to  us,  and  labour  on  the 

5.  Doing,  deed,  n»J£0  maasch. 

Exod23.  16  the  first  fruits  of  thy  lahours,  which  thou 

23.  16  when  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  labours 
Hab.   3.  17  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the 
Hag.   2.  17  with  hail  in  all  the  labours  of  your  hands 

6. Service,  tillage,  ni'nj;  abodah. 

Psa.  104.  23  Alan  goeth  forth,  .to  his  labour  until  the 

7.  Labour,  perverseness,  misery,  ?Dy  amal. 

Deut26.    7  looked  on  our  affliction,  and  our  labour 
Psa.  90.  10  yet  (is)  their  strength  labour  and  sorrow 
105.  44  and  they  inherited  the  labour  of  the  peo. 
107.  12  he  brought  down  their  heart  with  labour 
Eccl.  1.    3  What  profit  hath  a  man  of  all  his  labour 
2. 10  for  my  heart  rejoiced  in  all  my  labour 
2.  10  and  tins  w-as  my  portion  of  all  my  labour 
2.  11  on  the  labour  that  I  had  laboured  to  do 
2.  t8  I  hated  all  my  labour  which  I  had  taken 
2. 19  yet  shall  he  have  rule  over  all  my  labour 
2.  20  cause  my  heart  to  despair  of  all  the  labour 
2.  21  a  man  whose  labour  (is)  in  wisdom,  and  in 
2.  22  For  what  hath  man  of  all  his  labour,  and 

2.  24  make  his  soul  enjoy  good  in  his  labour 

3.  13  man  should.,  en  joy  the  good  of  all  his  lab. 

4.  8  (is  there)  no  end  of  all  his  labour ;  neither 

4.  9  they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  labour 
5. 15  shall  take  nothing  of  his  labour,  which  he 

5.  19  to  rejoice  in  his  labour  :  this  (is)  the  gift 

5.  18  to  enjoy  the  good  of  all  his  labour  that  he 

6.  7  All  the  labour  of  man  (is)  for  his  mouth 

8.  15  that  shall  abide  with  him  of  his  labour 

9.  9  in  thy  labour  which  thou  takest  under  the 
10. 15  The  labour  of  the  foolish  wearieth  every 

Jer.  eo.  18 1  forth  out  of  the  womb  to  see  labour  and 

S.Grievous  burden,  one  grieved,  astjj  atseb. 

Isa.  58.   3  find  pleasure,  and  exact  all  your  labours 
Q.Grievous  burden,  3>'y_  etseb. 

Prov.  5.  10  Lest,  .thy  labours  (be)  in  the  house  of  a 

14.  23  In  all  labour  there  is  profit :  but  the  talk 
10. Act,  work,  doing,  deed,  n^y?  peullah. 

Prov  10.  16  The  labour  of  the'  righteous  (tendeth)  to 
Eze.  29.  20  his  labour  wherewith  he  served  against  it 

11.  Work,  ipyov  ergon. 

Phil.    1. 22  this  (is)  the  fruit  of  my  labour  :  yet  what 

12.  A  beating,  wearying  out  work,  k6ttos  kopos. 
John   4.  38  men . .  ye  are  entered  into  their  labours 

1  Co.   3.   8  own  reward,  according  to  his  own  labour 

15.  58  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord 

2  Co.  6.    5  in  tumults,  in  labours,  in  watchings,  in 

10.  15  of  other  men's  labours  ;  but  having  hope 

11.  23  in  labours  more  abundant,  in  stripes  abim. 
1  Th.  1.    3  labour  of  love,  and  patience  of  hope  in 

2.  9  Bor  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour 

3.  s  have  tempted  you,  and  our  laliour  be  in 
i  Tli.  3.  8  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night  aud 
Heb.  6.  10  your  work  and  [labour]  of  love,  which  ye 
Rev.    2.    2  I  know  thy  works,  aud  thy  labour,  and 

14. 13  they  may  rest  from  their  labours;  andtheir 
[See  also  Companion  in.] 
LABOUR,  to — 
l.To  press,  hasten,  px  uts,  5. 

Isa    22.   4  labour  not  to  comfort  me,  because  of  the 
2.  To  labour,  be  weary,  fatigued,  yr  yaga. 

Josh.24.  13  aland  for  which  ye  did  not  labour,  and 
Job     9.  29  (If)  I  be  wicked,  why  then  labour  I  in 
Prov  23.    4  Labour  not  to  be  rich ;  cease  from  thine 
Isa     47.  12  sorceries,  wherein  thou  hast  laboured 
47. 15  they  be.  .with  whom  thou  hast  laboured 
49.    4  I  have  laboured  hi  vain,  I  have  spent  my 
62.    8  thy  wine,  for  the  which  thou  hast  laboured 
65.  23  They  shall  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  bring 
Jer.  51.  58  the  people  shall  labour  in  vain,  and  the 

5.   5  necks  (are)  under  persecution ;  we  labour* 
Hab.  2. 13  fhat  the  people  shall  labour  in  the  very 
Z.To  do,  serve,  12%  abad. 

Exod2o.  9  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  all  thy 
Deut.  5. 13  Six  days  thou  shalt  labour,  and  do  all  thy 

4.  To  labour,  Ssy  amal. 

Psa.127.  1  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it :  except 
Prov.  16.  26  He  that  laboureth,  laboureth  for  himself 
Eccl.  2.  11  on  the  labour  that  I  had  laboured  to  do 

2.  19  over  all  my  labour  wherein  I  havelabou. 

2.  21  yet  to  a  man  that  hath  not  laboured  the. 

5.  16  what  profit  hath  he  that  hath  laboured 

8.  17  though  a  man  labour  to  seek  (it)  out,  yet 
Jon.    4.  10  the  gourd,  for  the  which  thou  hast  not  1. 

5. Labouring,  Spy  amel. 

Eccl.  2.  22  wherein  he  hath  laboured  under  the  sun  ? 

4.  8  For  whom  do  I  labour,  and  bereave  my 

6.  To  do,  make,  ryy  asah. 

Exod.  5.  9  more  work . .  that  they  may  labour  therein 
Neh.  4.  21  So  we  laboured  in  the  work :  and  half  of 
Prov. 21.  25  killethhim;  for  his  hands  refuse  to  labour 


7. To  endeavour,  ~np  shedar,  4. 

Dan.    6.  14  he  laboured  till  the  going  down  of  the  sun 

S.To  labour,  be  vjearied  out,  KOTridca  kojriao. 

Mattn.  28  Come  unto  me,  all  (ye)  that  labour  and 
John  4.  38  other  men  laboured,  and  ye  are  entered 
Acts  20.  35  how  that  so  labouring  ye  ought  to  support 
Rom.  16.  12  Salute  Tryphena  and  Tryphosa,  who  lab. 
16.  12  Persis,  which  laboured  much  in  the  Lord 
1  Co.  4.  12  And  labour,  working  with  our  own  hands 

15.  10  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all 

16.  16  to  everyone  that  helpeth  with  (us),and  lab. 
Bph.   4.  2S  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with 

'  Phil.  2.  16  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain 
Col.  1.  29  Whereunto  I  also  labour,  striving  accord. 
1  Th.  5.  12  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you 

1  Ti.    4.  10  therefore  we  botli  labour  and  suffer  repr. 

5.  17  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word 

2  Ti.   2.   6  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  must  be 
Rev.    2.   3  for  my  name's  sake  hast  laboured,  and 

9.  To  make  haste,  speed,  airovfiafa  spoudazo. 

Heb.    4.  11  Let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter  into  that 

10.  To  esteem  as  an  honour,  <pi\orifx4ofxai  philotim. 
2  Co.  5.    9  we  labour,  that,  whether  present  or  absent 

[See  also  Bring  forth.] 

LABOUR,  to  bestow  — 

To  labour,  be  wearied  out,  Koirtdw  kopiao. 

John  4.  38  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  lab. 
Rom  16.  6  Greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour 
Gal.    4.  11  lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  youlabour  in  v. 

LABOUR  fervently,  to  — 

To  agonize,cmitend,  wrestle,  aycov't^ofxaL  agonizomai. 
Col.    4.  12  always  labouring  fervently  for  you  in  pr. 

LABOUR  for,  labouring,  to  — 

To  work,  epyd&fiat  ergazomai. 

John  6.  27  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth 
1  Th.  2.   9  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we  wo. 

LABOUR  with,  to  — 

To  strive  along  with  any  one,  ffvva9\4(a  sunathleo. 

Phil.  4.   3  help  those  women  which  laboured  with 
LABOUR,  full  of  — 
Labouring,  weary,  yr  yagea. 

Eccl.  1.   8  All  things  (are)  full  of  labour  ;  man  can. 
LABOUR,  to  make  to  — 
To  weary,  make  weary,  ya;  yaga,  3. 

Josh.  7.   3  make  not  all  the  people  to  labour  thither 
LABOUR,  strong  to  — 
To  be  borne,  carried,  set  up,  ?3D  sabal,  4. 

Psa.144.  14  (That)  our  oxen  (may  be)  strong  to  labour 
LABOURED  for,  that  which  he  — 
What  is  got  by  labour,  yj;  yaga. 

Job   20.  18  That  which  he  laboured  for  shall  he  res. 
LABOURER  (fellow)  — 
A  worker,  ipydrns  er gates. 

Matt.  9.  37  harvest  truly  (is)  plenteous,  but  the  lab. 

9.  38  he  will  send  forth  labourers  into  his  liar. 

20.    1  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to  hire  lab. 

20.   2"  when  he  had  agreed  with  the  labourers  for 

20.    8  Call  the  labourers,  and  give  them  (their) 

Lukeio.    2  but  the  labourers  (are)  few  :  pray  ye  the. 
10.   2  would  send  forth  labourers  into  hisharv. 
10.    7 ;  1  Ti.  5.  18 ;  Jas.  5.  4. 
Joint-worker,  a,wepy6s  sunergos. 

PhiL  4. 3 ;  1  Th.  3.  2 ;  Fhm.  i,  24. 
LABOURER  together  with  — 
A  worker  together,  vvuepyos  sunergos. 

1  Co.  3.    9  we  are  labourers  together  with  God :  ye 
LABOURETH,  that  — 
Labouring,  Vpy  amel. 

Prov  16.  26  He  that  laboureth,  laboureth  for  himself 

Eccl.   3.   9  he  that  worketh  in  that  wherein  he  labo. 

LABOURING  man  — 
To  do,  serve,  "ay,  abad. 

Eccl.  5.  12  The  sleep  of  a  labouring  man  (is)  sweet 

LACE  — 

Ribbon,  thread,  wire,  VQSpathil. 

Exod28.  38  unto  the  rings  of  theephod  with  a  lace  of 
28.  37  thou  shalt  put  it  on  a  blue  lace,  that  it 
39.  21  unto  the  rings  of  the  ephod  with  a  lace  of 
39.  31  they  tied  unto  it  a  lace  of  blue,  to  fasten 

LA'-CHISH,  B*zb  height. 

A  city  of  Judah/S.W.  from  Jerusalem  ;•  three  hours  S.  of 
Eleutheropolis ;  taken  by  Joshua,  fortified  by  Reho- 
boam,  and  conquered  by  the  Assyrians^and  Chaldeans. 
Now  called  Um  Lakhis. 

Josh  10.    3  king  of  Jerusalem  sent  unto,  .king  of  L. 
10.    5  king  of  L.,  the  king  of  Eglon,  gathered 
10.  23  brought  forth.,  out  of  the  cave.,  king  of  L. 
10.  31  Joshua  passed . .  unto  L.,  and  encamped 
10.  32  Lord  delivered  L.  into  the  hands  of  Israel 
10.  33  Horam  king  of  Gezar  came  up  to  help  L. 
io.  34  from  L.  Joshua  passed  unto  Eglon,  and 
10.  35  according  to  all  that  he  had  done  to  L. 
12.  11  king  of  Jarmuth,  one  ;  the  king  of  L.,  one 
15.39  I'm  an<l  Bozkath,  and  Eglon 
z  Ki.14.  19  fled  to  L.  ;  but  they  sent  after  him  to  L. 

18.  14  sent  to  the  king  of  Assyria  to  L.,  saying,  I 
18. 17  king  of  Assyria  sent.  .froiuL.  to  king  He. 

19.  8  had  heard  that  he  was  departed  from  L. 


LACK 


582 


LAKUM 


2  Ch.  ii.    9  And  Adoraim,  and  L.,  and  Azekah 

25.  27  he  fled  to  L. :  but  they  sent  to  L.  after  him 
32.   9  but  he  (himself  laid  siege)  against  L.,  and 

Neh.  11.  30  and  (in)  their  villages,  atL.,  and  the  fields 

Isa.  36.    2  sent  Rabshakeh  from  L.  to  Jerusalem, unto 
37/  8  had  heard  that  he  was  departed  from  L. 

Jer.  34.    7  king  of  Babylon's  army  fought. . against  L. 

Mie.    1.  13  0  thou  inhabitant  of  L.,  bind  the  chariot 

LACK  — 

l.Xeed,  want,  lack,  "nDijD  machsar. 

Prov.28.  27  He  thatgiveth  unto,  .poor  shall  not  lack 

2.The  thing  lacking,  varepwua  husterema. 

Phil.  2.  30  to  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me 

Z.Necessity,  xpe'ia  cAm#. 

1  Th.  4. 12  honestly,  .and  (that)  ye  may  have  lack  of 

LACK,  to-- 

l.To  abate,  be  lacking,  iprt  chaser. 

Gen.  18.  28  Perad venture  there  shall  lack  five  of  the 
Dent.  2.    7  these  forty  years . .  thou  hast  lacked  noth. 

8.   9  thou  shalt  uot  lack  any  (thing)  in  it ;  a 
Neh.  9.  21  they  lacked  nothing ;  their  clothes  waxed 
Eccl.  9.   8  white :  and  let  thy  head  lack  no  ointment 

2. Lacking,  *i?n  chaser. 

2  Sa.    3.  29  or  that  is  a  leper,  .or  that  lacketh  bread 

1  Ki.11.  22  But  what  hast  thou  lacked  with  me,  that 
Prov.  6.  32  whoso  committeth  adultery. . lacketh im. 

12.   9  that  honoureth  himself,  and  lacketh  bread 

Z.To'be  lacking,  tij;  adar,  2. 

2  Sa.17.  22  by  the  morning  light  there  lacked  not  one 

4.  To  let  be  lacking,  Tin'  adar,  3. 

1  K.i.  4.  27  officers  provided  victual . .  they  Jacked 

5.  To  be  visited,  missed,  ~ips  paqad,  2. 

K"uni3i.  49  men  of  war.  .there  lacketh  not  one  man 
Judg2i.    3  should  be  todayonetribelacking  in  Israel? 

2  Sa.  2.  30  there  lacked  of  David's  servants  nineteen 
Jer.  23.    4  neither  shall  they  be  lacking,  aaith  the  L. 

6.  To  be  poor,  impoverished,  trvi  rush. 

Psa.  34.  10  The  young  lions  do  lack,  and  surfer  huu. 

7.1?i  want,  kvSeiis  endees. 

Acts   4.  34  Neither  was  there  any . .  that  lacked :  for 

8.7Vo£  to  have,  fx-q  t^w  me  echo. 

Luke  8.    6  withered  away,  because  itlacked  moisture 

9.  To  leave,  he'nrai  leipd. 

Luke  iS.  22  Yet  lackest  thou  one  thing:  sell  all  that 
Jas.    1.    5  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask 

10. Not  to  be  near  one,  fx-i)  iraptifxi  me  pareimi. 
2  Pe.  1.    9  But  he  that  lacketh  these  things  is  blind 

11. To  be  last,  behind,  vtrrepete  hustereo. 

Matt  19.  20  have  I  kept  my  youth  up  :  what  lack  I 
Markio.  21  One  thing  thou  lackest  :  go  thy  way,  sell 
Luke22.  35  lacked  ye  anything  ?  And  they  said,  Not. 

1  C0.12.  24  abundant  honour-  to  that  (part)  which  la. 
LACK,  to  have  — 

l.To  suffer  lack,  ipn  chaser,  5. 

Esodi6.  iS  he  that  gathered  little  had  no  lack:  they 
2.  To  make  less,  fkarroveco  elattoned. 

2  Co.   8.  15  he  that  (had  gathered)  little  had  no  lack 
LACK  of,  for  — 

For  or  from  deficiency  of,  7lb,  '737  libli,  mibbeli. 
Job      4.  11  The  old  lion  peri'sheth  for  lack  of  prey 
38.  41  young  ones.. they  wander  for  lack  of  meat 
[See  also  Opportunity.] 

LACKING,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  lacking,  T]j/  adar,  2. 

1  Sa.  30.  19  there  was  nothing  lacking  to  them,  hei. 
2. The  thing  locking,  vo-rtprifxa  husterema. 

1  Co.  16.  17  that  which  was  lacking  on  your  part  they 

2  Co.  11.    9  that  which  waslackingto  me  the  brethren 
1  Th.  3.  10  might  perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in 

LACKING  in  his  parts  — 
To  be  contracted,  E73  qalat. 

Lev.  22.  23  that  hath . .  superfluous  or  lacking  in  his  p. 

LACKING,  to  suffer  to  be  — 

To  cause  or  suffer  to  cease,  r\iy  shabath,  5. 

Lev.    2. 13  suffer  the  salt,  .to  be  lacking  from  thy  meat 
LAD  — 

l.A  young  person,  child,  lad,  servant,  ntfj  naar. 
Gen.  21.  12  be  grievous  in  thy  sight  because  of  the  lad 
21.  17  And  God  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad  ;  and 
21. 17  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad  where 
21.  18  Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  in 

21.  19  and  filled  the  bottle,  .and  gave  the  lad  d. 
31.  20  God  was  with  the  lad ;  and  he  grew,  and 

22.  5  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship 
22.  12  Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither 
37.   2  the  lad  (was)  with  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  and 

43.  8  Seud  the  lad  with  me,  and  we  will  arise 

44.  22  The  lad  cannot  leave  his  father :  for  (if) 
44.  30  and  the  lad  (he)  not  with  us ;  seeing  that 
44.  31  when  he  seeth  that  the  lad  (is>  not  (with 
44.  32  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad  unto 
44.  33  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the  lad  a 
44.  33  and  let  the  lad  go  Up  with  his  brethren 
44.  34  and  the  Lad  (be)  not  with  me?  lest  pera. 
48.  16  The  angel.. bless  the  lads;  and  let  my 

.'  ■  tg  .'■.  26  Samson  said  unto  the  lad  that  held  him 
1  Sa.  20.  21  And,  behold,  I  will  send  a  lad,  (saying) 


1  Sa.  20.  21  If  I  expressly  say  unto  the  lad.  Behold 

20.  35  Jonathan  weut  out.  .and  a  little  lad  with 
20.  36  he  said  unto  his  lad,  Run,  find  out  now 
20.  36  as  the  lad  ran,  he  shot  an  arrow  beyond 
20.  37  when  the  lad  was  come  to  the  place  of  the 
20.  37  Jonathan  cried  after  the  lad,  and  said,  (Is) 
20.  38  Jonathan  cried  after  the  lad,  Make  speed 
20.  38  Jonathan's  ladgathered  up  the  arrows,aud 
20.  39  the  lad  knew  not  anything :  only  Jona. 
20.  40  Jonathan  gave  his  artillery  unto  his  lad 
20.  41  as  soon  as  the  lad  was  gone,  David  arose 

2  Sa.  17.  18  Nevertheless  a  lad  saw  them,  and  told  A. 
2  Ki.   4. 19  he  said  to  a  lad,  Carry  him  to  his  mother 

2.A  little  boy,  ■Kaih'dpt.ov  jiaidarion. 

John  6.   9  There  is  a  lad  here,  which  hath  five  barley 
LADDER — 
A  ladder,  d?d  sullam. 

Gen.  28.  i2ne  dreamed,  and  behold  a  ladder  set  up 
LADE,  LOAD  (with),  to  — 
l.To  load,  jyp  taan. 

Gen.  45.  17  This  do  ye  ;  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,  get 

2.  To  make  heavy,  weighty,  122  kabed,  5. 

Hab.    2.   6  to  him  that  ladetti  himself  with  thickclay 

3.  To  lift  up,  bear,  &$'}  nasa. 

Gen.  42.  26  they  laded  their  asses  with  the  corn,  and 

4.  To  lay  on,  load,  D&J/  anuts. 

Gen.  44.  13  laded  every  man  his  ass,  and  returned  to 
Neh.  13.  15  and  bringing  in  sheaves,  and  lading  asses 
Psa.  68.  19  Blessed  (be) the  Lord,  (who)dailyloadeth 
Isa.  46.  1  your  carriages  (were)  heavy  loaden.. a  bur. 
5.7*o  lay  on,  load,  osy  amas,  5. 

1  Ki.  12.  11  now  whereas  my  father  did  lade  you  with 
G.  To  put  on  or  upon,  iviridfj/JLt  ejntithemi. 

Acts  28.  10  they  laded  (us)  with  such  things  as  were 
7.  To  burden,  (poprifa  phoriizo. 

Luken.  46  ye  lade  men  with  burdens  grievous  to  be 
LADED — 
To  load,  lay  on,  coj;  amas. 

Neh.    4. 17  that  bare  burdens,  with  those  that  laded 
LADEN  — 
1. Heavy, 'weighty,  "D3  kabed. 

Isa.     1.    4  Ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  ini. 

2.  To  lift  up,  bear,  xyi  nasa. 

Gen.  45.  23  ten  asses  laden . .  ten  she  asses  laden  with 
3.7*0  heap  v.}?,  crwpeu&j  soreud. 

2  Ti.    3.    6  lead  captive  silly  women  laden  with  sins 

LADEN,  to  be  heavy  — 

To  burden,  (poprifa  phoriizo. 

Matt.  11.  28  all  (ye)  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden 
LADING  — 
What  is  borne,  burden,  <popros  phortos. 

Acts  27.  10  not  only  of  [the  lading]  and  ship,  but  also 
LADY  — 
1. Mistress,  rrua  gcbereth. 

Isa.  47.   5  thou  shalt  nc  more  he  called,  The  lady  of 
47.  7  And  thou  saidst,  I  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever 

2. Princess,  rr$p  sarah. 

Judg.  5.  29  Her  wise  ladies  answered  her,  yea,  she 
Esth.  1. 18  shall  the  ladies  of  Persia  and  Media  say 

3.  Lady,  Kvpia  kuria. 

2  John   1  The  Elder  unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  ch. 
5  now  I  beseech  thee,  lady,  not  as  though  I 

LA'-EL,  bxh  God-ward. 

A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Gershon.    B.C.  1510. 

Num.  3.  24  the  chief.  .(shallbe)Eliasaphthesonof  L. 

LA'-HAD,  in?  dark  coloured. 

Great  grandson  of  Shobal  the  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  1600. 
1  Ch.  4.    2  and  Jahath  begat  Ahuniai,  and  L.  These 

LA-HAIROX  **P  TjS  of  the  Living  onewho  beholds  me. 
A  well  or  fountain  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  between 
Kadish  and  Berod. 

Gen.  24.  62  Isaac  came  from  the  way  of  the  well  L. 
25. 11  blessed,  .and  Isaac  dwelt  by  the  well  L. 

LAH'-MAM,  LAH'-MAS,  Qtonhpfaee  of  light. 
A  city  of  Judah,  near  Cabboii. 

Josh.  1 5.  40  And  Cabbon,  and  L  ,  and  Kithlish 

LAH'-MI,  s?rf?  fiethlehcmite. 

A  brother  of  Goliath,  slain  by  Elhanan.    B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.20.   5  Elhanan  the  son  of  Jair  slew  L.  the  brot. 
LAID  — 

l.TYi  put,  place,  EftS*  sum. 

Dan.    6.  17  a  stone  was  brought,  and  laid  upon  the 

2.7*0  be  caused  to  be  laid  down,  32$  shakab,  6. 

2  Ki.   4.  32  the  child  was  dead,  (and)  laid  upon  his  bed 

[See  also  Desolate,  waste.] 
LAID,  to  be  — 
1.7*o  go  in,  *03  bo. 

Psa. 105.  18  they  hurt  with  fetters  :  he  was  laid  iniron 

2.7*o  lift  up,  bear,  iiy'i  nasa. 

1  Ki.  S.  31  an  oath  be  laid  upon  him  to  cause  him  to 

2  Ki.  9.  25  remember,  .the  Loup  laid  this  burden 

3  Ch.  6.  22  an  oath  be  laid  upon  him  to  make  him  s. 


3.  7*o  be  given,  jra  nathan,  2. 

Eze.  32.  29  her  princes,  which  by  their  might  are  laid 

4.7*0  go  up,  nhii  cdah. 

Psa.  62.   9  to  he  laid  in  the  balance,  they  (are)  alto. 

5.  To  put,  place,  D'c1,  c^b'  sum,  sim. 

Judg  9.  24  and  their  blood  be  laid  upon  Abimelech 

6.7*o  be  put,  placed,  flV,  nib  sum,  sim,  2. 

Ezra  5.   S  timber  is  laid  in  the  walls,  and  this  work 

7.  To  set,  put,  place,  nv  shith,  6. 

Exod2i.  30  If  there  be  laid  on  hini  a  sum  of  money 
21.  30  shall  give,  .whatsoever  is  laid  upon  him 

S.7*o  be  caused  to  lie  down,  nap  shakab,  6. 

Eze.  32.  19  go  down,  and  be  thou  laid  with  the  una 
32.  32  he  shall  be  laid  in  the  midst  of  the  uncir. 

9.7*o  be  set,  put,  T\rv  shalhath,  6. 

Psa.  49. 14  Like  sheep  they  are  laid  in  the  grave 

10.7*o  be  laid,  to  lie,  Keifxat  keimai. 

Matt.  3.  10  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root  of 
Luke  3.    9  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root  of 

23.  S3  sepulchre,  .wherein  never  man.  .was  laid 

24.  12  [beheld  the  linen  clothes  laid  by  thems.] 
John  11.  41  [(from  the  place)  where  the  dead  was  laid] 
1  Co.  3.  11  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  1. 

[See  also  Foundation.] 

LAID  down,  to  be  — 

7*o  lie  down,  3?y>  shakab. 

1  Sa.    3.   2  when  Eli  (was)  laid  down  inhisplace.and 

3.    3  And  ere . .  Samuel  was  laid  down  (to  sleep) 

2  Sa.  13.   8  went  to  her  brother.,  and  he  was  laid  down 

LAID  against,  or  to — [See  Crime,  charge.] 

LAID,  more  be  — 

Tube  heavy,  weighty,  ~n3  kabed. 

Exod.  5.   9  Let  there  more  work  be  laid  upon  the  men 
LAID  out,  to' be  — 
To  go  out,  h>£  yatsa. 

2  Ki.12. 12  that  was  laid  out  for  the  house  to  repair 
LAID  over  — 
To  overlay,  catch,  capture,  t'$$  taphas. 

Hab,  2.  19  it  (is)  laid  over  with  gold  and  silver,  and 
LAID  strongly  — 
To  be  borne,  set,  Sap  sebal,  36. 

Ezra    6.    3  and  let  the  foundations,  .be  strongly  laid 
LAID  thereon  or  upon,  to  be  — 
To  lie  or  be  laid  upon,  eV£/cei,uo:i  epikeimai. 

John2i.    9  theysawa  fire,  .and  fish  laid  thereon,  and 

1  Co.   9.  16  for  necessity  is  laid  upon  me;  yea,  woe  is 

LAID  up  (in  store),  to  be  — 

1.  7*0  become  strong  or  great,  jon  chasan,  2. 

Isa.   23.  18  it  shall  not  be  treasured  nor  laid  up;  for 
2.7*o  store  up,  DS3  kamas. 

Deut32.  34  (Is)  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  me,  (and) 
3.  7*o  Im  or  be  laid,  Kel/xat  keimai. 

Lukei2.  19  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for 
LAID  up,  that  which  — 
.4  deposit,  store,  n^p?  pequddah. 

Isa.   15.    7  that  which  they  have  laid  up,  shall 
LAID  waste,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  laid  waste,  stripped,  burnt,  nyi  natsah. 

Jer.     4.    7  thy  cities  shall  be  laid  waste,  without  an 

2.  To  be  sjjoiled,  destroyed,  "n^  shadad,  4. 

Isa.  15.  1  Because  in  the  night  ArofMoab  islaid  w. 
15.  1  because  in  the  night  Kir  of  Moabislaid  w. 
23.  1  it  is  laid  waste,  so  that  there  is  no  house 
23.  14  Howl,  .for  your  strength  is  laid  waste 

Nah.    3.    7  Nineveh  is  laid  waste:  who  will  bemoan 

LA'-ISH,  irS,  Vf-S* 

1.  A  Sidonian  city  at  the  N.  extremity  of  Palestine ; 
called  also  Leshem,  Josh.  19.  47  ;  and  afterwards  Dan. 

Judg. 18.  7  five  men  departed,  and  came  to  L.,  and 
18.  14  men  that  went  to  spy  out  the  country  of  L. 
18.  27  came  unto  L.,  unto  a  people  (that  were) 
18.  29  howbeit  the  name  of  the  city  (was)  L.  at 

Isa.    10.  30  cause  it  to  be  heard  unto  L.,  O  poor  Ana. 

2.  A  Benjamite,  whose  son   became  the  husband  of 
Michal,  David's  wife.     B.C.  1080. 

1  Sa.  25.  44  had  yiven  Michal.  .to  Phalti  the  son  of  L. 

2  Sa.  3.  15  and  took  her.  .from  Phaltiel  the  son  of  L. 

LAKE  — 

Lake,  \(fivn  limne. 

Luke  5.  1  it  came  to  pass . .  he  stood  by  the  lake  of  G. 
5.  2  And  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the  lake 
8.  22  Let  us  go .  .unto  the  other  side  of  the  lake 
8.  23  came  down  a  storm  of  wind  on  the  lake 
8.  33  violently  down  a  steep  place  into  the  lake 
Rev.  19.  20  into  a  lake  of  flreburniug  with  brimstone 
20.  10 ;  20.  14;  20.  15;  21.  8. 

Lama,  \ajxd  kafx/xa,  \€fxd,  Xrjfxd,  Ktfxd,  Ileb.  ns?, 
Ch.  K^why,  Matt.  27.  46;  Mark  15  34. 

LA'-KTTM,  n\ph  fortification. 

A  border  city  in  Naphtali;  said  to  be  Capernaum  on 

the  sea  of  Galilee. 

Josh.  19.  33  and  Adami,  Nekeb,  and  Jabueel,  unto  L. 


LAMB 


583 


LAMP 


LAMB,  (he  and  ewe)  — 

l.A  he  lamb,  tender  one,  n?a  taleh. 

i  Sa.    7.    9  Samuel  took  a  sucking  lamb,  aid  offered 
Isa.  65.  25  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together 
2.-4  he  lamb,  bqs  kebes. 

Exod29.  38  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  day  by  day 
29. 30  The  one  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  in  the  mo. 
29.  39  the  other  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  at  even 

29. 40  with  the  one  lamb  a  tenth  deal  of  fiour  m. 

29. 41  the  other  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  at  even 
Lev.    4.  32  if  lie  bring  a  lamb  for  a  sin  offering,  he  s. 

9.  3  a  calf  and  a  lamb . .  of  the  first  year,  with. 
12.  6  she  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  for 
14.  10  he  shall  take  two  he  lambs  without  blem. 
14.  12  the  priest  shall  take  one  he  lamb,  and  off. 
14.  13  he  shall  slay  the  lamb  in  the  place  where 
14.  21  take  one  lamb  (for)  a  trespass  offering  to 
14.  24  the  priest  shall  take  the  lamb  of  the  tres. 

14.  25  he  shall  km  the  lamb  of  the  trespass  offe. 
23.  12  an  he  lamb  without  blemish  of  the  first 
23. 18  seven  lambs  without  blemish  of  the  first 
23.  19  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  sacrifice 
23.  20  with  the  two  lambs  :  they  shall  be  holy  to 

Num.  6.12  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  for  a  trespass  offer. 

6. 14  one  he  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  ble. 

7.  15  one  ram,  one  lamb  of  the  first  year 
[So  in  v.  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81.] 

7.  17  five  he  goats,  five  lambs  of  the  first 
[So  in  v.  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  S3,  sg,  65,  71,  77,  83,  87.] 

7. 88  he  goats  sixty,  the  lambs  of  the  first  year 

15.  5  burnt  offering  or  sacrifice,  for  one  lamb 
28.   3  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 
28j    4  The  one  lamb  shalt  thou  offer  in  the  mo. 
28.   4  and  the  other  lamb  shaltthouofferateven 
28.    7  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  for  the  one  lamb 
28.   8  Andtheotherlambshaltthouofferateven 
28.   9  ou  the  sabbath  day  two  lambs  of  the  first 
28.  11  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 
28.  13  oil  (for)  a  meat  offering  unto  one  lamb 
28.  14  and  a  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  unto  a  lamb 
28.  19  one  ram,  and  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year 
28.  21  every  lamb,  throughout  the  seveu  lambs 
28.  27  offer,  .one  ram,  seven  lambs  of  the  first 

28.  29  one  lamb,  throughout  the  seven  lambs 

29.  2  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  ble. 
29.  4,  10  for  one  lamb,  throughout  the  seven  la, 
29.  8  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  ;  they  shall 
29.  13,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32  fourteen  lambs  of 
29.  15  tenth  deal  to  each  lamb  of  the  fourteen  1. 
29.  18,  21, 24,27,30, 3  3  the  rams,  and  for  the  lambs 
29.  36  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  bl. 
29.  37  the  bullock,  for*1     ram,  and  for  the  lambs 

1  Cli.2g.  21  a  thousand  ra*     .  .a  thousand  lambs,  with 

2  Ch.29.  21  seven  rams.    ..d  seven  lambs,  and  seven 

29.  22  killed  ala     .te  Iambs,  and  they  sprinkled 

29.  32  an  hundred  rams,  (and)  two  hundred  la. 

35.    7  lambs  aud  kids,  all  for  the  passover  offeri. 

Ezra  8.  35  seventy  and  seven  lambs,  twelve  he  goats 

Prov.27.  26  The  lambs  (are)  for  thy  clothing,  and  the 

Isa-      1.  11  I  delight  not  in  the  blood,  .of  lambs,  or  of 

5.  17  Then  shall  the  Iambs  feed  after  their  ma. 

11.  6  The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb 
Jer.  11.  19  But  I  (was)  like  a  lamb  (or)  an  ox  (that) 
£ze.  46.    4  six  lambs  without  blemish,  nnd  a  ram  wi. 

46.  5  the  meat  offering  for  the  lambs  as  he  shall 
46.  6  bullock  without  blemish,  and  six  lambs 
46.  7  for  the  lambs  according  as  bis  hands  shall 
46.  11  to  the  lambs  as  he  is  able  to  give,  and  an 
46. 13  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 
46.  15  Thus  shall  they  prepare  the  lamb,  and  the 
Hos.   4. 16  Lord  will  feed  them  as  a  lamb  in  a  large 

3.-4  she  lamb,  nb'^3,  npis  kabsah,  kibsah. 

Gen.  21.  28  Abraham  set  seven  ewe  lambs  of  the  flock 

21.  29  What.,  these  seven  ewe  lambs  which  thou 
2t.  30  seven  ewe  lambs  shalt  thou  take  of  my  h. 

Lev.  14.  10  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  b. 
Num.  6.  14  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  b. 
2  Sa.  12.    3  had  nothing,  save  one  little  ewe  lamb,  w. 

12.  4  took  the  poor  man's  lamb,  and  dressed  it 
12.   6  he  shall  restore  the  lamb  fourfold,  because 

4.  A  stout  he  lamb,  a  ram,  *i3  kar. 

Deut32.  14  milk  of  sheep,  with  fat  of  lambs,  and  rams 

1  Sa.  15.    9  and  of  the  fatlings,  and  the  lambs,  and  all 

2  Ki.  3.  4  an  hundred  thousand  lambs,  and  an  bun. 
Psa.  37.  20  as  the  fat  of  lambs  :  they  shall  consume 
Isa.   16.    1  Send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land 

34.   6  with  the  blood  of  lambs  and  goats,  with 
Jer.  51.  40  I  will  bring  them  down  like  lambs  to  the 
Eze.  27.  21  they  occupied  with  thee  in  lambs.and  rams 

39.  18  of  rams,  of  lambs,  .of  goats,  of  bullocks 
*  Amos  6.  4  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock,  and  the 

5.A  he  lamb,  2^3  keseb. 

Gen.  30.  40  Jacob  did  separate  the  lambs,  and  set  the 
Lev.     3.    7  If  he  offer  a  lamb  for  his  offering,  then 
4.  35  as  the  fat  of  the  lamb  is  taken  away  from 
17.   3  that  killeth  an  ox,  or  lamb,,  or  goat,  in  the 

6.  A  she  lamb,  n^b's  kisbah. 

Lev.  5.  6  a  female  from  the  flock,  a  lamb,  or  a  kid  of 
7. A  sheep,  |NS  tson. 

Exodi2.  21  Draw  out  and  take  you  alamb  according  to 
S.A  young  lamb  or  kid,  a  sheep,  n'tf  seh. 

Gen.  22.   7  but  where  (is)  the  lamb  for  a  burnt  off.  ? 

22.  8  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  b. 
Exodi2     3  take,  .every  man  a  lamb,  .a  lamb  for  an 

12.   4  the  household  be  too  little  for  the  lamb 
12.   4  every . .  shall  make  your  count  for  the  lamb 
12.    5  Your  lamb  shall  be  without  blemish,  am. 
13. 13  thou  shalt  redeem  with  a  lamb;  and  if 


Exod34.  20  firstling,  .thou  shalt  redeem  with  a  lamb 
Lev.    5.    7  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb,  then  he 
12.    8  if  she  be  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb,  then 
22.  23  Either  a  bullock  or  a  lamb  that  hath  any 
Num  15.  11  one  bullock,  or  for  one  ram,  or  for  a  lamb 
1  Sa.  17,  34  there  came  a  lion.,  and,  took  a  lamb  out  of 
Isa.   53.    7  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter 
66.    3  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  (as  if)  he  cut 
Eze.  45.  11  one  lamb  out  of  the  fiock,  out  of  two  hu. 
9. A  son  0/ the  /lock,  a  young  sheep,  |xx  \^bentson. 
Psa.114.    4  like  rams,  (and)  the  little  hills  like  lambs 
114.    6  like  rams;  (and)  ye  little  hills,  like  lambs? 
10. Lambs,  D'~)QN  immerim. 

Ezra    6.   9  rams,  and  lambs,  for  the  burnt  offerings 

6.  17  two  hundred  rams,  four  hundred  lambs 

7.  17  buy  speedily  with  thismoney.. lambs,  with 
\\.  Young  or  tender  lambs,  O'N^p  lelaim. 

Isa.  40.  11  he  shall  gather  the' lambs  with  his  arm 
12. A  lamb,  apvos  amnos. 

John  1.  29  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 

1.  36  looking,  .he  saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  G.! 
Acts    8.  32  and  like  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearer 

1  Pe.   t.  19  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
13. .4  lamb,  apvos  arms  (gen.) 

Lukeio.    3  Go..  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  wo. 
14.^4  little  lamb,  apviov  arnion. 

John?  1.  15  I  love.  .He  saith  unto  him,  Feed  my  lambs 

Rev.    5.    6  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having 

5.    8  twenty  elders  fell  down  before  the  Lamb 

5.  12  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  rec. 
5. 13  Blessing,  .unto  the  Lamb,  for  ever  and 

6.  1  And  I  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of 

6.  16  and  hide  us . .  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb 

7.  9  stood  before  the  throne,  aud  before  the  L. 
7.  10  Salvation  to  our  God . .  and  unto  the  Lamb 
7.  14  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 

7.  17  For  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 

12.  11  they  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  L. 

13.  8  written  in  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb 
13. 11  he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake 

14.  1  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Sion,  and  with 
1 4.    4  These  are  they  which  follow  the  Lamb  whi. 

14.  4  the  first  fruits  unto  God  and  to  the  Lamb 
14. 10  be  tormented . .  in  the  presence  of  the  L. 

15.  3  they  siug.  .the  song  of  the  Lamb,  saying 
17.  14  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the  La. 
19.  7  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  Ins 
19.  9  called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the  L. 
ei.  9  I  will  show  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  w. 
21. 14  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb 
21.  22  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple 
ei.  23  Aud  the  city,  .the  Lamb  (is)  the  light  th. 

21.  27  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of 

22.  1  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb 
22.    3  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall 

[See  also  Ewe.] 
LAME  (man)  — 
1. Smitten,  nra  nakeh. 

2.  Sa.   4.    4  Saul's  son,  had  a  son.  .lame  of  (his)  feet 
9.   3  Jonathan  hath  yet  a  son.  .lame  on  (his) 

I.Limphig,  ns?  pisseach. 

Lev.  zi.  iS  a  blind  man,  or  a  lame,  or  be  that  hath 
Deuti5.  21  lame,  or  blind,  .any  ill  blemish,  thou  shalt 

2  Sa.    5.    6  Except  thou  take  away,  .the  lame,  thou 

5.    8  the  lame  and  the  blind . .  hated  of  David's 

5.    8  The  blind  and  the  lame  shall  not  come  into 

9.  13  Meplribosheth . .  was  lame  on  both  his  feet 

19.  26  I  may  ride . .  because  thy  servant  (is)  lame 

Job  29.  15  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet,  .to  the  lame 

Prov  26.    7  The  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal ;  so  (is) 

Isa.  33.  23  is.  .spoil  divided ;  the  lame  take  the  prey 

35.    6  Then  shall  the  lame,  .leap  as  an  hart,  and 

Jer.  31.    S  them  the  blind  aud  the  l^ne,  the  woman 

Mai.    1.    8  ye  offer  the  lame  and  sick, (is  it)  not  evil? 

1. 13  the  lame,  and  the  sick;  thus  ye  brought 

Z.Lame,  crippled,  x^Ao's  cliolos. 

Matt  11.    5  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed 
15.  30  lame,  blind,  dumb,  maimed,  and  many 
15.  31  saw.  .the  lame  to  walk,  and  the  blind  to 
21. 14  the  blind  and  the  lame  came  to  him  in  the 

Luke  7.  22  how  that  the  blind  see,  the  lame  walk,  the 
14.  13  call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the 

Acts    3.    2  a  certain  man  lame  from  his  mother's  w. 

8.  7  with  palsies,  aud  that  were  lame,  were  h. 
T.ATVTR  (man),  that  which  is  — 

Tlie  lame,  (to)  x&>Aoy  [to)  cholos. 

Acts  3.  11  as  [the  lame  man]  which  was  healed  held  P. 
Heb.  12.  ij  lest  that  which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of 

LAME,  to  become  — 

To  become  limping,  hds  pasach,  2. 

2  Sa.   4.   4  haste  to  flee,  that  he  fell,  and  became  lame 

LA'-MECH,  ~?S  fiverthrower,  wild  man. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Cain,  by  Methusael.     B.C.  3769. 

Gen.  4.  18  begat  Methusael :  and  Methusael  begat  L. 
4.  19  L.  took  unto  him  two  wives :  the  name  of 
4.  23  L.  said  unto  his  wives,  .ye  wives  of  L.,  he. 

4.  24  Cain  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly  L. 

2.  The  son  of  Methuselah,  and  father  of  >'oah.     B.C. 
3000. 

Gen.   5.  25  Methuselah  lived  an  hundr.  ..andbegat  L. 

5.  26  Methuselah  lived  after  he  begat  L.  seven 
5.  28  L.  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two  years 
5.  30  L.  lived  after  he  begat  Noah  five  hundred 
5.  31  all  the  days  of  L.  were  seven  hundred  se. 


1  Ch.  1.    3  Henoch,  Methuselah,  L. 
Luke  3.  36  (the  son)  of  Noe,  which  was  (the  son)  of  L. 
LAMENT,  to  — 

1.  To  mourn,  be  moist,  *?3K  abal. 

Isa.   19.   8  all  theythatcastangle.  .shalllament,  and 

2.  To  sJwio  self  a  mourner,  hix  abal,  7. 

1  Sa.   6.  19  the  people  lamented,  because  the  Lord 

3.  To  wail,  rhg  alah. 

Joel    1.   8*Lameut  like  a  virgin  girded  with  eackcl. 

4.  To  lament,  mourn,  jijx  amah. 

Isa.     3.  26  her  gates  shall  lament  and  mourn ;  and 

5.  To  wail,  nr\i  nahah. 

Mic.    2.    4  take  upaparableagahistyou,  and  lament 

6.  To  become  wailing,  nni  nahah,  2. 

1  Sa.    7.    2  all  the  bouse  of  Israel  lamented  after  the 

7.  To  beat  the  breast,  mourn,  lament,  ngo  saphad. 

1  Sa.  25.    1  lamented  him,  and  buried  him  in  his  ho. 

28.    3  lamented  him,  and  buried  him  in  Ramah 
Isa.    32. 12  They  shall  lament  for  the  teats,  for  the 
Jer.     4.   8  For  this  gird  you  with  .sackcloth,  lament 
16.    5  neither  go  to  lament  nor  bemoan  them 
16.    6  neither  shall  (men)  lament  for  them,  nor 
22.  18, 18  They  shall  not  lament  for  him.  .Ah  my 

34.  5  they  will  lament  thee.  .Ah  lord  !  for  I 
49.    3  lament,  and  run  to  and  fro  by  the  hedges 

Joel    1. 13  Gird  yourselves,  and  lament,  ye  priests 

8. To  con,  lament,  mourn,  ]ip  gun,  da. 

2  Sa.   1. 17  David  lamented  with  this  lamentation 

3.  33  the  king  lamented  over  Abner,  and  said 

2  Ch.  35.  25  Jeremiah  lamented  for  Josiah  ;  and  all 

Eze.  27.  32  lamen*"  over  thee,  (saying).  What  (city  is) 

32. 16  lam'  .tation  wherewith  they  shall  lament 

32. 16  tK,  nations,  .lamentber  :  they  shall  lam. 

9.  To  give  (■'   xise),  run  tanah,  3. 

Judg  t      fo  went  yearly  to  lament  the  daughter  of  Je. 

10.  Tr      toail,  Bp-nviw  threneo. 

T  <ce23.  27  women,  which  also  bewailed  andlamented 
sOhni6.  20  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world 

11.  To  beat  or  strike  (the  breast),  K6-rrrofj.ai  koptomai. 
Mattn.  17  mourned  unto  you,  and  ye  have  not  lam. 
Rev.  18.    9 shall  bewailher.andlamentforher,  when 

LAMENT,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  mourn,  Six  abal,  5. 

Lam.  2.   8  he  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall  to  la. 

LAMENTABLE  — 

To  be  grievous,  Day.  atsdb. 

Dan.   6.  20  cried  with  a  lamentable  voice  unto  Dauiel 
LAMENTATION  — 
1. Lamentation,  mourning,  rrjx  aniyyah. 

Lam.  2.    5  and  hath  increased,  .mourning  and  lam. 

2.  Beating  of  the  breast,  "isp-*?  misped. 

Gen.  50.  10  mourned  with  a  great  and  very  sore  lam. 

Jer.    6.  26  make  thee  mourning,  .mostbitter  lament. 

48.  38  lamentation  generally  upon  all  thehousa 

3. A  wailing,  'nj  nehi. 

Jer.  31. 15  A  voice  was  heard  in  Ramah,  lamentation 
Amos  5. 16  such  as  are  skilful  of  lamentation  to  wail. 
Mic.    2.   4  lament  with  a  doleful  lamentation,  (and) 

4.^4  conning,  lamentation,  -irp  qinah. 

2  Sa.    x.  17  David  lamented  with  this  lamentation 
2  Ch.35.  25  spake  of  Josiah  in  then-  lamentations  to 

35.  25  behold,  they  (are)  written  in  the  Lament 
Jer.    7.  29  take  up  a  lamentation  on  high  places;  for 

9. 10  a  lamentation,  because  they  are  burnt 
9.  20  and  every  one  her  neighbour  lamentation 
Eze.     2. 10  written  therein  lamentations,  and  moiir. 
19.    1  Moreover  take  thou  up  a  lamentation 
19.  14  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a  lament  a. 

26.  17  they  shall  take  up  a  lamentation  for  thee 

27.  2  sou  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  T 
27.  32  they  shall  take  up  a  lamentation  for  thee 
28. 12  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  upon 
32.  2  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  P. 
32. 16  This  (is)  the  lamentation  wherewith  they 

Amos  5.    1  Hear  ye  this  word,  .augmentation,  O  house 
8.  10  I  will  turn .  .all  your  songs  into  lamentat. 

5.  Wailing,  Qprivos  threnos. 

Matt.  2.  18  In  Rama  was  there  a  voice  heard,  [lam.] 
6. Beating  or  smiting  [of  the  breast),  kottctos  kope. 

Acts    8.    2  devoutiiien.  .made  great  lamentation  over 
LAMENTATION,  to  make  — 
To  weep,  np3  bakah. 

Psa.  78  64  and  their  widows  made  no  lamentation 

LAMENTED,  to  be  — 

To  be  beaten  for,  lamented,  190  saphad,  2. 

Jer.    16.    4  they  shall  not  be  lamented,  neither  shall 
25.  33  they  shall  not  be  lamented, neither  gather 

LAMP  — 

1.^  torch,  flame,  tsS  lappid. 

Gen.  15.  17  a  burning  lamp  that  passed  between  those 
Judg.  7.  16  empty  pitchers,  and  lamps  within  the  pi. 

7.  20  held  the  lamps  in  their  left  hands,  and 
Job    12.    5  a  lamp  despised  in  the  thought  of  him 

41.  19  Out  of  his  mouth  go  burning  lamps .  spa. 
Isa.  62.  1  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  (that)  bu. 
Eze.  1.  13  appearance,  .like  the  appearanceof  lamps 
Dan.  10.    6  his  eyes  as  lamps  of  fire,  and  his  arms  and 


LANCE 


584 


LAND 


2.A  light,  lamp,  Ti  ner. 

2  Sa.  22.  29  thou  (art)  my  lamp,  0  LORD :  and . .  Lord 
3.  A  light,  lamp,  TJ  nir. 

1  Ki.  15.  4  give  him  a  lamp  in  Jerusalem,  to  set  up 
k.A  Z?7/fti,  lamp,  11  wer. 

Exod25>  37  thou  shalt  make  the  seven  lamps  thereof 
25.  37  they  shall  light  the  lamps  thereof,  that 

27.  20  oil  olive,  .to  cause  the  lamp  to  burn  alw. 
30.    7  when  he  dresseth  the  lamps,  he  shall  burn 
30.    8  when  Aaron  lighteth  the  lamps  at  even 
35.  14  and  his  lamps,  with  the  oil  for  the  light 
37.  23  he  made  his  seven  lamps,  and  his  snuffers 

39.  37  the  lamps  thereof,  .the  lamps  to  be  set  in 

40.  4  thou  shalt  bring  in.  .and  light  the  lamps 
40.  25  he  lighted  the  lamps  before  the  Lord  ;  as- 

Lev.  24.    2  oil.  .to  cause,  .lamps  to  burn  continually 

24.  4  He  shall  order  the  lamps  upon  the  pure 
Num.  4.    9  candlestick  of  the  light,  and  his  lamps 

8.   2  When  thou  lightest  the  lamps  the  seven  1. 

8.  3  Aaron  didso;  he  lighted  the  lamps  thereof 
1  Sa.  3.  3  ere  the  lamp  of  God  went  out  in  the  temple 
1  Ki.   7.  49  the  flowers,  and  the  lamps,  and  the  tongs 

1  Ch.28. 15  and  for  their  lamps  of  gold,  by  weight 

28.  15  every  candlestick,  and  for  the  lamps  the. 
28. 15  for  the  lamps  thereof,  according  to  the 

2  Ch.  4.  20  the  candlesticks  with  their  lamps,  that 

4.  21  the  flowers,  and  the  lamps,  and  the  tongs 
13. 11  the  candlestick  of  gold,  with  the  lamps 

29.  7  put  out  the  lamps,  and  have  not  burnt 
Psa.119.  105  Thy  word  (is)  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and 

132.  17  I  have  ordained  a  lamp  for  mine  anointed 
Prov.  6.  23  the  commandment  (is)  a  lamp ;  and  the 

13.  9  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 

20.  20  his  lamp  shall  be  put  out  in  obscure  dar. 
Zeeli.  4.    2  with  a  bowl . .  and  his  seven  lamps  thereon 

4.    2  and  seven  pipes  to  the  seven  lamps,  which 

5. A  lamp,  torch,  Xa/xirds  lampas. 

Matt 25.    1  ten  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps,  and 

25.  3  took  their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  with 
25.   4  But  the  wise  took  oil.  .with  their  lamps 
25.    7  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed  their  1. 
25.    8  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  gone 

Rev.    4.    5  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before  the 

8.  10  fell  a  great  star . .  burning  as  it  were  a  lamp 
[See  also  Burning.] 
LANCE  — 
Ilalbert,  javelin,  jiT?  kidon. 

Jer.  50.  42  They  shall  hold  the  bow  and  the  lance 
LANCET  — 
Dart,  javelin,  spear,  nan  romach. 

1  Ki.  18.  28  with  knives  and  lancets,  till  the  blood 
LAND  — 

liLand,  earth,  ground,  firm  soil,  npix  adamah. 

Gen.  28.  15  will  bring  thee  again  intVt'ins  land;  for 
47.  18  there  is  not. .  but  our  bodies,  a.nd  our  lands 
47.  19  Wherefore  shall  we  die . .  we  and  our  land  ? 
47. 19  buy  us  and  our  land  for  bread,  and  we 
47.  19  and  our  land  will  be  servants  unto  Phara. 
47.  19  and  not  die,  that  the  land  be  not  desolate 
47.  20  Joseph  bought  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  P. 
47.  22  Only  the  land  of  the  priests  bought  he  not 
47.  22  wherefore  they  sold  not  their  lands 
47.  23  I  have  bought  you  this  day  and  your  land 
47,  23  lo.  .seed  for  you,  and  ye  shall  sow  the  1. 
47.  26  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  E. 
47.  26  except  the  land  of  the  priests  ouly,(which) 

Exodso.  12  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land 
23.  19  The  first  of  the  first  fruits  of  thy  land  thou 
34.  26  The  first  of  the  first  fruits  of  the  land  thou 

Lev.  20.  24  Ye  shall  inherit  their  land,  and  I  will  give 

Nuiuu.  12  the  land  which  thou  swarest  unto  their 
32. 11  see  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  Abraham 

Deut.  5.  16  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
7  13  the  fruit  of  thy  land,  thy  corn,  and  thy  w. 

7.  13  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers 
11.  9  that  ye  may  prolong,  .days in  the  land,  w. 
it.  17  and  that  the  land  yield  not  her  fruit ;  and 
11.  21  the  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  your 
2i.    1  If  (one)  be  found  slain  in  the  land  which 

21.  23  that  thy  land  be  not  defiled,  which  the 

25.  15  thy  days  may  be  lengthened  in  the  land 
26. 10  have  brought  the  first  fruits  of  the  land 

26.  15  the  land  which  thou  hast  given  us,  as  thou 
28.  11  the  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy 
28.  18  the  fruit  of  thy  land,  the  increase  of  thy 
28.  21  he  have  consumed  thee  from  off  the  land 
28.  33  The  fruit  of  thy  land,  and  all  thy  labours 
28.  42  fruit  of  thy  land  shall  the  locust  consume 
28.  51  eat.  .of  thy  cattle,  and  the  fruit  of  thy  land 

28.  63  ye  shall  be  plucked  from  off  the  land  wh. 

29.  28  the  Lord  rooted  them  out  of  their  land  in 

30.  9  plenteous. .in  the  fruit  of  thy  land  for  good 
30. 18  shall  not  prolong  (your)  days  upon  the  I. 

30.  20  that  thou  mayest  dwell  in  the  land  which 

31.  13  as  long  as  ye  live  in  the  land  whither  ye 

31.  20  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathers 

32.  43  will  be  merciful  unto  his  land,  .tohispeo. 
32.  47  ye  shall  prolung  (your)  days  in  the  land 

Josh. 23.  13  ye  perish  from  off  this  good  land  which 
23. 15  have  destroyed  you  horn  off  this  good  land 

2  Sa.   9. 10  shall  till  the  land  fur  him,  and  thou  sbalt 

1  Ki.  8.  34  brhigthemagaiuuutothe  land  which  thou 

8.  40  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers 

9.  7  out  of  the  land  which  I  have  given  them 

14.  15  shall  root  up  Israel  out  of  this  good  land 

2  Ki.  r7-  23  Israel  carried  away  out  of  their  own  land 

21.  8  out  of  the  land  which  I  give  their  fathers 
25.  21  Judah  was  carded  away  out  of  their  land 


Jer. 


2  Ch.  6.  25  bringthem  again  unto  the  laud  which  thou 

6. 31  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers 

7.  20  out  of  my  land  which  I  have  given  them 

33.  8  the  land  which  I  have  appointed  for  your 

Xeh.  9.  25  they  took  strong  cities,  and  a  fat  land,  and 

Job  31.  38  If  my  land  cry  against  me,  or  that  the  fur. 

Psa.  49.  11  call  (their)  lands  after  their  own  names 

137.   4  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land 
Prov.12.  11  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  be  satisfied 

28. 19  He  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  have  plenty 
Isa.     1.    7  your  land,  strangers  devour  it  in  your  pre. 

11  Until  the  cities,  .and  the  land  be  utterly 

16  the  land  that  thou  abhorrest shall  befors. 

1  the  Lord  will . .  set  them  in  their  own  land 

2  Israel  shall  possess  them  in  the  land  of 
9  Moab,  and  upon  the  remnant  of  the  land 

1 7  the  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a  terror  unto  E. 

13  Upon  the  land  of  my  people  shall  come  up 

14  I  will  pluck  them  out  of  their  land,  and 

15  I  will  bring  them  again  into  their  land 
8  Israel . .  they  shall  dwell  in  their  own  land 

10  till  they  be  consumed  from  off  the  land 
5  and  dwell  in  the  land  that  the  Lord  hath 

10  unto  you,  to  remove  you  far  from  your  land 

it  will  I  let  remain  still  in  their  own  land 
7  ye  may  live  many  days  in  the  land  where 

15  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  have 

12  and  cause  you  to  return  to  your  own  land 
27  earned  away  captive  out  of  his  own  land 

2  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  the  land  of  Israel 
17  say . .  and  I  will  give  yon  the  land  of  Israel 

12.  19  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  . .  of  the  laud  of  I. 
i2.  22  proverb  (that)  ye  have  in  the  land  of  Israel 

13.  9  neither  shall  they  enter  into  the  land  of  I. 

18.  2  this  proverb  concerning  the  land  of  Israel 
20.  33  they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  of  Israel 

20.  42  I  shall  bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel 

21.  2  and  prophesy,  against  the  land  of  Israel 
21.    3  say  to  the  land  of  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  L. 
25.    3  against  the  land  of  Israel,  when  it  was  d. 
25.    6  all  thy  despite  against  the  land  of  Israel 
28.  25  land  that  I  have  given  to  my  servant  J  a. 

33.  24  those  wastes  of  the  land  of  Israel  speak 

34.  13  will  bring  them  to  their  own  land,  and 
34.  27  they  shall  be  safe  in  their  land,  and  shall 
36.    6  Prophesy  therefore  concerning  the  land 
36.  17  house  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  own  land 

36.  24  take.-aud  will  bring  you  into  your  own  1. 

37.  12  I  will,  .bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel 
37.  14  and  I  shall  place  you  in  your  own  laud 

37.  21  I  will,  .bring  them  into  their  own  land 

38.  18  when  Gog  shall  come  against  the  land  of 

38.  19  shall  be  a  great  shaking  in  the  land  of  I. 
39. 26  when  they  dwelt  safely  in  their  land,  and 

39.  28  I  have  gathered  them  unto  their  own  land 
Dan.  11.    9  the  king,  .shall  return  into  his  own  land 

11.  39  Thus  shall  he.  .divide  the  laud  for  gain 
Joel    1.  10  The  field  is  wasted,  the  land  mourneth 

2.  21  Fear  not,  O  land  ;  be  glad  and  rejoice:  for 
Amos  5.    2  she  is  forsaken  upon  her  land,  .none  to 
7.  11  be  led  away  captive  out  of  their  own  land 
7. 17  and  thy  land  shall  be  divided  by  line 
7.  17  die  in  a  polluted  laud,  .forth  of  his  land 
9. 15  I  will  plant  them  upon  their  laud,  and 
9. 15  out  of  then' land  whichlhavegiven  them 
Zeph.  1.    2  I  will . .  consume  all . .  from  off  the  land 

1.  3  I  will  cut  off  man  from  off  the  land,  saith 
Zech.  2.  12  inherit  Judah  his  portion  in  the  holy  land 

9.  16  crown,  lifted  up  as  an  ensign  upon  his  land 

2.Land,  earth,  country,  |hn  erets. 

Gen.    2.  11  which  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ha. 

2.  12  And  the  gold  of  that  land  (is)  good  :  there 
2.  13  that  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ethio. 
4.  16  in  the  land  of  Nod,  on  the  east  of  Eden 

10.  5  these  were  the  isles . .  divided  in  their  lands 
10. 10  Accad,  and  Calueh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar 
10.  11  Out  of  that  land  went  forth  Asshur,  and 

10.  31  These,  .in  their  lands,  after  their  nations 

11.  2  they  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar 

1 1.  28  Haran  died . .  in  the  land  of  his  nativity 

1 1. 31  they  went . .  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan 

12.  1  Get  thee,  .unto  a  land  that  I  will  show 
12.  5  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  they  came 
12.  5  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan' 
12.  6  through  thelandunto  the  place  of  Sichem 
12.  6  And  the  Canaanite  (was)  then  in  the  land 
12.  7  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land  :  and 
12.  10  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land :  and  Abr. 

12.  10  for  the  famine  (was)  grievous  in  the  land 

13.  6  the  land  was  not  able  to  bear  them,  that 
13.    7  and  the  Perizzite  dwelt  then  in  the  land 
13.   9  (Is)  not  the  whole  land  before  thee?  Sep. 
13.  10  like  the  land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  comest 
13.  12  Abram  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
13.  15  the  land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I 
13. 17  walkthrough  the  land,  in  the  length  of  it 
15.    7  brought  thee.,  to  give  thee  this  land  to 
15.  13  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  (that  is)  not  theirs 

15.  18  Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from 

16.  3  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

17.  8  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  all 
17.    8  all  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting 

19.  28  toward  all  the  land  of  the  plain,  and  beh. 
20. 15  Behold,  my  land  (is)  before  thee :  dwell 
21.  21  took  him  a  wife  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
21.  23  to  the  land  wherein  thou  hast  sojourned 
21.  32  they  returned  into  the  land  of  the  Philis. 

21.  34  sojourned  in  the  Philistines"  land  many 

22.  2  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  Moriah;  and 

23.  2  the  same  (is)  Hebron  in  the  land  of  Can. 
23.    7  bowed  himself  to  the  people  of  the  land 


Gen 23.  12  boweddown.. before thepeopleoftheland 
23.  13  in  the  audience  of  the  people  of  the  land 

23.  15  the  land  (is  worth)  four  hundred  shekels 
23. 19  the  same  (is)  Hebron  in  the  land  of  Can. 

24.  5  not  be  willing  to  follow  me  unto  this  land 
24.  5  unto  the  land  from  whence  thou  earnest 
24.  7  and  from  the  land  of  my  kindred,  and 
24.  7  saying,  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land 
24.  37  of  the  Canaanites,  in  whose  land  I  dwell 
26.  1  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land,  besides 
26.    2  in  the  land  which  I  shall  tell  thee  of 

26.   3  Sojourn  in  this  land,  and  I  will  be  with 
26.  12  Isaac  sowed  in  that  land,  and  received 

26.  22  For  now.  .we  shall  be  fruitful  in  the  land 

27.  46  of  the  daughters  of  the  land,  what  good 

28.  4  inherit  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger 
13  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will 

1  came  into  the  land  of  the  people  of  the  east 
3  Return  unto  the  land  of  thy  fathers,  and 
13  from  this  land,  and  return  unto  the  land 
iS  to  Isaac  his  father  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

3  to  Esau  his  brother,  unto  the  land  of  Seir 

18  Shechem,  winch  (is)  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
1  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land 

10  the  land  shall  be  before  you;  dwell  and 

21  the  land,  and  trade  therein ;  for  the  land 
30  stink  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

6  to  Luz,  which  (is)  in  the  laud  of  Canaan 
12  the  land  which  I  gave  Abraham  and  Isaac 

12  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I  give  the  land 

22  came  to  pass,  when  Israel  dwelt  in  that  1. 

5  were  born  unto  him  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

6  which  he  had  got  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

7  the  laud  wherein  they  were  strangerscould 

16  the  dukes,  .of  Eliphaz  in  the  land  of  Edoin 

17  the  dukes,  .of  Reuel  in  the  land  of  Edont 

20  of  Seir  the  Horite,  who  inhabited  the  land 

21  the  children  of  Seir  in  the  land  of  Edom 

30  these,  .among  their  dukes  in  the  land  of 

31  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom 
34  Husham  of  the  land  of  Temaui  reigned 
43  their  habitations  in  the  land  of  their  poss. 

1  dweltin  the  land,  .in  the  land  of  Canaan 
1 5  stolen  awayiout  of  the  land  of  the  Hebrews 

19  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for 

29  plenty  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

30  plenty  shall  be  forgotten  in  the  land  of  E. 

30  and  the  famine  shall  consume  the  land 

31  plenty  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land  by 

33  let  Pharaoh-  .set  him  over  the  land  of  E. 

34  let  him  appoiut  officers  over  the  land,  and 
34  take  up  the  fifth  part  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
36  that  food  shall  be  for  store  to  the  land  ag. 
36  shall  be  in  the  land  of  Egypt ;  that  the  laud 
41 1  have  set  thee  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

43  and  made  him . .  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

44  liftuphishandor  foot  in  all  the  land  of  E. 

45  And  Joseph  went  out  over,  .the  land  of  E. 

46  and  went  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt 
48  which  were  iu  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  laid 

52  hath  caused  me  to  be  fruitful  iu  the  land 

53  plenteousness  that  was  in  the  land  of  Eg, 

54  was  in  all  lands ;  but  in  all  the  land  of  E. 

55  when  all  the  land  of  Egypt  was  famished 

56  the  famine  waxed  sore  in  the  land  of  Eg. 

57  that  the  famine  was  (so)  sore  in  all  lands 

5  for  the  famine  was  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

6  Joseph  (was)  the  governor  over  the  land 

6  that  sold  to  all  the  people  of  the  laud  :  and 

7  From  the  land  of  Canaan  to  buy  food 
9,  12  to  see  the  nakedness  of  the  laud  ye  are 

13  the  sons  of  one  man  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

29  they  came  unto  Jacob,  .unto  the  land  of 

30  The  man,  (who  is)  the  lord  of  the  land 

32  this  day  with  our  father  in  the  land  of  C. 
34  your  brother,  .ye  shall  traffic  in  the  land 

1  And  the  famine  (was)  sore  in  the  land 

11  take  of  the  best  fruits  in  the  land  in  your 

8  brought  again  unto  thee  out  of  the  land 
6  these  two  years,  .the  famine,  .in  the  land 
8  and  a  ruler  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 

10  thou  shalt  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen 

17  and  go,  get  you  unto  the  land  of  Canaan 

18  will  give  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  Eg. 

18  and  ye  shall  eat  the  fat  of  the  land 

19  take  you  wagons  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

20  the  good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  (is)  yours 

25  came  into  the  laud  of  Canaan  unto  Jacob 

26  he  (is)  governor  over  all  the  laud  of  Egypt 
6  they  had  gotten  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

12  Er  and  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
20  unto  Joseph  in  the  land  of  Egypt  were 
28  and  they  came  into  the  laud  of  Goshen 

31  brethren,  .which  (were)  in  the  land  of  C. 
34  that  ye  may  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen 

1  all.  .are  come  out  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
1  and,  behold,  they  (are)  in  the  land  of  Go. 

4  For  to  sojourn  in  the  land  are  we  come 
4  the  famine  (is)  sore  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
4  thy  servants  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen 
6  The  land  of  Egypt  (is)  before  thee 
6  in  the  best  of  the  land  make  thy  father 
6  iu  the  land  of  Goshen  let  them  dwell 

11  gave  them  a  possession  in  the  laud  of  Eg. 
11  best  of  the  land,  in  the  laud  of  Rameses 

13  And  (there  was)  no  bread  in  all  the  land 
13  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  (all)  the  land  of  Ca. 
14,  15  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land 
20  Joseph  bought,  .so  the  land  became  i'lia. 

27  Israel  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the 

28  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen 
3  appeared  unto  me  at  Luz  iu  the  bind  of 


28. 
29. 
31- 
3i- 
3i- 
32- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36- 
36- 
3<5- 
37- 
40. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 


41. 
41. 
41. 


43- 
43- 
44- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
48. 


LAND 


585 


LAND 


Gen.  48, 
■  48 


49. 

49. 
50. 

5°- 
50. 
5°- 
So- 
50. 
Exod.  1. 


4  will  give  this  laud  to  thy  seed  after  thee 

5  which  were  born  unto  thee  in  the  land  of 
7  Rachel  died  by  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

22  bring  you  again  unto  the  land  of  your  fa. 
15  he  saw.,  the  land  that  (it  was)  pleasant 
30  before  Mature,  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  wh. 
5  I  have  digged  forme  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

7  and  all  tlie  elders  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

8  their  herds,  they  left  in  the  land  of  Gos. 

11  And  when  the  inhabitants  of  theland,  the 
13  his  sons  carried  him  into  the  land  of  Can. 

24  out  of  this  laud  unto  the  land  which  he  s. 

7  mighty;  and  the  laud  was  filled  with  them 

10  fight.,  and  (so)  get  them  up  out  of  the  land 

15  Hoses  fled.. and  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Midian 
22  I  have  been  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land 

8  out  of  that  land  unto  a  good  land  and  a 

8,  17  unto  aland  flowing  with  milkand  honey 
17  bring  you.  .unto  the  landof  the  Canaanites 

20  Moses,  .returned  to  theland  of  Egypt:and 
5  the  people  of  the  land  now  (are)  many,  and 

12  scattered  abroad  throughout  all  the  land 

1  with. . hand  shallhe  drive  them  out  of  his  1. 

4  to  give  them  the  laud  of  Canaan,  the  laud 

8  I  will  bring  you  in  uuto  the  land,  concern. 

11  the  children  of  Israel  go  out  of  his  laud 

13  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
26  the  children  of  Israel  from  the  land  of  E. 

25  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  land  of  E. 

2  send  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  his  land 

3  my  signs  and  my  wonders  in  the  landof  E. 

4  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt  by  great  judgm. 
19,  2i  blood  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

5  cause  frogs  to  come  up  upon  the  land  of  E. 

6  frogs  came  up,  and  covered  the  land  of  E. 

7  brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 

14  together  upon  heaps ;  and  the  land  stank 

16  thy  rod,  and  smite  the  dust  of  the  land 

16  itmay  become  lice  throughout  all  the  laud 

17  land  became  lice  throughout  all  the  laud 
22  will  sever  in  that  day  the  land  of  Goshen 

24  into  all  the  land  of  Egypt :  the  land  was 

25  Go  ye,  sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  land 

5  saying.  .Lord  shall  do  this  tiling  in  the  1. 

9  become  small  dust  in  all  the  laud  of  Egypt 

9,  22,  25  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

22  there  may  be  hail  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

23  Lord  rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 

24  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  since  it  became  a 

26  Only  in  the  landof  Goshen,  where  the  eh. 

12  Stretch,  .thine  hand  over  the  land  of  Eg. 
12  they  may  come  up  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 

12  and  eat  every  herb  of  the  land,  .all  that 

13  stretched  forth  his  rod  over  the  land  of  E. 

13  brought  an  east  wind  upon  the  land  all 

14  the  locusts  went  up  overall  the  land  of  E. 

15  they  covered,  .so that  the  land  was  dark. 
15  they  did  eat  every  herb  of  the  land,  and 
15  there  remained  not ..  through  all  the  land 

21  there  may  be  darkness  over  the  land  of  E. 

22  a  thick  darkness  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt 
3  Moses  (was)  very  great  in  the  land  of  Eg. 

5  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall 

6  a  great  cry  throughout  all  the  land  of  E. 
9  wonders  maybe  multiplied  in  the  land  of  E. 

io  let  the  children  of  Israel  go  out  of  his  1. 
1  unto  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  land  of  E. 

12  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of  Egypt  this 
12,  29  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

13  destroy  (you),  when  I  smite  the  land  of  E. 
17  brought  your  armies  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
19  whether  he  be  a  stranger,  or  born  in  the  1. 

25  when  ye  be  come  to  the  land  which  the  L. 
33  might  send  them  out  of  the  laud  iu  haste 

41  the  hosts,  .went  out  from  the  land  of  E. 

42  for  bringing  them  out  from  the  land  of  E. 
48  he  shall  be  as  one  that  is  born  in  the  land 
51  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  by  their  armies 

5,  11  bring  thee  into  the  land  of  the  Cana. 

5  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  that 
15  slewall  the  first  born  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

17  not.,  the  way  of  theland  of  the  PhilistineB 

18  went  up  harnessed  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
3  They  (are)  entangled  in  the  land  the  wil. 
1  after  their  departing  out  of  the  land  r '  E. 
3  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  E 

6  brought  you  out  from  the  land  of  Egypt 

32  Lord  hath  brought  you  forth  from  the  I. 
-^  eat.  .until  they  came  to  a  land  inhabited 
_,j  unto  the  borders  of  the  land  of  Canaan 

3  I  have  been  an  alien  in  a  strange  land 

27  and  he  went  his  way  into  Ms  owu  land 

1  were  gone  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

2  winch  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land 
21  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

9  seeing  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  E. 

10  six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  land,  and  sh. 

26  shall  nothing  cast  their  young,  .in  thy  1. 

29  lest  the  land  become  desolate,  and  the  b. 

30  until  thou  be  increased,  and  inherit  the  la. 

31  I  will  deliver  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

33  They  shall  not  dwell  in  thy  land,  lest  they 
46  that  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land 
1,  23  brought  us  up  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt 
4,  8  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

7  which  thou  broughtest  out  of  the  land  of 

11  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  great  power 
13  all  this  land  that  I  have  spoken  of  will  I 

1  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  unto  the  land 

3  Unto  a  laud  flowing  with  milk  and  honey 
12,  15  covenant  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  1. 
24  neither  shall  any  man  desiro  thy  land 

74 


Lev. 


25- 
25- 

25- 

25. 
25- 

25- 

25- 
25- 
25. 
25- 

25- 

25- 

25- 

25- 

25- 

26. 

26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26 
27- 

Xum.  1. 

3- 
8. 
9- 
9- 


45  Lord  that  bringeth  you  up  out  of  the  land 
34  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  Canaan 
34  in  a  house  of  the  land  of  your  possession 

22  all  their  iniquities  unto  a  land  not  iuhabi. 
3  After  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

3  and  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
25  the  land  is  defiled :  therefore  I  do  visit 
25  the  land  itself  vomiteth  out  her  inhabita. 
27  these  abominations  have  the  men  of  the  1. 

27  (were)  before  you,  and  the  land  is  defiled 

28  That  the  land  spue  not  you  out  also,  when 
9  when  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  laud 

23  And  when  ye  shall  come  into  the  land,  and 

29  lest  the  land  fall  to  whoredom,  and  the  1. 

33  if  a  stranger  sojourn  witli  thee  in  your  1. 

34  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
36  which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Eg. 

2  the  people  of  the  land  shall  stone  him  with 

4  if  the  people  of  the  land  do  any  ways  hide 
22  that  the  land,  whither  I  bring  you  to  dw. 

24  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
24  neither  shall  ye  make,  .(thereof)  in  yourl. 
33  That  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
10  When  ye  be  come  into  theland  which  I 

22  when  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  land 
39  ye  have  gathered  in  the  fruit  of  the  land 
43  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of 

2  hind  which  I  give  you,  then  shall  the  land 

4  shall  be  a  sabbath  of  rest  unto  the  land,  a 

5  not  reap,  .it  is  a  year  of  rest  unto  the  land 

6  the  sabbath  of  the  land  shall  be  meat  for 

7  for  the  beast  that  (are)  in  thy  land,  shall 
9  trumpet  sound  throughout  all  your  land 

10  proclaim  liberty  throughout-  .the  land 
iS  and  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  in  safety 

19  the  land  shall  yield  her  fruit,  and  ye  shall 

23  The  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  ever:  for 

23  the  land  (is)  mine ;  for  ye  (are)  strangers 

24  And  in  all  the  land  of  your  possession  ye 
24  ye  shall  grant  a  redemption  for  the  land 
38  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  to  give  you  theland 
42,  55  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
45  families,  .which  they  begat  in  your  land 

1  set  up  (any)  image  of  stone  in  your  land 

4  the  land  shall  yield  her  increase,  and  the 

5  shall  eat.  .and  dwell  in  your  land  safely 

6  I  will  give  peace  in  the  land,  and  ye  shall 
6  and  I  will  rid  evil  beasts  out  «f  fhe  land 
6  neither  shall  the  sword  go  through  yourl. 

13  which  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  land 

20  your  land  shall  not  yield  her  increase 
20  neither  shall  the  trees  of  the  land  yield 

32  And  I  will  bring  the  land  into  desolation 

33  yourlaud  shall  be  desolate,  and  your  cities 

34  Then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaths 
34  as  long  as.  .ye  (be)  in  your  enemies'  land 
34  then  shall  the  land  rest,  and  enjoy  her 
36  a  faintness  into  their  hearts  in  the  lands 

38  the  land  of  your  enemies  shall  eat  you  up 

39  in  their  iniquity  in  your  enemies'  lands 

41  have  brought  them  into  the  land  of  their 

42  my  covenant,  .and  I  will  remember  the  1. 

43  The  land  also  shall  be  left  of  them,  and 

44  when  they  bein  the  landof  their  enemies 

45  whom  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of 

24  to  him  to  whom  the  possession  of  the  land 

30  tithe  of  the  land.,  of  the  seed  of  theland 
1  after  they  were  come  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

13  that  I  smote  all  the  first  born  in  the  land 
17  that  I  smote  every  first  born  in  the  land 

1  after  they  were  come  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

14  ordinance,  .for  him  that  was.  .in theland 
9  If  ye  go  to  war  in  your  land  against  the 

30  I  will  depart  to  mine  own  land,  and  to  my 

2  that  they  may  search  the  land  of  Canaan 

16  men  which  Moses  sent  to  spy  out  the  land 

17  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  out  the  land  of  C 

18  see  the  land,  what  it  (is) ;  and  the  people 

19  what  the  land  ^is)  that  they  dwell  in  wh. 

20  what  the  land  (is),  whether  it  (be)  fat  or 

20  courage,  and  bring  of  the  fruit  of  the  land 

21  searched  the  land  from  the  wilderness  of 

25  they  returned  from  searching  of  the  land 

26  and  showed  them  the  fruit  of  the  land 

27  We  came  unto  the  land  whither  thou  sent. 

28  people  (lie)  strong  that  dwell  in  the  land 

29  Amalekites  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  south 
32  they  brought  up  an  evil  report  of  theland 
32  The  land,  through  which  we  have  gone  to 
32  (is)  a  land  that  ealeth  up  the  inhabitants 

2  Would  God  that  we  had  died  In  the  land 

3  hath  the  Lord  brought  us  unto  this  land 

6  (which  were)  of  them,  .searched  the  laud 

7  The  land,  .(is)  an  exceeding  good  land 

8  then  he  will  bring  us  into  this  land,  and 

8  a  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

9  neither  fear  ye  the  people  of  the  land 

14  will  tell  (it)  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  land 
16  into  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  them 

23  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathers 

24  him  will  I  bring  into  the  land  whereunto 

30  Doubtless  ye  shall  not  come  into  the  land 

31  they  shall  know  the  land  which  ye  have 
34  of  the  days  in  which  ye  searched  theland 
36  men  which  Moses  sent  to  search  the  land 

36  by  bringing  up  a  slander  upon  the  land 

37  did  bring  up  the  evil  report  upon  the  land 

38  of  the  men  that  went  to  search  the  land 
2  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  your 

18  When  ye  come  into  the  land  whither  I 

19  when  ye  eat  of  the  bread  of  the  land,  ye 
41  which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  E. 


Kumi6.  13  hast  brought  us  up  out  of  a  land  that 
16.  14  thou  hast  not  brought  us  into  a  land 
18.  13  whatsoever  is  fii-st  ripe  in  the  laud,  which 
18.  20  shalt  have  no  inheritance  in  their  land 
20.  12  notbring.. into  the  laud  which  I  have  given 
20.  23  mount  Hor,  by  the  coast  of  the  landof  E. 

20.  24  he  shall  not  euter  into  the  land  which  I 

21.  4  of  the  Red  sea,  to  compass  the  land  of  E. 
21.  22  Let  me  pass  through  thy  land  :  we  will  not 
21.  24  possessed  his  laud  from  Arnon  unto  Jab. 
21.  26  taken  all  his  Land  out  of  his  hand,  even 
21.  31  Israel  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  Amorites 
21.  34  and  all  his  people,  and  his  land  ;  and  thou 

21.  35  none  left  him.  .and  they  possessed  his  land 

22.  5  Pethor,  which  (is)  by  the  river  of  the  land 
22.  6  and  (that)  I  may  drive  them  out  of  the  1. 
22.  13  Get  you  into  your  laud;  for  the  Lord  ref. 
26.    4  which  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

19  and  Erand  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  Can. 
53  Unto  these  the  laud  shall  be  divided  for 
55  Notwithstandingtheland  shall  be  divided 
:  2  see  the  land  which  I  have  given  unto  the 

1  they  saw  the  land  of  Jazer,  and  the  land 

4  the  country,  .(is)  a  land  for  cattle,  and 

5  let  this  land  be  given  unto  thy  servants 

7  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  hath  given 

8  when  I  sent  them  from  Kadesh..to  see  the  1. 

9  For  when  they  went  up . .  and  saw  the  land 
9  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  had  given 

17  because  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
22  And  the  land  be  subdued  before  the  Lord 
22  this  land  shall  be  your  possession  before 
29  and  the  land  shall  be  subdued  before  you 

29  then  ye  shall  give  them  the  land  of  Gilead 

30  have  possessions  among  you  in  the  land 

32  before  the  Lord  into  the  land  of  Canaan 

33  land,  with  the  cities  thereof  in  the  coasts 
i  which  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

37  mount  Hor,  in  the  edge  of  the  laud  of  E. 

38  Israel  were  come  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
40  dwelt  in  the  south  in  the  laud  of  Canaan 

51  passed  over  Jordan  into  theland  of  Canaan 

52  drive  out  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

53  ye  shall  dispossess,  .the  land,  and  dwell 

53  for  I  have  given  you  the  land  to  possess 

54  ye  shall  divide  the  land  by  lot  for  an  inh. 

55  not  drive  out  tile  inhabitants  of  the  land 
55  shall  vex  you  in  the  land  wherein  ye  dwell 

2  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  this  (is)  the  land 
2  the  land  of  Canaan,  with  the  coasts  thereof 

12  your  land  with  the  coasts  thereof  round 

13  This  (is)  the  land  which  ye  shall  inherit 

17  men  which  shall  divide  the  land  unto  you 

18  prince,  .to  divide  the  land  by  inheritance 
29  unto  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  land  of 
10  When  ye  be  come  over  Jordan  into  the  1. 

14  three  cities  shall  ye  give  in  the  land  of  C. 
28  shall  return  into  the  land  of  his  possession 

32  he  should  come  again  to  dwell  in  the  land 

33  ye  shall  not  pollute  the  laud  wherein  ye 
33forblooditdefileththeland:  and  the  laud 

34  Defile  not  therefore  the  land  which  ye 
2  Lord  commanded  mylordtogive  theland 

Deut  1.  5  On  this  side  Jordan,  in  the  land  of  Moab 
1.  7  to  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  and  unto  L. 
1.  8  Behold,  I  have  set  the  land  before  you:  go 
t.  8  go  in  and  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord 
1.  21  Lord  thy  God  hath  set  the  land  before 
1.  22  they  shall  search  us  out  theland,  and  br. 
1.  25  they  took  of  the  fruit  of  the  land  in  their 
1.  25  a  good  land  which  the  LORD  our  God  doth 

1.  27  he  hath  brought  us  forth  out  of  the  land 
1  35  of  this  evil  generation  see  that  good  land 
1. 36  to  him  will  I  give  the  land  that  he  hath 

2.  5  I  will  not  give  you  of  their  land,  no,  not 
2.   9  will  not  give  thee  of  their  land,  .a  posses. 
2.  12  as  Israel  did  unto  the  land  of  his  posses. 
2.  19  I  will  not  give  thee  of  the  land  of  the  ch. 
2.  20  That  also  was  accounted  a  land  of  giants 
2.  24  Amorite,  king  of  Heshbon,  and  his  land 
2.  27  Let  me  pass  through  thy  land :  I  will  go 
2.  29  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  our  God 
2.  31  I  have  begun  to  give  Sihon  and  his  land 
2.  31  possess,  that  thou  mayest  inherit  his  land 

2.  37  Only  unto  the  land  of  the  children  of  Am. 

3.  2  all  his  people,  and  hisland,  into  thy  hand 
3.    8  the  land  that  (was)  on  this  side  Jordan 
3.  12  thatland,(which)wepossessedatthattime 
3.  13  Bashan,  which  was  called  the  land  of  gi. 
3.  18  God  hath  given  you  this  land  to  possess 
3.  20  they  also  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord 

3.  25  let  me  go  over  and  seethe  good  land  that 
3. 28  to  inherit  the  land  which  thou  shalt  see 

4.  1  go  in  and  possess  the  land  which  the  Lo. 
4.  5  so  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
4.  14  the  land  whither  ye  go  over  to  possess  it 
4.  21  I  should  not  go  in  unto  that  good  land 
4.  22  I  must  die  in  this  land,  I  must  not  goover 
4.  22  shall  go  over,  and  possess  that  good  land 
4.  25  ye  shall  have  remained  long  in  the  land 
4.  26  shall  soon  utterly  perish  from  off  theland 
4.  38  to  give  thee  theirland  (for)  an  inheritance 
4.  46  the  land  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites 

4.  47  they  possessed  his  land,  and  the  land  of 

5.  6  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
5.  15  that  thou  wast  a  servantin  the  ImdofE. 
5.  31  in  the  land  which  I  give  them  to  possess 

5.  "  ye  may  prolong,  .days  in  the  land  which 
C    1  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
o.    3  the  land  thatflowethwithmilkandhoney 

6.  10  into  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  thy  f. 
6.  12  which  brought  thee  forth  out  of  the  land 


LAND 


58G 


LAND 


Dent.  6.  18  the  good  land  which  the  LORD  sware  unto 

6.  23  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  our  fathers 

7.  1  into  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess 

8.  1  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord  sware 
8.    7  into  a  good  land  ;  a  land  of  brooks  of  wa. 
8.   8  A  laud  of  wheat,  .a  land  of  oil  olive  aud 
8.    9  A  land  wherein  thou  shalt  eat  bread  with 
8.    9  a  land  whose  stones  (are)  iron,  aud  out  of 
8.  10  for  the  good  land  which  he  hath  given 

8.  14  which  brought  thee  forth  out  of  the  land  of 

4  hath  brought  uie  in  to  possess  this  land 

5  dost  thou  go  to  possess  their  land  ;  but 

6  give tli  thee  not  this  good  land  to  possess 

7  thou  didst  depart  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
23  Go  up  and  possess  the  land  which  I  have 
28  Lest  the  land  whence  thou  broughtest  us 

28  into  the  land  which  he  promised  them 

7  and . .  to  Jotbath,  a  land  of  rivers  of  waters 
11  that  they  may  go  in  and  possess  the  land 

19  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

3  the  king  of  Egypt,  and  unto  all  his  land 

8  go  in  and  possess  the  land  whither  ye  go 

9  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
10  the  land,  whither  thou  goest  in  to  possess 

10  (is)  not  as  the  laud  of  Egypt,  from  whence 

1 1  But  the  land,  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 

1 1  (is)  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys,  (and)  drink. 

12  A  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth 

14  I  will  give . .  the  rain  of  your  land  in  his 
17  ye  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good  land 
25  upon  all  the  land  that  ye  shall  tread  upon 

29  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

30  in  the  land  of  the  Cauaauites, which  dwell 

31  the  land  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth 
1  which  ye  shall  observe  to  do  in  the  land 

10  dwell  in  the  laud  which  the  Lord  your  G. 
29  succeedest  them,  and  dwellest  in  their  land 
5,  10  which  brought . .  ou  t  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

4  Lord  shall  greatly  bless  thee  in  the  land 

7  land  which  the  Lord  thy  Godgiveth  thee 

1 1  the  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land 

1 1  to  thy  poor,  and  to  thy  needy,  in  thy  land 

15  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  the  land  of 
3,  3  earnest  forth  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt 

20  inherit  the  laud  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
14  unto  the  land  which  the  LORD  thy  God 

9  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God 

1  whose  land  the  LORD  thy  God  giveth  thee 

2  cities  for  thee  in  the  midst  of  thy  land 

3  divide  the  coasts  of  thy  land,  which  the  L. 

8  give  thee  all  the  laud  which  he  promised 
10  That  innocent  blood  be  not  shed  in  thy  1. 
14  which  thou  shalt  inherit  in  the  land  that 

1  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

7  because  thou  wast  a  stranger  in  Iris  land 

20  in  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess 

4  thou  shalt  not  cause  the  land  to  sin,  which 

14  strangers  that  (are)  in  thy  land  within  thy 
22  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
19  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

1  when  thou  (art)  come  in  unto  the  land 

2  thy  land  that  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

9  hath  given  us  this  land . .  a  land  that  now. 

15  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 
2,  3  unto  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God 

3  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

8  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 

12  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land  in  his  season 
24  Lord  shall  make  the  rain  of  thy  land  po. 
52,  52  all  thy  gates,  .throughout  all  thy  land 

1  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  land  of  Moab 

2  did  before  your  eyes  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
2  unto  all  his  servants,  and  unto  all  his  land 
8  we  tooktheirlaud.and  gave  it  foran  inn. 

16  how  we  have  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
22  stranger  that  shall  come  from  a  far  land 

22  when  they  see  the  plagues  of  that  land 

23  the  whole  land  thereof  (is)  brimstone,  and" 

24  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this  land? 

25  when  he  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  1. 

27  the  anger,  .was  kindled  against  this  land 

28  cast  them  into  another  land,  as.  .this  day 

5  into  the  land  which  thy  fathers  possessed 
16  God  shall  bless  thee  in  the  land  whither 

4  unto  the  land  of  them,  whom  he  destroyed 
7  thou  must  go  with  this  people  unto  the  1. 

16  after  the  gods  of  the  strangers  of  the  land 

21  brought  them  into  the  land  which  I  sware 
23  bring,  .into  the  land  which  I  sware  unto 

10  He  found  him  in  a  desert  land,  and  in  the 
49  mount  NebOj  which  (is)  in  the  land  of  M. 
49  behold  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  I  mive 
52  Yet  thou  shalt  see  the  land  before  (thee) 
52  unto  the  hind  which  I  give  the  children 

13  Blessed  of  the  Lord  (be)  his  land,  for  the 
28  fountain  of  Jacob,  .upon  aland  of  corn  and 

1  LORD  Bhowea  him  all  the  land  of  Gilead 

2  the  land  of  Ephraim.  and  Manasseh,  and 
2  the  land  of  Judah,  unto  the  utmost  sea 

4  This  (is)  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  A. 

5  So  Moses,  .died  therein  the  land  of  Moab 

6  he  buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the  land  of 

11  sent  him  tn  do  in  the  land  of  Egypt  to  P. 
1 1  and  tn  all  his  servants,  and  to  all  his  land 

2  initi.  the  land  which  I  do  give  to  them 
4  all  the  land  of  the  Hittites,  and  unto  the 
6  thou  divide  for  an  inheritance  the  land 
11  to  go  in  to  possess  the  land,  which  the  L. 

13  Lord  your  God  .  .hath  givenyon  this  land 

14  shall  remain  m  the  land  which  Moses  gave 

15  possessed  the  land  which  the  Lord  your 
15  ye  shall  return  unto  the  land  of  yourpos. 


Josh. 


16. 
16. 
*7- 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19, 
19. 
19. 
19. 
20. 
23- 
23. 
24. 
24. 
24. 

25- 

26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 

3°- 
3°- 
3'- 
3i- 
3* 
3i- 
3i- 
32. 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32. 
33- 
33- 
34- 
.34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 


Josh.  2.  1  Go  view  the  land,  even  Jericho.  And  they 
2.  9  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  land 
2.  9  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  faint  bee. 
2.  14  when  the  Lord  hath  given  us  the  land 
2.  18  we  come  into  the  laud,  thou  shalt  bind  this 
2.  24  hath  delivered  into  our  hands  all  the  land 
6  that  he  would  not  show  them  the  land 

6  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

11  they  did  eat  of  the  old  corn  of  the  laud 

1 2  they  had  eaten  of  the  old  com  of  the  land 
12  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  land  of  Canaan  that 

9  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  hear 
1  and  his  people,  and  his  city,  and  his  land 
24  servant  Moses  to  give  you  all  the  land 

24  destroy  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  from 
42  all  these  kings  and  their  land  did  Joshua 

3  the  Hivite  under  Hernion  iu  the  land  of 
16  Joshua  took  all  that  laud,  the  hills,  and 
16  all  the  land  of  Goshen,  and  the  valley,  and 

22  none,  .left  in  the  land  of  the  children  of 

23  Joshua  took  the  whole  land . .  And  the  land 
1  kings  of  the  land,  .their  land  on  the  other 

1  there  remaineth  yetverymuch  land  to  be 

2  This  (is)  the  land  that  yet  remaineth  :  all 

4  all  the  land  of  the-Canaanites,  and  Mearah 

5  the  land  of  the  Giblites,  and  all  Lebanon 

7  divide  this  land  for  an  inheritance  unto 

25  half  the  land  of  the  children  of  Amnion 
1  Israel  inherited  in  the  land  of  Canaan 

4  gave  no  part  unto  the  Levites  in  the  land 

5  so.  .Israel  did,  and  they  divided  the  land 

7  from  Kadesh-barnea  to  espy  out  the  land 
9  Surely  the  land  whereon  thy  feet  have 

15  And  the  land  had  rest  from  war 

19  thou  hast  given  me  a  south  land ;  give  me 

5  besides  the  land  of  Gilead  and  Bashau 

6  Manasseh's  sons  had  the  land  of  Gilead 

8  Manasseh  had  the  land  of  Tappuah :  but 
12  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that  land 

15  in  the  laud  of  the  Perizzites  and  of  the 

16  all  the  Canaanites  that  dwell  in  the  land 
1  And  the  laud  was  subdued  before  them 

3  long  (are)  ye  slack  to.  .possess  the  land 
ib.  4  go  through  the  laud,  and  describe  it  ace. 
1?.  6  Ye  shall  therefore  describe  the  land  (into) 
18.  8  charged  them  that  went  to  describe  the  la. 
18.  8  Go  and  walk  through  the  laud,  and  desc. 
18.  9  men  went  and  passed  through  the  land 
18.  10  Joshua  divided  the  land  unto  the  children 
19  49  of  dividing  the  land  for  inheritance  by 

21.  2  at  Shiloh  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  saying 
21. 43  Lord  gave  unto  Israel  all  the  land  which 

22.  4  unto  the  land  of  your  possession,  which 
22.  9  out  of  Shiloh,  which  (is)  in  the  land  of  C. 
22.  9  to  the  land  of  their  possession,  whereof 
22  10  borders  of  Jordan,  that  (are)  in  the  land 
22.  11  built  an  altar  over  against  the  land  of  C. 
22.  13,  15  tribe  of  Manasseh,  into  the  land  of  G. 
22.  ig  if  the  land  of  your  possession  (be)  unclean 
22  19  pass  ye  over  unto  the  land  of  the  possess. 
22.  32  out  of  the  land  of  Gilead,  uuto  the  land  of 

22.  33  to  destroy  the  land  wherein  the  children 
23-   5  ye  shall  possess  their  land,  as  the  Lord 

23.  16  the  good  land  which  he  hath  given  unto 

24.  3  led  him  throughout  all  the  land  of  Canaan 
24.  8  1  brought  you  into  the  land  of  the  Amor. 
24.  8  I  gave . .  that  ye  might  possess  their  land 
•24,  13  I  have  given  you  a  land  for  which  ye  did 
24. 15  the  gods  of  the  Amorites,  in  whose  lend 
24  17  brought.,  our  fathers  out  of  the  land  ofE. 
24.  18  even  the  Amorites  which  dwelt  in  the  land 

Judg  1.  2  behold,  I  have  delivered  the  land  into  his 
1.  15  thou  hast  given  me  asouth  laud ;  give  me 
1  26  the  man  went  into  the  land  of  the  Hittites 

1.  27  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that  land 
1  32,  33  Canaanites,  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

2.  1  brought  you  unto  the  land  which  I  sware 
2.   2  league  with  the  inhabitants  of  this  land 
2.    6  unto  his  inheritance  to  possess  the  land 
2. 12  which  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

11  the  land  had  rest  forty  years.    And  Oth. 

30  And  the  land  had  rest  fourscore  years 

31  And  the  laud  had  rest  forty  years 
5  they  entered  into  the  land  to  destroy  it 

9  from  before  you,  and  gave  you  their  land 
10  the  gods  of  the  Amorites,  in  whose  land 
37  people  down  by  the  middle  of  the  land 

10.   4  thirty  cities,  .which  (are)  in  the  land  of 

10.  8  in  the  land  of  the  Amorites,  which  (is)  in 

11.  3  Jephthah  fled,  .and  dwelt  in  the  land  of 
11.  5  to  fetch  Jephthah  out  of  the  land  of  Tob 
11.  12  art  come  against  me  to  fight  in  my  land 
11. 13  Israel  took  away  my  land,  when  they  came 
11.  15  the  land  of  Moab,  nor  the  land  of  the  ch. 
11.  17  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  pass  through  thy  land 
11.  18  compassed  the  land  of  Edom,  and  the  land 
11.  18  came  by  the  east  side  of  the  land  of  Moab 
11.  19  Let  us  pass,  we  pray  thee,  through  thy  1. 

11.  21  possessed  all  the  land  of  the  Amorites 

12.  15  buried  in  Pirathon  in  the  land  of  Ephraim 
18.  2  sent.. to  spy  out  the  laud,  and  to  search 
18.  2  they  said  unto  them,  Go,  search  the  land 
18.  7  and  (there  was)  no  magistrate  in  the  land 
18.  9  we  have  seen  the  land,  and,  behold,  it  (is) 
18.  9  to  go,  (and)  to  enter  to  possess  the  laud 
18.  10  uuto  a  people  secure,  and  to  a  large  land 
18.  17  men  that  went  to  spy  out  the  land  went 

18.  30  until  the  day  of  the  captivity  of  the  land 

19.  30  Israel  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

20.  1  to  Beer-sheba,  with  the  land  of  Gilead 
2i.  12  to  Shiloh,  which  (is)  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
si.  ai  every  man..and  go  Co  theland  of  Benjamin 


:Sa. 


>Sa, 


Ki. 


Ruth  1.    1  that  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land 

1.  7  their  way  to  return  unto  the  land  of  Judah 
11  thy  mother,  and  the  land  of  thy  nativity 
5  and  unages  of  your  mice  that  mar  the  land 
5  from  off  your  gods,  and  from  off  your  land 
4  passed  through  the  land  of  Shalisha,  but 
4  they  passed  through  the  land  of  Shalini 

4  passed  through  the  land  of  the  Ben  jamites 

5  when  they  were  come  to  the  land  of  Zuph 

16  send  thee  a  man  out  of  the  land  of  Benja. 

6  your  fathers  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

3  blew  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the  land 

7  over  Jordan  to  the  land  of  Gad  and  Gilead 

17  leadeth  to)  Ophrah,  unto  the  land  of  S. 
19  found  throughout  all  the  land  of  Israel 

25  And  all  (they  of)  the  laud  came  to  a  wood 
29  My  father  hath  troubled  the  land  :  see,  I 
11  (Is)  not  this  David  the  king  of  the  land ! 

5  depart,  and  get.  .into  the  land  of  Judah 
23  if  he  be  iu  the  land,  that  I  will  search  him 
27  the  Philistines  have  invaded  the  land 

1  escape  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 

8  for  those,  .of  old  the  inhabitants  of  the  1. 

8  goest  to  Shur,  even  unto  the  land  of  Egypt 

9  David  smote  the  laud,  and  left  neither 
3,  9  spirits,  aud  the  wizards,  out  of  the  land 

11  to  return  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 
16  the  land  of  the  Philistines  and  out  of  the  1. 

y  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round  about 

12  on  his  behalf,  saying,  Whose  (is)  the  land? 

6  Jebusites,  the  inhabitants  of  the  laud 
23  for  thy  land,  before  thy  people,  which  thou 

2  came  into  the  land  of  the  children  of  Am. 

4  Oh  that  I  were  made  judge  in  the  land,  that 

26  and  Absalom  pitched  in  the  land  of  Gilead 
9  now  he  is  fled  outof  the  land  for  Absalom 

14  after  that  God  was  entreated  for  the  land 
6  to  Gilead,  and  to  the  laud  of  Tahtim-ho. 

8  when  they  had  gone  through  all  the  land 

13  shall,  .famine  come  unto  thee  in  thy  land 
13  their  be  three  days'  pestilence  in  thy  land 

25  the  Lord  was  entreated  for  the  land,  and 

10  to  him . .  Soehohj  and  all  the  land  of  Hepher 
19  and.  .the  only  officer  which  (was)  in  the  1. 
21  from  the  river  unto  the  land  of  the  Phil. 

1  Israel  were  come  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

9  when  they  came  outof  the  land  of  Egypt 
21  he  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
$6  give  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou  hast 
37  If  there  be  in  the  land  famine,  if  there  be 
37  if  then*  enemy  besiege  them  in  the  land  of 

46  away  captives  uuto  the  land  of  the  enemy 

47  land  whither  they  were  carried  captives 

47  land  of  them  that  carried  them  captives 

48  in  the  land  of  their  enemies,  which  led 
48  pray  unto  thee  toward  their  land  which 

8  hath  the  LORD  done  this  unto  this  land 

9  brought  forth  their  fathers  out  of  the  laud 

11  gave  Hiram  twenty  cities  in  the  laud  of  j 
13  called  them  the  land  of  Cabul  unto  this 

18  and  Tadnior  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  laud 

19  to  build,  .in  all  the  land  of  his  dominion 
2 1  that  were  left  after  them  in  the  land,  whom 

26  shore  of  the  Red  sea,  in  the  land  of  Edom 
6  true  report  that  I  heard  in  mine  own  land 

11.  18  appointed  him  victuals,  and  gave  him  land 

12.  28  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

14.  24  And  there  were  also  Sodomites  in  the  land 
15. 12  took  away  the  Sodomites  out  of  the  land 

15.  20  Cinneroth,  with  all  the  land  of  Naphtali 

17.  7  because  there  had  been  no  rain  in  the  land 

18.  5  G  o  into  the  land, unto  all  fountains  of  water 
18.    6  they  divided  the  laud  between  them,  to 

20.  7  the  king,  .called  all  the  elders  of  the  land 
22.  46  And  the  remnant. ..he  took  out  of  the  1. 

2  Ki.   3  27  from  him,  and  returned  to  (their  own)  land 

4.  38  (their  was)  a  dearth  in  the  laud ;  and  the 

5.  2  brought,  .out  of  the  land  of  Israel  a  little 

5.  4  said  the  maid  that  (is)  of  the  land  of  Israel 

6.  23  came  no  more  into  the  land  of  Israel 

8.  1  shall  also  come  upon  the  land  seven  years 
8.  2  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines  seven  years 
8.  3  that  the  woman  returned  out  of  the  land 
8.   6  since  the  day  that  she  left  the  land,  even 

10.  33  the  laud  of  Gilead,  the  Gadites,  and  the 

11.  3  And  Athaliah  did  reign  over  the  land 
11.  14  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  aud  blew 
11.  18  people  of  the  laud  went  into  the  house  of 
11. 19  the  guard,  and  all  the  people  of  the  land 
11,  20  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and 

13.  20  bands  of  the  Moabites  invaded  the  land  at 
15.  5  king's  son .  .judging  the  people  of  the  land 
15.  19  the  king  of  Assyria  came  against  the  laud 
15.  20  the  king,  .stayed  not  there  in  the  land 

15.  29  and  Galilee,  all  the  land  of  Naphtali,  and 

16.  15  burnt  offering  of  all  the  people  of  the  land 

17.  5  the  king . .  came  up  throughout  all  the  land 
17.  7  had  brought  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
17.  26,  26  not  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  laud 

17.  27  teach.. the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  laud 
17. 36  who  brought  you  up  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

18.  25  Go  up  against  this  land,  aud  destroy  it 
iS.  32  away  to  a  land  Uke  your  own  land,  a  land 
1 8. 32  a  land  of  bread . .  a  land  of  oil  olive  and  of 

18.  33  delivered  at  all  his  land  out  of  the  hand 

19.  7  hear.,  and  shall  return  to  his  own  land 
19.    7  cause,  .to  fall  by  the  sword  in  his  owi  land 
19.  11  kings  of  Assyria  have  done  to  all  lauds  by 
19.  17  have  destroyed  the  nations  and  their  lauds 
19.  37  and  they  escaped  into  the  land  of  Anne. 

21.  24  the  people  of  the  land  slew  all  them  that 
31.  24  the  people  of  the  land  made  Josiahhissou 


LAND 


587 


LAND 


b  Ki.23.  24  iu  the  land  of  Judah  anil  in  Jerusalem 
03.-  30  the  people  of  the  laud  took  Jehoahaz  the 
23.  33  at  Hiblah,  in  the  land  of  Hamath,  that  he 
23.  33  put  the  land  to  a  tribute  of  an  hundred 
23.  35  but  he  taxed  the  land  to  give  the  money 

23.  35  exacted . .  the  gold  of  the  people  of  the  land 

24.  7  came  not  again  any  more  out  of  his  land 

24.  14  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the  laud 
24. 15  the  mighty  of  the  laud;  (those)  carried  he 

25.  3  was  no  bread  for  the  people  of  the  laud 
35.  12  left  of  the  poor  of  the  land  (to  be)  viue 
25.  19  which  mustered  the  people  of  the  land 
25. 19  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  land 
25.  at  slew  them  at  Hiblah  iu  the  land  of  Ham. 
25.  22  people  that  remained  in  the  land  of  Judah 
25.  24  dwell  in  the  land,  and  serve  the  king  of  B. 

1  Ch.  i.  43  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom 

i.  45  Husham  of  the  laud  of  the  Temanites  rei. 
2.  22  three  and  twenty  cities  in  the  land  of  G. 

4.  40  the  laud  (was)  wide,  and  quiet,  and  peac. 

5.  9  their  cattle  were  multiplied  in  the  land  of 
5.  11  dwelt,  .in  the  land  of  Bashau  unto  Salcah 
g.  23  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  dwelt  in  the  land 

5.  25  after  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the  land 

6.  55  gave  them  Hebrou  iu  the  land  of  Judah 

7.  21  men.  .(that  were)  bora  in  (that)  land  slew 
10.  9  sent  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round 
n.   4  Jebusites  (were),  the  inhabitants  of  the  1. 

13.  2  (that  are)  left  in  all  the  laud  of  Israel,  and 

14.  17  the  fame  of  David  went  out  into  all  lands 
16.  18  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  land  of  Canaan 
19.  2  into  the  land  of  the  children  of  Amnion 
19.  3  and  to  overthrow,  and  to  spy  out  the  land 
21. 12  the  pestilence,  in  the  land,  and  the  angel 
22.  2  the  strangers  that  (were)  iu  the  land  of  I. 
22.  18  of  the  land  into  mine  hand  ;  and  the  land 
28.   8  ye  may  possess  this  good  land,  and  leave 

2  Ch.  2.  17  strangers  that  (were)  in  the  land  of  Israel 

6.  5  brought  forth  my  people  out  of  the  land 
6.  27  send  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou  hast 
6.  28  if  there  be  dearth  in  the  laud,  if  there  be 
6.  28  besiege  them  iu  the  cities  of  their  land 
6.  36  away  captives  unto  a  land  far  off  or  near 
6.  37  in  the  land  whither  they  are  carried  cap. 
6.  37  pray  unto  thee  in  the  land  of  their  capti. 
6.  38  in  the  land  of  their  captivity,  whither 

6.  38  pray  toward  their  land,  which  thou  gavest 
7. 13  I  command  the  locusts  to  devour  the  land 

7.  14  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  heal  their  land 
7.  21  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this  land 

7.  22  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

8.  6  and  throughout  all  the  land  of  his  domi. 

8.  8  whowereleftafterthemintheland,  whom 
8. 17  Eloth,  at  the  sea  side  in  the  land  of  Edom 

9.  5  I  heard  in  mine  own  land  of  thine  acts 

9. 11  none  such  seen  before  in  the  land  of  Jud. 

9. 12  went  away  to  her  own  land,  she  and  her 
9.  26  from  the  river  even  unto  the  land  of  the 
9.  28  horses  out  of  Egypt,  and  out  of  all  lands 

13.  9  the  manner  of  the  nations  of  (other)  lands? 

14.  1  In  his  days,  the  land  was  quiet  ten  years 
14.   6  the  land  had  rest,  and  he  had  no  war  in 

14.  7  and  bars,  (while)  the  land  (is)  yet  before 

15.  8  out  of  all  the  land  of  Judah  and  Benjamin 
17.  2  set  garrisons  in  the  land  of  Judah,  and  in 
17.  10  of  the  lands  that  (were)  round  about  Jud. 
19.    3  hast  taken  away  the  groves  out  of  the  1. 

19.  5  he  set  judges  in  the  land,  throughout  all 

20.  7  didst  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  this  land 
20.  10  when  they  came  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt 

22.  12  hid.  .and  Athaliah  reigned  over  the  land 

23.  13  people  of  the  laud  rejoiced,  and  sounded 
23.  20  governors . .  and  all  the  people  of  the  land 
23.  21  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced:  and 
26.  21  son  (was),  .judging the  people  of  the  land 
30.    9  that  they  shall  come  again  into  this  land 
30.  25  that  came  out  of  the  land  of  Israel,  and 
32.    4  that  ran  through  the  midst  of  the  land 
32.  13  done  unto  all  the  people  of  (other)  lands 
32.  13  lands  any  ways  able  to  deliver  their  lands 
32.  17  the  gods  of  the  nations  of  (other)  lands 
32.  21  he  returned  with  shame,  .to  his  own  land 

32.  31  of  the  wonder  that  was  (done)  in  the  land 

33.  25  the  people  of  the  land  slew  all  them  that 

33.  25  the  people  of  the  land  made  Josiah  his  sou 

34.  7  throughout  all  the  land  of  Israel,he  return. 
34.    8  he  had  purged  the  land,  and  the  house 
36.    1  the  people  of  the  land  took  Jehoahaz  the 
36.    3  condemned  the  land  in  an  hundred  talents 
36.  21  until  the  land  had  enjoyed  her  sabbaths 

Ezra   4.    4  the  people  of  the  land  weakened  the  hands 
6.  21  the  filthiness  of  the  heathen  of  the  land 
9.    1  separated,  .from  the  people  of  the  lands 
q.    2  mingled,  .with  the  people  of  (those)  lauds 
9.    7  into  the  hand  of  the  kings  of  the  lands,  to 
9.  11  The  land,  unto  which  ye  go  to  possess  it 
9.  11  is  an  unclean  land  with  the  filthiness  of 
9.  11  of  the  people  of  the  lands,  with  their 
9. 12  eat  the  good  of  the  land,  and  leave  (it) 
10.    2  strange  wives  of  the  people  of  the  land 
10.  11  separate,  .from  the  people  of  the  land,  and 

Neh.   4.    4  give  them  for  a  prey  in  the  land  of  capt. 
5.  14  to  be  their  governor  in  the  land  of  Judah 
9.    8  with  him,  to  give  the  land  of  the  Canaan. 
9. 10  servants,  and  on  all  the  people  of  his  land 
9. 15  laud  which  thou  hadst  sworn  to  give  them 
9.  22  possessed  the  land  of  Sihon,  and  the  land 
9.  22  Heshbon,  and  the  land  of  Og  king  of  B. 
9.  23  bronghtest  them  into  the  land  concern. 
9.  24  children  went  in  and  possessed  the  land 
9.  24  before  them  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
9.  24  the  people  of  the  laud,  that  they  might 


Neh.  9.  30  into  the  hand  of  the  people  of  the  lands 
9.  35  fat  laud  which  thou  gavest  before  them 
9.  36  the  land  that  thou  gavest  uuto  our  fathers 
10.  28  separated,  .from  the  people  of  the  lands 
10.  30  our  daughters  unto  the  people  of  the  laud 
10.  31  (if)  the  people  of  the  land  bring  ware  or 

Esth.  8.  17  many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became  J. 
10.    1  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the  land 

Job  1.  1  There  was  a  man  in  the  land  of  Uz,  whose 
j.  10  and  his  substance  is  increased  in  the  land 
10.  21  land  of  darkness,  aud  the  shadow  of  death 
10.  22  A  land  of  darkness,  as  darkness  (itself 
28.  13  neither  is  it  fouud  in  the  land  of  the  living 
37.  13  whether  for  correction,  or  for  his  land,  or 
42.  15  in  all  the  land  were  no  women  found  (so) 

Psa.  to.  16  the  heathen  are  perished  out  of  his  land 
27.  13  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of 
35.  20  against  (them  that  are)  quiet  in  the  land 
37.    3  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily 
37.  29  The  righteous  shall  inherit  the  land,  aud 
37.  34  he  shall  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  land 
42.    6  I  remember  thee  from  the  laud  of  Jordan 
44.   3  they  gotnotthelandinpossessionbytheir 
52.    5  root  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  living 
63.    1  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  and  thirsty  land 
66.    1  JIake  a  joyful  noise  unto  God,  all  ye  lands 
74.    8  burnt,  .the  synagogues  of  God  in  the  laud 
78. 12  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  (in)  the  field  of  Zoau 

80.  9  to  take  deep  root,  and  it  filled  the  land 

81.  s  when  he  went  out  tlu'ough  the  land  of  E. 
81. 10  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
85.  1  thou  hast  been  favourable  unto  thy  land 
85.  9  fear  him;  that  glory  may  dwell  inourland 
85.  12  and  our  land  shall  yield  her  increase 

88.  12  righteousness  in  the  land  of  forgetfulness 

100.  1  a  joyful  uoise  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye  lands 

101.  6  (shall  be)  upon  the  faithful  of  the  land 
101.  8  will  early  destroy  the  wicked  of  the  land 
105.  11  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  land  of  Canaau 
105.  16  he  called  for  a  famine  upon  the  land :  he 
iog.  23  and  Jacob  sojourned  in  the  land  of  Ham 
iog.  27  They  showed,  .wonders  in  the  land  of  H. 
iog.  30  Their  land  brought  forth  frogs  in  abund. 
iog.  32  He  gave  them,  .flaming  fire  in  their  land 
105.  3g  did  eat  up  all  the  herbs  in  their  land,  and 
iog.  36  smote  also  all  the  first  born  in  their  land 

105.  44  And  gave  them  the  lands  of  the  heathen 

106.  22  Wondrousworksinthelandof  Ham;(and) 
106.  24  Yea,  they  despised  the  pleasant  land;  they 
106.  27  To  overthrow,  .to  scatter  them  in  the  la. 

106.  38  and  the  land  was  polluted  with  blood 
i°7-    3  gathered  them  out  of  the  lauds,  from  the 

107.  34  A  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  the 
116.   9  before  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living 
i3g.  12  And  gave  their  land  (for)  an  heritage,  an 
136.  21  gave  then  land  for  an  heritage  :  for  his 

142.  5  (and)  my  portion  in  the  land  of  the  living 

143.  6  (thirst  etli)  after  thee,  as  a  tliirsty  land 
143.  10  good  ;  lead  me  into  the  land  of  upright. 

Prov.  :2.  21  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  the  land,  and 

28.  2  For  the  transgression  of  a  laud  many  (are) 

29.  4  king  by  judgment  establisheth  the  land 
31.  23  he  sitteth  among  the  elders  of  the  land 

Eccl.  10.  16  Woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  (is) 
10.  17  Blessed  (art)  thou.O  land,  when  thy  king- 
Song  2.  12  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land 
Isa.     1.  19  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land 
2.   7  Their  land  also  is  full  of  silver  and  gold 
2.   7  their  land  is  also  full  of  horses,  neither 
2.   8  Their  land  also  is  full  of  idols  ;  they  wor. 
g.  30  if  (one)  look  unto  the  land,  behold  dark. 
6. 12  great  forsaking  in  the  midst  of  the  land 
7.  18  for  the  bee  that  (is)in  the  land  of  Assyria 
7.  22  shall  everyone  eat  (that  is)  left  in  the  land 

7.  24  the  land  shall  become  briers  and  thorns 

8.  8  wings  shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy  land 

9.  1  land  of  Zebulun,  and  the  land  of  Naphtali 
9.  2  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death 
9.  19  Through  the  wrath,  .is  the  laud  darkened 

10.  23  determined,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  land 

11. 16  that  he  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
13.    5  his  indignation,  to  destroy  the  whole  land 

13.  9  and  fierce  anger,  to  lay  the  land  desolate 
13. 14  turn,  .and  flee  every  one  into  his  own  land 

14.  20  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  land,  (and)  slain 
14.  21  nor  possess  the  laud,  nor  fill  the  face  of  the 
14.  2g  I  will  break  the  Assyrian  in  my  land,  and 
16.  1  Seud  ye  the  Iamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land 
16.  4  oppressors  are  consumed  out  of  the  land 
18.   1  Woe  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings 

18.  2/7  a  nation,  .whose  land  the  rivers  have  sp. 

19.  18  shall  five  cities  in  the  land  of  Egypt  speak 
19".  19  altar  to  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  the  land 
19.  20  for  a  witness  unto  the  Lord.. in  the  land 
19.  24  (even)  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  land 
21.  1  cometh  from  the  desert,  from  a  terrible  1. 
21.  14  The  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Tema  bro. 
23.    1  from  the  land  of  Chittim  it  is  revealed  to 

23. 10  Pass  through  thy  land  as  a  river,  0  daug. 

23.  13  Behold  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans ;  this 

24.  3  The  land  shall  be  utterly  emptied, -and 

24. 11  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land  is  gone 
24.  13  thus  it  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  land 
26.    1  this  song  be  sung  in  the  land  of  Judah 

26.  ioin  the  land  of  uprightness  will  he  deal 

27.  13  ready  to  perish  in  the  land  of  Assyria 
27.  13  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  shall 
30.    6  Into  the  land  of  trouble  and  anguish,  from 
32.    2  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land 

33. 17  they  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  very  far 
34.   6  a  great  slaughter  in  the  land  of  Idumea 
34.    7  their  land  shall  be  soaked  with  blood,  and 


Isa.   34.    9  land  thereof  shall  become  burning  pitch 
36.  10  Am  I  now  come  up . .  against  this  land  to 
36.  10  Go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it 
36.  17  you  away  to  a  land  like  your  own  land 
36.  17  a  land  of  corn  and  wine,  a  laud  of  bread 
36.  18  godsof  the  nations  delivered  his  land  out 

36.  20  lands,  that  have  delivered  their  land  out 

37.  7  hear  a  rumour,  and  return  to  his  ownland 
37.  7  him  to  fall  by  the  sword  in  his  own  land 
37.  11  to  all  lands  by  destroying  them  utterly 

37.  38  and  they  escaped  into  the  land  of  Armenia 

38.  11  (even)  the  Lord,  in  the  land  of  the  living 
41.  18  will  make,  .the  dryland  springs  of  water 
49.  12  Behold,  .these  from  the  land  of  Sinim 
49.  19  the  land  of  thy  destruction,  shall  even 
g3.  8  he  was  cut  off  out  of  thelandoftheliving 
57-  13  putteth  his  trust,  .shall  possess  the  land 
60.  18  Violence  shall  uo  more  be.  in  thy  land 

60.  21  they  shall  inherit  the  laud  for  ever,  the 

61.  7  their  land  they  shall  possess  the  double 

62.  4  thy  land  any  more  be  termed  Desolate 
62.    4  be  called  Hephzi-bah,  and  thy  land  Beu. 
62.    4  Load delighte thin  thee, and thy;land shall 

Jer.     t.    1  (were)  in  Anathoth  in  the  land  of  Benja. 
1.  14  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
i.  18  and  brazen  walls  against  the  whole  laud 

1.  18  priests,  .and  against  the  people  of  the  land 

2.  2  wilderness,  in  a  land  (that  was)  not  sown 
2.  6  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the  laud  of  Eg. 
2.  6  land  of  deserts  and  of  pits,  through  a  land 
2.  6  through  a  laud  that  no  man  passed  thro. 
2.  7  ye  defiled  my  land,  and  made  mine  heri. 
2.  ig  (and)  yelled,  and  they  made  his  land  wa. 

2.  31  a  wilderness  unto  Israel?  a  land  of  dark. 

3,  1  shall  not  that  laud  be  greatly  polluted? 
3.    2  and  thou  hast  polluted  the  land  with  thy 
3.   9  that  she  defiled  the  land,  and  committed 
3.  16  be  multiplied  and  increased  in  the  land 
3.  18  out  of  the  land  of  the  north  to  the  land 

3.  19  and  give  thee  a  pleasant  land,  a  goodly 

4.  5  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  iu  the  land  :  cry,  ga. 
4.  7  from  his  place  to  make  thy  laud  desolate 
4.  20  the  whole  land  is  spoiled  :  suddenly  are 

4.  27  The  whole  land  shall  be  desolate ;  yet  will 

5.  19  laud,  so  shall  ye  serve  strangers  in  a  laud 
g.  30  horrible  thing  is  committed  in  the  laud 

6.  8  make  thee  desolate,  a  land  not  inhabited 
6. 12  my  hand  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  laud 

7.  7  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers,  for 
7.  22  that  I  brought  them  out  of  the  laud  of  E. 
7.  2g  came  forth  out  of  the  land,  of  Egypt  unto 

7.  34  cause  to  cease,  .for  the  lav  J  shall  be  des. 
8. 16  the  whole  land  trembled  at  the  sound  of 

8.  16  have  devoured  the  land,  and  all  that  is 
9. 12  the  land  perisheth  (and)  is  burnt  up  like 

9.  19  we  have  forsaken  the  land,  because  our 
10.  17  Gather  up  thy  wares  out  of  the  land,  O 

10.  iS  I  will  sling  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

11.  4I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
11.    g  them  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey 

11.  7  brought  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
11. 19  let  us  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  li. 

12.  4  How  long  shall  the  land  mourn,  and  the 
12.    5  and  (if)  in  the  land  of  peace,  (wherein) 
12.  11  the  whole  land  is  made  desolate,  because 
12.  12  land  even  to  the  (other)  end  of  the  land 

12.  ig  to  his  heritage,  and  every  man  to  his  land 

13.  13  I  will  fill  all  the  inhabitants  of  this  land 

14.  8  thou  be  as  a  stranger  in  the  land,  and  as 
14.  15  and  famine  shall  not  be  in  this  land  ;  By 

14.  18  go  about  into  a  land  that  they  know  not 
ig.    7  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  the  gates  of  the  1. 

15.  14  pass,  .into  a  land  (which)  thou  knowest 

16.  3  their  fathers  that  begat  them  in  this  land 
16.  6  great  aud  the  small  shall  die  in  this  land 
16.  13  out  of  this  land  into  a  land  that  ye  know 
16.  14  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
16.  ig  land  of  the  north,  and  from  all  the  lands 

16.  18  because  they  have  defiled  my  land,  they 

17.  4  to  serve  thine  enemies  in  the  land  which 
17.    6  wilderness,  (in)  a  salt  land  and  not  inhab. 

17.  26  from  the  land  of  Benjamin,  and  from  the 

18.  16  make  their  land  desolate,  (and)  a  perpet. 
22.  12  captive,  and  shall  see  this  land  no  more 
sa.  27  the  land  whereunto  they  desire  to  return 

22.  28.  are  cast  into  a  land  which  they  know  not 

23.  7  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
23.  10  For  the  land  is  full  of  adulterers  ;  for 
23.  10  because  of  swearing  the  laud  mourneth 

23.  ig  is  profaneness  gone  forth  into  all  the  land 

24.  g  into  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  for  (their) 
24.    6  and  I  will  bring  them  again  to  this  land 

24.  8  this  land,  and  them  that  dwell  in  the  land 

25.  9  will  bring  them  against  this  land,  and  aga. 
2g.  11  this  whole  land  shall  be  a  desolation,  (aud) 
2g.  12  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  will  make 
2g.  13  I  will  tiring  upon  that  land  all  my  words 
2g.  20  land  of  Uz,  and  all  the  kings  of  the  land 
2g.  38  their  land  is  desolate  because  of  the  fierce. 

26.  17  rose  up  certain  of  the  elders  of  the  land 

26.  20  against  this  city  and  against  this  land 

27.  6  now  have  I  given  all  these  lands  into  the 
27.    7  serve,  .until  the  very  time  of  his  land 
30.    3  to  the  land  that  I  gave  to  their  fathers 

30.  10  thy  seed  from  the  land  of  their  captivity 

31.  16  shall  come  again  from  the  land  of  the 
31.  23  use  this  speech  in  the  land  of  Judah 

31.  32  to  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

32.  ig  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this  land 
32.  20  signs  and  wonders  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
32.  21  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  signs,  and 
32.  aa  this  land.  ,a  land  flowing  with  milk  and 


LAND 


588 


LAND 


Jer.  32.  41  I  will  plant  them  in  this  land  assuredly 
32.  43  And  fields  shall  be  bought  in  this  land 

32.  44  take  witnesses  in  the  land  of  Benjamin 

33.  11  cause  to  return  the  captivity  of  the  land 
33.  13  in  the  land  of  Benjamin,  and  in  the  places 
33-  15  judgment  and  righteousness  in  the  land 
34  13  that  I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  laud 
34. 19  all  the  people  of  the  kind,  which  passed 

35.  11  king  of  Babylon  came  up  into  the  land 

36.  29  shall  certainly  come  and  destroy  this  land 

37.  1  king  of  Babylon  made  king  in  the  land  of 
37.    2  nor  the  people  of  the  land,  did  hearken 
37.    7  shall  return  to  Egypt  into  their  own  land 
37.  12  went.,  to  go  into  the  land  of  Benjamin,  to 
37.  19  come  against  you,  nor  against  this  land 

39.  5  brought.,  to  Riblah  in  the  land  of  Hamath 
39. 10  which  had  nothing,  in  the  land  of  Judah 

40.  4  the  land  (is)  before  thee  :  whither  itseem. 
40.    6  among  the  people  that  were  left  in  the  1. 
40.    7  the  son  of  Ahikam  governor  in  the  laud 
40.    7  the  poor  of  the  land,  of  them  that  were 
40.    9  dwell  in  the  land,  and  serve  the  king  of 

40.  12  came  to  the  land  of  Judah,  to  Gedaliah 

41.  2  the  king,  .had  made  governor  over  the  1. 

41.  18  whom  the  king,  .made  governor  in  the  1. 

42.  10  If  ye  will  still  abide  in  this  land,  then  will 
42.  13  We  will  uot  dwell  in  this  land,  neither 
42.  14  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  Egypt,  where 

42.  16  shall  overtake  you  there  in  the  land  of  E. 

43.  4  obeyed  not.  .to  dwell  in  the  land  of  Judah 
43.   5  been  driven, to  dwell  in  the  land  of  Judah 
43.   7  they  came  into  the  land  of  Egypt :  for 
43.  11  when  he  cometh  he  shall  smite  the  land 

43. 12  shall  array  himself  with  the  land  of  Egypt 

43.  13  Beth-shemesh,  that  (is)  in  the  land  of  E. 

44.  1  all  the  Jews  which  dwell  in  the  land  ofE. 
44.  8  burning  incense  unto  other  gods  in  the  1. 
44.  9  they  have  committed  in  the  land  of  Judah 
44.  12,  14,  28  the  laud  of  Egypt  to  sojourn  there 
44.  12  consumed,  (and)  fall  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

44. 13  I  will  punish  them  that  dwell  in  the  land 
44.  14  they  should  return  into  the  land  of  Judah 
44.  15  the  people  that  dweltin  the  laud  of  Egypt 
44.  21  the  people  of  the  land,  did  not  the  Lord 
44.  22  therefore  is  your  land  a  desolation,  and 
44.  24,  27  Judah  that  (are)  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
44.  26  all  Judah  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
44.  26  any  man  of  Judah  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt 

44.  28  the  land  of  Egypt  into  the  land  of  Judah 

45.  4  and . .  I  will  pluck  up,  even  this  whole  land 

46.  12  and  thy  cry  hath  filled  the  land  :  for  the 
46.  13  should  come  (and)  smite  the  land  of  Egypt 
46.  16  and  to  the  land  of  our  nativity,  from  the 

46.  27  thy  seed  from  the  land  of  their  captivity 

47.  2  shall  overflow  the  land,  and  all  that  is 

47.  2  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  howl 

48.  24  upon  all  the  cities  of  the  land  of  Moab 
48.  33  plentiful  field,  and  from  the  land  of  Moab 
50.  1  against  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  by  Jer. 
50.  3  which  shall  make  her  laud  desolate,  and 
50.  8  go  forth  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
50.  16  they  shall  flee  every  one  to  his  own  land 
50.  18  punish  the  king  of  Babylon  and  his  land 
50.  21  Go  up  against  the  land  of  Merathaim 

50. 22  A  sound  of  battle  (is)  in  the  land,  and  of 
50.  25  the  work,  .in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
50.  2S  that  flee  and  escape  out  of  the  land  of  B. 
50.34  he  may  give  rest  to  the  land,  and  disquiet 
50.  38  it  (is)  the  land  of  graven  images,  and  they 

50.  45  purposed  against  the  land  of  theChaldeans 

51.  2  shall  fan  her,  and  shall  empty  her  land 
51.    4  shall  fall  in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
51.   5  their  land  was  filled  with  sin  against  the 
51.  27  Set  ye  up  a  standard  in  the  land,  blow 
51.  28  rulers,  .and  all  the  land  of  his  dominion 
51.  29  the  land  shall  tremble  and  sorrow:  for 
51.  29  to  make  the  land  of  Babylon  a  desolation 
Si.  43  Her  cities  are  a  desolation,  a  dry  land,  and 
51.  43  a  land  wherein  no  man  dwelleth,  neither 
51.  46  rumour  that  shall  be  heard  in  the  land 
51.  46  and  violence  in  the  land,  ruler  against 
51.  47  her  whole  laud  shall  be  confounded,  and 
51.  52  through  all  her  land  the  wounded  shall 

51.  54  destruction  from  the  land  of.  .Chaldeans 

52.  6  was  no  bread  for  the  people  of  the  land 
52.   9  carried,  .to  Riblah  in  the  land  of  Hamath 
52.  16  of  the  poor  of  the  land  for  vine  dressers 
52.  25  who  mustered  the  people  of  the  land;  and 
52. 25  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  land 
52.  27  put  them  to  death  in  Riblah  in  the  land 

Lam.  4.  21  daughter,  .that  dwellest  in  the  land  of  Uz 
Eze.    1.    3  the  land  of  the  Chahteans,  by  the  river 

6.  14  hand  upon  them,  and  make  the  land  des. 

7.  2  is  come  upon  the  four  corners  of  the  land 
7.  7  O  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  land  :  the  time 
7.  23  the  land  is  full  of  bloody  crimes,  and  the 

7.  27  hands  of  the  people  of  the  land  shall  be 

8.  17  they  have  filled  the  land  witli  violence 
9  the  laud  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city  full 

15  unto  us  is  this  land  given  in  possession 
13  to  Babylon  (to)the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
19  say  unto  the  people  of  the  land,  Thus  saith 

19  her  land  may  be  desolate  from  all  that 

20  laid  waste,  and  the  land  shall  be  desolate 
13  land  Burnetii  against  me  by  trespassing 

15  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through  the  land 

16  delivered,  but  the  land  shall  be  desolate 

17  land,  and  say,  Sword,  go  through  the  land 
19  I  send  a  pestilence  into  that  land,  and  pour 

3  I  will  make  the  land  desolate,  because  they 
3  thy  nativity  (is)  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
29  in  the  land  of  Canaan  unto  Chaldca  ;  and 


9- 


Eze.  17 

17' 
19. 
19. 


4  carried  it  into  a  land  of  traffic ;  he  set  it 

5  He  took  also  of  the  seed  of  the  land,  and 

13  he  hath  also  taken  the  mighty  of  the  land 

4  him  with  chains  unto  the  land  of  Egypt 

7  the  land  was  desolate,  and  the  fulness 

5  known  unto  them  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

6  forth  of  the  land  of  Egypt  into  a  land  that 
6,  15  which  (is)  the  glory  of  all  lands 

8  anger,  .in  the  midst  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

9  bringing  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
10  to  go  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and 
15  them  into  the  land  which  I  had  given 

28  I  had  brought  them  into  the  land,  (for) 
36  in  the  wilderness  of  the  laud  of  Egypt,  so 

40  Israel,  all  of  them  in  the  land,  serve  me 
19  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  one  land 
30  I  will  judge  thee,  .in  the  land  of  thy  nat. 
32  thy  blood  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

24  Thou  (art)  the  land  that  is  not  cleansed 

29  people  of  the  land  have  used  oppression 

30  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  land 

15  of  Chaldea,  the  land  of  their  nativity 

19  played  the  harlot  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
27  whoredom  (brought)  from  the  land  of  Eg. 
48  cause  lewdness  to  cease  out  of  the  land 

20  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living 

17  land  of  Israel,  they  (were)  thy  merchants 
29  all  the  pilots,  .shall  stand  upon  the  land 

9  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  desolate  and  waste 

10  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  utterly  waste 
12  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate 

14  (into)  the  land  of  Pathros,  into  the  land 

19  Behold,  I  will  give  the  land  of  Egypt  unto 

20  I  have  given  him  the  land  of  Egypt  (for) 

5  the  men  of  the  land  that  is  in  league 

11  He.  .shall  be  brought  to  destroy  the  laud 

11  they  shall,  .fill  the  land  with  the  slain 

12  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 
12 1  will  make  the  land  waste,  and  all  that 

13  thercbenomore  a  prince  of  the  laud  of  E. 
13  I  will  put  a  fear  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

25  he  shall  stretch  it  out  upon  the  land  of  E. 
12  are  broken  by  all  the  rivers  of  the  laud 

4  Then  will  I  leave  thee  upon  the  land,  I 

6  will  also  water  witli  thy  blood  the  land 

8  set  darkness  upon  thy  laud,  saith  the  Lord 

15  I  shall  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate 

23  which  caused  terror  in  the  laud  of  the  liv. 
24,  26  their  terror  in  the  laud  of  the  living 
25  terror  was  caused  iu  the  land  of  the  living 

27  terror  of  the  mighty  in  the  land  of  the  li  ving 
32  caused  my  terror  in  the  land  of  the  living 

2  upon  aland,  if  the  people  of  the  land  take 

3  he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the  land 

24  the  land  :  but  we  (are)  many ;  the  land  is 

25  shed  blood:  and  shall  ye  possess  the  land? 

26  ye  defile,  .and  shall  ye  possess  the  land  "'. 

28  I  will  lay  the  land  most  desolate,  and 

29  when  I  have  laid  the  laud  most  desolate 
25  the  evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of  the  land 

28  shall  the  beast  of  the  land  devour  them 

29  no  more  consumed  with  hunger  in  the  land 

5  which  have  appointed  my  land  into  their 

18  blood  that  they  had  shed  upon  the  laud 

20  These,  .are  gone  forth  out  of  his  land 

28  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers 

34  the  desolate  land  shall  be  tilled,  whereas 

35  This  land  that  was  desolate  is  become  like 
22  in  the  land  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel 
25  they  shall  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  have 

2  Gog,  the  land  of  Magog,  the  chief  prince 

8  land  (that  is)  brought  back  from  the  sword 

9  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land 

11  go  up  to  the  land  of  un walled  villages 

12  nations,  .dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

16  shalt  come,  .as  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land 

16  I  jvill  bring  thee  against  my  land,  that 

12  burying,  .that  they  may  cleanse  the  land 

13  all  the  people  of  the  land  shall  bury  (them) 

14  passing  through  the  land,  to  bury  with 

15  the  passengers  (that)  pass  through  the  1. 

16  Thus  shall  they  cleanse  the  land 

27  gathered  them  out  of  their  enemies'  lands 

2  brought  he  me  into  the  laud  of  Israel,  and 
1  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  the  land  for  iuheri. 

1  unto  the  Lori>,  an  holy  portion  of  the  land 

4  The  holy  (portion)  of  the  land  shall  be  for 
8  In  the  land  shall  be  his  possession  in  Is. 

8  (the  rest  of)  the  land  shall  they  give  to  the 
16  All  the  people  of  the  land  shall  give  this 
22  for  all  the  people  of  the  land  a  bullock 

3  the  people  of  the  land  shall  worship  at 

9  the  people  of  the  land  shall  come  before 

13  border  whereby  ye  shall  inherit  the  land 

14  land  shall  fall  unto  you  for  inheritance 

15  border  of  the  land  toward  the  north  side 

18  from  the  land  of  Israel  (by)  Jordan,  from 

21  So  shall  ye  divide  this  land  unto  you 

12  (this)  oblation  of  the  land  that  is  offered 

14  nor  alienate  the  first  fruits  of  the  land 

29  This  (is)  the  land  which  ye  shall  divide 

2  which  he  carried  into  the  land  of  Shinar 

6  fathers,  and  to  all  the  people  of  the  land 

15  brought  thy  people  forth  out  of  the  land 

16  he  shall  stand  in  the  glorious  land,  which 

19  his  face  toward  the  fort  of  his  own  land 

28  he  return  into  his  land  with  great  riches 
28  do  (exploits),  and  return  to  his  own  land 

41  He  shall  enter  also  into  the  glorious  land 

42  and  the  laud  of  Egypt  shall  not  escape 

2  the  land  hath  committed  great  whoredom 
11  they  shall  come  up  out  of  the  land  :  for 


Hos.  2.  3  set  her  like  a  dry  land,  and  slay  her  with 
2.  15  when  she  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Eg. 
4.  1  controversy  with,  .inhabitants  of  the  land 
4.    1  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land 

4.  3  Therefore  shall  the  land  mourn,  and  every 
7.  16  This  (shall  be)  their  derision  in  the  land 

0.  3  They  shall  not  dwell  in  the  Lord's  land 
10.    1  according  to  the  goodness  of  his  land  they 
n.    5  shall  not  return  into  the  land  of  Egypt 
11. 11  and  as  a  dove  out  of  the  land  of  Assyria 

12.  9  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  Egypt 

13.  4  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  Egypt 
13.    5  the  wilderness,  in  the  land  of  great  drought 

Joel     1.   2  give  ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  land 

1.  6  a  nation  is  come  up  upon  my  land,  strong 

1.  14  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  (into)  the 

2.  1  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  tremble  :  for 
2.  3  land  (is)  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before  them 
2.  18  Then  will  the  Lord  be  jealous  for  his  land 

2.  20  drive  him  into  a  land  barren  and  desolate 

3.  2  among  the  nations,  and  parted  my  land 
3.  19  have  shed  innocent  blood  in  their  land 

Amos  2.  10  I  brought  you  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt 

2.  10  led  you . .  to  possess  the  land  of  the  Amu. 

3.  1  which  I  brought  up  from  the  land  of  Eg. 
3.  9  Publish .  .in  the  palaces  in  the  land  of  E. 
3.  11  (there  shall  be)  even  round  about  the  land 
7.    2  made  an  end  of  eatingthe  grass  of  the  land 

7. 10  the  land  is  not  aide  to  bear  all  his  words 

7.  12  flee  thee  away  into  the  land  of  Judah,  and 

8.  4  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail 
8.   8  Shall  not  the  land  tremble  for  this,  and 

8.  11 1  will  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a 

9.  5  God  of  hosts  (is)  lie  that  toucheth  the  land 
9.    7  brought  up  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Eg.  ? 

Mic.    5.    5  when  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  our  1. 

5.  6  they  shall  waste  the  land  of  Assyria  with 
5.    6  land  of  Kimrod  in  the  entrances  thereof 

5.  6  wheu  he  cometh  into  our  land,  and  when 

5. 11  I  will  cut  oil  the  cities  of  thy  land,  andth. 

6.  4  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
7  13  the  land  shall  be  desolate  because  of  them 

7.  15  of  thy  coming  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
Nah.    3.  1 3  the  gates  of  thy  land  shall  be  set  wide  open 
Hab.    1.    6  march  through  the  breadth  of  the  land,  to 

2.  8, 17  the  violence  of  the  land,  of  the  city,  and 

3.  7  curtains  of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremble 
3.  12  Thou  didst  march  through  the  land  in  hid. 

Zeph.  1.  18  the  whole  land  shall  be  devoured  by  the 

1.  18  riddance  of  all  them  that  dwell  in  the  land 

2.  5  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  I  will  even 

3. 19  land  where  they  have  been  put  to  shame 

Hag.    1.  11  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  the  laud,  and 

2.    4  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  saith 

Zcch.  1.  21  horn  over  the  land  of  Judah  to  scatter  it 

2.    6  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north,  saith  the 

9  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one 

11  To  build  it  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar 

5  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and 

14  the  land  was  desolate  after  them,  that  no 

14  for  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate 

1  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  Hadrach 

10.  10  I  will  bring  them  .  .out  of  the  land  of  E. 

10.  10  into  the  land  of  Gilead  and  Lebanon  ;  and 

11.  6  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
11.    6  they  shall  smite  the  land,  and  <  >ut  of  their  1. 
11.  16  I  will  raise  up  a  shepherd  in  the  land 
12. 12  the  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart 
13.    2  the  namesof  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and 
13.    2  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the  land 

13.  8  shall  come  to  pass,  (that)  in  all  the  land 
14. 10  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from 

Mai.    3.  12  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land,  saith  the 

S.Field,  country,  level  place,  nr^ff  sadeh. 

Ruth  4.    3  Naomi,  .selleth  a  parcel  of  land,  which 

1  Sa.  14.  14  within  as  it  were  an  half  acre  of  land 

2  Sa.    9.    7  restore,  .all  the  land  of  Saul  thy  father 

19.  29  have  said,  Thou  and  Ziba  divide  the  land 

2  Ki.   8.    3,  5  the  king  for  her  house  and  for  her  land 

Neh.   5.    3  We  have  mortgaged  our  lands,  vineyards 

5.   4  (and  that  upon)  our  lands  and  vineyards 

5.    5  other  men  nave  our  lands  and  vineyards 

5.  ti  their  lands,  their  vineyards,  their  olive  y. 
5. 16  neither  bought  we  any  laud  :  and  all  iuy 

4. Field,  ayp6<>  agros. 

Mattig.  29  or  mother,  or  wive,  or  children,  or  lands 
Mark  10.  29  mother,  orwife,  or  children,  or  lands,  for 
10.  30  sisters,  .mothers,  and  children,  and  lands 
Acts  4.  37  Having  laud,  sold  (it),  and  brought  the  m. 

5. Land,  earth,  77)  ge. 

Matt.  2.    6  (in)  the  land  of  Juda,  art  not  the  least  am. 
2.  20  go  into  the  land  of  Israel :  for- they  are  d, 
2.  21  arose,  .and  came  iuto  the  land  of  Israel 
4. 15  The  land  of  Zabulon,  and  the  land  of  N. 
9.  26  fame,  .went  abroad  into  all  that  land 

10.  15  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom 

11.  24  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom 

14.  34  they  came  into  the  land  of  Gennesaret 
27.  45  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth  hour 

Mark  4.    1  multitude  was  by  the  sea  on  the  land 

6.  47  midst  of  the  sea,  and  he  alone  on  the  land 
6.  53  they  came  into  theland  of  Gennesaret,  and 

15.  33  over  the  whole  land  until  the  ninth  hour 
Luke  4.  25  great  famine  was  throughout  all  the  land 

5.   3  would  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land 
5.  11  when  they  had  brought  their  ships  to  land 

8.  27  when  he  went  forth  to  land,  there  met  him 
14.  35  It  is  neither  fit  for  the  laud,  nor  yet  for 
21.  23  there  shall  lie  great  distress  in  the  land 

John   3.  22  and  his  disciples  into  the  land  of  Judea 


LAND 


John  6.  21  ship  was  .it  the  land  whither  they  went 
2i-    8  they  were  not  far  from  land,  but  as  it  were 
2i.   9  As  soon  then  as  they  were  come  to  land 
2i.  ii  drew  the  net  to  land  full  of  great  fishes 
Acts    7.    3  into  the  land  which  I  shall  show  thee 

7.  4  came  he  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
7.  4  he  removed  him  into  this  land,  wherein  ye 
7.  6  seed  should  sojourn  in  a  strange  land 
7.  11  over  all  [the  land  of]  Egypt  and  Chanaan 
7.  29  and  was  a  stranger  in  the  land  of  Madian 
7.  36  wonders  and  signs  hi  the  land  of  Egypt 

7.  40  which  brought  us  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
13.  17  when  they  dwelt  as  straugers  in  the  land 
13.  19  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in  the  land 
13.  19  he  divided  their  land  to  them  by  lot 

27.  39  when  it  was  day,  they  knew  not  the  land 
27.  43  (themselves),  .(iuto  the  sea),  and  get  to  1. 

27.  44  it  came  to  pass,  .escaped  all  safe  to  land 
Heb.  8.   9  by  the  hand  to  lead  them  out  of  the  land 

11.    9  By  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  prom. 
Jude         5  having  saved  the  people  out  of  the  land 

6.  Dry  land,  typos  zeros. 

Matt23.  15  for  ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one 

7  .Place,  region,  x&Pa  chora. 

Mark  1.    5  there  went  out  to  him  all  the  land  of  J. 
Lukei5.  14  there  arose  a  mighty  famiue  in  that  land 
Acts  10.  39  in  the  laud  of  the  Jews,  and  in  Jerusalem 

8.-4  small  place,  spot,  xm?l^v  chorion. 

Acts  4.  34  for  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  lands 
5.   3  keep  back  (part)  of  the  price  of  the  land  ? 
5.   8  Tell  me  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so 
[See  also  Barren,  dry,  piece,  thirsty.] 

LAND,  to  — 

l.To  lead  down,  bring  to  land,  Karayw  katagO. 
Acts  2i.    3  and  sailed  into  Syria,  and  [landed]  at  T. 

28.  12  landing  at  Syracuse,  we  tarried,  .three 
2.  To  come  down,  /caTe'pxo^ou  katerchomai. 

Acts  18.  22  when  he  had  landed  at  Cesarea,  and  gone 
[See  also  Bring  to.] 

LAND,  born  in  the  — 

Native,  aboriginal,  indigenous,  rrjix  ezrach. 

Lev.  24. 16  the  stranger,  as  he  that  is  born  in  the  land 
Numis.  30  born  in  the  laud,  or  a  stranger,  the  same 

LAND  MARK  — 

1.  Border,  Sl33  gebul. 

Deutig.  14  shalt  not  remove  thy  neighbour's  landmark 
27. 17  he  that  remove th  his  neighbour's  landmark 

Prov22.  28  Remove  not  the  ancient  landmark,  which 

23.  10  Remove  r.ot  the  old  landmark  ;  and  enter 

2. Border,  n^isa  gebulah. 

Job   24.    2' remove  the  landmarks  :  they  violently 

LANE  — 

A  narrow  passage,  ftvprj  rhume. 

Lukei4,  21  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes 

LANGUAGE  — 

1.  Word,  "a?  dabar. 

Psa.  19.    3  nospeech  nor  language,  .theirvoiceisnot 

I.Tongue,  pc^>  lashon. 

Neh.  13.  24  but  according  to  the  language  of  each 
Esth.  1.  22  and  to  every  people  after  their  language 
1.  22  published  according  to  the  language  of 
3. 12  and  (to)  every  people  after  then-  language 

8.  9  unto  every  people  after  their  lauguage 

8.   9  to  the  Jews,  .according to  their  language 
Jer.     5.  15  a  nation  whose  language  thou  knowest 
Eze.    3.  5,  6  strange  speech  and  of  an  hard  language 
Zech.  S.  23  »ut  of  all  languages  of  the  nations,  even 

Z.Tongue,  ]^b  lislishan. 

Dan.    3.    4  cried  aloud.  .0  people,  nations,  and  Ian. 
3.   7  all  the  people,  the  nations,  and  the  lang. 

3.  29  That  every  people,  nation,  and  language 

4.  1  unto  all  people,  nations,  and  languages 

5.  19  all  people,  nations,  and  languages,  trem. 

6.  25  wrote  unto  all  people,  nations,  and  lang. 

7.  14  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages 
4.Lip,  nDy'  saphah. 

Geu.  11.  1  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language,  and 

11.  6  they  have  all  one  language ;  and  this  they 

11.  7  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  lang. 

11.  9  Lord  did  there  confound  the  language  of 

Psa.  81.  5  I  heard  a  language  (that)  I  understood  not 

Isa.    19.  iS  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  swear 

Zeph.  3.  9  will  I  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language 

5. Dialect,  tongue,  b~ia.XzKTOs  dialektos. 

Acts    2.    6  heard  them  speak  in  his  own  language 

LANGUAGE,  strange  — 

To  speak  a  strange  language,  iyb  laaz. 

Psa.114.    1  went  out.  .from  a  people  of  a  strange  la. 
LANGUISH,  to  — 
To  become  weak,  languish,  fex  arnal,  45. 

Isa.   16.    8  the  fields  of  Heshbon  languish.. the  vine 
19.   8  and  they  that  spread  nets . .  shall  languish 

24.  4  the  world  languisheth  (and)  fadeth  away 
24.  4  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish 
24.  7  The  new  wine  mourneth,  the  vine  langui. 
33.   9  The  earth  mourneth.  .languisheth  :  Leh. 

Jer.   14.    2  the  gates  thereof  languish  ;  they  are  black 

15.    9  She  that  hath  born  seven  languisheth 
Lam.  2.    8  the  rampart  and  the  wall .  .languished  tog. 
Hos.   4.   3  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall  la. 
Joel    1. 10  new  wine  is  dried  up,  the  oil  languisheth 


589 

Joel    1. 12  The  vine  is  dried  up.. the  fig  tree  languis. 
Nali.  1.    4  Bashan  languisheth.  .the  flower,  .langui. 

LANGUISHING  — 
Sick,  sickness,  T]  devai. 

Psa.  41.    3  will  strengthen  him  upon  the  bed  of  Ian. 
LANTERN  — 
A  light,  Jfambeau,  lantern,  (pavos 2>hanos. 

Johm8.    3  cometh  thither  with  lanterns  and  torches 

LA-O-DI-CE'-A,  AaoStKCia. 

The  chief  city  of  Phrygia  Pacatiana  in  Asia  Minor,  on 
the  river  Lycus,  a  little  above  its  junction  with  the 
Meander,  and  not  far  to  the  S.  of  Colosse  and  Hierapolis. 
Its  earlier  name  was  Diospolis,  and  afterwards  Rhoa3 ; 
it  was  enlarged  by  Antiochus  II.,  and  called  by  him 
Laodicea,  after  his  wife.  About  a.d.  64  it  was  destroyed 
as  also  Colosse  and  Hierapolis,  by  an  earthquake,  but 
was  rebuilt  by  Marcus  Aurelius.  Its  ruins  are  called 
Bski-hissar. 

Col.     2.    1  (for)  them  at  L.,  and  (for)  as  many  as  have 

4.  13  them  (that  are)  in  L.,  and  them  in  Hiera. 

4  15  Salute  the  brethren  which  are  in  L.,  and 

4. 16  that  ye  likewise  read  the  (epistle)  from  L. 

Rev.    1.  11  Sardis,  and  unto  Philadelpliia,  and  unto  L. 

LA-O-DI-CE-AN,  AaoSiKaios. 
An  inhabitant  of  Laodicea. 

Col.     4.  16  it  be  read  also  in  the  church  of  the  L. 

Rev.    3. 14  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  the  L. 

LAP  — 

l.Cloalc,  garment,  covering,  13|  beged. 

2  Ki.   4.  39  gathered  thereof  wild  gourds  his  Jap  full 

2.Bosom,  centre,  pvt  cheq. 

Prov  16.  33  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap ;  but  the  whole 

Z.Laf),  bosom,  jxh  chctsen. 

Neh.   5. 13  I  shook  my  lap,  and  said,  So  God  shake 
LAP,  to  — 
l.To  lick,  lap,  pp^>  laqaq. 

Judg.  7.    5  Every  one  that  lappeth . .  as  a  dog  Iappeth 

2.To  lick,  lap,  ppS  laqaq,  3. 

Judg.  7.    6  And  the  number  of  them  that  lapped 
7.    7  By  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped 

LAP-I'-DOTH,  niTsS  lamps,  lightnings. 

The  husband  of  Deborah  the  prophetess.    B.C.  1316. 

Judg.  4.   4  the  wife  of  L.,  she  judged  Israel  at  that 
LAPWING  — 
Lapwing,  woodcock,  ns'D'l  dukiphath. 

Lev.  11. 19  And  the  stork,  .the  lapwing,  and  the  bat 

Dent  14.  iS  And  the  stork,  .the  lapwing,  and  the  bat 
LARGE  — 
l.To  be  airy,  rrri  ravach,  4. 

Jer.  22. 14  build  me  a  wide  house  and  large  chanib. 

2.  To  he  broad,  wide,  3n~i  rachab,  2. 

Isa.   30. 23  in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  large 

3. Broad,  wide,  srn  rachab. 

Geu.  34.  21  the  land,  behold,  (it  is)  large  enough  for 
Exod.  3.  8  unto  a  good  land  and  a  large,  unto  a  land 
Neh.  4.  19  The  work  (is)  great  and  large,  and  we  are 
9.  35  in  the  large  and  fat  land  which  thou  gav. 
Eze.  23.  32  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  deep  and  large 

■L.Broad  of  hands,  DHJ  n?D1  rachabath  yadayim. 
Judg  18.  10  unto  a  people  secure,  and  to  a  large  land 
Neh.   7.    4  Now  the  city  (was)  large  and  great ;  but 
Isa.  22. 18  toss  thee  (like)  a  ball  iuto  a  large  country 

5. Sufficient,  licav6s  hikomos. 

Matt28.  12  they  gave  large  money  unto  the  soldiers 

6.  Great,  large,  p.iyas  nugas. 

Marki4.  15  And  he  will  snow  you  a  large  upperroom 
Luke22.  12  And  he  shall  show  you  a  large  upper  room 
[See  also  As,  how.] 

LARGE,  to  make  — 

To  inake  broad  or  wide,  srn  racliab,  5. 

Isa.   30.  33  he  hath  made  (it)  deep  (and)  large  ;  the 
LARGE  place  or  room  — 
Broad  or  wide  place,  srnn  merchab. 

2  Sa.  22.  20  He  brought  me  forth  also  into  a  large  pi. 

Psa.  18.  19  He  brought  me  forth  also  into  a  large  pi. 
31.    8  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  room 
118.    5  the  LorTj  answered  me.  .in  a  large  place 

Hos.    4.  16  will  feed  them  as  a  lamb  in  a  large  place 
LARGENESS  — 
Breadth,  width,  srh  rochab. 

1  Ki.   4. 29  largeness  of  heart,  even  as  the  sand  that 
LASCIVIOUSNESS  — 

Excess,  licentiousness,  ao-£kytia  aselgeia. 

Mark  7.  22  lasciviousuess,  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy 

2  Co. 12.  21  lasciviousuess.  .they  have  committed 
Gal.    5.  ig  Adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness,  lasci. 
Eph.  4.  19  have  given  themselves  over  unto  lascivi. 
1  Pe.  4.    3  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousuess,  lusts 
Jude        4  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lascivi. 

LA-SE'-A,  Aao-ata. 

A  city  on  a  promontory  at  the  S.E.  extremity  of  Crete, 
five  miles  E.  of  Fair  Havens,  and  close  to  Cape  Leonda. 
The  name  is  now  given  to  a  small  island  off  the  coast. 
Acts  27.  8  place,  .nigh  whereunto  was  the  city  (of)  L. 


LAST 

LA'-SHA,  y$h  bursting  forth. 

A  place  at  the  S.  extremity  of  Canaan,  E.  of  the  Salt 

Sea ;  called  also  CalUnhoe. 

Gen.  10.  19  as  thou  goest,  unto  Sodom,  .even  unto  L. 

LASH-A'-RON,  pT3^  the  plain  of  Sharon. 

Josh.  12.  18  The  king  of  Aphek,  one;  the  king  of  L. 
LAST  — 
I. Last,  latter,  pinN  acharon. 

2  Sa.  19.  11  Why  are  ye  the  last  to  bring  the  king  back 
19. 12  wherefore  then  are  ye  the  last  to  bring 
23.    1  .Now  these  (be)  the  last  words  of  David 

1  Ch.23.  27  For  by  the  last  words  of  David  the  Levites 

29.  29  the  acts  of  David  the  king,  first  and  last 

2  Ch.  9. 29  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon,  first  and  last 

12.  15  Now  the  acts  of  Rehoboam,  first  and  last 

16. 11  behold,  the  acts  of  Asa,  first  and  last,  lo 
20. 34  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat,  first  and  last,  be. 

25.  26  rest  of  the  acts  of  Amaziah,  first  and  last 

26.  22  rest  of  the  acts  of  Uzziah,  first  and  last,.did 
28.  26  the  rest  of  his  acts,  .first  aud  last,  behold 
35.  27  And  his  deeds,  first  and  last,  behold,  they 

Ezra  S.  13  the  last  sons  of  Adonikam,  whose  names 
Neh.  8.  18  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last  day,  he 
Isa.  41.  4  I  the  Lord,  the  first,  and  with  the  last 
44.  6  I  (am)  the  first,  and  I  (am)  the  last;  and 
48.  12  I  (am) he;  I  (am)  the  first,  I  also,  .the last 
Jer.  50.  17  last  this  Nebuchadrezzar  kingof  Babylon 
Dan.    8.    3  one  (was)  higher . .  the  higher  came  up  last 

2.  Last  or  latter  end,  rr"!DN  acharith. 

Gen.  49.    1  which  shall  befall  you  in  the  last  days 
Isa.     2.    2  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days 
Jer.  12.   4  because  they  said,  .shall  not  see  our  last 
Amos  9.    1  I  will  slay  the  last  of  them  with  the  sword 
Mic.    4.    1  But  in  the  last  days  it  shall  come  to  pass 

3. Last,  eo'xaros  eschatos. 

Matt  19.  30  first  shall  be  last ;  and  the  last  (shall  be) 
20.    8  give .  .beginning  from  the  last  unto  the  fi. 

20. 12  These  last  have  wrought  (but)  one  hour 
20.  14  I  will  give  unto  this  last,  even  as  unto  thee 
20.  16  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last 

27.  64  the  last  error  shall  be  worse  than  the  first 
Mark  9.  35  first,  .shall  be  last  of  all,  and  servant  of  all 

10.  31  many . .  first  shall  be  last ;  and  the  last  first 
12.   6  he  sent  him  also  last  unto  them,  saying 

12.  22  no  seed  :  [last]  of  all  the  women  died  also 
Lukei2.  59  not.  .till  thou  hast  paid  the  very  last  mite 

13.  30  behold,  there  are  last  which  shall  be  first 
13.  30  and  there  are  first  which  shall  be  last 

John  6.  39  but  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day 

6.  40,  44,  54  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day 

7.  37  In  the  last  day,  that  great  (day)  of  the  f. 

8.  9  [beginning  at  the  eldest,  .unto  the  last] 

11.  24  again  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last  day 

12.  48  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day 
Acts    2.  17  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days 

1  Co.   4.    9  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  last 

15.    8  last  of  all  he  was  seen  of  me  also,  as  of 
15.  26  last  enemy  (that)  shall  be  destroyed  (is)  d. 
15.  45  the  last  Adam  (was),  .a  quickening  spirit 
15.  52  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  tr. 

2  Ti.  3.  1  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come 
Heb.  1.  2  Hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by 
Jas.    5.    3  heaped  treasure  together  for  the  last  days 

1  Pe.    1.    5  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 

1.  20  was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for  you 

2  Pe.  3.  3  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  sc. 
1  Jo.    2.  18  Little  children,  is  to  the  last  time :  and 

2.  18  whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  time 
Jude  18  there  should  be  mockers  in  the  last  time 
Rev.    1.  11  Alpha  and  Omega,  [the  first  and  the  last] 

1.  17  saying.  .Fear not;  I  am  the  first  and  the  1. 

2.  8  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last 
2.  19  I  know . .  the  last  (to  he)  more  than  the  fi. 

15.  1  seven  angels  having  the  seven  last  plagues 
jzi.    9  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues 

22. 13  Alpha  and  Omega,  .the  first  and  the  last 

•i.Later  than,  after,  varepov  husteron. 

Matt  22.  27  And  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 
Luke2o.  32  Last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

LAST,  to  — 

To  be,  iTn  hayah. 

Judg  14. 17  the  seven  days,  while  their  feast  lasted 
LAST,  at  the  — 
l.At  last,  1'inx  ochoren. 

Dan.    4.    8  But  at  the  last  Daniel  came  in  before  rat 
2.Last  or  latter  end,  nnrm  acharith. 

Prov.  5.  11  And  thou  mourn  at  the  last,  when  thy 
23.  32  At  the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and 

S.ffeel,  end,  spy  aqeb. 

Gen.  49.  19  Gad,  a  troop  he  shall  overcome  at  the  1. 
i.At  any  time,  irore  pote. 

Phil.  4. 10  that  now  at  the  last  your  care  of  me  hath 

5. A  t  last,  after  all,  varepov  husteron. 

Matt26.  60  At  the  last  came  two  false  witnesses 
LAST  of  all  — 
At  last,  after  all,  varepov  husteron. 

Mattel.  37  But  last  of  all  he  sent  unto  them  his  sou 
LAST  or  latter  {end  or  time  or  state)  — 
l.Last  or  latter  end,  ri'inx'  acharith. 

Num23.  10  righteous,  and  let  my  lastend  he  likehis 

Deut.  8.  16  prove,  .to  do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  end 
32.  29  (that)  they  would  consider  their  latterend.' 


LASTING 


590 


LAW 


Job  8.  7  yet  thy  latter  end  should  greatly  increase 
42.  12  So  the  Lord  blessed  the  hitter  end  of  Job 

Frov  19.  20  that  thou  mayest  be  wise  in  thy  latterend 

Isa.  41.  22  that  we  may.  .know  the  latter  end  of  them 
47.   7  neither  didst  remember  the  latter  end  of 

Lam.  1.    9  she  remembereth  not  her  last  end  ;  there. 

Dan.  S.  19  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the  indig. 
8.  23  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom,  when 

%Last}  €<tx&tos  eschatos. 

Matti2.  45  the  last  (state)  of  that  man  is  worse  than 
Luke  1 1.  26  the  last  (state)  of  that  man  is  worse  than 
2  Pe.  2.  20  the  latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than 

LASTING  — 

Age  lasting,  nViy  olam. 

Deut33, 15  forthe  precious  thlngsof  the  lasting  hills 

LATCHET  — 

1. Latchet,  yfeif  seroh. 

Gen.  14. 23  from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe  latchet,  and 
Isa.     5.  27  nor  the  latchet  of  their  shoes  be  broken 

2.Latchct,  thong,  strap,  I  fids  himas. 

Mark  1.    7  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  uot  worthy 
Luke  3. 16  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  wor. 
John  1.  27  whose  shoe's  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to 
[See  also  Shoe-latchet.] 
LATE,  to  be  — 
To  tarry,  delay,  hinder,  inx  achar,  3. 

Psa.127.    2  to  situp  late,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows 
LATE,  of  — 
1.  Vesterday,  ViPrjN,  bvom  ethmul,  ethmol. 

Mic.    2.    8  Eve'nof  latVmy  peopleis  risen  upas  an 
2,iVowl  vvv  nun. 

Johnii.    8  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  sought  to  stone 
LATELY  — 
Recently,  ivpofftpdrots  prosphatos. 

Acts  18.    2  lately  come  from  Italy,  with  his  wife  Pr. 
LATIN,  'P&ftaiKos,  ^Vafia'iffri  Romaic,  Romaisti. 
The  language  of  the  Romans. 

Lukeas.  38  written  over  him  in  letters  of..  L.,  and  H. 
John  19.  20  written  in  Hebrew,  (and)  Greek,  (and)  L. 
LATTER  — 
l.Last,  latter,  f'nnN  acharon. 

Exod.  4.    8  they  will  believe  the  voice  of  the  latter 
Deut  24.    3  And  00  the  latter  husband  hate  her.  and 

24.  3  or  if  the  latter  husband  die,  which  took 
Ruth  3.  10  showed  more  kindness  in  the  latter  end 
2  Sa.  2.  26  that  itwillbebitternessin  the  latterend? 
J  oh.  19-  25  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  (day)  upon  the 
Dan.  11,  29  shall  not  be  as  the  former,  or  as  the  latter 
Hag.  2.  9  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  gr. 
2.La$t  or  latter  end,  nnrm  acharith. 

Nuni24.  14  shall  do  to  thy  people  in  the  latter  days 
24.  20  but  his  latter  end.  .that  he  perish  forever 
Deut.  4.  30  in  the  latter  days,  if  thou  turn  to  the  Lord 
31. 29  and  evil  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  days 
Jer.  23.  20  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it  per. 
30. 24  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it 
48.  47  the  captivity  of  Moab  hi  the  latter  days 
49. 39  But  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  latter  d. 
Eze.  38.    8  in  the  latter  years  thou  shalt  come  into 
38.  16  it  shall  be  in  the  latter  days,  and  I  will 
Dan.    2.  28  known,  .what  shall  be  in  the  latter  days 
10. 14  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  days 
Hos.   3.    5  the  Lord  and  his  goodness  in  the  latter 

d.Late,  latter,  ttihtjios  opsimos. 

Jas.     5.   7  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain 

4.  Latter,  varepos  husteros. 

1  Ti.    4.    1  that  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart 
LATTER  (growth)  — 

The  latter  growth,  gathering,  tfftb  hqesll. 

Amos  7.    1  of  the  shooting  up  of  the  latter  growth 
7.    1  the  latter  growth  after  the  king's  mowings 

LATTER  rain  — 

The  hitter  or  gathered  rain,  Bnp?D  malqosh, 

Deutn.  14  the  first  rain,  and  the  latter  ram,  that  thou 
Job  29. 23  opened theirmoutli wide.  .for.  .latter rain 
Prov  16.  1 5  his  favour  (is)  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter  rain 
Jer.  3.  3  Therefore . .  there  hath  been  no  latter  rain 
5.  24  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and  the  latter 
Hos.  6.  3  as  the  latter  (and)  former  rain  unto  the  e. 
Joel  2.  23  the  former  rain,  and  the  latter  rain  in  the 
Zech  10.    1  Ask.  .rain  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain 

LATTICE  — 

1. Lattice,  casement,  33^'X  eshndb. 

Judg.  5.  28  cried  through  the  lattice,  Why  is  his  cha. 

%  Lattices,  D*3nq  cliarakkim. 

Song  2.   9  looketh.  .showing  himself  through  the  1.' 

u.iYetor  wreathed  work,  n?:;^  sebakah. 

2  Ex  1.   2  Ahaziah  fell  down  through  a  lattice  in  his 
LATTD,  to  — 

To  applaud,  £iratv4a>  epainco. 

Rom  15. 11  Praise  the  Lord,  .laud  him,  all  ye  people 
LAUGH,  to  — 
l.To  scorn,  ijj  laag. 

Job     9.  23  he  will  laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  innocent 

Psa.  80.    6  and  our  enemies  laugh  among  themselves 
2. Laugh {<;,-,  phy  teechaq. 

Gen.  at.    6  Gtid  hath  made  me  to  laugh,  .all  that  hear 


3.  To  laugh,  pny  tsachaq. 

Gen.  17.  17  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face,  and  laughed 
18.  12  Sarah  laughed  within  herself,  saying,  Af, 
18.  13  Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh,  saying,  Shall 
18. 15  Sarah  denied,  saying,  I  laughed  not ;  for 
18.  15  And  he  said,  Nay ;  but  thou  didst  laugh 
21.    6  (so  that)  all  that  hear  will  laugh  with  me 

\.To  laugh,  pn'i?  sachaq. 

Job  5.  22  At  destruction  and  famine  thou  shalt  la. 
29.  24  (If)  I  laughed  on  them,  they  believed  (it) 
41.  29  Darts  are  counted  as  stubble  :  helaugheth 

Psa.  2.  4  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh 
37. 13  The  LORD  shall  laugh  at  him ;  for  he  seeth 
52.  6  shall  see,  and  fear,  and  shall  laugh  at  him 
59.    8  But  thou,  O  Lord,  shalt  laugh  at  them 

Prov.  1.  26  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity ;  I  will 

Eccl.  3.    4  A  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh ;  a 

5.  To  laugh,  yt\dw  gelao. 

Luke  6.  21  Blessed,  .that  weep  now :  for  ye  shall  la. 

6.  25  Woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now*!  for  ye  sh. 

LATJGH  to  scorn,  to  — 

1,7V  scorn,  J»?  laag. 

2  Ki,  19.  21  daughter  of  Zion.  .laughed  thee  to  scorn 
Job   22.  19  glad ;  and  the  innocent  laugh  them  to  sc. 
Neh.   2.  19  they  laughed  us  to  scorn,  and  despised 
Psa.  22.    7  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn 
Isa.   37.  22  daughter  of  Zion.  .laughed  thee  to  scorn 

2.  To  laugh,  deride,  pny  sachaq,  5. 

2  Ch.30. 10  they  laughed  them  to  scorn,  and  mocked 

3.  Laughter,  pn$  isechoq. 

Eze.  23.  32  thou  shalt  be  laughed  to  scorn  and  had  in 

■i.Laughter,  derision,  play,  pint?  seclwq. 

Job   12.    4  the  just  upright  (man  is)  laughed  to  scorn 

5.  To  laugh  at,  or  down,  tcarayeXdzo  katagelao. 
Matt.  9.  24  sleepeth.   And  they  laughed  him  to  scorn 
Mark  5.  40  And  they  laughed  him  to  scorn.  But  when 
Luke  S.  53  And  they  laughed  him  to  scorn,  knowing 

LAUGHING  or  laughter  — 

1. Laughter,  piny'  sechoq. 

Job     8.  21  Till  he  fill  thy  mouth  with  laughing,  and 
Psa. 126.   2  Then  was  our  mouth  filled  with  laughter 
Prov.  14.  13  Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful 
Eccl.  2.    2  I  said  of  laughter,  (It  is)  mad ;  and  of  mi. 

7.  3  Sorrow  (is)  better  than  laughter  :  for  by 
7.    6  under  a  pot,  so  (is)  the  laughter  of  the  fool 

10. 19  A  feast  is  made  for  laughter,  and  wine 

2.Laughter,  yekws  gelds. 

Jas.  4.    9  let  your  laughter  be  turned  to  mourning 
LAUNCH  (forth  or  out),  to  — 

1.  To  lead  up,  launch  out,  avdyw  anago. 

Luke  8.  22  side  of  the  lake.    And  they  launched  fo. 
Acts  21.    1  we  were  .gotten  from  them,  and  had  lau. 

27.    2  we  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by  the  co. 

27.   4  when  we  had  launched  from  thence,  we 

2.  To  lead  up  upon,  launch  forth,  iwavdyw  cpanago, 

Luke  5.    4  Launch  out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down 
LAVER  — 
Pan,  laver,  "iv?  kiyyor. 

EXOCI30.  18  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  laver  (of)  brass 

30.  28  all  his  vessels,  and  the  laver  and  his  foot 

31.  9  his  furniture,  and  the  laver  and  his  foot 
35.  16  and  all  his  vessels,  the  laver  and  his  foot 
38.  8  he  made  the  laver  (of)  brass,  and  the  foot 
39. 39  and  all  his  vessels,  the  laver  and  his  foot 
40.  7  thou  shalt  set  the  laver  between  the  tent 
40. 11  thou  shalt  anoint  the  laver  and  his  foot 
40.  30  he  set  the  laver  between  the  tent  of  the 

Lev.    8. 11  both  the  laver  and  his  foot,  to  sanctify 

1  Ki.   7.  30  under  the  laver  (were)  undersetters  mol. 

7, 38  Then  made  he  ten  lavers  of  brass  :  one  la. 
7.  3S  (and)  every  laver  was  four  cubits :  (and) 
7.  38  upon  every  one  of  the  ten  bases  one  laver 
7. 40  Hiram  made  the  lavers,  and  the  shovels 
7.  43  the  ten  bases,  and  ten  lavers  on  the  bases 

2  Ki.  16.  17  removed  the  laver  from  off  them ;  and 

2  Ch.  4.   6  He  made  also  ten  lavers,  and  put  five  on 
4.  14  He  made  also  bases,  and  lavers  made  he 

LAVISH,  to  — 

To  lightly  esteem,  pour  forth ,  ^1  ztd. 

Isa.  46.   6  They  lavish  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and  we. 

LAW  — 

l.Law,  sentence,  rn  datli. 

Deut33>    2  from  his  right  hand  (went)  a  fiery  law  for 
Ezra    7.  12,  21  a  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  hea. 

7. 14  according  to  the  law  of  thy  God  which  (is) 
7.  25  judge,  .all  suchas know  the  laws  of  thyG. 
7.  26  whosoever  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God 
7. 26  and  the  law  of  the  king,  let  judgment  be 

Estli.  1.    8  the  drinking  (was)  according  to  the  law 
1. 13  toward  all  that  knew  law  and  judgment 
1.  15  unto  the  queen  Vashti  according  to  law 
1. 19  let  it  be  written  among  the  laws  of  the  P. 
3.   8  and  their  laws  (are)  diverse  from  all  peo. 

3.  8  neither  keep  they  the  king's  laws:  there. 

4.  11  one  law  of  his  to  put  (him)  to  death,  ex. 
4. 16  go  in.  .which  (is) not  according  to  thelaw 

Dan.    6.    5  except  we  find  (it),  .concerning  the  law  of 

6.  8, 12  according  to  the  law  of  the  Medesand 

6. 15  Know,  O  king,  that  the  law  of  the  Medea 

7.  25  he  shall,  .think  to  change  times  and  laws 


2.  Statute,  decree,  ph  choq. 

Gen.  47.  26  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  E. 
1  Ch.  16.  17  hath  confirmed  the  same  to  Jacob  for  a  1 
Psa.  94.  20  thee,  which  frameth  mischief  by  a  law? 
105.  10  confirmed  the  same  unto  Jacob  for  a  law 

2. To  decree,  grave,  ppn  chaqaq. 

Prov.31.    5  Lest  they  drink,  and  forget  the  law,  and 

4,  Command,  precept,  charge,  n]vo  mitsvah. 

Jer.  32. 11  which  was  sealed  (according)  to  the  law 

^.Judgment,  t33[?o  mishpat. 

Psa.  81.   4  this  (was)  a  statute  for  Israel,  (and)  a  law 
6, Law,  direction,  .-nip  torah. 

Gen.  26.  5  Because  that  Abraham  obeyed .  .my  laws 
Exodi2.  4y  One  law  shalLbe.  to  him  that  is  home  born 
13.  9  that  the  Lord's  law  may  be  in  thy  mouth 
16.  4  whether  they  will  walk  in  my  law,  or  no 
16.  28  How  long  refuse  ye  to  keep . .  my  laws  ? 
18. 16  know  the  statutes  of  God,  and  his  laws 

18.  2c  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and  laws 
24.  12  will  give  thee  tables  of  stone,  and  a  law 

Lev.     6.    9  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering :  It 
6.  14  this  (is)  the  law  of  the  meat  offering :  the 

6.  25  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  sin  offering ;  In 

7.  1  this  (is)  the  law  of  the  trespass  offering 
7.    7  one  law  for  them  :  the  priest  that  maketh 
7.  11  this  (is)  the  law  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace 
7.  37  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering,  of 

11.  46  Tliis  (is)  the  law  of  the  beasts,  and  of  the 

12.  7  This  (is)  the  law  for  her  that  hath  born  a 

13.  59  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  plague  of  leprosy 

14.  2  Tliis  shall  be  the  law  of  the  leper  in  the 
14.  32  This  (is)  the  law  (of  him)  in  whom  (is)the 
14.  54  This  (is)  the  law  for  all  manner  of  plague 

14.  57  when  (it  is)  clean  :  this  (is)  the  law  of  le. 

15.  32  This  (is)  the  law  of  him  that  hath  an  issue 

26.  46  These  (are)  the  statutes,  .and  laws  which 
Num.  5.  29  This  (is)thelaw  of  jealousies,  whenawife 

5.  30  priest  shall  execute  upon  her  all  this  law 

6.  13  this  (is)  the  law  of  the  Nazarite,  when  the 
6.  21  This  (is)  the  law. .after  the  law  of  his  se. 

15.  16  One  law  and  one  manner  shall  be  for  you 
15.  29  Ye.shall  have  one  law  for  him  that  sinneth 

19.  2  This  (is)  the  ordinance  of. the  law  which 
19.  14  This  (is)  the  law,  when  a  man  dieth  in  a 
31.  21  This  (is)  the  ordinance  of  the  law  which 

Deut.  1.    5  began  Moses  to  declare  this  law,  saying 
4.    8  righteous  as  all  tins  law,  which  I  set  before 
4.  44  this  (is)  the  law  which  Moses  set  before 

17. 11  Accordingtothesentence  of  thelaw  which 
17. 18  he  shall  write  him  a  copy  of  this  law  in  a 
17.  19  keep  all  the  words  of  this  law  and  these 

27.  3,  8  thou  shalt  write,  .the  words  of  this  law 

27.  26  confirmeth  not  (all)  the  words  of  this  law 

28.  58  not  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 

28.  61  which  (is)  not  written  in  the  book  of  this  1. 

29.  21  that  are  written  in  this  book  of  the  law 

29.  29  that  (we)  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 

30.  10  (which  are)  written  in  this  book  of  the  law 

31.  9  Moses  wrote  this  law,  and  delivered  it  unto 
31.  11  thou  shalt  read  this  law  before  all  Israel 

31. 12  and  observe  to  do  allthewordsof  thislaw 
31. 24  of  writing  the  words  of  this  law  in  a  book 

31.  26  Take  this  book  of  the  law,  and  put  it  in 

32.  46  to  observe  to  do,  all  the  words  of  this  law 

33.  4  Moses  commanded  us  a  law,  (even)  the 
33. 10  They  shall  teach.  .Israel  thy  law:  they 

Josh.  1.    7  observe  to  do  according  to  all  the  law 

1.    8  This  book  of  the  law  shall  not  depart  out  of 
8.  31  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  M. 
8.  32  he  wrote  there,  .a  copy  of  the  law  of  M. 
8.  34  he  read  all  the  words  of  the  law,  the  bl. 
8.  34  all  that  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law 

22.  5  take  diligent  heed  to  do.  .the  law,  which 

23.  6  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  M. 

24.  26  wrote  these  words  in  the  book  of  the  law 

1  Ki.  2.    3  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  that 

2  Ki.  10.  31  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of 

14.    6  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  M. 
17.  13  according  to  all  the  law  which  I  comma. 
17.  34  neither  do  they,  .after  the  law  and  com. 
17.  37  the  law.  .which  he  wrote  foryou,  ye  shall 

21.  8  according  to  all  the  law  that  my  servant 

22.  8  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the 

22.  11  heard  the  words  of  the  book  of  the  law 

23.  24  he  might  perform  the  words  of  the  law 
23.  25  according  to  all  the  law  of  Moses;  neither 

1  Ch.  16.  40  according  to  all  that  is  written  in  the  law 

22.  12  that  thou  mayest  keep  the  law  of  the  L. 

2  Ch.  6.  16  take  heed  to  their  way  to  walk  in  my  law 

12.    1  he  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  all  I. 

14.  4  and  to  do  the  lawand  the  commandment 

15.  3  long  season  Israel  (hath  been),  .without  1. 
17.  9  the^bookof  the  law  of  the  Lord  with  them 
19.  10  between  law  and  commandment,  statutes 

23.  iS  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  with  rejoicing 

25.  4  written  in  the  law  in  the  book  of  Moses 

30.  16  according  to  the  law  of  Moses  the  man  of  G. 

31.  3  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 
31.  4  they  might  be  encouraged  in  the  law  of 
31.  21  in  the  law,  and  in  the  commandments,  to 

33.  8  according  to  the  whole  law  and  the  stat. 

34.  14  Hilkiah  the  priest  found  a  book  of  thelaw 

34.  15  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the 
34. 19  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of  the  law 

35.  26  according  to  (that. .)  written  in  the  law 
Ezra    3.    2  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  man  of  G. 

7.  6  he  (was)  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of  Mo. 
7.  :o  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of 
10.    3  and  let  it  be  done  according  to  the  law 


LAW 


Neh.  8.    i  to  bring  the  book  of  the  law  of  Moses 

8.  2  Ezra  the  priest  brought  the  law  before  the 
8.  3  (were  attentive)  unto  the  book  of  the  law 
8.  7  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law 
8.  8  So  they  read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of  G. 
8.  9  when  they  heard  the  words  of  the  law 
8.  13  even  to  understand  the  words  of  the  law 
8.  14  they  found  written  in  the  law  which  the 

8.  18  he  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God 

9.  3  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord 
9. 13  gavestthem.  .true  laws,  good  statutes  and 
9.  14  commandedst  them,  .laws,  by  the  hand  of 
9.  26  cast  thy  law  behind  then-backs,  and  slew 
9. 29  mightest  bring  them  again  unto  thy  law 
9.  34  Neither  have  ourkings.-keptthy  law;  nor 

10.  28  from  the  people  of  the  lands  unto  thelaw 
10.  29  to  walk  inGod's  law,  which  was  given  by 
10.  34  to  burn,  .as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law 
to.  36  of  our  cattle,  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law 

12.  44  portions  of  the  law  for  the  priests  and  L. 

13.  3  came topass,  whentheyhadheard thelaw 
Job  22.  22  Receive,  I  pray  thee,  the  law  from  his  m. 
Psa.     1.    2  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  ;  and  in  his  law 

19.    7  The  law  of  the  Lord  (is)  perfect,  convert. 
37.  31  The  law  of  his  God  (is)  in  his  heart ;  none 
40.    8  I  delight  to  do  thy  will . .  yea,  thy  law  (is) 
78.    1  Give  ear,  O  my  people,  (to)  my  law:  inc. 
78.    5  appointed  a  law  in  Israel,  which  he  com. 
78.  10  kept  not.  .and  refused  to  walk  in  his  law 
89.  30  If  his  children  forsake  my  law,  and  walk 
94.  12  0  LORD,  and  teachest  him  out  of  thy  law 
105.  45  observe  his  statutes,  and  keep  Ms  laws 
119.    1  theundefiled.  .who  walk  in  the  law  of  the 
119. 18  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law 
119.  29  Remove. .and  grant  me  thy  law  graciously 
119.  34  1  shall  keep  thy  law;  yea,  I  shall  observe 
119.  44  So  shall  I  keep  thy  law  continually  for 
119.  51  (yet)  have  I  not  declined  from  thy  law 
no.  53  because  of  the  wicked  that  forsake  thy  law 
119.  55  remembered  thy  name.. have  kept  thylaw 
119.  61  me  :  (but)  I  have  not  forgotten  thy  law 
119.  70  fat  as  grease;  (but)  I  delight  in  thy  law 
119.  72  The  law  of  thy  mouth  (is)  better  unto  me 
119.  77  that  I  may  live :  for  thy  law  (is)  my  deli. 
119.  85  digged  pits. .  which  (are)not  after  thy  law 
119.  92  Unless  thylaw  (had  been)  my  delights,  I 
119.  97  0  how  love  I  thy  law !  it  (is)  my  meditat. 
119.  109  in  my  hand :  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  law 
119.  113  I  hate  (vain)  thoughts  :  but  thy  law  do  I 
119,  126  work  ;  (for) they  have  made  void  thy  law 
119. 136  rundown,  .because  they  keep  not  thy  law 
119.  142  righteousness,  and  thylaw(is)  the  truth 
1T9.  150  draw  nigh,  .they  are  far  from  thy  law 
119. 153  deliver  me  ;  for  I  do  not  forget  thy  law 
119.  163  I  hate  and  abhor  lying:  (but)  thy  law  do 
119. 165  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  thy.law 
119.  174  longed  for  thy  salvation,  .and  thy  law 
Prov.  1.    8  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother 

3.  1  My  son,  forget  not  my  law  ;  but  let  thine 

4.  2  good  doctrine,  forsake  ye  not  my  law 
6.  20  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother 

6.  23  law  (is)  light;  and  reproofs  of  instruction 

7.  2  Keep,  .my  law  as  the  apple  of  thine  eye 
13.  14  The  law  of  the  wise  (is)  a  fountain  of  life 
28.  4  They  that  forsake  the  law  praise  the  wi. 
28.  4  such  as  keep  the  law  contend  with  them 
28.  7  Whoso  keepeth  the  law(is)  a  wise  son :  but 
28.  9  turneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law 
29. 18  but  he  that  keepeth  the  law,  happy  (is)  he 
31.  26  and  in  her  tongue  (is)  the  law  of  kindness 

Isa.     1.  ro  give  ear  unto  the  law  of  our  God,  ye  pe. 
2.    3  for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and 

5.  24  because  they  have  cast  away  the  law  of  the 
8. 16  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law  am. 

8.  20  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony :  if  they 
24.   5  because  they  have  transgressed  the  laws 

30.  9  children  (that)  will  not  hear  the  law  of  the 
42.  4  earth  :  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his  law 
42.  21  magnify  the  law,  and  make  (it)  honourable 
42.  24  neither  were  they  obedient  unto  his  law 
51.  4  a  law  shall  proceed  from  me,  and  I  will 
51.   7  the  people  in  whose  heart  (is)  my  law ;  fear 

Jer.    2.    8  they  that  handle  the  law  knew  me  not:  the 

6.  19  not  hearkened  unto  my  words,uor  to  my  1. 

8.  8  We  (are)  wise,  and  the  law  of  the  LORD  (is) 
9. 13  Because  they  have  forsaken  my  law  which 

16. 11  forsaken  me,  and  have  not  kept  my  law 
18.  18  for  the  law  shall  not  perish  from  the  pri. 
26.    4  to  walk  in  my  law,  which  I  have  set  before 

31.  33  I  will  put  my  law  in  their  inward  parts 

32.  23  obeyed  not.  .neither  walked  in  thy  law 

44. 10  neither  have  they . .  walked  in  my  law,  nor 
44.  23  not  obeyed,  .nor  walked  in  his  law 

Lam.  2.    9  the  law  (is)  no  (more);  her  prophets  also 

Eze.     7.  26  the  law  shall  perish  from  the  priest,  and 

22.  26  Her  priests  have  violated  my  law,  and  have 

43. 11  show  them,  .all  the  laws  thereof:  and  wr. 

43. 12  the  law  ofthe  house,  .the  law  of  thehouse 
44.  5  I  say  unto  thee  concerning,  .all  the  laws 
44.  24  they  shall  keep  my  laws  and  my  statutes 

Dan.   9.  10  to  walk  in  his  laws,  which  he  set  before 

9.  11  Yea,  all  Israel  have  transgressed  thy  law 

9. 11  the  oath  that  (is)  written  in  the  law  of  M. 
9. 13  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  all  this  evil 

Eos.    4.    6  thou  hast  forgotten  the  law  of  thy  God,  I 
8.    1  they  have,  .trespassed  against  my  law 

8. 12  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  my  law 
Amos  2.  4  they  have  despised  the  law  of  the  Lord 
Mic.  4.  2  for  the  law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion,  and  the 
Hab.  1.  4  Therefore  the  law  is  slacked,  and  judgm. 
Zeph.  3.  4  her  priests  have . .  done  violence  to  the  law 
Hag.  2. 11  Ask  now  the  priests  (concerning)  the  law 


591 


Zeeh.  7.  12  they  should  hear  the  law,  and  the  words 

Mai.    2.   6  The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth,  and 

2.   7  they  should  seek  thelaw  at  his  mouth :  for 

2.    8  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  law 

2.   9  not  kept . .  but  have  been  partial  in  the  law 

4.  4  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  my  serv. 

7 .Belonging  to  the  forum,  ayopdios  agoraios. 
Acts  19.  38  the  law  is  open,  and  there  are  deputies 

S.A  law,  ordinance,  custom,  v6fj.cs  nomos. 

Matt.  5. 17  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  1. 

5.  18  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  tillall 

7. 12  do  ye  even  so  to  them :  for  this  is  the  law 
n.  13  all  the  prophets  and  the  law  prophesied 
12.    5  have  ye  not  read  in  the  law,  how  that  on 
22. 36  (is)  the  great  commandmentin  the  law  ? 
22. 40  On  these  two.  .hang  all  the  law  and  the 

23.  23  omitted theweightier(matters)of  the  law 
Luke  2.  22  when  the  days,  .according  to  the  law  of  M. 

2.  23  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  Every 
2.  24  that  which  is  said  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 
2.  27  to  do  for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  law 
2.  39  performed  all  things  according  to  the  law 
10.  26  What  is  written  in  the  law?  howreadest 

16. 16  The  law  and  the  prophets  (were)  until  J. 

16. 17  it  is  easier,  .than  one  tittle  of  the  law  to 

24.  44  which  were  written  in  the  law  of  Moses 
John  1.  17  For  the  law  was  given  by  Moses,  (but)  gr. 

1. 45  found  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law,  and 

1 ,  19  Did  not  Moses  give  you  the  law,  and  (yet) 
7.  19  none  of  you  keepeth  the  law  ?  Why  go  ye 
7.  23  the  law  of  Moses  should  not  be  broken 
7.  49  people,  .knoweth  not  the  law  are  cursed 

7.  51  Doth  our  law  judge  (any)  man  before  it 

8.  5  [Moses  in  the  law  commanded  us,  that] 
8.  17  It  is  also  written  in  your  law,  that  the 

10. 34  Is  it  not  written  in  your  law,  I  said,  Ye 

12.  34  We  have  heard  out  of  the  law  that  Christ 
15. 25  the  word,  .that  is  writteu  in  their  law,  They 

18.  31  and  judge  him  according  to  your  law 

19.  7  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought 
Acts    6. 13  blasphemous  words  against  this,  .law 

7.  53  Who  have  received  the  law  by  the  dispo. 

13.  15  after  the  reading  of  the  law  and  the  prop. 
13.  39  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses 
15.  5  command  (them)  to  keep  the  lawof  Moses 
15.  24  [(Ye  must)  be  circumcised,  and  keep  the  1.] 
18.  13  men  to  worship  God  contrary  to  the  law 
18.  15  But  if  it  be  a  question  of.  .your  law,  look 

"21.  20  believe  ;  and  they  are  all  zealous  of  thelaw 
2i.  24  also  walkest  orderly,  and  keepest  the  law 

21.  28  This  is  the  man  that  teacheth.  .the  law 

22.  3  perfect  manner  of  thelaw  of  the  fathers 
22. 12  adevout  man  according  to  thelaw,  having 

23.  3  for  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after  the  law 

23.  29  to  be  accused  of  questions  of  their  law,  but 

24.  6  [would  have  judged  according  to  our  law] 
24. 14  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  law 

25.  8  Neither~against  the  law  of  the  Jews,  neit. 
28.  23  both  out  of  the  law  of  Moses,  and  (out  of) 

Rom  2.  12  in  the  law  shall  be  judged  by  the  law 

2.  13  For  not  the  hearers  of  [the]  law  (are)  just 
2.  13  but  the  doers  of  [the]  law  shall  be  justified 

h  2.  14  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law,  do 
2. 14  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law 

2. 14  these,  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  unto 
2.  iq  Which  show  the  work  of  the  law  written 
2.  1/  art  called  a  Jew,  and  restest  in  [the]  law 

2. 18  excellent,  being  instructed  out  of  thelaw 
2.  20  of  knowledge  and  of  the  truth  in  the  law 
2.  23  boast  ofthe  law,  through  breaking  the  law 
2.  25  verily  profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the  law ;  but 
2.  25  if  thou  be  a  breaker  of  the  law,  thy  cir. 
2.  26  keep  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  shall 

2.  27  which  is  by  nature,  if  it  fulfil  the  law,  ju. 
2. 27  by  the  letter,  .dost  transgress  the  law? 

3. 19  we  know  that  what  things  soever  the  law 
3. 19  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law 

3.  20  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh 
3.  20  for  by  the  law  (is)  the  knowledge  of  sin 
3.  21  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  law 
3.  21  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  prophets 
3.  27  what  law?  of  works?  Nay ;  but  by  the  law 
3.  28  justified  by  faith  without,  .deeds  of  the  I. 
3.  31  Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through 

3.  31  God  forbid:  yea,  we  establish  the  law 

4.  13  to  his  seed,  through  the  law,  but  through 

4.  14  For  if  they  which  are  of  the  law  (be)  heirs 

4. 15  the  law  worketh  wrath :  for  where  no  law 

4. 16  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  law,  but 

5. 13  For  until  the  law  sin  was  in  the  world 

5.  13  sin  is  not  imputed  when  there  is  no  law 

5.  20  the  law  entered, that  the  offence  might  ab. 

6. 14  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  butundergrace 

6.  15  because  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but 

7.  1  them  that  knowthelaw.how  that  the  law 
7.  2  which  hath  an  husband  is  bound  by  the  1. 
7.  2  she  is  loosed  from  the  law  of  (her)  husband 
7.  3  husbandbedead,  she  is  free  from  that  law 
7.  4  ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the 
7.  5  the  motions  of  sins,  which  were  by  the  law 
7.  6  we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being 
7.  7  What  shall  we  say  then?  (Is)  the  law  sin? 
7.  7  Nay,  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law 
7.  7  except  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shalt  not 
7.    8  For  without  the  law  sin  (was)  dead 

7.    9  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once :  but 
7. 12  the  law  (is)  holy,  and  the  commandment 
7. 14  we  know  that  the  law  is  spiritual :  but  I 
7.  16  I  consent  unto  the  law  that  (it  is)  good 
7.  2 1  I  find  then  a  law,  that,  when  I  would  do 


LAW 


Rom.  7.  22  I  delight  in  the  law  of  Godaftertheinwar^. 
7.  23  law  in  my  members,  warring  aga.  thelaw 
7.  23  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members 

7.  25  the  law  of  God,  but  with  the  flesh  the  law 

8.  2  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus 
8.  2  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  de. 
8.    3  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 

8.  4  That  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might 
S.    7  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither 

9.  31  Israel,  which  followed  after  the  law  of 
9.  31  hath  not  attained  to  the  law  of  righteous. 
9.  32  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  [of  the  law] 

10.  4  For  Christ  (is)  the  end  of  thelawforright. 
10.  5  describeth  the  righteousness,  .ofthe  law 
13.    8  thatloveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law 

13.  10  therefore  love(is)  the  fulfilling  of  the  law 
1  Co.  7.  39  The  wife  is  bound  [by  the  law]  as  long  as 

9.  8  a  man?  or  saith  not  the  law  the  same  also? 
9.  9  For  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  Thou 
9.  20  that  are  under  the  law,  as  under  the  law 

9.  20  I  might  gain  them  that  are  under  thelaw 

14.  21  the  law  it  is  written,  With  (men  of)  other 

14.  34  be  under  obedience,  as  also  saith  thelaw 

15.  56  Thesting..  and.,  strength  of  sin  (is)  the  law 
Gal.    2.  16  man  is  not  justified  by.  .works  ofthe  law 

2.  16  not.  .of  the  law:  for  by.  .works of  thelaw 
2.  19  I  through  the  law  am  dead  lo  the  law,  that 

2.  21  if  righteousness  (come)  by  the  law,  then 

3.  2  the  spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the 
3.  5  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing 
3. 10  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  thelaw  are 

3. 10  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law 
3.  11  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law  in  the 
3.  12  the  law  is  not  of  faith:  but,  The  man  that 
3.  13  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law 

3.  17  the  law,  which  was  fourhundred  and  th. 
3.  18  if  the  inheritance  (be)  of  the  law,  (it  is) 
3.  19  Wherefore  then  (serveth)  the  law  ?  It  was 
3.  21  (Is)  the  law  then  against  the  promises  of 
3.  21  a  law  given  which  could  have  given  life 
3.  21  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the  law 
3.  23  we  were  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto 

3.  24  Wherefore  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster 

4.  4  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  .under  the  law 
4.    5  To  redeem  them  that  were  under  thelaw 

4.  21  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law? 

5.  3  testify.. he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law 

5.  4  whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the  law 
5. 14  For  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in.,  word,  (even) 

5. 18  led  by  the  spirit,  ye  are  not  under  thelaw 
5. 23  temperance  :  against  such  there  is  no  law 

6.  2  Bear  ye.  .burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of 

6.  13  they,  .who are  circumcised  keep  thelaw 
15  the  enmity,  .the  law  of  commandments 

5  Hebrew . .  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee 

6  touching  the  righteous,  which  is  in  the  law 
3.   9  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law 
1.   8  we  know  that  the  law  (is)good,  if  a  man 

1.  9  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man 

7.  5  tithes  of  the  people  according  to  the  law 
7.  12  made  of  necessity  a  change  also  of  the  law 
7.  16  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandm. 

7. 19  For  the  law  made  nothing  perfect ;  but 
7.  28  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  which 

7.  28  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  thelaw 

8.  4  prieststhatoffergiftsaccordingto  the  law 

8.  10  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and 
9. 19  to  all  the  people  according  to  [the]  law 

9.  22  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged 

10.  1  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  good  things 
10.    8  burnt  offerings.. are  offered  by  [the] law 
10.  16  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  hearts,  and 
10.  28  He  that  despised  Moses' law  died  without 

Jas.     1.  25  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  lib. 

2.  8  If  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law  according  to  the 
2.  9  are  convinced  of  the  law  as  transgressors 
2.  10  For  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law 

2. 11  thou  art  become  a  transgressor  of  the  law 

2. 12  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty 
4. 11  evil  of  the  law,  and  judgeth  the  law :  but 
4. 11  judge  the  law,  thou  art  not  a  doer  of  the  1. 

[See  also  Daughter,  doctor,  father,  mother,  sister,  son, 
sue,  teacher,  transgress.] 

LAW,  manner  of  — 
Judgment,  E£PP  mishpat. 

Lev.  24.  22  Ye  shall  have  one  manner  of  law,  as  well 

LAW,  about  the  — 

Legal,  belonging  to  law,  pofiiKos  nomilros. 

Titus  3.   9 But  avoid . . strivings  about  the  law;  for 

LAW,  contrary  to  the  — 

To  act  aside  from  law,  TrapavofLtw  paronomeo. 
Acts  23.   3  me  to  be  smitten  contrary  to  the  law? 

LAW,  giving  of  the  — 

LoAvgiving,  vofioBeo-ia  nomothesia, 

Rom.  9.    4  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  ofthe  law 

LAW,  to  go  to,  or  sue  at  the  — 
l.To  have  a  lawsuit,  f~x&  fcpifj-a  echo  hrima. 
1  Co.  6.   7  because  ye  go  to  law  one  with  another 

2.  To  judge,  sift,  Kpiva  fcrino. 

Matt.  5.  40  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  law,  and 
1  Co.  6.    1  Dare  any  of  you.,  go  to  law  before  the  un. 
6.   6  But  brother  goeth  to  law  with  brother,  and 

LAW,  to  receive  the  — 

To  sit,  appoint  or  give  a  law,  vofAoQtTtca  noniotlieteo. 
Heb.  7. 11  for  under  it  the  people  received  the  law 


Eph. 
Phil. 


iTi. 
Heb. 


LAW 


592 


LAY 


LAW,  transgression  of  the  — 
Lawlessness,  avofxia  anemia. 

i  Jo.   3.    4  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law 
LAW,  under  the  — 
Within  law,  tvvofj.o<;  ennomos. 

1  Co.   9.  21  but  under  the  law  [to  Christ],  that  I  might 
LAW,  without  — 
1. Lawless,  &vo/j.o$  anomos. 

1  Co.  9.  2iTothemthatarewithoutlaw,aswithoutl. 
9.  21  being  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under 
9.  21  I  might  gain  them  that  are  without  law 

2,  Lawlessly \  av6fj.o>s  anomos. 

Rom.  2.  T2  without  law  shall  also  perish  without  law 
LAWFUL  — 
1.  Judgment,  Bfifp  mishpat. 

Eze.  18.  5  if  a  man  do.  .that  which  is  lawful  and  right 
18.  19  When  the  son  hath*  done  that  which  is  1. 
18.  21  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he 

18.  27  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he 
33.  14,  19  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 
33.  16  he  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful  andri. 

2. Right,  righteous,  just,  rigid,  p^X  tsaddiq. 

Isa.  49.  24  Shall  the  prey  be  taken . .  or  the  lawful  cap. 
3  In  conformity  to  law,  ivvofxos  ennomos. 

Acts  19.  39  it  shall  be  determined  in  a  lawful  assembly 
LAWFUL,  to  be  — 
l.A  ruler,  v*ip  shallit. 

Ezra   7.  24  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll,  tribute 

2. It  is  privileged,  authorized,  e£eo-Ti  exesti. 

Matti2.    2  thy  disciples  do  that  which  is  not  lawful 
12.   4  which  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  eat,  nei. 
12.  10  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  days? 
12. 12  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the  sabbath  days 
14.    4  John  said.  .It  is  uot  lawful  for  thee  to 

19.  3  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  w. 

20.  15  Isitnotlawfulforme  to  do  what  Iwill  with 
22.  17  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  unto  Cesar,  or 
27.    6  It  is  not  lawful  for  to  put  them  into  the 

Mark  2.  24  why  do  they,  .that  which  is  not  lawful? 

2.  26  which  is  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the  priests 

3.  4  Is  it  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  sabbath 

6.  18  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  thy  broth. 

10.   2  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  (his)  w.? 

12.  14  Is  itlawful  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or 

Luke  6.    2  Why  do  ye  that  which  is  not  lawful  to  do 

6.    4  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the  p. 

6.    9  Is  it  lawful  on  the  sabbath  days  to  do  good 

T4.    3  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  day  ? 

20.  22  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to  give  tribute  unto  C. 

John  5. 10  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  carry  (thy)  bed 

18.  31  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to 

Acts  16.  21  teach  customs. .not  lawful  for  us  to  receive 

22.  25  Is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  a  man  that 

1  Co.  6.  12  All  things  are  lawful,  .all  things  are  law. 

10.  23,  23  All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  all 

'  2  Co.  12.    4  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter 
LAWFULLY  — 
Lawfully,  according  to  law,  vofxip-dis  nnmimos. 

1  Ti.    1.8  the  law  (is)  good,  if  a  man  use  it  lawfully 

2  Ti.    2.    5  is  he  not  crowned,  except  he  strive  lawf. 
LAWGIVER  — 

1.  To  grave,  decree,  ppri  chaqaq,  3a. 

Gen.  49. 10  nor alawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until 
Nuni2i.  18  digged  it  by  (thedireetionof)thelawgiver 
Deut  33.  21  there,  (in)  a  portion  of  the  lawgiver,  (was 
Psa.  60.  7  strength  of  mine  head :  Judah  (is)  my  la. 
108.  8  strength  of  mine  head :  Judah  (is)  my  la. 
Isa.  33. 22  Lord  (is)  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  (is)  our 

2.  One  who  gives  a  law,  vofxoQerns  nomothetes. 
Jas.     4.  12  There  is  one  lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  save 

LAWLESS  — 

Lawless,  &vofj.os  anonws. 

1  Ti.    1.    9  but  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient,  for 
LAWYER  — 

Lawyer,  belonging  to  Hie  law,  vo(j.ik6s  nomikos. 
Matt22.  35  Then  one  of  them,  (which  was)  a  lawyer 
Luke  7.  30  the  Pharisees  and  lawyers  rejected  the 
10. 25  a  certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted 
11. 45  Then  answered  one  of  the  lawyers,  and 

11.  46  Woe  unto  you  also,  (ye)  lawyers  !  for  ye 
11.  52  Woe  unto  you,  lawyers!  for  ye  have  taken 
14.    3  Jesus  answering  spake  unto  the  lawyers 

Titus  3.  13  Bring  Zenas  the  lawyer  and  Apollos  on 
LAY,  to  — 

1.  To  fall,  %i  naphal. 

Judg.  4.  22  behold,  Sisera  lay  dead,  and  the  nail  (was) 

2.  To  cause  to  lie  down,  J>3")  robots,  5. 

Isa.  54. 11 1  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours,  and 
Z.A  lying,  nnrf  shekdbah. 

Exodi6. 13  in  the  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about 
16. 14  And  when  the  dew  that  lay  was  gone  up 
4.7b  send  sickness,  rhn  chalah,  3. 

Deut  29. 22  sicknesses  which  the  Lord  hath  laid  upon 
5.7b  give,  3n;  yehab. 

Eh -a   5.  16  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  God 
6.  To  leave,  lay,  n:;  yanach,5. 

Judg.  6.  20  lay  (them)  upon  this  rock,  and  pour  out 

1  Ki.  13.  29  laid  it  upon  the  ass,  and  brought  it  back 
13. 30  And  he  laid  his  carcase  in  his  own  grave 


1  Ki.  13.  31  When  I  am  dead,  .lay  my  bones  besidehis 
Eze.  40.  42  whereupon  also  they  laid  the  instruments 

42.  13  there  shall  they  lay  the  most  holy  things 
42.  14  there  they  shall  lay  their  garments  wher. 
44.  19  lay  them  in  the  holy  chambers,  and  they 

7.  To  found,  lay  a  foundation,  iwyasad. 

2  Ch.31.    7  they  began  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the 
Psa.  104.    s  (Who)  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth 

8.  To  cast,  rrv  yarah. 

Job  38.   6  or  who  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof 

9.  To  let  escape,  hatch,  the  malat,  3. 

Isa.  34. 15  shall  the  great  owl  make  her  nest,  and  lay 
10. A  sending  or  stretching  forth,  ni^p  mishloach. 

Isa.   11.  14  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  Edom  and 
11.  To  cause  to  rest,  leave,  put  down,  n^3  nuach,  5. 

Isa.  30.  32  which  the  Lord  shall  lay  upon  him,  (it) 
12.7b  stretch  out,  nm  natah,  5. 

Hos.  it.   4  I  drew  them  - .  and  I  laid  meat  nuto  them 

13.  To  set  up,  2kj  natsab,  5. 

2  Sa.  18. 17  laid  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  upon  him 

1 4.  To  lift  up,  N'p:  nasa. 

2  Ki.   9.  25  Ahab.  .the  Lord  laid  this  burden  upon 

15.  To  give,  jru  nathan. 

Gen.  15.  10  and  laid  each  piece  one  against  another 
Exod.  7.   4  that  I  may  lay  my  hand  upon  Egypt,  and 
Deut.  7.  15  will  lay  them  upon  all  (them)  that  hate 
11.  25  God  shall  lay  the  fear  of  you  and  the  dr. 

26.  6  afflicted  us,  and  laid  upon  us  hard  bond. 
1  Sa.    6.   8  lay  it  upon  the  cart ;  and  put  the  jewels 

1  Ki.  18.  23  and  lay  (it)  on  wood,  and  put  no  Are  (un.) 

2  Ki.  5.  23  and  laid  (them)  upon  two  of  his  servants 
2  Ch.31.  6  brought  in  the  tithe,  .and  laid  (them)  by 
Neh.  13.  5  where  aforetime  they  laid  the  meat  offer. 
Psa.  1 19.  no  The  wicked  have  laid  a  snare  for  me 
Eccl.  7.  2  end.  .and  the  living  will  lay  (it)  to  his  h. 
Isa.  22.  22  the  key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I  lay 
Jer.  6.  21 1  will  lay  stumbling  blocks  before  this  p. 
Eze.     3.  20  and  I  lay  a  stumbling  block  before  him 

4.    1  lay  it  before  thee,  aud  pour  tray  upon  it 
4.    2  lay  siege  against  it,  and  build  a  fort  aga. 
4.   5  For  I  have  laid  upon  thee  the  years  of 
4.   8  I  will  lay  bands  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
6.   5  I  will  lay  the  dead  carcases  of  the  child. 
25. 14  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom  by 
25. 17  when  I  shall  lay  my  vengeance  upon  them 

28. 17  I  will  lay  thee  before  kings,  that  they  may 
32.    5  I  will  lay  thy  flesh  upon  the  mountains 

32.  27  have  laid  then*  swords  under  their  heads 

33.  28  For  I  will  lay  the  land  most  desolate,  and 
33.  29  when  I  have  laid  the  land  most  desolate 

36.  29  will  increase  it,  and  lay  no  famine  upon 

37.  6  I  will  lay  sinews  upon  you,  and  will  bring 
Jon.  1.  14  lay  not  upon  us  innocent  blood:  for  thou 
Zech.  3.    9  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  Joshua 

16.  To  sustain,  support,  ^?o  samak. 

Lev.  3.  2,  8,  13  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head 
4.  4  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head 
4.  15  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  head  of 

4.  24,  29,  33  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head 
8.  14,  i8,  22  Aaron  and  his  sons  laid  their  hands 

16.  21  Aaron  shall  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the 

24.  14  let  all  that  heard,  .lay  their  hands  upon 
Num.  8.  12  the  Levites  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the 

27. 18  Take  thee  Joshua,  .and  lay  thine  hand 

27.  23  he  laid  his  hands  upon  him,  and  gave  him 
Deut  34.   9  for  Moses  had  laid  his  hands  upon  him 

2  Ch.  29.  23  he  goats . .  and  they  laid  their  hands  upon 

17.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  put  away,  "US'  abar,  5. 
Jon.    3.    6  and  he  laid  his  robe  from  him,  and  cove 

18.7b  cause  to  meet,  yi^paga,  5. 

Isa.   53.   6  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us 
19.7b  put,  place,  set,  W10,  d^l?  sum,  sim. 

Gen.   9.  23  laid  (it)  upon  both  their  shoulders,  and 

22.    6  laid  (it)  upon  Isaac  his  son  ;  and  he  took 

22.    9  and  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the  wood 

30.  41  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  eyes  of  the 

Exod.2.    3  she  laid  (it)  in  theflagsby  the  river's  brink 

5.  8  ye  shall  lay  upon  them  ;  ye  shall  not  dim. 
19.  7  laid  before  their  faces  all  these  words  wh. 
22.  25  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  usury 

Lev.    2.  15  thou  shalt  put  oil  upon  it,  and  lay  frank. 

Num.  ix.  11  that  thou  layest  the  burden  of  all  this  p. 

16.  18  put  fire  in  them,  and  laid  incense  thereon 

Josh.  8.    2  lay  thee  an  ambush  for  the  city  behind  it 

10.  27  and  laid  great  stones  in  the  cave's  mouth 
Judg.  9.  48  took  it,  and  laid  (it)  on  his  shoulder,  and 

18.  19  Hold  thy  peace,  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy 

1  Sa.   6.  11  they  laid  the  ark  of  the  Lord  upon  the  cart 

11.  2  and  lay  it  (for)  a  reproach  upon  all  Israel 
15.    2  howlie  laid  (wait)  for  him  in  the  way,  when 

19.  13  Michal  took  an  image,  and  laid  (it)  in  the 

25.  18  hundred  cakes  of  figs,  and  laid,  .on  asses 

2  Sa.  13.  19  laid  her  hand  on  her  head,  and  went  on 

1  Ki.18.  23  and  lay  (it)  on  wood,  and  putnofire(under) 

18.  33  and  cut  the  bullock  in  pieces,  and  laid 

2  Ki.  4.  29  and  lay  my  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  child 

4.  31  laid  the  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  child 

10.  8  Lay  ye  them  in  two  heaps  at  the  entering 

11.  16  they  laid  hands  on  her ;  and  she  went  by 

20.  7  they  took  and  laid  (it)  on  the  boil,  and  he 
2  Ch.23.  15  So  they  laid  hands  on  her:  and  when  she 
Esth.io.  1  And  thekingAhasueruslaidatributeupon 
Job    21.    5  Mark  me.  .lay.  .hand  upon  (your) mouth 

24. 12  Men  groan,  .yet  God  layetb  not  folly  (to) 
29.    9  princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid  (their) 


Job  34.  23  For  he  will  not  lay  upon  man  more  (than 

38.  5  Who  hath  laid  the  measures  thereof,  if  thou 

40.  4  Behold . .  I  will  lay  mine  hand  upon  my 

41.  8  Lay  thine  hand  upon  him,  remember  the 
Psa.  66.  11  Thou,  .thou  laidst  affliction  upon  our  loins 

79.    1  O  God.  .they  have  laid  Jerusalem  on  heaps 

Isa.   13.    9  to  lay  the  land  desolate :  and  he  shall  des. 

28. 17  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  aud 

42.  25  it  burned  him,  yet  he  laid  (it)  not  to  heart 

47.  7  that  thou  didst  not  lay  these . .  to  thy  heart 
51.  23  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  ground,  and 
57.  1  The  righteous  perisheth,  and  no  man  lay. 
57.  11  nor  laid  (it)  to  thy  heart?  have  not  I  held 

Jer.  9.  8  peaceably . .  but  in  heart  he  layeth  his  wait 
12.  11  desolate,  because  no  man  layeth  (it)  to  he. 

Eze.  4.  4  lay  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon 
xi.  7  Your  slain,  whom  ye  have  laid  in  the  mi. 
26.  12  they  shall  lay  thy  stones  and  thy  timber 
35.   4  I  will  lay  thy  cities  waste,  and  thou  shalt 

39.  21  and  my  hand  that  I  have  laid  upon  them 
Joel  1.  7  He  hath  laid  my  vine  waste,  and  barked 
Obad.  7  (they  that  eat)  thy  bread  have  laid  a  wo. 
"Mic.    1.    7  and  all  the  idols  thereof  will  I  lay  desol. 

5.    1  he  hath  laid  siege  against  us ;  they  shall 
7.  16  they  shall  lay.  .hand  upon. : mouth,  their 
Zech.  7.  14  for  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate 
Mai.    1.    3  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  mountains  and 
2.    2  if  ye  will  not  lay  (it)  to  heart,  to  give  glory 

2.  2  cursed . .  because  ye  do  not  lay  (it)  to  heart 

20,  To  make  ecpual,  compare,  place,  r\w  shavah,  3. 
Psa.  21.    5  honour  and  majesty  hast  thou  laid  upon 
89.  19  I  have  laid  help  upon  (one  that  is)  mighty 
119.  30  the  way  of  truth ;  thy  judgments  have  I  la. 
21.7b  set,  T\"$  shiih. 

Gen.  48.  14  and  laid  (it)  upon  Ephraim's  head,  who 

48.  17  when  Joseph  saw  that  his  father  laid  his 
Exod2i.  22  as  the  woman's  husband  will  lay  upon  him 
Niimi2.  11  lay  not  the  sin  upon  us,  wherein  we  have 
Ruth  3.  15  laid  (it)  on  her  :  and  she  went  into  the 

4.  16  Naomi  took  the  child,  and  laid  it  in  her 
Job     9.  33  daysman,  .might  lay  his  hand  upon  us 
Psa.  84.    3  for  herself,  where  she  may  lay  her  young 

88.    6  Thou  bast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit,  in 
I39*    5  Thouhastbeset.  .and  laid  thine  hand  upon 
Isa.     5.    6  I  will  lay  it  waste :  it  shall  not  be  pruned 

22.  To  cause  to  lie  down,  22$  shakab,  5. 

1  Ki.  3.  20  laid  it  in  her  bosom,  and  laid  her  dead 

17.  19  carried  him.  .aud  laid  him  upon  his  own 

2  Ki.  4.  21  she  went  up,  and  laid  him  on  the  bed  of 
2  Ch.16.  14  laid  him  in  the  bed  which  was  tilled  with 

23.  To  cause  to  tabernacle,  }?£*  shaken,  5. 

Psa.    7.    5  and  lay  mine  honour  in  the  dust.  Selah 

24.  To  send  forth,  rhv  sludack. 

Gen.  22. 12  Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither 

37.  22  Shed  no  blood.,  and  lay  no  land  upon  him 

Exod24.  11  And  upon  the  nobles,  .belaid  not  his  hand 

Esth.  2.  21  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  kiug  Ahasuerus 

3.  6  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Morde. 
6.    2  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  Ahasuerus 

8.  7  because  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the  Jews 

9.  2  to  lay  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt 
9.  10  on  the  spoil  laid  they  not  their  hand 

9.  15  but  on  the  prey  they  laid  not  their  hand 

9.  16  but  they  laid  not  their  hands  on  the  prey 

Neh. 13.  21  if  ye  do  (so)  again,  I  will  lay  hands  on  you 

Obad.     13  nor  have  laid  (hands)  on  their  substance 

25.7b  send  forth,  rhv  shaktch,  3. 

Prov3i.  19  She  layeth  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  and 

26.  7b  lay  back  or  up,  avaKXivw  anaklind. 

Luke  2.    7  laid  him  in  a  manger;  because  there  was 

27.7b  cast,  throw,  (3d\\co  ballo. 

Matt.  8.  14  he  saw  his  wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  of 
Mark  7.30  she  found,  .her  daughter  laid  upon  the  bed 
Lukei6.  20  which  was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores 

28. 7b  cast  down,  KarafiaAKw  kataballo. 

Heb.    6.    1  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of  repen. 

29.  To  put  down,  KaraTiOnm  katatiihemi. 
Marki5.  46  [laid]  him  in  a  sepulchre  which  was  hewn 

30.  To  lie,  be  laid,  K^ifxai  keinmi. 

Matt28.   6  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 
31.7b  lay,  incline,  k\Iuco  klind. 

Matt.  8.  20  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his)  h. 
Luke  9.  58  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his)h. 

32.7b  put,  place,  ti'Ot^uz  tithemi. 

Matt.27.  60  And  laid  it  in  his  own  new  tomb,  which 

Mark  6.  29  took  up  his  corpse,  and  laid  it  in  a  tomb 

6.  56  laid  the  sick  in  the  streets,  aud  besought 

1 5.  47  Mary  Magdalene . .  beheld  where  be  was  1. 

16.  6  Jesus,  .behold  the  place  where  they  laid 
Luke  5.  18  to  bring  him  in,  and  to  lay  (him)  before 

6.  48  digged  deep,  and  laid  the  foundation  on 
14.  29  Lest  haply,  after  he  hath  laid  the  founda. 
23.  53  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre  that  was  hewn  in 
23.  55  women,  .beheld,  .how  his  body  was  laid 
Johnn.  34  Where  have  ye  laid  him?  They  said  unto 
19.  41  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  yet  1. 

19.  42  There  laid  they  Jesus  therefore,  because  of 

20.  2  and  we  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him 
20.  13  and  I  know  not  where  they have  laid  him 
20.  15  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  him,  and  I 

Acts    3.    2  whom  they  laid  daily  at  the  gate  of  the  t. 

4.  37  the  money,  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles'  f- 

5.  2  certain  part  and  laid  (it)  at  the  apostles'  f. 

5.  15  laid  (them)  on  beds  and  couches,  that  at 
7. 16  laid  in  the  sepulchre  that  Abraham  bought 


LAY 


593 


LEAD 


Acts   9  37  washed,  they  laid  (her)  in  an  upper  cham. 
13.  29  from  the  tree,  and  laid  (him)  in  a  sepulchre 

Rom.  9.  53  I  lay  in  Sion  a  stumbling  stone  and  rock 

1  Co.  3.  10  I  have  laid  the  foundation,  and  another 
3.  1 1  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 

1  Pe.   2.    6  I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner  stone,  elect 
33.  To  hear,  earn/,  <p4pa>  phero. 

Acts  25.  7  laid  many  and  grievous  complaints  agai. 
[See  also  Beams,  dying,  foundation,  hands,  heavily, 
hold,  low,  plaster,  pledge,  siege,  snare,  wait,  waste.] 

LAY  along-,  to  — 
To  fall,  Veq  naphal. 

Judg.  7.  12  all  the  children  of  the  east  lay  along  in 
7. 13  and  overturned  it,  that  the  tent  lay  along 
LAY  apart  or  aside,  to  — 
\,  To  put  away,  airoridtfjiai.  upotithemai. 

Heb.  12.    1  let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin 

Jas.     1.  21  Wherefore  lay  apart  all  filthiness  and  su. 

1  Pe.  2.    1  Wherefore  laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all 

2.  To  send  aivay,  ktyinfju  aphiemt. 

Mark  7.    8  For,  laying  aside  the  commandment  of  G. 

3. To  put ,  place,  riQv^t  tithemi. 

Johni3_   4  laid  aside  his  garments  ;  and  took  a  towel 
LAY  at,  to  — 
To  attain,  overtake,  cause  to  reach,  1%'}  nasag,  5. 

Job  41.  26  The  sword  of  him  that  layeth  at  liiin  can. 
LAY  away  or  by,  to  — 
To  turn  aside,  "»D  sur,  5. 

Gen.  38.  19  laid  by  her  veil  from  her,  and  put  on  the 

Eze.  26. 16  lay  away  their  robes,  and  put  off  their 

LAY  down,  to  — 

1.  To  have,  put  doton,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Josh.  4.    8  where  they  lodged,  and  laid  them  down 

2.  To  (cause  to)  stretch  out,  naj  natah,  5. 

Amos  2.    8  And  they  lay  (themselves)  down  upon  cl. 

3.  To  put,  place,  cii?,  cty  sim,  sum. 

Job  17.    3  Lay  down  now,  put  me  in  a  surety  with. 

4.  To  put  away  or  off,  aTrorifk/jLai  apotithemai. 
Acts    7.  58  the  witnesses  laid  down  their  clothes  at 

5.  To  put,. place,  ridrj/it  tithemi. 

Lukeio.  21  thoutakestup  that  thou layedst  not  down 
19.  22  taking  up  that  I  laid  not  down  and  reap. 

Johnio.  15  know  I.  .and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the 
10.  17  because  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might 
10.  18  Hay  it  down.  .1  have  power  to  lay  it  down 
1 3.  37  Lord . .  I  will  lay  down  my  life  for  thy  sake 
13.  38  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake? 

15.  13  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends 
Acts    4.  35  And  laid  (them)  down  at  the  apostles'  feet 

1  Jo.    3.  16  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us :  and 

3.  16  we  ought  to  lay  down,  .lives  for  the  bret. 

6.  To  put  or  place  under,  viroTtd7]/j.t  hupotithemi. 

Rom.  16.   4  Who  have  for  my  life  laid  down  their  own 
LAY  for ;  to  — [See  Foundation.  3 
LAY  even  with  the  ground,  to  — 
To  rase  to  the  ground,  iScxplfa  edaphizo. 

Lukeig  44  Ana  shall  lay  thee  even  with  the  ground 
LAY  hold  (of,  on  or  upon),  to  — 

1.  To  lay  or  keep  hold  on,  inx  achaz. 

2  Sa.  2.  21  lay  thee  hold  on  one  of  the  young  men,  and 
Eccl.  2.  3  to  lay  hold  on  folly,  till  I  might  see  what 
Isa.     5.  29  they  shall  roar,  and  lay  hold  of  the  prey 

2.  To  catch,  capture,  keep  hold,  c'Sn  taphas. 

Deut  zi.  19  shall  his  father  and  his  mother  lay  hold  on 

22.  28  lay  hold  ou  her,  and  lie  with  her,  and  they 
1  Ki.13.    4  saving,  Lay  hold  on  him.    And  his  hand 

LAY  in— tSee  Order.] 

LAY  meat,  to  — 

To  give  to  eat,  "?2S<  akal,  5. 

Hos.  11    4 1  drew  them,  .and  I  laid  meat  unto  them 

LAY  on  or  upon,  to  — 

1.  To  cast  or  throw  upon,  eTn&dWo)  epibaUS. 

Matt  26.  50  Then  came  they,  and  laid  hand3  on  Jesus 
Marki4.  46  they  laid  their  hands  onhim, and  took  him 
Luke2o.  19  the  same  hour  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him 
21.  12  shall  lay  their  hands  on  you,  and  persec. 
John  7.  30  no  man  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his 

7.  44  taken  him;  but  no  man  laid  hands  on  him 
Acts    4.   3  they  laid  handson  them,  and  put.,  in  hold 

5.  18  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles,  and  put 
21.  27  the  Jews.. when  they  saw.. laid  handson 

2.To  lie  or  be  laid  upon,  iiriicstfiai  epikeimai. 
John  1 1.  38  It  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  lay  upon  it 

21.    g  they  saw  a  fire  of  coals  there,  and  fish  laid 
Acts  27.  20  And  when,  .no  small  tempest  lay  on  (us) 

3.  To  put  or  place  upon,  i-jrirldnfj-i  epitithemi. 
Matt.  9.  iS  come  and  Lay  thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she 

19.  15  he  laid  (his)  hands  on  them,  and  departed 

23.  4  lay.  .on  men's  shoulders ;  but  they,  .will 
Mark  5.  23  come  and  lay  thy  hands  on  her,  that  she 

6.  5  save  that  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few 

16.  18  they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they 
Luke  4.  40  helaidhishandsoneveryoneofthem.and 

13.  13  he  laid  (his)  hands  on  her:  and  immediately 

15.  5  And.  .he  layeth  (it)  on  his  shoulders,  rej. 

23.  26  on  him  they  laid  the  cross,  that  he  might 

Acts   6.    6  they  had  prayed, 'they  laid  (their)  hands  on 

8.  17  Then  laid  they  (their)  hands  on  them,  and 

75 


Acts  8. 19  that  on  whomsoever  I  lay  hands,  he  may 
13.    3laid(their)handsonthem,theysent(them) 

15.  28  to  lay  upon  you  no  greater  burden  than 

16.  23  when  they  had  laid  many  stripes  upon 
19.    6  when  Paul  had  laid  (his)  bands  upon  them 
28.   3  had  gathered  a  bundle  of  sticks,  and  laid 
28.   8  and  laid  his  hands  on  him,  and  healed  him 

1  Ti.    5.  22  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither 
Rev.    1.  17  he  laid  his  right  hand  upon  me,  saying  unto 

LAY  open,  to  — 

To  spread  forth  or  abroad,  'unpparas. 

Prov.13.  i6knowledge:butafoollayethopen(his)folly 
LAY  out,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  go  out,  expend,  nyt  yatsa,  5: 

2  Ki.  12.  11  laid  it  out  to  the  carpenters  and  builders 
2.  To  pour  out,  ps;  yatsaq,  5. 

Josh.  7.  23  brought,  .and  laid  them  out  before  theL. 
LAY  privily,  to  — 
To  hide,  secrete,  jpa  taman. 

Psa.  31.    4  the  net  that  they  laid  privily  for  me 

64.    5  they  commune  of  lay.. .snares  privily;  they 
142.   3  In  the  way ..  have  they  privily  laid  a  snare 
LAY  self  down,  to  — 
To  lie  down,  3?^  shakab. 

Ruth  3.   4  and  uncover  his  feet,  and  lay  thee  down 

3.  7  and  uncovered  his  feet,  and  laid  her  down 
2  Sa.  13.    5  Lay  thee  down  on  thy  bed,  and  make  th. 

1  Ki.  19.    6  did  eat  and  drink,  and  laid  him  down  ag. 

21.    4  he  laid  him  down  upon  his  bed,  and  tur. 
'     Psa.     3.    5  I  laid  me  down  and  slept ;  I  awaked ;  for 

4.  8  I  will  both  lay  me  down  iu  peace,  and  si. 
LAY  sick  of  — 

To  hold  or  press  together,  avvex^  sunecho. 

Acts  28.  8  that  the  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  of  a  fe. 
LAY  to  the  charge  of,  to  — 
l.To  set,  place,  %art]\x.i  histemi. 

Acts    7.  60  cried.  .Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  ch. 
'2.  To  count,  reckon,  \oyi(oftat  logizoinai. 

2  Ti.  4. 16  that  it  may  not  be  laid  to  their  charge 
LAY  snare,  to  — 

To  lay  a  snare,  E>p;  yaqash. 

Psa.i4T.   9  Keep  me  from  the  snares,  .they have  laid 
Jer.  50.  24  I  have  laid  a  snare  for  thee,  and  thou  art 

LAY  to— [See  Charge.] 

LAY  unto,  to  — 

To  put  toward,  add  to,  irpoffTtBijfn  prostitliemi. 

Acts  13.  36  was  laid  unto  his  fathers,  and  saw  corr. 
LAY  unto  charge,  to  — 
To  give,  jru  natluin. 

I)eut2i.   8  lay  not.  .unto  thy  people  of  Israel's  cha. 
LAY  up,  to  — 
1  .To put  down,  leave,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Gen.  39. 16  she  laid  up  his  garment  by  her  until  his  1. 

Exodi6.  23  that  which  remaineth  overlay  up  for  you 
16.  24  they  laid  it  up  till  the  morning,  as  Moses 
16.  33  lay  it  up  before  the  Lord,  to  be  kept  for 

16.  34  so  Aaron  laid  it  up  before  the  Testimony 
Nuni  17.   4  thou  shalt  lay  them  up  in  the  tabernacle 

17.  7  Moses  laid  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord  in 
19.   9  lay. .  up  without  the  camp  in  a  clean  place 

Deut  14.  28  bring  forth,  .and  shalt  lay  (it)  up  within 
1  Sa.  10.  25  wrote,  .in  a  book,  and  laid  (it)  up  before 

2.TopjU  down,  nn^  nechath,  5. 

Ezra   6.    1  where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  Baby. 
3.7*0  give,  \ni  nathan. 

Gen.  41.  48  laid  up  the  food,  .the  food,  .laid  he  up  in 
■4.  To  number,  appoint,  charge,  lay  up,~ip_£  paqad,  5. 

Isa.   10. 28  at  Michmash  he  hath  laid  up  his  carriages 
5. 7*o  heap  up,  lay  tsabar. 

Gen. 41.  35  and  lay  up  corn  unto  the  hand  of  Pharaoh 
6. 7*o  hide,  lay  up,  fay  tsaphctn. 

Job    21.  19  God  layeth  up  his  iniquity  for  his  children 

Psa.  31.  19  which  thou  hast  laid  up  for  them  that  fear 

Prov.  2.    7  He  layeth  up  sound  wisdom  for  the  righ. 
7.    1  My  son .  .lay  up  my  commandments  with 
10.  14  Wise  (men)  lay  up  knowledge  :  but  the 
13.  22  the  wealth  of  the  sinner  (is)  laid  up  for 

Song  7. 13  I  have  laid  up  for  thee,  O  my  beloved 

7 .To put,  place,  01b',  e'er  sim,  stem. 

1  Sa.  21.  12  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his  heart 
Job    22. 22  Receive,  .lay  up  his  words  in  thine  heart 

8.7*0  set,  rra>  shith. 

Job   22.  24  Then  shalt  thou  lay  up  gold  as  dust,  and 
Prov 26.  24  He  that  hateth.  .layeth  up  deceit  within 

9.  7*o  lie  or  be  laid  away,  awSKet/xat  apokehnai. 
Luke  19.  20  thy  pound,  which  I  have  kept  laid  up  in 
Col.     1.    5  For  the  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  youinh. 

2  Ti.    4.    8  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown 

10.7*0  treasure  up,  dno-avpifa  thesaurizo. 

Matt.  6.  19  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon 

6.  20  But  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  h. 

2  Co.  12. 14  children  ought  not  to  lay  up  for  the  par. 

11 .7*0  put,  place,  riB-^fxi  tithemi. 

Luke  1.  66  they  that  heard,  .laid  (them)  up  in  their  h. 

LAY  up  in  store,  to  — 

1.7b  treasure  up,  i^N  atsar. 

2  Ki.20. 17  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store 
Isa.   39.   6  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store 


2.7*o  treasure  off  or  away,  airoOno-avpLfa  apothesau. 
1  Ti.    6.  19  Laying  up  in  store  for  themselves  a  good 

LAY  up  treasure,  by  or  in  store,  to  — 
7*o  treasure  up,  Qnaavpifa  thesaurizo. 

Lukei2.  21  So  (is)  he  that  layeth  up  treasure  for  him. 

1  Co.  16.   2  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  Btore 

LAY  wait  (for),  to  — 

1.7*0  lie  in  wait,  3"2K  arab. 

Judg.  9.  34  laid  wait  against  Shechem  in  four  comp. 
9.  43  and  laid  wait  in  the  field,  and  looked,  and 
16.   2  laid  wait  for  him  all  night  in  the  gate  of 
Ezra  8.  31  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  way 
Job  31.   9  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour's  door 
Prov.  1.  11  Come  with  us,  let  us  lay  wait  for  blood 
1,  18  they  lay  wait  for  their  (own)  blood ;  they 
24. 15  Lay  not  wait,  0_wicked(man),  against  the 
Lam.  4.  19  Our  persecutors . .  laid  wait  for  us  in  the  w. 

2. 7*o  lay  wait,  tin  arab,  5. 

1  Sa.  15.    5  And  Saul  came . .  and  laid  wait  in  the  val. 

3.7*o  behold,  look,  y\v  shur. 

Jer.    5.  26  lay  wait,  as  he  that  setteth  snares;  they 

4.7*0  make  a  snare,  iroUar  evedpav  poieo  enedran. 
Acts  25.   3  would  send . .  laying  wait  in  the  way  to  kill 

5.7*o  lie  in  wait,  eVeSpeuw  enedreuo. 

Luken.  54  [Laying  wait  for]  him,  and  seeking  to  catch 

^.Counsel  against  {one),  plot,  £irt&ov\r)  yfoofiau 
Acts  20.   3  when  the  Jews  laid  wait  for  him,  as  he  was 

7, A  plot  to  be  about  to  be,  iirifiov\T)  ficWeiv  etvai. 

Acts  23.  30  how  that  the  [Jews  laid  wait]  for  the  man 
LAY,  where  each  — 
A  crouching  place,  f3!  rebels. 

Isa.  35.   7  the  habitation  of  dragons,  where  each  lay 
LAY,  while  he — 
Dwelling,  n^T  shibah. 

2  Sa.  19.  32  the  king  of  sustenance  while  he  lay  atM. 
LAYING  of  wait,  laying  await  — 

l.A  limiting,  lying  in  wait,  nji?  tsediyyah. 

NU11135.  20  or  hurl  at  him  by  laying  of  wait,  that  he 
35. 22  upon  him  any  thing  without  laying  of  wait 

^.Counsel  against  (one),  plot,  iwi(3ov\7}  epiboule. 

Acts    9.  24  But  their  laying  await  was  known  20, 19. 
LAYING  on  — 
A  putting  upon,  inrideo'ts  ep>it]iesis.- 

Acts    8. 18  when  Simon  saw  that  through  laying  on 

1  Ti.    4. 14  with  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  pres. 

Heb.    6.    2  the  doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  of  laying  on 

LAZ-AR/-TJS,  Ad(apos  without  help. 

1.  A  symbolic  name  in  one  of  the  parables. 

Luke  16.  20  there  was  a  certain  beggar  named  L.,wh. 
16.  23  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  L.  in  his  bo. 
16.  24  Abraham,  have  mercy  ou  me,  and  send  L. 
16.  25  good  things,  and  likewise  L.  evil  things 

2.  A  man  of  Bethany  whom  Jesus  raised  from  the  dead, 
brother  of  Martha  and  Mary. 

John  11,    1  Now  a  certain  (man)  was  sick,  (named)  L. 
11.    2  It  was  (that)  Mary . .  whose  brother  L.  was 
11.    5  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  L. 
11.  11  Our  friend  L.  sleepeth ;  but  I  go,  that  I 
.11.  14  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  plainly,  L.  is 

11.  43  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  L.,  come  forth 

12.  1  where  L.  was  which  had  been  dead,  whom 
12.  2  but  L.  was  one  of  them  that  sat  attheta. 
12.  9  but  that  they  might  see  L.  also,  whom  he 
12.  10  consulted  that  they  might  put  L.  also  to 
12. 17  that  was  with  him  when  he  called  L.  out 

LEACH — [See  Horse  leach.] 

LEAD—      " 

Lead,  rnafty  ophereth. 

Exodis.  10  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters 

Nuni3i.  22  the  brass,  the  iron,  the  tin,  and  the  lead 

Job   19. 24  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen  and  lead  in 

Jer.    6.  29  the  bellows  are  burnt,  the  lead  is  cousu. 

Eze.  22. 18  iron,  and  lead,  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace 

22.  20  they  gather  silver,  and  brass,  .and  lead 

27.  12  with  silver,  .and  lead,  they  traded  in  thy 

Zech.  5.   7  there  was  lifted  up  a  talent  of  lead  :  and 

5.    8  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth 

LEAD  (a  life),  to— 

1.7*0  declare  happy,  it?x  ashar,  3. 

Isa.     3.  12  they  which  lead  thee  cause  (thee)  to  err 
2.7*o  came  to  come  or  bring  in,  toa  bo,  5. 

Jer.  -3.   8  which  led  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel. 

Eze.  17.  12  taken,  .and  led  them  with  him  to  Babylon 

3.7*0  cause  to  tread,  ^T}  darak,  5. 

Psa.  25.    5  Lead  me  in  thy  truth,  and  teach  me  :  for 

Prov.  4. 11  I  have  taught..  I  have  led  thee  in  right  p. 

Isa.   42. 16  I  will  lead  them  in  paths,  .they  have  not 

48. 17  leadeth  thee  by  the  way.  .thou  shouldest 

4.7*0  make  to  go  on,  =|?n  halak,  3. 

Prov.  8.  20  I  lead  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  in  the 
5.7*o  cause  to  flow  or  move  on,  ^a;  yabal,  5. 

Jer.  31.   9  and  with  supplications  will  I  lead  them 
6.7*0  cause  to  go  on,  37;  yalak,  5. 

Deut.  8.   2  all  the  way  which  the  LORD  thy  God  led 


LEAD 


594 


LEAP 


Law  ft 
iTi 
2Ti 
LAWG 
1.  7b  r, 
Get' 
Ni 
Dei 
P&> 


Deut.  8. 15  Who  led  thee  through  that  great  and  ter. 

29.  5  I  have  led  you  forty  years  in  the  wildern. 
Jos,  24.  3  led  him  throughout  all  the  laud  of  Canaan 
2  Ki.  6.  19  I  will  bring  you.  .But  he  led  them  to  Sam. 
Job   12.  17  He  leadeth  counsellors  away  spoiled,  and 

12.  19  He  leadeth  princes  away  spoiled,  and  over 

Psa.  106.   9  so  he  led  them  through  the  depths,  as  th. 

136. 16  To  him  which  led  his  people  through  the 

Prov  16.  29  and  leadeth  him  into  the  way  (that  is) not 

Isa.   48.  21  they  thirsted  not  (when)  he  led  them  thr. 

63.  12  That  led.  .by  the  right  hand  of  Moses 

63. 13  That  led  them  through  the  deep,  as  an  h. 
Jer.     2.   6  led  us  through  the  wilderness,  through 
2.  17  thy  God,  when  he  led  thee  by  the  way? 

32.    s  he  shall  lead  Zedekiah  to  Babylon,  and 
Amos  2. 10  Also  I . .  led  you  forty  years  through  the 

7.  To  lead,  drive,  :rn  nahag. 

Exod.  3.  1  he  led  the  flock  to  the  backside  of  the  de. 
Psa.  80.  1  thou thatleadest  Joseph  like  aflock;  thou 
Song  8.  2  I  would  lead  thee . .  bring  thee  into  my  m. 
Isa.  11.  6  together;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them 
Lam   3.   2  He  hath  led  me,  and  brought,  .darkness 

8.  To  lead,  drive,  sni  nahag,  3. 

Deut.  4.  27  the  heathen,  whither  the  Lord  shall  lead 
28.  37  all  nations  whither  the  Lord  shall  lead 

Isa.  49. 10  he  that  hath  mercy  on  them  shall  lead 
63. 14  so  didst  thou  lead  thy  people,  to  make  thy. 

Nah.  2.    7  her  maids  shall  lead  (her)  as  with  the  vo. 

9.  To  lead,  tend,  feed,  ?3j  nahal,  3. 

Psa.  23.   2  to  lie  down.,  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still 

10.  To  lead  forth,  nyi  nachah. 

Gen.  24.  27  Lord  led  me  to  the  house  of  my  master's 
Exod  1 3- 17  God  led  them  not.  .the  way  of  the  land  of 

32.  34  Therefore  now  go,  lead  the  people  unto 
Psa.    5.   8  Lead  me,  O  Lord,  in  thy  righteousness 
27.  11  lead  me  in  a  plain  path,  because  of  mine 
.60.    9  Who  will  bring . .  who  will  lead  me  into  E,? 

77.  20  Thou  leddest  thy  people  like  a  flock  by  the 
108.  10  Who  will  bring,  .who  willleadmeintoE.? 
139.  24  And  see.  .and  lead  me  in  the  way  everla. 

11.2*0  lead  forth,  put,  nni  nachah,  5. 

Gen.  24.  48  which  had  led  me  in  the  right  way  to  take 

Exodi3.  21  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  to  lead  them  the  way 

Deut32. 12  the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him,  and.  .nost. 

Neh.  9.  12  thou  leddest  them  in  the  day  by  a  cloudy 

9.  19  from  them  by  day,  to  lead  them  in  the  way 

Psa,  23.    3  He  restoreth  my  soul :  he  leadeth  me  in 

31.    3  for  thy  name's  sake  lead  me,  and  guide 

43.   3  thy  light  and  thy  truth :  let  them  lead  me 

61.    2  lead  me  to  the  rock  (that)  is  higher  than  I 

78.  14  In  the  day  time  also  he  led  them  with  a  cl. 
78.  53  he  led  tliem  on  safely,  so  that  they  feared 

139.  10  Even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me,  and 
143.  10  Teach,  .lead  me  into  the  land  of  upright. 
Prov.  6.  22  When  thou  goest.it  shall  lead  thee;  when 
Isa.   57.  18  I  will  lead  him  also,  and  restore  comforts 
Vl.IIcad,  p**i  rosh. 

Deut 20."  9  shall  make  captains .  .to  lead  the  people 
13.  To  lead,  &yo>  ago. 

Marki3.  n  when  they  shall  lead,  .and  deliver  you 
Luke  4.    1  was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness 

4.  29  led  him  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon 

22.  54  Then  took  they  him,  and  led . .  and  brought 

23.  1  the.  whole . .  arose,  and  led  him  unto  Pilato 
23.  32  two  others,  .led  with  him  to  be  put  to  d. 

John  18.  28  Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caiaphas  untj 

5.  32  Be  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter 
Rom.  2.    4  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth 

8.  14  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  the  Spirit  of  God 
1  Co.  i2.    2  Gentiles,  carried  away,  .as  ye  were  led 
Gal.    5. 18  if  ye  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under 
14.ro  lead  up  or  bach,  avdyu  anago. 

Luke22.  66  came  together,  and  [led]  him  into  their  c. 

15.2*0  lead  away,  a-irdyu)  apago. 

Matt.  7.  13  broad  (is)  the  way,  that  leadeth  to  destr. 
7.  14  narrow  (is)  the  way,  winch  leadeth  unto  1. 

16.70  lead  throughout,  otdyoo  diago. 

1  Ti.   2.   2  that  we  m  ty  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  1. 

l~.7*ii  lead  the  way,  dS-qyew  hodeffeo. 

Matt,  15.  14  if  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall 
Luke  6.  39  Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind  ?  shall  they 
Rev.   7.  17  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountainsof  w. 

18.7*0  hear,  carry,  tfripapkero. 

Act3  12. 10  the  iron  gate  that  leadeth  unto  the  city 
[See  also  Captive,  hand.] 
LEAD  about,  to  — 

1.  To  turn  or  bring  round  about,  33D  sabab,  3a. 
Deut  32.  10  he  led  him  about,  lie  instructed  him,  he 

2.  To  turn  or  bring  round  about,  339  sabab,  5. 

Exod  13.  iS  God  led  the  people  about,  .the  way  of  the 
Eze.  47.    2  led  me  about  the  way  without  unto  the 

3.2*0  lead  around  about,  irepidyu)  periago. 

1  Co.  9.    5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister 
LEAD  away,  to  — 
1.  To  lead,  drive,  am  nahag. 

1  Sa.  30.  22  that  they  may  lead  (them)  away,  and  dc. 

Isa.  20.   4  So  shall  the  king  of  Assyria  lead  away  the 
2.2*0  lead  away,  airdyw  apagS. 

Matt.  26.  57  led  (him)  away  to  Caiaphas  the  high  priest 
27.  2  they  led  (him)  away,  and  delivered  him  to 
27.  31  they  took,  .and  led  him  away  to  crucify 


Mark  1 4.  44  is  he  ;  take  him,  and  lead,  .away  safely 

14.  53  they  led  Jesus  away  to  the  high  priest 

15.  16  the  soldiers  led  him  away  into  the  hall 
Luke  1 3.  15  loose,  .and  lead  (him)  away  to  watering? 

23.  26  as  they  led  him  away,  they  laid  hold  upon 
JohniS.  13  And  [led  him  away]  to  Annas  first :  for  he 

19.  16  And  they  took  Jesus,  and  [led  (him)  away] 

LEAD  captive,  to  — 

To  cause  to  remove,  exile,  n?3  galah,  5. 

Jer.  22. 12  place  whither  they  have  led  him  captive 
LEAD  forth,  to  — 
1.7*0  cause  to  tread,  ]~n  darak,  5. 

Psa.  107.    7  he  led  them  forth  by  the  right  way,  that 

2.  To  cause  to  go  on,  tji;  yalak,  5. 

Psa.  125.    5  Lord  shall  lead  them  forth  with  the  wor. 

3.  To  lead,  drive,  Jfc3  nahag. 

1  Ch.20.    1  Joab  led  forth  the  power  of  the  army,  and 

2  Ch.25.  11  Amaziah..led  forth  his  people,  and  went 

4.  To  lead  forth,  nru  nachah. 

Exodis.  13  Thou  in  thy  mercy  hast  led  forth  the  peo. 
LEAD  on,  gently,  to  — 
1.7*0  lead,  tend,  feed,  hill  nahal,  3. 

Isa.  40. 1 1  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young 
2.7*o  lead  self  on,  hrii  nahal,  7. 

Gen.  33.  14 1  will  lead  on  softly,  accordingas  the  cat, 
T/EATi  into,  to  — 

1.  To  lead  into,  eltfdya  eisago. 

Acts  21.  37  as  Paul  was  to  be  led  into  the  castle,  he 
2.7*o  bear  or  carry  into,  elo-fyipa  eisphero. 

Matt.  6. 13  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver 
Luken.   4  lead  us  not  into  temptation  ;  but  deliver 

3.2b  lead  together,  avudyce  sunago. 

Rev.  13.  10  [He  that  leadeth  into]  captivity  shall  go 
LEAD  out,  to  — 
1.2b  cause  to  go  out  or  forth,  n^T  yatsa,  5. 

Nuni27. 17  which  may  lead  them  out,  and  which  may 

2  Sa.    5.    2  Also,  .thou  wast  he  that  leddest  out.  .1. 

1  Ch.n.    2  he  that  leddest  out  and  broughtest  in  I. 

2.  To  lead  out  or  forth,  4%dyco  exago. 

Mark  8.  23  [let  him  out]  of  the  town;  and  when  he 
15.  20  they  took,  .and  [led  him  out]  to  crucify 
Ltike24-  50  And  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany 
John  10.    3  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out 
Acts  21.  38  and  leddest  out  into  the  wilderness  four 
Heb.   S.   9  took,  .to  lead  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 

LEAD  up,  to  — 

1.7*o  lead  up,  avdyw  anago. 

Matt.  4.    1  Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  spirit  into  . 
2.2b  bear  or  carry  up,  am<pepw  anapliero. 

Mark  9.    2  leadeth  them  up  into  an  high  mountain 
LEADER  — 
1.2b  declare  happy,  cause  to  step,  "it?N  ashar,  3. 

Isa.     9.  16  the  leaders  of  this  people  cause,  .to  err 
2. Leader,  one  who  goes  before,  Tji  nagul. 

1  Ch.12.  27  Jehoiada  (was)  the  leader  of  the  Aaronites 

13.    1  David  consulted  with  thecaptains.  .leader 

2  Ch.32.  21  the  leaders  and  captains  in  the  camp  of 
Isa.   55.    4  I  have  given  him.  .a  leader  and  comman. 

3. Leader  of  the  way,  681770s  hodegos. 

Matt  15.  14  Let  them  alone :  they  be  blind  leaders  of 
LEAF  — 
l.Any  thing  torn  away,  a  leaf,  «pp  tereph. 

Eze.  17.   9  it  shall  wither  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  sp. 

2.  What  go  up,  a  leaf,  fro  aleh. 

Gen.    3.    7  they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made 

8.  n  in  her  mouth  (was)  an  olive  leaf  pluckt  off 
Lev.  26.  36  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase  them 
Job   13.  25  Wilt,  thou  break  a  leaf  driven  to  and  fro? 
Psa.     1.    3  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither ;  and  what. 
Isa.     1.  30  ye  slrall  be  as  an  oak  whose  leaf  fadeth 

34.    4  as  the  leaf  falleth  off  from  the  vine,  and 

64.  6  we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf;  and  our  iniquit. 
Jer.     8.  13  nor  figs  on  the  fig  tree,  and  the  leaf  shall 

17.  8  when  heat  cometh,  but  her  leaf  shall  be 
Eze.  47.  12  whose  leaf  shall  not  fade,neithershallthe 

47. 12  for  meat,  and  the  leaf  thereof  for  medic. 

3..d  rib,  side,  jjJjx  tsela. 

1  Ki.   6.  34  two  leaves  of  the  one  door  (were)  folding 
4..-1  leaf,  (pvWov  phullon. 

Matt  21.  19  fouud  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  only 

24.  32  is  yet  tender,  and  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye 
Markn.  13  seeing  a  fig  tree,  afar  off  having  leaves,  he 

11.  13  he  found  nothing  but  leaves ;  for  the  time 
13.  28  is  yet  tender,  and  putteth  forth  leaves 
Rev.  22.    2  theleavesof  the  tree  (were) for  the  healing 
LEAGUE  — 
l.An  eating,  covenant,  league,  rVi?  ber'tth. 

Josh.  9.    6,  11  now  therefore  make  ye  a  league  with 

9.  7  and  how  shall  we  make  a  league  with  you  ? 
9. 15  made  a  league  with  them,  to  let  them  live 
9.  16  three  days  after  they  had  made  a  league 

Judg.  2.    2  ye  shall  make  no  league  with  the  inhabit. 

2  Sa.    3. 12  Make  thy  league  with  me,  and,  behold,  my 

3.  13  Well ;  I  will  make  a  league  with  thee :  but 
3.  21  that  they  may  make  a  league  with  thee 
5.    3  king  David  made  a  league  with  them  in  II. 
1  Ki.    5.  12  people,  .and  they  two  made  a  league  tog. 
15.  ig  (There  is)  a  league  between  me  and  thee 


1  Ki.15.  ig  come  and  break  thy  league  with  Baasha 

2  Ch.16.    3  (There  is)  a  league  between  me  and  thee 

16.    3  break  thy  league  with  Baasha  king  of  Is. 

2.7*0  join  selves  together,  "on  chabar,  7. 

Dan.  11.  23  And  after  the  league,  .with  him  he  shall 

LEAGTJE,  to  be  in  or  make  a  — 

l.An  eating,  covenant,  league,  nnj  berith. 

Job     5.  23  thou  shalt  be  in  league  with  the  stones  of 
Eze.  30.   5  and  the  men  of  the  land  that  is  in  league 

2.7b  cut, prepare,  make,  rr\%  karalh. 

1  Sa.  22.   8  that  my  son  hath  made  a  league  with  the 
LE'-AH,  nxS  weary. 

The  elder  daughter  of  Laban  aud  first  wife  of  Jacob. 

B.C.  1730. 

Gen.  29. 16  name  of  the  elder  (was)  L.,  and  the  name 

29. 17  L.  (was)  tender  eyed  ;  but  Rachel  was  be. 
29.  23  he  took  L.  his  daughter,  and  brought  her 
29.  24  Laban  gave  unto  his  daughter  L.  Zilpah 
29.  25  hi  the  morning,  behold,  it  (was) L. :  and  he 
29.  30  he  loved  also  Rachel  more  than  L.,  and 
29.  31  m  hen  the  Lord  saw  that  L.  (was)  hated,  he 

29.  32  L.  conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and  she  cal. 

30.  9  When  L.  saw  that  she  had  left  bearing 
30.  10,  12  And  Zilpah,  L.'s  maid,  bare  Jacob  a 
30.  11  L.  said,  A  troop  cometh  :  and  she  called 
30.  13  L.  said,  Happy  am  I,  for  the  daughters 
30.  14  brought  them  unto  his  mother  L.  Then 
30.  14  Rachel  said  to  L.,  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  of 
30.  16  and  L.  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said 
30.  17  God  hearkened  unto  L.,  and  she  conceived 

30. 18  L.  said,  God  hath  given  me  my  hire,  bee. 
30.  19  L.. conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob  the 

30.  20  L.  said,  God  hath  endued  me  (with)  a  good 

31.  4  Jacob  sent  and  called  Rachel  and  L.  to  the 

31. 14  Rachel  and  L.  answered  and  said  unto  him 
31.  33  Laban  went,  .into  L.'s  tent,  and  into  the 
31,  33  Then  went  he  out  of  L.'s  tent,  and  entered 
33.  1  he  divided  the  children  unto  L.,  and  unto 
33.    2  L.  and  her  children  after,  and  Rachel  and 

33.  7  L.  also  with  her  children  came  near,  and 

34.  1  Dinah  the  daughter  of  L.,  which"  she  bare 

35.  23  The  sons  of  L. ;  Reuben,  Jacob  s  first  born 
35.  26  sons  of  Zilpah,  L.'s  handmaid  ;  Gad  and 

46. 15  These  (he)  the  sons  of  L.,  which  she  bare 
46.  18  whom  Labangaveto  L. liis daughter ;  and 
49.  31  buried  Abraham,  .and  there  I  buried  L. 

Ruth  4.  11  Lokd  make  the  woman,  .like  L.,  which 
LEAN  — 
1.  Weak,  poor,  lean,  b?  dal. 

2  Sa.  13.   4  Why  (art)  thou,  .lean  from  day  to  day  ? 
2. Lean,  nil  razeh. 

Nuni  1 3*  2*0  whether  it  (be)  fat  or  lean,  whether  there 
Eze.  34.  20  the  fat  cattle  and  between  the  lean  cattle 

3.  Thin,  lean,  jn  raq. 

Gen.  41. 19  poor,  .very  ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed 
41.  20  the  lean  and  the  ill  favoured  kine  did  eat 
LEAN,  to  — 
1.  To  take  hold  on,  pm  chazaq,  5. 

2  Sa.   3.  29  that  is  a  leper,  or  that  leaneth  on  a  staff 
2. 2b  support,  Tjlpp  samak. 

Amos  5.  19  or  went  into  the  house,  and  leaned  his 
3.2*0  be  supported,  ^)£o  samak,  2. 

2  Ki.  iS.  21  on  which  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into 

Isa.   36.    6  whereon  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into  his 

4.7b  strengthen  or  rest  self,  P£!  raphaq,  7. 

Song  8.    5  that  cometh  up.. leaning  upon  her  beloved? 

5.2b  be  supported,  lean  on,  jya>  shaan,  2. 

Judgi6.  26  feel  the  pillars.  .1  may  lean  upon  them 
2  Sa.  1.  6  Saul  leaned  upon  his  spear  ;  and  lo,  the 
2  Ki.  5  iS  he  leaneth  on  my  hand,  and  I  bow  myself 
7.  2  Then  a  lord  on  whose  hand  the  king  leaned 
7.  17  the  lord  on  whose  hand  heleaned  to  have 
Job  8.  15  He  shall  lean  upon  his  house,  but  it  shall 
Prov.  3.  5  and  lean  not  unto  thine  own  understand. 
Eze.  29.  7  when  they  leaned  upon  thee,  thou  brak. 
Mic.  3. 11  yet  will  they  lean  upon  the  Lord,  and  say 

6,2*o  lie  or  be  laid  up  or  back,  ap&K€tp.ai  anakeimai. 

John  13.  23  Now  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom 
7.Tofallup  or  back,  avaTri-xTOj  anapipto. 

John2i.  20  which  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper 

LEAN,  to  wax  — 

To  become  lean,  nri  razah,  2. 

Isa.   17.    4  and  the  fatness  of  Ins  flesh  shall  wax  lean 

LEAN  fleshed  — 

Thin  qf flesh,  nb'3  p"3  daq  hasar. 

Gen.  41.    3  other  kine.  .ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed 
41.   4  the  ill  favoured  and  lean  fleshed  kine  did 

LEANNESS  — 

LFaiVwe,  Ue,  feigning,  u-ns  kachash. 

Job   16.    8  my  leanness  rising  up  in  me  beareth  wit. 

2. Leanness,  }i?n  razon. 

Psa. 106. 15  He  gave.,  but  sent  leanness  into  their  soul 
Isa.   10.  16  shall,  .send  among  his  fat  ones  leanness 

3. Leanness,  secret,  M*i  razi. 

Isa.  24. 16  My  leanness,  my  leanness,  woe  unto  me ! 
LE-AN'-NOTH— [See  MahalatlU 
LEAP  — 
1.2b  lea]),  skip,  YfidcUttg, 

Zeph.  1.    9  punish  all  those  that  leap  on  the  thresh. 


LEAP 


595 


LEAVE 


2.To  leap,  ship,  J1?"?  dalag,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.  30  For.  .by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  w. 

Psa.  18.  29  For.  .by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  w. 

Song  2.    8  he  cometh  leaping  upon  the  mountains 

Isa:  35.  6  Then  shall  the  lame.,  leap  as  an  hart,  and 
Z.To  leap  with  violence,  pi]  zanaq,  3. 

Deut33. 22  a  lion's  whelp :  he  shall  leap  from  Bashan 
4.To  move,  leap,  "im  nathar,  3. 

Lev.  11.  21  have  legs,  .to  leap  withal  upon  the  earth 

5.  To  go  up,  nhy  alah. 

Gen.  31.  10  the  rams  which  leaped  upon  the  cattle 
31. 12  all  the  rams  which  leap  upon  the  cattle 

6.  To  pass  over,  leap,  nps  pccsach,  3. 

1  Ki.18.  26  they  leaped  upon  the  altar  which  was  m. 
7. To  leap,  watch  enviously,  iyi  ratsad,  3. 

Psa.  68. 16  Why  leap  ye,  ye.  .lulls?  (tins  is)  the  hill 
8.7*o  dance,  skip,  bound,  "ip*i  raqad,  3. 

Joel    2.    5  shall  they  leap,  like  the  noise  of  a  flame 

9.  To  leap,  aWofiai  hallomai. 

Acts    3.   8  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God 
14. 10  Said.  .Stand  upright.  .And  he  leaped  and 

10.  To  bound,  spring,  o-Kiprdca  skirtao. 

Luke  r.  41  the  babe  leaped  in  her  womb  ;  and  Elisa. 
1. 44  the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy 
LEAP  for  joy,  to  — 
To  bound,  spring,  0~Ki.pr6.03  skirtao. 

Luke  6.  23  Rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  joy 
LEAP  on,  to  — 
To  leap  upon,  e<pd\\o(j.ai  ephallomai. 

Acts  19. 16  leaped  on  them,  and  overcame  them,  and 
LEAP  out,  to  — 
To  escape,  deliver  self,  slip  away,  aba  malat,  7. 

Job    41. 19  Out  of  his  mouth,  .sparks  of  fire  leap  out 
LEAP  up,  to  — 
To  leap  forth  or  out  of,  4%d\Ao/j.at  exallomai. 

Acts   3.    8  he  leaping  up  stood,  and  walked,  and  en. 
LEAPING  — 
To  move,  leap,  119  pazaz,  3. 

2  Sa.  6. 16  saw  king  David  leaping  and  dancing  bef. 
LEARN,  t3  — 

1.  To  learn,  r\bx  alaph. 

-   Ptov.22.  25  Lest  thou  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare 

2.  To  learn,  acctistom  self,  "157  lamad. 

Deut.  4. 10  that  they  may  learn  to  fear  me  allthe  days 
5.  1  ye  may  learn  them,  and  keep  and  do  them 
14.  23  mayest  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  Godal. 

17.  19  that  he  may  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  his  G. 

18.  9  thou  shalt  not  learn  to  do  after  the  abom. 

31. 12  may  learn,  and  fear  the  LORD  your  God 

31. 13  may  hear,  and  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  your 
Psa.  106.  35  among  the  heathen,  and  learned  their  w. 

119.    7when  I  shall  have  learned  thy  righteous  j. 

119.  71  good  for  me . .  that  I  might  learn  thy  stat. 

119.  73  give  me  understanding,  that  I  may  learn 
Prov3o.  3 1  neither  learned  wisdom,  nor  have  thek. 
Isa.    1. 17  Learn  to  do  well ;  seek  judgment,  relieve 

2.  4  And.,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  m. 
26.  9  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  right. 
26. 10  (yet)  will  he  not  learn  righteousness:  and 
29. 24  they  that  murmured  shall  learn  doctrine 

Jer.    10    2  Learn  not  the  way  of  the  heathen,  and  be 

12. 16  if  they  will  diligently  learn  the  ways  of  my 

Eze.  19.   3  it  learned  to  catch  the  prey ;  it  devoured 

19.  6  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  (and)  devoured 
Hie.    4.    3  And . .  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  m. 

3.7*0  learn,  fxavdavw  manthand. 

Matt.  9.  13  go  ye  and  learn  what  (that)  meaneth,  I 

11. 29  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 

24.  32  Now  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree :  Wheu 

Marki3.  28  Now  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree ;  Wheu 

John  6.  45  that  hath  heard,  and  hath  learned  of  the 

7.  1 5  How  knoweth  this  man . .  having  never  le. 

Rom  16. 17  contrary  to  the  doctrine  which  ye  have  1. 

1  Co.  4.   6  that  ye  might  learn  in  us  not  to  think  (of) 

14.  31  that  all  may  learn,  and  all  may  be  comf. 

14.  35  if  they  will  learn  any  thing,  let  them  ask 

Gal.     3.   2  This  only  would  I  learn  of  you,  Received 

Eph.  4.  20  But  ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ 

Phil.  4.    9  which  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received 

4. 1 1  for  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I 

Col.     1.    7  As  ye  also  learned  of  Epaphras  our  dear 

z  Ti.    2.  11  Let  the  woman  learn  in  silence  with  all 

5.    4  let  them  learn  first  to  show  piety  at  home 

5. 13  And  withal  they  learn  (to  be)  idle,  wand. 

2  Ti.    3.    7  Ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to 

3. 14  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned  and 

3.  14  knowing ofwhom thou hastlearned(them) 
Titus  3. 14  let  ours  also  learn  to  maintain  good  works 
Heb.  5.  8  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  ob. 
Rev.  14.   3  and  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the 

4.  To  instruct,  train  up,  7rcu5eucu  po.idcuo. 

1  Ti.    1.  20  delivered,  .that  they  may  learn  not  to 
LEARN  by  experience,  to  — 
To  observe  diligently,  vr\i  nachash,  3. 

Gen.  30.  27  I  have  learned  by  experience  that  the  L. 
LEARNED,  to  be  — 
1.7b  know  a  book,  nap  jn;  yada  sepher. 

Iaa.   29.  11  (men)  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying 
29. 12  him  that  is  not  learned . .  I  am  not  learned 


2.  WIio  is  taught,  learned,  "hbV  limmud. 

Isa.   50.    4  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned 
50.   4  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as  the  learned 
Z.To  instruct,  7rcu5et5aj  paidevJi. 

Acts   7.  22  Hoses  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdoni  of 
LEARNING  — 
1.  Reception,  a  taking  in,  n$?  leqach. 

Prov.  1.    5  A  wise  (man) . .  will  increase  learning ;  and 
9.    9  teach .  .and  he  will  increase  in  learning 
16.  21  the  sweetness  of  the  Lips  increaseth  lear. 
16.  23  The  heart  of  the  wise,  .addeth  learning 
2.A  book,  literature,  "isp  sejjJier. 

Ban.    1.    4  whom  they  might  teach  the  learning  and 
1.  17  knowledge  and  skill  in  all  learning  and 

3.^1  letter,  something  written,  learning,  ypdfi/j.a. 

Acts  26.  24  Paul.,  much  learning  doth  make  thee  mad 
^.Teaching,  instruction,  Sidao-Kahta  didaskalia. 

Rom.15.   4  were  written  for  our  learning  ;  that  we 
LEASING  — 
To  lie,  deceive,  njs  kazab. 

Psa.    4.   2  will  ye  love  vanity,  (and)  seek  after  leas.? 
5.   6  Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak  leas. 
LEAST  (that  thing  which  is) — 
1. Small,  little,  young,  Tys  tsair. 

Judg.  6.  15  and  I  (am)  the  least  in  my  father's  house 

1  Sa.    9.  21  my  family  the  least  of  all  the  families  of 
Jer.  49.  20  Surely  the  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw 

50. 45  Surely  the  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw 
2.L\ttle,  small,  juj?  qatan. 

2  Ki.18.  24  face,  .of  the  least  of  my  master's  servants 
1  Ch.12.  14  one  of  the  least  (was)  over  an  hundred 
Isa.  36.   9  face,  .of  the  least  of  my  master's  servants 
Jer.    6. 13  For  from  the  least  of  them  even  unto  the 

31.  34  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the  greatest 
Jon.    3.   5  greatest  of  them  even  to  the  least  of  them 

3.  Little,  small,  young,  Jbfj  qaton. 

Jer.  8. 10  from  the  least  even  unto  the  greatest  is  g. 
42.  i,  8  all. .from the  least  even  unto  the  greatest 
44. 12  die,  from  the  least  even  unto  the  greatest 

4.  The  least,  £\dxt<TTo$  elachistos. 

Matt.  2.   6  art  not  the  least  among  the  princes  of  J. 

5.  19  shall  break  one  of  these  least  commandme. 

5. 19  he  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom 

25.  40  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren 

25-  45  ye  did  (it)  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  these 

Lukei2.  26  not  able  to  do  that  thing  which  is  least 

16.  10  He  that  is  faithful  in  that  winch  is  least 

16.  io  he  that  is  unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also 

1  Co.  15.   9  I  am  the  least  of  the  apostles,  that  am 

5.  Little,  small,  fiiKpSs  mikros. 

Acts   8.  10  To  whom  they  all  gave  heed,  from  the  le. 
Heb.  8. 11  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to  the  gre. 

6. Lesser,  smaller,  fttKpSTtpos  mikroteros. 

Mattn.  11  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
13.32  Which  indeed  is  the  least  of  all  seeds;  but 

Luke  7.  28  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is  g. 
9.  48  he  that  is  least  among  you  all,  the  same 
[See  At,  esteemed,  less.] 
LEAST,  at  (the)  — 
l.Or,  it  may  be,  its  0. 

Gen.  24.  55  let.  .abide  with  us.  .days,  at  the  least  ten 
I.Only,  pi  rag. 

Judg.  3.   2  at  the  least  such  as  before  knew  nothing 
3. Even  indeed,  Kai  ye  kai  ge. 

Lukeig.  42  known,  even  thou,  [at  least]  in  this  thy 
A. Even  if  Kav  kan. 

Acts    5. 15  at  the  least  the  shadow  of  Peter  passing 
LEAST,  to  gather  — 
To  make  few  or  little,  ayD  maat,  5. 

Numu.  32  he  that  gathered  least  gathered  ten  ho. 
LEATHER,  LEATHERN  — 
1. Ski n,  lij;  or. 

2  EX   1.    8  with  a  girdle  of  leather  about  his  loins 
2. Made  of  skin,  Sep/iaTtvos  dermatinos. 

Matt.  3.   4  John  had.  .a  leathern  girdle  about  his  1. 
LEAVE,  to  — 
1.7*0  cease,  bin  chadal. 

Gen.  41.  49  very  much,  intil  he  left  numbering;  for 

Judg.  9.  g  Should  I  leave  my  fatness,  wherewith  by 
9.  13  Should  I  leave  my  wine,  which  cheereth 

Ruth  1.  iS  minded  to  go.  .she  left  speaking  unto  her 

1  Sa.   9.   5  lest  my  father  leave  (caring)  for  the  asses 
2.  To  leave,  put  down,  nr  yanach,  5. 

Gen.  42.  33  leave  one  of  your  brethren . .  with  me,  and 
Lev.  7. 15  shall  not  leave  any  of  it  until  the  morning 
16.  23  shall  put  off.  .and  shall  leave  them  there 
Num32. 15  he  will  yet  again  leave  them  in  the  .wild. 
Josh.  4.    3  leave  them  in  the  lodging  place  where  ye 

6.  23  and  left  them  without  the  camp  of  Israel 
Judg.  2.  23  Therefore  the  Lord  left  those  nations 

3.    1  these  (are)  the  nations  which  the  Lord  left 

2  Sa.  16.  21  concubines,  which  he  hath  left  to  keep 

20.  3  concubines,  whom  he  had  left  to  keep  the 
1  ELi.  7.  47  Solomon  left  all  the  vessels . .  because  they 

19.  3  And. .he  arose.. and  left  his  servant  there 
Psa.  17.  14  leave  the  rest  of  their  (substance)  to  their 
119. 121 1  have  done.. leave  me  not  to  mineopp. 
Eccl.  2. 18  because  I  should  leave  it  unto  the  mau 

10.    4.  leave  not  thy  place ;  for  yielding  pacifleth 


Isa.   65.  15  ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a  curse  unto 
Jer.  14.    9  we  are  called  by  thy  name ;  leave  us  not 

43.  6  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  left  with  G. 
Eze.  16.  39  theyshallstrip.  .andleavethee  naked  and 

22.  20  and  I  will  leave  (you  there),  and  melt  yon. 
3.  To  set  up,  place,  y$*  yatsag,  5. 

Gen.  33. 15  Let  me  now  leave  with  thee,  .of  the  folk 
4.7*o  leave,  let  remain  over,  *vv  yathar,  5. 

Exod  10.  15  fruit  of  the  trees  which  the  hail  had  left 
16.  19  said,  Let  no  man  leave  of  it  till  the  morrow 

16.  20  some  of  them  left  of  it  until  the  morning 
Lev.  22.  30  ye  shall  leave  none  of  it  until  the  morrow 
Deut  28.  54  remnant  of  his  children  winch  he  shall  I. 
Ruth  2.  14  and  she  did  eat,  and  was  sufficed,  and  left 
2  Ki.  4.  43  They  shall  eat,  and  shall  leave  (thereof) 

4.  44  they  did  eat,  and  left . .  according  to  the 
2  Ch.31.  10  we  have  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have  left 
Isa.  1.  9  Except  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  left  unto  us 
Jer.  44.  7  out  of  Judah,  to  leave  you  none  to  remain 
Eze.  12.  16  I  will  leave  a  few  men  of  them  from  the 
39.  28  and  have  left  none  of  them  any  more  there 

S.Tofyiisk,  rhskalah,  3. 

Gen.  18.  33  aY soon  as  he  had  left  communing  with  A. 

44.  12  at  the  eldest,  and  left  at  the  youngest 

6.7*0  leave,  spread  out,  t?a3  natash. 

1  Sa.  10.   2  thy  father  hath  left  the  care  of  the  assea 

17.  20  left  the  sheep  with  a  keeper,  and  took 
17.  22  David  left  his  carriage  in  the  hand  of  the 
17.  28  with  whom  hast  thouleft  those  few  sheep 

Neh.  10.  31  we  would  leave  the  seventh  year,  and  the 
Psa.  27.   9  leave  me  not,  neither  forsake  me,  O  God. 
Jer.    12.    7  I  have  left  mine  heritage ;  I  have  given 
Eze.  29.   5  I  will  leave  thee. .into  the  wilderness,  thee 

31.  12  strangers,  .have  cut  Mm  off,  and  have  1. 
31. 12  all  the  people  of  the  earth,  .have  left  him 

32.  4  Then  will  I  leave  thee  upon  the  land,  I 
Hos.  12. 14  therefore  shall  he  leave  his  blood  upon  h. 

7.7*0  give,  jru  nathan. 

Eccl.   2.  21  to  a  man.  .shall  he  leave  it  (for)  his  port. 
Jer.  40. 11  the  king  of  Babylon  had  left  a  remnant  of 

8.  To  forsake,  leave,  abandon,  3tjj  azdb. 

Gen.  2.  24  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and 
24.27  who  hath  not  left  destitute  my  master  of 
28. 15  I  will  not  leave  thee,  until  I  have  done 
39.  6  he  left  all  that  he  had  in  Joseph's  hand 
39.  12  left  his  garment  in  her  hand,  and  fled,  and 
39.  13  when  she  saw_that  he  hadleft  his  garment 
39. 15,  18  he  left  his' garment  with  me,  and  fled 
44.  22  cannot  leave,  .for  (if)  he  should  leave  his 
50.    8  then"  herds,  they  left  in  the  land  of  Goshen 

Exod.  2.  20  why  (is)  it . .  ye  have  left  the  man  ?  call  him 
9.  21  left  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  the  field 

Lev.  19. 10  thou  shalt  leave  them  for  the  poor  and  st. 
23.  22  thou  shalt  leave  them  unto  the  poor,  and 

Numio.  31  And  he  said,  Leave  us  not,  I  pray  thee 

Josh.  8.  17  they  left  the  city  open,  and  pursued  after 

22.  3  Yehavenotleityourbrethrenthesemany 
Judg.  2.  21  nations  which  Joshua  left  when  he  died 
Ruth  1.  16  Entreat  me  not  to  leave  thee  from  follow. 

2.  nthou  hast  left  thy  father  and  thy  mother 
2. 16  and  leave,  .that  she  may  glean,  .and  reb. 

1  Sa.  30. 13  my  master  left  me,  because  three  days 

2  Sa.   5.  21  there  they  left  their  images,  and  David 

15.  16  the  king  left  ten  women,  .concubines 

1  Ei.  8.  57  God.  .let  him  not  leave  us,  nor  forsake  us 

-19.  20  he  left  the  oxen,  and  ran  after  Elijah,  and 

2  Ki.   2.  2,  4,  6  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave  thee 

4.  30  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave  thee 

7.  7  left  their  tents,  and  then-  horses,  and  their 

8.  6  since  the  day  that  she  left  the  land,  even 
17.  16  they  left  all  the  commandments  of  the  L. 

1  Ch.14. 12  wheu  they  had  left  their  gods  there,  David 

16.  37  So  he  left  there,  before  the  ark  of  the  co. 
2Ch.11. 14  FortheLeviteslefttheirsuburbs,andtheir 

12.    5  therefore  have  I  also  left  you  in  the  hand 
24. 18  they  left  the  house  of  the  Loed  God  of 
24. 25  for  they  left  him  in  great  diseases,  his  own 
28.  14  So  the  armed  men  left  the  captives  and 
32.  31  God  left  him,  to  try  him,  that  he  might 
Neh.  9.  28  therefore  lef  test  thou  them  in  the  hand  of 
Job    10.    1 1  will  leave  my  complaint  upon  myself 
39. 11  Wilt  thou  trust,  .wilt  thou  leave  thy  lab. 
39. 14  Which  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the  earth,  and 
Psa.  16. 10  For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell 
37-  33  The  Lokd  will  not  leave  him  in  Ins  hand 
49.  10  wise  men  die.  .and  leave  their  wealth  to 
Prov.  2.  13  Who  leave  the  paths  of  uprightness,  to 
Isa.    10.    3  help?  and  where  will  ye  leave  your  glory? 

17.  9  which  they  left  because  of  the  children  of 
Jer.    9.   2  that  I  might  leave  my  people,  and  go  from 

17. 11  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst  of  his  days 
18. 14  Will  (a  man)  leave  the  snow  of  Lebanon 
48.  28  leave  the  cities,  and  dwell  in  the  rock,  and 
49. 11  Leave  thy  fatherless  children,  I  willpres. 
Eze.  23.    8  Neither  left  she  her  whoredoms .  .from  E. 

23.  29  shall  leave  thee  naked  and  bare ;  and  the 

24.  21  your  daughters  whom  ye  have  left  shall 
Zech  11. 17  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the 
Mai.    4.    1  it  shallleavethemneitherroot  nor  branch 

9.7*0  stand,  stand  still,  "ID#  amad. 

Gen.  29.  35shecalledhisnameJudah:  andleftbearing 
30.  9  When  Leah  saw  that  she  had  left  bearing 
lO.To  let  fall,  ns"j  raplwh,  5. 

Neh.  6.  3  whilst  I  leave  it,  and  come  down  to  you  % 
11. 7*o  put,  place,  n'v,  m'e*  mm,  sim. 

a  Sa.  14.    7  shall  not  leave  to  my  husband,  .name  nor 


rsZ^. 


LEAVE 


59G 


LEBANON 


12.  To  leave,  let  remain,  iNp  shaar,  5. 

Exodio.  12  eat  every  herb,  .all  that  the  hail  hath  left 
Num.  9. 12  They  shall  leave  none  of  it  unto  the  mo. 

21.  35  until  there  was  none  left  him  alive  :  and 
Deut.  2.  34  And . .  of  every  city,  we  left  none  to  remain 

3.  3  we  smote  him  until  none  was  left  to  him 
28.  51  shall  not  leave  thee,  .corn,  wine,  or  oil 
28.  5s  because  he  hath  nothing  left  him  in  the 

Josh.  10.  33  smote,  .until  ho  had  left  him  none  rema. 
10.  37  he  left  none  remaining,  according  to  all 
jo.  39  he  left  none  remaining  :  as  he  had  done 

10.  4.0  he  left  none  remaining,  but  utterly  dest. 

11.  8  smote,  .until  they  left  them  none  remain. 

11.  14  they  smote.. neither  left  they  any  to bre. 
Judg.  6.  4  left  no  sustenauce  for  Israel,  neither  sheep 
1  Sa.  14.  36  Saul  said,  .let  us  not  leave  a  man  of  them 

25.  22  if  I  leave  of  all  that  (pertain)  to  him,  by 

1  Ki.  15.  29  he  left  not  to  Jeroboam  any  that  breathed 

16.  11  he  left  him  not  one  that  pisseth  against 
19.  iS  I  have  left,  .seven  thousand  in  Israel,  all 

2  Ki.    3.  25  only  in  Kir-haraseth  left  they  the  stones 

10.  11  slew  all.  .until  he  left  him  none  remain. 
10.  14  and  slew  them.,  neither  left  he  any  of  them 
13.  7  Neither  did  he  leave  of  the  people  to  Je. 
25. 12  the  captain  of  the  guard  left  of  the  poor 

25.  22  whom  Nebuchadnezzar.. had  left,  even 
Ezra  9.  8  to  leave  us  a  remnant  to  escape,  and  to 
Jer.  39. 10  captain,  .left  of  the  poor  of  the  people 

49.    9  would  they  not  leave . .  gleaning  grapes  ? 

52.  16  left,  .of  the  poor  of  thelaud  for  vine  dre. 
Joel  2. 14  leave  a  blessing  behind  him .  .a  meat  off. 
Amos  5.    3  The  city  that  went  out.  .shall  leave  an  h. 

5.    3  that  which  went  forth,  .shall  leave  ten 
Obad.       5  to  thee,  would  they  not  leave  (some)  gr.? 
Zeph.  3.  12  I  will  also  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an 

IS. To  leave,  let  alone,  p?^  shebaq. 

Dan.    4. 15  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots  in  the  earth 

4.  23  leave  the  stump  of  the  roots  thereof  in 

4.  26  And . .  to  leave  the  stump  of  the  tree  roots 

14.  To  cause  or  suffer  to  cease,  T)2$  shabath,  5. 
Ruth  4.  14  Lord,  which  hath  not  left  thee  this  day 

15.  To  semi  up  or  back,  avinfxt  aniemi. 

Heb.  13.    5  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

16.  To  leave  behind  or  of,  airoXeiirto  apoleipo. 

2  Ti.    4. 13  The  cloak  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Car. 
4.  20  Trophimus  have  I  left  at  Miletum  sick 
Jude        6  left  their  own  habitation,  he  hath  reserved 

17.  To  send  away,  let  go,  atplvfjn  aphiemi. 

Matt.  4. 11  Then  the  devil  leaveth  him ;  and,  behold 
4.  20  they  straightway  left  (their)  nets,  and  fo. 

4.  22  they  immediately  left  the  ship  and  their 

5.  24  Leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and 
8. 15  he  touched  her  hand,  and  the  fever  left 

18.  12  doth  he  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine,  and 

22.  22  marvelled,  and  left  him,  and  went  their 

22.  25  having  no  issue,  left  his  wife  unto  his  br. 

23.  23  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other  undone 

23.  38  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  deso. 

24.  2  Thereshallnotbelefthereonestoneupon 
24.40,  41  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  1. 

26.  44  he  left  them,  and  went  away  again,  and 
Mark  1.  20  they  left  their  father  Zebedee  in  the  ship 

1.  31  immediately  the  fever  left  her,  and  she 

8. 13  he  left  them,  and,  entering  into  the  ship 

10.  28  we  have  left  all,  and  have  followed  thee 

10.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 

12. 12  feared,  .and  they  left  him,  and  went  their 

12.  19  and  leave  no  children,  that  his  brother  sh. 
12. 20  first  took  a  wife,  and  dying  left  no  seed. 

■     12.  21  [neither  left  he  any  seed  :  and  the  third] 

12.  22  And  the  seven  had  her,  and  left  no  seed 

13.  2  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon 

13.  34  who  left  his  house,  and  ga-ve  authority  to 
Luke  4.  39  stood,  .and  rebuked  the  fever;  and  it  left 

10.  30  wounded,  .and  departed,  leaving,  .half 

11.  42  to  have  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other 

13.  35  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  deso. 

17.  34  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  shall  be  left 
17.  35  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left 

1 7.  36  [the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left] 

18.  28  said,  Lo,  we  have  left  all,  and  followed 

18.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 

19.  44  they  shall  not  leave  in  thee  one  stone  upon 
21.    6  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  an. 

John  4.  3  He  left  Judea,  and  departed  again  into  G. 
4.  28  The  woman  then  left  her  water  pot,  and 
4.  52  Yesterday  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  1. 
8.  29  the  Father  hath  uot  left  me  alone  ;  for  I 
10. 12  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  and  leaveth  the 
14. 18  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will 

14.  27  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give 
16. 28  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father 
16.  32  shall  leave  me  alone :  and  yet  I  am  not  a. 

Acts  14.  17  he  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in 
Rom.  1.  27  men.leavingthe  natural  use  of  the  woman 
1  Co.   7.  13  pleased  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her  not  le. 
Heb.   2.    8  he  left  nothing  (that  is)  not  put  underhim 

6."    1  Therefore  leaving  the  principles  of  the 
Rev.   2.   4  I  have . .  against  thee . .  thou  hast  left  thy 

IS.  To  let,  suffer,  tdai  ead. 

Acts  23.  32  On  the  morrow  they  left  the  horsemen  to 

19.7b  leave  down  in,  iyKaraXeUw  e<Jkataleipo. 
Acts  2.  27  [thou  wilt  not  leave]  my  soul  in  hell 
Rom.  9.  29  Except  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  had  left  us  a 

20.  To  cast  out,  or  forth,  ifc&dWta  ekballo. 
'   Rev.  11.   2  But  the  court,  .leave  out,  and  measure  it 


21.  To  leave  down,  behind,  utterly,  KaraXenrca. 
Matt.  4.  13  leaving  Nazareth,  he  came  and  dwelt  in  C. 

16.   4  no  sign . .  And  he  left  them,  and  departed 
ig.    5  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father 
21.  17  he  left  them,  and  wentoutof  thecityinto 
Markio.    7  For  this  cause  shallaman  leave  hisfather 
12. 19  If  a  man's  brother  die,  and  leave  (his)  wife 

14.  52  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from  them 
Luke  5.  28  And  he  left  all,  rose  up,  and  followed  him 

10.  40  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve  alone? 

15.  4  doth  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the 

20.  31  the  seven,  .and  they  left  no  children,  and 
John   8.  •  9  [Jesus  was  left  alone,  and  the  woman] 
Acts    2.  31  that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither 

6.  2  It  is  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the 
18.  19  he  came  to  Ephesus,  and  left  them  there 

21.  3  we  left  it  on  the  left  hand,  and  sailed  into 

24.  27  to  show  the  Jews  a  pleasure,  left  Paul  bo. 

25.  14  There  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by  F. 
Eph.  5.  31  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father 
1  Th.  3.    1  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens 
Titus  1.    5  For  this  cause  [left  I]  thee  in  Crete,  that 
Heb.  4.    1  a  promise  being  left  (us)  of  entering  into 

22.  To  cease,  irairofiat  pauomai. 

Luke  5.   4  Now  when  he  had  left  speaking,  he  said 
Acts  21.  32  when  they  saw.  .they  left  beating  of  Paul. 

23.  To  leave  behind,  viroKtix-wdvoi  hupolimpano. 

1  Pe.  2.  21  also  suffered  forus,  leavingus  an  example 
LEAVE  destitute,  to  — 
To  forsake,  leave,  2i"  azab. 

Gen.  24.  27  who  hath  not  left  destitute  mymaster  of 
[See  also  Alive,  sixth  part,  unpunished.] 
LEAVE,  to  give  — 

1.  To  give,  suffer,  |m  nathan. 

Nunj.22. 13  Lord  refuseth  to  givemeleave  to  go  with 
2.To  turn  over  upon  one,  permit,  i-rriTpeiru)  epitrepo. 
Mark  5.  13  And  forthwith  Jesus  gave  them  leave 
John  19.  38  Pilate  gave.,  leave.    He  came  therefore 

LEAVE,  to  obtain  — 

To  ask  for  oneself  7*<y  shaal,  2. 

>:  Neh.  13.    6  after  certain  days  obta;ned  I  leave  of  the 

LEAVE  for,  to — [See  Inheritance.] 

LEAVE  off,  to  — 

l.To  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  bin  chadal. 

Gen.  it.   8  Lord  scattered.,  and  they  left  off  to  build 

1  Ki.15.  21  he  left  off  building  of  Ramah,  and  dwelt 

2  Ch.16.  5  he  left  off  building  of  Ramah,  and  let  his 
Psa.  36.  3  he  hath  left  off  to  be  wise,  (and)  to  do  good 
Jer.  44. 18  But  since  we  leftoff  to  burn  incense  to  the 

2.To  have,  put  down,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Amos  5.    7  and  leave  off  righteousness  in  the  earth 
3.  To  finish,  rr?3  kalah,  3. 

Gen.  17.  22  lie  left  off  talking  with  him,  and  God  went 
i.To  leave,  spread  out,  e>qj  natash.  ' 

Prov.17. 14  leave  off  contention,  before  it  be  meddled 

5.  To  forsake,  abandon.  jt»  azab. 

Ruth  2.  20  who  hath  not  left  off  his  kindness  to  the 
Neh.   5. 10  I  pray  you,  let  us  leave  off  this  usury 
Job     9.  27  I  will  leave  off  my  heaviness,  and  comfort 
Hos.    4. 10  they  have  left  off  to  take  heed  to  the  Lord 

6.  To  remove,  leave  off,  pnj;  atlutq,  5. 

Job  32. 15  They  were  amazed,  .they  left  off  speaking 

LEAVE  of,  to  take  — 

l.To  arrange  oneself  off froniany  one,h-KOTa.(r(To(xai. 
Acts  18.  18  took  his  leave  of  the  brethren,  and  sailed 
2  Co.  2. 13  taking  my  leave  of  them,  I  went  from  th. 

2.  To  salute,  aaird^ofMat  aspazomcti. 

Acts  21.   6  when  [we  had  taken  our  leave]  one  of  an. 
LEAVE  off  speaking,  to  — 

To  keep  or  remain  silent,  tynn  charash,  5. 

Jer.  38. 27  So  they  left  off  speaking  with  him ;  for 
LEAVE  a  remnant,  to  — 
To  let  remain,  in;  yathar,  5. 

Eze.    6.    8  Yet  will  I  leave  a  remnant,  that  ye  may 
LEAVE  undone,  to  — 
To  turn  aside,  "flD  sur,  5. 

Josh  11. 15  he  left  notliing  undone  of  all  that  the  L. 
LEAVE,  what  they  — 
What  remains  over,  TJT  yether. 

Exod23. 11  what  they  leave  the  beasts  of  the  field 
LEAVED— [.See  Gates.] 
LEAVEN,  leavened  bread  — 
X.  Anything  leavened  or  fermented,  ypn  chamets. 
Exodi2.  15  whosoever  eateth  leavened  bread  from 
13.    3  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  eaten 
13.    7  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  seen  with 
23.  18  blood  of  mysacriflce  with  leavened  bread 
34.  25  offer  the  blood  of  mysacriflce  with  leaven 
Lev.    2.  11  No  meat  offering,  .shall  be  made  with  1. 
6. 17  It  shall  not  be  baken  withleaven.    I  have 

7.  13  leavened  bread  withthesacriflceofthanks 
23. 17  wave  loaves,  .they  shall  be  baked  withl. 

Deut  16.  3  Thou  shalt  eat  no  leavened  bread  with  it 
Amos  4.    5  offer  a  sacrifice  of  thanks  giving  with  lea. 

2.  Leaven,  "iNtf*  seor. 

Exodi2. 15  ye  shall  put  away  leaven  out  of  your  hou 
12. 19  Seven  days  shall  therebenoleavenfound 


Exodi3.    7  neither  shall  there  be  leaven  seen  with 
Lev.    2.  11  ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor  any  honey 
■Deuti6.    4  there  shall  be  no  leavened  bread  seen  with 
S.Leaveih  (afty  zume. 

Matti3.  33  Thekingdom  of  heaven  islikeunto4eaven 
16.    6,  11  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees. 

16. 12  not  beware  of  the  leaven  of  bread,  butof 
Mark  8.  15  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  and.  .the  le. 
Luke  12.    1  Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 

13.  21  It  islike  leaven,  which  a  woman  tookand 

1  Co.  5.   6  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump? 

5.    7  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leaven,  that 

5.    8  not  with  old  leaven,  neither  with  the  le. 

Gal.     5.    9  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump 

LEAVEN,  to  — 

To  leaven,  £v/x6co  zumoS. 

Matti3.  33  took  and  hid . .  till  the  whole  was  leavened 
Lukei3.  21  took  and  hid.  .till  the  whole  was  leavened 
1  Co.  5.  6  a!ittleleaven[leaveneth]thewholelump? 
Gal.  5.  9  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump 
LEAVEN,  without — ■ 
Unleavened,  pressed,  ns?  matstsah. 

Lev.  10. 12  and  eat  it  without  leaven  beside  the  altar 
LEAVENED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  or  become  leavened,  f*pn  chamets. 

Exodi2.  34  took  their  dough  before  it  was  leavened 

12.  39  it  was  not  leavened  ;  because  they  were 

Hos.    7.   4  kneaded  the  dough,  until  it  be  leavened 

2. To  leaven,  fpn  chamets,  5. 

Exodi2.  19  whosoever  eateth  that  which  is  leavened 
12.  20  Ye  shall  eat  nothing  leavened  ;  in  all  your 

LEAVES,  (two  leaved  gates)  — 

l'.Leaf  (of  a  door  or  gate),  roi  deleth. 

Isa.   45.    1  to  open  before  him  the  two  leaved  gates 

Jer.  36.  23  when  Jehudi  had  read  three  or  four  leaves 

Eze.  41.  24  doors  had  two  leaves,  .two  turning  leaves 

41.  24  two.  .for  the  one  door,  and  two  leaves  for 

2.  Leaf '(of a  tree  or  flower),  'BU.  ophi. 

Dan.    4.  12  The  leaves  thereof  (were)  fair,  and  the  fir. 

4. 14  shake  off  his  leaves,  aud  scatter  his  fruit 

4.  21  Whose  leaves  (were)  fair,  and  the  fruit 

3.  Hangings,  cybp  qelaim. 

1  Ki.   6.  34  two'leavesof  the  other  door  (were)  fold. 

LE-BA'-NAH,  LE-BA'-NA,  nnS,  tillb  whiteness. 

One  of  the  Nethinini  whose  descendants  accompanied 

Zerubbabel.    B.C.  636. 

Ezra    2.  45  The  children  of  L. ,  the  childr.  of  Hagahah 
Neh.  7.  48  The  children  of  L.,  the  childr.  of  Hagaba 

LE-BA'-NON,  ]M^?  white,  snoioy. 
The  mountain  range  which,  commencing  near  Tyre, 
runs  N.E.  through  Syria,  nearly  parallel  to  the  sea- 
coast,  sometimes  as  high  as  9000  feet  above  the  sea. 
Deut.  1.    7  take  your  journey,  .unto  L.,  unto  the  gr. 

3.  25  me  go  overaud  see  the  good  land,  .and  L. 

11.  24  from  the  wilderness  and  L.,from  the  river 
Josh.  1.   4  From  the  wilderness  andtliisL.,evenunto 

9.    1  coasts  of  the  great  seaoveragainstL.,the 
11. 17  even  unto  Baal-gad  in  the  valley  of  L. 

12.  7  from  Baal-gad  in  the  valley  of  L.  even  unto 

13.  5  the  land  of  the  Giblites,  and  all  L., to  ward 

13.  6  All  the  inhabitants,  .from  L.  unto  Misre. 
Judg.  3.   3  Hivitesthat  dwelt  in  mount  L.,  from  m. 

9.  15  fire  come  out.  .and  devour  the  cedars  of  L. 

1  Ki.   4.  33  from  the  cedar  tree  that  (is)  in  L.  even 

5.  6  that  they  hew  me  cedar  trees  out  of  L. 

5.    9Myservantsshallbringthemdownfrom  L. 
5.  14  sent  them  to  L. . .  a  month  they  were  in  L. 

7.  2  built  also  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. ;  the 
9.  19  which  Solomon  desired  to  build  in..  L.,  aud 

10. 17  put  them  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. 
10.  21  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L. 

2  Ki.14.    9  The  thistle  that  (was)  in  L.  sent  to  the  ce. 

14.  9  that  (was)  in  L.,  saying,  Give  thy  daughter 
14.   9  passed  by  a  wild  beast  that  (was)  in  L. 
19.  23  I  am  come  up.  .to  the  sides  of  L.,and  will 

2  Ch.  2.  8  Send  me  also  cedar  trees,  .out  of  L.;  for 
2.  8  thy  servants  can  skill  to  cut  timber  in'L. 
2.  16  we  will  cut  wood  out  of  L.,  as  much  as 

8.  6  Solomon  desired  to  build,  .in  L.,  and  th. 

9.  20 vesselsof  thehouseoftheforestofL.  v.  16 

25. 18  The  thistle  that  (was)  in  L.  sent  to  the 
25.  18  that  (was)  in  L., 'saying,  Give  thy  daughter 
25.  18  passed  by  a  wild  beast  that  (was)  in  L.,  and 

Ezra   3.    7  to  bring  cedar  trees  from  L.  to  the  sea  of 

Psa.  29.   5  yea,  the  LORD  breaketh  the  cedars  of  L. 

29.   6  L.  and  Sirion  like  a  young  unicorn 

72. 16  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  L.:  and  (they) 
92.  12  righteous,  .shall  grow  like  a  cedar  in  L. 

104.  16  the  cedars  of  L.,  which  he  hath  planted 
Song  3.    9  made  himself  a  chariot  of  the  wood  of  L. 

4.  8  come  with  me  from  L. . .  from  L. :  look  from 
4.  11  and  the  smell,  .(is)  like  the  smell  of  L. 

4.  15  fountain  of  gardens,  .and  streams  from  L. 

5. 15  his  countenance  (is)  as  L.,  excellentas  the 
7.   4  thy  nose  (is)  as  the  tower  of  L.  which  lo. 

Isa.  2.  13  upon  all  the  cedars  of  L.,  (that  are)  high 
10.  34  shall  cut  down  the  thickets,  .and  L.  shall 
14.    8  trees  rejoice  at  thee,  (and)  the  cedars  of  L. 

29. 17  L.  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful  field,  and 
33.   9  L.  is  ashamed  (and)  hewn  down ;  Sharon 
35.    2  glory  of  L.  shall  be  given  unto  it,  the  ex. 
37.  24  I  come  up.  .to  the  sides  of  L.;  and  I  will 
40.  16  L.  (is)  not  sufficient  to  burn,  nor  the  beasts 

60. 13  The  glory  of  L.  shall  come  unto  thee,  the 
Jer.   18.  14  Will  (a  man)  leave  the  snow  of  L.  (which 

22,    6  Thou  (art),  .the  head  of  L.:  (yet)  surely  I 


LEBAOTH 


597 


LEG 


Jer.  22.  20  Go  up  to  L.,  and  cry ;  and  lift  up  thy  voice 
22.  23  0  inhabitant  of  L.,  that  makest  thy  nest 
Eze.  17.  3  Agreateagle..canieuntoL.,  and  took  the 
27.  5  they  have  taken  cedars  from  L.  to  make 
31.  3  (was)  a  cedar  in  L.  with  fair  branches 
31.  15  I  caused  L.  to  mourn  for  him,  and  all  the 
31.  16  the  choice  and  best  of  L.,  all  that  drink 
Hos.  14.    5  he  shall,  .cast  forth  his  roots  as  L. 

14.    6  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell  as  L. 
14.  -  7  scent  thereof  (shall  be)  as  the  wine  of  L. 
Nah.   1.    4  Bashan..and  the  flower  of  L.  languisheth 
Hab.    2.  17  the  violence  of  L.  shall  cover  thee,  and 
Zech.io.  10  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Gilead  and  L. 
11.    1  Open  thy  doors,  O  L.,  that  the  fire  may 

LE-BA'-OTH,  rTixn?  place  of  lionesses. 
A  city  of  Simeon,  in  the  S.  of  Judah  near  Shilhim  ;  the 
snme  as  Betk-lebaoth  in  Jos.  19.  6.    It  is  also  called  Beth- 
birel,  "place  of  stout  ones,"  in  1  Ch.  4.  31. 

Josh. 15.  32  L.,  and  Shilhim,  and  Ain,  and  Rimmon 

LEB-BE'-TJS,  Ae&&a?os  man  of  heart. 

An  apostle  sumamed  Thaddeus ;  supposed  to  be  the 

same  as  Jude,  the  brother  of  James. 

Matt  10.   3  Alpheus,  and  L.,  whose  surname  wasTh. 
XE-BO'-NAH,  niizh  frankincense. 
A  city  of  Ephraim,  a  little  N.  of  Shiloh;  now  called 
Lubban. 

Judg2i.  19  Beth-el  to  Shechem,  and  on  the  south  of  L. 
LE'-CAH,  npb  addition,  attached  place. 
Son  of  Er,  the  son  of  Shelah,  the  son  of  Judah,  B.C. 
1660;  or  the  place  where  Er  dwelt. 

1  Ch.  4.  21  the  father  of  L.,  and  Laadah,  the  father 
LED,  to  be  — 

To  be  caused  to  step,  declared  happy,  Ti:N  ashar,  4. 
Isa.     9. 16  (they  that  are)  led  of  them  (are)  destroyed 
LED  away,  to  be  — ■ 
To  lead,  &yca  ago. 

2  Ti.    3.   6  laden  with  sins,  led  away  with  divers  lu. 
LED  away  captive,  to  be  — 

To  be  removed,  exiled,  n?a  galah,  4. 

Nah.  2.    7  Huzzab  shall  be  led  away  captive,  she 
LED  away  with,  to  he  — - 
To  lead  away  with,  awaivdyw  sunapago. 

2  Pe.  3.  17  beware  lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with 
LED  forth,  to  be  — 
To  be  caused  to  flow  or  go  forth,  75;  ydbal,  6. 

Isa.  55.  12  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  be  led  fqrth  with 
LED  into,  to  be  — 
To  lead  into,  ela-dyco  eisago. 

Acts  21.  37  as  Paul  was  to  be  led  into  the  castle,  he 
LED  into  captivity,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  cause  to  remove,  exile,  npa  galah,  5. 

Eze.  39.  28  which  caused  them  to  be  led  into  captivity 
LEDGE  — 
l.Hand,  spoke,  "\\yad. 

1  Ki.  7.  35  on  the  top  of  the  base  the  ledges  thereof 
7.  36  on  the  plates  of  the  ledges  thereof,  and 
^.Joints,  joinings,  n"3hy  shelabbim. 

1  Ki.  7.  28  andthe  borders  (were)  between  the  ledges 

7.  29  between  the  ledges  (were)  lions,  oxen,  and 
7.  29  upon  the  ledges  (there  was)  a  base  above 
tyfp.-r-  — 
Herb,  leek,  "i*xn;  chatsir. 

Kum  11.   5  melons,  and  the  leeks,  and  onions,  and 
LEES  — 
Preserves,  Dorps'  shemarim. 

Isa.  25.   6  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things 

25.    6  marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined 
Jer.  48.  11  he  hath  settled  on  his  lees,  and  hath  not 
Zeph.  1. 12  punish,  .men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees 
[See  also  Wines]. 

LEFT  (hand,  side)  — 

l.The  left  hand,  side,  bxbtp,  VlNbip  semol. 

Gen.  13.    9  if.  .the  left  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  ri. 

14. 15  Hobah,  which  (is)  on  the  left  hand  of  Da. 

24.  49  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left 

[So in  ]Sum.  20.  17;  22.  26;  Deut.  2.  27;  5.  32;  17.  n,  20; 

28.  14 ;  Josh.  1.  7 ;  23.  6 ;  1  Sa.  6.  12 ;  2  Sa.  2.  19 ;  2  Ki. 

22.  2 ;  2  Ch.  34.  2 ;  Prov.  4.  27]. 

Gen.  48.  13  took.  .Ephraim.. toward Israel'sleft hand 
48.  13  and  Manasseh  in  his  left  hand  toward  I. 
48.  14  and  his  left  hand  upon  Manasseh's  head 
Exod  14.  as,  29  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their  left 
Josh  19.  27  and  goeth  out  to  Cabul  on  the  left  hand 
Judg.  3.  21  Ehud  put  forth  his  left  hand,  and  took 
7.  20  and  held  the  lamps  in  their  left  hands 
16.  29  Samson  took  hold . .  of  the  other  with  his  1. 

2  Sa.    2.  21  Turn,  .aside  to  +hy  right  hand  or  to  thyl. 

16.    6  men.  .on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left 

1  Ki.  7.  39  five  on  the  left  side  of  the  house :  and  he 

7.  49  five  on  the  left,  befoi  e  the  oracle,  with  the 
22.  19  by  him  on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left 

2  Ki.23.    8  on  a  man's  left  hand  at  the  gate'of  the  city 
1  Ch.  6.  44  the  sons  of  Merari  (siood)onthelefthand 

3  Ch.  3,  17  the  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left 

4.  6,  7,  8  the  right  hand,  and  five  on  the  left 
18. 18  standing  on  his  right  hind  and  (on)  his  left 
Neh.   8.    4  on  his  left  hand,  Pedaiah,  and  Mishael 
Job   23.    9  On  the  left  hand,  where  he  doth  work 
Prov.  3.  16  (and)  in  her  left  hand  riches  and  honour 


Eccl 

TO. 

Song 

.  2. 

8. 

Isa. 

9- 

i4- 

Eze. 

I. 
16. 

IP- 

Dan. 

T7. 

Jon. 

Zeeh 

•  4- 

4- 

12. 

2 

To  turn 

2Sa. 

14- 

i  t:h 

T2. 

Eze. 

21. 

Z.The  left 

Lev. 

14. 
*4- 

1  Ki 

7- 

■?.  Ki 

II. 

2Ch 

3- 

21- 

Eze. 

4- 

2  right  hand  ;  but  a  fool's  heart  at  his  left 

6  His  left  hand  (is)  under  my  head,  and  his 

3  His  left  hand  (should  be)  under  my  head 
20  he  shall  eat  on  the  left  hand,  and  they 

3  break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  1. 

10  four  had  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the  left  side 
46  her  daughters  that  dwell  on  thy  left  hand 

3  I  will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand 

7  held  up  liis  right  hand  and  his  left  hand 

11  between  their  right  hand  and  their  lefth. 

3  and  the  other  upon  the  left  (side)  thereof 
11  upon  the  right,  .and  upon.. left.. thereof? 

6  devour . .  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left 

to  the  left,  V$ti&  samal,  5. 
19  or  to  the  left  from  ought  that  my  lord  the 
2  could  use  both  the  right  hand  and  the  left 

16  Go  thee . .  on  the  right  hand,  (or)  on  the  left 

hand,  side,  yhx£iy  semali. 

15,  26  into  the  palm  of  his  own  left  hand 

16,  27  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  left  hand 
21  he  set  up  the  left  pillar,  and  called  the 
11  to  the  left  corner  of  the  temple,  .by  the 

17  and  the  name  of  that  on  the  left  Boaz 
10  to  the  left  side  of  the  temple,  along  by 

4  Lie  thou  also  upon  thy  left  side,  and  lay 

i. Remnant,  residue,  rHN;?  sheerith. 

Jer.  50.  26  destroy  her.  .let  nothing  of  her  be  left 

5. To  be  se?it  forth,  n1?^  shalach,  4. 

Prov 29.  15  a  child  left  (to  himself)  bringeth  his  mot. 

6.  Having  a  good  name,  the  left,  evwuvfios  euonumos. 
Hatt2o.  21  and  the  other  on  the  left,  in  thy  kiogdom 

20.  23  to  sit  on  my  right  hand,  and  on  my  left 

25.  33  on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  1. 

25.  41  shall  he  say  also  unto  them  on  the  left  h. 

27.  38  on  the  right  hand,  and  another  on  the  left 
Markio.  37  the  other  on  thy  [left  hand],  in  thy  glory 

10.  40  to  sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left  h. 

15.  27  his  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left 
Acts  21.  3  we  left  it  on  theleft  hand,  and  sailed  into 
Rev.  10.    2  and  he  set . .  (his)  left  (foot)  oh  the  earth 

LEFT,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  put  down,  left,  ru;  yanach,  6. 

Eze.  41.  9  (that)  which  (was)  left  (was)  the  place  of 
41.  11  doors. .(were) towa.  (theplacethat  was)l. 
41.  ii  and  the  breadth  of  the  place  that  was  left 

2.  To  be  left,  remain  over,  "in;  yathar,  2. 

Gen.  32.  24  Jacob  was  left  alone  ;  and  there  wrestled 
44.  20  he  alone  is  left  of  his  mother,  and  his  fa. 

Lev.  2. 10  And  that  which  is  left  of  the  meat  offering 
10;  12  unto  Aaron,  and.  .his  sons  that  were  left 

10.  16  with . .  the  sons  of  Aaron  (which  were)  left 
]S"um26. 65  there  was  not  left  a  man  of  them,  save  C. 
Joshn.  11  there  was  not  any  left  to  breathe  :  and  he 

11.  22  There  was  none  of  the  Anakimsleft  in  the 
Judg.  8. 10  all  that  were  left  of  all  the  hosts  of  thee. 

9.   5  yet.. the  youngest  son  of  Jerubbaal  was  1. 

1  Sa.  2.  36  every  one  that  is  left  in  thine  house  shall 

25. 34  surely  there  had  not  been-any  left  unto  N. 

2  Sa.    9.    1  Is  there  yet  any  that  is  left  of  the  house 

13.  30  king's,  .and  there  is  not  one  of  them  left 
17. 12  all . .  there  shall  not  be  left  so  much  as  one 

1  Ki.  9.  20  all  the  people.  .left  of  the  Amorites,  Hit. 

9.  21  Their  children  that  were  left  after  them 
15.  18  left  in  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  L. 
17. 17  sore,  that  there  was  no  breath  left  in  him 
19. 10  I  only,  am  left ;  and  they  seek  my  life,  to 

19.  14  I,  (even)  I  only,  am  left ;  and  they  seek 

20.  30  seven  thousand  of  the  men  (that  were)  left 

2  Ki.  20. 17  shall  be  carried,  .nothing  shall  be  left 

1  Ch.  6.  61  left  of  the  family  of  that  tribe. .outof  the 

2  Ch.  8.    7  all  the  people,  .left  of  the  Hittites,  and 

8.    8  were  left  after  them  in  the  land,  whom 
31.  10  we  have  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have  left 
31.  10  and  that  which  is  left  (is)  this  great  store 
Neb.  6.    1  (that)  there  was  no  breach  left  therein 
Psa.106.  11  enemies;  there  was  not  one  of  them  left 
Isa.      1.    8  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  cottage 
7.  22  shall  every  one  eat  (that  is)  left  in  the  land 
30. 17  till  ye  be  left  as  a  beacon  upon  the  top  of 
39.    6  shall  be  carried,  .nothing  shall  be  left 
Jer.   27.  18  that  the  vessels  which  are  left  in  the  ho. 
34.    7  against . .  the  cities  of  Judah  that  were  left 
Eze.  14.  22  therein  shall  be  left  a  remnant  that  shall 
48.  15  the  five  thousand .  .left  in  the  breadth  over 
Zechi3.    8  shall  come  to  pass.,  the  third  shall  be  left 

14.  16  every  one  that  is  left  of  all  the  nations 

3.  To  lodge,  pass  the  night,  yb,  \\b  lun,  lin. 
Exod34-  25  neither  shall  the  sacrifice,  .be  left  unto 

i.To  Ix  found,  N>'D  matsa,  2. 

2  Ki.19.  4  lift  up.,  prayer  for  the  remnant  that  arel. 
Isa.  37.   4liftup..prayerfortberemnantthat  isleft 

5.  To  be  forsaken,  left,  abandoned,  ityazab,  2. 
Lev.  26.  43  The  land  also  shall  be  left  of  them,  and 
Isa.    18.    6  They  shall  be  left  together  unto  the  fowls 
27.  10  the  habitation  forsaken,  and  left  like  a 

v.To  be  forsaken,  left,  abandoned,  37"  azab,  4. 
Isa.   32.  14  the  multitude  of  the  city  shall  be  left ;  the 
Jer.   49.  25  How  is  the  city  of  praise  not  left,  the  city 

7 '.Remnant,  remaining  one,  1*Tp  sarid. 

Job  20.  21  There  shall  none  of  his  meat  be  left 

20.  26  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  left  in  his 
Jer.  31.    2  The  people,  .left  of  the  sword  found  grace 


8.  To  remain,  be  left,  1^7  shaar,  2. 

Gen.  32.    8  other  company  which  is  left  shall  escape 
42.  38  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  is  left  alone 
47. 18  there  is  not  ought  left  in  the  sight  of  my 
Exodio.  26  there  shall  not  an  hoof  be  left  behind 
Lev.  26.  36  upon  them  that  are  left . .  of  you  I  will  send 
26.  39  they  that  are  left  of  you  shall  pine  away 
Deut.  4. 27  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number  amongthe 
7.  20  until  they  that  are  left,  .be  destroyed 
28.  62  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number,  whereas 
Josh.  8. 17  there  was  not  a  man  left  in  Ai  or  Bethel 
Judg.  4. 16  all  the  host.  .fell,  .there  was  not  a  man 
Ruth  1.    3  Elimelech.  .died ;  and  she  was  left,  and 
1.    5  the  woman  was  left  of  her  two  sons  and 

1  Sa.   5    4  only  (the  stump  of)  Dagon  was  left  to  him 

9.  24  Behold  that  which  is  left  !  set  (it)  before 

11. 11  so  that  two  of  them  were  not  left  together 

2  Sa.  14.    7  so  they  shall  quench  my  coal  which  is  left 
2  Ki.  7.  13  of  the  horses  that  remain,  which  are  left 

7. 13  as  all  the  multitude  of  Israel  that  are  left 
10.  21  that  there  was  not  a  man  left  that  came 
17. 18  was  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  Judah  only 
25.  11  the  rest  of  the  people,  .leftin  the  city,  and 

1  Ch.  13.    2  our  brethren,  .left  in  all  the  land  of  Israel 

2  Ch.21. 17  so  that  there  was  never  a  son  left  him 

34.  21  for  them  that  are  left  in  Israel  and  in  J. 

Neh.    1.    2  the  Jews.,  which  were  left  of  the  captivity 

1.-  3  The  remnant  that  are  left  of  the  captivity 

Isa.     4.    3  he  that  is)  left  in  Zion,  and  (he  that)rem. 

11. 11,  16  remnant  of  his  people  which  shall  be  1. 

17.    6  Yet  gleaning  grapes  shall  be  left  in  it,  as 

24.   6  curse  devoured  the  earth,  .and  few  men 

24. 12  In  the  city  is  left  desolation,  andthe  gate 
49.  21  I  was  left  alone;  these,  where  (had) they 

Jer.    21.    7  (such  as  are)  left  in  this  city  from  the  pe. 

38.  22  all  the  women  that  are  left  in  the  king  of 

40.    6  among  the  people  that  were  left  in  the  1. 

42.    2  we  are  left,  .a  few  of  many,  as  thine 
Eze.    9.    8  they  were  slaying  them,  and  I  was  left 

36.  36  Then  the  heathen  that  are  left  round  ab. 
Dan.  10.    8  Therefore  I  was  left  alone,  and  saw  this 

10.  17  no  strength,  .neither  is  there  breath  left 
Hag.    2.    3  Who  (is)  left  among  you  who  saw  this  h. 

9.  To  let  remain,  be  left,  ~\xy  shaar,  5. 

Nuni2i.  35  smote,  .until  there  was  none  left  him  alive 

Deut.  3.   3  we  smote  him  until  none  was  left  to  him 

28.  55  he  hath  nothing  left  him  in  the  siege,  and 

10. To  be  left,  py&  shebaq,  4. 

Dan.    2.  44  the  kingdom  °*>all  not  be  left  to  other  p. 
11.  To  be  over  and  above,  Trepti,  <reua>  p>crisseu,o. 

Matt  15.  37  took  up  of  the  broken  (meat)  that  was  1. 
12. To  be  left  behind,  vTTo\e'nroiJ.ai  hupoleipomai. 

Rom  11.   3  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek  my  life 
LEFT  behind,  to  be — 
To  be  left,  remain  over,  in;  yathar,  2. 

1  Sa.  30.   9  where  those  that  were  left  behind  stayed 
LEFT,  to  go  or  turn  to  the  — 

To  go  to  the  left,  i?Np"^  samal,  5. 

Gen.  13.   9  the  right  hand  then  will  I  go  to  the  left 
Isa.   30.  21  right  hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left 

LEFT  hand  — 

The  left,  apurrtpos  aristeros. 

Matt.  6.    3  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right 
Xuke23.  33  the  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left 

2  Co.  6.  7  armour,  .on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  1. 
LEFT,  that  was  — 

IVhat  is  left  over  andabove,  Trepio-aevfxaperissetima. 
Mark  8.    8  took  up  of  thebroken(meat)  that  was  left 
LEFT,  that  hath  — 
What  remains  or  is  left  over,  in*  yether. 

Joel    1.   4  That  which  the  palmerworm  hath  left 
1.    4  that  winch  the  locust  hath  left  hath  the 
1.   4  that  which  the  cankerworm  hath  left 
XEFT  HANDED  — 

Bound  of  the  right  hand,  |"p;  t  ien  itter  yadyamin. 
Judg.  3.  15  son  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite,  a  man  left  han. 
20. 16  seven  hundred  chosen  men  left  handed 
LEG  — 
l.Tico  legs,  D'jri?  Jceraayim. 

Exodi2.   9  his  head  with  his  legs,  and  with  purten. 

29.  17  wash  the  inwards  of  him,  and  his  lege 
Lev.    i.-  9  his  inwards  and  his  legs  shall  he  wash  in 
1.  13  he  shall  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs 
4.  11  with  his  head,  and  with  his  legs,  and  his 

8.  21  he  washed  the  inwards  and  the  legs  inw. 

9.  14  he  did  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs,  and 
11.  21  which  have  legs  above  their  feet,  to  leap 

Amos  3.  i2takethout  of  the  mouth  of.  .lion  two  legs 

2.Foot,  Sri  regel. 

1  Sa.  17.   6  And.  .greaves  of  brass  upon  his  legs,  and 

Z.Leg,  pic*  shoq. 

Deut  28. 35  and  in  the  legs,  with  a  sore  botch  that 
Psa.147. 10  taketh  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man ' 
Prov  26.    7  The  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal ;  so  (is) 
Song  5. 15  His  legs  (are  as)  pillars  of  marble  set  upon 

i.Leg,  pa>  shaq. 

Dan.  2.  33  His  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and 
5.  Skirt,  tram,  h$v  shobel. 

Isa.  47.  2  uncover  thy  locks,  make  bare  the  leg,  unc. 
6. Leg,  ckz\os  skelos. 

J0IUI19.  31  besought  Pilate  that  their  legs  might  be 


LEGION 


598 


LEST 


J0I1U19.  32  brake  the  legs  of  the  first,  and  of  the  other 
19.  33  saw. .he  was  dead.. they  brake  not  Ins  legs 
[See  also  Ornament.] 

LEGION  — 

A  legion,  Xeye&v  tegeon  {from  Lat.  legio). 

Matt->6.  53  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels? 
Mark  s     g  saying,  my  name  (is)  Legion  :  for  we  are 
5  15  and  see  him  that,  .had  the  legion,  sitting 
Luke  8.  30  What  is  thy  name?  And  he  said,  Legion 

LE-HA'-BLH,  n^rh  flame- coloured,  red. 

The  third  son  of  Mizraim,  supposed  to  be  the  ancestor  of 

the  Egyptian  Lybians. 

Gen  10.  13  Ludim,  and  Anamim,  and  L.,  and  Naph. 

1  Ch.  1.  11  L.,  and  Anamim,  and  L.,  and  Naphtuhim 
LE'-HI,  'nS,  '•rh  jaw-bone. 

A  district  in  the  Kill  country  of  Judah  near  Philistia, 
and  not  far  from  Jerusalem. 

Judgis.  9  pitched  in  Judah.  .spread  themselves  in  L. 
15. 14  he  came  unto  L.,  the  Philistines  shouted 
15.  19  En-hakkore,  which  (is)  in  L.  unto  this  day 

LEISURE,  to  have  — 

To  have  a  favour  able  opportunity,  eu/ccupeoj  eukaireo. 

Mark  6-  31  and  they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat 
LE-HTTJ'-EL,  ^wob,  ^wob  Oodward,  God  is  bright. 
A  king,  generally  supposed  to  be  Solomon.    B.C.  1000. 

Pro  v.  31.  1  The  words  of  king  L.,  the  prophecy  that 
31.    4  O  L.,  (it  is)  not  for  kings  to  drink  wiue 

LENT),  to  — 

1.7*0  cause  to  join,  lend,  m^>  lavaA,  5. 

Exodz2.  25  If  thou  lend  money  to  (any  of)  my  people 
Deut23.  12  thou  shalt  lend  unto  many  nations,  and 
28.  44  He  shall  lend .  .and  thou  shalt  not  lend  to 
Psa.  37.  26  (He  is)  ever  merciful,  aud  lendeth ;  and 

112.    5  A  good  man  showeth  favour,  aud  lendeth 
Prov  19.  17  He  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poor  lendeth 

2.7*0  bite,  lend  on  usury,  nyi  nashah. 

Deut24- 11  the  man  to  whom  thou  dost  lend  shall  bring 
Jer.  15.  10 1  have  neither  lent . .  nor  men  have  lent  to 

3.  To  cause  to  bite,  lend  on  v^ury,  ntjM  nashah,  5. 

Deutis.  2  Every  creditor  that  lendeth.  .unto  his  ne. 

24.  10  Whenthoudostlendthybrotheranythiug 

4.  To  give,  jru  nathan. 

Lev,  25.  37  Thou  shalt  not . .  lend  him  thy  victuals  for 

5.  7*0  suffer  to  borrow,  lend,  t33j?  abat,  5. 

Deut  15.  6  thou  shalt  lend  unto  many  nations,  but 
15.    8  shalt  surely  lend  him  sufficient  for  Ins 

6.7*0  suffer  to  ask,  bxy  shaal,  5. 

Exodi2.  36  so  that  they  lent  unto  them  (such  things 
1  Sa.    1.  28  Therefore.  .1  have  lent  lum  to  the  Lord 

7.7*0  lend,  make  a  loan,  Savelfa  daneizo. 

Luke  6.  34  if  yelend(tothem)of  whom  ye  hope  to  rec. 
6.  34  for  sinners  also  lend  to  sinners,  to  receive 
6.  35  do  good,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing 

8.7*0  give  as  a  piece  of  business,  kIxpv^  kichremi. 

Xuken.    5  and  say.  .Friend,  lend  me  three  loaves 

[See  Usury.] 

XENDER — 

To  cause  to  be  bound,  lend,  rnS  lavah,  5. 

Proif  22.   7  and  the  borrower  (is)  servant  to  the  lender 
Isa.   24.    2  as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the  borrower 

LENGTH,  at)— 

1, Latter  end,  furthest  part,  ri'in^  acharith. 

Prov  29.  21  shall  have  him  become  (his)  son  at  the  le. 
2  Length,  xi&  orek. 

Gen.  6. 15  The  length  of  the  ark . .  three  hundred  cu. 
13.  17  walk  through  the  land,  in  the  length  of  it 

.Exodzs.  10,  17  two  cubits  and  a  half,  .the  length  the. 

25.  23  two  cubits,  .the  length  thereof,  and  a  cu. 

26.  2,  8  The  leDgth  of  one  curtain  (shall  be) 

26.  13  in  the  length  of  the  curtains  of  the  tent 
26. 16  Ten  cubits,  .the  length  of  a  board,  and  a 

27.  11  And  likewise  for  the  north  side  in  length 

27.  18  The  length  of  the  court,  .an  hundred  cu. 

28.  16  a  span . .  the  length  thereof,  and  a  span 
30.   2  A  cubit,  .the  length  thereof,  aud  a  cubit 
36.    9,  .15  The  length  of  one  curtain  (was) 

36.  21  The  length  of  a  board,  .ten  cubits,  and 

37.  1,  6  two  cubits  and  a  half  (was)  the  length 
37.  10  two  cubits,  .the  length  thereof,  and  a  cu. 

37.  25  the  length  of  it . .  a  cubit,  and  the  breadth 

38.  1  five  cubits . .  the  length  thereof,  and  five  c. 

38.  18  twenty  cubits,  .the  length,  and  the  height 

39.  9  a  span,  .the  length  thereof,  and  a  span 
Deut.  3.  11  nine  cubits,  .the  length  thereof,  and  four 

30. 20  he  (is)  thy  life,  and  the  length  of  thy  days 

Judg.  3. 16  Ehud  made  him  a  dagger,  .of  a  cubit  len. 

1  Ki.  6.   2  the  length  thereof .  .threescore  cubits,  and 

6.   3  twenty  cubits,  .the  length  thereof,  accor. 

6.  20  twenty  cubits  in  length,  and  twenty  cub. 

7.  2  thelength thereof.. anhuudred cubits, and 
7.  6  the  length  thereof,  -fifty  cubits,  and  the 
7.  27  four  cubits,  .the  length  of  one  base,  and 

a  Ch.  3.  3  The  length  by  cubits  after  the  first  meas. 
3.    4  the  length  (of  it  was)  according  to  the  br. 

3.  8  the  length  whereof  (was)  according  to  the 

4.  1  twenty  cubits  the  length  thereof,  and  tw. 
Job    12.  12  and  in  length  of  days  understanding 
Psa.  21.    4  thou  gavest.  .length  of  days  for  ever  and 
Prov.  3.    2  length  of  days,  and  long  life,  and  peace 

3.  16  Length  of  days  (is)  in  her  right  hand 
Eze.  31.    7  in  the  length  of  his  branches;  for  his  root 


Eze.  40.  11  the  length  of  the  gate,  thirteen  cubits 

40.  18  over  against  the  length  of  the  gates,  (was)  I 
40.  20  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  and  the 
40.  21  the  length  thereof,  .fifty  cubits,  and  the 
40.  25,  36  the  length,  .fifty  cubits ;  and  the  bre. 

40.  49  The  length  of  the  porch,  .twenty  cubits 

41.  2  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  forty  cu. 
41.  4  Sohe  measured  the  length  thereof,  twenty 
41.  12  the  building,  .the  length  thereof  ninety 

41. 15  he  measured  the  length  of  the  building 

41.  22  The  altar  of  wood . .  the  length  thereof  two 
41. 22  the  corners  thereof,  and  the  length  there. 

42.  2  Before  the  length  of  an  hundred  cubits 
42.    7  the  wall,  .the  length  thereof .  .fifty  cubits 
42.    8  For  the  length  of  the  chambers  that  (were) 
45.    1  the  length,  .the  length  of  five  and  twenty 
45.    3  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  thousand 

■  45.  5  the  five  and  twenty  thousand  of  length 
45.  7  the  length  (shall  be)  over  against  one  of 
48.  8  and  (in)  length  as  one  of  the  (other)  parts 
48.  9,  10,  13  five  and  twenty  thousand  in  length 
48.  13  all  the  length,  .five  and  twenty  thousand 
48.  1 8  the  residue  in  length  over  against  the  obi. 
Zech.  2.  2  he' said.,  to  see.,  what  (is)  thelength  the. 
5.    2  the  length  thereof  (is)  twenty  cubits,  and 

3. Length,  fxr\Kos  mekos. 

Eph.    3. 18  what  (is)  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  de. 
Rev.  21.  16  and  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth 

21. 16  The  length,  and  the  breadth,  and .  .height 

4. At  any  time,  ttotg pote. 

Rom.  1.  10  if  by  any  means  now  at  length  I  might 

LENGTHEN,  be  lengthened,  to  — 

To  lengthen,  make  long,  tj-in  arak,  5. 

Deut  25. 15  that  thy  days  may  be  lengthened  in  the 
1  Ki.  3. 14 if  thou  wilt  walk,  .then  will  I  lengthen 
Isa.   54.   2  lengthen  thy  cords,  and  strengthen  thy 

LENGTHENING  — 

Lengthening,  n?"]N  arka. 

Dan.    4.  27  if  it  may  be  a  lengthening  of  thy  tranquil. 

LENT,  to  be  — 
7*o  ask,  Wy  sliaal. 

1  Sa.    2.  20  seed,  .for  the  loan  which  is  lent  to  the  L. 

LENTLLES  — 

Lentiles,  d'ehj;.  adaslvim. 

Gen.  25.  34  Jacob  gave  Esau  bread  and  pottage  of  1. 

2  Sa.  17.  28  and  beans,  and  lentiles,  and  parched 

23. 11  where  was  a  piecetrf  ground  full  of  lenti. 
Eze.    4.    9  beans,  and  lentiles,  and  millet,  and  fitches 

LEOPARD  — 

1.  Leopard,  ~ip3  namer. 

Song  4.    8  look.. from  the  mountains  of  the  leopards 
Isa.  11.    6  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid 
Jer.     5.    6  a  leopard  shall  watch  over  their  cities 

13.  23  Can  the  Ethiopian  change,  .skiu,  or  the  leo. 
Hos.  13.    7  as  a  leopard  b;v  the  way  will  I  observe 
Hab.   1.    8  Their  horses  afoo  are  swifter  than  the  le. 

2.  Leopard,  id?  nemar. 

Dan.   7.   6  another,  like  a  leopard,  which  had  upon 
Z.Lcopard,  panther,  TrdpBa\is  partialis. 

Rev.  13.   2  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like  unto  a  le. 
LEPER,  LEPROUS  — 
1.7*0  be  leprous,  iTSf  tsar  a. 

Lev.  13.  44  He  is  a  leprous  man,  he  (is)  unclean :  the 
13. 45  the  leper  in  whom  the  pLague  (is),  his  clo. 

14.  3  plague  of  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  leper 
22.    4  What  man  soever,  .(is)  a  leper,  or  hath  a 

Num.  5.   2  that  they  put  out  of  the  camp  every  leper 

2.7*0  be  or  become  leprous,  ywtsara,  4. 

Exod  4.    6  And.  .behold,  his  hand  (was)  leprous  as 
Lev.  14.    2  This  shall  be  the  law  of  the  leper  in  the 
Nivmi2.  10  behold,  Miriam.. leprous,  .as snow.  .lepr. 
2  Sa.  3.  29  one  that  hath  an  issue,  or  that  is  a  leper 
2  Ki.  5.    1  was  also  a  mighty  man  in  valour.,  a  leper 

5. 11  hand  over  the  place,  and  recover  the  le. 

5.  27  And  he  went  out  from  his  presence  a  le. 

7.   3  there  were  four  leprous  men  at  the  ente. 

7.    8  when  these  lepers  came  to  the  uttermost 

15.  5  so  that  he  was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his 
2  Co.  26.  20  he  (was)  leprous  in  his  forehead,  and  they 

26.  21  Uzziah  the  king  was  a  leper  unto  the  day 
26.  21  and  dwelt  in  a  several  house,  .a  leper 
26.  23  for  they  said,  He  (is)  a  leper :  and  Jntham 

3. Scabbed,  seedy,  a  leper,  \eirp6s  lepros. 

Matt.  8.    2  there  came  a  leper  and  worshipped  him 

10.  8  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise  the 

11.  5  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear 
26.    6  Jesus  was.  .in  the  house  of  Simon  the  le. 

Mark  1.  40  there  came  a  leper  to  him,  beseeching  him 

14.    3  in  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  le.' 

Luke  4.  27  many  lepers  were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of 

7.  22  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  the  deaf  hear,  the 

17. 12  there  met  him  ten  men  that  were  lepers 
LEPROSY  — 

1. Leprosy,  njny  tsaraath. 

Lev.  13.  2  In  the  skin  of  his  flesh . .  the  plague  of  le. 
*3-  3  it  Os)  a  plague  of  leprosy :  and  the  priest 
•  13.  8  shall  pronounce  him  unclean  :  it  (is)  a  le. 
13.  9  When  the  plague  of  leprosy  is  in  a  man 
13.  11  It  (is)  an  old  leprosy  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh 
13.  12  if  a  leprosy  break  out  abroad  in  the  skin 
13. 12  and  the  leprosy  coverall  the  skin  of  (him 
13-  13  (if)  the  leprosy  have  covered  all  his  flesh 
13. 15  (for)  the  raw  flesh  (is)  unclean :  it  (is)  a  1. 


Lev.  13.  20  a  plague  of  leprosy  broken  out  of  the  boil 
13.  25  it  (is)  a  leprosy  broken  out  of  the  burning 
13.  25,  27  him  unclean :  it  (is)  the  plague  of  lep. 
13.  30  dry  scall.  .a  leprosy  upon  the  head  or  be. 
13.  42  it  (is)  a  leprosy  sprung  up  in  his  bald  head 
13.  43  asthe  leprosy  appeareth  in  the  skin  of  the 
13.  47  The  garment  also  that  the  plague  of  lepr. 
13.  49  it  (is)  a  plague  of  leprosy,  and  shall  be 
13.  51  the  plague  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy;  it  (is) 
13.  52  it  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy ;  it  shall  be  burnt 

13.  59  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  plague  of  leprosy 

14.  3  (if)  the  plague  of  leprosy  be  healed  in  the 
14.  7  him  that  isto  be  cleansed  from  theleprosy 
14.  32  in  whom  (is)  the  plague  of  leprosy,  whose 
14.  34  I  put  the  plague  of  leprosy  in  a  house  of 
14.  44  it  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy  in  the  house:  it 
14.  54  the  lawforallmannerofplague  of  leprosy 
14.  55  for  the  leprosy  of  a  garment,  andofahouse 
14.  57  when  (it  is)clean  :  this  (is)  the  law  of  lepr. 

Deut24.  8  Take  heed  in  the  plague  of  leprosy,  that 
2  Ki.  5.    3  for  he  would  recover  him  of  his  leprosy 

5.    6  that  thou  mayest  recover  him  of  his  lep. 

5.    7  unto  me  to  recover  a  man  of  his  leprosy  ? 

5.  27  The  leprosy  therefore  of  Naaman  shall 
2  Ch.  27.  19  the  leprosy  even  rose  up  in  his  forehead 

2  .Leprosy,  Ketrpa  lepra. 

Matt  8.    3  And  immediately  his  leprosy  was  cleansed 
Mark  1.  42  immediately  the  leprosy  departed  from 
Luke  5. 12  behold  a  man  full  of  leprosy ;  who  seeing 
5.  13  immediately  the  leprosy  departed  from 

LE'-SHEM,  U^foi'tress. 

A  city  on  the  W.  of  Mount  Hermon,  between  Naphtali 

and  Manasseh ;  called  also  Laish  and  Dan. 

Josh. 19.  47  children  of  Dan  went  up  to  fight  against  L. 
19.  47  called  L.,  Dan,  after  the  name  of  Dan  their 

LESS,  LESSER  — 

1.  Beneath,  below,  nao  mattah. 

Ezra  9.  13  hast  punished  us  less  than  our  iniquities 
2. 7*o  make  little,  few,  less,  »ge  maat,  5. 

Exodi6.  17  did  so,  and  gathered,  some  more,  some  L 
3.  Little,  small,  young,  Jt?i?  qatan. 

Nuni22.  18  I  cannot  go  beyond.,  to  do  less  or  more 

Eze.  43. 14  from  the  lesser  settle . .  to  the  greater  set. 

i.Little,  small,  young,  ]h\>  qaton. 

Gen.    1. 16  God  made.,  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  ni. 

1  Sa.  22. 15  thy  servant,  .knew  nothing  of  all  this,  less 

25.  36  she  told  him  nothing,  less  or  more,  until 

5.  Less,  i^darrcov  elasson. 

Heb.,  7.   7  without  all  contradiction  the  less  is  bles. 

6.  Worse,  inferior,  less,  ^ttcoi/  hetton. 

2  Co.  12.  15  the  more  abundantly  I  love  you,  the  less 

7.  Little,  small,  short,  fiiKpSs  mikros. 

Mark  1 5.  40  Mary  the  mother  of  James  the  less  and  of 
S.Less,  smaller,  shorter,  (xiKp6repos  mikroteros. 
Mark  4.  31  less  than  all  the  seeds  that  be  in  the  earth 
[See  also  Honourable,  how  much,  sorrowfut] 

LESS  than  the  least  — 

Less  than  the  least,  £\axio"r6r$po$  elachistoteros. 

Eph.  3.    8  Unto  me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of 
LESS  than  nothing — 
End,  cessation,  D5X  ephes. 

Isa.   40.  17  they  are  counted  to  him  less  than  nothing 
LESS,  to  give  (the)  — 
7*o  make  little,  or  few \  ttys  maat,  5. 

Exod3o.  15  the  poor  shall  not  give  less,  than  half  a 

Nmn20.  54  to  few  thou  shalt  give  the  less  inheritance 
33.  54  to  the  fewer  ye  shall  give  the  less  inheri. 

LESSER  —  [See  Cattle.] 
LEST  — 
l.Not,  ^  bal. 

Psa.  32.   9mustbeheIdin..lesttheycomenearunto 

cz.Xot,  that  not,  yFh^?  lebilti. 

Gen.    4. 15  a  mark. . lest  any  finding  lum  should  kill 
38.    9  lestthat  he  should  giveseedtohisbrother 

3.  That  not,  ah  ]vob  lemaan  lo. 

Psa.  125.    3  lest  the  righteous  put  forth  their  hands 

4.  Facing,  fronting,  lest,  js  pen. 

Gen.   3.    3  said. .neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die 
5. That  not,  tva  fj.4)  hina  me. 

Matt  1 7.  27  lest  we  should  offend  them,  go  thou  to 

26.  5  lest  there  be  an  uproar  among  the  people 
Mark  3.    9  because  of  the  multitude,  lest  thc^  should 

14.  38  Watch  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  te. 
Luke  8.  12  taketh  away  the  word  .lest  they  should 

14.  29  Lest  haply,  after  he  hath  laid  the  foimda. 
'  16.  28  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  tor. 

18.    5  lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  weary 

22.  46  rise  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptat. 

John  3.  20  neither  cometh.  lest  his  deeds  should  be 

5.  14  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto 

i2.  35  Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkn. 

12.  42  they  did  not  confess  (him),  lest  they  sho. 

18.  28  lest  they  should  be  defiled,  but  that  they 
Acts  5.  26  feared .  .[lest]  they  should  have  been  sto. 
Rom  11.  25  lest  yf:  should  be  wise  in  your  ownconce. 

15.  20  lest  I  should  build  upon  another  man's 

1  Co.  1.  15  Lest  Pny  should  say  that  I  had  baptized  in 
1.  17  not  vith  wisdom  of  words,  lest  the  crops 
8.  13  no  nVsh  .  .lest  Imflfce  my  brufiierto  of  tend 
9. 12  sul'Vr  all  things,  lest  we  sftoskl  hinder 


LEST 


599 


LETTER 


2  Co.  2.   3  I  wrote  this  same  unto  you,  lest,  when  I 

2.  ii  Xest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  of  us 
9.    3  lest  our  boasting  of  you  should  be  in  vain 

12.    7  lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  measure 

12.  7  [lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  measure] 

13.  10  lest  being  present  I  should  use  sharpness 
Gal.    6.  12  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution  for  the 
Eph.    2.   9  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast 
Phil.    2.  27  lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow 
Col.    2.   4  this  I  say,  lest  any  man  shonld  beguile 

3.  21  provoke  not  your  children . .  lest  they  be 

1  Ti.    3.  6  Not  a  novice,  lest  being  lifted  up  with 

3.    7  lest  he  fall  into  reproach  and  the  snare  of 

Heb.   3.  13  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the 

4. 11  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example 

11.  28  lest  he  that  destroyed  the  firstborn  should 

12.  3  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds 

12.  13  makestraightpathsforyourfeet,  lest  that 
Jas.     5.    9  Grudge  not.  .brethren,  lestyebecondem. 

5.  12  nay,  nay;  lest  ye  fall  into  condemnation 

2  Pe.   3.  17  beware  lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with 
Rev.  16. 15  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked 

G.Xot,  yA\  me. 

Marki3.    5  say,  Take  heed  lest  any  (man)  deceive  you 

13.  36  Lest,coniing  suddenly.he  find  you  sleeping 
Acts  13.  40  Beware  therefore,  lest  that  come  upon  you 

23. 10  fearing  lest  Paul  should  have  been  pulled 
27. 17  fearing  lest  they  should  fall  into  the  qui. 
-27. 42  kill  the  prisoners,  lest  any  of  them  should 

1  Co.  10.  12  let  him  that,  .standeth  take  heed  lest  he 

2  Co.  12.   6  lest  any  man  should  think  of  me  above 

12. 21  lest,  when  I  come  again,  my  God  will  hum. 
GaL    6.    1  consideringthyself.lestthoualsobetemp. 
Col.    2.    8  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through 
Heb.  12.  15  Looking  diligently  lest  any  man  fail  of  the 
12. 15  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up 
7. In  order  that  not,  eis  rb  fir),  2  Co.  4.  4. 
S.Lest  at  any  time,  that  at  no  time,  u^7tot6  mepote. 
Matt.  7.    6  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet 

13.  29  Nay ;  lest,  while  ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye 
15. 32 1  will  not  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they 
25.    g  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you 
27.  64  lest  his  disciples  come  by  night,  and  steal 

JIarki4.   2  Not  on  the  feast . .  lest  there  be  an  uproar 
Lukeia.  58  lest  he  hale  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  j. 

14.  8  lest  a  more  honourable  man  than  thou  be 
14.  12  lest  they  also  bid  thee  again,  and  a  reco. 

Acts  28.  27  their  eyes  have  they  closed;  lest  they  sh. 

Heb.   3.  12  Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any 

4.    1  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,  a  promise  be. 

9.  Lest  in  any  way,  that  in  no  way,  fifaws  'mepos. 
Acts  27.  29  Then  fearing  [lest]  we  should  have  fallen 
Kom.11.  21  (take  heed)  [lest]  he  also  spare  not  thee 
2  C0.12.  20  For  I  fear,  lest,  whenIcome..lest(therebe) 
GaL    4. 11 1  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed 

LEST  at  any  time,  or  by  any  or  some  means  — 

I. Zest  at  any  time,  that  atjio  time,  fi^Trore  mepote. 

Matt.  4.    6  lest  at  anytime  thou  dash  thy  foot  against 

5.25  lest  at  any  time  the  adversary  deliver  thee 

13.  15  lest  at  any  time  they  should  see  with(th.) 

Mark  4.  12  lest  at  any  time  they  should  be  converted 

Luke  4.  11  lest  at  any  time  thou  dash  thy  foot  agai. 

21.  34  lest  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  overchar. 

Heb.    2.    1  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  (them)  slip 

2.  Lest  in  any  way,  that  in  no  way,  fi-fiiras  mtyos. 

1  Co.   3.    9  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty  of  yours 

9.  27  lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have  pre. 

2  Co.  11.    3  lest  by  any  means,  as  the  serpent  beguiled 
Gal.     2.    2  lest  by  any  means  I  should  run,  or  had  run 

1  Th.  3.    5  lest  by  some  means  the  tempter  have  te. 
LEST  haply,  perhaps,  peradventure  — 

1. Facing,  fronting,  Jest,  }$  pen. 

Gen.  42.   4  Lest  peradventure  mischief  befall  him 

I.Lest  at  any  time,  that  at  no  time,  fi-fiirore  mepote. 
Lukei4.  29  Lest  haply,  after  he  hath  laid  the  found. 
Acts    5.  39  lest  haply  ye  be  found  even  to  fight  agai. 

S.Lest  in  any  way,  that  in  no  way,  p^ttois  mepos. 

2  Co.  2.   7  lest  perhaps  such  a  one  should  be  swall. 

9.   4  Lest  haply  if  theyof  Macedonia  conie  with 

LET,  to  — 

l.To  give,  let,  suffer,  permit,  jrn  nathan. 

Exod.  3. 19  that  the  king  of  Egypt  will  not  let  you  go 
Lev.  18.  21  thou  shalt  not  let  any  of  thy  seed  pass 

1  Sa.  18.    2  would  let  hira  go  no  more  home  to  his  f. 

2  Ch.16.    1  that  he  might  let  none  go  out  or  come  in 
2  Ch.20. 10  whom  thou  wouldestnot  let  Israel  invade 

2.  To  make  free,  jr]3  para,  5. 

Exod  5.   4  do  ye . .  let  the  people  from  their  works  ? 

3.  To  cause  to  suffer  to  remain,  ">n»  shaar,  5. 

Josh.  8.  22  so  that  they  let  none  of  them  remain  or 
10.  28  he  let  none  remain  :  and  he  did  to  the  k. 
10.  30  he  let  none  remain  in  it ;  but  did  unto  the 

4.  To  cause  to  turn-  back,  2W  shub,  5. 

Isa.  43. 13  none.  .1  will  work,  and  who  shall  let  it? 

5.  To  send  away,  let  go  away,  a.<pinp.i  aphiemi. 

Matt.  7.   4  Let  me  pull  out  the  mote  out  of  thine  eye 

8.  22  Follow  me;  and  let  the  dead  bury  their  d. 
13.  30  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest 

Mark  7.  27  Let  the  children  first  be  filled :  for  it  is 
Luke  6.  42  let  me  pull  out  vhe  mote  that  is  in  thine 

9.  60  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead :  but  go  thou 
John.11.  44  Jesus  saith.. Loose  him,  and  let  bim  go 

18.   8  If  therefore  ye  s>ek  me,  let  these  go  their 


6.  To  permit,  suffer,  let  go,  4doj  eao. 

Acts  27.  32  cut  off  the  ropes,  .and  let  her  fall  off 

7.  It  is  privileged,  authorized,  Qe<rrt  exesti. 

Acts    2.  29  brethren,  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of 

8.  To  turn  over  upon,  permit,  cirirpeirw  epitrepo.' 
Luke  9.  61  let  me  first  go  bid  them  farewell  which 

9. To  hold  down  or  fast,  Kar4x<*>  katecho. 

•  2  Th.  2.    7  only  he  who  now  letteth  (will  let),  until 
10.  To  hinder,  restrain,  forbid,  kwAvw  kMuo. 

Bom.  1.  13  purposed  to  come  unto  you,  but  was  let 
[See  also  Cease,  come,  conversation,  depart,  down,  drink 
drive,  £ail,  fall,  gender,  go,  go  out,  hear,  heard,  know, 
live,  loose,  redeemed,  remain,  rest,  run  down,  see,  slip, 
wander.] 

LET  alone,  to  — 

l.To  cease,  710  chadal. 

Exodi4- 12  Let  us  alone,  that  we  may  serve  the  Eg. 

Job     7. 16  I  would  not  live  alway  :  let  me  alone  ;  for 

2.  To  catise  or  suffer  to  rest,  put  d-oton,  nr  yanach,  5. 
Exod32. 10  Now  therefore  let  me  alone,  that  my  wrath 
2  Sa.  16. 11  Let.  .alone,  and  let  him  curse  ;  for  the  L. 
2  Ki.23. 18  And  he  said,  Let  him  alone  ;  let  no  man 
Hos.  4.  17  Ephraini  (is)  joined  to  idols ;  let  him  alone 

3.  To  let  escape,  tob%  malat,  3. 

2  Ki.23. 1 8  So  they  let  his  bones  alone,  with  the  bones 

4.  To  cause  or  suffer  to  fall,  let  go,  n?ny  raphah,  5. 

Deut.  9. 14  Let  me  alone,  that  I  may  destroy  them 
Judgn.  37  let  me  alone  two  months,  that  I  may  go 
2  Ki.  4.  27  And  the  man  of  God  said,  Let  her  alone 
Job    7.  19  let  me  alone  till  I  swallow  down  my  spittle 
5.2*0  leave,  let  alone,  pj.p  shebaq. 

Ezra.  6.   7  Let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  alone 

6.  To  set,  place,  n*»  shith. 

Job  10. 20  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  take  comfort  a 

7.  To  send  away,  let  go,  atyiwfit  aphiemi. 

Matt  15.  14  Let  them  alone  :  they  be  blind  leaders  of 
Marki4.  6  Let  her  alone  ;  why  trouble  ye  her  ?  she 

15. 36  and  gave  him  to  drink,  saying,  Let  alone 
Lukei3.  8  Lord,  letitalonethisyearalso,  till  Ishall 
Johnn.  4S  If  we  let  him  thus  alone,  all.  .will  believe 

12.    7  Then  said  Jesus,  Let  her  alone  :  against 

%.  To  permit,  suffer,  let  go,  eaw  eao. 

Mark  1.  24  [Let.  .alone  ;]  what  have,  .to  do  with  thee 
Luke  4.  34  Let.  .alone  ;  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee 
Acts    5.  3S  now  Isay  unto  you.  .[letthem  alone]:  for 

LET  down,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  go  down,  let  doum,  tv  yarad,  5. 
Gen.  24.  18  she  hasted,  and  let  down  herpitcher  upon 

24.  46  she  made  haste,  and  let  down  her  pitcher 

Josh.  2. 15  Then  she  let  them  down  by  a  cord  through 

2.  18  window  which  thou  didst  let  us  down  by 

1  Sa.  19. 12  Michal  let  David  down  through  a  window 

2.  To  cause  to  rest, put  down,  rrtJ  nuach,  5. 
Exodi7. 11  when  he  let  down  his  hand,  Anialek  prev. 

3.  To  cause  to  stretch  out,  msinatah,  5. 

Gen.  24. 14  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee,  that 

4.  To  let  fall,  be  feeble,  nz-irapJwJi,  3. 

Eze.    1.  24  when  they  stood,  they  let  down  their  wi. 
1.  25  when  they  stood,  (and)  had  let  down  their 

5. To  send,  rhy  shalach,  3. 

Jer.  38.   6  and  they  let  down  Jeremiah  with  cords 
38. 11  let  them  down  by  cords  into  the  dungeon 

6.  To  cause  to  sink,  let  sink,  yp^  shaqa,  5. 

Job  41.    1  tongue  with  a  cord,  .thou  Iettest  down? 

7.  To  sold  down,  KaBi-nfju  kathiemi. 

Luke  5. 19  and  let  him  down  through  the  tiling  with 
Acts   9.  25  and  let  (him)  down  by  the  wall  in  a  basket 
10. 11  a  great  sheet  knit,  .and  let  down  to  the 
11.   5  sheet,  let  down  from  heaven  by  four  cor. 

S.To  loose,  lei  loose,  let  doum,  xaAacu  chalao. 

Mark  2.   4  they  let  down  the  bed  whereon  the  sick 

Luke  5.   4  Launch  out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down 

5.    5  nevertheless  at  thy  word  I  will  let  down 

Acts   9.  25  and  let  (him)  down  by  the  wall  in  a  basket 

27.  30  when  they  had  let  down  the  boat  into  the 

2  Co.  it.  33  through  a  window  in  a  basket  was  I  letd. 

LET  down,  to  be  — ■ 
To  go  on,  7]?;  yalak. 

2  Ki.  13.  21  when  the  man  was  let  down,  and  touched 
LET  go  or  get  away,  to  — 
l.To  escape,  let  off,  t3?D  malat,  2. 

iSa,  20.  29  Letmegetaway,Ipraythee,andseemybr. 

2.  To  let  fall,  desist,  n?n  raphah. 

Exod. 4.  26  So  he  let  him  go :  then  she  said,  A  bloody 

3.  To  cause  to  fall,  let  fall,  ng"i  raphah,  5. 

Job   27.   6  I  hold  fast,  and  will  not  let  it  go :  my  h. 
Prov.  4. 13  let.  .not  go :  keep  her;  for  she  (is)  thy  life 
Song   3.   4  I  held  him,  and  would  not  let  him  go 

4.  To  send,  rfa?  shalach. 

2  Sa.  13.  27  that  he  let.  .the  king's  sons  go  with  him 

5.  To  send,  jh$  shalach,  3. 

Gen.  32.  26  Let  me  go.  .1  will  not  let  thee  go,  except 
Exod.  3.  20  smite,  .and  after  that  he  will  let  you  go    . 
4.  21  Pharaoh,  .he  shall  not  let  the  people  go 
4.  23  Let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  serve  me :  and 
4.  23  if  thou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  behold,  I  will 


Exod.  5.    1  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  hold  a  f. 
5.    2  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  to  let  Israelgo 

5.  2  I  know  not.  .neither  will  I  let  Israel  go 

6.  1  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  let  them  go 

6.  11  that  he  let  the  children  of  Israel  go  out 

7.  14  Pharaoh . .  he  refuseth  to  let  the  people  go 

7.  16  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 

8.  1  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
8.  2  if  .thou  refuse  to  let . .  go,  behold,  I  will 
S.  S-I  will  let  the  people  go,  that  they  may  do 
8.  20  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
8.  21  if  thou  wilt  not  let  my  people  go,  behold 
8.  28  I  will  let  you  go,  that  ye  may  sacrifice  to 
8. 29  in  not  letting  the  people  go  to  sacrifice  to 

8.  32  this  time,  .neither  would  he  let  the  peo.  go 

9.  1  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
9.  2  thou  refuse  to  let . .  go,  and  wilt  hold  them 
9.  7  hardened,  and  he  did  not  let  the  people  go 
9.  13  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
9.  17  exaltest.  .that  thou  wilt  not  let  them  go? 
9.  28  I  will  let  you  go,  and  ye  shall  stay  no  lo. 
9.  35  neither  would  he  let  the  children,  .go 

10.   3  let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
10.    4  if  thou  refuse  to  let  my  people  go,  behold 
10.    7  let  the  men  go,  that  they  may  serve  the 
10. 10  as  I  will  let  you  go,  and  your  little  ones 
10.  20  would  not  let  the  children  of  Israel  go 

10.  27 hardened .  .and  he  would  not  let  them  go 

11.  1  yet.  .afterwards  he  will  let  you  go  hence 
11.  1  when  he  shall  let  (you)  go,  he  shall  surely 
ti.  10  would  not  let  the  children  of  Israel  go 

13.  15  when  Pharaoh  would  hardly  let  us  go 
13. 17  when  Pharaoh  had  let  the  people  go,  that 

14.  5  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  serving  us? 
21.  2.6,  27  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his.  .sake 

Lev.  14.  53  he  shall  let  go  the  living  bird  out  of  the 

16. 10  to  let  him  go  for  a  scape  goat  into  the  wild. 
16.  22  he  shall  let  go  the  goat  in  the  wilderness 
16.  26  he  that  let  go  the  goat  for  the  scape  goat 

Deut  15.  12  then,  .thou  shalt  let  him  go  free  from  thee 

15. 13  And.  .thou  shalt  not  let  him  go  away  em. 

21.  14  then  thou  shalt  let  her  go  whither  she 

22.  7  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  let  the  dam  go,  and 
Jadg  1. 25  but  they  let  go  the  man  and  all  his  family 

2.    6  when  Joshua  had  let  the  people  go,  the 

15.  5  he  let.  .go  into  the  standing  corn  of  the 
19. 25  and  when  the  day  began . .  they  let  her  go 

1  Sa.  6.  6  did  they  not  let  the  people  go,  and  they 
9. 19  to  morrow  I  will  let  thee  go,  and  will  tell 
19. 17  said . .  Let  me  go ;  why  should  I  kill  thee  ? 
20.  5  let  me  go,  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  the 
20.  29  And  he  said,  Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee ;  for 
24.  19  will  he  let  him  go  well  away?  wherefore 

1  Ki.  11.  22  Nothing:  howbeit  let  me  go  in  anywise 
20.  42  Because  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  (thy)  hand 

2  Ki.   5.  24  and  he  let  the  men  go,  and  they  departed 
Isa.  45.  13  he  shall  let  go  my  captives,  not  for  price 

58.   6  to  let  the  oppressed  go  free,  and  that  ye  b. 
Jer.  34.   9,  10  shonld  let  his  man  servant,  .go  free 
34.  10  heard..then  they  obeyed,  and  let  (them)  go 

34. 11  the  handmaids,  whom  they  had  let  go  free 
34.  14  let  ye  go  every  man  his  brother  an  Hebrew 

34. 14  thou  shalt  let  him  go  free  from  thee :  but 
40.   1  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  let  bim  go 
40.   5  gavc.victualsandarewardjandlethimgo 
50.  33  held  them  fast ;  they  refused  to  let  them  go 

Eze.  13.  20  will  let  the  souls  go.  .the  souls  that  ye  h. 

6.  To  loose  away,  wkoKvo)  opoluo. 

Luke22.  68  if  I  also  ask.  .ye  will  not.  .let (me)  go' 

7.  To  send  away,  a<plwfj.i  aphiemi. 

Markn.   6  they  said  unto  them. .and  they  let  them  gG 
[See  also  Free.] 
LET  forth,  to  — 
To  give  forth  or  <    t,  ^kBiSw/xi  ekdidomi. 

Luke2o.   9  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and  let-it  forth 
LET  out,  to  — 
l.To  give,  jm  nathan. 

Song  8.  11  let  out  the  vineyard  unto  keepers ;  every 
2.To  open,  free,  123  paiar. 

Prov  17.  14  one  letteth  out  water ;  therefore  leave 
Z.To  give  out  or  forth,  ifcSiSw/Ai  ekdidomi. 

Matt 21.  33  let  it  out  to  husbandmen,  and  went  into 
21.  41  and  will  let  out  (his)  vineyard  unto  other 

Marki2.    1  let  it  out  to  husbandmen,  and  went  into 

LET  he  or  have,  to  — 

To  send  away,  let  go,  a<f}tr)/J.t  aphiemi. 

Matt.  5.  40  take,  .thy  coat,  let  him  have  (thy)  27.  49. 
To  be,  etui  eimi. 

Matt.  5.  37;  iS.    17;  20.    26,  27;  Luke  12.  35;  Gal. 
1.  8,  9 ;  1  Ti.  3.  12 ;  Jas.  1.  19 ;  1  Pe.  3.  3. 
LET  remain,  to  — 
To  cause  to  rest,  let  rest,  put  down,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Jer.  27. 11  those  will  1  let  remain  still  in  their  own 
LETTER  — 
l.A  letter,  n"^n  iggera. 

Ezra  4.    8  wrote  a  letter  against  Jerusalem  to  Arta. 
4. 11  This  (is)  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  they 

5.  6  The  copy  of  the  letter  that  Tatnai,  gover.. 
2..4  letter,  rqax  iggereth. 

2  Ch.30.  1  wrote  letters  also  to  Ephraim  and  Manas 

30.  6  the  posts  went  with  the  letters  from  the 

Neh.   2.  7  let  letters  be  given  me  to  the  governors 

2.  8  And  a  letter  unto  Asaph  the  keeper  of  the 

2.  9  I  came . .  and  .gave  them  the  king's  letters 

6.  5  Then  sent.,  withan  open  letterin  his  hand 


LETTER 


600 


LBVITB 


Esth.  9.  26  Therefore  for  all  the  words  of  this  letter 
9.  29  wrote,  .to  confirm  this  second  letter  of  P. 
3. Epistle,  letter,  \yp#}  nishtevan. 

Ezra  4.  7  the  writing  of  the  letter  (was)  written  in 
4.18  The  letter  which  ye  sent  unto  us  hath  been 

4.  23  when  the  copy  of  king  Artaxerxes'  letter 

5.  5  they  returned  answer  by  letter  concerning 

7.  n  this  (is)the  copy  of  the  letterthat  the  king 

4,/i  book,  account,  "isp  sepher. 

2  Sa.  11.  14  that  David  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab,  and 
11.  15  he  wrote  in  the  letter,  saying,  Set  ye  Ur. 

1  Ki.  21.    8  she  wrote  letters  in  Ahab's  name,  and  s. 

zi.  8  and  sent  the  letters  unto  the  elders,  and 
21.  9  she  wrote  in  the  letters,  saying,  Proclaim 
21.  11  as  it  (was)  written  in  the  letters  which  she 

2  Ki.  5.    5  I  will  send  a  letter  unto  the  king  of  Israel 

5.   6  he  brought  theletterto  the  king  of  Israel 

5.    6  Now  when  this  letter  is  come  unto  thee 

5.    7  when  the  king  of  Israel  had  read  the  let. 

10.    1  Jehu  wrote  letters,  and  sent  to  Samaria 

10.    2  Now  as  soon  as  this  letter  cometh  to  you 

10.    6  Then  he  wrote  a  letter  the  second  time  to 

10.    7  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  letter  came  to 

19. 14  Hezekiah  received  the  letter  of  the  hand 

20. 12  sent  letters  and  a  present  unto  Hezekiah 

2  Ch.32.  17  He  wrote  also  letters  to  rail  on  the  Lokd 

Esth.  1.  22  For  he  sent  letters  into  all  the  king's 

3.  13  the  letters  were  sent  by  posts  into  all  the 

8.  5  to  reverse  the  letters  devised  by  Hainan 

8.  10  and  sent  letters  by  posts  on  horse  back 

9.  20  and  sent  letters  unto  all  the  Jews  that 
9.  25  he  commanded  by  letters,  that  his  wicked 
9.  30  he  sent  the  letters  unto  all  the  Jews,  to 

Isa.  37.  14  Hezekiah  received  the  letter  from  the  hand 
39.    1  sent  letters  and  a  present  to  Hezekiah 

Jer.  29.  1  these  (are)  the  words  of  the  letter  that  J. 
29.  25  Because  thou  hast  sent  letters  in  thy  name 
29.  29  Zephaniah  the  priest  read  this  letter  in 

5.  Matter,  word,  sentence,  carj?  pithgam. 

Ezra    5.    7  They  sent  a  letter  unto  him,  wherein  was 

6.A  letter,  anything  written,  ypd/x/xa  gramina. 
Luke23-  38  [written  over  him  in  letters  of  Greek] 
John  7.  15  How  knoweth  this  man  letters,  having 
Acts  28.  21  We  neither  received  letters  out  of  Judea 
Rom.  2.  27  who  by  the  letter  and  circumcision  dust 

2.  29  in  the  spirit,  (and)  not  in  the  letter 

7.    6  serve,  .not  (in)  the  oldness  of  the  letter 
2  Co.  3.    6  the  letter,  but  of  the  spirit :  for  the  letter 
Gal.    6. 11  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written 
7.  An  epistle,  any  thing  sent,  i-KKTroX-r]  ejnstole. 
Acts    9.    2  desired  of  him  letters  to  Damascus  to  the 

22.  5  from  whom  also  I  received  letters  unto 

23.  25  And  he  wrote  a  letter  after  this  manner 

1  Co.  16.    3  whomsoever  ye  shall  approve  by  (your)  1. 

2  Co.  7.    8  For  though  I  made  you  sorry  with  a  letter 

10.    9  not  seem  as  if  I  would  terrify  you  by  let. 
10.  10  For  (his)  letters,  say  they,  (are)  weighty 
10. 11  such  as  we  are  in  word  by  letters  when 
2  Th.  2.    2  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as 
LETTER— [.See  Write.] 

LE-TTJ'-SHXM,  DtfMS^  ojtyressed,  struck. 

Son  of  Dedan,  who  was  grandson  of  Abraham  by  Ketu- 

rah.    B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.   3  the  sons,  .were  Asshurim, andL.,  andLe. 
LE-UM'-MTM,  n*Q$. 

Son  of  Dedan,  who  was  grandson  of  Abraham  by  Ketu- 
rah.  B.C.  1800.  Also  the  name  of  the  tribe  that  sprung 
from  him,  called  Beni  Lam,  in  Asyrlaud,  S.  of  Hedgaz, 
in  the  province  of  Shira,  five  stations  from  Mecca,  on 
the  mountain  between  Tubuk  and  Akhdar  ;  also  in 
Babylonia  and  Mesopotamia. 

Gen. 25.    3  sons.. were  Asshurim.. Letushim,  and  L. 
lE'-VI;  'lS  joined,  Aeut 

1.  The  third  son  of  Jacob  by  Leah.    B.C.  1756-1619. 
Gen.  29.  34  therefore  was  his  name  called  L. 

34.  25  Simeon  andL., Dinah's  brethren,  took  each 

34.  30  And  Jacob  said  to  Simeon  and  L. ,  Ye  have 

35.  23  and  L.,  and  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  Ze 
46.  11  the  sons  of  L. ;  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  M. 
49.    5  Simeon  and  L.  (are)  brethren;  instruments 

Exod.  1.    2  Reuben,  Simeon,  L.,  and  Judah 

6.  16  sons  of  L.  according  to  their  generations 
6.  16  years  of  the  life  of  L.  (were)  an  hundred 

Num.  3.  17  these  were  the  sons  of-L.  by  their  names 
16.  1  the  son  of  L.,  and  Dathan  and  Abiram  the 
26.  59  daughter  of  L.,  whom  (her  m.Jbare  toL. 

1  Ch.  2.    1  Simeon,  L.,  and  Judah,  Issachar,  and  Ze. 
6.    1,  16  sons  of  L.  ;  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  M. 
6.  38  Kohath,  the  son  of  L.,  the  son  of  Israel 
6.  43  Jahath,  the  son  of  Gershom,  the  son  of  L. 
6.  47  of  Mushi,  the  son  of  Merari,  the  son  of  L. 

Ezra   8.  18  of  Mahli,  the  son  of  L.,  the  son  of  Israel 

2.  The  tribe  descended  from  Levi. 

Exod.  2.  1  of  L.,  and  took  (to  wife)  a  daughter  of  L. 
6.  19  these  (are)  the  families  of  L.  according  to 
32.  26  sons  of  L.  gathered  themselves  together 
32.  28  the  children  of  L.  did  according  to  the 

Num.  1.  49  Only  thou  shalt  not  number  the  tribeof  L. 

3.  6  Bring  the  tribe  of  L.  near,  and  present 

3.  15  Number  the  children  of  L.  after  the  house 

4.  2  sons  of  Kohath  from  among  the  sons  of  L. 
16.    7  (ye  take)  too  much  upon  you,  ye  sons  of  L. 

16.  8  Moses  said . .  Hear,  I  prav  you,  ye  sons  of  L. 
16. 10  all  thy  brethren  the  sons  of  L.  with  thee 

17.  3  shalt  write  Aaron's  name  upon  the  rod  of  L. 
n,.   8  rod  of  Aaron  fur.,  house  of  L.  was  budded 


Num  i3.    2  thy  brethren  also  of  the  tribe  of  L.,  the 
18.  21  I  have  given  the  children  of  L.  all  the 

Deut  10.  8  the  Lord  separated  thetnbeof  L.,  to  bear 
10.  9  L.  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  his 
*  18.  1  the  tribe  of  L.,  shall  have  no  part  nor 
21.  5  the  sons  of  L.  shall  come  near;  for  them 
27.  12  L.,  and  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  Joseph 
31.  9  delivered  it  unto,  .priests  the  sons  of  L. 
33.   8  of  L.  he  said,  (Let)  thy  Thummim  and  thy 

Josh  13.  14  the  tribe  of  L.  he  gave  none  inheritance 
13.  33  tribe  of  L.  Moses  gave  not  (any)  inherita. 
2j.  10  Kohath.,  (who  were)  of  the  children  of  L. 

1  Ki.12.  31  people,  which  were  not  of  the  sons  of  L. 

1  Ch.  9.  18  in  the  companies  of  the  children  of  L. 
12.  26  the  children  of  L.,  four  thousand  and  six 
21.    6  L.  and  Benjamin  counted  he  not  among  ' 
23.    6  divided,  .into  courses  among  the  sonsofL. 
23. 14  his  sons  were  named  of  the  tribe  of  L. 

23.  24  These  (were)  the  sonsofL.  afterthe  house 

24.  20  And  the  rest  of  the  sons  of  Levi  (were  th.) 
Ezra    8.  15  and  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of  L. 
Neh.  10.  39  children  of  L.  shall  bring  the  offering 

12.  23  The  sons  of  L.,  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
Psa.135.  20  Bless  the  LoRi>,Ohouse  of  L. :  yethatfear 
Eze.  40.  46  the  sons  of  Zadok  among  the  sons  of  L. 

48.  31  Reuben,  one  gate  of  Judah,  one  gate  of  L. 
Zech  iz.  13  The  family  of  the  house  of  L.  apart,  and 
Mai.    2.    4  my  covenant  might  be  with  L.,  saith  the 

2.  8  ye  have  corruptedthe  covenant  of  L.,saith 

3.  3  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  L.,  and  purge 
Heb.    7.    5  verily  they  that  are  of  the  sons  of  L. 

7.   9  L.  also,  who  receiveth  tithes,  payed  tithes 
Rev.    7.    7  tribe  of  L.  (were)  sealed  twelve  thousand 

3.  An  apostle,  called  also  Matthew,  formerly  a  publican 
or  Roman  tax-gatherer. 

Mark  2.  14  saw  L.  the  (son)  of  Alpheus  sitting  at  the 
Luke  5. 27  named  L.,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom 

5.  29  L.  made  him  agreat  feast  in  his  own  house 

4.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  24  which  was  (the  son)  of  L.,  which  was  (the 

5.  Another  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  29(son)of  Matthat,  which  was  (the  son)  of  L. 
LEVIATHAN  — 
Leviathan,  great  water  animal,  frn1?  livyathan. 

Job    41.    1  Canst  thou  draw  out  leviathan  with  an 

Psa.  74.  14  Thou  brakest  the  heads  of  leviathan  in 
104.  26  that  leviathan,  .thou  hast  made  to  play 

Isa.   27.    1  leviathan  the  piercing  serpent . .  leviathan 
LE-VTTE,  ^b,  D»l^n,  Aevirrjs. 
An  appellation  of  the  descendants  of  Levi. 

Exod  4.  14  (Is)  not  Aaron  the  L.  thy  brother?  I  know 

6.  25  (are)  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  L. 
38.  21  (for)  the  service  of  the  L.,  by  the  hand  of 

Lev,  25.  32  the  cities  of  the  L.,  (and)  the  houses  of 
25.  32  the  houses,  .may  the  L.  redeem  at  any 

25.  33  if  a  man  purchase  of  the  L.,  then  the  house 

25.  33  the  houses  of  the  cities  of  the  L.  (are) 
Num.  1.  47  the  L.  after  the  tribe  of  their  fathers 

1.  50  shalt  appoint  the  L.  over  the  tabernacle 
1.  51  setteth  forward,  the  L.  shall  take  it  down 
1.  51  the  tabernacle,  .the  L.  shall  set  it  up 
1.  53  L.  shall  pitch  round  about  the  tabernacle 

1.  53  L.  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle 

2.  17  camp  of  the  L.  in  the  midst  of  the  camp 

2.  33  L.  were  not  numbered  among  the  children 

3.  9  thou  shalt  give  the  L.  unto  Aaron  and  to 
3.  12  have  taken  the  L.  from  among  the  children 
3.  12  therefore  the  L.  shall  be  mine 

3.  20  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  L.  according 
3.  32  (shall  be)  cliief  over  the  chief  of  the  L. 
3.  39  AH  that  were  numbered  of  the  L.,  which 
3.  41  thou  shalt  take  the  L.  for  me.  .instead 
3.  41  the  cattle  of  the  L.  instead  of  all  the 
3.  45  Take  the  L.  instead  of  all  the  first  bom 
3.  45  the  L.  instead  of  their  cattle ;  and  the  L. 
3.  46  of  Israel,  which  are  more  than  the  L. 

3.  49  above  them  that  were  redeemed  by  the  L. 

4.  18  families  of . .  Kohathites  from  among  the  L. 
4.  46  those  that  were  numbered  of  the  L. ,  whom 

7.  5,  thou  shalt  give  them  unto  the  L.,  to  every 

7.  6  and  the  oxen,  and  gave  them  unto  the  L. 

8.  6  Take  the  L.  from  among  the  children  of 
8.    9  shalt  bring  the  L.  before  the  tabernacle 
8.  10  thou  shalt  bring  the  L.  before  the  Lord 
8.  10  Israel  shall  put  their  hands  upon  the  L. 
8. 11  Aaron  shall  offer  the  L.  before  the  Lord 
8.  12  L.  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  heads 
8.  12  offering,  .to  make  an  atonement  for  the  L. 
8.  13  thou  shalt  set  the  L.  before  Aaron,  and 
8. 14  Thus  shalt  thou  separate  the  L.  from  amo. 
8,  14  the  children  of  Israel:  and  the  L.  shall  be 
8.  15  after  that  shall  the  L.  go  in  to  do  the  serv. 
8.  18  I  have  taken  the  L.  for  all  the  first  born 
8.  19  I  have  given  the  L.  (as)  a  gift  to  Aaron 

8.  20  did  to  the  L.  according  unto  all  that  the 
8.  20  Lord  commanded  Moses  concerning  the  L. 
8.  21  theL.  were  purified, and  they  washed  their 
8.  22  after  that  went  the  L. . .  concerning  the  L. 
8.  24  This  (is  it)  that  (belongeth)  unto  the  L. 
8.  26  Thus  shalt  thou  do  unto  the  L.  touching 
18.  6  I  have  taken  your  brethren  the  L.  from 
18.  23  L.  shall  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 
1 8.  24  I  have  given  to  the  L.  to  inherit :  therefore 
18.  26  speak  unto  theL., and  sayunto  them, When 
18.  30  it  shall  be  counted  unto  the  L.  as  the 

26.  57  they  that  were  numbered  of  the  L.  after 

26.  58  These(are)thefamiliesoftheL.:thefamily 
31.  30  give  them  unto  the  L.,  which  keep  the 
31.  47  gave  them  unto  the  L.,  which  kept  the  ch. 


Num35.    2  they  give  unto  theL.,  of  the  inheritance 
35.    2  ye  shall  give  (also)  unto  the  L.  suburbs 
35*    4.  6,  7  cities  which  ye  shall  give  unto  the  L. 
35.    8  every  one .  .give  of  his  cities  unto  the  L. 

Deuti2.  12,  18  and  the  L.  that  (is)  within  your  gates 

12.  19  thou  forsake  not  the  L.  as  long  as  thou 
14.  27  theL.  that  (is)within  thy  gates;  thou  shalt 
14.  29  L.,  because  he  hath  nopartnorinheritance 
16.  11  the  L.  that  (is)  within  thy  gates,  and  the 

16.  14  thou  shalt  rejoice,  .and  the  L.,  the  stran. 

17.  9  thou  shalt  come  unto  the  priests  the  L. 

17.  18  of  (that  which  is)  before  the  priests  the  L. 

18.  1  The  priests  the  L.,  (and)  all  the  tribe  of  L. 
18.   6  if  a  L.  come  from  any  of  thy  gates  out  of 
18.    7  minister,  .as  all  his  brethren  the  L.  (do) 
24.    8  according  to  all  that  the  priests  the  L. 
26.  11  thou  shalt  rejoice,  .and  the  L.,  and  the 
26. 12  given  (it)  unto  the  L.,  the  stranger,  the 

26.  13  audalso  have  giventhem  unto  theL.,  and 

27.  9  Moses  and  the  priests  the  L.  spake  unto 
27.  14  the  L.  shall  speak,  and  say  unto  all  the 
31.  25  Moses  commanded  the  L.,  which  bare  the 

Josh.  3.    3  the  priests  the  L.  bearing  it,  then  ye  shall 

8.  33  on  that  side  before  the  priests  the  L.,  wh. 
14.    3  but  unto  the  L.  he  gave  none  inheritance 

14.  4  therefore  they  gave  no  part  unto  the  L.  in 
18.  7  the  L.  have  no  part  among  you ;  for  the 
21.  1  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  L.  untoEleazar 
21.  3  children  of  Israel  gave  unto  the  L.  out  of 
21.  4  children  of  Aaron. . (which  were)oftheL. 
21.  8  children  of  Israel  gave  by  lot  unto  the  L. 
21.  20  the  L.  which  remained  of  the  children  of 
21.27  of  the  families  of  theL.,  out  of  the  (other) 
21.  34  the  rest  of  the  L.,  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zeb. 
21.  40  were  remaining  of  the  families  of  the  L. 
21.  41  All  the  cities  of  the  L.  within  the  posses. 

Judg  17.    7  there  was  a  young  man .  .who  (was)  a  L. 
17.   9  he  said  unto  him,  I  (am)  a  L.  of  Beth-lehem 
17.  10  said.  .Dwell  with  me.  .So  the  L.  went  in 

17.  11  the  L.  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man 

17. 12  Micah  consecrated  the  L. ;  and  the  young 

17. 13  Lord  will  do  me  good,  seeing  I  have  a  L. 

18.  3  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  man  the  L. 

18.  15  came  tothehouseoftheyoungmantheL. 

19.  1  there  was  a  certain  L.  sojourning  on  the 

20.  4  the  L.,  the  husband  of  the  woman  that 

1  Sa.    6.  15  the  L.  took  down  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  and 

2  Sa.  15.  24  lo  Zadok  also,  and  all  the  L.  (were)  with 
1  Ki.  8.  4  even  those  did  the  priests  and  the  L.  bring 
1  Ch.  6.  19  these  (are)  the  familiesof  the L.  according 

6.  48  Their  brethren  also  the  L.  (were)  appoin. 

6.  64  children  of  Israel  gave  to  the  L.  (these) 
g.  2  first  inhabitants,  .(were),  .the  priests,  L. 
9. 14  of  the  L. ;  Shemaiah  the  son  of  Hasshub 

9.  26  For  these  L.,  the  four  chief  porters,  were 
9.  31  Mattithiah,  (one)  of  the  L.,  who  (was),the 
9.  33  the  singers,  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  L. 
9.  34  These  chief  fathers  of  the  L.  (were)  chief 

13.  2  and  L.  (which  are)  in  their  cities  (and) 

15.  2  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark.  .but  the  L. 
15.  4  David  assembled  the  children  of.  .the  L. 
15.  ti  David  called  for  Zadok  and.  .for  the  L. 
15.  12  Ye  (are)  the  chief.of  the  fathers  of  the  L. 
15.  14  So  the  priests  and  the  L.  sanctified  them. 
15.  15  children  of  the  L.  bare  the  ark  of  God 

15. 16  David  spake  to  the  chief  of  the  L.  to  app. 

15. 17  So  the  L.  appointed  Heman  the  son  of  J. 
15.  22  Chenaniah,  chief  of  the  L.,  (was)  for  song 
15.  26  when  God  helped  the  L.  that  bare  the  ark 

15.  27  and  all  the  L.  that  bare  the  ark,  and  the 

16.  4  he  appointed  (certain)of  the  L.  to  minister 
23.  2  gathered  together,  .the  priests  and  the  L. 
23.  3  Now  the  L.  were  numbered  from  the  age 
23.  26  unto  the  L. :  they  shall  no  (more)  carry 

23.  27  For  by  the  last  words  of  David  the  L. 

24.  6  Sliemaiah.  .(one)  of  the  L.,  wrote  them 
24.    6,  31  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  priests.  .L. 
24.  30  These  (were)  the  sons  of  the  L.  after  the 
26.  17  Eastward  (were)  six  L.,  northward  four  a 

26.  20  of  the  L.,  Ahijah  (was)  over  the  treasures 

27.  17  Of  the  L. ;  Hashabiah  the  son  of  Kemuel 

28.  13  for  the  courses  of  the  priests  and  the  L. 
28.21  the  courses  of  the  priests  and  theL.,  (even 

2  Ch.  5.  4  all  the  elders  of  Israel  came  ;  and  the  L. 
5.  5  these  did  the  priest  (and)  the  L.  bring  up 
5.  12  Also  the  L.  (which  were)  the  singers,  all 

7.  6  L.  also  with  instruments  of  music  of  the 
8. 14  he  appointed,  .the  L.  to  their  charges,  to 

8.  15  commandment  of  the  king  unto  the.  .L. 
11.  13  priests  and  the  L.  that  (were)  in  all  Israel 
11.  14  For  the  L.  left  their  suburbs,  andtheir 
13.    9  Have  ye  not  cast  out.  .the  L.,  and  have 
13.  10  priests,  which  minister,  .and  the  L.  (wait) 

17.  8  with  them  (he  sent)  L.,  (even)  Shemaiah 
17.  8Asahel.  .andTobijah,andTob-adonijah,L. 
19.    8  did  Jehoshaphat  set  of  the  L.,  and  (of) 

19.  11  also  the  L.  (shall  be)  officers  before  you 

20.  14  Then  upon  Jahaziel.  .aL.  ofthesonsof-A. 
20.  19  the  L.,  of  the  children  of  the  Kohathites 
23.  2  gathered  the  L.  out  of  all  the  cities  of  J. 
23.  4  of  the  L.,  (shall  be)  porters  of  the  doors 
23.  6  none . .  save . .  they  that  minister  of  the  L. 
23.  7  the  L.  shall  compass  thekingroundabout 
23.    8  So  the  L.  a*nd  all  Judah  did  according 

23.  18  by  the  hand  of  the  priests  the  L.,  whom 

24.  5  gathered  together  the  priests  and  the  L. 
24.    5  Howbeit  the  L.  hastened  (it)  not 

24.  6  Why  hast  t.iou  not  required  of  the  L.  to 
24.  11  was  brought,  .by  the  hand  of  the  L.    ' 

29.  4  he  brought  in  the  priests  and  the  L.,  and 
29.  s  Hear  me,  ye  L.  ;  'sanctify  now  yourselves 
29.  12  the  L.  aross,  Mabath  the  son  of  Aruasai 


LEVITICAL 


601 


LICE 


z  Ch.29.  16  the  L.  took  (it),  to  carry  (it)out  abroad  into 
29.  25  he  set  the  L.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
29.  26  the  L.  stood  with  the  instruments  of  David 
29.  30  princes  commanded  the  L.  to  sing  praise 
29.  34  their  brethren  the  L.  did  help  them,  till 

29.  34  L.  (were)  more  upright  in  heart  to  sanctify 

30.  15  L.  were  ashamed,  and  sanctified  therasel. 
30.  16  (which  they  received)  of  the  hand  of  the  L. 
30.  17  the  L.  had  the  charge  of  the  killing  of 
30.  21  the  L.  and  the  priests  praised  the  L. 

30.  22  the  L.  that  taught  the  good  knowledge  of 
30.  25  the  L.,  andall  the  congregation  that  came 

30.  27  the  L.  arose  and  blessed  the  people  :  aud 

31.  2  the  priest  and  the  L.  after  their  courses 
31.    2  and  L.  for  burnt  offerings  and  for  peace 
31.    4  give  the  portion  of  the  priests  and  the  L. 
31.    9  questioned  with  the  priests  and  the  L. 
31.  12  Cononiah  the  L.  (was)  ruler,  and  Shimei 
31.  14  the  son  of  Imnah  the  L.,  the  porter  towa. 

31. 17  the  L.  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward 
31.  19  reckoned  by  genealogies  among  the'L. 
34.    9  the  L.  that  kept  the  doors  had  gathered 
34.  12  Jahath  and  Obadiah.the  L.,  of  the  sons  of 
34.  12  the  L.,  all  that  could  skill  of  instruments 

34.  13  of  the  L.  (there  were)  scribes,  and  officers 
,   34.  30  the  L.,  and  all  the  people,  great  and  small 

35.  3  said  unto  the  L.  that  taught  all  Israel 
35.   5  the  division  of  the  families  of  the  L. 
35.   8  the  people,  to  the  priests,  and  to  the  L. 
35.    9  Jozabad,  chief  of  the  L.,  gave  unto  the  L. 
35. 10  the  L.  in  their  courses,  according  to  the 
35.  n  killed  the  passover.  .and  the  L.  flayed 

35. 14  the  L.  prepared  for  themselves,  and  for 

35. 15  their  brethren  the  L.  prepared  for  them 

35. 18  the  L.,  and  alljudahand  Israel  that  were 
Ezra    1.    5  the  L.,  with  all  (them)  whose  spirit  God 

2.  40  The  L. :  the  children  of  Jeshua,  aud  Kad. 

2.  70  L.,  and  (some)  of  the  people,  and  the  sin. 

3.  8  of  their  brethren  the  priests  and  the  L. 
3.  8  appointed  the  L.,  from  twenty  years  old 
3.  9  (with)their  sons  and  their  brethren  theL. 
3.  10  the  L.,  the  sons  of  Asaph,  with  cymbals 
3.  12  many  of  the  priests  and  L.,  and  chief  of 
6. 16  the  L.,  and  the  rest  of  the  children  of 

6. 18  the  L.  in  their  courses,  for  the  service 

6.  20  priests  and  the  L.  were  purified  together 

7.  7  the  L.,  and  the  singers,  and  the  porters 
7.  13  people  of  Israel,  and  (of)  his  priests  and  L. 

7.  24  touching  any  of  the  priests  and  L. ,  singers 
8".  20  had  appointed  for  the  service  of  the  L. 

8.  29  before  the  ehief  of  the  priests  and  the  L. 
8.  30  So  took  the  priests  and  the  L.  the  weight 

8.  33  J.,  and  Noadiah  the  son  of  Binnui,  L. 

9.  1  theL.,havenotseparatedthemselvesfrom 
10.  5  and  made  the  chief  priests,  the  L.,  and  all 
10. 15  and  Shabbethai  the  L.  helped  them 

10.  23  of  the  L.  ;  Jozabad,  and  Shimei,  and  Ke. 
Neh..  3. 17  after  him  repaired  the  L.,  Rehum  the  son 
7.    1  the  singers  and  the  L.  were  appointed 
7. 43  The  L.  :  the  children  of  Jeshua,  of  Kad. 

7.  73  the  L.,  and  the  porters,  and  the  singers 

8.  7  the  L.,  caused  the  people  to  understand 
8.   9  the  L.  that  taught  the  people,  said  unto 

8.  11  the  L.  stilled  all  the  people,  saying,  Hold 
8. 13  were  gathered,  .the  priests,  and  the  L. 

9.  4,  5  the  L.,  Jeshua,  and  Kadmiel,  Bani,  Sh. 
9.  38  our  princes,  L.,  (and)  priests,  seal  (unto 

10.  9  the  L.:  both  Jeshua  the  son  of  Azaniah 
10.  28  L.,  the  porters,  the  singers,'the  Nethinims 
10.  34  we  cast  the  lots  among  the  priests,  the  L. 
io.  37  of  our  ground  unto  the  L.,  that  the  same 

10.  38  the  L.,  when  the  L.  take  tithes:  and  the  L. 

11.  3  the  L.,  and  the  Nethinims,  and  the  child. 

11. 15  of  theL.:Shemaiah  the  sonofHashub,  the 

11. 16  Jozabad,  of  the  chief  of  the  L.,  (had)  the 
11. 18  theL.  in  the  holy  city  (were)  two  hundred 
11.  20  residue  of  Israel,  of  the  priests,  .the  L. 
11. 22  The  overseer  also  of  the  L.  at  Jerusalem 

11.  36  of  the  L.  (were)  divisions  in  Judah,  (and) 

12.  1  the  L.  that  went  up  with  Zerubbabel  the 
12.  8  the  L.:  Jeshua,  Binnui,  Kadmiel,  Shereb. 
12.  22  The  L.,  in  the  days  of  Eliashib,  Joiada 
12. 24  the  chief  of  the  L. :  Hashabiah,  Sherebiah 
12.  27  they  sought  the  L.  out  of  all  their  places 
12.  30  the  L.  purified  themselves,  and  purified 
12. 44  portions  of  the  law  for  the  priests  and  L. 
12.  44  for  the  priests  and  for  the  L.  that  waited 

12.  47  (holy  things)  unto  the  L.;  and  the  L. 

13.  5  was  commanded  (to  be  given)  to  the  L. 
13.  10  L.  had  not  been  given  (them) :  for  the  L. 
13. 13  of  theL.,  Pedaiah  :  and  next  to  them  (was) 
13.  22  commanded theL.thattheyshouldcleanse 
13.  29  covenant  of  the  priesthood,  and  of  the  L. 
13.  30  appointed  the  wards,  .and  the  L.,  every 

Isa.  66.  21  I  will  also  take  of  them,  .for  L.,  saiththe 
Jer.  33. 18  Neither  shall  the  priests  the  L.  want  a 
33.  21  and  with  the  L.  the  priests,  my  ministers 
33.  22  so  will  I  multiply,  .the  L.  that  minister 
Eze.  43.  19  thou  shalt  give  to  the  priests  the  L.  that 
44. 10  the  L.  that  are  gone  away  far  from  me 

44.  15  the  priests  the  L.,  the  sons  of  Zadok,  that 

45.  5  shallalso  theL.. .have  for  themselves,  for 
48.  11  went  not  astray,  .as  the  L.  went  astray 
48.  12  a  thing  most  holy  by  the  border  of  the  L. 
48:  13  against  the  border  of  the  priests  the  L. 
48.  22  Moreover  from  the  possession  of  the  L. 

Lukeio.  32  likewise  a  L.,  when  he  was  at  the  place 
John  1. 19  when  the  Jews  sent  priests  and  L.  from 
Acts   4.  36  Joses.  .a  L.,  (and)  of  the  country  of  Cyp. 

LEVITICAL,  Aev'CrtKos  belonging  to  the  Levites. 
Heb.    7.  n  If  therefore  perfection  were  by  the  L.  pr. 
70 


LEVY  — 

A  burden,  tribute,  D3  mas. 

1  Ki.   5. 13  Solomon  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  Israel 
5. 13  and  the  levy  was  thirty  thousand  men 
5.  14  and  Adoniram  (was)  over  the  levy 
9. 15  this  (is)the  reason  of  the  levy  which  king 
LEVY,  to  — 
1.7V<  cause  to  go  up,  rhy  alah,  5. 

1  Ki.  9.  21  upon  those  did  Solomon  levy  a  tribute  of 

2.  To  cause  to  be  high,  lift  up,  Dn  rum,  5. 

Num3i.  28  levy  a  tribute  unto  the  Lord  of  the  men 
LEWD,  LEWDLY  — 
1.  Wicked  thought  or  device,  nsi  zimmah. 

Eze.  16.  27  that  hate . .  which  are  ashamed  of  thy  lewd 

22.  11  another  hath  lewdly  defiled  his  daughter 

23.  44  Aholah  and. .  Aholibah,  the  lewd  women 

2.Causing  or  having  labour ;  bad,  evil,  irov-npSs. 

Acts  17.    5  certain  lewd  fellows  of  the  basersort,  and 
LEWDNESS  — 
1.  Wicked  thought  or  device,  .is)  zimmah. 

Judg2o.    6  they  have  committed  lewdness  and  folly 

Jer.   13.  27  thy  neighings,  the  lewdness  of  thy  whore. 

Eze.  1 6. 43  thou  shalt  not  commit  this  lewdness  above 
16.  58  Thou  hast  borne  thy  lewdness  and  thine 

22.  9  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  commit  lewdness 

23.  21  thou  calledst  to  remembrance  the  lewdn. 
23.  27  Thus  will  I  make  thy  lewdness  to  cease 
23.  29  both  thy  lewdness  and  thy  whoredoms 
23.  35  therefore  bear  thou  also  thy  lewdness  and 
23.  48  Thus  will  I  cause  lewdness  to  cease  out 
23.  48  may  be  taught  not  to  do  after  your  lewd. 

23.  49  theyshallrecompenseyourlewdnessupon 

24.  13  In  thy  fllthiness  (is)  lewdness  :  because  I 
Hos.    6.    9  the  company  of  priests,  .they  commit  le. 

2.Wicked  thought  or  device,  new?  mezimmah. 
Jer.  11. 15  she  hath  wrought  lewdness  with  many 

3.  Emptiness,  folly,  dishonour,  rflb^}  nabluth. 

Hos.   2. 10  now  will  I  discover  her  lewdness  in  the 

4.  Work  of  levity,  recklessness,  fiadtovpynfta  rliadi. 

Acts  18. 14  If  it  were  a  matter  of  wrong  or  wicked  1. 
LIAR  — 
1.  Lying,  failing,  nnx  akzab. 

Jer.  15, 18  wilt  thou  be  altogether  unto  me  as  a  liar 

2.A  device,  "13  bad. 

Isa.  44.  25  That  frustrateth  the  tokens  of  the  liars 
Jer.  50. 36  A  sword  (is)  upon  the  liars ;  and  they 

3.  To  be  a  liar,  deceiver,  3j|  kazab. 

Fsa.n6. 11 1  said  in  my  haste,  All  men  (are)  liars 

4.  ,4  lie,  falsehood,  ~i\}v  sheqer. 

Prov.17.  4  (and)  ailiargiveth  ear  to  a  naughty  tongue 

5.  A  man  of  lies,  313  ep'n  ish  kazab. 

Prov.19.  22 aud  a  poor  man  (is) better  than  a  liar 

Q.Lying,  i//et/57is  pseudes. 

Rev.    2.    2  and  are  not,  and  hast  found  them  liars 
21.   8  all  [liars],  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake 

7..1  liar,  tJ/euo-T7is  pseusles. 

John  8.  44  the  devil,  .he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of 
8.  55  I  shall  be  a  liar  like  unto  you  :  butlknow 
Rom.  3.  4  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar ;  as 
1  Ti.  1. 10  for  liars,  forperjured  persons,  and  if  there 
Titus  1. 12  The  Cretians  (are)  always  liars,  evil  beasts 

1  Jo.  1. 10  we  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not 

2.   4  He . .  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him 
2.  22  Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  J. 
4.  20  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar :  for 
5. 10  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him  a  liar 

LIAR,  to  be  found  or  make  a  — 

1.  To  become  or  prove  a  liar,  3]3  kazab,  2. 
Prov.30.   6  he  reprove  thee,  and  thou  be  found  a  liar 

2.  To  cause  to  lie,  prove  a  liar,  273  kazab,  5. 

_Job  24.  25  who  will  make  me  a  liar,  and  make  my  s. 
d.To  feign,  wr®  kachash,  2. 

Deut33-  29  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee 
LIBERAL,  liberal  things  — 
X.A  blessing,  nana  berakah. 

Ftov.  i  1.  25  The*  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat ;  and  he 
2.Free,  willing,  noble,  hhi  nadib. 

Isa,  32.   s  vile  person  shall  be  no  more  called  liberal 
32.    8  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things ;  and  by  1. 

3.  Simplicity,  unaffeetedness,  a-rrAorvs  haplotes. 

2  Co.   9.  13  for.  .liberal  distribution  unto  them,  and 

LIBERALITY  — 

1.  Unaffeetedness,  simplicity,  kirXSrn's  haplotes. 

2  Co.  8.  2  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their  libera 
2.^4  gracious  act,  benevolence,  x&pis  charts. 

1  Co.  16.    3  send  to  bring  your  liberality  unto  Jerus. 
LrBERALLY  — 
l.To  encircle,  pJjJ  anaq,  5. 

Deut  15. 14  Thou  shalt  furnish  him  liberally  out  of 
2£imply,  in  simplicity,  atr\a>s  haph~>s. 

Jas.  1.  5  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all ..  liberally 
LIBERTINES,  hifieprtvoi  (Lot  Libertini),freedmen. 
Jews  who  had  been  captives  at  Rome,  but  being  freed 
had  returned  to  Jerusalem,  where  they  had  a  synagogue. 

Acts   6.    9  which  is  called  (the  synagogue)  of  the  L. 


LIBERTY  — 

X. Freedom,  i\T\  deror. 

Lev.  25. 10  proclaim  liberty  throughout,  .the  land 

Isa.   61.    1  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and 

Jer.   34.    8  all  the  people,  .to  proclaim  liberty  unto 

34,  15  in  proclaiming  liberty  every  man  to  his 

34. 17  in  proclaiming  liberty,  every  one  to  his 

34.  17  behold,  I  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you,  saith 

Eze.  46. 17  then  it  shall  be  his  to  the  year  of  liberty 

2.Free,  *p?0  6hop>hshi. 

Jer.  34. 16  whom  he  had  set  at  liberty  at  their  plea. 

Z.A  sending  back,  letting  loose,  &veats  anesis. 
Acts  24.  23  to  keep  Paul,  and  to  let  (him)  have  liberty 

4.-4  sending  away,  remission,  &(peo-ts  aphesis. 
Luke  4. 18  sent  me.  .to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are 

5. Freedom,  liberty,  eXevdepla  eleutheria. 

Rom.  8.  21  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God 

1  Co.  10.  29  for  why  is  my  liberty  judged  of  another 

2  Co.  3.  17  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  (is),  there  (is)  liberty 
Gal.    2.    4  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty  wh. 

5.   1  Stand  fast  therefore  in  the  liberty  where. 

5.  13  brethren,  ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty 
5. 13  (use)  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  thefl. 

Jas.    1 .  25  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and 
2.  12  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty 

1  Pe.    2.  16  As  free,  and  not  using  (your)  liberty  for  a 

2  Pe.  2. 19  While  they  promise  them  liberty,  they 

6.  Authority,  privilege,  i^ovaia  exousia. 

1  Co.  8.   9  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty  of  yours 

LIBERTY,  at  — 

1.  Broad,  wide,  srn  rachab. 

Psa.119.  45  I  will  walk  at  liberty:  for  I  seek  thy  pre. 

2. Free,  e\evdepos  eleutheros. 

1  Co.  7.  39  she  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom 

LIBERTY,  to  give  — 

To  turn  over  upon,  ptermii,  ^7riTpeVw  epitrepo. 
Acts  27.   3  gave  (him)  liberty  to  go  unto  his  friends 

LIBERTY,  to  set  at  — 

To  loose  away,  anoKvoj  apoluo. 

Acts  26.  32  This  man  might  have  been  set  at  liberty 
Heb.13.  23  Know  ye  that.  .Timothy  is  set  at  liberty 

LLB'-NAH,  nil1?  whiteness. 

1.  The  16th  station  of  Israel  from  Egypt  and  5th  from 
Sinai.  See  Laban. 

Num33.  20  And  they  departed . .  and  pitched  in  L. 
33.  21  they  removed  from  L.,  and  pitched  at  R. 

2.  A  Levitical  city  in  Judah,  S.  from  Jerusalem  ;  now 
Tel-el-safceh,  a  mile  from  Eteutheropolis. 

Josh.  10.  29  Joshua  passed,  .unto  L. .  .fought  aga.  L. 
10.  31  Joshua  passed  from  L. ,  and  all  Israel  with 
10.  32  according  to  all  that  he  had  done  to  L. 
10.  39  as  he  had  done  also  to  L.,  and  to  her  king 
12.  J5  The  king  of  L.,  one  ;the  king  of  Adullam 
15.  42  L.,  and  Ether,  and  Ashan 
21.  13  they  gave  to  thechildren.  .L.  withhersu. 

2  Ki.  8.  22  Yet  Edom  revolted.  .Then  L.  revolted  at 

19.    8  found  the  king,  .warring  against  L.:  for 

23.  31  Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  Jeremiahxif  L. 

24.  18  Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  Jeremiah  of  L. 

1  Ch.  6.  57  they  gave.  .L.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Ja,  ■ 

2  Ch.21.  loThe  same  time  (also)  did  L.  revolt  from 
Isa.  37.  8  found  the  king. .warring  against  L.:  for 
Jer.  52.    1  Hamutal  the  daughter  of  Jeremiah  of  L. 

LEB'-NI,  'j?1?  white,  distinguished. 

1.  Son  of  Gershon,  the  son  of  Levi.  B.C.  1491. 

Exod.  6.  17  sonsof  Gershon ;  L.  andShimi,  according 
Num.  3. 18  sons  of  Gershon  by  their  families  ;  L.,  and 
1  Ch.  6.  17  names  of  the  sons  of  Gershom  ;  L.,  and 

6.  20  Of  Gershom  ;  L.  his  son,  Jahath  his  aon 

2.  Grandson  of  Merari,  the  son  of  Levi.    B.C.  1491. 

1  Ch.  6.  29  The  sons  of  Merari  ;  Mahli,  L.  his  son,  S. 

LIB-NITES,  »aaWi  the  Libnite. 
Descendants  of  Libni  the  son  of  Gershon.    B.C.  1491. 
Num.  3.  21  Of  Gershon  (was)  the  family  of  the  L.,  and 
26.  58  These  (are),  .the  family  of  the  L.,  thefam. 

LLB'-YA,  »S  Put. 

The  Greek  name  for  the  region  W.  from  Egypt  along 

the  African  coast.    The  Hebrew  name  is  Phut. 

Eze.  30.    5  Ethiopia,  and  L.,  and  Lydia,  and  all  the 
38.    5  Persia,  Ethiopia,  and  L,  witli  them  ;  all 

Acts    2.  10  and  in  the  parts  of  L.  about  Cyrene,  and 

LLB'-YANS,  LTJ'-BIK,  U'S  put,  C'21?  Ivbbim,  bowmen. 
The  inhabitants  of  Libya,  supposed  to  have  sprung  from 
Phut,  the  son  of  Ham.    B.C.  2300.    (See  Lubim). 
Jer.  46.   9  Ethiopians  and  the  L.,  that  handle  the 
Dan.  11.43  tne  Xj.  and  the  Ethiopians  (shall  be)  at  his 

LICE  — 

I. Gnat,  louse,  }3ken. 

Exod.  8. 16  thatitmaybecomelice  throughout  all  the 

8.  17  the  dust  of  the  land  became  lice  through. 

8.  1 8  did  so.  .to  bring  forthjiee,  but  they  could 
Psa.105.  31  He  spake,  and  there  came,  .lice  in  all  their 

2. Gnats,  lice,  C|3  kinnam. 

Exod. 8.  17  and  it  became  lice  in  man  and  in  beast 
8. 18  so  there  were  lice  upon  man  and  upon 


LICENCE 


602 


LIE 


LICENCE  — 
Place,  t6ttos  topos. 

Acts  25. 16  and  have  licence  to  answer  for  himself 
LICENCE,  to  give  — . 
To  turn  over  upon,  permit,  iTrtTfjeitu  epitrepo. 

Acts  21.  40  whenhe  had  given  liini  licence,  Paul  stood 

LICK  (up),  to  — 

l.To  lick  up,  ^rb  lachah. 

N1UU22.    4  as  the  ox  licketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field 

2.  To  tick  up,  ^b  Inched-,  3. 

Kum22.    4  Nowshallthiscompanylickupall.. round 
1  Ki.  iS.  38  licked  up  the  water  that  (was)  in  the  tre. 
Psa.   72.    9  that  dwell,  .and  his  enemies  shall  lick 
Isa    49.  23  how.  .and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet 
Mic.    7. 17  They  shall  lick  the  dust  like  a  serpent 

Z.To  tick,  lap,  pp?  laqaq. 

1  Ki.  21. 10  where  dogs  licked,  .shall  dogs  lick  thy  bl, 

22.  38  the  dogs  iicked  up  his  blood ;  aud  they 

4.T0  tick  off  or  away,  atroXeixo  apoleicho. 

Lukei6.  21  moreover  the  dogs  came  and  [licked}  his 

LEO  — 

Leaf,  lid,  door,  n?*j  deleth. 

2  Ki  12.   9  bored  a  hole  in  the  lid  of  it,  and  set  it  bes. 

HE  — 

\,Lying,  failing,  3J3N  akzab. 

Mic.    1.    14  Aclizib  (shall  be)  a  lie  to  the  kings  of  Is. 

%Device,  H3  bad. 

Job  11.  3  Should  thy  lies  make  men  hold  their  peace  ? 
Isa.  16.  6  Moab..  very  proud,  .his  lies  (shall)  not  (be) 
Jer.  48.  30  but . .  not . .  so ;  his  lies  shall  not  so  effect  (it) 

3.  To  be  a  liar,  373  kazab. 

J.udg  16.  10,  13  thou  hast  mocked  me,  and  told  me  lies 
Psa.  40.    4  respecteth  not.  .such  as  turn  aside  to  lies 

58.  3  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  born,  speaking  1. 
62.  4  they  delight  in  lies :  they  bless  with  their 
62.   9  men  of  high  degree  (are)  a  lie :  to  be  laid 

Prov.  6. 19  A  false  witness  (that)  speaketh  lies,  aud 
14.    s  not  lie :  but  a  false  witness  will  utter  lies 
14.  25  delivereth . .  but  a  deceitful . .  speaketh  lies 
19.    5  and  (lie  that)  speaketh  lies  shall  not  esca. 

19.  9  and  (he  that)  speaketh  lies  shall  perish 
30.    8  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies;  give 

Isa.  28. 15  we  have  made  lies  our  refuge,  and  under 
28. 17  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  1. 

Eze.  13.  8  ye  have  spoken  vanity,  and  seen  lies,  th. 
13.  9  that  see  vanity,  and  that  divine  lies :  they 
13. 19  byyourlyiug  tomypeoplethathear.  .lies? 
2i.  29  whiles  they  divine  alje  unto  thee,  to  bring 
22. 28  seeing  vanity,  aud  divining  lies  unto  them 

Dan.  11.  27  they  shall  speak  lies  at  one  table ;  but  it 

Hos.    7.  13  redeemed  them,  yet  they  have  spoken  lies 

12.  1  he  daily  increaseth  lies  and  desolation 
Amos  2.  4  their  lies  caused  them  to  err,  after  the 
Zeph.  3. 13  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity,  nor  speak  lies 

^.Feigning,  btg  kachash. 

Hos.   7.    3  wickedness,  and  the  princes  with  their  lies 
10.  13  ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of  lies  :  because 
11. 12  Ephraira  compasseth  me  about  with'  lies 

Nab.  3.    1  it  (is)  all  full  of  lies  (and)  robbery  ;  the 

5.  Vain  thing,  nib»  shav. 

Isa,  59.   4  they  trust  iu  vanity,  and  speak  lies ;  they 

6. A  tie,  falsehood,  "\^f  sheqer. 

Job   13.   4  ye  (are)  forgers  of  lies,  ye  (are)  all  physic. 

Psa.  63.  11  the  mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall 

•101.    7  he  that  telleth  lies  shall  not  tarry  in  my 

119.  69  The  proud  have  forged  a  lie  against  me 

Isa.     9.  15  and  the  prophet  that  telleth  lies,  he  (is) 

44.  20  nor  say,  (Is  there)  not  a  lie  in  my  right  h.? 

59.  3  your  lips  have  spoken  lies,  your  tongue 
Jer.     9.    3  bend  their  tongues  (like)  their  bow  (for)  1. 

9.    s  they  have  taught  their  tongue  to  speak  1. 

14. 14  The  prophets  prophesy  lies  in  my  name 
16.  19  Surely  our  fathers  have  inherited  lies,  va. 

20.  6  friends,  to  whom  thou  hast  prophesied  1. 

23.  14  they  commit  adultery,  and  walk  in  lies 
23-  25  that  prophesy  lies  in  my  name,  saying,  I 
23.  26  heart  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy  lies? 
23.  32  cause  my  people  to  err  by  then-  lies,  and 
27.  10,  14,  16  For  they  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you 
27.  15  yet  they  prophesy  a  lie  in  my  name ;  that 

28. 15  makest  this  people  to  trust  in  a  lie 

29.  21  which  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you  in  my  name 
29.  31  Shemaiah.  .he  caused  you  to  trust  in  a  lie 
Eze.  13.  22  Because  with  lies  yehave  made  the  heart 
Mic.  6.  12  the  inhabitants  thereof  have  spoken  lies 
Hab.  2.  18  the  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  lies 
Zech.io.    2  the  diviners  have  seen  a  lie,  and  have  told 

13.  3  thou  speakest  lies  in  the  name  of  the  L, 

t.A  word  of  falsehood,  "ipa*  Tyi  debar  sheqer. 

Prov. 29.  12  If  a  ruler  hearken  to  lies,  all  his  servants 

8. Sorrows,  D'jwi  teunnim. 

Eze.  24.  12  She  hath  wearied  (herself)  with  lies,  and 

9.  .4  lit,  lying,  falsehood,  tyevSos  pseitdos. 

John  S.  44  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of 
Rom.  1.  25  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 
2  Th.  2.  1 1  send . .  delusion,  that  they  sh.  believe  a  lie 
1  Jo.  2.  21  because  ye  know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is  of 

2.  27  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath 
Rev.  2i.  27  wurketh  abomination  or  (maketh)  a  lie 
22. 15  and  whosoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie 


10.  What  is  false,  ^evafxa  pseusma. 

Rom.  3.   7  hath  more  abounded  through  my  lie  unto 
LIE,  to  — 
1.7*0  lie,  act  as  a  liar,  373  kazab,  3. 

Nuni23. 19  God  (is)  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie 

2  Ki.  4.  16  man  of  God,  do  not  lie  unto  thine  hand. 

Job    6.  28  look . .  for  (it  is)  evident  unto  you  if  I  lie 
34.   6  Should  Hie  against  my  right  ?  my  wound 

Psa.  78.  36  and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongues 
89.  35  Once  have  I  sworn .  .1  will  not  lie  unto  D. 

Provi4-    5  A  faithful  witness  will  not  lie  :  but  a  false 

Isa.    57.  11  that  thou  hast  lied,  and  hast' not  remeni. 

Mic.    2. 1 1  If  a  man  walking  iu  the  spirit . .  do  lie . .  I 

Hab.    2.    3  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie 
2.  To' feign,  tins  kachash,  3. 

Lev.    6.    2  and  lie  unto  Ins  neighbour  in  that  which 
6.    3  and  lieth  concerning  it,  and  sweareth  fal. 

1  Ki.  13. 18  an  angel  spake .  .(But)  he  lied  unto  him 

Z.To  lie,  deal  falsely \  ipt?  shaqar,  3. 

Lev.  19. 11  neitherdeal  falsely,  neither  lieonetoano. 
1  Sa,  15.  29  the  Strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  norrep. 
Isa.  63.    8  my  people,  children  (that)  will  not  lie  :  so 

4.  To  face,  front,  nispatiah,  6. 

Eze.    9.   2  higher  gate,  which  lieth  toward  the  north 

5.  To  crouch,  P3*i  rabats. 

Gen.    4.    7  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  lieth  at  the  door 

29.  2  three  flocks  of  sheep  lying  by  it ;  for  out 
49.  25  with,  .blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  tin. 

Exod23.    5  lying  under  his  burden,  and  wouldest 
Deut29.  20  all  the  curses,  .shall  lie  upon  him,  and 
Isa.    13.  21  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie  there 
Eze.  29.    3  the  great  dragon  that  lieth  in  themidst 

34. 14  there  shall  they  lie  in  a  good  fold,  and 

6. To  lie  down,  33^  shakab. 

Gen.  19.  32  we  will  lie  with  him,  that  we  may  preserve 
19.  33  first  born  went  in,  and  lay  with  her  father 
19.  34  I  lay  yesternight  with  my  father:  let  us 
19-  34  go  thou  in.  .lie  with  hini,  that  we  may  p. 
19.  35  the  younger  arose,  and  lay  with  him ;  and 
26. 10  might  lightly  have  lien  with  thy  wife,  and 
28.  13  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will 

30. 15  he  shall  lie  with  thee  to  night  for  thy  son's 

30.  16  mandrakes.  Anu  he  lay  with  her  that  ni. 

34.  2  he  took  her,  and  lay  with  her,  and  denied 

35.  22  that  Reuben  went  and  lay  with  Bilhah  his 
39.    7  his  master's  wife,  .she  said,  Lie  with  me 

39. 10  he  hearkened  not  unto  her,  to  lie  by  her 
39.  12  she  caught  him . .  saying,  Lie  with  me-:  and 
39. 14  he  came  in  unto  me  to  lie  with  me,  and  I 
47.  30  I  will  lie  with  my  fathers;  and  thou  shalt 

Exod22. 16  if  a  man  entice  a  maid . .  and  lie  with  her 
22. 19  Whosoever  lieth  with  a  beast  shall  surely 

Lev.  14.  47  he  that  lieth  in  the  house  shall  wash  hisc. 
15.  4  Every  bed  whereon  he  lieth  that  hath  the 
15. 18  The  woman  also  with  whom  man  shall  lie 
15.  20  every  thing  that  she  lieth  upon  in  her  se. 
15.  24  if  any  man  he  with  her  at  all,  and  her 
15.  24  all  the  bed  whereon  he  lieth  shall  be  un. 
15.  26  Every  bed  whereon  she  lieth  all  the  days 
15.  33  of  him  that  lieth  with  her  that  is  unclean 

18.  22  Thou  shalt  not  lie  with  mankind  as  with 

19.  20  whosoever  lieth  carnally  with  a  woman 

20.  11  the  man  that  lieth  with  his  father's  wife 
20.  12  a  man  lie  with  liis  daughter  in  law,  both 
20. 13  If  a  man  also  lie  with  mankind,  as  he 
20. 18  if  a  man  shall  lie  with  a  woman  having  her 

20.  20  if  a  man  shall  lie  with  his  uncle's  wife,  he 
Num.  5. 13  And  a  man  lie  with  her  carnally,  and  it  be 

5. 19  If  no  man  have  lain  with  thee,  and  if  thou 
Deutn.  19  when  thou  liest  down,  and  when  thou  ri. 
22.  22  If  a  man  be  found  lying  with  a  woman 
22.  22  the  man  that  lay  with  the  woman,  and  the 
22.  23  man  find  her  in  the  city,  and  lie  with  her 
22.  25  and  the  man  force  her,  and  lie  with  her 
22.  25  the  man  only  that  lay  with  her  shall  die 
22.  28  lay  hold  on  her,  and  lie  with  her,  and  they 
22.  29  the  man  that  lay  with  her  shall  give  unto 

27.  20,  21,  22,  23  Cursed  (be)  he  that  lieth  with 

28.  30  betroth,  .and  another  man  shall  lie  with 
Judg  16.  3  Samson  lay  till  midnight,  and  arose  at  m. 
Ruth  3.    4  shalt  mark  the  place  where  he  shall  lie 

3.   8  turned,  .and,  behold,  a  woman  lay  at  his 

3.  14  she  lay  at  his  feet  until  the  morning 

1  Sa.    2.  22  how  they  lay  with  the  women  that  assem. 

3. 15  Samuel  lay  untU  the  mprning,  and  opened 

26.  5  David  beheld  the  place  where  Saul  lay 

26.  5  Saul  lay  in  the  trench,  and  the  people  pi. 

26.  7  Saul  lay  sleeping  within  the  trench,  and 

26.  7  Abner  aud  the  people  lay  round  about  him 

2  Sa,  4.  5  of  Ish-bosheth,  who  lay  on  a  bed  at  noon 

4.  7  he  lay  on  his  bed  in  his  bed  chamber,  and 
11.  4  she  came  in  unto  him,  aud  he  lay  with  her 

11.  11  eat  and  to  drink,  and  to  lie  with  my  wife? 

11. 13  at  even  he  went  out  to  lie  on  his  bed  with 

12.  3  lay  in  his  bosom,  and  was  unto  him  as  a  d. 

12. 11  he  shall  lie  with  thy  wives  in  the  sight  of 
12.  16  went  in,  and  lay  all  night  upon  the  earth 

12.  24  went  in  unto  her,  and  lay  with  her ;  and 

13.  11  said  unto  her,  Come  lie  with  me,  my  sister 

13. 14  stronger  than  she,  forced  her,  and  lay  with 
13.  31  tare  his  garments,  and  lay  on  the  earth 

1  Ki.  1.    2  let  her  lie  in  thy  bosom,  that  my  lord  the 

19.    5  as  he  lay  aud  slept  under  a  juniper  tree 

21.  27  Ahab .  .lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly 

2  Ki    4.  11  he  turned  into  the  chamber,  and  lay  there 

4.  34  he  went  up,  and  lay  upon  the  child,  and 

9.  16  and  went  to  Jezreel ;  for  Joramlay  there 

Job   40.  21  He  lieth  under  the  shady  trees,  in  the  co. 


Psa.    3.    5  I  laid  me  down  and  slept;  I  waked ;  for 
41.   8  (now)  that  he  lieth  he  shall  rise  up  no 
57.    4 1  lie  (even  among)  them  that  are  set  on 
68.  13  Though  ye  have  hen  among  the  pots,  (yet 
88.    5  like  the  slain  that  lie  in  the  grave,  whom 
Prov  23.  34  or  as  he  that  lieth  upon  the  top  of  a  mast 
Eccl.  4.  11  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  heat 
Isa.   14.  18  all  of  them,  lie  in  glory,  every  one  in  his 
51.  20  they  lie  at  the  head  of  all  the  streets,  as 
Lam,  2.  21  The  young  and  the  old  lie  on  the  ground 
Eze.    4.    4  Lie  thou  also  upon  thy  left  side,  and  lay 
4.   4,  9  number  of  the  days  that  thou  shalt  lie 

4.  6  lie  again  on  thy  right  side,  and  thou  shalt 
23.    8  in  her  youth  they  lay  with  her,  and  they 

31.  iS  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  uncirc. 

32.  21  they  he  uncireunicised,  slain  by  the  sword 
32.  27  And  they  shall  not  lie  with  the  mighty 
32.  28  and  shalt  lie  with,  .slain  with  the  sword 
32.  29  they  shall  lie  with  the  uncireunicised,  and 
32.  30  they  lie  uncireunicised  with . .  slaiu  by  the 

Amos  6.  4  That  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch 
Jon.  1.  5  gone  down,  .and  he  lay,  and  was  fast  asl. 
Mic.   7.    5  keep  the  doors . .  from;her  that  lieth  in  thy 

7.  To  he  supported,  ]]$  shaan,  2. 

Kuni2i.  15  Ar,  and  lieth  upon  the  border  of  Moab 

8.  To  he  caused  to  spread  out;  px;  yatsa,  6. 

Esth.  4.    3  wailing ;  and  many  lay  in  sackcloth  and 

9. To  give  an  effusion,  rab?>  jm  nathan  shekoheth. 

Lev.  18.  20  Moreover  Jhoii  shalt  not  lie-carnally  with 
18.  23  Neither  shalt  thou  lie  with  any  .beast  to 
20. 15  if  a  man  lie  with  a  beast,  he  shall  surely 

Num.  5.  20  some  man  have  lain  with  thee  besidesthine 

10.  To  be  laid  up,  ava.Keifj.ai  anakeimai. 

Mark  5.  40  entereth  in  where  the  damsel  was  [lying] 

11.  To  casty  throw,  f3d\\i»}  hallo. 

Matt.  8.    6  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  pa. 
9.   2  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying  on  a  bed 

12.  To  have,  exa  €clw. 

Mark  5.  23  My  little  daughter  lieth  at  the  point  of  d. 

13.7b  he  laid  upon,  iiriKeifxat  epikeimai. 

Johnn.  38  It  was  a  cave,  and  a  sto      lay  upon  it 
Acts  27.  20  no  small  tempest  lay  on  (,    ),  all  hope  that 

14. To  he  laid  down,  Kar6.Keifx.ai  katakeimai. 

Mark  1.  30  Simon's  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fever 

2.    4  the  bed  wherein  the  sick  of  the  palsy  lay 

Luke  5.25  tookup  that  whereon  he  lay,  and  departed 

John   5.    3  In  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  impotent 

5.  6  When  Jesus  saw  hini  lie,  and  knew  that  he  ' 
Acts  28.   8  the  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  of  a  fever 

15.7*0  lie,  be  laid,  Kelfxai  keimai. 

Matt  28.  6  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 
Luke  2,  12  Ye  shall  find  the  babe,  .lying  in  a  mauger 
2. 16  found  MaryandJoseph,  and  the  babe  lying 
John 20.  5  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying;  yet  went  he 
20.  6  Simon  Peter . .  seeth  the  linen  clothes  lie 
20.  7  not  lying  with  the  linen  clothes,  but  wrap. 
20.  12  sitting,  .where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  lain 

1  Jo.  5. 19  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness 
Rev.  21. 16  the  city  lieth  foursquare,  and  the  length 

16.7b  lie,  speak  falsely,  ipevdo/xai  pseudomai. 
Acts    5.    3  why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie 

5.   4  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  G. 
Rom.  9.    1 1  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my 

2  Co. 11.  31  The  God  and  Father,  .knoweth  that  I  lie 
Gal.  1.  20  the  things  which  I  write . .  before  God,  I  lie 
Col.  3.  9  Lie  not  one  to  another,  seeing  that  ye  have 
1  Ti.  2.  7  I  speak  the  troth  in  Christ,  (and)  lie  not 
Heb.  6.  1 8  in  which  (it  was)  impossible  for  God  to  lie 
Jas.  -  3.  14  But.  .glory  not,  and  lie  not  against  the 

1  Jo.  1.  6  walk  in  darkness,  we  he,  and  do  not  the 
Rev.   3.   9  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not,  but  do  he 

LIE,  that  cannot  — 

That  cannot  tie,  atyevS-fis  ajiseiaies. 

Titus  1.   2  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the 

LEE  (towards  the  north),  to  — 
To  look,  $\4itu  blepo. 

Acts  27. 12  lieth  toward  the  south  west  and  north  west 

LIE  all  night,  to  — 

To  pass  the  night,  ]"b,  ])b  lun,  Un. 

2  Sa.  12. 16  went  in,  and  lay  all  night  upon  the  earth 
Job  29.  19  and  the  dew  lay  all  night  upon  my  branch 
Song  1.  13  he  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt  my  breasts 
Joel    1. 13  come,  lie  all  night  in  sackcloth,  ye  mini.* 

LLE  by  man,  to  — 

A  lying,  33s*p  mishkab. 

Judg  21.  ii  destroy.,  every  woman  thathatlilainbym. 
LEE  down,  to  — 
l.To  fall,  bzi  naphal. 

1  Sa.  19.  24  lay  down  naked  all  that  day  and  all  that 

2, To  crouch,  *"3"J  rabats. 

Job   11.  19  thou  shalt  lie  down,  and  none  shall  xnak* 
Psa.  104.  22  they  gather,  .and  lay  them  down  in  their 
Isa.    11.    6  the  leopard  shall  he  down  with  the  kid 
11.   7  their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together 
14.  30  the  needy  shall  lie  down  in  safety  :  and  I 
17.    2  shall  be  for  flocks,  which  shall  He  down 
27.  10  there  shall  he  lie  down,  and  consume  the 
Eze.  19.    2  she  lay  down  among  lions,  she  nourished 
Zeph.  2.    7  shall  they  lie  down  in  the  evening  ;  for 

2.  14  flocks  shall  he  down  in  the  midst  of  her 

3.  13  they  shall  feed  and  lie  down,  and  none 


. 


LIB 


603 


LIFE 


Z.To  lie  down,  33tr  shakab. 

-     Gen.  ig.    4  before  they  lay  down,  the  men  of  the  city 
19.  33,  35  he  perceived  not  when  she  lay  down 
Lev.26.    6  ye  shall  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make 
NUIU23.  24  lie  shall  not  lie  down  until  he  eat.  .the  p. 

24.  g  He  couched,  he  lay  down  as  a  lion,  and 
Deut.  6.  7  when  thou  liest  down,  and  when  thou  ri. 
Josh.  2.  8  before  they  were  laid  down,  she  came  up 
Judg.  5.  27  At  her  feet  he  bowed,  he  fell,  he  lay  down 
Ruth  3.  4  it  shall  be,  when  he  lieth  down,  thatthou 
3.  7  he  went  to  lie  down  at  the  end  of  the  heap 
3.  13  Tarry  this  night,  .lie  down  until  the  nior. 

1  Sa.    3.    5  lie  down  again.  And  he  went  and  lay  down 

3.    6  I  called  not,  my  son ;  lie  down  again 
3.    9  lie  down :  So  Samuel  went  and  lay  down 

2  Sa.  13.    5  Lay  thee  down  on  thy  bed,  and  make  th. 

13.    6  Amnon  lay  down,  aud  made  himself  sick 

1  Ki.  19.    6  did  eat  and  drink,  and  laid  him  down  ag. 
21.    4  he  laid  him  down  upon  his  bed,  and  tur. 

Job  3. 13  For  now  should  I  have  lain  still  and  been 
7.  4  When  I  lie  down,  I  say,  When  shall  I  arise 
14. 12  So  man  lieth  down,  and  riseth  not :  till 
20. 11  which  shall'lie  down  with  him  in  the  dust 
21.  26  They  shall  lie  down  alike  in  the  dust,  and 
27. 19  The  richman  shall  lie  down,  but  he  shall 

Prov.  3.  24  When  thou  liest  down,  thou  shalt  not  be 
3. 24  thou  shalt  lie  down,  and  thy  sleep  shall 
23.  34  thou  shalt  be  as  he  that  lieth  down  in  the 

Isa.  14.    8  Since  thou  art  laid  down.no  feller  is  come 
43. 17  they  shall  he  down  together,  they  shall 
50.  11  This  shall  ye  have,  .ye  shall  lie  down  in 
56.  10  all . .  sleeping,  lying  down,  loving  to  slum. 

Jer.     3.  25  We  Lie  down  in  our  shame,  and  our  con. 

LIE  down,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  fall,  S53  naphal,  5. 

Deut25.   2  that  the  judge  shall  cause  him  to  lie  down 

2.To  cattse  to  crouch,  r3"j  rabats,  5. 

Psa.  23.   2  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pas. 

Jer.  33.  12  of  shepherds  causing,  .flocks  to  lie  down 

Eze.  34.  15  I  will  cause  them  to  lie  down,  saith  the 
Z.To  cause  to  lie  down,  331s*  shakah,  5. 

Hos.    2. 18  In  that  day  will  I  ..make  them  to  lie  down 
LIE  down  in,  to  — 
A  crouching,  f3"i  rebets. 

Isa.  65. 10  a  place  for  the  herds  to  lie  down  in,  for 
LIE  down,  place  to  — 
A  place  of  crouchin-g,  ^"lO  marbets. 

Zeph.  2. 15  a  place  for  beasts  to  lie  down  in  !  every 
LIE  down  to,  to  — 
To  lie  down,  J737  raba. 

Lev.  18.  23  stand  before  a  beast  to  lie  down  thereto 
20. 16  approach  unto  any  beast.. liedown  thereto 
LIE  down  to  sleep,  to  — 
To  lie  down,  33$  slialcab. 

Gen.  2S.  11  lighted,  .and  lay  down  in  that  place  to  s. 
LIE  hard,  to  — 
To  lean,  tjod  samdk. 

Psa.  88.    7  Thy  wrath  lieth  hard  upon  me,  and  thou 
LIE  in  ambush  or  in  wait,  to  — 
l.To  lie  in  wait,  3"ix  arab. 

Deut.  19. 11  lie  in  wait  for  him,  and  rise  up  against 

Josh.  8.   4  Behold,  ye  shall  he  in  wait  against  the 
8.  12  set  them  to  lieinambush  between  Beth-el 

Judg.  9.  32  up  by  night . .  and  he  in  wait  in  the  field 
21.  20  saying,  Go  and  lie  in  wait  in  the  vineyards 

1  Sa.22.   8  against  me,  to  Lie  in  wait,  as  at  this  day  ? 
22. 13  he  should  rise  against  me,  to  Lie  in  wait 

Ezra    8.  3 1  hand . .  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  way 

Psa.  10.  9  He  lieth  in  wait  secretly  as  a  lion  in  his 
10.  9  he  lieth  in  wait  to  catch  the  poor  :  he  doth 
59.    3  For,  lo,  they  lie  in  wait  for  my  soul  :  the 

Prov.  7.  12  now  in  the  streets,  and  Lieth  in  wait  at 
12.   6 ;  23.  28  ;  Hos.  7.  6 ;  Hie.  7.  2. 

2.  Toward  the  methodizing,  jrpbs  tV  nedofitiav. 
Eph.    4. 14  whereby  they  Lie  in  wait  to^deceive 

Z.A  lying  in  wait,  3hn  ereb. 

Job    38.  40  When  they,  .abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  in 
4=,  To  hunt,  ensnare,  my  tsadah. 

Exod2i.  13  if  a  man  lie  not  in  wait,  but  God  deliver 
LIE  on,  to  — 
To  fall  Ujpojhj  i-mir'nTTO}  epijnpto. 

Johni3.  25  He  then  [lying  on]  Jesus'  breast  saith  unto 
LIE  out,  to  — 
To  go  forth  or  out,  ayt  yatsa. 

Neh.   3.  25  the  tower  which  lieth  out  from  the  king's 
3.  26  unto,  .over  against,  .tower  that  lieth  out 
3.  27  over  against  the.  .tower  that  Lieth  out 
LIE  sore,  to  — 
To  press,  p.?s  tsuq,  5. 

Judg  14. 17  told  her,  because  she  lay  sore  upon  him 
LIE  still,  to  — 
l.To  spread  out,  leave,  c>B3  nata-sh. 

Exod23.  11  thou  shalt  let  it  rest  and  lie  still ;  that 
2.  To  He  down,  322>  shakab. 

Job     3. 13  For  now  should  I  have  lain  still  aud  been 
LIE,  that  — 
To  incline,  nirt  chanafo. 

Nuniio.    s,  a  then  the  camps  that  Lie  on  the  east  parts 


LLE  or  be  liea  with,  to  — 
l.To  lie  with,  biy  sJiagal. 

Deut28.  30  and  another  man  shall  Lie  with  her  :  thou 
2,  To  lie  down  or  with,  ?|p  or  33?  shakab  or  shagal,  i. 

Jer.    3.    2  see  where  thou  hast  not  been  Lien  with 
LIER  in  ambush  or  in  wait  — 
l.To  lie  in  wait,  31N  arab. 

Josh.  8.  14  liers  in  ambush  against  him  behind  the  c. 
Judg.  16.  12  And.  .Liers  in  wait  abiding  in  the  chamber 
20.  29  Israel  set  Liers  in  wait  round  about  Gibeah 
20.  33  the  Liers  in  wait  of  Israel  came  forth  out 
20.  36  they  trusted  unto  the  Liers  in  wait  which 
20.  37  the  Liers  in  wait  hasted  and  rushed  upon 
20.  37  the  Liers  in  wait  drew,  .aiong,  and  smote 
20.  38  between.  .Israel  and  the  liers  in  wait,  that 

2.  To  lie  in  wait,  3nx  arab,  3. 

Judg.  9.  25  the  men  of  Shechem  set  liers  in  wait  for 

3.  To  be  in  the  rear,  behind,  3j3#  aqab. 

Josh.  8. 13  set.  .their  liers  in  wait  on  the  west  of  the 
LIES,  to  speak  — 
One  speaking  a  falsehood,  \pev8o\6yos  pseudologos. 

1  Ti.    4.   2  Speaking  Lies  uxlrypocrisy;  having  their  c. 
LIETH  with  — 
.4  lying,   3^3  mishkab. 

Lev.  20. 13  as  he  lieth  with  a  woman,  both  of  them 
LLETJTENAHTS  — 
Satraps,  □'jsn'wnx  achaslidarpenim. 

Ezra   8.  36  delivered,  .commissions  unto  the  king's  1. 

Esth  3. 12  unto  the  king's  lieutenants,  and  to  the 

8.  9  to  the  lieutenants,  and  the  deputies,  and 

9.  3  the  lieutenants,  and  the  deputies,  and  offi. 
LIFE,  lives  -  - 

l.Life,  living,  alive,  1n  chai. 

Gen.    2.   7  breathed  into  his  nostrils . .  breath  of  Life 

2.  9  the  tree  of  life  also  in  the  midst  of  the 

3. 14  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

3. 17  shalt  thou  eat.  .it  all  the  days  of  thy  Life 

3.  22  take  also  of  the  tree  of  Life,  and  eat,  and 
3.  24  sword,  .to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  Life 

6.  17  ail  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the  breath  of  life 

7.  11  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life 

7. 15  of  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)the  breath  of  Life 
7.  22  in  whose  nostrils  (was)  the  breath  of  Life 

18. 10, 14  unto  thee  accordingto  the  time  of  life 

23.  1  (these  were)  the  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah 
25.  7  the  *  ears  of  Abraham's  life  which  he  lived 
25.  17  these  (are)  the  years  of  the  life  of  Ishmael 
27.  46  I  am  weary  of  my  Life  because  of  the  d. 

27.  46  if  Jacob  take . .  what  good  shall  my  life  do 
42. 15  By  the  life  of  Pharaoh  ye  shall  not  go  forth 

■  42.  16  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh  "surely  ye  (are)  spies 

47.    9  have  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been 

47.   9  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of  my 

Exod.  1.  14  they  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard 

6.  16  the  years  of  the  life  of  Levi  (were)  an  hu. 

6. 18  the  years  of  the  life  of  Kohath  (were)  an 
6.  20  the  years  of  the  Life  of  Amram  (were)  an 

Lev.  18. 18  to  uncover,  .besides  the  other  in  her  life 
Deut.  4.    9  from  thy  heart  all  the  days  of  thy  life ;  but 

6.  2  and  thy  son's  son,  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

16.  3  mayest  remember . .  aLL  the  days  of  thy  life 
17. 19  shall  read  therein  all  the  days  of  his  Life 

28.  66  thy  life  shall  hang  in  doubt  before  thee 
28.  66  and  shalt  have  none  assurance  of  thy  life 
30. 15  I  have  set  before  thee  tins  day  Life  and 
30.  19  I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death,  ble. 
30. 19  therefore  choose  life,  that  both  thou  and 
30.  20  he  (is)  thy  Life,  and  the  length  of  thy  days 

32.  47  because  it  (is)  your  life  :  and  through  this 
Josh.  1.    5  stand  before  thee  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

4. 14  they  feared  him.  .all  the  days  of  his  Life 
Judgi6.  30  more  than  (they)  which  he  slew  in  his  life 

1  Sa.   1. 11  unto  the  Lord  all  the  day.  of  his  life-  and 

7. 15  Samuel  judged  Is.  aLL  the  days  '  ois  Life 
18.  18  Who  (am)  I?  and  what  (1  )myh.  =(or)my 
25.  29  shall  be  bound  in  the  bundl"  :i  life  with 

2  Sa.    1.  23  lovdy  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and  in 

15.  21  whether  in  death  or  life,  even  there  also 

1  Ki.   4.  21  served  Solomon  all  the  days  of  Ins  life 

11.  34  make  him  prince  all  the  days  of  his  life 
15.   5  all  the  days  of  his  Life,  save  only  in  the  m. 
15.   6  there  was  war . .  aLl  the  days  *of  his  life 

2  Ki.  4. 16  according  to  the  time  of  life,  thou  shalt 

4. 17  bare  a  son . .  according  to  the  time  of  life 
25.  29  did  eat . .  before  him  all  the  days  of  his  life 

25.  30  a  daily  rate . .  all  the  days  of  his  life 
Ezra   6. 10  pray  for  the  Life  of  the  king,  and  of  his 
Job     3.  20  Wherefore  is . .  Life  unto  the  bitter  (in)  souL 

7.  7  O  remember  that  my  life  (is)  wind  :  mine 
g.  21  not  know  my  soul :  I  would  despise  my  1. 

10.  1  My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life  :  I  will  leave 
10. 12  Thou  hast  granted  me  life  and  favour,  and 

24.  22  he  riseth  up,  and  no  (man)  is  sure  of  life 
33. 18  and  Ms  Life  from  perishing  by  the  sword 

33.  20  So  that  his  life  abhorreth  bread,  and  his 
33.  22  unto  the  grave,  and  his  life  to  the  destro. 
33.  28  into  the  pit,  and  his  Life  shalL  see  the  Light 
36. 14  They  die  in  youth,  aud  their  life  (is)  among 

Psa.    7.    5  let  him  tread  down  my  life  upon  the  earth 
16. 11  Thou  wilt  shew  me  the  path  of  Life :  in 

17.  14  (which  have)  their  portion  in  (this)  Life 
21.    4  He  asked  life  of  thee . .  thou  gayest  (it)  him 
23.   6  mercy  shall  follow  me  all . .  clays  of  my  life 

26.  g  Gather  not  my  soul . .  nor  my  life  with  bl. 

27.  1  the  Lord  (is)  the  strength  of  my  Life  ;  of 
27.   4  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  thebea. 


Psa.  30.  5  in  his  favour  (is)" life:  weeping  may  endure 
31.  10  my  life  is  spent  with  grief,  and  my  years 
34.  12  What  man  (is  he  that)  desirethlife,  (and) 
36.  9  with  thee  (is)  the  fountain  of  life  :  in  thy 
42.    8  (and)  my  prayer  unto  the  God  of  my  Life 

63.  3  thy  Loving  kindness  (is)  better  than  Life 

64.  1  preserve  my  life  from  fear  of  the  enemy 
66.  9  Which  holdeth  our  soul  in  life,  and  suff. 
78.  50  but  gave  their  life  over  to  the  pestilence 
88.    3  and  my  Life  draweth  nigh  unto  the  grave 

103.    4  Who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  "destruction 

128.    5  shalt  see  the  good . .  all  the  days  of  thy  Life 

133.    3  commanded  the  blessing,  .life  for  everm. 

143.    3  he  hath  smitten  my  Life  down  to  the  ground 

Prov.  2. 19  neither  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  Life 

3.   2  longlife,  and  peace,  shall  they  add  to  thee 

3.  18  She  (is)  a  tree  of  Life  to  them  that  lay  hold 

3.  22  So  shall  they  be  Life  unto  thy  soul,  and  g. 

4.  10  and  the  years  of  thy  Life  shall  be  many 

4.  13  let . .  not  go :  keep  her ;  for  she  (is)  thy  Life 
4.  22  they  (are)  life  unto  those  that  find  them 

4.  23  thy  heart . .  out  of  it  (are)  the  issues  of  Life 

5.  6  Lest  thou,  .ponder  the  path  of  Life,  her 
6. 23  reproofs  of  instruction  (are),  .way  of  life 

8.  35  whoso  findeth  mefindeth  life,  and  shall 

9.  11  and  the  years  of  thy  Life  shall  be  increased 
10.  1 1  a  well  of  Life :  but  violence  covereth  the  m. 
10.  *6  The  labour  of  the  righteous  (tendeth)  to  1. 

10.  17  He  (is  in)  the  way  of  life  thatkeepeth  ins. 
11. 19  As  righteousness  (tendeth)  to  life;  so  he 

11.  30  the  fruit  of  the  righteous.,  a  tree  of  life 

12.  28  In  the  way  of  righteousness  (is)  life ;  and 

13.  12  (when)  the  desire  cometh,  (it  is)  a  tree  of  L 

13. 14  The  law  of  the  wise  (is)  a  fountain  of  life 

14.  27  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  a  fountain  of  life,  to 

14.  30  A  sound  heart(is)  the  life  of  the  flesh:  but 

15.  4  A  wholesome  tongue  (is)  a  tree  of  life :  but 
15. 24  The  way  of  life  (is)  above  to  the  wise,  that 

15.  31  The  ear  that  heareth  the  reproof  of  life 

16.  15  In  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance.  .1. 

16.  22  Understanding  (is)  a  well  spring  of  life 

18.  21  Death  and  Life  (are)  in  the  power  of  the  t. 

19.  23  Thefear  of  the  Lord  (tendeth)  to  life :  and 

21.  21  He.  .findeth  life,  righteousness,  and  hon. 

22.  4  humility,  .(are)  riches,  and  honour,  and  L 

31.  12  good  and  not  evil  all  the  days  of  her  Life 
EccL.  2.  3  they  should  do.  .all  the  days  of  their  life 

2. 17  Therefore  I  hated  Life;  because  the  work 
3. 12  for.  .-to  rejoice,  and  to  do  good  in  his  Life 
5.  18  aLL  the  days  of  his  Life,  which  God  giveth 
5.  20  not  much  remember  the  days  of  his  Life 
6. 12  in  (this)  life,  all  the  days  of  his  vain  Life 
8. 15  the  days  of  his  life,  which  God  giveth  him 
9.   9  aLL  the  days  of  the  Life  of  thy  vanity,  which 
9.    9  for  that  (is)  thy  portion  in  (this)  life,  and 
Isa.   38.  12  I  have  cut  off  Like  a  weaver  my  life ;  he 
38.  16  in  all  these .  .is)  the  Life  of  my  spirit :  so 
38.  20  we  will  sing  .  .all  the  days  of  our  life  in 
57.  10  thou  hast  found  the  life  of  thine  hand 
Jer.     S.   3  death  shall  be  chosen  rather  than  Life  by 
21.    8  I  set  before  you  the  way  of  life,  and  the 
52.  33  did.  .eat.  .before  him  all  the  days  of  his  1. 
52.  34  given,  .every  day.  .all  the  days  of  lu»  *_. 
Lam.  3.  53  They  have  cut  off  my  life  in  the  dungeon 
3.  58  0  Lord,  thou.. thou  hast  redeemed  my  Life 
Eze.    7. 13  strengthen  himself  in .. iniquity  of  hislife 

33. 15  walk  in  the  statutes  of  Life,  without  com. 
Dan.    7. 12  their  Lives  were  prolonged  for  a  season 

12.  2  some  to  everlasting  Life,  and  some  to  sh. 
Jon.  2.  6  yet  hast  thou  brought  up  my  life  from  cor. 
Mai.    2.    5  My  covenant  was  with  him  of  Life  and  p. 

2.  Days,  D'D'v  yomayim. 

1  Ki.  3.  11  and  hast  not  asked  for  thyself  long  life 

2  Ch.  1.  11  neither  yet  hast  asked  long  Life  ;  but  hast 
Psa,  61.   6  Thou  wilt  prolong  the  king's  life . .  his  ye. 

91. 16  With  long  Life  will  I  satisfy  him,  and  show 

3. Breath,  vsi  nephesh. 

Gen.   g.   4  flesh  with  the  life  thereof . .  the  blood  the. 
9.   5  blood  of  your  lives. .  will  I  require  the  life 
19.  17  Escape  for  thy  life  ;  look  not  behind  thee 
19. 19  hast  showed  unto  me  in  saving  my  life 

32.  30  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life 
44. 30  that  his  life  is  boimd  up  in  the  lad's  life 

Exod.  4. 19  all  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy  life 

21.  23  mischieffollow,thoushaltgivehfe  for  life 
21.  30  he  shall  give  for  the  ransom  of  his  life 

Lev.  17.  •    For  the  Life  of  the  flesh  (is)  in  the  blood 

17.  iv  For  (it  is)  the  Life  of  alL  flesh  ;  the  blood 
17. 14  the  Life  of  aLl  flesh  (is)  the  blood  thereof 
17. 14  For.  .the  blood  of  it  (is)  for  the  lifether. 

Niini35.  31  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  niur. 

Deuti2.  23  eat  not  the  blood,  .the  blood  (is)  the  life 

12.  23  thou  mayest  not  eat  the  Life  with  the  fl. 

19.  21  life,  .for  Mfe,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth 
24.    6  for  he  taketh  (a  man's)  Life  to  pledge 

Josh.  2.  13  savealive.  .and deliver  our  lives  from  de. 
2.  14  Our  life  foryour's,  if  ye  utter  not  this  our 
g.  24  were  sore  afraid  of  our  lives  because  of 
Judg.  5.  18  jeoparded  their  Lives  unto  the  death  in 
9.  17  my  father,  .adventured  his  life  far,  and 
12.    3  I  put  my  life  in  my  hands,  and  passed 
18.  25  run  upou  thee,  and.  .lose  thy  life,  with 
Ruth  4.  15  he  shall  be  unto  thee  a  restorer  of.  .life 
1  Sa.  19.   5  he  did  put  his  life  in  his  band,  and  slew 
ig.  11  If  thou  save  not  thy  Life  to  night,  to  mor. 

20.  1  before  thyf ather,  that  he  seeketh  my  life  ? 

22.  23  he  that  seeketh  my  Life  seeketh  thy  life 
23. 15 'saw  that  Saul  was  come  out  to  seek  his  1. 
26. 24  as  thy  life . .  so  let  my  life  be  much  set  by 
28.    9  layest  thou  a  snare  for  my  life,  to  cause 
28.  21 1  have  put  my  life  in  my  hand,  and  have 


LIFE 


604 


LIFT 


2  Sa.    i.   9  slay  me.  .because  my  life  (is)  yet  whole 

4.  8  Saul  thine  enemy,  which  sought  thy  life 
14.  7  for  the  life  of  his  brother  whom  he  slew 
16.  n  Behold,  my  son.  .seeketh  my  life  :  how 

18.  13  wrought  falsehood  against  mine  owu  life 

19.  5  have  saved  thy  live,  and  the  lives  of  thy 
19.    5  the  lives  of  thy  wives,  and  the  lives  of  thy 

1  Ki.   1.  12  mayest  save  thine  own  life,  and  the  life  of 

2.  23  not  spoken  this  word  against  his  own  lift; 

3.  11  nor  hast  asked  the  life  of  thine  enemies 
ig.    2  if  I  make  nut  thy  life  as  the  life  of  one  of 
19.    3  he  arose,  and  went  for  his  life,  and  came 
19.   4  now,  0  Lord,  take  away  my  life ;  for  I  (am) 

19.  j4  ana  they  seek  my  life,  to  take  it  away 
20. 31  the  king,  .perad venture  he  will  save  thy 
20. 39  then  shall  thy  life  be  for  his  life,  or.  else 

20.  42  therefore  thy  life  shall  go  for  his  life,  and 

2  Ki.   1.  13  let  my  life,  and  the  life  of  these  fifty  thy 

1. 14  let  my  life  now  be  precious  in  thy  sight 
7.    7  Wherefore  they  arose . .  and  fled  for  their  1. 

10.  24  (If)  any . .  escape .  .his  life  (shall  be)  for  the 
iCh.  11.  19  God  forbid.,  for  with.,  their  lives  they  br. 
2  Ch.  1. 11  nor  the  life  of  thine  enemies,  neither  yet 
Esth.  7.    3  let  my  life  be  given  me  at  my  petitiou 

7.  7  to  make  request  for  his  life  to  Esther  the  1. 

8.  11  to  stand  for  their  life,,  to  destroy,  to  slay 
9. 16  stood  for  their  lives,  and  had  rest  from 

Job     2.   4  all.  .a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life 

2.    6  he  (is)  in  thine  haud  ;  but  save  his  life 

6.  11  mine  end,  that  I  should  prolong  my  life? 

13. 14  Wherefore  do  I.,  put  my  life  in  mine  hand? 

31.  39  caused  the  owners  thereof  to  lose  their  1. 

Psa.  31.  13  while,  .they  devised  to  take  away  my  life 

38.  12  They  also  that  seek  after  my  lifelaysnares 

Prov.  1. 18  And. . they lurkprivily  for their(own)lives 

1.  19  taketh  away  the  life  of  the  owners  thereof 

6.  26 adulteress  will  hunt  for.  .precious  life 

7.  23  and  knoweth  not  that  it  (is)  for  his  life 

12.  10  A  righteous  (man)  regardeth  the  life  of 

13.  3  He  that  keepeth  his  mouth  keepeth  his  1. 
13.    8  The  ransom  of  a  man's  life  (are)  his  riches 

Isa.   15.   4  Moab.  .his  life  shall  be  grievous  unto  liim 

43.  4  give  men  for  thee,  and  people  for  thy  1. 

.    Jer.     4.  30  lovers  will  despise  thee . .  will  seek  thy  1. 

11.  21  the  men  of  Anathoth,  that  seek  thy  life 
19.  7  by  the  hands  of  them  that  seek  their  lives 
19.   9  their  enemies,  and  they  that  seek  their  li. 

21.  7  into  the  hand  of  those  that  seek  their  life 
.21.    g  and  his  life  shall  be  unto  him  for  a  prey 

22.  25  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  thy  life 
34.  20,  21  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  their  1. 
38.    2  shall  have  his  life  for  a  prey,  and  shall  1. 

38.  16  the  hand  of  these  men  that  seek  thy  life 

39.  18  but  thy  life  shall  be  for  a  prey  unto  thee 

44.  30  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  his  life 

44.  30  king,  .his  enemy,  and  that  sought  his  life 

45.  5  thy  life  will  I  give  unto  thee  for  a  prey  in 

46.  26  into  the  hand  of  those  that  seek  their  li. 

48.  6  Flee,  save  your  lives,  and  be  like  the  heath 

49.  37  and'b'efore  them  that  seek  their  life 
Lam.  2.  19  for  the  life  of  thy  young  children,  that 

5.  9  we  got  our  bread  with  the  peril  of  our  1. 
Eze.  32.  10  every  man  for  his  own  life,  in  the  day  of 
Jon.     1. 14  let  us  not  perish  for  this  man's  life,  and  1. 

4.  3  take,  I  beseech  thee,  my  life  from  me ;  for 

4.A  living  breathing  creature,  <vn  v)si  nephesh  chay. 
Gen.    1.  20  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and 
1.  30  and  to  every  thing,  .wherein  (there  is)  1. 

5.  Bone,  d*j;  etsem. 

Job     7. 15  my  soul  chooseth . .  death  rather  than  my  1. 

6.  Manner,  means  or  period  of  life,  $ios  bios. 

Luke  8.  14  with  cares  and  riches  and  pleasures  of .  .1. 

1  Ti.    2. .  2  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in 

2  Ti.    2.    4  entaugleth  himself  with  the  affairs  of .  .1. 
1  Pe.    4.   3  the  time  past  [of.  .life]  may  suffice  us  to 

1  Jo.   2.  16  the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but 

7.  Life,  motion,  activity,  £aj)  zoe. 

MatC.  7. 14  narrow  (is)  the  way,  which  leadeth  unto  1. 

18.  8,  9  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life 

19.  16  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  have  eternal  life? 
19.  17  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  com. 
19.  29  every  one.  .shall  inherit  everlasting  life 
25. 46  go  away,  .but  the  righteous  into  lif  e  eternal 

Mark  9.  43,  45  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter,  .into  life 
10.  17  shall  I  do  that  I  may  inherit  eternal  life? 
10.  30  receive .  .in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life 

Luke  1.  7sln.. righteousness,  .all  the  days  [of  our  lif  ej 
10.  25  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
12. 15  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance 
18.  18  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
18.  30  and  in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting 

John  1.  4  In  him  was  life ;  and  the  life  was  the  light 
3.  15,  16  should  not  pefish,  but  have  eternal  1. 
3.  36  He  that  believeth.  .hath  everlasting  life 

3.  36  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life 

4.  14  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life 

4.  36  reapeth.  .gathereth  fruit  to  life  eternal 

5.  24  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 
5. 24  believeth.  .is  passed  from  death  unto  life 
5.  26  For  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself 

5.  26  so  hath  he  given  to  the  Son  tu  have  life  in 
5.  29  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life 
5.  39  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life 

5.  40  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  1. 

6.  27  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life 
6.  33  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and  giveth  life 
6.  35  I  am  the  bread  of  life:  he  that  cometh  to 
6.  40  believeth  on  him,  may  have  everlasting  1. 
6.  47  He  that  believeth . .  hath  everlasting  life 
6.  48  I  am  that  bread  uf  life 


John  6.  51  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world 
6.  53  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you 
6.  54  Whoso . .  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternall. 
6.  63  words  thatlspeak  unto  you.,  (they)are  life 
6.  68  Lord . .  thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  Uf  e 

8. 12  followeth  me.  .shall  have  the  light  of  life 
10.  10  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and 

10.  28  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life ;  and  they 

11.  25  I  am  the  resurrection,  and  the  life :  he 

12.  25  that  hateth..  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal 

12.  50  I  know,  .his  commandment  is  life  everlas. 

14.  6  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the  life 
17.  2  that  he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many 
17.  3  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know 
20.  31  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his 

Acts  2.  28  Thou  hast  made  known  to  me  the  ways  of  1. 
3-.  15  killed  the  Prince  of  life,  whom  God  hath 
5.  20  speak . .  to  the  people  all  the  words  of . .  1. 
8.  33Tlerlare.  .for  his  life  is  taken  from  the  ea. 
11.  18  Then  hath  God. .  granted  repenta.  unto  life 

13.  46  yourselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life,  lo 
13.  48  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life 
17.  25  seeing  he  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath 

Rom.  2.    7  who.  .seek  for.  .immortality,  eternal  life 
5. 10  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life 
5.  17  shall  reign  in  life  by  one,  Jesus  Christ 
5.  18  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life 

5.  21  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life 

6.  4  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life 
6.  22  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life 

6.  23  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  L. 

7.  10  commendment,  which(was  ordained)  to  life 

8.  2  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus 
8.  6  to  be  spiritually  minded  (is)  life  and  peace 
8.  10  the  spirit  (is)  life  because  of  righteousness 
8.  38  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  p. 

11. 15  what,  .the  receiving,  .but  life  from  thed.? 

1  Co.  3.  22  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  th. 

15.  19  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ 

2  Co.  2.  16  to  the  other  the  savour  of  life  unto  life 

4.  10,  11  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  might  be 

4.  12  So  tben  death  worketh  in  us,  but  life  in 

5.  4  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of  life 
Gal.  6.  8  he . .  shall  of  the  spirit  reap  life  everlasting 
Eph.  4.  18  being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  thro. 
Phil.  1.  20  magnified . .  whether  (it  be)  by  life,  or  by  d. 

2.  16  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life ;  that  I  may 
4.    3  other,  .whose  names,  .in  the  book  of  life 

Col.     3.    3  aud  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 

3.  4  When  Christ,  .our  life,  shall  appear,  then 

1  Ti.    1.  16  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  et. 

4.  8  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is 

6.  12  lay  hold  on  eternal  liie,  whereunto  thou 
6.  19  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  [eternal]  life 

2  Ti.    1.    1  according  to  the  promise  of  life  which  is 

1.  10  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
Titus  1.    2  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  c. 

3.  7  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life 
Heb.   7.    3  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life 

7. 16  made,  .after  the  power  of  an  endless  life 
Jas.     1.  12  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which 

4.  14  what  (is)  your  life  ?  It  is  even  a  vapour 

1  Pe.  3.   7  being  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life 

3. 10  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days 

2  Pe.   1.    3  (pertain)  unto  life  and  godliness,  through 
1  Jo.   1.    1  hands  have  handled,  of  the  word  of  life 

1.    2  the  life  was  manifested.,  that  eternal  life 
2. 25  And  this  is  the  promise,  .eternal  life 
3.  14  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life 
3.  15  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in 

5.  11  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life 
s.  12  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life ;  (and)  he 
5.  12  that  hath  not  theSon  of  God  hath  not  life 

5. 13  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life 
5. 16  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  siu 

5.  20  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life 
Jude      21  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life 
Rev.  2.    7  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which 

2. 10  behold.  .1  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life 
3.    5  not  blot . .  his  name  out  of  the  book  of  life 
11. 11  the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into 
13.   8  not  written  in  the  bookof  life  of  the  Lamb 
17.   8  were  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from 
20.  12  another  book  was  opened,  which  is.  .of  1. 

20.  15  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was 

21.  6  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely 

21.  27  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life  . 

22.  1  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  c. 
22.    2  the  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve,  .fruits 
22. 14  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  1. 
22.  17  whosoever,  .let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
22.  ig  take  away  his  part  out  of  the  book  of  life 

S.Sjnrit,  iryevfxa  2)neuma. 

Rev.  13.  15  to  give  life  unto  the  image  of  the  beast 
9. Animal  life,  breath,  tyvxh  psuche. 

Matt.  2.  20  dead  which  sought  the  young  child's  life 

6.  25  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye 
6.  25  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the 

10.  39  He  that  findeth  his  life  shall  lose  it :  and 
10.  39  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake  shall 
16.  25  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it 
16.  25  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
20.  28  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 
Mark  3.    4  lawful.,  to  do  evil?  to  save  life,  or  to  kill? 
8.  35  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it 

8.  35  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
10.  45  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many- 
Luke  6.    9  Is  it  lawful,  .to  save  life,  or  to  destroy  (it)? 

9.  24  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it 
9.  24  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
9.  56  is  not  come  to  destroy  meu's  lives,  but  to 


Lukei2.  22  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye 
12.  23  The  life  is  more  than  meat,  and  the  body 

14.  26  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he 
17.  33  Whosoever  shall  seek  to  save  his  life  shall 

17.  33  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  shall  preserve 
Jolin  10.  11  the  good,  shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the 

10.  15  so  know  I .  .and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the 
10.  17  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it 
12.  25  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  and 

12.  25  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall 

13.  37  Lord..  I  Will  lay  down  my  life  for  thy  sake 
13.  38  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake  ? 

15.  13  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends 
Acts  15.20  Men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the 

20.  10  Trouble  not  yourselves ;  for  his  life  is  in 
20.  24  neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  myself 
27.  10  with  hurt  and  much  damage,  .of  our  lives 
27.  22  there  shall  be  no  loss  of.  .life  among  you 
Rom.  1 1.    3  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek  my  life 

16.  4  WTio  have  for  my  life  laid  down  their  own 
Phil.  2.  30  nigh  unto  death,  not  regarding  his  life,  to 

1  Jo.    3.  16  because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us :  and 

3.  16  we  ought  to  lay  down  four)  lives  for  the  br. 
Rev.    8.    9  which  were  in  the  sea,  and  had  life,  died 
12. 11  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death 
lO.Tfo  live,  move,  £dw  zao. 

2  Co.  1.  8  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life 
[See  also  Jeopardy,  lead,  preserve,  promise,  restore, 
save.] 

LIFE  again — [See  Raise  to.] 

LIFE,  of  this,  things  pertaining  to  — 

Belonging  or  pertaining  to  life,  &iutik6s  biotikos. 
Luke2i.  34  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this  life,  and 
1  Co.  6.    3  much  more  things  that  pertain  to  this  1.? 
6.    4  judgment  of  things  pertaining  to  this  life 

LIFE,  things  without  — 

The  things  without  breath,  ra  tyvxa-  ta  apsucha. 

1  C0.14.    7  even  things  without  life  giving  sound 
LIFE,  manner  of  — 

IJJowse  of  life,  ayayr)  agoge. 

2  Ti.  3. 10  thou  hast  fully  known  my . .  manner  of  life 
2.  Manner  of  life,  (Maoris  biosis. 

Acts  26.   4  My  manner  of  life  from  my  youth,  which 
LIFE,  to  give  or  preserve  — 
1  .To  give,  preserve,  or  revive  life,  n;n  chayah,  3. 

Job  33.    4  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  1. 

36.  6  He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the  wicked 
Eccl.  7.  12  wisdom  giveth  life  to  them  that  have  it 

2.7*0  make  alive,  or  living,  {aoirotta  zoopoied. 

2  Co.   3.    6  theletterkilleth,  but  the  spirit  giveth  lif  © 

Gal.    3. 21  a  law  given  which  could  have  given  life 
LIFE  TIME  — 
l.Life,  alive,  living,  'n  chai. 

2  Sa.  18. 18  Absalom  in  his  lifetime  had  taken  and  r. 
l.Life,  motion,  activity,  £&>ift  zoe. 

Lukei6.  25  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good 
3-7*0  live,  be  alive,  £da  zao. 

Heb.  z.  15  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage 
LIFT  up  or  out,  to  — 
1.7b  make  great,  magnify,  *rn  gadal,  5. 

Psa.  41.  9  friend.. hath  lifted  up  (his)  heel  against 
2.7*0  draw  up,  rby  dalah,  3. 

Psa.  30.  1  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  hast  not  made 
3.7b  wave,  *pj  nuph,  5. 

Exod2o.  25  for  if  thou  lift  up  thy  tool  upon  it,  thou 

Deut27.    5  thou  shalt  not  lift  up.  .iron,  .upon  them 

Josh.  8.  31  over  which  no  man  hath  lift  up.  .iron 

Job  31.  21  If  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  against  the 
4.  To  lift  up,  hsi  netal. 

Dan.  4.  34  I  Nebuchadnezzar  lifted  up  mine  eyes 
5.7*0  lift  tip,  bear,  carry  away,  Nb*J  ?ia$a. 

Gen,  13.  10  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  ail  the 

13.  14  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the 

18.  2  he  lift  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and,  lo,  th. 
2i.  16  she  sat  over  against . .  and  lift  up  her  voice 
21. 18  Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  in  thine 
22.  4  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the 
22.  13  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked 
24.  63  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  behold 
24. 64  Rebekah  lifted  up  her  eyes,  and  when  she 
27.  38  And  Esau  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 

29. 11  Jacob  kissed  Rachel,  and  lifted  up  his  v. 

31.  10  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a  dream 

31. 12  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  see,  all  the 
33.    1  Jacob  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and 
33.    5  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  women 

37.  25  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  looked,  and 
40.  13,  19  within  three  days  shall  Pharaoh  lift  up 
40.  20  he  lifted  up  the  head  of  the  chief  butler 
43.  29  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  his  brother 

Exodi4-  10  the  children  of  Israel  lifted  up  their  eyes 
Lev.  9.  22  Aaron  lifted  up  his  haud  toward  thepeo. 
Num.  6.  26  The  Lokp  lift  up  his  countenance  upon 

14.  1  all  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  voice 
24.    2  Balaam  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  he  saw  Is. 

Deut.  3.  27  lift  up  thine  eyes  westward,  and  north. 
4. 19  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven 

32.  40  I  lift  up  my  haud  to  heaven,  and  say,  I 
Josh.  5.  13  that  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and 
Judg.  2.   4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 

8.  28  that  they  lifted  up  their  heads  no  more 

9.  7  liftsd  up  his  voice  and  cried,  and  said 


LIFT 


605 


LIGHT 


Judgip.  17  when  he  had  lifted  up  his  eyes,  he  saw  a 

21.  2  and  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept  sore 
Ruth  1.   9,  14  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 

1  Sa.  6.  13  they  lifted  up  their  eyes,  and  saw  the  ark 

n.   4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept 
24. 16  And  Saul  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 
30.   4  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept,  until  they 

2  Sa.  3.  32  the  king  lifted. up  his  voice,  and  wept  at 

13.  34  the  young  man .  .lifted  up  his  eyes  and  1. 

13.  36  came,  and.  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept 
18.  24  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold 

18.  28  lifted  up  their  hand  against  my  lord  the 
20.  21  hath  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  king 

2  Ei.   9. 32  he  lifted  up  his  face  to  the  window,  and 

14.  10  and  thine  heart  hath  lifted  thee  up :  glory 

19.  4 lift  up.  .prayer  for  the  remnant  that  are 
19. 22  hf  ted  up  thine  eyes  on  high  ? . .  against  the 
25.  27  did  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachiu  king  of 

1  Ch.  21. 16  David  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  an. 

2  Ch.2$.  19  and  thine  heart  lifted  thee  up  to  boast 
Job     2.  12  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off,  and 

2.  i2  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept ;  and 
10.  15  (if)  I  be  righteous,  (yet)  will  I  not  lift  up 
n.  15  then  shalt  thou  lift  up  thy  face  without 

22.  26  For  then . .  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  unto  God 
30.  22  Thou  liftest  me  up  to  the  wind  ;  thou  ca. 

Psa.  4.  6  lift  thou  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance 
10. 12  lift  up  thine  hand  :  forget  not  the  humble 
24.  4  who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  van. 
24.   7  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates  ;  and  be  ye 

24.  9  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,  .lift,  .up 

25.  1  Unto  thee,  0  Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  soul 
28.   2  when  I  lift  up  my  hauds  toward  thy  holy 
63.   4  I  will  lift  up  my  hands  in  thy  name 

•83.    2  they  that  hate  thee  have  lifted  up  the  h. 
86.   4  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  soul 
93.    3  The  floods  have  lifted  up .  .have  lifted  up 
93.   3  0  Lord,  .the  floods  lift  up  their  waves 
T02. 10  for  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  cast  me 
106. 26  he  lifted  up  his  hand  against  them,  to  over. 
1 19.  48  My  hands  also  will  I  lift  up  unto  thy  com. 
121.    1  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  lulls 
123.    1  Unto  thee  lift  I  up  mine  eyes,  O  thou  that 
134.    2  Lift  up  your  hands  (in)  the  sanctuary,  and 
143.    8  cause  me  to  know,  .for  I  lift  up  my  soul 
Isa.     2.    4  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  na. 
5.  26  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations 
10.  24  shall  lift  up  his  staff  against  thee,  after 
10.  26  so  shall  he  lift  it  up  after  the  manner  of 
13.   2  Lift  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  high  mount. 
18.   3  he  lifteth  up  an  eusign  on  the  mountains 
24.  14  They  shall  lift  up  their  voice,  they  shall 
37.   4  lift  up.  .prayer  for -the  remnant  that  is  1. 
37.  23  exalted  (thy)  voice,  and  lifted  up  thine 
40.  26  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold  who 
42.    2  He  shall  not  cry  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his 
42.  11  Let  the  wilderness  and  the  cities,  .lift  up 
49. 18  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  ben. 
49.  22  I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  Gentiles 

51.  6  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and  look 

52.  8  Thy  watchmen  shall  lift  up  the  voice*,  with 
60.   4  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see 

Jer.     3.   2  Lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  the  high  places 
7. 16  neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them 
11. 14  neither  lift  up  a  cry  or  prayer  for  them 
13.  20  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  behold  them  that 
52.  31  lifted  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachinkingof  J 
Lam.  2. 19  lift  up  thy  hands  toward  him  for  the  life 
3.  4 1  Let  us  lift  up  our  heart  with . .  hands  unto 
Eze.    3. 14  So  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  took  me 
8.   3  the  spirit  lifted  me  up  between  the  earth 
8.   5  lift  up  thine  eyes  now  the  way  toward  the 
8.    s  So  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  the  way  toward 
10. 16  when  the  cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings 

10.  19:  the  cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings,  and 

11.  1  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  brought  me 
it.  22  Then  did  the  cherubim  lift  up  their  wings 
18.  6, 15  neither  hath  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  the 
18. 12  hath  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  the  idols,  hath 
20-  5,  5, 6, 15,  23 1  lifted  up  mine  hand  unto  them 
20.  28,  42 1  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  to  them 

23.  27  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  them 
33.  25  and  lift  up  your  eyes  toward  your  idols 
36.    7  I  have  lifted  up  mine  hand,  Surely  the  h. 
44. 12  therefore  have  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  ag. 
47.  14  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  unto  your 

Dan.   8.    3  Then  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and 

10.    5  Then  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked 
Mic.   4.   3  nation  shall  not  lift  up  a  sword  against  n. 
Hab.   3.  10  the  deep . .  lifted  up  his  hands  on  high 
Zech.  1. 18  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and 
1.  21  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head  :  but 

1.  21  which  lifted  up  (their)  horn  over  the  land 

2.  1  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  again,  and  looked 
5.    1  Then  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes 
5.   5  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  see  what  (is) 
5.    9  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked 

5.  9  they  lifted  up  the  ephah  between  the  earth 

6.  1  And  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and 

6.7b  lift  up,  bear,  carry  a/way,  Ntr;  nasar,  3. 

Psa.  28.   9  feed  them  also,  and  lift  them  up  forever 

7.  To  give,  |ru  nathan. 

Prov.  2.    3  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understanding 
Jer.   22.  20  lift  up  thy  voice  in  Bashan,  and  cry  from 

8.  To  cause  to  stand,  ~iy  ud,  Sa. 

Psa.  147.   6  The  Lord  lifteth  up  the  meek  :  he  casteth 

9.  To  stir  up,  -ny  ur,  Sa. 

2  Sa.  23. 18  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  hundred 
1  Ch.n.  ii  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  hundred 


10.  To  cause  to  come  up,  draw  up,  rnj/  alah,  5. 
Gen.  37.  28  drew  and  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit 
IS'ah.    3.    3  The  horseman  lifteth  up  both  the  bright 

11.  To  answer,  respond,  n;j;  anah. 

Jer.  51.  14  and  they  shall  lift  up  a  shout  against  thee 

12.  To  cry  aloud,  rejoice,  neigh,  hnf  tsahal,  3. 
Isa.    10.  30  Lift  up  thy  voice,  0  daughter  of  Gallim 

13.  To  cause  to  rise  up,  D?p  gum,  5. 

Eccl.  4.  10  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow 
Eze.  26.    8  He  shall,  .lift  up  the  buckler  against  thee 

14. To  make  high,  on  rum,  3a. 

1  Sa.    2.  7  The  LORD.. bringeth  low,  and  lifteth  up 

2  Sa.  22.  49  thou  also  hast  lifted  me  up  on  high  above 
Psa.     9.  13  that  liftest  me  up  from  the  gates  of  death 

18.  48  thou  liftest  me  up  above  those  that  rise 
107.  25  wind,  which  lifteth  up  the  waves  thereof 

15.  To  make  high,  on  rum,  5. 

Gen.  14.  22  I  have  lift  up  mine  hand  unto  the  Lord 
39.  15  when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice 

39.  iS  it  came  to  pass,  as  I  lifted  up  my  voice 
41.  44  without  thee  shall  no  man  lift  up  his  hand 

Exod.  7.  20  he  lifted  up  the  rod,  and  smote  the  waters 
14.  16  lift  thou  up  thy  rod,  and  stretch  out  thine 
Nuni2o.  n  Moses  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  with  his  rod 
1  Sa.    2".    8  lifteth  up  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill 
1  Ki.ii.  26^  27  he  lifted  up  (Ins)  hand  against  the  king 

1  Ch.25.    5  All . .  the  sons  of  Heman . .  to  lift  up  the  h. 

2  Ch.  5.  13  when  they  lifted  up  (their)  voice  with  the 
Ezra  9.  6  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee,  my  God 
Job  38. 34  Canst  thou  lift  up  thy  voice  to  the  clouds 
Psa.  74.    3  Lift  up  thy  feet  unto  the  perpetual  deso. 

75.    4  I  said . .  to  the  wicked,  Lift  not  up  the  horn 

75.    5  Lift  not  up  your  horn  on  high:  speak  (not) 

no.    7  He  shall  drink,  .therefore  shall  he  lift  up 

■    113.    7  He.,  lifteth  the  needy  out  of  the  dunghill 

Isa.   10.  15  shake  (itself)  against  them  that  lift  it  up 

10. 15  as  if  the  staff  should  lift  up  (itself),  as  if 

40.  9  lift  up  thy  voice  and  strength ;  lift  (it)  up 
58.  1  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show 
62.  10  Go  through,  .lift  up  a  standard  for  the  p. 

Eze.  21. 22  to  Uft  up  the  voice  with  shouting,  to  ap. 

16.7*0  cause  to  go  in,  Mia  bo,  5. 

Psa.  74.   5  he  had  lifted  up  axes  upon  the  thick  trees 

17.7*1  lift  up,  atpou  aird. 

Lukei7- 13  they  lifted  up  (their)  voices,  and  said,  J. 
John:  1,  41  Jesus  lifted  up(liis)  eyes,  and  said,  Father 
Acts  4.  24  they  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one 
Hev.  10.    5  the  angel,  .lifted  up  his  hand  to  heaven 

13.7*0  cause  to  stand  up,  b.vio-Tf\y.i  anistemi. 

Acts   9.  41  he  gave  her  (Ins)  hand,  and  lifted  her  up 
19.7*0  set  upright  again,  avopBow  anorthoo. 

Heb.  12. 12  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and 
20.  To  lift  out,  eyzlpto  egeiro. 

Matt  12.  11  will  he  not  lay  hold  on  it  and  lift  (it)  out? 

Mark  1. 31  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  lifted  her  up 
9.  27  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  lifted  him  up 

Acts   3.    7  took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  lifted . .  up 

21.7*o  lift  up,  raise  upon,  eiraipa  epairo. 

Matt  17.    8  when  they  had  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they 

Luke  6.  20  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  on  his  disciples,  and 

n.  27  a  certain  woman,  .lifted  up  her  voice,  and 

i6. 23  in  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torm. 

18. 13  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as(his)eyes  unto 

21.  28  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads ;  for 
24.  50  he  lifted  up  his  hands,  and  blessed  them 

John  4.  35  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields 
6.   5  When  Jesus  then  lifted  up  (his)  eyes,  and 
13. 18  that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  up 
17.    1  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said,  F. 
•  Acts    2. 14  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  said  unto  them 
14.  n  lifted  up  their-voices,  saying  in  the  speech 

22.  22  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  said,  Away  with 
1  Ti.    2.   8  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  wrath  and 

22. 7*o  exalt,  elevate,  set  on  high,  v^Sco  hupsod. 
John  3. 14  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  injthe  wit 
3. 14  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  [be  lifted  up] 
8.  28  When  ye  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  man 
i2.  32  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  d. 
12.  34  The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up?  who  is 
Jas.     4- 10  Humble  yourselves . .  he  shall  lift  you  up 

LIFT  up  again,  to  help  to  — 

7*0  cause  to  rise  up,  Dip  qum.  5. 

Deut22.    4  thou  shalt  surely  help  him  to  lift,  .up  ag. 
LIFT  up  as  or  on— [See  Eusign,  high.] 

LIFT  up  self,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  or  become  high  or  haughty,  n^3  gabah. 

Eze.  31. 10  thou  hast  lifted  up  thyself  in  height,  and 
2. 7*o  lift  self  on  high,  K*in  mora,  5. 

Job  39. 18  What  time  she  lifteth  up  herself  on  high 
3.7*o  be  lifted  up,  n^j  nasa,  2. 

Psa.    7.   6  lift  up  thyself,  because  of  the  rage  of  mine 
94.   2  Lift  up  thyself,  thou  judge  of  the  earth 

Isa.  33. 10  Now  will  I  rise,  .now  will  I  lift  up  myself 

4. 7*o  lift  up  self,  KjpJ  nasa,  7. 

Num  16.   3  wherefore  then  lift  ye  up  yourselves  above 

23.  24  and  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  lion:  he  shall 
Prov.30.  32  hast  done  foolishly  in  lifting  up  thyself 
Eze.  17. 14  that  it  might  not  lift  itself  up.  .that  by  k. 

5.  To  stir  tip  self  i*y  ur,  7a. 

Job  31.  29  or  lifted  up  myself  when  evil  found  him 


6.7*0  lift  up  self,  go  up  high,  rhy  alah,  7. 

Jer.   51.    3  against  (him  that)  lifteth  himself  up  in 
7.7*0  lift  up  or  exalt  self,  on  rum,  7a. 

Dan.    5.  23  hast  lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord  of 
8.7*0  be  lifted  up,  DD"i  ramam,  2. 

Eze.  10.  17  (these)  lifted  up  themselves.,  for  the  spirit 
9.7*0  lift  self  up  again,  avatcvTrrce  anafcitptd. 

Lukei3-  11  a  woman,  .could  in  no  wise  lift  up  (hers.) 

John  8.    7  [lifted  up  himself,  and  said  unto  them] 
8.  10  [When  Jesus  had  lifted  up  himself,  and] 

LIFT  up  standard  or  ensign,  to  — 

1.7*0  cause  to  fee,  lift  up  an  ensign,  dij  nus,  Sa. 

Isa.  59.  19  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him 
2.  7*o  lift  up  self  display  self,  DD3  nasas,  7a. 

Zech.  9. 16  lifted  up  as  an  ensign  upon  his  land 
LIFTED  up,  to  be  — 
1. 7*o  be  or  become  high  or  haughty,  pqs  gabah. 

2  Ch.  17.   6  his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  of  the 

26. 16  his  heart  was  lifted  up  to  (his)  destruction 
32.  25  his  heart  was  lifted  up :  t  heref  ore  there  was 

Eze.  28.    2  Because  thine  heart  (is^lifted  up,  and  thou 
28.    5  thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  ri. 

28. 17  Thine  heart  was  lifted  up  because  of  thy 

2.  To  be  lifted  up,  bni  netal. 

Dan.    7.    4  it  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  and  made 

3.7*0  be  lifted  up,  Kb'i  nasa,  2. 

1  Ch.14.  2  for  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  high  be. 
Psa.  24.  7  andbeyeliftup,yeeverlastingdoors;  and 
Prov  30.  13  their  eyes  !  and  their  eyelids  are  lifted  up 
Isa.     2.  12  and  upon  every  (one  that  is)  lifted  up,  and 

2. 13  all  the  cedars,  .(that  are),  .lifted  up,  and 

2. 14  and  upon  all  the  hills  (that  are)  lifted  up 
6.    1  upon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  and 

Jer.  51.   9  her  judgment,  .is  lifted  up.  .to  the  skies 
Eze.     1. 19  when  the  living  creatures  were  lifted  up 
1.  19  from  the  earth,  the  wheels  were  lifted  up 
1.  20  the  wheels  were  lifted  up  over  against 
1.  21  when  those  were  lifted  up  from  the  earth 
1.  21  the  wheels  were  lifted  up  over  against 
4.7*o  be  drawn  away,  pr\i  nathaq,  2. 

Josh.  4. 18  the  priests'  feet  were  lifted  up  unto  the 
5. 7*o  be  lifted  up,  presumptuous,  b$y  aphal,  4. 

Hab.    2.   4  Behold,  his  soul  (which)  is  lifted  up  is  not 
6. 7*o  be  high,  DX*n  raam. 

Zech.14. 10  it  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  inhabited  in  her 
7. 7*o  be  high,  on  rum. 

Gen.  7. 1 7  the  ark,  and  it  was  lift  up  above  the  earth 
Deut.  8.  14  Then  thine  heart  be  lifted  up,  and  thou 
17.  20  That  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up  above  his 
Psa.  27.  6  now  shall  mine  head  be  lifted  up  above 
Isa.  26. 11  Lord,  .thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not 
Eze.  10.  17  stood ;  and  when  they  were  lifted  up,  (th.) 

31. 10  and  his  heart  is  lifted  up  in  his  height 
Dan.  5.  20  when  his  heart  was  lifted  up,  and  his  mind 
11. 12  his  heart  shall  be  lifted  up  ;  and  he  shall 
Mic.    5.   9  Thine  hand  shall  be  lifted  up  upon  thine 

S.  7*o  be  lifted  up,  Di?*i  ramam,  2. 

Eze.  10. 15  And  the  cherubims  were  lifted  up.  This 

LIFTED  up  with  pride,  to  he  — 

7*o  be  puffed  up,  rv<p6ofxai  tupthoomai. 

1  Ti.   3.   6  lest  being  lifted  up  *with  pride  he  fall  into 
UTTER  up  — 

7*o  make  high,  nn  rum,  5. 

Psa.    3.   3  my  glory,  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  head 
LIFTING  up  — 
l.Rising,  lifting  up,  niN3  geuth. 

Isa.     9. 18  shall  mount  up  (like)  the  lifting  up  of  sin. 
2.Rising,  lifting  up,  nia  gevah. 

Job  22.  29  thou  shalt  say,  (There  is)  lifting  up ;  and 

3.  Lifting  up,  *?"b  moal. 

Neh.  8.   6  Amen,  Amen,  with  lifting  up  their  hands 
i.Liftmg  up,  FiN^a  maseth. 

Psa.  141.   2  the  lifting  up  of  my  hands  (as)  the  evening 

5.7*0  stir  up,  "NJ7  ur,  3a. 

1  Ch.11.  20  for  lifting  up  his  spear  against  three  hun. 

6. 7*o  make  high,  on  rum,  5. 

1  Ch.15. 16  sounding,  by  lifting  up  the  voice  with  joy 

LIFTING  up  of  self  — 
Lifting  up,  niDCi  romemuth. 

Isa.   33.   3  at  the  lifting  up  of  thyself  the  nations 

LIGHT  — 
l.Light,  tin  or. 

Gen.    1.   3  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light 

1.  4  God  saw  the  light,  that  (it  was)  good ;  and 
1.  4  God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness 
1.  c  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  darkness 
1.  18  and  to  divide  the  lisht  from  the  darkness 
Exodio.  23  all  the  children  of  Israel  had  light  in  their 
Judgio.  26  fell  down  at  the  door,  .till  it  was  light 

1  Sa.  14.  36  spoil  them  until  the  morning  light,  and 

25.  22  that  (pertain)  to  him,  bythemorninglight 
25.  34  left  unto  Nabal  by  the  morning  light  any 
25.  36  told  him  nothing . .  until  the  morning  light 

2  Sa.  17.  22  bythemorninglight  there  lacked  not  one 

23.    4  as  the  light  of  the  morning  (when)  the  sun 
2  Ki.  7.   9  if  we  tarry  till  the  morning  light,  some 


LIGHT 


606 


LIGHT 


Job     3.    9  let  it  look  for  light,  but  (have)  none ;  nei. 

3.  16  not  been  ;  as  infants  (which)  never  saw  li. 

3.  20  Wherefore  is  light  given  to  him  that  is  in 
12.  22  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death 
12.  25  They  grope  in  the  dark  without  light,  and 

17.  12  the  light  (is)  short  because  of  darkness 

18.  5  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 
18.  6  The  light  shall  be  dark  in  his  tabernacle 
18.  18  He  shall  be  driven  from  light  into  dark. 
22.  28  and  the  light  shall  shine  upon  thy  ways 
24.  13  They  are.  .those  that  rebel  against  the  1. 
24.  14  The  murderer  rising  witli  the  light  killeth 

24.  16  in  the  daytime  :  they  know  uot  the  light 

25.  3  and  upon  whom  doth  not  his  light  arise? 

28.  11  thing  that  is)  hid  bringeth  he  forth  to  li. 

29.  3  by  his  light  I  walked  (through)  darkness 

29.  24  the  light  of  my  countenance  they  cast  not 

30.  26  I  waited  for  light,  there  came  darkness 
33. 28  into  the  pit,  and  his  life  shall  see  the  light 
33.  30  to  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  liv. 
36.  30  he  spreadeth  his  light  upon  it,  and  cover. 

36.  32  With  clouds  hecovereth  the  light;  and  c. 

37.  15  and  caused  the  light  of  his  cloud  to  shine  ? 

37.  21  And  now  (men)  see  not  the  bright  light 

38.  15  from  the  wicked  their  light  is  withholden 
38.  19  Where  (is) the  way.  .light  dwelleth  ?  and 
38.  24  By  what  way  is  the  light  parted,  (which) 
41.  18  By  his  neesings  a  light  doth  shine,  and  his 

Psa.    4.   6  lift  thou  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance 
27.    1  The  Lord  (is)  my  light  and  my  salvation 

36.  9  with  thee,  .in  thy  light  shall  we  see  light 

37.  6  bring  forth  thy  righteousness  as  the  light 

38.  10  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  also  is  gone  from  me 

43.  3  0  send  out  thy  bght  and  thy  truth:  let 

44.  3  and  the  light  of  thy  countenance,  because 
49.  19  of  his  fathers;  they  shall  never  see  light 
56.  13  that  I  may  walk  before  God  in  the  light 
78.  14  he  led  them,  .all  the  night  with  a  light 
89.  15  they  shall  walk,  0  Lord,  in  the  light  of 
97.  n  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gla, 

104.  2  Who  coverest.  .with  light  as.,  a  garment 
112.  4  Unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in 
119.  105  a*  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto 
136.  7  To  him  that  made  great  lights :  for  his 
139.  11  even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  me 
148.  3  Praise  ye.  .praise  him,  all  ye  stars  of  light 
Prov.  4. 18  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  moTe 

6.  23  the  law  (is)  light ;  and  reproofs  of  instru. 
13.  9  The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth  :  but 
16.  15  In  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance  (is) 

Eccl.   2.  13  excelleth.  .as  far  as  light  excelleth  dark. 

11.  7  Truly  the  light  (is)  sweet,  and  a  pleasant 

12.  2  or  the  light,  or  the  moon,  or  the  stars,  be 
Isa.     2.    5  and  let  us  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord 

5.  20  that  put  darkness  for'light,  and  light  for 
5.  30  light  is  darkened  in  the  heavens  thereof 
9.  2Thepeople..haveseenagreatlight :  they 
9.  2  that  dwell,  .upon  them  hath  the  light  sh. 
10.  17  the  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire,  and 

13.  10  For  the  stars,  .shall  not  give  their  light 
13. 10  moon  shall  not  cause  her  light  to  shine 
30.  26  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light 

30.  26  light  of  the  sun  shall  be .  .as  the  light  of 
42.  61.  .give  thee,  .for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles 
42.  16  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them 
45.  7  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness  ;  I 
49.  6  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the  G. 
51.  4  I  will  make  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  li. 
58.    8  Then  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  mo. 

58.  10  then  shall  thy  light  rise  in  obscurity,  and 

59.  9  we  wait  for  light,  but  behold  obscurity 

60.  1  Arise,  shine  ;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and 
60.    3  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and 
60.  19  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day 
60.  19  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and 
60.  20  the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light 

Jer.     4.  23  and  the  heavens,  and  they  (had)  no  light 

13.  16  while  ye  look  for  light,  he  turn  it  into  the 
25.  10  of  the  millstones,  and  the  light  of  the  c. 

31.  35  Lord,  which  giveth  the  sun  for  a  light  by 
31.  35  and  of  the  stars  for  a  light  by  night 

Lam.  3.    2  and  brought,  .darkness,  but  not.  .light 
Eze.  32.    7  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light 
Hos.    6.    5  thy  judgments . .  the  light  (that)  goeth 
Amos  5.  18  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  darkness.,  not  li. 
5.  20  the  day  of  the  Lorl  (he)  darkness,  .notli. 
Mic.    2.    1  when  the  morning  is  light,  they  practise 

7.  8  when  I  sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord.,  a  light 
7.    9  he  will  bring  me  forth  to  the  light..  I  shall 

Hab.  3.    4  And  (his)  brightness  was  as  the  light;  he 

3.  11  at  the  light  of  thine  arrows  they  went 
Zeph.  3.    5  doth  lie  bring  his  judgment  to  light,  he  f. 
Zech.14.    6  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  (nor)  dark 

14.  7  pass,  (that)  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  1. 

%,IAghtt  "UK  ur. 

Isa.  50. 11  walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire,  and  in  the 

Z. Light,  •ti'in  orah. 

Esth.  8.  16  The  .Tewshad  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy 
Psa.139.  12  the  darkness  and  the  light  (are)both  alike 

4.  Light  giver,  tind  maor. 

Gen.    1. 14  Lettherebe  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the 
1. 15  let  them  be  for  lights  in  the  firmament  of 
i.  16  And  God  made  two  great  lights;  the 
1.  16  greater  light  to  rule,  .the  lesser  light  to 
Exod2s.   6  Oil  for  the  light,  spices  for  anointing  oil 
27.  20  pure  oil  olive  beaten  for  the  light,  to  ca. 
35.    8  oil  for  the  light,  and  spices  for  anointing 
35.  14  The  candlestick  also  for  the  light,  and  Ins 
35.  14  and  his  lamps,  with  the  oil  for  the  light 
35.  28  spice,  ami  oil  for  the  light,  and  for  the 


Exod39.  37  all  the  vessels  thereof,  and  the  oil  for  light 
Lev.  24.  2  pure  oil  olivebeateuforthe light,  to  cause 
Num.  4.  9  and  cover  the  candlestick  of  the  light,  and 
4. 16  the  oil  for  the  light,  aud  the  sweet  incense 
Psa.  74. 16  thou  hast  prepared  the  light  and  the  sun 
90,  8  our  secret  (sins)  in  the  light  of  the  count. 
Prov  15.  30  The  light  of  the  eyes  rejoiceth  the  heart 

5.  Place  of  sight,  visio?i,  window,  rnrn  mechesah. 

1  Ki.  7.    4,  5  light  (was)  against  light  (in)  three  ranks 

6.  Shining,  pijj  nogah. 

Isa.  50.  10  walketh  (in)  darkness,  and  hath  no  light  ? 

7 .Light,  ti.ij,  Trn  nehir,  nehor. 

Dan.   2.  22  knoweth . .  and  the  light  dwelleth  with  him 

8.  Light,  WflJ  nahiru. 

Dan.  5.  11  light  and  understanding  and  wisdom,  like 
5. 14  light  and  understanding  and  excellent  w. 
9. Light,  rrrni  neharah. 

Job  3.  4  darkuess.  .neither  let  the  light  shine  upon 
10.  Light,  YJ  nir. 

1  Ki.n.  36  David  my  servant  may  have  a  light  alway 

2  Ki.  8.  19  he  promised  him  to  give  him.  .a  light 

2  Oh.  21.    7  as  he  promised  to  give  a  light  to  Mm  and 

11. Light,  "U  ner. 

2  Sa.  21.  17  that  thou  quench  not  the  light  of  Israel 

12.  Dawning,  ~irttt>  shachar. 

Isa.      8.  20  (it  is)  because  (there  is)  no  light  in  them 

13.  Light,  not  heavy,  £\a<ppos  elaphros. 

Mattn.  30  my  yoke  (is)  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light 
2  Co.  4.  17  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  m. 

14.^4  torch,  Kafxiras  lampas. 

Acts  20.    8  there  were  many  lights  in  the  upper  cha. 

15.^4  lam}),  \v\vos  luchnos. 

Matt  6.  22  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye :  if  ther. 
Luketi.  34  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye:  therefore 
12.  35  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and.. lights 
John  5.  35  He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light :  and 
2  Pe.  1.  19  as  unto  alight  thatshineth  in  adarkplace 
Rev.  21.  23  And  the  city,  .the  Lamp  (is)  the  light  th. 

16. Splendour,  brightness,  a  shining  light,  <peyyos. 

Matt  24.  29  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 

Marki3-  24  after  that,  .the  moon  shall  not  give  her  1. 

Luken.  33  that  they  which  come  in  may  see  [the  li.] 
l7.Li'jht,  radiance,  <pa>s phos. 

Matt.  4.  16  The  people,  .saw  great  light;  aud  to  them 

4.  16  in  the . .  shadow  of  death  light  is  sprung  up 

5.  14  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world.     A  city  that 

5.  16  Let  your  light  so  shiue  before  men,  that 

6.  23  If  therefore  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be 

10.  27  What  I  tell  you.  .speak  ye  in  light :  and 
17.    2  and  his  raiment  was  white  as  the  light 

Luke  2.  32  A  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
8.  16  that  they  which  enter  in  may  seethe  light 

11.  35  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  uot  darkness 

12.  3  shall  be  heard  in  the  light;  and  that  which 
16.    8  generation  wiser  than  the  children  of  light 

John  1.  4  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light 
1.  5  the  light  shineth  in  darkuess ;  and  the  dar. 
1.  7  came,  .to  bear  witness  of  the  Light,  that 
1.  8  not  that  Light,  but.  .witness  of  that  Light 
1.  9  the  true  Light,  which  lighteth  every  man 
3.  19  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men 
3.  19  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because 
3.  20  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light 
3.  20  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds 
3.  21  cometh  to  the  light,  that  his  deed  may  be 

5.  35  willing  for  a  season  to  rejoice  in  his  light 
8.  12  I  am  the  light  of  the  world :  he  that  foil. 

8.  12  not  walk,  .but  shall  have  the  light  of  life 

9.  5  As  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  I  :  a  the  li, 
11.    9  because  he  sceth  the  light  of  this  world 

11.  10  stumbleth, be  cause  there  is  no  light  in  him 

12.  35  Yet  a  little  while  is  th.  light  with  you 
12.  35  Walkwhileyehavethe.1:.ght, lest  darkness 
12.  36  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the  light 
12.  36  that  ye  maybe  the  children  of  light.  These 
12.  46 1  am  come  a  light  into  the  world,  that  who. 

Acts    9.    3  there  shined  round  about  him  a  light  from 

12.  7  came  upon . .  and  a  light  sh.  .ed  in  the  pr. 

13.  47  I  have  set  thee  to  be  a  light  of  the  Gent. 
16.  29  he  called  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in,  and 
22.  6  there  shone  from  heaven  a  great  light  ro. 
22.  9  they  that  were  with  me  saw  indeed  the  1. 
22.  11  And  when  I  could  not  see  for.  .that light 
26. 13  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light  from  heaven,  ab. 
26. 18  to  turn . .  from  darkuess  to  light,  and  (from) 
26.  23  should  show  light  unto  the  people,  and 

Horn.  2. 19  art.  .a  lightof  them  which  are  in  darkness 

13.  12  let  us  therefore,  .put  on  the  armour  of  li. 

2  Co.   4.    6  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine 

6.  14  what  communion  hath  light  with  dark.? 
11.  14  Satan,  .is  transformed  into  an  angel  of  1. 

Eph.   5.    8  light  in  the  Lord  :  walk  as  children  of  li. 
5.  13  all  things,  .are  made  manifest  by  the  light 
5.  13  whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  light 
Col.     1.  12  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light 
1  Th.  5.    5  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  light,  and  the 
1  Ti.    6.  16  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach 
Jas.     1.  17  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights 
1  Pe.  2.   9  hath  calledyou.  .into  his  marvellous  light 
1  Jo.  1.    5  declare  unto  you,  that  God  is  light,  and 

1.  7  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  li. 

2.  8  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth 

2.  g  He  thatsaithheisiu  the  light,  and  hateth 
2.  10  He  that  loveth.  .abideth  in  the  light,  and 


Rev.  18.  23  the  light  of  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more 

21.  24  the  nations,  .shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it 

22.  5  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the 

18. Light  giver,  (pwa-r-qp  phoster. 

Phil.    2.  15  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  w. 
Rev.  21.  11  her  light.,  like  unto  astone  most  precious 

19. Light,  illumination,  tpairio-p-os  23hotis7nos. 

2  Co.   4.    4  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  C. 
4.    6  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
[See  Give,  set,  show.] 
LIGHT  — 
\.To  be  unstable,  ins packaz. 

Judg/9.    4  Abimelech  hired  vain  and  light  persons 
Zeph.  3.    4  Her  prophets  (are)  light  (and)  treacher. 

2. Light,  not  heavy,  Sp  qal. 

2  Sa.    2. 18  Asahel  (was  as)  light  of  foot  as  a  wild  roo 

3.  Very  light,  Sj^j?  qeloqel. 

KuiU2i.    5  spake,  .our  soul  loatheth  this  light  bread 
LIGHT,'  to  — 
l.To  light,  kindle,  "nN  or,  5. 

Psa.  18.  28  thou  wilt  light  my  candle  :  the  Lord  my 

2-.  To  come  down,  "n;  yarad. 

1  Sa.  25.  23  she  hasted,  and  lighted  off  the  ass,  and 

3.  To  fall,  btynaphal. 

Gen.  24.  64  when  she  saw  Isaac,  she  lighted  off  the  c. 
Isa.     9.    8  The  Lord  sent,  .and  it  hath  lighted  upon 

4.  To  cause  to  go  up,  rny  alah,  5. 

Exod25.  37  they  shall  light  the  lamps  thereof,  that 
30.  8  when  Aaron  lighteth  the  lamps  at  even 
40.  4  bring  in  the  candlestick,  and  light  the  1. 
40.  25  he  lighted  the  lamps  before  the  Lord  ;  as 

Num.  8.    2  When  thou  lightest  the  lamps,  the  seven 
8.    3  Aaron  did  so ;  he  lighted  the  lamps  ther. 

5. To  light,  kindle,  cLtttq)  hapto. 

Luke  3.  16  No  man,  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle 
11.  33  No  mau,  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle 
15.   8  doth  not  light  a  candle,  and  sweep  the 

6.  To  burn,  cause  to  burn,  kclIoo  kaio. 

Matt.  5. 15  Neither  do  men  light  a  candle,  and  put 

7.  To  fall,  fall  upon,  iriirrco  fJiptd. 

Rev.    7. 16  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor 

5.  To  enlighten,  <p(arl(w  photizo. 

John  1.    9  winch  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh 

9.  To  come,  epxofj.at  crchomai. 

Matt.  3. 16  descending  like  a  dove,  and  lighting  upon 
LIGHT,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  or  become  light,  11 K  or. 

Gen.  44.   3  As  soon  as  the  morning  was  light,  the  men 

1  Sa.  29.  10  as  soon  as  ye  be  up.  .and  have  light,  dep. 

2. To  '{cause  to)  shine,  ys;  yapha,  5. 

Job  10.  22  without  any  order,  and.  .the  light  (is)  as 
LIGHT  down,  to  — 
1.  To  come  down,  tv  yarad. 

Judg.  4.  15  Sisera  lighted  down  off  (his)  chariot,  and 
2.Tofall,  %inaphal. 

2  Ki.  5.  21  he  lighted  down  from  the  chariot  to  meet 
LIGHT  (from  off),  to  — 

To  alight,  sink  down,  ruy  isanach. 

Josh  1 5.  18  she  lighted  off  (her)  ass ;  and  Caleb  said 
Judg.  1.  14  she  lighted  from  off  (her)  ass  ;  and  Caleb 

LIGHT,  to  bring  to  — 

To  enlighten,  bring  to  light,  ^wt/^oj  photizo, 

1  Co.  4.    5  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  d. 

2  Ti.   1. 10  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
LIGHT,  full  of  — 

Full  of  light,  shining,  bright,  <pcoTeiv6s  2^h>~>teino$. 
Matt.  6.  22  single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  li. 
Luken.  34  single,  thy  whole  body  also  is  full  of  light 

11.  36  If  thy  whole  body,  .(be)  full  of  light,  hav. 

1 1.  36  the  whole  shall  be  full  of  light,  as  when 

LIGHT,  to  give  or  show  — 

l.To  cause  or  give  light,  "lit*  or,  5. 

Gen.    1.  15  to  give  light  upon  the  earth  :  and  it  was 

1. 17  God  set  them,  .to  give  light  upon  the  ea. 

Exodi3.  21  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give  them  light ;  to 

14.  20  itgavelight  by  night. .so  that  the  onecame 

25.  37  that  they  may  give  light  over  against  it 

Num.  8.    2  shall  give  light  over  against  the  candles. 

Neh.   9. 12  to  give  them  light  in  the  way  wherein  they 

9,  ig  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  to  show  them  light 

Psa.  105.  39  He  spread,  fire  to  give  light  in  the  night 

118.  27  LORD,  which  hath  showed  us  light :  bind 

119.  130  The  entrance  of  thy  words  giveth  light 
Isa.   60.  19  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give  light 

2. To  cause  to  appear  or  shine  Wpon,  iiritpatva}. 
Luke  1.  79  To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness 

3.  To  appear  or  shine  upon,  etrlcpavu)  epiphauo. 

Eph.   5.  14  Awake,  .and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light 

4.  To  give  the  light  of  a  torch,  \dfxirca  lampd. 

Matt,  5. 15  it  giveth  light  unto  all  that  are  in  the  ho. 
5. To  enlighten,  tparlfa photissa. 

Luke  1 1.  36  shining  of  a  candle  doth  give  thee  light 
Rev.  22.    5  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light :  and  they 


LIGHT 


607 


LIKE 


LIGHT  of,  to  make  — 

To  be  careless,  disregard,  OjueAe'o)  ameleo. 

Matt22.    5  they  made  light  of  (it),  and  went  their  w. 

LIGHT  on,  or  upon,  to  — 

l.To  find,  k>*c  matsa. 

Deut  19.    s'lighteth  Upon  his  neighbour,  that  he  die 
2  Ki.  10.  15  he  lighted  on  Jehonadab  the  son  of  Rec. 

%Tb  come  or  strike  upon,  JJ33 paga. 

Gen.  28.  n  he  lighted  upon  a  certain  place,  and  tar, 
LIGHT  thing,  to  he  or  seem,  a  — 
To  be  or  become  light,  hh$  qalal,  2. 

l  Sa.  18. 23  Seemethit  to  you  (a)  light  (thing)  to  be  a 

1  Ki.  16.  31  as  if  it  had  been  a  light  thing  for  him  to 

2  Ki.    3.  18  this  is.  .a  light  thing  in  the  sight  of  the 

20.  10  It  is  a  light  thing  for  the  shadow  to  go 
Isa.   49.    6  It  is  a  light  thing  that  thou  shouldest  be 
Eze.    8.  17  Is  it  a  light  thing  to  the  house  of  Judah 

LIGHT — [See  Narrow.] 

LIGHTEN,  to  — 

l.To  cause  or  give  light,  lit*  or,  5. 

Ezra  9.   8  that  our  God  may  lighten  our  eyes,  and 
Psa.  13.   3  O  Lord  my  God :  lighten  mine  eyes,  lest 
77.  18  the  lightnings  lightened  the  world  :  the 
Prov29.  13, meet,  .the  Lord  lighteneth  both  their 

2.  To  cause  to  shine,  PtJi  nagah,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  29  and  the  Lord  will  lighten  my  darkness 

Z.To  make  light,  lighten,  hhpr  qalal,  5. 

1  Sa.    6.    5  he  will  lighten  his  hand  from  off  you,  and 
Jon.     1.    5  cast  forth  the  wares,  .to  lighten  (it)  of 

4.  To  lighten  as  lightning,  acrpdirrw  astrapto. 
Lukeiy.  24  as  the  lightning,  that  lighteneth  out  of 

5. To  lighten,  make  light,  xovcpifa  kouphizo. 

Acts  27.  38  they  lightened  the- ship,  and  cast  out  the 
Q.To  make  a  clearance  or  casting  out,  4k$o\t]v  iroi4. 

Acts  27. 18  And.  .the  next  (day)  they  lightened  the 
7.  To  enlighten,  give  light,  (pwrifa  photizo.  • 

Rev.  18.    1  and  the  earth  was  lightened  with  his  glory 
21. 23  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  L. 

5.  Uncovering,  els  airoKaKv^iv  eis  apokalupsin. 
Luke  2.  32  A  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the 

LIGHTENED,  to  be  — 

To  become  bright,  "tffj  nohar. 

Psa.  34.    5  They  looked  unto  him,  and  were  lightened 
LIGHTER,  to  make  (somewhat)  — 
To  make  light,  %jj  qalal,  5. 

1  Ki.12.   4  make  thou  the  grievous  service,  .lighter 

12.   9  Make  the  yoke. .thy  father,  .put  upon  us  1. 
12. 10  make  thou  (it)  lighter  unto  us ;  thus  shalt 

2  Ch.  10. 10  make  thou  (it)  somewhat  lighter  for  us 
LIGHTING  down  — 

Coming  down,  nrti  nachath. 

Isa.  30.  30  shall  show  the  lighting  down  of  his  arm 
LIGHTLY  — 
1.A  little  thing,  Byp3  fcimat. 

Gen.  26. 10  one  of  the  people  might  lightly  have  lien 

2.Quickly,  hastily,  raxv  tachu. 

Mark  9.  39  no  man . .  that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me 
[See  also  Afflict,  move.] 

LIGHTLY  esteem,  to  — 

To  dishonour,  hii  nabel,  3. 

Deut32.  15  lightly  esteemed  the  Rock  of  his  salvation 

LIGHTNESS  — 

1.  Instability,  nsma  pachazuih. 

Jer.  23.  32  to  err  by  their  lies,  and  by  their  lightness 

I.Lightness,  bp  qol. 

Jer.    3.   9  came  to  pass  through  the  lightness  of  her 

3. Lightness,  4\a<ppia  elaphria. 

2  Co.  1. 17  did  I  use  lightness?  or  the  things  that  I 

LIGHTNING  — 

l.Light,  tx  or. 

Job   37.    3  his  lightning  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

1. Lightning,  pi3  baraq. 

Exodig.  16  that  there  were  thunders  and  lightnings 
2  Sa.  22.  15  he  sent  out.  .lightning,  and  discomfited 
Job   38.  35  Canst  thou  send  lightnings,  that  they  may 
Psa.  18. 14  he  shot  oiit  lightnings,  and  discomfited 
77. 18  the  lightnings  lightened  the  world  :  the 
97.   4  His  lightnings  enlightened  the  world  :  the 
135.    7  he  maketh  lightnings  for  the  rain  :  he  b. 
144.   6  Cast  forth  lightning,  and  scatter  them 
Jer.  10. 13  he  maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  and  brin. 
51. 16  he  maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  and  brin. 
Eze.    1. 13  and  out  of  the  fire  went  forth  lightning 
Dan.  10.   6  his  face  as  the  appearance  of  lightning 
Nah]  2.   4  Thechariots.  .shall  run  like  the  lightnings 
Zech.  9. 14  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning 

Z. Brightness,  lightning,  i*;ri  chaziz. 

Job  28.  26  anil  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  the  thunder 
38.  25  or  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  thunder 
4.Flame,  tsS  lappid. 

Exod2o.  18  the  thunderings,  and  the  lightnings,  and 
o.Lt'fhtning,  aarpa-Trr)  astrape. 

Matt. 24. 27  as  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east 
28.   3  His  countenance  was  like  lightning,  and 


Lukeio.  18  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  he. 

17.  24  as  the  lightning,  that  lighteneth  out  of 
Rev.   4.    5  lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voices 

8.  5  voices,  and  thunderings,  and  lightnings 

11.  19  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  th. 
16. 18  were  voices,  and  thunderings,  and  light. 

LIGHTNING,  flash  of  — 
Lightning,  po  bazaq. 

Eze.    1. 14  as  the  appearance  of  a  flash  of  lightning 
LIGN  aloes— {See  Trees.] 
LIGTJRE  — 
Opal,  jacinth,  d^7  leshem. 

E:\od28.  19  third 'row  a  ligure,  an  agate,  and  an  am. 
39.  12  third  row,  a  ligure,  an  agate,  and  an  am. 
LIKE  (things,  occupation)  — 

l.A  brother,  nx  ach. 

Eze.  18.  10  (that)  doeth  the  like  to  (any)  one  of  these 
2.  Likeness,  n-sn  demuth. 

Tsa.  58.   4  Their  poison  (is)  like  the  poison  of  a  serp. 

3.77*7/5,  713  koh. 

Jer.  23.  29  (Is)  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire  ?  saith  the 

i.Like,  iDS  kemo. 

2  Ch.  35. 18  there  was  no  passover  like  to  that  kept  in 
Isa.   46.    9  I  (am)  God,  and  (there  is)  none  like  me 
51.    6  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like 
Lam.  1.  it  hast  called,  and  they  shall  be  like  unto  me 

5. Simile,  similitude,  b$&  mashal. 

Job    13. 12  Your  remembrances  (are)  like  unto  ashes 

6. Similitude,  hz'D  moshel. 

Job   41.  33  Upon  earth  there  is  not  his  like,  who  is 

7.  With,  py  im. 

Psa.  73.    5  neither  are  they  plagued  like  (other)  men 

Dan..  5.  21  his  heart  was  made  like  the  beasts,  and 
^.Likeness,  ]Vpi  diniyon. 

Psa.  17.  12  Like  as  a  lion,  .is  greedy  of  his  prey,  and 
9.  As  these,  like  these,  nsns  kahemmah. 

Jer.  36.  32  there  were  added  besides ..  many  like  w. 
10. Like,  equal,  Jo-os  isos. 

Acts  11. 17  God  gave  them  the  like  gift  as.  .unto  us 

11. Like,  resembling,  '6/j.olos  homoios. 

Matt  11.  16  It  is  like  unto  children  sitting  in  the  ma. 
13.  31  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  grain 
13.  33  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  leaven 
13. 44  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  treas. 
13.  45  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  m. 
13.  47  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  net 
13.  52  is  like  unto  a  man.  .an  householder  which 
20.  1  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man 
22.  39  the  second  (is)  like  unto  it,  Thou  shalt  love 
Marki2.  31  the  second  (is)  [like].,  this,  Thoushaltlove 
Luke  6.  47  I  will  show  you  to  whom  he  is  like 

6.  48  He  is  like  a  man  which  built  an  house 
6. 49  is  like  a  man  that,  .built  an  house  upon 

7.  31  And  the  Lord  said,  .to  what  are  they  like? 
7.  32  They  are  like  unto  children  sitting  in  the 

12.  36  like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  lord 
13. 18  Unto  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  like  ? 

13.  19  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  winch 
13.  21  It  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman  took 

John  S.  55  I  shall  be  a  liar  like  untoyou ;  but  I  know 

9.  9  others  (said),  He  is  like  him .  .he  said,  I  am 
Acts  17.  29  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,  or 
GaL  5.  21  drunkenness,  re  veilings,  and  such  like  :  of 
1  Jo.  3.  2  we  shall  be  bike  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him 
Jude  7  the  cities  about  them,  in  like  manner  giv. 
Rev.   i.  13  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  clothed  with 

i.  15  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they 
2. 18  the  Son  of  God .  .his  feet  (are)  likefine  b. 
4.    3  he  that  sat  was  to  look  upon  bike  a  jasper 
4.3  a  rainbow . .  in  sight  [like]  unto  an  emerald 
4.   6  a  sea  of  glass  like  unto  crystal :  and  in  the 
4.    7  like  a  lion,  and  the  second  beast  like  a 
4.   7  and  the  fourth  beast,  .like  a  flying  eagle 
9.    7  locusts,  .bike  unto  horses  prepared  unto 
9.    7  as  it  were  crowns  [like]  gold,  and  their 
9.  10  they  had  tails  like  unto  scorpions,  and 
9.  19  their  tails,  .like  unto  serpents,  and  had 
11.    1  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  unto  a  rod 
13.    2  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  bike  unto  a 
13.    4  Who  (is)  like  unto  the  beast  ?  who  is  able 
13. 11  hehadtwo  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake 
14. 14  (one)  sat  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  having 
16.  13  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  [hike]  frogs 

18.  iS  saying,  What  (city  is)  like  unto  this  great 
21. 11  her  light  (was)  bike  unto  a  stone  mostpr. 
21. 18  the  city,  .pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass 

12.Thvs  as,  ovrois  &s  houtos  lids. 

John  7.  46  [Never  man  spake  like  this  man] 
13. Nearly  like,  similar,  wapo/xoios  paromoios. 

Mark  7.    S  [and  many  other  such  like  things  ye  do] 
7. 13  and  many  such  like  things  ye  do 

14:.These,  ravra  tauta. 

1  Th.  2.  14  ye  also  have  suffered  like  things  of  your 
15. Such  as  these,  roiavra  toiauta. 

Acts  19.  25  with  the  workmen  of  like  occupation,  and 
16.  As,  so  as,  &s  hos. 

Matt.  6.  29  Solomon .  .was  not  arrayed  like  oue  of  th. 
28.    3  His  countenance  was  like  lightning,  and 

Mark  4.  31  (It  is)  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which 

Luk*ei2.  27  Solomon.,  was  not  arrayed  like  one  Jo.  7.46 


Acts    S.  32  bike  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearer,  so 
Rev.  1 8.  21  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great  millstone,  and 

17.--1S  if,  ward  hosei. 

Matt.  3.  16  saw  the  spirit  of  God  descending  like  a  d. 
Mark  1.  10  spirit  [like]  a  dove  descending  upon  him 
Luke  3.  22  descended  in  a  bodily  shape  [like]  a  dove 
John  1.  32  spirit  descentlingfrom  heaven  [like] a  dove 
Rev.  1.  14  His  head  and . .  hairs . .  white  [like]  wool 
[See  also  Come,  each,  even,  figure,  manner,  men,  occu- 
pation, passions,  precious,  such,  tires.] 

LIKE,  to  — 

l.To  love,  nnx  aheb. 

Amos  4.    5  for  this  liketh  you,  0  ye  children  of  Israel 

2.To  delight,  ffln  chaphets. 

Deut25.    7  if  the  man  like  not  to  take  his  brother's 
25.    8  (if)  he  stand . .  and  say,  I  like  not  to  take 

Z.To  be  pleased,  n>"i  ratsah. 

1  Ch.28.   4  he  hiked  me  to  make  (me)  king  over-all  I. 

4.To  make  trial,  proof,  doKi/xd^co  dokimazo. 

Rom.  1.  28  even  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in 

LIKE,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  like,  ncn  damah. 

Psa.  102.    6  I  am  like  a  pelican  of  the  wilderness ;  I 
144.    4  Man  is  bike  to  vanity :  his  days  (are)  as  a 
Song  2.    9  My  beloved  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 
2. 17  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon 
7.   7  This  thy  stature  is  like  to  a  palm  tree,  and 
8. 14  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart 
Isa.     1.   9  we  should  have  been  hike  unto  Gomorrah 
46.    5  equal.,  compare  me,  that  we  may  be  bike? 
Jer.    6.   2  I  have  likened  the  daughter  of  Zion  to  a 
Eze.  31.   2  speak..  Whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  great.? 
31.    8  the  fir  trees  were  not  like  his  boughs,  and 
31.    8  nor  any  tree,  .was  like  unto  him  in  his  b. 
31. 18  To  whom  art  thou  thus  like  in  glory  and 

2.To  be  or  become  like,  n^g  damah,  2. 

Eze.  32.  2  Thou  art  bike  a  young  lion  of  the  nations 

Z.To  liken  self,  HOT  damah,  7. 

Isa.  14. 14  I  will  ascend.. I  will  be  like  the  most  H. 

4.  To  be  like,  nc^  demah. 

Dan.    3.  25  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of  God 
7.    5  behold  another  beast,  a  second,  like  to  a 

5.  To  be,  become,  n;rr  hayah. 

Jer.  48.   6  Flee,  .be  like  the  heath  in  the  wilderness 

6.  To  think,  reckon,  2trn  chashab,  3. 

Jon.    l   4  sea,  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to  be  broken 

7.  To  be  or  become  like,  Sa;p  mashal,  2. 

Psa.  49.12  Nevertheless. .he is likethe beasts  (that) 
49.  20  Man  (that  is),  .is  like  the  beasts  (that)  pe. 
143.    7  like  unto  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit 

8 -To  be  equal,  compared,  rnjp  shavah. 

Prov.26.   4  Answer  not.  .lest  thou  also  be  like  unto 

9. To  be  like,  in  the  image  of,  eoiKa  eoika  cikcd  eiko. 

Jas.   1.  6  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the'sea 

1.  23  he  is  like  unto  a  man  beholding  his  natural 

10. To  make  like,  bfioiota  homoiod. 

Matt  6.    8  Be  not  ye  therefore  like  unto  them :  for 
22.   2  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like-unto  a  cer. 

LIKE,  to  become  — 

l.To  be  or  become  like,  bpD  mashal,  2. 

Psa.  28.   1 1  become  like  them  that  go  down  into  the 
Isa.   14. 10  Art  thou  also . .  art  thou  become  like  unto 

2.  To  be  or  become  like,  ivo  mashed,  7. 

Job    30. 19  and  I  am  become  like  dust  and  ashes 
LIKE,  tc  be  made  — 
l.To  make  equal,  njp  sJievah,  3. 

Dan.    5.  21  Ms  heart  was  made  like  the  beasts,  and 
2.  To  liken  off,  a.(po,uoi6w  aphomoioo. 

Heb.   7.    3  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God ;  abideth 
LIKE,  to  make  — 
l.To  make  equal,  compare,  nic;  shavah,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.  34  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hind's  (feet) ;  and 
Psa.  18.  33  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hind's  (feet),  and 

2.  To  make  like,  S^otSta  homoiod. 

'Rom.  9.  29  Sodoma,  and  been  made  like  unto  Gom. 
Heb.  2. 17  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  like  unto  (his) 

LIKE  manner,  in  — 
l.So,  J?  ken. 

Esod.  7. 11  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchantm. 

Deut  22.   3  In  hike  manner  shalt  thou  do  with  his  ass 

2.And,  /cat  kai. 

Marki3.  29  So  ye  in  like  manner,  when  ye  shall  see 
3. According  to  these,  Kara,  ravra  kata  tauta. 

Luke  6.  23  in  the  like  maruer  did  their  fathers  unto 
4.  In  the  same  way,  wo-av-  js  hosautos. 

Luke2o.  31  in  like  maniiw  the  seven  also  :  and  they 

1  Ti.    2.   9  In  like  manner  also,  that  women  adorn 

T-TK"E  as  — 

1. Likeness,  niOT  demuth. 

Isa.    13.   4  The  noise,  .like  as  of  a  great  people ;  a  tu. 

2. As,  even  as,  iDg  kemo. 

Isa.  26. 17  Like  as  a  woman  with  child,  (that)  draw. 


LIKE 


608 


LINEN 


3.  According  to  the  likeness,  KaO'  bfxot6ry)Ta  kath  ho. 
Heb.  4.  15  but  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  (we 

A. As,  so  as,  w$  hos. 

Mattia,  13  it  was  restored  whole,  like  as  the  other 

5. As  if,  ixrel  hdsei. 

Act3    2.    3  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues,  like  as 

Q.Just  as,  tfxnrep  hosper. 

Rom.  6.    4  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the 

LIKE,  the  — 
So,  thus,  13  ken. 

'  1  Ki.  10.  20  there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  king. 

LIKE  to,  made  — 

A  likeness,  something  made  like,  Sfioluffia  homoioma. 
Roni.  1.  23  into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible 

LIKE  unto,  (to  be)  — 

To  be  or  act  nearly  like,  irapofioidfa  paromoiazo. 
Matt23.  27  [ye  are  like  unto]  whited  sepulchres,  which 

.-15,  ws  hos,  Acts  3.  22 ;  7.  37  ;  Rev.  2.  18. 

LIKE  MINDED,  to  be  — 

l.To  mind  the  same  thing,  to  avrh  (ppopew  to  auto. 
Rom. is.  5  grant  you  to  be  like  minded  one  toward 
Phil.   2.    2  Fulfil  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  like  minded 

2.  One  of  a  like  or  equal  soul,  iao^/vxos  isopsuchos, 

Phil.    2.  20  I  have  no  man  like  minded,  who  will  na. 

3.  Joint- souled,  au/xipvxos  sumjjsuchos,  Phil,  2.  2. 
LIKEN,  or  be  likened  to  — 

1.  To  liken,  non  damah,  3. 

Isa.  40. 18  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  God  ?  or  what 
40.  25  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  me,  or  shall 
46.    5  To  whom  will  ye  liken  me,  and  make  (me) 

Lam.  2.  13  what  thing  shall  I  liken  to  thee,  O  daug. 

2.  To  liken,  compare,  nD'i  damah. 

Psa.  89.    6  (who)  among,  .sons,  .can  be  likeued  unto 
Jer.    6.   2  I  have  likened  the  daughter  of  Zion  to  a 

3.  To  make  like,  6/j.oioq}  homoind. 

Matt.  7.  24  I  will  liken  him  unto  a  wise  man,  which 

7.  26  shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man,  which 
11. 16  But  whereunto  shall  I  liken  this  genera.? 
13.  24  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  unto  a 
18.  23  Therefore  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  like. 
25.    1.;  Mark  4.  30;  Luke  7.  31;  13.  20. 

LIKENESS  — 

1. Likeness,  TWty]  dem/uth. 

Gen.'  1.26  Letusmake  man..afterour  likeness  :  and 
5.  1  day  that  God  created  man,  in  the  likeness 
5.    3  Adam,  .begat  (a  son)  in  his  own  likeness 

Isa.    40.  18  or  what  likeuess  will  ye  compare  unto  him? 

Eze.  1.  5  out  of  the  midst,  .(came)  the  likeness  of 
1.  5  And  this,  .they  had  the  likeness  of  a  man 
1.  10  As  for  the  likeness  of  their  faces,  they  four 
1. 13  As  for  the  likeness  of  the  living  creatures 
1.  16  they  four  had  one  likeness  :  and  their 
t.  22  the  likeness  of  the  firmament  upon  the  h. 
1.  26  above  the  firmament,  .(was)  the  likeness 
1.  26  upon  the  likeness  of  the  throne,  .the  like. 
1.  28  This  (was)  the  appearance  of  the  likeness 

8.  2  a  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  fire  :  from 
10.  1  the  appearance  of  the  likeness  of  a  throne 
10. 10  they  four  had  one  likeness,  as  if  a  wheel 
10.  21  the  likeness  of  the  hands  of  a  man.  .under 
10.  22  the  likeness  of  their  faces  (was)  the  same 

2.  Pattern,  form,  building,  rmri  tabnith. 

Deut.  4.  16  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female 
4.  17  likeness  of  any  beast,  .likeness  of  any  wi. 
4. 18  likeness  of  any  thing,  .likeness  of  any  fish 

Z.Form.,  similitude,  likeness,  miDn  temunah. 

Exod2o.    4  or  any  likeness  (of  any  thing)  that  (is)  in 
Deut.  4.  23  the  likeness  of  any  (thing),  which  the  L. 

4.  25  make  a  graven  image,  (or)  the  likeness  of 

5.  8  Thou  shalt  not  make  thee,  .any  likeness 
Psa.  17.  15  satisfied,  when  I  awake,  with  thy  likeness 

4.  A  likeness, something  made  like,b^.olo>}iahomoioma. 

Rom.  6.    5  if  we  have  been  planted,  .in  the  likeness 

8.    3  God,  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness 

Phil.  2.   7  took . .  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men 

5.  To  make,  like,  6/j,oi6w  homoiod. 

Acts  14.  ir  gods  are  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness 
LLKETH  (best)  — 
Good,  3183  tab. 

Deut 23.  16  He  shall  dwell,  .where  it  liketh  him  best 

Esth.  8.    8  Write  ye  also  for  the  Jews,  as  it  liketh  you 
LIKEWISE  — 
I. Also,  D3  gam. 

Deut  12.  30  How  did  these.. even  so  will  I  do  likewise 

2.Thus,  according  to  this,  nxia  kazoth. 

Judg.  8.    8  to  Penuel,  and  spake  unto  them  likewise 

3.  Together,  alike,  at  once,  r?ir,  Tin:.  10!  yachad. 

Job   31.  38  or  that  the  furrows  likewise  thereof  com. 

4.  So,  thus,  }3  ken. 

Exod22.  30  Likewise  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  oxen 
5. And,  Kai  kai. 

Matt. 18.  35  ;  20.  10  ;  24.  33 ;  Lu.  3.  14;  17.  ro;  19. 19 ; 
21.  31 ;  Acts  3.  24 ;  1  Co,  14.  9;  Col.  4.  16  ;  1  Pe.  4.  1. 

Q.Tn  like  manner,  likewise,  6/j.oitas  homoios. 

Matt.22.  26  Likewise  the  second  also,  and  the  third 
26-  35;  27.  41 ;  Mark  4.  16  ;  15.  31. 


Jas. 
1  Pe. 


Jude 


Luke  3.  11  and  he  that  hath  meat,  let  him  do  like  wise 

5.  33  and  likewise  (the  disciples)  of  the  Phari. 

6.  31  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  also  to  them  like. 
10.  32  likewise  a  Levite,  when  he  was  at  the  pi. 
10.  37  Then  said  Jesus  unto  him,  Go . .  do  thou  1. 

13.  5  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  [likewise] 
16. 25  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things :  but  now  he 
17.  28  Likewise  also  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot 
17. 31  the  field,  let  him  likewise  not  return  hack 
22.  36  let  him  take  (it),  and  likewise  (his)  scrip 

John  5. 19  what,  .doeth,  these,  .doeth  the  Son  like. 

6.  11  likewise  of  the  fishes  as  much  as  they  wo. 
21.  13  Jesus  then,  .taketh  bread,  .andfish  like. 

Rom.  1.  27  likewise  also  the  men,  leaving  the  natural 
1  Co.  7.    3  likewise  also  the  wife  unto  the  husband 

7.  4  likewise  also  the  husband  hath  not  power 
7.  22  likewise  also  he  that  is  called,  (being)  free 

2.  25  Likewise  also,  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  j. 

3.  1  Likewise,  ye  wives,  (be)  in  subjection  to 

3.  7  Likewise,  ye  husbands,  dwell  with  (them) 
5.    5  Likewise,  ye  younger,  submit  yourselves 

8  Likewise  also  these,  .dreamers  defile  the 
Rev.    8.  12  the  day  shone  not.. and  the  night  likewise 

7.  Thus,  so,  ovtw  houtd. 

Matti7.  12  Likewise  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  suffer 

Luke  15.    7  likewise  joy  shall  lie  in  heaven  over  one 

15.  10  Likewise,  I  say  unto  you,  There  is  joy  in 

Rom.  6.  11  Likewise  reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be 

S.Very  near  to,  TrapatrArio'i&s  paraplesios. 

Heb.  2.  14  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the 
9. So  in  the  same  maimer,  wa-avrms  hosautos. 

Matt  20.    5  went  out  about  the  sixth . .  and  did  likew. 

21.  30  And  he  came  to  the  second,  and  said  like. 
21. 36  otherservants..and  they  did  unto  them  1. 
25.  17  likewise  he  that  (had  received)  two,  he 

Marki2.  21  the  second  took  her.  .and the  third  like. 

14.  31 1  will  not  deny  thee.  .Likewise  also  said 
Lukei3-    3  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  [likewise] 

22.  20  Likewise  also  the  cup  after  supper,  saying 
Rom.  8.  26  Likewise  the  spirit  also  helpeth  our  iufi. 
1  Ti.    3.   8  Likewise,  .the  deacons  (be)  grave,  not  d. 

5.  25  Likewise  also  the  good  works,  .are  mani. 
Titus  2.    3  aged  women  likewise,  that,  .in  behaviour 

2.    6  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  besober  mi. 

LLK'-HI,  "npS  Jah  is  doctrine. 

Son  of  Shemidah,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7.  19  the  sons  of  Shemidah  were . .  L.  and  Aniam 

LIKING,  in  good  — 

To  be  safe,  sound,  u7r\  chalam. 

Job    39.   4  Their  young  ones  are  in  good  liking,  they 
LILY  — 
\.A  lily,  jene*  shoshan. 

1  Ki.  7.  22  upon  the  top  of  the  pillars  (was)  lily  work 
7.  26  the  brim  of  a  cup,  with  flowers  of  lilies 
16  and  I  (am)  his:  he  feedetb  among  the  lil. 

4.  5  that  are  twius,  which  feed  among  the  lil. 

5.  13  his  lips. .  lilies,  dropping  sweet  smelling 

6.  2  to  feed  in  the  gardens,  and  to  gather  lilies 

6.  3  beloved  (is)  mine,  he  faedeth  among  the  1. 

7.  2  an  heap  of  wheat  set  about  with  lilies 

2.A  lily,  Jehu*  shushan. 

1  Ki.  7.  19  the  chapiters,  .of  lily  work  in  the  porch 
3.^1  lily,  nyvw  shoshannah. 

2  Ch.  4.   5  the  brim  of  a  cup,  with  flowers  of  lilies 
Song  2.    1  I  (am)  the  rose  of  Sharon,  .the  lily  of  the 

2.    2  As  the  lily  among  thorns,  so  (is)  my  love 
Hos.  14.    5  he  shall  grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth 

A.. A  lily,  Kp'ivov  krinon. 

Matt.  6.  28  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they 
Lukei2.  27  Consider  the  lilies  how  they  grow :  they 

LIME  — 

Plaster,  lime,  T(?  sid. 

Isa.  33.  12  people  shall  be  (as)  the  burnings  of  lime 
Amos  2.    1  he  burned  the  bones  of  theking.. into  lime 

LIMIT  — 

A  border,  ^na  gebul. 

Eze.  43. 12  the  whole  limit  thereof  rourd  about  (ah. 
LIMIT,  to  — 
1.7*0  mark  off,  limit,  n;n  tavah,  5. 

Psa.  78. 41  Yea,  they /.limited  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 

2.  To  mark  off,  dpffoj  horizo. 

Heb.  4.   7*  Again,  he  limiteth  a  certain  day,  saying 

LINE  — 

1. Cord,  tine,  rope,  ^sn  cliebel. 

2  Sa.   8.    2  with  a  line,  .with two  lines,  .one  full  line 
Psa. .16.    6  The  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant 
78.  55  He.  .divided  them  an  inheritance  by  line 
Amos7.  17  thy  landshall  be  divided  by  line;  and  thou 
Zech.  2.    1  behold,  a  man  with  a  measuring  line  in 

2.  A  thread,  cord,  Bin  chut. 

1  Ki.  7.  15  a  line  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  either 
3. Ribbon,  thread,  h^patliil. 

Eze.  40.  3  a  man.  .with  a  line  of  flax  in  his  hand,  and 
4.A  line,  ride,  mg,  ijj,  ^qav,  qeveh. 

1  Ki.  7.  23  a  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it  ro. 

2  Ki. 21. 13  I  will  stretchover  Jerusalem  the  lineofS. 
2  Ch.  4.  2  a  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  itround 
Job  38.  5  or  who  hath  stretched  the  line  upon  it  ? 
Psa.  19.  4  Their  line  is  gone  out  through  all  the  ea. 
Isa.   28.  io,  13  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line  ;  here  a 

28. 17  judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and 


Song 


Isa.  34.  1 1  he  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  con. 
34. 17  his  hand  hath  divided  it  unto  them  by  line 
Jer.  31.  39  the  measuring  line  shall  yet  go  forth  over 
Lam.  2.  8  he  hath  stretched  out  a  line,  he  hath  not 
Eze.  47.  3  when  the  man  that  had  the  line  in  his  h. 
Zech.  1.  16  a  line  shall  be  stretched  forth  upon  Jeru. 

5.^1  cutting  instrument,  red  ochre,  ~\~ver  sered. 

Isa.   44. 13  he  marketh  it  out  with  a  line,  he  fitteth 
6. Line,  nipfi  tiqvah. 

Josh.  2.  18  thou  shalt  bind  this  line  of  scarlet  threat  I 
2.  21  she  bound  the  scarlet  line  in  the  window 

7. A  canon,  reed,  rule,  Kavwv  kanon.  . 

2  Co.  10. 16  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  hue  of  things 
LINEAGE  — 
Paternal  descent,  irarpia  patria. 

Luke  2.   4  he  was  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  David 
LINEN  — 
l.Fine  linen,  13  bad. 

ExodjS.  42  thou  shalt  make  them  linen  breeches  to  c. 
39.  28  and  linen  breeches  (of)  fine  -twined  linen 
Lev.  6.  10  the  priest  shall  put  on  his  linen  garment 
6. 10  his  linen  breeches  shall  he  put  upon  his 
16.  4  He  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  coat,  and 
16.  4  he  shall  have  the  linen  breeches  upon  his 
16.  4  a  linen  girdle,  and  with  the  linen  nhtre 
16.  23  shall  put  off  the  linen  garments  which  he 
16.  32  shall  put  on  the  linen  clothes,  .the  holy 

1  Sa.   2.18  (being)  a  child,  girded  with  a  linen  ephod 

22.  18  slew,  .persons  that  did  wear  a  linen  epliod 

2  Sa.    6.  14  David  (was)  girded  with  a  linen  ephod 

1  Ch.15.  27  David,  .(had)  upon  liim  an  ephod  of  linen 
Eze.  9.  2  one  man  among  them,  .clothed  with  linen 
9.  3  and  he  called  to  the  man  clothed  with  li. 
9.  11  behold,  the  man  clothed  withlinen,  which 
10.  2  he  spake  unto  the  man  clothed  with  linen 
10.  6  had  commanded  the  man  clothed  withli. 
10.  7  hands  of  (him  that  was)  clothed  with  linen 
Dan.  10.  5  a  certain  man  clothed  in  linen,  whose  lo. 
12.   6  And.  .said  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen 

12.  7  I  heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  .which 

2. Linen,  flax,  ni^s  pishteh. 

Lev.  13.  47  a  woollen  garment,  or  a  linen  garment 

13.  48  of  linen,  or  of  woollen,  whether  in  a  skin 
13.  52  whether  warp  or  woof,  in  woollen  or  in  1. 
13.  59  in  a  garment  of  woollen  or  linen,  either 

Deut  22.  11  of  divers  sorts,  (as)  of  woollen  and  linen 

Jer.  13.    1  Go  and  get  thee  a  linen  girdle,  and  put  it 

Eze.  44.  17  they  shall  be  clothed  with  linen  garments 

44.  18  They  shall  have  linen  bonnets  upon  their 

44  18  shall  have  linen  breechesupon  their  loins 

Z.Flax,  linen,  xtvov  linon. 

Rev.  15.    6  angels,  .clothed  in  pure  and  white  [linen] 

A.Mvslin,  fine  linen,  vivZoiv  sindOn. 

Markis.  46  fine  linen,  .and  wrapped  him  in  the  linen 
Luke23-  53  wrapped  it  in  linen,  and  laid  it  in  a  sepul. 

LINEN  and  woollen  — 
Mixed  cloth,  TjtpjHP  shaatnez. 

Lev.  19. 19  shall  a  garment  mingled  of  linen  and  wo, 

LINEN,  fine  (twined)  — 

1. Linen  garment,  |ho  sadin. 

Prov.31.  24  She  maketh  fine  linen,  and  selleth  (it) 
Isa.     3.  23  The  glasses,  and  the  fine  linen,  and  the 

%Fine  linen,  »(?",  *yy  sheshi,  shesh. 

Gen.  41.  42  arrayed  him  in  vestures  of  fine  linen,  and 
Exod25.   4  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  linen,  and 
26.    1  ten  curtains  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  and 
26.  31  and  fine  twined  linen,  of  canning  work 

26.  36  fine  twined  linen,  wrought  with  needlewo. 

27.  9  hangings  for  the  court  (of)  fine  twined  1. 
27. 16  fine  twined  linen,  wrought  with  needlewo. 

27.  18  the  height  five  cubits  (of)  fine  twined  linen 

28.  5  they  shall  take  gold,  .and  fine  linen 

28.   6  shall  make  the  ephod  (of),  .fine  twined  1. 
28.    8  girdle,  .shall  he  of.  .fine  twined  liuen 
28.  15  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  shalt  thou  make  it 
28.  39  shalt  embroider  the  coat  of  fine  linen 
28.  39  thou  shalt  make  the  mitre  (of)  line  linen 
35-   6,  23  purple,  andscarlet,  and  fine  linen,  and 

35.  25  that  which  they  had  spun.,  of  fine  linen 
35. 35  the  embroiderer,  .in  fine  linen,  and  of  the 

36.  8  made  ten  curtains  (of)  fine  twined  linen 
36.  35  And  he  made  a  veil  (of),  .finetwined  linen 
36.  37  he  made . .  fine  twined  linen,  of  needlewo. 
38.    9,  16  the  hangings,  .(were  of)  fine  twined  1. 
38.  18  needlework,  (of)  blue,  .and  fine  twined  1. 

38.  23 and  an  embroiderer  in  blue,  .and  fine  li. 

39.  2,  5,  8 purple,  and  scarlet,  .finetwined  linen 
39.    3  and  in  the  fine  linen,  (with)  cunning  work 

39.27  they  made  coats  (of)  fine  linen,  (of)  woven 
39.  28  mitre  (of)  fine  linen.. bonnets  (of)  fine  li. 

39. 28  and  linen  breeches  (of)  fine  twined  linen 
3g.  29  a  girdle  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  and  blue 

Eze.  16. 10  I  girded  thee  about  with  fine  linen,  and 

16. 13  thy  raiment  (was  of)  fine  linen,  and  silk 
27.    7  Fine  linen  with  broidered  work  from  E, 

3.  Made  of  fine  linen,  fivvvivos  bussinos. 

Rev.  18. 16  that  great  city,  that  was  clothed  in  fine  1. 
19.  8  that  she  should  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen 
19.    8  tlie  fine  liuen  is  the  righteousness  of  saints 

19. 14  the  armies. .followed. .clothed  in  fine  linen 

4. Fine  flax  or  linen,  fivaaos  bussos. 

Lukei6.  19  which  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen 
Rev.  18.  12  merchandise  of  gold,  .and  [fine  linen],  unci 


LINEN 


609 


LIP 


14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 


XLNEN  cloth,  clothes  — 

l.A  piece  of  fine  linen,.  bQ6viov  othonion. 

Luke  24.  12  [beheld  the  linen  clothes  laid  by  theme.] 

J0I11119.  40  wound  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the  spices 

2.0.   5  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying  ;  yet  went  he 

20.   6  cometh  Simon,  .and  seeth  the  linen  clot. 

20.    7  napkin,  .not  lying  with  the  linen  clothes 

2. Muslin,  fine  linen,  aivZwv  sindon. 

Matt  27.  59  Joseph,  .wrapped  it  in  a  clean  linen  cloth 
Mar.  14.  51  having  a  linen  cloth  cast  about  (his)  naked 

14.  52  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from  them 

LINEN  yarn  — 

Linen  yarn,  nipp  miqveh. 

1  Ki.  10.  28  Solomon  had  horses,  .and  linen  yarn  :  the 

10.  sS  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn  at  a  p. 

2  Ch.  1.  16  And  Solomon  had  horses,  .and  linen  yarn 

1. 16  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn  at  a  p. 

LINGER,  to  — 

1.  To  tari'y,  linger,  delay,  Pino  mahah,  7a. 

Gen.  ig.  16  while  he  lingered'the  men  laid  holdupon 
43.  10  except  we  had  lingered,  surely  now  we 

2.  To  be  inactive,  apyeoj  arged. 

2  Te.  2.    3  whosejudgmeut. .lingereth  not,andtheir 
LINTEL  (upper)  — 
l.A  ram,  post,  ?:n  ayil. 

t  Ki.   6.  31  the  lintel  (and)  side  posts  (were)  a  fifth 
2*  Capital  of  a  column,  "YIRS3  kajriitor. 

Amos  9.    1  Smite  the  lintei  of  the  door,  that  the  posts 

Zeph.  2.  14  thebittern  shalllodge  in  the  upper  lintels 

%. Lintel,  upper  doorpost,  *ppyo  mashqoph. 

Exodi2.  22  strike  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts 

12.  23  when  he  seeth  the  blood  upon  the  lintel 

LI'-NTTS,  A7uos. 

A  Christian  at  Rome. 

2  Xi.   4.  21  Eubulus  greeteth  thee.  ,L.,  and  Claudia 
LION  — 
l.A  lion,  n^H,  ntj  ari,  aryeh. 

Gen.  49.   9  Judali  (is)  a  lion's  whelp :  from  the  prey 

49.  9  he  stooped  down,  he  couched  as  a  lion 
Nuni24.    9  he  lay  down  as  a  lion,  and  as  a  great  lion 
Deut  33. 22  Dan  (is)  a  lion's  whelp  :  he  shall  leap  from 
Judg  14.    5  behold,  a  young  lion  roared  against  him 

8  he  turned  aside  to  see  the  carcase  of  the  1. 

8  bees  and  honey  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion 

9  taken  the  honey  out  of  the  carcase  of  the  1. 
_.  18  what(is)strongerthanalion?  And  he  said 

1  Sa.  17.  34  there  came  a  lion  and  a  bear,  and  took  a 

17.  36  Thy  servant  slew  both  the  lion  and  the  b. 

17.  37  delivered  me  out  of  the  paw  of  the  lion,  and 
■2  Sa.   1.  23  swifter  than  eagles,  .stronger  than  lions 

17.  10  whose  heart  (is)  as  the  heart  of  a  lion,  sh. 

23.  20  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  time  of  snow 

1  Ki.  7.  29  the  borders,  .lions,  oxen,  and  cherubim 
7.  29  beneath  the  lions  and  oxen  (were)  certain 
7.  36  he  graved  cherubim,  lions,  and  palm  trees 

10.  19  seat,  and  two  lions  stoodbesidethe  stays 
10.  20  twelve  lions  stood  there  on  the  one  side 

13.  24  a  lion  met  him.  .the  lion  also  stood  by  the 
13.  25  men . .  saw . .  the  lion  standing  by  the  care. 
13.  26  the  Lord  hath  delivered  him  unto  the  lion 
13.  2S  found,  .the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase 
13.  28  the  lion  had  not  eaten  the  carcase,  nor 
20.  36  as  soon  as  thou  art  departed,  .a  lion  shall 

20.  36  as  soon  as  he  was  departed,  .a lion  found 

2  Ki.  17.  25  therefore  the  Lord  sent  lions  among  them 
17.  26  therefore  he  hath  sent  lions  among  them 

1  Ch.  11.  22  also  he  went  down  and  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit 
12.    8  whose  faces  (were  like)  the  faces  of  lions 
,  18  stays,  .and  two  lions  standing  by  the  sta. 
,  19  twelve  lions  stood  there  on  the  one  side 
,  10  The  roaring  of  the  lion,  and  the  voice  of 
>  Lest  he  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion,  rending 
10.    9  He  liethin  wait  secretly  as  a  lion  in  his 
17?  12  like  as  a  lion  (that)  is  greedy  of  his  prey 
22.  13  gaped,  .(as)  a  raveningand  a  roaring  lion 
22.  21  Save  me  from  the  lion's  mouth  :  for  thou, 
Prov  22.  13  a  lion  without,  I  shall  be  slain  in  the  str. 

26. 13  saith.  .a  lion  (is)  in  the  streets 
28.  15  (As)  a  roaring  Hon,  and  a  ranging  bear 

Eccl.  9.  4  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion 

Song.  4.  8  from  the  lion's  dens,  from  the  mountains 

Isa.    n.  7  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox 

15.  9  I  will  bring,  .lionsuponhim  thatescapeth 

21.  8  he  cried,  A  lion  :  My  lord,  I  stand  conti. 
31.    4  Like  as  the  liou.  .roaring  on  his  prey 
35.    9  no  lion  shall  be  there,  nor  (any)  ravenous 
38.  13  as  a  lion,  so  will  he  break  all  my  bones 
65.  25  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bullock 

2.  30  hath  devoured .  .like  a  destroying  lion 

4.  7  The  lion  is  come  up  from  his  thicket,  and 

5.  6  a  lion  out  of  the  forest  shall  slay  them 
12.    8  Mine  heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  lion  in  the 
49. 19  shall  come  up  like  a  lion  from  the  swell. 

50.  17  the  lions  have  driven  (him)  away :  first 

50.  44  he  shall  come  up  like  a  lion  from  the 

51.  38  shall  roar,  .they  shall  yell  as  lions' whelps 
Lam.  3.  10  He  (was)  unto  me.  .a  lion  in  secret  places 
Eze.    1. 10  the  face  of  a  lion  on  the  right  side ;  and 

10. 14  and  the  third  the  face  of  a  lion,  and  the 
19.  2  she  lay  down  among  lions,  she  nourished 
19.    6  he  went  up  and  down  among  the  lions,  he 

22.  25  like  a  roaring  lionravening  the  prey :  they 

6.  7,  T2,  shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions 
6.  16  brought . .  and  cast  (him)  into  the  den  of  1. 
6.  iq  and  went  in  haste  unto  the  den  of  lions 

77 


2CI1.  9. 

9- 
Job 
I'sa. 


Jer. 


Dan. 


Dan.  6.  20  is  thy  God.  .able  to  deliver,  .from  the  1.? 
6.  22  My  God.  .hath  ehut  the  lions'  mouths,  that 
6.  24  they  cast .  .iuto  the  den  of  lions,  them 
6.  24  the  lions  had  the  mastery  .of  them,  and 

6.  27  delivered  D.  from  the  power  of  the  lions 

7.  4  The  first,  .like  a  lion,  and  had  eagle's  wi. 
Hoe.  11. 10  he  shall  roar  like  a  lion  :  when  he  shall 
Joel    1.    6  whose  teeth  (are)  the  teetlt  of  a  lion,  and 
Amos  3.    4  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest  when  he 

3.    8  The  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  ? 

3.  12  taketh  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion  two 

5.  19  As  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a  bear 

Mic.    5.    8  as  a  lion  among  the  beasts  of  the  forest 

Nah.    2.  n  Where  (is)  the  dwelling  of  the  lions,  and 

2.  ii  where  the  lion,  .walked,  .the  lions' whelp 

2.  12  The  lion  did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his 

Zeph.  3.    3  Her  princes  within  her  (are)  roaring  lions 

2.A  young  lion,  whelp,  *V2?  kephir. 

Psa.  35. 17  Lord,  .rescue,  .my  darling  fromthe  lions 
Prov  19. 12  The  king's  wrath  (is)  as  the  roaiing  of  a  1. 

20.    2  The  fear  of  a  king  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a  1. 

28.  1  flee,  .but  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion 
Jer.  25.  38  He  hath  forsaken  his  covert,  as  the  lion 

51.  38  They  shall  roar  together  like  lions  ;  they 

3. Lions,  D'nt?  lebaim, 

Psa.  57.   4  My  soul  (is)  among  lions . .  I  lie  ( . .  among) 

LA  bold  lion,  K*37  labi. 

Deut33i  20  he  dwelleth  as  a  lion,  and  teareth  the 
Job   38.  39  Wilt  ttiou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  lion,  or 
Isa.     5.  29  Their  roaring  (shall  be)  like  a  lion,  they 
Hos.  13.    8  there  will  I  devour  them  like  a  lion  :  the 

5. An  old  lion,  &'b  layish. 

Prov  30.  30  A  lion,  (which  is)  strongest  among  beasts 

6.  A  roaring  lion,  bnv  shachal. 

Psa.  91.  13  Thou  sbalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder 
Prov 26.  13  The  slothful,  .saith,  (There  is)  a  lion  in 
Hos.    5.  14  Fori  (will  be)  uuto  Ephraun  asalion,  and 
13.    7  Therefore  I  will  be  unto  them  as  a  lion 

7.  Pride,  pnc;  shachats. 

Job  28.    8  The  lions'  whelps  have  not  trodden  it ;  nor 

S.J.  lion,  \c&v  Icon. 

2  Ti.   4. 17  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion 

Heb.  11.  33  through  faith,  .stopped  the  mouths  of  1. 

1  Pe.  5.    8  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking 

Rev.    4.    7  And  the  first  beast  (was)  like  a  lion,  and 

5     5  behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda,  the 

9.    8  and  their  teeth  were  as  (the  teeth)  of  lions 

9. 17  the  heads,  .(were)  as  the  heads  of  lions 

10.  3  with  a  loud  voice,  as  (when)  a  lion  roar. 
13.   2  and  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion 

LION,  fierce  — 

A  roaring  lion ,  pngj  shachal. 

Job    4. 10  the  voice  of  the  fierce  lion,  and  the  teeth 
10. 16  Thou  huntest  me  as  a  fierce  lion ;  and  aga. 
28.    8  trodden  it ;  nor  the  fierce  lion  passed  by 
LION,  great,  old,  stout  — 
l.A  bold  lion,  N'nj?  labi. 

Gen. 49.   9  he  couched,  .as  an  old  lion  ;  who  shall 
Nuni23.  24  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  Hon 

24.  9  he  lay  down,  .as  a  great  Hon  :  who  shall 
Job  4.  11  and  the  stout  lion's  whelps  are  scattered 
Joel  1.  6  and  he  hath  the  cheek  teeth  of  a  great  1. 
Nah.    2.  11  where,  .the  old  lion,  walked,  .and  none 

2. An  old  lion,  vyb  layish. 

Job    4. 1 1  The  old  Hon  periaheth  for  lack  of  prey,  and 
Isa   30.    6  from  whence  (come)  the  young  and  old  1. 

LION,  young  — 

l.A  lion,  -TIN,  ""it*  ari,  aryeh, 

Num,23.  24  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  Hon.:  he  shall 

2.A  bold  lion,  n'^h  labi. 
Isa.     30.    6  fromw'hence  come  the  youngandoldlion 

3.1-1  young  lion,  whelp,  Y?3  kephir. 

Job     4. 10  and  the  teeth  of  the  young  Hons,  are  bro. 
38.  39  or  fill  the  appetite  of  the  young  lions 

Psa.  17.  12  and'as  it  were  a  young  lion  lurking  in  se. 
34.  10  young  Hons  do  lack,  and  suffer  hunger 
58.   6  break  out  the.,  teeth  of  the  young  lions 
gi.  13  the  young  lion  and  the  dragon  shaltthou 
104.  21  The  young  lions  roar  after  their  prey,  and 

Isa.     5.  29  they  shaU  roar  Hke  young  lions ;  yea,  they 

11.  6  the  calf  and  the  young  Hon  and  the  fatl. 

31.  4  the  young  lion  roaring  on  his  prey,  when 
Jer.  2.  15  The  young  Hons  roared  upon  him,  (and)y. 
Eze.  19.  2  she  nourished  her  whelps  among  young  1. 

19.    6  became  a  young  lion,  and  it  learned  to 
19.    5,  3  she  took  another,  .made  himayoungl. 

32.  2  Thou  art  Hke  a  young  Hon  of  the  nations 
38. 13  Sheba.  .with all  the  young  lions  thereof 
41.  19  the  face  of  a  j'oung  Hon  toward  the  palm 

Hos.  5. 14  and  as  a  young  Hon  to  the  house  of  Judah 
Amos  3.  4  will  a  young  lion  cry  out  of  his  den  if  he 
Mic.  5.  8  as  a  young  lion  among  the  flocks  of  sheep 
Nan.  2.  1 1  and  the  feeding  place  of  the  young  lions 
2.  13  and  the  sword  shall  devour  thy  young  J. 
Zech  11.   3  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  lions ;  for 

LIONESS  — 

l.A  bold  lioness,  k*2?  lefa'yya. 

Eze.  19.   2  say,  What  (is)  thy  mother  ?  A  lioness  :  she 

2.Bold  lionesses,  niN^?  lebaoth. 

Nan.  2.  12  strangled  for  Ins  lionesses,  and  filled  his 


LION  LIKE  men  — 

Lion  of  God,  "wjtm,  ^'xnx,  ariel. 

2  Sa.  23.  20  Benaiah..slew  two  lion  Hke  men  of  Moab 
1  Ch.11.  22  Benaiah.  .slew  two  UonHkeme-n  of  Moab 

LIP  — 

l.Lip,  ledge,  Ttsfy  saphah. 

Exod.6.  12  hear  me,  who  (am)  of  uncircumcisedHps? 

6.  30  I  (am)  of  uncircumcised  lips,  and  how 
Lev.    5.   4  pronouncing  with  (lus)  hps  to  do  evil,  or 
Nuro.30.   6  vowed,  or  uttered  ought  out  of  her  lips 

30.    8  that  which  she  uttered  with  her  lips,  w. 

30.  12  whatsoever  proceeded  out  of  her  Hps  co. 
Deut23.  23  That  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  Hps  thou 

1  Sa.  1.  13  only  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not 

2  Ki.  19.  28  I  will  put.  .my  bridle  in  thy  lips,  and  I 
Job     2.  10  In  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  with  Ins  lips 

8.  21  Till  he  till,  .thy  Hps  with  rejoicing 

11.  5  oh  that  God  would,  .open  his  lips  against 
13.    6  and  hearken  to  the  pleadings  of  my  Hps 

15.  6  yea,  thine  own  Hps  testify  against  thee 

16.  5  the  moving  of  my  Hps  should  ass-wage 

23.  12  back  from  the  commandment  of  his  Hps 
27.  4  My  lips  shall  not  speak  wickedness,  nor 
32. 20 1  will  speak . .  I  will  open  my  lips  and 

33.  3  and  my  Hps  shall  utter  knowledge  clearly 
Psa.  12.  2  flattering  Hps. .with  a  double  heart,  do  they 

12.  3  Lord  shall  cut  off  all  flattering  lips . .  the 
12.  4  our  lips  (are)  our  own  :  who  (is)  lord  over 

16.  4  nor  take  up  their  naanes  into  my  lips 

17.  1  prayer,  (that  goeth)  not  out  of  feigned  Hps 
17.   4  by  the  word  of  thy  Hps  I  have  kept  (me 

21.  2  hast  not  withholden  the  request  of  his  Hps 

22.  7  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  h. 

31.  18  Let  the  lyinglips  be  put  to  silence  ;  which 

34.  13  Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips 
40.  9  I  have  not  refrained  my  Hps,  0  LORD,th©u 
45.  2  grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips :  therefore  G. 
51. 15  O  LORD,  open  thou  my  lips ;  and  my  mo. 
59.  7  swords  (are)  in  their  Hps  :  for  who.  .doth 
59.  12  the  words  of  their  Hps  let  them  even  be 
63.  3  Because  thy  loving  kindness . .  my  lips  sh. 
63-  5  my  mouth  shall  praise,  .with  joyful  Hps 
66.  14  Which  my  lips  have  uttered,  and  my  mo. 
71.  23  My  lips  shall  greatly  rejoice  when  I  sing 
89.  34  nor  alter  the  tiling,  .gone  out  of  my  lips 

106. 33  that  he  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips 
119. 13  With  my  lips  have  I  declared  all  the  ju. 

119.  171  My  lips  shall  utter  praise,  when  thou 

120.  2  Deliver  my  soul,  0  Lord,  from  lying  lips 
140.   3  adders' poison  (is)  under  their  lips.  Selah 

140.  9  let  the  mischief  of  their  own  lips  cover 

141.  3  Set  a  watch,  .keep  the  door  of  my  lips 
Prov.    4.  24  froward.  .and  perverse  Hps  put  far  from 

5.    2  and  (that)  thy  lips  may  keep  knowledge 

5.  3  For  the  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  (as) 

7.  21  with  the  flattering  of  her  Hps  she  forced 

8.  6  the  opening  of  my  Hps  (shaU  be)  right  th. 
8.    7  wickedness  (is)  an  abomination  to  my  lips 

10. 13  In  the  Hps  of  him  that  hath  understand. 
10.  18  He  that  hideth  hatred  (with)  lying  Hps 
10. 19  sin  :  but  he  that  refraineth  his  lips  (is)  wise 
10.  21  The  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  many  :  but 

10.  32  The  lips  of  the  righteous  know  what  is  ac. 
12. 13  The  wicked  is  snared  by.  .(his)  lips  :  but 
12.  19  The  Hp  of  truth  shall  be  established  for 

12.  22  Lying  Hps  (are)  abomination  to  the  Lord 

13.  3  he  that  openeth  wide  his  Hps  shaU  have 

14.  3  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them 
14.    7  when  thou  perceivest  not.  .the  Hps  of  k. 

14.  23  but  the  talk  of  the  lips,  .only  to  penury 

15.  7  The  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  knowledge 

16.  10  A  divine  sentence  (is)  in  the  Hps  of  the 
16. 13  Righteous  lips  (are)  the  deHght  of  kings 
16.  21  the  sweetness  of  the  Hps  increaseth  lear. 
16.  23  heart  of  the  wise.,  addeth  learning  to..  1. 

16.  27  and  in  his  Hps  (there  is)  as  a  burning  fire 
16. 30  moving  his  lips  he  bringeth  evil  to  pass 

17.  4  A  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  Hps 
17.    7  becomethnotafool;  much  less  do  lying  I. 

17.  28  he  that  shutteth  his  Hps  (is  esteemed)  a 

18.  6  A  fool's  lips  enterinto  contention,  andhis 
18.    7  A  fool's  mouth,  .and  his  Hps  (are)  the  sn. 

18.  20  with  the  increase  of  his  Hps  shall  he  be 

19.  1  than  (he  that  is)  perverse  in  his  lips,  and 

20. 15  Hps  of  knowledge  (are)  a  precious  jewel 
20. 19  not  with  him  that  tiattereth  with  his  Hps 
22.11  (for)  the  grace  of  his  Hps  the  king  (shaU  be) 
22.  18  For.  .they  shaU  withal  be  fitted  in  thylips 

23. 16  my  reins  shall  rejoice  when  thy  Hps  speak 

24.  2  their  heart . .  and  their  Hps  talk  of  misch. 
24.  26  (Every  man)  shall  kiss  (his)Hpsthat  giveth 
24.  28  cause ;  and  deceive  (not)  with  thy  lips 
26. 23  Burning  Hps  and  a  wicked  heart  (are  like) 

26.  24  He  that  hateth  dissembleth  with  Iris  Hps 

27.  2  another  man  praise.,  not  thine  own  lips 
Eccl. 10. 12  but  the  Hps  of  afool  willswallowup  him. 
Song  4.   3  Thy  lips  (are)  Hke  a  thread  of  scarlet,  and 

4. 11  Thylips,  O(ruy) spouse,  drop(as)the  hon. 

5. 13  his  lips  (like)  lilies,  dropping  sweet  smeU. 

7.    9  causing  the  lips  of  those  that  are  asleep 

Isa.    6.    5  I  (am)  a  man  of  unclean  Hps,  and  I  dwell 

6.  s  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  Hps 

6.    7  Lo,  this  hath  touched  thy  Hps  ;  and  thine 

11.  4  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay 

28.  11  with  stammering  lips,  .will  he  speak  to 
29. 13  this  people,  .with their  Hps  dohonour  me 
30.  27  his  lips  are  full  of  indignation,  and  his  to. 
37.  29  therefore  will  I  put.  .my bridle  in  thy  Hps 
57. 19  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips;  Peace,  peace 
59.   3  your  Hps  have  spoken  Hes,  your  tongue 


LIP 


610 


LIVE 


Jer.  17. 16  that  which  came  out  of  my  lips  was  (right) 
Lam.  3.62  The  lips  of  those  that  rose  up  against  me 
Eze.  36.    3  ye  are  taken  up  iu  the  lips  of  talkers,  and 
Dan.  io.  16  (one)  like,  .sons  of  men  touched  my  lips 
Hos.  14.    2  BO  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips 
Hub.   3.  16  \Vlien  I  heard,  .my  lips  quivered  at  the 
filial.    2.    6  and  iniquity  was  not  found  iu  his  lips :  he 
2.    7  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knuwle. 

2.  Upper  Up,  os^  sapham. 

Eze.  24.  17  cover  not(thy)  lips,  and  eat  not  the  bread 
24.  22  ye  shall  not  cover  (your)  lips,  nor  eat  the 
Mic.    3.    7  yea,  they  shall  all  cover  their  lips  :  for 

3.4  lip,  x*^os  chetlos. 

Matt.  15.    8  people . .  honoureth  me  with  (their)  lips 
Mark  7.   6  people  honoureth  me  with  (their)  lips 
Rom.   3. 13  the  poison  of  asps  (is)  under  their  lips 
r  Co.  14.21  With  (men  of).,  other  lips  will  I  speak  un  to 
Heb.  13.  15  the  fruit  of  (our)  lips  giving  thanks  to* his 

1  Pe.    3. 10  let  him  refrain .  .his  lips  that  they  speak 

LIP,  upper  — 

I  Up,  DD"y  sapham. 

Lev.  13.  45  shall  put  a  covering  upon  his  upper  lip 
LiauOR  — 
l.A  tear,  liquid,  jrn  dema. 

Exod22.  29  Thou  shalt  not  delay,  .the  first,  .of  thy  1. 

2.  A  mixture,  Jtp  mezeg. 

Song  7.    2  a  round  goblet,  (which)  wanteth  not  liquor 
3. Liquor,  iTJS'P  mishrah. 

Num.  6.    3  neithershallhe  drink  any  liquor  of  grapes 
LIST,  to  — 
l.To  wish,  fSovAoficu  boulomai. 

Jas.    3.    4  turned,  .whithersoever  the  governor  liste. 
2.2*0  willa  wish,  04\w  thelo. 

Matt  17.  12  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they  list. 

Mark  9.  13  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they  list. 

John   3.   8  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and 

LISTEN,  to  — 

To  hear,  yc^>  shamm. 

Isa.  49.    1  Listen,  O  isles,  unto  me  ;  and  hearken,  ye 

LITTER  — 

Litter,  covered  coach,  2?,  3y  tsab. 

Isa.   66.  20  upon  horses,  and  in  chariots,  and  in  litters 

LITTLE,  (for  a,  farther,  one  time)  — 

I. Small,  little,  young,  Tjfl  zeer. 

Job    36.    2  Surfer  me  a  little, and  I  will  show  thee  that 
Isa.  28.  10,  13  here  a  little,  (and)  there  a  little 
Dan.    7.    8  came  up  among  them  another  little  horn 

2. A  little,  few,  »H?  meat. 

Gen.  18.  4  Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched 
24.  17  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  drink  a  little  water 
24.  43  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  of  thy 
30.  30  For  (it  was)  little  which  thou  hadst before 
43.    2  their  father  said,  Go . .  buy  us  a  little  food 

43.  11  a  present,  a  little  balm  and  a  little  honey 

44.  25  father  said.  .Go  again,  buy  usa  little  food 
Exodz3.  30  By  little  and  little  I  will  drive  them  out 
Deut.  7.  32  God  will  put  out  those,  .by  little  and  little 

28.  38  shalt  gather . .  little  in ;  for  the  locust  shall 
Josh.22. 17  (Is)  the  iniquity  of  Poor  too  little  for  us 
Judg  4. 19  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  to  dr. 
Ruth  2.    7  until  now,  that  she  tarried  a  little  in  the 
j  Sa.  14.  39  enlightened,  because  I  tasted  a  little  of 

14.  43  I  did  but  taste  a  little  honey  with  the  end 

2  Sa.  12.    8  and  if  (that  had  been)  too  little,  I  would 

16.    1  And  when  David  was  a  little  past  the  top  ' 
19.  36  Thy  servant  will  go  a  little  way  over  Jor. 

1  Ki.17.  10  Fetch  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  in  a 

17. 12  I  have  not  a  cake,  but.  .a  little  oil  in  a  c. 

2  Ki.io.  iS  Ahab  served  Baal  a  little.  .Jehu  shall  serve 
Ezra    9.    8  And  now  for  a  little  space  grace  hath  been 

9.  8  and  give  us  a  little  reviving  in  our  bond. 
Job  10.  20  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  take  comfort  a  li. 
Psa.    2.  12  when  his  wTath  is  kindled  but  a  little 

8.    5  thou  hast  made  him  a  little  lower  than  the 
37. 16  A  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  (is)b. 
Prov.  6.  10  a  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber,  a  little  fo. 
10. 20  the  heart  of  the  wicked  (is)  little  worth 

15.  16  Better(is)  little  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

16.  8  Better  (is)  a  little  with  righteousness  than 
24.  33  a  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber,  a  little  fob 

Eccl.  5.  12  (is)  sweet,  whether  he  eat  little  or  much 
10.  1  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  reputation  for 
Song  3.  4  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them,  but 
Isa.  10.  25  a  very  little  while,  and  the  indignation 
.  Jer.  51.  33  yet  a  little  while,  and  the  time  of  herhar. 
Eze.  11.  16  yet  will  I  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary 

16.  47  but,  as  (if  that  were)  a  very  little  (thing) 
Dan.  11.34  they  shall  be  holpen  with  a  little  help:  but 
Hos.    1.    4  yet  a  little.. and  I  will  avenge  the  blood 

8.  10  they  shall  sorrow  a  little  for  the  burden 
Hag.    1.    6  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  little 

1.  9  looked  for  much,  and,  lo,  (it  came)  to  little 
Zech.  1.  15  for  I  was  but  a  little  displeased  aud  they 

3.  Little,  small,  rryy^  ?nitstseirah. 

Dan.   8-   9  outof  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  horn 

A.Little,  small,  "ryy  tsai?\ 

Psa.  63.  27  There(is)littleBenjamin(with)theirruler 
Mic.    5.    2  (though)  thou  be  little  among  the  thous. 

h.LiWe,  small,  jeh  qatan. 

2  Sa.  13.    3  the  poor  (man)  had  nothing.save  one  little 
1  Ki.u.17  n'1  !ad  fled..Hadad  (being) yet  a  little  c. 

17.  13  mr.ke  me  thereof  a  little  cake  first,  aud 


1  Ki.iS.  44  there  ariseth  a  little  cloud  out  of  the  sea 

2  Ki.  2.  23  there  caineforth  little  children  out  of  the 

4.  10  Let  us  make  a  little  chamber,  I  pray  thee 

5.  2  had  brought  away  captive,  .a  little  maid 
Prov  30.  24  There  be  four  things . .  little  upon  the  ea. 
Eccl.  9. 14  a  little  city,  and  few  men  within  it ;  and 
Song  2.  15  Take  us.  .the  little  foxes,  that  spoil  the 

8.    8  We  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  hath  no 
6. Little,  small,  \b$  qaton. 

1  Sa.   2.  19  his  mother  made  him  alittlecoat,  and  b. 

15. 17  When  thou  (wast)  little  in  thine  own  sight 
20.  35  Jonathan  went  out.  .and  a  little  lad  with 

1  Ki.    3.    7  and.  .a  little  child  :  I  know  not.  .to  go  out 

5.  64  the  brasen  altar,  .(was)  too  little  to  reec. 
12.  10  My  little  (finger)  shall  be  thicker  than  my 

2  Ki.  5.  14  his  flesh  came  again  like,  .a  little  child 

2  Ch.io.  10  Mylittle  (finger)  shall  be  thicker  than  my 
Isa.    11.    6  together;  and  alittle  child  shall  lead  them 

60. 22  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,  and 
Amos  6.  11  he  will  smite.,  the  little  house  with  clefts 
l.A  little,  way,  rnis  kibrah. 

Gen.  35. 16  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  come  to  Ep. 

48.  7  yet.  .but  a  little  way  to  come  unto  Ephr. 
2  Ki.  5. 19  Go..  So  he  departed  from  him  a  little  way 

8..1  little  thing,  sound,  }'?v  shemets. 

Job  4. 12  a  thing.,  mine  ear  received  a  little  thereof 
26. 14  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him? 

9.  Outpouring,  *]X^  sheUeph. 

Isa.  54.    8  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 

10. Short,  small,  fipaxvri  brachu  ti. 

John  6.    7  that  every  one  of  them  may  take  a  little 

Acts  27.  28  when  they  had  gone  a  little  further,  they 

Heb.   2.   7  Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the 

2.    9  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  an. 

11. in  a  measure,  /.icTpicos  metyios. 

Acts  20. 12  man  alive,  and  were  not  a  little  comforted 

12. Small,  little,  short,  (xiKpov  mik/ron. 

Matt  26.  39  went  a  little  farther,  and  fell  on  his  face 

Marki4.  35  he  went  forward  a  little,  and  fell  on  the 

14.  70  a  little  after,  they  that  stood  by  said  again 

2  Co.  11.    1  ye  could  bear  with  me  a  little  in  (my)  fo. 

11.  16  receive  me,  that  I  may  boast  myself  a  lit. 
Heb. 10.  37  yet  a  little  while,  and  he  that  shall  come 

13.Smr,dl,  little,  fxttepos  mikros. 

Matt  10.  42  unto  one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold 
18.  6  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little  ones 
18. 10  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones 

18.  14  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish 
Mark  9.  42  shall  offend  oue  of  (these)  little  ones  that 
Lukei2.  32  Fear  not,  little  flock ;  for  it  is  your  Father's 

17.  "2  he  should  offend  one  of  these  little  ones 

19.  -3  could  not.,  because  he  was  little  of  stature 
John  7.  33  Yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  you,  and  (then) 

12.  35  Yet  a  little  while  is  the  light  with  you 

1  Co.  5.  6  Know  ye  not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth 
Gal.  5.  9  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump 
Jas.  3.  5  Even  so  the  tongue  is  a  little  member,  and 
Rev.    3.    8  thou  hast  a  little  strength  and  hast  kept 

6.  11  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  [little]  seasou 

20.  3  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  sea. 

1-1.  Little,  oklyos  oligos,-ov. 

Mark  r,  19  when  he  had  gone  a  little  further  thence 
Luke  5.    3  he  would  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land 

7.  47  but  to  whom  little  is  forgiven,  .loveth  li. 

2  Co.  8. 15  and  he  that  (had  gathered)  little  had  no 

1  Ti.    4.    8  bodily  exercise  profiteth  little ;  but  godl. 

5.  23  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake 
Jas.     3.    5  how  great  a  matter  [a  little]  flrekindleth  ! 

4.  14  a  vapour,  that  appeareth  for  a  little  time 

15.  To  happen,  occur,  rvyxavo  tujjchano. 

Acts  28.    2  the  barbarous. people  showed  us  no  little 
[See  also  Book,  chamber,  child,  children,  daughter, 
faith,  fish,  flock,  river,  ship,  while]. 

LITTLE,  as  it  were  for  a  — 
As  a  little,  BJM?3  kimat. 

Isa.  26.  20  hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment 
LITTLE,  to  be,  gather,  or  seem  — 

1.  To  be  or  become  few  or  little,  bes  maat.  ' 
Exodi2.    4  if  the  household  be  too  little  for  the  lamb 
Neb.  9.  32  let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  little  before 

2.  To  make  few  or  little,  ays  maat,  5. 

Exod  16. 18  he  that  gathered  little  had  no  lack :  they 
LITTLE,  a  very  — 
Least,  smallest,  iXaxto-ros  eh'chistos. 

Luke  19.  17  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  very  little 
LITTLE  hill  — 
A  height  or  hill,  rryna  gihah. 

Psa.  65.  12  and  the  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  side 
72.    3  people,  and  the  little  hills,  by  righteousn. 
114.    4,  6  skipped  like  rams,  .little  hills,  like  la. 
LITTLE  one  — 
1. Little,  small,  "iJ^S  mitsar. 

Gen.  ig.  20  a  little  one.  .(is)  it  not  a  little  oue? 
2.A  suckling,  ViJJ.  ami. 

Job   2i.  11  They' send  forth  their  little  ones  like  a  fl. 
3./1  suckling,  b^V,  V?V  olal,  olel. 

Psa.  137.   9  that  taketh  and  dashetli  thy  little  ones 
A.Little,  small,  ryy,  -nyy  tsaor,  tsair. 

Jer.  14.  3  their  nobles  have  sent  their  little  ones  to 
48.   4  her  little  ones  have  caused  a  cry  to  be  h. 


5.  To  be  little  or  small,  "H#  tsaar. 

Zech  13.  7  will  turn  mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones 
6. Little,  small,  ]$$  qatan. 

Gen.  44.  20  a  child  of  his  old  age,  a  little  one;  and  his 
7. Infant,  heap.  mass.  *|B  taph. 

Gen.  34.  29  all  their  little  ones,  .took  they  captive,  and 
43.    8  that  we  may  live . .  also  our  little  ones 

45.  19  take  you  wagons,  .for  your  little  ones,  and 

46.  5  sons  of  Israel  carried .  .their  little  ones 

47.  24  four  parts  shall  be.  .for  your  little  ones 
50.    8  little  ones.. they  left  in  the  land  of  Goshen 
50.  21 1  will  nourish  you,  and  your  little  ones 

Exodio.  10  as  I  will  let  you  go,  and  your  little  ones 

10.  24  Go  ye.  .let  your  little  ones  also  go  with  you 
.Nunii4.  31  your  little  ones,  which  ye  said  should  be 

31.   9  took  (all)  the  women . .  and  their  little  ones 

31.  17  kill  every  male  among  the  little  ones,  and 

32.  16  We  will  build,  .cities  for  our  little  one3 
32.  17  our  little  ones  shall  dwell  in  the  fenced 
32.24  Build  you  cities  for  your  little  ones,  and 
32.  26  Our  little  ones,  .shall  be  there  in  the 

Deut.  1.  39  your  little  ones,  which  ye  said  should  be 
2.  34  we . .  destroyed . .  the  little  ones,  of  every 
3. 19  your  little  ones,  .shall  abide  in  your  cities 
20. 14  the  little  ones,  .shalt  thou  take  unto  thy. 

29.  11  Your  little  oues,  your  wives,  and  thy  str. 
Josh.  1. 14  your  little  ones,  .shall remain  in  the  land 

8.  35  with  the  women,  and  the  little  ones,  and 
Judg  18.  21  So  they,  .put  the  little  ones,  .before  them 
2  Sa.  15.  22  all  the  little  ones  that  (were)  with  him 
2  Ch.20.  13  Judah  stood  before,  .with  their  little  ones 

31. 18  to  the  genealogy  of  all  then*  little  ones 
Ezra.  8.  21  to  seek.,  a  right  way.  .for  our  little  ones 
Esth.  8. 1 1  to  cause  to  perish . .  little  ones  aud  women 

LITTLE  owl  — 

A  little  owl,  pelican,  01 3  kos. 

Lev.  n.  17  the  little  owl,  and  the  cormorant,  and  the 
Deut  14.  16  The  little  owl,  and  the  great  owl,  and  the 

LITTLE  thing,  very  — 

Lean,  thin,  small,  dwarfish,  p^  daq. 

Isa    40. 15  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing 

LITTLE  while  or  space  — 

X. Little,  small,  tajga  meat. 

Job    24.  24  They  are  exalted  for  a  little  while,  but 
Psa.  37. 10  For  yet  alittle  while,  and  the  wicked  (sh.) 
Hag.   2.    6  a  little  wliile,  and  I  will  shake  the  heav. 

2.Little,  small,  "iysD  mitsar. 

Isa.  63. 18  people.,  have  possessed  (it)  but  a  little  wh. 

%. Short,  small,  @paxvs  brachus  fHpaxv  brachu, 
Luke22.  58  after  a  little  while,  another  saw  him,  and 
Acts    5.  34  and.  .to  put  the  apostlesforth  a  little  space 
i.Small,  little,  fj,tKp6v  mikron. 

John  13.  33  Little  children,  yet  a  little  while  I  am  with 

14.  19  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me 

16.16,  17,  19  A  little  while,  .again,  a  little  while 

16. 18  What  is  tins  that  he  saith,  A  little  while  ? 

LIVE  coal  — 

Burning  coal,  hot  sto?ie,  nB^"i  ritspah. 

Isa.     6.    6  having  a  live  coal  in  his  hand . .  he  had  ta. 
LIVE,  to  — 
\. Living,  alive,  *rj  chai. 

Gen.    9.    3  Everymoving  thing  thatliveth  shall  hem. 

25.   6  while  he  yet  lived,  eastward,  unto  the  east 

45.    3  I  (am)  Joseph :  doth  my  father  yet  live  ? 

Lev.  25.  35  or  a  sojourner;  that  he  may  live  with  thee 

25.  36  God  ;  that  thy  brother  may  live  with  thee 

Numi4,  21  I  live,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the 

14.  28  I  live,  saith  the  LORD,  as  ye  have  spoken 

Deut.  4.  10  to  fear  me  all  thedaysthat  they  shall  live 

12.    1  do.  .all  the  days  that  ye  live  upon  the  ea. 

30.  6  and  with  all  thy  soul,  that  thou  mayestl. 
31. 13  as  long  as  ye  live  in  the  land  whither  ye 
32.  40  I  lift  up  my  hand .  .and  say,  I  live  for  ever 

Judg  8. 10  Lord  liveth,  if  ye  had  saved  them  alive,  I 
Ruth  3.  13  Lord  liveth :  lie  down  till  the  morning 

1  Sa.    1.  26  thy  soul  liveth,  my  lord,  I(am)the  woman 

14.  39  Lord  liveth,  which  saveth  Israel,  though 
14.  45  Lord  liveth,  there  shall  not  one  hair  of 
17.  55  (As)  thy  soul  liveth,  0  king,  I  cannot  tell 

19.  6  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  he  shall  not  be  slain 

20.  3  Lord  liveth,  and.  .thy  soul  liveth.  .but  a 
20.  14  thou  shalt  not  only  while  yet  1  live  show 
20.  21  peace  to  thee,  and  no  hurt,  (as)  the  LordI. 
25.  6  And  thus  shall  ye  say  to  him  that  liveth  (i. 
25.  26  LORD  liveth,  and . .  thy  soul  liveth,  seeing 
25.  34  LORD  God  of  Israel  liveth,  which  hath  k. 
26  10  Lord  liveth,  the  Lord  shall  smite  him 
26. 16  Lord  liveth,  ye  (are)  worthy  to  die,  beca. 

28.  10  Lord  liveth,  there  shall  no  punishment 

29.  6  LORD  liveth,  thou  hast  been  upright,  and 

2  Sa.  2.  27  God  liveth,  unless  thou  hadst  spoken,  sure. 

4.    9  Lord  liveth,  who  hath  redeemed  my  soul 

11.  11  thou  livest,  and.  .thy  soul  liveth,  I  will 

12.  5  Lord  liveth,  the  man  that  hath  done  this 
12.  22  be  gracious  tome,  that  the  child  may  live? 
14.  11  Lord  liveth,  there  shall  not  onehairofthy 

14.  igthysoul  liveth,  my  lord  the  king,  none  can 

15.  21  Lord  liveth,  and.  .my  lord  the  king  liveth 
19.  6  if  Absalom  hail  lived,  and  all  we  had  died 
19.  34  How  long  have  I  to  live,  that  I  should  go 
22. 47  Lord  liveth;  and  blessed  (be)  my  rock;  and 

1  Ki.  1.  29  Lord  liveth,  that  hath  redeemed  my  soul 

2.  24  Lord  liveth,  which  hath  established  me 

3.  23  The  one  saith,  This  (is)  my  son  that  liveth 
8.  40  may  fear  thee  all  the  days  that  they  live 


LIVE 


i  Ki.12.    6  Solomon  his  father  while  he  yet  lived,  and 
17.    1  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth,  before  whom 

17. 12  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  I  have.not  a  cake 

17,  23  Elijah  took. .and.  .said,  See,  thyson-liveth 

18.  10  Lord  thy  God  liveth,  there  is  no  nation 
iS.  15  LORDof  hosts  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand 
22. 14  Lord  liveth,  what  the  Lord  saith  unto  me 

2  Ki.  2.   2,  4,  6  Lord  liveth,  and  (as)  thy  soul  liveth 
3. 14  Lord  of  hosts  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand 

4.  30  Lord  liveth,  and  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  I 

5.  16  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  I  will 
5.  20  Lord  liveth,  I  will  run  after  him,  and 

2  Ch.  6.  31  so  long  as  they  live  in  the  land  which 
10.  6  Solomon  his  father  while  he  yet  lived 

18. 13  Lord  liveth,  even  what  my  God  saith,  that 
Job   19.  25  Fori  know,  .my  redeemer  liveth,  and.  .he 

27.    2  God  liveth,  (who)  hath  taken  away  my  j. 

Psa.  18.  46  Lord  liveth  ;  and  blessed  (be)  my  rock 

49.  18  Though  while  he  lived  he  blessed  his  soul 

6^.    4  Thus  willl  bless  thee  while  I  live  :  I  will 

104.  33  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  as  long  as  I  live 

146.    2  While  I  live  willl  praisetheLoRD;  I  will 

Eccl.  9.   3  madness  (is)  in  their  heart  while  they  live 

9.    9  Live  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lo. 

Isa.  49. 18  live,  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  surely  cl. 

Jer.    4.    2  Lord  liveth,  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  in 

5.   2  The  Lord  liveth;  surely  they  swear  falsely 

12. 16  The  Lord  liveth  ;  as  they  taught  mypeo. 

16.  14,  15  The  Lord  liveth,  that  brought  up  the 

22.  24  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  though  Coniah  the 

23.  7,  8  The  Lord  liveth,  which  brought  up  the 
38.  16  Lord  liveth,  that  made  us  this  soul,  I  will 
44.  26  be  named,  .saying,  The  Lord  God  liveth 

46. 18  I  live,  saith  the  king,  whose  name  (is)  The 
Eze.    5. 11  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God 

[So  in  14. 16, 18,  20;  16.  48;  17.  16,  19;  18.  3;  20.  3,  31; 
33.  11;  34.  8;  35.  6,  ir.] 

Eze.  33.  27  I  live,  surely  they  that  (are)  in  the  wastes 
47.    9  And . .  every  thing  that  liveth,  which  mo. 
Dan.   4.  34  I  praised  and  honoured  him  that  liveth 
12.    7  and  swarebyhim  that  liveth  for  ever,  that 
Hos.    4. 15  neithergoye.  .norswear,  The  LORD  liveth 
Amos  8.  14  They  that  swear,  -say,  Thy  God,  ODan,  1. 
8.  14  and, The  manner  of  Beer-sheba  liveth;  even 
Jon.    4.    3,  8  for.  .better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live 
Zeph.  2.   9  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God 
2.To  live,  be  alive,  -Trt  chayah. 

Gen.  5.  3  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years 
5.  6  Seth  lived  an  hundred  and  five  years,  and 
5.  7  Seth  lived  after  he  begat  Enos  eight  hu. 
5.  9  Enos  lived  ninety  years,  and  begat  Cainan 
5. 10  Enos  lived  after  he  begat  Cainan  eight  h. 

5. 12  Cainan  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  51. 

5. 13  Cainan  lived  after  he  begat  Mahalaleel  e. 

5. 15  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and 

5. 16  Mahalaleel  lived  after  he  begat  Jared  eight 

5. 18  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two  ye. 

5. 19  Jared  lived  after  he  begat  Enoch  eight  h. 
5. 21  Enoch  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  be. 
5.  25  Methuselah  lived  an  hundred  eight  and 
5.  26  Methuselah  lived  after  he  begat  Lamech 
5.  28  Lamech  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two 
5.  30  Lamech  lived  after  he  begat  Noah  five  h. 
9. 28  Noah  lived  after  the  flood  three  hundred 

11. 11  Shem  lived  after  he  begat  Arphaxad  five 
11.  13  Arphaxad  lived  after  he  begat  Salah  four 

11. 15  Salah  lived  after  he  begat  Eberfour  hun. 

11. 16  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  be. 

11. 17  Eber  lived  after  he  begat  Peleg  four  hun. 
11.  18  And  Peleg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begatR. 

11. 19  Peleg  lived  after  he  begat  Reu  two  hund. 
11.  20  Reu  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and  begat 

11. 21  Reu  lived  after  he  begat  Serug  two  hund. 

11. 22  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Nahor 
11.  23  Serug  lived  after  he  begat  Nahor  two  hu. 
11.  24  Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and 
11. 25  Nahor  lived  after  he  begat  Terahanhun. 

11.  26  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Ab. 

12.  13  sister,  .and  my  soul  shall  live  because  of 

17. 18  0  that  Ishmael  might  live  before  thee ! 

19.  20  Oh,  let  me  escape . .  and  my  soul  shall  live 

20.  7  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  live 
27.  40  by  thy  sword  shalt  thou  live,  and  shalt 
31.  32  whomsoever  thou  findest..  let  himnot  live 

42.  2  get  you  down . .  that  we  may  live,  and  not 

42. 18  Joseph  said..  This  do,  and  live..  I  fear  God 

43.  8  that  we  may  live,  and  not  die,  both  we 
47.  19  give  (us)  seed,  that  we  may  live,  and  not 
47.  28  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen 
50.  22  and  Joseph  lived  an  hundred  and  ten  ye. 

Exodig.  13  whether,  .beast  or  man,  it  shall  not  live 

Num.  4.  19  that  they  may  live,  and  not  die,  when  they 

14.  38  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb.  .lived 

24.  23  Alas,  who  shall  live  when  God  doeth  this? 

Deut  4.    1  that  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and  possess 

4,  33  Did  (ever)peoplehearthevoiee.  .and live? 
5. 26  who.  .hath  heard  the  voice,  .and  lived? 

5.  33  Ye  shall  walk . .  that  ye  may  live,  and  (that) 
8.    1  shall  ye  observe  to  do,  that  ye  may  live 

8.  3  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only,  but  by 
8.  3  by  every  (word).,  of  the  Lord  doth  man  I. 
16.  20  that  thou  mayest  live,  and  inherit  the  land 
30. 16  love'. .  that  thou  mayest  live  and  multiply 

30. 19  that  both  thou  and  thy  seed  may  live 

33.    6  Let  Reuben  live,  and  not  die ;  and  let  (not) 

Josh.  6. 17  only  Rahab  the  harlot  shall  live,  she  and 

9. 21  Let  them  live  ;  but  let  them  be  hewers  of 

2  Sa.    1. 10  I  was  sure  that  he  could  not  live  after  lie 

1  Ki.  1.  31  Let  my  lord  king  David  live  for  ever 

20.  32  Benhadad  saith,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  live 

2  Ki.  4.    7  live  thou  and  thy  children  of  the  rest 


611 


2  Ki.  7.    4  if  they  save  us  alive,  we  shall  live ;  and 

10.  19  whosoever  shall  be  wanting,  .shall  not  1. 
14. 17  Amaziah.  .lived  after  the  death  of  Jeho. 
18.  32  that  ye  may  live,  and  not  die  :  and  hear. 

20.  1  in  order  ;  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live 
2  Ch.25.  25  Amaziah.  .lived  after  the  death  of  Joash 
Neb.   2.    3  Let  the  king  live  for  ever:  why  should 

5.  2  wo  take  up  corn .  .that  we  may  eat,  and  1. 
9.  29  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shaH  live  in  them 

Esth.  4.  1 1  out  the  golden  sceptre,  that  he  may  live 
Job     7.  16  I  loathe  (it);  I  would  not  live  alway  :  let 

14.  14  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  (again)?  All  the 

21.  7  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live,  becomeold 
42.  16  After  this  lived  Job  an  hundred  and  forty 

Psa.  22.  26  seek  him  :  your  heart  shall  live  for  ever 
49.   9  he  should  still  live  for  ever,  (and)  not  see 
69.  32  and  your  heart  shall  five  that  seek  God 

72. 15  he  shall  live,  and  to  him  shall  be  given 
89.48  What  man.. liveth,  and  shall  not  see  de. 

118.  17  I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the 
119. 17  Deal  bountifully,  .(that)  I  may  live,  and 

119.  77  Let  thy  tender  mercies,  .that  I  may  live 
119. 316  Uphold,  .unto  thy  word,  that  Imay  live 
119. 144  give  me  understanding,  and  I  shall  live 
119. 175  Let  my  soul  live,  andit  shall  praise  thee 

Prov.  4.  ^  said,  .keep  my  commandments,  and  live 
7.  2  Keep  my  commandments,  and  live  ;  and 
9.    6  Forsake  the  foolish,  and  live ;  and  go  in 

15.  27  but  he  that  hateth  gifts  shall  live 
Eccl.  6.    3  If  a  man.  .live  many  years,  so  that  the  d. 

6.  6  Yea,  though  he  live  a  thousand  years 

11.  8  if  a  :nan  live  many  years,  (and)  rejoice 
Isa.   26.  14  (They  are)  dead,  they  shall  not  live ;  (they) 

26. 19  Thy  dead  (men)shall  live,  (together  with) 
38.    1  in  order ;  for  thou  shalt  die.  and  not  live 

38. 16  by  these  (things  men)  live,  and  in  all  these 
55.    3  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live ;  and  I 

Jer.  21.    9  he  shall  live,  and  his  life  shall  be  unto 
27. 12  and  serve  him  and  his  people,  and  live 

27. 17  serve  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  live :  wh. 
35.  7  ye  may  live  many  days  in  the  land  where 
38.  2  he  thatgoeth.  .to  the  Chaldeans  shall  live 
38. 17  thy  soul  shall  live,  and  this  city  shall 
38.  17  go.  .and  thou  shalt  live,  and  thin"  house 
38.  20  be  well  unto  thee,  and  thy  soul  ^nall  live 

Lam.  4.  20  Under  his  shadow  we  shall  live  among 
Eze.    3.  21  he  shall  surely  live.,  because  heis  warned 
13. 19  save  the  souls  alive  that  should  not  live 

16.  6,61  said  unto  thee.. in  thy  blood,  Live 
18.   9  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the  Lord  God 
18.  13  he  shall  not  live  :  he 
18. 17  he  shall  not  die.  .he  shall  surely  live 
18. 19  and  hath  done  them,  he  shall  surely  live 
18.  21  But.  .he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die 
18.  22  in  his  righteousness,  .done  he  shall  live 
18.  23  he  should  return  from  his  ways,  and  live 
18.  28  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die 
18.  32  no  pleasure . .  wherefore  turn . .  and  live  ye 
20. 25  judgments  whereby  they  should  not  live 

33. 10  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we.  .live? 

33. 11  the  wicked  turn  from  Ins  way  and  live 

33. 12  neither  shall  the  righteous  be  able  to  live 

33. 13  When  I  shall  say.,  he  shall  surely  live  ;  if 

33. 15  walk ..  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die 

33. 16  he  hath  done  that,  .he  shall  surely  live 
33. 19  if  the  wicked  turn,  .he  shall  live  thereby 
37.  3  Son  of  man,  can  these  bones  live  ?  And  I 
37.  5  I  will  cause  breath,  .and  ye  shall  live 
37.  6  put  breath  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live  ;  and 
37.  9  breathe  upon  these  slain,  .they  may  live 
37. 10  the  breath  came  into  them,  and  they  lived 

37. 14  put  my  Spirit  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live 
47.  9  whithersoever  the  rivers . .  come,  shall  live 

Hos.   6.   2  he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in 
Amos  5.    4  the  Lord.  .Seek  ye  me,  and  ye  shall  live 
5.   6  Seek  the  Lord,  and  ye  shall  live ;  lest  he 
5. 14  Seek  good,  and  •    t  evil,  that  ye  may  live 
Hab.   2.   4  but  the  just  sh  II  live  by  his  faith 
Zech.  1.    5  and  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever  ? 
10.   9  they  shall  live  with  their  children,  and 
13.  3  Thou  shalt  not  live  ;  for  thou  speakest  lies 

S.To  live,  tf.'D,  n;n  cliayah,  chaya. 

Dan.    2.    4  0  king,  live  for  ever:  tell  thy  servants  the 
3.    9  They  spake  and  said . .  O  king,  five  for  e. 

5.  10  O  king,  live  for  ever,  let  not  thy  thoughts 

6.  6  said  thus,  .king  Darius,  live  for  ever 

6.  21  Then  said  Daniel.  .0  king,  live  for  ever 

4.  To  live,  y3}  chayai. 

Gen.   3. 22  take  also  of  the  tree,  .and  live  for  ever 
5.    5  all  the  days  that  Adam  lived  were  nine 
11. 12  Arphaxad  lived  five  and  thirty  years,  and 
11. 14  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Eber 
25.    7  the  years  of  Abraham's.lif e  which  he  lived 
Exod.  1. 16  if  it  (be)  a  daughter,  then  she  shall  live 
33.  20  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me,  and  live 
Lev.  18.   5  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  five  in  them 
Nuni2i.   8  when  he  looketh  upon  it,  shall  live 

21.   9  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived 
Deut.  4.  42  fleeing  unto  one  of  these  cities  he  might  1. 
5.  24  that  God  doth  talk  with  man,  and  he  liv. 
19.   4  which  shall  flee  thither,  that  he  may  live 

19.  s  shall  flee  unto  one  of  those  cities,  and  live 
1  Sa.  20.  31  as  long  as  the  son  ef  Jesse  liveth  upon 
Jer.   38.    2  shall  have  his  life  for  a  prey,  and  shall  live 
Eze.  18.  13  hath  taken  increase  :  shall  he  then  live? 

18.  24  that  the  wicked  (man) doeth,  shall  he  live? 

20.  11,  13,  21  which  (if)  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  I. 
47.   9  every  thing  shall  live  whither  the  river 

b.  To  turn,  conduct  self,  ava<TTp€<pofj,aia7iastrepho7nai 
Heb.  13. 18  trust,  .in  all  things  willing  to  live  honestly 


LIVE 

2  Pe.  2. 18  clem  escaped  from  them  who  live  in  error 
Q.To  live,  (3i6a>  Mod. 

1  Pe.  4.   2  That  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of 

7.  To  eat,  consume,  devour,  iffdia  esth  id. 

1  Co.  9.  13  they  which  minister  about  holy  things  I. 

S.To  live,  have  life,  £deo  zao. 

Matt.  4.   4  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by 

9.  18  lay  thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she  shall  live 
Mark  5.  23  lay  thy  hands  on  her.  .and  she  shall  live 
Luke  2.  36  she  was  of  a  great  age,  and  had  lived  with 

4.   4  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by 

10.  28  answered  right :  this  do,  and  thou  shalt  1. 
20.  38  a  God.  .of  the  living  :  for  all  live  unto  him 

John  4.  50  Go  thy  way  ;  thy  son  liveth.  And  the  man 
4.  51  servants.. toldfhim),  saying,  Thy  son  liveth. 

4.  53  which  Jesus  said  unto  him  Thy  son  liveth 

5.  25  shall  hear,  .and  they  that  hear  shall  live 

6.  51  If  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live 
6.  57  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the  F. 
6.  57  he  that  eateth  me.  .he  shall  live  by  me 
6.  58  he  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for 

11.  25  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live 
11.  26  whosoever  liveth  and  belie veth  in  me  sh. 
14. 19  ye  see  me  :  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live 

Acts  17.  28  For  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have 
22.  22  Away,  .for  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live 

25.  24  crying  that  he  ought  not  to  live  any  longer 

26.  5  after  the  most  straitest  sect.  .1  lived  a  P. 
28.    4  whom,  .yet  vengeance  suft'ereth  "not  to  1. 

Rom.  1.  17  it  is  written,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 
6.    2  How  shall  we.  .live  any  longer  therein? 

6.  10  but  in  that  he  liveth,  lie  liveth  unto  God 

7.  1  dominion  over,  a  man  as  long  as  he  liveth 
7.    2  bound . .  to  (her)  husband  so  long  as  he  liv. 

7.  3  if,  while  (her)  husband  liveth,  she  be  ma. 

8.  12  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live  after  the  flesh 

8.  13  For  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die 
8.  13  but  if  ye.  .mortify  the  deeds!  .ye  shall  1. 
10.  5  man  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live 
14.  7  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man 
14.  8  whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord 
14.   8  whether  we  live  therefore,  or  die,  we  are 

14.  11I  five,  saith  the  Lord,  every  knee  shall  h. 

1  Co.  7.  39  by  the  law  as  long  as  her  husband  liveth 

9. 14  they  which  preach  the  Gospel  should  live 

2  Co.   4.  11  we  which  live  are  alway  delivered  unto 

5.  15  they  which  live  should  not  henceforth  1. 

6.  9  as  dying,  and,  behold,  we  live;  as  chast. 
13.  4  crucified,  .yet  he  liveth  by  the  power  of 
13.   4  but  we  shall  live  with  him  by  the  power 

Gal.    2. 14  If  thou,  being  a  Jew,  livest  after  the  ma. 

2. 19  I.  .am  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  live 

2.  20  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me 

2. 20  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by 

3.  11  evident :  for,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 
3. 12  The  man  that  doeth  them  shall  live  in 

5.  23  If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk 
Phil.  1. 21  For  to  me  to  live  (is)  Christ,  andtodie(is) 

1.  22  if  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  (is)  the  fruit  of 
Col.  3.  7  ye  also  walked  sometime,  when  ye  lived 
1  Th.  3.    8  For  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  L. 

5.  10  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  five 

1  Ti.  5.    6  But  she.  .in  pleasure  is  dead  while  shel. 

2  Ti.    3.  12  Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
Titus  2. 12  we  should  five  soberly,  righteously,  and 
Heb.   7.   8  he . .  of  whom  it  is  witnessed  that  he  liveth 

7.  25  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
9. 17  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  testator  li. 

10.  38  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith  :  but  if 

12.  9  much  rather  be  in  subjection . .  and  live  ? 
Jas.  4.  15  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do  this 
i  Pe.   1.  23  by  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  ab. 

2.  24  that  we,  bemg  dead  to  sins,  should  live 

4.  6  but  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit 

1  Jo.   4.    9  God  sent.,  that  we  might  live  through  him 
Rev.    1.  iS  (I  am)  he  that  liveth,  and  was  dead  ;  and 

3.  1  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest 

4.  9  to  him  that  sat  on  the  throne,  who  liveth 
4.  10  worship  him  that  liveth  forever  and  ever 
5. 14  worshipped  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  e. 

10.   6  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever 

13.  14  had  the  wound  by  a  sword,  and  did  live 

15.  7  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God,  who  liveth 
20.   4  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ?  a  tho. 

Q.To  preserve  life,  faoyoveta  zdogoneo. 

Acts    7. 19  cast  out.  .to  the  end  they  might  not  live 
10. To  be  a  citizen,  troXiTevofiat  2Joliteuomai. 

Acts  23.   1 1  have  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before 

11.7b  begin  to  be,  virdpxw  hiqxtrcho. 

Luke  7.  25  apparelled,  and  live  delicately,  are  in  ku 
[See  also  Jews,  peace,  pleasure,  ungodly.] 

LTVE  again,  to  — 

To  live  again,  ava^dw  anazao. 

Rev.20.   5  rest  of  the  dead  [lived  not  again]  until  the 
LIVE  deliciously,  to  — 
To  be  luxuriant,  crp^vidu}  streniao. 

Rev.  18.   7  she  hath  glorified  herself,  and  lived  deli. 
18.   9  And  the  kings,  .lived  deliciously  with  her 

LIVE  long,  to  — 

To  be  long  timed,  long  lived,  el  fit  fiaKpoxpdvtos. 

Eph.   6.    3  and  thou  mayest  five  long  on  the  earth 
LIVE  peaceably,  or  in  peace,  to — 
To  be  peaceable,  elpTji/edo*  eireneuo. 

Rom. 12. 18  If  it  be  possible,  .live  peaceably  with  all 

2  Co.  13. 11  be  of  one  mind,  live  in  peace  ;  and  theGi 


LIVE 


LIVE  with,  to  — 

To  live  with,  av£du>  suzao. 

Rom.  6.  8  we  believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him 
2  Co  7.  3  ye  are  in  our  hearts  to  die  and  live  with 
2  Ti.    2.  ii  if  we  he  dead  with.,  we  shall  also  live  with 

LIVE,  to  let,  or  suffer,  or  make  to  — 

1.  To  live,  keep  living  or  alive,  revive,  n;n  chayah,  3. 
Exod22.  18  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to  live 
Josh.' 9.  15  made  a  league  with  them,  to  let  them  live 

2.  To  cause  to  live,  let  live,  n;ri  chayah,  5. 

Josh.  9.  20  we  will  even  let  them  live,  lest  wrath  he 
Isa.  38.  16  so  wilt  thou  recover  me . .  make  me  to  live 

LIVE,  LIVELY,  LIVING  (thing)'  — 

1.  Living,  alive,  lively,  'n  chai. 

Gen.    1.  21  God  created . .  every  living  creature  that 

1.  28  have  dominion .  .over  every  living  thing 

2.  7  breathed . .  and  man  became  a  living  soul 

3.  20  because  she  was  the  mother  of  all  living 
6. 19  of  every  liring  thing  of  all  flesh,  two  of 
8.    1  God  remembered  Noah,  and  every  living 

8.  17  Bring  forth  with  thee  every  liviug  thing 
8. 21  smite  any  more  every  thing  living,  as  I 

9.  10  with  every  living  creature  that  (is)  with 
9. 12, 15  between  me  and  you  and  every  liviug 

9.  16  between  God  and  every  living  creature  of 
Exod2i.  35  they  shall  sell  the  live  ox,  and  divide  the 
Lev.  11.  10  any  living  thing  which  (is)in  the  waters 

11.  46  This  (is)  the  law  of.. every  livingcreature 
i4.   6  As  for  the  living  bird,  he  shall  take  it 
14.   6  shall  dip .  .the  living  bird  in  the  blood 
14.    7  shall  let  the  living  bird  loose  into  the  open 
14.  51  he  shall  take,  .the  liviug  bird,  and  dip 
14.  52  with  the  living  bird,  and  with  the  cedar 
14.  53  he  shall  let  go  the  living  bird  ®ut  of  the 
16.  20  he  shall  bring  the  live  goat 
16.  21  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat 
Num  16.  48  he  stood  between  the  deftd  and  the  living 
Deut.  5.  26  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  living  God 
Josh.  3.  10  ye  shall  know  that  the  living  God(is)  am. 
Ruth  2.  20  not  left  off  his  kindness  to  the  living  and 
1  Sa.  17.  26,  36  should  defy  the  armies  of  the  living  G? 

1  Ki.  3.  22  Nay;  but  the  living  (is)  my  son,  and  the  d. 

3.  22  dead  (is)  thy'son,  and  the  living  (is)  my  son 
3.  23  thy  son  (is)  the  dead,  .my  son  (is)  the  liv. 
3.  25  Divide  the  living  child  in  two,  and  give 
3, 26  the  woman  whose  the  living  child  (was) 

3.  26,  27  give  her  theliving  child,  and  in  no  w. 

2  Ki.19.  4, 16  hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living  God 
Job    12.  10  In  whose  baud  (is)  the  soul  of  every  living 

28.  13  neither  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  liv. 
28.  21  Seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyesofrall  living 
30.  23  and  (to)  the  house  appointed  for  all  living 
33.  30  enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  living 
Psa.  27. 13  see  thegoodness.  .in  the  land  of  theliving 
38.  19  But  mine  enemies  (are) lively,  .they are 
42.    2  My  soul  thirsteth.  .for  the  living  God 

52.  5  androotthee  out  of  the  land  of  the  living 
56.  13  that  I  may  walk.,  in  the  light  of  theliving 
58.    9  he  shall  take  them  away . .  both  living 

69.  28  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  the  living 
84.   2  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God 
116.  9  before  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living 

142.  5  (and)  my  portion  in  the  land  of  the  living 

143.  2  for  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  livimrbejust. 
145.  16  and  satisfiestthe  desire  of  every  livingth. 

Eccl.  4.  2  I  praised  the  dead,  .more  than  the  living 
4. 15  I  considered  all  the  living  which  walk 

6.  8  poor,  that  knoweth  to  walk  before  the  li. 

7.  2  men  ;  and  the  living  will  lay  (it)  to  his  he. 
9.  4  to  him  that  is  joined  to  all  the  living  there 
9.  4  for  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion 
9.  5  the  living  know  that  they  shall  die :  but 

Song  4.  15  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from 
Isa.     4.    3  every  one . .  written  among  the  living  in  J . 

8.  19  people  seek  unto  their  God?  for  the  living 

37.  4,  17  hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living  God 

38.  11  see  the  Lotcb.  .in  the  land  of  the  living 
38. 19  The  living,  the  living,  he  shall  praise  thee 

53.  8  he  was  cut  off  out  of  theland  of  the  living 
Jer.     2.  13  forsaken  me,  the  fountain  of  living  waters 

10.  10  he  (is)  the  living  God,  and  an  everlasting 

11.  19  let  us  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  li. 
17. 13  forsaken  the  Lord,  the  fountain  of  living 
23.  36  have  perverted  the  words  of  the  living  G. 

Lam.  3.  39  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a 

Eze.  26.  20  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living 

32.  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  32  in  the  land  of  the  living 

Dan.    2.  30  wisdom  that  Ihave  more  than  any  living 

4.  17  that  the  living  may  know  that  the  most 
6.  20  O  Daniel,  servant  of  the  living  God,  is  thy 
6.  26  he  (is)  the  living  God,  and stedfast  forever 

Hos.  1.  10  be  said.  .(Ye  are)  the  sons  of  the  living  G. 
Zech.  14.    8  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem 

2.  Life,  lively,  -"m  chayeh, 

Exod.  1.  19  they  (are)  lively,  and  arc  delivered  ere  the 

Z.Life,  nvo  chayyuth. 

2  Sa.  20.    3  So  they  were  shut  up,  .living  in  widowh. 

4. Means  of  life,  (3los  bios, 

Marki2.44  did  cast  in  all  that  she  had.,  all  her  living 

Luke  8.  43  had  spent  all  her  living  upon  physicians 

15. 12  give.  .And  he  divided  unto  them  (his)  liv. 

15-  30  which  hath  devoured  thy  living  with  bar. 

21.   4  she.  .hath  cast  in  all  the  living  that  she 

5.  To  lead  or  go  through,  Bidyai  diago, 

Titus   3.    3  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful . .  hating 


612 


G.  To  live,  (dw  zao. 

Matt  16.  16  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 

22.  32  not  the  God  of  thedead,but  of  the  living 

26.  63  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou 

Marki2.  27  not  theGod  of  the  dead,  but. .of  the  living 

Lukeis.  13  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  living 

20.  38  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living 

24.   5  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead  ? 

John  4.  10  and  he  would  have  given  thee  living  water 

4.  11  whence  then  hast  thou  that  living  water? 

6.  51  I  am  the  living  bread  which  came  down 

6.  57  As  the  liviug  father  hath  sent  me,  and  I 

6.  69  thou  art  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 

7.  38  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 
Acts    7.  38  received  the  lively  oracles  to  give  unto  us 

14.  15  that  ye  should  turn,  .unto  theliving  God 
Rom.  9.  26  they  be  called  the  children  of  the  living  G. 
12.    1  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice 
14.   9  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living 

1  Co.  15.  45  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  s. 

2  Co.   3.    3  written . .  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God 

6.  16  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  liviug  God  ;  as 
Col.    2.  20  why,  as  though  living  in  the  world,  are 
1  Th.  1.    9  how  ye  turned,  .to  serve  the  living  and 
1  Ti.    3.  15  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  God,  the 

4.  10  because  we  trust  in  the  living  God,  who  is 

6.  17  in  [the  living]  God,  who  givethus  richly 
Heb.   3.  12  unbelief,  in  departing  from  the  living  G 

9.  14  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God 
10.  20  By  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he  hath 
10.  31  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God 
12.  22  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  J. 
1  Pe.  1.  3  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope 
2.  4  To  whom  coming,  (as  unto)  a  living  stone 
2.  5  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  sp. 
Rev.    7.    2  angel,  .having  the  seal  of  the  living  God 

7.  17  shall  lead  them  unto  [living]  fountains  of 
16.    3  blood .  .and  every  [living]  soul  died  in  the 

LIVER  — 

Liver,  *U3  kabed. 

Exod2g!  13,  22  the  caul,  .above  the  liver,  and  the  two 

Lev.    3.  4,  10, 15  caul  above  the  liver,  with  the  kid. 

4.    9  the  caul  above  the  liver,  with  the  kidneys 

7.    4  the  caul,  .above  the  liver,  with  the  kidn. 

8. 16,  25  caul  (above)  the  liver,  and  the  two  ki. 

9.  10,  to  the  kidneys,  and  the  caul  (above)  the 
Prov.  7.  23  Till  a  dart  strike  through  his  liver;  as  a 
Lam.  2.  11  my  liver  is  poured  upon  the  earth,  for  the 
Eze.  21.  21  the  king  of  Babylon,  .looked  in  the  liver 

LIVING  creature  — 

l.A  living  being,  'D  chai. 

Eze,  1.  5  Also. .  the  likenessof  four  living  creatures 
1, 13  As  for  the  likeness  of  the  living  creatures 
1.  13  it  went  up  and  down  among  the  living  c. 
1.  14  the  living  creatures  ran  and  returned  as 
1. 15  Now  asl  beheld  the  living  creatures,  be. 

1. 15  one  wheel  upon  the  earth  by  the  living  c. 
1. 19  when  the  living  creatures  went,  the  whe. 
1.  19  when  the  living  creatures  were  lifted  up 
1.  20j  21  for  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature 

1. 22  upon  the  heads  of.  .living  creature  (was) 
3. 13  also  the  noise  of  the  wings  of  the  living  c. 

10,  15,  20  This  (is)  the  living  creature  that  I  saw 
10. 17  for  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature . .  in 

2.  A  breathing  living  being,  n;n  v$i  nepheshchayyah, 

Geu.    1.  21  and  every  living  creature  that  moveth 

1.  24  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  crea. 

2.  19  wliatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  ere. 
[See  also  9.  10,  12,  15,  16  ;  Lev.  11.  46.] 

LIVING  substance  — 

Lilting  substance,  mp)  yequm. 

Gen.  7.  4  every  living  substance  that  I  have  made 
7.  23  every  living  substance  was  destroyed  wh. 

LIZARD  — 

A  lizard,  nNp?  letaah. 

Lev.  11.  30  and  the  lizard,  and  the  snail,  and  the  m. 

LO  — 

l.Lo,  see,  via  aru. 

Dan.  7.   6  After  this  i  beheld .  .lo  another,  like  a  1. 

2.Lo,  ha  I  ttn  ha. 

Dan.  3. 25  He  answered  and  said,  Lo,  I  see  four  men 

3.  Lo,  he  I  nn  lie. 

Gen.  47.  23  lo.  .seed  for  you,  and  ye  shall  sow  the  1. 
4.Lo,  see,  behold,  ]r\  hen. 

Gen.  29.  7  Lo.  .yet  high  day,  neither,  .time  that  the 
Exod.  8.  26  lo,  shall  we  sacrifice  the  abomination  of 

5.Z/0,  see,  behold,  run  hinneh. 

Gen.  42.  28  My  money  is  restored  ;  and,  lo.  .even  in 
50.    5  My  father  made  me  swear,  saying,  Lo,  I 

6.  To  see,  nipT  raah. 

1  Ch.21.23  1°»  I  give.. the  oxen .. for  burnt  offerings 
Eccl.  7.  29  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath 
Eze.    4. 15  Lo,  I  have  given  thee  cow's  dung  for  ma. 

7.  See,  behold,  V5e  ide.  . 

Matt.  25.  25  and  hid  thy  talent,  .lo.  .thou  hast,  .thine 

John  7.  26  lo,  he  speaketh  boldly,  and  they  say  not. 

16. 29  Lo,  now  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speak. 

8.  See,  behold,  IB06  idou. 

Matt.  2.   9  lo,  the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the  east 

3. 16  lo,  the  heavens  were  opened  unto  him 

3. 17  lo  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  This  is  my 
24.  23  Lo,  here  (is)  Christ,  or  there ;  believe  (it) 
26.  47  lo,  Judas,  one  of  tUe  twelve,  came,  and 


LOCK 

Matt23.    7  there  shall  ye  see  him  :  lo,  I  have  told 

28.  20  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway.  .unto  the  end 

Markio.  28  Lo,  we  have  left  all,  and  have  followed 

13.  21  [Lo,]  here  (is)  Christ ;  or,  [lo,]  (he  is)  there 

14.  42  let  us  go  ;  lo,  he  that  betrayeth  me  is  at 
Luke  1.  44  lo,  as  soon  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation 

2.   9  lo,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them 
9.  39  lo,  a  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he  suddenly 

13.  16  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen  ye. 

15.  29  Lo,  these  many  years  do  I  serve  thee,  ne. 
77.  21  Neither  shall  they  say,  Lo  here  !  or,  [lo] 
18.  28  said,  Lo,  we  have  left  all,  and  followed 
23-  15  lo,  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  unto 

Acts  13.  46  ye  put.it  from  you.  .lo,  we  turn  to  the  G. 

27.  24  lo,  God  hath  given  thee  all  them  that  sail 

Heb.  10.    7  said  I,  Lo,  I  come,  .to  do  thywill,  OGod 

10.  9  Then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will 
Rev.    5.    6  [lo,]  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the 

6.    5  lo  a  black  horse  :  and  he  that  sat  on  him 

6.  12  [lo,]  there  was  a  great  earthquake  ;.and 

7.  9  [lo,]  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man 

14.  1  lo,  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Sion,  and 
LO  AM-'MI,  'sy  N7  not  my  people. 

A  symbolic  name  given  by  Hosea  to  his  son.    B.C.  765. 
Hos.    1.    9  Then  said  (God),  Call  his  name  L. :  for  ye 
[In  v.  g,  10 ;  2.  23  the  name  is  translated.] 

LO  DE'-BAR,  -ni  S1?  or  tib  with  pasture. 
A  city  in  Manasseh  beyond  Jordan  in  Gilead,  near 
Mahanaim.     Here  Mephibosheth  resided  with  Machir 
the  Ammonite. 

2  S*.    9.   4  house  of  Machir,  the  son  of  Ammiel,  in  L. 
g.    5  of  Machir,  the  son  of  Ammiel,  from  L. 
17.  27  the  son  of  Ammiel  of  L„  and  Barziliai 
LOAD,  to — {See  also  Lade.) 
l.To  lay  on,  load,  ddj;  amas. 

Psa.  68.  19  Blessed  "(be)  the  Lord,  (who)  daily  loadeth 

2.To  heap  up,  load,  (rwpevaj  soreuo. 

2  Ti.    3.    6  lead  captrve  silly  women  laden  with  sins 

LOAF  — 

1  Cake,  133  kikkar. 

Exod2g'  23  one  loaf  of  bread,  and  one  cake  of  oiled 
Judg.  8.    5  Give,  I  pray  you,  loaves  of  bread  unto 
1  Sa.  10.   3  another  carrying  three  loaves  of  bread 
1  Ch.16.   3  to  every  one  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  a  good 

2.  Bread,  food,  Dr6  lechem. 

Lev.  23.  17  bring,  .two  wave  loaves  of  two  tenth  de. 
1  Sa.  17.  17  Take. .  these  ten  loaves,  and  run  to  the 
25.  18  Abigail,  .took  two  hundred  loaves,  and 

1  Ki.14.    3  take  with  thee  ten  loaves,  and  cracknels 

2  Ki.  4.  42  twenty  loaves  of  barley,  and  full  ears  of 

3. Bread,  a  loaf,  apr6s  artos. 

Matt  14.  17  We  have  here  but  five  loaves,  and  two  fi. 

14.  19  took  the  five  loaves . .  and  gave  the  loaves 

15.  34  How  many  loaves  have  ye?  And  they  said 

15.  36  he  took  the  seven  loaves  and  the  fishes,  and 

16.  9  neither  remember  the  five  loaves  of  the 
16.  10  Neither  the  seven  loaves  of  the  four  tho. 

Mark  6.  38  saith . .  How  many  loaves  have  ye?  go  and 
6.  41  when  he  had  taken  the  five  loaves  and  the 
6.  41  and  blessed"  and  brake  the  loaves,  and  g. 
6.  44  they  that  did  eat  of  the  loaves  were  about 
6.  52  For  they  considered  not.  .of  the  loaves 

8.  5  he  asked  them,  Howmanyloaveshaveye? 
8.  6  he  took  the  seven  loaves,  and  gave  thanks 
8. 14  had  they .  .with  them  more  than  one  loaf 
8.  19  When  I  brake  the  five  loaves  among  five 

Luke  9.  13  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two  fish. 
9. 16  he  took  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes 

11.  5  say  unto  him,  Friend,  lend  me  three  loaves 
John  6.   9  a  lad  here,  which  hath  Ave  barley  loaves 

6. 11  Jesus  took  the  loaves  ;  and  when  he  had 
6. 13  with  the  fragments  of  the  five  barley  loa. 
6.  26  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  f. 

LOAN  — 

Asking,  request,  rnxy  slieelah. 

1  Sa.    2.  20  give .  'for  the  loan  which  is  lent  to  the  L. 
LOATHE,  to  — 
l.To  tread  down,  D^3  ous. 

Prov.27.    7  The  full  soul  loatheth  an  honey  comb:  but 

2.  To  despise,  reject,  cnd  maas. 

Job     7. 16  I  loathe  (it) ;  I  would  not  live  alway  ;  let 

3.  To  be  vexed,  weary,  pp  quts. 

Num. 21.  5  no  bread,  .our  soul  loatheth  this  light  br. 
[See  also  Lothe.] 

LOATHSOME  — 

1.j4  strange  abomination,  N"iT  zara. 

Num.11.  20  until.. itbe  loathsome  unto  you :  because 
2.  To  be  burning  or  loatlisome,  rrcj?  qalah,  2. 

Psa.  38.   7  For  my  loins  are  fille'd  with  a  loathsome 
LOATHSOME,  to  be  or  become  — 
l.To  cause  a  stink,  abhorrence,  c;N3  baash,  5. 

Prov.  13.   5  a  wicked  (man)  is  loathsome,  and  cometh 
2. To  be  despised,  rejected,  ond  maas,  2. 

Job     7.   5  my  skin  is  broken,  and  become  loathsome 

LOCK  — 

l.A  lock  of  door,  ^yja  manul. 

Neh.   3.  3,  6,  13,  14,  15  locks  thereof,  and  the  bars 
Song  5.   5  dropped.. myrrh,  upon  the  handles  of  the  I. 

2.  .A  fringe  or  lock  of  hair,  ru'V  isitsith. 

Eze.    8.   3  took  me  by  a  lock  of  mine  head ;  and  the 


LOOK 

Z.Braided  locks  of  hair,  Ri&TijB  machlaphoth. 

Judg  16. 13  If  thou  wea vest  the  seven  locks  of  my  h. 
16. 19  caused  him  to  shave  off  the  seven  locks 

i.Locks  or  otherpart  of  thehair  of  the  heady-gpera. 
Num.  6.  5  shall  let  the  locks  of  the  hair  of  his  head 
Eze.  44.  20  Neither . .  suffer  their  locks  to  grow  long 

5.  A  lock  of  hair,  veil,  nps  tsammah. 

Song  4.    1  thou  (hast)  doves'  eyes  within  thy  locks 
4.   3  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate  within  thy  locks 
6.    7  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate . .  within  thy  lo. 
Isa.  47.    2  uncover  thy  locks,  make  bare  the  leg,  un. 

G.Ends  or  locks  of  hair,  nivip  qevutstsoth. 

Song  5.    2  dew.  .my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  ni. 
5. 11  his  locks  (are)  bushy,  (and)  black  as  ara. 

LOCK,  to  — 

To  bolt,  nail,  byi  naal. 

Judg.  3.  23  shut  the  doors . .  upon  him,  and  locked  th. 

3.  24  behold,  the  doors  of  the  parlour  (were)l. 

LOCUST  — 

1.A  locust,  n3*iH  arbch. 

Exodio.    4  to  morrow  will  I  hring  the  locusts  into  thy 

10. 12  for  the  locusts,  that  they  may  come  up 

10. 13  morning,  the  east  wind  brought  the  loc. 
10.  14  the  locusts  went  up  over  all  the  land  of 
10.  14  there  were  no  such  locusts  as  they,  neit. 
10.  19  west  wind,  which  took  away  the  locusts 
10.  19  there  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  the 

Lev.  11.  22  these  of  them  ye  may  eat ;  the  locust  after 
Deut2S.  38  little  in  ;  for  the  locust  shall  consume  it 

1  Ki.    8.  37  if  there  be.  .blasting,  mildew,  locust,  (or) 

2  Ch.  6.  28  If  there  be. .mildew,  locusts,  orcatterpil. 
Psa.  78.  46  He  gave  also. .their  labour  unto  the  locust 

105.  34  He  spake,  and  the  locusts  came,  and  cat. 

109.  23  I  am  gone,  .tossed  up  and  down  as  the  1. 
Prov  30.  27  The  locusts  have  no  king,  yet  go  they  fo. 
Joel    1.    4  palmerworm  hath  left  hath  the  locust 

1.  4  that  which  the  locust  hath  left  hath  the 

2.  25  restore,  .the  years  that  the  locust  hath 
Nail.  3.  15  many  as  the  cankerwonn.  .as  the  locusts 

3. 17  Thy  crowned  (are)as  the  locusts,  andthy 

2. A  locust,  grasshopper,  33  geb, 

Isa.  33.   4  as  the  running  to  and  fro  of  locusts  shall 

3.  J.  grasshojyper,  3jri  chagab. 

2  Ch.  7.  13  if  I  command  the  locusts  to  devour  the 

±.A  locust,  cymbal,  shadow,  Sita*  tselatsal. 

Deut28. 42  All  thy  trees,  .shall  the  locusts  consume 

5.A  locust,  aKpis  akris. 

Matt.  3.    4  and  his  meat  was  locusts  and  wild  honey 

Mark  1.   6  And  John. .did  eat  locustsand  wild  honey 

Rev.   9.    3  there  came  out  of  the  smoke  locusts  upon 

9.   7  the  shapes  of  the  locusts.. like  unto  horses 

LOCUST,  bald  — 

Bald  or  devouring  locust,  oybu  solam. 

Lev.  11.  22  bald  locust  after  his  kind,  and  the  beetle 

LOD,  lb  fissure. 

A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Joppa,  on  the  road  from  Jeru- 
salem to  Cesarea.  Under  the  Syrian  supremacy  it  be- 
longed to  Samaria,  then  to  Judah,  and  was  left  to 
Jonathan  for  a  possession,  It  was  destroyed  during 
the  Jewish  war  by  Cestius  the  Roman  general,  but  being 
afterwards  restored,  it  became  the  seat  of  an  academy. 
The  Greeks  called  it  Lydda,  Lydde,  and  others  Diospolis. 
Now  called  Liddi. 

1  Ch.  8. 12  built  Ono  and  L.,  with  the  towns  thereof 
Ezra  2.  33  The  children  of  L.,  Hadid,  and  Ono,  seven 
Neh.  7.  37  The  children  of  L. ,  Hadid,  and  Ono,  seven 

"•  35  !*•»  and  Ono,  the  valley  of  craftsmen 
LODGE  — 
Place  for  passing  tlie  night,  ^JiSp  melunah. 

Isa.     1.   8  as  a  lodge  in  a  garden  of  cucumbers,  as  a 
LODGE  (all  night,  or  all  this  night\  to  — 
l.To]}ass  the  night,  lodge,  \"h,  p?  Inn,  lin. 

Gen.  24.  23  is  there  room  (in)  thy  father's . .  to  lodge  in? 

24.  25  and  provender  enough,  and  room  to  lodge 

32.  13  he  lodged  there  that  same  night ;  and  took 

32.  21  himself  lodged  that  night  in  the  company 

Nuni22.    8  Lodge  here  thisnight,  and  I  will  bring  you 

Josh.  3.    1  and  lodged  there  before  they  passed  over 

4.  3  lodging  place  where  ye  shall  lodge  this 
6.  11  they  came  into  the  camp,  and  lodged  in 
8.   9  Joshua  lodged  that  night  among  the  peo. 

Judg  iS.  2  to  the  house  of  5Hcah,  they  lodged  there 
19.  4  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  lodged  there 
19.  7  urged  him  :  therefore  he  lodged  there  ag. 
19.  9  the  day  groweth  to  an  end  ;  lodge  here 
19.  11  let  us  turn  in  into  this  city.,  and  lodge  in 
19.  13  to  lodge  all  night,  in  Gibeah,  or  in  Ramah 
19.  15  to  go  in  (and)  to  lodge  in  Gibeah  :  and 

19.  20  Peace  (be)  with  thee . .  only  lodge  not  in 

20.  4  said,  I  came.  .1  and  my  concubine,  to  lo. 
Ruth  1. '16  where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge:  thy  pe. 

2  8a.  17.    8  thy  father,  .will  not  lodge  with  the  people 

17.  16  Lodge  not  this  night  iu  the  plains  of  the 
1  Ki.19.    9  And  he  came,  .unto  a  cave,  and  lodged 
1  Ch.  9.  27  they  lodged  round  about  the  house  of  God 
Neh,  4.  22  Let  every  one  with  his  servant  lodge  with 

13.  20  sellers  of  all  kind  of  ware,  lodged  without 

13.  21  Why  lodge  ye  about  the  wall  ?  if  ye  do  (so) 
Job.  31.  32  The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street 
Rong  7.  11  Come,  my  beloved,  .let  us  lodge  in  the  vi. 
Isa.     1.  21  righteousness  lodged  in  it ;  but  now  mur. 

21. 13  In  the  forest  in  Arabia  shall  ye  lodge,  0  ye 


613 

Isa.  65.    4  Which .  .lodge  in  the  monuments  ;  which 
Zeph.  2. 14  the  bittern  shall  lodge  inthe  upper  lintels 

2.  To  cause  to  p>ass  the  night,  p7,  jiS  lun,  lin. 
Jer.     4. 14  How  long  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge 

3.  To  lie  cloum,  33$  shakah. 

Josh.  2.    1  into  a  harlot's  house,  .and  lodged  there 

4.  To  lie  in  a  fold,  avA't^o/iat  aidizomai. 

Matt2i.  17  went  out.  .into  Bethany  ;  and  he  lodged 

5.  To  loose  doion,  ungird,  KaraAvo)  katahto. 

Luke  9.  12  that  they  maygo.  .lodge,  and  get  victuals 
6. To  rest  as  in  a  tent,  Ka.To,aK-qv6oi  kataskenoo. 
Matt  13.  32  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge  in  the  br. 
Mark  4.  32  fowls  of  the  air  may  lodge,  under  the  sha. 
Lukei3.  19  fowls  of  the  air  lodged  in  the  branches  of 

7. To  receive  a  stranger,  ^evlfa  xenizo. 

Acts  10.  6  He  lodgeth  with  one  Simon  a  tanner,  wh. 
10.  18  and  asked  whether  Simon,  .were  lodged 
10.23  Then  called  he  them  in,  and  lodged  (them) 
10.  32  he  is  lodged  inthe  house  of.  .Simon  a  ta. 
21.  16  an  old  disciple,  with  whom  we  should  lo. 
28.  7  Publius.  .lodged  us  three  days  courteous. 
LODGE,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cause  to  xxiss  the  night,  pS,  \*h  lin,  lun,  5. 

Job  24.    7  They  cause  the  naked  to  lodge  without  c. 
LODGE,  lodging  place,  place  where  to  — 
1. Place  for  p>assing  the  night,  |i?9  malon. 

Josh  4.  3  in  the  lodging  place,  where  ye  shall  lodge 
4.  8  unto  the  place  where  they  lodged,  and!. 
2  Ki.19.  23  I  wiU  enter  into  the  lodgings  of  his  bord. 
Isa.  10.  29  they  have  taken  up  their  lodging  at  Geba 
Jer.    g.    2  a  lodging  place  of  wayfaring  men,  that  I 

%A  place  for  strangers,  |ec/a  xenia. 

Acts  28.  23  there  came  many  to  him  into  (his)  lodging 

Phm.       22  But  withal  prepare  Die  also  a  lodging;  for 
10ET  — 
Upper  chamber,  n;1^.  aliyyah. 

1  Ki.17. 19  carried  him  up  into  a  loft,  where  he  abode 
LOFTILY  — 
High  thing,  place  or  person,  Diis  marom. 

Psa.  73.   8  They  are  corrupt,  and.,  they  speak  loftily 
LOFTINESS  — 
1. Height,  loftiness,  haughtiness,  ?u5  gobah. 

Jer.  48.  29  the  pride  of  M-oab.  .his  loftiness,  and  his 

2.Loftiness,  haughtiness,  height,  nirni  gabhuth. 

Isa.     2. 17  the  loftiness  of  man  shall  be  bowed  down 
LOFTY  — 
l.High,  lofty,  haughty,  n'na  ga.boah. 

Isa.     5. 15  and  theeyes  of  the  lofty  shall  be  humbled 
57-    7  Cpon  a  lofty  and  high  mountain  hast  thou 
2.Height,  loftiness,  haughtiness,  mrna  gabhuth. 

Isa.     2.  11  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  humbled 

3,  To  be  lifted  up,  n^J  nasa,  2. 

Isa.   57.  15  For  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  One  that 

4.  To  be  or  become  high,  on  rum. 

Isa.  2. 12  upon  every  (one  that  is)  proud  and  lofty 
5. To  be  or  become  high  or  strong,  2yy  sagab,  2. 

Isa.  26.   5  the  lofty  city,  he  layeth  it  low ;  he  layeth 
LOFTY,  to  be  — 
To  be  high,  nn  rum. 

Psa.  131-    1  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes  lofty 
Prov.30.  13  a  generation,  0  how  lofty  are  their  eyes ! 
LOG  — 

..4  log,  a  liquid  measure,  §  of  an  imperial  pint,ih  log. 
Lev.  14. 10  meat . .  mingled  with  oil,  and  one  log  of  oil 
14. 12  for  a  trespass  offering,  and  the  log  of  oil 
14.  15  thepriest  shall  take,  .of  the  log  of  oil,  and 
14.  21  flour,  .for  a  meat  offering,  and  a  log  of  oil 
14.  24  of  the  trespass  offering,  and  the  log  of  oil 
LOIN  — 
l.Loin,  jnn  charats. 

Dan.  5.  6  so  that  the  joints  of  his  loins  were  loosed 
I.Loins,  D^n  chalatsayim. 

Gen.  35.  11  a  nation,  .kings  shall  come  out  of  thy  loins 

1  Ki.  8.  19  son,  that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thy  loins 

2  Ch.  6.   9  son,  which  shall  come  forth  out  of  thy  lo. 
Job   31.  20  If  his  loins  have  not  blessed  me,  and  (if) 

38.  3  Gird  up  now  thy  loins  like  a  man  ;  for  I 
40.    7  Gird  up  thy  loins  now  like  a  man  :  I  will 

Isa.  5.  27  neither  shall  the  girdle  of  their  loins  be  1. 
32. 11  make  you  bare,  and  gird,  .upon  (your)  1. 

Jer.  30.  6  see  every  man  with  his  hands  on  his  loins 
S.Thigh,  7|n;  yarek. 

Gen.  46.  26  souls.. "which  came  out  of  his  loins,  besides 

Exod  1.    5  all  the  souls  that  came  out  of  the  loins  of  J. 

4. Flank,  Spa  kesel. 

Psa.  38.    7  For  my  loins  are  filled  with  a  loathsome 

5. Loins,  D'Jrt?  mothnayim. 

Gen.  37.  34  putsackcloth  uponhisloins,  and  mourned 
Exodi2.  11  your  loins  girded,  your  shoes  on  your  feet 

28.  42  from  the  loins  even  unto  the  thighs  they 
Deut33.  11  smite  through  the  loins  of  them  that  rise 
2  Sa.  20.  8  a  sword  fastened  upon  his  loins  in  the  sh. 
1  Ki.    2.    5  about  his  loins,  and  in  his  shoes  that(w.) 

12.  10  little . .  shall  be  thicker  than  my  father's  1. 

18.  46  he  girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran  before  Ahab 

20.31  let  us.  .put  sackcloth  on  our  loins  and 


LONG 


i  Ki.  20. 32  So  they  girded  sackcloth  on  their  loins 
2  Ki.  1.    8  with  a  girdle  of  leather  about  his  loins 
4.  29  Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  my  staff  in 
9.    1  Gird  up  thy  luins,  and  take  this  box  of  oil 
2  Ch.io.  10  little,  .shall  be  thicker  than  my  father's  I. 
Job  12.  18  looseth.  .and  girdeth  their  loins  with  a  g. 

40.  16  Lo  now,  his  strength  (is)  in  his  loins,  and 
Psa.  65.  11  Thou. .  thou  laidst  affliction  upon  our  loins 

6g.  23  and  make  their  loins  continually  to  shake 
Prov.31.  17  She  girdeth  her  loins  with  strength,  and 
Isa.    11.   5  shall  be  the  girdle  of  liis  loins,  and  faith. 

20.  2  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off  thy  loins,  and 

21.  3  Therefore  are  my  loins  filled  with  pain 
45.    1  I  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open 

Jer.  1.  17  Thou  therefore  gird  up  thy  loins,  and  ar. 
13.  1  linen  girdle,  andputitupon  thy  loins, and 
13.  2  I  got  a  girdle,  and  put  (it)  on  my  loins 
13.  4  which  <is)upon  thy  loins,  and  arise,  go  to 
13. 11  as  the  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of  am. 
4S.  37  be)  cuttings,  and  upon  the  loins  sackcloth 

Eze.  1.  27,  27  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins  even 
8.  2  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins  even  d. 
8.  2  from  his  loins  even  upward,  as  the  appe. 
21.  6  with  the  breaking  of.  .loins  ;  and  withbi 
23. 15  Girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  ex. 
29.  7  madest  all  then'  loins  to  be  at  a  stand 
44. 18  shall  have  linen  breeches  upon  theirloins 
47.    4  he  measured,  .the  waters(were)  to  the  lo. 

Dan.  10.    5  whose  loins,  .girded  with  fine  gold  of  Up. 

Amos  8. 10  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth  upon  all  loins 

Nah.  2.    1  watch  the  way,  make,  .loins  strong,  for. 
2.  10  much  pain  (is)  in  all  loins,  and  the  faces 

6. 77ie  loins,  lotver  part  of  the  back,  oacpvs  osphus. 
Matt.  3.   4  a  leathern  girdle  about  his  loins;  and  his 
Mark  1.    6  and  with  a  girdle  of  a  skin  about  his  loins 
Lukei2.  35  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and.. lights 
Acts    2.  30  that  of  the  fruit  of  his  loins,  according 
Eph.   6.  14  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth 
Heb.  7.   5  though  they  come  out  of  the  loins  of  Abr. 
7.  10  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  father  when 

1  Pe.  1. 13  Wherefore  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  miud 

LO'-IS,  Avis. 

The  grandmother  of  Timothy,  commended  by  Paul  for 

her  faith. 

2  Ti.   1.   5  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  L. 

LONG  — 

I. Length,  ^N  orek. 

Exod27.    1  altar,  .five  cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  br. 

27.    9  of  an  hundred  cubits  long  for  one  side 

27. 11  hangings  of  an  hundred,  .long,  and  his 
2  Ch.  3.  11  wings  of  the  cherubim.. twenty  cubits  long 

6.  13  brasen  scaffold,  of  five  cubits  long,  and 
Psa.  91.  16  With  long  life  will  I  satisfy  him,  and  show 
Prov  25.  15  By  long  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded 
Lam.   5.  20  forget  us  for  ever,  .forsake  us  so  long  t.? 
Eze.  40.    7  little  chamber,  .one  reed  long,  and  one 

40.  29  fifty  cubits  long,  and  five  and  twenty  cu. 

40.  30  five  and  twenty  cubits  long,  and  five  cu. 

40.  33  fifty  cubits  long,  and  five  and  twenty  cu. 

40.  42  tables,  .of  a  cubit  and  an  half  long,  and  a 

40.  47  the  court,  an  hundred  cubits  long,  and 

41.  13  measuredthe  house,  an  hundred  cubits  1. 
41. 13  and  the  building,  .anhundred  cubits  long 

42.  11  as  long  as  they,  .as  broad  as  they  :  and  all 

43.  16  altar,  .twelve  (cubits)  long,  twelve  broad 
43.  17  the  settle,  .fourteen  (cubits)  long  and  fo. 

45.  6  five  and  twenty  thousand  long,  over  aga. 

46.  22  courts  joined  of  forty  (cubits)  long,  and 
2.Le/ngth,  n3"ix  arukkah. 

2  Sa.  3.  1  Now  there  was  long  war  between  the  ho. 
Jer.  29.  28  This  (captivity  is)  long  ;  build  ye  houses 

3.  Great,  bill  gadol. 

Dan.  10.    1  but  the  time  appointed  (was)  long:  and 

4.  When  ?  yr\^  mathai. 

Exodio.   3  How  longwilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  thy. 
5. Age  lusting,  indefinite  {time),  oViy  olam. 

Psa.143.  3  dwell,  .as  thosethat  have  been  long  dead 
Eccl.  12.    5  because  man  goeth  to  his  long  home ;  and 

6.Ti?ne,  ny  eth. 

Esth.  5.  13  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting 
Hos.  13.  13  he  should  not  stay  long  in.  .the  breaking 

7. Abundance,  multitude,  3h  rob. 

Josh.  9. 13  become  old  by  reason  of  the  very  long  jo. 
2  Ch.30.    5  for  they  had  not  done  (it)  of  a  long  (time 

S.Many,  much,  31  rab. 

Num2o.  T5  and  we  have  dwelt  in  Egypt  a  long  time 
Deut2o.  19  When  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city  a  long  time 
Josh  1 1.  18  Joshua  made  war  a  long  time  with  all  th. 

23.  1  it  came  to  pass,  a  long  time  after  thatthe 

24.  7  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long  season 
2  Sa.  14.    2  as  a  woman  that  had  alongtimemourned 

1  Ki.  3  11  hast  not  asked  for  thyself  long  life;  neit. 

2  Ch.  i-  n  neither  yet  hast  asked  long  life  ;  but  hast 

15-  3  N"ow  for  a  *0US  season  Israel  (hath  been) 
Psa.120.    6  My  soul  hath  long  dwelt  with  him  that 

9.  Far  off,  pirn  rachoq. 

Prov.   7. 19  For  the  good  man. .is  gone  a  long  journ. 

10..4  year,  n$  shanah. 

Prov.  3.   2  length  of  days,  and  long  life,  and  peace 

11.  Not  a  little,  ouk  b\iy6v  ouk  oligon. 

Acts  14.  28  there  they  abode  long  time  with  the  dis. 

12.  More,  additional,  eVl  TrXtiov  epi  pleion. 

Acts  20.    9  as  Paul  was  long  preaching,  he  sunk  down 


LONG 


C14 


LOOK 


2.3.  Sufficient,  ittavos  hikanos. 

Luke  8.  '27  certain  man,  which  had  devils  long  time 

20.   9  went  into  a  far  country  for  a  long  time 
.vets    8.  11  of  long  time  he  had  bewitched  them  with 

14.   3  Long  time  therefore  abode  they  speaking 

'll.Long,  (xclkoos  makros. 

Matt  23.  14  lor  a  pretence  make  long  prayer:  theref. 
Marki2.  40  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayers:  these 
Luke 20.  47  for  a  show  make  long  prayers  :  the  same 

15. Much,  many,  iro\vs  polus. 

Matt25.  19  After  a  long  time  the  lord  of  those  serv. 

John  5.    6  knew  that  he  had  been  now  a  long  time 

Acts  27.  14  But  not  long  after  there  arose  against  it 
27.  21  after  long  abstinence  Paul  stood  forth  in 
{See  also  All  life,  bear, "clothing,  enjoy,  garment,  grow, 
hair,  how,  live,  remain,  patience,  robe,  sew,  span,  suffer, 
tarry,  time.] 
LONG,  to  — 
l.To  desire,  rrjx  aval),  3.  ■ 

Ueut.12.  20  because  thy  soul  longeth  to  eat  flesh,  thou 
*J  T<>  desire  for  oneself,  nix  avah,  7. 

2  Sa.  23.  15  David  longed,  and  said,  Oh  that  one  wou. 

1  Ch.  11.  17  David  longed,  aud  said,  Oh  that  one  wou. 

Z.To  wait,  n?n  chakah,  3. 

Job     3.  21  'Which  long  for  death,  but  it  (cometh) 
■i.  To  join  to,  befUletted,  ptrri  chashaq. 

Gen.  34.    8  The  soul  of  my  son  Shechein  lougeth  for 
5.  To  desire,  incline  to,  3n;  yaah, 

Psa.119. 131  I  opened.  .1  longed  for  thy  commaudm. 

0.  To  consume,  make  an  end,  -173  kalah,  3, 

2  Sa.  13.  39  king  David  longed  to  go  forth  unto  Ahs. 

7.  To  long  for,  pine,  be  weary,  n.ps  kamah. 

Psa.  63.    1  my  flesh  lougeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  aud  th. 

8.  To  have  a  desire,  ^ps  kasaph,  2. 

Gen.  31.  30  because  thou  sore  longedst  after  thy  fat. 
Psa.  84.   2  My  soul  lougeth,  yea,  even  fainteth  for 

9.  To  run  to  and  fro,  ppy  shaqaa. 

rsa.107.    9  he  satisfietii  the  longing  soul,  aud  filleth 

1 0 .  To  desire,  incline  to,  hnj-i  taab. 

Psa.  119.  40  I  have  longed  after  thy  precepts :  quicken 
119.  174  I  have  longed  for  thy  salvation,  0  LORD 

11.  To  desire  much  or  upon,  iirnrod^co  epipotheo. 
Rom.  1.  11  I  long  to  see  you,  that  I  may  impart  unto 

LONG,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  or  become  long,  Tpx  arak. 

Gen.  26.   8  when  he  had  been  there  a  long  time,  that 
2.7*0  make  long,  prolong,  lengthen,  -px  arak,  5. 

Exod2o.  12  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  landw. 
3.  To  delay,  be  long,  Bna  bosh,  Sa. 

Judg  5.  2S  Why  is  his  chariot  (so)  longin  coming?  why 
4..  To  he  many,  much,  great,  nrri  rabah. 

Deut  14.  24  if  the  way  be  too  long  for  thee,  so  that 

19.  6  overtakehim.becausetheway  is  long,  and 
x  Sa.    7.    2  the  time  was  long ;  for  it  was  twenty  years 

LONG  after  (greatly),  to  — 

To  desire  much  or  upon,  eiwroOsa  epipotheo. 

2  Co.  9. 14  which  long  after  you  for  the  exceeding  g. 

Phil.  1.  8  how  greatly  I  long  after  you  in  the  bowels 
2.26  he  longed  after  you  all,  aud  was  full  ofh. 

LONG,  to  become,  make,  or  sound1  — 
l.To  be  or  become  long,  tjix  arak. 

Eze.  31.    5  his  branches  became  long,  because  of  the 
2.7*0  make  long,  lengthen,  prolong,  ^px  arak,  5. 

Psa.  129.    3  plowers  plowed,  .they  made  long  their  f. 
Z.To  draw  {along  or  out),  tj*^o  mashdk. 

Exod.19.  13  when  the  trumpet  soundeth  long,  they 

Josh.  6.    5  when  they  make  a  long  (blast)  with  the 
LONG,  to  bear,  suffer,  or  live"  — 
1   T<>  be  long  suffering,  /j.aKpo9vy.4eu  mak  othumeo. 

Lukei8.    7  God  avenge,  .though  he  bear  Long  with 

1  C0.13.    4  Charity  siitfereth  long,  (and)  is  kind  ;  ch. 

!_'  L<<  "j  timed,  fia.Kpoxpo'vios  makrochronios. 

Eph.   6.    3  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth 
LONG  continuance,  to  be  of  — 
To  be  steady,  [»$  '.man,  2. 

Deut2S.  59  great  plagues,  and  of  long  continuance 

28.  59  sore  sicknesses,  and  of  long  continuance 
LONG  ago  — 

1. /"•'</■  off,  p'm-j  rachoq. 

2  Ki.  19.  25  Hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago.  .1  have  d. 
isa.  22. 11  respect  unto  him  that  fashioned  it  long  a. 

37.  26  Hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago.  .1  have  d. 
f  ago,  formerly,  anciently,  ird\ai  palai. 
Matt.  1 1.  21  they  would  have  repented  long  ago  in  s. 
LONG  as,  so  long  as,  as  — 

1,  .1  day,  dV  yam. 

Lev.  26.  34  as  long  as  it  lieth  desolate,  and  ye  (lie)  in 
26.  35  As  long  as  it  lieth  desolate  it  shall  rest 

Num.  9.  tS  as  loner  as  the  cloud  abode  upon  the  tab. 

Deut  12.  19  forsake  not  the  Levite  as  lone  as  thou  liv. 
31.  13  as  long  as  ye  live  in  the  land  whitherye 

1  Sa.    1.  28  as  long  as  he  livcth  he  shall  be  lent  to  the 

20.  31  as  Inn- as  the  son  of  Jesse  liveth  upon  the 
25. 15  as  long  as  we  were  conversant  with  them 

29.  8  so  long  as  I  have  been  with  thee  unto  this 


2  Ch.  6. 31  so  long  as  they  live  in  the  land  which  thou 
26.  5  as  long  as  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made 
36.  21  as  long  as  she  lay  desolate,  she  kept  sabb. 

%At  the  face  of,  ,4?1?  liphne. 

Psa.  72. 17  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the 

"Z.As  much  time  as,  oaov  xpovov,  hoson  chronon. 
Mark  2. 19  as  long  as  they  have  the  bridegroom  with 
Bom.  7.    1  law  hath  dominion  over  a  man  as  long  as 

1  Co.  7.  39  The  wife  is  bound  by  the  law  as  long  as  her 
Gal.    4.    i  the  heir,  as  long  as  he  is  a  child,  differeth 

LQNG  as  I  live,  as  or  so  — 
From  my  days,  *D*t?  miyyamai. 

Job    27.   6  heart  shall  not  reproach,  .so  long  as  1 1. 

Psa.  116.   2  will  I  call  upon  (him)  as  long  as  I  live 

LONG,  all  my  life  — 

From  my  being,  *ni$N3  meodi. 

Gen.  48. 15  the  God  which  fed  me  all  my  life  long  unto 
LONG  enough  — 
Much,  many,  abundant,  31  red). 

Deut   1.   6  Ye  have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount 

2.  3  compassed  this  mountain  long  enough 
LONG  for,   (thing  that  I)  — 

l.IIope,  expectation,  rnpn  tiqvah. 

Job     6.    8  would  grant  (me)  the  tiring  that  I  long  for 
2.  One  much  desired,  iTrnrSOtiros  epipothetos. 

Phil.  4.    1  my  brethren  dearly  beloved  andlonged  for 
LONG  (season  or)  while  — 
l.Many,  much,  11  rob. 

Josh 24.    7  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long  season 

2  Ch.15.    3  Now  for  a  long  season  Israel  (hath  been) 

%0ut  of  sufficiency,  e£  Ikwov  cxhikanou. 

Luke23.  8  for  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  [of  a  longs.] 
Acts  20. 1 1  talked  a  long  while,  even  till  break  of  day 

LONG  (time)  or  life  — 

Hidden  or  indefinite  time*  oS'iy  olam. 

Isa.  42. 14  I  have  longtime  holdenniypeacejl  have 

LONGER,  (any)  — 

1.  Length,  rt3"ix  arukkah. 

Job  11.   9  The  measure  thereof  (is)  longer  than  the 

2.  Yet,  still,  any  more,  again,  liy  od. 

Exod.  2.  3  when  she  could  not  longer  hide  him,  she 
Judg.  2.  14  so  that  they  could  not  any  longer  stand 

3.  Yet,  still,  in  eti. 

Luke  16.   2  account,  .for  thou  mayst  lie  no  longer 
Pom.  6.   2  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  ? 

4.  More,  irXetow  pleidn. 

Acts  18.  20  When  they  desired  (him)  to  tarry  longer 

5.  To  add,  rjp;  yasaph,  5„ 

Exod  9.  28  will  let  you  go  and  ye  shall  stay  no  longer 

LONGING  — 

A  desire,  inclination,  longing,  nnxn  taabah. 
Psa.  119.  20  My  soul  breaketh  for  the  lunging  (that 

LONG  STTFFERING  —    ' 

1.  Length  of  face  or  anger,  *]N  ^ns*  erek  aph. 

Exod34_  6  merciful  and  gracious,  longsuffering  and 
NU11114.  18  The  Lord  (is)  long  suffering,  and  of  great 
Psa.  86. 15  long  suffering,  and  plenteous  in  mercy  and 
Jer.    15.  15  take  me  not  away  in  thy  long  Buffering 

I.Long  suffering,  p.a.KpoQu}j.la  makrothumia. 

Roni.  2.  4  goodness  and  forbearance  and  long  suffer. 
9.  22  endured  with  much  long  suffering  the  ves. 
6.  6  by  long  suffering,  by  kindness,  by  the  H. 
5.  22  the  fruit  of  the  spirit  is.  .long  suffering 
4.  2  with  long  suffering,  forbearing  one  anot. 
1.  n  unto  all  patience  and  long  suffering  with 

3.  1    humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  long  stiff. 
1. 16;  2  Ti.  3.  10;  4.2;  iPe.  3.20;  2.  Pe.  3. 15. 

LONGED  for  — 

Much  desired,  eiwr69r)Tos  epipothetos. 

Phil.    4.    1  brethren,  dearly  beloved  and  longed  for 
LONG  SUFFERING,  to  be  — 
To  be  long  suffering,  (ia,KpoQvjx4(o  makrothumeo. 

2  Pet.  3.   9  is  long  suffering  to  us  ward,  not  willing 
LONG  WINGED  — 
Length  of  wing,  15X  tqx  erek  eber. 

Eze.  17.    3  great  eagle  with  great  wings,  long  winged 
LOOK  — 

1.  Vision,  sight,  -im  chezer. 

Dan.    7.  20  whose  look,  .more  stout  than  his  fellows 

2.  Eye,  sight,  J'w  ayin. 

Psa.  18.  27  thou  will  save,  .wilt  bring  down  high  looks 
101.    5  that  hath  an  high  look  and  a  proud  heart 

Prov.  6.  17  A  proud  look,  a  lying  tongue,  and  hands 
21.   4  An  high  look,  and  a  proud  heart.,  .the  plo. 

Isa.     2.  1 1  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  humbled 
10. 12  I  will  punish,  .the  glory  of  his  high  looks 
LOOK,  to  — 
l.To  be  pained,  stay,  W,  hn  chul,  chil. 

Job  20.  21  therefore  shall  no  man  look  for  his  goods 
2.  To  see,  8  'hold,  look,  ™  chazah. 

Song  6. 13  return,  return,  that  we  may  look  upon  thee 

Isa.   33.  20  LookuponZion.thecityof  our  solemnities 

Mic.    4. 11  nations,  .that  say .  .let  our  eye  look  upon 
Z.To  look  atteniivi  hi,  u^:  nabat,  3. 

Isa.     5.  30  if  (uue)'look  unto  the  land,  behold  dark.    ' 


2  Co. 
Gal 
Eph. 
Col. 

iTi. 


4.7b  look  attentively,  u?:  nabat,  5. 

Gen,  15.    5  Look  now  toward  heaven,  and  tell  the  st. 
19. 17  look  not  behind  thee,  neither  stay  thou 
19.  26  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind  him 

Exod.  3.  6  Moses  hid  his  face  ;  for  he  was  afraid  to  1. 
33.    8  the  people . .  looked  after  Moses,  until  he 

1  Sa.  16.  7  Look  not  on  his  countenance,  or  on  theh. 
17.  42  when  the  Philistine  looked  about,  andsaw 
24.    8  And  when  Saul  looked  behind  him,  David 

1  Ki.  18.  43  look  toward  the  sea.  .And  he  .  .looked 

19.  6  he  looked,  and,  behold,  .a  cake  baken  on 

2  Ki.  3. 14  I  would  not  look  toward  thee,  nor  see  thee 

1  Ch.21.  21  as  David  came  to  Oman,  Oman  looked 
Job     6.  19  The  troops  of  Tenia  looked,  the  companies 

28.  24  For  he  looketh  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
35.   5  Look  unto  the  heavens,  and  see ;  and  beh. 
Psa.  22.  17  I  may  tell  all  my  bones :  they  look  (and) 

33.  13  The  Lokd  looketh  from  heaven ;  he  beho. 

34.  5  They  looked  unto  him,  and  were  lightened 
84.    9  and  look  upon  the  face  of  thine  anointed 

104.  32  He  looketh  on  the  earth,  and  it  trembleth 

142.    4  I  looked  on  (my)  right  hand,  and  beheld 

Prov.  4.  25  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on,  and  let  thine 

Isa.    8.  22  they  shall  look  unto  the  earth ;  and  beh. 

22.   8  thou  didst  look  in  that  day  to  the  armour 

22. 11  ye  have  not  looked  unto  the  maker  there. 

42/18  Hear,  ye  deaf;  and  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye 

51.    1  look  unto  the  rock  (whence")  ye  are  hewn 

51.    2  Look  unto  Abraham  your  father,  and  unto 

51.   6  look  upon  the  earth  beneath ;  for  the  he. 

63.   5  Hooked, and(therewas)nonetohelp;  and 

63. 15  Look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from 
66.    2  but  to  this  (man)  will  I  look,  (even)to  (hini 

Jon.    2.    4  I  will  look  again  toward  thy  holy  temple 
Hab.    1. 13  to  behold  evil,  and  canst  not  look  on  iui. 

1.  13  .wherefore  lookest  thou  upon  them  that 
2. 15  that  thou  mayest  look  on  their  nakedness 

Zech.12.  10  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have 
5.Fye,  sight,  \\liayin. 

Lev.  13.  12  coverall. .wheresoever  the  priest  looketh 

Q.To  turn  the  face,  fti3  panah. 

Exod.  2. 12  he  lookeclthis  way  and  that  way,  and  w 

16.  10  that  they  looked  toward  the  wilderness 
Num  12. 10  Aaron  looked  upon  Miriam,  and,  behold 

16.  42  that  they  looked  toward  the  tabernacle 
Deut.  9.  27  look  not  unto  the  stubbornness  of  this  p. 
Josh.  8.  20  when  the  men  of  Ai  looked  behind  them 

15.  2  sea,  from  the  bay  that  looketh  southward 

15.  7  and  so  northward,  looking  toward  Gilgal 
Judg.  6.  14  the  Lord  looked  upon  him,  and  said,  Go 

20.  40  the  Benjamites  looked  behind  them,  and 

2  Sa.    1.    7  when  he  looked  behind  him,  he  saw  me 

2.  20  Then  Abner  looked  behind  him,  and  said 
9.   8  that  thou  shouldest  look  upon  such  a  dead 

1  Ki.  7.  25,  25,  25,  25  three  looking  toward  the.  .north 

2  Ch.  4.    4,  4,  4,  4  three  looking  toward  the.  .north 

13. 14  when  Judah  looked  back,  behold,  the  ba. 

20. 24  they  looked  unto  the  multitude,  and,  beh. 

26.  20  all  the  priests,  looked  upon  him,  and,  be. 
Job  6.  28  Now  therefore  be  content;  look  upon  me 
Psa.119.  132  Look  thou  upon  me,  and  be  merciful  unto 
Eccl.  2. 11  I  looked  on  all  the  works  that  my  hands 
Isa.     8.  21  curse  their  king  and  their  God,  and  look 

45.  22  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  e. 
56. 11  they  all  look  to  their  own  way,  every  one 

Eze.     8.   3  inner  gate  that  looketh  toward  the  north 

10. 11  to  the  place  whitherthehead  looked  they 
11.    1  unto  the  east  gate,  .which  looketh  eastw. 

29. 16  whenthey  shalllook  after  them  :  but  they 
43.    1  gate  .".the  gate  that  looketh  toward  thee. 

43.  17  and  his  stairs  shall  look  toward  the  east 

44.  1  of  the  gate,  .which  looketh  toward  the  e. 

46.  1  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  that  looketh 

46. 12  open,  .the  gate  that  looketh  toward  the 
46. 19  of  the  gate,  .which  looked  toward  the  n 

47.  2  outer  gate  by  the  way  that  looketh  east. 
Hos.  3.  1  who  look  to  other  gods,  and  love  tiagons 
Hag.    1.    9  Ye  looked  for  much,  aud,  lo.. little;  and 

7.  To  inspect,  *ipp  paqad. 

1  Sa.  17. 18  look  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  take  th 
S.T'i  wait,  expect,  rrjij  qavah,  3. 

Job     3.   9  let  it  look  for  light,  but  (have)  none  ;  ne. 

7.  2  and  as  an  hireling  looketh  for.  Jus  work 
30.  26  When  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  came 

Psa.  69.  20  I  looked  ^for  some)  to  take  pity,  but.  ,n. 

Isa.    5.    2,  4  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes 

5.   7  he  looked  for  judgment,  but  behold  opp. 

8.  17  I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord,  .will  look  for 
59.  11  we  look  for  judgment,  but.  .none ;  for  sa. 
64.   3  didst  terrible  things,  .we  looked  not  for 

Jer.     8.  15  We  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good,  .for  a 

13.  16  while  ye  look  for  light,  he  turn  it  into  the 

14.  19  we  looked  for  peace,  and.  .no  good  ;  and 
Lam.  2.  16  certainly  this  (is)  the  day  that  we  looked 

9.To  see,  look,  behold,  nio  raah. 

Gen.    6.  12  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold 
8.  13  Noah.. looked,  and,  behold,  the  face  of 
13.  14  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the 
16.  13  Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him  that 
18.   2  he  lift  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and.  lo 
22.  13  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  aud  looked 
29.    2  he  looked,  and  behold  a  well  in  the  field 
29.  32  the  Lokd  hath  looked  upon  my  affliction 
33.    1  Jacob  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and 
37.  23  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  looked,  and 

39.  23  The  keeper  of  the  prison  looked  not  to  any 

40.  6  Joseph,  .looked  upon  them,  and,  behold 
Exod.  2.  11  looked  on  their  burdens:  and  he  spied  an 

2.  25  God  looked  upon  the  children  of  Israel 


LOOK 


615 


LOOKING 


Exod  3.  .  2  he  looked,  and,  behold,  the  bush  burned 

4.  31  that  he  had  looked  upon  their  affliction 

5.  21  Lord  look  upon  you,  and  judge  ;  because 
10. 10  And  he  said.  .look,  .for  evil  (is)  before  you 

25.  40  look  that  thou  make  (them)  after  their  pa. 
39.  43  Moses  did  look  upon  all  the  work,  and 

Lev.  13.  3, 50  And  the  priest  shall  look  011  the  plague 
13.  25,  43  the  priest  shall  look  upon  it:  and,  be. 
13.  31  if  the  priest  look  on  the  plague  of  the  s. 
13.  32,  34  in  the  seventh  day  the  priest  shall  lo. 
13.  39  Then  the  priest  shall  look :  and,  behold 
13.  51  he  shall  look  on  tbeplague  on  the  seventh 
13.  53,  56  if  the  priest  look,  and,  behold,  the  p. 

13.  55  the  priest  shall  look  on  the  plague,  after 

14,  3  the  priest  shall  look,  and,  behold,  .the  p. 
14.  37  he  shall  look  on  the  plague  :  and,  behold 
14.  39  come  again  the  seventh  day,  and  shall  look 
14.44  the  priest  shall  come  and  look,  and  behold 
14.  48  if  the  priest  shall  come  in,  and  look,  .and 

Nuni  15.  39  that  ye  may  look  upon  it,  and  remember 
77.    9  they  looked,  and  took  every  man  his  rod 
ax,   8  every  one . .  when  he  looketh  upon  it,  shall 
24.  20  when  he  looked  on  Amalek,  he  took  up 
24.  21  he  looked  on  the  Kenites,  and  took  up  bis 

Deut.  9. 16  I  looked,  and,. behold,  ye  had  sinned  ag. 

26.  7  Lord  heard  our  voice,  and  looked  on  our 
28.  32  thine  eyes  shall  look,  and  fail,  .for  them 

Josh.  5.  13  that  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and 
Judg.  7. 1 7  Look  on  me,  and  do  likewise :  and,  behold 
9.  43  laid  wait  in  the  field,  and  looked,  and  be. 
13.  19,  20  and  Manoah  and  his  wife  looked  on 

1  Sa.   1. 11  O  Lord  of  hosts,  if  thou  wilt.. look  on  the 

6.  19  because  they  had  looked  into  the  ark  of 

9.  16  I  have  looked  upon  my  people,  because 

14. 16  the  watchmen  of  Saul  in  Gibeah.  .looked 

16.   6  he  looked  on  Eliab,  and  said,  Surely  the 

16.    7  man  looketh  on  the  outward.  .Lord  look. 

2  Sa.  13.  34  looked,  and,  behold,  there  came  much 

16.  12  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  look  on  in. 

18.  24  looked,  and  behold  a  man  running  alone 

2  Ki.  6.  30  he  passed  by.  .and  the  people  looked,  and 

6.  32  Look,  when  the  messenger  cometh,  shut 

9.   2  when  thou  comest  thither,  look  out  there 

10.    3  Look  even  out  the  best  and  meetest  of  yo. 

10.  23  look  that  there  be  here  with  you  none  of 

11. 14  when  she  looked,  behold,  the  king  stood 

1  Ch.12.  17  the  God  of  our  fathers  look,  .and  rebuke 

2  Ch.  23. 13  she  looked,  and,  behold,  the  king  stood. 

24.  22  The  Lord  look  upon  (it),  and  require  (it) 
Neh.    4.  14  I  looked,  and  rose  up,  and  said  unto  the 
Esth.  1.  11  her  beauty;  for  she  (was)  fair  to  look  on 
Job    40. 12  Look  on  every  one.  .proud,  (and)  bring 
Psa.  25.  18  Look  upon  mine  affliction  and  my  pain 
109.  25  they  looked  upon  me  they  shaked.  their 
Prov.23.  31  Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  is 

24.  32  I  looked  upon  (it,  and)  received  instruct. 
Eccl.  12.  3  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  be  d. 
Song  1.  6  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  (am)  black 
Isa.  28.   4  which  (when)  he  that  looketh  upon  it 

66.  24  and  look  upon  the  carcases  of  the  men 
Eze.     1.    4  I  looked,  and,  behold,  a  whirlwind  came 
2.   9  when  I  looked,  behold,  an  hand,  .sent 
8.    7  when  I  looked,  behold,  a  hole  in  the  wall 

10.    :  I  looked,  and,  behold,  in  the  firmament 

10.   9  when  I  looked,  behold,  the  four  wheels 

16.  8  when  I  passed  by  thee,  and  looked  upon 
si.  21  the  king  of  Babylon,  .looked  in  the  liver 
44.   4  I  looked,  and,  behold,  the  glory  of  the  L. 

Dan.  io.  5  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and  be. 
12.  5  I  Daniel  looked,  and,  behold,  there  stood 
Obad.  12,  13  thou  shouldest  not  have  looked  on  the 
Nah.  3.  7  all  they  thatlookuponthee  shall  flee  from 
Zech.  2.  1  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  again,  and  looked 

4.  2  I  have  looked,  and,  behold,  a  candlestick 

5.  1  I  turned,  .looked,  and,  behold,  a  flying  roll 

5.  9  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked 

6.  1 1,  .looked,  and,  behold,  there  came  four 

lO.To  look,  n)V  shagach,  5. 

P?a.  33.  14  he  looketh,  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Song   2.  9  he  looketh  forth  at  the  windows,  showing 

11.  To  behold,  look,  TC*  shur. 

Job  33.  27  He  looketh  upon  men ;  and  (if  any)  say 
Song  4.    8  look  from  the  top  of  Aniana,  from  the  top 

12.7b  look,  glance,  ptj#>  shaah. 

2  Sa.  22.  42  They  looked,  but . .  none  to  save .  .unto  the 
Isa.   17.    7  At  that  day  shall  a  man  look  to  his  Maker 

17.  8  he  shall  not  look  to  the  altars,  the  work 
31.    1  they  look  not  unto  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 

15.  To  look,  be  seen,  Fjpi  shaqaph,  2. 

Num2T.  20  Pisgah,  which  looketh  toward  Jeshimon 
23. 28  top  of  Peor,  that  looketh  toward  Jeshimon 
Judg.  5. 28  The  mother  of  Sisera  looked  out  *t  a  win. 

1  Sa.  13. 18  the  way  of  the  border  that  looketh  to  the 

2  Sa.   6. 16  Saul's  daughter,  looked  through  a  window 

1  Ch.15.  29  daughter  of  Saul  looking  out  at  a  window 
Proy.  7.    6  For  at  the  window.  .1  looked  through  my 

14.  To  look,  p]pp  shaqaph,  5. 

Gen.  18. 16  the  men  rose  up.  .and  looked  toward  So. 
19.  28  he  looked  toward  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
Exodi4.  24  id  the  morning  watch  the  Lord  looked 

2  Sa.  24.  20  Araunah  looked,  and  saw  the  king  and 
I5.ro  set  the  heart,  lb  n't?  shith  leb. 

Prov27.  23  Be  thou  diligent,  .look  well  to  thy  herds 

16.  To  look  up  or  again,  ava&\eirto  anablepo. 
Marki6.   4  when  they  looked,  they  saw  that  the  stone 

17. To  be  intent,  &revifa  atenizo. 

Acts  10.    4  when  he  looked  on  him,  he  was  afraid 


18.7*0  look  away,  atyopaw  apliorao. 

Heb.  12.  2  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finis. 

19.  To  look,  &\eirw  blepo. 

Luke  9. 62  No  man . .  looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  kin, 
Johni3.  22  the  disciples  looked  one  on  another,  dou. 
Acts   3.   4  And  Peter,  .with  John,  said,  Look  on  us 

20.  To  see,  perceive,  e?Sa)  eido. 

John  7*.  52  Search,  and  look  :  for  out  of  Galilee  arise th 
Pvev.    4.    1  After  this  I  looked,  and,  behold, ji  door 
6.  8 ;  14.  1 ;  14.  14  ;  15.  5. 

■21. See/  iStide. 

John  7.  52  Search  and  look ;  for  out  of  Galilee 

22.  To  see,  behold,  look  after,  o-rrroixat  optomai. 
Jolmig.  37  They  shall  look  on  him  whom  they  pierced 
Acts  18.  15  look  ye  (to  it) ;  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of 

2c.  To  stoop  alongside  of,  TrapaKvima  parakuptd. 
Jas.     1.  25  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  li. 

1  Pe.   1.  12  which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into 
24. To  look  or  watch  toward,  TrpoaBoKacc prosdokao. 

Acts  28.   6  they  looked  when  he  should  have  swollen 
28.    6  but  after  they  had  looked  a  great  while,  and 
LOOK  round  about  (on),  to  — 
To  look  around,  TrepifiXsiroi  periblepo. 

Mark  3.  5  when  he  had  looked  round  about  on  them 
3.  34  he  looked  round  about  on  them  which  sat 
5.  33  he  looked  round  about  to  see  her  that  had 
9.    8  when  they  had  looked  round  about,  they 

10.  23  Jesus  looked  round  about,  and  saith  unto 

1 1.  1 1  when  he  had  looked  round  about  upon  all 
Luke  6. 10  lookingrouiidaboutuponthemall,hesaid 

LOOK  at  or  on,  to  — 

To  view,  inspect-,  aKOiriw  skopeo, 

2  Co.  4. 18  While  we  look  not  at  the  things  which 
Phil.    2.    4  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things 

LOOK  away,  to  — 
To  look,  n}$  shaah. 

Isa.  22.   4  Look  away  from  me  ;  I  will  weep  bitterly 
LOOK  back,  to  — 
To  turn  the  face,  nispanah,  5. 

Jer.  46.  5  are  fled  apace,  and  look  not  back,  .fear 
47.   3  fathers  shall  not  look  back  to.  .children 

Nah.    2.    8  Stand,  stand,  .but  none  shall  look  back 
LOOK  diligently  — 
To  view.or  inspect,  iirtaKOTreco  episkqpeo. 

Heb.  12. 15  Looking  diligently  lest  any  man  fail  of 
LOOK  down,  to  — 
l.To  look  attentively,  regard,  tt2J  nabat,  5. 

Psa.  80.  14  look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold,  and 

2.  To  look,  *]j3y  shaqaph,  2. 

Psa.  85. 11  righteousness  shall  look  down  from  hea. 
3.7b  look,  *]p^  shaqaph,  5. 

Deut26.  15  Look  down  from  thy  holy  habitation 
Psa.  14.    2  LORD  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the 
53.   2  God  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the 
102.  19  he  hath  looked  down  from  the  height  of 
Lam.  3.  50  Till  the  Lord  look  down,  and  behold  from 

LOOK  earnestly   on  or  upon,  to  — 

To  be  intent,  arei/lfa  atenizo. 

Luke22.  56  earnestly  looked  upon  him,  and  said,  This 
Acts.  3. 12  or  why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us,  as  tho. 

LOOK  for,  to  — 

l.To  receive  out  from,  wait  long  for,  air^nSex0^- 
Pliil.  3.  20  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour 
Heb.  9.  28  unto  them  that  look  for  liini  shall  he  ap. 

2.To  receive  out,  wait  for,  e/cSexo/xai  elcdechomai. 

1  Co.  16. 11  may  come .  .for  I  look  for  him  with  the 
Heb.  11. 10  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundation 

3.  To  receive  toward,  wait,  irpoadexo/j-ai  prosdecho, 

Luke  2.  38  to  all  them  that  looked  for  redemption 
Acts  23.  21  are.  .ready,  looking  for  a  promise  from 
Titus  2.  13  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the 
Jude      21  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

4.7b  look  or  watch  toward,  irpoahoKam  prosdokao. 
Matt  1 1.    3  Art  thou  he . .  or  do  we  look  for  another  ? 

24.  50  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for 
Luke  7. 19  Art  thou  he.  .or  look  we  for  another? 

12.  46  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  (h.) 

2  Pe.  3. 12  Looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming 

3. 13  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth 

3. 14  seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,  be  d. 

LOOK  forth,  to  — 

To  look,  look  out,  *1P7  shaqaph,  2. 

Song   6. 10  Who  (is)  she  (that)  looketh  forth  as  the 
LOOK,  to  narrowly  — 
To  look,  x\y$  shagach,  5. 

Isa.   14.  16  They  that  see  thee  shall  narrowly  look 
LOOK  on  or  upon,  to  — 
1. Appearance,  sight,  rrK"j3  march. 

Gen.  12.  11  that  thou  (art)  a  fair  woman  to  look  upon 
24.  16  damsel,  .very  fair  to  look  upon,  a  virgin 
26.    7  kill  me.  .because  she  (was)  fair  to  look  u. 

2  Sa.  11.    2  woman  (was)  very  beautiful  to  look  upon 

Esth.  1.  11  Vashti  the  queen,  .(was)  fair  to  look  on 

2.To  see,  n>!"i  raah. 

Gen.  9.  16  I  will  look  upon  it,  that  I  may  remember 
Lev.  13.   3,  5,  6,  27  And  the  priest  shall  look  on  him 


Lev.  13.  21,  26  if  the  priest  look  on  it,  and,  behold 
13.  36  Then  the  priest  shall  look  on  him  :  and 

2  Ki.  2.  24  he  turned  back,  and  looked  on  them,  and 

Psa.  35.  17  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  look  on  ?  rescue 

Esth.  2. 15  in  the  sight  of  all  them  that  looked  upon 
S.To  be  seen,  mpT  raah,  2. 

Dan.    1. 13  Then  let  our  countenances  be  looked  uprtn 
4.  To  see,  behold,  scorch,  ^  shazaph. 

Song  1.   6  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me 
6. To  look,  jSAeVw  blepo. 

Matt.  5. 28  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust 

2  Co. 10.    7  Do  ye  look  on  things  after  the  outward 

Rev.    5.   3,  4  open  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon 
6.  To  see,  peiceive,  sidco  eido. 

Mark  8. 33  when  he  had  turned  about,  and  looked  on 

Lukeio.  32  and  looked.,  and  passed  by  on  the  others. 
7 -To  look  in,  eju£A.eVa>  emblepo. 

Markio.  27  Jesus,  lookingupon  them,  saith, With  men 
14.67  she  looked  upon  him,  and  said,  And  thou 

Luke22.  61  And  the  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon  P. 

John  1. 36  looking  upon  Jesus  as  he  walked,  he  saith 
8.7b  lookitpon,  GTiifi\€Trw  epiblepo. 

Luke  9. 38  Master,  I  beseech  thee,  look  upon  my  son 
9.  To  look  upon,  4<popa.w  ephorao,  iirsiSov  epeidon. 

Luke  1.  25  in  the  days  wherein  he  looked  on  (me) 
10.7b  view,  8eup4a>  theorcO. 

Markij.  40  There  were  also  women  looking  on  afar  off 
11.7b  view,  contemplate,  Oedo/xai  theaomai. 

John  4.  35  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields 

1  Jo.  1.    1  which  wehavelookedupon,andourhands 
12.  The  sight,  aspect,  opacts  horasis. 

Rev.    4.  3  he  that  sat  was  to  look  upon  like  a  jasper 
LOOK  one  (upon)  another,  to  — 
7b  see  or  look  on  one  another,  hnt  raah,  7. 

Gen.  42.   1  said. .  Why  do  ye  look  one  upon  another? 

2  Ki.14.   8  Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face 

14. 11  he  and  Amaziah.  .looked  one  another  in 
LOOK  out  — 
1.7b  see,  provide,  n^ri  raah. 

Gen.  41.  33  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  discreet  and 
2.  To  look,  *]j2¥:  shaqaph,  5. 

Gen.  26.   8  Abimelech.  .looked  out  at  a  window,  and 

2  Ki.  9.  30  tired  her  head,  and  looked  out  at  a  window 

9.  32  there  looked  out  to  him  two . .  three  eun. 

S.To  look  out  for,  4iricrKiirTOfj.at  ep>iskeptomai. 

Acts  6.   3  lookyeoutamongyousevenmenof  honest 
LOOK  stedfastly,  to  — 
7b  be  intent,  areviCco  atenizo. 

Acts    1. 10  while  they  looked  stedfastly  toward  he. 

6.  15  looking  stedfastly  on  him,  saw  his  face 

7.  55  looked  up  stedfastly  into  heaven,  and  s. 
2  Ch.  3.  13  could  not  stedfastly  look  to  the  end  of 

LOOK   to  or  toward,  to  — 

1. Appearance,  sight,  ii^TO  march. 

Lev.  13.  12  coverall,  .wheresoever  the  priest  looketh 
Eze.  23. 15  all  of  them  princes  to  look  to,  after  the 

2.  To  look  out,  watch,  nsy  tsaphah,  S. 

Song  7.    4  tower,  .which  looketh  toward  Damascus 
Mic.    7.   7  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord  ;  I  will  wait  for 

3.-4  spectator,  sight,  appearance,  'to  roi. 

1  Sa.  16. 12  beautiful  countenance,  .goodly  to  look  to 
4.7b  look,  {Skenco  blepo. 

2  John     8  Look  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not  those 
LOOK  up,  to  — 

1.7b  look  out,  watch,  n?^  tsaphah,  3. 

Psa.    5.   3  will  I  direct,  .unto  thee,  and  will  look  up 
2.7b  see,  nto  raah. 

Psa.  40.  12  so  that  I  am  not  able  to  look  up  :  they 
S.To  look  up,  avct&Keiru  anablepo. 

Matt  14.  19  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed,  andbr. 

Mark  6.  41  he  looked  up  to  heaven,  and  blessed,  and 

7.  34  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  sighed,  and  said 

8.  24  he  looked  up,  and  said,  I  see  men  as  trees 
8.  25  [made  him  lookup] :  and  he  was  restored 

Luke  9. 16  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed  them 
19.    5  he  looked  up,  and  saw  him,  and  said  unto 
2i.    i  he  looked  up,  and  saw  the  rich  men  cast.- 
Acts  22. 13  And  the  same  hour  I  looked  up  upon  him 
4.7b  be?id  up  or  back  again,  avvKinrrat  anukuptd. 
Luke2i.  28  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads ;  for  your 
LOOK  well,  to  — 

1.  7b  understand,  consider,  discover,  attend,  p?  bin. 
Prov.14. 15  the  prudent,  .looketh  well  to  his  going 

2.  To  look  out,  watch,  n^  tsaphah. 

Prov.31.  27  Shelookethwelltothe  waysofherhouseh. 
3.7b  set  the  eye,  pu  tnb  sum  ayin. 

Jer.  39.  12  look  well  to  him,  and  do  him  no  harm;  but 
40.   4  come,  and  I  will  look  well  unto  thee ;  but 

LOOKETH,  looked  — 
Face,  u^Bpanim. 

Eze.  40.    6,  22  gate  which  looketh  toward  the  east 
40.  20  the  gate,  .that  looked  toward  the  north 

LOOKING  after  or  for  — 

l.To  look  or  watch  toward,  irpoo-doKdw  prosdokao. 
Luke2i.  26  for  looking  after  those  things  which  are 


LOOKING 


G16 


LORD 


2.A  reception,  waiting  for ;  ifcBox'ft  ekdoche. 

Heb.  10.  27  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 

LOOKING  GLASS  — 
I.Appearance,  ntfjjQ  inarah. 

Exod 38.   8  of  the  looking  glasses  of  (the  women)  asse. 

2. Looking  glass,  'so  rei. 

Job  37.  18  Hast  thou.. spread  out.. as  a  looking  glass 

LOOKS,  to  look  — 
Face,  wy^panim. 

Gen.  40.    7  saying,  Whereforelookye(so)sadlytod.? 

Eze.     2.    6  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  looks,  though 
3.   9  neither  be  dismayed  at  their  looks,  tho. 

LOOPS  — 

Loo})s,  rwhh  lulaoth. 

Exod;?6.'  '4  thou  shalt  make  loops  of  blue  upon  the 
26-    5.  5  Fifty  loops  shalt  thou  make  in  the 
26.   5  that  the  loops  may  take  hold  one  of  ano. 
26.  10,  10  fifty  loops  on  the  edge  cf  the . .  curtain 

26.  1 1  put  the  taches  into  the  loops,  and  couple 

36. 11  he  made  loops  of  blue  on  the  edge  of  one 

36. 12  Fifty  loops  made  he  in  one  curtain,  and 
30.  12  fifty  loops  made  he  in  the  edge  of  the  cu. 
36. 12  the  loops  held  one  (curtain)  to  another 
36. 17  he  made  fifty  loops  upon  the  uttermost 

.  36.  17  fifty  loops  made  he  upon  the  edge  of  the 

LOOSE,  to  — 

1.7*0  draw  off,  p3  chatats. 

Deut  25.   9  loose  his  shoe  from  off  his  foot,  and  spit 
25.  10  The  house  of  him  that  hath  his  shoe  loo. 

2.  To  cast  off,  h$l  nashal. 

Josh  5. 15  Loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot;  for 

3.  To  loose,  shake  off,  "irjJ  nathar,  5. 

Psa.105.  20  The  king  sent  and  loosed  him.  .the  ruler 
146.    7  hungry.    The  LORD  looseth  the  prisoners 

A. To  open,  nnp  pathach,  3. 

Job  12. 18  He  looseth  the  bond  of  kings,  and  girdeth 
30.  11  Because  he  hath  loosed  my  cord,  and  affl. 

38.  31  Canst  thou . .  loose  the  bands  of  Orion  ? 

39.  5  who  hath  loosed  the  bands  of  the  wild  ass? 
Psa.102.  20  to  loose  those  that  are  appointed  to  death 

116.  16  O  Lord, truly,  .thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds 

Isa.   20.    2  Go  and  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off  thy  1, 

45.    1  I  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open 

58.    6  to  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness,  to  undo 

Jer.  40.   4  I  loose  thee  this  day  from  the  chains  wh. 

5.  To  loose  off  or  away,  airo\vio  apoluo. 

Matt  18.27  an^  loosed  him,  and  forgave  him  the  debt 
Lukei3.  12  Woman,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  infir. 

6.  To  make  inactive,  Karapyew  katargeo". 

Horn.  7.    2  she  is  loosed  from  the  law  of  (her)  husb. 

7.  To  loose,  \vw  luo. 

Matt  16. 19  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose,  .shall  be  lo. 

18.  18  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose.,  shall  be  loosed 
ai.    2  and  a  colt,  .loose,  .and  bring,  .unto  me 

Mark  7.  35  the  string  of  his  tongue  was  loosed,  and 
11.   2  ye  shall  find  a  colt.. loose  him,  and  bring 
11.   4  found  the  colt  tied .  .and  they  loose  him 
11.    5  certain,  .said.  .What  do  ye,  loosing  the  c? 

Lukei3.  15  on  the  sabbath  loose  his  ox  or.  .ass  from 
13.  16  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the  sabbath 

19.  30  ye  shall  find  a  colt . .  loose  him,  and  bring 
19. 31  And  if  any  man  ask  you,  Why  do  ye  loose 
19.  33  And  as  they  were  loosing  the  colt,  the 

19.  33  owners,  .said  unto  them,  Why  loose  ye  the 
Johnn.  44  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Loose  him,  and  let 
Acts    2.  24  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death  :  because 

13. 25  one.  .whose  shoes.  .1  am  not  worthy  to  1. 

22.  30  loosed  him  from,  .bands,  and  commanded 

24.  26  [that  he  might  loose  him :  wherefore  he] 

1  Co.  7.  27  Art  thou  loosed  frpm  a  wife?  seek  not  a 

Rev.    5.   2  is  worthy  to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose 

5.    5  and  [to  loose]  the  seven  seals  thereof 

9.  14  Loose  the  four  angels  which  are  bound  in 

9.  15  the  four  angels  were  loosed,  which  were 

20.  3  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  sea. 
20.    7  And .  .Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  pr. 

8.  To  send  again  or  up,  let  go,  avlrifu  amend. 
Acts  16.  26  opened,  and  every  one's  bands  were  loosed 

27.  40  loosed  the  rudder  bands,  and  hoised  up 

9.  To  lift  up,  cupui  aird. 

Acts  27.^13  loosing  (thence),  they  sailed  close  by  Cre. 

10.7*0  lead  forth,  avaycj  anago. 

Acts  13.  13  when  Paul  and  his  company  loosed  from 
16.  11  loosing  from  Troas,  we  came  with  a  stra. 
27.  21  not  have  loosed  from  Crete,  and  to  have 
LOOSE,  to  let  — 
1.7*0  loose,  shake  off,  "ini  nathar,  5. 

Job     6.  9  that  he  would  let  loose  his  hand,  and  cut 

2.7*0  send  forth  or  away,  n~y  shalach. 

Gen.  49.  21  Naphtali  (is)  a  hind  let  loose:  he  giveth 

3.7*0  send  forth  or  away,  rfop  shalach,  3. 

Lev.  14.    7  shall  let  the  living  bird  loose  into  the  open 
Job  30.  11  they  have  also  let  loose  the  bridle  before 

LOOSE  self,  to  — 

7*o  open  for  one's  self,  nnp  pathach,  7. 

Isa.   52.    2  loose  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  neck 


LOOSED,  to  be  — 

1.7*o  be  loosed,  nnr  zachach,  2. 

Exod28.  28  thatthe  breast  plate  be  notloosed  from  the 
39.  21  that  the  breast  plate  might  not  be  loosed 

2. 7*o  be  melted,  ODD  masas,  2. 

Judgi5.  14  and  his  bands  loosed  from  off  his  hands 
3.7*o  be  spread  out,  irai  natash,  2. 

Isa.    33. 23  Thy  tacklings  are  loosed  ;  they  could  not 
i.To  be  opened,  nrs pathach,  2. 

Isa.     5.  27  neither  shall  the  girdle  of  their  loins  be  1. 

51. 14  exile  hasteneth  that  he  may  be  loosed,  and 

5. 7*o be  unbound,removed,  prn,  prnrathaq  or  rachaq. 

Eccl.12.   6  Or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  loosed,  or  the 
6. 7*o  loose,  NTf  shere. 

Dan.    3.  25  Lo,  I  see  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the 
7.7*0  be  loosed,  N"iif'  shere,  4.- 

Dan.  5.    6  so  that  the  joints  of  his  loins  were  loosed 

S.A  loosening,  Kvats  lusis. 

1  Co.  7.  27  Art  thou  bound  unto . .  seek  not  to  be  lo. 
LOP,  to  — 
7*o  lop,  cast  off,  *iyn  saaph,  3. 

Isa.    10.  33  Lord  of  hosts  shall  lop  the  bough  with 
LORD  — 
l.Lord,  sir,  master,  piN  ctdan. 

Gen.  18.  12  shall  I  have  pleasure,  my  lord  being  old 
19.  2  now,  my  lords,  turn  in,  I  pray  your  into 
19. 18  Lot  said  unto  them,  Oh !  not  so,  my  lord 
23.  6  Hear  us,  ray  lord  :  Thou  (art)  a  mighty  p. 
23. 11  Nay,  my  lord,  hear  me:  the  field  give  I 

23.  isMy  lord,  hearken  unto  me :  the  land  (is  w.) 
24. 18  she  said,  Drink,  my  lord :  and  she  hasted 

31.  35  Let  it  not  displease  my  lord  that  I  cannot 

32.  4  Thus  shall  ye  speak  unto  ray  lord  Esau 

32.  5  I  have  sent  to  tell  my  lord,  that  I  may  find 
32. 18  it  (is)  a  present  sent  unto -my  lord  Esau 

33.  8  (are)  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

33. 13  My  lord  knoweth  that  the  children  (are) 

33. 14  Let  my  lord,  I  pray  thee,  pass  over  before 

33.  14  lead  on.. until  I  come  unto  my  lord  unto 

33. 15  let  me  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

39.  16  she  laid  up  his  garment,  .until  Ins  lord 

40.  1  had  offended  their  lord  the  king  of  Egypt 
40.  7  with  him  in  the  ward  of  his  lord's  house 
42.  10  Nay,  my  lord,  but  to  buy  food  are  thy  se. 
42.  30  The  man,  (who  is)  the  lord  of  the  land,  s. 
42.  33  the  lord  of  the  country,  said  unto  us,  He. 
44.  5  (Is)  not  this  (it)  in  which  my  lord  drink. 
44.  7  Wherefore  saith  my  lord  these  words?  G. 
44.  8  how  then  should  we  steal  out  of  thy  lord's 
44.  9  and  we  also  will  be  my  lord's  bond  men 
44.  16  say  unto  my  lord  ? . .  we  (are)  my  lord's  se. 
44.  18  Oh  my  lord,  let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee 
44.  18  speak  a  word  in  my  lord's  ears/and  let  not 
44.  19  My  lord  asked  his  servants,  saying,  Have 
44.  20  we  said  unto  my  lord,  We  have  a  father 
44.  22  we  said  unto  my  lord,  The  lad  cannot  le. 
44.  24  came,  .we  told  him  the  words  of  my  lord 

44.  t,^  abide  instead,  .a  bond  man  to  my  lord 

45.  8  lord  of  all  his  house,  and  a  ruler  through 
45.  9  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  Egypt:  come 
47. 18  We  will  not  hide  (it)  from  my  lord,  how 
47.  18  my  lord  also  hath  our  herds  of  cattle  :  th. 
47.  18  is  not  ought  left  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 
47.  25  let  us  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

Exod23-  17  thy  males  shall  appear  before  the  Lord  God 
32. 22  Let  not  the  anger  of  my  lord  wax  hot 

34.  23  men  children  appear  before  the  Lord  God 
Numn.  28  answered  and  said,  My  lord  Moses,  forbid 

12. 11  Aaron  said  unto  Moses,  Alas  !  my  lord,  I 
32.  25  servants  will  do  as  my  lord  commandeth 
32.  27  every  man  armed  for  war.  .as  my  lord  sa. 
36.  2  commanded  my  lord  to  give  the  land  for 
36.   2  my  lord  was  commanded,  .to  give  the  in. 

Deut  10.  17  Lord  of  lords,  a  great  God,  a  mighty,  and 
Josh.  3.  11  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of  all  the 
3.  13  ark  of.  .the  Lord  of  all  the  earth,  shall 
5.  14  What  saith  my  Lord  unto  his  servant  ? 
Judg.  3.  25  their  lord  (was)  fallen  down  dead  on  the 
4. 18  Turn  in,  ray  lord,  turn  in  to  me  ;  fear  not 
6. 13  Gideon  said  unto  him,  Oh  my  Lord,  if  the 
19. 26  of  the  man's  house  where  her  lord  (was) 
19.  27  her  lord  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  ope. 
Ruth  2.  13  Let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 
1  Sa.    1.  15  No,  my  lord ;  I  (am)  a  woman  of  a  sorrow. 
1.  26  Oh  my  lord,  (as)thysoulliveth,  my  lord,  I 

16. 16  Let  our  lord  now  command  thy  servants 

22. 12  And  he  answered,  Here  I  (am),  my  lord 

24.  8  cried  after  Saul,  saying.  My  lord  the  king 
24. 10  not  put  forth  mine  hand  against  my  lord 

25.  24  Upon  me,  my  lord,  (upon)  me  (let  this) 
25.  25  Let  not  my  lord,  I  pray  thee,  regard  this 
25.  25  saw  not  the  young  men  of  my  lord,  whom 
25.  26  Now  therefore,  my  lord,  .(as)  thy  soul  li. 
25.  26  they  that  seek  evil  to  ray  lord,  be  as  Na. 
25.  27  thine  handmaid  hath  brought  unto  my  1. 
25.  27  unto  the  young  men  that  follow  my  lord 
25.  28  will  certainly  make  my  lord  a  sure  house 
25.  28  because  my  lord  fighteth  the  battles  of  the 
25.  29  but  the  soul  of  my  lord  shall  be  bound  in 
25.  30  shall  have  done  to  my  lord  according  to 
25.  31  no  grief,  .nor  offence  of  heart  unto  my  1. 
25.  31  or  that  my  lord  hath  avenged  himself 

25.  31  shall  have  dealt  well  with  my  lord,  then 
25. 41  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  servants  of  my  lord 

26.  15  hast  thou  not  kept  thy  lord  the  king? 
26.  15  came  one. , to  destroy  the  king  thylord 


1  Sa.  26.  i7Davidsaid,  (It  is)  my  voice,  my  lord,  0  king 

26. 18  Wherefore  doth  my  lord  thus  pursue  after 
26.  19  let  my  lord  the  king  hear  the  words  of  his 
29.    8  go  fight  against  the  enemies  of  my  lord  the 

2  Sa.    1.  10  have  brought  them  hither  unto  my  lord 

2.   5  showed  this  kindness  unto  your  lord,  (ev. 
3. 21  gather  all  Israel  unto  my  lord  the  king 
4.   8  hath  avenged  my  lord  the  king  this  day  of 
9.  11  Accordingto  all  thatmylord  the  king  hath 

10.  3  said  unto  Hanun  their  lord,  Thinkestthou 

11.  9  slept . .  with  all  the  servants  of  his  lord,  and 

11. 11  my  lord  Joab,  and  the  servants  of  my  1. 
11. 13  he.,  with  the  servants  of  his  lord,  but  went 
13.  32  Let  not  my  lord  suppose  (that)  they  have 

13.  33  Now  therefore  let  not  my  lord  the  king 

14.  9  My  lord,  O  king,  the  iniquity  (be)  on  me 

14. 12  speak  (one)  word  unto  ray  lord  the  king 
14.  15  to  speak  of  this  thing  unto  my  lord  thek. 
14. 17  The  word  of  my  lord  the  king  shall  now  be 

14. 17  as  an  angel  of  God,  so  (is)  my  lord  the  k. 

14. 18  woman  said,  Let  my  lord  the  king  now  sp. 

14. 19  my  lord  the  king,  none  can  turn  to  the  ri" 
14.  19  ought  that  my  lord  the  king  hath  spoken 
14.  20  my  lord  (is)  wise,  accordingto  the  wisdom 

14.  22  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 
15. 15  whatsoever  my  lord  the  king  shall  appoi. 

15.  21  (As)  the  LoitD  liveth,  and  (as)  my  lord  the 

15.  21  in  what  place  my  lord  the  king  shall  be 

16.  4  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord,  O 
16.  9  W7hy  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord 
18.  28  lifted  up  their  hand  against  my  lord  the 
18.  31  Cushi  said,  Tidings,  my  lord  the  king :  for 

18.  32  The  enemies  of  my  lord  the  king,  and  all 
19. 19  Let  not  my  lord  impute  iniquity  unto  me 

19.  19  my  lord  the  king  went  out  of  Jerusalem 
19.  20  first . .  to  go  down  to  meet  my  lord  the  king 
19.  26  My  lord,  O  king,  ray  servant  deceived  me 
19.  27  unto  my  lord  the  king ;  but  my  lord  the 
19.  28  but  dead  men  before  ray  lord  the  king ;  yet 
19.  30  my  lord  the  king  is  come  again  in  peace 

10.  35  be  yet  a  burden  unto  my  lord  the  king? 

19.  37  let  him  go  over  with  my  lord  the  king 

20.  6  take  thou  thy  lord's  servants,  and  pursue 
24.  3  the  eyes  of  my  lord  the  king  may  see  (it) 
24.  3  why  doth  ray  lord  the  king  delight  in  this 
24.  21  is  my  lord  the  king  come  to  his  servant  ? 
24.  22  Let  my  lord  the  king  take  and  offer  up 

1  Ki.   1.    2  sought  for  my  lord  the  king  a  young 

1.    2  that  my  lord  the  king  may  get  heat 
1.  11  reign,  and  David  our  lord  knoweth  "(it) 
1.  13  Didst  not  thou,  my  lord,  0  king,  swear 
1.  17  said  unto  him,  My  lord,  thou  swarest  by 
1.  18  now,  my  lord  the  king,  thou  knowest  (it> 
1.  20  my  lord,  O  king,  the  eyes  of  alllsrael  (are) 
1.  20,  27  throne  of  my  lord  the  king  after  him 
1.  21  my  lord  the  king  shall  sleep  with  his 
1.  24  My  lord,  O  king,  hast  thou  said,  Adonijali 
1.  27  Is  this  thing  done  by  my  lord  the  king,  and 
1.  31  said,  Let  my  lord  king  David  live  for  ever 
1.  33  Take  with  you  the  servants  of  your  lord 
1.  36  the.  .God  of  my  lord  the  king  say  so  (too) 
1.  37  hath  been  with  my  lord  the  king,  even  so 
1.  37  than  the  throne  of  my  lord  king  David 
1. 43  lord  king  David  hath  made  Solomon  king 

1.  47  servants  came  to  bless  our  lord  king  David 

2.  38  as  my  lord  the  king  hath  said,  so  will  thy 

3.  17  O  my  lord,  I  and  this  woman  dwell  in  one 

3.  26  0  my  lord,  give  her  the  living  child,  and 

11.  23  from  his  lord  Hadadezer  king  of  Zobah 

12.  27  of  this  people  turn  again  unto  their  lord 
18.  7  and  said,  (Art)  thou  that  my  lord  Elijah? 
18.  8,  n,i4tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah(is  here) 
18.  10  whither  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to  seek  thee 
18.  13  Was  it  not  told  my  lord  what  I  did  when 
20.   4  My  lord,  O  king,  according  to  thy  saying 

20.  9  Tell  my  lord  the  king,  All  that  thou  didst 

2  Ki.   2.  19  the  situation,  .(is)  pleasant,  as  ray  lord 

4.  16  my  lord,  (thou)  man  of  God,  do  not  lie 

4.  28  Did  I  desire  a  son  of  my  lord?  did  I  not 

5.  3  Would  God  my  lord  (were)  with  the  pro. 

5.  4  (one)  went  in,  and  told  his  lord,  saying 

6.  12  None,  my  lord,  O  king:  but  Elisha,  the 
6.  26  cried  a  woman,  .saying,  Help,  ray  lord,  O 
8.    5  My  lord,  0  king,  this  (is)  the  woman,  and 
8.  12  Hazael  said.  Why  weepeth  ray  lord  ?  And 
9. 11  Jehu  came  forth  to  the  servants  of  his  k 

iS.  23  pledges  to  my  lord  the  king  of  Assyria 

1  CI1.21.    3  lord  the  king,  (are)  they  not  all  my  lord's 

21.  3  why  then  doth  my  lord  require  this  thing? 
21.  23  let  my  lord,  .king  do  (that  which  is)good 

2  Ch,  2.  14  cunning  men  of  my  lord  David  thy  father 

2. 15  the  wine,  which  my  lord  hath  spoken  of 

13.  6  and  hath  rebelled  against  his  lord 
Neb.   3.    5  their  necks  to  the  work  of  their  Lord 

8.  10  (this)  day  (is)  holy  unto  our  Lord :  neither 
10.  29  do  all  the  commandments  of .  .our  Lord 
Psa.    S.   1,  9  Lord,  how  excellent  (is)  thy  name  in  all 
12.    4  our  lips  (are)  our  own  :  who  (is)lord  over 
45. 11  for  he  (is)  thy  Lord  ;  and  worship  thou 
97*   5  presence  of  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth 
105. 21  He  made  him  lord  of  his  house,  and  ruler 
no.    1  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right 
114.    7  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  at  the  presence 

135.  5  I  know . .  (that)  our  Lord  (is)  above  all  gods 

136.  3  6ive  thanks  to  the  Lord  of  lords :  for  his 
147.    5  Great  (is)  our  Lord,  and  of  great  power 

Isa.  1.  24  Therefore  saith  the  Lord . .  the  mighty  One 
3.  1  the  Lord . .  doth  take  away  from  Jerusalem 
10.  16  Therefore  shall;the  Lord . .  send  among  his 
ia  33  the  Lord,  .shall  lop  the  bough  with  terror 
19.  4  I  give  over  into  the  hand  of  a  cruel  lord 
19.   4  king  shall  rule  over  them,  saith  the  Lord 


LORD 


617 


LORD 


Isa. 


Jer. 

34- 
37- 

38. 
Dan.   r. 


Hos.  12. 
Mic.  4. 
Zech..  1 


Mai, 


iS  (shall  be)  the  shame  of  thy  lord's  house 

1 3  lords  besides  thee  have  had  dominion  over 
51.  22  Thus  saith  thy  Lord,  .ami  thy  God  (that) 

18  for  him,  (saying),  Ah  lord  !  or,  Ah  his  glory 
5  they  will  lament  thee,  (saying),  Ah  lord  ! 

20  hear  now,  I  pray  thee,  0  my  lord  the  king 
9  My  lord  the  king,  these  men  have  done 
10  fear  my  lord  the  king,  who  hath  appoint 
t6  0  my  lord,  by  the  vision  my  sorrows  are 
17  of  this  my  lord  talk  with  this  my  lord?  for 

19  my  lord  speak ;  for  thou  hast  strengthened 

8  0  my  lord,  what  (shall  be)  the  end  of  these 

14  reproach  shall  his  Lord  return  unto  him 
13  substance  unto  the  Lord  of  the  whole  ea. 

9  Then  said  I,  O  my  lord,  what  (are)  these  ? 
4  with  me,  saying,  What  (are)  these,  my  Io.? 

4.  5,  i3knowestthounot..Aud  Isaid,  No.myl. 
4.14  that  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth 
6.  4  I  answered.  .What  (are)  these,  my  lord? 
6.  5  standing  before  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth 
3.   1  the  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly 


2. My  lords,  "ris  adonai. 

Gen.  15.   2  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing 

15.  8  Lord  God,  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  sh. 
18.  3  My  Lord,  if  now  I  have  found  favour  in 
18.  27,  3 1  taken  upon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord 
18.  30,  32  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will 
20.   4  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  uat. 

Excel.  4.  10  0  my  Lord,  I  (am)  not  eloquent,  neither  h. 

4.  13  0  my  Lord,  send,  I  pray  thee,  by  the  hand 

5.  22  Lord,  wherefore  hast  thou  (so)  evil  15. 17.. 
34.    9  0  .Lord,  let  my  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  go  am. 

Numi4.  17  let  the  power  of  my  Lord  be  great,  accor. 
Deut.  3.  24  0  Lord  God,  thou  hast  begun  to  show  thy 

9.  26  O  Lord  God,  destroy  not  thy  people  and 
Josh.  7.    7  0  Lord  God,  wherefore  hast  thou  at  all  b. 

7.  8  Lord,  what  shall  I  say,  when  Israel  turn. 
Jutlg.  6.  15  Oh  my  Lord,  wherewith  shall  I  save  Isr. 

6.  22  0  Lord  God  !  for  because  I  have  seen  an 
13.    8  O  my  Lord,  let  the  man  of  God  which 

16.  28  O  Lord  God,  remember  me,  I  pray  thee 
2  Sa.    7.  18  Who  (am)  I,  O  Lord  God  ?  and  what  (is) 

7. 19  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight,  0  Lord  God 
7. 19  And  (is)  this  the  manner  of  man,  0  Lord 

7.  20  for  thou,  Lord  God,  kuowest  thy  servant 
7.  28  O  Lord  God,  thou  (art)  that  God,  and  thy 
7.  29  for  thou,  0  Lord  God,  hast  spoken  (it) 

1  Ki.  2.  26  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  be. 


3. 10 ;  8.  53 ; 
3;  Neh.  1.  11 ;  4. 


10.  3;  JNen.  1.  11 ;  4.  14;  Job  28.  28  ;  Psa.  2.  4;  16.  2; 
22.30;  35.  17,  22;  44.  23;  57.  9;  66.  18;  68.  11,  26; 
77.  2;  89.    9 ;  90.  1 ;  130.  6. 

35.  23  (even)  untu  ray  cause,  my  God  and  my  L. 

37.  13  The  Lord  shall  laugh  at  him  ;  for  he  se. 

38.  9  Lord,  all  my  desire  (is)  before  thee  ;  and 
38.  15  do  I  hope  :  thou  wilt  hear,  O  Lord  my  G. 

38.  22  Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord  my  salva. 

39.  7  Lord,  what  wait  I  for?  my  hope  (is)  in 
40. 17  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me  :  thou  (art) 
51.  15  O  Lord,  open  thou  my  lips ;  and  ray  mo. 

54.  4  the  Lord  (is)  with  them  that  uphold  my 

55.  9  Destroy,  0  Lord,  (and)  divide  their  tong. 
59.  11  and  bring  them  down,  0  Lord  our  shield 

62.  12  Also  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  (belongeth)  me. 
68.  17  the  Lord  (is)  among  them,  (as)  in  Sinai 
68.  19  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord,  (who)  daily  load. 

63.  20  unto  God  the  Lord  (belong)  the  issues 
68.  22  The  Lord  said,  I  will  bring  again  from  B. 

68.  32  Sing  unto  God . .  O  sing  praises  unto  the  L. 

69.  6  Let  not  them  that  wait  on  thee,  0  Lord  God 
71.   s  For  thou  (art)  my  hope,  0  Lord  God.  .my 
71. 16  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God 
73. 20  O  Lord,  when  thou  awakest,  thou  shalt 
73.  28  I  have  put  my  trust  iu  the  Lord  God,  that 

77.  7  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever  ?  and  will 

78.  65  TheD  the  Lord  awaked  as  one  out  of  sleep 

79.  12  wherewith  they  have  reproached  .0  Lord 
86.  3  Be  merciful  unto  me,  O  Lord  ;  for  I  cry 
86.  4  for  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  soul 
86.  5  thou,  Lord,  (art)  good,  and  ready  to  forg. 
86.  8  none  like  unto  thee,  0  Lord  ;  neither  (are 
86. 12  I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord  my  God,  with 
86.  is  But  thou,  0  Lord  ,(art)  a  God  full  of  com. 
89.  49  Lord,  where  (are)  thy  former  loving  kin. 
89.  50  Remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  thy  se. 

109. 21  do  thou  for  me,  O  God  the  Lord,  for  thy 
no.    5  The  Lord  at  thy  right  hand  shall  strike 
130.   2  Lord,  hear  ray  voice  ;  let  thine  ears  be 
130.    3  If  thou,  .shouldest  mark.  .0  Lord,  who 

140.  7  0  GOD  the  Lord,  the  strength  of  my  salv. 

141.  8  mine  eyes(are)  unto  thee,  O  God  the  Lord 
Isa.     3. 15  What  mean  ye.  .saith  the  Lord  God  of  h. 

3.  1 7  the.  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab  the  crown 

3.  18  In  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away  the 

4.  4  When  the  Lord  shall  have  washed  away 

6.  n  Then  said  I,  Lord,  how  long?  And  6. 1,  8. 

7.  7  saith  the  Lord  God,  It  shall  not  v,  14,  15. 

8.  7  the  Lord  bringeth  up  upon  them  the  wa. 

9.  8  the  Lord  sent  a  word  into  Jacob,  and  it 
9. 17  the  Lord  shall  have  no  joy  in  then'  young 

10.  12  when  the  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole 
10. 16  shall,  .the  Lord  of  hosts,  send  among  his 
10.  23  For  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a 
10.  24  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  O  my  people 
n.  11  Lord  shall  set  his  hand  again  the  second 
21.   6  thus  hath  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Go,  set 

21.  8  he  cried,  A  lion :  My  lord,  I  stand  contin. 
21. 16  thus  hath  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Within 

22.  5  by  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  iu  the  valley  of 
22. 12  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call 
22.  14  till  ye  die,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

78 


Isa.  22. 15  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  Go,  get 
25.  8  Lord  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all 
28.-  2  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty  and  a  strong  one 

28. 16  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion 

28.  22  I  have  heard  from  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

29.  13  the  Lord  said,  Forasmuch  as  this  people 

30.  15  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 
30.  20  the  Lord  give  you  the  bread  of  adversity 
S7-  24  reproached  the  Lord,  and  hast  said,  By  the 
38.  16  0  Lord,  by  these  (things  men)  live,  aud  in 
40. 10  the  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong(hand) 

48.  16  the  Lord  God,  and  Ins  spirit,  hath  sent  me 

49.  14  But  Zion  said.,  ray  Lordhath  forgotten  me 

49.  22  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  will 

50.  4  Lord  God  hath  giveu  me  the  tongue  of  the 
50.  5  Lord  God  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and  I 
50.  7  For  the  Lord  God  will  help  me ;  therefore 
50.  9  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  help  me  ;  who 
i,2.  4  saith  the  Lord  GOD,  My  people  went  down 
56.  8  The  Lord  GoD  which  gathereth  the  out  c. 
61.  1  spirit  of  the  Lord  God  (is)  upon  me ;  bee. 
61.  11  the  Lord  GOD  will  cause  righteousness  and 
65.  13  saith  the  Lord  GOD,  Behold,  ray  servants 
65.  15  for  the  Lord  GOD  shall  slay  thee,  and  call 

Jer.  1.  6  Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  behold,  I  can. 
2.  19  my  fear  (is)  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
2.  22  thine  iniquity  is  marked . .  saith  the  Lord 

4. 10  Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  surely  thou 

7.  20  saith  the  Lord  GOD  ;  Behold,  mine  anger 
14. 13  Theu  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  behold,  the 

32. 17  All  Lord  God  !  behold,  thou  hast  made 
32.  25  thou  hast  said  unto  me,  0  Lord  God,  Buy 
44.  26  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  The  Lord 
46.  10  day  of  the  Lord,  .for  the  Lord  GOD  of  h. 

49.  5  bring  a  fear  upon  thee,  saith  the  Lord  G. 

50.  25  this  (is)  the  work  of  the  Lord  GOD  of  hosts 
so.  31  I(am)agaiust  thee,  .saith  the  Lord  GOD  of 

Lam.  2.    1  How  hath  the  Lord  covered,  r.  14. 15,  15. 
2.  2  Lordhathswallowedupallthehabitations 
2.    5  Lord  was  as  an  enemy:  he  hath  swallowed 
2.   7  The  Lord  hath  cast  off  his  altar,  he  hath 

2.  18  Their  heart  cried  unto  the  Lord,  0  wall  of 
2. 19  like  water  before  the  face  of  the  Lordv.20 
3. 31  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  oil'  for  ever 

3. 36  To  subvert  a  man.  .the  Lord  approveth 

3.  37  commandeth  to  pass,  (when)  the  Lord  c. 
3.  58  0  Lord,  thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of 

Eze.  2.  4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD 
[So  in  3.  11,  27;  5.  5,  7,  8;  6.  3,  n;  7.  2,  5 ;  n.  7,  16,  17; 
12.  10,  19,  23,  28;  13.  3,  8,  13,  18,  20;  14.  4,  6,  21;  15.  6  ; 
16.  3»  36,  59  ;  17*  3,  9,  *9,  22;  18.  3,  9,  23,  30,  32;  20.  3,  5, 
27»  3°,  39»  47!  21.  24,  26,  28;  22.  3,  19,  28;  23.  22,  28,  32, 
35,  46;  24.  3,  6,  9,  21;  25.  3,  6,  8,  12,  13,  15,  16;  26.  3,  7, 
15,  19;  27.  3  ;  28.  2,  6,  12,  22,  25  ;  29.  3,  8,  13,  19;  30.  2, 
10,  13,  22;  31.  10,  15;  32.  3,  n;  33.  25,  27;  34.  2,  10,  11, 
i7»  20;  35-  3.  14;  36-  2.  3»  4,  5-  6,  7,  13,  22,  33,  37;  37.  5, 
9,  i2,  19,  21;  38.  3,  10,  14,  17  ;  39.  1,  17,  25;  43.  18;  44. 
6,  9 ;  45.  9,  iS ;  46.  1,  16 ;  47.  13.] 

Eze.  4.  14  Then  said  I,  All  Lord  God  !  behold,  my 
5.  n  saith  the  Lord  God 
[So  in  11.  8,  21 ;  12.  25,  28:13.  8,  16;  14.  11,14,16,18, 
20,  23;  15.  8;  16.  8,  14,  19,  23,  30,  43,  48,  63 ;  17.  16;  18. 
3,  9»  23>  30.  32!  20.  3,  31,  33,  36,  40,  44  ;  21.  7,  13;  22.  12, 
31 ;  23.  34 ;  24.  14  ;  25.  14 ;  26.  5,  14,  21 ;  28.  10 ;  30.  6 ; 
31.  18 ;  32.  8,  14,  16,  31,  32 ;  33.  n ;  34.  8,  15,  3c,  31 ;  35. 
6 ;  36.  14,  15,  23,  32 ;  38.  18,  21 ;  3g.  5,  8,  10,  13,  20,  29 ; 
43.  19,  27;  44.  12,  15,  27;  45.  9,  15;  47.  23;  48.  29.] 

Eze.    6.    3  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  God  ;  Thus  saith 

8.  1  hand  of  the  Lord  God  fell  there  upon  me 

9.  8  Ah  Lord  God  !  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the 
11.  13  Ah  Lord  God  !  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end 
13.   9  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 
18.  25,  29  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 

20.  49  Ah  Lord  God  !  they  say  of  me,  Doth  he 
23. 49  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 

24.  24  ye  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 

25.  3  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  God  ;  Thus 

28.  24  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 

29.  16  they  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  God 
29.  20  they  wrought  for  me,  saith  the  Lord  God 
33. 17,  20  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 

36.  4  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  God;  Thus  saith 

37.  3  I  answerad,  0  Lord  God,  thou  knowest 
Dan.    1.    2  Lord  gave  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah  into 

9.    3  I  set  my  face  unto  the  Lord  God,  to  seek 
9.   4  I  prayed .  .and  said,  0  Lord,  the  great  and 
9.    7  0  Lord,  righteousness  (belongeth)  unto 
9.    8  0  Lord,  to  us  (belongeth)  confusion  of  face 
9.   9  To  the  Lord  our  God  (belong)  mercies  and 
9.  15  0  Lord  our  God,  that  hast  brought  thy  p. 
9.  16  OLord,  according  to  all  thy  righteousness 
9. 17  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer,  .for  the  Lo. 
9.  19  O  Lord,  hear;  0  Lord,  forgive;  O  Lord 
Amos  1.    8  the  remnant,  .shall  perish,  saith  the  Lord 
3.    7  Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do  nothing,  but 

3.  8  the  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  can  but 

3. 11  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  An  adversary 
3. 13  Hear  ye,  and  testify,  .saith  the  Lord  God 

4.  2  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  his  holiness 

4.  5  ye  children  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  God 

5.  3  Forthus  saith  the  Lord  God ;  The  city  that 

5.  16  the  Lord,  saith  thus;  Wailing  (shall  be)  iu 

6.  8  The  Lord  G  od  hath  sworn  by  himself,  saith 

7.  1,  4  Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  shewed  unto 
7.  2  said  O  Lord  God,  forgive,  I  beseech  thee 
7.    4  the  Lord  God  called  to  contend  by  fire 

7.  5  said  I,  O  Lord  God,  cease,  I  beseech  thee 
7.  6  This  also  shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord  God 
7.    7  the  Lord  stood  upon  a  wall  (made)by  a 

7.  8  said  the  Lord,  Behold,  I  will  set  a  plum. 

8.  1  Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  showed  unto  me 
S.    3  bowlings  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  God 


Amos  8.  9  it  shall  come  to  pass . .  saith  the  Lord  God 

8.  11  days  come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I  will 

9.  1 1  saw  the  Lord  standing  upon  the  altar 
9.    s  Lord  God  of  hosts  (is)  he  that  toucheth  the 
9.    8  eyes  of  the  Lord  God  (are)  upon  the  sinful 

Obad.  1  saith  the  Lord  God  concerning  Edom;  We 
Mic.  1.  2  let  the  Lord  God  . .  the  Lord  from  his  holy 
Zeph.  1.  7  Hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  L. 
Zech.  9.  4  Behold,  the  Lord  will  cast  her  out,  and  he 
9.  14  the  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  trumpet,  and 
Mai.    1. 14  sacrificeth  unto  the  Lord  a  corrupt  thing 

Z.Lord,  master,  owner,  fe  baal. 

Num.21.  2S  the  lords  of  the  high  places  of  Arnon 
Isa.    16.    8  lords  of  the  heathen  have  broken  down 

4.^4  mighty  or  strong  one,  T^s  gebir. 

Gen.  27.  29  be  lord  over  thy  brethren,  and  let  thy 
27.  37  I  have  made  him  thy  lord,  and  all  his  br, 

5.  He  (who)  is,  fljnj  yehovah. 

Gen.  2.  4  LoRDGod  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens 
2.  5  the  Lord  God  had  not  caused  it  to  rain 
2.  7  the  Lord  God  formed  man  (of)  thedustof 
2.  8  the  Lord  God  planted  a  gardeu  eastward 
2.  9  out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lord  God  to 
2. 15  the  Lord  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him 
2.  16  the LoRDGod  commanded  the  man,  saying 
2. 18  the  Lord  God  said,  (It  is)  not  good  that 
2. 21  the  Lord  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall 

2.  22  which  the  Lord  God  had  takeh  from  man 

3.  1  any  beast:  .which  the  Lord  God  had  made 
3.    8  And  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God 

.  3 .    8  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  anion. 

3.  9  the  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and  said 

3.  13,  14,  21,  22,  23;  4.  i,  3,  4,  6,  9,  13,  15,  15, 

16,  26 ;  5.  29  ;  6.  3,  5,  6,  7,  8 ;  7.  1,  5,  16  ;  8.  20,  21,  21  ; 

9,  26 ;  10.  9,  9;  11.  5,  6,  8,  9,  9 ;  12.  1,  4,  7,  7,  8,  8,  17  ; 
13.  4,  10,  10,  13,  14,  18  ;  14.  22 ;  15.  1,  4,  6,  7,  18 ;  16.  2, 
5,  7,  9,  io,  11,  11,  13  ;  17.  1  ;  18.  1,  13,  14,  17,  19,  19,  20, 

22,  26,  33;  19.  13,  13,  14,  16,  24,  24*27;  20.  18;  21.  1,  1, 
33  ;  22.  11,  14,  15,  16 ;  24.  1,  3,  7,  12,  21,  26,  27,  27,  31,  35, 
40,  42.  44,  48,  48,  50,  51,  52,  56 ;  25.  21,  21,  22,  23 ;  26.  2, 
12,  22,  24,  25,  28,  29  ;  27.  7,  20,  27 ;  28.  13,  13,  16,  21 ;  29. 
3*»  32,  33.  35  I  30-  24,  27,  30  ;  31.  3,  49  ;  32.  9  ;  38.  7,  7, 
10 ;  39.  2,  3,  3,  5,  5,  21,  23,  23  ;  49.  iS. 

Exod.  3.  2,  4,  7,  15,  16,  18,  18 ;  4.  1,  2,.  4,  5,  6,  10,  11, 

11,  14,  19,  21,  22,  24,  27,  28,  30,  31 ;  5.  1,  2,  2,  3,  17,  21, 
22 ;  6.  7*  2,  3,  6,  7,  8,  10,  12,  13,  26,  28,  29,  29,  30 ;  7.  1, 
5,  6,  8,  10,  13,  14,  16,  17,  17,  19,  20,  22,  25  ;  8.   1,   1,  5,  8, 

8,  10,  12,  13,  15,  16,  19,  20,  20,  22,  24,  26,  27,  28,  29,  29, 
3°j  3*  >  9-  1,  !j  3>  4j  5»  5>  6,  8,  12,  12,  13,   13,  20,  21,  22, 

23,  23,    27,  28,  29,   29,  30,  33,  35  ;  10.  1,  2,    j,    7,    8,   9, 

10,  11,  12,  13,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  24,  25,  26,  26,  27  ;  11. 

1,  3,  4j  7>  9>  Jo;  12.  1,  11,  12,  14,  23,  23,  25,  27,  28,  29,  31, 
36,  41,  42,  42,  43,  48,  50,  51  ;  13.  1,  3,  5,  6,  8,  9,  9,  ii,  12, 

12,  14,  15,  15,  16,  21  ;  14.  1,  4,  8,  10,  13,  14,  15,  18,  21,  24, 

25,  26,  27,  30,  31,  31,  31  ;  15.  1,  1,  3,  3,  6,  6,  11,  16,  17, 
18,  19,  21,  25,  25,  26,  26;  16.  3,  4j  6,  7,  7,  8,  8,  8,  9,  10, 

11,  12,  15,  16,  23,  23,  25,  28,  29,  32,  33,  34  ;  17.  1,  2,  4,  5, 
7,  7,  14,  16;  18.  1,  8,  8,  9,  10,  11 ;  19.  3,  7,  8,  8,  9,  9, 
10,  11,  18,  20,  20,  21,  21,  22,  22,  23,  24,  24 ;  20.  2,  5,  7,  7, 

10,  11,  11,  12,  22 ;  22.  11,  20 ;  23.  17,  19,  25 ;  24. 1,  2,  3,  3, 

4.  Sj  7,  8,  12,  16,  17  ;  25.  1 ;  27.  21  ;  28.  12,  29,  30,  30,  35, 
36,  38  ;  29.  11,  18,  18,  23,  24,  25,  25,  26,  28,  41,  42,  46,  46 ; 
30.  8,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  20,  22,  34,  37 ;  31,  1,  12, 

13,  15.  17  ;  3a-  5,  7»  9.  IT»  ">  *4»  26,  27,  29,  30,  31,  33,  35  ; 
33-  x»  5.  7,  ">  ">  I7j  19.  2I  I  34-  *>  4,  5,  5\  6,  6,  6,  10,   14, 

23,  24,  26,  27,  28,  32,  34;  35.  1,  2,  4,  5,  5,  10,  21,  22,  24, 
29,  29>  3°  I  36-  i»  1,  2,  Si  38.  22;  39,  1,  5,  7,  21,  26,  29, 
3°)  3I»  32»  42»  43  >  4°-  x,  *&>  19,  21,  23,  23,  25,  25,  27,  29, 
32.  34,  35.  38. 

Lev.  1.  1,  2,  3,  5,  9,  11,  13,  14,  17  ;  2.  1,  2,  3,  8,  9,  10, 

11,  11,  12,  14,  16;  3.  1,  3,  5,  6,  7,  9,  11,  12,  14,  16;  4.  1, 

2,  3.  4,  4t  6,  7,  13,  15,  15,  17,  18,  22,  24,  27,  31,  35  ;  5.  6, 
7,  12, 14,  15,  15,  17,  19  ;  6.  1,  2,  6,  7,  8,  14,  15,  18,  19,  20, 

21,  22,  24,  25  ;  7.  5,  11,  14,  20,  21,  22,  25,  28,  29,  29,  30, 
3°>    35,    35,    36>    38,  38;  8.  1,  4,  5,  9,  13,   17,   21,    21,  26, 

27,  28,  29,  29,  34,  35,  36;  9.  2,  4,  4,  5,  6,  6,  7,  10,  21,  23, 
24;  10.  1,  2,  2,  3,  6,  7,  8,  11,  12,  13,  15,  15,  17,  19,  19;  11. 

I,  44,  45;  12.  1,  7 ;  13.  1 ;  14.  1,  11,  12,  16,  18,  23,  24,  27, 
29.  31,  33;  15-  1,  14,  15,  30  !  16.  1,  1,  2,  7,  8,  9,  10,  12,  13, 
18,  30,  34 ;  17.  1,  2,  4,  4,  5,  5,  6,  6,  9 ;  18.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  21, 
30;  19.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  18,  21,  22,  24,  25, 

28,  30,  31,  32,  34,  36,  37;  20.  1,  7,  8,  24,  26;  21.  1,  6,  8, 

12,  15,  16,  21,  23  ;  22.  1,  2,  3,  3,  8,  9,  15,  16,  17, 18,  21,  22, 

22,  24,  26,  27,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33 ;  23.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9, 

II,  12,  13,  16,  17,  18,  iS,  20,  20,  22,  23,  25,  26,  27,  28,  33, 
34,  36>  36,  37,  37,  38,  38>  39,  40,  4r»  43,  44;  24.  1,  3,  4,  6, 
7,  8,  9,  12,  13,  16,  22,  23  ;  25.  1,  2,  4,  17,  38,  55;  26. 
1,  2,  13,  44,  45,  46;  27.  1,  2,  9,  9,  11,  14,  16,  21,  22,  23, 

26,  26,  28,  28,  30,  30,  32,  34. 

Num.  1.  1,  19,  48,  54 ;  2.  1,  33,  34;  3.  1,  4,  4,  5,  n,  13, 

14,  16,  39,  40,  41,  42,  44,  45,  51,  51  ;  4.  1,  17,  21,  37,  41, 
45,  49,  49 >  5-  l>  4>  5»  ^,  8,  11,  16,  18,  21,  21,  25,  30  ;  6.  1,  2, 

5,  6,  8,  12,  14,  16,  17,  20,  21,  22,  24,  25,  26;  7.  3,  4,  11 ;  8 
i,  3,  4,  5,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  20,  21,  22,  23;  9.  1,  5,  7,  8,  9, 
10,  13,  14,  18,  18,  19,  20,  20,  23, 23,  23,  23 ;  10.  1,  9,  10,  13, 

29,  29,  32,  33,  33>  34.  35,  36  ;  11.   1,  1,   1,  2,  3,  10,  11,  16, 

18,  18, 20,  23,  23,  24,  25,  29,  29,  31,  33, 33 ;  12.  2,  2, 4,  5,  6,  8, 

9,  13,  14;  13-  ri  3''  J4-  3.  8,  9>  9»  10,  ",  13,  H,  14,  16,  18, 
20,  21,  26,  28,  35,  37,  4°.  4i,  42,  43,  43.  44  \  r5-  r,  3,  3,  4> 
7,  8,  10,  13,  14,  15,  17,  i9»  21,  22>  23,  23,  24,  25,  25,  28,  30, 
3i»  35>  36,  37,  39,  41,  4i  !  l6"  3-  3,  5,  7,  7>  9,  ">  15,  16,  17,  19, 
20,  23,  28,  29,  30,  30,  35,  36,  38,  40,  40,  41,  42,  44,  46;  17. 

1,  7,  9,  10,  11,  13  ;  18.  1,  6,  8,  12,  13,  15,  17,  19,   19,    20, 

24,  25,  26,  28,  28,  29 ;  19.  1,  2,  13,  20 ;  20.  3,  4,  6,  7,  9,  i2, 

13,  16,  23,  27 ;  21.  2,  3,  6,  7,  7,  8,  14,  16,  34 ;  22.  8,  13,  18, 

19,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  31,  31,  32,  34,  35 ;  23.  3,  5,  8, 
12,  16,  17,  21,26;  24.  1,  6,  11,  13,  13;  25.  3,  4,  4,  4.  IO>  16; 
26.  1,  4,  9,  52,  61,  65 ;  27.  3,  5,  6,  11,  12,  15,  16,  17,  18,  21, 
22,  2^  ;  23.  1,  3,  6,  7,  8,  11,  13,  15,  16,  19,  24,  26,  27  ;  29. 

2,  6,  8,  12,  13,  36,  39,  40;  30.  1,  2,  3,  5,  8,  i2!  16;  31.  1, 


LORD 


618 


LORD 


3,  7,  16,  16,  21,  25,  28,  29,  30,  31,  37,  38,  39,  40,  41,  41,  47, 
47.  5°.  50,  52»  54  ;  32-  4'  7)  9>  IO»  12>  x3.  13.  J4.  20.  21,  22, 
22,  22,  23,  27,  29,  31,  32  ;  33.  2,  4,  4,  38,  50 ;  34.  1,  13,  16, 
29;  35.  1,  9,  34;  36.  2,  2,  5,  6,  10,  13. 

Deut.  1.  3,  6,  8,  10,  11,  19,  20,  21,  21,  25,  26,  27,  30,  31, 
32>  34»  36>  37.  41.  4*»  42»  43-  45.  45 ;  2-  *»  2.  7»  7.  9.  12.  i4> 

15,  17,  21,  29,  30,  31,  33,  36,  37;  3.  2,  3,  l8,  20,  20,  21,  21, 

22,  23,  26,  26;  4.  i,  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  7,  10,. 10,  i2,  14,  15,  19, 
20,  21,  21,  23,  23,  24,  25,  27,  27,  29,  30,  31,  34,  35,  39,  40 ; 

5.  2,  3,  4,  5,  5,  6,  9,  II,  II,  12,  14,  IS,  15,  l6,  16,  22,  24, 

25,  27,  27,  28,  2$,  32,  33;  6.  I,  2,  3,  4,  4,  5,  IO,  12,  13,  15, 
15,  l6,  17,  l8,  l8,  ig,  20,  21,  22,  24,  24,  25  J  7.  I,  2,  4,  6, 

6,  7i  8,  8,  9,  12,  15,  16,  18,  19,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  25;  S.  I, 
2,  3,  5.  6,  7,  10,  ii,  14,  r8,  19,  20,  20 ;  9.  3,  3,  4,  4,  4,  5,  5, 
6j  7j  7.  8,  8,  9,  10,  10,  11,  12,  13,  16,  16,  18,  18,  19,  ig,  20, 

22,  23,  23,  24,  25,  25,  26,  28  ;  10.  1,  4,  4,  5,  8,  8,  8,  9,  9, 
10,  10,  11,  12,  12,  12,  13,  14,  15,  17,  20,  22;  11.  1,  2,  4,  7, 

9,  12,  12,  13,  17,  17,  21,  22,  23,  25,  27,  28,  29,  31 ;  12.  1,  4, 

5,  7,  7,  9,  10,  11,  11,  12,  14,  15,  18,  18,  18,  20,  21,  21,  25, 

26,  27,  27,  28,  29,  31,  3*  ;  13-  3>  3>  4i  5.  5;  1°.  12,  16,  17, 
18,,  18;  14.  1,  2,  2,  21,  23,  23,  24,  24,  25j  26,  29;  15.  2,  4, 

4,  5.  6,  7,  9,  10,  14,  15,  18,  19,  20,  20,  21 ;  16.  1,  1,  2,  2,  5, 

6,  7,  8,  10,  10,  11,  11,  15,  15,  15,  16,  16,  17,  18,  20,  21, 
22;  17.  1,  1,  2,  2,  8,  10,  12,  14,  15,  16,  19;  18.  1,  2,  5,  5,  6, 

7,  7,  g,  12,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  21,  22,  22 ;  19.  1,  1, 

2,  3.  8,  g,  10,  14,  17;  20.  1,  4,  13,  14,  16,  17,  18;  21.  1,  5, 

5,  8,  9,  10,  23 ;  22.  5 ;  23.  1,  2,  2,  3,  3,  5,  5,  5,  8,  14,  18, 

18,  20,  21,  21,  23  ;  24.  4,  4,  9,  13,  15,  18,  19 ;  25.  15,  16,  19, 
19 ;  26.  1,  2,  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  7,  7,  8,  10,  10,  10,  11,  13,  14,  16, 
17,  18,  19;  27.  2,  3,  3,  5,  6,  6,  7,  g,  10,  15 ;  28.  1, 1,  2,  7,  8, 

8,  g,  9,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  13,  15,  20,  21,  22,  24,  25,  27,  28, 
35.  36.  37.  45.  47.  48.  49.  52>  53.  58.  59-  61,  62  63,  63,  64,  65, 
68;  29.  1,  2,  4,  6,  io,  12,  12,  15,  18,  20,  20,  20,  21,  22,  23, 
24,  25,  27,  28,  29;  30.  1,  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  6,  6,  7,  8,  9,  g,  io, 

10,  16,  16,  20,  20;  31.  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  14, 
15,  16,  25,  26,  27,  29 ;  32.  3,  6,  g,  12,  19,  27,  30,  36,  48  ; 
33.  2.  7,  11,  12,  13,  21,  23,  2g;  34.  1,  4,  5,  5.  9,  10,  11. 

Josh.  1.  1,  1,  9,  11,  13,  13,  15,  15,  15,  17  ;  2.  g,  10,  11, 

12,  14,  24 ;  3.  3,  5,  7,  9,  13,  17 ;  4.  1,  5,  7,  8,  10,  11,  13,  14, 
15,  18,  23,  23,  24,  24 ; -5.  1,  2,  6,  6,  6,  9,  14,  15;  6.  2,  6,  7, 
8,  8,  11,  12,  13,  13,  16,  17,.  19,  ig,  24,  26,  27 ;  7.  1,  6,  10, 

13,  14,  14,  14,  15,  19,  20,  23,  25,  26  ;  8.  1,  7,  8,  18,  27,  30, 
3i.  3i.  33.  33  i  9-  9.  i4.  18,  19,  24,  27 ;  10.  8,  10,  11,  12,  12, 

14,  14,  19,  25,  30,  32,  40,  42;  11.  6,  8,  9,  12,  15,  15,  20,  20, 
23;  12  6,  6  ;  13.  1,  8,  14,  33;  14.  2,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  10, 

12,  12,  12,  14;  15.  13;  17.  4,  4,-  14;  18.  3,  6,  7,  7,  8,  10; 

19.  50,  51 ;  20.  1 ;  21.  2,  3,  8,  43,  44,  44,  45  ;  22.  2,  3,  4,  4, 
5,  5,  9,  16,  16,  16,  17,  18,  18,  19,  19,  19,  19,  22,  22,  22,  23, 

23,  24,  25,  25,  25  27,  27,  28,  29,  29,  29,  31,  31,  31,  34 ; 
23-  1.  3.  3.  5.  5.  8,  9,  10,  11,  13,  13,  14,  ;5,  15,  15,  16,  16  ; 

24,  2,  7,  14,  14,  15,  15,  16,  17,  18,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24, 
26,  27,  29,  gi,  31. 

Judg.  1.  1,  2,  4,  19,  22 ;  2.  1,  4,  5,  7,  7,  8,  10,  11,  12,  12, 

13,  14,  15,  15,  15,  16,  17,  18,  18,  18,  20,  22,  23 ;  3.  1,  4,  7, 

7,  8,  9,  9,  10,  10,  12,  12,  12,  15,  15,  28;  4.  1,  2,  3,  6,  g,  14, 

14,  15",  5.  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  5,  9,  11,  11,  13,  23,  23,23,  31;  6.  1, 
i.  6,  7,  8,  8,  10,  11,  12,  12,  13,  13,  13,  14,  16,  21,  21,  22,  22, 

23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  34  ;  7-2,  4,  5,  7,  g,  15,  18,  20,  22  ;  8.  7, 
z9>  23.  341  IO-  6,  6,  7,  10,  11,  15,  16;  11.  g,  10,  11,  21,  23, 

24,  27,  29,  30,  31,  32,  35,  36,  36;  12.  3;  13.  1,  1,  3,  8,  13, 

15,  16,  16,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  21,  23,  24,  25  ;  14.  4,  6, 
19 ;  15.  14,  18 ;  16.  20,  28 ;  17.  2,  3,  13 ;  18.  6  ;  19.  18  ;  20. 
1,  18,  23,  23,  23,  26,  26,  27,  28,  35 ;  21.  3,  5,  5,  7,  8,  15, 
19- 

Ruth  1.  6,  8,  9,  13,  17,  21,  21 ;  2.  4,  4,  12,  12,  20 ;  3. 10, 
13;  4.  11,  12,  13,  14. 

1  Sa.  1.  3,  3,  5,  6,  7,  9,  10, 11,  11,  12,  15,  19,  ig,  20,  21, 
22,  23,  24,  26,  27,  28,  28,  28  ;  2.  1,  1,  2,  3,  6,  7,  8,  10,  10, 

11,  12,  17,  17,  18,  20,  20,  21,  21,  24,  25,  25,  26,  27,  30,  30; 

3.  1,  1,  3,  4,  6,  7,  7,  8,  8,  9,  10,  11,  15,  18,  19,  20,  21,  21, 
21 ;  4.  3,  3,  4,  5,  6 ;  5.  3,  4,  6,  g ;  6.  1,  2,  8,  11,  14,  15,  15, 
17,  18,  19,  19,  20,  21 ;  7.  1,  i,  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  6,  6,  8,  9,  9,  9, 
10,  12,  13,  17  ;  8.  6,  7,  10,  iS,  21,  22 ;  9.  15,  17  ;  10.  1,  6, 

17,  18,  19,22,  22,24,  25;  11.  7,  13,  15,  15  ;  12.3,  5,6,  7,  7,  8, 

8,  9,  10,  10,  ii,  12,  13,  14,  14,  14,  15,  15,  15,  16,  17,  17,  18, 

18,  18,  ig,  20,  20,  22,  22,  23,  24  ;  13.  12,  13,  13,  14,  14,  14; 
14.  3,  6,  6,  io,  12,  23,  33,  34,  35,  35,  39,  41,  45  ;  15.  1,  1,  2, 
10,  11,  13,  13,  15,  16,  17,  18,  ig,  19,  20,  20,  21,  22,  22,  23, 
24,  25,  26,  26,  28,  30,  31,  33,  35  ;  16.  1,  2,  2,  4,  5,  6,  7,  7,  8, 

9,  10,  12,  13,  14,  14,  18 ;  17.  37,  37,  45,  46,  47,  47 ;  18.  12, 
14, 17,  28;  19.  s,  6,  9;  20.  3,  8,  12,  13,  13,  14,  15,  16,  21, 
22,  23,  42,  42 ;  21.  6,  7 ;  22.  10,  17,  17,  21  ;  23.  2,  2,  4,  4, 

10,  11,  11,  12,  18,  21  ;  24.  4,  6,  6,  6,  10,  10,  12,  12,  15,  18, 

19,  21 ;  25.  26,  26,  28,  28,  29,  30,  31,  32,  34,  38,  39,  39; 

26.  9,  10,  10,  11,  11,  12,  16",  16,  19,  19,  19,  20,  23,  23,  23, 
24  ;  28.  6,  6,  10,  10,  16,  17, 17,  18,  18,  19,  19;  29.  6;  30.  6, 

8,  23,  26. 

2  Sa.  1.  12,  14,  16 ;  2.  1,  1,  5,  6 ;  3.  9,  18,  28,  39 ;  4.  8, 
'9>   5-  2»  3.  io.  12,  ig,  19,  20,  23,  24,  25;  6.  2,  s.  7j  8,  9,  9, 

10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  17,  18,  21,  21,  21 ;  7. 
i.  3.  4.  5.  8,  11,  11,  18,  22,  24,  25,  26,  27 ;  8.  6,  11,  14;  10. 
12  ;  11.  27  ;  12.  1,  5,  7,  g,  11,  13,  13,  14,  15,  20,  22,  24, 25; 
14.  11,  11,  17 ;  is-  7,  8,  8,  21,  25,  31  ;  16.  8,  8,  10,  11,  12, 

12,  18  ;  17.  14,  14  ;  18.  19,  28,  31 ;  19.  7,  21 ;  20.  19 ;  21. 
1,  1,  3,  6,  6,  7,  9 ;  22.  1,  1  2,  4,  7, 14,  16,  ig,  21,  22,  25,  29, 
29.  31.  32.  42,  47,  50;  23.  2,  10,  12,  16,  17;  24.  1,  3,  10,  10, 

11,  12,  14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  18,  ig,  21,  23,  24,  25,  25. 

1  Ki.  1.  17,  29,  30,  36,  37,  48 ;  2.  3,  4,  8,  15,  23,  24,  27, 

27,  28,  29,  30,  32,  33,  42,  43,  44,  45 ;  3.  1,  2,  3,  5,  7,  15 ;  5. 
3*  3-  4.  5.  -5.  7.  12  ;  6.  1,  2,  ii,  19,  37  ;  7.  12,  40,  45,  48,  51, 
51  ;  8.  1,  4,  6,  9,  10,  11,  11,  12,  15,  17,  18,  20,  20,  20,  21, 
22,  23,  25,  2S,  44,  54,  54,  56,  57,  59,  59,  60,  61,  62,  63,  63, 
64,  64,  65,  66 ;  g.  1,  2,  3,  8,  9,  9,  10,  15,  25,  25 ;  10.  1,  5,  9, 

9,  12 ;  11.  2,  4,  6,  6,  9,  g,  10,  11,  14,  31 ;  12.  15,  15,  24,  24, 
24>  27 ;  13-  1.  2>  2,  3,  5,  6,  6,  9,  17,  18,  20,  21,  21,  21,  26, 
26,  26,  32 ;  14.  5,  7,  n,  13,  14,  15,  i5(  18,  21,  -22,  24,  26, 
28  '.  J5-  3.  4.  5.  n.  14.  r5>  r8f  26,  29,  30,  34  ;  16.  1,  7,  7, 

12,  13,  19,  25,26,  30,  33,  34;  17.  1,  2,  5,  8,  12,  14,  14,  16, 

20,  20,  21,  21,  22,  24;  18.  1,  3,  4,  10,  12,  12,  13,  13,  15,  18, 

21,  22,  24,  30,  31,  32,  36,  37,  37,  38,  39,  39,  46  ;  19.  4,  7,  9, 

10,  it,  11,  ii,  11,  ii,  12,  14,  15  ;  20.  13,  13,  14,  28,  28,  28, 
35.  36.  42;  21.  3,  17,  ig,  19,20,  23,  25,  26,  28;  22.  5,  7,  8, 


11,  12,  14,  14,  15,  16,  17,  19,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  23,  24,  28, 

38.  43.  52,  53- 

2  Ki.  1.  3,  4,  6,  15,  16,  17 ;  2.  i,  2,  2,  3,  4,  4,  5,  6,  6,  14, 
16,  21,  24;  3.  2,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18;  4.  1, 

27,  30,  33,  43,  44;  5.  1,  11,  16,  17,  18,  18,  20;  6.  17.  17, 

18,  20,  20,  27,  33,  33;  7.  1,  1,  2,  16,  19;  8.  1,  8,  10,  13,  18, 

19,  27 ;  9.  3,  6,  6,  7,  12,  25,  26,  26,  26,  36 ;  10.  10,  10,  10, 
16,  17,  23,  30,  31,  32 ;  11.  3,  4,  4,  7,  10,  13,  15,  17, 17,  18, 
19  ;  12.  5,  4,  4,  9,  9,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  13,  14, 16,  18 ;  13. 
2,  3.  4  4,  5.  ">  17.  23  ;  14-  3.  6,  14,  24,  25,  26,  27  ;  15.  3, 
5,  9,  12,  iS,  24,  28,  34,  35,  37;  16.  2,3,  8,  14,  14, -18;  17. 
2,  7,  8,  9,  11,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  23, 
25,  25,  28,  32,  33,  34,  34,  35,  36,  39,  41 ;  18.  3,  5,  6,  6,  7, 

12,  12,  15,  16,  22,  25,  25,  30,  30,  32,  35;  19.  1,  4,  4,  6,  14, 
14,  15,  15,  16,  16,  17,  19,  19,  20,  21,  31,  32,  33,  35  ;  20.  1, 
2,  3»-4>  5.  5.  8.  8.  9.  9.  "»  *6»'  17>  *9  '>  21.  2,  2,  4,  4,  5,  6,  7, 
g,  10,  12,  16,  20,  22,  22  ;  22.  2,  3,  4,  5,  5,  8,  9,  13,  13,  15, 

16,  18,  18,  19,  19;  23.  2,  2,  3,  3,  4,  6,  7,  9,  11,  12,  16,  21, 

23.  24,  25,  26,  27,  32,  37;  24.  2,  2,  3,  4,  9,  13,  13,  13,  19, 
20;  25.  9,  13,  13,  16. 

1  Ch.  2.  3  ;  6.  15,  31,  32  ;  9.  19,  20,  23  ;  10.  13,  13,  14 ; 

11,  2,  3,  3,  9,  10,  14, 18 ;  12.  23  ;  13.  2,  6,  10,  11,  14;  14. 

2,  10,  17 ;  15.  2,  3,  12,  13,  14,  15,  25,  26,  28,  29  ;  16.  2,  4, 

4.  7,  8,  10,  11,  14,  23,  25,  26,  28,  28,  29,  29,  31,  33,  34,  36, 
36,  37,  39,  40,  40,  41  ;  17.  1,  4,  7,  10,  16,  16,  17,  igj  20,  22, 
23,24,  26,  27;  18.  6,  n,  13;  19.  i3;"2i.  3,  9,  10,  11,  12,  12, 

13,  14,  15,  15,  16,  17,  18,  18,  19,  22,  24,  26,  26,  27,  28,  29, 
30;  22.  1,  5,  6,  7,  8,  11,  11,  12,  12,  13,  14,  16,  18,  18,  19,  19, 

19,  19;  23.  4,  5,  13,  24,  25,  28,  30,  31,  31,  32;  24.  19,  19;  25. 

3,  6,  7  ;  26.  12,  22,  27,  30;  27.  23;  28.  2,  4,  s,  5,  8,  8,  9,  10, 

12,  13,  13,  18,  19,  20,  20;  29.  1,  5,  8,  9,  10,  10,  11,  11,  16, 
i3,  20,  20,  20,  21,  21,  22,  22,  23,  25. 

2  Ch.  1.  1,  •  3,  5,  6,  g ;  2.  1,  4,  4  h,  12,  12 ;  3. 1  j  4.  16 ; 

5.  1,  2,  7,  10,  13,  13,  13,  14 ;  6.  1,  4,  7,  8,  10,  10,  10,  11,  12, 

14,  16,  17,  19,  41,  41,  42 ;  7.  1,  2,  2,  2,  3,  3,  4,  6,  6,  7,  10, 
11,  11,  12,  21,  22;  8.  1,  11,  12;  12,  16,  16;  g.  4,  8,  8,  11 ; 

10.  15;  11.  2,  4,  4,  14,  16,  16;  12.  1,  2,  s,  6,  7,  7,  9,  11,  12, 

13,  14 ;  13.  5,  8,  9,  10,  10, 11,  11,  12,  14,  18,  20;  14.  2,  4,6, 

7,  11,  11,  11,  11,  12,  13,  14 ;  15.  2,  4,  8,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  14, 
15;  16.  2,  7,  8,  9,  12;  17.  3,  s,  6,  9,  10,  16;  18.  4,  6,  7,  10, 11, 

13,  15,  16,  18,  18,  ig,  20,  20,  22,  22,  23,  27,  31  ;  ig.  2,  2,  4, 

6.  7,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  11 ;  20.  3,  4,  4,  5,  6,  13,  14,  15,  17,  17, 
18,  18, 19, 20,  21,  21, 22,  26,  27,  28,  29,  32,  37 ;  21.  6,  7,  10, 12, 

14,  16,  18;  22.  4,  7,  9;  23.  3,  5,  6,  6,  12,  14, 16, 18,  iS,  18, 19, 
20;  24.  2,  4,  6,  7,  8,  g,  12,  12,  12, 14,  14,  18,  19, 20,  20,  21,  22, 

24,  24 ;  25.  2,  4,  7,  9,  15,  27 ;  26.  4,  5,  16,  16,  17, 18,  18,  19, 

20,  21 ;  27.  2,  2,  3,  6;  28.  1,  3,  s,  6,  g,  g,  10,  11,  13,  19,  19, 

21,  22,  24,  25;  29.  2,  3,  5,  6,  6,  8,  10,  11,  15,  15,  16,  16,  16, 

17,  17,  18,  ig,  20,  21,  25,  25,  27,  30,  31,  31,  32,  35;  30.  1,  1, 

5,  6,  7,  8,  8,  g,  9,  12,  15,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  21,  22,  22  ;  31. 

2,  3,  4,  6,  8,  10,  10,  11,  14,  16,  20;  32.  8,  11,  16,  17,  21,  22, 
23,  24,  26  ;  33.  2,  2,  4,  4,  5,  6,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  15,  15,  16, 
16,  17,  18,  22,  23;  34.  2,  8,  10,  10,  14,  14,  15,  17,  21,  21, 
21,  23,  24,  26,  26,  27,  30,  30,  31,  31,  33,  33 ;  35.  1,  2,  3,  3, 

6,  12,  16,  16,  26;  36.  5,  7,  9,  10,  12,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  18, 
21,  23,  22,  23,  23. 

Ezra  1.  1,  1,  2,  3,  5,  7 ;  2.  63 ;  3.  3,  5,  5,  6,  6,  8,  10,  10, 

11,  11,  11  ;  4.  1,  3  ;  6.  21,  22;  7.  6,  6,  10, 11,  27,  27,  28 ;  8. 

28,  28,  29,  35;  9.  5,  8,  15 ;  10.  11. 

Neh.  1.5;  5.  13 ;  8.  1,  6,  6,  9,  10,  14 ;  9.  3,  3,  4,  5, 6,  7 ; 

IO.  20,  34,  35. 

Job  1.  6,  7,  7,  8,  9,  12,  12,  21,  21,  21 ;  2.  1,  1,  2,  2,  3,  4, 
6,  7;  12.  9;  38.  1 ;  40.  1,  3,  6;  42.  1,  7,  7,  9,  9,  10,  10,  n, 
12. 

Psa.  1.  2,  6;  2.  2,  7,  11 ;  3.  1,  3,  4,  5,  7,  8 ;  4.  3,  3,  5,  6, 
8;  S-  t,  3,  6,  8,  12  ;  6.  1,  2,  2,  3,  4,  8,  9,  9;  7.  title,  1,  3, 

6,  8,  8,  17,  7  ;  8.  1,  9 ;  9.  1,  7,  10,  n,  13,  16,  19,  20;  10.  1, 

3,  12, 16,  17  ;  11.  1,  4,  4,  5,  7  ;  12.  -i,  3,  5,  6,  7 ;  13.  1,  3,  6  ; 

14.  2,  4,  6,  7  ;  15.  1,  4;  16.  2,  2,  5,  7,  8;  17.  1, 13,  14;  18. 
title  ter.  1,  2,  3,  6,  13,  15,  18,  20,  21,  24,  28,  30,  31,  41, 
46,  49;  19.  7,  7,  8,  8,  9,  9,  14;  20.  5,  6,  7,  9 ;  21.  1,  7,  9, 
13  ;  22.  8,  ig,  23,  26,  27,  28  ;  23.  1,  6 ;  24.  1,  3,  5,  8,  8, 10;  25. 
1.  4)  6,  7,  8,10,  11,  12,  14,  15  ;  26.  1, 1, 2,  6,  3, 12  ;  27.  1,  1,  4, 

4,  4,  6,  7,  8,  10,  11,  13,  14,  14  ;  28. 1,  5,  6,  7,  8  ;  2g.  1,  1,  2,  2, 
3>  3>  4.  4.  5.  5.  7.  8-  8,  9, 10, 10,  11, 11 ;  30.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  7,  8, 
10,  10,  12  ;  31.  1,  5,  6,  9,  14,  17,  21,  23,  24 ;  32.  2,  5,  10, 
11 ;  33.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  8,  10,  11,  12,  13,  18,  20,  22 ;  34.  1,  2, 
3,  4,  6,  7,  8,  g,  10,  11,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  22 ;  35.  1,  5,  6,  g, 

10,  22,  24,  27 ;  36.  title,   5,  6 ;  37.  3,  4/5,  7,  9,  17,  18,  20, 

23,  24,  28,  33,  34,  39,  40 ;  38.  1,  15,  21,  22 ;  39.  4,  12  ;  40. 

1.  3.  4.  5.  9.  11.  13.  13.  16;  41-  1.  2»  3.  4.  io,  13;  42.  8; 
46.  7,  8,  11;  47.  2,  5;  48.  1,  8;  50.  1  j  54.  6;  55.  16,  22; 
56.  10;  58.  6;  59.  3,  5,  8 ;  64.  10;  63,  16;  69.  13,  16,  31, 
33  ;  70.  1,  s ;  71.  1,  5 ;  72.  18 ;  74.  18 ;  76.  11 ;  78.  4,  21 ; 
79.  5 ;  80.  4,  19  ;  81.  10,  15  ;  83.  16,  18 ;  84.  1,  2,  3,  8,  11, 

11,  12 ;  85.  1,  7,  8,  12  ;  86.  1,  6,  11,  17  ;  87.  2,  6 ;  88.  1,  9, 
13,  14 ;  89.  1,  5,  6,  6,  8,  15,  18,  46,  51,  52  ;  90.  13,  17 ;  gi. 

2,  9;  92.  1,  4,  5,  8,  9,  13,  is;  93-  1,  1.  3.  4.  5  ;  94-  h  3.  5, 

11,  14,  17,  18,  22,  28  ;  95.  1,  3,  6  ;  96.  1, 1,  2,  4,  5,  7,  7,  8, 
9,  10,  13 ;  97.  1,  5,  8,  g,  10,  12 ;  98.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  9 ;  99.  1, 
2.  5>  6,  8,  9,  9;  100.  1,  2,  3,  5 ;  101.  1,  8;  102.  title,  1,  12, 

15,  16,  19,  21,  22 ;  103.  1,  2,  6,  8,  13,  17,  19,  20,  21,  22,  22 ; 
104.  1,  1,  16,  24,  31,  31,  33,  34,35;  105.  1,  3,  4,  7,  19;  106. 

1,  2,  4,  16,  25,  34,  40,  47,  48 ;  107.  1,  2,  6,  8,  13,  15,  19,  21, 

24,  28,  31,  43 ;  108.  3 ;  109.  14,  15,  20,  26,  27,  30 ;  no.  1, 

2,  4;  in.  1,  2,  4,  10 ;  112.  1,  7;  113.  1,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5;  115- 

1,  9,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16;  116.  1,  4,  4,  s,  6,  7,  9, 

12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19 ;  117.  1,  2  ;  118.  1,  4,  6,  7,  8, 
9,  10,  n,  12,  13,  15,  16,  21,  23,  24,  25,  25,  26,  26,  27,  29; 
119.  1,  12,  31,  33,  41,  52,  55,  57,  64,  75,  89,  107,  108,  126, 
T37>  !45»  i49»  151.  156,  159,  166,  169,  174',  120.  1,  2;  121. 

2.  5>  5)  7.  8  ;  122.  1,  4,  g  ;  123.  2,  3  ;  124.  1,  2,  6,  8 ;  125. 
1,  2,  4,  s ;  126.  1,  2,  3,  4 ;  127.  1,  1,  3 ;  128. 1, 4,  5 ;  i2g.  4, 

8,  8;  130.  ^  5,  7,  7;  131.  1,  3;  132.  1,  2,  5,8,  n,  13;  133.  3; 
134.  i,  1,  1,  2,  3 ;  135.  1,  1,  2,  3,  5,  6, 13,  13,  14,  19.  19.  2°. 
20,  20,  21 ;  136.  1  ;  137.  4,  7  ;  138.  4,  5,  5,  6,  8,  8  ;  139.  1,  4, 
21  ;  140.  1,  4,  6,  6,  8,  12  ;  141.  1,  3  ;  142.  1,  1,  5  ;  143.  1,  7, 

9,  11 ;  144.  1,  3,  5,  15 ;  145.  3,  8,  9,  10,  14,  17,  18,  20,  21  ; 
146.  1,  2,  5,  7,  8,  8,  8,  9,  10 ;  147.  2,  6,  7,  n,  12 ;  148.  1,  5, 

7,  13;  149.  1,  4. 

Prov.  i.  7,  29;  2.  5,  6;  3.  5,  7,  g,  n,  12,  ig,  26,  32,  33; 

5,  21 ;  6.  16  ;  8.  13,  22,  35  ;  9.  10  ;  10.  3,  22  27,  29 ;  11. 1, 


20;  12.  2,  22;  14.  2,  35,  27;  15.  3,  8,  9,  n,  16,  25,  26,  29, 
33 ;  16.  1,  2,  3,  4,  s,  6,  7,  9,  11,  20,  33 ;  17.  3,  i5  ;  18.  10, 
22;  19.  3,  14,  17,  21,  23;  20.  10,  12,  12,  23,  24,  27;  21.  1, 
2>  3.  3°.  31 !  22.  2,  4,  12,  14,  19,  23  ;  23.  17 ;  24.  18,  21  ; 
25.  22  ;  28.  5,  25 ;  2g.  13, 25,  26  ;  30.  9 ;  31.  30^ 
Isa.  1.  2,  4,  9,  10,  n,  18,  20,  24,  28.;  2.  2,  3, "3,  5,  10, 11, 

12,  17,  ig,  21 ;  3.  1,  8,  13,  14,  16,  17  ;  4.  2,  5;  5.  7,  g,  12, 

16,  24,  25;  6.  3,  5,  12;  7.  3,  10,  11,  12,  17,  18;  8.  1,  3,  5, 
iii  13,  17,  18,  18  ;  9.  7,  n,  13,  14,  19 ;  10.  20,  26,  33 ;  n. 
2.  3.  9.  15  ;  i2-  1.  2.  4.  5  J  13-  4.  5.  6,  g,  13  J  14-  i.  2,  3.  5> 
22,  23,  24,  27,  32 ;  16.  13,  14 ;  17.  3,  6 ;  18.  4,  7,  7 ;  ig.  1, 

4,  12,  14,  16,  17,  18,  19,  19,  20,  20,  21,  21,  22,  22,  25 ;  20. 

2,  3 ;  21.  io,  17 ;  22.  14,  17,  25,  25  ;  23.  g,  n,  17,  18,  18 ; 
24.  1,  3,  14,  15,  15,  21,  23  ;  25.  1,  6,  8,  9,  10 ;  26.  4,  4,  8, 

10,  11,  12,  13,  15,  16,  17,  21  ;  27.  1,  3,  12;  28.  5,  13,  14,  21, 
2g  ;  29.  6,  10,  15,  19,  22 ;  30.  1,  9,  18,  18,  26,  27,  29,  30, 
31.  32.  33  I  3i-  i>  3.  4.  4.  5.  9;  32-  6;  33-   2,  5,  6,    10,   21, 

22,  22,  22;  34.  2,  6,  6,  8,  16;  35.  2,  10;  36.  7,  10,  10,  15, 
15,  18,  20 ;  37.  1,  4,  4,  6,  14,  14,  15,  16,  17,  17,  18,  20,  20, 
21,  22,  32,  33,  34,  36 ;  38.  1,  2,  3,  4,  s,  7,  7,  14,  20,  22 ;  39. 

5,  6,  8;  40.  2,  3,  5,  5,  7,  13,  27,  28,  31 ;  41.  4,  13,  14,  16, 

17,  20,  21 ;  42.  5,  6,  8,  10,  12,  13,  19,  21,  24  ;  43.  1,  3,  10, 
n,  12,  14,  15,  16;  44.  2,  5,  5,  6,  6,  23,  23,  24,  24;  45.  1,  3, 
5,  6,  7,  8,  11,  13,  14,  17,  iS,  18,  19,  21,  24,  25 ;  47.  4  ;  48. 

1.  2,  14,  17,  17,  20,  22  ;  49.  1,  4,  5,   5,  7,  7,  8,  13,  14,  18, 

23,  25»  26;  50.  1,  10,  10;  51.  1,  3,  3,  9,  11,  13,  15,  15,  17, 
20,  22 ;  52.  3,  5,  5,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12  ;  53.  1,  6,  10,  10 ;  54. 1, 
5,  6,  8,  10,  13,  17,  17  ;  55.  5,  6,  7,  8,  13 ;  56.  1,  3,  3,  4,  6, 
6;  57-  19  ;  58.  5.  8,  9,  n,  13.  14.  14;  59-  !.  T3»  T5.  19.  19. 
20,  21,  21  ;  60.  1,  2,  6,  9,  14,  16,  19,  20,  22 ;  61.  1,  2,  3,  6, 

8,  g,  10 ;  62.  2,  3,  4,  6,  8,  9,  n,  12  ;  63.  7,  7,  7,  14,  16, 17 ; 
64.  8,  9,  12 ;  65.  7,  8,  n,  23,  25 ;  66.  1,  2,  5,  5,  6,  9,  12,  14, 

15,  16,  16,  17,  20,  20,  20,  21,  22,  23. 

Jer.  1.  2,  4,  7,  8,  g,  9,  n,  12,  13,  14,  15,  19;  2.  1,  2,  3, 

3,  4.  5.  6,  8,  g,  12,  17,  19,  29,  31,  37 ;  3.  1,  6,  io,  n,  12. 12, 

13,  13,  14,  16,  16,  17,  17,  20,  21,  22,  23,  25;  4.  1,  2,  3,  4,  8, 

9,  17,  26,  27;  5.  2,  3,  4,  5,  g,   10,  11,  12,  14,  15,  18,  19,  22, 

24,  29;  6.  6,  9,  10,  11,  12,  15,  16,  21,  22,  30;  7.  1,  2,  2,  3, 

4,  4,  11,  13,  ig,  21,  28,  2g,  30,  32 ;  8.  1,  3,  4,  7,  8,  9,  12,  13, 

14,  14, 17,  19 ;  g.  3,  6,  7,  9,.  12,  13,  15,  17,  20,  22,  23,  24,  24, 
25;  10.  1,  2,  6,  10,  16,  18,  21,  23,  24;  11.  1,  3,  5,  6,  9,  11, 

16,  17,-18,  20,  21,  21,  22;  12.  1,  3,  12,  13,  14,  16, 17;  13.  1, 

2.  3.  5.  6,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  14,  16,  17,  25 ;  14.  1,  7,  9,  10,  10, 

11,  14,  15,  20,  22;  15.  1,  2,  3,  6,  9,  11,  15, 16,  19,  20;  16. 1, 

3.  5.  5.  9.  io.  10,  11,  14.  14.  15.  16,  19.  21;  17.  5,  5,  7,  7, 

10,  13,  13,  14,  15,  19,  20,  21,  24,  26 ;  18.  1,  5,  6,  11,  13,  ig, 
23  J  19*  i»  3.  3.  6,  11,  12,  14,  14,  15;  20.  1,  2,  3,  4,  7,  8,  11, 
i2.  13.  13.  16;  21.  1,  2,  2,  4,  7,  8,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14;  22.  1, 
2.  3.  5.  6,  8,  9,  11,  16,  18,  24,  29,  30;  23.  1,  2,  2,  4,  5,  6,  7, 

7,  8,  9,  11,  12,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  23,  24,  28,  29,  30,  31, 
32>  33.  33.  34.  35.  36,  37.  37.  38>  38;  24.  1,  1,  3,  4,  5,  7,  8 ; 
25-  3>  4.  5.  7.  8,  9,  12,  15,  17,  17,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31,  31,  32, 
33.  36.  37;  26.  1,  2,  2,  2,  4,  7,  8,  9,  9,  10,  10,  12,  13,  13,  15, 
16,  18,  ig,  19,  19,  20;  27.  1,  2,  4,  8,  11,  13,  15,  16,  16,  18, 

18,  19,  21,  21,  22 ;  28.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  6,  6,  9,  n,  12,  13,  14, 

15,  16,  16;  29.  4,  7,  8,  9,  10,  n,  14,  14,  15,  16,  17,  19,  10, 
20,  21,  22,  23,  25,  26,  30,  31,  32,  32,  32  ;  30.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  8, 
9,  10,  it,  12,  17,  iS,  21,  23,  24  ;  31.  1,  2,  3,  6,  7,  7,  10,  11, 

12,  14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  18,  20,  22,  23,  23  27,  28,  31,  32,  33, 
34>  34.  35.  36,  37.  38,  38>  4©  ;  32.  1,  3.  5.  6,  8,  8,  14,  15,  16, 
18,  26,  27  28,  30,  36,  42,  44  ;  33.  1,  2,  2,  2,  4, 10, 11, 11, 11, 
n,  12,  13,  14,  16,  17.  19,  20,  23,  24,  25 ;  34.  1,  2,  2,  4,  4,  5, 

8,  12,  12,  13,  17,  17,  22;  35.  1,  2,  4,  12,  13,  13,  17,  18,  19  ; 
36.  1,  4,  5,  6,  6,  7,  7,  8,  8,  9,  10,  10,  11,  26,  27,  29,  30 ;  37. 

2,  3,  6,  7,  9,  17 ;  38.  2,  3,  14,  16,  17,  20,  21  ;  39.  15,  16,  17, 
18 ;  40.  1,  2,  3,  3 ;  41.  5 ;  42.  2,  3,  4,  4,  5,  5,  6,  6,  7,  9,  n, 
J3.  15.  i5j  l8,  19,  20,  20,  20,  21  ;  43.  1,  1,  2,  4,  7,  8,  10; 
44.  2,  7,  n,  16,  21,  22,  23,  23,  24,  25,  26,  26,  29,  30 ;  45.  2, 

3,  4,  5  ;  46.  1,  5,  13,  15,  18,  23,  25,  26,  28  ;  47.  1,  2,  4,  6, 
7 ;  48.  1,  8,  10,  i2,  15,  25,  26,  30,  35,  38,  40,  42,  43,  44,  47 ; 
49.  1,  2,  2,  6,  7,  12,  13,  14,  16,  18,  20,  26,  28,  30,  31,  32,  34, 

35.  37.  38.  39  5  50-  *>  4.  4.  5.  7.  7.  10.  13.  14.  15.  iS,  20,  21, 
24,  25,  28,  29,  30,  33,  34,  35,  40,  45;  51.  1,  5,  6,  7,  10,  10, 

11,  11,  12,  14,  19,  24,  25,  26,  29,  33,  36,  39,  45,  48,  50,  51, 
52.  53.  55.  56>  57.  58.  62  ;  52.  2,  3,  13,  17,  17,  20. 

Lam.  1.  5,  g,  n,  12,  17,  18,  20 ;  2.  6,  7,  8,  g,  17,  20,  22 ; 

3.  18,  22,  24,  25,  26,  40,  50,  55,  sg,  61,  64,  66 ;  4.  n,  16,  20; 

5,  1,  ig,  21. 

Eze.  1.  3,  3,  28;  3.  12,  14,  16,  22,  23;  4.  13;  5.  13,  15, 
i7;-6.  1,  7,  10,  13,  14;  7.  1,  4,  9,  19,  27  ;  8.  12,  12,  14, 16, 

16,  16 ;  9.  4,  g,  9 ;  10.  4,  4,  18,  19 ;  n.  1,  5,  5,  10,  12,  14, 

15,  23,  25  ;  12.  1,  8,  is,  16,  17,  20,  21,  25,  26;  13.  1,  2,  s, 

6,  6,  7,  14,  21,  23  ;  14.  2,  4,  7,  8,  9,  12  ;  15.  1,  7 ;  16.  1,  35, 
58,  62;  17.  1,  11,  21,  24,  24;  18.  1;  20.  1,  2,  5,  7,  13,  19, 
20,  26,  38,  42,  44,  45, 47,  4"8  ;  21. 1,  3,  5,  8,  9, 17,  18,  32  ;  22. 

1,  14,  16,  17,  22,  23,  28;  23.  1,  36;  24.  1,  14,  15,  20,  27; 
25*  J>  5.  7.  n>   17!  26-   1,  6,   14;  27.  1;  28.  1,   n,  20,  22, 

23,  26;  29.  1,  6,  9,  17,  21 ;  30.  1,  3,  6,  8,  12,  19,  20,  25,  26; 
31.  1;  32.  1,  15,  17  ;  33.  1,  22,  23,  29,  30;  34.  1,  7,  9,  24, 

24,  27,  30 ;  35.  1,  4,  9,  10,  12,  15 ;  36.  1,  n,  16,  20,  23,  36, 

36.  38J  37-  I.  I.  4.  6.  13.  14.  14- 15.  28;  38.  1,  23;  39.  6, 

7,  22,  2S ;  40.  1,  46 ;  41.  22  ;  42.  13 ;  43.  4,  5,  24,  24 ;  44. 

2,  2.  3,  4,  4,  s,  5 ;  45.  1,  4,  23 ;  46.  3,  4,  g,  12,  13,  14 ;  48. 

9,  10,  14,  35, 

Dan.  9,  2,  4,  10,  13,  14,  14,  20. 

Hos.  1.  1,  2,  2,  2,  4,  7  ;  2.  13,  16,  20,  21 ;  3.  1,  1,  5,  5 ; 

4.  1,  1,  10,  15,  16 ;  5.  4,  6,  7 ;  6.  1,  3  ;  7.  10 ;  8.  1,  13 ;  9. 

3,  4,  4,  5,  14 ;  10.  3,  12 ;  11.  10,  11 ;  12.  2,  5,  5,  9,  13 ;  13. 

4,  15;  14.  1,  2,  9. 

Joel  1.  t,  9,  9,  14,  14,  15,  19  ;  2.  1,  11,  11,  12,  13,  14,  17, 

17,  18,  ig,  21,  26,  27,  31,  32,  32,  32 ;  3.  8,  n,  14,  16,  16,  17, 

18,  21. 

Amos  1.  2,  3,  5,  6,  9,  11,  13,  15 ;  2.  1,  3,  4,  4,  6,  11,  16 ; 
3.  1,  6,  10,  12,  15 ;  4.  3,  6,  8,  g,  10,  n,  13 ;  5.  4,  6,  8,  15, 

16,  17,  18,  18,  20,  27 ;  6.  8,  10,  11,  14 ;  7.  3,  3,  6,  8,  15,  15, 
16,  17  ;  8.  2,  7,  it,  12;  g.  6,  7,  8,  12,  13,  15. 

Obart.  1,  4,  8,  15,  18,  21. 

J011.  i.  i,  3.  3,  4,  g,  10,  14,  14,  14,  16,16,  17 ;  2.  1,  2,  6, 
7,  0,  10  ;  3.  1,  3 ;  4.  2,  2,  3,  4,  6,  10. 

Mic.  1.  1,  3,  12 ;  2.  3,  5,  7,  13 ;  3.  4,  5,  8,  11,  n  ;  4.  1, 
2,  2,  4,  5,  6,  7, 10,  12,  13 ;  5.  4,  4,  7,  10];  6. 1,  2,  2,  5,  6,  7,  8, 
g;  7.  7,  8,.9,  10,  17. 


LORD 


619 


LORD 


Nail.  i.  2,  2,  2,  3,  3,  7,  g,  ii,  i2,  14 ;  2.  2,  13 ;  3.  5. 

Hab.  1.  2,  12;  2.  2,  13,  14,  i6s  20;  3.  2,  2,  8,  18. 

Zeph.  1.  1,  a,  3,  5,  6,  6,  7,  7,  8,  10,  12,  14,  14,  17,  18 ; 
2>  2»  3»  3>  5>  7)  9>  IO>  XI »  3-  2»  5>  8,  9,  12,  15,  15,  17,  20. 

Hag.  1.  i,  2,  2,  3,  5,  7,  8,  9,  12,  i2,  13,  13, 13,  14, 14  ; 
1,  4,  4,  4,  6,  7,  8,  9,  9,  10,  11,  14,,  15,  17,  18,  20,  23,  23,  23 

Zech.  1.  1,  2,  3,  3,  3,  4,  4,  6,  7,  10,  11,  12,  12,  13,  14, 16, 
16,  17,  17,  20;  2.  6,  6,  8,  9,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13  ;  3.  1,  2,  2,  2. 
5>  6,  7,  9,  10;  4.  6,  6,  8,  9,  10 ;  5.  4  ;  6.  9,  12,  12,  13,  14 
*5>  i5»  15;  7-  1*  2,  3-  4.  7.  8,  9.  !2,  12,  13;  8.  1,  2,  3,  3,  4 
6,  6,  7,  9,  g,  11,  14,  14,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  21,  22,  22,  23;  9 

1,  1,  14,  15,  16;  10.  1,  1,  3,  5,  6,  7,  12,  12;  11.  4,  5,  6,  11 
13.  13.  15 ;  is-  1,  1.  4.  5.  7>  8,  8 ;  13.  2,  3,  7,  8,  9  ;  14. 1,  3, 
5>  7j  9)  9>  12,  13,  16,  17,  iS,  20,  20,  21,  21. 

Mai.  1.  1,  2,  2,  4,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  13,  14 

2.  2,  4,  7,  8,  11,  i2,  12,  13,  14,  16,  16,  17,  17 ;  3.  1,  3,  4,  5, 
6,  7,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  16,  16,  16,  17;  4.  1,  3,  5. 

6.  One  high  or  exalted,  kid  mare. 

Dan*   2. 47  a  Lord  of  kings,  and  a  revealer  of  secrets 
4. 19  My  lord,  thedream(be)  to  them  that liate 

4.  24  decree,  .which  is  come  upon  my  lord  the 

5.  23  hast  lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord  01 

l.Jah,  {a  contraction  of  Jehovah),  n;  yoJu 

Exodis.  2  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  song,  and  he  is 
17. 16  For  he  said,  Because  the  Lord  hathsworn 
Psa.  77.  11  I  will  remember  the  works  of  the  LORD 
89.  8  who  (is)  a  strong  Lord  like  unto  thee  ?  or 
94.  7  The  Lord  shall  not  see,  neither  shall  the 
94. 12  the  man  whom  thou  ehastenest,  O  Lord 
102.  18  and  the  people . .  shall  praise  the  Lord 

104.  35  Bless  thou  the  Lord,  0  my  soul.    Praise 

105.  45  and  keep  his  laws.    Praise  ye  the  Lord 

106.  1  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for  (he  is) 
106.  48  the  people  say,  Amen.  Praise  ye  the  Lord 
in.   1  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  I  will  praise,  .in  the 

112.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Blessed  (is)  the  man 

113.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Praise,  0  ye  servants 
113.   9  (be)  a  joyful  mother.  .Praise  ye  the  Lord 

115.  17  Thedead  praise  not  the  LORD,  neither  any 
115. 1 S  we  will  bless  the  Lord.  .Praise  the  Lord 

116.  1  I  love  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  heard 
116. 19  In  the  courts  of  the  LORD'S  house,  in  the 
118.    5  caUeduponthejLoRDindistress:  theLoRD 
118.  14  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  song,  and 
11S.  17  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord 

118. 18  The  Lord  hath  chastened  me  sore :  but 

118. 19  go  in  to  them,  (and)  I  will  praisethe  Lord 
122.  4  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the  Lord 
130.  3  If  thou,  Lord,  shouldest  mark  iniquities 
135.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Praise  ye  the  name 
135.  3  Praise  the  Lord,  .sing  praises  unto  his  na. 
135.  4  the  Lord  h?th  chosen  Jacob  unto  himself 
135.  21  dwelleth  at  Jerusalem.  Praise  ye  the  Lord 

146.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  .0  my  soul 

146. 10  unto  all  generations.  Praise  ye  the  Lord 

147.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord:  for  (it  is)  good  to  sing 

147.  20  have  not  known  them.  Praise  ye  the  Lord 

148.  1  Praise  ye  the  LORD .  .from  the  heavens 
148. 14  people  near  unto  him.  Praise  ye  the  Lord 

149.  1  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Sing,  .a  new  song 

149.  9  this  honour  have  all.  .Praise  ye  the  Lord 
iso.    1  Praise  ye  the  LORD.  Praise  God  in  his  sa. 

150.  6  breath  praise  the  Lord.  Praise  ye  the  L. 
Isa.  12.   2  Lord  Jehovah  (is)  my  strength  and  (my) 

26.  4  Lord  Jehovah  (is)  everlasting  strength 
38.  ii  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord,  (even)  the  Lord 

S.A  prince,  axle,  pn  seren. 

Josh.  13.   3  five  lords  of  the  Philistines  ;  the  Gazath. 

Judg.  3.  3  five  lords  of  the  Philistines,  and  all  the  C. 
16.  5  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  came  up  unto 
16.  8  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  brought  up  to 
16. 18  called  for  the  lords  of  the  Philistines,  say. 
16.  18  lords  of  the  Philistines  came  up  unto  her 

16.  27  all  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  (wereY.there 

17.  30  the  house  fell  upon  the  lords,  and  upon 
1  Sa.   5.    8  gathered  all  the  lords  of  the  Philistines 

5. 11  together  all  the  lords  of  the  Philistines 

6.   4  the  number  of  the  lords  of  the  Philistines 
6.   4  one  plague . .  on  you  all,  and  on  your  lords 

6. 1 2  the  lords  of  the  Philis  tines  went  after  them 
6  16  the  five  lords  of  the  Philistines  had  seen 

6.  iS  the  cities,  .(belonging)  to  the  five  lords 

7.  7  lords  of  the  Philistines  went  up  against 
29.  2  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  passed  on  by 
29.  6  nevertheless  the  lords  favour  thee  not 
29.  7  that  thou  displease  not  the  lords  of  the  P. 

1  Ch.12. 19  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  upon  advise. 

9.  A  great  one,  3*i  rob. 

Dan.    2. 10  no  king,  lord,  nor  ruler,  .asked  such  thi. 

10.  Prince,  head,  chief,  captain,  "ii?  sar. 

Ezra     8.  25  his  lords,  and  all  Israel  (there)  present 
ll.One  of  or  over  three,  why  shalish. 
■     2  Ki.  7.    2  Then  a  lord  on  whose  hand  the  king  lea. 
7.  17  the  king  appointed  the  lord  on  whose  h. 
7. 19  that  lord  answered  the  man  of  God,  and 
Eze.  23.  23  great  lords  and  renowned,  all  of  them  rid. 
12.  .4  great  one,  ]212i  rctbreban. 

Dan.  4.  36  counsellors  and  my  lords  sought  unto  me 
5.  1  a  great  feast  to  a  thousand  of  his  lords 
5.  9  greatly  troubled,  .and  his  lords  were  ast. 
5. 10  of  the  words  of  the  king  and  his  lords 
5.  23  thy  lords,  thy  wives,  and  thy  concubines 
6. 17  king  sealed  it . .  with  the  signet  of -his  lords 
1Z.A  desjiot,  master,  Seo-rroT-ns  despotes. 

Luke  2.  29  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart 
Acts    4.  24  Lord,  thou  (art)  God,  which  hast  made 

2  Pe.   2.    1  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  and  I 


Jude        4  and  denying  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our 
Rev.    6.  10  How  long,  0  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou 

H.Lord,  sir,  mooter,  icOpics  hurios. 

Matt.  1.  20  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him 
1.  22  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  pro. 

1.  24  did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had  bidden 

2.  13  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth  to  Joseph 
o.  15  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  pr. 

2.  19  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeareth  in  a  dream 

3.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 

4.  7  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 

4.  to  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

5.  33  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths 
7.  21  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord 

7.  22  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy 

8.  2  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 
8.    6  Lord,  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the 
8.    8  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  should. 
8.  21  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  f . 

8.  25  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  save  us :  we  pe. 

9.  28  Believe  ye.  .They  said  unto  him,  Yea,  L. 
9.  38  Pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 

10.  24  (his)  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  1. 

10.  25  as  his  master,  and  the  servant  as  his  lord 

11.  25  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  bee. 

12.  8  Son  of  man  is  Lord  even  of  the  sabbath 

13.  51  Have  ye  understood . .  They  say . .  Yea,  [L.] 

14.  28  Lord,  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come.unto  tliee 

14.  30  beginning  to  gink,  .cried.  .Lord,  save  me 

15.  22  Have  laercy  on  me,  O  Lord,  (thou)  son  of 
15.  25  and  worshipped  him,  saying,  Lord,  help 
15.  27  Truth,  Lord :  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  cru. 
16. 22  Be  it  far  from  thee,  Lord :  this  shall  not 
17.   4  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  :  if  thou 

17.  15  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son :  for  he  is  1. 

18.  21  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against 

18. 25  his  lord  commanded  him  to  be  sold,  and 
18.  26  [Lord,]  have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will 
18.  27  the  lord  of  that  servant  was  moved  with 
18.  31  came  and  told  unto  their  lord  all  that  was 
18.  32  his  lord,  after  that  he  had  called  him,  said 
18.  34  his  lord  was  wroth,  and  delivered  him  to 
20.  8  lord  of  the  vineyard  saith  unto  his  steward 
20. 30,  31  Have  mercy  on  us,  0  Lord,  .son  of  D. 

20.  33  They  say.  .Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be  op. 

21.  3  ye  shall  say,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them 
21.  9  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
21.  40  the  Lord  therefore  of  the  vineyard  v.  42. 

21.  42  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous 
22.37  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 

22.  43  then  doth  David  in  spirit  call  him  Lord 

22.  44  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on 
22. 45  If  David  then  call  liim  Lord,  how  is  he  his 

23.  39  (is)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  L. 

24.  42  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  come 
24.  45  his  lord  hath  made  ruler  over  his  house. 
24.  46  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so  doing 
24.  48  say  in  his  heart,  My  lord  delayeth  his  co. 

24.  50  The  lord  of  that  servant  shall  come  in  a 

25.  11  otfier  virgins,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to 

25. 18  digged  luthe  earth,  and  hid  his  lord's  m. 
25.  19  the  lord  of  those  servants  cometh,  and  r. 
25.  20  Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five  tale. 
25.  21  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  (thou) 
25.  21,  23  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord 
25.  22  Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two  tale. 
25.  23  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  good 
25.  24  Lord,  I  knew  thee  that  thou  art  an  hard 

25.26  His  lord  answered,  .said  unto  him,  (Thou) 
25.  37  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered,  and 

25.  44  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered,  or 

26.  22  one  of  them  to  say  unto  him,  Lord,  is  it 
27. 10  potter's  field,  as  the  Lord  appointed  me 
28.    2  angel  of  the  Lord  descended  from  heaven 
28.   6  Come,  see  the  place  where  [the  Lord]  lay 

Mark  1.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 
2.  28  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  sabbath 
5.  19  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee 
7.  28  Yes,  Lord :  yet  the  dogs  under  the  table 
9.  24  [Lord,]  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief 
11.   3  say  ye  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 

11.  9  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
11. 10  [that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord] 

12.  9  What  shall  therefore  the  lord  of  the  vin. 
12.  11  was  the  Lord'sdoing,  and  it  is  marvellous 
12.  29  0  Israel;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord 
12.  30  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 
12.  36  The  Lord  said  to  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on  my 

12.  37  David  therefore  himself  calleth  him  Lord 

13.  20  except  that  the  Lord  had  shortened  those 

16. 19  [after  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  them] 
16.  20 '[the  Lord  working  with  (them),  and  con.] 

Luke  1.  6  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  L. 
1.  9  when  he  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
1.  11  appeared  unto  him  an  angel  of  the  Lord 

1. 15  he  shall  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

1. 16  many . .  shall  he  turn  to  the  Lord  their  God 

1. 17  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  L. 
1.  25  Thus  hath  the  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the 
1.  28  highly  favoured,  the  Lord  (is)  with  thee 
1. 32  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  him  the 

1.  38  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord ;  be  it 
1.  43  the  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to 
1. 45  tilings  which  were  told  her  from  the  L. 
1.  46  Mary  said.  My  soul  doth  magnify  the  L. 
1.  58  the  Lord  had  showed  great  mercy  upon 
1.  66  And  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him 
1.  68  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  Israel;  for  he 

1.  76  thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord 

2.  9  theftngelof  theLordcameuponthcm.and 
2.   9  glory  [of  theLordjshoneiCMnd  about  them  J 


Luke  2.  11  born,  .a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  L. 
2. 15  which  the  Lord  hath  made  known  unto 
2.  22  to  Jerusalem,  to  present  (him)  to  the  L. 
2.  23  As  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  Ev. 
2.  23  male,  .shall  be  called  holy  to  the  Lord 
2.  24  that  which  is  said  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 
2.  26  not . .  before  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ 
2.  38  she . .  gave  thanks  likewise  unto  [the  Lord] 

2.  39  all  things  according  to  the  law  of  the  L. 

3.  4  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make 

4.  8  Thou  shalt  worslup  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

4.  12  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 

4. 1 8  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  me,  be.  ■ 

4. 19  To  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  L. 

5.  8  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord 
5. 12  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 
5. 17  power  of  the~  Lord  was  (present)  to  heal 

6.  5  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  sabbath 

6.  46  why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not 

7.  6  Lord,  trouble  not  thyself ;  for  I  am  not 
7.  13  when  the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had  compassion 
7.  31  [Lord  said,  Whereunto  then  shall  I  liken] 
9.  54  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to 
9.  57  [Lord,]  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever 
9.  59  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my 

9.  61  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee;  but  let  me  first 
10.  1  the  Lord  appointed  other  seventy  also,  and 
10.  2  pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 
.  10.  17  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto  us 
10.  21  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that 

10.  27  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 

10. 40  Lord,  dost  thou  not  care  that  my  sister 

11.  1  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  also  tau. 

11.  39  Lord  said  untohim,!NTow-do  ye  Pharisees 

12.  36  ye.,  like  untonien  that  wait  for  their  lord 
12.  37  lord  wheu  he  cometh  shall  find  watching 

12.41  Lord,  speakest  thou  this  parable  unto  us 
12.  42  the  Lord  said,  Who  then  is  that  faithful 
12.  42  lord  shall  make  ruler  over  his  household 
12.  43  his  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so  do. 
12.  45  say  in  his  heart,  My  lord  delayeth  Ins  co. 
12.  46  The  lord  of  that  servant  will  come  in  a 

12.  47  that  servant,  which  knew  his  lord's  will 

13.  8  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also,  till  I 
13.  15  The  Lord  then  answered  him,  and  said 
13.  23  said.  .Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved? 

13.  25  the  door,  saying,  Lord,  [Lord,]  open  unto 
13-  35  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

14.  22  Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  commanded 
14. 23  the  lord  said  unto  the  servant,  Go  out 
16,    3  lord  taketh  away  from  me  the  stewardship 
16.    5  So  he. called  every  one  of  his  lord's  debt. 
16.    5  said.  .How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  1.? 

16.  8  the  lord  commended  the  unjust  steward 

17.  5  the  apostles  said  unto  the  Lord,  Increase 
17.    6  the  Lord  said,  H  ye  had  faith  as  a  grain 

17.  37  they  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Where 

18.  6  the  Lord  said,  Hearwhattheunjustjudge 
iS.  41  he  said,  Lord,  that  I  may  receive  my  sight 

19.  8  said  unto  the  Lord;  Behold,  Lord,  the  half 
19.  16  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  tenpounds 
19.  18  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  five  pounds 
19.20  Lord,  behold,  (here  is)  thy  pound,  which 
19.25  they  said  unto  him,  Lord,  he  hath  ten  po. 
19.  31  say.  .Because  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 
ig.  34  And  theysaid,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  him 

19.  38  King  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  L. 

20.  13  Then  said  the  lord  of  the  vineyard,  What 
20.  i5shallthe  lord  of  the  vineyard  do  unto  them 
20.  37  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of  Abraham 
20.  42  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on 
20.  44  David  therefore  calleth  him  Lord,  how  is 
22.  31  [the  Lord  said,  Simon,  Simon,  behold,  S.] 
22.  33  Lord,  I  am  ready  to  go  with  thee,  both 
22.  38  they  said,  Lord,  behold,  here  (are)  two  s. 
22. 49  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the  sword  ? 

22.  61  And  the  Lord  turned,  and  looked  .upon 

22.  61  Peter  remembered  the  word  of  the  Lord 

23.  42  [Lord,]  remember  me  when  thou  comest 

24.  3  and  found  not  the  body  of  [the  Lord]  Je. 
24.  34  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  hath  appeared. 

John   1.  23  Make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord,  as 
4.    1  Lord  knew  how  the  Pharisees  had  heard 
6.  23  eat.  .afterthat[theLord]hadgiven  thanks 
6.  34  said  they.  .Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  b. 
6.  63  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go?  thou  hast  the 
8. 11  [She  said,  No  man.  Lord.  And  Jesus  said] 
9.  36  Who  is  he,  Lord,  that  I  might  believe  on 
9.  38  he  said,  Lord,  I  believe.  And  he  worship. 
11.   2  which  anointed  the  Lord  with  ointment 
11.   3  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick 
11.  12  saidhisdisciples,Lord,if  hesleep,  he  shall 
11.  21,  32  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  my  br.    • 
11.  27  Lord  :  I  believe  that  thou  art  the  Christ 

11.  34  They  said  unto  him,  Lord,  come  and  see 
11.39  Lord,  by  this  time  he  stinketh:  forhehath 

12.  13  king,  .that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  L. 
12. 38  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  report?  and 

12.  38  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been  revealed? 

13.  6  Petersaith..Lord,  dost  thou  wash  my  feet? 
13.  9  Lord.notmyfeetonly.but  also  (nry)  hands 
13.  13  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord:  and  ye  say 
13.  14  I  then,  (your)  Lord  and  Master,  have  wa. 
13.  16  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord 
13.  75  He  then,  .saith  unto  him,  Lord,  who  is  it? 
13.  36  said  unto  him,  Lord,  whither  goest  thou? 

13.  37  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  the  now?  I  will 

14.  5  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  thou  goest 
14.    8  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficcth 

14.  22  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest 

15.  15  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth 
15.  20  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord 


LORD 


620 


LORD 


John2o.    2  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of  the  sepulchre 
zo.  13  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I  kn. 
20.  18  and  told,  .that  she  had  seen  the  Lord 
20. 20  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord 
20.  25  said  unto  him,  We  have  seen  the  Lord 

20.  28  and  said  unto  him,  My  Lord  and  my  God 
2i.    7  disciple,  .saith  unto  Peter,  It  is  the  Lord 
2i.    7  Simon  Peter  heard  that  it  was  the  Lord 
21. 12  durst  ask .  .knowing  that  it  was  the  Lord 

21.  15,  16  Yea,  Lord;  thou  knowest that  I  love 
21.  17  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things ;  thou  kno. 
21.  20  said,  Lord,  which  is  he  that  betrayeth  thee 
21.  21  saith.. Lord,  and  what  (shall)  this  man(do) 

Acts    1.   6  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again 
1. 21  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us 

1.  24  Thou,  Lord,  which  knowest  the  hearts  of 

2.  20  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord  come 
2. 21  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved 
2. 25 1  foresaw  the  Lord  always  before  my  face 
2.  34  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on 
2.  36  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  C. 
2.  39  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call 

2.  47  the  Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such 
3. 19  shall  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 

3.  22  A  Prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise 

4.  26  were  gathered  together  against  the  Lord 
4.  29  Lord,  behold  their  threatenings:  and  grant 

4.  33  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  J. 

5.  9  together  to  tempt  the  spirit  of  the  Lord? 
.  14  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the  Lord 
.  19  the  angel  of  theXord  by  night  opened  the 
.  30  Angel  of  the  Lord  in  a  flame  of  fire  in  a  b. 
.  31  and.  .the  voice  [of  the  Lord]  came  unto  h. 
.  33  Then  said  the  Lord  to  him,  Put  off  thy  s. 

. .  37  A  Prophet  shall  [the  Lord]  your  God  raise 
7.  49  what  house  will  ye  build,  .saith  the  Lord 

7.  59  and  saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit 
7. 60  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge 
8. 16  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

8.  24  Pray  ye  to  the  Lord  for  me,  that  none  of 
8.  25  aud  preached  the  word  of  the  Lord 
8.  26  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  uuto  Philip 

8.  39  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip 
1  slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord 

5  said,  Who  art  thou,  Lord?  And  [the  Lord] 

6  [said,  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  haveine  to  do  ?] 
6  [the  Lord  (said)  unto  him,  Arise,  and  go] 

.  10  to  him  said  the  Lord  in  a  vision,  Ananias 
.  10  And  he  said,  Behold,  I  (am  here),  Lord 
_.  11  the  Lord  (said)  uuto  him,  Arise,  and  go 

9.  13  Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man 
9. 15  the  Lord  said  unto  him, Go  thy  way:  for 
9.  17  the  Lord,  (even)  Jesus,  that  appeared  unto 
9.  27  how  he  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  way,  and 
9.  29  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Je. 
9.  31  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
9. 35  and  Saron  saw  him,  and  turned  to  the  L. 
9.  42  all  Joppa ;  and  many  believed  in  the  Lord 

10.  4  he  was  afraid,  and  said.  What  is  it,  Lord? 
10.  14  Not  so,  Lord ;  for  I  have  never  eaten  any 
10.  36  peace  by  Jesus  Christ :  he  is  Lord  of  all 

10.  48  to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  [the  Lord] 

11.  8  Not  so,  Lord  :  for  nothing  common  or  un 
11.  16  Then  remembered  I  the  word  of  the  Lord 
11.  17  who  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
11.  20  unto  the  Grecians,  preaching  the  Lord  J. 
11.  21  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them  :  and 
11.  21  number  believed,  and  turned  unto  the  L. 
11.  23  that,  .they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord 

11.  24  and  much  people  was  added  unto  the  L. 

12.  7  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  (him) 
12.  11  the  Lord  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  hath 
12. 17  Lord  had  brought  him  out  of  the  prison 

12.  23  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him,  because 

13.  2  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted 
13. 10  cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  L. 
13.  11  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  thee,  and 
13. 12  astonished  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord 

13.  47  so  hath  the  Lord  commanded  us,  (saying) 

13. 48  glorified  the  word  of  the  Lord  :  aud  as  m. 

13. 49  word  of  the  Lord  was  published  throughout 

14.  3  abode  they  speaking  boldly  in  the  Lord 

14.  23  they  commended  them  to  the  Lord,  on  w. 

15.  11  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
15.  17  residue  of  men  might  seek  after  the  Lord 
15.  17  saith  the  Lord,  who  doeth  all  these  things 
15.  26  lives  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
15.  35  preaching  the  word  of  the  Lord,  with  many 

15.  36  we  have  preached  the  word  of  the  Lord 

16.  10  [the  Lord]  had  called  us  for  to  preach  the 
16.  14  whose  heart  the  Lord  opeued,  that  she 
16. 15  have  judged  me  to  be  faithful  to  the  Lord 
16.  31  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  aud  thou 

16.  32  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the  Lord 

17.  24  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 

17.  27  they  should  seek  [the  Lord],  if  haply  they 

18.  8  believed  on  the  Lord  with  all  his  house 
18.   9  spake  the  Lord  to  Paul  in  the  night  by  a 
18.  25  man  was  instructed  in  the  way  of  the  L. 

18.  25  taught  diligently  the  things  of  [the  Lord] 

19.  5  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
19.  10  they,  .heard  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
19.  13  to  call  over,  .the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
19.  17  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  magnified 

19.  20  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and  p. 

20.  19  Serving  the  Lord  with  all  humility  of  m. 
20.  21  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
20.  24  which  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

20.  35  to  remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
si.  13  to  die.  .for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

21.  14  ceased,  saying,  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  d. 
21.  20  they  glorified  [the  Lord],  and  said  unto  him 


Acts  22.    8  I  answered,  Who  art  thou,  Lord?  v.ip,  10. 
22. 16  baptized,  .calling  on  the  name  [of  the  L.] 

22.  19  Lord,  they  know  that  I  imprisoned  and  b. 

23.  11  Lord  stood  by  him,  and  said.  Be  of  good 

25.  26  no  certain  thing  to  write  unto  my  lord 

26.  15  I  said,  Who  art  thou,  Lord?  And  he  said 
28.  31  things  which  concern  the  Lord  Jesus  Chr. 

Roni.  1.    3  Concerning  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
1.    7  God  our  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
8  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute 

24  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  dead 
i  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

11  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

21  uuto  eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
11  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  [our  Lord] 
23  eternal  Life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 

25  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
39  love,  .which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord 

28  work  will  the  Lord  make  upon  the  earth 

29  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  had  left  us  a  seed 
10.  9  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus 
10. 12  the  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all 
10.  13  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 

10.  16  saith,  Lord,  who  hath  believed  ourreport? 

11.  3  Lord,  they  have  killed  thy  prophets,  and 
11.34  wno  h-ath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord ?  or 

12.  11  Not  slothful  in  business,  .serving  the  [L.] 
12. 19  is  written!  .1  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord 

13.  14  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  aud  make 

14.  6  the  day,  regardeth  (it)  unto  the  Lord ;  and 
14.    6  [to  the  Lord  he  doth  not  regard  (it)] 

14.  6  He  that  eateth,  eateth  to  the  Lord,  for  he 
14.  6  that  eateth  not,  to  the  Lord  he  eateth  not 
14.  8  For  whether  welive,  we  live  unto  the  Lord 
14.    8  and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord 

14.  8  we  live  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's 
14. 11  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  every  knee  shall 
14. 14  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  J. 

15.  6  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
15.  11  Praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles;  and  laud 

15.  30  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  and  for 

16.  2  ye  receive  her  in  the  Lord,  as  becometh 
16.    8  Greet  Amplias  my  beloved  in  the  Lord 

16. 11  them . .  of  Narcissus,  which  are  in  the  Lord 

16. 12  and  Tryphosa,  who  labour  in  the  Lord 

16. 12  [Persis,  which  laboured  much  intheLord] 

16. 13  Salute  Rufus  choseu  in  the  Lord,  and  his 
16.  18  such  serve  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but 
16.  20  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 
r6.  22  I  Tertius.  .salute you  in  the  Lord 

16.  24  [The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ] 
1  Co.   1.    2  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
1.    3  our  Father,  and  (from)  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 
1.    7  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
1.    8  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 
1.    9  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus,  .our  Lord 

1.  10  by  thenameof  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
1. 31  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord 

2.  8  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory 

2. 16  whohath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  that 

3.  5  ministers . .  as  the  Lord 'gave  to  every  man 

3.  20  TheLordknoweththethoughtsof  the  wise 

4.  4  nothing . .  but  he  that  judgeth  me  is  the  L. 
4.    5  until  the  Lord  come,  who  both  will  bring 

4. 17  my  beloved  son,  and  faithful  in  the  Lord 
4.  19  will  come  to  you  shortly,  if  the  Lord  will 

4  In  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  wheu 

4  with  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

5  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

11  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

13  for  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  body 

14  God  hath  both  raised  up  the  Lord,  and 
17  he  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  sp. 
10  I  command,  (yet)  not  I,  but  the  Lord,  Let 

12  to  the  rest  speak  I,  not  the  Lord :  If  any 
17  as  [the  Lord]  hath  called  every  one,  so  let 

22  intheLord,  (being)  a  servant,  is  the  Lord's 
25  I  have  no  commandment  of  the  Lord :  yet 
2$  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful 
32  to  the  Lord,  how  he  may  please  the  Lord 

34  woman  careth  for  the  things  of  the  Lord 

35  attend  upon  the  Lord  without  distraction 
39  married  to  whom  she  will ;  only  in  the  L 

a.    5  as  there  be  gods  many,  and  lords  many 

8.  6  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  (are) 

9.  1  our  Lord?  are  not  ye  my  work  in  the  Lord 
9.  2  the  seal  of  mine  apostleship.  .in  the  Lord 
9.  5  (as)  the  brethren  of  the  Lord,  and  Cephas 
9.  14  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which  preach 

10.  21  Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  and 
10.  ei  ye  cannot  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table 
10.  22  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy?  are 
10.  26  the  earth  (is)  the  Lord's,  aud  the  fulness 

10.  28  [the  earth  (is)  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness] 

11.  11  the  woman  without  the  man,  in  the  Lord 
11.  23  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that  which 
11.  23  the  Lord  Jesus  the  (same)  night  in  which 
11.  26  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come 
11.  27  and  drink  (this)  cup  of  the  Lord,  un  worth. 
11.  27  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord 
11. 29  damnation,  .not  discerning  the  [Lord's] 

11.  32  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we 

12.  3  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but 
12,  5  there  are  differences,  .but  the  same  Lord 
14.  21  that  will  they  not  hear  me,  saith  the  Lord 

14.  37  unto  you  are.,  commandments  of  the  Lord 
16.  31  which  I  have  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord 

15.  47  the  second  man  (is)  [the  Lordl  from  hea. 
15.  57  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

15.  58  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord 
J5-  58  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord 

16.  7  tarry  a  while  with  you,  if  the  Lord  permit 


1  Co.  16. 

16. 
16. 
16. 

2  Co.  1. 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Phil 


10  he  worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I  also 
19  and  Priscilla  salute  you  much  in  the  Lord 

22  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

23  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

2  our  Father,  and  (from)  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 

3  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
14  also  (are)  ours  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Je. 
12  and  a  door  was  opened  unto  me  of  theL. 

16  it  shall  turn  to  the  Lord,  the  veil  shall 

17  Now  the  Lord  is  that  spirit :  and  where 

17  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  (is),  there  (is)  liberty 

18  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  ch. 
18  to  glory,  (even)  as  by  the  spirit  of  the  L. 

5  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord 

10  in  the  body  the  dying  of  [the  Lord]  Jesus 
14  he  which  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus  shall 

6  in  the  body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord 

8  absent . .  and  to  be  present  with  the  Lord 

11  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord. 

17  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  touch. 

18  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty 
5  but  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord 

9  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chr. 

19  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  same  Lord,  and 
21  not  only  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  also 

8  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  edification 

17  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord 

18  is  approved,  but  whom  the  Lord  commen. 
17  I  speak  (it)  not  after  the  Lord,  but  as  it 

1  come  to  visions  and. revelations  of  the  L. 
8  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice,  that  it  might 

10  the  Lord  hath  given  me  to  edification 
14  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 

3  the  Father,  and  (from)  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 

19  saw  I  none,  save  James  the  Lord's  brother 

1  from  a  servant,  though  he  be  lord  of  all 

10  have  confidence  m  you  through  the  Lord 

14  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

17  in  my  body  the  marks  of  [the  Lord]  Jesus 

18  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be) 

2  our  Father,  and  (from)  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 

3  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

15  I  heard  of  your  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
17  That  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 

21  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord 

1 1  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  L. 
14  [the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ] 

1  I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord,  be. 

5  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism 
17  testify  in  the  Lord,  that  ye  henceforth  w. 

8  but  now.  .light  in  the  Lord  :  walk  as  ch. 
10  Proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord 
17  understanding  what  the  will  of  [the  Lo.] 

19  making  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord 

20  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

22  unto  your  own  husbands,  as  unto  the  Lord 
29  cherisheth  it, even  as  [the  Lord]  the  church 

1  obey  your  parents  [in  the  Lord] :  for  this  is 

3  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord 

7  service,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men 

8  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord 

10  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 

21  brother  and  faithful  minister  in  the  Lord 

23  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

24  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity 

2  our  Father,  and  (from)  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 

14  many  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  waxing 

11  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  (is)  Lord 

19  trust  in  [the  Lord]  Jesus  to  send  Timoth. 
24  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also  myself 

29  Receive  him  therefore  in  the  Lord  with 
1  Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
8  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord 

20  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,  (my)  dearly  belo. 

2  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  Lord 

4  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway :  (and)  again  I 

5  known  unto  all  men.  The  Lord  (is)  at  hand 
10  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,  that  now  at 
23  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

2  [God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Ch.] 

3  and  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

10  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing 

6  therefore  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord 

16  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  [the  Lord] 

17  (do)  all  in  the  name  of  [the  Lord]  Jesus 
iS  your  own  husbands,  as  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord 
20  for  this  is  well  pleasing  unto  the  Lord 

23  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men 

24  that  of  the  Lord .  .for  ye  serve  the  Lord  C. 

7  minister  and  fellow  servant  in  the  Lord 
17  which  thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord 

1  the  Father  and  (in)  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
1  [God  our  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  C] 
3  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
6  became  followers  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord 

8  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of  the  L. 

15  the  Lord  Jesus  and  their  own  prophets  ' 
19  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his 

8  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord 

1 1  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto 

12  [the  Lord]  make  you  to  increase  and  abo. 

13  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1  exhort  (you)  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  as  ye 

2  commandments  we  gave  you  by  the  Lord 
6  the  Lord  (is)  the  avenger  of  all  such,  as 

15  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord 

15  (and)remain  unto  the  corning  of  the  Lord 

16  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven 

17  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air 
17  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord 

2  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  conieth  as  a  thief 


LORD 


i  Th.  5.    9  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
5. 12  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and  admonish 
5.  23  unto  the  coining  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
5.  27  charge  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  epistle 
5.  28  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

2  Th.  1.  1,  2  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
1.  7  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven 
1.  8  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 
1.  9  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
1.  12  That  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1.  12  grace  of  our  God  aud  the  Lord  Jesus  Ch. 

2.  1  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
2.    8  the  Lord  shall  consume  with  the  spirit 
2.  13  brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God 
2.  14  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

2.  16  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and  God 

3.  1  word  of  the  Lord  may  have  (free)  course 
3.  3  [the  Lord]  is  faithful,  who  shall  stahlish 
3.  4  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  touching  you 
3".  5  the  Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love 
3.  6  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
3. 12  exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with 
3.  16  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace 
3.  16  by  all  means.  The  Lord  (be)  with  you  all 
3.  iS  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (lie)  with 

1  Ti.    1.    1  [Lord]  Jesus  Christ,  (which  is)  our  hope 

1.    2  God  our  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  L. 
1.  12  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  who  hath 
1.  14  grace  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  abundant 

5.  21  [Lord]  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  elect  angels 

6.  3  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 

6.  14  until  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 
6. 15  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,  and  L. 

2  Ti.   1.    2  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord 

1.    8  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  our  Lord 
1.  16  The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of 

1.  18  The  Lord  grant  unto  him  that  he  may  find 

1. 18  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day :  and  in  how 

2.  7  Lord  give  thee  uuderstandingin  all  things 
2.  14  charging(them)before[theLord]that  they 

2. 19  seal,"The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his 
2.  22  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart 

2.  24  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive 

3.  11  but  out  of  (them)  all  the  Lord  delivered 

4.  1  [the  Lord]  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  judge 
4.  8  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  sh. 
4.  14  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  works 
4.  17  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened 
4.  18  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil 
4.  22  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with  thy  spirit 

Titus  1.    4  and  [the  Lord]  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour 
Phil.         3  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
5  which  thou  hast  toward  the  Lord  Jesus 
16  more,  .both  in  the  flesh,  and  in  the  Lord 
20  the  Lord :  refresh  my  bowels  in  [the  Lord] 
25  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 
Heb.   1.  10  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid 
2.    3  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord 

7.  14  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  out  of  Judah 

7.  21  The  Lord  sware  and  will  not  repent,  Thou 

8.  2  tabernacle,  winch  the  Lord  pitched,  and 
8.  8  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord, 'when  I  will 
8.  9  and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith  the  Lord 
8.  10  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord 

8. 11  shall  not  teach,  .saying,  Know  the  Lord 
10.  16  with  them  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord 
10. 30  saith  [the  Lord].  And  again,  The  Lord  sh. 
12.    s  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  L. 

12.  6  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and 
12. 14  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord 

13.  6  The  Lord  (is)  my  helper,  and  I  will  not 
13.  20  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  J. 

Jas.     i .    1  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  C. 

1.  7  that  he  shall  receive  any  tiling  of  the  L. 

1. 12  [Lord]  hath  promised  to  them  that  love 

2.  1  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ch. 

4.  10  Humble  yourselves  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
4. 15  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do  this 

5.  4  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  sab. 
5.   7  Be  patient,  .unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
5.    8  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh 
5.  10  who  have  spoken  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
5.  11  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord ;  that  [the  Lord] 

5. 14  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

5. 15  the  sick,  and  the  Lord  shall  raise  him  up 
t  Pe.  1.    3  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1.  25  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever 

2.  3  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  (is)  gracious 

2.  T3  every  ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake 

3.  6  as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord 
3. 12  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  over  therighte. 
3.  12  face  of  the  Lord  (is)  against  them  that  do 

3. 15  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts :  and 
2  Pc.    1.    2  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord 

1.  8  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
1. 11  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  C. 

1.  14  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  showed  me 

1. 16  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ch, 

2.  9  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  go. 

2.  11  accusation  against  them  before  [the  Lord] 

2. 20  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 

3.  2  us  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour 
3.    8  day  (is)  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years 
3.    9  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise 
3.  10  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief 
3.  15  long  suffering  of  our  Lord  (is)  salvation 
3. 18  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 

2  John     3  from  [the  Lord]  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
Jude        4  the  only.  .God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
5  how  that  [the  Lord],  having  saved  thepe.  ! 
9  durstnot..butsaid.  The  Lord  rebuke  thep    1 
14  the  Lord  coraeth  with  ten  thousand  of  his  ! 


621 


Jude       17  of  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

21  for  the  mercy  of  ourLordJesus'Christ unto 
Rev.  1.  8  beginning  and  the  ending,  saith  the  Lord 
4.  8  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty,  w. 
4.  11  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory 
11.  8  city,  .where  also  our  Lord  was  crucified 
1 1 .  1 5  are  become  (the  kingdoms)  of  our  Lord,  and 
11.  17  0  Lord  God  Almighty,  whichart,  and  wast 

14.  13  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  heneefo. 

15.  3  marvellous  (are)  thy  works,  Lord  God  Al. 

15.  4  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  [0  Lord],  and  gl. 

16.  5  Thou  art  righteous  [O  Lord],  which  art 

16.  7  Lor.d  God  Almighty,  true  and  righteous 

17.  14  Lamb  shall  overcome  them  :  for  he  is  L. 

18.  8  strong  (is)  [the  Lord]  God  who  judgethher 

19.  1  honour,  and  power,  unto  [the  Lord]  our 
19.   6  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth 
19.  16  written.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords 

21.  22  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are 

22.  5  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light :  and  they 
22.    6  the  Lord  God  of  the  holy  prophets  sent 
22.  20  come  quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  L. 
22.  21  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with 

15.  My  master,  my  rabbi,  {from  Heb.  'Jtsi),  f>a${5ovi. 
Alarkio.  51  said.  .Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight 

16.  To  be  lord,  Kvpizvw  kurieuo. 

1  Ti.     6.  15  onlyPotentate..King  of  kings,  and.. of  1. 

17.  Great  men,  fxtyurraves  megista?ies.     ■ 

Mark  6.  21  made  a  supper  to  his  lords,  high  captains 

LORD,  to  he  — 
1.2*0  rule,  in  rud. 

Jer.     2.  31  We  are  lords  ;  we  will  come  no  more  unto 

2,  To  be  lord,  Kvpievw  kurieuo. 

Rom.  14.  9  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living 

LORD  over,  to  be  — 

To  lord  it  over  one,  KaraKvpisiKo  katakurieuo. 

1  Pe.    5.    3  Neither  as  being  lords  over  (God's)  heri. 
LORD'S,  the  — 
Belonging  to  the  Lord,  KvpiauSs  kuriakos. 

1  Co.  11.  20  ye  come,  .(this)  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's 

Rev.    1.  10  I  was  in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and 
LORDLY  — 
Honourable,  vnx  addir. 

Judg.  5.  25  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish 
LORDSHIP  over,  to  exercise  — 

1.  To  be  a  very  lord,  Karatcvpievcc  katakurieuo. 
Markio.  42  accounted  to  rule,  .exercise  lordship  over 

2. To  be  lord,  Kvpteva)  kurieuo. 

Luke.22,  25  The  kings,  .exercise  lordship  over  them 
LO  RU-HA'-MATT,  nvyi  nS  not  pitied. 
A  symbolic  name  given  to  Hosea's  daughter,  indicating 
God's  rejection  of  Israel.     B.C.  783. 

Hos.    1.    6  Call  her  name  L. :  for  I  will  no  more  have 
1.    8  when  she  had  weaned  L.,  she  conceived 
[In  Hos.  2.  23  the  name  is  translated.] 
LOSE,  to  — 
1.2*0  lose,  be  lost,  perish,  i?x  abad. 

Deut  22.    3  which  he  hath  lost,  and  thou  hast  found 

2.  To  lose,  *nx  abad,  3. 

Eccl.  3.    6  A  time  to  get,  and  a  time  to  lose  ;  a  time 

3.  To  gather,  *]Dx  asaph. 

Judg.  18.  25  and  thou  lose  thy  life,  with  the  lives  of 

4.  To  fall,  "753  naphal. 

1  Ki.  20.  25  an  army  like  the  army  that  thou  hast  lost 

5.  To  corrupt,  mar,  Ttiytf  shuclwih,  3. 

Prov.23.   8  shalt  thou  vomit  up,  and  lose  thy  sweet 
6.2b  cut,  cut  off,  rns  karath,  5. 

1  Ki.  18.   5  find  grass,  .that  we  lose  not  all  the  beasts 

7. To  loose  off  or  away,  airoWvfit  apollumi. 

Matt  10.  39  shall  lose  it :  and  he  that  loseth  his  life 
10.  42  verily . .  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward 

16.  25  shall  lose  it :  and  whosoever  will  lose  his 
Mark  8.  35  shall  lose  it ;  but  whosoever  shall  lose  his 

9.  41  verily  I  say.  .he  shall  not  lose  his  reward 
Luke  9.  24  shall  lose  it :  but  whosoever  will  lose  his 

9.  25  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  him. 
15.  4  if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth  not  leave  the 
15.  8  if  she  lose  one  piece,  doth  not  light  a  ca. 
15.   9  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  had  lost 

17.  33  shall  lose  it;  and  whosoever  shall  lose 
John  6.  39  I  should  lose  nothing,  but  should  raise  it 

12.  25  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it;  and  he 

18.  9  Of  them  which  thou  gavest  me  have  I  lost 

2  John     8  that  we  lose  not  those  things  which  we 

8. 2*0  cause  loss,  ^rjfitSta  zemioo. 

Matt  16.  26  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
Mark  8.  36  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 

LOSE  children,  to  — 

To  be  bereaved,  Sb$>  shakol. 

Isa.   49.  21  seeing  I  have  lost  my  children,  and  am  de. 
LOSE,  to  cause  to  — 
To  cause  to  breathe  out,  nsj  naphach,  5. 

Job  31.  39  caused  the  owners  thereof  to  lose  their  I. 
LOSS  — 

\.A  casting  avmy,  airoBoK-r)  apobole. 

Acts  27.  22  there  shall  be  no  loss  of.  .life  am  ng  you 


LOT 

2. Loss,  fyifua  zemia. 

Acts  27.  21  and  to  have  gained  this  harm  and  loss 

Phil.    3.    7  what  things  were  gain,  .those  I  counted  1. 
3.   8  I  count  all  things . .  loss  for  the  excellency 
LOSS,  to  bear  the  — 
To  be  or  suffer  as  a  sinner,  or  as  one  erring,  xan. 

Gen.  31.  39  I  bare  the  loss  of  it ;  of  my  hand  didst 
LOSS  of  (children  or)  others,  to  have  after  the  — 
1.2V)  be  bereaved,  ^iay  shekol. 

Isa.  47.    8  neither  shall  I  know  the  loss  of  children 
47.    9  the  loss  of  children,  and  widowhood :  they 
2.  Bereaved,  Q,?|?'  shikkulim. 

Isa.   49.  20  shalt  have,  after  thou  hast  lost  the  other 
LOSS,  to  suffer  — 
2*0  cause  loss,  £tifit6a>  zemioo. 

1  Co.    3. 15  he  shall  suffer  loss  :  but  he  himself  shall 

Phil.   3.    8  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all 

LOST,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  perishj  be  lost,  nix  abad. 

1  Sa.    9.    3  the  asses  of  Kish,  Saul's  father,  were  lost 

9.  20  as  for  thine  asses  that  were  lost  three  days 

Psa.119.  176  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep:  seek 

Jer.  50.   6  My  people  hath  been  lost  sheep ;  their  sh. 

Eze.  19.    5  when  she  saw  that,  .her  hope  was  lost 

34.   4  neither  have  ye  sought  that  which  was  lost 

34. 16  I  will  seek  that  which  was  lost,  and  bring 
37.  1 1  our  hope  is  lost :  we  are  cut  off  for  our  pa. 

2.  To  fall,  "?53  naphal. 

Num.  6. 12  the  days  that  were  before  shall  be  lost,  be. 
3.2*0  loose  away,  destroy,  waste,  airoXKvfii  apollu. 
Matt  10.   6  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
15.  24  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of 

18.  11  [Son.  .is  come  to  save  that  which  was  lost] 
Luke  1 5.    4  go  after  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find 

15.  6  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost 
15.  24  For  this  my  son  was.  .lost,  and  is  found 

15.  32  this  thy  brother,  .was  lost,  and  is  found 

19.  10  to  seeji  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost 
John  6. 12  Gather.. fragments.. that  nothing  be  loss 

17.  12  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdi. 

2  Co.  4.   3  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are  1. 

LOST  (thing),  that  which  was  — 
Lost  thing,  rnnx  abedah. 

Exod22.    9  (or)  for  any  manner  of  lost  thing,  which 

Lev.    6.    3  Or  have  found  that  which  was  lost,  and 
6.   4  shall  restore,  .the  lost  thing  which  he  fo. 

Deut  22.   3  with  all  lost  tiling  of  thy  brother's,  which 
LOT  — 
1.A  lot,  S-J13  goral. 

Lev.  16.    8  Aaron  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goats 

16.  8  one  lot  for  the  Lord,  and  the  other  lot  for 
16.   9  bring  the  goat  upon  which  the  Lord's  lot 

16. 10  But  the  goat,  on  which  the  lot  fell  to  be 
Xuni26.  55  the  land  shall  be  divided  by  lot :  accord. 

26.  56  According  to . .  lot  shall  the  possession  th. 
33-  54  >'e  shall  divide  the  land  by  lot  for  an  inh. 

33.  54  shall  be  in  the  place  where  his  lot  falleth 

34.  13  the  land  which  ye  shall  inherit  by  lot,  wh. 
36.  2  to  give  the  land  for  an  inheritance  by  lot 
36.   3  so  shall  it  be  taken  from  the  lot  of  our  in. 

Josh.  14.    2  By  lot  (was)  their  inheritance,  asthe  Lord 

15.  1  (This)  then  was  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  the 

16.  1  the  lot  of  the  children  of  Joseph  fell  from 

17.  1  There  was  also  a  lot  for  the  tribe  of  Man. 
17. 14  Why  hast  thou  given  me.  .one  lot  and  one 

17.  17  great  power :  thou  shalt  not  have  one  lot 
t8.   6,  8  that  I  may  cast  lots  for  you  here  before 

18.  10  Joshua  cast  lotsforthem  in  Shiloh before 
iS.  11  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  B. 

18. 11  the  coast  of  their  lot  came  forth  between 

19.  1  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  Simeon,  .for 
19. 10  the  third  lot  came  up  for  the  children  of 

19. 17  the  fourth  lot  came  out  to  Issachar,  for 
19.  24  the  fifth  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of  the 
19.  32  The  sixth  lot  came  out  to  the  children  of  X. 
19.  40  the  seventh  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of 

19.  51  divided  for  an  inheritance  by  lot  in  Shiloh 
21.    4  lot  came  out  for  the  families  of  the  Koh. 
21.   4  had  by  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and 
21.   5  lot  out  of  the  families  of  the  tribe  of  Ep. 
21.    6  the  children  of  Gershon  (had)  by  lot  out 
21.   8  gave  by  lot  unto  the  Levites  these  cities 
21. 10  Kohathites ;  for  theirs  was  the  first  lot 
bi.  20  they  had  the  cities  of  their  lot  out  of  the 
21.  40  all  the  cities,  .were  (by)  their  lot  twelve 

Judg.  1.    3  Come  up  with  me  into  my  lot,  that  we  may 
1.    3  I  likewise  will  go  with  thee  into  thy  lot 

20.  9  the  thing  which  we  will  do . .  by  lot  against 
1  Ch.  6.  54  of  the  Kohathites ;  for  theirs  was  the  lot 

6.  61  (out  of)  the  half.. of  Mauasseh,  by  lot,  ten 

6.  63  TTnto  the  sons  of  Merari.  by  lot.  .twelve 

6.  65  they  gave  by  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  c 

24.    5  Thus  were  they  divided  by  lot,  one  sort 

24.    7  Now  the  first  lot  came  forth  to  Jehoiarib 

24.  31  These  likewise  cast  lots  over  against  their 

25.  8  they  cast  lots,  ward  against  (ward),  as  well 

25.  9  Now  the  first  lot  came  forth  for  Asaph  to 
26. 13  they  cast  lots,  as  well  the  small  as  the  g. 

26.  14  And  the  lot  eastward  fell  to  Shelemiah 
26.  14  they  cast  lots ;  and  his  lot  came  out  nor. 

Neh.  10.  34  wecastthelotsamongthepriests.theLev. 

11.    1  the  rest  of  the  people  also  cast  lots,  tobr. 

Esth.  3.    7  they  cast  Pur,  that  (is),  the  lot,  before  H. 

9.  24  had  cast  Fur,  that  (is),  the  lot,  to  consume 

Fja.  1 5.    5  and  of  my  cup :  thou  maintaincst  my  lot 


LOT 


622 


LOVE 


Isa. 


Jer. 

Eze. 

Dan. 

Joel 

Obad 

Jon. 


Mic. 

Nail.   3. 


13- 
i3- 
13. 
13- 
*3- 


?ga.  22.  18  They  part,  .and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture 

125.    3  shallnot  restupon  the  lot  of  the  righteous 

Prov.  1.  14  Cast  in  thy  lot  among  us;  let  us  all  have 

16.  33  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap  ;  but  the  whole 

18.  18  The  lot  causeth  contentions  to  cease,  and 

17.  14  the  portion,  .and  the  lot  of  them  that  rob 
34.  17  he  hath  cast  the  lot  forthem,  andhishand 
57.-  6  they,  they  (are) thy  lot :  eveutothemhast 
13.  25  thy  lot,  the  portion  of  thy  measures  from 
2i.    6  Woetothebloudyeity.  .letno  lot  fall  upon 

.  13  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at 

.    3  they  have  cast  lots  for  my  people  ;  and 

11  and  cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem,  even  thou 

,    7  Come,  and  let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may 

.    7  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  Jon. 

.    5  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by  lot  in  the  cong. 

w.  10  they  cast  lots  for  her  honourable  men,  and 

2.^1  cord,  portion,  snare,  ??n,  ^3n  chebel. 

Deut  32.   9  For.  .Jacob  (is)the  lot  of  his  inheritance 
r  Ch.  16.  18  land  of  Canaan,  the  lotof  your  inheritance 
Psa.  105.  1 1  land  of  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  inlierita. 
3.-.-1  lot,  K\rjpo$  kleros. 

Matt27.  35  [and  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots] 
'        27-  35  [and  upou  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots] 
Markis.  24  they  parted  hisgarnients,casting  lots  upon 
Luke  23.  34  And  they  parted  his  raiment,  and  cast  lots 
John  19.  24  and  for  my  vesture  they  did  cast  lots 
Acts    1.  26  they  gave  forth  their  lots;  and  the  lot  fell 
8.  21  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  m. 
LOT,  ai1?  concealed,  dark  coloured. 
Abraham's  brother's  son,  father  of  Amnion  and  Moab. 
B.C.  1898. 

Gen.  11.  27  Nahor,  and  Haran ;  and  Haran  begat  L. 

11.  31  L.  the  son  of  Haran  his  son's  son,  and  S. 

12.  4  Abram  departed,  .and  L.  went  with  him 

12.  s  And  Abram  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and  L. 
1  wife  and  all  that  he  had,  and  L.  with  hira 
5  L,  also,  which  went  with  Abram,  had  fio. 

7  strife  between,  .theherdmenof  L.'s  cattle 

8  Abram  said  unto  L.,  Let  there  be  no  strife 
.  10  L.  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the 

13.  1 1  L.  chose  him . .  the  plain  of  Jordan ;  and  L. 
13.  12  L.  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and 

13.  14  Abram,  after  that  L.  was  separated  from 

14.  12  they  took  L.,  Abram's  brother's  son,  who 
14. 16  brought  again  his  brother  L.,  and  his  goods 
19.    1  L.  sat  in  the  gate  of  Sodom :  and  L.  see. 
19.    5  And  they  called  unto  L.,  and  said  unto 
19,    6  L.  went  out  at  the  door  unto  them,  and 
19.    9  they  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,  (even)  L. 
19.  10  pulled  L.  into  the  house  to  them,  and  shut 
19. 12  the  men  said  unto  L.,  Hast  thou  here  any 
19.  14  L.  went  out,  and  spake  unto  his  sons  in 
19.  15  the  angels  hastened  L.,  saying,  Arise,  take 
ig.  18  And  L.  said  unto  them,  Oh !  not  so,  my 
19.  23  The  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  L. 
19.  29  sent  L.  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow 
19.  29  overthrew  the  cities  in  the  which  L.  dwelt 
19.  30  L.  went  up  out  of  Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the 

19.  36  Thus  were  both  the  daughters  of  L.  with 
Deut.  2.    9,  19  the  children  of  L.  (for)  a  possession 
Psa.  83.    8  they  have  holpen  the  children  of  L.  Selah 
Lukei7.  28  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  L. ;  they  did  eat 

1 17.  29  the  same  day  that  L.  went  out  of  Sodom 
17.  32  Remember  L.'s  wife. 
2  Pe.   2.    7  delivered  just  L,  vexed  with  the  filthy 
LOT,  to  be  one's,  to  cast  — 

To  cast  a  lot,  obt  tin  by  lot,  \ayxcivco  lagchano. 
Luke  1.   9  his  lot  was  to  burn  incense  when  he  went 
Johnrg.  24  Let  us  not  rend  it,  but  cast  lots  for  it,  wh. 
LO'-TAN,  fa'iS  a  covering. 
Son  of  Seir  the  Horite.    B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  36.  20  L.,  and  Shobal,  and  Zibeon,  and  Anah 
36.  22  children  of  L . .  Hon  and  Henian  ;  and  L.  's 
36.  2q  duke  L.,  duke  Shobal,  duke  Zibeon,  duke 
1  Ch.  1.  38  L.,  andShobal.aud  Zibeon,  and  Anah,  and 
1.  39  L.;Hori,andHoniam:andTimna(was)L:'s 
LOTHE,  to  — 
l.To  loathe,  cast  away,  ^ya  gaaL 

Jer.  14. 19  hath  thy  soul  l'othed  Zion?  why  hast  thou 
Eze.  16.  45  that  lothethher  husbandandherchildren 
16.  45  which  lothed  their  husbands  and  their  ch. 
2.7*0  be  or  become  weary,  hnS  Jaah,  2. 

Exod  7. 18  Egyptians  shall  iothe  to  drink  of  the  wa. 
3.  To  be  short,  grieved,  *w[j  qatsar. 

Zech.11.    8  my  soul  lothed  them,  and  their  soul  also 
[See  also  Loathe.] 
LOTHE  selves,  to  — 
To  be  cut  off,  loathed,  taip  qut,  2. 

Eze.    6.   9  they  shall  lothe  themselves  for  the  evils 

20.  43  shall  lothe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight 
36.  31  shall  lothe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight 

LOTHTNG  — 

Casting  away,  b'$  ffoxL 

Eze.  16.   5  to  the  lotliing  of  thy  person,  in  the  day 
LOUD  — 
l.Great,  {old,  high,  lovd),  \fini  gadoL 

Gen.  39. 14  he  came  in.  .and  I  cried  with  a  loud  voice 

1  Sa.  2S.  12  she  cried  with  a  loud  voice:  and  the  wo. 

2  Sa.  15.  23  all  the  country  wept  with  a  loud  voice,  and 

19.  4  the  king  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Omy  son 

1  Ki.  8.  55  and  blessed  all.  .with  a  loud  voice,  saying 

2  Ki.iS.  2S  with  a  loud  voice  iu  the  Jews'  language 

2  Ch.15. 14  sware  unto  the  Lord  with  aloud  voice,  and 

20.  19  to  praise  the  Lord,  .with  a  loud  voice  on 
32.  iS  Then  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the 


Ezra    3.  12  wept  with  a  loud  voice ;  and  many  shou. 

3.  13  thepeople  shouted  with  a  loud  shout,  and 
10. 12  congregation,  .said  with  a  loud  voice,  Aa 

ICeh.  9.    4  cried  with  a  loud  voice  unto  the  Lord 
Eath.  4.    1  Mordecai.  .cried  with  aloud  and  a  bitter 
Prov. 27.  14  He  that  blesseth  his  friend  with  a  loud  vo. 
Isa.    36.  13  with  a  loud  voice  in  the  Jews'  language 
Eze.    8.  18  though  they  cry  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud 
9.    1  He  cried  also  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud  v. 

11.  13  cried  withaloud  voice,  and  said,  All  Lord 
2.  To  roar,  move,  sound,  make  a  noise,  nprr  hamah. 

Prov.  7.  11  She  (is)  loud  and  stubborn;  her  feet  abide 
3. Strong,  hard,  severe,  pjn  chazaq. 

Exod  19.  16  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud 
^.Strength,  might,  hardness,  iy  oz. 

2  Ch.30.  21  with  loud  instruments  unto  the  LORD 
5.  To  be  high,  an  rum. 

Deut  27.  14  the  Levites  shall  speak . .  with  a  loud  voice 
6. Hearing,  yat?  stoma. 

Psa.  1 50.  5  Praise  him  upon  the  loud  cymbals :  praise 
7.  Great,  peyas  megas. 

Matt  27.  46  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli! 
27.  50  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice 

Mark  1.  26  had  torn  him,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
5.    7  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said.  What 

15.  34  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eloi! 
1S-  37  Jesus  cried  with  aloud  voice,  and  gave  up 

Luke  1.  42  she  spake  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said 

4.  33  unclean  devil,  and  cried  out  with  a  loud 
8.  28  with  a  loud  voice  said.  What  have  I  to  do 

17.  15  turned  back,  and  with  a  loud  voice  glori. 

19.  37  began  to.  .praise  God  with  a  loud  voice 

23.  23  they  were  instant  with  loud  voices,  req. 

23.  46  when  Jesus  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
Johnn.  43  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazaru3,  come 
Acts    7.  57  Then  they  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and 

7.  60  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lord,  lay  not  this 

8.  7  unclean  spirits,  crying  with  loud  voice 
14.  10  Said  with  a  loud  voice,  Stand  upright  cm 

16.  28  Paul  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Do 

26.  24  Festus  said  with  a  loud  voice,  Paul,  thou 
Rev.    5.    2  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  aloud  voice 

5.  12  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Worthy  is  the 

6.  10  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  How 

7.  2  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four  an. 

7.  10  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Salvation 

8.  13  saying  with  a  loud  voice  Woe,  woe,  woe 

10.  3  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as . .  a  lion  roareth 

12.  10  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  heaven 
14.    7  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Fear  God,  and 

14.  9  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  If  any  man  wo. 
14. 15  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  sat 
14. 18  cried  with  a  loud  cry  to  him  that  had 
19. 17  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all 

LOUD,  to  sing  — 

To  cause  to  be  heard,  ynt?  shamea,  5. 

Neh.  12.  42  And  the  singers  sang  loud,  with  Jezrah. 
LOUDER  and  louder  — 
Might,  "lio  meod. 

Exodig.  19  sounded  long,  and  waxed  louder  andlou. 
LOVE  — 
l.Love,  -i^qK  ahabah. 

Gen.  29.  23  (but)  a  few  days,  for  the  love  he  had  to  her 

2  Sa.    1.  26  thy  love  to  me  was . .  passing  the  love  of 

13.  15  than  the  love  wherewith  he  had  loved  her 
Psa.  109.   4  For  my  love  they  are  my  adversaries 

109.    5  theyhave  rewarded  me.  .hatred  for  my  love 

Prov.  5.  19  and  be  thou  ravished  always  withher  love 

10. 12  Hatred  stirreth  up  strifes  :  but  love  cover. 

15.  17  Better  (is)  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is 

17.  9  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh  love 

27.  5  Open  rebuke  (is)  better  than  secret  love 
Eccl.  9.    1  no  man  knoweth  either  love  or  hatred  (by) 

9.  6  Also  their  love,  and  theirhatred,  and  their 
Song  2.    4  house,  and  his  banner  over  me  (was)  love 

2.    5  comfortmewithapples.-I(am)sick  of  love 

2.  7  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 

3.  5  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 

3.  10  the  midst  thereof  being  paved  (with)  love 
5.    8  ye  tell  him,  that  I  (am)  sick  of  love 

7.  6  how  pleasant  art  thou,  0  love,  for  delights 

8.  4  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 
8.    6  love  (is)  strong  as  death ;  jealousy  (is)  cruel 
8.    7  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither 
8.    7  if  a  man  would  give  all.  .for  love,  it  would 

Isa.   63.    9  in  his  love  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed 

Jer.     2.    2  the  love  of  thine  espousals,  wheu  thou  w. 

2.  33  Why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  seek  love? 

31.   3  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love 

Hos.    3.   1  according  to  the  love  of  the  Lord  toward 

11.  4  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love 
Zeph.  3. 17  he  will  rest  in  his  love  ;  he  will  joy  over 

2.Acts  of  loves,  D'artx  olvtbim. 

Prov.  7.  iS  Come,  .let  us  solace  ourselves  with  loves 
3.0ffices  of  love,  "fn  dod. 

Prov.  7.  18  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until  the  morn. 

Song  1.  2  his  mouth.,  thy  love  (is)  better  than  wine 
1.    4  we  will  remember  thy  love  more  than  wine 

4.  10  How  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister . .  spouse 
4. 10  how  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine  ! 
7.  12  the  vineyards  .there  will  I  give  thee  my  I. 

Eze.  16.    8  behold,  thy  time  (was)  the  time  of  love 
23. 17  came  to  her  into  the  bed  of  love,  and  they 
4,  A  female  friend,  rvy~\rayah, 

Song  1.  9  I  have  compared  thee,  0  my  love,  to  a  co. 


Song  1. 15  Behold,  thou  (art)  fair,  my  love ;  behold 
2.  2  As  the  lily  among  thorns,  so  (is)  my  love 
2.  10  Rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come 
2. 13  Arise,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  comeaway 
4.    r  Behold,  thou  (art)  fair,  my  love  ;  behold 

4.  7  Thou  (art)  all  fair,  my  love,  .no  spot  in 

5.  2  Open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove 

6.  4  Thou  (art)  beautiful,  0  my  love,  as  Tirzah 

5. Love,  0707177  agape. 

Matt  24.  12  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of 
Luken.  42  pass  over  judgment  and  the  love  of  God 
John  5.  42  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  you 
13-  35  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  anot. 
15.    9  so  have  I  loved . .  continue  ye  in  my  love 
15.  ro  abide  in  my  love,  .as  I.  .abide  in  his  love 
15.  13  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that 
17.  26  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved 
Rom.  5.    5  because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  iu 
5.    8  But  God  conimaudeth  his  love  toward  us 
8.  35  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  C? 
8.  39  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 

12.  9  (Let)  love  be  without  dissimulation.  Ab. 

13.  io'Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour. .  love 

15.  30  for  the  love  of  the  spirit,  that  ye  strive 

1  Co.  4.  21  shall  I  come  unto  you.  .in  love,  and(iu) 

16.  24  My  love  (be)  with  you  all  in  Christ  Jesus 

2  Co.  2.    4  that  ye  might  knowthe  love  which  I  have 

2.    8  that  ye  would  confirm,  .love  toward  him 

5.  14  For  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us;  be. 

6.  6  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  love  unfeigned 
8.   7  and  (in)  all  diligence,  and  (in)  your  love 
8.   8  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your  love 
8.  24  show  ye.,  the  proof  of  your  love,  and  of  our 

13. 11  God  of  love  and  peace  shall  be  with  you 
13.  14  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of 
Gal.  5.  6  un circumcision ;  but  faith. .worketh  by  lo. 
5. 13  to  the  flesh,  but  by  love  serve  one  another 
5.  22  the  fruit  of  the  spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace 
Eph.  1.  4  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love 
1. 15  of  your  faith,  .and  [love]  unto  all  the  sai. 

2.  4  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us 

3.  17  that  ye,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love 
3. 19  And  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which 

4.  2  meekness . .  forbearing  one  another  inlove 

4. 15  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  may  grow  up 

4. 16  the  body  unto  the  edifying  of  itself  in  1. 

5.  2  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us 

6.  23  and  love  with  faith,  from  God  the  Father 
Phil.  r.    9  this  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound 

1.  17  the  other  of  love,  knowing  that  I  am  set 

2.  1  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if  any  fellowship 
2.    2  ye  be  like  minded,  having  the  same  love 

Col.     1.   4  of  the  love  (which  ye  have)  to  all  the  sa. 

1.  8  Who  also  declared  unto  us  your  love  in 

2.  2  be  comforted,  being  knit  together  in  love 

1  Th.  1.    3  your  work  of  faith,  and  labour  of  love 

3.  12  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another 
5.  8  putting  on.. breast  plate  of  faith  and  1  >ve 
5.  13  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for 

2  Th.  2.  to  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the 

3.   s  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love  of  God 

1  Ti.   1.  14  with  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ 

6. 11  follow  after,  .faith,  love,  patience,  meek. 

2  Ti.    1.    7  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  m. 

1. 13  in  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

Phil.        5  Hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith,  which  thou 

7  have  great  joy  and  consolation  in  thy  love 

9  Yet  for  love's  6ake  I  rather  beseech,  .b. 

Heb.  6.  10  your  work  and  labour  of  love,  which  ye 

10.  24  to  provoke  unto  love  and  to  good  works 

1  Jo.  2.    5  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected 

2.  15  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in 

3.  1  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
3. 16  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  (of  God),  be. 
3. 17 'But.  .how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him? 

4.  7  for  love  is  of  God ;  and  every  one  that  I. 
4.  8  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God . .  God  is  love 
4.  9  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  to. 
4. 10  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but 
4.  12  dwelleth.  .and  his  love  is  perfected  in  us 
4.  16  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us 
4.  16  God  is  love ;  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love 
4.  17  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we 
4.  18  There  is  no  fear  in  love ;  but  perfect  love 

4.  18  He  that  feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  love 

5.  3  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep 

2  John     3  Grace  be  with  you.  .in  truth  and  love 

6  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his  com. 
Jude        2  Mercy  unto  you,  and  peace,  and  love,  be 
21  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  look. 
Rev.    2.   4  have,  .because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love 

LOVE,  to  — 

1.  To  love,  anx  aheb. 

Gen.  22.    2  thine  only  (son)  Isaac,  whom  thou  lovest 

24.  67  and  she  became  his  wife  ;and  he  loved  her 

25.  28  And  Isaac  loved  Esau. .  but  Rebekah  loved 
27.   4  make  me  savoury  meat,  such  as  I  love 
27.    9  make  .  .meat  for  thy  father,  such  as  he  1. 
27. 14  made  savoury  meat,  such  as  his  father  lo. 
29.  18  Jacob  loved  Rachel;  and  said,  I  will  serve 
29.  30  and  he  loved  also  Rachel  more  than  Leah 
29.  33  now  therefore  my  husband  will  love  me 
34.   3  he  loved  the  damsel,  and  spake  kindly 
37.    3  Israel  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his  ch. 
37.   4  when  his  brethren  saw  that  their  father 
44.  20  he  alone  is  left . .  and  his  father  loveth  him 

Exod2o.   6  that  love  me,  and  keep  my  commandme. 

ax.    5  I  love  my  master,  my  wife,  andniy  child. 
Lev.  19. 18  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

19.  34  thou  shalt  love  him  as  thyself ;  for  ye  w. 


LOVE 


623 


LOVE 


Deut.  4.  37  because  he  loved  thy  fathers,  therefore  he 


imto  thousands  of  them  that  love  me  and 
5  thou  shaltlove  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 


7.  9  mercy  with  them  ttiat  love  liim  aud  keep 
7,  13  he  will  love  thee,  and  bless  thee,  and  mu. 
10.  12  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  love  him 

10. 15  had  a  delight  in  thy  fathers  to  love  them 

10.  18  loveth  the  stranger,  in  giving  him  food 
10. 19  Love  ye  therefore  the  stranger :  for  ye  w. 

11.  1  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
11. 13  to  love  the  Lord  your  God,  and  to  serve 
11.  22  to  love  the  Lord  your  God,  to  walk  in  all 
13.    3  know  whether  ye  love  the  Lord  your  God 

15.  16  because  he  loveth  thee  and  thine  house 

19.  g  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  aud  to  walk 
23.    5  turned,  .because  the  Lord  thy  God  loved 
30.    6  to  love  the  Lord  thy  G  id  with  all  thine 
30.  16  lu  that  I  command  thee  this  day  to  love 
30.  20  That  thou  mayest  love  the  Lord  thy  God 

Josh.  22.   5  charged  you,  to  love  the  Lord  your  God 
23. 11  Take  good  heed,  .that  ye  love  the  Lord 
Judg.  5.  31  (let)  them  that  love  liim  (be)  as  the  sun 

14. 16  Thou  dost  hut  hate  me,. and  lovest  me  not 

16.  4  he  loved  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  Sorek 
16. 15  How  canst  thou  say,  I  love  thee,  when 

Ruth  4. 15  for  thy  daughter  in  law,  which  loveth  thee 

1  Sa.   1.    5  he  loved  Hannah  :  but  the  Lord  had  shut 

16.  21  he  loved  him  greatly  ;  and  he  became  his 
18.    1  aud  Jonathan  loved  him  as  his  own  soul 
tS.  16  But  all  Israel  and  Judah  loved  David 
18.  20  And  Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  loved  David 
18.  22  all  his  servants  love  thee  :  now  therefore 

18.  28  (that)  Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  loved  him 

20.  17  for'  he  loved  liim  as.  .his  own  soul 

2  Sa.  12.  24  bare  a  son.  .Solomon.,  and  the  Lord  loved 

13.    1  and  Ammon  the  son  of  David  loved  her 
13.    4  Amnon  said  unto  him,  I  love  Tamar,  my 
13.  15  than  the  love  wherewith  he  had  loved  her 
ig.    6  In  that  thou  lovest  thine  enemies,  and  ha. 

1  Ki.  3.    3  Solomon  loved  the  Lord,  walking  in  the 

11.    1  king  Solomon  loved  many  strange  women 

2  Ch.11.  21  Rehoboam  loved  Maachali  the  daughter  of 

19.  2  Shouldest  thou,  .love  them  that  hate  the 
26.  to  and  in  Carmel :  for  he  loved  husbandry 

Neh.  1.  5  mercy  for  them  that  love  him  and  observe 
Esth.  2.  17  the  king  loved  Esther  above  all  the  women 
Job  19.  19  they  whom  I  loved  are  turned  against  me 
Psa.  4.  2  will  ye  love  vanity,  (aud)  seek  after  leas.? 
5.  11  let  them  also  that  love  thy  name  be  joyful 
11.    5  and  him  that  loveth  violence  his  soul  ha. 

11.  7  For  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteous. 
26.  8  Lord,  I  have  loved  the  habitation  of  thy 
31.  23  O  love  the  Lord,  all  ye  his  saints . .  the  L. 

33.  5  He  loveth  righteousness  and  judgment 

34.  12  loveth  (many)  days,  that  he  may  see  good? 
37.  28  the  Lord  loveth  judgment,  and  forsaketh 
40.  16  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  continually 
45.  7  Thou  lovest  righteousness,  and  hatest  wi. 
47.  4  the  excellency  of  Jacob  whom  he  loved 
52.  3  Thou  lovest  evil  more  than  good,  .lying 
52.    4  Thou  lovest  all  devouring  words,  O..deoe. 

69.  36  they  that  love  his  name  shall  dwell  ther. 

70.  4  let  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  coutin. 
78.  68  But  chose.. the  mount  Zion  which  he  loved 
87.  2  The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more 
97.  10  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil :  he  pr. 
99.   4  The  king's  strength  also  loveth  judgment 

109.  17  As  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  come  unto 
116.    1 1  love  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  heard 
119.  47, 48  thy  commandments, which  I  have  loved 
119.  97  0  how  I  love  thy  law  !  it  (is)  my  nieditat. 
119.  113  I  hate,  .thoughts:  but  thy  law  do  Hove 
119. 119  Thou  puttest  away,  .therefore  I  love  thy 
119.  127  I  love  thy  commandments  above  gold 
119. 132  usest  to  do  unto  those  that  love  thy  name 
119. 140  very  pure :  therefore  thy  seryant  loveth 
1 19.  159  Consider  how  I  love  thy  precepts  :  qui. 
1 19. 163  I  hate  and  abhor  lying . .  thy  law  do  I  love 
119.  165  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  thy  law 
119. 167  thy  testimonies.  .Hove  them  exceedingly 
122.    6  Jerusalem :  they  shall  prosper  that  love 

145.  20  Lord  preserveth  all  them  that  love  him 

146.  8  bowed  down :  the  Lord  loveth  the  righ. 
Prov.  1.  22  How  long,  ye  simple  ones,  will  ye  love  si.? 

3. 12  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  correcteth 

4.  6  preserve  thee :  love  her,  and  she  shall  keep 
8.  17  I  love  them  that  love  me ;  and  those  that 
8. 21  That  I  may  cause  those  that  love  me  to 

8.  36  own  soul:  all  they  that  hate  me  love  de. 

9.  8  rebuke  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee 

12.  1  Whoso  loveth  instruction  loveth  knowle. 

13.  24  he  that  loveth  himchastenethhim  betimes 
15.  9  he  loveth  him  that  followeth  after  right. 
15.  12  A  scorner  loveth  not  one  that  reproveth 
16. 13  and  they  love  him  that  speaketh  right 
17. 17  A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother 
17. 19  He  loveth  transgression  that  loveth  strife 
r8.  21  they  that  love  it  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof 
19.  8  He  that  getteth  wisdom  loveth  his  own 
20. 13  Love  not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  to  poverty 

21.  17  He  that  loveth  pleasure  (shall  be)  a  poor 
21. 17  he  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  be 
22. 11  He  that  loveth  pureness  of  heart,  (for)the 
29.    3  Whoso  loveth  wisdom  rejoieeth  his  father 

Eccl.   3.    8  A  time  to  love,  and  atime  to  hat&|;  atime 
5. 10  He  that  loveth  silver  shall  notbe  satisfied 

5.  10  norhethatlovethabundancewithincrease 
9.    9  Live  joyfully  with  the  wife  whomthoulo. 

Song  1.  3  ointment,  .therefore  do  the  virgins  love 
1.  7  Tell  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  wh. 
1.  4  we  will  run  after  thee,  .the  upright  love 
3.    1 1  sought  him  whom  my  soul  loyeth :  I  so. 


Song  3.    2  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I 
3.   3  watchmen.  .Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  lo.? 
3.    4  but  I  found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth :  I 
Isa.      1.  23  every  one  loveth  gifts,  and  followeth  after 
43.    4  I  have  loved  thee  :  therefore  will  I  give 
4S.  14  The  Lord  hath  loved  him :  he  will  do  his 
56.    6  and  to  love  the  name  of.the  Lord,  to  be 

56.  10  sleeping,  lying  down,  loving  to  slumber 

57.  8  thou  lovedst  their  bed  where  thou  sawest 
61.  S  I  the  Lord  love  judgment,  I  hate  robbery 
66. 10  and  be  glad  with  her,  all  ye  that  love  her 

Jer.    2.  25  I  have  loved  strangers,  and  after  them  wRl 
5.  31  my  people  love  (to  have  it)  so :  and  what 

8.  2  whom  they  have  loved,  and.  whom  they 
14.  10  Thus  have  they  loved  to  wander,  they  have 
31.   3  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love 

Eze.  16.  37  and  all  (them)  that  thou  hast  loved,  with 
Dan.  9.  4  covenant  and  mercy  to  them  that  love  him 
Hos.   3.    1  love  a  woman  beloved  of  (her)  friend,  yet 

3.  1  who  took  to  other  gods,  and  love  flagons 

4.  18  her  rulers  (with)  shame  do  love,  Give  ye 

9.  1  thou  hast  loved  a  reward  upon  every  corn. 
9.  10  abominations  were  according  as  they  loved 

10.  11  Ephraim.  .an  heifer,  .taught,  .loveth  to 

11.  1  then  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out 

12.  7  (He  is)  a  merchant,  .he  loveth  to  oppress 
14.    4  I  will  love  them  freely:  for  mine  auger  is 

Amos  5.  15  Hate  the  evil,  aud  love  the  good,  and  est. 
Mic.  3.  2  Who  hate  the  good,  and  love  the  evil ;  who 
Zech.  8.  17  love  no  false  oath  :  for  all  these,  .that  I 

8.  19  feasts ;  therefore  love  the  truth  aud  peace 
Hal.    1.    2  have  loved  you . .  Wherein  hast  thou  luved 

1.  2  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother?,  .yet  I  loved  J. 

2.  11  the  holiness  of  the  Lord  which  he  loved 

I.Love,  n^rix  ahabah. 

Dent.  7.   8  because  the  Lord  loved  you,  and  because 

1  Sa.  18.    3  made,  .because  he  loved  him  as  his  own  s. 

20. 17  because  he  loved  him.  .as  he  loved  hisown 

1  Ki.  10.   9  because  the  Lord  loved  Israel  for  ever 

2  Ch.  2. 11  Because  the  Lord  hath  loved  his  people 

9.  8  because  thy  God  loved  Israel,  to  establish 
Hos.  9.  15  I  will  love  them  no  more  :  all  theirprinces 
Mic.    6."  8  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and 

3.  To  love,  have  in  the  bosom,  3317  chabab. 

Deut. 33.   3  Yea,  he  loved  the  people  ;  all  his  saints 

i.  To  love,  pity ',  be  merciful,  Drn  racham. 

Psa.  18.    1 1  will  love  thee,  0  Lord,  my  strength 


5.  To  Jove, 

Matt.  5. 

5- 

5- 

6. 


Mark  10. 


Luke  6 
6. 
6. 

6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


16. 

John  3. 

3- 
3 


*3- 
13- 
13- 
*3- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
15- 
iS- 
15- 
17- 
*7- 
*7- 
19. 


[Co. 


aya-iraa)  ogapao. 

43  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate 

44  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your  enemies,  bless 

46  For  if  ye  love. them  which  love  you,  what 
24  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the 
19  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
37  Thou  shalt  love  the  LordthyGod  with  all 
39  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
21  Then  Jesus, beholding  him, loved  him,  and 

30  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 

31  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
33  to  love  him  with  all  the  heart,  and  with 

33  to  love  (his)  neighbour  as  himself,  is  more 
27  Love  youreuemies,  do  good  to  them  which 

32  if  ye  love  them  which  love  you,  what  th. 
32  for  sinners  also  love  those  that  love  them 
35  love  ye  your  enemies,  and  do  good,  and  1. 

5  he  loveth  our  nation,  and  he  hath  built  us 

42  Tell  me.  .which  of  them  will  love  him  m.? 

47  shelovedmuch;  but.  .(the  same)loveth  li. 

27  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 

43  ye  love  the  uppermost  seats  in  the  synag. 
13  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the 

16  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his 

19  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light 
35  The  Father  loveth  the  Son.andhath  given 

42  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would  love 

17  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  bee. 
5  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister  and  L. 

43  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than 

1  having  loved  hisown.  .he  loved  them  unto 
23  Now.  .one  of  his  disciples,  whom  Jesus  1. 

34  A  new  commandment.  .That  ye  love  one 
34  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  me 
15  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments 
21  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me 
21  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  F. 
21  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself 
23  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words 

23  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come 

24  He  that  loveth  me  not  keepeth  not  my 

28  If  ye  loved  me,  ye  would  rejoice,  because 
31  that  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  F. 

9  As  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  1 1. 

12  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved 
17  I  command  you,  that  ye  love  one  another 

23  and  hast  loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved 

24  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of 
26  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved 
26  and  the  disciple  standing  by  whom  he  1. 

7  that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  saith  unto 

15  Simon,  .lovest  thou  me  more  than  these? 

16  again . .  Simon,  (son)  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou 

20  seeth  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  fol. 
28  work,  .for  good  to  them  that  love  God 
37  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  loved 

13  As  it  is  written,  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but 

8  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one  an. 

8  he  that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the 

9  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
9  God  hath  prepared  forthem  that  love  him 
3  if  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  known  of 


2  Co.  9.    7  or  of  necessity :  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful 

11.  11  Wherefore?  because  I  love  you  not'.'  God 
12. 15  abundantly  I  love  you,  the  less  I  be  loved 

Gal.    2.  20  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
5.  14  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

Eph.  2.    4  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us 
5.   2  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us 
5.  25  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ,  .loved 
5.  28  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their 
5.  28  He  that  loveth"  his  wife  loveth  himself 

5.  33  let  every  one.  .so  love  his  wife  even  as  h. 

6.  24  Grace  (be)  with  all  them  that  love  our  L. 
Col.    3. 19  Husbands,  love  (your)  wives,  and  be  not 

1  Th.  4.   9  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love 

2  Th.  2.  16  even  our  Father,  which  hath  lovedus,  and 
2  Ti.    4.    8  unto  all  them  also  that  love  his  appearing 

4.  10  Demas.  .having  loved  this  present  world 
Heb.    1.    9  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness,  and  hated 

12.  6  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth 
Jas.     1.  12  Lord  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him 

2.  5  he  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him? 
b.    8  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

1  Pe.    1.    8  Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love ;  iu  whom 

1.  22  love  one  anotherwith  a  pure  heart  ferven. 

2.  17  Honour  all  (men).  Love  the  brotherhood 
3. 10  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days 

2  Pe.    2.  15  wdio  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness 

1  Jo.  2. 10  He  that  loveth  his  brother  abldeth  in  the 

2.  15  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things 

2. 15  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the 

3. 10  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother 

3. 11  the  message,  .that  we  should  love  one  an. 

3.  14  We  know  that,  .because  we  love  the  bre. 
3.  14  He  that  loveth  not  (his)  brother  abideth 

3.  iS  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word 
3. 23  and  love  one  another,  as  he  gave  us  com. 

4.  7  let  us  love  one  another,  .every  one  that  1. 
4.  8  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for 
4. 10  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved 
4.  11  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love 

4. 12  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in 
4.  19  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us 
4.  20  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his 

4.  20  that  loveth  not  his  brother . .  how  can  he  1. 
4. 21  That  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother 

5.  1  every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat  lov. 
5.  2  By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children 
5.   2  when  we  love  God,  and  keep  his  comma. 

2  John     1  whom  I  love  in  the  truth ;  and  not  I  only 

5  new  commandment,  .that  we  love  one  a. 

3  John     1  well  beloved  Gaius,  whom  I  loved  in  the 
Rev.    1.   5  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us 

3.    9  make  them . .  to  know  that  I  have  loved 
12.  11  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death 

6. To  will  or  wish,  deAa  thelo, 

Marki2.  38  scribes,  which  love  to  go  in  long  clothing 
7.  To  be  a  friend,  <pt\€u  phileo. 

Matt.  6.  5  for  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  the  syn. 
10.  37  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more 

10.  37  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than 
23.    6  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and 

Luke2o.  46  love  greetings  in  the  markets,  and  the 
John  5.  20  the  Father  [loveth]  the  Son,  and  showeth 

11.  3  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  thou  lovestissick 

1 1.  36  Then  said  the  Jews,  Behold,  how  he  loved 

12.  25  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  and 
15. 19  the  world  would  love  his  own  :  but  beca. 
16.  27  Father,  .loveth  you,  because  ye  have  loved 

20.  2  to  the  other  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 

21.  15,  16,  i7Lord,  thou  kuowestthat  I  lovethee 
21.  17  Simon.  .Lovest  thou  me?  Lovest  thoume? 

1  Co.  16.  22  If  any  man  love  nottheLord  Jesus  Christ 
Titus  3.  15  Greet  them  that  love  us  in  the  faith.  Grace 
Rev.    3. 19  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten 
22. 15  and  whosoever  loveth  and  niaketh  a  lie 

LOVE,  in  — 

1.  To  love,  nr™  aheb. 

1  Ei.11.  2  the{nations..Solomon;dave  unto  these  in  1. 
2.To cleave  to,  p*;n  chashaq. 

Isa.  38. 17  thou  hast  in  love  to  my  soul  (delivered 
LOVE,  inordinate  or  much  — 
1. Doting  love,  nnaji  agabali. 

Eze.  23. 11  she  was  more  corrupt  in  her  inordinate  1. 

2. Doting  loves,  W^iH.  agabivi. 

Eze.  33.  31  for  with  their  mouth  they  showmuch  love 

LOVE  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  to  — 
To  love  to  be  first,  <pt\oirpcaTevw  philoproteno. 
3  John     9  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  have  thepre-e. 

LOVE,  to  set  — 

To  cleave  to,  pvn  chashaq. 

Deut  7.   7  The  Lord  did  not  set  his  love  upon  you 
Psa.  91. 14  Because  he  hath  set  his  love  upon  me 

LOVE,  tender  — 

Pity,  mercy,  D'Enn  rachamim. 

Dan.    1.   9  into  favour  and  tender  love  with  the  pri. 

LOVE  as  brethren  — 

Loving  one's  brethren,  tyiXdSektpos  2)hiladelphos. 

i  Pe.    3.    8  love  as  brethren,  (be)  pitiful,  (be)  court. 
LOVE  of  the  brethren,  or  brotherly  love  — 
Love  of  tlie  brethren,  <pt\a.<>z\<pia,  Philadelphia. 

Rom. 12. 10  one  to  another  with  brotherly  love;  in  hon. 

1  Th.    4.    9  as  touching  brotherly  love  ye  need  not 

Heb.  13.    1  Let  brotherly  love  continue 

1  Pe.  1.  22  purified. .  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  bre. 


LOVE 


6M 


LUD 


;_OVE  of  money  — 

Love  of  silver,  <pt\apyvpta  philarguri%. 

i  Ti.    6.  10  For  the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  e. 
LOVE  one's  children  or  husband  — 
I.  Lover  of  children,  cpi\6reKvos  philoteknos. 

Titus'  2.   4  teach  the  young  women .  .to  love  their  ch. 

'2.  Lover  of  husband,  <pl\avdpo$  philandros. 

Titus  2.    4  women  to  be  sober,  to  love  their  husbands 
LOVE  toward  man  — 
Love  of  mankind,  (ptXavQpviria  philanihropia. 

Titus  3.    4  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man 
LOVELY  — 
l.To  be  loved,  nrrs  aheb,  2. 

2  Sa.    it  23  Saul  and  Jonathan  (were)  lovely  and  pie. 
^.Desire,  a  desirable  thing,  il?D9  machmad. 

Song  5.  16  yea,  he  (is)  altogether  lovely.  This  (is)  my 
3.  Very  lovely,  or  lovable,  irpo<r<piXr\s  prosphiles. 

Phil,   4.   8  whatsoever  things  (are)  lovely,  .think  on 
LOVELY,  very  — 
Doting  acts  of  love,  D'ajjf.  agabim.    ■ 

Eze.  33.  32  as  a  very  lovely  song  of  one  that  hath  a  pi. 
LOVER  — 
l.To  low,  3nN  aheb. 

1  Ki.  5.    1  for  Hiram  was  ever  a  lover  of  David 
Psa.  38.  ii  My  lovers  and  my  friends  stand  aloof  from 

88.  18  Lover  and  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from 
Lam.  1.    2  among  all  her  lovers  she  hath  none  to  co. 

2.  To  love,  nnx  aheb,  3. 

Jer.  22.  20  and  cry.  .for  all  thy  lovers  are  destroyed 
22  22  thy  lovers  shall  go  into  captivity :  surely 
301 14  All  thy  lovers  have  forgotten  thee ;  they 

Lam.  1.  19  I  called  for  my  lovers,  .they  deceived  me 

Eze.  16.  33  thou  givest  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  lovers,  and 
16.  36  with  thy  lovers,  and  with  all  the  idols  of 
16.  37  I  will  gather  all  thy  lovers,  with  whom 
23.  5  she  doted  on  her  lovers,  on  the  Assyrians 
23.  g  delivered  her  into  the  hand  of  her  lovers 
23.  22  I  will  raise  up  thyloversagainst  thee,  from 

Eos.  2.  5  I  will  go  after  my  lovers,  that  gave  (me) 
2.  7  she  shall  follow  after  her  lovers,  but  she 
2.  10  her  lewdness  in  the  sight  of  her  lovers 

2. 12  my  rewards  that  my  lovers  have  given  me 

2. 13  she  went  after  her  lovers,  and  forgat  me 

3.  To  dote  on,  love,  21%  agab. 

Jer.    4.  30  lovers  will  despise  thee,  they  will  seek  thy 

4.  A  friend,  companion,  yi  rea. 

Jer.     3.    1  hast  played  the  harlot  with  many  lovers 

5. Loves,  0'39*j  ahabim. 

Hos.  8.   9  alone  by  himself  :  Ephraim  hath  hired  lo. 
LOVER  of  God  — 
Lover  of  God,  <pt\6deos  philotheos. 

2  Ti.    3.   4  of  pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God 
LOVER  of  good  men  — 

Lover  of  the  good,  tpiXayaSos  philagathos. 

Titus  1.   8  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  tern. 

LOVER  of  hospitality  — 

Lover  of  strangers  or  of  hospitality,  (ptXo^evos. 
Titus  1.    8  But  a  lover  of  hospitality,  .sober,  just,  h. 

LOVER  of  own  self  — 

Lover  of  self,  rptXavros  philautos. 

2  Ti.    3.  2  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves 

LOVER  of  pleasures  — 

Lover  of  pleasure,  <piX-f)b*oi/os  philedonos. 

2  Ti.   3.   4  lovers  of  pleasures  more  than .  .of  God 

LOVES  — 

Beloved,  vv  yadid. 

Psa.  45.  title,  sons  of  Korah.  Maschil,  A  song  of  loves 

LOVING  — 

1.  Loves,  D'^nx  ahabim. 

Prov.  5.  19  the  loving  hind  and  pleasant  roe  ;  let  her 

%Good,  3ia  tab. 

Prov  22.    1  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold 

LOVING  kindness  — 

Kindness,  "ipQ  chesed. 

Psa.  17.   7  Show  thy  marvellous  loving  kindness,  O 
25.   6  tender  mercies  and  thy  loving  kindnesses 
•  26.    3  thy  loving  kindness  (is)  before  mine  eyes 
36.    7  How  excellent  (is)  thy  loving  kindness,  O 
36.  10  O  continue  thy  loving  kindness  unto  them 
40.  10  I  have  not  concealed  thy  loving  kindness 
4:1.  ii  let  thy  loving  kindness  and  thy  truth  co. 
42.   8  Lord  will  command  his  loving  kindness 
48.   9  We  have  thought  of  thy  loving  kindness 
51.    1  0  God,  according  to  thy  loving  kindness 
63.    3  thy  loving  kindness  (is)  better  than  life 
69. 16  Hear  me,  O  Lord;  for  thy  loving  kindn. 
88. 11  Shall  thy  loving  kindness  be  declared  in 
89. 33  my  loving  kindness  will  I  not  utterly  take 
89.49  where  (are)  thy  former  loving  kindnesses 
92.    2  To  show  forth  thy  loving  kindness  in  the 
103.   4  who  crowneth  thee  with  loving  kindness 
107. 43  they  shall  understand  the  loving  kindness 
119.  88  Quicken  me  after  thy  loving  kindness ;  so 
119. 149  Hear,  .according  unto  thy  loving  kind. 
119.  159  0  Lord,  according  to  thy  lovingkindiiess 
1  ; :.    2  praise  thy  name  for  thy  loving  kindness 


Psa.  143.  8  Cause  me,  to  hear  thy  loving  kindness  in 
Isa.  63.   7  I  will  mention  the  loving  kindnesses  of 

63.    7  to  the  multitude  of  his  loving  kindnesses 
Jer.    9.  24  I  (am)  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving  ki. 

16.  5  my  peace,  .loving  kindness  and  mercies 

31.  3  with  loving  kindness  have  I  drawn  thee 

32.  18  showest  loving  kindness  unto  thousands 
Hos.    2.  19  betroth,  .in  loving  kindness,  and  in  mer. 

LOW  — 

l.A  {common)  man,  Wt$  adam. 

Psa.  49.  2  Both  low  and  high,  rich  and  poor,  toge.t. 

2. Low,  humble,  "75^  shaphal. 

Job  5. 1 1  To  set  up  on  high  those  that  be  low  ;  that 
Eccl.12.  4  when  the  sound  of  the  grinding  is  low,  and 
Eze.  17.    6  became  a  spreading  vine  of  low  stature 

17.  24  I  the  Lord,  .have  exalted  the  low  tree 
21.  26  exalt (hini that  is)low,  and  abase  (him  that 

3.  Lower,  under,  'f^n  tachti. 

Lam.  3.  55  I  called . .  O  Lord,  out  of  the  low  dungeon 
[See  also  Bring,  brought,  degree,  man.] 

LOW,  to  — 

To  low,  nj;a  gaah. 

1  Sa.   6.'  12  along  the  highway,  lowing  as  they  wont 

Job     6.   5  grass?  or  loweth  the  ox  over  his  fodder? 
LOW,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  bowed  down,  t\t\v  shachach,  2. 

Isa.   29.    4  thy  speech  shall  be  low  out  of  the  dust 
ST.  To  be  low,  humble,  bvy  shaphel. 

Isa.  32.  19  and  the  city  shall  be  low  in  a  low  place 

LOW,  to  be  made  — 

1.2*0  be  low,  humble,  hzw  shaphel. 

Isa.     2. 17  the  haughtinessof  man  shall  be  made  low 
40.    4  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made  low 

2. Humiliation,  lowliness,  raTretucosris  tapeinosis. 
Jas.     1.  10  But  the  rich,  in  that  he  is  made  low :  be. 

LOW,  to  bring  or  lay  — 

To  make  low  or  humble,  "?D*>  shaphel,  5. 

1  Sa.    2.   7  The  Lord.. he  bringeth  low,  and  Hfteth 
Prov  29.  23  A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low :  but  h. 
Isa.  13. 11  will  lay  low  the  haughtiness  of  the  terrible 

25.  12  of  thy  walls  shall  he  bring  down,  lay  low 

26.  s  lofty  city,  he  layeth  it  low.  .layeth  it  low 

LOW,  to  be  brought  — 
l.To  be  low,  7j:jd  viakak. 

Psa.  106.  43  and  were  brought  low  for  their  iniquity 

2.  To  be  made  low,  339  makak,  6. 

Job  24.  24  but  are  gone  and  brought  lo%v ;  they  are 

Z.To  bow  down,  nrr^  shachach. 

Psa.  107.  39  they  are  minished  and  brought  low  thro. 

4.  To  be  bowed  down,  nni?  shachach,  2. 

Eccl.12.    4  daughters  of  music  shall  be  brought  low 

5.  To  be  low,  humble,  bzy  shaphel. 

Isa.     2. 12  and.  .lifted  up.  .he  shall  be  brought  low 

6.  To  make  low,  TaTteivocn  tapeinoo. 

Luke  3.    5  every  mount,  and  hillshallbebroughtlow 

LOW  country  or  plain  — 

Low  country,  low  land,  Tn^p  shephelah. 

1  Ch.27.  28  sycamore  tree's  that  (were)  in  the  low  pi. 

2  Ch.  9.  27  that  (are)  in  the  low  plains  in  abundance 

26. 10  had  much  cattle,  both  in  the  low  country 
28. 18  had  invaded  the  cities  of  the  low  country 

LOW  estate,  or  place,  or  degree  — 

l.Low,  humble  place,  bsw  shephel. 

Psa.  136.  23  Who  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate 
Eccl.  10.    6  great  dignity,  and  the  rich  sit  in  low  pi. 

%Low)iess,  low  place,  n?s^  shiphlah. 

Isa.   32. 19  and  the  city' shall  be  low  in  a  low  place 

3. Low,  humble,  Taireivds  tapeinos. 

Luke  1.  52  put  down,  .and  exalted  them  of  low  deg. 
Rom  12. 16  condescend  to  men  of  low  estate.  Be  not 
Jas.    1.  9  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  rejoice  in 

4. Lowliness,  low  estate,  TcnreiVcucrir  tapeinosis. 

Luke  1.  48  For  he  hath  regarded  the  low  estate  of 
LOW,  lower  or  lowest  parts  — 
Lower,  under,  'nnn  tachti. 

Psa.  63.   9  shall  go  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth 
139. 15  wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth 

Isa.   44.  23  shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth:  break 

Eze.  26.  20  shall  set  thee  in  thelowparts  of  the  earth 
LOW,  very  —  >£ 

Beneath,  low,  naD  mattah. 

Deut28.  43  high,  and  thou  shalt  come  down  very  low 
LOWER,  lowest  — 
l.End,  extremity,  nyp  katsah. 

1  Ki.12.  31  made  priests  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 

13.  33  made,  .of  the  lowest  of  the  people  priests 

2  Ki.  17.  32  and  made  unto  themselves  of  the  lowest 

2. Low ,  humble,  bny  shaphal. 

Lev.  13.  20  behold,  it  (be)  in  sight  lower  than  the  skin 
13. 21  and  (if)  it  (be)  not  lower  than  the  skin,  but 

13.  26  and  it  (be)  no  lower  than  the  (other)  skin 

14.  37  which  in  sight  (are)  lower  than  the  wall 


3.  Lower,  under,  jifcrjB  tachton. 

Isa.    22.    9  gatheredtogetherthe  waters  of  the  lower 
Eze.  40.  18  And  the  pavement ..  (was)  the  lower  pav. 

40.  19  from  the  forefront  of  the  lower  gate  unto 

41.  7  and  so  increased  (from)  the  lowest . .  to  the 

42.  5  than  the  lower,  and  than  the  middlemost 

42.  6  straitened  more  than  the  lowest  and  the 

43.  14  to  the  lower  settle  (shall  be)  two  cubits 
4. Lower,  under,  'finn  tachti. 

Gen.  6.  16  lower,  second,  and  third,  .shalt  thou  make 
Deut  32.  22  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell,  and  shall 
Neh.  4.  13  Therefore  setl  in  the  lower  places  behind 
Psa.  86.  13  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the  lo. 
88.   6  Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit,  in  da. 

5. Last,  most  extreme,  distant,  €o-xaTOS  eschatos. 

Lukei4.    9  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  room 
14.  10  But.  .go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  room 
G.Loiver  down,  Kardbrepos  katoteros. 

Eph.    4.    9  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
LOWER  or  LOUR,  to  — 
To  lour,  be  dark,  gloomy,  (rTvyvafa  stugnazo. 

Matt  16.    3  for  the  sky  is  red  and  lowering.. hypoorites 
LOWER,  to  make  — 
l.To  let  or  make  to  lack,  ipn  chassr,  3. 

Psa.    8.    s  thou  hast  made  him  a  b'ttle  lower  than  the 
2.  To  make  low,  less,  eXarroco  elattoo. 

Heb.    2.    7  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  ang. 
2.    9  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  an. 
LOWER,  to  be  put  — 
To  make  low,  humble,  h$xp  shaphel,  5. 

Prov  25.    7  than  that  thou  shouldest  be  put  lower  in 
LOWING  — 
A  voice,  "?ip  qol. 

1  Sa.  15.  14  and  the  lowing  of  the  oxen  which  I  hear? 
LOWLINESS  (of  mind)  — 

Lowliness  ofmind.Taireivocppoo'vvn  tapeinophrosune. 

Eph.    4.    2  With  all  lowliness  and  meekness,  with 

Phil.   2.    3  in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem  other 
LOWLY  — 
l.Low,  humble,  afflicted,  ljj/,  *iyt  ani,  anav. 

Prov.  3.  34  scorneth.  .but  he  giveth  grace  unto  the  1. 
16.  19  of  an  humble  spirit  with  the  lowly,  than 
2.  To  be  lowly,  y:y  tsana. 

Prov  11.    2  conieth  shame :  but  with  the  lowly  (Is)  w. 
Z.Low,  humble,  hzy  shaphal. 

Psa.  138.    6  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly:  but 

4.  Low,  humble,  raireiv6s  tapeinos. 

Matt  11.  29  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye 
LU-'BIM,  Wl\h. 

The  inhabitants  of  N.  Africa,  W.  from  Egypt.    (See 
Libyans). 

2  Ch.12.    3  the  L.,  the  Sukkiims,  and  the  Ethiopians 

16.    8  Were  not.. Ethiopians  and.  .L.  a  huge 
Nah.    3.    9  was)  infinite ;  Put  and  L.  were  thy  help. 

LTJC'-AS,  LUKE,  Aoufcres-  light-giving . 

A  physician  who  travelled  much  with  the  apostle  Paul, 

and  is  understood  to  have  written  the  third  gospel  and 

the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

Col.  4.  14  L.,  the  beloved  physician,  and  Demas 
2  Ti.  4. 11  Only  L.  is  with  me.  Take  Mark,  and  bring 
Phm.      24  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  Demas,  L.,  my  fell. 

LU-CI-FER,  y?Yi  shining  one. 

A  translation  of  helel  applied  to  the  king  of  Babylon 
by  Isaiah,  in  reference  to  his  glory  and  pomp.  B.C.  720. 
Isa.   14. 12  0  L.,  son  of  the  morning  !  (how)  art  thou 
LU-CI'-US,  Aovkios  of  light. 

1.  A  Christian  from  Cyrene,  ministering  at  Antioch. 

Acts  13.    1  L.  of  Cyrene,  and  Manaen,  which  had  been 

2.  A  kinsman  of  Paul ;  perhaps  the  same  as  No  1. 
Rom. 16.  21  Timotheus  my  work  fellow,  and  L.,  and 

LUCRE  — 

1. Dishonest  gain,  J?a3  betsa. 

1  Sa.    8.    3  turned  aside  after  lucre,  and  took  bribes 
I.Gain,  profit,  KtpSos  Icerdos. 

Titus  1.  11  teaching  things,  .for  filthy  lucre's  sake 
LUCRE,  given  to  or  greedy  of  filthy  — 
A  shameful  gainer,  alo-xpoKepb-ns  aischrokerdes. 

Titus  1.  7  must  be.. no  striker,  not  given  to  filthy  1. 

1  Ti.   3.    8  not  double  tongued . .  not  greedy  of  filthy  1. 

LUCRE,  for  filthy  — 

Shamefully  gaining.  alo-xpoKepdcos  aisehrokerdos. 

1  Pe.   5.   2  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind 
LUCRE,  not  greedy  of  filthy  — 
Not  loving  silver,  atytXapyvpos  ajihilarguros. 

1  Ti.   3.    3  no  striker,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre ;  but 
LUD,  LUD'-TM,  LY-DI'A,  1^. 

1.  Son  of  Shem,  B.C.  2280 ;  supposed  to  have  founded 
the  kingdom  of  Lydia  in  Asia  Minor. 

Gen.  10.  22  The  children  of  Shem.  .Arphaxad,  and  L. 
1  Ch.  1. 17  The  sons  of  Shem.  .Arphaxad,  and  L.,  and 

2.  Descendants  of  Lud  in  N.  Africa,  Asia  Minor,Assyria, 
&c. 

Isa.   66.  19  I  will  send  those  that  escape,  .(to)  Pul 
Eze  27.  10  They  of  Persia  and  of  L.  and  of  Phut  were 


LUDIM 


625 


MAACHAH 


LU'-DIM,  [TT& 

Son  of  Mizraim ;  the  African  Lewatah  in  Mauritania. 
Gen.  10.  13  Mizraim  begat  L.,  and  Anamim,  and  Leh. 

1  Ch.   1. 11  Mizraim  begat  L.,  and  Anamim,  and  Leh. 

LU'-HTTH,  TVirb,  rrnS  table. 

A  city  of  Moab  between  Ar  and  Zoar,  at  the  S.  extremity 

of  the  Salt  Sea. 

Isa.   15.   5  for  by  the  mounting  up  of  L.  with  weep. 

Jer.  48.    5  For  in  the  going  up  of  L.  continual  weep. 

LUKEWARM  — 

Somewhat  warm,  xA.tapo's  cJiliaros. 

Rev.    3.  16  So  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and 
LUMP  (of  figs)  — 
I. Bunch  of  dried  jigs,  rrVa^  debelah. 

2  Ki.  20.    7  And  Isaiah  said,  Take  a  lump  of  figs.  And 
Isa.   38.  2t  Let  them  take  a  lump  of  figs,  and  lay  (it) 

2.  Mass  of  things  mixed,  <f>vpafj.a  phurama. 

Rom.  9.  21  of  the  same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  unto 

11.  16  if  the  first  fruit  (be)  holy,  the  lump  (is)also 

1  Co.  5.    6  a  little  leaven  leaven eth  the  whole  lump? 

5.    7  that  ye  may  be  anew  lump,  as  ye  are  unl. 

Gal.    5.    9  A  little  leaven  leaventh  the  whole  lump 

LUNATICK,  to  be  — 

To  be  moon- struck,  treXrjVLa^o/iai. 

iJ  att.  4.  24  those  which  were  lunatick,  and  those  that 
17.  15  he  is  lunatick,  and  sore  vexed :  for  oft 
LURK  privily,  to  — 
To  hide,  watch  secretly,  J 9*  tsaphan. 

Prov.  1. 11  let  us  lurk  privily  for  the  innocent  witho. 
1. 18  And.. they  lurk  privily  for  their  (own)  lives 

LURKING  — 

To  sit  still  or  down,  3»;  yashab. 

Psa.  17.  12  as  it  were  a  young  lion  lurking  in  secret 

LURKING  place  — 

1. Place  of  lying  in  wait,  Tjga  maarab. 

Psa.  10.    8  He  sitteth  in  the  lurking  places  of  the  vill. 

2. Hiding  place,  D'sprr?  machdboim. 

1  Sa.  23.  23  take  knowledge  of  all  the  lurking  places 
LUST  — 
l.Soul,  breath,  desire,  v$i  nepliesh. 

Exod  15.    9  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  them ;  I 

Psa.  78.  18  they  tempted.,  by  asking  meat  for  their  1. 
2.Stitbbornness,enmity,imagi?iation,rt'n^~ipsh^riruth 

Psa.  81.  12  gave  them  up  unto  their  own  hearts'  lust 

3.  Object  of  desire,  hinp  taavah. 

Psa.  78.  30  They  were  not  estranged  from  their  lust 

4.  Desire,  over  desire,  itrtOv/j-ia  epithumia. 

Mark  4. 19  the  lusts  of  other  things  entering  in,  choke 

John  8.  44  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do.  He  w. 

Rom.  1.  24  through  the  lusts  of  their  own  hearts,  to 

6. 12  [that  ye  should  obeyit  in  the  lusts  thereof] 

7.    7  for  I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law 

13.  14  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  (fulfil)  the  lusts 

Gal.     5.  16  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh 

5.  24  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the.  .lusts 
Eph.   2.    3  conversation  in  times  past  in  the  lusts  of 

4.  22  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts 

1  Ti.    6.   9  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  dr. 

2  Ti.    2.  22  Flee  also  youthful  lusts  :  but  follow  righ. 

3.  6  silly  women .  .led  away  with  divers  lusts 

4.  3  after  their  own  lusts  shall  they  heap  to 
Titus  2.  12  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts 

3.  3  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  living 
Jas.     1.  14  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust 

1. 15  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  fo. 

1  Pe.   1.  14  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  your  ig. 

2.  11  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  ag. 

4.  2  in  the  flesh  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the 
4.   3  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousness,  lusts 

2  Pe.   1.    4  the  corruption . .  in  the  world  through  lust 

2.  10  that  walk  after  the  flesh  in  the  lust  of  un. 

2.  18  they  allure  through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 

3.  3  come . .  scoffers,  walking  after  their  own  1. 
1  Jo.   ?..  16  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes 

2. 17  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  the. 

6.  25  Lust  not  after  her  beauty  in  thine  heart 
Jude     16  complainers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts 

18  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts 

5.  Pleasure,  sweetness,  ydovrj  Jiedone. 

Jas.     4.    1  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  members? 

4.  3  ask . .  that  ye  may  consume  (it)  upon  your  I. 

6. -Eager  desire,  opzfys  orexis. 

Rom.  1.  27  burned  in  their  lust  one  toward  another 

7. Suffering,  affection,  tt&Oos  pathos. 

1  Th.  4.   5  Not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence  even  as 

LUST  (after),  to  — 

l.To  desire,  incline  to,  itin  avah,  7. 

Numn.  34  there  they  buried  the  people  that  lusted 
Psa.  106. 14  But  lusted  exceedingly  in  the  wilderness 

2.  To  desire,  rnt<  avah,  3. 

Deut  14.  26  for  whatsoever  thy  soul  lusteth  after,  for 

3. Desire,  nix  avvah. 

Deut  12. 15,  20,  21  whatsoever  thy  soul  lusteth  after 

4.  To  desire  greatly,  imBvpew  epithumco. 

Matt.  5.  28  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  af. 
1  Co.  10.   6  not.. after  evil  things,  as  they  also  lusted 

79 


Gal.     5.  17  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and 
Jas.    4.    2  Ye  lust,  and  have  not ;  ye  kill,  and  desire 

5.  To  be  desiring,  elvat  zinQvfxriTTjseinai  epithumetes. 

1  Co.  10.  6  we  should  not  lust  after  evil  things,as  they 

6.  Desire,  over  desire,  iiuOvfxla  epithumia. 

Rev.  18.  14  the  fruits  that  thy  soul  lusted  after  are  d. 

7.  To  desire  upon  or  eagerly,  iirnro8eaj  epipotheo. 

Jas.    4.    5  The  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to 
LUSTING— 
Desire,  ni^n  taavah. 

Numn.    4  the  mixed  multitude .  .fell  a  lusting :  and 
LUSTY  — 
Oil,  ointment,  {Dy1  shamen. 

Judg.  3.  29  about  ten  thousand  men,  all  lusty,  and 
LUZ,  T17  bending,  curve. 

1.  A  city  of  the  Canaanites,  afterwards  called  Beth-el ; 
in  the  lot  of  Benjamin.     Now  called  Beitin. 

Gen.  28. 19  the  name  of  that  city  (was  called)  L.  at  the 
35.  6  So  Jacob  came  to  L. ,  which  (is)  in  the  land 
48.    3  God  Almighty  appeared  unto  me  at  L.  in 

Josh.  1 6.  2  goeth  out  from  Beth-el  to  L.,  and  passeth 
18.  13  toward  L.,  to  the  side  of  L.,  winch  (is)  B. 

Judg.  1.  23  now  the  name  of  the  city  before  (was)  L. 

2.  A  city  in  the  land  of  the  Hittites,  i.e.  Cyprus  ;  built 
by  the  man  who  showed  the  entrance  of  Luz  or  Bethel 
to  the  spies  of  Israel.    B.C.  1425. 

Judg.  1.  26  called  the  name  thereof  L.:  which  (is)  the 

LY-CA-O-NI'-A,  AvKaovia. 

A  province  of  Asia  Minor  N.  from  Cilicia,  W.  from 
Cappadocia,  and  S.  from  Galatia.  Its  chief  cities  were 
Derbe,  Lystra,  and  Iconium. 

Acts  14.   6  fled  unto  Lystra  and  Derbe,  cities  of  L. 
14. 11  saying  in  the  speech  of  L.,  The  gods  are 

LY-CI'-A,  Avicia. 

A  province  in  the  extreme  S.  of  Asia  Minor. 

Acts  27.    5  Pamphylia,  we  came  to  Myra,  (a  city)  of  L. 
LYD'-DA,  Au55a. 

A  city  of  Dan,  ten  miles  E.  from  Joppa;  once  called 
Lod  and  Diospolis  ;  now  Lucid. 

Acts    9.  32  down  also  to  the  saints  which  dwelt  at  L. 
9.  35  all  that  dwelt  in  L.  and  Saron  saw  him 
9.  38  forasmuch  as  L.  was  nigh  to  Joppa,  aud 
LY-DI'-A,  yhAvMcu 

1.  Lud.  A  country  and  people  in  the  N.  of  Africa,  W. 
from  Egypt. 

Eze.  30.    5  Ethiopia,  and  Libya,  and  L.,  and  all  the 

2.  A  devout  woman  of  Thyatira,  converted  by  Paul's 
preaching  at  Philippi. 

Acts  16.  14  certain  woman  named  L.,  a  seller  of  pur. 

16.  40  entered  into  (the  house  of)  L.:  and  when 

LYDIANS,  CHiS. 

A  people  of  Africa.    See  Lud,  Ludim. 

Jer.  46.    9  the  L.,  that  handle  (and)  bend  the  bow 
LYING  — 
l.A  lying,  deceitful  one,  sns  kedab. 

Dan.   2.    9  ye  have  prepared  lying  and  corrupt  words 
2. To  lie,  deceive,  fail,  213  kazab,  3. 

Eze.  13.  igyour  lying  tomy  people  that  hear  (your)  1.? 
Z.A  lie,  deceit,  313  kazab. 

Eze.  13.    6  They  have  seen  vanity  and  lying  divination 
13.    7  and  have  ye  not  spoken  a  lying  divination 
i.To  fail,  feign,  lie,  deceive,  wna  kachash,  3. 

Isa.   59.  13  In  transgressing  and  lying  against  the  L. 

Hos.   4.    2  By  swearing,  and  lying,  and  killiug,  and 

5.  A  lie,  failure,  feigning,  t^ns  kachash. 

Psa.  59. 12  and  for  cursing  and  lying  (which)  they  s. 
Q.Liars,  D'&'na  kechashim. 

Isa.    30.    9  lying  children,  children  (that)  will  not 

7.  To  fall,  hsi  naphal. 

Deut 2 1.    1  If  (one)  be  found  slain ..  lying  in  the  field 

8.  Vanity,  falsehood,  \xv$  shav. 

Psa.  31.    6  I  have  hated  them  that  regard  lying  va. 
Jon.    2.    8  They  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake 

^.Falsehood,  lie,  *ijr^  sheger. 

1  Ki.  22.  22  I  will  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of 

22.  23  LORD  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth 

2  Ch.18.  21  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  his  proph. 

18.  22  Lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth 
Psa.  31.  18  Letthe  lying  lips  be  put  to  silence  ;  which 
109.    2  they  have  spoken  against  me  with  a  lying 
119.  29  Remove  from  me  the  way  of  lying ;  and 

119.  163  I  hate  and  abhor  lying  :  (but)  thy  law  do 

120.  2  Deliver  my  soul,  0  Lord,  from  lying  lips 
Prov.  6.  17  A  proud  look,  a  lying  tongue,  and  hands 

10. 18  He  that  hideth  hatred  (with)  lying  lips 

12. 19  but  a  lying  tongue  (is)  but  for  a  moment 
12. 22  Lying  lips  (are)  abomination  to  the  Lord 

17.  7  becometh  not  a  fool ;  much  less  do  lying  1. 
21.  6  The  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue 
26.  28  A  lying  tongue  hateth  (those  that  are)  affl. 

Isa.   32.   7  devices  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  wo. 

Jer.     7.    4  Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,  saying,  The 

7.    8  ye  trust  in  lying  words,  that  cannot  profit 

29.  23  have  spoken  lying  words  in  my  name,  wh. 

10.-^  word  of  falsehood,  ij2»  Tji  debar  sheqer. 

Prov.  1 3.5  A  righteous(nianjhateth  lying:  but  a  wicked 


11.  A  lie,  falsehood,  tyzvdos  pseudos. 

Eph.   4.  25  Wherefore  putting  away  lying,  speak  ev. 

2  Th.  2.    9  with  all  power  and  signs  and  lying  won. 
LYTNG  down  — 
l.A  couch,  lying  down,  V2~\  reba. 

Psa.  139.    3  compassest  my  path  and  my  lying  down 
2.  To  lie,  lie  down,  nay  shakab. 

Isa.   56.  10  sleeping,  lying  down,  loving  to  slumber 
LYING  in  wait  — 
1. Place  of  lying  in  wait,  ZveSpov  enedron. 

Acts  23.  16  heard  of  then*  lying  in  wait,  he  went  and 
2. Counsel  against  one,  i-rrt&ovAri  epiboule. 

Acts  20. 19  befell  me  by  the  lying  in  wait  of  the  Jews 
LYTNG  in  wait,  (men  ) — 
l.To  lie  in  wait,  3"ix  arab. 

Judg  16.   9  menjlying  in  wait,  abiding  with  her  in  the 
2. Place  of  lying  in  wait,  :nio  maarab. 

Judg.  9.  35  Abimelech  rose  up.  .from  lying  in  wait 
LYING  with  — 

l.A  place  of  lying  down,  aspf?  mishkab. 
-    NUUI31.  17  woman  that  hath  known  man  by  lying  w. 
31.  18  that  hath  not  known  a  man  by  lying  with 
31.  35  that  had  not  known  man  by  lying  with  him 

Judg2i.  12  that  had  known  noman  by  lying  with  any 
2.  To  lie,  lie  doum,  33E>  shakab. 

Gen.  34.    7  folly . .  in  lying  with  Jacob's  daugher ;  w. 

Deut22.  22  If  a  man  be  found  lying  with  a  woman  m. 
LY-  SA-NI'-AS,  Avo-avias. 
A  tetrarch  of  Abilene.     a.D.  26. 

Luke  3.    1  Herod  being  tetrarch  of  Galilee,  .and  L. 
LY-SI'-AS.  A-  -'„-. 
Chief  captain  of  the  Roman  garrison  at  Jerusalem. 

Acts  23.  26  Claudias  L.  unto  the  most  excellent  gov. 
24.  7  [chief  captain  L.  came  (upon us),  and  with] 
24.  22  When  L.  the  chief  captain . .  come  down 

LYS'-TRA,  Avarpa. 

A  city  of  Lycaonia,  in  Asia  Minor,  forty  miles  W.  of 

Iconium.    Now  called  Latik. 

Acts  14.  6  They  were  ware  of  (it),  and  fled  unto  L. 
14.  8  there  sat  a  certain  man  at  L.,  impotent  in 
14.  21  they  returned  again  to  L.,  and  (to)  Icon. 
16.  1  Then  came  he  to  Derbe  and  L.:  and,  beh. 
16.  2  by  the  brethren  that  were  at  L.  and  Ico. 
2  Ti.    3.  11  afflictions,  which  came  unto  me.. at  L. 


M 

MA-A'-CHAH,  MA-A'-CAH,  7ll%p  depression. 

1.  Son  of  Nahor,   Abraham's  brother,  by  Reumah  a 
concubine.    B.C.  i860. 

Gen.  22.  24  his  concubiue.  .bare  also  Tebah.  .and  M. 

2.  One  of  David's  wives,  and  mother  of  Absalom.    B.C. 
1060. 

2  Sa.   3.    3  Absalom,  the  son  of  M.  the  daughter  of  T. 

1  Ch.  3.    2  Absalom  the  son  of  M.  the  daughter  of  T. 

3.  A  district  and  city  of  SjTia,  inManasseh,  E.  of  Jordan. 

2  Sa.  10.    8  Ish-tob,  and  M.,  (were)  by  themselves  in 

1  Ch.19.    6  to  hire  them  chariots,  .out  of  Syria-M. 

19.    7  So  they  hired,  .the king  of  M.  and  his  pe. 

4.  A  king  of  Maachah.     B.C.  1060. 

2  Sa.  10.    6  sent  and  hired,  .of  king  M.  a  thousand 

5.  The  father  of  Achish  king  of  Gath  in  Solomon's  time. 
B.C.  1038. 

1  Ki.   2.  39  ranawayunto  Achish  son  of  M.  king  of  G. 

6.  The  wife  of  Rehoboam  and  mother  of  Abijah  kings 
of  Judah.    B.C.  1000. 

1  Ki.  15.    2  his  mother's  name  (was)  M.,  the  daughter 

2  Ch.11.  20  after  her  he  took  M.  the  daughter  of  Ab. 

11.  21  Rehoboam  loved  M.  the  daughter  of  Abs. 
11.  22  Rehoboam  made  Abijah  the  son  of  M.  the 

7.  The  mother  of  Asa  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  960. 

1  Ki.  15.  10  his  mother's  name'(was)M.,  the  daughter 

15.  13  also  M.  his  mother,  even  her  he  removed 

2  Ch.15.  16  (concerning)  M.  the  mother  of  Asa  the  king 

8.  Concubine -of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hezron.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  2.  48  M.,  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Sheber,  and 

9.  A  woman  of  Benjamin,   married  to  Machir,  son  of 
Manasseh.    B.C.  1630. 

1  Ch.  7.  15  whose  sister's  name  (was)  HI.;  and  the  name 
7.  16  >1.  the  wife  of  Machir  bare  a  son,  and  she 

10.  Wife  of  Jehiel  the  father  or  founder  of  Gibeon. 

B.C.    1250. 

1  Ch.  8.  29  father  of  Gibeon  ;  whose  wife's  name.  .M. 
9-  35  dwelt.  .Jehiel,  whose  wife's  name.  .M. 

11.  The  father  of  Hanun,  one  of  David's  warriors.    B.C. 
1048. 

1  Ch.11.  43  Hanun,  the  son  of  M.,  and  Joshaphat  the 

12.  The  father  of  Shephatiah,  who  ruled  the  Simeonites 
in  David's  time.     B.C.  1038. 

1  Ch.27.  16  the  Simeonites ;  Shephatiah  the  son  of  II. 


MAACHATHI 


626 


MADE 


MA-A-CHA'-THI,  MA-A-CHA-THITES,  ?033£P,  naj^D. 
Patronymic  of  the  inhabitants  of  Maachah  orMaachath, 
near  Mount  Hermon,  at  the  W.  slope  of  South  Anti- 
lebanus. 

Deut.  3.  14  Argon  unto  the  coasts  of  Geshuri  and  M. 

Josh.12.  5  the  border  of  the  Geshurites,  and  the  M. 
13.  11  and  the  border  of  the  Geshurites  and  M. 
13.  13  expelled  not.  .the  M.;  but.  .the  M.  dwell 

2  Sa.  23.  34  Aliasbai,  the  son  of  the  Iff.,  Eliam  the  son 

2  Ki.25.  23  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  a  M.,  they  and  their 

1  Ch.  4. 19  Naham,  the  father  of.  .Esntenioa  the  M. 

Jer.  40.    8  Jezaniah  the  son  of  a  M.,  they  and  their 
MA-A'-DAI,  'T£n  Jah  is  ornament. 
One  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  34  Of  the  sons  of  Bani;  M.,  Amrani,  and  Uel 
MA-AD-I'AH,  nnjgD  Jah  is  ornament. 
A  priest  who  returned  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel. 
B.C.  538. 

Neh.  12.    5  Mianiim,  M.,  Bilgah 
MA'-AI,  *y?  Jah  is  comjwssionate. 
One  of  the  priests  who  purified  the  people  after  their 
return  from  Babylon.     B.C.  445- 

Neh.  12. 36  his  brethren..  Milalai,  Gilalai,  11.,  Neth. 
MA-A'-LEH  AK-RAB'-BLM,  n^-ipy  n^D. 
An  acclivityonthe  S.  border  of  Judah,  between  Kedish 
and  the  Salt  Sea,  with  a  bend  toward  the  East. 

Josh  15.    3  it  wentout  to  the  south  side  to  M.-A.,  and 

MA-A'-RATH,  nrjfiia  bare  place. 

A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah  near  Beth-anon ;  now 

Ciuiiian. 

Josh.  15.  59  M.,  and  Beth-anoth,  and  Eltekon  ;  six 
MA-A'-SE'-IAH,  i.Tb-j/D,  nsj?$p  work  of  Jah. 

1.  A  Levite  appointed  for  the*  service  of  praise.  B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.15. 18  with  them  their  brethren.  .M.,  and  Matt. 

15.  20  Eliab,  and  M.,  and  Beuaiah,  with  psalter. 

2.  One  of  the  captains  who  assisted  in  setting  Joash  on 
the  throne  of  Judah.    B.C.  878. 

2  Ch.23.    1  M.  the  son  of  Adaiah,  and  Elishaphat  the 

3.  An  officer  of  king  Uzziah.     B.C.  810. 

2  Ch.26. 11  hand  of  Jeiel  the  scribe,  andM.  the  ruler 

4.  Son  of  Ahaz,  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.28.    7  slew  M.  the  king's  son,  and  Azrikam  the 

5.  The  governor  of  Jerusalem  in  Josiah's  reign.  B.C. 
640. 

2  Ch.34.    8  M.  the  governor  of  the  city,  and  Joah  the 

6.  A  priest  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  18  M.,  and  Eliezer,  and  Jarib,  and  Gedaliah 

7.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Harhn,  who  had  taken  a 
strange  wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  21  M.,  and  Elijah,  and  Shemaiah,  and  Jehiel 

8.  A  priest,  family  of  Pashur,  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.     B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  22  ST.,  Ishmael,  Nethanel,  Jozahad,  and  El. 

9.  One  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife  of  the  family 
of  Pahath-Moab.     B.C.  486. 

Ezra  10.  30  M.,  Mattaniah,  Bezaleel,  and  Binnui,  and 

10.  Father  of  Azariah  who  repaired  part  of  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem.    B.C.  470. 

Neh.    3.  23  After  him  repaired  Azariah  the  son  of  M. 

11.  A  priest  who  stood  beside  Ezra  while  he  read  the 
law.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    8.   4  M.,on  his  right  hand;  and  on  his  left  hand 

12.  A  priest  who  explained  the  law  read  by  Ezra.  Per- 
haps the  same  with  No.  11. 

Neh.  8.    7  M.,  Kelita,  Azariah,  Jozabad,  Hanan,  Pe. 

13.  One  who  sealed  the  covenant  made  by  Nehemiah. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  25  Rehum,  Hashabnah,  M. 

14.  A  descendant  of  Pharez,  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  after 
the  captivity.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    5  M.  the  son  of  Baruch,  the  son  of  Col-hozeh 

15.  A  Benjamite  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  Jerusalem 
after  the  captivity.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    7  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Ithiel,  the  son  of 

16.  A  priest  who  assisted  at  the  purification  of  the  wall. 
Perhaps  the  same  with  No.  n. 

Neh.  12.  41  M.,  Minianrin,  Michaiah,  Elioenai,  Zech. 

17.  Another  priest  who  took  part  in  the  above  ceremony. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.  12.  42  M.,  and  Shemaiah,  and  Eleazar,  and  Uzzi 

18.  A  priest  whose  son  was  sent  by  king  Zedekiah  to 
inquire  of  the  Lord.    B.C.  680. 

Jer.  21.    1  and  Zephauiah  the  son  of  M.  the  priest 
29.  25  Zephaniah  the  son  of  M.  the  priest,  and 
37.    3  and  Zephaniah  the  son  of  ML.  the  priest 
ID.  Tho  father  of  a  false  prophet  during  the  Babylonish 
captivity.    B.C.  638. 

Jer.  29.  21  of  Ahab . .  and  of  Zedekiah  the  son  of  ML 
20.  An  officer  of  the  temple  in  Jehoiakim's  reign.    B.C. 
601. 

Jer.  35.    4  above  the  chamber  of  if.  the  son  of  Shal. 

maa-se'-iah,  n;pro  Jah  is  a  refuge. 

The  grandfather  of  Baruch,  Jeremiahs  amanuensis  and 

messenger.     B.C.  650. 

Jer.  32.  12  Baruch  the  son  of  NeriaTti,  the  son  of  M. 
51.  59  Seraiah  the  son  of  Xeriah,  the  son  of  M. 


MA-A-SI'-AI,  'byo  ivork  of  Jah. 

An  Aaronite  whose  family  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  after 

the  captivity.     B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  12  M.  the  son  of  Adiel,  the  son  of  Jahzerah 

ELA'-ATH,  Maa0. 

An  ancestor  of  Jesus,  through  Mary. 

Luke  3.  26  Which  was  (the  son)  of  M.,  which  was  (the 
MA'-AZ,  f*yo  counsellor. 

A  son  of  Ram,  the  eldest  son  of  Jerahmeel,  great  grand- 
son of  Judah.    B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2.  27  the  sons  of  Ram . .  were  M. ,  and  Jamin,  and 
HA-AZ-I'AH,  ?n;7yp,  n^rp  strength  of  Jah. 

1.  A  priest  to  whom  the  charges  of  the  sanctuary  were 
assigned  by  lot  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  18  to  Delaiah,  the  four  and  twentieth  to  M. 

2.  A  priest  or  family  of  priests  that  sealed  the  covenant 
made  by  Nehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  8  M.,  Bilgai,  Shemaiah :  these  (were)  the  p. 
MACEDONIA,  Macedonian,  ManeSovia,  Ma«e5wc. 
A  region  N.  of  Greece  proper,  having  Thessaly  and 
Epirus  on  the  S.,  Thrace  and  the  /Egean  Sea  on  the  E., 
the  Adriatic  and  Illyria  on  the  W.,  and  Dardania  and 
Mccsia  on  the  N.  The  towns  were  Amphipolis,  Apol- 
lonia,  Berea,  Philippi,  and  Thessalonica.  The  Romans 
divided  the  whole  country  S.  of  the  valley  of  the  Danube 
into  Illyrioum,  Achaia,  and  Macedonia,  which  included 
Thessaly.  In  Macedonia  proper  are  Amphipolis,  Beraea, 
Philippi,  Thessalonica,  and  Apollonia. 

Acts  16.    9  M.,  and  prayed  him.  .Come  over  into  M. 

16.  10  we  endeavoured  to  go  into  M.,  assuredly 
16. 12  which  is  the  chief  city  of  that  part  of  M. 

18.  5  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  M. 

19.  21  when  he  had  passed  through  M.  and  Ac. 
19  22  sent  into  M.  two  of  them  that  ministered 

19.  29  caught  Gaius  and  Aristarchus,  men  of  M. 

20.  1  and  departed  for  to  go  into  M. 

20.    3  he  purposed  to  return  through  M. 

27.   2  a  M.  of  Thessalonica,  being  with  us 

Rom  15.  26  it  hath  pleased  them  of  M.  and  Achaia 

1  Co.  16.    5  pass  through  M. :  for  I  do  pass  through  M. 

2  Co.  1. 16  by  you  into  M. .  .to  come  again  out  of  M. 

2.  13  leave  of  them,  I  went  from  thence  into  M. 

7.  5  when  we  were  come  into  M.,  ourfleshhad 

8.  1  grace  of  God  bestowed  on . .  churches  of  M. 

9.  2  I  boast  of  you  to  them  of  M.,  that  Achaia 
9.    4  if  they  of  M.  come  with  me,  and  find  you 

11.  9  the  brethren  which  came  from  M.  supplied 
Phil.  4. 15  I  departed  from  M.,  no  churches  eommu. 
1  Th.  1.    7  to  all  that  believe  in  M.  and  Achaia 

1.  8  word  of  the  Lord  not  only  in  M.  and  Ach. 
4. 10  all  the  brethren  which  are  in  all  M.  :  but 

1  Ti.    1.    3  abide  still  at  Ephesus,  when  I  went  into  M. 

MACH-BAN'-AI,  '33?0  thick. 

A  Gadite  warrior  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag.    B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch  12. 13  Jeremiah  the  tenth,  M.  the  eleventh 
MACH-BE'-NAH,  x:3?a  knob,  lump. 
Patronymic  of  a  descendant  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephun- 
neh  ;  comp.  Cabbon,  Josh.  15.  40. 

1  Ch.  2.  49  the  father  of  M.,  and  the  father  of  Gibea 

MA'-CHI,  '?!?. 

A  Gadite,  the  father  of  Geuel  whom  Moses  sent  to  spy 

out  the  land.    B.C.  1520. 

Num  13.  15  Of  the  tribe  of  Gad  Geuel  the  son  of  M. 
MA'-CHTR,  "i'D3  salesman. 

1.  Son  of  Manasseh.     B.C.  1635. 

Gen.  50.  23  children  also  of  M.  the  son  of  Manasseh 

Nuni26.  29  M.,  the  family  of  the  Machirites  :  and  M. 
27.    1  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Manasseh,  of  the 
32.  39  the  children  of  M.  the  son  of  Manasseh 
32.  40  gave  Gilead  unto  M.  the  son  of  Manasseh 
36.    1  the  son  of  Iff.,  the  son  of  Manasseh,  of  the 

Deut.  3.  15  And  I  gave  Gilead  unto  M. 

Josh.13.  31  the  children  of  M.  the  son  of  Manasseh 
13.  31  of  the  children  of  M.  by  their  families 

17.  1  M.,  the  first  born  of  Manasseh,  the  father 
17.   3  Gilead,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Manasseh 

Judg.  5.  14  out  of  M.  came  down  governors,  and  out 

1  Ch.  2.  21  the  daughter  of  M.  the  father  of  Gilead 

2.  23  to)  the  sons  of  M.,  the  father  of  Gilead 

7.  14  the  Aramitess  bare  M.  the  father  of  Gilead 
7.  15  M.  took  to  wife  (the  sister)  of  Huppim  and 
7.  16  the  wife  of  M.  bare  a  son,  and  she  called 
7.  17  Gilead,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Manasseh 

2.  A  Manassite,  living  near  Mahauaim  in  the  days  of 
David.     B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    9.    4,  5  the  house  of  M.,  the  son  of  Ammiel 

17.  27  andM.  the  son  of  Ammiel  of  Lo-debar,  and 

MA-CHJU-ITES,  'I'D?  Descendants  of  the  preceding. 
Nuni26.  29  of  Machir,  the  family  of  the  M.  :  aud  M. 

MACH-NAD-E'~BAI,  »3T3?0  gift  of  the  noble  one. 

A  Jew  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife  during  or  after  the 

captivity.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  40  M.,  Shashai,  Sharai 

MACH-PE'-LAH,  n^psp  winding,  spiral  form. 

A  field  before  Mamre  in  Hebron  with  a  cave  bought  for 

a  burying  place  by  Abraham  from  Ephron  the  Hittite. 
Gen.23.  9  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  M.,  which  he 
23.  17  the  field  of  Ephron,  which  (was)  in  M. 
23.  19  the  cave  of  the  field  of  M.  before  Mature 
25.   9  Ishmael  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  M.,  in 

49.  30  In  the  cave  that  (is)  in  the  field  <>f  M. 

50.  13  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  the  field  Qj  M. 


MAT! 

1.  To  pretend  to  be  feeble,  nnS  tahah,  7 

Prov.26.  18  As  a  mad  (man),*  who  casteth  fire  brands 

2.  To  be  mad,  erring,  V?9  shaga,  4. 

Deut  28.  34  So  that  thou  shalt  be  mad  for  the  sight 
2  Ki.    9.  11  wherefore  came  thismad  (fellow)  to  thee? 
Jer.   29.  26  for  every  man  (that  is)  mad,  and  maketh 
Hos.    9.    7  the  spiritual  man  (is)  mad,  for  the  mult. 

3.  Madness,  (xavia.  mania. 

Acts  26.  25  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble  Festus ;  but  sp. 
MAD,  to  be  or  feign  self  — 

1.  To  be  foolish,  to  shine,  T?n  halal. 

Eccl.    2.    2  I  said  of  laughter,  (It  is)  mad  ;  and  of  m. 
2.To  shoto  self  foolish,  Sbn  halal,  7  a. 

1  Sa.  21. 13  feigned  himself  mad  in  their  hands,  and 
Jer.  25.  16  shall  drink,  and  be  moved,  and  be  mad 

50.  38  images,  and  they  are  mad  upon  (their)  id. 

51.  7  drunken.. therefore  the  nations  are  mad 

0.T0  show  self  mad  or  erring,  yyy  shaga,  7. 
1  Sa.  21.  14  Lo,  ye  see  the  man  is  mad  :  wherefore 

4.  To  be  furious,  raving,  mad,  fiaxvofxai  mainomai. 
John  10.  20  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad ;  why  hear  ye 
Acts  12.  15  And  they  said  unto  her,  Thou  art  mad.  B. 

26.  25  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble  Festus  ;  butsp. 
1  Co.  14.  23  come  in.  .will  theynot  say  that  ye  are  ni.2 

MAD  against,  to  be  — 

1.7*9  act  foolishly,  hbn  halal,  Ba. 

Psa.102.    8  they  that  are  mad  against  me  are  sworn 
2.To  be  furious  or  mad  with  any  one,  iu.fxa.il/ofu.ai. 

Acts  26.  11  being  exceedingly  mad  against  them,  I. 
HAD,  to  make  — 
1.7*9  act  foolishly,  make  foolish,  ^n  halal,  Sa. 

Eccl.  7.    7  Surely  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  m. 

Isa.   44.  25  maketh  diviners  mad  ;  that  turueth  wise 

2.  To  turn  round  into  madness,  trepiTptTrit)  els  fxaviav. 

Acts  26.  24  Paul,  .much  learning  doth  make  thee  mad 
MA'-DAI,  H?  middle. 

A  sou  of  Japheth,  B.C.  2320,  whose  descendants  (Medes) 
lived  in  Media,  the  region  S.  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  having 
Hyrcania  and  Parthia  on  the  E.,  Persia  and  Susiana  on 
the  S.,  Assyria  and  Armenia  on  the  W. 

Gen.  10.  2  M.,  and  Javan,  and  Tubal,  and  Meshech 
1  Ch.  1.    5  M.,  and  Javan,  and  Tubal,  and  Meshech 

MADE  — 

Ten,  or  Made,  n'^'j;  asah  or  Tp'J?  asar. 

1  Ki.  22.  48  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  of  Tharshish  to 
MADE,  to  he  — 
1.7*o  be  formed,  brought  forth,  Vn,  h>T\  chul,  chil,  3b. 

Job   15.    7  (Art)thou  the  first,  .or  wast  thou  made 
2. To  be  given,  \nz  nathan,  2. 

Isa.   51. 12  son  of  man  (which)  shall  be  made  (as)  gr. 

3.  To  be  destroyed,  n?x  abad,  2. 

Ezra    4.  19  rebellion  aud  sedition  have  been  made 
6.  11  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  this 

4.  To  be  made,  np'y  asah,  2. 

Exod25.  31  beaten  workshallthecandlestickbe made 

Lev.    2.    7  oblation,  .shall  be  made  (of)  fine  flourwith 

2.    8  bring  the  meat  offering  that  is  made  of 

2.  11  No  meat  offering,  .shall  be  made  with  le. 

6.  21  In  a  pan  it  shall  be  made  with  oil.,  oaken 

13.  51  spread,  .in  any  work  that  is  made  of  skin 
Num.  4.  26  all  that  is  made  for  them :  so  shall  they 

6.    4  shall  he  eat  nothing  that  is  made  of  the 

1  Ki.  10.  20  there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  king. 

2  Ki.  12. 13  there  was  not  made  for  the  house  of  the  L. 
2  Ch.  9. 19  there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  king. 
Psa.  33.   6  were  the  heavens  made  ;  and  all  the  host 

5.  To  be  made,  n^'j;  asah,  4. 

Psa.139. 15  when  I  was  made  in  secret,  .curiously  w. 

6.  7*o  set,  Wty,  D'b  sum,  sim. 

2  Sa.  15.  4  O  that  I  were  made  judge  in  the  land,  that 
Ezra  5.  17  that  a  decree  wasmade  of  Cyrus  the  king 

7.  To  be  set,  tnfe  suin,  2. 

Dan.   2.    5  and  your  houses  shall  be  made  a  dunghill 
8.7*o  be  made  like,  appointed,  nig>  shevah,  4. 

Dan.   3.  29  their  houses  shall  be  made  a  dunghill 
9.7*o  beget,  bring  forth,  yewda  gennao. 

2  Pe.  2.  12  But  these,  .[made]  to  be  taken  and  destr. 
10.  7*o  become,  begin  to  be,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Matt.  4.    3  command  that  these  stones  be  made  bread 
9. 16  taketh  from  the  garment,  and  the  rent  is 
23.  15  when  he  is  made,  ye  make  him  twofold 
25.    6  And  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry  made 

27.  24  but.  .rather  a  tumult  was  made,  he  took 
Mark  2.  21  away  from  the  old,  and  the  rent  is  made 

2.  27  The  sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not 

14.  4  Why  was  this  wasteof  the  ointment  made? 
Luke  4.    3  command  this  stone  that  it  be  made  bread 

8.  17  nothing  is  secret  that  shall  not  be  made 

14. 12  bid  thee  again,  and  a  recompence  be  made 

23.  12  Pilate  and  Herod  were  made  friends  tog. 

23. 19  Who  for  a  certain  sedition  made  in  the  city 

John  1.    3  All  things  were  made  by  him  ;  and  with. 

1.    3  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made 

1  10  the  world  was  made  by  him,  and  the  wo. 

1.  14  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  am. 

2.  9  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  made  wine 
5.    4  [was  made  whole  of  whatsoever  disease] 


MADE 


627 


MAHANAIM 


John  5.  6  saith  unto  him,  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole? 
5.  g  immediately  the  man  was  made  whole,  and 
5.  14  Behold,  thou  art  made  whole:  sin  no  more 

8.  33  how  sayest  thou,  Ye  shall  be  made  free? 

9.  39  that  they  which  see  might  be  made  blind 
Acts     7,  13  Joseph's  kindred  was  made  known  unto 

12.  5  prayer  was  made  without  ceasing  of  the 
13  32  how  that  the  promise  which  was  made 

14.  5  when  there  was  an  assault  made  both  of 
19.  26  they  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with  ha. 
21. 40  when  there  was  made  a  great  silence,  he 
26.    6  the  promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fathers 

Horn.  1.   3  which  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  ace. 

2.  25  thy  circumcision  is  made  un circumcision 
7.  13  Was  then  that  which  is  good  made  death 

10. 20  I  was  made  manifest  unto  them  that  asked 
ir.    9  Let  their  table  be  made  a  snare,  and  a  t. 

1  Co.  1.  30  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and 

3.  13  Every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest 

4.  9  we  are  made  a  spectacle  unto  the  world 
4. 13  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of  the  world,  (and) 
7.  21  if  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  use  (it)  ra. 
9. 22  I  am  made  all  things  to  all  (men),  that  I 

11.  19  approved  may  be  made  manifest  among 
14. 25  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made  m. 

15.  45  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living 

2  Co.  5.  21  that  we  might  be  made  the  lighteousness 
Gal.    3.  13  Christ  hath  redeemed  us.  .being  made  a 

4.  4  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the 
Eph.   2.  13  ye.  .are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ 

3.  7  Whereof  I  wasmadeaminister,  according 
Phil.  2.  7  took . .  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men 
Col.    1.  23  gospel,  .whereof  I  Paul  am  made  a  min. 

r.  25  Whereof  I  am  made  a  minister,  according 
Titus  3.  7  we  should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the 
Heb.    1.    4  Being  made  so  much  better  than  the  an. 

3.  14  JFor  we  are  made  partakers  of  Christ,  if 

5.  5  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made 

6.  4  and  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  G. 
6. 20  made  an  high  priest  for  ever,  after  the 
7. 12  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  change  also 

7.  16  Who  is  made,  uot  after  the  law  of  a  car. 
7.  21  For  those  priests  were  made  without  an 
7.  22  By  so  much  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of 
7.  26  an  high  priest,  .made  higher  than  the  h. 

11.  3  were  not  made  of  things  winch  do  appear 
Jas.  3.  9  which  are  made  after  the  similitude  ofG. 
1  Pe.   2.   7  the  same  is  made  the  head  of  the  corner 

11.  To  be,  ell/at  einai. 

Acts  16. 13  where  prayer  was  wont  to  be  made ;  and 

12.  To  lay,  be  laid,  Kelfiai  keimai. 

1  Ti.  1.  9  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man 
[See  also  Almonds,  appear,  atonement,  bald,  better, 
breach,  bring  forth,  broad,  cedars,  clean,  confession, 
conformable,  desolate,  drunk,  fat,  gazingstock,  glorious, 
inquisition,  king,  like,  low,  mention,  naked,  partition, 
plain,  possess,  reckoning,  red,  search,  serve,  slaughter, 
straight,  strong,  sure,  sweet,  thin,  unclean,  white, 
whole]. 

MADE  of,  that  is  — 
Vessel,  instrument,  72  keli. 

Num3x.  20  all  that  is  made  of  skins,  and  all  work  of 
MADE,  thing- — 
l.Work,  rtJN?3  mclakah. 

Lev.  13/48^2  a  skin,  or  in  any  thing  made  of  skin 
2. Deed,  work,  n'^Jgn  maaseh. 

1  Ch.  9.  31  the  things  that  were  made  in  the  pans 
Psa.  45.    1 1  speak  of  the  things  which  I  have  made 

3. Anything  made,  Troiv/j-a poiema. 

Roni.  i.  20  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  m. 
MADE  ready  to  hand  — 
Ready,  prepared,  eroiuos  helohnos. 

2  Co.  10. 16  line  of  things  made  ready  to  our  hand 

MADE  with  or  without  hands,  not  — 

Not  madewith  hands,  ax€tpQ7ro(r)Tos acheiropoietos. 
Marki4.  58  I  will  build  another  made  without  hands 
2  Co.    5.    t  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal 
Col.    2.  11  with  the  circumcision  made  without  ha. 

MADE  up,  to  be  — 

To  go  up  in  length,  progress,  ■i3"ix  nb'4  alah  arukah. 

Neh.  4.  7  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were  made  up 
MADIAN,  MaSicEii.— See  Midian. 

Acts    7.  29  was  a  stranger  in  the  land  of  51.,  where  he 
MAD  MAN,  (to  play  the)  — 
l.To  be  mad  or  erring,  j?a?j  shaga,  4. 

1  Sa.  21. 15  Have  I  need  of  mad  men,  that;  ye  have 
2.  To  show  self  mad  or  erring,  yry  shaga,  7. 

1  Sa.  21. 15  to  play  the  mad  man  in  my  presence? 
MAD-MAN'-NAH,  n$yp  heap. 

1.  A  city  of  Judah,  near  Ziklag.    Same  as  El-Minyay, 
fifteen  miles  from  Gaza. 

Josh.  15. 31  And  Ziklag,  and  51.,  and  Sansannah 

2.  Patronymic  of  a  son  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh. 

1  Ch.  2.  49  She  bare  also  Shaaph  the  father  of  51. 
MAD'-MEN,  jp-is  heap. 

A  city  of  5Ioab,  "whose  destruction  was  foretold  by  Jere- 
miah.    B.C.  628-586. 

Jer.  48.   2  thou  shalt  be  cut  down,  O  M.;  the  sword 
MAD-ME'-NAH,  rnoia  heap. 
A  city  of  Benjamin,  near  Jerusalem. 

Isa.  10.  31  M.  is  removed ;  the  inhabitants  of  Gebini 


MADNESS  — 

1.  Foolishness,  madness,  boasting,  nSVin  holelah. 
Eccl.  1.  17  I  gave  my  heart  to  know,  .madness  and 
2.  12  to  behold  wisdom,  and  madness,  and  folly 
7.  25  of  folly,  even  of  foolishness  (and)  madness 
9.    3  niadness(is)  in  their  heart  while  they  live 

2. Foolishness,  madness,  boasting,  n^Vm  holeluth. 
Eccl.  10. 13  the  end  of  his  talk  (is)  mischievous  mad. 

3.  Madness,  erring,  fiyx?  shiggaon. 

Deut28.  28  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  madness,  and 
Zechi2.    4  I  will  smite,  .his  rider  with  madness;  and 

4.  Want  of  thought  or  sense,  &voia  anoia. 

Luke  6.  n  they  were  filled  with  madness ;  and  com. 

5.  Wrong  mindedness,  -napatypovia  paraphrenia. 

2  Pe.   2. 16  dumb  ass.. forbade  the  madness  of  the  pr. 
MA'-DON,  |tTD  district  of  the  dan. 
A  Canaanitish  city  in  the  N.  of  the  Holy  Land. 

Josh  11.    1  he  sent  to  Jobab  king  of  51.,  and  to  the 
12. 19  The  king  of  51.,  one ;  the  king  of  Razor 
MAG'-BISH,  &2}Q  a  fortress. 
A  place  named  with  Bethel,  Ai,  <fcc 

Ezra   2.  30  children  of  M.,  an  hundred  fifty  and  six 

MAG-DA'-LA,  McrySaAa,  Mayaddv  a  tower,  greatness. 
A  city  of  Galilee,  S.W.  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias ;  the  same 
with  Dalmanutha,  or  near  it ;  comp.  5Iark  8.  10.  Now 
a  small  village  called  Mejdel,  three  miles  N.  of 
Tiberias. 

51atti5-  39  took  ship,  andcame  into  the  coasts  of  [51.] 
MAG-DA-LE'-NE,  MaySaKnvf]. 
A  woman  of  5Iagdala,  called  5Iary. 

Matt  27.  56  Among  which  was  5iary  51.,  and5Iary  the 

27.  61  And  there  was  Mary  51.,  and  the  other  51. 

28.  1  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  came  5Iary  51. 
5Iarki5.  40  among  whom..51ary  51.,  and  5rary  the  m. 

15.  47  And  5Iary  51.  and  51ary  (the  mother)  of  J. 

16.  1  5iary  51.,  and  5iary  the  (mother)  of  James 
16.   9  [he  appeared  first  to  51ary  51.,  out  of  w  ] 

Luke  8.  2  5Iary  called  51.,  out  of  whom  went  seven 
24.  10  It  was  5Iary  51.,  and  Joanna,  and  5Iary 

John  19.  25  5Iary  the  (wife)  of  Cleophas,  and  5Iary  51. 
20.    1  first  (day)  of  the  week  cometh  51ary  51. 
20.  18  5Iary  51.  came  and  told  the  disciples  that 

MAG-BI'-EL,  Sn^jd  God  is  renoumed. 
A  duke  of  Edom.    B.C.  1450. 

Gen.  36.  43  Duke  51. ,  duke  Irani :  these  (be)  the  dukes 

1  Ch.  1.  54  Duke5I.,dukeIrain.  These  (are)  the  dukes 
MAGICIAN  — 
1. Scribes,  magicians,  D'oa")n  chartummim. 

Gen.  41.  8  sent  and  called  for  all  the  magicians  of  E. 
41.  24  And  I  told  (this)  unto  the  magicians  ;  but 

Exod.  7. 11  the  magicians  of  Egypt,  they  also  did  in 

7.  22  the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  so  with  their 

8.  7,  18  the  magicians  did  so  with  their  ench. 
8. 19  the  magicians  said  unto  Pharaoh,  This  (is) 
9. 11  the  magicians  could  not  stand  before  51. 
9. 11  the  boil  was  upon  the  magicians,  and  upon 

Dan.    1.  20  ten  times  better  than  all  the  magicians 
2.    2  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  magicians 

2.  Scribe,  magician,  cb~\n  chartom. 

Dan.  2. 10  asked  such  things  at  any  magician,  or  as. 
2. 27  the  astrologers,  the  magicians,  thesooth. 
4.    7  the  magicians,  the  astrologers,  the  Chal. 

4.  9  O  Belteshazzar,  master  of  the  magicians 

5.  11  of  the  magicians,  astrologers,  Chaldeans 

MAGISTRATE  — 

1.-4  judge,  magistrate,  EDy*  shephat. 

Ezra    7.  25  set  magistrates  and  judges,  which  may  j. 

2.  To piossess  restraint,  li'y  k>"v  yarash  etser. 
JudgiS.    7  no  magistrate  in  the  land,  that  might  put 

3.  Ruler,  the  first,  foreiwst,  apx"h  arche. 

Lukei2. 11  "when  they  bring  you  unto.. magistrates 

4.^4  ruler,  apxwv  archon. 

Lukei2.  58  thou  goest  with,  .adversary  to  the  magi. 

5. Leader  of  a  host,  o-rparvyos  strategos. 

Acts  16.  20  brought  them  to  the  magistrates,  saying 
16.  22  the  magistrates  rent  off  their  clothes,  and 
i5.  35  the  magistrates  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying 
16.  36  The  magistrates  have  sent  to  let  you  go 
16.  38  Serjeants  told  these  words  unto  the  mag. 

MAGISTRATES,  to  obey  — 

To  be  obedient  to  rulers,  iveiQapx^  peitharcheo. 

Titus  3.    1  to  obey  magistrates,  to  be  ready  to  every 
MAGNIFICAL  — 
To  make  great,  *?n3  gadal,  5. 

1  Ch.22.    5  house',  .(must  be)  exceeding  magniflcal 
MAGNIFICENCE  — 
Greatness,  p.€ya\et6rns  megaleiotes. 

Acts  19.  27  and  her  magnificence  shouldbe  destroyed 
MAGNIFIED,  to  be  — 
1.  To  be  or  become  great,  yia  gadal. 

1  Sa.  7. 26  let  thy  name  be' magnified  for  ever,  say. 

1  Ch.17.  24  that  thy  name  may  be  magnified  for  ever 

Psa.  35.  27  Let  the  Lord  be  magnified,  which  hath 
40. 16  let  such,  .say  continually,  The  Lord  be 
70.   4  let  such . .  say  continually,  Let  God  be  ma. 

Zech  12.    7  do  not  magnify  (themselves)  against  Ju. 

Mai.    1.   5  The  LORD  will  be  magnified  from  the  bor. 


2.  To  be  lifted  up,  n-;u  nasat  2. 

.  2  Ch.32.  23  so  that  he  was  magnified  in  the  sight  of 
MAGNIFY,  to  — 
l.To  magnify,  Via  gadal,  3. 

Josh.  3.  7  This  day  will  I  begin  to  magnify  thee  in 
4.  14  On  that  day  the  Lord  magnified  Joshua 
1  Ch.29.  25  the  Lord  magnified  Solomon  exceedingly 
2Ch.  1.  1  hisGod(was)  with  him, and  magnified  him 
Job  7.  17  What  (is)  man,  that  thou  shouldest  mag. 
Psa.  34.  3  O  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us 
69.  30  said  will  magnify  him  with  thanksgiving 

2.  To  make  great,  byi  gadal,  5. 

Gen.  19. 19  thouhastmagnifiedthyniercy,  which  thou 
Job  19.  5  If  indeed  ye  will  magnify,  .against  me,  and 
Psa.  35.  26  clothed  withshame  and  dishonour  that  m. 

38.  16  when  my  foot  slippeth,  they  magnify . .  ag. 
55.  12  neither.. he  that  hated  me.  .did  magnify 

138.  2  thou  hast  magnified  thy  word  above  all 
Isa.  42.  21  he  will  magnify  the  law,  and  make  (it)  h. 
Jer.  48.26  5Iakeyehimdrunken;forhemagnified(h.) 
48.  42  because  he  hath  magnified . .  against  the  L. 
Lam.  1.  9  0  Lord,  behold,  .for  the  enemy  hath  ma. 
Dan,  8.  n  Yea,  he  magnified,  .even  to  the  prince  of 
8.  25  he  shall  magnify . .  in  his  heart,  and  by  pe. 
Zeph.  2.  S,  10  have  reproached,  .and magnified,  .aga. 

3.  To  make  great,  magnify,  increase,  ttiy  saga,  5. 
Job   36.  24  Remember  that  thou  magnify  his  work,  w. 

4.  To  make  honourable  en*  glorious,  5o£a£o>  doxazo. 
Rom  11. 13  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  I  magnify  mine 

5.  To  make  great,  fieya\vuto  megaluno. 

Luke  1.  46  Mary  said,  51y  soul  doth  magnify  the  L. 
Acts    5  13  durst  no  man .  .but  the  people  magnified 

10.  46  them  speak  with  tongues,  and  magnify  G. 
19.  17  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  magnified 

Phil.   1.  20  also  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body 

MAGNIFY  self,  to  — 

To  make  self  great,  *?"13  gadal,  7. 

Isa.  10. 15  shall  the  saw  magnify  itself  against  hini 
Eze.  38.  23  Thus  will  I  magnify  myself,  and  sanctify 
Dan.  11.  36  magnify  himself  above  every  god,  and  sh. 

11.  37  for  he  shall  magnify  himself  above  all 

MA'-GOG,  aiJp,  Maycvy. 

1.  The  second  son  of  Japheth.     B.C.  2340. 

Gen.  10.  2  51.,  and5Iadai,andJavan,  andTubahand 
1  Ch.    i.    5  51., and  5iadai,aud  Javan,  and  Tubal,  and 

2.  The  descendants  of  5Iagog  and  their  land,  called 
Scythia,  in  the  N.  of  Asia  and  Europe. 

Eze.  38.   2  set  thy  face  against  Gog,  the  land  of  51. 

39.  6  I  will  send  a  fire  on  51.,  and  amongthem 
Rev.  20.    8  Gog  and  51.,  to  gather  them  together  to 

MA-GOR  MIS-SA'-BrB,  THDO  1UD  terror  is  about 
A  symbolic  name  of  Pashur.     B.C.  600. 

Jer.  20.  3  hath  not  called  thy  name  Pashur,  but  51. 
MAG-PI'-ASH,  b^'S^d  collector  of  a  cluster  of  stars. 
A  person  or  family  that  sealed  the  covenant  made  by 
Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  20  51.,  51eshullam,  Hezir 
MA-HA'-LAH,  n^iTD  tenderness,  mildness. 
Great  grandson  of  51anasseh,  through  Hammoleketh 

B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7. 18  sister  Hammoleketh  bare.  .Abiezer,  and5I. 
MA-HA-LAL'-EEL,  S^nn  God  is  splendour. 

1.  Son  of  Cainan  the  grandson  of  Seth.    b.  c.  3609-2714. 

Gen    5. 12  Cainau  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  51. 

5. 13  Cainan  lived  after  lie  begat  M.  eight  bun. 

5. 15  51.  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat  J. 

5. 16  51.  lived  after  he  begat  Jared  eight  hund. 

5. 17  all  the  days  of  51.  were  eight  hundred  ni. 

1  Ch.  1.   2  Kenan,  51.,  Jered 

2.  One  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  after  the 
captivity.    B.C.  566. 

Neh. 11.  4  Shephatiah,  the  son  of  51.,  of  the  children 
MA-HA'-LATH,  n^nn  mild. 

1.  A  daughter  of  Ishmael,  and  one  of  Esau's  wives. 

B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  28.   9  took  unto  the  wives  which  he  had  51.  the 

2.  A  grand-daughter  of  David,  and  one  of  Rehoboam's 
wives.    B.C.  974. 

2  CI1.11. 18  Rehoboam  took  him  51.  the  daughter  of  J. 

3.  A  musical  choir.    (See  Leannoth.) 

Psa.  53.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  51.,  5Iaschil 
88.  ,,  to  the  chief  musician  upon  51.  Leannoth 
MA-HA-NA'-LM,  D'jHC  two  camps. 
A  town  E.  of  Jordan  S.  of  the  Jabbok,  so  named  by 
Jacob ;  afterwards  a  Levitical  city  of  Gad.  On  the 
upper  course  of  the  Wady-Jabes,  N.  of  Tibni,  are  rivers 
called  Mahaneh. 

Gen.  32.    2  and  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  51. 
Josh  13.  26  and  from  51.  unto  the  border  of  Debir 
13.  30  their  coast  was  from  51.,  all  Bashan,  all 
21.  38  city  of  refuge  for  the  slayer ;  and  51.  with 
2  Sa.   2.   8  Abner.  .son  of  Ner.  .brought  him.  .to  51. 
2. 12  Abner  the  son  of  Ner.  .went  out  from  51. 
2.  29  through  all  Bithron,  and  they  came  to  51. 
17.  24  Then  David  came  to  51.  And  Absalom  pa. 
17.  27  came  to  pass,  when  David  was  come  to  51. 
19.  32  provided .  .sustenance  while  he  lay  at  51. 
1  Ki.  2.    8  cursed  me . .  in  the  day  when  I  went  to  51. 

4. 14  Ahinadab  the  son  of  Iddo  (had)  51. 

1  Ch.  6.  80  Ramoth  in  Gilead.  .and  51.  with  her  sub. 


MAHANEH    DAN 


628 


MAKE 


MA-HA'-NEH  DAN,  jy.TinD  camp  of  Dan. 

A  place  m  Judah,  W.  of  Ki'rjath-jearim. 

Judg.i8.  12  they  called  that  place  M.D.  unto  this  day 

MA-HA'-RAI,  nno  hasty. 

One  of  David's  warriors.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.23.  28  Zalmonthe  Ahohite,  M.  the  Netophathite 

1  Ch.n.  30  M.  the  Netnphathite,  Heled  the  son  of  B. 

27. 13  The  tenth  (captain),  .(was)  M.  the  Netop. 

MA'-HATH,  nnn  dissolution. 

1.  A  descendant" of  Kohath  the  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch    635  the  ion  of  Elkanah,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son 

2  Ch.29. 12  Then  the  Levites  arose,  M.  the  son  of  Am. 
2  A  Levite,  overseer  of  the  dedicated  things  in  Heze- 
kiah's  reign.    B.C.  726 ;  or  perhaps  the  same  as  No  1. 

2  Ch.31.  13  M.,  and  Benaiah,  (were)  overseers  under 
MA-HA  VTTE,  D'ine. 

Patronymic  of  Eliel,  one  of  David's  warriors.  Locality 
unknown. 

1  Ch.n.  46  Eliel  the  M.,  and  Jeribai  and  Joshaviah 
MA-HA-ZI'-OTH,  rnN'inn  visions. 

One  of  the  sons  of  Heman,  set  over  the  service  of  song 
in  David's  reign.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  Of  Heman.  .Mallothi,  Hothir,  (and)  M. 

25.  30  The  three  and  twentieth  to  M.,  (he),  his 
MA'-HER  SHA'-LAL  HASH  BAZ,  13  VH  VStf  TTTD. 
Symbolical  name  given  to  a  son  of  Isaiah,  signifying 
"hasten  the  spoil,  rush  on  the  prey."     B.C.  741. 

Isa.     8.    1  Take,  .and  write  in  it.  .concerning  M. 

8.    3  Then  said  the  Lord  to  me,  Call  his  name  M. 

MAH'-LAH,  n^rra  mildness. 

The  eldest  daughter  of  Zelophehad,  descended  from 
Manasseh,  and  allowed  a  portion  in  the  laud  because 
her  father  left  no  male  issue.    B.C.  1452. 

Nuni26.  33  the  names,  .(were)  M-,  and  Noah,  Hoglah 
27.    1  these  (are)  the  names  of  his  daughters  ;  M. 
36.  11  For  M.,  Tirzah,  and  Hoglah,  and  Milcah 
Josh. 17.    3  these(are)  the  names  of  his  daughters,  M. 

MAH'-LI,  ^nn  mild. 

1.  Son  of  Merari,  son  cf  Levi.     B.C.  1490. 

Exod.6. 19  sons  of  Merari ;  M.  and  Mushi :  these  (are) 

Num.  3.  20  sons  of  Merari  by  their  families;  M.,  ami 

1  Ch.  6.  19  sons  of  Merari  ;  M.,  and  Mushi.  And  these 

6.  29  sons  of  Merari  ;  M.,  Libni  his  son,  Shimei 

23.  2t  M.  and  Mushi.    The  sons  of  M. ;  Eleazar 

24.  26  sons  of  Merari  (were)  M.  and  Mushi :  the 
24.  28  Of  M.  (came)  Eleazar,  who  had  no  sons 

Ezra  8.  18  of  the  sons  of  M.,  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son 

2.  Son  of  Mushi  the  son  of  Merari.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch    6.  47  The  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Mushi,  the  son 

23.  23  sons  of  Mushi ;  M. ,  and  Eder,  and  Jerem . 

24.  30  sons  also  of  Mushi;  M.,  and  Eder,  and  J. 

MAH-LITES,  ^rya, 

Descenlauts  of  Mahli  the  son  of  Merari. 

Num.  3.  33  Of  Merari  (was)  the  family  of  the  M.,  and 

26.  58  family  of  the  M.,  the  family  of  the  Mus. 

MAH'-LON,  fiSilD  mild. 

Elder   son    of   Naomi,    and   first    husband   of   Ruth. 

B.C.  1312. 

Ruth  1.    2  the  name  of  his  two  sons  51.  and  Chilion 

1.  5  M.  and  Chilion  died  also  both  of  them 
4.    9  bought,  .all  that  (was)  Chilion's  andM.'s 
4. 10  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  the  wife  of  M.,  have 

MA'-HOL,  bins  dancer. 

The   father  of*  certain  men  renowned  for  wisdom  in 

Solomon's  time.    B.C.  1000. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  For hewaswiser than. .the sons ofM.:and 
MAID,  MAIDEN  — 

1. Handmaid,  nox  amah. 

Gen.  30.    3  Behold  my  maid  Bilhah,  go  in  unto  her 
Exod.  2.    5  when  she  saw . .  she  sent  her  maid  to  fetch 
21.  20  if  a  man  smite,  .his  maid,  with  a  rod,  and 

21.  26  if  a  man  smite,  .the  eye  of  his  maid,  that 
Lev.  25.  6  for  thy  servant,  and  for  thy  maid,  and  for 
Ezra  2.  65  Besides  their  servants  and  their  maids,  of 
Job  19.  15  my  maids,  count  me  fora  stranger  :  I  am 
Nah.  2.   7  her  maids  shall  lead . .  as  with  the  voice  of 

2.A  virgin,  n?W3  bethulah. 

Exod22.  l6  if  a  man  entice  a  maid  tliLt  is  not  betro. 
Judgig.  24  Behold,  .my  daughter,  a  maiden,  and  his 

2  Ch.36. 17  no  compassion  upon  youngman  or  maiden 
Job  31.  1  eyes;  why  then  should  I  think  upon  am.? 
Psa.  78.  63  their  maidens  were  not  given  to  marriage 

148.  12  Both  young  men  and  maidens  ;  old  men 

Jer.     2.  32  Can  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments,  (or)  a 

51. 22  will  I  break,  .the  young  man  and  the  m. 

Lam.  5.  11  They  ravished,  .the  maids  in  the  cities  of 

Eze.    9.    6  both  maids,  and  little  children,  and  wo. 

44.  22  they  shall  take  maidens  of  the  seed  of 
Zech.  9.  17  make,  .cheerful,  and  new  wine  the  maids 

3.  Maries  of  virginity,  D'^na  bcthulim. 

Deut22.  14  when  I  came  to  her  I  found  her  not  a  m. 

22.  17  saying,  I  found  not  thy  daughter  a  maid 

&.A  maid,  maiden,  n-Tjy  naarah. 

Exod.  2.    5  and  her  maidens  walked  along  by  the 
Ruth  2.   8  Go  not.  .but  abide  here  fast  by  my  maid. 

2.  22  that  thou  go  out  with  his  maidens,  that 

2.  23  So  she  kept  fast  by  the  maidens  of  Boaz 

3.  2  (is)  not  Bnnz.  .with  whose  maidens  thou 
i  Sa.  9.  11  they  found  young  maidens  going  out  to 
2  Ki    5.    2  had  brought  away  captive.,  a  little  maid 


2  Ki.   5.    4  said  the  maid  that  (is)  of  the  land  of  Isr. 

Esth.  2.  4  let  the  maiden  which  pleaseth  the  king 
2.  7  Esther . .  the  maid  (was)  fair  and  beautiful 
2.  8  when  many  maidens  were  gathered  toge. 
2.  9  the  maiden  pleased  him,  and  she  obtained 
2.  9  and  seven  maidens,  .meet  to  be  given  her 
2.   9  he  preferred  her  and  her  maids  unto  the 

2. 12  when  every  maid's  turn  was  come  to  go 

2. 13  Then  thus  came  (every)  maiden  unto  the 
4.   4  Esther's  maids  and;lier  chamberlains  came 

4.  16  I  also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  likewise 
Job  41.  5  or  wilt  thou  bind  him  for  thy  maidens? 
Prov.  9.    3  She  hath  sent  forth  her  maidens:  shecri. 

27. 27  and.  .the  maintenance  for  thy  maidens 
31. 15  Sheriseth..andgiveth..aportiontoherm. 
Amos  2.    7  will  go  in  unto  the.  .maid,  to  profane 

5.A  young  ivoman,  virgin,  nopy  ahnah. 

Exod  2.  8  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child's  mo. 
Prov. 30.  19  the  sea,  and  the  way  of  a  man  with  a  m. 

6.-4  maidservant,  nn?^  shiphchah. 

Gen.  16.  2  I  pray  thee,  go  in  unto  my  maid  ;  it  may 
16.  3  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  took  Hagarhermaid 
16.  5  I  have  given  my  maid  into  thy  bosom 
16.  6  Behold,  thy  maid  (is)  in  thy  hand  ;  do  to 
16.  8  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  whence  earnest  thou? 
29.  24  gave.  .Zilpah  his  maid  (for)  an  handmaid 

29.  29  gave.  .Bilhah  his  handmaid  to  be  her  m. 

30.  7  Bilhah,  Rachel's  maid,  conceived  again 
30.    9  she  took  Zilpah  her  maid,  and  gave  her  J. 
30.  10  Aud  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  ason 

30.  12  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  a  second 
30. 18  I  have  given  my  maiden  to  my  husband 

Psa  123.  2  as  the  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand  of 
Eccl.  2.  7  I  got . .  servants  and  maidens,  and  had  ser. 
Isa.   24.    2  as  with  the  maid,  so  with  her  mistress ;  as 

7.  A  damsel,  Kopdatov  korasion. 

Matt.  9.  24  Give  place. .the  maid  is  not  dead,  but  sle. 
9.  25  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  maid  arose 

8.-4  little  maid,  7raiSto"/C7j  paidiske. 

Marki4.  66  there  cometh  one  of  the  maids  of  the  high 

14.  69  a  maid  saw  him  again,  and  began  to  say 
Lukei2.  45  to  beat  the  men  servants  and  maidens,  and 

22.  56  a  certain  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by  the 

9.-4  maid,  maiden,  child,  7rat>  pais. 

Luke  8.  51  the  father  ancl  the  mother  of  the  maiden 
8.  54  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  called.  .Maid 
MATO  CHILD  — 
A  female,  nipi  neqebah. 

Lev.  T2.    5*  if  she  bear  a  maid  child,  then  she  shall  be 

MAID  SERVANT— 

1.  Handmaid ,  nCN  amah. 

Gen.  20.  17  God  healed,  .his  wife,  and  his  maid  serv. 

31.  33  into  the  two  maid  servants'  tents;  but  he 
Exod2o.  10  thymanservant,northymaidservant,nor 

20. 17  nor  his  man  servant,  nor  his  maid  servant 
21.  7  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  maid  s. 
21.  27  if  he  smite  out.  .his  maid  servant's  tooth 
21.  32  shall  push  a  man  servant  or  maid  servant 
Deut.  5.  14  nor  thy  man  servant,  northy  maid  servant 

5,  14  thy  maid  servant  may  rest  as  well  as  thou 
5.  21  or  his  man  servant,  or  his  maid  servant 

12. 12  your  men  servants,  and  your  maid  serv. 
12.  18  thy  man  servant,  and  thy  maid  servant 

15.  17  unto  thy  maid  servant  thoushalt  do  like. 
i5.  ii,  14  thy  manservant,  and  thy  maidservant 

Judg.  9.  18  made  Abimelech,  the  son  of  his  maid  se. 
2  Sa.   6.  22  the  maid  servants  which  thou  hast  spoken 
Neh.  7.  67  their  man  servants  and.  .maid  servants 
Job  31. 13  If  I  diddes.  the  cause ..  of  my  maid  serv. 
I.Maid  servant,  nnDii>  shiphchah. 

Gen.  12.  16  men  servants,  and  maid  servants,  and 

24.  35  and  men  servants,  and  maid  servants,  and 

30.  43  maid  servants,  and  men  servants,  andca. 

Exodi  1.    5  unto  the  first  born  of  the  maid  servant  that 

2  Ki.  5. 16  oxen, and  men  servants,and  maid  servants? 

Jer.  34.   9  That  every  man  should  let  his . .  maid  ser. 

34.  10  every  one  should  let  his.  .maid  servant 

MATT,— 

Scales,  fins,  armour,  niypfp  qasqeseth. 

1  Sa.  17.    s  and  he  (was)  armed  with  a  coat  of  mail 
[See  also  Coat.] 
MAIMED  — 
1.7*9  cut  off,  pn  charats. 

Lev.  22.  22  Blind,  or  broken,  or  maimed,  or  having  a 

2.  Maimed,  deprived  of  a  limb,  avdirripos  anaperos. 

Luke  14.  13  call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the 

14.  21  the  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt 

o.T>! started,  crooked,  kv\\6s  kvllos. 

Matt  15.  30  lame,  blind,  dumb,  maimed,  and  many 

15.  31  the  maimed  to  be  whole,  the  lame  to  walk 
18.    8  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  halt  or  maimed 

Mark  9.  43  it  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  mai. 
MAINSAIL  — 
Main  sail,  jib,  dolon,  apTefiwu  artemon. 

Acts  27.  40  hoised  up  the  mainsail  to  the  wind,  and 
MAINTAIN,  to  — 
1.7*0  make  or  keep  strong,  piri  chazaq,  3. 

1  Ch.26.  27  Out  of  the  spoils,  .to  maintain  the  house 

2.7*o  reason,  make  prominent,  rp;  yakach,  5. 

Job    13.  15  I  will  maintain  mine  own  ways  before  him 


3. 7*o  do,  nb*u  asah. 

1  Ki.  8.  45,  49  Then  hear  thou,  .and  maintain  their 

8.  59  that  he  maintain  the  cause  of  his  servant 

2  Ch.  6.  35,  39  Then  hear  thou,  .and  maintain  their 
Psa.    9.    4  thou  hast  maintained  my  right  and  my  c. 

140.  12  I  know  that  the  Lord  will  maintain  the  c. 

4.7*0  hold,  uphold,  retain,  Tfen  tamak. 

Psa.  16.    5  The  Lord.  .  thou  maintainest  my  lot 

5.  7*o  cause  to  stand  before  or  forward,  -Trpouarnfxt. 

Titus  3.    8  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works 

3.  14  let  ours  also  learn  to  maintain  good  works 

MAINTENANCE,  (to  have) 
l.Life,  D,!;n  chayyim. 

Prov.27.  27  and  (for)  the  maintenance  for  thy  maidens 
2.7*o  hwe  salt,  rpp  melach. 

Ezra   4. 14  Now  because  we  have  maintenance  from 
MAJESTY  — 
\  .Excellency ,  pxa  gaon. 

Job  40.  10  Deck  thyself  now  (with)  majesty  and  ex. 

Isa.     2.  io,  19,  21  and  for  the  glory  of  his  majesty 
24.  14  they  shall  sing  for  the  majesty  of  the  L. 

Eze.     7.  20  he  set  it  in  majesty;  but  they  made  the 

Mic.    5.    4  in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of  the  Lord 

2.  Excellency,  niN3  geuth. 

Psa.  93.    1  The  Lord  reignetl. ;  he  is  clothed  withm. 
Isa.    26.  10  and  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  the  L. 

3.  Greatness,  •"i^n^  gedulah. 

Esth.  1.    4  showed.,  the  honour  of  his  excellent  ma. 

4.  Honour,  majesty,  beauty,  tin  liadar. 

Psa.  21.  5  honour  and  majesty  hast  thou  laid  upon 

29.  4  the  voice  of  the  Lord  (is)  full  of  majesty 

45.  3  Gird  thy  sword . .  with  thy  glory  and  thy  m. 

45.  4  in  thy  majesty  ride  prosperously, because 

96.  6  Honour  and  majesty  (are)  before  him  :  s 

104.  1  thou  art  clothed  with  honour  and  majesty 
145.  12  and  the  glorious  majesty  of  his  kingdom 

5.  Honour,  majesty,  beauty,  Tin  Jieder. 

Dan.   4.  30  I  have  built,  .for  the  honour  of  my  maj.? 

6. Honour,  beauty,  majesty,  lin  hod. 

1  Ch.29. IJ  *h-e  gl°ry>  and  tne  victory,  and  the  maj. 

29.  25  bestowed  upon  him . .  royal  majesty  as  had 
Job  37.  22  Fair  weather,  .with  God  (is)  terrible  ma. 
Psa.  145.    5  I  will  speak  of .  .glorious  honour  of  thym. 

1.  Greatness,  13"!  rebu. 

Dan.  4.  36  and  excellent  majesty  was  addedjunto  me 
5.  18  a  kingdom,  and  majesty,  and  glory,  and 
5. 19  for  the  majesty  that  he  gave  him,  all  pe. 

S.Greatness,  fxeyaKeiorns  megaleiotes. 

2  Pe.   1.  16  fables.. but  were  eye  witnesses  of  his  ma. 

^.Greatness,  fieya\cc(rvvr)  megalosune. 

Heb.  1.    3  on  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high 

8.    1  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  them. 

Jude       25  glory  and  majesty,  dominion  and  power 

MA'-KAZ,  y^oend. 

A  town  ordistrict  in  the  N.'W.  of  Judah.  See'Sfichmash. 
1  Ki.  4.   9  son  of  Dekar,  inM.,andinShaalbim,  and 

MAKE  (ruler),  to  — 

1.7*0  build,  build  up,  rns  banah. 

Gen.   2.  22  the  rib.  .made  he  a  woman,  and  brought 
1  Ki.22.  39  the  ivory  house  which  he  made,  and  all 
Eze.  27.   5  They  have  made  all  thy.. boards  of  fir 

2.  7*o  build,  build  up,  N33  bena. 

Ezra  5.   4  What  are  the  names  of  the  men  that  m. 
3. 7*o  prepare,  N"ia  bara. 

Numi6.  30  if  the  Lord  make  a  new  thing,  and  the 
Psa.  89.  47  wherefore  hast  thou  made  all  men  in  v.? 

4. 7*o  hew,  dig,  nsn  chatseb. 

Isa.     5.   2  and  also  made  a  wine  press  therein  :  and 

5.7*o  set  up,  place,  js;  yatsag,  5. 

Job    17.   6  He  hath  made  me  also  a  byword  of  the  p. 
Jer.  51.  34  he  hath  made  me  an  empty  vessel,  he  hath 

Q.  To  form,  constitute,  fashion,  frame,  is;  yatsar. 
Psa.  74.  17  thou  hast  made  summer  and  winter 

104.  26  leviathan,  .thou  hast  made  to  play  therein 
Isa.   44.    9  They  that  make  a  graven  image  (are)  all  of 

7.  To  give,  fm  nathan. 

Gen.  9.  12  the  token  of  the  covenant  which  I  make 
17.  2  I  will  make  my  covenant  between  me  and 
17.  s  a  father  of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee 
17.    6  I  will  make  nations  of  thee,  and  kings  shall 

17.  20  Ishmael.  .1  will  make  him  a  great  nation 
41.  43  he  made  him.  .over  all  the  land  of  Egypt 
48.    4  I  will  make  of  thee  a  multitude  of  people 

Exod.  7.    1  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh 

18.  16  I  do  make  (them)  know  the  statutes  of  God 
18.  25  made  them  heads  over  the  people,  rulers 
23.  27  I  will  make  all  thine  enemies  turn  their 

Lev.  19.  28  Ye  shall  not  make  any  cuttings  in  your  ri\ 
22.  22  nor  make  an  offering  by  fire  of  them  upon 
26.  19  I  will  make  your  heaven  as  iron,  and  your 
26.  31  I  will  make  yonr  cities  waste,  and  bring 
26.  46  laws  which  the  Lord  made  between  him 

Num.  5.  21  Lord  make  thee  a  curse  and  an  oath  am. 
5.  21  when  the  Lord  doth  make  thy  thigh  to  rot 
14.    4  Let  us  make  a  captain,  and  let  us  return 

Deut.  1.  15  wise  meu,  and  known,  and  made  them  li. 
16.  18  Judges  and  officers  shalt  thou  make  thee 


MAKE 


629 


MAKE 


Deut.28.  13  Lord  shall  make  thee  the  head,  and  not 
28.  24  Lord  shall  make  the  rain  of  thy  land  po. 

Josh.  7. 19  make  confession  unto  him ;  and  tell  me 
9.  27  Joshua  made  them  that  day  hewers  of  w. 
22.  25  Lord  hath  made  Jordan  a  border  between 

Ruth  4.  11  Lord  make  the  woman  that  is  come  into 

1  Sa.   9.  22  made  them  sit  in  the  chiefest  place  among 

1  Ki.  6.   6  he  made  narrowed  restsjround  about,  that 

9.  22  of  Israel  did  Solomon  make  no  bondmen 
10.  27  the  king  made  silver  (to  be)  in  Jerusalem 
ro.  27  cedars  made  he.  .as  the  sycamore  trees 
14.    7  and  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  I. 
16.    2  and  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  I. 

16.  3  will  make  thy  house  like  the  house  of  J. 
21. 22  will  make  thine  house  like  the  house  of 

2  Ki.  9.    9  I  will  make  the  house  of  Ahab  like  the 

1  Ch.12.  18  David  received  them,  and  made  them  ca. 

17.  22  thy  people  Israel  didst  thou  make  thine 

2  Ch.  1.  15  the  kingmadesilverandgoldat  Jerusalem 

1.  15  cedar  trees  made  he  as  the  sycamore  trees 

2.  1 1  the  Lord  . .  hath  made  thee  king  over  them 

7.  20  and  will  make  it.. a  proverb  and  a  byword 

8.  9  of  Israel  did  Solomon  make  no  servants 

9.  8  therefore  made  he  thee  king  over  them 
9.  27  the  king  made  silver  in  Jerusalem  as 

9.  27  cedar  trees  made  he  as  the  sycamore  trees 

24.   9  they  made  a  proclamation  through  Judah 

25. 16  Art  thou  made  of  the  king's  counsel  ?  for. 

35.  25  and  made  them  an  ordinance  in  Israel;  and 

Ezra  10. 1 1  make  confession  unto  the  Lord  God  of 

Neh.  13.  26  and  God  made  him  king  over  all  Israel 

Psa.  18.  32  (It  is)  God  that,  .maketh  my  way  perfect 

39.   5  Behold,  thou  hast  made  my  days  (as)  an  h. 

69.  11 1  made  sackcloth  also  my  garment ;  and  I 

89.  27  Also  I  will  make  him.  .first  born,  higher 

106. 46  He  made  them  also  to  be  pitied  of  all  those 

148.   6  he  hath  made  a  decree  which  shall  not  p. 

Isa.  43. 16  Thus  saith the  Lord,  which  maketh  a  way 

53.    9  he  made  his  grave  with  the  wicked,  and 

Jer.     1.  18  I  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  city 

5. 14  I  will  make  my  words  in  thy  mouth  fire 

9.  11  And  I  will  make  Jerusalem  heaps,  .a  den 

9.  11  I  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  desolate 

12. 10  they  have  made  my  pleasant  portion  a  d. 

15.  20 1  will  make  thee  unto  this  people  a  fenced 

19. 12  Thus  will  I  do.  .make  this  city  as  Tophet 

20.   4  I  will  make  thee  a  terror  to  thyself,  and 

25. 18  to  make  them  a  desolation,  an  astonishm. 

26.   6  Then  will  I  make  this  house  like  Shiloh 

26.   6  and  will  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  the 

29.  17  will  make  them  like  vile  figs,  that  cannot 

29.  26  Lord  hath  made  thee  priest  in  the  stead  of 
34.  17  I  will  make  you  to  be  removed  into  all 
34.  22  I  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  a  desola. 
49.  15  I  will  make  the  small  among  the  heathen 
51.  25  Behold,  I.  .will  make  thee  a  burnt  mount. 

Lam.  1. 13  he  hath  made  me  desolate,  .faint  all  the 

2.  7  they  have  made  a  noise  in  the  house  of  the 
Eze.    3.    81  have  made  thy  face  strong  against  their 

3.  9  an  adamant  harder  than  flint  have  I  made 
3.  17  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  h. 
5.  14  I  will  make  thee  waste,  and  a  reproach 

6. 14  and  make  the  land  desolate,  yea,  more  d. 
15.   8  I  will  make  the  land  desolate,  because  they 
22.   4  therefore  have  I  made  thee  a  reproach 
25.   4  and  make  their  dwellings  in  thee  :  they 
25.    5  I  will  make  Itabbah  a  stable  for  camels 

25.  13  and  I  will  make  it  desolate  from  Teman 

26.  4  scrape,  .and  make  her  like  the  top  of  a  r. 
26.   8  he  shall  make  a  fort  against  thee,  and  cast 
26.  19  When  I  shall  make  thee  a  desolate  city 
26.  21  I  will  make  thee  a  terror,  and  thou  (shalt 
29. 10,  12  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt 

30.  12  I  will  make  the  rivers  dry,  and  sell  the 
32.  15  When  I  shall  make  the  land  of  Egypt  de. 

34.  26  I  will  make  them  and  the  places  round 

35.  3  Behold.  .1  will  make  thee  most  desolate 
35.    7  Thus  will  I  make  mount  Seir  most  desol. 
35.    9  I  will  make  thee  perpetual  desolations 
44.  14  I  will  make  them  keepers  of  the  charge 

Hos.  11.  8  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah?.  .shall 
Joel  2.  19  I  will  no  more  make  you  a  reproach  am. 
Obad.  2  I  have  made  thee  small  among  the  heat. 
Mic.  6.  16  that  I  should  make  thee  a  desolation,  and 
Zeph.  3.  20 1  will  make  you  a  name  and  a  praise  am. 
Mai.  2.  g  have  I  also  made  you  contemptible  and 
8.7*0  make,  do,  "U£  abad. 

Jer.  10.  11  the  gods  that  have  not  made  the  heavens 
Dan.    3.    1  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  made  an  image 

3. 15  and  worship  the  image  which  I'havemade 
5.  1  Belshazzar  the  king  made  a  great  feast  to 
7. 21  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints 

9.  To  cause  to  stand,  set  up,  131?  amad,  5. 

2  Ch.11.  22  Rehoboam  made  Abijah  the  son  of  Maac. 
25.   s  made  them  captains  over  thousands,  and 

Neh.  10. 32  Also  we  made  ordinances  for  us,  to  charge 
10.7b  take  pains,  labour,  3xjj  atsah,  3. 

Job  10.  8  Thine  hands  have  made  me,  and  fashione. 
11.7b  do,  make,  nftrjg  asah. 

Gen.  1.   7  God  made  the  firmament,  and  divided  the 

1. 16  God  made  two  great  lights ;  the  greater  1. 
1.  25  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his 

1.  26  Let  as  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our 
1. 31  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  made 

2.  2  God  ended  his  work  which  he  had  made 
2.  2  day  from  all  his  work  which  he  had  made 
2.   3  all  his  work  which  God  created  and  made 

2.  4  Lord  God  made  the  earth  and  the  heav. 
2. 18  I  will  make  him  an  help  meet  for  him 

3.  1  any  beast,  .which  the  Lord  God  had  made 


Gen.    3.   7  fig  leaves  together,  and  made  themselves 
3.  21  God  make  coats  of  skins,  and  clothed  them 

5.  1  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he  him 

6.  6  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth,  and 

6.  7  foritrepentethme  thatl  have  madethem 

6. 14  Make  thee  an  ark.  .rooms  shalt  thou  make 

6. 15  And  this . .  which  thou  shalt  make  it . .  The 

6. 16  A  window  shalt  thou  make  to  the  ark,  and 
6. 16  lower,  second,  and  tliird.  .shalt thou  make 

7.  4  every  living  substance  that  I  have  made 

8.  6  the  window  of  the  ark  which  he  had  made 

9.  6  man..forintheimageof  God  made  he  man 

11.  4  let  us  make  us  a  name,  lest  we  be  scatt. 

12.  2  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  I 

13.  4  altar,  which  he  had  made  there  at  the  fi. 

14.  2  made  war  with  Bera  king  of  Sodom,  and 

18.  6  knead,  .and  make  cakes  upon  the  hearth 

19.  3  made  them  a  feast,  and  did  bake  unleav. 
91.  6  God  hath  made  me  to  laugh. .all  that  hear 
-21.    8  Abraham  made  a  great  feast  the.  .day  that 

26.  30  he  made  them  a  feast,  and  they  did  eat 

27.  4  make  me  savoury  meat.such  as  I  love,  and 
27  7  make  me  savourymeat,  thatl  may  eat,  and 
27.  9  I  will  make  them  savoury  meat  for  thy  f. 
27. 14  his  mother  made  savourymeat,  such  as  his 
27.  31  And  he  also  had  made  savoury  meat,  and 
29.  22  Laban  gathered . .  the  men . .  and  made  a 
31. 46  they  took  stones,  and  made  an  heap :  and 
33. 17  built  him  an  house,  and  made  booths  for 
35.  1  make  there  an  altar  unto  God,  that  appe. 
35.  3  I  will  make  there  an  altar  unto  God,  who 
37.  3  and  he  made  himacoat  of  (niany)colours 
40.  20  that  he  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  servants 

50. 10  made  a  mourning  for  his  father  seven  days 
Exod.  1.  21  it  came  to  pass .  .that he  made  them  houses 

5.    8  the  tale  of  the  bricks,  which  they  did  make 
5.  16  they  say  to  us,  Make  brick  :  and,  behold 

20.  4  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  anygraven 

20. 11  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth 
20.  23  Ye  shall  not  make  with  me  gods  of  silver 
20. 23  neither  shall  ye  make  unto  you  gods  of  g. 
20.  24  An  altar  of  earth  shalt  thou  make  unto 
20.  25  if  thou  wilt  make  me  an  altar  of  stone 
25.  8  let  them  make  me  a  sanctuary ;  that  I  may 
25.   9  and  the  pattern. .even  so  shall  yemake(it) 

25. 10  they  shall  make  an  ark  (of)  shittim  wood 

25. 11  make  upon  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 

25. 13  thou  shalt  make  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
25. 17  thou  shalt  make  a  mercy  seat  (of)  pure  g. 
25.  18  thou  shalt  make  two  cherubim  (of)  gold 
25.  18  beaten  work  shalt  thou  make  them,  in  the 
25.  19  make  one  cherub  on  the  one  end,  and  the 
25.  19  shall  ye  make  the  cherubim  on  the  two 
25.  23  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  table  (of)  shittim 
25.  24  make  thereto  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 
25.  25  thou  shalt  make  unfeo  it  a  border  of  an  h. 
25.  25  thou  shalt  make  a  golden  crown  to  the  b. 
25.  26  thou  shalt  make  for  it  four  rings  of  gold 
25.  28  thou  shalt  make  the  staves  (of)  shittim  w. 
25. 29  to  cover  withal . .  pure  gold  shalt  thou  ma. 
25.  31  thou  shalt  make  a  candlestick  (of)  pure  g 
25.  37  thou  shalt  make  the  seven  lamps  thereof 
25.  39  a  talent  of  pure  gold  shall  he  make  it,  with 

25.  40  look  that  thou  make,  .after  their  pattern 

26.  1  thou  shalt  make  the  tabernacle,  .ten  cu. 
26.    1  cherubim  of  cunniugwork shalt  thou  make 
26.    4  thou  shalt  make  loops  of  blue  upon  the 
26.   4  likewise  shalt  thou  make  in  the  uttermost 
26.   5,  5  Fifty  loops  shalt  thou  make  in  the 

26.    6  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  gold,  and 
26.   7  And  thou  shalt  make  curtains  (of)  goat's 
26.    7  tabernacle;  eleven  curtains  shalt  thou  m. 
26.  10  thou  shalt  make  fifty  loops  on  the  edge 
26.  ti  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  brass,  and 

26. 14  thou  shalt  make  a  covering  for  the  tent 

26. 15  thou  shalt  make  boards  for  the  tabernacle 

26. 17  thus  shalt  thou  make  for  all  the  boards  of 

26. 18  thou  shalt  make  the  boards  forthetaber. 
26.  19  thou  shalt  make  forty  socketsof  silver  un. 
26.  22  for  the  sides . .  thou  shalt  make  six  boards 
26. 23  two  boards  shaltthou  make  for  the  corner 
26.  26  thou  shalt  make  liars  (of)  shittim  wood 
26.  29  make  their  rings  (of)  gold . .  places  for  the 

26.  31  thou  shalt  make  a  veil  (of)  blue,  and  pur. 
26. 37  thou  shalt  make  for  the  hanging  five  pill. 

27.  ~l  thoushaltmakeanaltar(of)shittim  wood 
27.  2  thou  shalt  make  the  horns  of  it  upon  the 
27.  3  thou  shalt  make  his  pans  to  receive  his  as. 
27.  3  all  the  vessels  thereof  thou  shalf  make  (of) 
27.  4  thou  shalt  make  forita  grate  of  net  work 
27.  4  upon  the  net  shalt  thou  make  four  brazen 
27.  6  Thou  shalt  make  staves  for  the  altar,  sta. 
27.  8  Hollow  with  boards  shalt  thou  make  it 
27.   8  as  it  was  showed . .  so  shall  they  make  (it) 

27.  9  thou  shalt  make  the  court  of  the  taberna. 

28.  2,  4  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron  thy 
28.   3  that  they  may  make  Aaron's  garments  to 
28.   4  these,  .the garments  which  they  shall  m. 
28.   6  they  shall  make  the  cphod  (of)  gold,  Cof) 
28. 11  thou  shalt  make  them  to  be  set  in  ouches 

28. 13  And  thou  shalt  make  ouches  (of)  gold 

26. 14  (of)  wreathen  work  shalt  thou  make  them 

28. 15  thou  shalt  make  the  breast  plate  of  judg. 
28. 15  after  the  work  of  the  ephod  thou  shalt  m. 
28. 15  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  shalt  thou  make  it 
28.  22,  23  thou  shalt  make  upon  the  breastplate 
28.  26  thou  shalt  make  two  rings  of  gold,  and 
28.  27  two.  .rings  of  gold  thou  shalt  make,  and 
28.  31  thou  shalt  make  the  robe  of  the  ephod  all 
28.  33  thou  shalt  make  pomegranates  (of)  blue 
28.  36  thou  shalt  make  a  plate  (of)  pure  gold,  and 
?8.  39  thou  shalt  make  the  mitre  (of)  fine  linen 


Exod28.  39  thou  shalt  make  the  girdle  (of)  needlework 
28.  40  for  Aaron's  sons  thou  shalt  make  coats 
28.  40  and  thou  shalt  make  for  them  girdles,  and 
28. 40  bonnets  shalt  thou  make  for  them,  for 

28.  42  thou  shalt  make  them  linen  breeches  to 

29.  2  (of)  wheaten  flour  shalt  thou  make  them 

30.  1  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  to  burn  incense 
30.    1  (of)  shittim  wood  shalt  thou  make  it 

30.  3  thou  shalt  make  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold 
30.  4  two  golden  rings  shalt  thou  make  to  it  un. 
30.  4  upou  the  two  sides  of  it  shalt  thou  make 
30.  5  thou  shalt  make  the  staves(of)  shittim  w. 
30. 18  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  laver(of)  brass 
30. 25  thou  shalt  make  it  an  oil  of  holy  ointment 
30.  32  neither  shall  ye  make,  .like  it,  after  the 
30.  35  thou  shalt  make  it  a  perfume,  a  confection 
30.  37  And.,  the  perfume  which  thou  shalt  make 
30.  37  ye  shall  not  make  to  yourselves  according 

30.  38  Whosoever  shall  make  like  unto  that,  to 

31.  6  that  they  may  make  all  that  I  have  com. 

31.  17  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth 

32.  1  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before  us 
32.    4  tool,  after  he  had  made  it  a  molten  calf 
32.   8  they  have  made  them  a  molten  calf,  and 
32.  10  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation 
32.  20  he  tookthe  calf  which  they  had  made,  and 
32.  23  Make  us  gods  which  shall  go  before  us 
32.  31  this  people . .  have  made  them  gods  of  gold 
32.  35  because  they  made  the  calf  which  Aaron  m. 

34.  17  Thou  shalt  make  thee  no  moltec  gods 

35. 10  and  make  all  that  the  Lord  hath  comm. 

35.  33  And.  .to  make  any  manner  of  cunning  w. 

36.  3  And  theyreceived  of  Moses  all . .  to  make  it 
36.  4  every  man  from  the  work  which  they  made 
36.  5  work  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  make 
36.  6  Let  neither  man  nor  woman  make  anymore 
36.  7  was  sufficient  for  all  the  work  to  make  it 
36.  8  made  ten  curtains(of)finetwined  linen,and 
36.  8  cherubim  of  cunning  work  made  he  them 
36.  11  he  made  loops  of  blue  on  the  edge  of  one 
36.  11  likewise  he  made  in  the  uttermost  side  of 
36.  12  Fifty  loops  made  he  in  one  curtain,  and 
36. 12  fifty  loops  made  he  in  the  edge  of  the 
36.  13  he  made  fifty  taches  of  gold,  and  coupled 
36.  14  made  curtains,  .eleven  curtains  he  made 
36.  17  madefifty  loops  upon  the  uttermost  edge 
36.  17  fifty  loops  made  he  upon  the  edge  of  the 
36. 18  he  made  fifty  taches  (of)  brass  to  couple 
36.  19  he  made  a  covering  for  the  tent  (of)  ram's 
36.  20  he  made  boards  for  the  tabernacle  (of)  s. 
36.  22  thus  did  he  make  for  all  the  boards  of 
36.  23  he  made  boards  forthetabernacle;  twenty 
36.  24  forty  sockets  of  silver  he  made  under  the  t. 
36.  25  for  the  other  side . .  he  made  twenty  boards 
36.  27  for  the  sides,  .westward  he  made  six  bo. 
36.  28  two  boards  made  he  for  the  corners  of  the 
36.  31  he  made  bars  of  shittim  wood ;  five  for  the 
36.  33  he  made  the  middle  bar  to  shoot  through 
36.  34  made  their  rings  (of)  gold,  .places  forthe 
36.  35  he  made  a  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and 
36.  35  (with)  cherubim  made  he  it  of  cunning 
36.  36  And  he  made  thereunto  four  pillars  (of) 

36.  37  he  made  an  hanging  for  the  tabernacle 

37.  1  Bezaleel  made  the  ark  (of)  shittim  wood 
37.    2  and  made  a  crown  of  gold  to  it  round  ab. 
37.   4  he  made  staves  (of)  shittim  wood,  and 
37.   6  he  made  the  mercy  seat  (of)  pure  gold 
37.    7  And  he  made  two  cherubim  (of)  gold 

37.    7  beaten  out  of  one  piece  made  he  them 
37.    8  out  of  the  mercy  seat  made  he  the  cher. 
37.  10  he  made  the  table  (of)  shittim  wood  :  two 

37. 11  made  thereunto  a  crown  of  gold  round 
37.  12  Also  he  made  thereunto  a  border  of  an 
37.  12  and  made  a  crown  of  gold  for  the  border 
37. 15,  28  he  made  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
37.  16  he  made  the  vessels  which  (were)  upou 
37.  17  he  made  the  candlestick  (of)  pure  gold 
37.  17  (of)  beaten  work  made  he  the  candlestick 
37.  23  he  made  hissevenlamps,  and  his  snuffers 
37.  24  (Of)  a  talent  of  pure  gold  made  he  it,  and 
37.  25  made  the  incense  altar  (of)  shittim  wood 
37.  26  he  made  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round 
37.  27  he  made  two  rings  of  gold  for  it  under 

37.  29  he  made  the  holy  anointing  oil,  and  the 

38.  1  he  made  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (of): 
38.  2  he  made  the  horns  thereof  on  the  four 
38.  3  he  made  all  the  vessels  of  the  altar,  the 
38.  3  all  the  vessels  thereof  made  he  (of)  brass 
38.  4  he  made  for  the  altar  a  brazen  grate  of 
38.  6  he  made  the  staves (of)shittim  wood,  and 
38.  7  And.  .he  made  the  altar  hollow  with  bo. 
38.  8  he  made  the  laver  (of)  brass,  and  the  foot 
38.  9  he  made  the  court :  on  the  south  side  so. 
38.  22  made  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  M. 

38.  28  he  made  hooks  for  the  pillars,  and  over. 
38. 30  he  made  the  sockets  to  the  door  of  the 

39.  1  they  made  cloths  of  service,  to  do  service 
39.    1  and  made  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron 
39.    2  he  made  the  ephod  (of)  gold,  blue,  and 
39.    4  They  made  shoulder  pieces  for  it,  to  cou. 
39.   8  he  made  the  breast  plate  (of)  cunning  w. 
39.   9  they  made  the  breast  plate  double  :  a  s. 
39.  15  they  made  upon  the  breast  plate  chains 
39. 16  they  made  two  ouches  (of)  gold,  and  two 
39. 19  they  made  two  ring?  of  gold,  and  put  (th.) 
39.  20  they  made  two.  .golden  rings,  and  put 
39.  22  he  made  the  robe  of  the  ephod  (of)woven 
39.  24  they  made  upon  the  hems  of  the  robe  po. 
39.  25  they  made  bells  (ofl  pure  gold,  and  put 
39.  27  they  made  coats  (of)  finelinen,  (of) woven 
39.  30  they'made  the  plate  of  the  holy  crown  (of) 
39.  42  so  the  children  of  Israel  made  all  the  w. 


MAKE 


630 


MAKE 


Lev. 


26. 

Num.  S. 


Deut.  4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 

9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 


26. 
27. 
32. 
32- 
Josh.  5. 


Judg.  3. 

6. 

6. 

8. 

9- 
13- 
14. 

*7- 
I7- 
i7- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 


tSa. 


13- 

17- 

25- 

2  Sa.    3. 

7- 

7- 

1  Ki.  2'. 

3- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
!■ 
7- 
9 
10. 


13- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
15- 
15- 
16. 
17- 
17- 
i'. 
18. 


4  nor  niake  to  yourselves  molten  gods  :  I 

24  cut ;  neither  shall  ye  make . .  in  your  land 

1  Ye  shall  make  you  no  idols  nor  graven  i. 
4  the  pattern,  .so  he  made  the  candlestick 

2  Make  ...of  a  whole  piece  shalt  thou  make 
8  baked  (it)  in  pans,  and  made  cakes  of  it 

12  will  make  of  thee  a  greater  nation  and 

3  will  make  an  offering  by  fire  unto  the  L. 
3  tn  make  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord,  of 

38  bid  them  that  they  make  them  fringes  in 
38  let  them  make  them  broad  plates,  .a  cov. 

8  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  aud  set  it  upon 

9  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and' put 
16  Lest  ye  corrupt,  .and  make  you  a  graven 

23  lest  ye.. make  you  a  graven  image,  (or)  the 

25  When  thou  shalt . .  make  a  graven  image 
8  Thou  shalt  not  make  thee  (any)  graven  i. 

12  for. .  they  have  made  them  a  molten  image 

14  I  will  make  of  thee  a  nation  mightier  and 
16  had  made  you  a  molten  calf:  ye  had  tur. 
21  I  took  your  sin,  the  calf  wluch  ye  had  m. 

1  and  come . .  and  make  thee  an  ark  of  wood 
3  I  made  an  ark  (of)  shittim  wood,  and  he. 

5  put  the  tables  in  the  ark  which  I  had  made 

1  At  the  end  ofs.. even  years  thou  shalt  make 

21  unto  the  altar,  .which  thou  shalt  make 
12  but  will  make  war  against  thee,  then  thou 
20  build  bulwarks  against  the  city  that  ma. 

8  thou  shalt  make  a  battlement  for  thy  roof 
12  Thou  shalt  m  ike  thee  fringes  upon  the  four 
19  high  above  all  nations  which  he  hath  m. 

15  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  maketh  (any)  g. 

6  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  established 
15  then  he  forsook  God  (which)  made  him 

7  Make  thee  sharp  knives,  and  circumcise 
3  Joshua  made  him  sharp  knives,  and  cir. 

15  Joshua  made  peace  with  them,  and  made 

18  Joshua  made  war  a  long  time  with  all  those 
2S  which  our  fathers  made,  not  for  burnt  off. 

16  Ehud  made  him  a  dagger  which  had  two 

2  the  children  of  Israel  made  them  the  dens 

19  Gideon  went  in,  and  made  ready  a  kid,  and 
27  Gideon  made  an  ephod  thereof,  and  put 
27  and  trode  (the  grapes),  and  made  merry 
15  until  we  shall  have  made  ready  a  kid  for 

10  Samson  made  there  a  feast ;  for  so  used 

3  to  make  a  graven  image,  and  a  molten  i. 

4  whomadethereofagravenimageand  am. 

5  made  an  ephod,  and  teraphim,  and  con. 

3  Who  brought  thee  hither?  and  what  ma. 

24  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods.,  which  I  ma. 
27  they  took  (the  things)  which  Micah  had  m 
31  set.  .up  Micah's  graven  image,  which  he 
15  had  made  a  breach  in  the  tribes  of  Israel 
19  Ins  mother  made  him  a  little  coat,  and  b. 

5  ye  shall  make  images  of  your  emerods,  and 
7  make  a  new  cart,  and  take  two  milch  k. 
12  to  make  his  instruments  of  war,  and  ins. 

22  pleased  the  Lord  to  make  you  his  people 

19  Lest  the  Hebrews  make . .  swords  or  spears 

25  and  make  his  fathers  house  free  in  Israel 

25  will  certainly  make  my  lord  a  sure  house 

20  David  made  Abner,  and  the  men.  .a  feast 

9  have  made  thee  a  great  name,  like  unto 

11  telleth.  .that  he  will  make  thee  an  house 

10  Tamartook  the  cakes  which  she  had  made 
24  who  hath  made  me  an  house,  as  he  prom. 

15  Solomon,  .made  a  feast  to  all  his  servants 

4  for  the  house  he  made  windows  of  narrow 

5  oracle :  and  he  made  chambers  round  about 
2^  within  the  oracle  he  made  two  cherubim 
31  for  the  entering  of  the  oracle  he  made  d. 
33  So  also  made  he  for  the  door  of  the  tern. 

6  he  made  a  porch  of  pillars ;  the  length  th. 

7  he  made  a  porch  for  the  throne  where  he 

8  Solomon  made  also  an  house  for  Pharaoh's 

16  he  made  two  chapiters  (of)  molten  brass 
18  he  made  the  pillars,  and  two  rows  round 

23  he  made  a  molten  sea,  ten  cubits  from  the 

27  he  made  ten  bases  of  brass  ;  four  cubits 

37  After  this,  .he  made  the  ten  bases  :  all  of 

38  Then  made  he  ten  lavers  of  brass  :  one 
40  Hiram  made  the  lavers,  and  the  shovels 
40  all  the  work  that  he  made  king  Solomon 
45  all  these  vessels,  which  Hiram  made  to 
48  And  Solomon  made  all  the  vessels  that 
51  all  the  work  that  kiug  Solomon  made  for 

26  king  Solomon  made  a  navy  of  ships  in  E. 

12  the  king  made  of  thealmug  trees  pillars 
16  king  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets 
iS  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and 

28  king  took  counsel,  and  made  two  calves 

31  he  made  an  house  of  high  places,  and  m. 

32  sacrificing  unto  the  calves  that  lie  had  m. 

32  priests  of  the  high  places  which  he  had  m. 

33  upon  the  altar  which  he  had  made  in  B. 
33  made  again  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 

9  thou  hast  gone  and  made  theeother  gods 

15  because  they  have  made  their  groves,  p. 

16  who  did  sin,  and  who  made  Israel  to  sin 

26  the  shields  of  gold  which  Solomon  had  m. 

27  made  In  their  stead  brasen  shields,  and 

12  removed,  .the  idolsthathisfathershadm. 

13  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a  grove 
33  Ahab  make  a  grove  ;  and  Ahab  did  more 
13  make  me  thereof  a  little  cake  first,  and 
13  and  after  make  for  thee  and  for  thy  son 
26  they  leaped  upon  the  altar  which  was  in. 
32  he  made  a  trench  about  the  altar,  as  great 

11  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Chenaanah  made  him 
1    •'>  ]i"-haphat  made  ships  of  Tbarshish  to 

2  the  image  of  Baal  that  his  father  had  m. 


.  Ch. 


>Ch. 


!  Ki.  3. 16  And  he  said.  .Make  this  valley  full  of  di. 
4. 10  Let  us  make  a  little  chamber,  I  pray  thee 

6.  2  let  us  make  us  a  place  there,  where  we  may 

7.  2,  19  (if)  the  Lord  would  make  windows  iu 
16.  11  made  (it)  against  king  Ahaz  came  from  D. 

8  walked  in  the  statutes.,  which  they  had  m. 
16  made  them  molten  images,  .two  calves 

19  in  the  statutes  of  Israel  which  they  made 
30  the  men  of  Babylon  madeSuccoth-benoth 

30  made  Nergal.  .men of  Hamathmade  Ash. 

31  Avitus  made  Nibhaz  and  Tartak,  and  the 
29  every  nation  made  gods  of  their  own,  and 
29  high  places  which  the  Samaritans  had  m. 

32  made  unto  themselves  of  the  lowest  of 

4  the  brazen  serpent  that  Moses  had  made 
31  Make,  .with  me  by  a  present,  and  come 
15  OLord.  .thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth 

20  how  he  made  a  pool,  and  a  conduit,  and 
3  made  a  grove,  as  did  Ahab  king  of  Israel 

7  the  grove  that  he  had  made  in  the  house 
12  altars.,  which  the  kings  of  Judah  had  made 

12  the  altars  which  Manasseh  had  made  in 

15  high  place  which  Jeroboam,  .had  made 
19  which  the  king3  of  Israel  had  made  to  pro. 

13  which  Solomon  king  of  Israel  had  made 

16  the  bases  which  Solomon  had  made  for 
10  in  the  days  of  Saul  they  made  war  with 
19  they  made  war  with  the  Hagarites,  with 

1  made  hini  houses  in  the  city  of  David,  and 

26  the  gods. .(are)  idols  :  but  the  Lord  made 

8  have  made  thee  a  name  like  the  name  of 
8  wherewith  Solomon  made  the  brasen  sea 

29  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  which  Moses 
8  Thou  hast  sired  blood,  .and  hast  made 

5  Lord  with  the  instruments  which  I  made 
3  Moses  t'     servant  of  the  Lord  had  made 

5  Be2aleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur 

12  Lord  God  of  Israel,  that  made  heaven  and 
8  he  made  the  most  holy  house,  the  length 

10  he  made  two  cherubim  of  image  work,  and 

14  he  made  the  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and 

15  he  made  before  the  house  two  pillars  of 

16  he  made  chains,  (as) in  the  oracle,  .and  m. 

1  he  made  an  altar  of  brass,  twenty  cubits 

2  he  made  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits  from 

6  He  made  also  ten  lavers,  and  put  five  on 

7  he  made  ten  candlesticks  of  gold  accord. 

8  He  made  also  ten  tables,  and  placed,  .in 

8  And  he  made  an  hundred  basons  of  gold 

9  he  made  the  court  of  the  priests,  and  the 

11  Huram  made  the  pots,  and  the  shovels 
1 1  finished  the  work  that  he  was  to  make  for 

14  He  made  also  bases,  and  lavers  made  he 

16  did  Huram  his  father  make  to  king  Solo. 

18  Solomon  made  all  these  vessels  in  great 

19  Solomon  made  aU  the  vessels  that  (were 

1  all  the  work  that  Solomon  made  for  the  h. 

1 3  Solomon  had  made  a  brasen  scaffold,  of  five 

6  which  David  the  king  had  made  to  praise 

7  the  brasen  altar  which  Solomon  had  made 
9  in  the  eighth  day  they  made  a  solemn  as. 

11  all  that  came  into  Solomon's  heart  to  m. 
1 1  the  king  made  (of)  the  algum  trees, terraces 

15  king  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets 

17  the  king  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and 

15  priests,  .for  the  calves  which  he  had  made 
9  the  shields  of  gold  which  Solomon  had  m. 

10  king  Rehoboam  made  shields  of  brass,  and 

8  calves,  which  Jeroboam  made  you  for  gods 

9  have  made  you  priests  after  the  manner 

16  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a  grove 

10  Zedekiah  the  sou  of  Chenaanah  had  made 
36  make  ships  to  go  to  Tarshish  :  and  they  m. 

11  he  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  of 
19  his  people  made  no  burning  for  liim,  like 

8  they  made  a  chest,  and  set  it  without  at 

14  whereof  were  made  vessels  for  the  house 

13  that  made  war  with  mighty  power,  to  help 

15  he  made  in  Jerusalem  engines,  invented 

2  and  made  also  molten  images  for  Baalim 

24  he  made  him  altars  in  every  corner  of  J. 

25  he  made  high  places  to  burn  incense  unto 
5  and  made  darts  and  shields  in  abundance 

27  he  made  himself  treasuries  for  silver,  and 

3  he  reared  up  altars  for  Baalim,  and  made 
7  a  carved  image,  the  idol  which  he  had  m. 

22  images  whh-h  Manasseh  his  father  had  m. 

4  pulpit  of  wood,  which  they  had  made  for 

8.  12  to  make  great  mirth,  because  they  had 
8.  15  branches  of  thick  trees,  to  make  booths 
8. 16  made  themselves  booths,  every  one  upon 

8.  17  made  booths,  aud  sat  under  the  booths 

9.  6  thou  hast  made  heaven,  the  heaven  of  h. 
9.  18  when  they  had  made  them  a  molten  calf 

Esth.  1.  3  he  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and 
1.  5  the  king  made  a  feast  unto  all  the  people 
1.  9  Vashti  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  the  w. 

1.  20  the  king's  decree  which  he  shall  make 
2. 18  the  king  made  a  great  feast  unto  all  his 

2.  18  he  made  a  release  to  the  provinces,  and 

14  Let  a  gallows  be  made  of  fifty  cubits  high 
14  and  he  caused  the  gallows  to  be  made 

9  gallows,  .which  Hainan  had  made  for  M. 
17,  18  made  it  a  day  of  feasting  and  gladness 
19  made  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 
22  they  should  make  them  days  of  feasting 

9  maketh  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  Pleiades,  and 
9  Remember,  .thou hast  made  me  as  the  c. 
27  and  maketh  collops  of  fat  on  (his)  flanks 
2  he  maketh  peace  in  his  high  places 

18  and  as  a  booth,  .the  keeper  maketh 
25  To  make  the  weight  for  the  winds;  and 


21. 
24. 
24, 
26. 
26. 
28. 
28. 
28. 

32- 

32- 

33- 
33- 

Neh.   8. 


Job  28, 
31- 

33- 
40. 

40. 

Psa.    9 


100 

104. 
104 
106, 
111. 
"5 


124. 
i34. 
135 
I35- 
136. 
136. 
46. 
149. 
Prov.  8. 


23 
24 
31 
31 
Eccl.  2 


Isa. 


Jer. 


27. 
27. 
29. 
29. 
3i- 
36- 

37- 

40. 

43- 

44. 

44. 

44. 

44. 

44- 

44- 

45- 

45- 

45- 

45- 

46. 

46. 

57- 

63. 

63- 

66. 

66. 

2. 

4- 

5- 

5- 

6. 

7- 


26  When  he  made  a  decree  for  the  rain,  and 
15  did  not  he  that  made  me  in  the  womb.  .m. 

4  The  spirit  of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the 
15  behemoth,  which  I  made  with  thee  ;  he 
19  he  that  made  him  can  make  his  sword  to 
15  heathen  aresunkdownintbepit.  .theym. 

9  All  nations  whom  thou  hast  made  shall 

5  The  sea  (is)  his,  and  lie  made  it ;  and  his 
5  the  gods,  .(are)  idols :  but  the  Lord  made 

3  he  (that)  hath  made  us,  and  not  we  ours. 

4  Who  maketh  his  angels  spirits;  his  mini. 
24  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them  all :  the 
19  They  made  a  calf  in  Horeb,  and  worship. 

4  He  hath  made  his  wonderful  works  to  be 
8  They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them 

15  Ye  (are)  blessed  of  the  Lord  which  made 
24  This  (is)  the  day  (which) the  Lord  hath  m. 
73  Thy  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned 

2  My  help,  .from  the  Lord,  which  made  h. 

8  of  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven  and  earth 

3  The  Lord  that  made  heaven  and  earth  b. 
7  he  maketh  lightnings  for  the  rain :  he  br. 

18  They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them 

5  To  him  that  by  wisdom  made  the  heavens 

7  To  him  that  made  great  lights  :  for  his  m. 

6  Which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea 
2  Let  Israel  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him 

26  While  as  yet  he  had  not  made  the  earth 
12  the  Lord  hath  made  even  both  of  them 

18  counsel ;  and  with  good  advice  make  war 

5  for  (riches)  certainly  make  themselves  w. 

6  by  wise  counsel  thou  shalt  make  thy  war 

22  She  maketh  herself  coverings  of  tapestry 
24  She  maketh  finelinen, and  selleth(it);  and 

5  I  made  me  gardens  and  orchards,  and  I  p. 

6  I  made  me  pools  of  water,  to  water  there. 
11  He  hath  made  every  (thing)  beautiful  in 

11  can  find  out  the  work  that  God  maketh 
29  God  hath  made  man  upright ;  but  they 

19  A  feast  is  made  for  laughter,  and  wine 

5  knowest  not.  .works  of  God  who  maketh 

12  of  making  many  books  (there  is)  no  end 
ii  We  will  make  thee  borders  of  gold,  with 

9  King  Solomon  made  himself  a  chariot  of 
10  He  made  the  pillars  thereof  (of)  silver,  the 

8  that  which  their  own  fingers  have  made 

20  which  they  made,  .for  himself  to  worship 

23  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a  consump. 

8  which  his  fingers  have  made,  either  the 

10  all  that  make  sluices  (and)  ponds  for  fish 

11  Ye  made  also  a  ditch  between  the  two 

6  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things 

5  he  may  makepeace  with  me.  .he  shall m. 

1 1  he  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on 

16  for  shaU  the  work  say  of  him  that  made  it 
16  He  made  me  not?  or  shall  the  thing  fra. 

7  which  your  own  hands  have  made  unto  you 
16  Make  (an  agreement)  with  me  (by)  a  pre. 

16  O  Lord  .  .thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth 

23  he  maketh  the  judges  of  the  eartli  as  va. 
7  I  have  formd  hini ;  yea,  I  have  made  him 
2  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  made  thee,  and 

13  and  maketh  it  after  the  figure  of  a  man 

15  he  maketh  it  a  graven  image,  and  falleth 

1 7  the  residue  thereof  he  maketh  a  god . .  his 

19  shall  I  make  the  residue  thereof  an  abo.? 

24  I  (am)  the  Lord  that  maketh  all  (things) 

7  I  make  peace,  and  create  evil  :  I  the  L. 

9  Shall  the  clay  say.  .What  niakest  thou? 

12  I  have  made  the  earth,  aud  created  man 

18  God  himself  that  formed  the  earth, andm. 

4  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear ;  even  I  will 

6  hire  a  goldsmith  ;  and  he  maketh  it  a  god 

16  the  spirit,  .and  the  souls  (which)  I  have 
12  led. .  to  make  himself  an  everlastingname? 

14  thou  lead,  .to  make  thyself  a  glorious  n. 
2  all  those,  .hath  mine  hand  made,  and  all 

22  aud  the  new  earth,  which  I  will  make 
,  28  where,  .thy  gods  wliich  thou  hast  made 

27  land  shall  be  desolate;  yet  will  I  not  make 

10  and  destroy;  but  make  not  a  full  end:  take 
iS  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  notmakeafull  end 
26  make  thee  mourning,  (as  for)  an  only  son 

18  to  make  cakes  to  thequeen  of  heaven,  and 

8  Lo,  certainly  in  vain  made  he  (it) ;  the  pen 

12  He  hath  made  the  earth  by  his  power,  he 

13  he  maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  and  bri. 

22  O  LORDour  God.. thou  hast  madeall  these 

20  Shall  a  man  make  gods  unto  himself,  and 
4  vessel  that  he  made  of  clay  was  marred 

4  so  he  made  it . .  as  seemed  good . .  to  make 
J  2  Make  thee  bonds  and  yokes,  and  put  them 

5 1  have  made  the  earth,  the  man  and  the  b. 
13  but  thou  shalt  make  for  them  yokes  of  i. 

11  though  I  make  a  full  end  of  all  nations 
11  yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee ;  but 

17  thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth 
20  and  hast  made  thee  a  name,  as  at  this  day 

15  the  house . .  for  they  had  made  that  the  pr. 

16  LoRDliveth,  that  made  us  this  soul,  I  will 

9  which  Asa  the  king  had  made  for  fear  of 

19  did  we  make  her  cakes  to  worship  her 

25  I  will  make  a  full  end  of  all  the  nations 
2S  I  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee,  but  co. 

15  He  hath  made  the  earth  by  his  power,  he 

16  he  maketh  ligb.tnings  with  rain,  and  bri. 

20  which  king  Solomon  had  made  in  the  h. 
9  make  thee  bread  thereof,  .to  the  number 

20  made  the  images  of  their  abominations 

23  Make  a  chain  ;  for  the  land  is  full  of  bio. 
13  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  the  remnant 

18  Woe  to  the  (women)  that,  .make  kerchiefs 


MAKE 


631 


MAKE 


Jon. 


Mic. 
Nan. 


Hab. 


Eze.  16.  i>  madest  to  thyself  images  of  men,  and  di. 
16.  24  hast  made  thee  an  high  place  in  every 

16.  31  and  makest  thine  high  place  in  every  st. 

17.  17  make  for  him  in  the  war,  by  casting  up 

18.  31  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit 

20.  17  make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilderness 
22.  3  maketh  idols  against  herself  to  defile  her. 
22.  4  defiled . .  in  thine  idols  which  thou  hast  m. 
22.  13  thy  dishonest  gain  which  thou  hast  made 
24.  17  Forbear  to  cry,  make  no  mourningfor  the 
27.  5  taken  cedars  fromLehanon  to  make  masts 
27.  6  (Of)  the  oaks  of  Bashan  have  they  made 
27.  6  Ashurites  have  made  thy  benches(of)ivory 
29.   3  My  river  (is)  mine  own,  and  I  have  made 

29.  9  The  river  (is)  mine,  ami  I  have  made  (it) 

31.  9  I  have  made  him  fair  by  the  multitude  of 
35.  14  When  the  whole  earth  rejoiceth,  I  will  m. 
37.  19  make  them  one  stick,  and  they  shall  be 

37.  22  I  will  make  them  one  nation  in  the  land 
40.  14  He  made  also  posts  of  threescore  cubits 
43.  27  thepriestsshallmakeyourburntofferings 

Dan.  11.    6  shall  come  to  the  king,  .to  make  an  agre. 
Hos.   8.    4  their  gold  have  they  made  them  idols 

8.   6  the  workman  made  it;  therefore  it  (is)  not 

13.  2  have  made  them  molten  images  of  their 
Amos  4.  13  that  maketh  the  morning  darkness,  and 

5.    8  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion 
5.  26  the  star  of  your  god,  which  ye  made  to 
.  14  they  shall  also  make  gardens,  and  eat  the 
.    9  God.  .which  hath  made  the  sea  and  the 
,    5  made  him  a  booth,  and  sat  under  it  in  the 
.    8  I  will  make  a  wailing  like  the  dragons 
.    8  he  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place 
.    9  he  will  make  an  utter  end  :  affliction  sh. 

1.  14  makest  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  as  the 

2.  18  that,  .trusteth  therein,  to  make  dumb  id.? 
Zeph.  i.  18  he  shall  make  even  a  speedy  riddance  of 
Zech    6.  11  take  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns 

10.  1  Lord  shall  make  bright  clouds,  and  give 
Mai.    2.  15  And  did  not  he  make  one?  Yet  had  he 

3.  17  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels 

12.To ponder,  ohs  palas,  3. 

Psa.  78.  50  He  made  a  way  to  his  anger ;  he  spared 

13.ro  work,  make,  hyppaal. 

Exodis.  17  thou  hast  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in ;  (in) 
Psa.     7.  15  and  is  fallen  into  the  ditch  (which) hem. 
Prov  16.    4  The  Lord  hath  made  all  (things)  for 
Isa.   44.  15  he  maketh  a  god,  and  worshippeth  (it) 

li.  To  give  a  charge,  ~ip9  paqad. 

Deut2o.    9  they  shall  make  captains  of  the  armies 

15.  To  give  a  charge,  npa  paqad,  5. 

1  Ki.  11.  28  he  made  him  ruler  over  all  the  charge  of 

2  Ki.  25.  23  that  the  king,  .had  made  Gedaliah  gove. 
Jer.   40.    5  whom  theking..hathmadegovernorover 

40.  7  had  made  Gedaliah . .  governor  in  the  land 

41.  2  whom  the  king,  .had  made  governor  over 
41.  18  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  made  governor 

16.  To  cause  to  rise  or  stand  still,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Psa.  107.  29  He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm,  so  that  the 
Dan.    5.  1 1  made  master  of  the  magicians,  astrologers 

17.7*0  set,  put,  lay,  D»'p,  oifc*  sum,  sim. 

Gen.  13.  16  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  e. 

21.  13  of  the  son  of  the  bond  woman  will  I  make 

21.  18  lift  up  the  lad.  .1  will  make  him  a  great 

27.  37  I  have  made  him  thy  lord,  and  all  his  br. 

32.  12  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  w. 
45.    8  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to  Pharaoh,  and 

45.  9  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  Egypt :  come 

46.  3  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation 

47.  6  then  make  them  rulers  over  my  cattle 

47.  26  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  E. 

48.  20  God  make  thee  as  Ephraim,  and  as  Man. 
Exod.2.  14  Who  made  thee  a  prince  and  a  judge  over 

4. 11  Who  hath  made  man's  mouth?  or  who  m. 

14.  21  Lord. .made  the  sea  dry.,  and  the  waters 

15.  25  there  he  made  for  them  a  statute  and  an 
Deut.  1.  13  Take,  .and  I  will  make  them  rulers  over 

10.  22  hath  made  thee  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for 

14.  1  nor  make  any  baldness  between  your  eyes 
Josh.  6.  18  make  the  camp  of  Israel  a  curse,  and  tro. 

8.  28  Joshua  burnt  Ai,  and  made  it  an  heap  for 
Judg.  8.  33  Israelturned.  .and made Baal-berith their 

11.  11  the  people  made  him  head  and  captain 

1  Sa.    8.    1  that  he  made  his  sons  judges  over  Israel 

8.    5  make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  na. 

18.  13  aud  made  him  his  captain  overathousand 

22.  7  make  you  all  captains  of  thousands,  and 

28.  2  I  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  for  ever 

30.  25  he  made  it  a  statute  and  an  ordinance  for 

2  Sa.   7.  23  to  make  him  a  name,  and  to  do  for  you 

15.  4  Oh  that  I  were  made  judge  in  the  land 

17.  25  Absalom  made  Amasa  captain  of  the  host 

23.  5  he  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  co. 

1  Ki.  10.    9  therefore  made  he  thee  king,  to  do  judg. 

19.  2  if  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the  life  of  one  of 

20.  34  and  thou  shalt  make  streets  for  thee  in  D 
20.  34  in  Damascus  as  my  father  made  in  Sam. 

2  Ki.  10.  27  and  made  it  a  draught  house  unto  this  day 

13.  7  had  made  them  like  the  dust  by  threshing 
1  Ch.17.  21  to  make  thee  a  name  of  greatness  and  te. 

26. 10  Simri.  .yet  his  father  made  him  the  chief 
Job     1.  17  The  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands,  aud 

18.  '2  How  long  (will  it  be  ere)  ye  make  an  end 
24. 25  who  will  make  me  a  liar,  and  make  my 

31.  24  If  I  have  made  gold  my  hope,  or  have  said 

38.  9  When  I  made  the  cloud  the  garment  the. 

39.  6  Whose  house  I  have  made  the  wilderness 
41. 31  he  maketh  the  sea  bike  a  pot  of  ointment 

Psa.  18,  43  thou  hast  made  me  the  head  of  the  hea. 


Psa.  39, 
40. 
44. 
44. 
46. 
52. 
66. 


91. 
104. 
105. 
107. 
147. 
Prov.  30. 
Song  1. 
6. 


Isa. 


Lam. 


8  make  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  foolish 

4  Blessed  (is)  that  man  that  maketh  the  L. 

13  Thou  makest  us  a  reproach  to  our  neigh. 

14  Thou  makest  us  a  byword  among  the  h. 

8  what  desolations  he  hath  made  in  the  ea. 
7  Lo.  .the  man  (that)  made  not  God  his  st. 

2  Sing  forth  the  honour  of  his  name;  make 
6  Thou  makest  us  a  strife  unto  our  neigh. 

29  His  seed  also  will  I  make . .  for  ever,  and 

9  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  .thy 

3  who  maketh  the  clouds  his  chariot ;  who 

21  He  made  him  lord  of  his  house,  and  ruler 
41  and  maketh  (him)  families  like  a  flock 

14  He  maketh  peace  (in)thy  borders . .  filleth 
26  yet  make  they  their  houses  in  the  rocks 

6  they  made  me  the  keeperofthe  vineyards 
12  my  soul  made  me  (like)  the  chariots  of  A. 

7  saying,  .make  me  not  a  ruler  of  the  peo. 
17  made  the  world  as  a  wilderness,  amides. 
23  I  will  also  make  it  a  possession  for  the 

2  For  thou  hast  made  of  a  city  an  heap  ;  (of) 
9  when  he  maketh  all  the  stones  of  the  a. 

15  we  have  made  lies  our  refuge,  and  under 
15  I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing 
15  small,  and  shalt  make  the  hills  as  chaff 
iS  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  wa. 

15  I  will  make  the  rivers  islands,  aud  I  will 

16  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them 
19  I  will  even  make  a  way  in  the  wilderness 

2  he  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  sw. 
2  he  hid  me,  aud  made  me  a  polished  shaft 
11I  will  make  all  my  mountains  a  way,  2nd 

2  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness  :  their  fish 

3  heavens . .  I  make  sackcloth  their  covering 
3  he  will makeherwildernesslikeEden, and 

10  hath  made  the  depths  of  the  sea  a  way  for 

10  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering 
12  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  agates,  and  thy 

15  I  will  make  thee  an  eternal  excellency,  a 

17  I  will  also  make  thy  officers  peace,  and 
7  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  e. 
7  and  made  mine  heritage  an  abomination 

7  he  is  gone  forth  from  his  place  to  make 

8  lest  I  make  thee  desolate,  a  land  not  in. 

22  to  make  the  cities  of  Judah  desolate,  .a 

11  They  have  made  it  desolate,  .desolate  it 

5  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that,  .maketh  flesh 

16  To  make  their  landdesolate.  .aperpetual 

8  I  will  make  this  city  desolate,  and  an  hi. 

9  and  make  them  an  astonishment,  and  an 

12  and  will  make  it  perpetual  desolations 

22  Lord  make  thee  like  Zedekiah,  and  like  A. 
21  make  thee  high  heaps :  set  thine  heart  to. 
29  to  make  the  laud  of  Babylon  a  desolation 

11  pulled  me  in  pieces  :  he  hath  made  me  d. 
45  Thou  hast  made  us.,  the  offscouring  and 

5  took  another  of  her  whelps,  .made  him 
28  there  also  they  made  their  sweet  savour 
3  make  her  as  a  wilderness,  and  set  her  like 

12  I  will  make  them  a  forest,  and  the  beasts 
10  I  will  make  it  as  the  mourning  of  an  only 

6  I  will  make  Samaria  as  an  heap  of  the  fi. 

7  I  will  make  her  that  halted  a  remnant 

13  I  will  make  thine  horn  iron,  and  I  will  m. 

14  I  will  make  thy  grave  ;  for  thou  art  vile 
19  he  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds"  (feet) 
13  And  he .  .will  make  Nineveh  a  desolation 

23  will  make  thee  as  a  signet :  for  I  have  ch. 

12  they  made  their  hearts,  .anadamantstone 

13  made  thee  as  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man 
3  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in  the 

2.  2  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trembling 
12.    3  in  that  day  will  I  make  Jerusalem  a  bur. 

12.  6  In  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of 

18.  To  set,  place,  cVti*  sum. 

Ezra    5.  13  made  a  decree  to  build  this  house  of  God 

5.  14  Sheshbazzar,  whom  he  had  made  governor 

6.  1  Then  Darius  the  king  made  a  decree,  and 
6.  3  Cyrusthekingmadeadecree(concerning) 
6.  8  I  make  a  decree  what  ye  shall  do  to  the 
6.  11  I  have  made  a  decree,  that  whosoever  s. 

6.  12  I  Darius  have  made  a  decree  ;  let  it  be  d. 

7.  13  I  make  a  decree,  that  all  they  of  the  peo. 
7.  21 1,  .do  make  a  decree  to  all  the  treasurers 

Dan.    3.  10  Thou,  O  king,  hast  made  a  decree,  that 

3.  29  I  make  a  decree,  That  every  people,  nat. 

4.  6  Therefore  made  I  a  decree  to  bring  in  all 
6.  26  I  make  a  decree,  That  in  every  dominion 

19.7*0  set,  put,  lay,  Wp  shith. 

2  Sa.  22.  12  he  made  darkness  pavilions  round  about 

1  Ki.  11.  34  I  will  make  him  prince  all  the  days  of  his 
Psa.  18.  11  He  made  darkness  his  secret  place  ;  his 

21.    6  thou  hast  made  him  most  blessed  forever 
21.    9  Thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in 

21.  12  Therefore  shalt  thou  make  them  turn  th. 
45. 16  whom  thou  mayest  make  princes  in  all 

83.  11  Make  their  nobles  like  Oreb  and  like  Z. 
83. 13  O  my  God,  make  them  like  a  wheel;  as  the 

84.  6  make  it  a  well ;  the  rain  also  filleth  the 
88.    8  thou  hast  made  me  an  abomination  unto 

104.  20  Thou  makest  darkness,  and  it  is  night :  w. 

no.  1  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  foot  stool 
Isa.  16.  3  make  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  the  midst 
Jer.    2. 15  they  made  his  land  waste  :  his  cities  are 

13.  16  he  turn  it.  .(and) make  (it) gross  darkness 

22.  6  surely  I  will  make  thee  a  wilderness,  .ci. 

50.  3  which  shall  make  her  land  desolate,  and 

51.  39  In  their  heat  I  will  make  their  feasts,  and 

20.  To  dig,  prepare,  rna  Jcarah. 

2  Ch.16.  14  in  his  own  sepulchres,  which  he  had  made 


3- 
14. 
14. 
25. 
27. 
28. 
41. 
4i- 
41. 
42. 
42. 

43- 
49. 
49. 
49. 
50. 
5°- 
5i- 
5i- 
53- 
54- 
60. 
60. 
62. 
2. 
4- 
6. 


J7- 
18. 
19. 
25. 
25. 
29. 
31- 
5i- 
3- 
3- 

Eze.  19. 

20. 

Hos.    2. 

2. 

Amos  8. 

Mic.    1. 

4- 

Nali.  1. 
Hab.  3. 
Zeph.  2. 
Hag.  2. 
Zech.  7. 
9- 


Psa.    7, 15  He  made  a  pit,  and  digged  it,  and  is  fallen 
21. To  loose,  unloose,  "va  nathar,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  33  God  (is)  my  strength . .  he  maketh  my  way 

22.  To  put,  set,  or  lay  out  throughout,  Btari8€fxat. 
Acts    3.  25  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  our 
Heb.  8.  10  this  (islthe  covenant  that  I  will  make  10. 16 

23.  To  give,  SiBufit  'didomi,  2  Th.  3.  9  ;  Rev.  3.  9. 

24.  To  make  an  end  of,  tTrtTsKew  epiteleo. 

Heb.   8.    5  when  he  was  about  to  make  the  tabern. 

25.  To  be,  clfit  eimi. 

Marki2.  42  threw  in  two  mites,  which  make  a  farthing 

26.  To  set  down,  KaQiar-^fxt  kathistemi. 

Matt 24.  45  whom  his  lord  hath  made  ruler  over  his 

24.  47  he  shall  make  him  ruler  over  all  his  goods 

25.  21,  23 1  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things 
Lukei2. 14  Man,  who  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider 

12.  42  lord  shall  make  ruler  over  his  household 
12.  44  he  will  make  him  ruler  over  all  that  he 

Acts  7.  10  he  made  him  governor  over  Egypt  and  all 
7'  27,  35  Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge? 

Rom.  5.  19  For  as  by  one.  .many  were  made  sinners 

5.  19  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  m. 
Heb.  7.  28  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  which 
2  Pe.  1.    8  they  make,  .neither,  .barren  nor  unfruit. 

27.  Topreparethoroughly,KaTacrK€vdfa  kataskeuazO. 
Heb.   9.    2  For  therewasatabernaclemade'  the  first 

28.  To  make,  found,  kti^qj  ktizo. 

Eph.    2.  15  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man 

29.  To  do,  make,  iroteapoieo. 

Matt.  3.  3  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his  paths  str. 
4.  19  Follow  me.  .1  will  make  you  fishers  of  men 

5. 36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  b. 
12.  16  charged,  .they  should  not  make  bun  kn. 
12.  33  make  the  tree  good . .  or . .  make  the  tree  c. 
17.    4  let  us  make  here  three  tabernacles ;  one 

19.  4  he  which  [made],  .at  the  beginning  made 

20.  12  thou  hast  made  them  equal  unto  us,  which 

21.  13  My  house,  .ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thi. 

22.  2  a  certain  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for 

23.  15  to  make  one  proselyte;  and  when  he  is  m. 
23. 15  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of  h. 
25.  16  with  the  same,  and  [made],  .other  five  ta. 

Mark  1.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 
1. 17  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men 
3.  i2charged.  .they  should  not  make  him  known 

6.  21  Herod,  on  his  birth  day  made  a  supper  to 

7. 37  he  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the 
8.  25  [made  him  look  up] :  and  he  was  restored 
q.   5  let  us  make  three  tabernacles ;  one  for  thee 

6  from  the  beginning.  .God  made  them  male 

1 7  My  house . .  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves 
4  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 

29  Levi  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  h. 

33  fast  often,  and  make  prayers,  and  likewise 

34  Can  ye  make  the  children  of  the  bride  ch. 
33  let  us  make  three  tabernacles;  one  for 
40  did  not  he  that  made  that,  .without  make 

12  When  thou  makest  a  dinner  or  a  supper 

13  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor 
16  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper,  and 

19  no  more . .  make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  se. 
9  Maketoyourselvesfriendsof  the  mammon 

46  My  house . .  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves 

15  whenhehadmadeascourgeof  small  cords 

16  make  not  my  Father's  house  an  house  of 

1  that  Jesus  made  and  baptized  more  disc. 
46  Cana  of  Galilee,  where  he  made  the  water 
11  He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said 
15  it  was  Jesus  which  had  made  him  whole 
iS  God  was  his  Father,  making  himself  equal 

10  And  Jesus  said,  Make  the  men  sit  down 
15  come  and  take  him  by  force,  to  make  him 
23  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit  whole  on 
53  theprophetsaredead:  whom  makest  thou 

6  he  spat  on  the  ground,  and  made  clay  of 

11  Jesus  made  clay,  and  anointed  mine  eyes 

14  Jesus  made  the  clay,  and  opened  his  eyes 
33  that  thou,  being  a  man,  makest  thyself  G. 

2  There  they  made  him  a  supper;  and  Ma. 
23  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  ourab. 

18  had  made  a  fire  of  coals  ;  for  it  was  cold 

7  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  uou 

12  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king  speak. 

23  took  his  garments,  and  made  four  parts 

1  The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  O  The. 
36  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye 

12  or  holiness  we  had  made  this  man  to  w.? 

24  Lord,  thou  (art)  God,  which  hast  made  h. 
40  Saying  unto  Aaron,  M  ake  us  gods  to  go  be. 

43  figures  which  ye  made  to  worship  them 

44  should  make  it  according  to  the  fashion 
50  Hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  things? 

2  devout  men . .  made  great  lamentation  over 

13  the  coats  and  garments  which  Dorcas  m. 

15  unto  the  living  God,  which  made  heaven 
24  God  that  made  the  world  and  all  things 
26  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men 
24  which  made  silver  shrines  for  Diana,  br. 

13  they  were  more  than  forty  which  had  m. 
9  that  without  ceasing  I  make  mention  of 

20  say  to  him  ..Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus? 

21  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honour,  and  an. 
28  a  short  work  will  the  Lord  make  upon  the 

14  make  not  provision  for  the  flesh,  to.  .the 
26  to  make  a  certain  contribution  for  the  p. 

15  and  make  (them)  the  members  of  a"n  har. 
13  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  maybe  able 


10 

11. 

Luke  3 

5 

5' 

5' 

9 

ii. 

14 

14 

14, 

15 

16. 

10. 

John  2 


3- 
4- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
8. 

9- 

14. 

17- 

*7- 
19. 

23- 

Rom.  1. 
9- 
9- 
9- 
*3- 
*5- 
1  Co.    6. 


MAKE 


632 


MAKE 


2  Co.  5.  21  he  hath  made  him . .  sin  for  us,  who  knew 
Eph.    1. 16  thanks,  .makiug  mention  of  you  in  my  pr. 

2.  14  he  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one 
a.  15  of  twain  one  new  man,  (so)  making  peace 

4,  16  maketh  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  edi. 
Phil  1.  4  Always,  .for  you  all  making  request  with 
1  Th.  1.    2  always.,  making  mention  of  you  in  our  p. 

1  Ti.  2.  1  prayers,  intercessions . .  be  made  for  all  in. 
Phil.  4  making  mention  of  thee  always  m  my  pr. 
Heb.    1.    2  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made 

1.  7  Who  maketh  his  angels  spmts,  and  his 
8.  k  thou  make  all  things  according  to  the  pa. 
8.  o  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their  fat. 
12.  13  make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest  that 
12  27  that  are  shaken,  as  of  tilings  that  are  m. 
Jas.     3.  18  is  sown  in  peace  of  them  that  makepeace 

2  Pe.  1.  10  tomakeyour  calling  and  election  sure:  for 
1  Jo     t  10  we  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not 

5.  10  he  that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him 
Rev.    1.   6  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God 

3.  9  I  will  make  them  to  come  and  worship  be. 
3.  12  Him  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar 
5.  10  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  pr. 

11.  7  the  beast,  .shall  make  war  against  them 

12.  17  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of 

13.  7  [it  was  given  unto  him  to  make  war  with] 
13. 13  [he  maketh]  fire  come  down  from  heaven 

13.  14  they  should  make  an  image  to  the  beast 

14.  7  worship  him  that  made  heaven,  and  earth 
17.  16  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked,  and 

19.  19  gathered  together  to-make  war  against  h. 
2i.  5  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new.  And  ho 
22.  15  and  whosoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie 

30.  To  hand  forth,  vpoxeipt £07*01  procheirizomai. 
Acts  26.  16  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a  witness 

Zl. To  speak,  utter, ipSi  ero. 

Gal.     3.  16  Now  to  Abraham,  .were  the  promises  m. 

32,  To  place  together,  set,  <rvvi<rTwp.i  sunistemi. 
Gal.    2.  18  if  I  build.  .1  make  myself  a  transgressor 

33.  To  end  with,  accomplish,  <tvvts\4w  sunteleo. 
Heb.    8.    8  when  I  will  make  a  new  covenant  with 

34-7*0  set,  put>  lay,  Ti6-n/j.t  tithemi. 

Matt22.  44  Sit.  .till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  foots.? 
Marki2.  36  Sit.  .till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footst. 
Luke2o.  43  Tdl  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 
Acts    2.  35  Until  I  make  thy  foes  thy  footstool 

20.  28  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  overseers 
Rom.  4.  17  I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  nati. 
1  Co.  9.  18  I  may  make  the  gospel  of  Christ  without 
Heb.    1.  13;  10.  13;  2  Pe.  2.  6. 

35.  To  cast  or  put  together,  <rvfj.@d\\w  els,  Lu.  14.  31 
[See  also  Abhorred,  abide,  abominable,  about,  account 
of,  accursed,  ado,  affected,  afraid,  alive,  ashamed, 
astonished,  amazed,  amends,  appointment,  approach, 
atonement,  bald,  banquet,  bear,  beams,  bed,  better, 
bitter,  boast,  boil,  brick,  bright,  bring  forth,  broad, 
cakes,  calf,  cease,  cheerful,  childless,  clean,  cleave, 
come  up,  confession,  conspiracy,  consume,  count, 
crooked,  cry,  dark,  deep,  defence,  desolate,  differ,  dif- 
ference, distribution,  doubt,  drink,  drunk,  drunken, 
dry,  dust,  dwell,  eat,  empty,  end,  endanger,  enjoy, 
enquiry,  equal,  err,  eunuch,  excuse,  fail,  fall,  fast,  fat, 
few,  firm,  first  born,  fit,  flee,  flourish,  fly,  fold,  foolish, 
fools,  forget,  free,  fret,  friend,  friendship  with,  fruitful, 
full,  gain,  glad,  glorious,  go,  go  forth,  go  over,  go  up, 
good,  goodly,  great,  great  man,  grievous,  grow,  hard, 
haste,  hear,  heard,  heavy,  hedge,  high,  honourable, 
hope,  howl,  increase,  inhabited,  inherit,  inquisition, 
intercession,  invasion,  journey,  joyful,  joyful  noise, 
keep  (house),  king,  kneel  down,  know,  known,  labour, 
lament,  large,  league,  liar,  lie  down,  light,  lighter,  like, 
long,  lower,  many,  marriages,  matter,  meet,  melody, 
melt,  mention,  mention  of,  merchandise,  merry,  mirth, 
mock,  more,  move,  multiply,  murmur,  naked,  nest, 
noise,  obedient,  obeisance,  obstinate,  odious,  offend, 
offender,  oil,  old,  oration,  overflow,  overseer,  pass, 
pass  by,  pay,  payment,  peace,  perfect,  perish,  plain, 
plenteous,  poor,  possess,  prayer,  precious,  preparation, 
princes,  proclamation,  promise,  prosper,  prosperous, 
provision,  queen,  ready,  reconciliation,  refuge,  reign, 
rejoice,  remembered,  rent,  request,  rest,  restitution, 
return,  rich,  ride,  rise  up,  rode,  room,  rot,  rule,  ruler, 
run  away,  rushing,  sad,  search,  see,  separation,  serve, 
servants,  shake,  show,  shine,  shipwreck,  signs,  sin, 
singular,  skip,  slaughter,  sleep,  sit  down,  sit  together, 
small,  soft,  sore,  sorry,  sound,  speed,  spoil,  sport,  stag- 
ger, stand,  stiff,  stink,  stoop,  straight,  strange,  strong, 
stronger,  suck,  subject,  suddenly,  suit,  supplication, 
sure,  swear,  sweet,  swell,  swim,  tinkling,  transgress, 
treasurer,  tremble,  trouble,  trust,  tumult,  turn,  under- 
stand, uproar,  vain,  vile,  void,  walk,  wander,  war, 
waste,  weak,  weary,  which,  white  .whole,  wide,  willing, 
wise,  wiser,  wonderful,  wonderfully.] 

MAKE  as  though,  to  — 

To  make  toward,  -rrpoo-jroteopai  prospoieomai. 

Luke24.  28  he  made  as  though  he  would  have  gone 
MAKE  away,  utterly  to  — 
To  devote  {to  Ood  or  destruction^,  tnrr  charain,  5. 

Dan.  11.  44  to  destroy,  and  utterly  to  make  away  m. 
MAKE  (baldness),  to  — 
To  make  bald,  rn3  qarach. 

Lev.  21.    5  They  shall  not  make  baldness  upon  their 
MAKE  (bed),  to  — 
1.  To  turn  over,  change,  ?isn  haphak. 

Paa,  41.    3  thou  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness 


2.  To  spread  out,  15"J  raphad,  3. 

Job  17.  13  If  I  wait.  .1  have  made  my  bed  in  the  da. 
MAKE  (breach),  to  — 
To  break  forth,  p5  parats. 

2  Sa.   6.   8  the  Lord  had  made  abreachupon  Vzzah 

1  Ch.13. 1:  the  Lord  had  made  abreach  uponUzza 

15. 13  Lord  our  God  made  a  breach  upon  us,  for 

MAKE  (brick),  to 

To  make  brick,  jn^>  laben. 

Gen.  11.   3  let  usTmake  brick,  and  burn  them  thro. 

Exod.  5.    7  no  more,  .give  straw  to  make  brick,  as 

MAKE  burning,  to  — 

To  make  a  burni?ig,  ppV  saraph. 

2  Ch.16.  14  and  they  made  a  very  great  burning  for 

MAKE  cakes,  to  — 

To  make  cakes.  237  labab. 

2  Sa.  13.   6  make  me  a  couple  of  cakes  in  my  sight 

13.  8  made  cakes  in  his  sight,  and  did  bake  the 

MA'ff'F-  choice,  to  — 

To  lay  or  choose  out,  iKkeyop-at  eklegomai. 

Acts  15.    7  how  that  a  good  while  ago  God  made  ch. 
MA"KT.  (conspiracy),  to  — 
To  conspire,  bind  together,  "W$  qasliar. 

2  Ki.12.  20  his  servants  arose,  andmade  a  conspiracy 

14.  19  they  made  a  conspiracy  against  him  in  J. 
15. 15  Shallum,  and  his  conspiracy  which  hem. 

15.  30  j-i-oshea    made  a  conspiracy  against  ?ek. 
2  Ch.25.  27  they  mad>  a  conspiracy  against  him  in  J. 

MAKE  (covenant  or  league),  to  — 
To  cut  or  prepare,  m.a  karath. 

Gen.  15.  18  the  Lord' made  a  covenant  with  Abram 

21.27  gave,  .and  both  of  them  made  a  ovenant 
2i.  32  Thus  they  made  a  covenant  at  Beer-sheba 

26. 28  said . .  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  thee 
31.  44  let  us  make  a  covenant,  I  and  thou  ;  and 

Exod23.  32  Thou  shalt  make  no  covenant  with  them 
24.    8  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord  hathm. 
34.10  I  make  a  covenant:  before  all  thy  people 
34.  12,  15  lest  thou  make  a  covenant  with  the  in. 
34.  27  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  thee  and 
Deut.  4.  23  lest  ye  forget  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
5.    2  Lord  our  God  made  a  covenant  with  us 
5.    3  Lord  made  not  this  covenant  with  our 

7.  2  thou  shalt  make  o  covenant  with  them 
9.   9  of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord  made 

29.    1  covenant.  .Lord  commanded  Moses  to  m. 
29.    1  the  covenant  which  he  made  with  them 
20. 12  covenant,  .which  the  Lord,  .maketh  with 
29.  14  Neither  with  you  only  do  I  make  this  co. 
29.  25  have  forsaken  the  covenant,  .he  made 
31.  16  break  my  covenant  which  I  have  made 
Josh.  9.    6,  ti  now  therefore  make  ye  a  league  with 
9.    7  and  how  shall  we  make  a  league  with  you? 
9. 15  made  a  league  with  them,  to  let  them  live 
9.  16  after  they  had  made  a  league  with  them 
24.  35  Joshua  made  a  covenant  with  the  people 
Judg.  2.    2  ye  shall  make  no  league  with  the  inhabi. 

1  Sa.  11.  1  Make  a  covenant  with  us,  and  we  will  se. 
11.  e  On  this. .willl  make(aeovenant)with  you 
18.    3  Then  Jonathan  and  David  made  a  coven. 

20. 16  So  Jonathan  made  (a  covenant)  with  the 
23. 18  they  two  made  a  covenant  before  the  Lord 

2  Sa.   3.  12  Make  thy  league  with  me,  and,  behold,  my 
3. 13  I  will  make  a  league  with  thee :  but  one 
3.  21  that  they  may  make  a  league  with  thee 
5.    3  David  made  a  league  with  them  in  Heb. 

1  Ki.   5.  12  and  they  two  made  a  league  together 

8.  9  when  the  Lord  made  (a  covenant)  with 

8.  21  the  ark, wherein  (is) the  covenant,  .he  ma. 
20. 34  he  made  a  covenant  with  him,  and  sent 

2  Ki.  11.    4  made  a  covenant  with  them,  and  took  an 

11. 17  Jehoiadamade  a  covenant  between  theL. 
17.  15  they  rejected .  .his  covenant  that  he  made 
17.  35  With  whom  the  Lord  had  made  a  coven. 
17.  38  the  covenant  that  I  have  made  witli  you 
23.   3  made  a  covenant  before  the  Lord,  to  walk 

1  Ch.11.  3  David  made  a  ovenant  with  them  inHeb. 
16.  16  (Even  of  the  covenant)  which  he  made 

2  Ch.  5.  10  when  the  Lord  made  (a  covenant)  with 
6. 11  covenant  of  the  Lord,  that  he  made  with 

21.  7  because  of  the  covenant  that  he  had  made 
23.  3  all  the  congregation  made  a  covenant  with 
23.  16  Jehoiada  made  1  covenant  between  him 
29.  10  to  make  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  God 
34. 31  madeacovenantbefore  the  Lord,  to  walk 
Ezra  10.  3  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  our  God  to 
Neh.    9.    8  madest  a  covenant  with  him,  to  give  the 

9.  38  because  of  all  this  we  make  a  sure  (coven.) 
Job   31.    1  1  made  a  covenant  with  mine  eyes  ;  why 

41.  4  "Will  he  make  a  covenant  with  thee?  wilt 
Psa.  50.    5  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sa. 

89.    3  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  my  chosen 

105.    9  Which  (covenant)  he  made  with  Abraham 

Isa.   28. 15  We  have  made  a  covenant  with  death,  and 

55.    3  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 

57.    8  and  made  thee  (a  covenant)  with  them 

61.  8  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
Jer.   11.  10  have  broken  my  covenant  which  I  made 

31.  31  I  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the  ho. 

31.  32  Not  according  to  the  covenant  that  I  made 

31.  33  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  the 

32.  40  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
34.    8  Zedekiah  had  made  a  covenant  with  all 
34.  13  I  made  a  covenant  with  your  fathers  in 
34. 15  ye  had  made  a  covenant  before  me  in  the 

34. 18  words  of  the  covenant  which  they  had  m. 


Eze.  17.  13  made  a  covenant  with  him,  and  hath  ta. 
34.  25  I  will  make  with  them  a  covenantof  peace 
37.  26  I  will  make  a  covenant  of  peace  with  them 

Hos.  2.  18  in  that  day  will  I  make  a  covenant  for 
10.  4  swearing  falsely  in  making  a  covenant 
12.    1  they  do  make  a  covenant  with  the  Assy. 

Zech.n.  10  I  might  break  my  covenant  which  I.  .m. 

MAKE  (cuttings),  to  — 

To  cut  in,  make  an  incision,  tniy  sarat. 

Lev.  21.    5  They  shall  not.,  make  any  cuttings  iu  their 
MAKE  (ensample),  to  — 
To  give,  8(807**  didomi. 

2  Th.  3.    9  to  make  ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you 

Rev.   ,3.    9  I  will  make  them  of  the  synagogue  of  Sa. 
MATTE  for,  things  which  — 
The  things,  ra  ta. 

Kom.14. 19  follow  after  the  things  which  make  for  p. 

MAKE  full  (proof)  of,  to  — 

To  bear  on  fully,  Trknpotpopew  plerophoreo. 

2  Ti.    4.   5  watch  thou,  .make  full  proof  of  thy  min. 

MA'RE  glorious,  to  — 

To  make  honourable  or  glorious,  8o|d£o>  doxazo. 
2  Co.  3.  io  even  that  which  was  made  glorious  had 

MAT*"**1,  (go)  up  and  down,  to  — 

To  move,  shake,  stagger,  wander,  jm  nua. 

2  Sa.  15.  2oshouldi.. make  thee  go  up  and  down  with 

MAKE  (interpretations),  to  — 
To  interpret,  *ity?  peshar. 

Dan.    5.  16  thou  canst  make  interpretations,  and  dis. 

MATH?  (a  king),  to  — 

To  make  a  king,  cause  to  reign,  372  malak,  5. 

1  Sa.   8.  22  Lord  said. .Hearken. .and  make  them  a  ki. 

12.    1  I  have  hearkened . .  and  have  made  a  king 

MAKE  mad,  to  — 

To  turn  round  to  raring,  TreptTpeTra}  els  paviav. 
Acts  26.  24  Paul.,  much  learning  doth  make  thee  m. 

MAKE  merchandise,  to  — 

To  travel,  traffic,  cheat,  tp.iropzvop.ai  emporeuomai. 

2  Pe.   2.    3  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise  of 

MAKE  (noise),  to  — 

To  cause  to  hear  or  be  heard,  U&&  shamea,  5. 
Josh.  6. 10  ye  shall  not.  .make  any  noise  with  your 

MAKE  (ointment),  to  — 

To  mix,  compound,  np"i  raqach. 

1  Ch.  9.  30  the  priests  made  the  ointment  of  the  sp 
MAKE  out,  to  — 
To  set,  place,  lay,  D'fc',  D^b  sum,  sim. 

Job     1.  17  The  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands,  and 

MAKE  peace,  to  — 

To  make  peace,  stprivoiroUtj}  eirenopoieo. 

Col.     1.  20  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of 

MAKE  perfect,  to  — 

To  make  an  end  of,  perfect,  errn-eXe&j  epiteleo. 
Gal.     3.    3  Are  ye  so  foolish?.. are  ye  now  made  per. 

MAKE  (petition),  to  — 

To  request,  pray,  seek,  xyi  bea. 

Dan.   6. 13  hut  maketh  hispetition  three  times  aday 

MATCF,  (prayer  or  supplication),  to  — 

l.To  entreat  grace  or  favour,  ]in  chanan,  7. 

1  Ki.  9.    3  and  thy  supplication  that  thou  hast  made 

2.  To  judge  for  oneself,  hbppalal,  7. 

1  Ki.    8.  29  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  shall  make 

2  Ch.  6.  21  supplications.,  which  they  shall  make  to. 

MAKE  ready,  to  — 

1.  Finished,  perfect,  whole,  D71?  shalem. 

1  Ki.   6.    7  of  stone  made  ready  before  it  was  brou. 

2.  To  make  ready,  eVoiuo^o  etoimazo. 

Matt26.  19  And  the  disciples,  .made  ready  the  pass. 
Marki4.  15  large  upper  room,  .there  make  readyfor 
14.  16  And  his  disciples,  .made  ready  the  pass. 
Luke  1.  17  to  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the 
9.  52  they  went . .  into  a  village . .  to  make  ready 
17.   8;  22I  12;  22.  13;  Acts  23.  23;  Rev.  19.  y 
MAKE  up  beforehand  — 
To  make  fully  ready  beforehand,  trpoKarapri^ta. 

2  Co.  9.    5  and  make  up  beforehand  your  bounty 

MAKE  self  — 

[See  Fair,  known,  many,  poor,  prey,  prince,  prophet,  rich, 
sick,  strong,  unclean,  wise.] 

MAKE  (slaughter^,  to  — 
To  smite,  hdj  nakah,  5. 

1  Sa.  14,  iVthat  first  slaughter  which  Jonathan,  .ma. 

MAKE  to  rise,  to  — 

To  rise  or  spring  up,  raise,  avareWw  anatello. 

Matt.  5.  45  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and 
MAKE  toward,  to  — 
To  hold  doum,  Karexo  katecho. 

Acts  27.  40  unto  the  sea.  .and  made  toward  shore 


MAKE 


633 


MAN 


MAKE  up,  to  — 

l.To  hedge  about,  make  a  hedge,  ~na  gadar. 

Eze.  13.    5  neither  made  up  the  hedge  for  the  house 
22.  30  for  a  man.  .that  should  make  up  the  he. 

2.  To  perfect,  finish,  complete,  bbz  kelal. 

Ezra   5.    3  Who  hath  commanded,  .to  make  up  this 
5.    gWho  commanded  you.  .to  make  up  these 
MAKE  (vow),  to  — 
To  vow,  "i"]j  nadar. 

Jon.    1. 16  a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  and  made  vows 
MAKE  (-wall),  to  — 
To  hedge,  hedge  about,  *na  gadar. 

Hos.    2.   6  I  mil.  .make  a  wall,  that  she  shallnotfiud 
MAKE  (war),  to  — 
To  cast  or  throw  together,  with,  crv/x^aWoi  sumba. 

Lukei4.  31  Or  what  king,  going  to  make  war  against 
MAKER  — 
l.To  grave,  vy}  charash. 

Isa.  45.  16  go  to  confusion  together  (that  are)  makers 

2.  To  form,  is^  yatsar. 

Isa.  45.   9  Woeuntohim  thatstriveth  with  his  mak.! 

45. 1 1  Lord,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  his  Ma. 

Hab.  2. 18  that  the  makerthereofhathgraven  it;  the 

2. 18  that  the  maker  of  his  work  trusteth  ther. 

3.  To  do,  make,  ripy  asah. 

Job     4. 17  shall  a  man  be  more  pure  than  his  maker? 

32.  22  For . .  my  maker  would  soon  take  me  away 
35.  10  But  none  saith,  Where  (is)  God  my  maker 

Psa.  95.    6  let  us  kneel  before  the  LORD  our  maker 
Prov  14.  31  oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Ma. 
17.    5  mocketh  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker 
22.   2  rich  and  poor . .  the  Lord  (is)  the  maker  of 
Isa.    17.   7  At  thatday  shall  a  man  look  to  his  Maker 
22.  11  ye  have  not  looked  unto  the  maker  the. 
51. 13  forgettest  the  Lord  thy  maker,  that  hath 
54.    5  For  thy  Maker  (is)  thine  husband  ;  The 
Jer.  33.    2  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  maker  thereof 
Hos.    8.  14  For  Israel  hath  forgotten  his  Maker,  and 

4.  To  work,  make,  7^3  paal. 

Job  36.   3  and  will  ascribe  righteousness  to  my  M. 
5. To  work,  make,  by3poal,  or  byhpoel. 

Isa.     1.  31  and  the  maker  of  it  as  a  spark,  and  they 
6.  A  public  worker,  8w/J.iovpy6s  demiourgos. 

Heb.n.  10  a  city,  .whose  builder  and  maker  (is)  God 
MAK-HE'-LOTH,  riSn~j?D  assemblies. 
The  twenty-first  station  of  Israel  from  Egypt.    Locality 
uncertain. 

Num33.  25  removed  from  Haradah,  andpitcbedinM. 

33,  26  they  removed  from  M.,  and  encamped  at 
MAK-KE'-DAH,  TTiftO  place  of  shepherds. 

A  city  twelve  miles  S.W.  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  plain 
country  of  Judah,  near  Naamah  ;  now  called  Mttgkar. 
Josh.  10. 10  and  smote  them  to  Azekah,  and  unto  M. 
10.  16  fled,  and  hid  themselves  in  a  cave  at  M. 
10. 17  The  five  kings,  .found  hid  in  a  cave  at  M. 
10.  21  returned  to  the  camp  to  Joshua  at  M .  in 
10.  28  that  day  Joshua  took  M.,  and  smote  it 
10.  28  he  did  to  the  king  of  M.  as  he  did  unto 
10.  29  Then  Joshua  passed  from  M.,  and  all  Isr. 
12. 16  The  king  of  M.,  one ;  the  king  of  Beth-el 
15.  41  Beth-dagon,  and  Naamah,  and  M. ;  sixt. 

MAKING  — 

To  do,  make,  n'yy  asah. 

Eccl.r2.  12  of  making  many  books  (there  is)  no  end 
MAKING,  wares  of  — 
Work,  deed,  doing,  nc'yo  maaseh. 

Eze.  27.  16,  18  the  multitude  of  the  wares  of  thy  m. 
MAK'-TESH,  £#pD  depression. 
A  district  in  or  near  Jerusalem  where  merchants  traded . 

Zeph.  1.  11  Howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  M.,  for  all  the  m. 
MAL- A' -CHI,  '3n^d  messenger  of  J  ah. 
The  last  of  the  O.  "T.  prophets.    B.C.  400-300. 

Mai.    1.    1  The  burden  of  the  word,  .to  Israel  by  M. 
MAL'-CHAM,  D|Sp  thinking. 

1.  Son  of  Shaharaim,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.  8.   9  begat  of  Hodesh  his  wife.  .Mesha,  andM. 

2.  An  idol  of  the  Ammonites.  Supposed  the  same 
with  Moleeh  and  Milcom.    (Amos  1.  15.) 

Zeph   1.    5  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  that  swear  by  M. 

MAL-CHI'-AH,  MAL-CHI'-JAH,  n;?Sp  Jah  is  king. 

1.  A  Gershonite,  ancestor  of  Asaph,  a  leader  of  the 
singing  in  David's  reign.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.   6.  40  Michael,  the  son  of  Baaseiah..SDnof  M. 

2.  An  Aaronite  (B.C.  630)  whose  descendants  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem  after  the  captivity.     B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  12  the  son  of  Pashur,  the  son  of  M.,  and  M. 
Neh.  11. 12  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Pashur.  .son  of  M. 

3.  The  head  of  a  family  of  priests  when  the  charges  of 
the  sanctuary  were  assigned  by  lot.  B.C.  1015.  Per- 
haps the  same  as  No.  2. 

1  Ch.  24.   9  The  fifth  to  M.,  the  sixth  to  Mijamin 

4.  One  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife  during  or  after 
the  captivity.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  25  of  the  sons  of  Parosh  ;  Ramiah.  .M.,  and 

5.  Another  who  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  25  Miamin,  and  Eleazar,  and  M.,  and  Bena. 
80 


6.  Another  who  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  31  Eliezer,  Ishijah,  M.,Shemaiah,  Shimeon 

7.  One  who  assisted  in  reparing  the  wall  after  the  cap- 
tivity.   B.C.  456.    May  be  the  same  as  No  6. 

Neh.    3. 1 1  M. . .  son  of  Harim,  and  Hashub . .  son  of  P. 
S.  One  of  the  Rechab  family,  who  did  the  same. 

Neh.  3. 14  But  the  dung  gate  repaired  M.  the  son  of 

9.  Another  who  did  the  same.     May  be  the  same  as 
No.  7  or  8. 

Neh.  3.  31  After  him  repaired  M.  the  goldsmith's  son 

10.  A  prince  or  Levite  who  stood  beside  Ezra  while  he 
read  the  law.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  8.   4  on  his  left  hand.  .M.,  and  Hashum,  and 

11.  A  priest  who  assisted  in  purifying  the  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.    3  Pashur,  Amariah,  M. 

12.  42  Jehohanan,  and  M.,  and  Elam,  and  Ezer 

12.  Father  of  Pashur  whom  Zedekiah  sent  to  Jeremiah 
to  consult  the  Lord.    B.C.  630. 

Jer.  21.  1  Pashur  the  son  of  M.,  and  Zephaniah  the 
38.    1  Pashur  the  son  of  M.,  heard  the  words 

MAL-CHI'-EL,  hi^ihn  God  is  a  king. 
A  son  of  Beriah,  son  of  Asher.    B.C.  1660. 

Gen.  46.  17  and  the  sons  of  Beriah ;  Heber  and  M. 

Nuni26.  45  Of  the  sons  of  Beriah.  .of  St.,  the  family 

1  Ch.   7.  31  sons  of  Beriah;  Heber,  and  M.,  who  (is) 
MAL-CHI-EL-ITES,  ^K^D- 
The  descendants  of  the  preceding. 

Num26.  45  the  sons  of.  .Malchiel,  the  family  of  theM. 
MAL-CHI'-RAM,  D^S?  my  king  is  exalted. 
Son  or  grandson  of  Jeconiah,  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  580. 

1  Ch.  3. 18  M.  also,  and  Pedaiah,  and  Sheuazar,  Jec. 
MAL-CHI'-SHTTA— See  Melchi-shiux. 

MAI/-CHTJS,  MaAxos  counsellor. 

A  servant  of  the  high  priest  whose  ear  Peter  cut  off, 

but  who  was  healed  by  Jesus. 

JohniS.  10  the  high  priest's,  .servant's  name  was  M. 

WAIVE — 

l.A  male,  I^T  zakur. 

Exod23.  17  Three  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  sh. 

Deut  16. 16  Three  times  in  a  year  shall  all  thy  males 
20.  13  thou  shalt  smite  every  male  thereof  with 
2.  A  man,  individual,  t^N  ish. 

Gen.    7.   2  the  male  and  his  female .  .the  male  and 
S.Male,  np)  zakar. 

Gen.    1.  27  God.  .male  and  female  created  he  them 

5.  2  Male  and  female  created  he  them  ;  and 

6.  19  with  thee  ;  they  shall  be  male  and  female 

7.  3  the  male  and  the  female  ;  to  keep  seed 
7.  9  went  in  two  and  two.  .the  male  and  the 
7.  16  went  in  male  and  female  of  all  flesh,  as 

17.  23  every  male  among  the  men  of  Abraham's 
34. 15  If  ye  will  be  as  we.  .that  every  male  of 
34.  22  if  every  male  among  us  be  circumcised 
34. 2r,  every  male  was  circumcised,  all  that  w. 
34.  25  came  upon  the  city,  .and  slew  all  the  m. 

Exodi2.  5  a  male  of  the  first  year :  ye  shall  take  (it) 
12.  48  let  all  his  males  be  circumcised,  and  then 
13. 12  every  firstling,  .the  males(shall  be)theL. 
13. 15  all  that  openeth  the  matrix,  being  males 

Lev.  1.  3  let  him  offer  a  male  without  blemish  :  he 
1.  to  he  shall  bring  it  a  male  without  blemish 
3.    1  whether  (it  be)  a  male  or  female,  heshall 

3.  6  male  or  female,  he  shall  offer  it  without 

4.  23  heshall  bring. .a  kid.. a  male  without  hie. 
6. 18  All  the  males  among  the  children  of  Aaron 
6. 29  All  the  males  among  the  priests  shall  eat 

7.  6  Every  male  among  the  priests  shall  eat 
12.  7  for  her  that  hath  born  a  male  or  a  female 
22.  19  at  your  own  will  a  male  without  blemish 
27.  3  the  male  from  twenty  years  old  even  unto 
27.  5,  6  then  thy  estimation  shall  be  of  themale 
27.    7  if  (it  be)  a  male,  then  thy  estimation  shall 

Num.  1.  2  Take  ye  the  sum. .every  male  by  their  p. 
1.  20,  22  every  male  from  twenty  years  old  and 
3. 15  every  male  from  a  month  old  and  upward 
3.  22  according  to  the  number  of  all  the  males 
3.  28,  34, 3oall  the  males,  from  a  month  old  and 
3.  40  Number  all  the  first  born  of  the  males  of 
3.  43  all  the  first  born  males  by  the  number  of 

5.  3  Both  male  and  female  shall  ye  put  out 
18. 10  every  male  shall  eat  it:  it  shall  be  holy 
26.  62  all  males  from  a  month  old  and  upward 
31.    7  they  warred . .  and  they  slew  all  the  males 
31.  17  kill  every  male  among  the  little  ones,  and 

Deut.  4.  16  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female 
15.  19  All  the  firstling  males  that  come  of  thy  h. 

Josh.  5.  4  males,  (even)  all  the  men  of  war,  died  in 
17.    2  the  male  children  of  Manasseh  the  son  of 

Judg2i.  11  Ye  shall  utterly  destroy  every  male,  and 
21. 12  had  known  no  man  by  lying  with  any  m. 

1  Ki.  11. 15  after  he  had  smitten  every  male  in  Edom 

11.  16  until  he  had  cut  off  every  male  in  Edom 

2  Ch.31.  16  Besides  their  genealogy  of  males.fromthr. 

31.  19  to  give  portions  to  all  the  males  among 
Ezra    8.    3  were  reckoned  by  genealogy  of  the  males 

8.  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  ii,  12  and  with  him.  .m. 
8.  13  last  sons,  .and  with  them  threescore  m. 
8. 14  the  sons  also,  .and  with  them  seventy  m. 

Mai.    1.  14  which  hath  in  his  flock  a  male,  and  voweth 


4.  A  male,  Ixpcrvv  arsen. 

Matt  19.   4  at  the  beginning  made  them  male  and  fe. 
Markio.  6  But.  .God  made  them  male  and  female 
Luke  2.  23  Every  male  that  openeth  the  womb  shall 
Gal.    3.  28  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  :  for  ye 

MALEFACTOR  — 

l.Evil  doer,  KaKoirotos  kakopoios. 

John  18.  30  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  would  not 

2. Evil  worker,  Kcucovpyos  kakourgos. 

Luke23.  32  there  were  also  two  others,  malefactors 
-3-  33  there  they  crucified  him,  and  the  malefa. 
23.  39  one  of  the  malefactors  which  were  hanged 

MA- LE-LE'-EL,  MaAeAe^A — See  Mahalaleel. 

Luke  3.  37  Jared,  which  was  (the  son)  of  M.,  which 
MALICE,  MALICIOUSNESS— 
Evil,  badness,  Kateia  kakia. 

Rom.  1.  29  Being  filled  with  all.,  maliciousness;  full 

1  Co.   5.   8  neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  w. 
14.  20  in  malice  be  ye  children,  but  in  underst. 

Eph.   4.  31  all.  .be  put  away  from  you,  with  all  mal. 

Col.     3.    8  also  put  off  all  these  ;  anger,  wrath,  mal. 

Titus  3.    3  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  .hating 

1  Pe.  2.    1  laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and 
2.  16  for  a  cloke  of  maliciousness,  but  as  the 
MALICIOUS  — 
Laborious,  evil,  irovnp6s  poneros. 

3  John    10  prating  against  us  with  malicious  words 
MALIGNITY  — 
Evil  disposition,  KaKorjdeia  kakoetheia. 

Rom.  1.  29  full  of  envy.. deceit,  malignity;  whisperers 

MAL-LO'-THI,  'rnVn  Jah  is  speaking,  or  splendid. 
One  of  the  sons  of  Heman,  set  over  the  service  of  song. 
B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.   4  the  sons  of  Heman,  Joshbekashah,  M. 
25.  26  The  nineteenth  to  M.,  (he),  his  sons,  and 

MAL'-LTJCH,  *pVo  counsellor, 

1.  A  Merarite  whose  descendant  Ethan  was  set  over 
the  service  of  song  by  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  6.  44  son  of  Kishi,  the  son  of  AbdLthe  son  of  M. 

2.  A  son  of  Bani  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.     B.C. 
45o\ 

Ezra  10.  29  the  sons  of  Bani ;  Meshullam,  M. ,  and  A . 

3.  One  of  the  family  of  Harim  that  had  done  the  same 

Ezra  10.  32  Benjamin,  M.,  (and)  Shemariah 

4.  A  priest  who,  with  Neheiuiah,  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.   445. 

Neh.  10.    4  Hattush,  Shebaniah,  M. 
12.   2  Amariah,  M.,  Hattush 

5.  A  chief  of  the  people  that  did  the  same. 

Neh.  10.  27  M.,  Harim,  Baanah 
MALLOWS  — 
Salt  plant    rnVo  malluach. 

Job   30.   4  Who  cut  up  mallows  by  the  bushes,  and 
MAMMON  — 
Wealth,  riclws,  fxafxfxwvas  mammonas  {Ch.  yfoti). 

Matt.  6.  24  No  man . .  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mam. 

Luke  16.  9  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mam. 
16.  11  not  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  ma. 
16.  13  No.  .Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 

MAM'-RE,  n*v?o  firmness,  vigour. 

1.  A  place,  two  miles  N.  of  Hebron,  with  oaks ;  now 
Rameh  or  Ramel 

Gen.  13.  iS  Abram.  .came  anddwelt  intheplainof  M. 
18.  1  the  Lord  appeared,  .in  the  plains  of  M. 
23.  17  Machpelah,  which  (was)  before  M.,  the  fl. 
23.  19  cave  of  the  field  of  Machpelah  before  M. 
25.  9  cave  of  Machpelah .  .which  (is)  before  M. 
35.  27  Jacob  came,  .unto  M.,  unto  the  city  of  A. 

49.  30  field  of  Machpelah,  which  (is)  before  M. 

50.  13  cave  of  the  field  of  Machpelah . .  before  M. 

2.  An  Amorite,  confederate  with  Abraham. 

Gen.  14.  13  he  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  M.  the  Amorite 
14.  24  Save  only. .  the  portion  of..  Eschol,  andM. 

MAN,  (man's,  of)  — 

l.A  man,  human  being,  Dtx  adam. 

Gen.    1.  26  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our 

1.  27  So  God  created  man  in  his  (own)  image 

2.  5  and  (there  was)  not  a  man  to  till  the  gro. 
2.  7  God  formed  man  (of)  the  dust  of  the  gro. 
2.  7  breathed,  .and  man  became  a  living  soul 
2.  8  there  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed 
2.  15  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him  into  the 
2.  16  the  Lord  God  commanded  the  man,  saying 
2.  18  not  good  that  the  man  should  be  alone 

2.  22  which  the  Lord  God  had  taken  from  man 
2.  22  woman,  and  brought  her  unto  the  man 

2.  25  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his  wife 

3.  12  man  said,  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest 
3.  22  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to 
3.  24  So  be  drove  out  the  man  ;  and  he  placed 

5.  1  In  the  day  that  God  created  man,  in  the 

6.  1  when  men  began  to  multiply  on  the  faee 
6.  2  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men  that 
6.  3  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  m. 
6.  4  came  in  unto  the  daughters  of  men,  and 
6.  5  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  (was)  gr. 
6.  6  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man 

6.  7  I  will  destroy  man.  .both  man,  and  beast 

7.  21  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  and  every  man 


MAN 


634 


MAN 


Gen.   7.  23  both  man,  and  cattle,  antl  the  creeping 

8.  21  curse  the  ground  any  more  for  man's  sake 
8. 21  for  the  imagination  of  man's  heart(is)  evil 

9.  5  will  I  require  it,  and  at  the  hand  of  man 
9.  5  at  the  hand . .  will  I  require  the  life  of  man 
9.  6  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall 
9.    6  for  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  man 

11.  5  tower,  which  the  children  of  men  builded 
16.  T2  he  will  be  a  wild  man  ;  his  hand  (will  be) 

Exud  4.    1  Who  hath  made  man's  mouth?  or  who  m. 
8.  17  it  became  lice  in  man  and  in  beast ;  all  the 

8.  18  there  were  lice  upon  man  and  upon  beast 

9.  9,  10  breaking  forth  (with)  blains  upon  man 
9.  19  every  man  and  beast  which  shall  be  found 
9.  22  that  there  may  be  hail,  .upon  man,  and 
9.  25  the  hail  smote . .  both  man  and  beast ;  and 

12  12  will  smite  all . .  both  man  and  beast ;  and 
13.  2  whatsoever,  .(both)  of  man  and  of  beast 
13.  13  the  first  born  of  man  among  thy  children 
13.  15  both  the  first  born  of  man,  and  the  first 

30.  32  Upon  man's  flesh  shall  it  not  be  poured 
33.  20  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me,  and  live 

Lev.    1.    2  If  any  man  of  you  bring  an  offering  unto 
5.    3  whatsoeveruncleanness(itbe)that  a  man 

5.  4  that  a  man  shall  pronounce  with  an  oath 

6.  3  in  any  of  all  these  that  a  man  doeth,  sin. 

7.  21  the  uncleanness  of  man,  or  (any)  unclean 
13.    2  When  a  man  shall  have  in  the  skin  of  his 
13.    9  When  the  plague  of  leprosy  is  in  a  man 
16. 17  there  shall  be  no  man  in  the  tabernacle 
18.    5  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them 
22.    5  a  man  of  whom  he  may  take  unclean 

24. 17  he  that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  be 
24.  20  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a  man,  so 

24.  21  he  that  killeth  a  man,  he  shall  be  put  to 
27.  28  no  devoted  thing  that  a  man  shall  devote 
27.  29  devoted,  which  shall  be  devoted  of  men,  s. 

Num.  3.  1 3  I  hallowed . .  both  man  and  beast ;  mine 
5.    6  or  woman  shall  commit  any  sin  that  men 

8.  17  all  the  first  born,  .man  and  beast :  on 

9.  6,  7  defiled  by  the  dead  body  or  a  man 

12.  3  above  all  the  men  which  (were)  upon  the 
16.  29  die  the  common  death  of  all  men,  or  if 
16.  29  be  visited  after  the  visitation  of  all  men 
16.  32  the  men  that  (appertained)  unto  Korah 

18.  15  of  men.,  nevertheless  the  first  born  of  man 

19.  11.  13  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any  man 
19.  14  This  (is)  the  law,  when  a  man  dieth  in  a 

19.  16  whosoever  toucheth.  .a  bone  of  a  man,  or 
23. 19  that  he  should  lie ;  neither  the  son  of  man 

31.  ti  they  took  all  the  spoil . .  of  men  and  of  b. 
31.  26  Take  the  sum  of  the  prey . .  of  man  and  of 
31.  47  Moses  took  one  portion  of  fifty,  .of  man 

Deut.  4.  28  serve  gods,  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood 

4.  32  since  the  day  that  God  created  man  upon 

5.  24  seen  this  day  that  God  doth  talk  with  man 
8.   3  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only 

8.    3  but  by  every  (word),  .doth  man  live 

20.  19  for  the  tree  of  the  field  (is)  man's  (life) 
Josh. 11.  14  every  man  they  smote  with  the  edge  of 

15  (which  Arba  was)  a  great  man  among  the 
7,  11  shalllbe  weak,  and  be  as  another  man 

17  become  weak,  and  be  like  any  (other)  man 
7,  28  had  no  business  with  (any)  man 

29  for  he  (is)  not  a  man, that  he  should  repent 
7  not  as  man  seeth ;  for  man  looketh  on 

32  Let  no  man's  heart  fail  because  of  him 
9  Wherefore  hearest  thou  men's  words,  say. 

29  Yet  a  man  is  risen  to  pursue  thee,  and 

19  but  if  (they  be)  the  children  of  men,  cur. 

14  with  the  stripes  of  the  children  of  men 

19  (is)  this  the  manner  of  man,  O  Lord  God? 
3  He  that  ruleth  over  men  (must  be)  just 

14  and  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man 
31  For  he  was  wiser  than  all  men ;  than  E. 

38  supplication  soever  be  (made)  by  any  man 

39  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways 
46  for(there  is)nomanthatsinnethnot,  and 
2  and  men's  bones  shall  be  burnt  upon  thee 

10  neither  voice  of  man,  but  horses  tied,  and 

18  nogods,buttheworkofmen'shands,wood 
14  filled  their  places  with  the  bones  of  men 

20  and  burned  men's  bones  upon  them,  and 

21  two  thousand,  and  of  men  an  hundred  th. 

17  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high 
13  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man 

1  for  the  palace  (is)  not  for  man,  but  for  the 

18  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on 

29  what  prayer,  .shall  be  made  of  any  man 

30  render  unto  every  man  according  unto  all 
36  for  (there  is)  no  man  which  sinneth  not 

6  ye  judge  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord 

19  (which  were)  the  work  of  the  hands  of  m. 
10  there  was  come  a  man  to  seek  the  welfare 
12  neither  told  I  (any)man  what  my  God  had 
29  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them 

7  Yet  man  is  born  unto  trouble,  as  the  spa. 

20  do  unto  thee,  O  thou  preserver  of  men? 
12  though  man  be  born  (like)  a  wild  ass's  colt 

i  Man  (that  is)  born  of  a  woman  (is)  of  few 
10  man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  (is) 
7  (Art)  thou  the  first  man  (that)  was  born? 

21  Oh  that  one  might  plead,  .as  a  man.  .for 

20.  4  Knowest  thou  (not)  this  of  old,  since  man 
20. 29  This  (is)  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  from 

21.  4  As  for  me,  (is)  my  complaint  to  man  ?  and 
21.  33  every  man  shall  draw  after  him,  as  (these 

25.  6  How  much  less,  .the  son  of  man,  (which 

27.  13  This  (is)  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  with 

28.  28  unto  man  he  said.  Behold,  the  fear  of  the 
32.  21  neither,  .give  Hattering  titles  unto  man 
33. 17  That  he  may  withdraw  man  (from  his)  p. 


14. 
Judgi6. 

16. 

tR. 

iSa 

IS- 

16. 

17- 

24. 

=S- 

*6. 

zSa. 

7- 

7- 

23- 

24. 

iki 

4- 

8. 

R. 

8. 

sKi 

'J- 

7- 

19. 

'!■ 

=  1- 

it'll 

S- 

17- 

21. 

29. 

2Uh 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

19. 

V- 

.Neh 

2. 

2. 

Job 

7- 

11. 

14. 

14. 

IS- 

16. 

Job  33.  23  a  messenger,  .to  show  unto  man  his  upr. 
34.  11  For  the  work  of  a  man  shall  he  render 

34. 15  All  flesh  shall  perish  together,  and  man 

34.  29  whether  (it  be  done),  .against  a  man  only 

35.  8  righteousness  (may  profit)  the  son  of  man 

36.  25  Every  man  may.  .behold  (it)  afar  off 

36.  28  clouds  do  drop  (and)  distil  upon  man  ab. 

37.  7  He  sealeth  up  the  hand  of  every  man  ;  th. 
38. 26  the  wilderness,  wherein  (there  is)  no  man 

Psa.    8.    4  and  the  sou  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  h.? 

11.  4  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the  children  of  m. 

12.  1  the  faithful  fail  from,  .the  children  of  m. 
12.    8  The  wicked  walk . .  when  the  vilest  men 

14.  2  looked  down,  .upon  the  children  of  men 
17.    4  Concerning  the  worksof  men,  by  the  word 

21.  10  their  seed  from  among  the  children  of  m. 

22.  6  reproach  of  men,  and  despised  of  the  pe. 
31. 19  that  trust  in  thee  before  the  sons  of  men ! 
32.   2  Blessed  (is)  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord 

33. 13  The  Lord,  .beholdeth  all  the  sons  of  men 
36.  6  O  Lord,  thou  preservest  man  and  beast 
36.  7  the  children  of  men  put  their  trust  under 
39.  5  man  at  his  best  state  (is) altogether  vanity 
39.  n  like  a  moth :  surely  every  man  (is)  vanity 
45.  2  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  children  of  men 
49. 12  man  (being)  in  honour  abideth  not :  he  is 
49.  20  Man  (that  is)  in  honour,  and  understand. 
53.   2  looked  down,  .upon  the  children  of  men 

56.  11  I  will  not  be  afraid  what  man  can  do  unto 

57.  4  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  (are)  spears  and 

58.  1  do  ye  judge  uprightly,  O  ye  sons  of  men  ? 

58. 11  So  that  a  man  shall  say,  Verily  (there  is) 
60.  11  Give  us  help,  .for  vain  (is)  the  help  of  m. 
64.  9  all  men  shall  fear,  and  shall  declare  the 
66.  5  (lie  is)  terrible,  .toward,  .children of  men 
68.  18  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men  ;  yea 
73.  5  neither  are  they  plagued  like  (other)  men 
76.  10  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee 
78.  60 forsook.  .tent( which)  he  placed  amongm. 
80. 17  upon  the  son  of  man  (whom)  thou  madest 
82.  7  ye  shall  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of 
84.   5  Blessed  (is)  the  man  whose  strength  (is) 

84. 12  blessed  (is)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  thee 

89.  47  wherefore  hast  thou  made  all  men  in  v.? 

90.  3  Thou,  .sayest,  Return,  ye  children  of  men 
94.  10  he  that  teacheth  man  knowledge,  (shall 
94.  n  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  man,  that 

104.  14  herb  for  the  service  of  man  :  that  he  may 

104.  23  Man  goethforth  unto  his  work  and  to  his 

105.  14  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong;  yea 
107.  8,15,  21, 31  wonderful,  .to.  .children  of  men  ! 
to8.  12  Give  us  help,  .for vain  (is)thehelp  ofman 
115.    4  silver  and  gold,  the  work  of  men's  hands 

115.  16  earth  hath  he  given  to  the  children  of  men 

116.  11  I  said  in  my  haste,  All  men  (are)  liars 
118.    6  1  will  not  fear  :  what  can  man  do  unto 

118.  8  to  trust,  .than  to  put  confidence  in  man 

119.  134  Deliver  me  from  the  oppression  of  man 
124.    2  on  our  side,  when  men  rose  up  against  us 
135.    8  Who  smote  the  first  born .  .both  of  man 
135.  15  silver  and  gold,  the  work  of  men's  hands 
140.    1  Deliver  me,  0  Lord,  from  the  evil  man 
144.    3  what  (is)  man,  that  thou  takest  knowle. 

144.  4  Man  is  like  to  vanity  :  his  days  (are)  as  a 

145.  12  To  make  known  to  the  sons  of  men  his 

146.  3  Put  not  your  trust,  .hi  the  son  of  man,  in 
Prov.  3.    4  find  favour,  .in  the  sight  of  God  and  man 

3.  13  Happy  (is)  the  man.  .and  the  man  (that) 
3.  30  Strivenot  with  aman  without  cause,  if  he 
8.  4  I  call ;  and  my  voice . .  to  the  sons  of  man 
8.  31  and  my  delights  (were)with.  .sons  of  men 
8.  34  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  heareth  me,  w. 

11.  7  When  a  wicked  man  dieth,  (his)  expect. 

12.  3  man  shall  not  be  established  by  wicked. 

12. 14  the  recompence  of  a  roan's  hands  shall  be 
12.  23  A  prudent  man  concealeth  knowledge 
12.  27  the  substance  of  a  diligent  man  (is)  pre. 

15.  11  mxichmore.  .heartsof  the  children  of  men? 

15.  20  but  a  foolish  man  despiseth  his  mother 

16.  1  Thepreparationsof  the  heart  in  man,  and 

16.  9  A  man's  heart  deviscth  his  way  :  but  the 

17.  18  A  man  void  of  understanding  striketh 

18.  16  A  man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him,  and 

19.  3  foolishness  of  man  perverteth  his  way 
19.  n  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his  anger 

19.  22  desire  of  a  man  (is)  his  kindness  :  and  a 

20.  6  Most  men  will  proclaim  every  one  his  own 
20. 24  how  can  a  man  then  understand  his  own 

20.  25  (It  is)  a  snare  to  the  man  (who)  devoureth 
20  27  The  spirit  of  man  (is)  the  candle  of  the  L. 

21. 16  The  man  that  wandereth  out  of  the  way 

21.  20  treasure,  .but  a  foolish  man  spendeth  it 

23.  28  andincreaseththetransgressorsamongm. 

24.  9  and  the  scorner(is)  an  abomination  torn. 
24.  12  shall  (not)  he  render  to  (every)  man  acco. 
24.  30  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  understand. 
27.  19  As  in  water,  .so  the  heart  of  man  to  man 

27.  20  so  the  eyes  of  man  are  never  satisfied 

28.  2  by  a  man  of  understanding  (and)  knowl. 
28.  12  but  when  the  wicked  rise,  a  man  is  hidden 
28.  14  Happy(is).. man  that  fearethalway  :  but 
28.  17  A  man  that  doeth  violence  to  the  blood 
28.  23  He  that  rebuketh  a  man,  afterwards  shall 

28.  28  When  the  wicked  rise,  men  hide  themse. 
29  23  A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low  :  but 

29.  25  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare  :  but  whoso 

30.  2  and  have  not  the  understanding  of  a  man 
30.  14  to  devour,  the  needy  from  (among)  men 

Eccl.  1.    3  What  profit  hath  a  man  of  all  his  labour 

1.  13  travail  hathGod  given  to  thesonsof  man 

2.  3  what  (was)  that  good  for  the  sons  of  men 
-.    8  the  delights  of  the  sons  of  men,  (as)  mils. 


Isa 


Jer. 


Lam 
Eze. 


12  what  (can)the  man  (do)  that  comcth  after 
18  because  I  should  leave  it  unto  the  man 
2t  there  is  a  man.  .yet  to  a  man  that  hath 
22  For  what  hath  man  of  all  his  labour,  and 

24  nothing  better  for  a  man,  (than)  that  he 

26  giveth  to  a  man  that  (is)  good  in  his  sight 

10  God  hath  given  to  the  sons  of  men  to  be 

11  so  that  no  man  can  find  out  the  work  that 

13  also  that  every  man  should  eat  and  drink 

18  concerning  the  estate  of  the  sous  of  men 

19  For  that  which  befalleth  the  sons  of  men 
19  man  hath  no  pre-emineuce  above  a  beast 

21  Who  knoweth thespiritof  manthatgoeth 

22  that  a  man  should  rejoice  in  his  own  works 

19  Every  man  also  to  whom  God  hath  given 

1  There  is  an  evil,  .it  (is)  common  amongm. 

7  All  the  labour  of  man  (is)  for  his  mouth 

10  it  is  known  that  it  (is)  man  :  neither  may 

1 1  there  be  many  things . .  (is)  man  the  better? 

12  who  knoweth  what  (is)  good  for  man  in 
12  who  can  tell  a  man  what  shall  be  after  him 

2  for  that  (is)  the  end  of  all  men  ;  and  the 

14  to  the  end  that  man  should  find  nothing 

20  For  (there  is)  not  a  just  man  upon  earth 

28  one  man  among  a  thousand  have  I  found 

29  God  hath  made  man  upright ;  but  they 

1  a  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine 

6  the  misery  of  man  (is)  great  upon  him 

8  (There  is)  no  man  that  hath  power  over 

11  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set 

15  a  man  hath  no  better  thing  under  the  sun 
17  a  man  cannot  find  out  the  work  that  is 
17  though  a  man  labour  to  seek  (it)  out,  yet 

1  no  man  knoweth  either  love  orhatred  (by) 

3  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  full  of  evil 

12  For  man  also  knoweth  not  his  time :  as 

12  so  (are)  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil 
15  yet  no  man  remembered  that  same  poor 

14  man  cannot  tell  wh^t  shall  be  ;  and  what 
8  if  a  man  live  many  years,  (and)  rejoice  in 

5  man  goeth  to  his  long  home  ;  and  the  m. 

13  FearGod.  ,this(is)thewhole(duty)ofman 
11  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  humbled 
17  the  loftiness  of  man  shall  be  bowed  down 

20  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and 
22  Cease  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  (is)  in 

11  the  houses  without  man,  and  the  land  be 

12  the  Lord  have  removed  men  far  away,  and 

12  even  a  man  than  the  golden  wedge  of  O. 

7  that  day  shall  a  man  look  to  his  Maker 

6  bare  the  quiver  with  chariots  of  men  (and) 
19  the  poor  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the 

21  That  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a  word 

3  the  Egyptians(are)  men,  and  not  God ;  and 

19  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone 
11  I  shall  behold  man  no  more  with  the 

4  therefore  will  I  give  men  for  thee,  and 

11  they  (are)  of  men  :  let  them  all  be  gathe. 

13  according  to  the  beauty  of  a  man  ;  that 

15  Then  shall  it  be  for  man  to  burn :  for  he 

12  made  the  earth,  and  created  man  upon  it 
3  and  I  will  not  meet  (thee  as)  a  man 

12  son  of  man(which)shallbemade(as)grass 

14  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men 

2  and  the  son  of  man  (that)  layeth  hold  on 

5  Is  it ..  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  soul  ? 

6  through  a  land .  .where  no  man  dwelt  ? 

25  (there  was)  no  man,  and  all  the  birds  of  the 

20  upon  man,  and  upon  beast,  and  upon  the 

22  the  carcases  of  men  shall  fall  as  dung 

14  Every  man  is  brutish  in  (his)  knowledge 

23  I  know  that  the  way  of  man  (is)  not  in  h. 
20  Shall  a  man  make  gods  unto  himself,  and 

5  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh 

6  inhabitants  of  this  city,  .man  and  beast 
5  the  man  and  beast  that  (are)  upon  the  g. 

27  sow.. house  of  Judah  with  the  seed  of  man 

30  every  man  that  eateth  the  sour  grape,  his 

19  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons  of  men 

20  set  signs.. in  Israel,  and  among(other)  men 
43  (It  is)  desolate  without  man  or  beast ;  it 

5  to  fill  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of  men 
10,  12  desolate  without  man  and  without  b. 
10  withoutman,  andwithout  inhabitant,  and 
29  cause  to  cease  from  thence  man  and  beast 

2  the  men  shall  cry,  and  all  the  inhabitants 

15  lo,  I  will  make  thee,  .despised  among  men 
iS  neither  shall  a  son  of  man  dwell  in  it 

33  abide  there,  nor  (any)  son  of  man  dwell  in 

3  they  shall  depart,  both  man  and  beast 
40  neither  shall  any  son  of  man  dwell  therein 

14  fill  thee  with  men,  as  with  caterpillars 
17  Every  man  is  brutish  by  (his)  knowledge 
43  neither  doth  (any)son  of  man  pass  thereby 
62  shall  remain  in  it,  neither  man  nor  beast 
36  To  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause,  the  Lord 
39  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a 

5  appearance  :'they  had  the  likeness  of  a  man 

8  (they  had)  the  hands  of  a  man  under  their 
10  they  four  had  the  face  of  a  man,  and  the 

26  as  the  appearance  of  a  man  above  upon 
1 ,  3  And  he  said  unto  me,  Son  of  man 

6  son  ofman,  be  not  afraid  of  them,  neither 
8  son  of  man,  hear  what  I  say  unto  thee;  Be 
1,  3,  4,  10  he  said  unto  me,  Son  of  man 

17  Son  of  man,  I  havemade  thee  a  watchman 

25  son  of  man,  behold,  they  shall  put  bands 

1  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  tile,  and  lay  it 

12  bake  it  with  dung  that  cometh  out  ofman 

15  I  have  given  thee  cow's  dung  for  man's  d. 

16  Son  of  man,  behold,  I  will  break  thest.iff" 
1  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  knife,  take 


MAN 


635 


MAN 


Eze.    6.   2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  mo. 

7.  2  son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto 

8.  5,  S  Then  said  he  unto  me,  Son  of  man 
8.    6  Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  they  do? 

8.  12  Son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  what  the  an. 
8.  15,  17  said..  Hast  thou  seen(this),Oson  of  man 
10.    8  the  form  of  a  man's  hand  under  their  w. 

10. 14  thesecondface(was)thefaceof  aman.aud 

10.  21  the  likeness  of  the  hands  of  a  man  (was) 

11.  2  said  he  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  these  (are) 

11.  4  prophesy  against  them.  .0  son  of  man 

11. 15  Son  of  man,  thy  brethren,  (even)  thy  bre. 

12.  2  Son  of  man,  thou  dwellestin  the  midst  of 
12.  3  son  of  man,  prepare  thee  stuff  for  remov. 
12.  g  Son  of  man,  hath  not  the  house  of  Israel 
12.  18  Son  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking 
i2.  22  Son  of  mau,what(is)thatproverb(that)ye 
12.  27  Son  of  man,  behold,  (they  of)  the  house 
i^s.    2  Son  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  proph. 

17  thou  son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the 
3  Son  of  man,  these  men  have  set  up  their 

13  Son  of  man,  when  the  land  sinneth  agai. 
13,  17,  19,  21  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it 

2  Son  of  man,  What  is  the  vine  tree  more 
2  Son  of  niau,  cause  Jerusalem  to  know  her 

2  Son  of  man,  put  forth  a  riddle,  and  speak 
3, 6  learned  to  catch  the  prey;  it  devoured  m. 

3  Son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  elders  of  Isr. 

4  Wilt  thou  judge  them,  sou  of  man  ?  wilt 
11,  13,  21  which  (if)  a  man  do,  he  shall  even 

27  son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel 
46  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south 

2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem 

6  Sigh  therefore,  thou  son  of  man,  with  the 
9  Son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  Thus  saith 

12  howl,  sonof  man;  for  it  shall  be  upon  my 

14  son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  smite  (thine) 

19  son  of  man,  appoint  thee  two  ways,  that 

28  sonof  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  Thus  saith 
2  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge,  wilt  thou 

18  Son  of  man,  the  house  of  Israel  is  to  me 

24  Sonof  man,  say  unto  her,  Thou  (art)  the 
2  Son  of  man,  there  were  two  women,  the 

36  Sou  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  Aholah  and 
2  Son  of  man,  "Write  thee  the  name  of  the 

16  Sonof  man,  behold,  I  take  away  from  thee 

25  son  of  man,  (shall  it)  uot(be),  in  the  day 
2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the 

13  will  cut  off  man  and  beast  from  it;  and  I 
2  Son  of  man,  because  that  Tyrus  hath  said 

8  and  cut  off  man  and  beast  out  of  thee 

1 1  No  foot  of  man  shall  pass  through  it 

18  Son  of  man,  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Ba. 
2  Son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say,  Thus  saith 

21  Son  of  man,  I  have  broken  the  arm  of 
2  Son  of  man,  speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of 

14  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  men,  with 
2  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for 

7  son  of  man,  I  have  set  thee  a  watehman 
10  son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  house  of  Isr. 
24  Son  of  man,  they  that  inhabit  those  wa. 

30  son  of  man,  the  children  of  thy  people 
2  Son  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  sheph. 

31  the  flock  of  my  pasture,  (are)  men,  (and) 

2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  mount 

1  son  of  man,  prophesy  unto  the  mountains 

10  will  multiply  men  upon  you,  all  the  house 
11I  will  multiply  upou  you  man  and  beast 

12  I  will  cause  men  to  walk  upon  you,  (even) 

13  Thou  (land)  devourest  up  men,  and  hast 

14  thou  shalt  devour  men  no  more,  neither 

17  Son  of  man,  when  the  house  of  Israel  d. 

37  will  increase  them  with  men  like  a  flock 

38  waste  cities  be  Ailed  with  flocks  of  men 

3  he  said . .  Son  of  man,  can  these  bones  live  ? 

9  prophesy,  sonof  man,  and  say  to  the  wind 

11  Son  of  man,  these  bones  are  the  whole  h. 

16  sou  of  man,  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write 

2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Gog,  the 

14  son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say  unto  Gog 

20  men  that  (are)  upon  the  face  of  the  earth 

1  son  of  man,  prophesy  against  Gog,  and  say 

15  when  (any)  seeth  a  man's  bone,  then  shall 

17  son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Sp. 

4  Son  of  man,  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and 

19  the  face  of  a  man  (was)  toward  the  palm 
7  Son  of  man,  the  place  of  my  throne,  and 

10  son  of  man,  show  the  house  to  the  house 

18  Sonofman,thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  These 

5  Son  of  man,  mark  well,  and  behold  with 

6  he  said . .  Son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  (this ) 

16  I  heard  a  man's  voice  between  (the  banks 

17  Understand,  0  son  of  man  ;  foratthetime 
16  (one)  like  the  similitudeofthesonsofmen 

18  (one)  like  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and 

7  they,  like  men.  .transgressed  the  covenant 

12  (there shall)not(be)amau (left):  yea, woe 
4  drew  them  with  cords  of  ajnan,  with  bands 

2  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the  calves 

12  joy  is  withered  away  from  the  sons  of  men 

13  declareth  unto  man  what  (is)  his  thought 

7  Let  neither  man  nor  beast,  herd  nor  flock 

8  But  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with 
12  noise  by  reason  of  (the  multitude  of)  men 

5.    5  seven  shepherds,  and  eight  principal  men 

5.  7  tarrieth..nor  waitetli  for  the  sons  of  men 

6.  8  He  hath  showed  thee.O  man, what  (is)good 

7.  2  (there  is)  none  upright  among  men :  they 
Hab.    1.  14  makest  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  as 

2.   8,  17  because  of  men's  blood,  and  (for)  the 

Zeph.  1.    3  will  consume  man  and  beast;  I  will  con. 

1,   3  I  will  cut  off  man  from  off  the  land,  saith 


21. 
22. 
22. 


23- 
24. 
24. 
24. 

25- 

25- 
26. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
30- 
31- 
31- 
32- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
36- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36- 
36- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
41. 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44- 
47- 

Dan.  8. 
8. 
10. 
10. 
Hos.  6. 
,  9. 
11. 

13- 
Joel    1. 
Amos  4. 
3- 
3- 


Jon. 

Mic. 


Zeph.  1.  17  I  will  bring  distress  upon  men,  that  they 
Hag.  1.  11  upon  men,  and  upon  cattle,  and  upon  all 
Zech.  2.    4  speak  to  this  young  man,  saying,  Jerusa. 

8.  10  there  was  no  hire  for  man,  nor  any  hire 
8. 10  set  all  men  every  one  against  his  neighb. 

9.  1  the  eyes  of  man,  as  of  all  the  tribes  of 

11.  6  1  will  deliver  the  men  every  one  into 

12.  1  and  formeththe  spirit  of  man  within  him 

13.  5  man  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  my 
Mai.    3.   8  Will  a  man  rob  God  ?  Yet  ye  have  robbed 

1.A  man,  husband.,  individual,  ff'N  ish. 

Gen.    2.  23  Woman,  because  she  was  taken  out  of  m. 
2.  24  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father 
4.    1  said,  I  have  gotten  a  man  from  the  Lord 
4.  23  I  have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding,  and 
6.   9  Noah  was  a  just  man  (and)  perfect  in  his 

13. 16  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of  the  earth 
19.  8  two  daughters  which  have  not  known  man 
19.    9  they  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,  (even)  L. 

19.  31  (there  is)  not  a  man  in  the  earth  to  come 

20.  7  restore  the  man  (his)  wife;  for  he  (is)  a  p. 
24.  21  the  man  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace 
24.  22  the  man  took  a  golden  ear  ring  of  half  a 
24.  26  man  bowed  down  his  head,  and  worship. 
24. 29  Laban  ran  out  unto  the  man,  unto  the  w. 
24.  30  saying,  Thus  spake  the  man  unto  me 

24.  30  he  came  unto  the  man;  and,  behold,  he 
24.  32  man  came  into  the  house:  and  he  ungir. 
24.  58  said  unto  her,  Wilt  thou  go  with  this  m.? 
24.  61  rode  upon,  .camels,  and  followed  the  man 

24.  65  What  man  (is)  this  that  walketh  in  the  fi. 

25.  27  was  a  cunning  hunter,  a  man  of  the  field 

26.  11  He  that  toucheth  this  man  or  his  wife 

26. 13  the  man  waxed  great,  and  went  forward 

27. 11  (is)  a  hairy  man,  and  I  (am)  a  smooth  man 
29. 19  that  I  should  give  her  to  another  man 
30. 43  the  man  increased  exceedingly,  and  had 

31.  50  If  thou  shalt  afflict,  .no  man  (is)  with  us 

32.  6  he  cometh . .  and  four  hundred  men  with 

32.  24  there  wrestled  a  man  with  him  until  the 

33.  1  Esau  came, and  with  him  four  hundred  men 
37. 15  a  certain  man  found  him,  and,  behold,  he 

37. 15  man  asked  him,  saying,  Whatseekest thou? 

37.  17  the  man  said,  They  are  departed  hence 

38.  25  the  man  whose  these  (are  am)  I  with  child 

39.  2  he  was  a  prosperous  man  ;  and  he  was  in 
41.  33  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  discreet  and 
41.  38  a  man  in  whom  the  spirit  of  God  (is) 

41.  44  without  thee  shall  no  man  lift  up  his 

42.  11  We  (are)  all  one  man's  sons:  we  (are)  true 
42.  13  the  sons  of  one  man  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
42.  30  The  man,  (who  is)  the  lord  of  the  land,  sp. 
42. 33  the  man,  the  lord  of  the  country,  said  unto 

42.  35  every  man's  bundle  of  money  (was)  in  his 

43.  3  The  man  did  solemnly  protest  unto  us,  s. 
43.  5  the  man  said  unto  us,  Ye  shall  not  see  my 
43.  6  to  tell  the  man  whetheryehad..a  brother 
43.  7  The  man  asked  us  straitly  of  our  state 
43.  11  carry  down  the  man  a  present,  a  little  b. 
43.  13  Take,  .your  brother.,  go  again  unto  the  m. 

43. 14  Almighty  give  you  mercy  before  the  man 

43. 17  the  man  did  as  Joseph  bade ;  and  the  man 

43.  21  (every)  man's  money  (was)  in  the  mouth  of 
43. 24  the  man.. gave  (them)  water,  and  they  wa. 

44.  1  put  every  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mouth 
44.  11  took  down  every  man  his  sack  to  the  gro. 
44.  11  Then  they,  .opened  every  man  his  sack 
44. 13  laded  every  man  his  ass,  and  returned  to 
44.  15  that  such  a  man  as  I  can  certainly  divine 
44. 17  the  man  in  whose  hand  the  cup  is  found 

44.  26  we  may  not  see  the  man's  face,  except  our 

45.  1  cried,  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me 
45.  1  there  stood  no  man  with  him  while  Joseph 
49    6  for  in  their  anger  they  slew  a  man,  and  in 

Exod.2.    1  there  went  a  man  of  the  house  of  Levi,  and 
2.  20  why  (is)  it  (that)  ye  have  left  the  man? 
2.21  Moses  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man 
11.   2  let  every  man  borrow  ofhisneighbour,and 
11.   3  the  man  Moses  (was)  very  great  in  the  land 

11.  7  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue,  against  man 

12.  44  But  every  man's  servant  that  is  bought 
15.   3  The  Lord  (is)  aman  of  war  :  theLoRD(is) 
16. 19  Let  no  man  leave  of  it  till  the  morning 
16. 29  abide  ye  every  man  in  his  place;  let  nom. 

19. 13  whether  (it  be)  beast  or  man,  it  shall  not 

21.  7  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  maid 

21. 12  He  that  smiteth  aman  so  that  he  die,  shall 

21. 14  if  a  man  come  presumptuously  upon  his 

21. 16  he  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  selleth  him 
21.  20  if  a  man  smite  his  servant,  or  his  maid 
21.  26  if  a  man  smite  the  eye  of  his  servant,  or 
21.  28  If  an  ox  gore  a  man  or  a  woman,  that  they 
21. 29  but  that  he  hath  killed  a  man  or  a  woman 
21.33  if  a  man  shall  open  a  pit,  or  if  a  man 

21.  35  if  one  man's  ox  hurt  another's,  that  he  die 

22.  1  If  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and 
22.   5  If  a  man  shall  cause  a  field  or  vineyard 
22.   7  If  a  man  shall  deliver  unto  his  neighbour 
22.   7  and  it  be  stolen  out  of  the  mau's  house 
22.  10  If  a  man  deliver  unto  his  neighbour  an 
22.  14  if  a  man  borrow  (ought)  of  his  neighbour 
22.  16  And  if  a  man  entice  a  maid  that  is  not 
32.    1,  23  the  man  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the 

32.  28  and  there  fell,  .about  three  thousand  men 

33.  4  and  no  man  did  put  on  him  his  ornaments 

33.  1 1  spake . .  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his  friend 

34.  3  no  man  shall  come  up  with  thee,  neither 

35.  2z  every  man  thatoffered(offered)anoffering 
35.  23  every  man  with  whom  was  found  blue,  and 

35.  29  every  man  and  woman,  whose  heart  made 

36.  j,  2  eyery  wise  hearted  man,  in  whom  the 


Exod36.    6  Let  neither  man  nor  woman  make  any  m. 

Lev.  13.  29  If  a  man  or  woman  have  a  plague  upon 
13.  38  If  a  man  also  or  a  woman  have  in  the  skin 
13.  40  the  man  whose  hair  is  fallen  off  his  head 

13.  44  He  is  a  leprous  man,  he  (is)  unclean  :  the 

14.  11  present  the  man  that  is  to  be  made  clean 

15.  18  The  woman  also  with  whom  man  shall  he 

16.  21  send  (him)  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man 

17.  3,  8,  10,  13  What  man  soever  (there  be)  of 
17.   4  that man;hehathshedblood;andthatm. 
17.   9  that  man  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his 
20.    3,  5  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and 
20.   4  do  any  ways  hide  their  eyes  from  the  man 
20.  10  man  thatcommitteth  with. .(another)nian*s 
20.  11  the  man  that  lieth  with  his  father's  wife 
20.  is  if  aman  lie  with  his  daughter  in  law,  both 
20.  13  If  aman  also  liewithmankind,  as  he  lieth 
20. 14  if  a  man  take  a  wife  and  her  mother,  it  (is) 
20.  15  if  a  man  lie  with  a  beast,  he  shall  surely 
20.  17  a  man  shall  take  his  sister,  his  father's 
20.  18  if  a  man  shall  lie  with  a  woman  having 
20. 20  if  a  man  shall  lie  with  his  uncle's  wife 
20.  21  if  a  man  shall  take  his  brother's  wife,  it 

20.  27  A  man  also  or  woman  that  hath  a  familiar 
21. 18  whatsoever  man  (he  be)  that  hath  a  ble. 

21.  18  a  blind  man,  or  a  lame,  or  he  that  hath  a 
21.  19  Or  a  man  that  is  broken  footed,  or  broken 

21.  21  No  man  that  hath  a  blemish  of  the  seed 

22.  4  What  man  soever  of  the  seed  of  Aaron  (is) 
22.    4  or  a  man  whose  seed  goeth  from  him 
22.  14  a  man  eat  (of)  the  holy  thing  unwittingly 

10  son  of  the  Israelitish  (woman)  and  a  man 

17  he  that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  he 

19  if  a  man  causea  blemish  in  his  neighbour 

26  if  the  man  have  none  to  redeem  it,  and 

27  restore  the  overplus  unto  the  man  to  whom 
29  if  a  man  sell  a  dwellinghouseina  walled 

2  When  a  man  shall  make  a  singular  vow 

14  when  a  man  shall  sanctify  his  house  (to 
16  if  a  man  shall  sanctify  unto  the  Lord 

20  if  lie  have  sold  the  field  to  another  man 
26  firstling  of  the  beasts,  .no  man  shall  san. 

28  no  devoted  thing  that  aman  shall  devote 
31  if  a  man  will  at  all  redeem  (ought)  of  his 

Num.  i.    4  with  you  there  shall  bea  man  of  everytr. 
1.  44  princes  of  Israel,  (being)  twelve  men :  each 

6  When  a  man  or  woman  shall  commit  any 
S  if  the  man  have  no  kinsman  to  recompense 

13  a  man  lie  with  her  carnally,  and  it  be  hid 

15  Then  shall  the  man  bring  his  wife  unto 

19  If  uo  man  have  lain  with  thee,  and  if  thou 

20  some  man  have  lain  with  thee  besides 

31  Then  shall  the  man  be  guiltless  from  ini. 

2  When  eitherman  orwoman  shallseparate 
13  man  that  (is)  clean .  .that  man  shall  bear 

16  Gather  uutome  seveutymenof  the  elders 
24  gathered  the  seventy  men  of  the  elders 

3  Now  the  man  Moses  (was)  very  meek 
2  of  every  tribe. .shall  ye  send  a  man,  every 

15  thou  shalt  kill  (all)this  people  as  one  man 

32  they  found  a  man  that  gathered  sticks 
.  35  The  man  shall  be  surely  put  to  death  :  all 

7  it  shall  be  (that)the  man  whom  the  Lord 
22  shall  one  man  sin,  and  wilt  thou  be  wroth 
35  consumed  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 

5  the  man's  rod,  whom  I  shall  choose,  shall 
9  man  (that  is)  clean  shall  gather  up  the 
20  man  that  shall  be  unclean,  and  shall  not 
19  God  (is)  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie 

8  went  after  the  man.  .the  man  of  Israel 
10  fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 
64  among  these  there  was  not  a  man  of  them 
6s  there  wras  not  left  a  man  of  them,  save 

8  If  a  man  die,  and  have  no  son,  then  ye 

16  Let  the  Lord,  .set  aman  over  the  congre. 

18  Take  thee  Joshua,  .a  man  in  whom  (is) 
2  If  a  man  vow  a  vow.  .or  swear  an  oath  to 

16  statutes,  .between  a  man  and  his  wife 

17  kill  every  woman  that  hath  known  man 
49  and  there  lacketh  not  one  man  of  us 

Dent."  1. 16  judge  righteously  between  (every)  man 
1.  17  ye  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the  face  of  man 
1. 31  bare  thee,  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in 
3. 1 1  the  breadth  of  it,  after  the  cubit  of  a  man 
4.   3  for  all  the  men  that  followed  Baal-peor 

7.  24  there  shall  no  man  be  able  to  stand  before 

8.  5  as  a  man  chasteueth  his  son, (so)  the  Lord 
11.  25  There  shall  no  man  be  able  to  stand  bef. 
17.  2  man  or  woman,  that  hath  wrought  wick. 
17.  5  bring  forth  that  man.  .(even)  that  man  or 
17.  12  man  that  will  do.  even  that  man  shall  die 
19.  11  if  any  man  hate  his  neighbour,  and  lie  in 
19.  15  One  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  am. 

19.  16  a  false  witness  rise  up  against  any  man 

20.  5  What  man  (is  there)  that  hath  built  a  new 
20-    S>  6»  7  tue  m  tne  battle,  and  another  man 
20.    6  what  man  (is  he)  that  hath  planted  a  vin. 
20.    7  what  man  (is  there)  that  hath  betrothed  a 

20.  8  What  man  (is  there  that  is)  fearful  and  fa. 

21.  15  If  a  man  have  two  wives,  one  beloved,  and 
21. 18  If  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  rebellious 

21.  22  If  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of 
22. 16  gave  my  daughter  unto  this  man  to  wife 

22.  18  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  that  man  and 
22.  22  If  a  man  be  found  lying  with  a  woman  m. 

22  man  that  lay  with  the  woman,  and  the  w. 

23  man  find  her  in  the  city,  and  lie  with  her 

24  the  man,  because  he  hath  humbled  his  ne. 

25  if  a  man  find,  and  the  man  force  her,  and 

25  then  the  man  only  that  lay  with  her  shall 

26  for  as  when  a  man  riseth  against  his  nei, 
28  If  a  man  find  a  damsel  (that  is)  a  virgin 


22. 
22. 


MAN 


636 


MAN 


Deut  22.  29  Then  the  man  that  lay  with  her  shall  give 
22.  30  A  man  shall  not  take  his  father's  wife,  nor 
24.    1  When  a  man  hath  taken  a  wife,  and  mar. 
24.    2  she  may  go  and  be  another  man's  (wife) 
24.    5  When  a  man  hath  taken  a  new  wife,  he. 
24.    7  If  a  man  be  fonnd  stealing  any  of  his  br. 

24.  11  man  to  whom  thou  dost  lend  shall  bring 
24. 12  if  the  man  (be)  poor,  thou  shalt  not  sleep 

25.  7  if  the  man  like  not  to  take  his  brother's 
25.    9  So  shall  it  be  done  unto  that  man  that 
27.  14  say  unto  all  the  men  of  Israel  with  a  loud 

27.  15  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  maketh  (any)  g. 

28.  30  shalt  betroth  a  wife,  and  another  man  sh. 

28.  54  (So  that)  the  man  (that  is)  tender  among 

29.  10  and  your  officers,  (with)  all  the  men  of  I. 
29.  18  Lest  there  should  be  among  you  man,  or 
29.  20  his  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  man 
32.25  sword.,  shall  destroy  both  the  young  man 

33.  1  Moses  the  man  of  God  blessed  the  children 

34.  6  no  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto  this 
Josh.  3.  12  twelve  men.  .out  of  every  tribe  a  man 

4.    2  Take  you  twelve,  .out  of  every  tribe  a  man 
4.   4  Joshua  called  the  twelve  men,  whom  he 
4.   4  children  of  Israel,  outof  every  tribea  man 
5. 13  there  stood  a  man  over  against  him  with 
6.  2i  utterly  destroyed,  .both  man  and  woman 

6.  26  Cursed  (be)  the  man  before  the  Lord  that 

7.  3  let  about  two  or  three  thousand  men  go 
7.  4  there  went  up . .  about  three  thousand  men 

7.  s  smote  of  them  about  thirty  and  six  men 

8.  3  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty  men  of 
8.  12  took  about  Ave  thousand  men,  and  set 

8.  17  there  was  not  a  man  left  in  Ai  or  Beth-el 

8.  25  all  that  fell  that  day,  both  ofmen  and  wo. 

9.  6  said  unto  him,  and  to  the  men  of  Israel 
9.   7  men  of  Israel  said  unto  the  Hivites,  Per. 

10.   8  there  shall  not  a  man  of  them  stand  before 
10.  14  Lord  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  a  man 
10.  24  Joshua  called  for  all  the  men  of  Israel 
14.    6  said  unto  Moses  the  man  of  God  concern. 
17.    1  because  he  was  a  man  of  war,  therefore 

21.  44  there  stood  not  a  man  of  all  their  enemies 

22.  20  that  man  perished  not  alone  in  hisiniqu. 

23.  9  no  man  hath  been  able  to  stand  before 
23.  10  One  man  of  you  shall  chase  a  thousand 

Judg.  1.  4  slew  of  them  in  Bezek  ten  thousand  men 
1.  24  spies  saw  a  man  come  forth  out  of  the  city 
1  25  but  they  let  go  the  man  and  all  his  family 

I.  26  the  man  went  into  the  land  of  theHittites 

3. 15  a  Benjamite,  a  man  left  handed  :  and 

3.  17  untoEglon..andEglon(was)averyfat  m. 
3.  28  took  the  fords . .  and  suffered  not  a  man  to 
3. 29  about  ten  thousand  men.  .all  men  of  va. 
3.  29  they  slew,  .and  there  escaped  not  a  man 

3.  31  slew  of  the  Philistines  six  hundred  men 

4.  6  take  with  thee  ten  thousand  men  of  the 
4.  10  went  up  with  ten  thousand  men  at  his 
4.  14  Barak  wentdown.. and  ten  thousandmen 
4. 22  will  show  thee  the  man  whom  thou  seek. 

6.  16  thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites  as  one  man 

7.  6  number  of  them. .were  three  hundred  men 
7.   7  By  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped. 
7.   8  he  sent . .  every  man  unto  h  is  tent,  and 

7. 13  a  man  that  told  a  dream  unto  his  fellow 
7.  14  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash,  a  man  of  Israel 

7. 16  divided  the  three  hundredmen(into)three 
7. 19  So  Gideon,  and  the  hundred  men  that 

7.  23  men  of  Israel  gathered  themselves  toge. 

7.  24  the  men  of  Ephraim  gathered  themselves 

8.  1  the  men  of  Ephraim  said  unto  him,  Why 
8.    4  the  three  hundred  men  that  (were)  with 
8.  10  and  twenty  thousand  men  that  drew  sw. 
8.  14  described,  .threescore  and  seventeen  meu 
8.  21  for  as  the  man  (is,  so  is)  his  strength 

8.  22  the  men  of  Israel  said  unto  Gideon,  Rule 

9.  49  likewise  cut  down  every  man  his  bough 
9.  49  died  also,  about  a  thousand  men  and'w. 
9.  55  men  of  Israel  saw  that  Abimelech  was  d. 
9.  55  they  departed  every  man  unto  his  place 

10.  1  Puah,  the  son  of  Dodo,  a  man  of  Issachar 
10.  18  What  man  (is  he)  that  will  begin  to  fight 

II.  39  that  she  returned,  .and  she  knew  no  man 

12.  1  the  men  of  Ephraim  gathered  themselves 

13.  2  there  was  a  certain  man  of  Zorah,  of  the 
13.  6  man  of  God  came  unto  me,  and  his  conn. 
13.    8  let  the  man  of  God  which  thou  didst  send 

13. 10  the  man  hath  appeared  unto  me,  that  came 

13.  11  and  came  to  the  man,  and  said  unto  him 

13. 11  (Art)  thou  the  man  that  spakest  unto  the 

14.  19  slew  thirty  men  of  them,  and  took  their 

15.  10  the  men  of  Judah  said,  Why  are  ye  come 
15. 11  three  thousand  men  of  Judah  went  to  the 

15.  15  took  it,  and  slew  a  thousand  men  there. 
15/16  with  the  jaw.  .have  I  slain  a  thousand  m. 

16.  19  she  called  for  a  man,  and  she  caused  him 

16.  27  three  thousand  men  and  women,  that  be. 

17.  1  there  was  a  man  of  mount  Ephraim,  whose 
17.    5  the  man  Micah  had  an  house  of  gods,  and 

17.  8  And  the  man  departed  outof  the  city  from 
17. 11  Levite  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man 

18.  11,  16  hundred  men  appointed  with  weapons 
18. 17  six  hundred  men  (that  were)  appointed 

18.  19  to  be  a  priest  unto  the  house  of  one  man 

19.  6  the  damsel's  father  had  said  unto  the  man 
19.    7,  q  And  when  the  man  rose  up  to  depart 
19.  10  the  man  would  not  tarry  that  night,  but 
19.  15  (there  was)  no  man  that  took  them  into 
19.  16  there  came  an  old  man  from  his  work  out 

19. 17  a  wayfaring  man  in  the  street  of  the  city 
19.  17  the  old  man  said.  Whither  goest  thou?  and 

19. 18  there  (is)  no  man  that  receiveth  me  to  house 
19.  20  And  the  old  man  said,  Peace  (be)  with  thee 


Judgig.  22  Bring  forth  the  man  that  came  into  thine 
19. 23  the  man,  the  master  of  the  house,  went 
19.  23  this  man  is  come  into  mine  house,  do  not 
19.  24  but  unto  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 
19.  26  fell  down  at  the  door  of  the  man's  house 

19.  28  the  man  took  her  (up)  upon  an  ass,  and 

20.  1  was  gathered  together  as  one  man,  from 
20.    8  the  people  arose  as  one  man,  saying,  We 
20.  11  So  all  the  men  of  Israel  were  gathered 
20.  11  against  the  city,  knittogether  as  one  man 
20.  15  and  six  thousand  men  that  drew  sword 
20.  15  were  numbered  seven  huudred  chosen  m. 
20.  16  (were)  seven  hundred  chosen  men  left  h. 
20. 17  the  men  of  Israel,  besides  Benjamin,  were 
20.  17  men  that  drew  sword:  all  these  (were)  men 
20.  20  men  of  Israel  went  out  to  battle  against 
20.  20  the  men  of  Israel  put  themselves  in  array 
20.  21  destroyed,  .twenty  and  two  thousandmen 
20.  22  the  men  of  Israel,  encouraged  themselves 
20.  25  destroyed.,  again  eighteen  thousand  men 
20.  31  began  to  smite,  .about  thirty  men  of  Israel 
20.  33  the  men  of  Israel  rose  up  out  of  their 
20.  34  ten  thousand  chosen  men  out  of  all  Israel 
20.  35  and  five  thousand  and  an  hundred  men 
20.  36  men  of  Israel  gave  place  to  the  Benjamites 
20.  38  the  meu  of  Israel  and  the  liers  in  wait 
20.  39  the  men  of  Israel  retired  in  the  battle 
20.  39  kill  of  the  men  of  Israel  about  thirty 

20.  41  the  men  of  Israel  turned  again,  the  men 
20.  42  turned  (their  backs)  before  the  men  of  I. 
20.  44  fell  of  Benjamin  eighteen  thousand  men 
20.  45  gleaned,  .in.  .highways  five  thousand  men 
20.  45  pursued. .  nd  slew  two  thousand  men  of 
20.  46  and  five  t!  usand  men  that  drew  the  s. 
20.  47  six  hundred  men  turned  and  fled  to  the 

20.  48  the  men  of  Israel  turned  again  upon  the 

21.  1  Now  the  men  oi  Israel  had  sworn  in  Mi. 
21.  10  twelve  thousand  men  of  the  valiantest 
21.  12  had  known  no  man  by  lying  with  anymale 

Ruth  1.    1  a  certain  man  of  Beth-lehem-judah  went 

1.  2  the  name  of  the  man(was)Elimelech,aud 

2.  1  a  mighty  man  of  wealth,  of  the  family  of 
2.  19  The  man's  name  v  ith  whom  I  wrought  to 

2.  20  The  man  (is)  near      *in  unto  us,  one  of 

3.  3  make  not  thyself  known  unto  the  m. ,  until 
3.  8  the  man  was  afraid,  and  turned  himself 
3.  16  told  her  all  that  the  man  had  done  to  her 

3.  18  the  man  will  not  be  in  rest  until  he  have 

4.  7  a  man  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave  (it) 
1  Sa     1.    1  Now  theri"  was  a  certain  man  of  Ramath. 

1.  3  this  man  went  up  out  of  his  city  yearly 
1. 21  the  man  Elkanah,  and  all  his  house 

2.  9  for  by  strength  shall  no  man  prevail 
2.  15  said  to  the  man  th  ^  sacrificed,  Give 

2.  25  If  one  man  sin  against  another,  the  judge 
2.  25  if  a  man  sin  against  the  Lord,  who  shall 
2.  27  there  came  a  man  of  God  unto  Eli,  and 
2.  33  the  man  of  thine,  (whom)  I  shall  not  cut 
4.  2  slew  of  the  army.. about  four  thousand  m. 
4.  12  there  ran  a  man  of  Benjamin  out  of  the 

4. 13  the  man  came  into  the  city,  and  told  (it) 

4. 14  And  the  man  came  in  hastily,  and  told  E. 
4.  16  the  man  said  unto  Eli,  I  (am)  he  that  came 
4.  18  he  died;  for  he  was  an  old  man,  and  heavy 
6.  19  fifty  thousand  and  threescore  and  ten  men 
g.  1  there  was  a  man  of  Benjamin,  whose  name 
9.  6  a  man  of  God,  ad  (lie  is)an  honourablem. 
9.  7  what  shall  we  bring  the  man  ?  for  the  b. 
9.  7  not  a  present  to  bring  to  the  man  of  God 
9.  8  give  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell  us  our  way 
9.  9  when  a  man  went  to  enquire  of  God,  thus 
9.  10  unto  the  city  where  the  man  of  God  (was) 

9. 16  send,  .a  man  outof  i      land  of  Benjamin 

9. 17  Behold  the  man  whorr.  I  spake  to  thee  of 
10.   6  and  shalt  be  turned  into  another  man 

10.  22  if  the  man  should  yet  come  thither 

11.  8  and  the  men  of  Judah  thirty  thousand 

1 1.   9  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto  the  men  of  Jabesh 
11. 13  There  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to  death 
13.    6  the  men  of  Israel  saw  that  they  were  in 
13.  14  hath  sought  him  a  man  after  his  own  he. 

13.  15  present  with  him,  aboutsix  hundred  men 

14.  2  the  people,  .(were)  about  six  hundred  m. 
14.  14  was  about  twenty  men,  within  as  it  were 
14.  22  men  of  Israel  which  had  hid  themselves 
14.  24  men  of  Israel  were  distressed  that  day 
14.  24,  28  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  eateth  (any) 
14.  36  spoil.,  and  let  us  not  leave  a  man  of  them 

14.  52  Saul  saw  any  strong  man,  or  any  valiant 

15,  3  slay  both  man  and  woman,  infant  and  s. 

15.  4  numbered  them . .  ten  thousand  men  of  J. 

16.  16  to  seek  out  a  man,  (who  is)  a  cunning  pi. 

16. 17  Provide  me  now  a  man  that  can  play  well 

16. 18  a  man  of  war,  and  prudent  in  matters,  and 

17.  2  the  men  of  Israel  were  gathered  together 
17.  8  choose  you  a  man  for  you,  and  let  him 
17. 10  give  me  a  man,  that  we  may  fight  together 
17.  12  had  eight  sons :  and  the  man  went  among 
17.  19  the  men  of  Israel,  (were)  in  the  valley  of 
17.  24  the  men  of  Israel,  when  they  saw  the  man 
17.  25  men  of  Israel  said,  Haveye  seen  this  man 
17.  25  the  man  who  killeth  him,  the  king  will 
17.  26  What  shall  be  done  to  the  man  that  killeth 
17.  27  So  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  thatkilleth 
17.  33  and  he  a  man  of  war  from  his  youth 

17.  41  man  that  bare  the  shield  (went)  before  him 

18.  23  that  I  (am)  a  poor  man,  and  lightly  estee. 
18.  27  David  arose  and  went,  he  and  his  men 
21.    1  Why  (art)  thou  alone,  and  no  man  with 
21.    2  Let  no  man  know  any  thing  of  the  business 
21.    7  Now  a  certain  man  of  the  servants  of  Saul 
21.  14  ye  see  the  man  is  mad  :  wherefore(then) 


1  Sa.  22. 
22. 

24. 

24. 
25. 

25- 

25- 
25- 

25- 
25. 

26. 

27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 

30. 
30. 
3i- 

2Sa.    1. 


18. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


:£! 


2  were  with  him  about  four  hundred  men 
19  smote  he . .  both  men  and  women,  children 

2  Saul  took  three  thousand  chosen  men  out 
19  For  if  a  man  find  his  enemy,  will  he  let 

2  a  man  in  Maon,  whose  possessions  (were) 

2  the  man  (was)  very  great,  and  he  had  th. 

3  name  of  the  man.  .but  the  man  (was)  ch. 

13  there  went  up.  .about  four  hundred  men 
25  Let  not  my  lord . .  regard  this  man  of  Belial 

2  having  three  thousand  chosen  men  of  Isr. 

15  (Art)  not  thou  a  (valiant)  man  r  and  who 
2  passed  over  with  the  six  hundred  men  that 
9  left  neither  man  nor  woman  alive,  and 

it  David  saved  neither  man  nor  womaualive 

14  An  old  man  cometh  up;  and  he  (is)  cover. 
9  he  and  the  six  hundred  men  that  (were) 

10  pursued,  he  and  four  hundred  men  :  for 
17  there  escaped  not  a  man  of  them,  save 

17  young  men,  which  rode  upon  camels,  aud 

22  Then  answered  all  the  wicked  men.  .of 

12  All  the  valiant  men  arose,  and  went  all 

2  a  man  came  out  of  the  camp  from  Saul 

30  lacked  of  David's  servants  nineteen  men 

31  three  hundred  and  three  score  men  died 

19  as  well  to  the  women  as  men,  to  every  one 

5  David  slew,  .two  and  twenty  thousand m. 

6  and  of  king  Maacah  a  thousand  men,  and 

4  came  a  traveller  unto  the  rich  man  ;  and 

4  poor  man's  lamb,  .dressed  it  for  the  man 

5  anger  was  greatly  kindled  against  the  m. 
5  man  that  hath  done  this(  thing)  shall  surely 

7  Nathan  said  to  David,  Thou  (art)themau 

3  and  Jonadab  (was)  a  very  subtil  man 

9  Amnion  said,  Have  out  all  men  from  me 

16  out  of  the  hand  of  the  man  (that  would) 
1  and  horses,  and  fifty  men  to  run  before 

1 1  with  Absalom  went  two  hundred  men  out 

13  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel  are  after  Abs. 

18  six  hundred  men.  .passed  on  before  the 
5  thence  came  out  a  man  of  the  family  of 

7  thou  bloody  man,  and  thou  man  of  Belial 

8  mischief,  because  thou  (art)  a  bloody  man 

15  men  of  Israel,  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  A. 
iS  Nay;  but  whom,  .men  of  Israel,  choose 

23  as  if  a  man  had  enquired  at  the  oracle  of 
1  Let  me.  .choose  out  twelve  thousand  men 

3  man  whom  thou  seekest(is)as  if  all  retu. 

8  father  (is)  a  man  of  war,  and  will  not  lo. 

14  all  the  meu  of  Israel  said,  The  counsel  of 
18  came  to  a  man's  house  in  Bahurim,  which 

24  passed  over  Jordan,  he  and  all  the  men 

25  which  Amasa  (was)  a  man's  son  whose  n. 

10  a  certain  man  saw  (it),  and  told  Joab,  and 

1 1  Joab  said  unto  the  man  that  told  him,  And 

12  man  said  unto  Joab,  Though  I  should  re. 
24  looked,  and  behold  a  man  running  alone 

26  the  watchman  saw  another  man  running 

26  said,  Behold  (another)  man  running  alone 

27  He  (is)  a  good  man,  and  cometh  with  good 

16  came  down  with  the  men  of  Judah  to  m. 

17  a  thousand  men  of  Benjamin  with  him 

32  provided,  .for  he  (was)  a  very  great  man 
41  all  the  men  of  Israel,  .said  unto  the  king 

41  Why  have  our  brethren  the  men  of  Judah 

42  men  of  Judah  answered  the  men  of  Israel 

43  men  of  Israel  answered  the  men  of  Judah 
43  And  the  words  of  the  men  of  Judah  were 
43  fiercer  than  the  words  of  themen  of  Israel 

1  there  happened  to  be  there  a  man  of  B. 

2  but  the  men  of  Judah  clave  unto  their 

4  Assemble  me  the  men  of  Judah  within 

12  when  the  man  saw  that  all  the  people 

2T  man  of  mount  Ephraim,  Sheba  the  son  of 

5  man  that  consumed  us,  and  that  devised 

20  where  was  a  man  of  (great)  stature,  that 
49  hast  delivered  me  from  the  violent  man 

7  the  man  (that)  shall  touch  them  must  be 

9  and  the  men  of  Israel  were  gone  away 

20  the  son  of  a  valiant  man,  of  Kabzeel,  who 

21  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  goodly  man  :  and 
9  eight  hundred  thousand  valiant  men  that 
9  men.  .(were)  five  hundred  thousand  men 

15  died  ofthe  people,  .seveutythousandmen 
5  he  prepared . .  fifty  men  to  run  before  him 

42  Come  in  ;forthou(art)avaliantman,  and 
49  and  rose  up,  and  went  every  man  Ids  way 
2  be  thou  strong,  .and  show  thyself  a  man 

4  there  shall  not  fail  thee,  .a  man  on  the 
9  for  thou  (art)  a  wise  man,  and  knowest 

13  and  the  levy  was  thirty  thousand  men 

14  his  father  (was)  a  man  of  Tyre,  a  worker 
2  all  the  men  of  Israel  assembled  themsel. 

25  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  sight 

5  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  upon  the 

28  the  man  Jeroboam  (was)  a  mighty,  .and 

22  came  unto  Shemaiah  the  man  of  God,  say. 
1  there  came  a  man  of  God  out  of  Judah  by 

4  Jeroboam  heard  the  saying  of  the  man  of 

5  according  to  the  sign  which  the  man  ofG. 

6  king  answered  and  said  unto  the  man  of 

6  man  of  God  besought  the  Lord,  and  the 

7  king  said  unto  the  man  of  God,  Come  h. 

8  man  of  God  said  unto  the  king,  If  thou 

11  told  him  all  the  works  that  the  man  of  G. 

12  had  seen_what  way  the  man  of  God  went 
14  went  after  the  man  of  God,  and  found  him 
14  (Art)  thou  the  man  of  God  that  earnest 
21  he  cried  unto  the  man  of  God  that  came 

26  It  (is)  the  man  Of  God,  who  was  disobed. 
.  29  prophet  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  man 

31  sepulchre  wherein  the  man  of  God  (is)  b. 
18  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  thou  man 


MAN 


i  Ki.17.  24  by  this  I  know  that  thou  (art)  a  man  of  G. 
18.  13  how  I  hid  an  hundred  men  of  the  Lord's 
18.  22  prophets  (are) four  hundred  and  fifty  men 
18.  44  cloud  out  of  the  sea,  like  a  man's  hand 
20.  20  they  slew  every  one  his  man :  and  the  Sy. 
20.  28  there  came  a  man  of  God,  and  spake  unto 
20.  30  twenty  and  seven  thousand  of  the  men  (th. 
20.  35  certain  man . .  said . .  And  the  man  refused 
20.  37  found  another  man.  .And  the  man  smote 
20.  39  man  turned  aside,  and  brought  a  man  unto 
20.  39  Keep  this  man  :  if  by  any  means  he  be  m. 
20.  42  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  (thy)  hand  a  man 
22.  6  gathered . .  about  four  hundred  men,  and 
22.  8  (There  is)  yet  one  man,  Micaiah  the  son 
22. 17  let  them  return  every  man  to  his  house 
22.  34  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  and  smote 

2  Ki.  1.  6  There  came  a  man  up  to  meet  us,  and  said 
1.  7  What  manner  of  man  (was  he)  which  came 
1.    8  (He  was)  an  hairy  man,  and  girt  with  a  g. 

1.  9  Thou  man  of  God,  the  king  hath  said,  Come 
1. 10,  12  Elijah  answered.  .If  I  (be)aman  of  G. 
1. 11  O  man  of  God,  thus  hath  the  king  said,  C. 

1. 13  man  of  God,  I  pray  thee,  let  my  life,  and 

2.  7  fifty  men  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  went 
2. 17  They  sent  therefore  fifty  men ;  and  they 

3.  26  he  took  with  him  seven  hundred  men  that 

4.  7  Then  she  came  and  told  the  man  of  God 
4.    9  I  perceive  that  this  (is)  an  holy  man  of  God 

4. 16  man  of  God,  do  not  lie  unto  thine  hand. 
4.  21  laid  him  on  the  bed  of  the  man  of  God 

4.  22  that  I  may  run  to  the  man  of  God,  and  c. 
4.  25,  came  unto  the  man . .  when  the  man  of  G. 
4.  27  when  she  came  to  the  man .  .the  man  of 
4.  40  man  of  God,  (there  is)  death  in  the  pot 
4.  42  came  a  man.  .and  brought  the  man  of 

4.  43  should  I  set  this  before  an  hundred  men  ? 

5.  1  great  man.  .he  was  also  a  mighty  man  in 
5.    7  doth  send  unto  me  to  recover  a  man  of 
5.    8  when  Elisha  the  man  of  God  had  heard 

5. 14  according  to  the  saying  of  the  man  of  G. 
5.  15  returned  to  the  man  of  God,  he  and  all 
5.  20  Gehazi,  the  servant  of  the  man  of  God 

5.  26  when  the  man  turned  again  from  his  ch. 

6.  6  man  of  God  said,  Where  fell  it?  Aud  he 
6.    9  man  of  God  sent  unto  the  king  of  Israel 
6. 10  which  the  man  of  God  told  him  and  war. 
6.  15  when  the  servant  of  the  man  of  God  was 
6.  19  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom  ye  seek 

6.  32  sent  a  man  from  before  him :  but  ere  the 

7.  2  answered  the  man  of  God,  and  said,  Beh. 
7.  5  when  they  were  come . .  (there  was)  no  man 
7. 10  no  man  there,  neither  voice,  .but  horses 

7. 17  died,  as  the  man  of  God  had  said,  who  sp. 

7.  18  as  the  man  of  God  had  spoken  to  the  king 
7  19  lord  answered  the  man  of  God,  and  said 

8.  2  did  after  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 

8.   4  with  Gehazi,  the  servant  of  the  man  of  G. 
8.    7  saying,  The  man  of  God  is  come  hither 
8.    8  meet  the  man  of  God,  and  enquire  of  the 

8.  11  settled  his  countenance,  .and  the  man  of 

9.  11  Ye  know  the  man,  and  his  communication 
10.  14  slew,  .two  and  forty  men ;  neither  left  he 
10.  21  so  that  there  was  nota  man  left  that  came 
10.  24  Jehu  appointed  fourscore  men  without 

12.  4  money  that  conieth  into  any  man's  heart 
13. 19  man  of  God  was  wroth  with  him,  and  said 

13.  21  as  they  were  burying  a  man.  .they  spied 
13.  21  cast  the  man.  .and  when  the  man  was  let 
15.  20  exacted,  .of  each  man  fifty  shekels  of  sil. 

15.  25  and  "with  him  fifty  men  of  the  Gileadites 
18.  21  staff,  .on  which  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go 

22.  15  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Tell  the  man  that 

23.  2  all  the  men  of  Judah  and  all  the  inhabit. 
23.  8  on  a  man's  left  hand  at  the  gate  of  the  c. 
23. 10  no  man  might  make  his  son  or  his  daugh. 
23.  16  word  of  the  Lord,  which  the  man  of  God 
23.  17  (It  is)  the  sepulchre  of  the  man  of  God 
23.  18  Let  him  alone  ;  let  no  man  move  his  bones 
25.  19  and  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the 

1  Ch.io.    1  men  of  Israel  fled  from  before  the  Philis. 

10.  7  when  all  the  men.  .saw that  they  fled,  and 
10. 12  They  arose,  all  the  valiant  men,  and  took 
xi.  22  son  of  a  valiant  man  of  Kabzeel,  who  had 

11.  23  slewan  Egyptian,  a  man  of  (great)  stature 

16.  21  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  "wrong ;  yea 
18.    5  David  slew,  .two and  twenty  thousand  m. 

20.  6  at  Gath,  where  was  a  man  of  (great)  stat. 

21.  5  an  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew  sw. 

21.  5  threescore  and  ten  thousand  men  that  dr. 
21. 14  there  fell  of  Israel  seventy  thousand  men 

22.  9  son  shall  be  born,  .who  shall  be  a  man  of 
23. 14  Now  (concerning)  Moses  the  man  of  God 

27.  32  was  a  counsellor,  a  wise  man,  and  ascribe 

28.  3  because  thou  (hast  been)  a  man  of  war 

2  Ch.  2.   2  told  out  threescore  and  ten  thousand  men 

2.  7  Send  me  now  therefore  a  man  cunning  to 
2. 13  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man,  endued  with 
2.  14  his  father  (was)  a  man  of  Tyre,  skilful  to 

5.  3  all  the  men  of  Israel  assembled  themselves 

6.  5  neither  chose  I  any  man  to  be  a  ruler  over 
6.  16  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  sight 

6.  22  If  a  man  sin  against  his  neighbour,  and 

7.  18  There  shall  not  fail  thee'a  man  (to  be)ru. 

8.  14  so  had  David  the  man  of  God  commanded 
11.  2  came  to  Shemaiah  the  man  of  God,  saying 
13.  3  with  an  army  of  valiantmenofwar,  (even) 
13.  3  with  eight  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 
13.  15  Then  the  men.  .as  the  men  of  Judah sho. 
13. 17  fell  down,  .five  hundred  thousand  men 
15.  13  whether  small  or  great,  whether  man  or 
18.  5  gathered.,  four  hundred  men,  and  said 
18.    7  (There  is)  yet  one  man,  by  whom  we  may 


637 


2  Ch.18.  33  a.  .man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  andsm. 
20.  27  Then  they  returned,  every  man  of  Judah 
25.  7  there  came  a  man  of  God  to  him,  saying 
25.   9  said  to  the  man . .  And  the  man  of  God 

30.  16  according  to  the  law  of  Moses  the  man  of 
34.  23  answered.  .Tell  ye  the  man  that  sent  you 
34.  30  king  went  up .  .and  all  the  men  of  Judah 

Ezra   3.    1  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man 

3.  2  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  .man 
8.  18  they  brought  us  a  man  of  understanding 

Nell.   1. 11  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this  man 

6. 11  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  and  who  (is 

7.  2  for  he  (was)  a  f aithf  ul  man,  and  feared  God 

8.  1  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man 

8.  2  both  of  men  and  women,  and  all  thatco. 
12.  24  commandment  of  David  the  man  of  God 
12.  36  musical  instruments  of  David,  .man  of  G. 

Esth,  1.  22  every  man  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  h. 

4.  11  that  whosover,  whether  man  or  women 
6.    6,  7,  9,  9,  11  man  whom  the  king  dehghteth 

9.  2  no  man  could  withstand  them  ;  for  the 
g.   4  this  man  Mordecai  waxed  greaterandgr. 
9.   6  Jews  slew  and  destroyed  five  hundred  m. 

9. 12  slain  and  destroyed  five  hundred  men  in 
9. 15  slew  three  hundred  men  at  Shushan  :  but 

Job     1.    1  There  was  a  man . .  and  that  man  was  per. 

I.  3  so  that  this  man  was  the  greatest  of  all  the 

1.  8  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  fe. 

2.  3  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  fe. 
2.   4  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his 

9.  32  For  (he  is)  not  a  man,  as  I  (am,  that)Ish. 

11.  2  and  should  a  manfullof  talk  be  justified? 
11. 12  For  vain  man  would  be  wise,  though.. born 

12.  14  he  shutteth  up  a  man,  and  there  can  lie 

14. 12  So  man  lieth  down,  and  riseth  not :  till 
15.  16  much  more  abominable  and  filthy  (is)  m. 
22.    8  But  (as  for)  the  mighty  man,  he  had  the 

32. 13  say.  .God  thrusteth  him  down,  not  man 
32.  21  Let  me  not.  .accept  any  man's  person 
34. 2t  For  his  eyes  (are)  upon  the  ways  of  man 

34.  23  For  he  will  not  lay  upon  man  more  (than 

35.  8  Thy  wickedness  (may  hurt)  a  man  as  thou 
37.  20  If  a  man  speak,  surely  he  shall  be  swall. 
38. 26  to  rain  on  the  earth,  (where)  no  man  (is 

Psa.     r.    1  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  walketh  not  in 

4.  2  0  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long  (will  ye  turn) 

5.  6  Lord  will  abhor . .  bloody  and  deceitful  m. 
18.  48  hast  delivered  me  from  the  violent  man  ? 
22.  6  But  I  (am)  a  worm,  and  no  man  ;  a  repr. 
25. 12  What  man  (is)  he  that  feareth  the  Lord  ? 

31.  20  shalt  hide  them .  .from  the  pride  of  man 
34. 12  What  man  (is  he  that)desireth  life,  (and) 
37.   7  because  of  the  man  who  bringeth  wicked 

37.  37  behold  the  upright:  fortheendof  (that)m. 

38.  14  Thus  I  was  as  a  man  aat  heareth  not,  and 

39. 11  When  thou  with  rebukes  dost  correct  man 
43.  1  O  deliver  me  from  the  deceitful,  .man 
62.  3  will  ye  imagine  mischief  against  a  man? 
78.  25  Man  did  eat  angels'  food  :  he  sent  them 
80.  17  Let  thy  hand  be  upon  the  man  of  thy  ri. 
87.  5  This  and  that  man  was  born  in  her  :  and 
90.  title.  A  prayer  of  Moses  the  man  of  God 

92.  6  A  brutish  man  knowethnot;  neither  doth 
105. 17  He  sent  a  man  before  them,  (even)  Joseph 
109.  16  but  persecuted  the  poor  and  needy  man 
112.  1  Blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  feareth  the  L. 
112.    5  A  good  man  showeth  favour,  and  lendeth 

140.  1  0  Lord.,  preserve  me  from  the  violent  m. 
140. 11  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  overt. 

141.  4  to  practise  wicked  works  with  men  that 
147. 10  taketh  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man 

Prov.  2.  12  To  deliver  thee,  .from  the  man  that  spea. 

5.  2i  For  the  ways  of  man  (are)  before  the  eyes 

6.  11  poverty,  .and  thy  want  as  an  armed  man 
6. 12  a  wicked  man,  walketh  with  a  froward  m. 
6.  27  Can  a  man  take  fire  in  his  bosom,  and  his 
8.    4  Unto  you,  O  men,  Z  call ;  and  my  voice 

10.  23  but  a  man  of  understanding  hath  wisdom 

II.  12  man  of  understanding  holdeth  his  peace 

11.  17  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul 
k>.    2  a  man  of  wicked  devices  will  he  condemn 

12.  8  man  shall  be  commended  according  to 
12.  14  man  shall  be  satisfied  with  good  by  the  f. 

12.  25  Heaviness  in  the  heart  of  man  maketh  it 

13.  2  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  (his)  m. 

13.  8  The  ransom  of  a  man's  life  (are)  his  riches 

14.  7  Go  from  the  presence  of  a  foolish  man 

14. 12  is  a  way  which  seemeth  right  unto  a  man 

14. 14  a  good  man  (shall  be  satisfied)  from  him. 
14. 17  and  a  man  of  wicked  devices  is  hated 

15.  18  A  wrathful  man  stirreth  up  strife  :  but(he 
15.  21  man  of  understanding  walketh  uprightly 

15.  23  man  hath  joy  by  the  answer  of  his  mouth 

16.  2  All  the  ways  of  a  man  (are)  clean  in  his  own 
16.  7  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 
16. 14  messengers  of  death :  but  a  wise  man  will 
16.  25  way  that  seemeth  right  unto  a  man  ;  but 
16.  27  An  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  evil;  and  in 
16.  28  A  froward  man  soweth  strife  ;  and  a  wh. 

16.  29  A  violent  man  enticeth  his  neighbour,  and 

17.  12  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man 

17.  27  man  of  understanding  is  of  an  excellent 

18.  4  words  of  a  man's  mouth  (are  as)  deep  wa. 
18.  12  Before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is  h. 
18.  14  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity 
18.  20  A  man's  belly  shall  be  satisfied  with  the 

18.  24  man  (that  hath)  friends  must  show  hims. 

19.  21  (There  are)  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart 

20.  3  (It  is)  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from 
20.   5  Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  (is  like)  deep 
20.   5  a  man  of  understanding  will  draw  it  out 
20.   6  his  own  goodness :  but  a  faithful  man 


MAN 


Prov  20.  17  Bread  of  deceit  (is)  sweet  to  a  man  ;  but 
21.  2  Every  way  of  a  man  (is)  right  in  his  own 
21.  8  The  way  of  man  (is)  froward  and  strange 
21.  17  He  that  loveth  pleasure  (shall  be)  a  poor 
21.  28  the  man  that  heareth  speaketh  constantly 

21.  29  A  wicked  man  hardeneth  his  face :  but  (as 

22.  24  and  with  a  furious  man  thou  shalt  not  go 
22.  29  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business 
24.  5  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  strength 
24.  29  I  will  render  to  the  man  according  to  his 

24.  34  poverty,  .and  thy  want  as  an  armed  man 

25.  18  man  that  beareth  false  witness  against  hi? 
26. 16  than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  reason 

26.  19  So  (is)  the  man  (that)  deceiveth  his  neigh. 

26.  21  so  (is)  a  contentious  man  to  kindle  strife 

27.  8  so  (is)  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his  pi. 
27.  17  as  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of 

27.  21  the  furnace  for  gold  ;  so  (is)  a  man  to  his 

28.  11  The  rich  man  (is)  wise  in  his  own  conceit 

28.  20  A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  blessings 

29.  6  In  the  transgression  of  an  evil  man  (there 
29.  9  a  wise  mancontendeth  with  a  foolish  man 
29.  13  poor  and  the  deceitful  man  meet  together 
29.  20  Seest  thou  a  man  (that  is)  hasty  in  his  w.? 
29.  22  An  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,  and  a  fu. 
29.  26  but.  .man's  judgment  (cometh)  from  the 

29.  27  An  unjust  man  (is)  an  abomination  to  the 

30.  2  Surely  I  (am)  more  brutish  than  (any)  man 
Eccl.  1.    8  All  things  (are)  full  of  labour ;  man  can. 

4.  4  for  this  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neighbour 
6.    2  A  man  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches 

6.  3  If  a  man  beget  an  hundred  (children),  and 

7.  5  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  song  of  fools 
9.  15  Now  there  was  found  in  it  apoor  wise  man 

9.  15  yet  no.  .remembered  that  same  poor  man 
Song  3.   8  every  man  (hath)  his  sword  upon  his  thigh 

8.  7  if  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of 
Isa.     2.    9  the  great  man  humbleth  himself :  theref. 

3.    2  man  of  war,  the  judge,  and  the  prophet 

3.  6  When  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  his  brother 

4.  1  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man 

5.  3  men  of  Judah,  judge,  I  pray  thee,  betwixt 

5.  7  and  the  men  of  Judah  his  pleasant  plant 

6.  s  because  I  (am)  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and 

7.  21  a  man  shall  nourish  a  young  cow  and  two 
9. 19  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire :  no  man  shall  spare 

14.  16  (Is)  this  the  man  that  made  the  earth  to 
21.    grhere  cometh  a  chariot  of  men,  (with)  a  co. 
32.    2  man  shall  be  as  an  hiding  place  from  the 
36.    6  whereon  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into  his 

41.  28  I  beheld,  and  (there  was)  no  man;  even 

42.  13  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  aman  of  war 
44.  13  and  maketh  it  after  the  figure  of  a  man 
46.  11  man  that  executeth  my  counsel  from  a  f  al- 
so. 2  Wherefore,  when  I  came,  (was  there)  no  m.? 
52. 14  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any  man 
53.  3  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  aman 
55.  7  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts:  and 
57.  1  perisheth,  and  no  man  layeth  (it)  to  heart 
59.  16  saw  that(there  was)no  man,  and  wonder. 
66.    3  that  killeth  an  ox  (is  as  if)  he  slew  a  man 

Jer.     2.    6  a  land  that  no  man  passed  through,  and 
3.    1  They  say,  If  a  man  put  away  his  wife,  and 

3.  1  she  go  from  him,  and  become  another  mn. 

4.  3  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  men  of  Judah 
4.    4  men  of  Judah  and  inhabitants  of  Jerusa. 

4.  29  be)  forsaken,  and  not  a  man  dwell  therein 

5.  1  if  ye  can  find  a  man,  if  there  be  (any)  that 

6.  23  set  in  array  as  men  for  war,  against  thee 

7.  5  judgment  between  a  man  and  his  neigh. 

8.  6  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wickedness 

9.  12  Who  (is)  the  wise  man,  that  may  unders. 

10.  23  (it  is)  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct 

11.  2  speak  unto  the  men  of  Judah,  and  to  the 
11.    3  the  man  that  obeyeth  not  the  words  of 

11.  9  A  conspiracy  is  found  among  the  men  of 

12.  11  desolate,  because  no  man  layeth  (it)  to  h. 
13. 11  the  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of  a  man 
14.    9  Why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  man  astonied 

15. 10  hast  born  me  a  man  of  strife  and  a  man 

17.  25  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the  inhabitants  of 

18.  11  go.  .speak  to  the  men  of  Judah,  and  to  the 
20.  15  Cursed  (be)  the  man  who  brought  tidings 
20.  16  let  that  man  be  as  the  cities  which  the 
22.  30  saith  the  Lord,  Write  ye  this  man  child 

22.  30  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  prosper,  sitting 

23.  9  like  a  man  whom  winehath  overcome,be. 
23.  34  I  will  even  punish  that  man  and  his  house 

25. 11  This  man  (is)  worthy  to  die;  for  he  hath 
26.  16  This  man  (is)  not  worthy  to  die  :  for  he 
26.  20  there  was  also  a  man  that  prophesied  in 
2y.  32  not  have  a  man  to  dwell  among  this  peop. 

32.  33  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the  inhabitants  of 

33.  17  David  shall  never  wanta  man  to  sit  upon 
33. 18  shall  the  priests  the  Levites  want  a  man 
35.  4  Hanan,  the  son  of  Igdaliah,  a  man  of  God 
35.  13  tell  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the  inhabita. 

35.  19  want  a  man  to  stand  before  me  for  ever 

36.  31  upon  the  men  of  Judah,  all  the  evil  that 
38.  4  let  this  man  be  put  to  death ;  for  thus  he 
38.  4  this  man  seeketh  not  the  welfare  of  this 
38.  24  Let  no  man  know  of  these  words,  and  thou 

40.  15  no  man  shall  know  (it) :  wherefore  should 

41.  4  he  had  slain  Gedaliah,  and  no  man  knew 
41.  5  fourscore  men,  having  their  beards  shaven 
44.  7  to  cut  off  from  you  man  and  woman,  child 
44.  26  named  in  the  mouth  of  any  man  of  Judah 
44.  27  the  men  of  Judah  that  (are)  in  the  land  of 

49.  18  no  man  shall  abide  there,  neither  shall  a 
49. 33  there  shall  no  man  abide  there,  nor  (any) 

50.  40  (so)shallno  man  abide  there, neither  shall 
=;o.  42  like  a  man  to  the  battle,  against  thee,  O 


MAN 


638 


MAN 


Jer.  si. 
5*- 
52- 

Lam.  3. 

Eze.    8. 


14, 
18. 
18. 
22, 
33- 
39- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
43- 
44- 
t,        47' 

Dan.   9. 
9- 


Hos.  3 
4 
6, 

9 

1 1. 
Amos  2 

5' 
Jon.  1 
Mic.    2. 

5- 

7- 

Zepii.  3. 
Zech.  1. 


4- 

6. 
Mai.   2. 

3. A  man, 

Gen.   6. 

12. 

*3- 
14. 

17- 

17. 
1 3. 
18. 
iS. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
20. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
26. 
26. 
29. 
32- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
43 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
46. 
47- 

Exod.2. 
4- 
5- 

10. 

17- 

18. 

iS. 


22  also  will  I  break  in  pieces  man  and  worn. 
43  a  land  wherein  no  man  dwelleth,  neither 
25  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  land 
33  he  doth  not.  .grieve  the  children  of  men 
11  seventy  men  of  the  ancients  of  the  house 
1 1  with  every  man  his  censer  in  his  hand ;  and 
16  Ave  and  twenty  men,  witli  their  backs 

2  every  man  a  slaughter  weapon  in  his  hand 

2  one  man  among  them  (was)  clothed  with 

3  he  called  to  the  man  clothed  with  linen 
6  coinenotuearany  man  upon  whom  (is)  the 

11  the  man  clothed  with  linen,  which  (had) 

2  he  spake  unto  the  man  clothed  with  linen 

3  stood  on  the  right,  .when  the  man  went 
6  had  commanded  the  man  clothed  with  li. 

1  at.  .door  of  the  gate  five  and  twenty  men 
8  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and 
5  if  a  man  be  just,  and  do  that  which  is 

8  executed  true  judgment  between  man  and 
30  I  sought  for  a  man  among  them,  that  sho. 

2  people  of  the  laud  take  a  man  of  their 

20  filled  at  my  table,  .with  all  men  of  war 

3  (there  was)  a  man,  whose  appearauGe( was) 

4  the  man  said  unto  me.  .behold  with  thine 

5  in  the  man's  hand  a  measuring  reed  of  sis 

6  heard  (him)  speaking.. and  the  man  stood 

2  no  man  shall  enter  in  by  it ;  because  the 

3  the  man  bhat  had  the  line  in  his  hand 

7  the  men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  inhabitants 

21  the  man  Gabriel,  whom  I  had  seeniu  the 

5  behold  a  certain  man  clothed  in  linen 

11  O  Daniel,  a  man  greatly  beloved,  under. 
19  0  man  greatly  beloved,  fear  not :  peace 

6  (one)  said  to  the  mau  clothed  in  linen 

7  1  heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  which 

3  thou  shalt  not  be  for  (another)  man :  bo 

4  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another 

9  as  troops  of  robbers  wait  for  a  man,  (so) 
7  spiritual  man  (is)  mad,  for  the  multitude 
9  I  (am)  God,  and  not  man  ;  the  Holy  One 
7  a  man  and  his  father  will  go  in  unto  the 

19  man  did  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a  bear  met 
14  let  us  not  perish  for  this  man's  life,  and 

2  so  they  oppress,  .a  man  and  his  heritage 

11  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  falseho. 

7  tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the 

6  a  man's  enemies  (are),  .of  his  own  house 
6  that  there  is  no  man,  that  there  is  none 

5  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse 

10  the  man  that  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees 

21  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head  :  but  these 

1  a  man  with  a  measuring  line  in  his  hand 

1  a  man  that  is  wakeued  out  of  his  sleep 

12  Behold  the  man  whose  name  (is)  The  Bran. 

12  The  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  doeth 

a  mortal,  bmjk  cnosh. 
4  the  same  (became)  mighty,  .men  of  reno. 

20  Pharaoh  commanded  (his)  men  concerning 

13  the  men  of  Sodom  (were)  wicked  and  sin. 
24  the  men  which  weut  with  me,  Aner,  Esh. 

23  every  male  among  the  men  of  Abraham's 

27  the  men  of  his  house,  born  in  the  house 

2  three  men  stood  by  him  :  and,  when  he 
16  the  men  rose  up  from  thence,  and  looked 

22  the  men  turned  their  faces  from  thence 

4  the  men  of  the  city,  (even)  the  men  of  S. 

5  Where  (are)  the  men  which  came  in  to  thee 

8  unto  these  men  do  nothing,  for  therefore 
10  But  the  men  put  forth  their  hand,  andp. 
ir  they  smote  the  men  that  (were)  at  the  d. 

12  Anl  the  men  said  unto  Lot,  Hast  thou  h. 
16  the  men  laid  hold  upon  his  hand,  and 

5  called  all  his  servants,  .and  the  men  were 

13  the  daughters  of  the  men  of  the  city  come 

32  and  the  men's  feet  that  (were)  with  him 
54  he  and  the  men  that  (were)  with  him,  and 
59  they  sent.  .Abraham's  servant,  and  hism. 

7  men  of  the  place  asked  (him)  of  his  wife 
7  the  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for 

■22  Laiian  gathered  together  all  the  men  of 

28  hast  thou  power  with  God  and  with  men 
7  the  men  were  grieved,  and  they  were  very 

20  and  communed  with  the  men  of  their  city 
2i  These  men  (are)  peaceable  with  us ;  ther. 
22  Only  herein  will  the  men  consent  unto  us 

21  Then  he  asked  the  men  of  that  place,  sa. 

22  also  the  men  of  the  place  said,  (that)  these 
ii  (there  was)  none  of  the  men  of  the  house 

14  she  called  unto  the  men  of  the  house,  and 

15  And  the  men  took  that  present,  and  they 

16  Bring  (these)  men  home,  and  slay,  and  m. 
16  for  (these)  men  shall  dine  with  me  at  noon 
17,  24  brought  the  men  into  Joseph's  house 
iS  And  the  men  were  afraid,  because  they 

33  and  the  men  marvelled  one  at  another 

1  Fill  the  men's  sacks  (with)  food,  as  much 

3  the  men  were  sent  away,  they  and  their 

4  Up,  follow  after  the  men;  and  when  thou 
32  the  men  (are)  shepherds,  for  their  trade 

2  And  he  took,  .five  men,  and  presented 

6  if  thou  knowest  (any)  men  of  activity  am 
13  behold,  two  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove 
19  for  all  the  men  are  dead  which  sought 

9  Let  there  more  work  belaid  upon  the  men 

7  let  the  men  go,  that  they  may  serve  the 
9  Choose  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with 

21  provide,  .able men,  such  as  fear  God,  men 
25  Moses  chose  able  men  out  of  all  Israel 
iS  And  if  men  strive  together,  and  one  smite 

22  If  men  strive,  and  hurt  a  woman  with  c. 
31  ye  shall  be  holy  men  unto  me:  neither  shall 


25- 

3i- 


Josh.  2. 


Exod35.  22  men  and  women,  as  many  as  were  willing 

Lev.  18.  27  these  abominations  have  the  men  of  the 

Kum.  1.    5  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  men  that  shall 

1.  17  Aaron  took  these  men  which  are  expressed 

9.  7  those  men  said  unto  him,  We  (are)  defiled 
11.  -*6  there  remained  two  (of  the)  men  in  the 
13,  2  Send  thou  men,  that  they  may  search  the 
13.  3  those  men  (were)  heads  of  the  children  of 
13.  16  These  (are)  the  names  of  the  men  which  M 
13.  31  the  men  that  went  up  with  him  said,  We 

13.  32  the  people  that  we  saw  in  it  (are)  men  of 

14.  22  those  men  which  have  seen  my  glory,  and 
14.  36  men  which  Moses  sent  to  search  the  land 
14.  37  Even  those  men  that  did  bring  up  the  evil 
14.  38  of  the  men  that  went  to  search  the  land 
16.  2  famous  in  the  congregation,  men  of  ren. 
16.  14  wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of  these  men  ? 
16.  26  Depart,  .from  the  tents  of.  .wicked  men 
16.  30  that  these  men  have  provoked  the  Lord 
22.  9  and  said,  What  men  (are)  these  with  thee? 
22.  20  If  the  men  come  to  call  thee,  rise  up,  (aud) 
22.  35  Go  with  the  men :  but  only  the  word  that 
25.  5  Slay  ye  every  one  his  men  that  were  joined 
31.  21  the  priest  said  uuto  the  nien  of  war  which 
31.  28  the  men  of  war  which  weut  out  to  battle 
31.  42  which  Moses  divided  from  the  men  that 
31.  49  the  men  of  war  which  (are)  uuder  our  ch. 

3 1.  53  For  the  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil,  every 

32.  11  none  of  the  men  that  came  up  out  of  E. 
32.  14  an  increase  of  sinful  men,  to  augment  yet 
34.  17  These  (are)  the  names  of  the  -men  which 
34.  19  And  the  names  of  the  men  (are)  these :  Of 

Deut.  1.  13  Take  you  wise  men,  and  understanding 
1.  15  I  took  the  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise  men 

1.22  We  will  send  meu  before  us,  and  they  shall 

1. 23  I  took  twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe 

1.  35  there  shall  not  one  of  these  men  of  this 

2.  14  generation  of  themeu  of  war  were  wasted 
2.  16  the  men  of  war  were  consumed  and  dead 

13. 13  (Certain)  men,  the  children  of  Belial,  are 
19.  17  the  men,  between  whom  the  controversy 

21.  21  the  men  of  his  city  shall  stone  him  with 

22.  21  the  men  of  the  city  shall  stone  her  with 
25.    1  Iftherebeacontroversybetweenmen.and 

,  11  When  men  strive  together  one  with  ano. 
.  12  men,  women,  and  children,  and  thy  str. 
26  remembrance  of  them  to  cease . .  among  m. 

1  sou  of  Nun  sent  out  of  Shittim  two  men 

2  there  came  men  in  hither  to  night  of  the 
2.  3  Bring  forth  the  men  that  are  come  to  thee 
2.  4  the  woman  took  the  two  men,  aud  hid 
2.  4  There  came  men  unto  me,  hut  I  wist  not 
2.  5  the  men  went  out :  whither  the  men  went 
2.  7  men  pursued  after  them  the  way  to  Jordan 
2.  9  she  said  unto  the  men,  I  know  that  the  L. 
2.  14  the  men  answered  her,  Our  life  for  yours 
2.  17  the  men  said  unto  her,  We  (will  be)  bla. 
2.  23  the  two  men  returned,  and  descended  from 

4.  2  Take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  people 

5.  4  the  men  of  war,  died  in  the  wilderness 

5.  6  the  people  (that  were)  men  of  war,  which 

6.  3  shall  compass  the  city,  all  (ye)  men  of  war 
6. 22  Joshua  had  said  unto  the  two  men  that 

7.  2  Joshua  sent  men  from  Jericho  to  Ai,  which 
7.    2  And  the  men  went  up  and  viewed  Ai 

7.    4  and  they  fled  before  the  men  of  Ai 

7.  5  the  men  of  Ai  smote  of  them  about  thirty 

8.  14  men  of  the  city  went  out  against  Israel 
8.  20  when  the  men  of  Ai  looked  behind  them 

8.  21  they  turned  again,  and  slew  the  men  of 

9.  14  the  men  took  of  their  victuals,  and  asked 

10.  2  and  all  the  men  thereof  (were)  mighty 
10.   6  the  men  of  Gibeon  sent  unto  Joshua  to 

10.  18  cave,  and  set  men  by  it  for  to  keep  them 
18.  4  Give  out  from  among  you  three  men  for 
18.  8  the  men  arose,  and  went  away  :  and  Jos. 
18.   9  the  men  went  and  passed  through  the  land 

Judg.  6.  27  Gideon  took  ten  men  of  his  servants,  and 
6.  27  father's  household,  and  the  men  of  the  city 
6. 28  the  men  of  the  city  arose  early  in  the 
6.  30  men  of  the  city  said  unto  Joash,  Bring 
8.  5  he  said  unto  the  men  of  Succoth,  Give,  I 
8.  8  the  meu  of  Penuel  answered  him  as  the  men 
8.    9  spake  also  unto  the  men  of  Penuel,  saying 

8. 14  And  caught,  .of  the  men  of  Succoth,  and 

8. 15  came  unto  the  men  of  Succoth,  and  said 

8. 15  give  bread  unto  thy  men  (that  are)  weary 

8. 16  with  them  he  taught  the  men  of  Succoth 

8. 17  beat  down  the  tower,  .and  slew  the  meu 

8.  18  What  manner  of  men  (were  they)  whom 

9.  9  wherewith  by  me  they  honour  God  and 
9.  13  leave  my  wine,  which  cheereth  God  and 
9.  28  Serve  the  men  of  Hamor  the  father  of 
9.  36  seest  the  shadow,  .as  (if  they  were)  men 
9.  49  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  died  also 
9.  51  thither  fled  all  the  men  and  women,  and 
9.  57  the  evil  of  the  men  of  Shechern  did  God 

11.  3  there  were  gathered  vain  men  to  Jephthah 

12.  4  gathered  together  all  the  men  of  Gilead 
12.  4  themenofGileadsmoteEphraim, because 
12.  5  the  men  of  Gilead  said  unto  him,(  Art)  thou 
14.  18  the  men  of  the  city  said  unto  him  on  the 
16.  27  the  house  was  fullofmen  and  women;and 
18.  2  five  men  from  their  coasts,  men  of  valour 
18.  7  the  five  men  departed,  and  came  to  Laish 
iS.  14  Then  answered  the  five  men  that  went  to 
18^  17  the  five  men  that  went  to  spy  out  the 

18.  22  the  men  that  (were)  in  the  houses  near  to 

19.  16  but  the  men  of  theplace(were)Benjamites 
19.  22  the  men  of  the  city,  certain  sons  of  Belial 
19.  25  the  men  would  not  hearken  to  him ;  so  the 
20. 10  will  take  ten  men  of  an  hundred  throug. 


Ruth  4 
1  Sa.    1 


>Sa. 


Ki. 


12  the  tribes  of  Israel  sent  men  through  all 

13  deliver  (us)  the  men,  the  children  of  Belial 
44,  46  all  these  (were)  men  of  valour 

2  he  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 

1 1  wilt  give  unto  thine  handmaid  a  man  child 
17  for  men  abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord 
26  favour,  .with  the  Lord,  and  also  with  m. 

9  quit  yourselves  like  men,  O  ye  Philistines 
9  quit  yourselves  like  men,  and  fight 

7  when  the  men  of  Ashdod  saw  that  (it  was) 
9  he  smote  the  men  of  the  city,  both  small 

12  the  men  that  died  not  were  smitten  with 

10  the  men  did  so;  and  took  two  milch  kine 
15  and  the  meu  of  Beth-shemesh  offered  bu. 

19  he  smote  the  men  of  Beth-shemish  beca 

20  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh  said,  Who  is  able 

1  men  of  Kirjath-jearim  came,  and  fetched 

11  the  men  of  Israel  weut  out  of  Mizpeh,  and 
22  Samuel  said  uuto  the  men  of  Israel,  Go  ye 

2  shalt  find  two  men  by  Rachel's  sepulchre 

3  there  shall  meet  thee  three  men  going  up 

1  the  men  of  Jabesh  said  unto  Naliash,  M. 
5  told  him  the  tidings  of  the  men  of  Jabei  h 
9  came  and  showed  (it)  to  the  men  of  Jabesh 

10  the  men  of  Jabeshsaid,  To  morrow  we  will 

12  bring  the  men,  that  we  may  put  them  to 
15  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  rejoiced  greatly 

8  we  will  pass  over  unto  (these)  men,  and 
12  the  men  of  the  garrison  answered  Jonat. 
12  went  among  men.  .in  the  days  of  Saul 

26  David  spake  to  the  men  that  stood  by  him 

28  bi'other  heard  when  he  spake  uuto  the  men 
52  the  men  of  Israel  and  of  Judah  arose,  and 

5  Saul  set  him  over  the  men  of  war;  and  he 

27  and  went,  he  and  his  men,  and  slew  of  the 

6  discovered,  and  the  men  that  (were)  with 
3  David's  men  said  unto  him,  Behold  ;  we 

5  his  men  went  to  Keilah,  and  fought  with 
8  to  Keilah,  to  besiege  David  and  his  men 

12  deliver  me  and  my  men  into  the  hand  of 

13  his  men,  (which  were)  about  six  hundred 

24  his  men  (were)  in  the  wilderness  of  Maon 

25  his  men  went  to  seek  (him).  And  they  told 

26  and  his  men  on  that  side  of  the  mountain 
26  his  men  compassed  David  and  Ins  meu 

2  went  to  seek  David  and  his  men  upon  the 

3  his  men  remained  in  the  sides  of  the  cave 

4  the  men  of  David  said  unto  him,  Behold 

6  he  said  unto  his  men  The  Lord  forbid  that 

22  aud  his  men  gat  them  up  unto  the  hold 

11  unto  men  whom  I  know  not  whence  they 

13  David  said  unto  his  men,  Gird  ye  on  every 

15  the  men  (were)  very  good  unto  us,  and  we 

20  his  men  came  down  agaiust  her;  and  she 

3  dwelt  with  AchishatGath.heandhisroen 
8  men  went  up,  and  invaded  the  Geshurites 

1  out  with  me  to  battle,  thou  and  thy  men 
8  he  went,  and  two  men  with  him,  and  they 

2  his  men  passed  on  in  the  rereward  with 

4  (should  it)  not  (be),  .heads  of  these  men 
11  his  men  rose  up  early  to  depart  in  the 

1  his  men  were  come  to  Ziklag  on  the  third 

3  his  men  came  to  the  city,  and,  behold,  (it) 

21  David  came  to  the  two  hundred  men  which 
31  himself  and  his  meu  were  wont  to  haunt 

1  the  men  of  Israel  fled  from  before  the 

6  his  armour  bearer,  aud  all  his  men,  that 

7  the  meu  of  Israel  that  (were)  on  the  other 

7  saw  that  the  men  of  Israel  fled,  and  that 
1 1  likewise  all  the  men  that  (were)  with  him 

3  men  that  (were)  with  him  did  David  bring 

4  the  men  of  Judah  came,  and  there  they 

4  the  men  of  Jabesh-gilead  (were  they)  that 

5  messengers  unto  the  meu  of  Jabesh-gilead 
17  Abner  was  beaten,  and  the  men  of  Israel 

29  his  men  walked  all  that  night  through  the 

31  smitten  of  Benjamin,  and  of  Abner's  men 

32  his  men  went  all  night,  and  they  came  to 
20  So  Abnercanie.  .and  twenty  men  with  him 

20  Abner,  and  the  men  that  (were)  with  him 
39  these  men  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  (be)  too  h. 

2  had  two  men  (that  were)  captains  of  bands 

11  when  wicked  men  have  slain  a  righteous 

6  men  went  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  Jebusites 

21  images, and  Davidand  his  men  burnt  them 

14  I  will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  men 

5  the  men  were  greatly  ashamed :  and  the 

16  place  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men 

17  the  men  of  the  city  went  out  and  fought 

23  the  men  prevailed  against  us,  and  came 

1  There  were  two  men  in  one  city  ;  the  one 

6  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel 

22  his  men,  and  all  the  little  ones  that  (w.) 
13  as  David  and  his  men  went  by  the  way,  S. 

8  thou  knowest  thy  father  and  his  men, that 

12  of  all  the  men  that  (are)  with  him  there 

28  the  men  that  lifted  up  their  hand  against 
28  all  (of)  my  father's  house  were . .  dead  men 
41  and  all  David  s  men  with  him,  over  Jordan 

.  7  there  went  out  after  him  Joab's  men,  and 
.  6  Let  seven  men  of  his  sons  be  delivered  unto 
.  17  the  men  of  David  sware  unto  him,  saying 
.  17  the  men  that  went  in  jeopardy  of  their 
.  9  all  the  men  of  Judah  the  king's  servants 
.  32  two  men  more  righteous  and  better  than 
.  22  they  (were)  men  of  war,  and  his  servants 
.  8  Happy  (are)  thy  men, happy  (are)  these  thy 
.  18  they  took  men  with  them  out  of  Paran.aud 
.  24  gathered  men  unto  him,  and  became  ca. 
.  25  men  passed  by,  and  saw  the  carcase  cast 
.  17  saying,  There  are  men  come  out  of  Sam. 
.  33  the  meu  did  diligently  observe  whether 


MAN 


639 


MAN 


■  Oh 


•  Ch. 


i  Ki.21. 10  set  two  men,  sons  ofBelial,  before  him 
21.  ii  the  men  of  his  city,  (even)  the  elders  and 

21. 13  there  came  in  two  men,  children  of  Belial 
zi.  13  the  men  of  Belial  witnessed  against  him 

2  Ki.  2. 16  there  be  with,  .servants  fifty  strong  men 
2.  19  men  of  the  city  said  unto  Elisha,  Behold 
4. 40  they  poured  out  for  the  men  to  eat :  and 
5.  24  and  he  let  the  men  go,  and  they  departed 
7.  3  were  four  leprous  men  at  the  entering 
10.   6  the  heads  of  the  men  your  master's  sons 

10.  24  of  the  men  whom  I  have  brought  into  your 

11.  9  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath 

12.  15  they  reckoned  not  with  the  men  into  wh. 
17.  30  the  men  of  Babylon  made  Succoth-benoth 

17.  30  the  men  of  Cuthmade  Nergal,  and  the  m. 

18.  27  (sent  me)  to  the  men  which  sit  on  the  w. 

20. 14  What  said  these  men  ?  and  from  whence 
23. 17  And  the  men  of  the  city  told  him,  (It  is) 

24.  16  the  men  of  might,  (even)  seven  thuusand 

25.  4  the  men  (of  war)  fled  by  night  by  the  way 
25. 19  was  set  over  the  men  of  war,  and  five  m. 
25.  23  their  men,  heard  that  the  king  of  Babylon 
25.23  there  came  to  Gedaliah.  .they  and  their  m. 

25.  24  Gedaliah  sware  to  them,  and  to  their  men 
2=;.  25  IshmaeL.came,  and  ten  men  with  him,  and 

12  Paseah,  and  Tehinnah . .  These  (are)  the  m. 
22  the  men  of  Chozeba,  and  Joash,  and  Sa. 
42  five  hundred  men,  went  to  mount  Seir,  h. 

18  men  able  to  bear  buckler  and  sword,  and 
24  men  of  valour,  famous  men,  (and)  heads 

21  the  men  of  Gath  (that  were)  born  in  (that) 
40  number,  .(was)twenty  and  six  thousand  m. 
40  sons  of  Ulam  were  mighty  men  of  valour 

9  these  men  (were)  chief  of  the  fathers  in 

19  shall  I  drink  the  blood  of  these  men  that 

8  men  of  war  (fit)  for  the  battle,  that  could 
38  these  men  of  war,  that  could  keep  rank 

5  told  David  how  the  men  were  served :  and 

5  he  sent,  .the  men  were  greatly  ashamed 

9  they  (were)  men  of  war,  and  chief  of  his 
7  Happy  (are )  thy  m  en,  and  happy  (are)  these 

7  there  are  gathered  unto  him  vain  men,  the 

11  ourGod;  let  not  man  prevail  against  thee 

13  and  the  men  of  war.  .(were)  in  Jerusalem 

8  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath 

24  Syrians  came  with  a  small  company  of  men 
15  men  which  were  expressed  by  name  rose 
19  the  men  that  were  expressed  by  name,  to 

12  the  men  did  the  work  faithfully :  and  the 
4  let  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  with 
2  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel 

22  The  men  of  Netophah,  fifty  and  six 

23  The  men  olAnathoth.an  hundred  twenty 
27  men  of  Michmas,  an  hundred  twenty  and 

25  men  of  Beth-el  and  Ai,  two  hundred  tw. 

1  congregation  of  men  and  women  and  ch. 

9  the  men  of  Judahand  Benjamin  gathered 
17  the  men  that  had  taken  strange  wives  by 

2  he  and  (certain)  men  of  Judah;  and  I  as. 

12  in  the  night,  I  and  some  few  men  with  me 

2  next  unto  him  builded  the  men  of  Jericho 
7  the  men  of  Gibeon  and  of  Mizpah,  unto 

22  repaired  the  priests,  the  men  of  the  plain 

23  the  men  of  the  guard  which  followed  me 

7  The  number,  (I  say),  of  the  men  of  the  pe. 

26  men  of  Beth-lehem  and  Netophah,  an  hu. 

27  The  men  of  Anathoth,  an  hundred  twenty 

28  The  men  of  Beth-azmaveth,  forty  and  two 
29ThemenofKh'jath-jearim,Chephirah,and 

30  men  of  Kamah  and  Gaba,  six  hundred  tw. 

3 1  The  men  of  Michmas,  an  hundred  and  tw. 

32  men  of  Beth-eland  Ai,  an  hundred  twenty 
3^  The  men  of  the  other  Nebo,  fifty  and  two 

3  before  the  men  and  the  women,  andthose 
2  the  men  that  willingly  offered  themselves 

6  hundred  three  score  and  eight  valiant  men 

13  the  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  on  men 
17  happy  (is)  the  man  whom  God  correcteth 

1  not  an  appointed  time  to  man  upon  earth? 

17  "What  (is)  man,  that  thou  shouldest  magn. 

2  but  how  should  man  be  just  with  God  ? 

4  eyesof  flesh?  or  seest  thou  as  man  seeth? 

5  (Are)  thy  days  as  the  days  of  man  ?  (are) 
19  and  thou  destroyest  the  hope  of  man 

14  What  (is)  man,  that  he  should  be  clean  ? 
4  How  then  can  man  be  justified  with  God? 

6  How  muchlessman,  (that  is)  a  worm;  and 

4  are  dried  up,  they  are  gone  away  from  m. 
13  Man  knoweth  not  the  price  thereof  ;  neit. 

1  So  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  Job 

5  no  answerin  the  mouth  of  (these)  three  m. 

8  But  (there  is)  a  spirit  in  man  :  and  the 
12  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater  than  man 

15  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men 

16  he  openeth  the  ears  of  men,  and  sealeth 

26  will  render  unto  man  his  righteousness 

27  He  looketh  upon  men;  and  (if  any)  say,  I 
8  goeth.  .and  walketh  with  wicked  men 

10  hearken  untome,  ye  men  of  understanding 
34  Let  men  of  understanding  tell  me,  and 
36  because  of  (his)  answers  for  wicked  men 

24  thou  magnify  his  work,  which  men  bell. 

25  may  see  it ;  man  may  behold  (it)  afar  off 

7  sealeth.  .that  all  men  may  know  his  work 
24  Men  do  therefore  fear  him;  he  respecteth 

4  "What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him? 

19  let  not  man  prevail ;  let  the  heathen  be 

20  nations. . know  themselves(to  be  but) men 

18  the  man  of  the  earth  may  no  more  oppr. 

26.  9  Gather  not.  .my  life  with  bloody  men 
55. 13  thou,  a  man  mine  equal,  my  guide,  andm. 
55.  23  deceitful  men  shall  not  live  out;half  their 


Job 


14. 
15- 

25- 

25- 
28. 
28. 

32- 

32- 
32. 

33- 
33. 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
36. 
36. 
37- 
37- 
Psa.  8. 
9' 
9- 
10. 


Jer 


Psa.  56.    1  man  would  swallow  me  up  :  he  fighting 
59.   2  Deliver  me . .  and  save  me  from  bloody  m. 
66.  12  hast  caused  men  to  ride  over  our  heads 
73.    5  They(are)  not  in  trouble  (as  other)  men 
76.    5  none  of  the  men  of  might  have  found  th. 
90.    3  Thou  turnest  man  to  destruction;  and  say. 
103. 15  (As  for)  man,  his  days  (are)  as  grass  ;  as  a 
104. 15  wine  (that)  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man 
104.  15  and  bread  (which)  strengtheneth  man's  h. 
139. 19  depart  from  me  therefore,  ye  bloody  men 
144.   3  son  of  man,  that  thou  makest  account  of 
Pro  v.  24.    1  Be  not  thou  envious  against  evil  men 
25.    1  men  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  copied  out 

28.  5  Evil  men  understand  not  judgment :  but 

29.  8  Scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare 
Eccl.  9.  14  (was)  a  little  city,  and  few  men  within  it 

1 2.  3  the  strong  men  shall  bow  themselves,  and 
Isa.    2.  11  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  bowed  down 

2.  17  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  made  low 
5.  22  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  drink 

7.  13  (Is  it)  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  men 

8.  1  write  in  it  with  a  man's  pen  concerning 

13.  7  be  faint,  and  every  man's  heart  shall  melt 
13.  12  make  a  man  more  precious  than  fine  gold 
24.  6  inhabitants,  .areburned.andfewmenleft 
28.  14  ye  scornful  men,  that  rule  this  people 
29. 13  their  fear,  .taught  by  the  precept  of  men 
33.  8  despised  the  cities,  he  regardeth  no  man 
36. 12  (sent  me)  to  the  men  that  sit  upon  the  w. 
39.  3  What  said  these  men  ?  and  from  whence 
45.  14-merchandise.  .of  the  Sabeans,  men  of  st. 
51.  7  fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  men  neither 
51. 12  shouldest  be  afraid  of.  .man  (that)  shall  d. 

56.  2  Blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  doeth  this,  and 

57.  1  merciful  men  (are)  taken  away,  none  con. 

24  men  that  have  transgressed  against  me 
26  lay  wait . .  they  set  a  trap,  they  catch  men 
21  saith  the  Lord  of  the  men  of  Anathoth 
23  will  bring  evil  upon  the  men  of  Anathoth 

21  let  their  men  be  put  to  death ;  (let)  their 
10  in  the  sight  of  the  men  that  go  with  thee 

22  king  sent  men  into  Egypt,  (namely),  Eln. 
22  and  (certain)  men  with  him  into  Egypt 

18  will  give  the  men  that  have  transgressed 
10  there  remained  (but)  wounded  men  among 

4  the  men  of  war  that  remain  in  this  city 
9  these  men  have  done  evil  in  all  that  they 

10  Take  from  hence  thirty  men  with  thee,  and 

11  Ebed  melech  took  the  men  with  him,  and 

16  the  hand  of  these  men  that  seek  thy  life 
4  king  of  Judah  saw  them,  and .  .men  of  war 

17  hand  of  the  men  of  whom  thou  (art)  afraid 
7  their  men,  heard  that  the  king  of  Babylon 

7  had  committed  unto  him  men,  and  women 

8  the  sons  of  Ephai.  .they  and  their  men 

9  sware  unto  them,  and  to  their  men,  saying 

1  ten  men  with  him,  came  unto  Gedaliah 

2  and  the  ten  men  that  were  with  him,  and 

3  and  the  Chaldeans,  .(and)  the  men  of  war 

7  he,  and  the  men  that  (were)  with  him 

8  ten  men  were  found  among  them  that  said 

9  had  cast  all  the  dead  bodies  of  the  men 

12  they  took  all  the  men,  and  went  to  fight 

1 5  escaped  from  Johanan  with  eight  men, and 

16  men  of  war,  and  the  women,  and  the  ch. 

17  the  men  that  set  their  faces  to  go  into 
2  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  proud  men 
9  hide,  .in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  Judah 

15  the  men  which  knew  that  their  wives  had 

19  drink  offerings  unto  her,  without  our  m? 

14  We  (are)  mighty  and  strongmen  for  the  war 

31  shall  mourn  for  the  men  of  Kir-heres 
36  shall  sound,  .for  the  men  of  Kir-heres 

26  the  men  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  in  that  day 

30  her  man  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  iu  that 

32  burned.,  and  the  men  of  war  are  affrigh. 
7  the  men  of  war  fled,  and  went  forth  out 

25  charge  of  the  men  of  war ;  and  seven  men 
2  men  came  from  the  way  of  the  higher  gate 

4  the  men  that  sigh  and  that  cry  for  all 

6  ancient  men  which  (were)  before  the  ho. 

2  these  (are)  the  men  that  devise  mischief 

15  the  men  of  thy  kindred,  and  all  the  house 

16  leave  a  few  men  of  them  from  the  sword 

3  these  men  have  set  up  their  idols  in  their 
14  these  three  men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job 
16,  18  (Though)  these  three  men  (were)  in  it 

31  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  brutish  men 
9  are  men  that  carry  tales  to  shed  blood 

14  she  saw  men  pourtrayed  upon  the  wall 
40  ye  have  sent  for  men  to  come  from  far 
42  the  men  of  the  common  sort  (were)  brou. 
45  the  righteous  men,  they  shall  judge  them 

17  cover  not.  .and  eat  not  the  bread  of  men 
22  cover  (your)  lips,  nor  eat  the  bread  of  men 
10  They.,  were  in  thine  army,  thy  men  of  war 

27  thy  men  of  war,  that  (are)  in  thee,  and  in 
14  sever  out  men  of  continual  employment 

7  men  that  were  with  me  saw  not  the  vision 
7  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  men  of  war 
9  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near;  let  them 
9  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  one  house,  that 
7  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought 
7  men  that  were  at  peace  with  thee  have 

Jon.    1.  10  Then  were  the  men  exceedingly  afraid, and 

1.  10  men  knew  that  he  fled  from  the  presence 

1.  13  men  rowed  hard  to  briug  (it)  to  the  land 

1, 16  the  men  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly,  and 

Mic.    7.    6  enemies  (are)  the  men  of  his  own  house 

Nah.  2.   3  the  valiant  men  (are)  in  scarlet :  the  char. 

Zeph.  1. 12  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their 

Zech.  3.    8  they  (are)  men  wondered  at :  for,  behold 


Eze, 


Dan. 
Joel 


Amos  6 
Obad. 


'i.A  man, 
Ezra  4 
Dan.    2 


4- 

4- 

5- 

5- 

■;■ 

6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

7- 

7- 

5.  One  con 

1  Ki 

T. 

2  Ki 

2. 

JudgiS. 

Eze. 

<n- 

27- 

=7- 

1  Sa 

14- 

2  Sa 

3- 

1  Ch 

26. 

26. 

26. 

■7ft. 

2CI1 

26. 

28. 

Job 

I. 

Jer. 

40. 

Eze. 

2°;. 

=  5- 

3°- 

2  Sherezerand  Kegem-melech,  and  their  m. 
23  men  shall  take  hold  out  of  all  languages 

mortal,  B^g  mash. 

1 1  men  on  this  side  the  river,  and  at  such 

10  There  is  not  a  man  upon  the  earth  that 
3S  wheresoever  the  children  of  men  dwell 
43  mingle  themselves  with  the  seed  of  men 
jo  every  man  that  shall  hear  the  sound  of 

16  Let  his  heart  be  changed  from  man's,  and 
17,  25, 32  Most  High  ruleth  in . .  kingdom  of  m. 

17  and  setteth  up  over  it  the  basest  of  men 
25,  32  they  shall  drive  thee  from  men,  and 

.  33  he  was  driven  from  men,  and  did  eat  grass 

5  came  forth  fingers  of  a  man's  hand,  and 
21  he  was  driven  from  the  sons  of  men ;  and 
21  most  high  God  ruled  in  the  kingdom  of  men 

7  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  god  or  man 

12  not  signed  a  decree,  that  every  man  that 

12  shall  ask  (a  petition)  of  any  god  or  man 
4  stand  upon  the  feet  as  a  man,  and  a  man's 

8  in  this  horn  (were)  eyes  like,  .eyes  of  man 

13  (one)  like  the  Son  of  man  came  with  the 

nected  loith  or  possessing  a  thing,  j2  ben. 
52  If  he  will  show  himself  a  worthy  man 

16  there  be  with  thy  servants  fifty  strong  m. 

2  men  of  valour,  from  Zorah,  and  from  Esh. 
7  chosen  men  of  Assyria,  and  with  all  on 

11  The  men  of  Arvad  with  thine  army(were) 
15  The  men  of  Dedan  (were)  thy  merchants 
52  when  Saul  saw . .  any  valiant  man,  he  took 

,  34  as  a  man  falleth  before  wicked  men,  (so) 
10  (they)  which  (be)  with  him  (are)  valiant  m. 
7  whose  brethren  (were)  strong  men,  Elihu 

9  had  sons  and  brethren,  strong  men,  eight 
30  men  of  valour,  a  thousand  and  seven  hu. 
32  And  his  brethren,  men  of  valour,  (were) 

17  priests  of  the  Lord, (that  were)  valiant  men 

6  hundred  and  twenty  thousand. .  valiant  m. 

3  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the  east 
28  Arise  ye.  .and  spoil  the  men  of  the  east 

4  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the  men  of  the 
10  the  men  of  the  east  with  the  Ammonites 

5  the  men  of  the  laud  that  is  in  league 

Q.A  son  of  man,  a  human  being,  cnx"?  benadam. 

Job  16.  21  as  a  man  (pleadeth)  for  his  neighbour 

Psa.  12.    8  walk  on  every  side,  when  the  vilest  men 

89.  47  wherefore  hast  thou  made  all  men  in  vain 

Eccl.  3.  21  Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth 

7. Owner,  master,  lord,  ?y3  baal. 

Gen.  20.   3  the  woman  which  thou  hast,  .(is)  a  man's 
Exod24.  14  if  any  man  have  any  matters  to  do,  let 
Judg.  9.    2,  3  in  the  ears  of  all  the  men  of  Shechem 
9.    6  the  men  of  Shechem  gathered  together 
9.    7  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  men  of  Shechem 
9.  18  king  over  the  men  of  Shechem,  because  he 
9.  20  devour  the  men  of  Shechem, and  the  house 
9.  20  let  fire  come  out  from  the  men  of  Shechem 
9.  23  the  men  of  Shechem ;  and  the  men  of  S. 
9.  24  upon  the  men  of  Shechem,  which  aided 
9.  25  the  men  of  Shechem  set  liers  in  wait  for 
9.  26  men  of  Shechem  put  their  confidence  in 
9.  39  Gaal  went  out  before  the  men  of  Shechem 
9.  46  men  of  the  towerof  Shechem  heard  (that) 
9.  47  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  were  gath. 
20.    5  the  men  of  Gibeah  rose  against  me,  and 

1  Sa.  23.  1 1  Will  the  men  of  Keilah  deliver  me  up  into 

23.  12  Will  the  men  of  Keilah  deliver  me  and  my 

2  Sa.  21. 12  from  the  men  of  Jabesh-gilead,  which  had 
Pro v  22.  24  Make  no  friendship  with  an  angry  man 

23.   2  if  thou  (be)  a  man  given  to  appetite 

29.  22  a  furious  man  aboundeth  in  transgression 

8.  A  {mighty)  man,  *Ti33  gihbor. 

1  Ch.  9.  13  able  men  for  the  work  of  the  service  of 

12.  8  there  separated . .  unto  David . .  men  of  mi. 

2  CI1.13.   3  an  army  of  valiant  men  of  war,  (even)  four 

13.  3  hundred  thousand . .  mighty  men  of  valour 

9. A  {mighty)  man,  "a  a  gebar. 

Ezra   4.  21  commandment  to  cause  these  men  to  ce. 
5.    4  What  are  the  names  of  the  men  that  make 

5.  10  the  names  of  the  men  that  (were)  the  chief 

6.  8  forthwith  expences.. given  unto  these  men 
Dan.   2.  25  have  found  a  man  of  the  captives  of  Judah 

3. 12  these  men,  0  king,  have  not  regarded  thee. 
3.  13  they  brought  these  men  before  the  king 
3.  20  most  mighty  men  that  (were)  in  his  army 
3.  21  these  men  were  bound  in  their  coats,  their 
3. 22  flame .  .slew  those  men  that  took  up  Sha. 
3.  23  And  these  three  men,  Shadrach,  Meshaeh 
3.  24  Did  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  into  the 
3.  25  I  see  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the  midst 
3.  27  saw  these  men,  upon  whose  bodies  the  fire 

5.  11  There  is  a  man  in  thy  kingdom  in  whom 

6.  5  Then  said  these  men,  We  shall  not  find 
6. 15  these  men  assembled  unto  the  king,  and 

6.  24  brought  those  men  which  had  accused  D. 

10.  A  (mighty)  man,  133  geber. 

Exodio.  11  go  now  ye  (that  are)  men,  and  serve  the 

12.  37  hundred  thousand  on  foot  (that  were)  men 
Nuni24-  3,  i5themanwhoseeyes  are  open  hath  said 
Deut22.  5  pertaineth  unto  a  man,  neither  shall  am. 
Josh.  7.  14  and  the  household . .  shall  come  man  by  m. 

7.  17  the  family  of  the  Zarhites  man  by  man 
7.  18  hebroughthishouseholdmanbyman;and 

Judg.  5.  30  to  every  man  a  damsel  (or)  two ;  to  Sisera 
2  Sa.  23.  1  the  man  (who  was)  raised  up  on  high,  the 
1  Chi. 23.    3  their  number  by  their  polls,  man  by  man 


MAN 


i  Ch.24.  4  there  were  more  chief  men  found  of  the 
26.  12  (even)amongthechief  men, (having) wards 
Job  3.  3  was  said.  There  is  a  man  child  conceived 
3.  23  (Why  is  light  given)  to  a  man  whose  way 
4. 17  shall  a  man  be  more  pure  than  his  Maker 
10.  5  (Are)  thy  days . .  thy  years  as  man's  days 
14. 10  But  man  dieth,  and  wasteth  away  ;  yea 
14.  14  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  (again)?  All  the 

16.  21  Oh  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with 
22.  2  Can  a  man  be  profitable  unto  God,  as  he 
33.  17  may  withdraw,  .and  hide  pride  from  man 

33.  29  these. .  worketh  God  oftentimes  with  m. 

34.  7  Whatman(is)likeJob,(who)driukethup 
34.  9  It  profiteth  a  man  nothing  that  lie  should 
34.  34  and  let  a  wise  man  hearken  unto  me 

38.  3  Gird  up  now  thy  loins  like  a  man  ;  for  I 
40.  7  Gird  up  thy  loins  now  like  a  man :  I  will 
Psa.  34.  8  blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  trusteth  in  him 
37.  23  steps  of  a  (good)  man  are  ordered  by  the 
40.  4  Blessed  (is)  that  man  that  maketh  the  L. 
52.    7  the  man  (that)  made  not  God  his  strength 

88.  4  I  am  counted . .  I  am  as  a  man  (that  hath) 

89.  48  What  man  (is  he  that)  liveth,  and  shall 
94.  12  Blessed  (is)  the  man  whom  thou  chasten. 

127.  5  Happy  (is)  the  man  that  hath  his  quiver 

128.  4  thus  shaU'theminbeblessed  that  feareth 
Prov.  6.  34  jealousy  (is)  the  rage  of  a  man  ;  therefore 

20.  24  Man's  goings  (are)  of  the  LORD  ;  how  can 
24.  5  A  wise  man  (is)  strong;  yea.  .of  knowle. 
28.    3  A  poor  man  that  oppresseth  the  poor  (is 

28.  21  for  a  piece  of  bread  (that)  man  will  trans. 

29.  5  man  that  fiattereth  his  neighbour  sprea. 

30.  1  man  spake  unto  Ithiel,  even  unto  Ithiel 
30.  19  and  the  way  of  a  man  with  a  maid 

Jer.  17.    5  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Cursed  (be)theman 

17.  7  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  the 

22.  30  a  man  (that)  shall  not  prosper  in  his  days 

23.  9  and  like  a  man  whom  wine  hath  overcome 

30.  6  wherefore  do  I  see  every  man  with  his 

31.  22  new  thing..  A  woman  shall  compass  am. 

43.  6  men,  and  women,  and  children,  .the  king's 

44.  20  Then  Jeremiah  said.  ,to  the  men,  and  to 
Lam.   3.    1  I  (am)  the  man  (that)  hath  seen  affliction 

3.  27  (It  is)  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the 
3.  35  To  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before 
3.  39  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  sins? 
Dan.   8.  15  there  stood  before,  .theappearanceofam. 
Mic.    2.    2  so  they  oppress  a  man  and  his  house,  even 
Hal).  2.    5  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at  home 
Zech.  13.    7  A  wake,  O  sword . .  against  the  man  (that 
11. A  {mighty)  man,  "Ha  geber. 

Psa.  18.  25  with  an  upright  man  thou  wilt  show  thy. 
12.  A  nude,  irn  zakar. 

Lev.  15.  33  of  the  man, And  of  thewoman.and  of  him 
Num.  31.  17  kill  every  woman  that  hath  known  man  by 
31. 18  have  not  known  a  man  by  lying  with  him 
31.  35  women  that  had  not  known  man  by  lying 
Judgzi.  11  and  every  woman  that  hath  lain  by  man 
Jer.  20.  15  A  man  child  is  born  unto  thee,  making 

30.   6  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail  with  child 
Eze.  16. 17  madest  to  thyself  images  of  men,  and  didst 
1Z.A  soul,  breathing  creature,  v)*}\  nephesh. 

2  Ki.  12.   4  money  that  every  man  is  set  at,  (and)  all 
1  Ch.  5.  21  they  took,  .of  meu  an  hundred  thousand 

li.One,  ~ins<!  echad. 

Judg.  4.  16  Barak  pursued,  .(and)  there  was  not  a  man 

15.-4  man 

Matt.  7. 

7 


husband,  avrjp  oner. 
24  I  will  liken  him  unto  a  wise  man,  which 
26  shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man,  which 
41  men  of  Nineve  shall  rise  in  judgment  with 
14.  21  they,  .were about  five  thousand  men,  bes. 

14.  35  when  the  men  of  that  place  had  knowledge 

1 5.  33  they  that  did  eat  were  four  thousand  men 
Mark  6.  20  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  an 

6.  44  And  they,  .were  about  five  thousand  men 

10.  2  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  putaway(his)w.? 
Luke  1.  27  To  a  virgin  espoused  to  a  man  whose  name 

1.34  How  shall  this  be,  seeing  I  know  not  am.? 
5.    8  Depart  from  me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man 
5.  is  a  man  full  of  leprosy ;  who,  seeing  Jesus 
5.  18  men  brought  in  a  bed.  .and  they  sought 

7.  20  When  the  men  were  come  unto  him,  they 

8.  27  there  met  him  out  of  the  city  a  certain  man 
8.  38  Now  the  man  out  of  whom  the  devils  were 

8.  41  there  came  a  man  named  Jairus,  and  he 

9.  14  For  they  were  about  five  thousand  men 
9.  30  there  talked  with  him  two  men,  which  were 
9.  32  they  saw  his  glory,  and  the  two  men  that 
9.  38  man  of  the  company  cried  out,  saying,  M. 

11.  31  rise  up  in  the  judgment  with  the  men  of 
1 1.  32  men  of  Nineve  shall  rise  up  in  the  judgm. 
14.  24  none  of  those  men  which  were  bidden  shall 
17.  12  there  met  him  ten  men  that  were  lepers 
19.  2  man  named  Zaccheus,  which  was  the  chief 
19.    7  lie  was  gone  to  be  guest  with  a  man  that 

22.  63  men  that  held  Jesusmockedhim.andsm. 

23.  50  a  man  named  Joseph . .  a  good  man,  and  a 

24.  4  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining  garni. 
John   1. 13  not  of  blood,  .nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but 

1. 30  After  me  cometh  a  man  which  is  preferred 
6. 10  So  the  men  sat  down,  in  number  about  five 
Acts   1.  10  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white  apparel 
1.  11  Ye  meu  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing 
1.  16  Men  (and)  brethren,  this  scripture  must 

1.  21  Wherefore  of  these  men  which  have  com. 

2.  5  devout  men,  out  of  every  nation  under  h. 
2. 14  Ye  men  <»f  Judea,  and  all  (ye)  that  dwell 
2.  22  Ye  men  of  Israel . .  a  man  approved  of  God 
2. 29  Men  (and)  brethren,  let  me  freely  speak 


640 


.  2.  37  said.  .Men  (and)  brethren,  what  shall  we 

3.  2  certain  man  lame  from  his  mother's  womb 
3. 12  Ye  men  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye  at  this? 

4.  4  number  of  the  men  was  about  five  thou. 

5.  1  certain  man  named  Ananias,  with  Sapph. 
5. 14  multitudes  both  of  men  and  women 
5.  25  men  whom  ye  put  in  prison  are  standing 
5.  35  Ye  men  of  Israel,  take  heed  to  yourselves 

5.  36  to  whom  a  number  of  men.  .joined  them. 

6.  3  look  ye  out  among  you  seven  men  of  ho. 
6.    5  they  chose  Stephen,  aman  full  of  faith  and 

6.  11  Then  they  suborned  men,  which  said,  We 

7.  2  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers, hearken  ;  The 

8.  2  devout  men  carried  Stephen  (to  his  burial) 
8.  3  haling  men  and  women, committed  (them) 
8.  9  there,  .a  certain  man  called  Simon,  which 
8.  12  they  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women 

8.  27  man  of  Ethiopia,  an  eunuch  of  great  aut. 

9.  2  whether  they  were  men  or  women,he  might 
9.   7  men  which  journeyed  with  him  stood  sp. 
9.  12  hath  seen  in  a  vision  aman  named  Anan. 
9.  13  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man,  how 
9.  38  they  sent  unto  him  two  [men],  desiring 

10.  1  There  was  a  certain  man  in  Cesarea  called 
10.  5  send  men  toJoppa,and  call  for  (one)  Simon 
10.  17  men  which  were  sent  from  Cornelius  had 
10. 19  spirit  said  unto  him,  Behold,  three  men 
10.  21  Then  Peter  went  down  to  the  men  which 
10.  22  Cornelius  the  centurion,  a  just  man,  and 
10.  28  unlawful  thing  for  a  man  that  is  a  Jew  to 

10.  30  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright  clothing 

11.  3  Thou  wentest  in  tomen  uncircumcised 
11.  11  three  men  already  come  unto  the  house 

11. 12  and  we  entered  into  the  man's  house 
11.  13  Send  [men]  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  Simon 
11.  20  some  of  them  were  )  len  of  Cyprus  and  C. 
11.  24  For  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the 
13.    7  Sergius  Paulus,  a  prudent  man  ;  who  ca. 
13.  15  men  (and)  brethren,  if  ye  have  any  word 

13. 16  Men  of  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God,  give 
13.  21  gave,  .a  man  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  by 
13.  22  IhavefoundDavid..[anian]aftermineown 
13.  26  Men  (and)  brethren,  .to  you  is  the  word 

13.  38  Be  it  known  unto  you  therefore, men  (and) 

14.  8  there  sat  a  certain  man  at  Lystra,  impo. 

15.  7  Men  (and)  brethren,  ye  know  how  that  a 

15. 13  James  answered,  saying,  Men  (and)  bre. 
15.  22  send  chosen  meu.  .chief  men  among  the 

15.  25  send  chosen  men  unto  you  with  our  bel. 

16.  9  There  stood  a  man  of  Macedonia,  and  pr. 

17.  12  many  of  them  believed,  .of  men,  not  a  few 
17.  22  men  of  Athens,  I  perceive  that  in  all  th. 
17.  31  (that)  man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  .he 

17.  34  certain  men  clave  unto  him,  and  believed 

18.  24  an  eloquent  man,  (and)  mighty  in  the  Scr. 

19.  7  And  all  the  men  were  about  twelve 
19.  35  whatman  is  there  that  knoweth  not  how 

19.  37  For  ye  have  brought  hither  these  men 

20.  30  Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise 

21.  11  So  shall  the  Jews,  .bind  the  man  that  ow. 
21.  23  We  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on 
21.  26  Then  Paul  took  the  men,  and  the  next  day 
21.  28  Crying  out,  Men  of  Israel,  help  :  This  is 

21.  38  four  thousand  men  that  were  murderers? 

22.  1  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hear  ye  my 
22.  3  I  am  verily  a  man  (which  am)  a  Jew,  born 
22.  4  delivering  into  prisons  both  men  and  wo 
22.  12  devout  man  according  to  the  law,  having 

1  Men  (and)  brethren,  I  have  lived  in  all 
6  Men  (and)  brethren,  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the 
21  lie  in  wait,  .more  than  forty  men,  which 
27  This  man  was  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  sh. 
30  how  that  the  Jews  laid  wait  for  the  man 
5  For  we  have  found  this  man  (a)  pestilent 
25.    5  go  down  with  (me),  and  accuse  this  man 
25.  14  There  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by  F. 

25. 17  commanded  the  man  to  be  brought  forth 
25-  23  with  the  chief  captains  and  principal  m. 
25.  24  all  men  which  are  here  present  with  us 
28. 17  Men  (and)  brethren,  though  I  have  com. 

Rom.  4.    8  Blessed  (is)  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord 
7.    3,  3  she  be  married  to  another  man 
11.    4  reserved  to  myself  seven  thousand  men 
1  Co.  7.  16  how  knowest  thou,  O  man,  whether  thou 
11.   3  know,  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  Christ 
11.    3  and  the  head  of  the  woman  (is)  the  man 
it.    4  Kvery  man  praying  or  prophesying,  having 
11.    7  For  a  man  indeed  ought  not  to  cover  (his) 
11.    7  but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  man 
11.    8  man  is  not.  .but  the  woman  of  the  man 
11.    9  Neither  was  the  man  created  for  the  wo. 
11.    9  but  the  woman  for  the  man 
11.  11  neither  is  the  man  without  the  woman 
11.  11  neither  the  woman  without  the  man,  in 
11.  12  woman  (is)  of  the  man,  even  so  (is)  the  m. 
11.  14  if  aman  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame  unto 
13.  11  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish 
Eph.   4.  13  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of 
5.  28  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  astlicir 
1  Ti.    2.    8  I  will  therefore  that  men  pray  every  where 
2.  12  nor  to  usurp  authority  over  the  man,  but 
5.   9  widow,  .having  been  the  wife  of  one  man 
Jas.     1.    8  A  double  minded  man  (is)  unstable  in  all 
1.  12  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  endureth  temp. 
1.  20  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteous. 

1.  23  he  is  like  unto  a  man  beholding  hisnatu. 

2.  2  For  if  there  come,  .a  man  with  a  gold  ring 

3.  2  the  same  (is)  a  perfect  maii,:(and)  able  also 

16. Belonging  to  tnan  or  humanity,  avdpcoirivos. 
1  Co,   2.    4  notwithenticingwords  of  [man's]  wisdom 
2. 13  not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  te. 


MAN 


1  Co.    4.    3  be  judged  of  you,  or  of  man's  judgment 
1  Pe.    2.  13  Submit,  .to  every  ordinance  of  man  for 

17. A  man,  a  human  being,  6.v6pwrros  a?ithropos. 
Matt.  4.   4  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but 

4.  19  Follow,  .and  I  will  make  you  fishers  of  m. 

5.  13  and  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  men 

5.  16  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that 

5.  19  Whosoever  therefore,  .shall  teachmen  so 

6.  1  do  not  your  alms  before  men,  to  be  seen 
6.  2  that  they  may  have  glory  of  men.  Verily 
6.  5  standing,  .that  they  may  be  seen  of  men 
6. 14  For  ifyeforgive  men  their  trespasses, your 
6.  15  ye  forgive  not  men  their  trespasses,  neither 
6.  16  that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast 

6.  18  That  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast 

7.  9  Or  what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom  if  his 

7.  12  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do 

8.  9  For  I  am  a  man  uuder  authority,  having 
8.  20  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay 

8.  27  the  men  marvelled  saying,  What  manner 

9.  6  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  for. 
9.  8  God,  which  had  given  such  power  unto  m. 
9.  9  saw  a  man,  named  Matthew,  sitting  at  the 
9.  32  brought  to  him  a  dumb  [man]  possessed 

10.  17  But  beware  of  men  ;  for  they  will  deliver 
10.  23  nothavegone.  .till the Sonofman become 
10.  32  Whosoever,  .shall  confess  me  before  men 
10.  33  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men,  him 
10.  35  For  I  am  come  to  set  a  man  at  variance 

10.  36  man's  foes  (shall  be)  they  of  his  own  hou. 

11.  8  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment?  Behold,  they 
11.  19  The  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  drinking 

11.  19  say,  Behold  a  man  gluttonous,  and  a  wine 

12.  8  For  the  Son  of  man  is  lord  even  of  the 
12.  10  there  was  a  man  which  had  (his)  hand  w. 
12.  11  What  man  shall  there  be  among  you  that 
12.  12  How  much  then  is  a  man  better  than  a 
12.  13  Then  saith  he  to  the  man,  Stretch  forth 
12.  31  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  [unto  111.] 
12.  31  blasphemy,  .shall  not  be  forgiven  unto  m. 
12.  32  speaketh  a  word  against  the  Sou  of  man 
12.  35  A  good  man.  .and  an  evilman,  out  of  the 
12.  36  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak 

12.  4c  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and 
12.  43  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 

12.  45  last  (state)  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the 

13.  24  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  unto  a  man 
13.  25  while  men  slept,  his  enemy  came  and  so. 
13.  31  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took 
13.  37  He  thatsoweth  the..seedistheSouofmac 
13.  41  The  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  ang. 
13.  44  which  when  a  man  hath  found,  he  hideth 
13.  45  like  unto  a  merchant  man  seeking  goodly 
13. 52  like  unto  a  man  (that  is)  an  householder 
15.    9  worship,  .teaching,  commandmer.es  of  111, 

1 5. 1 1  defileth  a  man ;  but . .  this  defileth  a  man 
15.  18  forth  from  the  heart;  and  they  defile  them. 
15.  20  These  are  (the  things)  which  defile  a  man 

15.  20  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not  a  m. 

16.  13  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  man 
16.  23  not  the  things,  .but  those  that  be  of  men 
16. 26  what  is  a  man.  .or  what  shall  a  man  give 
16.  27  For  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  the  gl. 

16.  28  till  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  his 

17.  9  until  the  Son  of  man  be  risen  again  from 

17. 12  Likewise  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  suffer 
17.  14  there  came  to  him  a  (certain)  man,  kneel. 
17.  22  The  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  into 

17.  22  shall  be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  men 

18.  7  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence  co. 
18.  11  [For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that] 

18.  12  If  a  man  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  one 

19.  3  IS  it  lawful  for  [a  man]  to  put  away  his  w. 
19.  5  Fortius  cause  shalla  man  leave fatheraud 
19.    6  What.  .God  hath  joined.. let  not  man  put 

19. 10  If  the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  (his)  w. 
19. 12  eunuchs,  which  were  made  eunuchs  of  m. 
19.  26  With  men  this  is  impossible ;  but  with  G. 

19.  28  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  thr. 

20.  1  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man  (that 
20.  18  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  unto  the 

20.  28  Even  as  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  m. 

21.  25  whence  was  it?  from  heaven,  or  of  men? 
21.  26  But  if  we  shall  say,  Of  men ;  we  fear  the 
21.  28  A  (certain)  man  had  two  sons;  and  he  c. 

22. 11  a  man  which  had  not  on  a  wedding  garni. 
22. 16  for  thou  regardest  not  the  person  of  men 
23.  4  bind  heavy  burdens.  .audlay(them)onm. 
23.  5  their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen  of  men 
23.  7  greetings,  .to  be  called  of  men,  Rabbi,  R. 
23.  13  for  ye  shut  up  the  kingdom.,  against  men 

23.  28  outwardly  appear  righteous  unto  men,  but 

24.  27  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man 
24.  30  sign  of  the  Son  of  man . .  see  the  Son  of  man 
24-  37i  39  shallalso  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man 

24.  44  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man 

25.  13  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  man 
25.  14  For  (the  kingdom  of  heaven  is)  as  aman 
25.  24  I  knew  thee  that  thou  art  an  hard  man 

25.  31  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his 
26. 24  The  Son  of  man  goeth.  .the  Sou  of  man  is 

26.  45  the  Sonofman  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 
26  64  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sit. 
26.  72  again  he  denied.  .1  do  not  know  the  man 

26.  74  I  know  nut  the  man.  And  immediately  the 

27.  32  they  found  a  manofCyrene,  Simon  byname 
27.  57  there  came  a  rich  man  of  Arimathea,  na. 

Mark  i.  17  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men 

1.  23  there  was.  .a  man  with  an  unclean  spirit 
2. 10  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth 

2.  27  sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man 


MAN 


641 


MAN 


Mark  2  28  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  sabbath 
3.    1  there  was  a  man  which  had  a  withered 
3.    3  he  saith  unto  the  man  which  had  the  wi. 
3.    5  saith  unto  the  man.  Stretch  forth  thine 

3.  28  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto  the  sons  of  men 

4.  26  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  ground 

5.  2  there  met  him  out  of  the  tombs  a  manw. 
5.  8  Come  out  of  the  man,  (thou)  unclean  sp. 
7.  7  (for)  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men 
7.  8  ye  hold  the  tradition  of  men,  (as)  the  w. 
7.  n  if  a  manshall  say  to  his  father  or  mother 
7. 15  There  is  nothing;  from  without  a  man, that 
7. 15  but.  .those  are  they  that  defile  the  man 
7.  18  thing  from  without entereth  intotheman 
7.  20  cometh  out  of  the  man.  .defileththeman 
7.  21  For  from  within,  out  of  the  heart  of  men 

7.  23  All  these  evil  things,  .defile  the  man 
S.  24  looked  up,  and  said,  I  see  men  as  trees 

8.  27  saying  unto  them,  Whom  do  men  say  that 
8.  33  thou  savourest . .  the  things . .  be  of  men 
8.  36  For  what  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall 

8.  37  what  shall  [a  man]  give  in  exchange  for 
8  38  of  him  also  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  asha. 

9.  9  till  the  Son  of  man  were  risen  from  the 
9.  12  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  that 
9.  31  Son  of  manisdelivered-.thehandsofnien 

10.  7  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father 
10.  9  What . .  God  hath  joined . .  let  not  man  put 
10.  27  With  men  (it  is)  impossible,  but  not  with 
10.  33  the  Son  of  manshall  he  delivered  unto  the 

10.  45  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  beministered 

11.  2  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never  man  sat 
11.  30  The  baptism  of  John,  was  (it),  .of  men? 

11.  32  if  we  shall  say,  Of  men  ;  they  feared  the 

12.  1  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and  set  an  hedge 
12. 14  thou  art  true,  and  carest  for  no  man ;  for 

13.  26  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  ofman  coming 
13. 34  the  Son.,  is)  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey 

14.  13  there  shall  meet  you  a  mau  bearing  a  pit. 
14.  21  The  Son  of  man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  iswr. 
14.  21  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  ofman 
14.  21  for  that  man  if  he  had  never  been  born 
14.  41  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 
14.  62  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on 

14.  71 1  know  not  this  man  of  whom  ye  speak 

15.  39  said,  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God 
Luke  1.  25  to  take  away  ray  reproach  among  men 

2. 14  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men 
2.  25  there  was  a  man.  .the  same  man  (was)  just 
2.  52  Jesus  increased. .  favour  with  God  and  in. 
4.    4  That  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone 

4.  33  in  the  synagogue  there  was  a  man  which 
5. 10  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men 

5. 18  a  man  which  was  taken  with  a  palsy :  and 

5.  20  said  unto  him,  Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven 

5.  24  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  upon  e. 

6.  5  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  sabb. 
6.   6  there  was  a  man  whose  right  hand  was 
o.    8  said  to  the  [man]  which  had  the  withered 
6. 10  said  unto  [the  man],  Stretch  forth  thy  h. 
6.  22  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you 
6.  22  cast  out.. as  evil,  for  the  Son  of  man's s. 
6.  26  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak 
6.  31  as  ye  would  that  raen  should  do  to  you,  do 
6.  45  A  good  man . .  and  an  evil  [man]  out  of  the 
6.  48  He  is  like  a  man  which  built  an  house,  and 

6.  49  like  a  man  that  without  a  foundation  built 

7.  8  For  I  also  am  a  man  set  under  authority 
7.  25  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  man  cloth. 
7.  31  Whereunto  then  shall  I  liken  the  men  of 
7.  34  The  Son  of  man  is  come  eating  and  drin. 

7.  34  Behold  a  gluttonous  man,  and  a  wine  bib. 

8.  29  the  unclean  spirit  to  come  out  of  the  man 

8.  33  Then  went  the  devils  out  of  the  man,  and 
S.  35  foundthe man outofwhomtbedevils were 
9. 22  The  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things 

9.  25  what  is  a  man  advantaged,  if  he  gain  the 
9.  26  of  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed 
9.  44  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  into.  .m. 
9.  56  [Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's] 
9.  58  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay 

j  1.  24  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,  he 
11.  26  last  (state)  of  that  man  (is)  worse  than  the 
11.  30  so  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  be  to  this 
11.  44  the  men  that  walk  over(them)  are  not  a. 

1 1.  46  for  ye  lade  men  with  burdens  grievous  to 

12.  8  Whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men 
12.  8  shall  the  Son  of  man  also  confess  before 
12.  9  he  that  denieth  me  before  raen  shall  be 
12. 10  shall  speak  a  word  against  the  Son  of  man 
12.  14  Man,  who  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider 
12.  16  ground  of  a  certain  rich  man  brought  forth 
12.  36  like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  lord,w. 

12.  40  the  Son  of  man  cometh  at  an  hour  when 

13.  4  sinners  above  all  men  that  dwelt  at  Jeru. 

13.  19  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took 

14.  2  there  was  a  certain  man  before  him  which 
14. 16  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper,  and 

14.  30  This  manbegan  to  build,  and  was  not  able 

15.  4  What  man  of  you,  having  an  hundred  sh. 

15.  11  And  he  said,  A  certain  man  had  two  sons 

16.  1  There  was  a  certain  rich  man  which  had 
16.  15  wilich.  justify  yourselves  before  men ;  but 
16.  15  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men  is 

16.  19  There  was  a  certain  rich  man,  which  was 

17.  22  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
17.  24  so  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  be  in  his  day 
17.  26  it  be  also  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man 

17.  30  it  be  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of  man  is 

18.  2  whiehfearednotGod,neitherregardedm. 
18.  "4  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man 
18.    8  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find 

81 


Luke 1 8 
18 
1 8, 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


=3- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
24. 
24. 


John 


19 

Acts    4 


0  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray 

1  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men 
.  27  things  which  are  impossible  with  men  are 

31  concerning  the  Son  of  manshall  be  acco. 
10  For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and 

21  feared,  .because thou  art  an  austere  man 

22  Thou  knewest  that  I  was  an  austere  man 
30  colt  tied,  whereon  yet  neverraan  sat:  loose 

4  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it.  .of  men  ? 
6  if  we  say,  Of  men ;  all  the  people  will  stone 
9  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and  let 

26  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,  and 

27  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming 
36  worthy,  .to  stand  before  the  Son  of  man 
10  there  shall  a  man  meet  you,  bearing  a  p. 
22  truly  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it  was  det. 
22  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  he  is  betrayed 
48  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss? 
58  also  of  them.  And  Peter  said,  Man,  I  am 
60  Peter  said,  Man,  I  know  not  what  thou 
69  Hereafter  shall  the  Son  of  man  sit  on  the 

4  Then  said  Pilate . .  I  find  no  fault  in  this  m. 

6  he  asked  whether  the  man  were  a  Galilean 
14  Ye  have  brought  this  man  unto  me,  as  one 
14  have  found  no  fault  in  this  man  touching 
47  saying,  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  ra. 

7  The  Son  of  man  must  be  delivered  into  the 
7  hands  of  sinful  men,  and  be  crucified 
4  was  life ;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men 

6  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 
9  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the 

51  angels,  .descending  upon  the  Son  of  man 
10  Every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  fortli 

25  testify  of  man.  .he  knew  what  was  in  man 
1  There  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees,  named 

4  How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old  ? 

13  but  he.  .the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heav 

14  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up 

19  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  b. 

27  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  gi. 

28  woman,  .went,  .and  saith  to  the  men 

29  see  a  man  which  told  me  all  things  that 

50  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus  had  sp. 

5  certain  man  was  there,  which  had  an  inf. 

7  I  have  no  man,  when  the  water  is  troub. 
9  immediately  the  man  was  made  whole 

12  What  man  is  that  which  said  unto  thee 

15  man  departed,  and  told  the  Jews  that  it 
27  authority,  .because  he  is  the  Son  ofman 
34  I  receive  not  testimony  from  man  :  but 
41  I  receive  not  honour  from  men 

10  Jesus  said,  Make  the  men  sit  down.  Now 
14  men,  when  they  had  seen  the  miraclelthat 

27  which  the  Son  ofman  shall  give  unto  you 
53  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man 
62  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  ascend 

22  ye  on  the  sabbath  day  circumcise  a  man 

23  If  a  man  on  the  sabbath  day  receive  circ. 

23  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit  whole  on 

46  answered,  Never  man  spake  like  this  [m.] 

51  Doth  our  law  judge  (any)  man  before  it  h. 
17  written,  .that  the  testimony  of  two  men 

28  When  ye  have  lifted  up  the  Sou  of  man 
40  man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth,  which 

1  he  saw  a  man  which  was  blind  from  (his) 

11  man  that  is  called  Jesus  made  clay,  and 

16  This  man  is  not  of  God,  because  he  keep. 

16  How  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such 

24  Then  again  called  they  the  man  that  was 

24  Give  God  the  praise  :  we  know  that  this 

30  man  answered.  .Why  herein  is  a  marvel. 

33  because  that  thou,  being  a  man,  makest 

47  What  do  we?  fortius  man  doeth  many 
50  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people 
23  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  mansh. 

34  The  Son  of  man . .  who  is  this  Son  of  man  ? 
43  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  p. 

31  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and  God 

21  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world 

6  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the  men 
14  expedient  that  one  man  should  die  for  the 

17  Art  not  thou  also  (one)  of  this  man's  dis. 

29  What  accusation bringye  against  this  m.? 
5  (Pilate)  saith  unto  them,  Behold  the  man  ! 
9  the  good  deed  done  to  the  impotent  man 

12  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  w. 

13  that  they  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  m. 

14  the  man  which  was  healed  standing  with 

16  What  shall  we  do  to  these  men?  for  that 

17  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  name 

22  For  the  man  was  above  forty  years  old  on 
4  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  G. 

28  intend  to  bring  this  man's  blood  upon  us 

29  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men 

35  what  ye  intend  to  do  as  touching  these  men 
38  Refrain  from  these  men,  and  let  them  al. 
38  for  if  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men 
13  This  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphem. 
56  I  see . .  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right 
33  there  he  found  a  certain  man  named  Eneas 

26  saying,  Stand  up  ;  I  myself  also  am  a  man 

25  should  not  call  any  man  common  or  unc. 
22  It  is)  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man 
11  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness  of  men 

15  We  also  are  men  of  like  passions  with  you 
17  residue  of  men  might  seek  after  the  Lord 

26  Men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the 
17  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  most 

20  These  raen,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly 
35  magistrates  sent.. saying,  Let  those  men 

25  Neither  is  worshipped  with  [men's]hands 

26  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  raen  for 


Acts  17. 
*7- 
18. 
19. 
19. 


26. 

26. 

28. 

.  Rom.  1. 


:  Co. 


Gal. 


Eph. 


Col. 


:Th. 


2TI1. 


29  silver,  or  stoue,  graven  by  art  and  man's 

30  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent 

13  persuadeth  men  to  worship  God  contrary 
16  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was  leaped  on 
35  what  man  is  there  that  knoweth  not  how 

28  This  is  the  man  that  teacheth  all  (men)  ev. 
39  I  am  a  man  (which  am)  a  Jew  of  Tarsus 

15  thou  shalt  be  his  witness  unto  all  men  of 

25  Is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  a  man  that 

26  Take  heed  what  thou  doest  -  for  this  man 
9  We  find  no  evil  in  this  man :  but  if  a  spirit 

16  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward,  .men 
16  deliver  any  man  to  die,  before  that  he  w. 

22  Agrippa  said.  .1  would  also  hear  the  man 

31  This  man  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death 

32  This  man  might  have  been  set  at  liberty 
4  No  doubt  this  man  is  a  murderer,  whom 

18  against  all.  .unrighteousness  of  men,  wh. 

23  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man 

1  0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest 

3  O  man,  that  judgest  them  which  do  such 
9  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,  of 

16  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  raen 

29  a  Jew.  .whose  praise  (is)  not  of  men,  but 

4  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar;v.5 
28  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds 

6  describeththeblessednessoftheman,unto 
12  by  one  man.  .so  death  passed  upon  all  men 

15  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be  dead 

18  (judgment  came)  upon  all  men  to  condem. 
j  8  (the  free  gift  came)  upon  all  raen  unto  j. 

19  For  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many 

6  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  (him),  that 
1  the  law  hath  dominion  over  a  man  as  long 

22  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward 

24  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  de. 

20  Nay  but,  O  man,  who  art  thou  thatrepli. 

5  man  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live 

17  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men 

18  If  it  be  possible,  .livepeaceablywithallm. 
iS  he  that.. serveth  Christ  (is).. approved  of  m. 

20  evil  for  that  man  who  eateth  with  offence 

25  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men 

25  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men 

5  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men 
9  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the 

11  For  whatman  knoweth  the  things  of  a  m. 
11  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him 

14  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  th.;3.  3. 

1  Let  a  man  so  account  of  us  as  of  the  min. 
9  a  spectacle  unto  the  world,  .and  to  men 

18  Every  sin  that  a  man  doeth  is  without  the 
1  (It  is)  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  wo. 

7  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  myself 

23  Ye  are  bought. .be  not  ye  the  servants  of  m. 

26  (I  say),  that  (it  is)  good  for  a  man  so  to  be 
28  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him 

1  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 

2  speaketh  not  unto  men,  but  unto  God :  for 

3  But  he  that  prophesieth  speaketh  unto  m. 

19  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most ;  v.  32. 

21  For  since  by  man  (came)  death,  by  man 
39  but  (there  is)  one  (kind  of)  flesh  of  men 
45  The  first  [man]  Adam  was  made  a  livings. 
47  The  first  mau.  .the  second  man  (is)  the  L. 

2  are  our  epistle . .  known  and  read  of  all  m. 
2  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of 

16  though  our  outward  man  perish,  yet  the 

11  we  persuade  men:  butwearemademani. 

21  not  only,  .but  also  in  the  sight  of  men 

2  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ  above  four ;  9. 8. 

3  I  knew  such  a  man,  whether  in  the  body 

4  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter 
1  not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus 

10  men,  or  God?  or  do  I  seek  to  please  men? 
10  if  I  yet  pleased  men,  I  should  not  v.  n. 

12  I  neither  received  it  [of  man],  neither  was 

6  God  accepteth  no  man's  person:  for  they 
16  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of 

12  man  that  doeth  them  shall  live  in  them 

15  Though(itbe)butaman'scov..  .no  man.   I] 

3  again  to  every  man  that  is  circumcised 

1  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,'ye  which 

7  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 

15  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man 

5  was  not  made  known  unto  the  sons  of  ra. 

16  with  might  by  his  spirit  in  the  inner  man 

8  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men 

14  the  sleight  of  men, (and)  cunningcraftiness 

22  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according 

24  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after 
31  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother 

7  service,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men 

7  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men 

8  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  hum. 

5  Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all  m. 
28  warning  every  man, and  teaching  every[m.] 
28  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Ch. 

8  after  the  tradition  of  men,  after  the  nidi. 

22  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of  men 

9  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds 

23  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men 

4  notaspleasingmen,  but  God, which  trieth 

6  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory,  neither  of  you 

13  ye  received  (it)  not  (as)  the  word  of  men 

15  please  not  God, and  are  contrary  to  all  men 
8  despiseth  not  man,  but  God,  who  hath  also 

3  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of 

2  delivered  from  unreasonable  wicked  men 
1  (and)  giving  of  thanks,  be  made  for  all  men 

4  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to 

5  one  mediator  between  God  and  men,  the 


MAN 


642 


MANASSEH 


i  Ti.    4.  10  who  is  the  saviour  of  all  men,  specially 

5.  24  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  be. 

6.  5  Perverse  disputings  of  men  of  corrupt  m. 

6.  g  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition 
6. 11  0  man  of  God,  flee  these  things.,  folio  w 
6. 16  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see :  to 

2  Ti.    2.    2  the  same  commit  then  to  faithful  men,  who 
3.    2  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves 
3.    8  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concer. 
3.  13  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and 
3.  17  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  throughly 

Titus  1.  14  commandments  of  men,  that  turn  from 

2.  11  grace  of  God.  .hath  appeared  to  all  men 

3.  2  speak  evil  of  no  man,  to  be  no  brawlers 
3.  8  things  are  good  and  profitable  unto  men 
3,  10  A  man  that  is  an  heretic  after  the  first 

Heb.   2.    6  What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of 
2.    6  or  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him 
5.    1  taken  from  among  men  is  ordained  for  m. 
1    6. 16  men  verily  swear  by  the  greater ;  and  an 

7.  8  herementhatdiereceivetithes;  butthere 

7.  28  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  which 

8.  2  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  man 

9.  27  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but 
13.    6  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto  me 

Jas      1.   7  For  let  not  that  man  think  that  he  shall 
1. 19  let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to 
2.  20  But  wilt  thou  know,  O  vain  man,  that  faith 

2.  24  by  works  a  man  is  justified,  and  not  by 

3,  8  tongue  can  no  man  tame ;  (it  is)  an  unruly 
3.    9  therewith  curse  we  men,  which  are  made 

5.  17  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions 

1  Pe    1.  24  the  glory  (of  man]  as  the  flower  of  grass 

2.    4  disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  G. 

2.  15  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men 

3.  4  (let  it  be)  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  in 

4.  2  live,  .in  the  flesh  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but 
4.   6  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh 

2  Pe.    1.  21  old  time  by  the  will  of  man ;  but  holy  men 

2.  16  the  dumb  ass  speaking  with  man's  voice 

3.  7  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men 
1  Jo.    5.    9  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the 
Jude         4  there  are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares 
Rev.    4.    7  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  man,  and 

8.  11  men  died  of  the  waters,  because  they  were 

9.  4  those  men  which  have  not  the  seal  of  God 
9.   5  of  a  scorpion,  when  he  striketh  a  man 

9.  6  in  those  days  shall  men  seek  death,  and 
9.  7  and  their  faces  (were)  as  the  faces  of  men 
9.  10  their  power  (was)  to  hurt  men  five  months 
9.  15  loosed,  .for  to  slay  the  third  part  :f  men 
9. 18  By  these  three  was  the  third  part  of  men 
9.  20  the  rest  of  the  men,  which  were  not  killed 
11. 13  in  the  earthquake  were  slain  men  of  seven 
13.  13  maketh  fire  come  down .  .in  the  sight  of  m. 

13.  18  it  is  the  number  of  a  man  ;  and  his  number 

14.  4  These  were  redeemed  from  among  men 
16.    2  the  men  which  had  the  mark  of  the  beast 
16.    8  given  unto  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire 
16.    9  And  men  were  scorched  with  great  heat 
16.  i3  as  was  not  since  men  were  upon  the  earth 
16.  21  fell  upon  men  a  great  hail  out  of  heaven 
16.  21  men  blasphemed  God  because  of  the  pla. 
i3.  13  and  chariots,  and  slaves,  and  souls  of  men 
21.    3  the  tabernacle  of  God  (is)  with  men,  and  he 

21.  17  (according  to)  the  measure  of  a  man,  that 

18.^  male,  frpp-qv  arren. 

Pom.  1.  27  also  the  men,  leaving  the  natural  use  of 
Rev.  12.    5  she  brought  forth  a  man  child,  who  was 

19.^  male,  6.panv  arsen. 

Rom.  1.  27  men  with  men  working  that  which  is  an, 

%Q.Some  one,  a  certain  one,  rts  tis. 

Matt.  8.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
18.  12  If  a  man  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  one 

22.  24  If  a  man  die,  having  no  children,  his  br. 
Mark  8.    4  From  whence  can  a  man  satisfy  these(m.) 

12. 19  If  a  man's  brother  die,  and  leave  (his)  w. 
Lukeis.  15  for  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  ab. 
John  3.    3  Except  a  man  be  box*  again,  lie  cannot 
3.  ,5  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  (of) 

6.  50  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  die 
8.  51  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never 
8.  52  thou  sayest,  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he 

11.  10  But  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  stumb. 
14. 23  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words 

15.  6  If  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth 
15.  13  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends 

Acts  13.  41  not.  .believe,  though  a  man  declare  it  unto 
Rom.  8.  24  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope 

1  Co.  4.    2  it  is  required.,  that  anian  be  found  faith. 

2  Co.  8.  12  accepted  according  to  that  [a  man]  hath 

n.  20  if  a  man.  .a  man.  .a  man.. a  man.. a  man 

Gal.     6.    3  For  if  a  man  think  himself  to  be  someth. 

i  Ti.  1.  8  the  law  (is)  good,  if  a  man  use  itlawfnlly 
3.  1  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop,  he 
3.    5  For  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own 

2  Ti.    2.    5  And  if  a  man  also  strive  for  masteries 

2.  21  If  a  man.  .purge  himself  from.. Heb.  5.  4. 

Jas.     2.  14  though  a  man  say  he  hath  faith,  and  have 

7.  18  ;  1  Pe.  2.19;  2  Pe.  2.  19 ;  1  Jo.  4.  20. 

21.  Perfect,  TfXeios  telcios. 

1  Co.  14.  20  Brethren  .  .in  understanding  be  men 
\Sse  also  Ared,  another,  any,  every,  forbidding,  free, 
heathen,  if ,  "impotent,  love  toward,  manner,  never,  no, 
not,  old,  other,  some,  such,  this,  vise,  yet,  young.] 
HAN,  common  to  — 
Ifumaa,  belonging  to  >,i'>n,  avQpwmvos  anthropinos. 

1  Co. 10.  13  temptation . .  but  such  as  is  common  to  m. 


MAW  CHILD  — 
A  male,  131  rj'kar. 

Gen.  17.' 10  Everyman  child  among  you  shall  be  cir. 
17. 12  every  man  child  in  your  generations,  he 
17.  14  the  uncircumcised  man  child,  whose  flesh 

Lev.  12.    2  have  conceived  seed,  and  born  a  man  child 

Isa.  66.   7  Before.,  she  was  delivered  of  a  man  child 
MAW,  every  — 
A  skull,  poll,  n?373  gulgoleth. 

Exodi6.  16  an  oraer  for  every  man .  .the  number  of 
38.  26  A  bekah  for  every  man.  .half  a  shekel 
MAN  of  great  — 
1.  Great,  Sii3  gadol. 

Prov.  19. 19  A  man  of  great  wrath  shall  suffer  punish. 
MAN  of  war  — 
Army,  military  force,  0-Tpdrevy.a  strateuma. 

Luke23.  11  Herod  witli  his  men  of  war  set  him  at  no. 
MAN,  strong  — 
Strong,  l(rxvp6s  ischuros. 

Matt  12.  29  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strong  man's  ho. 
12.  29  except  he  first  bind  the  strong  man  ?  and 

Marie  3.  27  No  man  can  enterinto  a  strong  man's  ho. 
3.  27  except  he  will  first  bind  the  strong  man 

Luken.  21  When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  p. 
MAN,  young  — 

1.  youth,  young  man,  ob%  elem. 

1  Sa.  20.  22  But  if  I  say  thus  unto  the  young  man 

2.  Youth,  young  vuln,  ueavias  neanias. 

Acts  7. 58  their  clothes  at  a  young  man's  feet,  whose 
20.  9  certain  young  man  named  Eutychus,  being 
23.  17  Bring  this  young  mau  unto  the  chief  cap. 
23.  18  prayed  me  to  bring  this  [young  man]  unto 
23.  22  let  [the  young  man]  depart,  aud  charged 

3.  Youth,  youngster,  veaviffKos  neaniskos. 
Matti9.  20  The  young  mau  saith  uuto  him,  All  these 

19.  22  when  the  young  man  heard  that  saying 
Marki4.  51  a  certain  youngmau..aud[the  young  men] 

16.  5  they  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right 
Luke  7.  14  said,  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise 
Acts    2.  17  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  y. 

5.  10  the  young  men  came  in,  and  found  her 
1  Jo.   2.  13  I  write  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye 
2.  14  I  have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  be. 

MA-NA'-EN,  MavarjV  comforter. 

An    early   associate  of    Herod  the  tetrarch,  and   one 

of  the  five  prophets  or  teachers  in  Antioeh. 

Acts  13.    1  M.,  which  had  been  brought  up  with  H. 
MA  NA'-HATH,  n~:5,  nnjp  resting  place,  rest. 

1.  A  son  of  Shobal,  son  of  Reir  the  Horite.    B.C.  1760. 

Gen.  36.  23  the  children  of  Shobal  (were)  these.  .M. 
1  Ch.  1.  40  The  sonsof  Shobal;  Alian,andM.,  andE. 

2.  A  city  in  Benjamin,  over  against  Gibeah. 

1  Ch.  8.   6  inhabitants  of  Geba.  .removed  them  to  M. 
MA-NA-HETH-ITES,  nimp,  'tfflJD: 
The  families  of  Shobal  and  Salma,  two  sons  of  Caleb  son 
of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  2.52  Shobal.  .had  sons;  Haroeh.. half  of  the  M. 
2.  54  The  sons  of  Salma..  half  of  the  M.,  the.  Z. 

MA-NAS'-SEH,  -irp,  'S'p,  causing  forgetfulness. 

1.  Elder  son  of  Joseph.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  41.  51  Joseph  called,  .the  firstborn  M.:  For  God 
46.  20  unto  Joseph,  .were born  M.  and  Ephraim 
48.  1  and  he  took  with  him..M.  and  Ephraim 
48.  5  thy  two  sons,  Ephraim  and  M. .  .(are)  mi. 
48.  13  Joseph  took.  .M.  in  his  left  hand  toward 
48.  14  Israel,  .laid,  .his  left  hand  upon  M's  head 
48.  14  guiding  his  hand  wittingly ;  for  M.  (was) 
48.  17  to  remove  it  horn  Ephraim's.  .unto  M.'s 
48.  20  God  make  thee  as  Ephraim,  and  as  M.:  and 
48.  20  blessed  them,  .he  set  Ephraim  before  M. 
50.  23  the  children  also  of  Machir  tiie  son  of  M. 

Xuni26.  2S  The  sons  of  Joseph,  .(were)  M.  and  Eph. 

26.  29  Of  the  sons  of  M.:  of  Machir,  the  family 

27.  1  Gilead,  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  M. 
27.  1  the  families  of  M.  the  son  of  Joseph  :  and 
32.  39  children  of  Machir  the  son  of  M.  went  to 
32.  40  Moses  gave  Gikjad  unto,  .thesonof  M.;aud 
32.  41  Jair  the  son  of  M.  went  and  took  the  sm. 
36.    1  Gilead,  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  M. 

Deut.  3.  14  Jair  the  son  of  M.  took  all  the  country 
Josh  13.  31  the  children  of  Machir  the  son  of  M.,  (even) 

17.  1  for  Machir,the first  horn  of  M.,  the  father 
17.  2  There  was  (a  lot)  for.  .the  children  of  M. 
17.  2  these  (were)  the  male  children  of  M.  the 
17.    3  Gilead,  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  M. 

1  Ki.  4.  13  the  towns  of  Jair  the  son  of  M.,  which 
1  Ch.  7.  14  The  sons  of  M.;  Ashriel,  whom  she  bare 
7.  17  Gilead,  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  M. 

2.  His  posterity. 

Num.  1. 10  Of  the  children,  .of  M.;  Gamaliel  the  son 
1.  34  Of  the  children  of  M.,  by  their  generations 

1.  35  Those . .  of  the  tribe  of  M. ,  (were)  thirty  and 

2.  20  And  by  him  (shall  be)  the  tribe  of  M. 
2.  20  the  captain  of  the  children  of  M.  (shall 
7.  54  Gamaliel,  .prince  of  the  children  of  M. 

10.  23  over,  .the  children  of  M.  (was)  Gamaliel 
1  3.  11  of  the  tribe  of  M.,  Gaddi  the  son  of  Susi 
26.  34  These  (are)  the  families  of  M.,  and  those 
32.  33  Moses  gave,  .unto  half  the  tribe  of  M. 
34.  14  half  the  tribe  of  M.  have  received  their 
34.  23  for  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  M.,  Han. 
36,  i2  the  families  of  the  sons  of  M.  the  son  of 


Deut  3.  13  gave  I  unto  the  half  tribe  of  M.;  all  the 

29.  8  an  inheritance,  .to  the  half  tribe  of  M. 

33.  17  ten  thousands  of  Ephraim.. thous.  of  M. 

34.  2  all  Naphtali.  .and  M.,  and  all  the  land 
Josh.  1.  12  to  half  the  tribe  of  M.,  spake  Joshua 

4. 12  half  the  tribe  of  M.,  passed  over  armed 
12     6  a  possession  unto,  .the  half  tribe  of  M. 
T3.    7  an  inheritance  unto,  .the half  tribe  of  M. 
13.  29  (inheritance)  unto  the  half  tribe  of  M. 

13.  29  (the  possession),  .of  the  children  of  M.by 

14.  4  children  of  Joseph  were  two  tribes,  M.  and 
16.  4  the  children  of  Joseph,  M.  and  Ephraim 

16.  9  among  the  inheritance  of.  .M.,  all  the 

17.  1  There  was  also  a  lot  for  the  tribe  of  M. 
17.  5  There  fell  ten  portions  to  M.-,  besides  the 
17.  6  Because  the  daughters  of  M.  had  an  inn. 
1 7.  6  the  rest  01 M  .'s  sons  had  the  land  of  Gilead 
17.  7  the  coast  of  M.  was  from  Asher  to  Midline. 
17.  8  (Now)  M.  had  the  land  of  Tappuah  :  but 
17.  8  Tappuah  on  the  border  of  M.  (belonged) 
17.  9  these  cities,  .(are)  among  the  cities  of  M. 
17.  9  the  coast  of  M.  also  (was)  on  the  north  side 
17.  10  northward  (it  was)  M.'s,  and  the  sea  is  his 
17.  11  M.  had  in  Issachar  andin  Asher,  Beth-sh. 
17.  T2  Yet  the  children  of  M.  could  not  drive  out 

17.  17  Joshua  spake  unto..  M.,  saying,  Thou  (art) 

18.  7  half  the  tribe  of  M.,  have  received  their 

20.  8  assigned . .  Golan . ,  out  of  the  tribe  of  M. 

21.  5  and  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.,  ten  cities 
21.  6  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  M. .  .thirteen  cities 
21.  25  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.,  Taanach  with 

21.  27  out  of  the  (other)  half  tribe  of  M.,(theyg.) 

22.  1  Then  Joshua  called .  .the  half  tribe  of  M. 
22.    7  Now  to  the  (one)  half  of  the  tribe  of  M. 
22.    9,  10,  11,  21  and  the  half  tribe  of  M. 

22.  13  sent,  .to  the  half  tribe  of  M.,  into  the  land 
22.  15  they  came  unto,  .the  half  tribe  of  M.,  unto 
22.  30  heard  the  words  that  the.  .children  of  M. 

22.  31  Phinehas  .  .said,  .to  the  children  of  M. 
Judg.  1.  27  Neither  did  M.  drive  out  (the  inhabitants 

6.  15  my  family  (is)  poor  in  M.,  and  I  (am)  the 

6.  35  hesentmessengersthroughoutallM.,  who 

7.  23  gathered  themselves,  .out  of  all  M.,  and 

11.  29  he  passed  over  Gilead  and  M.,  and  passed 

1  Ch.  5.  18  and  half  the  tribe  of  M.,  of  valiant  men 

5.  23  children  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.  dwelt  in 

5.  26  carried,  .away,  even,  .the  half  tribe  of  M. 

6.  61  (out  of)  the  half  (tribe)  of  M.,  by  lot,  ten 
6.  62  out  of  the  tribe  of  M.  in  Bashau,  thirteen 
6.  70  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.;  Aner  with  her 

6.  71  given)  out  of  the.  .half  tribe  of  M.,  Golan 

7.  29  by  the  borders  of  the  children  of  M.,  Be. 
9.    3  and  of  the  children  of  Ephraim,  and  M. 

12.  19  there  fell  (some)  of  M.  to  David,  when  he 
12.  20  there  fell  to  him  of  M.,  Adnah,  and  Joz. 
12.  20  captains  of  the  thousands  that(were)ofM. 
12.  31  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.  eighteen  thousand 
12.  37  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.,  with  all  manner 

26.  32  rulers  over,  .the  half  tribe  of  M.,forevery 

27.  20  of  the  half  tribe  of  M.;  Joel  the  son  of  P. 
27.  21  Of  the  half  (tribe)  of  M.  in  Gilead  ;  Iddo 

2  Ch.15.   9  strangers,  .out  of  Ephraim  and  M.,  and 

30.  1  wrote  lettersalso  to  Ephraim  andM.,  that 
30.  10  passed,  .through  the  country  of.  .M.  even 
30.  11  divers  of  Asher  aud  M.  and  of  Zebulun  h. 

30.  18  many  of  Ephraim,  and  M.,  Issachar,  and 

31.  1  the  high  places. .in  Ephraim  also  and  M. 
34.  6  (so  did  he)  in  the  cities  of  M.,andEphraim 
34.   9  gathered  of  the  hand  of  M.  aud  Ephraim 

Psa.  60.    7  Gilead  (is)  mine,  and  M.  (is)  mine  ;  Ephr. 
80.    2  Before  Ephraim  and  Benjamin  and  M.  stir 
108.    8  Gilead  (is)  mine;  M.  (is)  mine;  Ephraim 
Isa.     9.  21  M.,  Ephraim;  and  Ephraim,  M. :  (and)  they 
Eze.  48.    4  border  of  Naphtali.  .a  (portion  for)  M. 
48.    5  by  the  border  of  M. . .  a  (portion  for)  Eph. 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of  Manas- 
seh:  Abel,  Abel-beth-maachah,  Abel-maim,  Adam,  Aner, 
Ashtaroth,  Beeshterah,  Beth-shean,  Beth-shittah,  Bil- 
cam,  Dor,  Edrei,  Endor,  Gath-rimmon,  Gilead,  Golan, 
Gur,  Ibleam,  Megiddo,  Miehmethah,  Nophah,  Oplu-ah, 
Taanach,  Tappuah,  Zarthan,  Zereda,  ore. 

3.  The  grandfather  of  Jonathan  who,  with  his  sons, 
became  priests  to  the  tribe  of  Dan  when  they  set  up  a 
graven  image  in  Laish  ;  but  perhaps  Manasseh  should 
be  read  Moses  in  this  passage,    b  c.  1450. 

JudgiS.  30  Gershom,  the  son  of  M.,  he  and  his  sons 

4.  The  son  of  Hezekiah,  and  father  of  Anion  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  680. 

2  Ki.20.  21  Hezekiah  slept.,  and  M.  his  son  reigned  in 
21.  1  M.  (was)  twelve  years  old  When  he  began 
21.  9  M.  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil  than  did 
21. 11  Because  M.  king  of  Judah  hath  done  these 
21.  16  Moreover  M.  shed  innocent  blood  very  mu. 
21.  17  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  M.,  and  all  that  he 
21.  18  M.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
21.  20  And  he  did.  .evil.. as  his  father  M.  did 

23.  12  the  altars  which  M.  had  made  in  the  two 

23.  26  the  provocations  that  M.  had  provoked 

24.  3  to  remove  (them),  .for  the  sins  of  M.,  ac. 

1  Ch.  3. 13  Ahaz  his  son,  Hezekiah  his  son,  M.  his  son 

2  Ch.32.  33  Hezekiah  slept .  .AndM.  his  sonreignedin 

33.  1  M.  (was)  twelve  years  old  when  he  began 
33.  9  So  M.  made  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of 
33. 10  the  Lord  spake  to  M.,  and  to  his  people 
33.  11  the  captains,  .took  M.  among  the  thorns 
33.  13  M.  knew  that  the  Lord  he  (was)  God 
33.  18  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  M.,  and  his  prayer 
33.  20  So  M.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  bu. 
33.  22  he  did.  .evil,  .as  did  M.  his  father  :  for  A. 
33  22  carved  images  which  M.  his  father  had  m. 


MANASSBS 


643 


MAN   SERVANT 


2  Cli  33.  23  humbled  not  himself.  .asM.  his  father  had 
Jer.   15.   4  M.  the  sou  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah,  for 

5.  One  of  the  family  of  Pahath-moab  who  had  taken  a 
strange  wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  30  the  sons  of  Pahath-moab ;  Adna.  .andM. 

6.  One  of  the  family  of  Hashum,  who  had  done  the 
same. 

Ezra  10.  33  the  sons  of  Hashum  ;  Mattenai..M.,  (and) 

MA-NAS  SES,  Ma^atro-T/y — See  Manasseh. 

1.  A  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  680. 

Matt.  1.  10  Ezekias  begat  M.;  and  M.  begat  Anion 

2.  The  descendants  of  Joseph's  elder  son. 

Rev.    7.    6  Of  the  tribe  of  M.  (were)  sealed  twelve 
MA-NAS-SITES,  'B>jp. 
The  descendants  of  Manasseh,  elder  son  of  Joseph. 

Deut.4. 43  (Namely)-  .Golan  in  Bash  an,  of  the  M. 

Judgi2.  4  among  the  Ephrairnites,(and)anioug  the  M. 

2  Ki.io.  33  the  Reubenites:  and  the  M.,  from  Aroer 

MANDRAKES  — 

Love  apples,  *TM  dudai. 

Gen.  30. 14  found  mandrakes  in  the  field,  and  brought 
30.  14  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  of  thy  son's  mandra. 
30.  15  wouldest  thou  take  away  my  son's  mand. 
30.  15  lie  with  thee  to  night  for  thy  son's  mand. 
30.  16  have  hired  thee  with  my  son's  mandrakes 
Song   7.  13  The  mandrakes  give  a  smell,  and  at  our 

MANEH—  ' 

A  weight,  ■£■$  of  a  talent,  nj£  maneh. 

Eze.  45.  12  And. .  fifteen  shekels,  shall  be  yourinaneh 
MANGER  — 
Manger,  crib,  tparvn  phoitne. 

Luke  2.    7  laid  him  in  a  manger ;  because  there  was 
2.  12  Ye  shall  find  the  babe,  -lying  in  a  manger 

2.  t6  found  Mary . .  and  the  babe  lying  in  a  ma. 

MANIFEST  — 

1. Evident,  StjAos  delos. 

1  Co.  15.  27  (it  is)  manifest  that  he  is  excepted  which 

2.  Very  evident,  ckowXos  ekdelos. 

2  Ti.    3.   9  for  their  folly  shall  be  manifest  unto  all 

3.  Fully  manifest,  apparent,  4/j.cpavqs  empkanes. 

Rom. 10.  20  I  was  made  manifest  unto  them  that  ask. 

4.  Manifest,  apparent^  tpavepos  phaneros. 

Luke  S.  17  is  secret  that  shall  not  be  made  manifest 
Acts    4.  16  manifest  to  all  them  that  dwell  in  Jerus. 
Rom.  1. 19  is  manifest  in  them;  for  God  hath  showed 
1  Co.  3.  13  Every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest 
11.  19  that  they,  .may  be  made  manifest  among 
14.  25  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made  manifest 
Gal.     5.  19  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest 
Phil.  1.  13  So  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest 
1  Jo.  3.  xo  In  tins  the  children  of  God  are  manifest 
MANIFEST,  to  — 

1.  To  purify,  dear,  Tia  barar. 

Eccl.  3.  18  that  God  might  manifest  them,  and  that 

2.  To  manifest,  (pavepow  phaneroo. 

Mark  4.  22  is  nothing  hid,  which  shall  not  be  maui. 
Johni7.  6  I  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  themen 
Rom.  3.  21  without  the  law  is  manifested,  being  w. 
1  Ti.  3.  16  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified 
Titus  1.  3  But  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  word 
1  Pe.  1.  20  but  was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for 
1  Jo.  1.  2  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen 
1.  2  that  eternal  life  which,  .was  manifested 
3.    5  ye  know  that  he  was  manifested  to  take 

3.  8  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  he 

4.  9  In  this  was-manifested  the  love  of  God  to. 

Z.To  make  fully  manifest,  ifxpavifa  emphanizo. 

John  14.  21  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  to  him 
14.  22  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself 
MANIFEST  beforehand  — 
Evident  beforehand,  irp6$n\os  prodelos. 

1  Ti.    5.  25  the  good  works.,  are  manifest  beforehand 
MANIFEST  forth,  to  — 
To  make  manifest,  (pavepoco  phaneroo. 

John  2.  11  and  manifested  forth  his  glory ;  and  his 
MANIFEST,  to  make  or  be  — 
To  make  manifest,  <pavep6ta  phaneroo. 

John  1.  3 1  that  he  should  be  made  manifest  to  Israel 

3.  21  that  his  deeds'may  be  made  manifest,  that 
9.    3  the  works,  .should  be  made  manifest  in 

Rom.  16.  26  But  now  is  made  manifest,  and  by  the  sc. 

1  Co.  4.   5  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts 

2  Co.  2.  14  maketh  manifest  the  savour  of  his  know. 

4.  io.nlife  also  of  Jesus  might  be  made  manifest 
5. 11  wearemademanifestuntoGod;andItrust 

5.  11  I  trust  also  are  made  manifest  in  your  c. 
11.    6  but  we  have  been  throughly  made  manif. 

Eph.  5.  13  all  things.,  are  made  manifest  by  the  light 
5.  13  whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  light 

Col.     1.  26  but  now  is  made  manifest  to  his  saints 
4.    4  That  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought 

2  Ti.    1.  10  But  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  appear. 

Heb.  9.    8  was  not  yet  made  manifest,  while  as  the 

1  Jo.  2.  19  that  theymight  be  made  manifest  that  they 

Rev.  15.    4  O  Lord.,  thy  judgments  are  made  manifest 
MANIFEST,  not^ 
Not  manifest,  a<pavr)s  aphanes. 

Heb.  4. 13  Neither  is  there  any . .  that  is  not  manifest 


MANIFESTATION  — 

1.  C iicovering,  awoKaKu^ts  apokalupsis. 

Rom.  8.  19  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons 
^.Manifestation,  tyavipwois  phanerosis. 

1  Co.  12.    7  But  the  manifestation  of  the  spirit  is  gi. 

2  Co.  4.   2  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  commending 
MANIFOLD  — 

I. Many,  abundant,  21  rob. 

Neh.    9.  19  Yetthouin  thy  manifold  mercies  forsook 
9.  27  according  to  thy  manifold  mercies  thou 
Amos  5.  i2  Fori  know  your  manifold  transgressions 

2.  To  be  many,  multiplied,  2ir\  rabab. 

Psa.104.  24  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  works !  in 
3. Manifold,  ttolkiXos  poikilos. 

1  Pe.  1.  6  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations 
4-  10  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 
4.  Very  manifold,  iroKviroiKiKos  polupoikilos. 

Eph.  3.  10  by  the  church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God 
MANIFOLD   more  — 
Manifold  more,  v-oXKavKawitav pollaplasion. 

LukeiS.  30  Who  shall  not  receive  manifold  more  in 
MANKIND  — 
\.A  male,  "131  zakar. 

Lev.  18.  22  Thou  shalt  not  lie  with  mankind  as  with 
20. 13  If  a  man  also  lie  with  mankind,  as  he 
2. Flesh  of  man,  »*«"T^3  besar  ish. 

Job    12.  io  the  soul,  .and thebreath  of  all  mankind 
3. Human  nature,  (pvais  avSpunrii't}  phusis  anthrd. 

Jas.     3.    7  is  tamed,  and  hath  been  tamed  of  mank. 
MANNA  — 
I.Mem,  a  sweet  gum  or  resin,  JD  man. 

Exodi6.  15  they  said  one  to  another,  It  (is)  manna 
16.  31  And.  .Israel  called  the  name  thereof  M. 

16.  33  put  an  omer  full  of  manna  therein,  and 
16. 35  the  children  of  Israel  did  eat  manna  forty 
16.  35  they  did  eat  manna  until  they  came  unto 

Numii.    6  nothiugatall,  besides  this  mamia, (before) 
11.    7  And  the  manna  (was)  as  coriander  seed 
11.    9  And.  .in  the  night,  the  manna  fell  upon 

Deut.  8.    3  fed  thee  with  manna,  which  thou  knewest 
8. 16  Who  fed  thee  in  the  wilderness  with  ma. 

Josh.  5.  12  the  manna  ceased  on  the  morrow  after  they 

5.  12  had  the  children  of  Israel  manna  any 
Neh.  9.  20  withheldest  not  thy  manna  from  their 
Psa.  7S.  24  had  rained  down  manna  upon  them  to  eat 

2.A  sweet  resin  or  gum,  {from  Heb.)  pawa.  manna. 
John   6.  31  Our  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  desert 

6.  49  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  wilde. 
6.  58  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  [manna],  and 

Heb.    0.    4  the  golden  pot  that  had  manna,  and  A.'s 
Rev.    2. 17  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna 
MANNER  — 

1.  Path,  custom,  m.s  orach. 

Gen.  tS.  11  to  be  with  Sarah  after  the  manner  of  w. 

2.  Word,  thing,  matter,  133  dabar. 

Gen.  18.  25  That  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this  m. 
32.  19  On  this  manner  shall  ye  speak  unto  Esau 
39.  19  After  this  manner  did  thy  servant  to  me 
Exod22.    9  For  all  manner  of  trespass,  .for  ox,  for 
Deut  15.    2  And  this  (is)  the  manner  of  the  release 

1  Sa.  17.  27  people  answered  him  after  this  manner 

17.30  he  turned,  .and  spake  after  the  same  man. 

17.  30  answered  him  again  after  the  former  ma. 

18.  24  saying,  On  this  manner  spake  David 

2  Sa.  14.    3  come,  .and  speak  on  tins  manner  unto  him 

15.  6  on  this  manner  did  Absalom  to  all  Israel 
17.    6  Ahithophel  hath  spoken  after  tliis  manner 

Neh.  6.  4  I  answered  them  after  the  same  manner 
6.    5  in  like  manner  the  fifth  time  with  an  open 

Esth.  1. 13  for  so  (was)  the  king's  manner  toward  all 

%. Leading,  pasture,  "Q^  dober. 

Isa.     5. 17  Then  shall  the  lambs  feed  after  their  ma. 

4. Likeness,  nvy\  demuth. 

Eze.  23.  15  after  the  manner  of  the  Babylonians  of 

5.  IVay,  375  derek. 

Gen.  19.  31  unto  us  after  the  mar.nerof  all  the  earth 
1  Sa.  21.    5  and  (the  bread  is)  in  a  manner  common 
Isa.  10.  24  against  thee,  after  the  manner  of  Egypt 

10.  26  shall  he  lift  it  up  after  the  manner  of  Egypt 
Jer.  22.  21  this,  .thy  manner  from  thy  youth,  that 
Eze.  20.  30  Are  ye  polluted  after  the  manner  of  your 
Amos  4.  10  the  pestilence  after  the  manner  of  Egypt 

8.  14  The  manner  of  Beer-sheba  liveth ;  even 

Q.Laiv,  sentence,  rn  dath. 

Esth.  2. 12  according  to  the  manner  of  the  women 

7. Statute,  custom,  n|3n  chuqqah. 

Lev.  20.  23  ye  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the  n. 

8.  Judgment,  ospa  mishpat. 

Gen.  40.  13  after  the  former  manner  when  thou  wast 
Exod2i.   9  he  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  manner 
Lev.     5.  10  a  burnt  offering,  according  to  the  manner 

9.  16  and  offered  it  according  to  the  manner 
24.  22  Ye  shall  have  one  manner  of  law,  as  well 

Num.  9.  14  according  to  the  manner  thereof,  so  shall 
15.  16  One  law  and  one  manner  shall  be  for  you 
1  ^.  24  his  drink  offering,  according  to  the  man. 
29.  6  drink  offerings,  according  unto  their  ma. 
29. 18,  21,  24,  27,  30,  33,  37  number,  after  the  m. 
Josh.  6.  13  compassed  the  city  afterthesame  manner 
JudgiS-    7  after  the  manner  of  the  Zidonians,  quiet 


1  Sa.    8.    9  show  them  the  manner  of  the  king  that 
8.  11  This  will  be  the  manner  of  the  king  that 

10.  25  the  manner  of  the  kingdom,  and  wrote 
27.  11  his  manner  all  the  while  he  dwelleth  in 

1  Ei.18.  28  cut  themselves,  after  their  manner,  with 

2  Ki.  1.    7  What  manner  of  man  (was  he)  which  came 

11.  14  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  as  the  manner 
17.  26,  26  know  notthe manner  of  the  God  of  the 
17.  27  let  him  teach  them  the  manner  of  the  God 
17.  33  after  the  manner  of  the  nations  whom  they 
17.  34  they  do  after  the  former  manners:  they 
17.  40  but  they  did  after  their  former  manner 

1  Ch.24.  19  according  to  their  manner,  under  Aaron 

2  Ch.  4.  20  burn  after  the  manner  before  the  oracle 

30. 16  they  stood  in  their  place  after  their  man. 
Neh.  8.  18  solemn  assembly,  according  unto  the  m. 
Jer.  30. 18  the  palace  shall  remain  after  the  manner 
Eze.  11.  12  have  done  after  the  manners  of  the  heathen. 

23.  45  they  shall  judge  them  after  the  manner  of 

23.  45  after  the  manner  of  women  that  shed  bl. 
9. Law,  direction,  nyn  torah. 

2  Sa.    7. 19  (is)  this  the  manner  of  man,  0  Lord  God? 
lO.Custom,  habit,  manner,  e0os  ethos. 

Johmg.  40  spices,  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  b. 
Acts  15.    1  Except  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  man. 

25.  16  It  is  not  the  manner  of  the  Romans  to  d. 
Heb.  10.  25  Not  forsaking,  .as  the  manner  of  some  (is) 

11.-4  mark)  impression,  tyjie,  twos  tupos. 

Acts  23.  25  And  he  wrote  a  letter  after  tliis  manner 
[See  also  After,  all,  any,  like,  know,  perfect,  that,  this, 
what,  workmanship.] 

MANNER,  after  this,  or  in  this,  or  in  like  — 
l.AZso,  C2  gam. 

1  Sa.  19.  24  prophesied  before  Samuel  in  like  manner 
2.1n  which  manner,  or  turn,  ov  TpQTtovhototropoi 

Acts    1.  11  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have 

3.  Thus,  so,  accordingly,  ovrco  houto. 

Matt  6.    9  After  this  manner  therefore  pray  ye 
Marki3.  29  So  ye,  in  like  manner,  when  ye  shall  see 
1  Co.  7.   7  one  after  tliis  manner,  and  another  after 

1  Pe.  3.    5  For  after  this  maimer  in  the  old  time  fie 
Rev.  11.    5  hurt  them,  he  must  in  this  manner  be  k. 

4.  These  things,  thus,  raSe  tade. 

Acts  15. 23  they  wrote,  .by  them  [after  this  manner] 
5. In  like  manner,  turn,  rbi/  ofxoiov  Tp6-woi>  tonhoonoi. 

Jude         7  in  like  manner  giving  themselves  over 
MANNER,  after  what  — 
How  ?  ircospos. 

Acts  20.  iS  after  what  manner  I  have  been  with  you 
MANNER  of,  such  — 
Concerning 'thts,els  tijv ireplTOvrov  eistenperitouton. 

Acts  25.    20  because  I  doubted  of  such  manner  of  q. 
MANNER  of  life  — 
\. Course  of  life,  ayojyi}  agoge. 

2  Ti.  3. 10  thou  hast  fully  known  my .  .manner  of  life 
2.Act  of  living,  mode  of  lift,  filwais  biosis. 

Acts  26.   4  My  manner  of  life  from  my  youth,  which 

MANNER  of  store,  all  — 

Kind,  species,  ]i  zan. 

Psa.  144.  13  affording  all  manner  of  store  ;  (that)  our 

MANNER  was  — 

According  to  habit,  Kara  to  el&dhs  kata  to  eidthos. 
Acts  17.    2  Paul,  as  Ms  manner  was,  went  in  unto 

MANNERS  — 

Habit,  manner,  ijdos  ethos. 

1  Co.  15.  33  evil  communications  corrupt  good  man. 

MANNERS,  to  suffer  the  — 

To  bear  with  the  manners  of  others,  TpoTro^opew. 
Acts  13.  iS  forty  years  [suffered  he  their  manners]  in 

MA-NO'-AH,  rp3D  rest. 

A  man  of  Zorah  in  Dan,  and  father  of  Samson.    B.C. 

1150. 

Judgi3.  2  a  certain  man . .  whose  name  (was)  M. ;  and 
13.  8  ThenM.  entreated  the  Lord,  and  said,  O 
13.  9  God  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  M.;  and  the 
13.  9  but  M.  her  husband  (was)  not  with  her 
13.  11  And  M.  arose,  and  went  after  his  wife,  and 
13.  12  And  M.  said,  Now  let  thy  words  come  to 
13.  13,  16  And  the  angelof  the  LORD  said  unto  M. 
13.  15,  17  And  M.  said  unto  the  angelof  the  L. 
13.  16  For  M.  knew  not  that  he  (was)  an  angel 
13. 19  So  M.  took  a  kid  with  ameat  offering,  and 
13.  19  (the  angel)  did  wondrously  ;  and  M.  and 
13.  20  And  M.  and  his  wife  looked  on  (it),  and  fell 
13.  21  the  angel,  .did  no  more  appear  to  M.  and 
13.  21  ThenM.  knew  that  he  (was)  an  angel  of  the 
13.  22  M.  said  unto  his  wife,  We  shall  surely  die 
16.  31  in  the  burying  placeof  M.  his  father :  and 

MAN  SERVANT  — 

l.Servant,  "Dj;  ebed. 

Gen.  12.  16  he  asses,  and  men  servants,  and  maid  se. 
20.  14  oxen,  and  men  servants,  and  women  ser. 
24.  35  silver,  and  gold,  and  men  servants,  and 
30.  43  and  men  servants,  and  camels,  and  asses 
32.  5  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  men  servants 
Exod2o.  10  thy  man  servant,  nor  thy  maid  servant 

20.  17  nor  his  manservant,  nor  his  maid  servant 

21.  7  she  shall  not  go  out  as  the  men  servants 
21.  27  if  he  smite  out  his  man  servant's  tooth,  or 


MANSION 


GU 


MANY 


Exottat.  32  If  the  ox  shall  push  a  man  servant  or  maid 

Deut.  5. 14  nor  thy  man  servant,  nor  thy  maid  servant 

5.  14  that  tliy  man  servant,  .may  rest  as  well  as 

5.  21  or  his  man  servant,  or  his  maid  servant 

12.  12  your  men  servants, and  your  maid  servants 

12.  18  and  thy  man  servant,  and  thy  maid  serv. 

16.  11,  14  and  thy  man  servant.and  thy  maid  se. 

1  Sa.    8. 16  will  take  your  men  servants,  and  your  m. 

2  Ki.  5.  26  oxen,  and  men  servants,  and  maid  serv.  ? 
Neh.  7.  67  Besides  their  man  servants  and  their  ma. 
Job  31.  13  If  I  did  despise  the  cause  of  my  man  ser. 
Jer.  34.    9  That  every  man  should  let  his  man  servant 

34. 10  should  let  his  man  servant,  .go  free,  that 

1. Child,  boy,  servant,  iraTis  pais. 

Lukei2.  45  to  heat  the  men  servants  and  maidens.and 

MANSION  — 

Mansion,  abode,  (.iovt)  nione. 

Johni4.   2  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions 
MAN  SLAYER  — 
I.  To  murder,  r\$~\  ratsach. 

N  una  35.    6  which  ye  shall  appoint  for  the  man  slayer 
35.  12  that  the  man  slayer  die  not,  until  he  stand 

'2.  Man-murderer,  av8po<p6vos  androphonos. 

1  Ti.    1.    9  and  murderers  of  mothers,  for  man  slayers 
MANTLE  — 

1.  Ornamental  mantle,  rvriNt  addereth. 

1  Ki.  19. 13  that  he  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle 

19.  19  Elijah  passed  by  him,  and  cast  his  mantle 

2  Ki.    2.   8  Elijah  took  his  mantle,  and  wrapped  (it) 

2. 13  He  took  up  also  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that 
2.  14  he  took  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that  fell  from 

2.  Coverings, mantles, wrappers,  Tfovypmaataphoth. 
Isa.     3.  22  suits  of  apparel,  and  the  mantles,  and  the 

3.  Upper  robe,  7'yP  mcil, 

1  Sa.  15.  27  lie  laid  hold  upon  the  skirt  of  his  mantle 

28.  14  And  she  said . .  he  (is)  covered  with  a  man. 
Ezra   9.   3  I  rent  my  garment  and  my  mantle,  and 

9.  5  having  rent  my  garment  aud  my  mantle 
Job     1.  20  Then  Job  arose,  and  rent  his  mantle,  and 

2.  12  rent  every  one  his  mantle,  and  sprinkled 
Psa.109.  29  with  their  own  confusion,  as  with  a  man. 

\.A  coverlet,  nyrzp  semikah. 

Judg.  4. 18  turned  in.  .she  covered  him  with  a  man. 
MANY  (things  of)— 
1.  Multitude,  pDii  hamoH. 

Gen.  17.  4  and  thou  shalt  be  a  father  of  many  nations 

17.  5  father  of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee 

2  Ch.11.  23  And  he  desired  many  wives 
•l.Maiuj,  ri  rob. 

Gen.  21.  34  sojourned  in  the  Philistines'  land  many 
37.  34  Jacob,  .mourned  for  his  son  many  days 

Exod.  5.   5  the  people  of  the  land  now  (are)  many 
19.  21  lest  they . .  gaze,  and  many  of  them  perish 

23.  2  to  decline  after  many  to  wrest  (judgm.) 
Lev.  15.  25  have  an  issue  of  her  blood  many  days  out 

25.  51  If  ..yet  many  years,  .according  unto  them 
Num.  9.  19  when  the  cloud  tarried.,  many  days,  then 

13.  18  whether  they,  .strong  or  weak,  few  or  m. 
22.    3  of  the  people,  because  they  (were)  many 

24.  7  and  his  seed,  .in  many  waters,  and  his  k. 

26.  54  To  many  thou  shalt  give  the  more  inheri. 
26.  56  possession,  .be  divided  between  many  and 
35.   8  from  (them  that  have)  many  ye  shall  give 

Deut   1. 46  So  ye  abode  in  Kadesli  many  days,  accor. 
2.    1  and  we  compassed  mount  Seir  many  days 
2.  10,  21  a  people  great,  and  many,  and  tall,  as 
7.    1  hath  cast  out  many  nations  before  thee 
15.    6  thou  shalt  lend  unto  many  nations,  but 
15.    6  thou  shalt  reign  over  many  nations,  but 

25.  3  and  beat  him  above  these  with  many  stri. 
28. 12  thou  shalt  lend  unto  many  nations,  and 
31. 17  many  evils  and  troubles  snail  befall  them 

31.  21  many  evils  and  troubles  are  befallen  them 
Josh. 11.    4  went  out.  .with  horses  and  chariots.  ,m. 

22.  3  Ye  have  not  left  your  brethren  these  many 
Judg.  7.    2  The  people,  .with  thee  (are)  too  many  for 

7.  4  The  people  (are)  yet  (too)  many ;  bring 

8.  30  threescore  and  ten  sons,  .for  he  had  many 

9.  40  many  were  overthrown  (and)  wounded 

1  Sa.14.   6  no  restraint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by  many 

2  Sa.  22. 17  he  took  me ;  he  drew  me  out  of  many  w. 

1  Ki.   2.  38  And  Shimei  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  many  d. 

4.  20  Judah  and  Israel  (were)many,  as  the  sand 
11.    1  But  king  Solomon  loved  many  strange  w. 

18.  1  came  to  pass,  (after)  many  days,  that  the 
18.  25  ye  (are)  many;  and  call  on  the  name  of 

2  Ki.  9.  22  whoredoms . .  her  witchcrafts  (are  so)  m.  ? 

1  Ch.  4.  27  but  his  brethren  had  not  many  children 

5.  22  For  there  fell  down  many  slain,  because 
7.  22  Ephraim  their  father  mourned  many  days 

28.    5  for  the  Lord  hath  given  me  many  sons 

2  Ch.14.  11  whether  with  many,  or  with  them  that 

30. 17  For  (there  were)  many  in  the  congregation 
30.  18  multitude  of  the  people,  (even)  many  of  E. 

32.  23  many  brought  gifts  unto  the  Lord  to  Jer. 
Ezra    3.  12  many.  .wept,  .and  many  shouted  aloud 

10.  13  people  (are)  many,  and  (it  is)  a  time  of 
Neh.   5.    2  our  daughters,  (are)  many :  therefore  we 

6.  18  For  (there  were)  many  in  Judah  sworn 

7.  2  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above  many 
9.  28  many  times  didst  thou  deliver  them  ace. 
9.  30  Yet  many  years  didst  thou  forbear  them 

13.  26  yet  among  many  nations  was  there  no  k. 

£sth.  1.   4  many  days,  (even)  an  hundred  and  fours. 

2.    8  when  many  maidens  were  gathered  toge. 


Esth. 


Psa 


29. 
31- 
32- 
34- 

37- 

40. 

40. 

55- 

56. 

71- 

93- 
106. 
no. 
119, 
Prov.  7, 

10. 

14. 

19, 

19 

19. 

28. 

28. 
29, 

^       31- 
Ecc.    6 

6 

7 
Song  S. 
Isa.     2. 


35< 
36. 
37' 
So> 

5I' 
Lam.  1. 

Eze.    3. 

12. 

16. 

17- 
17- 

17- 
19. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
3=- 
32- 
32. 
33< 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38, 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
43' 
47- 

~        47' 
Dan.   S. 


Hos.    3 


3  wailing;  and  many  lay  in  sackcloth  and 

17  many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became  J. 
3  Behold,  thou  hast  instructed  many,  and 

19  thou  shalt  lie  down,  .yea,  many  shall  make 
2  have  heard  many  such  things :  miserable 

14  performeth.  .and  many  such  (things  are) 

1  Lord,  .many  (are)  they  that  rise  up  against 

2  Many  (there  be)  which  sayof  my  soul,  (Th. 

6  many  that  say.  Who  will  show  us  (any)  g. 
16  he  took  me,  he  drew  me  out  of  many  wa. 

12  Many  bulls  havecompassed  me  :  strong 

3  thundereth  :  the  Lord  (is)  upon  many  w. 

13  For  I  have  heard  the  slander  of  many  :  f. 

10  Many  sorrows  (shall  be)  to  the  wicked:  but 
ig  Many  (are)  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous 
16  (is)  better  than  the  riches  of  many  wicked 

3  many  shall  see  (it),  and  fear,  and  shall 

5  Many,  .(are)  thy  wonderful  works  (which) 

18  hath  delivered,  .for  there  were  many  with 
2  for  (they  be)  many  that  fight  against  me 

7  I  am  as  a  wonder  unto  many  :  but  thou 

4  (is)  mightier  than  the  noise  of  many  wat. 

43  Many  times  did  he  deliver  them;  but  they 

6  shall  wound  the  heads  over  many  count. 
157  Many  (are)  my  persecutors  and  mine  e. 

26  For  she  hath  cast  down  many  wounded 

21  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  many :  but  fools 

20  poor  is  hated . .  but  the  rich  (hath)  many 
4  Wealth  maketh  many  friends :  but  the 

6  Many  will  entreat  the  favour  of  the  prince 

21  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart ;  neverthe. 

2  For  the  transgression  of  a  land  many  (are) 

27  he  that  hideth  his  eyes  shall  have  many 

26  Many  seek  the  ruler's  favour :  but  (every) 
29  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously,  but 

3  If  a  man.  .live  many  years,  so  that  the 

3  days  of  his  years  be  many,  and  his  soul  be 
29  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions 

7  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither 

3  many  people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye 

4  shall  rebuke  many  people;  and  they  shall 
9  Of  a  truth  many  houses  shall  be  desolate 

7  the  waters  of  the  river,  strong  and  many 

15  many  among  them  shall  stumble,  and  fall 

12  Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many  people 

13  shall  rush  like  the  rushing  of  many  waters 
1  and  trust  in  chariots,  because  (they  are) 

14  aud  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men 

15  So  shall  he  sprinkle  many  nations  ;  the 

11  shall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many 

12  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  interces. 

1  but  thou  hast  played  the  harlot  with  m. 

15  she  hath  wrought  lewdness  with  many 
10  Many  pastorshave  destroyed  my  vineyard 

6  came  to  pass  after  many  days,  that  the 

16  send  formauy  fishers  many  hunters,  and 
10  For  I  heard  the  defaming  of  many,  fear 

8  many  nations  shall  pass  by  this  city,  and 
14  For  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall 

7  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve 

8  prophesied  both  against  many  countries 

14  put  them,  .that  they  may  continue  many 
7  that  ye  may  live  many  days  in  the  land 

32  were  added  besides  unto  them  many  like 

16  and  Jeremiah  had  remained  there  many 
41  many  kings  shall  be  raised  up  from  the 

13  O  thou  that  dwellest  upon  many  waters 

22  for  my  sighs  (are)  many,  and  my  heart 

6  Not  to  many  people  of  a  strange  speech 

27  The  vision  that  he  seeth  (is)  for  many  days 
41  execute  judgments,  in  the  sight  of  many 

7  eagle  with  great  wings  and  many  feathers 

9  without  great  power  or  many  people  to 

17  and  building  forts,  to  cut  off  many  persons 
10  full  of  branches  by  reason  of  many  waters 

3  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  aga. 
3  a  merchant  of  the  people  for  many  isles 

15  many  isles  (were)  the  merchandise  of  th. 

33  thou  filledst  many  people ;  thou  didst 

3  over  thee  with  a  company  of  many  people 
9  I  will  also  vex  the  hearts  of  many  people 
10  I  will  make  many  people  amazed  at  thee 

24  but  we  (are)  many;  the  land  is  given  us 

2  (there  were)  very  many  in  the  open  valley 

6  all  his  bands ;  (and)  many  people  with  thee 

8  After  many  days  thou  shalt  be  visited  :  in 

8  (is)  gathered  out  of  many  people,  against 

9  all  thy  bands,  and  many  people  with  thee 
15  many  people  with  thee,  all  of  them  riding 

22  upon  the  many  people  that  (are)  with  him 

23  will  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many  nations 
27  sanctified,  .in  the  sight  of  many  nations 

2  his  voice  (was)  like  a  noise  of  many  wate. 

7  many  trees  on  the  one  side  and  on  the 
10  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  exceeding  many 

25  by  peace  shall  destroy  many:  he  shall  also 

26  the  vision ;  for  it  (shall  be)  for  many  days 

27  he  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with  many 

14  there  shall  many  stand  up  against  the 

18  face  unto  the  isles,  and  shall  take  many 
26  overflow ;  and  many  shall  fall  down  slain 

33  they  that  understand,  .shall  instruct  ma. 

34  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with  flatteries 

39  he  shall  cause  them  to  rule  over  many,  and 

40  and  with  horsemen,  and  with  many  ships 

41  many(countries)shallbeoverthrown:  but 

44  to  destroy,  aud  utterly  to  make  away  ma. 

2  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of 

3  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as 

4  many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge 
10  Many  shall  be  purified,  and  made  white 

3  Thou  shalt  abide  for  me  many  days ;  thou 


Mic. 


Nah. 
Hab. 


Hos.    3.    4  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  king 
Amos  8.    3  (shall  be)  many  dead  bodies  in  every  place 

2  many  nations  shall  come,  and  say,  Come 

3  And  he  shall  judge  among  many  people 

11  many  nations  are  gathered  against  thee 
13  thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  many  people :  aud 

7  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  many  people  as 

8  the  Gentiles  in  the  midst  of  many  people 

12  Though  (they  be)  quiet,  and  likewise  m. 
8  thou  hast  spoiled  many  nations,  all  the 

_  10  hast  consulted  shame,  .by  cutting  off  m. 
Zech.  2. 11  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord 

8.  20  people,  and  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities 

8..  22  many  people  and  strong  nations  shall  co. 
Mai.    2.    6  and  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity 

2.   8  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  law 

3. Abundance,  3T  rob, 

1  Ki.   7.  47  they  were  exceeding  many  :  neither  was 
Isa.   24.  22  and  after  many  days  shall  they  be 

\.  Myriad,  nrai  rebabah. 

Num.  10.  36  Return,  .unto  the  many  thousands  of  I. 

5. Great,  tt*3v?  saggi, 

Ezra   5.  11  that  was  builded  these  many  years  ago 
Dan.  2.  48  gave  him  many  great  gifts,  and  made  him 

6. Sufficient,  IkolvSs  hikanos. 

Luke  7.  11  many  of  his  disciples  went  with  him,  and 

8.  32  an  herd  of  many  swine  feeding  on  the 

23.  9  he  questioned  with  him  in  many  words 
Acts    9.  23  after  that  many  days  were  fulfilled,  the 

9.  43  he  tarried  many  days  in  Joppa  with  one 

12.  12  where  many  were  gathered  together  pra. 

14.  21  when  they,  .had  taught  many,  they  retu. 
19.  19  Many  of  them  also  which  used  curious  arts 
Ko.  8  were  many  lights  in  the  upper  chamber 
27.    7  we  had  sailed  slowly  many  days,  and  sea. 

1  Co.  1 1.  30  many  (are)  weak  and  sickly  among  you 

7. More,  greater,  irKeiow  pleion. 

Luken.  53  to  provoke  him  to  speak  of  many  things 
Acts   2.  40  with  many  other  words  did  he  testify  and 

13.  31  he  was  seen  many  days  of  them  which  c. 
zi.  10  as  we  tarried  (there)  many  days,  there  c. 

24.  17  after  many  years  I  came  to  bring  alms  to 

25.  14  when  they  had  been  there  many  days,  1' 

27.  20  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days  appeared 

28.  23  there  came  many  to  him  into  (his)  lodging 

1  Co.io.    5  with  many  of  them  God  was  not  well  pit-. 

2  Co.  2.    6  punishment,  which  (was  inflicted)  of  ma. 

4.  15  might  through  the  thanksgiving  of  many 
Phil.  1. 14  many  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  waxing 
Heb.  7.  23  they  truly  were  many  priests,  because  they 

8.  Much,  many,  woX&s  polus. 

Matt.  3.    7  But  when  he  saw  many  of  the  Pharisees 
7.  13  broad,  .and  many  there  be  which  go  in 
7.  22  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  L. 

7.  22  and  in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful 

8.  11  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west 
8.  16  many  that  were  possessed  with  devils :  and 

8.  30  there  was . .  an  herd  of  many  swine  feeding 

9.  10  many  publicans  and  sinners  came  and  sat 
10.  31  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 
13.  3  he  spake  many  things  unto  them  in  par. 
13.  17  many  prophets  and  righteous  (men)  have 
13.  58  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there,  be. 

15.  30  blind,  dumb,  maimed,  and  many  others 

16.  21  and  suffer  many  things  of  the  elders  and 

19.  30  But  many  (that  are)  first  shall  be  last;  and 

20.  16  first  last :  [for  many  be  called,  but  few  c.J 
20.  28  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 
22. 14  For  many  are  called,  but  few  (are)  chosen 
24.    5  many  shall  come,  .and  shall  deceive  many 

24.  10  then  shall  many  be  offended,  and  shall 

24. 11  many  false  prophets  shall,  .deceive  many 

24. 12  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many 

25.  21,  23  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  th. 

26.  28  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins 

26.  60  Tyea,  though  many  false  witnesses  came] 

27.  19  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day  in  a 
27.  52  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which'slept  arose 
27.  53  into  the  holy  city  .and  appeared  unto  many 
27.  5s  many  women  were  there  beholding  afar 

Mark  1.  34  healed  many,  .and  cast  out  many  devils 
2.    2  straightway  many  were  gathered  together 
2. 15  many  publicans  and  sinners  sat  also  tog. 

2.  15  for  there  were  many,  and  they  followed 

3.  10  For  he  had  healed  many ;  insomuch  that 

4.  2  he  taught  them  many  things  by  parables 

4.  33  with  [many]  such  parables  spake  he  the 

5.  9  saying,  My  name  (is)  Legion :  for  we  are 

5.  26  suffered  many  things  of  many  physicians 

6.  2  [many]  hearing[(him)  were  astonished,  sa. 
6. 13  many  devils,  and  anointed  with  oil  many 
6.  20  he  did  many  things,  and  heardhim  gladly 
6.  31  forthereweremauycomingandgoing.and 
6.  33  many  knew  him,  and  ran  afoot  thither  out 

6.  34  and  he  began  to  teach  them  many  things 

7.  4  many  other  things  there  be  which  they 

7.  8  [and  many  other  such  like  things  ye  do] 
7. 13  delivered  :  and  many  such  like  things  do 

8.  31  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things,  and 

9.  12  he  must  suffer  many  things,  and  he  set  at 
9.  26  was  as  one  dead ;  insomuch  that  many  said 

10.  31  But  many  (that  are)  first  shall  be  last ;  and 
10.  45  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many 

10.  48  many  charged  him  that  he  should  hold  his 

11.  8  many  spread  their  garments  in  the  way 

12.  5  him  they  killed,  and  many  others;  beating 

12.  41  and  many  that  were  rich  cast  in  much 

13.  6  many  shall  come.,  and  shall  deceive  many 


MANY 


645 


MARK 


Marki_(.  24  This  is  my  blood . .  which  is  shed  for  many 

14.  56  many  bare  false  witness  against  him,  but 

15.  3  the  chief  priests  accused  him  of  many  th. 

15.  41  many  other  women  which  came  up  with 
Luke  1.    1  many  have  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in 

1.  14  gladness;  and  many  shall  rejoice  at  his 
1. 16  many  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  he  turn 

2.  34  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in  I. 

2.  35  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be  re. 

3.  18  many  other  things  in  his  exhortation  pr. 

4.  25  many  widows  were  in  Israel  in  the  days 
4.  27  many  lepers  were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of 

4.  41  devils  also  came  out  of  many,  crying  out 
7.  21  he  cured  many  of  (their)  infirmities  andpl. 

7.  21  and  unto  many  (that  were)  blind  he  gave 
7. 47  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven;  for 

5.  3  Susanna,  and  many  others,  which  minis. 

8.  30  because  many  devils,  .entered into  him 
9. 22  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things,  and 

10.  24  For  I  tell  you,  that  many  prophets  and  k. 

10. 41  thou  art  careful  and  troubled  about  many 
12.  7  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 
12.  19  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years 

12.  47  that  servant,  .shall  be  beaten  with  many 

13.  24  for  many,  I  say  unto  you,  will  seek  to  enter 

14.  16  A.  .man  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  m. 

15. 13  And  not  many  days  after,  the  younger  son 
17.  25  But  first  must  he  suffer  many  things,  and 

21.  8  for  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying 

22.  65  many  other  things  blasphemously  spake 

23.  (  8  because  he  had  heard  many  things  of  him 
John  2.  12  and  they  continued  there  not  many  days 

2.  23  many  believed  iuhis  name,  when  they  saw 
4.  39  many  of  the  Samaritans  of  that  city  beli. 
4. 41  many  more  believed  because  of  his  own 

6.  60  Manythereforeofhis  disciples,  when  they 

6.  66  From,  .(time)  many,  .disciples  went  back 

7.  31  many  of  the  people  believed  on  him,  and 
7. 40  [Many]  of  the  people  therefore,  when  they 

8.  26  I  have  many  things  to  say  and  to  judge  of 
8.  30  As  he  spake  these  words  many  believed  ou 

to.  20  many  of  them  said,  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is 
10.  32  Many  good  works  have  I  showed  you  from 
10.  41  many  resorted  unto  him,  and  said,  John 

10.  42  And  many  believed  on  him  there 

11. 19  many  of  the  Jews  came  to  Martha  andM. 

11.  45  Then  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  M. 
ji.  47  What  do  we  ?  for  this  man  doeth  many 

11.  55  many  went  out  of  the  country  up  to  Jeru. 

12.  11  Because  thatbyreason  of  him  many  of  the 

12. 42  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed 
14.  2  In  my  v  ather's  house  are  many  mansions 
16. 12  I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you 

19.  20  This  title  then  read  many  of  the  Jews ;  for 

20.  30  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the  p. 
21. 25  there  are  also  many  other  things  which  J. 

Acts    1.    3  by  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  t. 

1.  5  baptized,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many 

2.  43  many  wonders  and  signs  were  done  by  the 
4  Howbeit  many  of  them  which  heard  the 

12  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were  many  s. 

7  came  out  of  many,  .and  many  taken  with 

25  preached  the  gospel  in  many  villages  of 

13  Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man 

42  known,  .and  many  believed  in  the  Lord 
27  and  found  many  that  were  come  together 

43  many  of  the  Jews  and  religious  prose^es 
32  exhorted  the  brethren  with  many  words 
35  the  word  of  the  Lord,  with  many  others 
iS  this  did  she  many  days.  But  Paul,  being 
23  whentheyhad  laid  manystripes  upon  them 
12  Therefore  many  of  them  believed  ;  also 

8  many  of  the  Corinthians  hearing  believed 

18  many  that  believed  came,  and  confessed 

19  with[many]  tears,  and  temptations,  which 
10  know  that  thou  hast  been  for  many  years 

7  laid  many  and  grievous  complaints  agai. 

9  that  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary 
10  many  of  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison 
10  Who  alsohonoiu'ed  us  with  many  honours 

17  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  nations 

18  might  become  the  father  of  many  nations 
15  if  through  the  offence  of  onemanybedead 

15  grace  of  God . .  hath  abounded  unto  many 

16  but  the  free  gift(is)  of  many  offences  unto 

19  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  m. 
19  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made 
29  that  he  might  be  the  first  born  among 

4  For  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  b. 

5  So  we,  (being)  many,  are  one  body  in  Ch. 
23  having  a  great  desire  these  many  years 

2  for  she  hath  been  a  succourer  of  many 

26  many  wise,  .not  many  mighty,  not  many 
4.  15  yet  (have  ye)  not  many  fathers  :  for  in  *C. 
8.    5  earth,  as  there  be  gods  many,  ...lords  m. 

10. 17  For  we  (being)  many  are  one  bread,  (and) 
10.  33  mine  own  profit,  but  the  (profit)  of  many 
11. 30  For  tliis  cause  many  (are)  weak  and  sickly 
12. 12  For  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  many  m. 
12.  12  members  of  that  one  body,  being  many 

12. 14  For  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  ni. 

12. 20  But  now  (are  they)  many  members,  yet 

16.  9  opened  unto  me,  and  (there  are)  many  ad. 
2  Co.  1. 11  upon  us  by  the  means  of  many  persons 

1.  11  thanks  may  be  given  by  many  on  our  be. 

2.  4  I  wrote  unto  you  with  many  tears ;  not 
2.  17  For  we  are  not  as  [many],  which  corrupt 
6.  10  as  poor,  yet  making  many  rich  ;  as  having 

8.  22  proved  diligent  in  many  things,  but  now 

9.  12  is  abundant  also  by  many  thanksgivings 
*r.  18  Seeing  that  many  glory  after  the  flesh,  I 
12.  21  I  shall  bewail  many  which  have  sinned 


16. 
16. 

T7< 
18. 
19. 
20. 
24. 
25, 
26. 
26. 
28. 

Horn.  4. 
4- 

5' 
5' 
5- 

5- 
5- 


15 

16. 

1  Co.  1. 


Gal. 


Phil. 
iTi. 


1  Ti. 


1.  14  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own  nat. 

3.  16  He  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  of  many 

4.  27  for  the  desolate  hath  many  more  children 
3.  18  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told  you 
6.   9  and  (into)  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts 
6.  10  pierced  themselves  through  with  many 
6. 12  a  good  profession  before  many  witnesses 

2.  2  hast  heard  of  me  among  many  witnesses 
Titus  1. 10  For  there  are  many  unruly  and  vain  talk. 
Heb.   2.  10  in  bringiug  many  sons  untoglory,  to  make 

5.  it  Of  whom  we  have  many  tilings  to  say 

9.  28  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many 

12. 15  trouble  (you),  and  thereby  [many]  be  defi. 
Jas.     3.    1  My  brethren,  be  not  many  masters,  kno. 

3.  2  For  in  many  things  we  offend  all.  Ifanym. 
2  Pe.    2.   2  many  shall  follow  their  pernicious  ways 

*    1  Jo.    1. 18  even  how  are  their  many  antichrists;  wh. 

4.  1  because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out 

2  John     7  For  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the 

12  Having  many  things  to  write  unto  you,  I 

3  John  13  I  had  many  things  to  write,  but  I  will  not 
Rev.    1 .  15  and  his  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters 

5.  11  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  round  ab. 
8. 11  many  men  died  of  the  waters,  because  they 
9.    9  as  the  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses 

10. 11  must  prophesy  again  before  many  peoples 
14.  2  as  the  voice  of  many  waters, andas  thev. 
1 7.  1  great  whore  that  sitteth  upon  many  waters 
19.    6  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 

19. 12  on  his  head  (were)  many  crowns  ;  and  he 
[See  also  How,  so,  these  very.] 

MAN?  thousands  — 

-4  myriad,  .1521  rebabah. 

Nuni  10.  36  Return,  .unto  the  many  thousands  of  Is. 

MATTY,  to  be,  do,  give,  have,  make,  use  — 

l.To  be  many,  multiplied,  33"i  rabab. 

1  Sa.  25.  10  There  be  many  servants  now  a  days  that 
Psa.  25.  19  Consider  mine  enemies,  for  they  are  many 
Isa.   22.    9  of  the  city  of  David,  that  they  are  many 

66. 16  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  many 
Jer.     5.   6  because  their  transgressions  are  many 

14.    7  for  our  backslidings  are  many;  we  have 

2.  To  be  many,  ni-t  rabah. 

1  Ch.23. 17  but  the  sons  of  Rehabiah  were  very  many 
Prov.  4. 10  and  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be  many 

3.  To  make  many,  H2"i  rabah,  5. 

Num.35.  8  from(themthathave).  .ye  shall  give  many 
1  Ch.  7.   4  for  war.  .for  they  had  many  wives  and 

8.  40  had  many  sons,  and  sons'  sons,  an  hund. 

23. 11  but  Jeush  and  Beriah  had  not  many  sons 
Ezra  10.  13  we  are  many  that  have  transgressed  in 
Job    41.    3  Will  he  make  many  supplications  unto 
Prov.  6.  35  rest  content,  though  thou  givest  many 
Isa.     1. 15  yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I  will 
Jer.   46.  11  in  vain  shalt  thou  use  many  medicines 

46.  16  He  made  many  to  fall,  yea,  one  fell  upon 
Eze.  22.  25  they  have  made  her  many  widows  in  the 
Hos.    8. 11  Because  Ephraini  hath  made  many  altars 

i.Many,  abundant,  2~\  rab. 

1  Sa.    2.    5  that  hath  many  children  is  waxed  feeble 

2  Sa.  23.  20  of  Kabzeel,  who  had  done  many  acts,  he 
1  Ch.11. 22  man  of  Kabzeel,  who  had  done  many  acts 

5. Abundance,  31  rob. 

1  Ki.  7. 47  because  they  were  exceeding  many  :  nei. 
IiTANY  a  time  — 
l.Many,  abundant,  3"i  rab. 

Psa.  129.    1,  2  Many  a  time  have  they  afflicted  me  from 
2,  To  make  many,  rn"j  rabah,  5. 

Psa.  78.  38  many  a  tinieturnedhehisangeraway,aml 
MANY,  to  make  self  — 
To  make  self  heavy,  133  leaded,  7. 

Nan.  3. 15  make  thyself  many,  .make  thyself  many 
MANY  things  — 
Many,  abundant,  31  rab. 

Isa.   42.  20  Seeing  many  things,  but  thou  observest 
MA'-OCH,  SppD  poor. 

Father  of  Achish  king  of  Gath,  to  whom  David  fled 
when  persecuted  by  Saul.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa.  27.    2  unto  Achish,  the  son  of  M.,  king  of  Gath 
MA'-ON,  |iyD  habitation. 

1.  A   city  and  wilderness  in    Judah,   near  Ziph  and 
Carmel ;  now  called  Main,  seven  miles  S.E.  of  Hebron. 

Josh  15.  55  M.,  Carmel,  and  Ziph,  and  Juttah 

1  Sa.  25.   2  (there  was)amaninM., whose  possessions 

2.  A  descendant  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hezron,  or  his  abode. 
B.C.   1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  45  And  the  son  of  Shammai(was)M.:and  M. 

ma-on-ites,  yiya. 

A   tribe  (near    Amalek)  that  oppressed  Israel.      See 
Mehunim. 

Judgio.  12  the  M.,  did  oppress  you;  and  ye  cried  to 
MAR,  to  — 
l.To  (five pain,  mar,  3N3  kaab,  5. 

2  Ki.    3. 19  and  mar  every  good  piece  of  laud  with  s, 
'?..  To  break  down,  mar,  Dm  nathas. 

Job  30. 13  They  mar  my  path,  they  set  forward  my 

3.  To  corrupt,  rwd  shachath,  3. 

Nah.  2.   2  emptied  them  out,  and  marred  their  vine 

4.  To  corrupt,  hit^  shachath,  5 

Lev,  19.  27  neither  shalt  thou  mar  the  corners  of  thy 


Ruth  4.  6  lest  I  mar  mine  own  inheritance  :  redeem 
1  Sa.  6.  5  imagesofyourmicethatmartheland;and 
Jer.  13.   9  After  this  manner  will  I  mar  the  pride  of 

MA'-RA,  K-JD  bitter. 

An  appellation  assumed  by  Naomi,  B.C.  1320,  instead 

of  her  former  one  which  signified  "pleasant." 

Ruth  1.  20  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  M. :  for  the 
MA'-RAH,  rrjD  bitter. 

The  first  station  of  Israel  on  the  E.  of  the  Red  Sea,  in 
the  peninsula  of  Sinai. 

Exodis.  23  when  they  came  to  M.,  they  could  not  d. 
15.  23  drink  of  the  waters  of  M.,  for  they  (were)  b. 
15.  23  therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  M. 
Num  33.    8  And  they  departed . .  and  pitched  in  M. 
33.   9aud  they  reniovedfroniM.,  andcameunto 

MAR-A'-LAH,  n^np  declivity. 

A  city  in  Zebulun,  how  called  Arrabeh. 

Josh  19.  11  border  went  up  toward  the  sea,  and  M. 

MAR-AN-A'-THA,  Mapdvadd,  from  Ch.  Nfix  fiD. 
An  emphatic  assertion  of  the  apostle  Paul,  in  Chaldee  or 
Syriac,  meaning  "  Our  Lord  has  come." 

1  Co.  16.  22  love  not. .let  him  be  anathema  maranatha 

MARBLE  — 

I.White  marble,  V]v,  vp  shesh,  shayish. 

1  Ch.29.  2  stones,  and  marble  stones  in  abundance 
Esth.  1.  6  silver  rings  and  pillars  of  marble  :  the  b. 
Song  5.  15  His  legs  (are  as)  pillars  of  marble  set  upon 

2.  Shining  marble,  fxdpfiapos  marmaros. 

Rev.  18. 12  wood,  and  of  brass,  and  iron,  and  marble 

MARCH  (through),  to  — 
l.To  go  on,  tqh  halak. 

Hab.   1.    6  which  shall  march  through  the  breadth 

2.  To  go  on,  *]?;  yalak. 

Jer.  46.  22  for  they  shall  march  with  an  army,  and 
Joel    2.    7  they  shall  march  every  one  on  his  ways 

Z.To  remove,  journey,  i'Di  nasa. 

Exodi4.  10  Egyptians  marched  after  them  ;  and  they 

4.  To  step  forward,  ij#  tsaad. 

Judg.  5.    4  when  thou  marchedst  out  of  the  field  of 
Psa.  6S.    7  thou  didst  march  through  the  wilderness 
Hab.  3.  12  Thou  didst  inarch  through  the  land  in  in. 

MA-RE'-SHAH,  nw;so£,  n^n^  possession. 

1.  A  fortified  city  in  the  plain  of  Judah,  one  and  a  half 
miles  S.  of  Eleutheropolis. 

Josh. 15.  44  Keilah,  and  Achzib,  and  M.,  nine  cities 
2Ch.11.    8  And  Gath,  and  M.,  and  Ziph 

14.  9  And  there  came  out  against  them . .  unto  M. 
14. 10  and  they  set  the  battle  in  array,  .at  M. 
20.  37  Then  Eliezer  the  son  of  Dodavah  of  M.  p. 

Mic.    1.  15  an  heir  unto  thee,  0  inhabitant  of  M. :  he 

2.  The  father  of  Hebron.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  42  and  the  sons  of  M.  the  father  of  Hebron 

3.  The  son  of  Laadah.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 21  Laadah,  the  father  of  M.,  and  the  families 
MARINER  — 

1 .  Ma  riner,  n  k?  mallach . 

Eze.  27.   9  the  ships  of  the  sea  with  their  mariners 
27.  27  thy  mariners,  and  thy  pilots,  thy  calkers 
27.  29  the  mariners,  (and)  all  the  pilots  of  the 

Jon.    1.    5  Then  the  mariners  were  afraid,  and  cried 

'2.  To  go  to  and  fro,  row,  u*t:;  shut. 

Eze.  27.   8  inhabitants  of  Zidon . .  were  thy  mariners 

MARISH  — 

Ditch,  marshy  place,  N33  gcbe. 

Eze.  47. 11  marishes  thereof  shall  not  be  healed ;  t. 

MARK,  MAR-CTJS,  MaipKos. 

l.The  surname  of  one  John,  a  nephew  of  Barnabas,  the 

companion  of  Paul. 

Acts  12. 12  John,  whose  surname  was  M. ;  where  m. 
12. 25  took  with .  .John,  whose  surname  was  M. 

15.  37  with  them  John,  whose  surname  was  M. 
15.  39  Barnabas  took  M.,  and  sailed  unto  Cyprus 

Col.     4.  ioM.,sister,ssontoBarnabas,touchingwhom 

2  Ti.  4.  11  Take  M.,  and  bring  him  with  thee :  for  he 
Phm.      24  M.,  Aristarchus,  Demas,  Lucas,  my  fellow 

2.  A  son  or  disciple  of  Peter,  said  to  have  written  the 
second  Gospel. 

1  Pe.  5.  i3The(church)..salutethyou;and..M.myson 

MARK-- 

\.A  sign,  nix  oth. 

Gen.  4. 15  Lobd  set  a  mark  upon  Cain,  lest  any  find 

*2.  A  butt,  mark,  n"V32,  rviBO  mattarah,  inattara. 
1  Sa.  20.  20  I  will  shoot . .  as  though  I  shot  at  a  mark 
Job   16. 12  shaken  me.  .and  set  me  up  for  his  mark 
Lam.   3.  12  bent  his  bow,  and  set  me  as  markforthe 

Z.A  butt,  mark,  yarn  miphga. 

Job     7.  20  why  hast  thou  set  me  as  a  mark  against 

i.A  mark,  in  tav. 

Eze.    9.    4  set  a  mark  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  men 
9.    6  not  near  any  man  upon  whom  (is)  the  m. 

5. A  cross  mark,  ypMp  qaaqa. 

Lev.  19.  2S  Ye  shall  not .  .priut  any  marks  upon  you 


MARK 


6i6 


MARVELLOUS 


Q.Mark,  goal,  aim,  o-koit6s  skopos. 

Phil.  3. 14  I  press  towards  the  mark  for  the  prize  of 

7.  A  point,  puncture,  arly/xa  stigma. 

Gal.    6.  17  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the 

8.  Impressed  mark,  engraving,  xdpayfxa  cJutragma. 

Rev.  13. 16  to  receive  a  mark  in  their  right  hand,  or 
13. 17  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or  the  name 
14.   9  receive  (his)  mark  in  his  forehead,  or  in 

14.  11  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of  his  name 

15.  2  [and  over  his  image,  and  over  his  mark] 

16.  2  the  men  which  had  the  mark  of  the  beast 

19.  20  that  had  received  the  mark  of  the  beast 

20.  4  neither  had  received  (his)  mark  upon  th. 

MARK,  to  — 

\.To  understand,  p3  bin. 

Job  iS.    2  mark,  and  afterwards  we  will  speak 

2.  To  seal,  shut  up,  enn  Chatham,  3. 

Job   24. 16  (which)  they  had  marked  for  themselves 

3.  To  know,  jn;  yada. 

Ruth  3.   4  that  thou  shalt  mark  the  place  where  he 

1  Ki.  20.    7  Mark,  I  pray  you,  and  see  how  this  (man) 

20.  22  Go,  strengthen  thyself,  and  mark,  and  s. 

4.  To  face,  front,  n:£  panah. 

Job   21.    5  Mark  me,  and  be  astonished,  andlay(your) 

5.  To  give  attention,  3^3  qashab,  5. 

Jer.  23. 18  who  hath  marked  his  word,  and  heard  (it) 

6.  To  see,  rm"i  raah. 

2  Sa.  13.  28  Mark  ye  now  when  Amnon's  heart  is  ra. 

7.  To  set,  place,  nty,  nw  sum,  sim. 

Eze.  44.  5  Son  of  man,  mark  well,  and  behold  with 
44.    5  mark  well  the  entering  in  of  the  house 

8.T0  set,  place,  TC$  shilh. 

Psa.  48. 13  Mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her 

9.  To  observe,  watch,  10^  shamar. 

1  Sa.  1.  12  it  came  to  pass,  .that  Eli  marked  her  m. 
Job  10.  14  If  I  sin,  then  thou  markest  me,  and  thou 

22. 15  Hast  thou  marked  the  old  way  which  w. 

33. 11  in  the  stocks,  he  marketh  all  my  paths 

39.  1  canst  thou  mark  when  the  hinds  do  calf? 
Rsa.  37.  37  Mark  the  perfect  (man),  and  behold  the 

56.  6  they  hide  themselves,  they  mark  my  steps 
130.   3  If  thou,  Lord,  shouldest  mark  iniquities 

10.  To  hold  on  or  upon,  £n-exw  epecho. 

Lukei4.    7  when  he  marked  how  they  chose  out  the 
11. To  look  at,  watch,  <tkott€co  skopeo. 

Rom  16.  17  mark  them  which  cause  divisions  and  off. 
Phil.  3. 17  mark  them  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us 

MARK  out,  to  — 

To  mark  out,  ini?  taar,  3. 

Isa.  44. 13  he  marketh  it  out  with  a  line,  he  fitteth 
44.  13  he  marketh  it  out  with  the  compass,  and 

MARK  well,  to  — 

To  give  attention,  ntyp  qashab,  5. 

Job   33.31  Mark  well,  0  Job;  hearken  unto  me  :  hold 
MARKED,  to  be  — 
To  be  treasured  up,  mc^ked,  spotted,  Dns  katham,2. 

Jer.    2.  22  (yet)  thine    dquity  is  marked  before  me 
MARKET  (place)  — 

1.  Merchandise,  3"JJ£p  macwdb.  • 

Eze.  27.  13  of  men' and  vessels  of  brass  in  thy  market 
27. 17  they  traded  in  thy  market  wheat  of  Min. 
27.  19  cassia,  and  calamus,  were  in  thy  market 
27.  25  Tarshish  did  sing  of  thee  in  thy  market 

2.  Market  place,  place  of  assembly,  ayopd  agora. 
Mattn.  16  unto  children  sitting  in  the  markets,  and 

20.    3  others  standing  idle  in  the  marketplace 
23.    7  greetings  iu  the  markets,  and  to  be  called 

Mark  7.  4  (when  they  come)  from  the  market,  except 
12.  38  and(love)salutations  in  the  market  places 

Luke  7.  32  unto  children  sitting  in  the  market  place 
11.43  for  ve  l°ve  •  ■  greetings  in  the  markets 
20.  46  love  greetings  in  the  markets,  and  the  hi. 

Acts  16.  19  drew  (them)  into  the  market  place  unto 

17.  17  iu  the  market  daily  with  them  that  met 

MA'  ROTH,  n'ns  lordship. 

A  city  in  the  KW.  of  Judah;  perhaps  the  same  as 

Jarmuth. 

Mic.    1.  12  the  inhabitant  of  M.  waited  carefully  for 
MARRED,  tobe  — 
1. Corn/pi  ion,  marring,  rtn^p  mishchath. 

Isa.    52. 14  his  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any 
2. To  corrupt,  mar,  nnp»  shachath,  2. 

Jer.  13.    7  and,  behold,  the  girdle  was  marred,  it 

18.  4  vessel  that  he  made  of  clay  was  marred 

3.  To  lose,  destroy,  a-n-Swufxt  apoUumi. 

Mark  2.  22  is  spilled,  and  the  bottles  will  be  marred 
MARRIAGE  — 
Marriage  or  wedding  feast,  ydfios  gamos. 

Matt  22.   2  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for  his  son 

22.    4  things  (are)  ready  :  come  unto  the  irmrri. 

22.   9  many  as  ye  shall  find,  bid  to  the  marriage 

25.  10  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage :  and 

John  2.    1  the  third  day  there  was  a  marriage  in  C. 

2.    2  called,  and  his  disciples,  to  the  marriage 

lieb.  13.   4  Marriage  (is)  honourable  in  all,  and  the 

Tiny.  t0.    7  f(ir  [\iv  marriage  Of  the  lamb  is  come,  and 

iq.   q  they  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage 


MARRIAGE,  duty  of  — 
Habitation,  n:iy  onah. 

Exod2i.  10  her  raiment,  aud  her  duty  of  marriage 
MARRIAGE,  to  give,  be  given  in  or  to  — 
1.7b  be  praised,  V?n  halal,  4. 

Psa.  78.  63  their  maidens  were  not  given  to  marriage 

2.  To  be  given  in  marriage,  yct,/j.io-tca/j.ai  gamiskomai. 
Mark  12.  25  neither  marry,  nor  [are  given  in  marriage] 

3.  To  give  out  in  marriage,  efcyafxifa  ckgamizo. 
Matt  22.  30  nor  [are  given  in  marriage],  but  are  as  the 

24.  38  marrying  and  [given  in  marriage],  until 
Luke  17.  27  [they  were  given  in  marriage],  until  the 
1  Co.  7.  38  So  then  [he  that  giveth  (her)  in  marriage] 
7.  38  but  [he  that  giveth  (her)  nut  in  marriage] 

4.  To  be  given  out  in  marriage,  ^Kyafxio-KOfxai. 

Luke 20.  34  children,  .marry,  and  [are  given  in  mar.] 
20.  35  neither  marry,  nor  [are  given  in  marriage] 

MARRIAGES,  to  make  — 

To  intermarry,  jrjn  chathan,  7. 

Gen.  34.  9  make  ye  marriages  with  us,  (and) give  your 
Deut.  7.  3  Neither  shalt  thou  make  marriages  with 
J0SI123.  12  and  shall  make  marriages  with  them,  and 

MARRIED,  to  be  — 

l.Lord,  master,  owner,  ?j£3  baal. 

I>eut22. 22  with  a  woman  married  to  an  husband,  then 
Jer.     3.  14  for  I  am  married  unto  you :  and  I  will  take 

2.7*0  be  lord,  master,  owner,  Vj/3  baal,  2. 

Prov  30.  23  For  an  odious  (woman)  when  she  is  marr. 
Isa.  62.   4  in  thee,  and  thy  land  shall  be  married 

3.  Owner  of  a  wife,  n^x  ^ya  baal  ishshah. 

Exod2i.    3  if  he  were  married,  then  his  wife  shall  go 

4.  Wives,  dtj  nashim. 

Num.  36.    3  if  they  be  married  to  any  of  the  sons  of 
36.  11  married  unto  their  father's  brother's  sons 
36.  12  they  were  married  into  the  families  of  the 

5.  To  marry,  yajx4<a  gamed. 

Markio.  12  if  a  woman,  .be  married  to  another,  she 
1  Co.  7.  10  unto  the  married  I  command,  (yet)  not 

7.  33  But  he  that  is  married  careth  for  the  th. 

7.  34  but  she  that  is  married  careth  for  the  th. 

7.39  she  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom 

6.  7*0  become,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Rom.  7.    3  she  be  married  to  another  man,  she  shall 
7.   3  no  adulteress,  though  she  be  married  to 
7.    4 thatye should  bemarriedto  another ,(evei 
MARRIED  wife  — 
Fo  be  master,  owner,  7J/3  baal. 

Isa.    54.    1  more,  .than  the  children  of  the  married  v. 
MARROW,  (full  of)  — 
l.Fat,  iSn  ckeleb. 

Psa.  63.    5  soul  shall  he  satisfied  as  (with)  marrow  and 

2.  Marrcnv,  nb  moach. 

Job  21.  24  and  his  bones  are  moistened  with  marrow 
\.To  be  full  of  marrow,  nno  machah,  4. 

Isa.  25.  6  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on 
i.Juice,  marrow,  *-pp  shiqqui. 

Prov.  3.   8  health  to  thy  navel,  and  marrow  to  thy  b . 

:"i  Marrow,  ftve\6$  muelos. 

Heb.    4.  12  and  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow 
MARRY  (a  wife),  to  — 
1.  To  be  master,  owner,  by$  baal. 

Deut24.    1  hath  taken  a  wife,  and  married  her,  and 

Isa.   62.    5  For  (as)  a  young  man  marrieth  a  virgin 
62.   5  shall  thy  sons  marry  thee  :  and  (as)  the  b. 

Mai.    2.  11  hath  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange 

2.To  marry  a  brother's  widow,  03;  yabam,  3. 
Gen.  38.    8  unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry  her 

3.  To  cause  to  sit  down  or  still,  ats';  yashab,  5. 

Neh.  13.  23  Jews  (that)  had  married  wives  of  Ashdod 
13.  27  transgress  against  our  God  in  marrying  s. 

4.  To  take,  np^  laqach. 

Gen.  19.  14  sons  in  law,  which  married  his  daughter 

Numi2.    1  the  Ethiopian  woman  whom  he  had  mar. 

12.    1  for  he  had  married  an  Ethiopian  woman 

1  Ch.  2.  21  whom  he  married  when  he  (was)  threesc. 

5.  To  lift  up,  k'c'3  nasa. 

2  Ch.13.  21  waxed  mighty,  and  married  fourteen  wi. 

6.  Wives,  wwi  nashim. 

Nuni36.  6  Let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  best 
36.    6  only  to  the  family,  .shall  they  niairy 

7.  To  marry,  yaueco  gamed. 

Matt.  5.  32  whosoever  shall  marry  her  that  is  divor. 
19.  9  Whosoever,  .shall  marry  another,  comm. 
19.   9  whoso  marrieth  her  which  is  put  away  a. 

19.  10  be  so  with  (his)  wife,  it  is  not  good  to  m. 
22.  25  first,  when  he  had  married  a  wife,  decea. 
22.  30  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
24.  38  marrying  and  given  in  marriage,  until 

Mark  6.  17  Philip's  wife  ;  for  he  had  married  her 
10. 11  shall  put  away  his  wife,  and  marry  anot. 
12.  25  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 

Lukei4.  20  And  another  said,  I  have  married  a  wife 

16.  18  puttetb  away  his  wife,  and  marrieth  an. 
'    16.  iS  whosoever  marrieth  her  that  is  put  away 

17.  27  they  drank,  they  married  wives,  they  were 

20.  34  children  of  this  world  marry,  and  arc  gi. 
20.  35  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 

1  Co.  7.    9  But  if  they  cannot  contain,  let  them  marry 


1  Co.  7.    9  for  it  is  better  to  marry  than  to  burn 

7.  28  But  and  if  thou  marry,  thou  hast  not  sin. 
7.  28  and  if  a  virgin  marry,  she  hath  not  sinned 

7.  36  what  he  will,  he  sinneth  not :  let  them  in. 

1  Ti.   4.    3  Forbidding  to  marry,  (and  commanding') 

5.  11  wax  wanton  against  Christ,  they  will  ma. 

5.  14  therefore  that  the  younger  women  marry 

S.  To  marry  a  brother's  widow,  iirtyauppevw. 

Matt22.  24  his  brother  shall  marry  his  wife,  and  raise 
MAR-SE'-NA,  N3p-)Q  worthy. 

One  of  the  seven  princes  of  Media  and  Persia  which  saw 
the  king's  face  at  pleasure.    B.C.  519. 

Esth.  1.  14  next  unto  him  (was)  Carshena . .  Meres,  M, 
MAR'S  HILL,   'Apeios  irdyos    arcios  pagos.       See 

Areopagus. 
A  hill  in  Athens  with  an  open  space,  where  sat  the  court 
of  the  Areopagus,   the    supreme  tribunal  of    justice 
modified  by  Solon. 

Acts  17.  22  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  M.H.,  and  said 
MART  — 
A  mart,  merchandise,  "inn  sachar. 

Isa.  23.    3  her  revenue;  and  she  is  a  mart  of  nations- 
MAR'-THA,  Mdpda,  from  Ch.  NJ?10  lady. 
The  elder  sister  of  Mary  and  Lazarus  in  Bethany. 

Lukeio.  38  a  certain  woman  named  M.  received  him 
10.  40  But  M.  was  cumbered  about  much  serving 

10.  41  Jesus,  .said  unto  her,  1J.,  M.,  thou  are  c. 
Johun.    1  (named)  Lazarus,  of  Bethany. .town of.. M. 

11.  5  Now  Jesus  loved  M.,  and  her  sister,  and 
11.  19  many  of  the  Jews  came  to  M.  and  Mary 
11.  20  Then  M.,  as  soon  as  she  heard  that  Jesus 
11.  21  Then  said  M.  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  if  thou  h. 
11.  24  M.  saith  unto  him,  I  know  that  he  shall  r. 
11.  30  Jesus,  .was  in  that  place  where  M.met  him 

11.  39  M.,  the  sister  of  him  that  was  dead,  saitli 

12.  2  they  made  him  a  supper;  and  M.  served 
MARTYR  — 

A  witness,  martyr,  pdprvs,fxdprup  martus,  martur. 
Acts  22.  22  the  blood  of  thy  martyr  Stephen  was  shed 
Rev.   2.  13  Antipas  (was)  my  faithful  martyr,  who  was 
17.   6  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus 

MARVEL  — 

Admirable,  wonderful,  6avpaar6s  thaumastos. 

2  Co.  11.  14  And  no  [marvel];  for  Satan  himself  is 
MARVEL  (at),  to  — 

l.To  wonder,  matvet,  nnj*  tamah. 

Gen.  43.  33  and  the  men  marvelled  one  at  another 
Psa.  48.    5  they  marvelled  ;  they  were  troubled,  (and) 
Eccl.  5.    8  marvel  not  at  the  matter :  for  (he  that  is) 

2.7*0  admire,  wonder,  davfidfa  thaumazo. 

Matt.  8.  10  marvelled,  and  said  to  them  that  followed 

8.  27  the  men  marvelled,  saying,  What  manner 

9.  8  [they  marvelled],  and  glorified  God,  which 
9.  33  the  multitudes  marvelled,  saying,  It  was 

21.  20  they  marvelled,  saying,  How  soon  is  the 

22.  22  they  marvelled,  and  left  him,  and  went 
27.  14  that  the  governor  marvelled  greatly 

Mark  5.  20  great  things,  .and  all  (men)  did  marvel 

6.  6  he  marvelled  because  of  their  unbelief 
12.  17  Aud  they  marvelled  at  him 

15.    5  answered  nothing ;  so  that  Pilate  marvel. 

15.  44  Pilate  marvelled  if  he  were  already  dead 
Luke  1. 2i  and  marvelled  that  he  tarried  so  long  in 

1.  63  His  name  is  John.     And  they  marvelled 

2.  33  his  mother  marvelled  at  those  things  which 

7.  9  he  marvelled  at  him, and  turned  him  about 
11.  38  marvelled  that  be  had  not  first  washed 
20.  26  they  marvelled  at  his  answer,  and  held 

John  3.    7  Marvel  nut  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must 

4.  27  marvelled  that  he  talked  with  the  woman 

5.  20  greater  works,  .that  ye  may  marvel 

5.  28  Marvel  not  at  this :  for  the  hour  is  coming 

7.  15  the  Jews  marvelled,  saying.  How  knoweth 

7.  21  I  have  done  one  work,  aud  ye  all  marvel 

Acts   2.    7  marvelled,  saying  one  to  another,  Behold 

3.  12  why  marvel  ye  at  this?  or  why  look  ye 

4. 13  they  marvelled  ;  and  they  took  knowledge 

Gal.     1.    6  1  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from 

1  Jo.    3.  13  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  h. 

Rev.  17.    7  Wherefore  didst  thou  marvel?  I  will  tell 

MARVELLOUS  (thing  or  work)  — 

1,2*0  be  wonderful,  singular,  tOBpala,  2. 

1  Ch.16.  12  his  marvellous  works  that  he  hath  done 

16.  24  his  marvellous  works  among  all  nations 
Job  5.  9  doeth.  .marvellous  things  without  num. 
Psa.    9.    1  will  show  forth  all  thy  marvellous  works 

98.    1  he  hath  done  marvellousthings:his  right 
105.    5  his  marvellous  works  that  he  hath  done 
139.  14  marvellous  (are)  thy  works  ;  and  (that) 
Ban.  11.  36  shall  speak  marvellous  things  against  the 
Mic.    7.  15  will  I  shuw  unto  him  marvellous  (things) 

2- A   wonder,  vh%  pete. 

Psa.   78.  12  Marvellous  things  did  he  in  the  sight  of 

^.Admirable,  wonderful,  Bav/xao-ros  thuumastos. 
Matt  21.  42  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes? 
Markz2.  1 1  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes? 
John  9.  30  herein  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  ye 
1  Pe.  2.  9  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light 
Rev.  15.  1  saw  another  sign,  .great  and  marvellous 
15.    3  Great  and  marvellous  (are)  thy  works,  L. 

MARVELLOUS,  to  be  or  show  self  — 

l.JTo  be  wonderful,  singular,  vbspala,  2. 

Psa.  n3  23  Lord's  doing;  it  (is')niarvellous  in  our  e. 


MARVELLOUS 


G47 


MASTER 


Zech.  8.   6  If  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the 

8.   6  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  mine  eyes 

2.To  make  wonderful,  xhsjxtla,  5. 

Psa.  31.  21  liis  marvellous  kindness  in  a  strong  city 
S.To  shoio  self 'wonderful,  ttbapala,  7. 

Job    10. 16  thou  showest  thyself  marvellous  upon  me 
4.  To  make  wonderful,  nhp palah,  5. 

Psa.  17.  7  Show  thy  marvellous  loving  kindness,  0 
MAIIVELLOTJS  work,  to  do  a  — 
To  make  wonderful,  do  singularly,  n^3  pala,  5. 

Isa.  29.  14  to  do  a  marvellous  work  among  this  peo. 
MARVELLOUSLY,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  wonderful,  tibs  pala,  2. 

Job  37-   5  God  thujidereth  marvellously  with  his  v. 

2.  To  make  wonderful,  N73  pala,  5. 

2  Ch.26. 15  he  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was 

3.  To  wonder,  marvel,  nan  tamah. 

Hab.  1.   5  wonder  marvellously :  for  (I)  will  work  a 
MARVELS  — 
To  be  laonderful,  abs  pala,  2. 

Exod34. 10I  will  do  marvels,  such  as  have  not  been 
MARY,  Mapia,  Mapia^  from  Heb.  rriD  bitter. 

1.  The  mother  of  Jesus,  and  wife  of  Joseph. 

Matt.  1.  16  Joseph  the  husband  of  51.,  of  whom  was 
1. 18  When  as  his  mother  M.  was  espoused  to  J. 

1.  20  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  M.  thy  wife;  for 

2.  11  they  saw  the  young  child  with  M,  his  m. 
13.  5s  is  not  his  mother  called  M.?  and  his  bret. 

Mark  6.  3  the  son  of  M.,  the  brother  of  James,  and 
Luke  1.  27  virgin  espoused,  .virgin's  name  (was)  M. 
1.  30  Fear  not,  M.;  for  thou  hast  found  favour 
1.  34  Then  said  M.  unto  the  angel,  How  shall 
i.  38  AndM.  said,  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the 
1.  39  And  M.  arose  in  those  days  and  went  into 
1.  41  when  Elisabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  M. 
1.  46  And  M.  said,  My  soul  doth  magnify  the 

1.  56  AndM.  abode  with  her  about  three  mon. 

2.  5  To  be  taxed  with  M.  his  espoused  wife,  be. 
2.  16  they  came  with  haste,  and  found  M.  and 
2.  ig  But  M.  kept  all  these  thiDgs,  and  pondered 
2.  34  Simeon,  .said  unto  M. his  mother,  Behold 

Acts    1. 14  and  M.  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  with  his 

2.  A  woman  of  Magdala,  in  Galilee. 

Matt27.  56  Among  which  wasM.  Magdalene  and.. the 

27.  61  there  was  M.  Magdalene . .  sitting  over  ag. 

28.  1  In  the  end  of  the  sabbath,  .came  M.  Ma. 
Markis.  40  among  whom  was  M.  Magdalene,  and .  .the 

15.  47  And  M.  Magdalene . .  beheld  where  he  was 

16.  1  when  the  sabbath  was  past,  M.  Magdalene 
16.   9  he  appeared  first  to  M.  Magdalene,  out  of 

Luke  8.    2  M.  called  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went 
24.  10  It  was  M.  Magdalene,  and  Joanna,  and 

John  19.  25  Now  there  stood  by  the  cross . .  M.  Magd. 
20.    1  The  first  (day)  of  the  weekcometh  M.  M. 
20. 11  But  M.  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre 
20.  16  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  M.!  She  turned  he. 
20. 18  M.  Magdalene  came  and  told  the  disciples 

3.  Mother  of  James  and  Joses,  the  apostles. 

Matt27-  56  Among  which  was.  .M.  the  mother  of  J. 

27.  61  And  there  was.  .the  other  M.,  sitting  over 

28.  1  as  it  began  to  dawn . .  came . .  the  other  M. 
Markis.  40  among  whom  was.  .M.  the  mother  of  J. 

15.  47  M.  (the  mother)  of  Joses  beheld  where  he 

16.  1  when  the  sabbath  was  past . .  M.  the  (mot.) 
Luke24- 10  It  was.  .M.  (the mother)  of  James,  and 

4.  Wife  of  Cleophas. 

John  19.  25  there  stood  by  the  cross.  .M.  the  (wife)  of 

5.  Sister  of  Lazarus  and  Martha  in  Bethany. 

Lukeio.  39  she  had  a  sister  called  M.,  which  also  sat 

10.  42  M.  hath  chosen  that  good  part,  whichshall 
Johnu.    1  Bethany,  the  town  of  M.  and  her  sister 

11.  2  It  was  (that)  M.  which  anointed  the  Lord 
11.  19  many  of  theJewscame  to  Martha  and  M. 
11.  20  Martha,  .went  and  met  him :  but  M.  sat 
11.  28  called  M.  her  sister  secretly,  saying,  The 
11.  31  when  they  saw  M.,  that  she  rose  up  hastily 
1 1 .  32  Then  when  M.  was  come  where  Jesus  was 

11.  45  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  M.,  and 

12.  3  Then  took  M.  a  pound  of  ointment  of  sp. 

6.  Mother  of  John  Mark,  nephew  of  Barnabas. 

Acts  12. 12  he  came  to  the  house  of  M.  the  mother  of 

7.  A  female  believer  in  Rome  who  had  helped  Paul. 

Rom  16.    6  Greet[M.],  who  bestowed  muchlabouron 
MASCHXL  — 
To  act  wisely,  ,5'p  sakal,  5. 

Psa.  32.  title.    (A  psalm)  of  David,  Maschil 

42.    ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  Maschil,  for  the 

44.  „  for  the  sons  of  Korah,  Maschil 

45.  ,,  for  the  sons  of  Korah,  Maschil,  A  Song  of 

52.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician,  Maschil,  (A) 

53.  „  chief  Musician  upon  Mahalath,  Maschil 

54.  ,,  chief  Musician  upon  Neginoth,  Maschil 

55.  ,,  To  the  chief  Musician  on  Negmoth,  Mas. 
74.  ,,  Maschil  of  Asaph 

78.    ,,  Maschil  of  Asaph 

88.  „  Maschil  of  Heman  the  Ezrahite 

89.  ,,  Maschil  of  Ethan  the  Ezrahite 

142.    „  Maschil  of  David  ;  A  prayer  when  he 
MASH,  tf£. 

A  son  of  Aram,  son  of  Shem,  the  same  as  Meshech,  in 
Ch.  1.  17. 

Gen.  10.  23  children  of  Aram ;  Vz,  and  Hul . .  and  M. 


MA'-SHAL,  W'2  depressed. 

A  Levitioal  city  in  Asher.    See  Misheal. 

1  Ch.  6.  74  of  the  tribe  of  Asher ;  M.  with  her  subu. 
MASON  — 

l.To  grave  a  stone,  |n^  trri  charash  eben. 

2  Sa.    5.  1 1  and  masons ;  and  they  built  David  an  ho. 

2.To  make  a  hedge  or  wall,  ~na  gadar. 

2  Ki.12.  12  to  masons,  and  hewers  of  stone,  and  to 

22.  6  carpenters,  and  builders,  and  niasons,and 

Z.To  hew,  dig,  3sq  chatsab. 

1  Ch.22.    2  he  set  masons  to  hew  wrought  stones  to 

2  Ch.24.  12  hired  masons  and  carpenters  to  repair  the 
Ezra    3.    7  They  gave  money  also  unto  the  masons 

4.  To  work  or  devise  a  wall,  Yp  ann  charash  qir. 
1  Ch.  14.    1  masons  and  carpenters,  to  build  him  an 

MAS-RE'-KAH,  npTfO  place  of  rivers. 

A  place  in  Edom,  between  Petra  and  Shobek,  the  place  of 

Samlah,  the  fifth  king  of  Edom. 

Gen.  36.  36  Hadad  died,  and  Samlah  of  M.  reigned  in 
1  Ch.  1.  47  when  Hadad  was  dead,  Samlah  of  M.  rei. 

MAS'-SA,  xv'D  burden. 

A  son  of  Ishmael,  son  of  Hagar,  and  his  land  near 

Dumah,  in  Mount  Seir.     B.C.  1880. 

Gen.  25.  14  And  Mislrma,  and  Dumah,  and  M. 

i  Ch.  1.  30  Mishma,  and  Dumah,  M.,  Hadad,  and  T. 

MAS'-SAH,  npa  trial,  tenijitation. 
A  place  also  called  Meribah,  in  the  wilderness,  where 
the  people  murniured  for  want  of  water.     B.C.  1492. 
Exodi7.   7  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  M.,  and 
Deut.  6. 16  Ye  shall  not  tempt  the  Lord.  .as.  .in  M. 
9.  22  and  at  M. .  .ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wr. 

33.  8  thy  holy  one,  whom  thou  didst  prove  at  M. 

MAST  — 

l.JIast,  cable,  rope,  7?n  chibbel. 

Prov  23.  34  as  he  that  lieth  upon  the  top  of  a  mast 
2.A  pole,  mast,  \~p  toren. 

Isa.  33.  23  they  could  not  well  strengthen  their  mast 
Eze.  27.    5  havetakencedars..tomakeniastsfor  thee 
MASTER,  (ship)  — 
l.Lord,  sir,  jiix  adon. 

Gen.  24.  9  under  the  thigh  of  Abraham  his  master 
24.  10  ten  camels  of  the  camels  of  his  master 
24.  10  the  goods  of  his  master  (were)  in  his  hand 
24. 12,  27,  42,  48  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abra. 
24.  12  and  show  kindness  unto  my  master  Abra. 
24.  14  thou  hast  showed  kindness  unto  my  master 
24.  27  who  hath  not  left  destitute  my  master  of 
24.  27  led . .  to  the  house  of  my  master's  brethren 
24.  35  the  Lord  hath  blessed  my  master  greatly 
24.  36  my  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my  master 

24.  37  my  master  made  me  swear,  saying,  Thou 

34.  39  I  said  unto  my  master,  Peradventure  the 
34.  44  hath  appointed  out  for  my  master's  son 
34. 48  take  my  master's  brother's  daughter  unto 
34.  49  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  my  master 
34.  51  let  her  be  thy  master's  son's  wife,  as  the 
34.  54  and hesaid, Send meawayunto  niymaster 
34.  56  send  me  away  that  I  may  go  to  my  master 
34.  65  And  the  servant  (had)  said,  It  (is)  my  ma. 
39.    2  in  the  house  of  Iris  master  the  Egyptian 
39.    3  his  master  saw  that  the  Lord  (was)  with 
39.    7  master's  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  Joseph 
39.    8  unto  his  master's  wife,  Behold,  my  master 
39.  19  his  master  heard  the  words  of  his  wife 
39.  20  Joseph's  master  took  him,  and  put  him 

Exod2i.    4  If  his  master  have  given  him  a  wife,  and 
21.   4  her  children  shall  be  her  master's,  and  he 
21.    5  I  love  my  master,  my  wife,  and  my  ch.il. 
21.    6  master  shall  bring  him  unto  the  judges 
21.    6  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear  through 
21.    8  If  she  please  not  her  master,  who  hath 
21.  32  unto  their  master  thirty  shekels  of  silver 

Deut  23.  15  Thou  shalt  not  deliver  unto  his  master 

23.  15  which  is  escaped  from  his  master  unto 
Judg  19.  11  the  servant  said  unto  his  master,  Come,  I 

ig.  12  master  said  unto  him,  We  will  not  turn 

1  Sa.  20.  38  And  Jonathan's  lad . .  came  to  his  master 

24.  6  I  should  do  this  tiling  unto  my  master 
25. 10  that  break  away  every  man  from  his  ma. 

25.  14  salute  our  master ;  and  he  railed  on  them 

25.  17  evil  is  determined  against  ourmaster,  and 

26.  16  ye  have  not  kept  your  master,  the  Lord's 
29.   4  he  reconcile  himself  unto  his  master? 

29.  10  master's  servants  that  are  come  with  thee 

30.  13  and  my  master  left  me,  because  three  d. 
30.  15  deliver  me  into  the  hands  of  my  master 

2  Sa.   2.    7  your  master  Saul  is  dead,  and  also  the 

9.  9  I  have  given  unto  thy  master's  son  all 
9. 10  thy  master's  son  may  have  food  to  eat 
9. 10  thy  master's  son  shall  eat  bread  alway 

12.    8  thy  master's  house,  and  thy  master's  wi. 

16.    3  king  said,  And  where  (is)  thy  master's  son  ? 

1  Ki.  22.  17  These  have  no  master;  let  them  return 

2  Ki.   2.    3,  5  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  master 

2.  16  seek  thy  master:  lest  peradventure  the 
5.    1  Naaman..wasagreat  man  with  his  master 
5.  18  when  my  master  goeth  into  the  house  of 
5.  20  Behold,  my  master  hath  spared  Naaman 
5.  22  My  master  hath  sent  me,  sajing,  Behold 

5.  25  he  went  in,  and  stood  before  his  master 

6.  5  and  he  cried,  and  said,  Alas,  master  ! 
6. 15  Alas,  my  master  !  how  shall  we  do? 

6.  22  may  eat  and  drink,  and  go  to  their  master 
6.  23  andthey  wenttotheirmaster.So  the  bands 


2  Ki.   6.  32  sound  of  his  master's  feet  behind  him  I 

8.  14  came  to  his  master ;  who  said  to  him 

9.  7  shalt  smite  the  house  of  Ahab  thy  master 
9.  31  (Had)  Zimri  peace,  who  slew  his  master? 

10.    2  seeing  your  master's  sons  (are)  with  you 
10.    3  best  and  meetest  of  your  master's  sons 
10.   3  Look. .out  and  fight  for  your  master's  house 
10.   6  the  heads  of  the  men  your  master's  sons 
10.   9  I  conspired  against  my  master,  and  slew 
10.  24  of  the  least  of  my  master's  servants,  and 

18.  27  Hath  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  master 

19.  4  whom,  .his  master  hath  sent  to  reproach 
19.   6  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  your  master,  Tims  saith 

1  Ch.  12.  19  saying,  He  will  fall  to  his  master  Saul  to 

2  Ch.i3. 16  and  the  Lord  said,  These  have  no  master 
Job     3.  19  the  servant  (is)  free  from  his  master 
Psa.123.    2  (look)  unto  the  hand  of  their  masters 
Prov  25.  13  for  he  refresheth  the  soul  of  his  masters 

27.  18  he  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be 
30.  10  Accuse  not  a  servant  unto  his  master,  lesfc 
Isa.  24.   2  as  with  the  servant,  so  with  his  master 
36.    8  to  my  master  the  king  of  Assyria,  and 
36.    9  of  the  least  of  my  master's  servants,  and 

36.  12  Hath  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  master 

37.  4  his  master  hath  sent  to  reproach  the 

37.    6  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto  your  master.  Thus 
Jer.  27.    4  command  them  to  say  unto  their  masters 

27.    4  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto  your  masters 
Amos  4.    i  which  say  to  their  masters,  Bring,  and 
Zeph.  1.   9  which  fill  their  masters'  houses  with  viol. 
Mai.    1.    6  a  servant  his  master :  if  then  I  (be)a  father 
1.    6  if  1  (be)  a  master,  where  (is)  my  fear?  saith 

2. Master,  owner,  Sy3  baal. 

Exod22.    8  the  master  of  the  house  shall  be  brought 
Judg  19.  22  spake  to  the  master  of  the  house,  the  old 

19.  23  the  master  of  the  house,  went  out  unto 
Eccl.12.  11  fastened  (by)  the  masters  of  assemblies 
Isa.     1.   3  the  ass  his  master's  crib :  (but)  Israel  doth 

3.  Great,  mighty,  elder,  yy  rah. 

Dan.    1.    3  unto  Ashpenaz  the  master  of  his  eunucns 

4.  9  0  Belteshazzar,  master  of  the  magicians 
5. 11  made  master  of  the  magicians,  astrologers 

Jon.    1.   6  the  ship  master  came  to  him,  and  said  unto 

4.  Prince,  head,  chief,  captain,  ~ty  sar. 

Exod.  r.  11  they  did  set  over  them  task  masters  to 
1  Ch.15.  27  the  master  of  the  song  with  the  singers 

5.  To  awake,  stir  up,  "iiy  wr. 

Mai.    2.  12  the  master  and  the  scholar,  out  of  the 

6.-4  desptot,  sovereign  master,  SeaTroT-qs  despotes. 

1  Ti.    6.    1  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all 

6.    2  they  that  have  believing  masters,  let  them 

2  Ti.    2.  21  and  meet  for  the  master's  use,  (and)  pre. 
Titus  2.    9  to  be  obedient  unto  their  own  masters 

1  Pe.  2.  18  (be)  subject  to  (your)  masters  with  all  fear 
7.TeacIier,  SiSacntaAos  didaskalos. 

Matt.  S.  19  Master,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever 
9.  11  Why  eateth  your  Master  with  publicans 
10.  24  The  disciple  is  not  above  (his)  master,  nor 
10.  25  It  is  enough .  .that  he  be  as  his  master 
12.  38  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from  thee 

17.  24  and  said, Doth  not  your  master'pay  tribute 

19.  16  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do,  that 
22.  16  Master,  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and 
22.  24  Master,  Moses  said,  If  a  man  die,  having 
22.  36  Master,  which  (is)  the  great  commandm. 
26.  18  The  Master  saith,  My  time  is  at  hand  ;  I 

Mark  4.  38  Master,  carest  thou  not  that  we  perish? 

5.  35  whytroublestthouthe  Masterany  further 
9.  17  Master,  I  have  brought  unto  thee  my  sou 
9.  38  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in 

10.  17  Good  Master,  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may 
10.  20  Master,  all  these  have  I  observed  from  my 
10.  35  Master,  we  would  that  thou  shouldest  do 
12.  14  Master,  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and 
12.  19  Master,  Moses  wrote  unto  us,  If  a  man's 

12.  32  Master,  thou  hast  said  the  truth:  forthere 

13.  1  Master,  see  what  manuer  of  stones  and 
14. 14  Master  saith-,  Where  is  the  guest  chamber 

Luke  3. 12  and  said  unto  him,  Master,  what  shall  we 

6.  40  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master :  but 

6.  40  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  Ins  master 

7.  40  say  unto  thee.  And  he  saith,  Master,  say 

8.  49  daughter  is  dead ;  trouble  not  the  Master 

9.  38  Master,  I  beseech  thee,  look  upon  my  s<  ;i 

10.  25  Master,  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal 

11.  45  Master,  thus  saying  thou  reproachest  us. 

12.  13  Master,  speak  to  my  brother,  that  he  df. 

18.  18  Master,  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal 

19.  39  said  unto  him, Master,rebuke  thy  disciples 

20.  21  sayiug,  Master,  we  know  that  thousayest 

20.  28  Master,  Moses  wrote  unto  us,  If  any  man's 
20.  39  answering  said,Master,thou  hast  well  said 
2i.  7  Master,  but  when  shall  these  things  be? 
22. 11  The  Master  saith  unto  thee,  Where  is  the 

John  1.  38  which  is  to  say,  being  interpreted,  Master 
3.  10  Art  thou  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest 
8.  4  [They  say  unto  him,  Master,  this  woman] 
11.  28  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee 

13.  13  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord  :  and  ye  say 
13.  14  If  I  then,  (your)  Lord  and  Master,  have 
20.  16  saith.  .Rabboni !  which  is  to  say,  Master 

Jas.     3.    1  My  brethren,  be  not  many  masters,  kno. 

%.  Superintendent,  one  who  stands  over,  e-ma-rar-ns. 
Luke  v    5  Master,  we  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and 
8.  24  awoke  him,  saying,  Master,  master,  we 

8.  45  Master,  the  multitude  throng  thee  and 

9.  33  Peter  said  unto  Jesus,  Master,  it  is  good 


MASTER    BUILDER 


648 


MAY 


Luke    9.  49  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in 
17. 13  and  said,  Jesus,  Master,  have  mercy  on  us 

9.  A  leader,  Ka,Btiyr\T-^s  kathegetes. 

Matt. 23.  8,  10  for  one  is  your  [Master],  (even)  Christ 
23.  10  Neither  be  ye  called  masters  :  for  one  is 

10.  Master,  lord,  sir,  nvptos  kurios. 

Matt.  6.  24  No  man  can  serve  two  masters  :  for  either 

15.  27  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  masters'  ta. 
Marki3.  35  not  when  the  master  of  the  house  cometh 
Lukei4.  21  the  master  of  the  house,  being  augry,  said 

16.  13  No  servant  can  serve  two  masters  :  for 
Acts  16.  16  which  brought  her  masters  much  gain  by 

16.  19  her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their 
Rom  14.    4  to  his  own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth 
Eph.  6.    5  are  (your)  masters  according  to  the  flesh 

6.    9  ye  masters,  do  the  same  things  unto  them 

6.   9  knowing  that  your  Master,  .is  in  heaven 
Col.    3. 22  (your)  masters  according  to  the  flesh 

4.!  1  Masters,  give  unto  (your)  servants  that  wh. 

4.    1  knowingthat  yealso  have  aMaster  in  he. 

11.  Rabbi,  my  teacher,  {TZ^.'ai)  pa&&i  rabbi. 
Matt26.  25  Then  Judas,  .said,  Master,  is  it  I?  He  said 

26.  49  and  said,  Hail,  Master !  and  kissed  him 
Mark  9.    5  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  :  and 

11.  21  saith  unto  him, Master,  behold,  the  fig  tree 

14.  45  and  saith.  Master,  [master];  and  kissed 
John  4.  31  his  disciples  prayed  him,  saying,  Master 
9.    2  Master,  who  did  sin,  this  man,  or  his 

11.   8  disciples  say  unto  him,  Master,  tiie  Jews 

V2.Pilot,steersman,governor,Kv^pvr)T7]skubernetes. 
Acts  27.  11  centurion  believed  the  master  and  the 
Rev.  18.  17  And  every  ship  master,  and  all  the  com. 

MASTER  BUILDER  — 

Chief  architect,  apxtT€KTav  architekton. 

1  Co.   3.  10  as  a  wise  master  builder,  I  have  laid  the 
[See  also  Sheep  master,  task  master,  ship  master.] 

MASTERY,  (to  have)  — 
1. Might,  rnua  geburah. 

Exod32. 18  the  voice  of  (them  that)  shout  for  mastery 

2.  To  rule,  have  power,  vhy  shelet. 

Dan.  6.  24  and  the  lions  had  the  mastery  of  them 

MATE  — 

Friend,  companion,  neighbour,  niin  reuih. 

Isa.  34.  15  also  be  gathered,  every  one  with  herniate 
34.  16  none  shall  want  her  mate :  for  my  mouth 

MA-THTJ-SA'-LA,  Maflot/traAct — See  Methuselah. 
Luke  3.  37  M.,  which  was  (the  sou)  of  Enoch,  which 

MAT'-RED,  Tipo  God  is  pursuer. 

Mother  of  Mehetabel,  wife  of  Hadar,  last  of  the  old 

kings  of  Edom.     B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  39  Mehetabel,  the  daughter  of  M.,  the  dau. 

1  Ch.  1.  50  Mehetabel,  the  daughter  of  M.,  the  daug. 

MAT'-RI,  'It?!?  Jah  is  watching. 

Head  of  a  Benjamite  family  from  which  Saul  came. 

B.C.  1096. 

1  Sa.  10.  21  the  family  of  M.  was  taken,  and  Saul  the 
MATRIX— 

Womb,  DQ"i  rechem. 

Exodi3.  12 setapart. .allthatopeneththematrix,  and 

13.  15  all  that  openeththe  matrix,  being  males 

34.  19  All  thatopeneth  the  matrix  (is)  mine  ;  aud 

Num.  3.  12  the  first  bom  that  openeth  the  matrix 

18. 15  Every  thingthat  openeth  the  matrix  in  all 

MAT'-TAN,  ]PiD  gift. 

1.  A  priest  of  Baal  in  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Athaliab, 
and  slain  along  with  her.    b.o.  878. 

2  Ki.11.  18  slew  M.  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the  alt. 
z  Ch.23,  17  slew  M.  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the  alt. 

1,  The  father  of  Shephatiah,  a  priuce  of  Judah  in  the 
time  of  Zedekiah.     B.C.  630. 

Jer.  38.    1  Shephatiah  the  son  of  M.,  and  Gedaliah 
MAT-TA'-NAH,  rnno  gift. 

A  station  of  Israel,  N.  of  the  Anion,  aud  W.  of  the  wil- 
derness of  Kedemoth. 

Nuni2i.  18  And  from  the  wilderness  (they  went)  to  M. 
21.  19  And  from  M.  to  Nahaliel :  and  from  Na. 

MAT-TAN'-IAH,  n;;PD,  in;#)Q  gift  of  Jah. 

1.  A  brother  of  Jehoiakim,  made  king  instead  of  his 
nephew  Jehoiakim,  also  called  Zedekiah.  B.C.  590.  The 
last  king  of  Judah. 

2KJ.  24.  17  made  M.  his  father's  brother  king  in  his 

2.  A  Levite,  descendant  of  Asaph,  whose  family  dwelt 
in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.-  9. 15  Heresh,  and  Galal,  and  M.  the  son  of  Mi. 

2  Ch.20.  14  the  son  of  M.,  a  Levite  of  the  sons  of  As. 
Neh.11.  17  And  M.  the  son  of  Micha,  the  son  of  Za. 

11.  22  Hashabiah,  the  son  of  M,,  the  son  of  Mi. 

12.  8  M.,  (which  was)  over  the  thanksgiving,  he 
12.  25  M.,  andBakbukiah,  Obadiah,  Meshullam 
12.  35  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Mic. 

:J.  A  son  of  Heman  the  singer.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  sous  of  Heman ;  Bukkiah,  M.,  Uzziel 

25.  16  The  ninth  to  M.,  (lie),  his  sous,  and  his  br. 

4.  A  descendant  of  Asaph  who  helped  to  cleanse  the 
temple  in  the  days  of  king  Hezekiah.     B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.zg.  13  of  the  sons  of  Asaph ;  Zcchariah  and  M. 


5.  A  descendant  of  Elam  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 

B.C.  436. 

Ezra  10.  26  of  the  sons  of  Elam ;  M.,  Zechariah,  and 

6.  A  son  of  Zattu  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  27  the  sons  of  Zattu;  Elioenai,  Eliashib,  M. 

7.  One  of  the  family  of  Pahath-Moab  who  had  done  the 
same. 

Ezra  10,  30  the  sons  of  Pahath-moab ;  Adna,  and . .  M. 
S.  A  son  of  Bani  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  37  M.,  Mattenai,  and  Jaasau 
9.  A  Levite  whose  descendant  Hanan  was  one  of  the 
treasurers  appointed  by  Nehemiah.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  13. 13  Hanan  the  son  of  Zaccur,  the  son  of  M. 
MAT-TA'-THA,  Ma-rrafla  gift. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  31  Menan,  which  was  (the  son)  of  M.,  which 
MAT-TA'-THAH,  nrwD. 

One  of  the  family  of  Hashum  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  33  Of  the  sons  of  Hashum;  Mattenai,  M.,  Z. 
MAT-TA-THI'-AS,  Marradias. 

1.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  25  M.,  which  was  (the  son)  of  Amos,  which 

2.  An  ancestor  of  the  former  in  the  sixth  remove. 

Luke  3.  26  Maath,  which  was  (the  son)  of  M.,  which 
MAT-TE-NA'-I,  Uifi?  gift  of  Jah. 

1.  One  of  the  family  of  Hashum  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  33  of  the  sons  of  Hashum;  M.,  Mattathah 

2.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  37  Mattaniah,  M.,  and  Jaasau 

3.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Joiarib.     B.C.  500. 

Neh.  12. 19  And  of  Joiarib,  M. ;  of  Jedaiah,  TJzzi 
MATTER  — 

1.  Word,  matter,  thing,  "133  dabar. 

Gen.  24.    9  and  sware  to  him  concerning  that  matter 

ExodiS.  16  When  they  have  a  matter,  they  come  unto 

18.  22  every  great  matter  they  shall  bring  unto 

18.  22  but  every  small  matter  they  shall  judge 

18.  26  every  small  matter  they  judged  themsel. 

23.  7  Keep  thee  far  from  a  false  matter ;  and 

24.  14  if  any  manhaveany  matters  to  do,  let  him 
Num.16. 49  them  that  died  about  the  matter  of  Kor. 

25. 18  in  the  matter  of  Peor,  and  in  the  matter 
31.  16  commit  trespass,  .in  the  matter  of  Peor 
Deut.  3.  26  speak  no  more  unto  me  of  this  matter 
17.    8  If  there  arise  a  matter  too  hard  for  thee 

17.  8  matters  of  controversy,  within  thy  gates 

19.  15  witnesses,  shall  the  matter  be  established 
22.  26  and  slayeth  him,  even  so  (is)  this  matter 

Ruth  3.  18  how  the  matter  will  fall :  fortheman  will 

1  Sa.  10.  16  But  of  the  matter  of  the  kingdom,  whereof 

16.  18  a  man  of  war,  and  prudent  in  matters 

20.  23  (as  touching)  the  matter  which  thou  and 
20.  39  only  Jonathan  and  David  knew  the  mat. 
30. 24  who  will  hearken  unto  you  in  this  matter  ? 

2  Sa.   1.    4  How  went  the  matter  ?  I  pray  thee,  tell 

11.  19  made  an  end  of  telling  the  matters  of  the 
15.   3  See,  thy  matters  (are)  good  and  right ;  but 

18.  13  for  there  is  no  matter  hid  from  the  king 

19.  29  speakest  thou  any  more  of  thy  matters  ? 

19.  42  wherefore  then  be  ye  angry  for  this  ma.? 

20.  21  The  matter  (is)  not  so  :  but  a  man  of  m. 
1  Ki.  8.  59  at  all  times,  as  the  matter  shall  require 

15.  5  save  only  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hit. 

1  Ch.26.  32  for  every  matter  pertaining  to  God,  and 

27.    1  that  served  the  king  in  any  matter  of  the 

2  Ch.  8. 15  concerning  any  matter,  or  concerning  the 

19. 11  priest  (is)  over  you  in  all  matters  of  the  L. 
19.  11  for  all  the  king's  matters:  also  the  Levites 

24.  5  see  that  ye  hasten  the  matter.     Howbeit 
Ezra  10.    4  Arise  ;  for  (this)  matter  (belongeth)  unto 

10.    9  because  of  (this)  matter,  and  fur  the  great 
10. 14  wrath  of  our  God  for  this  matter  be  turned 
10.  16  and  sat  down,  .to  examine  the  matter 
Neh.  11.  24  at  the  king's  hand  in  all  matters  concer. 
Esth.  2.  23  when  inquisition  was  made  of  the  matter 
3.    4  to  see  whether  Mordecai's  matters  would 
9.  31  the  matters  of  the  fastings  and  their  cry 
9.  32  confirmed  these  matters  of  Purim;  and 
Job    19.  28  seeing  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found  in 
33.  13  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his  matters 
Psa.  35.  20  devise  deceitful  matters  against  (them) 
45.    1  My  heart  is  inditing  a  good  matter :  I  sp. 
64.    5  encourage  themselves  (in)  an  evil  matter 
Prov. it.  1 3  of  a  faithful  spirit  concealeth  the  matter 

16.  20  He  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall 

17.  9  but  he  that  repeatethamatterseparateth 
38. 13  He  that  answereth  a  matter  before  he  he. 

25.  2  honour  of  kmgs(is)  to  search  out  a  matter 
Eccl.io.  20  that  which  hath  wings  shall  tell  the  mat. 

12. 13  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter 

Jer.   38.  27  left  off.  .for  the  matter  was  not  perceived 

Eze.     9. 11  reported  the  matter,  saying,  I  have  done 

Dan.    1. 14  So  he  consented  to  them  in  this  matter 

1.  20  in  all  matters  of  wisdom  (aud)uuderstan. 

9. 23  therefore  understand  the  matter,  and  co. 

2.  Business,  matter,  pleasure,  f sn  chephets. 
Eecl.     5.    8  marvel  not  at  the  matter  :  for  (he  that 

3. Reason,  behaviour,  decree,  djjb  taavi. 

Ezra    5.    5  to  cease,  till  the  matter  came  to  Darius 
I.  Wordy  speech,  matter,  n?p  millah. 

Job   32. 18  For  I  am  full  of  matter;  the  spirit  within 


Dau.    2.  10  that  can  show  the  king's  matter  :  theref 
2.  23  made  known  unto  us  the  king's  matter 
7.    1  wrote,  .(and)  told  the  sum  of  the  matters 
7.  28  Hitherto  (is)  the  end  of  the  matter.    As 
7.  28  troubled .  .but  I  kept  the  matter  in  my 

6.  Sentence,  matter,  letter,  oaris  pithgam. 

Dan.    3.  16  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  matter 
4.  17  This  matter  (is)  by  the  decree  of  the  wa. 

6.  Word,  thing,  matter,  \6yos"logos. 

Mark  1.  45  to  blaze  abroad  the  matter,  insomuch 
Acts    8.  21  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter 

15.  6  came  together  for  to  consider  of  this  mat. 

19.  38  if  Demetrius.,  have  a  matter  against  auy 

7. Anything  done,  affair,  matter,  -n pay /xa pragma. 

1  Co.   6.    1  Dare  any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against 

2  Co.   7.  11  approved  yourselves. .in  this  m.,  1  Th.  4.  6 

8.  Against,  Kara  kata,  Acts  24.  22. 

9.  Matter,  ftky]  hide. 

Jas.    3.   5  Behold  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire 
[See  also  Great,  small,  this,  wrong.] 

MATTER,  to  make  — 

To  bear  or  carry  diversely,  Siacpepw  diaphero. 

Gal.    2.   6  it  inaketh  no  matter  to  me  :  God  accept. 
MAT'-THAN,  MarOdv,  MaQddv. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus,  through  Joseph. 

Matt.  1.  15  and  Eleazar  begat  M. ;  and  M.  begat  Jacob 
MAT'-THAT,  MaTfla-r,  Maflfla-r. 

1.  The  grandfather  of  Joseph,  the  husband  of  Mary. 

Luke  3.  24  (the  son)  of  M.,  which  was  (the  son)  of  L. 

2.  A  more  remote  ancestor  still. 

Luke  3.  29  Jorini,  which  was  (the  son)  of  M.,  which 
MAT'-THEW,  Men-flams,  Maflflcuoy. 
A  taxgatherer  (called  also  Levi,  thesonof  Alpheus)  who 
became  an  apostle  of  Christ,  and  is  generally  reckoned 
to  have  written  the  first  gospel,    a.d.  40. 

Matt.  9.   9  Jesus,  .saw  a  man,  named  M.,  sitting  at 
10.   3  Thomas,  and  M.  the  publican  ;  James  (the 

Mark  3. 18  Bartholomew,  and  M.,  and  Thomas,  and 

Luke  6.  15  M.  and  Thomas,  James  the  (son)  of  Alph. 

Acts  1. 13  Bartholomew,  and  M.,  James  (the  son)  of 

MAT-THI'-AS,  Morflias,  Maflflias. 

A  disciple  surnamed  Justus,  chosen  by  lot  to  succeed 

Judas  Iscariot  as  an  apostle. 

Acts    1.  23  And  they  appointed  two,  Joseph,  .and  M. 
1.  26  thelotfell  upon  M. ;  and  he  was  numbered 
MAT-TITH'-IAH,  rrru-ip,  in^iflB  gift  of  Jah. 

1.  A  Korahite  who  had  the  charge  of  "things  made  in 
the  pans."    B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  9.  31  And  M.,  (one)  of  the  Levites,  who  (was) 

2.  A  Levite,  singer  and  gate  keeper  in  the  days  of  David. 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  18  And  with  them..  Maaseiah,  andM.,  andE. 
15. 21  And  M.j  and  Elipheleh,  and  Mikneiah 

16.  5  next  to  him.  .M.,  and  Eliab,  and  Benaiah 

3.  Son  of  Jeduthun,  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    3  sons  of  Jeduthun ;  Gedaliah.  .and  M.  six 

25.  21  The  fourteenth  to  M.,  (he),  his  sons,  and 

4.  One  of  the  family  of  Nebo  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  43  the  sons  of  Nebo;  Jeiel,  M.,  Zabad,  Zeb. 
fi.  A  prince,  priest,  or  Levite  that  stood  beside  Ezra  when 
he  read  the  law  of  the  people.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.   8.    4  beside  him  stood  M.,  and  Shema,  and  A. 
MAY,  mayest,  might  — 
l.To  be  able,  Yd;  yakol. 

Gen.  43.  32  because  the  Egyptians  mightnoteat  bread 
44.  26  for  we  may  not  see  the  man's  face,  except 
Deut  7.  22  thou  mayest  not  consume  them  at  once 
12.  17  Thou  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  gates  the 
16.    5  Thou  mayest  not  sacrifice  the  passover 

17. 15  thou  mayest  not  set  a  stranger  over  thee 

21. 16  he  may  not  make  the  son  of  the  beloved 
22.  3  do  likewise:  thou  mayest  not  hide  thyself 
22.  19,  29  he  may  not  put  her  away  all  his  days 
24.   4  may  not  take  her  again  to  be  his  wife,  after 

Josh.  q.  19  now  therefore  we  may  not  touch  them 
Judg2i.  18  Howbeit  we  may  not  give  them  wives  of 

2  Sa.  17.  17  for  they  might  not  be  seen  to  come  into 
1  Ki.  13.  16  I  may  not  return  with  thee,  nor  go  in  with 

20.  9  I  will  do:  but  this  thing  I  may  not  do.  And 
Eccl.  6.  10  neither  may  he  contend  with  him  that  is 
Jer.   13.  23  may  ye  also  do  good,  that  are  accustomed 

2.To  be  able,  hvva.fj.ai  dunamai. 

Matt-6.    9  this  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for 

26.  42  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me 
Mark  4. 12.  fowls  of  the  air  may  lodge  under  the  sha. 

14.  "5  it  might  have  been  sold  for  more  than  th. 
14.  7  whensoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good 
Luke  16.  2  for  thou  mayest  be  no  longer  steward 
Acts  17.  19  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine,  w. 
19.  40  no  cause  whereby  we  may  give  an  account 
24.  8  by  examiningof  whom  thyself  mayesttake 
24. 11  Because  thatthoumayestunderstand, that 
25. 11  no  man  may  deliver  me  unto  them.  I  ap. 

26.  32  This  man  might  have  been  set  at  liberty 

27.  12  if  by  any  means  they  might  attain  to  Ph. 
1  Co.    7.  21  hut  if  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  use  (it) 

14.  31  For  ye  may  all  prophesy  one  by  one,  that 
Eph.    3.   4  Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  may  unders. 
1  Th.  2.    6  when  wc  might  have  been  burdensome 
-"..v.  13.  17  thatnoman  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that 


MAY 


649 


MEANS 


3.  It  is  allowed,  privileged,  jjossible,  e^eart  exesti. 

Acts    8.  37  If  thou  belie  vest,  .thou  mayest.  And  he 
21.  37  May  I  speak  unto  thee?  Who  said,  Canst 

4.  To  be  strong,  have  strength,  i<rxva>  ischuo. 

Matt.  8.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
MAY  be,  it  — 
l.If  so  be,  it  may  be,  unless,  'z^VH**  ulai. 

Gen.  16.   2  it  may  be  that  I  may  obtain  children  by 

2  Ki.19.   4  It  may  be  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hear  all 

Job  1.  5  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have  sin.  Zeph.  2.  3 
2. If  perhaps,  el  tvxol  ei  tuchoi,  1  Co.  14. 10  ;  16. 6. 
3. Perhaps,  taws  isos. 

luke2o.  13  it  may  be  they  will  reverence  (hi"1)  when 
MATTOCK  — 
1. Sword,  iveapon,  axe,  tool,  Jrm  chereb. 

2  Ch.34.  6  even  unto  Naphtati,  with  their  mattocks 
2.Maltock,  n^nqn  machareshah. 

1  Sa.  13.  20  his  coulter,  and  his  ax,  and  his  mattock 

13.  21  Yet  they  had  a  file  for  the  mattocks,  and 
S.A  rake,  Tiyo  mader. 

Isa.     7.  25  that  shall  be  digged  with  the  mattock 
MAUL  — 
^4  maul,  axe,  pan  mejjhits. 

Prov.25. 18  (is)  a  maul,  and  a  sword,  and  a  sharp  ar. 
MAW  — 
Maw,  stomach,  rnp  qebah. 

Deut  iS.    3  shoulder,  and  the  two  cheeks.and  the  maw 
MAZ-ZA'-ROTH,  rin$p. 
The  (twelve)  constellations  of  the  Zodiac. 

Job.  38.  32  Canst  thou  briug  forth  M.  in  his  season? 
ME  — 
1.7",  I  myself,  'jx  ani. 

1  Sa.  25. 24  my  lord,  (upon)  me  (let  this)  iniquity  (be) 
2. Soul,  breath,  wsi  nephesh. 

NUIU23. 10  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and 

Judgio.  30  Let  me  die  with  the  Philistines.  And  heb. 

1  Ki.  20.  32  saith,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  live.  And  he  said 

3.1,  I  myself,  iyw  ego. 

Phm.      20  Yea,  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  iu 

4.  Of  myself,  4/j.avrov  emautou. 

Matt.  8.    g  authority,  having  soldiers  under  me  :  and 
Luke  7.    8  authority,  having  under  me  soldiers ;  and 
Johni2.  32  And  I.  .will  draw  all  (men)  unto  me 
Phm.      13  Whom  I  would  have  retained  with  me 

5.  Me,  ifj.4  (ace.)  erne. 

Matt  10.  37,  37  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me 

10.  40  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that  receiveth  me 
18.   5  little  child  in  my  name  receiveth  me 
18.   6  these  little  ones  which  believe  in  me,  it 
18.  21  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me 
26. 10  for  she  hathwroughtagood  workuponme 
26.  n  always  with  you ;  but  me  ye  have  not  al. 

[This  particle  occurs  so  translated  72  times.] 

6. To  me,  ifioi  (dat.)  emoi. 

Matt  10.  32  Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me  be. 

11.  6  whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in  me 

18.  26,  29  have  patience  [with  me],  and  I  will  p. 
25.  40  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  (it)  unto  me 

25.  45  of  the  least  of  these,  ye  did  (it)  not  to  me 

26.31  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this 
[This  particle  occurs  so  translated  34  times.] 

7. Of  me,  ifxov{gen.)  emou. 

Matt.  7.  23  never  knew  you :  depart  from  me,  ye  that 
n.  29  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 

12.  30  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me ;  and 
12.  30  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth 
15-    5  hy.  .thou  mightest  be  profited  by  me 

15.  8  honoureth..but  their  heart  is  far  from  me 
17.  27  that  take,  and  give  unto  them  for  me  and 
25. 41  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast. 

26.  23  He  that  dippeth  (his)  hand  with  me  in  the 
26. 38  saith.  .tarry  ye  here,  and  watch  with  me 
26.  39  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me 
26. 40  What !  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one 
26.  42  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  [from  me] 

[This  particle  occurs  so  translated  82  times  ] 
S.Me,  jue  (ace.)  me. 

Matt.  3.  14  I  have  need,  .and  comest  thou  to  me? 
8.   2  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  caust  make  me 
10.  33  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men 

10.  40  receiveth.  .receiveth  him  that  sent  me 

11.  28  Come  unto  me,  all  (ye)  that  labour  and 

14.  28  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  unto  thee  on 

14.  30  to  sink,  he  cried,  saying,  Lord,  save  me 

15.  8  and  honoureth  me  with  (their)  lips;  but 
15.  9  But  in  vain  they  do  worship  me,  teaching 
15.  22  Have  mercy  on  me,  O  Lord,  (thou)  son  of 

18. 32  all  that  debt,  because  thou  desiredst  me 

19.  14  and  forbid  them  not,  to  come  unto  me ;  for 
19.  17  Whycallest  thou  me  good?  (there  is)  none 
22. 18  said,  Why  tempt  ye  me,  (ye)  hypocrites? 
23.  39  Ye  shall  not  see  me  henceforth,  till  ye  sh. 
25.  35  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink :  I 

25. 35  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in 
25.  3c  and  ye  clothed  me.  .and  ye  visited  me 

25. 36  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me 
25.  42  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink 

25.  43  took  me  not  in :  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me 
25. 43  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me  not 

26.  21  unto  you,  That  one  of  you  shall  betray  me 
26.  23  Hethatdippeth.  .thesameshallbetrayme 
26.  34  this  night .  .thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice 

82 


Matt26.  46  behold,  he  is  at  hand  that  doth  betrayme 
26.  55  with  swords  and  staves  for  to  take  me?  I 
26.  55  in  the  temple,  and  ye  laid  no  hold  on  me 

26.  75  Before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me 

27.  46  my  God !  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? 
28. 10  go  intoGalilee.and there  shall  theyseeine 

Mark  r.  40;  5.  7;  6.  22,  [23];  7.  6,  7;  8.  38;  9.  19,  37, 
39;  14.  10,  18,  47,  48;  12.  15;  14.  18,  30,  42,  48,  49,  72; 

15.  34;  Luke  1.  43,  48;  2.  49;  4.  18,  18;  5.  12;  6.  46,  47 ; 

8.  28;  9.  26,  48;  10.  16,  40;  11.  6;  12.  9,  14;  13.  35;  14. 

18,  19,  26;  15.  19;  16.  4,  24;  18.  3,  5,  16,  19,  38,  39;  20. 
[23];  22.  21,  34,  61 ;  24.  39 ;  John  1.  33,  48 ;  2.  17 ;  4.  34 ; 

5.  7,  11,  24,  30,  36,  37,  40,  43;  6.  26,  [35,  36,]  37,  39,  [40, 
44L  44.  [45]»  57>  57)  65 ;  7-  16,  19,  28,  29,  33,  34,  36,  37;  8. 

16,  18,  21,  26,  38,  29,  29,  37,  40,  42,  46,  49,  54;  9.4;  10. 

15.  I7»  [32];  11.  42;  12.  27.  44>  45»  49;  *3-  13*  20,  21,  33, 
38;  14.  7,  9,  15,  19,  19,  21,  21,  23,  24,  24,  28;  15.  9,  16,  21, 
25;  16.  5,  5,  10,  16,  16,  17,  17,  19,  19  ;  17.  5,  8,  21,  23,  24, 
25,  26;  18.  21,  23;  19.  11,  20,  21,  29;  21  15,  16,  17,  17; 
Acts  2.  28;  7.  28;  8.  31,  36 ;  9.  4,  [6],  17 ;  10.  29;  11.  n ; 
12.  11;  16.  25 ;  20.  23 ;  22.  7,  [8],  10,  [13],  21 ;  23.  3,  3,  18, 
22;  24.  12,  18,  [19];  25.  11;  26.  5,  13,  14,  14,  21,  28;  28. 
18;  Horn.  7.  11,  23,  24;  8.  [2];  9.  20;  1  Co.  1.  17;  4.  4; 

16.  6,  [11];  2  Co.  2.  2;  11.  16,  16,  32;  12.  6,  7,  11,  [21]; 
Gal.  1.  15;  2  20;  4.  12,  14;  Phil-  2.  30;  4.  13;  1  Ti.  1. 
12,  12;  2  Ti.  1.  15,  16,  17;  3.  11 ;  4.  9,  16,  17,  18;  Titus 
3.  12 ;  Heb.  3.  [9,  9];  8.  11 ;  11.  32 ;  Rev.  17.  3 ;  21.  [9],  10. 

9.  To  me,  pot  (dat.)  moi. 

Matt.  2.    8  bring  me  word  again,  that  I  may  come 
4.    9  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me 

7.  21  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord 
7. 22  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  L. 

8.  21  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  f. 
8.  22  But  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Follow  me ;  and 
g.    9  and  he  saith  unto  him,  Follow  me.  And  he 

11.  27  All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my 
14.   8  Give  me  here  John  Baptist's  head  in  a  ch. 

14.  tS  He  said,  Bring  them  hither  to  me 

15.  8  This  people  draweth  nigh  unto  me  with 
15. 25  and  worshipped  him,  saying,  Lord,  help 

15.  32  because  they  continue  with  me  now  three 
16. 24  and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me 

17.  17  Jesus  answered.  .Bring  him  hither  to  me 

18.  28  the  throat,  saying,  Pay  [me]  that  thou  ow. 

19.  21  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure,  .follow  me 

19.  28  That  ye  which  have  followed  me,  in  the 

20. 13  didst  not  thou  agree  with  me  forapeuny? 
20. 15  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will 
21.    2  her:  loose. .and  bring  (them)  unto  me 
21.  24  which  if  ye  tell  me,  I  in  likewise  will 

22. 19  Show  me  the  tribute  money.    And  they 

25. 20  Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five  tale. 
25.  22  Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two  tale. 
25.  35  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat 

25.  42  I  was  anhungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  m. 
26. 15  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver 

26.  53  he  shall  presently  give  me  more  than  tw. 
27. 10  potter's  field,  as  the  Lord  appointed  me 

28. 18  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and 
Mark  2.  14;  6.  25 ;  [8.  2],  34;  10.  21 ;  11.  29,  30;  12. 

15;  Luke  1.  25,  38,  43,  49;  4.  23;  5.  27;  7.  45;  9.  23,  59, 
61 ;  10.  22,  40 ;  11.  5,  7 ;  15.  6,  a,  12 ;  17.  8 ;  18.  5,  13,  22 ; 
20.  3,  24;  22.  29,  [68] ;  23.  14;  John  1.  33,  43  ;  3.  28;  4.  7, 

10,  15,  21,  29,39;  5-  "J  36;  6.  37)39!  8-  45.  46 ;  9-  «J  i°- 
27;  29,  37;  12.  49,  50;  13.  36,  [36];  14.  ii,  [11],  31;   17.   4, 

6.  7,  8,  9,  11,  12,  22,  24,  24 ;  18.  9,  11 ;  20.  15;  21.  19,  22; 
Acts  1.8;  2.  28 ;  5.  8 ;  3.  6 ;  5.  8 ;  7.  7,  42,  49,  49 ;  q.  15 ; 
ii-  7i  [9L  12 ;  12.  8;  13.  2 ;  20.  19,  22;  21.  39;  22.  5,  7,  9, 

11,  13,  18,  27;  23.  19,  30;  25.  24,27;  27.21,23,25;  Rom. 

7.  13,  18;  9.  1,  19;  12.  3 ;  15.  15,  30;  1  Co.  1.  11 ;  3.  10; 
6.  12,  12 ;  7.  1 ;  9.  15,  16,  16;  10.  23,  23;  15.  32;  16.  9;  2 
Co.  9.  1 ;  12.  1,  7,  9,  13 ;  13.  10 ;  Gal.  2.  6,  9 ;  4.  15,  21 ;  6. 
17;  Eph.  3.  2,  3,  7;  6.  19;  Phil.  2.  18;  3.  7;  4.  3,  15;  Col. 

I.  25;  4.  11 ;  2  Ti.  3.  11 ;  4.  8,  8,  11,  14,  16,  17 ;  Phm.  13. 

19,  22;  Heb.  1.  5;  2.  13;  8.  10;  10.  5;  13.  6 ;  Jas.  2.  18; 
2  Pe.  1.  14;  Rev.  1.  17;  5.  5;  7.   13,  14;  10,  4,  9.  9,  i-i; 

II.  1 ;  14.  13;  17.  1,  7,  15 ;  19.  9,  10;  21.  5,  6,  10;  22. 1, 
6,  8,  9,  10. 

10.  Of  me,  fiov  (gen.)  mou. 

Matt.  3. 11  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than 
4. 19  And  he  saith  unto  them,  Follow  me,  and 
10.  37  more  thau  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me ;  and 
10.  38  followeth  after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me 

16.  23  said  unto  Peter,  Get  thee  behind  me,  Sa. 
16.  23  thou  art  an  offence  unto  me;  for  thou  sa. 
16.  24  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let  him 
[This  particle  occurs  so  translated  39  times.] 

11. Mine  eyes,  TJJ  enai. 

Deut.  1.  23  And  the  saying  pleased  me  well:  and  I 
Judgi4.    3  said  unto  his  father . .  she  pleaseth  me  well 
Psa.  73.  16  to  know  this,  it  (was)  too  painful  for  me 
Jer.  27.   5  it  unto  whom  it  seemed  meet  unto  me 
32.  30  Judah  have  only  done  evil  before  me  from 

12.  With  me,  "l^y  immadi. 

Gen.    3. 12  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest.  .with  me 

19. 19  mercy,  which  thou  hast  showed  unto  me 

20.  9  thou  hast  done  deeds  unto  me  that  ought 

21.  23  thou  shalt  do  unto  me,  and  to  the  land 
29.  19  And  Laban  said,  .abide  with  me 

29.  27  thou  shalt  serve  with  me  yet  seven  other 
31.   5  but  the  God  of  my  father  hath  been  with 

31.  7  yourfather..Godsuffercd..not  to  hurt  me 

40. 14  show  kindness,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me,  and 

13. Face,  countenance,  D'3?  panim. 

Gen.  24.  12 1  pray  thee,  send  me  good  speed  this  day 

27.  20  said. .the  Lord  thy  God  brought  (it)  to  me 

32.  20  that  goeth  before  me . .  will  accept  of  me 
44.  29  if  ye  take  this  also  from  me,  and  mischief 

Exod2o.    3  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me 


Xuni22.  33  turned  from  me.  .turned  from  me,  surely 

1  Ki.  2.  16  now  I  ask  one  petition  of  thee,  deny  me 
2. 20  say  me  not  nay.    And  the  king  said  unto 
li.Before  me,  V}?t.  qodamai. 

Dan.   2.   6  ye  shall  receive  of  me  gifts  and  rewards 
ME  also  (to)  — 
A  nd  I,  to  me  also,  tca-yca,  Kafiol  kago,  kamoi. 

Luke  1.    3  It  seemed  good  to  me  also,  having  had 

Acts    8.  19  Give  me  also  this  power,  that  on  whom. 

1  Co.  15.    8  last  of  allhe  was  seen  of  me  also,  asof  one 
ME,  a3  for  — 
\.I,  I  myself ,  n^,  n:^  ana,  anah. 

Dan.   2.  30  But  as  for  me,  this  secret  is  not  revealed 
7.  28  As  for  me  Daniel,  my  cogitations  much 

2.1, 1  myself,  '3X  ani. 

Gen.  17.   4  As  for  me,  behold,  my  covenant  (is)  with 

3./,  /  myself,  '•six  anoki. 

1  Sa.  12.  23  as  for  me,  God  forbid  that  I  should  sin 

ME,  of  — 

Of  me,  my,  ipos  (gen.)  emos. 

Luke22. 19  saying,  .this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 
1  Co.11.  24  and  said,  .this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 

11.  25thisdoye..inremembranceofme, Col. 4.18 
Of  me,  my,  fiov  (gen.)  Matt.  10.  37. 

MEADOW  — 

l.Reed,  meadow,  'nx  achu. 

Gen.  41.   2,  18  and  they  fed  in  a  meadow 
2.Cave,  forest,  rriyp  maareh. 

Judg2o.  33  came  forth.,  out  of  the  meadows  of  Gibeah 
ME'-AH,  nxp  hundred. 
A  tower  near  the  sheep  gate  of  Jerusalem. 

Neh.  3.    1  even  unto  the  tower  of  M.  they  sanctified 

12.  39  from,  .the  tower  of  M.,  even  unto  the  sb. 
WTAT. 

1. Meal,  fine  meal,  nb'u  nc^  qemach  soleth. 

Gen.  18.   6  quickly  three  measures  of  fine  meal,  knead 

2.  Meal,  n£j}  qemach. 

Num.  5.  15  the  tenth  (part)  of  an  ephah  of  barley  meal 

1  Ki.  4.  22  fine  flour,  and  threescore  measures  of  meal 

17.  12  but  an  handful  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  and  a 
17.  14  The  barrel  of  meal  shall  not  waste,  neither 

17.  16  the  barrel  of  meal  wasted  not,  neither  did 

2  Ki.  4.  41  But  he  said,  Then  bring  meal :  andhe  cast 
1  Ch.12.  40  meat,  meal,  cakes  of  figs,  and  bunches  of 
Isa.  47.  2  Take  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal :  un. 
Hos.    S.    7  the  bud  shall  yield  no  meal :  if  so  be  it 

3.  Ground  flour,  meal,  &\evpov  aleuron. 

Matt  13.  33  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal 

Lukei3-  21  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal 
WF.AT,  TIME  — 
Time  of  eating,   S5X  ny  elh  okel. 

Ruth  2.  14  At  meal  time  come  thou  hither,  and  eat 
MEAN  (man)  — 
l.A  man,  human  being,  Dix  adam. 

Isa.     2.   9  the  mean  man  boweth  down,  and  the  gr. 

5. 15  the  mean  man  shall  be  brought  down,  and 

31.    8  sword,  not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  devour 

2.0bscure,  ijfc»rj  chashok. 

Prov22.  29  he  shall  not  stand  before  mean  (men) 

3.  Unmarked,  obscure,  franfios  asemos. 

Acts  21.  39  a  citizen  of  no  mean  city:  and,  I  beseech 
MEAN,  (should;,  to  — 
1.7b  think,  devise,  n^n  damah,  3. 

Isa.    10.    7  he  meaneth  not  so,  neither  doth  his  heart 
2.  To  think,  devise,  reckon,  esteem,  3yfn  chashab. 

Gen.  50.  20  God  meant  it  unto  good,  to  bring  to  pass 

'd.He,  she  or  it  is,  ia-rl  esti. 

Matt.  y.  13  learn  what  (that)meaneth,  I  will  have  m. 

12.    7  if  ye  had  known  what  (tins)  meaneth,  I 
Mark  9. 10  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  m. 

A.  It  would  be,  tYn  eie. 

Lukei5-  26  called.,  and  asked  what  these  things  meant 

18.  36  multitude  pass  by,  he  asked  what  it  meant 
Acts  10.  i7this  vision  whichhe  had  seen  shouldmean 

5.  To  will  or  wish  to  be,  0e\w  elvat  thelo  einai. 

Acts    2.  12  sayingonetoanother,  Whatmeaneththis? 
17.  20  know  therefore  what  these  things  mean 
6.T0  be  about,  fieWta  mello. 

Acts  27.    2  meaning  to  sail  by  the  coasts  of  Asia 

7.  To  do,  ttoUw  poieo. 

Acts  21. 13  mean  ye  to  weep  and  to  break  mine  heart? 

MEANING  — 

1.  Understanding \  ru*3  binah. 

Dan.    8. 15  sought  for  the  meaning,  then,  behold,  th. 
2.Poicer,  Svvafits  dvnamis. 

1  C0.14.  11  if  I  know  not  the  meaning  of  the  voice,  I 

MEANS  — 

I. Hand,  power,  X  Vac^ 

1  Ki.io.  29  did  they  bring  (them)  out  by  their  means 

2  Ch.  1.  17  for  the  kings  of  Syria,  by  their  means 
Jer.     5.  31  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means ;  and 
Mai.    1.    9  this  hath  been  by  your  means:  will  he 

2.  Thought,  device,  rotyra  machashebeth. 

2  Sa.  14.  14  yet  doth  hedevise  means,  that  his  banish 


MEANS 


650 


MEAT 


MEANS,  by  all  — 

l.By  all  means,  altogether,  entirely,  ir6,vrtas pernios, 
Acts  18.  21  I  must  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  that 
i  Co.  9.  22  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some 

2.  In  every  way,  iv  travrX  rp6-Ktp  en  panti  tropo. 

2  Th.  3.  16  Lord.,  give  you  peace  always  by  all  [means] 

MEANS,  by  any,  some,  no  — 
l.Any  how,  ir£>s, pos. 

Acts  27.  12  if  by  any  means  they  might  attain  to  Ph. 

"Rom.  1. 10;   11.  14;  2  Co.  8.  g ;  9.  27;  2  Co.  11.  3  ; 
Gal.  2.  2;  Phil.  3.  11;  iTh.  3.  5. 
2.Not  at  all,  ou  ^  ou  me. 

Matt.  5.  26  Thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out 

3.  Through  any  turn,  Kara.  fitiHeva  rpoivov  kata. 
2  Th.  2.    3  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means 

MEANS,  by  this  — 

Over  against  this,  nil  bz#h  loqobel  devah. 

Ezra  4. 16  by  this  means  thou  shalt  have  no  portion 

MEANS,  by  what  — 

How,  ttws  pos. 

Luke  8.  36  by  what  means  he  that  was  possessed  of 
John  9.  21  by  what  means  he  nowseeth,  we  know  nut 

By  what,  iv  rivt  en  iini,  Acts  4.  Q. 

MEANS  of,  by  — 

1.  Thro  ugh,  ny?  bead. 

Prov.  6.  26  For  by  means  of  a  whorish  woman  (a  man 
%Out  of,  e/c  efr,  2  Co.  I.  II. 
3.To  become,  yfaofj.au  ginomai,  Heb.  6.  15. 
MEAN  WHILE,  in  the  — 
l.Vnto  thus,  ns  iy  ad  koh. 

1  Ki.18.  45  it  came  to  pass  in  the  mean  while,  that 
%After,  between,  mean  while,  /j.era£v  mctaxic. 

John  4.  31  In  the  mean  while  his  disciples  prayed 

Rom.  2. 15  (their)  thoughts  the  meanwhile  accusing 

ME-A'-RAH,  .Tiyp  cave. 

A  place  in  the  N.  of  Canaan,  near  Sidon  ;  now  Adlan. 

Josh.  1 3.   4  M.  that  (is)  beside  the  Sidonians,  unto  A. 
MEASURE  — 
l.An  ephah,  measure  (3  seahs),  ns"N  ephah. 

Dent  25.  14  Thou  shalt  not  have,  .divers  measures 

25.  15  just  measure  shalt  thou  have :  that  thy 
Prov  20. 10  Divers  weights,  (and)  divers  measures 
Mic.    6.  10  and  the  scant  measure  (that  is)  abomin. 

2.  A  fore  arm,  cubit,  measure,  rrax  ammah. 

Jer.  51. 13  (and)  the  measure  of  thy  covetousness 
3. Statute,  limit,  ph  choq. 

Isa.     5.  14  and  opened  her  mouth  without  measure 
4..4  cor,  measure  {10  ephahs),  13  kor. 

1  Ki.  4.  22  for  one  day  was  thirty  measures  of  fine 

4.  22  fine  flour,  and  threescore  measures  of  meal 
5. 1 1  twenty  thousand  measures  of  wheat  (for) 

5.  11  and  twenty  measures  of  pure  oil:  thus 

2  Ch.  2.  10  twenty  thousand  measures  of  beaten  wheat 

2. 10  twenty  thousand  measures  of  barley,  and 
27.    5  ten  thousand  measures  of  wheat,  and  ten 

5. Cars,  measures  (10  ephahs  each),  jnia  korin. 
Ezra   7.  22  to  an  hundred  measures  of  wheat,  and  to 

6. .A  measure,  long  robe,  id  mad. 

Job   11.    9  The  measure  thereof  (is)  longer  than  the 
Jer.  13.  25  the  portion  of  thy  measures  from  me 

7.  Measure,  long  robe,  rnp  middah. 

Exodafi.    2  of  the  curtains  shall  have  one  measure 

26.  8  curtains  (shall  be  all)  of  one  measure 
Josh.  3.   4  about  two  thousand  cubits  by  measure 

t  Ki.    6.  25  the  cherubim  (were)  of  one  measure  and 
7.    9  according  to  the  measures  of  hewed  stones 
7.  11  after  the  measures  of  hewed  stones,  and 
7. 37  hadonecasting,onemeasure,(and)onesize 
2  Ch.  3.    3  length  by  cubits  after  the  first  measure 
Job  28.  25  and  he  weigheth  the  waters  by  measure 
Psa.  39.   4  know  mine  end,  and  the  measure  of  my 
Eze.  40.  10  one  measure :  and  the  posts  had  one  me. 
40.  21  were  after  the  measure  of  the  first  gate 
40.  22  measure  of  the  gate  that  looketh  toward 

40.  24,  28,  29,  32,  33,  35  according  to  these  mea. 

41.  17  about,  within  and  without,  by  measure 
43. 13  measures  of  the  altar  after  the  cubits 

45.  3  of  this  measure  shalt  thou  measure  the 

46.  22  these  four  corners  (were)  of  one  measure 
48.  16  these  (shall  be)  the  measures  thereof ;  the 
48.  30,  33  four  thousand  and  five  hundred  mea. 

8.  Measures,  0^09  memaddim. 

Job  38.   5  Who  hath  laid  the  measures  thereof,  if 
9..1  liquid  measure,  ft^iM?  jneswrah. 

Lev.  19.  35  in  mete  yard,  in  weight,  or  in  measure 
1  Ch.23.  29  and  for  all  manner  of  measure  and  size 
Eze.     4.  11  Thou  shalt  drink  also  water  by  measure 
4. 16  they  shall  drink  water  by  measure,  and 

10.  Judgment,  ta^p  mishpat. 

Jer.  30. 11  I  will  correct  thee  in  measure,  and  will 
46.28  end  of  thee,  but  correct  thee  in  measure 

11. Measure,  proper  quantity,  nprjn  maihkoneth. 
Eze.  45.  11  measure  thereof  shall  be  after  the  homer 

12.-1  seah,  measure  {third  of  an  ephah),  nxp  seah. 
Gen.  1  s.   6  Make  ready  quickly  three  measures  of  fine 
1  Sa,  25.  18  and  five  measures  of  parched  (corn),  and 
i  Ki.  18.  32  as  would  contain  two  measures  of  seed 


2  Ki.   7.    1  measure  of  fine  floirr  (be  sold)  for  a  shekel 

7.  1,  16,  1 8  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel 
7. 16  So  a  measure  of  fine  flour  was  (sold)  for  a 
7. 18  and  a  measure  of  fine  flour  for  a  shekel 

1.3. Seah  seah,  various  measures,  ."indnd  sasseah. 
Isa.  27.   8  In  measure,  when  it  shooteth  forth,  thou 

14.^4  threefold  measure,  ^7^  shalish. 

Psa.  80.    5  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  mea. 
Isa.  40. 12  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  and 

15.  Weight  or  measure,  ]$n  token. 

Eze.  45. 11  the  bath  shall  be  of  one  measure,  that  the 

16.  Bath  [7\  gallons,  Heb.  n3),  pdros  batos. 
Lukei6.   6  And  he  said,  An  hundred  measures  of  oil 

17.  A  cor  (75^  gallons),  Heb.  "ti>),  Kopos  koros. 
Lukei6.    7  And  he  said,  An  hundred  measures  of  w. 

18.-1  measure  {of  length  or  capacity),  fxerpoymetron. 

Matt.  7.    2  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measu. 

23.  32  Fill  ye  up  then  the  measure  of  your  fath. 

Mark  4.  24  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measu. 

Luke  6.  38  good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken 

6.  38  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete  withal 
John  3.  34  givethnotthespiritbymeasure(untohim) 
Rom. 12.    3  dealt  to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith 
2  Co.  10.  13  the  measure  of  the  rule  which  God  hath 
io.  73  to  us,  a  measure  to  reach  even  unto  you 
Eph.  4.    7  accor.  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ 
4. 13  the  measme  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness 
4. 16  working  in  the  measure  of  every  part 
Rev.  21. 17  the  measure  of  a  man,  that  (is),  of  thean. 

Id. A  seat  {2h  gallons,  Heb.  nxp),  odrop  saton. 
Matti3.  33  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal 
Luke  13.  21  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal 

20.  ^4  choinix  (1^  pints),  x°lvll  choinix. 

Rev.   6.   6  A  measure  of  wheat . .  and  three  measures 
MEASTJRE,  to  — 
l.To  measure,  stretch  out,  tid  madad. 

Num35.    s  ye  shall  measure  from  without  the  city 
Deut2i.   2  they  shall  measure  unto  the  cities  which 
Ruth  3.  15  he  measured  six  (measures)  of  barley,  and 
Isa.   40. 12  Who  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  ha. 
65.    7  therefore  will  I  measure  their  former  wo. 
Eze.  40.    5  he  measured  the  breadth  of  the  building 
40.   6  measured  the  threshold  of  the  gate,  (wh. 
40.    8  He  measured  also  the  porch  of  the  gate 
40.   9  Then  measured  he  the  porch  of  the  gate 
40. 11  he  measured  the  breadth  of  the  entry  of 
40. 13  He  measured  then  the  gate  from  the  roof 
40. 19  he  measured  the  breadth,  from  the  fore 
40.  20  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  and  the 
40.  23,  27  and  he  measured  from  gate  to  gate 
40.  24  he  measured  the  posts  thereof,  and  the 
40.  28  he  measured  the  south  gate  according  to 
40.  32  he  measured  the  gate  according  to  these 
40.  35  measured  (it)  aecordingto  these  measures 
40.  47  he  measured  the  court,  an  hundred  cubits 

40.  48  and  measured  (each)post  of  the  porch,  five 

41.  1  measured  the  posts,  six  cubits  broad  on 
41 .  2  and  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  forty 
41.  3  measured  the  post  of  the  door  two  cubits 
41.  4  So  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  twen. 

41.  5  he  measured  the  wall  of  the  house  six 
41. 13  he  measured  the  house,  an  hundred  cub. 
41. 15  he  measured  the  length  of  the  building 

42.  15  toward  the  east,  and  measured  it  round 
42.  16  measured  the  east  side  with  the  measur. 
42.  17  He  measured  the  north  side,  five  hundred 
42.  18  He  measured  the  south  side,  five  hundred 
42. 19  measured  five  hundred  reeds,  with  the  m. 

42.  20  He  measured  it  by  the  four  sides  :  it  had 

43.  10  iniquities  ;  and  let  them  measure  the  pa. 
45.  3  And  of  this  measure  shalt  thou  measure 
47.  3  measured  a  thousand  cubits,  and  he  bro. 
47.    4, 4  Again  he  measured  a  thousand 

47.    5  Afterward  he  measured  a  thousand  ;  (and 

47.  18  the  east  side  ye  shall  measure  from  Hau. 

Zeeh.  2.    2  he  said  unto  me,  To  measure  Jerusalem 

2.To  measure,  tic  madad,  3. 

2  Sa.  8.   2  measured  them  with  a  line,  casting  them 

8.  2  even  with  two  lines  measured  he  to  put 

3.7V  stretch  out  self,  to  measure,  tid  madad,  Sa. 
Hab.  3.   6  He  stood,  and  measured  the  earth :  he 

i.  To  measure,  /xerpew  metreo. 

2  Co.  10. 12  measuring  themselves  by  themselves,  and 
Rev.  11.  1  Rise,  and  measure  the  temple  of  God,  and 
11.  2  the  temple  leave  out,  and  measure  it  not 
21.  15  had  a  golden  reed  tomeasure  the  city,aud 
21.  16  he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  twe. 
21.17  he  measured  the  wall  thereof,  an  hundred 

MEASURE,  above  — 

Above  measure,  vTrep{Sa.\\6vT(*>s  huperballontos. 
2  Co.  11.  23  in  stripes  above  measure,  in  prisons  more 

MEASURE  again,  to  — 

To  measure  in  return^eorresjmndingly,  aurifxeTpew. 
Matt.  7.  2  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  [again] 
Luke  6.  38  withal  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  [again] 

MEASURE,  beyond  or  out  of  — 

1. Abundantly,  excessively,  £k  irepia-trov  ek  pcrissou. 

Mark  6.  51  amazed  in  themselves  [beyond  measure] 
2,Beyond  measure,  KaB'  faep$o?div  hath' huperbol&i. 

2  Co.    1.    8  that  we  were  pressed  out  of  measure,  ab. 

Gal.     1.  13  how  that  beyond  measure  I  persecuted 


3. Most  abundantly  or  excessively,  vTrepTrspio'o'cos. 
Mark  7.  37  And  were  beyond  measure  astonished,  s. 

4. Abundantly,  excessively,  Trepto-aws 2^erissos. 
Markio.  26  they  were  astonished  out  of  measure,  sa. 

MEASURE,  thing  without  — 

Unmeasured,  without  measure,  ix/xerpos  ametros. 

2  Co.  10. 13  boast  of  things  without  (our)measure,  but 
10. 15  Not  boasting  of  things  without  (our)  me. 
MEASURED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  measured,  "no  madad,  2. 

Jer.   31.  37  Ifheaven  abovecaube  measured,  and  the 

33.  22  neither  the  sand  of  the  sea  measured;  so 
Hos.    1.  10  which  cannot  be  measured  nor  numbered 

2.  To  measure,  ^erpew  metreo. 

Mark  4.  24  it  shall  be  measured  to  you;  and  untoyou 
MEASURING  — 
Measure,  rnp  middah. 

Jer.  31.  39  And  the  measuring  line  shall  yet  go  forth 
Eze.  40.    3  flax  in  his  hand,  and  a  measuring  reed 
40.    5  in  the  man's  hand  a  measuring  reed  of  six 
42. 15  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  measuring 
42.  16,  16,  17,  18,  19  with  the  measuring  reed 
Zech.  2,   i  and,  behold,  a  man  with  a  measuring  line 

MEAT  — 

1.  What  is  eaten,  food,  nJ,'?S  akilah. 

1  Ki.19.   Swentinthestrengthofthatmeatfortydays 

2.To  eat,  bix  akal. 

Lev.  25.    7Tshall  all  the  increase  thereof  be  meat 

1  Sa.  20.  5  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king  at  meat :  but 
J°h  34-  3  trieth  words,  as  the  mouth  tastethmeat 
Psa.   59.  15  Let  them  wander  up  and  down  for  meat 

3.  What  is  eaten,  food,  bin  okel. 

Lev.  11.  34  Of  all  meat  which  may  be  eaten,  (that)on 
Deut.  2.   6  Ye  shall  buy  meat  of  them  for  money,  that 
2.  28  Thou  shalt  sell  me  meat  for  money,  that 
Job    12. 11  try  words?  and  the  mouth  taste  his  meat? 
20.  21  There  shall  none  of  his  meat  be  left ;  the. 
36.  31  judgeth  he  the  people ;  he  giveth  meat 
38.  41  cry  unto  God,  they  wander  for  lack  of  m. 
Psa.  78.  18  tempted  God.  .by  asking  meat  for  their 
78.  30  while  then-  meat  (was)  yet  in  their  mouths 
104.  21  The  young  lions,  .seek  then-  meatfromG. 
104.  27  mayest  give  (them)  their  meat  in  due  sea. 
107.  18  Their  soul  abhorreth  all  manner  of  meat 
145.  15  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  dueseason 
Lam.  1.  ii  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for  meat 
1. 19  they  sought  then'  meat  to  relieve  their  so. 
Joel    1. 16  Is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  our  eyes 
Hab.  3.  17  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat;  the  flock 
Mai.    1.  12  fruit  thereof,  (even)  his  meat,  (is)  con. 

4.  What  is  eaten,  food,  nbix  oklah. 

Gen.   1.  29  yielding  seed* ;'  to  you  it  shall  he  for  meat 
1.  30  (I  have  given)  every  green  herb  for  meat 
9.    3  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  meat  for  you 
Lev.  25.    6  the  sabbath  of  the  land  shall  be  meat  for 
Eze.  29.    5  I  have  given  thee  for  meat  to  the  beasts 

34.  5  and  they  became  meat  to  all  the  beasts 
34.  8  my  flock  became  meat  to  every  beast  of 
34.  10  their  mouth  that  they  may  not  be  meat 

5.  To  eat,  n*i3  barah,  3. 

Lam.  4. 10* they  were  their  meat  in  the  destruction 
6. Food,  eating,  rrt-n  baruth. 

Psa.  69.  21  They  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  meat ;  and 
7. Food,  eating,  nn?  biryah. 

2  Sa.13.    5  dressthe  meat  inmy  sight, that  I  maysee 

13.    7  now  to.  .Amnon's  house,  and  dress  him  m. 
13. 10  Bring  the  meat  into  the  chamber,  that  I 

8.  Torn  food,  fpa  tereph. 

Psa.ni.    5  He'hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear 
Prov  31.  15  and  giveth  meat  to  her  household,  and 
Mai.    3.  10  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house,  and 

9. Bread,  food,  flesh,  nn^  lechem. 

Lev.  22. 11  in  his  house :  they  shall  eat  of  his  meat 

22.  13  she  shall  eat  of  her  father's  meat ;  but 
Nuni23.  24  the  meat  of  the  sacrifice  made  by  fire 

1  Sa.  20.  24  and.  .the  king  sat  him  down  to  eat  meat 

20.  27  cometh  not  the  son  of  Jesse  to  meat,  nei. 
20.-34  did  eat  no  meat  the  second  day  of  the  m. 

2  Sa.    3.  35  people  came  to  cause  David  to  eat  meat 

13.   5  Tamar  come  and  give  me  meat,  and  dress 

Job     6.    7  The  things,  .(are)  as  my  sorrowful  meat 

20. 14  his  meat  in  his  bowels  is  turned,  (it  is)  the 

30.   4  who  cut  up.  .juniper  roots  (for)  their  meat 

Psa.  42.    3  My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  night 

Prov.  6.    8  Provideth  her  meat  in  the  summer,  (and) 

23.  3  his  dainties;  for  they  (are)  deceitful  meat 
30.  22  and  a  fool  when  he  is  filled  with  meat 
30.  25  they  prepare  their  meat  in  the  summer 

Isa.  65.  25  dust  (shall  be)  the  serpent's  meat.  They 
Eze.    16.  19'My  meat  also  which  I  gave  thee,  fine  flour 
10.  What  is  eaten,  food,  "??n2  maakal. 

Gen.  40. 17  (there  was)  of  all  manner  of  bake  meats 
Deut2o.  20  knowest  that  they  (be)  not  trees  for  meat 

28.  26  thy  carcase  shall  be  meat  unto  all  fowls 
Judgi4.  14  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and  out 
1  Ki.  10.   5  the  meat  of  his  table,  and  the  sitting  of 

1  Ch.12.  40  on  mules,  and  on  oxen,  (and)  meat,  meal 

2  Ch.  9.    4  the  meat  of  his  table,  and  the  sitting  of 
Ezra  3.    7  meat,  and  drink,  and  oil,  unto  them  of  Z. 
Job  33.  20  abhorreth  bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat 
Psa.  44. 11  given  us  like  sheep  (appointed)  for  meat 


MEAT 


651 


MEDITATION 


Psa.   74: 14  gavest  him  (to  be)  meat  to  the  people  in. 

79.   2  dead  bodies . .  have  they  given  (to  be)  meat 

Isa.   62.    8  give  thy  corn  (to  be)  meat  for  thine  enemies 

Jer.     7.  33  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 

16.   4  shall  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and 

19.    7  will  I  give  to  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  the 

34.  20  their  dead  bodies  shall  be  for  meat  unto 

Eze.    4.  10  thy  meat  which  thou  shalt  eat  (shall  be) 

47.  12  shall  grow  all  trees  for  meat,  whose  leaf 

47.  12  and  the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  for  meat,  and 

Dan.    1. 10  who  hath  appointed  your  meat  and  your 

Hab.    1. 16  portion  (is)  fat,  and  their  meat  plenteous 

Hag.   2.  12  or  wine,  or  oil,  on*  any  meat,  shall  it  be  h.  ? 

11. Food,  fitnmazoTi. 

Gen,  45.  23  corn  and  bread  and  meat  for  his  father  by 
Dan.    4.  12,  21  and  in  it  (was)  meat  for  all 

12. Morsel,  nspa&i. 

2  Sa.  12.  3  it  did  eat  of  his  own  meat,  and  drank  of 
1%. Hunting,  venison,  provision,  nrj  tsedah. 

Psa.  78.  25  eat  angels'  food :  he  sent  them  meat  to  the 

li.Food,  meat,  Ppaifxa  broma. 

Mark  7.  19  out  into  the  draught,  purging  all  meats? 
Luke  3.  11  and  he  that  hath  meat,  let  him  do  likewise 

9.  13  except  we  should  go  and  buy  meat  for  all 
John  4.  34  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 
Rom  14.  15  if  thy  brother  be  grieved  with  (thy)  meat 

14. 15  Destroy  not  him  with  thy  meat  for  whom 
14.  20  For  meat  destroy  not  the  work  of  God.  All 
1  Co.   3.    2  fed  you  with  milk,  and  not  with  meat 

6. 13  Meats  for  the  belly, and  the  belly  for  meats 
8.  8  But  meat  conunendeth  us  not  to  God :  for 
8.  13  if  meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will 

10.    3  And  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat 
1  Ti.    4.    3  (and  commanding)  to  abstain  from  meats 
Heb.    9.  10  (Which  stood)  only  in  meats  and  drinks 

13.    q  not  with  meats,  which  have  not  profited 

15.  Eatable,  what  may  be  eaten,  &pu)o~t(xos  brosimos. 
Luke24.  41  he  said  unto  them,  Have  ye  here  any  m.? 

16.  Act  of  eating,  food,  fSpaxris  brosis. 

John  4.  32  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of 

6. 27  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth 

6.  27  but  for  that  meat  which  endureth  unto 

6.  55  For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood 

Roni  14.  17  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and 

Col.    2.  16  Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you  in  meat 

17. Any  thing  to  cat,  irpoo-<pdytov  prosphagion. 
John  21.    5  Children,  have  ye  any  meat?  They  answ. 

18.  Table,  Tpairtfa  trapeza. 

Acts  16.  34  he  set  meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced,  b. 
1§.  Nourishment,  rpo<pr}  trqpke. 

Matt.  3.  4  and  his  meat  was  locusts  and  wild  honey 
6.  25  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  b. 

10.  10  for  the  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat 

24.  45  made  ruler,  .to  give  them  meat  in  due  se. 
Lukei2.  23  The  life  is  more  than  meat,  and  the  body 
John  4.  8  were  gone  away  unto  the  city  to  buy  meat 
Act3    2.  46  did  eat  their  meat  with  gladness  and  sin. 

g.  19  when  he  had  received  meat,  he  was  stren. 
27.  33  Paul  besought  (them)  all  to  take  meat,  sa. 
27.  34  Wherefore  I  pray  you  to  take  (some)  meat 
27.  36  good  cheer,  and  they  also  took  (some)  meat 
Heb.   5. 12  have  need  of  milk,  and  not  of  strong  meat 

5. 14  But  strong  meat  belongeth  to  them  that 

20.ro  eat,  feed  on,  consume,  corrode,  (pdyoj  phago. 
Mattes-  35  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat 

25.  42  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  m. 
Luke  8.  55  and  he  commanded  to  give  her  meat 

MEAT  offering  — 

An  offering,  present,  nn?0  minclvxh. 

Exod2g.  41  shalt  do  thereto  according  to  themeatoff. 
30.  9  Ye  shall  offer  no.  .meat  offering;  neither 
40.  29  and  offered  upon  it . .  the  meat  offering ;  as 
Lev.  2.  1  when  any  will  offer  a  meat  offering  unto 
2.  3  And  the  remnant  of  the  meat  off  ering  (shall 
2.  4  if  thou  bring  an  oblation  of  a  meat  offer. 
2.  5,  7  if  thy  oblation  (be)  a  meat  offering,  .in 
2.  6  pour  oil  thereon :  it  (is)  a  meat  offering 
2.  8  thou  shalt  bring  the  meat  offering  that  is 
2.  9  the  priest  shall  take  from  the  meat  offer. 
2. 10  And  that  which  is  left  of  the  meat  offering 
2.  11  No  meat  offering,  which  ye  shall  bring 
2. 13  every  oblation  of  thy  meat  offering  shalt 
2. 13  suffer,  .to  be  lacking  from  thy  meat  offer. 
2.  14  if  thou  offer  a  meat  offering  of  thy  first 
2.  14  offer  for  the  meat  offering  of  thy  first  fru. 

2. 15  lay  frankincense  thereon :  it  (is)  a  meat  o. 

5.  13  and . .  shall  be  the  priest's,  as  a  meat  offer. 

6.  14  And  this  (is)  the  law  of  the  meat  offering 
6.  15  of  the  flour  of  the  meat  offering,  and  of 
6.  15  frankincense  which  (is)  upon  the  meat  off. 
6.  20  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour  for  a  meat  offer. 
6.  21  the  baken  pieces  of  the  meat  offeringshalt 

6.  23  For  every  meat  offering  for  the  priest  shall 

7.  9  all  the  meat  offering  that  is  baken  in  the 
7. 10  every  meat  offering  mingled  with  oil,  and 
7. 37  This  (is)  the  law.  .of  the  meat  offering,  and 
9.  4  and  a  meat  offering  mingled  with  oil:  for 
9.  17  And  he  brought  the  meat  offering,  and  took 

10.  12  Take  the  meat  offering  thatremainethof 
14. 10  he  shall  take,  .(for)  a  meat  offering,  min. 
14.  20  the  priest  shall  offer,  .the  meat  offering 
14.  21  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil  for  a  meat  off. 
14.  31  a  burnt  offering,  with  the  meat  offering 
23.  13  the  meatofferingthereof.. two  tenth  deals 
23.  16  ye  shall  offer  a  new  meat  offering  unto  the 


Lev.  23.  18  with  their  meat  offering  and  their  drink 
23.  37  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  meat  offering,  a 
Nivni.  4. 16  the  daily  meat  offering,  and  the  anointing 

6.  15  their  meat  offering,  and  their  drink  offer. 
6. 17  the  priest  shall  offer  also  his  meat  offering 

7.  13  flour  mingled  with  oil,  for  a  meat  offering 
[So  in  v.  19,  25,  31,  37,  43,  40,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79.] 

7.  87  All  the  oxen,  .with  their  meat  offering 

8.  8  take  a  young  bullock  with  his  meat  offer. 
15.  4,  o  Then  shall  he.  .bring  a  meat  off  ering  of 
15.    6  thou  shalt  prepare  (for)  a  meat  offering 

15.  24  with  his  meat  offering,  and  his  drink  off. 
18.  9  every  meat  offering  of  theirs,  and  every 
28.  5  And . .  of  an  ephah  of  flour  for  a  meat  off. 
28.  8  as  the  meat  offering  of  the  morning,  and 
28.  9,  12,  12  two  tenth  deals  of  flour(for)am.  0. 
28.  13  flour  mingled  with  oil  (for)  a  meat  offering 
28.  20  their  meat  offering,  .flour  mingled  with 
28.  26  when  ye  bring  a  new  meat  offering  unto 
28.  28  their  meat  offering  of  flour  mingled  with 

28.  31  continual  burnt  offering,  and  his  meat  o. 

29.  3,  9,  14  their  meat  offering,  .flour  mingled 
29.  6  offering  of  the  month,  and  his  meat  offer. 
29.  6  the  daily  burnt  offering,  and  his  meat  off. 
29.  11  continual  burnt  offering,  and  the  meat  off. 
29. 16,  22,  25,  28,  31,  34,  38his  meat  offering,  and 
29.  18,  21,  24,  27,  30,  33,  37  then'  meat  offering 
29.  19  themeat  offering  thereof,  and  their  drink 
29.  39  for  your  meat  offerings,  and  for  your  dr.  o. 

Josh. 22.  23  or  if  to  off er  thereon .  .meatoffering,  or  if 

22.  29  to  build  an  altar,  .for  meat  offerings,  or 
Judg  13.  19  Manoah  took  a  kid  with  a  meat  offering 

13.  23  would  not  have  received,  .a  meat  offering 

1  Ej.   8.  64  for  there  he  offered,  .meat  offerings,  and 

8.  64  too  little  to  receive  the.  .meat  offerings 

2  Ki.  3.  20  when  the  meat  offering  was  offered,  that 

16. 13  And  he  burnt,  .his  meatoffering,  and  po. 
16. 15  burn,  .the  evening  meat  offering,  and  the 

16.  15  their  meat  offering,  and  their  drink  offer. 

1  Ch.  21.  23  the  wheat  for  the  meat  offering ;  I  give  it 

23.  29  for  the  fine  flour  for  meat  offering,  and  for 

2  Ch.  7.  7  the  burnt  offerings,  and  the  meat  offerings 
Ezra  7. 17  lambs,  with  their  meat  offerings  and  their 
Neh.  10.  33  for  the  continual  meat  offering,  and  for 

13.   5  where  aforetime  they  laid  the  meat  offer. 

13.  9  with  the  meat  offering  and  the  fraukinc. 
Isa.  57.  6  to  them .  .thou  hast  offered  a  meat  offer. 
Jer.   17.  26bringiug..  meatofferings  and  incense,  and 

33.  18  to  kindle  meat  offerings,  and  to  do  sacri. 
Eze.  42. 13  there  shall  they  lay.  .the  meat  offering 

44.  29  They  shall  eat  the  meat  offering,  and  the 
45. 15  one  lamb,  .for  a  meat  offering,  and  for  a 
45. 17  meat  offerings,  and  drink  offerings,  in  the 
45. 17  he  shall  prepare,  .the  meat  offering,  and 

45.  24  he  shall  prepare  a  meat  offering  of  an  ep. 

45.  25  according  to  the  meat  offering,  and  acco. 

46.  5  And  the  meat  offering .  .an  ephah  for  a 
46.   5  and  the  meat  offering  for  the  lambs  as  he 
46.   7  he  shall  prepare  a  meat  offering,  an  ephah 
46. 11  the  meat  offering  shall  be  an  ephah  to  a 

46. 14  thou  shalt  prepare  a  meat  offering  for  it 

46. 14  a  meat  offering  continually  by  a  perpet. 

46. 15  Thus  shall  they  prepare,  .the  meat  offer. 
46.  20  where  they  shall  bake  the  meat  offering 

Joel    1.   9,  13  The  meat  offering  and  the  drink  offer. 

2. 14  a  meat  offering  and  a  drink  offering  unto 
Amos  5.  22  Though  ye  offer  me.  .your  meat  offerings 

HEAT,  morsel  of  — 

Act  of  eating,  food,  fipSxrts  brosis. 

Heb.  12.  16  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birth. 

BLEAT,  portion  or  provision  of  — 

Morsel  or  portion  of  food,  J2n?  pathbag. 

Dan.   1.    5  them  a  daily  provision  of  the  king's  meat 

1.  8  with  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat,  nor 
1. 13  that  eat  of  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat 

1. 15  which  did  eat  the  portion  of  the  king's  m. 

1. 16  took  away  the  portion  of  their  meat,  and 
11.  26  they  that  feed  of  the  portion  of  his  meat 

[See  also  Broken,  dainty,  lay,  offered  to  idols,  portion, 

sit,  savoury.] 

ME-BTfN'-NAI,  'If?  built  up. 

One  of  David's  valiant  men  of  the  family  of  Hushah 

and  tribe  of  Judah.  B.C.  104S.    In  Ch.  n.  29 ;  2  Sa.  23. 

27,  it  is  Sibbecai,  Abiezer  the  Anethothite,  M.  the 

Hushathite. 

2Sa.  23.  27  Abiezer  the  Amethotliite  M.theHushath. 
MECH-ER-A-THTTE,  »*T3P. 

Patronymic  of  Hepher,  one  of  David's  valiant  men; 
place  unknown.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  36  Hepher  the  M.,  Ahijah  the  Pelonite 
ME'-DAD,  it;?  love. 

An  elder  on  whom  the  spirit  fell  when  remaining  in  the 
camp  with  Eldad.    B.C.  1492. 

Nuniii.  26  But  there  remained.  .Eldad,  and.  .M.:and 
11.  27  said,  Eldad  and  M.  do  prophesy  in  the  c. 

ME'-DAN".  JT?  judgment. 

A  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah,  brother  of  Midian.  B.C. 

1844. 

Gen.  25.    2  she  bare  him  Zimran,  and.  .M.,  and  Mid. 

1  Ch.  1.  32  she  bare  Zimran,  and  Jokshan,  and  M. 
MEDDLE  (with),  to  — 

l.To  stir  self  up,  rna  garah,  7. 

Deut.  2.    5  Meddle  not  with  them  ;  for  I  will  not  give 

2.  19  distress  them  not,  nor  meddle  with  them 

2  Ki.14. 10  why  shouldest  thou  meddle  to  (thy)  hurt 
2  Ch.25.  19  why  shouldest  thou  meddle  to  (thine)  h. 


2,  To  cause  self  to  pass  over,  13^  aho.r,  7. 

Prov  26.  17  meddleth  with  strife  (belonging)  not  to  h. 

3. To  mix  selfu}}  with,  iyjr  arab,  7. 

Prov  20. 19  meddle  not  with  him  that  flattereth  with 
24.  21  meddle  not  with  them  that  are  given  to 

MEDDLING,  meddled  with,  to  be  — 
To  intermeddle  with,  jrSa  gala,  7. 

Provi;.  14  leave  off  contention,  before  it be  meddled  w. 
20.  3 cease  from  strife,  .every  fool  will  be  me. 

ME-DE'-BA,  xzynfidl  waters. 

A  plain  and  city  in  Reuben,  S.E.  of  Heshbon  on  the  right 
side  of  the  Arnou ;  taken  from  Moab  by  Sihon,  but  finally 
retaken.     .Now  called  Madizabeh. 

Nunm.  30  unto  Wophah,  which  (reacheth)  unto  M. 

Josh.  1 3.    9  the  city . .  and  all  the  plain  of  M.  unto  Di. 
13. 16  city. .  in  the.,  river,  and  all  the  plain  by  M. 

1  Ch.  19.   7  and  the  king . .  came  and  pitched  before  M. 
Isa.    15.   2  Moab  shall  howl  over  Nebo,  and  over  M. 

MEDES,  n?,  HD,  Mf?5o*,  the  middle,  midst. 

The  inhabitants  of  Media,  a  rude  and  uncultivated 

race. 

2  Ki.  17.    6  and  placed  them,  .in  the  cities  of  the  M. 

18.  11  and  put  them .  .hi  the  cities  of  the  M. 

Ezra  6.    2  palace  that  (is)  in  the  province  of  the  M. 

Esth.  1.  19  the  laws  of  the  Persians  and  the  M.,  that 

Isa.    13.  17  I  will  stir  up  the  M.  against  them,  which 

Jer.   25.  25  kings  of  Elain,  and  all  the  kings  of  the  M. 

51.  11  the  spirit  of  the  kings  of  the  M. :  for  his 

51.  28  Prepare  against  her.  .the  kings  of  the  M. 

Dan.   5. 28  Thy  kingdom  is  divided,  and  given  to.  .M. 

6.   8,  12  the  law  of  the  M.  and  Persians,  which 

6. 15  the  law  of  the  M.  and  Persians  (is),  That 

9.  1  Ahasuerus,  oftheseedoftheM.,  which  was 
11.    1  first  year  of  Darius  the  M.,  (even)  I,  stood 

Acts    2.   9  Parthians,  and  M.,  and  Elamites,  and  the 

ME'-DIA,  "]?  middle  land. 

A  country  having  the  Caspian  Sea  on  the  N  ,  Hyrcania 
and  Parthia  on  the  E. ,  Persia  and  Susiana  on  the  S. ,  and 
Assyria  and  Armenia  Major  on  the  W.  It  separated 
from  Assyria  B.C.  711,  and  became  a  republic;  in  709 
Deioces  became  king  ;  in  656  it  was  invaded,  audDeioces 
was  defeated  and  slain ;  in  634  its  king  Phraortes,  with 
his  army,  perished  before  Babylon ;  in  632  it  is  invaded 
by  the  Scythians;  in  609  they  are  expelled ;  in  603  the 
Lydiau  war  commences;  in  593  Cyrus  was  born  ;  in  584 
the  Lydian  war  closes  by  the  battle  of  Halys ;  in  560 
Cyrus  deposes  Astyages,  and  raises  Cyaxares  II.  or  Darius 
the  Mede,  to  the  throne ;  in  551  Cyrus  becomes  its  king; 
in  547  Larissa  and  Mespila,  cities  of  Media,  revolt  but 
are  subdued ;  in  538  Cyrus  takes  Babylon,  and  marries 
the  daughter  of  his  uncle  Cyaxares,  thereby  uniting 
Persia  and  Media. 

Esth.  1.    3  the  power  of  Persia  and  M.,  the  nobles 
1. 14  the  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  M.,  which 
1. 18  (Likewise)  shall  the  ladies  of  Persia  and  M. 

10.  2  Chronicles  of  the  kings  of  M.  and  Persia? 
Isa.   21.    2  Go  up,  O  Elani :  besiege,  0  M.  :  all  the 
Dan.   8.  20  (two)  horns  (are)  the  kings  of  M.  and  Pe. 

ME-DI-AN,  NHS. 

A  native  of  Media.    B.C.  538. 

Dan.    5.  31  Darius  the  M.  took  the  kingdom,  (being) 

MEDIATOR  — 

Middle  man,  mediator,  fx^o-ir-qs  mesites. 

Gal.    3. 19  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  med. 

3.  20  Now  a  mediator  is  not.  .of  one ;  but  God 

1  Ti.    2.    5  and  one  mediator  between  God  and  men 

Heb.    8.    6  he  is  the  mediator  of  a  better  covenant 

9.  15  for  this  cause  he  is  the  mediator  of  the 

12.  24  to  Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant 

MEDICINE  — 

1. Medicine,  nrra  gehah. 

Provi7.  22  Amerry  heart  doeth  good  (like)  a  medicine 

2X'urotives,  meclizine,  niK3~!  rephuoth. 

Jer.  30. 13  none  to  plead,  .thou  hast  no  healing  me. 
46. 11  in  vain  shalt  thou  use  many  medicines 
%. Healing  remedy,  medicine,  nsvin  teruphah. 

Eze.   47.  1?  fruit,  .for  meat,  and  the  leaf,  .for  medi. 
MEDITATE  (upon),  to  — 
1.  To  meditate,  mutter,  nan  hagah. 

Josh.  1.    8  thou  shalt  meditate  therein  day  and  night 
Psa.     1.    2  in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and 
63.    6  meditate  on  thee  in  the  (night)  watches 
77.  12  I  will  meditate  also  of  all  thy  work,  and 
143.    5  I  meditate  on  all  thy  works ;  I  muse  on 
Isa.   33.  18  Thine  heart  shall  meditate  terror.  Where 
2.To  bow  down,  muse,  meditate  rn'er,  nty  siach,  suach. 
Gen.  24.  63  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field  at 
Psa. 119.  15  I  will  meditate  in  thyprecepts,  and  have 
119. 23  thy  servant  did  meditate  in  thy  statutes 
ng.  48  and  I  will  meditate  in  thy  statutes 
119.  78  (but)  I  will  meditate  in  thy  precepts 
119.  148  watches,  that  I  might  meditate  in  thy  w. 
Z.To  be  careful,  ta/:-e  care,  (xeXerdco  meletao. 

1  Ti.    4. 15  Meditate  upon  these  things;  give  thyself 
MEDITATE  before,  to  — 

To  take  care  beforehand,  irpoixeXerdui  promeletao. 
Luke2i.  14  to  meditate  before  what  ye  shall  answer 
MEDITATION  — 
\.M-<Htation,  rnarr  haguth. 

Psa.  49.    3  the  meditation  of  my  heart  (shall  be)  of 


MEEK 


652 


MBHETABEL 


%  Earnest  meditation,  ran  hagig, 

Psa.  5.  1  Give  ear.  .0  Lord;  consider  my  medita. 
3. Meditation,  j'van  higgaynn. 

Psa.  19.  14  Let  .  .the  meditation  of  my  heart,  be  ac. 
4.  Meditation,  nty  siach. 

Psa.  104.  34  My  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet :  I 
5. A  bowing  down,  musing,  njy'p  sichah. 

Psa.119. 97  thy  law  !  it  (is)  my  meditation  all  the  day 
119.  99  for  thy  testimonies  (are)  my  meditation 

MEEK  — 

1% Humble,  1JJ/  anav. 

Psa.  22.  26  The  meek  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied :  they 

25.    9  The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment;  and 

25.    9  and  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  way 

37. 71  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth;  and  sh. 

76.    9  When  God  arose,  .to  save  all  the  meek  of 

147.   6  The  Lord  lif  teth  up  the  meek :  he  casteth 

149.   4  lie  will  beautify  the  meek  with  salvation 

Isa.    11.   4  and  reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of 

29.  19  The  meek  also  shall  increase,  .joy  in  the 

61.    1  me  to  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek 

Amos  2.   7  pant . .  and  turn  aside  the  way  of  the  meek 

Zeph.  2.   3  all  ye  meek  of  the  earth,  which  have  wr. 

2.  Humble,  Vjjf  anav. 

Numu.  3  Now  the  man  Hoses  (was)  very  meek,  ab. 
3. Meek,  easy,  mild,  -xpaos  praos. 

Mattn.  29  I  am  [meekj  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye 
i.MeeJCi  easy,  mild,  Trpavs  2^raus. 

Matt.  5,  5  Blessed  (are)  the  meek:  for  they  shall  inh. 
21     5  Behold,  thy  kiug  cometh  unto  thee,  meek 

1  Pe.   3.   4  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the 

MEEKNESS  — 

1.  Humility,  npy  anvah. 

Psa.  45.    4  because  of  truth,  and  meekness  (and)  rig. 

2.  Humility,  nijjg.  anavah. 

Zeph.  2.   3  seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness  :  it 
3. Meekness,  mildness,  TrpaSrijs  j)raotes. 

1  Co.   4.  2T  or  in  love,  and  (in)  the  spirit  of  [meekness] 

2  Co.  10.  1  by  the  [meekness]  and  gentleness  of  Cliri. 
Gal.    5.  23  [Meekness],  temperance :  against  such 

6.    1  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  [me.] 
Eph.   4.    2  With  all  lowliness  and  [meekness],  will 
Col.     3. 12  Put  on  therefore,  .[meekness],  long  suffe. 

1  Ti.   6.  11  follow  after,  .love,  patience,  [meekness] 

2  Ti.  2.  25  In  [meekness]  instructing  those  that  opp. 
Titus  3.    2  gentle,showing  all  [meekness]  unto  all  m. 

4. Meekness,  7nildness,  irpavr-ns  prautes. 

Jas.     1.  21  receive  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  word 
3.  13  let  him  show,  .his  works  with  meekness 

1  Pe.  3.  15  hope  that  is  in  you  with  meekness  and  f. 
HEET,  (more  than  is)  — 
I.Sons  of,  \13  bene. 

Deut.  3.  18  shall  pass  over.,  all  (that  are)meet  for  the 
Z.Uprigkt,  right,  "v;  yashar. 

Jer.  26.  14  do  withmeasseemeth  good  andmeet  unto 
!,  I  uprightness,  "i^'  yosher. 

Provn.  24  that  withhuldeth  more  than  is  meet,  but 
:.7*«  see,  nx"i  raah. 

Esth.  2.  9  meet  to  be  given  her,  out  of  the  king's  h, 
~>.  Worthy,  &£tos  axios. 

Matt.  3.    3  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  meet  for  rep. 

Acts  26.  20  they  should-  .do  works  meet  for  repentan. 

1  Co.  16.    4  if  it  be  meet  that  I  go  also,  they  shall  go 

2  Th.    1.    3  AVe  are  bound  to  thank  God.  .as'itis  meet 

C*fust,  right,  hitcatos  dikaios. 

Phil.  1.  7  Even  as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think  this  of 
2  Pe.    1.  13  Yea,  I  think  it  meet,  as  long  as  I  am  in 

7.  Well  set,  eijQeros  euthetos. 

Heb.   6.    7  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them  by 

^Sufficient,  lnav6s  hikanos. 

1  Co.  15.    9  that  am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle 

v  Honest,  beautiful,  Ka\6s  kalos. 

Matt  15.  26  It  is  not  [meet]  to  take  the  children's  br. 

Mark  7.  27  it  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread 
IffEET,  (together  or  -with),  be  met,  to  — 
l.To  meet  together  by  appointment,  ij,?;  yaad,  2. 

Exodus.  22  And  there  I  will  meet  with  thee,  and  I 

29.  42  where  I  will  meetyou,  to  speak  there  unto 
29. 43  there  I  will  meet  with  the  children  of  Is. 

30.  6,  36  testimony,  where  I  will  meet  with  thee 
Num.17.  4  testimony,  where  I  will  meet  with  you 
Josh,  11.  5  when  all  these  kings  were  met  together 
Neh.    6.  2  Come,  let  us  meet  together  in.  .the  villa. 

6.  10  Let  us  meet  together  in  the  house  of  God 

\.Tofind,  Ryo  matsa. 

1  Sa.  10.  3  there  shall  meet  thee  three  men  going  up 
1  Ki.  13.  24  a  lion  met  him  by  the  way,  and  slew  him 
^  Ki.   4.  2y  if  thou  meet  any  man,  salute  him  not ;  and 

9.  21  they  went  out  against  Jehu,  and  met  him 

10.  13  Jehu  met  with  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah  k. 
.  To  rome  or  fall  upon,  yas  paga. 
Gen.  32.    1  went. .and  the  angels  of  God  met  him 
Exod.  5.  20  they  met  M«>si>s  and  Aaron,  who  stood  in 

23.    4  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or  his  ass 
Num.35.  10  when  he  meeteth  him,  he  shall  slay  him 

35.  2 1  shall  slay  the  murderer  when  he  meeteth 
roan.  2.  16  Get  you  to.. lest  the  pursuers  meet  you 


Josh. 17.  10  they  met  together  in  Asher  on  the  north 
Kuth  2.  22  that  they  meet  thee  not  in  any  other  field 
1  Sa.  10.    5  thou  shalt  meet  a  company  of  prophets 
Isa.   47.    3  I  will  take  vengeance,  and  I  will  not  meet 

64.    5  Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  and  w. 
Amos  5.  19  did  ttee  from  a  lion,  and  a  bear  met  him 

4.  To  meet,  ii'13  jM^rasA. 

Gen.  32.  17  When  Esau  my  brother  meeteth  thee,  and 

33.    8  What.,  thou  by  all  this  drove  which  I  met 

Exod.  4.  24  the  Lord  met  him,  and  sought  to  kill  him 

4.  27  met  him  in  the  mount  of  God,  and  kissed 

1  Sa.  25.  20  men  came  down  against  her ;  and  she  met 

2  Sa.    2.  13  went  out,  and  met  together  by  the  pool 
Prov.17.  12  Let  a*bearrobbed  of  her  whelps  meet  am. 
Isa.    34.  14  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  also  meet 
Jer.   41.    6  as  lie  met  them,  he  said  unto  them.  Come 
Hos.  13.    8  I  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  (that  is)  here. 

5.  To  be  met,  wi3 pagash,  2. 

Psa.  85.  10  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together ;  right. 
Prov.22.    2  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together  :  the  L. 

29.  13  The  poor  and  the  deceitful  man  meet  to. 

6.  To  meet,  pjb  pagash,  3. 

Job     5.  14  They  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day  time 

7. To  go  or  come  before,  ohj?  qadam,  3. 

Deut  23.    4  Because  they  met  you  not  with  bread  and 
Neh.  13.    2  Because  they  met  not  the  children  of  I. 

S.To  meet,  happen,  come,  k*ij3  qara. 

Gen.  14. 17  the  king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  meet  him 

18.  2  when  he  saw.  .he  ran  to  meet  them  from 

19.  1  Lot  seeing,  .rose  up  to  meet  them  ;  and 

24. 17  the  servant  ran  to  meet  her,  and  said,  Let 
2  \.  65  this  that  walketh  in  the  field  to  meet  us 
29. 13  he  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him 
30. 16  Leah  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said,  Thou 

_  32.    6  he  cometh  to  meet  thee,  and  four  hundred 

33.   4  Esau  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him 

46.  29  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  father,  to  Gos. 

Exod.  4.  14  he  cometh  forth  to  meet  thee :  and  when 

4.  27  said.  .Go  into  the  wilderness  to  meet  M. 

18.  7  Moses  went  out  to  meet  his  father  inlaw 

19.  17  people  out  of  the  camp  to  meet  with  God 
JSum  22.  36  he  went  out  to  meet  him  unto  a  city  of  M. 

23*   3  peradventure  the  Lord  will  come  to  meet 
31.  13  weut  forth  to  meet  them  without  the  ca. 
Josh.  9.  11  go  to  meet  them,  and  say  unto  them,  We 
Judg.  4.  iS  Jael  went  out  to  meet  Sisera,  and  said 

4.  22  Jael  came  out  to  meet  him,  and  said  unto 

6.  35  And  he  sent,  .and  they  came  up  to  meet 
11. 31  forth  of  the  doors  of  my  house  to  meet  me 
11.  34  his  daughter  came  out  to  meet  him  with 
19.    3  the  father,  .saw  him,  he  rejoiced  to  meet 

1  Sa.  10.  10  behold,  a  company  of  prophets  met  hini 

13.  10  Saul  went  out  to  meet  him,  that  he  might 
15. 12  when  Samuel  rose  early  to  meet  Saul  in 
17.  48  and  came  and  drew  nigh  to  meet  David 

17.  48  ran  toward  the  army  to  meet  the  Philistine 

18.  6  the  women  came  out.  .to  meet  king  Saul 
25.  32  God.  .which  sent  thee  this  day  to  meet 
25.  34  thou  hadst  hasted  and  come  to  meet  me 

30.  21  they  went  forth  to  meet  David,  and  to  meet 

2  Sa.   6.  20  MichaL.came  out  to  meet  David,  and  said 

10.   5  he  sent  to  meet  them,  because  the  men 

15.  32  Hushai  the  Archite  came  to  meet  himw. 

16.  1  Ziba.  .servantof  Mephiboshethmethim 

19.  15  Judah  came  to  Gilgal,  to  go  to  meet  the 
19. 16  came  down  with  the  men  of  Judah  to  m. 
19.  20  I  am  come  the  first,  .to  meet  my  lord  the 
19.  24  the  son  of  Saul  came  down  to  meet  the  k. 
19.  25  when  he  was  come  to  Jerusalem  to  meet 

1  Ki.   2.    S  he  came  down  to  meet  me  at  Jordan,  and 

2. 19  the  king  rose  up  to  meet  her,  and  bowed 
18.    7  as  Obadiah  was  in  the  way.  .Elijah  met 
18.  16  wenttomeetAhab...  And  Ahabwent  torn. 

21. 18  Arise,  go  down  to  meet  Ahab  king  of  Isr. 

2  Ki.    1.    3  Arise,  go  up  to  meet  the  messengers  of  the 

1.  6  There  came  a  man  up  to  meet  us,  and  said 
1  7  which  came  up  to  meet  you,  and  told  you 
2. 15  they  came  to  meet  him,  and  bowed  them. 
4.  26  Run  now,  I  pray  thee,  to  meet  her;  and 

4.  31  wherefore  he  went  again  to  meet  him,  and 

5.  21  he  lighted  down  from  the  chariot  to  meet 
5.  26  turned  again  from  his  chariot  to  meet  thee? 
8.  8  meet  the  man  of  God,  and  enquire  of  the 
8.   9  So  Hazael  went  to  meet  him,  and  took  a  p. 

9.17  Take  anhorseman,  and  send  to  meet  them 

9. 18  So  there  went  one  on  horseback  to  meet 
10. 15  the  son  of  Rechab  (coming)  to  meet  him 
16.  10  king  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus  to  meet  Ti. 

1  Ch.19,    5  and  he  sent  to  meet  them :  for  the  men 
Job   39. 2 1  He  paweth . .  he  goeth  on  to  meet  the  armed 
Prov.  7.  10  there  met  him  a  woman  (with)  the  attire 

7.  15  therefore  came  I  forth  to  meet  thee,  dili. 
Isa.     7.    3  Go  forth  now  to  meet  Ahaz,  thou,  and  Sh. 

14.  9  Hell,  .is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  (thee) at 
Jer.  41.    6  And.  .went,  .from  Mizpah  to  meet  them 

51.  31  One  post  shall  run  to  meet  another 
51. 31  and  one  messenger  to  meet  another,  to  s. 
Amos  4.  12  Therefore,  .prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  0 
Zech.  2.    3  and  another  angel  went  out  to  meet  him 

9.  To  meet,  happen,  come,  x~;p  qara,  2. 

Exod  5.    3  The  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  met  with  us 

2  Sa.  18.   9  And  Absalom  met  the  servants  of  David 

10.  To  meet,  happen,  come,  rnp,  qarah. 

Deut  25.  18  How  he  met  thee  by  the  way,  and  smote 
1  !./'•  meet)  happen,  come,  rrjij  <t>tr<th,  2. 

Exod  3.  18  The  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  nut 


Nuni23.    4  God  met  Baalam :  and  he  said  unto  him 

23. 15  Stand. .by  thy  burnt  offering,  while  I  meet 

23. 16  Lord  met  Balaam,  and  put  a  word  ha  his 

12. Face,  B'lppanim. 

1  Ch.  12.  17  David  went  out  to  meet  them,  and  answ. 

2  Ch.  15.    2  he  went  out  to  meet  Asa,  and  said  untoh. 

19.    2  son  of  Hanani  the  seer  went . .  to  meet  him 

13.7*0  meet,  airavrdu)  apantao. 

Matt  28.    9  behold,  Jesus  [met]  them,  saying,  All  hail 
Mark  5.    2  there  [met]  him  out  of  the  tombs  a  man 

14.  13  there  shall  meet  you  a  man  bearing  a  pi. 
Lukei4.  31  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  [to  meet] 

17.  12  there  met  him  ten  men  that  were  lepers 
John  4.  51  his  servants  [met]  him,  and  told .  .saying 
Acts  16.  16  a  certain  damsel  possessed,  .[met]  us,  w. 

H.For  a  meeting,  els  airavrnffiv  eis  apantesin. 
Matt  25.    1  virgins,  which,  .went  forth  [to  meet]  the 
25.    6  the  bridegroom  cometh;  goyeouttomeet 
Acts  28.  15  they  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  Appii  Fo. 

1  Th.  4.17  shall  be  caught  up.  .to  meet  the  Lord  in 

15.  To  happen  to  be  near,  traparvyxdvu}  paratugch. 
Acts  17. 17  disputed,  .daily  with  them  that  met  with 

16.  To  cast  together,  come  up  with,  (Tv/x^aWw  sum. 
Acts  20. 14  when  he  met  with  us  at  Assos,  we  took 

VI.  To  meet  together,  trvva.vTa.oi  sunantao. 

Luke  9.  37  it  came  to  pass,  that,  .much  people  met 

22.  10  there  shall  a  man  meet  you,  bearing  a  p. 
Acts  10. 25  Cornelius  met  him,  and  fell  down  at  his 
Heb.   7.    1  who  met  Abraham  returning  from  the  s. 

7.  10  loins  of  his  father  when  Melchisedec  met 

IS. For ameeting with,  els  ffwavr-naiv  eissunantesin. 
Matt.  8.  34  the  whole  city  came  out  [to  meet]  Jesus 

19.  To  come  to  meet,  viravraw  hiqmntao. 

Matt.  8.  28  there  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils 
Luke  8.  27  there  met  him  out  of  the  city  a  certain  man 
Jolmii.  30  was  in  that  place  where  Martha  met  him 
12. 18  For  this  cause  the  people  also  met  him 

20. In  order  to  a  meeting,  eh  vwavrrjo-tv  eis  hupant. 
John  12. 13  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and  cried,  Hos. 

MEET,  go  and  — 

To  come  to  meet,  vTravrdoj  hupantao, 

Johnn.  20  Then  Martha,  .went  and  met  him  :  but 

MEET,  to  be  — 

l.To  hare  patience,  tjix  arak. 

Ezra  4.  14  it  was  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the  king's 

l.To  be  right,  prepared,  ps  kun,  2. 

Exod.  8.  26  It  is  not  meet  so  to  do  ;  for  we  shall  sac. 

3.  To  be  made,  used,  njpjf  asah,  2. 

Eze.  15.   5  when  it  was  whole,  it  was  meet  for  no  work 

15.  5  shall  it  be  meet  yet  for  (any)  work,  when 

i.To  prosper,  n^y  tsaleach. 

Eze.  15.    4  cast  into  the  fire.  .Is  it  meet  for  (any)  w? 

5. It  behoveth,  5e?  dei. 

Luke  15.  32  It  was  meet  that  we  should  make  merry 
Bom.  1.  27  recompenceof  their  error  which  was  meet 

MEET  for  use  — 

Very  useful,  €i»xP77<TTO*  cuchrestos. 

2  Ti.    2.  21  sanctified,  and  meet  for  the  master's  use 

MEET,  to  make  — 

To  make  sufficient,  Ikclvoqj  hikanoo. 

Co],     1.  12  which  hath  made  us  meet  to  be  partaken 
MEET,  to  seem  — 
To  be  or  seem  right,  ^';  yashar. 

Jer.  27.    5  have  given  it  unto  whom  it  seemed  meet 
MEETEST  — 
Right,  upright,  ir;  yashar. 

2  Ki.io.   3  Look  even  out  the  best  and  meetest  of  your 
MEETING  — 
To  meet,  happen,  come,  N"JD  qara. 

1  Sa.  21.    1  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  the  meeting  of 
MEETING  (two  ways)  — 
Double  way,  crossway,  &ft<po$os  amphodos. 

Markn.    4  without  in  a  place  where  two  ways  met 
ME-GED'-DO,  ME-GLD'-DON,  Y=IJD,  ]'w?  place  of  God. 
A  city  in  Issachar  or  Mauasseh,  W.  of  Jordan,  in  the 
plain  of  Jezi-eel,  at  the  N.E.  of  Mount  Carmel,  near 
Taanach  andlbleam;  once  Legio,  now  Lcggvn. 

Josh  12.  21  The  king  of  Taanach,  one;  the  king  of  M. 
17.  11  theinhabitantsofM.  and  hertowns,  (even) 

Judg.  1.  27  nor  the  inhabitants  of  M.  and  her  towns 
5.  19  Taanach  by  the  waters  of  M. ;  they  took 

1  Ki.  4.  12  (to  him  pertained)  Taanach  and  M.,  and 
9. 15  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord,  .and  M. 

2K1.  9.  27  Ahaziah  the  king.. fled  to  M.,  and  died 

23.  29  he  slew7  him  at  M.,  when  he  had  seen  him 
23.  30  carried  him  in  a  chariot  dead  from  M.,  and 

1  Oh.  7.  so  M.  and  her  towns,  Dor  and  her  towns.  In 

2  Oh. 35.  22  Josiah.  .came  to  fight  in  the  valley  of  M. 
Zech  12.  11  as  the  mourning  of  H.  in  the  valley  of  M. 

ME-HE-TAB'-EL,  s;ot:*no  God  is  doing  good. 

1.  Wife  of  Hadar,  eighth  king  of  Edom.    B.C.  1500. 
Gen.  36.  30  M.,  the  daughter  of  Matred,  the  daughter 
1  Ch.  1.  50  M.,  the  daughter  of  Matred,  the  daughter 


MBHIDA 


633 


MEN 


2.  A  person  whose  grandson  tried  to  intimidate  Nehe- 
miah  when  threatened  by  Sanballat  and  Tobiah.  B.C. 
490. 

Xeh.  6.  10  Delaiah  the  son  of  51.,  who  (was)  shut  up 

ME-HI'-DA,  NTCP  famous. 

A  Nethiniiu  whose  descendants  returned  with  Zerub- 

babel  from  exile.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  52  the  children  of  51.,  the  children  of  Hars. 

Xeh.    7.  54  the  children  of  M.,  the  children  of  Hars. 

ME'-HTR.  vrp  dexterity. 

A  son  of  Cheliib,  through  Caleb  son  of  Hur.  B.  C.  1420. 
1  Ch.  4. 11  Chelub  the  brother  of  Shuah  begat  M. 

ME-HO-LA-THTTE,  'rh'rn. 

An  inhabitant  of  a  city  in  Issachar,  also  called  Ab'el- 

uwholah. 

1  Sa.  18. 19  she  was  given  unto  Adriel  the  M.  to  wife 

2  Sa.  21.  8  for  Adriel  the  son  of  Barzillai  the  II. 

ME-HTJ-JA'-EL,  Sn;i"P  God  is  combating. 

Son  of  Irad,  a  descendant  of  Cain,  and  father  of  Methu- 

sael.    B.C.  3700. 

Gen.  4.  18  Irad  begat  M. :  and  M.  begat  MethiTsael 

HE-EOJ'-MAN,  |0?np. 

One  of  the  seven'chamberlains  that  served  in  the  pre- 
sence of  Ahasueras  king  of  Persia.    B.C.  500. 

Esth.  1.  10  the  king,  .commanded  51.,  Biztha,  Harb. 

ME-HU'-NIM,  ME  TJ'-NTM,  E\liyp. 

One  of  the  Xethinim  whose  descendents  returned  with 

Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  50  the  children  of  51.,  the  children  of  Neph. 

Xeh.   7.  52  the  children  of  51.,  the  children  of  Neph. 

ME-HTJ'-NIM,  D^yp. 

An  Arab  tribe  at  the  S.  of  the  Salt  Sea,  and  towards 

Petra. 

2  Ch.26.   7  And  God  helped  him  against,  .the  M. 
ME  JAR'-KON,  fipyjn  *D. 
A  city  iu  Dan,  near  Rakkon  ;  now  called  Oyun  Kara. 

Josh. 19.  46  And  51.,  and  Rakkon,  with  the  border  b. 
ME-KO'-NAH,  niba  foundation. 
A  city  in  Judah,  near  Ziklag. 

Xeh.  n.  28  And  at  Ziklag,  and  at  M.,  and  in  the  vill. 
ME-LAT'-IAH,  n;t?^  Jdk  delivers. 
A   Gibeonite   who   helped    to    repair  the    wall  after 
Nehemiah  came  from  Shushan.     B.C.  445. 

Xeh.    3.   7  next  unto  them  repaired  51.  the  Gibeonite 

MEL'-CHI,  Me\xt,  MeAx^t,  from  Ileb.  *afe  my  king. 

1.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus  through  Mary. 

Luke  3.  24  Levi  which  was  (the  sou)of  5L,  which  was 

2.  A  still  more  remote  ancestor. 

Luke  3.  28  Which  was  (the  son)  of  51.,  which  was  (the 
MEL-CEI-SE'-DEC,  MeA.x'o'eSeV.    See  Melchizedek. 
Heta.  5.    6  a  Priest  for  over,  after  the  order  of  51. 

5.  10  Called,  .a.  .Priest  after  the  order  of  51. 

6.  20  High  Priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  51. 

7.  1  For  this  51.,  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  the 

7. 10  in  the  loins  of  his  father  when  51.  met 

7. 11  priest  should  rise  after  the  order  of  51. 
7.  15  after  the  similitude  of  51.  there  ariseth 
7.  17,  21  [a  Priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  51.] 

MEL-CHI-SHTJ'-A,  MAT.-CHI-SHTJ'-A,  B^sfe. 
The  third  son  of  king  Saul.     B.C.  1056. 

1  Sa.  14.  49  the  sons  of  Saul  were  Jonathan  .  .and  51. 

31.   2  the  Philistines  slew  Jonathan . .  and  51. 
1  Ch.  8.  33  Saul  begat  Jonathan,  and  51. ,  and  Abina. 
9.  39  Saul  begat  Jonathan,  and  51.,  and  Abiu. 
10.   2  the  Philistines  slew  Jonathan . .  and  51. 
MEL-CHI-ZE'-DEK,  piygj©  my  king  is  righteous. 
The  priest  and  king  of  Salem,  who  met  Abraham  and 
blessed  him.    B.C.  1917. 

Gen.  14. 18  And  51.  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  bread 
Psa.no.    4  (art)  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  51. 

ME-LE-A,  Meheas. 

An  ancestor  of  Jesus,  through  5Iary. 

Luke  3.  31  Which  was  (the  son)  of  51.,  which  was  (the 
ME'-LECH,  370  king. 

A  son  of  Micah,  grandson  of  Jonathan  son  of  king  Saul. 
B.C.  970. 

1  Ch.  8.  35  the  sons  of  Micah  (were)  Pithon,  and  51. 
9.  41  the  sons  of  Micah  (were)  Pithon,  and  51. 

ME-U'-CTJ,  '3lVp,  >Tl.D  counsellor. 

A  priest  iu  Jerusalem  iri  the  days  of  Joikini,  grandson 

of  Jozadak ;  called  also  Malluch.     B.C.  536. 

Xeh.  12.  14  Of  51.,  Jonathan  ;  of  Shebauiah,  Joseph 
ME-LT-TA,  MeA.n-77. 

An  island  in  the  Adriatic,  where  Paul  was  shipwrecked; 
now  called  Malta,  which  is  twenty  miles  long  by 
twelve  broad ;  or  it  may  have  been  Meleda  or  Melita,  a 
small  isle  near  Dalmatia. 

Acts  28.    1  they  knew  that  the  island  was  called  51. 
MELODY  — 
l.Song  or  instrument  of  praise,  rrtpi  zimrah. 

Isa.   51.    3  joy..  thanksgiving,and  the  voice  of  melody 

Amos  5.  23  for  I  will  not  hear  the  melody  of  thy  viols 
2. To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  ]l}  vagan,  3. 

Isa.  23.  16  make  sweet  melody,  singmany  songs,  that 


MELODY,  to  make  — 

To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  \pd\\w  ^ffZ/o. 
Eph.  5.  19  making  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord 

MELONS  — 

Melons,  C'ncs^x  abattichim. 

Xunin.    5  the  cucumbers,  and  the  melons,  aud  the 
MELT  (away!-,  to  — 
l.To  drop,  *]V|!  dalaph. 

Psa.119.  28  My  soul  melteth  for  heaviness:  strengthen 
l.To  melt,  waste,  ncs  masnh,  5. 

Psa.147. 18  He  sendeth  out  his  word  and  melteth  them 
Z.To  be  loathed,  despised,  rejected,  dnq  maas,  2. 

Psa.  58.    7  Let  them  melt  away  as  waters  (which)  run 

4.  To  melt,  dissolve,  i)Q  mug. 

Psa.  46.    6  he  uttered  his  voice,  the  earth  melted 
Amos  9.    5  it  shall  melt,  and  all  that  dwell  therein 

5.  To  be  melted,  dissolved,  Jia  mug,  2. 

Exod  15.  15  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  shall  melt  away 
r  Sa.  14.  16  the  multitude  melted  away,  and  they  went 

6.  To  be  melted,  HO  mug,  7a. 

Amos  9.  13  sweet  wiue,  and  all  the  hills  shall  melt 
Xah.    1.   5  the  hills  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burned  at 

7.  To  be  melted,  wasted,  op^  masas,  2. 

Exodi6.  21  and  when  the  sun  waxed  hot,  it  melted 
Josh.  2.  11  our  hearts  did  melt,  neither  did  there  re. 

5.  1  their  heart  melted,  neither  was  their  spi. 
7.   5  the  hearts  of  the  people  melted,  and  be. 

2  Sa.  17.  10  And  he  also,  .shall  utterly  melt :  for  all  I. 
Psa.  68.   2  as  wax  melteth  before  the*  fire,  (so)  let  the 

97.   5  The  liills  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence 

112. 10  he  shall  gnash  with  his  teeth.and  melt  away 

Isa.   13.    7  Therefore,  .every  man's  heart  shall  melt 

19.  1  the  heart  of  Egypt  shall  melt  in  the  midst 
Eze.  2i.  7  every  heart  shall  melt,  and  all  hands  shall 
5iic.  1.  4  the  mountains  shall  be  molten  under  him 
Xah.  2.  10  the  heart  melteth,  and  the  knees  smite 

S.Tofiow,  bn  nazal. 

Judg.  5.    5* The  mountains  melted  from  before  the 
9.  To  pour  out,  "C3  nasal:-. 

Isa.   40.  19  The  workman  melteth  a  graven  image,  and 
44. 10  Who  hath  formed  a  god,  or  molten  a  gra 

10.2b  pour  out,  ^ni  nathak,  5. 

Eze.  22.  20  to  blow  the  fire  upon  it,  to  melt  (it);  so 
22.  20  and  I  will  leave  (you  there),  and  melt  you 

11.  To  refine,  purify,  *{V$  tsaraph. 

Jer.      6.  29  the  founder  melteth  in  vain;  for  the  wi. 
9.    7  Behold,  1  will  melt  them,  and  try  them 

12.  A  melting  or  wasting  away,  D~n  femes. 

Psa.  58.   S  As  a  snail  (which)  melteth,  let  (every  one 

13. To  loose,  \vu>  luo. 

2  Pe.  3. 10  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat 
14.Tobedissolved,melted,  liquified,  T7)KO}j.attekomai. 

2  Pe.  3. 12  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat? 
MELT,  to  make  — 
To  melt,  waste,  TOa  masah,  5. 

Josh.  14.    8  brethren . .  made  the  heart  of  the  people  m. 
MELTED,  to  be  — 
l.Melting,  spnn  hittuk. 

Eze.  22.  22  As  silveris  melted  in  the  midst  of  the  fu. 
'l.To  be  melted,  JHD  mug,  7a. 

Psa. 107.  26  their  soul  is  melted  because  of  trouble 
3. To  be  melted,  Dps  masas,  2. 

Psa.  22.  14  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels 

Isa.  34.    3  the  mountains  shall  be  melted  with  their 
l.To  be p>oured  out,  "ru  noihak,  2. 

Eze.  22.  21  ye  shall  be  melted  in  the  midst  thereof 
5.  To  be  poured  out,  "n:  nathak,  6. 

Eze.  22.  22  so  shall  ye  be  melted  in  the  midst  thereof 
MELTING  — 
Stubble,  meltings,  refuse,  D'pcrj  hamasim. 

Isa.  64.    2  As  (when)  the  melting  fire  burnetii,  the 

MEL'-ZAR,  "ixpsn  the  overseer. 

One  to  whose  care  Daniel  and  his  companions  were  com- 
mitted by  the  chief  of  the  eunuchs  of  Xebuchadnezzar. 
B.C.  530. 

Dan.    1.  11  Then  said  Daniel  to  5L,  whom  the  prince 
1. 16  Thus  51.  took  away  the  portion  of  their  m. 

MEMBER  — 

1.  Things  formed,  trnx]  yetsurim. 

Job  17.    7  and  all  my  members  (are)  as  a  shadow 

2.  A  member,  limb,  part  of  the  body,  fie\os  melos. 

5fatt  5.  29,  30  thatoneof  thy  members  should  perish 
Eom.  6.  13  X  either  yield  ye  your  members  (as)  inst. 

6. 13  your  members  (as)  instruments  of  right. 

6. 19  as  ye  have  yielded  your  members  servants 

6.  19  yield  your  members  servants  to  righteous. 

7.  5  did  work  in  our  members  to  bring  forth 
7.  23  I  see  another  law  in  my  members,  warring 
7.  23  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members 

1 2.    4  For  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  body 
12.    4  and  all  members  have  not  the  same  office 
12.    5  and  every  one  members  one  of  another 
1  Co.   6. 15  that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of  Ch. 
6. 15  shall  I  then  take  the  members  of  Christ 


1C0.  6. 15  aud  make  (them)  the  members  of  an  harJ 
12.  12  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  many  mem. 
12. 12  all  the  members  of  that  one  body,  being 

12. 14  Forthebody  is  not  one  member,  but  many 

12. 18  But  now  hath  God  set  the  members  every 

12. 19  And  if  they  were  all  one  member,  where 
12.  20  But  now  (are  they)  many  members,  yet 
12.  22  Nay,  much  more  those  members  of  the 
12.  25  the  members  should  have  the  same  care 
12.  26  whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the  mem. 
12.  26  one  member  be  honoured,  all  the  members. 

12.  27  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members 
Eph.    4.  25  for  we  are  members  one  of  another 

5.  30  For  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his 
Col.  3.  5  Mortify  therefore  your  members  which 
Jas.    3.    5  Even  sothetongueis  a  little  member.aud 

3.  6  so  is  the  tongue  among  our  members,  that 

4.  1  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  members? 

MEMORIAL  — 

1.  Memorial,  !Ti3lN  azkarah. 

Lev.    2.   2  the  priest  shall  burn  the  memorial  of  it 

2.  9  shall  take  from  the  meat  offering  a  mem. 
2. 16  the  priest  shall  burn  the  memorial  of  it 
5. 12  a  memorial  thereof,  and  burn  (it)  on  the 

6.  15  shall  burn,  .the  memorial  of  it,  unto  the 
24.    7  that  it  may  be  on  the  bread  for  a  raemor. 

Num.  5.  26  the  memorial  thereof,  and  burn  (it)  upon 

2.  Remembrance,  memorial,  IDT,  ~ot  zelcer. 

Exod.  3. 15  this  (is)  nry  memorial  unto  all  generations 
Esth.  9.  28  nor  the  memorial  of  them  perish  from 
Psa.    9.   6  their  memorial  is  perished  witli  them 

135. 13  thy  memorial,  O  LORD,  throughout  all  g. 
Hos.  12.   5  Lord  God  of  hosts ;  the  Lord  (is)  his  me. 

3.  Memorial,  remembrance,  p"i3l  zikkaron. 

Exodi2.  14  this  day  shall  be  unto  you  for  a  memorial 

13.  o  for  a  memorial  between  thine  eyes,  that 
17.  14  Write  this  (for)  a  memorial  in  a  book,  and 
28.  12  stones  of  memorial  unto  the  children  of 
28. 12  upon  his  two  shoulders,  for  a  memorial 
28.  29  for  a  memorial  before  the  Lord  continu. 

30.  16  it  may  be  a  memorial  unto  the  children 
39.    7  stones  for  a  memorial  to  the  children  of 

Lev.  23.  24  a  memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets,  an 
Xum.  5. 15  an  offering  of  memorial,  bringing  iniquity 

5.  18  put  the  offering  of  memorial  in  her  hands 

10.  10  that  they  may  be  to  you  for  a  memorial 

16.  40  (To  be)  a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  I 

31.  54  a  memorial  for  the  children  of  Israel  before 
Josh.  4.  7  these  stones  shall  be  for  a  memorial  unto 
Xeh.  2.  20  ye  have  no  portion,  norright,  normemorial 
Zech.  6.  14  for  a  memorial  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord 

4.  A  memorial,  token  of  remembrance,  p.vr\\x.6fjvvov. 

Matt 26. 13  shall  also  this,  .be  told  for  a  memorial  of 
5Iarki4.  9  shall  be  spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her 
Acts  10.   4  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God 

MEMORY  — 

Memory,  remembrance,  memorial,  13],  13]  zeker. 
Psa. 109. 15  that  he  may  cut  off  the  memory  of  them 
145.    7  They  shall  abundantly  utter  the  memory 
Provio.    7  The  memory  of  the  just  (is)  blessed  :  but 
Eccl.  9.   5  for  the  memory  of  them  is  forgotten 
Isa.  26. 14  hast  thou,  .made  all  their  memory  to  pe. 

MEM'-PHIS,  *p  moph. 

A  city  in  Central  Egypt,  on  the  W.  of  the  Nile,  the  seat 

of   the  3rd,  4th,  7th,    and  8th  dynasty  of   Manetho ; 

after  Psammetichus  the   royal  residence ;   also  called 

Noph. 

Hos.    9.  6  51.  shallbury  them  :  the  pleasant  (places) 
ME-MTJ'-CAN,  J33DD, 

One  of  the  seven' princes  of  Persia  and  5Iedia  that  saw 
the  king's  face  at  pleasure.    B.C.  519. 

Esth.  1.  14  next  unto  him  (was)  Carshena.  .(and)  51 
1. 16  M.  answered  before  the  king  aud  theprin. 
1.  21  The  king  did  according  to  the  word  of  51. 

MEN  —  [See  also  Man.] 

I. Men,  tall  ones,  D'np  methim. 

Deut.  2.  34  utterly  destroyed  the  men,  and  the  women 

3.  6  utterly  destroying  the  men,  women,  and 
33.    6  Let  Reuben  live . .  let  (not)  his  men  be  few 

Job   11.    3  Should  thy  lies  make  men  hold  their  p.  ? 

11.  11  For  he  knoweth  vain  men  :  he  seeth  wit*. 

22. 15  old  way  which  wicked  men  have  trodden  I 
24.  12  Men  groan  from  out  of  the  city,  and  the 
31.  31  If  the  men  of  my  tabernacle  said  not,  Oh 

Psa.  17.  14  From  men  (which  are)  thy  hand,  0  Lord 

17.  14  from  men  of  the  world,  (which  have)  their 
105.  12  When  they  were(but)afewmeninnumber 

Isa.     3.  25  Thy  men  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  thy 

5.  13  their  honourable  men  (are)  famished,  and 

41. 14  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob .  .ye  men  of  I 

2. All,  every,  ch?  methom. 

Judg2o.  48  as  well  the  men  of  (every)  city,  as  the  b 

3.  People,  □&  cy  am. 

Xum  31.  32  the  prey  which  the  men  of  war  had  caught 

4.  Male,  &p<rr\v  arsen. 

Rom.  1.  27  men  with  men  working  that  which  is  un. 

MEN,  certain  — 
Men,  d'b'jn  anashim. 

Num.  9.   6  there  were  certain  men,  who  were  defiled 
MEN  of  low  degree  — 
Sons  of  Adam  or  of  man,  01X"\I3  bene-adam. 

Psa.  62.    9  Surelymenoflowdegree(are)vanity,(and) 


MEN 


654 


MERCIES 


SEEN,  after  the  manner  of  — 

Human,  belonging  to  man,  kvQp&irt.vos  anthropinos. 

Rom.  6.    19  I  speak  after  the  manner  of  men  because 
MEN'S  persons  — 
Face,  TTpoawirov  prosopon. 

Jude       16  having  men's  persons  in  admiration  beca. 
MEN,  to  play  or  quit  like  — 

1,  To  strengthen  self,  pin  chazaq,  7. 

2  Sa.  10.  12  let  us  play  the  men  for  our  people,  and 

2.  To  act  a$  men,  av8pl£ofxat  andrizomai. 

1  Co.  16. 13  Watch  ye . .  quit  you  like  men,  be  strong 
MEN,  to  show  selves  — 

To  show  self  a  man,  £;,N  isk,  7a. 

Isa.   46.   8  Remember  this,  and  show  yourselves  men 
ME-NA'-HEM,  Dry?  comforter. 

The  son  of  Gadi  who  slew  Shallum,  and  was  succeeded 
by  his  son  Pekahiah.     B.C.  761. 

2  Ki.15.  14  M.  the  son  of  Gadi  went  up  from  Tirzah 

15.  16  Then  M.  smote  Tiphsah,  and  all  that  (were) 
15.  17  began  JYI.  the  son  of  Gadi  to  reign  over  I. 
15. 19 ;  15.  20  ;  15.  21 ;  15.  22 ;  15.  23. 

MENE  — 

2.Nximbcr,  njd,  rgp  mena,  menah. 

Dan.  5.  26  God  hath  numbered  thy  kingdom,  and 

ME'-NAN,  MaiVck,  or  Mewa. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus,  through  Mary 

Luke  3.  31  Melea,  which  was  (the  son)  of  [M.J  which 
MEN  CHILDREN  — 
A  male,  iO\  zakur. 

Exod34.  23  Tlirice  in  the  year  shall  all  your  men  ch. 
MEND,  to  — 

1.  To  strengthen,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

2  Ch.24. 12  and  brass  to  mend  the  house  of  the  LORD 

2.  To  make  thoroughly  ft,  naraprifa  katartizo. 
Matt  4.21  he  saw  other  two  brethren.. mending  their 
Mark  1. 19  who  also  were  in  the  ship  mending  their 

MEN  PLEASERS  — 

Pleasing  men,  avOpcoirdpeo-Kos  anthropareskos. 

Eph.   6.    6  Not  with  eye  service,  as  men  pleasers ;  but 

Col,     3.  22  not  with  eye  service,  as  men  pleasers ;  but 
MEN  STEALER  — 
Men  enslaver,  o.uBpaTrodiur^s  andrapodistes. 

1  Ti.     1.  10  for  men  stealers,  for  liars,  for  perjured  p. 
MENSTRTJOTJS  woman  or  cloth — 
l.One  separated,  ni3  niddah. 

Lam.  i.  17  Jerusalem  is  as  amenstruous  woman  am. 

Eze.  18.    6  neither,  .come  near  to  a  nienstruous  wo. 
2. Sick,  menstruous,  nn  daveh. 

Isa.  30.  22  shalt  cast  them  away  as  a  nienstruous  cl. 
MENTION  — 
Mention,  fxv^ia  mneia. 

Rom.  1.   9  I  make  mention  of  you  always  in  my  pra. 

Eph.    1.  16  making  mention  of  you  in  my  prayers 

1  Th.  1.    2  making  mention  of  you  in  our  prayers 

Phm.        4  making  mention  of  thee  always  in  my  pr. 
MENTION  (of,  to  make),  to  — 

1.  To  remember,  be  mindful  of  T3J  zakar. 

Jer.  20.    9  I  will  not  make  mention  of  him,  nor  sp. 
23.  36  the  burden  of  the  Lord  shall  ye  mention 

2.  To  make  mention,  "or  zakar,  5. 

Gen.  40.  14  make  mention  of  me  unto  Pharaoh,  and 
Exod23.  13  make  no  mention  of  the  name  of  other  g. 
Josh. 23.    7  neither  make  mention  of  the  name  of  their 
1  Sa.   4.  18  when  he  made  mention  of  the  ark  of  God 
Psa.  71.  16  I  will  make  mention  of  thy  righteousness 
87.    4  I  will  make  mention  of  Rahab  and  Babylon 
Isa.   12.    4  make  mention  that  his  name  is  exalted 
19.  17  every  one  that  maketh  mention  thereof 
26.  13  by  thee  only  will  we  make  mention  of  thy 

48.  1  which,  .make  mention  of  the  God  of  Isr. 

49.  1  motherhath  he  made  mention  of  my  name 

62.  6  ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep 

63.  7  I  will  mention  the  lovingkindnesses  of  the 
Jer.     4.  16  Make  ye  mention  to  the  nations ;  behold 
Amos  6. 10  we  may  not  make  mention  of  the  name  of 

3.  To  mention,  remember,  /xun^ovevw  mnemoneuo. 

Heb.  11.  22  made  mention  of  the  departing  of  the  ch. 
MENTION  of,  to  be  made  — 
To  be  remembered,  mentioned,  naj  zakar,  2. 

Job  28. 18  No  mention  shall  be  made  of  coral,  or  of 
MENTIONED  — 
What  is  heard,  report,  tidings,  f^VSxf  sliemuah. 

Eze.  16.  56  thy  sister  Sodom  was  not  mentioned  by 
MENTIONED,  to  be  — 
1 .  To  go  or  come  in,  ni2  bo. 

1  Ch.  4.  38  these  mentioned  by.  .names,  .princes  in 
2. To  be  remembered,  mentioned,  13)  zakar,  2. 

Eze.  18.  22  they  shall  not  be  mentioned  unto  him 
18.  24  that  he  bath  done  shall  not  be  mentioned 
33.  16  hath  committed  shall  be  mentioned  unto 
3.  To  be  caused  to  come  up,  n^  alah,  6. 

2  Ch.20.  34  who  (is)  mentioned  in  the  book  of  the  ki. 
4.To  call,  read,  kt|3  qara. 

Josh2i.    9  cities  which  are  (here)  mentioned  by  name 


ME-O-NE'-NIM,  DUfiyp. 

A  place  in  Ephraim,  near  Shechem. 

Judg.  9.  37  company  come  along  by  the  plain  of  M. 

ME-O-NO'-THAI,  'ru'lJN?  Jatis  dwellings. 

Father  of  Ophrah,  and  descendant  of  Judah    tlirough 

Caleb  son  of  Hur.     B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  4.  14  M.  begat  Ophrah :  and  Seraiah  begat  Joab 

ME-PHA'-ATH,  njjap,  nys'p,  nyaie  height. 

A  Levitical  city  in  Reuben,  nearKedemoth  or  Kirjath- 

aim. 

Josh.  13.  18  And  Jahaza,  and  Kederaoth,  and  M. 

21.  37  Kedemothwith  her  suburbs,  M.with  her 

1  Ch.  6.  79  Kedemoth  also  with  her  suburbs,  andM. 
Jer.  48.21  judgment  is  come  upon. .Jahazah,  and.. M. 

ME-PHI-BO'-SHETH,  riBO'sp  utterance  of  Baal. 

1.  Son  of  Jonathan,  son  of  Saul.     B.C.  1068. 

2  Sa.   4.   4  was  Ave  years  old . .  And  his  name  (was)  M. 

9.   6  Now  when  M.,  the  son  of  Jonathan,  the 

9.    6  David  said,  M.  And  he  answered,  Behold 

9.  10  but  M.  thy  master's  son  shall  eat  bread 

9.  11  As  for  M.  (said  the  king,)  he  shall  eat  at 

9.  12  And  M.  had  a  young  son,  whose  name  (was) 

9. 12  the  house  of  Ziba  (were)  servants  unto  M. 

9.  13  So  M.  dwelt  in  Jerusalem ;  for  he  did  eat 

16.    1  Ziba  the  servant  of  M.  met  him,  with  a 

16.   4  thine  (are)all  that(pertained)unto  M.  And 

19.  24  AndM.  the  sonofSaulcamedowntomeet 

19.  25  Wherefore  wentestnot  thou  with  me,  M.? 

19.  30  And  M.  said  unto  the  king,  Yea,  let  liim 

21.    7  the  king  spared  M.,  the  son  of  Jonathan 

2.  A  son  of  Rizpah,  Saul's  concubine,  whom  David  gave 
up  to  the  Gibeonites. 

2  Sa.  21.    8  the  king  took.  .Armoni  and  M.;  and  the 

ME'-RAB,  mo  increase. 

Elder  daughter  of  king  Saul,  promised  to  David,  but 

given  to  Adriel  the  Melolathite.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa.  14.  49  the  name  of  the  first  horn  M.,andthename 
18.  17  Behold  my  elder  daughter  M.,  her  will  I 
18. 19  when  M.,  Said's  daughter,  should  have 

ME-RA'-IAH,  rrnv  revelation  of  J  ah. 

A  priest  in  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  grandson 

of  Jozadak.    B.C.  600. 

Neh.  12.  12  of  Seraiah,  M.;  of  Jeremiah,  Hananiah 

ME-RA'-IOTH,  n'vnp  revelations. 

1.  An  Aaronite,  and  ancestor  of  Azariah  the  priest  in 

the  days  of  Solomon.     B.C.  1100. 

1  Ch.  6,    6  Uzzi  begat  Zerahiah,  and  Zerahiah.  .M. 
6.    7  M.  begat  Amariah,  and  Amariah  begat  A. 
6.  52  M.  his  sen,  Amariah  his  son,  Ah  it  11  b  his 
Ezra    7.    3  Amariah,  the  yon  of  Azariah,  the  son  of  M. 

2  Another  priest  of  the  same  line.    B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  9.  11  Zadok,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Ahitub 
Neh.  11. 11  Zadok,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Ahitub 

3.  A  priest  at  the  close  of  the  exile.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.  15  Of  Harim,  Adnah  ;  of  M.  Helkai 

ME-RA'-RI,  *-}-rp  Utter,  excited. 

The  third  and  youngest  son  of  Levi,  ancestor  of  the 

Merarites.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  11  sons  of  Levi;  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  M. 

Exod.  6.  16  sons  of  Levi.. Gershon.. Kohath,  and  M. 

6.  19  the  sons  of  M. ;  Mahli  and  Mushi :  these 
Num.  3. 17  sons  of  Levi.  .Gershon,  and  Kohath.  .M. 

3.  20  sons  of  M.  by  their  families;  Mahli;  andM. 
3.  33  of  M.  (was)  the  family  of  the  Mahlites,  and 
3.  33  the  Mushites :  these  (are)  the  family  of  M. 
3.  35  the  chief,  .of  the  families  of  M.  (was)  Zu. 

3.  36  (under)  the . .  charge  of  the  sons  of  M.  shall 

4.  29  As  for  the  sons  of  M.,  thou  shalt  number 
4.  33  the  families  of  the  sons  of  M.,  according 
4.  42  the  families  of  the  sons  of  M.,  throughout 
4.  45  the  families  of  the  sons  of  M.,  whom  Mo. 

7.  8  he  gave  unto  the  sons  of  M.,  according  unto 
10. 17  the  sons  of  M.  set  forward,  bearingthe  t. 
26.  57  they  that  were  numbered  of.  ,M.,  the  fa. 

Josh.21.  7  The  children  of  M.  by  their  families  (had) 
21.  34  the  families  of  the  children  of  M.,  the  rest 
21.  40  the  children  of  M.,  by  their  families,  wh. 

1  Ch.  6.    1  sons  of  Levi ;  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  M. 

6.  16  Thesonsof  Levi ;  Gershon,  Kohath,  andM. 
6. 19  The  sons  of  M. ;  Mahli,  and  Mushi.     And 
6.  29  sons  of  M. ;  Mahli,  Libni  his  son,  Shimei 
6.  44  the  sonsof  M.,(stood)on  the  left  hand:  E. 
6.  47  of  Mushi,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Levi 
6.  63  Unto  the  sons  of  M.  (were  given)  by  lot 
6.  77  Unto  the  rest  of  the  children  of  M.  (were 
9.  14  the  son  of  Hashabiah,  of  the  sons  of  M. 
15.    6  Of  the  sons  of  M.;  Asaiah  the  chief,  and 
15.  17  of  the  sons  of  M.  their  brethren,  Ethan 
23.    6  thesonsof  Levi.  .Gershon,  Kohath,  andM. 

23.  21  The  sons  of  M.;  Mahli  and  Mushi.     The 

24.  26  The  sons  of  M.  (were)  M.  and  Mushi:  the 
24.  27  The  sons  of  M.  by  Jaaziah ;  Beno,  and  Sh. 
26.  10  Hosah,  of  the  children  of  M.,  had  sons 
26.  19  among  the  sons  of  Kore,  and . .  sons  of  M, 

2  Ch.29.  12  of  the  sons  of  M.;  Kish  the  son  of  Abdi 

34.  12  Levites,  of  the  sons  of  M.;  snd  Zechariah 
Ezra    8.  19  Jeshaiah  of  the  sons  of  M.,  his  brethren 

ME-RA  RITES,  n*T$rr  the  Merari. 
The  descendants  of  Merari. 

N1111126.  57  Levites.  .of  Merari,  the  family  of  the  M. 


ME-RA-THA'-IM,  d:07?  double  bitterness. 
A  symbolic  name  for  Babylon.     B.C.  628—586. 

Jer.  50.  21  GoupagainstthelandofM.,(even)against 
MERCHANDISE  — 
1. Merchandise,  barter,  traffic,  3T2.D  maarab. 

Eze.  27.  9  all.  .were  in  thee  to  occupy  thy  merchan. 
27.  27  thy  merchandise,  thy  mariners,  and  thy  p. 
27.  27  and  the  occupiers  of  thy  merchandise,  and 
27.  33  multitude  of  thy  riches,  aud  of  thy  mere. 

27.  34  thy  merchandise,  and  all  thy  company  in 

2. Merchandise,  traffic,  n|?3"ip  markoleth. 

Eze.  27.  24  made  of  cedar,  among  thy  merchandise 

Z.Gain  of  merchandise,  inp  sachar. 

Prov.  3.  14  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver,  an<J 
Isa.    45.  14  merchandise  of  Ethiopia,  and  of  the  Sa. 

i.Gain  of  merchandise,  inp  sachar. 

Prov.  3.  14  the  merchandise  of  it  (is)  better  than  the 

31.  18  Sheperceiveththathermerehandise(is)g. 

Isa.  23.  18  her  merchandise  and  her  hire  shall  be  h. 

23.  18  forhermerchandise  shall  be  forthemthat 

5. Merchandise,  trade  or  gain,  nnhp  sechorah. 

Eze.  27.  15  many  isles(were)themerchandiseof  thine 
6*. Merchandise,  traffic,  trade,  ware,  n^3")  rekullah. 

Eze.  26.  12  and  make  a  prey  of  thy  merchandise 

28.  16  By  the  multitude  of  thy  merchandise  they 

7 .Merchandise,  the  lading  of  a  ship,  y6fios  gomos. 

Rev.  18. 11  no  man  buyeth  their  merchandise  any  m. 

18.  12  The  merchandise  of  gold,  and  silver,  and 

8.  Trade,  merchandise,  traffic,  i/x-n-opla  emporia. 
Matt  22.    5  one  to  his  farm,  and  another  to  his  mer. 

9.^4  place  of  trade  or  traffic,  i/xtrSptov  emporion. 

John  2.  16  not  my  Father's  house  an  house  of  mere. 
MERCHANDISE,  to  make  — 
1.  To  show  self  a  tyrant,  "lpj;  amar,  7. 

Deut2i.  14  thou  shalt  not  make  merchandise  of  her 

24.  7  maketh  merchandise  of  him,  or  selleth 

2.To  traffic,  make  a  trade  of,  ip.wupevofxat  empore. 

2  Pe.    2.   3  shall  they  with  feigned  word  make  mere. 
MERCHANT  (man)  — 
l.Canaanite,  merchant,  jyj?  kenaan. 

Isa.   23. 11  given  a  commandment  against  the  mere. 

Hos.  12.    7  (He  is)  a  merchant,  the  balances  of  deceit 

Zeph.  1. 11  for  all  the  merchant  people  are  cut  down 

2.Cauaanite,  merchant,  *J»J|  kenaani. 

Job  41.  6  shall  they  parthim  among  the  merchants 
Prov3i.  24  and  delivereth  girdles  unto  the  merchant 

3.  To  go  about,  trade,  "inn  sachar. 

Gen.  23.  16  shekels  of  silver,  current,  .with  the  mer. 

37.  28  there  passed  by  Midianites,  merchant  m. 

1  Ki.  10.  28  the  king's  merchants  received  the  linen 

2  Ch.  1.  16  the  king's  merchants  received  the  linen 

9.  14  (that  which)  chapmen  and  merchants  br. 

Prov  31.  14  She  is  like  the  merchants'  ship  ;  she  brin. 

Isa.  23.  2  thou  whom  the  merchants  of  Zidon,  that 
23.  8  whose  merchants  (are)  princes,  whose  tr. 
47.  15  thy  merchants,  from  thy  youth ;  they  sh. 

Eze.  27.  12  Tarshish(was)  thy  merchant  by  reason  of 
27.  16  Syria  (was)  thy  merchant  by  reason  of  the 
27.  18  Damascus  (was)  thy  merchant  in  the  inu. 
27.  21  goats  :  in  these  (were  they)  thy  merchants 
27.  36  The  merchants  among  the  people  shall  h. 

38.  13  Sheba,  and  Dedan,  and  the  merchants  of 

4.  To  go  to  and  fro,  be  a  merchant,  *?y\  rakal. 
Neh.   3.  31  unto  the  place,  .of  the  merchants,  over 

3.  32  repaired  the  goldsmiths  and  the  merchants 
13.  20  So  the  merchants,  and  sellers  of  all  kind 

Song  3.   6  perfumed,  .with  all  powders  of  the  mer. 

Eze.  17.   4  He  cropped  off.  .he  set  it  in  a  city  of  me. 
27.    3  a  merchant  of  the  people  for  many  isles 
27.  13  Tubal,  and  Meshech,  they  (were)  thy  me. 
27.  15  The  men  of  Dedan  (were)  thy  merchants 
27.  17  the  land  of  Israel,  they  (were)  thy  mere. 
27.  20  Dedan  (was)  thy  merchant  in  precious  c. 
27.  22  The  merchants  of  Sheba  and  Raamah 
27.  22  they  (were)  thy  merchants:  they  occupied 
27.  23  the  merchants  of  Sheba.  .(were)  thy  mer. 
27.  24  These  (were)  thy  merchants  in  all  sorts  (of 

Nah.  3.  16  Thouhastmultipliedthymerchantsabove 

5.  To  go  about,  trade,  search,  "Wi  lur. 

1  Ki.io.  15  Besides.,  of  the  merchant  men,  and  of  the 
6. A  traveller,  trader,  e/xTropos  emjjoros. 

Matt  13.  45  like  unto  a  merchant  man  seeking  goodly 

Rev.  18.    3  the  merchants  of  the  earth  are  waxed  rich 

18.  11  the  merchants  of  the  earth  shall  weep  and 

18.  15  Themerchants  of  these  things,  which  were 

18.  23  thy  merchants  were  the  great  men  of  the 

MERCHANT,  spice  — 

To  go  to  and  fro,  be  a  merchant,  hy\  rakal. 

1  Ki.  10.  15  of  the  traffic  of  the  spice  merchants  and 
MERCIES,  (great  or  tender)  — 

l.Boioels,  mercies,  I'prn  rachamin. 

Dan.    2.  18  That  they  would  desire  merciesof  the  God 
2.  Bowels,  mercies,  n^rn  rachaminu 

2  Sa.  24.  14  his  mercies  (are)  great:  and  let  me  not  fall 
1  Ch.21.  13  very great(are)hismercies:  butletmenot 
Neh.   9. 19  Yet  thou  in  thy  manifold  mercies  forsook 

9.  27  according  to  thy  manifold  mercies  thou  g. 
9.  28  didst,  .deliver  them  according  to  thy  m. 
9.  31  for  thy  greatmercies'  sake  thou  didst  not 


MERCIFUL 


055 


MERCY 


Psa.  25,  6  Remember,  0  Lord,  thy  tender  mercies  • 

40.  11  "Withhold  not  thou  thy  tender  mercies  fr. 
51.  1  .ice. unto  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mere. 
69.  16  ace.  to  the  multitude  oi' thy  tender  mercies 
77.  g  hath  -he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender  mer. 
79.    8  let  thy  tender  mercies  speedily  prevent  us 

103.   4  with  loving  kindness  and  tender  mercies 

119.  77  Let  thy  tender  mercies  come  unto  me,  that 

119.  156  Great  (are)  thy  tender  mercies,  0  Lord 

145.    9  his  tender  mercies  (are)  over  all  his  works 

Prov.  12.  10  the  tendermercies  of.  the  wicked  (are)cruel 

Isa.  54.    7  but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee 

63.    7  according  to  his  mercies,  and  according 

63.  15  the  sounding,  .of  thy  mercies  toward  me? 

Jer.   16.    5  my  peace,  .loving  kindness  and  mercies 

42. 12  I  will  showmercies  unto  you,  that  hemay 
Dan    9.   9  To  the  Lord  our  God  (belong)  mercies  and 

9.  18  our  righteousnesses,  but  for  thy  great  in. 

Hos.    2.  19  unto  me.  .in  loving  kindness,  and  in  mer. 

Zech.  1.  16  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies 
3. The  kindnesses,  judgments,  to  oaia  ta  kosia. 

Acts  13.  34  I  will  give  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David 
MERCIFTjL  (kindness)  — 
■I,  Pity,  rh?ri  chemlah. 

Gen.  19.  16  the  Lord  being  merciful  unto  him :  and 
2.  Kindness,  *ipn  chesed. 

1  Ki.  20.  31  the  kings  of  the  house  of  Israel  (are)  me. 
Psa.  1 1 7.    2  his  merciful  kindness  is  great  toward  us 

119.  76  Let,  I  pray  thee,  thy  merciful  kindness  be 
Prov  11.  17  The  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  own 
Isa.   57.    1  merciful  men  (are)  taken  away,  none  con. 

3. Kind,  Tprt  chasid. 

2  Sa.  22.  26  With  the  merciful,  .wilt  show  thyself  111. 
Psa.  18.  25  With  the  merciful,  .wilt  show  thyself  m. 
Jer.     3. 12  I  (am)  merciful,  saith  the  LORD . .  I  will  not 

4.  Pitiful,  merciful,  D*rri  rachum. 

Exod34.  6  The  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  lo. 
Deut.  4.  31  For  the  Lord  thy  God  (is)  a  merciful  God 
2  Ch.30.  9  Lord  your  God  (is)  gracious  and  merciful 
Neh.  9.  17  a  God  ready  to  pardon,  gracious  and  me. 
9.  31  for  thou  (art)  a  gracious  and  merciful  God 
Psa.  103.  8  The  Lord  (is)  merciful  and  gracious,  slow 
Joel  2.  13  he  (is)  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger 
Jon.    4.    2  thou  (art)  a  gracious  God,  and  merciful 

5.  To  love,  pity,  he  merciful,  orn  racham,  3. 

Psa.  1 16.    5  and  righteous  ;  yea,  our  God  (is)  merciful 
Q.Kind,  compassionate,  4\zi]{i<i>v  eleemon. 

Matt.  5.  7  Blessed  (are)  the  merciful :  for  they  shall 
Heb.  2.  17  that  he  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful 

7. Kind,  propitious,  "\ecos  hileos. 

Heb.   8. 12  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  unrighteousness 

%. Pitiful,  otKripfxcov  oiktiriii'm. 

Luke  6.  36  Be  ye.  .merciful,  as  your  Father,  .is  mer. 
BTETRCrnJL,  to  be  (or  show  self)  — 
l.To  be  gracious,  inclined  to,  f^n  chanan. 

Psa.  26.  11  redeem  me,  and  be  merciful  uuto  me 
37.  26  (He  is)  ever  merciful,  and  lendeth  ;  and 

41.  4  be  merciful  unto  me :  heal  my  soul ;  for  I 
41. 10  be  merciful  unto  me,  and  raise  me  up,  that 

56.  1  Be  merciful  unto  me,  O  God ;  for  man  w. 

57.  1  Be  merciful  unto  me,  0  God,  be  merciful 
59.  5  be  not  merciful  to  any  wicked  transgress. 
67.  1  Godbemercifuliintous,andblessus;(and) 
86.  3  Be  merciful  unto  me,  0  Lord :  for  I  cry 

119.  58  be  merciful  unto  me  according  to  thy  word 
ng.  132  be  merciful  unto  me,  as  thou  usest  to  do 

2.  To  cover,  pardon,  "S3  fcaphar,  3. 

Deut  21.    S  Be  merciful,  O  Lord,  unto  thy  people  I. 
32.  43  will  be  merciful  unto  his  land,  .to  his  p. 

3.  To  shoio  self  kind,  ipn  chasad,  7. 

2  Sa.  22.  26  thou  wiltshow  thyself  merciful.,  with  the 
Psa.  18.  25  thou  wilt  show  thyself  merciful ;  with  an 

4.  To  be  propitious,  apj)eased,  i\d<TKOf.Lat  hilaskomai. 

Luke  18.  13  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner 
MER-CTJ-RI'-US,  'Ep/ifjs  Hermes. 
One  of  the  false  gods  of  Greece  and  Rome,  their  mes- 
senger, and  patron  of  eloquence  and  trade. 

Acts  14.  12  they  called . .  Paul,  M. ,  because  he  was  the 
MERCY  — 
l.Kindness,  loving  kindness,  ipn  chesed. 

Gen.  19.  19  thou  hast  magnified  thy  mercy,  which  thou 
24.  27  not  left  destitute  my  master  of  his  mercy 
32. 10  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all  the  mercies 
39.  2i  showed  him  mercy,  and  gave  him  favour 
Exodis.  13  Thou  in  thy  mercy  hast  led  forth  the  peo. 
20.  6  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them 
34.  7  Keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving 
Nuni  14.  18  The  Lord  (is),  .of  great  mercy,  forgiving 

14.  19  according  unto  the  greatness  of  thy  mercy 
Deut.  5. 10  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them 

7.    9  which  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  with 

7.  12  thy  God  shall  keep  unto  thee,  .the  mercy 
Judg.  1.  24  into  the  city,  and  we  will  show  thee  mercy 
2  Sa.   7.  15  But  my  mercy  shall  not  depart  away  from 

15.  20  return  thou,  .mercy  and  truth  (he)  with 
22.  51  showeth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  unto  D. 

1  Ki.   3.    6  Thou  hast  showed,  .great  mercy,  accord. 

8.  23  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  with  thy 

1  Ch.16.  34  give  thanks  .  .  for  his  mercy  (endureth) 

16.  41  thanks,  .because  his  mercy  (endureth) 

17. 13  I  will  not  take  my  mercy  away  from  him 

2  Ch.  1.    8  Thou  hast  showed  great  mercy  unto  David 

5.  13  (he  is)  good ;  for  his  mercy  (endureth)  for 


Ezra 


6.  14  mercy  unto  thy  servants  that  walk  before 

6.  42  remember  the  mercies  of  David  thy  serv. 

7.  3  (lie  is)  good ;  for  his  mercy  (endureth) for 
7.   6  because  his  mer.(endureth) for  ever,  when 

20.21  Praise  the  Lord  ;  for  his  mercy  (endureth) 


Neh. 


Job 
Psa. 


3.  11  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever  toward  Is. 
7.  28  hath  extended  mercy  unto  me  before  the 
9.  9  hath  extended  mercy  unto  us  iu  the  sight 
1 .  5  that  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  for  them 
9.  32  God,  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy,  let 
13.  22  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  mercy 
37.  13  for  correction,  or  for  his  land,  or  for  mercy 

5.  7  thy  house  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy 

6.  4  Return,  .oh  save  me  for  thy  mercies' sake 

13.  5  I  have  trusted  in  thy  mercy  ;  my  heart 
18.  50  showeth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to  David 
21.    7  through  the  mercy  of  the  most  High  he 
23.    6  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow 
25.    7  according  to  thy  mercy  remember  thou 
25. 10  All  the  paths  of  the  LoRD(are)mercyand 
31.    7  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thy  mercy 

31.  16  thy  servant:  save  me  for  thy  mercies' sake 

32.  10  he  that  trusteth.  .mercy  shall  compass 

33.  18  fear  him,  upon  them  that  hope  in  his  m. 
33.  22  Let  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  upon  us,  ace. 
36.    5  Thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  (is)  in  the  heavens 
44.  26  Arise,  .and  redeem  us  for  thy  mercies'  s. 
52.   8  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and 
57.   3  God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  his  t. 
57.  10  For  thy  mercy  (is)  great  unto  the  heavens 
59.  10  The  God  of  my  mercy  shall  prevent  me 
59.  16  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  mercy  in  the  mo. 
59.  17  God  (is)  my  defence,  .the  God  of  my  me. 
61.   7  0  prepare  mercy  and  truth,  (which)  may 
62. 12  Also  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  (belongeth)  me. 
66.  20 God.  .hath  not  turned.. his  mercy  from 
69.  13  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy  hear  me,  in 
77.   8  Is  his  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever  ?  doth  (his) 
85.    7  Show  us  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  and  grant  us 

85.  10  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together ;  right. 

86.  5  plenteous  in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  c. 
86.  13  great  (is) thy  ihercy  toward  me;  and  thou 
86. 15  thou,  .a  God.  .plenteous  in  mercy  and 
89.  1  I  will  sing  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for 
89.  2  Mercy  shall  be  built  up  for  ever :  thy  fai. 
89. 14  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face 
89.  24  my  faithfulness  and  my  mercy  (shall  be) 

89.  28  My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  everm. 

90.  14  0  satisfy  us  early  with  thy  mercy ;  that 
94.  18  My  foot  slippeth ;  thy  mercy,  0  LORD,  h. 
98.  3  He  hath  remembered  his  mercy  and  his 

100.  s  the  Lord  (is)  good  ;  his  mercy  (is)  everla. 

101.  1  I  will  sing  of  mercy  and  judgment :  unto 
103.  8  Lord,  .slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  inm. 
103.  11  great  is  his  mercy  toward  them  that  fear 
103.  17  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  (is)  from  everlast. 
106.   1  (he  is)  S001-' :  for  his  mercy  (endureth)  for 

106.  7  remembered  not  the  multitude  of  thy  m. 
106. 45  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  mercies 

107.  1  (he  is)  good ;  for  his  mercy  (endureth)  for 
10S.    4  thy  mercy  (is)  great  above  the  heavens,  and 
109.  12  Let  there  be  none  to  extend  mercy  unto 
109.  16  he  remembered  not  to  show  mercy,  but 
109.  21  because  thymercy  (is)  good,  deliver  thou 
109.  26  Help,  .save  me  according  to  thy  mercy 
115.    1  glory,  forthy  mercy,  .for  thy  truth's  sake 

118.  1,  2,  3,  4,  29  his  mercy  (endureth)  for  ever 

119.  41  Let  thy  mercies  come  also  unto  me,  O  L. 
119.  64  The  earth,  O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy 
119.  124  Deal  with  thy  servant  ace.  unto  thy  me. 
130.   7  for  with  the  Lord  (there  is)  mercy,  and 
136.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7  for  his  mercy  (endureth)  for 

[So  in  v.  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  iS,  19,  20,  21, 
22,  23,  24,  25,  26.] 

138.   8  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  (endureth)  for  ever 

143.  12  of  thy  mercy  cut  off  mine  enemies,  and. 

145.   8  The  Lord,  .slow  to  anger,  and  of  greatni. 

147. 11  pleasure,  .in  those  that  hope  in  his  mercy 
Prov.  3.    3  Let  not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee 

14.  22  mercy  and  truth  (shall  be)  to  them  that 
16.    6  Bymercyandtruthiniquityis purged;  and 
20.  28  Mercy  and  truth  preserve  the  king 

20.  28  and  his  throne  is  upholden  by  mercy 

21.  21  He  that  followeth  after,  .mercy  findeth 
16.    5  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  established 
55.    3  covenant  with  you.  .the  sure  mercies  of 
33.  11  for  the  Lord  (is)  good;  for  his  mercy 


Isa. 


Jer. 
Lam. 


Dan. 
Hos. 


Jon. 
Mic. 


Zech. 


(It  is  of)  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are 

3.  32  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  mercies 
9.   4  keeping  the  covenant  and  mercy  to  them 

4.  1  notruth,normercy,norkuowledgeof  God 
6.    6  I  desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice;  and  the 

10.  12  Sow.  .in  righteousness,  reap  in  mercy;  br. 
r2.    6  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on 
2.    8  They  that  observe,  .forsake  their  own  m. 

6.  8  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 

7.  iS  heretainethnot..hedelighteth(in)mercy 
7.  20  Thou  wilt  perform. .the  mercy  to  Abraham 
7.    9  show  mercy  and  compassions  every  man 

2.To  loverpity-,  be  merciful,  orn  racham,  3. 

Hab.    3.    2  make  known  ;  in  wrath  remember  mercy 

3.  Botoels,  mercies,  D'Ern  rachamim. 

Gen.  43.  14  God  Almighty  give,  .mercy before  the  m. 
Deutis- 17  the  Lord  may  turn.,  and  show  thee  mercy 
Neh.  1.  13  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this  man 
Isa.   47.    6  thou  didst  show  them  no  mercy;  upon  the 

A. Kindness,  beneficence,  e\eos  eleos. 

Matt.  9.  13  I  will  have  [mercy],  and  not  sacrifice :  for 
12.  7  I  will  have  [mercy],  and  not  sacrifice,  ye 
23.  23  (matters)  of  the  law,  judgment,  [mercy] 


1.  54 

1.58 

1.72 

1.7SS 

l°-37 

Rom 

9.23 

11.  31 

15.    9 

(ial. 

6.16 

Eph. 

2.    4 

7  Tl. 

1.    2 

2  Ti. 

1.    2 

Titus  i 


3- 

5 

Heh. 

Tf> 

Jas. 

z. 

*1 

2. 

J3 

3- 

17 

1  Pe. 

T. 

2  Jo. 

Jude 

2 

his  mercy  (is)  on  them  that  fear  him  from 

He  hath  holpen.  .in  remembrance  of  (his) 

the  Lord  had  showed  great  mercy  upon 

To  perform  the  mercy  (promised)  to  our 

Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God,  w. 

And  he  said,  He  that  showed  mercy  on  him 

on  ilie  vessels  of  mercy,  which  he  had  afore 

through  your  mercy  they  also  may  obtain 

the  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for  (liis)m. 

peace  (be)  on  them,  and  mercy,  and  upon 

God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love 

Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from  God  our 

Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace  from  God  the 

The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of 

that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that 

Grace,  mercy,  (and)  peace,  from  God  the  F. 

according  to  his  [mercy]  he  saved  us,  by 

that  we  may  obtain  [mercy],  and  find  gract 

have  judgment,  .that  hath  showed  no  m. 

and  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment 

full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  p. 

which  according  to  his  abundant  mercy 

Grace  be  with  you,  mercy,  (and)  peace 

Mercy  unto  you,  and  peace,  and  love,  be 

21  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

5, Pity,  merciful  compassion,  oifcripuSs  oiktermos. 
R011112.  1  Ibeseech  you.  .by  the  mercies  of  God,  that 
2  Co  .  1.  3  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all 
Phil.  2.  1  if  any  fellowship,  .if  any  bowels  and  me. 
Col.  3.  12  Put  on  therefore. .bowels  of  mercies,  kind. 
Heb.  10.  28  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three 

MERCY  on  or  upon,  to  find,  have,  obtain,  receive,  show  — 
l.To  be  gracious,  inclined  to,  \in  chanan. 

Deut.  7.    2  no  covenant  with  them,  nor  show  mercy 
Psa.     4.    1  have  mercyupon  me,  andhear  myprayer 
6.    2  Have  mercyupon  me,  OLORD;  for  I  (am) 
9. 13  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord  ;  consider 
25. 16  Turn  thee  unto  me,  and  have  mercyupon 
27.    7  have  mercy  also  upon  me,  and  answerme 
30. 10  Hear,  O  LORD,  and  have  mercy  upon  me 
31.    9  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord,  for  I  am 
37.  21  the  righteous  showeth  mercy,  and  giveth 
51.    1  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  God,  according 
86.  16  0  turn  unto  me,  and  have  mercy  uponme 
123.   2  God,  until  that  he  have  mercy  upon  us 
123.    3  Have  mercy  upon  us,OLoRD,have  mercy  u. 
Provi4.  31  he  thathonoureth  him  hath  mercy  on  the 

2.  To  be  gracious,  inclined  to,  jjn  chanan,  Sa. 

Prov  14.  21  he  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor,  happy  (is) 

Z.To  be  gracious,  inclined  to,  }jq  chanan,  3- 

Dan.  4.  27 break  off.  .thine  iniquities  by  showing m. 

4.  To  love, pity,  be  merciful,  orn  racham,  3. 

Exod33.  19  will  show  mercy  on  whom  I  will  showm. 

Psa.  102.  13  Thou  shalt  arise,  (and)  have  mercy  upon 

Isa.     9.  17  neither  shall  have  mercy  on  their  father. 

14.    1  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  Jacob,  and 

27.  11  he  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on 

30. 18  exalted,  that  he  may  have  mercy  upon 

49.  10  lie  that  hath  mercy  on  them  shall  lead 
49. 13  Lord,  .will  have  mercy  upon  his  afflicted 

54.  8  with  everlastingkindness  will  I  have  m,  o. 
54. 10  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on  thee 

55.  7  return,  .and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him 
60. 10  in  my  favour  have  I  had  mercy  on  thee 

Jer.     6.  23  they  (are)  cruel,  and  have  no  mercy;  their 

13.  14  I  will  not  pity,  nor  spare,  nor  have  mercy 
21.    7  he  shall  not.  .have  pity,  nor  have  mercy 

30.  18  and  have  mercy  on  his  dwelling  places 

31.  20  I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon  him,  saith 
33.  26  I  will  cause. .to  return,  and  have  mercy  on 
42. 12  I  will  show  mercies  unto  you,  that  he 
42.  12  that  he  may  have  mercy  upon  you,  and 

50.  42  they  (are)  cruel,  and  will  not  show  mercy 
Eze.  39.  25  have  mercy  upon  the  whole  house  of  Isr. 
Hos.    1.   61  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house 

1.  7  I  willhave  mercyupon  the  house  of  Judah 

2.  4  I  will  not  have  mercy  upon  her  children 
2.  23  I  will  have  mercy  upon  her  that  had  not 

Zech.  1.  12  how  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  on  J. 

10.  6  for  I  have  mercy  upon  them  :  and  they  s. 

5.  To  beloved,  pitied,  find  pity,  ditt  racham,  4. 

ProV28.  13  confesseth  and  forsaketh .  .shall  have  me. 
Hos.    2.  23  upon  her  that  had  not  obtained  mercy 

14.  3  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  fiudeth  mercy 

6.  To  be  kind,  beneficmt,  eAee'&j  eleeo. 

Matt.  5.  7  the  merciful :  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy 
9.  27  saying,  (Thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on 
15. 22  Have  mercy  on  me,  0  Lord  (thou)  son 
17.  15  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son  :  for  he  is  1. 
20.  30,  31  Have  mercy  on  us,  0  Lord,  (thou)  son 
Mark  10.  47,  48  (Thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me 
Lukei6.  24  Father  Abraham,  have  mercy  on  me,  and 

17.  13  and  said,  Jesus,  Master,  have  mercy  on  us 

18.  38,  39  (thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me 
Rom.  9. 15  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  willhave  m. 

9.  16  nor  of  him.. but  of  God  that  showeth  mc. 
9. 18  Therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  whom  he  will 

1 1.  30  yet  have  now  obtained  mercy  through  th. 
11.  31  Even  so.  .that,  they  also  may  obtain  m. 
-1. 32  concluded..that  he  might  havemercy  upon 

2.  8  he  that  showeth  mercy,  with  cheerfulness 
7,  25  as  one  that  hath  obtained  mercy  of  the 
4.  1  as  we  have  received  mercy,  we  faint  not 
2.  27  God  had  mercy  on  him ;  and  not  on  him 
1.  13  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  (it)igno. 
1. 16  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in 
2. 10  had  not  obt.  mercy,  but  now  have  obt.  m. 


1  Co. 

2  Co. 
Phil. 
1  Ti. 


Pe. 


MERCY 


656 


MESOBAITE 


MERCY,  of  tender  — 

Tenderly,  pitiful,  olxTtpficov  oiktirmon. 

Jas.     5.  11  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  in. 
MERCY,  without  — 
Without  kindness,  afiAews  anileds. 

Jas.    2. 13  he  shall  have  judgment  [without  mercy] 
MERCY  SEAT  — 

1..1  iid,  place  of  covering  (sin),  rnss  kapporeth. 
EXOCI25.  17  thou  shalt  make  a  mercy  seat  (of)  pureg. 
25.  18  cherubim-.. in  the  two  ends  of  the  mercy  s. 
?5.  19  of  the  mercy  seat  shall  ye  make  theche. 
25.  20  covering  the  mercy  seat.. toward  the  m.  s. 
25.  21  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy  seat  above  upon 

25.  22  commune  with  thee  from  above  the  m.  s. 

26.  34  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy  seat  upon  the 

30.  6  before  the  mercy  seat  that  (is)  over  the 

31.  7  the  mercy  seat  that  (is)  thereupon,  and 
35.  12  (with)  the  mercy  seat,  and  the  veil  of  the 
37.    6  And  he  made  the  mercy  seat  (of)  pure  g. 
37.    7  cherubim.. on  the  two  ends  of  the  mercy  s. 
37.   8  out  of  the  mercy  seat  made  he  the  eher. 
37.    g  over  the  mercy  seat,  .to  the  mercy  seat 

39.  35  and  the  staves  thereof,  and  the  mercy  seat 

40.  20  and  put  the  mercy  seat  above  upon  the 
Lev.  16.    2  within  the  veil  before  the  mercy  seat,  wh. 

16.    2  I  will  appear  in  the  cloud  upon  the  m.  s. 
16.  13  cloud  of  the  incense  may  cover  the  m.  s. 
16.  14  upon  the  mercy  seat,  .before  the  mercy  s. 
16. 15  upon  the  mercy  seat,  and  before  the  m.  s. 
Num.  7.  89  from  off  the  mercy  seat  that  (was)  upon 
1  Oh. 28.  11  the  pattern.. of  the  place  of  the  mercy  s. 
"2.  Place  of  propitiation,  or  appeasement,  l\aa,T7]piov. 
Heb.   9.    5  cherubim  of  glory  shadowing  the  mercy  s. 
ME'-RED,  TJ9,  T39  bold,  rebellious. 
A  son  of  Ezra*,  a  descendant  of  Judah,  through  Caleb 
son  of  Jephunneh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 17  the  sons  of  Ezra  (were)  Jether,  andM.,  and 
4. 18  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Bithiah.  .which  M. 
ME-RE'-MOTH,  niiriB  strong,  firm. 

1.  The  son  of  Uriah  the  priest  who  weighed  the  gold 
and  silver  vessels  he  had  brought.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra    8.  33  M.  the  son  of  Uriah  the  priest ;  and  with 

Neh.    3.    4  next  unto  them  repaired  M.  the  son  of  U. 

3.  21  After  him  repaired  M.  the  son  of  Urijah  the 

2.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  36  Vaniah,  M.,  Eliashib 

3.  A  priest  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.      457. 

Nth.  10.    5  Harim,  M.  Obadiah 

12.    3  Shechaniah,  Relnun,  M. 

ME'-RES,  Din  worthy. 

One  of  the  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  Media  that  saw 

the  king's  face  at  pleasure.    B.C.  520. 

Esth.  1. 14  M.,  Marsena,  (and)  Memucan,  the  seven 
MERl'-BAfl,  rr?,l5)  (triR-rgHp)  strife,  contention. 
A  place  in  Rephidim  between  Sin  and  Sinai,  at  Kadesh- 
baruea,  where  Moses  struck  the  rock  and  water  flowed 

OUt.      B.C.  1491. 

Exod.17.  7  he  called  the  name  of  the  place.  .M.,  be. 

Num2o.  13  This  (is)  the  water  of  M. ;  because  the  c. 

20. 24  because  ye  rebelled,  .at  the  water  of  M. 

27. 14  that  (is)  the  water  of  M.  in  Kadesh  in  the 

Deut32.  51  the  waters  of  M.-Kadesh,in  the  wilderness 

33.    8  thou  didst  strive  at  the  waters  of  11. 
Psa.  81.   7  I  proved  thee  at  the  waters  of  M.    Selah. 
ME-RIB  BA'-AL,  ^y?  3'")?,  ^3  Tip,  *?%}  HD. 
Son  of  Jonathan  son  of  Saul,  and  father  of  Micah. 

B.C.      1020. 

1  Ch.  8.  34  the  son  of  Jonathan  (was)  M.  ;  and  M,  be. 
9.  40  the  son  of  Jonathan  (was)  M. :  and  M.  be, 

ME-RO'-DACH,  7]TO  bold. 

A  Babylonian  idol,  the  god  of  war.    Compare  Evil- 

Merodach  and  also  Merodach-baladan. 

Jer.  50.   2  Bel  is  confounded,  M.  is  broken  in  pieces 
ME-RO-DACH  BA-LA'-DAN,  p*£s  TfttClX. 
The  king  of  Babylon  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.    B.C. 
712.    See  Bcroddch-baladan. 

Isa.   39.    t  At  that  time  M.,  the  son  of  Baladan,  king 
ME'-ROM,  o'np  h  igh  place. 

The  district  in  which  lies  a  small  lake  N.  of  Cinueroth, 
nearer  the  springs  of  Jordan. 

Josh. 11.    5  pitched  together  at  the  waters  of  M.,  to 
11.   7  J.  came,  .against  them  by  the  waters  of  M. 

ME-RO-NO-THITE,  TjftO. 

An  inhabitant  of    a    district  in   Zebulun.      Compare 
Shiinron-meron. 

1  Ch.27.  30  and  over  the  asses  (was)  Jehdciah  the  M. 

Neh.    3.    7  next  unto  them  repaired . .  Jadon  the  M . 

ME'-ROZ,  11TD. 

A  place  N.  of  Mount  Tabor,  near  the  lake  of  Heroin. 
Judg.  5.  23  Curse  ye  M.,  said  the  angel  of  the  Lord 

MERRILY,  MERRY  — 

1. Praised  things,  D'^n  hilluUm. 

.ludg.  9.  27  made  merry,  and  went  into  the  house  of 

2.0oodt  31a  fob. 

.'udg  16.  25  when  their  hearts  were  merry,  that  they 
1  Sa,  25.  36  and  Nabal's heart  (was)  merry  within  him 
-■  Sa,  13.  28  wlun  Amn  m's  heart  is  merry  with  wine 


2  Ch.  7.  10  glad  and  merry  in  heart  for  the  goodness 
Esth.  1.  10  when  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with 
Prov.15.  15  he  that  is  of  a  merry  heart  (hath)  a  contin. 
Eecl.  9.    7  drink  thy  wine  with  amerry  heart ;  for  G. 

3.  Rejoicing,  OPV  sameach. 

Esth.  5.  14  then  go  thou  in  merrily  withthekingunto 

Prov  15.  13  Amerry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  counte. 

17.  22  A  merry  heart  doeth  good  (like)  a  medicine 

MERRY,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  or  become  good,  glad,  3ta;  yatdb. 

Judg  19.  6  Be  content,  .and  let  thine  heart  be  merry 

19.  9  lodge  here,  that  thine  heart  may  be  merry 

Ruth  3.  7  And  when . .  his  heart  was  merry,  he  went 

1  Ki.21.  7  eat  bread,  and  let  thine  heart  be  merry 

2.  To  rejoice,  np'p1  sameach. 

Eccl.  8.  15  than  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to  be  merry 

3.  To  be  cheerful,  merry,  "i?c:  shakar. 

Gen.  43.  34  And  they  drank,  and  were  merry  with  him 

4.  To  be  of  good  courage,  eiiOvfitw  euthumeo. 

Jas.    5.  13  let  him  pray.  Is  any  merry?  let  him  sing 

5. To  have  an  easy  mind,  be  merry,  eucppaipofiat. 
Lukei2. 19  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  (and)  be  merry 
15.  23  and  kill  (it) ;  and  let  us  eat,  and  be  merry 
15.  24  is  found.    And  they  began  to  be  merry 

MERRY,  to  make  — 

l.To  do  good,  make  glad,  aa;  yatdb,  5. 

Judgig.  22  as  they  were  making  their  hearts  merry 

2.To  gladden,  rejoice  life,  D,sn  npjy  3.  sameach  chay. 
Eccl. 10.  19  wine  maketh  merry :  butmoueyanswereth 

3.  To  have  an  easy  mind,  be  merry,  evippaivofxai. 
Luke  1 5.  29  that  I  might  make  merry  with  my  friends 
15.  32  It  was  meet  that  we  should  make  merry 
Rev.  11.  10  shall  rejoice  over  them,  and  make  merry 

MERRY,  (making)  — 

Becoming  glad,  rejoicing,  np'p'  sameach. 

1  Ki.  4.  20  eating  and  drinking,  and  making  merry 
MERRY,  that  make  — 

To  laugh,  deride,  play,  rejoice,  pnw  sacluiq,  3. 
Jer.  30.  19  and  the  voice  of  them  that  make  merry 

31.  4  in  the  dances  of  them  that  make  merry 

MERRY  HEARTED  — 

Rejoicing  of  heart,  dS  np#  semach  leb. 

Isa.    24.   7  the  vine  langiusheth,  all  the  merry  hear. 
ME'-SHA,  JKTD,  VT^  freedom. 

1.  A  king  of  Moab  in  the  days  of  Ahab,  Ahaziah,  and 
Jehoram,  kings  of  Israel,  who  rebelled  against  Ahaziah. 
B.C.  896. 

2  Ki.   3.    4  And  M.  king  of  Moab  was  a  sheep  master 

2.  Eldest  son  of  Caleb,  brother  of  Jerahmeel,  and  grand- 
son of  Pharez.     B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  2.  42  the  sons  of  Caleb.. (were)  M.  his  first  born 
ME'-SHA,  N9»p,  tiyV- 

1,  A  place  in  Yemen,  or  S.E.  Arabia. 

Gen.  10.  30  their  dwelling  was  from  M.,  as  thou  goest 

2.  A  Benjamite.    B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.  8.    9  And  he  begat..  Zibia,  andM.  .andMalcham 
ME'-SHACH,  *[&G. 

The  name  given  to  Michael,  one  of  Daniel's  companions, 
by  the  chief  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  eunuchs.    B.C.  600. 

Dan.    1.    7  hegave..(thename)..of M.;  andtoAzariah 

2.  49  he  set  Shadrach,  M.,  and  Abed-nego,  over 

3.  12  Shadrach,  M.,  aud  Abed-nego ;  these  men 
3.  13  commanded  to  bring  Shadrach,  M.,  and 
3.  14  (Is  it)true,0  Shadrach, M.,  and  Abed-nego 
3.  16  Shadrach,  M.,  and  Abed-nego,  answered 
3.  19  visage  was  changed  against  Shadrach,  M. 
3.  20  hecomnianded.  ,tobiudShadrach,M.,and 
3.  22  those  men  that  took  up  Shadrach,  M.,  and 
3.  23  Shadrach,  M.,  and  Abed-nego,  fell  down 
3.  26  said,  Shadrach,  M.,  and  Abed-nego,  ye  se. 
3.  26  Shadrach,  M.,  and  Abed-nego,  came  forth 
3.  28  Blessed  (be)  the  God  of  Shadrach,  M.,  and 
3.  29  the  God  of  Shadrach,  M.,  and  Abed-nego 
3.  30  the  king  promoted  Shadrach,  M.,  and  A. 

ME'-SHECH,  ME'-SECH,  ^n. 

1.  A  son  of  Japheth.     B.C.  2320. 

Gen.  10.  2  Thesonsof  Japheth;  Gonier.. andM., aud 
1  Ch.  1.    5  Thesonsof  Japheth;  Gomer..  andM.,  and 

2.  A  son  of  Shem.    B.C.  2320. 

1  Ch.   1. 17  sons  of  Shem;  Elam..and  Gether.and  M. 

3.  A  tribe  joined  with  Kedar. 

Psa.120.   5  "Woe  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  M.,  (that) 

4.  The  descendants  of  the  son  of  Japheth,  the  Moschi  or 
Mosocki. 

Eze.  27. 13  Javan,  Tubal,  and  M.,  they  (were)  thy  m. 

32.  26  There(is)M.,  Tubal,  and  all  hermultitude 
38.  2  set  thy  face  against.  .M.  and  Tubal,  and 
38.    3  Gog,  the  chief  prince  of  M.  and  Tubal 

ME-SHE-LEM'-IAH,  n;oSrD,  w^wftJahrccompenscs. 

A  Kohathite  whose  son'  Zechariali  was  a  gate  keeper  of 

the  tabernacle.     B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  g.  21  Zechariali  the  son  of  M.  (was)  porter  of 
26.    1  Of  the  Korhites  (was)  M.  the  son  of  Kore 
26.    2  And  the  sons  of  M.  (were)  Zechariali  the 
26.    9  AndM.  had  smisand  brethren,  strong  men 


ME-SHE-ZAB'-EEL,  ^IK"?  God  is  deliverer. 

1.  One  whose  descendant,  Meshullam,  helped  to  repair 
the  wall.    B.C.  506. 

Neh.  3.   4  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the  son  of  M.    And 

2.  A  person  or  family  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the 
covenant.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  21  M.,  Zadok,  Jaddua 

11.  24  Pethahiah  the  son  of  M.,  of  the  children 

ME-SHTL-LE'-MTTH,  n'p^p  recomiyense. 

A  priest  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.    B.C 

500. 

1  Ch.  9.  12  Meshullam,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Im 
ME-SHIL-LE'-MOTH,  rncW>p  recompenses. 

1.  An  Ephraimite  whose  son  Berechiah  opposed  making 
slaves  of  the  Jewish  captives.    B.C.  770. 

2  Ch.28.  12  Berechiah  the  son  of  M.,  and  Jehizkiah 

2.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Immer,  whose  descendant 
Amashai  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.    B.C.  500. 

Neh.  it.  13  the  son  of  Ahasai,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of 
ME-SHO'-BAB,  inieb  returned,  delivered. 
A  Simeonite.     B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  34  And  M. ,  and  Jamlech,  aud  Joshah  the  son 

ME-SHTJL'-LAM,  D^o  associate,  friend. 

1.  Grandfather  of  s'ha'phan,  a  scribe    in   the  days  of 
king  Josiah.    B.C.  700. 

2  Ki.  22.   3  the  son  of  Azaliah,  the  son  of  M.,  the  scr. 

2.  A  descendant  of  Jeconiah,  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  520. 

1  Ch.  3. 19  thesonsof  Zerubbabel;  M.,andHananiah 

3.  The  head  of  a  Gadite  family.     B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5. 13  And  their  brethren.  .(were)Michael,  and  M . 

4.  A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Elpaal.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  17  And  Zebadiah,  and  M.,  and  Hezeki,  and 

5.  A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Haseuuah,  whose  son 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  9.  7  Sallu  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Hodaviah 
G.  A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Shephatiah  who  dwelt 
in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  510. 

1  Ch.  9.    8  aud  M.  the  son  of  Shephathiah,  the  son 
7.  An  Aaronite  of  the  family  of  Zadok,  whose  descend- 
ants dwelt  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  9. 11  Hilkiah,  the  son  of  M.,  the  sou  of  Zadok 

Neh.  11.  11  Hilkiah,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Zadok 

S.  A  priest,  ancestor  of  a  family  that  dwelt  in  Jerusalem. 
B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  9. 12  Jahzerah,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Mesh. 

9.  A  Kohathite  appointed  to  oversee  the  repairs  of  the 
temple  by  Josiah.    B.C.  640. 

2  Ch.34.  12  Zechariali  and  M.,  of  the  sons  of  the  Koh. 

10.  A  chief  man  who  returned  with  Ezra.     B.C.  457. 
Ezra   8.  16  Then  sent  I  for  Eliezer.  .and  for  M.,  chi  1 

11.  One  who  assisted  in  taking  account  of  those  who  had 
taken  strange  wives.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra  10.  15  M.  and  Shabbethaithe  Levite  helped  them 

12.  A  son  of  Bani  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.     B.C. 
456"- 

Ezra  10.29  0I  tne  S011S  OI  Bani;  M.,  Malluch,  and 

13.  A  person  who  rebuilt  two  portions  of  the  wall.     B.C. 
445- 

Neh.   3.    4  next  unto  them  repaired  M.  the  son  of 
3.  30  After  him  repaired  M.  the  son  of  Berech 
6. 18  Johanan  had  taken  the  daughter  of  M. 

14.  Another  who  repaired  a  portion.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.   6  and  M.  the  son  of  Besodeiah;  they  laid 

15.  A  prince,   priest,  or  Levite  who  stood  beside  Ezra. 
B.C.  457- 

Neh.   8.    4  on  his  left  hand..  Zechariali,  (and)  M. 

16.  A  priest  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.io.    7  M.,  Abijah,  Mijamin. 

17.  A  chief  man  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehe- 
niiah.    B.C.  445* 

Neh.  10.  20  Magpiash,  M.,  Hezir. 

18.  A  Benjamite  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  Jerusalem. 
B.C.  470. 

Neh.  11.   7  Sallu  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Joed 

19.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Ezra  who  assisted  in  the 
dedication  of  the  wall.     B.C.  470. 

Neh.  12. 13  Of  Ezra,  M. ;  of  Amariah,  Jehohanan 
12.  33  And  Azariah,  Ezra,  and  M. 

20.  One  of  the  family  of  Ginnethon  in  the  days  of 
Joiakim  the  priest.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  16  Of  Iddo,  Zechariali ;  of  Ginnethon,  M. 

21.  A  Levite  and  gate  keeper  for  the  sanctuary  after  the 
exile.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  25  M„  Talnion,  Akkub,  (were)  porters,  keep 
ME-SHTJL-LE'-METH,  npWe. 

Wife  of  Manasseh,  and  mother  of  Anion,  kings  of  Judah, 
and  daughter  of  Haruz  of  Jotbah.    B.C.  670. 

2  Ki.  21. 19  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  M.,  the  da. 
ME-SO-BA-ITE,  n;3kp. 

The  patronymic  of  Jaziel,  one  of  David's  valiant  men; 
place  unknown.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  47  Eliel,  and  Obed,  and  Jasiel  the  M. 


MESOPOTAMIA 


657 


MICHAEL. 


IiiE-SO-PO-TAM'-IA,  DHiH  C"ix  Me<ro7roTa,uta. 
The  country  between  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  on  the 
N.W.  of  Babylonia  and  S.W.  of  Assyria.  See  Aram- 
Naharavm.  It  passed  successively  under  the  Babylo- 
nians, the  Medes,  and  the  Persians ;  after  the  battle  of 
Issus,  B.C.  333,  it  came  under  the  Macedonians  ;  in  A.D. 
165  under  the  Romans;  in  363  under  the  Persians;  in 
902  under  the  Carmathians;  and  in  1514  under  the 
Turks,  who  still  possess  it. 

Gen.  24.  10  he  arose,  and  went  to  M.,  unto  the  city  of 
Deut  23.    4  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  of  Pethor  of  Iff. 
Judg.  3.    8  the  hand  of  Chushanrishathaim  kingof  M. 

3. 10  the  Lord  delivered,  .king  of  M.  into  his 

1  Ch.19.    6  chariots  and  horsemen  out  of  M.,  and  out 
Acts    2.   9  dwellers  in  M.,  and  in  Judea,  and  Cappa. 

7.  2  Abraham,  when  he  was  in  M.,  before  he 

MESS  — 

Lifting,  burden,  gift,  11x175  maseth. 
'  Gen.  43.  34  he  took  (and  sent)  messes  unto  them  from 
43.  34  Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  so  much 

2  Sa.  11.   8  and  there  followed  a  mess. .from  the  king 

MESSAGE  — 

l.U'ord,  thing,  matter,  157  clabar. 

Judg.  3.  20  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee 
1  Ki.  20. 12  when  (Beu-hadad)  heard  this  message,  as 
Prov  26.   6  He  that  sendeth  a  message  by  the  hand  of 

2. Message,  ni3x?a  malakvth. 

Hag.    1.  13  spake.,  in  the  Lord's  message  unto  thep. 

3. Message,  0776X10  afjgelia. 

1  Jo.   3. 11  this  is  the  message  that  yeheard  from  the 
4. Message,  promise,  eirayyeAia  epaggelia. 

1  Jo.    1.    5  This  then  is  [the  message]  which  we  have 
5.  Embassy,  wpsafiiia  presbeia. 

Luke  19.  14  sent  a  message  after  him,  saying,  We  w. 
MESSENGER  — 
1.7*0  tell  (good)  ?mvs,  "1&3  basar,  3. 

1  Sa.  4. 17  the  rnessengeransweredandsaid, Israelis 
2. Messenger,  "nxSa  malah. 

Gen.  32.   3  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Esau 
32.    6  the  messengers  returned  to  Jacob,  saying 

Xuni2o.  14  And  Moses  sent  messengers  from  Kadesh 

21.  21  And  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon 

22.  5  He  sent  messengers  therefore  unto  Balaam 
24. 12  Spake  I  not  also  to  thy  messengers  which 

Deut.  2.  26  And  I  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wilderne. 
Josh.  6.  17  because  she  hid  the  messengers  that  we 

6.  25  because  she  hid  the  messengers  which 

7.  22  So  Joshua  sent  messengers,  and  they  ran 
Judg.  6.  35  And  he  sent  messengers  throughout  all 

6.  3s  and  he  sent  messengers  unto  Asher,  and 

7.  24  And  Gideon  sent  messengers  throughout 
9.  31  And  he  sent  messengers  unto  Abimelech 

11.  12  And  Jephthah  sent  messengers  unto  the 
11.  13  answered  unto  the  messengers  of  Jepht. 
11.  14  And  Jephthah  sent  messengers  again  unto 
11.  17  Then  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  the  king 
11.  19  And  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon 

1  Sa.   6.  21  And  they  sent  messengers  to  the  inhabita. 

ti.    3  that  we  may  send  messengers  unto  all  the 
11.    4  Then  came  the  messengers  to  Gibeah  of 
11.    7  bythehandsof messengers,  saying, Whoso 
11.    9  And  they  said  unto  the  messengers  that 
11.    9  And  the  messengers  came  and  showed  (it) 
16.  19  Wherefore  Saul  sent  messengers  unto 
ig.  11  Saul  also  sent  messengers  unto  David's 
19.  14  And  when  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take 
19.  15  And  Saul  sent  the  messengers  (again)  to 
19.  16  And  when  the  messengers  were  come  in 
19.  20  And  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  David 
19.  20  the  spirit  of  God  was  upon  the  messengers 
19. 21  he  sent  other  messengers,  and  they  prop. 

19.  21  Saul  sent  messengers  again  the  third  time 

23.  27  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Saul,  saying 
25.  14  David  sent  messengersout  of  the  wilder. 
25.  42  she  went  after  the  messengers  of  David 

2  Sa.  2.    5  David  sent  messengers  unto  the  men  of  Ja. 

3. 12  Abner  sent  messengers  to  David  on  his 
3.  14  David  sent  messengers  to  Ishbosheth,  S. 
3. 26  he  sent  messengers  after  Abner,  which 

5. 11  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  toD. 
ir.  4  And  David  sent  messengers,  and  took  her 
11. 19  charged  the  messenger,  saying,  When  thou 
11.  22  So  the  messenger  went,  and  came  and  sh. 
11.  23  the  messengersaid  unto  David,  Surely  the 

11.  25  Then  David  said  unto  the  messenger,  Thus 

12.  27  Joab  sent  messengers  to  David,  and  said 

1  Ki.19.    2  Then  JezebelseutamessengeruntoElijah 

20.  2  he  sent  messengersto  Ahabking  of  Israel 
20.  5  the  messengers  came  again,  and  said,  Thus 
20.  9  Wherefore  he  said  unto  the  messengers  of 
20.  9  the  messengers  departed,  and  brought  him 
22.  13  the  messenger  that  was  gone  to  call  M. 

2  Ki.   1.    2  he  sent  messengers,  and  said  unto  them 

1.  3  Arise,  go  up  to  meet  the  messengers  of  the 
1.  5  when  the  messengers  turned  back  unto  him 
1.  16  Forasmuch  as  thou  hast  sent  messengers 
5. 10  Elisha  sent  a  messenger  unto  him,  saying 
6.  32  ere  the  messenger  came  to  him,  he  said 
6. 32  when  themessenger  cometh,  shutthe  door 

6.  33  the  messenger  came  down  unto  him:  and. 

7.  15  the  messengers  returned,  and  told  the  king 
9. 18  The  messenger  came  to  them,  but  he  co. 

10.  8  there  came  a  messenger,  and  told  him 

14.  8  Then  Amaziah  sent  messengers  to  Jehoash 

16.  7  So  AhazsentmessengerstoTiglath-Pileser 

17  4  he  had  sent  messengers  to  So  king  of  Eg. 

83 


2  Ki.  19.  9  he  sent  messengers  again  uuto  Hezekiah 
19.  14  received  the  letter  of  the  hand  of  the  m. 
19.  23  By  thy  messengers  thou  hast  reproached 

1  Ch.14.    1  Now  Hiram  kingof  Tyre  sent  messengers 

19.    2  David  sent  messengers  to  comfort  him 
19.  16  they  sent  messengers,  and  drew  forth  the 

2  Ch.18. 12  the  messenger  that  went  to  call  Micaiah 

36. 15  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  risingup 

36. 16  they  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and 
Neh.  6.  3  Isentmessengersuntothem,saying,I(am) 
Job     1.  14  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Job,  and 

33.  23  If  there  be  a  messenger  with  him,  an  int. 
Prov  13.  17  A  wicked  messenger  falleth  into  mischief 

16.  14  The  wrath  of  a  king  (is  as)  messengers  of 

17.  11  a  cruel  messenger  shall  be  sent  against 
Isa.    14.  32  What  shall  (one)  then  answer  the  messe. 

18.  2  Go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  nation  sea. 
37.    9  he  sent  messengers  to  Hezekiah,  saying 
37. 14  letter  from  the  hand  of  the  messengers 
42.  19  or  deaf,  as  my  messenger  (that)  I  sent? 
44.  26  performeth  the  counsel  of  his  messengers 

Jer.   27.    3  by  the  hand  of  the  messengers  which  come 

Eze.  23.  16  sent  messengers  unto  theminto  Chaldea 

23.  40  unto  whom  a  messenger  (was)  sent ;  and 

30.    9  In  thatdayshallmessengersgoforthfrom 

Nah.   2.  13  the  voice  of  thymessengers  shallnomore 

Hag.   1. 13  Then  spake  Haggai  the  Lord's  messenger 

Mai.    2.    7  he  (is)  the  messenger  of  the  LORD  of  hosts 

3.    1  I  will  send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall 

3.  1  eventhemessengerofthecovenant,  whom 

0.T0  cause  to  go  before,  tell,  declare,  ~i}}  nagad,  5. 
2  Sa.  15. 13  there  came  a  messenger  to  David,  saying 
Jer.   51.  31  one  messenger  to  meet  auother,  to  show 

4. Ambassador,  "VX  tsir. 

Prov.25. 13  a  faithful  messenger  to  them  that  send 
Isa.  57.   g  didst  send  thy  messengers  far  off,  and 

5. Messenger,  &.yyeXos  aygelos. 

Mattn.  10  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face,  wh. 
Mark  1.  2  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face,  w. 
Luke  7.  24  when  the  messengers  of  John  were  dep. 

7. 27  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face,  w. 

9. 52  sent  messengers  before  his  face  :  and  they 
2  C0.12.  7  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  me,  lest 
Jas.     2.  25  when  she  had  received  the  messengers 

6.  Apostle,  one  sent  off,  air6o-ro\os  a^ostolos. 
2  Co.   8.  23  the  messengers  of  the  churches,  .the 
Phil.    2.  25  your  messenger,  and  he  that  ministered 

MESSENGER,  to  send  a  — 

To  lay  a  charge,  command,  nix  tsavah,  3. 

Gen.  50.  16  they  sent  a  messenger  unto  Joseph,  saying 

MES-SI'-AH,  n'a'n  anointed. 

The  prince  who  was  to  come  as  Leader. 

Dan.   9. 25  unto  the  M.  the  Prince  (shall  be)  seven 
9.  26  after  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall  M. 

MES-SI'-AS,  Meaalas  Mecrtas  Gr.  form  of  preceding. 
John  1. 41  We  have  found  the  M.,  which  is,  beingiu. 

4.  25  I  know  that  M.  cometh,  which  is  called  C. 
METE  (out),  to  — 

X.To  measure,  "no  madad. 

Exodi6.  iS  when  they  did  mete  (it)  with  anomer,  he 

"2.  To  measure,  TiD  madad-,  3. 

Psa.  60.    6  I  wiU  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out  the 
108.    7  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out  the 

3.  To  weigh,  measure,  j5$  takan,  3. 

Isa.  40.  12  Who  hath . .  meted  out  heaven  withthe  spa. 

4.  To  measure,  juerpeai  metreo. 

Matt.  7.  2  with  what  measure  ye  mete,  itshallbem. 
Mark  4.  24  with  what  measure  yemete,  it  shall  beni. 
Luke  6.  38  with  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete  wit. 

METED  out  — 

A  line,  ride,  i[?,  lp  qav. 

Isa.   18.   2,  7  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden 

METE  T ARC  — 

A  measure,  mete  yard,  rna  middah. 

Lev.  19. 35  in  judgment,  in  mete  yard,  in  weight,  or 
ME-THEG  AM'-MAH,  naxri  jna  bridle  of  metropolis. 
A  place  in  Philistia  not  known." 

2  Sa.   8.   1  David  took  M.  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 
ME-THTJ-SA'-EL,  W*n3. 

Son  of  Mehujael,  a  descendant  of  Cain,  and  father  of 
Lamech.    B.C.  3800. 

Gen.  4.  iS  Mehujael  begat  M.:  andM.  begat  Lamech 
ME-THTT-SE'-LAH,  n^irtf?. 

Son  of  Enoch,  and  grandfather  of  Noah.     B.C.  3317- 
2348. 

Geu.   5.  21  Enoch  lived  sixty,  .years,  and  begat  M. 

5.  22  Enoch  walked  with  God  after  he  begat  M. 

5.25  M.  lived  an  hundred  and  eighty  and  seven 

5. 26  M.  lived  after  he  begat  Lamech  seven  hu. 
5.  27  all  the  days  of  M.  were  nine  hundred 

1  Ch.  1.    3  Kenoch,  M.,  Lamech 
ME  ZA'-HAB,  3?rl?  offspring  of  tJie  shining  one. 
Grandfather  of  Mehetabel,  wife   of  Hadar  the  eighth 
king  of  Edom.    B.C.  1500. 

Gen. 36.  39  thedaughterofMatred.thedaughterofM. 

1  Ch.  1.  50  thedaughterofMatred,thedaughterofM. 

MI-A'-MTN,  JpJ?  fortunate. 

1.  One  of  the  family  of  Parosh  who  had  taken  a  strange 

wife.    B.C.  450. 

Ezra  10.  25  of  the  sons  of  Parosh ;  Ramiah . .  and  M. 


2.  A  priest  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 
See  Alijamin. 
t    Neh.12.    5  M.,  Maadiah,  Bilgah 

MXB'-HAR,  -irnp  choice,  youth. 

A  son  of  Haggeri,  and  one  of  David's  valiant  men.   B.C. 

1048. 

1  Ch.11.  38  Joel  the  brother  of  Nathan,  M.  the  son  of 
MTB'-SAM,  Djqp  sweet  odour. 

1.  A  son  of  Ishmael  son  of  Hagar.     B.C.  1^40. 

Gen.  25.  13  the  sons  of  Ishmael. .  Adbeel,  and  M. 
1  Ch.  1. 25  Nebaioth ;  then  Kedar,  and  Adbeel,  and  M. 

2.  A  son  of  Simeon.     B.C.  1200.  -n 

1  Ch.  4.  25  Shallum  his  son,  M.  his  son,  Mishma  his 
MTR'-ZAR,  "iy3D  fortified. 
A  chief  of  Edom,  descendant  from  Esau.     B.C.  1470. 

Gen.  36.  42  Duke  Kenaz,  duke  Teman,  duke  M. 

1  Ch.  1.  53  Duke  Kenaz,  duke  Teman,  duke  M. 

ME'-CAH,  MI'-CHA,  MI'-CHAH,  rrp'p,  WTO,  «?''■?• 

1.  An  Ephraimite  who  hired  a  Levite  to  be  priest  to 
his  image.    B.C.  1406. 

Judg  1 7.  1  there  was  a  man.  .whose  name  (was) M. 
17.  4  made.,  agraven  image.,  in  the  house  of  M. 
17.    5  the  man  M.  had  an  house  of  gods,  and 
17.    8  he  came,  .to  the  house  of  M.,  as  he  journ. 
17.   9  M.  said  unto  him,  Whence  comest  thou  ? 
17.  io  M.  said  unto  him,  Dwell  with  me,  aud 
17.  12  And  M.  consecrated  the  Levite  ;  and  the 

17. 12  andtheyoungman.  .was  in  the  house  of  M. 

17.  13  Then  said  M.,  Now  know  I  that  the  Lord 

18.  2  when  they  came  to.  .the  house  of  M.,  they 
18.  3  When  they  (were)  by  the  house  of  M.,  they 
18.   4  Thus  and  thus  dealeth  M.  with  me,  and 

18. 13  And  they  passed,  .unto  the  house  of  M. 
iS.  15  and  came  to  the  house  of..  M.,  and  saluted 
18.  18  these  went  into  M.'s  house,  and  fetched 
18.  22  a  good  way  from  the  house  of  M.,  the  men 
1 8.  22  the  men . .  in  the  houses  near  to  M.  's  house 
18.  23  they  turned  their  faces,  and  said  unto  M. 
18.  26  when  M.  saw  that  they  (were)  too  strong 
1 8.  27  they  took  (the  things)  which  M.  had  made 
18.  31  theyset  them  up  M.'s  graven  image,  which 

2.  Head  of  a  family  of  Reuben.    B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  5.    5  M.  his  son,  Reaia  his  son,  Baal  his  son 

3.  The  son  of  Merib-baal  the  grandson  of  Saul.  B.C. 
1020. 

1  Ch.  S.  34  And  the  son  of  Jonathan ..  begat  M. 

S.  35  the  sons  of  M.  (were)  Pithon,  and  Melech 

9. 40  And  the  son  of  Jonathan . .  begat  M. 

9.  41  the  sons  of  M.  (were)  Pithon,  and  Melech 

4.  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Asaph,  whose  descendants 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem.    B.C.  480. 

1  Ch.  9.  15  Mattaniah  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Zicliri 

Neh.  11.  17  Mattaniah  the  son  of  M.,  the  son  of  Zabdi 

11.  22  the  son  of  Mattaniah,  the  son  of  M.  Of  the 

5.  A  Kohathite.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  20  Of  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  M.  the  first,  and  J. 

24.  24  of  Uzziel ;  M. :  of  the  sons  of  M. ;  Shamir 
24.  25  The  brother  of  M.  (was)  Isshiah :  of  the 

6.  Father  of  Abdon  whom  Josiah  sent  to  inquire  of  the 
Lord  when  the  Book  of  the  Law  was  found.    B.C.  642. 

2  Ch.34.  20  the  king  commanded. . Abdon  thesonofM. 

7.  A  prophet  surnamed  the  Morasthite  (from  Moresheth 
Gath),  he  was  nearly  contemporary  with  Hosea  and 
Amos.    B.C.  750-700. 

Jer.  26. 18  M.  the  Morasthite  prophesied  in  the  days 
Mic.    1.    1  came  to  M.  the  Morasthite  in  the  days  of 

MI-CA-I'AH,  w.yo  who  is  like  Jah  ? 

A  prophet,  the  son  of  Imlah,  who  foretold  the  fall  of 

Aliab  at  Ranioth  Gilead.    B.C.  897. 

1  Ki.  22.    8  (There  is)  yet  one  man,  M.  the  son  of  Im. 

22.  9  Then  the  king,  .said,  Hasten  (hither)  M. 
22. 13  the  messenger  that  was  gone  to  call  M. 
22.  14  And  M.  said,  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  what 
22.  15  the  king  said  unto  him,  M.,  shall  we  go 
22.  24  ButZedekiah. .  smote  M.  on  the  cheek,  and 
22.  25  AndM.  said, Behold, thou  shaltsee  in  that 
22.  26  Take  M.,  and  can-y  him  back  unto  Amon 
22. 28  And  M.  said,  If  thou  return  at  all  in  peace 

2  Ch.18.    7  (There  is)  yet  one  man.  .the  same  (is)  M. 

18.  8  the  king.. said,  Fetch  quickly  M.  the  son 
18.  12  the  messenger  that  went  to  call  M.  spake 

18. 13  And  M.  said,  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  even 

18. 14  the  king  said  unto  him,  M.,  shall  we  go  to 
18  23  Then  Zedekiah..  smote  M.  upon  the  cheek 
18.  24  And  M.  said,  Behold,  thou  shalt  see  on 
18  25  Take  ye  M.,  and  carry  him  back  to  Amon 
iS.  27  And  M.  said,  H  thou  certainly  return  in 

MI'-CHA,  XT?. 

1.  Son  of  Mephibosheth,  son  of  Jonathan.     B.C.  1020. 

2  Sa.   9.  12  a  young  son,  whose  name  (was)  M.  And 

2.  A  Levite  who  sealed  the  covenant  with  Nehemiah. 
B.C.  480. 

Neh.  10.  11  M.,  Rehob,  Hashabiah 

MI-CHA'-EL,  hay?  lVhxa^*-  w^°  •*  k'&e  @°d  -? 

1.  An  Asherite,  father  of  Sethur  whom  Moses  sent  to 
spy  the  land.    B.C.  1520. 

Numi3- 13  the  tribe  of  Asher,  Sethur  the  son  of  M. 

2.  A  Gadite  who  settled  in  Bashan.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5. 13  And  their  brethren,  .(were)  M.,  andMes, 

3.  A  Gadite.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5. 14  Gilead,  theson  of  MM  the  son  of  Jeshishai 


MICHAIAH 


658 


MIDDLE 


4.  A  Gershonite  whose  great-grandson  Asaph  was  a  chief 
singer  in  the  temple.    B.C.  noo. 

i  Ch.  6.  40  M.,  the  son  of  Baaseiah,  the  son  of  Male. 

5.  A  chief  man  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.    7.    3  the  son3  of  Izrahiah;  M.,  and  Obadiah 

6.  A  Benjamite,  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.  8.  16  And  M.,  and  Ispah,  and  Joha,  the  sous  of 

7.  A  Manassite,  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.  12.  20  ofSIanasseh,  Adnah..andSI.,  and  Jozabad 

8.  The  fattier  of  Omri  prince  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch. 27.  18  of  David  :  of  Issachar;  Omri  the  son  of  M. 

9.  A  son  of  Jehoshaphat.     B.C.  890. 

2  Ch.21.    2  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat.  .SI.,  and  Shep. 

10.  The  father  of  Zebadiah  who  returned  with  Ezra.  B.C. 
470. 

Ezra    3.    S  Zebadiah  the  son  of  SI.,  and  with  him  four. 

11.  The  messenger  of  God  who  came  to  Daniel,  and  is 
called  by  him  prince  of  the  people  of  Israel.    B.C.  530. 

Dan.  10.  13  but,  lo,  M.,  one  of  the  chief  princes,  came 
10.  21  and  (there  is)  none,  .but  M.  your  prince 
12.    1  at  that  time  shall  SI.  stand  up,  the  great 
Jude         9  Yet  M.  the  archangel,  when  contending 
Rev.  12.    7  Sl.andhisangelsfoughtagainstthedragon 

mi-cha'-iah,  njav?,  ^^p,  ^T??,  ^)?V  who  is  like  JJ 

1.  Father  of  Achbor,  a  chief  offieerof  king  Josiah.  B.C. 
620. 

2  Ki.  22. 12  the  king  commanded. .Achbor  the  son  of  M. 

2.  Daughter  of  Uriel  of  Gibeah,  wife  of  Kehoboam,  and 
another  of  Abijah.  B.C.  960.  In  1  Ki.  15.  2  she  i3 
called  Slaaehah,  daughter  of  Abishalom,  and  in  2  Ch. 
11.  20  Slaaehah,  daughter  of  Absalom. 

2  Ch.13.    2  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  SI.  the  dan. 

3.  A  prince  of  Judah  ordered  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the 
people.    B.C.  913. 

2  Ch.17.    7  he  sent  to  his  princes,  .to  M.,  to  teach 

4.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Asaph,  one  of  whose  descend- 
ants took  part  in  the  purification  of  the  wall.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  35  Slattaniah,  the  son  of  SI.,  the  son  of  Zac. 

12.  41  And  the  priests;  Eliakim.  .M.,  Elioenai 

5.  The  son  of  Gemariah,  one  of  the  princes  of  Judah  in 
the  days  of  Jehoiakim.    B.C.  606. 

Jer.  36.  ri  When  M.,  the  son  of  Gemariah,  the  son 
36. 13  Then  M.  declared  unto  them  all  the  words 
MI'-CHAL,  St?  toho  is  like  God  ? 
The  younger  daughter  of  king  Saul  who  became  David's 
wife,  saved  him  in  his  distress,  and  mocked  him  in  his 
triumph.    B.C.  j.050. 

1  Sa.14.  49  names  of  his  two  daughters.  .Merab.  .M. 

18.  20  And  M.,  Saul's  daughter,  loved  David:  and 
18.  27  And  Saul  gave  him  SI.  his  daughter  to  w. 

18.  28  Saulsaw..  (that)  SI. .Saul's  daughter,  loved 
19. 11  St  ,  David's  wife,  told  him,  saying,  If  thorn 

19.  12  So  M.  let  David  down  through  a  window 
19.  13  And  M.  took  an  image,  and  laid  (it)  in  the 
19.  17  And  Saul  said  unto  SI.,  Why  hast  thou 
19. 17  And  SI.  answered  S.,  He  said  unto  me,  Let 
25."  44  But  Saul  had  given  SI.  his  daughter,  Da. 

2  Sa.  3.  13  except  thou  first  bring  SI.,  Saul's  daughter 

3.  14  Deliver  (me)  my  wife  II.,  which  I  espous. 
6. 16  SI.,  Saul  s  daughter,  looked  through  a  w. 
6.  20  And  Iff.  the  daughter  of  Saul  came  out  to 
6.  21  David  said  unto  SI.,  (It  was)  before  the  L. 
6.  23  Therefore  M.  the  daughter  of  Saul  had  no 
21.    8  the  five  sons  of  M.  the  daughter  of  Saul 
1  Ch.15.  29  M.  the  daughter  of  Saul,  looking  out  at  a 
KICH'-MAS,  dd??  place  of  CJiemosh. 
A  place  to  winch  some  belonged  who  returned  with 
Zerubbabel :  the  same  as  Michumsh, 

Ezra   2.  27  The  men  of  M.,  an  hundred  twenty  and 
Xeh.   7.  31  The  men  of  M.,  an  hundred  and  twenty 
MICH'-MASH,  tfD^p,  stop; 

A  city  in  Benjamin  ;  sruk'hmas,  seven  miles  N.  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  E.  of  Btith-aven. 

1  Sa.  13.    2  two  thousand  were  with  Saul  in  SI,  and  in 

13.  5  Aud  the  Philistines.,  pitched  in  SI., east. 
13. 11  the  Philistines  gathered,  .together  at  SI. 

13.  16  but  the  Philistines  encamped  in  SI. 
13.23  the  Philistines  went.. to  thepassageof  SI. 

14.  5  the  fore  front. .  (was),  .over  against  M.,  and 
14.  31  they  smote  the  Philistines.  .fromSI.  to  A. 

Neh.  ir.  31  Benjamin  from  Geba  (dwelt)  at  SI.,  and 
Isa.   10.  28  He  is  come  to  Aiatli.  .at  SI.  he  hath  laid 

MICH-ME'-THAH,  npp50  VwrHwg  place. 
A  city  between  Ephraiin  and  Slanasseh. 

Josh  16.    6  And  the  border  went  out.  .to  SI.  on  the 
17.    7  And  the  coast,  .was  from  AshertoSL,  that 
MICH'-RI,  n^a  Jah  'possesses. 

A  Benjamite,  ancestor  of  the  head  of  a  family  in  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  480. 

1  Ch.  9.    8  Uzzij  the  son  of  SI.,  and  sreshullam  the 
MICH'-TAM,  en??. 

The  name  of  a  particular  kind  of  Psalm  ;  perhaps 
"golden." 

Psa.  16.  title.  Si.  of  David 

56.  ,,  SI.  of  David,  when  the  Philistines  took 
57-  „  SI.  of  David,  when  he  fled  from  Saul  in 

58.  „  To  the  chief  Musician.. SI.  of  David 

59.  „  SI.  of  David,  when  Saul  sent,  and  they 

60.  „  To  the  chief  Musician.  .SI.  of  David,  to 


MIDDAY  — 

\.Du}i,hh:,  brightness,  onny  tsohoraim, 

1  Ei.  18.  29  when  mid  day  was  past,  and  they  proph. 

2.  Mid  day,  Dvg  rrxnp  machatsith  hayyom. 

Neh.   8     3  from  the  morning  until  mid  day,  before 

3.  Middle  of  the  day,  Tjfx4pas  (x4ai)s  hemeras  meses. 

Acts  26.  13  At  mid  day  0  king,  I  saw  in  the  way  a  1. 
mTD'-DIN,  p?  extension. 
A  city  in  the  desert,  S.  of  Judah, 

Josh  15.  61  Iu  the  wilderness,  Beth-arabah,  M.,  and 
MIDDLE,  MIDST  — 
I. Half  middle,  midst,  *yrr,  'jrn  chatsi,  chetsi. 

Exod27.    5  that  the  net  may  be  even  to  the  midst  of 
38.   4  a  brasen  grate,  .beneath  unto  the  midst 

Josh.  10. 13  the  sun  stood  still  in  the  midst  of  heaven 

2  Sa.  10.  4  and  cut-  off  their  garments  in  the  middle 
r  rli.  19.  4  cut  off  their  garments  in  the  midst  hard 
Psa.  102.  24  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  days 
Jer.  17.  11  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst  of  his  days 
Dan.  9.  27  in  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall  cause 
Zech  14.   4  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  toward 

2.  Back,  body,  midst,  ia  gai\ 

Dan.  3.  6,  n,  15  be  cast  into  the  midst  of  a  burning 
3.  21,  23  into  the  midst  of  the  burning  fiery  fur. 
3.  24  Did  not  we  cast,  .into  the  midst  of  the  fire? 
3.  25  walking  in  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  they 

3.  26  Shadrach . .  came  forth  out  of  the  midst  of 

4.  10  behold  a  tree  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 
7.  15  was  grieved  in  my  spirit  in  the  midst  of 

Z.Bosom,  centre,  pTi  cheq, 

1  Ki.  22.  35  blood  ran  out  of  the  wound  into  the  midst 
A:. Middle,  navel,  high  part,  "l*3B  tabbur. 

Judg.  9.  37  See  there  come  people  down  by  the  midd. 

Eze.  38. 12  people,  .thatdwelliuthemidstof  the  land 
5. Palm,  *|3  kaph. 

1  Sa.  25.  29  them  shall  he  sling  out . .  of  the  middle  of 

6.  Heart,  n1?  &6. 

Deut  4.  11  burned  with  flreuntothemidstof  heaven 

2  Sa.  18.  14  while  (he)was  yet  alive  in  the  midst  of  the 
Psa.  46.  2  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of 
Prov  23.  34  as  lie  that  lieth  down  in  the  midst  of  the 

30.  19  the  way  of  a  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 
Jer.  51.  1  against  them  that  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
Eze.  27.   4  Thy  borders  are  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 

27.  25  made  very  glorious  in  the  midst  of  the  s. 

27.  26  hath  broken  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 

27.  27  shall  fall  into  the  midst  of  the  seas  in  the 

28.  2  I  (am)  a  god,  I  sit.  .in  the  midst  of  the  s. 

28.  8  (them  that  are)  slain  in  the  midst  of  the  s. 

7.  Heart,  2^h  lebab. 

Jon.  2.  3  hadst  cast  me  into . .  the  midst  of  the  seas 
S.hitvard  pari,  yjg  qereb. 

Gen.  48. 16  into  a  multitude  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 

Exod.  3.  20  wonders  which  I  will  do  in  the  midst  the. 

8. 22  I  (am)*the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 

23.  25  take  sickness  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 
33.    3  for  I  will  not  go  up  in  the  midst  of  thee 

33.  5  I  will  come  up  into  the  midst  of  thee  in 

34.  12  lest  it  be  for  a  snare  in  the  midst  of  thee 
Deut.  4.  34  (and)  take  him  a  nation  from  the  midst  of 

11,  6  And  what  he  did.  .in  the  midst  of  all  Isr. 
13-    5  put  the  evil  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 

17.  20  he,  and  his  children,  in  the  midst  of  Isr. 

18.  15  a  Prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy 
23. 14  LoRDthyGodwalkethinthe  midst  of  thy 

Josh.  7.  13  an  accursed  thiug  in  the  midst  of  thee,  0 
JudgiS.  20  took.. and  went  in  the  midst  of  the  peop.J 
1  Sa.  16  13  anointed  him  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren 
1  Ki  20.  39  Thy  servant  went  out  into  the  midst  of  the 
Psa.  46.    5  God  (is)  in  the  midst  other;  she  shall  not 

48.   9  We  have  thought,  .in  the  midst  of  thy  te. 

55.  10  miseluef  also  and  sorrow  (are)  in  the  mi. 

55. 11  Wickedness  (is)  in  the  midst  thereof;  de. 
74.   4  Thine  enemies  roar  in  the  midst  of  thy  c. 

74. 12  working  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  ea. 
78. 28  he  let  (it)  fall  in  the  midst  of  their  camp 

no.   2  rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies 
138.    7  Though  I  walk  in  the  midst  of  trouble 

Prov  14. 33  (that  which  is)  in  the  midst  of  fools  is  m. 

Isa.     4.   4  the  blood  of  Jerusalem  from  the  midst 

5.  8  be  placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 

5.  25  their  carcases,  .torn  in  the  midst  of  the 

6. 12  a  great  forsaking  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

10.  23  a  consumption. .in  the  midst  of  all  the  la. 

12.  6  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee 

19.  1  the  heart  of  Egypt  shall  melt  in  the  midst 
19.    3  spirit  of  Egypt  shall  fail  in  the  midst 

19.  14  hath  mingled  a  perverse  spirit  in  the  mi. 
19.  24  (even)  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

24.  13  When  thus  it  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the 

25.  n  shall  spread  forth  his  hands  in  the  midst 

29.  23  the  work  of  mine  hands,  in  the  midst  of 
Jer.     6.    1  to  flee  out  of  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and 

6.  6  she  (is)  wholly  oppression  in  the  midst  of 
14.   9  yet  thou,  0  Loud,  (art)  in  the  midst  of  us 

29.  8  dinners,  that  (be)  in  the  midst  of  you,  de. 

30.  21  their  governor  shall  proceed  from  them. 
46.  21  her  hired  men  (are)  in  the  midst  of  her 

Lam.  1.  15  all  my  mighty  (men)  in  the  midst  of  me 
3.  45  Thou  hast  made  us.  .refuse  in  the  midst 

4. 13  shed  the  blood  of  the  just  hi  the  midst  of 
Eze.  22.  27  Her  princes  in  the  midst  thereof  (arc)  like 
Hos.   5.    4  spirit  of  whoredoms  (is)  in  the  midst  of 

11.  9  the  Holy  One  in  the  midst  of  thee :  and  I 
Joel    2.  27  ye  shall  know  that  I(am)in  the  midst  of  I. 


Amos  2.  3  will  cut  off  the  judge  from  the  midst  the. 
3.  9  behold  the  great  tumults  in  the  midst  the. 
7.  8  I  will  set  a  plumb  line  in  the  midst  of  my 
7. 10  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the  midst 

Slic.    5.    7,  8  shall  be.  .in  the. midst  of  many  people 

5. 10  I  will  cut  off  thy  horses  out  of  the  midst 

5.  13  thy  standing  images  out  of  the  midst  of 
5. 14  I  will  pluck  up  thy  groves  out  of  the  midst 

6.  14  thy  casting  down  (shall  be)  in  the  midst 
Nab..  3.  13  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  thee  (are)  wo. 
Hab.  2. 19  and.,  no  breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  it 

3.   2  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years 
3.   2  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known 
Zeph.  3.    5  The  just  Lord  (is)  in  the  midst  thereof ;  he- 

3. 11  I  will  take  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee 
3.  12  I  will  also  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an 
3.  15  the  LORD,  (is)  in  the  midst  of  thee  :  thou 
3.  17  The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  (is) 

Zech. 14.    1  spoil  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of  thee 

9. Middle,  midst,  =]Y|-i  tavek. 

Gen.    1.    6  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of 

2.  9  the  tree  of  life  also  in  the  midst  of  thega. 

3.  3  the  fruit  of  the  tree  which  (is)  in  the  midst 
15.  10  divided  them  in  the  midst,  and  laid  each 
19.  29  sent  Lot  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow 

Exod.  3.    2  in  aflame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush 

3.  4  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of 
11.    4  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  them. 
14.  16  dry  (ground)  through  the  midst  of  the  sea 
14.  22  went  into  the  midst  of  the  sea  upon  the 
14.  23  went  in  after  them  to  the  midst  of  the  sea 
14.  27  overthrew  the  Egyptians  in  the  midst  of 

14.  29  walked  upon  dry  (laud)  in  the  midst  of  the 

15.  19  went  on  dry  (land)  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

24.  16  he  called  unto  Sloses  out  of  the  midst  of 
24. 18  Sloses  went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud 
26.  28  the  middle  bar  in  the  midst  of  the  boards 
28.  32  an  hole  in  the  top  of  it,  in  the  midst  ther. 
39.  23  And.  .an  hole  in  the  midst  of  the  robe,  as 

Lev.  16.  16  among  them  in  the  midst  of  their  unclean. 

Num.  2. 17  with  the  camp  of  the  Levitesin  the  midst 

5.    3  then-  camps,  in  the  midst  whereof  I  dwell 

16.  47  and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation 
19.  6  into  the  midst  of  the  burning  of  the  heifer 
33.  8  passed  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  into 
35.    5  the  city  (shall  be)  in  the^midst :  this  shall 

Deut.  4. 12  Lord  spake  unto  you  out  of  the  midst  of 

4.  15  spake  unto  you  in  Horebout  of  the  midst 
4.  33  the  voice  of  Godspeakingoutof  themidst 

4.  36  thou  heardest  his  words  out  of  the  midst 

5.  4  in  the  mount,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 
5.  22  iu  the  mount,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 
5.  23  when  ye  heard  the  voice  out  of  the  midst 
5.  24  we  have  heard  his  voice  out  of  the  midst 
5.  26  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 
9. 10  in  the  mount,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

10.  4  in  the  mount,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

11.  3  which  he  did  in  the  midst  of  Egypt  unto 
13. 16  gather  all  the  spoil  of  it  into  the  midst  of 

19.  2  separate  three  cities  for  thee  in  the  midst 
32.  51  ye  sanctified  me  not  in  the  midst  of  the  c. 

Josh.  3.  17  stood  firm  on  dry  ground  in  the  midst  of 
4.  3  Take  you  hence  out  of  the  midst  of  Jordan 
4.  5  into  the  midst  of  Jordan,  and  take  you  up 
4.  8  took  up  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of 
4.  9  Joshua  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  midst 
4. 10  stood  in  the  midst  of  Jordan,  until  every 

4.  18  were  come  up  out  of  the  midst  of  Jordan 

7.  21  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  tent 

7.  23  they  took  them  out  of  the  midst  of  the  tent 

8.  13  Joshua  went  that  night  into  the  midst  of 

5.  22  so  they  were  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  some 

12.  2  from  the  middle  of  the  river,  and  from  h. 

13.  9,  16  the  city  that  (is)  in  the  midst  of  the  r. 
Judg  15.    4  put  a  fire  brand  in  the  midst  between  two 

16.  29  Samsou  took  hold  of  the  two  middle  pill. 
20. 42  them,  .they  destroyed  in  the  midst  of  them 

1  Sa.  11.  11  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  host  hi  the 

18.  10  prophesied  in  the  midst  of  the  house :  and 

25.  29  them  shall  he  sling  out.  .of  the  middle  of 

2  Sa.   1.  25  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of 

4.  6  they  came  thither  into  the  midst  of  the 
6. 17  in  the  midst  of  the  tabernacle  that  David 

20.  12  Amasa  wallowed  in  blood  in  the  midst  of 
23.  12  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  ground,  and 

23.  20  slew  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  time 

24.  5  side  of  the  city  that  [lieth]  in  the  midst 

1  Ki.   3.   8  thy  servant  (is)  in  tlie  midst  of  thy  people 

6.  27  touched  one  another  in  the  midst  of  the 

8.  51  out  of  Egypt,  from  the  midst  of  the  furn. 
8. 64  did  the  king  hallow  the  middle  of  the  court 

2  Ki.   6.  20  and  behold .  in  the  midst  of  Samaria 

1  Ch.  11.  14  they  set  themselves  in  the  midst  of  (that) 

16.    1  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  teut  that  David 

2  Ch.  6. 13  and  had  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  court 

7.  7  Solomon  hallowed  the  middle  of  the  court 
20.  14  the  Lord  in  the  midstof  the  congregation 
32.    4  the  brook  that  ran  through  the  midst  of 

Neh.   4.  11  till  we  come  in  the  midst  among  them 

9.  11  so  that  they  went  through  the  midst  of 
Esth.  4.  1  went  out  into  the  midst  of  the  city,  and 
Psa.  22. 14  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels 

22.  22  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  will  I  p. 
57.    6  into  the  midst  whereof  they  are  fallen 
116.  19  in  the  midst  of  thee,  O  Jerusalem.  Fratee 

135.  9  sent  tokens  aud  wonders  into  the  midst 

136.  14  made  Israel  to  pass  through  the  midst  of 

137.  2  our  harps  upon  the  willows  in  the  midst 
Prov.  4.  21  keep  them  in  the  midst  of  thine  heart 

5.  14  I  was  almost  in  all  evil  in  the  nrdst  of  the 
S.  20  I  lead,  .in  the  midst  of  the  paths  of  judg. 


MIDDLE 


659 


MIGDOL 


Song  3, 
Isa.     5 

6, 

7- 
16. 
19, 
24. 
41. 
52- 
58. 
66. 
Jer.     9. 


37- 
39- 
41. 
41. 
50. 
50. 
5i- 
5r- 
51- 
5i- 
52- 


24. 

26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
30. 
31- 
31- 
3i- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32. 
32- 
36- 
37- 
37- 
37- 
39- 
43- 
43- 
46. 


48. 


A1UOS3. 
6. 


10  the  midst  thereof  being  paved  (with)  love 

2  built  a  tower  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  also 

5  I  dwell  in  the  niidstof  a  people  of  unclean 

6  set  a  king  in  the  midst  of  it.. the  son  of  T. 

3  as  the  night  in  the  midst  of  the  noon  day 
19  an  altar  to  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  the  1. 
18  he  that  cometh  up  out  of  the  midst  of  the 
18  and  fountains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys 
ir  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her ;  be  ye  clean 

9  If  thou  take  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 

17  in  the  gardens  behind  one  (tree)  in  the  ra. 

6  Thine  habitation  (is)  in  the  midst  of  dec. 
16  then  shall  they  be  built  in  the  midst  of  my 

4  I  will  assemble  them  into  the  midst  of 
12  to  separate  himself  thence  in  the  midst  of 

3  princes,  .came  in,  and  sat  in  the  middle  g. 

7  when  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  city 

7  into  the  midst  of  the  pit,  he,  and  the  men 

8  Remove  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  and 
37  mingled  people  that  (are)  in  the  midst  of 

6  Flee  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  and  de. 
45  My  people,  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her 
47  all  her  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  her 
63  and  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  Euplirates 
25  (that  were)  found  in  the  midst  of  the  city 

4  out  of  the  midst  thereuf.  .out  olthe  midst 

5  Also  out  of  the  midst  thereof  (came)  the 
16  as  it  were  a  wheel  in  the  middle  of  a  wh. 

2  burn  with  fire  a  third  part  in  the  midst  of 

4  cast  them  into  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and 

5  I  have  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  nations 

8  execute  judgments  in  the  midst  of  thee  in 

10  fathers  shall  eat  the  sons  ia  the  midst  of 

1 2  shall  they  be  consumed  in  the  midst  of  thee 

7  And  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  you 
4  thine  abominations  shall  be  in  the  midst 

9  thine  abominations  (that) are  in  the  midst 

11  in  the  midst  of  them  stood  Jaazaniah  the 
4  Lord  said.  .Go  through  the  midst  of  the 
4  through  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  set 

4  abominations  that  be  done  in  the  midst 

10  as  if  a  wheel  had  been  in  the  midst  of  a 

7  whom  ye  have  laid  in  the  midst  of  it,  they 

7  I  will  bring  you  forth  out  of  the  midst  of 
9  I  will  bring  you  out  of  the  midst  thereof 

11  neither  shall  ye  be  the  flesh  in  the  midst 
23  glory,  .went  up  from  the  midst  of  the  city 

2  thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  a  rebellious 

14  ye  shall  be  consumed  in  the  midst  thereof 

5  I  will  cut  him  off  from  the  midst  of  my  p. 

9  will  destroy  him  from  the  midst  of  my  p. 

4  fire  devoureth .  .the  midst  of  it  is  burnt 
53  the  captivity  of  thy  captives  in  the  midst 
16  with  him  in  the  midst  of  Babylon  he  shall 

8  them  in  the  midst  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
32  thy  blood  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

3  The  city  sheddeth  blood  in  the  midst  of  it 
7  in  the  midst  of  thee  have  they  dealt  by 

9  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  commit  lewdness 

13  thy  blood  which  hath  been  in  the  midst  of 

18  iron,  and  lead,  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace 

19  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  Jeru. 

20  lead,  and  tin,  into  the  midst  of  the  furnace 

21  ye  shall  be  melted  in  the  midst  thereof 

22  As  silver  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  the  fu. 
22  so  shall  y,e  be  melted  in  the  midst  thereof 
25  a  conspiracy  of  her  prophets  in  the  midst 
25  have  made  her  many  widows  in  the  midst 
39  thus  have  they  done  in  the  midst  of  mine 

7  For  her  blood  is  in  the  midst  of  her ;  she 

5  the  spreading  of  nets  in  the  midst  of  the 

12  shall  lay.  .thy  dust  in  the  midst  of  the  w. 

15  when  the  slaughter  is  made  in  the  midst 

27  company  which  (is)  in  the  midst  of  thee 
32  like  the  destroyed  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 
34  thy  company  in  the  midst  of  thee,  shall 

14  thou  hast  walked  up  and  down  in  the  m. 

16  they  have  filled  the  midst  of  thee  with 

16  destroy,  .from  the  midst  of  the  stones  of 
18  will  I  bring  forth  a  fire  from  the  midst  of 

22  I  will  be  glorified  in  the  midst  of  thee 

23  the  wounded  shall  be, judged  in  the  midst 

3  the  great  dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst 

4  I  will  bring  thee  up  out  of  the  midst  of  thy 
12  make,  .desolate  in  the  midst  of  the  coun. 
21  opening  of  the  mouth  in  the  midst  of  them 

7  they  shall  be  desolate  in  the  midst  of  the 
7  her  cities  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  cit. 

14  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  men,  with 

17  dwelt  under  his  shadow  in  the  midst  of  the 

18  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircu. 

20  They  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  (them  that) 

21  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  midst  ofhell 
25  They  have  set  her  a  bed  in  the  midst  of  the 

25  he  is  put  in  the  midst  of  (them  that  be) 

28  thou . .  be  broken  in  the  midst  of  the  unc. 
32  he  shall  be  laid  in  the  midst  of  the  nncir. 
23  which  ye  have  profaned  in  the  midst  of 

1  set  me  down  in  the  midst  of  the  valley  w. 

26  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them 
28  when  my  sanctuary  shall  be  in  the  midst 

7  will  I  make  my  holy  name  known  in  the  m. 

7  where  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  oh. 
9  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them  forever 

10  the  prince  in  the  midst  of  them,  when  they 

8  the  sanctuary  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  it 

10  the  sanctuary,  .shall  be  in  the  midst  the. 

15  and  the  city  shall  be  in  the  midst  thereof 

21  and  the  sanctuary,  .in  the  midst  thereof 

22  in  the  midst  (of  that)  winch  is  the  prince's 

9  behold  the  great  tumults  in  the  midst  th. 
4  the  calves  out  of  the  midst  of  the  stall 


Mie. 


Zeph. 
Zeuh. 


2.  12  as  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their  fold 

7.  14  dwell  solitarily  (in)  the  wood,  in  the  midst 
14  flocks  shall  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  her 

2.  5  and  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her 
2.  10,  11  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee 
5.    4  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house 

7  this  (is)  a  woman  that  sitteth  in  the  midst 

8  And  he  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah 
u.   3  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem 

8.  8  they  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem 
10.  Middle,  ]\y$  tikon. 

Exods6.  28  the  middle  bar  in . .  the  boards  shall  reach 
36.  33  he  made  the  middle  bar  to  shoot  through 


5- 
5- 


Judg 

iKX 


19  came,  .in  the  beginning  of  the  middle  w_ 
6  the  middle  (was)  six  cubits  broad,  and  the 

0.  8  The  door  for  the  middle  chamber  (was)  in 
6.    8  went  up  with  winding  stairs  into  the  m. 

6.  8  went  up.. out  of  the  middle  into  the  third 
2  Ki.  20.  4  afore  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into  the  middle 
Eze.  41.   7  lowest  (chamber)  to  the  highest  by  the  m. 

11.  Middle,  midst,  /teVoy  mesas.-™-. 

Matt  10.  16  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
14.  24  [the  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea] 
18.    2  And  Jesus,  .set  him  in  the  midst  of  them 

18.  20  two  or  three,  .there  am  I  in  the  midst  of 
Mark  6.  47  the  ship  was  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and 

7.  31  through  the  midst  of  the  coasts  of  Decap. 
9. 36  he  took  a  child,  and  set  him  in  the  midst 

14.  60  the  high  priest  stood  up  in  the  midst,  and 
Luke  2  46  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  both 

4.  30  he  passing  through  the  midst  of  them  w. 

4.  35  when  the  devil  had  thrown  him  in  the  m. 

5. 19  with  (his)  couch  into  the  midst  before  J. 

6.   8  Rise  up,  and  stand  forth  in  the  midst 
17. 11  he  passed  through  the  midst  of  Samaria 

21.  21  let  them  which  are  in  the  midst  of  it  de. 

22.  55  when  they  had  kindled  a  fire  in  the  midst 
23. 45  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  m. 

24.  36  Jesus  himself  stood  in  the  midst  of  them 
John  8.    3  [when  they  had  set  her  in  the  midst] 

8.  9  [and  the  woman  standing  in  the  midst] 
8.  sg  going  through  the  midst  of  them,  and  so 

19.  18  on  either  side  one,  and  Jesus  in  the  midst 

20.  19  came  Jesus  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and 
20.  26  came  Jesus,  .and  stood  in  the  midst,  and 

Acts    1.  15  in  those  days  Peter  stood  up  in  the  midst 

1.  18  he  burst  asunder  in  the  midst,  and  all  his 

2.  22  which  God  did  by  him  in  the  midst  of  you 
4.    7  when  they  had  set  them  in  the  midst,  they 

17.  22  Then  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  Mars'  hill 
27.  21  Paul  stood  forth  in  the  midst  of  them,  and 

Phil.  2.  15  in  the  [midst]  of  a  crooked  and  perverse 
Heb.  2.  12  in  the  midst  of  the  church  will  I  singpr. 
Rev.    1. 13  in[the  midst]of  the  seven  candlesticks(one) 

2.    1  who  walketh  hi  the  midst  of  the  seveu  g. 

2.    7  which  is  in  [the  midst]  of  the  paradise  of 

4.  6  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  round  about 

5.  6  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four 

5.  6  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb 

6.  6 1  heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four  b. 
7. 17  the  Lamb  which  is  [in  the  midst]  of  the 

22.    2  In  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it,  and  on 
MIDDLE  wall  between  — 
Middle  wall,  fisa6roixov  mesotoichon. 

Eph.    2.  14  hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall. ..bet. 
MIDDLEMOST  — 
Middle,  midst,  pTn  tikon. 

Eze.  42.    5  and  than  the  middlemost  of  the  building 
42.    6  more  than  the  lowest  and  the  middlemost 
HLD'-IAN,  JHO  contention. 

1.  A  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah.    B.C.  1840. 

G-en.  25.    2  And  she  bare  him  Zimran.  .and  M.,  and 

25.  4  And  the  sons  of  M.,  Ephah,  and  Epher 

1  Ch.  1.  32  she  bare  Zimran.  .and  M.,  and  Ishbak,  and 

1.  33  the  sons  of  M.;  Ephah,  and  Epher,  and  H. 

2.  His  descendants  and  their  land  beyond  the  Jordan, 
in  Edom,  the  Sinai  peninsula,  and  Arabia  Petraea. 

Gen.  36.  35  Hadad  the  son  ofBedad,  who  smote  M.  in 
Exod.  2.  15  Moses  fled,  .and  dwelt  in  the  land  of  M. 

2.  16  Now  the  priest  ofM.hadseven daughters 

3.  1  Jethro  his  father  in  law,  the  priest  of  M. 

4.  19  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses  in  M.,  Go,  ret. 

18.  1  Jethro,  the  priest  of  M.,  Moses' father  in  1. 
Nuni22.   4  Moab  said  unto  theelders  of  M.,  Nowsh. 

22.  7  theeldersof  M.  departed  with  therewards 
25. 15  he  (was)  head .  .of  a  chief  house  in  M. 
25.  18  the  daughter  of  a  prince  of  M. ,  their  sister 
31.  3 Mosesspake.. saying.. avenge theLoRDofM. 
31.  8  they  slewthe kings  of  M.,  besides  the  rest 
31.  8  Zur,  and  Hur,  and  Reba,  five  kings  of  M. 
31.  9  took  (all)  the  women  of  M.  captives,  and 
Josh  13.  21  Moses  smote  with  the  princes  of  M.,  Evi 
Judg.  6.    1  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  M.  seven 

6.  2  the  hand  of  M.  prevailed  against  Israel 

7.  8  the  host  of  M.  was  beneath,  him  in  the  v. 

7. 13  a  cake,  .tumbled  into  the  host  of  M.,  and 

7. 14  into  Ids  hand  hath  God  delivered  M.,  and 

7. 15  delivered  into  your  hand  the  host  of  M. 

7.  25  And  they,  .pursued  M.,  and  brought  the 

8.  3  princes  of  M.,  Oreb  and  Zeeb:  and  what 
8.   5  and  I  am  pursuing  after,  .kings  of  M. 

8.  12  took  the  two  kings  of  M.,  Zebah  and  Zal. 
8.  22  thou  hastdeliveredusfromthehandofM. 
8.  26  raiment  that  (was)  on  the  kings  of  M.,  and 
8.  28  Thus  was  M.  subdued  before  the  children 
g.  17  and  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  M. 
1  Ki.  11.  18  they  arose  out  of  M.,  and  came  to  Paran 
1  Ch.  t.  46  which  smote  M.  in  the  field  of  Moab,  reig. 


Isa. 


Judg. 


3*- 

3*« 

.  6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 


Psa. 


9.    4  hast  1  roken  the  yoke,  .asin  the  day  of  M. 
10.  26  according  to  the  slaughter  of  M.  at'the  r 
60.    6  the  dromedaries  of  M.  and  Ephah ;  all  the 
Bab.  3.    7  the  curtains  of  the  land  of  M.  did  tremble 
HLD-IA1MTES,  □•r-p,  pD: 

They  are    distinguished  "(but    not   always)  from  the 
Ishraaelites,  as  in  Judg.  6.  33  and  7.  12. 

Gen.  37.  28  Then  there  passed  by  M.,  merchant  men 

37.  36  And  the  M.  sold  him  into  Egypt  unto  Po. 
JTumio.  29  Hobab,  the  son  of  Raguel  the  M.,  Moses/ 

25.  17  Vex  the  M.,  and  smite  them 
31.    2  Avenge  the  children  of  Israel  of  the  M. 
3  let  them  go  against  the  M.,  and  avenge 
7  they  warred  against  the  M.,  as  the  Lord- 

2  because  of  the  M.  the  children  of  Israel 

3  the  M.  came  up,  and  the  Amalekites 

6  Israelwas..impoverished  because  of  theM. 

7  Israel  cried  unto  the  L.  because  of  the  M. 

11  threshed  wheat,  .to  hide  (it)  from  the  JdL 

13  and  delivered  us  into  the  hands  of  the  M. 

14  shalt  save  Israel  from  the  hand  of  the  M. 
16  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  M.  as  one  man 

6.  33  Then  all  the  M.  and  the  Amalekites  and 

7.  1  the  host  of  the  M.  were  on  the  north  side 
2  to  give  the  M.  into  their  hands,  lest  Israel 
7  and  deliver  the  M.  into  thine  hand  :  and. 

12  the  M.  and  the  Amalekites  and  all  the 

23  the  men  of  Israel,  .pursued  after  the  M_ 

24  Come  down  against  the  M. ,  and  take  before 

25  they  took  two  princes  of  the  M.,  Oreb  ami 
i  when  thou  wentest  to  fight  with  the  M. : 
9  Do  unto  them  as  (unto)  the  M.;  as  (to)  S. 

MTD-IA2MT-I6H,  rvr*ip /e?«..  of*iyp. 
Belonging  to  Midian. 

Kum25.    6  brought  unto  his  brethren  a  M.  woman  hi 
25.  14  that  was  slain  with  the  M.  woman,  (was); 
25.  15  the  name  of  the  M.  woman  that  was  slain 
MID  NIGHT,  (at)  — 
l.Mid  night,  rhfi  nisq  chatsoth  laylah. 

Exodn.    4  About  mid  nightwill  I  go  out  into  them- 

Job  34.  20  the  people  shall  be  troubled  at  mid  night 

Psa  119.  62  At  mid  night  I  will  rise  to  give  thanks  unto 
l.Mid  night,  rt^D  'art  or  'xn  chetsi  or  chatsi  haL 

Exodi2.  29  at  mid  night  the  Lord  smote  all  the  firsif 

Judgi6.    3  Samson  lay  till  mid  night, and  arose  at  mid. 

Ruth  3.    8  it  came  to  pass  at  midnight,  that  the  man 
3. Mid  night,  n^n  r(m  tokhallaylah. 

1  Ki.  3.  2o  she  arose  at  mid  night,  and  took  my  son 
^.Middle  of  the  night,  jueVrjs  (or  fi4<rov  ttjs)  vvkt&s. 

Matt  25.   6  at  mid  night  there  was  a  cry  made,  Behold 

Acta  27.  27  about  mid  night  the  shipmen  deemed  thai 
5. Mid  night,  ^<xovvktlov  mesonvMion. 

Marki3-35  cometh,  at  even,  or  at  mid  night,  or  at  the 

Luken.  5  shall  go  unto  him  at  mid  night, and  say  untt; 

Acts  16.  25  at  mid  night  Paul  and  Silas  prayed,  and 
20.  7  and  continued  his  speech  until  mid  night 
MIDST  of  heaven  — 
Mid  heaven,  /j.effovpdvn/j.a  mesouranema. 

Rev.    8.  13  an  angel  flying  through  the  midst  of  he. 
14.    6  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven 
19. 17  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of  heat 
MIDST,  afcont  the  — 
To  be  or  reach  the  middle,  /zecow  mesoo. 

John  7. 14  about  the  midst  of  the  feast,  Jesus  went 
MIDST,  to  be  cut  off  in  the  — 
To  be  halved,  ysn  chatsats,  4. 

Job  2i.  21  number  of  his  months  is  cut  off  in  the  m\- 
MTDST,  to  reach  to  the  — 
To  halve,  come  to  the  middle,  nyrj  chatsah . 

Isa,  30.  28  shall  reach  to  the  midst  of  the  neck,  to- 
MID  WIFE,  (to  do  the  office  of  a)  — 
To  help  to  bear,  be  a  midtoife,  "lb;  yalad,  3. 

Gen.  35. 17  the  midwife  said  unto  her,  Fear  not;  thou 

38.  28  the  mid  wife  took  and  bound  upon  his  ban  tl 
Exod.  1.  15  king  of  Egypt  spake  to  the  Hebrew  mid  w. 

1. 16  When  ye  do  the  office  of  a  midwife  to  the 
1.  17  the  midwives  feared  God,  and  did  not  as 
1.  18  the  king  of  Egypt  cabled  for  the  midwives 
1.  19  the  midwives  said  unto  Pharaoh,  Because 
1. 19  are  delivered  ere  the  midwives  come  innn. 
1.  20  Therefor  God  dealt  well  with  the  midwives 
1.  21  it  came  to  pass,  because  the  midwiveste. 

MIG'-DAX  EL,  hx  ^jp  tower  of  God. 
A  fortified  city  in  JTaphtali,  near  Iron  and  Horem, 
supposed  by  some  to  be  the  Magdala  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, on  the  "W.  of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  but  the  latter  is 
in  Zebulon,  S.  of  Capernaum,  and  one  and  a  half  hours 
from  Tiberias. 

Josh.  19.  38  Iron,  and  M.,  Horem,  and  Beth-anatk. 
MIG'-DiL  GAD,  "iS'ViJP  tower  of  Gad. 
A  city  in  the  plain  of  jiidah,  now  Mejdal. 

Josh. 15.  37  Zenan,  and  Hadashah,  audM. 
MIG'-DOL,  Snap,  ^iiJp  tower. 

1.  A  place  W.  of  the  Red  Sea. 

Exodi4.    2  Pi-hahiroth,  between  Migdol  and  the  sea- 
Nuni33.    7  theyremoved..andtheypitched  before  M. 

2.  A  city  in  the  N.E.  of  Egypt  from  Palestine,  as  Syene  was 
in  the  south. 

Jer.  44.    1  all  the  Jews  which  dwell,  .at  M.,  and  at 
46.  14  Declare  ye  in  Egypt,  and  publish  in  M- 


MIGHT 


600 


MIGHTY 


MIGHT  — 
"[.Strength,  Jin  on. 

Isa.  40.  26  by  names  by  the  greatness  of  his  might 
40.  29  to  (them  that  have)  no  might  he  increas. 

2.  Might,  Vn  el. 

Deut28.  32  and  (there  shall  be)  no  might  in  thine  hand 

3.  Might,  rrpai  geburah. 

Deut.  3.  24  God. .that  can  do. .according  to  thy  might 
Judg.  5.  31  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  ra. 

1  Ki.15.  23  all  his  might,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  the 

16.  5  what  he  did,  and  his  might,  (are)they  not 
16.  27  which  he  did,  and  his  might  that  he  sho. 
22.  45  his  might  that  he  showed,  and  how  hew. 

2  Ki.io.  34  all  that  he  did,  and  all  his  might,  (are) 

13.    8  all  that  he  did,  and  his  might,  (are)they 

13.  12  las  might  wherewith  he  fought  against  A. 

14.  15  his  might,  and  how  he  fought  with  Ama. 
14.  28  all  that  he  did,  and  his  might,  how  he 
20.  20  all  liis  might,  and  how  he  made  a  pool 

1  Ch.29. 12  in  thiue  hand  (is)  power  and  might ;  and 

29.  30  With  all  his  reign  and  his  might,  and  the 

2  Ch.20.  6  power  and  might,  so  that  nune  is  able  to 
Esth.io.  2  all  the  acts  of  his  power,  and  of  his  might 
Isa.    11.  13  ye  (that  are)  near,  acknowledge  my  might 

33.  2  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the  spirit 
Jer.     9.  23  neither  let  the  mighty . .  glory  in  his  might 

10.  6  Forasmuch  as.  .thy  name  (is)  great  in  m. 
16.  21  cause,  .to  know  mine  hand  and  my  might 
49-  35  t'ie  ')0W  °*  Elam,the  chief  of  their  might 
51.  30  their  might  hath  failed ;  they  became  as 

Eze.  ',32.  29  princes,  which  with  their  might  are  laid 
32.  30  their  terror  they  are  ashamed  of  their  m. 

Dan.-  2.  20  and  ever:  for  wisdom  and  might  are  his 
2.  23  who  hastgiven  me  wisdom  and  might,  and 

Mic.  3.  8  I  am  full . .  of  judgment,  and  of  might,  to 
7. 16  see,  and  be  confounded  at  all  their  might 

4. Force,  army,  strength,  b\n  chayil. 

2  Ki.24.  16  all  the  men  of  might,  .seven  thousand 
1  Ch.  7.  2  valiant  men  of  might  in  theirgenerations 
7.  5  valiant  men  of  might,  reckoned  in  all  by 
12.  8  men  of  might . .  men  of  war . .  for  the  battle 
Psa.  76.  s  none  of  the  men  of  might  have  found  their 
Zech.  4.    6  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  s. 

5.  To  be  able,  "?b;  yakol. 

Gen.  43.  32  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  bread  with 

Q.Power,  nb  koach. 

Gen.  49.    3  Reuben,  thou  (art)  my  first  born,  my  might 

Num'i4. 13  thou  broughtest  up  this  people  in  thy  m. 

Judg.  6.  14  Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  save 

16.  30  he  bowed  himself  with  (all  his)  might 

1  Ch.29.    2  I  have  prepared  with  all  my  might  forthe 

2  Ch.20.  12  we  have  no  might  against  this  great  com. 
Eccl.   9. 10  lnthd  findeth  to  do,  do  (it)  with  all  thy  m. 

7.  Might,  ")Np  meod. 

Deut.  6.  5  with  all'thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might 
2  Ki.23.  25  withallhismight.accordingtoallthelaw 

^.Strength,  might,  vigour,  iy  oz. 

2  Sa.    6. 14  danced  before  the  LORD  with  all  (his)  m. 

1  Ch.13.    8  played  before  God  with  all  (their)  might 

9. Strength,  vigour,  H1JJ  ezuz. 

Psa.i4S.    6  shall  speak  of  the  might  of  thy  terrible 

10.  Substance,  bone,  Dsy  otsem. 

Deut.  8.  17  My  power  and  the  might  of  (mine)  hand 

11.  Strength,  might,  *i'pn  tekoph. 

Dan.    4.  30  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the 

11. Power,  Svvapis  dunamis. 

Eph.    1.  21  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might 

3. 16  to  be  strengthened  with  might  by  his  spirit 
Col.     1.  11  Strengthened  with  all  might,  according 

2  Pe.   2. 11  angels,  which.are  greater  in  power  and  m. 

13.  Strength,  lo~xvs  ischus. 

Eph.  6.  10  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might 
Rev.    7.  12  honour,  and  power,  and  might,  (be)  unto 

14. To  be  strong,  have  strength,  iVxuo?  ischuo. 

Matt  8.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
MIGHTIER,  MIGHTILY,  MIGHTY,  (that  is)  — 
1.  Mighty,  T3N  abbir. 

Job   24.  22  He  draweth  also  the  mighty  with  his  po. 

34.  20  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away  without 
Lam.  1.  15  all  my  mighty  (men)  in  the  midst  of  me 

2.Mighty,  TJJK  abir.' 

Gen.  49.  24  by  the  hands  of  the  mighty  (God)  of  Jacob 
Psa.  1 32.    2  vowed  unto  the  mighty  (God)  01  Jacob 

132.    s  habitation  for  the  mighty  (God)  of  Jacob 

Isa.     1.  24  Lord  of  hosts,  the  mighty  One  of  Israel 

49.  26  thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  Jacob 

60.  16  thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  Jacob 

3.  Honourable,  shining,  "V^  addir. 

Exod  15. 10  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters 

1  Sa.  4.  8  us  out  of  the  hand  of  these  mighty  Gods 
Tsa.  93.  4  mightier  than.,  the  mighty  waves  of  the 
Zech.11.   2  because  the  mighty  are  spoiled  ;  howl,  O 

4. Mighty  one,  bin  ul. 

2  Ki.24. 15  bis  officers,  and  the  mighty  of  the  land 
5.  Mighty  ones,  wbn  elim. 

Job  41.  25  When  he  raiseth  up  himself,  the  mighty 
Eze.  17. 13  he  hathalsotaken  the  mighty  of  the  land 
Q.Strong,  firm,  perennial,  |;vn,  jriN  ethan. 

Job  12.  19  He  leadeth.  .and  overthroweth  the  migh. 
Psa.   74.  15  Thou  didst  cleave,  .thou  driedst  up  mig. 


Jer.     5.  15  a  mighty  nation,  it  (is)  an  ancient  nation 
Amos  5.  24  as  waters,  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty 

7. Mighty  one,  7N  el. 

Psa.  29.    1  Give  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye  mighty,  give 
50.    1  The  mighty  God.  .the  LORD,  hath  spoken 
82.    1  standeth  in  the  congregation  of  the  mig. 
89.    6  (who)  among  the  sons  of  the  mighty  can 
S.  Strong,  courageous,  f'EN,  f'SN  ammits. 

Job  9.  4  (He  is)  wise  in  heart,  and  migkty  in  stre. 
9.  Force,  p'SN  aphiq. 

Job  12.  21  and  weakeneththe  strength  of  the  mighty 
10. Mighty  one,  li3|  gibbor. 

Gen.  10.   9  He  w.asa  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord 

10.  9  as  Nimrod  the  mighty  hunter  before  the 
Deut  10.  17  agreatGod,  amighty,andaterrible,  which 
Josh. 10.  2  Gibeon.  .all  the  men  thereof  (were)  migh. 
Judg.  5. 13  made  me  have  dominion  over  the  mighty 

5.  23  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty 
Ruth  2.    1  a  mighty  man  of  wealth,  of  the  family  of  E. 

1  Sa.  16.  18  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war 

2  Sa.    1.  19,  25,  27  How  are  the  mighty  fallen 

1.  21  there  the  shield  of  the  mighty  is  vilely  c. 

1.  22  from  the  fat  of  the  mighty,  the  bow  of  J. 

2  Ki.   5.    1  Naaraan.  .was  also  a  mighty  man  in  valour 

1  I  'h.   1. 10  he  began  to  be  mighty  upon  the  earth 

5.  24  mighty  men  of  valour,  famous  men.  .heads 

11.  12  theAhohite,  who  (was  one)  of  the  three  m. 
11.  19  These  things  did  these  three  mightiest 

11.  24  and  had  a  name  among  the  three  mighties 

12.  28  Zadok,  ayoungman  mighty  of  valour,  and 
27.    6  Benaiah . .  mighty  (among)  the  thirty,  and 

Ezra    7.  28  and  before  all  the  king's  mighty  princes 

Neh.   3.  16  overagainst.  .uutothenouseofthemighty 

9.  32  the  great,  the  mighty, and  the  terrible  God 

Psa.  24.    8  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty 

45.  3  Gird  thy  sword  upon  (thy)  thigh,  O.  .mig. 
89. 19  I  have  laid  help  upon  (one  that  is)  mighty 

112.    2  His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  earth  :  the 

120.    4  Sharp  arrows  of  the  mighty,  with  coals  of 

Prov.16.  32  slow  to  auger  (is)  better  than  the  mighty 

21.  22  A  wise(man)scaleththe  city  of  the  mighty 

Isa.     5.  22  Woe  unto  (them  that  are)  mighty  to  drink 

9.   6  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty  God 

10.  21  the  remnant  of  Jacob,  unto  the  mighty  G. 

49.  24  Shall  the  prey  be  taken  from  the  mighty 

49.  25  Even  the  captives  of  the  mighty  shall  be 

Jer.  20. 11  But  the  Lord  (is)  with  me  asa  mightyte. 

32. 18  The  Great,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Lord  of 

46.  12  hath  stumbled  against  the  mighty,  (and) 
48.  14  We  (are)  mighty  and  strong  men  for  the 

Eze.  32.  12  By  the  swords  of  the  mighty  will  I  cause 

32.  21  The  strong  among  the  mighty  shall  speak 

32.  27  And  they  shall  not  lie  with  the  mighty 

32.  27  the  terror  of  the  mighty  in  the  land  of 

39. 18  Ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  mighty,  and 

Dan.  11.    3  a  mighty  king  shall  stand  up,  that  shall 

Amos  2.  14  neither  shall  the  mighty  deliver  himself 

2.16  courageous  among  the  mighty  shall  flee  aw. 

Obad.       9  mighty(men),  OTeman,  shall  be  dismayed 

Zeph.  3. 17  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  (is)  mi. 

Zech.  10.    5  they  shall  be  as  mighty  (men),  which  tread 

10.  7  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  (man),  and 

\\. Might,  nina  geburah. 

Psa.  89.  13  Thou  hast  a  mighty  arm  :  strong  is  thy  h. 

Isa.  3.  25  Thy  men  shall  fall . .  and  thy  mighty  in  the 
l2.Mighty,  133  gibbar. 

Dan.  3.  20  he  commanded  the  most  mighty  men  that 
IB. Great,  Vlia  gadol. 

Lev.   19.  15  nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty:  (but) 

Deut.  4.  37  brought  thee,  .with  his  mighty  power  out 
7.  21  God  (is)  among  you,  a  mighty  God  and  t. 
7. 23  shall  destroy  them  with  a  mighty  destru. 
9.  29  thou  broughtest  out  by  thymightypower 

Eze.  17.  17  Neither  shall  Pharaoh  with  (his)  mighty 

Jon.  1.  4  and  there  wasa  mighty tempestinthesea 
14. Arm,  y'nj  zeroa. 

Job    22.    8  But.  .the  mighty  man,  he  had  the  earth 

15.  Strong,  hard,  pin  chazaq. 

Exod.  3.  19  not  let  you  go,  no,  not  by  a  mighty  hand 

32.  11  with  great  power,  aud  with  a  mighty  hand 

Deut.  3.  24  to  show,  .thy  greatness,  and  thy  mighty 

4.  34  by  war,  and  by  a  mighty  hand,  and  by  a 

5.  15  broughtthee  out  thence  through  a  mighty 

6.  21  brought  us  out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  h. 

7.  8  Lord  brought  you  out  with  a  mighty  hand 
7.  19  the  wonders,  and  the  mighty  hand,  and 
9.  26  brought  forth  out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty 

11.  2  his  greatness,  his  mighty  hand,  and  his  s. 
26.  8  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt  with  a  mi. 
34.  12  in  all  that  mighty  hand,  and  in  all  the  g. 

Josh.  4.  24  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  that  it  (is)  mighty 

2  Ch.  6.  32  thy  mighty  hand,  and  thy  stretched  out 
Job  5. 15  But  he  saveth.  .from  the  hand  of  the  mi. 
Prov23.  11  their  Redeemer(is)mighty;  he  shall  plead 
Isa.  28.  2  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty  and  strong  one 
Eze.  20. 33,34  with  a  mighty  hand,  and  with  a  stret. 
Dan.   9.  15  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty 

16.  Strength,  hardness,  npm  chezkah. 

Judg.  4.    3  twenty  years  he  mightily  oppressed  the 
Jon.    3.    8  cry  mightily  unto  God ;  yea,  let  them  turn 

17. Force,  might,  b\n  chayil. 

2  Ch.  26. 13  that  made  war  with  mighty  power  to  help 

18. Heavy,  Y23  kabbir. 

Job  34.  24  He  shall  break  in  pieces  mighty  men  wi. 
36.   5  God(is)mighty..mightyinstrength(and) 


Isa.    17. 12  make  a  rushing  like  the  rushing  of  mig. 
28.    2  as' a  flood  of  mighty  waters  overflowing 

19. Might,  1MI?  meod. 

Exod  10. 19  Lord  turned  a  mighty  strong  west  wind 
Deut.  6.  3  that  ye  may  increase  mightily,  as  the  L. 
Nah.  2.    1  make,  .loins  strong,  fortify.,  power  migh. 

20. Strong,  i"  az. 

Neh.  9. 11  threwest.  .as  a  stone  into  the  mighty  wa. 
Psa.  59.    3  the  mighty  are  gathered  against  me ;  not 
Isa.  43. 16  which  maketh..apath  in  the  mighty  wa. 
2l.TeiTor,  D;y.  ay  am. 

Isa.   11. 15  with  his  mighty  wind  shall  he  shake  his 
22.  Bony,  substantial,  Disy  atsum. 

Gen.  18. 18  shall  surely  become  a  great  and  mighty 
Exod.  1.    9  of  Israel  (are)more  and  mightier  than  we 
Num  14.  12  a  greater  nation  and  mightier  than  they 
22.   6  for  they  (are)  too  mighty  for  me :  peradv. 
Deut.  4.  38  greater  and  mightier  than  thou . .  to  bring 
7.    1  seven  nations  greater  and  mightier  than 
9.   1  nations  greater  and  mightier  than  thyself 
9.  14  a  nation  mightier  and  greater  than  they 
11.  23  greater  nations  and  mightierthan  yourse. 
26.    5  there  a  nation,  great,  mighty,  and  popul. 
Psa.  135.  10  Who  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  mig. 
Prov.18.  18  The  lot.  .parteth  between  the  mighty 
Dan.    8.  24  shall  destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  p. 
11.  25  to  battle  with  a  very  great  and  mighty  a. 
Amos  5.  12  manifold  transgressions  and  your  mighty 

2Z.Terrible,  fn;;  arits. 

Job  6.  23  Redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty 
!4,Great,  mighty,  lirab. 

Job  35.  9  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  of  the  mighty 
25. Ruler,  ruling,  fc'W'  shallit. 

Eccl.  7.  10  more  than  ten  mighty,  .which  are  in  the 

26. Strong,  t\*$%  taqqiph. 

Ezra  4.  20  There  have  been  mighty  kings  also  over 
Eccl.  6.  10  may  he  contend  with  him  that  is  mightier 
Dan.  4.    3  how  mighty  (are)  his  wonders !  his  kingdom 

27.  God,  godlike,  mighty,  D'nSt  elohim. 

Gen.  23.    6  Thou  (art)  a  mighty  prince  among  Us ;  in  the 

2S.3Iight,  133  geber. 

Isa.  22.  17  carry  thee  away  with  a  mighty  captivity 
Jer.  41.  16  mighty  men  of  war,  aud  the  women,  and 

29. Sons  of  the  mighty,  D'^n  \13  bene  elim. 

Psa.  29.    1  GiveuntotheLORD,Oyemighty,giveunto 

30. Forcible,  violent,  ^tatos  biaios. 

Acts    2.    2  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  it  filled 

31. Power,  8vva.fj.is  dunamis. 

Rom  15.  19  Through  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  by 
Col.  "  1.  29  working,  which  worketh  in  me  mightily 
2  Th.  1.    7  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty 

S2.Able,  powerful  one,  dwdarris  dwiastes. 

Luke  1.  52  He  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  (their) 

33.  Able,  powerful,  Bwaros  dunatos. 

Luke  1.  49  he  that  is  mighty  hath  done  to  me  great 

24.  19  which  was  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  w. 
Acts    7.  22  Moses . .  was  mighty  in  words  and  in  deeds 

18.  24  mighty  in  the  scriptures,  came  to  Ephesus 

1  Co.  1.  26  how  that,  .not  many  mighty,  not  many 

2  Co.io.  4  but  mighty  through  God  to  the  pulling  d. 
Zi.Intently,  intensely,  euToVcus  eutonos. 

Acts  18.  28  he  mightily  convinced  the  Jews,  .publicly 
35.0/  might,  in  strength,  lax^os  or  eV  lo-xvi. 
Eph.    1.  19  ace.  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power 
Rev.  18.    2  [And  he  cried  mightily  with  a  strong  voice] 
36. Strong,  l<rxvp6s  ischuros. 

Matt.  3.  11  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than 
Mark  1.  7  There  cometh  one  mightier  than  I  after 
Luke  3. 16  one  mightier  than  I  cometh,  the  Jatchet 

15.  14  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land 
1  Co.  1.  27  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty 
Rev.  10.    1  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  come  down 

18.  10  that  great  city  Babylon,  that  mighty  city 

18.  21  a  mighty  angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a  gr. 

19.  6  as  the  voice  of  mighty  thunderings,  saying 
19.  18  the  flesh  of  mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of 

37 '  .According  to  or  in  strength,  kcltcl  Kpdros  kata. 
Acts  19.  20  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and  p. 

38.  Strong,  KpqraiSs  krataios. 

1  Pe.  5.    6  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  them. 

39.  Great,  fi4yas  megas. 

Rev.    6. 13  tree.,  when  she  is  shaken  of  a  mighty  wind 
[See  also  Deed,  powers,  works.] 

MIGHTY,  mightier,  to  he  — 

l.To  be  or  become  mighty,  "135  gabar. 

Job  21.    7  the  wicked,  .become  old,  yea,  are  mighty 

2.  To  be  or  become  bony,  substantial,  nsy  atsam. 

Gen.  26. 16  Go  from  us ;  for  thou  art  much  mightier 
Psa.  69.  4  they.. mine  enemies  wrongfully,  are  migh. 
Dan.    8.  24  his  power  shall  be  mighty,  but  not  by  his 

3.  To  be  able,  have  power,  Zwariw  dunated. 

2  Co.  13.   3  which  to  you  ward  is  not  weak,  but  is  m. 

4.  To  work  in,  eVepyew  energed. 

Gal.    2.   8  the  same  was  mighty  in  me  toward  the  G. 
MIGHTY  act  or  power  — 
Might,  mighty  deed,  rTT*33  geburah. 

Psa. 106.   2  Who  can  utter  the  mighty  acts  of  the  L.? 


MIGHTY 


661 


MIND 


Psa,io6.    8  might  make  his  mighty  power  to  be  kno. 
X45.   4  One  generation,  .shall declare  thy  mighty 
145.    2  To  make  known,  .his  mighty  acts,  150.  2. 
2.  Greatness,  /j.eya\ei6Tv^  viegalciotes,  Luke  9.  43. 
MIGHTY,  to  become  or  wax  — 
\,To  strengthen  self,  pin  chazaq,  7. 

2  Ch.13.  21  Abijah  waxed  mighty,  and  married  four. 

27.  6  So  Jotham  became  mighty,  because  he  p. 

2.  To  be  or  become  bony,  substantial,  nxy  atsam. 
Exod.  1.    7  multiplied,  and  waxed  exceeding  mighty 
1. 20  people  multiplied,  and  waxed  very  mighty 

MIGHTY  deed  or  work  — 
Power,  8iW/us  dunamis. 

Matt  1 1.  20  wherein  most  of  his  mighty  works  were 

11. 21  if  the  mighty  works  which  were  done  in 
11.  23  if  the  mighty  works,  which  have  been  d. 
13.  54  Whence. ,thiswisdom,and(these)mightyw. 

13.  58  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there,  be. 

14.  2  therefore  mighty  works  do  show  forth  th. 
Mark  6.    2  that  even  such  mighty  works  are  wrought 

6.    5  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  save 
6. 14  therefore  mighty  works  do  show  forth  th. 
Lukeio.  13  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in  Tyre 
19.  37  all  the  mighty  works  that  they  had  seen 
2  Co.  1 2.  12  in  signs,  and  wonlers,  and  mighty  deeds 
MIGHTY  God  — 
vi  rock,  Jinn  one,  lis  tsur. 

Hab.   1.  12  0  mighty  God,  thou  hast  established  them 
MIGHTY  man  — 
l.A  man,  male,  e>*n  ish. 

Isa.     5.  15  the  mighty  man  shall  be  humbled,  and 

31.  8  fall  with  the  sword,  not  of  a  mighty  man 

2.  Mighty,  Ti33  gibbor. 

Gen.   6.   4  the  sanie(beeame)niightymen  which(we.) 
Josh.  1.  14  the  mighty  men  of  valour,  and  help  them 

6.  2  I  have  given  into  thine  hand.,  mighty  men 

8.  3  thirty  thousand  mighty  men  of  valour 

10.  7  with  him, and  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour 
Judg.6. 12  Lord  (is)  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of 

n.    1  Jephthah.  .was  a  mighty  man  of  valour 

1  Sa.   2.  4  The  bows  of  the  mighty  men  (are)  broken 

9.  1  Kish.  .a  Benjamite,  a  mighty  man  of  po. 

2  Sa.  10.   7  Joab,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mighty  men 

16.  6  and  all  the  people  and  all  the  mighty  m. 

17.  8  his  men,  that  they  (be)  mighty  men,  and 
17.  10  knoweth  that  thy  father  (is)  a  mighty  man 
2D.    7  and  the  Pelethites,  and  all  the  mighty  m. 
23.    8  These  (be)  the  names  of  the  mighty  men 
23.   9  (one)  of  the  three  mighty  men  with  David 

23.  16  the  three  mighty  men  brake  through  the 
23. 17  These  things  did  these  three  mighty  men 

23.22  and  had  the  name  among  three  mighty  m. 

1  Ki.  1.   8  Shiniei,  and  Rei,  and  the  mighty  men  w. 

1. 10  and  Benaiah,  and  the  mighty  men,  and  S. 

11.  28  the  man  Jeroboam  (was)  a  mighty  man  of 

2  Ki.  15.  20  of  all  the  niighty  men  of  wealth,  of  each 

24.  14  princes,  and  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour 

1  Ch.  7.    7  mighty  men  of  valour ;  and  were  reckoned 

7.  9  of  their  fathers,  mighty  men  of  valour 
7.  11  of  their  fathers,  mighty  men  of  valour 

7.  40  choice..mightymenof  valour,  chief  of  the 

8.  40  the  sons  of  Ulam  were  mighty  men  of  va. 

11. 10  the  chief  of  the  mighty  men  whom  David 

11. 11  number  of  the  mighty  men  whom  David 

12.  1  among  the  mighty  men,  helpers  of  the  w. 
12.  4  a  mighty  man  among  the  thirty,  and  over 
12.  21  for  they  (were)  all  niighty  men  of  valour 
12.  25  of  Simeon,  mighty  men  of  valour  for  the 
12.  30  mighty  men  of  valour,  famous  throughout 
19.  8  Joab,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mighty  men 
26.    6  for  they  (were)  mighty  men  of  valour 

26.  31  found  among  them  mighty  men  of  valour 

28.  1  with  the  mighty  men,  and  with  all  the 

29.  24  all  the  princes,  and  the  mighty  men,  and 

2  Ch.13.    3  chosen  men,  (being) mighty  men  of  valour 

14.  8  And..allthese(were)mightymenofvalour 
17.  13  and  the  men  of  war,  mighty  men  of  valour 
17.  14  and  with  him  mighty  men  of  valour  three 

17. 16  two  hundred  thousand  mighty  men  of  va. 
17.  17  Eliada  a  niighty  man  of  valour,  and  with 

25.  6  an  hundred  thousand  mighty  men  of  val. 

26. 12  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  mighty  men  of 
28.    7  Zichri,  a  mighty  man  of  Ephraim,  slew  M. 

32.  3  with  his  princes  and  his  mighty  men  to 
32.  21  which  cut  off  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour 

NeKxi.  14  their  brethren,  mighty  men  of  valour,  an, 

Psa.  33.  16  a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by  much 
52.    1  Why  boastestthou..O  mighty  man?  the 
7S.  65  like  a  mighty  man  that  shouteth  by  reason 
127.    4  As  arrows  (are)  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  m. 

Song   4.    4  thousandbucklers,allshieldsofmightym. 

Isa.     3.   2  The  mighty  man ,  and  the  man  of  war,  the 

21. 17  the  mighty  men  of  the  children  of  Kedar 
42.  13  The  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  man 

Jer.    5,  16  open  sepulchre,  they  (are)  all  mighty  men 

9.  23  neither,  .the  mighty  (man)  glory  in  hism. 
14.    9  as  a  mighty  man  (that)  cannot  save  ?  yet 

26.  21  Jehoiakimthe  king,  with  all  his  mighty  m. 
4^.   6  Let  not  the  swift,  .nor  the  mighty  man 
46.   9  let  the  mighty  men  come  forth  ;  the  Eg. 
4'5.  12  the  mighty  man  hath  stumbled  against  the 

48.  41  the  mighty  men's  hearts  in  Moab  at  that 

49.  22  shall  the  heart  of  the  mighty  men  of  Eg. 

50.  9  their  arrows . .  as  of  a  mighty  expert  man 

50.  36  a  sword  (is)  upon  her  mighty  men  ;  and 

51.  30  The  mighty  men  of  Babylon  have  forborne 
51.  56  upon  Babylon,  and  her  mighty  men  are 


Jer.  51.  57  make  drunk. .herrulers,  and  hermightym. 
Eze.  39.  20  with  mighty  men,  and  with  all  men  of  war 
Hos.  10.  13  trust,  .in  themultitude  of  thy  mighty  men 
Joel.  2.  7  They  shall  run  like  mighty  men ;  they  sh. 
3.  9  Prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  men,  let 
N"ah.  2.  3  The  shield  of  his  niighty  men  is  made  red 
Zeph.  1. 14  the  niighty  man  shall  cry  there  bitterly 
Zech.  9.  13  made  thee  as  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man 

3. Mighty  or  strong  ones,  ltVn  elim. 

EXOCI15. 15  the  mighty  men  of  Moab,  trembling  shall 

i.Poioerful,  Buvaros  dunatos. 

Rev.    6. 15  the  chief  captains,  and  the  [mighty  men] 
MIGHTY  one  — 
I.  Mighty,  t?n  abbir. 

Judg.  5.  22  by.  .the  prancings  of  their  mighty  ones 

2. Honourable,  shining,  "ViN  addir. 

Isa.  10.  34  and  Lebanon  shall  fall  by  a  mighty  one 

3. Mighty  one,  god,  Sn  el. 

Eze.  31.  1  l  into  the  hand  of  the  mighty  one  of  the  h. 

i.Mighty  one,  "i"i33  gibbor. 

Gen.  10.   8  he  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the  earth 
Isa.    13.   3  I  have  also  called  my  mighty  ones  for  m. 
Jer.  46.    5  their  mighty  ones  are  beaten  down,  and 
Joel    3. 11  thither  cause  thy  mighty  ones  to  come  d. 

5.^4  rock,  firm  one,  "flx  tsur. 

Isa.   30.  29  mouutain  of  the  LORD,  to  the  mighty  One 
MIGHTY  things  — 
To  cut  off,  fence,  1X3  batsar. 

'  Jer.  33.    3  show  thee  great  and  mighty  things,  which 
MIGHTY,  so  — 
Such,  so  much,  tt)\ikovto$  telikoutos. 

Rev.  16. 18  so  mighty  an  earthquake,  (and)  so  great 

MIG'-RON,  pip  land-slip. 

A  city  in  Benjamin  near  Gibeah,  where  the  main  road 

from  Aiath  to  Michinash  passed,  Isa.  10.  28.   Now  called 

Makrun. 

1  Sa.  14.  2  a  pomegranate  tree  which  (is)  in  M.:  and 
Isa.    10.  28  He  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  to  M. ;  at 

MI-JA'-MTN,  jon?  fortunate. 

1.  A  priest  in  the  time  of  David.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.24.   9  The  fifth  to  Malchijah,  the  sixth  to  M. 

2.  A  priest  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant 
(See  Mi-ami?i).    B.C.  450. 

Neh.  10.    7  Meshullam,  Abijah,  M. 

MTK'-LOTH,  n'^i??  -twigs,  sticks. 

1.  A  Benjamite  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  1160. 

1  Ch.  8.  32  And  M.  begat  Shimeah.  And  these  also 
9.  37  Gedor,  and  Ahio,  and  Zechariah,  and  M. 
9.  38  And  M.  begat  Shimeam.     And  they  also 

2.  A  ruler  in  the  second  division  of  the  guard  appointed 
by  David.     B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.  27.   4  of  his  course  (was)  M.  also  the  ruler :  in 
MTK-NE'-IAH,  ^TJjpO  Jah  is  zealous. 
A  Levite  musician.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15. 18  brethren  of  the  second  (degree),  Zech. .  .M. 
15.  21  M.,  and  Obed-edoin,  andJeiel,and  Azaziah 

MI-LA'-LAI,  ^So  Jah  is  elevated. 

A  priest  that  took  part  in  the  purification  of  the  wall. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  12.  36  And  his  brethren.  .M.,  Gilalai,  Maai,  Ne. 

MTX'-CAH,  nsbp  counsel. 

1.  Daughter  of  Haran  Abraham's  brother,  wife  of  Nahor, 
and  mother  of  Bethuel.     B.C.  1996. 

Gen.  ir.  29  and  the  name  of  Nahor's  wife,  M.,  the  d. 
11.  29  Haran,  the  father  of  M.,  and  the  father 
22.  20  Behold,  M.,  she  hath  also  born  children 
22.  23  these  eight  M.  did  bear  to  Nahor,  Abra. 
24. 15  who  was  born  to  Bethuel,  son  of  M.,  the 
24.  24  (am)  the  daughter  of  Bethuel  the  son  of  M. 
24.  47  The  daughter  of  Bethuel.  .whom  M.  hare 

2.  A  daughter  of  Zelophehad,  a  Manassahite. 

Nuni26.  33  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  (were).  .M. 

27.    1  these  (are)  the  names  of  his  daughters .  .M. 

36. 11  For  Mahlah.  .and  M.,  and  Noah,  the  dau. 
Josh. 17.   3  these  (are)  the  names  of  his  daughters..  M. 

MILCH  — 

1.7*0  suckle,  give  suck,  p?,  yanaq,  5. 

Gen.  32.  15  Thirty  milch  camels  with  their  colts,  forty 

2.  To  stickle,  hty  ul. 

1  Sa.   6.    7  take  two  milch  kine,  on  which  there  hath 

6.  10  took  two  milch  kine,  and  tied  them  to  the 

MIL'-COM,  D3/»p. 

The  national  deity  of  the  Ammonites,  the  same  as  Mo- 

lerh,  Maleham,  or  Malehan. 

iKi.  11.  5  Solomon  went  after.  .M.  the  abominatiou 
si.  33  and  have  worshipped.  ,M.  the  god  of  the 

2  Ki.  23.  13  had  builded  for.  .M.  the  abomination  of 

MILDEW  — 

Mildew,  greenness,  paleness^  jipT.  yeraqon. 

Deut23.  22  smite  thee,  .with  blasting,  and  with  mil. 

1  Ki.  8.  37  if  there  be  pestilence,  blasting,  mildew,  L 

2  Ch.  6.  28  if  there  be  blasting,  or  mildew,  locusts,  or 
Amos  4.  9  I  have  smitten  you  with  blasting  and  mil. 
Hag.  2,  17  I  smote  you  with  blasting  and  with  mild. 


HUE  — 

A  mile,  /xi\top  (from  Lat.  miliarium)  milion. 
Matt.  5.  41  whosoever  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile 

MI-LE'-TTJS,  MI-LE'-T"u*M,  M/Atjtoj. 
A  city  and  seaport  in  the  province  of  Caria,  at  the  S.  of 
Iouia,  on  the  confines  of  Caria,  forty  miles  S.  of  Ephesus ; 
it  is  now  ten  miles  inland,  audits  ruins  are  called  Melas. 
It  had  a  temple  of  Apollo,  and  was  the  birthplace  of 
Thales  and  Anaxiniander. 

Acts  20.  15  Andwe  sailed  thence,  and.  .we  came  toM. 

20.  17  And  from  M.  he  sent  to  Ephesus,  and  ca. 
2  Ti.    4.  20  but  Tropliimus  have  I  left  at  M.  sick 

MILK  — 

l.Milk,  fat,  ibn  chalab. 

Gen.  18.    8  he  took  butter,  and  milk,  and  the  calf  w. 

49.  12  with  wine,  and  his  teeth  white  with  milk 

Exod.  3.   8,  17  unto  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  hon. 

[So  in  13.  5;  33.  3;  Lev.  20.  24;  Num.  14.  8;  16.  13,  14; 

Deut.  6.  3;  11.  9;  26.  9,  15 ;  27.  3;  Josh.  5.  6;  Jer.  11.  5 ; 

32.  22;  Eze.  20.  6,  15.] 

Exod23.  19  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  milk 

34.  26  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  milk 

Nuni  13.  27  and  surely  it  floweth  with  milk  and  honey 

Deut  14.  21  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  milk 

31.  20  laud,  .that  floweth  with  milk  and  houey 

32. 14  Butter  of  kine,  and  milk  of  sheep,  with  fat 

Judg.  4.  19  she  opened  a  bottle  of  milk,  and  gave  him 

5.  25  He  asked  water.. she  gave,  .milk;  she  br. 

Job   10.  10  Hast  thou  not  poured  me  out  as  milk,  and 

21.  24  His  breasts  are  full  of  milk,  and  his  bones 
Prov  27.  27  goats'  milk,  .for  thy  food,  for  the  food 

30.  33  Surely  the  churning  of  milk  bringeth  forth 

Song  4.  11  honey  and  milk  (are)  under  thy  tongue 
5.    1  I  have  drunk  my  wine  with  my  milk :  eat 
5.  12  Hiseyes.  .washed  with  milk.. (and)fltlyset 

Isa.  7.  22  for  the  abundance  of  milk  (that)  they  shall 
28.  9  weaned  from  the  milk,  .drawn  from  the 
55.  1  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money 
60.  16  Thou  shalt  also  suck  the  milk  of  the  Ge. 

Lam.  4.    7  they  were  whiter  than  milk,  they  were  m. 

Eze.  25.    4  eat  thy  fruit,  and  they  shall  drink  thy  m. 

Joel    3. 18  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  the 

'l.Milk,  ydha  gala. 

1  Co.  3.    2  I  have  fed  you  with  milk,  and  not  withni. 

9.   7  or  who.  .eateth  not  of  the  milk  of  the  flo 

Heb.   5. 12  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  milk,  and 

5.  13  every  one  that  useth  milk  (is)  unskilful  in 

1  Pe.   2.   2  As  new  born  babes,  desire  the  sincere  m. 

MILK  out,  to  — 

To  wdng,  suck,  or  milk  out,  fxs  matsats. 

Isa.   66.  11  that  ye  may  milk  out,  and  he  delighted 

MILL  (stone,  aether  or  upper)  — 

l.Mill  stones,  D!rn  rechayim. 

Exodn.  5  the  maid  servant  that(is)behind  the  mill 
Numn.  8  ground  (it)  in  mills,  or  beat  (it)  in  a  mor. 
Deut  24.  6  No  man  shall  take  the  nether,  .millstone 
Isa.  47.  2  Take  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal:  un. 
Jer.   25.  10  the  sound  of  the  millstones,  and  the  light 

2.A  rider,  upper  mill  stone,  3?"i  rekeb. 

Deut  24.    6  no  man  shall  take  the . .  upper  millstone 
-Judg.  9.  53  cast  a  piece  of  a  miiistune,  2  Sa.  n.  21. 
3^4  millstone,  KiBos  fivKaths  lit/ids  muli  ,Mr.  9.  42. 

4.  A  mill,  (xvKwv  mulon. 

Matt24.  41  Two  (women shall  be) grinding  [at  the  m.] 

5.  A  millstone  turned  by  an  as$,fiv\osbviK6s  mulos  o- 

Matt  18.    6  that  [a  millstone]  were  hanged  about  his 
Lukei7.    2  that  [a  millstone]  were  hanged  about  his 
Rev.  18.  21  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great  [millstone] 
18.  22  the  sound  of  a  millstone  shall  be  heard  no 

MILLET  — 

Millet,  corn,  fni  dochan. 

Eze.    4.   9  beans,  and  lentiles,  and  millet,  and  fitches 
MILLIONS  — 
.4  myriad,  ten  thousand,  nia"i  rebabah. 

Gen.  24.  60  be  thou  (the  mother)  of  thousands  of  m 
MLL'-LO,  Nlta,  x^?  fulness. 

1.  A  fortification  near  Shechem. 

Judg.  9.  6  men  of  Shechem. .aud  all  the  house  of  M. 
9.  20  and  devour,  .the  house  of  M.;  and  let  fire 
9.  20  men  of  Shechem.  .from  the  house  of  M. 

2.  One  near  Jerusalem,  enlarged  by  David  and  Solomon 
and  wherein  Joash  was  slain. 

2  Sa.   5.    9  David  built  round  about  from  M.  and  in 

1  Ki.  9.  1 5  to  huild . .  his  own  house,  and  M. ,  and  the 

9.  24  had  built  for  her  :  then  did  he  build  M. 
11.  27  Solomon  built  M.,(and)  repaired  thebre. 

2  Ki.12.  20  slew  Joash  in  the  house  of  M.,  which 

1  Ch.11.    8  he  built  the  city,  .even  from  M.  round 

2  Ch.32.   5  and  repaired  M.  (in)  the  city  of  David,  and 

MINCE,  to  — 

To  mince,  trip  nicely,  rpn  taphaph. 

Isa.     3. 16  walkingandmincing(as)theygo,andmak- 

MTND  — 

^Imagination,  frame.,  formation,  "is;  yetser. 

Isa.   26.    3  in  perfect  peace,  (whose)  mind  (is)  stayed 

%tteartt  ^7.  Icb. 

Numi6.  28  (I  have)  not  (done  them)  of  mine  own  mind 
24.  13  go. .to  do.  .good  or  bad.  of  mine  own  mind 
1  Sa.    9.  20  set  not  thy  mind  on  them ;  for  they  are 
Neh.  4.    6  was  joined.. for  the  people  had  a  mind  to 


MIND 


G62 


MINISTER 


Psa.  31,  12  I  am  forgotten  asa  dead  mail  out  of  mind 

Isa.   46.    8  bring  (it)  again  to  mind,  0  ye  transgress. 

65. 17  not  be  remembered,  nor  come  into  mind 

Jer.     3.  16  neither  shall  it  come  to  mind,  neither  sb. 

19.  5  spake  (it),  neither  came  (it)  into  my  mind 
32.  35  neither  came  it  into  my  mind,  that  they 
44.  21  remember,  .and  came  it  (not)  into  his  m. 

Lam.  3.  21  This  I  recall  to  my  mind,  therefore  have 
&  Heart,  33b  lebab. 

Deut  30.  '1  thou  shalt  call  (them)  bo  mind  among  all 
i  Ch.22.   7  it  was  in  my  mind  to  build  an  house  unto 
Jer.  51.  50  and  let  Jerusalem  come  into  your  mind 
Eze.  3S.  10  same  time  shall  things  come  into  thy  mind 

4.  Soul,  breath,  ^33  nephesh. 

Gen.  23.   8  If  it  be  your  mind  that  I  should  bury  my 

Deut  18.    6  come  with  all  the  desire  of  his  mind  unto 

28.  65  give  thee,  .failing  of  eyes,  and  sorrow  of  m. 

1  Sa.  2.  35  which  (is)  in  mine  heart  and  in  my  mind 

2  Sa.  17.   8  they  (be)  chafed  in  their  minds,  as  a  bear 
j  Ki.   9.  15  If  itbeyour.miuds.  .let  none  go  forth  (nor) 
1  Ch.28.   9  a  perfect  heart  and  with  a  willing  mind 
Jer.    15.    1  my  mind  (could)  not  (be)  toward  thispe. 
Eze.  23.  17  and  her  mind  was  alienated  from  them 

23.  18  then  my  mind  was  alienated  from  her 
23.  iS  like  as  my  mind  was  alienated  from  her 
23.  22  from  whom  thy  mind  is  alienated,  and  I 
23.  28  into  the  hand  (of  them)  from  whom  thy  m. 
24. 25  that  whereupon  they  set  their  minds,  th. 
36.  5  with  despiteful  minds,  to  cast  it  out  for 
5.  Mouth,  .is  peh. 

Lev.  24.  12  that  the  mind  of  the  Lord  might  be  sho. 
(5. Spirit,  nn  ruach. 

Gen.  26.  35  Which  were  a  grief  of  mind  unto  Isaac 
Prov.29.  ir  A  fool  tittereth  all  his  mind :  but  a  wise 
-Eze.  11.    5  know  the  things  that  come  into  your  m. 

20.  32  that  which  cometh  into  your  mind  shall 
Dan.  5  20  and  his  mind  hardened  in  pride,  he  was  d. 
Hab.   1. 11  Then  shall  (his)  mind  change,  and  he  sh. 

T.lCnowlcdg-',  opinion,  decision,  yvwy.7}  gnome.' 
Phni.      14  But  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing 
Rev.  17.  13  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give  their 

^.Intellect,  full  or  thorough  mind,  dtdfota  dianoia. 
Matt  22.  37  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind 
Hark  1 2.  30  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind 
Lukeio.  27  with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  m. 
Eph,  2.  3  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind 
Col.  x.  21  enemies  in  (your)  mind  by  wicked  works 
Heb.   8.  10  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and 

10.  t6  my  laws,  .in  their  minds  will  I  write  them 

1  Pe.  1. 13  Wherefore  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind 

2  Pe.   3.    1  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  rem, 

9.  Inner  mind,  purpose,  ivvoia.  ennoia. 

1  Pe.   4.    1  arm  yourselves  likewise  with  the  same  m. 

10.  Thought,  v6r\^o.  noema. 

2  Co.  3.  14  theirmindswTereblinded;  for  until  this  day 

4.    4  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  which  be!. 

11.  3  so  your  minds  should  be  corrupted  from 
Phil.    4.    7  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through 

11. Mind,  will,  vovs  71011s. 

Rom.  1.  28  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind 
7.  23  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and 

7.  25  So  then  with  the  mind  I  myself  serve  the 

11.  34  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  L.  ? 

12.  2  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mi. 
14.    5  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind 

1  Co.  1. 10  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and  in 
2.  16  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord 
2. 16  But  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ 

Eph.  4.  17  ye. .walk  not.. in  the  vanity  of  their  mind 
4.  23  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind 

2.  1 S  not . .  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind 
2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or 
5  disputhigs  of  men  of  corrupt  minds,  and 

8  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concern. 
,  15  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled 

9  And  here  (is)  the  mind  which  hath  wisdom 

12.  Mind ,  inclination,  tf>p6pr)fia  phroTiema. 

Rom.  8.    7  Because  the  carnal  mind  (is)  enmity  aga. 

8.  27  knoweth  what  (is)  the  mind  of  the  .Spirit 

XZ.SotU,  animal  life,  tyvxft  ps-uche. 

Acta  14.    2  made  their  minds  evil  affected  against  the 

Phil.   1.  27  with  one  mind  striving  together  for  the  f. 

Heb.  12.    3  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds 
MIND,  to  — 
1.7*0  be  about,  fte\Kw  mello. 

Acts  20. 13  he  appointed,  minding  himself  togo  afoot 

:  To  mind,  will,  dtpovia  phroneo- 

Rom.  8.    5  they  that  are  after  the  flesh  do  m.  12.16. 
Phil.    3.  16  [same  rule,  let  us  mind  the  same  thing] 

3.  19  glory,  in  their  shame,  who  mind  earthly  t. 
iSee  also  Cast,  change,  doubtful,  fervent,  forwardness, 
humbleness,  humility,  lowliness,  put  in  readiness, 
ready,  sound,  wicked,  willing.] 

HIND,  to  be  in  a  ri^ht  — 

71"  be  in  or  have  a  ■  ',  <r&xpowrew  sSphi  ~. 

Hark  5.  15  see  him.  .clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind 
Luke  S.  35  feet  of  Jesus,  clothed,  and  in  his  rigid  in. 
2TCND,  let  this  — 
7o  mind  this,  (ppa>v4w  toGto  phroned  touto. 

Phil.  2.    5  Let  this  [mind]  be  in  you,  which  was  al?o 
MIND,  to  be  of  one  or  the  same  — 
To  mind  *i>    same  thing,  to  aiirb  <ppoveu>  to  auto  ph. 
i.ie.  1    1  "■■  1  of  the  -  uue  mind  one  toward  another 


•Col. 
-Th. 
1  Ti. 
2T1. 
Titus  1. 
Rev.  17. 


2  C0.13.  11  Be  perfect,  .be  of  one  mind,  live  in  peace 
Phil-   4.   2  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  Lord 

MIND,  to  call  to  — 

7  indfput  in  mind,  &pafiifiv^o,Kaanamimnes. 

Mark  1 4.  72  Peter  called  to  mind  the  word  that  Jesus 

MIND,  of  one  — 

l.Ofa  like  mind,  6/x6<ppa}i/  homophron. 

1  Pe.  3.   8  Finally,  .all  of  one  mind,  having  conipas. 
2.To  mind  the  same  thing,  eppovew  to  %v  phroneo  to. 

Phil.  2.    2  the  same  love . .  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind 
MIND,  to  put  in  — 
To  remind  quietly,  viro/j.i/j.vf}tTK(i}  hupomimnesko. 

Titus  3.    1  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  princ. 
MIND,  with  one  — 
With  the  like  mind,  6/j.odvp.aZov  homothumadon. 

Rom  15.   6  That  ye  may  with  one  mind .  .one  mouth 
MINDED,  to  be  — 
1.2*0  be  icith  the  heart,  lb  cy  rrrn  hayah  im  leb. 

2  Ch.24.    4  Joash  was  minded  to  repair  the  house  of 

2.  To  wish,  will,  determine,  fiovAofj.ai,  euoAcu. 
Matt.  1.  19  Joseph,  .was  minded  to  put  her  awaypr. 
Acts  27.  39  a  shore,  into  the  which  they  were  minded 
2  Co.    1. 15  I  was  minded  to  come  unto  you  before 

1.  17  When  I  therefore  was  thus  [minded],  did 

3.  To  mind,  set  the  mind  on,  (ppovew  phroned. 
Gal.     5.  10  that  ye  will  be  none  otherwise  minded 
Phil.  3.  15  Let..bethusminded.,beotherwiseminded 

MINDED,  to  be  carnally  — 

The  mind  of  the  flesh,  tpp6vriua  rrjs  aapKos  phron. 

Rom.  8.  6  For  to  be  carnally  minded  (is)  death  ;  but 
MINDED,  to  be  sober  — 
To  be  of  a  sound  mind,  o-coeppopeco  sophroneo. 

Titus  2.    6  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober  minded 
MINDED,  to  be  spiritually  — 
The  mind  of  the  spirit,  <pp6vnua,  rov  irvev/xaros. 

Rom.  8.    6  to  be  spiritually  minded  (is)  life  and  peace 
MINDED,  to  be  high  — 
To  be  raised  or  puff zd  up,  rvcpSofxcu  tuphoomai. 

2  Ti.    3.    4  Traitors,  heady,  high  minded,  lovers  of  pi. 
MINDFTJL  (of),  to  be  — 
1.2*6  remember,  be  mindful  of ,  "aj  zakar. 

1  Ch.16. 15  Be  ye  mindful  always  of  his  covenant,  the 
Neh.  9.  17  neither  were  mindful  of  thy  wonders  that 
Psa.     8.   4  What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of 

in.   5  lie  will  ever  be  mindful  of  his  covenant 
115. 12  The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us  :  he 
Isa.    17.  10  hast  not  been  mindful  of  the  Rock  of  thy 

2.  To  remember,  be  mindful  of,  fj.ijxwno-no/xai  mimn. 

2  Ti.  1.  4  being  mindful  of  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be 
Heb.  2.  6  What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him 
2  Pe.    3.    2  That  ye  may  be  mindful  of  the  words  wh. 

Z.To  remember,  recollect,  fxvT)p.ovevw  mnHnioneuo. 

Heb.  11.  15  truly,  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that 
MINE  — 
1./,  I  myself ,  ';s  ani. 

Prov23- 15  be  wise,  my  heart  shall  rejoice,  even  mine 
2. My  hand,  "V  yadi. 

2  Sa.  14.  30  See,  Joab's  field  is  near  mine,  and  he  hath 

3.  With  me,  *T$y  immadi. 

Psa.  50. 11  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  (are)  mine 

4.  To  me,  my,  mine,  ipol  (dat.)  emoi. 

Rom  12.  19  Vengeance  (is)  mine;  I  will  repay,  saith 

5.  Of  me,  my,  mine,  ep.6s  {gem.)  emos. 

Matt&o.  23  is  not  mine  to  give,  but.  .for  whom  it  is 
John  7.  16  My  doctrine  isnot  mine,  but  his  that  sent 

10.  14  and  know  my  (sheep),  and  am  known  of 
14.  24  the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not  mine,  but 

16. 14  he  shan  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  show  (it) 
16.  15  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine 

16. 15  therefore  said  I,  that  he  shall  take  of  m. 
17. 10  And  all  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  m. 

1  Co.  9.   2  seal  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  L. 

9.   3  Mine  answer  to  them  that  do  examine  me 

Q.Ofme,  my,  mine,  ifxov  {gen.)  emou. 

Rom  16.  13  Salute  Rufus.  .and  his  mother  and  mine 

7.  To  m<\  my,  mine,  uol  (dat.)  moi. 

Luke  9.  38  look  upon  my  son ;  for  he  is  mine  only  c. 

8.  Of  me,  mine,  my,  /xov  {gen.)  mou. 

Matt.  7.  24  whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine 

7.  26  everyone  that  heareth  these  sayings  of  m. 

Luke  1.  44  thevoiceofthysalutationsoundedinmine 

11.  6  For  a  friend  of  mine  in  his  journey  is  come 

18.  3  came . .  saying,  Avenge  me  of  mine  adver. 

19.  27  But  those  mine  enemies,  which  would  not 
John  9.  11  Jesus  made  clay,  and  anointed  mine  eyes 

9.  15  He  put  clay  upon  mine  eyes,  and  I  washed 

9.  30  amarvellOUs  thing,  .he  bath  opened  mine 

Rom.  1 1.  13  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  I  magnify  mine  of. 

2  Co. 11.  30  I  will  glory  of.  .things  which  concern  m. 

12.  5  of  myself  i  will  not  glory,  but  in  [mine] in. 
Phil.  1.   4  ;  Rey.  22.  16  ;  DuarK  9.  24  ;  Luke  2.  30;  John 

2.  4;  Acts  21.  13  ;  16.  23. 
MINE  own  (self)  — 
1.  //<•,  it,  avrSs  autos. 

Lukeig.  23  I  might  have  required  mine  own  with  us.? 

2.0f  myself,  i/xavrdu  {gen.)  emautou. 

John  5.  30  I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing  :  as  I 


1  Co.  4.    3  small  thing.,  yea,  I  judge  not  mine  own  s. 
10.  33  notseekmgmnieownpront,butthe(profit) 
3.7*0  me,  my,  mine,  €/xos  {dat.)  emos. 

Mattzs.  27  I  should  have  received  mine  own  20. 15, 
John  5.  30  I  seek  not  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of 

6.  38  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of 

1  Co.    1.  15  say  that  I  had  baptized  in  mine  own  name 

16.  21  The  salutation  of  (me)  Paul  with  mine  own 
Gal.     6.  11  I  have  written  unto  you  with  mine  own 
Phil.   3.    9  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  wh. 

2  Th.  3. 17  The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  h. 
Phm.      12  therefore  receive  him  thatismineownbo. 

19  I  Paul  have  written  (it)  with  mine  own  h. 
4.  Of  me,  my,  mine,  fiov  {gen.)  mote. 

John  8.  50  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory :  there  is  one 
Acts  13.  22  a  man  after  mine  own  heart,  which  shall 
26.    4  which  was  at  the  first  among  mine  own  na. 
Gal.  ,1. 14  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own  nation 
MINGLE,  to  — 
l.Tomix,fyz  balal. 

Exod2g.  40  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with  the  fou. 
Lev.    2.    4  unleavened  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  w. 
2.    5  fine  flour  unleavened,  mingled  with  oil 

7.  10  every  meatoffering  mingled  with  oil,  and 

7. 12  unleavened  cakes  mingled  with  oil,  and 

7.  12  cakes  mingled  with  oil,  of  fine  flour,  fried 
9.   4  a  meat  offering  mingled  with  oil:  for  to  day 

14.  10  a  meat  offering,  mingled  with  oil,  and  one 

14.  21  one  tenth  deal  of  fine  flour  mingled  with 
23. 13  two  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  mingled  with 

Num.  6.  1 5  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and  wa. 

7. 13  full  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  for 
[So  in  v.  19,  25,  36,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79.] 

8.  8  fine  flour  mingled  with  oi!,  and  another 
15-  4.  6,  9  of  a  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with 
28.  5  mingled  with  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin 
28.    9,  12,  12  a  meat  offering,  mingled  with  oil 

28. 13  a  several  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with 

28.  20,  28  their  meat  offering,  .of  flour  mingled 

29.  3,  9,  14  their  meat  off ering .. flour  mingled 
2.To  mix,  mingle,  }0£  masak. 

Psa.  102.  9  I  have,  .mingled  my  drink  with  weeping 
Prov.  9.   2  she  hath  mingled  her  wine ;  she  hath  also 

9.  5  drink  of  the  wine  (which)  I  have  mingled 
Isa.     5.  22  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  drink 

19. 14  The  Lord  hath  mingled  a  perverse  spirit 
3.7*0  mix,  mingle,  fxiyt/vpt  mignumi. 

Matt  27.  34  They  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink  mingled 
Lukei3.  1  whose  blood  Pilate  had  mingled  with  their 
Rev.    8.    7  followed  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood 

15.  2  I  saw  asitwereaseaofglassrningledwith 
MINGLE  selves,  be  mingled,  to  — 

1.7*0  mingle  self,  3*3J  arab,  7. 

Ezra  9.    2  the  holy  seed  have  mingled  themselves 

Psa.  106.  35  But  were  mingled  among  the  heathen,  and 
2.To  be  mingled,  Inj  arab,  4. 

Dan.  2. 43  they  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the  seed 
MINGLED  people  — 
The  mixture,  Arab,  anwr  ha-ereb. 

Jer.  25.  20  all  the  mingled  people,  and  all  the  kings 
25.  24  all  the  kings  of  the  mingled  people  that 

Eze.  30.    5  Lydia,  and  all  the  mingled  people,  and  Ch. 

MINGLED  (seed)— 

l.TV'o  divers  kinds,  B\x?2)  kilayim. 

Lev.  19.  19  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  mingled  seed 
19. 19  neither  shall  a  garment  mingled  of  linen 

'2.  To  take  or  catch  self,  np?  laqach,  7. 

Exod.  9.  24  So  there  was  hail,  and  fire  mingled  with 
MIN-IA'-MIN,  ]?iirj  fortunate. 

1.  A  Levite  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  who  distributed  the 
tithes  and  oblations.    B.C.  724. 

2  Ch.31. 15  next  him  (were)  Eden,  and  M.,  and  Jeshua 

2.  A  priest  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel,  called  also 
Mtamin.    B.C.  450. 

Neh.  12. 17  Of  Abijah,  Zichri;  of  M.,of  Moadiah,  Piltai 
12.  41  the  priests;  Eliakim.Maaseiah.M^Michaiah 

MXNISH,  be  minished,  to  — 

1,  To  diminish,  withdraw,  jn-s  gara. 

Exod.  5. 19  Ye  shall  notminish.  .from  your  bricks  of 

2.  To  be  or  become  little,  few,  BJHJ  moot. 

Psa. 107.  39  areminishedandbruughtlowtlvroughop. 

MINISTER  — 

l.To  split,  till,  serve,  rvgpelach. 

Ezra   7.  24  or  ministers  of  this  house  of  God.it  shall 

2.7*0  minister,  serve,  TF3&  sho  rath,  3. 

Exod24.  13  Moses  rose  up,  and  his  minister  Joshua 
Josh.  1.    1  Joshua  the  sou  of  Nun,  Moses'  minisfa  r 

1  Ki.io.    5  the  attendance  of  his  ministers,  and  their 

2  Ch.  9.  4  the  attendance  of  his  ministers,  andtheir 
Ezra  8.  17  they shouldbringuntousministersforthe 
Psa. 103.  21  (ye)  ministers  of  Ins,  that  do  his  pleasure 

104.    4  Who  maketh.  .his ministers  a  flamingfire 

Isa.  61.   6  (men)  shall  call  you  the  ministers  of  our 

Jer.  33.  21  the  Levites  the  priests,  my  ministers 

Eze    44.  11  Yet  they  shall  be  ministers  in  mysanct. 

45.    4  the  priests  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary 

45.    s  the  Levites,  the  ministers  of  the  house 

46. 24  where  the  ministers  of  the  house  shall!). 

Joel    1.    9  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers,  mourn 

1.  13  ye  ministers  of  the  altar,  .ye ministers  of 

2. 17  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  die  Lori> 


MINISTER 


663 


MIRIAM 


13- 

15- 
[CO.  3. 
I  CO.     3. 

6. 


Gal. 
Eph. 


Col. 


Z.Deacon,  labourer,  ministrant,  Skikouos  diakonos. 
Matt  20.  26  great  aniongyou,  let  himbeyourrninister 
Mark  10.  43  be  great  among  you,  shall  be  your  minis. 
Roin.13.    4  For  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for 

4  for  he  is  the  minister  of  God,  a  revenger 
8  Christ  was  a  minister  of  the  circumcision 

5  but  minister  by  whom  ye  believed,  even 

6  Who  also  hath  made  us  able  ministers  of 
4  approving  ourselves  as  the  ministers  of  G. 

.  15  (it  is)  no  great  tiling  if  his  ministers  also 
11.  15  transformed  as  the  ministers  of  unright. 
11.  23  Are  they  ministers  of  Christ?  I  speak  as 

2.  17  (is)  therefore  Christ  the  minister  of  sin? 

3.  7  Whereof  I  wasmadeaminister.according 
6.  21  a  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister 

7  who  is  for  you  a  faithful  minister  of  Chr. 
1.  23  gospel,  .whereof  I  Paul  am  made  a  mini. 

1.  25  Whereof  I  am  made  a  minister,  according 

4.  7  a  beloved  brother,  and  a  faithful  minister 
1  Th.  3.   2  [our  brother,  and  minister  of  God,  and] 

1  XL   4.   6  thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  C. 

A.Public  worker,  or  labourer,  Xeiroupyos  leitourgos. 

Roni  13.    6  they  are  God's  ministers,  attending  cont. 

15. 16  That  I  should  be  the  minister  of  Jesus  C. 

Heb.    1.    7  Who  maketh.  .his  ministers  a  flame  of  fire 

8.    2  A  minister  of  the  sanctuary,and  of  the  true 

5.  An  under  rower,  assistant,  v-Kwpsrns  huperetes. 

Luke   1.    2  eye  witnesses,  and  ministers  of  the  word 

4.  20  gave  (it)  again  to  the  minister,  and  sat  d. 

Acts  13.    5  and  they  had  also  John  to  (their)  minister 

26. 16  make  thee  a  minister  ami  a  witness  both 

1  Co.  4.   1  so  account  of  us  as  of  the  ministers  of  C. 

MINISTER  (to  or  unto),  to  — 
I.To  minister,  Vfdv  shemash,  3. 

Dan.  7. 10  thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  Mm 
2.7*0  minister,  serve,  rny  sharath,  3. 

Exod2S.  35  And  it  shall  be  upon  Aaron^o  minister 

28.  43  they  come  near  unto  the  altar  to  minister 

29.  30  when  he  conieth.  .to  minister  in  the  holy 
30.20  when  they  come  near  to  the  altar  toniin. 
35.  19  The  cloths,  .to  minister  in  the  priest's  offi. 
39.  26  round  about  the  hem  of  the  robe  to  niini. 
39.41  The  cloths,  .to  minister  in  the  priest's  offi. 

Num  1.  50  they  shall  minister  unto  it,  and  shall 

3.   6  priest,  that  they  may  minister  unto  him 

3.  31  wherewith  they  minister,  and  the  hanging 

4.  g  oil  vessels,  .wherewith  they  ministerunto 
4. 12  wherewith  they  minister  in  the  sanctuary 
4. 14  wherewith  theyministeraboutit.  .censers 
8.  26  But  shall  minister  with  their  brethren  in 

16.   9  the  congregation  to  minister  unto  them 
18.   2  maybe  joined  unto  thee,  and  minister  unto 
Deut  10.    8  to  stand  before  the  Lord  to  minister  unto 
17. 12  the  priest  that  standeth  to  minister  there 
18.   5  to  stand  to  minister  in  the  name  of  the  L. 

18.  7  Then.  .shaH minister  inthenameof  theL. 

21.  5  Lord  thyGod  hath  chosen  to  ministerunto 
t  Sa.    2.  11  the  child  did  minister  unto  the  Lord  be. 

2.  18  But  Samuel  ministered  before  the  Lord 

.    1  the'ehild  Samuelministered  unto  the  Lord 

.  1 7  he  called  his  servant  that  ministered  unto 

.    4  cherished  the  king,  and  ministered  to  him 

.  15  Abishag  the  Shunammite  ministered  unto 

8.  11  thepriestscouldnotstandtoniinisterbec. 

19.  21  went  after  Elijah,  and  ministered  unto 
.  25.  14  the  vessels  of  brass  wherewith  they  mi. 

1  Ch.  6.  32  they  ministered  before  the  dwelling  place 

15.  2  to  carry  the  ark  of  God,  and  to  minister 
16.-  4  to  minister  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

16.  37  to  minister  before  the  ark  continually,  as 
23.  13  to  minister  unto  him,  and  to  bless  in  his 
26. 12  men . .  to  minister  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
28.    1  captains  of  the  companies  that  ministered 

2  Ch.  5.  14  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  by 

8.  14  to  praise  and  minister  before  the  priests 

13. 10  the  priests,  which  minister  unto  the  Lord 

22.  8  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah,  that  ministered 

23.  6  and  they  that  minister  of  the  Levites 

29. 11  thatye  should  minister  unto  him,  and  burn 
31.    2  to  minister,  and  to  give  thanks,  and  to  p. 

Neh.  10.  36  priests  that  minister  in  the  house  of  our 

10.  39  the  priests  that  minister,  and  the  porters 

Esth.  2.    2  said  the  king's  servants  that  ministered  u. 

6.   3  said  the  king's  servants  that  ministered  u. 

Isa.   60.    7  rams  of  Nebaioth  shall  minister  unto  thee 

60. 10  their  kings  shall  minister  unto  thee ;  for 
Jer.  33.  22  David,  .ami  the  Levites  that  ministerunto 

52.  18  vessels  of  brass  wherewith  thej  ministered 
Eze.  40.  46  which  comenearto  the  Lord  to  minister  u. 

42. 14  shall  lay  their  garments  wherein  they  m. 
43. 19  to  minister  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  God 

44. 1 1  ministering  to  the  house . .  to  ministerunto 

44. 12  Because  theyministereduntothembefore 

44. 15  theyshall  comenearto  me  to  ministerunto 
44.  16  shall  come  near  to  my  table,  to  minister 
44.  17  whiles  they  minister  in  the  gates  of  the 
44.  19  off  their  garments  wherein  they  ministered 

44.  27  to  minister  in  the  sanctuary,  he  shall  offer 

45.  4  which  shall  come  near  to  minister  unto 

3.  Ministry,  rn$  shareth. 

2  Ch.24. 14  were  made,  .vessels  to  minister,  and  to 

4.  TV)  act  as  a  deacon,  serve,  StaKovea  diahoned. 

Matt.  4.  11  angels  came  and  ministered  unto  him 

8.  15  and  she  arose,  and  ministered  unto  them 
20.  28  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister 
25. 44  in  prison,  and  did  not  minister  unto  thee? 
27-  55  which  followed  Jesus,  .ministering  unto 

Mark  1. 13  tempted.,  and  the  an  jels  ministered  unto 


aSa. 
iKi. 


a  XL 


Phm. 
Heb. 

iPe. 


Mark  1.  31  fever  left  her,  and  she  ministered  unto  th. 
10.45  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister 
15.  41  followed  him,  and  ministered  unto  him 

Luke  4.  39  immediately  she  arose  and  ministered  unto 

8.  3  which  ministered  unto  him  of  their  subs. 
Acts  19.  22  sent,  .two  of  them  that  ministered  unto 
Roni  ie,,  25  I  go  unto  Jerusalem  to  minister  unto  the 
2  Co.   3.    3  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by 
2  Ti.    1.  iS  in  how  many  things  he  ministered  unto 

13  he  might  have  ministered  unto  me  in  the 
6. 10  ye  have  ministered  to  the  saints, and  do  m. 
1.  12  they  did  minister  the  things  which  are 
4. 10  minister  the  same  one  to  another,  as  good 

4.  11  if  any  man  minister,  (let  him  do  it)  as  of 

5.  With  a  view  to  ministration,  els  Siatopiap  eis  diak. 
Heb.    1.  14  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who 

6. To  give,  didwfit  didomi. 

Eph.   4.  29*that  it  may  minister  grace  unto  the  hea. 

7.  To  supply,  €TrtxopT)ysu}  epichoregeo. 

2  Co.  9. 10  Now  he  that  ministereth  seed  to  the  sower 
Gal.  3.  s  He  therefore  that  ministereth  to  you  the 
2  Pe.   1.  11  For  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto 

S.To  work  as  a  priest,  tepovpyeco  hierourgeo. 
Roni  15.  16  ministering  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the 

9.  To  work  publicly,  \etrovpy4w  leitourged. 

Acts  13.  2  As  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  nnd  fas. 
Horn.  1 5.  27  their  duty  is  also  to  minister  unto  them 
Heb.  10. 11  every  priest  standeth  daily  ministering 

lO.To  hold  alongside,  7rapex&>  parecho, 

1  Ti.    1.   4  endless  genealogies,  which  minister  que 

11.  To  act  as  an  under  rower,  assist,  virwpeTeoo. 
Acts  20.  34  these  hands  have  ministered  unto  my  nee. 

24.  23  forbid  none  of  his  acquaintance  to  minis. 

12.  To  supply,  {lead  the  chorus),  xoP'0y^to  choregeo. 

2  Co.  9. 10  both  minister  bread  for  (your)  food,  andni. 

MINISTER  about,  to  — 

To  work;  epyd(ofxat  ergazomai. 

1  Co.  9. 13  that  they  which  ministeraboutholy  things 

MINISTER  judgment,  to  — 

To  judge,  plead,  strive,  decide,  Vi  din. 

Psa.     9.    8  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  the  people 

MINISTERED  (nourishment)  — 
1. Public  worker  or  servant,  \eirovpy6s  leitourgos. 
Phil.   2.  25  your  messenger,  and  he  that  ministered 

2.  To  supply,  {lead  the  chorus),  iirixopnyeoo  epichor. 
Col.     2.  19  having  nourishment  ministered,  and  knit 

MINISTERING  — 

1. Service,  niUJi  abodah. 

1  Ch.  9.  28  had  the  charge  of  the  ministering  vessels 

2. Ministration,  dtaicopla  diakonia. 

Rom  12.    7  (let  us  wait)  on  (our)  ministering;  or  he 

2  Co.    8.   4  the  fellowship  of  the  ministering  to  the  s. 

9.  1  For  as  touching  the  ministering  to  the  sa. 

S .  Liturgical,  working  publicly,  Xeirovpyttcos. 
Heb.    1.  14  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent 

MINISTRATION  — 

1.  Ministration,  Staxopta  diakonia. 

Acts    6.    1  were  neglected  in  the  daily  ministration 

2  Co.   3.    7  But  if  the  ministration  of  death,  written 

3.    8  How  shall  not  the  ministration  of  the  sp. 

3.    9  For  if  the  ministration  of  condemnation 

3.  9  much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  righ. 
9. 13  Whiles  by  the  experiment  of  this  ministra. 

I.Public  work,  Xetrovpytd  leitourgia. 

Luke  1.  23  as  soon  as  the  days  of  his  ministration 

MINISTRY  — 

XMand,  ~i;  yad. 

2  Ch.  7.  6  when  David  praised  by  their  ministry;  and 
Hos.  12. 10  I  have  also  spoken . .  by  the  ministry  of  the 

^.Ministry,  n~};y  shareth. 

Num.  4. 12  shall  take  all  the  instruments  of  ministry 
3. Ministration,  dianopia  diakonia. 

Acts    1.  17  and  had  obtained  part  of  tMs  ministry 
1.  25  That  he  may  take  part  of  this  ministry 
6.    4  to  prayer,  and  to  the  ministry  of  the  word 
12.  25  when  they  had  fulfilled  (their)  ministry 

20.  24  finish  my  course  with  joy,  and  the  minis. 

21.  19  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by  his  min. 
Rom  12.    7  Or  ministry,  (let  us  wait),  .or  he  that  tea. 

1  C0.16. 15  have  addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry 

2  Co.  4.    1  seeing  we  have  this  ministry,  as  we  have 

5.  18  hath  given  to  us  the  ministry  of  reconcil. 

6.  3  no  offence,  .that  the  ministry  be  not  bla. 
Eph.  .4. 12  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edi. 
Col.     4.  17  Take  heed  to  the  ministry  which  thou 

1  Ti.    1.  12  counted . .  faithful,  putting  me  into  the  m. 

2  Ti.   4.    5  watch  thou.. make  full  proof  of  thy  mini. 

4.  11  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry 

LPublic  work,  XeiTOvpyia  leitotirgia. 

Heb.    8.    6  hath  lie  obtained  a  more  excellent  minis. 
9.  21  sprinkled,  all  the  vessels  of  the  ministry 

MINISTRY,  service  cf  t'ae  — 

Service,  rnisy.  abodah. 

Num.  4/47  that  came  to  do  the  sendee  of  the  ministry 


HUf-NI,  *j?. 

The  district  of  Mauavas  in  the  centre  of  later  Armenia, 

near  Ararat. 

Jer.  51.  27  the  kingdoms  of  Ararat,  M.,  and  Ashche. 

MIN'-NITH,  rT3D  distribution. 

A  city  in  the  E.  of  Ammon,  four  miles  from  Heshbon, 

on  the  way  to  Philadelphia,  whence  grain  was  taken  by 

merchants  to  Tyre. 

Judgn.  33  till  thou  come  to  M.,  (even)  twenty  cities 
Eze.  27. 17  they  traded  in  thy  market  wheat  of  M. 

MINSTREL  — 

1. To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  |3j  nagan,  3. 

2  EJ.  3.  15  bring  me  a  minstrel. .  when  the  minstrel 
2. Pipe/,  avKvTns  auletes. 

Matt.  9.  23  saw  the  minstrels  and  the  people  making 
MINT  — 
Mint,  a  fragrant  herb,  -^Si/oo^ioV  heditosmon. 

Matt  23.  23  ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and  cummin 

Luken.  42  ye  tithe  mint  and  rue,  and  all  manner  of 

MIPH'-KAD,  ijjat?  appointed  place. 

Gate  of  Jerusalem  or  of  the  temple,  near  the  S.E.  corner. 
Neh.   3.  31  over  against  the  gate  M.,  and  to  the  going 

MIRACLE  — 

1.-4  sign,  nit*  oth. 

Nunii4.  22  my  miracles  which  I  did  in  Egypt  and  in 
Deut  11.    3  his  miracles,  and  his  acts,  which  he  did 

2. Miracle,  wonder,  sign,  type,  n$iD  mophcth. 

Exod.  7.    9  Show  a  miracle  for  you  :  then  thou  shalt 
Deut  29.    3  temptations,  .the  signs,  and  those  great  m. 

S.To  be  wonderful,  vhspala,  2. 

Judg.  6.  13  where  (be)  all  his  miracles  wMch  our  fa. 

4.. Act  of  power,  Svpa/xis  dunamis. 

Mark  9.  39  no  man,  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my 

Acts    2.  22  approved  of  God  among  you  by  miracles 

8. 13  beholding  the  miracles  and  signs  which 

19.  11  God  wrought  special  miracles  by  the  ha. 

1  Co.  12.  10  To  another  the  working  of  miracles;  to 

12.  28  thirdly,  teachers,  after  that  miracles,  then 
Gal.  3.  5  therefore  that,  .worketh  miracles  among 
Heb.   2.   4  with  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 

5. A  sign,  owfj.e'top  semeion. 

Luke23.    8  he  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done 
John  2.  11  This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  Ca. 

2.  23  when  they  saw  the  miracles  which  he  did 

3.  2  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou 

4.  54  This  (is)  again  the  second  miracle.  .Jesus 
6.   2  they  saw  his  miracles  which  he  did  on 

6.  14  when  theyjhad  seen  a  miracle  which  Jesus 

6.  26  not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles,  but  be. 

7.  31  will  he  do  more  miracles  than  these  winch 
9.  16  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such  miracles 

1  x  41  unto  him,  and  said,  John  did  no  miracle  ? 

11.  47  What  do  we?  for  this  mandoeth  manym. 
12. 18  that  they  heard  that  he  had  done  this  m. 

12.  37  though  he  had  doneso  manymiracles  be. 
Acts  4.  16  for  that  indeed  a  notable  miracle  hath 

4.  22  on  whom  this  miracle  of  healing  was  sh. 
6.    8  did  great  wonders  and  miracles  among 

8.  6  hearing  and  seeing  the  miracles  which  he 
15.  12  declaring  whatmiraclesand  wonders  God 

Rev.  13.  14  by.  .those  miracles  which  he  had  power 
16. 14  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils,  working  m. 
19.  20  the  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles 

MIRACLES,  workers  of  — 

Power  ;  (pi.)  powers,  Svpafits  dunamis. 

1  C0.12.  29  (are)  all  teachers?  (are)  all  workers  of  m.? 

MIRE  — 
l.Mire,  f3  bots. 

Jer.  ,38.  22  thy  feet  are  sunk  in  the  mire,  .they  are 
l.Mire,  n$3  bitstsah. 

Job     8. 11  Can  the  rush  grow  up  without  mire?  can 
3. Heap,  clay,  iDh  chomer. 

Job    30.  19  He  hath  cast  me  into  the  mire,  and  I  am 

Isa.    10.    6  to  tread  them  down  like  the  niire  of  the 

i.Mud,  mire,  u"P  tit. 

2  Sa.  22.  43  I  did  stamp  them  as  the  mire  of  the  street 
Job  41.  30  spreadeth  sharp  pointed  things  on  the  m. 
Psa.  69.  14  Deliver  me  out  ofthe  mire,  and  let  me  not 
Jer.  38.  6  but  mire,  so  Jeremiah  sunk  in  the  mire 
Mic.  7.  10  shall  she  be  trodden  down  as  the  mire  of 
Zech.  9.    3  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets 

10.    5  tread  down  (then-  enemies)  in  the  mire  of 

5. Mire,  \vt  yaven. 

Psa.  69.    2  I  sink  in  deep  mire,  where,  .no  standing 
6.  Filth,  mire,  bs"i  replies. 

Isa.  57.  20  sea.. whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt 

l.Mire,  filth,  &6p&opos  borboros. 

2  Pe.  2.  22  was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire 
MI-RI'-AM,  Dl-iJp  fat,  thick,  strong. 
1.  The  elder  sister  01  Aaron  and  Moses;  she  watched  over 
Moses,  sang  at  the  Red  Sea,  murmured  against  Moses, 
and  was  smitten  with  leprosy.    B.C.  1578-1460. 

Exodis.  20  And  M.  the  prophetess,  the  sister  of  Aaron 
15.  21  And  M.  answered  them,  Sing  yeto  theL. 
Numi2.  1  And  M.  and  Aaron  spake  against  Moses 
12.  4  And  the  Lord  spake. .unto  M.,  Come  out 
12.  s  called  Aaron  andM:  and  they  both  came 
12. 10  behold,  M.  (became)  leprous,  (white)  as  s. 
12. 10  Aaron  looked  upon  M.,  and  behold,  (she 


MIRMA 


664 


MIZAR 


Numi2.  15  And  M.was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 
12. 15  the  people  journeyed  not  till  M.  was  bro. 
20.  1  the  people  abode  in  Kadesh ;  and  M.  died 
26.  59  she  bare  unto  Amram.  .M.  their  sister 

Deut  24.   9  Remember  what  the  Lord  . .  did  unto  M. 

1  Ch.   6.    3  the  children  of  Amram;  Aaron.. and  M. 

Mic.  6.  4  I  sent  before  thee  Moses,  Aaron,  and  M. 
2.  A  daughter  of  Ezra  of  the  tribe  of  Judah. 

1  Ch.  4.  17  she  bare  M..,  and  Shammai,  and  Ishbah 

HIR'-MA,  nnip  height, 

A  son  of  Shaharaiin,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.  8.  10  Jeuz,  and  Shaehia,  and  M.    These  (were) 
MIRTH  — 
l.Joy,  rejoicing,  bibo  masos. 

Isa.   24.    8  The  mirth  of  tabrets  ceaseth,  the  noise  of 

24.  11  all  joy  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land 
Hos.    2. 11 1  will  also  cause  all  her  mirth  to  cease,  her 

2.  Rejoicing,  joy,  gladness,  mirth,  nnpt?  simchah. 
Gen.  31.  27  that  I  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  m. 
Neh.   8.  12  to  send  portious,  and  to  make  great  mirth 
Psa.137.    3  they  that  wasted  us  (required  of  us)  mirth 
Prov  14.  13  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  (is)  heaviness 
Eccl.  2.    1  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth 

2.    2  I  said  of  laughter.,  and  of  mirth,  What  d. 

7.    4  the  heart  of  fools  (is)  in  the  house  of  m. 

8. 15  Then  I  commended  mirth,  because  a  man 

Z.Joy,  rejoicing,  gladness,  pb'tt'  sason. 

Jer.     7.  34  voice  of  mirth,  and  the  voice  of  gladness 

16.  9  voice  of  mirth,  and  the  voice  of  gladness 

25.  10  voice  of  mirth,  and  the  voice  of  gladness 
MIRTH,  to  make  — 

To  enjoy,  rejoice,  v'-w,  irb*,  sis,  sus. 

Eze.  21.  10 it  is  furbished,  .should  we  then  make  m.? 
MIRY  (place)  — 
I. Mire,  n^3  bitstsah. 

Eze.  47.  11  the  miry  places  thereof,  and  themarishes 
'2. Mire,  mud,  ya  tin. 

Dan.  2.  41,  43  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry 
Z.Mire,  jv  yaven. 

Psa.  40.    2  He  brought  me  up . .  out  of  the  miry  clay 
MISCARRY,  to  — 
To  bereave,  cause  to  miscarry,  ?3v?  shakol,  5. 

Hos.    9.  14  give  them  a  miscarrying  womb  and  dry  b. 
MISCHIEF  — 
1. Iniquity,  vanity,  fix  aven. 

Psa.  36.   4  He  deviseth  mischief  upon  his  bed :  he  s. 
55,  10  mischief  also  and  sorrow  (are)  in  the  midst 

Eze.  11.    2  these  (are)  the  men  that  devise  mischief 

2.  Mischief,  injury,  pDN  ason. 

Gen.  42.    4  Lest  peradventure  mischief  befall  him 
42.  38  if  mischief  befall  him  by  the  way  in  the 
44.  29  and  mischief  befall  him,  ye  shall  bring  d. 

Exodai.  22  so  that  her  fruit  depart,  .yet  no  mischief 
21.  23  if.  .mischief  follow,  then  thou  shalt  give 

3.  Mischief,  calamity,  rnrr  havvah. 

Psa.  52.    2  thy  tongue  deviseth  mischiefs ;  like  a  sh. 

4.  Mischief,  accident,  .tin  hovah. 

Isa.  47.  11  mischief  shall  fall  upon  thee;  thou  shalt 
Eze.    7.  26  Mischief  shall  come  upon  mischief,  and 

5.  Wicked  thought  or  device,  nsi  zimmah. 

Psa.  26.  10  In  whose  hands  (is)  mischief,  and  their  ri. 
119.  150  They  draw  nigh  that  follow  after  mischi. 
Prov.  10.  23  (It  is)  as  sport  to  afool  to  do  mischief :  but 
^.Perversity,  punishment  for  iniquity,  ji#  avon. 

2  Ki.   7.   9  some  mischief  will  come  upon  us :  now 
7. Labour,  perverseness,  misery,  ?pjj  amal. 

Job    15.  35  They  conceive  mischief,  and  bring  forth 

Psa.     7.  14  conceived  mischief,  and  brought  forth  fa. 

7.  16  His  mischief  shall  return  upon  his  own  h. 

10.    7  under  his  tongue  (is)  mischief  and  vanity 

10.  14  for  thou  behohlest  mischief  and  spite,  to 
94.  20  throne  •  ■  which  f  rameth  mischief  by  a  law 

140.    9  let  the  mischief  of  their  own  lips  cover  the. 
Prov 24.    2  studieth.  .and  their  lips  talk  of  mischief. 
Isa.    59.   4  they  conceive  mischief , and  bring  forth  in. 
8.  Evil)  wrong,  m  ra. 

Exod32.  12  For  mischief  did  he  bring  them  out,  to 

32.  22  the  people,  that  they  (are  set)  on  mischief 
Deut  32.  23  I  will  heap  mischiefs  upon  them ;  I  will 

1  Sa.  23.    9  knew  that  Saul  secretly  practised  mischief 

2  Sa.  16.    8  thou  (art  taken)  in  thy  mischief,  because 
1  Ki.  11.25  besides  themisehiefthatHadad(did):and 

20.    7  and  see  how  this  (man)  seeketh  mischief 

Neh.  6.    2  But  they  thought  to  do  me  mischief 

Esth.  8.    3  to  put  away  the  mischief  of  Haman  the  A. 

Psa.  28.    3  speak  peace. .  mischief  (is)  in  their  hearts 

52.    1  Why  boastest  thou  thyself  in  mischief,  O 

140.   2  Which  imagine  mischiefs  in  (their)  heart 

Prov.  6.  14  he  deviseth  mischief  continually;  he  so. 

6.  18  feet  that  be  swift  in  running  to  mischief 

11.  27  he  that  seeketh  mischief,  it  shall  come 

12.  21  but  the  wicked  shall  be  filled  with  misch. 

13.  17  A  wicked  messeugerfallethinto  mischief 

17.  20  a  perverse  tongue  falleth  into  mischief 
24. 16  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  mischief 
28.  14  hardeneth  his  heart  shall  fall  into  misch. 

Dau.  11.  27  these  king's  hearts  (shall  be)  to  do  misch. 
Hos.    7.  15  yet  do  they  imagine  mischief  against  me 
9. Easy  work,  craftiness,  fiaStvvpyia.  rhadiourgia. 
Acts  13.  10  O  full  of  all  subtilty  and  all  mischief 


MISCHIEF,  to  do  or  imagine  — 
l.To  do  evil,  yjnr  raa,  5. 

Prov.  4. 16  sleep  not,  except  they  have  done  mischief 

2.  To  devise  mischief,  nnn  hathath,  Sa. 

Psa.  62.    3  How  long  will  ye  imagine  mischief  against 
MISCHIEVOUS  (device  or  thing)  — 
1. Mischief,  calamity,  nyi  havvah. 

Psa.  138.  12  that  seek  my  hurt  speak  mischievous th. 

Mic.    7.    3  uttereth  his  mischievous  desire  :  so  they 

2.  Wicked  device,  narp  mezimmah. 

Psa.  21. 11  For.  .they  imagined  amischievous  device 
Prov  24.    8  to  do  evil  shall  be  called  a  mischievous 

3.  Evil,  bad,  sad,  wrong,  jn  ra. 

Eccl.  10. 13  the  end  of  his  talk  (is)  mischievous  mad. 
MISERABLE,  that  is  in  misery,  most  — 
1. Laborious,  perverse,  miserable,  Vpj;  amal. 

Job    16.    2  I  have  heard . .  miserable  comforters  (are) 
^.Labouring,  perverse,  miserable,  bay  amel. 

Job     3.  20  is  light  given  to  him  that  is  in  misery 
3,  An  object  for  kindness,  i\eeiv6s  eleeinos. 

1  C0.15.  19  in  this  life . .  we  are  of  all  men  most  mis. 

Rev.    3. 17  thou  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and 
MISERABLY  — 
Evilly,  KaK&s  kakds. 

Mattzi.  41  He  will  miserably  destroy  those  wicked 
MISERY  — 

1.  Miserable,  mourning,  ino  marud. 

Lam.  1.    7  remembered  in  the  days,  .of  her  miseries 
3.  igRemembering.  .my  misery,  the  wormwood 

2.  Labour,  perverseness,  misery,  bay  amal. 

Judgro.  16  his  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  Is. 
Job    11.  16  Because  thou  shalt  forget  (thy)  misery 
Prov  31.   7  forget  his  poverty,  and  remember  his  m. 

3.  Evil,  yn  ra. 

Eccl.    8.    6  therefore  the  misery  of  man  (is)  great  upon 
i.Orievotis  misery,  raAanrcopla  talaiporia. 

Rom.    3.  16  Destruction  and  misery  (are)  in  their  ways 
Jas.       5.    1  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come 

MIS'-GAB,  sap'pn  the  high  land. 
The  mountainous  country  of  Moab. 

Jer.  48.    1  thus  saith  the  Lord.  .M.  is  confounded 
MI-SHA'-EL,  Sn^'P  who  is  xohat  God  is  ? 

1.  A  son  of  Uzziel,  son  of  Kohath.     B.C.  1452. 

Exod.  6.  22  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  M.,  and  Elzaphan,  and 
Lev.  10.    4  Moses  called  M.  aud  Elzaphan,  the  sons 

2.  One  who  stood  beside  Ezra  when  he  read  the  law. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.   8.    4  on  his  left  hand,  Pedaiah,  and  ST.,  and  M. 

3.  A  companion  of  Daniel,  also  called  Meshek.     B.C. 
607. 

Dan.    1.    6  among  these  were..Hananiah,  M.,  and 
1.    7  he  gave,  .(the  name),  .to  M.,  of  Meshach 

1.  11  had  set  over  Daniel,  Hananiah,  M.,  and 
1. 19  none  like  Daniel,  Hananiah,  M.,  aud  Az. 

2.  17  Daniel,  .made  the  thing  known  to.  .M. 
MISH'-AM,  ds;^p  impetuous,  haste,  fame. 

A  Benjamite,  son  of  Elpaal.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.  12  The  sons  of  Elpaal ;  Eber,  and  M.,  and  S. 
MISH-E'-AL,  MISH'-AL,  bwpa  depression. 
A  Levitical  city  in  Asher,  near  Amad. 

Josh  19.  26  Alammelech,  and  Amad,  and  M. ;  and 
21.  30  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  11.  with  her  suburbs 
MISH'-MA.  yapp  fame. 
A  son  of  Ishmael,  son  of  Hagar.     B.C.  1846. 

Gen.  25.  14  And  M.,  and  Dumah,  and  Massa 

1  Ch.  1.  30  M.,  and  Dumah,  Massa,  Hadad,  and  Tenia 
4.  25  Shallum  his  son,  Mibsam  his  son,  M.  his 
4.  26  sons  of  M.  ;  Haniuel  his  son,  Zacchur  his 
MISH-MAN'-NAH,  njpgto  strength,  vigour. 
A  Gadite  that  joined  David  in  Ziklag.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12. 10  M.  the  fourth,  Jeremiah  the  fifth 
MISH-RA-TTES,  *y~\VQ, 
A  family  of  Kirjath-jearim. 

1  Ch.  2.  S3  the  Shumathites,  and  the  M. :  of  them  c. 
MIS-PE'-RETH,  rnspp  writing. 

The  person  called  Mispar  iu  Ezra  2.  2,  who  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  538. 

Neh  7.  7  Who  came  with  Zerubbabel,  Jeshua.  .M. 
MIS-RE-PHOTH  MA'-IM,  n%  niDnfp  burning  waters. 
A  city  E.  of  Sidon ;  same  as  Zarepliath. 

Josh  11.    8  chased  them  unto.  .M.,  and  unto  the  va. 
13.   6  the  hill  country  from  Lebanon  unto  M. 
MISS,  to  — 
1.7*o  err,  sin,  miss,  Nan  chata,  5. 

Judg2o.  16  sling  stones  at  an  hair,  .and  not  miss 
2.  To  inspect,  look  after,  "ips  paqad. 

1  Sa.  20.    6  If  thy  father  at  all  miss  me,  then  say,  D. 
25.  15  neither  missed  we  anything,  as  long  as  we 
MISSED,  MISSING,  to  be  — 
To  insjiect,  look  after,  "lpfi  paqad,  2. 

1  Sa.  20.  18  thou  shalt  be  missed,  because  thy  seat  will 
25.  7  neither  was  there  ought  missing  unto  them 
25.  21  so  that  nothing  was  missed  of  all  that 

1  Ki.  20.  39  if  by  any  means  he  be  missing,  then  shall 


MIST  — 

l.Mist,  vapottr,  in  ed. 

Gen.    2.    6  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth,  and 

%Thick  mist,  fog,  o^aus  achlus. 

Acts  13.  11  immediately  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and 

3.  Thick  darkness,  blackness,  £6<pos  zophos. 

2  Pe.   2. 17  to  whom  the  mist  of  darkness  is  reserved 

MISTRESS  — 

l.Lady,  owner,  rhyji  baalah. 

1  Ki.  17.  17  the  son  of.  .the  mistress  of  the  house,  fell 
Nah.   3.   4  the  mistress  of  witchcrafts,  that  selleth 

2. Mistress,  mighty  one,  n-pa  gebereth. 

Gen.  16.    4  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her  eyes 
16.    8  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  Sarai 
16.    9  Return  to  thy  mistress,  and  submit  thy. 

2  Ki.  5.  3  she  said  unto  her  mistress,  Would  God  my 
Psa.123.  2  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand  of  her  m. 
Prov  30.  23  an  handmaid  that  is  heir  to  her  mistress 
Isa.   24.   2  as  with  the  maid,  so  with  her  mistress 

MISUSE,  to  — 

To  shoiv  self  a  deceiver,  pyn  taa,  7a. 

2  Ch.36.  16  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of 
MITE  — 
A  lepton,  (tenth  of  a  penny),  Xvktop  lepton. 

Marki2.  42  she  threw  in  two  mites,  which  make  a  f. 

Lukei2.  59  not . .  till  thou  hast  paid  the  very  last  mite 
21.   2  poor  widow  casting  in  thither  two  mites 

MTTH'-CAH,  nj?rjp  sweet  place. 

Tiie  24th  station  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  the  13th  from 

Sinai,  in  Arabia  the  rocky. 

Num33.  28  removed  from  Tarah,  and  pitched  in  M. 
33.  2§  they  went  from  M.,  and  pitched  in  Hash. 
MITH-NTTE,  'jnp. 

Patronymic  of  Jbshaphat,  one  of  David's  valiant  men. 
B.  C.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  43  son  of  Maachah,  and  Joshaphat  the  M. 

MITH-RE'-DATH,  rmnp  given  by  Mithra,  i.e.  -sun. 

1.  The  treasurer  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra    1.    8  by  the  hand  of  M.  the  treasurer,  and  nu. 

2.  An  enemy  of  the  Jews  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes  king: 
of  Persia.     B.C.  522. 

Ezra  4.   7  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes  wrote.  .M.,  Tab. 

MITRE  — 

l.A  mitre,  nssiip  mitsnepheth. 

Exod28.    4a  broidered  coat,  a  mitre,  and  a  girdle 
28.  37  blue  lace,  that  it  may  be  upon  the  mitre 
28.  37  upon  the  forefront  of  the  mitre  it  shall  be 

28.  39  thou  shalt  make  the  mitre  (of)  fine  linen 

29.  6  And  thou  shalt  put  the  mitre  upon  his  h. 
29.    6  and  put  the  holy  crown  upon  the  mitre 
39.  28  a  mitre  of  fine  linen,  and  goodly  bonnets 
39.  31  lace,  .to  fasten  (it)onhigh  upon  the  mitre 

Lev.    8.    9  And  he  put  the  mitre  upon  his  head;  also 
8.   9  also  upon  the  mitre,  .upon  his  fore  front 
16.  4  with  the  linen  mitre  shall  he  be  attired 

2.  Diadem,  hood,  f],jy  tsaniph. 

Zech.  3.    5  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head 
3.    5  So  they  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head,  and 

MI  TY-LE'-NE,  MiTv\-fjvn. 

The  capital  city  of  Lesbos,  in  the  JEgean  Sea,  birthplace 

of  Sappho,   Alcams,   Pittacus,   <&c. ;    now  Castro    and 

Mitylen. 

Acts  20. 14  at  Assos,  we  took  him  in,  and  came  to  M 
MIX  self,  to  — 
To  mix  self  S73  balal,  la. 

Hos.    7.    8  Ephraim,  he  hath  mixed  himself  among 

MIXED  (-with),  to  be  — 
l.To  mix,  ?rp  mahal. 

Isa.     1.  22  Thy  silver  is.  .dross,  thy  wine  mixed  with 

2.To  mingle,  2yjr  arab,  3. 

Dan.  2.  41  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry  c. 
2.  43  whereas  thou  sawest  iron  mixed  with  miry 

3.  To  'mingle  self,  3tJ£  arab,  7. 

Dan.    2.  43  not  cleave . .  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with 

4.  Mingled  crowd,  2"$  ereb. 

Exodi2.  38  a  mixed  multitude  wentup  also  with  them 
Neh.  13.    3  separated  from  Israel  all  the  mixed  mul. 

5.  Tomix,minglewith,  avyKepavvvfxi  svykerannumi. 
Heb.    4.    2  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that 

MIXTURE  — 
l,Mixture,  ^jpp  mesek. 

Psa.  75.   8  it  is  full  of  mixture  ;  and  he  poureth  out 

2. Mixture,  /xty/xa  wigma. 

Jon.  19.  39  brought  ainixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  alb. 

MIXTURE,  without  — 
Unmixed,  6.Kparov  akraton. 

Rev.  14. 10  which  is  poured  out  without  mixture  into 

MIZ'-AR,  TJgts  little,  small. 
A  hill  near  Hermon. 

Psa.  42.    6  therefore  will  I  remember,  .the  hill  M- 


MIZPAH 


C65 


MOCK 


KHZ'-PAH,  MIZ'-PEH,  n»sp,  ns^'p,  watch-tower. 

1.  A  city  of  GadinGilead,  called  also  Gateed  and  Jegar- 
sahadutha. 

Gen.  31.  49  And  M.;  for  he  said,  The  Lord  watch  be. 
Judg  10.  17  the  children  of  Israel.. encamped  in  M. 

11. 11  and  Jephthahutteredall  his  words.. inM. 
11.  29  Jephthath.  .passed  over  M.  of  Gilead,  and 
11.  29  from  Al.  of  Gilead  he  passed  over  (uuto) 
11.  34  Jephthah  came  to  M.  uuto  his  house,  and 

2.  A  valley  in  Manasseh,  at  Mount  Hernion. 

Josh. n.    3  Hivite  under  Hermou  in  the  land  of  M. 
11.   8  and  chased  them,  .unto  the  valley  of  M. 

3.  A  city  in  the  plain  of  Judah,  near  Dileau  and  Gilgal, 
and  Geba. 

Josh  15.  38  And  Dilean,  and  M.,  and  Joktheel 
Judg2o.    1  the  children  of  Israel  went  out.  .unto.  .M. 

20.  3  the  children  of  Israel  were  gone  up  to  M. 

21.  i  the  men  of  Israel  had  sworn  inM.,  saying 
21.  5  him  that  came  not  up  to  the  Lord  to  M. 
21.   8  came  not  up  to  M.  to  the  Lord?  And,  be. 

1  Sa.  7.    5  Samuel  said,  Gather  all  Israel  to  M.,  and 

7.  6  they  gathered  together  to  M.,  and  drew 
7.  6  Samuel  judged  the  children  of  Israel  inM. 
7.    7  children  of  Israel  were  gathered,  .to  M. 

7. 11  the  men  of  Israel  went  out  of  M.,  and  p. 

7. 12  Samuel . .  set(it)  between  M.  and  Shen,  and 
7.  16  he  went.,  in  circuit  to  Bethel.,  and  M.,  and 

10. 17  Samuel  called  the  people  together.,  to  M. 

2  Ki.25.  23  there  came  toGedaliahto  M.,even  Ishni. 

25.  25  ,the  Chaldees  that  were  with  him  at  St 
2  Ch.16.   6  and  he  built  therewith  Geba  and  M. 
Jer.   40.    6  Then  went  Jeremiah,  .to  M.,  and  dwelt 
40.    8  Then  they  came  to  Gedaliah  to  M.,  even 
40.  10  As  for  me,  behold,  I  will  dwell  at  M.,  to 

40. 12  all  the  Jews  returned,  .unto  M.,  and  gat. 

40.  13  Moreover  Johan. .  .came  toGedaliahto M. 

40. 15  Then  Johauau.  .spake  to  Gedaliah  in  M. 

41.  1  Ishmael-. came. .to  M.,  and  there  they  did 
41.  1  and  there  they  did  eat  bread  together  in  M. 
41.  3  Ishmael  also  slew.  .Gedaliah,  at  M.,  and 
41.  6  And  Ishmael . .  went  forth  from  M.  to  meet 
41. 10  theresidueof  the  people  that  (were)  inM. 
41. 10  and  all  the  people  that  remained  in  M. 

41. 14  Ishmael  had  carried  away  captive  from  M. 

41. 16  all  the  remnant  of  the  people,  .from  M. 
Hos.    5.    1  ye  have  been  a  snare  on  M.,  and  a  net  spr. 

4.  A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Chephirah,  on.  hour  from 
Rama,  and  now  called  Neby  Samuil. 

Josh. 18.  26  And  M.,  and  Chephirah,  and  Mozah 
1  Ki.15.  22  king  Asa  built  with  them  Geba.  .and  M. 
Neh.  3.    7  the  men  of  Gibeonand  of  M.,  unto  the  th. 

5.  A  city  in  Moab. 

1  Sa.  22.    3  David  went  thence  to  M.  of  Moab :  and  ho 

6.  A  city  or  district  of  part  of  which  Shallum  was  ruler. 

Neh.  3.  15  repaired  Shallum..  the  ruler  of  part  of  M. 

7.  A  place  of  which  Ezer  s      of  Jeshua  was  ruler. 

Neh.   3.  ig  Ezer  the  son  of  Jeshua,  the  ruler  of  M. 
MIZ'-PAR,  BUS-PAR,,  ispp  writing. 
A  chief  man  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel,  B.C.  538; 
called  in  Neh.  7.    7  Mispereth. 

Ezra   2.    2  Which  came  with  Zerubbabel.  .M.,  Bigvai 

MIZ-RA'-IM,  DH>'P. 

The  second  son  of  Ham,  and  father  of  Ludim,  &c;  his 

descendants  in  Egypt.    B.C.  2300. 

Gen.  10.    6  the  sons  of  Ham ;  Cush,  and  M. ,  and  Phut 

10. 13  And  M.  begat  Ludim,  and  Anamim,  and 
1  Ch.    1.    8  The  sons  of  Ham;  Cush,  and  M.,  Put,  and 

1.  11  And  M.  begat  Ludim,  and  Anamim,  and 

inZ'-ZAH,  run  terror,  joy. 

Son  of  Keuel  son  of  Esau,  one  of  the  dukes  of  Edom. 

B.C.   1700. 

Gen.  36.  13  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Reuel;  Nahath..M. 

36.  17  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Reuel.  .duke  M. 
1  Ch.  1.  37  The  sons  of  Reuel;  Nahath,  Zerah.  .andM. 

MNA'-SON,  IVWow. 

A  native  of  Cyprus,  an  aged  disciple  with  whom  Paul 

lodged  on  his  last  visit  to  Jerusalem. 

Acts  21.  16  brought  with  them  one  M.  of  Cyprus,  an 
MO'-AB,  3SOD  water  of  a  father. 
l.Son  of  Lot  and  his  elder  daughter.     B.C.  1897. 

Gen.  19.  37  And  the  first ~oorn.  .called  his  name  M. 
2.  His  place  and  race,  in  the  S.E.  of  Judah,  and  E.  of 
the  Salt  Sea,  and  S.  of  Reuben.  Its  chief  places  are 
Ar,  the  Arnon,  Bamoth  Baal,  Beer,  Elim,  Beth-Dihla- 
thaim,  Dibon  or  Dimon,  Eglaim,  Eglath-shtjlishiya, 
Horonaim,  Kirjathaim,  Kirjath-huzoth,  Kir-haraseth, 
-haresh,  -heres,  Kir-Moab,  Luhith,  Medeba,  Ninirim  or 
Nimrah,  Nobah  or  Nophah,  Hap-Pisgah,  Hap-Peor 
Shaveh-Kariathaim,  Zophim,  Zoar,  &c. 

Gen.  36.  35  Bedad,  who  smote  Midian  in  the  field  of  M. 

Exodis.  15  the  mighty  men  of  M.,  trembling  shall 

Nuni2i.  11  the  wilderness  which  (is)  before  M.,  tow. 
21.  13  Arnon  (is)  the  border  of  M.,  between  M. 

21. 15  And  at  the  stream.,  upon  the  border  of  M. 
21.  20  the  valley,  that  (is)  in  the  country  of  M. 
21.  26  had  fought  against  the  former  king  of  M. 
21.  28  it  hath  consumed  Ar  of  M.,(and)thelords 

21.  29  "Woe  to  thee,  M.!  thou  art  undone,  O  peo. 

22.  1  pitched  in  the  plains  of  M.  on  this  side  J. 
22.  3  And  M.  was  sore  afraid  of  uhe  people,  be. 
22.  3  and  M.  was  distressed  because  of  the  chil. 
22.  4  And  M.  said  unto  the  elders'  of  Midian 
22.  7  the  elders  of  M.  and  the  elders  of  Midian 
22.  8  and  the  princes  of  M.  abode  with  Balaam 

84 


NU11122.  10  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  M.,  hath 
22.  14  the  princes  of  M.  rose  up,  and  they  went 
22.  21  And  Balaam . .  went  with  the  princes  of  M. 

22.  36  he  went  out  to  meet  him  uuto  a  city  of  M. 

23.  6  he  stood . .  he,  and  all  the  princes  of  M. 
23.    7  Balak  the  king  of  M.  hath  brought  me  from 

23.  17  he  stood,  .and  the  princes  of  M.  with  him 

24.  17  shall  smite  the  corners  of  M.,  and  destroy 

25.  1  commit  whoredom,  the  daughters  of  M. 

26.  3  the  priest  spake  with  them  in.  .M.,  by  Jo. 

26.  63  the  plains  of  M.  by  Jordan  (near)  Jericho 
31.  12  the  plains  of  M.,  which  (are)  by  Jordan 
33.  44  pitciied  in  Ije-abarim,  in  the  border  01 M. 
33.  48  and  pitched  in  the  plains  of  M. ,  by  Jordan 

33.  49  theypitchedbyJordan..intheplainsofi\I. 
33. 50  the  plains  of  M.,  by  Jordan  (near)  Jericho 

35.  1  the  plains  of  M.  by  Jurdan  (near)  Jericho 

36.  13  the  plains  of  M.  by  Jordan  (near)  Jericho 
Dent.  1.    5  On  this  side  Jordan,  in  the  laud  of  M.,  be. 

2.    8  passed  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  M. 

2.  18  Thou  art  to  pass  over,  .the  coast  of  M. 
29.  1  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  land  of  M. 
32. 49  mount  Nebo,  which  (is)  in  the  land  of  M. 

34.  1  Moses  went  up  from  the  plains  of  M.  unto 
34.    5  So  Moses,  .died  there  in  the  land  of  M. 
34.    6  buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the  land  of  M. 
34.    8  Israel  wept  for  Moses  in.  .M.  thirty  days 

Josh.  13.  32  inheritance  in  the  plains  of  M.,  on  the 

24.   9  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  king  of  M.,  arose 

Judg.3.  1-  Lord  strengthened  Eglon  the  king  of  M. 

3. 14  children  of  Israel  served . .  the  king  of  M. 

3.  15  sent  a  present  unto  Eglon  the  king  of  M. 
3.  17  brought  the  present  unto  Eglon  king  of  M. 
3.  28  and  took  the  fords  of  Jordan  toward  M. 
3.  29  they  slew  of  M.  at  that  time  about  ten  th. 

3.  30  So  M.  was  subdued  that  day  under  the  h. 

10.  6  gods  of  M.,  and  the  gods  of  the  children 

11.  15  I.  took  not  away  the  laud  of  M.,  nor  the  1. 
11.  i,  in  like  manner,  .unto  the  king  of  M.:  but 
11.  18  compassed  the  land,  .of  M.,  and  came  by 
11.  18  east  side  of  the  land  of  M.,  and  pitched  on 
11.  18  border  of  M.:  for  Arnon. .the  bord^J' of  M. 
11.  25  (art),  .anything  better  than,  .king  of  M.? 

Ruth  1.  1  went  to  sojourn  in  the  country  of  M.,  he 
1.  2  came  into  the  countryofM.,  and  continued 
1.  4  they  took  them  wives  of  the  women  of  M. 
l  6  she  might  return  from  the  country  of  M. 
1.    6  she  had  heard  in  the  country  of  M.  how 

1.  22  which  returned  out  of  the  country  of  M. 

2.  6  back  with  Naomi  out  of  the  country  of  M. 

4.  3  is  come  again  out  of  the  country  of  M.,  se. 

1  Sa.  12.    9  sold  them,  .iuto  the  hand  of  thekingof  M. 

14.  47  So  Saul,  .fought,  .against  M.,  and  against 
22.  3  David  went  thence  to  Mizpeh  of  M. ;  and 
22.   3  said  uuto  the  king  of  M.,  Let  my  father 

22.  4  brought  them  before  the  king  of  M. ;  and 

2  Sa.    8.    2  he  smote  M.,  and  measured  them  with  a 

8.  12  Of  Syria,  and  of  M.,and  of  the  children  of 

23.  20  he  slew  two  lion  like  men  of  M.  :  he  went 

1  Ki.  11.    7  the  abomination  of  M.,  in  the  hill  that  (is) 

2  Ki.    1.   1  Then  M.  rebelled  against  Israel  after  the 

4  Mesha  king  of  M.  was  a  sheep  master,  and 

5  king  of  M.  rebelled  against  the  king  of  I. 
7  The  king  of  M.  hath  rebelled  agaiust  me 

7  wilt  thou  go  with  me  against  M.  to  battle  ? 
10,  13  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  M. 
23  And  they  said,  .now  therefore,  M.,  to  the 
26  when  the  king  of  M.  saw  that  the  battle 
46  which  smote  Midian  in  the  field  of  M.,  r. 
22  Saraph,  who  had  the  dominion  in  M.,  and 

8  begat  (children)in  the  country  of  M.,  after 
22  he  slew  two  lion  like  men  of  M. :  also  he 

2  he  smote  M.  ;  and  the  Moabites  became 

ir  gold  that  he  brought,  .from  M.,  and  from 

1  children  of  M. . .  came  against  J  ehoshaph  at 

10  children  of  Amnion  and  M.  and  mount  S. 

22  against  the  children  of  Ammon,  M.,  aud 

23  For  the  children  of  Ammon  and  M.  stood 
23  saw  I  Jews  (that),  .married  wives,  .of  M. 

8  M.  (is)  my  wash  pot ;  over  Edom  will  I  cast 

6  The  tabernacle  of  Edom.  .of  M.,  and  the 

9  M.  (is)  my  wash  pot ;  over  Edom  will  I  c. 
14  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  Edom  aud  M. 

1  burden  of  M. . .  Ar  of  M.  is  laid  waste,  (and) 

1  Kir  of  M.  is  laid  waste,  (and)  brought  to 

2  M.  shall  howl  over  Nebo,  and  over  Med. 

4  therefore  the  armed  soldiers  of  M.  shall 

5  My  heart  shall  cry  out  for  M. ;  his  fugitives 

8  cry  is  gone  round  about  the  borders  of  M. 

9  lions  upon  him  that  escapeth  of  M.,  and 
2  daughters  of  M.  shall  be  at  the  fords  of  A. 
4  Let  mine  outcasts  dwell  with  thee,  M.;  be 

6  We  have  heard  of  the  pride  of  M.;  he  (is) 

7  Therefore  shall  M.  howl  for  M.,  every  one 

11  my  bowels  shall  sound  like  an  harp  forM. 

12  when  it  is  seen  that  M.  is  weary  on  the 

13  Lord  hath  spoken  concerning  5l.  since 

14  glory  of  M.  shall  be  contemned,  with  all 
10  M.  shall  be  trodden  down  under  him,  even 
26  children  of  Amnion,  and  M.,  and  all  (that 
21  Edom,  and  M.,  and  the  children  of  Am. 

27.  3  send  them,  .to  the  king  of  M.,  and  to  the 
40.  11  when  all  the  Jews  that  (were)  in  M.,  and 
48.  1  Against  M.  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 
48.  2  (There  shall  be)  no  more  praise  of  M.:  in 
48.  4  M.  is  destroyed ;  her  little  ones  have  cal. 
48.  9  Give  wings  unto  M,,  that  it  may  flee  and 
48.  11  M.  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth,  and 
48.  13  M.  shall  be  ashamed  of  Chemosh,  as  the 
48.  15  M.  is  spoiled,  and  gone  up  (out  of)  her  c. 
48.  16  calamity  of  M.  (is)  near  to  come,  and  his 
48.  18  for  the  spoiler  of  M.  shall  come  upon  thee 


:Ch. 


•  Ch.: 


Neh.  13, 
Psa.  60. 


15- 
15- 

15- 
15- 

15- 
15- 
16. 

16. 
16. 
16. 
■  16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
25- 

Jer.     9. 


Jer.  48.  20  M.  is  confounded,  .tell  ye  it.  .that  M.  is 
48.  24  upon  all  the  cities  of  the  land  of  M.,  far 
48.  25  horn  of  M.  is  cut  off,  and  his  arm  is  broken 
48.  26  M.  also  shall  wallow  in  his  vomit,  and  he 
48.  28  O  ye  that  dwell  in  M. ,  leave  the  cities,  aud 
48.  29  We  have  heard  the  pride  of  M.,  he  is  ex. 
48.  31  howl  for  M.,  and  I  will  cry  out  for  all  M. 
48.  33  gladness  is  taken .  .from  the  land  of  M. 
48.  35  Moreover  I  will  cause  to  cease  in  M. ,  saith 
48.  36  mine  heart  shall  sound  for  M.  like  pipes 
48.  38  all  the  house  tops  of  M...I  have  broken  M. 
48.  39  how  hath  M.  turned,  .so  shall  M.  be  a  d. 
48.  40  Behold,  he . .  shall  spread  his  wings  over  M. 
48.  41  mighty  men's  hearts  iu  M.  at  that  day  s. 
48. 42  M.  shall  be  destroyed  from  (being)  a  pe. 
48.  43  Fear . .  (shall  be)  upon  thee,  O  inhaui.  of  M. 
48.  44  for  I  will  bring  upon  it,  (even)  upon  M. 
48.  45  a  flame,  .shall  devour  the  corner  of  M.,  and 
48.  46  Woe  be  unto  thee,  0  M. !  the  people  of  Ch. 
48.  47  Yet  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  M. 


Eze. 


.  47  Thus  far  (is)  the  judgment  of  M. 

8  Because  that  M.  and  Seir  do  say,  Behold 


9  I  will  open  the  side  of  M.  from  the  cities- 
25.  11  I  "will  execute  judgments  upon  M.;  aud 
Dan.  11.  41  these  shall  escape,  .(even)  Edom,  and  M. 
Amos  2.    1  For  three  transgressions  of  M.,  and  for 
2.    2  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  M. .  .and  M.  shall 
Mic.    6.    5  remember  now  what  Balak  king  of  M.  coi 
Zeph.  2.    8  I  have  heard  the  reproach  of  M.,  and  the 
2.  9  Surely  M.  shall  be  as  Sodom,  and  the  chi. 
MO-AB-ITES,  '3K1D,  D'aiOO,  HiOD,  '2X0. 
The  posterity  of  the  preceding  ;  they  were  not  to  be  re- 
ceived into  Israel ;  were  conquered  by  David  ;  rebel 
after  Ahab's  death;  again  defeated,  when  their  king 
offers  his  son  a  sacrifice. 

Gen.  19.  37  the  same  (is)  the  father  of  the  M.  unto  this 

NUI1122.    4  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor  (was)  king  of  the  M. 

Deut.  2.    9  Distress  not  the  M.,  neither  "contend  with 

2.  11  accounted  giants,  .but  the  M.  call  them  E. 

2.  29  As  the.  .M.  which  dwell  in  Ar,  did  unto 
23.    3  An  Ammonite  or  M.  shall  uot  enter  into 

Judg.  3. 28  delivered  your  enemies  the  M.  into  your 
2  Sa.   8.    2  the  M.  became  David's  servants,  (and)  b. 

1  Ki.  11.  33  worshipped .  .Chemosh  the  god  of  the  M. 

2  Ki.  3.  18  he  will  deliver  the  M.  also  into  your  hand? 

3.  21  when  all  the  M.  heard  that  the  kings  were 
3.  22  the  M.  saw  the  water  on  the  other  side  (as) 

3.  24  smote  the  M. .  .smiting  the  M.,  even  in 
13. 20  bands  of  the  M.  invaded  the  land  at  the 

23.  13  for  Chemosh  the  abomination  of  the  M. 

24.  2  Lord  sent  against  him.  .bands  of  the  M. 
1  Ch.n.  46  the  sons  of  Elnaam,  and  Ithmah  the  M. 

18.  2  the  M.  became  David's  servants,  (and)  br. 
Ezra  9.  1  abominations,  (even)  of  the.  .M.,  the  Eg. 
Neh.  13,    1  that  the  Ammonite  and  the  M.  should  not 

MO-AB-ITESS,  MO-AB-IT-ISH,  JVZl.sio,  rrnxiD. 

1. Patronymic  of  Ruth,  the  wife  of  Boaz.     B.C.  1312. 
Ruth  1.  22  So  Naomi  returned,  and  Ruth  the  M.,  her 
2.    2  Ruth  the  M.  said  unto  Naomi,  Let  me  now 
2.    6  It  (is)  the  M.  damsel  that  came  back  with 
2.  21  Ruth  the  M.  said,  He  said  unto  me  also 

4.  5  thou  must  buy  (it)  also  of  Ruth  the  M.,  the 
4. 10  Moreover  Ruth  the  M.,  the  wife  of  Mahlon 

2.  Some  of  Solomon's  wives.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  11.    1  women  of  the  M.,  Ammonites,  Edomites- 

3.  Shinirith,  who  slew  king  Joash.     B.C.  835. 

2  Ch.24.  26  and  Jehozabad  the  son  of  Shimrith  a  M. 
MO-AD-I'AH,  rti-\yin  festival  of  Jah. 

A  priest  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  grandson  of  Jozadak  ; 
also  called  Maadiah  (which  see).     B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.  17  Of  Abijah,  Zichri ;  of  Miniamin,  of  M. 
HOCK  (on),  to  — 
1.  To  play  upon,  deceive,  mock,  *?nn  hathal,  3. 

Judg  16. 10  Behold,  thou  hast  mocked  me,  and  told 
16. 13  Hitherto  thou  hast  mocked  me,  aud  told 

16.  15  thou  hast  mocked  me  these  three  times 

1  Ki.  18.  27  Elijah  mocked  them,  and  said,  Cry  aloud 
Job   13.    g  as  one  man  mocketh . .  do  ye  (so)  mock  him 

2.To  mock,  iv}>  laab,  5. 

2  Ch.36.  16  they  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  aud 

3. To  scorn,  JjjS  laag. 

Job  11.  3  when  thou  mockest,  shall  no  man  make 
Prov.  1.  26  I  also . .  I  will  mock  \\  hen  your  fear  cometh 

17.  5  Whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproacheth  his 
30.  17  The  eye  (that)  mocketh  at  (lus)  father,  and 

Jer.  20.    7  I  am  in  derision  daily,  every  one  mocketh 

4.  To  scorn,  Jy^>  laag,  5. 

2  Ch.30.  10  laughed  them  to  scorn,  and  mocked  them 
Neh.  4.  1  took  great  indignatiou,  and  mocked  the  J. 
Job  21.    3  and  after  that  I  have  spoken,  mock  on 

5.  To  roll  self,  abme,  insult,  bbil  alal,  7. 

Num  22.  29  Because  thou  hast  mocked  me :  I  would 
Jer.  38.  19  deliver  me  into  their  hand,  and  they  mock 

6.  To  mock,  play  with,  pny  tsachaq,  3. 

Gen.  19. 14  he  seemed  as  one  that  mocked  uuto  his  s. 
21.   9  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar.  .mocking 
39.  14  brought  in  an  Hebrew  unto  us  to  mock  us 
39. 17  Hebrew  servant.,  came  in  unto  me  to  mock 

7.  To  show  self  a  derider,  scoffer,  dSr  qalas,  7. 

2  Ki.  2.  23  mocked  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Go  up 
Eze.  22.    5  (those  that  be)  far  from  thee,  shall  mock 

8.  To  laugh,  deride,  play,  pny  sachaq. 

Job  39.  22  He  mocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  affrighted 
Lam.  1.    7  saw  her,  (and)  did  mock  at  her  sabbaths 


MOCK 


066 


MONEY 


9. To  treat  as  a  child,  mock,  tfATratfa  cmpaizo. 

Matt.  2.  16  Herod,  when  he  saw  that  he  was  mocked 
20.  19  to  mock,  and  to  scourge,  and  to  crucify 
27.  29  mocked  him,  saying,  Hail,  King  of  the  J. 
27.  31  And  after  that  they  had  mocked  him,  they 
27.  41  Likewise  also  the  chief  priests,  mocking 

Markio.  34  they  shall  mock  him,  and  shall  scourge  him 
15.  20  when  they  had  mocked  him,  they  took  off 
15.  31  Likewise  also  the  cliief  priests  mocking 

Lukei4.  29  all  that  behold  (it)  begin  to  mock  him 
18.  32  shall  be  mocked,  and  spitefully  entreated 

22.  63  the  men  that  held  Jesus  mocked  him,  and 

23.  11  set  him  at  nought,  and  mocked,  .and  arr. 
23. 36  the  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  coming  to 

10.  To  mock,  scoff,  deride,  laugh,  yAev^a) ehleuazo. 

Acts   2.  13  Others  [mocking],  said,  These  men  are  full 

j  7,  32  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  some  mo. 

MOCK,  to  make  a  — 
To  scorn,  ph  hits,  5. 

Provi4.   9  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin :  but  among  the 
MOCKED,  to  be  — 
l.L'twjhter,  derision,  play,  pin^  sechoq* 

Job  12.   4  I  am  (as)  one  mocked  of  Ms  neighbour,  who 

2.To  sneer,  mock,  ^vxr^pi^o/iat  mukterizomai. 
Gal.    6.   7  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked :  for 

MOCKER  — 

1. Deceivers,  mockers,  Q^Cl!  hathulim. 

Job   1 7.    2  (Are  there)  not  mockers  with  me  ?  and  doth 

2.  To  scorn,  p1?  hits, 

Prov  20.    1  Wine  (is)  a  mocker,  strong  drill k  (is)  rag. 

3.  To  show  self  a  scorner,  p*?  hits,  7a. 

Isa.    28.  22  Now  thereforebeye  not  mockers,  lest  your 

A.Mocking,  stammering,  Jyp  laeg. 

Psa.  35. 16  With  hypocritical  mockers  in  feasts,  they 

5.  To  laugh,  deride,  play,  pny  sachaq,  3. 

Jer.  15.  17  I  sat  not  in  the  assembly  of  the  mockers 

6, •Sporting  as  children,  4fj.waiKT7}s  etnpaiktes. 

Jude       18  they  told  you  there  should  be  mockers  in 
MOCKING:  — 
1. Derision,  scoffing,  nppp  qallasah, 

Eze.  22.   4  have  I  made  thee . .  a  mocking  to  all  coun. 

I.Sporting,  iuTra.iyiJ.6s  empaigmos. 

Heb.  11.  36  others  had  trial  of.  .mocking3  and  scour. 
MODERATELY  — 
To  Tightness,  njyi^  Utsedaqah. 

Joel    2.  23  hath  giveu  you  the  former  rain  moderat. 
MODERATION  — 
Yirfdingness,  pliability,  to  eirieixes  to  epieikes. 

Phil.  4.    5  Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all 
MODEST  — 
Orderly,  becoming,  k6<t/j.ios  hosmios. 

1  Ti.    2.   9  that  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest 
MOIST  — 
Moisture,  freshness,  n?  Inch. 

Num.  6.   3  neither  shall  he.  .eat  moist  grapes,  or  dr. 
MOISTENED,  to  be  — 
To  bi  watered,  moistened,  rtpp  shaqah,  4. 

Job  21. 24  and  his  bones  are  moistened  with  marrow 
MOISTURE  — 
1.  Moisture,  freshness,  12>?  leshad. 

Psa.  32.   4  my  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought 

2.Moisturc,  humour,  Ik/j.&s  ikmos. 

Luke  8.    6  it  withered  away,  because  it  lacked  mois. 
MOLE  — 
l.C'hamclion,  owl,  no^-jfl  tinshemeth, 

Lev.  11.  30  the  lizard,  and  the  snail,  and  the  mole 

'2. A  mole,  ni5")3n  chapharpcrah. 

Isa.     2.  2D  shall  cast  his  idols,  .to  the  moles  and  to 

MO-LA'-DAH,  rn^D,  *i?o  birth. 

A  city  in  the  S.W.  of  Judah,  near  Shema,  Sheba,   or 

Jeshua. 

Josh.15.  26  Amain,  and  Shema,  and  M. 

19.  2  had  in  their  inheritance.  .Sheba,  and  M, 
1  Ch.  4.  28  they  dwelt  at  Beer-sheba,  andM.,  and  II. 
Neh,  11. 26  at  Jeshua,  and  at  M0  and  at  Beth-phelet 

MO'-LECH,  MO'-LOCH,  ifyb  Mo\6x  counsellor,  king, 
A  god  of  the  Ammonites ;  called  also  MUcom,  Maleam, 
and  Malcan. 

Lev.  18.  21  shalt  not  let.,  pass  through  (the  fire)  to  M 

20,  2  Whosoever.. giveth  (any)  <>i  his  .scjd  it ui  > 
20.  3  because  he  hath  given  of  his  sued  unto  M. 
20.  4  when  he  giveth  of  his  seed  unto  M  .  an  I 
20.    5  to  commit  whoredom  with  M.,  from  among 

1  Ki.  11.   7  for  M.,  the  abomination  of  the  children 

2  Ki.  23.  10  his  daughter  to  pass  through  the  tire  to  ' r 
Jer.  32.  35daughter5topnssthrough(theflre)uiito  V. 
Amos  5.  25  ye  have  borne  the  tabernacle  of  your  M. 
Acts    7.  43  ye  took  up  the  tabernacle  of  M.,'and  the 

MO'-lid,  -pjto  bsgetter. 

A  descendant  of  Jerahmeel,  grandson  of  Pharez  sou  of 

Judah.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.   2.  29  Abihail,  and  she  bare  him  Ahban,  and  M. 


MOLLIFIED,  to  be  — 

To  be  made  tender,  soft,  !ja*i  rakak,  4. 

Isa.     1.    6  bound  up,  neither  mollified  withointment 
MOLTEN  (image)  — 
l.To  cast,  melt,  pour,  be  firm,  pv;  yatsaq. 

1  Ki.   7.  30  under  the  laver(were)undersettersrnolteu 
2.  To  be  poured  out,  cast  firm,  ps;  yatsaq,  6. 

1  Ki.  7. 16  he  made  two  chapiters  (of)  molten  brass,  to 

7.  23  he  made  a  molten  sea,  ten  cubits  from  the 
7.  33  their  felloes,  and  their  spokes.,  all  molten 

2  Ch.  4.    2  he  made  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits  from 
Job    37.  18  strong,  (and)  as  a  molten  looking-glass 

3.-4  molten  image,  npDfi  massekah. 

Exod32.  4  And.  .after  he  had  made  it  a  molten  calf 
32.  8  they  have  made  them  a  molten  calf,  and 
34.  17  Thou  shalt  make  thee  no  molten  gods 
Lev.  19.  4  normaketo  yourselves  molten  gods  :I(am) 
NUH133.  52  destroy  all  their  molten  images,  and  quite 
Deut.  9. 12  they  have  made  them  a  molten  image 

9. 16  had  made  you  a  moltencalf :  ye  had  turned 
27.  15  that  maketh  (any)  graven  or  molten  image 
Judg  17.    3,  4  a  graven  image,  and  a  molten  image 
1 3.  14  and  a  graven  image  and  a  molten  image 
18.  17,  iS  and  the  teraphim,  and  the  molten  im. 

1  Ki.  14.   9  made  thee  othergods,  and  molten  images 

2  Ki.  17.  16  and  made  them  molten  images,  .two  cal. 
2  Ch.28.    2  and  made  also  molten  images  for  Baalim 

34.  3,  4  carved  images,  and  the  molten  images 
Neh.  9.  i3  when  they  had  made  them  a  molten  calf 
Psa.  106. 19  made.,  and  worshipped  the  molten  image 
Isa.   30.  22  the  ornament  of  thy  molten  images  of  g. 

42. 17  that  say  to  the  molten  images,  Ye  (are)  our 
Hos.  13.    2  have  made  them  molten  images  of  their 
Nan.   1. 14  the  graven  image  and  the  molten  image 
Hab.   2.  iS  the  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  lies 
4.  A  pouring  out,  molten  image,  ?JEB,  ^pi  nesek. 
Isa.   41.  29  their  molten  images  (are)  wind  and  con. 

48.  5  my  molten  image,  hath  commanded  them 
Jer?  10.  14  for  his  molten  image  (is)  falsehood,  and 

51. 17  for  his  molten  image  (is)  falsehood,  and 
MOLTEN,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  poured  out,  melted,  Tjrij  natliak,  2. 

Eze.  24.  11  the  filthiness  of  it  may  be  molten  in  it 

2.  To  pour  out,  pis  tsuq. 

Job    28.    2  and  brass  (is)  molten  (out  of)  the  stone 
MOMENT  — 
l.A  moment,  jjfan  rega. 

Exod33.    5  come  up  into  the  midst  of  thee  in  a  mom. 

N urn  16.  2t  that  I  may  consume  them  in  a  moment 

16.  45  that  I  may  consume  them  as  in  a  moment 
Job     7.  18  visit  him  every  morning,  .try  him  every  m. 

20.  5  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  (but)  for  a  mom. 

21.  13  and  in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave 
34.  20  In  a  moment  shall  they  die,  and  the  peo. 

Psa.  30.    5  For  his  anger  (endureth  but)  a  moment 
73.  19  How  are  they,  .unto  desolation,  as  in  am. 

Isa.   26.  20  hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment 
27.    3  I  will  water  it  every  moment:  lest  (any) 
47.   9  shall  come  to  thee  in  a  moment  in  one  d. 
54.    7  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee 
54.    8  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a  moment 

Jer.    4.  20  my  tents  spoiled . .  my  curtains  in  a  mom. 

Lam.  4.    6  overthrown  as  in  a  moment,  and  no  hands 

Eze.  26. 16  shall  tremble  at  (every)  moment,  and  be 
32.  10  they  shall  tremble  at  (every)  moment,  ev. 
2. In  a  moment,  iv  ard/xaj  (dat.)  en  atomo. 

1  Co.  1 5.  52  In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye 

3.  Point,  puncture,  ariyp.4]  stigme. 

Luke  4.    5  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  a  moment  of  t. 
MOMENT,  hut  for  a  — 
At  thepresent  time,  immediately,  irapavTiKaparau. 

2  Co.   4. 17  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  m. 
MOMENT,  tob;  a  — 

To  cause  to  rest,  yrj  raga,  5. 

Prov  12.  19  but  a  lying  tongue  (is)  but  for  a  moment 
HONEY  — 
1, Silver ,  money,  f]D3  keseph. 

Gen.  17.  12  or  bought  with  money  of  any  stranger 

17.  13  he  that  is  bought  with  thy  money,  must 
17.  23  all  that  were  bought  with  his  money,  ev. 
17.  27  bought  with  money  of  the  stranger,  were 
23.  9  for  as  much  money  as  it  is  worth  he  shall 
23.  13  I  will  give  thee  money  for  the  field ;  take 
31.  15  and  hath  quite  devoured  also  our  money 
42.  25  to  restore  every  man's  money  into  his  sack 
42.  27  he  espied  his  money  ;  for,  behold,  it  (was) 
42.  28  My  money  is  restored ;  and,  lo,  (it  is)  even 
42.  35  every  man's  bundle  of  money  (was)  in  his 

42.  35  and  theirfathersawthe  bundles  of  money 
43. 12  And  take  double  money  in  your  hand 

43.  12  and  the  money  that  was  brought  again  in 
43.  15  they  took  double  money  in  their  hand,  and 

43. 18  Because  of  the  money  that  was  returned 
43. 21  (every)  man's  money  (was)  in  the  mouth 
43.  21  of  his  sack,  our  money  in  full  weight:  and 
43.  22  othermoney  have  we  brought  down  in  our 
43.  22  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in  our 

43.  23  I  had  your  money.    And  he  brought  Sim. 

44.  1  put  every  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mouth 
44.    2  and  his  corn  money.    And  he  did  accord. 
44.    8  the  money  which  we  found  in  our  sack's 
47.  14  Joseph  gathered  up  all  the  money  that 
47.  i^  Joseph  brought  the  money  into  Phara<  h*9 


Gen.  47.  15  when  money  failed  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
47. 15  why  should  we  die.,  for  the  money  faileth 
47.  16  I  will  give  you  for  your  cattle,  if  money 
47.  18  We  will  uot  hide,  .how  that  our  money 

Exodi2.  44  every  man's  servant,  .bought  for  money 
21.  11  then  shall  she  go  out  free  without  money 
21.  21  he-shall  not  be  punished:  for  he  (is)  his  m. 

21.  34  (and)  give  money  unto  the  owner  of  them 
2i.  35  sell  the  live  ox,  and  divide  the  money  of 

22.  7  shall  deliver  unto  his  neighbour  money  or 
22.  17  he  shall  pay  money  according  to  the  dowry 

22.  25  If  thou  lend  money  to . .  my  people  (that  is) 
30.  16  thou  shalt  take  the  atonement  money  of 

Lev.  22.  11  if  the  priest  buy  (any)  soul  with  his  money 

25.  37  Thou  shalt  not  give  him  thy  money  upon 

25.  51  out  of  the  money  that  he  was  bought  for 

27. 15, 19  shall  add  the  fifth,  .of  the  money  of  thy 

27.  18  the  priest  shall  reckon  unto  him  the  money 

Num.  3.  48  thou  shalt  give  the  money,  wherewith  the 

3.  49  Moses  took  the  redemption  money  of  them 

3.  50  of  the  children  of  Israel  took  he  the  money 

3.  51  Moses  gave  the  money  of  them  that  were 

18.  16  for  the  money  of  five  shekels,  after  the  s. 

Deut.  2.    6  Ye  shall  buy  meat  of  them  for  money,  that 

2.    6  ye  shall  also  buy  water  of  them  for  money 

2.  28  Thou  shalt  sell  me  meat  for  money,  that 

2.  28  give  me  water  for  money,  that  I  may  drink 

14.  25  turn  (it)  into  money,  and  bind  up  the  m. 

14.  26  thou  shalt  bestow  that  money  for  whats. 
21.  14  thou  shalt  not  sell  her  at  all  for  money 

23.  19  usury  of  money,  usury  of  victuals,  usury 
Judg.  5.  19  The  kings  came,  .they  took  no  gain  of  ni. 

16.  18  came,  .and  brought  money  in  their  hand 

17.  4  Yetherestoredthenioney  unto  his  mother 

1  Ki.  21.    2  I  will  give  thee  the  worth  of  it  in  money 

2i.    6  Give  me  thy  vineyard  for  money;  or  else 

21.  rs  which  he  refused  to  give  thee  for  money 

2  Ki.    5.  26  (Is  it)  a  time  to  receive  money,  and  to  r. 

1 2.  4  All  the  money  of  the  dedicated  things  that 
12.  4  the  money  of  every  one  that  passeth  (the 
12.  4  the  money  that  every  man  is  set  at,  (and) 
12.  4  all  the  money  that  cometh  into  any  man's 
12.  7  receive  no  (more)  money  of  your  acquain. 
12.  8  consented  to  receive  no  (more)  money  of 
12.  9  put  therein  all  the  money,  .brought  into 
12.  10  when  they  saw  that,  .much  money  in  the 
12.  10  told  the  money . .  found  in  the  house  of  the 
12. 11  they  gave  the  money,  being  told,  into  the 
12.  13  of  the  money,  .brought  into  the  house  of 
12.  15  into  whose  hand  they  delivered  the  money 
12.  16  The  trespass  money  and  sin  money  was 

15.  20  Menahem  exacted  the  money  of  Israel 

22.  7  no  reckoning  made  with  them  of  the  mo. 
22.    9  Thy  servants  have  gathered  the  money 
23-  35  but  he  taxed  the  land  to  give  the  money 

2  Ch.24.    5  gather  of  all  Israel  money  to  repair  the 

24.  11  when  they  saw  that,  .much  money,  the 
24.  11  Thus  they  did.  .and  gathered  money  in 

24.  14  they  brought  the  rest  of  the  money  before 
34.  q  they  delivered  the  money  that  was  brought 
34.  14  whentheybroughtoutthemoneythatwas 
34.  17  they  have  gathered  together  the  money 

Ezra  3.    7  They  gave  money  also  unto  the  masons 
Neh.    5.   4  ^Ve  have  borrowed  money  for  the  king's 
5.  10  I .  .might  exact  of  them  money  and  corn 
5.  11  also  the  hundredth  (part)  of  the  money 
Esth.  4.    7  of  the  sum  of  the  money  that  Haman  had 
Job   31.  39  If  I  have  eaten  the  fruits,  .without  money 
Psa.  15.    5  putteth  not  out  his  money  to  usury,  nor 
Prov.  7.  20  He  hath  taken  a  bag  of  money  with  him 
Eccl.  7.  12  wisdom  (is)  a  defence,  .money  (is)  a  defe. 
10.  19  wine  niaketh  merry:  but  money  answereth 
Isa    43.  24  Thou  hast  bought  me  no  sweet  cane  with 
52.    3  and  ye  shall  be  redeemed  without  money 
55.    1  and  he  that  hath  no  money';  come  ye,  buy 
55.    1  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money 
55.    2  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  (that 
J  er.   32.    g  weighed  him  the  money . .  seventeen  shek. 
32.  10  and  weighed,  .the  money  in  the  balances 
32.  25  Buy  thee  the  field  for  money,  and  takew. 
32.  44  Men  shall  buy  fields  for  money,  and  sub. 
Lam.  5.    4  We  have  drunken  our  water  for  money 
Mic.    3.  11  and  the  prophets  thereof  divine  for  money 

2. Silver,  money,  ^p?  kesaph. 

Ezra    7. 17  thou  may  est  buy  speedily  with  this  money 

3.  Silver,  money,  apyvpiov  oritur  ion. 

Matt?5.  18  digged  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord's  m. 

25.  27  oughtest  therefore  to  have  put  my  money 
28.  12  they  gave  large  money  unto  the  soldiers 
28.  15  So  they  took  the  money,  and  did  as  they 

Marki4.  n  wereglad.andpromisedtogivehimmoney 

Luke  9.    3  nor  scrip,  neither  bread,  neither  money 

19.  15  to  whom  he  had  given  the  money,  that  he 

19.  23  gavest  thou  not  my  money  into  the  bank 

22.    5  were  glad,  and  covenanted  to  give  him  ni. 

Acts    7.  16  that  Abraham  bought  fora  sum  of  money 

8.  20  Thy  money  perish  with  thee,  because  thou 

L  Small  coin,  clipped  money,  /i-epua  kerma. 

John  2.  15  poured  out  the  changers' money,  and  over. 

0.  Legal  or  lawful  coin,  u6/j.to-fxa  nomisma. 

Mattjj.  19  Show  me  the  tribute  money.  And  they  br. 

,  copper  coin,  x^k^s  chalkos. 
.Mark  6.    B  no  scrip,  no  bread,  no  money  in  (their)  p. 
12.  4X  beheld  how  the  people  cast  money  into 

7..-i  thing,  possession,  money,  xoripa.  chroma. 

Acts    4.  37  Having  land,  sold  (it),  and  brought  them. 
8.  aS  holy  ghost  was  given,  he  offered  them  m. 


MONEY 


667 


MOON 


Acts  8.  20  gift  of  God  may  be  purchased  with  money 
24.  26  He  hoped,  .that money  should  have  beeu 

MONEY,  piece  of  — 

1.-4  qesitah,  (a  silver  coin),  n$tyj?  qesltali. 

Gen.  33.  19  he  bought,  .for  an  hundred  pieces  of  mo. 

Job  42. 11  every  man  alsogave  him  apiece  of  money 

2.  A  stater  (24  drachmas),  trrar-qp  suiter. 

Matt  17.  27  thou  shalt  find  a  piece  of  money  :  that 

MONEY,  with  — 

Acquisition,  substance,  |;;p  qinyan. 

Lev.  22.  11  if  the  priest  buy  (any)soul  with  his  money 

MONEY  CHANGER  — 

J.  changer  of  small  coin,  ko\\v^lijtt)$  kollubistes. 

Matt  21.  12  overthrew  the  tables  of  the  money  chan. 

Markn.  15  overthrew  the  tables  of  the  money  chan. 

MONSTER,  sea  — 
Dragons,  pan  tannin. 

Lam.  4.    3  Even  the  sea  monsters  draw  out  the  bre. 

MONTH,  — 

l.Xew  moon,  month,  enn  chodesh. 

Gen.  7. 11  second  month,  the  seventeenth,  .of  the  m. 
8.  4  month,  on  the  seventeenth,  .of  the  month 
8.  5  the  tenth  month . .  on  the  first . .  of  the  m. 
8.  13  first  (month),  the  first  (day)  of  the  month 
8. 14  And  in  the  second  month,  on  the  seven 
8.  14  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month,  was  the 

29. 14  he  abode  with  him  the  space  of  a  month 
38.  24  it  came  to  pass,  about  three  months  after 

Exod  12.  2  This  mouth . .  unto  you  the  beginning  of  m. 
12.  2  it  (shall  be)  the  first  month  of  the  year  to 
12.    3  In  the  tenth,  .ofthismonththeyshalltake 

12.  6  until  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same  mo. 
12. 18  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  mouth  at  even 
12. 18  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month 

13.  4  This  day  came  ye  out,  in  the  month  Abib 
13.  5  thou  shalt  keep  this  service  in  this  month 
16.  1  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  second  month 
19.    1  In  the  third  month,  when  the  children  of 

23. 15  in  the  time  appointed  of  the  month  Abib 
34. 18  unleavened,  .in  the  time  of  the  month  A. 
34.  iS  for  in  the  month  Abib  thou  earnest  out 
40.   2  On  the  first  day  of  the  first  month  shalt 
40.  17  the  first  month,  .on  the  first.. of  the  month 

Lev.  16.  29  the  seventh  mon.,  on  the  tenth.. of  the  m. 
23.  5  In  the  fourteenth,  .of  the  first  mouth  at 
23.  6on  thefineenth  dayofthesamemonth(is) 
23.  2+  seventh  month,  in  the  first,  .of  the  month 
23.  27  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  this  seventh  month 
23.  32  in  the  ninth  (day)  of  the  month  at  even 
23.  34,  39  The  fifteenth  day  of  thisseventhmonth 
23. 41  ye  shall  celebrate  it  in  the  seventh  month 

25.  9  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  the  seventh  month 
27.    6  if  (it  be)  from  a  month  old  even  unto  five 

Num.  1.  i,  18  on  the  first  (day)  of  the  second  month 
3.15,  22,  28,  34,39,  40,  43  from  a  month  old  and 
9.  1  in  the  first  month  of  the  second  year  after 
9.  3  In  the  fourteenth  day  of  this  month,  at 
9.  5  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month 
9. 11  The  fourteenth  day  of  the  second  month 
9.  22  two  days,  or  a  month,  or  a  year,  that  the 

10. 10  in  thebeginnings  of  your  months,  yeshall 

10.  11  on  the  twentieth,  .of  the  second  month 

11.  20  even  a  whole  month,  until  it  come  out 
11.  21  flesh,  that  they  may  eat  a  whole  month 

18. 16  from  a  month  old  shalt  thou  redeem,  ac. 
20.    1  into  the  desert  of  Zin  in  the  first  month 

26.  62  all  males  from  a  month  old  aud  upward 

28. 11  in  the  beginningsof  your  months  yeshall 
28. 14  of  every  month  throughout  the  months  of 

28. 16  in  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

28. 17  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  this  month  (is)the 
29.  1  seventh  month,  on  the  first,  .of  the  month 
29.  6  Beside  the  burnt  offering  of  the  month,and 
29.  7  on  the  tenth,  .of  this  seventh  month  an 
29.  12  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventhmonth 
33-  3  departed  from  Rameses  in  the  first  month 
33,  3  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month 
33.  38  anddied.  ,inthefirst(day)ofthe fifth  mon. 

Deut.  1.  3  eleventh  month,  on  the  first,  .of  the  mo. 
16.  1  Observe  the  month  of  Abib,  and  keep  the 
16.    1  for  in  the  mouth  of  Abib  the  Lord  thy  God 

Josh.  4.  19  came  up . .  on  the  tenth . .  of  the  first  month 
5.  10  on  thefourteenthdayofthemonthat  even 

Judgn.  37  let  me  alone  two  months,  that  I  may  go 
11.  38  Aud  he  sent  her  away,  .two  months :  and 
11.  39  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  two  months 

19.  2  went  away.,  and  was  there  four  whole  m. 

20.  47  abode  in  the  rock  Rimmon  four  months 

1  Sa.   6.   1  the  country  of  the  Philistines  seven  months 

20.  27  on  the  morrow . .  the  second . .  of  the  month 
20.  34  eat  no  meat  the  second  day  of  the  month 

27.  7  the  time . .  was  a  full  year  aud  four  months 

2  Sa,    2.  11  of  Judah  was  seven  years  and  six  months 

5.    5  over  Judah  seven  years  and  six  months 

6. 11  continuedin  the  house  three.. months:  and 

24.    8  at  the  endof  ninemonthsandtwentydays 

24. 13  or  wilt  thou  fiee  three  months  before  thine 

1  Ki.   4.    7  each  man  his  month  in  a  year  made  pro. 

4.  27  every  man  in  his  month :  they  lacked  no. 

5.  14  sent  them,  .ten  thousand  a  month  by  co. 
5. 14  a  month  they  were  in  Lebanon,  .two  mo. 

6.  1  the  month  Zif,  which  (is)  the  second  mo. 
6.  38  in..  Bui,  which  (is)  the  eighth  month,  was 
8.    2  KLhanim,  which  (is)  the  seventh  month 

11.  i5  six  monthsdid  .T.vsb  remain  therewithal! 

12.  33  month,  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month 


1  Ki.12.  33  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  eighth  mouth 

12.  33  in  the  month  which  he  had  devised  of  his 

2  Ki.15.   8  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria  six  months 

23.  31  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  Jerusalem 

24.  8  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  three  months 

25.  1  ninth  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  tenth  mo. 
25.  1  in  the  tenth,  .of  the  month.  .Nebuchad. 
25.  3  on  the  ninth,  .of  the .  .month  the  famine 
25.  8  fifth  month, on  theseventh..of  the  mouth 
25.  25  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  month,  that 
25.  27  twelfth  month,  on  the.  .(day)  of  the  month 

1  Ch.  3.    4  there  he  reigned  seven  years  and  six  mo. 

12.  15  that  went  over  Jordan  in  the  first  month 

13.  14  family  of  Obed-edomiu  his  house  three  m. 
21.  12  or  three  months  to  be  destroyed  before  thy 
27.    1  came  in  and  went  out  month  by  month 
27.    1  throughout  all  the  months  of  the  year,  of 
27.   2  Over  the  first  course  for  the  first  month 
27.    3  the  chief . .  of  the  host  for  the  first  month 
27.   4  And  over  the  course  of  the  second  month 
27.    5  third  captain  of  the  host  for  the  third  rao. 
27.    7  The  fourth .  .for  the  fourth  month  (was) 
27.    8  The  fifth .  .for  the  fifth  mouth  (was)  Sha. 
27.   9  The  sixth,  .for  the  sixth  month  (was)  Ira 
27.  10  The  seventh . .  for  the  seventh  month  (was) 
27.  11  The  eighth,  .for  the  eighth  month  (was)  S. 
27. 12  The  ninth,  .for  the  ninth  month  (was)  A. 
27.  13  The  tenth.. for  the  tenth  month  (was)M. 

27. 14  The  eleventh.. for  the  eleventh  mon.  (was) 

27. 15  The  twelfth . .  for  the  twelfth  month  (was) 
2  CI).  3.    2  in  the  second  (day)  of  the  second  month 

5.  3  in  the  feast  which  (was)  in  the  seventh  m. 
7.  10  day  of  the  seventh  month  he  sent  the  pe. 

15.  10  at  Jerusalem  in  the  third  month,  in  the 

29.  3  in  the  first  month,  opened  the  doors  of  the 
29. 17  they  began  on  the  first . .  of  the  first  month 
29. 17  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  month  came  they 
27. 17  in  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  first  month  they 

30.  2  to  keep  the  passover  in  the  second  month 
30.  13  to  keep  the  feast.. in  the  second  month,  a 

30.  15  on  the  fourteenth,  .of  the  second  month 

31.  7  In  the  third  month  they  began  to  lay  the 
31.    7  and  finished  (them)  iu  the  seventh  month 

35.  1  on  the  fourteenth  (day)  of  the  first  month 

36.  2  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  Jerusalem 
36.   9  he  reigned  three  months  and  ten  days 

Ezra  3.  1  when  the  seventh  month  was  come,  and 
3.  6  From  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 
3.    8  in  the  second  month,  began  Zerubbabel 

6.  19  upon  the  fourteenth  (day)  of  the  first  m. 

7.  8  he  came  to  Jerusalem  in  the  fifth  month 
7.    9  For  upon  the  first  (day)  of  the  first  month 

7.  9  on  the  first  (day)  of  the  fifth  month  came  he 

8.  31  departed  .  on  the  twelfth . .  of  the  first  m. 
10.  9  ninth  month,  and  the  twentieth. .of  them. 
10.  16  sat  down  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  m. 
10. 17  an  end.,  by  the  first  day  of  the  first  month 

Neh.    1.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  month  Chisleu,  in 

2.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  month  Nisan,  in  the 

7.  73  when  the  seventh  month  came,  the  cliil. 

8.  2  upon  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 

8. 14  in  booths  hi  the  feast  of  the  seventh  mo. 

9.  1  in  the  twenty  and  fourth  day  of  this  mo. 
Esth.  2.  12  after  that  she  had  been  twelvemonths,  ac. 

2. 12  six  months  with  oil  of  myrrh,  and  six  mo. 

2. 16  in  the  tenth  month,  which  (is)  the  month 

3.  7  In  the  first  month,  that  (is),  the  month  N. 
3.  7  from  day  to  day,  and  from  month  to  mo. 
3.    7  the  twelfth  (month),  that  (is),  the  month 

3. 12  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

3. 13  upon  the  thirteenth,  .ofthetwelfthmonth 
3.  13  which  (is)  the  month  Adar,  and  (to  take) 

8.  9  in  the  third  month,  that  (is),  the  month 
8. 12  twelfth  month,  which  (is)  the  month  Adar 

9.  1  the  twelfth  month,  that  (is),  the  month  A. 

9. 15  on  the  fourteenth  day  also  of  the  month 

9. 17  On  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  Adar 
9.  19  made  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 
9.  21  keep  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 
9.  22  the  month  which  was  turned  unto  them 

Job    14.    5  the  number  of  his  months  (are)  with  thee 

21.  21  when  the  number  of  his  months  is  cut  off 

Jer.     1.    3  away  of  Jerusalem  captive  in  the  fifth  m. 

2.  24  wild  ass.  .in  her  mouth  they  shall  find  her 

28.  1  in  the  fourth  year,  (and)in  the  fifth  month 
28. 17  died  the  same  year,  in  the  seventh  mouth 
36.  9  in  the  ninth  mouth,  .they  proclaimed  a 
36.  22  in  the  winter  house,  in  the  ninth  month 
39.  1  In  the  ninth  year . .  in  the  tenth  month,  c. 
39.  2  in  the  fourth  month,  the  ninth . .  of  the  m. 
41.  1  Now  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  month 
52.    4  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth,  .of  the  month 

51.  6  the  fourth  month,  in  the  ninth . .  of  the  m. 

52.  12  the  fifth  month,  in  the  tenth,  .of  the  mo. 
52.  31  month,  in  the  five  and  twentieth,  .of  them. 

Eze.    1.    i,  2  In  the  fifth  (day)  of  the  month 

G.  1  in  the  fifth  (day)  of  the  month,  (as)  I  sat  in 
20.  1  thetenth(day)of  the  month  certainofthe 
24.  1  in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth. .of  them. 
26.    1  in  the  first . .  of  the  month . .  the  word  of  the 

29.  1  iu  the  twelfth . .  of  the  month,  the  word  of 
29. 17  in  the  first . .  of  the  month,  the  word  of  the 

30.  20 iu  the  seventh,  .of  the  month,  .the  word 

31.  1  in  the  first,  .of  the  month,  .the  word  of  the 

32.  1  the  twelfth  month,  in  the  first . .  of  the  mo. 

32. 17  in  the  fifteenth,  .of  the  month,  .the  word 

33.  21  in  the  fifth,  .of  the  month,  .one  that  had 
39.  12  seven  months  shall  the  house  of  Israel  be 

39.  14  after  the  end  of  seven  months  shall  they 

40.  "1  in  the  tenth,  .of  the  month,  in  the  fourti 

45. 18  in  the  first,  .of  the  month,  thou  shalt  take 
45.  20  so  thou  shalt  do  the  seventh .  .of  the  mouth 


Eze.  45.  21  :*i  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month,  ye 
45.  25  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  mouth,  shall  he 
47.  12  bring  forth  new  fruit  according  to  his  m. 
Dan.  10.    4  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  first  month 
Hos.    5.    7  now  shall  a  month  devour  them  with  th. 
Amos  4.    7  when,  .yet  three  months  to  the  harvest 
Hag.    1.    1  sixth  month,  in  the  first  day  of  the  month 
1. 15  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  sixth  month 
2.    1  in  the  one  and  twentieth,  .of  the  month 
2.  20  in  the  four  aud  twentieth,  .of  the  month 
Zech.  1.    1  In  the  eighth  mouth,  in  the  second  year 
1".    7  eleventh  mouth,  which  (is)  the  month  Seb. 
7.    1  in  the  fourth . .  of  the  ninth  month . .  in  Ch. 

7.  3  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  separ. 
2.Moon,  month,  rrv  yerach, 

Exod.  2.    2  a  goodly  (child),  she  hid  him  three  months 
Deut  21.  13  her  father  and  her  mother  a  full  month 

1  Ki.  6.  37  In  the  fourth  year,  .in  the  month  Zif 

6.  38  in  the  month  Bui,  which  (is)  the  eighth 

8.  2  themonthEthanim,  which  (is)  the  seventh 

2  KX15.  13  and  he  reigned  a  full  month  in  Samaria 
Job      3.    6  let  it  not  come  in  to  the  number  of  the  m. 

7.  3  So  am  I  made  to  possess  months  of  vanity 
29.  2  Oh  that  I  were  as  (iu)  months  past,  as  (in) 
39.    2  Canst  thou  number  the  months,  .theyfu. 

Zech.  11.    8  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  mo, 
o'.Moon,  month,  rrv  yerach. 

Ezra    6. 15  on  the  third  day  of  the  month  Adar,  which 

Dan.    4. 29  At  the  end  of  twelve  months  he  walkedin 
i.A  month,  fx-r\v  men. 

Luke  1.  24  conceived,  and  hid  herself  five  months 
1.  26  in  the  sixth  month  the  angel  Gabriel  was 
1.  36  this  is  the  sixth  month  with  her,  who  was 
1.  56  Mary  abode  with  her  about  three  months 
4.  25  was  shut  up  three  years  and  six  months 

Acts  7.  20  nourished . .  in  his  father's  house  three  m. 

18.  1 1  he  continued '. .  a  year  and  six  months,  te. 

19.  8  spake  boldly  for  the  space  of  three  months 

20.  3  And.  .abode  three  months.  And  when  the 
2S.  11  after  three  months  we  departed  iu  a  ship 

Gal.    4.  10  Ye  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times 
Jas.     5.  17  by  the  space  of  three  years  and  six  months 
Rev.   9.    5  thattheyshouldbe  tormented  five  months 
9.  10  their  power  (was)  to  hurt  men  five  months 
9. 15  for  an  hour,  and  a  day,  and  a  month,  and 
ii,    2  they  tread  under  foot  forty,  .two  months 
13.    5  unto  him  to  continue  forty  (and)two  mon. 
22.    2  yielded  her  fruit  every  month ;  and  the  1. 
[See  also  Four,  three.] 
MONTHLY  — 
New  moon,  month,  ann  chodesh. 

Isa.   47.  13  Let  now  .".the  monthly  prognostic  at  ors 
MONUMENTS  — 
To  keep,  watch,  reserve,  "ixj  natsar. 

Isa.   65.   4  and  lodge  in  the  monuments ;  which  eat 
MOON  — 

1.  Moon,  wandering,  Q"V  yareach. 

Gen.  37.   9  the  sun,  and  the  moon.'and  the  eleven  stars 
Deut.  4. 19  when  thou  seest  the  sim,  and  the  moon 

17.  3  either  the  sun,  or  moon,  or  any  of  the  host 
Josh.io.  12  aud  thou,  moon,  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon 

to.  13  and  the  moon  stayed,  until  the  people  had 
2  Ki.  23.  5  to  thesun,and  to  the  moon,  and  to  the  pi. 
Job  25.    5  Behold  even  to  the  moon,  aud  it  shineth 

31.  26  If  I  beheld . .  the  moon  walking  (in)  bright. 
Psa.    8.    3  the  moon  aud  the  stars,  which  thou  hast 

72.    5  shall  fear  thee  as  long  as  the  sun  and  m. 

72.    7  abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the  moon 

89.  37  It  shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the  m. 
104. 19  He  appointed  the  moon  for  seasons :  the 
121.  6  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day,  nor  the  moon 
136.  9  The  moon  and  stars  to  rule  by  night :  for 
148.  3  Praise  ye  him,  sun  and  moon :  praise  him 
Eccl.  12.  2  While  the  sun,  or  the  light,  or  the  moon 
Isa.  13.  10  the  moon  shall  not  cause  her  light  to  shine 

60. 19  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give 
Jer.     8.   2  the  moon,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven 

31.  35  the  ordinances  of  the  moon  and  of  the  stars 
Eze.  32.   7  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light 
Joel    2.  10  the  suu  and  the  moon  shall  be  dark,  and 

2.  31  aud  the  moon  into  blood,  before  the  great 

3.  15  The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened 
Hab.   3.  11  sun  (and)  moon  stood  still  in  their  habit. 

2.  Tlie  moon,  rrv  yerach. 

Deut  33.  14  the  precious  things  put  forth  by  the  moon 
Isa.   60.  20  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself 
S.TJie  moon  {from  its  whiteness),  ni^b  lebanah. 
Song  6.  10  fairasthemoon.clearas  thesun.  .terrible 
Isa.    24.  23  Then  the  moon  shall  be  confounded,  and 
30.  26  the  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light 
4.  The  moon,  (TeX'fjvr}  selene. 

Matt24.  29  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
Marki3.  24  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light 
Luke2i.  25  shall  he  signs  in  the  sun,  aud  in  the  moon 
Acts    2.  20  the  moon  into  blood,  before  that  great 
1  C0.15.  41  another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  another 
Rev.   6.  12  became  black,  .and  the  moon  became  as 
8.  12  the  third  part  of  the  moon,  and  the  third 
12.    1  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  upon  her 
21.  23  thecityhadnoneed-.oftnemoon,  to  shine 
MOON,  new  — 
X.New  moon,  enn  chodesh. 

1  Sa.  20.   5  to  rhorrow(is)  the  new  moon,  and  I  should 

20. 18  to  David,  To  morrow  (is)  the  new  moon:  and 
20.  24  when  the  new  moon  was  come,  the  king 

2  Ki.  4.  23  said,  .(it  is)  neither  new  moon  nor  sabbath 


MORASTHITE 


6G8 


MORE 


i  Ch.23.  31  in  the  sabbaths,  in  the  new  moons,  and  on 

2  Ch.  2.    4  on  the  sabbaths,  and  on  the  new  moons 

8.  13  on  the  sabbaths,  and  on  the  new  moons 

31.  3  for  the  sabbaths,  and  for  the  new  moons 
Ezra  3.  5  burnt  offering,  both  of  the  new  moons,  and 
Neb.  10.  33  of  the  sabbaths,  of  the  new  moons,  for  the 
Paa,  81.  3  Blowup  the  trumpet  in  the  new  moon,  in 
Isa.  x.  13  the  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  calling 
1. 14  Your  new  moons  and  your  appointed  fea. 

66.  23  from  one  newmoon  to  another,  and  from 
Eze.  45. 17  in  the  feasts,  and  iu  the  new  moons,  and 

46.    1  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  it  shall  be 

46.    3  worship,  .in  the  sabbaths  and  in  the  new  m. 

46.   6  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon . .  a  young  bu. 
Hos.   2.  11  her  feast  days,  her  new  moons,  and  her 
Amos  8.    5  When  will  the  new  nuon  be  gone,  that 

'l.N'eio  moon,  vav^invia  noumwiia,  veofxrivia. 

Col.     2.  16  of  an  holy  day,  or  of  the  new  moon,  or  of 
LIOR-AS-THTTE,  TifhD, 
Patronymic  of  Mieah  the  prophet  from  Moresheth  Gath. 

B.C.  750 — 721. 

Jer.  26.  18  Micah  the  M.  prophesied  in  the  days  of 
Mic.    1.    1  word .  .that  came  to  Micah  the  M.  in  the 

MOR  DE-CA'I,  "llll?  dedicated  to  Mars. 

1.  A  chief  man  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel.  B.C.  536. 

Ezra  7.  2  31.,  Bilshan,  Mispar,  Bigvai,  Rehum,  Ba. 
Neh,    7.   7  Who  came  with  Zerubbabel,  Jeshua. .  M. 

2.  A  Ben  jamite,  cousin  of  Esther  the  queen  of  Ahasuerus. 

B.C.  520. 

Esth.  2.    5  there  was  a.  .Jew,  whose  name  (was)M. 
2.    7  whom  M. .  .took  for  his  own  daughter 
2. 10  M.  had  charged  her  that  she  should  not 
2.  11  M.  walked  every  day  before  the  court  of 
2.  15  M.,  who  had  taken  her  for  his  daughter 
2. 19  when  the  virgins  were  gathered.. M.  sat 
2.  20  had  not  (yet)  showed.  .asM.  had  charged 
2.  20  Esther  did  the  commandment  of  M.,  like 
2.  21  while  M.  sat  in  the  king's  gate,  two  of  the 
2.  22  the  thing  was  known  to  M.,  who  told  (it) 

2.  22  certified  the  king  (thereof)  in  M.'s  name 

3.  2  butM.  bowed  not,  nor  did  (him)  reverence 
3.  3  Then  the  king's  servants,  .said  unto  M. 
3.  4  to  see  whether  M.'s  matters  would  stand 
3.  5  Haman  saw  that  M.  bowed  not,  nor  did 
3.  6  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  M.  alone 
3.  6  for  they  had  showed  him  the  people  of  M. 

3.  6  Haman  sought  to  destroy,  .people  of  M. 

4.  1  When  M.  perceived  all  that  was  done,  M. 
4.  4  she  sentraimeut  toclothe  M.,and  totake 
4.  5  gave  him  a  commandment  to  M.,  to  know 
4.  6  Hatach  went  forth  to  M.  unto  the  street 
4.  7  M.  told  him  of  all  that  had  happened  unto 
4.  9  Hatach  came  and  told  E. .  .words of  M. 

4.  10  Esther  spake.. gave  him  command,  unto  M. 

4. 12  And  they  told  to  M.  Esther's  words 

4.  13  M.  commanded  to  answer  Esther,  Think 
4. 15  Estherbade(them)returnM.(thisanswer) 

4.  17  M.  went  his  way,  and  did  according  to  all 

5.  9  Hainan  saw  M.  in  the  king's  gate,  that  he 
5.    9  he  was  full  of  indignation  against  M. 

5. 13  so  long  as  I  see  M.  the  Jew  sitting  at  the 

5.  14  speak  thou,  .that  M.  may  be  hanged  the. 

6.  2  M.  had  told  of  Bigthana  and  Teresh,  tw  j 
6.  3  What  honour,  .hath  been  done  to  M.  fur 
6.   4  to  hang  M.  on  the  gallows  that  he  had 

6.  10  do  even  so  to  M.  the  Jew,  that  sitteth  at 
6.  11  arrayed  M.,  and  brought  him  on  horseback 
6. 12  M.  came  again  to  the  king's  gate :  but  H. 

6.  13  If  M.  (be)  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews,  before 

7.  9  the  gallows . .  which  Haman . .  made  for  M. 

7.  10  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  forM, 

8.  1  M.  came  before  the  king  ;  for  Esther  had 
8.  2  and  gave  it  unto  M.   And  Esther  set  M. 
8.  7  unto  Esther  the  queen,  and  toM.  the  Jew 
8.  9  written  accordingto  all  that  M.  comman. 

8.  15  M.  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  king 

9.  3  because  the  fear  of  M.  fell  upon  them 

9.  4  M.  (was)  great  in  the  king's  house,  and  Ins 
9.    4  for  this  man  M.  waxed  greater  and  grea. 
9.  20  M.  wrote  these  things,  and  sent  letters 
9.  23  to  do .  .as  M.  had  written  unto  them 
9.  29  M.  the  Jew,  wrote  with  all  authority,  to 
9.  31  as  M.  the  Jew  and  Esther  the  queen  had 

10.   2  the  declaration  of  the  greatness  of  M. 

10,   3  M.  the  Jew  (was)  next  unto  king  Ahasue. 

MORE,  (the) 

1.  Great,  Vna  gadol. 

Nuni22. 18  the  word  of  the  Lord,  .to  do  less  or  more 
1  Sa.  22. 15  for  thy  servant  knew  nothing,  .less  or  m. 
25.  36  she  told  him  nothing,  less  or  more,  until 
Isa.   56.  12  shall  be  as  tins  day.  .much  more  abund. 

2.  Outside  of,  pn  chuts. 

Eccl.   2.  25  or  who  else  can  hasten,  .more  than  I  ? 
?*.  Advantage,  farther,  101*  yoth  \r. 

Esth.  6.    6  the  king  delight  to  do  honour  more  than 
Eccl.  2.  15  why  was  I  then  more  wise?  Then  I  said 
6.    8  For  what  hath  the  wise  more  than  the  f. 

■{.Again,  yet,  any  more,  "py  od. 

Gen.    9.  15  the  waters  shall  no  more  become  a  flood  to 

5.  Abundant,  much,  many,  y\rab. 

Gen.  36.  7  For  their  riches  were  more  than  that  they 
Exod.  1.  9  the  children  of  Israel  (are)  more  and  mi. 
Nam-.'.  15  Ami  Balak  sent  yet  again  princes,  more 

31.  54  to  the  more  ye  shall  give  the.  .inheritance 
Deut.  7.  17  These  nations  (are)  more  than  I ;  how  can 

aa.    1  a  people  more  than  thou,  be  not  afraid  of 


Julgi6.  30  were  more  than  (they)  which  he  slew  in 
2  Ki.   6.  16  they  that(be)  with  us(are)more  than  they 

1  Ch.24.    4  there  were  more  chief  men  found  of  the 

2  Ch.32.    7  for  (there  be)  more  with  us  than  with  him 
Isa.   54.    1  for  more  (are)  the  children  of  the  desolate 

6.  Second,  other,  again,  n'rJ  shenith. 

Lev.  13.    5  priest  shall  shut  him  up  seven  days  more 
13.  33  up  (him  that  hath)theseall  seven  daysm. 

13.  54  and  he  shall  shut  it  up  seven  days  more 

7. Other,  &\Aos  alios. 

Matt2$.  20  I  have  gained  besides  them  five  talents  m. 

8.  Vet,  still,  en  eti. 

MattiS.  16  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,  Lu.  20. 36 
Johnu.  54  Jesus  therefore  walked  no  more  openiy 

14.  19  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  nienoni. 
16.  10  I  goto  my  Father, and  yesee  me  no  more 

16.  21  she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish 
i5. 25  when  I  shall  no  more  speak  unto  you  in 

17.  iz  now  I  amnomorein  the  world,  but  these 
Rom.  6.   9  Christ .  .dieth  no  more ;  death  hath  no  m. 

7. 17,  20  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that 
11.    6  more  of  works ;  otherwise  grace  is  no  m. 

11.  6  no  more  grace ;  otherwise  work  is  no  more 
2  Co.  5.  16  yet  now  henceforth  know  we.  .no  more 
Gal.     3. 18  (it  is)  no  more  of  promise:  but  God  gave 

4.  7  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but  a  sou;  and 
Heb.    8.  12  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more 

10.    2  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of 

10. 17  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember  nom. 

10. 18  remission  of  these  (is,  there  is)  no  more 
10.  26  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins 
ii.  32  what  shall  I  more  say?  for  the  time  wou. 

Rev.  3.  12  he  shall  go  no  more  out:  aud  I  will  write 
7.  16  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst 
9.  12  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  12. 8. 
iS.  21  thrown  down,  and  shall  be  found  no  more 

18.  22,  22  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  all  in  thee 
18.  23  shall  shine  no  more  at  all  in  thee ;  and  the 
18.  23  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  all  in  thee 

20.  3  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  m. 

21.  1  And  I  saw.  .and  there  was  no  more  sea 

21.  4  there  shall  be  no  mr>re  death,  neither  so. 

22.  3  there  shall  be  no  [morej  curse:  but  the  th. 

9.M6ret  rather,  paWou  mallon. 

Matt.  6.  30  not  much  more  (clothe)  you,  0  ye  of  little 
7.  11  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which 

10.  25  how  much  more . .  them  of  his  household  ? 
18.  13  herejoiceth  more  of  that.. than  of  the  u. 

Luken.  13  how  much  more  shall  (your)  heavenly  F. 

12.  24  how  much  more  are  ye  better  than  the  f. 
12.  28  how  much  more,  .you,  0  ye  of  little  faith 

Johni2.  43  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than 
Acts    4.  19  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than  unto  God 

20.  35  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive 
27.  11  more  than  those  things  which  were  spok. 

Rom.  5.   9  Much  more  then,  being  now  justified  by 

5.  10  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be 
5.  15  much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gr. 
5.  17  much  more  they  which  receive  abundance 

11. 12  the  fall  of  them,  .how  much  more  their 

11.  24  how  much  more  shall  these,  which  be  the 

1  Co. 12.  22  Nay,  much  more  those  members  of  the  b. 

14.  18  I  speak  with  tongues  more  than  ye  all 

2  Co.  3.   9  much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  righ. 

3.  11  much  more  that  which  remaineth  (is)  glo. 
Gal.  4.  27  the  desolate  hath  many  more  children  than 
Phil.   2.  12  now  much  more  in  my  abseuce,  1.9.9. 

3.  4  whereof  he  might  trust  in  the  flesh,  I  m. 
2  TS.  3.  4  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  G. 
Phm.  16  how  much  more  unto  thee,  both  in  the  fl. 
Heb.   9.  14  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ 

12.  25  much  more  (shall  not)  we . .  if  we  turn  away 

10.  Greater,  more,  y.zifav  meizon. 

Jas.     4.   6  But  he  giveth  more  graes.  Wherefore  he 

11.  Abundant,  exceeding,  irepicr<r6s p^rissos. 

Matt.  5.  37  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of 
5.  47  what  do  ye  more .  .do  not  even  the  publi. 

12.  More  abundant,  -jrepKrarSr^pov  perissoteron. 
Matt  11.    9  yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and  more  than  a  pr. 
Lukei2.    4  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do 

12.  48  to  whom. .of  him  they  will  ask  the  more 
2  Co.  10.    8  I  should  boast  somewhat  more  of  our  au. 

XZ.More,  Trhelcov pleidn,  irAelov,  tt\4ov. 

Matt6.  25  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the 
20. 10  that  they  should  have  received  more ;  and 

21.  36  he  sent  other  servants  more  than  the  first 
26.  53  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  an.? 

Marki2.  33  is  [more]  than  all  whole  burnt  offerings 
12.  43  That  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  more  in 

Luke  3.  13  Exact  no  more  than  that  which  is  appoi. 
9.  13  We  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two 
12.  23  The  life  is  more  than  meat,  and  the  body 
21.    3  that  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  in  more 

John  4.    1  made  and  baptized  more  disciples  than  J. 

4.  41  many  more  believed  because  of  his  own 
7.31  willhedo  more  miracles  tlian  these  which 

15.  2  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more 
21.  15  lovest  thou  me  more  than  these?  Hesaith 

Acts  23.  13  they  were  more  than  forty  which  had  made 

23.  2i  tbereliein  waitforhimof  them  more  than 
25.    6  when  he  had  tarried  among  them  more 

1  Co.   9.  19  servant  unto  all,  that  I  might  gain  the  m. 

2  Ti.    2.  16  they  will  increase  unto  more  ungodliness 
Heb.    3.    3  was  counted  worthy  of  more  glory  than  M. 

3.  3  he  who  hath  builded  the  house  hath  more 
Rsv.    2.  19  I  know,  .the  last  (to  be)  more  than  the  first 


14.  Above,  beyond,  more  than,  vw4p  huper. 

2  Go.  11.  23  Are  they  ministers  of  Christ..  I  (am)  more 
[See  also  Abominable,  afflict,  any,  carefully,  cheerfully, 
come,  enough,  excellent,  get,  give,  honourable,  how 
much,  laid,  much,  not,  put  to,  ready,  show,  so  many, 
so  much,  spend,  surely,  twofold,  value,  vile.] 

15. To  weep,  npzbakah. 

Isa.  30. 19  thou  shalt  weep  no  more :  he  will  be  very 

16.  To  add,  ^d;  yasaph. 

Lev.  26.  18  I  will  punish  youseventimesmoreforyour 
Judg.  8.  28  so  that  they  lifted  up  their  heads  no  more 

1  Sa.  27.    4  and  he  sought  no  more  again  for  him 

2  Sa.  2.  28  stood  still .  .neither  fought  they  any  more 
2  Ki.   6.  23  So  the  bands  of  Syria  came  no  more  into 

17.  To  be  added,  ^0;  yasaph,  2. 

Isa.  15.  9  I  will  bring  more  upon  Dimon,  lions  upon 
18.0/1,  above,  by  al. 

Dan.    3. 19  heat  the  furnace  one  seven  times  more 
19.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  many,  Ji3"i  rabah,  5. 

1  Sa.   2.   3  Talk  no  more  so  exceeding  proudly ;  let 

2  Sa.  18.    8  the  wood  devoured  more  people  thatday 

MORE,  to  he  — 

1 . To  be  over  and  above,  *fi'Jr  adaph. 

Num.  3.  46  of  Israel,  which  are  more  than  the  Levites 

2.  To  be  bony,  substantial,  cxy,  atsam. 

Psa.  40.   5  they  are  more  than  can  be  numbered 
40. 12  they  are  more  than  the  hairsof  mine  head 

3.  To  be  many,  multiplied,  2ir\  rabab. 

Psa.  69.   4  They,  .are  more  than  the  hairs  of  mine  h. 
MORE  and  more  — 
l.To  go  on,  ^Sri  judaic. 

Prov.  4. 18  that  shinethmore  and  more  unto  the  pe. 
2.To  cause  to  add,  *]p;  yasap>h,  5. 

Psa.  71.  14  and  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more 
115.  14  The  LORD  shall  increase  you  more  and  m. 

Isa.      1.    5  Why.  .ye  will  revolt  more  and  more 

Hos.  13.    2  now  they  sin  more  and  more,  and  have  m. 

3.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  many,  nxj  rabah,  5. 

2  Ch.33.  23  but  Anion  trespassed  more  and  more 
A.  More,  rather,  fiaWov  mallon. 

1  Th.4.    1  God,  (so)  ye  would  abound  more  and  more 
4. 10  brethren,  that  ye  increase  more  and  more 
MORE  excellent  — 
Thoroughly  excelling,  tcad'  vtrepfioA'hvkatK'  huper. 

1  Co.  12.  31  yet  show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way 
MORE,  fax  or  much  — 

1.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  many,  n;ri  rabah,  5. 

2  Ch.25.  9  Lori>  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than 
%  To  cause  to  add,  *)p;  yasaph,  5. 

1  Sa.  20.  13  The  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jona. 
3,  More  abundantly,  ir£piaa,6Tzpov  perissoteron. 

Luke  7.  26  I  say  unto  you.  .much  more  than  a  prop. 

Heb.  7.  15  it  is  yet  far  more  evident :  for  that  after 
\.More  abundantly,  irepto-o-oreptos  perissoterds. 

Phil.   1. 14  are  much  more  bold  to  speak  the  word 
MORE,  can  no  — 
Thus  neither,  ovtws  ou5e  houtos  oude. 

John  1 5.    4  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me 
I  ORE  part  — 
More,  greater,  tvKsiqv  pleion. 

Acts  19.  32  the  more  part  knew  not  wherefore  they 
4  27. 12  the  more  part  advised  to  depart  thence 

MORE  than  — 

1.  From,  out  of,  above,  jp  win, 

Dan.    2.  30  wisdom  that  I  have  more  than  any  living 

2.  With,  Dy  im. 

Eccl.  2.  16  no  remembrance  of  the  wise  more  than  of 

3.  Except,  dx  '3  hi  im. 

2  Ki.  9.  35  they  found  no  more  of  her  than  the  skull 

4.  Thi 'face,  D*3 panim. 

Job  34. 19  nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor 

5.  Except,  ci  yA\  ex  me. 

Mark  8.  14  had  they  in  the  ship  with  them  morethau 

6.  Above,  upon,  over,  more  than,  indua  epano. 

Marki4.  5  For  it  might  have  been  soldfor  more  than 
7. Beyond,  alongside  of  more  than,Trapd  (ace)  para. 

Rom.  1.  25  served  the  creature  more  than  the  12. 3. 
S.Than,  $  e,  Luke  15.  7. 
9.0ver,  above,  beyond,  more  than,  u-n-ep  (ace.)  huper. 

Matt  10.  37  He  thatloveth  father  or  mother  more  than 
10.  37  he  thatloveth  son  or  daughter  more  than 

rhm.      21  knowingthat  thou  wilt  also  do  more  than 

MORE,  any  — 

To  cause  tomnltiply,  make  abundant,  nzn  rabah,  5 
2  Sa.  14.  11  the  revengers  of  blood  to  destroy  any  m 

MORE,  to  add,  be,  bring,  do,  make  or  put  — 

1.7*0  add,  *)p;  yasaph. 

Lev.  26.21 1  will  bringseven  times  more  plagues  upon 
Deut.  5.  22  he  added  no  more :  and  he  wrote  them  in 
Judg  13.  21  the  angel  of  the  Lord  did  no  more  appear 

2.  To  cause  to  add,  f]p;  yasaph,  5. 

1  Ch.21.   3  make,  .an  hundred  times  so  many  more 


MORE 


669 


MORNING 


2  Ch.io.'  ii  I  will  put  more  to  your  yoke:  my  father 
28.  22  did  he  trespass  yetmore  against  the  Lord 

Job  34.  32  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more 
41.    8  Lay.  .remember  the  battle,  do  no  more 

Isa.     1.  13  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ;  incense  is 

Neh.  13.  18  yet  ye  bring  more  wrath  upon  Israel  by 

MORE,  to  give  or  have  (the)  — 

1,  To  pass  over,  *ujj  abar. 

Psa.  73.    7  they  have  more  than  heart  could  wish 

2.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  many,  rn"i  rabah,  5. 
Exod3o.  15  The  rich  sliall  not  give  more,  and  the  poor 
Lev.  11.  42  or  whatsoever  hath  more  feet  among  all 
Num26.  54  To  many  thou  shalt  give  the  more  inner. 

33.  54  to  the  more  ye  sliall  give  the  more  inher. 
MORE  in  number,  to  be  — 

1.  Abundance,  T)  rob. 

Deut.  7.    7  because  ye  were  more  in  number  than  any 

2.  To  be  many,  nn"j  rabah. 

Psa.  139.  18  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  sand 
MORE,  to  (see)  — 
To  turn  back,  MB*  shub. 

Job     7.    7  remember,  .mine  eye  shall  no  more  see 
MORE,  (so  much)  the  — 
1.7*0  cause  to  add,  *]p;  yasaph,  5. 

Gen.  37.   5,  8  And  they  hated  him  yet  the  more 

1  Sa.  18.  29  Saul  was  yet  the  more  afraid  of  David 

2. So,  |3  ken.  ■ 

Exod.i.  12  the  more  they  multiplied  and  grew 

Z.Rathzr,  more,  fj,a\\ov  motion. 

Mark  7.  36  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal  they  pub. 

10.  48  he  cried  the  more  a  great  deal,  (Thou)  son 

14.  31  hespake[themore]vehemently,If  Ishould 

Luke  5,  15  so  much  the  more  went  there  a  fame  abr. 

18.  39  cried  so  much  the  more,  (thou)  sou  of  D. 
John  5. 18  Therefore  the  Jews  sought  the  more  to 

19.  8  heard  that  saying,  he  was  the  more  afraid 
Acts    5.  14  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the  L. 

9.  22  Saul  increased  the  more  in  strength,  and 
22.    2 ;  2  Co.   7.  7^7.  13 ;  Heb.  10.  25. 
4.  Greater,  fj.e?£ov  meizon. 

Matt  20.  31  tliey  cried  the  more,  saying,  Have  mercy 
5.-45  much  as,  '6<ros  hosos. 

Mark  7.  36  but  the  more  he  charged  them,  so  much 

6.  Abundantly,  wepLao-cos  perissos. 

Matt  27.  23  they  cried  out  the  more,  saying,  Let  him 
MORE,  whatsoever  — 
Remnant,  residue,  ~ix£>  shear. 

Ezra  7.  20  whatsoever  more  shall  be  needful  for  the 
MORE,  to  be  yet  the  — 
To  cause  to  add,  ^p;  yasaph,  5. 

Exod.  9.  34  he  sinned  yet  more,  and  hardened  his  he. 

1  Sa.  r8.  29  Saul  was  yet  the  more  afraid  of  David 

MO'-REH,  .tyio,  n~ib  teacher. 

1.  A  place  inEphraim,  near  Gilgal  and  Mount  Gerizim. 

Gen.  12.    6  the  place  of  Sichem,  unto  the  plain  of  M. 
Deutn.  30  against  Gilgal,  beside  the  plains  of  M. 

2.  A  hill  in  Issachar,  at  the  E.  end  of  Jezreel. 

Judg  7.    1  the  north  side  of  them,  by  the  hill  of  M. 
MOREOVER  — 
l.Ateo,  even,  but,  yea,  although,  *]H  aph. 

Num  16. 14  Moreover  thou  hast  not  brought  us  into 
2, Also,  even,  yea,  yet,  truly,  na  gam. 

Gen.  32.  20  say  ye  moreover,  Behold,  thy  servant  J». 

1  Ch.ir.    2  moreover  in  time  past,  even  when  Saul 

3. Advantage,  more,  "irr  yother. 

Eccl.  12.  9  And  moreover,  because  the  Preachev  was 
k.Again,  yet, while,  any  more,  liy  od. 

Exod.  3. 15  God  said  moreoverunto  Moses,  Thus  sh. 
5.  But  even,  aWa  Kal  alia  kai. 

Luke  16.  21  moreover  the  dogs  came  and  licked  his  s. 

6. Yet,  stilly  en  eti. 

Acts   2. 26  moreover  also  my  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope 
Heb.  11.  36  yea,  moreover  of  bonds  and  imprisonment 

7. But  what  is  left  over,  '6  5e  Aoiirbv  ho  de  loipon. 

1  Co.  4.  2  Moreover  it  is  required  in  stewards,  that 
8. And,  Kal,  and  also  5e  teat,  I  Ti.  3.  7. 

9.  And  likewise,  Kal  dfioitos  kai  homoios,  He.  9.  21, 

MOREOVER  if  — 
And  if,  dxi  ve-im. 

2  Sa.  17. 13  Moreover  if  he  be  gotten  into  a  city,  then 

MO-RE'-SHETH  GATH,  na  jibhid  possession  of  Gath. 
A  city  in  the  W.  of  Judah,  birthplace  of  Micah  the 
prophet. 

Mic.  1. 14  Therefore  shalt  thou  give  presents  to  M. 

MO-RI'-AH,  n;-ib,  nnia  J  ah  provides. 

The  hill  on  the  N.W.  of  Jebus  (afterwards  called  the 

city  of  David),  on  which  Solomon's  temple  was  built. 
Gen.  22.  2  get  thee  into  the  land  of  M. ;  and  offer 
2  Ch.  3.    1  house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerus.  in  mount  M. 

MORNING,  (in  the)— 

1.  Light,  "lit*  or. 

Neh.  8.   3  from  the  morning  until  mid  day,  before 


2.  iVorning,  "lga  boqer. 

Gen.    1.    5,  8,  13,  19,  23,  31  the  evening  and  the  mo. 

19.  27  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to 

20.  8  Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and 
2r.  14  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 
22.    3  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 
24. 54  they  rose  up  in  the  morning ;  and  he  said 

26.  31  they  rose  up  betimes  in  the  morning,  and 

28.  18  Jacob  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

29.  25  that  in  the  morning,  behold,  it  (was)  Leah 
31.  55  early  in  the  morning  Laban  rose  up,  and 

40.  6  Joseph  came  iu  unto  them  in  the  morning 

41.  8  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  that  his 
44.    3  As  soon  as  the  morning  was  light,  the  men 
49.  27  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the  prey 

Exod.  7.15  Get  tbee  unto  Pharaoh  iu  the  morning 

8.  20  Rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  stand 

9.  13  Rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  stand 
10.  13  when  it  was  morning,  the  east  windbro. 
12.  10  let  nothing  of  it  remain  until  the  morning 
12.  10  that  which  remaineth  of  it  until  the  m. 
12.  22  none  of  you  shall  go  out.  .until  the  mor. 
14.  24  in  the  morning  watch  the  Lord  looked 
14.  27  returned  to  his  strength  when  the  morn. 
16.  7  in  the  morning,  then  shall  ye  see  the  gl. 
16.    8  in  the  morning  bread  to  the  full ;  for  that 

16. 12  in  the  morning  ye  shall  be  filled  with  b. 

16. 13  in  the  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about 
16.  19  Let  no  man  leave  of  it  till  the  morning 
16.  20  some  of  them  left  of  it  until  the  morning 
16.  21  they  gathered  it  everymorning,  everynian 
16. 23  lay  up  for  you  to  be  kept  until  the  morn. 
16.  24  they  laid  it  up  till  the  morning,  as  Moses 
r8.  13  the  people  stood  by  Moses  from  the  mor. 

18. 14  all  the  peoplestandby  thee  from  morning 
19.  16  it  came  to  pass . .  the  morning,  that  there 
23. 18  shall  the  fat.  .remain  until  the  morning 
24.   4  Moses . .  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

27.  2t  shall  orderit  from  evening  to  morning  be. 
29.  34  if  ought,  .remain  unto  the  morning, then 
29.  39  one  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  in  the  morning 

29.  41  according  to  the  meat  offering  of  the  m. 

30.  7  burn  thereon  sweet  inceuse  every  morn. 
34.  -  2  ready  in  the  morning . .  come  up  in  the  m. 
34.    4  Moses  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 
34.  25  the  sacrifice,  .be  left  nuto  the  morning 
36.    3  they  brought  yet  unto  him .  .every  morn. 

Lev.    6.    9  the  burning . .  all  night  unto  the  morning 
6. 12  priest  shall  burn  wood  on  it  every  morn. 

6.  20  half  of  it  in  the  morning,  and  half  thereof 

7.  15  he  shall  not  leave  any  of  it  until  the  mo. 
9. 17  beside  the  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  morning 

19.  13  shall  not  abide  with  thee,  .until  the  mor. 

24.  3  shall  Aaron  order  it.  .unto  the  morning 
Num  9. 12  They  shall  leave  none  of  it  unto  the  mor. 

g.  15  the  appearance  of  fire,  until  the  morning 
9.  21  when  the  cloud  abode,  .untothemoming 
9.  21  the  cloud  was  taken  up  in  the  morning 
14.  40  they  rose  up  early  iu  the  morning,  and  gat 
22.  13  Balaam  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

22.  21  Balaam  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  sad. 

28.  4  The  one  lamb  shalt  thou  offer  in  the  mo. 
28.  8  as  the  meat  offering  of  the  morning,  and 
28. 23  beside  the  burnt  offering  in  the  morning 

Deuti6.    4  neither.. remain  all  night  until  the  morn. 
"16.    7  thou  shalt  turn  in  the  morning,  and  go 
28.  67  In  themornmgthoushalt  say,  Would  God 

28.  67  thou  shalt  say,  Would  God  it  were  morn. 
Josh.  3.    1  Joshua  rose  early  in  the  morning  ;  and 

6. 12  Joshua  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and 

7. 14  In  the  morning  therefore  ye  shall  be  bro. 

7.  16  So  Joshua  rose  up  early  iu  the  morning 

8.  10  Joshua  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 
Judg.  6.  28  when  the  men.  .arose  early  in  the  morn. 

6.  31  let  him  be  put  to  death  whilst,  .morning 

9.  33  it  shall  be.  .in  the  morning,  as  soon  as 

16.  2  In  the  morning,  when  it  is  day,  we  shall 
19.    5  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning 
19.    8  he  arose  early  in  the  morning,  on  thefifth 
19.  25  abused  herall  the  night  unto  the  morning 

19.  27  her  lord  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  op. 

20.  19  the  children  of  Israel  rose  up  in  the  mo. 
Ruth  2.    7  hath  continued  even  from  the  morning 

3.  13  Tarry,  .and  it  shall  be  in  the  morning 

3. 13  Lord  liveth:  lie  down  until  the  morning 
3.  14  she  lay  at  his  feet  until  the  morning;  and 

1  Sa.    1.  19  they  rose  up  in  the  morning  early,  and 

3.  15  Samuel  lay  until  the  morning,  and  opened 
5.  4  when  they  arose  early  on  the  morrow  m. 
ii.  11  midst  of  the  host  in  the  morning  watch 

14.  36  and  spoil  them  until  the  morning  light 

15.  12  Samuel  rose  early  to  meet  Saul  in  the  m. 

17,  20  David  rose  up  earlyin  the  morning,  and 
19.    2  take  heed  to  thyself  until  the  morning 
19.  11  to  watch  him,  and  to  slay  him  in  the  mo. 
20.135  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  that  Jon. 

25.  22  if  I  leave  of  all.  .by  the  morning  light,  any 
25.  34  had  not  been  left,  .by  the  morning  light 
25.  36  told  himnothing.  .until  the  morning  light 
25.  37  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  when  the 

29. 10  now  rise  up  early  in  the  morning  with  thy 

29.  10  as  soon  as  ye  be  up  early  in  the  morning 

29. 11  rose  up  early  to  depart  in  the  morning,  to 

2  Sa.   2.  27  surely  then  in  the  morning  the  people  had 

11. 14  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  that  Da. 
17.  22  by  the  morning  light  there  lacked  not  one 

23.  4  as  the  light  of  the  morning,  .a  morning 

24.  11  when  David  was  up  in  the  morning,  the 

24. 15  from  the  morning  even  to  the  time  appo. 
1  Ki.   3.  21  when  I  arose  in  the  morning  to  give  my 

3.  21  when  I  had  considered  it  in  the  morning 
17.   6  brought  him  bread  and  flesh  in  the  morn. 


1  Ki.  18.  26  called  on  the  name  of  Baal  from  morning 

2  Ki.  3.  20  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  when  the 

3.  22  they  rose  upearly  iuthemorning,  and  the 
7.    9  if  we  tarry  till  the  moruiug  light,  some 

10.    8  Lay  ye  them  in  two  heaps . .  until  the  mor. 

10.  9  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  that  he 
16. 15  Upon  the  great  altar  burn  the  morning 
iq.  35  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning,  b. 

1  Ch.  9. 27  the  opening  thereof  every  morning,  .to 

16.  40  To  offer,  .continually  morning  and  even. 

23.  30  to  stand  every  morning  to  thank  and  pr 

2  Ch.  2.    4  for  the  burnt  offerings  morning  and  eve. 

13. 11  they  burn  unto  the  Loud  every  morning 

20.  20  they  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and  went 
31.   3  for  the  morning  and  evening  burnt  offer. 

Ezra  3.    3  offered,  .burnt offerings  morningand  eve. 
Job     1.    5  rose  up  earlyin  the  morning,  and  offered 

4.  20  They  are  destroyed  from  morning  to  eve. 
7. 18  shouldest  visit  him  every  morning,  .try 

11.  17  shine  forth,  thou  shalt  be  as  the  morning 

24.  17  the  morning  (is)  to  them  even  as  the  sh. 
38.   7  When  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and 
38.  12  Hast  thou  commanded  the  morning  since 

Psa.    5.    3  My  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  morning 

5.  3  in  the  morning  will  I  direct,  .unto  thee 
30.  5  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy.  .in  the  morn. 
49. 14  shall  have  dominion  over  them  iu  the  m. 
55.  17  Evening,  and  morning,  and  at  noon,  will 
59.  16  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  mercy  in  the  mo. 
65.  8  thou  makest  the  outgoings  of  the  morning 
73.  14  been  plagued,  and  chastened  every  morn. 
88. 13  in  the  morning  shall  my  prayer  prevent 
90.  5  in  the  morning,  .like  grass  (which)  grow. 
90.  6  In  the  morning  itflourisheth,  and  grow. 
92.    2  To  show  forth,  .in  the  morning,  and  thy 

130.    6,  6  they  that  watch  for  the  morning 
143.    8  Cause  me  to  hear,  .in  the  morning;  for  in 
Prov.  7.  18  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until  the  mor. 

27.  14  with  a  loud  voice,  rising  early  in  the  mo. 
Eccl.  10.  16  Woe  to  thee,  .thy  princes  eat  in  the  mo. 

11.  6  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the 
Isa.     5.  11  Woe  unto  them  that  rise  up.  .in  the  mo. 

17.  11  in  the  morning  shalt  thou  make  thy  seed 
17.  14  And  behold,  .before  the  morning  he  (is) 

21.  12  The  watchmen  said,  The  morning  cometh 

28.  19  for  morning  by  morning  shall  it  pass  over 
33.   2  be  thou  their  arm  every  morning,  our  sa. 

37.  36  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning,  b. 

38.  13  I  reckoned  till  morning,  .asalion,  so  will 
50.    4  he  wakeneth  morning  by  morning,  he  w. 

Jer.  20.  16  let  him  hear  the  cry  in  the  morning,  and 
21.  12  Execute  judgment  iu  the  morning,  and  d. 

Lam.  3.  23  new  every  morning:  great(is)  thy  faithful. 

Eze.  12.  8  in  the  morning  came  the  word  of  the  Lord 
24.  18  So  I  spake  unto  the  people  in  the  morning 
24.  18  I  did  in  the  morning  as  I  was  commanded 
33.  22  until  he  came  to  me  in  the  morning ;  and 
46.  13  lamb,  .thou  shalt  prepare  it  every  morn. 
46.  14  prepare  a  meat  offering  for  it  every  mor. 
46.  15  shall  they  prepare  the  lamb,  .every  mor 

Dan.    8.  26  the  vision  of  the  evening  and  the  morning 

Hos.  6.  4  for  your  goodness  (is)  as  a  morning  cloud 
7.  6  in  the  morning  it  burnetii  as  a  flaming  fire 
13.    3  they  shall  be  as  the  morning  cloud,  and  as 

Amos  4.    4  and  bring  your  sacrifices  every  morning 
5.    8  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning 

Mic.    2.    1  when  the  morning  is  light,  they  practise 

Zeph.  3.    5  every  morningdothhebruig his  judgment 
Z.Dcnon,  in^p  mishchar. 

Psa.  1 10.    3  of  holiness  from  the  womb  of  the  morning 

4.  Shining,  brightness,  nai  nogah. 

Dan.    6.  19  Then  the  king  arose  very  early  in  the  m. 

5.  An  aioakening,  learning,  mishap,  ni'D?  tsephirah. 

Eze.    7.   7  The  morning  is  come  unto  thee,  O  thou 

7. 10  the  morning  is  gone  forth ;  the  rod  hath  - 

6.  Dawn,  ">ijB>  shachar. 

Gen.  19.  15  when  the  morning  arose,  then  the  angels 
Neh.  4.  21  from  the  rising  of  the  morning  till  the 
Job  41.  18  his  eyes,  .like  the  eyelids  of  the  morning 
Psa.  1 39.  9  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning . .  dwell  in 
Song  6.  10  looketh  forth  as.  .morning,  fair  as  the  m. 
Isa.  14.  12  O  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning  !  (how)  art 
58.  8  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning 
Hos.    6.   3  his  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morn. 

10.  15  in  a  morning  shall  the  king  of  Israel  utt. 
Joel  2.  2  the  morning  spread  upon  the  mountains 
Amos  4.  13  that  maketh  the  morning  darkness,  and 
Jon.    4.    7  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  morning 

7.  To  rise  or  go  early,  □?!?  shakam,  5. 

1  Sa.  17.  16  the  Philistine  drew  near  morning  and  ev. 

8.  To  wander,  n?t?  shakah,  5. 

Jer.     5.    8  They  were  (as)  fed  horses  in  the  morning 
9. Of  the  early  dawn,  opdpivos  orthrinos. 

Rev.  22.  16  I  am  the  root.. the  bright  and  [morning]  s. 
10.  Early,  former,  irpuivos  proinos. 

Rev.   2.  28  And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star 
11. Early,  Trpwt  ]?roi. 

Matt  16.    3  in  the  morning,  .foul  weather  to  day 

Mark  1.  3c  in  the  morning,  rising  up  a  great  while 

11.  20  in  the  morning,  as  they  passed  by,  they 
13.  35  master.. cometh,  at  even,  .or  in  the  m. 
15.    1  straightway  in  the  morning  the  chief  pr. 

Acts  28.  23  persuading  them .  .from  morning  till  eve. 

12.  Early  datm,  irpaia  jwdia. 

Matt  21.  18  Now  [in  the  morning], as  he  returned  into 

27.    1  When  the  morning  was  come,  all  the  chief 

J0IUI21.    4  when  the  morning  was  now  come,  Jesus 


MORNING 


670 


MOSES 


MORNING,  to  come  early  in  the  — 

To  be  early  in  dawn  or  mormngt  bpQpifa  orth/rieo. 
Luke  21.  33  all  the  people  came  early  in  the  morning 

MORNING,  early  in  the  — 

I. Marly  dawn  or  morning,  6p6po?  orthros. 

John  8.    2  [early  in  the  morning  he  came  again  into] 
Acts    5.  21  entered  into  the  temple  early  in  the  mor. 

2.  Early  vn  the  dawn  or  morning,  (xna)  irpcct. 

Matt  :?:>.    1  which  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to 
Mark  16.    2  very  early  in  the  morning,  the  Lu-  24. 1. 

MORROW  (after)  — 
\,A£orning7~§&  boqer. 

Lev.  22.  30  ye  shall  leave  none  of  it  until  the  morrow 
Num  16,    5  Even  to  morrow  the  Lord  will  show  who 

22.  41  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  thatBalak 
1  Sa.  9.  19  to  morrow  I  will  let  thee  go,  and  will  tell 
Esth.  2.  14  ou  the  morrow  she  returned  into  the  se. 

5.  14  to  morrow  speak  thou  unto  the  king  that 
Zeph.  3.    3  they  gnaw  not  the  bones  till  the  morrow 

'I.Morroiv,  rnT?  mochoraih. 

Gen.  19.  34  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  the 
Exod  9.    6  the  Lord  did  that  thing  on  the  morrow 
iS.  13  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  Moses 
32.    6  they  rose  up  early  on  the  morrow,  and 

32.  30  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  Moses 
Lev.    7.  16  the  morrow  also  the  remainder  of  it  shall 

19.  6  tiie  same  day  ye  offer  it,  and  on  the  mor. 
23. 11  on  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath  the  priest 

23.  15  ye  shall  count  unto  you  from  the  morrow 
23.  16  Even  unto  the  m  arrow  after  the  seventh 

Xumio.  41  on  the  morrowall  the  congregation  of  the 

17,  8  it  came  to  pass,  that  on  the  morrow  Moses 

33.  3  on  the  morrow  after  the  passover  the  ch. 
Josh.  5.  11  they  did  eat  of  the  old  corn,  .on  the  mor. 

5.  12  theraannaceasedouthemorrowafterthey 

Judg.  6.  38  he  rose  up  early  on  the  morrow,  and  th. 

9.  42  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  the  p. 

21.  4  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  the  p. 

1  Sa.    5.    3  when  they,  .arose  earlyon  themorrow,  be. 

5.  4  when  they  arose  early  on  the  morrow  m. 
11.  11  it  was  (so)  on  the  morrow,  that  Saul  put 

18.  10  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  the 

20.  27  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  .the  second 
31.    8  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  when  the 

2  Sa.  n.  12  Tarry,  .and  to  morrow  I  will  let  thee  de. 
2  Ki.   8.  15  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  he 

1  Ch.io.    8  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  when  the 
29.  21  on  the  morrow  after  that  day.  .a  thousand 
Jer.  20.    3  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  Pa. 

3.  The  dawn,  to  marrow,  avptov  aurion. 

Matt.  6.  34  Take  therefore  no  thought  for  the  morrow 

6.  34  for  the  morrow  shall  take  thought  for  the 
Lukeio.  35  on  the  morrow,  when  he  departed,  he  took 
Acts  4.  5  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  their 
Jas.    4. 14  Whereas  ye  know  not  what,  .on  the  mor. 

4.  Succeeding  {day),  €|JJs  hexes. 

Acts  25. 17  without  any  delay  on  the  morrow  I  sat  on 

5. The  morrow,  firavpiov  epawrion. 

Marten.  12  on  the  morrow,  when  they  were  come  from 
Acts  10.   9  On  the  morrow,  as  they  went  on  their 

10.  23  on  the  morrow  Peter  went  awaywith  them 
10.  24  themorrowafterthey entered iutoCesarea 
20.    7  preached,  .ready  to  depart  on  the  morrow 

22.  30  On  the  morrow,  because  he  would  have  k. 

23.  32  On  the  morrow  they  left  the  horsemen  to 
25.  23  on  themorrow,  when  Agrippa  was  come 

MORROW,  to —  [  See  To  morrow.] 

MORSEL  (of  meat)  — 

1..1  cake,  T33  Hkkar. 

1  Sa.   2.  36  shall . .  crouch  to  him  for . .  a  morsel  of  br. 

Z.Morsel,  ni  path. 

Gen.  iS.  5  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  comf. 
Judgig.  5  Comfort  thine  heart  with  a  morsel  of  br. 
Ruth.  2.  14  come  thousand  dip  thy  morsel  in  the  vi. 
1  Sa.  28.  2?.  let  me  set  a  morsel  of  bread  before  thee 
1  Ki.17.  11  Bring  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  morsel  of  bread 
Job  31.  17  Or  hive  eaten  my  morsel  myself  alone 
Psa.147.  17  He  casieth  forth  his  ice  like  morsels:  who 
Prov  17.  1  Better  (is)  a  dry  morsel,  and  quietness 
23.    8  The  morsel,  .thou  hast  eaten  shalt  thou 

Z.Act  of  eating,  food,  fipwats  brosis. 

Heb.  12.  i6  who  for  onemorselof  meat  sold  his  birth. 

MORTAL  (man)  — 
X.A  man,  snag  enosh, 

Job     4.  17  Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just  than  God? 

^.Mortal,  dying,  Bvy\t6s  thnetos. 

Rom.  6.  12  Let  not  sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal 
8.  11  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by 

1  Co.  15.  53  and  this  mortal  (must)  put  on  immortality 

15.  54  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality 

2  Co.  4. 11  might  be  made  manifest  in  our  mortal  flesh 

MORTALITY  — 

Dyir,  ',  9vi]t6i>  tJmelon. 

1  Co.   5.    4  that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of 

MORTALLY  — 

Soul,  breaiti,  •-'■"'  nephesh. 

Deut  ii   1 1  »mite  him  mortally  that  he  die,  and  flee. 
MORTAR,  MORTER  — 

1,01  ''..'<   1  1  ion  chomer. 

Gen.  ii.    3  r  ■    stone,  and  slime  had  they  for  mortar 


Exod.  1. 14  hard  bondage,  in  mortar,  and  in  brick,  and 
Isa.  41.  25  he  shall  come  upon  priuces  as.  .mortar 
Nah.   3.  14  go  into  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar,  make 

2.-4  mortar,  HTIO  medokah. 

Num  11.    8  or  beat  (it)  in  a  mortar,  and  baked  (it)  in 

B.A  mortar,  hollow  place,  c'nrn  maktesh. 

Prov  27.  22  Though  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  m. 

\.Dust,  T3U,  ap 

Lev.  14!  42  he  shall  take  other  niorter,  and  shall  pi. 
14.  45  all  the  morter  of  the  house:  and  he  shall 

MORTGAGE,  to  — 

To  mingle,  traffic,  negotiate,  pledge,  ^~Vr  arab. 
!Neh.  5.    3  We  have  mortgaged  our  lands,  vineyards 

MORTIFY,  to  — 

1.  To  put  to  death,  kill,  OavaTooj  thanatoo. 

Rom.  8. 13  if  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  d. 

2.To  put  to  death,  deaden,  veKp6a>  nekroo. 

Col.     3.    5  Mortify  therefore  your  members  which  are 

MO-S2'-RA,  h^did  chastisement. 

The  place  where  Aaron  died  and  was  buried  ;  between 

Bereth  Bene-jaaken  and  Gudgodah. 

Deut  10.   6  Beeroth  of  the  children  of  Jaakan  to  M. 

MO-SE'-ROTH,  rvhpb,  rfftSlO. 

The  26th  station  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  and  15th 
from  Sinai,  between  Hashmanah  and  Bene-jaaken. 
Nuni33.  30  departed  from  Hash.,  and  encamped  at  II. 
33.  31  they  departed  from  M.,  and  pitched  iuB. 

MO'-SES,  nafD,  Mwo-ijs,  yiwvtrysWovo-Tis  drawer  out. 
The  youngest  son  of  Amram  and  Jochebed,  born  B.C. 
1571,  just  at  the  time  when  the  king  of  Egypt  had  re- 
solved on  the  destruction  of  every  newly  born  male 
child  among  the  Israelites.  Being  saved  by  Pharaoh's 
daughter,  she  gave  him  her  own  title,  the  "drawer out," 
from  the  water,  and  brought  him  up  as  an  adopted  son, 
so  that  he  was  skilled  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the 
Egyptians.  His  patriotic  desire  for  his  brethren  at  last 
compelled  him  to  leave  Egypt  when  forty  years  of  age, 
to  which  he  returned  after  an  interval  of  forty  years' 
sojourn  in  Midian  only  at  the  repeated  command  of 
God.  His  successive  interviews  with  his  brethren,  and 
with  the  king  of  Egypt,  his  wonderful  miracles,  and  the 
admirable  patience,  faith,  aud  skill  he  evinced  through- 
out his  whole  career,  are  graphically  depicted  in  his 
works  that  remain.  He  is  traditionally  supposed  to 
have  written  the  introductory  chapters  of  the  Book  of 
Job,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  whole.  His  authorship 
of  Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numbers,  and  Deuteronomy  are 
attested  by  every  possible  mark  of  an  internal  and  of 
an  external  kind.  These  books  bear  incontestable 
evidence  that  they  were  composed  in  a  wilderness 
state,  yet  with  an  express  view  to  a  speedy  settlement 
in  a  fruitful  laud.  Repeatedly  in  these  Moses  is 
directed  to  write  in  a  book  (or  more  properly,  in  the 
Book),  Exod.  17. 14;  34.  27,  and  he  is  represented  as  writ- 
ing in  Exod.  24.  4-7  ;  34.  28.  These  passages  refer  to  the 
wars,  the  ten  commandments,  the  treatment  of  the 
Canaanites,  and  the  various  festivals.  In  Num.  33.  2 
it  is  said  he  "  wrote  their  goings  out  according  to  their 
journeys  by  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,"  that  is, 
apparently,  a  kind  of  "  Daily  Journal."  Deuteronomy 
is,  if  possible,  even  more  express  on  the  point,  iu  such 
passages  as  31.9,  22,  24,  enjoining,  "the  book— the 
song— the  law,"  to  be  read  and  rehearsed  and  pre- 
served. Accordingly  the  Book  of  Joshua  makes 
express  mention  of  "the  Book  of  the  Law  of  Moses,"in 
1.  7,  8;  8.  32,  34 ;  23.  3,  6,  16  ;  24.  26,  and  all  the  succeed 
rng  books  of  Scripture  support  the  same  view.  The 
ten  tribes  who  revolted  after  the  death  of  Solomon,  held 
fast  to  the  Pentateuch,  which  they  certainly  would  not 
have  done  had  it  been  composed  after  that  event.  The 
Book  which  Hilkiah  found  in  the  temple  was  pro- 
bably tin-  I'.'tnk  <if  Leviticus— a  book  so  strictly  appro- 
priate for  the  priests  alone,  that  it  is  not  wonderful  it 
was  left  very  much  in  their  hands— the  threatenings 
of  which  in  chapter  xxvi.  are  so  well  fitted  to  have 
stirred  the  heart  of  the  pious  king  Josiah.  As  a 
historian,  an  orator,  a  leader,  a  statesman,  a  legislator, 
a  patriot,  and  a  man,  Moses  stands  pre-eminent. 
But  no  mere  genius  could  have  made  him  the  originator 
of  sound  jurisprudence— the  great  teacher  of  mono- 
theism and  sound  morality— except  he  had  also  been 
a  prophet  of  the  Most  High,  supernatnrally  guided  and 
aided  in  his  work.  He  died  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  over 
against  Beth-peor,  B.  C.  1451,  at  the  ripe  age  of  120 
years,  while  yet  "  his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural 
force  abated." 

Exod.  2. 10  she  called  his  name  M.:  and  she  said,  Be. 
2.  11  when  M.  was  grown,  that  he  went  out  into 
2.  14  M.  feared,  and  said,  Surely  this  thing  is 
2.  15  he  sought  to  slay  41.  And  M.  fled  from  the 
2.  17  M.  stood  up  and  helped  them,  and  wate. 
2.  21  And  M.  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man 

2.  21  and  he  gave  M.  Zippnrah  his  daughter 

3.  1  41.  kept  the  flock  of  Jetliro  his  father  in 
3.  3  M.  said,  I  will  now  turn  aside,  and  see 
3.  4  God  called  unto  him.  .and  said,  M.,  41. 
3.  6  M.  hid  his  face ;  for  he  was  afraid  to  look 
3.  11  M.  said  unto  God,  Who  (am)  I,  thatlsho. 
3.  13  M.  said  unto  God,  Behold,  (when)  I  come 
3.  14  God  said  unto  M.,  I  am  that  I  am  :  and  he 

3.  15  God  said  moreover  unto  41.,  Thus  shalt 

4.  1  M.  answered  and  said,  But,  behold,  they 
4.  3  became  a  serpent;  and  M.  fled  from  bef. 
4.    4  And  the  Lord  said  unto  M. 


So  in  4.  19,  21 ;  6.  1 ;  7.  1,  14 ;  8.  16,  20;  9.  1,  8,  13,  22; 

10.  1,  12,  21;  11.  1,  9;  12.  43;  r4-  r5.  26;  16.  28;  17.  5, 

14;  19.  9,  10,  21;  20.  22;  24.  12;  30.  34;  32.  9,  33;  33. 

17;  34.  1,  27.  Lev.  10.  2;  21.  1.  Num.  3.  40;  7.  n;  n. 

16,  23 ;  12.  14 ;  14.  11 ;  15-  35 '.  r7-  IO  \  2I-  8>  34 ;  25.  4 ; 

27.  12,  18.  Deut.  31.  14,  16. 

Exod.  4.  10  M.  said  unto  the  Lord,  0  my  Lord,  I  (am) 
4.  14  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  M. 
4.  iS  M.  went  and  returned  to.Tethro  his  father 
.4.  18  And  Jethro  said  to  M.,  Go  in  peace 
4.  20  M.  took  his  wife  and  his  sons,  and  set 
4.  20  and  M.  took  the  rod  of  God  in  his  hand 
4. 27  said.  .Go  into  the  "wilderness  to  meet  41. 
4.  28  M.  told  Aaron  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 
4.  29  M.  and  Aaron  went  and  gathered  together 

4.  30  words  which  the  LoRDhadspokenuntoM. 

5.  1  M.  and  Aaron  went  in,  aud  told  Pharaoh 
5.    4  Wherefore  do  ye,  M.  and  Aaron,  let  the 
5.  20  they  met  M.  and  Aaron,  who  stood  in  the 

5.  22  M.  returned  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  L. 

6.  2  God  spake  unto  41.,  and  said  unto  him,  I 
6.   9  M.  spake  so  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
6.    9  they  hearkened  not  unto  M.  for  anguish 
6. 10  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.,  saying 

6. 12  M.  spake  before  the  Lord,  saying,  Behold 
6.  13  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  unto  Aaron 
6.  20  she  bare  him  Aaron  and  41. ;  and  the  years 
6.  26  These  (are)  that  Aaron  and  M.,  to  whom 
6.  27  these  (are)  that  M.  and  Aaron 
6.  2S  Lord  spake  unto  M.  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

6.  29  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.,  saying,  I  (am) 

7.  6  M.  and  Aaron  did  as  the  Lord  commau. 
7.   7  And  II.  (was)  fourscore  years  old,  and  A. 
7.   3  Lord  spake  unto  M.  and  Aaron,  saying 
7.  10  M.  and  Aaron  went  in  unto  Pharaoh,  and 
7.  19  The  Lord  spake  unto  M.,  Say  unto  Aaron 

7.  20  M.  and  Aaron  did  so,  as  the  Lord  comm. 

8.  1  TheLORDspake  unto  M.,  Gounto Pharaoh 
8.  5  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.,  Say  unto  Aaron 
8.  8  Pharaoh  called  for  M,  and  Aaron,  and  said 
8.  9  M.  said  unto  Pharaoh,  Glory  over  me  :  w. 
8. 12  11.  and  Aaron  went  out  from  Pharaoh.  .M. 
8.  13,  31  LORD  did  according  to  the  word  of  M. 
8.  25  Pharaoh  called  for  M.  and  for  Aaron,  and 
8.  26  M.  said,  It  is  not  meet  so  to  do ;  for  we 
8.  29  M.  said,  Behold,  I  go  out  from  thee,  and 

8.  30  M.  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  and  entreated 

9.  8  let  3L  sprinkle  it  toward  the  heaven  in 
9.  10  M.  sprinkled  it  up  toward  heaven ;  aud  it 
9.  11  magicians  could  not  stand  before  M. 

9.  12  the  LORD  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh 

9.  23  M.  stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  heaven 
9.  27  called  for  II.  and  Aaron,  and  said  unto 
9.  29  M.  said  unto  him,  As  soon  as  I  am  gone 
9.  33  M.  went  out  of  the  city  from  Pharaoh,  and 
9. 35  hardened,  .as  the  Lord  had  spoken  by  M. 

10.  3  M.  and  Aaron  came  in  unto  Pharaoh,  and 
10.  8  And  M.  and  Aaron  were  brought  again' 
10.  9  M.  said,  We  will  go  with  our  young  and 
10. 13  M.  stretched  forth  his  rod  over  the  land 
10.  16  Pharaoh  called  for  41.  and  Aaron  in  haste 
10.  22  41.  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  heaven 
10.  24  And  Pharaoh  called  unto  M.,  and  said,  Go 

10.  25  M.  said.  Thou  must  give  us  also  sacrifices 

10.  29  M.  said,  Thou  hast  spoken  well,  I  will  see 

11.  3  M.  (was)  very  great  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

11.  4  M.  said,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  About  mid. 
11. 10  M.and  Aarondid  all  these  wonders  before 

12.  1  the  Lord  spake  unto  41.  and  Aaron  in  the 
12.  21  41.  called  for  all  the  elders  of  Israel,  and 
12.  28  didastheTLoRDhad"commanded41.(and  A. 
12.  31  he  called  for 41.  and  Aaron  by  night,  and 
12.  35  did  according  to  the  word  of  41. ;  and  they 

12.  50  as  the  Lord  commanded  41.  and  Aaron 

13.  1  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  4L,  saying 

So  in  14.  1 ;  16.  n;  25.  1 ;  30.  n,  17,  22;  31.  i,  12  ;  40. 
1.  Lev.  4.  1 ;  5. 14 ;  6.  i,  8, 19, 24 ;  7. 22,  28  ;  8.  1 ;  12.  1 ; 
14.  1 ;  17.  1 ;  18.  1 ;  19.  1 ;  20.  1 ;  21.  16 ;  22.  1,  17,  26 ; 
23.  1,  9,  23,  33  ;  24.  1,  13  ;  27.  *■  Num.  3.  5,  n,  14,  44  ; 
5.  1,  5, 11 ;  6.  1 ;  7.  4 ;  8.  1,  5,  23 ;  9.  9 ;  10. 1 ;  13.  1 ;  15- 
r.  17.  37  I  16.  20,  23,  36,  44 ;  17.  1 ;  18.  25 ;  19.  1 ;  20.  7 ; 
25.  10,  16;  26.  52;  27.  6;  28.  1;  31.  1,  25;  34-  1.  16;  35- 
9. 

Exodi3-    3  41.  said  unto  the  people,  Remember  this 

13.  19  41.  took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with  him  :  for 

14.  11  they  said  unto  M.,  Because  (there  were) 
14.  13  41.  said  unto  the  people.  Fear  ye  not,  stand 
14.  21  41.  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea 
14. 27  41.  stretched  forth  his  hand  over  the  sea 

14.  31  and  believed  the  Lord,  and  his  servant  41. 

15.  1  Theu  sang  M.  and  the  children  of  Israel 
15.  22  So  41.  brought  Israel  from  the  Red  Sea 

15.  24  people  murmured  against  41.,  saying,  W. 

16.  2  murmured  against  41.  and  Aaron  in  the 
16.   4  Then  said  the  Lord  unto  41.,  Behold,  I 
16.    6  41.  and  Aaron  said  unto  all  the  children 
16.    8  41.  said,  (This  shall  be),  when  the  LORD 
16.   9  41.  spake  unto  Aaron,  Say  unto  all  the 
16.  15  41.  said  unto  them,  This  (is)  the  bread 
16.  19  41.  said,  Let  no  man  leave  of  it  till  them. 
16.  20  hearkened  not  unto  41. . .  and  41.  was  wroth 
16.  22  and  all  the  rulers,  .came  and  told  41. 

16.  24  they  laid  it  up  till  the  morning,  as  41.  bade 
16.  25  41.  said,  Eat  that  to  day,  for  to  day  (is)  a 
16.  32  41.  said,  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  L. 
16.  33  41.  said  unto  Aaron,  Take  a  pot,  and  put 

16.  34  As  the  Lord  commanded  41.,  so  Aaron 

17.  2  people  did  chide  with  41. .  .And  41.  said 
17.    3  people  murmured  against  41.,  and  said 
17.    4  41.  cried  unto  the  L  HTD,  saying.  What 
17.    6  41.  did  so  iu  the  sight  of  the  elders  of  I3. 
17.    9  41.  said  unto  Joshua,  Choose  us  out  men 


MOSES 


671 


MOSES 


EXQ1I17. 
17' 

17 

"7- 

iS. 
18. 

iS. 

18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
18. 


Lev. 


24. 
24- 
24. 
24, 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
31. 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32- 
32- 
32- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 
40. 


10  Joshua  did  as  II. had  said,  .and  \L,  Aaron 
ir  when  51.  held  up  his  hand,  that  Israel  p. 
12  2I.1  hands  (were)  heavy  ;  and  they  took 
15  31.  built  au  altar,  and  called  the  uarne  of 

1  When  Jetliro.  .M.1  father  in  law,  heard 

1  that  God  had  done  for  M.,  and  for  Israel 

2  51.*  father  in  law,  took  Zipporah,  51.'  wife 
5  II.'  father  inlaw,  came  with  his  sonsand 

5  came,  .unto  M.  iuto  the  wilderness,  where 

6  he  said  unto  51.,  I  thy  father  in  law  Jetliro 

7  51.  went  out  to  meethisfatherin  law, and 

8  31.  told  his  father  in  law  all  that  the 
12  31.'  father  in  law,  took  a  burnt  offering 

12  eatbread  with  31.'  father  in  law  before  God 

13  that  31.  sat  to  judge  the  people:  and  the 

13  people  stood  by3I.fromthemorninguuto 

14  31.'  father  in  law  saw  all  that  he  did  to 

15  31.  said  unto  his  father  in  law,  Because 
17  31.'  father  in  law  said  unto  him,  The  thing 

24  31.  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  his  father 

25  31.  chose  able  men  out  of  all  Israel,  and 

26  the  hard  causes  they  brought  unto  31. 

27  31.  let  his  father  in  law  depart;  and  he 

3  31.  went  up  unto  God,  and  the  Lord  call. 

7  M.  came  and  called  for  the  elders  of  the 

8  31.  returned  the  words  of  the  people  unto 

9  31.  told  the  words  of  the  people  unto  the 

14  31.  went  down  from  the  mount  unto  the 

17  And  31.  brought  forth  the  people  out  of 

19  31.  spake,  and  God  answered  him  by  a  voice 

20  called  31.  (up)  to  the  top  of  the  mount 

23  '31.  said  unto  the  Lord,  The  people  cannot 
25  31.  went  down  unto  the  people,  audspake 

19  they  said  unto  M.,  Speak  thou  with  us 

20  31.  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  not :  for  God 

21  31.  drew  near  unto  the  thick  darkness  w. 
r  he  said  unto  31.,  Come  up  unto  the  Lord 

2  31.  alone  shall  come  near  the  Lord  ;  but 

3  31.  came  and  told  the  people  all  the  words 

4  31.  wrote  all  the  words  of  the  LORD,  and 

6  31.  took  half  of  the  blood,  and  put  (it)  in 

8  31.  took  the  blood,  and  sprinkled  (it)  on 

9  Then  went  up  31.,  and  Aaron,  Nadab,  and 
13  31.  rose  up,  and  his  minister  Joshua:  and 
13,  15  And  31.  went  up  into  the  mount 

16  he  called  unto  31.  out  of  the  midst  of  the 
iS  31.  went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud,  aud 
1 3  31.  was  in  the  mount  forty  da3rsand  forty 

18  he  gave  unto  31.,  when  he  had  made  an 

1  31.  delayed  to  come  down  out  of  the  mo. 
1  (as  for)  this  31.,  the  man  that  brought  us 

7  the  Lord  said  unto  31.,  Go,  get  thee  down 

11  31.  besought  the  Lord  his  God,  and  said 

15  31.  turned,  aud  went  down  from  the  mo. 

17  he  said  unto  31.,  (There  is)  a  noise  of  war 

19  31.*  anger  waxed  hot,  and  he  cast  the  ta. 
21  31.  said  unto  Aaron,  What  did  this  people 

25  31.  saw  that  the  people  (were)  naked,  for 

26  31.  stood  in  the  gate  of  the  camp,  and  said 
38  Levi  did  accordingto  the  word  of  31. :  and 
2i  31.  had  said,  Consecrate  yourselves  to  day 

30  31.  said  unto  the  people,  Ye  have  sinned 

31  31.  returned  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  Oh 
1  Lord  said  unto  31.,  Depart,  (and)go  up  he. 

5  the  Lord  had  said  unto  31.,  Say  unto  the 

7  And  31.  took  the  tabernacle,  aud  pitched 
S  31.  wentout  untothetaberuacle,(that)all 

8  looked  after  31. ,  until  he  was  gone  into  the 

9  as  31.  entered  into  the  tabernacle,  the 

9  descended . .  and  (the  Lord)  talked  with  31. 

11  the  Lord  spake  unto  31.  face  to  face,  as  a 

12  31.  said  unto  the  Lord,  See,  thou  sayest 

4  31.  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  went 

5  31.  made  haste,  and  bowed  his  head  tow. 
29  when  31.  came  down  from  mount  Sinai 
29  the  two  tables  of  testimony  in  31.'  hand 

29  31.  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone 

30  Aaron  and.  .the  children  of  Israel  saw  31. 

31  31.  called  unto  them ;  and  Aaron  and  all 

31  retTirued  unto  him :  and  31.  talked  with 

33  (till)  31.  had  done  speaking  with  them,  he 

34  31.  went  in  before  the  Lord  to  speak  with 

35  31.,  that  the  skin  of  31. 'face  shone:  and  31. 

1  31.  gathered  all  the  congregation  of  the 

4  31.  spake  unto  all  the  cougregation  of  the 

20  Israel  departed  from  the  presence  of  31. 

29  commanded  to  be  made  by  the  hand  of  31. 

30  31.  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  See 

2  31.  called  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  and  every 

3  they  received  of  31.  all  the  off  ering  which 

5  they  spake  unto  31.,  saying.  The  people 

6  31.  gave  commandment,  and  they  caused 

21  according  to  the  commandment  of  31. 

22  made  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  31. 
1,  5,  7,  2i,  -26,  29,  31  as  the  Lord  com.  31. 

32  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  31.,  so  did 

33  they  brought  the  tabernacle  unto  31.,  the 

42  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  31.,  so  the 

43  31.  did  look  upr.n  all  the  work .  .and  31. 

16  Thus  did  31.:  according  to  all  that  the 

1 3  31.  reared  up  the  tabernacle,  and  fastened 
19,  21,  23,  25,  27,  29,  32  as  the  Lord  com.  31. 

31  31.  and  Aaron  and  hi3  sons  washed  their 
33  he  reared  up  the  court.  .So  31.  fiuished 
35  31.  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the  tent  of 

1  Lord  called  unto  31.,  aud  spake  unto  him 
33  Which  the  LoRDcommanded  31.  inmount 

4  31.  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him;  and 

5  31.  said  unto  the  congregation,  This  (is) 

6  31.  brought  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  wa. 
9,  13,  17,  21,  29  asthe  Lord  commanded  31. 

10  31.  took  the  anointing  oil,  and  anointed 


xr      27 
!Nuju.  1. 


Lev.    8.  13  31.  brought  Aaron's  sons,  and  put  coats 
8.  15  31.  took  the  blood,  and  put  (it)  upon  the 
8.  16  he  took . .  their  fat,  and  31.  burned  (it)  upon 
8. 19  31.  sprinkled  the  blood  upon  the  altar  ro. 
8.  20  31.  burnt  the  head,  and  the  pieces,  and 
8..21  31.  burnt  the  whole  ram  upon  the  altar 
8.  23  31.  took  of  the  blood  of  it,andput(it)upon 
8.  24  31.  put  of  the  blood,  .and  31.  sprinkled  the 
8.  28  31.  took  them  from  off  their  bauds,  and 
8.  29  31.  took  the  breast,  .it  was  31.'  part ;  as 
8.  30  31.  took  of  the  anointing  oil,  and  of  the  b. 
8.  31  M.  said  unto  Aaron  and  to  his  sons,  Boil 

8.  36  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  31. 

9.  1  31.  called  Aaron  aud  his  sons,  and  the  el. 
9.  5  they  brought  (that)  which  31.  commanded 
9.  6  31.  said,  This  (is)  the  thiug  which  the  L. 
9.  7  31.  said  unto  Aaron,  Go  unto  the  altar,  and 
9.  10  he  burnt,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 

9.  21  wave  offering  before  the  Lord  ;  as  31.  co. 

9. 23  31.  aud  Aaron  went  into  the  tabernacle 
10.    3  31.  said  unto  Aaron,  This  (is  it)  that  the 
10.    4  31.  called  3Iishael  and  Elzaphan,  the  sons 
10.    5  went  near,  and  carried  them,  .as  31.  had 
10.    6  31.  said  unto  Aaz'on,  and  unto  Eleazar  and 
10.    7  And  they  did  according  to  the  word  of  31. 
10. 11  hath  spoken  unto  them  by  the  hand  of  31. 
10.  12  31.  spoke  unto  Aaron,  aud  unto  Eleazar 
10. 16  31.  diligently  sought  the  goat  of  the  sino. 
10. 19  A.  said  unto  31.,  Behold,  this  day  have 

10.  20  And  when  31.  heard  (that),  he  was  content 

11.  1  Lord  spake  unto  31.  and  to  Aaron,  saying 

13.  1  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  31.  and  Aaron 

14.  33  Lord  spake  unto  3L  and  unto  Aaron,  sa. 

15.  1  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  31.  and  to  Aaron 

16.  1  Lord  spake  unto  31.,  after  the  death  of 
16.  34  And  he  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 
21.  24  31.  told  (it)  unto  Aaron,  and  to  his  sons 

23.  44  31.  declared  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

24.  11  brought  him  unto  31.:  and  his  mother's 
24. 23  31.  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that 
24. 23  Israel  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 

25.  1  Lord  spake  unto  31.  in  mount  Sinai,  say. 

26.  46  which  the  Lord  made . .  by  the  hand  of  31. 
34  which  the  Lord  commanded  M.  for  the 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  31.  in  the  wilderness 
17  And  31.  and  Aaron  took  these  men  which 

19  As  the  Lord  commanded  31.,  so  he  num. 

44  which  31.  and  Aaron  numbered,  aud  the 

48  For  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  31.,  saying 
54  accord,  to  all  that.  .LoRDcommanded  31. 

1  Lord  spake  unto  31.  and  nnto  Aaron,  say. 

33  numbered,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  51. 

34  accord,  to  all  that.  .Lord  commanded 31. 
1  31. ,  in  the  day(that)the  LORD  spake  withi3I. 

16  31.  numbered  them,  according  to  the  word 

38  those  that  encamp  before,  .(shall  be)  31. 

39  31.  and  Aaron  numbered  at  the  comman. 
42  51.  numbered,  as  the  Lord  commanded 

49  31.  took  the  redemption  money  of  them 
51  51.  gave  the  money  of  them  that  were  re. 
51  word  of  the  Lord,  as  the  Lord  comma.  51. 

1,  17,  21  And  the  LORD  spake  unto  51.  and 
34  And  31.  and  Aaron  and  the  chief  of  the 
37  which  31.  and  Aaron  did  number,  accor. 
37  command,  of  the  LoRDby  the  hand  of  31. 
41  31.  and  Aaron  did  number  according  to  the 

45  whom  31.  and  Aaron  numbered,  according 

45  that  were  numbered,  .by  the  hand  of  31. 

46  whom  31.  and  Aaron  and  the  chief  of  Isr. 
49  they  were  numbered  by  the  hand  of  51. 
49  numbered  of  him. .the  LORD  command.  51. 

4  as  the  Lord  spake  unto  51.,  so  did  the  ch. 
1  51.  had  fully  set  up  the  tabernacle,  and 
6  51.  took  the  wagons  and  the  oxen,  and 
89  31.  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle  of  the 

3  lighted  the  lamps.. as  the  Lord  comma.  31. 

4  pattern  which  the  Lord  had  showed  31. 

20  51.,  and  Aaron,  and  all  the  congregation 
20,  22  commanded  51.  concerning  the  Levites 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  31.  in  the  wilderness 

4  51.  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that 

5  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  51.,  so  did 

6  they  came  before  31.  and  before  Aaron  on 
8  31.  said  unto  them,  Stand  still,  and  I  will 

23  command,  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of  51. 

13  command,  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of  31. 

10.  29  31.  said  unto  Hobab,  the  son  of.. 31.'  father 

10.  35  5I._said,  Rise  up.  Lord,  and  let  thine  en. 

11.  2  thepeople  cried  unto  51.;  and  when  31.  pr. 
n.  10  31.  heard  the  people  weep  throughout  th. 
11. 10  anger  of  the  Lord..  51.  also  was  displeased 
11.  11  51.  said  unto  the  LORD,  Wherefore  hast 
11.  21  51.  said,  The  people,  among  whom  I  (am) 
11.  24  31.  went  out,  and  told  the  people  the  wo. 
11.  27  and  told  31.,  and  said,  Eldad  and  Medad 
11.  28  the  servant  of  31.,  (one)  of  his  young  men 
11.  28  answered  and  said,  5Iy  lord  51.,  forbid 

11.  29  51.  said  unto  him,  Enviest  thou  for  mys.? 
11. 30  51.  gat  him  into  the  camp,  he  and  the  el. 

12.  1  and  Aaron  spake  against  51.  because  of 
12.   2  Hath  the  LaRD  indeed  spoken  only  by  51. 
12.    3  51.  (was)  very  meek,  above  all  the  men  w. 
12.    4  the  Lord  spake  suddenly  unto  51.,  and 
12.    7  31.  (is)  not  so,  who  (is)  faithful  in  all  mine 
12.    8  not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  servant  31. 

12.  11  Aaron  said  unto  31.,  Alas!  my  lord,  I  be. 
12. 13  31.  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  Heal  her 

13.  3  31.  by  the  commandment  of  theLoRDsent 
13.  16  which 51. sentto spy  outthe  laud.  And  51. 
13.  17  51.  sent  them  to  spy  out  the  land  of  Can. 
13.  26  and  came  to  31.,  and  to  Aaron,  and  to  all 
13.  30  Caleb  stilled  the  peojjle  before  31.,  and 


Sam  14.    2  murmured  against  51.  and  against  Aaron 
14.    5  51.  aud  Aaron  fell  on  their  faces  before 

14. 13  51.  said  unto  the  Lord,  Then  the  Egypt. 
14.  26  Lord  spake  unto  51.  aud  unto  Aaron,  say. 
14.  36  the  men  which  31.  sent  to  search  the  laud 
14,  39  51.  told  these  sayings  unto  all  the  children 
14.  41 II.  said,  Wherefore  now  do  ye  transgress 

14.  44  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and  31 

15.  22  which  the  Lord  hath  spoken  unto  31. 
15.  23  hath  commanded  you  by  the  hand  of  51. 
15,  33  they  that,  .brought  him  unto  31.  and  Aa 

15.  36  and  he  died  ;  as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 

16.  2  they  rose  up  before  31.,  with  certain  of 
16.   3  gathered  themselves  together  against  51. 
16.   4  And  when  31.  heard  (it),  he  fell  upou  his 
16.   8  31.  said  unto  Korah,  Hear,  1  pray  you,  ye 
16.  12  31.  sent  to  call  Dathan  and  Abiram,  the 
16.  15  31.  was  very  wroth,  and  said  unto  the  L. 
16. 16  31.  said  unto  Korah,  Be  thou  and  all  thy 
16.  18  and  stood  in  the  door.,  with  31.  and  Aarou 
16.  25  31.  rose  up,  and  went  unto  Dathan  and  Ab. 
16.  28  31.  said,  Herebyye  shall  know  thatthe  L. 
16.  40  the  Lord  said  to  him  by  the  hand  of  31. 
16.  41  murmured  against  31.  and  against  Aaron 

16. 42  was  gathered  against  31.  and  against  Aa. 

16. 43  31.  and  Aaron  came  before  the  tabernacle 
16.  46  51.  said  unto  Aaron,  Take  a  censer,  and 
16. 47  Aaron  took  as  31.  commanded,  and  ran 

16.  50  Aaron  returned  unto  31.  unto  the  door  of 

17.  6  31.  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  aud 
17.    7  31.  laid  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord  in 
17.    8  31.  weut  into  the  tabernacle  of  witness 
17.   9  51.  brought  out  all  the  rods  from  before 
17.  11  51.  did  (so):  as  the  Lord  commanded  him 
17. 12  children  of  Israel  spake  unto  51.,  saying 
20.   2  gathered  themselves  together  against  3f. 
20.    3  the  people  chode  with  31.,  andspake,  sa. 
20.   6  31.  aud  Aaron  went  from  the  presence  of 
20.   9  31.  took  the  rod  from  before  the  Lord,  as 
20.  10  And  31.  and  Aaron  gathered  the  congre. 
20.  11  31.  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  with  his  rod 
20. 12  Lord  spake  unto  51.  and  Aaron,  Because 

20. 14  51.  sent^messengers  fromKadeshuntothe 
20.  23  Lord  spake  unto  51.  and  Aaron  in  mount 
20.  27  51.  did  as  the  Lord  commanded :  and 
20.  28  51.  stripped  Aaron  of  his  garments,  and 

20.  28  51.  and  Eleazar  came  down  from  the  m. 

21.  s  people  spake  against  God,  and  against  51. 
21.  7  the  people  came  to  31. .  .And  31.  prayed 
21.  o  31.  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it 
21.  16  the  well  whereof  the  Lord  spake  unto3I. 
21.  32  51.  sent  to  spy  out  Jaazer,  and  they  took 
25.  5  51.  said  unto  the  judges  of  Israel,  Slay}'e 
2=;.    6  a  5Iidiauitish  woman  in  the  sight  of  51. 

1  Lord  spake  unto  51.  and  unto  Eleazarthe 

3  31.  and  Eleazar  the  priest"spake  with  them 

4  the  Lord  conimanded'3I.  and  the  cliildren 
9  who  strove  against  51.  and  against  Aaron 

59  she  bare  unto  Amram  Aaron  and  51.,  and 

63  were  numbered  by  51.  and  Eleazar  the  pr. 

64  them  whom  51.  and  Aaron  the  priest  nu. 

2  they  stood  before  51.,  andbefore  Eleazar 

5  And  31.  brought  their  cause  before  theL. 

11  a  statute,  .as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 

15  And  51.  spake  unto  the  Lord,  saying 

22  51.  did  as  the  LoRDcommanded  him :  and 

23  as  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  51. 
40  51.  told  the  children  of  Israel  according 

40  according  tolall.  .the  Lord  commanded  51. 

1  And  51.  spake  unto  the  heads  of  the  tribes 

16  statutes  which  the  Lord  commanded  51. 

3  51.  spake  unto  the  people,  saying,  Arm 

6  31.  sent  them  to  the  war,  a  thousand  of 

7  they  warred . .  as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 

12  unto  31.,  and  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  unto 

13  And  31.,  and  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  all 

14  31.  was  wroth  with  the  officers  of  the  host 

15  31.  sa'id  unto  them,  Have  ye  saved  all  the 
21  of  thelaw  which  the  Lord  commanded  31. 
31  3J.  aud  Eleazar..  did  as  the  Lord  com.  51. 

41  51.  gave  the  tribute,  (which  was)  the  L. 

41  unto  Eleazar.. as  the  Lord  command.  51. 

42  which  51.  divided  from  the  men  that  wa. 
47  51.  took  one  portion  of  fifty,  (both)  of  man 

47  gave  them .  .as  the  Lord  commanded  31. 

48  captains  of  hundreds,  came  near  unto  51. 

49  they  said  unto  51., Thy  servants  have  taken 
54  31.  and  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  gold 

2  spake  unto  31.,  and  to  Eleazar  the  priest 
6  31.  said  unto  the  children  of  Gad  and  to 

20  31.  said  unto  them,  If  ye  will  do  this  thing 
25  children  of  Reuben  spake  unto  31. ,  saying 

28  31.  commanded  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  J. 

29  31.  said  unto  them,  If  the  children  of  Gad 
33  31.  gave  unto  them,  (even)  to  the  children 

40  And  31.  gave  Gilead  unto  3Iachir  the  son 

1  amiies  under  the  hand  of  51.  and  Aaron 

2  51.  wrote  their  goings  out  according  to 

50  the  Lord  spake  unto  51.  in  the  plains  of 
13  51.  commanded  the  cliildren  of  Israel,  s. 

1  spake  before  51.,  and  before  the  princes 
5  And  51.  commanded  the  children  of  Israel 
10  Even  as  the  Lord  commanded  51.,  so  did 
13  which  the  Lord  comma,  by  the  hand  of  51. 
1  31.  spake  unto  all  Israel  on  this  side 

3  (that)  51.  spake  unto  the  children  of  I. 
5  land  of  5Ioab,  began  51.  to  declare  this  law 

41  31.  severed  three  cities  on  this  side  Jordan 

44  which  31.  set  before  the  children  of  Israel 

45  31.  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  after 

46  whom  31.  and  the  children  of  Israel  smote 
1  31.  called  all  Israel,  and  said  unto  them 


26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
29. 
29. 
30. 
3°- 
31- 

31- 
31- 
3*. 
31- 

31- 
3i- 


3i 

31 
31 
3i 
31 
3«- 
31- 
31- 
32. 
32- 
32- 
32. 
32. 
32- 
32- 


Deut. 


MOSES 


672 


MOTHER 


Deufca/.  i  M.  with  the  elders  of  Israel  commanded 
27.  9  M.  and  tlie  priests  the  Levites  spake  unto 
27.  11  M.  charged  the  people  the  same  day,  say. 
29.  1  covenant  which  the  Lord  commanded  AI. 
eg.  2  M.  called  unto  all  Israel,  and  said  unto 
31.  1  M.  went  and  spake  these  words  unto  all 
31.  7  M.  called  unto  Joshua,  and  said  unto  him 
31.  9  M.  wrote  this  law,  and  delivered  it  unto 
31.  10  M.  commanded  them,  saying,  At  the  end 
31.  14  AI.  and  Joshua  went,  and  presented  the. 
31.  22  M.  therefore  wrote  this  song  the  same  day 
31.  24.  AI.  had  made  an  end  of  writing  the  words 
31.25  M.  commanded  the  Levites,  which  bare 

31.  30  M.  spake  in  the  ears  of .  .the  congregation 

32.  44  At.  came  and  spake  all  the  words  of  this 
32.  45  At.  made  an  end  of  speaking  all  these  w. 
32.  48  the  Lord  spake  unto  M.  that  self  same  day 
3  j.  1  M.  the  man  of  God  blessed  the  children 
3  i.  4  AI.  commanded  us  a  law,  (even)  the  inhe. 
34.  1  At.  went  up  from  the  plains  of  Moab  unto 
- 1-    5  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  died  there  in 

|.    7  AI.  (was)  anhundred  and  twentyyearsold 

3  f.    3  the  children  of  Israel  wept  for  M.  in  the 

34.    8  weeping(aud)  mourning  for  AI.  were  ended 

34.    9  for  At.  had  laid  his  hands  upon  him  :  and 

34.    9 hearkened.. and  did  as.. Lord  comman.  M. 

34.  10  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like  uuto  M. 

34. 12  which  AI.  showed  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel 

Josh.   1.    1  the  death  of  M.  the  servant  of  the  Lord 

1.    1  unto  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  M.'  minister 

1.    2  M.  my  servant  is  dead;  now  therefore  arise 

1.    3  have  I  given  unto  you,  as  I  said  unto  AI. 

1.    5  as  I  was  with  AI.,  (so)  I  will  be  with  thee 

1.    7  the  law  which  AI.  my  servant  commanded 

1.  13  At.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  commanded 

1.  14  land  which  51.  gave  you  on  this  side  Jor. 

1.  15  AI.  the  Lord's  servant  gave  you  on  this 

1.  17  as  we  hearkened  unto  M.  in  all  things,  so 

1.  17  thy  God  be  with  thee,  as  lie  was  with  M. 

3.  7  as  I  was  with  At.,  (so)  I  will  be  with  thee 

4.  10  according  to  all  that  AI.  commanded  Jo. 
4.  12  passed  over  armed.  .as  AI.  spake  uuto  them 
4.  14  as  they  feared  M.,  all  the  days  of  his  life 
8.  31 II.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  commanded 
8.  31  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  At. 

8.  32  upon  the  stones  a  copy  of  the  law  of  At. 
8.  33  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  had  comman. 

8.  35  was  not  a  word  of  all  that  M.  commanded 

9.  24  God  commanded  his  servant  M.  to  give 

11. 12  as  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  commanded 
11. 15  the  Lord  commanded  At.  his  servant,  so 

1 1. 15  undone  of  all  that  the  Lord  comman.  At. 

11.  20  destroy  them,  as  the  Lord  commanded  M. 
n.  23  according  to  all  that.  .Lord  said  unto  At. 

12.  6  At.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  and  the  chil. 
12.   6  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave  it  (for)  a 

8  which  M.  gave  them,  beyond  Jordan  east. 

8  as  At.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave  them 
12  for  these  did  51.  smite,  and  cast  them  out 

15  M.  gave  unto  the  tribe  of  the  children  of 
21  whom  At  smote  with  the  princes  of  Mid. 
24  AI.  gave  (inheritance)  unto  the  tribe  of  Gad 
29  AI.  gave  (inheritance)  unto  the  half  tribe 

32  (are  the  countries)  which  AI.  did  distribute 

33  tribe  of  Levi  AI.  gave  not  (any)  inheritance 

2  as  the  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  AI. 

3  AI.  had  given  the  inheritance  of  two  tribes 

5  As  the  Lord  commanded  AI.,  so  the  chil. 

6  that  the  Lord  said  unto  AI.  the  man  of  God 

7  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  sent  me  from 

9  AI.  sware  on  that  day,  saying,  Surely  the 

10  the  Lord  spake  this  word  unto  AI.,  while 

1 1  strong . .  (I  was)  in  the  day  that  AI.  sent  me 

4  Lord  commauded  AI.  to  give  us  an  inherit. 
7  which  fit. the  servant  of  the  LoRDgave  them 
2  whereof  I  spake  unto,  .by  the  hand  of  AI. 
2,  8  Lord  commanded  by  the  hand  of  AI. 
2  Ye  have  kept  all  that  AI.  the  servant  of 

4  which  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave  you 

5  which  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  charged 
7  (one)  half  of  the  tribe  of  Alanasseh  AI.  had 
9  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of  AI. 

6  is  written  in  the  hook  of  the  law  of  AI. 
5  I  sent  AI.  also  and  Aaron,  and  I  plagued 

16  the  children  of  the  Kenite,  AI.'  father  in 
20  they  gave  Hebron  unto  Caleb,  as  AI.  said 

3.  4  commanded  their  fathers  by.  .hand  of  AI. 

4.  1 1  Heber  the  Kenite . .  the  father  in  law  of  AI. 
t  Sa.12.   6  (It  is)  the  Lord  that  advanced  AI.  and  A. 

12.    8  then  the  Lord  sent  AI.  and  Aaron,  which 
1  Ki.  2.    3  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  AI.,  that  thou 

8.   9  two  tables  of  stone,  which  AI.  put  there 

8.  53  as  thou  spakest  by  the  hand  of  AI.  thy  s. 

8.  56  which  he  promised  by  the  hand  of  AI.  his 
■2  Ki.14.  6  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  AI. 
18.  4  brake  in  pieces  the  brasen  serpent  that  AI. 
18.  6  but  kept,  .which  the  Lord  commanded  AI. 
18.  12  transgressed,  .all  that  M.  the  servant  of 
21.  8  all  Lhe  law  that  my  servant  AI.  commanded 
23.  25  turned,  .according  to  all  the  law  of  AI. 
1  Ch.  6.    3  children  of  Amram;  Aaron,  and  AI.,  and 

6.  49  according  to  all  that  AI.  the  servant  of  G. 
15.  15  as  AI.  commanded  according  to  the  word 
21. 29  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  which  AI.  made  in 

22. 13  judgments  which  the  Lord  charged  AI. 
23.  13  sons  of  Amram;  Aaron  and  AI.:  and  Aa. 

23. 14  Now  (concerning)  AI.  the  man  of  God,  his 
23.  15  The  sons  of  AI.  (were)  Gershom  and  Elie. 
26.  24  Shcbuel  the  son  of  Gershom,  the  sou  of  AI. 

a  Ch.  1.  3  which  AI.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  had  m. 
s.  10  the  two  tables  which  AI .  put  (therein)  at  H. 
8.  13  according  to  the  commandment  of  AI.,  on 


Judg. 


2  Ch.23. 
24. 

25' 

30 

33 

34' 
35' 
35< 

Ezra   3 

6. 

Neh.  1.' 


13- 
Psa.  77. 
90. 
99, 
103. 
105. 
106. 
106. 
106. 
Isa.   63, 

Jer.  15. 
Dau.   9. 

Mic.  6. 
Mai.  4. 
Matt.  S 

!?■ 

■7< 
19, 
19. 


Mark 


Luke  2 

5- 
9 
9' 

16. 

16. 


3' 
5' 
5. 
6. 
7 
7- 
7- 
8. 

9- 
9- 
Acts    3. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
13- 
IS- 
IS- 
'S- 


28. 

Rom.  5. 

9. 


:  Co. 


!  l:o.    3. 
3- 

!Ti.  |: 

3 
3 
3 
I 
7 


Heb. 


Jude 


18  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  AI.,  witli 

6  (according  to  the  commandment)  of  AI. 

9  bring  in  to  the  Lord  the  collection.  .AI. 

4  written  in  the  law  in  the  book  of  AI.,  where 
16  according  to  the  law  of  AI.  the  man  of  G. 

8  law  and  the  statutes,  .by  the  hand  of  AI. 
14  a  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord  (given)  by  AI. 

6  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of  AI. 
12  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  AI.:  and 

2  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  AI.  the  man 

18  set.  .as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  AI. 

6  he  (was)  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of  fit. 

7  which  thou  commandedst  thy  servant  M. 

8  that  thou  commandedst  thy  servant  Ai. 
1  bring  the  book  of  the  law  of  AI.,  which 

14  the  Lord  had  commanded  by  At.,  that  the 
14  statutes,  and  laws,  by  the  hand  of  fit.  thy 

29  which  was  given  by  AI.  the  servant  of  G. 
1  On  that  day  they  read  in  the  book  of  AI. 

20  leddest  thy  people . .  by  the  hand  of  At.  and 
title.  A  prayer  of  AI.  the  man  of  God 

6  AI.  and  Aaron  among  his  priests,  and  Sa. 

7  He  made  known  his  ways  unto  AI.,  his  a. 
26  He  sent  AI.  hi3  servant,  (and)  Aaron  whom 

16  They  envied  AI.  also  in  the  camp,  (and)A. 

23  had  not  AI.  his  chosen  stood  before  him  in 

32  so  that  it  went  ill  for  AI.  for  their  sakes 

11  Then  he  remembered  the  days  of  old,  AT. 

12  That  led  (them)  by  the  right  hand  of  AI. 

1  Though  AI.  and  Samuel  stood  before  me 
11  oath  that  (is)  written  hi  the  law  of  AI.  the 

13  As  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  AI.,  all  this 
4  and  I  sent  before  thee  AI.,  Aaron,  and  AI. 
4  Remember  ye  the  law  of  AI.  my  servant 
4  offer  the  gift  that  AI.  commanded,  for  a 

3  there  appeared  unto  them  AI.  and  Elias 

4  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  AI.,  and  one  for 

7  Why  did  AI.  then  command  to  give  a  wr. 

8  AI.  because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts 

24  Alaster,  AI.  said,  If  a  man  die,  having  no 

2  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  AI.'s  seat 
44  offer,  .those things  which  AI.  commanded 

10  For  AI.  said,  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  m. 

4  there  appeared  unto  them  Elias  with  AI. 

5  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  AI.,  and  one  for 

3  heanswered  . .  What  did  AI.  command  you? 

4  AI.  suffered  to  write  a  bill  of  divorcement 

19  AI.  wrote  unto  us,  If  a  man's  brother  die 

26  have  ye  not  read  iu  the  book  of  AI.,  how 
22  purification  according  to  the  law  of  AI. 

14  offer,  .according  as  AI.  commanded,  for  a 

30  talked  with  him  two  men,  which  were  AI. 

33  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  AI.,  and  one  for 
29  They  have  AI.  and  the  prophets;  let  them 

31  If  they  hear  not  AI.  and  the  prophets,  ne. 

28  AI.  wrote  unto  us,  If  any  man's  brother 
37  even  AI.  showed  at  the  bush,  when  he  ca. 

27  beginning  at  AI.  and  all  the  prophets,  he 

44  which  were  written  in  the  law  of  AI.,  and 

17  For  the  law  was  given  by  AI.,  (but)  grace 

45  We  have  found  him  of  whom  AI.  in  the  law 
14  as  AI.  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilder. 

45  there  is(one)  that  accuseth  you,  (even)  AI. 

46  For  had  ye  believed  AI.,  ye  would  have  b. 

32  AI.  gave  you  not  that.bread  from  heaven 

19  Did  not  AI.  give  yon  the  law,  and  (yet) 

22  AI,  therefore  gave,  .not  because  it  is  of  AI. 

23  that  the  law  of  AI.  should  not  be  broken 

5  [Now  Al.in  the  law  commanded  us,  that] 

28  Thou  art  his  disciple ;  but  we  are  AI.'s  dis. 

29  We  know  that  God  spake  unto  AI. :  (as  for) 
22  For  AI.  truly  said  uuto  the  fathers,  A  pr. 

11  speak  blasphemous  words  against  AI.,  and 
14  shall  change  the  customs  which  AI.  deli. 

20  AI.  was  born,  and  was  exceeding  fair,  and 
22  AI.  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the 

29  Then  fled  AI.  at  this  saying,  and  was  a 

31  AVhen  AI.  saw  (it),  he  wondered  at  the  si. 

32  Then  AI.  trembled,  and  durst  not  behold 
35  AI.  whom  they  refused,  saying,  Who  made 
37  AI.  which  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
40  AI.,  which  brought  us  out  of  the  land  of 
44  speaking  unto  AI.,  that  he  should  make 
39  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  AI. 

1  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  manner  of  At. 
5  to  command  (them)  to  keep  the  law  of  AI. 

21  AI.  of  old  time  hath  in  every  city  them  that 

21  thou  teachest  all  the  Jews. .  to  forsake  At. 

22  the  prophets  and  AI.  did  say  should  come 

23  of  the  law  of  AI. ,  and  (out  of)  the  prophets 

14  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  AI.,  evenover 

15  he  saith  to  AI.,  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom 
5  fit.  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is 

19  AI.  saith,  I  will  provoke  yon  to  jealousy 

9  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  AI.,  Thou  shalt 

2  were  all  baptized  unto  AI.  in  the  cloud  and 

7  could  not  stedfastly  behold  the  face  of  AI. 

13  At.,  (which)  put  a  veil  over  his  face,  that 

15  when  AI.  is  read,  the  veil  is  upon  their 

8  as  Jannesand  Jambres  withstood  AI.,  so  do 

2  as  also  AI.  (was  faithful)  in  all  his  house 

3  was  counted  worthy  of  more  glory  than  AI. 
5  AI.  verily  (was)  faithful  in  all  his  house 

16  not  all  that  came  out  of  Egypt  by  AI. 

14  At.  spake  nothing  concerning  priesthood 
5  AI.  was  admonished  of  God  when  he  was 

19  AI.  had  spoken  every  precept  to  all  the 
28  He  that  despised  AI.'  law  died  without  m. 

23  AI.,  when  he  was  born,  was  hid  three  mo. 

24  AI.,  when  he  was  come  to  years,  refused 
21  (that)  AI.  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and  qn. 

9  when,  .he  disputed  about  the  body  of  AI. 


Rev.  15.    3  they  sing  the  song  of  AI.  the  servant  of 
MOST  — 
\. Abundant,  great,  mighty,  V33  kabbir. 

Job  34.  17  wilt  thou  condemn  him  that  is  most  just? 
^.Abundance,  31  rob. 

Prov  20.    6  Alost  men  will  pro  claim  every  one  his  own 
Z.Good,  31D  tob. 

Lam.  4.    1  How.. is  the  most  flue  gold  changed!  the 
4. More,  -kKziow  pleion. 

Luke  7.  42  Tell  me.,  which  of  them  will  love  him  m. 
7.  43  I  suppose  that.,  to  whom  he  forgave  most 
5.  Most,  TrAeftTToy  jrfeistos 

Alattn.  20  wherein  most  of  his  mighty  works  were 

1  Co.  14.  27  by  two,  or  at  the  most,  .three,  and.  .by 
[See  also  Believed,  bitter,  bitterly,  holy,  noble,  rebel- 
lious, upright.] 

MOST  desolate  — 

Astonishment  and  desolation,  nDE;jn  nOD?. 

Eze.  35.    7  Thus  will  I  make  mount  Seir  most  desoL 
MOST  fine  gold  — 
Pure  gold,  nr}3  kethem. 

Song  5.  11  His  head,  .the  most  fine  gold ;  his  locks 
MOST  high  — 
High,  most  high,  u'U/kttos  Jnqjsistos. 

Alark  5.    7  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  the  most  high  God 

Luke  8.  28  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  God  most  high 

Acts  7.  48  Howbeit  the  most  High  dwelleth  not  in  t. 
16.  17  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  mosth. 

Heb.   7.    1  Alelchisedec .  .priest  of  themosthigh  God 
MOST  (mighty)  — 
Strong,  mighty,  powerful,  b]n  chayil. 

Dan.    3.  20  he  commanded  the  most  mighty  men  that 
MOST  strong  — 
Strong  jrtace  or  hold,  Tiyp  maoz. 

Dun.  11.  39  Thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strong  holds 
MOST  of  all  — 
Most  of  all,  chiefly,  uctAto-ra  mallsta. 

Acts  20.  38  Sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  words  which 
MOTE  — 
Chaff,  stable,  sjjlinter,  nap<pos  karphos. 

Alatt   7.    3  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in 
7.   4  Let  me  pull  out  the  mote  out  of  thineeye 
7.    5  to  cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's 

Luke  6.  41  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in 
6.  42  let  me  pull  out  the  mote  that  is  in  thine 
6.  42  to  pull  out  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  broth. 
MOTH  — 
I.  Moth,  worm,  vy  ash. 

Job  4. 19  houses.,  (which)  are  crushed  before  them. 
13.  28  consumeth,  as  a  garment  that  is  moth  eat. 
27.  18  He  buildeth  his  house  as  a  moth,  and  as 

Psa.  39.  11  his  beauty  to  consume  away  like  a  moth 

Isa.  50.    9  Behold,  .the  moth  shall  eat  them  up 

51.    8  For  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a  ga. 

Hos.    5.  12  untoEphraim  as  a  moth,  and  to  the  house 
2. Moth,  o-f]s  ses. 

Alatt.  6. 19  where  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and 
6.  20  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt 

Lukei2.  33  where  no  thief  approacheth,  neither  moth 
MOTH  EATEN  — 
Moth  eaten,  o-7]t6@po>tos  setobrotos. 

Jas.     5.    2  corrupted,  aud  your  garments  are  mothe. 
MOTHER  — 
1. Mother,  dam,  ancestress,  DN  em. 

Gen.  2.  24  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  liis  mot. 
3.  20  because  she  was  the  mother  of  all  living 

20.  12  not  the  daughter  of  my  mother ;  and  she 

21.  21  his  mother  took  him  a  wife  out  of  the  1. 
24.  28  and  told,  .her  mother's  house  these  things 
24.  53  he  gave  also,  .to  her  mother  precious  thi. 
24.  55  her  brother  and  her  mother  said,  Let  the 
24.  67  Isaac  brought  her  into  his  motherSarah's 
24.  67  Isaac  was  comforted  after  hismother's(d.) 
27.  11  Jacob  said  to  Rebekah  his  mother,  Behold 
27.  13  his  mother  said  unto  him,  Upon  me.. thy 
27.  14  and  fetched,  and  brought,  .to  lus  mother 
27.  14  his  mother  made  savoury  meat,  such  as 

27.  29  let  thy  mother's  sons  bow  down  to  thee 

28.  2  the  house  of  Bethuel  thy  mother's  father 
28.  2  daughters  of  Laban  thy  mother's  brother 
28.    5  brother  of  Rebekah,  Jacob's  and  Esau's  m. 

28.  7  that  Jacob  obeyed  his  father  and  his  mo. 
29. 10  the  daughter  of  Laban  his  mother's  brot, 
29. 10  the  sheep  of  Laban  his  mother's  brother 

29.  10  watered  the  flock  of  Laban  his  mother's 
30. 14  brought  them  unto  his  mother  Leah 

32.  11  will  come  and  smite,  .the  mother  with  the 
37.  10  Shall  I  and  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren 

43.  29  saw  his  brother  Benjamin,  his  mother's 

44.  20  he  alone  is  left  of  his  mother,  and  his  father 
Exod.  2.    8  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child's  mo. 

20.  12  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother  :  that 

21.  15  he  that  smiteth  his  father  or  his  mother 
21.  17  he  that  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother 
23.  19  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  m. 
34.  26  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  m. 

Lev.  18.    7  or  the  nakedness  of  thy  mother,  shalt 
18.    7  she  (is)  thy  mother ;  thou  shalt  not  una 
18,    9  or  daughterof  thy  mother,  .born at  home 
18.  13  uncover  the  nakedness  of  thy  mothers 


MOTHER 


673 


MOUNT 


Lev.  iS.  13  for  she  (is)  thy  mother's  near  kinswoman 

19.  3  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  and 

20.  9  For  every  one  that  curseth.  .his  mother 
20.  9  he  hath  cursed  his  father  or  his  mother 
20.  14  if  a  man  take  a  wife  and  her  mother,  it 
20.  17  if  a  man  shall  take . .  his  mother's  daughter 

20.  19  not  uncover  the  nakedness  of  thy  mother's 

21.  2  for  his  mother,  and  for  his  father,  and  for 

21.  11  defile  himself  for  his  father,  or  for  his  m. 

24. 1 1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Shelomith,  the  d. 
Num.  6.    7  for  his  father  or  for  his  mother,  for  his 

12.  12  when  he  cometh  out  of  his  mother's  womb 
Deut.  5.  t6  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  as  the 

13.  6  If  thy  brother,  the  son  of  thy  mother,  or 

14.  21  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  milk 
21. 13  bewail  her  father  and  hermothera  full  m. 

21. 18  will  not  obey.,  the  voice  of  his  mother,  and 

21. 19  Then  shall  his  father  and  Ills  mother  lay 

22. 15  the  father  of  the  damsel,  and  her  mother 

27. 16  that  setteth  light  by  his  father  or  his  mo. 
27.  22  with  his  sister,  .the  daughter  of  his  mot. 
33.   9  Who  said  unto  his  father  and  to  his  mot. 

Josh.  2.  13  ye  will  save  alive  my  father,  and  my  mot. 

2.  18  thou  shalt  bring  thy  father,  and  thy  mo. 

6.  23  Rahab,  and  her  father,  and  her  mother 
Judg.  5.    7  that  I  Deborah  arose,  that  I  arose  a  mo. 

5.  28  The  mother  of  Sisera  looked  out  at  a  wi. 

8.  19  They,  .my  brethren,  .the  sons  of  my  mo. 

9.  1  went  to  Shechem  unto  his  mother's  bret. 
9.  1  all  the  family  of  the  house  of  his  mother's 
9.    3  his  mother's  brethren  spake  of  him  in  the 

14.  2  told  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  said 
14.  3  Then  his  father  and  his  mother  said  unto 
14.  4  his  father  and  his  mother  knew  not  that 
14.  5  Than wentSamson down.. andhismother 
14.  6  he  told  not  his  father  or  his  mother  what 
14.  9  came  to  his  father  and  mother,  and.  he 
14.  16  I  have  nottold.  .myfathernor  mymother 

16. 17  a  Nazarite  uuto  God  from  my  mother's 
17.    2  he  said  unto  his  mother,  The  eleven  hun. 
17.   2  his  mother  said,  Blessed . .  of  the  Lord,  my 
17.    3  to  his  mother,  his  mother  said,  I  had  wh. 

17.  4  unto  his  mother;  and  his  mother  tooktwo 
Ruth  1.    S  Go,  return  each  to  her  mother's  house 

2. 11  thou  hast  left  thy  father  and  thy  mother 

1  Sa.   2. 19  his  mother  made  him  a  little  coat,  and 

J5-  33  so  shall  thy  mother  be  childless  among  w. 
20.  30  unto  the  confusion  of  thy  mother's  nake. 

22.  3  Let  my  father  aud  my  mother,  I  pray  thee 

2  Sa.  17.  25  Nahash,  sister  to  Zeruiah,  Joab's  mother 

I0-  37  by  the  grave  of  my  father  and  of  my  mo. 

20.  19  to  destroy  ?  city  and  a  mother  in  Israel 

1  Ki.    1.  11  Nathan  spake  unto  Bath-sheba  the  mother 

2. 13  cameto  Bath-sheba  themotherofSolonion 
2.  19  caused  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the  king's  mo. 
2.  20  the  king  said  unto  her,  Ask  on,  my  moth. 

2.  22  Solomon  answered  and  said  unto  his  mo. 

3.  27  in  no  wise  slay  it :  she  (is)  the  mother 
11.  26  Jeroboam,  .whose  mother's  name  (was) 

14.  21,  31  his  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an 

1 5.  2,  10  his  mother's  name  (was)  Maachah,  the 

15. 13  also  Maachah  his  mother,  even  her  he  re. 
1 7. 23  delivered  him  unto  his  mother :  and  Elij. 

19.  20  Let  me.  .kiss  my  father  and  my  mother 
22.  42  his  mother's  name  (was)  Azubah  the  dau. 
22.  52  walked .  .in  the  way  of  his  mother,  and  in 

2  Ki.  3.   2  but  not  like  his  father,  and  like  his  moth. 

3. 13  get  thee,  .to  the  prophets  of  thy  mother 

4.  19  he  said  to  a  lad,  Carry  him  to  his  mother 
4.  20  brought  him  to  his  mother,  he  sat  on  her 
4.  30  the  mother  of  the  child  said,  .the  Lord 

8.  26  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  Athaliah 

9.  22  so  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother 

11.  1  when  Athaliah  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw 

12.  1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Zibiah  of  Beer-s. 

14.  2  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jehoaddan  of  J. 

15.  2  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jecholiah  of  Je. 
15. 33  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jerusha,  the  da. 

18.  2  his  mother's  name  also  (was)  Abi,  the  da. 

21.  1  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hephzi-bah 
21. 19  his  mother's  name  (was)  Meshullemeth 

22.  1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jedidah,  the  da. 
23. 31  his  mother's  name  (was)  Harautal,  the  d. 

23.  36  his  mother's  name  (was)  Zebudah,  the  da. 

24.  8  his  mother's  name  (was)  Nebushta,  the  d. 

24. 12  he,  and  his  mother,  and  his  servants,  aud 

24. 15  he  carried  away,  .the  king's  mother,  and 

24. 18  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hamutal,  the  d. 

1  Ch.  2.  26  Atarah :  she  (was)  the  mother  of  Onani 

4.    9  his  mother  called  his  name  Jabez,  saying 

2  Ch.12.  13  his  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an  Am. 

13.  2  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Michaiah 

15. 16  Maachah  the  mother  of  Asa  the  king,  he 

20.  31  his  mother's  name  (was)  Azubah  the  da. 
22.    2  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Athaliah 
22.   3  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do  wick. 
22. 10  when  Athaliah  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw 
24.    1  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Zibiah  of  B. 

'  25.    1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jehoaddan  of  J. 

26.  3  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Jecoliah 

27.  1  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Jerushah 
29.    1  his  mother's  name  was  Abijah,  the  daug. 

Esth.  2.    7  she  had  neither  father  nor  mother,  and 
2.    7  when  her  father  and  mother  were  dead 
Job     1.  21  Naked  came  I  out  of  mymother's  womb 

17. 14  I  have  said,  .to  the  worm,  .my  mother 
31. 18 1  have  guided  her  from  my  mother's  wo. 

Psa.  22.  9  make  me  hope,  .upon  mymother's  breasts 
22.  10  thou  (art)  my  God  from  my  mother's  belly 
27.  10  When  my  father  and  my  mother  forsake 
35.  14  bowed.. as  one  that monrneth (for his) m. 
50.  20  thou  slanderest  thine  own  mother's  son 

85 


23- 
23- 

28. 
29. 

3°- 
3°- 
3*- 

Eccl.  5, 

Song  1. 

3- 


Isa.     8. 


Psa.  51.    5  Behold.,  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me 
69.   8  and  an  alien  unto  my  mother's  children 
71.    6  that  took  me  out  of  my  mother's  bowels 
109.  14  let  not  the  sin  of  his  mother  be  blotted 
113.    9  He  maketh .  .a  joyful  mother  of  children 
131.    2  as  a  child  that  is  weaned  of  his  mother 
139.  13  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  mother's  wo. 
Prov.  1.    8  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother 

4.  3  and  only  (beloved)  in  the  sight  of  my  mo. 
6.  20  My  son . .  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother 

10.    1  a  foolish  son  (is)  the  heaviness  of  his  mot. 

15.  20  but  a  foolish  man  despiseth  his  mother 

19.  26  He  that,  .chaseth  away  (his)  mother,  (is)  a 

20.  20  Whoso  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother 

22  and  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is 

25  Thy  father  and  thy  mother  shall  be  glad 

24  Whoso  robbeth  his  father  or  his  mother 

15  butachild.  .bringeth  his  mother  to  shame 

n  a  generation,  .doth  not  bless  their  mother 

17  despiseth  to  obey  (his)  mother,  the  ravens 

1  the  prophecy  that  his  mother  taught  him 
15  As  he  came  forth  of  his  mother's  womb 
6  my  mother's  children  were  angry  with  me 

4  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's  house 
11  with  the  crown  wherewith  his  mother  cr. 

9  she  (is)  the  (only)  one  of  her  mother,  she 

1  that  sucked  the  breasts  of  my  mother 

2  I  would. .bring  thee  into  my  mother's  ho. 

5  there  thy  mother  brought  thee  forth ;  th. 
4  shall  have  knowledge  to  cry.  .my  mother 

49.  1  from  the  bowels  of  mymother  hath  hem. 

50.  1  Wliere(is)thebillofyourmother'sdivorc. 
50.   1  for  your  transgressions  is  your  mother  put 

66. 13  As  one  whom  his  mother  cotnforteth,  so 
Jer.  15.   8  against  the  mother  of  the  young  men  as. 

15. 10  Woe  is  me,  my  mother,  that  thou  hast  b. 

16.  3  concerning  their  mothers  that  bare  them 
16.   7 cupof consolationtodrink..fortheirrnoth. 

20. 14  let  not  the  day  wherein  my  mother  bare  me 
20. 17  that  mymothermight  have  beenmygrave 
22.  26  I  will  cast  thee  out,  and  thy  mother  that 
50. 12  Your  mother  shall  be  sore  confounded 
52.    1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hamutal  the  da. 

Lam.  2.  12  They  say  to  their  mothers,  Where  (is)  com 
2.  12  was  poured  out  into  their  mother's  bosom 

5.  3  We  are  orphans,  .our  mothers  (are)  as  wid. 
Eze.  16.   3  thy  father.  .anAmorite.  .thymotheranH. 

16.  44  saying,  As  (is)  the  mother,  (so  is)  her  dau. 
16.  45  Thou  (art)  thy  mother's  daughter,  that  1. 
16.  45  your  mother  (was)  an  Hittite,  and  your  fa. 
19.    2  What  (is)  thy  mother?  A  lioness :  she  lay 

19. 10  Thy  mother  (is)  like  a  vine  in  thy  blood 

22.  7  In  thee .  .they  set  light  by  father  and  mo. 

23.  2  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother 
44.  25  or  for  mother,  .they  may  defile  themsel. 

Hos.    2.    2  Plead  with  your  mother,  plead  ;  for  she 
2.   5  For  their  mother  hath  played  the  harlot 

4.  5  prophet  also,  .and  I  will  destroy  thy  mo. 
10.  14  the  mother  was  dashed  in  pieces  upon 

6  thedaughterrisethup  against  her  mother 
3,  3,  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat 

fx^r-qp  meter. 

18  When  as  his  mother  Mary  was  espoused 
2.  11  saw  the  young  child  with  Mary  his  mother 
2.  13  take  the  young  child  and  his  mother,  and 
2. 14  he  took  the  young  child  and  his  mother  by 
2.  20  take  the  young  child  and  his  mother,  and 

2.  21  and  took  the  young  child  and  his  mother 
10.  35  the  daughter'agaiust  her  mother,  and  the 
10. 37  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than 
i2.  46  mother  and  his  brethren  stood  without 
12.  47  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  with. 
12.  48  Who  is  my  mother?  and  who  is  my  breth. 
12.  49  said,  Behold  my  mother  and  my  brethren 

12.  50  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother 

13.  55  is  not  his  mother  called  Mary?  and  his 

14.  8  she,  beingbefore  instructed  of  her  mother 

14. 11  damsel :  and  she  brought  (it)  to  her  mot. 

15.  4  saying,  Honour  thy  father  and  mother 
15.  4  He  that  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him 
15.  s  Whosoever  shall  say  to.  .father  or.  .mot. 
15.  6  And  honour  not  his  father  or  his  mother 
19.  5  shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and 
19.  12  which  were  so  born  from,  .mother's  womb 

19.  19  Honour  thy  father  and  (thy)  mother ;  and 
19. 29  [every  one  that  hath  forsaken.. mother,  or] 

20.  20  Then  came  to  him  the  mother  of  Zebedee's 
27.  56  mother  of  James  and  Joses,  and  the  mo. 

Mark  3.  31  There  came  then  his  brethren  and  his  m. 

3.  32  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  without  seek 
3.  33  saying.  Who  is  my  mother,  or  my  breth.? 
3. 34  Behold  my  mother  and  my  brethren ! 

3.  35  is  my  brother,  and  my  sister,  and  mother 

5.  40  he  taketh  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the 

6.  24  she  went  forth,  and  said  unto  her  mother 

6.  28  head,  .and  the  damsel  gave  it  to  her  mo. 

7.  10  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother ;  and 
7. 10  Whoso  curseth  father  or  mother,  let  him 
7.  11  If  a  man  shall  say  to  his  father  or  mother 
7.  12  to  do  ought  for  his  father  or  his  mother 

10.    7  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother 
10. 19  Defraud  not,  Honour  thy  father  and  mo. 
10.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left,  .mother 
10.  30  he  shall  receive . .  sisters,  and  mothers,  and 
15.  40  among  whom  was.  .Mary  the  mother  of 
Luke  1.  15  shall  be  great,  .even  from  his  mother's 
1. 43  that  the  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come 
1. 60  And  his  mother  answered  and  said,  Not 
2. 33  Joseph  and  his  mother  marvelled  at  those 
2.  34  Simeon,  .said  unto  Mary  his  mother,  Be. 
2.  43  [and  Joseph  and  his  mother  knew  not] 


Mic.    7. 
Zech.13 

2.  Mother, 
Matt.  1. 


Luke  2.  48  his  mother  said  unto  him,  Son,  why  hast 
2.  51  his  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in  her 
7.  12  only  son  of  his  mother,  and  she  was  a  w. 

7.  15  And  he  delivered  him  to  his  mother 

8.  19  Then  cameto  him  (his)  mother  and  his 
8.  20  Thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  with. 
8.  21  My  mother  and  my  brethren  are  those 

8.  51  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the  maiden 
12.  53  the  mother  against  the  daughter,  and  the 
12.  53  and  the  daughter  against  the  mother 
14.  26  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife 

18.  20  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother 
John  2.    1  Cana.  .and  the  mother  of  Jesus  wasthere 

2.  3  the  mother  of  Jesue  saith  unto  him,  They 
2.    5  His  mother  saith  unto  the  servants.  Wh. 

2.  12  went  down  to  Capernaum,  he,  and  hisni. 

3.  4  can  he  enter,  .into  his  mother's  womb,  and 
6. 42  Jesus . .  whose  father  and  mother  we  know  ? 

19.  25  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  bis  mo. 
19.  25  his  mother's  sister,  Mary  the  (wife)  of  C. 
19.  26  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  his  mother,  and 
19.  26  he  saith  unto  his  mother,  Woman,  behold 
19.  27  Then  saith  he . .  Behold  thy  mother !  And 

Acts   1.  14  with  the  women,  and  Mary  the  mother  of 

3.  2  a  certain  man  lame  from  his  mother's  wo. 
12.  12  to  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother  of  John 
14.    8  being  a  cripple  from  hismother's  womb 

Rom  16.  13  Salute  Ruf  us . .  and  his  mother  and  mine 
Gal.     1.  15  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's  w. 

4.  26  Jerusalem .  .which  is  the  mother  of  us  all 
Eph.    5-  31  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his.  .m. 

6.   2  Honour  thy  father  and  mother ;  which 

1  Ti.    5.  2  Theelderwomenasmothers;  theyounger 

2  Ti.    1.   5  which  dwelt  first  in.  .thy  mother  Eunice 
Rev.  17.    5  The  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations 

MOTHER  IN  LAW  — 

1. Husband's  mother,  niDn  chamoth. 

Ruth  1.  14  Orpah  kissed  her  mother  in  law;  butR. 

2.  11  that  thou  hast  done  unto  thy  mother  in  1. 

2.  18  her  mother  in  law  saw  what  she  had  gle. 

2. 19  her  mother  in  law  said  unto  her,  Where 

2.  19  she  showed  her  mother  in  law  with  whom 

2.  23  So  she . .  dwelt  with  her  mother  in  law 

3.  1  Then  Naomi  her  mother  in  law  said  unto 
3.  6  did.  .all  that  her  mother  in  law  bade  her 

3. 16  when  she  cameto  her  mother  in  law,  she 

3.17  said .  .Go  not  empty  unto  thy  mother  in  law 
Mic.    7.    6  daughter  in  law  against  her  mother  inlaw 

%To  be  a  father  or  mother  in  law,  jrin  chathan. 
Deut  27.  23  Cursed(be)he  that  lieth  with  his  m.  in  I. 

3. A  wife's  mother,  Trev9epd  penihera. 

Mattio.  35  daughter  in  law  against  hermother  in  law 

Lukei2.  53  mother  in  law  against  her  daughter  in  law 

12. 53  daughter  in  law  againsther  motherinlaw 

MOTH K ft,  wife's  — 

.4  wife's  mother,  irevQepa  penthera. 

Matt.  8. 14  he  saw  his  wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  ot 

Mark  r.  30  Simon's  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fever 

Luke  4.  38  Simou's  wife's  mother  was  taken  with  a 
MOTHER,  without  — 
Motherless,  without  mother,  a/x7}Tccp  ametor, 

Heb.    7.   3  Without  father,  without  mother,  without 
MOTHER,  murderer  of  a  — 
One  who  beats  a  mother,  ^rpaXwas,  /Ayr  poKtpas. 

1  Ti.    1.   9  murderers  of  fathers  and  murderers  of  m. 
MOTION  — 
Suffering,  affection,  iraQ-rifia.  pailiema. 

Rom.  7.    5  motions  of  sins,  which  were  by  the  law 
MOULDY  — 
Small  round  cakes,  D'^jM  niqquddim. 

Josh.  9.   5  bread  of  their  provision  was  dry.  .mouldy 

9.  12  butnow,behold,  it  is  dry,  and  it  is  mouldy 

MOUNT,  MOUNTAIN  — 

I. Mount,  hill,  in  har. 

Gen.    7.  20  Fifteen  cubits,  .and  the  mountains  were 
8.   4  the  ark  rested .  .upon  the  mountains  of  A. 
8.    5  were  the  tops  of  the  mountains  seen 
10.  30  as  thou  goest, unto  Sephar,  amount  ofthe 
12.    8  he  removed  from  thence  unto  a  mountain 
14.  10  they  that  remained  fled  to  the  mountain 
19.  17  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  con. 
19.  19  I  cannot  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  some 
19. 30  Lot  went  up.  .and  dwelt  in  the  mountain 
22.    2  upon  one  of  the  mountains  which  I  will 
22.  14  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  see 
31.  21  andsethis  face  (toward)themountGilead 
31.  23  they  overtook  him  in  the  mount  Gilead 
31.  25  Jacob  had  pitched  his  tent  in  the  mount 
31.  25  brethren  pitched  in  the  mount  of  Gilead 
31.  54  Jacobofferedsacrificeuponthemount.and 
31.  54  and  they,  .tarried  all  night  in  the  mount 
36.    8  Thus  dwelt  Esau  in  mount  Seir:  Esau  (is) 
36.   9  the  father  of  the  Edomites  in  mount  Seir 
Exod.  3.    1  and  came  to  the  mountain  of  God.  .to  H. 

3.  12  ye  shall  serve  God  upon  this  mountain 

4.  27  he  went,  and  met  him  in  the  mount  of  God 
15-  17  plant  them  in  the  mountain  of  thine  inn. 

18.  5  where  he  encamped  at  the  mount  of  God 

19.  2  and  there  Israel  camped  before  the  mount 
19.  3  Lord  called  unto  him  out  of  the  mountain 
19.  11  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people  upon  mount 
19,  12  go  (not)  up  into  the  mount,  or  touch  the 

19. 12  whosoever  toucheth  the  mount  shall  be 

19. 13  soundeth.  .they  shall  come  up  to  the  mo. 
19.  14  Moses  went  down  from  the  mount  unto 


MOUNT 


C74 


MOUNT 


Exodig.  16  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  mount,  and  the 
19.  17  they  stood  at  the  aether  partof  the  mount 
19.  iS  mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  smoke 
29.  iS  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  greatly 
19.  20  uponmountSiuai,on  the  top  of  themouut 
19.  20  Lord  called  Moses,  .to  the  top  of  the  mo. 
19.  23  The  people  cannot  come  up  to  mount  S. 

19.  23  Set  bounds  about  the  mount,  and  sanctify 

20.  iS  allthepeoplesaw-.themountain  smoking 
24.  i2  Come  up  to  me  into.. mount,  and  be  there 
24.  13  aud  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount  of  G. 
24.  15  the  mount,  and  a  cloud  covered  the  mount 

24. 16  the  glory  of  the  Lord  abode  upon  mount 

24. 17  likedevouringnreonthe  topof  the  mount 
24.  18  AndMoses  ..gat  him  up  into  the  mount:  and 

24.  iS  Moses  was  in  the  mount  forty  days  and  fo. 

25.  40  pattera,  which  was  showed  thee  in  the  m. 

26.  30  fashion.,  which  was  showed  thee  in  them. 

27.  8  as  it  was  showed  thee  in  the  mount,  so 

31.  i3  au  end  of  communing  with  him  upon  mo. 

32.  1  Moses  delayed  to  come  down  out  of  them. 
32.  12  to  slay  them  in  the  mountains,  and  to  c. 
32. 15  Moses  turned,  and  went  down  from  them. 

32.  19  cast,  .and  break  them  beneath  themouut 

33.  6  stripped,  .of  their  ornaments  by  the  mo. 

34.  2  come  up  in  the  morning  unto  mount  Sinai 
34.  2  present  thyself,  .to  me  in  the  topof  them. 
34.  3  neitherletany.  .throughout all  themouut 
34.  3  neither  let.  .herds  feed  before  that  mount 
34.  4  went  up  unto  mount  Sinai,  as  the  Loud 
34.  29  when  Moses  came  downfrom  mount  Sinai 
31..  29  when  he  came  down  from  the  mount,  that 
34.  32  Lord  had  spoken  with  him  in  mount  Sinai 

Lev.    7.  3S  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  in  mount  S. 

25.  1  the  Lord  spake  unto  Mo3es  in  mount  Si. 

26.  46  which  the  LORD  made,  .in  mount  Sinai  by 

27.  34  the  Lord  commanded  Moses . .  in  mount  S. 
Num.  3.    :  the  Lopd  spake  with  Moses  in  mount  Si. 

10.  33  they  departed  from  the  mount  of  the  L. 
13.  17  southward,  and  go  up  into  the  mountain 

13.  29  and  the  Aniorites,  dwellin  the  mountains 

14.  40  gat  them  up  into  the  top  of  the  mountain 
20.  22  from  Kadesh,  and  came  unto  mount  Hor 
20.  23  spake  unto  Moses  aud  Aaron  in  mount  H. 
20.  25  Take . .  and  bring  them  up  unto  mount  H. 
20. 27  they  went  up  into  mount  Hor  in  the  sight 
20.  28  Aaron  died  there  in  the  top  of  the  mount 

20.  2S  and  Eleazar  came  down  from  the  mount 

21.  4  journeyed  from  mount  Hor  by  the  way 

27.  12  Get  thee  up  into  this  mount  Abarim,  and 

28.  6  which  was  ordained  in  mount  Sinai  for  a 
33. 23  they  went,  .and  pitched  in  mount  Shapher 
33.  24  they  removed  from  mount  Shapher,  and 
33.  37  pitched  in  mount  Hor,  in  the  edge  of  the 
33.  38  Aaron  the  priest  went  up  into  mount  Hor 
33.  39  Aaron  (was),  .old  when  he  died  in  mount 
33.  41  they  departed  from  mount  Hor,  aud  pit. 
33-  47  pitched  in  the  mountains  of  Abarim,  bef. 

33.  4S  they  departed  from  the  mountains  of  Ab. 

34.  7  great  sea  ye  shall  point  out  for  you  mount 
34.    8  From  mount  Hor  ye  shall  point  out  (your 

Dent.  1.  2  fromHoi-ebbythewayofmountSeir  unto 
1.  6  Ye  have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount 
1.  7  go  to  themouut  of  the  Amorites,  and  unto 
1. 19  which  ye  saw  by  the  way  of  the  mountain 
T.20  Ye  are  come  unto  the  mountain  of  the  A. 
1.  24  they  turned  and  went  up  into  the  mount. 

1.  44  the  Amorites,  which  dwelt  in  thatmoun. 

2.  1  and  we  compassed  mount  Seir  many  days 
2.    3  Ye  have  compassed  this  mountain  long 
2.    5  because  I  have  given  mount  Seir  unto  E. 

2.  37  unto  the  cities  in  the  mountains,  noruuto 

3.  8  from  the  river  of  Arnon  unto  mount  Her. 
3.  12  and  half  mount  Gilead,  and  the  cities  th. 

3.  25  land,  .thatgoodlymountain,  andLebanon 

4.  1 1  ye  came  near  and  stood  under  the  mount. 
4.  11  the  mountain  burned  with  fire  unto  the 

4.  48  even  unto  mount  Seir,  which  (is)  Hermon 

5.  4  talked  with  you  face  to  face  in  the  mount 
5.  5  of  the  fire,  and  went  not  up  into  the  mo. 
5.22  spake  unto  all  your  assembly  in  the  mount 
5.  23  for  the  mountain  did  burn  with  fire 

9.    9  When  I  was  gone  up  into  the  mount  to  r. 

9.    9  then  I  abode  in  the  mount  forty  days  and 

9.  10  which  the  Lord  spake  with  you  in  them. 

9.  15  came  down  from  the  mount,  and  the  mo. 

9.  21  the  brook  that  descended  out  of  the  mo. 
10.    1  come  up  unto  me  into  the  mount,  and  m. 
10.    3  went  up  into  the  mount,  having  the  two 
10.   4  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  the  mount 
10.    5  I  turned .  .  and  came  down  from  the  mount 

10.  10  I  stayed  in  the  mount,  according  to  the 

11.  29  upon  mount  Gerizim.  .the  curse  upon  m. 

12.  2  upon  the  high  mountains,  and  upon  the 
27.  4  ye  shall  set  up  these  stones,  .in  mount  E. 
27. 12  These  shall  stand  upon  mount  Gerizim  to 
27.  13  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  Ebal  to  c. 
32.  22  set  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the  mount. 
32.  49  Get  thee  up  into  this  mountain  Abarim 
32. 49  mount  Nebo,  which  (is)  in  the  land  of  M. 
32.  50  die  in  the  mount  whither  thou  goest  up 

32.  50  as  Aaron  thy  brother  died  in  mount  Hor 

33.  2  heshined  forth  from  mount  Paran,  and  he 
33. 19  They  shall  call  the  people  unto  the  moil. 

34.  1  from  the  plains  of  Moab  unto  the  moun. 
Josh.  2.  16  Get  you  to  the  mountain,  lest  the  pursu. 

2.  22  they  went,  and  came  unto  the  mountain 
2.  23  descended  from  the  mountain,  and  passed 
8.  30  Then  Joshua  built  an  altar,  .in  mount  E. 
8.  33  half  of  them  over  against  mount  Gerizim 
8.  33  and  half  of  them  over  against  mount  Ebal 
30.    6  the  Amorites  that  dwell  in  the  mountains 


Josh.  11.    2  kings  that  (were)  on  the  north  of  the  m 
11.    3  the  Jebusite  in  the  mountains,  and  (to) 
11.  16  the  mountain  of  Israel,  and  the  valley  of 
11. 17  from  the  mount  Halak,  thatgoeth  uptoS. 
11.  17  in  the  valley  of  Lebanon,  under  mount  H. 

11.  2i  cut  off  the  Aniki?ns  from  the  mouutains 
n.  21  mountains  of  Judah,  and  from  all  the  m. 

12.  1  from  the  river  Arnon  unto  mount  Hermon 
12.  5  reigned  in  mount  Hermon,  and  inSalcah 
12.    7  unto  the  mount  Halak,  thatgoeth  up  to 

12.  8  In  the  mouutains,  and  in  the  valleys,  and 

13.  5  from  Baal-gad  under  mount  Hermon  unto 

13.  11  all  mount  Hermon,  and  all  Bashan  unto  S. 
13. 19  Zareth-shahar  in  the  mount  of  the  valley 

14.  12  Now  therefore  give  me  this  mountain,  w. 

15.  8  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  mountains  that 
15.    9  went  out  to  the  cities  of  mount  Ephron 
r5. 10  from  Baalah  westward  unto  mouutSeir 
15.  10  the  side  of  mount  Jearim,  which  (is)  Che. 
15.  11  passed  along  to  mount  Baalah,  and  went 

15.  48  in  the  mountains,  Shamir,  aud  Jattir,  and 

16.  1  up  from  Jericho,  throughout  mount  Be. 
17. 15  if  mount  Ephraim  be  too  narrow  for  thee 

17.  18  the  mountain  shall  be  thine  ;  for  it  (is)  a 

18.  12  went  up  through  the  mountains  westward 

18.  16  border  came  down  to  the  end  of  the  mou. 

19.  50  he  asked.  .Timnath-serah  in  mount Ephr. 

20.  7  And.  .Kedesh  in  Galilee  in  mount  NTaph. 
20.    7  and  Shechem  in  "mount  Ephraim,  aud 

20.  7  Kirjath-arba.  .in  the  mountain  of  Judah 

21.  21  Shechem  with  her  suburbs  in  mount  Eph. 
24.  4  I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  Seir,  to  possess 
24.  30  which  (is)  in  mount  Ephraim,  on  the  north 
24.  33  which  was  given  him  in  mount  Ephraim 

Judg.  1.   9  Canaanites,  that  dwelt  in  the  mountain 
1. 19  he  drave  out  (the  inhabitants)  of  the  mo. 

1.  34  forced  the  children  of  Dan  into  the  mou. 
r.  35  the  Amorites  would  dwell  in  mount  Heres 

2.  9  in  themouut  of  Ephraim,  on  the  north  s. 

3.  3  the  Hivites  that  dwelt  in  mountLebanon 
3.  3  from  mount  Baal-hermon  unto  the  enter. 
3.  27  he  blew  a  trumpet  in  the  mountain  of  E. 

3.  27  went  down  with  him  from  the  mount,  and 

4.  5  between  Rarnah  and  Beth-el  in  mount  E. 
4.    6  Go  and  draw  toward  mount  Tabor,  and 

4.  12  son  of  Abinoam  was  gone  up  to  mount  T. 
4. 14  So  Barak  went  down  from  mount  Tabor 

5.  5  The  mountains  melted  from  before  the  L. 

6.  2  made,  .the  dens  which  (are)  in  the  moun. 

7.  3  return  and  depart  early  from  mount  Gilea. 
7.  24  sent  messengers  throughout  all  mount  E. 
9.  7  he  went  and  stood  inthe  top  of  mount  G. 
9. 25  liers  in  wait  for  him  in  the  top  of  the  m. 
9.  36  come  people  down  from  the  top  of  the  m. 
9.  36  Thou  seest  the  shadow  of  the  mountains 
9.  48  Abimelech  gat  him  up  to  mount  Zalmon 

10.  1  and  he  dwelt  in  Shamir  in  mount  Ephraim 

11.  37  that  I  may  go  up  and  down  upon  the  m. 

11.  38  bewailed  her  virginity  upon  the  mountains 

12.  15  of  Ephraim,  in  the  mount  of  the  Amalek. 
17.  1  there  was  a  man  of  mount  Epliraim,  whose 
17.    8  he  came  to  mount  Ephraim,  to  the  house 

1 3.  2  who  when  they  came  to  mount  Ephraim 
18. 13  they  passed  thence  unto  mount  Ephraim 
19.  1  sojourning  on  the  side  of  mount  Ephraim 
19.  16  an  old  man.,  which  (was)  also  of  mount  E. 

19.  iS  passing,  .toward  the  side  of  mount  Ephr. 

1  Sa,    1.    1  man  of  Ramathaim-Zophim  of  mount  Ep. 

9.  4  he  passed  through  mount  Ephraim,  and 

13.  2  were  with  Saul  in  Michmash  andinmount 

14.  22  which  had  hid  themselves  inmount  Eph. 
17.    3  the  Philistines  stood  on  a  mountain  on  the 

17.  3  Israel  stood  on  a  mountain  on  the  other 
23.  14  remained  in  a  mountain  in  the  wilderness 
23.  26  Saul  went  on  this  side  of  the  mountain 
23.  26  David  and  his  men  on  that  side  of  the  m. 
26.  20  doth  hunt  a  partridge  in  the  mountains 
31.  1  fled.,  and  fell  down  slain  inmouut  Gilboa 
31.    8  Saul  aud  his  three  sous  fallen  in  mount  G. 

2  Sa.    1.   6  As  I  happened  by  chance  upon  mount  G. 

1.  21  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa. .no  dew,  neither 

20.  21  a  man  of  mount  Ephraim,  Sheba  the  son 

1  Ki.   4.    3  And  these.  .The  son  of  Hur,  in  mount  E. 

5.  15  fourscore  thousand  hewers  in  the  mount. 
12.  25  Jeroboam  built  Shechem  in  mount  Ephr. 

18.  19  gather  to  me  all  Israel  unto  mount  Carmel 

18.  20  the  prophets  together  unto  mount  Carmel 

19.  8  aud  went,  .unto  Horeb  the  mount  of  God 
19. 11  Go  forth,  and  stand  upon  the  mount  bef. 
19. 11  a  great  and  strong  wind  rent  the  mount. 

2  Ki.   '2.  16  cast  him  upon  some  mountain,  or  into 

2.  25  Aud  he  went  from  thence  to  mount  Car. 

4.  25  came  unto  the  man  of  God  unto  mount  C. 

5.  22  even  now  there  be  come  to  me  from  mount 
6. 1 7  the  mountain  ( wa  a)  full  of  horses  and  cha. 

19.  23  I  am  come  up  to  the  height  of  the  moun. 
19.  31  and  they  that  escape  out  of  mount  Zion 
23. 13  on  the  right  hand  of  the  mount  of  corru. 
23.  16  sepulchres  that  (were)  there  in  the  mount 

1  Ch.  4.  42  went  to  mount  Seir,  having  for  their  cap. 

5.  23  Baal-hermon  and  Senir.  and  unto  mount 

6.  67  Shechem  in  mount  Ephraim  with  her  su. 

10.  1  fled,  .and  fell  down  slain  in  mount  Gilboa 
:o.   8  found  Saul  and  his  sous  fallen  in  mount  G. 

12.  8  as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains 

2  Ch.  2.    2  fourscore  thousand  to  hew  in  the  mount. 

2.  18  fourscore  thousand . .  hewers  in  the  moun. 

3.  1  to  build,  .at  Jerusalem  in  mount  Moriah 

13,  4  Abijah  stood  up  upon  mount  Zemaraim 
13.    4  which  (is)  in  mount  Ephraim,  and  said 
15.    8  which  he  had  taken  from  mount  Ephraim 
18.  16  I  did  see.  .Israel  scattered  upon  the  mo. 


2  Ch.19.  4  went  out.  .from  Beer-sheba  to  mount  Ep. 
20.  10  children  of  Amnion  and  Moab  and  mount 
20.  22  children  of  Amnion,  Moab,  and  mount  S. 

20.  23  stood  up  against  the  inhabitants  of  mount 

21.  11  he  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  of 

26.  10  vine  dressers  in  the  mountains,  aud  in  I  . 

27.  4  he  built  cities  in  the  mountains  of  Judah 
33. 15  all  the  altars  that  he  had  built  in  the  m 

Neh.   8.  15  Go  forth  unto  the  mount,  and  fetch  olive 

9.  13  Thou  earnest  down  also  upon  mount  Sinai 
Job     9.    5  Which  removeth  the  mountains,  and  they 

14.  18  surely  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  n. 

24.  8  They  are  wet  with  the  showers  of  the  mo. 

25.  9  he  overturneth  the  mountains  by  the  roots 

39.  8  The  range  of  the  mountains  (is)  his  pasture 

40.  20  Surely  the  mouutains  briug  him  forthfood 
Psa.  11.    1  how  say  ye ..  Flee  (as)  a  bird  to  your  mou. 

46.  2  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the 
46.  3  mountains  shake  with  the  swelling  thereof 
48.  1  in  the  city  of  our  God.. the  mountain  of 
48.  2  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  (is)  mount  Zion 
48. 11  Let  mount  Zion  rejoice,  let  the  daughters 
50.  11  I  know  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains:  aud 
65.  6  Which  by  his  strength  setteth  fast  the  m 
72.  3  The  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the  p. 
72.  io  corn  in  the  earth  upon  the  top  of  the  mo. 
74.  2  thi3  mount  Zion,  wherein  thou  hast  dwelt 
78.  54  this  mountain .  .his  right  hand  had  pure. 
78.  68  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  mount  Zion 
83. 14  as  the  flame  setteth  the  mountains  on  fire 
90.  2  Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth 
104.  6  the  waters  stood  above  the  mountains 
104.  8  They  go  up  by  the  mountains ;  they  go  d. 
114.  4  The  mountains  skipped  like  rams,  .little 
114.  6  Ye  mountains,  .ye  skipped  like  rams,  .ye 
125.  1  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  . .  as  mount  Z. 
125.  2  the  mountains  (are)  round  about  Jerusa. 
144.    5  touch  the  mountains,  and  they  shall  sm. 

147.  8  who  maketh  grass  to  grow  upon  the  mou. 

148.  9  Mountains,  and  all  hills  ;  fruitful  trees 
Prov.  8.  25  Before  the  mountains  were  settled,  before 

27.  25  and  herbs  of  the  mountains  are  gathered 
Song  2.    8  he  cometh  leaping  upon  the  mountains 

2. 17  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  Be. 
4.    1  a  flock  of  goats,  that  appear  from  mouut 
4.    6  I  will  get  me  to  the  mountain  of  myrrh 
8.  14  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spi. 

Isa.     2.   2  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be 
2.   2  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains 
2.    3  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mount. 
2.  14  upon  all  the  high  mountains,  and  upon 
4.   5  create  upon  every  dwelling  place  of  mou 

8. 18  Lord  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth  in  mount 

10.  12  whole  work  upon  mount  Zion  and  on  Je. 

10.  32  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the 

11.  9  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mou. 
13.    2  Lift  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  high  moun. 

13.  4  The  noise  of  a  multitude  in  the  mountains 
14. 13  I  will  sit  also  upon  the  mount  of  the  con. 

14.  25  upon  my  mountains  tread  him  under  foot 

16.  1  unto  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

17.  13  shall  be  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the  moun. 

18.  3  when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on  the  mou. 
18.  6  left.,  unto  the  fowls  of  the  mountains,  and 
18.  7  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  mount 
22.    5  the  walls,  and  of  crying  to  the  mountains 

24.  23  LORD  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  mount  Zion 

25.  6  in  this  mountain  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts 

25.  7  he  will  destroy  in  this  mountain  the  face 
25.  10  in  this  mountain  shall  the  hand  of  the  L. 

27.  13  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at  J. 

28.  21  the  Lord  shall  rise  up  as  (in)  mount  Per. 

29.  8  nations  be  that  fight  against  mount  Zion 
30. 17  as  a  beacon  upon  the  top  of  a  mountain 

30.  25  there  shall  be  upon  every  high  mountain 

30.  29  to  come  into  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 

31.  4  come  down  to  fight  for  mount  Zion,  and 
34.    3  mountains  shall  be  melted  with  their  bl. 
37.  24  I  come  up  to  the  height  of  the  mountains 
37.  32  aud  they  that  escape  out  of  mount  Zion 
40.   4  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made  1. 
40.   9  0  Zion . .  get  thee  up  into  the  high  mount. 

40. 12  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales,  and  the 

41. 15  thou  shalt  thresh  the  mouutains,  and  beat 
42.  11  let  them  shout  from  the  top  of  the  moun. 
42. 15 1  wall  make  waete  mountains  and  hills,  and 
44.  23  break  forth  into  siugiug  ye  mountains,  O 
49.  11  I  will  make  all  my  mountains  a  way,  and 

49. 13  breakforth  into  singing,  O  mouutains :  for 
52.    7  How  beautiful  upon  the  mouutains  are  the 

54. 10  Eor  the  mouutains  shall  depart,  and  the 
55. 12  the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 

56.  7  Even  them  will  I  bring  to  my  holy  moun. 

57.  7  Upon  a  lofty  aud  high  mountain  hast  thou 
57.  13  but  he.  .shall  inherit  my  holy  mountain 
64.    1  that  the  mountains  might  flow  down  at 

64.  3  the  mouutains  flowed  down  at  thy  prese. 

65.  7  which  have  burnt  incense  upon  the  mou. 
65.    9  out  of  Judah  an  inheritor  of  my  mounta. 

65. 11  that  forget  my  holy  mountain,  that  pre. 

65.  25  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mou. 

66.  20  to  my  holy  mountain  Jerusalem,  saith  the 
Jer.     3.   6  she  is  gone  up  upon  every  high  mountain 

3.  23  from  the  hills,  .the  multitude  of  mount. 
4. 15  publisheth  affliction  from  mount  Ephraim 

4.  24  I  beheld  the  mountains,  and,  lo,  they  tr. 
9. 10  For  the  mountains  will  I  take  up  a  weep. 

13.  16  your  feet  stumble  upon  the  dark  mount. 

16. 16  they  shall  hunt  them  from  every  mountain 
17.  26  from  the  mouutains,  and  from  the  south 

26.  18  the  mouutain  of  the  house  as  the  high  p. 
31.    5  Thou  shalt  yet  plant  vines  upon  the  mo. 


MOUNT 


675 


MOURN 


Jer.  31.    6  watchmen  upon  the  mount  Ephraim  shall 

31.  23  O  habitation  of  justice,  .mountain  of  ho. 

32.  44  in  the  cities  of  the  mountains,  and  in  the 

33.  13  In  the  cities  of  the  mountains,  in  the  cit 
46. 18  Surely  as  Tabor  (is)  among  the  mountains* 
50.  6  they  have  turned  them  away  (on)  the  m. 
50.    6  they  have  gone  from  mountain  to  hill,  they 

50.  19  his  soul  shall  be  satisfied  upon  mount  E. 

51.  25  I  (am)  against  thee,  0  destroying  mount. 
51.  25  and  will  make  thee  a  burnt  mountain 

Lam.  4.  1  g  they  pursued  us  upon  the  mountains,  they 

5.  iS  Because  of  tlie  mountain  of  Zion,  which  is 
Eze.    6.   2  set  thy  face  toward  the  mountains  of  Israel 

6.  3  Ye  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of 
6.    3  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  the  mountains 

6.  23  in  all  the  tops  of  themountains.and  under 

7.  7  not  the  sounding  again  of  the  mountains 
7. 16  shall  be  on  the  mountains  like  doves  of 

12.  23  stood  upon  the  mountain  which  (is)  on  the 
27.  22  will  plant  (it)  upon  an  high  mountain  and 

27.  23  In  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel 

28.  6,  25  hath  not  eaten  upon  the  mountains 
28. 21  but  even  hath  eaten  upon  the  mountains 

19.  9  voice  should  n  0  more  be  heard  upon  the  m. 

20.  40  in  mine  holy  mountain,  in  the  mountain 
22.  9  and  in  thee  they  eat  upon  the  mountains 
28.  14  thou  wast  upon  the  holy  mountain  of  God 

16  I  will  cast  thee  as  profane  out  of  the  m. 
12  upon  the  mountains  and  in  all  the  valleys 

,    5  I  will  lay  thy  flesh  upon  the  mountains 
,    6  I  will  also  water . .  the  land . .  to  the  mou. 
,  28  the  mountains  of  Israel  shall  be  desolate 
,    6  My  sheep  wandered  through  all  the  mo. 

23  and  feed  them  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 

14  upon  the  high  mountains  of  Israel  shall 

24  shall  they  feed  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 
.  2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  mount  S. 
.  3  Behold,  O  mount  Seir,  I  (am)  against  thee 
.   7  Thus  will  I  make  mount  Seir  most  desol. 

8  And  I  will  fill  his  mountains  with  his  si. 
.  12  which  thou  hast  spoken  against  the  mou. 

15  thou  shalt  be  desolate,  O  mount  Seir,  and 
.   1  prophesy  unto  the  mountains  of  Israel,  and 

1,  4  ye  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word 
4  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  the  mountains 
6  say  unto  the  mountains,  aud  to  the  hills 
8  But  ye,  O  mountains  of  Israel,  ye  shall 

22  in  the  land  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel 
8  against  the  mountains  of  Israel,  which 

20  the  mountains  shall  be  thrown  down,  and 

21  call,  .against  him  throughout  all  my  mo. 
2  will  bring  thee  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 

4  Thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  mountains  of  Is. 

17  a  great  sacrifice  upon  the  mountains  of  I. 
2  set  me  upon  a  very  high  mountain,  by  w. 

12  Upon  the  top  of  the  mountain  the  whole 

16  from  thy  city  Jerusalem,  thy  holy  moun. 
20  before  the  Lord  my  God  for  the  holy  m. 
45  between  the  seas  in  the  glorious  holy  m. 

23  They  sacrifice  upon  the  tops  of  the  mou. 

8  they  shall  say  to  the  mountains,  Cover  us 

1  and  sound  an  alarm  in  my  holy  mountain 

2  as  the  morning  spread  upon  themountains 

5  Like,  .noise  of  chariots  on  the  tops  of  m. 
32  in  mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  shall  be 

17  your  God  dwelling  in  Zion,  my  holy  mou. 

18  the  mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine 

9  Assemble  yourselves  upon  the  mountains 

1  that  (are)  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria 

13  For,  io,  he  that  formeth  the  mountains 

2  and  trust  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria 
13  and  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine 

8  understanding  out  of  the  mount  of  Esau? 

9  that  every  one  of  the  mount  of  Esau  may 
16  For  as  ye  have  druuk  upon  my  holy  mou. 
2  7  But  upon  mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance 

19  the  south  shall  possess  the  mount  of  Esau 
2i  come  up  on  mount  Zion  to  judge  the  mo. 

6  I  went  down  to  the  bottoms  of  the  moun. 
4  the  mountains  shall  be  molten  under  him 

12  the  mountain  of  the  house  as  the  high  p. 
2  the  mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

1  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains 

2  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain 
.    7  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Z. 

1  Arise,  contend  thou  before  the  mountains 

2  Hear  ye,  O  mountains,  the  Lord's  contro. 
12  from  sea  to  sea,  and.  .mountain  to  mou. 

.    5  The  mountains  quake  at  him,  and  the  h. 

25  Behold  upon  the  mountains  the  feet  of 
28  thy  people  is  scattered  upon  the  mount. 

3  the  holy  one  from  mount  Paran.    Selah 

10  The  mountains  saw  thee,  .they  trembled 
it  be  haughty  because  of  my  holy  mountain 

8  Go  up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood 

11  upon  the  land,  and  upon  the  mountains 

7  \Vho(art)t'iou  0  great  mountain?  before 
1  four  chariots  out  from  between  two  mo. 
1  the  mountains  (were)  mountains  of  brass 

3  be  called,  .the  mountain.  .The  holy  mou. 

4  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the  m. 
4  the  mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the 

4  half  of  the  mountain  shall  remove  toward 

5  ye  shall  flee  (to)  the  valley  of  the  mount. 
5  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach 
3  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  mountains  and 


28 
31' 
3Z 
32. 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35' 
35- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36- 
36. 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
39- 
39- 
40. 
43- 

Dan.  9 

9> 
12 

Hos.  4. 
ro 

Joel    2. 


3 

Amos  3 
4- 


Obad. 


Jon.  2 
Mac.  1. 
3' 
4- 
4- 
4 
4 
6. 
6. 
7 

Nah.    1 
2. 

Hab.  3. 
3- 

Zeph.  3. 

Hag.    1. 

1. 

Zech.  4. 


Mai. 


%Mountain,  hill,  Yin,  Yin  herer,  harar. 

Gen.  14.  6  the  Horites  in  their  mount  Seir,  unto  E. 
Num23.  7  brought  me  from  Aram,  out  of  the  mou. 
Deut33.  15  for  the  chief  tilings  of  the  ancient  moun. 
Psa.  30.    7  thou  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand 


Psa.  36.  6  Thy  righteousness  (is)  like  the  great  mo. 

76.  4  more  glorious . .  than  the  mountains  of  p. 

87.  1  His  foundation  (is)  in  the  holy  mountains 

133.  3  that  descended  upon  the  mountains  of  Z. 

Song  4.  8  look,  .from  the  mountains  of  the  leopards 

Jer.    27.  3  0  my  mountain  in  the  field,  I  will  give  thy 

Hab.  3.  6  the  everlasting  mountains  were  scattered 

Z. Something  set  up,  station,  3Xj3  mutstsab. 

Isa.    29.    3  will  lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  mount 

4.  IVJiat  is  raised  up,  mount,  ?hhb  solelah. 

Jer.    6.   6  Hew  ye  down  trees,*  and  cast  a  mount  a. 

32.  24  Behold  the  mounts,  they  are  come  unto 

33.  4  which  are  thrown  down  by  the  mounts 
Eze.    4.    2  build  a  fort  against  it,  and  cast  a  mount 

27.  17  by  casting  up  mounts,  and  buildingforts 

21.  22  against  the  gates,  to  cast  a  mount,  .to  b. 

26.  8  cast  a  mount  against  thee,  and  lift  up  the 
Dan.  11.  15  of  the  north  shall  come,  and  cast  up  am. 

5. Round  tower,  height,  yb  tur. 

Dan.    2.  35  became  a  great  mountain,  and  filled  the 
2.  45  that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  mount. 

6. Mount,  mountain,  hill,  6po$  oros. 

Matt.  4.    8  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high  m. 
5.    2  he  went  up  into  a  mountain :  and  when 

8.  1  When  he  was  come  down  from  the  moun. 

14.  23  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart  to  pray 

15.  29  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  sat  down 
17.    1  bringeth  them  up  into  an  high  mountain 
17.    9  as  they  came  down  from  the  mountain,  J. 

27.  20  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove 
28. 22  goeth  into  themountains,and  seeketh  that 

22.  1  were  come,  .unto  the  mount  of  Olives 

21.  21  if  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Be  thou 
24.  3  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount  of  Olives,  the  d. 
24.  16  let  them  which  be  in  Judea  flee  into  them. 
26.  30  they  went  out  into  the  mount  of  Olives 

28.  16  went  away  into  Galilee,  into  a  mountain 
Mark  3.  13  he  goeth  up  into  a  mountain,  and  calleth 

5.    s  night  and  day,  he  was  in  the  mountains 

5.  22  there  was  there,nigh[unto  the  mountains] 

6.  46  And.  .he  departed  into  a  mountain  to  p. 

9.  2  leadeth  them  up  into  an  high  mountain 
9:    9  as  they  came  down  from  the  mountain 

11.  1  at  the  mount  of  Olives,  he  sendeth  forth 
11.  23  whosoever  shall  say  unto  this  mountain 

13.  3  as  he  sat  upou  the  mount  of  Olives,  over 
13. 14  let  them  that  be  in  Judea  flee  to  the  mo. 

14.  26  And . .  they  went  out  into  the  mount  of  O. 
Luke  3.    5  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  brought 

4.  5  [the  devil,  taking  him  up  into  an  high  ni.] 
6. 12  that  he  went  out  into  a  mountain  to  pray 

8.  32  an  herd  of  many  swine  feeding  on  the  m. 

9.  28  and  went  up  into  a  mountain  to  pray 

29.  29  at  the  mount  called  (the  mount)of  Olives 
29.  37  now  at  the  descent  of  the  mount  of  Olives 

22.  22  let  themwhicharein  Judeaflee  to  them. 

21.  37  abode  in  the  mount  that  is  called,  .of  01. 

22.  39  went,  as  he  was  wont,  to  the  mount  of  0. 

23.  30  Then  shall  they  begin  to  say  to  the  mou. 
John  4.  20  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mountain 

4.  21  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain 
6.    3  Jesus  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  there 

6.  25  departed  again  into  a  mountain  himself 
8.    1  [Jesus  went  unto  the  mount  of  Olives] 

Acts    1.  12  from  the  mount  called  Olivet,  which  is 

7.  30  appeared  to  him  in  the  wilderness  of  m. 

7.  38  angel  which  spake  to  him  in  the  mount 

1  Co.  13.   2  so  that  I  could  remove  mountains,  and 
Gal.    4.  24  one  from  the  mount  Sinai,  which  gender. 

4.  25  For  this  Agar  is  mount  Sinai  in  Arabia 
Heb.   S.    5  the  pattern  showed  to  thee  in  the  mount 

11.  38  they  wandered  in  deserts,  and .  .mountains 

12.  18  For  ye  are  not  come  unto  the  [mount]  that 
12.  20  if  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain 
12.  22  ye  are  come  unto  mount  Sion,  and  unto 

2  Pe.    1.  18  when  we  were  withhiinin  the  holy  mount 
Rev.   6.  14  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved 

6.  15  in  the  dens  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  moun. 
6. 16  said  to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  Fall  on 

8.  8  as  it  were  a  great  mountain  burning  with 
14.    1  a  Lamb  stoodoutheinouutSion,  and  with 

16.  20  fled  away,  and  the  mountains  were  not 

17.  9  The  seven  heads  are  seven  mountains,  on 
22.  10  in  the  spirit  to  a  great  and  high  mountain 

[See  also  Abarim,  Ararat,  Baalah,  Baal-hermon,  Beth-el, 
Bether,  Carmel,  Ebal,  Ephraim,  Ephron,  Gerizim,  Gil- 
boa,  Gilead,  Halak,  Heres,  Hermon,  Hor,  Horeb, 
Jearim,  Lebanon,  Moriah,  Naphtali,  Nebo,  Olivet, 
Paran,  Perazim,  Samaria,  Sen-,  Shaphar,  Sion,  Sinai, 
Tabor,  Zalmon,  ZemaraLm,  Zion,  &c] 

MO  TJNT  up,  to  — 

1.7b  raise  self  up,  7|?x  abak,  7. 

Isa.     9. 18  they  shall  mount  up.  .the  lifting  up  of 

2.  To  go  up  high,  naa  gabah,  5. 

Job  39.  27  Doth  the  eagle  mount  up  at  thy  command 

Z.To  go  up,  thy  alah. 

Job  20.   6  Though  his  excellency  mount  up  to  the 
Psa.  107. 26  They  mount  up  to  the  heaven, they  go  dowm 
Isa.   40.  31  they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles 
Jer.   51. 53  Though  Babylon  should  mount  up  to  he. 

LTo  be  high,  on  911m. 

Eze.  10.  16  lifted  up  their  wings  to  mount  up  from 

5. To  be  high,  lifted  up,  dqt  ramam,  2. 

Eze.  10.  19  lifted  up  their  wings,  and  mounted  up 


MOUNTING  up  — 

Going  up,  ascent,  step,  rhyjs  maaleh. 

Isa.   15.    5  by  the  mounting  up  of  Luhith  with  we. 
MOURN,  to  — 
I.  To  mourn,  *?3N  abal. 

Job    14.  22  and  his  soul  within  him  shall  mourn 
Isa.     3.  26  her  gates  shall  lament  and  mourn  ;  and 
24.   4  The  earth  mourneth.  .fadeth  away,  the 
24.    7  The  new  wine  mourneth,  the  vine  langu. 
33.   9  The  earth  mourneth  (and)  languisheth 
Jer.     4.  28  For  this  shall  the  earth  mourn,  aud  the 

12.  4  How  long  shall  the  laud  mourn,  and  the 
12.  11  desolate  it  mourneth  unto  me ;  the  whole 
14.   2  Judah  mourneth,  and  the  gates  thereof 

23.  10  for  becauseof  swearing thelandmourneth 
Hos.   4.    3  Therefore  shall  the  land  niouru,  and  every 

10.  5  the  people  thereof  shall  mourn  over  it 
Joel    1.   9  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers,  mourn 

1.  20  The  field  is  wasted,  the  land  mourneth 
Amos  1.    2  the  habitations  of  the  shepherds  shallm. 

8.  8  and  every  one  mourn  that  dwelleth  the. 

9.  5  and  all  that  dwell  therein  shall  mourn 

'I.Mourning,  Snx  abel. 

Psa.  35.  14  I  bowed  down  heavily,  as  one  that  mou. 

Isa.  61.    2  day . .  of  our  God  ;  to  comfort  all  that  mo. 

61.   3  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion 

Lam.  1.   4  The  ways  of  JZion  do  mourn,  because  none 

Z.To  show  self  a  mourner,  S5N  abal,  7. 

Gen.  37.  34  loins,  and  mourned  for  his  son  many  days 
Exod33.    4  heard  these  evil  tidings,  they  mourned 
Num  14.  39  Moses  told,  .and  the  people  mourned  gr. 

1  Sa.  25.  35  Samuel  mourned  for  Saul :  and  the  Lord 

16.    1  How  long  wilt  thoumouru  for  Saul,  seeing 

2  Sa.  13.  37  And(David)mournedforliisson  everyday 

24.  2  that  had  a  long  time  mourned  for  the  dead 

29.  1  the  king  weepeth  and  mourneth  for  Abs. 

1  Ch.  7.  22  Ephraim  their  father  mourned  many  days 

2  Ch.  35.  24  Judah  and  Jerusalem  mourned  for  Josiah 
Ezra  10.  6  he  mourned  because  of  the  transgression  of 
Neh.    1.    4  wept,  and  mourned  (certain)  days,  and  f. 

8.  9  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  God ;  mourn  not 
Isa.  66.  10  Rejoice,  .with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn  for 
Eze.    7. 12  let  not.  .buyer  rejoice,  nor.  .seller  mourn 

7.  27  The  king  shall  mourn,  and  the  prince  sh. 
Dan.  10.    2  In  those  days  I  Daniel  was  mourning  th. 

4.  To  lament,  mourn,  .tjn  anah. 

Isa.   19.    8  The  fishers  also  shall  mourn,  and  all  they 

5.  To  be  sighing,  to  sigh,  rux  anach,  2. 

Prov29.   2  the  wicked  beareth  rule,  the  people  mo. 

6.  To  weep,  np3  bakah. 

Gen.  50.    3  Egyptians  mourned  for  him  three  score 
Kum  20.  29  saw . .  they  mourned  for  Aaron  thirty  days 

7. To  be  grieved,  pained,  3*ri  daab. 

Psa.  88.   9  Mine  eye  mourneth  by  reason  of  affliction 
S.To  meditate,  mutter,  rnn  hagah. 

Isa.    16.    7  foundations  of  Xir-hareseth  shall  ye  mou. 
38.  14  I  did  mourn  as  a  dove  :  mine  eyes  fail 
59.  11  We  roar  all  like  bears,  and  niourn  sore 
Jer.  48.  31  and.  .shall  mourn  for  the  men  of  Kir-he. 
9.  To  soitnd,  make  a  noise,  nen  hamah. 

Eze.    7. 16  all  of  them  mourning,  every  one  for  his  i. 
lO.^o  howl,  groan,  nni  naham. 

Prov.  5.  11  thou  mourn  at  the  last,  when  thy  flesh  and 
Eze.  24.  23  ye  shall  pine  away,  .and  niourn  one  tow. 
11. Tomove,  bemoan,  Y3  nud. 

Job     2.  22  to  come  to  mourn  with  him  and  to  comf. 

ll.Tobeat  {the  breast),  mourn,  lament,  ^bsapliad. 

Gen.  23.    2  Abraham  came  to  mourn  for  Sarah,  and 

50.  20  there  they  mourned  withagreatand  very 

2  Sa.    2.  12  they  mourned  and  wept,  and  fasted  until 

3.  32  gird  you  with  sackcloth, audmourn before 

11.  26  was  dead,  she  mourned  for  her  husband 

1  Ki.  13.  29  the  old  prophet  came  to  the  city,  to  mo. 

13.  30  they  mourned  over  him.  .Alas,  my  broth. 

14.  13  all  Israel  shall  mourn  for  him,  and  bury 
24. 18  all  Israel  mourned  for  him,  according  to 

Eccl.  3.    4  a  time  to  mourn,  and  a  time  to  dance 
Eze.  24. 16  yet  neither  shalt  thou  mourn  nor  weep 

24.  23  ye  shall  not  mournnor  weep ;  but  ye  shall 
Zech.  7.    5  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth 

12.  10  they  shall  niourn  for  him,  as  one  mourn. 
12. 12  the  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart 

13. 7b  be  black,  to  mourn,  ~nn  qadar. 

Job      5.  11  that  those  whichmournmaybeexalted  to 

30.  28  Iwentraourning  without thesun :  I  stood 
Psa.  38.    6  I  am  troubled . .  I  go  mourning  all  the  day 

42.  9  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  oppre. 

43.  2  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  oppr. 

14.  To  rule,  mourn,  Tn  rud,  5. 

Psa.  55.   2  I  mourn  in  my  complaint,  and  make  a 

15.  To  bewail,  lament,  6p<nv4w  threneo. 

Matt  11. 17  we  have  mourned  unto  you,  and  ye  have 
Luke  7.  32  we  have  mourned  to  you,  and  ye  have  not 

16.  To  beat  (the  breast),  Koirrofxat  koptomai. 

Matt  24.  30  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mo. 

17.  To  mourn,  grieve,  sorroiv,  irtvQw  pentheo. 
Matt.  5.    4  Blessed  (are)  they  that  mourn  :  for  they 

9. 15  Can  the  children  of  the  bride  chamberm. 
Marki6. 10  [thathadbeenwithhim.as  theyrnouraed] 
Luke  6.  25  Woe  unto  you  that  laugh . .  for  ye  shall  m. 

2  Co.   5.    2  ye  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  m. 


MOURN 


676 


MOUTH 


.Tas.     4.   g  Be  afflicted,  and  mourn,  and  weep:  let 
Rev.  18.  11  merchants  of  the  earth  shall  weep  andm. 

MOURN,  to  cause  f>  — 

To  make  black,  cause  to  mourn,  T]j3  qadar,  5. 
Eze.  31.  15  I  caused  Lebanon  to  mourn  for  him,  and 

MOURNER,  MOURNING  — 

1.  Mourning  one,  Siin  abel. 

Gen.  37.  35  go  down  into  the  grave  unto  my  son  mo 
Esth.  6.  12  flaman  hasted  to  his  house  mourning 
Job  29.  25  sat.  .as  one  (that)  comforteth  the  mourn. 
Isa.   57.  18  restore  comforts  uuto  him,  and  to  his  m. 

^.Mourning,  73NI  ebel. 

Gen.  27.  41  The  days  of  mourning  for  my  father  are 
50.  10  he  made  a  mourning  for  his  father  seven 
50.  11  saw  the  mourning  in  the  floor  of  Atad.they 
50.  11  This  (is)  a  grievous  mourning  to  the  Egy. 

Deut34.    8  so  the  days  of  weeping.. mourning  for  11. 

2  Sa.  11.  27  when  the  mourning  was  past,  David  sent 
14.    2  put  on  now  mourning  apparel,  and  anoint 

19.  2  the  victory  that  day  was.  .into  mourning 
Esth.  4.   3  great  mourning  among  the  Jews,  and  fa. 

9.  22  was  turned,  .from  mourning  into  a  good 
Job  30. 31  My  harp  also  is.  .to  mourning,  and  my  o. 
Eccl.  7.    2  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than 

7.  4  heart  of  the  wise  (is)  in  the  house  of  mo. 
Isa.  60.  20  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended 

61.  3  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment 
Jer.     6.  26  make  thee  mourning,  (as  for)  an  only  son 

16.   7  neither,  .tear  (themselves)  for  them  in  m. 

31.  13  I  will  turn  their  mourning  into  joy,  and 

Lam.  5.  15  ceased;  ourdanceisturnedintomourning 

Eze.  24. 17  Forbear  to  cry,  make  no  mourning  for  the 

Amos  5.  16  they  shall  call  the  husbandman  to  mour. 

8. 10  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning,  and 

8. 10  I  will  make  it  as  the  mourning  of  an  only 
Mic.    1.    8  like  the  dragons,  and  mourning  as  the  o. 

3.  Vanity,  iniquity,  \y&  aven. 

Deut26.  14  I  have  not  eaten  thereof  in  my  mourning 
Hos.    9.    4  as  the  bread  of  mourners;  all  that  eat  the. 

4.-4  sigh,  sighing,  nnjN  anachah* 

Isa.   51.  11  (and)  sorrow  and  mourning  shall  flee  away 
5,We&piitff,   rr::3  bekith. 

Gen.  50.  4  when  the  days  of  his  mourning  were  past 
(». Meditation,  muttering,  nin  hegeh. 

Eze.    2.  10  lamentations,  and  mourning,  and  weeping 
7. Beating  the  breast,  mourning,  "isipp  misped. 

Psa.  30. 1 1  Thou  hast  turned  for  me  my  mourning  into 

Isa.   22.  12  call  to  weeping,  and  to  mourning,  and  to 

Joel    2.  12  Turn  ye.. with  weeping,  and  with  mour. 

Mic.    1.  11  came  not  forth  in  the  mourning  of  Beth. 

Zech.12. 11  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mourn. 
12. 11  as  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the 
S.A  mourning  feast,  nrjD  marzeach. 

Jer.  16.    5  Enter  not  into  the  house  of  mourning,  ne. 
9.  To  beat  the  breast,  mourn,  150  saphad. 

Eccl.  12.    5  because,  .the  mourners  go  about  the  stre. 
\0 .  Lamentation,  mourning,  .tjxj-i  taaniyyah. 

Lam.  2.    5  in  the  daughter  of  Judah  mourning  and 
11.  Leviathan,  jrn1?  livyathan. 

Job     3.   8  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  their  mourning 
Yl.Lammtation,  wailing,  6dvp/x6s  odurmos. 

Matt.  2. 18  lamentation,  and  weeping,  and  great  mo. 

2  Co.  7.   7  your  mourning,  your  fervent  mind  toward 
IS. Sorrow,  grief,  mourning,  irivdos  penthos. 

Jas.     4.   9  let  your  laughter  be  turned  to  mourning 

Rev.  18.   8  come  in  one  day,  death,  and  mourning, and 
MOURNER,  to  feign  self  to  be  a  — 
To  feign  self  to  be  a  mourner,  Sjx  abal,  7. 

2  Sa.  14.   2  I  pray  thee,  feign  thyself  to  be  a  mourner 
MOURNFULLY  — 
In  blackness,  n'nip  qedorannith. 

Mai.  3.  14  that  we have  walked  mournfully  before  the 
MOURNING,  to  cause  a  — 
To  cause  to  mourn,  *?nx  abal,  5. 

Eze.  31.  15  he  went  do'wn  to  the  grave  I  caused  a  m. 
MOURNING  woman  — 
To  cone,  mourn,  lament,  pp  qun,  Sa. 

Jer.    9.  17  call  for  the  mourning  women,  that  they 
MOUSE  — 
-•1  inouset  153^  akbar. 

Lev.  11,  29  weasel,  and  the  mouse,  and  the  tortoise 

1  Sa.  6.  4  Five  golden  emerods,  and  Ave  golden  mice 
6.    5  and  images  of  your  mice  that  mar  the  land 

6. 11  the  coffer  with  the  mice  of  gold,  and  the 
6.  18  the  golden  mice . .  the  number  of  all  the  c. 

Isa.   66.  17  eating,  .the  abomination,  and  the  mouse 
MOUTH  — 

1.  Throat,  |*n|  garon. 

Psa.  149.   6  the  high  (praises)  of  God  (be)  in  their  mo. 

2.  Palate,  -jn  chek. 

Job   12..  11  Doth  not  the  ear  try  words?,  .the  mouth 

20.  13  it  not,  but  keep  it  still  within  his  mouth 
31.  30  Neither  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  sin 

33.  2  Behold . .  my  tongue  hath  spoken  in  my  m. 

34.  3  the  ear  trieth  words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth 
Prov.  5.3  a  strange  woman .  .her  mouth  (is)  smooth. 

8.  7  For  my  mouth  shall  speak  truth  ;  and  w. 


Son 

1  5 

16 

Hos 

8 

1 

Z.Cheek, 

~!V, 

Psa 

32- 

9 

103 

5 

4.  Mouth, 

ns 

Gen 

4- 

11 

8 

11 

24 

57 

29 

2 

29 

3 

29. 

3 

29 

8 

29. 

10 

42 

=7 

43- 

12 

43- 

21 

44. 

1 

44. 

2 

44. 

8 

45- 

12 

Exoil.4. 

11 

4- 

12 

4- 

15 

4- 

15 

4- 

16 

13- 

9 

=3- 

13 

\um12. 

8 

16. 

3° 

16. 

32 

22. 

28 

22. 

38 

23- 

5 

23- 

12 

23- 

16 

26. 

10 

3°- 

2 

32- 

24 

35- 

3° 

Deut.  8 

3 

11. 

6 

■7- 

6 

18. 

18 

19. 

15 

23- 

23 

30. 

14 

SI- 

19 

S'- 

21 

32- 

1 

.Tosh 

.  1. 

8 

6. 

10 

9- 

14 

10. 

18 

10. 

10. 

27 

Judg.  7. 

6 

9- 

38 

11. 

35 

11. 

36 

11. 

36 

18. 

19 

1  Sa 

1. 

12 

2. 

1 

2. 

3 

14. 

26 

14. 

27 

17- 

35 

2  Sa 

1. 

16 

14. 

3 

14- 

19 

18. 

25 

22. 

9 

iKi 

7- 

3' 

7- 

3» 

7- 

31 

8. 

15 

8. 

24 

13- 

21 

'7- 

24 

19. 

18 

22. 

13 

22. 

22 

22. 

23 

2  Ki 

4- 

34 

1  Ch 

16. 

12 

2CI1 

6. 

4 

6. 

15 

18. 

18. 

22 

35- 

22 

36- 

12 

36. 

21 

36- 

Ezra 

1. 

1 

Neh 

9- 

20 

Esth 

■  7- 

8 

Job 

3- 

1 

5- 

15 

5- 

16 

15, 
15- 

5 
6 

■5- 

13 

is. 
16. 
16. 

3° 

5 

10 

19 

16 

His  mouth  (is)  most  sweet ;  yea,  he  (is)  al. 
(Set)  the  trumpet  to  thy  mouth.  (He  shall 

adi. 

whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  bit  and 
Whosatisfleth  thy  mouth  with  good  (thi.) 
peh. 

which  hath  opened  her  mouth  to  receive 
in  her  mouth  (was)  an  olive  leaf  pluckt  off 
call  the  damsel,  and  enquire  at  her  mou. 
a  great  stone  (was)  upon  the  well's  mouth 
they  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mo. 
put  the  stone  again  upon  the  well's  mouth 
they  roll  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth 
and  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mou. 
money,  .behold,  it  (was)  in  his  sack's  mo. 
brought  again  in  the  mouth  of  your  sacks 
man's  money  (was)  in  the  mouth  of  his  s. 
put  every  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mouth 
in  the  sack's  mouth  of  the  youngest,  and 
money  which  we  found  in  our  sacks'  mo. 
(it  is)  my  mouth  that  speaketh  unto  you 
Who  hath  made  man's  mouth?  or  who  m. 
therefore  go,  and  I  will  be  with  thy  mouth 
speak  unto  him,  and  put  words  in  his  m. 
will  be  with  thy  mouth  and  with  his  mo. 
he  shall  be  to  thee  instead  of  a  mouth,  and 
that  the  Lord's  law  may  be  in  thy  mouth 
neither  let  it  be  heard  out  of  thy  mouth 
With  him  will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth 
the  earth  open  her  mouth,  and  swallow 
the  earth  opened  her  month,  and  swallo. 
the  Lord  opened  the  mouth  of  the  ass ;  and 
the  word  that  God  putteth  in  my  mouth 
the  Lord  put  a  word  in  Balaam's  mouth 
that  which  the  Lord  hath  put  in  my  mo.? 
put  a  word  in  his  mouth,  and  said,  Go 
the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallo. 
to  all  that  proceedeth  out  of  his  mouth 
which  hath  proceeded  out  of  your  mouth 
be  put  to  death  by  the  mouth  of  witnesses 
that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  theL. 
how  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  s. 
At  the  mou  til  of  two.  .at  the  mouth  of  one 
and  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth  ;  and 
at  the  mouth  of  two.  .or  at  the  mouth  of 
which  thou  hast  promised  with  thy  mouth 
word  (is)  very  nigh  unto  thee,  in  thy  mo. 
put  it  in  their  mouths,  that  this  song  may 
shall  not  be  forgotten  out  of  the  niouths 
and  hear,  O  earth,  the  words  of  my  mouth 
the  law  shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth 
shall  (any)  word  proceed  out  of  your  mo. 
and  asked  not.  .at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
Roll  great  stones  upon  the  mouth  of  the 
Open  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  and  bring 
and  laid  great  stones  in  the  cave's  mouth 
lapped,  (putting)  their  hand  to  their  mo. 
Where  (is)  now  thy  mouth,  wherewith  thou 
for  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  L. 
thou  hast  opened  thy  mouth  unto  the  L. 
that  which  hath  proceeded  out  of  thy  m. 
Hold  thy  peace,  lay .  .hand  upon  thy  mo. 
it  came  to  pass,  .that  Eli  marked  her  m. 
my  mouth  is  enlarged  over  mine  enemies 
let  (not)  arrogancy  come  out  of  your  mo. 
butnomanputhishand  to  his  mouth :  for 
put  his  hand  to  his  mouth ;  and  his  eyes 
and  delivered  (it)  out  of  his  mouth :  and 
for  thy  mouth  hath  testified  against  thee 
So  Joab  put  the  words  in  her  mouth 
put  all  these  words  in  the  mouth  of  thine 
If  he  (be)  alone,  (there  is)  tidings  in  his  m. 
fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured :  coals  were 
the  mouth  of  it  within  the  chapiter  and 
but  the  mouth  thereof  (was)  round,  .the 
also  upon  the  mouth  of  it  (were)  gravings 
which  spake  with  his  mouth  unto  David 
thou  spakest  also  with  thy  mouth,  and 
Forasmuch  as  thou  hast  disobeyed  the  m. 
the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy  mouth  (is) 
and  every  mouth  which  hath  not  kissed 
(declare)  good  unto  the  king  with  one  m. 
I  will  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all 
LoRD*hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth 
put  his  mouth  upon  his  mouth,  and  his  e. 
his  wonders,  and  the  judgments  of  hism. 
which  he  spake  with  his  mouth  to  my  fa. 
spakest  with  thymouth,  and  hast  fulfilled 
and  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all 
Lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth 
unto  the  words  of  Necho  from  the  mouth 
(speaking)  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
To  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  m. 
that  the  word  of  the  Lord  . .  by  the  mouth 
that  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth 
withheldest  not  thy  manna  from  their  m. 
As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  mouth 
After  this  opened  Job  his  mouth,'and  cur. 
from  their  mouth,  and  from  the  hand  of 
hath  hope,  and  iniquity  stoppeth  her  m. 
Therefore  I  will  not  refrain  my  mouth ;  I 
the  words  of  thy  mouth,  .a  strong  wind 
Till  he  fill  thy  mouth  with  laughing,  and 
If  I  justify  myself,  mine  own  mouth  shall 
For  thy  mouth  uttereth  thine  iniquity,  aud 
Thine  own  mouth  condemneth  thee,  and 
and  lettest.  .words  go  out  of  thy  mouth 
by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  he  go 
I  would  strengthen  you  with  my  mouth 
They  have  gaped  upon  me  with  their  m. 
my  servant. .  I  entreated  him  with  my  in. 


Job 


Psa. 


23 

=3' 
29. 
29. 
31- 
32. 
33' 
35- 
37- 
40. 
40. 
41. 
41. 
5- 


105 
107, 
109 
109. 

"5' 
119. 
119. 


119. 
119. 
no. 
126. 
*35- 
135. 
138. 
141, 
141. 
144, 
MS. 


12  Though  wickedness  be  sweet  in  his  mouth 
5  Mark  me.  .and  lay.  .hand  upon,  .mouth 

22  Receive,  I  pray  thee,  the  law  from  hism. 

4  I  would,  .fill  my  mouth  with  arguments 

12  I  have  esteemed  the  words  of  his  mouth 
9  The  princes . .  laid  (their)  hand  on  their  m. 

23  they  opened  their  mouth  wide  (as)  for  the 

27  heart,  .or  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  hand 

5  no  answer  in  the  mouth  of  (these)  three 

2  Behold,  now  1  have  opened  my  mouth,  my 
16  Therefore  doth  Job  open  his  mouth  in  v. 
2  and  the  sound  (that)  goeth  out  of  his  mo. 
4  what . .  I  will  lay  mine  hand  upon  my  mo. 

23  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his  mo. 
19  Out  of  his  mouth  go  burning  lamps,  (and) 
21  coals,  and  a  flame  goetli  out  of  his  mouth 

9  For..no  faithfulness  in  their  mouth ;  their 

2  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 

7  His  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  deceit 

3  I  am  purposed,  .my  mouth  shall  not  trail. 

10  fat:  with  their  mouth  they  speak  proudly 

8  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured :  coals  w. 
14  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  me. 

13  They  gaped  upon  me  (with)  their  mouths 
21  Save  me  from  the  lion's  mouth :  for  thou 

6  host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth 
1  his  praise  (shall)  continually  (be)  in  mym. 

21  they  opened  their  mouth  wide  against  me 
3  The  words  of  his  mouth  (are)  iniquity  and 
30  The  mouth  of  the  righteous  speaketh  wi. 

13  as  a  dumb  man  (that)  openeth  not  his  m. 

14  as  a  man.  .in  whose  mouth  (are)  no  repr. 

1  I  will  keep  my  mouth  with  a  bridle,  wh. 

9  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth 

3  And  he  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth 

3  My  mouth  shall  speak  of  wisdom;  and  the 

16  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in  thy  mou.? 

19  Thou  givest  thy  mouth  to  evil,  and  thy 

15  and  my  mouthshall  show  forth  thy  praise 

2  0  God;  give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  mouth 
21  (The  words)  of  his  mouth  were  smoother 

6  Break  their  teeth,  O  God,  in  their  mouth 

7  Behold,  they  belch  out  with  their  mouth 

12  (For)  the  sin  of  their  mouth,  .the  words 

4  they  bless  with  their  mouth,  but  they  cur. 

5  my  mouth  shall  praise,  .with  joyful  lips 

11  the  mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall 

14  my  lips  have  uttered,  and  my  mouth  hath 

17  I  cried  unto  him  with  my  mouth,  and  he 

15  let  not  the  pit  shut  her  mouth  upon  me 

8  Let  my  mouth  be  filled  (with)  thy  praise 

15  My  mouth  shall  show  forth  thyrighteou. 
g  They  set  their  mouth  against  the  heavens 

1  incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my  mo. 

2  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  a  parable  :  I  w. 
30  while  their  meat  (was)  yet  in  their  mouths 
36  they  did  flatter  him  with  their  mouth,  and 

10  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it 

1  with  my  mouth  will  I  make  known  thy 
5  his  wonders,  and  the  judgments  of  his  m 

42  and  all  iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth 

2  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  and  the  mouth 

30  I  will  greatly  praise.  .Lord  with  my  mo. 

5  They  have  mouths,  but  they  speak  not 

13  I  declared  all  the  judgments  of  thy  mouth 

43  take  not  the  word  of  truth,  .out  of  my  m. 
72  The  law  of  thy  mouth  (is)  better  uuto  me 
88  so  shall  I  keep  the  testimony  of  thy  mo. 
103  (yea,  sweeter)  than  honey  to  my  mouth! 
108  Accept,  .the  free  will  offerings  of  my  mo. 
131  I  opened  my  mouth,  and  panted:  fori  1. 

2  Then  was  our  mouth  filled  with  laughter 

16  They  have  mouths,  but  they  sneak  not 

17  neither  is  there,  .breath  in  their  mouths 

4  when  they  hear  the  words  of  thy  mouth 

3  Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  mouth 

7  Our  bones  are  scattered  at  the  grave's  m. 
8,  11  Whose  mouth  speaketh  vanity,  and 
21  My  mouth  shall  speakthe  praise  of  the  L. 

6  out  of  his  mouth,  .knowledge  and  under. 

5  decline  from  the  words  of  my  mouth 

24  Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth,  and 

7  and  depart  not  from  the  words  of  my  m. 
2  Thou  art  snared  with  the  words  of  thy  m. 
2  thou  art  taken  with  the  words  of  thy  m. 

i2  wicked  man,  walketh  with  a  froward  m. 
24  Hearken,  .attend  to  the  words  of  my  m. 

8  All  the  words  of  my  mouth  (are)  in  righ. 

13  the  evil  way,  and.  .froward  mouth,  do  1 
6,  11  violence  covereththe  mouth  of  the  w. 

11  The  mouth  of  a  righteous  (man  is)  a  well 

14  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  near  destru. 

31  The  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth  forth  wis. 

32  but  the  mouth  of  the  wicked . .  f  rowardness 

9  An  hypocrite  with  (his)  mouth  destroyeth 
11  overthrown  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked 

6  the  mouth  of  the  upright  shall  deliver 
14  shall  be  satisfied,  .by  the  fruit  of  (his)  m. 

2  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  (his)  m. 

3  He  that  keepeth  his  mouth  keepeth  his 

3  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  a  rod  of 
2  the  mouth  of  fools  poureth  out  foolishness 

14  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  on  foolishness 
23  A  man  hath  joy  by  the  answer  of  his  mo. 

28  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  poureth  out  evil 
10  his  mouth  transgresseth  not  in  judgment 
23  The  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  his  mouth 
26  laboureth . .  f  orhis  mouth  craveth  it  of  him 

4  The  words  of  a  man's  mouth  (are  as)  deep 

6  A  fool's,  .mouth  calleth  for  strokes 

7  A  fool's  mouth  (is)  his  destruction,  and 

20  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of'his  m. 


MOUTH 


G77 


MOVABLE 


Prov  19.  24  will  not  so  much  as  bring  it  to  his  mouth 
19.  28  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  devoureth  iuiq. 
20. 17  but.,  his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  gravel 

21.  23  Whoso  keepeth  his  mouth  and  his  tongue 

22.  14  The  mouth  of  strange  women  (is)  a  deep 
24.    7  a  fool . .  openeth  not  his  mouth  in  the  gate 
26.    7,  9  so  (is)  a  parable  in  the  mouth  of  fools 
26.  15  it  grieveth  him  to  bring  it.  .to  his  mouth 

26.  28  and  a  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin 

27.  2  Let.  .man  praise  thee,  .not  thine  own  m. 
30.  20  she  eateth,  and  wipeth  her  mouth,  and 

30.  32  thought  evil,  (lay)  thine  hand  upon  thy  m. 

31.  8  Open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  iu  the  cause 
31.  9  Open  thy  mouth,  judge  righteously,  and 
31.  26  Sheopeneth  her  mouth  with  wisdom;  and 

£ccl.  5.    2  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let  not 

5.  6  Suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh 

6.  7  All  the  labour  of  man  (is)  for  his  mouth 
10.  12  The  words  of  a  wise  man's  mouth  (are) 
10.  13  The  beginning  of  the  words  of  his  mouth 

Song  1.    2  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  m. 
Isa.     1.  20  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

5.  14  and  opened  her  mouth  without  measure 

6.  7  he  laid  (it)  upon  my  mouth,  and  said,  Lo 
g.  12  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  open  mouth 
9.  17  evil  doer,  and  every  moutli  speaketh  folly 

10.  14  that  moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the  mo. 

1 1.  4  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth 
19.    7  by  the  brooks,  by  the  mouth  of  the  brooks 

29.  13  as  this  people  draw  near,  .with  their  mo. 

30.  2  That  walk,  .and  have  not  asked  atmym. 
34.  16  for  my  mouth  it  hath  commanded,  and 
40.    5  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spokeu 
45.  23  the  word  is  gone  out  of  my  mouth  (in)  ri. 

48.  3  they  went  forth  out  of  my  mouth,  and  I 

49.  2  he  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  sw. 

51.  16  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth,  and 

52.  15  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him 

53.  7  he  was  afflicted ;  yet  he  opened  not  his  m. 
53.   7  as  a  sheep,  .so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth 
53.    9  neither  (was  any)  deceit  in  his  mouth 
55.  11  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out  of  my  mou. 

57.  4  against  whom  make  ye  a  wide  mouth,  .dra. 

58.  14  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  (it) 

59.  2i  my  words  which  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth 
59.  21  out  of  thy  mouth,  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of 
59.  21  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed's  seed 
62.   2  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  shall  name 

Jer.  1.  9  put  forth  his  hand,  aud  touched  my  mouth 
1.  9  Behold,  I  iiave  put  my  words  in  thy  mo. 
5.  14  I  will  make  my  words  in  thy  mouth  fire 

7.  28  is  perished,  and  is  cut  otf  from  their  mou. 
9.  8  with  his  mouth,  but  in  heart  he  layeth  his 
9.  12  to  whom  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  sp. 
9.  20  let  your  ear  receive  the  word  of  his  mouth 

12.  2  thou  (art)  near  in  their  mouth,  and  far  fr. 

15.  19  from  the  vile,  thou  shalt  be  as  my  moutli 
23. 16  they  speak,  .not  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
32.  4  and  shall  speak  with  him  mouth  to  mouth 
34  3  he  shall  speak  with  thee  mouth  to  mouth 
36.  4  Baruch  wrote  from  the  mouth  of  Jeremi. 
36.    6  which  thou  hast  written  from  my  mouth 

36.  17  How  didst  thou  write  all  these,  .at  hism.? 
36. 18  all  these  words  unto  me  with  his  mouth 

37.  27  Baruch  wrote  at  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah 
36.  32  who  wrote  therein,  from  the  mouth  of  J. 
44.  17  thing  goeth  forth  out  of  our  own  mouth 
44.  25  wives  have  both  spoken  with  your  mouths 

44.  26  shall  no  more  be  named  in  the  mouth  of 

45.  1  written  these  words  in  a  book  at  the  mo. 
48.  28  her  nest  in  the  sides  of  the  hole's  mouth 
51.  44  I  will  bring  forth  out  of  his  mouth  that 

Lam.  2.  16  All  thine  enemies  have  opened  their  mo. 
3.  29  He  putteth  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  so  be 
3.  38  Out  of  the  mouth  of  the  most  High  proc. 
3. 46  All  our  enemies  have  opened  their  mouths 

Eze.  2.  8  open  thy  mouth,  and  eat  that  I  give  thee 
3.  2  So  I  opened  my  mouth,  and  he  caused  me 
3.  3  it  was  in  my  mouth  as  honey  for  sweetness 
3.  17  therefore  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and 

3.  27  I  will  open  thy  mouth,  and  thou  shalt  say 

4.  14  came  then*  abominable  flesh  into  my  mo. 

16.  56  Sodom  was  not  mentioned  by  thy  mouth 
16.  63  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more  because 
21.  22  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter,  to  lift 
24.  27  In  that  day  shall  thy  mouth  be  opened  to 
29.  21  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  mouth 
33.  7  thoushalthearthewordat  mymouth,and 
33.  22  came  and  had  opened  my  mouth,  until  he 
33.  22  my  mouth  wasopened,  and  I  was  no  more 

33.  31  for  with  their  mouth  they  show  much  love 

34.  10  I  will  deliver  my  flock  from  their  mouth 

35.  13  Thus  with  your  mouth  ye  have  boasted 
Dan.  10.    3  neither  came  flesh  nor  wine  in  my  mouth 

10. 16  then  I  opened  my  mouth,  and  spake,  and 
Hos.    2.  1 7  the  names  of  Baalim  out  of  her  mouth,  and 

6.  5  I  have  slain  them  by  the  words  of  my  m. 
Joel    1.    5  new  wine ;  for  it  is  cut  off  from  your  m. 
Amos  3.  12  As  the  shepherd  taketh  out  of  the  mouth 
llic.    3.   5  hethat  putteth  not  into  their  mouths.they 

4.  4  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath 
6. 12  their  tongue  (is)  deceitful  in  their  mouth 

7.  5  keep  the  doors  of  thy  mouth  from  her  that 

7.  16  they  shall  lay  (their)  hand  upon  (their)  m. 
Nah.  3.  12  they  shall  even  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the 
Zeph.  3.  1 3  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found  in  their  mouth 
Zech.  5.    8  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth 

8.  9  these  words  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophets 

9.  7  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  m. 
14.  12  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  mouth 

Mai.    2.    6  The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth,  and 
2.    7  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth 


5.  Mouth,  oiBpum. 

Dan.   4.  31  While  the  word  (was)  in  the  king's  mouth 
6.  17  stone  was  brought,  and  laid  upon  the  m. 

6.  22  hath  shut  the  lions' mouths.that  they  have 

7.  5  three  ribs  in  the  mouth  of  it  between  the 
7.  8  eyes . .  and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things 
7.  20  and  a  mouth  that  spake  very  great  things 

6. Face,  D'23  panim. 

Prov  15. 14  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  on  foolishness 
7. Gate,  jniji  tera. 

Dan.  3.  26  Nebuchadnezzar  came  near  to  the  mouth 
S,  Word,  \6yos  logos. 

Acts  15.  27  shall  also  tell .  .the  same  things  by  mouth 
§.  Mouth,  <rrofj.a  stoma. 

Matt.  4.    4  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God 

5.  2  he  opened  his  mouth,  and  taught  them 
12. 34  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  m. 
13.  35  saying,  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  parables 
15.  8  [draweth  nigh  unto  me  with  their  mouth] 
15.  11  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  de. 
15.  11  but  that  which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth 
15.  17  that  whatsoever  eutereth  in  at  the  moutli 
15.  18  those  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  m. 
17.  27  when  thou  hast  opened  his  mouth,  thou 
18. 16  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witne. 
21. 16  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 

Luke  1. 64  his  mouth  was  opened  immediately,  and 
1.  70  As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  pr. 
4.  22  words  which  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth 

6.  45  for  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  his  m. 
11.  54  seeking  to  catch  something  out  of  his  m. 
19.  22  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee 

21.  15  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  which 

22.  71  for  we  ourselves  have  heard  of  his  own  m. 
Jolinig.  29  put  (it)  upon  hyssop,  and  put  (it)  to  his  m. 
Acts    1.  16  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  mouth  of  David 

3. 18  which  God  before  had  showed  by  the  m. 

3.  21  which  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of 

4.  25  Who  by  the  mouth  of  thy  servant  David 
8.  32  before  his  shearer,  .opened  he  not  his  m. 

8.  35  Philip  opened  his  mouth,  and  began  at  the 

10.  34  Peter  opened  (his)  mouth,  and  said,  Of  a 

11.  8  hath  at  any  time  entered  into  my  mouth 
15.    7  the  Gentiles  by  my  mouth  should  hear 
18. 14  when  Paul  was  now  about  to  open  (his)  m. 

22.  14  and  shouldest  hear  the  voice  of  his  moutli 

23.  2  that  stood  by  him  to  smite  him  on  the  m. 
Bum.  3.  14  Whose  mouth  (is)  full  of  cursing  and  bit. 

3.  19  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all 
ro.  8  The  word  is  nigh  thee . .  iu  thy  mouth,  and 
10.  9  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  L. 
10. 10  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto 
15.  6  That  ye  may  with  one  mind,  .one  mouth 
2  Co.   6. 11  our  mouth  is  open  unto  you,  our  heart  is 

13.  1  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
Eph.  4.  29  communicationproceedoutofyourmouth 
6.  19  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  make 
Col.  3.  8  filthy  communication  out  of  your  mouth 
2  Th.  2.  8  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth 
2  Ti.  4. 17  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
Heb.n.  33  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of 
Jas.    3.    3  we  put  bits  in  the  horses'  mouths,  that 

3. 10  Out  of  the  same  mouth  proceedeth  bless. 

1  Pe.  2.  22  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  m. 

Juds      16  and  their  mouth  speaketh  great  swelling 

Rev.    1. 16  out  of  his  mouth  went  a  sharp  two  edged 

2. 16  against  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth 

3. 16  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth 

9.  17  out  of  theirmouths  issued  fire  and  smoke 

9. 18  brimstone,  which  issued  out  of  their  mo. 

9. 19  theirpoweris  in  their  mouth,  and  in  their 

10.  9  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  sweet  as  honey 
10. 10  and  it  was  iu  my  mouth  sweet  as  honey 

11.  5  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth,  and 

12.  15  And  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  wa. 

12.  16  the  earth  opened  her  moutli, and  swallowed 
12. 16  flood  which  the  dragon  cast  out  his  mouth 

13.  2  bear,  and  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion 
13.    5  there  was  given  unto  him  a  mouth  speak. 

13.  6  he  opened  his  month  in  blasphemy  against 

14.  5  in  their  moutli  was  found  no  guile :  for 
16. 13  like  frogs . .  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon 
16. 13  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and  out  of  the  m. 
19.  15  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that 
19.  21  which  (sword)  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth 

MOUTH,  roof  of  the  — 

Palate,  tjq  chek. 

Job  29. 10  tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth 
Psa.  137.  6  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  m. 
Song  7.  9  the  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  best  wine 
Lam.  4.  4  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth  for  th. 
Eze.   3.  26  thy  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  thy  mouth 

MOUTH,  to  stop  the  — 

To  stop  the  mruth,  ^irto-To^t^w  epistomizo. 

Titus  1.  11  Whose  mouths  must  be  stopped,  who  su. 
MOVE,  to  — 
l.To  move,  tremble,  J^T  zua. 

Esth.  5.    9  that  he  stood  not  up,  nor  moved  for  him 
•2.To  bend,  pan  chaphets. 

Job  40.  17  He  nioveth  his  tail  like  a  cedar:  the  sin. 

3.  To  move  sharply,  y~n  charats. 

Exodn.    7  shall  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue,  against 
Josh  10.  21  none  moved  his  tongue  against  any  of  the 

4.  To  move,  flee,  wander  away,  *nj  nadad. 

Isa.   10.  14  and  there  was  none  that  moved  the  wing 


5.  To  move,  yu  nua. 

1  Sa.  1. 13  only  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not 
Isa.   6.   4  the  posts  of  the  door  moved  at  the  voice 

6. To  cause  tomove,  "»  nua,  5. 

2  Ki.23.  iS  Let  himalone  ;  let  no  man  move  his  bones 

7.  To  cause  to  wave,  *p3  nuph,  5. 

Deut23-  25  thou  shalt  not  move  a  sickle  unto  thy 

8.  To  move,  persuade,  remove,  n?D  suth,  5. 

Josh  15.  18  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field 
Judg.  1.  14  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field 
2  Sa.24.     1  he  moved  David  against  them  to  say,  Go 
2  Ch.18.  31  and  God  moved  them  (to  depart)  from  him 
Job     2.    3  although  thou  movedst  me  against  him 

9.  To  make,  do,  i^y.  abad. 

Ezra   4. 15  that  they  have  moved  sedition  within  the 

10.  To  cause  to  fall,  stumble,  pis  puq,  5. 

Jer.   10.    4  they  fasten  it  with  nails . .  that  it  move  not 
W.To  move,  cause  to  step,  nys paam. 

Judgi3.  25  spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  move  him  at 

12.  To  move,  wink,  pip  qarats. 

Prov  16.  30  moving  his  lips  he  bringeth  evil  to  pass 

13.  To  be  angry,  to  trouble,  tremble,  Tfi  ragaz. 

2  Sa.  7.  10  dwell  in  a  place  of  their  own,  and  move 

22.    8  the  foundations  of  heaven  moved  and  sh. 
Psa.  18.    7  foundations  also  of  the  hills  moved  and 
Mic.    7. 17  they  shall  move  out  of  their  holes  like  w. 

14.  To  move,  shake,  *]rri  rachaph,  3. 

Gen.    1.    2  spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 

15.  To  teem,  bring  forth  abundantly,  f'17  sharats. 
Eze.  47.    9  every  thing  that  liveth,  which  moveth 

16. A  teeming  creature,  y~w  sherets. 

Lev.  11.  10  of  all  that  move  in  the  waters,  and  of  an 
1 7. To  stir  up,  excite,  avaaeloo  anaseio. 

Markis.  n  the  chief  priests  moved  the  people,  that 
IS. To  move,  agitate,  shake,  excite,  Ktvew  kineo. 

Matt  23.   4  will  not  move  them  with  one  of  their  fin. 

Acts  17.  28  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our 
MOVE  lightly,  to  — 
To  move  self  lightly,  t?$  qalal,  7a. 

Jer.     4.  24  they  trembled,  and  all  the  hills  moved  I. 
MOVE  ir.e,  none  of  these  things  — 
To  make  account  of  not  even  one  thing,    ovS€v6s 

Xoyov  ■jroicco  oudenos  logon  poieo. 

Acts  20.  24  none  of  these  things  move  me,  neither  c. 
MOVE,  to  make  -  - 
To  cause  to  move,  TW  nud,  5. 

2  Ej.21.    8  Neither  will  I  make  the  feet  of  Israel  m. 
MOVE  self,  to  — 
To  go  up  and  down,  ^hn  Jialak,  7. 

Prov.  23  31  colour  in  the  cup.  .it  moveth  itself  aright 
MOVABLE  or  moved,  to  be  — 
l.To  shake  self,  be  shaken,  vyi  gnash,  la. 

Jer.  25  16  they  shall  drink,  and  be  moved,  and  be 
46.    7  flood,  whose  waters  are  moved  as  the  riv.? 
46.   8  and  (his)  waters  are  moved  like  the  rivers 

'l.To  be  moved,  o-.n  hum,  2. 

Ruth  1.  19  all  the  city  was  moved  about  them,  and 

3.  To  move,  sound,  make  a  noise,  narj  hamah. 
Song  5.   4  My  beloved.. my  bowels  were  moved  for 

4.  To  move,  slip,  fail,  oio  mot. 

Psa.  46.    6  The  heathen  raged,  the  kingdoms  werem. 
55.  22  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be  m. 

5.  To  be  moved,  aiD  mot,  2. 

1  Ch.16.  30  also  shall  be  stable,  that  it  be  not  moved 

Job    41.  23  firm  in  themselves  ;they  cannot  be  moved 

Psa.  10.    6  hath  said  iu  his  heart,  I  shall  not  be  mo. 

13.    4  that  trouble  me  rejoice  when  I  am  moved 

15.  5  He  that  doeth  these,  .shall  never  be  mo. 

16.  8  is)  at  my  right  hand,  I  shall  not  be  moved 
21.  7  mercy  of  the  most  High  he  shall  not  be  m. 
30.  6  my  prosperity  I  said,  I  shall  never  be  m. 
46.  5  she  shall  not  be  moved  :  God  shall  help 
62.  2  my  defence ;  I  shall  not  be  greatly  moved 
62.  6  He  only,  .my  defence ;  I  shall  not  be  mo. 
93.  1  alsoisestablished.thatitcannotbemoved 
96.  10  shall  be  established  that  it  shall  not  be  m. 

ri2.    6  Surely  he  shall  not  be  moved  for  ever 
Prov  12.    3  the  root  of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  m. 
Isa.  40.  20  a  graven  image,  (that)  shall  not  bemoved 
41.   7  it  with  nails,  (that)  it  should  not  be  moved 

6.^1  moving,  tottering,  Bio  mot. 

Psa.  66.   9  and  suffereth  not  our  feet  to  be  moved 
121.    3  He  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to  be  moved 
7.  To  move  self,  be  moved,  bid  mot,  7. 

Isa.  24. 19  is  clean  dissolved,  the  earth  ismovedexc. 
S.To  shake,  be  moved,  turned,  an  nut 

Psa.  99.    1  The  Lord  reigneth . .  let  the  earth  be  mov. 
9.  To  move,  shake,  wander,  yu  nua. 

Prov.  5.    6  her  ways  are  moveable,  .thou  canst  not 
Isa.     7.    2  his  heart  was  moved,  and  the  heart  of 

7.    2  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with 
19.    1  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  his  pres. 

10.70  be  moved,  "»ru  nathar. 

Job  37.    1  my  heart  trembleth,  and  is  moved  out  of 


MOVED 


678 


MULE 


11.  To  tremble,  he  troubled,  angry,  U"J  ragaz. 

2  Sa.  18.  33  the  king  was  much  moved,  and  went  up 

i  Ch.17.   9  shall  dwell  in  their  place,  andshallbem. 

Isa.  14.    9  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee  to 
12.ro  shake,  tremble,  vyi  raash. 

Jer.  49.  21  The  earth  is  moved  at  the  noise  of  their 

13.  To  be  shaken,  try-)  raash,  2. 

Jer.  50.  46  earth  is  moved,  and  the  cry  is  heard  am. 

14.  To  move,  agitate,  shake,  excite,  klv4o)  kineo. 
Acts  21.  30  all  the  city  was  moved,  and  the  people 
Rev.   6.  14  every  mountain  and  island  were  moved 

15.  To  fawn  upon,  cajole,  aaivca  samo. 

1  Th.  3.    3Thatnomanshouldbemovedbythese  affl. 
16.ro  shake,  agitate,  toss,  <ro\tuw  saleuo. 

Acts    2.  25  my  right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be  mo. 

17.  To  shake,  trouble,  disturb,  aciw  seio. 

Mattai.  10  all  the  city  was  moved,  saying,  Who  is  t.? 

18.  To  bear,  carry,  (pepoi  phero. 

2  I'e.    1.  21  men  of  God  spake,  .moved  by  the  Holy  G. 
MOVED  away,  be  — 

To  move  away,  or  over,  fxeraKtv^co  mciakineo. 

Col.     1.  23  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  g. 
MOVED,  which  cannot  be  — 
Unshaken,  ao-aAevros  asaleutos. 

Heb.  12.  28  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  m. 
MOVED  with  fear,  to  be  — 
To  be  careful,  devout,  £vXaf$4oy.a,t  eulaheomai. 

Heb.  11.    7  moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  to  the 
MOVER  of  — 
To  move,  klvzw  hineo. 

Acts  24.   5  a  mover  of  sedition  among  all  the  Jews 

MOVING  (creature  or  thing)  — 
1. Moving,  TJ  nid. 

Job  16.  s  and  themoving  of  my  lips  should  asswage 

%A  creeping  thing,  vvn  rentes. 

Gen.  9.   3  Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be 
Z.A  teeming  thing,  fna*  she  rets. 

Gen.    1.  20  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and 
4. Movement,  commotion,  klptjo'is  kinesis. 

John  5.    3  fdlk..[waitingforthe  moving  of  the  water] 
MOWER  — 
To  shorten,  reap,  n$$  qatsar. 

Psa.  129.   7  Wherewith  the  mower  filleth  not  his  hand 
MOWTNG,  MOWN"  grass  — 
A  shearing,  mowing,  cut  grass,  la  gez. 

Psa.  72.    6  comedown  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass 

Amos  7.    1  the  latter  growth  after  the  king's  mowings 

MO'-ZA,  Kyto  origin,  offspring. 

1.  A  son  of  Caleb,  son  of  Jephunneh.     B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2.  46  Ephah.  .begat  Haran,  and  M.,  and  Gazez 

2.  A  Benjamite,  descendant  of  Saul.    B.C.  1890. 

1  Ch.   8.  36  Azmaveth,  and  Zimri ;  and  Zimri  begat  M\ 

8.  37  M.  begat  Binea :  Kapha  (was)  his  son,  Ele. 

9.  42  Azmaveth,  and  Zimri ;  andZimri  begat  M. 
9  43  And  M.  begat  Binea;  and  Rephaiah  his 

MO'-ZAH,  nybri. 

A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Rosh,  now  Kulonish  or  Mizzeh. 

Josh.  18.  26  And  Mizpeh,  and  Chephirah,  and  M. 
MUCH  — 
X.Great,  Vila  gadol. 

Isa.   56.  12  shall  be  as  this  day.  .much  more  abundant 

2.TTeavy,  weighty,  133  kabed. 

Exod.  12.  38  and  flocks  and  herds,  (even)  very  much  c. 
Nuni2o.  20  Edom  came  out  against  him  with  much 

S.Abundant,  great,  mighty,  ~i'33  kahbir. 

Job   15.  to  very  aged  men,  much  elder  than  thy  fat. 
31.  25  and  because  mine  hand  had  gotten  much 

A.Mi'ilit,  1K0  meod. 

Gen.  26.  16  Go  from  us  ;  for  thou  art  much  mightier 
-?4.  12  Askmeneversomuchdowry  and  gift,  and 
Ruth  1.  13  it  giveth  me  much  for  your  sakes,  that 

1  9a.  tS.  30  more  wisely,  so  that  his  name  was  much 

19.   2  Jonathan,  Saul's  son,  delighted  much  in 

2  Sa.  14.  25  there  was  none  to  be  so  much  praised  as 
Neb.   6.  16  they  were  much  cast  down  in  their  own 
Psa.no.  107  I  am  afflicted  very  much:  quicken  me,  O 
Jer.     2.  36  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  cha. 

5. Abundance,  increase,  H3"ip  mvrbak. 

Ezc.  23.  32  and  had  in  derision  ;  it  containeth  much 
6. Bony,  substantial,  DHSJJ  atsum. 

Psa.  35.  iS  I  will  praise  thee  among  much  people 

7.  To  spread,  7fy3  pasah, 

kev,  13.  35  if  the  scall  spread  much  in  the  skin  after 

8.  Many,  much,  ni  rah. 

Gen.  30.  43  had  much  cattle,  and  maid  servants,  and 
50.  20  as  (it  is)  this  day,  to  save  mnch  people  a. 

Nunisi.   6  bit  the  people;  and  much  people  of  ferae! 

De-ut.  3.  19  your  cattle.  .1  know  that  ye  have  much 
28.  38  Thou  shalt  carry  much  seed  out  into  the 

Joab.22.    3  Return  with  much  riches  unto  your  tents 
22.    8  and  with  very  much  cattle,  with  silver 

2  Sa.  13.  34  there  came  much  people  by  the  way  of  the 

1  Ki.  10.    2  and  very  much  gold,  and  precious  stones 

2  K.i.12.  m  when  they  saw.  .much  money  in  theche^t 


very  much  brass,  wherewith  Solomon  m. 
because  thou  hast  shed  much  blood  upon 
he  had  much  business  in  the  cities  of  J. 
in  gathering  of  the  spoil,  it  was  so  much 
when  they  saw  that,  .much  money,  the 
three  thousand  of  them,  and  took  much 
he  had  much  cattle,  both  in  the  low  cou. 
and  took  also  away  much  spoil  from  them 
there  assembled  at  Jerusalem  much  peo. 
there  was  gathered  much  people  together 
kings  of  Assyria  come,  and  find  much  w.? 
than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold;  sw. 
In  the  house  of  the  righteous  (is)  much 
and  he  hearkened  diligently  with  much  he. 
that  they  might  give  him  horses  and  m. 
shall  mock  thee,  .infamous,  .much  vexed 
horsemen,  and  companies,  and  much  pe. 
and  their  left  hand  ;  and . .  much  cattle 
:,  XI  rob. 

gate . .  and  on  the  wall  of  Ophel  he  built  m. 
a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by  much 
With  her  much  fair  speech  she  caused  him 
Much  food  (is  in)  the  tillage  of  the  poor 
much  increase  (is)  by  the  strength  of  the 
in  much  wisdom  (is)  much  grief ;  and  he 


1  Ch.18.    8 

22.    8 

2  Ch.17.  13 

20.  25 

24.  11 

25.  13 
26. 10 
28.  8 
30-  13 
32-  4 
32-    4 

Psa.  19. 10 
Prov  15.  6 
Isa.  21.  7 
Eze.  17. 15 
22.    5 

26.  7 
Jon.    4.  11 

9.Abunda?ict 
2  Ch.27.  3 
Psa.  33.  16 
Prov.  7.  21 

13-  23 

14.  4 
Eccl.  1. 18 

10.  Tocausetomultiply,makeabuiidant,XT\rabah,5. 

Gen.  41.  49  Joseph  gathered  corn,  .very  much,  until 

Josh  13.    1  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be 

22.    8  with  iron,  and  very  much  raiment:  divide 

2  Sa.    8.    8  And.  .king  David  took  exceeding  much 

1  Ki.   4.  29  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom. .  exceeding  m. 

2  Ki.10.  18  Baal  a  little.  Jehu  snail  serve  him  much 

21.  6  wrought  much  wickedness  in  the  sight  of 
21. 16  Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood  very  much 

1  Ch.  20.    2  he  brought  also  exceedingmuch  spoil  out 

2  Ch.14.  13  and  they  earned  away  very  much  spoil 

32.  27  Hezekiah  had  exceeding  much  riches  and 

33.  6  wrought  much  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
Nell.  4.  10  is  decayed,  and  (there  is)  much  rubbish 
Prov  25.  27  not  good  to  eat  much  honey  ;so.  .to  search 
Eccl.  5.  12  (is)  sweet,  whether  lie  eat  little  or  much 

5. 17  much  sorrow  and  wrath  with  his  sickness 
5.  20  he  shall  not  much  remember  the  days  of 

9.  18  war :  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  g. 

12.  [2  and  much  study  (is)  a  weariness  of  the  ti. 
Isa.   30.  33  the  pile  thereof  (jb)  fire  and  much  wood 
Jer.  40. 12  gathered  wine  and  summer  fruits  very  m. 
Hag.    1.    6  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  little 

i.   9  Ye  looked  for  much,  and,  lo,  (it  came)  to 

11. Mitch,  many,  great,  **&  saggU 

Dan.   4.  12  the  fruit  thereof  much,  and  in  it(was)m. 
7.    5  they  said  thus  unto  it,  Arise,  devour  m. 

7.  28  my  cogitations  much  troubled  me,  and  my 

1*2.  Sufficient,  Iko.v6s  hikanos. 

Luke  7. 12  and  much  people  of  the  city  was  with  her 

Acts    5.  37  Judas. .drewaway[much]peopleafterhim 

11.  24  and  much  people  was  added  unto  the  L. 

11.  26  with  the  church,  and  taught  much  people 
19  26  hath  persuaded  and  tinned  away  much  p. 

27.  9  Now,  when  much  time  was  spent,  and 

13.il/ore,  rather,  fxaXXov  mallon. 

Matt.  6.  26  the  fowls.  .Are  ye  not  much  better  than 
1  i.Mwh,  many,  ttoXvs  polus. 

Matt  6.  30  not  much  more,  .you,  O  ye  of  little  faith 

13.  5  stony  places,  where  they  had  not  much 
26.   9  thisointmentmighthavebeen  soldfor  m. 

Mark  1.  45  he  went  out,  ami  began  to  publish  (it)  in. 

4.  5  stony  ground,  where  it  had  not  much  ea. 
5. 10  he  besought  him  much  that  he  would  not 

5.  21  other  side,  much  people  gathered  unto  him 
5.  24  much  people  followed  him,  and  thronged 
6. 34  Jesus,  when  he  came  out,  saw  much  pe. 

Luke  7.  47  Her  sins,  .are  forgiven;  for  she  loved  mu. 

8.  4  when  much  people  were  gathered  tog.  7.1  c 

9.  37  down  from  the  hill,  much  people  met  him 

10.  40  Martha  was  cumbered  about  much  serving 

12.  19  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  form. 
12.  48  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  req. 
12.  48  to  whom  men  have  committed  much,  of 
16. 10  that  which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  mu. 
16.  10  is  unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also  in  much 

John  3.  23  because  there  was  much  water  there :  and 
6. 10  Now  there  was  much  grass  in  the  place 
7.  12  there  was  much  murmuring  among  the  p. 
12.   9  Much  people  of  the  Jews  therefore  knew 
12.  12  On  the  next  day  much  people  that  were 
12.  24  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit 

14.  30  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you 

15.  5  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit :  for 
15.    8  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much 

Acts  10.    2  which  gave  much  alms  to  the  people,  and 

14.  22  that  we  must  through  much  tribulation 

15.  7  when  there  had  been  much  disputing.  Pe. 
x6.  16  which  brought  her  masters  much  gain  by 
18.  10  to  hurt  thee :  for  I  have  much  people  in 
18.  27  helped  them  much  which  had  believed 
20.   2  and  had  given  them  much  exhortation,  he 

26.  24  Paul.,  much  learning  cloth  make  thee  mad 

27.  10  this  voyage  will  be  with  hurt  and  much 
Rom.  3.    2  Much  every  way:  chiefly,  because  that 

5.  9  Much  more  then,  being  now  just  iliedl  iy  his 
5.  10  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be 
5.  15  much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift 
5. 17  much  more  the;  which  receive  abundance 
9.  22  endured  with  much  long  suffering  the  v. 
15. 22  I  have  been  [much]  hindered  from  coming 

16.  6  Greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour 
16. 12  [Persis,  which  laboured  much  Lathe  Lord] 


r  Co. 


2  Co. 


Phil. 
1  Th. 


iTi. 
Ti. 


3  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  tr. 
12.  22  much  more  those  members  of  the  body 
16.  19  Aquila  and  Priscilla  salute  you  much  in 

2.  4  For  out  of  much  affliction  and  anguish  of 

3.  9  much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  rig. 
3.  11  much  more  that  which  remaineth  (is)  gl. 
6.  4  as  the  ministers  of  God,  in  much  patience 
8.  4  Praying  us  with  much  entreaty  that  we 
8. 1 5  He  that  (had  gathered)  much  had  nothing 
8.  22  now  much  more  diligent,  upon  the  great 
2.  12  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence,  work 
1.    5  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance 

1.  6  having  received  the  word  in  much  afflict. 

2.  2  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  contention 

3.  8  not  given  to  much  wine,  not  greedy  of  fi. 

4.  14  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much 
Titus  2.  3  not  given  to  much  wine,  teachers  of  good 
Phm.  8  though  I  might  be  muchbold  in  Christ  to 
Heb.  12.    9  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection 

12.  25  much  more  (shall  not)  we  (escape)  if  we 
Jas.     5.  16  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much 

1  Pe.   1.    7  being  much  more  precious  than  of  gold 
Rev.    5.    4  I  wept  [much],  because  no  man  was  found 

8.    3  there  was  given  unto  him  much  incense 
19.    i  I  heard  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in 
[See  also  And,  as,   discouraged,   displeased,   half  so, 
heed,  how,  love,  more,  observed,  perplexed,  over,  pain, 
pained,  so,  speaking,   sufficient,   too,  twice  as,  very, 
work.  ] 

MUCH,  to  ask,  gather,  take,  or  yield  — 
To  cause  to  multiply ,  make  abundant,?vx}  rabah,  3, 
Gen.  34. 12  Ask  me  never  so  much  dowry  and  gift,  and 
Exod  16.  18  he  that  gathered  much  had  nothing  over 
Neh.   9.  37  it  yieldeth  much  increase  unto  the  kings 
Jer.     2.  22  For  though  thou . .  take  thee  much  soap 
MUCH  abroad  — 
To  spread,  be  spread,  rfy^pasalu 

Lev.  13.    7  if  the  scab  spread  much  abroad  in  the  s. 

13.  22  if  it  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin,  then 

13.  27  if  it  be  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin 

MUCH  less,  how  — 

How  much  less,  a1?  '?  f]X  aph  Id  lo. 

2  Ch.32.  15  how  much  less  shall  yourGod  deliveryou 

MUCH  more  — 

1 .  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  abundan  t,  rran  rabah,  5. 

Exod36.    5  The  people  bring  much  more  than  enough 

2  Ch.25.   g  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more 
2.7*0  {cause  to)  add,  *]p;  yasaph,  5. 

1  Sa.  20. 13  The  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jona. 
MUCH  perplexed,  to  be  — 
7*0  be  in  doubt  or  perplexity,  dtairopea  diaporeo. 

Luke24.   4  as  they  were  much  perplexed  thereabout 
MUCH  set  by,  to  be  — 
To  be  great,  hji  gadal, 

1  Sa.  26.  24  so' let  my  life  be  much  set  by  in  the  eyes 

MUCH,  to  be  so  — 

To  be  many,  abundant,  rryi  rabah. 

Gen.  43.  34  Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  so  much 

MUCH,  too — ■ 

1.7*0  cause  to  or  let  remain  over,  in;  yathar,  5. 
Exod3(5.    7  for  all  the  work  to  make  it,  and  too  much 

2.  Many,  much,  abundant,  zn  rab. 

Numx6.    3,  7  (Ye  take)  too  much  upon  you 

Josh.  19.    9  the  part  ot.Judah  was  too  much  for  them 

1  Ki.  12.  28  It  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jems. 

MUCH,  very  — 

Much,  many,  abundant,  i~i  rab. 

2  Ch.32.  29  for  God  had  given  him  substance  very  m. 

MUFFLERS  — 

A  veil,  muffler,  Sjh  raal. 

Isa.     3. 19  the  chains,  and  the  bracelets,  and  the  m. 
MULBERRY  TEEE  — 
Baka  tree,  mulberry,  X33  baka. 

2  Sa.    5.  23  upon  them  over  against  the  mulberry  trees 
5.  24  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees 

1  Ch.14. 14  upon  them  overagainstthemulberry  trees 

14.  15  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees 
MULE  — 

1 .  A  mule,  separate  one,  "ns  pered. 

2  Sa.  13.  29  every  man  gat  him  up  upon  his  mule,  and 

18.    9  Absalom  rode  upon  a  mule,  and  the  mule 
18.    9  the  mule  that  (was)  under  him  went  away 

1  Ki.io.  25  spices,  horses,  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by 

18.    5  find  grass  to  save  the  horses  and  mules  al. 

2  Ki.    5.  17  be  given  to  thy  servant  two  mules"  burden 

1  Ch.12.  40  bread  on  asses,  and  on  camels,  and  on  m. 

2  Ch.  9.  24  spices,  horses  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by 
Ezra  2.  66  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  Ave 
\eh.  7.  6S  their  mules,  two  hundred  forty  and  Ave 
Tsa.  32.  9  Be  ye  not  as  the  horse,  for)  as  the  mule 
Isa.  66.  20  in  litters,  and  upon  mules,  and  upon  sw. 
Eze.  27. 14  traded,  .with  horses,  .horsemen  and  mu. 
Zech.14.  15  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the.  .mule,  of 

2.  A  female  mule,  rtr^peirdah. 

1  Ki.  1.  33  to  ride  upon  mine  own  mule,  and  bring 
1.  38  Solomon  to  ride  upon  king  David's  mule 
1.  44  have  caused  him  to  ride  upon  the  king's  m. 

:"■>..!  swift  beast,  courser,  ej3"!  rekesh. 

Esth.  8.  10  riders  on  mules,  camels,  (and)  young  dro. 
3.  14  the  posts  that  rode  upon  mules  (and)  ca. 


MULTIPLIED 


07 'J 


MULTITUDE 


4.  Warm  springs,  n?:.  yemim. 

Gen.  36.  24  that  found  the  mules  in  the  wilderness 

MULTIPLIED,  to  be  — 

1.2*0  be  many,  multiply,  33*1  r&bab. 

Gen.    6.   1  when  men  began  to  multiply  on  the  face 
Job  35.    6  or  (if)  thy  transgressions  be  multiplied 
Psa.  38.  19  they  that  hate  me  wrongfully  are  raultip. 
Isa.   59.  12  our  transgressions  are  multiplied  before 

2.  To  be  many,  more,  abundant,  n:n  rabah. 

Exod  11.   9  that  my  wonders  may  be  multiplied  in  the 
Deut.  8.  13  is  multiplied,  and  all  that  thou  hast  is  m. 

11.  21  That  your  days  may  be  multiplied,  and 
1  Ch.  5.  9  because  then-  cattle  were  multiplied  in 
Job  27.  14  If  his  children  be  multiplied,  (it  is)  for 
Psa.  16.  4  Their  sorrows  shall  be  multiplied  (that) 
107.  38  so  that  they  are  multiplied  greatly,  and 
Prov.  9.  11  by  me  thy  days  shall  be  multiplied,  and 
29. 16  "When  the  wicked  are  multiplied,  transg. 
Jer.  3.  16  when  ye  be  multiplied  and  increased  in 
Eze.  31.   5  his  boughs  were  multiplied,  and  his  bran. 

3.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  abundant,  n3"i  rabah,  5. 
Eze.  21.  15  heart  may  faint,  and  (their)  ruins  be  rnul. 

1.  To  become  great  or  many,  nj^  sega. 

Dan.   4.    1  unto  all  people..  Peace  be  multiplied  unto 
6. 25  unto  all  people . .  Peace  be  multiplied  unto 

5.  To  multiply,  increase,  tt\7}9v!/qj  plethuno. 

Acts    6.    1  when  the  number  of  the  disciples  was  in. 
MULTIPLY  — 
1. Abundant,  21  rah. 

Exod23.  29  beast  of  the  field  multiply  against  thee 
2.A  myriad,  ten  thousand,  ng^l  rebtbah. 

Eze.  16.   7  I  have  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  the  bud 
MULTIPLY,  to  — 

1.7*0  multiply,  multitude,  )VSn  or  '^nhamon,  haman. 
Eze.    5.    7  Because  ye  multiplied  more  than  the  na. 
2.7*0  multiply,  heap  up,  T33  kabar,  5. 

Job  35.  16  he  multiplieth  words  without  knowledge 
3.  7*o  multiply,  make  abundant,  TfljJ  athar,  5. 

Eze.  35.  13  have  multiplied  your  words  against  me 
4. To  be  many,  abundant,  nan  rabah. 

Gen.  1.  22  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  aud  fill  the  w. 
1.  22  and  let  fowl  multiply  in  the  earth 
1.  28  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish 
8. 17  be  fruitful,  and  multiply  upon  the  earth 
9.  1  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish 
9.  7  And  you,be  ye  fruitful, and  multiply;  bring 
9.  7  forth  abundantly  in  the  earth,  and  multi. 
35. 11  I  (am)God  Almighty ;  be  fruitful  and  m. 

47.  27  Israel,  -grew,  and  multiplied  exceedingly 
Exod.  1.    7  increased  abundantly,  and  multiplied,  and 

1.  10  lest  they  multiply,  and  it  come  to  pass,  that 
1. 12  But.  .the  more  they  multiplied  and  grew 

1.  20  the  people  multiplied,  and  waxed  very  m. 
Deut.  S.    1  that  ye  may  live,  and  multiply,  and  go  in 

8.  13  And.  .thy  herds  and  thy  flocks  multiply 
30.  16  that  thou  mayest  live  and  multiply :  and 

5.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  abundant,  nan  rabah,  5. 

Gen.  3.  16  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  aud  thy 
16. 10  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  exceedingly,  that 
1 7.  2  covenant . .  and  will  multiply  thee  exceed. 
17.  20  will  multiply  him  exceedingly;  twelve  p. 

22.  17  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as 
26.  24  will  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thy  seed,  for 
28.   3  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply  thee,  that 

48.  4  I  will  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply 
Exod.  7.    3  multiply  my  signs  and  my  wonders  in  the  1. 

32.  13  I  will  multiply  your  seed  as  the  stars  of 
Lev.  26.    9  make  yon  fruitful,  and  multiply  you,  and 
Deut.  1.  10  The  Lord  your  God  hath  multiplied  you 

7.  13  he  will  love  thee,  and  bless  thee,  and  m. 
13.  17  multiply  thee,  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy 
17. 16  he  shall  not  multiply  horses  to  himself 
17. 16  to  the  eud  that  he  should  multiply  horses 
17.  17  Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself 
17.  17  neither  shall  he  greatly  multiply  to  him. 

28.  63  to  do  you  good,  and  to  multiply  you ;  so 
30.   5  he  will  do  thee  good,  and  multiply  thee 

Josh.24.  3  and  multiplied  his  seed,  and  gave  him  I. 
1  Ch.  4.  27  neither  did  all  their  family  multiply,  like 
Neh.  9.  23  Their  children  also  multipliedst  thou  as 
Job     9.  17  and  multiplieth  my  wounds  without  cause 

29.  18  and  I  shall  multiply .  .days  as  the  sand 
34.  37  and  multiplieth  his  words  against  God 

9.  3  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation,  (aud) 

30.  19 1  will  multiply  them,  and  they  shall  not 
33. 22  so  will  I  multiply  the  seed  of  David  my 
ie.  6  Ye  have  multiplied  your  slain  in  this  city 
16. 25  to  every  one  that  passed  by,  and  niultip. 
16.  29  Thou  hast  moreover  multiplied  thy  forn. 
16.  51  thou  hast  multiplied  thine  abominations 

23.  19  Yet  she  multiplied  her  whoredoms,  inca. 
36.  10  I  will  multiply  men  upon  you,  all  the  ho. 
36.  11  I  will  multiply  upon  you  man  and  beast 

36,  30  I  will  multiply  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  and 

37.  26  I  will  place  them,  and  multiply  them,  and 

2.  8  wine,  and  oil,  and  multiplied  her  silver 

8.  14  and  Judah  hath  multiplied  fenced  cities 
12.  10  I  have  multiplied  visions,  and  used  sim. 

Amos  4.  4  at  Gilgal  multiply  transgression ;  and  b. 
N  ah.  3. 16  Thou  hast  multiplied  thy  merchants  above 

6.  7*0  multiply,  increase,  irA^fltW  plethuno. 

Acts  6.  7  the  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied  in 
7.  17  the  people  grew  and  multiplied  in  Egypt 


Isa, 
Jer. 


Eze. 


Hos. 


29. 
29. 
29. 
32. 
3- 


Acts    9.  31  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  mu. 

12.  24  But  the  word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied 
2  Co.  9. 10  multiply  your  seed  sown,  aud  increase  the 
Heb.   6.  14  Surely,  .multiplying  I  will  multiply  thee 

1  Pe.   1.    2  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  be  multiplied 

2  Pe.  1.    2  Grace  aud  peace  be  multiplied  unto  you 
Jude        2  Mercy  unto  you,  and  peace,  and  love,  be  m. 

MULTIPLYING,  to  make  to  multiply  — 

To  cause  to  multiply,  make  numerous,  ni"i  rabah,  5. 

Gen.  22.  17  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed 
26.   4  I  will  make  thy  seed  to  multiply  as  the  . 
MULTITUDE  — 
X.A  multitude,  pox  anion. 

Jer.   46.  25  Behold,  I  will  punish  the  multitude  of 

52. 15  earned  away,  .the  rest  of  the  multitude 
2.  A  multitude,  noise,  store,  |ion  hamon. 

Judg.4.    7  with  his  chariots,  and  his  multitude  ;  and 

1  Sa.14. 16  and,  behold,  the  multitude  melted  away 

2  Sa.  6.  19  among  the  whole  multitude  of  Israel,  as 

1  Ki.20.  13  Hast  thou  seen  all  this  great  multitude  ? 

20.  28  will  I  deliver  all  thisgreat  multitude  into 

2  Ki.    7.  13  as  all  the  multitude  of  Israel  that  are  left 

7. 13  as  all  the  multitude  of  the  Israelites  that 

25.  11  withthe  remnant  of  the  multitude,  did  N. 

2  Ch.13.   8  ye  (be)  a  great  multitude,  and.  .with  you 

14. 11  in  thy  name  we  goagainst  this  multitude 
20.  2  There  cometh  a  great  multitude  against 
20.  15  nor  dismayed  by  reason  of  this  great  mu. 
20.  24  they  looked  unto  the  multitude,  and,  be. 
32.    7  norforallthemultitudethat(is)withhim 

Job  31.  34  Did  I  fear  a  great  multitude,  or  did  the 

39.   7  He  scorneth  the  multitude  of  the  city,  n. 

Psa.  42.   4  fori  had  gone  with  the  multitude  ;  I  went 

Isa.     5. 13  and  their  multitude  dried  up  with  thirst 

5.  14  their  glory,  and  their  multitude,  and  their 

13.  4  The  noise  of  a  multitude  in  the  mountains 
16.  14  be  contemned,  with  all  that  great  multi. 

17. 12  Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many  people 

29.  5  Moreover  the  multitude  of  thy  strangers 
5  the  multitude  ofthe  terrible  ones .  .as  ch. 

7  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations 

8  so  shall  the  multitude  of  all  the  uations 
14  the  multitude  of  the  city  shall  be  left ;  the 

Jer.    3.  23  from  the  hills .  .the  multitude  of  mount. 

10.  13  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heavens,  and 
49.  32  and  the  multitude  of  their  cattle  a  spoil 

51. 16  (is)  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heavens 
51.  42  she  is  covered  with  the  multitude  of  the 

Eze.     7.  11  nor  of  their  multitude,  nor  any  of  theirs 

7.  12  for  wrath  (is)  upon  all  the  multitude  th. 

7.  13  vision  (is)  toucliing  the  whole  multitude 

7.  14  my  wrath  (is)  upon  all  the  multitude  th. 

23.  42  a  voice  of  a  multitude  being  at  ease  (was) 

29. 19  he  shall  take  her  multitude,  and  take  her 

30.  4  they  shall  take  away  her  multitude,  and 

30.  10 1  will  also  make  the  multitude  of  Egypt 

30. 15  and  I  will  cut  off  the  multitude  of  No 

31.  2  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and  to  his  multi. 

31.  18  This  (is)  Pharaoh  arid  all  his  multitude 
32. 12  will  I  cause  thy  multitude  to  fall,  the  ter. 
32. 12  all  the  multitude  thereof  shall  be  destro. 

32. 16  for  Egypt,  and  for  all  her  multitude,  saith 
32. 18  Son  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  E. 

32.  20  to  the  sword :  draw  her  and  all  her  multi. 
32.  24  There  (is)  Elam  and  all  her  multitude  ro. 
32.  25  in  the  midst  of  the  slain  with  all  her  mu. 
32.  26  Meshech,  Tubal,  and  all  her  multitude 
32.  31  shall  be  comforted  over  all  his  multitude 
32.  32  Pharaoh  and  all  his  multitude,  saith  the 
39.  ii  there  shall  they  bury  Gog,  and  all  Ins  in. 

Dan.  10.    6  voice  of  his  words  like  the  voice  of  a  mu. 
11. 10  shall  assemble  a  multitude  of  great  forces 

11.  11  he  shall  set  forth  a  great  multitude ;  but 
11.  11  the  multitude  shall  be  given  into  his  hand 
11. 12  when  he  hath  taken  away  the  multitude 
11.  13  shall  set  forth  a  multitude  greater  than 

Joel    3. 14  Multitudes,  multitudes  in  the  valley  ofde. 

3..1  living  creature,  beast,  desire,  *n  chai. 

Psa.  74. 19  the  soul  of  thy  turtle  dove  unto  the  mul. 
±.Full,  ttbo  male. 

Jer.   12.  6  they  have  called  a  multitude  after  thee 
ET.  Fulness,  t&o  melo. 

Gen.  48.  19  his  seed  shall  become  a  multitude  of  na. 

Isa.   31.    4  when  a  multitude  of  shepherds  is  called 
6.  Abundance,  increase,  n\STTb  marbith. 

2  Ch.30.  18  a  multitude  of  the  people.. many  of  Eph. 
7.-4  thick  mass,  crowd,  tjd  sak. 

Psa.  42.    4  fori  had  gone  withthe  multitude;  I  went 
8.  Company,  swarm,  niu  edah. 

Psa.  68.  30  the  multitude  of  the  bulls,  with  the  calves 
9.A  congregation,  convention,  yn^qahal. 

Gen.  28.    3  that  thou  mayest  be  a  multitude  of  people 
48.   4 1  will  make  of  thee  a  multitude  of  people 

Jer.  44 . 1 5  a  great  multitude,  e veu  all  the  people  that 

10. Abundance,  3*1  rab. 

Exodi2.  38  a  mixed  multitude  went  up  also  with  them 

23.    2  Thou  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to.  .evil 

Num  32.    1  Gad  had  a  very  great  multitude  of  cattle 

2  Ch.  1.9  a  people  like  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  mu. 

Psa.  97.    1  let  the  multitude  of  isles  be  glad  (thereof) 
109.  30  yea,  I  will  praise  him  amoug  the  mul  tit. 
Eze.  31.    5  because  of  the  multitude  of  waters,  when 

11. Abundance,  21  rob. 

Gen.  16.  10  that  it  shall  not  be  numbered  for  multi. 


Gen.  30.  30  and  it  is  (now)  increased  unto  a  multitude 
32.  12  which  cannot  be  numbered  for  multitude 

48.  16  let  them  grow  into  a  multitude  in  the  mi. 
Lev.  25.  16  According  to  the  multitude  of  years  thotz 
Deut.  1.  10  this  day  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multi. 

10.  22  made  thee  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  mn_ 
28.  62  ye  were  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multi. 

Josh.  n.    4  the  sand  that  (is) upon  the  sea  shore  inmu. 

Judg.  6.  5  and  they  came  as  grasshoppers  for  multi. 
7.  12  in  the  valley  like  grasshoppers  for  multi t. 

7.  12  as  the  sand  by  the  sea  side  for  multitude 

1  9a.  13.   5  the  sand  whk-h  (is)on  the  sea  shore  in  nt 

2  Sa.  17. 11  as  the  sand  that  (is)  by  the  sea  for  multi. 

1  Ki.   3.    8  cannot  be  numbered  nor  counted  for  mu. 

4.  20  as  the  sand  which  (is)  by  the  sea  in  mult. 

8.  5  could  not  be  told  nor  numbered  for  mul. 

2  Ch.  5.   6  could  not  be  told  nor  numbered  for  mul. 
Esth.  5.  11  multitude  of  his  children,  and  all.,  where. 

10.  3  accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren 
Job  11.    2  Should  not  the  multitude  of  words  be  an. 

32.  7  multitude  of  years  should  teach  wisdom 
35.   9  By  reason  ofthe  multitude  of  oppressions 

Psa.    5.    7  thy  house  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy 

5.  10  cast  them  out  in  the  multitude  of  their' 

33.  16  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude  - 

49.  6  boast  themselves  in  the  multitude  of  their 
51.    1  according  unto  the  multitude  of  thy  ten. 

69. 13  0  God,  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy  hear 
69. 16  ace.  to  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mere. 
94.  19  In  the  multitude  of  my  thoughts  within 

106.    7  they  remembered  not  the  multitude  of  thy 
106.  45  repented  according  to  the  multitude  of 
Prov  10.  19  In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wautetli 

11. 14  but  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors,  .saf. 

14.  28  In  the  multitude  of  people  (is)  the  king's 

15.  22  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors  they  are 

20. 15  There  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  rubies 
24.   6  and  in  multitude  of  counsellors . .  safety 

Eccl.  5.    3  a  dream  cometh  through  the  multitude  of 

5.   3  and  a  fool's  voice,  .by  multitude  of  words 

5.   7  in  the  multitude  of  dreams  and  many  w. 

Isa.     1. 11  To  whatpurpose(is)themultitudeof  your 

37. 24  By  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  am  I  come 

47.   9  in  their  perfection  for  the  multitude  of  thy 

47. 12  with  the  multitude  of  thy  sorceries,  wh. 

47. 13  Thou  art  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy 
63.    7  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  loving 

Jer.  30. 14,  1$  for  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquity 
Lam.    1.    5  afflicted  her  for  the  multitude  of  hertra. 
3.  32  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  mercies 
Eze.  14.    4  according  to  the  multitude  of  Iris  idols 

19.  11  in  her  height  with  the  multitude  of  herb. 
27.  12  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  all.  .riches 
27.  16  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  the  wares  of 

27.  18  in  her  multitude  of  the  wares  of  thy  ma. 
27. 18  for  the  multitude  of  all  riches;  in  the  wine 
27-  33  with  the  multitude  of  thy  riches,  and  of 

28.  16  By  the  multitude  of  thy  merchandise  they 
28.  18  by  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquities,  by 
31.    9  I  have  made  him  fair  by  the  multitude  of 

Hos.   9.    7  for  the  multitude  of  thiue  iniquity,  and 
10.    1  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  fruit  he 

10.  13  trust.,  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mighty  men 
Nan.   3.    3  a  multitude  of  slain,  and  a  great  number 

3.  4  Because  of  the  multitude  of  the  whored. 
Zech.  2.   4  for  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle  ther. 

12.Strife,  pleading,  3n  rib. 

Job  33. 19  and  the  multitudeof  his  boueswith  strong 

IS.* 1  waggon,  rider,  driver,  22~\  rekeb. 

2  Ki.19.  23  With  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  I  ani 

1±.  Abundance,  company,  nj£SB>  shiphah. 

Isa.   60.  6  The  multitude  of  camels  shaU  cover  thee 
lo.Crowd,  6x^05  oehlos. 

Matt.  4.  25  there  followed  him  great  multitudes  of  pe. 
5.  1  And  seeing  the  multitudes  he  went  up  into  > 
8.    1  Whenhe  wascomedowTi..greatmultitudes 

8.  18  when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about 

9.  8  when  the  multitude  saw  (it),  they  marv. 
9.  33  the  multitudes  marvelled,  saying,  It  was 
9.  36  when  he  saw  the  multitudes,  he  was  mo. 

11.  7  Jesus  began  to  say  unto  the  multitudes 

12.  15  great  [multitudes]  followed  him,  and  he 

13.  2  great  multitudes  were  gathered  together 
13.  2  the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  shore 
13.  34  All  these  things  spake  Jesus  unto  the  m. 

13.  36  Jesus  sent  the  multitude  away,  and  went 

14.  5  he  feared  the  multitude,  because  they  c. 
14.  14  Jesus  went  forth,  and  saw  a  great  multi t. 
14.  15  send  the  multitude  away,  that  they  may 
14.  19  he  commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down 
14.  19  disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multit. 
14.  22  other  side,  while  he  sent  the  multitudes 

14.  23  when  he  had  sent  the  multitudes  away 
15. 10  he  called  the  multitude,  and  said  unto 

15.  30  great  multitudes  came  unto  him,  having; 
15.  31  Insomuch  that  the  multitude  wondered 
15.  32  I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude,  bee 
15.  33  so  much  bread,  .as  to  fill  so  great  a  mult. 
15. 35  he  commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down 
15.  36  disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multitu. 
15.  39  he  sent  away  the  multitude,  and  took  ship 
17.  14  when  they  were  come  to  the  multitude 
T9.   2  great  multitudes  followed  him ;  and  he 

20.  29  as  they  departed  from  Jericho,  a  greatm. 

20.  31  the  multitude  rebuked  them,  because  they 
ai.    8  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their  garm. 

21.  9  the  multitudes  that  went  before,  and  that 
21.  11  the  multitude  said,  This  is  Jesus  the  pro. 
21.  46  they  feared  the  multitude,  because  they 


MULTITUDE 


680 


MUST 


Luke  3. 
5- 
5- 


19. 

23- 

John  5. 


Matt22.  33  when  the  multitude  heard,  .they  were  as. 

23.  1  Then  spake  Jesus  to  the  multitude,  and 

26.  47  with  him  a  great  multitude  with  swords 
26. 55  In  that  same  hour  said  Jesus  to  the  mill. 

27.  20  persuaded  the  multitude  that  they  should 
27.  24  washed. .hands  before  the  multitude,  say. 

Mark  2.  13  all  the  multitude  resorted  unto  him,  and 
3.  9  should  wait  on  him  because  of  the  multi. 
3.  20  the  multitude  cometh  together  again,  so 

3.  32  the  multitude  sat  about  him;  and  they 

4.  1  there  was  gathered  unto  him  a  great  mil, 
4.   1  the  whole  multitude  was  by  the  sea  on  the 

4.  36  when  they  had  sent  away  the  multitude 

5.  31  Thou  seest  the  multitude  thronging  thee 

7.  S3  he  took  him  aside  from  the  multitude,  and 

8.  1  In  those  days  the  multitude  being  very  g. 

8.  2  I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude,  be. 

9.  14  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  them,  and 
9.  17  one  of  the  multitude  answered  and  said 

14.  43  with  him  a  great  multitude  with  swords 

15.  8  the  multitude,  cryiDg  aloud,  began  to  d. 
.    7  Then  said  he  to  the  multitude  that  came 

15  great  multitudes  came  together  to  hear 
,  19  might  bring  him  in  because  of  the  mult. 
,  19  the  whole  multitude  sought  to  touch  him 

8.  45  Master,  the  multitude  throng  thee  and 

9.  12  Send  the  multitude  away,  that  they  may 
9.  16  gave  to  the  disciples  to  set  before  the  m. 

14.  25  there  went  great  multitudes  with  him:  ami 

18.  36  hearing  the  multitude  pass  by,  he  asked 

19.  39  some  of  the  Pharisees  from  among  the  m. 
22.    6  unto  them  in  the  absence  of  the  multitude 

22.  47  while  he  yet  spake,  behold  a  multitude 
John  5.  13  Jesii3  had  conveyed  himself  away,  a  mil. 

6.  2  a  great  multitude  followed  him,  because 
Acts  13.  45  when  the  Jews  saw  the  multitudes,  they 

16.  22  the  multitude  rose  up  together  against 
19.  33  they  drew  Alexander  out  of  the  multitude 
21.  34  one  thing,  some  another,  among  the  mil. 

24.  18  found  me.  .neither  with  multitude,  nor 
Rev.    7.    9  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could 

17.  15  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and  tongues 
19.   6  I  heard  a3  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  m. 

1$.  Multitude,  fulness,  whrjOos  plethos. 

Mark  3.    7  a  great  multitude  from  Galilee  followed 

3.  8  a  great  multitude,  when  they  had  heard 
Luke  r.  10  the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  were 

2.  13  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising 

5.  G  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude  of  fishes 

6.  17  great  multitude  of  people  out  of  all  Judea 
8.  37  Then  the  whole  multitude  of  the  country 

.  37  the  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  began 
1  the  whole  multitude  of  them  arose,  and 
3  In  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  impotent 
21.    6  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the  multitude  of 
Acts    2.   6  the  multitude  came  together,  and  were 

4.  32  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were 

5.  14  added,  .multitudes  both  of  men  and  wo. 

5.  16  There  came  also  a  multitude  (out)  of  the 

6.  2  Then  the  twelve  called  the  multitude  of 
6.    s  the  saying  pleased  the  whole  multitude 
14.    1  that  a  great  multitude  both  of  the  Jews 

14.  4  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided:  and 

15.  12  Then  all  the  multitude  kept  silence,  and 
15.  30  when  they  had  gathered  the  multitude  to. 
17.  4  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  great  multitude 
19.  9  spake  evil  of  that  way  before  the  multit. 
21.  22  the  multitude  must  needs  come  together 
21.  36  the  multitude  of  the  people  followed  after 

23.  7  arose  a  dissension . .  and  the  multitude  was 

25.  24  about  whom  all  the  multitudeof  the  Jews 
Heb.n.  12  as  the  stars  of  the  sky  in  multitude,  and 
Jas.  5.  20  from  death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of 
1  Pe.  4.    8  chanty  shall  cover  the  multitude  of  sins 

MULTITUDE,  innumerable  — 

Myriad,  large  number,  fxvpids  murias. 

Lukei2.    1  were,  .an  innumerable  multitude  of  peo. 
MULTITUDE,  mixed  or  mixt  — 
1. Gathered  crowd,  riff-raff,  *]pDDS  asaphsuph. 

\  Num  11.    4  the  mixed  multitude  that  (was)  among 
%  Mixture  ^  rabble,  D"jy  ereb. 

Neh  13.   3  separated  from  Israel  all  the  mixed  mul 
MUNITION  — 
\. Stronghold,  T}0  metsad. 

Isa,  33.  16  his  place  of  defence,  .the  munitions  of  r. 
"2.  Stronghold,  rn'iiD  metsodah. 

Isa.   29.    7  all  that  fight  against  her  and  her  munition 
3.  Siege,  bulwark,  rrnnQ  metsurah. 

Nah.    2.    1  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  way,  make 
MUP'-PIM,  D'SD  obscv,rities. 
A  son  of  Benjamin,  Jacob's  youngest  son.    B.C.  1680. 

Gen.  46.  21  sons  of  Benjamin  (were).  .M.,andHuppim 
MURDER  — 
Murder,  <p6vos  phonos. 

Matt  1 5.  19  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  m. 

Mark  7.  21  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,  m. 
15.   7  who  had  committed  murder  in  the  insur. 

Luke23-  19  Who.  .for  murder,  was  cast  into  prison 
23.  25  him  that  for  sedition  and  murder  was  c. 

Rom.  1.  29  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit,  mal. 

Gal,     5.  21  Envyings,  [murders],  drunkenness,  revel. 

Rev.   9.  21  Neither  repented  they  of  their  murders 
MURDER,  to  (do)  — 
1.  To  kill,  3"iri  harag. 

Tsa.  10.   8  in  the  secret  places  doth  he  murder  the 


2.2*0  do  murder,  no  ratsach. 

Jer.     7.    9  Will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  commit  adul. 

3.  To  do  murder,  mq  ratsach,  3. 

Psa.  94.    6  the  stranger,  and  murder  the  fatherless 
Hos.    6.    9  the  company  of  priests  murder  in  the  way 

4.  To  do  murder,  <poveva  phoneuo. 

Matt  19. 18  Jesus  said,  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder 
MURDERER  — 
I. To  kill,  rin  harag. 

Jer.     4.  3i  for  my  soul  is  wearied  because  of  murd. 
Hos.   9.  13  shall  bring  forth  his  children  to  the  mur. 
2.  To  (cause  to)  smite,  npi  nakah,  5. 

2  Ki.  14.   6  the  children  of  the  murderers  he  slew  not 
3.2*0  murder,  n^n  ratsach. 

Nuni35. 16,  17,  18  he  (is)  a  murderer:  the  murderer 
35.  19  The  revenger,  .himself  shall  slay  the  mil. 
35.  21  shall,  .be  put  todeath.  .he(is)amurderer 
35.  21  the  revenger  of  blood  shall  slay  the  mur. 
35.  30  the  murderer  shall  be  put  todeath  bythe 
35.  31  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  mur. 
Job  24.  14  The  murderer  rising  with  the  light  killeth 
4.  To  do  murder,  ns";  ratsach,  3. 

2  Ki.   6.  32  See  ye  how  this  son  of  a  murderer  hath 
Isa.     1.  21  righteousness  lodged  in  it;  but  now  mu. 
5. Man  killer,  avdpcoiroKTovos  anthro}joktonos. 
Jolm  8.  44  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning 
1  Jo.   3. 15  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murd. 
3. 15  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal  1. 
6.  Assassin,  (rttc&pios,  Lat.  sicarius,  from  sica. 

Acts  21.  38  four  thousand  men  that  were  murderers? 
7 .Homicide,  murderer,  <povev$  phoneus. 

Matt  22.    7  destroyed  those  murderers,  and  burned 
Acts    3.  14  desired  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto 
7.  52  ye  have  been  now  the  betrayers  and  mu. 
28.   4  No  doubt  this  man  is  a  murderer,  whom 
1  Pe.  4.  15  But  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer 
Rev.  21.    8  the  abominable,  and  murderers,  and  wh. 
22. 15  murderers,  and  idolaters,  and  whosoever 
MURMUR,  (to  make  to)  — 

1.  To  murmur,  |*J>,  yh  lun,  lin,  2. 

Exodi5.  24  the  people  murmured  against  Moses,  say. 

16.    2  children  of  Israel  murmured  against  M. 

16.    7  what  (are)  we,  that  ye  murmur  against  us? 
NU11114.    2  all  the  children  of  Israel  murmured  agai. 

14.  36  made  all  the  congregation  to  murmur  ag. 

16. 11  what  (is)  Aaron,  that  ye  murmur  against 

16.  41  children  of  Israel  murmured  against  M. 
Josh.  9.  18  all  the  congregation  murmured  against 

2.  To  (cause  to)  murmur,  yb,  yh  lun,  lin,  5. 

Exod  16.    8  your  murmurings  which  ye  murmur  aga. 

17.  3  the  people  murmured  against  Moses,  and 
Num  14.  27  evil  congregation,  which  murmur  against 

14.  27  of  Israel,  which  they  murmur  against  me 
14.  29  numbered,  .which  have  murmured  against 
14.  36  made  all  the  congregation  to  murmur  ag 
1 7.    5  the  murmurings . .  they  murmur  against " 

3.  To  murmur,  be  discontented,  jrj  ragan. 

Isa.   29.  24  they  that  murmured  shall  learn  doctrine 
4.7*0  be  discontented,  murmur,  J3*i  ragan,  2. 

Deut.  1.  27  And  ye  murmured  in  your  tents,  and  said 
Psa.  106.  25  murmured  in  their  tents,  (and)  hearkened 
5.7*0  mutter,  murmur,  grumble,  yoyyvfa  gogguzti. 
Matt  20.  11  they  murmured  against  the  good  man  of 
Luke  5.  30  their  scribes  and  Pharisees  murmured  ag. 
John  6.  41  The  Jews  then  murmured  at  him,  because 
6.  43  said  unto  them,  Murmur  not  among  your. 

6.  61  knew  in  himself  that  his  disciples  murm. 

7.  32  Pharisees  heard  that  the  people  murmii. 
1  Co.  10.  to  Neither  murmur,  .as  some  of  them  also  m. 

6.7*0  murmur  throughout,  Siayoyyvfa  diagojjguzd. 
Lukeis.   2  Pharisees  and  scribes  murmured,  saying 
19.    7  when  they  saw  (it),  they  all  murmured,  s. 
MURMUR  against,  to  — 

Togroan,  censure,  chide,  kfx0ptjudofxat  cmbrimaomai. 
Mark  1 4    5  been  sold.  .And they  murmured  against 
MURMURER  — 
Murmurer,  yoyyucT-qs  goggustes. 

Jude     16  These  are  murmurers,  complainers  wal. 
MURMURING  — 
1.  Murmuring,  nia^fl  telunnoth. 

Exod  1 6.  7  for  that  he  hearethyourmumiuringsaga. 
16.  8  the  Lord  heareth  your  murmurings  which 
16.  8  your  murnmrings(are)not  against  us,  but 
16.   9  Lord:  for  he  hath  heard  your  murmurings 

16.  12  I  have  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  chi. 
Num  14.  27  I  have  heard  the  murmurings  of  the  chil. 

17.  5  I  will  make  to  cease  from  me  the  murm. 
17.  10  thou  shalt  quite  take  away  their  murmu. 

2. Murmuring,  yoyyva-fxos  goggusmos. 

John  7.  12  there  was  much  murmuring  among  the  p. 

Acts    6.    1  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecians 

Phil.   2.  14  Do  all  things  without  murmurings  and  d. 
MURRAIN  — 
Pestilence,  plague,  *i5i  deber. 

Exod.  9.    3  (there  shall  be)  a  very  grievous  murrain 
MUSE,  to  — 
1,2*0  meditate,  n*'v  siach,  3a. 

Psa.  143.   5  I  meditate.  .1  muse  on  the  work  of  thy  h. 


2.7*0  reason  diversely,  Sta\oyiCo/J.at  dialogizomai. 

Luke  3.  15  and  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  John 
MU'-SHI,  't?  D,  'trD  dravm  out. 
A  sou  of  Merari,  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1660. 

Exod.  6.  19  sons  of  Merari;  MahliandM.:  these(are) 

Num.  3.  20  of  Merari  by  their  families;  Mahli,  and  M. 

1  Ch.  6.  19  The  sons  of  Merari ;  Mahli,  and  M.  And 

6.  47  The  son  of  Mahli,  the  son  of  M.,  the  son 
23.  21  The  sons  of  Merari;  Mahli  and  M.  The 

23.  23  The  sons  M.;  Mahli,  and  Eder,  and  Jere. 

24.  26  The  sons  of  Merari  (were)  Mahli  and  M. 
24.  30  The  sons  also  of  M. ;  Mahli,  and  Eder,  and 

MU-SHITES,  vmrt. 

The  family  of  Mushi  son  of  Merari. 

Num.  3.  33  Of  Merari  (was),  .the  family  of  the  M. 
26.  58  (are)  the  families,  .the  family  of  the  M. 
MUSIC  — 
\.  Singing  of  praise,  music,  ID]  zemar, 

Dan.  3.  5  all  kinds  of  music,' ye  fall  down  and  wor. 
3,  7  all  kinds  of  music,  all  the  people,  the  nat. 
3.  10  all  kinds  of  music,  shall  fall  down  and  w. 

3.  15  all  kinds  of  music,  ye  fall  down  and  wor. 
2.Music,  song  with  instrument,  nyijQ  manginah. 

Lam.  3.  63  Behold.,  their  rising  up;  I  (am)  their  mu 
3.  Stringed  instrumental  music,  nrjj  neginah. 

Lam.  5.  14  the  gate,  the  young  men  from  their  music 
i.Song,  Yip  shir. 

1  Ch.ig.  16  the  singers  with  instruments  of  music,  ps. 

2  Ch.  5.  13  cymbals,  and  instruments  of  music,  and 

7.  6  Levites  also  with  instruments  of  music  of 

23.  13  the  singers  with  instruments  of  music,and 
34.  12  all  that  could  skill  of  instrumentsofmusic 

Neh.  12.  36  with  the  musical  instruments  of  David 

Eccl.  12.   4  all  the  daughters  of  music  shall  be  brou. 

Amos  6.  5  invent  to  themselves  instruments  of  mu. 
5. Symphony,  harmony  of  sound,  trvji^uuia  sumph. 

Lukei5.  25  drew  nigh  to  the  house,  he  heard  music 
MUSICAL  — 
A  30ng,  YP  shir. 

1  Ch.16.  42  cymbals,  .with  musical  instruments  of  G. 

Neh.  12.  36  with  the  musical  instruments  of  David  the 
MUSICAL  instrument  — 
Mistress,  breast,  nyp  shiddah. 

Eccl.  2.   8  musical  instruments,  and  that  of  all  sorts 
MUSICIAN,  (chief)  — 
1.2*0  be  pre-eminent,  prominent,  w$i  natsach,  3. 

Psa.  4.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician 
[So  Ps.  5,  6,  9,  11,  12,  13,  14,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  31,  36,  39, 
40,  41,  42,  44,  45,  46,  47,  49,  51,  52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  57,  58, 
59,  60,  61,  62,  64,  65,  66,  67,  6S,  69,  70,  75,  76,  77,  80,  Si, 
84,  85,  88,  109,  139,  140.] 

2. Musician,  fj.ovatK6s  mousikos. 

Rev.  18.  22  the  voice  of  harpers,  and  musicians,  and 
MUSING  — 
Earnest  meditation,  ran  hagig. 

Psa.  39.   3  while  I  was  musing  the  fire  burned:  (then) 
MUST  — 
It  behoveth,  Se?  dei. 

Matti6.  21  how  that  he  must  go  unto  Jerusalem,  and 
17.  10  Why  then  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must 

24.  6  for  all.  .must  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is 

26.  54  Scriptures  be  fulfilled, that  thus  it  must  be? 
Mark  8.  31  that  the  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  th. 

9.  11  Why  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first 

13.  10  the  Gospel  must  first  be  published  among 

Luke  2.  4g  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business 

4.  43  he  said  unto  them,  I  must  preach  the  king. 
9.  22  The  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things 

13.  33  Nevertheless  I  must  walk  to  day,  and  to 

17.  25  But  first  must  he  suffer  many  things,  and 

19.  5  come  down;  for  to  day  I  must  abide  at  thy 
2z.  9  for  these  things  must  first  come  to  pass;  but 
22.    7  bread,  when  the  passover  must  be  killed 

22.  37  that  is  written  must  yet  be  accomplished 
24.    7  The  Son  of  man  must  be  delivered  into 
24.  44  that  all  things  must  be  fulfilled  which  w. 

John  3.  7  Marvel  not  that  I  said.  .Ye  must  be  born 
3. 14  even  so  [must]  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up 

3.  30  He  must  increase,  but  I  (must)  decrease 

4.  24  they  that  worship  him  must  worship,  .in 
9.    4  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent 

10.  16  them  also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall 
12.  34  thou,  The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up 

20.  9  not. .  that  he  must  rise  again  from  the  dead 
Acts    1.  22  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  with 

3.  21  Whom  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the 

4.  12  giveu  amongmen  whereby  we  must  be  sav. 
9.   6  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  must  do 
9. 16  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  must 

14.  22  that  we  must  through  much  tribulation 
16.  30  and  said,  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved 

18.  21  I  [must]  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  that 

19.  21  After  I  have  been  there,  I  must  also  see 

23.  11  so  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Rome 

27.  24  Fear  not,  Paul;  thou  must  be  brought  bef. 
27.  26  Howbeit  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain 

1  Co.  11.  19  there  must  be  also  heresies  among  you 

15.  25  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  eneni. 
15.  53  their  corruptible  must  put  on  incorrupt. 

2  Co.   5.  10  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
1  Ti.     3.    2  A  bishop  then  must  be  blameless,  thehus. 

3.    7  Moreover  he  must  have  a  good  report  of 


MUST 


6S1 


MYSELF 


2  Ti.  2.  6  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  must  be 
2.  24  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive 

Titus  1.  7  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  as  the  steward 
1.  11  Whose  mouthsmust  be  stopped  ,who  sub. 

Heb.   9.  26  For  then  must  he  often  have  suffered  since 

11.  6  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that 
Rev.    1.    1  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass 

4.    1  show  thee  things  which  must  be  hereafter 

10.  11  Thou  must  prophesy  again  before  many  p. 

11.  5  if  any  man  will  hurt  them,  he  must  in  this 
13.  10  he  that  killeth  with  the  sword,  must  be 
17  to  when  he  cometh,  he  must  continue  a  short 

20.  3  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  22.  6. 
2.  In  order  that,  'Lva  hina,  Mark  14.  49. 

MUST  needs,  of  necessity  — 

1 .  It  belwveth,  5e?  dei. 

Marki3.    7  must  needs  be;  but  the  end  (shall)  not  (be) 
John  4.    4  And  he  must  needs  go  through  Samaria 
Acts   1.  16  this  scripture  must  needs  have  been  fulfl. 
17.    3  that  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered,  and 

21.  22  the  multitude  must  needs  come  together 
2  Co.  11. 30  If  I  must  needs  glory,  I  will  glory  of  the 

2.  To  have  a  necessity,  «xw  avaryK-qv  echo  anayken. 

Lukei4-  iS  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and  I  must  ne. 

%.A  necessity,  avdyK-rj  anagke. 

Matt  18.   7  for  it  must  needs  be  that  offences  come 
Luke23-  17  For  of  necessity  he  must  release  one  unto 
Rom  13.   5  Wherefore  (ye)  must  needs  be  sub.  He.g- 16 

4.  To  be  indebted,  o0€iAa?  opheilo,  I  Co.   I.  10. 

MUSTARD  seed  — 

Mustard  tree  or  seed,  vlva-m  sinapi. 

Matt  13.  31  kingdom . .  is  like  to  a  grain  of  mustard  s. 

17. 20  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed 

Mark  4.  31  (It  is)  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which 

Lukei3-  19  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which 

17.   6  If  ye  had  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed 

MUSTER,  to  — 

l.To  insjiect,  "ip?  paqad,  3. 

Isa.   13.   4  Lord  of  hosts  mustereth  the  host  of  the 

2.  To  caitse  to  assemble,  x^y  tsaba,  5. 

2  Ki.  25.  19  which  mustered  the  people  of  the  land 
Jer.  52.  25  who  mustered  the  people  of  the  land;  aud 

MUTH  LABBEN  — 

Death  of  Ben,  or  of  the  son,  ]zh  mo  muth  labben. 
Psa.  9.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  Muth  labben 

MUTTER,  to  — 

\.To  mutter,  meditate,  n:rr  hagah. 

Isa.  59.    3  your  tougue  hath  muttered  perverseness 

2.  To  {cause  to)  mutter,  njrr  hagah,  5. 

Isa.     8. 19  unto  wizards  that  peep  aud  that  mutter 
MUTUAL  — 
In  each  other,  £v  aWrjKoif  en  allelois, 

Rom.  1.  12  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me 
MUZZLE  — 
1.2*0  muzzle,  stop,  con  chasam. 

Deut  25.   4  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  t. 
-.  To  muzzle,  gag,  <pt/j,6w  phimoo. 

1  Co.  9.    9  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  mouth  of  the 

1  Ti.  5. 18  saith,  Thou  shalt  muzzle  the  ox  that  tread. 
MY  — 
I. Me,  ^jue  (ace.)  erne, 

Eph.    6.  21  that  ye  also  may  know  my  affairs,  .how 

Col.     4.    7  All  my  state  shall  Tychicus  declare  unto 
'2. To  me,  £y.ol  emoi. 

Heb.  13.    6  The  Lord  (is)  my  helper,  and  I  will  not  f. 

3.  My,  mine,  i^.6s  emos. 

Matt  18.  20  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my 
Mark  8.  38  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of  my  words 
Luke  9.  26  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of  my  words 
John  3.  29  voice.    This  my  joy  therefore  Is  fulfilled 

4.  34  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 

5.  30  as  I  hear,  I  judge  :  and  my  judgment  is 
5.  47  his  writings,  how  shall  ye  believe  my  vr.1 
7.   6  My  time  is  not  yet  come :  but  your  time  13 

7.  8  this  feast;  for  my  time  is  not  yetfullcome 
8. 16  And  yet  if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  true 
S.  31  If  ye  continue  in  my  word   (then)  are  ye 

8.  37  but.  .because  my  word  hatV-no  place  in 
8.  43  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech? 
8.  43  (even)  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  word 
8.  51  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never 
8.  56  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my 

10. 14  and  knowmy  (sheep),  and  am  known  of  m. 
10.  26  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said  uuto  you 
10.  27  Mysheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them 

12.  26  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  servaut  be 
I3-  35  By  this  shall  all.  .know  that  ye  are  my  d. 

14. 15  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments 

14.  27  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give 

15.  8  that  ye  bear  much  fruit;  so  shall  ye  be  my 
15.  9  have  I  loved  you :  continue  ye  in  my  love 
15.  11  thatiuyjoy  might  remain  in  you,  and'(that) 
15.  12  This  is  my  commandment, That  ye  love  one 
17.  13  they  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  them. 

17.  24  that  they  may  behold  my  glory,  whichthou 

18.  36  Jesus  answered,  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this 
18.  36  If  my  kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then 
18.36  would  my  servants  fight,  that  Ishouldnot 
18.  36  but  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from  hence 

Rom.  3.   7  hath  more  abounded  through  my  lie  unto 
10.    1  Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to 
i  Co.  5.   4  and  my  spirit,  with  the  power  of  our  Lord 
80 


1  Co.   7.  40  she  is  happier  if  she  so  abide  after  my  j. 

11.  25  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  is  my  blood 
16.  18  For  they  have  refreshed  my  spirit  and  y. 

2  Co.  1.  23  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my  soul,  that 

2.  3  in  you  all,  that  my  joy  is.  .of  you  all 
8.  23  my  partner  and  fellow  helper  concerning 
Gal.  1. 13  For  ye  have  heard  of  my  conversation  in 
Phil.  1.  26  abundant,  .for  me  by  my  coming  to  you 
2  Ti.  4.  6  and  the  time  of  tmy]  departure  is  at  hand 
Phm.      10  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus 

2  Pe.   1.  15  that  ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease  to 

3  Jo.        4  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  tr. 
Rev.    2.  20  to  teach  and  toseducemyservantsto  com. 

4.  Of  me  j  my,  mine,  (Trap)  ipLov  (par*)  emou. 
Matt  5.  11  all . .  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake 
10. 18  before  governors  and  kings  for  my  sake 
10.  39  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake  shall 

16.  25  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
Mark  8.  35  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 

10.  29  left,  .lands,  for  my  sake,  and  the  gospel's 
13.  9  brought  before  rulers  and  kings  for  my 
Luke  9.  24  whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
Johni3.  38  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake  ? 
Rom  11  27  this  (is)  my  covenant  unto  them,  when  I 

5. Me,  (ue  me. 

Matt26. 12  ointment  on  my  body,  she  did  (it)  for  my 

Q.To  me,  fxol  mot. 

Mark  5.   9  My  name  (is)  Legion :  for  we  are  many 
Acts   7.  49  Heaven  (is)  my  throne,  and  earth  (is) 

1  Co.  9.  18  What  is  [my]  reward  then?,  .that,  when 

2  Co.  6. 16  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  [my]  people 

6. 18  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith 
7.  4  Great  (is)  my  boldness  of  speech  toward 
7.   4  great  (is)  my  glorying  of  you :  I  am  filled 

Phil.  1.  19  For  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  sal. 
1.  22  in  the  flesh,  this  (is)  the  fruit  of  my  labour 
4.  16  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my  necessity 

Rev.  21.    7  I  will  be  his  God,  aud  he  shall  be  my  son 

7.  Of  me,  my,  mine,  pov  mou. 

Matt.  2.  6  Governor,  that  shall  rule  my  people  Israel 
•2.  15  saying,  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  my  son 
3. 17  This  is  my  beloved  son,  in  whom  I  am  w. 

7.  2 1  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  w. 

8.  6  Lord,  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the 
8.  8  that  thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof 
8.  8  word  only,  and  my  servant  shall  be  heal. 
8.  9  to  my  servant,  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  (it) 

8.  21  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father 

9,  18  My  daughter  is  even  now  dead:  but  come 
10.  22  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all.  .formy  name's  sake 
10.  32  also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

10.  33  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven 

11.  10  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face,  w. 
11.  27  All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  F. 

11.  29  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 
it.  30  my  yoke  (is)  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light 
12. 18  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  have  chosen 
12. 18  my  beloved,  in  whom  my  soul  is  well  pie. 
12. 18 1  will  put  my  Spirit  upon  him,  and  he  sh. 

12.  44  I  will  return  into  my  house  from  whence 
12.  48  Who  is  my  mother?  and  who  are  my  bre. 
12.  49  said,  Behold  my  mother  and  my  brethren! 
12.  50  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in 

12.  50  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,!and  m. 

13.  30  to  burn . .  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  b. 
13.  35  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  parables ;  I  will 
15. 13  Every  plant,  which  my  heavenly  Father 
15. 22  my  daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  d. 

16. 17  hath  not  revealed  (it)  unto  thee,  but  ray 

16. 18  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church 

17.  5  This  is  my  beloved  son,  in  whoralam  well 
17  15  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son :  for  he  is  lu. 

18.  5  shall  receive  one  such  little  child  in  my 
18. 10  donlways  behold  the  face  of  my  Father 
iS.  ig  it  shall  be  done  forthem  of  myFather  which 
18. -2i  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me 

18.  35  So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do 

19.  20  All  these  things  have  I  kept  from  [my]  y. 

19.  29  for  my  name's  sake,  shall  receive  an  him. 
20. 21  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the 

20.  23  Ye  shall  drink  indeed  of  my  cup,  and  be 
20.  23  to  sit  on  my  right  hand,  and  on  my  left,  is 

20.  23  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  [my]  Father 
21. 13  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  pr. 

21.  28  said,  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  [my]  vineyard 

21.  37  son,  saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son 

22.  4  I  have  prepared  my  dinner :  my  oxen  and 

22.  44  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand 
24.  5  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am 
24.  9  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  nations  for  my  n. 
24.  35  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my 

24.  36  not  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  [my]  Father 
24. 48  say  in  his  heart,  My  lord  delayeth  his  co. 

25.  27  to  have  put  my  money  to  the  exchangers 

25.  34  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the 
25. 40  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  [my]  breth. 

26.  12  she  hath  poured  this  ointment  on  my  body 
26. 18  The  Master  saith,  My  time  is  at  hand ;  I 
26.  18  the  passover  at  thy  house  with  my  discip. 
26.  26  gave . .  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body 
26.  28  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  w. 
26.  38  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto 
26.  39  O  [my]  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this 
26.  42  0  my  Father,  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  a. 

26.  53  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and 

27.  35  [They  parted  my  garments  among  them] 
27.  35  [and  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots] 
27.  46MyGod!  my  God  !  why  hast  thou  forsaken 

23.  10  go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  G. 


Mark  r.  2,  11;  3.  33,  [33],  34,  34,  35,  [3S];  5.  23,  30;  6. 
23'.9-  7.  *7>  37»  39>  U^ll  10-  2°>  4°>  [40]".  "■  17!  12.  6,  36, 
36  ;  13.  6,  13,  31 ;  14.  8, 14,  22,  24,  34 ;  15.  34,  34;  16.  [17]. 

Luke  1.  18,  20,  25,  43,  44,  46,  47,  47;  2.  49;  3.  22;  6. 
47;  7-  6»  7»  8,  27,  [44],  44,  45,  46,  [46];  8.  21,  21 ;  9.  35, 
38,  48,  59,  61 ;  10.  22,  29,  40 ;  11.  7,  24;  12.  4,  13,  17,  18, 
[iS],  18,  19,  45;  14.  23,  24,  26,  27,  33;  15.  6,  17,  18,  24, 
29;  16.  3,5,  24,  27;  18.  [21];  19.  8,  23,  46;  20.  13,  42,  42; 
21.  8,  12,  17,  33 ;  22.  11,  19,  20,  28,  29,  30,  30,  42 ;  23.  46 ; 

24-39.  39.  49- 

John  2.  16 ;  4.  49 ;  5.  17,  24,  31,  43 ;  6.  32,  51,  54,  54, 
55.  55>  56*  56,  [65];  8.  14,  19,  19,  [28],  31,  [38],  49,  52,  54, 
54;  10.  15,  16,  17,  18,  25,  27,  28,  29,  [29,  32],  37;  11.  21, 
32;  12.  7,  27,  47,  48;  13.  6,  8,  9,  37;  14.  2,  7,  [12],  13,  14, 
20,  21,  21,  23,  23,  24,  26,  [28];  15.  1,  7,  8,  10,  10,  [10],  14, 

15,  16,  20,  21,  23,  24;  16.  [10],  23,  24,  26;  18.  37;  19.  24, 
24;  20.  13,  [17],  17,  17,  17,  25,  25,  27,  27,  28,  28;  21.  15 

16,  17. 

Acts  2.  14,  17,  18, 18,  18,  25,  25,  26,  26,  26,  27,  34,  34;  7. 
34,  49>49»  50.  591  9-  IS»  T6 ;  10.  30;  11.  8;  13.  22,  33;  15. 

7,  17;  16.  15;  20.  [24],  24,  25,  29,  34;  22.  1;  24.  17;  26. 
4;  28.  19. 

Rom.  1.  8,  9,  9,  9;  2.  16;  7.  4,  18,  23,  23,  23;  9.  1,  2, 
3>  3»  J7»  i7»  25.  25,  26;  10.  21;  11.  3,  14;  15.  14,  31;  16. 
3»  4>  5.  7.  7>  3,  9,  11,  21,  21,  25. 

1  Co.  1.  4,  11;  2.   4,  4;  4.   14,  17,  17;  8.  13,  13;  9.  1, 

15.  181  27 ;  10.  14,  29 ;  11.  24,  33 ;  13.  3,  3 ;  14.  i4t  14,  [18J, 
19;  15.  58 ;  16.  24. 

2  Co.  2.  13,  13;  12.  9,  [9],  9,  21;  Gal.  1.  14,  15;  4.  [14]. 
14,  19,  20;  6.  17. 

Eph.  1.  16;  3.  4,  13,  14;  6.  [io],  19;  Phil.  1.  3,  7,  7,  8, 

13,  14,  16,  20,  20;  2.  2,  12,  12,  12,  25,  25;  3.  1,  [8];  4.  1, 

1.  3,  14,  19;  Col.  1.  [24],  24;  2.  1 ;  4.  10,  18. 

2  Ti.  1.  3,  6,  16;  2.  1,  8 ;  3.  10;  4.  i6;Pkni.  4,  4,  [10], 
20,  23,  24. 
Heb.  1.  5,  13;  2.  12;  3.  9,  10,  11,  11;  4.  3,  3,  5;  5.  5; 

8.  9,  10 ;  10.  16,  [34],  38 ;  12.  5 ;  Jas.  1.  2,  16,  19 ;  2.  1,  3, 
5,  14,  [18];  3.  1,  10,  12 ;  5.  [10],  12 ;  1  Pe.  5.  13 ;  2  Pe.  1. 

14,  17 ;  1  Jo.  2.  1 ;  3.  13,  [iS] ;  Rev  1.  20 ;  2.  3,  13,  13,  13, 

16,  26,  27  ;  3.  5,  8,  8,  10,  12,  12,  12,  12,  12,  16,  20,  21,  21  ; 
10.  10,  10;  11.  3;  18.  4;  22.  12. 

MY'-RA,  Mvpa,  Mvppa. 

One  of  the  chief  cities  of  Lycia,  a  province  on  the  S.W.  of 
Asia  Minor,  between  Cana  and  Pamphylia;  forty  miles 
E.  of  Patara ;  now  called  Dembra. 

Acts 27.  5  whenwehadsailed..wecametoM..ofLycia 
MYRRH  — 
l.Gum  of  the  cistus,  ladanum,  sh  lot. 

Geu.  37.  25  bearing  spicery  and  balm  and  ruyrrh,  go. 
43. 11  honey,  spices,  and  myrrh,  nuts,  and  aim. 

2.  Myrrh,  lb  mx>r. 

Exod3o.  23  of  pure  myrrh  five  hundred  (shekels),  and 
Esth.  2.  12  six  months  with  oil  of  myrrh,  and  six  m. 
Psa.  45.  8  All  thy  garments  (smell)  of  myrrh,  andal. 
Prov.  7.  17  Ihave  perfumedmy  bed withmyrrh, aloes 
Song  1.  13  A  bundle  of  myrrh  (is)  my  well  beloved  to 

3.  6  perfumed  with  myrrh  and  frankincense 

4.  6  I  will  get  me  to  the  mountain  of  myrrh 
4. 14  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the  chief  spices 

5.  1 1  have  gathered  my  myrrh  with  my  spice 
5.    5  my  hands  dropped  (with)  myrrh,  and 

5.    5  my  fingers  (with)  sweet  smelling  myrrh 
5.  13  (like)  lilies,  dropping  sweet  smelling  my. 

3. Myrrh,  o~fj.vpva  smurna. 

Matt  2. 11  presented.  .gold,andfrankincense,andra. 
John  19.  39  brought  a  mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  ab. 

MYRRH,  to  be  mingled  -with  — 

To  mix  or  mingle  with  myrrh,  trfxvpvi^ca  smumizo. 

Markis.  23  gave  liim  to  drink  wine  mingled  with  m 
MYRTLE  (tree)  — 
Myrtle  tree,  Din,  nnq  hadas. 

Neh.   8. 15  pine  branches,  and  myrtle  branches,  and 

Isa.   41.  19  the  cedar,  the  shittah  tree,  and  the  mjT. 
55. 13  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree 

Zech.  1.    8  and  he  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  that 

1. 10  the  man  that  stood  among  the  myrtle  tr. 

1. 11  angel,  .that  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees 

MYSELF  — 

1. 1,  I  myself ,  "IX  am. 

2  Sa.  18.    2  I  will  surely  go  forth  with  you  myself  also 

Z.Soul,  h'eath,  ^94  nephesh. 

Psa.  131.    2  Surely  Ihave  behaved  and  quieted  mys. 

3.  Of  myself,  i/xavrov  emautou. 
Luke  7.    7  Wherefore  neither  thought  I  myself  wor. 
John  5.  31  If  I  bear  witness  of  myself,  my  witnessis 

7. 17  be  of  God,  or  (whether)  I  speak  of  myself 

7.  28  I  am  not  come  of  myself,  but  he  that  sent 

8.  14  Thoughlbear  record  of  myself.. myrecord 
8.  18  I  am  one  that  bear  witness  of  myself,  and 
8.  2S  I  do  nothing  of  myself ;  but  as  my  Father 
8.  42  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  he  sent  me 
8.  54  Jesus  answered,  If  I  honour  myself,  my 

10.  18  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  m. 

12.  49  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself ;  but  the  Fa. 

14.    3  I  will  come  again,  and  receive,  .unto  my. 

14. 10  that  I  speak  unto  you  I  speak  not  of  my. 

14.  21  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  to  him 

17.  19  fortheirsakesl  sanctify  myself,  that  they 
Acts  20.  24  neither  count  I  my  life  dear  uuto  myseU 

24. 10  I  do  the  more  cheerfully  answer  for  my. 

26.   2  I  think  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  bee. 

26.    9  I  verily  thought  with  myself,  that  I  ought 

Rnm  11.    4  I  have  reserved  to  myself  seven  thousand 

1  Co.  4.   4  For  I  know  nothing  by  myself ;  yet  am  I 

4.    6  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  to  myself  and 


MYSIA 


682 


NAIL 


i  Co.  9.  19  yet  have  I  made  myself  servant  unto  7. 7. 

2  Co.  2.    1  I  determined  this  with  myself,  that  I  would 

11.    7  Have  I  committed  an  offence  in  abasing  m. 

11.  9  I  have  kept  myself  from  being  burdensome 

12.  5  yet  of  myself  I  will  not  glory,  but  in  mine 
Gal.     2.  18  I  destroyed,  I  make  myself  a  transgressor 

4. He,  himself,  avr6s  autos,  Ro.  9.  3  ;  16.  2. 
5  J/.-,  l/ie  erne. 

Phm.      17  If  thou  count  me.  .receive  him  as  myself 

KY'-SIA,  Mvffla. 

A  province  in  the  N.W.  of  Asia  Minor,  having  Lydia  on 

the  S.,  Bithynia  on  the  E.,  and  the  Propontis  on  the 

X. ;  Assos,  Pergamos,  and  Troas  were  its  chief  cities. 

Acts  16.    7  After  they  were  come  to  M.,  they  assayed 

16.    8  And  they  passing  by  M.  came  down  to  T. 

MYSTERY  — 

What  is  known  only  to  the  initiated,  fxv<xr4)piov. 
Matt  13.  11  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the  mysteries 
Mark  4.  n  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  mystery 
Luke  8.  10  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  mysteries 
Kom  11.  25  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of  this  mystery 

16.  25  according  to  the  revelation  of  the  mystery 

1  Co.  2.    7  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery 

4.  1  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God 

13.  2  and  understand  all  mysteries,  and  all  kn. 

14.  2  howbeit  in  the  spirit  he  speaketh  myste. 

15.  51  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery ;  We  shall 
Eph.    1.    9  Having  made  known  unto  us  the  mystery 

3.    3  How.  .he  made  known  unto  me  the  niys. 
3,    4  may  understand  my  knowledge  in  the  m. 

3.  9  see  what  is  the  fellowship  of  the  mystery 

5.  32  Tills  isagreat mystery:  but  Ispeakconce. 

6.  19  to  make  known  the  mystery  of  the  gospel 
Col.     1.  26  the  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from  ages 

1.  27  what  (is)  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  thism. 

2.  2  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  of 

4.  3  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,  for  which 

2  Th.   2.  7  the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work 
1  Ti.    3.  9  Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure 

3.  16  without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery 
Kev.    1.  20  The  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  thou 

10.    7  the  mystery  of  God  should  be  finished,  as 

17.  5  Mystery,  Babylon  the  great,  the  mother  of 
17.   7  I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman 


N 

NA'-AM,  DJ.M  pleasantness. 

A  son  of  Caleb,  son  of  Jephunneh.     B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  4.  15  the  sons  of  Caleb . .  Iru,  Elah,  and  N. :  and 
NA-A'-MAH,  nTIEJ 

1.  Sister  of  Tubal'cain,  and  daughter  of  Zillah  wife  of 
Lamech,  of  the  race  of  Cain.     B.C.  3874. 

Gen.   4.  22  and  the  sister  of  Tubal-cain  (was)  N. 

2.  An  Ammonitess,  mother  of  Rehoboam.    B.o.  998. 

1  Ki.  14.  21,  31  his  mother's  name  (was)  N.  an  Amm, 

2  Ch.12.  13  his  mother's  name  (was)  N.  an  Ammonit. 

3.  A  city  in  the  S.W.  of  Judah,  near  Beth-dagon. 

Josh  15.  41  Gederoth,  Beth-dagon,  and  N.,  audMak. 
NA-A'  MAN,  jlpjy,  Nee/iar,  Naijua*,  pleasant. 
1.  A  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  21  N.,  Ehi,  and  Rosh,Muppira,  and  Huppim 
•2.  A  son  of  Bela,  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1600. 

Num  26.  40  the  sons  of  Bela  were  Ard  and  X. :  (of  Ard) 
26.  40  (and)  of  N.,  the  family  of  the  Naamites 

1  Ch.  8.   4  And  Abishua,  anil  N.,  and  Ahoah 

3.  A  son  of  Ehud  or  Abilnid,  grandson  of  Benjamin.  B.C. 
1600. 

1  Ch,    3.    7  N.,and  Ahiah.andGera,  he  removed  them 

4.  A  Syrian  captain  in  the  days  of  Joram  son  of  Aliab, 
who  was  cured  of  leprosy  by  Elisha  the  prophet.  B.C. 
894. 

2  Ki.   5.    iN„  captain  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  Sy. 

5.  2  a  little  maid  \  and  she  waited  on  N.'s  wife 
5.  6  I  have  (therewith)  sent  N.  my  servant  to 
5.  9  N.  came  with  his  horses  and  with  his  ch. 
5.  11  X".  was  wroth,  and  went  away,  and  said 
5.  17  X.  said,  Shall  there  not  then,  I  pray  thee 
5.  20  my  master  hath  spared  N.  this  Syrian,  in 
5.21  Gehazi  followed  after  N.  And when  N.  saw 
5.  23  And  N.  said,  Be  content,  take  two  talents 
5.  27  The  leprosy  therefore  of  X.  shall  cleave 
Luke  4.  27  and  none,  .was  cleansed,  saving  [N.]  the 

NA-A-MA-THTTE,  'n-i;;  Naamathi. 

Patronymic  of  Zophar,  one  of  Job's  friends;  probably 

from  Edom. 

Job  2.  11  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and  Zophar  the  N. 
11.  1  Then  answered  Zophar  the  N,  and  said 
20.  1  Then  answered  Zophar  the  N.,  and  said 
42.   9  the  N.  went  and  did  according  as  the  L. 

NA-A-MITES,  "?y;3rt  the  Xaami. 

The  family  of  Naaman,  grandson  of  Benjamin  youngest 

son  of  Jacob. 

Num  26.  40  (and)  of  Naaman,  the  family  of  the  N. 
NA-A'-RAH,  n-iJU  shoot,  posterity. 
A  wife  of  Aslmr,  descended  from  Judah  through  Caleb 
son  of  Hur.    b.o.  1560. 

1  Ch.  4.    5  father  of  Tekod  had. .wives,  Helah  and  X. 
4-    6  N.  bare  him  Ahuzam,  and  Hepher,  and 
4-    6  These  (were)  the  sons  of  N. 


NA-A'-RAI,  Hi'J  pleasantness  of  Jah. 

One  of  David's  valiant  men,  and  sou  of  Ezbai;  in  2  Sa. 

23.  35  called  Faarai  the  Arbite.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  37  Hezro  the  Carmelite,  N.  the  son  of  Ezbai 

NA-A'-RAN,  yrpj  waterfall. 

A  city  in  Ephraim ;  the  same  as  the  succeeding. 

1  Ch.  7.  28  the  towns  thereof,  and  eastward  N.,  and 

NA-A'-RATH,  myj  waterfall. 

A  city  in  Ephraim  "or  Benjamin,  near  Jericho. 

Josh. 16.    7  it  went  down  from  Janohah.  .to  N.,  and 

NA-A'-SHON,  jic'OJ  oracle. 

Brother  of  Elisheba,  Aaron's  wife ;  perhaps  the  same  as 

Nahshon  son  of  Amminadab.    B.C.  1492. 

Exod.  6.  23  Aaron  took  Elisheba . .  sister  of  N.  to  wife 

NA-AS'-SON,  Naao-o-i&v.     An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 
Matt.  1.    4  Armnadab  begat  N.;  and  N.  begat  Salmon 
Luke  3.  32  (the  son)  of  Salmon,  .was (the  son)  of  N, 

NA'-BAL,  befool,  2^'ojectimj. 

A  rich  man  in  Maon  who  insulted  David  and  died  of 
fright,  husband  of  Abigail  whom  David  afterwards 
married.    B.C.  1060- 

1  Sa.  25.    3  Now  the  name  of  the  man  (was)  N.,  and 

25.   4  David  heard  in  the  wilderness  that  N.  did 
25.    5  Get  you  up  to  Carmel,  and  go  to  N.,  and 
25.   9  they  spake  to  N.  according  to  all  those  w. 
25.  10  N.  answered  David's  servants,  and  said 
25. 14  told  Abigail,  N.'s  wife,  saying,  Behold,  D. 
25. 19  But  she  told  not  her  husband  N. 
25.  25  N.:  for  as  his  name  (is),  so  (is)  he  ;  N.  (is) 
25.  26  and  they  that  seek  evil  to  my  lord,  be  asN. 
25.  34  surely  there  had  not  been  left  unto  N.  by 
25.  36  Abigail  came  to  N. . .  and  N.'s  heart  (was) 
25. 37  when  the  wine  was  gone  out  of  N.,  and 
25.  38  came  to  pass,  .that  the  Lord  smote  N. 
25.  39  when  David  heard  that  N.  was  dead,  he 
25.  39  cause  of  my  reproach  from  the  hand  of  N. 

25.  39  hath  returned  the  wickedness  of  N.  upon 

27.  3  David,  .and  Abigail  the  Carmelitess,  N.'s 
30.   5  Ahinoam.  .and  Abigail  the  wife  of  N.  the 

2  Sa.  2.    2  Ahinoam.  .and  Abigail,  N.'s  wife,  3.  3. 

KA'-BOTH,  rvn:  prominence. 

A  Jezreelite  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  whom  Jezebel,  wife 
of  Ahab,  caused  to  be  put  to  death  to  obtain  his  vine- 
yard.   B.C.  899. 

1  Ki.21.    1  N.  the  Jezreelite  had  a  vineyard,  which 

21.   2  Ahab  spake  unto  N.,  saying,  Give  me  thy 
21.    3  N.  said  to  Ahab,  The  Lord  forbid  it  me 
21.   4  displeased  because  of  the  word  which  N. 
21.    6  Because  I  spake  unto  N.  the  Jezreelite 
21.    7  I  will  give  thee  the  vineyard  of  N.  the  J. 
21.    8  the  nobles,  .in  his  city  dwelling  with  N. 
21.    9  Proclaim  afast,  and  set  N.  on  high  among 
21.  12  They  proclaimed  a  fast,  and  set  N.  on  high 
21.  13  against  N.  ..saying,  N.  did  blaspheme  God 
21.  14  Then  they  sent  to  Jezebel,  saying,  N.  is 
21.  15  when  Jezebel  heard  that  N.  was  stoned 
21.  15  possession  of  the  vineyard  of  N. .  .for  N. 
21.  16  when  Ahab  heard  that  N.  was  dead,  that 
21.  16  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the  vineyard  of  N. 
21.  18  in  the  vineyard  of  N.,  whither  he  has  gone 
21.  19  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  N. 

2  Ki.  9.  21  met  him  in  the  portion  of  N.  the  Jezreel. 

9.  25  cast  him  in  the  portion  of  the  field  of  N. 
9  26  I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  N.,  and 

NA'-CHON,  fiDi  stroke. 

A  Benjamite  at  whose  thrashing  floor  Uzzah  was  smitten 
for  touching  the  ark.  B.C.  1042.  In  1  Ch.  13.  9  called 
also  Chidon  {which  see). 

2  Sa.  6.   6  when  they  came  to  N.'s  threshing  floor 
NA'-CHOR,  Nax^p-     An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  34  (son)  of  Thara,  which  was  (the  son)  of  N. 
NA'-DAB,  211  liberal,  willing. 

I.Elder  son  of  Aaron,  slain  by  fire  for  offering  strange 
fire.     B.C.  1490. 

Exod.  6.  23  she  bare  him  N  ,  and  Abihu,  Eleazar,  and 
24.  1  Come  up.  .thou,  and  Aaron,  N.,  and  Ab. 
24.   g  Then  went  up  Moses,  and  Aaron,  N.,  and 

28.  1  Aaron.  N.  and  Abihu,  Eleazar  and  Itham. 
Lev.  10.  1  N.  and  Abihu,  the  sons  of  Aaron,  took  eit. 
Num.  3.    2  N.  the  first  born,  and  Abihu,  Eleazar,  and 

3.   4  N.  and  Abihu  died  before  the  Lord,  when 

26.  60  unto  Aaron  was  born  N.  and  Abihu,  Ele. 
26.  61  N.  and  Abihu  died,  when  they  offered 

1  Ch.  6.    3  The  sons  also  of  Aaron  ;  N,,  and  Abihu 
24.    1  of  Aaron  ;  X  ,  andAbihu,  Eleazar,  and  I. 
24    2  N.  andAbihu  diedbeforetheirfather,  and 

2.  Son  of  Jeroboam  I.  king  of  Israel,  and  slain  by 
Baasha.  B  c.  954. 

1  Ki.14.  20  and  N.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

15.  25  N.  the  son  of  Jeroboam  began  to  reign  0. 
15.  27  N.  and  all  Israel  laid  siege  to  Gibbethon 
15.  31  the  acts  of  N.,  and  all  that  lie  did,  (are) 

3.  Great  graudsou  of  Jerahmeel,  son  of  Hezron.  B.C. 
1410. 

1  Ch.  2.  28  And  the  sons  of  Shanmai ;  X.,  and  Abis. 
2.  30  the  sons  of  N.,  Seled  and  Appaim:  but  S. 

4.  A  Benjamite  of  the  kindred  of  kingSaul.  B.C.  1180. 

1  Ch.  S.  30  Abdon..Zur,  and  Kish,  and  Baal.  andN. 
9.  36  Zur,  and  Kish,  and  Baal,  and  Ner,  and  X. 

NAG'-GE,  Nayyal.     An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  25(theson)of  Ksli,  which  was  (the  son)  of  N. 


NA-HA-LI'-EL,  ^N^ru  inheritance  of  God. 
A  station  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  between 
Mattanah  and  Banioth,  N.  of  Moab,  near  the  wilder- 
ness of  Kedeinoth,  and  watered  by  a  tributary  of  the 
Arnon. 

Num  21.  19  from  Mattanah  to  N.:  and  from  N.  to  B. 

NA-HA1'-LAL,NA-HA'-LAL,  NA-HA'-LOL,  tyru,  ^qj. 
A  Levittcal  city  in  Zebuluu,  retained  by  the  Canaanites, 
near  Kattath  and  Dimnah.    Now  called  Mahlul. 

Josh.  19.  15  X.,andSMniron,  andldalah, andBeth-le. 

21.  35  Dimnah.. N.  with  her  suburbs  ;  four  cit. 
Judg.  1.  30  of  Kitron,  nor  the  inhabitants  of  N. 

NAH'-AM,  nni  consolation. 

Brother  of  Hodiah  wife  of  Ezra,  descendant  of  Caleb  son 

of  Jephunneh.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  19  the  sister  of  N.,  the  father  of  Keilah  the 

NA-HA-Ma'-NI,  ':D[U  comforter. 

A  chief  man  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel  from  exile. 

B.C.  536. 

Neh.   7.    7  N.,  Mordecai,  Bilshan,  Mispereth,  Bigvai 

NA-HA-RA'-I,  ITU,  "1QJ  snorting  one. 

One  of  David's  valiant  men,  fromBeeroth  in  Benjamin. 

B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  37  N.  the  Beerothite,  armour  bearerto  Joab 
1  Ch.n.  39  N.theBerothite,thearmourbearertoJoab 

NA'-HASH,  e>ru  oracle. 

1.  An  Ammonite  king  who  besieged  Jabesh-gilead,  and 
was  defeated  by  Saul.    B.C.  1090. 

1  Sa.11.    1  Then  N.  the  Ammonite  came  up,  and  enc. 

11.    1  all  the  men  of  Jabesh  said  unto  N.,  Make 

11.  2  N.  the  Ammonite  answered  them,  On  this 

12.  12  N.  the  king  of  the  children  of  Animon  c. 

2.  Another  king  of  Ammon  and  father  of  Shobi  and 
Hanan.    B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.  10.    2  show  kindness  unto  Hanun  the  son  of  N. 

17.  27  the  son  of  N.  of  Rabbah  of  the  children 

1  Ch.19.    1  N.  the  king  of  the  children  of  Animon  d. 

19.   2  show  kindness  unto  Hanun  the  son  of  N. 

3.  Mother  of  Abigail  the  mother  of  Amasa,  Absalom's 
general,  and  sisterof  Zeruiah  Joab's  mother.    B.C.  1090. 

2  Sa.  17. 25  that  went  in  to  Abigail  the  daughter  of  N. 
NA'-HATH,  nn:  lowness. 

1.  A  son  of  Reuel,  son  of  Esau.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  13  N.,  and  Zerah,  Shammah,  and  Mizzah 
36. 17  duke  N.,  duke  Zerah,  duke  Shammah,  d. 

1  Ch.  1.  37  sons  of  Reuel ;  N.,  Zerah,  Shammah,  and 

2.  A  Kohathite,  son  of  Zophai ;  perhaps  the  same  as 
Toah  in  1  Ch.  6.  34.    B.C.  1170. 

i  Ch.  6.  26  of  Elkanah ;  Zophai  his  son,  and  N.  his  s 

3.  A  Levite,  overseer  of  the  offerings  in  the  days  of 
Hezekiah.    B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.31.  13  N.,  and  Asahel,  and  Jerimoth,  and  Joza. 

NAH'-BI,  *2r\i  Jah  is  protection,  consolation. 

A  prince  of  Naphtali  whom  Moses  sent  out  to  spy  the 

land.    B.C.  1490. 

Numi3,  14  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  N.  the  son  of  Vop. 
NA'-HOR,  iwi  piercer,  slayer. 

1.  Grandfather  of  Abraham,  and  great  grandson  of  Peleg, 
fourth  from  Shem.     B.C.  2140. 

Gen.  11.  22  And  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  N. 
11.  23  Serug  lived  after  he  begat  X.  two  hundred 
11.  24  N.  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and  begat 
11.  25  N.  lived  after  he  begat  Terah  anhundred 

1  Ch.  1.  26  Serug,  N.,  Terah 

2.  Sonof  Terah,  brotherof  Abraham,  husband  of  Milcah, 
who  bore  him  eight  children.    B.C.  1950. 

Gen.  11.  26  Terah  lived,  .and  begat  Abram,  N.,  and 
11.  27  Terah  begat  Abram,  N.,  and  Haran;  and 
11.  29  Abram  and  X.  tool*  them  wives :  the  name 
11.  29  the  name  of  X.'s  wife,  Milcah,  the  daugh. 

22.  20  also  born  children  unto  thy  brother  N. 
22.  23  these  eight  Milcah  did  bear  to  X.,  Abra. 
24.  10  went  to  Mesopotamia,  unto  the  city  of  X". 
24.  15  Milcah,  the  wife  of  X.,  Abraham's  brother 
24.  24  the  son  of  Milcah,  which  she  bare  unto  X. 
24.  47  Bethuel,  N.'s  son,  whom  Milcah  bare  unto 
29.  5  unto  them,  Know  ye  Laban  the  son  of  X'. 
31.  53  and  the  God  of  N.,  the  God  of  their  father 

Josh. 24.    2  father  of  Abraham,  and  the  father  of  N. 

NAH'-SHON,  pc*ru  oracle. 

Son  of  Aminadab,  and  prince  of  Judah  in  the  days  of 

Moses.     See  Naasho?i.    B.C.  1492. 

Num.  1.    7  Of  Judah  ;  N.  the  son  of  Amminadab 

2.  3  N.  the  son  of  Amminadab  (shall  be)capt. 
7. 12  he  that  offered,  .was  N.  the  son  of  Amm. 
7.  17  the  offering  of  N.  the  son  of  Animinadab 
10.  14  over  his  host  (was)  X.  the  son  of  Ammin. 
Ruth  4.  20  And  Amminadab  begat  N.,  and  N.  begat 
1  Ch,  2.  10  Amminadab  begat  N.,  prince  of  the  chil. 
2.  11  And  X.  begat  Salma,  and  Salma  begat  B. 

NA'-HTJM,  Diru  comforter. 

One  of  the  later  prophets,  a  native  of  Elkoshin  Galilee, 

who  prophesied  against  Xiueveh.     B.C.  713. 

Nah.  1.    1  The  book  of  the  vision  of  X.  theElkoshite 
NAIL  — 
l.Xoil,  claw,  159  tephar. 

Dan.    4.  33  like  eagles'  (feathers),  and  his  nails  like 
7. 19  (were  of)  iron,  and  his  nails  (of)  brass 


NAIL 


683 


NAME 


2.  A  pin,  nail,  "in;  yathed. 

Jndg.  4.  21  took  a  nail  of  the  teut,  and  took  an  ham. 
4.  21  smote  the  nail  into  his  temples,  and  fast. 

4.  22  lay  dead,  and  the  nail  (was)  in  his  temples 

5.  26  She  put  her  hand  to  the  nail,  and  her  ri. 
Ezra  9.  8  and  to  give  us  a  nail  in  his  holy  place,  that 
Isa.   22.  23  And  I  will  fasten  him  (as)  a  nail  in  a  sure 

22.  25  shall  the  nail  that  is  fastened  in  the  sure 
Zech.  10.   4  came  forth  the  corner,  out  of  him  the  ua. 

3.  A  nail  or  pin,  ipp-p  masmer. 

1  Ch.22.  3  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  the  nails 

2  Ch.  3.  9  the  weight  of  the  nails  (was)  fifty  shekels 
Isa.  41.  7  he  fastened  it  with  nails,  (that)  it  should 
Jer.   10.  4  fasten  it  with  nails  and  with  hammers, that 

4. yails,  orpins,  rrnpfea?  masmeroth. 

Eccl.  i2.  11  and  as  nails  fastened  (by)  the  masters  of 

5.  Natl,  print,  \~&i  tsipporen. 

Deut2i.  12  shall  shave  her  head,  and  pare  her  nails 

6. Nail,  riAos  kelos. 

J0I1U20.  25  see  in  his  hands  the  print  of  the  nails,  and 
20.  25  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails,  and 
NAIL,  to  — 
To  nail,  Trpoo-wAScc  2)roselod. 

Col.     2. 14  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  c. 
NA'-LN,  Naiis. 

A  city  in  Galilee,  two  miles  S.  of  Mount  Tabor,  a  little 
S.W.  of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  where  Jesus  restored  a 
widow's  son  to  life ;  now  called  Nain. 

Luke  7. 11  he  went  into  a  city  called  N. ;  and  many 

NA'-IOTH,  rnj,  nvi  facetting. 

A  place  in  Ramah  where  Samuel  dwelt. 

1  Sa.  10. 18  And  he  and  Samuel  went  and  dwelt  in  N. 

ig.  19  saying,  Behold,  David  (is)  at  N.  in  Ramah 

19.  22  And  (one)  said,  Behold,  (they  be)  at  N.  in 

20.  1  David  fled  from  N.  in  Ramah,  and  came 
NAKED  — 

l.Nalced  ones,  W?~l'JJ?  maanimniim. 

2  Ch.28. 15  clothed  all  that  were  naked  among  them 

2.  Naked,  avy  eroni. 

Gen.    3.  7  and  they  knew  that  they  (were)  naked  ;and 

3. 10  and  I  was  afraid,  because  I  (was)  naked 

3. 11  Who  told  thee  that  thou  (wast)  naked? 
Eze.  16.    7  grown,  whereas  thou  (wast)  naked  and 

16.  22  when  thou  wast  naked  and  bare,  (and) 
16.  39  fair  jewels,  and  leave  thee  naked  and  ba. 
18.    7, 16  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  garment 

23.  29  and  shall  leave  thee  naked  and  bare ;  and 
3. Naked,  n'nj/  arom. 

Gen.    2.  25  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his 

1  Sa.  19.  24  and  lay  dowu  naked  all  that  day  and  all 
Job     1.  21  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb 

1.  21  naked  shall  I  retarn  thither:  the  Lord 
22.    6  and  stripped  the  naked  of  their  clothing 

24.  7  Theycause  the  naked  to  lodge  withoutcl. 

24.  10  They  cause  (him)  to  go  naked  without  c. 
26.    6  Hell  (is)  naked  before  him,  and  destruct. 

Eccl.  5. 15  naked  shall  he  return  to  go  as  lie  came 
Isa.  20.   2  And  he  did  so,  walking  naked  and  baref. 
20.    3  Isaiah  hath  walked  naked  and  barefoot 
20.   4  young  and  old,  naked  and  barefoot,  even 
58.  7  when  thou  seestthe  naked,  that  thou  cover 
Hos.    2.    3  Lest  I  strip  her  naked,  and  set  her  as  in 
Amos  2.  16  shall  flee  away  naked  in  that  clay,  saith 
Mic.   x.    8  I  will  go  stripped  and  naked ;  I  will  make 
4. Nakedness,  rrnj;  eryah. 

Mic.    1. 11  of  Saphir,  having  thy  shame  naked  :  the 

5.  To  free,  expose,  y*]3  para. 

Exod32.  25  when  Moses  saw  that  the  people  (were)  n. 

6.  Naked,  yvfj.uos  giimnos. 

Matt  25.  36  Naked,  and  ye  clothed  me :  I  was  sick,  and 
25.38  took(thee)in?ornaked,amiciothed(thee)? 

25.  43  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not :  sick,  and 
25.  44  or  athirst,  or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick 

Marki+.  51  alinen  cloth  castabout  (his)naked  (body) 
14.  52  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from  them  naked 
Johnai.    7  for  he  was  naked,  and  did  cast  himself 
Acts  19. 16  so  that  they  fled  out  of  that  house  naked 

2  Co.  5.  3  being  clothed  we  shall  not  be  found  nak. 
Heb.  4.  13  butallthings(are)nakedandopeneduuto 
Jas.  2. 15  If  a  brother  or  sister  be  naked,  and  dest. 
Rev.    3.  17  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  nak. 

16.  15  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his  shame 
17. 16  andshallmake  herdesolate  and  naked,and 

NAKED,  to  be  (made)  — 

I. To  be  nalced,  -ny  ur,  2. 

Hab.   3.   9  Thy  bow  was  made  quite  naked,  (accor.) 

2.To  be  naked,  destitute,  yvfxunrevco  gumneteuo. 

1  Co.  4. 11  thirst,  and  are  naked,  and  are  buffeted 
NAKED,  to  make  (self)  — 

I. To  make  or  show  self  naked ,  rny,  arah,  7. 

Lam.  4.  21  be  drunken,  and  shalt  make  thyself  naked 
'2.  To  free,  expose,  jn?  para. 

Exod32.  25  Aaron  had  made  them  naked  unto  (their) 

3.  To  make  free,  expose,  sn=?  para,  5. 

2  Ch.28.  19  he  made  Juclah  naked,  and  transgressed 
NAKEDNESS  — 

1.  Nakedness,  lij/D  maor. 

Hab.    2. 15  that  thou  mayest  look  on  their  nakedness 


2. Nakedness,  void  space,  iy_D  maar. 

Nah.  3.  5  I  will  show  the  nations  thy  nakedness,  and 

3.  Naked,  D*ry  erom. 

Deut2S.  48  and  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness,  and  in 

4.  Nakedness,  nnw  ervah. 

Gen.    9. 22  saw  the  nakedness  of  his  father,  and  told 

9.  23  and  covered  the  nakedness  of  their  father 

9.  23  and  they  saw  not  their  father's  nakedness 

42.    9  see  the  nakedness  of  the  land  ye  are  come 

42.  12  Nay,  but  to  see  the  nakedness  of  the  land 

Exod2o.  26  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  discovered  th. 

Lev.  18.    6  shall  approach,  .to  uncover  (their)  naked. 

8.    7  nakedness  of  thy  father,  or  the  nakedness 

8.    7,  11,  15  thou  shalt  not  uncover  her  naked. 

8.   8  The  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife  shalt 

8.    8notuncover:  it  (is)  thy  father's  nakedness 

S.    9  The  nakedness  of  thy  sister,  the  daughter 

8.    9  (even)  their  nakedness  thou  shalt  not  un. 

8. 10  The  nakedness  of  thy  son's  daughter,  or 

8.  10  their  nakedness  thou  shalt  not  uncover 

8.  10  for  theirs  (is)  thine  own  nakedness 

8.  11  The  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife's  dan. 

8. 12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17  shalt  not  uncover  the  n. 

8.  16  brother's  wife :  it  (is)  thy  brother's  nake. 

8.  17  to  uncover  her  nakedness;  (for)  they  (are) 

8.  18  to  vex  (her),  to  uncover  her  nakedness,  be. 

8.  19  to  uncover  her  nakedness  as  long  as  she 

20.  11  hath  uncovered  his  father's  nakedness:  b. 

20.  17  see  her  nakedness,  and  she  see  his  naked. 

20. 17  he  hath  uncovered  his  sister's  nakedness 
20.  18  shall  uncover  her  nakedness,  he  hath  dis. 
20.  19  And  thou  shalt  not  uncover  the  nakedness 
20. 20  he  hath  uncovered  his  uncle's  nakedness 

20.  21  hehathuncoveredhisbrother'snakedness 

1  Sa,  20.  30  the  confusion  of  thy  mother's  nakedness 
Isa.  47.  3Thynakednessshallbeuncovered,yea,  thy 
Lam.  1.  8  because  they  have  seen  her  nakedness  ;yea 
Eze.  16.    8  over  thee,  and  covered  thy  nakedness 

16.  36  and  thy  nakedness  discovered  through  thy 
16.  37  and  will  discover  thy  nakedness  unto  them 
16.  37  that  they  may  see  all  thy  nakedness 
22.  10  they  discovered  their  father's  nakedness 
23. 10  These  discovered  her  nakedness  :  they  t. 

23. 18  discovered  her  nakedness :  then  my  mind 
23. 29  and  the  nakedness  of  thy  whoredoms  shall 

Hos.   2.   9  and  my  flax  (given)  to  cover  her  nakedness 

0. Flesh,  nnjj  nb^  bcsar  ervah. 

Exod28.  42  linen  breeches  to  cover  their  nakedness 
S.NoJcedness,  yvfivSr^s  gumnotes. 

Rora.  8.  35  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword 

2  Co.  11.  27  in  fastings  often,  hi  cold  and  nakedness 
Rev.   3. 18  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear 

NAME  — 

I. Name,  renoion,  Dt?  shem. 

Gen.    2.  11  name  of  the  first  (is)  Pison:  that  (is)  it  wh. 

2.  13  And  the  name  of  the  second  river  (is)  Gi. 

2.  14  And  the  name  of  the  third  river  (is)  Hid. 

2.  19  living  creature,  that  (was)  the  name  ther. 
•  2.  20  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,  and  to  the 

3.  20  Adam  called  his  wife's  name  Eve ;  because 

4.  17  called  thenameof  the  city,  after  the  name 
4.  19  name  of  the  one  (was)  Adah,  and  the  name 
4.  21  his  brother's  name  (was)  Jubal :  he  was  the 
4.  25  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth 
4.  26  born  a  son ;  and  he  called  his  name  Enos 

4.  26  began  men  to  call  upou  the  name  of  the  L. 

5.  2  blessed  them,  and  called  their  name  Adam 
5.  3  after  his  image ;  and  called  his  name  Seth 
5.  29  And  he  called  his  name  Noah,  saying,  This 

10.  25  the  name  of  one  (was)  Peleg ;  for  in  his  d. 

10.  25  divided ;  and  his  brother's  name  (was)  Jo. 

11.  4  let  us  make  us  a  name,  lest  we  be  scattered 
ii„    9  Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babel 

11.  29  the  name  of  Abram's  wife  (was)  Sarai 
11. 29  name  of  Nahor's  wife,  Milcah . .  daughter 

12.  2  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  name  great 

12.  8  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Loud 

13.  4  there  Abram  called  on  the  name  of  the  L. 
16.    1  had.  .an  Egyptian,  whose  name  (was)  H. 
16.  11  a  sou,  and  shalt  call  his  name  Ishmael 
16.  13  she  called  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  sp. 

16.  15  Abram  called  his  son's  name,  which  Hag. 

17.  5  Neither  shall  thy  name  anymore  be  called 
17.  5  but  thy  name  shall  be  Abraham ;  for  a  f. 
17.  15  name  Sarai, butSarah(shall)hername(be) 
17.  19  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Isaac :  and 
ig.  22  Therefore  the  name  of  the  city  was  called 
19. 37  bare  a  son,  and  called  hisname  Moab  :  the 
19.  38  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Ben-ammi 

21.  3  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his  son  that 

21.  33  and  called  there  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 

22.  14  Ahraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  J. 
22.  24  his  concubine,  whose  name  (was) Reumah 

24.  29  had  a  brother,  and  his  name  (was)  Laban 

25.  1  took  a  wife,  and  her  name  (was)  Keturah 
25.  13  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Ishm. 
25-  13  by  their  names,  according  to  their  gener. 
25.  16  of  Ishmael,  and  these  (are)  their  names 
25.  25  garment;  and  they  called  his  name  Esau 
25.  26  and  his  name  was  called  Jacob:  and  Isaac 

25.  30  faint ;  therefore  was  his  name  called  Edom 

26.  18  he  called  their  names  after  the  names  by 
26.  20  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  well  Esek 
26.  21  also  :  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  Sitnah 
26.  22  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  Rehoboth 
26.  25  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
26.  33  the  name  of  the  city  (is)  Beer-sheba  unto 
28.  19  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Beth-el 


Exod. 


So  in 

3 
3 

3 
3' 
3< 
4< 

6. 


19  the  name  of  that  city  (was  called)  Luz  at 

16  name  of  the  elder  (was)  Leah,  and  the  n. 

32  she  called  his  name  Reuben :  for  she  said 

33  (son)  also :  and  she  called  his  name  Sime. 

34  sons  :  therefore  was  his  name  called  Levi 

35  therefore  she  called  hisname  Judah  :  and 
6  a  son:  therefore  called  she  his  name  Dan 
8,  11,  13,  18,  20    and  she  called  his  name 

21  a  daughter,  and  called  her  name  Dinah 
24  And  she  called  hisname  Joseph;  and  said 
48  Therefore  was  the  name  of  it  called  Gale. 

2  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Mahan. 

27  he  said  unto  him,  What  (is)  thy  name? 

28  Thy  name  shall  be  called  110  more  Jacob 

29  said,Tell  (me),I  pray  thee,thy  name.  And 

29  (is)  it  (that)  thou  dost  ask  after  my  name? 

30  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel 

17  therefore  the  name  of  the  place  is  called 
8  the  name  of  it  was  called  Allon-bachuth 

10  God  said  unto  him.  Thy  name  (is)  Jacob 
10  thy  name  shall  not  be  called  any  more  J. 

10  shall  be  thy  name  ;  and  he  called  Ins  name 

15  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  where 

18  that  she  called  his  nameBen-oui :  but  his 
.  10  These  (are)  the  names  of  Esau's  sons  ;  E. 

32>  35>  39  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was) 

39  his  wife's  name  (was)  Mehetabel,  the  da. 

40  these  (are)  the  names,  .by  their  names 

1  certain  Adullamite,  whose  name  (was)H. 

2  certain  Canaanite,  whose  name  (was)  Sh. 

3  and  bare  a  son ;  and  he  called  his  name  Er 

4  bare  a  son  ;  and  she  called  his  name  Onau 

5  bare  a  son  ;  and  called  his  name  Shelah 

6  Judah  took  a  wife,  .whose  name  (was)  T. 

29  therefore  his  name  was  called  Pharez 

30  his  hand  :  and  his  name  was  called  Zarah 
45  Pharaoh  called  Joseph's  name  Zaphnath. 

51  Joseph  called  the  name  of  his  first  born 

52  the  name  of  the  second  calleu  he  Ephraim 

8  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  children  of  I. 

6  called  after  the  name  of  their  brethren  iu 

16  my  name  be  named  on  them,  and  the  name 

11  the  name  of  it  was  called  Abel-mizraim 

1  Now  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  children 
15  name  of  the  one  (was)  Shiphrah . .  the  name 
10  And  she  called  his  name  Moses  :  and  she 

22  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Gershom 
13  they  shall  say  to  me.  What  (is)  his  name  ? 

15  this  (is)  my  name  for  ever,  and  this  (is) 

23  I  came  to  Pharaoh  to  speak  iu  thy  name 
3  butbymy  name  Jehovah  was  I  not  known 

16  And  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of 

16  that  my  name  maybe  declared  throughout 
3  (is)  a  man  of  war :  the  Lord  (is)  his  name 

23  therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  Marah 

31  the  house  of  Israel  called  the  name  thereof 

7  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Massah 

15  and  called  the  name  of  it  Jehovah-nissi 

3  of  which  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Gers. 

4  And  the  name  of  the  other  (was)  Eliezer 
7  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 
7  hold  him  guiltless  that  tuketh  his  name 

24  In  all  places  where  I  record  my  name  I 

13  make  no  mention  of  the  name  of  other  g. 
21  will  not  pardon . .  for  my  name  (is)  in  him 

9  grave  on  them  the  names  of  the  children 
10  Six  of  their  names  on  one  stone,  and  (the 

10  six  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone 

11  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel 

12  Aaron  shall  bear  their  names  before  the 
21  be  with  the  names  of  the  cluldren  of  Isr. 
21  twelve,  according  to  their  names,  (like) 
21  every  one  with  his  name  shall  they  be  ac 

29  Aaron  shall  bear  the  names  of  the  child. 

2  See,  I  have  called  by  name  Bezaleel  the 
12  yet  thou  hast  said,  I  know  thee  by  name 

17  grace  in  my  sight,  and  I  know  thee  by  n. 

19  and  I  will  proclaim  the  name  of  the  Lord 

5  and  proclaimed  the  name  of  the  Lord 

14  for  the  LORD,  whose  name  (is)  Jealous,  (is) 

30  Lord  hath  called  by  name  Bezaleel  the  son 
6,  14  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel 

14  twelve,  according  to  their  names,  (like)  the 
14  every  one  with  his  name,  according  to  the 
21  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of 
12  And  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  name  falsely 
12  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of  thy 

3  sanctuary,  and  to  profane  my  holy  name 
,    6  and.  not  profane  the  name  of  their  God 

,    2  that  they  profane  not  my  holy  name  (in 

32  Neither  shall  ye  profane  my  holy  name 

.  11  Israelitish  woman's  son  blasphemed  then. 
.  1 1  and  his  mother's  name  (was)  Shelomith 

16  he  that  blasphemeth  the  name  of  the  L. 

16  when  he  blasphemeth  the  name,  .shall  be 
.    2  with  the  number  of  (their)  names,  every 

.   s  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  men  that  shall 

17  men  which  are  expressed  by  (their)names 

18  according  to  the  number  of  the  names 
V.  20,  Sr2,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42. 

.    2,  3  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  A. 

17  these  werethe  sons  of  Levi  by  theirnames 

18  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Gers. 
40  and  take  the  number  of  their  names 

43  by  the  number  of  names,  from  a  month  old 
32  by  name  ye  shall  reckon  the  instruments 
27  And  they  shall  put  my  name  upon  the  c. 

.  3  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Taberah 
26  the  camp,  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Eld. 

.  26  and  the  name  of  the  other  Medad  :  and 

.  34  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Kibroth. 

.    4  these  (were)  their  names :  of  the  tribe  of 


NAME 


684 


NAME 


NUU113.  16  These  (are)  the  names  of  the  men  which  M. 
17.   2  write  thou  every  man's  name  upon  his  rod 

17.  3  thou  shalt  write  Aaron's  name  upon  the 
si.  3  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Hor. 
25.  14  Now  the  name  of  the  Israelite  that  was 

25.  15  the  name  of  the  Midianitish  woman  that 

26.  33  the  names  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 
26.  46  And  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  Asher 
26.  53  shall  be . .  according  to  the  number  of  na. 
26.  55  according  to  the  names  of  the  tribes  of 

26.  59  the  name  of  Amram's  wife  (was)  Joehebed 

27.  1  these  (are)  uhe  names  of  hisdaughters;  M. 

27.  4  Why  should  the  name  of  our  father  be 
32.  38  Baal-meon,  their  names  being  changed 
32.  38  aud  gave  other  names  unto  the  cities  wh. 
32.  42  and  called  it  Nobah,  after  his  own  name 
34.  17  These  (are)  the  names  of  the  men  which 
34.  19  the  names  of  the  men  (are)  these:  Of  the 

Deut.  3.  14  called  them  after  his  own  name,  Bashan. 
5.  11  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  LORD 
5.  11  hold  (him)  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in 
6. 13  and  serve  him,  and  shalt  swear  by  his  n. 
7.  24  and  thou  shalt  destroy  their  name  from 
g.  14  blot  out  their  name  from  under  heaven 
10.    8  and  to  bless  in  his  name,  unto  this  day 
10.  20  shalt  thou  cleave,  and  swear  by  his  name 
12.   3  destroy  the  names  of  them  out  of  that  p. 
12.    5  out  of  all  your  tribes  to  put  his  name  th. 
12.  11  choose  to  cause  his  name  to  dwell  there 

12.  21  thy  God  hath  chosen  to  put  his  name  th. 
14.  23  he  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 
14. 24  God  shall  choose  to  set  his  name  there 
16.    2  Lord  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 

16.  6  thy  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  in 
16. 11  God  hath  chosen  to  place  his  name  there 

18.  5,  7  minister  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

18.  19  words  which  he  shall  speak  in  my  name 
18.  20  shall  presume  to  speak  a  word  in  my  name 
18.  20  that  shall  speak  in  the  name  of  other  gods 

18.  22  When  a  prophet  speaketh  in  the  name  of 
2i.  5  and  to  bless  in  the  name  of  the  Lord;  and 
22.  14  bring  up  an  evil  name  upon  her,  and  say 
22.  19  because  he  hath  brought  up  an  evil  name 
25.  6  shall  succeed  in  the  name  of  his  brother 
25.  6  that  his  name  be  not  put  out  of  Israel 
25.   7  raise  up  unto  his  brother  a  name  in  Israel 

25.  10  his  name  shall  be  called  in  Israel,  The  h. 

26.  2  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 
26.  19  in  praise,  and  in  name,  and  in  honour;  and 

28.  10  see  that  thou  art  called  by  the  name  of 

28.  58  fear  this  glorious  and  fearful  name,  The 

29.  20  Lord  shall  blot  out  his  name  from  under 
32.    3  Because  I  will  publish  the  name  of  theL. 

Josh.  5.  9  Wherefore  the  name  of  the  place  is  called 
7.  9  and  cut  oh*  our  name  from  the  earth:  and 
7.    9  what  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  great  name? 

7.  26  the  name  of  that  place  was  called,  The  v. 
9.   9  because  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God 

14.  15  the  name  of  Hebron  before  (was)  Kirjath. 

15.  15  and  the  name  of  Debir  before  (was)  Kir. 

17.  3  and  these  (are)  the  names  of  his  daughters 

19.  47  Dan,  after  the  name  of  Dan  their  father 
2i.  9  cities  which  are  (here)  mentioned  by  name 
23.    7  make  mention  of  the  name  of  theirgods 

Judg.  1.  10  the  name  of  Hebron  before  (was)  Kirjath. 
1.  11  the  name  of  Debir  before  (was)  Kir jath-s. 
1.  17  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Hormah 
1.  23  now  the  name  of  the  city  before  (was)  Luz 

1.  26  a  city,  and  called  the  name  thereof  Luz 
i.  26  which  (is)  the  name  thereof  unto  this  day 

2.  5  they  called  the  name  of  that  place  Bochim 

8.  31  a  son,  whose  name  he  called  Abimelech 

13.  2  the  Danites,  whose  name  (was)  Manoah 
13.   6  whence  he  (was),  neither  told  he  me  his  n. 
13,  17  What(is)  thy  name,  that  when  thy  sayings 
13.  18  him,  Why  askest  thou  thus  after  my  name 
13. 24  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Samson 
15. 19  he  called  the  name  thereof  En-hakkore 

16.  4  loved  a  woman,  .whose  name  (was)  Del. 

17.  1  man  of  mount  Ephraim,  whose  name  (was) 

18.  29  Aixl  they  called  the  name  of  the  city  Dan 
18.  29  after  the  name  of  Dan  their  father,  who 
18.  29  the  name  of  the  city  (was)  Laish  at  the  fi. 

Ruth  1.    2  And  the  name  of  the  man(was)ElimeIech 
1.    2  name  of  his  wife  Naomi,  and  the  name 
1.    4  of  Moab  ;  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Or. 

1.  4  name  of  the  other  Ruth:  and  they  dwelt 
z.    1  of  Elimelech ;  and  his  name  (was)  Boaz 

2.  19  The  man's  name  with  whom  I  wrought 
4.    5,  10  to  raise  up  the  name  of  the  dead  upon 
4.  10  that  the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off 
4.  14  that  his  name  may  be  famous  in  Israel 

4.  17  the  women  her  neighbours  gave  it  a  name 
4.  17  and  they  called  his  nameObed:  he  (is)  the 
1  Sa.  1.  1  and  his  name  (was)  Elkanah,  the  son  of  J. 
1.  2  name  of  the  one  (was)  Hannah,  and  then. 
1. 20  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Samuel 

7.  12  and  called  the  name  of  it  Eben-ezer,  say. 

8.  2  Now  the  name  of  his  first  born  was  Joel 

8.  2  the  name  of  his  second,  Abiah:  (they  were) 

9.  1  whose  name  (was)  Kish,  the  son  of  Abiel 
g.    2  And  he  had  a  son,  whose  name  (was)  Saul 

12.  22  not  forsake  his  people  forhis  great  name's 
14.  4  the  name  of  the  one(was)Bozez,  and  then. 
14.  49  the  names  of  his  two  daughters  (were  th. 
34.  49  name  of  the  first  born  Merab,  and  the  na. 
14.  50  the  name  ofSaul's  wife  (was)Ahiuoam, the 
14.  50  name  of  the  captain  of  his  host  (was)  Ab. 
17.  12  of  that  Ephrathite.  .whose  name  (was)  J. 
17.  13  the  mimes  of  his  three  sons  that  went  to 
17.  23  the  Philistine  of  G-atll,  Goliath  by  name 
17.  45 1  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 


>Sa. 


Ki. 


:Ch. 


30  wisely,  .so  that  hismune  was  much  setby 
42  sworn  both  of  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

7  his  name  (was)  Doeg,  an  Edomite,  the  ch. 
2 1  destroy  my  name  out  of  my  father's  house 

3  name  of  the  man  (was)  Nabal,  aud  the  n. 
5  and  go  to  Nabal,  and  greet  him  in  my  n. 
9  they  spake  to  Nabal.  .in  the  name  of  Da. 

25  his  name  (is),  so  (is)  he ;  Nabal  (is)  his  n. 
7  a  concubine,  whose  name  (was)  Rizpah,  the 
2  name  of  the  one  (was)  Baanah,  and  the  n. 

4  became  lame.  And  his  name  (was)  Mep. 
14  the  names  of  those  that  were  born  unto 

20  called  the  name  of  that  place  Baal-pera. 
2  called  by  the  name  of  The  Lord  of  hosts 

18  he  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 
9  made  thee  a  great  name,  like  unto  the  n. 
13  He  shall  build  an  house  for  my  name  ;  and 

23  to  make  him  a  name,  and  to  do  for  you 

26  let  thy  name  be  magnified  for  ever,  saying 
13  David  gat  (him)  a  name  when  he  returned 

2  (there  was),  .a  servant,  whose  name  (was) 
12  had  a  young  son.  whose  name  (was)  Micah 

24  he  called  his  name  Solomon  :  and  the  L. 

25  he  called  his  name  Jedidiah,  because  of 

28  the  city,  and  it  be  called  after  my  name 

1  had  a  fair  sister,  whose  name  (was)  Tamar 

3  a  friend,  whose  name  (was)  Jonadab,  the 

7  (neither)  name  nor  remainder  upon  the 

27  and  one  daughter,  whose  name  (was)  T. 

5  whose  name  (was)  Shimei,  the  son  of  Gera 

25  (was)  a  man's  son  whose  name  (was)Ithra 
18  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  remembrance 
18  he  called  the  pillar  after  his  own  name 

1  a  man  of  Belial,  whose  name  (was)  Sheba 

21  Sheba  the  son  of  Bichri  by  name,  hath 
50  and  I  will  sing  praises  unto  thy  name 

8  the  names  of  the  mighty  men  whom  Da. 
18  (and)  slew  (them),  and  had  the  name  am. 

22  and  had  the  name  among  three  mighty  m. 
47  the  name  of  Solomon  better  than  thy  u. 

2  no  house  built  unto  the  name  of  the  L. 

8  these  (are)  their  names :  The  son  of  Hur 
3,  5  build  an  house  unto  the  name  of  the  L. 
5  he  shall  build  an  house  unto  my  name 
21  pillar,  and  called  the  name  thereof  Jachin 
21  pillar,  and  calle-'  the  name  thereof  Boaz 
16  an  house,  that  my  name  might  be  therein 
17,  20  an  house  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  God 

1 8  was  in  thine  heart  to  build . .  unto  my  name 

19  he  shall  build  the  house  unto  my  name 

29  thou  hast  said,  My  name  shall  be  there 
33  and  confess  thy  name,  and  pray,  and  make 

35  confess  thy  name,  and  turn  from  their  sin 

41  out  of  a  far  country  for  thy  name's  sake 

42  they  shall  hear  of  thy  great  name,  aud  of 

43  people  of  the  earth  may  know  thy  name 
43  that  this  house,  .is  called  by  thy  name 
44,  48  house  that  I  have  built  for  thy  name 

3  hast  built,  to  put  my  name  there  for  ever 

7  house,  which  I  have  hallowed  for  my  name 

1  concerning  the  name  of  the  Lord,  she 

26  whose  mother's  name  (was)  Zeruah,  a  w. 

36  I  have  chosen  me  to  put  my  name  there 

2  a  child  shall  be  born.  .Josiah  by  name 
21  Lord  did  choose,  .to  put  his  name  there 
21,  31  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an  A. 

2,  10  mother's  name  (was)  Maachah,  the  d. 
24  called  the  name  of  the  city  which  he  built 
24  after  the  name  of  Shemer,  owner  of  the 
24  And  call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  and 

24  I  will  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  and 

25  call  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  but  put  no 

26  called  on  the  name  of  Baal  from  morning 

31  came,  saying,  Israel  shall  be  thy  name 

32  built  an  altar  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

8  she  wrote  letters  in  Ahab's  name,  and  s. 

16  (which  is)  true  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
42  his  mother's  name  (was)  Azubah  the  dan. 
24  and  cursed  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
11  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and 

26  his  mother's  name  (was)  Athaliah,  the  d. 

1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Zibiah  of  Beer-s. 

2  mother's  name  (was)  Jenoaddan  of  Jeru. 

7  called  the  name  of  it  Joktheel  unto  this 

27  he  would  blot  out  the  name  of  Israel  from 
2  and  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jecoliah  of 

33  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jerusha,  the  da. 
2  mother's  name  also  (was)  Abi,  the  daug. 

.    1  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hephzi-bah 
.    4  said,  In  Jerusalem  will  I  put  my  name 
.    7  In  this  house.  .1  put  my  name  for  ever 
,  iq  his  mother's  name  (was)  Meshullemeth 
,    1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Jedidah,  the  da 
27  of  which  I  said,  My  name  shall  be  there 
31  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hamutal,  the  d. 

34  and  turned  hisnameto  Jehoiakim.andtu. 
36  his  mother's  name  (was)  Zebndah,  the  d. 

8  Aud  his  mother's  name  (was)  Nehusta,  the 

17  the  king,  .changed  his  name  to  Zedekiah 

18  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hamutal,  the 

19  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Peleg,  because 
.  19  and  his  brother's  name  (was)  Joktan 

.  43  ami  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Dinhabah 
.  46  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Avith 
.  50  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  Pai ;  and 
.  50  wife's  name(was)Mehetabel,  thedaughter 
.  26  also  another  wife,  whose  name  (was)  Atar. 
.  29  name  of  the  wife  of  Abishur(was)  Abiha. 
.  34  servant,  an  Egyptian,  whose  name  (was) 
.  3  the  name  of  their  sister  (was)  Hazelelponi 
.  q  his  mothercalled  his  name  Jabez,  saying 
.  38  These  mentioned  by  (their)  names  (were) 


iCh. 


!   Cll. 


Ezra 


Neh. 


Job      1. 

7. 

l8. 
42, 
42, 

Tsa.    5, 

7 
8, 
9 
9 
9 

16. 

iS. 


41  these  written  by  name  came  in  the  days 
17  these  (be)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Gers. 
65  cities  which  are  called  by  (their)  names 

15  sister's  name(was)Maachah;  and  the  naiui- 

16  shecalledhisname  Peresh:  and  the  name 

23  and  he  called  his  name  Beriah,  because 
29  father  of  Gibeon;  whose  wife's  name  (was) 
38  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  these 

35  Jehiel,  whose  wife's  name  (was)  Maachah 
44  Azel  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  these 

20  slew  (them),  and  had  a  name  among  the 

24  and  had  a  name  among  the  three  mighties 

31  which  were  expressed  by  name,  to  come 

6  cherubim,  whose  name  is  called  (on  it) 

4  these  (are)  the  names  of  (his)  children  wh. 
1 1  called  the  name  of  that  place  Baal-perazim 

2  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the  L. 
8  call  upon  his  name, make  known  his  deeds 

10  Glory  ye  in  his  holy  name  :  let  the  heart 
29  Give . .  the  Lord  the  glory . .  unto  his  name 
35  we  may  give  thanks  to  thy  holy  name, (and) 
41  were  chosen,  who  were  expressed  byname 
8  have  made  thee  a  name  like  the  name  of 

21  to  make  thee  a  name  of  greatness  and 
24  thy  name  may  be  magnified  for  ever,saymg 
19  which  he  spake  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

7  house  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord  my  God 

8  shalt  not  build  an  house  unto  my  name 

9  his  name  shall  be  Solomon,  and  I  will  g. 

10  He  shall  build  an  house  for  my  name 

19  is  to  be  built  to  the  name  of  the  Lord 

13  to  minister,  .and  to  bless  in  his  namefor 
24  counted  by  number  of  names  by  their 

3  shalt  not  build  an  house  for  my  name 

13  thank  thee,  aud  praise  thy  glorious  name 

16  build  thee  an  house  for  thine  holy  name 

1  build  an  house  for  the  name  of  the  Lord 

4  I  build  an  house  tothe  name  of  the  Lord 

17  called  the  name  of  that  on  the  right  hand 

17  and  the  name  of  that  on  the  left  Boaz 

5  an  house  in,  that  my  name  might  be  there 

6  Jerusalem,  that  my  name  might  be  ther« 
7,  iofor  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

8  in  thineheart  to  build  an  house  for  myn. 

9  he  shall  build  the  house  for  my  name 

20  that  thou  wouldest  put  thy  name  there 
24  confess  thy  name,  and  pray,  and  make 
26  confess  thy  name,  and  turn  from  their  siu 

32  a  far  country  for  thy  great  name's  sake 

33  all  people  of  the  earth  may  know  thy  na. 
33  house.  .1  have  built,  is  called  by  thy  na. 
34,  38  house  which  I  have  built  for  thy  name 

14  If  my  people,  which  are  called  by  my  na. 
16  that  my  name  maybe  there  for  ever;  and 
20  house,  which  I  have  sanctified  for  my  na. 
13  Lord  had  chosen,  .to  put  his  name  there 
13  mother's  name  (was)  Naamah  an  Amnion 

2  His  mother's  name  also  (was)  Michaiah  the 

11  in  thy  name  wego  against  this  multitude 

15  the  truth  to  me  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

8  built,  .a  sanctuary  therein  for  thy  name 

9  presence,  for  thy  name  (is)  in  this  house 
26  the  name  of  the  same  place  was  called 
31  his  mother's  name  (was)  Azubah  the  da. 

2  His  mother'sname  also  (was)  Athaliah  the 
1  mother's  name  also  (was)  Zibiah  of  Beer. 
1  mother's  name  (was)  Jehoaddan  of  Jeru. 

3  his  mother's  name  also  (was)  Jecoliah  of 

8  name  spread  abroad  (even)  to  the  entering 
15  his  name  spread  far  abroad;  for  he  was 

1  His  mothers  name  also  (was)  Jerushah 

9  prophet  of  the  Lord,  .whose  name  (was) 

15  men  which  were  expressed  by  name  ruse 
1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Abijah,  the  da. 

19  the  men  that  were  expressed  by  name,  to 

4  In  Jerusalem  shall  my  name  be  for  ever 

7  In  this  house.  .1  put  my  name  for  ever 

18  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

4  and  turned  his  name  to  Jehoiakirn.  And 
61  Gileadite,  and  was  called  after  their  name 

13  whose  names  (are)  these,  Eliphelet,  Jeiel 

20  all  of  them  were  expressed  by  name 

16  all  of  them  by  (their)  names,  were  separ 
9  that  I  have  chosen  to  set  my  name  there 

11  thy  servants,  who  desire  to  fear  thy  name 
63  to  wife,  and  was  called  after  their  name 

5  and  blessed  be  thy  glorious  name,  which  is 

7  and  gavest  him  the  name  of  Abraham 
10  so  didst  thou  get  thee  a  name,  as  (it  is) 

5  certain  Jew,  whose  name  (was)  Mordecai 

14  in  her,  and  that  she  were  called  by  name 

22  certified  the  king,  .in  Mordecai's  name 

12  in  the  name  of  king  Ahasuerus  was  it  w. 

8  as  it  liketh  you,  in  the  kiug's  name,  and 
8  which  is  written  in  the  king's  name,  and 

10  And  he  wrote  in  the  king  Ahasuerus'  na. 
26  these  days  Purim,  after  the  name  of  Pur 

1  whose  name  (was)  Job  ;  and  that  man  wa3 

21  away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  LORD 

17  and'he  shall  have  no  name  in  the  street 
14  he  called  the  name  of  the  first,  Jemima 
14  the  name  of  the  second,  Kezia;  and  then. 

11  them  also  that  love  thy  name  be  joyful  in 
17  will  sing  praise  to  the  name  of  the  Lord 

1  excellent  (is)  thy  name  in  all  the  earth  1 

2  I  will  sing  praise  to  thy  name,  0  thou  M. 
5  hast  put  out  their  name  for  ever  and  ever 

10  they  that  know  thy  name  will  put  their 

4  offer,  nor  take  up  their  names  into  my  1. 
49  heathen,  and  sing  praises  unto  thy  name 

1  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee 

5  iutheuameof  ourGod  we  will  setup(our) 


NAME 


QS5 


NAME 


=3- 

25- 

29. 
3i- 

33- 
34* 
41. 
44. 
44- 
44. 
45- 
48. 
49- 
52. 
54- 
54- 
61. 
61. 
63. 
66. 
66. 
68. 
68. 
69. 
6g. 
72. 
72. 
74- 
74' 
74 
74 
75 
76. 

79- 
79- 
79- 
80. 

S3- 
S3- 
83- 
86. 
86. 


91. 

92. 

96. 

96. 

99. 

99- 
100. 
102. 
102. 
103. 
105. 
105. 
106. 
106. 
109. 
109. 
in. 

"3- 
113. 
"3- 
"5- 
116. 
116. 
118. 
118. 
118. 
119. 
119. 
122. 
124. 
129. 
*35- 
135- 
135- 
138. 
138. 
140. 
142. 
143- 
145- 
145- 
145- 
147. 


149. 
Pl'OV  10. 

18, 


3o. 

30. 

Eccl.  6. 

7- 
Song  1. 
Isa.     4. 


7  we  will  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord 
22  I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren 

3  paths  of  righteousness  for  his  name's  sake 
ti  For  thy  name's  sake,  O  Lord,  pardon  m. 

2  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  name ;  w. 

3  therefore  for  thy  name's  sake  lead  me 
21  because  we  have  trusted  in  his  holy  name 

3  magnify.. and  let  us  exalt  his  name  toget. 
5  When  shall  he  die,  and  his  name  perish? 

5  through  thy  name  will  we  tread  themun. 

8  the  day  long,  aud  praise  thy  name  for  ever 

20  If  we  have  forgotten  the  name  of  our  God 
17  I  will  make  thy  name  to  be  remembered 

10  According  to  thy  name,  O  God,  so  (is)  thy 

11  they  call  (their)  lands  after  their  own  na. 

9  I  will  wait  on  thy  name;  for  (it  is)  good 

1  Save  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name,  and  judge 

6  I  will  praise  thy  name,  O  Lord,  for  (it  is) 

5  the  heritage  of  those  that  fear  thy  name 

8  So  will  Ising  praise  unto  thy  name  for  ever 

4  live  :  I  will  lift  up  my  hands  in  thy  name 

2  Sing  forth  the  honour  of  his  name  ;  make 
4  sing  unto  thee ;  they  shall  sing  (to)  thy  n. 
4  Sing  unto  God,  sing  praises  to  his  name 
4  ridethupon  the  heavens  by  his  name  Jah 

30  I  will  praise  the  name  of  God  with  a  song 
36  and  they  that  love  his  name  shall  dwell 

17  His  name  shall  endure  forever:  his  name 
19  And  blessed  (be)  his  glorious  name  for  ever 

7  dwelling  place  of  thy  name  to  the  ground 

10  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  name  for  ever? 

18  foolish  people  have  blasphemed  thy  name 

21  let  the  poor  and  needy  praise  thy  name 
1  for  (that)  thy  name  (is)  near  thy  wondrous 
1  God  known  ;  his  name  (is)  great  in  Israel 

6  kingdoms  that  have  not  called  upon  thy  n. 

9  our  salvation,  for  the  glory  of  thy  name 
9  purge  away  our  sins,  for  thy  name's  sake 

18  quicken  us,  and  we  will  call  upon  thy  na. 

4  that  the  name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more 
16  that  they  may  seek  thy  name,  O  Lord 
iS  that  thou,  whose  name  alone  (is)  Jehovah 

9  thee,  0  Lord  ;  aud  shall  glorify  thy  name 

11  truth  :  unite  my  heart  to  fear  my  name 

12  aud  I  will  glorify  thy  name  for  evermore 

12  Tabor  and  Hermon  shall  rejoice  in  thy  n. 
16  In  thy  name  shall  they  rejoice  all  the 

24  and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be  exalted 

14  on  high,  because  he  hath  known  mj'name 

1  sing  praises  unto  thy  name,  0  most  High 

2  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  bless  his  name ;  show 

8  Give,  .the  glory  (due  unto)  Ms  name  :  br. 

3  Let  them  praise  thy.. terrible  name ;  (for) 

6  among  them  that  call  upon  his  name;  and 

4  thankful  unto  him,  (and)  bless  his  name 

15  So  the  heathen  shall  fear  the  name  of  the 
21  To  declare  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  Zion 

1  all  that  is  within  me,  (bless)  his  holy  name 
1  call  upon  his  name  :  make  known  his 
3  Glory  ye  in  his  holy  name  :  let  the  heart 

8  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake,  that  lie 
47  to  give  thanks  unto  thy  holy  name,  (and) 

13  generation  following  let  their  name  be 
21  do  thou  for  me.  .for  thy  name's  sake  :  be. 

9  for  ever  :  holy  and  reverend  (is)  his  name 

1  of  the  Lord,  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord 

2  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  from  this 

3  From  the  rising  of  the  sun. .the  Lord's  n. 
1  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy  m. 

4  Then  called  I  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
13,  17  call  upon  the  name  of  the  LORD 

10  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  will  I  destroy 
11,  12  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  I  will  destroy 
26  Blessed  (be)  he  that  cometh  in  the  name 
55  I  have  remembered  thy  name,  O  Lord,  in 
132  usest  to  do  unto  those  that  love  thy  name 

4  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord 
8  Our  help  (is)  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who 

8  you :  we  bless  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lo. 

1  Praise  ye  the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  praise 

3  sing  praises  unto  his  name ;  for  (it  is)  pi. 
13  Thy  name,  O  Lord,  (endureth)  for  ever 

2  praise  thy  name  for  thy  loving  kindness 
2  magnified  thy  word  above  all  thy  name 

13  righteous  shall  give  thanks  unto  thy  name 

7  of  prison,  that  I  may  praise  thy  name :  the 

11  Quicken  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  name's  sake 

1  I  will  bless  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 

2  I  will  praise  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 

21  let  all  flesh  bless  his  holy  name  for  ever 

4  stars ;  he  calleth  them  all  by  (their)  names 
5,  13  Let  them  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord 

13  for  his  name  alone  is  excellent;  his  glory 

3  Let  them  praise  his  name  in  the  dance 

7  blessed  :  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall 
10  The  name  of  the  Lord  (is)  a  strong  tower 
24  (is)  his  name  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath 

1  A  (good)  name  (is)  rather  to  be  chosen  than 

4  his  name,  and  what  (is)  his  son's  name,  if 

9  lest  I.  .steal,  and  take  the  name  of  my  God 
4  his  name  shall  be  covered  with  darkness 
1  A  (good)  name  (is)  better  than  precious  o. 
3  thy  name  (is  as)  ointment  poured  forth 

1  only  let  us  be  called  by  thy  name,  to  take 

14  a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel 

3  Call  his  name  Mahar-shalal-hash-baz 

6  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful 

4  say,  Praise  the  Lord,  call  upon  his  name 
4  make  mention  that  his  name  is  exalted 

22  cut  off  from  Babylon  the  name,  and  rem. 

7  to  the  place  of  the  name  of  theLoRD  of  h. 

15  (even)  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 


Isa.   25 

26. 
26. 
29, 

3°' 
40. 
41. 
42, 
43- 
43^ 
44' 
44. 

45- 
45' 
47' 
48. 


Jer. 


Si- 

52' 
Lam.  3. 

Eze.  20. 


1  I  will  exalt  thee,  I  will  praise  thy  name 
8  desire  of  (our)  soul  (is)  to  thy  name,  and 
13  only  will  we  make  mention  of  thy  name 
23  of  him,  they  shall  sanctify  my  name,  and 
27  the  name  of  the  Lord  cometh  from  far 

26  calleth  them  all  by  names  by  the  greatn. 
25  shall  he  call  upon  my  name ;  and  he  shall 

8  I  (am)  the  Lord  ;  that  (is)  my  name:  and 
1  I  have  called  (thee)  by  thy  name  ;  thou 
7  every  one  that  is  called  by  my  name:  for 
5  shall  call  (himself)  by  the  name  of  Jacob 
5  surname  (himself)  by  the  name  of  Israel 

3  I  the  Lord,  which  call  (thee)  by  thy  name 

4  I  have  even  called  thee  by  thy  name:  I 

4  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name,  the  Holy  One 
1  which  are  called  by  the  name  of  Israel 

1  which  swear  by  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and 

2  Israel:  The  Lord  of  hosts  (ia)his  name 

9  For  my  name's'sake  will!  defer  mine  ang. 
19  his  name  should  not  have  been  cut  off 

1  hath  he  made  mention  of  my  name 

.  10  let  him  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and 
15  waves  roared:  The  LORD  of  hosts  (is)  his  n. 

5  name  continually  every  day  (is)  blasphe. 

6  Thereforemy  people  shall  knowjny  name 
5  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name;  and  thy 

13  and  it  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  aname,  for 
5  a  place  and  a  name  better  than  of  sons 

5  I  will  give  them  an  everlasting  name,  that 

6  and  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  be 

15  high  and  lofty  One. .whose  name  (is)  Holy 
ig  So  shall  they  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord 

9  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

2  and  thou  shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name 
12  to  make  himself  an  everlasting  name  ? 

14  people,  to  make  thyself  a  glorious  name 

16  Redeemer;  thy  name  (is)  from  everlasting 
19  them;  they  were  not  called  by  thy  name 

2  make  thy  name  known  to  thine  adversar. 

7  (there  is)  none  that  calleth  upon  thy  name 

1  nation  (that)  was  not  caled  by  my  name 

15  ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a  curse  unto 

15  and  call  his  servants  by  another  name 

5  that  cast  you  out  for  my  name's  sake,  said 

22  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  remain 

17  to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  Jerusalem 
10,  11.  14,  30  house,  which  is  called  by  my  n. 

12  Shiloh,  where  I  set  my  name  at  the  first 

6  great,  and  thy  name  (is)  great  in  might 

16  inheritance.  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  n. 
25  the  families  that  call  not  on  thy  name:  for 
16  The  Lord  called  thy  name,  Agreen  olive 

19  that  his  name  may  be  no  more  remembe. 
21  Prophesy  not  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
16  ways  of  my  people,  to  swear  by  my  name 
11  for  a  name,  aud  for  a  praise,  and  for  a  gl. 

7  do  thou  (it)  for  thy  name's  sake:  for  our 
9  we  are  called  by  thy  name ;  leave  us  not 

14  The  prophets  prophesy  lies  in  my  name 

15  the  prophets  that  prophesy  in  my  name 
21  Do  not  abhor  (us),  for  thy  name's  sake,  do 

16  for  I  am  called  by  thy  name,  0  Lord  God 
21  shall  know  that  my  name  (is)  The  Lord 

3  The  Lord  hath  not  called  thy  name  Pas. 
9  of  him,  nor  speak  any  more  in  his  name 

6  (is)  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called 
25  that  prophesy  lies  in  my  name,  saying,  I 
27  to  cause  my  people  to  forget  my  name  by 

27  their  fathers  have  forgotten  my  name 
29  on  the  city  which  is  called  by  my  name 

9  Why  hast  thou  prophesied  in  the  name  of 
16  for  he  hath  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of 

20  that  prophesied  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
15  yet  they  prophesy  a  lie  in  my  name  ;  that 

9  prophesy  falsely  unto  you  in  my  name  :  I 

21  which  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you  in  my  name 

23  and  have  spoken  lying  words  in  my  name 

25  thou  hast  sent  letters  in  thy  name  unto  all 
35  thereof  roar ;  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  n. 

18  Mighty  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  n. 
20  hast  made  thee  a  name,  as  at  this  day 
34  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  my  name 

2  to  establish  it;  The  Lord  (is)  his  name 
9  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  joy,  a  praise 

15  in  the  house  which  is  called  by  my  name 
16 But  yeturned,  andpollutedmy name,  and 

13  name  (was)  Irijah,  the  son  of  Shelemiah 

16  spoken  unto  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

26  Behold,  I  have  sworn  by  my  great  name 
26  that  my  name  shall  no  more  be  named  in 

18  king,  whose  name  (is)  The  Lord  of  hosts 

15  king,  whose  name  (is)  The  LORD  of  hosts 

17  and  all  ye  that  know  his  name,  say,  How 
34  strong ;  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  name 

19  inheritance :  The  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  11. 
57  King,  whose  name  (is)  The  Lord  of  hosts 

1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Hamutal  the  da. 
55  I  called  upon  thy  name,  O  Lord,  out  of  the 

9, 14, 22  wrought  for  my  name's  sake,  that  it 
29  And  the  name  thereof  is  called  Bamah 
39  but  pollute  ye  my  holy  name  no  more  with 
44  have  wrought  with  you  for  my  name's  sake 

4  And  the  names  of  them  (were)  Aholah  the 
4  Thus  (were)  their  names ;  Samaria  (is)  Ah. 

2  Write  thee  the  name  of  the  day,  (even)  of 

20  they  profaned  my  holy  name,  when  they 

21  But  I  had  pity  for  mine  holy  name,  which 

22  but  for  mine  holy  name's  sake,  which  ye 

23  And  I  will  sanctify  my  great  name,  which 

7  So  will  I  make  my  holy  name  known  in  the 
7  will  not  (let  them)  pollute  my  holy  name 

16  also  the  name  of  the  city  (shall  be)  Ham. 


Eze.  39.  25  and  will  be  jealous  for  my  holy  name 
43.    7  my  holy  name,  shall  the  house  of  Israel 
43.    8  they  have  even  defiled  my  holy  name  by 
48.    1  Now  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  tribes 
48.  31  after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel :  t. 
48.  35  and  the  name  of  the  city  from  (that)  day 

Dan.    1.    7  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  gave  names :  for 
9.    6  the  prophets,  which  spake  in  thy  name  to 

9. 18  and  the  city  which  is  called  by  thy  name 
9.  19  cityandthypeopleare  called  by  thyname 

10.    1  whose  name  was  called  Belteshazzar ;  and 

Hos.    1.    4  said  unto  him,  Call  his  name  Jezreel ;  for 

1.    6  said  unto  him,  Call  her  name  Lo-ruhamah 

1.  9  Then  said  (God),  Call  his  name  Lo-ammi 

.  2.  17  For  I  will  take  away  the  names  of  Baalim 

2.  17  no  more  be  remembered  by  their  name 
Joel    2.  26  and  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  G. 

2.  32  whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  L. 
Amos  2.    7  the  (same)  maid,  to  profane  my  holy  name 

4.  13  The  Lord,  The  God  of  hosts,  (is)  his  name 

5.  8  face  of  the  earth ;  The  Lord  (is)  his  name 

5.  27  Lord,  whose  name  (is)  The  God  of  hosts 

6.  10  not  make  mention  of  the  name  of  the  Lo. 
9.  6  face  of  the  earth ;  The  Lord  (is)  his  name 
9.  12  which  are  called  by  my  name,  saith  the  L. 

Mic.    4.    5  walk  every  one  in  the  name  of  his  god 

4.  5  we  will  walk  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our 

5.  4  in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of  the  LORD  his 

6.  9  (the  man  of)  wisdom  shall  see  thy  name 
Xah.    1. 14  thee,  (that)  no  more  of  thy  name  be  sown 
Zeph.  1.    4  (and)thename  of  theChemarims  with  the 

3.  9  may  all  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
3.  12  they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
3.  20  for  I  will  make  you  a  name  and  a  praise 

Zech.  5.  4  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely  by  my  name 
6.  12  the  man  whose  name  (is)  The  Branch ;  and 
10. 12  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  his  name 
13.  2 1  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols  out  of 
13.    3  speakest  lies  in  the  name  of  the  LORD 

13.  9  they  shall  call  ou  my  name,  and  I  will  hear 

14.  9  there  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name  one 
Mai     1.    6  you, 0 priests,  that  despisemyname.  And 

1 .   6  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  na.'; 
1.  11,  11  my  name  (shall  be)  great  among"  the 
1.  11  incense  (shall  be)  offered  unto  my  name 

1.  14  my  name  (is)  dreadful  among  the  heathen 

2.  2  to  heart,  togivegloryuntomyname,  saith 

2.  5  feared  me,  and  was  afraid  before  my  name 

3.  16  that  feared.,  and  that  thought  upon  his  11. 

4.  2  But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the 

2.xV«m€,  renown,  cy  shum. 

Ezra    5.    1  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel,  (even) 

5.  4  What  are  the  names  of  the  men  that  make 
5. 10  We  asked  their  names  also,  to  certify 

5.  to  the  names  of  the  men  that  (were)  the  chief 

5.  14  unto  (one), whose  name  (was)Sheshbazzar 

6.  12  God  that  hath  caused  his  name  to  dwell 
Dan.  2.  20  Blessed  be  the  name  of  God  for  ever  and 

2.  26  to  Daniel,  whose  name  (was)  Belteshazzar 
4.    8  Daniel  came,  .whose  name  (was)Beltesh. 

4.  8  according  to  the  name  of  my  god,  and  in 

4. 19  Daniel,  whose  name  (was)  Belteshazzar 

Z.To  call,  koXsq}  kaleo. 

Acts   7.  58  at  a  young  man's  feet,  whose  name  was  S. 

i.Xame,  6vo/xa  onoma. 

Matt.  1.  21  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus ;  for  he 

1.  23  they  shall  calilns  name  Emmanuel,  which 
1.  25  first  born  son :  and  he  called  his  name  Je. 

6.  9 pray  ye :  Our  Father.  .Hallowed be  thyn. 

7.  22  prophesied  in  thy  name? and  in  thyname 
7.  22  in  thyname  done manywonderful works? 

10.  2  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  are  these 
10.  22  be  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name's  sake 
10.  41  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name 
10.  41  receiveth  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of 

10.  42  cold  (water)  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple 

12.  21  And  in  his  name  shall  the  Gentiles  trust 
18.   5  such  little  child  in  my  name  receiveth  nic 

18.  20  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name 

19.  29  or  children,  or  lands,  for  my  name's  sake 
21.   y  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

23.  39  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

24.  5  ruanyshall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am 
24.    9  hated  of  all  nations  for  my  name's  sake 

27.  32  they  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  Simon  by  n. 

28.  19  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father 
Mark  5-   9  thyname?  And  he  answered, saying,  Myn. 

5.  22  cometh  one  of  the  rulers. .  Jairus[bynameJ 
6. 14  for  his  name  was  spread  abroad  :  and  he 
9.  37  receive  one  of  such  children  in  my  name 
9.  38  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 

9.  39  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my  name 
9.  41  give . .  a  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  my  name 

11.  9  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
11.  10  [that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord] 

13.  6  many  shall  come  in  myname,  saying,  lam 
13.  13  be  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name's  sake 
16. 17  [In  my  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils] 

Luke  1.  5  and  his  wife,  .her  name  (was)  Elisabeth 
1. 13  a  son,  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  John 
1.  27  espoused  to  a  man  whose  name  was  Joseph 
1.  27  a  virgin,  .and  the  virgin's  name  (was)  M. 
1.  31  bring..a  son,  and  shalt  callhis  name  Jesus 
1.  49  For  he  that  is  mighty,  .holy  (is)  his  name 
1.  59  Zacharias,  after  the  name  of  his  father 
1.  61  none  of  thy  kindred,  .called  by  thisname 

1.  63  saying,  His  name  is  John.  And  they  ma. 

2.  21  his  name  was  called  Jesus,  which  was  so 
2.  25  man  in  Jerusalem,  whose  name  (was)  Si. 


NAME 


686 


NAPHTUHIM 


Luke  6 


John 


Acts 


Eom.  i. 


i  Co. 


5- 
6. 

Jiph. 

.  I. 

Phil. 

2. 

2. 

Col. 

4- 
3- 
i. 

iTi. 
2Ti. 
Heb. 

3- 
6. 

2. 
I. 

2. 

6. 

Jas. 

13- 

2. 

5- 

iPe 
1  Jo. 

4- 

2. 

3- 
5- 
5- 

3  John 
Rev, 


2a  cast  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the  Son 

30  Jesus  asked  him,  saying,  What  is  thy  n. 

48  shall  receive  this  child  in  my  name  receiv. 

49  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 
17  are  subject  unto  us  through  thy  name 

20  because  your  names  are  written  in  heaven 

2  say,  Our  Father.  .Hallowed  be  thy  name 
35  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
38  King  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

8  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I 
i->  before  kings  and  rulers  for  my  name's  sa. 

17  l)e  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name's  sake 
iS  the  one  of  them,  whose  name  was  Cleopas 

47  be  preached  in  his  name  among  all  nations 
6  man  sent  from  God,  whose  name  (was)  J. 

12  (even)  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name 
23  many  believed  in  his  name,  when  they  saw 

18  he  hath  not  believed  iu  the  name  of  the 
43 1  am  come  iu  my  Father's  name,  and  ye 
43  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name,  him 

3  and  he  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and 

25  the  works  that  I  do  in  my  Father's  name 

13  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

28  Father,  glorify  thy  name.  Thencamethere 

13  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that 

14  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  uame,  I 

26  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my  name 
16  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my  name,  he 

21  will  they  do  unto  you  for  my  name's  sake 

23  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask . .  in  my  name,  he 

24  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  name :  ask,  and 
26  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name  :  and  I 

6  I  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the  men 

11  keep  through  thine  own  name  those  whom 

12  I  kept  theminthyname  :  those  that  thou 

26  I  have  declared  uutothem  thy  name,  and 
10  The  servant's  name  was  Malchus 

3 1  But . .  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name 

15  the  number  of  the  names  together  were 
21  whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the 
38  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  name 

6  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth 

16  his  name  through  faith  in  his  namehath 

7  or  by  what  name,  have  ye  done  this? 

10  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  w. 
12  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven 

17  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  name 

18  to  speak,  .nor  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
30  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  child  Jesus 

23  that  ye  should  not  teach  in  this  name? 

40  should  not  speak  in  the  name  of  Jesus 

41  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  name 

12  concerning,  .the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
16  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

14  priests  to  bind  all  that  call  on  thy  uame 

15  to  bear  my  uame  before  the  Gentiles,  and 

16  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  names  sake 
21  which  called  on  this  name  in  Jerusalem 

27  boldly  at  Damascus  in  the  name  of  Jesus 

29  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Je. 
43  through  bis  name  whosoever  believeth  in 

48  to  be  baptized  iu  the  name  of  the  Lord 

6  prophet,  a  Jew,  whose  name  (was)  Bar-J, 

8  for  so  is  his  name  by  interpretation 

14  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  his  name 

17  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name  is  cal. 
26  for  the  uame  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

iS  command  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 

15  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  names 
5  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  .lesus 

13  call  over  them,  .uame  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
17  the  nameof  the  Lord  Jesus  was  magnified 
13  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the 

16  baptized,  .calling  on  the  name  of  theLcrd 

9  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth 

7  of  the  chief  man.  .whose  name  was  Publ. 

5  the  faith  among  all  nations,  for  his  name 

24  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among  the 

17  that  my  name  might  be  declared  through. 
13  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the 

9  I  will  confess,  .and  sing  unto  thy  name 

2  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 

10  by  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesns  Christ 

13  or  were  ye  baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul? 
15  say  that  I  had  baptized  in  mine  own  name 

4  In  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

11  justified  in  the  uame  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
21  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in 
20  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

9  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every  n. 

10  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee 

3  and . .  whose  names  (are)  in  the  book  of  life 
17  (do)  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

12  That  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

6  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
1  that  the  name  of  God  and  (his)  doctrine 

19  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ 

4  obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they 

12  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren 
10  love,  which  ye  have  showed  toward  hisn. 
15  the  fruit  of  (our)  lips,  -thanks to  his  name 

7  Donot  they  blaspheme  that  worthyname 
10  who  have  spoken  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

14  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the 
14  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ 

,  12  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  his  name's  sake 
23  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  his  Son 

13  [believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God] 

13  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God 
7  for  his  name's  sake  they  went  forth,  tak. 

14  salute  thee.  Greet  the  friends  by  name 
.   3  for  my  name's  sake  hast  laboured,  and 


Rev.    2.  13  thou  holdest  fast  my  name,  and  hast  not 

2.  17  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which 

3.  1  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art 
3.    4  Thou  hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis 

3.    5  blot  out  his  name  out  of  the  book  of  life 
3.    5  will  confess  his  name  before  my  Father 
3.    8  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my  n. 
3.  12  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  n. 
3.  12  and  (I  will  write  upon  him)  my  new  name 
6.    8  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death,  and 

8.  11  the  name  of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood 

9.  n  whose  name  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  (is)  A. 

9.  11  in  the  Greek  tongue  hath  (his)  name  Ap. 

11.  18  them  that  fear  thy  name,  small  and  great 
13.  1  and  upon  hisheads  the  name  of  blasphemy 
13.  6  to  blaspheme  hisname,andhistabernacle 
13.    8  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book 

13.  17  name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his  n. 

14.  1  Father's  name  written  in  their  foreheads 
14. 11  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of  his  name 

15.  2  the  victory . .  over  the  number  of  his  name 

4  not  fear  thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thyna. 
9  blasphemed  the  name  of  God.which  hath 
3  coloured  beast,  full  of  names  of  blasphemy 

5  upon  her  forehead  (was)  a  name  written 
8  whose  names  were  not  written  in  the  book 

12  he  had  a  name  written  that  no  man  knew 
19.  13  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God 
19.  16  he  hath  on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  King 
21  12  and  names  written  thereon,  which  are 
21. 14  uame  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb 

22.  4  and  his  name(shallhe)  in  their  foreheads 

NAME,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  t?n  ameer. 

t  Sa.  16.    3  anoint  unto  me  (hini)  whom  I  name  unto 

28.    8  me  (him)  up  whom  I  shall  name  unto  the 

Mic.    2.    7  O  (thou  that  art)  named  The  house  of  Ja. 

%To  speak,  131  dabar,  3.  ' 

Gen.  23. 16  which  he  had  named  in  the  audience  of 

3.  To  mark  out,  define,  3pj  naqab. 

Isa.   62.    2  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  shall  name 
Amos  6.    1  (which  are)  named  chief  of  the  nations,  to 

4.  To  call,  wiR  qara. 

z  Sa.    4.  21  And  she  named  the  child  I-"habod,  saying 

h.Toplace,  set,  put,  D't^,  Die*  sum,  sim. 

Dan.   5.  12  Daniel,  whom  the  king  named  Belteshaz. 

6.  To  say,  call,  xiyoo  lego. 

Matt.  9.    9  he  saw  a  man,  named  Matthew,  sitting  at 
Marki5.    7  And  there  was  (one)  namedBarabbas,(wh. 

7. 2^0  name,  give  a  name,  6vo/j.dfa  onomazd. 
Luke  6.  13  twelve,  whom  also  he  named  apostles 

6. 14  Simon,  whom  he  also  named  Peter,  and 
Rom.  1 5.  20  the  gospel,  not  where  Christ  was  named 

1  Co.  5.    1  as  is  not  [so  much  as  named]  among  the 
Kph.    1.  21  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only 

3.  15  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named 
5.    3  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  you,  as 

2  Ti.   2. 19  every  one  that  nameth  the  uame  of  Christ 

NAMED  — 

l.Xame,  renoton,  uy  shem. 

Josh  2.    1  came  into  an  harlot's  house,  named  Rah. 

1  Sa.  17.   4  named  Goliath,  of  Gath,  whose  height 

•J2.  20  the  son  of  Ahitab,  named  Abiathar,  esca. 

2  Ki.17.  34  children  of  Jacob,  whom  he  named  Israel 
EqGL  6. 10  That  which  hath  been  is  named  already 

I.Name,  D'y  shum. 

Dan.   5.  12  Daniel,  whom  the  king  named  Belteshaz. 

S.N'ame,  ovofia  onoma. 

Matt  27.  57  a  rich  man  of  Arimathea,  named  Joseph 

Marki4.  32  to  a  place  which  was  named  Gethsemane 

Luke  1.    5  a  certain  priest  named  Zacharias,  of  the 

1.  26  unto  a  city  of  Galilee,  named  Nazareth 

5.  27  saw  a  publican,  named  Levi,  sitting  at  the 

8.  41  behold,  there  came  a  man  named  Jairus 

10.  38  a  certain  woman  named  Martha  received 

16.  20  there  wasacertain  beggarnamed  19.  2. 

23.  50  behold,  (there  was)  a  man  named  Joseph 
John  3.  1  a  man  of  the  Pharisees,  named  Nicodemus 
Acts    5.    1  But  a  certain  man  named  Ananias,  with 

5.  34  a  Pharisee,  named  Gamaliel,  a  doctor  of 

9.  10  discipleat Damascus, named  Ananias;and 
9.  12  seen  in  a  vision  a  man  named  Ananias 

9.  33  there  he  foundacertainmannamedEneas 
9.  36  at  Joppa, a  certain  disciple  named  Tabitha 
11.28  there  stood  up  one  of  them  named  Agabus 

12.  13  a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named  Rhoda 
16.    1  disciple  was  there,  named  Timotheus,  the 

16.  14  certain  woman  named  Lydia,  a  seller  of 

17.  34  woman  named  Damaris,  and  others  with 

18.  2  found  a  certain  Jew  named  Aquila,  born 
18.   7  a  certain  (man's)  house,  named  Justus 

18.  24  And  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos,  born 

19.  24  For  a  certain  (man)  named  Demetrius,  a 

20.  9  a  certain  young  man  named  Eutychus 

21.  10  from  Judea  a  certain  prophet,  named  A. 
27.    1  unto  (one)  named  Julius,  a  centurion  of  A. 

NAMED,  to  be  — 

l.To  cell  a  name,  ctr  mrn  qara.  shrm. 

Gen.  27.  36  he  said,  Is  he  not  rightly  named  Jacob? 

2.  To  be  called,  eqij  qara,  2. 

Gen.  48.  16  and  let  my  name  be  named  on  them,  and 
i  Ch.23.  14  his  sous  were  named  of  the  tribe  of  Levi 


Eccl.  6.  10  That  which  hath  been  is  named  already 
Isa.  61.  6  ye  shall  be  named  the  priests  of  the  LORD 
Jer.  44.  26  that  my  name  shall  no  more  be  named  in 

3.7V)  call,  Ka\€u>  {ovo/xa)  kaleo  {onoma). 

Luke  2.  21  which  was  so  named  of  the  angel  before  he 
19.   2  behold,  (there  was)amannamedZaccheu9 
NAMELY  — 
In  the,  in  this,  iv  t£  en  to. 

Rom  13.   9  comprehended  in  this  saying,  [namely] 

NA-O'-MI,  'QJJ3  pleasant. 

Wife  of  Elimeiech,  mother  of  Mahlon  and  Chilion,  and 
mother  in  law  of  Ruth  the  Moabitess.  B.C.  1312. 
Ruth  1.  2  the  name  of  his  wife  N.,  and  the  name  of 
1.  3  N.'s husband  died;  and  she  was  left,  and 
1.  8  N.  said  unto  her  two  daughters  in  law,  Go 
1.  11  N.  said,  Turn  again,  my  daughters;  why 
1.  19  moved  about  them,  .they  said,  (Is) thisN. 
1.  20  Call  me  not  N.,  call  me  Mara:  for  the  Aim. 

1.  21  why(then)  call  ye  me  N.,  seeing  the  Lord 
-1.22  N.  returned,  and  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  her 

2.  1  N.  had  a  kinsman  of  her  husband's,  a  mi. 
2.  2  the  Moabitess  said  unto  N.,  Let  me  now 
2.  6  Moabitish  damsel  that  came  back  with  N. 
7. 20  N.  said  unto  her  daughter  in  law,  Blessed 
2.  20  N.  said  unto  her,  The  man  (is)  near  of  kin 

2.  22  N.  said  unto  Ruth  her  daughter  in  law 

3.  1  Then  N.  her  mother  in  law  said  unto  her 

4.  3  N.,  that  is  come  again  out  of  the  country 
4.    5  thou  buyest  the  field  of  the  hand  of  N. 

4.  9  that  I  have  bought  all.  .of  the  hand  of  N. 
4. 14  the  woman  said  unto  N.,  Blessed  (be)  the 
4.  16  N.  took  the  child,  and  laid  it  in  her  bosom 

4.17  a  name,  saying,  There  is  a  son  boru  to  N. 

NA'-PHISH,  NE'-PHISH,  era:  numerous. 

1.  A  son  of  Ishmael,  son  of  Abraham  and  Hagar.  B.C. 
1840. 

Gen.  25.  15  Hadar, andTema,  Jetur,  N.,andKedemah 
1  Ch.  1.  31  Jetur,N.,andKedemah,  These  are  the-son 

2.  His  descendants,  W.  of  Jordan,  subdued  along  with 
the  Hagarites  and  Jeter  and  Nodah  by  the  two  and  a 
half  tribes. 

1  Ch.  5. 19  the  Hagarites,  with  Jetur,  and  N.,  and  N. 

NAPH-TA'-LI,  "hriEi  ivrestling, 

1.  Sixth  son  of  Jacob,  and  second  of  Bilhah  Rachel's 
maid.    B.C.  1747. 

Gen.  30.    8  have  prevailed:  aud  she  called  his  name  N. 

35.  25  Bilhah,  Rachel's  handmaid  ;  Dan  aud  N. 

46.  24  the  sons  of  N.;  Jahzeel,  and  Guru,  and  J. 

49.  21  N.  (is)  a  hind  let  loose:  he  giveth  goodly 
Exod.  1,   4  Dan,  and  N.,  Gad,  and  Asher 
1  Ch.  2.    2  Dan,  Joseph,  and  Benjamin,  N.,  Gad,  and 
7.  13  The  sons  of  N.;  Jaziel,  aud  Guni.andGe. 

2.  His  descendants  and  their  territory  which  lay  in 
Galilee,  E.  of  Asher  and  N.  of  Zebulun.  SeeNephthalim. 

Num.  1. 15  Of  N.;  Ahira  the  son  of  Euan 

1.  42  Of  the  children  of  N.,  throughout  their 

1.  43  numbered  of  them,(even)  of  the  tribe  of  N. 

2.  29  N.:  and  the  captain  of  the  children  of  N. 
7.  78  son  of  Enan,  prince  of  the  children  of  N. 

10.  27  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  N. 
13.  14  Of  the  tribe  of  N.,  Nahbi  the  son  of  Vop. 
26.  48  (Of)  the  sons  of  N.  after  their  families:  of 

26.  50  families  of  N.  according  to  their  families 
34.  28  prince  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  N. 

Deut  27.  13  Gad,  and  Asher,  and  Zebulun,  Dan,  and  N. 

33.  23  of  N.  he  said,  O  N.,  satisfied  with  favour 

34.  2  N.,  aud  the  land  of  Ephraim,  and  Manas. 
Josh  19.  32  children  of  N.  (even)  for  the  children  of  N. 

19.  39  tribe  of  the  childreu  of  N.  according  to 

20.  7  appointed  Eedesh  in  Galilee  in  mount  N. 
2i.    6  out  of  the  tribe  of  N.,  and  out  of  the  half 

21.  32  out  of  the  tribe  of  N.,  Kedesh  in  Galilee 
Judg.  1.  33  Neither  did  N.  drive  out  the  inhabitants 

4.    6  ten  thousand  men  of  the  childreu  of  N. 
4.  10  Barak  called  Zebulun  and  N.  to  Kedesh 

5. 18  Zebulun  audN.  (were)  a  people  (that)  jeop. 

6.  35  unto  Asher, anduuto  Zebulun, anduntoN. 

7.  23  gathered  themselves  together  out  of  N. 

1  Ei.   4.  15  Ahimaaz  (was)  in  N. ;  lie  also  took  Basm. 

7.  14  He  (was)  a  widow's  sou  of  the  tribe  of  N. 

15.  20  and  all  Cinneroth,  with  all  the  laud  of  N. 

2KL  15.  29  andGilead,  and  Galilee,  all  the  land  of  N. 

1  Ch.  6.  62  out  of  the  tribe  of  N.,  and  out  of  the  tribe 

6.  76  out  of  the  tribe  of  N. ;  Kedesh  iu  Galilee 
12.  34  of  N.  a  thousand  captains,  aud  with  them 
12.  40  (even)  unto  Issacharand  Zebulun  aud  N. 

27.  19  of  N. ;  Jerimoth  the  son  of  Azriel 

2  Ch.16.    4  Abel-maim,  and  all  the  store  cities  of  N. 

34.    6  and  Ephraim,  aud  Simeon,  even  unto  N. 
Psa.  68.  27  princes  of  Zebulun,  (and)  the  princes  of  N. 
Isa.     9.    1  the  land  of  Zebulun,  and  the  land  of  N. 
Eze.  48.    3  even  unto  the  west  side,  a  (portion  for)  N. 
48.    4  by  the  border  of  N.,  from  the  east  side 
4S.  34  of  Gad,  one  gate  of  Asher,  one  gate  of  N. 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of  Naph- 
tali :  Adamah,  Adami,  Allon,  Aznotb-tabor,  Beth-anath, 
Beth-shemesh,  En-hazor,  Hammath,  Hamniou,  Hazor, 
Heleph,  Horem,  Hukkok,  Ijon,  Iron,  Jabneel,  Kartan, 
Kedesh, Kirjathaim,  Lakum.  Migdal-eLNeker.Rakkath, 
Raman,  Tishb,  Zaanannim,  Zer,  &c. 

NAPH-TU'-HIM,  D'rWEfl. 

The  inhabitants  of  Central  Egypt,  as  the  Pathrusim 
are  of  Upper  Egypt. 

Gen.  10. 13  begat Ludim . .  Anamim,  and  Lehabim . .  N. 

1  Ch.  1.  11  begat  Ludim.  .Anamim,  and  Lehabim..  N. 


NAPKIN 


687 


NATION 


NAPKIN— 

Napkin,  handkerchief,  o-ovZaptov  {Lai.  sudcerittm). 
Lukeig.  20  which  I  have  kept  laid  up  in  a  napkin 
Johnn.  44  and  his  face  was  bound  about  with  a  ua. 
20.    7  the  napkin,  that  was  about  his  head,  not 

NAB-CIS'-SUS,  NapKiaa-os  flower  causing  lethargy. 

A  believer  at  Rome,   whose  household  Paul  salutes; 

perhaps  the  favourite  freedmau  of  Claudius  the  emperor. 
Romi6.  11  G-reetthem  that  be  of.. X.,  which  are  in  the 

NARROW,  (to  be)  — 

I.  To  be  narrow,  shut,  stopped,  D2X  atani. 

Eze.  40. 16  narrow  windows  to  the  little  chambers 
41. 16  The  door  posts,  and  the  narrow  windows 
41.  26  narrow  windows  and  palm  trees  on  the 
2.7*066  narrow,  pressed,  px  ids. 

Josh  17.  13  if  mount  Ephraini  be  too  narrow  for  thee 
3.7*0  be  straitened,  distressed,  T£*  yatsar. 

Isa.   49. 19  shall  even  now  be  too  narrow  by  reason  of 

4.  Strait,  "ii  tsar. 

\nm22.  26  went  further,  and  stood  in  a  narrow  place 
Prov  23.  27  and  a  strange  woman  (is)  a  narrow  pit 

5.7*0  be  straitened,  "ny  tsarar. 

Isa.  28.  20  covering  narrower  than  that  he  can  wrap 
6.  To  press,  squeze,  afflict,  B\ifS(u  thlibo. 

Matt.  7. 14  narrow  (is)  the  way,  which  leadeth  unto 
NARROW  lights  — 
Frame  works,  beams,  D'a^  shequphim. 

1  Ki.  6.  4  for  the  house  he  made  windows  of  narrow  1. 
NARROWED  rests  — 

Ledges,   rests,  rny"i;?  migraoth. 

iKi.  6.   6  he  made  narrowed  rests  round  about,  that 
NARROWLY,  to  look  — 
7*0  observe,  watch,  take  heed,  "id^  sha?nar. 

Job    13.   27  and  lookest  narrowly  unto  all  my  paths 

NA'-THAN,  |ru  giver. 

1.  A  son  of  David,  born  after  he  came  to  reign  over 
Israel.     B.C.  1030. 

2  Sa.   5. 14  Shammuah,  and  Shobab.  .X. .  .Solomon 

1  Ch.  3.    5  X.,  and  Solomon,  four,  of  Bathshua  the  d. 

14.    4  Shammua,  and  Shobab,  X.,  and  Solomon 

2.  One  of  David's  prophets.     B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.   7.   2  the  king  said  unto  X.  the  prophet,  See  now 

7.  3  N.  said  lo  the  king,  Go,  do  all  that  (is)  in 
7.  4the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  X.,  say. 
7. 17  According  to  all . .  so  did  X.  speak  unto  D. 
12.  1  the  Lord  sent  X.  unto  David.  And  he  c. 
i2.  s  he  said  toX..(As)theLoRDliveth,  them. 
12.  7  And  N.  said  to  David,  Thou  (art)  the  man 
12.  13  David  said  unto  N-,  I  have  sinned  against 
T2. 13  N.  said  unto  David,  The  Lord  also  hath  put 
12. 15  X.  departed  unto  his  house.  And  the  L. 
12. 25  he  sent  by  the  hand  of  X.  the  prophet;  and 

1  Ki.  1.   8  X.  the  prophet,  and  Shimei,  and  Rei,  and 

1. 10  X.  the  prophet,  and  Benaiah,  and  the  mi. 

1. 11  X.  spake  unto  Bath-sheba  the  mother  of 
1.  22  And,  lo.  .N.  the  prophet  also  came  in 

1. 23  told  the  king,  saying.  Behold  X.  the  prop. 
1.  24  And  X.  said,  My  lord,  O  king,  hast  thou 
1.  32,  38,  44  X.  the  prophet,  and  Benaiah  the 
1.  34  let  Zadok  the  priest  and  X.  the  prophet 
1.  45  priest  and  X.  the  prophet  have  anointed 
t  Ch.17.    1  David  said  to  X.  the  prophet,  Lo,  I  dwell 
17.    2  X.  said  unto  David,  Doall  that(is)in  thine 
17.    3  that  the  word  of  God  came  to  X.,  saying 
17. 15  According  to  all.. so  didX".  speak  unto  D. 
29.  29  in  the  book  of  X\  the  prophet,  and  in  the 

2  Ch.  9.  29  not  written  in  the  book  of  X.  the  prophet 

29.  25  of  Gad  the  king's  seer,  and  X.  the  prophet 
Psa.  51.  title,  X.  the  prophet  came  unto  hini,  after  he 

3.  From  Zobah  in  Syria,  and  father  of  Igal,  one  of 
David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1070. 

2  Sa.  23.  36  Igal  the  son  of  X.  of  Zobah,  Bani  the  Ga. 

4.  Father  of  Azariah  who  was  over  Solomon's  officers. 

B.C.  1060. 

1  Ki.  4.    5  the  son  of  X.  (was)  over  the  officers ;  and 

5.  Father  of  Solomon's  chief  officer.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Ki.  4.   5  the  son  of  X.  (was)  principal  officer,  (and) 

6.  Son  of  Attai,  and  father  of  Zabad,  of  the  family  of 
Jerahmeel.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  36  And  Attai  begat  X.,  and  X.  begat  Zabad 

7.  Brother  of  Joel,  one  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  38  the  brother  of  X.,Mibharthe  son  of  Hag. 

8.  A  chief  man  who  returned  from  exile  with  Ezra.     B.C. 
457- 

Ezra    S.  16  for  X.,  and  for  Zechariah,  and  for  Mesh. 

9.0ne  of  the  family  of  Banni  who  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.     B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  39  And  Shelemiah,  and  X.,  and  Adaiah 
10.A  chief  man  in  Israel.     B.C.  1030. 

Zech.  12. 12  the  family  of  the  house  of  X.  apart,  and 
11.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  31  (the  son)  of  X.,  which  was  (the  son)  of  D. 
NA-THAN  ME'-LECH,  JlW]&  the  king  is  giver. 
A  eunuch  or  chamberlain  of  king  Josiah.    B.C.  640. 

2  Ki  25. 11  the  chamber  of  X.  the  chamberlain,  which 


14. 
14. 
15- 
17- 
*7- 
*7- 


NA-THA-NA'-EL,  NatoaTjA.  gift  of  God. 

A  native  of  Cana  in  Galilee  ;  supposed  to  be  the  same 

as  Bartholomew  the  apostle. 

John  1. 45  Philip  findeth  X.,  and  saith  unto  him, We 
1.  46  X.  said  unto  him,  Can  there  any  good  th. 
1.  47  Jesus  saw  X.  coming  to  him,  and  saith  of 
1. 48  X.  saith  unto  him,  "Whence  knowest  thou 
1.  49  X.  answered  and  saith  unto  him,  Rabbi 
21.    2  and  X".  of  Cana  in  Galilee,  and  the  (sons) 
NATION  — 
X.A  nation,  .tax  ummah. 

Ezra    4.  10  the  rest  of  the  nations  whom  the  great  and 

Dan.    3.    4  Toyouitiscommanded,  O people, nations 

3.    7  people,  the  nations,  and  the  languages,  fell 

3.  29  That  every  people,  nation,  and  language 

4.  1  unto  all  people,  nations,  and  languages 
5. 19  nations,  and  languages,  trembled  and  fe. 

6.  25  Darius  wrote  unto  all  people,  nations,  and 

7.  14  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages 

2.  A  nation,  corporate  body,  *"*!3  goi. 

Gen.  10.    5  after  their  families,  in  their  nations 

10.  20  in  their  countries,  (and)  in  their  nations 

10. 31  tongues,  in  their  lands,  after  their  nations 

10. 32  after  their  generations,  in  then-  nations 

10.  32  and  by  these  were  the  nations  divided  in 
12.   2  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and 

1  king  of  Elam,  and  Tidal  king  of  nations 
9  of  Elam,  and  with  Tidal  king  of  nations 
14  And  also  that  nation,  whom  they  shall 

4  and  thou  shalt  be  a  father  of  many  nations 

5  a  father  of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee 

6  I  will  make  nations  of  thee,  and  kings  shall 
17.  16  she  shall  be  (a  mother)  of  nations ;  kings 

17.  20  beget,  aud  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation 
18. 18  surely  become  a  great  and  mighty  nation 
18. 18  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed 
20.   4  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay,  .a righteous  nation  ? 

21. 13  of  the  bond  woman  will  I  make  a  nation 
21. 18  hand ;  for  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation 

22. 18  And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of 

25.  23  Two  nations  (are)  in  thy  womb,  and  two 

26.  4  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  bles. 

35. 11  a  nation,  and  a  company  of  nations 

46.    3  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation 

48. 19  seed  shall  become  a  multitude  of  nations 
Exod.  9.  24  land  of  Egypt  since  it  became  a  nation 

ig.  6  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation 

32.  10  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation 

33.  13  and  consider  that  this  nation  (is)  thy  pe. 

34.  10  done  in  all  the  earth,  nor  in  any  nation 
34.  24  I  rail  cast  out  the  nations  before  thee 

Lev.  iS.  24  for  in  all  these  the  nations  are  defiled  w. 

18.  28  as  it  spued  out  the  nations  that  (were) 
20. 23  not  walk  in  the  maimers  of  the  nations 

Xunii4.  12  and  will  make  of  thee  a  greater  nation  and 

14.  15  then  the  nations  wiiich  have  heard  the  f. 

23.  9  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations 

24.  8  he  shall  eat  up  the  nations  his  enemies 
24.  20  said,  Amalek  (was)  the  first  of  the  nations 

Deut.  4.  6  the  nations,  which  shall  hear  all  these  st. 
4.  7,  8  what  nation  (is  there  so)  great 
4.  27  Lord  shall  scatter  you  among  the  nations 
4.  34  take  Mm  a  nation  from  the  midst  of  (ano.) 
4.  34  nation,  by  temptations,  by  signs,  and  by 
4.  38  To  drive  out  nations  from  before  thee  gre. 
7.    1  hath  cast  out  many  nations  before  thee 

7.  1  nations  greater  and  mightier  than  thou 
7. 17  These  nations  (are)  more  than  I ;  how  can 
7. 22  Lord  thy  God  will  put  out  those  nations 

8.  20  As  the  nations  which  the  Lord  destroyeth 

9.  1  to  go  in  to  possess  nations  greater  and 

9.  4,  5  but  for  the  wickedness  of  these  nations 
9. 14  I  will  make  of  thee  a  nation  mightier  and 

11.  23  will  the  Lord  drive  out  all  these  nations 
11. 23  and  ye  shall  possess  greater  nations  and 

12.  2  all  the  places  wherein  the  nations  which 

12. 29  shall  cut  off  the  nations  from  before  thee 

12. 30  How  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods? 

15.  6  and  thou  shalt  lend  unto  many  nations 
15.   6  and  thou  shalt  reign  over  many  nations 

17. 14  like  as  all  the  nations  that  (are)about  me 

18.  9  after  the  abominations  of  those  nations 

18. 14  For  these  nations,  which  thou  shalt  pos. 

19.  1  Lord  thy  God  hath  cut  off  the  nations 

20. 15  which  (are)  not  of  the  cities  of  these  uat. 
z6.  5  became  there  a  nation,  great,  mighty,  and 
26. 19  And  to  make  thee  high  above  all  nations 
28.    1  will  set  thee  on  high  above  all  nations  of 

28. 12  and  thou  shalt  lend  unto  many  nations 
•*.  28.  36  unto  a  nation  winch  neither  thou  nor  thy 

28. 49  Hie  Lord  shall  bring  a  nation  against  thee 
28.  49  a  nation  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  un. 
28.  50  A  nation  of  fierce  countenance,  which  sh. 

28.  65  among  these  nations  shalt  thou  find  no 

29. 16  how  we  came  through  the  nations  which 
29. 18  go  (and)  serve  the  gods  of  these  nations 

29.  24  Even  all  nations  shall  say,  Whereforehath 

30.  1  call(them)  to  mind  among  all  the  nations 

31.  3  he  will  destroy  these  nations  from  before 

32.  8  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance 
32.  21  provoke  them  to  anger  with  a  foolish  na. 
32.  28  For  they  (are)  a  nation  void  of  counsel 
32.  43  Rejoice,  0  ye  nations,  (with)  his  people 

Josh  23.    3  your  Godhath  done  unto  all  these  nations 
23.    4  have  divided  unto  you  by  lot  these  nations 
23.   4  with  all  the  nations  that  I  have  cut  off 
23.   7  That  ye  come  not  among  these  nations 
23.    9  from  before  you  great  nations  and  strong 
23.  12  cleave  unto  the  remnant  of  these  nations 

23. 13  drive  out  (any  of)  these  nations  from  bef. 


1  Sa.  S. 

8 

2  Sa.    7 


i  Ki.  4. 
11. 
14- 
18. 
1 8. 

2  Ki.17. 
17- 
17- 
17- 
17- 
18. 
19. 
19. 
21. 

i  Ch.  14. 
16. 


32. 

32- 

32- 

32- 

32. 

.Sell 

13- 

Job 

12. 

T2. 

34- 

tsa. 

Q- 

9- 

105- 

106. 
106. 

"3- 
117. 
118. 


T^         I47' 

Prov 14 
Isa.     1. 


14. 
14- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
18. 
18. 
23- 

25- 

25- 
26. 
26. 
29. 
30- 

33- 
34- 
34- 
36. 
37- 
40. 
40. 
41. 
43- 
45- 
45- 
49. 
52. 
52- 
55- 
58. 
60. 
60. 
60. 
61. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
66. 
66. 
66. 


21  the  nations  winch  Joshua  left  when  he  d. 
23  Therefore  the  Lord  left  those  nations,  wi. 

1  Xow  these  (are)  the  nations  which  the  L. 

5  make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  hike  all  the  n. 
20  That  we  also  may  be  like  all  the  nations 
23  And  what  ou3  nation  in  the  earth  (is)like 

23  Egypt,  (from)  the  nations  and  their  gods? 

11  he  had  dedicated  of  all  nations  which  he 
31  his  fame  was  in  all  nations  round  about 

2  Of  the  nations  (concerning)  which  the  L. 

24  to  all  the  abominations  of  the  nations  wh. 
10  there  isno  nation  or  kingdom  whitberniy 

10  took  an  oath  of  the  kingdom  and  nation 
26  The  nations  which  thou  hast  removed, and. 
29  Howbeit  every  nation  made  gods  of  their 
29  every  nation  in  then"  cities  wherein  they 
33  after  the  manner  of  the  nations  whom  they 
41  So  these  nations  feared  the  Lord,  and  se. 

33  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  deli. 

12  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 

1 7  have  destroyed  the  nations  and  their  lands 
9  did  the  nations  whom  the  Lord  destroyed 
17  brought  the  fear  of  him  upon  all  nations 

20  (when)  they  went  from  nation  to  nation 

31  and  let  (men)  sayamong  the  nations,  The 

21  And  what  one  nation  in  the  earth  (is)  like 

21  by  driving  out  nations  from  before  thy  p. 

11  that  he  brought  from  all  (these)  nations 

6  And  nation  was  destroyed  of  nation,  and 

13  were  the  gods  of  the  nations  of  these  lands 

14  among  all  the  gods  of  those  nations  that 

15  for  no  god  of  any  nation  or  kingdom  was 
17  As  the  gods  of  the  nations  of  (other)  lands 
23  was  magnified  in  the  sight  of  all  nations 

26  yet  among  many  nations  was  there  no  king 
23  increaseth  the  nations,  and  destroyeth 
23enlargeththenations,andstraiteneththem 
29  whether  (it  be  done)  against  a  nation,  or 
17  into  hell,  (and)  all  the  nations  that  forget 
20  (that)  the  nations  may  know  themselves 

27  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  worship  be. 

25  and  he  (is)  the  governor  among  the  nat. 

12  Blessed  (is)  the  nation  whose  God  (is)the 

1  plead  my  cause  againstan ungodly  nation 

7  his  eyes  behold  the  nations :  let  not  the 

2  thy  saving  health  among  all  nations 

11  fall  down  before  him  ;  all  nations  shall 
17  in  him :  all  nations  shall  call  him  blessed 

8  the  earth :  for  thou  shalt  inherit  all  nat. 

4  let  us  cut  them  off  from  (being)  a  nation 

9  All  nations  whom  thou  hast  made  shall 

1 3  they  went  from  one  nation  to  another,  from 

5  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation 

27  overthrow  their  seed  also  among  the  na. 
4  The  LORD  (is)highaboveall  nations,  (and) 

1  O  praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  nations :  praise 
10  All  nations  compassed  me  about:  but  in 
10  Who  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  mig. 
20  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation:  and 

34  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  :  but  sin 
4  Ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  in. 

2  the  hills ;  and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto 
4  And  he  shall  judge  among  the  nations 

4  nation  shall  not  Uft  np  sword  against  n. 

26  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations 

1  beyond  Jordan,  in  Galilee  of  the  nations 

3  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation,  (and) 

6  send  Mm  against  an  hypocritical  nation 

7  to  destroy  and  cut  off  nations  not  a  few 

12  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations 

4  kingdoms  of  nations  gathered  together 

6  he  that  ruled  the  nations  in  anger,  is  p. 
9  hath  raised  up.  .all  the  kings  of  the  nat. 

12  ground,  which  didst  weaken  the  nations! 
i3  All  the  kings  of  the  nations,  (even)  all  of 
26  (that  is)  stretched  out  upon  all  the  nat. 

32  then  answer  the  messengers  of  the  nation? 

2  Go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  nation  sea. 
2,  7  hitherto;  a  nation  meted  out  and  trod. 

3  her  revenue;  andshe  is  a  mart  of  nations 
3  the  city  of  the  terrible  nations  shall  fear 

7  and  the  veil  that  is  spreadoverallnations 

2  that  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth 
15,  15  Thou  hast  increased  the  nation 

7,  8  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations 

28  to  sift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  vanity 

3  at  the  lifting  up  of  thyself  the  nations 

1  Come  near,  ye  nations,  to  hear;  and  he. 

2  Indignation  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  all  nat. 
iS  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  del. 
12  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 
15  Behold,  the  nations  (are)  as  a  drop  of  a  b. 

17  nations  before  him  (are)  as  nothing ;  and 
2  gave,  .nations  before  him,  and  made  (him) 
9  Let  all  the  nations  be  gathered  together 

1  holden.tosubduenationsbeforehim;  and 
20  ye  (that  are)  escaped  of  the  nations  •  they 

7  to  him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth,  to  a 

10  his  holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations 
15  So  shall  he  sprinkle  many  nations :  the 

5  thou  shalt  call  a  nation,  .and  nations  (that) 

2  as  a  nation  that  did  righteousness,  and 
12  For  the  nation  and  kingdom  that  mil  not 
12  yea,  (those)  nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted 

22  and  a  small  one  a  strong  nation  :  I  the  L. 

11  praise  to  spring  forthbefore  all  the  nations 
2  the  nations  may  tremble  at  thy  presence 
1  unto  a  nation  (that)  was  not  called  by  my 

8  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once  ?  for  as  soon 

18  I  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues ;  and 

19  that  escape  of  them  unto  the  nations,  (to) 

20  out  of  all  nations,  upon  horses,  and  in  c. 


NATION 


688 


NAVE 


Jer.     i.    5  ordained  thee  a  prophet  unto  the  nations 
i.  10  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  nations 

2.  ii  Hath  a  nation  changed  (their)  gods,  which 

3.  17  all  the  nations  shall  be  gathered  unto  it 
3. 19  a  goodly  heritage  of  the  hosts  of  nations 

4.  2  the  nations  shall  bless  themselves  in  him 

4.  16  Make  ye  mention  to  the  nations;  behold 

5.  9,  29  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation  as 
5.  15  I  will  bring  a  nation,  .a  mighty  nation,  it 

5.  15  an  aneieut  nation, a  nation  whose  language 

6.  iS  Therefore  hear,  ye  nations,  and  know,  O 

6.  22  great  nation  shall  be  raised  from  the  sides 

7.  2S  This(is)anationthatobeyethnot  the  voice 
9.  9  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  this? 
9.  26  forall  (these)  nations  (are)  uncircumcised 

10.  7  Who  would  not  fear  thee,  O  king  of  nat.? 
10.  7  as  amongall  the  wise  (men)  of  the  nations 
10.  10  the  nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  his 
12.  17  utterly  pluck  up  and  destroy  that  nation 
18.    7,  0  I  shall  speak  concerning  a  nation,  and 

18.  8  If  that  nation,  against  whom  I  have  pro. 
22.  8  And  many  nations  shall  pass  by  this  city 
25.   9  againstall  these  nations  round  about,  and 

25. 11  these  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of  Ba. 

25. 12  punish  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  that  na. 

25. 13  hath  prophesied  against  all  the  nations 
25.  14  For  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall 
25.  15  and  cause  all  the  nations,  to  whom  I  send 

25. 17  made  all  the  nations  to  drink,  unto  whoiu 
25.  31  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the  nations 

25.  32  evil  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation 

26.  6  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  the  nations  of 

27.  7  And  all  nations  shall  serve  him,  and  his 
27.   7  many  nations  and  great  kings  shall  serve 
27.   8  the  nation  and  kingdom  which  will  serve 
27.  8  that  nation  will  I  punish,  saith  the  Lord 
27.  11  But  the  nations  that  bring  their  neck  u. 

27. 13  Lord  hath  spoken  against  the  nation  that 
28. 11  from  the  neck  of  all  nations  within  the  s. 

28. 14  iron  upon  the  neck  of  all  these  nations 

29. 14  aud  I  will  gather  you  from  all  the  nations 

29. 18  reproach,  among  all  the  nations  whither 

30. 11  though  I  make  a  full  end  of  all  nations 
31.    7  and  shout  among  the  chief  of  the  nations 
31.  10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  nations 
31.  36  also  shall  cease  from  being  a  nation  bef. 
33.    9  and  an  honour  before  all  the  nations  of 
33.  24  should  be  no  more  a  nation  before  them 
36.    2  against  all  the  nations,  from  the  day  I  s. 

43.  5  that  were  returned  from  all  nations  whi. 

44.  8  reproach  among  all  the  nations  of  the  ea. 

46. 12  nations  have  heard  of  thy  shame,  and  thy 
46.  28  will  make  a  full  end  of  all  the  nations  w. 

48.  2  let  us  cut  it  off  from  (being)a  nation:  also 

49.  31  get  you  up  unto  the  wealthy  nation,  that 

49.  36  shall  he  no  nation  whither  the  outcasts 

50.  2  Declare  ye  among  the  nations,  and  publ. 
50.    3  there  cometh  up  a  nation  against  her,  w. 
50.   9  an  assembly  of  great  nations  from  the  n. 
50.  12  behold,  the  hindermost  of  the  nations 
50.  23  become  a  desolation  among  the  nations 

50.  41  and  a  great  nation,  and  many  kings  shall 
50. 46  and  the  cry  is  heard  among  the  nations 

51.  7  nations  have  drunken,  .therefore  the  ua. 
51.  20  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  nations 
51.  27  among  the  nations,  prepare  the  nations 
51.  28  Prepare  against  her  the  nations  with  the 
51.  41  become  an  astonishment  among  the  nat. 
51.  44  nations  shall  not  flow  together  any  more 

Lain.  1.    1  she  (that  was)  great  among  the  nations 

4.  17  we  have  watched  for  a  nation  (that)  could 
Eze.    2.    3  a  rebellious  nation  that  hath  rebelled  ag. 

5.  5  I  have  set  it  iu  the  midst  of  the  nations 
5.  6  into  wickedness  more  than  the  nations 
5.  7,  7,  14,  15  the  nations  that  (are)  round  ab. 

5.  8  midst  of  thee  in  the  sight  of  the  nations 

6.  8  shall  escape  the  sword  among  the  nations 
6.   9  shall  remember  me  among  the  nations  w. 

12. 15  when  I  shall  scatter  them  among  thenati. 

19.  4  The  nations  also  heard  of  him ;  he  was  ta. 
19.   8  Then  the  nations  set  against  him  on  every 

25.  10  may  not  be  remembered  among  the  nati. 

26.  3  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  aga. 
26.  5  and  it  shall  become  a  spoil  to  the  nations 
2S.  7  upon  thee,  the  terrible  of  the  nations:  and 
29.  12  scatter  the  Egyptians  among  the  nations 
29.  15  exalt  itself  any  more  above  the  nations 

29. 15  they  shall  no  more  rule  over  the  nations 

30. 11  the  terribleof  the  nations, shall  be  brought 
30. 23,  26  scatter  the  Egyptians  among  the  nat. 
31.   6  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations 

31.  12  strangers,  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  have 

31. 16  I  made  the  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound 

32.  2  Thou  art  like  a  young  lion  of  the  nations 
32.  9  bring  thy  destruction  among  the  nations 
32.  12  terrible  of  the  nations,  all  of  them  ;  and 
32.  16  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shalllament 
32. 18  and  the  daughters  of  the  famous  nations 
35. 10  two  nations  aud  these  two  countries  shall 
36.  13  devourest.  .men,  and  hast  bereaved  thy  11. 
36.  14  neither  bereave  thy  nations  any  more,  sa. 

36.  15  neither  shalt  thou  cause  thy  nations  to 

37.  22  I  will  make  them  one  nation  in  the  land 
37.  22  they  shall  be  no  more  two  nations,  neither 

38. 12  people  (that  arelgathered  out  of  the  nat. 
3S.  23  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many  nations 
39.  27  in  them  in  the  sight  of  many  nations 

Dan!    S.  22  shall  stand  up  out  of  the  nation,  but  not 

i2.    1  such  as  never  was  sinee  there  was  a  nation 

Hos.    3.  io  though  they  have  hired  amongthe  nations 

9.  17  theyshall  be  wanderersamongthenations 

Joel     1.    6  For  a  nation  is  come  up  upon  my  land,  str. 


Joel     3.    2  I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and  will  br. 

3.  2  they  have  scattered  among  the  nations 
Amos  6.    t  (which  are)  named  chief  of  the  nations,  to 

6. 14  I  will  raise  up  against  you  a  nation,  0  h. 
9.    9  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among  all  nations 
Mic.    4.   2  And  many  nations  shall  come,  and  say 

4.  3  and  rebuke  strong  nations  afar  orf  ;  and 
4.    3  nation  shall  not  lift  up.  .against  nation 
4.    7  her  (that  was)  cast  far  off  a  strong  nation 
4.  11  Now  also  many  nations  are  gatheredagai. 
7.  16  The  nations  shall  see,  and  be  confounded 

Nab.  3.    4  that  selleth  nations  through  her  whored. 

3.    5  I  will  show  the  nations  thy  nakedness 
Hah,    1.    6  (that)  bitter  and  hasty  nation,  which  sh. 

1.  17  not  spare  continually  to  slay  the  nations'.' 

2.  5  but  gathereth  unto  him  all  nations,  and 

2.  8  Because  thou  hast  spoiled  many  nations 

3.  6  he  beheld,  and  drove  asunder  the  nations 
Zeph.  2.    1  yea,  gather  together,  0  nation  not  desired 

2.  5  Woe  unto,  the  nation  of  theCherethites! 
2. 14  all  the  beasts  of  the  nations:  both  the 

3.  6 1  have  cut  off  the  nations :  their  towers 
3.    8  my  determination  (is)  to  gather  the  nati. 

Hag.   2.    7  allnations,  and  the  desire  of  all  nations 

2.  14  so  (is)  this  nation  before  me,  saith  the 
Zeeh.  2.    8  sent  me  unto  the  nations  which  spoiled 

2. 11  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord 
7.  14  among  all  the  nations  whom  they  knew 

8. 22  strong  nations  shall  come  to  seek  the  L. 

8. 23  hold  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations 

12.  9  the  nations  that  come  against  Jerusalem 
14.  2  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem 
14.  3  forth,  and  fight  against  those  nations,  as 
14.  16  the  nations  which  came  against  Jerusalem 
14.  19  all  nations  that  come  not  up  to  keep  the 

Mai.    3.    9  ye  have  robbed  me,  (even)  tins  whole  nat. 

3.  12  all  nations  shall  call  you  blessed:  for  ye 

Z.A  nation,  people,  d"in^>  leom. 

Gen.  27.  29  people  serve  thee,  aud  nations  how  down 

Psa.  47.   3  shall  subdue,  .the  nations  under  our  feet 

57.    9  I  will  sing  unto  thee  among  the  nations 

67.   4  let  the  nations  be  glad,  and  sing  for  joy 

67.   4  thou  shalt.  .govern  the  nations  upon  earth 

108.   3  sing  praises  unto  thee  among  the  nations 

Prov  24.  24  the  people  curse,  nations  shall  abhor  him 

Isa.   17.  12  therushingof  nations,  (that)  make  a  rush. 

17.  13  The  nations  shall  rush  like  the  rushing 
51.   4  give  ear  unto  me,  O  my  nation  :  for  a  law 

LA  people,  uy,  Dj?  am, 

Exod2i.    8  to  sell  her  unto  a  strange  nation  he  shall 
Deut.  2.  25  nations  (that  are)  under  the  whole  heaven 

4.  6  understanding  in  the  sight  of  the  nations 
4. 19  unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven 
4.  27  Lord  shall  scatter  you  among  the  nations 

14.  2  all  the  nations  that  (are)  upon  the  earth 
28.  33  shall  a  nation  which  thou  knowest  not  eat 
28.  37  among  all  nations  whither  the  LORD  shall 
30.   3  gather  thee  from  all  the  nations,  whither 

1  Ch.16.  24  his  marvellous  works  among  all  nations 

2  Ch.   7.  20  proverb  and  a  by  word  among  all  nations 

13.  9  the  manner  of  the  nations  of  (other)  lands 
Neh.   1.    8  will  scatter  you  abroad  among  the  nations 

9.  22  thou  gavest  them  kingdoms  and  nations 
Psa.  96.   5  the  gods  of  the  nations  (are)  idols :  but 

106.  34  did  not  destroy  the  nations,  concerning 
Eze.  38.    8  it  is  brought  forth  out  of  the  nations,  and 

5.  Generation,  race,  yeved  genea. 

Phil.  2.  15  midst  of  a  crooked  aud  perverse  nation 

^.Generation,  race,  yevos  genos. 

Mark  7.  26  was  a  Greek,  a  Syrophenician  by  nation 
Gal.    r.  14  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own  nat. 

7. A  nation,  tQvos  ethnos. 

Matt2i.  43  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the 
24.  7  For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and 
24.  9  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  nations  for  my 
24.  14  preached,  .for  a  witness  unto  allnations 
25  32  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations 
28. 19  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the 

Markn.  17  My  house  shall  be  called  of  all  nations 
13.   8  For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and 
13. 10  must  first  be  published  among  all  nations 

Luke  7.    5  he  loveth  our  nation,  and  he  hath  built  us 

12.  30  these  things  do  the  nations  of  the  world 
21. 10  Nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and  king. 
21. 24  shall  he  led  away  captive  into  all  nations 
21.  25  upon  the  earth  distress  of  nations,  with 

23.  2  found  this  (fellow)  perverting  the  nation 

24.  47  preached  in  his  name  among  all  nations 
Johnxx.  48  and  take  away  both  our  place  and  nation 

11.  50  die.,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not 
11.  51  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation 
11.  52  not  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also 

18.  35  Thine  own  nation  and  the  chief  priests 
Acts   2.    5  men,  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven 

7.   7  nation  to  whom  theyshall  he  in  bondage 

10.  22  good  report  among  all  the  nation  of  the 
10.  35  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  him,  and 

13.  ig  he  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in  the 

14.  16  Who  in  times  past  suffered  all  nations  to 
1 7.  26  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men 
24.    2  worthy  deeds  are  done  unto  this  nation 
24.  10  of  many  years  a  judge  unto  tins  nation 
24.  17  I  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation,  and 
26.    4  first  among  mine  own  nation  at  Jerusalem 
28.  19  that  I  had  ought  to  accuse  my  nation  of 

Kum.  1.  5  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  nations 
4. 17  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  nations 
4.  18  might  become  the  father  of  many  nations 
10. 19  (and)  by  a  foolish  nation  I  will  anger  you 


Romi6.  26  made  known  to  all  nations  forthe  obedieuce 
Gal.    3.    8  preached. .Intheeshallallnationsbe bless. 

1  Pe.  2.  9  ye  (are).,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people 
Rev.    2.  26  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations 

5.    9  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  na. 
7.   9  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and 

10.  11  many  peoples,  and  nations,  aud  tongues 

11.  9  kindreds,  and  tongues,  andnations,  shall 

11.  18  the  nations  were  angry,  and  thy  wrath  is 

12.  5  "was  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron 

13.  7  all  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations 

14.  6  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 

14.  8  she  made  all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of 

15.  4  all  [nations]  shall  come  and  worship  before 

16.  19  the  cities  of  the  nations  fell :  and  great 

17.  15  and  multitudes,  andnations,  and  t.  ngues 

18.  3  all  nations  have  drunk  of  the  wine  of  the 

18.  23  by  thy  sorceries  were,  .nations  deceived 

19.  15  that  with  it  he  should  smite  the  nations 

20.  3  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more,  till 

20.  8  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the  nations  which 

21.  24  the  nations  of  them  which  are  saved  shall 

21.  26  bring  the  glory  and  honour  of  the  nations 

22.  2  leaves.. (were)forthehealingof  thenations 

$. Nations,  peoptles,  niax  umnioth. 

Gen.  25.  16  twelve  princes  according  to  their  nations 

9.  Land,  county,  piN  erets. 

Isa.  37. 18  the  kings..have  laid  waste  all  the  nations 

NATION,  of  one's  own  — 

Aboriginal,  native,  indigenous,  rrjiN  ezrach. 

Lev.  18.  26  (neither)  any  of  your  own  nation,  nor  any 

NATIVE,  NATIVITY  — 

1. Birth,  kindred,  rnViD  moledeth. 

Gen.  11.  28  Haron  died,  .in  the  land  of  his  nativity 
Ruth  2.  11  thy  mother,  and  the  land  of  thy  nativity 
Jer.  22. 10  return  no  more,  nor  see  his  native  country 
46.  16  and  let  us  go.  .to  the  land  of  our  nativity 
Eze.  16.    3  and  thy  nativity  (is)  the  land  of  Canaan 

16.  4  (as  for)  thy  nativity,  in  the  day  thou  wast 
23. 15  manner  of  Chaldea,the  laud  of  their  nativ. 

2.  A  cutting  out,  birth,  n-i'ZJp  mekurah. 

Eze.  21.  30  wast  created,  in  the  land  of  thy  nativity 

NATURAL  (force),  nature  — 

1.  Origin,  birth,  ysvea-is  genesis. 

Jas.     1.  23  man  beholding  his  natural  face  in  a  glass 

3.  6  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature;  and 

^.According  to  nature,  Kara.  <pvcrtv  kata pJiusin. 
Rom  11.  21  if  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches 
11.  24  these,  which  be  the  natural  (branches),  be 

Z. Natural,  belonging  to  nature,  <Pvgik6s phusikos. 
Rom.  1.  26  women  did  change  the  natural  use  into 

1.  27  men,  leaving  the  natural  use  of  the  woman 

2  Pe.  2.  12  as  natural  brute  beasts,  made  to  be  taken 

i.Nature,  <pvo-ts  phusis. 

Rom.  1.  26  the. .use  into  that  which  is  against  nature 

2.  14  do  by  nature  the  tilings  contained  in  the 
2.  27  not  uncircumcision  which  is  by  nature 

11.  24  the  olive  tree,  which  is  wild  by  nature 
11.  24  wert  graffed  contrary  to  nature  into  a 

1  Co.  11. 14  Doth  not  even  nature  itself  teach  you.that 
Gal.     2.  15  We  (who  are)  Jews  by  nature,  and  not  si. 

4.  8  unto  them  which  by  nature  are  no  gods 
Eph.   2.    3  and  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath 

2  Pe.  1.   4  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  divine  nature 

5. Animal,  sensuous,  ypvxa<6s  psuchikos, 

1  Co.  2. 14  But  the  natural  man  receivethnot  the  th. 

15.  44  It  is  sown  a  natural  body ;  it  is  raised  a 
15.  44  There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a 
15.  46  wliichisspii-itual.butthatwhichisuatural 

6. Moist,  fresh,  green,  nS  leach. 

Deut  34.   7  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force  abated 
NATURALLY  — 
\.Genuinely,  sincerely,  yvnalws  gnesios. 

Phil.  2.  20  who  will  naturally  care  for  your  state 

2. Naturally,  <pv<riKws  phusikos. 

Jude       10  but  what  they  know  naturally,  as  brute  b, 

NAUGHT,  NAUGHTINESS,  NAUGHTY  — 
1.  Without  profit,  worthless,  !>J£^  beliyyaal. 

Prov.  6.  12  Anaughty  person,  a  wicked  man,  walkelh 
2. Mischief,  calamity,  n)rt  havvah. 

Provn.    6  shall  be  taken  in  (their  own) naughtiness 

17.  4  (and)a  liar  giveth  ear  to  anaughty  tongue 

Z.EvU,  bad,  ]n.  ra. 

2  Ki.  2.  19  the  water  (is)  naught,  and  the  ground  b. 
Prov.20.  14  (It  is)  naught,  (it  is)  naught,  saith  the  h. 
Jer.  24.    2  other  basket  (had)  very  naughty  figs,  wh. 

LEvil,  badness,  in  roa. 

1  Sa.  17.  28  pride,  and  the  naughtiness  of  thine  heart 
5. Badness,  evil,  wickedness,  Kania  kafcia. 

Jas.    1. 21  superfluity  of  naughtiness,  and  receive 
NA'-UM,  NctotV,  from  Ileb.  cinj  comfort. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus,  through  Mary. 

Luke  3.  25  which  was(the  son)of  N.,  which  was  (the 
NAVE  — 
Nave,  back,  ring,  33  gab. 

1  Ki.  7.  33  the'iraxletrees,  and  their  naves,  and  thei 


NAVEL 


689 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR 


NAVEL   — 

1 .  Navel,  nerve,  sinew,  ib>  shor. 

Prov.  3.    8  it  shall  be  health  to  thy  navel,  and  marrow 
Eze.  16.   4  day  thou  wast  born  thy  navel  was  not  cut 

'2. Muscle  or  sinew,  VT^  sharir. 

Job  40. 16  and  his  force  (is)  in  the  navel  of  his  belly 

3.  Navel,  "rife*  shorer. 

Song   7.    2  Thy  navel  (is  like)  a  round  goblet,  (which) 
NAVY  (of  ships)  — 
A  ship,  navy,  UN  oni. 

1  Ki.  9.  26  And  king  Solomon  made  a  navy  of  ships 
9.  27  And  Hiram  sent  in  the  navy  his  servants 
10.  n  And  the  uavy  also  of  Hiram,  that  brought 
10.  22  For  the  king  had  at  sea  a  navy  of  Tharsh. 
10.  22  with  the  navy  of  Hiram,  .came  the  navy 
NAY  — 
I. Not,  bit  al. 

Judgig.  23  Nay,  my  brethren,  (nay),  I  pray  you,  do 

"2.  No,  t&lo. 

Gen.  1 3.  15  And  he  said,  Nay;  but  thou  didst  laugh 
23.  11  Nay,  my  lord,  hear  me :  the  field  give  I 

2. But,  except,  unless,  aAAa  alia. 

Roni.  7.    7  Nay,  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law 
8.  37  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than 

1  Co.  6.    8  Nay,  ye  do  wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that 

12. 22  Nay,  much  more  those  members  of  the  b. 
i.No,  not,  ou  ou. 

Matt.  5.  37yourcomraunicationbe,Yea,yea;Nay;ua5 

13.  29  Nay ;  lest,  while  ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye 
John  7.  12  said,  Nay;  but  he  deceiveth  the  people 
Acts  16.  37  nay  verily;  but  let  them  come  themselves 

2  Co.   1.  17  there  should  be  yea  yea,  and  nay  nay? 

1.  18  our  word  toward  you  was  not  yea  and  nay 
1.  19  was  not  yea  and  nay,  but  in  him  was  yea 

Jas.    5. 12  let  your  yea  be  yea ;  and  your  nay,  nay 
5. No,  not,  oux'i  ouchi. 

Lukei2.  51  I  tell  you,  Nay ;  but  rather  division 
J3-    3»  5  Nay :  hut,  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall 
16.  30  Nay,  father  Abraham :  but  if  one  went 

Rom.  3.  27  of  works?  Nay;  but  by  the  law  of  faith 
NAY  hut  — 
Therefore  indeed,  yea  verily,  /xevovpye  menounge. 

Horn.  9.  2o[Nay but,] Oman,  who  art  thou  that  repli. 
NAY...  NEITHER  — 
Also... also,  D3...D3  gam... gam. 

Jer.     6.  15  nay,  they  were  not  at  all  ashamed,  neither 
NAZ-AR-ENE,  NaCcopaTos.     A  native  of  Nazareth. 

Matt.  2.  23  which  was  spoken . .  He  shall  be  called  a  N. 

Acts  24.  5  man.  .a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  N. 
NAZ-AR'-ETH,  Nafapefl,  -er,  -dO,  -a. 
A  city  in  Zebulun,  in  Lower  Galilee,  seventy  miles  N. 
of  Jerusalem,  six  miles  W.  of  Mount  Tabor,  and  twenty- 
four  S.E.  of  Accho  or  Acre.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
Old  Testament,  but  still  exists  under  the  name  of 
H-Nazirah. 

Matt.  2.  23  he  came  and  dwelt  in  a  city  called  N. :  th. 
4.  13  leaving  N.,  he  came  and  dwelt  in  Capern. 

21.  11  This  is  Jesus  the  prophet  of  N.  of  Galilee 
26.  71  This  (fellow)  was  also  with  Jesus  of  N. 

Mark  1.    9  Jesus  came  from  N.  of  Galilee,  and  was 

1.  24  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee.  .J.  of  N. 
10.  47  when  he  heard  that  it  was  Jesus  of  N.,  he 

14.  67  And  thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  of  N. 

16.   6  Ye  seek  Jesus  of  N.,  which  was  crucified 
Luke  1.26  was  sent.,  unto  a  city  of  Galilee,  named  N. 

2.  4  out  of  the  city  of  N.,  into  Judea,  unto  the 
2.  39  returned  into  Galilee,  to  their  own  city  N. 

2.  51  came  to  N.,  and  was  subject  unto  them 
4. 16  he  came  to  N.,  where  he  had  been  brought 
4.  34  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee . .  Jesus  of  N. 

18. 37  they  told  him,  that  Jesus  of  N.  passeth  by 

24. 19  Concerning  Jesus  of  N.,  which  was  a  pro. 

John  1 .  45  have  found . .  Jesus  of  N.  the  sou  of  Joseph 

1.  46  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of  N.? 
18.    s  They  answered  him,  Jesus  of  N.  Jesus 

18.  7  "Whom  seek  ye?  And  they  said,  Jesus  of  N. 

19.  19  writing  was,  Jesus  of  N.  the  king  of  the  J. 
Acts    2.  22  Jesus  of  N.,  aman  approved  of  God  among 

3.  6  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  N.  rise  up 

4.  10  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  N.,  whom 
6.  14  Jesus  of  N .  shall  destroy  this  place,  and 

10.  38  How  God  anointed  Jesus  of  N.  with  the 

22.  8  I  am  Jesus  of  N.,  whom  thou  persecutest 
26.   9  thing  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  N. 

NAZ-AR-ITE,  tu  separated. 

The  appellation  of  one  who  by  a  vow  refrains  from 

certain  things  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time. 

Num.  6.    2  separate  (themselves)  to  vow  a  vow  ofaN. 

6.  13  this  (is)  the  law  of  the  N.,  when  the  days 

6.  18  N.  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  separation 

6.  19  shall  put  (them)  upon  the  hands  of  the  N. 

6.  20  and  after  that  the  N.  may  drink  wine 

6.  21  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  N.  who  hath  vowed 

Judg  13.    5,  7  the  child  shall  be  a  N.  unto  God  from 

16.  17  I  (have  been)  a  N.  unto  God  from  my  mo. 

Lam.   4.   7  Her  N.  were  purer  than  snow,  they  were 

Amos  2.  11  Andl  raised  up.  .of  your  young  men  for  N. 

2.  12  ye  gave  the  N.  wine  to  drink;  andcomni. 
NE'-AH,  njgn  the  settlement. 

A  city  in  Zebulun. 

Josh  19.  13  and  goeth  out  to  Remmon-methoar,  to  N. 

87 


NE-A-PO'-LIS,  NeaTToAi?. 

A  seaport  ou  the  E.  of  Macedonia,  ten  miles  S.E.  of 
Philippi,  on  the  Sinus  Strymonicus ;  now  called 
Ka  valla. 

Acts  16.  11  to  Samothracia,  and  the  next  (day)  to  N. 

NEAR,  NEARER,  {unto  or  to)  — 
l.Unto,  toioard,  7K  el. 

2  Sa.  14.  30  Joab's  field  is  near  mine,  and  he  hath  bar. 

'2.  Near,  bxx  etsel. 

Deut  16.  21  a  grove  of  any  trees  near  unto  the  altar 
Prov.  7.    8  Passing  through  the  street  near  her  corner 
Dan.    8.  17  he  came  near  where  I  stood ;  and  when  he 

'Z.Hand,  v  yad. 

Josh.15.  46  all  that  (lay)  near  Ashdod,  with  their 
2  Ch.21. 16  Arabians,  that  (were)  near  the  Ethiopians 

i.To  touch,  come  upon,  strike,  y\\  naga. 

Judg.20.  34  but  they  knew  not  that  evil  (was)  near 

5. Near,  rrilR  qarob. 

Gen.  19.  20  this  city  (is)  uear  to  flee  unto,  and  it  (is) 
45.  18  thou  shalt  be  near  unto  me,  thou,  and  thy 
Exodi3.  17  land  of  the  Philistines,  .that  (was)  near 
Lev.  21.    2  his  kin  that  is  near  unto  him,  (that  is) 
Ruth  3. 12  howbeit  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than 

1  Ki.  8.  46  unto  the  land  of  the  enemy,  far  or  near 

21.  2  it  (is)  near  unto  my  house :  and  I  will  give 

2  Ch.  6.  36  captives  unto  a  land  far  ofF  or  near 
Psa.  22.  11  for  trouble  (is)  near ;  for  (there  is)  none 

75.  1  (that)  thy  name  (is)  near  thy  wondrous  w. 
119. 151  Thou  (art)  near,  0  Lord  ;  and  all  thy 
148. 14  children  of  Israel,  a  people  near  unto  him 
Prov  10. 14  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  near  destruction 
27.  10  better  (is)  a  neighbour  (that  is)  near,  than 
Isa.  13.  22  her  time  (is)  near  to  come,  and  her  days 
33. 13  and  ye  (that  are)  near,  acknowledge  my 

50.  8  (He  is)  near  that  justifieth  me ;  who  will 

51.  5  My  righteousness  (is)  near ;  my  salvation 

55.  6  Seek,  .call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near 

56.  1  for  my  salvation  (is)  near  to  come,  and  my 

57.  19  Peace,  .to  (him  that  is)  near,  saith  the  L. 
Jer.  12.    2  thou  (art)  near  in  their  mouth,  and  far 

25.  26  the  kings  of  the  north,  far  and  near,  one 
48.  16  The  calamity  of  Moab  (is)  near  to  come 
48.  24  the  cities  of  the  land  of  Moab,  far  or  near 
Eze.    6.  12  he  that  is  near  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
7.   7  the  day  of  trouble  (is)  near,  and  not 
11.    3  (It  is)  not  near ;  let  us  build  houses :  this 

22.  5  (Those  that  be)  near,  aud  (those  that  be) 
30.    3  (is)  near,  even  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near 

Dan.  9.    7  all  Israel,  (that  are)  near,  and  (that  are) 
Joel    3. 14  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near  in  the  valley 
Obad.     15  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near  upon  all  the 
Zeph.    1. 14  great  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  near,  (it  is)  near 

6. Necessary, closely  connected,  auaytccuos  anagkaios. 
Acts  10.  24  called,  .his  kinsmen  and  near  friends 

7. Nigh,  iyyvs  eggus. 

Matt24-  33  know  that  it  is  near,  (even)  at  the  doors 
Marki3-  23  leaves,  ye  know  that  summer  is  near 
John  3.  23  also  was  baptizing  in  Aenon  near  to  Ralim 
11.  54  unto  a  country  near  to  the  wilderness 

8.  Nigher,  nearer,  eyyvrtpov  egguteron. 

Rom  13.  11  now  (is)  our  salvation  nearer  than  when 

9.  Close  to,  near,  irXnaiov  plesion. 

John  4.   5  near  to  the  parcel  of  ground  that  Jacob 
[See  also  Bring,  come,  draw,  go,  kin,  kinsman,  kins- 
woman.] 

NEAR,  to  be  — 

1.7b  be  nigh,  Bb3  nagash. 

Job   41. 16  One  is  so  near  fco  another,  that  no  air 

2.  To  be  near,  Tip  qarab. 

Lam.  4. 18  our  end  is  near,  our  days  are  fulfilled ;  for 

S.To  see,  nx~i  raah. 

Jer.  52.  25  of  them  that  were  near  the  king's  person 

NE-AR-I'AH,  nnyj  Jah  drives  away. 

1.  Grandson  of  Shechaniah,  descended  from    David. 
B.C.  456. 

1  Ch.  3.  22  and  Igeal,  and  Bariah,  and  N.,  and  Shap. 
3.  23  the  sons  of  N. ;  Elioenai,  and  Hezekiah 

2.  A  Simeonite  captain  who  smote  the  remnant  of  the 
Amalekites  in  Mount  Seir.     B.C.  722. 

1  Ch.  4.  42  N.,  and  Rephaiah,  and  Uzziel,  the  sons 

NE'-BAI,  '513,  '5*2  marrowy,  projecting. 
A  person  or  family  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed  the  cove- 
nant.   B.C.  445. 

Neh.'io.  19  Hariph,  Anathoth,  N. 

NE-BA'-JOTH,  NE-BA'-IOTH,  nvnJ,  n\2l  husbandry. 

1.  Eldest  son  of  Ishmael  son  of  Hagar.     kc.1840. 

Gen.  25. 13  the  first  born  of  Ishmael,  N. ;  and  Kedar 
28.  9  the  daughter  of  Ishmael . .  the  sister  of  N. 
36.    3  Bashem.,  Ishmael's  daughter,  sisterof  N. 

1  Ch.  1.  29  The  first  born  of  Ishmael,  N. ;  then  Kedar 

2.  His  descendants,  the  Nabatheans,  in  Arabia  Petraea 
and  Arabia  Felix. 

Isa.  60.    7  the  rams  of  N.  shall  minister  unto  thee 

NE-BAX'-LAT,  B^?  hard,  firm. 
A  city  in  Judah  or  Benjamin,  now  called  Bir  Ncbala. 
Neh.  11.  34  Hadid,  Zeboim,  N. 


NE'-BAT,  an?  look,  cultivation. 

Father  of  Jeroboam  who  rebelled  against  Rehoboam, 
and  became  the  first  king  of  the  tentribesof  Israel,  and 
set  up  the  two  golden  calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan.    B.C. 

IOIO. 

1  Ki  11.  26  the  son  of  N.,  an  Ephrathite  of  Zereda 

12.  2  the  son  of  N.,  who  was  yet  in  Egypt,  heard 
12. 15  LORD  spake.,  unto  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

15.  1  the.  .year  of  king  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 
id.    3  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

16.  26  in  all  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

16.  31  walk  in  the  sinsof  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

21.  22  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  sou  of  N. 

22.  52  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. ,  who 

2  Ki.   3.    3  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

9.  9  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 
10. 29  (from)  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

13.  2  followed  the  sins  of  Jeroboam,  .son  of  N. 

13.  11  allthesinsof  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N.,who 

14.  24  all  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

15.  9,  iS,  24,  28  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

17.  21  they  made  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N.  king 

23.  15  high  place  which  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 
2  Ch.  9.  29  visions,  .against  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N.? 

10.  2  when  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. .  .heard  (it) 
10.  15  whichhespake. .toJeroboamthesonof N. 
13.   6  Yet  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. . .  is  risen  up 

NE'-BO,  134  height. 

1.  A  city  in  Reuben,  E.  of  Jordan 

Nimi32.    3  Elealeh,  and  Shebam,  and  N.,  and  Beon 

32.  38  N.,  and  Baal-meon,  their  names  being  c. 

33.  47  and  pitched  in  the  mountains,  .before  N. 

1  Ch.  5.  8  Bela  the  son  of  Azaz.  .even  unto  N.  and 
Isa.  15.  2  Moab  shall  howl  over  N.,  and  over  Med. 
Jer.  48.    1  Woe  unto  N. !  for  it  is  spoiled ;  Kiriathaim 

48.  22  upon  Dibon,  and  upon  N.,  and  upon  Beth. 

2.  A  mount  E.  of  Jordan  over  against  Jericho,  in  Moab, 
part  of  the  Abarim  range,  with  a  top  called  Pisgah,  six 
miles  W.  of  Heshbon. 

Deut  32.49  Get  thee  up.  .(unto)  mount  N.,  which  (is) 

34.  1  went  up . .  unto  the  mountain  of  N. ,  to  the 

3.  A  twofold  city  in  Judah;  perhaps  Bcith-N'ube,  near 
Lydda. 

Ezra  2.  29  The  children  of  N.,  fifty  and  two 
Neh.  7.  33  The  men  of  the  other  N.,  fifty  and  two 

4.  The  name  of  a  Chaldean  idol. 

Isa.  46.    1  Bel  boweth  down,  N.  stoopeth ;  their  idols 

5.  The  ancestor  of  certain  Jews  who  had  taken  strange 
wives  during  or  after  the  captivity. 

Ezra  10.  43  Of  the  sons  of  N.,  Jeiel,  Mattithiah,  Zab. 

NE-BU-CHAD-NEZ'-ZAR,     or     REZ'  ZAR,     n«N31333, 

Son  of  Nabbpolassar,"  and  king  of  Babylon  who  invaded 
Judah,  captured  Jerusalem,  destroyed  it  and  the  temple, 
carried  the  inhabitants  to  Babylon,  set  up  a  golden 
image  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  put  three  young  men  into 
the  fiery  furnace,  became  proud,  had  a  dream  which 
Daniel  explained,  was  driven  for  a  time  from  men,  but 
restored  and  praised  God.    B.C.  600. 

2  Ki.24.    1  In  his  days  N.  king  of  Babylon  came  up 

24.  10  At  that  time  the  servants  of  N.  king  of  B. 

24.  11  N.  king  of  Babylon  came  against  the  city 

25.  1  N.  king  of  Babylon  came,  he,  and  all  his 
25.  8  which  (is)  the  nineteenth  year  of  king  N. 
25.  22  people . .  whom  N.  king  of  Babylon  had  left 

1  Ch.  6. 15  carried  away  Judah.  .by  the  hand  of  N. 

2  Ch.36.    6  Against  him  came  up  N.  king  of  Babylon 

36.  7  N.  also  carried  of  the  vessels  of  the  house 
36. 10  when  the  year  was  expired  king  N.  sent 
36. 13  he  also  rebelled  against  king  N. ,  who  had 

Ezra    1.    7  which  N.  had  brought  out  of  Jerusalem 
2.    1  whomN.  the  king  of  Babylon  had  carried 

5.  12  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  N.  the  ki. 
5. 14  which  N.  took  out  of  the  temple  that(was) 

6.  5  which  N.  took  forth  out  of  the  temple  w. 
Neh.  7.  6  whom  N.  the  king  of  Babylon  had  carried 
Esth.  2.  6  whom  N.  the  king  of  Baby  Ion  had  carried 
Jer.  21.  2  for  N.  king  of  Babylon  maketh  war  again. 

21.  7  into  the  hand  of  N.  kingof  Babylon,  and 

22.  25  even  into  the  hand  of  N.  king  of  Babylon 

24.  1  after  that  N.  king  of  Babylon  had  earned 

25.  1  that  (was)  the  first  year  of  N.  king  of  B. 
25.  9  take.  .N.  the  king  of  Babylon,  my  servant 
27.  6  given  all  these  lands  into  the  hand  of  N. 
27.  8  which  mil  not  serve  the  same  N.  the  king 

27.  20  Which  N.  king  of  Babylon  took  not,  when 

28.  3  that  N.  king  of  Babylon  took  away  from 
28.  11  Even  so  will  I  break  the  yoke  of  N.  king 

28.  14  that  they  may  serve  N.  kingof  Babylon 

29.  1  all  the  people  whom  N.  had  carried  away 
29.    3  whom  Zedekiah.  .sent  unto  Baby  Ion  to  N. 
29.  21  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  N. 
32.    1  year,  .which  (was)  the  eighteenth,  .of  N. 
32.  28  into  the  hand  of  N.  king  of  Babylon,  and 

34.  1  when  N.  kingof  Babylon,  .fought  a  gain  &t 

35.  11  when  N.  kingof  Babylon  came  up  into  the 

37.  1  whom  N.  king  of  Babylon  made  king. .of  J. 
39.  1  came  N.  king  of  Babylon  and  alibis  army 
39.  5  they  brought  him  up  to  N.  king  of  Baby. 
39.  1 1  Now  N.  king  of  Babylon  gave  charge  co. 

43.  10  I  will  send  and  take  N.  the  king  of  Bab 

44.  30  gave  Zedekiah.  .into  the  hand  of  N.  king 
46.    2  which  N.  king  of  Babylon  smote  in  the 
46. 13  howN.  king  of  Babylon  shouldcome  (and) 
46.  26  into  the  hand  of  N.  king  of  Babylon,  and 

49.  28  which  N.  kingof  Babylon  shall  smite,  thus 
49.  30  for  N.  kingof  Babylon  hath  taken  counsel 


NEBUSHASBAN 


690 


NEEDY 


Jer.   50.  17  N.  king  of  Babylon  hath  broken  his  bones 

51.  34  ST.  the  king  uf  Babylon  hath  devouredme 

52.  4  X.  king  of  Babylon  came,  he  and  all  his  a. 
52.  12  the  nineteenth  year  of  X.  king  of  Babylon 
52. 28  the  people  whom  X.  carried  away  captive 
52.  29  In  the  eighteenth  year  of  N.  he  carried 
52.  30  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  X.    . 

Eze.  26.    7  will  bring  upon  Tyrus  N.  king  of  Babylon 

29.  18  X.  king  of  Babylon  caused  his  army  to  s. 
29. 19  I  will  give  the  land  of  Egypt  unto  X.  king 

30.  10  cease  by  the  hand  of  N.  king  of  Babylon 
Dan.    1.    1  came  X.  king  of  Babylon  unto  Jerusalem 

1. 18  then  the  prince.. brought  them  in  before  N. 
2.  1  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  N.,  N. 
2.  28  maketh  known  to  the  king  X.  what  shall 

2.  46  X.  fell  upon  his  face,  and  worshipped  D. 

3.  1  X.  the  king  made  an  image  of  gold,  whose 
3.  2  X.  the  king  sent  to  gather  together  the 
3-  2»  3>  3»  5.  7  hnage  which  X.  the  king  had  set 
3.  9  said  to  the  king  X.,  0  king,  live  for  ever 
3.  13  Xr.  in  (bis)  rage  and  fury  commanded  to  br. 
3.  14  X.  spake  and  said  unto  them,  (Is  it)  true 
3.  16  0  X.,  we  (are)  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in 
3.  19  Then  was  X.  full  of  fury,  and  the  form  of 
3.  24  X.  the  king  was  astonied,  and  rose  up  in 
3.  26  X.  came  near  to  the  mouth  of  the  burning 

3.  28  X.  spake,  and  said,  Blessed  (be)  the  God  of 

4.  1  X.  the  king,  unto  all  people,  nations,  and 
4.  4 1  X.  was  at  rest  in  mine  house,  and  flour. 
4. 18  This  dream  I  king  X.  have  seen.  Xow  thou 
4. 28  All  this  came  upon  the  king  X. 

4.  31  (saying),  O  king  X.,  to  thee  it  is  spoken 
4.  33  samehour  was  the  thing  fulfilled  upon  X. 
4.  34  I  X.  lifted  up  mine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and 

4.  37  I  X.  praise  and  extol  and  honour  the  King 

5.  2  X.  had  taken  out  of  the  temple  which  (was) 
5.  11  X.  thy  father,  the  king,  I  (say),  thy  father 
5. 18  God  gave  X.  thy  father  a  kingdom,  and 

NE-BTJ-SHAS'-BAN,  ]Z}&3}. 

A  prince  of  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon.    B.C.  600, 
Jer.  39.  13  X.,  Rabsaris,  and  Xergal-sharezer,  Kab. 

NE-BTJ-ZAR-A'-DAN,  n>Tjn3f 

The  captain  of  the  guard  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  left 

behind  him  in  Jerusalem  for  a  time.     B.C.  600. 

2  Ki.  25.    8  came  X.,  captain  of  the  guard,  a  servant 

25.  11  did  X".,  the  captain  of  the  guard,  carry  a. 

25.  20  And  X.,  captain  of  the  guard,  took  these 

Jer.  39.   9  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  carried  away 

39.  10  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  left  of  the 
39. 11  X.  king  of  Babylon  gave  charge  concern. 
39. 13  So  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  sent,  and 

40.  1  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  let  aim 
41. 10  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  commit. 
43.  6  X\  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  left  with 
52.  12  came  X.,  captain  of  the  guard,  (which)  s. 
52.  T5,  30  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  carried  a. 
52.  16  X.  the  captain  of  the  guard  had  left  (ce.) 
52.  26  X".  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  them,  and 

NECESSARY,  NECESSITY,  (must  of)— 
1. Statute,  pn  choq. 

Job    23.  12  esteemed  the  words,  .more  than  my  nee. 
2. Necessary,  avayKcuos  anaykaios. 

Acts  13.  46  It  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  God 

1  Co.  12.  22  members . .  which  seem . .  feeble,  are  nece. 

2  Co.    9.    5  I  thought  it  necessary  to  exhort  the 
Phil.    2.  25  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send  to  you 
Titus  3.  14  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses 

3. Necessity,  avdyKy  anayke. 

1  Co.  7.  37  having  no  necessity,  but  hath  power  over 

9.  16  for  necessity  is  laid  upon  me  ;  yea,  woe  is 

2  Co.  6.    4  in  afflictions,  in  necessities,  in  distresses 

9.    7  not  grudgingly,  or  of  necessity  :  for  God 

12.  10  I  take  pleasure,  .in  necessities,  in  perse. 

Phm.       14  should  not  be  as  it  were  of  necessity,  but 

Heb.  7.  12  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  change  also 

9.  16  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the 

9.  23  (It  was)  therefore  necessary  that  the  pat. 

4.  The  things  necessary,  to  iirdvajKes  tth  epanaffkes. 

Acts  15.  28  greater  burden  than  these  necessary  things 

5.  Use,  need,  necessity,  xp€ia  chreia. 

Acts  20.  34  have  ministered  unto  my  necessities,  and 
28.  10  laded  (as)  with  such  things  as  were  [nee] 

Rom  12.  13  Distributing  to  the  necessity  of  saints 

Phil.   4.  16  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my  necessity 
NECESSITY,  of — 
1.  To  have  necessity,  txw  wdytc-nv  echo  anayken. 

Luke23.  17  [For  of  necessity  he  must  release  one  unto] 
%. Necessary,  avayKaios  anaykaios. 

Heb.    S.    3  (it  is)  of  necessity  that  this  man  have  so. 
NE'-CHO,  1D3. 

An  appellation  given  to  the  king  of  Egypt  who  succeeded 
Bsammetichus  and  fought  against  Xabopolassar  in  the 
days  of  king  Josiah,  and  after  making  Eliakim  (or 
Jehoiakim)  king,  carried  off  Jehoahaz  his  brother  to 
Egypt.     B.C.  610. 

2  Ch.35.  20  X.  king  of  Egypt  came  up  to  fight  against 

35.  22  hearkened  not  unto  the  words  of  X.  from 

36.  4  X.  took  Jehoahaz  his  brother,  and  earried 
NECK  — 

1,  Throat,  neck,  n'viria  gargeroth. 

Prov.  1.   9  unto  thy  head,  and  chains  about  thy  neck 
3.    3  bind  them  about  thy  neck;  write  them 
3.  22  life  unto  thy  soul,  and  grace  to  thy  neck 
6. 21  thine  heart,  (and)  tie  them  about  thy  neck 


2. Throat,  jYi|  garon. 

Isa.     3.  16  walk  with  stretched  forth  necks,  and  wa. 

Eze.  10. 11  upon  thy  bauds,  and  a  chain  on  thy  neck 
3. Bone  or  vertebrae,  nj2"jSD  maphreqeth. 

1  Sa.   4.  18  the  gate,  and  his  neck  brake,  auit  he  died 
i.Neck,  back,  rpj}  oreph. 

Gen.  49.  8  (shall  be)  in  the  neck  of  thine  enemies ;  thy 
Lev.  5.  8  and  wring  off  his  head  from  his  neck,  but 
Deutji.  27  I  know  thy  rebellion,  and  thy  stiff  neck:  b. 

2  Sa.22.  41  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  uecks  of  mine 
2  Ki.17.  14  would  not  hear,  but  hardened  their  necks 

17.  14  like  to  the  neck  of  their  fathers,  that  did 
2  Ch.36.  13  but  he  stiffened  his  neck,  and  hardened 
Neh.  9.  16  hardened  their  necks,  and  hearkened  not 
9.  17  but  hardened  their  necks,  and  in  their  re. 
9.  29  hardened  their  neck,  and  would  not  hear 
Job  16. 12  he  hath  also  taken  (me)  by  my  neck,  and 
Psa.  i3.  40  Thou  nast  also  given  me  the  necks  of  mine 
rrov2g.  1  being  often  reproved,  hardeneth(his)  neck 
Isa.  48.  4  and  thy  neck  (is)  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy 
Jer.     7.  26  their  ear,  but  hardened  their  neck  :  they 

17.  23  made  their  neck  stiff,  that  they  might  not 

19.  15  because  they  have  hardened  their  necks 
d.Neck,  nape,  ltt\$  tsavvar. 

Gen.  27. 16  hands,  and  upon  the  smooth  of  his  neck 
27.  40  shalt  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck 

33.  4  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him :  and  they 
41. 42  and  put  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck 

45.  14  he  fell  upon  his  brother  Benjamin's  neck 

45.  14  wept ;  and  Benjamin  wept  upon  his  neck 

46.  29  he  fell  on  his  neck,  and  wept  on  his  neck 
Dent  28. 48  he  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  neck 
Josh.  10.  24  put  your  feet  upon  the  necks  of  these  ki. 

10.  24  and  put  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of  them 

Judg.  5.  30  for  the  necks  of  (them  that  take)  the  ap.? 

8.  21  ornaments  that  (were)  on  their  camel's  n. 

8.  26  chains  that  (were)  about  their  camel's  ne. 

Xeh.   3.    5  but  their  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to 

Job   15.  26  runneth  upon  him,  (even)  on  (his)  neck 

39. 19  hast  thou  clothed  his  neck  with  thunder? 

41.  22  In  his  neck  remaineth  strength,  and  sor. 
Psa.  75.  5  horn  on  high  :  speak  (not)  with  a  stiff  n. 
Song  1.  10  rows  (of  jewels),  thy  neck  with  chains  (of 

4.  4  Thy  neck  (is)  like  the  tower  of  David  bu. 
7.    4  Thy  neck  (is)  as  a  tower  of  ivory ;  thine 

Isa      8.   8  he  shall  reach  (even)  to  the  neck :  and  the 
10.  27  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck,  and  the  yoke 
30.  28  shall  reach  to  the  midst  of  the  neck,  to 
52.   2  loose  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  neck 

Jer.  27.    2  Make..yokes,and  put  them  upon  thy  neck 
27.    8  that  will  not  put  their  neck  under  the 
27.  11  the  nations  that  bring  their  neck  under 

27.  12  Bring  your  necks  under  the  yoke  of  the 

28.  10  yoke  from  off  the  prophet  Jeremiah's  neck 
28. 11  from  the  neck  of  all  nations  within  the 
28.  12  had  broken  the  yoke  from  off  the  neck  of 
28. 14  iron  upon  the  neck  of  all  these  nations 
30.    8 1  will  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck 

Lam.  1.  14  are  wreathed,  (and)  come  up  upon  my  n. 

5.  5  Our  necks  (are)  under  persecution;  we  la. 
Eze.  21. 29  upon  the  necks  of  (them  that  are)  slain 
Dan.    5.    7,  29  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck,  and 

5.  16  (have)  a  chain  of  gold  about  thy  neck,  and 
Hos.  10.  11  I  passed  over  upon  her  fair  neck:  I  will 
Mic.    2.    3  from  which  ye  shall  not  remove  your  ue. 
Hab.  3.  13  discovering  the  foundation  unto  the  neck 

6.  Neck,  D'riiy  isavveronun. 

Song  4.    9  of  thine  eyes,  with  one  chain  of  thy  neck 

7. Neck,  Tpctx^Xo?  trachelos. 

Matt  18.  6  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 
Mark  9.  42  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 
Lukeis.  20  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him 
17.  2  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck 
Acts  15.  10  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples 

20.  37  and  fell  on  Paul's  neck,  and  kissed  him 
Rom.  16.   4  for  my  life  laid  down  their  own  necks 

NECK,  to  break,  cut  or  strike  off  the  — 
To  break  Hie  neck,  behead,  came  to  drop,  *p#  araph. 
Exodi3- 13  thou  shalt  break  his  neck:  and  all  the 

34.  20  if  thou  redeem  (him)  not.  .break  his  neck 
Deutai.   4  shall  strike  off  the  heifer's  neck  there 
Isa.  66.    3  a  lamb,  (as  if)  he  cut  off  a  dog's  neck 

NECROMANCER  — 

To  enquire  at  the  dead,  D'np  eh?  darash  methim. 

Deuti8.  11  a  charmer,  .orawizard,  or  a  necromancer 
NE-DAB-I'AH,  n;ni3  Joh  is  ioilli?ig,  liberal. 
Sou  of  Jeconiah,  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah.  B.C.  590. 

1  Ch.   3. 18  Shenazar,  Jecamiah,  Hosharaa,  and  N. 
NEED,  needB,  needful,  to  need  — 

1. Needful  things,  necessaries,  runyn  chashchuth. 

Ezra  7.  20  whatsoever  more  shall  be  needful  for  the 
2.Need,  want,  lack,  liorjo  machsor. 

Deuti5.    8  surely  lend  him  sufficient  for  his  need 
3.  Necessity,  need,  ^"JS  tsorek. 

2  Ch.  2.  16  will  cut  wood .  .as  much  as  thou  shalt  n. 
^.Necessity,  avdytcT)  anayke. 

Heb.    7.  27  Who  needet'h  not  daily,  as  those  high 
Jude         3  it  was  needful  for  me  to  write  unto  you 
5. It  bchovcth,  SeT  del. 

Acts  15.    5  it  was  needful  to  circumcise  them,  and 
i  Pe.    1.   6  if  need  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness  through 

6.  To  oivc,  be  under  obligation,  oQetKa  opheilo. 
1  Co.  7.  36  need  so  require,  let  him  do  what  he  will 


7. To  v:antbesides,needmore, TrpnaBeo/.iat2rrosdeomai 
Acts  17.  25  as  though  he  needed  any  tiling,  seeing  he 

8.  Use,  need,  necessity,  xPei'a  chreia. 

Matt.  3.  14  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and  c. 
6.  8  Father  knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need 
9.  12  They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician 
14.  16  They  need  uot  depart ;  give  ye  them  to  eat 

21.  3  ye  shall  say,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them 

26.  65  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses? 
Mark  2.  17  They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the 

2.  25  read  what  David  did,  when  he  had  need 
1.    3  say  ye  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 

14.  63  saith,  What  need  we  any  further  witnes.? 
Luke  5.  31  They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician 

9.  ii  and  healed  them  that  had  need  of  healing 
10.  42  But  one  thing  is  needful :  and  Mary  hath 

15.  7  nine  just  persons,  which  need  no  repen. 
19.  31  say  unto  him,  Because  the  Lord  hath  need 
19.  34  And  they  said,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  him 

22.  71  they  said,  What  need  we  any  further  wi.? 
John  2.  25  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man 

13.  10  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to  w. 
13.  29  Buy.  .that  we  have  need  of  against  the  f. 

16.  30  needest  not  that  any  mau  should  ask  thee 
Acts    2.  45  parted  them  to  all.  .as  every  man  had  need 

4.  35  unto  every  man  according  as  he  had  need 

1  Co.  12.  21  eye  cannot  say  unto  the  hand,  I  have  no  n. 
12.  21  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you 
12.  24  For  our  comely  (parts)  have  no  need :  but 

Eph.   4.  28  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  ne. 

Phil.    4.  19  But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  ac. 

1  Th.   1.    8  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  anything 

4.  9  ye  need  not  that  I  write  unto  you ;  for  ye 

5.  1  But.  .ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto 
Heb.   5.  12  ye  have  need  that  one  teach  you  again  w. 

5.  12  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  milk,  and 
7. 11  what  further  need,  .that  another  priest  s. 
10.  36  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye  have 

1  Jo.    2.  27  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you 

3.  17  seethhis  brother  have  need,  and  shutteth 
Rev.    3.  17  increased  with  goods  and  have  need  of  n. 

21.  23  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither 

22.  5  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the 

9.  To  want,  need,  xpv{^  chrezo. 

Luken.    8  will  rise  and  give  hini  as  many  as  he  ne. 

2  Co.  3.    1  or  need  we,  as  some,  .epistlesof  coninien. 
NEED  of,  to  have  — 

l.To  abate,  lack,  ~iprr  chaser, 

Prov  31. 11  trust.,  so  that  he  shall  have  no  need  of  sp. 
%  Lacking,  *ipn  chaser. 

1  Sa.  21.  15  Have  I  need  of  mad  men,  that  ye  have  br. 
3.  To  have  need,  nc'n  chashach. 

Ezra   6.    9  that  which  they  have  need  of,  both  young 

4.7b  want,  need,  xp'hC01  chrezo. 

Matt  6.  32  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all 

Luke  1 2.  30  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these 

Rom  16.    2  in  whatsoever  business  she  hath  need  of 
NEEDFUL,  things  which  are  — 
The  (hi  ngs  suitable,convenient,Ta  iTTLT7}Seiaepitedeia 

Jas.    2.  16  those  tilings  which  are  needful  to  the  body 
NEEDLE  — 
A  needle,  fa(pls  rhaphis. 

Matt  19.  24  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  ne. 

Markio.  25  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  ne. 

Lukei8.  25  for  a  camel  to  go  through  a  [ueedle's]  eye 
NEEDLE  "WORK  (on  both  sides)  — 
1.  Work  of  the  embroiderer,  npn  niyj£0  maaseh  roqe. 

Exod26.  36  fine  twined  linen,  wrought  with  needle  w. 

27.  16  fine  twined  linen,  wrought  with  needle  w. 

28.  39  thou  shalt  make  the  girdle  (of)  needle  wo. 

36.  37  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  of  needle  w. 

38.  18  hanging  for  the  gate  of  the  court,  .n.  w. 

39.  29  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  of  needle  w. 
2. Embroidered  work,  ncp-i  riqmah. 

Judg.  5.  30  a  prey  of  divers  colours  of  needle  work,  of 

5.  30  of  divers  colours  of  needle  work  on  both  s. 

Psa.  45. 14  shall  be  brought.,  in  raiment  of  needle  w. 

NEEDS,  must  — 

l.To  be  necessary,  exw  avdyK7\v,  avdyKt)  iffrtv. 
Matt  18.    7  for  [it]  must  needs  be  that  offences  come 
Lukei4.  18  ground,  and  I  must  needs  go  and  see  it 
Rom  13.    5  must  needs  be  subject,  not  only  for  wrath 

2.1t  behoveth,  Zel  dei. 

Marki3.    7  must  needs  be;  but  the  end  (shall)not  (be) 
John  4.    4  And  he  must  needs  go  through  Samaria 
Acts    1.  16  this  scripture  must  needs  have  been  ful. 

17.  3  that  Christ  must  needs  have  suff.  21,  22. 

2  Co.  1 1.  30  If  I  must  needs  glory,  I  will  glory  of  the 
Z.By  all  means  it  behoves,  TrdvTws  del  pantos  dei. 

Acts  21.  22  [the multitude  must  needs  cometogether] 
NEEDY  — 
\.  Needy,  desiring,  |V3$  ebyon. 

Deut  15.  11  to  thy  poor,  and  to  thy  needy,  in  thy  land 

24.  14  oppress  an  hired  servant.,  poor  and  needy 
Job    24.    4  They  turn  the  needy  out  of  the  way:  the 

24.  u  killetb  the  poor  and  needy,  and  in  the  ni. 
Psa.    9.  1 8  For  the  needy  shall  not  alway  be  forgotten 

12.    5  for  the  sighing  of  the  needy,  now  will  I 

35. 10  poor  and  the  needy  from  him  that  spoileth 

37.  14  to  cast  down  the  poor  and  needy,  .to slay 

40.  17  Butl.. poor andneedy.  .the Lord thinketh 
70.    5  But  I  (am)  poor  and  needy  ;  make  haste 
72.   4  he  shall  save  the  children  of  the  needy,  and 
72. 12  he  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  crieth 


, 


NEESING- 


GUI 


NEITHER 


Psa.  72. 13  He  shall  spare  the  poor  and  needy 
72. 13  and  shall  save  the  souls  of  the  needy 
74.  21  let  the  poor  and  needy  praise  thy  name 
82.    4  Deliver  the  poor  and  needy :  rid.  .out  of 
86.   1  Lord,  hear  me ;  furl  (am)  poor  and  needy 
109.  j6  persecuted  the  poor  and  needy  man,  that 
109.  22  I  (am)  poor  and  needy,  and  my  heart  is 
113.    7  He..lifteth  the  needy  outof  the  dung  hill 
Pro v 30.  14  to  devour  the  poor,  .and  the  needy  from 
31.   9  and  plead  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy 

31.  20  shereacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  needy 
Isa.    14.  30  the  needy  shall  lie  down  in  safety:  and 

23.    4  a  strength  to  the  needy  in  his  distress,  a 

32.  7  to  destroy.. even  whenthe  needy  speaketh 
41.  17  (When)  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water 

Jer.     5.  28  the  right  of  the  needy  do  they  not  judge 

22. 16  He  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy 
Eze.  16.  49  strengthen  the  haud  of  the  poor  and  ne. 

18.  12  Hath  oppressed  the  poor  and  needy,  hath 
22.  20  have  vexed  the  poor  and  needy ;  yea,  they 
Amos  4.  1  which  oppress  the  poor,  .crush  the  needy 
S.  4  Hear  this,  O  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy 
8.  6  That  we  may  buy . .  the  needy  for  a  pair  of 
2. Lean j  thin,  weak,  ^  dal. 

Isa.   10.    2  To  turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment 
26.    6  the  feet  of  the  poor,  .the  steps  of  the  ne. 

3. Afflicted,  humble,  poor,  'j*'  «>"■ 

Prov3i.  20  she  reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  needy 
4.  To  be  poor,  lacking,  c'n  rush. 

Psa.  82.    3  do  justice  to  the  afflicted  and  needy 
NEESING  — 
A  sneesing,  n^K,  atishah. 

Job  41. 18  By  Ms  neesingsalight  doth  shine,  andhis 
NE-Gf-NOTH,  rnrai,  nj*a|. 
A  kind  of  stringed  instrument. 

Psa,    4.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  on  Neginoth 
[So  in  Psa.  6.  54.  55.  61.  67.  76.] 
NEGLECT,  (to  hear)  to  — 

1.  To  be  careless,  not  to  care,  a^eAew  ameleo. 

1  Ti.  4. 14  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee,  which 
Heb.  2.    3  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  gr. 

2.  To  view  amiss,  overlook,  neglect,  irapadeccp4u>. 
Acts   6.    1  because  their  widows  were  neglected  in 

3. To  hear  amiss,  disregard,  irapaKovto  parakouo. 
Matt  iS.  17  if  he  shall  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  (it) 

18. 17  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him 
NEGLECTING  — 

Unsparing  severity,  arpetSla  apheidia. 

Col.    2.  23  and  humility,  and  neglecting  of  the  body 
NEGLIGENT,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  deceived,  at  rest,  rha  shalah,  2. 

2  Ch.29.  11  My  sons,  be  not  now  negligent ;  for  the 
2.  To  be  careless,  not  to  care,  a/teAew  ameleo. 

2  Pe.  1. 12  Wherefore  [I  will  not  be  negligent]  to  put 
NE -HE -LA' -BUTE,  'D^nj,  *9$Bg. 

Patronymic  of  Shemaiahj  a  presumptuous  person  whom 
God  reproved  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah. 

Jer.  29.  24  thou  also  speak  to  Sheinaiah  the  N.,  say. 
29.  31  saith . .  Lord  concerning  Shemaiah  the  N. 
29.  32  I  will  punish  Shemaiah  the  X.,  and  his 

NE-HEM-I'AH,  n;pn?  Jah  is  comfort. 

l.A  chief  man  who  returned  from  exile.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.    2  N.,  Seraiah,  Reelaiah,  Mordecai,  Eilshau 

Neh.  7.  7  N.,  Azariah,  Raauiiah,  Nahamani,  Mord. 
2.  The  son  of  Halachiah,  who  being  cup  bearer  to 
Artaxerxes,  was  sent  by  him  to  Jerusalem  where  he 
became  governor  for  many  years.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.    1.    1  The  words  of  N.  the  son  of  Hachaliah 

8.    9  N.,  which  (is)  the  Tirshatha,  and  Ezra  the 
10.    1  Now  those  that  sealed  (were)  X.,  the  Tir. 
12.  26  and  in  the  days  of  N.  the  governor,  and 
12.47  all  Israel ..  in  the  days  of  X.,  gave  the  por. 
3.A  person  who  repaired  a  portion  of  the  wall.   B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  16  After  him  repaired  X.  the  son  of  Azbuk 
NE-HT-LOTH,  rnVcq. 
Name  of  a  music  choir,  inheritance. 

Psa.    5.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  Xehiloth 
NE'-HTJM,  zm\  comfort. 

A  chief  man  that  returned  from  the  exile  with  Zerub- 
babel ;  called  Iichum  in  Ezra  2.  2.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.    7.    7  Who  came  with  Zerubbabel.  .M.,  Baanah 
NE-EOJSH'-TA,  xnyn}  basis,  ground,  support. 
Wife  of  Jehoiakim  and  mother  of  Jehoiachin.   B.C.  600. 

2  Ki.  24.   8  his  mother's  name  (was)  X.,  the  daughter 
NE-HUSH'-TAN,  I$g?n|  brazen  serpent. 
The  contemptuous  appellation  given  by  Hezekiahto  the 
brazen  serpent  made  by  Moses  in  the  wilderness,  when 
men  began  to  worship  it. 

2  Ki.  18.   4  brake  the  images,  .and  he  called  it  N. 
NE-f -EL,  bx*$l  dwelling  of  God. 
A  city  in  Asher(orXaphtaii),uearBeth-emek;  now  Mi'ar. 

Josh.  19.  27  toward  the  north  side  of .  .X.,  and  goeth 
NEIGH,  to  — 
To  cry  aloud,  neigh,  Srra  tsahal. 

Jer.     5.    8  every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's  w. 
NEIGHBOUR  — 
1.  Neighbour,  equal,  fellow,  n*e$  amith. 

Lev.    6.   2  lie  unto  his  neighbour  in  that  which  was 


Lev.  6.  2  by  violence,  or  hath  deceived  his  neighb. 
18. 20  thou  shalt  not  lie  carnally  with  thy  neig. 
19.  15  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thy  ne. 

19.  17  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighb. 

24.  ig  if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbour 

25.  14  if  thou  sell  ought  unto  thy  neighbour,  or 

25. 14  buyest.  .of  thy  neighbour's  hand,  ye  shall 

25. 15  after  the  jubilee  thou  shalt  buy  of  thy  n. 
2.Near  one,  aYijj  qarob. 

Exod32.  27  his  companion,  and  every  man  his  neigh. 
Josh.  9.  16  they  heard  that  they  (were)  their  neighb. 
Psa.  15.  3  nor  taketh  up  a  reproach  against  his  nei. 
Eze.  23.  5  on  her  lovers,  on  the  Assyrians  (her)  uei. 
23.  12  She  doted  upon  the  Assyrians  (her)  neigh. 

3. Friend)  companion,  neighbour,  jn  rea. 

Exodn.    2  let  every  man  borrow  of  his  neighbour 

20. 16  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  n. 

20.  17  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  ho. 
20.  17  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife 
20.  17  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  thing  that  (is)  thy  ne. 
2i.  14  if  a  man  come  presumptuously  upon  his  n. 
22.  7  If  a  man  shall  deliver  unto  his  neighbour 
22.  8  he  have  put  his  hand  unto  his  neighbour's 
22.  9  he  shall  pay  double  unto  his  neighbour 
22.  10  If  a  man  deliver  unto  his  neighbour  an  ass 
22. 11  that  he  hath  not  put  Ins  hand  unto  his  n. 
22.  14  if  a  man  borrow . .  of  his  neighbour,  and  it 
22.  26  If  thou  at  all  take  thy  neighbour's  rainie. 

Lev.  ig.  13  Thou  shalt  not  defraud  thy  neighbour,  n. 

19. 16  thou  stand  against  the  blood  of  thy  neig. 

19.  18  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

20.  10  that  comniitteth  adultery  with  his  neigh. 
Deut.  4.  42  which  should  kill  his  neighbour  unawares 

5.  20  Neither,  .bear  false  witness  against  thy  n. 
5. 2i  Neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's 
5.  21  neither  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour's 

5.  21  his  ass,  or  any  (thing)  that  (is)  thy  neighb. 
15.    2  Every  creditor  that  lendeth.  .unto  his  ne. 

15.  2  he  shall  not  exact  (it)  of  his  neighbour,  or 
19.  4  Whoso  killeth  his  neighbour  ignorantly 
19.  5  a  man  goeth  into  the  wood  with  his  neig. 
19.  5  lighteth  upon  his  neighbour,  that  he  die 

19.  11  if  any  man  hate  his  neighbour,  and  lie  in 
19. 14  Thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  neighbour's  1. 
22.  24  because  he  hath  humbled  his  neighbour's 

22.  26  for  as  when  a  man  riseth  against  his  nei. 

23.  24  When  thou  comest  into  thy  neighbour's 
23.  25  comest  into  the  standing  corn  of  thy  nei. 

23.  25  thou  shalt  not  move  a  sickle  unto  thy  ne. 
27.  17  he  that  removeth  his  neighbour's  land  m. 

27.  24  Cursed  (be)  he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour 
Josh. 20.  5  because  he  smote  his  neighbour  unwitti. 
Ruth  4.    7  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave,  .tohisue. 

1  Sa.  15.  28  given  it  to  a  neighbour  of  thine,  .better 

28. 17  and  given  it  to  thy  neighbour,  .to  David 

2  Sa.12. 11  and  give,  .unto  thy  neighbour,  and  he  sh. 

1  Ki.  8.  31  If  any  man  trespass  against  his  neighbour 

20.  35  unto  his  neighbour  in  the  word  of  the  L. 

2  Ch.  6.  22  If  a  man  sin  against  his  neighbour,  and 
Job  12.    4  I  am  (as)  one  mocked  of  his  neighbour 

16.  21  might  plead . .  as  a  man . .  for  his  neighbour 
31.   9  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour's  door 

Psa.  12.  2  They  speak  vanity  every  one  with  his  ne. 

15.  3  with  his  tongue,  nor  doeth  evil  to  his  ne. 

28.  3  winch  speak  peace  to  their  neighb  ours,  but 
101.  5  Whoso  privily  slandereth  his  neighbour 

Prov.  3.  2S  Saynot  unto  thyneighbour,  Go,  and  come 
3.  29  Devise  not  evil  against  thy  neighbour,  se. 

6.  29  So  he  that  goeth  in  to  his  neighbour's  w. 
11.    9  An  hypocrite,  .destroyeth  his  neighbour 

11.  12  He  that  is  void  of  wisdom  despisethhisn. 

12.  26  The  righteous,  .more  excellent  than  his  n. 
14. 20  The  poor  is  hated  even  of  his  own  neigh. 
14.  21  He  that  despiseth  his  neighbour  sinneth 

16.  29  A  violent  man  enticeth  his  neighbour 
18. 17  his  neighbour  cometh  and  searcheth  him 
19.    4  but  the  poor  is  separated  from  his  neigh. 

21. 10  his  neighbour  findeth  no  favour  in  his  eyes 

24.  28  Be  not  a  witness  against  thy  neighbour 

25.  8  when  thy  neighbour  hath  put  thee  to  sh. 
25.  9  Debate  thycause  with  thy  neighbour(him.) 
23.  17  Withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour's 
25.  iS  that  beareth  false  witness  against  his  ne. 
26. 19  So  (is)  the  man  (that)  deceiveth  his  neig. 

29.  5  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour  spr. 
EccL.  4.  4  that  for  tins  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neig. 
Isa.     3.   s  one  by  another,  and  every  one  by  his  ne. 

19.  2  every  one  against  his  neighbour;  city  ag. 

41.  6  They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour;  and 

Jer.    5.  8  every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's 

7.  5  judgment  between  a  man  and  Ms  neigh, 
g.  4  Take  ye  heed  every  one  of  his  neighbour 
9.  4  and  every  neighbour  will  walk  with  slan. 
9.  5  they  will  deceive  every  one  Ms  neighbour 
9.  8  speaketh  peaceably  to  his  neighbour  with 

22.  8  they  shall  say  every  man  to  his  neighbour 
22. 13  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  w. 

23.  27  wliich  they  tell  every  man  to  Ms  neighb. 
23.  30  steal  my  words  every  one  from  Ms  neigh. 
23.  35  Thus  shallye  say  every  one  to  his  neighbour 
29.  23  have  committed  adultery  with  their  nei. 

1.  34  shall  teach  no  more  every  man  Ms  neigh. 

34-  *5  proclaiming  liberty  every  man  to  Ms  nei. 

34.  17  to  his  brother,  and  every  man  to  his  nei. 

Eze.  18.    6  neither  hath  defiled  his  neighbour's  wife 

18. 11  but  even  hath,  .defikdhis  neighbour's  w. 
18.  15  hath  not  defiled  his  neighbour's  wife 

22. 11  hath  committed  abomination  with  Ms  n. 

22.  12  thou  hast  greedily  gained  of  thy  neighb. 

33.  26  and  ye  defile  everyone  his  neighbour's  w. 

Hab    2.  15  Wue  unto  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour 


Zech.  3.  10  shall  ye  call  every  man  his  neighbour  un. 
8.  10  for  I  set  all  men  every  one  against  his  n. 
8. 16  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  Ms  nei. 
8.  17  imagine  evil  in  your  hearts  against  your  n. 

11.  6  men  every  one  into  his  neighbour's  hand 
14.  13  lay  hold  every  one  on  the  hand  of  Ms  ne. 

14.  13  shall  rise  up  against  the  haud  of  his  neig. 

4.  Female  friend,  companion,  neighbour,  mjn  reicth. 

Exodn.    2  every  woman  of  her  neighbour,  jewels 
Jer.     9.  20  and  every  one  her  neighbour  lamentation 

5.  Dweller,  neighbour,  inhabitant,  \y&  shaken. 

Exod.  3.  22  But  every  woman  shall  borrow  of  her  ne. 

12.  4  let  him  and  his  neighbour  next  unto  his 
Ruth  4.  17  the  women  her  neighbours gaveitaname 
2  Ki.  4.  3  borrow  thee  vessels  abroad  of  all  thy  ne. 
Psa.  31.  nespeciallyamongmyneighbours,andafear 

44. 13  Thou  makest  us  a  reproach  to  our  neigh. 
79.   4  We  are  become  a  reproach  to  our  neighb. 

79.  12  render  unto  our  neighbours  seven  fold  in. 

80.  6  Thou  makest  us  a  strife  unto  our  neighb. 
89.  41  spoil  Mm  :  he  is  a  reproach  to  Ms  neighb. 

Prov. 27. 10  better  (is)  a  neighbour.. near,  than  a  bro. 
Jer.     6.  21  the  neighbour  and  his  friend  shall  perish 

12.  14  saith  the  Lord  against  all  mine  evil  neig. 

49.  10  his  brethren,  and  Ms  neighbours,  and  he 

49.  18  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  neighbour 

50.  40  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  the  neighbour 
Eze   16.  26  with  the  Egyptians  thy  neighbours,  great 

G.Fellow  countryman,  ye(r<i>i>  geito/i. 

Lukei4.  12  call  not  thy.  .rich  neighbours  ;  lest  they 

15.  6  he  calleth  together  (Ms)  friends  and  net 
15.    9  she  calleth  (her)  friends  and  (her)  neigh. 

John  9.    8  The  neighbours  therefore,  and  they  which 

7.  One  dwelling  around  about,  irepfoiKOs perwikos. 
Luke  1.  58  her  neighbours  and  her  cousins  heard  how 

8.  The  one  near  or  close  to,  6  -rrX-naiov  hoplesion. 

Matt.  5.  43  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate 
19.  19  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

22.  39  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
Marki2.  31  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

12.  33  and  to  love  (his)  neighbour  as  Mniself 
Luke  10.  27  all  thy  mind ;  and  thy  neighbour*  as  thys.. 

10.  29  said  unto  Jesus,  And  who  is  my  neighbour? 

10.  36  was  neighbour  unto  him  that  fell  among 
Acts    7.  27  he  that  did  his  neighbour*  wrong  tM'Ust 
Rom  13.    9  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

13. 10  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  Ms  neighbour 

15.  2  Let  every  one  of  us  please  (his)  neighbour 
Gal.  5. 14  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
Eph.  4.  25  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour 
Heb.  8.  11  they  shall  not  teach  every  man  Ms  [nei.] 
Jas.     2.    8  Thou  shalt  love  thyneighbour  as  thyself 

NEIGHING — 

Loud  cryings,  neighings,  ni^rj?0  mitshaloth. 

Jer.     8. 16  at  the  sound  of  the  neigMng  of  his  strong 

13.  27 1  have  seen  tMne  adulteries,  and  thy  ne. 
NEITHER  — 

l.T/iere  is  not,  there  are  not,  pK  ayin. 

Gen.  45.  6  (there  shall)  neither(be)  earing  nor  harv. 
2.  Not.  ■?*  ah 

Exod34.  3  neitherlet  the  flocks  nor  herds  feed  before 
3. if,  on  im. 

Eze.  14.  20  they  shall  deliver  neither  son  nor  daught. 
i.Not,  "72  bal. 

Isa.  26. 18  neither  have  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
5.7/1  order  not,  *3?3v  lebilti. 

2  Ki.12.  8  neither  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  ho. 
G.No,  not,  ah  la. 

Dan.  3.  27  neitherwere  theircoats  changed,  nor  the 
6. 18  neither  were  instruments  of  music  brou 

7. No,  not,  t&  lo. 

Gen.  21.  26  neither  didst  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  h. 
2  Sa.  ig.  24  had  neither  dressed  his  feet,  nor  trimmed- 

8.  From,  jp  min. 

1  Sa.  30. 19  there  was  nothing  lacking  to  them,  neither 

9.  Either,  or,  tf  e. 

Acts  24.  12  disputing,  .neither  raising  up  the  people 
Rom.  1.  21  they  glorified  (Mm)  not  as  God,  neither 
Jas.     1. 17  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning 

lO.Nbt.  yA\  me. 

Mattio.    9  Provide  neithergold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass 

24. 18  Neither  let  Mm  wMch  is  in  the  field  ret. 
Luke  10.    4  Carry  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes 

12.  29  shall  drink,  neither  be  ye  of  doubtful  m. 

18.  2  which  feared  not  God,  neither  regarded 
Rom  14.  21  (It  is)  good  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  d.. 

2  John  io  receive  him  not.  .neither  bid  him  God  s. 
11. Not  even,  nor,  neither,  ftifSe  mede. 

Matt.  7.  6  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine 
10.  10  neither  two  coats,  neither  shoes,  nor  yet 

23.  10  Xeither  be  ye  called  masters :  for  one  is 

24.  20  be  not  M  the  winter,  neither  on  the  sab. 
Mark  S.  26  Xeither  go  into  the  town,  nor  tell  (it)  to 

12.  24  not  the  Scriptures,  neither  the  power  of 

13.  11  ye  shall  speak,  [neither  do  ye  premeditate] 

13.  15  neither  enter.. to  takeauy  thingoutofMs 
Luke  3.  14  Do  violence  to  no  man,  neither  accuse 

12.  22  neither  for  the  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on 
12.  47  neither  did  accordingto  his  will,  shall  be 

14.  12  [nor  thy  brethren,  neither  thy  kinsmen] 

16.  26  neither  can  they  pass  to  us..frum  thence 
John  4.  15 1  thirst  not,  neither  come  hither  to  draw 

14. 27  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither 


NEITHER 


692 


NET 


Acts  21.  21  to  circumcise,  neither  to  walk  after  the 
23.    8  there  is  no  resurrection,  [neither]  angel 
Rom.  6.  13  Neither  yield  ye  your  members.. iustrum, 
9.  11  neither  having  done  anygoodorevil,  that 

1  Co.   5.    8  neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wi. 

10.    7  Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  as..someof  them 
10.    8  Neitherletuseoinniitfornieation,  as  some 

10.  9  Neither  let  us  tempt  Christ,  as  some  of 
10.  10  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  some  of  them  also 

2  Th.  3.  10  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he 
1  Ti.    1.    4  Neither  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless 

5.  22  neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins 
1  Pe.  3.  14  be  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither  be 

5.   3  [Neither]  as  being  lords  over  (God's)  her. 
1  Jo.  2.  15  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things 

3.  18  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue 

12.Not  even,  fifac  mSte. 

Matt.  5.  34  neither  by  heaven  ;  for  it  is  God's  throne 

5.  35  neither  by  Jerusalem ;  for  it  is  the  city  of 
5.  36  Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  be. 

11.  18  John  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking 
Luke  7.  33  John  the  Baptist  came  neither  eating  br. 

9.   3  Take  nothing  for  (your)  journey,  neither 
9.    3  neither  bread,  neither  money;  neither 
Acts  23.  12,  21  they  would  neither  eat  nor  drink  till 
27.  20  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days 
Eph.   4.  27  [Neither]  give  place  to  the  devil 
2  Th.  2.    2  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  le. 
1  Ti.    1.    7  understanding  neither  what  they  say,  nor 
Heb.    7.    3  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end 
Jas.     5. 12  neither  by  heaven,  neither  by  the  earth 
5. 12  neither  by  any  other  oath :  but  let  your 
Rev.    7.    3  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor 

13.  Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  oh  p-f]  ou  mi. 

Marki3.  19  God  created  unto  this  time,  neither  shall 

Luke  1.  15  shall  drink  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink 
l&.No,  not,  ou  ou. 

Matt23-  13  for  ye  neither  go  in. .neither  suffer  ye  them 
25. 13  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour 

Luke  8.  43  spent  all . .  upon  physicians,  neither  could 

12.  24  they  [neither] sow  nor  reap;  which neith. 
John  17.  20  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them 
Acts    8.  21  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  m. 

9.    9;  24.  18;  Gal.  3.  28;  Col.  3.  it  ;  2  Pe.  1.  8 
15.  A710Z,  nut,  Kal  ou  kai  ou  or  ouk  Se  ouk  de. 

Matt. 22. 16  ;  Mark  8.  14 ;  14.  40 ;  Luke  8.  27  ;  18.  34 ; 
20.  21 ;  Jo.  3.  20;  10.  28;  Acts  4.  12 ;  1  Co.  2.  9,  14,  15  ; 
it.  9;  Eph.  5.  3  ;  6.  9  ;  Heb.  4.  13  ;  Rev.  9.  21 ;  20.  4. 
16. Not  even,  neither,  ou5e  oude. 

Matt.  5.  15  Neither  do  men  light  a  candle,  and  put  it 

6.  15  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your  tre. 
6.  26  for  they  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap,  nor 

6.  28  the  lilies,  .they  toil  not,  neither  do  they 

7.  18  neither,  .a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good 
9.  17  Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  bo. 

11.  27  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save 

12.  4  neither  for  them  which  were  with  him,  but 
12.  19  neither  shall  any  man  hear  his  voice  in  the 
13. 13  theyhearnot;  neither  do  they  understand 
16.  9  Do  ye  not  yet  understand,  neither  reme. 
16.  10  Neither  the  seven  loaves  of  the  four  tho. 

21.  27  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

22.  46  neither  durst  any.  .from  that  day  forth 

23.  13  neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering 
Mark  4.  22  neither  was  any  thing  kept  secret,but  that 

8.  17  perceive  ye  not  yet,  neither  understand? 

1.  26  [neither  will  your  Father  which  is  in  he.] 

11.  33  Neither  do  I  tell  you  by  what  authority 

12.  21  the  second  took  her,  and  died,  neither  left 

13.  32  not  the  angels,  .neither  the  Son,  but  the 

14.  59  neither  so  did  their  witness  agree  together 
14.  68  [neither]  understand  I  what  thou  sayest 
16. 13  [told. .the  residue :  neither  believed  they] 

Luke  6.  43  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  g. 
7.  7  neither  thought  I  myself  worthy  to  come 
8. 17  neither,  .hid  that  shall  not  be  known  and 

11.  33  neither  under  a  bushel,  but  on  a  candles. 

12.  33  where  no  thief  approacheth,  neither  moth 

16.  31  neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one 

17.  21  Neither  shall  they  say,  Lohere!  or,  lo  there 
20.    8  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

John  6.  24  saw  that  Jesus  was  not  there,  neither  his 

7.  5  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in  him 

8.  11  [Neither  do  I  condemn  thee :  go,  and  sin] 

8.  42  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  he  sent  me 

13.  16  neitherhethat  is  sent  greater  than  he  that 

14.  17  it  seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him 
Acts    2. 27  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to 

2.  31  that,  .[neither]  his  flesh  did  see  corruption 
4.  32  neithersaidany.  .that  ought  of  the  things 
4.  34  Neither  was  there  any  among  them  that 

16.  21  not  lawful  for  us  to  receive,  neither  to  o. 

17.  25  Neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands 
20.  24  [ueither]  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  myself 

Rom,  2  2S  neither(is  that)  circumcision  which  is  out, 

9.  7  Neither,  because  they  are  the  seed  of  A. 

1  Co.  11.  16  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  cli. 

15.  50  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorru. 
Gal.     1.    1  not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus 

1. 12  I  neither  received  it  of  man .  .but  by  the 
1. 17  Neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them 
2.  3  But  neither  Titus,  who  was  with  me,  being 
6.  13  For  neither  they  themselves  who  are  cir. 
Phil.    2.  16  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain 

2  Th.   3.    8  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  forn. 
Heb.    9. 12  Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves 

9.  18  Whereupon  neither  the  first.. dedicated 

10.    8  for  sin  thou  wouldest  not,  neither  hadst 

1  Pe,    2-  2r  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 


1  Jo.  3.  6  sinneth  hath  not  seen  him,  neitherknown 
Rev.    5.    3  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  neither  under  the 

5.  3  to  open  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon 
7.  16  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst 

7.  16  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor 
9.    4  neither  any  green  thing,  neither  any  tree 

2 1.  23  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of 
17. Xot  even,  neither,  oi/Te  oute. 

Luke2o.  36  Neither  can  they  die  any  more :  for  they 
Acts  24.  12  they  neither  found  me  in  the  temple  dis. 

24. 12  neither  in  the  synagogues,  nor  in  the  city 

24.  13  Neither  can  they  prove  the  tilings  whereof 

25.  8  Neither  against  the  law  of  the  Jews,  nei. 
Rom.  8.  38  For  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death 

1  Co.  3.   7  neither  is  he  that  plauteth.  .neither  he 

6.  9  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  ad. 
Gal.  1.  12  neither  was  I  taught  (it),  but  by  the  revel. 
1  Th.  2.  6  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory,  neither  of  you 
3  John  10  neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  breth. 
Rev.    5.    4  to  read  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon 

g.  20  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk 
12.    8  [neither]  was  their  place  found  any  more 

20.  4  not  worshipped  the  beast,  neither  his  im. 

21.  4  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  shall 
IS.  But  not  even,  oAA*  o&re  all'  oute. 

1  Co.   3.   2  hitherto  ye  were  not  able,  .neitheryetnow 

NEITHER . . .  NEITHER — 

Xot  even. ..not  even,  o$T€...ov,Te  oute. ..oute. 

Matt  12.  32  neither  in  this  world,  neither  in  the  (wo.) 
Act  28.  21  We  neither  received  letters.,  neither  any 
i  Co.  3.    7  neither  is  he  that  planteth.  .neither  he 

8.  8  neither,  if  we  eat.  .neither,  if  we  eat  not 
11.  11  neither  is  the  man  without,  .neither  the 

NEITHER  ..NOR  (yet) — 

Xot  even. ..not  even,  oure  ..out*  oute. ..oute. 

Matt.  6.  20  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt 

22.  30  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
Marki2.  25  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
Lukei4.  35  It  is  neither  fit  for  the  land,  nor  yet  for 

20.  35  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
John  4.  21  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet 

5.  37  neither  heard  his  voice  at  any  time,  nor 

8.  19  Ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father :  if 

9.  3  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his  pa. 
Acts  15.  10  wilieh  neither  our  fathers  nor  w'e  were  able 

19.  37  are  neither  robbers  of  churches,  nor  yet 
Gal.     5.    6  neither  circumcision  availeth . .  nor  uncir. 

6.  15  neither  circumcision  availeth . .  nor  uncir. 
1  Th.  2.  5  neither,  .used  we  flattering  words .  .nor  a 
Rev.    3. 15  I  know,  .that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor 

3.  16  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor 
NEITHER  .  .any  (man  or  thing)  — 
Xot  even  one,  Kai  ovSeis  kai  oudeis, 

Mark  5.    4  in  pieces:  neither  could  any.  .tame  him 
16,    8  neither  said  they  any  thing  to  any.  .for 

Jas.     1. 13  God  cannot,  .neither  tempteth  he  any  man 
NEITHER  at  any  time  — 
Not  even  at  any  time,  ouSeVore  oudepote. 

Luke  1 5.  29  neither  transgressed  I  at  any  time  thj  co. 
NEITHER  indeed  — 
Not  even,  ovSe  oude. 

Rom.  8.    7  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be 
NE'-KEB,  3jJ|7J  the  hollow. 

a  city  in  Naphtali,  between  Adami  and  Jabneel;  now 
called  Uuzethi. 

Josh. 19.  33  their  coast  was  from  Heleph.  .N.,  and  J. 
NE-ZO'-DA,  ttyp)  herdsman. 

1.  One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  from 
exile  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  48  the  children  of  N.,the  children  of  Gazzaiu 
Neh.    7.  50  the  children  of  Rezin,  the  children  of  N. 

2.  A  person  whose  descendants  did  the  same,  but  could 
not  show  their  genealogy.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  60  the  children  of  Tobiah,  the  children  of  N. 

Neh.    7.  62  the  children  of  Tobiah,  the  children  at  N. 
NE-MU'-EL,  bmv}  God  is  spreading. 
l.A  Reubenite,  son  of  Eliab,  and  brother  of  Datlian  and 
Abiram  who  strove  against  Moses.     B.C.  1490. 

Nuni26.    9  the  sons  of  Eliab ;  N.,  and  Dathan,  and 

2.  A  son  of  Simeon,  second  son  of  Jacob  and  Leah.    B.C. 
1700. 

Nuni26.  12  of  N.,  the  family  of  the  Nemuelites  :  of 

1  Ch.  4.  24  The  sons  of  Simeon  (were)  N.,  and  Jamin 
NE-MTJ-LI-TES,  ^tODJ. 

The  family  of  Nemuel  son  of  Simeon. 

Num-6.  12  of  Nemuel,  the  family  of  the  N.:of    imin 
NE'-PHEG,  J53  sprout 

1.  A  son  of  Izhar,  son  of  Kohath.    B.C.  1491. 

Exod  6.  21  the  sons  of  Izhar;  Korah,  and  N.,  and  Z. 

2.  A  son  born  to  David  after  he  became  king  of  Israel. 
B.C.  1028. 

2  Sa.  5.  1 5  Ibhar  also, and  Elishua,  and  N. ,  and  Japhia 
1  Ch.  3.    7  And  Nogah,  and  N.,  and  Japhia 

14.   6  And  Nogah,  and  N.,  and  Japhia 
NEPHEW  — 
l.Sons  of  sons,  grandchildren,  0*35  *r»  bene  banim. 

Judgi2.  14  he  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  nephews,  that 
2.  Successor,  progeny,  15:  neked. 

Job   18.  19  He  shall  neither  have  son  nor  nephew  am. 

Isa.    14.  22  name,  and  remnant,  and  son.  and  nephew 


Z.Offsprvng,  descendants,  eKyova  ekgona.- 

1  Ti.    5.    4  if  any  widow  have  children  or  nephews 
NE-PHI-SHE'-SIM,  D'pyhaj,  D'p^'DJ  expansions. 
A  family  of  the  Nephinim  who  returned  with  Zerub- 
babel.   B.C.  536.    In  Ezra  2.  50  it  is  Nephusliim,  which 
is  better. 

Neh.   7.  52  children  of  Meunim,  the  children  of  N. 
NEPH-THA'-UM,  Ne(f>6a\eip. 
The  country  and  tribe  of  Naphtali.  (which  see). 

Matt.  4.  13  in  Capernaum,  .in  the  borders  of .  .N. 
4.  15  the  land  of  N.,  (by)  the  way  of  the  sea 

Rev.    7.    6  Of  the  tribe  of  N.  (were)  sealed  twelve  th. 
NEPH-TO'-AH,  mn?J. 
A  small  stream  on  the  W.  or  N.W.  of  Jerusalem. 

Josh. 15.    9  unto  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  N.,  and 
18.  15  and  went  out  to  the  well  of  waters  of  N. 
NE-PHTJ'-SIM,  C'C*?3,  D'KSJ  expansions. 
A  family  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536.     (See  Nephishesim.) 

Ezra    2.  50  children  of  Mehunim,  the  children  of  N 
NER,  T3  light. 

A  Benjamite,  grandfather  of  Saul  the  first  king  of 
Israel,  and  father  of  Abner  his  chief  captain.  B.C. 
1112. 

1  Sa.  14.  50  name,  .(was)  Abner,  the  son  of  N.,  Saul's 

14.  51  N.  the  father  of  Abner  (was)  the  son  of  A. 
26.  5  Abner  the  son  of  N.,  the  captain  of  his  h. 
26.  14  David  cried . .  to  Abner  the  son  of  N.,  sa. 

2  Sa.    2.    8  Abner  the  son  of  N. .  .took  Ish-bosheth 

2.  12  Abner  the  son  of  N. .  .went  out  from  Ma. 

3.  23  Abner  the  son  of  N.  came  to  the  king,  and 
3.  25  Thou  knowest  Abner  the  son  of  N.,  that 
3.  28  from  the  blood  of  Abner  the  son  of  N. 

3.  37  not  of  the  king  to  slay  Abner.  .son  of  N. 
1  Ki.  2.    5  what  he  did.  .unto  Abner  the  son  of  N. 
2.  32  Abner  the  son  of  N.,  captain  of  the  host 

1  Ch.  8.  33  N.  begat  Kish,  and  Kish  begat  Saul,  and 

9.  36  first  born  son  was  Abdon,  then  Zur. .  N. 
9.  39  N.  begat  Kish,  and  Kish  begat  Saul,  and 
26.  28  all  that.  .Abner  the  son  of  N. .  .had  dedi. 
NE-RE'-TJS,  Nnpevs. 
A  believer  at  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom  16.  15  Salute  Philologus,  and  Julia,  N.,  and  his 
NER'-GAX,  bflj. 

The  war  god  of  the  men  of  Cuth  whom  Shalnianeser 
placed  in  the  cities  of  Israel  in  place  of  the  ten  tribes. 

2  Ki.17.  30  men  of  Cuth  made  N.,  and  the  men  of  II 
NER-GAL  SHAR-E'-ZER.  "IVX")^  irji. 

1.  A  prince  of  Nebuchadnezzar.    B.C.  600. 

Jer.  39.    3  all  the  princes,  .came  in.  .(even)  N.,  Sam. 

2.  Another  of  the  same  name,  at  the  same  time. 

Jer.  39.    3  N.,  Rab-mag,    with  all  the  residue  of  the 
39.  13  N.,  Rab-mag,  and  all  the  king  of  Babylon's 
NE'-RI,  N-npi.  An  ancestor  0/ Jesus. 

Luke  3.  27  (son)of  Salathiel,  which was(theson)of  N 
NE-RI'-AH,  npi,  nn]  Jah  is  light. 
Father  of  Baruch  the  amanuensis  and  messenger  of 
Jeremiah.    B.C.  630. 

Jer.   32.  12  gave .  .unto  Baruch  the  son  of  N.,  the  son 
32.  16  had  delivered . .  unto  Baruch  the  son  of  N . 
36.   4  JerenuahcallsdBaruchthesonof  N.:  and 
36.   8  Baruch  the  son  of  N.  did  according  to  all 
36.  14  So  Baruch  the  son  of  N.  took  the  roll  in 
36.  32  it  to  Baruch.  .the  sou  of  N. ;  who  wrote 
43.    3  Baruch  the  son  of  N.  setteth  thee  on  ag 
43.    6  the  prophet ,  and  Baruch  the  son  of  N. 
45.    1  prophet  spake  unto  Baruch  the  sou  of  N 
51. 59  commanded  Seraiah  the  son  of  N.,  the  son 
NEST- 
LE nest,  cell,  \q  qen. 

Num24.  21  Strong..audthoupuUestthynestinarn<  k 
Deut  22.    6  If  a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be  before  thee 
32. 11  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  flutter 
Job    29.  18  Then  I  said,  I  shall  die  in  my  nest,  and 
39.  27  thy  command,  and  make  her  nest  on  high 
Psa.  84.    3  the  swallow  a  nest  for  herself,  where  she 
Pro v  27.    8  As  a  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest 
Isa.    10. 14  my  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches 
16.    2  as  a  wandering  bird  cast  out  of  the  nest 
Jer.   49.  16  though  thou  shouldest  make  thy  nest  as 
Obad.  '     4  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the  stai^ 
Hab.  2.    9  that  he  may  set  Ids  nest  on  high,  that  he 

2. Place for  roosting  in,  KaracrK^vwats  kataskendsis 
Matt  8.  20  birds  of  the  air  (have)  nests  ;  but  the  Son 
Luke  9.  58  birds  of  the  air  (have)  nests;  but  the  Son 

NEST,  to  make  a  — 

I.  To  nestle,  male  a  nest,  \1Q  qanan,  3. 

Psa.  104.  17  Where  the  birds  make  their  nests,  .the  st 
Isa.  34.  15  There  shall  the  great  owl  make  her  nest 
Jer.  48.  23  be  like  thedove(that)maketh  her  nest  in 
Eze.  31.    6  All  the  fowls  of  heaven  made  their  nesti 

2.To  be  nestled,  pi?  qanan,  4. 

Jer.  22.  23  that  makest  thy  nest  in  the  cedars,  how 
NET  — 
l.A  net,  snare,  harm,  D*jn  cherem. 

Eccl.  7.  26  the  woman  whose  heart  (is)  snares  ami  n. 

Bee.  26.    5  the  spreading  of  nets  in  the  midst  of  the 

26.  14  thou  shalt  be  (a  place)  to  spread  nets  upon 

32.   3  and  they  shall  bring  thee  up  in  my  net 

47.  10  they  shall  lie  a  (place)  to  spread  forth  n. 


NBTHANBEL 


693 


NEVERTHELESS 


Mic.  .  7.    2  they  hunt  every  man  hisbrother  with  a  n. 

Hab.  1.  15  they  catch  them  in  their  net,  and  gather 
1.  i6Thereforetheysacrificeuntotheirnet, and 
1.  17  Shall  they  therefore  empty  their  net,  and 

2.  A  draff  or  net,  1D3D,  *ib;p  makmor,  mikmar. 

Psa.141.  10  Let  the  wicked  fall  into  their  own  nets 
Isa.   51.  20  of  all  the  streets,  as  a  wild  bull  in  a  net 

3.  A  draff  or  net,  rnbpo  mikmoreih. 

Isa.    19.    8  they  that  spread  nets  upon  the  waters  sh 
i.  A  fortress,  net,  "USD,  lisD  matsod,  matsud. 

Job    19.   6  that  God . .  hath  compassed  me  with  his  n. 
Prov  12.  12  The  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  evil  (men) 

5.. 4  fortress,  net,  niiss,  rnisa  metsodah,metsitdah. 
Psa.  66.  1 1  Thou  broughtest  us  into  the  net ;  thou  1. 
Eccl.  9.  12  as  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net 

6*.  .4  net,  what  tabes  possession,  n^"j  reslieth. 

Exod27.    4  upon  the  net  shalt  thou  make  four  brasen 

27.  5  that  the  net  may  be  even  to  the  midst  of 
Job  18.  8  For  he  is  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own  feet 
Psa.    9.  15  in  the  net  which  they  hid  is  their  own  f. 

10.   9  the  poor,  when  he  draweth  him  into  his  n. 

25.  15  for  he  shall  pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  net 

31.  4  Pull  me  out  of  the  net  that  they  have  laid 
35.  7  without  cause,  .they  hid  for  me  their  net 
35.  S  let  his  net  that  he  hath  hid  catch  himself 
57.    6  They  have  prepared  a  net  for  my  steps;  my 

140.    5  they  have  spread  a  net  by  the  way  side  * 
Prov.  1.  17  Surely  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  si. 

2g.~  5  flattereth.  .spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet 
Lam.  1. 13  he  hath  spread  a  net  formy  feet;  he  hath 
Eze.    12.  13  My  net  also  will  I  spread  upon  him,  and 
17.  20 1  will  spread  my  net  upon  him,  and  he 
19.    8  spread  their  net  over  him:  he  was  taken 

32.  3  I  will  therefore  spread  out  my  net  over 
Hos.    5.    1  a  snare  on  Mizpah,  andanetspread  upon 

7.  12  ^Vlien  they  shall  go,  I  will  spread  my  net 

7.  A  net,  T\2'y  sabak. 

1  Ki.  7. 17  nets  of  checker  work,  and  wreaths  of  chain 

8.  .4  large  fishing  net,  a.n<pi$\n<rToov  amphiblestron. 

Matt  4.  18  Andrew  his  brother,  casting  a  net  into  the 
Mark  1.  16  Andrew  his  brother  casting  [a  net]  into 

9.  A  fishing  net,  Biktvop  diktuon. 

Matt  4.  20  they  straightway  left  (their)  nets,  and  fo. 

4.  21  Zebedee  their  father,  mending  their  nets 
Mark  1.  18  straightway  they  forsook  their  nets,  and 

1.  19  also  were  in  the  ship  mending  their  nets 
Luke  5.    2  gone  out  of  them,  and  were  washing.,  nets 

5.  4  Launch  out.  .and  let  down  your  nets  for 
5.  5  said,  .at  thy  word  I  will  let  down  the  net 
5.    6  great  multitude  of  fishes  :  and  their  net 

.Tohn2i.    6  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship 
21.   8  little  ship . .  dragging  the  net  with  fishes 
2i.  ii  drew  the  net  to  lanA  full  of  great  fishes 
21.  11  there  were  so  many,  yet  was  not  the  net 

10.  A  drag  net,  o-ayrjun  sagene. 

Matt  13.  47  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  net 
NE-THAN'-EEL,  ^X}rg  God  gives. 

1.  The  prince  of  Issachar,  and  son  of  Zuar,  whom  Moses 
sent  to  spy  out  the  land.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1.    8  Of  Issachar;  N.  the  son  of  Zuar 

2.  5  N.  the  son  of  Zuar  (shall  be)  captain  of 
7.  18  On  the  second  day  X.  the  sou  of  Zuar,  pr. 
7.  23  this  (was)  the  offering  of  N.  the  son  of  Z. 

10.  15  And  over  the  host .  .(was)  N.  the  son  of  Z. 

2.  One  of  David's  brothers.     B.C.  1060. 

1  Ch.  2.  14  N.  the  fourth,  Kaddai  the  fifth 

3.  A  priest  who  helped  to  bring  up  the  ark  from  the 
house  of  Obed-edom.    B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.15.  24  Shebaniah,  and  Jehoshaphat,  and  X.,  and 

4.  A  Levite  whose  son  Shemaiah  was  employed  by  David 
to  write  down  the  distribution  of  the  Levites  in  the 
service  of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.24.   6  Shemaiah  the  son  of  X.  the  scribe,  (one) 

5.  A  son  of  Obed-edom  appointed  by  David  as  gate  keeper 
for  the  tabernacle.     B.C.  1042. 

1  Ch.26.   4  sons  of  Obed-edom  (were).  ,X.  the  fifth 
(j.  A  prince  of  Judah  whom  king  Jehoshaphat  sent  to 
teach  the  people.    B.C.  912. 

2  Ch.17.  7  he  sent  to  his  princes.. to  X.,  and  to  Mi. 
7.  A  chief  Levite  in  the  days  of  Josiah.     B.C.  623. 

2  Ch.35.  9  Conaniah  also,  and  Shemaiah,  and  X.,  his 
S.  A  person  who  returned  with  Ezra,  and  had  taken  a 
strange  wife.     B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  22  of  the  sons  of  Pashur.  .N.,  Jozabad,  and 

9.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Jedaiah,  who  lived  in  the 
days  of  Joiakim  grandson  of  Jozadak.     B.C.  500. 

Xeh.  12.  21  of  Hilkiah,  Hashabiah ;  of  Jedaiah,  X. 

10.  An  Aaronite  musician  who  helped  in  the  ceremony 
of  purification.    B.C.  445. 

Xeh.  12.  36  his  brethren,  Shemaiah.  .X.,  and  Judah 
NE-THAN-I'AH,  n;:^,  in;^  Jah  gives. 
1.  Father  of  Ishmael  who  slew  Gedaliah,  whom  Nebu- 
chadnezzar had  left  governor  in  the  land.    B.C.  625. 

2  Ki.25.  23  there  came,  .even  Ishmael  the  son  of  X. 
25.  25  Ishmael  the  son  of  X. . .  came,  and  ten  men 

Jer.   40.    8  they  came,  .even  Ishmael  the  son  of  X. 

40.  14  sent  Ishmael  the  son  of  X.  to  slay  thee  ? 
40. 15  I  will  slay  Ishmael  the  son  of  X.,  and  no 

41.  1  the  son  of  X.  the  son  of  Elishama,  of  the 
41.  2  Then  arose  Ishmael  the  son  of  X.,  and  the 
41.    6  the  son  of  X.  went  forth  from  Mizpah  to 


Jer.  41.    7  the  son  of  X.  slew  them,  (and  cast  them) 
41.   9  the  son  of  X.  filled  it  with  (them  that 

41. 10  the  son  of  X.  carried  them  away  captive 

41. 11  evil  that  Ishmael  the  son  of  X.  had  done 

41. 12  went  to  fight  with  Ishmael  the  son  of  X. 
41  15  the  Son  of  X.  escaped  from  Johauan  with 
41.  16  had  recovered  from  Ishmael  the  son  of  X. 
41.  iS  the  son  of  X.  had  slain  Gedaliah  the  son 

2.  A  chief  singer  in  the  days  of  David. 

1  Ch.25.    2  X.,and  Asarelah,  the  sons  of  Asaph, under 

25. 12  fifth  to  X.,  (he),  his  sous,  and  his  brethren 

3.  A  Levite  whom  Jehoshaphat  sent  to  teach  in  the  cities 
of  Judah.    B.C.  912. 

2  CI1.T7.  8  X.,  and  Zebadiah,  and  Asahel,  and  Shem. 
■4. Father  of  Jehudi  whom  the  princes  of  Judah  sent  to 
bring  Baruch.    B.C.  625. 

Jer.   36. 14  the  princes  sent  Jehudi  the  son  of  X.,  the 
NETHER  (part\  nethermost  — 
1.  Lower,  under,  pnon  tachton. 

Josh.  16.    3  unto  the  coast  of  Beth-horou  the  nether 
18.  13  on  the  south  side  of  the  nether  Beth-hor. 
1  Ki.  6.    6  The  nethermost  chamber  (was)  five  cub. 
9.  17  built  Gezer,  and  Beth-horon  the  nether 

1  Ch.  7.  24  Sherah,  who  built  Beth  horon  the  nether 

2  Ch.  8.    5  Also  he  built, .Eeth-horon  the  nether,  feu. 

"l.Loioer,  under,  "rrnn  tachti. 

Exodig.  17  they  stood  at  the  nether  part  of.  .mount 
Josh. 15.  19  the  upper  springs,  andthenethersprings 
Judg.  1.  15  the  upper  springs  andthenethersprings 
Job  41.  24  as  hard  asapieceof  the  nether  (millstone) 
Eze.  31.  14  to  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth,  in  the 
31.  16  shall  be  comforted  in  the  nether  parts  of 

31.  18  Eden  unto  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth 
32. 18  unto  the  nether  parts  of  the  earth,  with 

32.  24  are  gone  down,  .into  the  nether  parts  of 

NETHER  and  upper  millstone  — 
The  two  millstones,  D^rri  rechayim. 

Deut24.  6  Xo  man  shall  take  the  nether,  .millstone 
NE-THLN'-IM,  D'rnj  dedicated. 

A  class  of  persons  employed  as  servants  or  assistants  to 
the  Levites ;  probably  the  Gibeonites  and  others  reduced 
to  servitude. 

1  Ch.  9.  2  Israelites,  the  priests,  Levites,  and  the  X. 
Ezra  2.  43  The  X.:  the  children  of  Ziha,  the  children 

2.  58  X.,  and  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 

2.  70  X.,  dwelt  in  their  cities,  and  all  Israel 
7.    7  the  singers,  and  the  porters,  and  the  X. 

7.  24  X.,  or  ministers  of  this  house  of  God 

8.  17  and  to  his  brethren  the  X.,  at  the  place 
8.  20  of  the  X.,  whom  David  and  the  prince  had 

8.  20  two  hundred  and  twenty  X. :  all  of  them 
Xeh.  3.  26  the  X.  dwelt  in  Ophel,  unto  (the  place) 

3.  31  goldsmith's  son  unto  the  place  of  the  X. 
7.  46  the  X".:  the  children  of  Ziha,  the  children 
7.  60  X., and  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 
7.  73  X.,  and  all  Israel,  dwelt  in  their  cities 

10.  28  the  X.,  and  all  they  that  had  separated 

11.  3  X. ,  and  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 
11.  21  But  the  X.  dwelt  in  Ophel 

11.  21  and  Ziha  and  Gispa  (were)  over  the  X. 
NE-TO'-PHAH,  n£b3  resin-dropping. 
A  city  in  Judah,  S.  of  Jerusalem,  near  Bethlehem  ;  now 
called  Beit-Xetiph. 

Ezra    2.  22  The  men  of  X.,  fifty  and  six 

Xeh.  7.  26  The  men  of  Beth-lehem  and  X.,  an  hund. 
NE-TO-PHA'-THI,  yn?b)  Inhabitant  of  Netophah. 

Xeh.  12.  28  plain  country. .  and  from  the  villages  of  X. 
NE-TO-PHA-THITE,  -n^bj  same  as  preceding. 

2  Sa.  23. 28  Zalmon  the  Ahohite,  Maharai  the  X. 

23.  29  the  son  of  Baanah,  a  X.,  Ittai  the  son  of 

2  Ej.  25.  23  the  son  of  Tanhumeth  the  X.,  and  Jaaza. 
1  Ch.  2.  54  the  X.,  Ataroth,  the  house  of  Joab,  and 

9.  16  that  dwelt  in  the  villages  of  the  N. 

11.  30  the  X.,  Heled  the  son  of  Baanah  the  X. 
27.  13  The  tenth(captain)..(was)MaharaitheX. 
27. 15  Thetwelith(captain).  .(was)Heldaithe  X. 
Jer.  40.    8  the  sons  of  Ephai  the  X.,  and  Jezaniah  the 
NETTLE  — 
X.Nettie,  thorn,  shrub,  ^ncharul. 

Job  30.  7  under  the  nettles  they  were  gathered toge. 
Prov  24.  31  nettles  had  covered  the  face  thereof,  and 
Zeph.  2.   9  the  breeding  of  nettles,  and  salt  pits,  and 

2.  Thorn,  nettle,  t?iD*p,  E>i2p  qimmosh,  qimosh. 
Isa.   34.  13  nettles  and  brambles  in  the  fortresses  th. 
Hos.    9.   6  for  their  silver,  nettles  shall  possess  them 
NET  WORK  — 
X.Net  oj'  white  work,  "iin  chor. 

Isa.    19.    9  they  that  weave  net  works,  shall  be  conf . 

2. Net  or  wreatlied  work,  lattice,  niqty  sebakah. 

1  Ki.  7. 18  rows  round  about  upon  the  one  net  work 

7.  20  the  belly  which  (was)  by  the  net  work:  and 

7. 41  the  two  net  works,  to  cover  the  two  bowls 

7.  42  for  the  two  net  works,  .for  one  net  work 

Jer.  52.  22  with  net  work  and  pomegranates  upon  the 

52.  23  all  the  pomegranates  upon  the  net  work 

Z.Worh  of  net,  n^"i  nb^D  maaseh  resheth. 

Exod27.   4  thou  shalt  make  for  it  a  grate  of  net  work 
38.   4  he  made,  .a  brasen  grate  of  net  work  uu. 
NEVER  — 
1. There  is  not,  there  are  not,  \"H  ayin. 

Judgi4.    3  (Is  there)  never  a  woman  among  the  dau. 

Eze.  28.  19  thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  and  never  (shalt) 


2.No,  K4?  lo. 

Gen.  41.  19  such  as  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  Eg. 
Xumi9.    2  a  red  heifer. .  upon  which  never  came  yo. 
Prov  27.  20  Hell  and  destruction  are  never  full ;  so 
Jer.  33.  17  David  shall  never  want  a  man  to  sit  upon 

3.  To  generation  and  generation,  Til  TV?  ledor  vador. 
Psa.  10.   6  I  shall  not  be  moved :  for.  .never.. in  adve. 

i.Not  to  the  age,  n4?  oViyS  leolam  la, 

Judg.  2.  1 1  will  never  break  my  covenant  with  you 
2  Sa.  12.  10  Xow  therefore  the  sword  shall  never  de. 
Psa.  15.    5  He  that  doeth  these,  .shall  never  be  mo. 

30.  6  in  my  prosperity  I  said,  I  shall  never  be 

31.  1  let  me  never  be  ashamed  :  deliver  me  in 
55.  22  he  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be 
71.    1  Lord,  .let  me  never  be  put  to  confusion 

119.  93  I  will  never  forget  thy  precepts:  for  with 
Prov  10.  30  The  righteous  shall  never  be  removed:  but 
Isa.    14.  20  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  never  be  renowned 

25.    2  palace,  .to be  no  city;  itshall  never  be bu. 

63.  19  We  are  (thine);  thou  never  barest  rule 
Eze.  26.  21  yet  shalt  thou  never  be  foundagain,  saith 
Joel.  2.  26,  27  and  my  people  shall  never  be  ashamed 

5.  Not  to  the  ages,  J'l??^*?  ^  la  leolmin. 

Dau.  2.  44  kingdom,  which  shall  never  be  destroyed 
Q.Not  continual,  a*?  1  pn  tamid  lo. 

Isa.   62.   6  shall  never  hold  their  peace  day  nor  night 

7.  Not  to  the  age,  oViy?  ^x  at  leolam. 

Psa.  31.    1  let  me'never  be  ashamed :  deliver  me  in 
71.    1  Lord,  .let  me  never  be  put  to  confusion 

8. Not  to  perpetuity,  nxy?  tth  lo  lanetsach. 

Psa.  10. 11  he  hideth  his  face ;  he  will  never  see  (it) 

49. 19  his  fathers ;  they  shall  never  see  light 
Isa.    13.  20  It  shall  never  be  inhabited,  neither  shall 
Amos  8.    7  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  w. 
Hab.  1.  4  and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth  :  for 

9.  Not,  /jut}  me. 

John  7.  15  How  knoweth  this  man  letters,  having  ne. 
10. Not  at  anytime,  ^7j8€7roTe  medepote. 

2  Ti.  3.    7  Ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to 

11. Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ov  yA\  01c  me. 

John  6.  35  he  that  conieth  to  me  shall  never  hunger 
Heb.  13.    5  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

12. Not  at  all  to  the  age,  ov  /xt)  its  rov  alwva  ou  me. 

John  4. 14  [that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  never  thirst] 

8.  51  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  see 

8.  52  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  [never] 

10.  28  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 

11.  26  whosoever,  .believeth  in  me  shall  never 

13.  8  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  never  wa. 

13.  Not  to  the  age,  ovk  els  aluva  ouk  eis  aiona. 

Mark  3.  29  hath  [never]  forgiveness,  but  is  in  danger 
14.Not  at  all  at  any  time,  ov  fiy  irdbiroTe  ou  mepopo. 

John  6.  35  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst 
15.  No,  not,  ov  ou. 

Marki4.  21  good  were  it  for  that  man  if  he  had  never 

Luke23-  29  that  never  bare,  and  the  paps  which  never 

lQ.Not  even,  oySe  oude. 

Matt  27.  14  And  he  answered  him  to  never  a  word 

17. Not  even  one,  ovStts  Truirore  oudeis  popote. 

Markn.  2  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never  man 
Lukeig.  30  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  yetneverman  sat 

18.-A7o£  even  at  any  time,  ovSe-nore  oudepote. 

Matt.  7.  23  will  I  profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you 

9.  33  saying,  It  was  never  so  seen  in  Israel 
21.  16  have  ye  never  read,  Out  of  the  mouth  of 
21.  42  Did  ye  never  read  in  the  Scriptures,  The 
26. 33  Though  all.. (yet)  will  I  never  be  offended 

Mark  2.  12  God,  saying,  "We  never  saw  it  on  this  fas. 
2. 25  Have  ye  never  read  what  David  did,  when 
Lukeij.  29  thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid,  that  I  might 
John  7.  46  answered,  Xever  man  spake  like  this  man 
Acts  10.  14  for  I  have  never  eaten  anything  that  is 

14.  8  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb,  who  never 

1  Co.  13.  8  Charity  never  faileth..  whether  (there  be) 
Heb.  10.    1  can  never  with  those  sacrifices  which  they 

10.  11  sacrifices, which  can  never  take  awaysins 

19. Not  at  all  at  any  time,  ov  lit}  irore  ou  me  pote. 

2  Pe.    1. 10  for  if  ye  do  these  tilings,  ye  shall  never 

NEVER  before  or  yet  — 

Not  even  yet,  ouSeV&j  oudepo. 

Luke23.  53  stone,  wherein  never  man  before  was  laid 
Johmg.  41  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  yet  laid 

NEVER  so  — 

Cleanness,  purity,  soap,  13  bor. 

Job    9.  30  If  I  wash,  .make  my  hands  never  so  clean 
NEVER... any  man  — 
Not  even  at  anytime,  ovBe'ts  Tranrore  oitdeis  popote. 

John  8.  33  We.  .were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man 
NEVERTHELESS  — 
l.But,  verily,  "7n^  ahal. 

2  Ch.19.    3  Xevertheless  there  are  good  things  found 
33. 17  Xevertheless  the  people  did  sacrifice  still 

2.  Only,  y\i<  ah. 

Lev.  11.   4  Xevertheless  these  shall  ye  not  eat  of  th. 

3.  Surely,  but,  yet,  J3N  aken. 

Psa.  31.  22  nevertheless  thou  heardest  the  voice  of 


NEW 


604 


NICOLAS 


i.JSnd,  cessation,  only,  "x  ephes. 

Num  13.  23  Nevertheless  the  people  (be)  strong  that 
h.But,  0*35  beram. 

Dan.    4.  15  Nevertheless,  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots 

6.  Because,  when,  *?  hi. 

1  Sa.15.  35neverthelessSamuelmournedforSaul:  and 

v,  surely,  nevertheless,  pn  raq. 
1  Ki.    8.  19  Nevertheless  thou  shalt  not  build  the  h. 

8. But,  but  surely,  ok  *?  fc*  fat. 

Num  24.  22  Nevertheless  the  Keuite  shall  be  wasted 

9.  B 'V,  aAAa  a&a. 

Marki4-  36  nevertheless  not  what  I  will,  but  what 

Johnix.  15  I  am  glad,  .nevertheless,  let  us  go  unto 

16.    7  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth  ;  It  is 

Rom.  5.  14  Nevertheless  death  reigned  from  Adam 

1  Co.  9.  12  Nevertheless  we  have  not  used  this  power 

2  Co.  7.    6  Nevertheless  God,  that  comforteth  those 

12. 16  nevertheless,  being  crafty,  I  caught  you 
il.     4.  30  Nevertheless  what  saith  the  scripture? 
2  Ti.    i.  12  nevertheless  I  am  not  ashamed ;  for  I  k. 
Hev.    2.    4  Nevertheless  I  have,  .against  thee,  beca. 

I  ".And  consequently  indeed,  ieai  rot  ye  kai  toi  ge. 

Acts  14.  (7  Nevertheless  he  left  not  himself  without 
11. At  the  same  time  indeed,  ofiu>s  fievroi  homos. 

John  1 2.  42  Nevertheless  among  the  chief  rulers  also 
12. But  yet,  nevertheless,  tt\7]v  plen. 

Matt  26.  39  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou 
26. 64  nevertheless,  I  say  unto  you,  Hereafter 
Lukei3-  33  Nevertheless  I  must  walk  to  day,  and  to 
18.    8  Nevertheless  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh 
22.  42  nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be 

1  Co.  11.  11  Nevertheless  neither  is  the  man  without 
Eph.   5-  33  Nevertheless  let  every  one  of,  Ph.  3.  16  - 

IS.  But,  Be  de,  Gal.  4.  20. 

II  Nevertheless,  yet  indeed,  6  \xiv  rot  ho  men  toi. 

2  Ti.   2.  19  Nevertheless  the  foundation  of  God  stan. 
NEW  (man,  moon,  thing)  — 

X.New,  viychadash. 

Exod.i.    8  Now  there  arose  up  a  new  king  over  E. 
Lev.  23.  16  ye  shall  offer  a  new  meat  offering  unto 

26.  10  and  bring  forth  the  old  because  of  the  new 
Num28.  26  when  ye  bring  a  new  meat  offering  unto 
Deut2o.    5  What  man . .  that  hath  built  a  new  house 
22.    8  When  thou  bulkiest  a  new  house,  then 
24.    5  When  a  man  hath  taken  a  new  wife,  he 
32. 17  to  gods  whom  they  knew  not,  to  new  (gods 
Josh.  9.  13  these  bottles  of  wine,  .(were)  new;  and 
Judg.  5.    8  They  chose  new  gods;  then  (was)  war  in 
15. 13  they  bound  him  with  two  new  cords,  and 
16.  11  If  they  bind  me  fast  with  new  ropes  that 
16.  12  Delilah  therefore  tooknew  ropes,  and  bo. 

1  Sa.   6.    7  Now  therefore  make  anew  cart,  and  take 

2  Sa.   6.    3  they  set  the  ark  of  God  upon  a  new  cart 

6.    3  the  sons  of  Abinadab,  drave  the  new  cart 
21. 16  he,  being  girded  with  a  new  (sword),  tho. 

1  Ki.11.  29  he  had  clad  himself  with  a  new  garment 

11.  30  And  Ahijah  caught  thenewgarmentthat 

2  Ki.  2.  20  Bring  me  a  new  cruse,  and.  put  salt  ther. 

1  Ch.13.    7  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  in  a  new  cart 

2  Ch.20.  5  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  before  the  new 
Job  32.  19  my  belly,  .is  ready  to  burst  like  new  bot. 
Psa-  33-    3  SinS  unto  him  a  new  song;  play  skilfully 

40.   3  And  he  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth 
96.    1  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song ;  sing 
98.    1  0  sing  unto  the  LORD  a  new  song;  for  he 
144.    9  I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto  thee,  0  God 
EccL  1.    9  (there  is)  no  new  (thing)  under  the  sun 

1.  10  whereof  it  may  be  said,  See,  this  (is)  new? 
-"•ng   7.  13  all  manner  of  pleasant  (fruits),  new  and 
Isa.   41.  15  I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing 
42.    9  are  come  to  pass,  and  new  things  do  I  d. 

42.  10  Sing  unto  the  Li >rd  a  new  song,  .his  praise 

43.  19  I  will  do  a  new  thing  ;  now  it  shall  spring 
48.  6  I  have  showed  thee  new  things  from  this 
62.    2  thou  shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name,  wh. 

65.  17  I  create  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth 

66.  22  as  the  new  heavens,  and  the  new  earth 
Jer.   26.  10  sat  down  in  the  entry  of  the  new  gate  of 

31.  22  the  Lord  hath  created  a  new  thing  iu  the 
31.  31  that  I  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the 
36.  10  at  the  entry  of  the  newgate  of  the  Lord's 

Lam.  3.  23  neweverymorning;great(is)thy  faithful. 

Eze.  11.  19 1  will  put  a  new  spirit  within  you;  and  I 
18.  31  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit 
36.  26  A  new  heart,  .will  I  give  you,  and  a  new 

2. New,  rnr  cliadath. 

Ezra  6.    4  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of  new  ti. 

;/(,  raw,  HE)  f>>ri. 
Judgis.  15  he  fouud  a  new  jaw  bone  of  an  ass,  ami 

A. A  creation,  nx,*?4i  beriah. 

Nurm6.  30  if  the  Lord  make  a  new  thing,  and  the 

h.Unsmoothed,  unfinished,  &yya<pos  agnaphos. 
Matt.  ■:■_,.  i'i  No  man  putteth  a  piece  of  ncwdothunto 
Mark  2.  21  No  man  also  soweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth 

&.New,  />,  ,<',,  recentt  newly  m  tde,  Kaiv6s  hainos. 

Malt.  ..j.  t;  int.-  uew  bottles,  and  both  are  pi 

13.  52  out  of  hi-;  treasure  (thinffs)  new  and  old 
26. 28  For  this  1  new  j  testam 

26.  29  until  that  day  when  1  drink  it  new  with 

27.  60  laid  it  in  his  own  new  toml>,  which  lie 
Mark  1.  27  what  new  doctrine  (is)  this?  for  witli  an. 

a.  2i  cl>e  the  new  piece  that  tilled  it  up  taketh 


Mark  2.  22  [but.  .wiuemust  be  put  into  new  bottles] 
14.  24  This  is  my  blood  of  the  [new]  testament 
14.  25  until  that  day  that  I  drink  it  new  in  the 

16.  17  [In  my  name .  .they  shall  speak  with  new] 
Luke  5.  36  a  piece  of  a  uew  garment  upon  an  old 

5.  36  then  both  the  new  maketh  a  rent,  and  the 

5.  36  piece  that  was  (taken)  out  of  the  new  agr. 

5. 38  wine  must  be  put  into  new  bottles ;  and 

22.  20  This  cup  (is)  the  new  testament  in  my  bl. 

Johni3-  34  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  T. 

19.  41  in  the  garden  a  new  sepulchre,  wherein 

Acts  17. 19  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine,  w. 

17.  21  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new  thing 

1  Co.  11.  25  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  bl. 

2  Co.  3.    6  hath  made  us  able  ministers  of  the  new 

5.  17  if  any  man  (be)  in  Christ,  (lie  is)  a  new  c. 

5.  17  away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new 
Gal.     6.  15  nor  uncircunicision,  but  a  new  creature 
Epli.   2. 15  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new 

4.  24  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after 
Heb.   8.    8  when  I  will  make  a  new  covenant,  with 

8. 13  In  that  he  saith,  Anew,  .he  hath  made  the 
9. 15  he  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  testament 
2  Pe.   3.  13  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  w. 

1  Jo.    2.    7  I  write  no  new  commandment  unto  you 

2.  8  a  new  commandment  I  write  unto  you 

2  Jo.         5  not  as  though  I  wrote  a  new  commandm. 
Rev.    2.  17  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which 

3.  12  the  name  of  the  city  of  my  God. .new  Jeru. 
3. 12  and  (I  will  write  upon  him)  my  new  name 

5.  9  they  sung  a  new  song,  saying.  Thou  art  w. 
14.  3  they  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the 
2i.  i  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth 
21.  2  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem 
ax.    5  he . .  said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new 

7. New,  young,  veos  neos. 

Matt.  9. 17  Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  b. 
9.  17  they  put  uew  wine  into,  .bottles,  and  both 

Mark  2.  22  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles 
2. 22  else  the  [new]  wine  doth  burst  the  bottles 
2  22  [but  new  wine  must  be  put  into,  .bottles] 

Luke  5.  37  new  wine  into  old  bottles ;  else  the  new 
5.  38  new  wine  must  be  put  into . .  bottles ;  and 
5. 39  straightway desirethnew;  forhesaith.Tlie 

1  Co.  5.    7  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  maybe  a  new  lump 

Col.     3. 10  have  put  on  the  uew  (man),  which  is  rene. 

Heb.  12. 24  to  Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  covena 

8. Newly  slain,  recent,  irpoatyaTos  prosphatos. 
Heb.  10.  20  By  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he  hath 

NEW  fruit,  to  bring  — 

To  bring  forth  first  fruit,  133  bakar,  3. 

Eze.  47. 12  it  shall  bring  forth  new  fruit  according  to 

NEW  moon  — 

New  moon,  month,  enn  chodesh. 

1  Sa.  20.    5  Behold,  to  morrow  (is)  the  new  moon,  and 

20.  18  To  morrow  (is)  the  new  moon :  and  thou" 
20. 24  when  the  new  moon  was  come,  the  king 

2  Ki.   4.  23  said. . (it  is)  neither  new  moon  nor  sabbath 

1  i'h. 23.  31  in  the  sabbaths,  in  the  new  moons,  and 

2  Ch.   2.    4  ou  the  sabbaths,  and  on  the  new  moons 

8.  13  on  the  sabbaths,  and  on  the  new  moons 
31.    3  for  the  sabbaths,  and  for  the  new  moons 

Ezra  3.  5  both  of  the  new  moons,  and  of  all  the  set 
Neli.  10.  2^  of  the  sabbaths,  of  the  new  moons,  for  the 
Psa.  81.  3  Blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  moon 
Isa.  66.  23  from  one  new  moon  to  another,  and  from 
Eze.  45.  17  in  the  feasts,  and  in  the  new  moons,  and 
46.  3  in  the  sabbaths,  and  in  the  new  moons 
46.  6  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  .a  young  bu. 
Hos.  2.  11  her  feast  days,  her  new  moons,  and  hers. 
Amos  S.   5  When  will  the  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we 

NEW  wine  — 

l.New  sweet  wime,  or  juice  of  grapes,  i?n*n  iirosh. 

Neh.  10.  39  the  offering  of  the  corn,  of  the  new  wine 

13.    5  the  tithes  of  the  corn,  the  new  wine,  and 

13. 12  the  tithe  of  the  corn,  and  the  new  wine 

Prov.  3.  10  thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  new  wine 

Isa.    24.    7  The  new  wine  niourueth,  the  vine  langui. 

65.    8  As  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster 
Hos.    4.  1 1  Whoredom  and  wine  and  new  wine  take 

9.  2  The  floor,  .and  the  new  wine  shall  fail  in 
Joel  1.  10  the  corn  is  wasted :  the  new  wine  is  dried 
Hag.  1.  n  upon  the  new  wine,  and  upon  the  oil,  and 
Zech.  9.  17  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine  them. 

2.  Must,  ■      wine,  yXevxas  gleukos. 

Acts   2. 13  Others,  .said,  These  men  are  full  of  new- w. 

NEW  born  — 

Now  born,  lately  lorn,  apTiyevwnros  artigennStos. 
1  Pe.  2.   2  As  new  born  babes,  desire  the  sincere  mi 

NEWLY,  (but)  — 

1.  To  cause  to  rise  up,  set,  O'P  qum,  5. 

Judg.  7.  19  and  they  had  but  newly  set  the  watch 

%Near,  yn$  qarob. 

Deut32.  17  to  new  (gods  that)  came  newly  up,  whom 

NEWNESS  — 

■"  ■■-.  KaiuoTTjs  ha  ' 
Rom.  '         so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life 
7.    6  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit 

NEWS  — 

Report,  tidings,  ntyov  ihemuah. 

ElTOY   3.  -5  so  (is)  good  news  from  a  far  country 


NEXT,  (that  is)  — 

1. After,  later,  next,  inN  acher. 

Gen.  17.  21  bear,  .at  this  set  time  in  the  next  year 
2  Ki.  6.  29  I  said  unto  her  on  the  next  day,  Give  thy 

2. The  second,  rusto  mishneh. 

1  Sa.  17.  13  and  next  unto  him,  Abinadab ;  and  the 
23.  17  I  shall  be  next  unto  thee ;  and  that  also 

1  Ch.  5.  12  Shapham  the  next,  and  Jaauai,  and  Sha. 

16.    5  next  to  him  Zecbariab,  Jeiel,  and  Shem. 

2  Ch.28.    7  and  Elkanah  (that  was)  next  to  the  king 

31. 12  ruler,  and  Shimei  his  brother,  .the  next 
Esth  10.    3  the  Jew  (was)  next  unto  king  Ahasuerus 

S.Xear,  ailg  qarob. 

Exodi2.   4  him  and  Ins  neighbour  next  unto  his  house 
Num 27.  11  his  kinsman  that  is  next  to  him  of  his 
Deut2i.    3  the  city  (which  is)  next  unto  the  slam  man 
21.    6  elders,  .(that  are)  nextun  to  the  slain  (man) 
Esth.  1.  14  the  next  unto  his  (was)  Carshena,  Shethar 

4.  In  succession,  e|f;s  liexes. 

Luke  9.  37  the  next  day,  when  they  were  come  down 

h. Coming  on,  ewiovo-a  epiousa. 

Acts    7.  26  the  next  day  he  showed  himself  unto  them 

6.  To  come,  epxo,uat  erchomai. 

Acts  13.  44  And  the  [next]  sabbath  day  came  almost 

7. After,  between,  fiera^v  meta.ru. 

Acts  13.  42  be  preached  to  them  the  next  sabbath 

S.To  hare,  hold,  adhere  to,  adjoin,  ey_&j  echo. 

Mark  1,  38  Let  us  go  into  the  next  towns,  that  I  may 
Acts  21.  26  the  next  day  purifying  himself  with  them 

NEXT  day  after — 

l.At  noon,  rfinc  mochorath. 

Num  11.  32  all  (that)  night,  and  all  the  next  day,  and 

1  Sa.  30. 17  even  unto  the  evening  of  thenextday 
Jon.    4.   7  when  the  morning  rose  the  next  day,  and 

2. In  succession,  e^s  hexes. 

Acts  27. 18  the  next  (day)  they  lightened  theLu-  7.  n 
o.The  morrow,  avpiov  aurion. 

Acts    4.   3  put  (them)  in  hold  unto  the  next  day :  for 
i.Bdoagingto  the  second  dayfievrepaios  deuteraios. 

Acts  28. 13  and  we  came  the  next  day  to  Puteoli 
b.Coniing  on,  e-movaa  epiousa. 

Acts  16.  11  we  came,  .the  next  (day)  to  Neapolis 

20.  1 5  came  the  next  day  over  against  Chios ;  and 

6.  To  morrow,  iiravptop  epaurion. 

Matt  27.  62  the  next  day,  that  followed  the  day  of 
John  1.  29  The  next  day  John  seeth  Jesus  coming 
1.  35  the  next  day  after,  John  stood,  and  two 
12.  12  the  next  day  much  people  that  wTere  come 
Acts  14.  20  the  next  day  he  departed  with  Barnabas 

21.  8  next  (day)  we  that  were  of  Paul's  company 
25.    6  the  next  day,  sitting  on  the  judgment  seat 

7.  Other*  tJie  other,  different  from,  erepos  heteros. 

Acts  20.  15  and  the  nest  (day)  we  arrived  at  Samos 
27.    3  next  (day)  we  touched  at  Sidon.  And  Ju. 

8.7*0  hare,  hold,  adhere  to,  adjoin,  exw  echo. 
Acts  20.  15  and  the  next  (day)  we  came  to  Miletus 

NE-ZI'-AH,    D'V  pre-eminent. 

One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  with 

Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  54  Thechildrenof  N.,  the  children  of  Hatipha 
Neh.  7.  56  The  children  of  N.,  thechildrenof  Hatipha 

NE'-ZEB,  3^3  plantation. 

A  city  in  Judah;  now  called  Beit  Nasib,  near  Ashna. 

Josh. 15. 43  And  Jiphtah,  and  Ashnah,  and  N. 
NTB'-HAZ,  TTJ33. 

An  idol  of  the  Avites  (in  the  form  of  a  dog)  brought  to 
Samaria  along  with  Tartak,  etc. 

2  Ki.17.  31  And  the  Antes  made  N.  and  Tartak,  and 
NTB'-SHAN,  |*v:-:?  the  f u mace. 

A  city  in  the  S.E.  of  Judah,  near  the  city  of  Salt,  and 
En-gedi,  supposed  to  be  the  same  as  Ashan  and  Chor- 
Ashan ;  but  these  were  rather  in  the  tribe  of  Simeon  to 
the  3.^ 

Josh.  15.  62  N.,  and  the  city  of  Salt,  and  En-gedi;  six 
NI-CA'-NOR,  Nmavwp  conqueror. 
One  of  the  seven  disciples  chosen  to  serve  tables  in  the 
church  at  Jerusalem. 

Acts    6.    5  N., and  Tinion,  and  rarmenas,  and  Nicolas 
NT-CO-DE'-MTJS,  Nik-o'St^uos  innocent  blood. 
A  rabbi  who  came  to  Jesus  by  night ;  who  vindicated 
him,  and  Who  at  last  embalmed  him. 

John  3.    1  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees,  named  N. 

3.    4  N.  saith  unto  him,  How  can  a  man  be  born 

3.    9  N.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  How  can 

7.  50  N.  saith  unto  them,  he  that  came  to  Jesus 

iq.  39  there  came  also  N.,whichat  the  first  came 

NI- CO-LAI -TANES,  Ni/coAafrai. 

The  followers  of  one  Nicolas,  whose  deeds  are  con- 
demned without  being  mentioned.    B.C.  70. 

Rev.    2.    6  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  N.,  which  I 
2. 15  also  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  X 

NI-CO'-LAS.  NtKoAaoy  conqueror  of  the  people. 

A  proselyte  of  Antioch,  and  one  of  the  seven  disciples 
chosen  to  serve  tables. 

Acta    6.   5  aud  Parmenas,  and  N.  a  proselyte  of  An. 


NICOPOLIS 


695 


NIGKT 


NI-C0-P0'-LT3,  Nuc6iro\is  city  of  victory. 

A  city  of  Thrace,    now  called  Nikopi,    on  the  river 

Nessus  (Karasu),  the  boundary  between  Thrace  and 

Macedonia. 

Titus  3.  12  be  diligent  to  come  unto  me  to  IS" :  for  I 

NI'-GER,  Ni-yep. 

Surname  of  Simeon,  one  of  the  prophets  and  teachers 
at  Antioch  when  Paul  and  Barnabas  returned  thither 
after  carrying  the  contributions  of  the  brethren  to  the 
poor  saints  at  Jerusalem. 

Acts  13.    1  Simeon  that  was  called  X,  and  Lucius  of 

NIGH  (at  hand,  to  or  unto) — 
l.Near,  iv\p,  qarob. 

Lev.  10.    3  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me 

21.  3  a  virgin,  that  is  nigh  unto  him,  which  h. 
Num  24.17  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  nigh  :  there 
Deut.  4.   7  who  (hath)  God  (so)  nigh  unto  them,  as 

13.  7  which  (are)  round  about  you,  nigh  unto 

22.  2  if  thy  brother  (be)  not  nigh  unt  j  thee,  or 

30.  14  the  word  (is)  very  nigh  unto  thee,  in  thy 
1  Ki.  8.  59  nigh  unto  the  Lord  our  God  day  and  night 
1  Ch.12.  40  Moreover  they  that  were  nigh  them,  (ev.) 
Esth.  9.  20  in  all  the  provinces,  .(both)  nigh  and  far 
Psa.  34.  iS  The  Lord  (is)  nigh  unto  them  that  are  of 

85.    9  his  salvation  (is)  nigh  them  that  fear  him 
145.  iS  The  Lord  (is)  nigh  unto  all  them  that  call 
Joel    2.    1  for  the  day  of  the  Lord,  .(is)  nigh  at  hand 
2.Flesh,  relation,  ixp  sheer. 

Lev.  25.  49  (any)  that  is  nigh  of  kin  unto  him  of  his 
3. Neighbour,  py  shaken. 

Deut.  1.   7  (the  places)  nigh  thereunto,  in  the  plain 

4.  Nigh,  eyyvs  eygus. 

Matt  24.  32  leaves,  ye  know  that  summer  (is)  nigh 
Mark  1 3.  29  know  that  it  is  nigh,  (even)  at  the  doors 
Lukeig.  11  because  he  was  nigh  to  Jerusalem,  aud 
zi.  30  and  know,  .that  summer  is  now  nigh  at 
21.  31  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand 
John  6.    4  the  passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  was  ni. 
6. 19  see  Jesus,  .drawing  nigh  unto  the  ship 

6.  23  nigh  unto  the  place  where  they  did  eat 
11. 18  ISow  Bethany  was  nigh  unto  Jerusalem 

11.  55  the  Jews'  passover  was  nigh  at  hand  :  and 
19.  20  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified  was  nigh 
19.  42  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand 

Acts    9.  38  Lydda  was  nigh  to  Joppa,  and  the  discip. 

27.  8  nigh  whereunfeo  was  the  city,(of)  Lasea 
Rom.  10.   8;  Eph.  2.  13;  2.  17;  Beb.  6.  8. 

5.  To  he  or  co?)ie  nigh,  eyyi^w  eygizo. 

Luke2i.  20  that  the  desolation,  .is  nigh,  Phil.  a.  30 
6 . Alongside  oj *,  ivapd  {ace.)  para. 

Matt  15.  29  and  came  nigh  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee 
Mark  5  21  passed  over,  .he  was  nigh  unto  the  sea 

7  .Very  near  or  nigh  to,  TrapaTrX-qo-iov  parajilesion.. 
Phil.  2.  27  he  was  sick  nigh  unto  death  :  but  God  had 
8,  Toward,  irp6s  (ace.)  pros. 

Mark  5.  n  there  was  there,  [nigh  untu]  the  mount. 
NIGHT,  (by  or  in  the)  — 
1.  Darkness,  yvn  chosh-ek. 

Job  26.  10  until  the  day  and  night  come  to  an  end 
2.Night,  V1?,  nty  laylah,  layil. 

Gen.    1.    5  and  the  darkness  he  called  night.    And 
1.  14  lights,  .to  divide  the  day  from  the  night 
1.  16  and  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  night :  (he 
1.  18  to  rule  over  the  day  and  over  the  night 

7.  4,  12  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  n. 

8.  22  winter,  and  day  and  night  shall  not  cease 

14.  15  he  and  his  servants,  by  night,  and  smote 
19.  5  the  men  which  came  in  to  thee  this  night  ? 
19.  33  hiade  their  father  drink  wine  that  night 
19.  34  let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this  night  also 

19.  35  their  father  drink  wine  that  night  also 

20.  3  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by  night 
26.  24  Lord  appeared  unto  him  the  same  night 
30. 16  mandrakes.    And  he  lay  with  her  that  n. 

31.  24  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a  dreani  by  night 
31.  39  (whether)  stolen  by  day,  or  stolen  by  night 

31.  40  consumed  me,  and  the  frost  by  night;  and 
32. 13  And  he  lodged  there  that  same  night ;  and 

32.  21  himself  lodged  that  night  in  the  company 
32.  22  And  he  rose  up  that  night,  and  took  his 

40.  s  each  man  his  dream  in  one  night,  each 

41.  11  And  we  dreamed  a  dream  in  one  night,  I 
46.    2  unto  Israel  in  the  visions  of  the  night,  and 

Exbciio.  13  the  land  all  that  day,  and  all  (that)  night 

12.  8  they  shall  eat  the  flesh  in  that  night,  ro. 
12.  12  pass  through  the  land  of  Egypt  this  night 
12.  30  And  Pharaoh  rose  up  in  the  night,  he,  and 
12. 31  he  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron  by  night 

12.  42  It  (is)  a  night  to  be  much  observed  unto 
12.42  this  (is)  that  night  of  the  Lord  to  be  obs. 

13.  2 1- and  by  night  in  a  pillar  of  fire 

13.  21  to  give  them  light ;  to  go  by  day  and  night 

13.  22  nor  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night.(from)  before 

14.  20  but  it  gave  light  by  night  (to  these) :  so 
14.  20  one  came  not  near  the  uther  all  the  night 
14.  21  by  a  strong  east  wind  all  that  night,  and 
24. 18  in  the  mount  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
34.  28  with  the  Lord  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
40.  38  and  fire  was  on  it  bynight,  in  the  sight  of 

Lev.    6.   9  burning  upon  the  altar  all  night  unto  the 
S.  35  Therefore  shall  ye  abide,  .day  and  night 
Num.  9. 16  and  the  appearance  of  fire  by  night 

9.  21  whether(itwas)bydayorbynight  thatthe 
11.   9  the  dew  fell  upun  the  camp  in  the  night 


Xumi 


Deut. 


Josh. 


Judg.  6. 

6. 

6. 

7- 

9- 

9- 

16. 

16. 

19. 

20. 

Ruth  3. 

1  Sa.  14. 

14. 


14. 

1 

14- 

14 

22. 

S 

22. 

19 

22. 

20 

.  1. 

33 

9- 

9. 

10. 

10 

16. 

1 

23- 

10 

19. 
19. 


2  Sa.    2. 


4- 
7- 
17- 
17- 
19- 
21. 
:  Ki.  3. 
3- 


2K1.    6. 


I  Ch.   9. 

17- 

2CI1.   1. 


Nell. 


Esth 
Job 


5- 

7- 
17- 
20. 
24. 
27. 
33- 
34- 
35- 
36. 

1. 

6. 

17- 
19. 
22. 
32. 
42- 
42- 
55- 
74- 
77- 
77- 
78. 
88. 
90. 
91. 
92. 

104. 

105. 


stood  up  all  that  day,  and  all  (that)  night 
and  cried ;  and  the  people  wept  that  night 
cloud,  and  in  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night 
saiduntothem,  Lodge  here  this  night,  and 
I  pray  you,  tarry  ye  also  here  this  night 
And  God  came  unto  Balaam  at  night,  and 
in  fire  by  night,  to  show  you  by  what  way 
,  n,  18,  25  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
first  time,  forty  days  and  forty  nights ;  and 
brought  thee  forth  out  of  Egypt  by  night 
uncleanness  that  chanceth  him  by  night 
thou  shalt  fear  day  and  night,  and  shalt 
sbalt meditate  therein dayandnigbt,  that 
lodging  place  where  ye  shall  lodge  this  n. 
of  valour,  and  sent  them  away  by  night 
but  Joshua  lodged  that  night  among  the 
Joshua  went  that  night  into  the  midst  of 
Joshua  .  went  up  from  Gilgal  all  night 
came  to  pass  the  same  night,  that  the  L. 
not  do  (it)  by  day,  that  he  did  (it)  by  night 
And  God  did  so  that  night :  for  it  was  dry 
And  it  came  to  pass  the  same  night,  that 
Now  therefore  up  oy  night,  thou  and  the 
people  that  (were)  with  him,  by  night,  and 
laid  wait  for  him  all  night  in  the  gate  of 
and  were  quiet  all  the  night,  saying,  In  the 
knew  her,  and  abused  her  all  the  night 
beset  the  house  round  about,  .by  night 
Tarry  this  night,  and  it  shall  be  in  the  m. 
every  man  his  ox  with  him  that  night,  and 
go  down  afterthe  Philistines  by  night,  and 
and  he  cried  unto  the  Lord  all  night 
what  the  Lord  hath  said  to  me  tins  night 
and  David  fled,  and  escaped  that  night 
naked  all  that  day  and  all  that  night 
They  were  a  wall  unto  us,  both  by  night 
and  Abishai  came  to  the  people  by  night 
and  they  came  to  the  woman  by  night:  and 
nc  bread  all  the  day,  nor  all  the  night 
they  rose  up,  and  went  away  that  night 
(any)  water,  three  days  and  three  nights 
valiant  men  arose,  and  went  all  night,  and 
Abner  and  his  men  walked  all  that  night 
Joaband  his  men  went  all  night,  and  they 
gat  them  away  through  the  plain  all  night 
And  it  came  to  pass  that  night,  that  the 
arise  and  pursue  after  David  this  night 
Lodge  not  this  night  in  the  plains  of  the 
will  not  tarry  one  with  thee  this  night :  and 
by  day,  nor  the  beasts  of  the  field  by  nig. 
appeared  to  Solomon  in  a  dream  by  night 
this  woman's  child  died  in  the  night ;  be. 
may  be  open  toward  this  house  night  and 
nigh  unto  the  Lord  our  God  day  and  night 
forty  days  and  forty  nights  unto  Horeb 
they  came  by  night,  and  compassed  the  c. 
the  king  arose  in  the  night,  and  said  unto 
he  rose  by  night,  and  smote  the  Edomites 
it  came  to  pa3S  that  night,  that  the  angel 
all  the  men.  .fled  by  night  by  the  way  of 
they  were  employed  in . .  work  day  and  n. 
it  came  to  pass  the  same  night,  that  the 
In  that  night  did  God  appear  unto  Solo, 
may  be  open  upon  this  house  day  and  ni. 
Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  by  night,  and 
rose  up  by  night,  and  smote  the  Edomites 
of  burnt  offerings  and  the  fat  until  night 
which  I  pray  before  thee  now,  day  and  n. 
I  arose  in  the  night,  I  and  some  few  men 
I  went  out  by  night  by  the  gate  of  the  v. 
Then  went  I  up  in  the  night  by  the  brook 
set  a  watch  against  them  day  and  night 
that  in  the  night  they  may  be  a  guard  to 
in  the  night  will  they  come  to  slay  thee 
in  the  night  by  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give 
neither  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  to  show 
neither  eat  nor  drink  three  days,  night  or 
On  that  night  could  not  the  king  sleep 
they  sat  down,  .seven  days  and  seven  ni. 
and  the  night.. it  was  said,  There  is  a  man 
that  night,  let  darkness  seize  upon  it;  let 
Lo,  let  that  night  be  solitary ;  let  no  joy. 
In  thoughts  from  the  visions  of  the  night 
and  grope  in  the  noon  day  as  in  the  night 
and  wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me 
They  change  the  night  into  day :  the  lig. 
be  chased  away  as  a  vision  of  the  night 
and  needy,  and  in  the  night  is  as  a  thief 
a  tempest  stealeth  him  away  in  the  night 
In  a  dream,  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  when 
he  overturneth . .  in  the  night,  so  that  they 
my  maker,  who  giveth  songs  in  the  night 
Desire  not  the  night,  when  people  are  cut 
in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night 
all  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  swim ;  I 
thou  hast  visited,  .in  the  night ;  thou  ha. 
and  night  unto  night  showeth  knowledge 
and  in  the  night  season,  and  am  not  silent 
day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon 
My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  ni. 
in  the  night  his  song  (shall  be)  with  me 
Day  and  night  they  go  about  it  upon  the 
The  day  (is)  thine,  the  night  also  (is)  thine 
my  sore  ran  in  the  night,  and  ceased  not 
call  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  night 
led  them,  .all  the  night  with  a  light  of  f. 
I  have  cried  day  (and)  night  before  thee 
wher  it  is  past,  and  (es)  a  watch  in  the  n. 
Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for.  .terror  by  n. 
To  show  forth,  .thy  faithfulness  every  11. 
Thou  makest  darkness,  and  it  is  night 
covering,  and  fire  to  give  light  in  the  ni. 


Psa. 119.  55  remembered.. in  the  night,  and  have  kept 
121.  6  not  smite  thee  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  n. 
134.  1  which  by  night  stand  in  the  house  of  the 
136.  9  The  moon  and  stars  to  rule  by  night :  for 
139.  11  even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  me 
139. 12  the  night  shine th  as  the  day :  the  darkn. 

Trov.  7.    9  in  the  evening,  in  the  black  and  dark  ni. 
31-.  15  She  riseth  also  while  it  is  yet  night,  and 

31. 18  good  :  her  candle  goeth  not  out  by  night 
Eccl.  2.  23  yea,  his  heart  taketh  not  rest  in  the  night 

8.  16  neither  day  nor  nigh*-,  seeth  sleep  with  his 
Song   3.    1  By  night  on  my  bed  I  sought  him  whom 

3.  8  upon  his  thigh,  because  of  fear  in  the  ni. 
5.    2  (and)  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night 

Isa.     4.    5  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night :  for 

15.  i,  1  Because  in  the  night,  .of  Moab  is  laid  w. 

16.  3  make  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  the  mid. 
2t.   8  and  I  am  set  in  my  ward  whole  nights 
21. 11  what  of  the  night?,  .what  of  the  night? 
21.  12  The  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night 

26.  9  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the  night 

27.  3  lest  (any)  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and 

28. 19  shallitpassover,  by  day  and  bynight;  and 

29.  7  all.  .shall  be  as  a  dream  of  a  night  vision, 

30.  29  Ye  shall  have  a  song,  as  in  the  night,  (w.) 
34.  10  It  shall  not  be  quenched  night  nor  day 
38. 12,  13  from  day.  .to  nightwilt  thou  make  an. 
60.  11  thy  gates,  .shall  not  be  shut  day  nor  night 
62.    6  shall  never  hold  their  peacedaynor  night 

Jer.    6.    5  Arise,  and  let  us  go  by  night,  and  let  us 

9.  1  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the 
14.  17  Let  mine  eyes  run  down  with  tears  night 
16. 13  shall  ye  serve  other  gods  day  and  night 
31.35  ordinances,  .of  the  stars  for  a  light  by  ni- 
33.  20  of  the  day,  and  my  covenant  of~the  night 
33.  20  that  there  should  not  be  day  and  night 
33.  25  If  my  covenant  (be)  not  with  day  and  ni. 
36.  30  cast  out  in.. to  the  heat,  and  in  the  night 
39.   4  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  night,  by 
49.   9  if  thieves  by  night,  they  will  destroy  till 
52.   7  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  night,  by  the 

Lam.  1.    2  She  weepeth  sore  in  the  night,  and  her 

2. 18  run  down  like  a  river  day  and  night :  give 

2. 19  Arise,  cry  out  in  the  night ;  in  the  begin, 
Eos.    4.    5  also  shall  fall  with  thee  in  the  night,  and- 

7.   6  wait :  then-  baker  sleepeth  all  the  night 
Amos  5.   8  and  makeththe  day  dark  with  night :  thatr 
Obad.        5  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  bynight 
Jon.    1.  17  belly  of  the  fish  three  days  and  three  ni. 

4.  io  came  up  in  a  night,  and  perished  in  a  ni. 
Mic.  3.  6  Therefore  night  (shall  be)  unto  you,  that 
Zech.  1.    8  I  saw  by  night,  and  behold  a  man  riding 

14.    7  knownto  theLoRD.notday.nornight:  but 
'3. Night,  n;?,7  leleya. 

Dan.    2.  19  revealed  unto  Daniel,  .nightvision.   Then 

5.  30  In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king  of 
7.  2  and  said,  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night,  and 
7.  7  After  this  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and 
7. 13  Isawin..night visions, and,  behold,  (ODe) 

i.The  twilight,  *]¥j  nesheph. 

Isa.  5.  11  that  continue  until  night,  (till)  wine  in. 
21.  4  the  night  of  my  pleasure  hath  he  turned 
59.  10  we  stumble  at  noon  day  as  in  the  night 

5.  Evening,  2~$i  ereb. 

Gen.  49.  27  and  at  night  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  ' 
Lev.    6.  20  in  the  morning,  and  half  thereof  at  night 
J<  b     7.    4  When  shall  I  arise,  and  the  night  be  gone? 
Psa.  30.   5  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy 

6.  Night,  vlt,  nux. 

Matt.  2.  14  the  young  child  and  his  mother  by  night 

4.  2  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
12.  40  as  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights 
12.  40  the  Son  of  manbetlu-ee  days  and  three  n. 
14.  25  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  Jesus  w. 
26.  31  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this  night 

26.  34  That  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow,  thou. 

27.  64  lest  his  disciples  come  [by  night],  and  steal 
28. 13  His  disciples  came  bynight,  and  stole  him 

Mark  4.  27  should  sleep,  and  rise  night  and  day,  and. 

5.  5  And  always,  night  and  day,  he  was  in  the 

6.  4S  about  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  he 
14.  27  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  [this  ni.] 
14.  30  That  this  day,  (even)  in  this  night,  before 

Luke  2.  8  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  night 
2.  37  with  fastings  and  prayers  night  and  day 
5.    5  Master,  we  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and 

12.  20  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required 

17.  34  I  tell  you,  in  that  nightthere  shall  be  two 
r8.  7  elect,  which  cry  day  and  night  unto  him 
21.  37  at  night  he  went  out,  and  abode  in  the 

John  3.  '2  The  same  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  said 

7.  50  he  that  came  to  Jesus  [by  night],  being  one 
9.    4  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work 

11.  10  But  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  stum. 

13.  30  went  immediately  out :  and  it  was  night 

19.  39  which  at  the  first  came  to  Jesus  by  night 
21.    3  and  that  night  they  caught  nothing 

Acts    5.  19  But  the  angel  of  the  Lord  by  night  opened 
9.  24  they  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to 
9.  25  Then  the  disciples  took  him  by  night,  and 

12.  6  same  night  Peter  was  sleeping  between 
16.   9  a  vision  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  night 

16.  33  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night 

17.  10  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  by  night  unto  B. 

18.  9  spake  the  Lord  to  Paul  in  the  night  by  a 

20.  31 1  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and 
23.  11  night  following,  the  Lord  st  od  by  him 
23.  23  hundred,  at  the  third  hour  of  the  night 
23.  31  and  brought  (him)  by  night  to  Antipatris 
26.    7  instantly  serving(God)dayand  night,ho. 


NIGHT 


69  r, 


NO 


Acts  27.  23  For  there  stood  by  me  this  night  the  angel 

27.  27  But  when  the  fourteenth  night  was  come 

Rom  13.  12  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand 

1  Co.  11.  23  That  the  Lord  Jesus  the  (same)  night  in 

1  Th.  2.    9  for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we 

3.  10  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that 
5.  2  the  day.  .so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night 
5.  5  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness 
5.  7  For  they  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night;  and 
5.    7  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night 

2  Th.  3.    8  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night  and 

1  Ti.    5.    5  supplications  and  prayers  night  and  day 

2  Ti.  1,  3  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers  night 
2  Pe.  3.  10  will  come  as  a  thief  [in  the  night];  in  the 
Rev.   4.    8  they  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying,  Holy 

7.  15  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple  ;  and 

8.  12  third  part  of  it,  and  the  night  likewise 
12.  10  accused  them  before  our  God  day  and  n. 
14.  11  and  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,  who 
20. 10  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever 

21.  25  day:  for  there  shall  be  no  night  there 

22.  5  there  shall  be  no  night  there  ;  and  they 
NIGHT  and  a  day,  a  — 

A  night  and  a  day,  vvxQ'h^pov  nuchthemeron. 
2  Co.  11. 25  a  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the  deep 

NIGHT,  to  pass  the  — 

To  pass  the  night,  ni3  buth. 

Dan.    6. 18  Then  the  king,  .passed  the  night  fasting 

NIGHT  HAWK  — 

Owl,  swallow,  cuckoo,  Dsnn  tachmas. 

Lev.  11.  16  the  night  hawk,  and  the  cuckoo,  and  the 
Deut  14.  15  the  night  hawk,  and  the  cuckoo,  and  the 

NIGHT  season  — 

Kighty  V1?  layil. 

Job  30.  17  are  pierced  in  me  in  the  night  season 
Psa.  16.    7  myreins-.instructmeintheniglitseasons 

NIM'-RAH,  rrjDl  flowing  water. 

A  city  in  Gad  in  Gilead,  bordering  on  Moab,  between 

Jazer  and  Hesbon,  or  in  the  valley  near  Beth-aram, 

See  Beth-nimrah. 

Num.32.    3  N. ,  and  Heshbon,  and  Elealeh,  and  Shcbam 

NTM'-RIM,  D"-iD]  flowing  streams, 

"Waters  on  the  borders  of  Gad  and  Moab ;  the  ruins  of 

a  city  XSimvtn  still  remain  near  Ramoth  (el-Salt). 

Isa.  15.  6  the  waters  of  N.  shall  be  desolate :  for  the 
Jer.   48.  34  the  waters  also  of  N.  shall  be  desolate 

NIM'-ROD,  nip],  *fnpj  valiant,  strong. 

1.  Son  of  Cush,  son  of  Ham.     B.C.  2218. 

Geu.  10.    8  Cush  begat  N.  :  he  began  to  be  a  mighty 

10.  9  as  N.  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord 
1  Ch.  1. 10  CushbegatN. :  he  began  to  be  mighty  upon 

2.  His  land,  i.e.  Babylonia. 

Mic.    5.    6  the  land  of  N.  in  the  entrances  thereof 
NTM'-SHI,  Tpi  Jah  reveals. 

Grandfather  or  father  of  Jehu,  who  smote  Joram  son 
of  Ahab,  and  reigned  in  his  stead  over  Israel.    B.C.  950. 

1  Ki.19.  16  the  son  of  N.  shalt  thou  anoint  (to  be)  k. 

2  Ki.  9.    2,  14  Jehu. .son  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  son  of  N. 

9.  20  (is)  like  the  driving  of  J.  the  son  of  N. 
2  Ch.22.    7  he  went  out.  .against  Jehu  the  sou  of  N. 

NINE  — 

I. Nine,  n^n,  yyri  tesha,  tishah. 

Gen.  5.  "5  days  .  .were  nine  hundred  and  thirty  ye. 
5.  8  the  days  of  Seth  were  nine  hundred  and 
5.  11  the  days  of  Enos  were  nine  hundred  and 
5.  14  the  days  of  Cainan  were  nine  hundred  and 
5.  20  the  days  of  Jared  were  nine  hundred  sixty 
5.  27  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  nine  years 
9.  29  the  days  of  Noah  were  nine  hundred  and 

11.  19  Peleg lived,  .two hundred  and  nine  years 
11.  24  Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and 
17.    1,  24  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine 

Exod38.  24  the  gold. .  was  twenty  and  nine  talents.and 
Lev.  25.    8  shall  be  unto  thee  forty  and  nine  years 
Num.  1.  23  fifty  and  nine  thousand  and  three  hundr. 
2. 13  liftyandnine  thousand  and  three  hundred 
29.  26  on  the  fifth  day  nine  bullocks,  two  rams 
34.  13  commanded  to  give  unto  the  nine  tribes 
Deut.  3.  11  nine  cubits  (was)  the  length  thereof.'and 
Josh  13.    7  for  an  inheritance  unto  the  nine  tribes 

14.  2  the  nine  tribes,  and  (for)  the  half  tribe 

15.  32  the  cities  (are)  twenty  and  nine,  with  th. 
15.  44,  54  nine  cities  with  their  villages 

21.  16  nine  cities  out  of  those  two  tribes 
Judg.  4.    3  he  had  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron:  and 

4. 13  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron,  and  all 
2  Sa.  24.    8  the  end  of  nine  months  and  twenty  days 
2  Ki.  14.    2  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerus. 
15.  13  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  TJzziah 
15.  17  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  Azariah 

17.  1  reign  in  Samaria  over  Israel  nine  years 

18.  2  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerusa. 

1  Ch.  3.    8  Elishama,  and  Eliada,  and  Eliphelet,  nine 

9.   9  brethren,  .nine  hundred  and  fifty  and  six 

2  Ch.25.    1  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerusa. 

29.  1  reigned  nine  and  twenty  years  in  Jerusa. 
Ezra  1.  q  thousand  chargers,  .nine  and  twenty  kn. 
2.  8  The  children  of  Zattu,  nine  hundred  forty 
2.  36  children,  .nine  hundred  seventy  and  three 
2.  42  (in)  all  an  hundred  thirty  and  nine 
Neh.  7.  38  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty 
7.  39  children,  .nine  hundred  seventy  and  three 
11.  1  and  nine  parts  (to  dwell)  in  (other)  cities 
11.   8  Sallai,  nine  hundred  twenty  and  ei  lit 


2.  Sine,  it/yea  en/iea. 

Lukei7.  17  not  ten  cleansed?  butwhere(are)thenine? 
NINETEEN  — 

Nine-ten,-iyy-nyvn,  Tr)&)tyw%  tesha  esre,  tishah  asar. 
Geu.  11.  25  Nahor  lived,  .an  hundred  and  nineteen 
Josh  19.  38  nineteen  cities  with  their  villages 
2  Sa.   2.  30  lacked  of  David's  servants  nineteen  men 
NINETEENTH  — 

Nirie-ten^yy-nyyn,  irn^-j>pfl  tesha  esre,  tlshaasar. 

2  Ki.  25.    8  which  (is)  the  nineteenth  year  of  king  N. 

1  Ch.24.  16  The  nineteenth  to  Pethahiah,  thetwenti. 

25.  26  The  nineteenth  to  Mallothi,  (he),  his  sons 

Jer.  52.  12  which  (was)  the  nineteenth  year  of  Nebu. 

NINETY  — 

Ninety,  nyyn  tishim. 

Gen.    5.   9  And  Enos  lived  ninety  years,  and  begat  C. 
5. 17  were  eight  hundred  ninety  and  five  years 
5.  30  Lamech  lived,  .five  hundred  ninety  and 
17.    1  And  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old 
17. 17  shall  Sarah, that  is  ninety  years  old,  bear? 

17.  24  And  Abram  (was)  ninety  years  old  andn. 
1  Sa.    4.  15  Now  Eli  was  ninety  and  eight  years  old 
1  Ch.  9.    6  their  brethren,  six  hundred  and  ninety 
Ezra   2.  16  children  of  Ater  of  Hezekiah,  ninety  and 

2.  20  The  children  of  Gibbar,  ninety  and  five 
2.  58  servants,  (were)three  hundred  ninety  and 
8.  35  ninety  and  six  rams,  seventy  and  seven 
Neh.    7.  21  of  Ater  of  Hezekiah,  ninety  and  eight 
7.  25  The  children  of  Gibeon,  ninety  and  five 
7.  60  (were)  three  hundred  ninety  and  two 
Jer.  52.  23  there  wereninetyandsixponiegranateson 
Eze.    4.    5  the  days,  three  hundred  and  ninety  days 
4.   9  three  hundred  and  ninety  days  shalt  thou 
41.  12  and  the  length  thereof  ninety  cubits 
Dan.  12. 11  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days 
NINETY  and  nine  — 

Ninety  nine,  iuueunKouTaevt/ea  ennenekontaennea. 
Matt'18.  12  doth  he  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine 

18.  13  than  of  the  ninety  and  nine  which  went 
Lukeis.    4  doth  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the 

15.    7  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  just  per. 

NIN-E'-VE,  Nivsvi.     Same  as  succeeding. 

Luken.  32  men  [of  N.]  shall  rise  up  in  the  judgment 

NI-NE'-VEH,  mi\3,  Ntveurj. 

A  city  on  a  tract  above  the  confluence  of  the  Zabatusor 
Lycus  (great  Zab)  with  the  Tigris;  now  called  Kouyanjak, 
It  was  greater  than  Babylon,  being  in  circumference  480 
stadia,  or  twenty-four  hours  (three  days')  journey,  Jonah 
3.  3:  was  the  capital  of  Assyria;  had  more  than  120,000 
infants  in  it  at  one  time;  it  was  taken  by  Arb aces  the 
Mede,  B.C.  876;  warned  by  Jonah  in  8=;2;  conquered 
and  destroyed  by  Cyaxares  and  Nebuchadnezzar  in  606; 
Hieraclius  and  Rhazates  fought  a  great  battle  on  its 
site,  a.d.  627;  it  was  explored  by  Layard  in  1840-1853. 
Gen,  10.  11  builded  N.,  and  the  city  Rehoboth,  and 
10. 12  Resen  between  N.  and  Calah  :  the  same 
2  Ki.19.  36  and  went  and  returned,  and  dwelt  at  N. 
Isa.   37.  37  and  went  and  returned,  and  dwelt  at  N. 
Jon.    1.    2  go  to  N.,  that  great  city,  and  cry  against 
3.    2  go  unto  N.,  that  great  city,  and  preach 
3.    3  Jonah  arose,  and  went  unto  N.,  according 
3.    3  N.  was  an  exceeding  great  city  of  three 
3.    4  Jonah  began  to  enter  into  the  city  a  day's 
3.    5  the  people  of  N.  believed  God,  and  proclai. 
3.   6  word  came  unto  the  king  of  N.,  and  he  arose 

3.  7  published  through  N.  by  the  decree  of  the 

4.  11  And  should  not  I  spare  N.,  that  great  city 
Nah.  1.    1  The  burden  of  Nineveh.    The  book  of  the 

2.  8  N.  (is)  of  old  like  a  pool  of  water ;  yet 

3.  7  N.  is  laid  waste  :  who  will  bemoan  her?  w. 
Zeph.  2.  13  will  make  N.  a  desolation,  (and)  dry  like 
Matti2-4i  The  men  of  N.  shall  rise  m  judgment  with 

NT  NE-VITES.  Nii/fiuxa*.      In/iabitants  of  Nineveh. 

Luken.  30  as  Jonas  was  a  sigu  unto  the  N.,  so  shall 
NINTH  — 
1. Ninth,  'w^J-i  tcshii. 

Lev.  25.  22  eat  (yet)  of  old  fruit  until  the  ninth  year 

Num  7.  60  On  the  ninth  day  Abidan  the  son  of  Gid. 

2  Ki.  17.    6  In  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  the  king  of 
25.    1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  ninth  year  of 

1  Ch.12.  12  Johanan  the  eighth,  Elzabad  the  ninth 

24.  ii  The  ninth  to  Jeshuah,  the  tenth  to  Shec. 

25.  16  The  ninth  to  Mattaniah.  (he),  his  sons 
27. 12  The  ninth  (captain)  for  the  ninth  month 

Ezra  10.    9  It(was)theninthmonth,andthetwentieth 

Jer.   36.    9  it  came  to  pass,  .in  the  ninth  month,  (that) 

36.  22  in  the  winter  house,  in  the  ninth  month 

39.    1  In  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Ju. 

52.   4  it  came  to  pass  in  the  ninth  year  of  his 

Eze.  24.    1  Again  in  the  ninth  year,  in  the  tenth  m. 

Hag.   2.  io,  18  four  and  twentieth  (day)of..ninth(m.) 

Zech.  7.    1  in  the  fourth  (day)  of  the  ninth  month 

2.Nine,  n^n,  ywn  tesha,  tishah. 

Lev.  23.  32  in  the  ninth  (day)  of  the  month  at  even 

2  Ki.  i3.  10  that  (is)  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  king  of 

25.  3  And  on  the  ninth  (day)  of  the  (fourth)  m. 
2  Ch.16.  12  in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  his  reign 
Jer.  39.    2  in  the  fourth  month,  the  ninth  (day)  of  the 

52.   6  in  the  fourth  month,  in  the  ninth  (day)  of 

3. Ninth,  tWa-ros  ennatos,  ivaros  enatos. 

Matt  20.    5  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  hour 
27.  45  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth  hour 
27.  46  about,  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a 
Mark  1 5   3^  over  the  whole  land  until  the  ninth  linn: 


Markij.  34  at  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud 
Luke23-  44  over  all  the  earth  until  the  ninth  hour 
Acts    3,    1  the  hour  of  prayer,  (being)  the  ninth  (ho.) 
10.   3  He  saw.  .about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day 
10.  30  at  the  ninth  hour  I  prayed  in  my  house 
Rev.  21.  20  the  eighth,  beryl ;  the  ninth,  a  topaz ;  the 
NI'-SAN,  ID':. 

The  first  month  of  the  year  (called  Abib  in  the  Books  of 

Moses),  beginning  with  the  new  moon  at  the  end  of 

March.  It  is  the  name  of  the  Babylonian  god  of ' '  spring. " 

Neh.   2.    1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  month  N. ,  in  the 

Esth.  3.    7  the  first  month,  that  (is),  the  month  N. 

NIS'-ROCH,  rpp;  eagle,  haiok. 

An  Assyrian  idol  with  a  temple  in  Nineveh,  in  which 

Sennacherib  was  slain,  B.C.  698 :  it  had  a  human  form 

with  an  eagle's  head,  according  to  Philo,  as  quoted  by 

Eusebius. 

2  Ki.19.  37  worshipping  in  the  house  of  N.  his  god 
Isa.    37.  38  worshipping  in  the  house  of  X.  his  god 

NITRE  — 

Nitre,  *)r\i  nether. 

Prov  25.  20  vinegar  upon  nitre,  so  (is)  he  that  singeth 
Jer.     2.  22  though  thou  wash  thee  with  nitre,  and 

NO,  NJ. 

A  city  on  both  sides  of  the  Nile ;  the  capital  of  Upper 

Egypt,  called  also  Thebes  and  Diospoiis;  the  chief  seat 

of  the  worship  of  Amon,  with  a  famous  temple.  It  was 

destroyed.    B.C.  81. 

Jer.   46.  25  I  will  punish  the  multitude  of  N.,  and 
Eze.  30.  14  in  Zoan,and  will  execute  judgments  in  N 
30.  15  and  I  will  cut  off  the  multitude  of  N. 
30.  16  N.  shall berent  asunder,  and  Noph(shall), 
Nah.  3.    8  Art  thou  better  than  populous  N., that  was 

NO  — 

l.TJiere  is  not,  there  are  not,  )]K  ayin. 

1  Ki.18.  26  But.  .no  voice,  nor  any  that  answered 
Jer.     7.  32  shall  bury  in  Tophet.till  there  benoplact- 

2.  Not,  hi$  al. 

Gen.  13.    8  Abram  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no 
Jer.   39.  12  look  well  to  him,  and  do  him  no  harm 

Z.End,  cessation,  only,  dsn  ephes. 

Isa.     5.    8  lay  field  to  field,  till .  .no  place,  that  they 
Prov  26.  20  AVhere  no  wood  is.  .the  firegoeth  out;  51  ► 
Amos  6.  10  he  shall  say,  No.  Then  shall  he  say,  Hold 
i.Not,  ^a  bal. 

Isa.  33. 21  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars,neithci- 
5. Not  any,  nh  V2  kol  la. 

Ezra   4.  16  by  this  means  thou  shalt  have  no  portion 

Dan.    2.  10  therefore,  .no  king,  lord,  nor  ruler,  .asked 

2-  35  I10  place  was  found  for  them  :  and  the  st. 

3.  25  the  midst  of.  .fire,  and  they  have  no  hurt 

3.  27  upon  whose  bodies  the  fire  had  no  power 

3.  29  because  there  is  no  otherGod  that  cau  de. 

4.  9  no  secret  troubleth  thee,  tell  me  the  visi. 
6.    2  accounts,  .and  the  king  should  have  no 
6.  15  That  no  decree  nor  statute  which  the  king 
6.  22  before  thee,  0  king,  have  I  done  no  hurt 

6.N0,  xi  lo. 

Gen.  15.    3  Behold,  to  me  tlum  hast  given  noseed:  ami1 
16.    1  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  bare  him  no  children 

7.  Without,  kS|,  M  lelo,  belo. 

1  Ch.  12.  17  seeing',  .no  wrong  inminehands,  the  God 

2  Ch.13.   9  may  be  a  priest  of  (them  that  are)  no  gods 
Job  26.   3  hast  thou  counselled  (him  that  hath)  uow  * 

S.But,  aXAa  alia. 

Luke23.  15  No,  nor  yet  Herod  :  for  I  sent  you  to  him 
9.No,  not,  ixy)  me. 

Matt  6.  31  Therefore  take  no  thought,  saying,  What 
6.  34  Take  therefore  no  thought  for  the  morrow 
9.  36  were  scattered  abroad,  as  sheep  having  110 
10. 19  take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  sp. 
13-  5  sprung  up,  because  they  had  no  deepness 
13  6  because  they  had  no  root,  they  withered 
22.  23  which  say  that  there  isnoresurrection.and 

22.  24  If  a  man  die,  having  no  children,  his  bro. 
22.25  having  no  issue,  left  his  wife  unto  his  br. 

23.  9  call  no  (man)  your  father  upon  the  earth 
Mark  4.   5  sprang  up,  because  it  had  no  depth  of  ea. 

4.  6  and  because  it  had  no  root,  it  withered  a. 

6.  8  save  a  staff  only ;  no  scrip,  no  bread,  no 
12.  18  Sadducees,  which  say  there  isnoresurre. 

12.  19  leave  no  children,  that  his  brother  should 

13.  11  take  no  thought  beforehand  what  ye  shall 
Luke  1 2.  11  take  ye  no  thought  how  or  what  thing  >e 

12.  22  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye 

13.  11  was  bowed  together,  and  could  in  no  wise 
22.  36  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  g. 

20  be  desolate,  and  let  no  man  dwell  therein 
8  For  the  Sadducees  say  that  there  is  no  r. 
13  but  sin  is  not  imputed  when  there  is  no  I. 

7.  3  so  that  she  is  no  adulteress,  though  she 

1.  10  and  (that)  there  be  no  divisions  among  you 
7.  37  standeth  stedfast  in  his  heart,  having  no 

5.  21  make  him.. sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin 

3.  7  Now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil;  not 

4.  8  service  unto  them  which  by  nature  are  no 

2.  12  having  nohope,  ami  withoutGod  in  the  w. 

5.  11  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  " . 
1  Th.  4.    6  That  no  (man)  go  beyond  and  defraud  his 

4.  13  not,  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope 
2.  Th.  3.  14  have  no  company  with  him,  that  he  may 
1  Ti.    1.3  charge  some  that  they  teach  no  other  do. 

3.  3  Not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  greedy 


Acts 
Rom. 

1  Co. 

2  Co. 

Gal. 
Eph. 


23- 


NO 


697 


NO 


Titus  i.  7  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to 
Jas.  2.  13  without  mercy  that  hath  showed  uo  me. 
1  Pe.  3.  10  refrain,  .his  lips  that  they  speak  no  guile 

1Q.  Not  any,  /j.tj  ri  me  ti. 

Lukei:.  36  full  of  light,  having  uo  part  dark,  12.  4. 
ll.Xot  even  one,  firjUeis  medeis. 

Luke  3.  13  Exact  no  more  than  that  which  is  appoin. 

Acts  4. 17  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  name 
13.  28  And  though  they  found  uo  cause  of  death 

15.  28  to  lay  upon  you  no  greater  burden  than 

16.  28  Do  thyself  no  harm ;  for  we  are  all  here 

19.  40  there  being  no  cause  whereby  we  may  give 
2i.  25  [concluded  that  theyobserve  no  such  tiling] 
28.  6  had  looked  agreat  while,  and  saw  no  harm 
28.  18  because  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in  me 

1  Co.    1.    7  So  that  ye  come  behind  in  uo  gift ;  wait. 

10.  25,  27  askingno  question  for  conscience'  sake 

2  Co.  6.    3  Giving  no  offenceinany  thing,  that  them. 

13.    7  Now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil ;  not 
Heb.  10.    2  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of 

12.  Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ob  /xtj  ou  me. 

1  Co.  8.  13  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  stand. 
Rev.  18.    7  I  sit  a  queen,  .and  shall  see  no  sorrow 

IZ.Xot,  no,  ou  ou. 

Matt.  6.  1  otherwise  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  Fat. 
12.  39  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  to  it,  but  the 
16.  4  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  it,  but 
16.  7  (It  is)  because  we  have  taken  no  bread 
16.  8  why.  .because  ye  have  brought  no  bread? 
19. 18  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,  Thou  shalt 

20.  13  Friend,  I  do  thee  no  wrong:  didst  not  thou 
25.  3tooktheirlamps,  andtookno  oil  with  them 
25.  42  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat 

25.  42  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink 

26.  55  teaching  in  the  temple,  and  ye  laidnohold 
Mark  2.  17  They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the 

4.  7  thorns,  .choked  it,  and  it  yielded  no  fruit 
4.  17  have  no  root  in  themselves,  and  so  endure 
4.  40  [so  fearful?  how  is  it  that  ye  have  no  fa.?] 

8. 16  they  reasoned.  .(Itis)  because  we  have  no 

8.  17  Why  reason  ye  because  ye  have  no  bread? 

9.  3  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 
12.  20  first  took  a  wife,  and  dying  left  no  seed 
12. 22  And  the  seven  had  her,  and  left  no  seed 

Luke  1.    7  they  had  no  child,  because  that  Elisabeth 

1.  33  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  he  no  end 

2.  7  because  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the 
7.  44  thou  gavest  me  no  water  for  my  feet :  but 

7.  45  Thou  gavest  me  no  kiss  :  but  this  woman 
8. 13  these  have  no  root,  which  for  a  while  be. 

8.  14  of.  .life,  and  bring  no  fruit  to  perfection 

8.  27  had  devils  long  time,  and  warenoclothes 

9.  13  "We  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two 

11.  29  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  it,  but  the  sign 

12.  17  What  shall  I  do,  because  I  have  no  room 

12.  33  where  no  thief  approacheth,  neithernioth 
15-    7  just  persons,  which  need  no  repentance 
16.    2  account,  .for  thou  may  est  be  no  longer 
20.  22  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to  give  tribute . .  or  no  ? 

20.  31  the  seven . .  they  left  no  children,  and  died 
2z-  S3  ye  stretched  forth  no  hands  against  me 

John  1.  21  thou  that  prophet?  And  he  answered,  No 

1.  47  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile  ! 

2.  3  mother . .  saith  unto  him,  They  have  no  w. 
4.   9  for  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  theS. 

4. 17  woman  answered  and  said,  I  have  no  hu. 
4.  17  Thou  hast  well  said,  I  have  no  husband 
4.  38  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  la. 

4.  44  a  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  co. 

5.  7  Sir,  I  have  no  man,  when  the  water  is  tr. 

6.  53  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you 

7.  18  is  true,  and  no  unrighteousness  is  in  him 

7.  52  look:  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet 
8.37  to  kill  me,  because  my  word  hath  noplace 

8.  44  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in 
9. 41  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin :  but 

"    11. 10  he  stumble th,  because  there  is  no  light  in 

13.  8  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with 

15. 22  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin 
19.   6  and  crucify,  .for  I  find  no  fault  in  him 
19.    9  Whence  art  thou  ?  But  Jesus  gave  him  no 

19. 15  answered,  We  have  no  king  but  Cesar 

21.  5  have  ye  any  meat?  They  answered  him,  No 
Acts    7.    5  his  seed  after  him,  when,  .he  had  no  chi. 

7.  11  dearth. .and  our  fathers  foundno  sustena. 
o.  34  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  pe. 

12.  18  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  soldi. 

13.  37  whom  God  raised  again,  saw  no  corrupt. 
15.   2  had  no  small  dissension  and  disput.  v.  24. 

18.  15  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of  such  (matters) 

19. 23  the  same  time  there  arose  no  small  stir 

19.  24  brought  no  small  gain  unto  the  craftsmen 
19.  26  saying  that  they  be  no  gods  which  are 
21.  39  Tarsus,  .in  Cilicia,  a  citizen  of  no  mean  c. 
25.  26  Of  whom  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  write 

27.  20  and  no  small  tempest  lay  on . .  all  hope  that 

28.  2  the  barbarous  people  showed  us  no  little 
Rom.  2.  1 1  For  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  G. 

3.  9  No,  in  no  wise  :  for  we  have  before  proved 

3. 18  There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes 
3.  22  all  ttiem  that  believe ;  for  there  is  no  diff. 
4. 15  for  where  no  law  is.  .no  transgression 

7. 18  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing :  for 

10. 12  For  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew 
10.  19  you  to  jealousy  by  (them  that  are)  no  pe. 
13.  1  there  is  no  power  but  of  God  :  the  powers 
13.  10  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour :  th. 

1  Co.  7.  25  I  have  no  commandment  of  the  Lord :  yet 

10. 13  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but 

11. 16  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  eh. 

88 


Gal. 

Phil. 

Col. 

iTh. 

2Ti. 

Heb. 


Jas. 


1  C0.12.  21  eye  cannot  say  unto  the  hand,  I  have  no 
12.  21  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no 

12.  24  our  comely  (parts)  have  no  need :  but  God 

13.  5  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  evil 

15. 12  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  ? 

15. 13  But  if  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead 

2  Co.   2.  13  I  had  no  rest  in  my  spirit,  because  I  found 
8. 15  that  (had  gathered)  little  had  no  lack 

11.  14  no  marvel ;  for  Satan  himself  is  transfor. 
11. 15  Therefore.. no  great  thing  if  his  ministers 

2.  6  God  accepteth  no  man's  person :  for  they 
5.  23  temperance :  against  such  there  is  no  law 

3.  3  For  we.  .have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh 
3.  25  receive,  .and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons 
5.    1  But.  .ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto 
3.    9  But  they  shall  proceed  no  further,  for 
S.    7  then  should  no  place  have  been  sought  for 
9.  22  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 

10.  6  offerings ..  for  sin  thou  hast  had  no  plea. 
10.  38  but.  .my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him 

12.  17  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 

13.  10  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  winch 

13. 14  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but  we 
1. 17  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  s. 
2. 11  Now  if  thou  commit  no  adultery,  yet  if 

1  Pe.  2. 22  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
1  Jo.   1.    8  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive 

2.  7  I  write  no  new  commandment  unto  you 
2. 27  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath 

3.  5  to  take  away  our  sins ;  and  in  him  is  no 

4.  iS  There  is  no  fear  in  love;  but  perfect  love 

3  John  4  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my 
Rev.    7.  16  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst 

10.    6  sware .  .that  there  should  be  time  no  Ion. 

14.  5  in  their  mouth  was  found  no  guile  :  for 
14. 11  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,  who  wor. 

18.  7  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and 

20.  6  on  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power 
20. 11  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them 

21.  1  passed  away;  and  theie  was  no  more  sea 
21.  4  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  so. 
21.  22  I  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  God 
21.  23  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither 

21.  25  not  be  shut,  .for  there  shall  be  no  night 

22.  3  there  shall  be  no  more  curse :  but  the  th. 

22.  5  shall  be  no  night  there,  .they  need  no  c. 

14.Notany  by  any  means,  oh  (fir))  iras  ou  (me)  pas. 
Matt 24.  22  there  should  no  flesh  be  saved:  but  for 
Marki3.  20  no  flesh  should  be  saved :  but  for  the  el. 
Rom.  3.  20  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight 

1  Co.  1.  29  That  no  flesh  shouldglory  in  his  presence 
Gal.  2.  16  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be 
Eph.    4.  29  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed 

5.  5  For  this  ye  know,  that  no  whoremonger 
Heb.  12.  11  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth 

2  Pe.  1.  20  Knowing  this  first,  that  no  prophecy  of 

1  Jo.   2.  21  because  ye  know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is  of 

3.  15  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal 
Rev.  18.  22  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  all  in  thee 

15. Xot  even,  ou5e  oude. 

Rom.  4. 15  for  where,  .law  is.  .no  trans.  Ro.  24.  2  . 

2  Co.  3.  10  had  [no]  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason 

IQ.Xot  even  one,  obSels  oudeis. 

Mark  6.    5  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  save 
Luke  4.  24  No  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own  country 
16. 13  No  servant  can  serve  two  masters  :  for  e. 

23.  4  (to)  the  people,  I  find  no  fault  in  this  man 
23.  14  have  found  no  fault  in  this  man  touching 
23.  22  I  have  found  no  cause  of  death  in  him  :  1 

Johnio.  41  John  did  no  miracle :  but  all  firings  i3.  38 
16.  29  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speakest  nop. 

19.  4  ye  may  know  that  I  find  no  fault  in  v.  11. 
Acts  15.    9  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them 

23.  9  We  find  no  evil  in  this  man :  but  if  a  spi. 
25. 10  to  the  Jews  have  I  done  no  wrong,  as  thou 

27.  22  there  shall  be  no  loss  of.  .life  among  you 

28.  5  he  shook  off  the  beast,  .and  felt  no  harm 
Rom.  8.  1  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
2  Co.  7.  5;  2  Ti.  2.  14  ;  Ph.  4.  15  ;  He.  6. 13;  Ja.  3.  12. 

11. If,  elei,  Mark  8.  12. 
IS.  No  more,  pnKeTi  meketi,  Mark  2.  2. 
19.iVro,  not,  ob  fj.ii  ou  me,  1  Co.  S.  13  ;  Rev.  18.  7. 
[See  also  Doubt,  hope,  means,  purpose,  rising.] 

NO ...  as  yet  — 

Not  yet,  ovttco  oupo. 

Rev.  17. 12  which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet 
NO... at  all  — 
l.Not  at  any  time,  yA\  irore  me  pote. 

Heb.  g.  17  otherwise  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while 
2.Xo,  not  even  one,  ov...obdeis  ou.. .oudeis. 

1  Jo.    1.    5  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all 
NO ...  is,  where  — 
Without^  beli. 

Psa.  63.   1  a  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where  no  water  is 
NO  case,  in  — 
Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ob  fir]  ou  me. 

Matt.  5.  20  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom 
NO  doubt  — 
\.In  truth,  indeed,  &pa  ara. 

Luken.  20  no  doubt  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon 
2. For,  wherefore,  truly,  yap  gar. 

1  Co.  9.  10  For  our  sakes  no  doubt,  (this)  is  written 


1  NO...  henceforward  — 

t  Not  any  more,  ^tjkcti  meketi. 

Matt  21.  19  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward 
NO  longer  — 
I  l.^Vo^  any  more,  ^.tjk4ti  meketi. 

1  Th.  3.    1  when  we  could  no  longer  forbear,  we  th. 

3.    5  when  I  could  no  longer  forbear,  I  sent  to 

1  Ti.    5.  23  Drink  no  longer  water,  but  use  a  little  w. 

1  Pe.    4.    2  That  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of 

2. Xot  any  more,  not  again,  ovketi  ouketi. 

Gal.     3.  25  we  are  no  longer  under  a  schoolmaster 
NO  man  — 
\.Xot  even  one,  pySeis  medeis. 

Matt  8.    4  saitli  unto  him,  See  thou  tell  no  man ;  but 
9. 30  saying,  See  (that)  no  man  know  (it) 

16.  20  tell  no  man  that  he  was  Jesus  the  Christ 

17.  9  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man,  until  the  Son  of 
Mark  5.  43  straitly  that  no  man  should  know  it ;  and 

7.  36  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no  m. 

8.  30  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no m. 

9.  9  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no  m. 
11.  14  Nomaneat  fruitof  thee  hereafter  for  evtr 

Luke  3. 14  violence  to  no  man,  neither  accuse  (any) 
5.  14  he  charged  him  to  tell  no  man;  but  go,  and 

8.  56  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no  m. 

9.  21  commanded  (them)  to  tell  no  man  that 
10.  4  nor  shoes :  and  salute  no  man  by  the  way 

Acts    9.    7  hearing  a  voice,  but  seeing  no  man 

23.  22  (See  thou)  tell  no  man  that  thou  hast  sh. 
Roiti  12.  17  Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil.  Pro. 

13.    8  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one  an. 

1  Co.  3.  18  Let  no  man  deceive  himself.  If  any  man 

3.  21  Therefore  let  no  man  glory  in  men.    For 

10.  24  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man 
Gal.    6.  17  From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me 
Eph.   5.    6  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words 
Col.     2.  18  Let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your  re  ward  in 
1  Til.  3.    3  That  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these 

1  Ti.   4. 12  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth;  but  be  thuu 

5.  22  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither  be 
Titus  2. 15  with  all  authority.    Let  no  man  despise 
3.   2 ;  Jas.  1.  13  ;  1  Jo.  3.  7  ;  Rev.  3.  n. 
2.Xo,  no  one,  fi-q,  yA\  rts  me,  me  tis,  Matt.  8.  2S. 

Rom. 14. 13;    1  Co.    16    11  ,   2  Co.  11.  16;  Col.  2.  16, 
2  Th.  2.  3. 
Z.Not,  no,  ob  ou. 

2  Co.  11.  10  no  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  boasting  in 

i.Xot  even  one,  obfiets  oudeis. 

Matt  6.  24  No  man  can  serve  two  masters:  for  either 
9.  16  No  man  putteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  unto 

11.  27  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father 

17.  8  eyes,  they  saw  uo  man,  save  Jesus  only 
20.    7  unto  him,  Because  no  man  hath  hired  us 
22. 46  And  no  man  was  able  to  answer  him  a  w. 

24.  36  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  (man) 
Mark  2.  21  No  man  also  seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth 

2. 22  And  no  man  puttetli  new  wine  into  old 
3.  27  No  man  can  enter  into  a  strong  man's  h. 
5.    3  and  no  man  could  bind  him,  no,  not  with 
5.  37  And  he  suffered  no  man  to  follow  him,  s. 

7.  24  house,  and  would  have  no  man  know  (it) 
9.    8  they  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus 

9.  39  there  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle 

10.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 

12.  14  thou  art  true,  and  carest  for  no  man 

12.  34  And  no  man  after  that  durst  ask  him  (any 

13.  32  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels  which 
Luke  5.  36  No  man  putteth  a  piece  of  a  new  garment 

5.  37  And  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old 

5.  39  No  man  also  having  drunk  old  (wine)  st. 
8. 16  No  man,  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle 

8.  51  [he  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save  Peter] 

9.  36  told  no  man  in  those  days  any  of  those 
9.  62  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plo. 

10.  22  no  man  knoweth  who  the  Son  is,  but  the 

11.  33  No  man,  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle 
15.16  swine  did  eat :  and  no  man  gave  unto  him 

18.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 
John  1. 18  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the 

3.  2  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  t. 
3. 13  And  no  man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven 

3.  32  and  no  man  receiveth  his  testimony 

4.  27  yet  no  man  said,  What  seekest  thou?  or 
5. 22  For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath 

6.  44  No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father 
6. 65  that  no  man  can  come  unto  me.except  itw. 

7.  4  For  (there  is)  no  man  (that)  doeth  any  t. 
7. 13  Howbeit  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for 
7.  27  cometh,  no  man  knoweth  whence  he  is 
7.  30  but  no  man  laid  hands  on  him,  because 

7.  44  taken  him  ;  butno  man  laid  hands  on  him 

8. 10  [accusers?  hath  no  man  condemned  thee?} 

8. 11  [She  said,  No  man,  Lord.  And  Jesus  saidl 
8. 15  Ye  judge  after  the  flesh  ;  I  judge  no  man 

8.  20  and  uoman  laid  hands  on  him ;  for  his  h. 

9.  4  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work 
10.  18  No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  d. 
13. 28  Now  no  man  at  the  table  knew  for  what 

14.  6  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by 

15.  13  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that 

16.  22  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you 
Acts    5. 13  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to 

5.  23  when  we  had  opened,  we  found  no  man 
9.    8  when  Iris  eyes  were  opened,  he  saw  [no  111. ; 

18.  10  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee 

20.  33  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or 

25. 11  no  man  may  deliver  me  unto  them.  Iapp. 

Rom  14.    7  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth  to  himself 


NO 


60S 


NOISE 


i  Co.   2.  1 1  so  the  things  of  G  od  knoweth  no  man,  but 

2.  15  yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  man 

3.  11  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 
12.  3  that  no  man  speaking  by  the  spirit  of  God 
12.  3  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but 
14.    2  untoGod:foruomanunderstaudeth(him) 

2  Co.  5. 16  Wherefore  henceforth  know  we  no  man 
7.    2  Receive  us ;  we  have  wronged  no  man,  we 
7.    2  corrupted  noman, we  havedefrauded  no  m. 
n.   9  I  was  chargeable  [to  no  man]:  for  that  w. 

Gal.     3.  11  But  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law  in 
3.  15  no  man  disannulled,  or  addeth  thereto 

Eph.    5.  29  For  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh 

Phil.   2.  20  For  I  have  no  man  like  minded,  who  will 

1  Ti.    6.  16  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see :  to 

2  Ti.    2.    4  No  man  that  warreth  entangleth  himself 

4. 16  At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with  me 

Heb.   7.  13  of  which  no  man  gave  attendance  at  the 

12.  14  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord 

Jas.    3.    8  But  the  tongue  can  no  man  tame;  (it  is)  an 

1  Jo.  4.  12  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  If  we 

Rev.    2. 17  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  re. 

3.    7  he  that  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth 

3.    7  and  shutteth,  and  no  man  openeth 

3.    8  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it:  for 

5.    3  no  man  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  neither 

5.  4  because  no  mau  was  found  worthy  to  open 
7.    9  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number 

14.  3  and  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the 

15.  8  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple 

18.  11  for  no  man  buyeth  their  merchandise  any 

19.  12  written  that  no  man  knew  but  he  himself 

NO  manner  — 

Not  any,  ab  *?3  kol  la. 

Dan.   6.  23  and  no  manner  of  hurt  was  found  upon 
NO  more  — 

1.  Without,  save,  not,  W3  biltl. 

Job    14. 12  till  the  heavens  (be)  no  more,  they  shall 

2,Not  any  more,  fivnert  meketi. 

Mark  1.  45  insomuch  that  Jesus  could  no  more  openly 

9.  25  out  of  him,  and  enter  no  more  into  him 
John  5.  14  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto 
8.  11  [do  I  condemn  thee:  go,  and  sin  no  more] 
Acts  13.  34  no  more  to  return  to  corruption,  he  said 
Rom  15.  23  But  now  having  no  more  place  in  these 
Eph.  4.  28  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no  more  ;  but  ra. 

3.jSfa  not  even,  ovtcos  o05e  houtos  oude. 

John  15.    4  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me 

4, Not  any  more,  not  again,  ovk4ti  ouketi. 

Matt  19.   6  Wherefore  they  are  no  more  twain,  but 
Marie  7.  12  And  ye  surfer  him  no  more  to  do  ought 

10.  8  so  then  they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one 
14.  25  I  will  drink  no  more  of  the  fruit  of  the  v. 

Lukeis.  19,  21  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
John  6.  66  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  him 

11.  54  Jesus  therefore  walked  no  more  openly 
14. 19  while,  and  the  world  seethme  no  more 

16.  10  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  no  more 
16.  21  sheremembereth  no  more  the  anguish, for 
16.25  time  cometh,  when  I  shall  no  more  speak 
17. 11  And  now  I  am  no  more  in  the  world,  but 

Acts    8.  39  that  the  eunuch  saw  him  no  more:  and  he 

20.  25  kingdom  of  God,  shall  see  my  face  no  m. 
20.  38  that  they  should  see  his  face  no  more 

Rom.  6.    9  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more 

6.  9  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him 

7.  17,  20  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that 
11.  6  And  if  by  grace,  then  (is  it)  no  more  of  w. 
11.  6  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.  But  if 
11.    6  [no  more  grace,  otherwise  work  is  no  more] 

2  Co.  5.  16  yet  nowhenceforth  know  we (him)no  more 
Gal.  3.  18  (be)  of  the  law,  (it  is)  no  more  of  promise 
Gal.     4.    7  ;  Eph.  2.  19;  Heb.  10. 18;  10.  26;  Re.  ;8. 14 

5-iVo  more  at  all,  ob  fxrt  en,  Heb.  S.   12  ;  10.  11. 

6. No  more  at  all,  -zras  oh  pi)  en,  Rev.  iS.  22. 

NO,  nor  yet  — 

But  not  even,  aAA'  ovSe  all'  oude. 

Luke  23.  15  No,  nor  yet  Herod  :  for  I  sent  you  to  him 

NO  not  (one)  — 

\*Not  even,  finSe  mede. 

1  Co.  5.  11  extortioner  ;  with  such  an  one  no  not  to 

2.  Not  even,  oi»5e  oude. 

Matt.  3.  10  not  fouud  so  great  faith,  [no,  not]  in  Isr. 

24.  36  knoweth  no  (man),  no,  not  the  angels  of 
Mnrki3.  32  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels 
Luke  7.    9  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel 
Acts    7.    5  no,  not  (so  much  as)  to  set  his  foot  on  :  yet 
Rom.  3.  10  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one 
1  Co.  6.    5  [no,  not]  one  that  shall  be  able  to,  Gal.  2.  5 

3.  Unto,  up  to,  ews  h-:'>s,  Rom.  3.  12. 

4. Not  even,  o£/Te  ov.te. 

Mark  5.    3  man  could  bind  him,  [no,  not]  with«chains 

NO  room  — 

Not  any  more,  fxvKtri  meketi. 

Mark  2.   2  that  there  was  no  room  to  receive  (them) 
NO ...  so  muoh  as  — 
Not  even,  ovh4  on 

Mark  6.  31  they  had  qo  Leisure  so  much  as  to  eat 
NO  value  — 
Now/fit,  S^x  elil. 

Job    13.    4  ye  (are)  all  physicians  of  no  value 


NO  where  — 

There  is  not,  there  are  not,  pN  ayin. 

1  Sa  10.  14  we  saw  that  (they  were)  no  where,  we 

NO  whither  — 

No  whither,  ruNi  hjn  nS  lo  aneh  vaanah. 

2  Ki.  5.  25  And  he  said,  Thy  servant  went  no  whither 

NO  wise,  in  — 

Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ov  yA\  ou  me. 

Matt.  5.  18  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the 
10.  42  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose 
LukeiS.  17  as  a  little  child  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
John  6.  37  hiin  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise 
Acts  13.  41  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe 
Rev.  21.  27  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any 

NO  AD  I' AH,  nny'u  Jah  assembles. 

1.  A  Levite  who  weighed  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary. 
B.C.  457. 

Ezra    8.  33  Jozabad.  .and  N.  the  son  of  Binnui,  Lev. 

2.  A  female  partisan  of  Sanballat  and  Tobiah,  called  a 
prophetess,  who  tried  to  terrify  Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.   6. 14  on  the  prophetess  N.,  and  the  rest  of  the 

NO'-AH,  NO'-E,  m  rest    N£e. 

Son  of  Lamech,  and  father  of  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth ; 
born  B.C.  2948,  died  1998,  aged  950  years;  he  was  the 
tenth  from  Adam  through  Seth,  and  was  born  46  years 
after  the  death  of  Adam,  and  14  after  that  of  Seth  ;  he 
was  contemporary  with  Enos  for  16  years,  with  Terah 
for  128  years,  and  with  Abram  for  about  50  years.  The 
Babylonians  called  him  Xisuthrus,  son  of  Oliartes;  the 
Chinese,  lr«oor  Fo-Hi;  others  Prometheus,  Deucalion, 
Atlas,  Theuth,  Inachus,  Osiris,  Dagun,  &c. 

Gen.    5,  29  he  called  his  name  X.,  saying,  This  (sa.) 
5.  30  Lamech  lived  after  he  begat  X.  five  him. 

5.  32  N.  was  five  hundred  years  old :  and  N.  b. 

6.  8  But  N.  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lo. 
6.  9  These  (are)  the  generations  of  N.:  X.  was 
6.   9  just  man.  .(and)  N,  walked  with  God 

6.  10  N.  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and  J. 
6.  13  God  said  unto  N.,  The  end  of  all  flesh  is 

6.  22  Thus  did  N.;  according  to  all  that  God 

7.  1  the  Lord  said  unto  N.,  Come  thou  and  all 
7.  5  N.  did  according  unto  all  that  the  Lord 
7.  6  And  N.  (was)  six  hundred  years  old  when 
7.  7  X.  went  in,  aud  his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and 
7.  9  two  aud  two  untoX. .  .God.  .comman.  N, 
7.  11  In  the  sixth  hundredth  year  of  N.'b  life,  in 
7. 13  the  selfsame  day  entered  N.,  and  Shem 
7.  13  the  sons  of  N.,  and  X.'s  wife,  and  the  th. 
7.  15  they  went  in  unto  N.  into  the  ark,  two 

7.  23  N.  only  remained  (alive),  and  they  that 

8.  1  God  remembered  X.,  and  every  living  th. 
8.  6  N.  opened  the  window  of  the  ark  which 
8. 11  N.  knew  that  the  waters  were  abated  from 
8. 13  N.  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark,  and 
8.  15  And  God  spake  unto  N.,  saying 

8.  18  N.  went  forth,  and  his  sons,  and  his  wife 

8.  20  N.  builded  an  altar  unto  the  LORD ;  and 

9.  1  God  blessedN.  andhissons,  and  said  unto 
9.    8  God  spake  unto  N.,  and  to  his  sous  with 

9. 17  God  said  unto  X.,  This  (is)  the  token  of 

9. 18  the  sons  of  X.,  that  went  forth  of  the  ark 

9. 19  These  (are)  the  three  sons  of  N.:  and  of 
9.  20  X.  began  (to  be)  an  husbandman,  and  be 
9.  24  N.  awoke  from  his  wine,  aud  knew  what 
9.  28  N.  lived  after  the  flood  three  hundred  and 
9.  29  the  days  of  X.  were  nine  hundred  and  fifty 

10.    1  (are)  the  generations  of  the  sons  of  N. 

10.  32  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  sons  of  X. 
1  Ch.  1.    4  N.,  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth 
Isa.   54.    9  For  this  (is  as)  the  waters  of  X.  unto  me 

54.    9  have  sworn  that  the  Waters  of  N.  should 
Eze.  14.  14  Though  these  three  men,  X.,  Daniel,  and 

14.  20  Though  X.,  Daniel,  and  Job,  (were)  in  it 
Matt  24.  37  But  as  the  days  of  X.  (were;,  so  shall  also 

24.  38  until  the  day  that  X.  entered  into  the  ark 
Luke  3.  36  which  was  (the  son)  of  N.,  which  was  (the 

17.  26  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  X.,  so  shall  it  be 

17.  27  until  the  day  that  X'.  entered  into  the  ark 
Heb.  11.    7  By  faith  X.,  being  warned  of  G  od  of  things 

1  Pe.  3.  20  waited  in  the  days  of  X.,  while  the  ark  was 

2  Pe.  2.    5  spared  njt  the  old  world,  but  saved  N. 

NO'-AH,  nuj  flattery. 

A  daughter  of  Zelophehad,  the  grandson  of  Gilead,  the 
grandson  of  Manasseh,  the  elder  son  of  Joseph.  B.C. 
1470. 

Xuni26.  33  names  of  the  daughters.. (were).. X..  nog. 

27.    1  Mahlah,  CT.,andHoglah,  andMilcah,  and 

36. 11  For  Mahlah.  .and  X.,the  daughters  of  Zel. 

Josh. 17.    3  names  of  his  daughters,  Mahlah,  and  X. 

NOB,  aj  height 

A  Levitical  city  in  Benjamin,  two  miles  N.  of  Jeru- 
salem, where  eighty-five  priests  and  their  families  were 
slain  by  Doeg. 

1  Sa.  21.    1  Then  came  David  to  X.to  Ahimelech  the 
22.    9  I  saw  the  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  X.,  to 
22. 11  kingsent  to  (.all.  .priests  that  (were)  in  X 
22.  19  X*. .  .smote  lie  with  the  edge  of  the  ^uinl 
Xeh.  1 1,  32  (And)  at  Anathoth,  X.,  Aiiauiah 
Isa.    re.  32  Asyet  shall  he  remain  at  X.  that  day 

NO'-BAH,  ir?J  prominent. 

1.  A  Manassitc  who  took  Kenath,  an  Amorite  city  in 

mount  Gilead.     B.C.  1452. 

Nuni32.  42  X.  went  and  took  Kenath,  and  the  villag. 


2.The  city  Kenath  in  Trachonitis  at  Bostra  (Argob  in 
Bashan) ;  now  called  Kanuat ;  it  is  called  Xnphah.  K. 
of  Moab,  or  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon,  near  Medeba. 

X"uni32.  42  took  Kenath.  .and  called  it  X*.,  after  his 

J  ixdg.  3.  11  that  dwelt  in  tents  on  the  east  of  N.  and 
NOBLE  — 
1. Honourable,  "HX  addir. 

Judg.  5.  13  dominion  over  the  nobles  among  the  peo. 

2  CI1.23.  20  nobles,  and  the  governors  of  the  people 

Neh.    3.    5  their  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  the 
10.  29  They  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles 

Jcr.   14.    3  their  nobles  have  sent  their  little  ones 
30.  21  their  nobles  shall  be  of  themselves,  and 

Nah.   3.  18  thy  nobles  shall  dwell  (in  the  dust) :  thy 

Z.Qrea£t  Vna  gadol. 

Jon.    3.    7  by  the  decree  of  the  king  aud  his  nobles 

3. Freemen,  nobles,  O'Tin  chorim. 

1  Ki.  21.    8  the  nobles  that  (were)  in  his  city  dwelling 

21.  11  the  nobles  who  were  the  inhabitants  in 
Neh.    2.  16  nor  to  the  nobles,  nor  to  the  rulers,  nor 

4.  14,  19  said  unto  the  nobles,  and  to  the  rulers 

5.  7  I  rebuked  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and 

6.  17  nobles  of  Judah  sent  many  letters  unto 

7.  5  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and  the  people 

13.  17  I  contended  with  the  nobles  of  Judah,  and 
Eccl.io.  17  thy  king  (is)  the  sou  of  nobles,  and  thy 
Isa.   34.  12  call  the  nobles  thereof  to  the  kingdom 
Jer   27.  20  all  the  nobles  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem 

39.    6  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  all  the  nobles 

4.  Rare,  precious,  prized,  ~>si?l  yaqqir. 

Ezra  4.  10  the  great  and  noble  Asnapper  brought  over 

o.A  leader,  tjj  nagid. 

Job  29.  10  The  nobles  held  their  peace,  and  their 

ti.  W,  II tag  hearted,  liberal,  2n:nadib. 

Xum  21.  18  the  nobles  of  the  people  digged  it,  by 
Psa.  83.  11  Make  their  nobles  like  Oreb  and  like  Zeeb 
I'rov.  8.  16  By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles,  (even)  all 
Isa.   13.    2  they  may  go  into  the  gates  of  the  nobles 

7.  Well  bom,  of  good  birth,  evyevys  eugenes. 

Acts  17.  11  These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Th. 
1  Co.    1.  26  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  (are  c.) 

NOBLE,  most  — 

l.Foremost  ones,  D'^rn?  parteviim. 

Esth.  6.    9  of  one  of  the  king's  most  noble  princes 
2.  Strongest,  most  pmver Jul,  Kpartaros  hratistos. 

Acts  24.    3  always,  and  in  all  places,  most  noble  Felix 
26.  25  Iamnotmad,mostuobleFestus;butspeak 

NOBLEMAN  — 

1. Kingly,  belonging  to  a  king,  &o.<ji\ik.6s  basilikos. 

John  4.  46  there  was  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son 

4.  49  The  nobleman  saith  unto  him,  Sir,  come 

2...-1  man  well  born,  tvyei/rjs  avOpwKos  eugenes  anthro. 

Lukeig.  12  certain  nobleman  went  into  afar  country 
NOBLES  — 
1. Those  near,  nobles,  D*.?*SK  atsilim. 

Exod24.  11  the  nobles  of  the  children  of  Israel  he 
'2.  A  bar,  fugitive,  n'l^bariueh. 

Isa.    43.  14  have  brought  down  all  their  nobles,  and 
3. To  be  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  "H3  kabed,  2. 

Psa.  149.    8  and  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron 
4. Foremost  ones,  D'DJjH?  parte mim. 

Esth.  1.    3  the  nobles  and  princes  of  the  provinces 
NOD,  iij  wandering, 

A  land  E.  of  Eden,  supposed  by  some  to  be  China  or 
Tartary. 

Gen.   4.  16  dwelt  in  the  land  of  X.  on  the  E.  of  Eden 
NO-DAB,  sin  liberal,  willing. 

Patronymic  o'f  a  tribe  E.  of  Jordan,  conquered  along  with 
Jetur.  Nephish,  and  the  Hagarites,  by  the  two  and  a 
half  tribes. 

1  Ch.   5.  19  Hagarites . .  Jetur,  and  Nephish,  and  X. 
NO'-GAH,  n;j  shining. 

A  son  born  to  David  after  he  became  king  of  Israel. 
B.C.  1030. 

1  Ch.  3.   7  And  X.,  and  Xepheg,  and  Japhia 

14.  6  And  X.,  and  Xepheg,  and  Japhia 

NO -HAH,  nn'13  rest. 

Fourth  son  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.  8.    2  N.  the  fourth,  and  Kapha  the  fifth 
NOISE  — 
l.To  roar,  move,  s&und,  nzn  hamah. 

Isa.    17.  12  like  the  noise  uf  the  seas ;  and  to  the 

'2.Noi<e,  multitude,  ;i£n  Ucmum. 

I  Sa.  14.  19  the  noise  that  (was)  in  the  host  of  the 
Isa.    31.    4  nor  abase  himself  for  the  noise  of  them 
Eze.  26.  13  I  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  songs  to 
Amos  5.  23  Take  thou  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy 

Z. Noise,  multitude,  rr;Dn  hemyafo. 

Isa.    14.  1 1  Thy  pomp  is  brought  down . .  (and)  the  no. 

4  Pbice,  ?ip  qol. 

II  18  the  ii"i>e  of  the  trumpet,  and  the  moun. 
jc.  17  Joshua  heard  the  noise  of  the  people  as 
32.  17  said.  .(There  is)  a  noise  of  war  in  the  camp 
32.  18  (but)  the  noise  of  (them  that)  sing  do  I 

Judg.  5.  11  (They  that  are  delivered)  from  the  noise 
i  Sa.   4.    6  L'hiJistiuu^  heard  the  noise  of  the  shout 


NOISE 


699 


NOR 


i  Sa. '  4.    6  the  noise  of  this  great  shout  in  the  camp 
4. 14  when  Eli  heard  the  noise  of  the  crying 
4.  14  What  (meaueth)  the  noiseof  this  tumult? 

1  EX    r.  41  Wherefore  (is  tins)  noise  of  the  city  being 

1.  45  This  (is)  the  noise  that  ye  have  heard 

2  Ki.   7.    6  the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise  of  chariots 

7.    6  a  noise  of  horse*,  (even)  the  noise  of  a 

11. 13  Athaliah  heard  the  noise  of  the  guard 

2  Ch.23.  12  Athaliah  heard  the  noise  of  the  people 

Ezra    3.  13  noise  of  the  shout  of  joy  from  the  noise 

3. 13  shout,  and  the  noise  was  heard  afar  off 

Psa.  42.    7  Deep  calleth  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of 

93.   4  mightier  than  the  noise  of  many  waters 
Isa.   13.   4  The  noise  of  a  multitude  in  the  mountains 
13.    4  a  tumultuous  noise  of  the  kingdoms  of 

24.  iS  he  who  fleeth  from  the  noise  of  the  fear 
29.    6  great  noise,  with  storm  and  tempest,  and 
33.   3  At  the  noise  of  the  tumult  the  people 

Jer.  4.  29  The  whole  city  shall  flee  for  the  noise  of 
10.  22  the  noise  of  the  bruit  is  come,  and  a  great 
n.  16  with  the  noise  of  a  great  tumult  he  hath 
47.  3  At  the  noise  of  the  stamping  of  the  hoofs 
49.  21  earth  is  moved  at  the  noise  of  their  fall 

49.  21  noise  thereof  was  heard  in  the  Red  sea 

50.  46  At  the  noise  of  the  taking  of  Babylon  the 
Lam.  2.  7  they  havemade  anoiseinthehouseof  the 
Eze.    1.  24  the  noise  of  their  wings,  like  the  noise  of 

1.  24  the  voice  of  speech,  as  the  noise  of  an  host 
3. 13  noise  of  the  wings,  .the  noise,  .a  noise  of 

19.    7  the  land  was  desolate,  .by  the  noise  of  his 
26.  10  thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the 
37.  -7  as  I  prohesied,  there  was  a  noise,  and  he. 
43.    2  his  voice  (was)  like  a  noise  of  many  wat. 
Joel    2.    5  Like  the  noise  of  chariots  on  the  tops  of  m. 

2.  5  like  the  noise  of  a  flame  of  fire  that  devo. 
Nah.'  3.  2  The  noise  of  a  whip,  and  the  noise  of  the 
Zeph.  1.  10  the  noise  of  a  cry  from  the  fish  gate,  and 

5.  Trembling,  trouble,  anger,  rage,  uh  rogez. 

Job    37.   2  Hearattentivelythenoiseof  hisvoice.and 

6.  Outcry,  shouting,  y.  rea. 

Job  36.  33  The  noise  thereof  showeth  concerning  it 

7.  Wasting,  desolation,  noise,  J"injj»  shaon. 

Psa.  65.  7  stilleth  the  noise  of  the  seas,  the  noiseof 

Isa.    24.  3  the  noise  of  them  that  rejoice  endeth 

25.  5  Thou  shalt  bring  down  the  noise  of  stra. 
66.  6  A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city,  a  voice  from 

Jer.  25.  31  A  noise  shall  come,  .to  the  ends  of  the  e. 
46.  17  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  (is  but)  a  noise;  he 

51.  55  do  roar,  .a  noise  of  their  voice  is  uttered 

3. Cry,  crying,  noise,  riaz'B  teshuoth. 

Job  36.  29  the  clouds,  (or)  the  noise  of  his  tabernacle? 
9.  Sound,  voice,  tone,  (pcavr)  phone. 

Rev.    6.    1 1  heard,  as  it  were  the  noise  of  thunder 
NOISE,  loud  — 
Shout,  shouting,  blowing,  nsp~\$  teruah. 

Psa.  33.    3  new  song,  play  skilfully  with  a  loud  noise 
NOISE,  to  make  a  (loud)  — 
l.To  (cause  to)  make  a  noise,  Din  hum,  5. 

Psa.  55.    2  I  mourn  in  my  complaint,  and  make  a  n. 

Mic.    2. 12  they  shall  make  great  noise  by  reason  of 

2.  To  roar,  move,  sound,  n£n  hamah. 

Psa.  59.   6  they  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go  round 

59. 14  let  them  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go 

Isa.    17. 12  of  many  people  (which)  make  a  noise  like 

Jer.     4.  19  my  heart  maketh  a  noise  in  me  Zech.9.15 

3.  To  break  forth,  n^3  patsach. 

Psa.  98.    4  Make  a  loud  noise  and  rejoice,  and  sing  p. 
4. To  cause  to  hear  or  be  heard,  upc5  shamea,  5. 
Josh.  6.  10  Ye  shall  not  shout,  nor  make  any  noise  . 

1  Ch.15.  28  making  a  noise  with  psalteries  and  harp3 

5.  To  disturb,  cause  a  tumult,  6opvf3eu>  thorubeo. 

Matt.  9.  23  minstrels  and  the  people  making  a  noise 
NOISE,  with  great  — 
With  a  hissing  noise,  p*oifa§6v  rhoizedon. 

2  Pe.  3.  10  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the 
NOISED  (abroad),  to  be  — 

l.To  bear,  olkovco  akouo. 

Mark  2.    1  it  was  noised  that  he  was  in  the  house 

2.  To  talk  or  speak  throughout^  SnxAaAe'oi  dialaleo. 
Luke  1.  65  and  all  these  sayings  were  noised  abroad 

3.  There  came  a  voice,  yivop.a.1  (ptavt),  Acts  2.  6. 
NOISOME  — 

1. Mischief,  calamity,  rnn  hawah. 

Psa.  91.  3  deliver  thee.. from  the  noisome  pestilence 
2. Evil,  viva. 

Eze.  14. 15  If  I  cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through 
14.  21  the  famine,  and  the  noisome  beast,  and  the 

-j. Evil,  bad,  kukSs  kakos. 

Rev.  16.  2  there  fell  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore  u. 
NON,  pn  continuation. 

An  Ephraimite  through  Beriah,  who  was  horn  to 
Ephraim  after  the  men  of  Gath  had  slain  some  of  his 
sons;  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  same  as  Nun  the 
father  of  Joshua.     B.C.  1492. 

1  Ch.  7.  2    X.  his  son,  'ehoshuahis  son 
NONE  — 
I. There  is  not,  ]\H  ayin. 

Isa.  45.  21  and  a  Saviour ;  (there  is)  none  besides  me 

Jer.  30.    7  iorthatday(is^great,sothatnone(is)like 


2.Not,  hx  al. 

2  Ki.  9.  15  (then)  let  none  go  forth  (nor)  escape  out 

3. End,  cessation,  except,  only,  D5S*  ephes. 

Deut32.  36  is  gone,  and  (there  is)  none  shut  up,  or  left 
Isa.  46.   9  (I  am)  God,  and  (there  is)  none  like  me 

ijfotj  *?2  bal. 

Psa.  10. 15  seek  out  Ms  wickedness  (till)  thou  find  n. 

5.  Without,  "bfy  ^3?  mibbeli,  beli. 

Job  18.  15  liis  tabernacle,  because  (it  is)  none  of  his 
Isa.  14.    6  he.  .is  persecuted,  (and)  none  hindereth 

Q.Witlwut,  'Fkzbilti. 

Nuni2i.  35  until  there  was  none  left  him  alive:  and 

7. No,  vh  la. 

Dan.   2. 11  and  there  is  none  other  that  can  show  it 
4.  35  none  can  stay  Ids  hand,  or  say  unto  him 

6.  4  they  could  find  none  occasion  nor  fault 

S.No,  tihlo. 

Exod.  9.  24  was  none  like  it  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt 
Num.  7.  9  But  unto  the  sons  of  Kohath  he  gave  none 

Q.Not  a  mem,  n?  jrx  ish  lo. 

Gen.  23.   6  none  of  us  shall  withhold  from  thee  his 
10. Not  any,  nV  V2  kol  lo. 

Lev.  27.  29  None  devoted,  which  shall  be  devoted  of 
ll.Not  a  woman,  vb  n^x  ishshah  lo. 

Isa.  34. 16  these  shall  fail,  none  shall  want  her  mate 
ll.Not  a  voice,  h>\p  ah  la  qol. 

Dan.  6.    4  but  they'could  find  none  occasion  nor  fa. 
IB. Not,  fj.-f]  me. 

Luke  3.  11  let  him  impart  to  him  that  hath  none 
11.  24  finding  none,  he  saith,  I  will  return  uuto 

1  Co.  7.  29  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  n. 
14. Not  even  one,  fx-nSeis  medeis. 

John  8.  10  [saw  none  butthe  woman,  he  said  untoh.] 

Acts    8.  24  Pray,  .that  none  of  these  things  which  ye 

11.  19  preaching  the  word  to  none  but  uuto  the 

24.  23  that  he  should  forbid  none  of  his  acquai. 

1  Ti.  5.  14  give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  sp. 
Rev.    2.  10  Fear[none  of] those  things  which  thou  sh. 

lo.No,  not,  ov.ou. 

Matti2.  43  dry  places,  seeking  rest,  and  flndethnone 
26.  60  But  found  none :  yea,  though  many  false 
26. 60  witnesses  came,  [(yet)  found  they  none] 
Marki2.  31  There  is  none  other  commandment  grea. 

12.  32  there  is  one  God;  and  there  is  none  other 
14.  5s  sought . .  to  put . .  to  death  ;  and  found  none 

Lukei3.    6  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  andfound  none 

13.  7  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig  tree,  and  find  none 
John  6.  22  saw  that  there  was  none  other  boat  there 
Acts    3.   6  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  such  as 

7.  5  he  gave  him  none  inheritance  in  it,  no,  not 
Rom.  3.  10  As  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous 

3.  11  none  that  understandeth,  there  is  none 

3.  12  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one 

8.  9  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his 

2  Co.  1.  13  we  write  noneother  things  unto  you  than 
Gal.  1.  19  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none,  save  Ja. 
1  Jo.  2.  10  there  isnoneoccasionofstumblinginliini 
Rev.   2.  24  But.  .1  will  put  upon  you  none  other  bur. 

16. Not  even  one,  ovSels  oudeis. 

Mattig.  17  [(there  is)  none  good  but  one,  (that  is)] 
Luke   1.  61  There  is  none  of  thy  kindred  that  is  ca. 

4.  26  unto  none  of  them  was  Elias  sent,  save 
4.  27  none  of  them  was  cleansed,  saving  Naa. 

14.  24  that  none  of  these  men  which  were  bid. 
18.  19  good?  none  (is)  good,  save  one,  (that  is) 
18.  34  And  they  understood  none  of  these  things 

John  7. 19  none  of  you  keepeth  the  law  ?  Why  go  ye 
15. 24  done,  .the  works  which  none  other  man 

16.  5  none  of  you  asketli  me,  Whither  goest 

17.  12  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perd. 

18.  9  them  which,  thou  gavest  me .  .1  lost  none 
21.  12  none  of  the  disciples  durst  ask  him,  Who 

Acts  8. 16  as  yet  he  was  fallen  upon  none  of  them 
18. 17  And  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  those  20.24. 
25. 11  if  there  be  none  of  these  things  whereof 

25.  18  they  brought  none  accusation  of  such  t. 

26.  22  saying  none  other  things  than  those  v.25 
Rom.  14.  7  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man 
1  Co.    1.  14  I  thank  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you 

2,    8  Which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world 

8.  4  we  know . .  that . .  none  other  God  but  one 

9.  15  I  have  used  none  of  these  things  :  neither 
14.  10  and  none  of  them  (is)  without  signification 

Gal.    5.  10  that  ye  will  be  none  otherwise  minded 
17.  Not  even,  ovre  oute* 

Acts   4. 12  there  is  [none]  other  name  under  heaven 
18.i\ro£  any,  ^77  tis  me  tis. 

1  Pe.   4.  15  But  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer 
19. Not  any,  ov  tls  ou  tis. 

Acts  26.  26  I  am  persuaded  that  [none]  of  these  thi. 
NONE  (besides  me)  — 
None  beside  me,  none,  D3X,  *p£X  aphsi,  ephes. 

Isa.  45.  6  they  may  know.  .that,  .none  besides  me 
47.    8,  10  heart,  I  (am),  and  none  else  besides  me 

Zeph.  2.  15  in  her  heart,  I  (am),  and . .  none  besides  me 

NONE  (can)  — 

A  man  not,  no  man,  ah  p'n  ish  lo. 

Psa.  49.   7  None,  .can  by  any  means  redeem  his  br. 
[See  also  Effect,  move,  surely.] 


NOON  (day  or  tide)  — 

1. Brightness,  bright  thing,  noon,  in'xtsohar. 

Gen.  43. 16  for  (these)  men  shall  dine  with  me  at  noon 

43.  25  the  present  against  Joseph  came  at  noon 
Deut28.  29  thou  shalt  grope  atnoon  day,  as  the  blind 
2  Sa.  4.   5  Ishbosheth,  who  lay  on  a  bed  at  noon 

1  Eli. 18.  26  name  of  Baal  from  morning  even  until  n. 

18.  27  it  came  to  pass  at  noon,  that  Elijah  moc. 
20.  l6  they  went  out  at  noon  :  but  Benhadad 

2  Ki.  4.  20  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon,  and. .died 
Job     5. 14  and  grope  in  the  noon  day  as  in  the  night 

11.  17  age  shall  be  clearer  than  the  noon  day 

Psa.  37.    6  bringforth..  thy  judgment  asthenoon  d. 

55.  17  Evening,  and  morning,  and  at  noon,  will 

91.   6  the  destruction  (that)  wasteth  at  noon  d. 

-  Song   1 .   7  where  thou  makest  (thy  flock)  to  rest  at  n. 

Isa.   16.    3  as  the  night  iu  the  midst  of  the  noon  day 
5S.  10  and  thy  darkness  (be)  as  the  noon  day 
59.  10  we  stumble  at  noon  day  as  in  the  night 

Jer.  6.  4  Prepare  ye  war.  .arise,  .let  us  go  up  at  u. 
15.   8  brought  upon  them,  .a  spoiler  at  noon  d. 

Amos  8.    9  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon. 

Zeph.  2.   4  shall  drive  out  Ashdod  at  the  noon  day 

2.Even  time,  dhh^  ny  eth  tsohorayim. 

Jer.  20. 16  the  morning,  and  the  shouting  at  noon  t. 
Z.Mid  day,  p.eo-nfx^pta  niesembria. 

Acts  22.   6  was  come  nigh  unto  Damascus  about  noon 
NOPH,  F]3. 

A  city  in  Egypt,  the  same  as  Memphis  (orMoph),  on  the 
W.  bank  of  the  Nile,  S.  of  Cairo  or  Kahira. 

Isa.    19.  13  the  princes  of  N.  are  deceived  ;  they  have 

Jer.     2. 16  Also  the  children  of  N.  and  Tahapanes  h. 

44.  1  and  at  N.,  and  in  the  country  of  Pathros 
46.  14  and,  publish  in  N.  and  inTahpanhes  :  say 
46.  19  N.  snail  be  waste  and  desolate  without 

Eze.  30.  13  will  cause  (their)  images  to  cease  out  of  N. 
30.  16  and  N.  (shall  have)  distresses  daily 

NO'-PHAH,  njj  height. 

A  eity  in  the  E.  of  the  kingdom  of  Silion,  near  Medeba. 

See  Xobah. 

Nuni2i.  30  we  have  laid  them  waste  unto  N.,  which 
NOR  — 
l.Or,  ix  0. 

Judgn.  34  beside  her  he  had  neither  son  nor  daugh. 
2.1t  is  not,  \VA  ayin. 

Isa.  40.  16  Lebanon  (is)not  sufficient  toburn,  northe 
Z.Not,  W  al. 

Josh  22.  19  rebel  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  rebel  ag. 
i.If,  dx  im. 

1  Sa.  30. 15  that  thou  wilt  neither  kill  me,  nor  deliver 
Eze.  14.  20  they  shall  deliverneithersonnordaughter 

5.  .AH  hzbal. 

Psa.  16.   4  will  I  not  offer,  nor  take  up  their  names 
6. No,  not,  ti^  la. 

Dan.  3. 12'they  serve  not  thy  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  27  the  fire  had  no  power,  nor  was  an  hair  of 
3.  27  were  their  coats  changed,  nor  the  smell 

5.  23  the  gods,  .which  see  not,  nor  hear,  nor  k. 

6.  4  but  they  could  find  none  occasion  nor  fa. 

7.  No,  not,  nS  lo. 

2  Sa.  19.  24  nor  trimmed  his  beard,  nor  washed  his  c. 
S.A'/id  not,  N?l  veto. 

Exod  1 1.    6  such  as  there  was  none  like  it,  nor  shall 

9.  Or,  either,  $  e. 

Luke22. 68  if  I  also  ask . .  ye  will  not  answer  me,  [nor] 

1  Co. 12.  21  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no 
Eph.   5.   4  foolish  talking,  nor  jesting,  which  are  not 

5.    5  no  whoremonger,  nor  unclean  person,  nor 

10.  Not,  fxi\  me. 

Matt  10. 10  Nor  scrip  for. .  journey,  neither  two  coats 
Lukeio.   4  Carry  neitherpurse,  norscrip.  .and  salute 

ll.Not  even,  /x-n5e  mede. 

Mattio.    9  Provide  neither  gold,  [nor]  silver,  nor  br. 

10.  14  shall  not  receive  you,  nor  hear  your  words 

22.  29  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  northe  power 
Mark  6. 11  shall  not  receive  you,  nor  hear  you,  when 

8.  26  Neither  go  into  the  town,  nor  tell. .  to  any 
Lukeio.    4  Carry  neither  purse,  .nor shoes:  and  salu. 

14. 12  northy brethren,  neitherthy kinsman,  nor 

17.  23  or,  see  there  !  gonot  after.,  nor  follow  (th.) 

Acts   4.  18  commanded  them  not  to  speak  at  all  nor 

Rom  14.  21  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  think  wine  nor 

2  Co.  4.   2  not  walldngiucraftiness,norhandlingthe 

1  Ti.    6. 17  that  they  be  not  high  minded,  nor  trust 

2  Ti.  1.  8  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  our  Lord,  nor 
Heb.  12.   5  nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him 

VI.  Not  even,  nor,  fjL-fjre  mete. 

Matt.  5.  35  Nor  by  the  earth ;  for  it  is  his  foot  stool 

11.  18  John  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking 
Luke  7.  33  came  neither  eating  bread  nor  drinking 

9.  3  neither  staves,  nor  scrip,  neither  bread 
Acts  23.    8  is  no  resurrection,  neither  angel,  nor  spi. 

23.  21  that  they  will  neither  eat  nor  drink  till 
27.  20  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days 

2  Th  2.  2  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as 
t  Ti.  1.  7  understanding  neither  what  they  say,  nor 
Heb.  7.  3  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end 
Rev.    7.    1  not  blow  on  the  earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor 

7.  3  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor 

13. No,  not,  ov  ou,  oi>xi  ouchi. 

Lukei8.    4  Though  I  fear  not  God,  [nor]  regard  man 


NOR 


roo 


NOT 


t  Co.  2.  9  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
6.  io  nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners,  shall  inhe. 

i  [.Not  even,  ou5<?  oude. 

Matt.  6.  20  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor 
6.  26  neither  do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns 
io.  24  (his)  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  1. 
12.  19  He  shall  not  strive,  nor  cry;  neithershall 

24.  21  was  not .  .to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall 

25.  13  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour 
Luke  6.  44  nor  of  a  bramble  bush  gather  they  grapes 

12.  24  the  ravens  :  for  they  neither  sow  [nor]  r. 
ax.  15  shall  not  be  able  to  gainsay  [nor]  resist 
22.  24  which  neither  have  store  house  nor  barn 

John  1.  13  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 
11.  50  Nor  consider  that  it  is  expedient  for  us 
16.    3  they  have  not  known  the  Father,  nor  me 

Acts  8.  21  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  m. 
9.  9  three  days . .  and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink 
24.  18  neither  with  multitude,  nor  with  tumult 

Rom.  9.  16  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that 

1  Co.  2.   6  yet  not  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  nor  of 

2  Co.  7.  12  nor  for  his  cause  that  suffered  wrong,  but 
Gal.    3.  28  Jew  nor  Greek,  .bond  nor  free,  .male  nor 

4. 14  in  my  flesh  ye  despised  not,  nor  rejected 

1  Th.  2.    3  our  exhortation  (was)  not  of  deceit,  nor 

5.    5  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness 

1  Ti.   2.  12  nor  to  usurp  authority  over  the  man,  but 

6. 16  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see  :  to 
Heb.13.    5  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 

2  Pe.  1.    8  neither  (be)  barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the 
Rev.  5.   3  no  man  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  neither 

7. 16  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor 

15. Not  even,  nor,  ovre  oute. 

Matt.  6.  20  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt 
22.  30  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
Marki2.25  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
Luke2o.  35  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage 
John  1.  25  if  thou  be  not  that  Christ,  [nor]  Elias,  net 

5.  37  neither  heard  his  voice  at  any  time,  nor 
8. 19  Ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father :  if 
9.    3  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his  p. 

Acts  15. 10  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were 

24. 12  neither  in  the  synagogues,  nor  in  the  city 

Rom.  8.  38  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principal, 

8.  38  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 

8.  39  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  cr. 
r  Co    6.    9  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effemi. 

6.  9  nor  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind 
6.  10  Nor  thieves,  norcovetous, [nor]  drunkards 

Gal.     5.   6  nor  uncircumcision  ;  but  faith  which  wo. 

6.  15  nor  uncircunicision,  but  a  new  creature 
1  Til.  2.    3  not  of  deceit.,  of  uncleanness,  nor  in  guile 

2.    5  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness  ;  God  (is)  wit. 

2.  6  Nor  of  men.  .nor  (yet)of  others,  when  we 
Rev.   3.  15  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot :  I  wo. 

3. 16  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor 

9.  20  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  v.  21. 
16  And,  Kai,  Jo  12.  40  ;  Gal.  3.  28  ;  Eph.  5.  31. 
NOR  any  (thing)  — 

There  is  not,  there  are  not,  f'N  ayin. 

1  Ki.18.  26  But.  .no  voice,  nor  any  that  answered.  And 
£cc.    3. 14  nothing  can  be  put  to  it,  nor  any  thing 

NOR  ever  — 

Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ov  yA]  on  me, 

Matt.24.  21  was  not.  .to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall 

NOR  yet  — 

l.Not  even,  fitj^e  mule. 

Matt.  6.  23  nor  yet  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put 

10. 10  neither  two  coats,  neither  shoes,  nor  yet 

%.Not  even,  ovbe  oude. 

Heb.  9.  25  Nuryet  that  he  should  offer  himself  often 

3.  Not  even,  nor,  oijre  oute. 

Acts  25.    8  nor  yet  against  Cesar,  have  I  offended  any 

NORTH,  Northern,  side,  wind,  ward  — 
{.Scattering  urinds,  c*~it?  mezarim. 

Job   37.    9  the  whirlwind  ;  and  cold  out  of  the  north 

•l.North,  psx  tsapktm. 

Gen.  13.  14  look  from  theplace  where  thou  art  north. 

28. 14  to  the  east,  and  to  the  north,  and  to  the 
Exod26.  20  side  of  the  tabernacle,  on  the  north  side 

26.  35  thou  sbalt  put  the  table  on  the  north  side 

27. 11  And  likewise  for  the  north  side  in  length 
36.  25  toward  the  north  corner,  he  made  twenty 
38. 11  for  the  north  side,  .an  hundred  cubits,  t. 
40.  22  upon  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  northward 

Lev.    1. 11  shall  kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar  north. 
Num.  2.  25  standard  of  the  camp  of  Dau..on  the  n.  s. 

3.  35  pitch  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  north. 
34.    7  this  shall  be  your  north  border :  from  the 

34.  9  Hazar-enan :  this  shall  be  your  north  bo. 

35.  5  and  on  the  north  side  two  thousand  cub. 
Deut.  2.    3  compassed,  .longenough:  turnyounorth. 

3.  27  lift  up  thine  eyes  westward,  and  northw. 
Josh.  S.  11  before  the  city, and  pitched  on  the  norths. 

8. 13  all  the  host  that  (was)  on  the  north  of  the 
11.  2  to  the  kings  that  (were)  on  the  north  of 
13.  3  evenuntothebordersof  Ekron  northward 
15.  5  border  mthenorthquarter(was)from  the 
1 5.  5  passed  along  by  the  north  of  Beth-arabah 
1 5.  7  from  the  valley  of  Achor,  and  so  northw. 
15.    8  at  the  end  of  the  valley  of  the  giants  n.  w. 

15.  10  side  of  mount  Jearim .  .on  the  north  side 
is-  11  went  out  unto  the  side  of  Ekron  nortliw. 

16.  6  toward  the  sea  to  Michmethah  on  the  n.  s. 


Josh.  17, 

17- 
18. 
1 3. 


Judg 


12. 

21. 

1  Sa  14. 

1  Ki.  7. 

2  Ki.  16. 

1  Ch.  9. 

26. 
26. 

2  Ch.  4. 
Job  26. 

37- 

Psa.  48. 


107, 
Prov  25, 
Eccl.  1. 
ii, 
Song  4 
Isa.  14. 


Jer 


Eze. 


Dan. 


9  the  north  side  of  the  river,  and  the  out. 
10  northward  (it  was)  Manasseh's,  and  the 
10  they  met  together  in  Asher  on  the  north 

5  shall  abide  in  their  coasts  on  the  north 
12  their  border  on  the  north  side  was  from 
12  went  up  to  the  side  of  Jericho  on  the  no. 

16  in  the  valley  of  the  giants  on  the  north 

17  was  drawn  from  the  north,  and  went  forth 

18  toward  the  side  over  against  Arabah,  n.  w. 

19  along  to  the  side  of  Beth-hoglah  northw. 

19  out  goings  of  the  border  were  at  the  no. 
14  the  border  compasseth  it  on  the  north  s. 
27  toward  thenorth  side  of  Beth-emek,  and 

30  Timnath-serah .  .on  the  north  side  of  the 
9  Timnath-heres .  .on  thenorth  side  of  the 
1  host  of  the  Midiauites  were  on  the  north 

1  went  northward,  and  said  unto  Jephthah 
io  which  (is)  on  the  north  side  of  Bethel,  on 

5  situate  northward  over  against  Michmash 
25  twelve  oxen,  tliree  looking  towardsthe  u. 
14  and  put  it  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar 

24  were,  .toward  the  east,  west,  north,  and 
14  Zechariah.  .and  his  lot  came  out  northw. 

17  Levites,  northward  four  a  day,  southward 
4  twelve  oxen,  three  looking  towards  then. 

7  He  streteheth  out  the  north  over  the  em. 

22  Fair  weather  cometh  out  of  the  north :  w. 

2  mount  Zion,  (on)  the  sides  of  the  north 

12  The  north  and  the  south  thou  hast  created 

3  west,  from  the  north,  and  from  the  south 

23  The  north  wind  driveth  away  rain;  so  (d.) 

6  the  south,  and  turneth  about  unto  then. 
3  or  toward  the  north,  in  the  place  where 

16  Awake,  O  north  wind  ;  and  come,  thou  s. 

13  the  congregation,  in  the  sides  of  the  north 

31  there  shall  come  from  the  north  a  smoke 

25  I  have  raised  up  (one)  from  the  north,  and 
6  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up  ;  and  to 

12  lo,  these  from  the  north  and  from  the  w. 

13  and  the  face  thereof  (is)  towards  the  north 

14  Out  of  the  north  an  evil  shall  break  forth 

15  the  families  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  north 
12  proclaim  these  words  toward  the  north 

1 8  come  together  out  of  the  laud  of  the  north 
6  I  will  bring  evil  from  the  north,  and  a  g. 

1  evil  appeareth  out  of  the  north,  and  great 
22  a  people  cometh  from  the  north  country 

22  a  great  commotion  out  of  the  north  coun. 

20  behold  them  that  come  from  the  north 

12  Shall  iron  break  the  northern  iron  and  the 
15  from  the  land  of  the  north,  and  from  all 

8  house  of  Israel  out  of  the  north  country 

9  send  and  take  all  the  families  of  the  north 

26  all  the  kings  of  the  north,  far  and  near 

8  I  will  bring  them  from  the  north  country 

6  fall  toward  the  north  by  the  river  Euphr. 

10  the  north  country  by  the  river  Euphrates 
20  destruction  cometh.  .cometh  out  of  the  n. 

24  into  the  hand  of  the  people  of  the  north 

2  waters  rise  up  out  of  the  north,  and  shall 

3  out  of  the  north  there  cometh  up  a  nation 

9  assembly  of  great  nations  from  the  north 
41  Behold, a  people  shall  come  from  the  north 
48  spoilers  shall  come  unto  her  from  the  n. 

4  a  whirlwind  came  out  of  the  north,  a  great 

3  inner  gate  that  looketh  toward  the  north 

5  lift  up  thine  eyes . .  the  way  toward  the  n. 
5  lifted . .  mine  eyes  the  way  toward  the  no. 

5  northward  at  the  gate  of  the  altar  this 

14  door  of  the  gate,  .which(was)  toward  then. 
2  higher  gate,  which  lieth  toward  the  north 

47  all  faces  from  the  south  to  the  north  shall 

4  against  all  flesh  from  the  south  to  the  no. 

7  king  of  kings,  from  thenorth,  with  horses 
30  There  (be)  the  princes  of  the  north,  all  of 

6  the  house  of  Togarniah  of  the  north  qua. 

15  shall  come  from  thy  place  out  of  the  north 
2  will  cause  thee  to  come  up  from  thenorth 

19  an  hundred  cubits  eastward  and  north  w. 

20  outward  court  that  looked  toward  the  no. 

23  over  against  the  gate  toward  the  north 
35  he  brought  me  to  the  north  gate,  and  m. 
40  as  one  goeth  up  to  the  entry  of  the  north 
44  which  (was)  at  the  side  of  the  north  gate 
44  gate  (having)  the  prospect  toward  the  nor. 
46  chamber  whose  prospect  (is)  toward  the  n. 

11  one  door  toward  the  north,  and  another 
1  the  outer  court,  the  way  toward  the  north 

1  (was)  before  the  building  toward  the  nor. 

2  of  an  hundred  cubits  (was)  the  north  door 
4  one  cubit ;  and  their  doors  toward  the  n. 

11  the  chambers  which  (were) toward  then. 

1 3  The  north  chambers  (and)the  south  chain. 

17  He  measured  the  north  side,  five  hundred 
4  the  way  of  the  north  gate  before  the  ho. 
9  hethatentereth  in  by  the  way  of  thenorth 
9  shall  go  forth  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate 

19  the  priests,  which  looked  toward  the  no. 
2  brought-.meoutof  the  way  of  the  gate  n.w. 

15  border  of  the  land  toward  the  north  side 
17  north  northward .  .(this  is)  the  north  side 

1  From  the  north  end  to  the  coast  of  the  way 
1  the  border  of  Damascus  northward,  to  the 
10  toward  the  north  five  ami  twenty  thous. 

16  the  north  side  four  thousand  and  five  hu. 

17  suburbs  of  the  city  shall  be  toward  the  n. 

30  the  goings  out  of  the  city  on  the  north  side 

31  three  gates  northward  ;  one  gate  of  Reu. 
4  I  saw  the  ram  pushing  westward, and  n.  w. 

6  shall  come  to  the  king  of  the  north  to  m. 

7  into  the  fortress  of  the  king  of  the  north 

8  (more)  years  than  the  king  of  the  north 


Dan.  11. 11  fight  with  him.  .with  the  king  of  the  north 
11. 13  king  of  the  north  shall  return,  and  shall 
11. 15  So  the  kiug  of  the  north  shall  come,  and 
11. 40  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come  against 
11.  44  tidings  out  of  the  east  and  out  of  the  no. 

Amos  8.  12  from  the  north  even  to  the  east,  they  shall 

Zeph.  2. 13  he  willstretch  out  his  hand  against  then. 

Zech.  2.    6  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north,  saith  the 
6.   6  therein  go  forth  into  the  north  country 
6.    8  these  that  go  toward  the  north  country 

6.  8  quieted  my  spirit  in  the  north  country 
14.    4  mountain  shall  remove  toward  the  north 

o.  Northern,  uis?  tsephoni. 

Joel"  2.  20  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you  the  north. 

A. North  wind,  north,  fiopp'as  borrhas. 

Lukei3.  29  from  the  north,  and.,  the  suuth,  and  shall 
Rev.  21.  13  on  the  north,  three  gates;  on  the  south 

NORTH  WEST  — 

North  v:est  wind,  north  west,  (Lat.  corns)  veDoos. 

Acts  27. 12  toward  the  south  west  and  norm  west 
NOSE,  NOSTRILS  — 
l.ATo$e,  fjn  aph. 

Gen.    2.    7  breathediutohisnostrilsthebreathoflife 

7.  22  All  in  whose  nostrils  (was)  the  breath  of 
Exodis.  8  with  the  blast  of  thy  nostrils  the  waters 
Nuni  11.  20  until  it  come  out  at  your  nostrils,  and  it 
2  Sa.  22.    9  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils 

22.  16  at  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  nostrils 
2  Ki.19.  28  I  will  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose,  and  my 
Job     4.    9  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  are  they  con . 

27.   3  and  the  spirit  of  God  (is)  in  my  nostrils 

40.  24  He  taketh  it  with  his  eyes;  (his)  nose 

41.  2  Canst  thou  put  an  hook  into  his  nose?  or 
Psa.  18.   8  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils 

18.  15  at  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  thy  nostrils 

115.    6  ears,  .noses  have  they,  but  they  smell  not 

Prov  30.  33  wringing  of  the  nose  bringeth  forth  blood 

Song   7.    4  thy  nose  (is)  as  the  tower  of  Lebanon  wh. 

7.    8  and  the  smell  of  thy  nose  like  apples 
Isa.     2.  22  from  man,  whose  breath  (is)  in  his  nostr. 

3.  21  The  rings,  and  nose  jewels 

37.  29  therefore  will  I  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose 

65.    5  These(are)a  smoke  in  mynose,  a  fire  that 

Lam.  4. 20  The  breath  of  our  nostrils,  the  anointed 

Eze.    8.  17  and,  lo,  they  put  the  branch  to  their  nose 

23.  25  they  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine 
Amos  4. 10  of  your  camps  to  come  up  unto  your  nos. 

'2. Snorting,  "inj  nachar. 

Job    39.  20  afraid,  .the  glory  of  his  nostrils  (is)  terr. 
3.  Nostrils,  D'Tnj  nechirim. 

Job   41.  20  Out  of  his  nostrils  goeth  smoke,  as. .of  a 
NOSE,  to  have  a  flat  — 
To  have  a  flat  nose,  Din  charam. 

Lev.  21.  18  or  a  lame,  or  he  that  hath  a  flat  nose,  or 
NOT  — 
I. There  is  not,  ]"H  ayin. 

Gen.   2.    5  and  (there  was)  not  a  man  to  till  the  gro. 

Lam.  5.    7  Our  fathers  have  sinned,  (and  are)  not 

2.There  is  not,  J'N  in. 

1  Sa.  21.    8  is  there  not  here  under  thine  hand  spear 
Z.Not,  "?N  al. 

Dan.    2.  24  Destroy  not  the  wise  (men)  of  Babylon 

4.  19  let  not  the  dream,  or  the  interpretation 
5. 10  let  not  thy  thoughts  trouble  thee,  nor  let 
9.  19  defer  not,  for  thine  own  sake,  O  my  God 

4.//;  CN  im. 

1  Sa.  ig.    6  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  he  shall  not  be  slain 
5. End,  cessation,  d?n  ephes. 

2  Sa.;  9.   3  (Is)  there  not  yet  any  of  the  house  of  Saul 
Isa.   54.  15  they  shall  surely  gather  together,  .not  by 

Q.Not,  "?3  bal. 

Isa.   26. 10  (yet)  will  he  not  learn  righteousness 

26. 10  and  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  the  L. 

7.  Without,  "h^bdi. 

Gen.  31.20  unawares,  .in that  hetoldhimnot  that  he 

8.  Without,  save,  besides,  "T£??  bilade. 

Job  34.  32  (That  which)  I  see  not,  teach  thou  me;  if 

9.  Without,  ^2  biUi. 

Gen.    3.  11  commanded  thee  that  thou  shouldestnot 
Exod  8.  29  in  not  letting  the  people  go  to  sacrifice 
Lev.  20.   4  of  his  seed  unto  Molech,  and  kill  him  not 
N urn  14.  16  Because  the  LORD  was  not  able  to  bring 
Ruth  3. 10  inasmuch  as  thou  followedst  not  young 
1  Sa.  20.  26  Something  hath  befallen  him,  he  is  not  c. 

10.  No,  not,  vh  la. 

Ezra  4. 13  will  they  not  pay  toll,  tribute,  and  custom 
4. 14  it  was  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the  king's 
4. 21  to  cease,  and  that  this  city  be  not  builded 

5.  5  that  they  could  not  cause  them  to  cease 

5.  i6hathitbeeninbuilding,and..it  is  not  finis. 

6.  8  given  unto  these  men,  that  they  be  noth. 

7.  24  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll,  tribute 
7.  25  and  teach  ye  them  that  know  (them)  not 
7.  26  whosoever  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God 

Jer.  10.  11  The  gods  that  have  not  made  the  heavens 
Dan.  2.  5,  9  if  ye  will  not  make  known  unto  me  the 
2.  10  There  is  not  a  man  upon  the  earth  that 
2.  11  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  flesh 
2.  18  that  Daniel  and  his  fellows  should  not  p. 
2.  30  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me  for  (any) 
2.  43  not  cleave  one  to  another,  .as  iron  is  nut 


NOT 


701 


NOT 


Dan.  2.  44  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other  people 
3.  6,  11  whoso  falleth  not  down  and  worship. 
3.  12  these  men,  O  king,  have  not  regarded  thee 
3. 12  they  serve  not  thy  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  14  do  not  ye  serve  my  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  15  if  ye  worship  not,  ye  shall  be  cast  the  sa. 
3.  16  we  (are)  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this 
3.  18  But  if  not,  be  it  known  unto  thee,  0  king 
3.  18  that  we  will  not  serve  thy  gods,  nor  wor. 
3.  24  bid  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  in  to  the 

3.  28  that  they  might  not  serve  nor  worship  any 

4.  7  buttheydidnot  make  known  unto  methe 
4.  18  are  not  able  to  make  known  unto  me  the 

4.  30  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  bu. 

5.  8  but  they  could  not  read  the  writing,  nor 
5. 15  they  could  not  show  the  interpretation  of 
5.  22  thou  his  son,  O  Belshazzar,  hast  not  hu. 

5.  23  which  see  not,  nor  hear,  nor  know  :  and 

6.  5  We  shall  not  And  any  occasion  against  t. 
6.    8%sign  the  writing,  that  it  be  not  changed 
6.    8  Medes  and  Persians,  which  altereth  not 
6.  12  Hast  thou  not  signed  a  decree,  that  every 
6.  12  theMedesand  Persians,  which  altereth  not 
6.  13  regardeth  not  thee,  0  king,  nor  the  deer. 
6.  17  that  the  purpose  might  not  be  changed 
6.  22  tlie  lions'  mouths,  that  they  have  not  h. 
6.  26  kingdom,  .which  shall  not  be  destroyed 
7. 14  shall  not  pass  away,  .which  shall  not  be 

ll.No,  not,  vb  lo. 

Gen.    2.    5  the  Lord  God  had  not  caused  it  to  rain 

Vl.Without,  not,  fc6s  belo. 

Nuni35.  23  seeing  (him)  not,  and  cast  (it)  upon  him 
Deut  32.  21  me  to  jealousy  with  (that  which  is)  not 
32.  21  to  jealousy  with  (those  that  are)  not  a  p. 

13.iVo,  not,  nS  loh. 

Deut.  3. 11  (is)  it  not  in  Rabbath  of  the  children  of  A. 

li.From,  ]p  min. 

Deut  33.  11  them  that  hate  him,  that  they  rise  not 

15. Not,  fir]  me. 

Matt.  1.  19  not  willing  to  make  her  a  public  example 
1.  20  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife 
2. 12  that  they  should  not  return  to  Herod,  they 
3.  9  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  We  h. 
3.  10  which  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  h. 
5.  17  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the 
5.  29,  30  not  (that)  thy  whole  body  should  be  c. 
5.  34  Swear  not  at  all :  neither  by  heaven ;  for 
5. 39  That  ye  resist  not  evil;  but  whosoever 

5.  42  that  would  borrow  of  thee  turn  not  thou 

6.  1  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  j'our  alius  before 
6.  2  do  not  sound  a  trumpet  before  thee,  as  the 
6.  3  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right 
6.  7  when  ye  pray,  use  not  vain  repetitions,  as 
6.  8  Be  not  ye  therefore  like  unto  them  :  for 
6.  13  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver 
6.  16  Moreover,  when  ye  fast,  be  not,  as  the  by. 
6.  18  That  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast 

6.  19  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon 

7.  1  Judge  not,  that  ye  be.  .judged 

7.  6  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs 
7.  19  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 
7.  26  and  doeththem  not,  shall  be  likened  unto 
10.  5  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
10.  5  into . .  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not 
10.  26  Fear  them  not  therefore  :  for  there  is  not. 
10.  28  And  fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body 
10.  28  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul :  but  rat. 
10.  31  Fear  ye  not  therefore,  ye  are  of  more  va. 
10.  34  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace 
12.  30  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me 

12.  30  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth 

13.  19  of  the  kingdom,  and  understandeth .  .not 

14.  27  Be  of  good  cheer :  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid 

17.  7  touched,  .and  said,  Arise,  and  be  not  afr. 

18.  13  the  ninety  and  nine  which  went  not  ast. 
18. 25  But  forasmuch  as  he  had  not  to  pay,  his 

19.  6  God  hath  joined  together,  letnotmanput 
19.  14  and  forbid  them  not,  to  come  unto  me 

21.  21  If  ye  have  faith,  and  doubt  not,  ye  shall 

22.  12  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not  having  a 

22.  29  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  n. 

23.  3  but  do  not  ye  after  their  works  :  for  they 
23.    8  But  be  not  ye  called  Rabbi :  for  one  is 

23.  23  to  have  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other 
24. 17  Let  him  which  is  on  the  house  top  not  c. 

24.  23  here  (is)  Christ,  or  there  ;  believe  (it)  not 
24.  26  Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert ;  go  not  forth 

24.  26  behold .  .in  the  secret  chambers ;  believe 

25.  29  from  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken 

26.  s  Buttheysaid,  Not  on  the  feast.,  lest  there 
28.  5  Fear  not  ye  ;  for  I  know  that  ye  seek  Je. 
28.  10  Be  not  afraid  :  go  tell  my  brethren  that 

Mark  2.  4;  3.20;  4.  12, 12;  5.  36;  6.  9,  11,  34,50;  9.39; 
»3.  9,  14,  19,  [19,1  19,  19,  19;  11. 23 1  12.  15,  24;  13.  7,  15, 

16,  21 ;  14.  2;  16.  6. 

Luke  1.  13,  20,  30;  2,  10,  26,  45 ;  3.  8,  9;  4.  42;  5.  10, 
it  ;  6.  29,  30,  37,  37,  49 ;  7.  6,  13,  30 ;  8.  io,  10,  18,  28,  [49], 
50.  52;  9-  5»  33.  50;  «»■  7>  IO>  zo;  "-  4>  7>  23>  23,  35.  42  J 
12.  4,  7,  21,  29,  32,  33,  47,  48;  13.  14;  14.  8,  12,  29  ;  16.  26; 
z7-  23.  31.  31,  31,  31 ;  18.  1,  2,  16,  20,  20,  20,  20;  19.  26,  27; 

20.  7 ;  21.  8,  9,  14,  21 ;  22.  40,  42 ;  23.  28  ;  24.  16,  23. 
Jolin  2.  16;  3.  7,  [16],  18,  18;  5.  23,  28,  45;  6.  20,  27, 

43,  64 ;  7.  24,  49 ;  8.  [6] ;  9.  39  ;  10.  1,  37,  38 ;  11.  37,  50 ;  12. 
*5t  [47].  48;  13-  9;  14-  i»  24,  27;  T5.  2;  18.  17,  25,  40;  19. 

21,  24;  20.  17  27,  29. 

Acts  1.  4 ;  3.  23 ;  4.  18;  5.  7,  28,  40;  7.  19,  60;  9.  26, 
3?  :  10.  15,  47 ;  11.  9;  12.  19;  13.  11 ;  14.  18;  15.  19,  38,  38; 

17.  6 ;  18.  9,  9 ;  19.  31 ;  20.  10,  16,  22,  29 ;  21.  4,  12,  14,  21, 
34 ;  23.  [9],  21  ;  25.  24,  27 ;  27.  7,  15,  21,  24. 


Rom.  1.  28  ;  2.  14,  14,  21,  22 ;  3.  8 ;  4.  5,  17,  19;  5.  [14] ; 
6.  12  ;  8.  [1],  4  ;  9.  30;  10.  6,  20,  20;  n.  8,  8,  10, 18,  20;  12. 

2,  3,  11,  14,  16,  16,  19,  21;  13.  3,  13,  13,  13,  14;  14.  i,  3, 

3,  3>  3.  [6],  6,  15,  16,  20,  22;  15.  1. 

1  Co.  1.  28;  4.  7,  18;  5.  8,  9,  11 ;  6.  9;  7.  1,  5,  io,  11,  12, 

13,  18,  18,  21,  23,  27,  27,  30,  30,  30,  31,  38;  9.  18,  21;  10. 

6,  28,  33;  11.  [22J,  29;  13.  1,  2,  3;  14.  20,  39;  15.  33,  34; 
2  Co.  2.  1,  13 ;  3.  7,  13 ;  4.  2,  7,  18,  18,  18 ;  5.  19 ;  6.  1,  9, 

14,  17;  9.  5,  7;  10.  2,  14;  12.  21. 

Gal.  3.[i];  4.  18;  5.  1,7,  13,  26;  6.7,  9,  9;  Eph.  3.  13; 

4,  26,  26,  30;  5.  7,  15,  17,  18,  27;  6.  4,  6;  Phil.  2.  4,  12;  3. 
9 ;  Col.  1.  23 ;  2.  [18],  21 ;  3.  2,  9, 19,  21,  22 ;  1  Th.  1.  8  ;  2.  9, 
15;  4-  5.  5 !  5-  6,  19,  20;  2  Th.  1.  8,  8 ;  2.  2,  12;  3.  6,  8,  13, 
15;  1  Ti.  1.  20;  2.  9;  3.  3,  [3],  6,  8,  8,  8,  11;  4.  14;  5.  1, 
9,  13,  16,  19;  6.  2,  3,  17;  2  Ti.  1.  8;  2.  14 ;  Titus  1.  6,  7,  7, 

7,  7,  ii,  14;  2.  3,  3,  9,  10. 

Heb.  3.  8,  15,  18;  4.  2,  7,  15;  6.  1 ;  7.  6;  g.  9;  10.  25, 
25;  ii«  3,  5)  8,  13,  27;  12.  s,  19,  27;  13.  2,  g,  16,  17;  Jas. 
1.  5,  7,  16,  22,  26;  2.  1,  11,  ti,  14,  16;  3.  1,  14;  4.  2,  ii, 

17;  5-  9-  J2.  *7- 
1  Pe.  1.  8,  14;  2.  16;  3.  6,  7,  9,  14 ;  4.  4,  12,  16 ;  5.  2; 

2  Pe.  2.  21 ;  3.  8,  9;  1  John  2.  4,  15,  28;  3.  10,  10,  13,  14, 
18,  21 ;  4.  1,  3,  8,  20 ;  5.  10,  12,  16,  16 ;  2  John  7,  9,  10 ; 

3  John  10,  11 ;  Jude  5,  6,  19;  Rev.  1. 17  J  3.  18 ;  5.  5;  6.  6; 
7.  3  ;  8.  12 ;  10.  4 ;  11.  2  ;  13.  15 ;  19. 10  ;  22.  r,  10. 

16.//  not,  except,  idy  yA\  can  me. 

Mark  4.  22  there  is  nothing  hid,  which  shall  not  be 
17. Not  even,  ju-nSe  mede. 

Col.     2.  21  taste  not,  handle  not 

1  Pe.  5.   2  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind 

18.  Not  even  one,  firjSeis  medeis. 

Luke  4.  35  came  out.  .and  hurt  him  not,  Acts  10.  28. 

19.  No  not,  yes  verily,  yA\  ovk  me  ouk. 

Romio.  18  Have  they  not  heard?  Yes  verily,  their 

10.  19  Did  not  Israel  know  ?  First  Moses  saith 

1  Co.  9.  4  Have  we  not  power  to  eat  and  to  drink  ? 
g.    5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister 

11.  22  have  ye  not  houses  to  eatand  to  drink  in  ? 

20.  What  ?  /x7}tl  meti. 

Matti2.  23  And  all.  .said,  Is  not  this  the  son  of  Da.? 
John  4.  2g  things  that  ever  I  did  ;  is  not  this  the  C? 

'2\. Assuredly  not,  ov  fx-fj  ou  me. 

Matt  10.  23  Ye  shall  not  have  gone  over  the  cities  of 
13. 14  By  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  un. 
13. 14  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  shallnot  perceive 

15.  6  And  honour  not  his  father  or  his  mother 

16.  22  from  thee,  Lord :  this  shall  not  be  unto 
16.  28  which  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they 
18.    3  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  h. 

23.  39  Ye  shall  not  see  me  henceforth,  till  ye  s. 

24.  2  There  shall  [not]  be  left  here  one  stone 
24.    2  that  shall  [not]  be  thrown  down 

24.  34  This  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all 
24.  35  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass 
26.  29  I  will  not  drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit  of 
26.  35  should  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny 
Mark  9.    1  which  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they 

9.  41  say  unto  you,  he  shall  not  lose  his  reward 
10.  15  he  shall  not  enter  therein 
13.  2  there  shall  not  be  left,  .that  shall  not  be 
13.  30  this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  th. 
13.  31  pass  away ;  but  my  words  shall  not  pass 
16.  18  [they  drink  any  deadly  thing,  it  shallnot] 
Luke  6.  37  shall  [not]  be  judged . .  shall  not  be  con. 

9.  27  which  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they 

12.  59  thou  shalt  not  depart  thence,  till  thou 

13.  35  Ye  shall  not  see  me,  until  (the  time)  come 
18.   7  And  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own 

18.  30  Who  shall  not  receive  manifold  more  in 
21.  18  But  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  your  head 
21. 32  This  generation  shall  not  pass  away  till 

21.  33  pass  away ;  but  my  words  shall  not  pass 

22.  16  I  will  not  any  more  eat  thereof,  until  it 
22. 18  I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine 
22.  34  Peter,  the  cock  shall  [not]  crow  this  day 
22.  67  he  said.  .If  I  tell  you,  ye  will  not  believe 
22.  68  if  I  also  ask.  .ye  will  not  answer  me,  nor 

John  4.  48  Except  ye  see  signs,  .ye  will  not  believe 
8.  12  he  that  followeth  me  shall  not  walk  in  d. 

10.  5  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow,  but  will 

11.  56  What  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to 
13.  38  The  cock  shall  not  crow,  till  thou  hast  d. 
20.  25  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not  believe 

Acts  28.  26  Hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  und. 
28.  26  and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  not  perceive 
Rom.  4.   8  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute 
Gal.    4.  30  the  son  of  the  bond  woman  shall  not  be  h. 

5. 16  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh 

1  Th.  4.  15  shall  not  prevent  them  which  are  asleep 
5.   3  woman  with  child ;  and  they  shall  not  es. 

Heb.   8.  1 1  they  shall  not  teach  every  man  his  neigh. 

1  Pe.  2.    6  he  that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  con. 

Rev.    2. 11  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of 
3.    3  thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour 
3.   5  and  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name  out  of 
15.   4  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord,  and  gl. 

2'2.Not,  ov,  ovk  ou,  ouk. 

Matt.  1.  25  knew  her  not  till  she  had  brought  forth 
2. 18  would  not  be  comforted,  because  they  are 

3.  11  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear:  he 

4.  4  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by 

4.  7  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 

5. 17  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil 

5.  21  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  and  whosoever  shall 
5.  27  heard.  .Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery 

5.  33  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thyself,  but  shalt 

6.  5  thou  shalt  not  be  as  the  hypocrites  (are) 
6.  20  and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through 


Matt.  6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


26  for  they  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap 
26  Behold.  Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they? 

28  lilies,  .they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin 

30  (shall  he)  not  much  more  (clothe)  you,  O 
3  butconsiderest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  th. 

21  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord 

22  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name 

25  it  fell  not :  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock 

29  having  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes 
8  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  come 

20  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay 

12  They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician 

13  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice :  for  I  am  nut 

14  we.  .fast  oft,  but  thy  disciples  fast  not? 
24  for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 
20  For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  spirit 
24  The  disciple  is  not  above(his)master, nor 

26  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be 
26  is  nothing,  .hid,  that  shall  not  be  known 

29  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  w. 
34  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword 
37,  37  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me 

33  taketh  [not]  his  cross,  .is  not  worthy  of  me 
11  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than  John 

17  ye  have  not  danced,  .ye  have  not  lamen. 
20  to  upbraid,  .because  they  repented  not 

2  thy  disciples  do  that  which  is  not  lawful 

3  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did,  when 

4  did  eat  the  showbread,  which  was  not  la. 

5  Or  have  ye  not  read  in  the  Law,  how  that 
7  what. . I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice 

7  ye  would  not  have  condemned  the  guiltl. 

19  He  shall  not  strive,  nor  cry ;  neither  shall 

20  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and 

.  20  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  till  he 

24  This  (fellow)  doth  not  cast  out  devils,  but 

25  every  city  or  house  divided,  .shall  notst. 

3 1  blasphemy . .  shall  not  be  forgiven  unto  m. 

32  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in 

5  upon  stony  places,  where  they  had  notm. 

1 1  it  is  given  unto  you . .  but  to  them  it  is  not 

12  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be 

13  they  seeing,  see  not ;  and  heariug,  they 
17  and  have  not  seen,  .and  have  not  heard 

21  Yet  hath  he  not  root  in  himself,  but  dur. 

34  without  a  parable'spake  he  [not]  unto  them 
55  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son?  is  not  his 

57  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  save  in 

58  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there,  be. 
4  said.  .It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her 

16  They  need  not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to  eat 

2  wash  not  their  hands  when  they  eat  bread 
11  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  de. 

13  which  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not  pla. 

,  20  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not 

23  he  answered  her  not  a  word.  Andhisdis. 

24  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of 

26  It  is  notmeet  to  take  the  children's  bread 

32  will  not  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they 

11  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  that 
11I  spake,  .not  to  you  concerning  bread,  that 

,  12  he  bade,  .not  beware  of  the  leaven  of  br. 

17  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  (it)  unto 

18  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against 

23  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of  God 

12  they  knew  him  not,  but  have  done  unto 

2 1  [this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer  and  ] 

24  said,  Doth  not  your  master  pay  tribute? 

14  Even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father 

22  I  saynotunto  thee,  Until  seven  times;  but 

30  he  would  not ;  but  went  and  cast  him  into 

33  Shouldest  not  thou  also  have  had  compa. 
~4  Have  ye  not  read,  that  he  which  made 

8  He  saith.  .from  the  beginning  it  was  not 

10  His  disciples  say.,  it  is  not  good  to  marry 

11  All.  .cannot  receive  this  saying,  save,  .to 
18  Jesus  said.  .Thou  shalt  not  commit  adul. 
iS  Thou  shalt  not  steal,  Thou  shalt  not  bear 

15  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will 

22  Jesus  answered  and  said,  Ye  know  not  w. 

23  to  sit  on  my  right  hand,  .is  not  mine  to 
26  it  shall  not  be  so  among  you :  but  whoso. 

28  Even  as  the  Son  of  roan  came  not  to  be 
21  ye  shallnot  only  do  this.,  to  the  fig  tree 

25  say.  .Why  did  ye  not  then  believe  him? 

29  He  answered  and  said,  I  will  not :  but  a. 

30  answered  and  said, I  (go),  sir;  and  went  not 
32  ye  believed  him  not.  .repented  [not]  aft. 

3  sent,  .to  call  them .  .and  they  would  not 

8  but  they  which  were  bidden  were  not  w. 

1 1  he  saw  there  a  man  which  had  not  on  a  w. 

16  for  thou  regardest  not  the  person  of  men 

17  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  unto  C,  or  not? 

31  have  ye  not  read  that  which  was  spoken 

32  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 

3  do.  .ye  after,  .for  they  say,  and  do  not 

4  but  they,  .will  not  move  them  with  one  of 
30  we  would  not  have  been  partakers  with 
37  would  I  have  gathered . .  and  ye  would  not 

2  See  ye  [not]  all  these  things?  Verily  I  say 
2r  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the 
29  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
39  knew  not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took 

42  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  come 

43  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  b. 

44  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of 
50  shall  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not 
50  and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of 

9  lest  there  be  [not]  enough  for  us  and  you 

12  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not 

24  thou  hast  not  sown,  and.  .thou  hast  not 

26  I  sowed  not,  and  gather  where  I  have  not 


NOT 


702 


NOTABLE 


Matt  25.  43  ye  took  me  not  in.  .ye  clothed  me  not 
25.  43  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me  not 
25.  44  in  prison,  and  did  nut  minister  unto  thee? 

25.  45  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  (it)  not  to  one  of  the 

26.  11  ye  have  the  poor,  .hut  me  ye  have  not  al. 
26.  24  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not 
26.  39  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  (wilt) 
26.  40  What!  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  h.? 
26.  42  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me 
26.  70  denied,  .saying,  I  know  not  what  thou  say. 
26.  72  agaiu  he  denied  with  an  oath,  I  do  not  k. 

26.  74  curse  and  to  swear. .  I  know  not  the  man 

27.  6  It  is  not  lawful  for  to  put  them  into  the 
27. 13  H^arest  thou  not  how  many  things  they 

27.  34  and  when  he  had  tasted . .  he  would  not  dr. 

28.  6  He  is  not  here ;  for  he  is  risen,  as  he  said 
[This  particle  occurs  in  all  about  1270  times.] 

23.  By  no  means,  in  no  xoise,  ovBa/xas  oudamos. 
Matt,  2.    6  art  not  the  least  among  the  princes  of  J. 

'2LX<>(  even,  ovde  oude. 

Matt  25.  45  Inasmuch  as  ye  did.  .ye  did  (it)  not  to  me 
Marki2.  10  have  ye  notread  this  scripture;  The  stone 
Lukei2.  27  [they  toil  not,  they  spin  not];  and  yet  I  say 

12.  27  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed 
23. 40  Dost  not  thou  fear  God,  seeing  thou  art  in 

John  1.    3  without  him  was  not  any  tiling  made  that 
1  Co.  4.    3  judged,  .yea,  I  judge  not  mine  own  self 
14.  21  for  all  that  will  they  not  hear  me,  saith 
Heb.   8.   4  if  he  were  on  earth  he  should  not  be  a  p. 
1  Jo.   2.  23  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  F. 

25. Not  even  one,  ovSels  oudeis. 

Luke  7.  28  there  is  not  a  greater  prophet  than  John 

26.  Not  even,  ovre  oute. 

Lukei2.  26  If  ye  then  be  not  able  to  do  that  thing  w. 

27.  No,  not,  oiix't-  ouchi. 

Matt.  5.  46  if  ye  love  them  which  love  you  .do  not  ev. 

5.  47  if  ye  salute  your  brethren,  .do  not  even 

6.  25  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  bo. 

10.  29  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing? 

12. 11  will  he  not  lay  hold  on  it,  and  lift  (it)  out? 

13.  27  didst  not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field  ? 
*3-  55  is  t^ot]  his  mother  called  Mary?  and  his 

13.  56  And  his  sisters,  are  they  not  all  with  us? 

18. 12  doth  he  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine,  and 
20.  13  didst  not  thou  agree  with  me  for  a  penny? 

Luke  6.  39  shall  they  not  both  fall  into  the  d.  1.  fo. 

12.  6  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God 

14.  28  which  of  you.  .sitteth  not  down  first,  and 

14.  31  Or  what  king,  .sitteth  not  down  first,  and 

15.  8  whatjwoman.  .doth  not  light  a  candle, and 
17.  8  will  not  rather  say  unto  him,  Make  ready 
17.  17  Were  there  [not]  ten  cleansed?  but  where 
22.  27  (is)  not  he  that  sittetli  at  meat  ?  but  I  am 
24.  26  Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  these  t. 
24.  32  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us,  while 

John  7.  42  Hath  [not]  the  scripture  said,  That  Christ 

11.  9  Are  there  not  twelve  hours  in  the  day  ?  If 

13.  10  Jesus  saith.  .and  ye  are  clean,  but  not  all 

13.  11  knew,  .therefore  said  he,  Ye  are  not  all  el. 

14.  22  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself  unto  us,  and  not 
Acts    5.    4  Whiles  it  remained,  was  it  not  thine  own? 

7.  50  Hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  things 
Horn.  2.  26  shall  [not]  his  uncircumcision  be  counted 

3.  29  (is  he)  not  also  of  the  Gentiles  ?  Yes.  of  the 

8.  32  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give 

1  Co.  1.  20  hath  not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of 

3.  3  divisions,  are  ye  [not]  carnal,  and  walk  as 
3.  4  and  another,  I  (am)  of  Apollos;  are  ye  [not] 
5.    2  ye  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  mo. 

5.  12  For.  .do  not  ye  judge  them  that  are  wit.? 

6.  1  before  the  unjust,  and  not  before  the  sa.? 
6.    7  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong,  .whydoyen. 

8.  10  shall  not  the  conscience  of  him  which  is 
g.    1  have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ? 

9.  8  Say  I  these  things .  .saith  [not]  the  law  the 
10.  16,  16  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the.  .Christ 
10. 18  are  [not]  they  which  eat  of  the  sacrifices 
10.  29  Conscience,  I  say,  not  thine  own,  but  of 

2  Co.  3.    8  How  shall  not  the  ministration  of  the  sp. 

10.  13 ;  1  Th.  2.  19 ;  Heb.  1,  14 ;  3.  17. 

23.//,  €*  ei,  Heb.  3.  11. 

[See  also  And,  after  that,  agreeing,  albeit,  also,  appear- 
ing, as,  ashamed,  believe,  believing,  brawler,  circum- 
cised, commodious,  doubtless,  equal,  even,  failing, 
hereafter,  hitherto,  if,  inhabited,  know,  knowledge,  no, 
now,  obey,  please,  possible,  put  under,  regard,  speak, 
surfer,  surely,  tempted,  than,  that,  then,  understand, 
whither,  worthy.] 

NOT  any  (man)  — 

I.EikI,  cassation,  none,  DSN  ephcs. 

2  Ki.  14.  26  not  any  shut  up,  nor  any  left,  nor  any  h. 

2.  Not,  "?3  bal. 

Isa.    26. 18  we  have  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in 
Z.Not  even  one,  fxi}h'els  medeis. 

Acts  10.  28  that  I  should  not  call  any  man  common 
$.X<./<rrrn  one,  ov$ els  oudeis,  Lu.20.  40;  Ac.  27.34 
NOT  a  whit  — 

Not  even  <»n\  ,u7j5e£s  medeis. 

2  Co.  1 1.    5  I  suppose  I  wasnota  whitbehind the  very 
NOT  .  any  more  — 
I. Not  wvy  more,  }xvk4ti  mekcti. 

Rom  14.  .3  Let  us  not.  .judge  ono  another  any  more 
2..\V  u,ri/  more,  no  more,  avKtrtoul-ti. 

Lukc22.  16  I  wflj  [not  any  more]  eat  thereof,  until  it 


NOT,  for  — 
Without,  n^?5  belo. 

Isa.    55.    2'ye  spend  money  for  (that  which  is)  not  b. 
55.    2  your  labour  for  (that  which)  satisfieth  not 

NOT,  of  — 

Of  [or  by)  not,  M  lelo. 

Isa.  65.    1 1  am  sought  of  (them  that)  asked  not  (for 
65.    1  I  am  found  of  (them  that)  sought  me  not 

NOT  as  yet  — 

Not  any  more,  no  more,  ovk4ti  oalceti  2  Co.  I.  23 

Not  yet,  ^^SeVw  medepo,  Heb.  n    7. 

NOT  at  all  — 

l.Not  even  one,  fxnBeis  medeis. 

2  Th.  3. 11  working  not  at  all,  but  are  busy  bodies 

2.  Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ov  yA\  ou  me. 

Rev.  21.  25  the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by 

S.Not  even  one,  ovdeis  oudeis. 

Gal.    4.  12  Brethren,  .ye  have  not  injured  me  at  all 

NOT  (can)  — 

l.Not  to  be  able,  to  be  unable,  ob  Bvuafiat  ou  duna. 
Matt.  5.  14  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid 

5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  bl. 

6.  24  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 

6.  27  Which  of  you . .  can  add  one  cubit  unto  his 

7.  18  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 

16.  3  but  can  ye  not.  .the  signs  of  the  times? 

17.  16  thy  disciples,  and  theycould  notcure  him 
17. 19  and  said,  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out? 

26.  53  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to 

27.  42  He  saved  others;  himself  he  cannot  save 
Mark  2. 19  as  long  as  they  have,  .with  them,  they  can. 

3.  24,  25  divided  against  itself,  that.. cannot st. 
3.  26  divided,  he  cannot  stand,  but  hath  an  end 

6.  19  would  have  killed  him ;  but  she  could  not 
7. 18  thing  from  without.. (it)cannot  defile  him 

7.  24  would  have  no  man  know.. but  he  could  not 
9.  28  asked.  .Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out? 

15.  31  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save 
Luke  1.  22  when  he  came  out,  he  could  not  speak  unto 

8.  19  and  could  not  come  at  him  for  the  press 

9.  40 1  besought  thy  disciples,  .they  could  not 

11.  7  he  from  within  shall  answer.  .1  cannot  r. 
14.  20  married  a  wife,  and  therefore  I  cannot  c. 
14. 26  hate  not  his  father,  .he  cannot  be  my  di. 
14.  27  doth  not  bear  his  cross,  .cannot  be  my  d. 

14.  33  that  forsaketh  not  all.,  he  cannot  bemyd. 

16.  13  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 

19.  3  could  not  for  the  press,  because  he  was 
John  3.    3  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see 

3.  5  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
7.    7  The  world  cannot  hate  you ;  but  me  it  h. 

7.  34,  36  and  where  I  am.  .ye  cannot  come 

8.  21  Then  said  Jesus,  .whither  I  go,  ye  cannot 
8.  22  because  he  saith,  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot 

8.  43  do  ye  not . .  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  w. 
10.  35  called,  .and  the  Scripture  cannot  be  bro. 

12.  39  Therefore  theycould  not  believe,  because 
13-  33  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come  ;  so  now  I 
13. 36  Whither  I  go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me 

13.  37  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  thee  now?  I  w. 
14. 17  the  spirit  of  truth ;  whom  the  world  can. 

15.  4  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself 

16.  12  have  yet  many  things,  .but  ye  cannot  bear 
Acts    4.  16  (is)  manifest  to  all.  .and  we  cannot  deny 

4.  20  we  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  we 

5.  39  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it 
13.  39  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by 

15.  1  Except  ye  be  circumcised,  .ye  cannot  be 
27.  31  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot 

Rom.  8.    8  So  then  they  that  are  in  the  fiesh  cannot 

1  Co.  3.    1 1,  brethren,  could  not  speak  unto  you  as 

10.  21  Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  and 
10.  21  ye  cannot  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table 
12.  21  the  eye  cannot  say  unto  the  hand,  I  have 

2  Co.  3.    7  so  that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  s. 

1  Ti.   5.  25  and  they  that  are  otherwise  cannotbe  hid 

2  Ti.  2. 13  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  him. 
Heb.  3.  19  So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in  b. 
Jas.  4.  2  ye  kill,  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot  ob. 
1  Jo.  3.  9  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God 
Rev.  2.    2  thou  canst  not  hear  them  which  are  evil 

2.  Not  to  be  able,  fx-f]  Svva/j.ai  me  dunamai. 

Mark  2.    4  when  they  could  not  come  nigh  unto  him 

3.  20  so  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  eat  br. 

Luke  5.  19  when  they  could  not  find  by  what  (way) 

16.  26  so  that  they  which  would  pass . .  cannot 

20.  7  they  answered,  That  they  could  not  tell 
Acts  21.  34  when  he  could  not  know  the  certainty  for 

27.  15  ship,  .could not  bear  up  into  the  wind,  we 
Heb.   4. 15  we  have  not  an  high  priest  which  cannot 

9.  9  that  could  not  make  him  that  did  the  se. 

S.It  is  not,  ovk  effTi  ouk  esti. 

Heb.  9.    s  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particula. 

A. Not  to  have  strength,  ovk  iVx^w  ouk  ischuo. 

Lukei6.    3  What  shall  I  do?.  .1  cannot  dig;  to  beg  I 
NOT  be,  (can)  — 
It  is  not  receivable,  ob  eVoVxeTcti  oil  endeclietai. 

Lukei3.  33  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  J. 
NOT  contain,  can  — 
Not  to  have  inward  strength,  ovk  iyKparevofxai. 

1  Co.  7.    9  But  if  they  cannot  contain,  let  them  ma. 


NOT  tell,  can  — 

Not  to  know,  ovk  oJSa  ouk  oida. 

Matt  21 .  27  And  they  answered  Jesus . .  We  cannot  tell 

Markn.  33  And  they,  .said  unto  Jesus,  We  cannot  t. 

Luke  20.    7  they  answered,  That  they  could  not  tell  w. 

John  3.    8  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and 

8. 14  ye  cannot  tell  whence  I  come,  and  whit. 

16.  18  They  said,  .we  cannot  tell  what  he  saith 

2  Co.  i2.    2  a  man . .  whether  in  the  body,  I  cannot  tell 

12.  2  or  whether  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell 

12.  3  whether,  .out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell 
NOT  even,  even... not  — 

Not  even,  ou5e'  oude. 

Matt  6.  29  That  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not 

1  Co.  11. 14  Doth  not  even  nature  itself  teach  you,  that 
NOT  henceforth,  henceforth... not  — 

Not  any  more,  ^k4tl  mekcti. 

Rom.  6.   6  that  henceforth  we  should  pot  serve  sin 

2  Co.   5. 15  they  whichlive  should  nothenceforth live 
Eph.   4. 17  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other  Ge. 

NOT  in  me  — 

Without,  save,  besides  me,  ^y55  bilade. 

Gen.  41. 16  Joseph  auswered Pharaoh. .(It  is)  not  in  me 
NOT... in  any  wise  — 
Assuredly  not,  not  at  all,  ov  fir)  ou  me. 

Marki4.  31  he  spake. .  I  will  not  deny  thee  in  any  wise 
NOT  now,  now... not  — 
Not  any  more,  no  more,  ovkcti  ouketi. 

John  4.  42  Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying 
21.   6  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the 

Rom  14.  15  grieved . .  now  walkest  thou  not  charitably 

Phm.      16  Not  now  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  servant 
NOT...  once  — 
Not  even,  fxnb*4  mede. 

Eph.   5.    3  let  it  nothe  once  named  among  you,  ash. 
NOT  out  of  — 
Without,  in  not,  not  in,  N^a  belo. 

Psa.  1 7.    1  prayer,  (that  go'eth)  not  out  of  feigned  lips 
NOT  so  — 
By  no  means,  in  no  ivise,  /xn^a/xcos  medamos. 

Acts  to.  14  Not  so,  Lord;  for  I  have  never  eaten  any 
11.   8  Not  so,  Lord :  for  nothing  common  or  un. 
NOT  so  much  as,  no  — 
l.Not  even,  fx-nBe  mede. 

Mark  2.   2  no  room,  .no,  not  so  much  as  about  the 
2.  Not  even,  &\h'  oi/54  all'  oude. 

Luke  6.    3  Have  ye  not  read  so  much  as  this,  what 

Acts  19.    j  We  have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether 

1  Co.  5.    1  as  is  not  so  much  as  named  among  the  G. 
NOT... yet  — 
l.Not  yet,  be/ore,  d~ib  terem. 

Exodio.    7  knowest  thou  not  yet  that  Egypt  is  dest.? 

1  Sa.  3.    7  Now  Samuel  did  not  yet  know  the  Lord 
'l.Not  even  yet,  fxrjSeTroo  medepo. 

Heb.  1 1.    7  warned  of  God  of  things  not  seen  as  yet 
S.Not  yet,  ix^ttqj  mepo. 

Rom.  9.  11  For  (the  children)  being  not  yet  born,  ne. 

Heb.  9.   8  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  m. 
4. Not  even  yet,  ovdewaj  oudepo. 

John  7.  39  because  that  Jesus  was  [not  yet]  glorified 
5. Not  yet,  otfirw  oupo. 

Matt  15. 17  Do  not  ye  [yet]  understand,  that  whatsoev. 
16.  9  Do  ye  not  yet  understand,  neither  reme. 
24.    6  must  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  yet 

Mark  8. 17  perceive  ye  not  yet,  neither  understand? 

13.  7  needs  be ;  but  the  end  (shall)  not  (be)  yet 
John  2.    4  Jesus  saith.  .mine  hour  is  not  yet  come 

3.  24  For  John  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison 
7.   6  My  time  is  not  yet  come :  but  your"  time  is 
7.    8  I  go  not  up  [yet],  .for  my  time  is  not  yet 
7.  30  laid  hands,  .because  his  hour  was  not  yet 

7.  39  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet.. because  that 

8.  20  laid  hands,  .for  his  hour  was  not  yet  come 
8.  57  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast 

11.  30  Now  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into  the  town 
20.  17  Touch  me  not;  fori  am  not  yet  ascended 

Heb.   2.    8  now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under 

12.  4  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood,  str. 
1  Jo.  3.  2  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be 
Rev.  17.  10  one  is.  .the  other  is  [not  yet]  come;  and 

NOT  to  be  — 

[See   Approached,  condemned,  repented    of,    spoken 

against.] 

NOTABLE  (one),  of  note  — 
1.  Vision,  sight,  mm  chazuth. 

Dan.  8.  5  the  goat  (had)  a  notable  horn  between  his 
8.    8  for  it  came  up  four  notable  ones,  toward 

"l.Knoivn,  knowable,  yvwar6s  gnostos. 

Acts   4.  16  for  that  indeed  a  notable  miracle  hath  b. 
3. Noted,  notable,  iwio~T)jj.os  episemos. 

Matt  27.  16  they  had  then  a  notable  prisoner,  called 

Rom  16.    7  who  are  of  note  among  the  apostles,  who 
4.  Very  manifest,  iintyavhs  epiphanes. 

Acts    2.  20  before  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the 
NOTE,  be  noted,  to  — 
l.To  grave,  decree,  write,  ppn  chaqaq. 

Isa.   30,   8  note  it  in  a  book,  that  it  may  he  for  the 


NOTE 


703 


NOW 


2,7*0  note  down,  note,  sign,  D?H  rasham. 

Dan.  10.  21  I  will  show  thee  that  which  is  noted  in 
3.  To  put  a  sign  on,  arj/J-etSai  semeioo. 

2  Th.  3. 14  note  that  man,  and  have  no  company  with 
NOTHING,  nothing  — 
1.  There  is  not,  there  are  not,  yM  ayin. 

Eccl.  3. 14  nothing  can  be  put  to  it,  nor  any  thing 
2,End,  cessation,  nothing,  D3^  ephes. 

Isa.   34.  12  They  shall  call,  .herprincesshallbenoth. 
41.  29  their  works  (are)  nothing :  their  molten 

3.  WifhovA  any  thing,  a  band,  cord,  rope,  ~C')5. 
Job    26.    7  stretcheth .  hangeth  the  earth  upon  noth. 

4.  Without,  save,  not,  'fib?  bilti. 

Isa.   44.  10  or  molten  a  graven  image. . profitable  forn. 
Amos  3.    4  cry  out  of  his  den  if  he  hath  taken  noth.? 

5. Ruin,  vacancy,  *nn  tohu. 

Job     6.  18  The  paths,  .are  turned  aside;  they  go  ton. 
6.  Not  a  thing,  tyi  k?  to  dabar. 

Gen.  19.    8  do  ye  to  them.,  only  unto  these  men  don. 

1  Sa.  20.    2  my  father  will  do  nothing,  either  great  or 

7. Not  any  {thing),  72  a.  lo  kol. 

Gen.  11.   6  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  them 
ProY.13.    7  There  is  that  maketb  himself  rich,  yet..n. 

8. Not  any  thing,  nwx?  vtb  lo  meurnah. 

Gen.  40.  15  here  also  have  I  done  nothing  that  they 
Judgi4_    6  he  rent  him.  .and.  .nothing  in  his  baud 
1  Sa.  25.  21  so  that  nothing  was  missed  of  all  that 
1  Ki.  10.  2 1  it  was  nothing  accounted  of  in  the  days  of 

18.  43  and  looked,  and  said,  (There  is)  notliing 
Eccl.  5.  14  he  beggeth  a  son,  and  (there  is)  nothing 

5.  15  shall  take  nothing  of  his  labour,  which  he 
7.  14  that  man  should  find  nothing  after  hiru 
Jer.  39. 10  of  the  poor  of  the  people  which  had  noth. 
9.Not  what,  na  bz  bal  mah. 

Prov.  9.  13  A  foolish  woman,  .knoweth  nothing 
10. Not,  fx-t)  me. 

Luke  7.  42  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly 
YL.lVot  anything,  yA\  rlmeti. 

Mark  S.    1  being  very  great,  and  having  notliing  to 

1  Co.   4.    5  Therefore  judge  notliing  before  the  time 

12.  Not  any  one,  fxyjdeis  viedeis. 

Matt27. 19  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  m. 
Mark  1.  44  See  thou  say  nothing  to  any  man :  but  go 

5.  26  was  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grew  w. 

6.  8  that  they  should  take  nothing  for.,  journey 
Luke  6.  35  do  good,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing  ag. 

9.  3  Take  nothing  for  (your)  journey,  neither 
Acts    4.  21  finding  nothing  how  they  might  punish  th. 

10.  20  Arise . .  and  go  with  them,  doubting  noth. 

11.  12  spirit  bade  me  go  with  them,  nothing  do. 

19.  36  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  ras. 
23. 14  will  eat  nothing  until  we  have  slain  Paul 
23.  29  to  have  nothing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy 
25.  25  had  committed  nothing  worthy  of  death 
27.  33  continued  fasting,  having  taken  nothing 

2  Co.  6.  10  as  having  nothing,  and.  .possessing  all  t. 

7.  9  ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  in  nothing 
Gal.  6.  3  think,  .to  be  something,  when  he  is  not. 
Phil.  1.  28  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries 

2.  3  (Let)  nothing  (be  done)  through  strife  or 

4.  6  Be  careful  for  nothing ;  but  in  every  thing 
1  Th.  4.  12  honestly,  .and.  .ye  may  have  lack  of  not. 
1  Ti.    5.  2 1  observe  these . .  doing  nothing  by  partial. 

6.  4  Heis proud,  knowing  nothing,  but  doting 
Titus  2.    8  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of 

3.  13  Bring,  .that  nothing  be  wanting  unto  t. 
Jas.     1.    4  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  not. 

1.    6  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  waveri. 

3  John     7  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles 

13.-i.Vb,  not,  ov  ou. 

Luke  8.  17  For  nothing  is  secret  that  shall  not  be 

11.  6  come,  .and  I  have  nothing  to  set  before  him 
1  Co.  9.  16  though  I  preach . .  I  have  nothing  to  glory 

11. Xot  any,  ov  tis  021  tis. 

Mattis.  32  they  continue,  .and  have  nothing  to  eat 
Mark  6.  36  buy.. bread:  [for  they  have  nothing  to  eat] 

8.  2  with  me  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to 

15.N"ot  any  word,  ov  irav  prjfxa  ou  f)an  rhema. 

Luke  1.  37  For  with  God  nothing  shall  be  impossible 
16tJ.Voi  even  any,  ov  Be'  tis  ou  de  tis. 

1  Ti.   6.    7  it  is)  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out 
17.  Not  even  one,  ovSeis  oitdeis. 

Matt.  5.  13  it  is  thenceforth  good  for  nothing,  but  to 

10.  26  there  is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be 
17.  20  and  nothing  shall  be  impossible  unto  you 
21.  19  found  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  only 
23. 16  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it  is  nothing 
23.  18  shall  swear  by  the  altar,  it  is  nothing ;  but 
26. 62  said  unto  him,  Answerest  thou  nothing? 
27.  12  when  he  was  accused,  .he  answered  not. 
27. 24  When  Pilate  saw  that  he  could  prevail  n. 

Hark  7.  15  There  is  nothing  from  without  a  man,  t. 
9. 29  This  kind  can  come  forth  by  nothing  but 

11.  13  when  he  came  to  it,  he  foundnothing  but 
14.  60  asked  Jesus,  saying,  Answerest  thou  not.? 

14.  61  But  he  held  his  peace,  and  answered  no. 

15.  3  accused  him.  .[but  he  answered  nothing] 
15.  4  Pilate  asked  him.  .Answerest  thou  noth.? 
15.    5  Jesus  yet  answered  nothing ;  so  that  Pilate 

Luke  4.    2  in  those  days  he  did  eat  nothing :  and  w. 

5.  5  we  have  toiled,  .and  have  taken  nothing 
10.  ig  and  nothing  shall  by  any  means  hurt  you 


-   Lukei2.    2  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be 

22.  35  lacked  ye  any  thing?  And  they  said,  No. 

23.  9  he  questioned,  .but  he  answered  him  no. 
23.  15  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  unto  him 
23.  41  but  this  man  hath  done  notliing  amiss 

[>an  3.  27  A  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be 
5.  19  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but  w. 

5.  30  I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  notliing :  as  I  h. 

6.  63  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing:  thewordsthat 

7.  26  he  speaketh  boldly,  and  they  say  nothing 

8.  28  shall  ye  know,  .(that)  I  do  nothing  of  mys. 

8.  54  If  I  honour  myself,  my  honour  is  nothing 

9.  33  this  man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do  n. 

12.  19  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  notlung?  beh. 

14.  30 prince,  .cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me 

15.  5  branches,  .without  me  ye  can  do  nothing 

16.  23  Aud  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing 

16.  24  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  n. 
iS.  20  Jesus  answered,  .in  secret  have  I  said  n. 
21.    3  They  went,  .and  that  night  they  caught  n. 

Acts   4.  14  beholding  the  man.  .they  could  say  noth. 

17.  21  spent  their  time  in  notliing  else,  but  eit. 

20.  20  how  I  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profit. 

21.  24  all  may  know  that  those  things,  .are  noth. 
26.  31  This  man  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death 
28.  17  though  I  have  committed  nothing  against 

Bom  14.  14  that  (there  is)  nothing  unclean  of  itself 

1  Co.   4.    4  For  I  know  nothing  by  myself ;  yet  am  I 

7. 19  Circumcision  is  n. . .  uncircumcision  is  no. 
8.  2  he  knoweth  [nothing]  yet  as  he  ought  to 
8.   4  we  know  that  an  idol  (is)  nothing  in  the 

13.  3  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  nothing 

2  Co.  12.  11  in  nothing  am  I  behind,  .though  I  be  no. 
Gal.     2.    6  for  they  who  seemed,  .added  nothing  to 

4.  1  differeth  nothing  from  a  servant,  though 

5.  2  if . .  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit  you  n. 
Phil.  1.  20  hope,  that  in  notliing  I  shall  be  ashamed 
1  Ti.   4.   4  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  w. 

6.  7  For  we  brought  nothing  into  (this)  world 
Titus  1. 15  unto  them  that  are  defiled,  .(is)  nothing 
Phm.  14  But  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing 
Heb.   2.    8  ;  7.  14  ;  7.  19  ;  Rev.  3.  17. 

IB. Nothing,  ov$4v  outhen,  I  Co.  13.  2. 

19. Not  even,  ovre  oute. 

John  4. 11  Sir,  thou  hast  nothing  to  draw  with,  and 
NOTHING. . .  at  any  time,  at  all  — 
Any  thing  not  even  at  any  time,  Trav...ovB4irore. 

Acts  11.  8  [nothing]  common  or  unclean  hath  at  any  t. 
Not  a  thing,  obtc  ov$4u  ouk  outhen,  Jo.  11.  49. 
NOTHING,  as  — 
No,  nothing,  nb  lah. 

Dan.   4.  35  all  the  inhabitants,  .(are) reputed  as  not. 
NOTHING,  to  bring  to  — 
1.7b  make  few,  little,  ayo  maat,  5. 

Jer.    10. 24  in  thine  anger,  lest  thou  bring  me  to  no. 
2.7b  put  away  or  aside,  aOereaj  atheteo. 

1  Co.  1.  19  will  bring  to  nothing  the  understanding 
NOTHING  but  — 

Only,  pr\  raq. 

Gen.  26.  29  we  have  done  un,tothee  nothing  but  good 
NOTHING,  (for)  — 
Gratis,  free,  for  nought,  D3n  chinnam. 

Exodzi.   2  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  free  for  noth. 

2  Sa.  24.  24  offer,  .that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing 

NOTHING  worth  — 
For  nothing,  bxh  leal. 

Job  24.  25  who  will,  .make  my  speech  nothing  wo.? 
NOTICE,  to  take  — 
7b  discern,  133  nakar,  5. 

2  Sa.   3.  36  all  the  people  took  notice,  .and  it  pleased 
NOTICE  before,  to  have  — 
7b  tell  or  announce  beforehand,  irpoKaTayyiWw. 

2  Co.  9.    5  your  bounty,  whereof  [ye  had  notice  bef.] 

NOTWITHSTANDING  — 
I.  Only,  T]X  ak. 

Esod2i.  21  Notwithstanding,  if  he  continue  a  day  or 

2.And  only,  3*0  vedk. 

Josh  22.  ig  Notwithstanding,  if  the  land  of  your  po. 
3. End,  cessation,  nothing,  dsx  ephes. 

Judg.  4.    9  notwithstanding  the  journey  that  thou 

4.  Only,  pi  raq. 

2  Ch.  6    9  Notwithstanding  thou  shaltnot  build  the 
5. But,  a\\d  alia. 

Rev.   2.  20  Notwithstanding  I  have  a  few  things  ag. 

6. But  yet,  irX^vplen. 

Luke  10.  11  notwithstanding,  be  ye  sure  of  this,  that 

10.  20  Notwithstanding  in  this  rejoice  not,  that 

Phil.    1.  iS  notwithstanding,  every  way,  whether  in 

4.  14  Notwithstanding  ye  have  done  well  that 

NOUGHT  — 

1.  Vanity,  jix  aven. 

Amos  5.    5  seek  not  Beth-el.  .Beth-el  shall  come  ton. 

2.  Ruin,  vacancy,  *nn  tohu. 

Isa.   49.    4  I  have  spent  my  strength  fornought,  and 
Z.Not  anything,  nsiND  nb  lo  meurnah. 

Deuti3.  17  there  shall  cleave  nought  of  the  cursed 
4.  Confutation.fullcanviction,a.ireA<:yfi6s  apelegmos. 

Acts  19.  27  our  craft  is  in  danger  to  be  set  at  nought 


5. Not  even  one,  ovSeis  oudeis. 

Acts    5.  36  all.. were  scattered,  and  brought  to  noug. 
NOUGHT,  for  — 
1. Gratis,  for  nought,  Dan  chinnam. 

Gen.  29. 15  shouldest  thou  therefore  serve  me  for  n.? 

Job      1.    9  and  said,  Doth  Job  rear  God  for  nought  ? 

22.  6  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  brother  for  noa. 
Isa.   52.    3  Ye  have  sold  yourselves  for  nought;  and 

52.    5  that  my  people  is  taken  away  for  nought? 
Mai.    1.  10  do  ye  kindle  (tire)  on  mine  altar  for  nou. 

2.  Without  wealth  or  substance,  fin  nbi  belo  hon. 

Psa.  44.  12  Thou  sellest  thy  people  for  nought,  and 
3. Freely,  without  payment,  Scopedv  dorean. 

2  Th.    3.    8  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for  n. 
NOUGHT,  (thing)  of — 
1. Nought,  nothing,  i'3X  epha. 

Isa.  41.  24  ye  (are)  of  nothing,  and  your  work  of  uq 
2. End,  cessation,  nothing,  dsn  ejihes. 

Isa.  41.  12  shall  be  as  nothing,  and  as  a  thing  of  no 
3. At  nothing,  "nn  vhh  lelo  dabar. 

"  Amos    6.  13  Ye  whichrejoice  in  athingof  nought,  w. 
4. Ruin,  vacancy,  inn  tohu. 

Isa.   29.  21  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought 
NOUGHT,  to  bring  or  come  to  — 
1.  To  fade  or  wear  away,  biz  nabel. 

Job  14.  iS  surely  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  n 
2.7b  make  void,  -\>B  p>ur,  5. 

Psa.  33.  10  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  ton. 
3.7b  break  off,  make  void,  ~ns  parar,  5. 

Neh.  4.  15  God  had  brought  their  counsel  to  nought 
4.7*0  be  broken,  made  void,  ~ns  parar,  6. 

Isa.     8.  10  Take  counsel.,  and  it  shall  come  to  nought 

5.  To  cut  off,  lay  waste,  destroy,  nay  sJiamad,  5. 

Deut2S.  63  destroy  you,  and  to  bring  you  to  nought 

6.  7*0  desolate,  lay  waste,  ipvfiSa}  eremoo. 

Rev.  iS.  17  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to  n. 

7.  To  make  useless,  without  effect,  Karapy4(o  katar. 

1  Co.    1.  28  things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought 

2.    6  princes  of  this  world,  that  come  to  nought 
S.Tb  loose  down,  KaraKvta  kalaluo. 

Acts  5.  38  if. .this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  cometo  no. 
NOUGHT,  to  be  brought  to  — 
7b  cease,  fail,  have  an  end,  dsn  aphes. 

Isa.   29.  20  For  the  terrible  one  is  brought  to  nought 
NOUGHT,  to  set  at  — 
7b  free,  make  void,  refuse,  y~l3  para. 

Prov.  1.  25  But  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel 
NOUGHT,  to  — 
There  is  not,  there  are  not,  }:n  ayin. 

Job     8.  22  place  of  the  wicked  shall  come  to  nought 
NOURISH  (up  in),  to  — 
1.7b  make  great,  magnify,  bring  up,  b^  gadal,  3. 

Isa.     1.    2  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children 

23.  4  neither  do  I  nourish  up  young  men,  (nor) 
44.  14  planteth  an  ash,  and  the  rain  doth  nour. 

Dan.    1.    5  sonourishing  them  three  years,  thatatthe 

2.7*0  keep  living  or  alive,  n;n  chayah,  3. 

2  Sa.  12.    3  which  he  had  bought  and  nourished  up 
Isa.     7.  21  shaU  nourish  a  young  cow  and  two  sheep 

3.  To  provide,  nourish,  sustain,  b\3  kul,  3a. 
Gen.  45. 11  And  there  will  I  nourish  thee  ;  for  yet 

47.  12  Joseph  nourished  his  father,  and  his  bre. 

50.  21  I  will  nourish  you,  and  your  little  ones 
Ruth  4.  15  he  shall  be.  .a  nourisher  of  thine  old  age 

4.7b  multiply,  nourish,  nrn  rabah,  3. 

Eze.  19.    2  she  nourished  her  whelps  among  young 

5.  To  nourish  or  bring  up,  ai/arpetyco  anatrepho. 

Acts    7.  20  nourished  up  in  his  father's  house  three 
7.  21  took  him  up,  and  nourished  him  for  her 

6.  7b  nourish  much,  iKrp€<p(o  ektrepho. 

Eph.  5.  29  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the 
7.7b  be  nourished  in,  ivrp4<pofj.at  entrephomai. 

1  Ti.  4.  6  nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of 
S.To  nourish,  rpztpw  trepho. 

Acts  12.  20  because  their  country  was  nourished  by 
Jas.  5.  5  ye  have  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day 
Rev.  12. 14  where  she  is  nourishedfor  a  time,  and  t. 

NOURISHMENT  ministered,  to  have  — 

7b  supply  besides,  i-jrtxopriyea)  epichoregeo. 

Col.    2. 19  having  nourishment  ministered,  and  knit 
NOVICE  — 
One  newly  planted,  ve6<pvTOs  neophtdos. 

1  Ti.  3.  6  Not  a  novice,  lest  being  lifted  up  with'p. 
NOW  — 

l.Then,  jn«  cdayin. 

Ezra  4.  23  Now  when  the  copy  of  king  Artaxerxes* 
2.  Then,  7X  az. 

Josh.22'31  now  ye  have  delivered  the  children  of  I. 
3. Here,  now,  kibn,  iax  epho. 

Gen.  27.  37  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  son? 
43.  11  father  Israel  said  unto  them,  If.  .so  now 

Judg.  9.  38  Where  (is)now  thy  inouth,  wherewith  thou 

2  Ki.io.  10  Enow  now  that  there  shall  fall  unto  the 
Job  17. 15  where  (is)  now  my  hope  ?  as  for  my  hope 


NOW 


70-1 


NUMBER 


Job.  19.   6  Know  now  that,  God  hath  overthrown  me 

19.  23  Oh  that  ray  words  were  now  written !  Oh 

24.  25  And  if.  .not  (so)  now,  who  will  make  me 

Prow  6.    3  Do  this  now,  my  son,  and  deliver  thyself 

Isa.  22.    1  What  aileth  thee  now,  that  thou  art  wh. 

i.  If rre,  hither,  then,  rrjri  hennah. 

Numi4.  19  hast  forgiven  this  people,  even  until  now 
o.This,  ni  zeh. 

2  Ki.    1.    5  said  unto  them,  Why  are  ye  now  turned 

*5.  To  day,  D'vg  kayyom. 

Deut3i.  21  even  now,  before  I  have  brought  them  into 
1  Sa.  9.    9  for  (lie  that  is)  now  (called)  a  prophet  was 
N'eh.  1.    6  I  pray  before  thee  now,  day  and  night 
Jer.  34.  15  ye  were  now  turned,  and  had  done  right 

7. Already,  now,  -135  kebar. 

Keel.  3.  15  That  which  hath  been  is  now  ;  and  that 
9.    6  their  hatred,  and  their  envy,  is  now  per. 
9.   7  Go  thyway..Godnowaccepteththy  works 
8. Became ,  \3  M. 

Josh.  5.    5  Now  all  the  people  that  came  out  were 

9. Now,  ]U~>  kean, 

Ezra  4.  13  Be  it  known  now  unto  the  king,  that  if" 
4.  14  Now  because  we  have  maintenance  from 

4.  21  Giveyenowcommandmentto  cause  these 

5.  16  since  that  time  even  until  now  hath  it 

6.  6  Now.  .Tatnai,  governor  beyond  the  river 
Dan.   2.  23  hast  made  known  unto  me  now  what  we 

3.  15  Now  if  ye  be  ready  that  at  what  time  ye 

4.  37  Now  I  Nebuchadnezzar  praise  and  extol 

5.  12  now  let  Daniel  be  called,  and  he  will  show 
5. 15  now  tlie  wise  (men),  the  astrologers,  have 

5.  16  now  if  thou  canst  read  the  writing,  and 

6.  8  Now,  0  king,  establish  the  decree,  and  si. 

10. Pray,  please  now,  NJ  na. 

Gen.  12.  11  Behold  now',  I  know  that  thou  (art)  a  fair 

ILNow,  n$y  attah. 

Gen.  22.  12  now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing 
26.  22  now  the  Lord  hath  made  room  for  us,  and 
26.  29  thou  (art)  now  the  blessed  of  the  Lord 

VI.  A  stejj,  time,  Dy?  paam. 

Gen.   2.  23  This  (is)  now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh 

29.  35  and  she  said,  Now  will  I  praise  the  Lord 

30.  20  now  will  ray  husband  dwell  with  me,  bee. 
46.  30  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face 

Prov.  7.  12  Now  (is  she)  without,  now  in  the  streets 

lZ.Xow,  at  present,  apri  art/. 

Matt.  3.  15  Jesus  answering,  .unto  him.  Suffer,  .now 
11.  12  from  the  days  of  J.  the  Baptist  until  now 
26.  53  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to 
John  2.  10  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now 
9.  19  boru  blind  ?  how  then  doth  he  now  see  ? 
9. 25  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I 
13.    7  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but 
13.  19  Now  I  tell  you  before  it  come,  that,  when 
13.  33  as  I  said  unto  the  Jews,  .so  now  I  say  to 
13.  37  Why  cannot  I  follow  thee  now  ?    I  will 
16.  12  things  to  say.  .ye  cannot  bear  them  now 
16.  31  Jesus  answered  them,  Do  ye  now  believe? 
1  C0.13.  12  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly 

13.  12  now  I  know  in  part;  but  then  shall  I  know 
16.    7  For  I  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  way;  but 

Gal.  1.  9  As  we  said  before,  so  say  I  now  again,  If 
1.  10  For  do  I  now  persuade  men,  or  God?  or 
4.  20  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you  now,  and 

1  Th.  3.    6  But  now  when  Timotheus  came  from  you 

2  Th.  2.    7  oulyhe  who  now  letteth( will  let),  until  he 
1  Pe.  1.    6 'though  now  for  a  season,  if  need  be,  ye  are 

1.  8  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  (him)  not,  yet 
1  Jo.  2.  9.  He  that.,  hateth..  is  in  darkness,  .until  now 
Rev.  12. 10  Now  is  come  salvation,  and  strength,  and 

14.  But,  now,  end,  further  84  de. 

Matt   1.  22  Now  all  this  was  done  that  it  might  be 
\See  also  John  5.  25;  6.  10;  19.  23;  Acts  27.  9;  Rom.  15. 
8  ;  1  Cor.  10.  11 ;  25.  50;  Gal.  1.  20;  4.  1,  &c] 

15. Truly,  certainly,  there/ore,  57)  de. 

Luke  2.  15  Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and 
\Q.  Still,  yet,  hitherto,  eri  eti. 

John2i.    6  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the 

Romi4-  15  if  thy  brother  be  grieved,  .now  walkest 
1". Xow,  already,  tjStj  ede. 

Matt.  3.  10  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root  of 

14.  15  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  the  time  is  now 

14.  24  the  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

15.  32  because  they  continue  with  rae  now  three 
Mark  4.  37  beat  into  the  ship,  so  that  it  was  now  full 

6.  35  And  when  the  day  was  now  far  spent,  his 

6.  35  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  now  the  time 
8.    2  because  they  have  now  been  with  me  three 

11.  it  now  the  eventide  was  come,  he  went  out 
15.  42  now  when  the  even  was  come,  because  it 
Luke  3.    9  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root  of 

7.  6  when  he  was  now  not  far  from  the  house 
ii,    7  Trouble  me  not:  the  door  is  now  shut,  and 

14.  17  tosay..Come;  forall  things  are  now  ready 
21.  30  When  they  now  shoot  forth,  ye  see  and 
21.  30  and  know,  .that  summer  is  now  nigh  at  h. 

John  4.  51  as  he  was  now  going  down,  hi-  servants 

5.  6  knew  that  he  had  been  now  a  long  time 

6.  17  it  was  now  dark,  and  Jesus  was  not  come 

7.  14  Now  about  the  midst  of  the  feast,  Jesus 
13.    2  the  devil  having  now  put  intothe  heart  of 

15.  3  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which 
19.  28  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now 
21.  4  when  the  morning  was  now  come,  Jesus 
21.  14  This  is  now  the  third  time  that  Jesus  show. 


Acts  4.  3  and  put.,  in  hold,  .for  it  was  now  eventide 
27.    9  when  sailing  was  now  dangerous,  because 

Rom.  1.  10  if  by  any  means  now  at  length  I  might  h. 
4.  19  he  considered  not  his  own  body  [now]  d. 
13.  11  now  (it  is)  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep 

1  Co.  4.    8  Now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  rich,  ye  have 

6.    7  Now  therefore  there  is  utterly  a  fault  am. 
Phil.  4.  10  that  now  at  the  lastyour  care  of  me  hath 

2  Ti.  4.  6  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time 
2  Pe.  3.  1  This  second  epistle,  beloved,  I  now  write 
1  Jo.  2.    8  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  s. 

18.  As  to  the  rest,  henceforth,  to  \onrbv  to  loipon. 
Matt 26.  45  Sleep  on  now,  and  take,  .rest,  behold,  the 
Marki4.  41  Sleep  on  now,  and  take,  .rest:  it  is  enough 
19. 1V010,  iw  nun. 

Matt  26.  65  behold,  now  ye  have  heard  his  blasphemy 
27.  42  let  himnowcome  down  from  the  cross, and 
27.  43  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have 
Markio.  30  he  shall  receive  an  hundred  fold  now  in 

15.  32  Let  Christ  the  king  of  Israel  descend  now 
Luke  2.  29  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  p. 

6.  21  Blessed  (are  ye)  that  hunger  now  :  for  ye 
6.  21  Blessed  (are  ye)  that  weep  now :  for  ye  sh. 

6.  25  Woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now !  for  ye  sh. 
11.  39  Now  do  ye  Pharisees  make  cleaD  the  out. 

16.  25  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  torm. 

19.  42  If  thou  hadst  known,  .but  now  they  are 
22.  36  But  now,  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him  t. 

John  2.    8  Draw  out  now,  and  bearunto  the  governor 
4.  18  he  whom  thou  now  hast  is  not  thy  husband 

4.  23  the  hour  coraeth,  and  now  is,  when  the 

5.  25  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the 
8.  40  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that 

8.  52  said . .  Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  de. 

9.  21  by  what  means  he  nowseeth,  we  know  not 
9. 41  now  ye  say,  We  see  ;  therefore  your  siu  re. 

11.  22  But  I  know,  that  even  now,  whatsoever 

12.  27  Now  is  my  soul  troubled  ;  and  what  shall 

12.  31  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world  :  now 

13.  31  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and  God 

13.  36  Whither  I  go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me 

14.  29  now  I  have  told  you  before  it  come  to  p. 

15.  22  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin 

15.  24  now  have  they  both  seen  and  hated  both 

16.  5  But  now  I  go  my  way  to  him  that  sent  me 
16.  22  ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow ;  but  I  will 
16.  29  now  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speakest 
16.  30  Now  are  we  sure  that  thou  knowest  all 

16.  32  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  [now]  c. 

17.  s  now,  O  Father,  glorifiy  thou  me  with  th. 

17.  7  Now  they  have  known  that  all  things  w. 
17. 13  now  come  I  to  thee;  and  these  things  I 

18.  36  but  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from  hence 

21.  10  Bring  of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  cau. 
Acts    2.  33  he  hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  [now] 

3.  17  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  igno. 

7.  4  removed  him  into  this  laud,  wherein  yen. 
7.  34  And  now  come,  I  will  send  thee  into  E. 

7.  52  of  whom  ye  have  been  now  the  betrayers 

10.  5  And  now  send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for 

10.  33  Now  therefore  are  we  all  here  present  b. 

12.  11  Now  I  know  of  a  surety,  that  the  Lord 
13. 11  now,  behold,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (is)  u. 

15.  10  Now  therefore  why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put 

16.  36  sent,  .now  therefore  depart,  and  go  in  p. 
16.  37  now  do  they  thrust  us  out  privily?  nay 

20.  22  now,  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto 
20.  25  now,  behold,  I  know  that  ye  all,  among 

22.  1  fathers,  hear  ye  my  defence  .now  unto  you 
22. 16  now  why  tamest  thou  ?  arise,  and  be  bab. 

23.  15  Now  therefore~ye  with  the  council  signi. 

23.  21  now  are  they  ready,  lookingfor  a  promise 

24.  13  cantheyprovethethings whereof they[n.] 
26.  6  now  I  stand  and  am  judged  for  the  hope 
26.  17  the  Gentiles,  uuto  whom  [now]  I  send  thee 

Rom.  3.21  But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  without 

5.  9  being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall 
5. 1 1  by  whom  we  have  now  received  the  aton. 

6.  19  now  yield  your  members  servants  to  right. 

6.  21  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed? 

8.  1  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
8.  22  and  travaileth  in^pain  together  until  now 

11.  30  have  now  obtained  mercy  through  their 

11.  31  Even  so  hav«  these  also  now  not  believed 

13.  11  now(is)oursalvationnearerthan'wlien  we 
16  26  But  now  is  made  manifest,  and  by  the  Sc. 

1  Co.  3.    2  ye  were  not  able,  .neither  yet  now  are  ye 

7.  14  else  were  your  children  unclean  ;  but  now 

12.  20  But  now.  .many  members,  yet  but  oueb. 

2  Co.  5.  16  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  (him)  no  m. 

6.  2  now  (is)  the  accepted  time,  .now  (is)  thed. 

7.  9  Now  I  rejoice,  not  that  ye  were  made  so. 

13.  e  being  absent  now  I  write  to  them  which 
Gal.     t.  23  now  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he  d. 

2.  20  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  1. 

3.  3  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now 

4.  9  But  now,  after  that  ye  have  known  God 
4. 25  answereth  to  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and 

4.  29  as  then  he.  .persecuted  him.  .so.  .now 
Eph.   2.    2  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  child. 

3.  5  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apost. 
3. 10  To  the  iutent  that  now,  unto  the  princi. 

5.  8  For  ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now 
Phil.    1.    5  in  the  gospel  from  the  first  day  until  uo»v 

1.  20  now  also  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my 

1.  30  ye  saw  in  me,  (and)  now  hear  (to  be)  in 

2.  12  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence,  work 

3.  18  Ihavetoldyouofteu,andnowtell youeven 
Col.     1.  24  Who  now  rejoice  in  ray  sufferings  foryou 
r  Th.  3.    8  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord 
2  Th.  2.    6  now  ye  know  what  withholdeth,  that  he 


1  Ti,    4.    8  having  promise  of  the  life  thatnowis,  and 

2  Ti.    1.  10  But  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  appear. 
Heb.   2.    8  But  now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  un. 

9.  5  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particula. 
9.  24  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for 
9.  26  but  [now]  once,  in  the  end  of  the  world 
12.  26  but  now  he  hath  promised,  saying,  Yet 
Jas.  4.  13  Go  to  now,  ye  that  say,  To  day,  or  to  mo. 
4. 16  But  now  ye  rejoice  in  your  boastings :  all 
5.    1  Go  to  now.  .rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for 

1  Pe.   1.  12  theydidmiuisterthethingswhichareuow 

2.  10  (are)now  the  people  of  God.  .but  now  h. 
2. 25  but  are  now  returned  unto  the  shepherd 

3.  21  whereunto.  .baptism  doth  also  now  save 

2  Pe.  3.    7  the  heavens  and  the  earth  which  are  now 

3.  18  To  him  (be)  glory  both  now  and  for  ever 

1  Jo.  2.  18  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists,  wh. 

2. 28  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  him 

3.  2  Beloved,  now  are  we  thesons  of  God ;  and 

4.  3  and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world 

2  John     5  And  now  I  beseech  thee,  lady,  not  as  th. 
Jude     25  (be) glory  and  majesty . .  both  now  and  ever 

20.  The  noio,  the  present  things,  ra  vuv  ta  nun. 
Acts    4.  29  And  now.  Lord,  behold  theirtlu^eatemngs 

5.  38  And  now  I  say  unto  you,  Refrain  from  th. 

20.  32  And  now.  brethren,  I  commend  you  to  G. 
27.  22  And  now  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  che. 

'2\.Xow,  at  this  moment,  yiivi  rami. 

Rom.  6.  22  But  now  being  made  free  from  sin,  and 
7.   6  But  now  we  are  delivered  from  the  law 

7.  17  Now  then  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but 
15. 23  But  now  having  no  mure  place  in  these 
15.  25  But  now  I  go  unto  Jerusalem  to  minister 

1  Co.  5.  1 1  But  now  I  have  written  unto  you  not  to 

12.  18  But  now  hath  God  set  tire  members  every 

13.  13  Andnowabideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  th. 

14.  0  Now,  brethren,  if  I  come  unto  you  spea. 

15.  20  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead 

2  Co.  8. 11  Now  therefore  perform  the  doing,  .that 

8.  22  but  now  much  more  diligent,  upon  the 
Eph.  2.  13  But  now  in  Christ  Jesus  ye  who  soraeti. 
Col.     1.  21  you,  that  were,  alienated,  .now  hath  he 

1.  26  the  mystery  which. .now  is  made  manifest 
3.    8  But  now  ye  also  put  off  all  these  ;  anger 
Phm.        9  and  now  also  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ 

11  but  now  profitable  to  thee  and  to  me 
Heb.  8.    6  But  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excell. 
11.  16  But  [now]  they  desire  a  better . .  that  is,  an 

2'2.  Therefore,  then,  now,  ovv  own. 

Marki2.  20  [Now]  there  were  seven  brethren  :  and  the 

Lukeio.  36  Which  [now]  of  these  three,  thinkest  thou 

Johni6.  19  [Now]  Jesus  knew  that  they  weredesirous 

19.  29  [Now]  there  was  set  a  vessel  full  of  vine 

21.  7  Now  when  Simon  Peter  heard  that  it  was 
Acts    1.  18  Now  this  man  purchased  a  field  with  the 

11. 19  Now  they  which  were  scattered  abroad 
25.    1  Now  when  Festus  was  come,  1  Co.  9.  25. 
2^. And,  teat  kit,   I  Co.  4.  7. 
NOW  already  — 
Even  now  or  already,  kcl\  tfdw  kai  ede. 

Acts  27.   9  because  the  fast  was  now  already  past,  P. 
NOW... not,  or  no  more — 
Not  any  ncre,  no  more,  ovkcti  ouketi. 

John  4.  42  Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  say. 

17.  11  And  now  I  am  no  more  in  the  world,  but 

21.    6  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the 

Rora  14.  15  be  grieved,  .now  walkest  thou  not  charit. 

Phm.       16  Not  now  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  servant 

NOW  then,  or  henceforth  — 
Therefore,  then,  now,  otiv  oun. 

2  Co.  5.  20  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  2  Co.  =  ."16. 
NOW,  seeing  that  which  — 
Already,  now,  "a?  kebar. 

Eccl.  2. 16  seeing  that  which  now  (is),  in  the  days  to 
NUMBER. — 
1. Search,  searching,  -\pn  cheqer. 

Job  34.  24  break  in  pieces  mighty  men  without  num. 
2.Xumber,  amount,  HD3D  miksah. 

Exodi2.   4  take..accorilingtothenuinberof  thesouls 
S.Meni,  goddess  of  fate,  'J?  meni. 

Isa.   65.  11  furnish  the  drink  offering  unto  that  num. 
i.ITumber,  j;;p  minyan. 

Ezra   6. 17  according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes  of 
5.Xumber,  narration,  reckoning,  ispo  mispar. 

Gen.  34.  30  few  in  number,  they  shall  gather  thems. 
41 .  49  he  left  numbering ;  for(it  was)  without  n. 

ExodxS.  16  an  omer  for  every  man.,  the  number  of  y 
23.  26  barren.,  the  number  of  thy  days  I  willful 

Lev.  25.  15,  15  According  to  the  number  of  years 

25.  16  to  the  number,  .of  the  fruits  doth  he  sell 

25.  50  shall  be  according  uuto  the  number  of  y. 
>  urn.  1.    2  with  the  number  of.  .names,  every  male 

1.  18  according  to  the  number  of  the  names 
So  in  v.  20,  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42. 

3.  22,  34  according  to  the  number  of  all  the  111. 
3.  28  In  the  number  of  all  the  males,  from  a  m. 
3.  40  Lord  said . .  take  the  number  of  their  na. 
3.  43  all  the  first  born  males  by  the  number  of 
14.  29  according  to  your  whole  number,  from  t. 

14.  34  After  the  number  of  the  days  in  which  ye 

15.  12  According  to  the  number  that  ye  shall  pr. 
15.  12  doto  everyone  according  to  theirnumber 
23. 10  and  the  number  of  the  fourth . .  of  Israel 

26.  53  divided,  .according  to  the  number  of  na. 


NUMBER 


705 


NURSE 


NHQI29. 

Deut.  4. 
32- 

Josh   4. 

Judg.  6. 
7- 
7- 


Neh. 
Esth. 
Job 


Eze. 


Dan. 
Hos. 
Joel 


18,  21,  24,  27,  30,  33,  37  according  to  their  n. 

36  the  half,  .was  in  number  three  hundred 
27  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number  among  the 

8  according  to  the  number  of  the  children 
5,  S  according  unto  the  number  of  the  tribes 

5  they  and  their  camels  were  without  num. 

6  the  number  of  them  thatlapped,  (putting) 
12  their  camels  (were)  without  number,  as 
23  and  took,  .wives,  according  to  their  num. 

a,   6.   4  the  number  of  the  lords  of  the  Philistines 
6. 18  the  number  of  all  the  cities  of  the  Philis. 

15  Then  there  arose  and  went  over  by  numb. 
20  every  foot  six  toes,  four  and  twenty  in  n. 

2  that  I  may  know  the  number  of  the  peo. 
31  according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes  of 

2  whose  number  (was)  in  the  days  of  David 
40  the  number  throughout  the  genealogy  of 
11  this  (is)  the  number  of  the  mighty  men 

23  these  (are)  the  numbers  of  the  bands . .  rea. 

2  biing  the  number  of  them  to  me,  that  I 
5  Joab  gave  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the 

16  Of  the  gold,  .and  the  iron,  .no  number 

3  their  number  by  their  polls,  man  by  man 

24  as  they  were  counted  by  number  of  names 

31  by  number,  according  to  the  order  com. 
1  the  number  of  the  workmen  according  to 

7  So  the  number  of  them,  with  their  breth. 

1  Now  the  children  of  Israel  after  their  n. 

23  David  took  not  the  number  of  them  from 

24  neither  was  the  number  put  in  the  acco. 

3  the  people  (were)  without  number  that  c. 

1 1  according  to  the  number  of  their  account 

12  The  whole  number  of  the  chief  of  the  fa. 

32  the  number  of  the  burnt  offerings,  which 
7  to  the  number  of  thirty  thousand,  and  th. 

9  this  (is)  the  number  of  them  :  thirty  cha. 

2  The  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of 

4  the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  number,  ac. 
34  By  number  (and)  by  weight  of  every  one 

7  the  number,  .of  the  men  of  the  people  of 

11  On  that  day  the  number  of  those  that  w. 

5  burnt  offerings,  .to  the  number  of  them 

6  let  it  not  come  in  to  the  number  of  the  m. 
9  doeth.  .marvellous  things  without  numb. 

10  doeth  great  things. .wonders  without  nu. 
5  the  number  of  his  months  (are)  with  thee 

20  the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  op. 

21  when  the  number  of  his  months  is  cut  off 

3  Is  there  any  number  of  his  armies?  and 

37  I  would  declare  unto  him  the  number  of 
26  neither  can  the  number  of  his  years  b'  s. 
21  because,  .the  number  of  thy  days  (is)  gr. 

12  When  th*»y  were,  .a  few  men  in  number 
34  and  caterpillars,  and  that  without  number 

4  He  telle  th  the  number  of  the  stars  ;  he 

8  There  are.,  queens.,  virgins  without  num. 

17  the  residue  of  the  number  of  archers,  the 
26  that  bringeth  out  their  host  by  number 

2.  28  the  number  of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  0  J. 

2.  32  people  have  forgotten  me  days  without  n . 
11.  13  the  number  of  thy  cities  were  thy  gods,  0 
11. 13  the  number  of  the  streets  of  Jerusalem 
4.4. 28  Yet  a  small  number  that  escape  the  sword 

4.    4,  9  to  the  number  of  the  days  that  thou  s. 

4.  5  according  to  the  number  of  the  days,  th. 

5.  3  Thou  shalt  also  take  thereof  a  few  in  nu. 
9.  2  I,  Daniel  understood  by  books  the  num. 
1.  10  Yet  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel 
1.    6  For  a  nation . .  strong,  and  without  number 


sSa. 

21. 

^.  24' 
iKi.iS. 

1  Ch.  7. 

7 


23 

23' 

23 
25. 

25' 

27, 
27. 
27. 

2Ch.I2. 

26. 

..       26, 

29. 

35- 

Ezra   1. 


147. 
Song  6. 
Isa.  21. 

40. 


Q.Xumber,  inspection,  "iprp  miphqad. 

2  Sa.  24.   9  Joab  gave  up  the  sum  of  the  number  of 

1  Ch.21.    5  Joab  gave  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the 

7 .Number,  rnap  sephorah. 

Psa.  71. 15  all  the  day ;  for  I  know  not  the  numbers 

S.Number,  apiQ^os  arithmos. 

Luke22.  3  Judas . .  being  of  the  number  of  the  twelve 
John  6.  10  sat  down,  in  number  about  five  thousand 
Acts    4.   4  the  number  of  the  men  was  about  live  th. 

5.  36  to  whom  a  number  of  men,  about  four  h. 

6.  7  the  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied  in 
11.  21  a  great  number  believed,  and  turned  unto 
16.    5  the  churches,  .increased  in  number  daily 

Rom.  9.  27  Though  the  number  of  the  children  of  Is. 
Rev,    5.  11  [the  number  of  them  was  ten  thousand] 

7.  4  I  heard  the  number  of  them  which  were 
9. 16  the  number  of  the  army .  .1  heard  the  nu. 

13. 17  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name 

13. 18  Let  liim..countthe  number.. forit  is  then. 
13.  18  his  number  (is)  Six  hundred  threescore 
15.   2  victory,  .over  the  number  of  his  name 
20.   8  the  number  of  whom . .  as  the  sand  of  the 

NUMBER  (of  people)  — 
Crowd,  ux^os  ochlos. 

Markio.  46  his  disciples  and  a  great  number  of  peo. 

Acts    1.  15  the  number  of  the  names  together  were 
NUMBER,  to  make  of  the  — 
To  judge  in,  reckon  among,  syKplvw  egkrino. 

2  Co.io.  12  "we  dare  not  make  ourselves  of  tho  num. 
NUMBER,  to  — 

l.To  number,  count,  appoint,  run  manah. 

Gen.  13. 16  so  that  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of 
2  Sa.  24.  1  moved  David,  .to  say,  Go,  number  Israel 
1  Ki.20.  25  number  thee  an  army  like  the  army  that 

**»>  1  Ch.21.    1  Satan,  .provoked  David  to  number  Israel 
27.  24  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  began  to  number 
Psa.  90. 12  So  teach  (us)  to  number  our  days,  that 
Isa.  65.  12  Theref  ore  will  I  number  you  to  the  sword 

89 


2.  To  number,  count,  appoint,  N.;p  mena. 

Dan.   5.  26  God  hath  numbered  tiiy  kingdom,  and  fi. 

3.  To  write,  cypher,  number,  "13D  saphar. 

Gen.  15.    5  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number 
Lev.  15. 13  he  shall  number  to  himself  seven  days  for 

15.  28  then  she  shall  number  to  herself  seven  d. 

23.  16  Even  unto  the  morrow,  .shall  ye  number 

25.  8  thou  shalt  number  seven  sabbaths  of  years 
Deut  16.    9  Seven  weeks  shalt  thou  number  unto  thee 

16.  g  begin  to  number  the  seven  weeks  from 

2  Sa.  24.  10  heart  smote  him  after  that  he  had  numb. 

1  Ch.21.   2  number  Israel  from  Beer-sheba  even  to  D. 

2  Ch.  2.  17  Solomon  numbered  all  the  strangers  that 

2.  17  wherewith  David  his  father  had  numbered 
Ezra  1.  8  numbered  them  unto  Sheshbazzar,  the  p. 
Job    14.  16  For  now  thou  numberest  my  steps  :  dost 

39,    2  Canst  thou  number  the  months,  .they  fu. 
Isa.  22. 10  ye  have  numbered  the  houses  of  Jerusal. 
i.To  number,  recount,  *i?o  saphar,  3. 

Job    3S.  37  Who  can  number  the  clouds  in  wisdom? 
5. To  inspect,  ipa  paqad. 

Exod3o.  12  when  thou  numberest.  .when  (thou)  nu. 
Num.  1.    3  thou  and  Aaron  shall  number  them  by 
1.  19  so  he  numbered  them  in  the  wilderness 
1.  44  which  Moses  and  Aaron  numbered,  and 

3. 15  Number  the  children  of  Levi  after  the  ho. 

3.  15  from  a  month,  .and  upward  shalt  thou  n. 

3. 16  Moses  numbered  them,  according  to  the 
3.  39  which  Moses  and  Aaron  numbered  at  the 

3.  40  Number  all  the  first  born  of  the  males 

3. 42  Moses  numbered,  as  the  Lord  commanded 
4  23  From  thirty  years  old.  .shalt  thounumber 

4.  29  thou  shalt  number  them  after.. their  fami. 
4.  30  shalt  thou  number  them,  every  one  that 
4.  34  Moses  and  Aaron,  .numbered  the  sons  of 
4.  37,  41,  45  whom  Moses  and  Aaron  did  num. 
4. 46  whom,  .the  chief  of  Israel  numbered 

26.  63  who  numbered  the  children  of  Israel  in 
26.  64  numbered,  when  they  numbered  the  ch. 

Josh.  8.  10  Joshua  rose  up.  .and  numbered  the  people 

1  Sa.  11.   8  when  he  numbered  them  in  Bezek,  the  c. 

13.  15  Saul  numbered  the  people,  .present  with 
14. 17  Number  now,  and  see  who  is  gone  from 
14. 17  And  when  they  had  numbered,  behold,  J. 
15.    4  Saul,  .numbered  them  in  Telaim,  two  h. 

2  Sa.  18.    1  David  numbered  the  people  that  (were) 

24.  2  number  ye  the  people,  that  I  may  know 
24.   4  went  out . .  to  number  the  people  of  Israel 

1  Ki.  20.  15  Then  he  numbered  the  young  men  of  the 

20.  15  after  them  he  numbered  all  the  people 
20.  26  Ben-hadad  numbered  the  Syrians,  and  w. 

2  Ki.  3.  6  Jehoram  went  out.  .and  numbered  all  I. 
2  Ch.25.    5  he  numbered  them  from  twenty  years  old 

6.  To  number,  api^ew  arifhmeo. 

Rev.    7.    9  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  nu. 

7.  To  reckon,  \oyi£op,ai  logizomai. 

Markis.  28  [he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors] 
NUMBER,  to  take  into  the  — 
To  be  laid  or  put  dozen,  KaraXtyo/xai  hatalegomai. 

1  Ti.   5.    9  Let  not  a  widow  betaken  into  the  number 
NUMBER  after  or  throughout  the  genealogy,  to  — 
To  reckon  self  by  genealogy,  tvrr  yachas,  7. 

1  Ch.  7.    9  the  number  of  them,  after  then-  genealogy 
7.  40  the  number  throughout  the  genealogy  of 
NUMBER,  certain  — 
Number,  reckoning,  ">£9P  mispar. 

Deut25.   2  according  t'j  his  fault,  by  a  certain  number 
NUMBER,  odd  — 
To  be  over  and  above,  superfluous,  r\iy  adaph. 

Num.  3.  48  wherewith  the  odd  number  of  them  is  to 
NUMBERED  — 
Number,  reckoning,  "iS~p  viispar. 

1  Ch.23.  27  the  Levites  (were)  numbered  from  twenty 
NUMBERED,  to  be  — 
l.To  number,  n$n  manah. 

1  Ch.21. 17  (that)  commanded  the  people  to  be  num.  ? 
l.To  be  numbered,  rtfD  manah,  2. 

Gen.  13.  16  (then)  shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered 

1  Eli.  3.    8  that  cannot  be  numbered  nor  counted  for 

'  8.    5  that  could  not  be  told  nor  numbered  for 

2  Ch.  5.  6  which  could  not  be  told  nor  numbered  for 
Eccl.  1. 15  that  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  numbered 
Isa.  53. 12  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgres. 

3.2*0  be  written,  cyphered,  numbered,  isn  saphar,  2. 
Gen.  16.  10  that  it  shall  not  be  numbered  for  multit. 
32.  i2  which  cannot  be  numbered  for  multitude 
1  Ch  23.  3  the  Levites  were  numbered  from  the  age 
Jer.  33.  22  As  the  host  of  heaven  cannot  be  numbered 
Hos.    1.  10  which  cannot  be  measured  nor  numbered 

4.  To  number,  recount,  130  sapluur,  3. 

Psa.  40.   5  works .  .they  are  more  than  can  be  numb. 
5. To  inspect,  "ips  paqad. 

Exod3o.  13,  14  thatpasseth  among  them  that  are  nu. 
38.  25  the  silver  of  them  that  were  numbered  of 
38.  26  for  every  one  that  went  to  be  numbered 
Num.  1.  21  Those  that  were  numbered  of  them 
So  in  v.  22,  23,  25,  27,  29,  31,  33,  35,  37,  39,  41,  43. 

1.  44  These  (are)  those  that  were  numbered,  w. 
1.  45  So  were  all  those  that  were  numbered  of 

1.  46  Even  all  they  that  were  numbered,  were 

2.  4  his  host,  and  those  that  were  numbered 
So  in  v.  6,  8,  11,  13,  15,  19,  21,  23,  26,  28,  30. 


Num.  2.  9,  16  All  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp 
2.  24  All  that  were  numbered  of  the  camp  of  E. 
2.  31  All  they  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp 
2 .  32  These  (are)  those  which  were  numbered  of 

2.  32  all  those  that  were  numbered  of  the  camps 

3.  22,  22,  34,43  Those  that  were  numbered  of 

3.  39  All  that  were  numbered  of  the  Levites  - 
4'  36,  38,  40,  42,  44, 45,  46, 48  those  that  were  n. 

4.  37,  41  they  that  were  numbered  of  the  fami. 
4.  49  they  were  numbered  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
7.    2  and  were  over  them  that  were  numbered 

14.  29  all  that  were  numbered  of  you,  according 
26.  7  they  that  were  numbered  of  them  were  lo. 
26.  iS  according  to  those  that  were  numbered  of 

So  in  v.  22,  25,  27,  37,  43,  47. 
26.  34,  62  and  those  that  were  numbered  of  them 
26.  41,  50  and  they  that  were  numbered  of  them 
26.  51  These.. the  numbered  of  the  children  of 
26.  54  according  to  those  that  were  numbered  of 
26. 57,  63  And  these,  .they  that  were  numbered 

Q.To  inspect  self,  charge  self ,  ipS  paqad,  7. 

Judg2o.  15  the  children  of  Benjamin  were  numbered 
20.  15  which  were  numbered  seven  hundred  ch. 

20.  17  were  numbered  four  hundred  thousand 

21.  9  For  the  people  were  numbered,  and,  beh. 

7.  To  inspect  or  charge  self,  ip3  paqad,  7a. 

Num.  1.  47  the  Levites.  .were  not  numbered  among 
2.  33  But  the  Levites  were  not  numbered  anio. 
26.  62  they  were  not  numbered  among  the  chil. 

1  Ei.20.  27  the  children  of  Israel  were  numbered,  and 

8.  To  number,  apiOfieco  arithmeo. 

Matt  10.  30  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numb. 
Luke  12.    7  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numb. 

NUMBERED  with,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  numbered  down,  KarapLdp.€o/j.ai  katarithm. 
Acts    1.  17  he  was  numbered  with  us,  and  had  obta. 

2.  To  be  voted  down  with,  avyKaTa^ncpi^ofxaL  sugk. 

Acts    1.  26  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven  a. 
NUMBERING  — 
l.To  urrite,  cypher,  number,  *iap  saphar. 

Gen.  41.  49  gathered  corn,  .until  he  left  numbering 

^.Numbering,  "i?P  sepfhar. 

2  Ch.  2. 17  after  the  numbering  wherewith  David  his 

NUMBERS  — 

Inspection,  charge,  number,  n^g  petpiddah. 

2  Ch.17.  14  these  (are)  the  numbers  of  them  accord. 

NUN,  j«  continuation. 

An  Ephraimite,  father  of  Joshua,  the  servant  of  Moses, 

and  leader  of  Israel  over  Jordan,  born  B.C.  1536,  died 

B.C.  1426,  aged  no  years. 

Exod33.  n  the  son  of,  N.  a  young  man,  departed  not 

Nunin.  28  the  son  of  N.,the  servant  of  Moses,  (one) 

13.    8  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Osheathe  son  of  N. 

13.  16  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son  of  N. ,  Jehosh. 

14.  6,  38  son  of  N.,  and  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephu. 
14.  30  son  of  Jephunneh.  .Joshua  the  son  of  N. 
26.  65  son  of  Jephunneh.  .Joshua  the  son  of  N. 
27. 18  the  son  of  N.,  a  man  in  whom  (is)  the  sp. 
32. 12  son  of  Jephunneh.  .Joshua  the  son  of  N. 
32.  28  the  son  of  N.,  and  the  chief  fathers  of 
34. 17  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua,  .son  of  N. 

Deut.  1.  38  the  son  of  N.,  which  standeth  before  thee 

31.  23  he  gave  Joshua  the  son  of  N.  a  charge,  and 

32.  44  and  spake,  .he  and  Hoshea  the  son  of  N. 

34.  9  son  of  N.  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
Josh.  1.    1  the  Lord  spake  unto  Joshua  the  son  of  N. 

2.    1  the  son  of  N.  sent  out  of  Shittim  two  men 

2.  23  came  to  Joshua  the  son  of  N.,  and  told 

6.    6  the  son  of  N.  called  the  priests,  and  said 

14.    1  the  son  of  N.,and  the  headsof  the  fathers 

17.    4  before  Joshua  the  son  of  N.,  andbefore  the 

19.  49  an  inheritance  to  Joshua  the  son  of  N. 

19.  51  the  son  of  N.,  and  the  heads  of  the  fathers 

21.    1  unto  Joshua  the  son  of  N.,  and  unto  the 

24.  29  the  son  of  N.,  the  servant  of  the  Lord  d. 

Judg.  2.    8  the  son  of  N.,  the  servant  of  the  Lord  d. 

1  Ki.16.  34  which  he  spake  by  Joshua  the  son  of  N 
Neh.  8.  17  since  the  days  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  N.  u. 

NURSE,  (nursing  mother  or  father)  — 

l.To  nurse,  be  faithful,  be  a  support,  JCX  aman. 
Numn.  12  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  the  sucking 
Ruth  4. 16  laid  it  in  her  bosom,  and  became  nurse 

2  Sa.   4.   4  his.nurse  took  him  up,  and  fled  :  and  it 
Isa.  49.  23  kings  shall  be  thy  nursing  fathers,  and 

%To  suckle,  give  suck,  pr  yanaq,  5. 

Gen.  24.  59  they  sent  away  Rebekah.  .and  her  nurse 

35.  8  Deborah,  Rebekah 's  nurse,  died,  and  she 
Exod.  2.  7  Shall  I  go  and  call  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the 
2  Ki.  11.  2  they  hid  him.  .him  and  his  nurse,  in  the 
2  Ch.22.  n  put* him  and  his  nurse  in  a  bed  chamber 
Isa.   49.  23  and  their  queens  thy  nursing  mothers 

Z.A  nurse,  nourisher,  rpotpos  trophos. 

1  Th.  2.    7  even  as  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  children 

NURSE,  be  nursed,  to  — 

1.  To  be  nursed,  supp>orted,  ]£N  aman,  2. 

Isa.  60.  4  thy  daughters  shall  be  nursed  at  (thy)  side 

2.  To  suckle,  give  suck,  pTr  yana,g,  5. 

Exod.  2.    7 'that  she  may  nurse  the  child  for  thee  ? 

2.   9  Take  this  child  away,  and  nurse  it  for  me 


NURTURE 


706 


OBEDIENCE 


3.  To  suckle,  give  suck,  pu  nuq,  5. 

Exod.  2.    9  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  nursed  it 
NTTRTTTRE  — 
Nurture,  instruction,  chastening,  traioeia  paideia. 

Eph,   6.   4  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admo. 
NUT  — 
1.-4  nut,  nut  tree,  von  egoz. 

Song  6.  ii  I  went  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts  to 
2.Pistacia  nuts,  D'^3  bolnim. 

Gen.  43.  iihoney,spices,andmyrrh,nuts,and almonds 

NYMPH'-AS,  NufKpas. 

A  believer  at  Colosse  or  Laodicea,  to  whom  Paul  sends 

a  salutation. 

Col.    4.  15  N.,  and  tho  church  which  is  in  his  house 


0,  OH  !  — 

1.1  pray  thee !  0/  Oh  f  njs,  njx  anna,  annah. 
Exod32.  31  Oh,  thispeople  have  sinned  a  great  sin, and 
Psa.n6.  16  0  Lord,  truly  I  (am)  thy  servant ;  I  (am) 
Dan.   9.    4  0  Lord,  the  great  and  dreadful  God,  keep. 

2.0/  Oh  /  '5  bi. 

Gen.  43.  20  0  sir,  we  came  indeed  down  at  the  first 

44.  18  Oh  my  lord,  let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee 

Exod  4.  10  O  my  Lord,  I  (am)  not  eloqueut,  neither 

4. 13  0  my  Lord,  send,  I  pray  thee,  by  the  hand 

Josh.  7.    8  0  Lord,  what  shall  I  say,  when  Israel  tur. 

Judg.6.  13  O  my  Lord,  if  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why 

6. 15  Oh  my  Lord,  wherewith  shall  I  serve  Isr.? 

13.    8  0  my  Lord,  let  the  man  of  God  which  th. 

1  Sa.   1.  26  Oh  my  lord,  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  my  lord 

1  Ki.  3.  17  O  my  lord,  I  and  this  woman  dwell  in  one 

3.  26  0  my  lord,  give  her  the  living  child,  and 

3Mo  I  'in  hoi. 

Isa.   10.   5  0  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  mine  anger,  and 
Jer.  47.   6  0  thouswurdof  the  Lord,  how  long,  .ere 

4.  Pray,  please  now,  ay  na. 

Gen.  18.  30  Oh  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will 

5.  Oh  1  3>  0. 

ilattis.  28  O  woman,  great  (is)  thy  faith  :  be  it  unto 
17. 17  O  faithless  and  perverse  generation,  how 
Mark  9.  19  0  faithless  generation,  how  long  shall  I 
Luke  9.  41  0  faithless  and  perverse  generation  !  how 

24.  25  0  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all 
Acts    1.    1  The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  O  Theo. 
13.  10  0  full  of  of  all  subtility  and  all  mischief 
18. 14  O  (ye)  Jews,  reason  would  that  I  should 
Rom.  2     1  Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable,  O  man 
2.    3  thinkest  thou  this,  0  man,  that  judgest 
9.  20  Nay  but,  O  man,  who  art  thou  that  repl. 
11.  33  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wis. 
Gal.     3.    i  O  foolish  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched 
1  Ti.   6.  20  0  Timothy,  keep  that  which  is  committed 
Jas.     2.  20  But  wilt  thou  know,  0  vain  man,  that  fa. 

0  that,  oh  that  — 

1.  Would  that,  0  that,  "'pHX,  '^nx  achule,  achahti. 
Psa.  119.    5  0  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy 

2.7/;  on  tin. 

1  Ch.  4. 10  Ohthatthou  wouldestblessme indeed, and 
3.1/,  0  that,  tnb,  ^  lu. 

Gen.  17.  18  said.  .0  that  Ishmael  might  live  before 
Deut32.  29  Oh  that  they  were  wise,  (that)  they  under. 
Job    6.    2  Oh  that  my  grief  were  throughly  weighed 
Psa.  81.  13  Oh  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto 
Isa.   48.  18  O  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my  com. 
64.    1  Oh  that  thou  wouUlest  rend  the  heavens 
4.  Who  will  give  ?  jrv  *p  mi  yitten. 

Job     6.    8  Oh  that  I  might  have  my  request ;  and 
11.    5  But  oh  that  God  would  speak,  and  open 
13.    5  O  that  ye  would  altogether  hold  yourpe. 
14. 13  O  that  thou  wouldest  hide  me  in  the  gra. 
19.  23  Oh  that  my  words  were  now  written  !  oh 
23.    3  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him 
29.    2  Oh  that  I  were  as  (in)  months  past,  as(in) 
31.  31  Oh  that  we  had  of  his  flesh!  we  cannot  be 
31-  35  Oh  that  one  would  hear  me !  behold,  my 
Psa.  14.    7  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  (were  co.) 
53.   6  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  (were  co.) 
55.   6  I  said,  Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove  ! 
Song  8.    1  Oh  that  thou,  .as my  brother,  that  sucked 
Jer.    g.    1  Oh  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine 
9.    2  Oh  that  I  had  in  the  wilderness  a  lodging 
OAK  — 
I.  An  oak,  terebinth,  rky  elah. 

Gen.  35.   4  Jacob  hid 'them  underthe  oakwhich(was) 
Judg  6.  11  sat  under  an  oak  which  (was)  in  Ophrah 
6.  19  brought  (it)  out  unto  him  under  the  oak 

2  Sa,  18.   9  went  under  the  thick  boughs  of  agreatoak 

18.    9  his  head  caught  hold  of  the  oak,  and  he 
18.  10  Behold,  I  saw  Absalom  hanged  in  an  oak 
iS.  14  he  (was)  yet  alive  in  the  midst  of  the  oak 
1  Ki  13.  14  went,  .and  found  himsittingunderan oak 
1  Ch.io.  12  buried  their  bones  under  the  oak  in  Jabe. 
Isa.     1.  30  ye  shall  be  as  an  oak  whose  leaf  fadeth 
Eze.    6.  13  every  green  tree,  .under  every  thick  oak 
2.0ak,  terebinth,  n^x  allah. 

Josh. 24.  26  and  set  it  up  there  under  an  oak  that  (was) 
Z.An  oak,  fh%  allon. 

Gen.  35,  8  was  buried  beneath  Beth-cl  under  an  oak 


Isa.  2.  13  upon  all  the  cedars,  .and  upon  all  the  oaks 
6.  13  as  a  teil  tree,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  subs. 
44.  14  taketh  the  cypress  and  the  oak,  which  he 
Eze.  27.  6  (Of)  the  oaks  of  Bashan  have  they  made 
Hos.  4.  13  burn  incense  upon  the  hills,  under  oaks 
Amos  2.  9  he  (was)  strong  as  the  oaks ;  yet  I  destro. 
Zeehn.    2  howl,  O  ye  oaks  of  Bashan;  for  the  forest 

LOahs,  D'?'^  elivi. 

Isa.     1.  29  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  oaks  which 
OAR  — 
l.An  oar,  rudder,  rreo  mashot, 

Eze.  27.  29  Aud  all  that  handle  the  oar,  the  mariners 

2. An  oar,  rudd?.r,-wvn  mishshot. 

Eze.  27.   6  oaks  of  Bashan  have  they  made  thine  oars 

3.  An  oar,  rudder,  ta;^  shayii. 

Isa.  33.  21  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars,  nei. 

OATH  — 

1 . Execration,  curse,  oath,  nhx  alah. 

Gen.  24.  41  Then  shalt  thou 'be  clear  from,  .my  oath 

24.  41  give  not.  .thou  sbaltbeclearfrom  my  oath 

26.  28  said,  Let  there  be  now  an  oath  betwixt  us 

Dent  29.  12  and  intohis  oath,  which  the  Lord  thy  God 

29.  14  only  do  I  make  this  covenant  and  this  oath 

1  Ki.  8.  31  and  an  oath  be  laid  upon  himtocausehim 

8.  31  oath  come  before  thine  altar  in  this  house 

2  Ch.  6.  22  and  an  oath  be  laid  upon  him  to  make  him 

6.  22  oath  come  before  thine  altar  in  this  house 

Eze.  16.  59  which  hast  despised  the  oath  in  breaking 

17.  13  made  a  covenant,  .and hath  taken  an  oath 

17.  16  whose  oath  lie  despised,  and  whose  cove. 
17  18  Seeing  he  despised  the  oath  by  breaking 
17. 19  surely  mine  oath  that  he  hath  despised 

2. Swearing,  nyiyj  shebuah. 

Gen.  24.    8  then  thou  shalt  lie  clear  from  this  my  oath 

26.    3  I  will  perform  the  oath  which  I  sware 
Exod  22. 11  (Then)  shall  an  oath  of  the  Lord  be  bet. 
Lev.     5.    4  that  a  man  shall  pronounce  with  an  oath 
Num.  5.  21  priests  shall  charge  the  woman  with  ano. 

5.  21  The  LORD  make  thee  a  curse  and  an  oath 

30.  2  or  swear  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a 
30. 10  or  bound  her  soul  by  a  bond  with  an  oath 
30.  13  Every  vow,  and  every  binding  oath  to  arH. 

Dent.  7.    8  because  he  would  keep  the  oath  which  he 

Josh.  2.  17  We  (will  be)  blameless  of  this  thine  oatli 

2.  20  then  we  will  be  quit  of  thine  oath  which 

9.  20  because  of  the  oath  which  we  sware  unto 
Judg2i.    5  For  they  had  made  a  great  oath  concern 

1  Sa.  i^..  26  no  man  put.  .for  the  people  feared  the  0. 

2  Sa.  21.  7  because  of  the  Lord's  oath  that  (was)  be. 
1  Ki.    2.  43  Why  then  hast  thou  not  kept  the  oath  of 

1  Ch.16.  16  he  made  with  Abraham,  and  of  his  oatli 

2  Ch.15.  15  all  Judah  rejoiced  at  the  oath :  for  they 
Neh.  10.  29  entered  into  a  curse,  and  into  an  oath 
Psa.  105.   9  he  made  with  Abraham,  and  his  oath  unto 
Eccl.  8.    2  and  (that)  in  regard  of  the  oath  of  God 

9.  2  that  sweareth,  as  (he)  that  feareth  an  oath 
Jer.  11.  5  That  I  may  perform  the  oath  which  Ihave 
Eze.  21.  23  divination,  .to  them  that  have  sworn  oaths 
Ban.  9.  11  the  oath  that  (is)  written  in  the  law  of  M. 
llab.  3.  9  to  the  oaths  of  the  tribes,  (even  thy)  wo. 
Zech.  8. 17  and  love  no  false  oath :  for  all  these  (are 

3.  Oath,  promise,  optcos  hovkos. 

Matt.  5.  33  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths 
14.    7  Whereupon  be  promised  with  an  oatli  to 
14.    9  for  the  oath's  sake,  and  them  which  sat 
26.  72  again  he  denied  with  an  oath,  I  do  not  k. 

Mark  6.  26  for  his  oath's  sake,  and  for  their  sakes  w. 

Luke  1.  73  The  oatli  which  he  sware  to  our  father  A. 

Acts    2.  30  knowing  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  oath 

Heb.   6.  16  an  oath  for  confirmation  (is)  to  them  an 

6.  17  Wherein  God.  .confirmed  (it)  by  an  oath 
Jas.     5. 12  by  the  earth,  neither  by  any  other  oath 

4.  The  swearing  of  an  oath,  SpKcu/xoaia  horkomosia. 

Heb.   7.  20  And  inasmuch  as  not  without  an  oath  (lie 

7.  21  For  those  priests  were  made  without  an  o. 
7.  21  this  with  an  oath  by  him  that  said  unto 
7.  28  but  the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since 

OATH,  to  bind  with  an  — 
To  anathematize,  auaBe^ari^w  anaifiematizo. 
Acts  23.  21  which  have  bound  themselves  with  an  0. 

OATH,  to  take  or  charge  by  or  with  an  — 

To  cause  to  swear,  jnip  shaba,  5. 

Gen.  50.  25  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  I. 
Num.  5.  19  And  the  priest  shall  charge  her  by  an  oatli 
1  Sa.  14.  28  straitly  charged  the  people  with  an  oath 

1  Ki.18.  10  he  took  an  oath  of  the  kingdom  and  nat. 

2  Ki.11.  4  took  an  oath  of  them  in.  .house  of  the  L, 
Neh.    5.  12  took  an  oath  of  them,  that  they  should 

0-BAD  fAH,  ^T-ny,  n;*py  servant  ofJdh. 

1.  The  pious  governor  of  Ahab's  house*.     B.C.  916. 

1  Ki.18.   3  Ahab  called  0.,  which  (was)  thegovernor 

18.  3  Now  O.  feared  the  Lord  greatly 

18.    4  O.  took  an  hundred  prophets,  and  hid  th. 
18.    s  Ahab  said  unto  O.,  Go  into  the  land,  unto 
18.   6  and  O.  went  another  way  by  himseli 
18.   7  as  O.  was  in  the  way,  behold,  Elijah  met 
18.  16  0.  went  to  meet  Ahab, and  told  him:  and 

2.  Head  of  a  family  from  David.    B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  3.  21  the  sons  of  O.,  the  sons  of  Shechaniah 

3.  A  descendant  of  Tola  son  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.    3  Michael,  and  0.,  and  Joel,  Ishiah,  five:  all 


4.  Son  of  Azel,  a  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Saul.  B.C. 
860. 

1  Ch.  8.  38  and  Ishmael,  and  Sheariah,  and  0.,  and 
9.  44  and  Ishmael,  and  Sheariah,  andO.,andH. 

5.  Son  of  Shemaiah  a  Levite,  from  Netophah  near  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  16  0.  the  son  of  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  Galal 

6.  A  Gadite  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.   9  the  first,  O.  the  second,  Eliab  the  third 

7.  Father  of  Ishmaiah,  prince  of  Zebulunin  the  days  of 
David.     B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.27.  ig  Of  Zchulun  ;  Ishmaiah  the  son  of  0.:  of 

8.  A  prince  of  Judah  whom  Jehoshaphat  sent  to  teach 
in  the  cities  of  Judah.     B.C.  916. 

2  Ch.17.    7  to  0.,  and  toZechariah.aud  to  Nethaneel 

9.  A  Levite,  overseer  of  the  repairs  of  the  temple  in  the 
days  of  Josiah.     B.C.  634. 

2  Ch.34.  ;2  overseers  of  them  (were)  Jahathand  0. 

10.  Son  of  Jehicl,  and  chief  man  that  returned  with  Ezra. 
B.C.  457. 

Ezra  8.    9  O.  the  son  of  Jehiel,  and  with  him  two 

11.  A  priest  that  sealed,  with  Nehemiah,  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10.    5  Harim,  Meremoth,  0. 

12.  A  gate  keeper  for  the  sanctuary.     B.C.  445. 
Neh. 12.  25  0.,  Meshullam,  Talmon,  Akkub,  (were) 

13.  A  prophet  who  is  reckoned  to  have  lived  about  B.C. 
587. 

Obadiah  1  The  vision  of  0.   Thus  saith  the  LordGOD 

O'-BAL,  h^y  bare. 

A  son  of  Joktan,  of  the  family  of  Shem,  B.C.  2190 ;  in  1 

Ch.  1.  22  he  is  called  Ebal  (which  see). 

Gen.  10.  28  And  O.,  and  Abimael,  and  Sheba 
0-BED,  iiny,  'n^TJS,  Iw0ij5,  serving. 

1.  Son  of  Boaz  by  Ruth,  and  father  of  Jesse.    B.C.  1300. 

Ruth  4.  17  they  called  his  name  0  :  he  (is)  the  father 
4.  21  And  Salmon  begat  Boaz,  and  Boaz  begat  O. 

4.  22  And  0.  begat  Jesse,  and  Jesse  begat  David 
1  Ch.  2.  12  And  Boaz  begat  0.,  and  0.  begat  Jesse 
Matt.  1.    5  Boaz  begat  0.  of  Ruth  ;  and  0.  begat  J. 
Luke  3.  32  which  was  (the  son)  of  0.,  which  was  (the 

2.  Son  of  Ephlal,  descendant  of  Judah.     B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  2.  37  Zabad  begat  Ephlal,  and  Ephlal  begat  O. 
2.  38  And  O.  begat  Jehu,  and  Jehu  begat  Azar. 

3.  One  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.n.  47  Eliel,  and  0.,  and  Jasiel,  the  Mesobaite 

4.  A  son  of  Shemaiah,  a  Kohathite,  a  gate  keeper  of  the 
tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.    7  O.,  Elzabad,  whose  brethren  (were)  strong 

5.  Father  of  Azariah,  a  captain  who  helped  Jehoiada 
the  priest  in  making  Joash  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  878. 

2  Ch.23.    1  and  Azariah  the  son  of  O.,  and  Maaseiah 
0-BED  E'-DOM,  oris  -iip  servant  of  Edom. 

1.  A  Levite  in  whose  house  the  ark  lay  three  months. 

B.C.  1050. 

2  Sa.  6.  10  carried  it  aside  into  the  house  of  O,,  the 
6.  1 1  in  the  house  of  0. . .  and  the  Lord  blessed  O. 
6.  12  Lord  hath  blessed  the  house  of  O.,  and 
6.  12  from  the  house  of  O.  into  the  city  of  Da  v. 
1  Ch.13.  13  carried  it  aside  into  the  house  of  0.  theG. 
13.  14  remained  with  the  family  of  0.  in  his  ho. 
13. 14  Lord  blessed  the  house  of  O.,  and  all  that 
15.  25  bring  up  the  ark.  .out  of  the  house  of  O. 

2.  A  gate  keeper  of  the  tabernacle,  appointed  to  bring 
up  the  ark. 

1  Ch.15.  lS  Mikneiah,  and  O.,  and  Jeiel,  the  porters 
15.  21  O.,  and  Jeiel,  and  Azaziah,  with  harpson 

15.  24 O.  and  Jehiah  (were) doorkeepers  for  the 
26.  4  Moreover  the  sons  of  O.  (were)  Shemaiah 
26.  8  sons  of  0. . .  (were)  threescore  and  two  of  0. 
26.  15  To  O.  southward  ;  and  to  his  sons  the  ho. 

3.  A  Levite  appointed  to  minister  before  the  ark. 

1  Ch.16.    5  next  to  him.  .Eliab,  aud  Benaiah,  and  0. 

16.  38  0.  with  their  brethren,  threescore  and  e. 

4.  A  Levite,  son  of  Jeduthun,  a  gate  keeper  of  the  taber- 
nacle. 

1  Ch.16.  38  0.  also  the  son  of  Jeduthun,  and  Hosah 

5.  An  Aaronite,  having  charge  of  the  vessels  of  the  sanc- 
tuary in  the  days  of  Amaziah  king  of  Judah.  B.C.  839- 
810. 

2  Ch.25  24  were  found  in  the  house  of  God  with  0. 
OBEDIENCE  — 

Hearkening  submissively,  obedience.  u-n-aKor)  hu/pa. 
Rom.  1.    5  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  nat. 

5.  19  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be 
6. 16  death,  orof  obedience  untorighteousness? 

16.  19  For  your  obedience  is  come  abroad  unto 
16.  26  made  known  to  all  nations  for  the  obed. 

2  Co.  7  15  he  remembereth  the  obedience  of  you  all 
10.  5  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ 
10.    6  to  revenge,  .when  yourobedieuce  is  fulfl. 

Pbm.      21  Having  confidence  in  thy  obedience  I  wro. 

Heb.   5.    8  learned  he  obedience  by  the  things  which 

1  Pe.    1.    2  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  bio. 
OBEDIENCE,  to  be  under  — 
To  set  in  array  under,  v-Kor6.<T(ro>  hupotasso. 

1  C0.14.  34  but.  .to  be  under  obedience,  as  also  saith 


OBEDIENT 


707 


OBSERVE 


OBEDIENT,  (to  be  or  make)  — 
1.7*0  hear,  hearken,  yjyj  sliamea. 

Exod  24.   7  Lord  hath  said  will  we  do,  and  be  obed. 

^1111127.  20  that  all  the  congregation,  .maybe  obedi. 

Deut  4.  30  if  thou,  .shalt  be  obedient  unto  his  voice 
8.  20  because  ye  would  not  be  obedient  unto  the 

Prov.25.  12  (is;  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obedient  ear 

Isa.     r.  19  If  ye  be  willingand  obedient,  ye  shall  eat 

42.  24  neither  were  they  obedient  unto  his  law 

2.7b  be  heard,  hearkened  to,  yoy  shamea,  2. 

2  Sa.  22.  45  as  soon  as  they  hear,  they  shall  be  obed. 
Z.Hearkening  submissively,  obedience,  vwaicoii  hu. 

Horn  15.  18  to  make  the  Gentiles  obedient,  by  word 

1  Pe.  1.  14  As  obedient  children,  not  fashioning  yo. 
4. To  hearken  submissively,  obey,  uwaKovw  hupakouo. 

Acts    6.    7  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obed. 
Eph.    6.    5  Servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are 
5 .  Hearkening  submissively,  obedient,  uw^kqqs  hup. 

2  Co.    2.   9  know,  .whether  ye  be  obedient  in  all  thi. 
Phil.    2.    8  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient 

6. 7*0  set  in  order  under,  vwoTdacrct}  hupotasso. 

Titus  2.    5  good,  obedient  to  their  own  husbands,  t. 
2.    9  servants  to  beobedientuntotheirownm. 
OBEISANCE,  to  do  or  make  — 
To  bmo  self  down,  nyj  sliachali,  7. 

Gen.  37.    7  stood  round  about,  and  made  obeisance 

37.  9  and  the  eleven  stars,  made  obeisance  to 

43.  2S  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  made  obei. 
ExodiS.  7  Moses  went,  .and  did  obeisance,  and  kis. 
2Sa.    1.    2  that  he  fellto  the  earth,  and  did  obeisance 

14.  4  fell  on  her  face  to  the  ground,  and  did  o. 

15.  5  when  any  man  came  nigh,  .to  do  him  ob. 

1  Ki.   1.  16  Bath-sheba  bowed,  and  did  obeisance  unto 

2  Ch.24.  17  came  the  princes  of  Judah,  and  made  ob. 
OBEY,  to  — 

1. Obedience,  expectation,  nn$]  yigqekah. 

Prov3o.  17  The  eye  (that)  .despiseth  to  obey  (his)  mo. 
%  Hearing,  Jiearkening,  n;;?fp    misfimaatJi. 

Isa.  11. 14  the  children  of  Amnion  shall  obey  them 
3.7*0  hear,  hearken,  jflp:?  shamea. 

Gen.  22. 18  blessed ;  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  v. 

26.  s  Because  that  Abraham  obeyed  my  voice 

27.  8  Now  therefore,  my  son,  obey  my  voice 
27.  13  only  obey  my  voice,  and  go  fetch  me  (t.) 

27.  43  Now  therefore,  my  son,  obey  my  voice 

28.  7  that  Jacob  obeyed  his  father  and  his  mo. 
Exod.  5.    2  Who  (is)  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  his 

19.    5  Now  therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice 
23.  21  Beware  of  him,  and  obey  his  voice,  prov. 

23.  22  But  if  thou  shalt  indeed  obey  his  voice 
Deuti  1.  27  A  blessing,  if  ye  obey  the  commaudments 

11.23  And  a  curse,  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  com. 
13.   4  keep  his  commandments,  and  obey  his  v. 

21. 18  which  will  not  obey  the  voice  of  his  fath. 

21.  20  stubborn  and  rebellious,  he  will  not  obey 
27. 10  Thou  shalt  therefore  obey  the  voice  of  the 
28.  62  because  thou  wouldest  not  obey  the  voice 
30.  2  and  shalt  obey  his  voice,  according  to  all 
30.  8  thou  shalt  return,  and  obey  the  voice  of 
30.  20  that  thou  mayest  obey  his  voice,  and  that 

Josh.  5.    6  because  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the 

22.  2  have  obeyed  my  voice  in  all  that  I  coram. 

24.  24  will  we  serve,  and  his  voice  will  we  obey 
Judg.  2.    2  ye  have  not  obeyed  my  voice  :  why  have 

2.  17  obeying  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 

6.  10  I  said . .  but  ye  have  not  obeved  my  voice 
1  Sa.   8.  19  Nevertheless  the  people  refused  to  obey 

12. 14  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  hirn,  and  obey 

12. 15  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

15. 19  Wherefore  then  didst  thou  not  obey  the 
15.  20  Yea,  I  have  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
15.  22  delight . .  as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  L.? 
15.  22  Behold,  to  obey  (is)  better  than  sacrifice 
15.  24  I  feared  the  people,  and  obeyed  their  vo. 
28.  iS  Because  thou  obeyedst  not  the  voice  of  the 
28.  21  tliine  handmaid  hath  obeyed  thy  voice,  and 

1  Ki.20.  36  Because  thou  hast  not  obeyed  the  voice  of 

2  Ej.iS.  12  Because  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the 
1  Ch.29.  23  and  prospered ;  and  all  Israel  obeyed  him 
2_Ch.11.   4  they  obeyed  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and 
Neh.   9.  17  refused  to  obey,  neither  were  mindful  of 
Job    36.  11  If  they  obey  and  serve .  .they  shall  spend 

36. 12  But  if  they  obey  not,  they  shall  perish  bv 
Prov.  5.  13  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers 
Isa.  50.  10  that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  Ms  servant,  that 
Jer.    3.  13  ye  have  not  obeyed  my  voice,  saith  the  L. 

3.  25  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 

7.  23  Obey  my  voice,  and  I  will  be  your  God 
7.  28  This  (is)a  nation  that  obeyeth  not  the  voice 
9. 13  have  not  obeyed  my  voice,  neither  walked 

11.  3  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  obeyeth  not  the 
11.  4  Obey  my  voice,  and  do  them,  according  to 
11.  7  rising  early  and  protesting,  saying,  Obey 
11.    8  Yet  they  obeyed  not,  nor  inclined  their 

12. 17  But  if  they  will  not  obey,  I  will  utterly  p. 
17. 23  But  they  obeyed  not,  neither  inclined  th. 
18. 10  If  it  do  evil  in  my  sight,  that  it  obey  not 
22. 21  thy  manner  from  thy  youth,  .thou  obeye. 

26. 13  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

32.  23  but  they  obeyed  not  thy  voice,  neither  w. 

34.  10  when  all  the  princes.. heard. .then  they  o. 

35.  8  Thus  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  Jonadab 
35.  10  have  obeyed,  and  done  according  to  all 

35. 14  they,  .obey  their  father's  commandment 

35. 18  Because  ye  have  obeyed  the  comm.nndm. 

38.  20  Obey,  I  beseech  thee,  the  voice  of  the  L. 


Jer.   40.    3  because  ye.  .have  not  obeyed  his  voice 
42.    6  we  will  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God 
42.   6  when  we  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 
42. 13  neither  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  G. 

42.  21  ye  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
4^.    4  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  to  dwell 

43.  7  for  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

44.  23  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord, nor 
Dan.   9. 10  Neither  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the 

9.  11  by  departing, that  they  might  not  obey  thy 

9. 14  God  (is)  righteous,  .for  we  obeyed  not  his 

Zeph.  3.    2  She  obeyed  not  the  voice;  she  received  not 

Hag.   1.  12  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God 

Zech.  6.  15  if  ye  will  diligently  obey  the  voice  of  the 

4.7*0  be  hearing,  hearkening,  Jfa»  shamea,  2. 

Psa.  18.  44  As  soon  as  they  hear  of  me,  they  shall  ob. 
5.7*0  be  hearing,  Jiearkening,  yap  sJiema,  4. 

Dan.   7.  27  and  all  dominions  shall  serve  and  obey 
6.7*0  obey  a  chief  or  ruler,  Treidapxto*  peitJiarcheo. 
Acts   5. 29  said,  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than 
5.  32  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey 

7.  To  persuade,  ireiBw  peitho. 

Acts   5. 36  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  scattered 
5.  37  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  dispersed 
Bom.  2.    S  the  truth,  but  obey  unright.,  indignation 
Gal.    3.    1  [bewitched  you,  that  ye  should  not  obey] 

5.  7  who  did  hinder  you  that  ye  should  not  0. 
Heb.  13.  17  Obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you 
Jas.    3.    3  bits  in. .horses'  mouths,  that  they  may  o. 

8. .4  hearkening  submissively,  obedience,  viraKo-q. 

Rom  6. 16  to  whomye  yield  yourselves  servants  too. 

9.7*0  hearken  submissively,  obey,  viraKovcahupakouo. 

Matt.  S.  27  that  even  the  winds  and  the  sea  obey  liim 

Mark  r.  27  even  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  do  obey 

4.  41  that  even  the  wind  and  the  sea  obey  him? 

Luke  8.  25  even  the  winds  and  water,  and  they  obey 

17.    6  be . .  planted  in  the  sea,  and  it  should  obey 

Bom  6.  12  that  ye  should  obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof 

6.  16  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey;  w. 

6.  17  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart  that  form 
10.  16  But  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the  gospel 

Eph.    6.    1  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord 

Phil.   2.  12  asyehavealwaysobeyed.notasinmypres. 

Col.     3.  20  Children,  obey  (your)parentsin  all  things 

3.  22  Servants,  obey  in  all  things  (your)  masters 

2  Th.  1.    8  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

3. 14  if  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  epi. 

Heb.  5.    9  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  h. 

ix.   8  Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to  go.  .ob. 

1  Pe.  3.   6  Even  as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham,  calling 

10.Hearkening  submissively,  obedient,  viryKoosytv. 

Acts    7.  39  To  whom  our  fathers  would  not  obey,  but 
OBEY  magistrates,  to  — 
7*o  obey  a  chief  or  rider,  ireiQapx*'-*>  peitharcheo. 

Titus  3.    1  Put  them  in  mind,  .to  obey  magistrates 
OBEY  not,  to  — 
7*o  be  unpersuaded,  disobedient,  awctOew  apeitheo. 

Bom.  2.    8  But  unto  them  that,  .do  not  obey  the  tr. 

1  Pe.  3.    1  that,  if  any  obey  not  the  word,  they  also 
4. 17  shall  the  end  (be)  of  them  that  obey  not 
OBEYING  — 
1.7*0  hear,  hearken,  J.v?e>  shamea. 

Judg.  2. 17  out  of  the  way.. their  fathers  walked  in,  0. 

1  Sa.  15.  22  delight,  .as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  L. 

2.^4  submissive  hearkening,  obedience,  vwaKori  hup. 

1  Pe.    1.  22  in  obeying  the  truth  through  the  Spirit 
O'-BIL,  ^?iy  driver,  leader. 

An  Ishmaelite  camel  driver  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.27.  30  Over  the  camels  also  (was)  0.  the  Ishma. 
OBJECT,  to  — 

7*o  speak  against  o?  down,  Karriyopeu,  kategoreo. 

Acts  24. 19  and  object,  if  they  had  ought  against  me 
OBLATION  — 
X.Offering,  present,  nntt  minchah. 

Isa.     1. 13  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ;  incense  is 

19.  21  Egyptians,  shall  do  sacrifice  and  oblation 

66.    3  he  that  off  ereth  an  oblation . .  swine's  blood 

Jer.  14.  12  when  they  offer  burnt  offering  and  an  obi. 

Dan.  2.  46  commanded  that  they  should  offer  an  obi. 

9.  21  me  about  the  time  of  the  evening  oblation 

9.  27  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblat. 

^.Lifting  up,  burden,  gift,  nx^o  maseth. 

Eze.  20.  40  I  require .  .the  firstfruits  of  your  oblations 
S.Tliing  brought  near,  jsifj  korban. 

Lev.  2.  4  if  thou  bring  an  oblation  of  a  meat  offeri. 
2.    5,  7  And  if  thy  oblation  (lie)  a  meat  offering 

2.  12  As  for  the  oblation  of  the  first  fruits,  ye 

2. 13  every  oblation  of  thy  meat  offering  shalt 

3.  1  if  his  oblation  (be)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  of. 

7. 14  of  it  he  shall  offer  one  out  of  the  whole  o. 

7.  29  shall  bring  his  oblation  unto  the  Lord  of 
7.  38  to  offer  their  oblations  to  the  Lord,  in 

22. 18  that  will  offer  his  oblation  for  all  his  vo. 
NuniiS.    9  every  oblation  of  theirs,  every  meat  off. 
31. 50  We  have  therefore  brought  an  oblation 
4.  Heave  offering,  n^n^i  terumah. 

2  Ch.  31.  14  to  distribute  the  oblations  of  the  Lord 
Isa.  40.  20  (is)  so  impoverished  that  he  hath  no  ob. 
Eze.  44.  30  every  oblation  of  all.  .of  your  oblations 

6   45-   *  J'e  shall  offer  an  0  _  lation  unto  the  Lord 


Eze.  45-  6  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy  (p.) 
45.  7  the  other  side  of  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
45.  7  the  city,  before  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
45.  13  Tins  (is)  the  oblation  that  ye  shall  offer 
45. 16  the  people  of  the  land  shall  give  this  ob. 
48.  9  The  oblation  that  ye  shall  offer  unto  the 
48.  10  them.. for  the  priests,  shall  be.,  holy  obi. 
48.  18.  18  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
48.  20  All  the  oblation,  .five  and  twenty  thous. 
48.  20  ye  shall  offer  the  holy  oblation  four  squ. 
48.  21  of  the  holy  oblation . .  of  the  oblation  to. 
48.  21  it  shall  be  the  holy  oblation ;  and  the  sa. 

5. Heave  offering,  itdd?)  terumiyyah. 

Eze.  4S.  12  (this)  oblation  of  the  land  that  is  offered 

O'-BOTH,  nix  hollows. 

A  station  of  Israel,  E.  of  Edom,  between  Punon  and  Ije- 

abarim. 

Xumci.  10  children,  .set  forward,  and  pitched  in  0. 

21. 11  they  journeyed  fromO.,  and  pitched  at  I. 
33.  43  departed  from  Punon,  and  pitched  in  O. 

33.  44  they  departed  from  0.,  and  pitched  in  I. 
OBSCTTRE,  Obscurity  — 

1. Blackness,  pew,  pE^N  isJion,  eshun. 

Prov  20. 20  his  lamp  shall  be  put  out  in  obscure  dar. 
2.Thick  darkness,  isk  opJiel. 

Isa.  29. 18  the  eyes'of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  obs. 
3.  Darkness,  Tj^n  cJwsJiek. 

Isa.   58.  10  then  shall  thy  light  rise  in  obscurity,  and 
59.   9  wait  for  light,  but  behold  obscurity ;  for 
0BSEE.VATI0N  — 
An  intense  watching,  TraparTjpno'is  parateresis. 

Lukei7.  20  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  ob. 
OBSERVE,  to  — 
1.7*0  keep,  watch,  "isj  natsar. 

Prov  23.  26  give  me  thiue  heart,  and  let  thine  eyes  o 
2.7*0  do,  make,  ni"jt  asah. 

Exod3i.  16  to  observe  the  sabbath  throughout  their 

34.  22  thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  weeks,  of 
Num.15.  --  i1  ye haveerred, and notobservedall  these 
Deut  16.  13  Thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  tabernac. 

3.  7*o  bt'hold,  look,  -fltf  shur. 

Hos.  13.   7  a  leopard  bythe  way  will  I  observe  (them) 

14.  S  I  have  heard  (him),  and  observed  him :  I 

4.  To  observe,  keejj,  take  heed,  ~i?^  shamar. 

Gen.  37. 11  his  brethren  envied  hhn ;  but  his  father  o. 

Exodi2.  17  ye  shall  observe  (the  feast  of)  unleavened 

12.  17  therefore  shaU  ye  observe  this  day  in  your 

12.  24  ye  shall  observe  this  thing  for  an  ordina. 

34.  11  Observe  thou  that  which  I  command  thee 

Lev.  19.  37  Therefore  shall  ye  observe  all  my  statutes 

NUU12S.    2  shall  ye  observe  to  offer  unto  me  in  their 

Deut.  5.  32  Ye  shall  observe  to  do  therefore  as  the  L. 

6.    3  Hear  therefore,  0  Israel,  and  observe  to 

6.  25  if  we  observe  to  do  all  these  commandm. 

S.    1  shall  ye  observe  to  do,  that  ye  may  live 

11.  32  ye  shall  observe  to  do  all  the  statutes  and 

12.  1  which  ye  shall  observe  to  do  in  the  land 
12.  28  Observe  and  hear  all  these  words  which  I 
12.  32  What  thing  soever  I  command  you,  obse. 

15.  5  to  observe  to  do  all  these  commandments 

16.  1  Observe  the  month  of  Abib,  and  keep  the 

16. 12  thou  shalt  observe  and  do  these  statutes 
17. 10  thou  shalt  observe  to  do  according  to  all 
24.    8  Take  heed . .  that  thou  observe  diligently 

24.  S  as  I  commanded  them,  .ye  shall  observe 
28.  1  to  observe.. to  do  all  his  commandments 
28.  13  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  to  obse. 

25.  15  to  observe  to  do  all  his  commandments 
28.  58  If  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  all  the  wo. 
31.  12  and  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 
32. 46  shall  command  your  children  to  observe 
33.    9  they  have  observed  thy  word,  and  kept 

Josh.  1.  7,  8  that  thou  mayest  observe  t"  do  accord. 
Judg  13. 14  all  that  I  commanded  her  let  her  observe 
2  Sa.  11.  16  it  came  to  pass,  when  Joab  observed  the 
2  Ki.  17.  37  law.  .ye  shall  observe  to  do  for  evermore 

21.  8  only  if  they  will  observe  to  do  according 
2  Ch.  7.17  shalt  observe  my  statutes  and  my  judgm. 
Neh.  1.    5  mercy  forthem that  love  hini and  observe 

10.  29  to  observe  and  do  all  the  commandments 
Psa.105.  45  That  they  might  observe  his  statutes,  and 
107.  43  Whoso  (is)  wise,  and  will  observe  these 
II9-  34  J'ea- 1  shall  observe  it  with  (my)  whole  h. 
Eccl.11.  4  He  that  observeth  the  wind  shall  not  sow 
Isa.  42.  20  Seeing  many  things,  but  thou  observest 
Jer.  8.  7  the  crane  and  the  swallow  observe  the  t. 
Eze.  20.  18  neither  observe  their  judgments,  nor  de. 

37.  24  they  shall,  .observe  my  statutes,  and  do 

5.  To  observe,  keep,  take  heed,  "is;?  shamar,  3. 
Jon.    2.    8  They  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake 

6.7*o  watch  intensely  or  amiss,  iraparvpiu  paratereo. 

Gal.  4.  10  Ye  observe  days,  and  months,  and  tinies 
7.  To  do,  make,  ttoUw  poieo. 

Acts  16.  21  not  lawful  for  us  to  receive,  neither  to  0. 
S.  To  watch  with,  o-wrripi(o  suntereo. 

Mark  6.  20  For  Herod  feared  John,  .and  observed  him 
9.  To  watch,  Tvp4oj  ierco. 

Matt  23.  3  whatsoever  they  bid  you  [observe].,  obse, 
28.  20  Teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whi. 

Acts  21.  25  [concluded  that  they  observe  no  suchth.] 

10.7*0  guard,  keep  watch,  <pv\do-o-u}  phulasso. 
Markio.  20  all  these  have  I  observed  from  my  youth 
'*!     5.  21  that  thou  observe  these  things  without 


OBSERVE 


70S 


OF 


03SERVE  diligently,  to  — 

To  observe  diligently,  divine,  c'ru  nachash,  3. 

i  Ki.20.  33  the  meu  did  diligently  observe  whether 
OBSERVE  times,  to  — 
To  observe  the  clouds,  ]yjr  anan,  3a. 

Lev.  19.  26  shall  ye  use  enchantment,  nor  observe  t. 

Deut  18.  10  shall  not  be  found.,  an  observer  of  times 
18.  14  hearkened  unto  observers  of  times,  and 

2  Ki.21.    6  observed  times,  and  used  enchantments 

2  Ch.33.   6  he  observed  times,  and  used  enchantme. 

OBSERVED,  to  be  (much)  — 

Observances,  observations,  as~)2y  shimmurim. 

Exodi2.  42  It  (is)  a  night  to  be  much  observed  unto 
12.  42  this  (is)  that  night  of  the  Lukd  to  be  obs. 
OBSTINATE  — 
Herd,  sharp,  naJjj  qasheh. 

Isa.  48.   4  Because  I  knew  that  thou  (art)  obstinate 
OBSTINATE,  to  make  — 
To  strengthen,  harden,  {'Dn  amats,  3. 

Deut.  2.  30  made  his  heart  obstinate,  that  he  might 
OBTAIN,  to  — 

I.  To  take  or  keep  fast  hold,  p\n  chazaq,  5. 

Dan.  11.  21  he  shall  come  in  peaceably,  and  obtain 

2,To  lift  up,  n^j  nasa. 

Esth.  2.  9  the  maiden  pleased  him,  and  she  obtained 
2.  15  Esther  obtained  favour  in  the  sight  of  all 
2. 17  she  obtained  grace  and  favour  in  his  sight 

5.  2  when  the  king  saw  Esther,  .she  obtained 

3.  To  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  ijpj  nasag,  5. 

Isa.  35.  10  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and 
51  11  they  shall  obtain  gladness  and  joy  .sorrow 

4.  To  bring  out,  cause  to  come  forth,  pis  puq,  5. 

Prov.  8.  35  flndeth  life,  and  shall  obtain  favour  of  the 
12.  2  A  good  (man)  obtaineth  favour  of  the  Lo. 
18.  22  findeth  a  good  (thing),  and  obtaineth  fa. 

5.  To  happen  or  come  upon,  i-mrvyxavw  epituychano. 

Rom  1 1.    7  Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  se. 

11.  7  the  election  hath  obtained  it,  and  the  rest 
Heb.  6.  15  so,  after  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  ob. 

11.  33  wrought  righteousuess.obtained  promises 
Jas.    4.    2  ye  kill,  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot  o. 

6.  To  find,  evpi(TKa  heurisko. 

Heb.  9.  12  entered.,  having  obtained  eternal  redem. 

7.  To  take  or  receive  thoroughly,  KaTa\a/i$dva>  hat. 

1  Co.   9.  24  one  receiveth..So  run,  that  ye  may  obtain 
S.  To  holdfast,  obtain,  attain,  Kpareoj  krateo. 

Acts  27.  13  supposing  that  they  had  obtained  (their) 

9.  To  acquire,  possess,  KTaofxai  ktaomai. 

Acts  22.  28  With  a  great  sum  obtained  I  this  freedom 

10.  To  obtain  by  lot,  \ayxdvu)  laychano. 

Acts    1.  17  was  numbered  with  us,  and  had  obtained 

2  Pe.    1.    1  to  them  that  have  obtained  like  precious 

II.  To  take,  receive,  Xap.$dva>  lambano. 

1  Co.   9.  25  they  (do  it)  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown 
Heb.    4.  16  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace 
12. For  a  making  all  around,  els  irepnroiwvii'. 

1  Th.  5.    9  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 
13.  To  happen,  come  upon,  rvyxdvcv  tugchano. 

Luke-io.  35  which  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obt. 
Arts  26.  22  Having  therefore  obtained  help  of  God 

2  Ti.    2.  10  that  they  may  also  obtain  the  salvation 
Heb    8.    6  But  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excellent 

11.  35  that  they  might  obtain  a  better  resurree. 
[See  also  Children,  leave,  mercy,  witness,  good  report.] 
OBTAIN  by  inheritance,  to  — 
To  obtain  by  lot,  K\vpovofj.4w  kleronomeo. 

1Kb.    1.    4  as  he  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a  more 
OBTAIN  an  inheritance,  to  — 
To  choose  by  lot,  K\np6m  klerod. 

Eph.    1.  11  In  whom  also  we  have  obtained  an  inhe. 
OBTAINING  — 
For  a  miking  all  around,  els  irtpnroincrtv  cis  per. 

2  Th.  2.  14  to  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord 
OCCASION  — 
I.  A  rolling,  occasion,  opportunity,  n^y  illah. 

Dan.   6.    4  sought  to  find  occasion  against  Daniel  co. 

6.  4  but  they  could  find  none  occasion  nor  fa. 
6.    5  We  shall  nut  find  any  occasion  against 

3.^4  rolling,  opportunity,  occasion,  rh*hy.  alilah. 
Deut22.  14  And  give  occasions  of  speech  against  her 
22.  17  And,  lo,  he  hath  given  occasions  of  speech 

■i.A  meeting,  njxn  taanah. 

Jer.    2.  24  in  her  occasion  who  can  turn  her  away? 
5. A  meeting,  ruNn  toanah. 

Judgi4.   4  that  he  sought  an  occasion  against  the  P. 
6. A  quarrel,  removal,  nxm?  tenuah. 

Job  33. 10  Behold,  he  flndeth  occasions  against  me 
7.0cc«si.>ny  excitement,  -impulse,  a<t>op/j.7)  aphorme. 

Rom.  7.    8,  11  sin,  taking  occasion  by  the  command. 
2  Co.  5.  12  give  yon  occasion  to  glory  on  our  behalf 
11. 12  cut  off  occasion  from  them  which  desire  o. 
1.     5  13  only(uBe)not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the 
5. 14  give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak 


1  Ti. 


OCCASION  of,  by  — 

Through,  by  means  of,  Sia  {gen.)  dia. 

2  Co.  8.   8  but  by  occasion  of  the  forwardness  of  ot. 
OCCASION  (of  stumbling),  to  fall  — 
A  stumbling  block,  attdvciaXov  skandalon. 

Rom  14. 13  or  an  occasion  to  fall,  in . .  brother's  way 
1  Jo.   2.  10  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  him 

OCCASION,  to  (have)  — 
I.  To  fall,  ity  nephal. 

Ezra  7.  20  which  thou  shalt  have  occasion  to  bestow 
2.To  bring  round  about,  23D  sabab. 

1  Sa.  22.  22  I  have  occasioned  (the  death)  of  all  the  p. 
OCCASION  serves,  to  find  occasion,  as  — 
To  find,  xyo  matsa. 

Judg.  9.  33  then  mayest  thou,  .as  thou  shalt  find  oc. 

1  Sa.  10.    7  do  as  occasion  serve  thee ;  for  God  (is)  with 

OCCUPATION  — 

1.  Work,  <*t?n^  melakah. 

Jon.    1.  '8  What  (is)  thine  occupation?  and  whence 
2. Doing,  work,  ni^yp  maaseh. 

Gen.  46.  33  Pharaoh. . shall  say,  What  (is)  youroccu.? 
47.    3  said  unto  his  brethren,  What  (is)  your  oc. 

Z.Art,  trade,  profession,  rex^V  techne. 

Acts  18.   3  by  their  occupation  they  were  teut  makers 
OCCUPIED,  to  be  — 
l.To  do  work,  npuSo  njpjj  asah  melakah,  2. 

Judg  16. 11  with  new  ropes  that  never  were  occupied 

2.  To  do,  use,  n^'jj  asah. 

EXXKI38.  24  All  the  gold  that  was  occupied  for  the  w. 

3.  To  walk  round  about,  7T€pt7raT€a>  peripateo. 
Heb.  13.   9  not  profited  them  that  have  been  occupied 

OCCUPY,  to  — 

l.To  give,  \r\inathan. 

Eze.  27.  16  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  emeralds 

27. 19  Dan  also  and  Javan  going  to  and  fro  occ. 

27.  22  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  chief  of  all 

2.  To  mingle,  traffic,  3tv  arab. 

Eze.  27.   9  all  the  ships,  .were  in  thee  to  occupy  thy 
27.  27  the  occupiers  of  thy  merchandise,  and  all 

3.  To  fill  up  or  again,  avairAripoco  anapleroo. 

1  Co.  14.  16  how  shall  he  that  occupieth  the  room  of 

4.  To  do  business,  irp  ay  par  evo/xat  pragmateuomai. 

Lukeig.  13  called,  .and  said  unto  them,  Occupy  till 
OCCUPY  with,  to  — 
To  go  about,  trade,  trip  sachar. 

Eze.  27.  21  they  occupied  with  thee  in  lambs,  and  r. 
OCCURRENT  — 
A  coming  or  falling  upon,  occurrence,  yiBpega. 

1  Ki.    5.    4  (is)  neither  adversary  nor  evil  occurrent 
OC'-RAN,  j-py  troubler. 

Father  of  Pagiel,  an   Asherite  whom  Moses  chose  to 
number  the  people.    B.C.  1490. 

Num.  1.  13  Of  Asher ;  Pagiel  the  son  of  O. 

2.  27  the  captain . .  (shall  be)  Pagiel  the  son  of  0. 
7.  72  On  the  eleventh  day  Pagiel  the  son  of  0). 
7.  77  (was)  the  offering  of  Pagiel  the  son  of  O. 
10.  26  over  the  host . .  (was)  Pagiel  the  son  of  O. 
O'-DED,  -niy,  Tiy  aiding. 

1.  Father  of  the  prophet  Azariah  who  encouraged  Asa 
king  of  Judah.     B.C.  941. 

2  Ch.15.    1  spirit,  .came  upon  Azariah  the  son  of  0. 

15.   8  when  Asa  heard .  .the  prophecy  of  O.  the 

2.  A  prophet  in  Samaria  who  obtained  the  release  of  the 
captives  of  Judah.     B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.28.    9  prophet,  .was  there,  whose  name  (was)  0. 
ODIOUS  — 
To  hate,  n$?  sane. 

Prov3o.  23  For  an  odious  (woman)  when  she  is  mar. 
ODIOUS,  to  make  selves  — 
To  ron$c  self  to  stink  or  be  abhorred,  t^N?  baash,  7. 

1  Ch.19.    6  saw  that  they  had  made  themselves  odi. 
ODOUR,  (sweet)  — 
I. Rest,  sweetness,  sweet  thing,  nin'j  nichoach. 

Lev.  26.  31  will  not  smell  the  savour  of  your  sweet  0. 

Dan.  2.  46  should  offer  an  oblation  and  sweet  odours 

2. Smell*  odour,  savour,  oV/dj  osme. 

Johnz2.    3  was  filled  with  the  odourof  the  ointment 
Phil.   4.  18  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  ac. 

3.  Incense*  perfume,  8vfxla.p.a  thumiama. 

Rev.    5.    8  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which  are  the 
18.  13  cinnamon,  and  odours,  and  ointments,  and 
OF  — 
l.Unto,  concerning,  bi<  el. 

Gen.  20.    2  A.  said  of  Sarah  his  wife,  She  (is)  my  sis. 
2.  With,  tin  eth. 

1  Ch.  2. 18  Caleb,  .begat,  .of  Azubah  (his)  wife,  and 
3.0/,  n  di. 

Ezra   5.  14  vessels  also  of  gold  and  silver  of  the  house 
4. From,  out  of,  jp  mm. 

Gen.    2.    7  LOUD  God  formed  man  (of)  the  dust  of  the 

5.  From  before,  Dip.jp  min  fnfr«». 

Ezra   4. 15  moved  sedition  within  the  same  of  old  t. 


Ezra  4. 19  it  is  found  that  this  city  of  old  time  hath 

5.  17  that  a  decree  was  made  of  Cyrus  the  king 
7.  14  Forasmuch  as  thou  art  sent  of  the  king 

Dan.    2.   6  ye  shall  receive  of  me  gifts  and  rewards 
2.    8  I  know  of  certainty  that  ye  would  gai.i 
2.  16  desired  of  the  king  that  he  would  givehim 
2. 18  they  would  desire  mercies  of  the  God 
2.  25  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  captives  of  J. 
2.  35  became  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  thr. 
2.  41  but  there  shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength 
2.  47  Of  a  truth.  .yourGod(is)aGodofgods,  and 

2.  49  Daniel  requested  of  the  king,  and  he  set  3. 

3.  26  Then,  .came  forth  of  the  midst  of  the  tire 

4. 12  the  fruit  thereof,  .all  flesh  was  fed  of  it 

5. 13  which  (art)  of  the  children  of  the  captivity 

6.  7, 12  of  any  god  or  man.  .save  of  thee,  O  ki. 

6.  13  That  Daniel,  which  (is)  of  the  children 

7.  16  I  came  near  unto  one  of  them  that  stood 

^.Concerning,  upon,  over,  1%  al. 

2  Sa.  21.    4  We  will  have  no  silver.,  of  Saul,  nor  of  his 

Jer.     8.    6  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wickedness 

Dan.    5.  14  I  have  even  heard  of  thee,  that  the  spirit 

5.  16  I  have  heard  of  thee,  that  thou  canst  make 

7.  19  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the  fourth  be. 

7.  20  of  the  ten  horns  that  (were)  in  his  head 

7. From  with,  Dj;p  meim. 

Exod22. 14  if  a  man  borrow  (ought)  of  his  neighbour 

S.From  with  me,  npyp  meimmadi. 

1  Sa.  20.  28  David  earnestly  asked,  .of  me.  -to  Beth. 

9.  From  the  face  of,  "^\o  milliphne. 

Exod23.  21  Beware  of  Jum, andobey  his  voice, provoke 
36.    3  they  received  of  Moses  all  the  offering  w. 
10. From  the  hand  of,  Tp  miyyad. 

2  Sa.  18.  31  Lord  hath  avenged  thee  this  day  of  all  th. 
11. From  of,  air6  apo. 

Matt.  3.  4  the  same  John  had  his  raiment  of  camel's 
5.  42  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  thee  turn 
7.  15  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to 
7.  16  Do  men  gathergrapes  of.. or  figs  of  thistles 

10.  17  But  beware  of  men ;  for  they  will  deliver 
11. 19  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children 

11.  29  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 
15.    1  scribes  and  Pharisees,  which  were  of  Jer. 

15.  27  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  from 

16.  6   11  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 

16.  12  not  beware  of  the  leaven  of  bread,  but  of 
10.  21  surfer  many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief 

17.  25  of  whom  do  the  kings,  .take  custom  or  t. 
17.  25  of  their  own  children,  or  of  strangers? 

17.  26  Peter  saith.  .Of  strangers.    Jesus  saith 
2t.  11  said,  This  is  Jesusthe  prophet  of  Nazareth 
24.32  Now  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree :  27.  9. 
27.  21  Whether  of  the  twain  willye  that  I  release 
27.  24  saying,  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood,  .see 
27.  57  there  came  a  rich  man  of  Arimathea,  na. 

Mark  5.  29,  34;  6.  43;  7.  28;  8.  15, [31];  12.  2,  38;  13. 
28  ;  15.  43,  45  ;  Luke  5.  15  ;  6.  13,  17,  30 ;  7.  21,  35  ;  8.  2, 
[3];  9.  22,  38;  11.  50,  51 ;  12.  1,  4,  15,  20,  57;  17.  25  ;  18. 
3;  20.  10,  46;  21.  30;  22.  18,  71  ;  23.  51  ;  24.  [42];  John 

1.  44,  44;  5.  19,  30;  7.  17,  18,  28;  8.  28,  42;  10.  18;  11. 
1  51 ;  12.  21 ;  14.  10 ;  15.  4 ;  16.  13 ;  18.  34 ;  19.  38 ;  21. 

2,  10 ;  Acts  2.  17,  18,  22 ;  5.  2,  3 ;  6.  9 ;  8.  22  ;  10.  38 ;  12. 
1 ;  13.  23 ;  15.  5 ;  17.  13 ;  19.  [13] ;  21.  16,  27 ;  23.  34  ;  27. 
44;  Rom.  13.  [1] ;  1  Co.  1.  30;  4.  5 ;  6.  19 ;  11.  23;  2  Co. 
2-3  5  3-  5 1  io-  7 ;  Gat.  2.  1 ;  2.  6 ;  3.  2 ;  Phil.  1.  28 ;  Col. 
1.  7 ;  3.  24 ;  1  Th.  2.  6,  6 ;  1  Ti.  3.  7 ;  Heb,  7.  2,  13 ;  n. 
13;  12.  15 ;  13.  24;  Jas.  1.  13 ;  5.  4 ;  1  Jo.  1.  5 ;  2.  27 ;  3 
Jo.  7  ;  Rev.  2.  [17] ;  12.  6  ;  16.  12. 

12.77;  rough,  by  means  of,  dia  {gen.)  dia. 

Rom  14.  14  (there  is)  nothing  unclean  of  itself;  but  to 
13. Through,  because  of,  Sta  (ace.)  dia. 

Phil.  1.  15  preach  Christ  even  of  envy.  .soraeal30  of 
li.In  regard  to,  eU  eis. 

Matt.  5.  22  Thou  fool  !  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire 

Acts  25.  20  because  I  doubted  of  such  manner  of  qu. 

2  Co. 10.  13  But  we  will  not  boast  of  thiugs  without 
10. 15  Not  boasting  of  things  without  (our)  me. 
10.  16  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  line  of  th. 

12.  6  lest  any  man  should  think  of  me  above 
Heb.   7.  14  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake  nothing  con. 
1  Pe.  1.  11  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Ch. 

15.  Out  of  4k  ek,  e|  r:>\ 

Matt.  1.  3  And  .rudas  begat  Pharez  and  Zara  of  Ta. 
1.  5  And  Salmon  begat  Booz  of  Rachab  ;  and 
1.  5  Booz  begat  Obed  of  Ruth  ;  and  Obed  be. 
1.  6  and  David  the  king  begat  Solomon  of  her 
1. 16  of  whom  was  born  Jesus  who  is  called  C. 
1.  18  she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Gh. 
1.  20  that  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of  the 
3.   9  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  c. 

5.  37  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of 

6.  27  Which  of  you,  by  taking  thought,  can  add 

7.  9  Or  what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom  if  his 
10.  29  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground 
13. 47  was  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  of  eve. 

18.  12  and  one  of  thein  be  gone  astray,  doth  he 
21.25  whence  was  it  ?  from  heaven,  or  of  men  1 
21.  26  if  we  shall  say,  Of  men  ;  we  fear  the  peo. 

21.  31  Whether  of  them  twain  did  the  will  of 

22.  35  one  of  them,  .a  lawyer,  asked,  .tempting 
23-  25  within  they  are  full  [of]  extortion  and  ex. 
25.    2  five  of  them  were  wise,  and  five,  .foolish 

25.  8  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for  our  lamps  are  g. 

26.  21  I  say  unto  you,  That  one  of  you  shall  bet. 
26.  27  gave  (it)  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all  of 
26.  29  I  will  not.  .drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit 


OF 


"09 


OFFEND 


Matt27-  29  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns 

27.  48  straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a 

Mark  9.  17  ;  ix.  14,  30,  32  ;  12.  44,  44  ;  14.  18,  [20],  23, 

25  ;  16.  [12]:  Luke  1.  5,  5,  27,  [35];  2.  4,  35,  36;  3.  8 ;  6.  44, 

44,  45  ;  10.  11  ;  11.  5,  15,  27,  49;  12.  6.  13,  25;  14.  28,  33; 

15.  4,  4;  16.  9;  17.  [7],  15  ;  20.  4,  6;  21.  4,  4,  iS;  22.  3, 
231  5°.  58 ;  24.  13,  [18J,  22 ;  John  1.  13,  13,  13,  13,  16,  24, 
35,  40 ;  2.  15  ;  3.  1,  5,  6,  6,  8,  31,  31 ;  4.  7)  13,  14,  22,  39  ; 
6.  8,  11,  13,  26,  51,  60,  64,  65,  70,  71 ;  7.  17,  19,  22,  22,  25, 
31,  40,  42,  44,  48,  48,  50.  52  J  8.  23,  23,  41,  44,  44,  46,  47, 
47  ;  9.  6,  16  ;  10.  16,  20,  26 ;  11.  19,  37,  45,  46, 49  ;  12.  [4], 

9,  49 ;  13.  21 ;  15.  19,  19  ;  ifi.  5,  14,  15 ;  17.  12, 14, 14, 16, 
16  ;  iS.  9,  26,  36,  36,  37  ;  19.  2  ;  20.  24;  21.  2. 

Acts  1.  24;  2.  30;  3.  22;  4.  6;  5.  38,  39;  6.  9;  7.  37; 

10.  1,  45;  11.  2.  20,  28;  13.  21;  15.  2,  21,  22,  23;  17.  4;  12. 
26 ;  20.  30;  22.  14;  23.  21,  34;  34.  10. 

Rom.  1.  3;  2.  29,  29;  4.  12,  14,  16,  16,  16;  5.  16;  9.  5, 
6,  11,  11,  21,24,  24,  30;  10.  5,  6;  11.  1,  6,  [6],  14,  36;  13. 
3;  14.  23,  23;  16.  10,  11;  1  Co.  1.  30;  2.  12 ;  7.  7;  8.  6;  9. 
[7],  7,  13,  14;  10.  4,  17;  11.  8,  8,  12,  i2,  28,  28;  12.  15, 15, 

16,  16 ;  15.  6,  47  ;  2  Co.  2.  17,  17 ;  3.  5,  5  ;  4.  7 ;  5.  1,  18 ; 
9.  7;  12.  6;  Gal.  2.  12,  15;  3.  7,  9,  10,  12,  18,  18;  4.  4, 
23,  23;  5.  8;  6.  8,  8;  Eph.  2.  8,  9;  3.  15;  5.  [30,  30]; 
Phil.  1.  16,  17 ;  3.  5,  5,  9,  9 ;  4.  22 ;  Col.  4.  n  ;  1  Th.  2. 

3,  3,  6;  2TL  2.  8;  3.  6 ;  Titus  1.  10,  12;  2.  8. 

Heb.  2.  11;  3.  13;  4.  1;  7-4,  5,  12;  n.  3;  Jas.  2.  16; 

4.  1;  1  Pe.  1.  23;  11.  3;  Jas.  2.  16;  4.  1;  1  Pe.  1.  23;  4. 
11 ;  i  Jo.  2.  16,  16,  19,  19,  19,  21,  29;  3.  8,  9, 9,  10,  12,  19; 
4.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  5,  6,  6,  7,  7,  13;  5.  1,  1,  4, 18,  18,  19;  2  Jo. 
4;  3  Jo.  11 ;  Rev.  1.  [5];  2.  7,  10,  11,  17,  21,  22;  5.  5,  5;  6. 
1,1:7.  4>  5>  5>  5>  °"»  6,  6,  7,  7,  7,  8,  8,  8,  9,  13 ;  8.   11 ;  9. 

20.  21,  21,  21,  21;  14.  8,  10;  15.  7;  16.  n;  17.  1,  11;  18. 
3,  4,  12;  21.  6,  21. 

16. In,  by,  with,  ei/  en. 

Luke  1.  61  There  is  none  [of]  thy  kindred  that  is  ca. 
Acts  26.  20  But  showed  first  unto  them  of  Damascus 
Rom.  2.  17  art  called  a  Jew.  .and  makest  thy  boast 
2.  23  Thou  that  makest  thy  boast  of  the  law 
11.   2  Wot  ye  not  what  the  scripture  saith  of  E.? 
2  Co.  2.  12  and  a  door  was  opened  unto  me  of  the  L. 
10. 15  Notboasting.  .of  othermen's  labours;  but 
Gal.     4.  20  change  my  voice ;  for  I  stand  in  doubt  of 
Eph.  4.    1  I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord,  be. 
Titus  3.    5  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we 
Jas.     5.  19  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and 
2  Pe.  2. 12  speak  evil  of  the  things  that  they  under. 

1". On,  upon,  over,  hri  (gen.)  epi. 

Luke  4.  25  But  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  many  widows 

22.  59  of  a  truth  this  (fellow)  also  was  with  him 
Acts   4.  27  For  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  Jes. 

10.  34  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  resp. 
Gal.  3.  16  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  of  many;  but  as  of 
Rev.    8. 13  woe,  woe  to  the  inhabiters<._"  the  earth 

IS. In  regard  to,  upon;  over,  iiri  (dat)  •'•.pi. 

Matt  18.  13  He  rejoiceth  more  of  that  (sheep),  than  of 
Mark  6.  52  For  they  considered  not  (the  mb'acle)  of 
Johni2.  16  that  these  things  were  written  01  him,  and 
Acts    4.   9  If  we  this  day  be  examined  of  the  good  de. 

1  Co.  16. 17  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  Stephanas  and 

2  Co.  12.  21  have  not  repented  of  the  uncleanness.and 
Heb.  8.    1  Now  of  the  things  which  we  have  spoken 

11.  4  he  obtained  witness..  God  testifying  of  his 
19.0k,  upon,  over,  £iri  (ace.)  epi. 

Mark  9.  12  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  that 

9.  13  and  they  have  done,  .as  it  is  written  of 
Heb.  7. 13  For  he  of  whom  these  things  are  spoken 

20. Dmcn  against,  Kara  (gen.)  kata. 

1  C0.15. 15  because  we  have  testified  of  God  that  he 

21.  Over  against,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Acts  27.    2  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by  the  coasts  of 
27.    5  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  Silicia 
Rom.  4.    4  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt 
1  Co.   7.    6  I  speak  this  by  permission,  .not  of  com. 
Phm.      14  should  not  be  as  it  were  of  necessity,  but 

22.  With,  fxerd  (gen.)  meta. 

MattiS.  23  which  would  take  account  of  his  servants 

23.  From,  -rrapd  (gen.)  para. 

Matt.  2.    4  he  demanded  of  them  where  Christ  should 
2.    7  enquired  of  them  diligently  whattime  the 

2.  16  had  diligently  enquired  of  the  wise  men 
t8.  19  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  w. 
20.  20  came  to  him . .  desiring  a  certain  thing  [of] 

Mark  8.  n  seeking  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven,  temp. 

Luke  6. 34  if  ye  lend  (to  them)  of  whom  ye  hope  to  r. 

11. 16  others,  tempting.. sought  of  him  asign  from 

12.  48  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him 
John  1.  14  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father 

4.    9  How  is  it  that  thou,  .askest  drink  of  me 

4.  52  Then  enquired  he  of  them  the  hour  when 

5.  44  which  receive  honour  one  of  another,  and 

6.  45  that  hath  heard,  and  hath  learned  of  the 

6.  46  save  he  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the 
8.  26  speak . .  those  things  which  I  have  heard  of 

8.  40  told  you  the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  of 
9. 16 This  manisnotof  God,  becausehekeepeth 

9.  33  If  this  man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do 
10.  18  This  commandment  have  I  received  of  my 
15.  15  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my  Father 
17.    7  have  known  that  all  things,  .are  of  thee 

Acts    2.  33  having  received  of  the  Father  the  promise 

3.  2  to  ask  alms  of  them  that  entered  into  the 
3.    s  expecting  to  receive  something  of  them 

7.  16  sepulchre  that  Abraham  bought.. of  the  so. 
9.   2  desired  of  him  letters  to  Damascus  to  the. 

10. 22  to  send  for  thee,  .to  hear  words  of  thee 
17.    9  when  they  had  taken  security  of  Jason,  and 
20.  24  ministry  which  I  have  received  of  the  Lord 


Acts  22.  30  certainty  wherefore  he  was  accusedfof]  the 
24.    8  by  examining  of  whomthyselfmayesttake 
25. 22  Having  therefore  obtained  help  [of]  God 
28.  22  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  thin. 

Gal.     1.  12  I  neither  received  it  of  man,  neither  was 

Eph.    6.    8  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  wh. 

Phil.   4.  18  having  received  of  Epaphroditus  the  thi. 

1  Th.  2. 13  ye  received  the  word,  .winch  ye  heard  of 

4.  1  as  ye  have  received  of  us  how  ye  ought  to 

1  Th.  3.    6  after  the  tradition  which  he  received  of  us 

2  Ti.    1.  13  sound  words,  winch  thou  hast  heard  of  me 

1.  18  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  th. 

2.  2  the  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me  a. 

3.  14  knowing  of  whom  thouhastlearned(them) 
Jas.     1.    5  any  of  youlack  wisdom, lethimaskof  God 

1.  7  that  he  shall  receiveanything  of  the  Lord 
1  Jo.  3.  22  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  [of]  him,  b. 

5.  15  have  the  petitionsthat  we  desired  [of  J  him 
Rev.    2.  27  shall  rule,  .even  as  I  received  of  my  Fat. 

3.  iS  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in 

21.  By  the  side  of,  irapd  (dat.) para. 

Matt.  6.    1  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  Father  which 
1  Pe.  2.   4  disallowed  indeed  of  men. .chosen  of  God 

25. About,  concerning,  irepi  (gen.)  peri. 

Matt  11.  10  For  this  is  (he),  of  whom  it  is  written,  B. 

15.  7  hypocrites,  well  did  Esaias  prophesy  of 
17.  13  understood  that  he  spake  unto  them  of  J. 

22.  42  What  think  ye  of  Chirst?  whose  son  is  he? 
24.  36  But  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  (in.) 
26.  24  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  is  written  of  him 

Mark  1.  30  lay  sick,  .and  anon  they  tell  him  of  her 
5.  27  When  she  had  heard  of  Jesus,  came  in  the 
7.    6  Well  hath  Esaias  prophesied  of  you  hyp. 

7.  25  heard  of  him,  and  came  and  fell  at  his  f. 

8.  30  charged . .  that  they  should  tell  no  man  of 
10. 10  his  disciples  asked  him  again  of  the  same 

13.  32  But  of  that  day  and.. hour  knoweth  no  m. 

14.  21  Son.  .indeed  goeth,  as  it  is  written  of  him 
Luke  1.    1  a  declaration  of  those  things  which  are 

2. 33  at  those  thingswhich  were  spoken  of  him 

2.  38  spake  of  him  to  all  them  that  looked  for 

3.  15  and  all  menmused  in  their  heartsof  John 

4. 14  there  went  out  a  fame  of  him  through  all 

4.  37  the  fame  of  him  went  out  into  every  place 

5. 15  the  more  went  there  a  fame  abroad  of  him 
7.   3  when  he  heard  of  Jesus,  he  sent  untohini 
7.  17  this  rumour  of  him  went  forth  throughout 
7.  18  the  disciples  of  John  showed  him  of  all 
7.  27  This  is  (lie)  of  whom  it  is  written,  Behold 

9.  9  but  who  is  this  of  whom  I  hear  such  th.? 
9.  11  spake  unto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
9.  45  and  they  feared  to  ask  him  of  that  saying 

11.  53  to  provoke  him  to  speak  of  many  things 

13.  1  told  him  of  the  Galileans,  whose  blood 

16.  2  How  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  thee  ?  give 
21.    5  as  some  spake  of  the  temple,  how  it  was 

23.  8  because  he  had  heard  many  things  of  him 
24. 14  they  talked  together  of  all  these  things 

John  1.  7,  8,  15,  22,  [30],  47 ;  2.  21,  25 ;  5.  31,  32,  32, 
3<5>  37,  39,  46;  7.  7,  13,  17,  39  :  8.  13,  14,  18,  18,  26,  46 ;  9. 
17 ;  10.  25,  41  ;  11.  13,  13 ;  12.  41 ;  13.  18,  22,  24 ;  15.  26 ; 
16.  8,  8,  8,  9,  10,  11,  19,25;  18.  19,  19,  23,  34;  21.  24; 
Acts  1.  1;  2.  29,  31;  5.  24;  7.  52;  8.  34,  34,  34;  9. 13  ;  n. 
22  ;  13.  29  ;  15.  6  ;  17.  32  ;  18.  15,  25  ;  21.  21 ;  22.  10  ;  23. 
6,  11,  20,  29 ;  24.  8,  22,  25 ;  25.  9,  19,  19,  20,  26;  26.  26 ; 
28.  21 ;  Rom.  14.  12  ;  15.  14,  21 ;  1  Co.  1.  11 ;  2  Co.  10.  8; 
1  Th.  1.  9 ;  4.  6;  5.  1 ;  2  Ti.  1.  3 ;  Titus  2.  8 ;  Heb.  4.  4, 
8;  5.  11 ;  6.  9 ;  9.  5;  10.  7  ;  11.  7,  [22],  32;  1  Pe.  1.  to,  10; 
3.  15 ;  2  Pe.  1.  12 ;  3.  16  ;  1  Jo.  1. 1 ;  2.  27 ;  5.  9,  10 ;  Jude 
3>  *S»  *5- 
26. About,  a/round,  concerning,  irept  (ace.)  peri. 

Mark  4. 19  the  lusts  of  other  tilings  entering  in,  cho. 
27.  Toioards,  to,  unto,  irpos  (ace)  pros. 

Heb.    1.    7  of  the  angels  he  saith,  Who  maketh  his  a. 
11. 18  Of  whom  it  was  said,  That  in  Isaac  shall 

2S.In  behalf  of ,  for,  virep  (gen.)  huper. 

2  Co.    1.    7  our  hope  of  you  (is)  stedfast,  knowing,  t. 

1.  8  not.,  have  you  ignorant  [of]  our  trouble 
7.    4  great  (is)  my  glorying  of  you  :  I  am  filled 

7.  14  if  I  have  boasted  any  thing  to  him  of  you 

8.  23  Whether.. of  Titus.. my  partner  and  fello. 

9.  2  for  which  I  boast  of  you  to  them  of  Mae. 
9.    3  lest  our  boasting  of  you  should  be  in  vain 

12.  5  Of  such  an  one  will  I  glory  :  yetof  myself 
Phil.  2.  13  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  (his)  good4-'io. 

29. In  the  presence  of,  before,  c/j.Trpo(r6evl\la,t.  18.14. 
SO. By,  under,  vtr6  (gen.)  hvpo. 

Matt.  1.  22  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  pr. 

2.  15  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  pr. 

2. 16  when  he  saw  that  he  was  mocked  of  the 

3.  6  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan,  confess. 

3.  13  cometh.  .unto  John,  to  be  baptized  of  him 
3. 14  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and 

4.  1  Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  Spirit  into 

4.  1  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil 

5.  13  cast  out,  and  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of 

6.  2  that  they  may  have  glory  of  men.  Verily 
10. 22  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  (men)  for  my  name 
11.  27  All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  F. 

14.  8  she,  being  before  instructed  of  her  moth. 

17.  12  Likewise  shall,  .the  Son  of  man  suffer  of 
19. 12  eunuchs,  which  were  made  eunuchs  of  m. 
20.  23  but . .  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  Fath. 

23.  7  in  the  markets,  and  to  be  called  of  men 

24.  9  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  nations  for  my  n. 
27. 12  when  he  was  accused  of  the  chief  priests 

Mark  1.  5,  9,  13  ;  2.  3,  5,  26 ;  13.  13  ;  16.  [n] ;  Luke 
2.  21 ;  3.  7 ;  4.  2,  15 ;  7.  30 ;  8.  29,  [43] ;  9.  7,  8,  10,  22 ; 
14.  8,  8  ;  17.  20 ;  21.  17,  24 ;  John  10.  [14] ;  14.  21 ;  Acts 


2.  24  ;  4.  11 ;  10.  [33],  38,  41,  42 ;  12.  s  ;  15.  [4] ;  16.  4,  6, 
*4  \  *7-  J3  I  z  <•  35  ;  zz-  "»  12 ;  23.  10,  27,  27 ;  24.  26 ;  26. 
2,  6,  7 ;  Koni.  12.  21 ;  13.  1 ;  15.  15 ;  1  Co.  2.  12,  15 ;  4.  3, 
3  ;  6.  12;  7.  25 ;  8.  3 ;  10.  9,  10,  29  ;  11.  32 ;  14.  24,  24;  2 
Co.  i.  4,  16;  2.  6 ;  3.  2  ;  5.  4;  8.  19 ;  11.  24;  12.  11 ;  Gal. 
1.  14 ;  3.  17 ;  4.  9 ;  5.  15 ;  Eph.  5.  12 ;  Phil.  3.  12 ;  1  Th. 

1.  4  ;  2.  4,  14,  14 ;  2  Th.  2.  13 ;  Heb.  5.  4,  10 ;  7.  7 ;  11. 
23;  12-  3>  5  J  Jas-  r.  14;  2.  9 ;  3.  4,  6 ;  1  Pe  2.  4 ;  3  Jo. 
12.  12;  Jude  12,  17 ;  Kev.  6.  13. 

OF  fire  — 

Fiery,  of  fire,  irvpivos  p>urinos. 

Bev.   9.  17  sat  on  them,  having  breast  plates  of  fire 
OF  him,  or  of  himself  — 
Of  him  or  himself,  aurov,  avrov  hautou,  autou. 

Eph.    1.  17  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him 

Heb.   9.  26  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself 
OF,  there  — 
Concerning  it,  irspi  avrov  peri  autou. 

Matti2.  36  they  shall  give  accountthereofin  the  day 
OF,  where  — 
l.Concerning  which,  irepl  7js  perl  lies. 

Heb.   2.   5  put  in  subjection  the  world .  .whereof  we 

2.  Concerning  certain  things,  irepi  rlv<av  peri  tinOn. 

1  Ti.    1.    7  neither  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they 
[See  also  Full,  plenty,  speak,  weary.] 
OFF  — 
I. From  off,  xry&  meal. 

Gen.  24.  64  when  she  saw  Isaac,  she  lighted  off  the 
2.7 'he  face,  d-js  panim. 

Zeph.  1.  2  I  will  utterly  consume  all.  .from  off  the 
1.   2  I  will  cut. .  man  from  off  the  land,  saith  the 

3. From,  off,  away,  air6  apo. 

Matt26.  5S  Peter  followed  liim  afar  off  unto  the  high 

27.  55  many  women  were  therebeholdingafarofli 

Mark  5.    6  when  he  saw  Jesus  afar  off,  he  ran  and  w. 

14.  54  Peter  followed  him  afar  off,  eveninto  the 

15.  40  There  were  also  women  looking  on  afar  off 
Lukei6.  23  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  inhis 
John  1 1.  18  Bethany  was.  .about  fifteen  furlongs  off 
Rev.  18.  10  Standing  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  torm. 

18. 15  shall  stand  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  to. 
18.  17  and  as  many  as  trade  by  sea,  stood  afaroff 

4.  Out  off,  £k  eh. 

Markn.  8  otherscutdownhranchesoff  the  trees,  and 
[See  also  Afar,  beat,  branch,  break,  broken,  cast,  cast 
far,  crop,  cut,  cutting,  draw,  fall,  fallen,  far,  from, 
good  way,  leave,  neck,  pluck,  pluckt.  pull,  put,  put- 
ting, rend,  remove,  ring,  scrape,  shake,  shave,  smite, 
strip,  take,  taken,  wipe.] 
OFFENCE  — 
l.Sin,  Nan  cliet. 

Eccl.io.   4  leave  not.  .yielding  pacifieth  great  offen. 
2. A  stumbling,  tw^d  mikshol. 

1  Sa.  25.  31  this  shall  be  no.,  offence  of  heart  unto  my 
Isa.    8. 14  stone  of  stumbling  and  for  a  rock  of  otfe. 

Z.Sin,  error,  aixapria  hamartla. 

2  Co.  1 1.   7  Have  I  committed  an  offence  in  abasing  ni. 
4.  A  falling  aside  or  aicay,  ^ap6.-mo>y.apa/rapioma. 

Rom.  4.  25  Who  was  delivered  for'our  offences,  and 
5.  15  But  notastheoffence.so  also  (is)  the  free 
5.  15  For  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be 
5. 16  the  free  gift  (is)  of  many  offences  unto  ju. 
5.  17  if  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by 
5. 18  Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one  (judg. 
5.  20  Moreover  the  law  entered,  that  the  often. 

5. A  stumbling  block,  irpoo-Ko/x/xa  proskomma. 

Roni  14.  20  is)  evil  for  that  man  who  eateth  with  off. 

6. A  stumbling  block,  TrpoaKotri)  proskope. 

2  Co.  6.   3  Giving  no  offence  in  any  thing,  that  the 

7 '.A  stumbling  block,  o-Kav5a\ov  skandalon. 

Matti6.  23  thou  art  an  offence  unto  me ;  for  thou  sa. 
18.    7  Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  offences ! 
18.    7  for  it  must  needs  be  that  offences  come 
18.    7  but  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence 

Luke  17.    1  It  is  impossible  but  that  offences  will  co. 

Rom.  9.  33  Behold,  I  lay  in  Sion  a.  .rock  of  offence 

16.  17  mark  them  which  cause  divisions  and  off. 
Gal.     5.  11  then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross  ceased 

1  Pe.  2.   S  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence 
OFFENCE,  none,  void  of,  without  — 
Not  causing  to  stumble,  airpoo-KOiros  aproshojjos. 

Acts  24. 16  to  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offe. 

1  Co.  10.  32  Givenoneoffence.neitherto  the  Jews,  nor 
Phil.  1. 10  that  ye  may  be  sincere  and  without  offen. 

OFFENCE,  to  acknowledge  — 

To  be  guilty,  confess  guilt,  cc-n;  ashem. 

Hos.    5. 15  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,  and 
OFFEND,  to  (make  to)  — 
1.7*0  be  guilty,  Ci^x  ashem. 

Jer.     2.    3  all  that  devour  him  shall  offend ;  evil  sh. 
50.   7  We  offend  not,  because  they  have  sinned 

Eze.  25.  12  hath  greatly  offended,  and  revenged  him. 

Hos.   4.  15  let  not  Judah  offend  :  and  come  not  ye  u. 
13.    1  but  when  he  offended  in  Baal.,  he  died 

Hab.  1 .  1 1  offend,  (imputing)  this  power  unto  his  god 

I.GuiU,  nD^x  ashmah. 

2  Ch.23.  13  whereas  we  have  offended  against  the  Lo. 


OFFEND 


710 


OFFER 


3,  T"  deal  treacherously,  133  bagad. 

Psa"  73.  15  I  should  of  feud  (against)  the  generation 

t.  T<<  act  wickedly,  y^chabal. 

Job  34.  31  meet  to  be  said  unto  God.. I  will  not  ofT. 
5  To  silt,  err,  miss  the  mark,  san  chata. 

Gen.  20.  9  what  have  I  offended  thee,  that  thou  hast 
40.    1  had  offended  their  loid  the  king  of  Egypt 

2  Ki.18.  14  saying,  I  have  offended;  return  from  me 

Jer.  37.  18  What  have  I  offended  against  thee,  or  a. 

i>.  T    sin,  err,  miss  the  mark,  a/xaprduco  hamarXano. 

Acts  25.  8  nor  yet  against  Cesar,  have  I  offended  any 
7.  To  stumble,  fail,  TTTalo)  ptaio. 

.fas.  2.  10  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend 
3.    2  in  many  things  we  offend  all.     If  any.  .0. 

8.2*0  cause  to  stumble,  <Ttcau8a\(£a>  shandalizo. 
Matt.  5.  29  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 

5.  30  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 
11.   6  blessed  is  (he),  whosoever  shall  not  be  o. 
13.  21  when. .persecution  ariseth.  .heisoffended 

13.  57  they  were  offended  in  him.    But  jesussaid 

15.  12  Knowest  thou  that  the  Pharisees  were  of. 

17.  27  lest  we  should  offend  them,  go  thou  to 

18.  6  But  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little 
18.    8  if  thy  hand  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut  th. 

18.  9  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,  and 
24.  10  then  shall  many  be  offended,  and  shall  b. 
26.  31  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  t. 

26.  33  Thoughall .  .be  offended . .  will  I  never  be  0. 
Mark  4.  17  when,  .persecution  ariseth.  .they  are  off. 

6.  3  the  carpenter.  .And  they  were  offended  at 
9.  42  whosoever  shall  offend  oueof  (these)  little 
9.  43  if  thy  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off :  it  is  b. 
9. 45  if  thy  foot  offend  thee,  cut  it  off :  it  is  be. 

0.  47  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out:  it  is 

14.  27  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  t. 

14.  29  Although  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  (will) 
Luke  7.  23  blessed  is  (he),  whosoever  shall  not  be  o. 

17.  2  than  that  he  should  offend  one  of  these  1, 
John  6.  61  he  said  unto  them,  Doth  this  offend  you? 

16.  1  spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be  o. 
Horn  T4.  21  stumbleth,  [or  is  offended],  or  is  made  w. 

1  Co.  3.  13  if  meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will 

8.  13  eat  no  flesh . .  lest  I  make  my  brother  to  o. 

2  Co, 11.  29  Who  is  weak.. who  is  offended, andl  burn 
OFFEND,  (no)  thing  — 

.1  stumbling,  stumbling  Nock,  V^ro  milcshol. 

Psa.  119. 165  which  love  thy  law:  nothing  shall  offend 
OFFENDED  — 
To  step  over,  transgress,  V'Js  pasha,  2. 

ProviS.  19  A  brother  offended  (is  harder  to  be  won) 
OFFENDER,  (to  be  or  make  an)  — 

1.  Sinful  or  erring  one,  Nan  chatta. 

1  Ki.  1.  21  I  and  my  son  Solomon  shall  be  counted  of. 

2.  To  cause  to  sin  or  err,  Nan  chad',  5. 

Isa.   29.  21  That  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a  word 

3.  To  be  unrighteous,  unjust,  aSt/ceoi  adikeo. 

Acts  25. 11  Forif  I  be  an  offender,  or  have  committed 
OFFENDS,  thing  that  — 
.1  stumbling  block,  o-KavdaXov  skandalon. 

Matti3,  41  they  shall  gather,  .all  things  that  offend 
OFFER,  to  — 

1.  '/'"  slaughter,  offer  sacrifice,  rn?  zabach. 

Gen.  31.  54  Then  Jacob  offered  sacrifice  upon  the  m. 

46.    1  offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  fat. 

Kxod23.  18  Thou  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my  sac. 

Lev.  17.    5  sacrifices,  which  they  offer,  .and  offer  th. 

17.  7  they  shall  no  more  offer  their  sacrifices 

19.  5  if  ye  offer  a  sacrifice,  .ye  shall  offer  it  at 
22.  29  when  ye  will  offer  a  sacrifice,  .offer  (it) 

Nuni22.  40  Balak  offered  oxen  and  sheep,  and  sent 
DeutiS.    3  priests'  due.  .from  them  that  offer  asacr. 

27.  7  thou  shalt  offer  peace  offerings,  and  shalt 
33.  19  there  shall  they  offer  sacrifices  of  righte. 

Judgiu.  23  gathered  them  together  for  to  offer  a 

1  Sa.    1.   4  when  the  time  was  that  Elkanah  offered 

1.  21  went  up  to  offer  unto  the  Loud  the  yearly 

2.  13  when  any  man  offered  sacrifice, the  priests' 
2.  19  when  she  came  up  with  her  husband  to  o. 

2  9a.  15.  12  A.  sent  for  A. .  .while  he  offered  sacrifices 
1  Ki.  8.  62  all  Israel  with  him,  offered  sacrifice  before 

8.  63  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice.,  which  he  off. 
13.    2  upon  thee  shall  he  offer  the  priests  of  the 

1  Ch.15.  26  they  offered  seven  bullocks  and  seven  ra. 

2  Ch.  7.    4  the  king  and  all  the  people  offered  sacri. 

7.  5  king  Solomon  offered  asaerificeof  twenty 

15.  11  they  offered  unto  the  LORD  the  same  time 
Neh.12.  43  Also  that  day  they  offered  great  sacrifices 
Psa.    4.    5  Offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  and 

27.    6  therefore  will  I  offer  in  his  tabernacle  a. 

50.  14  Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving;  and  pay  thy 

50.  23  Whoso  olfereth  praise  glorifleth  me ;  and 

116.  17  I  will  offer  to  thee  the  sacrifice  of  thank. 

I^:t.    57.   7  thither  wentest  thou  up  to  offer  sacrifice 

Eze.  20.  28  they  offered  there  their  sacrifices,  ami  th. 

Jon.    1.  16  offered  a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lonn,  and  m. 

2.  To  slaughter,  offer  sacrifice,  nn»  zabach,  3. 

1  Ki.22. 43t.hu  people  off ered  and  burnt  inoense  yet 
^.Slaughter,  sacrifice,  r\z-<  zebach, 

Lev.  19.    6  It  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  ye  offer  it 

T   cause  to  draw  nigh,  bring  nigh,  wzinagash,  5. 

\mn.  s.  ...  Have  ycotlViftl  md  omc  sacrifices  and  nlf. 

Hal,    1.   7  \  c  offer  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar 


Mai.   1.  8  if  yi  offer  the  blind,  .if  ye  offer  the  lame 

2.  12  him  that  offereth  an  offering  unto  the  L. 

3.  3  they  may  offer  unto  the  Lokd  an  offering 

5.To  [cause  to)  wave,  offer,  ~'3  nuph,  5. 

Exod35.  22  every  man  that  offered,  (offered)  an  offer. 

Num.  8.  11  Aaron  shall  offer  the  Levites  before  the 
8.  13  offer  them  (for)  an  offering  unto  the  Lord 
8.  15  cleanse  them,  and  offer  them  (for)  an  off. 

8.  21  Aaron  offered  them  (as)  an  offering  before 
(3.  To  stretch  out  to,  naj  natah, 

1  Ch.21.  10  Thus  saitll  the  Lord,  I  offer  thee  three 
7.  To  lift  up  to.  b$i  natal, 

2  Sa.  24.  12  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  offer  thee  three 
S.Topow  out,  Tipi  nasah, 

Hos.   9.    4  They  shall  not  offer  wine  (offerings)  to  the 

9.  To  cause  to  pour  out,  tjdj  nasah,  5. 

Psa.  16.    4  drink  offerings' of  blood  will  I  not  offer 

10.  To  pour  out,  *jp?  nesak,  3. 

Dan.  2.  46  commanded  that  they  should  offer  an  ob. 
11.2b  lift  up,  xyi  nasa. 

Eze.  20.  31  For  when  ye  offer  your  gifts,  when  ye  m. 

12.  To  give,  |m  nathan. 

Num  18.  12  first  fruits  of  them  which  they  shall  offe. 
Eze.    6. 13  the  place  where  they  did  offersweet  savour 

13.  To  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

1  Sa.   2.  28  to  offer  upon  mine  altar,  to  burn  incense 
14.ro  cause  to  go  up,  rhy  alah,  5. 

Gen.    8.  20  and  offered' burnt  offerings  on  the  altar 
22.    2  offer  him  there  for  a  burnt  offering  upon 
22.  13  offered  him  up  for  a  burnt  offering  in  the 
Exod24.    5  he  sent  young  men.  .which  offered  burnt 

30.  9  Ye  shall  offer  no  strange  incense  thereon 

32.  6  rose  up . .  and  offered  burnt  offerings,  and 
40.  29  offered  upon  it  the  burnt  offering,  and  the 

Lev.  14.  20  the  priest  shall  offer  the  burnt  offering 
17.    8  that  offereth  a  burnt  offering  or  sacrifice 

Nuni23. 2, 4  offered  on  (every )altar  a  bullock  and  a  ram 
23. 14,  30  offered  a  bullock  and  a  ram  on  (every) 

Dent  12.  13  offer  not  thy  burnt  offerings  in  every  pla. 

12.  14  there  thou  shalt  offer  thy  burnt  offerings 
27.   6  thou  shalt  offer  burnt  offerings  thereon 

Josh.  8.  31  they  offered  thereon  burnt  offerings  unto 

22.  23  to  offer  thereon  burnt  offering  or  meat  of. 
Judg.  6.  26  offer  a  burnt  sacrifice  with  the  wood  of 

11.  31  and  I  will  offer  it  up  for  a  burnt  offering 
13. 16  if  thou  wilt  offer,  .thou  must  offer  it  unto 

13.  19  and  offered  (it)  upon  a  rock  unto  the  Lord 

20.  26  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

31.  4  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

1  Sa.    6.  14  offered  the  kine  a  burnt  offering  unto  the 

6.  15  offered  burnt  offerings  and  sacrificed  sa. 

7.  9  Samuel  took  a  sucking  land],  and  offered 

7.  10  as  Samuel  was  offering  up  the  burnt  offe. 
10.  S  I  will  come  down  unto  thee,  to  offer  burnt 
13.   9  And  Saul,  .offered  the  burnt  offering 

13. 10  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  ottering 
13.  12  I  forced  myself  therefore,  and  offered  a  b. 

2  Sa.    6.  1 7  David  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  o. 

6. 18  as  soon  as  David  had  made  an  end  of  off. 
24.  22  Let  my  lord  the  king  take  and  offer  up 
24.  24  neither  will  I  offer  burnt  offerings  uuto 
24.  25  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

1  Ki.  3.    4  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  did  S.offer  upon 

3.  15  offered  up  burnt  offerings,  and  offered  p. 

9.  25  three  times  in  a  year  did  Solomon  offer  b. 

12.  32  ordained  a  feast,  .he  offered  upon  the  al. 
12.  33  So  he  offered  upon  the  altar  which  he  had 
12.  33  offered  upon  the  altar,  and  burnt  incense 

2  Ki.  3.  27  and  offered  him.  .a  burnt  offering  upon 

)6. 12  the  king  approached  to  the  altar,  and  off. 

1  Ch.16.    2  when  David  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

16.  40  To  offer  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  up. 

21.  24  I  will  not.  .offer  burnt  offerings  without 
21.  26  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

23.  31  to  offer  all  burnt  sacrifices  unto  the  Lord 
29.  21  and  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Loud 

2  Ch.  1.    6  offered  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  upon 

4.  6  such  things  as  they  offered  for  the  burnt. 

8.  12  Then  Sol  onion  offered  burnt  offerings  unto 
8.  13  offering  according  to  the  commandment 

23. 18  to  offer  the  burnt  offering  of  the  Lord,  as 

24.  14  vessels,  .to  offer,  .and  they  offered  burnt 
29.  7  have  not.. offered  burnt  offerings  in  the 
29.  21  commanded,  .to  offer.. on  the  altar  of  the 
29.  27  Hezekiah  commanded  to  offer  the  burnt  o. 
29.  29  whentheyhadmadeanendofofteriiii;,  the 
35.  14  the  sons  of  Aaron  (were  busied)in  offering 
35.  16  to  offer  burnt  offerings  upon  the  altar  of 

Ezra    3.    2  to  offer  burnt  offerings  thereon,  as.. writ. 
3.    3  they  offered  burnt  ottering  thereon  unto 
3.    6  to  offer  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord 
Job      1.    5  and  offered  burnt  offerings,  .to  the  num. 

42.    8  and  offer  up  for  yourselves  a  burnt  offer. 
Psa.  51. 19  then  shall  they  offer  bullocks  upon  thine 

66.  15  I  will  offer  unto  thee..  I  will  offer  bullocks 
Isa.    57.    6to  them  .thou  hast  offeredameat  offering 

66.    3  he  that  offereth  an  oblation . .  swine's  flesh 
Jer.   14.  12  when  they  offer  burnt  offering  and  an  of. 

33.  18  want  a  man  before  me  to  offer  burnt  off. 
4S.  35  him  that  offereth  in  the  high  places,  and 

Eze.  43.  i3  to  offer  burnt  offerings  thereon,  and  to 
43.24  they  shall  offer  them  up.,  a  burnt  offering 

Amos  5.  22  Though  ye  offer  me  burnt  offerings  and 
15.  To  do,  make,  n'pjj  asah. 

Exod2g.  36  And  thou  shalt  offer  every  day  a  bullock 
29.  38  Nun'  tbis(is  that)  which  thou  shalt  offer 


Exod  29.  39  The  one  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  in  the  mor. 
29.  39,  41  and  the  other  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  at 
Lev.  5. 10  he  shall  offerthe  second,  .a  burnt  offering 
6.  22  the  priest.. that  is  anointed. .shall  offer  it 
9.  7  offer  thy  sin  offering.. offer  the  offering  of 
9.  16  and  offered  it  according  to  the  manner 
14.  19  the  priest  shall  offer  the  sin  offering,  and 

14.  30  he  shall  offer  the  one  of  the  turtle  doves 
15. 15  priest  shall  offer  them,  the  one. .a  sin  of. 

15.  30  the  priest  shall  offer  the  one.  .a  sin  offer. 

16.  9  Aaron  shall  bring  the  goat,  .and  offer  him 

16.  24  come  forth,  and  offer  his  burnt  offering 

17.  9  briugeth  it  not.  .to  offer  it  unto  the  Lord 

22.  23  that  mayest  thou  offer,  .a  free  will  offer. 

23.  12  ye  shall  offer  that  day  when  ye  wave  the 
Num.  6.  11  the  priest  shall  offer  the  one  for  a  sin  off. 

6.  16  the  priest . .  shall  offer  his  sin  offering,  and 
6.  17  shalloffer  the  ram.  .shall offer  alsohism. 
Josh.  22.  23  or  if  to  off er  peace  offerings  thereon,  let  the 
Judg  13. 16  if  thou  wilt  offer  a  burnt  offering,  thou 

1  Ki.  3. 15  offered  up  burnt  offerings,  and  offered  p. 

8.  64  there  he  offered  burnt  offerings,  and  meat 

2  Ki.  5.  17  thy  servant  will  henceforth  offer  neither 

10.  24  when  they  went  in  to  offer  sacrifices  and 
2  Ch.  7.  7  there  he  offered  bm-nt  offerings,  and  the 
Psa.  66. 15  I  will  offer  bullocks  with  goats.     Selah 

16.  To  make  perfume',  offer  incense,  nap  qatar,  5. 
Numi6.  40  that  no  stranger,  .come  near  to  offer  inc. 
1  Ch.  6.  49  Aaron  and  his  sons  offered  upon  the  altar 

1 7.  To  be  or  bring  near,  a^j?  qarab. 

Lev.  16.    1  when  they  offered  before  the  Lord,  and 

IS.  To  cause  to  come  near,  2~$  qarab,  5. 

Lev.    1.    3  let  him  offer  a  male,  .he  shall  offer  it  of 
2.    1  when  any  will  offer  a  meat  offering  unto 
2. 12 ye  shall  offer  them  unto  the  Lord:  but 

2. 13  with  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer  s. 

2.  14  if  thou  offer  a  meatoffering,  .thou  shalt  o. 

3.  1  if  he  offer  (it)  of  the  herd.,  he  shall  offer 
3.  3,  9  he  shall  offer  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  pe. 
3.  6  male  or  female,  he  shall  offer  it  without 
3.  7  If  he  offer  a  lamb,  .then  shall  he  offer  it 
3.  12  goat,  then  he  shall  offer  it  before  the  Lo. 

3.  14  And  he  shall  offer  thereof  his  offering 

4.  14  shall  offer  a  young  bullock  for  the  sin,  and 

5.  8  shall  offer  (that)  which  (is)  for  the  sin  ot. 

6. 14  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  offer  it  before  the 

6.  20  which  they  shall  offer  unto  the  Lord  in 

6.  21  baken  pieces,  .shalt  thou  offer,  .a  sweet 

7.  3  And  he  shall  offer  of  it  all  the  fat  thereof 
7.   8 the  priest  that  offereth  any  mans  burnt 
7.    8  the  burnt  offering  which  he  hath  offered 
7.   9  all .  .shall  be  the  priest's  that  offereth  it 
7. 11  of  the  sacrifice,  .which  he  shall  offer  unto 
7.  12  If  he  offer  it  for  a  thanksgiving,  then 

7.  12  he  shall  offer  with  the  sacrifice  of  thank. 
7.  13  he  shall  offer,  .his  offering  unleavened  b. 
7.  14  of  it  he  shall  offer  one  out  of  the  whole 
7.  16  the  same  day  that  he  offereth  his  sacrifice 
7. 18  shall  it  be  imputed  unto  him  that  offereth 
7.  25  men  offer  an  ofEeringjmade  by  fire  unto  the 
7.  29  He  that  offereth  the  sacrifice  of  his  peace 
7.  33  that  offereth  the  blood  of  the  peace  offer. 
7.  38  commanded  the  children  of  Israel  to  offer 

9.  2  Take  thee . .  and  offer  (them)  before  the  L. 
10.  1  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Loud,  which 
10.  19  this  day  have  they  offered  their  sin  offer. 
12.   7  Who  shall  offer  it  before  the  Lord,  and 

14.  12  the  priest  shall  take  one  he  lamb,  and  of. 

16.  6  Aaron  shall  offer  his  bullock  of  the  sin  o. 

17.  4  to  offer  an  offering  unto  the  Lord  before 
21.  6  (and)  the  bread  of  their  God,  they  do  offer 
21.  8  for  he  offereth  the  bread  of  thy  God :  he 
21.  17  let  him  not  approach  to  offer  the  bread  of 
21.  21  shall  comenigh  to  offer  the  offeringsof  the 

21.  21  he  shall  not  come  nigh  to  offer  the  bread 

22.  18  that  will  offer  his  oblation  for  all  hisvows 
22.  18  which  they  will  offer  unto  the  Lord  for  a 
22.  20  hath  a  blemish,  (that)  shall  ye  not  offer;  for 
22.  21  whosoever  offereth  a  sacrifice  of  peace  off. 
22.  22  ye  shall  not  offer  these  unto  the  Lord,  nor 

22.  24  ye  shall  not  offer  unto  the  Lord  that  wh. 
32.  25  shall  ye  offer  the  bread  of  yourGodofany 

23.  8,  25,  27,  36,  36,  37  offer  an  offering  made  by 
23.  16  ye  shall  offer  a  new  meat  ottering  unto 
23. 18  ye  shall  offer  with  the  bread  seven  lambs 

27.  11  of  which  they  do  not  offer  a  sacrifice  unto 
Num.  3.    4  when  they  tittered  strange  fire  before  the 

5.  25  and  shall  wave,  .and  otter  it  upon  tbeal. 

6.  14  he  shall  otter  his  offering  unlo  the  LORD 

7.  2  That  the  princes  of  Israel,  heads  .  offered 
7.  10  the  princes  ottered  for  dedication  of  the 
7.  10  the  princes  ottered  their  offering  before 
7.  11  They  shall  offer  their  offering,  each  prime 
7.  12  he  that  ottered  his  offering  the  first  day 
7.  iS  On  the  second  day  Nethaneel. .did  offer 
7.  19  He  offered  (for)  his  offering  one  silver  e 
9.    7  that  we  may  not  offer  an  offering  of  the 

15.  4  Then  shall  he  that  olfereth  his  ottering 

15.  7  for  a  drink  offering  thou  shalt  offer  the 

16.  35  and  consumed  the.,  men  that  offered  in. 
16.  38  they  ottered  them  before  the  LORD,  ther. 
16.  39  wherewith  they  that  were  burnt  had  off 
26.  61  when  they  offered  strange  tire  before  the 

28.  2  shall  ye  observe  to  offer  unto  me  in  their 
28.  3  the  offering.. which  ye  shall  offerunto  the 
28.  11  ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering  unto  the  L. 
28.  19  But  ye  shall  utter  a  sacrifice  made  byfire 

28.  27  But  ye  shall  offer  the  burnt  offering  for  a 

29.  8  But  ye  shalloffer  a  burnt  offering  unto  the 
29.  13,  36  ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering,  a  sacr. 


OFFER 


•11 


OFFERING 


Judg.  3.  iS  when  lie  had  made  an  end  to  offer  the  p. 
i  (_'1i.i6.  i  they  ottered  burnt  sacrifices  and  peace  o. 
2  Ch.35. 12  to  offer  unto  the  Loud,  as  (it  is)  written 
Ezra  8.  35  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  God  of 
Psa.  72. 10  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts 
Eze.  43. 22  on  the  second  day  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid 
43.  23  thou  shalt  offer  a  young  bullock  without 

43.  24  thou  shalt  offer  them  before  the  Lord 

44.  7  when  ye  offer  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the 
44.  15  they  shall  stand  before  me  to  offer  unto 

44.  27  he  shall  offer  his  sin  offering,  saith  theL. 
46.    4  the  burnt  offering  that  the  prince  shall  o. 

Hag.    2. 14  and  that  which  they  offer  there  (is)  unci. 
Hal.    1.   8  offer  it  now  unto  thy  governor;  will  lie 

19.  To  bring  near,  3"ij?  qereb,  3. 

Ezra  7.  17  offer  them  upon  the  altar  01  the  house  of 

20.  To  cause  to  come  near,  3"ij3  qereb,  5. 

Ezra  6.  10  That  they  may  offer  sacrifices  of  sweet  sa. 

6.  17  offered  at  the  dedication  of  this  house  of 

21.  To  cause  to  lift  tip,  on  rum,  5. 

Exod35-  24  Everyone  that  did  offer  an  offering  of  sil. 

Lev.  22.  15  the  holy  things.,  which  they  offer  unto  the 

NumiS.  19  which. .  children  of  Israel  offer  unto  theL. 

18. 24  which  they  offer  (as)  an  heave  offering 

18.  28  Thus  ye  also  shall  offer  an  heave  offering 

18.  29  all  your  gifts  ye  shall  offer  every  heave  off. 

Ezra  8. 25  the  offering . .  which  the  king . .  had  offered 

Eze.  45.    1  ye  shall  offer  an  oblation  unto  the  Lord 

45.  13  This  (is)  the  oblation  that  ye  shall  offer 
48.    8  shall  be  the  offering  which  ye  shall  offer 
48.    9  The  oblation  that  ye  shall  offer  unto  the 
48.  20  ye  shall  offer  the  holy  oblation  four  squa. 

22.  To  slaughter,  b~?  shachaL 

Exod34-  25  Thou  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my  sac. 

23.  To  lead  up,  avdya)  anago. 

Acts   7. 41  offered  sacrifice  unto  the  idol,  andrejoiced 

24.  To  bear  up,  avacpepa  anaphero. 

Heb.13.  15  By  him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice 
Jas.   2.  21  when  he  had  offered  Isaac  his  son  upon  the 

25.  To  give,  BiHupi  dido}n£. 

Luke  2.  24  to  offer  a  sacrifice  according  to  that  wh. 
Rev.    8.   3  that  he  should  offer  (it)  with  the  prayers 

26.  To  bear  toward,  irpo(r(/)epa)  prosphero. 

Matt.  5.  24  be  reconciled,  .then come  and  offer thy  g. 
8.   4  offer  the  gift  that  Moses  commanded,  for 

Mark  1.  44  offer  for  thy  cleansing  those  things  which 

Luke  5. 14  offerforthy  cleansing,  according  as  Moses 
23.  36  coming  to  him,  and  offering  him  vinegar 

Acts  7.  42  have  ye  offered  to  ms  slain  beasts  andsa. 
8.  18  And  when  Simon  saw.  .he  offered  them 

Heb.  5.  1  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices 
5.  3  he  ought. .  alsofor  himself,  to  offer  for  sins 
8.  3  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer  gifts 
8.    3  that  this  man  have  somewhatalsotooffer 

8.  4  that  there  are  priests  that  offer  gifts 

9.  7  which  he  offered  for  himself,  and.  .v.  g, 
9. 14  who.  .offered  himself  without  spot  to  God 
9. 25  Nor  yet  that  he  should  offer  himself  often 

10.  1  with  those  sacrifices  which  they  offered 
10. 11  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices,  w. 
ic.  12  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins 

11.  4  By  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  ex. 

27.  To  give  upon  or  besides,  iirididca/xt  epididomi. 
Lukeu.  12  Or  if  he  shall  ask  an  egg,  will  he  offer  him 

28.  To  hold  near,  irapex™  parecho. 

Luke  6.  29  unto  him  that  smiteth . .  offer  also  the  ot. 
OFFER  up,  to,  unto,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  be  high  or  lifted  up,  en  rum,  5. 
Nuni  15. 19  ye  shall  offer  up  an  heave  offering  unto 
15. 20  Te  shall  offer  up  a  cake  of  the  first  of  your 
18*  26  ye  shall  offer  up  an  heave  offering  of  it 
31.  52  gold  of  the  offering  that  they  offered  up  to 
2.To  bear  up  or  again,  avcxpepco  anaphero. 

Heb.   7.  27  Who  needeth  not.  .to  offer  up  sacrifice 

7.  27  for  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up 
1  Pe.  2.   5  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable 

3.  To  bear  toward,  irpoo-<p4pu>  prosphero. 

Heb.   5.    7  when  he  had  offered  up  prayers  and  sup. 
11. 17  offered  up  Isaac,  .offered  up  his  only  be. 
OFFER  for  sin,  to  — 
To  offer  a  sin  offering,  NEprt  chata,  3. 

Lev:  6.  26  The  priest  that  offereth  it  for  sin  shall  eat 
9.  15  slew  it,  and  offered  it  for  sin,  as  the  first 

OFFER  (selves)  freely  or  willingly,  to  — 

l.To  show  self  willing  hearted,  :n:  nadab,  7. 

Judg.  5.  2  when  the  people  willingly  offered  thems. 
5.   9  that  offered  themselves  willingly  among 

1  Ch.29.    6  the  chief  of  the  fathers,  .offered  willingly 

29.   9  rejoiced,  for  that  they  offered  willingly" 
29.    9  because,  .they  offered  willingly  to  the  L. 
29.  14  that  we  should  be  able  to  offer  so  willingly 
29.  17  I  have  willingly  offered  all  these  things 
29.  17  seen  with  joy  thy  people .  .to  offer  willin. 

2  Ch.  17.  16  who  willingly  offered  himself  unto  the  L. 
Ezra   1.   6  And.,  besides  all  (that)  was  willingly  off. 

2.  68  offered  freely  for  the  house  of  God  to  set 

3.  5  every  one  that  willingly  offered  a  free  will 
Neh.  11.   2  the  men  that  willingly  offered  themselves 

2.7b  be  offered  willingly,  3"]3  nedab,  4. 

Ezra  7.  15  have  freely  offered  unto  the  God  of  Israel 
7. 16  offering  willingly  forthehouseof  theirG. 


OFFER  incense  or  sacrifice,  to  — - 

l.To  make  jperfume,  offer  incense,  n»a  qatar,  3. 

Jer.  11.  17  to  provoke  me  to  anger,  in  offering  nice. 
32.  29  upon  whose  roofs  they  have  offered  ince. 

Amos  4.  5  offer  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  with  lea. 
2.  To  slaughter,  offer  sacrifice,  nyj  debach. 

Ezra  6.  3  theplace  where  they  offered  sacrifices,  and 
OFFERED,  to  be  (ready  to  be)  — 

1 .  To  be  brought  or  caused  to  come  nigh,  mi  nagash,  6. 
MaL    1.  j  1  in  every  place  incense  (shall  be)  offered 

2.  To  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

2  Ki.  3.  20  when  the  meat  offering  was  offered,  that 

3.  To  be  brought  or  caused  to  go  up,  ?hy  alah,  6. 
Judg.  6. 28  second  bullock  was  offered  upon  the  altar 

4.  To  be  made,  done,  nirj;  asah,  2. 

Nuni28.  24  After  this  manner  ye  shall  offer  daily 
5. A  heave  offering,  rtfDnp  terumah. 

Eze.  48.  12  (this)  oblation  of  the  land  that  is  offered 

6.  What  is  brought  near,  |3"?p  qorban. 

Lev.    7. 15  be  eaten  the  same  day  that  it  is  offered 

7.  To  bear  toward,  Trpocnpepco  prospliero. 

Acts  21.  26  offering  should  be  offered  for  every  one 
Heb.    9.  28  So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  s. 
10.   2  would  they  not  have  ceased  to  be  offered? 
10.    8  burnt  offerings,  .which  are  offered  by  the 
8.7V)  be  poured  out,  o-irzvb'oiia.i  spendomai. 

Phil.  2.  17  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice 

2  Ti.  4.   6  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the 

OFFERED  (in  sacrifice)  to  idols,  meats  or  things  — 

Any  thing  sacrificed  to  an  idol,  elSaj\66uTov  eido. 

Acts  15.  29  That  ye  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  id. 

2 1.  25  keep  themselves  from  (things)  offered  to  i. 

1  Co.  8.    1  Now  as  touching  things  offered  unto  idols 

8.    4  things  that  are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  i. 

8.    7  eat  (it)  as  a  thingoffereduntoanidol;and 

8.  10  eat  those  things  which  are  offered  to  idols 

10.  19  or  that  which  is  offered  in  sacrifice  to  id. 

10.  2S  This  is  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,  eat 

Rev.    2.  14  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,  and  to 

2.  20  seduce,  .to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols 

OFFERED  things  — 

Work,  deeel,  ri%?JlO  maaseh. 

2  Ch.  4.  6  such  tilings  as  they  offered  for  the  burnt 
OFFERING  — 

1. Slaughter,  sacrifice,  rot  zebach. 

Exod24.  5  sacrificed  peace  offerings  of  oxen  unto  the 
Lev.  17.  5  offer  them  (for)  peace  offerings  unto  theL. 
Josh.  22.  23  or  if  to  offer  peace  offerings  thereon,  let 
2  Ch.30.  22  offering  peace  offerings,  and  making  con. 
33. 16  sacrificed  thereon  peace  offerings  and  th. 
Prov.  7. 14  (I  have)  peace  offerings  with  me ;  this  day 

2. Offering,  present,  npio  nrinehah. 

Gen.    4.    3  that  Cain  brought,  .an  offering  unto  the 
4.   4  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  to  his  offering 

4.  5  unto  Cain  and  to  his  offering  he  had  not 
Num.  5.  15  an  offering  of  jealousy,  an  offering  of  m. 

5.  18  put  the  offering  of  memorial  in  her  bands 
5.  18  which  (is)  the  jealousy  offering:  and  the 
5.  25  the  priest  shall  take  the  jealousy  offering 
5.  25  shall  wave  the  offering  before  the  Lord 
5.  26  the  priest  shall  take  an  handful  of  the  c. 

16. 15  Respect  not  thou  their  offering:  I  have 
1  Sa.    2.  17  for  men  abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord 
2.  29  Wherefore  kick  ye . .  at  mine  offering,  wh. 

2.  29  the  chiefest  of  ail  the  offerings  of  Israel 
3. 14  not  be  purged  with  sacrifice  nor  offering 

26.  19  let  him  accept  an  offering :  but  if  (they  be) 
1  Ch.16  29  bring  an  offering,  and  come  before  him 
Psa.  20.    3  Remember  all  thy  offerings,  and  accept 

40.   6  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  des. 

96.    8  bring  au  offering,  and  come  into  his  courts 
Isa.  43. 23  not  caused  thee  to  serve  with  an  offering 

66.  20  they  shall  bring  all  your  brethren . .  an  of. 

66.  20  bring  an  offering  in  a  clean  vessel  into  the 
Jer.  41.    5  with  offerings  and  incense  in  their  hand 
Amos  5.  25  Have  ye  offered  unto  me  sacrifices  and  o. 
Zeph  3.  10  the  daughter,  .shall  briug  mine  offering 
Mai.    1.  10  neither  will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your 
1.  11  (shall  be)  offered,  .and  a  pure  offering:  for 
1.  13  thus  ye  brought  an  offering:  should  lac. 

2. 12  him  that  offereth  an  offering  unto  the  L. 

2. 13  insomuch  that  heregardeth  not  the  offer. 

3.  3  that  they  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  off. 
3.   4  Then  shall  the  offering  of  Judah  and  Jer. 

3.  To  go  up,  n?j/  alah. 

1  Ki.  18.  29  prophesied  until  the  (time)  of  the  offering 
18.  36  it  came  to  pass  at.. the  offering  of  the..s. 

i.  To  cause  to  go  up,  n?^  alah,  5. 

1  Sa.  13. 10  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

2  Sa.   6. 18  as  soon  as  David  had  made  an  end  of  off. 

1  Ch.16.    2  when  David  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

2  Ch.  8  13  offering  according  to  the  commandment 

29.  29  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  offering,  the 
35. 14  the  son3  of  Aaron  (were  busied)  in  offering 

o.To  do,  malce,  rf^w  asah. 

Lev.    9.  22  and  came  down  from  offering  of  the  sin  o. 
2  Ki.io.  25  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  offering 

6.7*0  bring  or  cause  to  come  near,  y\j)  qarab,  5. 
Num.  15.  13  in  offering  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a 

7.  What  is  brought  near,  i?")i3  qorban. 

Lev.    1.    2  If  any  viua  of  you  bring  an  offering  unto 


Lev.    1.    2  ye  shall  bring  your  offering  of  the  cattle 
1.    3  If  his  offering  (be)  a  burnt  sacrifice  of  tho 
1.  10  if  his  offering  (be)  of  the  flocks,  (namely) 
1.  14  the  burnt  sacrifice  for  his  offering  to  the 

1.  14  he  shall  bring  his  offering  of  turtle  doves 

2.  1  when  any  will  offer  a  meat  offering  unto 
2.    1  his  offering  shall  be  (of)  fine  flour ;  and  he 

2.  13  with  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer 

3.  2,  8  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  his  offer. 
3.  6  And  if  his  offering  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace 
3.    7  If  he  offer  a  lamb  for  his  offering,  then 

3.  12  if  his  offering  (be)  a  goat,  then  he  shall  of. 
3. 14  he  shall  offer  thereof  his  ottering,  (even) 

4.  23,  28  he  shall  bring  his  offering,  a  kid  of 

4.  32  if  he  bring  a  lamb  for  a  sin  offering,  he 

5.  11  he  that  sinned  shall  bring  for  his  offering 

6.  20  This  (is)  the  offering  of  Aaron,  and  of  his 

7. 13  he  shall  offer,  .his  offering  leavened  bread 

7.  16  if  the  sacrifice  of  his  offering  (be)  a  vow 
9.  7  offer  the  offering  of  the  people,  and  make 
9.  15  he  brought  the  people's  offering,  and  took 

17.  4  to  offer  an  offering  unto  the  Lord  before 
22.  27  it  shall  be  accepted  for  an  offering  made 
23. 14  thatyehave  brought  an  offering  unto  your 

27.  9  whereof  men  bring  an  offering  unto  the  L. 
Num.  5. 15  he  shall  bring  her  offering  for  her,  the  t. 

6. 14  he  shall  offer  his  offering  unto  the  Lord 

6.  21  his  offering  unto  the  Lord  for  his  separa. 

7.  3  they  brought  their  offering  before  the  L. 
7.  10  the  princes  offered  their  offering  before 
7.  11  They  shall  offer  their  offering,  each  prince 
7.  12  he  that  offered  his  offering  the  first  day 
7. 13  his  offering  (was)  one  silver  charger,  tlie 
7.  17  this  (was)  the  offering  of  Nahshon  the  son 
7.  19  He  offered,  .his  offering  one  silver  charger 
7.  23  this  (was)  the  offering  of  Nethaneel  the 
7.  25  His  offering,  .one  silver  charger,  the  wei. 
[So  in  v.  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79.] 

7.  29  this  (was)  the  offering  of .  .the  son  of 
[So  in  v.  35,  4i,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.] 

9.    7  that  we  may  not  offer  an  offering  of  the 
9. 13  because  he  brought  not  the  offering  of  the 
15.   4  Then  shall  he  that  offereth  his  offering 
15.  25  they  shall  bring  their  off  ering,  a  sacrifice 

28.  2  My  offering,  .my  bread  for  my  sacrifices 
Eze.  20.  2S  presented  the  provocation  of  their  offering 

40.  43  upon  the  tables  (was)  the  flesh  of  the  off' 

&.W7iai  is  brought  near,  |2~t£  qu/rban. 

Neh,  10.  34  we  cast  the  lots,  .for  the  wood  offering 
13.  31  for  the  wood  offering,  at  times  appointed 
9..-1  wave  offering,  n£fl3£i  tenuphah. 

Exod3g.  22  offered.,  an  offering  of  gold  unto  the  Lord 
38. 24  the  gold  of  the  offering,  was  twenty  and 
38.  29  the  brass  of  the  offering  (was)  seventy  tal. 
Num.  8. 11  an  offering  of  the  children  of  Israel,  that 

8.  13  and  offer  them. .an  offering  unto  the  Lord 
8.  15  cleanse  them,  and  offer  them,  .an  offering 
8.  21  Aaron  offered  therm. an  offeringbef ore  the 

10.-4  heave  offering,  npry-i  terumah. 

Exod25.    2  Speak,  .that  they  bring  me  an  offering 
25.    2  of  every  man.  .ye  shall  take  my  offering 
25.   3  this  (is)  the  offering  which  ye  shall  take 
30.  13  an  half  shekel  (shall  be)  the  offering  of  the 
30.  14  Every  one . .  shall  give  an  offering  unto  the 

30.  15  when  (they)  give  an  offering  unto  the  Lo. 
35.  5  Take  ye  from  among  you  an  offering  unto 
35.  5  let  him.  bring  it,  an  offering  of  the  Lord 
35.  21  they  brought  the  Lord's  offering  to  the  w. 

35.  24  Every  one  that  did  offer  an  offering  of  sil. 
35. 24  and  brass.broughtthe  Lord's  offering:  and 

36.  3  they  received  of  Moses  all  the  offering  wh. 
36.    6  make  any  more  work  for  the  offering  of 

Lev.  22. 12  she  may  not  eat  of  an  offering  of  the  holy 
Num.  5.    9  every  offering  of  all  the  holy  things  of  the 

31.  52  all  the  gold  of  the  offering  that  theyoffe. 
2  Sa.  1.  21  rain  upon  you,  nor  fields  of  offerings :  for 
2  Ch.31.  10  began  to  bring  the  offerings  into  the  house 

31. 12  brought  in  the  offerings  and  the  tithes 
31. 14  (was)  over  the  free  will  offerings  of  God 
Ezra  8.  25  theofferingof  thehouseof  ourGod,  which 
Neh.  10.  37  our  offerings,  and  the  fruit  of  all  manner 
10.  39  children  of  Levi  shall  bring  the  offering 

12.  44  were  some  appointed,  .for  the  offerings 

13.  5  the  tithes,  .and  the  offerings  of  the  priests 
Eze.  20.  40  there  will  I  require  your  offerings,  and 

48.  8  shall  be  the  offering  which  ye  shall  offer 
Mai.   3.   8  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee?  In.  .offer. 

11.  A  gift,  8u>pov  dbron. 

Luke2i.    4  all  these  have,  .cast  in  unto  the  offerings 

12.  What  is  borne  forward  or  toward,  -7rpoo~<popd. 
Acts  21.  26  until  that  an  offering  should  be  offered 

24.  17  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation,  and  off. 
Eph.    5.    2  hath  giveu  himself  for  us  an  offering  and 
Heb.  10.    5  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not 
10.    8  Sacrifice  and  offering  and  burnt  offerings 
10.  10  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus 
10.  14  For  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for 
10. 18  Now.  .(there  is)  no  more  offering  for  sin 
[See  also  Burnt,  drink,  free,  freewill,  heave,  meat,  pass- 
over,  peace,  sin,  thank,  trespass,  voluntary,  wave,  whole, 
willing.] 

OFFERING  vp  — 

1  To  cause  to  go  up,  n^j*  alah,  5. 

1  Sa.    7. 10  as  Samuel  was  offering  up  the  burnt  offe. 

'l.What  is  borne  forward  or  toward,  trpoa-(popd. 
Rom. 15.  16  that  the  offering  upof  the  Gentiles  might 


OFFERING 


712 


OIL 


OFFERING  (or  sacrifice)  made  by  fire  — 
A  fire  offering,  n^x  ishsheh. 

Exod29. 18,  25,  4iofferingmadebyfire  unto  the  Lord 
[So  in  v.  30.  20;  Lev.  2  16 ;  3.  3,  9, 14 ;  7.  5,  25;  8.21,28;  22. 
27;  23.  8,  13,  25,  27,  36,  36,  37;  34.  7;  Num.  29.  6.] 

Lev.  1.  9  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  asweet  savour 
[So  in  v.  13,  17;  2.  2,  9;  3.  5 ;  Num.  15.  10,  13,  14;  18.  17; 
23.  8,  24 ;  29.  13,  26.] 

Lev.    2.    3,  10  of  the  offerings  of  theLoRi)  made  by  fire 

2.  11  in  any  offering  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 

3.  11,  16  (it  is)  thefood  of  the  offering  made  by 

4.  35  according  to  the  offerings  made  by  fire  u. 

5.  12  according  to  the  offerings  made  by  fire  u. 

6.  17  their  portion  of  my  offerings  made  by  fire 
6. 18  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 

7. 30,  35  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 
10.  12  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 
10.  13  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 
10.  15  with  the  offerings  made  by  fire  of  the  fat 

21.  6,  21  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 

22.  22  nor  make  an  offering  by  fire  of  them  upon 

23.  18  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  sweet  savour 

24.  9  of  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 
Numi5-    3  will  make  an  offering  by  fire  unto  the  Lo. 

15.  25  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord 

■   28.'  2  my  bread  for  my  sacrifices  made  by  fire 
28.    3  This  (is)  the  offering  made  by  fire  which  ye 
28.    6,  13  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord 

28.  19  ye  shall  offer  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire 
Deut  18.    1  eat  the  offeriugs  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 
Josh  13. 14  the  sacrifices .  .made  by  fire  (are)  their  inn. 
1  Sa.    2.  28  did  I  give,  .all  the  offerings  made  by  fire 

OFFERING  for  sin  — 

A  guilt  offering,  d$n  asham. 

Isa.   53. 10  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  fors. 

OFFERING  incense  — 

To  make  perfume,  offer  incense,  Tttj3  qatar,  3. 
Jer.  11.  17  to  provoke  me.  .in  offering  incense  unto 

OFFERINGS  — 

Givings,  gifts,  o-^n^n  habhabim. 

Hos.    8. 13  They  sacrifice,  .the  sacrifices  of  mine  off. 
OFFICE  — 
l.Base,  station,  }3  ken. 

Gen.  41. 13  me  he  restored  unto  mine  office,  and  him 
%  Standing ,  station,  ~d^_d  maamad. 

1  Ch.23.  28  their  office  (was)  to  wait  on  the  sons  of  A. 

3.  Watch,  guard,  "iD^o  mishmar, 

Neh.  13.  14  deeds  that  I  have  done,  .for  the  offices th. 

4.  Watch,  guard,  rnp^p  mishmereth. 

2  Ch.  7.    6  the  priests  waited  on  their  offices ;  the  L. 

5.  Service,  riiiiy.  abodah. 

1  Ch.  6.  32  they  waibed  on  their  office  according  to 
Q. Inspection,  charge,  .Tips  pequddah. 

Num.  4.  16  to  the  office  of  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron 

1  Ch.24.    3  according  to  their  offices  in  their  service 

2  Ch.23.  l8  -fehoiada  appointed  the  offices  of  the  ho. 

24.  11  the  chest  was  brought  unto  the  king's  office 
Psa.109.    8  Let.  .be  few.  .let  another  take  his  office 

7. Ministration,  Siaxoula  diakonia. 

Romn.  13  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  I  magnify  mine  0. 

8.  Work,  action,  office,  use,  irpa£is  praxis. 

Rom  1 2.    4  and  all  members  have  not  the  same  office 
OFFICE  of  a  bishop  — 
Oversight,  superintendence,  iTrtatcowf}  cpiskope. 

1  Ti.  3.    1  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop,  he 
OFFICE  of  the  priesthood,  priest's  office  — 
Priesthood,  Upareia  hicrateia. 

Luke  1.    9  According  to . .  custom  of  the  priest's  office 

Heb.  7.    5  they,  .who  receive  the  office  of  the  priest. 

OFFICE,  to  do,  execute,  or  minister  in  the  priest's  — 

1.  To  act  as  a  priest,  J  05  kahan,  3. 

Exod2S.  1, 3, 4, 41  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  office 

29.  i,  44  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  office 

30.  30  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  office 

31.  10  his  sons,  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office 
35.  19  his  sons,  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office 

39.  41  garments,  to  minister  in  the  priest'soffiee 

40.  13,  15  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  office 
Lev.    7.  35  minister  unto  the  Lord  in  the  priest's  of. 

16.  32  consecrate  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office 
Num.  3     3  consecrated  to  minister  in  the  priest's  of. 

3.  4  Ithamar  ministered  in  the  priest's  office 
Deut  10.    6  ministered  in  the  priest's  office  in  his  stc. 

1  Ch.  6.  10  that  executed  the  priest's  office  in  the  te. 

24.   2  and  Ithamar  executed  the  priest's  office 

2  Ch.n.  14  from  executing  the  priest's  office  unto  the 
Eze.  44. 13  to  do  the  office  of  a  priest  unto  me,  nor 

2.  To  act  as  a  priest,  Uparevo  hierateud. 

Luke  1.  8  while  he  executed  the  priest's  office  before 
OFFICER  — 

•  1 .  To  he  set  up,  3^3  natsab,  2. 

*  1  Ki.  4.    5  Azariah..(was)  over  the  officers;  and  Zah. 

4.  7  Solomon  had  twelve  officers  over  all  Isr. 
4.  27  those  officers  provided  victual  for  king  S. 
5. 16  Besides,  the  chief  of  Solomon's  officers  w 

.  9.  23  These  (were)  the  chief  of  the  officers  that 
2  Ch.  8.  10  these,  .the  chief  of  king  Solomon's  officers 


2.  One  set  up,  rritj  netsib. 
1  Ki.  4. 19  (was)  the  01 


only  officer  which  (was)  in  the 


3.A  eunuch,  officer,  D'lp  saris. 

Gen.  37.  36  an  officer  of  Pharaoh's,  .captain  of  the  g. 

39.  1  an  officer  of  Pharaoh,  captain  of  the  gua. 

40.  2  P.  was  wroth  against  two  (of)  his  officers 
40.   7  he  asked  Pharaoh's  officers,  that  (were) 

1  Sa.   S.  15  give  to  his  officers,  aud  to  his  servants 

i  Ki.22.   9  Then  the  king  of  Israel  called  an  officer 

2  Ki.  8.    6  the  king  appointed  unto  her  a  certain  of. 

24. 12  he,  and  his  mother,  .and  his  officers:  and 

24.  15  his  officers,  and  the  mighty  of  the  land 

25.  19  out  of  the  city  betook  an  officer  that  was 

1  Ch.28.    1  with  the  officers,  and  with  the  mighty  men 

2  Ch.18.   8  king,  .called  for  One  (of  his)  officers,  and  s. 

4.  To  inspect,  charge,  nps  paqad. 

Nuni3i.  14  Moses  was  wroth  with  the  officers  of  the 

31.  48  the  officers  which  (were)  over  thousands 

2  Ki.n.  15  the  priest  commanded.,  the  officers  of  the 

5. Inspection,  charge,  rn^|  pequddah. 

2  Ki.n.  18  the  priest  appointed  officers  over  the  ho. 

1  Ch.26.  30  officers  among  them  of  Israel  on  this  side 
Isa.  60.  17  I  will  also  make  thy  officers  peace,  and  t. 

G.ln$2iector,  Tps  paqid. 

Gen.  41.  34  let  him  appoint  officers  over  the  land,  and 
Judg.  9.  28  the  son  of  Jerubbaal?  and  Zebul  his  offi.? 

2  Ch.24.  11  high  priest's  officer  came  and  emptied  the 
Esth  2.    3  let  the  king  appoint  officers  in  all  the 
Jer.   29.  26  that  ye  should  be  officers  in  the  house  of 

7. Great  one,  an  rab. 

Esth.  1.    8  the  king  had  appointed  to  all  the  officers 

8.  To  do  work,  na**?*?  n^u  asah  melakah. 

Esth.  9.    3  and  officers  of  the  king,  helped  the  Jews 

9.  To  manage,  oversee,  rule,  lay  shatar. 

Exod.5.    6  task  masters  of  the  people,  and  their  offi. 

5.  10  task  masters  of  the  people,  .and  their  of. 

5. 14,  15,  19  the  officers  of  the  children  of  Israel 

Numn.  16  elders  of  the  people,  and  officers  over  them 

Deut.  1.  15  captains  over  tens,  aud  officers  among 

16.  18  Judges  aud  officers  shalt  thou  make  thee 

20.    5  the  officers  shall  speak  unto  the  people 

20.    8  officers  shall  speak  further  unto  the  peo. 

20.  9  when  the  officers  have  made  an  end  of  s. 
29. 10  and  your  officers,  (with)  all  the  men  of  I. 
31. 28  the  elders  of  your  tribes,  and  your  officers 

Josh.  1.  10  Then  Joshua  commanded  the  officers  of 
3.    2  it  came  to  pass,  .that  the  officers  went 

8.  33  all  Israel,  and  their  elders,  and  officers 

23.  2  called,  .for  their  judges,  and  for  their  o. 

24.  1  called-,  .for  their  judges,  and  for  their  0. 

1  Ch.23.   4  six  thousand  (were)  officers  and  judges 

26.  29  business  over  Israel,  for  officers  and  ju. 

27.  1  their  officers  that  served  the  king  in  any 

2  Ch.19.  11  also  the  Levites  (shall  be)  officers  before 

34. 13  of  the  Levites.  .scribes,  and  officers,  and 

10.  Police  officer,  bailiff,  •xpd.Krwp  praktor. 
Lukei2.  58  deliver  thee  to  the  officer,  and  the  officer 

11.  An  under  rower,  assistant,  vTrnperns  huperetes. 
Matt.  5.  25  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the  officer,  and 
John  7.  32  the'ehief  priests  sent  officers  to  take  him 

7.  45  Then  came  the  officers  to  the  chief  priests 
7. 46  The  officers  answered,  Never  man  spake 
18.  3  having  received  a  band  (of  men)  and  offi. 
18.  12  officers  ofthe  Jews  took  Jesus,  and  bound 
18.  18  the  servants  and  officers  stood  there,  who 

18.  22  one  of  the  officers  which  stood  by  struck 

19.  6  When  the  chief  priests,  .and  officers  saw 
Acts    5.  22  when  the  officers  came,  and  found  them 

5.  26  Theu  went  the  captain  with  the  officers 

OFFSCOTTRING  — 

1.  Scrapings,  offscouring,  ^np  sechi. 

Lam.  3.  45  Thou  hast  made  us  (as)  the  offscouring 

2.  Offscouring,  scrapings  round  about,  ireptywfj-a. 

1  Co.   4. 13  the  offscouring  of  all  tilings  unto  this 
OFFSPRING  — 

l.Outcomers,  issue,  produce,  D'Kytw  tseetsaim. 
Job     5.  25  thine  offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  earth 

21.  8  Their  seed  is  established,  .their offspring 

27. 14  his  offspring  shall  not  lie  satisfied  with  b. 
31.    8  eat ;  yea,  let  my  offspring  be  rooted  out 

Isa.  22.  24  they  shall  hang  upon  him .  .the  offspring 
44.  3  will  pour,  .my  blessing  upon  thine  offsp. 
48. 19  the  offspring  of  thy  bowels  like  the  gravel 
61.  9  theu-  seed  shall  be  known .  .and  their  off. 
65.  23  they  (are)  the  seed,  .and  their  offspring 

2.  Race,  kind,  yevos  genos. 

Acts  17.  28  certain . .  said,  For  we  are  also  his  offspring 

17  29  Forasmuch  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  of 

Rev.  22.  16  I  am  the  root  and  the  offspring  of  David 

OFT,  OFTEN,  OFTENER  — 

l.Many'a  time,  often,  iroWatus  pollah's. 

Matt.17. 15  falleth  into  the  fire,  and  of t  into  the  water 
Mark  5.    4  Because  that  he  had  been  often  bound 
Acts  26.  11  I  punished  them  oft  in  every  synagogue 

2  Co.  1 1.  23  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft 

11.  26(In)journeyingsoften,  (in)  perils  of  waters 

11.  27  in  watchings  often,  .in  fastings  often,  in 

Phil.   3. 18  many  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told  you  oft. 

2  Ti.   1.  16  he  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed 

Ileb.  6.   7  drinketh  in  the  rain  thatcometh  oftupon 

9.  25  Nor  yet  that  he  should  offer  himself  often 
9.  26  For  then  must  he 1  often  have  suffered  since 

2. Much,  iroWd  polla.  ■   . 

Matt.  9.  14  Whydowe  and  the  Pharisees  fast  [oft],  but 


3.  With  thejist,  irvy/xi)  pugme. 

Mark  7.    3  except  tliey  wash . .  hands  oft,  eat  not,  ho. 

4.  Thick,  close,  frequently,  ttvkvSs  puknos. 

Luke  5.  33  Why  do  the  disciples  of  John  fast  often 
Acts  24.  26  wherefore  he  sent  lor  him  the  of  tener,  and 

1  Ti.    5.  23  use  a  little  wine  for.  .thine  often  iufirmi. 

OFT  TIMES,  OFTEN  TIMES  — 

1.  Two  steps  (or)  t7vree,WY?i&  ccy  5 paamyim  shalosh. 
Job    33.  29  Lo,  all  these,  .worketh  God  often  times 

2.  Many  step>s,  times,  niai  D*Dj(;s  peamim  rabboth. 

Eccl.  7.  22  often  tunes  also  thine  own  heart  knoweth 

o.Many  times,  iroWols  xP^ois^'poUois  cnrcyiois. 
Luke  8.  29  often  times  it  had  caught  him:  and  he  was 

4  Many  a  time,  often,  ico'KK&KLs'poUakis. 

Matt  17.  15  for  ofttimes  he  falleth  into  the  fire,  and 
Mark  9.  22  oft  times  it  hath  cast  him  into  the  fire, and 
JohniS.   2  Jesus  oft  times  resorted  thither  with  his  d. 
Rom.  1.  13  oftentimes  I  purposed  to  come  unto  you 

2  Co.  8.  22  whom  we  have  often  times  proved  diligent 
Heb.  10. 11  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices,  w. 

OG,  Jiy  long-necked,  giant. 

The  king  of  Bashan  defeated  at  Edrei,  whose  land  was 
assigned  to  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  beyond  Jordan. 
B.C.  1452. 

Nuni2i.  33  O.  the  king  of  Bashan  went  out  against 

32.  33  the  kingdom  of  O.  king  of  Bashan,  the  la. 
Deut.  1.  4  After  he  had  slain.  .0.  the  king  of  Bashan 
3.  1  0.  the  king  of  Bashan  came  out  against  us 
3.  3  our  God  delivered  into  our  hands  O.  also 
3.  4  the  region  of  Argob,  the  kingdom  of  O.  in 
3.  10  and  Edrei,  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  0.  in 

3.  11  For  only  O.  king  of  Bashan  remained  of 
3. 13  all  Bashan,  (being)  the  kingdom  of  (_).,  gave 

4.  47  possessed  his  land,  and  the  land  of  O.  king 
29.    7  O.  the  king  of  Bashan,  came  out  against 

31.  4  shall  do.  .as  he  did  to  .Sihon  aud  to  O.,  ki. 
Josh.  2. 10  Sihon  and  0.,  whom  ye  utterly  destroyed 

9.  10  to  0.  king  of  Bashan,  which  (was)at  Asht. 

12.  4  coast  of  O.  king  of  Bashan,  (which  was)  of 
13. 12  All  the  kingdom  of  0.  in  Bashan,  which 

13.  30  all  the  kingdom  of  O.  king  of  Bashan,  and 

13.  31  and  Edrei,  cities  of  the  kingdom  of  0.  in 
1  Ki.  4.  19  ofO.  king  of  Bashan;  and  (he  was)  the  only 
Neh.  9.  22  so  they  possessed . .  the  land  of  O.  king  of 
Psa.135.  11  0.  king  of  Bashan,  and  all  the  kingdoms 

136.  20  0.  the  king  of  Bashan:  for  his  mercy  (en. 

O'-HAD,  "ihn  powerful. 

The  third  son  of  Simeon.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  10  Jemuel,  and  Jamin,  and  0.,  and  Jachin 
Exod.  6.  15  Jemuel,  and  Jamin,  and  0.,  and  Jachin 

O'-HEL,  ^nk  family,  race,  tent. 

A  son  of  Zerubbabel,  descended  from  Jehoiakim  king  of 

Judah.     B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  3.  20  Hashubah,  and  O.,  and  Berechiah,  and 

OIL  — 

1.  Shining,  oil,  "in**  yitshar. 

NumiS.  12  All  the  best  of  the  oil,  and  all  the  best  of 

Deut.  7.  13  he  will  also  bless. .  thine  oil,  the  increase 

11.  14  mayest  gather  in  thy  corn,  .and  thine  oil 

12. 17  mayest  not  eat.  .the  tithe,  .of  thy  oil,  or 

14.  23  shalt  eat.  .the  tithe,  .of  thine  oil,  and  the 
18.    4  The  first  fruit,  .of  thine  oil,  and  the  first 

28.  51  shall  not  leave  thee  .Teorn,  wine,  or  oil,  (or) 

2  Ki.18.  32  a  land  of  oil  olive  and  of  honey,  that  ye 

2  Ch.31.    5  children  of  Israel  brought.,  oil,  and  honey 

32.  28  for  the  increase  of  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil 
Neh.   5.  1 1  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  that  ye  exact  of  them 

to.  37  of  all  manner  of  trees,  of  wine,  and  of  oil 
10.  39  shall  bring  the  offering  of .  .the  oil,  unto 
13.    5  they  laid  the  meat  offerings!. and  the  oil 
13.  12  brought  all  Judah  the  tithe  of.  .the  oil 
Jer.   31.  12  for  oil,  and  for  the  young  of  the  flock 
Hos.    2.    8  that  I  gave  her  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil 
2.  22  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil 
Joel    1. 10  new  wine  is  dried  up,  the  oil  languisheth 
2.  19  I  will  send  you  com,  and  wine,  and  oil 
2.  24  the  fats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil 
Hag.    1.  11  upon  the  new  wine,  and  upon  the  oil,  and 

2.  Oil,  n-^V  meshaeh. 

Ezra    6.    9  wheat,  salt,  wine,  and  oil,  according  to 
7.  22  to  an  hundred  baths  of  oil,  and  salt  will). 

Z.Oil,  ointment,  fatness,  jet?  shemen. 

Gen.  28. 18  set  it  up.  .a  pillar,  and  poured  oil  upon  the 

35.  14  drink  offering  thereon,  and  he  poured  oil 

Exod25.    6  Oil  for  the  light,  spices  for  anointing  oil 

27.  20  that  they  bring  thee  pure  oil  olive  beaten 

29.  2  tempered  with  oil.  .wafers,  .anointed.  .0. 
29.   7  Then  shalt  thou  take  the  anointing  oil 

29.  21  thou  shalt  take,  .ofthe  anointing  oil,  and 
29.40  with  the  fourth  part  of  an  bin  of  beaten  oil 

30.  24  And  of  cassia,  .and  of  oil  olive  an  bin 

30.  25  thou  shalt  make  it  an  oil  of  holy  ointment 

30.  25  ointment . .  i  t  shall  be  an  holy  anointing  oil 
30. 31  This  shall  be  an  holy  anointing  oil  unto  me 

31.  11  theanointingoil,  andsweetincenseforthe 
35.  8  oil  for  the  light,  .spiees  for  anointing  o.l 
35.  14  The  candlestick,  .with  the  oil  forthe  light 
35. 15  the  anointing  oil,  and  the  sweet  incense 
35.  28  oil  for  the  light,  and  for  the  anointing  oil 
37.  29  he  made  the  holy  anointing  oil,  and  the 
39.  37  The  pure  candlestick,  .and  the  oil  for  1  g. 

39.  38  the  anointing  oil,  and  the  sweet  incense 

40.  9  thou  shalt  take  the  anointing  oil,  and  an. 
Lev.    2.    1  he  shall  pour  oil  upon  it,  and  put  frank. 


OIL 


713 


OLD 


Lev.  2.  .2  of  the  oil  thereof,  with  all  the  frankince. 
2.   4  mingled- with  oil,  or.,  anointed  with  oil 
2.    5  fine  Hour  unleavened,  mingled  with  oil 
2.    6  pour  oil  thereon  :  it  (is)  a  meat  offering 
2.    7  it  shall  be  made  (of)  fine  flour  with  oil 
2.  15  thou  shalt  put  oil  upon  it,  and  lay  frank. 
2.  16  of  the  oil  thereof,  with  all  the  frankince. 

5.  11  he  shall  put  no  oil  upon  it,  neither  shall 
6. 15  of  the  oil  thereof,  ana  all  the  frankincen. 
6.21  In  a  pan  it  shall  be  made  with  oil.  .baken 
7.  10  every  meatoffering  mingled  with  oil,  and 
7.  12  eakes  mingled  with  oil.,  anointed  with  oil 

7.  12  cakes  mingled  with  oil,  of  fine  flour,  fried 
-     -  8.   2  the  anointing  oil,  and  a  bullock  for  the  s. 

8. 10  Moses  took  the  anointing  oil,  and  anointed 
8. 12  poured  of  the  anointing  oil  upon  Aaron's 

8.  30"  Moses  took  pf  the  anointing  oil,  and  of  the 

9.  4  a  meat  offeriug  mingled  with  oil :  for  to 

10.  7  for  the  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon 
14.  10  offering," mingled  with  oil.  .one  log  of  oil 

14. 12  the  priest  shall  take,  .the  log  of  oil,  and 
14. 15  the  priest  shall  take,  .of  the  log  of  oil,  and 
14.  16  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in  the  oil  that 
14.  16  shall  sprinkle  of  the  oil  with  his  finger 

14. 17  of  the  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  hand 

14. 18  the  remnant  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  pr. 
14.  21  oil  for  a  meat  offering,  and  a  log  of  oil 
14.  24  the  priest  shall  take,  .the  log  of  oil,  and 
14.  26  the  pi'iest  shall  pour  of  the  oil  into  the 
14.  27  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  left  hand  seven 
14.  28  the  priest  shall  put  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in 
14.  29  the  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  priest's 
21-  10  upon  whose  head  the  anointing  oil  wasp. 
21.  12  the  crown  of  the  anointiug  oil  of  his  God 

23. 13  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  an  offering 
24.    2  that  they  bring  unto  thee  pure  oil  olive 

Num.  4.  9  all  the  oil  vessels  thereof,  wherewith  they 
4.  16  the  oil  for.  -light,  .and  the  anointing  oil 
5. 15  he  shall  pour  no  oil  upon  it,  nor  put  fran. 
6. 15  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and 

6.  15  ofuuleavened  bread  anointed  with  oil,  and 

7.  13  full  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  for 
So  in  v.  19,  25,  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 

8.  8  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and  another 

11.  8  taste  of  it  was  as  the  taste  of  fresh  oil 

4  flour . .  with  the  fourth . .  of  an  hin  of  oil 
6  flour . .  with  the  third . .  of  an  hin  of  oil 
9  of  flour  mingled  with  half  an  hin  of  oil 

5  with  the  fourth,  .of  an  hin.  of  beaten  oil 
9,  12,  12  a  meat  offering,  mingled  with  oil 

28.  13  a  several  tenth  deal,  .mingled  with  oil 
28.  20  (shall  be  of)  flour  mingled  with  oil :  three 

28.  28  meat  offering  of  flour  mingled  with  oil 

29.  3,9, 14  meatoffering,  .flour  mingled  with  oil 
35.  25  which  was  anointed  with  the  holy  oil 

Deufc.  8.    8  A  laud  of  wheat,  .a  land  of  oil  olive  and 
28.  40  thou  shalt  not  anoint,  .with  the  oil 

32.  13  made  him  to  suck . .  oil  out  of  the  flinty  r. 

33.  24  Asher  he  said,  .let  him  dip  his  foot  in  oil 

1  Sa.  10.    1  Samuel  took  a  vial  of  oil,  and  poured  (it) 

16.    1  Fill  thine  horn  with  oil,  and  go,  I  will  s. 
16. 13  Samuel  took  the  horn  of  oil,  and  anointed 

2  Sa.    1.  21  shield  of  Saul.  .not.  .anointed  with  oil 

14.   2  anoint  not  thyself  with  oil,  but  be  as  a 
1  Ki.  1.  39  took  an  horn  of  oil  out  of  the  tabernacle 
S- 
17' 


15- 

15- 
28. 

28. 


17 

r7 

2  Ki.  4 


gave  Hiram . .  twenty  measures  of  pure  oil 
12  I  have  not  a  cake,  but.  .a  little  oil  in  ac. 
14  neither  shall  the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  until 


6  neither  did  the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  according 

2  any  thing  in  the  house,  save  a  pot  of  oil 

6  (is)  not  a  vessel  more.    And  the  oil  stayed 

4.    7  Go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  thy  debt,  and  live 

.    .    9.    t  take  this  box  of  oil  in  thine  hand,  and  go 

9.   3  Then  take  the  box  of  oil,  and  pour  (it)  on 

9.    6  he  poured  the  oil  on  his  head,  and  said  unto 

1  Ch.  9.  29  appointed  to  oversee,  .the oil,  and  thefra. 

12.  40  brought  bread  on  asses . .  and  oil,  and  oxen 
.    27,  28  and  over  the  cellars  of  oil  (was)  Joash 

2  Ch.  2."  10  I  will  give,  .twenty  thousand  baths  of  oil 

2.  15  the  oil.  .let  him  send  unto  his  servants 
11.  ii  and  store  of  victual,  and  of  oil  and  wine 

Ezra    3.    7  They  gave,  .drink,  and  oil,  unto  them  of 

Est-h.  2. 12  six  months  with  oil  of  myrrh,  and  six  m. 

Job  29.    6  and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil 

Psa.  23.  5  thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil ;  my  cup 
45.  7  hath  inointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness 
55. 21  his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet  (were) 
89.  20  David,  .with  my  holy  oil  have  I  anointed 
92.  10  horn.  .1  shall  be  anointed  with  fresh  oil 
109.  18  let  it  come,  .like  water,  and  like  oil  into 
141.    5  (it  shall  be)  an  excellent  oil,  (which)  shall 

Prov.  5.    3  woman,  .her  mouth  (is)  smoother  than  oil 
21. 17  he  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  Dot  he 
21.  20  (There  is)  treasure  to  be  desired  and  oil  in 

Isa.  41 .  19  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness . .  the  oil  tree 
61.    3  to  give  unto  them,  .the  oil  of  joy  for  mo. 

Jer.  40.  10  gather  ye  wine,  .and  oil,  and  put  (them) 
41.    8  we  have  treasures  in  the  field,  .of  oil,  and 

Eze.  16.   9  washed  I  thee. .and  I  anointed  thee  with  oil 

16. 13  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil 
16.  iB  thou  hast  set  mine  oil  and  mine  incense 
16. 19  which  I  gave  thee,  fine  flour,  and  oil,  and 
23. 41  thou  hast  set  mine  incense  and  mine  oil 

__  .27. 17  they  traded  in  thy  market,  .oil,  and  balm 

32. 14  will  I-  cat'sp  their  rivers  to  run  like  oil 
45. 14  the  ordinance  of  oil,  the  bath  of  oil.  .the 
45.  24  he  shall  prepare,  .an  hin  of  oil  for  an  ep. 

45.  25  shall  he  do  the  like,  .according  to  the  oil 
46-    5,  7,  11  and  an  bin  of  oil  to  an  ephah 

"46.  14  the  third  part  of  an  hin  of  oil,  to  temper 

46.  15  Thus  shall  they  prepare.,  the  oil,  every  m. 
Hos.  2.   5  that  give..  myflax,niine  oil  and  my  drink 

90 


Hos.  12.  1  they  do  make  a  covenant,  .and  oil  is  car. 
Mic.    6.    7  the  Lord  be  pleased  with,  .rivers  of  oil? 

6.  15  but  thou  shalt  not  anoint  thee  with  oil 
Hag.   2.  i2  touch  bread,  or  pottage,  or  wine,  or  oil,  or 

4.  Olive  oil,  eKatov  elaiou. 

Matt  25.  3  foolish  took  their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil 
25.    4  But  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with 

25.  u  Give  us  of  your  oil;  forourlampsaregone 
Mark  6.  13  anointed  with  oil  many  that  were  sick, and 
Luke  7.  46  My  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint 

10.  34  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in  oil  and 

16.  6  And  he  said,  An  hundred  measures  of  oil 
Heb.  1.  9  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladn. 
Jas.  5. 14  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the 
Rev.   6.   6  and  (see)  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  w. 

18. 13  wine,  and  oil,  and  fine  flour,  and  wheat 
OIL,  oiled,  to  make  — 
l.To  cause  to  be  bright,  ~in>*  tsahar,  5. 

Job  24. 11  make  oil  within  then' walls,  .tread.. wine 
2. Oil,  }£»  sliemen. 

Exocbg.  23  one  cake  of  oiled  bread,  and  one  wafer 
OINTMENT,  (pot  of)  — 
l.Pot  of  perfumes,  nnfrp  merqacluih. 

Job  41.  31  he  maketh  the  sea  like  a  pot  of  ointment 

2.  Perfume,  nnjrip  mirqacluith. 

1  Ch.  9.  30  the  priests  made  the  ointment  of  the  spi. 

3.  Compounded  perfume,  nph  roqach. 

Exod3o.  25  an  ointment  compound  after  the  art  of 

4.  Oil,  \zu?  shemen. 

2  Ki.  20.  13  Hezekiah . .  showed  them . .  the  precious  o. 
Psa.  1 33.  2  like  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  head 
Prov  27.   9  Ointment  and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart 

27.  16  the  ointment  of  his  right  hand.,  betrayeth 

Eccl.  7.    1  name  (is)  better  than  precious  ointment 

9.    8  always  white ;  and  let  thy  head  lack  no  o. 

10.  1  Dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apo. 
Song    1.    3  Because  of  the  savour  of  thy  good  ointm. 

1.  3  thy  name  (is  as)  ointment  poured  forth 
4.  10  smell  of  thine  ointments  than  all  spices 

Isa.  1.  6  bound  up,  neither  mollified  with  oiutme. 
39.  2  the  spices,  and  the  precious  ointment,  and 
57.    9  thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  ointment 

Amos  6.    6  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief  ointme. 

5.  Myrrh,  ointment,  aromatic  balm,  fxvpov  muron. 

Matt  26.    7  alabaster  box  of  very  precious  ointment 

26.  9  this  [ointment]  might  have  been  sold  for 
26.  12  in  that  she  hath  poured  this  ointment  on 

Marki4.    3  having  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment  of 

14.  4  Why  was  this  waste  of  the  ointment  made? 
Luke  7.  37  she . .  brought  an  alabaster  box  of  ointme. 

7.  38  hisfeet,  and  anointed,  .with  the  ointment 
7.  46  this womanhath anointed  myfeet with  oi. 

23.  56  they  returned,  and  prepared  spices  and  0. 

John  1 1.    2  Mary  which  anointed  the  Lord  with  oint 

12.    3  Then  took  Mary  a  pound  of  ointment  of 

2.  3  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment 
12.    5  Why  was  not  this  ointment  sold  for  three 

Rev.  18. 13  cinnamon,  andodours,  and  ointments,  and 

OLD  (man,  men,  women,  things) — 

1.  Worn  out,  n^3  baleh. 

Josh.  9.    4  took  old  sacks . .  and  wine  bottles,  old,  and 

9.   5  And  old  shoes  and.  .old  garments  upon 
Eze.  23.  43  said-I  unto  (her  that  was)  old  in  adulteries 

2.  Worn  out,  Ni^a  belo. 

Jer.  38.  11  took  thence  old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten 
38. 12  Put  now  (these)old  cast  clouts  and  rotten 

a. A  son  of,  ||  ben. 

Gen.  5.  32  Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old:  and  N. 
7.   6  Noah  (was^  six  hundred  years  old  when 
it.  10  Shem  (was)  an  hundred  years  old,  andbe. 
12.   4  Abram  (was)  seventy  and  five  years  old 

16. 16  Abram  (was)  fourscore  and  six  years  old 

17.  1  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  n. 
17.  12  he  that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circura. 

17. 17  horn  unto  himthatis  an  hundred  years  0. 
17.  24  Abraham  (was)  ninety  years  old  and  nine 
17.  25  Ishmael  his  son  (was)  thirteen  years  old 
21.  4  Isaac  being  eight  days  old,  as  God  had  c. 
21.  5  Abraham  was  an  hundred  years  old  when 
25.  20  Isaac  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took  R. 

25.  26  Isaac  (was)  threescore  years  old  when  she 

26.  34  Esau  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took  to 

37.  2  Joseph,  .seventeen  years  old,  wasfeeding 
41.  46  Joseph  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  st. 
50.  26  Joseph  died . .  an  hundred  and  ten  years  o. 

Exod.  7.  7  fourscore  years  old.  .fourscore  and  three 
30.  14  Every  one.. from  twenty  years  old  and  ab. 

38.  26  every  one.  .from  twenty  years  old  and  u, 


Lev, 


27 
Num.  1 


3  twenty  years  old  even  unto  sixty  years  old 

5  five  years  old  even  unto  twenty  years  old 

6  from  a  month  old  even  unto  five  years  old 

7  And  if.  .from  sixty  years  old  and  above 
3  From  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  all 

18  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  by  th. 
1.  20  every  male  from  twenty  years  old  and  u. 
So  in  v.  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42,  45. 

3.  15  male  from  a  month  old  and  upward 

So  in  v.  22,  28,  34,  39,  40,  43. 

4.  3  From  thirty  years  old . .  until  fifty  years  0. 

So  in  v.  23,  30,  35,  39,  43,  47. 
8.  24  from  twenty  and  five  years  old  and  upw. 
14.  29  all.  .from  twenty  years  old  and  upward 
18.  16  And.  .from  a  month oldshalt thou  redeem 
26.    2,  4  Take,  .from  twenty  years  old  and  upw. 
26.  62  all  males  from  a  month  old  and  upward 


NUI1132 

Deul 

33 
31* 

34 

Josh 

14- 

14 

24 

J  iuU 
1  Sa. 

.  2 

4 

2  8a. 

2. 

4 

S 

19 

iKi 

19. 

14. 

[  Ch. 


I01J 


15 
i5> 
16. 
18. 
21. 
21. 

23- 
=3- 

24. 
24. 


24. 
24. 
=5- 
25- 
26. 
26. 

27- 

27. 

28. 
29. 

3i- 
31- 

33- 
33- 
34- 
36. 

36. 
36. 

,,        3S- 
Ezra    3. 

Isa.  65. 

Jer.  52. 
Mic.    6. 


11  men .  .from  twenty  years  old  and  upward 

39  hundred  and  twenty  and  three  years  old 

2  I  (am)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  old 

7  Moses  (was)  an  hundred.,  twenty  years  0. 

7  Forty  years  old  (was)  I  when  Moses  the 
10  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  and  five  years  0. 
29  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  years  0. 

8  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  years  o. 
15  Now  Eli  was  ninety  and  eight  years  old 

10  forty  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign 

4  He  was  five  years  old  when  the  tidings  c. 

4  David  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  be. 

32  a  very  aged  man, (even)fourscore years  o. 

35  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  years  old.  .can  I 
21  forty  and  one  years  old  when  he 

42  J.  (was)  thirty  and  five  years  old  when  he 

17  Thirty  and  two  years  old  was  he  when  he 

26  Two  and  twenty  years  old  (was)  Ahaziah 
21  Seven  years  old  (was)  J.  when  he  began  to 

2  He  was  twenty  and  five  years  old  when  he 

21  Azariah,  which  (was)  sixteen  years  old,  and 

2  Sixteen  years  old  was  he  when  he  began 

33  Five  and  twenty  years  old  was  he  when  he 
2  Twenty  years  old  (was)  A.  when  he  began 
2  Twenty  and  five  years  old  was  he  when  be 
1  Manasseh  (was)  twelve  years  old  when  he 

19  Anion  (was)  twenty  and  two  years  old  w. 

1  Josiah  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he  beg. 
31  Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years  o. 

36  Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
8  Jehoiachin  (was)  eighteen  years  old  when 

18  Zedekiah  (was)  twenty  and  one  years  old 
21  married  when  he  (was)  threescore  years  o. 

27  numbered  from  twenty  years  old  and  ab. 
23  not  the  number,  .from  twenty  years  old 
13  Rehoboam  (was)  one  and  forty  years  old 
31  (He  was)  thirty  and  five  years  old  when  he 

5  Jehoram  (was)  thirty  and  two  years  old 

20  Thirty  and  two  years  old  was  he  when  be 

2  Forty  and  two  years  old  (was)  Ahaziah  w. 
1  Joash  (was)  seven  years  old  when  he  beg. 

15  an  hundred  and  thirty  years  old .  .when 
1  Amaziah  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
5  he  numbered  them  from  twenty  years  old 
1  took  Uzziah,  who  (was)  sixteen  years  old 

3  Sixteen  years  old  (was)  Uzziah  when  he 
1  Jotham  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 

8  He  was  five  and  twenty  years  old  when  he 
1  Alias  (was)  twenty  years  old  when  he  beg. 
1  began  to  reign .  .five  and  twenty  years  old 

16  of  males,  from  three  years  old  and  upward 

17  Levitesfrom  twenty  yeavsoldandupward 
1  Manasseh  (was)  twelve  years  old  when  he 

21  Amon  (was)  two  and  twenty  years  old  w. 

1  J  osiah  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he  beg 

2  Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years  0. 

5  Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 

9  Jehoiachin  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he 

11  Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 
8  Levites,  from  twenty  years  old  and  upw. 

20  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old 

20  the  sinner,  .anhundred  years  old,  shall  be 

1  Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 

6  shall  I  come,  .with  calves  of  a  year  old  ? 


4.  .4  son,  13  bar. 

Dan.   5.31  (being)  about  threescore  and  two  years  old 

5.  A  daughter,  ns  bath. 

Gen.  17. 17  shall  Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  hear  ? 


Aged, 
Gen.  18. 

19. 

=5 
35> 
43 
44 

Exodio. 

Lev.  iq, 

Deut28. 

Judgig. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


t  Ki.i 


s  Ch.i 


30. 
Esth.  3 
Job  42. 
Psa.  148 
Prov  17, 

20. 
Eccl.  4. 
Isa.   20 

65. 
Jer.  31 

51 
Lam.  2, 
Eze.  9 
Joel  1 
2. 
Zech.  8. 


p.]  zaqen. 

11  Abraham  and  Sarah  (were)  old.  .well  str. 

4  compassed  the  house,  .both  old  and  young 

.    8  died  in  a  good,  .age,  an  old  man,  and  full 

.  29  and  died,  .old  and  full  of  days  :  and  his  s. 

■  27  (Is)your  fatherwell,theold  man  of  whom 

20  We  have  a  father,  an  old  man,  and  a  child 
9  We  will  go  with  our  young . .  with  our  old 

32  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man,  and  fear 

50  shall  not  regard  the  person  of  the  old,  nor 

16  there  came  an  old  man  from  his  work  out 

17  the  oldmansaid,  Whithergoest  thou?  and 

20  the  old  man  said,  Peace  (be)  with  thee 

22  to  the  master  of  the  house,  the  old  man 

3T,  32  there  shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  thine 

14  An  old  man  cometh  up  ;  and  he  (is)  covt. 

6  kingB,ehoboam  consulted  with  the  old  m. 

8  But  he  forsook  the  counsel  of  the  old  men 
13  forsook  the  old  men's  counsel  that  they  g. 
11  Now  there  dwelt  an  old  prophet  in  Beth. 
25  in  the  city  where  the  old  pi'ophet  dwelt 
29  the  old  prophet  came  to  the  city,  to  niou. 

6  Rehoboam  took  counsel  withtheold  men 

8  he  forsook  the  counsel  which  the  old  men 
13  Rehoboam  forsook  the  counsel  of  the  old 
17  had  no  compassion  upon,  .old  man,  or  h. 
13  destroy,  .all  Jews,  both  young  and  old 
17  So  Job  died,  (being)  old,  and  full  of  days 
.  12  Both  young  men  and  maidens  ;  old  men 

6  Children's  ehildi  en(are)  the  crown  of  old  m, 
29  the  beauty  of  old  men  (is)  the  grey  head 
13  Better,  .than  an  old  and  foolish  king,  wh. 

4  the  Ethiopians  captives,  young  and  old 

20  nor  an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his 
13  rejoice.,  both  young  men  and  old  together 
22  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  old  and 

21  The  young  and  the  old  lie  on  the  ground 
6  Slay  utterly  old  (and)  young,  both  maids 
2  Hear  this,  ye  old  men,  and  give  ear,  all  ye 

28  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your 
4  There  shall  yet  old  men  and  old  women 


OLD 


714 


OMEGA 


7.  To  be  aged,  IB!  eaqen. 

Gen  ig  iiOiir  father  (is)  old,  and.,  not  a  man  in  the 
j  Sa.  17. 12  the  man  went  among  men.  .an  old  man 

8  Life,  D-,n  chayyim. 
'  Gen.  23!"  1  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  years  old 

9  Dans,  D-3'  yamim.  , 
'  San.  2.  '  8  Nineveh  (is)  of  old  like  a  pool  of  water 

1 0.  Days  of  the  years  of  life,  Q"n  W  <p;  Vf™?*?™  «■ 
Gen  47    8  P.  said  unto  Jacob,  How  old  (art  thou  ? 

"4'  10  eat  old  store,  and  bring  forth  the  old 

Neh  "3.  6  the  old  gate  repaired  Jelioiadathe  son  of 

J  M  above  the  old  gate,  and  above  the  fish  gate 

Son"  7'  13  manner  of  pleasant  (fruits)  new  and  old 

Isa    22. 11  Ye  made..a  ditch..for  the  water  of  the  old 

13  Perpetuity,  antiquity,  iy_  ad. 

Job    20.   4  Knowest  thou  (not)  this  of  old,  since  man 

14.  A  n  age,  indefinite  time,  B?l«  olam. 

Deut  r-  7  Remember  the  days  of  old,  consider  the 
Job  L  is  Hast  thou  marked  the  old  way  which  w. 
Prov  23.  jo  Remove  not  the  old  landmark ;  and  enter 
Isa    61     4  they  .v  .all  build  the  old  wastes,  they  shall 

67  11  Then   le  remembered  the  days  of  old,  M. 
jer     (.  16  ask  fo r  the  old  paths,  where  (is)  the  good 

28     8  prophets. before  me.. before  thee  of  old 

Lam    3!    6  He.,  set  me  in  dark  places  as    dead  of  od 

Eze  2s  15  with,  .heart,  to  destroy  (it)  for  the  old  1 

Mir    7  1 4  flock . .  let  them  feed . .  as  in  the  days  of  old 

Mai'.  3.   4  as  in  the  days  of  old,  and  as  in  former  ye. 

15. An  an:,  indefinite  time,  nh'j.  alam.  M  .... 

Ezra   4. 15  moved  sedition  within  the  same  of  old  to. 

4. 19  it  is  found  that  this  city  of  old  time  hath 

16. Before,  before  i-rne,  n~\pr  qedem. 

Neil  1-46  in  f.  5  days  of  David  and  Asaph  of  old 

Psa.'  44.    1  didst,  in  their  days,  in  the  times  of  old 

s-igGod   hall  hear.. he  that  abideth  of  old 

68  33  heavens  of  heavens,  (which  were)  of  old 
74     2  (which)  thou  hast  purchased  of  old;  the 
77    s  I  have  considered  the  days  of  old,  the  y. 
77  11  surely  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old 
,       2  I  will  .  I  will  utter  dark  sayings  of  old 

! .     1  -  2  I  have  known  of  old  that  thou  hast  fou. 
1 .,'    c  I  remember  the  days  of  old  ;  I  meditate 
Jer    46  26  shall  be  inhabited,  as  in  the  days  of  old 
Lam.  1.    7  things  that  she  had  in  the  days  of  old,  w 
2  1 7  that  h   had  commanded  in  the  days  of  old 
='  21  Turn  thou  us.  .renew  our  days  as  of  old 
Jlie     I    2  whose  goings  forth  (have  been)  from  of  old 
7.  20  which . .  hast  sworn . .  from  the  days  of  old 

17  Before,  former,  'jioijj  qadmoni. 
Eze.  38. 17  he  of  whom  I  have  spoken  in  old  times  by 

18  Primeval,  old,  ancient,  apxaios  archaios. 
Luke  g     8  that  one  of  the  old  prophets  was  risen  ag. 

0  iq  that  one  of  the  oldprophets  is  risen  again 

Acts  21.  16  Mnason  of  Cyprus,  an  old  disciple  with 

-  Pe    2     5  spared  not  the  old  world,  but  saved  Noah 

Rev' 1-     o  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  that  old  s. 

'  20.'  2  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old  ser. 

19.  Old,  yepiov  geron.  . 
John   3.   4  How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old? 

20.  Old.  ancient,  worn  out,  TraKaios  palaios. 
Matt.  9.  16  putteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  unto  an  old 

9.  17  Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  b. 

13.  52  out  of  his  treasure  (things)  new  and  old 
Mark  2.  21  seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  ga. 
2.21  that  fllled  it  up  taketh  away  from  the  old 
2.  22  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles 

:  s  36  man  putteth  apiece  of  a  new.  upon  an  0. 
5.  36  out  of  :he  new  agreeth  not  with  the  old 
5  37  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles 
5.  39  No  man  also  having  drunk  old  (wine)  str. 
s  39  desireth  new;  for  he  saith.Theoldisbet. 

.  6.  6  Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified 
5  7  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leaven,  that 
5.   8  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven 

3  14  untaken  away  in  thereadingof  theOldT. 

4  -2  That  ve  put  off .  .the  old  man,  which  is 
3     9  seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man 

7  I  write  no  new  commandment .  .but  an  old 

2.    7  The  old  commandment  is  the  word  which 

2\.Lonri  ago,  formerly,  anciently,  TraKat  palai. 

2Pe'  1    of'orgoit  n  that  he  was  purged  from  his  old 

jude         4  were  before  of  old  ordained  to  tins  conde. 

22  Ehler,  aged,  7rpe<rj8uTepos  presbuleros. 

Acts    2.  17  shall  see  visions,  and  your  old  men  shall 
23. Ota,  aged,  Trpeir&vTris presbutis. 

Luke  1. 18  I  am  an  old  man,  and  my  wife  well  stne. 

24.7Y»ie,  vpoVos  chronos. 

Acts    1.  23  when  he  was  full  forty  years  old,  it  came 
[See  also  Age,  corn,  ever,  lion,  store,  three  years.] 
OLD,  to  be,  become,  make,  -wax  — 
1 .  To  wear  out,  nb?  balah. 

Oen.  18.  12  After  I  am  waxed  old  shall  1  have  pleasu. 
Deut.  8.    4  Thy  raiment  waxed  not  old  upon  thee 
29.    s  your  clothes  are  not  waxen  old  upon  you 
29.    5  thy  shoe  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy  foot 
Josh.  9. 13  are  Income  old  by  reason  of  the  very  long 
Neh.  9.  2i  their  clothes  waxed  not  old,  and  then-feet 


Luke 


Rom. 

1  Co. 

2  Co. 
Eph. 
Col. 
1  Jo. 


Psa   --     3  When  I  kept  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old 
'10-  26  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment 
Isa    so    g  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  a  garment ;  the 
51.   6  the  earth  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment 

•2.To  wear  out,  nhi  balah,  3. 

Lam.  3.   4  My  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  old 
3  To  be  or  become  aged,  )pr  zaqen. 

Gen.  18.  i2Sarahlaughed.. saying. .my lord beingold 

18. 13  I  of  a  surety  bear  a  child,  which  am  old? 

24.    1  Abraham  was  old,  (and)  well  stricken  in 

27.    1  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  Isaac  was  old 

27.    2  Behold  now,  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  day 

Josh  13    1  Joshua  was  old . .  stricken  in  years  ;  and 

13.    1  Thou  art  old.,  stricken  inyears.and  there 

23     1  that  Joshua  waxed  old . .  stricken  in  age 

23.    2  said  unto  them,  I  am  old . .  stricken  in  age 

Ruth  1.  12  Turn,  .for  I  am  too  old  to  have  an  hush. 

1  Sa.   2.  22  Now  Eli  was  very  old,  and  heard  all  that 

4.  18  he  died ;  for  he  was  an  oldman,  andheavy 

8     1  it  came  to  pass,  when  Samuel  was  old,  that 

i.    5  Behold,  thou  art  old,  and  thy  sons  walk 

12.    2  I  am  old  and  grey  headed  ;  and,  behold 

1  Ki    1     1  Now  king  David  was  old.  .stricken  in  ye. 
1  15  Bath-sheba  went,  .the  king  was  very  old 

2  Ki   4.  14  she  hath  no  child,  and  herhusbandis  old 

1  Ch'23     1  So  when  David  was  old  and  full  of  days 

2  Ch.24.  15  Jehoiada  waxed  old,  and  was  full  of  days 
Psa.  37.  25  I  have  been  young,  and  (now)  am  old  ;  yet 
Prov.23.  22  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old 

4.  To  make  or  become  aged,  ]p.J  zaqen,  5. 

Job  14  8  Though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  thee. 
Prov  22.   6  when  he  is  old,  he  will  not  depart  from 

5. Age,  njpi  tdqndh. 

Gen  24.  36  bare  a  son  to  my  master  when  she  was  old 
1  Ki  11.  4  For  it  came  to  pass,  when  Solomon  was  old 
Psa.  71. 18  Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  greyheaded 

6.  To  be  removed,  aged,  pry  athaq. 

Job  -1  7  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live,  become  old 
Psa.    6.   7  it  waxeth  old  because  of  all  mine  enemies 

7  To  become  old,  yvpaaKO)  gerasko. 

John-Ji.  18  when  thou  shalt  lie  old,  thou  shalt  stre. 
Heb.   8.  13  Now  that  which  decayeth  and  waxeth  old 

8.  To  make  old,  ira\ai6io  palaioo. 

Lukei-  33  provide  yourselves  bags  which  wax  not  old 

Heb    1.  11  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment 

8. 13  that  lie  saith . .  he  hath  made  the  first  old 

OLD  age  — 

1. Age,  njpi  ziqnah. 

1  Ki  15.  23  in  the  time  of  his  old  age  lie  was  diseased 
Psa  71  9  Castmenot  off  intke  time  ofoldage;  for 
Isa.  46.   4  And  (even)  to.  .old  age  I  (am)  he  ;  and 

2.  Age,  old  age,  D'JP!  zequnim. 

Gen  21     2  bare  Abraham  a  son  in  his  old  age,  at  the 
21.    7  for  I  have  born  (him)  a  son  in  his  old  age 
37     3  because  be  (was)  the  son  of  his  old  age 
44.  20  a  child  of  his  old  age,  a  little  one  ;  and 
3  Ob7  age,  grey  hairs,  nyto  sehah. 

Gen  is  15  thou  shalt  be  buried  in  a  good  old  age 

2s     8  up  the  ghost,  and  died  in  a  good  old  age 
Tudf  8  3'  the  son  of  Joash  died  in  a  good  old  age 
Ruth  4.  is  he  shall  be.  .a  nourisher  of  thine  old  age 
1  Ch  20.  28  he  died  in  a  good  old  age,  full  of  days 
Psa.  92.  14  shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age 
i.Old  aae,  ynpas  geras. 

Luke  1.  36  she  hath.. conceived  a  son  in  her  old  age 

OLD  estate  — 

Former  state,  nsnp  qadmah. 

Eze.  36. 1 1  I  will  settle  you  after  your  old  estates,  and 

OLD  (time,  things  of  or  in)  — 

1. From  then,  that  time,  is?  dice.  ,,■-..,      ,    „ 
Psa.  93.   2  Thythrone(is)establishedofold:thou(art) 

I.From  yesterday,  former  time,  ftUfff  meethmol 
Isa.  30.  33  For  Tophet  (is)  ordained  of  old;  yea,  for 
Z.From  indefinite  time,  B<j\yameolam 

Gen.    6.    4  mighty  men  which  (were)  of  old,  men  of 
1  Sa.  27.    8  for  those,  .of  old  the  inhabitants  of  the  1. 
Psa  no.  S2  I  remembered  thy  judgments  of  old,  O  L. 
Eccl    1.  10  it  hath  been  already  of  old  time,  which 
Isa.  46.   9  Remember  the  former  things  of  old :  for 
si    o  the  ancient  days,  iu  the  generations  of  o Id 
63'    g  bare . .  and  carried  them  all  the  days  of  old 
.Tor     2.'  20  For  of  old  time  I  have  broken  thy  yoke 
Eze.  26.  20  into  the  pit,  with  the  People  of  old  tmie 
26.  20  iu  places  desolate  of  old,  with  them  that 

Face,  before,  D-13  panim. 
Deut.  2/20  giants  dwelt  therein  in  old  time ;  and  the 


Lieut.  2.  20  giancs  uweu  lucihu  h<  ~. ..-....-,      -- 

1  Ch.  4.  40  for  (they)  of  Ham  had  dwelt  there  of  old 
Psa.  102.  25  Of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of 

5.  Former,  before,  'Jicip  qadmmii. 

Isa.  43. 18  things,  neither  consider  the  thiugs  of  old 

6. First,  former,  Jirifn  rishon. 

2  Sa  20. 18  They  were  wont  to  speak  m  old  time,  say. 

I.Far  off,  pvnrachoq.  . 

Isa    2s     1  (thy)  counsels  of  old  (arc) faithfulness.. t. 

Jer.  31.   3  The  Lord  hath  appeared  of  old  unto  me 
S.From  old  time,  tKiraXat  ekpalai. 

2  Pe.  3.   s  the  heavens  were  of  old,  and  the  earth  st. 
9  Once,  at  some  time  or  other,  ttots  pole. 

1  Pe    3    5  For  after  this  manner  in  the  old  time  the 

2  Pe    1  21  For  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by 


OLD  time,  (them)  of  — 

Primeval,  old,  ancient,  apxaios  archaios. 

Matt  s  21  heard  that  it  was  said  by  them  of  old  time 
5  07  heard  that  it  was  said  [by  them  of  old  t.] 
s  33  it  hath  been  said  by  them  of  old  time 
Acts  15.  21  For  Moses  of  old  time  hath  in  every  city 

OLD  things  — 

The  primeval,  ancient  things,  to  apxaio  ta  archaia. 

2  Co.  5. 17  old  things  are  passed  away  ;  behold,  all 
OLD,  very  — 
One  very  aged,  v>V'T  yashish. 

Job  32.   6  I  (am)  young,  and  ye  (are)  very  old..  I  was 

OLDNESS  — 

Oldness,  antiquity,  ira\ai6Tns  palaiotls. 

Rom.  7.    6  should  serve,  .not  (iu)  the  oldness  of  the 

OLIVE,  (berries  or  trees,  yard)  — 

I.Olive  (berry,  tree,  ard),  rn  zayith. 

Gen.  8.  1 1  in  her  mouth  (was)  an  olive  leaf  pluckt  off 
Exod^3.  n  with  thy  vineyard,(aud)  with  thy  olive  yard 

27.  20  that  they  bring  thee  pure  oil  olive  beaten 
30  24  And  of  cassia,  .and  of  oil  olive  an  Inn 

Lev    24     2  that  they  bring  unto  thee  pure  oil  olive  b. 
Deut  6.  11  and  olive  trees,  which  thou  plantedst  not 

8  8  A  land  of  wheat,  .a  land  of  oil  olive  and 
24.  20  When  thou  beatest  thine  olive  tree,  thou 

28.  40  Thou  shalt  have  olive  trees  throughout  all 
28  40  not  anoint,  .for  thine  olive  shall  cast 

Josh  24.  13  of  the  vine  yards  and  olive  yards  which  ye 
Judg.  g.    8  they  said  unto  the  olive  tree,  Reign  thou 

09  But  the  olive  tree  said  unto  them,  Should 
15.   5  and  burnt  up . .  the  vine  yards  (and)  olives 

1  Sa    8  i4take..youi'vineyards,andyourohveyards 

2  Ki    5  26  (Is  it)  a  time  to  receive,  .olive  yards,  and 
18  32  take  you  away  to.  .a  land  of  oil  olive  and 

1  Ch  -7  28  over  the  olive  trees  and  the  sycamore  tre. 
Neh    5.  11  Restore,  .their  olive  yards,  and  their  ho. 
8  is  Go  forth,  .and  fetch  olive  branches,  and 
o'  25  possessed,  .olive  yards,  and  fruit  trees  in 
Job  is.  33  and  shall  cast  off  his  flower  as  the  olive 
Psa    s2     8  1  (am)  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house 
128    3  thy  children  like  olive  plants  round  about 
Isa    17    6  left  in  it,  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive  tree 
24  13  (shall  be)  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive  tree 
Jer    11. 16  LORD  called  thy  name,  A  green  olive  tree 
Hos.  14.   6  his  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and 
Amos  4.    9  when . .  your  olive  trees  increased  the  pal 
Mic     6  is  thou  shalt  tread  the  olives,  but thoushalt 
Hab    3.17  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the 
Ha"    2  iq  the  pomegranate,  and  the  olive  tree,  hath 
Zech  4'.    3  two  olive  trees  by  it,  one  upon  the  right 

I  11  What  (are)  these  two  olive  trees  upon  the 
4!  12  What  (be  these)  two  olive  branches  which 

2.  Oil,  oil  tree,  jcg  shemen.  ■ 
1  Ki    6  2  3  And . .  he  made  two  cherubim  (of)  olive  tr. 

'  6  31  he  made  doors  (of)  olive  tree :  the  lintel 
6  32  The  two  doors  also  (were  of)  olive  tree 
6.  33  So  also  made  he.  .posts  (of)  olive  tree,  a 

3.  Olive,  tree  or  berry,  i\ala  elaia. 
Rom  n  17  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the  olive  tree 

II  24  these.-be  grafted  into  their  own  olive  tree 
Jas  3  i2C'authefigtree..bearoliveberries?either 
Rev.  11.    4  These  are  the  two  olive  trees,  and  the  two 

OLTVE  tree,  good  — 

A  good  olive  tree,  KaWitKaios  kallielaios. 

Rom  11.  24  and  wert  grafted,  .into  a  good  olive  tree 

OLIVE  tree,  wild  — 

A  field  or  wild  olive  tree,  aypieKaios  agrielaios. 
Rom  11  17  thou,  being  a  wild  olive  tree,  wert  grafted 
11.  24  cut  out  of  "the  olive  tree,  which  is  wild  by 

OLIVES  — 

Mount  of  Olives,  rh  opos  rwv   IXaiuv.     See  Ohret. 

Matt  11.    1  come  to  Bethphage,  unto  the  mount  of  0. 

24     3  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount  of  0.,  the  disc. 

26  30  sung . .  they  went  out  into  the  mount  of  O. 

Mark  1 1     1  at  the  mount  of  O.,  he  sendeth  forth  two 

13  3  he  sat  upon  the  mount  of  O.,  over  against 

14  26  sung,  .they  went  out  into  the  mount  of  O. 
Luke.9:  29  at  the  mount  called,  .of  O    he  sent  two  of 

in  37  even  uowatthe  descent  of  the  mount  of  O. 
21'  37  abode  in  the  mount  that  is  called,  .of  O. 
22  39  went,  as  he  was  wont,  to  the  mount  of  O. 
John*  8.    1  [Jesus  went  unto  the  mount  of  0.] 

O-LI'-VET,  'EXaitSv  olives. 

A  ridge  of  hills  on  the  E.  of  Jerusalem,  about  a  mile 
from  N.  to  S.,  and  2oofeet  above  the  site  of  the  temple; 
it  has  three  summits  with  distinct  names  for  each;  it  is 
called  also  the  Mount  of  Corruption,  2  Ki.  23.  13. 
Acts   1  12  unto  Jerusalem  from  the  mount  called  0. 


0  LTM'-PAS,  'OAluiTras. 

A  believer  at  Rome  whom  Paul  salutes. 

Rom  16.  is  O.,  aud  all  the  saints  which  are  with  them 

O'-MAR,  TON  mountaineer. 

A  son  of  Eliphaz  son  of  Esau.    B.C.  1670. 

Gen  36  11  were  Teman,  O..  Zepho,  and  Gatam,  and 
'  36  is  duke  Teman,  duke  0.,  duke  Zepho,  duke 

1  Ch.  1.  36  and  0.,  Zephi,  and  Gatam,  Kenaz,  andT. 

OM-E'-GA,  lrl)xlya.  . 

An  appellation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  signifying 

"the  last,"  as  A  Ipha  does  "  the  first." 

Rev.  1.    8  1  am  Alpha  and  0., the  beginning  andthe 


OMER 


ns 


ON 


Rev.    i.  ri  [I  am  Alpha  amlO.,  the  first  and  the  last] 

21.  6  I  am  Alpha  ami  0.,the  beginning  and  the 

22.  13  I  am  Alpha  ami  G.,the  beginning  and  the 

OMER — 

An  omer,  (tenth  of  an  ephah),  i£J7  omer. 

£xodi6. 16  an  omer  for  every  man .  .the  number  of 
16.  18  when  they  did  mete  (it)  with  an  omer,  he 
16.  22  they  gathered,  .two  omers  for  one  (man) 
16. 32  Fill  an  omer  of  it  to  be  kept  for  your  gen. 
16.  33  put  an  omer  full  of  manna  therein,  and 
16.  36  Now  an  omer  (is)  the  tenth  (part)  of  anep. 

OMIT,  to  — 

To  send  away,  let  go,  atyirjut  aphiemi. 

Matt  23.  23  have  omitted  the  weightier  (matters)  of 
OMNIPOTENT  — 
All powerful,  iravroKpa.Twp pantokrator. 

Rev.  19.    6  Alleluia,  .the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reign. 
OM'-RI,  nay  J  ah  apportions. 

1.  Father  of  Ahab,  and  captain  of  the  host,  afterwards 
made  king  instead  of  Zimii  who  had  slain  Elan.  B.C. 
929-907. 

1  Ki.16.  16  Israel  made  O.,  the  captain  of  the  host 

16.  17  O.  went  up  from  Gibbethon,  and  all  Israel 
16.  21  to  make  him  king;  and  half  followed  0. 
16.  22  But  the  people  that  followed  O.  prevailed 
16.  22  prevailed.. so  Tibni  died,  andO.  reigned 
16.  23  began  O.  to  reign  over  Israel,  twelve  ye. 
16.  25  0.  wrought  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
16.  27  the  acts  of  0.  which  he  did,  and  his  mi. 

16. 28  O.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
16.  29  began  Ahab  the  son  of  O.  to  reign  over 

16. 29  son  of  O.  reigned  over  Israel  in  Samaria 
16.  30  the  son  of  0.  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 

2  Ki.  S.  26  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  O.  king  of  1st. 
2  Ch.22.  2  name,  .(was)  Athaliah  the  daughter  of  O. 
Mic.    6.  t6  the  statutes  of  O.  are  kept,  and  all  the 

2.  A  son  of  Becher  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.    8  0.,  and  Jerimoth,  and  Abiah,  and  Anath. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Pharez  son  of  Judah.     B.C.  640. 

x  Ch.  9.   4  the  son  of  0.,  the  son  of  Imri,  the  son  of 

4.  Son  of  Michael,  and  ruler  of  Issachar  in  the  days  of 
David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  iS  of  the  brethren  of  David  :  of  Issachar ;  0. 

ON,  fan  sun. 

1.  Capital  of  Lower  Egypt,  E.  of  the  Nile,  and  a  little 
N.  of  Memphis  ;  it  is  called  also  Heliopolis,  as  well  as 
Beth-shemesh,  i.e.  "  house  of  the  sun." 

Gen.  41. 45,  50  daughter  of  Potipherah  priest  of  0. 
40.  2o  the  daughter  of  Potipherah  priest  of  O. 

2.  A  Reubenite,  son  of  Peleth,  who  joined  with  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram  in  murmuring  against  Moses  and 
Aaron.    B.C.  1472. 

Num. 16.  1  O.  the  son  of  Peleth,  sons  of  Reuben,  took 
ON  — 
l.Uhto,  Sn  el. 

Exodig.  20  the  Lord  came  down.. on  the  top  of  the 
2.To  rjo  on,  ~^rt  halaJc. 

Judgi4.    9  And  he  took  thereof.. and  went  on  Jos.  6.13- 

1  Sa.  14. 19  that  the  noise,  .went  on  and  increased 

19. 23  he  went  on  and  prophesied,  until  he  came 

2  Sa.   5.  10  And  David  went  on,  and  grew  great,  and 

13.  19  and  rent  her  garment,  .and  went  on  crying 

3.  Up  to,  in  ad, 

Ezra    6.  15  this  house  was  finished  on  the  third  day 

4.  On,  upon,  over,  Sy  al. 

Gen.  6.  1  men  began  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the 
Dan.   6.  14  set  (his)  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him 

5.  At  the  face  of,  »J9?  Uplme. 

2  Ki.  5.    2  little  maid ;  and  she  waited  on  Naaman's 

6.  To  set,  placet  put,  EPip,  dib*  sum,  sim,  5. 

Eze.  21. 16  on  the  right  hand,  (or)  on  the  left,  whither. 
7. From,  air6  apo. 

Rev.    6.  10  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  [on]  them  that 
21. 13  On  the  east.. on  the  north.. on  the  s. .  .on 

8.  Toward,  to,  into,  els  eis. 

Matt  27.  30  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head 

Mark  4.    8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  did  yield 

8. 23  when  he  had  spit  on  his  eyes,  and  put  his 

14.  6  said,  .she  hath  wrought  a  good  work  [onl 
Luke  6.  20  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  on  his  disciples,  and 

8.  23  there  came  down  a  storm  of  wind  on  the 
12. 49  I  am  come  to  send  fire  [on]  the  earth ;  and 

15.  22  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  (his) 
John  1. 12  power.. to  them  that  believe  on  his  name 

2. 11  did  Jesus,  .and  his  disciples  believed  on 
3.  18  He  that  helieveth  on  him  is  not  condem. 

3.  36  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everl. 

4.  39  many,  .believed  on  him  for  the  saying  of 
6.  29  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  sent 
6.  35  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst 
6.  40  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him 

6.  47  He  that  believeth  [on]  me  hath  everlasting 

7.  31  many  of  the  people  believed  on  him,  and 
7. 38  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  scripture 
7.  39  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  r. 

7.  48  Have  any  of  the  rulers,  .believed  on  him? 

8.  6  [with  (his)  finger  wrote  on  the  ground] 

3.    8  [stooped  down,  and  wrote  on  the  ground] 

8.  30  As  he  spake  these . .  many  believed  on  him 

9.  35  said . .  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God? 
g.  36  Who  is  he.,  that  I  might  believe  on  him? 


13 

M 

10 

17- 

19. 

21 

21. 

Acts 

6. 

'3- 

14. 

19 

IQ. 

Romi6. 

2  Co 

IT. 

(Sal. 

}, 

Phil 

T. 

1  Jo. 

■>• 

5- 

Rev. 

13. 

Out  c 

r", 

Mat 

21 

Rev. 

iS. 

Joluiio.  42  And  many  believed  on  him  there 

11.  45  Then  many  of  the  Jews,  .belieyed  on  him 

11.  48  If  we  let.  .alone,  all.  .will  believe  on  him 

12.  11  the  Jews  went  away,  and  believed  on  Je. 
12. 37  though  he  had  done,  .they  believed  not 
12.  42  the  chief  rulers,  .many  believed  on  him 
12.  44  Jesus  cried  and  said,  H    that  believeth  on 
12.  44  believeth  not  on  me,  buc  on  him  that  sent 
12.  46  that  whosoever  believeth  on  me  should 

22  Then  the  disciples  looked  one  on  another 

12  He  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that 
9  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me 

20  which  shall  believe  on  me  through  their 
37  They  shall  look  on  him  whom  they  pierced 
4  when. .morning  was. .come,  J.  stood[on) 
6  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship 
15  looking  stedfastly  on  him,  saw  his  face  as 
9  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  set  his  eyes  on 

23  they  commended  them  to  the  Lord,  on 
4  that  they  should  believe  on  him  which 
4  should  come  after  him,  that  is,  on  Christ 
6  GreetMary.whobestowedmuch  labour  on 

20  ye  suffer,  .if  a  man  smite  you  on  the  face 
14  might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus 
29  not  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  also  to  s. 
10  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath 

13  unto  you  that  believe  [on]  the  name  of  the 
13  that  ye  may  believe  on  the  name  of  the 
13  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven  on 

Ik  ek. 

.  19  Let  up  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward 
20  Rejoice,  .for  God  hath  avenged  you  on 

10. In,  among,  during,  iv  en. 

Matt  22.  40  On  these  two  commandments  haug  all  the 
24.  20  that  your  flight  be  not.  .[on]  the  sabbath 

26.  5  they  said,  Not  on  the  feast,  .lest  there  be 
Mark  2.  23  he  went  through  the  corn  fields  on  the  s. 

2.  24  why  do  they  [on]  the  sabbath  day  that  w. 
14.    2  they  said,  Not  on  the  feast,  .lest  there  be 
16.    5  they  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right 
Luke  1.  59  it  came  to  pass,  that  on  the  eighth  day 
4.  i5  he  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath 

4.  31  came.. and  taught  them  on  the  sabbath 
5. 17  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  as  lie  was 
6.    1  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  second  sabbath 
6.    2  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  [on]  the  sabbath 
6.    6  it  came  to  pass  also  ou  another  sabbath 

6.  7  whether  he  would  heal  on  the  sabbath  d. 
8.  15  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they,  which 
8.  22  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain  day,  that  he 

8.  32  an  herd  of  many  swine  feeding  on  the  in. 

9.  37  it  came  to  pass,  that  [on]  the  next  day,  w. 

12.  51  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace  on  earth  ? 

13.  7  I  come  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig  tree,  and 

13.  10  teaching  in  one  of  the  synagogues  ou  the 

14.  5  straightway  pull  him  out  [on]  the  sabbath 

20.  1  on  one  of  those  days,  as  he  taught  the  pe. 
John  5.   9  walked :  and  on  the  same  day  was  the  sa. 

5.  16  he  had  done  these  things  on  the  sabbath 

7.  22  ye  [on]  the  sabbath  day  circumcise  a  man 
7.  23  If  a  man  on  the  sabbath  receive  circum. 
7.  23  I  have  made  a  man.  .whole  on  the  sabbath 

13.  23  there  was  leaniug  on  Jesus'  bosom  one  of 
19.  31  not  remain  upon  the  cross  on  the  sabbath 

Rom  12.  7  Or.. on.. ministering:  or  he  that  teacheth 

12.  8  Or  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation  :  he 

2  Co.  4.  8  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  distressed 

7.  5  had  no  rest,  but  we  were  troubled  on  every 

8.  1  of  the  grace  of  God  bestowed  on  the  chu. 
Heli.    1.  3  on  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high 

8.  1  who  isseton  the  righthand  of  the  throne 
10.  12  forever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

1  Pe.   3.  22  who  is  gone  into  heaven,  and  is  on  the  r. 

4.  16  ashamed;  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  this 
Rev.    1.  10 1  was  in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and 

5. 13  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  [on] 

11.  Above,  upon,  iirdvoj  epano. 

Matt.  5.  14  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  be  hid 

21.  7  put  on  them  their  clothes,  and.  .set.  .the. 
Luke  10. 19  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  serpents 
Rev.    6.    8  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death,  and 

12.0k-,  upon,  eVt  (gen.)  epi. 

Matt.  9.   2  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying  on  a  bed 

9.  6  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgi. 

14.  25  Jesus  went  unto  them,  walking  [on]  the  sea 
16.  19  shalt  bind  on  earth,  .shalt  loose  on  earth 
18.  iS  shall  bind  on  earth,  .shall  loose  on  earth 
18. 19  That  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth 
24.  17  Let  him  which  is  on  the  house  top  not  c. 
26. 12  she  bath  poured  this  ointment  on  my  body 

27.  19  When  he  was  set  down  on  the  judgment 
Mark  2.  10  Son  of  man  hathpoweron  earth  to  forgive 

4.    1  whole  multitude  was  by  the  sea  on  the  1. 
midst  of  the  sea,  and  he  alone  on  the  land 
commanded  the  people  to  sit  down  on  the 
so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 
fell  on  the  ground,  and  wallowed  foaming 
let  him  that  is  on  the  house  top  not  go 
forward  a  little,  and  fell  [on]  the  ground 
and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men 
They  on  the  rock  (are  they),  which,  when 
setteth  fit)  on  a  candlestick,  that  they 
cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ? 
that  betrayeth  me  (is)  with  me  on  the  ta. 
sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes 
they  saw  his  miracles  which  he  did  on  t. 
they  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and  d. 
I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth  :  I  have 
Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and  put  (it)  on  the  c. 


6.47 

8.  6 

9-   3 

9.  20 

13-  *5 
14-35 
Luke  2.  14 
8.13 
8.  16 

18.  8 
22.  21 
22.  30 

John  6.  2 
6.  19 
17.    4 

19.  19 


Acts    2.  30 

5-  T5 
5-3° 

10.39 

21.  23 

21.40 

25.    6 

25-  n 

27.  44 

1  Co. 11.  10 

Gal.     3.  13 

Eph.  1.  10 

6-  3 
Col.     3.   2 

Heb.   8.   4 


Jas. 

Rev. 


12.25 

5-    5 


4.    9 

4.  10 

5-  1 

5.  10 

6.  10 
6.16 
7-  1 
7-  I 
7-  *5 
g.  17 

11.  10 

13-  '4 
13.14 
14.  6 
14.  14 

14-  15 
17.  8 
17.    9 

19.  d 
19.18 
19.19 

20.  6 
20.  11 
upon 

Mark  2.  21 
Luke  7. 13 
John  4.  6 
Acts  27.  44 
Rom.  g.  33 
10.  11 
1  Ti.  1.  16 
1  Pe.  2.  6 
Rev.   6.    2 

6-  5 
14.  On,  upon 

Matt.  4 
5 

5-39 
5-45 
5-45 
29 

34 


13.  On, 


26 
Mark2  4" 

4 

4 

4 

'  4 


16. 

Luke  1 


John 


Acts 


38 


[would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne] 
laid.  .011  beds  and  couches,  that  at  the  1. 
Jesus,  whom  ye  slew,  and  hanged  on  a  t. 
he.  .whom  they  slew,  and  hanged  on  a  t. 
We  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on 
Paul  stood  on  the  stairs,  and  beckoned  w. 
the  next  day,  sitting  on  the  judgment  seat 
on  the  morrow  I  sat  on  the  judgment  seat 
some . .  and  some  on  (broken  pieces)  of  the 
ought  the  woman  to  have  power  on  (her) 
Cursed  (is)  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 
which  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  on 
That.,  thou  may  est  live  long  on  the  earth 
things  above,  not.  .things  on  the  earth 
For  U  he  were  on  earth  he  should  not  be 
were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth 
not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth 
YeTiave  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and 
it  rained  not  on  the  earth  by  the  space  of 
set  in  heaven,  and  (one)  sat  on  the  throne 
and  thanks  to  him  that  sat  on  the  throne 
fall  down  before  him  that  sat  on  the  thr. 
I  saw  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on 
made  us. .priests:  and  we  shall  reign  on  the 
avenge  our  blood . .  them  that  dwell  on  the 
from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
standing  on  the  four  corners  of  the  earth 
not  blow  on  the  earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor 
he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell 
I  saw.  .horses,  .and  them  that  sat  on  them 
prophets  tormented  them  that  dwelt  on 
deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 
saying  to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 
to  preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the  e. 
having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,  and 
And.  .crying,  .to  him  that  sat  on  the  clo. 
they  that  dwell  ou  the  earth  shall  wonder 
mountains,  on  which  the  woman  sitteth 
worshipped  God  that  sat  on  the  throne 
of  them  that  sit  on  them,  and  the  flesh  of 
to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the 
on  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power 
I  saw  a.. throne, and lum  that  sat  upon  it 

,  eVi  (dat.)  epi. 

No  man.  .seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on 
had  compassion  on  her,  and  said  unto  her 
Jesus,  .being  wearied,  .sat  thus  on  the  w. 
And  the  rest,  some  on  boards,  and  some 
whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 
Whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 
which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to 
he  that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  co. 
he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  bow ;  and  a  cro. 
he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  pair  of  balances 

,  eVi  (ace.)  epi. 

setteth  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple 
put  it  under  a  bushel,  but  on  a  eandlt-st. 
whosoever  shall  smite  thee  [on]  thy  right 
maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and 
sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and ...  the  unjust 
one  of  them  shall  not  fall  [on]  the  ground 
Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  0. 
the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  shore 
commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down  on 
when  the  disciples  saw  him  walking  on  the 
Lord,  .bid  me  come  unto  thee  on  v.  29. 
I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude,  be. 
commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down  on 
they  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore  afr. 
whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall  be 
[but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will] 
bind  heavy  burdens,  .and  lay  (them)  on 
ointment,  and  poured  (it)  on  his  head,  as 
lie  went  a  little  farther,  and  fell  on  his  f. 
Then  came  they,  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus 
His  blood  (lie)  on  us,  and  on  our  children 
some  fell  on  stonyground,  where  it  had 
these  are  they  likewise  which  are  sown  on 
these  are  they  which  are  sown  on  good  g. 
put  under,  .and  not  to  be  set  on  a  candl. 
he  was  in  the  hinder  part . .  asleep  on  a  p. 
I  have  compassion  ou  the  multitude,  be. 
but.  .have  compassion  on  us,  and  help  us 
they  laid  their  hands  [on]  him,  and  took 
[they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  .they] 
fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  about 
and  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple 
wTho)seeing  Jesus,  fell  on  (his)  face,  and  be. 
unto  him  that smiteth  thee  on  the.  .cheek 
digged  deep,  and  laid  the  foundation  on 
other  fell  [on]  good  ground,  and  sprang 
set  him  ou  his  own  beast,  and  brought  him 
on  the  morrow,  when  he  departed,  he  took 
on  a  candlestick,  that  they  which  come  in 
he  layeth  (it)  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing 
ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him 
fell  down  on  (h>R)  f;lt-'e  R^  bis  feet,  giving 
on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind 
the  same  hour  soughtto  lay  hands  on  him 
they  shall  lay  their  hands  on  you,  and  p. 
shall  it  come  on  all  them  that  dwell  on 
begin  to  say  to  the  mountains,  Fall  on  us 
spirit  descending,  and  remaining  on  him 
believeth  not.  .wrath  of  God  abide th  on 
no  man  laid  bands  on  him,  because  his  h. 
have  taken  him  ;  but  no  man  laid  bands  on 
thy  king  cometh,  sitting  on  an  ass's  colt 
He  then  lying  on  Jesus'  breast  saith  unto 
which  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper 
on  my  servants  and  on  my  hand  maidens 
it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  their 


ON 


•16 


ONE 


Act3  4.  22  the  man  was  abo ve  forty  years  old  on  w. 
5.  5  great  fear  came  on  all  them  that  heard  t. 
5.  18  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles,  and  put 

7.  54  and  they  gnashed  onhimwith(their)teeth 

8.  17  Then  laid  thcv  .hands  on  them,  and  they 

9.  17  putting  his  hands  on  him,  said.  Brother 

10.  44  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  them  which  heard 
jo.  45  hecause  that  on  the  Gentiles  also  was  po. 

11.  15  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  them,  as  on  us  at  the 
11.  17  as.  .unto  us,  who  believed  on  the  Lord  Je. 

13.  11  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and  a  darkness 

14.  10  Said  with  a  loud  voice,  Stand  upright  on 

16.  31  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  th. 

17.  26  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  and 
19.  6  the  Holy  Ghost  came  on  them;  and  they 
19. 16  leaped  on  them,  and  overcame  them,  and 

19.  17  fear  fell  ou  them  all,  and  the  name  of  the 

20.  37  and  fell  ou  Paul's  neck,  and  kissed  him 

21.  5  we  kneeled  down  on  the  shore,  aud  prayed 
21.  27  stirred  up.  .the  people,  and  laid  hands  on 

22. 19  I  imprisoned,  .them  that  believed  outhee 
28.    3  laid  (them)  ou  the  Are, there  came  a  viper 

Rom.  4.  5  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungo. 
4.  24  if  we  believe  on  him  that  raised  up  Jesus 
9.  23  the  riches  of  his  glory  on  the  vessels  of  m. 
11.  22  on  them  which  fell,  severity  ;  but  toward 

12. 20  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head 
15.    3  reproaches,  .that  reproached  thee  fell  on 

1  Co.  14.  25  so  falling  down  on  (his)  face  he  will  wor. 
Gal.  6. 16  peace  (be)  on  them,  and  mercy,  and  upon 
Col.  3.  6  [the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children] 
1  Ti.  1.  18  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on  thee 
Titus  3.  6  Which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through 
1  Pe.  2.  24  bare  our  sins  in  his  owu  body  ou  the  tree 
Rev.  3.  3  I  will  come  [on]  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou 
4.   4  they  had  ou  their  heads  crowns  of  gold 

6.  16  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 

7.  1  standing  ou  the  four  corners  of  the  earth 
7.    1  that  the  wind  should  not  blow,  .on  any 
7.  11  fell  before  the  throne  on  their  faces,  and 
7. 16  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor 
9,    7  on  their  heads,  .as  it  were  crowns  like 

10.  2  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  (his)  left . .  on 

11.  16  elders  which  sat  before  God  ontheirseats 
14.    j  a  Lamb  stood  ou  the  mount  Sion,  and  w. 

14.  16  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  in  his  sickle  on  the 

15.  2  staud  on  the  seaof  glass,  having  the  harps 

18.  19  they  cast  dust  ou  their  heads,  and  cried 
ig.  12  on  his  head  (were)  many  crowns ;  and  he 

19.  16  he  hath  on  (his)  vesture  and  on  his  thigh 

20.  9  they  went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth 

15.  Down  upon,  koto,  (gen.)  kata. 

Marki4.  3  brake  the  box,  aud  poured  (it)[ou]  his  h. 
lQ.Dowti  through,  over  against,  Kara  {ace.)  kata. 

Acts  8.  36  as  they  went  on  (their)  way,  they  came  u. 
17*  Among,  with,  fx^rd  (gen.)  vieta. 

Luke  10.  37  And  he  said,  He  that  showed  mercy  on  him 
IS. About,  round  about,  wept  (gen.)  peri. 

Matt   9.  36  he  was  moved  with  compassion  on  them 

Acts  10.  19  While  Peter  thought  on  the  vision,  the  s. 
[See  also  About,  affection,  ask,  behalf,  bestow,  bind, 
breathe,  bring,  call,  come,  coming,  compassion,  draw, 
driven,  edge,  fasten,  follow,  foot,  go,  have,  high,  hold, 
horseback,  lay,  lead,  leap,  light,  look,  mercy,  pas3, 
pressed,  put,  putting,  ride,  right,  say,  set,  seize,  smoke, 
take,  take  hold,  wait,  walk,  way,  write.] 

ON  behalf  — 

I. On,  upon,  M  (dat.)  epi. 

Rom  16.  79  I  am  glad  therefore  on  your  behalf  :  but 
2,  About,  round  about,  -n-epl  {gen.)  peri. 

1  Co.  1.   4  I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf,  for 
ON  continually  — 
To  go  on,  ij7£  halak. 

Josh.  6.  i3*And  seven  priests,  .went  on  continually 

ON  either  side  — 

From  hence,  iurevGev  enteuthen. 

Johnig.  18  on  either  side  one,  and  Jesus  in  the  midst 
Rev.  22.  2  [on  either  side]  of  the  river,  .the  tree  of 

ON... part  — 

Down  through,  throughout,  Kara,  {ace.)  kata. 

1  Pe.  4. 14  [on  their  part  he  is  evil,  .on  your  part  he] 
ON  the  part  — 
F>r,  in  behalf  of  *  virep  {gen.)  huper. 

Mark  9.  40  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part 
ON  this  side... on  that  side  — 
Hither... thither,  njrrV . , .n^h  laliennah . .  lahennah. 

Eze.    1.  23  covered 'on  tliis*  side.. covered  ou  that  s. 

O'-NAM,  Diix  strength. 

1.  Second  son  of  Shobal  son  of  Seir.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  23  and  Manahath,  and  Ebal,  Shepho,  and  O. 
1  Ch.  1.  40  and  Manahath,  aud  Ebal,  Shephi,  and  O. 

2.  A  son  of  Jerameel  son  of  Hczron  son  of  Pharez  son 
of  Judah.     B.C.  1490. 

1  Ch.  2.  26  name(wa<0  Atarah.  .(was)themotherofO. 
2.  28  And  the  sons  of  0.  were  Shammai,  and  J. 
o'-nan,  $k  strength. 

Second  soli  of  Judah,  by  the  danghter  of  Shua  the 
Canaanite.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  )8.   4  bare  a  son  ;  and  she  called  his  name  0. 
38.    8  Judah  said  untoO.,  Go  in  unto  thy  brot. 
38.    9  O.  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his 
46.  12  sons  of  Judah  ;  Er,  and  0. . .  but  Er  and  0. 


Nura.26.  19  of  Judah  (were)  Er  and  0. :  and  Er  and  0. 
1  Ch.  2.    3  The  sons  of  Judah  ;  Er  and  O.,  and  Shel. 

ONCE,  at  once,  this  once,  for  all.  when  — ■ 
l.From  then  or  that  {time),  ind  meaz. 

Psa.  76.    7  who  may  stand,  .when  once  thou  art  an.? 
2.0ne,  "iriN  echad. 

Exod3o.  10  upon  the  horns  of  it  once  in  a  year  with 

30.  10  once  in  the  year  shall  he  make  atonement 

Lev.  16.  34  to  make  an  atonement  for.  .sins,  once  a 

Josh.  6.    3  And  ye  shall . .  go  rouud  about  the  city  once 

6. 11  compassed  the  city,  going  about  (it)  once 

6.  14  secoud  day  they  compassed  the  city  once 

Judgi6. 28  that  I  may  be  at  once  avenged  of  the  P. 

1  Sa.  26.   8  with  the  spear  even  to  the  earth  at  once 

1  Ki.  10.  22  once  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of  Ta. 

2  Ki.    6.  10  saved  himself  there,  not  once  nor  twice 
2  Ch.  9.  21  every  three  years  once  came  the  ships  or 
Job    33.  14  For  God  speaketh  once,  yea,  twice,  (yetm. 

40.  5  Once  have  I  spoken,  but  I  willnotanswer 
Psa.  62. 11  God  hath  spoken  ouce ;  twice  have  I  hea. 
Prov28.  iS  is)  perverse  (in  his)  ways  shall  fall  at  once 
Hag.  2.    6  Yet  once,  it  (is)  a  little  while,  and  I  will 

Z.Hasting,  hastily,  iriD  maher. 

Deut.  7.  22  thou  mayest  not  consume  them  at  once 
4.  Yet,  still,  any  more,  "iiy  od. 

Jer.  13.  27  Woe  unto  thee,  .when (shall  it)  once(be)? 
5.>$te2)f  beat,  tune,  cuspaam. 

Gen.  18.  j2  And  he  said.  .1  will  speak  yet  but  this  0. 

Exodio.  17  forgive,  .my  siu  ouly  this  once,  aud  intr. 

Josh.  6.    3  And  ye  shall,  .go  round  about  the  city  o. 

6.  :i  compassed  the  city,  going  about  (it)  once 

6. 14  the  second  day  they  compassed  the  city  0. 

Judg.  6.  39  I  will  speak  but  this  once,  .but  this  once 

16.  18  Come  up  this  once,  for  he  hath  showed 

16.  28  strengthen  me,  I  pray  thee,  only  this  on. 

1  Sa.  26.  3  with  the  spear  even  to  the  earth  at  once 
Neh.  13.  20  lodged  without  Jerusalem  once  or  twice 
Isa.  66.  8  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once?  for  as  soon 
Jer.  10. 18  sling  out  the  inhabitants,  .at  this  once,  and 

16.  21 1  will  this  once  cause  them  to  know,  I  w. 

0.  Once,  once  for  all,  awa^  hapax. 

2  Co.  11.  25  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  suffered  shipw. 
Phil.  4. 16  For  even  inThessalonicayeseutonceand 
1  Th.  2.  18  we  would  have  come  unto  you.  .once  and 
Heb.  6.   4  impossible  for  those  who  were  once  enli. 

9.    7  (went)  the  high  priest  alone  once  every 
9.  26  now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath 
9.  27  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die 
9. 28  So  Christ  was  once >  ff  ered  to  bear  the  sins 
10.   2  the  worshippers  once  purged  should  have 
12.  26  Yet  once  more  I  shake  not  the  earth  only 
12. 27  Yet  once  more,  signifieth  the  removing  of 
1  Pe.  3. 18  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins 
3.  20  when  [once]  the  long  suffering  of  God  w. 
Jude        3  which  was  once  delivered  unto  the  saints 
5  though  ye  once  knew  this,  how  that  the  L. 
7. From,  air6  (ou  &v)  apo  hou  an. 

Lukei3.  25  When  once  the  master  of  the  house  is  risen 

8.  At  once,  once  for  all,  £4>dTra£  epliapax. 

Rom.  6. 10  For  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin  once 
x  C0.15.    6  seen  of  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  o. 
Heb.   7. 27  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  him. 
9.  12  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place 
10. 10  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus. .ouce.  for  all 

9.  Once,  at  some  time,  ttot4  p>ote. 

Rom.  7.    9  For  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once :  but 
Gal.    1.  23  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he  destro. 
ONE  — 

1.  One,~in$  echad. 

Gen.   1.    9  be  gathered  together  unto  one  place,  and 

2.  21  he  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the 
2. 24  unto  his  wife ;  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh 

3.  22  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know 
4. 19  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Adah,  and  the 

10.  25  were  born  two  sons:  the  name  of  one(was) 

11.  1  was  of  one  language,  and  of  one  speech 
11.  6  the  people  (is)  one,  and  they  have  all  one 
19.  9  This  one.  .came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will 
21. 15  she  cast  the  child  under  one  of  the  shrubs 
22.  2  upon  one  of  the  mountains  which  I  will  t. 
26. 10  one  of  the  people  might  lightly  have  lien 
27.  38  Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,  my  father?  b. 
27. 45  I  be  deprived  also  of  you  both  in  one  day? 

32.  8  If  Esau  come  to  the  one  company,  and  s. 

33.  13  if  men  should  overdrive  them  one  day,  all 

34.  16  dwell  with  you,  and  we  will  become  one 
34.  22  to  be  one  people,  if  every  male  among  us 

40.  5  each  man  his  dream  in  one  night,  each  m. 

41.  5  seven  ears  of  corncameup  uponone  stalk 
41.  11  we  dreamed  a  dream  in  one  night,  I  and 

41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and  g. 

41. 25  The  dream  of  Pharaoh  (is)  one :  God  hath 

41.26  good  ears  (are)  seven  years :  the  dream  (is) 

42.  1 1  We  (are)  all  one  man's  sons  :  we  (are)  true 
42.13  the  sons  of  one  man  in  the  land,  .and  one 
42.  16  Send  one  of  you,  and  let  him  fetch  your  b. 
42. 19  let  one  of  your  brethren  be  bound  in  the 
42.  27  as  one  of  them  opened  his  sack,  to  give  his 
42.  32  sons  of  our  father;  oue(is)uot,  aud  theyo. 
42.  33  leave  one  of  your  brethren  (here)  with  me 
44.  28  And  the  one  wentout  from  me,  and  I  said 

48.  22  I  have  given  to  thee  one  portionabovethy 

49.  16  Dan  shall  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the 
Exod.  1.  15  of  which  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Ship. 

8.  31  removed  the  swarms,  .remained  not  one 

9.  6  but  of  the  cattle  of.  .Israel  died  not  one 


Exod.  9.    7  there  was  not  one  of  the  cattle  of  the  Is. 

10.  19  there  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  the 

11.  1  Yet  will  I  bring  one  plague. .upon  Phar. 

12.  18  until  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
12.  46  In  one  house  shall  it  be  eaten :  thuu  sha. 
12.  49  One  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home  born 
14.  2S  there  remained  notsoniuchas  one  ofthem 
16. 22  they  gathered  twice. .  two  omers  for  oue 

17.  12  the  one  on  the  one  side,  and  the  other  ou 

18.  3  of  which  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Gers. 

23.  29  not  drive  them  out  from  before  thee  in  o. 

24.  3  all  the  people  answered  with  one  voice 
25. 12  two  rings,  .in  the  oue  side  of  it,  and  two 
25. 19  make  one  cherub  ou  the  one  end,  and  the 
25. 32  three  branches,  .out  of  the  one  side,  and 

25.  33  (with)  a  knop  and  a  flower  in  one  branch 

25.  36  all  of  it.  .one  beaten  work  (of)  pure  gold 

26.  2,  8  The  length  of  one.  .the  breadth  of  one 
26.  2  and . .  the  curtains  shall  have  one  measure 
26.  4  make  loops,  .upon  the  edge  of  the  one  c. 
26.  5  Fifty  loops  shalt  thou  make  in  the  one  c. 
26.  6  and  couple,  .and  it  shall  be  one  taberna. 
26.  8  and  the  eleven  curtains,  .of  one  measure 
26.  10  make  fifty  loops  on  the  edge  of  the  one  c. 

26. 11  couple  the  tent  t  gether,  that  it.  .be  one 

26. 16  a  cubit  and  a  half .  .the  breadth  of  oue  b. 

26. 17  Two  tenons,  .in  one  board,  set  in  order 
26.  19,  21,  25  two  sockets  under  one  board 

26.  24  coupled,  .above  the  head  of  it  unto  one  r. 

26.  26  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 

27.  9  of  an  hundred  cubits  long  for  one  side 
28. 10  Six  of  their  names  on  one  stone,  and.  .six 
29.    1  Take  one  young  bullock,  and  two  rams 
29.    3  thou  shalt  put  them  into  one  basket,  and 
29.  15  Thou  shalt  also  take  one  ram  ;  aud  Aaron 
29.  23  one  loaf  of  bread,  and  one  cake,  .and  one 

20. 39  The  one  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  in  the  mor. 

29. 40  with  the  one  lamb  a  teuth  deal  of  flour 
36.  9  length  of  one  cuitain . .  the  breadth  of  one 
36.  9  four  cubits:  the  curtains  (were)  all  of  one  s. 
36. 10  coupled  the  five,  .one  uuto  auother.  .one 
36.  11  he  made  loops  of  blue  on  the  edge  of  one 
36.  12  Fifty  loops  made  he  in  oue  curtain,  and 

36. 12  the  loops  held  oup  (cm-tain)  to  another 
26.  13  coupled . .  one  unt  j  another . .  it  became  o 
36. 15  of  oue  curtain,  .of  one  curMn.  .of  oue  s 
36.  18  to  couple  the  tent,  .that  it  might  be  oue 
36.  22  One  board. .two  tenons,  equally  distant  o. 
36.  24,  26  two  sockets  ui  uei  one  board 

36.  29  coupled  together  at  the  hea;* . .  to  one  ring 

36.  31  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 

37.  3  two  riugs  upon  the  one  side  of  it,  aud  two 
37.    8  One  cherub  on  the  end  on  this  side,  and 
37.  19  made  after  the  fashion  of  almonds  in  0. 
37. 22  all  of  it. .  one  beaten  work  (of)  pure  gold 

Lev.    5.   4,  5  he  shall  be  guilty  in  one  of  these 

5.   7  one  for  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other  for  a 

5.  13  sin  that  he  hath  sinned  in  one  of  these 
7.    7  one  law  for  them  :  the  priest  that  maketh 

7.  14  of  it  he  shall  offer  one  out  of  the  whole 

8.  26  he  took  one  unleavened  cake,  and.  .one 

12.  8  one  for  the  burnt  offeriug,  and  the  other 

13.  2  unto  Aaron  the  priest,  or  unto  one  of  his 

14.  5  the  priest  shall  command  that  one  of  the 
14.  10  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year,  .and  one 
14.  12  the  priest  shall  take  one  he  lamb, aud  offer 
14.  21  he  shall  take  one  lamb,  .and  one  tenth 
14.  22  the  one  shall  be  a  sin  offering,  and.  the  o. 
14.  30  he  shall  offer  the  one  of  the  turtle  doves 
14.  31  the  one  (for)  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 

14.  50  he  shall  kill  the  oue  of  the  birds  in  an  e. 

15.  15,  30  the  one.,  a  siu  offering,  and  the  oth»r 

16.  5  he  shall  take,  .one  ram  for  a  burnt  offer. 
16.    8  one  lot  for  the  Lord,  and  the  other  lot 

22.  28  not  kill  it  and  her  young  both  in  one  day 

23. 18  ye  shall  offer,  .one  young  bullock,  and 

23.  19  ye  shall  sacrifice  one  kid  of  the  goats  for 

24.  5  And.  .two  tenth  deals  shall  be  in  oue  cake 

24.  22  Ye  shall  have  one  manner  of  law,  as  well 

25.  48  he  may  be  redeemed . .  one  of  his  brethren 

26.  26  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one 
Num.  1.  41  forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 

1. 44  each  one  was  for  the  house  of  his  fathers 
2.  16  fifty  and  one  thousand  and  four  hundred 
2.  28  forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 

6.  1 1  the  priest  shall  offer  the  one  for  a  sin  off. 
6. 14  one  he  lamb,  .and  one  ewe  lamb. .and  one 

6.  19  one  unleavened  cake,  .one  unleavened  w. 

7.  13  one  silver  charger,  .one  silver  bowl 

So  in  v.  19,  25,  31,  37,  4j,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 
7. 14,  20  one  spoon  of  ten  (shekels)  of  gold,  full 
7.  15  One  young  bullock,  one  ram,  oue  lamb 
So  in  v.  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63.  69.  75-  81. 
7.  16,  22,  2S,  34,  40,  46  One  kid  of  the  goats 
7.  52,  58,  64,  70,  76,  82  Oue  kid  of  the  goats 

7.  26  One  golden  spoon  of  ten  (shekels) 
So  in  v.  32,  38,  44,  50,  56,  62,  68,  74,  80. 

8.  12  thou  shaft  oHer  the  one.  .asinohVring.and 

9.  14  ye  shall  have  one  ordinance,  both  for  the 

10.  4  if  they  blow . .  with  one . .  then  the  princes 

11.  19  Ye  shall  not  eat  one  day,  nor  two  days 
11.  26  the  nanieof  the  one.  .Eldad.and  the  name 
13  23  cut  down  from  thence  a  branch  with  one 

14.  15  thou  shalt  kill,  .this  people  as  one  man 

15.  5  drink  offering  shalt  thou  prepare,  .for  one 
15.  11  shall  it  be  done  for  one  bullock,  .for  one 
15.  15  One  ordinance. .for  you  of  the  congregat. 
15.  16  One  law  and  one  manner  shall  be  for  you 
15.  24  offer  one  young  bullock,  .and  one  kid  of 

15.  29  Ye  shall  have  one  law  forhim  that  sinneth 

16.  15  have  not  takeu  one  ass.  .neither,  .hurt  o. 
16.  22  shall  one  man  sin,  and  wilt  thou  be  wroth 


ONE 


717 


ONE 


NUIU17.  3  one  rod. .  for  the  head  ofthe  house  of  their 
17.  6  for  each  prince  one,  according  to  their  f. 
28.  4  one  lamb  shalt  thou  offer  in  the  morning 
28.  7  the  fourth  (part)  of  an  hin  for  the  one  la. 
28.  11,  icjoffer.  .two  young  bullocks,  and  one  ram 
28.  12  three  tenth  deals  of  flour,  .for  one  bullock 
28. 12  two  tenth  deals  of  flour,  .for  one  ram 
28.  13  with  oil  (for)  a  meat  offering  unto  one  la. 
28.  15  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering  unto 
28.  22  one  goat,  .a  sin  offering,  to  make  an  ato. 
28.  27  two  young  bullocks,  one  ram,  seven  lambs 
28.  28  unto  one  bullock,  two  teutli  deals  unto  o. 
28.  29  A  several  tenth  deal  unto  one  lamb,  thro. 

28.  30  one  kid  of  the  goats,  to  make  an  atonem. 

29.  2, 8  one  young  bullock,  one  ram.  .seven  lambs 
29.    4  one  tenth  deal  for  one  lamb,  throughout 
29.    5  one  kid  of  the  goats,  .a  sin  offering,  to 
29.   9  mingled  with  oil.  .two  tenth  deals  to  one 
29.  10  A  several  tenth  deal  for  one  lamb,  thron. 
29.  11,  r6,  19,  25  one  kid  of  the  goats  (for)  a  sin 
29. 22,  28,  31,  34,  38  one  goat  (for)  a  sin  offering 
29.  36  one  bullock,  one  ram,  seven  lambs  of  the 
31.  28  one  soul  of  five  hundred,  .of  the  persons 
31.  30  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of  fifty,  of  the 
31.  34  And  threescore  and  one  thousand  asses 
31.  39  the  Lord's  tribute  (was)  threescore  and 
31.  47  Moses  took  one  portion  of  fifty,  .of  man 

34.  18  ye  shall  take  one  prince  of  every  tribe,  to 

35.  30  one  witness  shall  not  testify  against  any 

36.  8  shall  be  wife  unto  one  of  the  family  of  the 
Deut.  1.  23  I  took  twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe 

4.  42  that  fleeing  unto  one  of  these  cities  he 
6.  4  Hear.  .The  Lord  our  God  (is)  one  Lord 
j  2. 14  which  the  Lord  shall  choose  in  one  of  thy 

13. 12  If  thou  shalt  hear.. in  one  of  thy  cities 

15.  7  If  there  be  among  you  a  poor  man  of  one 
17.  6  at  the  mouth  of  one  witness  he  shall  not 
19.  5  shall  flee  unto  one  of  those  cities,  and  live 
19.  1 1  if  any  man . .  fleeth  into  one  of  these  cities 

19.  15  One  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  am. 
21. 15  If  a  man  have  two  wives,  one  beloved,  and 

23.  16  which  he  shall  choose  in  one  of  thy  gates 

24.  5  he  shall  be  free  at  home  one  year,  and  sh. 

25.  5  If  brethren  dwell  together,  and  one  of  th. 
25. 11  the  wife  of  the  one  draweth  near  for  to 
28.    7  they  shall  come  out  against  thee  one  way 
28.  25  thou  shalt  go  out  one  way  against  them 
32. 30  How  should  one  chase  a  thousand,  and  two 

Josh.  9.    2  to  fight  with  Joshua  and. .Israel,  with  one 

10.   2  Gibeon  (was)  a  great  city,  as  one  of  the  ro. 

10.  42  all  these  kings,  .did  J.  take  at  one  time 

12.    9  The  king  of.  .one;  the  king  of.,  one 

So  in  v.  10,  11,  i2,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  iS,  19,  20,  2i,  22,  23. 

12.  24  king  of  Tii-zah,  one :  all.  .thirty  and  one 
17. 14  Why  hast  thou  given  me . .  one  lot  and  one 
17.  17  saying.. thou  shalt  not  have  one  lot  (only) 

20.  4  when  he  that  doth  flee  unto  one  of  those 
23.  10  One  man  of  you  shall  chase  a  thousand 
23. 14  not  one  thing,  .not  one  thing  hath  failed 

Judg.  6.  ic  thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites  as  one  m. 

8.  i3  each  one  resembled  the  children  of  aking 

9.  2  Whether  (is)  better.,  that  all.  .or  that  one 
9.    3,  18  threescore  and  ten  persons,  upon  one 

16.  29  Samson  took  hold . .  of  the  one  with  his  ri. 
T7.   5  consecn^ed  one  of  his  sons,  who  became 

17.  11  the  young  man  was  unto  him  as  one  of  his 
18. 19  to  be  a  priest  unto  the  house  of  one  man 

19. 13  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these  places  to 
20.  1  was  gathered  together  as  one  man,  from 
20.  8  And  all  the  people  arose  as  one  man,  say. 
20. 11  were  gathered.,  knit  together  as  one  man 

20.  31  of  which  one  goeth  up  to  the  house  of  G. 

21.  3  that  there  should  be  to  day  one  tribe  lac. 
21.    6  There  is  one  tribe  cut  off  from  Israel  this 

21.  8  What  one  (is  there) of  the  tribesof  Israel 
Ruth  1.   4  the  name  of  the  one.  .Orpah,  and  the  na. 

e.  13  though  I  be  not  like  unto  one  of  thine  h 

1  Sa    1.   2  the  name  of  the  one. .Hannah,  and  the  na. 

1.  24  one  ephah  of  flour,  and  a  bottle  of  wine 

2.  34  in  one  day  they  shall  die  both  of  them 
2.  36  Put  me,  I  pray  thee,  into  one  of  the  pri. 
6.    4  one  plague  (was)  on  you  all,  and  on  your 
6.  17  for  Ashdodone,  for  Gaza  one,  forAskelon 
6. 17  one,  for  Gath  one,  for  Ekron  one 

9.  3  Take  now  one  of  the  servants  with  thee 
10.  3  one  carrying  three  kids,  and  another  ca. 
11     7  the  people,  .came  out  with  one  consent 

13.  17  one  company  turned  unto  the  way  (that) 

14.  4  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Bozez,  and  the 
14.  5  The  fore  front  of  the  one  (was)  situate  n. 
14. 40  said  he  unto  all  Israel,  Be  ye  on  one  side 

16.  iS  Then  answered  one  of  the  servants,  and 

17.  36  this.  .Philistine  shall  be  as  one  of  them 

22.  20  one  of  the  sons  of  Ahimelech  the  son  of  A. 

25. 14  But  one  of  the  young  men  told  Abigal,  N. 

26. 15  there  came  one  of  the  people  in  to  destroy 

26.  22  let  one  of  the  young  men  come  over  and 

27.  1 1  shall  now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of 

2  Sa.  1. 15  David  called  one  of  the  youngmen,  and  s. 

2.  21  laytheeholdononeof  the  youngmen,  and 
2.-25  became  one  troop,  and  stood  on  the  top 
3. 13  but  one  thing  I  require  of  thee,  that  is 
4.    2  the  name  of  the  one.  .Baanah,  and  the  n. 

6.  20  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  shamelessly  u. 

7.  23  what  one  nation  in  the  earth  (is)  like  thy 
9. 11  he  shall  eat  at  my  table,  as  one  of  the  ki. 

12.    1  There  were  two  men  in  one  city;  the  one 

12.  3  poor  (man)  had  nothing,  save  one  little 
13. 13  thou  shalt  be  as  one  of  the  fools  in  Israel 

13.  30  slain  all  the  king's  sons,  and  there  is  not 

14.  6  but  the  one  smote  the  other,  and  slew  h. 
14.  27  were  born  three  sons,  and  one  daughter 


2Sa.  15.    2  Thy  servant,  .of  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 
17.  12  and  of  all . .  shall  not  be  left  so  much  as  o. 

17.  22  by  the  morning  light  there  lacked  not  one 
19.  14  he  bowed.,  even  as  (the  heart  of)one  man 
23.    8  against  eight  hundred,  whom  he  slew  at  0. 

24. 12  choose  thee  one  of  them,  that  I  may  (do) 
1  Ki.  2. 16  now  I  ask  one  petition  of  thee,  deny  me 

2.  20  Then  she  said,  I  desire  one  small  petition 
3. 17  And  the  one  woman  said,  0  my  lord,  land 

3.  17  this  woman  dwell  in  one  house ;  and  I  was 

4.  22  Solomon's  provision  for  one  day  was  thirty 
6.  24  five  cubits . .  the  one  wing  of  the  cherub 
6.  25  the  cherubim,  .of  one  measure  and  one 
6.  26  The  height  of  the  one  cherub  (was)  ten  c. 
6.    27  so  that  the  wing  of  the  one  touched  the 

6.  34  the  two  leaves  of  the  one  tdoor  (were)  fol. 

7. 16  the  height  of  the  one  chapiter . .  five  cubits 

7. 17  seven  for  the  cme  chapiter,  and  seven  for 

7.  18  rows  round  about  upon  the  one  net  work 
7.  27  four  cubits,  .the  length  of  one  base,  and 
7.  34  undersetters  to  the  four  corners  of  one 
7.  37  had  one  casting.oue  measure,  .one  size 
7.  38  one  laver  contained  forty  baths . .  every  la. 
7.  38  upon  every  one  of  the  ten  bases  one  laver 
7.42  rows  of  pomegranates  for  one  net  work,  to 

7.  44  one  sea,  and  twelve  oxen  under  the  sea 

8.  56  there  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  his 
10.  14  of  gold  that  came  to  Solomon  in  one  year 
10.  16  six  hundred,  .of  gold  went  to  one  target 

10.  17  three  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield 

11.  13  will  give  one  tribe  to  thy  son  for  David 
11.  32  he  shall  have  one  tribe  for  my  servant  D. 

11.  36  unto  his  son  will  I  give  one  tribe,  thatD. 

12.  29  he  set  the  one  in  Beth-el,  and  the  other 
12.  30  the  people  went . .  before  the  one . .  unto  D. 
14.  21  Rehoboam  (was)  forty  and  one  years  old 
15. 10  forty  and  one  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusa. 

18.  6  Ahab  went  one  way  by  himself,  and  Oba. 

18.  23  let  them  choose  one  bullock  for  themsel. 
iS.  25  Choose  you  one  bullock  for  yourselves,and 

19.  2  if  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the  life  of  one  of 
20. 29  an  huudred  thousand  footmen  in  one  day 
22.    8  yet  one  man,  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah,  by 

22. 13  (declare)  good  unto  the  king  with  one  m. 
22.  13  let  thy  word,  .be  like  the  word  of  one  of 

2  Ki.   3.  11  And  one  of  the  king  of  Israel's  servants 
4.  22  Send  me.  .one  of  the  young  men,  and  one 
4.  39  one  went  out  into  the  field  to  gather  herbs 
6.    3  one  said,  Be  content,  I  pray  thee,  and  go 
6.    5  as  one  was  felling  a  beam,  the  axe  head 

6.  12  one  of  his  servants  said,  None,  my  lord,  0 

7.  8  they  went  into  one  tent,  and  did  eat  and 

7.  13  And  one  of  his  servants  answered  and  said 

8.  26  and  he  reigned  one  year  iu  Jerusalem 

9.  1  Elisha  the  prophet  called  one  of  the  child. 
14.  23  Jeroboam,  .(reigned)  forty  and  one  years 
17.  27  Carry  thither  one  of  the  priests  whom  ye 

17.  28  Then  one  of  the  priests,  whom  they  had 

18.  24  wilt  thou  turn  away  the  face  of  one  capt. 

22.  1  he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in  Jerusa. 

24.  18  Zedekiah  (was)  twenty  and  one  years  old 

25.  16  The  two  pillars,  one  sea,and  the  bases  wh. 
^    25.  17  The  height  of  the  one  pillar(was)eighteei) 

1  Ch.   1.  19  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Peleg,  because 

11.  11  against  three  hundred,  slain,  .atone  time 

12.  i4  0neof  the  least(was)  over  an  hundred,  and 
12.  38  (were)  of  one  heart  to  make  David  king 

17.  21  what  one  nation  in  the  earth  (is)  like  thy 
21. 10  choose  thee  one  of  them,  that  I  may  do  (it) 

23.  11  therefore  they  were  in  one  reckoning,  ac. 

24.  6  oneprincipalhouseholdbeingtakenforE. 

24.  17  The  one  and  twentieth  to  Jachin,  the  two 

25.  28  The  one  aud  twentieth  to  Hothir.. his  sons 

2  Ch.  3. 11  one  wing.. (was)  five  cubits,  reaching  to  the 

3. 17  he  reared  up.  .one  on  the  right  hand,  and 

4.  15  One  sea,  and  twelve  ox   -  under  it 

5.  13  singers  (were)  as  one,  to  make  one  sound 
9. 13  of  gold  that  came  to  Solomon  in  one  year 
9. 15  (shekels)  of  beaten  gold  went  to  one  target 
9.  16  hundred  (shekels)  of  gold  went  to  one  sh. 

12.  13  Rehoboam  (was)  one  and  forty  years  old 
16. 13  in  the  one  and  fortieth  year  of  his  reign 

18.  7  yet  one  man,  by  whom  we  may  enquire  of 
18.  8  the  king  of  Israel  called  for  one  (of  his)  of 
18.  12  (declare)  good  to  the  king  with  one  assent 
18.  12  let  thy  word,  .belike  one  of  theirs,  and  s. 

22.  2  and  he  reigned  one  year  in  Jerusalem 
28.  6  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  in  one 
30. 12  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  one  heart 
32. 12  Ye  shall  worship  before  one  altar,  and  b. 
34.  1  reigned  in  Jerusalem  one  and  thirty  years 
36.  11  Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 

Ezra  2.  26  The  children . .  six  hundred  twenty  and  one 
3.  1  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man 
to.  13  neither  (is  this)  a  work  of  one  day  or  two 

Nell.  1.    2  Hanani,  one  of  my  brethren,  came,  he  and 
4. 17  with  one  of  his  hands  wrought  in  the  work 
5.  18  which  was  prepared. .  daily  (was)  one  ox 
7.  30  men  of . .  Gaba,  six  hundred  twenty  and  one 

7.  37  children.. seven  hundred  twenty  and  one 

8.  1  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man 
11.    1  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem 

Esth.  3.  13  to  cause  to  perish,  all  Jews,  .in one  day 
4. 11  one  law  of  his  to  put  (him)  to  death,  exc. 

7.  9  Harbonah,  one  of  the  chamberlains,  said 

8.  12  Upon  one  day,  in  all  the  provinces  of  king 
Job     2.  10  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women 

9.  3  he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand 
9.  22  This  (is)  one  (thing),  therefore  I  said  (it) 

14.  4  Who  can  bring  a  clean  (thing)  out . .  not  one 

23.  13  But  he  (is)  in  one  (mind),  and  who  can  t 
31. 15  and  did  not  one  fashion  us  in  the  womb  ? 


Job  33 
Psa.  14 


Pl'OV.   I 

Eccl.  2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4' 
6. 
7- 
!■ 
9 
9 
9- 


Song 
Isa. 


Eze. 


48. 


Hos.   1. 

Amos  4. 
4- 
4- 
6. 

Obad. 

Zeph.  3. 

Hag.   2. 

Zech.  3. 
3- 


23  If  there  be.  .one  among  a  thousand,  to  s. 

16  One  is  so  near  to  another,  that  no  air  can 

3  (there  is)  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  0. 

4  One  (thing)  have  I  desired  of  the  Lord 
20  He  keepeth  all  his  bones :  not  one  of  them 

3  (is)  none  that  doetli  good,  no,  not  one 

7  ye  shall  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of 
11  enemies  ;  there  was  not  one  of  them  left 
14  Cast  in  thy  lot.  .let  us  all  have  one  purse 
14  I  myself  perceived  also  that  one  event  h. 

19  one  thing  befalleth  them,  .they  have  alio. 

20  All  go  unto  one  place  ;  all  are  of  the  dust 

8  There  is  one.. and.  .not  a  second;  yea,  he 

9  Two  (are)  better  than  one  ;  because  they 

10  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow 

11  they  have  heat:  but  how  can  one  be  warm 

12  if  one  prevail  against  him,  two  shall  with. 
6  seen  no  good :  do  not  all  go  to  one  place? 

27  (counting)  one  by  oue,  to  find  out  the  ac. 
2S  one  man  among  a  thousand  have  I  found 

2  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  w. 

3  This  (is)  an  evil,  .that  (there  is)  one  event 

18  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good 

11  assemblies,  (which)  are  given  from  one  s. 
9  with  one  of  thine  eyes,  with  one  chain  of 
9  my  undefiled  is.  .one.  .the  (only)  one  of 

1  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man 
10  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath 

6  Then  flew  one  of  the  seraphim  unto  me 

14  Lord  will  cut  off  from  Israel. .in  one  day 

17  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers  in  one 

18  one  shall  be  called,  The  city  of  destruct. 

15  years,  according  to  the  days  of  one  king 

12  ye  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one,  0  ye  ch. 
17  One  thousand,  .at  the  rebuke  of  one ;  at 

16  no  one  of  these  shall  fail,  none  shall  want 
9  wilt  thou  turn  away  the  face  of  one  capt. 
9  shall  come  to  thee  in  a  moment  in  one  day 

8  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day  ? 

17  in  the  gardens  behind  one  (tree)  in  the 

14  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of 

2  One  basket  (had)  very  good  figs.. like  the 
39  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  one  way 

2  bring  them,  .intooneof  thechambers,and 

1  Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 

20  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  twelve  brasen  b. 

21  the  height  of  one  pillar  (was)  eighteen  c. 

22  the  height  of  one  chapiter  (was)  five  cub. 

15  behold  one  wheel  upon  the  earth  by  the 

16  they  four  had  one  likeness  :  and  their  ap. 

9  put  them  in  one  vessel,  and  make  thee  b. 

2  one  man  among  them  (was)  clothed  with 
9  one  wheel  by  one  cherub,  and  another  w. 

10  they  four  had  one  likeness,  as  if  awheel 

19  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  I  will  put 
10  and.  .doeth  the  like  to  (any)  one  of  these 

3  she  brought  up  one  of  her  whelps  :  it  be. 

19  both  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  one  1. 

2  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother 

13  then  I  saw  that  they  (took)  both  oue  way 

24  Abraham  was  one,  and  he  inherited  the  1. 

23  I  will  set  up  one  shepherd  over  them,  and 

16  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write  upon  it,  For 

17  join  them  oue  to  another  into  one  stick 
17  and  they  shall  become  one  in  thine  hand 
19  make  them  one  stick,  .they  shall  be  one 
22  I  will  make  them  one  nation  in  the  land 
22  one  king  shall  be  king  to  them  all :  and  t. 

24  they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd :  they  s. 

5  the  breadth. .one  reed;  and  the  height,  one 

6  one  reed  broad,  and  the  other.. one  reed  b. 

7  (was)  one  reed  long,  and  one  reed  broad 

7  and  the  threshhold  of  the  gate,  .one  reed 

8  also  the  porch  of  the  gate  within,  one  reed 
10  chambers,  .they  three  (were)  of  one  mea. 

10  the  posts  had  one  measure  on  this  side 

12  one  cubit,  .the  space  (was)  one  cubit  on 
26,  49  one  on  this  side,  and  another  on  that 
42  And  the  four  tables  (were),  .one  cubit  h. 
44  one  at  the  side  of  the  east  gate  (having) 

11  one  door  toward  the  north,  and  another 
24  two.  .for  the  one  door,  and  two  leaves  for 

4  And  before  the  chambers,  .a  way  of  one 

14  two  cubits,  and  the  breadth  one  cubit;  and 

7  over  against  one  ofthe  portions,  from  the 
1 1  The  ephah  and  the  bath  shall  be  of  one  m. 

15  one  lamb  out  of  the  flock,  out  of  two  hu. 
17  But  if  he  give,  .to  one  of  his  servants,  then 
22  these  four  corners  (were)  of  one  measure 

8  and  (in)  length  as  oue  of  the  (other)  parts 

31  one  gate  of  Reuben,  one  gate  of  J.,  one  g. 

32  one  gate  of  Joseph,  one  gate  of  Benj.,  one 

33  one  gate  of  Simeon,  one  gate  of  Issa.,  ono 

34  one  gate  of  Gad,  one  gate  of  Asher,  one  g. 

3  one.,  higher  than  the  other,  and  the  big. 

9  out  of  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  ho. 

13  Then  I  heard  one  saint  speaking,  and  an. 
27  he  shall  confirm  the  covenant,  .for  one  w. 
13  withstood  me  one  and  twenty  days :  but 
13  Michael,  one  of  the  chief  princes,  came  to 
27  they  shall  speak  lies  at  one  table ;  but  it 

5  one  on  this  side  of  the  bank  of  the  river 
11  appoint  themselves  one  head,  and  they  s. 

7  I  caused  it  to  rain  upon  one  city,  and  ca. 

7  one  piece  was  rained  upon,  and  the  piece 

8  So  two(or)three cities  wanderedunto one 

9  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  one  house,  t. 
11  In  the  day.  .even  thou  (wast)  as  one  of  t. 

9  may  all  call,  .to  serve  him  with  one  con. 
1  in  the  one  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the  mo. 
9  behold,  .upon  one  stone  (shall  be)  seven 
g  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one 


ONE 


718 


ONE 


Zech.  4.    3  two  olive  trees  by  it,  one  upon  the  right 

8. ..    the  inhabitants  of  one . .  shall  go  to  anot. 

11.    7  one  I  called  beauty,  and  the  other  I  called 

11.   8  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  olf  in  one  mo. 

14.    7  it  shall  be  one  day  which  shall  be  known 

14.    9  shall  there  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name  one 

Mai.    2.  10  Have  we  not  all  one  father?  hath  not  one 

2.  15  did  nut  lie  make  one?..  And  wherefore  one? 

2.  A  man,  B»'N  ish. 

Gen.  11.    3  they  said  one  to  another,  Go  to,  let  us  m. 

11.  7  that  they  may  not  understand  one  anoth. 
13. 11  separated  themselves  the  one  from  the  0. 
26.  31  And  they  rose  up.  .and  sware  one  to  ano. 
31.  49  watch . .  when  we  are  absent  one  from  an. 
34.  14  to  give  our  sister  to  one  that  is  uncircu. 
37.  19  they  said  one  to  another,  Behold,  this  d. 
42.  21  they  said  one  to  another,  We  (are)  verily 
42.  28  they  were  afraid,  saying  one  to  another 
43-  33  thej  sat.  .and  the  men  marvelled  one  at 

Exodio.  23  They  saw  not  one  another,  neither  rose  any 

16. 15  theysaid  one  to  another,  It  f  is)  manna:  for 

18. 16  I  judge  between  one  and  another,  and  I 
37.   9  covered,  .with  their  faces  one  to  another 

Lev.    7. 10  shall  all  the  sons  of  Aaron  have,  one  (as 

19. 11  Ye  shall  not  steal,  .neither  lie  one  to  an. 
25.  46  ye  shall  not  rule  one  over  another  with  ii. 
26.37  theyshall  fall  one  upon  another,  as  it  were 

Numi4.    4  they  said  one  to  another,  Let  us  make  a 
Deut.  1.  35  Surely  there  shall  not  one  of  these  men 
Judg.  6.  29  they  said  one  to  another,  Who  hath  done 
10  18  princes  of  Gilead  said  one  to  another,  W. 

1  Sa.  10.  11  the  people  said  one  to  another,  What  (is) 

10. 12  one  of  the  same  place  answered  and  said 

20.  41  they  kissed  one  another,  and  wept  one  w. 
22.    2  everyone. .in  distress. .every  one. .every  o. 

2  Sa.  19.   7  there  will  not  tarry  one  with  thee  this  n. 

1  Ki.18.  40  Take  the  prophets,  .let  not  one  of  theme. 

2  £i.  3.  23  they  have  smitten  one  another :  now  there. 

7.  3  they  said  one  to  another,  Why  sit  we  here 

7.  6  they  said  one  to  another,  Lo,  the  king  of 

7.  9  they  said  one  to  another,  We  do  not  well 

12.  9  on  the  right  side  as  one  comethinto  the 
Esth.  6.  9  horse  he  delivered  to  the  hand  of  one  of 

9. 19,  22  and  of  sending  portions  one  to  another 
■Tii    41,  17  They  are  joined  one  to  another,  they  stick 
I'sa.  49., 16  Be  not  thou  afraid  when  one  is  made  rich 
Prov.  6.  28  Can  one  go  upon  hot  coals,  and  his  feet 
Isa.    13.    8  theyshallbeamnzedoneatanother;  their 

40.  26  that  (he  is)  strong  in  power ;  not  one  fail. 

66.  13  As  one  whom  his  mother  coniforteth,  so 
Jer.   13.  14  I  will  dash  them  one  against  another,  even 

25.  26  the  kings,  .far  and  near,  one  with  another 
Eze.    4.  17  astonied  one  with  another,  and  consume 

24.  23  hut  ye  shall  pine .  .and  mourn  one  toward 
47.  14  ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well  as  another 
Joel    2.    8  Neither  shall  one  thrust  another  ;  they 
Mai.    3. 16  Then  they .  .spake  often  one  to  another 

Z.Such  an  one,  'jb^g  »^>?  peloni  aVmoni. 

Ruth  4.    1  Ho,  such  a  one  !  turn  aside,  sit  down  here 

4..1  ujomcwi,  n'fijt  ishshah. 

Exod26.    3  coupled,  .one  to  another,  .coupled  one  to 

26.  5  that  the  loops  may  take  hold  one  of  anot. 
26.  17  Two  tenons,  .set  in  order  one  against  an. 

Eze.    1.    g  Their  wings  (were)  joined  one  to  another 
1.  23  their  wings  straight,  the  one  toward  the  o. 

3.  13  the  living  creatures  that  touched  one  an. 

5.Als0j  even,  □?  gam. 

2  Sa.  17.  13  until  there  he  not  one  small  stone  found 

6,  One,  "in  chad. 

Eze.  33.  30  thy  people,  .speak  one  to  another,  every 

Dan.   2.   9  one  decree  for  you ;  for  ye  have  prepared 

3_.  19  one  seven  times  more  than  it  was  wont  to 

4.  19  Then  Daniel,  ."was  astonied  for  one  hour 
7.    5  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and  (it  had) 
7. 16  I  came  near  uuto  one  of  theni  that  stood 

7. Soul,  breathing  creati&ret  c;?a  ncphesh. 

Lev.    4.  27  And  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin 
B,Anotkera  &\\os  alios. 

John  4.  37  hereinisthatsayingtrue.One  soweth,and 

Acts    2.  12  were  in  doubt,  saying  one  to  another,  W. 

1  Co.  1 5.  39  oue.. flesh  of  men,  another  flesh  of  beasts 

15.  41  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another  glory 

9.  One,  efs  heis. 

Matt.  5.  18  one  jot  or.  .tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from 

5.  29,  30  one  of  thy  members  should  perish,  and 

6.  24  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other 
6.  24  or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despi. 
6.  27  Which  of  you.  .can  add  one  cubit  unto  bis 
6.  39  Sob  inn  >n  . .  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these 

10.  29  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground 
10.  42  whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of 
12.  11  that  shall  have  one  sheep,  and  if  it  fall  into 
13. 46  Who,  when  he  had  found  one  pearl  of  g. 

16.  14  said.,  others,  .Teremias,  or  one  of  the  pro. 
18.  s  whoso  shall  receive  one  such  little  child 
18.  6  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little  ones 
1 8.  10  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these 
18.  12  If.. one  of  them  be  gone  astray,  doth  he 
18.14  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish 
18.  16  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,  that  in 
18.  24  one  was  brought  unto  htm,  which  owed 

18.  2S  found  one  of  his  fellow  servants,  which 

19.  16  one  came  and  said  unto  him,  Good  Master 
19.  17  none  good  but  one,  (that  is),  God ;  but  if 

20. 13  heansweredoneof  them,and  said,  Friend 
1  Hie  one  on  thy  right  band,  and  the  other 

21.  24  I  also  will  ask  you  one  thing,  which  if  ye 


Matt22.  35 
23.    8 


23- 

9 

=3- 

zo 

23- 

15 

24. 

40 

25. 

15 

26. 
26. 

27- 

Mark  5. 

6. 
8. 
8. 
9' 
9- 
9- 


13- 
14. 
14. 
M- 
14. 
i-t- 
15- 
*5- 
15- 

Luke  4. 
5- 
7- 
9> 


John 


Acts 


Rom 


17 

26 

17 

27 

20. 

31 

21 

20 

=3- 

b 

=  3- 

17 

20. 

as 

1 

3 

12 

3 

30 

S 

12 

Then  one  of  them.,  a  lawyer,  asked,  .tern, 
for  one  is  your  Master . .  Christ ;  and  all  ye 
for  one  is  your  Father,  whichis  in  heaven 
.Neither  be  ye  called  masters :  for  [one]  is 
ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  oue  pro. 
the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left 
gave. .to  another  two,audto  another  one 
he  that  had  received  one  went  and  digged 
he  which hadreceivedtheonetalent  came 
Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  (it)  unto  one  of 
Inasmuch  as  ye  did  (it)  not  to  one  of  the 
oue  of  the  twelve,  called  Judas  Iscariot 
I  say  unto  you,  That  one  of  you  shall  be. 
Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  came,  and  with 
one  of  them  which  were  with  Jesus  stret. 
straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a 
there  cometh  one  of  the  rulers  of  the  sy. 
it  is  a  prophet,  or  as  one  of  the  prophets 
neither  had  they.,  with  them  more  than  one 
but  Mime  (say)  Elias;  and  others,  One  of  the 
one  of  the  multitude  answered  and  said 
Whosoever  shall  receive  one  of  such  ehi. 
whosoever  shall  offend  one  of  (these)  little 
there  came  one  running,  and  kneeled  to 
(there  is)  none  good  but  one,  (that  is),  God 
One  thing  thou  lackest :  go  thy  way,  sell 
oue  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 
I  will  also  ask  of  you  one  question,  and 
Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  well  bel. 
one  of  the  scribes  came,  and  having  hea. 
Hear,  O  Israel ;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one 
there  is  one  God ;  and  there  is  none  other 
one  of  his  disciples  saith  uuto  him,  Mas. 
one  of  the  twelve,  went  unto  the  chief  p. 
Oue  of  you  which  eateth  with  me  shall  b. 
one  of  the  twelve,  that  dippeth  with  me 
cometh  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  and  with 
one  of  them  that  stood  by  drew  a  sword 
at  (that)  feast  he  released  unto  them  oue 
the  one  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  other 
[one]  ran  and  filled  a  sponge  full  of  vine. 
lie  laid  his  hands  on  every  one  of  them 
he  entered  into  one  of  the  ships,  which 
tlie  one  owed  five  hundred  pence,  and  the 
that  [one]  of  the  old  prophets  was  risen 
touch  not  the  burdens  with  one  of  your 
not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God 
which  of  you. .can  add  to  his  stature[one] 
Solomon,  .was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  th. 
there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  divided 
if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth  not  leave  the 
joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that 
Thc-e  is  joy.  .over  oue  sinner  that  repen. 
And  am  no  more  worthy . .  make  me  as  one 
he  called  one  of  the  servants,  and  asked  w. 
So  he  called  every  one  of  his  lord's  debtors 
he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other 
he  will  hold  to  theone,  and  despise  the  o. 
that  he  should  offend  one  of  these  little 
one  of  them,  when  he  saw  that  he  was  h. 
,  36  [the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other] 
one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  publican 
said. .none  (is)  good,  save  one,  (that  is),  G. 
I  will  also  ask  you  [one]  thing  ;  and  ans. 
he  that  was  called  Judas,  one  of  the  tw. 
one  of  them  smote  aservant  of  the  high 
[must  release  one  unto  them  at  the  feast] 
one  of  the  malefactors  which  were  hanged 
theone  of  them,  whose  name  was  Cleopas 
One  of  the  two  which  heard  John .  .and  f. 
One  of  his  disciples,  Andrew,  .saith  unto 
save  that  one  whereinto  his  disciples  were 
Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of 
that  should  betray  him,  being  one  of  the 
I  have  done  one  work,  and  ye  all  marvel 
came  to  Jesus  by  night,  being  one  of  them 
Then  said  they . .  we  have  one  Father. .  God 
and  there  shall  he . .  fold, and  one  shepherd 
I  and  (my)  Father  are  one 
one  of  them.  .Caiaphas, being  the  high  p. 
that  it  is  expedient,  .thatoneman  should 
he  should  gather  together  in  one  the  ch. 
Lazarus  was  oue  of  them  that  sat  at  the 
Then  saith  on*)  of  his  disciples,  Judas  Isc. 
I  sayunto  you.  .one  ofyoushallbetray  me 
there  was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom  one  of 
Holy  Father,  keep,  .that  they  may  be  one 
That  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou,  Father 
that  they  also  may  he  [one]in  us :  that  the 
that  they  may  he  one,  even  as  we  are  one 
that  they  ma>  be  made  perfect  in  one 
that  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  shou. 
one  of  the  ...fflcers  which  stood  by  struck 
One  of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  b. 
that  I  should  release  uuto  you  one  at  the 
oue  of  the  soldiers  with  a  spear  pierced 
the  one  at  the  head,  and  the  other  at  the 
Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Didy. 
which,  if  they  should  be  written  every  o. 
must  ouu  be  ordained  to  he  a  witness  w. 
there  stood  up  one  of  them  named  Agabus 
hath  n...de  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  m. 
though  he  be  not  far  from  everyone  of  us 
to  warn  every  one  night  and  day  with  te. 
should  be  nitei'ed  for  every  one  of  them 
when  l'a  ul  perceived  that  the  one  part  we. 
Then  Paul  called  one  of  the  centurions 
after  that  Paul  had  spoken  one  word.  Well 
it  is  written,  .none righteous, no, not  one 
there  is  none  that  doetll  good,  no,  not  one 
Serin-  (ii  is)  pne  God  which  shall  justify 
as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world 


Horn.  5.  15  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be  de. 
5. 15  by  one  man,  Jesus  Christ,  hath  abounded 
5.  16  not  as.  .by  one  that  sinned,  (so  is)  the  g. 
5.  16  for  the  judgment  (was)  by  onetocondem. 
5.  17  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by  one 
5.  17  much  mure  they.. shall  reign  iulife  by  o. 
5. 18  as  by  the  offence  of  one  (judgment  came) 

5. 18  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  (the  free) 

5. 19  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were 

5.  19  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be 
9.  10  when  .Rebecca  also  had  conceived  by  one 

12.  4  For  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  bo. 
12.  5  we,  (being)  many,  are  one  body  in  Christ 
15.    6  That  ye  may  with,  .one  mouth  glorify  G. 

1  Co.  3.  8  hethatplanteth..hethatwa."erethareonc 
4.    6  that  no  one  of  you  he  jmtfed  up  for  one 

6.  16  which  is  joined  to  an  harlot  is  one  body? 
6. 17  he  that  is  joined  uuto  the  Lord  is  one  sp. 
8.    4  and  that  (there  is)  none  other  God  but  o. 

8.  6  to  us.  .one  God,  the  Father,  .one  Lord  J. 

9.  24  they,  .run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize? 
10.  17  For  we.  .many  are  one  bread,  .one  body 

10.  17  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread 

11.  5  that  is  even  all  one  as  if  she  were  shaven 

12. 11  all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the  self 

12. 12  For  as  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  many 
12. 12  all  the  members  of  that  [one]  body,  .are  one 

12.  13  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one 
12.  13  have  been  all  made  to  drink  into  one  Sp. 
12.  14  For  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  m. 
12.  18  hath  God  set  the  members  every  one  of 
12.  19  if  they  were  all  oue  member,  where,  .the 
12.  20  But  now.  .many  members,  yet  but  one  b. 
j2.  26  whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the  mem. 

12.  26  or  one  member  be  honoured,  all  the  me. 

14.  27  If  any  man  speak  in  a.. tongue. .let  one  in. 

2  Co.  5.  14  because  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for 
11.    2  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that 

3.  16  but  as  of  one,  And  to  thy  seed,  which  is 
3.  20  a  mediator  is  not . .  of  one ;  but  God  is  one 

3.  28  neither,  .for  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus 

4.  22  theone  by  a  bond  maid,  the  other  by  a  free 

5. 14  For  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  (e.) 
14  who  hath  made  both  one,  and  hath  broken 

2.  15  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  oue  new  man 
2.  16  he  might  reconcile  both  tin  to  God  in  one 
2.  iS  through  him  we  both  have  access  by  one  sp. 
4.  4  one  body,  and  one  spirit,  even  as  ye  are  c. 
4.  5  One  Lord,  .one  baptism 
4.    6  One  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  (is)  above 

4.  7  But  unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace  a. 

1.  27  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit,  with  one 

2.  2  that  ye  he.  .of  one  accord,  of  one  mind 

3. 15  to  the  which  also  ye  are  called  in  one  body 
2.  11  comforted  and  charged  every  one  of  you 

2  Th.  1.    3  the  charity  of  every  one  of  you  all  toward 
1  Ti.    2.    5  For.  .one  God,  and  one  mediator  between 

5.  9  not  a  widow.,  having  been  the  wife  of  one 
2.  11  and  they  who  are  sanctified  (are)  all  of  one 

11.  12  Therefore  sprang  there  even  of  one,  and 
2.  10  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one 
2.  19  Thou  believestthat  there  is  one  God;  thou 
4. 12  There  is  one  law  giver,  who  is  able  to  save 
5.  7  [there  are  three,  .and  these  three  are  one] 
5.    8  there  are  three,  .these  three  agree  in  one 

5.  5  one  of  the  elders  saith  uuto  me,  Weep  not 

6.  1 1  heard.. one  of  the  four  beasts  saying, C. 

7.  13  one  of  the  elders  answered,  saying  unto 

15.  7  one  of  the  four  beasts  gave  unto  the  seven 
17.  1  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  which 
17.  10  five  are  fallen,  and  one.  .the  other  is  not 

21.  9  there  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven  an. 
2i.  21  every  several  gate  was  of  oue  pearl :  and 

10.  Other,  different,  trepos  hctcros. 

1  Co.,15.  40  but  the  glory  of  the  celestial  (is)  one,  and 
11.0>te,  (/em.)  fiia  mia. 

Matt.  5. 18  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the 
5.  19  shall  break  one  of  these  least  commandm. 

5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  b. 
17.  4  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one 
19.    5  cleave,  .and  they  t warn  shall  be  one  flesh 

19.  6  Wherefore  they  are  no  more  twain,  but 

20.  12  These  last  have  wrought,  .one  hour,  and 
24.  41  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left 
26.  40  What !  could  ye  not  watch  withmeoneh.? 

Mark  9.  5  one  for  thee. .one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  E. 
10.  8  one  flesh. .  they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one 
14.  37  saith.  .couldest  not  thou  watch  one  hour? 
14.  66  there  cometh  one  of  the  maids  of  the  high 

Luke  9.  33  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one 

13.  10  he  was  teaching  in  one  of  the  synagogues 

14.  iS  they  all  with  one  (consent)  began  to  make 

15.  8  if  she  lose  one  piece,  doth  not  light  a  ca. 

16.  17  easier,  .than  one  tittle  of  the  law  to  fail 

17.  22  ye  shall  desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the 
1 7.  34  there  shall  be  two  (men)  hi  [one]  bed  ;  the 
20.    1  on  one  of  those  days,  as  he  taught  the  pe. 

22.  59  about  the  space  of  one  hour  after,  another 
Johnio.  16  and  there  shall  be  one  fold  (and). .shepherd 
Acts    4.  32  multitude,  .were  of  one  heart  and  of  one 

12.  10  went  out,  and  passed  on  through  one  str. 
19.  34  all  with  one  voice  about  the  space  of  two 
31.  7  the  brethren,  and  abode  with  them  one  day 
24.  21  Except  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that  I  cried 
28.  13  after  one  day  the  smith  wind  blew,  and  we 

6.  16  body  ?  for  two,  saith  he,  shall  be  one  flesh 
10.   8  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand 

Co.  11.  2}  five  times  received  I  forty,  .save  one 

4.  24  I'liefrom theinoiMitSinai,  whiehgendeteth 
4.  4  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  ol'your  calling 
4.   5  Lord,  one  faith,  .baptism 


Gal. 


Eph. 


rhil. 


Col. 
1  Th. 


Heb. 
Jas. 

1  Jo. 
Rev. 


Co. 


GaL 

Eph. 


ONE 


719 


ONLY 


Eph.  5.  31  be  joined., and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh 
Pail.    1.  27  with  one  mind  striving  together  for  the  f. 

1  Ti.    3.    2  husband  of  one  wife,  vigilant,  sober,  of  g. 
Titus  1.    6  If  any  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one 
Heb.  10.  12  this  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice 

10.  14  For  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for 

12.  16  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birth. 

2  Pe.  3.    8  that  one  day  (is)  with  the  Lord  as  a  thou. 

3.  8  years  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day 
Rev.   6.   1  I  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the 

9. 12  One  woe  is  past,  .behold,  there  come  two 

13.  3  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were  wounded 

17.  12  receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the 
17. 13  These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give  their 

18.  8  Therefore  shall  her  plagues  came  in  one 
18.  10  saying,  .in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come 
18.  17  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to  no. 

18.  ig  saying,  .in  one  hour  is  she  made  desolate 
1*2.. I  certain  one,  tis,  ti  tis,  ti. 

Matti2.  29  Or  else  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strong 

12.  47  Then  one  said  unto  him,  Behold,  thy  mo. 
Luke  1 1.  45  Then  answered  one  of  the  lawyers,  and  s. 

12. 13  one  of  the  company  said  unto  him,  Master 

13.  23  Then  said  one  unto  him,  Lord,  are  there 

14.  1  as  he  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  c. 
14.  15  when  one  of  them  that  sat  at  meat  with 
16.  30  but  if  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead 
16.  31  neitherwill  they  be  persuaded  though  one 

23.  26  they  laid  hold  upon  one  Simon,  a  Cyrenian 
Acts    5.  34  Then  stood  there  up  one  in  the  council,  . 

7.  24  seeing  one.  .suffer  wrong,  he  defended 
9.  43  he  tarried  many  days  in  Joppawith  one 
10.    6  He  lodgeth  with  one  Simon  a  tanner,  wh. 

19.  9  disputing  daily  in  the  school  of  [one]  Ty. 
25.  19  and  of  one  Jesus,  which  was  dead,  whom 

Rom.  5.    7  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die 
1  Co.   3.   4  For  while  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and  a. 
5.    1  such,  .that  one  should  have  his  father's 

14.  24  and  there  come  in.one  that  believeth  not 
Titus  1.  12  One  of  themselves,  .a  prophet  of  their  o. 
Deb.  2.    6  ;  Jas.  2. 16  ;  5. 19  ;  Mr.  g.  38  ;  15.  21;  Lu, 

7.  36  ;  8.  49  ;  9.  19,  49  ;  n.  1;  Ac.  5.  25;  21.  16  ;  22.  12. 

13.  This  one,  olros  {dat.)  houtos. 

Luke  7.  8  I  say  unto  one,  Go,  and  he  goeth ;  and  to 
14.Peace,  dp-fawn  eirene. 

Acts  7.  26  would  have  set  them  at  one  again,  saying 
[See  also  Accord,  any,  each,  every,  holy,  look,  mind,  see, 
side,  such.] 

ONE  ..(from)... another  — 
1.  This,  so  da. 

Dan.    5.   6  and  his  knees  smote  one  against  another 
7.   3  four  great  beasts. .diverse  one  from  anot. 
I.This,  ji  den. 

Dan.    2.  43  but  they  shall  not  cleave  one  to  another 

%.A  vessel,  *hz  keli. 

Esth.  1.   7  the  vessels  being  diverse  one  from  another 

LA  wing,  "]j3  kanaph. 

1  Ki.  6.  27  their  wings  touched  one  another  in  the 

§.Each  other,  aW-t)\uv  allelon. 

Matt  24.  10  betray  one  another,  and  shall  hate  one  a. 

25.  32  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another 

Mark  4.  41  said  one  to  another,  What  manner  of  man 

9.  50  Have  salt,  .and  have  peace  one  withano. 

Luke  2.  15  the  shepherds  said  one  to  another, Letus 

6. 11  communed  one  with  another  what  they  m. 

7.  32  calling  one  to  another,  and  saying,  Wen. 

S.  25  saying  one  to  another,  What  manner  of 

12,  1  insomuch  that  they  trode  one  upon  anot. 

24.  17  these  that  ye  have  one  to  another,  as  ye 
24.  32  they  said  one  to  another,  Did  not  our  he. 

John  4.  33  Therefore  said  the  disciples  one  to  anot. 
5.  44  which  receive  honour  one  of  another,  and 

13. 14  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet 

13.  22  Then  the  disciples  looked  one  on  another 
13.  34  That  ye  love  one  another..alsoloveonea. 
13-  35  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  anot. 

15.  12  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved 
15.  17  I  command  you,  that  ye  love  one  another 

Acts    2.    7  saying  [one  to  another,]  Behold,  are  not 

7.  26  brethren;  why  do  ye  wrong  one  to  anoth. 

19.  3S  Wherefore,  .let  them  implead  one  another 

21.    6  when  we  had  taken  our  leave  one  of  ano. 

Rom.  1.  27  burned  in  their  lust  one  toward  another 

2.  15  and.  .accusing  or  else  excusing  one  anot, 

12.   5  and  every  one  members  one  of  another 

12. 10  one  to  another,  .in  honourpreferringone  a. 

12.  16  (Be)  of  the  same  mind  one  toward  anoth. 

13.  8  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one  an. 
14. 13  Let  usnotthereforejudgeoneanotherany 

14.  19  and  things  wherewith  one  may  edify  ano. 

15.  5  grant  you  to  be  like  minded  one  toward  a. 
15.    7  Wherefore  receive  ye  one  another,  as  Chr. 

15.  14  are.  .able  also  to  admonish  [one  another] 
16. 16  Salute  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss.  The 

1  Co.  ii.  33  when  ye  come  together,  .tarry  one  for  an. 

12.  25  should  have  the  same  care  one  for  anoth. 

16.  20  Greet  ye  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 

2  Co.  13.  12  Greet  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 
Gal.    5.  13  For,  brethren . .  by  love  serve  one  another 

5.  15  if  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  take 
5. 15  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of  another 

5.  26  provoking  one  another,  envying  one  ano. 

6.  2  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  f . 
Eph.    4.   2  Withalllowliness.  .forbearing  one  anoth. 

4.  25  speak . .  for  we  are  members  one  of  another 

4.  32.  be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tenderhearted 

5.  21  Submitting  yourselves  one  to  another  in 


Col.     3.   9  Lie  not  one  to  another,  seeing  thatye  have 

3.  13  Forbearing  one  another,  .and  forgiving 
1  Th.  3.  12  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another 

4.  9  ye . .  are  taught  of  God  to  love  one  another 

4.  iS  Whereforecomfort  one  another  with  these 
Titus  3.    3  ourselves  were,  .hateful,  .hating  one  ano. 
Heb.10.  24  let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke 
Jas.    4. 11  Speak  not  evil  one  of  another,  brethren 

5.  9  Grudge  not  one  against  another,  brethren 
5.  16  Confess . .  faults  one  to  another . .  pray  one 

1  Pe.   1.  22  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  fei  v. 

4.  9  Cse  hospitality  one  to  another  without  g. 

5.  5  Yea,  all.  .be  subject  one  to  another,  and 
5.  14  Greet  ye  one  another  with  a  kiss  of  char. 

1  Jo.    1.    7  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and 

3. 11  ye  heard,  .that  we  should  love  one  another 

3.  23  love  one  another,  as  he  gave  us  command. 

4.  7  let  us  love  one  another :  for  love  is  of  God 
4.  11  Beloved,  .we  ought  also  to  love  one  ano. 
4.  12  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in 

2  John     5  I  beseech  thee . .  that  we  love  one  another 
Rev.    6.    4  given,  .that  they  should  kill  one  another 

11. 10  And  they.,  shall  send  gifts  one  to  another 

6. Of  himself,  herself  itself  tavrov  heautou. 

1  Co.  6.  7  fault.. because  ye  go  to  law  one  with  an. 

Eph.  4.  32  forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  for  C. 

Col.     3.  13  forgiving  one  another,  if  any  man  have  a 
3. 16  teaching  and  admonishing  one  another  in 

Heb.  3. 13  But  exhort  one  another  daily,  while  it  is 

1  Pe.  4.  10  minister  the  same  onetoanother,  as  good 
1.  Other,  &\\os,  Jo.  4.  37  ;  Ac.  2. 12  ;  Co.  15.  39,40 
1. One. ..one,  eTy...efs  heis. ..heis* 

Matt.27.  38  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  another  on 
9.  One  the  other,  ets  tov  '4va  heis  ton  hena. 

1  Th.  5. 11  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do 
ONE  by  one  — 
I.  One  by  one,  els  Kad'  ets  heis  kath  heis. 

Mark  14.  i?  they  began,  .to  say  unto  him  one  by  one 

John  s.  9  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  the  e. 
■2.  One  by  one,  tcaQ'  %va.  kath  hena. 

1  Co.  14.  31  ye  may  all  prophesy  on*  by  one,  that  all 
ONE  sort  with  another  — 
These  with  these,  n^N-cy  r£x  elleh  im-elleh. 

1  Ch.24.    5  were  they  divided  by  lot,  one  sort  with  a. 
DNE,  the  — 
This,  nxi  zoth. 

1  Ki.  3. 2^  The  one  saith,  This  (is)  my  son  that  Iiveth 
ONE... the  other,  the  — 

1 .  This,  rrj . . .  nr  zeh . . . zeh. 

Exod.14. 20  so  that  the  one  came  not  near  the  other 
Ecc.     3.  19  as  the  one  dieth,  so  dieth  the  other  ;  yea 
2. Each  other ,  aAATjA.wi'  allelon. 

Acts  15.  39  they  departed  asunder  one  from  the  other 

1  Co.  7.    5  Defraud  ye  not  one  the  other,  except  (it 
Gal.    5.  17  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other 

ONE  thing  — 

I. One  thing,  %v  hen. 

Luke  10. 42  one  thing  is  needful :  and  Mary  hath  ch. 
18. 22  yet  lackest  thou  one  thing :  sell  all  that 

John  9.  25  one  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  wasbl. 

Phil.  3.  13  one  thing,  .forgetting  those  things  which 

2  Pe.  3.   8  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing,  that  one 

2.  A  certain  thing,  rt  ti. 

Luke  6.    9said.  .unto  them,  I  will  ask  you  [one  thi.] 

ONE,  tumultuous  — 
A  son,  js  ben. 

Jer.  48.  45  crown  of  the  head  of  the  tumultuous  ones 

O-NE-SI'-MTJS,  'OvriQifJiOS  profitable. 
A  native  of  Colosse,  and  a  slave  of  Philemon,   from 
whom  he  had  escaped,  but  to  whom  he  was  sent  back 
as  a  Christian  brother  by  Paul,  who  had  converted  him 
in  Rome. 

Col.     4.   9  With  0.,  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother 
Phm.      10  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  0.,  whom  I  h. 

O-NE-SI-PHO'-RTJS,  'Ovnaifycpos  bringing  profit. 
A  disciple  in  Ephesus  who  when  in  Rome  had  sought 
out  and  befriended  Paul. 

2  Ti.  1. 16  Lord  give  mercyunto  the  house  of  0. ;  for 
4. 19  Salute  Prisca.  .and  the  household  of  0. 
ONION  — 
Onion,  *?*3  betsel. 

Num.  11.  s  the  melons,  and  the  leeks,  and  the  onions 
ONLY  — 
l.One,  inx  echad. 

1  Ki.  4.  19  and.. the  only  officer  which  (was)  in  the 

Eze.    7.    5  saith.  .An  evil,  an  only  evil,  behold,  is  c. 

2.0nhj,  tjx  ak. 

Gen.   7.  23  Noahonlyremained.  .and  they  that  (were) 

3. Alone,  ~n7  lebad. 

Eccl.  7.  29  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath 

4.  Alone  by  itself  1137  lebaddo. 

Dent.  8.   3  know  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  0. 

5.A  lone,  solitary,  tin?  lebadad. 

Psa.    4.    8  thou,  Lord,  only  makest  me  dwell  in  sa. 

QSave,  except,  besides,  <">7H  zulah. 

Deut.  4. 12  saw  no  similitude;  only  (ye  heard)  a  voice 


7-  Together,  at  once,  "irr  yachad. 

Job  34.  29  whether  (it  be  done) . .  against  a  man  only 

8.  Singly,  lonely,  only,  tit  yachid. 

Gen.  22.     2  Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  (son)  Isaac 

22.  16  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  (son) 
Prov.  4.    3  only  (beloved)  in  the  sight  of  my  mother 
Amos  8.  10  I  will  make  it  as  the  mourning  of  an  only 
Zech.12.  10  mouru.  .as  one  mourneth  for  (his)  only 

9. To  cut  down  or  short,  Dps  kasom. 

Eze.  44. 20  Neither  shall  they  shave,  .they  shall  only 

10.  Only,  surely,  pi  raq. 

Gen.  6.  5  every  hnagination.  .(was)  only  evil  conti. 
11, One,  efy  heis. 

Mark  2.  7  Why.  .who  canforgiv  :■  ins  butGodonly? 
12. Alone,  \j.6vqv  motion. 

Matt.  5.  47  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do 
8.    8  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  servant  sh. 

10.  42  a  cup  of  cold  (water)  only  in  the  name  of  a 
14.  36  might  only  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment 
21.  19  and  found  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  0. 
21.  21  ye  shall  not  only  do  this,  .to  the  fig  tree 

Mark  5.  36  saith  unto  the  ruler.  .Be  not  afraid,  only 

6.    8  they  should  take  nothing,  .save  a  staff  0. 

Luke  8.  50  believe  only,  and  she  shall  be  made  whole 

John  5.  18  because  he  not  only  had  broken  the  sabb. 

11.  52  not  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also  he 

12.  9  they  came  not  for  Jesus'  sake  only,  but 

13.  9  Lord,  not  my  feet  only,  but  also  (my)  ha. 
Acts  8.  16  only  they  were  baptized  in  thenameof  the 

11.  19  preaching,  .to  none  but  unto  the  Jews  0. 
18.  25  taught,  .knowing  only  the  baptism  of  Jo. 
19. 27  So  that  not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  dan. 
21.  1 3  I  am  ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also 

26.  29  I  would  to  God,  that  not  only  thou,  but 

27.  10  not  only  of  the  lading  and  ship,  but  also 
Rom.  1.  32  not  only  do  the  same,  but  have  pleasure 

3.  29  (Is  he)  the  God  of  the  Jews  only'?,  .not  a. 

4.  12  them  who  are  not  of  the  circumctsion  on. 
4. 16  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  law,  but 

5.  3  not  only  (so),  but  we  glory  in  tribulations 
5.  1 1  not  only  (so),  but  we  also  joy  in  God  thro. 
8.  23  not  only  (they),  but  ourselves  also,  which 
g.  10  not  only  (this);  but  when  Rebecca  also  had 
g.  24  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gen.? 

13.  5  must  needs  be  subject,  not  only  for  wrath 

1  Co.  7.39  married  to  whom  she  will ;  only  iatheLo. 

15. 19  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ 

2  Co.  7.    7  not  by  his  coming  only,  but  by  the  consol. 

8. 10  begun  before,  not  only  to  do,  but  also  to 
8.  19  not  (that)  only,  but  who  was  also  chosen 
8.  21  Providing  for  honest  things,  not  c  dy  in 
9. 12  not  only  supplieth  the  want  of  th.  saints 
Gal.     1.  23  they  had  heard  only,  that  he  which  pers. 

2.  10  Only,  .that  we  should r unember  t    ^poor 

3.  2  This  only  would  I  learn  of  you,  B    reived 

4.  18  and  not  only  when  I  am  presentw.thyou 

5.  13  only  (use)  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to 

6.  12  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution 
Eph.  1.  21  named,  not  only  in  this  world,  but  also 
Phil.    1.  27  Only  let  your  conversation  be  as  it  beco. 

1. 29  not  only  to  believe  on  hi  a,  but  also  to 
2.  12  not  as  in  mypresence  on]  '  but  now  much 
2.  27  not  on  him  only,  but  uj   me  also,  lest  I 

1  Th.  1.    5  our  gospel  came  not  uiiv  >you  inwordonly 

1.  8  sounded  out  the  word,  .not  only  in  Mac. 

2.  8  not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our 

2  Th.  2.    7  only  he  who  now  letteth  (will  let),  until 

1  Ti.    5.  13  they  learn  (to  be)  idle,  .and  not  only  idle 

2  Ti.    2.  20  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of 

4.  8  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that 
Heb.   9.  10  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  wa. 

12.  26  Yet  once  more  I  shake  not  the  earth  only 
Jas.    1. 22  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only 

2.  24  a  man  is  justified,  and  not  by  faith  only 
1  Pe.   2.  18  not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  only 
1  Jo.  2.    2  not  for  ours  only,  but  a  so  for.  .the  whole 

5.  6  not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and  blood 

IS. Alone,  uoVos  vionos. 

Matt.  4.  10  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only 

12.    4  not  lawful,  .to  eat.  .but  only  for  the  pri. 

17.    8  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they  saw..Jesusonly 

24.  36  knoweth.  .not.  .angels,  .but  my  Father  o. 
Mark  9.  8  they  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus  o. 
Luke  4.    8  worship.. God,  and  him  only  shaltthou 

24.  18  Art  thou  only  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem,  and 
John  5.44  and  seek  not  the  honour,  .from  God  only? 

17.  3  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God 
Rom.  16.    4  unto  whom  not  only  I  give  thanks,  hut 

16.  27  To  God  only  wise,  (be)  glory  through  J. 
.  1  Co.  9.   6  Or  I  only  and  Barnabas,  have  not  we  po. 

14.  36  out  from  you?  or  came  it  unto  you  only? 
Phil.  4.  15  no  church  communicated  with  me.  .but 
Col.    4.  11  These  only,  .fellow  workers  unto  the  ki. 

1  Ti.    1.  17  unto.. the  only  wise  God,  (be)  honour  and 

6.  15  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  king 
6.  16  Who  only  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in 

2  Ti.  4. 11  Only  Luke  is  with  me.  Take  Mark,  and 
2  John  1  I  only,  but  also  all  they  that  have  known 
Jude        4  denying  the  only  Lord  God.  and  our  Lord 

25  To  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,  (be)  g. 
Rev.   9.    4  Tonly]  those  men  which  have  not  the  seal 

15.  4  for  (thou)  only  (art)  holy :  for  all  nations 

ONLY  (child)  — 

Only  begotten,  fxovoyevr\s  monogenes. 

Luke  7.  T2  the  only  son  of  his  mother,  and  she  was 
8.  42  he  had  one  only  daughter,  about  twelve 
g.  38  look  upon  my  son ;  for  he  is  mine  only  c. 


ONO 


O'-NO,  Wk  strong. 

1.  A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Lod  and  Hadad ;  now  called 
Auna. 

i  Ch.  8.  12  Shamed,  who  built  O.  and  Lod,  with  the 

Ezra    2.  $3  'Die  children  of  Lod,  Hadid,  and  0.,  seven 

Neh.    7.  37  The  children  of  Lod,  Hadid,  and  O.,  seven 

ii.  35  Lod,  and  0.,  the  valley  of  craftsmen 

2.  The  plain  or  valley  in  which  the  above  city  was,  near 
Jerusalem. 

Neh.   6.  2  let  us  meet  together,  .in  the  plain  of  O. 
ONYCHA  — 
Onyx  or  perfume  crab,  rfynty  shecheleth. 

Exud  30.34  Take  unto  thee . . stacte,  and  oyncha,  and 

ONYX  — 

The  leek  green  beryl,  cntf  slioham. 

Gen.    2.  12  And .  .  there  (is)  bdellium  and  the  onyx  s. 

Exodas.    7  Onyx  stones,  and  stones  to  be  set  in  the 

28.    9  thou  shalt  take  two  onyx  stones,  and  gr. 

28.  20  the  fourth  row  a  beryl,  and  an  onyx,  and 
35.  9  onyx  stones,  and  stones  to  be  set  for  the 
35.  27  the  rulers  broughtonyx  stones,  and  stones 
39.  6  they  wrought  onyx  stones  inclosed  in  ou. 
39.  13  the  fourth" row,  a  beryl,  an  onyx,  and  a  3. 

1  Ch.29.  2  onyx  stones,  and  (stones)  to  be  set,  glist. 
Job  28.  16  valued.  .  with  the  precious  onyx,  or  the  s. 
Eze,  23.  13  the  onyx,  and  the  jasper,  the  sapphire,  and 

OPEN  — 

1.  To  be  uncovered,  revealed,  n?a  galah,  4. 

riov'27.    5  Open  rebuke  (is)  better  than  secret  love 
%Myes,  n'vy  enayim. 

Gen.  38.  14  sat  in  an  open  place,  which  (is)  by  the  way 

3.  To  free,  let  away,  ~>t?3  patar. 

1  Ki.  6.  18  (was)  carved  with  Unops  and  open  flowers 

6.  29  he  carved  all  the  walls,  .with.,  open  flowers 
6.  32  carved  upon  them  carvings  of.  .open  flo. 
6.  35  he  carved  (thereon)  cherubim,  .and  open 

4.  Face  of,  'J?  pene. 

Gen.    1.  20  may  11  y  above  the  earth  in  the  open  firm. 

Lev.  14.  7  let  the  living  bird  loose  into  the  open  fl. 
14.  S3  let  go .  .  out  of  the  city  into  the  open  field 
17.    5  sacrifices,  which  they  olfor  in  the  open  fi. 

Num  19.  16  that  is  slain  with  a  sword  in  the  open  fi. 

2  Sa.  11.  11  servants.,  arc  encamped  in  the  open  fields 
Jer.  9.  22  carcases,  .shall  fall  as  dung  upon  the  open 
Eze.  16.    5  thou  wast  cast  out  in  the  open  field,  to  the 

29.  s  thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  fields ;  thou 

32.  4  I  will  cast  thee  forth  upon  the  open  field 

33.  27  him  that  is  (in)  the  open  field  will  I  give 
37.    2  very  many  in  the  open  valley;  and,  lo 
39.    5  Thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  field  ;  for 

5.  To  be  broken  forth,  |'19  parats,  2. 

1  Sa.  13.    1  And  the  word,  .was  precious,  .no  open  v. 

6.  To  open,  nop  pathach, 

Num  19.  15  every  open  vessel  which  hath  no  covering 
Josh.  8.  17  left  the  city  open,  and  pursued  after  Isr. 

1  Ki.    8.  29,  52  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open 

2  Ch.  6.  20  That  thine  eyes  may  be  open  upon  this  ho. 

6.  40  let,  I  beseech  thee,  thine  eyes  be  open,  and 

7.  15  Now  mine  eyes  shall  be  open,  and  mine 
Neh.    1.    6  and  thine  eyes  open,  that  thou  mayest  h. 

6.  5  Then  sent.. (with)an  open  letter  inhishand 
Psa.  5.  9  Their  throat  (is)  an  open  sepulchre  ;  they 
Jer.    5.  16  their  quiver  (is)  as  an  open  sepulchre,  t. 

7.  To  open,  nnp  pathach,  3. 

Job  41.  14  Who  can  open  the  doors  of  his  face  ?  his 
Isa,    28.  24  doth  he  open  and  break  the  clods  of  his  g. 

8.  To  open  up,  avotyta  anoigo. 

John  1.  51  ye  shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels 

Acts  16.  27  seeing  the  prison  doors  open,  he  drew  out 

Rom,  3.  13  Their  throat  (is)  an  open  sepulchre  :  with 

Rev.    3.    8  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and 

10.   2  had  in  his  hand  a  little  book  open,  10.  8. 

9. To  open  up,  avaxaAvirTw  anakalupto,  2  Co.  3,  18 

lO.Opening,  |injp9  pithchon. 

Eze.  16.  63  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more  because 

1 1,  Place,  Dip?  maqom. 

Job    34,  26  He  stnketh  thorn.,  in  the  open  sight  of  ot, 

OPEN,  to  — 

1.7*0  remove,  uncover,  07a  galah. 

Num  24.    4,  16  saw  the  vision.,  but  having  his  eyeso. 

Job    33,  16  he  openeth  the  cars  of  men,  and  sealeth 

36.  10  lie  openeth  also  their  ear  to  discipline 

36.  15  lie  delivereth  the  poor,  .and  openeth  th. 

Jer.  32.  11  that  which  was  sealed,  .that  which  was  0. 

32.  14  is  sealed  and  this  evidence  which  is  open 

2.  To  remove,  uncover,  n^a  galah,  3. 

Num  22.  31  the  Loup  opened  the  eyes  of  Baalam,  and 
l'sa.nn.  18  Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold 
Jer.    20.  120  Lord,  .unto  thee  have  I  opened  my  ca. 

3,  To  prepare,  pierce,  rnp  karah. 

Psa,  40.    6  mine  ears  hast  thou  opened  :  burnt  offer. 

i.To  open,  gape,  th$  paar, 

Psa  119.133  1  opened  my  mouth,  and  panted :  fori 
Isa.     5.  14  and  opened  her  mouth  without  measure 

5. To  open,  gape,  tvftpat&ah. 

Gen.  4,  1 1  the  earth  which  hath  opened  her  mouth 
Num  1  .  [o  the  earth  open  her  mouth,  and  swallow 
Deut  1 1.  0  how  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  sw. 
Judgu.  35  for  1  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  L. 


720 


Judgu.  36  thou  hast  opened  thy  mouth  unto  the  L. 
Job  35. 16  Therefore  doth  Job  open  his  mouth  in  vain 
Isa.  10.  14  none  that  moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the 
Lam.  2.  16  All  thine  enemies  have  opened  their  mo. 
3. 46  All  ourenemieshaveopenedtheirmouths 
Eze.    2.    8  open  thy  mouth,  and  eat  that  I  give  thee 

6.  To  open,  open  up,  nps  paqach. 

Gen.  21.  19  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well 

2  Ki.   4.  35  sneezed  seven  times,  and  the  child  opened 

6.  17  I  pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  he  may  s. 

6.  17  Loud  opened  the  eyes  of  the  young  man 

6.  20  open  the  eyes  of  these,  .that  they  may  see 

6.  20  Lord  opened  their  eyes,  and  they  saw;  and 

19. 16  open,  Lord,  thine  eyes,  and  see;  and  hear 

Job   14.    3  dost  thou  open  thine  eyes  upon  such  ano. 

27.  19  The  rich . .  openeth  his  eyes,  and  he  (is)  not 

Psa.  1 46.    8  Lord  openeth  (the  eyes  of)  the  blind  :  the 

l'rov2o.  13  open  thine  eyes,  .thou  shalt  be  satisfied 

Isa.  37. 17  open  thine  eyes,  O  Lord,  and  see;  and  h. 

42.    7  To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the 

42.  20  observest  not ;  opening  the  ears,  but  hea. 

Jer.  32.  19  thine  eyes  (are)  open  upon  all  the  ways  of 

Dan.    9.  18  open  thine  eyes,  and  behold  our  desolat. 

Zech  12.    4  I  will  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of 

7.  To  open  wide,  pi^p  pasaq. 

Eze.  16.  25  hast  opened  thy  feet  to  every  one  that  p. 

8.  To  open,  nn^  pathach. 

Gen.    8.   6  opened  the  window  of  the  ark  which  he 

29.  31  he  opened  her  womb  :  but  Rachel  (was) 

30.  22  God  hearkened  to  her,  and  opened  her  w. 

41.  56  Joseph  opened  all  the  store  houses,  and 

42.  27  as  one  of  them  opeued  his  sack,  to  give 

43.  21  we  opened  our  sacks,  and,  behold,  (every) 

44.  11  took  down,  .and  opened  every  man  his 
Exod.  2.   6  when     e  had  opened,  .she  saw  the  child 

21.  33  if  a  ma.i  shall  open  a  pit,  or  if  a  man  shall 
Num  16.  32  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallo." 

22.  28  And  the  Lord  opened  the  mouth  of  the 
26.  10  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallo. 

Deutao.  11  if  it  make,  .answer  of  peace,  and  open 

28. 12  Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  his  good  trea. 

Josh.  10.  22  Open  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  and  bring 

Judg  3.  25  opened  not  the  doors,  .therefore  they.  .0. 

4.  19  she  opened  a  bottle  of  milk,  and  gave  him 

19.  27  opened  the  doors  of  the  house,  and  went 

1  Sa.   3.  15  opened  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lo. 

2  Ki.  q.   3  Then  open  the  door  and  flee,  and  tarry  not 

q.  10  none  to  bury..  And  he  opened  the  door,  and 

13-  17  Open  the  window  eastward  :  and  he  open. 

15.  16  because  they  opened  not.  .therefore  he 

2  Ch,29.    3  opened  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

Neh.   8.    5  Ezra  opened  the  book  in  the  sight  of  all. 

8.   5  when  he  opened  it,  all  the  people  stood  up 

Job     3.    1  After  this  opened  Job  his  mouth,  and  cu. 

it.    5  oh  that  God  would  speak,  and  open  his  1. 

31.  32  did  not  lodge  in  the  street.  .1  opened  my 

32.  20  I  will  speak.  .1  will  open  my  lips  and  an. 

33.  2  now  I  have  opened  my  mouth,  my  tongue 
Psa.  38.  13  as  a  dumb  man  (that)  openeth  not  his  m. 

39.  9  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  notmy  mouth  ;  be. 

40.  4  I  will  open  my  dark  saying  upon  the  harp 

51. 15  open  thou  my  lips  ;  and  my  mouth  shall 

78.   2  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  a  parable :  I  will 

78.  23  Though  he  had . .  opened  the  doors  of  he. 

104.  28  thou  openest  thine  hand,  they  are  filled 


105.4 


He  opened  the  rock,  and  the  waters  gushed 

106. 17  The  earth  opeued  and  swallowed  up  Dath 

118.  19  Open  to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness:  I 

145. 16  Thou  openest  thine  hand,  and  satisfiest 

Prov.24.   7  a  fool,  .openeth  not  his  month  in  the  gate 

31.   8  Open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  in  the  cause 

31.  9  Open  thy  mouth,  judge  righteously,  and 

31.  26  Sheopeneth  her  mouth  with  wisdom  ;  and 

Song  5.    2  Open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove 

5.   5  I  rose  up  to  open  to  my  beloved  ;  and  my 

5.    6  I  opened  to  my  beloved  ;  but  my  beloved 

Isa.  14.  17  (that)  opened  not  the  house  of  his  prison. 

22.  22  And.  .so  he  shall  open,  and  none  shall  shut 

22.  22  and  he  shall  shut,  and  none  shall  open 

26.    2  Open  ye  the  gates,  that  the  righteous  11a, 

41.  18  I  will  open  rivers  in  high  places,  and  fo. 

45.    1  to  open  before  him  the  two  leaved  gates 

45.  8  let  the  earth  open,  and  let  him  bring  forth 
50.  5  Lord  God  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and  I  was 
53.   7  he  opened  not  his  mouth.. so  he  openeth 

Jer.  13.  19  shall  be  shut  up,  and  none  shall  open  (t.) 
50.  25  Lord  hath  opened  his  armoury,  and  hath 
50.  26  Come  against  her.  .open  her  storehouses 

Eze.  3.  2  So  I  opened  my  mouth,  and  he  caused  me 
3.  27  I  will  open  thy  month,  and  thou  shalt  say 
21. 22  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter,  to  lift 
25.  9  I  will  open  the  side  of  Moab  from  the  ci. 
33.  22  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  .had  opened  my  m. 
37.  12  I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you  to 
37.  13  when  I  have  opened  your  grave0,  <  >  my  pea. 

46.  12  shall  then  open  him* the  gate  that  looketh 
Dan.  to.  16  I  opened  my  mouth,  and  spake,  and  said 
Zech.11.  1  Open  thy  doors,  0  Lebanon,  that  the  fire 
Mai.    3.  10  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of  h. 

9.  To  unfold,  unroll,  apa-rrrvaao}  anaptussS. 

Luke  4. 17  when  [lie  had  opened]  the  book,  he  found 

10.  To  open  up  or  again,  avolyu  anoigo. 

.Matt.  2. 11  when  they  had  opened  their  treasures,  th. 
3. 16  the  heavens  were  opened  unto  him,  and 
5.  2  he  opened  his  mouth,  and  taught  them 
7.  7  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you 
7.  S  to  him  that  knoeketh  it  shall  be  opened 
9. 30  their  eyes  were  opened :  and  Jesus  stra. 


OPEN 


Matti3-  35  I  will  open  r  y  mouth  in  parables ;  I  will 
17.  27  when  thou  hast  opened  his  mouth,  thou 
20.  33  say.  .Lord,  that  our  eyes  might  be  open. 
25.  11  came  also.. saying.  Lord,  Lord,  open  to 
27.  52  the  graves  were  opened  ;  and  many  boil. 

Luke  1.  64  bis  mouth  was  opened  immediately,  and 
3.21  it  came  to  pass,  that.,  the  heaven  was  op. 
11.   9  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you 

11.  10  to  him  that  knoeketh  it  shall  be  opened 

12.  36  that,  .they  may  open  unto  him  immedia. 

13.  25  knock  at  the  door,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  o. 
John  9. 10  said  they.  .How  were  thine  eyes  opened? 

g.  14  Jesus  made  the  clay,  and  opened  his  ey. 
9. 17  What  sayest  thou  of  him,  that  he  hath  0. 
9.  21  or  who  hath  opened  his  eyes,  we  know 
9.  26  What  did  he  to  thee  V  how  opened  he  th. 
9.  30  ye  know  not.,  and.,  he  hath  opened  mine 
9.  32  was  it  uot  heard  that  any  man  opened  the 

10.  3  To  him  the  porter  openeth  ;  and  the  sh. 
10. 21  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ? 

11.  37  Could  not  this  man,  which  opened  the  e. 
Acts    5.  19  opened  the  prison  doors,  and  brought  t. 

5.  23  when  [we  had  opened], we  found  no  man 

7.  56  I  see  the  heavens  [opened],  and  the  Son  of 
8. 32  like  a  lamb  dumb,  .so  opened  he  not  his 

8.  35  Then  Philip  opened  his  mouth,  and  beg. 

9.  8  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  he  saw  no  m. 
9.40  she  opened  her  eyes  :  and  when  she  saw 

10.  11  saw  heaven  opened,  and  a  certain  vessel 

10.  34  Then  Peter  opened  (his)  mouth,  and  said 

12.  10  which  opened  to  them  of  his  own  accord 
12.  14  she  opened  not  the  gate  for  gladness,  but 
12. 16  when  they  had  opened.,  and  saw  him,  they 

14.  27  how  he  had  opened  the  door  of  faith  un. 

16.  26  all  the  doors  were  opened,  and  every  one's 

18.  14  when  Paul  wasnowabouttoopen(his)m. 
26.  18  To  open  their  eyes.. to  turn.. from  dark. 

1  Co.  16.    9  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto 

2  Co.   2.  12  and  a  door  was  opened  unto  me  of  theL. 

6.  n  our  mouth  is  open  unto  you,  our  heart  is 
Col.  4.  3  that  God  would  open  unto  us  adooi  of  ut. 
Kev.   3.    7  he  that  openeth,  and  no  man  slmtteth 

3.    7  he  that,  .shutteth,  and  no  man  openeth 

3.  20  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the 

4.  1  a  door  (was)  opened  in  heaven :  and  the 

5.  2,  5  to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seal. 
5.  3  was  able  to  open  the  book,  neither  to  look 
5.    4  because  no  man  was  found  worthy  to  open 

5.  9  to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals 

6.  1  I  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the 

6.  3,  5>  7,  9.  12  when  he  had  opened  the.  .seal 

8.  1  when  lie  had  opened  the  seventh  seal,  there 

9.  2  [he  opened  the  bottomless  pit;  and  there] 

11.  19  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven 

12.  16  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallo. 

13.  6  he  opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy  against 

15.  5  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle . .  was  opened 

19.  11  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white 

20.  12  I  saw  the  dead . .  and  the  books  were  ope. 
20. 12  another  book  wasopeued,  which  is.  .of  1. 

11. In  the  opening,  iv  avol£ti  en  anoixei. 

Eph.    6.  19  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  m. 

12.  To  open  up  thoroughly,  Biavoiyta  dianoigd. 
Mark  7,  34  saithunto  him,  Ephphatha,  that  is,  Beo. 

7.  35  straightway  his  ears  [were  opened],  and 
Luke  2.  23  Every  male  that  openeth  the  womb  shall 

24.  31  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  knew 
24.  32  and  while  he  opened  to  us  the  scriptures  ? 
24.  45  Then  opened  he  their  understanding,  that 
Acts  16.  14  whose  heart  the  Lord  opeued,  that  shea. 

17.  3  Opening  and  alleging  that  Christ  must  n. 

13.  To  rend,  tear,  <rxi'Cw  sckizo. 

Mark  1.  10  he  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  spi. 

OPEN,  opened,  to  be  (set)  — 

1.  To  be  removed,  n"?3  galah,  2. 

Job  38. 17  Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened  unto 

2.  To  be  opened,  nps  paqach,  2. 

Gen.   3.   5  know  that.,  then  your  eyes  shall  he  ope. 

3.    7  the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and 

Isa.   35.   5  Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened 

o.T<>  open,  nns  pathach. 

Neh.  13.  19  s'houldnotbe  opened  till  after  the  sabbath 
Psa.  109.    2  the  mouth  of  the  deceitful  are  opened 

i.To  be  opened,  nns  pathach,  2. 

Gen.    7.  11  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened 
Neh.   7.    3  Let  not  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  be  opened 
Isa.   24.  iS  the  windows  from  on  high  are  open,  and 
Eze.     1.    1  the  heavens  were  opened,  and  I  saw  visi. 
24.  27  In  that  day  shall  thy  mouth  be  opened  to 
33.  22  my  mouth  was  opened,  and  I  was  no  more 
44.    2  gate  shall  be  shut,  it  shall  not  be  opened 
46.    1  ou  the  sabbath  it  shall  be  opened,  and  in 
46.    1  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  it  shall  lie  opened 
Nah.  2.   6  The  gates  of  the  rivers  shall  be  opened 
3. 13  gates  of  thy  land  shnll  be  set  wide  open 
Zechi3.    1  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the 

5. To  open,  nop pathach,  3. 

Isa.   48.    8  from  that  time  (that)  thineear  was  not  o, 
60.  11  Therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  contin. 

6. To  open,  nn?  pethach. 

Dan.    6.  10  his  windows  being  open  in  his  chamber 
7. 10  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were  0. 

7.  To  lead  on,  &yw  ago. 

Acts  19.  38  have  a  matter  against  any . .  the  law  is  op 


OPEN 


721 


OPPRESSOR 


-.T"  have  the  neck  bent  back,  Tpaxy^iCo/xai. 

Heb.   4.  13  all  things  (arc)naked  and  opened  unto the 
OPEN  wide,  to  — 

I. To  open,  gape,  1*$  paar. 

Job  29.  23  they  opened  their  mouth  wide(as)forthe 

'l.Tn  open  wide,  pff^pasaq. 

I'rov  13.   3  he  that  openeth  wide  his  lips  shall  have 

3.  To  open,  nn$  pathach. 

Deutis.    8,  11  thou  slialt  open  thine  hand  wide  unto 
OPEN  beforehand  — 
Evident  or  manifest  before,  7rp6b'7]hos  prodelos. 

1  Ti.  5.  24  Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going 

OPEN,  OPENETH,  (such  as)  — 
l.Opening,  rrjp?  pitrah. 

Num.  8.  16  given,  .instead  of  such  as  open  every  wo. 

^..Opening,  usapeter. 

Exod  1 3.    2  whatsoever  openeth  the  womb  among  the 

13.  12  all  that  openeth  the  matrix,  and  every  fl. 

13.  15  all  that  openeth  tho  matrix,  being  males 

34.  19  All  that  openeth  the  matrix  (is)  mine;  and 

Num.  3.  )    all  the  Hist  born  that  openeth  the  matrix 

18.  13  Everything  that  openeth  the  matrix  in  all 

Eze.  20.  26  all  that  openeth  the  womb,  tliat  I  might 

3.  To  shut  or  open,  Dny  shed-ham. 

JSuni24.   3,  15  the  man  whose  eyes  are  open  hath  said 
OPENING,  (to  be)  — 
I. Opening,  nn~;D  maphteach. 

1  Ch.  9.  27  and  the  opening  thereof  every  morning 
'2.  Opening,  nn?p  miphtach. 

Prov.  8.   6  and  the  opening  of  my  lips,  .right  things 

3.  To  open,  nps  paqdeh. 

Isa.  42.  20  observest  not ;  opening  the  ears,  but  he 

4.  Opening,  nn?  pethach. 

Prov.    1.  21  She  crieth.  .in  the  openings  of  the  gates 
5.2*0  open,  nr\^  pathach,  2. 

Job    12. 14  heshutteth..andtherecanbe  no  opening 
Q. Opening,  pnrjp  pithchon. 

Eze.  29.  .  t  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  mouth 
OPENING  of  the  prison  — 
Opening  of  (he  prison,  rnp-np?  peqach-qoach. 

Isa.   61.    1  to  proclaim,  .the  opening  of  the  prison  to 
OPENLY  — 
I.  In  (lie  eyes,  openly,  u.yyz  baenayim. 

(Jen.  38.  21  Where  (is)  the  harlot  that  (was)  openly  by 

'1,  Manifestly,  cV  t$  tyavepep  en  (0  plianerd. 

Matt.  6.    4,  6,  18,  thy  Father,  .shall  reward  thee  [o.J 

•5.  In  public,  Brj/xoaia,  demosia. 

Acts  16. 37  They  have  beaten  us  openly  uncondenmed 

1.  Manifest,  £fi<pavfis  emphanos. 

Acts  10.  40  him  God  raised  up.  .and  showed  him  op. 

5. Freely,  openly,  irap'p'ncria.  parrhesia. 

Mark  8.  32  he  spake  that  saying  openly.  And  Peter 
John  7.    4  and  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  known  openly 
7.  13  Ho  wbeit  no  man  speak  openly  of  him  for  f. 
11.  54  Jesus  therefore  walked  no  more  openly 
18.  20  I  spake  openly  to  the  world ;  Col.  2. 15. 

G.  Manifestly,  (pavepws  phaneros. 

Mark  1.45  that  Jesus  could  no  more  openly  enter  into 
John  7.  10  went  lie  also  up  into  the  feast,  not  openly 

OPERATION  — 

1.  Work,  n'yup  inaaseh. 

Psa.  28.    5  they  regard  not . .  the  operation  of  his  ha. 
Isa.     5. 12  they  regard  not.,  the  operation  of  his  ha. 

2.  Energy,  wworking,  ii/epyeia  energeia. 

Col.    2. 12  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God 

Zt Energy,  in-working,  ivipyn^a.  energema. 

1  Co.  12.   6  there  are  diversities  of  operations,  but  it 

O'-PHEL,  ifflfrg  the  high  place. 

A  part  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  E.  of  Zion  ;  perhaps  the 
Bame  as  Millo  ;  in  2  Ki.  5.  24  it  is  translated  "  tower ;  " 
and  was  perhaps  a  fortified  place  near  Samaria. 

2  Ch.  27.   3  and  on  the  wall  of  O  he  built  much 

33.  14  compassed  about  O.,  and  raised  it  up  a 
Xeh.  3.  26  Moreover  the  Nethinims  dwelt  in  O.,  unto 
3.  27  that  lieth  out,  even  unto  the  wall  of  O. 
1 1.  21  But  the  Nethinims  dwelt  in  0. :  and  Ziha 

O'-PHIR,  n?;N,  "Vrftiitfat,  rick. 

l   A  sou  of  Joktan,  a  descendant  of  Shem.    B.C.  2200. 
Gen.  10.  29  0.,and  Havi!ah,and  Jobab ;  allthese(w.) 
1  Ch.  1. 23  O.,  and  Havilah,  and  Jobab,    All  these 

•2.  A  place  in  S.  Arabia,  from  whence  the  products  of 
India  were  brought  to  the  West. 

•  Ki.  9.  28  they  came  to  0.,and  fetched  from  thence 

10. 11  brought  gold  from  0.,  brought  in  from  O. 

22. 48  made  ships  of  Tharshish  to  go  to  0.  for  gold 

i  <  'h.29.    4  thousand  talents  of  gold,  of  the  gold  of  O. 

*  li.  C.  18  they  went  with  the  servants,  .to  O.,  and 

9.  10  servants,  .which  brought  gold  from  0.,br. 

J"!»   22.  24  the  (gold)  of  O.  as  the  stones  of  the  brooks 

28.  16  It  cannot  be  valued  with  the  gold  of  0. 
Psa.  45.   9  on  thy  right, .  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  O. 
Isa.   13.  12  even  a  man  than  the  gulden  wedge  of  o. 

01 


OPH'-NI,  'JDun  (he  high  place. 

A  place  in   Benjamin,   between  Chephar-haammonai 
and  Gaba,  five    Roman  miles  from    the   latter,  and 
also  not  far  from  Gibeah  of  Saul ;  now  called  Iifneh. 
Josh  18.  24  Chepbar-haatnouai,  and  0.,  and  Gaba 

OPH'  RAH,  tTJjau  hamlet. 

1,  A  city  in   Benjamin,   near   Parah.      (See   Aphrcth). 
Now  called  Taiyebth. 

Josh  18.  23  And  Avim,  and  Parah,  and  0. 

1  Sa.  13.  17  turned  untu  the  way  (that  leadeth  to)  O. 

'z.  A  city  in  Manasseh;  now  called  Arrabeh. 

Judg.  6.  11  sat  under  an  oak  which  (was)  in  O.,  that 
6.  24  unto  this  day  it  (is)  yet  in  O.  of  the  Abi. 
8.  27  put  it  in  his  city,  (even)  in  0. :  and  all  Is. 

8.  32  sepulchre  of  Joash  his  father,  in  0.  of  the 

9.  5  And  he  went  unto  his  father's  house  atO. 
3.  Son  of  Meonothai,  head  of  a  family  in  Judah.  B.C. 
1450. 

1  Ch.  4.  14  Meonothai  begat  0. :  and  Seraiah  begat 
OPINION  — 
X.Knowledge,  opinion,  jn  dea. 

Job  32.  6  afraid,  and  durst  not  show  you  mine  op. 
32.  10  Hearken  to  me ;  I  also  will  show  mineo. 
32. 17  I  will  answer. . I  also  will  show  mine  op. 

2.  Branches,  opinions,  D'^yp  seippim. 

1  Ki.  18.  21  How  long  halt  ye  between  twoopinions? 
OPPORTUNITY  — 

l.Aft  season  or  opportunity,  evKatpta  eukairia. 
Matt 26.  16  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 
Luke  22.    6  he  promised,  and  sought  opportunity  to 

2.  A  season,  opportunity,  tcatp6s  kairos. 

Gal.    6. 10  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us 
Heb.  11.  15  they  might  have  had  opportunity  to  have 

OPPORTUNITY,  to  lack  — 

To  be  without  an  opportunity,  aKa.ipioy.ai  dkaweo. 
Phil.   4. 10  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked  oppo. 
OPPOSE,  to  — 
To  be  laid  or  placed  over  against,  avriKetyat  ant. 

2  Th.  2.    4  Who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  abo. 
OPPOSE  self  (against),  to  — 

1.  To  hate,  oppose,  ua&  satam. 

Job   30.  21  with,  .hand  thou  opposest  thyself  against 

2.  To  be  placed  over  against,  avTtSiaTiQeyai  antid. 

2  Ti.    2.  25  instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves 

B.To  be  arranged  over  against,  avTirdaaoyat  ant. 
Acts  18.   6  when  they  opposed  themselves,  and  bla. 
OPPOSITION  — 
A  placing  over  against,  avrtOeats  antithesis. 

1  Ti.    6.  20  and  oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  cal. 
OPPRESS  to  — 
1.  To  bruise,  nan  dalca,  3. 

Prov  22.  22  neither  oppress  the  afflicted  in  the  gate 
'2.  To  put  down,  nj;  yanah,  5. 

Lev.  25.  14  And.  .ye  shall  not  oppress  one  another 

25.  17  Ye  shall  not  therefore  oppress  one  anot. 

Deut23-  16  dwell  with  thee,  .thou  shalt  not  oppress 

Isa.   49.  26  I  will  feed  them  that  oppress  thee  with 

Eze.  18.    7  hath  not  oppressed  any.  .hath  restored 

18.  12  Hath  oppressed  the  poor  and  needy,  hath 

18. 16  Neither  hath  oppressed  any.hath  notwith. 

45.   8  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  p. 

3.  To  press,  oppress,  crush,  yro  lachats. 

Exod.  3.    9  wherewith  the  Egyptians  oppress  them 

22.  21  Thou  shalt  neither  vex  a  stranger,  noro. 

23.  9  Also  thou  shalt  not  oppress  astranger ;  for 
Judg.  2.  18  by  reason  of  them  that  oppressed  them 

4.  3  he  mightily  oppressed  the  children  of  Isr. 
6.  9  out  of  the  hand  of  all  that  oppressed  you 
10. 12  The  Zidoniansalso.  .did  oppress  you  ;and 

1  Sa.  10. 18  out  of  the  hand,  .of  them  that  oppressed 

2  Ki.  13.   4  because  the  king  of  Syria  oppressed  them 

13.  22  Hazael  king  of  Syria  oppressed  Israel  all 
Psa.  56.    1  foi  man.,  he  fighting  daily  oppresseth  me 
106.  42  Their  enemies  also  oppressed  them,  and 
Jer.  30.  20  and  I  will  punish  all  that  oppress  them 

i.  To  terrify,  y~y  arats. 

Psa.  10. 18  the  man  of  the  earth  may  no  more  oppr. 
5.  To  oppress,  P^JJ  ashaq. 

Deut24. 14  Thou  shalt  not  oppress  an  hired  servant 
Job    10.    3  good  unto  thee  that  thou  shouldest  opp. 
Psa.  1 19. 122  Be  surety,  .let  not  the  proud  oppress  me 
Prov  14.  31  He  that  oppresseth  the  poorreproacheth 
22. 16  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase 
28.   3  A  poor  man  that  oppresseth  the  poor  (is 
Isa.  52.   4  Assyrian  oppressed  them  without  cause 
Jer.     7.   6  (If)  ye  oppressnot  the  stranger,  the  fath. 
Eze.  18.  18  because  he  cruelly  oppressed,  spoiled  hi. 
22.  29  they  have  oppressed  the  stranger  wrong. 
Hos.  12.    7  (He  is)  a  merchant .  .he  loveth  to  oppress 
Amos  4.    1  which  oppress  the  poor,  which  crush  the 
Mic.  2.   2  so  they  oppress  a  man  and  his  house,  even 
Zech.  7.  to  oppress  not  the  widow,  nor  the  fatherless 
Mai.   3.    5  against  those  that  oppress  the  hireling  in 

6.7*0  distress,  be  an  adversary,  "ny  tsarar. 

Numio.   9  against  the  enemy  that  oppresseth  you 
7.  To  break,  oppress,  bruise,  fs"i  ratsats. 

1  Sa.  12.   3  whom  have  I  oppressed?  or  of  whose  ha. 
12.    4  Thou  hast  not  defrauded  us,  nor  oppressed 


8.  To  break,  oppress,  bruise,  y^l  ratsats,  Za. 
Judg  10.    8  that  year  they  vexed  and  oppressed  the 
2  Ch.16.  10  Asa  oppressed  (some)  of  the  people  the 
Job  20.  19  Because  he  hath  oppressed,  .hath  forsak. 

9.  To  spoil,  destroy,  "n?>  shculad. 

Psa.  17.   9  From  the  wicked  that  oppress  me,  (from) 

10.2*0  prevail  against,  Karahwaareva  katadunas. 

Acts  10.  38  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  d. 

Jas.    2.   6  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw  you 

OPPRESSED  — 

I. Bruised,  oppressed,  ~"i  dak. 

Psa.  9.  9  Lord  also  will  be  a  refuge  for  the  oppres 
10.  18  To  judge  the  fatherless  and  the  oppressed 
74.  21  0  let  not  the  oppressed  return  ashamed 

2. Oppressed  one,  fieri  chwmots. 

Isa.  1. 17  relieve  the  oppressed,  judge  the  fatheiL 
3.  Oppressed  ones,  D^tPJi  ashuqim. 

Amos  3.  9  behold,  .the  oppressed  in  the  midst  the. 
LTo  be  oppressed,  p?*u  ashaq,  4. 

Isa.  23. 12  0  thou  oppressed  virgin,  daughter  of  Z. 

0.T0  oppress,  ptfj>  ashaq. 

Deut28.  29  thou  shalt  be  only  oppressed  and  spoiled 
28.  33  thou  shalt  be  only  oppressed  and  crushed 
Psa.  103.  6  and  judgment  for  all  that  are  oppressed 
146.  7  Which  executeth  judgment  for  the  oppr. 
Eccl.  4.  1  and  behold  the  tears  of  (such  as  were)  op. 
Jer.  50.  33  the  children  of  Judah  (were)  oppressed 
Hos.    5.  11  Ephraim  (is)  oppressed,  .broken  in  judg. 

6.  Oppression,  n^u  oshqah. 

Isa.  38. 14  O  Lord,  I  am  oppressed ;  undertake  for 
7. To  break,  oppress,  bruise,  pn  ratsats. 

Isa.  58.  6  to  let  the  oppressed  go  free,  and  that  ye 
OPPRESSED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  exacted,  toil  nagas,  2. 

Isa.     3.    5  the  people  shall  be  oppressed,  every  on& 

53.  7  He  was  oppressed,  and  he  was  afflicted 

2.2*0  be  warn  down,  Ka.Ta.Trovioy.ai  kataponeomai. 

Acts   7.  24  avenged  him  that  was  oppressed,  and  sm. 
OPPRESSING  — 
To  opptress,  break,  na*  yanah. 

Jer.  46. 16  and  let  us  go . .  from  the  oppressing  sword 

50. 16  for  fearof  the  oppressing  sword  they  shall 
Zeph.  3.    1  Woe  to  her  that  is  filthy . .  the  oppressing 

OPPRESSION  — 

I. Oppression,  Yrh  lachats. 

Exod.  3.  9  I  have  also  seen  the  oppression  wherewi. 
Deut  26.   7  LORD . .  looked  on  our . .  labour,  and  our  0. 
2  Ki.  13.    4  he  saw  the  oppression  of  Israel,  because 
Job   36. 15  He  delivereth  the  poor,  .in  oppression 
Psa.  42.    9  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  oppre. 

43.  2  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  oppre. 

44.  24  forgettest  our  affliction  and. .oppression? 

^.Oppression,  scabbing,  ns^p  mispach. 

Isa.     5.    7  he  looked  for  judgment,  but  behold  opp 

3.  Restraint,  isy  otser. 

Psa. 107.  39  brought  low  through  oppression,  affliction 
^.Oppression,  n|5u  aqah. 

l*sa-  55-  3  beeause  of  the  oppression  of  the  wicked 
5.  Oppressioji,  pt?y  osJieq. 

Isa.  62. 10  Trust  not  in  oppression,  and  become  not 
73.    8  and  speak  wickedly  (concerning)  oppres. 
119. 134  Deliver  me  from  the  oppression  of  man 
Eccl.  5.   8  If  shou  seest  the  oppression  of  the  poor 

7.    7  Surely  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad 
Isa.   30.  12  and  trust  in  oppression  and  perverseness 

54.  14  thoushaltbefarfrom  oppression;  for  thou 
59.  13  speaking  oppression  and  revolt,  conceivi. 

Jer.     6.    6  she  (is)  wholly  oppression  in  the  midst  of 

22. 17  for  to  shed  innocent  blood,  and  for  oppr. 
Eze.  22.    7  have  they  dealt  by  oppression  with  the  st. 

22.  29  The  people  of  the  land  have  used  oppres- 

ft.  Spoiling,  "tit?  shod. 

Psa.  12.    s  For  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  for  the  s. 

7 '.Oppressions,  thpplip  maashaqqoth. 

Isa.  33.  15  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  oppressions 
^.Oppressed  ones  or  things,  D'p'EJu.  ashuqim. 

Job  35.    9  By  reason  of  the  multitude  of  oppressions 

Eccl.  4.    1  considered  aid  the  oppressions  that  ared. 
OPPRESSION,  to  thrust  out  by  — 
To  thrust  out  or  away,  nr  yanah,  5. 

Eze.  46. 18  not  take,  .by  oppression,  to  thrust  them  out 
OPPRESSOR  — 
l.A  man  of  violence,  con  b>'n  ish  chamas. 

Prov.  3.  31  Envy  thou  not  the  oppressor,  and  choose 

2.  To  oppress,  thrust  end,  ra;  yanah. 

Jer.  25.  38  because  of  the  fierceness  of  the  oppressor 

3.  To  press,  yrj?  lachats. 

Isa.   19.  20  tVIey  shall  cry.  .because  of  the  oppressors 

4.  To  exact,  erii  nagas. 

Job     3.  18  prisoners,  .hear  not  the  voice  of  the  opp. 

Isa.  3.  1 2  children  (are)  their  oppressors,  and  women 
9.  4  thou  hast  broken,  .the  rod  of  his  oppres. 
14.  2  and  they  shall  rule  over  their  oppressors 
14.   4  How  hath  the  oppressor  ceased  !  the  gol. 

Zech.  9.  8  no  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any 
10.    4  Out  of  him  came  forth,  .every  oppressor 


OR 


722 


ORDERED 


5.  Terrible  one,  p"^  arils. 

Job   15.  20  the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  op. 

27.  13  This  (is).,  the  heritage  of  oppressors,  .th. 

Psa.  54.    3  oppressors  seek  after  my  soul:  they  have 

<3.  Oppressions,  nipwyo  maasliaqqoth. 

Prov.28.  16  prince.. (is)also  a  great  oppressor:  (but) 

7.  Oppressor,  p\»%  ashoq. 

Jer.   22.    3  deliver. .  out  of  the  hand  of  the  oppressor 

8.  To  oppress,  p$%  ashoq. 

Psa.  72.   4  He.. shall  break  in  pieces  the  oppressor 

no.  121  I  have  done,  .leave  me  not  to  mine  opp. 

Eccl.  4.    1  and  on  the  side  of  their  oppressors.. pow. 

Jer.  si.  12  deliver,  .out of  the  hand  of  the  oppressor 

9.  To  distress,  oppress^  straiten,  pre  tsuq,  5. 

Isa.  51.  13  fury  of  the  oppressor,  .fury  of  the  oppr.  ? 
10.7*0  tread,  Sample  down,  D?"j  ramas. 

Isa.  16.  4  oppressors  are  consumed  out  of  the  land 
OR,  or  else,  or  ever  — 

I.  Or,  iN  0. 

Gen.  4.  49  that  I  may  turn  to  the  right  hand  or  to 
24.  50  we  cannot  speak  unto  thee  bad  or  good 
31.  43  or  unto  their  children  which  they  have 

Exodig.  13  he  shall  surely  be  stoned  or  shot  through 
21.  18  one  smite  another  with  a  stone,  or  with 

Lev.  20.  17  his  father's  daughter,  or  his  mother's  da. 

2.  If,  DN  im. 

Gen.  24.  21  had  made  his  journey  prosperous  or  not 
Joel    1.    2  Hath  this  been  in  your  days,  or  even  in 

3.Lo,  if,  though,  whether,  or,  ]n  hoi. 

Ezra    7.  26  unto  death,  or  to  banishment,  or  to  con. 

4.  Up  to,  "i;>  ad. 

Gen.  31.  24  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob  either  good  or  b. 

h.Not,  vfy  la. 

Dan.   6.  24  or  ever  they  came  at  the  bottom  of  the  d. 

6.  Whether,  or,  efr-e  eite. 

Rom.  12.   7  Or  ministry,  .on  (our)  ministering;  or  he 
12.    o  [Or]  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation :  he 

1  Co.  3.  22  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world 

3.  22  or  life  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  th. 

2,  5  called:.  aIs,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth 
10.  31  Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  w. 
12. 13  whether..  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether,  .bo. 
12.  26  [or]  one  member  br  honoured,  all  he  m. 
14.  7  whether  pipe  or  harp,  except  they  give  a 
15. 11  whether.  .1  or  they,  so  we  preach  and  so 

2  Co.   5.   9  whether  r      .ent  or  aosent,  we  may  be  a. 

5. 10  that  he  hath  done,  whether,  .good  or  bad 
8.  23  or  our  brethren . .  the  messengers .  f  thy  c. 
12.   3  whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body 

Eph.  6.   8  receive  of  the  Lord,  whether,  .bond  or  f. 

Phil.  1.  iS  whether  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,  Christ  is 
1.  20  magnified,  .whether (it  be)  by  life,  or  by 
1.  27  whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else  bea. 

Col.     1.  16  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers 
1.  20  be)  things  in  earth,  or  things  in  heaven 

1  Th.  5.  10  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live 

2  Th.  2.  15  taught,  whether  by  word,  or,  1  Pe  2/14. 

7.  If  not,  ei  fxr\  ei  me,  2  Co.  3.  I. 

3.  Or,  either,  $  e. 

Matt.  5.  17  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law,  or  the 
5.  18  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass 

5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  b. 

6.  24,  31;  7.  4,  9,  16;  9.  5;  10.  11,  14,  19,  37, 
37;  11.  3;  12.  5,  25,  29,  33;  13.  21;  15.  4,  5,  [6];  16.  14, 
26;  17.  25,  25;  18.  8,8,  16,  16,  20;  19.  29,  29,  [29,  29,  29,] 
29,  29  ;  24.  23,  23 ;  25.  37,  38,  39,  44,  44,  44,  44,  44 ;  27.  17. 

Mark  2.  9;  3.  4,  4,  33;  4.  21,  30;  6.  [15],  56,  56;  7.  10, 

II,  12;  8.  37;  10.29,  29>  29,  29,  [29],  2g,  29;  11.30;  r2.  14, 
15;  13-  [a0>  35.  35.  35;  Luke'2.  24;  8.  16,  19,  27;  12.  14; 
13.15;  14.5,12;  17.  7,  21,  [23];  18.  11,  29,  29,  29,29; 
John  2.6;  6.  19 ;  7.  48 ;  9.  21 ;  13.  29 ;  Acts  1.7;  3.  12  ; 
4-  7>  34  J  5-  38 ;  10.  [14!,  28,  28;  11.  8;  17.  29,  29 ;  18.  14; 
19.  12;  20.  33,  33;  23.  9,  29;  24.  20,  [23];  26.  31;  28.  6, 
17,  21 ;  Rom,  2,  15;  4.  13;  9.  11 ;  10.  7;  14.  4,  10,  13,  21, 
[21] ;  1  Co.  2.  1 ;  4.  3;  5.  10,  [10],  10,  11,  11,  ri,  11, 11 ;  7. 
ii.  15  ;   11.  4»  5.  6;   13.  1  ;  14  7»  23>  24.  27.  29,  37'.  I5-  37  \ 

2  Co.  i.  13;  9.  7;  10.  12 ;  11.  4,  4 ;  12.  6;  Gal.  1.  8 ;  2.  2 ; 

3  15;  Eph.  3.  20;  5.  3,  27,  27;  Phil.  2.  [3];  Col.  2.  16,  16, 
16,  16 ;  3.  17 ;  2  Th  2.  4;  1  Ti.  2.  [g],  9,  9;  5.  4,  [16],  19; 
Titus  1.  6;  3.  12;  Phm.  18;  Heb.  2.  6;  10.  28;  12.  16, 
[20];  Jas.  2.  3,  15;  4.  15;  1  Pe.  1.  11;  3,  3,  9;  14.  15,  15, 
15 ;  Rev.  3.  15 ;  13.  16,  17,  [17L  17  ;  M-  9- 

Interrogative : — Matt.  6.  31,  31  ;  7.  4,  9,  16;  9.  5  ;  11. 
3 ;  12.  5  \  16.  26 ;  17.  25 ;  at.  25 ;  22.  17 ;  23.  17,  19;  25 ; 
37,  38;  27.  17;  Mark  2.  9;  3.4,  4,  [33!;  4-  21,  3°;  8-  [37]  I 
n.  30  ;  12.  14,  15 ;  Luke  5.  23  ;  6.  g,  9 ;  7.  19,  20;  11.  12  ; 
12.  [11],  11,  [29],  41 ;  13.  4;  14.  31;  20.  2,  4,22;  22.27; 
John  4.27  ;  7.  11 ;  9.  2  ;  18.  34;  Acts  3.  12  ;  7.  49  ;  8.  34  ; 
Rom.  2.  4 ;  3.  1  ;  4.  9,  10  ;  8.  35,  35,  35,  35,  35,  35 ;  11. 
34i  35  I  1  Co.  i.  13  ;  4-  2I ;  7-'  r6 ;  9-  6>  \l\i  8,  io ;  io.  [19] ; 
it.  22;  14.  36;  2  Co.  1.  17;  3.  [1],  1 ;  6.  16 ,  Gal.  1.  10, 
12;  3.  2,  5 ;  1  Th.  2.  19,  19. 
B.And  not,  neither,  nor,  jtnjTe  mete. 

2  Th.  2.   2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  [or] 
ORACLE  — 
l.Word,  15^  dabar. 

2  Sa.  16.  23  as  if  a  mau  had  enquired  at  the  oracle  of 
2.  Oracle,  speaking  place,  hinder  part,  van  debir. 

1  Ki.  6.  5  the  walls . .  of  the  temple  and  of  the  oracle 
6.  i6built.  .for  the  oracle,  .for  the  most  hoi  j  (p.) 
6.  19  the  oracle  he  prepared  in  thehousewithin 
6.  20  the  oracle  in  the  fore  ©art  (was)  twenty  c. 


1  Ki.  6.  21  made,  .by  the  chains  of  gold  before  the  or. 

6.  22  the  whole  altar  that  (was)  by  the  oracle 
6.  23  within  the  oracle  he  made  two  cherubim 

6.  31  for  the  entering  of  the  oracle  he  made  do. 

7.  49  before  the  oracle,  with  the  flowers,  and  the 

8.  6  into  the  oracle  of  the  house,  to  the  most 
8.   8  were  seen  out  in  the  holy,  .before  the  or. 

2  Ch.  3. 16  he  made  chains,  (as)  in  the  oracle,  and  put 

4.  20  burn  after  the  manner  before  the  oracle 

5.  7  brought  in  the  ark.  .to  the  oracle  of  the  h. 
5.   9  were  seen  from  the  ark  before  the  oracle 

Psa.  28.    2  I  lift  up  my  hands  toward  thy  holy  oracle 

$, Oracle,  Koyiov  logion. 

Acts      .  38  whoreceivedthelivelyoraelestogiveuuto 
Rom.  3.    2  unto  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of 
Heb.   5,  12  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God 
1  Pe.  4. 11  If  any  man  speak,  .as  the  oracles  of  God 

ORATION,  to  make  an  — 

To  address  tlie  people,  o*rgj.r\yop£<ti  demegoreo. 

Acts  12.  21  sat  upon  his  throne,  and  made  an  oration 
ORATOR  — 
1.  Whisper,  charm,  tyri?  lachash. 

Isa.     3.    3  cunning  artificer,  and  the  eloquent  orat. 
%A  speaker,  orator,  ^rtap  rhetor. 

Acts  24.  1  a  certain  orator.  .Tertullus,  who  informed 
ORCHARD  — 
Park,  garden  ground,  fruitful  land,  DT)£  pardes. 

Eccl.  2.    5  I  made  me  gardens  and  orchards,  and  I 

Song  4.  13  Thy  plants  (are)  an  orchard  of  pomegra. 
ORDAIN,  to  — 

1.  To  lay  a  foundation,  appoint,  settle,  ip;  yasad,  3. 

1  Ch.  9.  22  whom  David  and  Samuel  the  seer  did  or. 
Psa.     8.  2  hast  thou  ordained  strength  because  of 

2.  To  form,  prepare,  establish,  |i3  kun,  3a. 

Psa.    8.    3  moon  and  the  stars,  which  thou  hast  or. 

3.  To  number,  appoint,  n.;p,  kjd  mena,  menah,  3. 

Dan.    2.  24  whom  the  kin.;  had  ordained  to  destroy 

i.To  give,  jrji  nathan. 

2  Ki.  23.  5* whom  the  kings  of  Judah  had  ordained 
Jer.     . .    5  I  ordained  thee  a  prophet  unto  the  uati. 

5.  To  cause  to  stand,  "tsj;  amad,  5. 

2  Ch.n.  15  he  ordained  him  priest  for  the  high  pla. 

6.  To  arrange,  set  in  array,  %"$  arak. 

Psa.132.  17  I  have  ordained  a  lamp  for  mine  anoint. 

7.  To  ivork,  do,  use,  Sys  paal. 

Psa.    7. 13  he  ordaineth  his  arrows  against  the  per. 

8.  To  raise  up,  establish,  D^p  qum,  3. 

Esth.  9.27  The  Jews  ordained,  and  took  upon  them 

9.  To  set,  place,  put,  w'y,  dic>  sum,  sim. 

1  Ch.17.  9  Also  I  will  ordain  a  place  for  my  people 
Psa.  81  5  This  he  ordained  in  Joseph,  .a  testimony 
Hab.  1. 12  O  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained  them  for  ju. 

10. To  set  on,  appoint,  n^  shaphath. 

Isa.   26.  12  Lokd,  thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for  us:  for 

11.  To  arrange  throughout,  8taTdo~crco  diatassd. 

1  Co.  7. 17  so  let  him  walk.    And  so  ordain  I  in  all 

9.  14  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained,  that  th. 
Gal.     3.  19  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  med. 

12.  To  place  01-  set  down,  KaBiarrgxt  kathistemi. 
Titus        5  that  thou  shouldest.. ordain  elders  in  every 
Heb.    5.   1  every  high  priest,  .is  ordained  for  men  in 

8.    3  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer  gifts 

IZ.To  irrepare  fully,  naravKevafa  kataskeuazo. 
Heb.   9.    6  Now  when  these  things  were  thus  orda. 

14.  To  judge,  decide,  Kplvca  krino. 

Acts  16.    4  that  were  ordained  of  the  apostles  and  e. 

15.  To  mark  out  or  off,  opl£w  horizo. 

Acts  10.  42  to  testify  that  it  is  he  which  was  ordained 
17. 31  judge,  .by  (that)  man  whom  he  hath  ord. 

lQ.To  do,  make,  iroUta  poiefi. 

Mark  3. 14  he  ordained  twelve,  that  they  should  be 

17.  To  mark  out  publicly  or  before,  •npoopi&proorizo. 
1  Co.  2.    7  which  God  ordained  before  the  world  unto 

18.  To  arrange,  set  in  array,  rdctrco  tasso. 

Acts  13.  48  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life 
Rom  13.    1  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God 
ID.  To  2nd,  place,  set,  rie-n/xi  tithemi. 

Johni5. 16  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and  ordained  you 
1  Ti.   2.    7  Whereunto  I  am  ordained  a  preacher,  and 

20.  To  elect  by  stretching  out  the  hand,  xetporoveo). 

Acts  14.  23' when  they  had  ordained  them  elders  in 
ORDAIN  before,  to  — 
l.To  write  or  describe  publicly  or  before,  irpoypd<pw. 

Jude         4  who  were  before  of  old  ordained  to  this 
2.  To  make  ready  before,  TrpoeTotfid^w  proetoimazo. 

Eph.    2.  10  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we 
ORDAINED  (to  be),  to  be  — 
1.2*0  set  in  ay  ray,  Tl'l  arak. 

Isa.   30.  33  For  Tophet  (is)  ordained  of  old ;  yea,  for 

2.  To  become,  ytvofxai  ginomai. 

Acts    1.  22  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  with 

ORDER  — 

1.  Leading,  manner,  nini  dihrah, 

Psa.  no.   4  Thou(art)a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order 


2.  Hand,  t  yad. 

1  Ch.25.    2  which  prophesied  according  to  the  order 
25.    6  according  to  the  king's  order  to  Asaph,  .1 . 

^.Judgment,  ttl^p  mlshpat. 

Judg  13.  12  how  shall  we  order  the  child,  and  (how) 

1  Ch.  6.  32  waited  on  their  office  accord,  to  their  or. 

23.  31  according  to  the  order  commanded  unto 

2  Ch.  8.  14  according  to  the  order  of  David  Iris  father 

4.  Order,  arrangements,  CT"np  sedarim. 

Job    10.  22  A  land  of  darkness . .  without  any  order 

5.  Step,  beat,  nys  paam. 

Eze.  41 .  6  one  over  another,  and  thirty  in  order ;  and 

6.  Arrangement,  order,  rdyfxa  tagma. 

1  Co.  15.  23  every  man  in  his  own  order;  Christ  the 

7 . Arrangement,  order,  ra|is  taxis. 

Luke  1.  8  while  he  executed,  .in  the  order  of  his  c. 
1  Co.  14.  40  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  or. 
Col.  2.  5  joying  and  beholding  your  order,  and  the 
Heb.  5.    6  Thou  (art)apriest  forever,  after  the  order 

5.  10  called  of  God  an  high  priest  after  the  or. 

6.  20  made  an  high  priest  for  ever,  after  the  or. 

7.  11  thatanotherpnestshould  rise  after  the  or. 
7. 11  and  not  be  called  after  the  order  of  Aaron? 
7.  17  Thou  (art)a  priest  forever,  aftertheorder 
7.  21  [Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever  aftertheorder] 

ORDER,  by  or  in  — 

In  successio?i,  distinctly,  separately,  KaOe^s  kath. 

Luke  1.    3  to  write  unto  thee  in  order,  most  excellent 

Acts  11.   4  Peter,  .expounded  (it)  by  order  unto  them 

18.  23  departed,  and  wentover . .  country . .  in  or. 

ORDER,  due  — 
Judgment,  Q3t?p  mishpat. 

1  Ch.15. 13  that  we  sought  him  not  after  the  due  order 

ORDER,  to  (give)  — 
1.  To  hind,  direct,  "lpx  asar. 
1  Ki.  20. 14  Then  he  said,  Who  shall  order  the  battle? 

2.To  prepare,  establish,  ps  kun,  5. 

Psa. 119.  133  Order  my  steps  in  thy  word  :  and  letnot 
Isa.     9.    7  to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it  with  judg. 

3.  To  array,  y\yjt  arak. 

Exod27.  21  Aaron  and  his  sous  shall  order  it  from  ev. 
Lev.  24.   3  shall  Aaron  order  it  from  the  evening  unto 

24.  4  He  shall  order  the  lamps  upon  the  pure 
Job    13.  18  Behold  now,  I  have  ordered  (my)  cause;  I 

23.  4  I  would  order  (my)  cause  before  him,  and 
37.  19  Teach  us.  .we  cannot  order,  .by  reason  of 

Jer.  46.    3  Order  ye  the  buckler  and  shield,  and  draw 

4. To  set,  place,  put,  Wy,  e\'v  sum,  sim. 

Psa.  50.  23  and  to  bun  that  ordereth  (his)  conversa. 

5.  To  arrange  throughout,  Zuxtcuto-o)  diatasso. 

1  Co.  16.    1  as  I  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of 
ORDER,  to  lay,  put  or  set  in  — 
l.To  array,  Xl%  arak. 

Gen.  22.    9  laid  the  wood  in  order,  and  bound  Isaac 

40.    4  thou  shalt  bring  in.  .and  set  in  order  the 

40.  23  he  set  the  bread  in  order  upon  it  before 

Lev.    1.    7  and  lay  the  wood  in  order  upon  the  fire 

1.    8  shall  lay  the  parts,  .in  order  upon  the  w. 

1.  12  shall  lay  them  in  order  upon  the  wood  that 

6.  12  and  lay  the  burnt  offering  in  order  upon 

24.  8  Every  sabbath  he  shall  set  it  in  order  be. 
Josh.  2.  6  which  she  had  laid  in  order  upon  the  ro. 

1  Ki.  18.  33  he  put  the  wood  in  order,  and  cut  the  b. 
J°b  33.  5  If  thou  canst  answer  me,  set.  .in  order b. 
Psa.  50.  21  I  will  reprove  thee,  and  set.  .in  order  be. 
Isa.   44.    7  who . .  shall  declare  it,  and  set  in  order  f  or 

2.To  set  up,  command,  charge,  niy  tsavah,  3. 

2  Sa.  17.  23  put  his  household  in  order,  and  hanged 
2  Ki.20.  1  Set  thine  house  in  order  ;  for  thou  shalt 
Isa.  38.  1  Set  thine  house  in  order :  for  thou  shalt 

3.  To  make  straight  or  right,  jpi?  taqan,  3. 

Eccl.  12.    9  sought  out,  (and)  set  in  order  many  pro. 

4.  To  arrange  thoroughly,  5taTa<rcra>  diatassd. 

1  Co.  11.  34  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  come 
ORDER,  to  be  set   or  reckoned  up  in  — 

l.To  be  formed,  prepared,  established,  p3  htm,  2. 

2  Ch.  29.  35  the  service  of  the  house . .  was  set  in  ordeL 
2, Arrangement,  array,  order,  ^1>IP  maarakah. 

Exod.39.  37  the  lamps  to  be  set  in  order,  and  all  the 
Z.To  set  in  array,  arrange,  r^y  arak. 

Psa.  40.  5  they  cannot  be  reckoned  up  in  order  un. 
i.To  be  joined,  njp  shalab,  4. 

Exod.  26.17  Two  "tenons,  .set  in  order  one  against  an. 

ORDER,  things  that  are  to  be  set  in  — 
Array,  !)"$  erek. 

Exod.  40.    4  the  things  that  are  to  be  set  in  order  up. 

ORDERED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  formed,  prepared,  established,  pa  kun,  4. 

Psa.  37.  23  The  steps  of  a  (good)  man  are  ordered  by 
2.  To  set  in  array,  arrange,  Tl'4  arak. 

2  Sa.  23.   5  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all . .  and 

ORDERED  place  — 

Arrangement,  nrnys  maarakah. 

Judg.  6.  26  build  »n  altar,  .in  the  ordered  place,  and 


ORDERING 


723 


OTHER 


ORDERING  — 

Inspection,  visitation,  rnjpa  pequddah. 

i  Ch.24. 19  These,  .the  orderings  of  them  in  their  se. 
ORDINANCE  — 

1.  Statute,  decree,  fin  choq. 

Exodi2,  24  ye  shall  observe  this  thing  for  an  ordina. 

18.  20  thou  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and  laws 

Num  i3.  8  have  I  given  them . .  by  an  ordinance  for 

2  Ch.35.  25  lamentations,  .and  made  them  an  ordin. 
Psa.  99.  7  they  kept  his  testimonies,  and  the  ordin. 
Isa:  24.  5  changed  the  ordinance,  broken  the  ever. 
Jer.  31.  36  If  those  ordinances  depart  from  before  me 
Eze.  45. 14  Concerning  the  ordinance  of  oil,  the  bath 
Mai.    3.    7  ye  are  gone  away  from  mine  ordinances 

2.  Statute,  decree,  n$r\  chuqqah. 

Exodi2.  14  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast  by  an  ordinance 
12.  17  shall  ye  observe  this  day. . by  an  ordina. 

12.  43  This  (is)  the  ordinanceof  thepassover:T. 

13.  10  Thou  shalt  therefore  keep  this  ordinance 
Lev.  18.   3  neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  ordinances 

18.  4  keep  mine  ordinances,  to  walk  therein 
Num  9.  12  according  to  all  the  ordinances  of  the  pa. 

9. 14  according  to  the  ordinance  of  the  passover 
9. 14  ye  shall  have  one  ordinance,  both  forthe 
10.  8  they  shall  be  to  you  for  an  ordinance  for 
15.  15  One  ox'dinauee.  .an  ordinance  for  ever  in 

19.  2  This  (is)  the  ordinance  of  the  law  which 
31.  21  This  (is)  the  ordinance  of  the  law  which 

Job    38.  33  Kuowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven? 

Jer.   31.  35  the  ordinances  of  the  moon  and  of  the  st. 

33.  25  I  have  not  appointed  the  ordinances  of  h. 

Eze.  43.  11  show,  .all  the  ordinances.. keep..all  the  o. 

43.  18  These  (are)  the  ordinances  of  the  altar  in 

44.  5  concerning  all  the  ordinances  of  the  hou. 
46.  14  continually  by  a  perpetual  ordinance  unto 

Z.Hand,  T  yad. 

Ezra    3.  10  after  the  ordinance  of  David  king  of  Isr. 

4.  Command,  charge,  precept,  rrap  mitsvoJi. 

Neh.  10.  32  we  made  ordinances  for  us,  to  charge  ou. 

5.  Watch,  ward,  guard,  T\-£pn  mishmereth. 

Lev.  18.  30  Therefore  shall  ye  keep  mine  ordinance,  t. 

22.    9  They  shall  therefore  keep  mine  ordinance 

Mai.    3.  14  what  profit.,  that  we  have  kept  his  ordina. 

^.Judgment,  tosrp  mishpat. 

Exodi5.  25  he  made  for  them  a  statute  and  an  ordin. 
Josh  24.  25  set  them  a  statute  and  an  ordinance  in  S. 

1  Sa.  30.  25  that  he  made  ita  statute  and  an  ordinance 

3  Ki.17.  34  after  their  ordinances,  or  after  the  law  and 

17.  37  the  statutes,  and  the  ordinances,  and  the 

2  Ch.33.    8  whole  law  and  the  statutes  and  the  ordin. 

35.  13  roasted,  .with  fire  according  to  the  ordin. 
Psa.119.  91  They  continue,  .according  to  thine  ordin. 
Isa.  58.    2  and  forsook  not  the  ordinance  of  their  G. 

58.  2  they  ask  of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice 
Eze.  11.  20  Thattheymay..keepmineordinances,and 

7 1  Thorough  arrangement,  Starayr}  diatage. 

Rom.  13.   2  Whosoever  therefore . .  resisteth  the  ordi 

S..4  judicial  appointment,  Siwrataua  dikaioma. 
Luke  1.    6  walkiuginallthe..ordinancesofthe  Lord 
Heb.  9.    1  had  also  ordinances  of  divine  service,  and 
9. 10  carnal  ordinances,  imposed,  .until  theti. 

9. Dogma,  determination,  decree,  Z6yp.a  dogma. 
Eph.   2. 15  the  law  of  commandments,  .in  ordinances 
Col.    2.  14  Blotting  out  the  hand  writing  of  ordinan. 

10.  Any  made  thing,  ktIgis  ktisis. 

1  Pe.  2. 13  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of 
ll.A  giving  over,  ■Kapd'Boa'is  paradosis. 

1  Co.11.    2  keeptheordinances,asIdelivered..toyou 
ORDINANCES,  to  be  subject  to  — 
To  be  under  a  dogma  or  decree,  doy^ari^ofxai  dog. 

Col.    2. 20  Wherefore,  .are  ye  subject  to  ordinances 
ORDINARY— 
Statute,  decree,  fin  choq. 

Eze.  16.  27havediminishedthineordinary(food),  and 

O'-REB,  Ti'iy,  :ny  raven,  bustard. 

1.  A  prince  of  Midian  defeated  by  Gibeon,  and  slain  by 
the  Ephramites  at  the  Jordan.    B.C.  1249. 

Judg.  7.  25  took..O..  .and  they  slewO.  upon  the  rock 

7.  25  brought  the  heads  of  O.  and  Zeeb  to  Gid. 

8.  3  God  hath  delivered.  .0.  and  Zeeb :  and  w. 
Psa.  83.  n  Make  their  nobles  like  O.  and  like  Zeeb 

2.  A  rock  E.  of  the  Jordan,  near  Beth-bareh,  whereon 
Oreb  and  Zeeb  were  slain.    Now  called  Ash-el-Ghorab. 

Judg.  7.  25  they  slew.,  upon  the  rockO.,  and  Zeeb  they 
Isa.    10.  26  the  slaughter  of  Midian  at  the  rock  of  O. 

O'-REN,  jnx  strength. 

Third  son  of  Jerahmeel,  grandson  of  Pharez  son  of 

Judah.    B.C.  1510. 

1  Ch.  2.  25  and  Bunah,  and  O.,  and  Ozem,  (and)  Ah. 
ORGAN  — 
Lute,  flute,  3My,  33J|  uggab,  ugab. 

Gen.  4.  21  of  all  such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ 

Job  23. 12  They,  .rejoice  at  the  sound  of  the  organ 
30.  31  my  organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  w. 

Psa.150.  4  praise.,  with  stringed  instruments  and  o. 

O-RI'-ON,  Vps  strong. 

The  southern  constellation  seen  in  November;  called 

in  Hebrew  Ke-sil. 

Job   g.    9  Which  maketh  Arcturus,  0.,  and  Pleiades 


Job  38.  31  Canst  thou  bind .  .orloose  the  bandsof  0.? 

Amos  5.    8  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  0.,  and 
ORNAMENT  — 
l.Ephod,  niDx  aphuddah. 

Isa.  30.  22  the  ornament  of  thy  molten  images  of  g. 

I.Omament,  trinket,  "hn  chali. 

Prov  25.  12  (As)  an  earring  of  gold,  and  an  ornament 

3.  Wreath,  addition,  n;i?  livyah. 

Prov.  1.    9  they,  .an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy  he. 
4.   9  She  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament 
^.Ornament,  desirable  thing,  H&  adi. 

Exod33.   4  and  no  man  did  put  oh  him  his  ornaments 

33.   5  now  put  off  thy  ornaments  from  thee,  that 

33.   6  stripped  themselves  of  their  ornaments  by 

2  Sa.   1.  24  who  put  on  ornaments  of  gold  upon  your 

Isa.  49. 18  clothe  thee  with  them  all,  as  with  an  or. 

Jer.     2.  32  Can  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments.,  a  bride 

4.  30  though  thou  deckest  thee  with  ornaments 

Eze.     7.  20  As  for  the  beauty  of  his  ornament,  he  set 

16.   7  and  thou  art  come  to  excellent  ornaments 

16. 11  I  decked  thee  also  with  ornaments  and  I 

23.  40  for  whom  thou,  .deckedst  thyself  with  o. 

5.  A  moon  shaped  ornament,  □'Tins'  saharonim. 
Judg.  8.  21  and  took  away  the  ornaments  that  (were) 
8.  26  besides  ornaments,  and  collars,  and  pur. 

Q.  Beauty,  ornament,  headdress,  ~iN3  peer. 

Isa.   61.  10  as  a  bridegroom  decketh  (himself)  with  0. 
ORNAMENT  of  the  legs  — 
Bracelet  for  arm  or  ankle,  niyx  tseadak. 

Isa.     3.  20  The  bonnets,  and  the  ornaments  of  the  1. 
ORNAMENTS,  tinkling  — 
A  tinkling  clasp,  dsj;  ekes. 

Isa.     3.  18  take  away  the  bravery  of .  .tinkling  orna. 
OR'-NAN,  jr)N  strong. 

A  Jebusite  prince  whose  thrashing-floor  was  purchased 
by  David  for  an  altar,  called  Araunah  in  2  Sa.  24.  16. 
B.C.  1017. 

1  Ch.21.  15  Lord  stood  by  the  threshing  floor  of  O. 

21. 18,  28  in  the  threshing  floor  of  O.  the  Jebus. 
21.  20  0.  turned  back.  .Now  O.  was  threshing 
21.  21  as  David  came  to  O. ,  0.  looked,  and  saw  D. 
21.  22  David  said  to  O.,  Grant  me  the  place  of 
21.  23  0.  said  unto  David,  Take  (it)  to  thee,  and 
21.  24  David  said  to  O.,  Nay  ;  but  I  will  verily 
21.  25  So  David  gave  to  O.  for  the  place  six  hu. 

2  Ch.  3.    1  had  prepared  in  the  threshing  floor  of  O. 
OR'-PAH,  n*F\%  youthful  freshness. 

A  daughter  in  law  of  Naomi,  and  wife  of  Mahlon,  who 
returned  to  her  own  people.    B.C.  1312. 

Ruth  1.    4  thename  -.  theone(was)0  ,and  the  name 
1.  14  0.  kissed  her  mother  in  law ;  but  Ruth 

ORPHAN  — 

Fatherless  child,  orphan,  Din;  yathom. 

Lam.  5.    3  We  are  orphans  and  fatherless,  our  mo. 
O'-SEE,  'ZlffTje.     Greek  name  of  the  prophet  Hosea. 

Rom.  9.  2=;  As  he  saith  also  in  0.,  1  will  call  them  my 
O-SHE'-A,  yafin  God  saves. 
Same  as  Joshua  son  of  Nun,  servant  of  Moses. 

Numi3.    8  Of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  O.  the  son  of  Nun 

13.  16  Moses  called  0.  the  son  of  Nun,  Jehoshua 
OSPRAY  — 

Osjpray,  hjitj;  ozniyyah. 

Lev.  11. 13  the  eagle,  and  the  ossifrage,  and  the  ospr 
Deuti4.  12  the  eagle,  and  the  ossifrage,  and  the  ospr. 

OSSIFRAGE  — 

Ossifrage,  bone  breaker,  tn%  peres. 

Lev.  11. 13  the  eagle,  and  the  ossifrage,  and  the  ospr. 
Deuti4.  12  the  eagle,  and  the  ossifrage,  and  the  ospr. 
OSTRICH  — 
1. Ostriches,  screatners,  DMj£  yeenim. 

Lam.  4.    3  cruel,  like  the  ostriches  in  the  wilderness 
I.Plumage,  nfa  notsah. 

Job   39. 13  or  wings  and  feathers  unto  the  ostrich? 
OTHER  (things,  matters,  of),  others  — 
\.A  brother,  nx  ach. 

Gen.  13. 11  separated  themselves  the  one  from  theo. 
2.  One,  inx  echad. 

Exodi;.  12  the  one  on  the  one  side,  and  the  otheron 
18.   4  And  thename  of  the  other  (was)  Eliezer 
25. 19  And  make.,  the  other  cherub  on  the  other 
25.  33  three  bowls  made  like  almonds  in  the  ot. 
Lev.     5.    7  one  for  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other  for 
12.   8  the  one  for  the  burnt  offering,  and  the  o. 

14.  22  one  shall  be  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 

14.  31  the  one  (for)  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 

15.  15, 30 the  one(for)a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 

16.  8  one  lot  for  the  Lord,  and  the  other  lot  for 
Num.  6. 11  the  one  for  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 

8. 12  the  one  (for)  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 
Judg2o.  31  and  the  other  toGibeah  in  the  field,  about 

1  Sa.  14.   4  Bozez,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Seneh 

14.   5  the  other  southward  over  against  Gibeah 
14. 40  Jonathan  my  son  will  be  on  the  otherside 

2  Sa.  12.    1  two  men.  .the  one  rich,  and  the  other  po. 

14.   6  but  the  one  smote  the  other.and  slew  him 
1  EJ.  3.  25  give  half  to  the  one,  and  half  to  the  other 
12. 29  he  set  the  one  in  Beth-el,  and  the  other 
18.  23  I  will  dress  the  other  bullock,  and  lay  (it) 


2  Ch.  3. 12  (one)  wing  of  the  other  cherub  (was)  five 
3.  17  one  on  the  right  baud,  and  the  other  on 
Neh.  4.  17  and  with  the  other  (hand)  held  a  weapon 
Jer.   24.   2  the  other  basket  (had)  very  naughty  figs 
Eze.  40.   6  and  the  other  threshold.. one  reed  broad 
Dan.  12.   5  the  other  on  that  side  of  the  bank  of  the 
Zech.  4.    3  the  other  upon  the  left  (side)  thereof 
11.   7  the  one  I  called  Beauty,  and  the  other  I 
Z.A  sister,  ninx  achoth. 

Eze,  1.  23  wings  straight,  the  one  toward  the  other 
i.Ot/ier,  another,  next,  *inK  acher. 

Gen.  8.  10  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days ;  and  again 
8.  12  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days  ;  and  sent 
29.  27  shalt  serve  with  me  yet  seveuutheryears 
29.  30  and  served  with  him  yet  seven  other  ye. 
41.    3,  19  seven  other  kine  came  up  after  them 

43.  14  that  he  may  send  away  your  other  broth. 
43. 22  other  money  have  we  brought  down  in  our 

Exod2o.   3  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me 

23. 13  make  no  mention  of  the  name  of  otherg. 

34. 14  For  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  god  :  for 
Lev.   6.  11  put  on  other  garments,  aud  carry  forth 

14.  42  And  they  shall  take  other  stones,  and  put 
14.  42  he  shall  take  other  mortar,  aud  shall  pi. 
Deut.  5.   7  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  before 

6.  14  Ye  shall  not  go  after  other  gods,  of  the  g. 

7.  4  turn  away,  .that  they  may  serve  other  g. 

8.  19  walkafter  othergods,  and  serve  them,  and 

11. 16  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship  them 
11.  28  to  go  after  other  gods,  which  ye  have  not 
13.   2  Let  us  go  after  other  gods,  which  thou  h. 

13.  6,  13  Let  us  go  and  serve  othergods,  which 

17.  3  hath  gone  and  served  other  gods,  and  w. 

18.  20  that  shall  speak  in  the  name  of  othergods 
28. 14 not  go  aside.. to  go  after  other  gods  to  s. 
28.  36  there  shalt  thou  serve  other  gods,  wood 

28.  64  aud  there  thou  shalt  serve  other  gods,  w. 

29.  26  they  went  and  served  other  gods,  and  w. 

30. 17  and  worship  other  gods,  and  serve  them 

31. 18  in  that  they  are  turned  unto  other  gods 
31.  20  then  will  they  turn  unto  other  gods,  and 

Josh  23. 16  have  gone  and  served  other  gods,  and  bo. 

24.  2  Tourfathers  dwelt..they served  othergods 
24. 16  should  forsake  the  Lord,  to  serve  otherg. 

Judg.  2. 12  followed  other  gods,  of  the  gods  of  the  p. 
2. 17  but  they  went  a  whoring  after  othergods 
2. 19  in  following  othergods  to  serve  them,  and 

10.  13  ye  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  other  g. 
Ruth  2. 22  that  they  meet  thee  not  in  any  other  field 

1  Sa.   8.    8  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  other  gods 

19.  21  sent  other  messengers,  and  they  prophesi. 

21.  9  take  (it) ;  for  (there  is)  no  other  save  that 
26.  19  driven  me  out . .  saying,  Go,  serve  other  g. 
28.   8  disguised  himself,  and  put  ou  other  raim. 

2  Sa.13.  16  greater  than  the  other  that  thou  didst  unto 

1  Ki.   3.22  the  other  woman  said,  Nay;  buttheliving 

9.  6  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship  them 
9.    9  have  taken  hold  upon  other  gods,  and  h. 

11.  4  wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  otherg. 
11. 10  that  he  should  not  go  after  other  gods 

14.  9  for  thou  hast  gone  and  made  thee  other 

2  Ei.   5. 17  offer  neither,  .sacrifice  unto  other  gods 

17.  7  children  of  Israel . .  had  feared  other  gods 
17.  35  Ye  shall  not  fear  other  gods,  nor  bowyo. 
17.  37  observe.,  and  ye  shall  not  fear  other  gods 
17.  38  notforget;  neithershallyefearothergods 

22.  17  burnt  incense  unto  other  gods,  that  they 

1  Ch.23.  17  Eliezer  had  none  other  sons;  but  the  sons 

2  Ch.  3. 11  and  the  other  wing  (was  likewise)  five  cu. 

3. 11  reaching  to  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub 
3.  12  wing  of  the  other  cherub  (was)  five  cubits 
3.  12  other  whig  (was)  five  cubits  (also)  joining 
7.  19  shall  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worsh. 
7.  22  laid  hold  on  other  gods,  and  worshipped 

28.  25  burn  inceust  unto  other  gods,  and  provo. 

30.  23  assemblytook  counsel  to  keep  otherseven 
34.  25  burned  incense  unto  other  gods,  that  they 

Ezra  1. 10  Thirty  basins  of  gold,  .(and)  other  vessels 
2.  31  children  of  theotherElam.athousandtwo 

Neh.  5.  5  for  other  men  have  our  lands  and  vineya. 
7.  33  The  men  of  the  other  Nebo,  fifty  and  two 
7.  34  cliildrenoftheotherElam,athousandtwo 

Job     8.  19  Behold,  .outofthe  earth  shall  othersgrow 

31.  10  let  my  wife  grind . .  and  let  others  bow  do. 
34.  24  break  in  pieces,  .and  set  others  in  their 

Psa.  49.  10  men  die.  .and  leave  their  wealthtoothers 
Prov.  5.    9  Lest  thou  give  thine  honour  unto  others 
Eccl.  7.  22  thou  thyself  likewise  hast  cursed  others 
Jer.     1.  16  have  burnt  incense  unto  other  gods,  aud 

6. 12  their  houses  shall  be  turned  unto  others 
7.  6  neither  walk  afterothergodstoyourhurt 
7.    9  walk  after  other  gods  whom  ye  know  not 

7.  iS  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  gods 

8.  10  Therefore  will  I  give  their  wives  unto  ot. 
11.  10  they  went  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 
13. 10  walk  after  other  gods,  to  serve  them,  and 
16.  11  walked  after  other  gods,  and  have  served 
16.  13  there  shall  ye  serve  other  gods  day  and  ni. 
19.  4  have  burnt  inceuse  in  it  unto  other  gods 
19.  13  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  go. 
22.    9  and  worshipped  other  gods,  and  served 

25.  6  go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them,  and 

32.  29  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  gods 

35. 15  and  go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 

44.  3  to  serve  other  gods.whom  they  knew  not 
44.    5  to  burn  no  incense  unto  other  gods 

44.  8  burning  incense  unto  other  gods  in  the  1. 
44.  15  wives  had  burnt  incense  unto  other  gods 
Eze.  40.  40  on  the  other  side,  which  (was)  at  the  po. 
41.  24  one  door,  and  two  leaves  forthe  other  (d.) 
42. 14  put  on  other  garments,  and  shall  approach. 


O  T  H  Ml  K 


724 


OUCHES 


Eze.44.  T9  theyshallputonothergarmenta;  and  they 

Dan.  11.  4  plucked  up,  even  for  others  besides  those 
12.    5  there  stood  othertwo,  the  one  on  this  side 

Hos.  3.  i  look  to  other  gods,  aud  love  flagons  of  w. 
o.Otfor,  another,  ,_)nx  ocliorl. 

Dan.  7.  20  and  (of)  the  other  which  came  up,  and  b. 
Q.Otliee,  another,  pinx  oclioran. 

Dan.   2. 11  there  is  hone  other  that  can  show  it  he. 

2.  44  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other  people 
3. 29  110  othergod  that  can  deliver  after  tliisso. 

7. Rest,  remnant,  iNtf  shear. 

Esth.  9.  16  But  the"  other  Jews  that  (were)  in  the  ki. 

S. Second,  other,  \ik'",  rnt?  shenith,  sheni. 

Gen.   4.  19  Adah,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Zillah 
Exod  1.  15  Shiphrah,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Puah 
25.  12  one  side  of  it,  and  two  rings  in  the  other 

25.  32  and  three  branches,  .out  of  the  other  side 

26.  27  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  other  side 

27.  15  ontheotherside(shallbe)haugingsftfteen 
28. 10  six  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone 
29.  19  thou  shalt  take  the  other  ram;  and  Aaron 
29.  39, 41  the  other  lamb  thou  shaltoffer  at  even 

36.  25,  32  the  other  side  of  the  tabernacle 

37.  3  and  two  rings  upon  the  other  side  of  it 
37. 18  three  branches,  .out  of  the  other  side  tit. 

38.  15  for  the  other  side  of  the  court  gate,  on  this 
Lev.  8.  22  brought  the  other  ram,  the  ram  of  conse. 
Num  11.  26  name  of  the  other  tfednd :  and  the  spirit 

28.  4,  8  the  other  lamb  shalt  thou  offer  at  even 
Ruth  1.    4  name  of  the  other  Ruth :  and  they  dwelt 

1  Sa.    1.    2  name  of  the  other  Peninnah  :  and  Penin. 

2  Sa.    4.    2  name  of  the  other  Rechab,  the  sons  of  R. 
1  Ki.   6.  24  and  five  cubits  the  other  wing  of  the  oh. 

6.  25  the  ether  cherub  (was)  ten  cubits :  both 
6.  26  ten  cubits,  and  so  (was  it)  of  the  other  c. 
6.  27  wing  of  the  other  cherub  touched  the  ot. 

6.  34  two  leaves  of  the  other  door  (were)  folding 

7. 16  height  of  the  other  chapiter  (was)  five  c. 

7. 17  one  chapiter,  and  seven  for  the  other  ch. 

7. 18  pomegranates :  and  so  did  he  for  the  oth. 

7.  20  in  rows  round  about  upon  the  other  cha. 
Neh.    3.  11  repaired  the  other  piece,  aud  the  tower 

3.  20  earnestly  repaired  the  other  piece,  from 

1 2.  38  other  (company  of  them  that  gave)  thanks 
Dan.  8.  3  but  one  (was)  higher  than  the  other,  and 
Zech.11. 14  Then  I  ciit  asunder  mine  other  staff,  (even) 

9.  Winy,  *]33  kanaph. 

1  Ki.  6.  24  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  other  (were) 

10.^4  friend,  companion,  yi  fea. 

Exodi8.    7  they  asked  each  other  of  (their)  welfare 
Jer.  36.  16  they  were  afraid,  both  one  and  other,  and 

\\. Other,  another,  &\\os  alios. 

Matt.  4.  21  he  saw  othertwo  brethren,  James  (the  son) 

5.  39  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also 
12. 13  and  it  was  restored  whole,  like  as  the  other 

13.  8  other  fell  into  good  ground,  and  brought 
20.    3  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market  p . 

20.  6  found  others  standing  idle,  and  saith  unto 

21.  8  others  cut  down  branches  from  the  trees 
21.  36  he  sent  other  servants  more  than  the  first 

21.  41  let  out  (Ids)  vineyard  unto  other  husband. 

22.  4  sent  forth  other  servants,  saying,  Tell  them 
25.  16  traded  with  the  same,  and  made  (them)  o. 
25.  17  And  likewise,  .he  also  gained  other  two 
25.  20  came  and  brought  other  five  talents,  say. 
25.  22  have  gained  two  other  talents  besides  them 
27. 42  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save 

27.  61  other  Mary,  sitting  over  against  the  sep. 

28.  1  Mary  Magdalene  and  the  other  Mary  to 
Mark  3.    5  his  hand  was  restored  [whole  as  the  other] 

4.  8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  did  yield 
4.  36  there  were  also  with  him  other  little'  ships 

6.  15  Others  said.  That  it  is  Elias.    And  others 

7.  4  many  other  things  there  be  which  they  h. 

7.  8  [and  many  other  such  like  things  ye  do] 

8.  28  some  (say),  Elias;  and  others,  One  of  the 

11.  8  others  cut  down  branches  off  the  trees,  and 

12.  5  him  they  killed,  and  many  others;  beating 
12.  9  and  will  give  the  vineyard  unto  others 
12. 31  There  is  none  other  commandment  greater 
12.  32  is  one  God ;  and  there  is  none  other  but 
15.  31  He  saved  others;  himself  he  cannot  save 
15.  41  many  other  women  which  came  up  with 

Luke  5.  29  and  of  others  that  sat  down  with  them 

6. 10  [his  hand  was  restored  whole  as  the  other] 
6.  29  offer  also  the  other ;  and  him  that  taketh 

9.  8  of  others,  that  oneof  the  old  prophets  was 

9. 19  others  (say),  that  one  of  the  old  prophets 
20.  16  shall  give  the  vineyard  to  others.    And 

23.  35  He  saved  others  ;  let  him  save  himself,  if 
John  4.  38  other  men  laboured,  and  ye  are  entered 

6.  22  saw  that  there  was  none  other  boat  there 

6.  23  Howbeit  there  came  other  boats  from  Ti. 
7. 12  others  said,  Nay ;  but  he  deceiveth  the  p. 

7.  41  Others  said,  This  is  the  Christ.  But  some 
9.  9  others  (said),  He  is  like  him  :  (but)  he  said 
9.  16  Others  said,  How  can  a  man  that  is  a  sin. 

10. 16  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  thi3 
10.  21  Others  said,  These  are  not  the  words  of  him 
12.  29  said  that  it  thundered :  others  said.  An  a. 
15.  24  the  works  which  noneother  man  did,  they 
18.  16  Then  went  out  that  other  disciple,  which 

18.  34  Sayest  thou,  .or  did  others  tell  it  thee  of 

19.  iG  crucified  him,  and  two  other  with  him 

19.  32  brake  the  legs .  .of  the  other  which  was  e. 

20.  2  to  the  other  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 
20.  3  went  forth,  and  that  other  disciple,  and 
ao.   4  other  disciple  did  outrun  Peter,  an. I  came 


John^o.    8  Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple  wh. 
20.  25  The  other  disciples  therefore  said  untohim 

20.  30  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the  p. 

21.  2  of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  of  his  disciples 
21.    8  other  disciples  came  in  a  little  ship  ;  for 

21.  25  there  are  also  many  other  things  which  J. 
Acts    4,  12  [Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other] 

15.   2  certain  other  of  them,  should  go  up  to  J. 

1  Co.  1.  16  I  know  not  whether  I  baptized  any  other 

3.  11  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 
9.  2  H  I  be  not  an  apostle  unto  others,  yet  d. 
9. 12  If  others  be  partakers  of  (this)  power  over 
9.  27  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself 

14.  igthat(by  my  voice)I  might  teach  others  also 

14.  29  speak  two  or  three,  and  let  the  other  judge 

2  Co.  1.  13  For  we  write  none  other  things  unto  you 

8.  13  For  (I  mean)  not  that  other  men  be  eased 

11.  8  I  robbed  other  churches,  taking  wages  (of 
Phil.  3.    4  If  any  other  man  thinketh  that  he  hath 

1  Th.  2.    6  nor  (yet)  of  others,  when  we  might  have 
Heb.11.  35  others  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deli. 
Jas.     5.  12  neither  by  any  other  oath  :  butletyouryea 
Rev.    2.  24  I  will  pu'  upon  you  none  other  burden 
17. 10  and  one  is,  (and)  the  other  is  not  yet  come 

12. Belonging  to  anotlier,  a\.\6rpios  allotrios. 
Heb.  9  25  holy  place  every  year  with  blood  of  others 

13.  He,  avrSs  auios. 

Luke  14.  32  while  the  other  is  yet  a  great  way  off,  he 

li.One,  efs  heis. 

Matt2o.  21  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 

24.  40  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left 
Markio.  37  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 

15.  27  one  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 
John2o.  12  one  at  the  head,  and  the  other  at  the  feet 
Gal.    4.  22  one  by  a  bond  maid,  the  other  by  a  free  w. 

15.  That,  that  one,  eKeTvos  ekeinos. 

LukeiS.  14  justified  (rather)  than  the  other :  for  every 

IQ.Even  that,  KaKeTi/os  kakeinos. 

Matt  23.  23  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other  undone 
Luken.  42  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other  undone 

17.  Other,  different,  erepos  heteros. 

Matt.  6.  24  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other 

6.  24  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other 

12.  45  taketh  with  himself  seven  other  spirits 

15.  30  blind,  dumb,  maimed,  and  many  others 

16.  14  some,  Elias;  and  others,  Jeremias,  or  one 
Luke  3.  18  many  other  things  in  his  exhortation  pre. 

4.  43  must  preach  the  kingdom  of  God  to  other 

5.  7  partners,  which  were  in  the  other  ship,  that 

7.  41  owed  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  other 

8.  3  many  others,  which  ministered  unv.6,7. 
8.   8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  sprang  up 

10.  1  Lord  appointed  other  seventy  also,  and 

11.  16  others,  tempting  (him),  sought  of  him  a  s. 
11.  26  taketh  (to  him)  seven  other  spirits  more 
16.  13  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other 

16.  13  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other 

17.  34  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  shall  be 

17.  35,  36  [one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left] 

18.  10  the  one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  publ. 

22.  65  many  other  things  blasphemously  spake 

23.  32  there  were  also  two  others,malefactors,led 
23.  f.o  But  the  other  answeringrebuked  him,  say. 

Acts  2.  4  begau  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the 
2.  13  others  mocking  said,  These  men  are  full 
2. 40  with  many  other  words  did  he  testify  and 
4.  12  forthereis  none  other  name  underheaven 
8.  34  this?  of  himself,  or  of  some  other  man  ? 
15.  35  teaching  and  preaching,  .with  many  oth. 

17.  34  woman  named  Damaris,  and  others  with 

19.  39  if  ye  enquire  any  thing  [concerning  other] 
23.    6  one  part  were  Sadducees,  and  the  other 

27.  1  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other  prison. 
Rom.  S.  39  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  ere. 

13.  9  if  (there  be)  any  other  commandment,  it 

1  Co.  8.    4  an^  that  (there  is)  none  [other]  God  but 

10.  29  not  thine  own,  but  of  the  other :  for  why 
14. 17  givest  thanks  well,  but  the  other  is  not 

14.  21  With  (men  of),  .other  lips  will  I  speak  u. 

2  Co.  8.  8  by  occasion  of  the  frowardness  of  others 
Gal.  1. 19  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none,  save  Ja. 
Eph.  3.  5  Which  in  other  ages  was  not  made  known 
Phil.  2.    4  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others 

1  Ti.    1.  10  if  there  be  any  other  thing  that  is  contr. 

2  Ti.  2.  2  men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also 
Heb.  11.  36  others  had  trial  of  (cruel)  mockings  and 

IS. Rest,  remaining,  \0nr6s  loipos. 

Matt  25.  11  Afterward  came  also  the  other  virgins 
Mark  4.  19  lusts  of  other  things  entering  in,  choke 
Luke  8. 10  to  others  in  parables ;  that  seeing  they  m. 
i3.   9  that  they  were  righteous,  and  despised  o. 

18.  11  I  thank  thee,  that  lam  not  as  other  men 
24. 10  other  (women  that  were)  with  them,  wh. 

Acts  17.   9  taken  security  of  Jason,  and  of  the  other 

28.  9  others  also,  which  had  diseases  in  the  is. 
Rom.  1.  13  among  you  also,  even  as  among  other  Ge. 

1  Co.  9.    5  as  well  as  other  apostles,  and  (as)  the  br. 

15.  37  it  may  chance  of  wheat,  or  of  some  other 

2  Co.  1 2.  13  wherein  ye  were  inferior  to  other  churches 

13.    2  heretofore  have  sinned,  and  to  all  other 

Gal.     2.  13  other  Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him 

Eph.   2.    3  were . .  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  oth. 

4. 17  henceforth  walk  not  as  [other]  Gentiles  w. 

Phil.    1.  13  manifest  in  all  the  palace,  and  in  all  other 

4.  3  other  my  fellow  labourers,  whose  names 
1  Th.  4.  13  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  which  have  no 

5.  6  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  (do)  others 
1  Ti.    5.  -•-■  rebuke  before  all.  that  others  also  m:y  f. 


2  Pe.   3.  16  as  (they  do)  also  the  other  scriptures,  unto 

Rev.    8.  13  by  reason  of  the  othervoicesof  the  truni. 
19. One,  (Jem.)  fxta  mia. 

Matt24.  41  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left 
OTHER  side,  on,  to  or  unto  the  — 
l.Thus,  so,  here,  there,  to  koh. 

Numn.  31  as  it  were  a  day's  journey  on  the  other  s. 
2.  Beyond,  over,  other  side,  irspav  per  an. 

Matt.  8. 18  command,  to  depart  unto  the  other  side 
8.  28  when  he  was  come  to  the  other  side,  into 

14.  22  to  go  before  him  unto  the  other  side,  w. 
io\    5  his  disciples  were  come  to  the  other  side- 
Mark  4.  35  saith.  .Let  us  pass  over  unto  the  other  s. 

5.    1  they  came  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the 

5.  21  passed  over,  .unto  the  other  side,  much 

6.  45  to  go  to  the  other  side  before  uuto  Beth. 
8.  13  left  them,  and.. departed  to  the  other  s. 

Luke  8.  22  Let  us  go  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the 
John  6.  22  people  which  stood  on  the  other  side  of 
6.  25- when  they  had  found  him  on  the  other  s. 
OTHER,  the  — 

1.  These,  n^x  elleh. 

1  Ki.20.  29  pitched  one  over  against  the  other  seven 
Eze.    9.    5  to  the  others  he  said  in  mine  hearing 

2.  This,  {f em.)  nxi  zoth. 

1  Ki.  3.  23  the  other  saith,  Nay;  but  thy  son  (is)  the 

3.  This,  (mas.)  ni  zeh. 

Exodi4.  20  so  that  the  one  came  not  near  the  other 
OTHER,  each — 
Each  other,  a\\r)\wv  allelon. 

Phil.   2.    3  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  thems. 

2  Th.  1.    3  charity  of  every  one.  .toward  each  other 
OTHER  man  — 

Other,  ah\os  alios. 

John  4.  38  other  meu  laboured,  and  ye  are  entered 

15.  24 done,  .the  works  which  none  other  man 
2  Co.  8. 13  not  that  other  men  be  eased,  and  ye  bu. 
Phil.   3.    4  If  any  other  man  thinketh  that  he  hath 

OTHER  men's  — 

Belonging  to  another,  a\\6rptos  allotrios. 

2  Co.io.  15  without(our)measure,(thatis),ofotherm. 

1  Ti.    5.  22  neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins:  k. 
OTHER  than  — 

Outside,  £kt6$  ektos. 

Acts  26.  22  none  other  things  than  those  which  the 
OTHER  way,  some  — 
From  some  other  place,  aWaxoOev  allachothen. 

Johnio.    1  climbeth  up  some  other  way,  the  same  is 
OTHERWISE,  (if)  — 
l.Or,  otherwise,  ix  0. 

2  Sa.  18. 13  Otherwise  I  should  have  wrought  falseh. 

2.  Without,  k1??  belo. 

1  Ch.30. 18  yet  did  they  eat  the  passover  otherwise 

3.  And,  1  ve. 

1  Ki.  i.  21  Otherwise  itshall  come  to  pass,  whenmy 
±. Another,  oilier,  &h\os  alios. 

Gal.    5.  10  that  ye  will  be  none  otherwise  minded 
^.Otherwise,  &\\ais  alios. 

1  Ti.  5.  25  and  they  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid 

Q.But  if  not,  «i  Be  ju?)7e  ei  de  mege. 

Matt.  6.    1  otherwise  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  Fat. 
Luke  5.  36  if  otherwise,  then  both  the  new  niaketh 

2  Co.11. 16  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me,  that 

7. For  then,  otherwise,  iirel  epei. 

Rom  11.  6  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.  But  if 
11.  6  [grace;  otherwise  work  is  no  more  work  | 
11.  E2  but.  .otherwise  thou  also  shalt  be  cut  off 

Heb.   9. 17  otherwise  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while 

8.  Otherwise,  differently,  eTe'pa>s  heteros. 

Phil. 3.  15  if  in  any  thing  ye  beotherwise  minded,  God 
OTH'-XI,  'Jny  J  ah  is  force. 

A  son  of  Shemaiah,  gatekeeper  of  the  tabernacle  iu  the 
days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.   7  The  sons  of  Shemaiah ;  0.,  and  Rephael 
OTH-NI'-EL,  hwiny  God  is  force. 
\.  A  Son  of  Kenaz,'  yoimger  brother  of  Caleb,  who,  after 
death  of  Joshua,  became  judge  for  forty  years,  from 
U94-I354  B.C. 

Josh. 15. 17  0.  the  sou  of  Kenez,  thebrother  of  Caleb 

Judg.  1. 13  O.  the  son  of  Kenaz,  Caleb's  younger  bro 
3.    9  who  delivered  them,  (even)  O.  the  son  of 

3.  11  land  had  rest  forty  years.  And  0.  the  son 
1  Ch.  4. 13 Andthesonsof Kenaz;0.,andScraiah:and 

4.  13  and  the  sons  of  0.;  Hathah 
•1.  Perhaps  the  same  as  the  preceding. 

1  Ch.27.  15  (was)Heldai  the  Netophathite,  of  0.:  and 

OUCHES  — 

Settings,  textures,  brocades,  nis^?  mishbetsoth. 
ExcuhS.  11  shalt  make  them  to  be  set  in  ouches  ofg. 
28. 13  And  thou  shalt  make  onches  (of)  gold 
28.  14  fasten  the  wreathen  chains  to  the  ouches 
28.  25  thou  shalt  fasten  in  the  two  onches,  aud 
39.    6  onyx  stones  inclosed  in  ouches  of  gold 
39.  13  inclosed  in  ouches  of  gold  in  their  inclos. 
39.  16  they  made  two  ouches  (of)  gold,  and  two 
39.  t8  they  fastened  in  the  two  ouches,  and  put 


OUGHT 


725 


OUT 


OUGHT,   AUGHT  — 

1.-4  thing,  matter,  jg*  dabar. 

Exod.  5.  11  not  ought  of  your  work  shall  be  diminis. 
Josh.21. 45  There  tailed  uot  ought  of  auy  good  thing 

'2. Any  thing,  roiND  ^3  hoi  meumah. 

Gen.  39.    6  he  knew  not  ought  he  had,  save  the  bread 

1  Sa.12.    4  hast  thou  taken  ought  of  any  man's  haud 

12.  5  that  ye  liave  not  found  ought  in  my  hand 
25.    7  neither  was  there  ought  missing  unto 

2  Sa.   3.  35  if  I  taste  bread,  or  ought  else,  till  the 

3.  Thine/  sold,  ware,  i|P9  mimkar. 

Lev.  25. 14  if  thou  sell  ought  unto  thy  neighbour,  or 
A.Xot  one  thing,  ouSeV  ouden. 

Mark  7.  12  suffer  him  no  more  to  do  ought  for  his 

5.Any  thing,  tis  tis. 

Matt.  5.  23  that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against  thee 
21.   3  if  any  (man)  say  ought  unto  you,  ye  shall 
Markn.  25  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  any ;  that 
Acts    4.  32  neither  said  any  (of  them)  that  ought  of 
28. 19  that  I  had  ought  to  accuse  my  nation  of 
Phm.      18  oweth  (thee)  ought,  put  that  on  mine  aec. 

6. It  behoveth,  5e*  del. 

Matt  23.  23  these  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to 

25.  27  Thou  oughtest  therefore  to  have  put  my 

Mark  13. 14  standing  where  it  ought  not,  let  him  that 

Luke  1 1.  42  these  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to 

12. 12  in  the  same  hour  what  ye  ought  to  say 

13. 14  are  six  days  in  which  men  ought  to  work 

13.  16  ought  not  this  woman,  being  a  daughter 

18.  1  men  ought  always  (to)  pray,  and  not  to  f. 
24.  26  Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  these 

John  4.  20  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to  worship 

Acts    5.  29  said,  AVe  ought  to  obey  G-od  rather  than  m. 

10.   6  [shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do] 

19.  36  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  r. 

20.  35  how.  .ye  ought  to  support  the  weak,  and 

24.  19  Who  ought  to  have  been  here  before  thee 
25. 10  judgment  seat,  where  I  ought  to  be  judg. 

25.  24  crying  that  he  ought  uot  to  live  any  long. 

26.  9  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the 
Horn.  8.  26  know  not  what  we  should  pray,  .as  we  o. 

12.   3  not  to  think,  .more  highly  than  he  ought 

1  Co.  8.    2  kneweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know 

2  Co.  2.   3  sorrow  from  them  of  whom  I  ought  to  re. 
Eph.  6.  20  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ought  to  speak 
Col.     4.    4  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought  to  speak 

4.  6  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every 

1  Th.  4.    1  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  God,  (so) 

2  Th.  3.    7  yourselves  know  how  ye  ought  to  follow 

1  Ti.   3.  15  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself  in  the  h. 

5. 13  speaking  thiugs  which  they  ought  not 
Titus  1.  11  teaching  things  which  they  ought  not,  for 
Heb.   2.    1  we  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed 

2  Pe.  3. 11  what  manner  (of  persons)  ought  ye  to  be 

7.  To  owe,  be  obliged,  indebted,  6<pei\io  opheilo. 
J0IUI13.  14  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet 

19.  7  he  ought  to  die,  because  he  made  himself 
Acts  17. 29  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead 
J£om  15.    1  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak 

1  Co.  1 1.    7  a  man  indeed  ought  not  to  cover  (his)  he. 

11. 10  ought  the  woman  to  have  power  on  (her) 

2  C0.12. 11 1  ought  to  have  been  commended  of  you 

12. 14  the  children  ought  not  to  lay  up  for  the 
Eph.   5.  28  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their 
Heb.   5.   3  heought,asforthepeople,soalsoforhim. 

5.  12  when  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  teachers 
1  Jo.   2.   6  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as  he 

3.  16  we  ought  to  lay  down  (our)  lives  for  the 
4. 11  Beloved,  .we  ought  also  to  love  one  anot. 

3  John     8  We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such,  that 

8.  It  needs,  it  is  necessary,  xp"h  chre. 

Jas.     3. 10  brethren,  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be 
OUR,  OURS  — 
l.Hand,  X  yud- 

Deut  zi.    7  say,  Our  hands  have  not  shed  this  blood 

2. For  our  sake,  Si  7)fias  di  hemas. 

1  Co.  9. 10  altogether  for  our  sakes?  For  our  sakes 
-j.Our  own,  jjfierepos  hemeteros. 

Acts  2.  11  we  do  hear  them  speak  in  our  tongues  the 
24.  6  would  have  judged  according  to  our  law 
26.   5  the  most  straitest  sect  of  our  religion 

Rom  1 5.    4  aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning 

2  Ti.  4.  15  for  he  hath  greatly  withstood  our  words 
Titus  3.  14  letours  also  learn  tomaiutain  good  words 
1  Jo.    1.    3  our  fellowship  (is)  with  the  Father,  and  w. 

2.   2  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  (the  sins  of) 

4.  To  its,  7}fxiu  hemin. 

Lukei;.    5  said  unto  the  Lord,  Increase  0.  Ac.  19. 37. 
5.0/  us,  our,  7]fi£>v  hemon. 

Matt.  6.    9  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  Hallow. 

6. 11  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread 

6. 12  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  d. 
8.  17  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare 

20.  33  They  say.  .Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be  o. 
21. 42  Lord  s  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our 
23. 30  we  had  been  in  the  days  of  our  fathers 

-  25.    8  Give  us  of  your  oil;  forourlampsaregone 

27. 25  His  blood  (be)  on  us,  and  on  our  children 

Mark  9.  [40];  n.  10;  12.  7,  11,  29;  Luke  1.  55,  71,  72, 

73'  [74lt  75*  78.  79'»  7-  5;  "■  [2],  3,  4;  13.  26;  20.  14;  24. 
=20,  32;  John  3.  11;  4.  12,  20;  6.  31 ;  7.  51;  8.  39,  53;  9.  20; 
11.  11,  48 ;  12.  38;  [19.  7].  Acts  2.  8,  39;  3.  13,  25;  5.  30; 
7.  2,  11,  12,  15,  19,  [19],  38,  39,  44,  45.  45;  13-  17;  14-  [17]; 
75.  10,  26,  26,  [36];  16.  20;  17.  20;  10.  [25I;  20.  21;  22.  14; 
24.  [7J;  z6.  7;  27.   10:  28.  [25];  Rom.  1.  3,  7;  3.  5;  4.  1, 


12,  24,  25,  25;  5.  1,  5,  11,  21;  6.  6,  [11],  23;  7.  5,25:8.  16, 
23.  26»  39;  9-  10;  10.  16;  13.  n;  15.  6;  ic.  [1],  9,  iS,  20,24; 
1  CO.  1.  2,  2,  3,  7,  8,  9,  10;  2.  7 ;  5.  [4,  4],  7 ;  6.  11 ;  9.  1 ; 
10.  1,  6,  11 ;  12.  23,  24;  15.  3,  14,  31,  57;  2  Co.  1.  2,  3,  4, 
5.  7>  S,  [11],  12,  12,  14,  iS,  22;  3.  2,  5;  4.  3,  6,  10,  11^  16, 
17;  5-  1.  2»  [12J;  6.  11,  11;  7.  4,  5,  [12,  14J;  8.  9,22,  23,  24; 

9.  3;  10.  4,  8,  15;  11.  [31];  Gal.  1.  3>  4,  4;  2.  4;  3.  24;  6. 

14,  iS;  Eph.  1.  2,  3,  14,  i7;  2.  3,  14;  3.  ii,  [i4];  5.  2o;  6. 

Pi'-  24-h?  r  Xi  2  ;  3*  2°'  2I ;  4*  2°>  [23j;  CuL  x-  2'  3.  7  J  3- 
UJ,  i  in.  i.  Li  J,  2,  3,  3,  5;  2.  i,  2,  3,  4,  g,  10,  19,  20;  3.  2, 

Mi  5>  7>  9>  «i  ii»  ">  13.  13;  5-  9»  23,  28;  2  Th.  1.  1,  f2j,  8, 

10,  11,  12,  12;  2.  i,  1,  14,  i4j  i5>  16,  16;  3.  [6,  12],  14,  18; 
ill.  1.  1,  i,  [2],  12,  14;  2.  3;  6.  3,  14;  2  Ti.  1.  2,  8,  9,  10; 
litus  1.  3,  4;  2.  [10],  13;  3.  4,  6;  Phm.  1,  2,  3,  25  ;  Heb. 
i-  [3];  3-  1;  4-  15;  7-  M'>  12.  9,  29;  13.  20;  Jas.  2.  i,  21 ; 
3.  6;  1  Pe.  1.  3;  2.  24;  2  Pe.  1.  [ij,  2,  8,  n,  14,  16;  3.  15, 

15,  18;  1  Jo.  11,  1,  9;  2.  2;  3.  [5],  19,  20,  [21];  4.  10;  5. 
4;  2  Jo.  [12];  3  Jo.  12;  Jude4,  4,  17,  21,  25;  Rev.  1.  5; 

5.  [10];  6.  10;  7.  3,  [io],  12;  11. [8],  15;  12.  io,  10,  10;  19.  1, 
5;  22.  [21]. 

6.  With  us,  fxsd'    7)/j.wv  mcth  h&nOn. 

1  Jo.   4.  17  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we 
OUR  company  — 
UJ  us,  our,  7}/j.&i/  hemdn. 

Luke24. 22  certain  women  also  of  our  company  made 
OUR  own  — 
1.0/  selves,  eavrcou  hemiton. 

1  Th.  2.   8  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto 
I.Ones  own,  proper,  TStos  idios. 

Acts   3. 12  byour  ownpowerorholinesswe  had  made 

1  Co.  4. 12  labour,  working  with  our  own  hands :  be. 
OURSELVES  — 

1.  We,  we  ourselves,  ^nis  anachnu. 

Xuni32. 17  we  ourselves  will  go  ready  armed  before 
2. Of  selves,  havT&v  heauton. 

Acts  23.  14  have  bound  ourselves  under  a  great  curse 
Rom.  8.  23  even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves 

1  Co. 11.  31  if  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should  not 

2  Co.    1.    9  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves 

1.  9  we  should  not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in 

3.  1  Do  we  begiu  again  to  commend  ourselves 

3.  5  sufficient  of  ouiselvesto  think,  .[ourselv.] 

4.  2  commending  ourselves  to  every,  conscien. 
4.  5  we  preach  riot  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus 
4.  5  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus'  sa. 
5. 12  wecommendnotourselvesagain  unto  you 

6.  4  approving  ourselves  as  the  ministers  of  G. 

7.  1  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from,  .filthiness 

10.  12  compare  ourselves  with  some  that  conim. 

10. 14  For  we  stretch  not  ourselves  beyond  (our 
2  Th.  3.  9  to  make  ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you 
Heb  10.  25  Mot  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves 

15.    1  ought  to  bear,  .and  not  to  please  ourselv. 

1  Jo.   1.   8  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not 
OUT,  (from)  — 

I. Outside,  without,  yn  chuts. 

Gen.  24.  29  Laban  ran  out  unto  theman,  unto  the  w. 
39.  12,  15  left  hisgarment.  .fled,  audgothimout 
39.  18  he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled  out 

Xum  12.  14  be  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven  days 

12. 15  was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven  days 

2  Sa.  13.  17  Put  now  this  (woman)  out  from  me,  and  b. 

13. 18  his  servant  brought  her  out,  and  bolted 
[See  also  Bear,  beat,  beaten,  belch,  blot.] 

2.  Without,  outside,  e|&)  exo. 

Matt.  5.  13  to  be  cast  out,  and  to  be  trodden  under 
26.  75  And  Peter,  .went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 

Marki4-  68  went  out  into  the  porch ;  and  the  cock  c 

Lukei3-  28  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  you.,  th.  8.54. 
14.  35  nor.  .for  the  dunghill;  (but)  men  cast  it  out 
22. 62  And  Peter  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 
24.  50  he  led  them  [out]  as  far  as  to  Bethany;  and 

John  6.  37  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out 
9.  34  dost  thou  teach  us?  And  they  cast  him  out 

9.  35  Jesus  heard  that  they  had  cast  him  out;  and 
12.  31  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out 

Acts  16.  30  brought  them  out,  and  said,  Sirs,  what  m. 
1  Jo.  4. 18  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear:  because  fear 
Rev.    3.  12  he  shall  go  no  more  out :  and  I  will  write 

11.  2  court  which  is  without,  .temple  leave  [out] 
OUT  of  — 

1.  Unto,  *?x  el. 

Job     5.   5  taketh  it  even  out  of  the  thorns,  and  the 
2. As  to,  nx  eth. 

Gen.  37.  23  they  stripped  Joseph  out  of  his  coat,  (his) 

3.  From  within,  |'5P  wiibben. 

Niimi6.  37  take  up  the  censers  out  of  the  burning 
■4.  Without,  N^>3  belo. 

Lev.  15.  25  many  days  outof .  .time  of  her  separation 
Psa.  17.    1  prayer,  (that goeth)notoutoffeignedlips 

o.Outside,  without,  }'*n  chuts. 

Lev.  10.   4  from  before  the  sanctuary  out  of  the  camp 

10.  5  carried  them  in  their  coats  out  of  the  ca. 
14.  3  the  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp 
14. 45  he  shall  carry  (them)  forth  outof  the  city 
14.  53  he  shall  let  go  the  living  bird  out  of  the 
17.  3  What  man.  .that  killeth  (it)  out  of  the  c. 
24.  23  bring  forth  him  that  had  cursed  out  of  the 

1  Ki.  si.  13  they  earned  him  forth  out  of  the  city,  and 

2  Ch.33.  15  And  he  took,  .and  cast  (them)  out  of  the 
Xeh.  13.   8  cast,  .household  stuff  ..outof  the  chamber 

6.  From,  out  of,  jp  min. 

Gen.    2.   9  out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lord  God  to 


Ezra   5.  14  out  of  the  temple  that  (was)  in  Jerusalem 
5. 14  king  take  out  of  the  temple  of  Babylon 
6.    4  expences  be  given  out  of  the  king's  house 
6.    5  out  of  the  temple  which  (is)  at  Jerusalem 

Dan.    3.  15  that  shall  deliver  you  out  of  my  hauds 

3.  17  will  deliver  (us)  out  of  thine  hand,  0  kinc 
5.  2  out  of  the  temple  which  (was)  in  Jerusa". 
5.    3  vessels  that  were  taken  outof  the  temple 

5.  13  whom  the  king  my  father  brought  out  of 

6.  23  they  should  take  Daniel  up  out  of  the  den 

6.  23  Daniel  was  taken  up  out  of  the  den,  and 
7. 17  kings,  (which)  shall  arise  out  of  the  earth 

7. From  on,  73$?  meal. 

Exod23.  13  neither  let  it  be  heard  out  of  thy  mouth 
Deut.  9.  17  cast  them  outof  my  two  hands,  and  brake 
2  Ch.33.    8  out  of  the  land  which  I  have  appointed 

S.Heart,  midst,  centre,  2-$  qereb. 

Numi4.  44  and  Moses,  departed  not  out  of  the  camp 
Psa.  74.  11  thy  right  hand?  pluck  (it)  out  of  thy  bos. 

9.0;^  of  the  midst  of,  T)'*rq  mittok. 

Exod33.  11  Joshua,  .departed  not  out  of  the  tabern. 

Prov.  5.  15  and  running  waters  out  of  thineown  well 

Jer.  44.    7  child  and  suckling  out  of  Judah,  to  leave 
10.  From,  au-ay  from,  awo  apo. 

Matt.  3.  16  wentupstraightwayoutofthe  water:  and 

7.  4  Let  me  pull  out  the  mote  [out  of]  thine  eye 

8.  34  that  he  would  depart  out  of  their  coasts 

12.  43  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man 

13.  1  The  same  day  went  Jesus  [out  of]  the  ho. 

14.  13  they  followed  him  on  foot  out  of  the  cities 

14.  29  when  Peter  was  come  down  out  of  the  ship 

15.  22  a  woman  of  Canaan  came  outof  thesame 
17.  18  he  departed  out  of  him:  and  the  child  was 
24.  27  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east,  and 

Mark  1.  10  coming  up  [out  of]  the  water,  he  saw  the 
5. 17  to  pray  him  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts 

6.  33  ran  a  foot  thither  outof  all  cities,  and  out 

7.  15  the  things  which  come  [out  of]  him,  those 

10.  46  he  went  [out  of]  Jericho  with  his  disciples 

15.  21  who  passed  by,  coming  out  of  the  country 

16.  9  [out  of  whom  he  had  cast  seven  devils] 
Luke  4.  35  he  came  out  of  him,  and  hurt  him  not 

4.  41  And  devils  also  came  out  of  many,  crying 

5.  2  the  fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them,  and 

5.  36  the  piece  that  was  (taken)  out  of  the  new 

6.  r7  of  people  out  of  all  Judea  and  Jerusalem 

8.  2  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went  seven  dev. 
8. 12  taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts 
8.  29  the  unclean  spirit  to  come  outof  theman 
8.  33  Then  went  the  devils  out  of  the  man,  and 
8.  35,  38  out  of  whom  the  devils  were  departed 

8.  46  for  I  perceive  thatvirtueis  goneoutof  me 

9.  5  when  ye  go  out  of  that  city,  shake  off  the 

11.  24  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 

12.  54  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  west 

17.  29  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom 
23.  26  aCyrenian,  coming  out  of  the  country,  and 

John  7. 42  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  where  Da. 
Acts    1.    9  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight 
2.   5  men,  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven 
13. 50  and  expelled  them  out  of  their  coasts 

16.  18  and  said.. I  command  thee. .to  come  out  of 

17.  2  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures 
19.  12  So  that.,  the  evil  spirits  went  [out  of]  them 
28.  21  letters  out  of  Judea  concerning  thee 

28.  23  out  of  the  lawof  Moses,  and.,  the  prophets 

2  Co.  1. 16  to  come  again  out  of  Macedonia  unto  you 

Heb.  11.  34  outof  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed 

Rev.  16.  17  a  great  voice  [out  of]  the  temple  of,  22.  10 

ll.Through,  Std  (gen.)  dia,  llatt.  4.  4. 

\2.0utof,  4k  irekex. 

Matt.  2.   6  out  of  thee  shall  come  a  Governor,  that 
2.  15  saying,  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  my  son 

7.  5  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 

7.  5  cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye 

8.  28  coming  out  of  the  tombs,  exceeding  fierce 

12.  34  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  m. 
12. 35  out  of  the  good  treasure,  .out  of  the  evil 

13.  41  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  aU 
13.  52  bringeth  forth  outof  his  treasure  (things) 
15. 11  that  which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth,  tins 

15. 18  those  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  m. 

15. 19  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts 
17.  5  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  which  said,  This 
21.  16  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
24. 17  come,  .to  take  any  thing  out  of  his  house 
27.  53  And  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his 

Mark  1.  25,  [26],  29;  5.  2,  2,  [8],  30;  6.  54 ;  7.  20,  21, 
[26],  29;  9.  7,  [25];  13.  i,  15;  15.  46;  Luke  1.  74;  2.4;  4. 
22,  [35],  [38];  5.  3,  17;  6.  42,  45,  45;  8.  27;  9.35;  11.  54; 
17.  24;  19.  22 ;  John  1.  46;  2.  15  ;  4.  30,  47,  54 ;  7.  38,  41, 
52;  8.  59;  10.  28,29,  39;  11.  55;  12.  17,  34;  13.  1;  15.  19; 
17.  6,  15 ;  20.  2;  Acts  7.  3,  4,  10,  40;  8.  39;  12.  11,  17 ; 
13-  i7»t42];  i5-  14;  16.  40;  19.  16,  33;  22.  18;  24.  [7]; 
tj.  29,  30,  30;  28.  [3];  Rom.  2.  18;  11.  24,  26;  13.  11; 

1  Co.  s-  10;  2  Co.  2.  4;  4.  6;  8.  11;  Eph.  4.  29;  Col.  2. 
14 ;  3.  8 ;  2  Tli.  2.  7;  1  Ti.  1.  5 ;  2  Ti.  2.  22,  26 ;  3.  11 ;  4. 
17;  Heb.  3.  16;  7.  5,  14;  8.  9;  Jas.  3.  10,  13;  1  Pe.  2.  9; 

2  Pe.  2.9;  3.  5  ;  3  Jo.  10 ;  J  ude  5,  23  ;  Rev.  1.  16 ;  2.  5 ; 
3.  5,  12,  16 ;  4.  5 ;  5.  7,  9 ;  6.  14 ;  7.  [14];  S.  4 ;  9.  2,  3,  17, 
iS;  10.  10;  11.  5,  7;  12.  15,  16;  13.  1,  11;  14.  [15],  17,  20; 
15.  [6];  16.  [1],  [7];  3.  13,  13,  21;  17.  8  ;  iS.  4;  19.  [5],  15, 
21 ;  20.  7,  9,  12 ;  21.  2,  3,  10 ;  22.  1,  [19]. 

13. Outside,  without,  4ktos  eltos. 

2  Co.  12.   2,  3  [outof]  the  body,  I  cannot  tell,  God  k. 

.  l.Withoulj  outside,  e£w  exo. 

Matt 21. 17  wentoul  of  the  city  into  Bethany ;  and  he 


OUT 


726 


OVERCOME 


Matt  21.  39  cast  (liim)  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew 

Mark  5.  10  that  he  would  not  send  them  away  out  of 

8.  23  led  Mm  out  of  the  town  ;  and  when  he  had 

11.  19  when  even  was  come,  he  went  out  of  the 

12.  8  killed.. and  cast  (him)out  of  the  vineyard 
Luke  4.  29  thrust  him  out  of  the  city,  and  led  him 

13.  33  it  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of 

20.  15  they  cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  k. 
Acts    4.  15  commanded  them  to  go  aside  out  of  the 

7.  58  And  cast  (him)  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned 

14.  19  drew  (him)  out  of  the  city,  supposing  he 
16.  13  we  went  out  of  the  city  by  a  river  side 

21.  5  till  (we  were)  out  of  the  city  :  and  we  kn. 
21.  30  drew  him  out  of  the  temple  :  and  forew. 

15.  From  the  side  of,  from,  irapd  {gen.)  para, 

Luke  6.  19  for  there  went  virtue  out  of  him,  and  he. 
[See  also  Come,  course,  hand,  joint,  measure,  not,  season, 
sleep,  synagogue,  uttered,  way.] 

OUT,  to  seek  — 

To  search,  investigate,  ipn  chaqar,  3. 

Eccl.  12.   g  sought  out,  (and)  set  in  order  many  pro. 

OUTCAST  — 

l.To  be  driven  away  or  down,  iin"n  dachah,  2. 

Psa.147.    2  he  gathereth  together  the  outcasts  of  Is. 

Isa.   11. 12  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
56.   8  God  which  gathereth  the  outcasts  of  Israel 

2.  To  be  driven  or  forced  away,  rn3  nadach,  2. 
Isa.   16.    3  hide  the  outcasts;  bewray  not  him  that 

16.  4  Let  mine  outcasts  dwell  with  thee,  Moab 
27. 13  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and 

Jer.  30.  17  they  called  thee  an  outcast,  (sayiug,)This 
49.  36  whither  the  outcasts  of  Elam  shall  not 

OUTER  or  UTTER  — 

1. Outward,  without,  outer,  pM'n  chitson. 

Eze.  10.  5  sound.  .washeard(even)totheoutercourt 
40.  31  arches  thereof  (were)  toward  the  outer  c. 
40.  37  posts  thereof(were)toward  the  outer  court 
42.  1  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court 
42.  3  the  pavement  which  (was)  for  the  outer  c. 
42.  7  the  outer  court  on  the  fore  part  of  the 
42.  8  the  chambers  that  (were)  in  the  outer  c. 
42.  9  one  goeth  into  them  from  the  outer  court 
42.  14  shall  theynotgo.  .into  theoutercourt, but 
44.  19  the  outer  court,  (even)  into  the  outer  cou. 
46.  20  bear  (them)  not  out  into  the  outer  court 
46.  21  he  brought  me  forth  iuto  the  outer  court 

2.0uter,  exterior,  i^wrepos  exoteros. 

Matt.  8.  12  But.. shall  be  cast  out  into  outer  darkness 
22.  13  cast(him)intoouterdarkness;  there  shall 
25.  30  cast  ye  the .  .servant  into  outer  darkness 
(OUTGO,  to  — 

To  come  or  go  before,  wpo€pxo/j.at  proerchomai. 
Mark  6.  33  [outwent  them,  and  came  together  unto] 

OUTGOING:  — 

1.  Outgoing,  place  of  outgoing,  N?in  motsa, 

Psa.  65.    8  thou  makest  the  outgoings  of  the  morn. 

^.Outgoings,  niKyin  totsaoth. 

Josh  17.    9  and  the  outgoings  of  it  were  at  the  sea 

17.  18  the  outgoings  of  it  shall  be  thine  :  for  thou 

18.  19  the  outgoings  of  the  border  were  at  the 

19.  14  the  outgoings  thereof  are  in  the  valley  of 
19.  22  outgoings  of  their  border  were  at  Jordan 
19.  29  outgoings  thereof  are  at  the  sea  from  the 
19.  33  and.  the  outgoings  thereof  were  at  Jordan 

OUTLANDISH  — 

Strange,  unknown  person,  *~\1}  nokri. 

Neh.  13.  36  nevertheless  even  him  did  outlandish  w. 
OUTLIVE,  OVERLIVE,  to  — 
To  prolong  days  after,  "inxww'niiarakyamim  ach.  5. 

Josh  24.  31  that  overlived  Joshua,  and  which  had 

Judg.  2.   7  all  the  days  of  the  elders  that  outlived  J. 
OUTMOST  (coast)  — 
l.Ou/ward,  ps'p  qitson. 

Exod26. 10  edge  of  the  one  curtain  (that  is)  outmost 
Z.End,  extremity,  rrxpr  qatseh. 

NU11134.   3  border  shall  be  the  outmost  coast  of  the 
OUTRAGEOUS  — 
An  overflowing,  flood,  *\i2V  sheteph. 

Prov  27.   4  Wrath  (is)  cruel,  and  anger  (is)  outrageo. 
OUTRUN,  to  — 
To  run  before  quickly,  irporp^x^  rdx^ov  protrecho. 

John2o.    4  other  disciple  did  outrun  Peter,  and  came 
OUTSIDE  — 

1.  Outside,  without,  pn  chuts. 

1  Ki.   7.    9  (so)  on  the  outside  toward  the  great  court 
Eze.  40.    5  behold  a  wall  on  the  outside  of  the  house 

2.  find,  extremity,  ny£  qatseh. 

Judg.  7. 11  unto  the  outsfde  of  the  armed  men  that 
7.  17  when  I  come  to  the  outside  of  the  camp 
7. 19  came  unto  the  outside  of  the  camp  in  the 

3.  Outside,  without,  4kt6s  ektos. 

Matt  23.  26  that  the  outside  of  them  may  be  clean  also 
A.  From  without,  externally,  t£a?0ef  exothen. 

M:itt23.  25  for  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup 

Luke  1 1.  39  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the 
OUTSTRETCHED  — 
To  stretch  out,  nai  natch. 

Deut26.   8  a  mighty  hand,  and  with  an  outstretched 


Jer.  21.    5  flght  agaiust  you  with  an  outstretched  h. 
27.    5  have  made  the  earth . .  by  my  outstretched 
OUTWARD  — 
1. Outside,  without,  pin  chuts. 

Num3s.  4  and  outward  a  thousand  cubits  round  ;;b. 
2. Outward,  without,  ps'n  chitson. 

1  Ch  26.  29  for  the  outward  business  over  Israel,  for 
Neh.  11.  16  oversight  of  the  outward  business  of  the 
Esth.  6.  4  Now  Haman  was  come  into  the  outward 
Eze.  40. 17  Then  brought  he  me  into  the  outward  co. 

40.  20  gate  of  the  outward  court  that  looked  to. 
44.    1  way  of  the  gate  of  the  outward  sanctuary 

3. Outside,  without,  e£a>  exo. 

2  Co.  4.  16  but  through  our  outward  man  perish,  yet 

4.  From  without,  exterior,  e£a>0ev  exothen. 

Matt23.  27  which  indeed  appear  beautiful  outward 

1  Pe.  3.    3  Whose  adorning  let  it  not  be  that  outward 

5.  Manifestly,  iu  tw  (pavepij}  en  to  phanero. 

Rom.  2.  28  circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the  fle. 
OUTWARD  appearance — [See  Appearance]. 
OUTWARDLY  — 
1. Manifestly,  iv  ra>  (pavepep  en  to  phanero. 

Rom.  2.  28  For  he  is  not  a  Jew  whichis  one  outwardly 
2.  From  without,  e|a>0€i/  exothen. 

Matt  23. 28  Eveu  so  ye  also  outwardly  appear  right. 
OVEN  — 
1.  Furnace j  oven,  1135  tannur. 

Exod.  8.    3  into  thine  ovens,  and  iuto  thy  kneading 

Lev.    2.    4  bring  an  oblation,  .baken  in  the  oven,  (it 
7.    9  meat  offering  that  is  baken  in  the  oven 
11.  35  oven,  or  ranges  for  pots,  they  shall  be  b. 

26.  26  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one  oven 
Psa.  21.  9  Thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in 
Lam.  5.  10  Our  skin  was  black  like  an  oven  because 
Hos.  7.    4  adulterers,  as  an  oven  heated  by  the  baker 

7.    6  have  made  ready  their  heart  like  an  oven 

7.    7  They  are  all  hot  as  an  oven,  and  have  de. 

Mai.   4.    1  daycomeththatshallbumasanovenjand 

2. Oven,  furnace,  icAlfiavos  klibanos. 

Matt.  6.  30  and  to  morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  (shall 
Lukei2.  28  and  to  n\orrow  is  cast  into  the  oven ;  how 

OVER  — 

1.  Unto,  *?N  el. 

Josh.  8.  33  half  of  them  over  against  mount  Gerizim 

2.  Through,  over,  behind,  "IJJ3  bead. 

2  Sa.  20.  21  head  shall  be  throwu  to  thee  over  the  w. 

3.  More,  farther,  "irrr  yother. 

Eccl.  7.  16  neither  make  thyself  over  wise :  why  sh. 

4. From,  than,  above,  fp  min. 

1  Sa.  17.  50  So  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine 

5. Above,  over,  rhyzhn,  nj?yp^,  *?yp  maal,  lemalah. 
Num.  4.   6  shall  spread'dve'r  (it)  a  cloth  wholly  of 
1  Ch.29.    3  over  and  above  all  that  I  have  prepared 
Ezra.  9.    6  our  iniquities  are  increased  over  (our)  h, 

6. At  the  front,  before,  *uj?  leneged. 

Neh.  11.  22  singers  (were)  over  the  business  of  the  h. 
7. Over,  beyond,  ~oy  eber. 

Deut^o.  13  Who  shall  go  over  the  sea  for  us,  and  b. 
8. On,  upon,  over,  above,  7JJ  al. 

Gen.  8.  1  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth 
Ezra  4.  20  There  have  been  mighty  kings  also  over 
Dan.  2.  48  ruler  over,  .and  chief  ofthegovernorsover 
2.  49  over  the  affairs  of  the  province  of  Babylon 
3. 12  Jews  whom  thou  hast  set  over  the  affairs 
4.  16  changed,  .and  let  seven  times  pass  over 
4.  17  and  setteth  up  over  it  the  basest  of  men 
4.  23  let  it  be  wet.  .till  seven  times  pass  over 

4.  25,  32  and  seven  times  shall  pass  over  thee 

5.  21  he  appointethover  it  whomsoever  be  will 

6.  1  It  pleased  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom 
6.    3  thought  to  set  him  over  the  whole  realm 

9. Above,  over,  nVjj  ella. 

Dan.   6.    2  over  these  three  presidents,  of  whom  D. 

10.  Out  of,  he  eh. 

Rev.  15.  2  victory  over  the  beast,  and  over  his  image 
15.  2  [over  his  mark,  (and)  over  the  number  of] 
11. Zn,  among,  even. 

Acts  20.  28  to  all  the  flock  over  the  which  the  Holy  G. 
12. Above,  upon,  over,  iirduw  epano. 

Matt.  2.   9  till  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the  yo. 

27.  37  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation  writ. 
Luke  4.  39  stood  over  her,  and  rebuked  the  fever;  and 

11,  44  the  men  that  walk  over  (them)  are  not  a. 
19.  17  said  unto  him.  .have  thou  authority  over 
19.  19  said  likewise  to  him,  Be  thou  also  overlive 

13.0ft,  upon,  over,  itrl  (gen.)  epi. 

Matt 24.  45  whom  his  lord  hath  made  ruler  over  his 

25.  21,  23  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  thi. 

Luke  1 2.  42  whom  (his)  lord  shall  make  ruler  over  his 

Acts    6.    3  whom  we  may  appoint  over  this  business 

Rom.  9.    5  Christ  (came),' who  is  over  all,  God  blessed 

Rev.    2.  26  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations 

9.  11  had  a  king  over  them,  (which  is)  the  angel 

n.    6  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them  to 

14.  18  angel,  .which  had  power  over  fire  ;  andc. 

17.  18  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth 

14:.  On,  upon,  over,  iirt  (daf.)  epi. 

Matt  34-  -17  he  shall  make  him  ruler  over  all  his  goods 


Lukei2.  44  will  make  himrulerover  all  that  he  hath 
15.    7  over  one  sinner,  .more  than  over  ninety 

15.  10  There  is  joy.  .over  one  sinner  thatrepen. 
19.  41  near,  he  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it 
23.  38  was  written  over  him  in  letters  of  Greek 

Acts    8.    2  and  made  great  lanieutation  over  him 

1  Th.  3.  7  we  were  comforted  over  you  in  all  our  a. 
Rev.  11.  10  shall  rejoice  over  them,  and  make  merry 

18. 11  merchants,  .shall  weep  and  mourn  over 

15.  On,  upon,  over,  about,  iirl  (ace.)  epi. 

Matt  25.  21,  23  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a  few  th. 

27.  45  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth 

Mark  r  5.  33  darkness  over  the  whole  land  until  then. 

Luke  1.  33  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  e. 

2.  8  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  night 
9.    1  gave  them  power  and  authority  over  all 

10.  19  over  all  the  power  of  the  enemy :  and  no. 

12.  14  who  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider  over 
19. 14  We  will  not  have  this  (man)  to  reignover 
19.  27  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them 
23.  44  darkness  overall  the  earth  until  the  ninth 

Acts    7.  10  make  him  governor  over  Egypt  and  all  his 
7.  ti  Now  there  came  a  dearth  over  all  the  land 

7.  27  Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge  over 
19.  13  took  upon  them  to  call  over  them  which 

Rom.  5.  14  even  over  them  that  had  not  sinned  after 

2  Co.  3. 13  not  as  Moses,  (which)  put  a  veil  over  his 
Heb.  2.    7  [didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands] 

3.  6  But  Christ  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house 
10.  21  (having)anhighpriestoverthehouseof  G. 

Jas.  5.  14  let  them  pray  over  him,  anointiughim  w 
1  Pet.  3.  12  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)overthe  ri. 
Rev.   6.    8  power  was  given  unto  them  over  the  fourth 

13.  7  power,  .given  him  over  all  kindreds,  and 

16.  9  which  hath  power  over  these  plagues :  and 
18  20  Rejoice  over  her,  (thou)  heaven,  and  (ye) 

16.  Beyond,  over,  on  the  other  side,  irepav  peran. 
John  6.    1  Jesus  went  over  the  sea  of  Galilee,  which 

6.  17  and  went  over  the  sea  toward  Capernaum 
18.    1  went  forth  with  his  disciples  over  thebr. 

17.  Concerning,  irepi  (gen.)  peri. 

Luke  4.  10  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee 
1  Co.  7.  37  but  hath  power  over  his  own  will,  and  h. 

1$. Above,  beyond,  virep  (ace.)  huper. 

Eph.  1.  22  gave  him  (to  be)  the  head  over  all  (things) 
19.  To  be    far  above,  virepdvw  huperano. 

Heb  9.  5  over  it  the  cherubim  of  glory  shadowing 
[See  also  Against,  boughs,  bring,  carry,  come,  conduct, 
convey,  covered,  dominion,  get,  give,  go,  going,  grown, 
have,  be  lord,  laid,  pass,  passed,  passiug,  rule,  run,  run- 
iug,  sail,  send,  set,  spread,  stand,  triumph,  write.] 

OVER,  to  be  — 

l.To  change,  pass  on,  away,  through,  *(?n  chalaph. 

Song  2.  11  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  (and) 
2.To  stand,  "ibjj  amad. 

Num.7.    -  ai"l  were  over  them  that  were  numbered 

3.  To  set  before,  irpo't(rrvfj.i  proistemi. 

1  Th.  5.  12  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and  admonish 
OVER  (and  above),  to  have  or  be  — 

1.  To  be  over  and  above,  superfluous,  *\~iy  adap>h. 

Num.  3.  49  them  that  were  over  and  above  them  that 
2.To  make  over  and  above,  ^JJ  adaph,  5. 

Exodi6.  18  he  that  gathered  much  had  nothing  over 
OVER  against  — 
l.Over  against,  straightforward,  nai  nekach. 

Eze.  46.  9  not  return,  .but  shall  go  forth  over  agai. 
2.0n  the  face  of,  'l^'ty  al-p>cnc. 

Num.8.    2  seven  lamps  shall  give  light  over  against 

8.  3  he  lighted  the  lamps  thereof  over  agaiust 
Deut  32.  49  laud  of  Moab,  that  (is)  over  against  Jeric. 

1  Sa.  15.  7  comest  to  Shur,  that  (is)  over  against  Egy. 
Eze.  48. 15,  21,  21  over  against  the  five  and  twenty 

B.Over  against,  before,  ?3p,  hipt.  qobel,  qebel. 

Dan.   5.    5  wrote  over  agaiust  the  candlestick  upon 

4.  Over  against,  opposite  to,  avriupv  antikru. 

Acts  20.  15  and  came  the  next  (day)  over  against  Ch. 

5.  Over  against,  on  the  opposite  side,  avwrepav. 
Luke  8.  26  Gadarenes,  which  is  over  against  Galile» 

6.  Over  against,  in  opposition  to,  airevavrt  apenanti. 

Matt. 21.    2  Go  into  the  village  [over  against]you,  and 
27.  61  other  Mary,  sitting  over  against  the  sep. 

7.  Of  the  opposite  side,  e£  ivavrias  ex  enantias. 

Markis.  39  centurion,  which  stood  over  agaiust  him 
S.Down  to,  over  against,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Acts  27.   7  scarce  were  come  over  against  Cnidus,  the 
27.    7  we  sailed  under  Crete,  over  against  Salm. 

9. Over  against,  Karevavrt  h'tnianti. 

Markn.    2  Go  your  way  into  the  village  over  against 

12.  41  Jesus  sat  [over  against]  the  treasury,  and 

13.  3  the  mount  of  Olives,  over  against  the  te. 
Lukeig.  30  Go  ye  into  the  village  over  against  (you) 

OVERCHARGE,  be  overcharged,  to  — 
l.To  t>e  loaded,  burdened,  fiapvvofxai  barunomai. 
Luke 21.  34  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  overcharged 

2.  To  overload,  over  burden,  iwtfiapew  epibareo. 

2  <  !o.   2.    5  in  part ;  that  I  may  not  overcharge  you 
OVERCOME,  to  — 

l.To  assault,  "W3  gud. 

Geu.  49.  19  overcome  him ;  but  he  shall  overcome  at 


OVERCOME 


727 


OVERTHROW 


2.  To  be  able,  prevail,  bh'T  yakol. 

Xuni  13.  30  possess  it;  for  we  are  well  able  to  overco. 

Z.To  consume,  rjr6  lacham,  2. 

Xuni22.  11  perad  venture  I  shall  be  able  to  overcome 
2  Ki.  16.   5  besieged  Ahaz,  but  could  not  overcome 

4.  To  pass  over,  T33J  ('bar. 

Jer.  23.   9  like  a  man  whom  wine  hath  overcome,  be. 

5.  To  enlarge,  puff  up,  3rn  rahab,  5. 

Song  6.   5  for  they  have  overcome  me :  thy  hair  (is) 
6. 7*o  be  or  become  worsed,  less,  inferior,  yrTaofiai. 
2  Pe.   2.  19  for  of  whom  a  man  is  overcome,  of  the  sa. 
2.  20  For  if .  .they  are  again .  .overcome,  the 

7.  To  domineer,  k-ave  full  power,  KaraKvptevw,  hat. 
Acts  19. 16  overcame  them,  and  pre  vailed  against  th. 

8.7*0  gain  the  victory,  vtKato  nikao. 

Luke  11.  22  when  a  stronger  than  he  shall .  .overcome 
Johm6.  33  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  w. 
Rom.  3.   4  niightest  overcome  when  thou  art  judged 

12.  21  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good 
1  Jo.  2. 13,  14  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked  one 

4.  4  have  overcome  them ;  because  greater  is 

5.  4  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the 
5.  4the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,(ev.) 
5.  5  "Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but 

Rev.'  2.   7,  17  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to 

2. 11  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of 

2.  26  hethatoverconieth,  and  keepeth  my  works 

3.  5  He  that  overcometh,  the  same  shall  be  el. 

3. 12  Him  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar 
3.  21  To  him  that  overcometh.  .as I  also  overc. 

11.  7  and  shall  overcome  them,  and  kill  them 
12. 11  overcame  him  bythe  blood  oftheLamb.and 

13.  7  [it  was  given  unto  him . .  to  overcome  them] 
17.  14  Lamb  shall  overcome  them:  forhe  is  Lord 
zi.    7  He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things 

OVERCOME  (with),  to  he  — 

1.  Weakness,  n^nfe  chalushah. 

Exod32. 18  voice  of  (them  that)  cry  for  being  overcome 

2.  To  beat,  beat  down,  ubn  halam. 

Isa.  28.    1  valleys  of  them  that  are  overcome  with  w. 

3.  To  gain  victory,  viKaa>  nikao. 

Rom. 12.  21  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but.  .evil  with 
OVERDRIVE,  to  — 
To  beat,  knock,  ps^  dapha/p 

Gen.  33.  13  if  men  should  overdrive  them  one  day,  all 
OVERFLOW,  to  — 
1.7*0  run  over,  p*&  shuq,  5. 

Joel    2.  24  the  fats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil 
3. 13  fats  overflow:  for  their  wickedness  (is) 

2.  To  overflow,  *$&  shataph. 

Psa.  69.  2  deep  waters,  where  the  floods  overflow  me 
69. 15  Let  not  the  water  flood  overflow  me,  nei. 
78.  20  streams  overflowed ;  can  he  give  bread 

Isa.     8.   8  he  shall  overflow  and  go  over ;  he  shall 

10.  22  the  consumption  decreed  shall  overflow 
28.  17  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding  place 
43.    2  they  shall  not  overflow  thee :  when  thou 

Jer.  47.  2  waters  rise  up . .  and  shall  overflow  the  la. 
Dan.  11.  10  shall  certainly  come,  and  overflow7,  and 

11.  26  his  army  shall  overflow;  and  many  shall 
11.  40  countries,  and  shall  overflow  and  pass 

3.  To  be  full,  nSd  male. 

Josh.  3. 15  for  Jordan  overfloweth  all  his  banks  all 

4.  To  fill,  n1??  male,  3. 

1  Ch.12.  i5*when  it  had  overflown  all  his  banks ;  and 

OVERFLOW,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  flow,  fnx  tsuph,  5. 

"Deutn.   4  made  the  water,  .to  overflow  them,  as  they 
OVERFLOWED  or  OVERFLOWN,  to  he  — 
1.7*0  be  poured  out,  ps;  yatsaq,  6. 

Job  22  16  whose  foundation  was  overflown  with  a 
2.7*0  be  overflown,  f[Bp  shataph,  2. 

Dan.  11.  22  shall  they  be  overflown  from  before  him 
3.7*0  be  overflowed,  thoroughly  washed,  KaraK\v(a>. 

2  Pe.  3.    6  world  that  then  was,  being  overflowed 
OVERFLOWING  — 

1.  Weeping,  "32  beki. 

Job  28. 11  He  bindeth  the  floods  from  overflowing 

'2. Inundation,  dt|  zerem. 

Hab.  3.  10  the  overflowing  of  the  water  passed  by 
3. 7*o  overflow,  *]BW  shataph. 

Isa.  28.   2  as  a  flood  of  mighty  waters  overflowing 

28.  15,  18  when  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  p. 

30.  28  his  breath,  as  an  overflowing  stream,  shall 

Jer.  47.   2  shall  be  an  overflowing  flood,  and  shall 

Eze.  13.  ir,  13  there  shall  be  an  overflowing  shower 

38. 22  an  overflowing  rain,  and  great  hailstones 

4.  Overflowing,  *]»»,  pjbs>  sheteph. 

Job  38.  25  divided  a  watercourse  for  the  overflowing 

OVERLAID,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  covered,  wrapped  up,  ^by  ulaph,  4. 

Song  5.  14  belly  (is  as)  bright  ivory  overlaid  (with) 

2.  7*o  be  overlaid,covei-ed,spread  out,  nsx  tsaphah,4. 
Esod26.  32  pillars  of  shittim  (wood)  overlaid  wifchg. 

3.7*0  cover  round  about,  irspLKaXvirroj  perikalupto. 
Heb.  9.    4  ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  round  about 


OVERLAY,  to  — 

1.7b  cover,  ceil,  nsrj  chaphah,  3. 

2  Ch.  3.  5  which  he  overlaid  with  fine  gold,  and  set 
3.  7  He  overlaid  also  the  house,  the  beams,  the 
3.    8  overlaid  it  with  fine  gold,  (amounting)  to 

3.  9  he  overlaid  the  upper  chambers  with  gold 

2.7*0  plaister,  daub,  overlay,  n*a  tuach.         . 

1  Ch.29.    4  to  overlay  the  walls  of  the  houses  (with.) 

3.7*0  cover,  overlay,  nrx  tsaphah,  3. 

Exod25.  11  And  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold 
25.  11  within  and  without  shalt  thou  overlay  it 
25. 13  make  staves,  .and  overlay  them  with  gold 
25.  24  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  and 

25.  28  overlay  them  with  gold,  that  the  table  may 

26.  29,  29  And  thou  shalt  overlay,  .with  gold 

26.  37  overlay  them  with  gold,  (and)  their  hooks 

27.  2  and  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  brass 

27.  6  shalt  make  staves . .  and  overlay  them  with 
30.  3  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  the 
30.  5  shalt  make  the  staves . .  and  overlay  them 
36.  34  overlaid  the  boards,  .and  overlaid  the  bars 
36.  36  overlaid  them  with  gold  :  their  hooks  (we. 

36.  38  he  overlaid  their  chapiters  and  their  fillets 

37.  2,  11,  26  And  he  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold 

37.  4,  15,  28  and  overlaid  them  with  gold 

38.  2  made  the  horns,  .and  he  overlaid  it  with 

38.  6  made  the  staves,  .and  overlaid  them  with 
38. 28  overlaid  then-  chapiters,  and  filleted  them 

1  Ki.   6.  20  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold ;  and  (so)  cove. 

6.  21  overlaid  the  house,  .and  he  overlaid  it  w. 
6.  22  the  whole  house  he  overlaid  with  gold 
6.  22  that  (was)  by  the  oracle  he  overlaid  with 
6.  28  And  he  overlaid  the  cherubim  with  gold 
6.  30  floor  of  the  house  he  overlaid  with  gold 
6.  32  overlaid  (them)  with  gold,  and  spread  gold 

10.  18  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and  overlaid 

2  Ki.iS.  16  which  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  had  overl. 
2  Ch.  3.    4  And  he  overlaid  it  within  with  pure  gold 

3. 10  made  two  cherubim,  .and  overlaid  them 

4.  9  and  overlaid  the  doors  of  them  with  brass 
9.  17  made  a  great  throne  of  ivory,  and  overlaid 

4.  To  He  down,  33$  shakab. 

1  Ki.  3. 19  died  in  the  night ;  because  she  overlaid  it 

OVERLAYING  — 

Overlaying,  covering,  ''2S  tsippui. 

Exodus.  17  the  overlaying  of  their  chapiters  (of) silver 
3S.  19  overlaying  of  their  chapiters  and  their  fi. 

OVER  MUCH,  (to  be)  — 

1. 7*o  cause  to  mtdti ply, make- abundant,  ~yi  rabah,5. 
Eccl.  7.  16  Be  not  righteous  over  much 

7. 17  Be  not  over  much  wicked,  neither  be  thou 

2.  Over  abundantly,  irepia^ordpos  p>erissoteros. 

2  Co.  2.    7  be  swallowed  up  with  over  much  sorrow 
OVERPASS,  be  overpast,  to  — 

7*o  go  or  pass  over,  "Qjj  abar. 

Psa.  57.    1  refuge,  until  (these)  calamities  be  overp. 
Isa.   26.  20  hide . .  until  the  indignation  be  overpast 
Jer.     5.  28  yea,  they  overpass  the  deeds  of  the  wicked 

OVERPLTTS  — 

7*o  be  over  and  above,  superfluous,  *]?y  adaph. 
Lev.  25.  27  restore  the  overplus  unto  the  man  to  wh. 

OVERRUN,  to  — 

7*o  go  or  pass  over,  laj?  abar. 

2  Sa.18.  23  ran  by  the  way  of  the  plain,  and  overran 
Kah,  1.    S  But  with  an  overrunning  flood  he  will  m. 

OVERSEE,  to  — 

7*o  overlook,  be  pre-eminent,  ns3  natsach,  3. 

2  Ch.  2.   2  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  to  overs. 
OVERSEER,  (to  make)  — 
1.7*0  overlook,  be  pre-eminent,  nsi  natsach,  3. 

2  Ch.  2. 18  three  thousand  and  sis  hundred  overseers 
34. 13  overseers  of  all  that  wrought  the  work  in 

2.7*0  be  overlooked,  inspected,  ip3  paqad,  6. 

2  Ch.34.  12  overseers  of  them  (were)  Jahath  and  Ob. 
34. 17  delivered  it  into  the  hand  of  the  overse. 

3. 7*o  make  inspector,  nps  paqad,  5. 

Gen.  39.   4  made  him  overseer  over  Ms  house,  and 

39.  5  from  the  time  (that)  he  had  made  him  0. 

4.  Inspector,  tqb  paqid. 

2  Ch.  31.  13  overseers  under  the  hand  ofCononiahand 
Neh.  11.    9  Joel  the  son  of  Zichri  (was)  their  overseer 

11.  14  their  overseer  (was)  Zabdiel,  the  son  of 

11.  22  The  overseer  also  of  the  Levites  at  Jerus. 

12.  42  singers  sang  loud,  with  Jezrahiah  (their)  o. 

5.7*0  administrate,  ia»  shatar. 

Prov.  6.    7  Which  having  noguide,  overseer,  or  ruler 
6.  Overseer,  inspector,  iiriauoiros  episkopos. 

Acts  20.  2S  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  overseers 
OVERSHADOW,  to  — 
7*o  overshadow,  iwto-Kidfa  episkiazo. 

Matt  r  7.    5  bright  cloud  overshadowed  them  :  and  b. 

Mark  9.   7  there  was  a  cloud  that  overshadowed  them 

Luke  1.  35  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  t. 
9.  34  there  came  a  cloud  and  overshadowed  t. 

Acts   5.  i5passingbymightovershadowsomeofthem 
OVERSIGHT  — 
1.  Oversight,  error,  na^p  mishgeh. 

Gen.  43. 12  hand ;  perad  venture  it  (was)  an  oversight 


2. Oversight,  charge,  inspection,  rn|33  pequddah. 
Num.  3.  32  oversight.of  them  that  keep  the  charge  of 
4. 16  oversight  of  all  the  tabernacle,  and  of  all 
OVERSIGHT,  to  have  or  take  the  — 
1.7*0  be  put  in  charge  with,  *ips  paqad,  6. 

2  Ki.12.  11  that  had  theoversight  of  the  house  of  the 

22.   5,  9  that  have  the  oversight  of  the  house  of 

2  Ch.34, 10  workmen  that  had  the  oversight  of  the  u_ 

2.7*0  look  over,  inspect,  iTnaKoirtto  episkopeo. 

1  Pe.  5.    2  taking  the  oversight  (thereof),  not  by  coa. 
OVERSPREAD,  overspreading,  to  be  — 
l.A  wing,  ^3  kanaph. 

Dan.   9.  27  for  the  overspreading  of  abominations  ht 
2. 7*o  spread  out,  psj  naphats. 

Gen.   9.  19  of  them  was  the  whole  earth  overspread 
OVERTAKE,  be  overtaken,  to  — 
1.7b  cleave  or  adhere  to,  p3i  dabeq,  5. 

Gen.  31.  23  andtheyovertookhiminthemoiintGilead 
Judg  18. 22  gathered  together,  and  overtook  the  chiL 
20. 42  hut  the  battle  overtook  them ;  and  them 
2.7*0  come  or  draw  nigh,  e?jj  nagash,  2. 

Amos  9. 13  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  reaper 

3.7*0  cause  to  come  nigh,  approach,  b^j  nagash,  5.- 

Amos  9. 10  The  evil  shall  not  overtake  norprerent  us 

4.7*0  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  J'gtt  nasag,  5, 

Gen.  31. 25  Then  Laban  overtook  Jacob.    Now  Jacob- 

44.    4  when  thou  dost  overtake  them,  say  unto 

44.    6  overtook  them,  and  he  spake  unto  them 

Esodi4.   9  overtook  them  encamping  bythe  sea,  be. 

15.    9  enemy  said,  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake 

Deutig.   6  overtakehini, because  the  wayislong,and 

28.   2  overtake  thee,  if  thou  shalt  hearken  unto 

28. 15  curses  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  overtake 

2S.  45- and  overtake  thee,  till  thou  be  destroyed 

Josh.  2.    5  pursue  after  them,  .for  ye  shall  overtake 

1  Sa.  30.   S  shall  I  overtake,  .thou  shalt  surely  overt. . 

2  Sa.  15. 14  depart,  lest  he  overtake  us  suddenly,  and 
2  Ei.  25.  5  overtookhimintheplainsof  Jericho  :  and 
1  Ch.21.  12  that  the  sword  of  thine  enemies  overtak.. 
Psa.  18.  37  pursued  mine  enemies,  .overtaken  them 
Isa.  59.  9  neither  doth  justice  overtake  us :  we  wait 
Jer.   39.  5  overtook  Zedekiah  in  the  plains  of  3  ericho 

42.  16  which  ye  feared,  shall  overtake  you  there 
52.    8  overtookZedekiahintheplainsof  Jericho 

Lam.  1.    3  persecutors  overtook  her  between  the  st. 

Hos.  2.  7  shall  not  overtake  them;  and  she  shall  seek 
10.   9  children  of  iniquity  did  not  overtake  them 

5.7*0  take  thoroughly,  KaraKafifidt/w  katalambano. 

1  Th.  5.    4  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  t. 

6.  TV)  take  publicly ;  irpoAa/xfidvu  prolambo.no. 

Gal.    6.    1  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which 
0  7ERTHR0W  — 
1. Overthrow,  n^aq  haphekah. 

Gen.  19.  29  sent  Lot  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow 

2.  Overthrow,  nzsrtz  mahpekah. 

Deut29.  23  like  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  and  Gomo. 
Jer.  49. 18  As  in  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gom. 

3.  Catastrophe,  overthrow,  Karao-Tpo<p7t  katastrophe. 

2  Pe.  2.    6  condemned  (them)  with  an  overthrow,  m. 
OVERTHROW,  to  — 

1. 7*o  thrust  away  or  down,  nrn  dachah. 

Psa.140.   4  who  have  purposed  to  overthrow  my  go. 
2.7*0  turn,  overturn,  ~sn  haphak. 

Gen.  19. 21  not  overthrow  this  city,  for  the  which  t. 

19.  25  overthrew  those  cities,  and  all  the  plain 

19.  29  overthrew  the  cities  in  the  which  Lot  d. 

Deut  29.  23  Zeboim,  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  h.. 

2  Sa.  10.   3  and  to  spy  it  out,  and  to  overthrow  (it)? 

1  Ch.19.  3  for  to  search,  and  to  overthrow,  and  to  s. 
Jer.  20. 16  be  as  the  cities  which  the  Lord  overthrew 
Lam.  4.  6  overthrown  as  in  a  moment,  and  no  hands 
Amos  4. 11  I  have  overthrown  (some)  of  you,  as  God 
Hag.  2.  22  overthrow  the  throne,  .and  I  will  overth 

3.7V>  break,  throw  down,  onr?  haras. 

Exodis.    7  thou  hast  overthrown  them  that  rose  up 

2  Sa.  11.  25  make  thy  battle  more  strong,  .and  overt. 
Prov  29.   4  but  he  that  receiveth  gifts  overthroweth 

4.7*0  break,  throw  down,  Dirt  haras,  3. 

Exod23.  24  thou  shalt  utterly  overthrow  them,  and 

5.  Pressings,  overthrmrings,  narnn  madchephoth. 
Psa.140.  11  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  overt. 

^.Overthrow,  overturn,  rcsni?  mahpekah. 

Isa.   13*.  19  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom 
Jer.  50.  40  As  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
Amos  4.  11  as  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 

7. To  stretch  out,  incline,  nai  natah,  5. 

Prov  18.    5  to  overthrow  the  righteous  in  judgment 
8. 7*o  shake  off,  iU3  naar,  3. 

Esodi4.  27  overthrew  the  Egyptians  in  the  midst  of 

Psa. 136. 15  overthrew  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Red 
9.7*0  cause  to  fall,  ^5:  naphol,  5. 

Psa.  100.  26  lifted  up  his  hand  .to  overthrow  them  in 
106.  27  To  overthrow  then*  seed  also  among  the 

10.7*0  break  down,  yjy}  nathats,  3. 

Deut  12.   3  ye  shall  overthrow  their  altars,  and  break 
11.  7*o  overthrow,  pervert,  rjVp  salaph,  3. 

Job    12.  19  leadeth  princes  away  spoiled,  and  overth- 


OVERTHROWN 


728 


OX 


Prov  n    6  but  wickedness  overthroweth  the  sinner 
2i  12  overthroweth  the  wicked  for  (their)  wic. 
22!  12  overthroweth  the  words  ot  the  transgres. 
12.To  turn  upside  down,  ni"  avath,  3. 

Job    19.    6  Know  now  that  God  hath  overthrown  me 
13  To  turn  up  or  over,  avaarpeipai  anastrepho. 

John  2.  is  drove  them  all  out. .  and  overthrew  the  t. 
14.ro  turn  up  or  over,  avarpeiroi  anatrepo. 

2  Ti.  2.  i8haveerred..andoverthrowthefaithofsome 

15.ro  loose  down,  dissolve,  tcaraAvu  kataluo. 

Acts    5.  39  But  it  it  be  ot  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow 
16  To  turn  down,  Karaffrpeipii  katastrepho. 

Matt-i   1-  overthrew  the  tables  ot  the  money  chan. 

Marku'.  15  overthrew  the  tables  ol  the  money  chan. 
OVERTHROWS',  to  be  — 
1.  To  turn,  overturn,  as?  haphak. 

Prov  12    7  The  wicked  are  overthrown,  and  (are)not 

Lam.  4.    6  (that  was)  overthrown  as  in  a  moment 

2  To  be  turned,  overturned,  a.sn  haphak,  2. 

Jon.    3.   4  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  ov. 

3  To  break  or  throw  down,  trin  haras,  2. 

'  Prov  11.  11  isoverthrown  bythe  mouthof  thewicked 

4  To  be  feeble,  stumbled,  V?  kashal,  2. 

'  Dan.11.41  and  many  (countries)  shall  be  overthrown 

5  To  be  caused  to  stumble,  bps  kashal,  6 . 

Jer.  18. 23  but  let  them  be  overthrown  before  thee 

6  Overturn,  overthrow,  nasn?  mahpekah. 

Isa.     1.   7  (it  is)  desolate,  as  overthrown  by  strangers 

7 .To  fall,bsi  naphal. 

Juog  9.  40  and  many  were  overthrown  (and)  wounded 
2  SaTi?.   9  when  some  of  them  be  overthrown  at  the 

8  Tobe destroyed, cut  off,  laid  waste,~\Dy shamad,  2. 
Prov  14. 11  The  house  of  the  wicked  shall  be  overth. 

9  To  be  let  go,  thrown  down,  sva  shamat,  2. 

'  Psa.141.    6  When  their  judges  are  overthrown  in  st. 

10  To  strew  down,  Karao-Tpiivvvp-i  katastronnumi. 
1  Co.  10.    5  for  they  were  overthrown  in  the  wildem. 

OVERTURN,  to  — 

1. To  turn,  overturn,  a.sn  haphak. 

Judg  7  13  and  overturned  it,  that  the  tent  lay  along 
Job     0     5  which  overturneth  them  in  his  anger 

12'  15  sendeth  them  out,  and  they  overturn  the 
28  9  overturneth  the  mountains  by  the  roots 
34.  25  he  overturneth  (them)  in  the  night,  so  that 

2  To  make  an  overturn,  nfo  frjs  avvah  sum. 

Eze.  21.  27  Iwilloverturn,  overturn,  overturn  it:  and 
OVERWHELM,  to  — 

1.  To  cover,  riD?  kasah,  3. 

Psa    ss     5  come  upon  me,  and  horror  hath  overwhe. 
'  78.  S3  but  the  sea  overwhelmed  their  enemies 
2.To  cause  to  fall,  bs)  naphal,  5. 

Job     6. 27  ye  overwhelm  the  fatherless,  and  ye  dig  (a 

3.To  overflow,  r\W  shataph. 

Psa.  124.    4  Theu  the  waters  had  overwhelmed  us,  the 

OVERWHELMED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  feeble,  <]QV,  ataph. 

Psa  61  2  when  my  heart  is  overwhelmed :  lead  me 
'102.'  title,  prayer  of  the  afflicted,  when  he  is  over. 

2.  To  shmo  self  feeble,  ^B"  ataph,  7. 

Psa  77.  3  complained,  and  my  spirit  was  overwhel. 
142  3  When  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed  within 
143.   4  Therefore  is  my  spirit  overwhelmed  within 

OWE  (besides),  to  —  ^ 

1  To  owe,  be  obliged,  indebted,  b<pei\a  qpheilo. 
Matt  18.  28  found  one.  .which  owed  him  an  hundred 
18.  ->8  laid  hands,  .saying,  Pay  me  that  thou  o. 
Luke  7.  41  one  owed  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  ot. 
16     ssaid  .How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  1.? 
16'    7  said  he  to  another,  And  how  much  owest 
Rom  13'.    8  Owe  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  a 
Phm.      18  If  lie  hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  (thee) 
l.To  owe  besides,  wpoo-oipelKo>  prosopheilo. 

Phm.  19  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest-.besid. 
OWED,  which—  , 

A  debtor,  one  who  is  owing,  o^etAerns  oplmletes. 
Matt  18.  24  one  was  brought  unto  him,  which  owed 

OWL  (great,  little,  or  screech)  — 

l.Night  owl,  ibis,  r\wv yanshvph. 

Lev.  11.  17  and  the  cormorant,  and  the  great  owl 
Deuti4.  A  The  little.,  and  the  groat  owl,  and  the  s. 
Isa.   34.  11  the  owl  also  and  the  raven  shall  dwell  m 

2. Pelican,  little  owl,  Dia  kos. 

Lev.  11. 17  And  the  little  owl.  and  the  cormorant,  and 
Deut  14.  16  The  little  owl,  and  the  great,  and  the  s 
Psa.102.   6  wilderness ;  I  am  like  an  owl  of  the  desert 

A.Daughter  afhoxoling,  ostrich,  n\Tr  na  bath yaanah. 

Lev.  11.  16' the  owl,  and  the  night  hawk,  and  the  cu. 

Deuti4.  iS  the  owl,  and  the  night  hawk,  and  the  cu. 

.Toll   30.  29  brother  to  dragons,  and  a  companion  to  0. 

Isa.    13.  21  owls  shall  dwell  there,  and  satyrs  shal   d. 
34.  13  habitation  of  dragons,  .a  court  for  owls 
43.  20  shall  honour  me,  the  dragons  and  the  owls 

Jer.  50.  39  owls  shall  dwell  therein  :  and  it  shall  be 

Mic.    1.  81  will  make  a . .  mourning  as  the  owls 


i.Night  owl,  n-Vb  lilith. 

Isa.   34. 14  screech  owl  also  shall  rest  there,  and  find 
^.Bittern,  arrow  snake,  lisp  qippoz. 

Isa.  34. 15  There  shall  the  great  owl  make  her  nest 

OWN  — 

l.Soul,  breath,  vsi  nephesh. 

ProV^.  10  heart  kn oweth  his  own  bitterness;  and  a 

I.Priest,  \TO  kohen. 

Lev.  14.  26  pour,  .into  the  palm  of  his  own  left  hand 

3.  He,  it,  otto's  aulos. 

Luke  2.  35  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul 
Acts  21.  11  bound  his  own  hands  and  feet,  and  said 

4.  Genuine,  yvfjarios   gnesios. 

1  Ti.    1.    2  Unto  Timothy,  (my)  own  son  in  the  faith 
Titus  1.   4  To  Titus,  (mine)  own  son  after  the  comm. 

5.  One's  own,  1Sios  idios. 

John  1. 11  Heeameunto..andhisownreceivedhimn. 
10.  12  whoseownthesheeparenot,seeth  the  wolf 
19.  27  that  disciple  took  her  unto  his  own  (ho.) 

Acts    2.  6  every  man  heard  them  speak  in  his  own 
2.    8  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  toug. 

2  Pe.  3.   3  scoffers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts 

3. 16  wrest,  .unto  their  own  destruction 
Titus  1.  12  One  of  themselves.,  a  prophet  of  their  own 

OWN,  to—  _ 

Whose  is,  ov  ianv  hou  estin. 

Acts  21. 11  bind  the  man  that  owneth  this  girdle,  and 
[See  also  Accord,  conceits,  country,  freewill,  hands,  her, 
his,  mine,  nation,  our,  their,  thine.] 
OWN  (voluntary)  will  — 
Good  pleasure,  or  will,  psa  ratson. 

Lev.    1.    3  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  will  at 
ig.    5  the  Lord,  ye  shall  otter  it  at  your  own  w. 
22.  19  (Ye  shall  offer)  at  your  own  will  a  male 
22.  29  will  offer  a  sacrifice . .  at  your  own  will 
Dan.  11. 16  shall  do  according  to  his  own  will,  and 

OWN  (poets)  — 

Down  among,  Kara  (ace.)  kala. 

Acts  17.  28  your  own  poets  have  said,  For  we  are  also 

OWNER  — 

I.Lord,  master,  ]'ns  adon. 

1  Ki.16.  24  after  the  name  of  Shemer,  owner  of  the 

2.  Owner,  W a  baal. 

Exod2i.  28  iiut  the  owner  of  the  box  (shall  be)  quit 
21  29  testified  to  his  owner.,  his  owner  also  shall 
21.  34  owner.,  shall.,  give  money  unto  the  owner 
21.  36  his  owner  hath  not  kept  him  in  ;  he  shall 
22. 11  owner  of  it  shall  accept  (thereof),  and  he 
20  12  shall  make  restitution  unto  the  owner 

22. 14  owner  thereof  (being)  not  with  it ;  he  sh. 

22. 15  owner  thereof  (be)  with  it,  he  shall  not 
Job   31.  30  have  caused  the  owners  thereof  to  lose 
Prov    1  iq  taketh  away  the  life  of  the  owners  thereof 
Eccl.  5.  11  and  what  good  (is  there)  to  the  owners 

5. 13  riches  keptforthe  owners  thereof  to  their 

3.  To  acquire,  purchase,  rnp,  qanah. 

Isa.    1.    3  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass 
i.Lord,  master,  sir,  iciptos  kurios. 

Lukeig.  33  owners  thereof  said  unto  them,  Why  loose 

OX,  OXEN  — 

1:0m  or  cow,  ^,  <p8  alluph. 

Psa  144.  14  our  oxen  (may  be)  strong  to  labour;  (that 
Jer.  11.  i9;But  I  (was)  like  a  lamb  (or)  an  ox(that)is 

2.  Oxen,  herd,  cattle,  "ipa  baqar. 

Gen  i".  16  he  had  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  he  asses,  and 

20.  14  Abimelech  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men 

21.  27  Abraham  took  sheep  and  oxen,  and  gave 
34.-8  They  took  their  sheep,  and  their  oxen,  and 

Exod.  9.    3  upon  the  camels,  upon  the  oxen,  and  upon 
20.  24  peace  offerings,  thy  sheep,  and  thine  oxen 

22.  1  he  shall  restore  five  oxen.. and  foursheep 
Nnm  7.    3  covered  wagons,  and  twelve  oxen 

7.  6  Moses  took  the  wagons  and  theoxen,  and 
7.  7  Two  wagons  and  four  oxen  he  gave  unto 
7.  8  four  wagons  and  eight  oxen  he  gave  unto 
7.  17,  23,  29,  35,41,  47,53,  59,65,  71,  7.7.  83 oxen 
7  87  All  the  oxen  for  the  burnt  offering  (were) 
7.  88  all  the  oxen,  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace 
22.  40  offered  oxen  and  sheep,  and  sent  to  Bal. 
Deut  14.  26  for  oxen,  or  for  sheep,  or  for  wine,  or  for 
Jud".  3.  31  slew,  .six  hundred  men  with  an  ox  goad 

1  Sa.  11.    7  took  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  hewed  them  111 

11.    7  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  his  oxen.  And  the 

14.  y  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  calves,  and  s. 

15.  9,  15  the  best  of  the  sheep,  and  of  the  oxen 

15.  14  and  the  lowing  of  the  oxen  which  I  hear? 

15.  21  people  took  of  theipoil,  sheep  and  oxen 

27.    9  took  away  the  sheep,  and  the  oxen,  and 

2  Sa.   6.   6  and  took  hold  of  it ;  for  the  oxen  shook 
24.  22  oxen  for  burnt  sacrifice,  and  threshing  1. 
24.  22  and  (other)  instruments  of  the  oxen  for 
24.  24  bought  the  threshing  floor  and  the  oxen 

1  Ki.  1.  9  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  oxen  and  fat  c. 
4. 23  Ten  fat  oxen,  and  twenty  oxen  out  of  the 
7  25  It  stood  upon  twelve  oxen,  three  looking 
7.  29  between  the  ledges  (were)  lions,  oxen,  and 
7.  29  beneath  the  lions  and  oxen  (were)  certain 

7.  44  one  sea,  and  twelve  oxen  under  the  sea 

8.  5  sacrificing  sheep  and  oxen,  that  could  not 
8.  63  two  and  twenty  thousand  oxen,  and  an  h. 

19.  20  left  the  oxen,  and  ran  after  Elijah,  and  s. 
19.  31  took  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  slew  them,  and 


1  Ki.  19.  21  boiled,  .with  the  instruments  of  the  oxen 

2  Ki.  5.  26  vineyards,  and  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men 

16. 17  took  down  the  sea  from  off  the  brasen  o. 

1  Ch.12.  40  brought  bread,  .on  oxen,  .and  oil,  and  ox. 
13.  9  put  forth  his  hand.,  for  the  oxen  stumbled 
21.23  1  Sive  (thee)  the  oxen  (also)  for  burnt  off. 

1  Ch.  4.    3  under  it  (was)  the  similitude  of  oxen,wh. 

3  Tworowsof  oxen  (were)  cast,  when  it  was 

4  It  stood  upon  twelve  oxen,  three  looking 
15  One  sea,  and  twelve  oxen  under  it 

6  sacrificed  sheep  and  oxen,  which  could  not 

5  sacrifice  of  twenty  and  two  thousand  oxen 

15. 11  seven  hundred  oxen  and  seven  thousand 
18.  2  killed  sheep  and  oxen  for  him  in  abuud. 
29.  33  consecrated  things  (were)  six  hundred  0. 
31.  6  also  brought  in  the  tithe  of  oxen  and  sh. 
35.  8  gave  uuto  the  priests . .  three  hundred  oxen 
35.  9  gave  uuto  the  Levites . .  five  hundred  oxen 
35.  12  theyremoved..andso(didthey)withtheo. 

Job     1.    3  five  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  and  five  bund. 
1. 14  oxen  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding 
40.  15  Behold  now.  .he  eateth  grass  as  an  ox 

42. 12  for  he  had . .  a  thousand  yoke  of  oxen,  and 
Isa.   11.   7  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox 

22. 13  slaying  oxen  and  killing  sheep,  eating  fl. 
Amos  6. 12  will  (one)  plow  (there)  with  oxen?  for  ye 

3.  A  bullock,  calf,  -.3  par. 

Exod24.   5  sacrificed  peace  offerings  of  oxen  unto  the 
NuiU23.    1  prepare  me  here  seven  oxen  and  seven  r. 

4.  Ox,  bull,  "iw  shor. 

Gen.  32.    5  I  have  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  men  s. 

Exod2o.  17  Shalt  not  covet,  .his  ox,  nor  his  ass.  nor 
21.  28  If  an  ox  gore  a  man .  .then  the  ox  shall  be 
21.  28  not  be  eaten  ;  but  the  owner  of  the  ox 
21.  29  But  if  the  ox  were  wont  to  push  with  his 
21.  29  ox  shall  be  stoned,  and  his  owner  also  s. 
21.  32  If  the  ox  shall  push,  .the  ox  shall  be  sto. 
21.  33  not  cover  it,  and  an  ox  or  an  ass  fall  the. 
21.  35  if  one  man's  ox  hurt  another's,  that  hedie 
21.  35  shall  sell  the  live  ox,  and  divide  the  mo. 
21.  36  Or  if  it  be  known  that  the  ox  hath  used 

21.  36  he  shall  surely  pay  ox  for  ox ;  and  the  d. 

22.  1  If  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and 
22.  1  restore  five . .  for  an  ox,  and  four  sheep  for 
22.  4  whether  it  be  ox,  or  ass,  or  sheep,  he  shall 
22.  9  for  ox,  for  ass,  for  sheep,  for  raiment,  (or) 
22.  10  If  a  man  deliver,  .an  ox,  ora sheep,  orany 

22.  30  Likewise  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  oxen 

23.  4  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or  his  ass 
23. 12  that  thine  ox  and  thine  ass  may  rest,  and 
34. 19  every  firstling,  .ox  or  sheep,  (that  is  male) 

Lev.   7.  23  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat,  of  ox,  or  of 

17.  3  What  man  soever,  .killeth  an  ox,  or  lamb 

27.  26  whether  (it  be)  ox  or  sheep,  it  (is)  the  L. 
Num.  7.   3  for  each  one  an  ox :  and  they  brought  th. 

22.   4  as  the  ox  licketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field 
Deut.  5.  14  thou  shalt  not  do  anywork.  .nor  thine  ox 
5.  21  neither  shalt  thou  covet,  .his  ox,  or  his 
14.    4  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat:  The  ox,  the  s. 

18.  3  whether  (it  be)  ox  or  sheep  ;  and  they  sh. 
22.  1  Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  his 
22.  4  not  see  thy  brother's . .  ox  fall  down  by  the 
22.  10  Thou  shalt  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  an  ass 
25.    4  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  tre. 

28.  31  Thine  ox  (shall  be)  slain  before  thine  eyes 
Josh.  6.  21  utterly  destroyed . .  ox,  and  sheep,  and  ass 

7.  24  his  daughters,  and  his  oxen,  and  Ms  asses 
Judg.  6.   4  left  no  sustenance .  .neither  sheep,  nor  ox 

1  Sa.  12.    3  whose  ox  have  I  taken  ?  or  whose  ass  ha. 

14.  34  Bring  me  hither  every  man  his  ox,  and  e. 

14.  34  brought  every  man  his  ox  with  him  that 

15.  3  slay  both,  .ox  and  sheep,  camel  and  ass 
22.19  sucklings,  and  oxen,  and  asses,  and  sheep 

2  Sa.   6.  13  it  was  (so),  that,  .he  sacrificed  oxen  and 
1  Ki.    1. 19  he  hath  slain  oxen  and  fat  cattle  and  sh. 

1.  25  hath  slain  oxen  and  fat  cattle  and  sheep 
Neh.  5.  18  one  ox,  (and)  six  choice  sheep;  also  fowls 
Job     6.    5  Doth  the  wild  ass  bray . .  or  loweth  the  ox 

24.    3  they  take  the  widow's  ox  for  a  pledge 
Psa.  69.  31  shall  please  the  Lord  better  than  an  ox 

106.  20  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  g. 
Prov.  7.  22  as  an  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter.or  as  a  fool 

14.  4  increase  (is)  by  the  strength  of  the  ox 

15.  17  than  a  stalled  ox  and  hatred  therewith 
Isa.     1.    3  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  hism. 

7.  25  it  shall  be  for  the  sending  forth  of  oxen 
32.  20  send  forth  (thither)  the  feet  of  the  ox 
66.    3  He  that  killeth  an  ox  (is  as  if)  he  slew  a 
Eze.    1. 10  they  four  had  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the  left 

5.  Ox,  bull,  "fin  tor. 

Dan.  4.  25,  32  they  shall  make  thee  to  eat  grass  as  0. 

4.  33  did  eat  grass  as  oxen,  and  his  body  was 

5.  21  they  fed  him  with  grass  like  oxen,  and 

6.  A  beeve,  bull,  coio,  fiovs  bou.s. 

Lukeij.  15  doth  not  each  one.  .loose  his  oxor(hls)ass 
14.  5  Which  ofyoushallhaveanassoranoxfal. 
14.  iq  said,  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and 

John  2.  14  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  oxen 

2.  15  he  drove  them  all  out.,  and  the  oxen  ;  and 
1  Co    9.   9  shalt  not  muzzle  the  mouth  of  the  ox  that 

9.  9  it  is  written.. Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen? 
1  Ti.    5.  18  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  that  tread. 
7.^4  bull,  beere,  ravpos  tauros. 

Matt 22.    4myoxenand(my)fatlings(are)killed,and 
Acts  14. 13  brought  oxen  and  garlands  unto  the  gates 

8.O.7:,  cow,  <}bii  eleph. 

Psa.    8.    7  All  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the  beasts 
Isa.   30.  24  oxen  likewise  and  the  young  asses  thatear 


ox 


PALM 


CX,  wild  — 

Antelope,  goat,  wp  teo. 

Deut  14.    5  pygarg,  and  the  wild  ox,  and  the  chamois 

O'-ZEM,  DXtt  strength, 

1.  Sixth  son  of  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite.     B.C.  1090. 

1  Ch.  2.  15  O.  the  sixth,  David  the  seventh 

2.  A  son  of  Jerahmeel,  son  of  Hezron.     B.C.  1500 

1  Ch.  2. 25  and  Bunah,  and  Oren,  and  0.,  (and)  Alii. 

0 -ZI'-AS,  '0(las. 

An  ancestor  of  Jesus.    See  Uzziah. 

Matt.  1.    S  Josaphat  begat  Joranv,  arid  .loram  begat  0. 
1.   g  0.  begat  Joatham  ;  and  Joatham  begat  A. 

OZ'-NI,  ':ix  Jah  hears. 

A  son  of  Gad,  the  seventh  son  of  Jacob.     B.C.  1700. 

Num26.  16  Of  0.,  the  family  of  the  Oznites:  of  Eri 
OZ-NTTES,  'Jixn  the  Ozni. 
Descendants  of  tiie  preceding. 

Xuni2D.  16  Of  Ozni,  the  family  of  the  0. :  of  Eri,  the 


PA-A'-RAI,  '1^3  revelation  of  Jah. 

One  of  David's  valiant  men,  from  Aruboth  in  Judah. 

B.C.  1058  ;  called  Xaarai  in  1  Ch.  n.  37. 

2  Sa.  23.  35  Hezrai  the  Carmelite,  P.  the  Arbite 
PACE  — 
A  step,  po.ee,  i»s  tsaad. 

2  Sa.    6.  13  when  they,  .had  gone  six  paces,  he  sacri. 
PACIFIED,  to  be  — 
l.To  cover,  pacify,  "133  kaphar,  3. 

Eze.  16.  63  when  I  am  pacified  toward  thee  for  all  t. 
'2.  To  sink  down,  cease,  yyy  shakak. 

Esth.  7.  10  Then  was  the  king's  wrath  pacified 
PACIFY,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  rest,  quiet,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Eccl.  10.   4  leave  not  thy  place ;  for  yielding  pacifieth 

2.  To  avert,  extinguish,  nss  kaphah. 

Prov.21.  14  A  gift  in  secret  pacifieth  anger,  and  arew. 

3.  To  cover,  pacify,  "153  kaphar,  3. 

Prov  16.  14  wrath  of  a  king,  .wise  man  will  pacify  it 
PAD'-AN,  [H3  a  plain.     Same  as  tlie  succeeding. 

Gen.  48.    7  when  I  came  from  P.,  Rachel  died  by  me 
PAD-AN  A'-RAM,  ur&  |^S  the  plain  of  Aram. 
The  plains  of  Mesopotamia,  or  the  land  between  the 
Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  in  opposition  to  the  hilly 
country  of  Palestine  and  the  Lebanon  ranges. 

Gen.  25.  20  the  daughter  of  Bethuel  the  Syrian  of  P. 
28.   2  Arise,  go  to  P.,  to  the  house  of  Bethuel 
28.   s  he  went  to  P.  unto  Laban,son  of  Bethuel 
28.   6  sent  him  away  to  P.,  to  take  him  a  wife 
28.    7  obeyed  his  father,  .and  was  gone  to  P. 
31. 18  of  his  getting,  which  he  had  gotten  in  P. 
33.  18  J.  came  toShalem.  .when  he  came  from  P. 
35.   9  appeared  unto  Jacob,  .he  came  out  of  P. 
35. 26  sous  of  Jacob,  which  were  born  to  him  in  P. 
46. 15  which  she  bare  unto  Jacob  in  P.,  with  his 

PADDLE  — 

Pin,  nail,  in;  yathed. 

Deut  23.  13  thou  shalt  have  a  paddle  upon  thy  weapon 
PA'-DON,  p*i3  deliverance. 

One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  with 
Zerubbabel.    B.C.  538. 

Ezra    2.  44  the  children  of  Siaha,  the  children  of  P. 
Neh.  7.  47  the  children  of  Sia,  the  children  of  P. 
PAG-I'-EL,  Vyj?  God  meets. 

A  son  of  Ocran  and  head  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  chosen 
to  number  the  people.    B.C.  1451. 

Num.  1.  13  Of  Asher;  P.  the  son  of  Ocran 

2.  27  the  captain.. (shall  be)  P.  the  son  of  Ocran 
7.  72  P.  the  sonof  Ocran,  prince  of  the  children 
7. 77  (was)  the  offering  of  P.  the  son  of  Ocran 
10.  26  And  over  the  host,  .(was)  P.  the  son  of  0. 
PA-HATH  MO'-AB,  3n'id  ms  prefect  of  Moab. 

1.  A   person,  part  of  whose  posterity  returned  with 
Zerubbabel.    B.C.  538. 

Ezra   2.   6  children  of  P.,  of  the  children  of  Jeshua 

10.  30  of  the  sons  of  P.;  Adna,  and  Chelal,  Ben. 

]Seh.   3. 11  the  son  of  P.,  repaired  the  other  piece,  and 

7.  11  children  of  P.,  of  the  children  of  Jeshua 

2.  Another,  part  of  whose  posterity  returned  with  Ezra. 
B.C.  447- 

Ezra    8.   4  Of  the  sons  of  P.;  Elihoenai  the  son  of 

3.  A  family  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10. 14  of  the  people  ;  Parosh,  P.,  Elam,  Zatthu 
PA'-I,  'ys  yawning,  deep. 

A  city  in  Edom,  where  Hadad  the  last  of  the  early  kings 
was  born  or  reigned ;  called  Pau  in  Gen.  36.  39. 

1  Ch.  1.  50  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  P.;  and  his  wi. 
PAID,  to  be  — 
To  be  given,  3rp  yehab,  2, 
Ezra   4.  20  toll,    tribute,  and  custom,  was  paid  unto 

92 


PAIN,  (gTeat  or  much)  — 
l.Pang,  cord,  San  chebel. 

Isa.  66.   7  before  her  pain  came,  she  was  delivered 

2.  Pain,  writhing,  h'n  chil. 

Psa.  48.   6  Feartookholduponthemthere,(and)pain 

Jer.     6.  24  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  (and)  pain 

22.  23  when  pangs  come  upon  thee,  the  pain  as 

3.  Great  pain,  n^nSn  chalchalah. 

Isa.   21.    3  Therefore  are  my  loins  filled  with  pain:  p. 
Eze.  30.    4  great  pain  shall  he  in  Ethiopia,  when  the 
30.    9  great  pain  shall  come  upon  them,  as  in  the 
Nah.    2.  10  much  pain  (is)  in  all  loins,  and  the  faces 

i.Pain,  litskeeb. 

Jer.  15.  18  Why  is  my  pain  perpetual,  and  my  woimd 

5.  Pain,  sorrow,  3iiOS  makob. 

Job  33.  19  He  is  chastened  also  with  pain  upon  his 
Jer.  51.    8  take  balm  for  her  pain,  if  so  be  she  may 

Q.Straitness,  distress,  ">zo  metsar. 

Psa. 116.  3  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me ;  I  found  t. 
7. Labour,  Spy  amal. 

Psa.  25.  iSLookupoumineafflictionandmj-p^iu;  and 
S.Pain,  pang,  Ys  tsir. 

1  Sa.  4.  19  bowedherselfandtravailed;  forherpaius 
9.  Labour,  tt6vos p>onos. 

Rev.  16. 10  and  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain 

16.  11  blasphemed,  .because  of  their  pains  and 
21.    4  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain :  for 

10. Pang,  wStv  Odin. 

Acts    2.  24  raisedup,havingloosed  the  pains  of  death 
PAIN,  to  be  in  or  have,  fall  with  — 
l.To  be  pained,  writhe,  Vn,  "?in  chid,  chit. 

Isa.  13.  8  they  shall  be  in  pain  as  a  woman  that  tr. 
26. 17  is  in  pain,  (and)  crieth  out  in  her  pangs 
26.  18  we  have  been  in  pain,  we  have  as  it  were 
Jer.  30.  23  shall  fall  with  pain  upon  the  head  of  the 
Eze.  30. 16  Sin  shall  have  great  pain,  and  No  shall  be 
Mic.   4. 10  Be  in  pain,  and  labour  to  bring  forth,  O 

2.  To  be  pained,  3N3  kaab. 

Job    14.  22  his  flesh  upon  him  shall  have  pain,  and  his 

PAIN,  to  put  selves  to  — 

To  become  sick,  grieved,  pained,  nbn  chalah,  2. 
Jer.  12.  13  have  put  themselves  to  pain,  (but)  shall 

PAINED,  to  be  (much  or  sore)  — 

l.To  be  pained,  writhe,  VJ\f  hin  chul,  chil. 

Psa.  55.  4  My  heart  is  sore  pained  within  me;  and 
Isa.  23.  5  shall  they  be  sorely  pained  at  the  report 
Joel    2.   6  people  shall  be  much  pained ;  all  faces 

2.  To  be  pained,  writhe,  *?n;  yachal,  5. 

Jer.  4. 19  I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart ;  my  heart 
Z.To  try,  torture,  fiaaavlfa  basanizo. 

Rev.  12.  2  travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  del. 
PAINFUL,  PAINTTJLNESS  — 

1.  Labour,  misery,  *?£#  amal. 

Psa.  73.  16  thought  to  know  this,  it  (was)  too  painful 

2.  Labour,  toil,  fiox&os  mochthos. 

2  Co.  11.  27  In  weariness  and  painfulness,  in  watchful 
PAINT,  to  — 

l.To  paint,  colour,  *?~2  kachal. 

Eze.  23.  40  paintedst  thine  eyes,  and  deckedst  thyself 

2.  To  anoint,  smear,  rr&o  mashach. 

Jer.  22.  14  ceiled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with  ver. 

3.  To  put  in  paint,  "^93  Gib  sum  bappuk. 

2  Ei.  9.  30  she  painted  her  face,  and  tired  her  head 
PAINTING  — 
Paint,  painting,  "is  puk. 

Jer.    4.  30  though  thou  rentest  thy  face  with  painting 
PAIR  — 
A  pair,  a  yoke,  £i=vyo$  zcugos. 

Luke  2.  24  A  pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pig. 
PAIR  of  balances  — 
A  yoke,  beam  of  a  balance,  (vyo?  zugos. 

Rev.    6.    5  he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  pair  of  balances 
PALACE  — 
1.  Palace,  ornament,  idol,  |i3N  appeden. 

Dan.  11.  45  plantthe  tabernacles  of  his  palace  between 
2. High  place,  ftCTtH  armon. 

1  Ki.16.  18  went  into  the  palace  of  the  king's  house 

2  Ki.  15.  25  smote  him  in  Samaria,  in  the  palace  of  the 
2  Ch.36.  19  burnt  all  the  palacesthereof  with  fire,  and 
Psa.  48.   3  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge 

48.  13  consider  her  palaces ;  that  ye  may  tell  (it) 
122.    7 Peace. .(and)prosperity  withinthy palaces 

Isa.  23.  13  they  raised  up  the  palaces  thereof;  (and) 
25.  2  palace  of  strangers  to  be  no  city ;  it  shall 
32. 14  Becausethepalacesshallbeforsaken  ;  the 
34.  13  thorns  shall  come  up  in  her  palaces,  net. 

Jer.  6.  5  go  by  night,  and  let  us  destroy  herpalaces 
9.  21  is  entered  into  our  palaces,  to  cut  off  the 

17.  27  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Jerusalem 
30.  18  palace  shall  remain  after  the  manner  the. 

49.  27  it  shall  consume  the  palaces  of  Ben-hadad 
Lam.  2.    s  he  hath  swallowed  up  all  herpalaces:  he 

2.    7  hand  of  the  enemy  the  walls  of  herpalaces 
Hos.    8.  14  and  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  thereof 
Amos  1.    4  which  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Ben-h. 


Amos  1.    7,  10,  14  shall  devour  the  palaces  thereof 

1.  12  which  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  Bozrah 

2.  2,  5  and  it  shall  devour  the  palaces  of 

3.  9  Publish  in  the  palaces . .  and  in  the  palaces 
3.  10  store  up  violence  and  robbery  in  their  pal. 
3.  11  bringdown  thy  strength,  and  thypalaces 

6.  8  hate  his  palaces :  therefore  will  I  deliver 
Mic.    5.    5  when  he  shall  tread  in  our  palaces,  then 

3.  Palace,  castle,  temple,  rrva  birah. 

1  Ch.  29.    1  for  the  palace  (is)  not  for  man,  but  for 

29.  19  do  all  (these  things),  and  to  build  the  pal. 

Ezra  6.    2  there  was  found  at  Achmetha,  in  the  pal. 

Neh.  1.    1  came  to  pass,  .as  I  was  in  Shushan  the  p. 

2.    8  to  make  beams  for  the  gates  of  the  palace 

7.  2  I  gave.  .Hananiah  the  ruler  of  the  palace 
Esth.  1.   2  kingdom,  which  (was)  in  Shushan  the  pa. 

1.  5  that  were  present  in  Shushan  the  palace 

2.  3  fair  young  virgins  unto  Shushan  the  pal. 
2.    5  in  Shushan  the  palace  there  was  a  certain 

2.  8  gathered  together  unto  Shushan  the  pal. 

3.  15  the  decree  was  given  in  Shushan  the  pal. 

8.  14  the  decree  was  given  at  Shushan  the  pal. 

9.  6  in  Shushan  the  palace  the  Jews  slew  and 
9.  11  that  were  slain  in  Shushan  the  palace  was 
9.  12  five  hundred  men  in  Shushan  the  palace 

Dan.    8.    2  I  (was)  at  Shushan  (in)  the  palace,  which 

4. House,  JV3  bayith. 

2  Ch.  9. 11  made,  .terraces,  .to  the  king's  palace,  and 
5. House,  \r\*2  bithan. 

Esth.  1.    5  the  court  of  the  garden  of  the  king's  pala. 
7.    7  king,  .(went)  iuto  the  palace  garden:  and 
7.   8  Then  the  king  returned  out  of  the  palace 
6.  Temple,  palace,  hin  heked. 

1  Ki.  21.    t  which  (was)  in  Jezreel,  hard  by  the  palace 

2  Ki.20.  18  they  shall  be  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of  the 
Ezra  4.  14  have  maintenance  from  (the  king's)  palace 
Psa.  45.    8  out  of  the  ivory  palaces,  whereby  they  h. 

45. 15  they  shall  enter  into  the  king's  palace 
144.  12  polished  (after)  the  similitude  of  a  palace 
Prov  30.  28  taketh  hold . .  and  is  in  king's  palaces 
Isa.   13.  22  dragons  in  (their)  pleasant  palaces :  and 

3g.    7  eunuchs  in  the  palace  of  the  king  of  Baby. 
Dan.    1.    4  ability  in  them  to  stand  in  the  king's  pal. 

4.  4  was  at  rest . .  and  flourishing  in  my  palace 

4.  29  in  the  palace  of  the  kingdom  of  Babylon 

5.  5  the  plaster  of  the  wall  of  the  king's  pala 

6.  18  the  king  went  to  his  palace,  and  passed 
Nah.   2.    6  opened,  and  the  palace  shall  be  dissolve. 

7. High  place,  ]isin  harmon. 

Amos  4.    3  ye  shall  cast  (them)  into  the  palace,  saith 

8.  Tower,  n*yt?  tirah. 

Song  8.  9  we  will  build  upon  her  a  palace  of  silver 
Eze.  25.    4  they  shall  set  their  palaces  in  thee,  and 

9.  Court,  av\ij  aide. 

Matt26.  3  unto  the  palace  of  the  high  priest,  who 
26.  58  followed  .unto  the  high  priest's  palace 
26.  69  Peter  sat  without  in  the  palace:  and  a  da. 

Marki4.  54  followed,  .into  the  palace  of  the  high  pr 
14.  66  as  Peter  was  beneath  in  the  palace,  there 

Luken.  21  When  a  strong  man  armed  keepethhis  p 

Johni8.  15  went  in . .  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest 

1 0.  Praetor's  court,  Trpatrcopiovpraitdriov  (fromLat. ) 
Phil.    *.  13  my  bonds,  .are  manifest  in  all  the  palace 

PA'-LAL,  hb$  a  judge. 

A  son  of  TJzzai,  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem after  Nehemiah  came  from  Shushan.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  25  P.  the  son  of  Uzai,  over  against  the  turn. 
PALE  — 
Green,  pale,  sallow,  x^vpds   chloros. 

Rev.    6.   8  I  looked,  and  behold  a  pale  horse:  and  his 
PALE,  to  wax  — 
To  become  pale  or  white,  iin  chavar. 

Isa.    29.  22  Jacob.,  neither  shall  his  face  now  wax  pal? 
PALENESS  — 
Greenness,  mildew,  |ip*v  yeraqon. 

Jer.  30.   6  do  I  see.. all  faces  are  turned  into  pale.? 

PA-LES-TI-NA,PA-LES-TLNE,  nvh5,T\&hs  emigration. 
The  W.  coast  of  Canaan,  from  the  river  of  Egypt  or  the 
brook  Besor  (a  little  S.  of  Gaza)  to  Joppa ;  see  Isa.  14. 
29,  31 ;  Joel  3.  4. 

Exodis.  14  shall  take  hold  on  the  inhabitants  of  P. 

Isa.  14.  29  Rejoice  not  thou,  whole  P.,  because  the 
14.  31  cry.  .thou  whole  P.,  (art)  dissolved  :  for 

Joel    3.    4  Tyre,  and  Zidon,  and  all  the  coasts  of  P. 

PAL'-LTJ,  PHAL'-Lu",  i«!>5  distinguished,  wonderful. 

The  second  son  of  Reuben.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  9  Reuben,  Hanoch,  and  P.,  and  Hezron  and 
Exod.  6.  14  and  P.,  Hezron,  and  Carmi:  these  (be)  the 
Num26.    5  of  P.,  the  family  of  the  Palluites 

26.    8  And  the  sous  of  P.;  Eliab 
1  Ch.  5.    3  sons,  .were  Hanoch,  and  P.,  Hezron,  and 

PAL-LTMTES,  *xS>?n  the  Pallui. 
The  descendants  of  the  preceding. 

Nuru26.    5  of  Pallu  the  family  of  the  P. 
PALM,  PALM  TREE  — 
l.Palm  {of  hand),  sole  (of  foot),  *]3  kaph. 

Lev.  14.  15  pour  (it)  into  the  palm  of  his  own  left  h. 
14.  26  the  oil  into  the  palm  of  his  own  left  hand 

1  Sa.   5.    4  the  palms  of  his  hands  (were)  cut  off  up. 

2  Ki.  9.  35  and  the  feet,  and  the  palms  of  (her)  hand 


PALM 


730 


PARE 


Isa.   49. 16  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  (ray)  han. 
Dan.  10.  10  my  knees  and  (upon)  the  palms  of  my  ha. 

2. A  palm  tree,  Tjl?  tamar. 

Exodi5-  27  three  score  and  ten  palm  trees:  and  they 
Lev.  23.  40  branches  of  palm  trees,  and  the  boughs  of 
Niim33.    9  three  score  and  ten  palm  trees  ;  and  they 
Deut  34.    3  valley  of  Jericho,  the  city  of  palm  trees 
Judg.  1.  16  went  up  out  of  the  city  of  palm  trees  with 

3.  13  went . .  and  possessed  the  cityof  palm  trees 
2  Ch.28.  15  to  Jericho,  the  city  of  palm  trees,  to  their 
Neh.  8.  15  palm  branches,  and  branches  of  thick  tr. 
Psa.  92.  12  righteousshall  flourish  like  the  palm  tree 
Song.  7.    7  This  thy  stature  is  like  to  a  palm  tree,  and 

7.  8  I  will  go  up  to  the  palm  tree,  I  will  take 
Joel     1.  12  tree,  the  palm  tree  also,  and  the  apple  t. 

3.^4  palm  tree,  nan  turner. 

Judg.  4.    5  she  dwelt  under  the  palm  tree  of  Deborah 
Jer.   10.    5  They  (are)  upright  as  the  palm  tree,  but 

4.  A  palm  tree,  {artificial),  nnbn  tamm-orah. 

1  Ki.  6.  29,  32,  35  and  palm  trees  and  open  flowers 

6.  32  upon  the  cherubim,  and  upon  the  palmtr. 

7.  36  he  graved  cherubim,  lions,  and  palm  trees 

2  Ch.  3.    5  and  set  thereon  palm  trees  and  chains 
Eze.  40.  16  and  upon  (each)  post  (were)  palm  trees 

40. 22  their  palm  trees  (were)  after  the  measure 
40.  26  it  had  palm  trees,  one  on  this  side,  and 

40.  31,  34,  37  and  palm  trees  (were)  upon  the  po. 
41. 18  cherubim  and  palm  trees,  so  that  a  palmtr. 

41.  19  (was)  toward  the  palm  tree  on  the  one  s. 
41.  19  face,  .toward  the  palm  tree  on  the  other 
41.  20  (were)  cherubim  and  palm  trees  made,  and 
41.  25  palm  trees,  like  as  (were)  made  upon  the 
41.  26  palm  trees  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  ot. 

h.A  palm  tree  or  branch,  (po'ivt^  phoinix. 

John:2.  13  Took  branches  of  palm  trees,  and  went 
Rev.    7.    9  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in 

PALM  of  the  hand,  to  strike  with  — 

To  give  slaps,  bioai/.ii  ^dirnr/xa   clidomi  rhapisma, 
Marki4.  65  strike  him  with  the  palms  of  their  hands 
JohniS.  22  one.,  struck  Jesus  with  the  palm  of  his  h. 

PALMER  WORM  — 

Palmer  -worm,  caterpillar,  creeping  locust,  oia  gazam. 

Joel  1.  4  That  which  the  palmer  worm  hath  left  h. 
2.  25  and  the  caterpillar,  and  the  palmer  worm 

Amos  4.   9  the  palmer  worm  devoured  (them):  yet 

PALSY,  one  that  has,  or  is  sick  of,  or  taken  with  the  — 

1.2*0  be  paralytic, paralyzed,  irapahvoixat  parabiont. 

Luke  5.  iS  behold.,  a  man  which  was  taken  with  a  p. 

5.  24  he  said  unto  [the  sick  of  the  palsy],  I  say 
Acts    8.    7  many  taken  with  palsies,  and  that  were  1. 

9.  33  named  Eneas,  which,  .was  sick  of  the  pa. 

%Paralytlc,  paralyzed,  Trapa\vTtK6s  paraluiikos. 
Matt.  4.  24  those  that  had  the  palsy  ;  and  he  healed 

8.  6  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  pal. 

9.  2  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying  on  a  bed 
9.    2  said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Son,  be  of 
9.    6  then  saith  he  to  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Ar. 

Mark  2.  3  bringing  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  which  was 
2.  4  the  bed  wherein  the  sick  of  the  palsy  lay 
2.  5  he  said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Son  be 
2.  9  is  it  easier  to  say  to  the  sick  of  the  palsy 
2,  10  may  know,  .he  saith  to  the  sick  of  the  p. 

PAL'-TI,  'pVs  Jah  delivers. 

A  chief  Benjamite,  son  of  Raphu,  and  chosen  to  spy  out 

the  land.    B.C.  1490. 

Num  1 3.    9  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  P.  the  son  of  Raphu 

PAL-TI'-EL,  PHAX-TI'-EL,  *?n^S  God  delivers. 

1 .  A  chief  of  Issachar,  son  of  Azzan,  and  chosen  to  divide 
the  land  W.  of  Jordan.     B.C.  1452. 

Num 34.  26  prince  of  the  tribe.  .P.  the  son  of  Azzau 

2.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Laish,  called  also  Phalli,  to  whom 
Michal,  David's  wife,  was  given.     B.C.  1060. 

2  Sa.    3.  15  (her)  husband,  (even)  from  P.  the  son  of 

PAL-TITE,  ^sn  the  Palti. 

A  Patronymic  of  Helez,  from  Beth-Palet  in  the  S.  of 

Judah. 

2  Sa.  23.26  Helez  the  P.,  Ira  the  son  of  Ikkesh  thcT. 
PAM-PHY-LI  A,  UaatpvXla. 

A  province  in  the  S.  of  Asia  Minor,  having  Cilicia  on  the 
E.,  Pisidia  on  the  N.,  Lycia  on  the  W.,  and  the  Medi- 
terranean on  the  S.  Perga  is  the  only  one  of  its  cities 
named  in  the  New  Testament. 

Acts    2. 10  P.,  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  parts  of  Lybia 
13. 13  they  came  to  Perga  in  P.:  and  John  dep. 

14.  24  passed  throughout  Pisidia.theycametoP. 

15.  38  who  departed  from  them  from  P.,  and 
27.    5  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  Cilicia  and  P. 

PAN  — 

l.P./ns,  n'Finn  chahittim. 

t  Clr.9.  31  over  the  things  that  were  made  in  the  pan 
%.Pan,  laver,  ~iv3  hiyyor. 

1  Sa.  2. 14  he  struck  (it)  into  the  pan,  or  kettle,  or  c. 

3.  Thin  plate,  rono  machabalh. 

Lev.     2.  5  if  thy  oblation  (be),  .(b^ken)in  a  pan,  it  s. 

6.  21  In  a  pan  it  shall  be  made  with  oil ;  (and 

7.  9  all  that  is  dressed,  .in  the  pan,  shall  be 

2  Ch.23.  29  for  (that  which  is  baked  in)  the  pan,  and 
Eze.    4.    3  take  thou  uuto  thee  an  iron  pan,  and  set 

■\.Fi''/ing  pan,  rn^  wasreth. 

2  Sa.  13.   9  she  took  a  pan,  and  poured  (them)  out  b. 


5.  A  pot,  vp  sir.    . 

Exod27.   3  thou  shalt  make  his  pans  to  receive  his 
6. A  pan,  pot,  "ni3  parur, 

Num  11.   8  baked  (it)  in  pans,  and  made  cakes  of  it 
7.  Dish,  pan,  cruise,  nnb's  tselachah. 

2  Ch.35. 13  in  pots,  and'in  caldrons,  and  in  pans,  and 
PANG  — 

1 .  Pang,  cord,  h^n  chebel. 

Isa.   26. 17  Like  as  a  woman . .  crieth  out  in  her  pangs 
Jer.  22.  23  shalt  thou  be  when  pangs  come  upon  thee 

2.  Pain,  writhing,  ^n  chil. 

Jer.  50.  43  anguish,  .pangs  as  of  a  woman  in  travail 
Mic.    4.    9  for  pangs  have  taken  thee  as  a  woman  in 

3.  Pain,  pang,  t?  tsir, 

Isa.   13.    8  pangs  and  sorrows  shall  take  hold  of  them 
21.    3  pangs  have  taken  hold  upon  me,  as  the  p. 

4.  To  straiten,  distress,  ~n$  tearar,  5. 

Jer.  48. 41  be  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her  pangs 
49.  22  be  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her  pangs 
PAN'-NAG,  J33  sweet. 

A  place  on  the  road  from  Damascus  to  Baalbeck,  also 
called  P'mgi. 

Eze.  27. 17  in  thy  market  wheat  of  Minnith,  and  P. 
PANT,  to  — 
l.To  go  about,  pant,  "inp  sachar,  Sa. 

Psa.  38. 10  My  heart panteth,  my  strength  faileth  me 
2. 7*o  long  for,  pant,  T\y  a.rag. 

Psa.  42.    1  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  so  pant. 
3.7*0  swallow  up,  pant,  *]N^  shaapth. 

Psa.119.  131 1  opened  my  mouth,  and  panted :  for  I 

Amos  2.    7  That  pant  after  the  dust  of  the  ea^th  on 
4.  To  err,  wander,  go  astray,  nj/j-i  taah. 

Isa.  21.  4  My  heart  panted,  fearfulness  affrighted 
PAP  — 
1. Breast,  "W  shad. 

Eze.  23.  21  in  bruising  thy  teats,  .for  the  paps  of  thy 
2.  Breast,  pap,  ^.aarSs  mastos. 

Luken.  27  Blessed .  .the  paps  which  thou  hast  sucked 

23.  29  Blessed  (are) . .  the  paps  which  never  gave 
Rev.   1.  13  [girt  about  the  paps]  with  a  golden  girdle 

PAPER  (REEDS)  — 

l.Greenbushy  meadows,  rrn;/  aroth. 

Isa.   19.    7  The  paper  reeds  by  the  brooks,  by  the  m. 
2. Paper,  xaprvs  charles. 

2  John    12  I  would  not  (write)  with  paper  and  ink 

PA'-PHOS,  Tid(pos. 

A  city  on  the  W.  of  Cyprus  (now  Baffe),  the  station  of 
a  Roman  pro-consul ;  about  sixty  stadia  off  wasatemple 
of  Venus. 

Acts  13.    6  they  had  gone  through  the  isle  unto  P. 
13.  13  when  Paul  and  lus  companyloosedfromP. 
PARABLE  — 
1. Similitude,  parable,  proverb,  *?%!Q  moishal. 

Num23.    7,  18  And  he  took  up  his  parable,  and  said 

24.  3,  15,  20,  21,  23  took  up  his  parable,  and 
Job    27.    1  Job  continued  his  parable,  and  said 

29.  1  Job  continued  his  parable,  and  said 

Psa.  49.  4  I  will  iucline  mine  ear  to  a  parable;  I  w. 

78.  2  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  a  parable :  I  will 

Prov20.  7,  9  so  (is)  a  parable  in  the  mouth  of  fools 

Eze.  17.  2  speak  a  parable  unto  the  house  of  Israel 

20.  49  they  say  of  me,  Doth  he  not  speak  parab. 
24.  3*utter  a  parable  unto  the  rebellious  house 

Mic.    2.    4  shall  (one)  take  up  a  parable  against  you 
*  Hab.   2.    6  all  these  take  up  a  parable  against  him 
2. A  parable,  similitude,  wapafioKr)  parabola. 

Matt  13.  3  spake  many  things  unto  them  in  parables 
13.  to  Whyspeakestthouuntothemin  parables? 
13.  13  Therefore  speak  I  to  them  inparables :  be. 
33.  18  Hear  ye  therefore  the  parable  of  the  sower 
13.  24,  31  Another  parable  put  he  forth  unto  th. 
13.  33  Another  parable  spake  he  unto  them;  The 
13.  34  in  parables  ;  and  without  a  parable  spake 
*3-  35  I  W'U  open  my  mouth  iu  parables  ;  I  will 
13.  36  Declare  unto  us  the  parable  of  the  tares 
13.  53  when  Jesus  had  finished  these  parables 
T5.  15  said  unto  hiiu,  Declare  unto  us  this  par. 

21.  33  Hear  another  parable :  There  was  a  cert. 

21.  45  when  the.  .Phavisees  had  heard  his  para. 

22.  1  spake  unto  them  again  by  parables,  and  ' 
24.  32  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree  :  When  his 

Mark  3.  23  said  unto  them  in  parables,  How  can  Sa. 
4.  2  he  taught  them  many  things  by  parables 
4. 10  with  the  twelve  asked  of  him  the  parable 
4.  11  but.  .all  (these)  things  are  done  in  parabl. 
4.  13  said  unto  them,  Know  ye.  .this  parable? 
4. 13  and  how  then  will  ye  know  all  parables? 
4-  33  with  many  such  parables  spake  he  the  w. 
4.  34  without  a  parable  spake  he  not  uuto  them 

7.  17  disciples  asked  him  concerning  the  para. 

12.  1  he  began  to  speak  unto  them  by  parables 
ij2.'i2  he  had  spoken  the  parable  against  them 

13.  28  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig  tree;  When  her 
Luke  5.  36 hespakealsoaparableuntothem;Noman 

6.  39  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them  :  Can  the 

8.  4  were  come  to  him.  .he  spake  by  a  parable 
8.  9  asked,  .saying.  .What  might  this  parable 
8.  10  but  to  others  in  parables  ;  that  seeing  th. 
8.  11  the  parable  is  this  :  The  seed  is  the  word 

12.  16  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them,  saying,  The 


Lukei2.  41  speakest  thou  this  parable  unto  us,  or  even 

13.  6  Hespakealsothisparable,  Acertain(man) 

14.  7  he  put  forth  a  parable  to  those  which  w. 

15.  3  he  spake  this  parable  unto  them,  saying 
18.    1  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them  (to  this  end) 

18.  9  he  spake  this  parable  unto  certain  which 

19.  11  spake  a  parable,  because  he  was  nigh  to 

20.  9  began  he  to  speak  to  the  people  this  par. 
20. 19  he  had  spoken  this  parable  against  them 
2a.  29  he  spake  to  them  a  parable ;  Behold  the 

3. Adage,  dark  saying,  trapotn'ia  paroimia. 

Johnio.   6  This  parable  spake  Jesus  unto  them  :  but 

PARADISE  — 

Park,  garden  ground,  irapaftcio- os  (fromHeb.  DTiE). 
Luke23.  43  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise 
2  Co. 12.    4  he  was  caught  up  into  paradise,  and  hea. 
Rev.    2.    7  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of 

PA'-RAH,  rnsn  the  u?'dd  place. 

A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  A  vim  and  Ophrah. 

Josh.18.  23  And  Avini,  and  P.,  and  Ophrah 
PARAMOUR  — 
A  concubine,  (male  or  female),  vx?5  pillegesh. 

Eze.  23.  20  she  doted  upon  their  paramours,  whose 

PA'-RAN,  J>*s  full  of  caverns. 

A  wilderness  at  S.  and  S.W.  of  Canaan,  and  W.  of  Edom, 
reaching  westward  to  Shur,  and  S.  to  the  Elanitic  gulf, 
also  called  Mount  Paran,  and  el-Paran. 

Gen.  21. 21  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  P. :  and  his 
Nuniio.  12  the  cloud  rested  in  the  wilderness  of  P. 
12. 16  people,  .pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  P. 
13.    3  Moses . .  sent  them  from  . .  wilderness  of  P. 

13.  26  unto  the  wilderness  of  P.,  to  Kadesh ;  and 
Deut.  1.    1  between  P.,  and  Tophel,  and  Laban,  and 

33.    2  he  shined  forth  from  mount  P.,  and  he 
1  Sa.  25.    1  and  went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  P. 
1  Ki.n.  18  P.  :  and  they  took  men  with  them  out  of  P. 
Hab.   3.    3  from  Teman,  the  Holy  One  from  mount  P. 

PAR'-BAR,  13~)3  open  summer  Iwuse. 

A  place  W.  of  the  temple  and  surrounded  by  a  wall. 

Comp.  "suburb,"  in  2  Ki.  23.  n. 

1  Ch.26. 18  P.  westward,  four  at  the  causeway,  .two 

PARCEL  (of  ground)  — 

l.A  portion,  npVn  chelqah. 

Gen.  33.  19  he  bought  a  parcel  of  a  field,  where  he 
Josh. 24.  32  a  parcel  of  ground  which.  Jacob  bought 
Ruth  4.    3  Naomi,  .selleth  a  parcel  of  land,  which 
1  Ch.11.  13  where  was  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of  bar. 
11. 14  set  themselves  in  the  midst  of  (that)  par. 

2.  Field,  place,  x^p^-ov  chorion. 

John  4.    5  the  parcel  of  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to 

PARCHED  (com,  ground  or  places)  — 

1. Burnt  or  parclied  places,  Q'lin  charerim. 

Jer.  17.    6  parched  places  in  the  wilderness,  (in)  a 

2.7*o  roast,  njjj  qalah. 

Josh.  5.  11  did  eat.  .parched  (corn)  in  the  self  same 

3. Roasted  corn  or  grain,  K*7j3,  'Sp  qali. 

Lev.  23.  14  shall  eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched  corn 
Ruth  2. 14  he  reached  her  parched  (corn),  and  she  did 

1  Sa.  17.  17  Take..anephahofthisparched(corn),and 

25.  18  Ave  measures  of  parched  (corn),  and  an 

2  Sa.  17.  28  parched  (corn),  .beans,  and  lentiles,  and 

4.  H eat,  mirage,  xt^  sharab. 

Isa.   35.    7  the  parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool 
PARCHMENT  — 
A  thin  skin  of  parchment,  fxefifipdm  {from  Lat.). 

2  Ti.    4.  13  thebooks,  (but)  especially  the  parchments 
PARDON  — 
A  passing  over,  forgiveness,  nri'vp  selichah. 

Neh.    9.  17  thou(art)a  God  ready  to  pardon,  gracious 
PARDON,  to  — 

1.  7*o  cover,  pacify,  1&3  kaphar,  3. 

2  Ch.  30.  18  saying,  The  good  Lord  pardon  every  one 

2.  7*o  lift  up,  N^a  nasa. 

EXOCI23.  21  for  he  will  not  pardon  your  transgressions 

1  Sa.  15.  25  pardon  my  sin,  and  turn  again  with  me 
Job     7.  21  why  dost  thou  not  pardon  my  transgres, 
Mic.    7.  18  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by 

3. 7*o  pass  over,  forgive,  n?p  salach. 

Exod34.   g  pardon  ouriniquity,  and  our  sin,  and  take 
Num  14.  19  Pardon, Ibeseech thee, theiniquity  ofthis 

14.  20  I  have  pardoned,  according  to  thy  word 

2  Ki.  5. 18,  18  the  Lord  pardon  thy  servant 

24.   4  blood  that  he  shed.  .Lord  would  not  pa. 

Psa.  25.  11  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity;  for  it  (is)  g. 

Isa.   55.    7  toourGod,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon 

Jer.  5.  1  seeketh  the  truth ;  and  I  will  pardon  it 
5.  7  How  shall  I  pardon  thee  for  this?  thy  c. 
33.  8  will  pardon  all  their  iniquities,  whereby 
50.  20  for  I  will  pardon  them  whom  I  reserve 

Lam.  3.  42  and  have  rebelled  :  thou  hast  not  pardoned 

PARDONED,  to  be  — 

7*o  be  pleasing,  accepted,  ny*i  ratsah,  2. 

Isa.  40.   2  thatheriniquityispardoned:  forshehath 
PARE,  to  — 
To  make,  do,  prepare,  njyjj  asah. 

Deut  21.  12  shall  shave  her  head,  and  pare  her  nails 


PARENT 


731 


PARTIALITY 


PARENT  — 

1. Parent,  begetter,  yovevs  goneus. 

Mattio.  21  children  shall  rise,  .against  (their)  parents 
Harki3. 12  children  shall  rise.  .against(their)parents 
Luke  2.  27  the  parents  broughtin  the  child  Jesus,  to 

2.  41  his  parents  went  to  Jerusalem  every  year 

8.  56  her  parents  were  astonished  :  hut  he  ch. 
iS.  29  or  parents,  or  brethren,  or  wife,  or  child. 
21. 16  ye  shall  be  betrayed  both  by  parents,  and 

John  9.    2  who  did  sin,  this  man,  or  his  parents,  that 

9.  3  Neither,  .this man  sinned,  norhis parents 
9.  18  the  parents  of  him  that  had  received  his 
9  20  His  parents  answered  them,  and  said,  We 
9.  22  These  (words)  spake  his  parents,  because 
9.  23  Therefore  said  his  parents,  He  is  of  age 

Rom.  t.  30  inventors  of  evil,  .disobedient  to  parents 
2  Co. 12.  14  lay  up  for  the  parents,  but  the  parents 
Eph.   6.    1  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord :  for  this  is 
Col.     3.  20  obey  (your)  parents  in  all  things :  for  this 
2  Ti.  3.   2  disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unho. 

2.  Father,  trarr\p  pater. 

Heb.  11.  23  was  hid  three  months  of  his  parents 

3.  Progenitor,  irpoyovos  £>rogonos. 

1  Ti.    5.    4  to  requite  then*  parents :  for  that  is  good 
PARLOUR  — 
1. Inner  or  secret  place,  Tin  cheder. 

1  Ch.28. 11  and  of  the  inner  parlours  thereof,  and  of 
2. A  chamber,  parlour,  nsif'?  lishkah. 

1  Sa.   9.  22  Samuel,  .brought  them  into  the  parlour 
3.  Upper  place,  n^ll  aliyyah. 

Judg.  3.  20  and  he' was  sitting  in  a  srnnmer  parlour 

3.  23  and  shut  the  doors  of  the  parlour  upon 
3.  24  that,  .the  doors  of  the  parlour  (were)  lo. 
3.  25  and.  .he  opened  not  the  doors  of  the  par. 

PAR-MASH'-TA,  K^'^B. 

A  son  of  Hainan  the  Agagite,  in  the  days  of  Ahasueras 

and  Esther.    B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.   9  And  P.,  and  Arisai,  and  Aridai,  and  Vaje. 

PAR-ffiE'-NAS,  riap/xeea?. 

One  of  the  seven  disciples  chosen  to  serve  tables. 

Acts   6.    5  and  P. ,  and  Nicolas  a  proselyte  of  Antioch 

PAR'-NACH,  TJ31S. 

The  father  of  Elizaphan  a  chief  of  Zebulun,  chosen  to 

divide  the  land  W.  of  the  Jordan.     B.C.  1490. 

Nuni34.  25  And  the  prince.. Elizaphan  the  son  of  P. 

PAR'-OSH,  PHAR'-OSH,  vyiB  fleeing,  fugitive. 

1.  One  whose  descendants  returned  with  Zeruhbabel. 
B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  3  The  children  of  P.,  two  thousand  an  hun. 
Neh.    7.    8  The  children  of  P.,  two  thousand  an  hun. 

2.  One  whose  descendants  returned  with  Ezra.    B.C. 
447- 

Ezra   8.    3  the  sons  of  P. ;  Zechariah :  and  with  him 

3.  One  whose  descendants  had  taken  strange  wives. 
B.C.  447- 

Ezra  10.  25  of  the  sons  of  P. ;  Ramiah,  and  Jeziah,  and 

4.  The  father  of  Pedaiah  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall. 

B.C.  447. 

Neh.   3.  25  After  him  Pedaiah  the  son  of  P. 

5.  A  family  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh. 10. 14  The  chief. .  P.,  Pahath-moab,  Elam,  Zatthu 
PAR-SHAN-DA'-THA,  Nn-ush?. 
A  son  of  Hainan  the  Agagite.  "  B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    7  And  P.,  and  Dalphon,  and  Aspatha 
PART  (in)— 

1.  Part,  13  bad. 

Job  41.  12  I  will  not  concealhis  parts,  norhis  power 

2.  Piece,  irj?  bet  her. 

Jer.  34.  i3  when  they .  .passed  between  the  parts  th. 
34.  19  which  passed  between  the  parts  of  the  c. 

3.  Section,  "lia  gezer. 

Psa.136.  13  him  which  divided  the  Red  sea  into  parts 

4.  Word,  matter,  "i:n  dabar. 

1  EX  6.  38  finished  throughout  all  the  parts  thereof 

5.  Portion,  p%  cheleq. 

Nunii8.  20  have  any  part  among  them :  I  (am)  thy  p. 

Deut  10.   9  Levi  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with 
12.  12  he  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  you 
14.  27,  29  hath  no  partnorinheritance  with  thee 
18.    1  have  no  part  nor  inheritance  wjihlsrael 

Josh. 14.  4  gave  no  part  unto  the  Levites  in  the  land 
15-  13  gave  a  part  among  the  children  of  Judah 
18.  5  And  they  shall  divide  it  into  seven  parts 
18.  6  describe  the  land  (into)  seven  parts,  and 
18.    7  the  Levites  have  no  part  among  you ;  for 

18.  9  described  it  by  cities  into  seven  parts  in  a 

19.  9  the  part  of  the  children  of  Judah  was  too 
22.  25  ye  have  no  part  in  the  Lord  :  so  shall  yo. 
22. 27  may  not  say.  .Ye  have  no  part  in  the  Lo. 

1  Sa.  30.  24  as  his  part  (is)  that  goeth  down  to  the  ba. 

30.  24  so  (shall)  his  part  (be)  that  tarrieth  by  the 

2  Sa.20.    1  We  have  no  part  in  David,  neither  have 
Job  32.  17  I  will  answer  also  my  part ;  I  also  will  s. 
Eze.  48.    8  (in)lengthasoneof  the  (other)  parts,  from 
Amos  7.   4  devoured  the  great  deep,  and.  .eat  up  a  p. 

6.  Portion,  n^n  clielqah. 

Ruth  2.    3  on  apart  of  the  field  (belonging  unto  E. 


7,  Half,  ^tOj'sn  chetsi,  chatsi. 

1  Ki.16.  21  the  people  of  Israel  divided  into  two  pa. 
Isa.   44.  16  burnetii  part  thereof  in  the  fire ;  with  p. 

44.  19  I  have  burnt  part  of  it  in  the  fire ;  yea 

8. From,  out  of,  some  of,  IE  min. 

Dan.   2.  33  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part 
2.  41  part  of  potter'sclay,  and  part  of  iron,  the 

2.  42  the  toes,  .part  of  iron,  and  part  of  clay 

9.  Portion,  allotment,  rup  manah. 

Exod2g.  26  take  the  breast,  .and  it  shall  be  thy  part 
Lev.    7.  33  shall  have  the  right  shoulder  for  (his)  pa. 
8.  29  (for)  of  the  ram . .  it  was  Moses'  part ;  as 

10.  Mouth,  rra  peh. 

Zech  13.    8  two  parts  therein  shallbe  cut  off  (and)die 

11. Circuit,  X)B  pelelc. 

Nell.  3.    9/ 12  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  Jerusalem 

3.  14  Malchiah.  .ruler  of  part  of  Beth-haccerem 
3.  15  Shailum.  .the  ruler  of  part  of  Mizpah;  he 
3.  16  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  Beth-zur,  unto 
3. 17  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  Keilah,  in  his  part 
3.  18  Bavai.  .the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  Keilah 

12. End,  extremity,  D?  pas. 

Dan.   5.   s  king  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote 
5.  24  was  the  part  of  the  hand  sent  from  him 

IS. End,  extremity,  fraction,  nyp  qatsah. 

Job  26. 14  these  (are)  parts  of  his  ways  ;  but  how  li. 

14.End,  extremity,  fraction,  n^j?  qetsath. 

Dan    1.   2  with  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  G. 

15. Lot,  portion,  tckripos  Jcleros. 

Acts    1.  17  and  had  obtained  part  of  this  ministry 

1.  25  take  [part]  of  this  ministry  and  apostleship 

1Q. Climate,  region,  district,  K\tp.a  Mima. 

Rom  15  23  having  no  more  place  in  these  parts,  and 

17. Division,  part,  piepls  meris. 

Lukeio.  42  Mary  hath  chosen  that  good  part,  which 

Acts    8  21  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  ma. 

16. 12  the  chief  city  of  that  [part]  of  Macedonia 

2  Co.  6.  15  what  part  hath  he  that  believeth  with  an 

IS. Division,  part,  fxepos  meros. 

Matt.  2.  22  he  turned  aside  into  the  parts  of  Galilee 
Mark  8. 10  and  came  into  the  parts  of  Dalmanutha 
Luke  1 1.  36  (be)  full  of  light,  having  no  part  dark,  the 
J0IU113.   8  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me 

19.  23  and  made  four  parts,  to  every  soldier  a  p. 
Acts    2.  10  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Cyrene,  and 

5.    2  brought  a  certain  part,  and  laid  (it)  at  the 

20    2  he  had  gone  overthose  parts,  and  had  gi. 

23.    6  the  one  part  were  Sadducees,  and  the  ot. 

23.    9  [scribes  (that  were)  of  the  Pharisees' part] 

Roniii.  25  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel 

1  Co. 13.    9  we  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in  part 

13. 10  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away 
13. 12  now  I  know  in  part ;  but  then  shall  I  know 

2  Co.  1.  14  ye  have  acknowledged  us  in  part,  that  we 

2.  5  he  hath  not  grieved  me,  but  in  part ;  that 
Eph.  4.    9  also  descended  first  in  to  the  lower  [parts] 

4. 16  the.  .working  in  the  measure  of  every  [p.] 
Rev.  16. 19  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  parts 

20.  6  Blessed  and  holy  (is)  he  that  hath  part  in 

21.  8  But.  .shall  have  their  part  in  the  lak.v.ig 
19. The  one. ..the  other,  ot  fiev...ol  5e,  Acts  14.  4. 
20. Hand,  t  yad. 

Gen.  47.  24  four  parts  shall  be  your  own,  for  seed  of 
2  Ki.n.  7  two  parts  of  all  you  that  go  forth  on  the 
Neh.  11.    1  and  nine  parts  (to  dwell)  in  (other)  cities 

2\.Thigh,  nsn:  yarkah. 

Eze.   38.  15  come  from  thy  place  out  of  the  north  parts 
39.    2  cause  thee  to  come  up  from  the  north  pa. 

22.  A  cut  piece,  nru  neihach. 

Lev.  1.  8  shall  lay  the  parts,  the  head,  and  the  fat 
[See  also  Back,  east,  fifth,  first,  forth,  greater,  greatest, 
habitable,  hallowed,  highest,  hinder,  inner,  innermost, 
inward,  kinsman,  lacking,  low,  more,  neither,  secret, 
sixth,  tenth  third,  two,  utmost.] 
PART,  on  (ones) — 
I.Down  through,  Kara,  {ace.)  Jcata. 

1  Pe.  4  14  [on  their  part  he  is  evil,  .on  your  part  he] 
2.1n  behalf  of  ,  virep  (gen.)liuper. 

Mark  9.  40  For  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  ourpart 
PART,  to  have,  give,  or  take  a  — 
1.7*0  have  a  portion,  pby  chalaq. 

1  Sa.  30.  24  that  tarrieth  by  the  stuff :  they  shall  part 
Prov  17.    2  shall  have  part  of  the  inheritance  among 

2.  To  give  a  portion,  apportion,  pin  chalaq,  3. 
Psa.  22.  18  They  part  my  garments  among  them,  and 
Joel    3.    2  whom  they  have  scattered.,  and  parted  my 

3.7V)  halve,  divide,  rvsn  chatsah. 

Job    41.   6  shall  they  part  him  among  the  merchants? 

4.  To  be  halved,  divided,  n^n  chatsah,  2. 

2  Ki.   2.  14  they  parted  hither  aud  thither :  and  Elis. 
5. To  snatch  or  take  away,  "?X3  natsal,  5. 

2  Sa.  14.    6  (there  was)  none  to  part  them,  but  the  one 
6.  To  part,  separate,  "ns  parad,  5. 

Ruth  1 .  1 7  do  so ..  (if  ought)  but  death  part  thee  and 
2  Ki.  2. 11  parted  them  both  asunder;  and  Elijah 
Prov.  18. 18  The  lot.  .parteth  between  the  mighty 


7.  To  divide,  part,  D"i£ paras,  5. 

Lev.  11.    3  Whatsoeverparteththehoof.and  is  cloven 
Deut  14.    6  every  beast  that  parteth  the  hoof,  and  cl. 

8.  To  divide,  nns  pathath. 

Lev.    2.   6  Thou  shalt  part  it  in  pieces,  and  pour  oil 

9.  To  divide  throughout,  8iap.epi(w  diamerizo. 
Matt27.  35  parted  his  garments,  casting  lots:  that  it 

27.  35  Theypartedmygarments  among  them, and 
Markis.  24  theypartedhisgarments,castiuglotsupou 
Luke23.  34  And  they  parted  his  raiment,  and  cast  lots 
John  19.  24  Theyparted  niyraiment  among  them,  and 
Acts    2.  45  parted  them  to  all  (men),  as  every  man  had 

10.  To  divide,  fxepifa  inerizo. 

Heb.  7.    2  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  part  of  all;  first  be. 

11.2*0  hold  along  with,  juere'xw  metecho. 

Heb.  2. 14  also  himself  likewise  took  i)art  of  the  same 

PARTAKE,  PARTAKER  (with)— 

1. Portion,  pbr,  cheleq. 

Psa.  50. 18  and  hast  been  partaker  with  adulterers 

2.  To  recdvein  return,  avr  iX^.u^dyofxai  antilanibano. 

1  Ti.   6.    2  faithful  and  beloved,  partakers  of  the  be. 

Z.To  become  a  joint  partaker,  avyKoivwvos  yivop.at. 
Rom  11. 17  partakest  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the 
1  Co.   9.  23  that  I  might  be  partaker  thereof  with  (you) 
Phil.    1.   7  inasmuch  as.  .ye  all  are  partakers  of  my 

4.  Holding  along  with,  /x4roxos  metochos. 

Heb.  3.  1  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,  consi. 
3.  14  we  are  made  partakers  of  Christ,  if  we  hold 
6.  4  aud  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Gli 
12.   8  without  chastisement,  where  of  all  are  p. 

5.  One  having  in  common,  kolvwvos  koinonos. 

Matt  23  30  we  would  not  have  been  partakers  with 

1  Co.  10. 18  are  not  they  which  eat  of  the  sacrifices  p. 

2  Co.   1.   7  that  as  ye  are  partakers  of  the  sufferings 

1  Pe.  5.    1  a  partaker  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  rev. 

2  Pe.  1.   4  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  divine  nature 

6.  Division,  portion,  fxtpis  meris. 

Col.     1. 12  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance 

7. A  joint  holder*  av fx/xer o%o s  summetochos. 

Eph.    3.    6  partakers  of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  the 
5.    7  Be  not  ye  therefore  partakers  with  them 

PARTAKER  of  or  with  (afflictions),  to  be — 

1.  To  give  or  have  in  common,  Koivwvew  koinoned. 
Rom.  15.  27  have  been  make  partakers  of  their  spirit. 
1  Ti.    5.  22  neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins 
Heb.   2. 14  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and 

1  Pe.  4. 13  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings 

2  Jo.       11  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is  partak.  of 

2, To  take  or  receive  with,  fi€Ta\a{xfia.vw  metalamba. 
2  Ti.    2.    6  The  husbandman,  .must  be  first  partak.  of 
Heb.  12.  10  that  (we)  might  be  partakers  of  his  holi. 

3.  To  hold  with,  /j.€t4x<*>  metecho. 

1  Co.   9.  10  and  that  he.  .should  be  partaker  of  his  ho. 

9. 12  If  others  be  partakers  of  (this)  power  over 
10.  17  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread 
10.  21  ye  cannot  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table 
10. 30  if  I  by  grace  be  a  partaker,  why  am  I  evil 

i.To&ifferevilalongwith,avyKaKOTra64wsu<jkakopa. 

2  Ti.   1.   8  be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the 
5. To  give  or  have  in  common  with,  (rvyKoivwvew. 

Rev.  iS.    4  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and 
6.  To  have  a  division  or  part  with,  avp.j.tepi£ofj.at, 
1  Co.  9. 13  which  wait. .  are  partakers  with  the  altar? 

PARTED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  portioned,  apportioned,  phn  chalaq,  2. 

Job  38.  24  By  what  way  is  the  light  parted,  (which) 
2. To  be  parted,  separated,  "na  par  ad,  2. 

Gen.    2.  10  it  was  parted,  and  became  into  four  heads 
3.  To  set  or  place  apart,  Buo-rnpn  diistemi. 

Luke24.  51  he  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up 

PAR-THI-ANS,  Udpdoi. 

The  inhabitants  of  Parthia  proper,  which  is  N.W.  of 
Persia,  and  about  600  miles  long ;  having  Hyrcania  on 
the  N.W.,  Media  on  the  W.,  Asia  on  the  E.,  and 
Carmania  Deserta  on  the  S. ;  it  is  wholly  surrounded 
by  mountains ;  it  was  early  subject  to  Media,  then  to 
Persia,  and  also  to  Alexander  and  his  successors ;  it 
became  independent  in  B.C.  256;  at  the  death  of 
Mithridates,  B.C.  130,  it  extended  from  the  Euphrates 
to  the  Jordan,  and  from  the  Oxus  to  the  Persian  Gulf; 
m  B.C.  53  it  was  invaded  by  Craasus,  who  was  defeated 
and  slain  ;  in  A.D.  226  it  became  subject  to  Persia. 
Acts    2.   9P.,  andMedes, andElamites, andthedwe. 

PARTIAL,  to  be  — 

l.To  lift  up  the  face,  D'JD  n^'J  nasa  phanim. 

Mai.  2.   9  have  not  kept  my*  ways,  but  have  been  p. 

2.  To  judge  diversely,  Sm/eptVw  diakrino. 

Jas.    2.   4  Are  ye  not  then  partial  in  yourselves,  and 
PARTIALITY  (without)  — 
1. Not  judging  diversely,  impartial,  aStdtcptTos. 

Jas.    3.  17  without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrisy 
2.  A  bearing  toward,  partiality,  ^oV/cAnns  prosk. 

1  Ti    521  before  another,  doing  nothing  by  [part.] 


PARTICULAR 


732 


PASS 


PARTICULAR  (in)— 

Individually,  imperfectly,  4k  fiepovs  eh  inerous. 
i  Co.  12.  27  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular 

PARTICULARLY  — 

I.Down  to  or  in  parts,  Kara,  (xepos  kata  meros. 

Heb.  g.  5  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particular. 
'2.  Down  to  each  one,  icad*  %v  ckclgtov  hath  hen  hek. 

Acts  21. 19  he  declared  particularly  what  things  God 
PARTING  — 
The  mother,  DN  em. 

Eze.  21.  21  the  king  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  parting 

PARTITION  — 

Fence,  hedge,  <ppayfx6s  phragmos. 

Eph.   2. 14  broken  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition 
PARTITION,  to  make  a  — 
To  make  to  2?ass  over,  ~oy  abar,  3, 

1  Ki.  6.  21  madeapartition  by  the  chains  of  gold  be. 
PARTLY  — 
I. End,  extremity,  n?j?  qetsath. 

Dan.  2.  42  shall  be  partly  strong,  and  partly  broken 
~2. Some  part,  /xepos  rt  meros  ti. 

1  Co.11.  18  divisions  among  you ;  and  I  partly  believe 
-3. This  (indeed),  tovto  (fxey)  touto  (men). 

Heb.  10.  33  Partly,  whilst  ye  were,  .partly,  whilst  ye 
PARTNER  — 
l.To  have  a  portion,  apportion,  phn  chalaq. 

Prov.29.  24  Whoso  is  partner  with  a  thief  hatethhis 
2.0ne  having  in  common,  koivwvos  koinonos. 

Luke  5.  10  sons  of  Zebedee,  which  were  partners  w. 

2  Co.  8.  23  my  partner  and  fellow  helper  concerning 
Phm.      17  If  thou  count  me  therefore  a  partner,  re. 

"?>.  One  holdimg  along  tcith,  (x4roxos  metochos. 
Luke  5.   7  they  beckoned  unto  (their)  partners,  wh. 

PARTRIDGE  — 

.1  partridge,  caller,  N"Vp  qore. 

1  Sa.  26.  20  as  when  one  doth  hunt  a  partridge  in  the 
Jer.   17.  11  partridge  sitteth  (011  eggs),  and  hatcheth 

PA-RTJ'-AH,  nns  increase. 

Father  of  Jehoshaphat,  one  of  Solomon's  purveyors. 

a  c.  1040. 

1  Ki.  4. 17  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  P.  in  Issachar 
PAR-VA'-IM,  D-n?. 

\n  unknown  gold  region. 

2  Ch.  3.  6  precious  stones,  .the  gold  (was)  gold  of  P. 
PA'-SACH,  71 D3  limping. 

A  son  of  Japhlet,  great-grandson  of  Asher.     B.C.  1590. 

1  Ch.  7.  33  P.,  and  Bimhal,and  Ashvath.    These  (are) 
PAS-DAM-MTM,  D'Sn  D3  extremity  of  the  Jiowings. 
A   place  in  the  W.    of  Judah,  between  Shocho  and 
Azekah  ;  in  1  Sa.  17.  1  it  is  Ephes-dammim. 

1  Ch.ii.  13  He  was  with  David  at  P.,  and  there  the 
PA-SE'-AH,  PHA-SE'-AH,  npp  limping. 
1.  A  son  of  Eshton,  grandson  of  Chelub,  descendant  of 
Caleb  son  of  Hur.    b.c.  1420. 

1  Ch.  4.  12  and  P.,  and  Tehinnah  the  father  of  Irn. 
-2.  One  whose  descendants  were  reckoned  among  the 
Nethinim. 

Ezra    2.  49  the  children  of  P.,  the  children  of  Besai 

Neh.    7.  51  the  children  of  Uzza,  the  children  of  P. 
^.  Father  of  Jehoiada  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.    3.    6  old  gate  repaired  Jehoiada  the  son  of  P. 
PASH'-TJR,  -nivs  free. 
1.  Head  of  a  priestly  family  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  589. 

1  Ch.  9.  12  son  of  P.,  the  son  of  Malchijah,  and 
Ezra  2.  38  The  children  of  P.,  a  thousand  twohund. 

10.  22  And  of  the  sons  of  P.;  Elioenai,  Maaseiah 

Neh.   7.  41  The  children  of  P.,  a  thousand  two  hund. 

11. 12  Zecbariah,  the  son  of  P.,  the  son  of  Mai. 

2  A  priest  who  sealed  witli  Nehemiah  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10.    3  P.,  Amariah,  Malchijah 
3.  A  son  of  Immer  the  priest,  attd  chief  governor  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah.     B.C.  605. 
Jer.  20.    1  Now  P.  the  son  of  Immer  the  priest,  who 
20.   2  Then  P.  smote  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  and 
20.    3  P.  brought  forth  Jeremiah  out  of  the  sto. 
20.    3  The  Lord  hath  not  calledthy  nameP.,but 
20.    6  And  thou,  P.,  and  all  that  dwell  in  thine 
38.    1  Then.  .Gedaliah  the  son  of  P.,  and  Jucal 
i.  Son  of  Melchiah,  a  prince  of  Judah  in  the  days  of 
-leremiah.     B.C.  605. 

Jer.  21.    1  P.  the  son  of  Melchiah,  and  Zephaniah 
38.    1  P.  the  son  of  Malchiah,  heard  the  words 

PASS,  (along,  away,  beyond,   by,  forth,   on,  out,  over, 

through,  throughout),  to  — 

l.To  be  great,  greater,  Via  gadal. 

2  Ch.  9.  22  king  Solomon  passed  all  the  king  of  the  e. 
'2.  To  go  on,  ^?n  halak. 

Job   14.  20  Thou  prevailest.  .and  he  passeth  :  thou 

•   Psa.  58.    8  let  (every  one  of  them)  pass  away;  (like) 

78.  39  wind  that  passeth  away,  and  cometh  not 

Eccl.  1.    4  generation  passeth  away,  and  (another) 

Hos.  13.    3  and  as  the  early  dew  that  passeth  away 


3.  To  piass  on,  ^Sn  chalaph. 

Job  4.  15  Then  a  spirit  passed  before  my  face  ;  the 
9.  11  he  passeth  on  also,  but  I  perceive  him  not 

9.  26  They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships 
Isa.     8.    8  shall  prss  through  Judah ;  he  shall  overt 

21.    1  As  whirlwinds  in  the  south  pass  through 

4.To2^ciss  on,  r\hn  chalaph. 

Dan.  4.  16,  23  and  let.. seven  times  pass  over  him 
4.  25,  32  and  seven  times  shall  pass  over  thee 

5.  To  go  or  pass  over,  "GJJ  abar. 

Gen.  12.  6  Abram  passed  through  the  land  iinto  the 
15.  17  burning  lamp  that  passed  between  those 
18.  3  pass  not  away,  I  pray  thee,  from  thy  ser. 
18.    5  after  that  ye  shall  pass  on  :  for  therefore 

30.  32  will  pass  through  all  thy  flock  to  day,  rem . 

31.  21  passed  over  the  river,andset  hisface(to.) 

31.  52  not  pass  over,  .thou  shalt  not  pass  over 

32.  10  for  with  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  J  ordan 
32.  16  Pass  over  before  me,  and  put  a  space  bet. 
32.  22  took  his  two  wives,  .and  passed  over  the 

32.  31  as  he  passed  over  Penuel  the  sun  rose  upon 

33.  3  passed  over  before  them,  and  bowed  hims. 
33.  14  Let  my  lord,  .pass  over  before  his  servant 
37.  28  there  passed  by  Midianites,  merchant  m. 

Exodi2.  12  pass  through  the  land  of  Egypt  this  night 
12.  23  will  pass  through  to  smite  the  Egyptians 
15.  16  till  thy  people  pass  over,  O  LORD,  till  the 
15.  16  people  pass  over,  (which)  thou  hast  pure. 
30. 13  passeth  among  them  that  are  numbered 
30.  14  Every  one  that  passeth  among  them  that 
33.  22  while  my  glory  passeth  by,  that  I  will  put 

33.  22  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  I  pass  by 

34.  6  Lord  passed  by  before  him,  and  proclaim. 
Lev.  27.  32  (even)  of  whatsoever  passeth  under  the 
Nunii4.    7  land,  which  we  passed  through  to  search 

20.  17  Let  us  pass,  .through  thy  country  :  we 
20.  17  not  pass  through  the  fields,  or  through  the 
20.  17  not  turn,  .until  we  have  passed  thy  bord. 

20.  1 8  Thou  shalt  not  pass  by  me,  lest  I  come  out 

21.  22  Let  me  pass  through  thy  land  :  we  will 
21.  23  would  not  suffer  Israel  to  pass  through 
32.  27  servants  will  pass  over,  every  man  armed 
32.  29  If  the  children . .  will  pass  with  you  over 
32.  30  if  they  will  not  pass  over  with  you  armed 

32.  32  We  will  pass  over  armed  before  the  Lord 

33.  8  passed  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  into 

34.  4  pass  on  to  Zin .  .and  pass  on  to  Azmon 
Deut.  2.    4  Ye  (are)  to  pass  through  the  coast  of  your 

2.    8  when  we  passed  by.  .and  passed  by  the 
2.  18  Thou  art  to  pass  over  through  Ar,  the  co. 
2.  24  Rise  ye  up . .  and  pass  over  the  river  Arnon 
2.  27  Let  me  pass  through  thy  land  :  I  will  go 
2.  28  only  I  will  pass  through  on  my  feet 

2.  29  until  I  shall  pass  over  Jordan,  into  the  la. 

3.  18  ye  shall  pass  over  armed  before  yourbre. 
3.  21  all  the  kingdoms  whither  thou  passest 

9.  1  Thou  (art)  to  pass  over  Jordan  this  day 
11.  31  For  ye  shall  pass  over  Jordan  to  go  in  to 
27.   2  on  theday  when  yeshallpassoverJordan 

29.  16  through  the  nations  which  ye  passed  by 

30.  18  land  whither  thou  passest  over  Jordan  to 
Josh.  1.  11  Pass  through  the  host,  andcommandthe 

1.  11  for  within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over 

1 .  14  but  ye  shall  pass  before  your  brethren  ar. 

2.  23  passed  over,  and  came  to  Joshua  the  son 

3.  1  and  lodged  there  before  they  passed  over 
3.  4  for  ye  have  not  passed  (this)  way  hereto. 
3.  6  Take  up  the  ark . .  and  pass  over  before  the 
3. 11  ark  of  the  covenant,  .passeth  over  before 

3.  14  removed  from  their  tents,  to  pass  over  J. 

3. 16  the  people  passed  over  right  against  Jer. 

3. 17  Israelites  passed  over  on  dry  ground,  un. 

4.  s  Pass  over  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord  your 
4.  7  when  it  passed  over  Jordan  the  waters  of 
4. 10  and  the  people  hasted  and  passed  over 
4.  ir  that  the  ark  of  the  Lord  passed  over,,  and 
4.  12  passed  over  armed  before  the  children  of 
4.  13  passed  over  before  the  Lord  unto  battle 
6.  7  Pass  on.  .let  him  that  is  armed  pass  on 
6.    8  passed  on  before  the  Lord,  and  blew  with 

10.  29  Then  Joshua  passed  fromMakkedah,  and 
10.  31  Joshua  passed  from  Libnah,  and  all  Israel 

10.  34  from  Lachish  Joshua  passed  unto  Eglon 
15.  3  passed  along  to  Zin . .  and  passed  along  to 
15.  4  it  passed  toward  Azmon,  and  went  out 
15.  6  passed  along  by  the  north  of  Beth-arabah 
15.  7  passed  toward  the  waters  of  En-shemesh 
15.  10  passed  along,  .and  passed  on  toTimnah 

15.  11  passed  along  to  mount  Baalah,  and  went 

16.  2  passeth  along  unto  the  borders  of  Archi 
16.  6  and  passed  by  it  on  the  east  to  Janohah 
18.    9  men  went  and  passed  through  the  land 

18. 18  passed  along  toward  the  side  over  against 

18.  19  passed  along  to  the  side  of  Beth-hoglah 
19. 13  from  thence  passeth  on  along  on  the  east 

22. 19  pass  ye  over  unto  the  land  of  the  posses. 
24.  17  all  the  people  through  whom  we  passed 

Judg.  3.  26  passed  beyond  the  quarries,  and  escaped 
3.  28  went,  .and  suffered  not  a  man  to  pass  over 
8.   4  Gideon .  .passed  over,  he,  and  the  three 

10.  9  passed  over  Jordan  to  fight  also  against 

11.  17  Letme,  Ipray  thee,  pass  through  thyland 
11. 19  Let  us  pass,  .through  thy  land  into  my  p. 

11.  20  trusted  not  Israel  to  pass  through  his  CO. 
ti.  29  passed  over  Gilead.  .and  passed  over  Mi. 

11.  29,  32  passed  over  (unto)  the  children  of  A. 

12.  1  Wherefore  passedst  thou  over  to  fight  a. 
12.  3  passed  over  against  the  children  of  Am. 
18. 13  they  passed  thence  unto  mount  Ephrajm 

19.  12  not  turn  aside,  .we  will  pass  over  to  Gil). 


Judg  19.  14  they  passed  on  and  went  their  way;  and 

1  Sa.    9.   4  he  passed  through  mount  Ephraim,  and 

9.  4  they  passed  through . .  and  he  passed  thr. 
9.  27  pass  on  before  us,  and  he  passed  on,  but 
14.    8  Behold,  wewillpassover  unto  (these)  men 

14.  23  and  the  battle  passed  over  unto  Beth-aven 

15.  12  is  gone  about,  and  passed  on,  and  gone  d. 
27.  2  he  passed  over  with  the  six  hundred  men 
29.    2  lords  of  the  Philistines  passed  on  by  hun. 

29.  2  David  and  his  men  passed  on  in  the  rere. 

2  Sa.   2.  29  passed  over  Jordan,  and  went  throughall 

10.  17  and  passed  over  Jordan,  and  came  to  H. 
15.  18  all  his  servants  passed  on  beside  him ;  and 
15.  18  six  hundred  men.  .passed  on  before  the 
15.  22  pass  over.  And  Ittai  the  Gittite  passed  o. 
15.  23  passed  over:  the  king,  .passed  over  theb. 
15.  23  people  passed  over,  toward the'way  of  tht 
15.  33  If  thou  passest  on  with  me,  then  thou  sh. 
17.  16  speedily  pass  over;  lest  the  king  be  swa. 
17.  21  pass  quickly  over  the  water:  for  thus  ha. 
17,  22  passed  over  Jordan:  by  the  morninglight 
17.  24  Absalom  passed  over  Jordan,  he  and  all 

24.  s  passed  over  Jordan,  and  pitched  in  Aroer 

1  Ki.  2.  37  on  the  day  thou,  .passest  over  the  brook 

•    9.   8  every  one  that  passeth  by  it  shall  be  ast. 
T3. 25  men  passed  by,  and  saw  the  carcase  cast 
iS.    6  divided  the  land,  .to  pass  thi'oughout  it 
19. 11  Lord  passed  by,  and  a  great  and  strong 

19.  19  passed  by  him,  and  cast  his  mantle  upon 

20.  39  as  the  king  passed  by,  he  cried  unto  the 

2  KTi.  4.    8  passed  to  Shunem.  .And.  .as  he  passed  by 

4.  9  holyman  of  God  which  passeth  by  us  con. 
'4.  31  passed  on  before  them,  and  laid* the  staff 

6.  9  Beware  that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place 
6.  30  passed  by  upon  the  wall,  and  the  people 

12.  4  money  of  every  one  that  passeth  (the  ac.\ 
14.   9  there  passed  by  a  wild  beast  that  (was)  in 

1  Ch.19.  17  passed  over  Jordan,  and  came  upon  them 

2  Ch.  7.  21  astonishment  to  everyone  that  passeth  by 

25.  18  there  passed  by  a  wild  beast  that  (was)  in 

30.  10  passed  from  city  to  city  through  the  co.i 
Neh.  2. 14  (there  was) no  place  for  the  beast,  .topass 
Job     6.  15  as  the  stream  of  brooks  they  pass  away 

11.  16  remember  (it)  as  waters  (that)  pass  away 

14.  5  appointed  his  bounds  that  he  cannot  pass 

15.  19  given,  andnostrangerpassed  amongthem 
19.  8  fenced  up  my  way  that  I  cannot  pass,  and 
30.  15  and  my  welfare  passeth  away  as  a  cloud 
34.  20  be  troubled  at  midnight,  and  pass  away 
37.  21  but  the  wind  passeth,  and  cleanseththem 

Psa.    8.    8  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  seas 

iS.  12  thick  clouds  passed,  hail  (stones)  and  coals 
37.  36  Yet  he  passed  away,  and,  lo,  he  (was)not 
d.8.  4  kings  were  assembled,  they  passed  by  to. 
12  so  that  all  they  which  pass  by  the  way  do 
6  passing  through  the  valley  of  Baca  make 
41  All  that  pass  by  the  way  spoil  him :  he  is 

16  Forthewind  passethover  it, and  itisgone 
9  set  a  bound  that  they  may  not  pass  over 
4  his  days(are)as  a  shadow  that  passeth  away 
6  hath  made  a  decree  which  shall  not  pass 

15  pass  not  byit.turn  from  it,  and  passaway 
29  waters  should  not  pass  his  commandment 
25  As  the  whirlwind  passeth,  so  (is)  the  wick. 

11  (it  is)  his  glory  to  pass  over  a  transgression 

3  but  the  simple  pass  on,  and  are  punished 

17  He  that  passeth  by,  (and)  meddleth  with 

12  (but)  the  simple  pass  on,  (and)  are  punis. 

4  (I  t  was)but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them 
21  they  shall  pass  through  it  hardly  bestead 

2  merchantsof  Zidon,  that  pass  over  the  sea 
6  Pass  ye  over  to  Tarshish;  howl,  ye  inha, 

10  Pass  through  thy  land  as  a  river,  0  daug. 

12  pass  over  to  Chittim ;  there  also  shalt  thou 

15,  18  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass  th. 

19  for  morning  by  morning  shall  it  pass  over 

5  as  chaff  that  passeth  away ;  yea,  it  shall 
9  he  shall  pass  over  to  his  strong  hold  for 

21  neither  shall  gallant  ship  pass  thereby 
10  none  shall  pass  through  it  for  ever  and  e. 
8  unclean  shallnot  pass  over  it;  butit(shall 
27  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God 
3    pursued  them,  (and)  passed  safely  ;(even) 
2  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I 
2  uncover  the  thigh,  pass  over  the  rivers 
10  the  sea  a  way  for  the  ransomed  to  pass  0.? 
Jer.     2.   6  a  land  that  no  man  passed  through,  and 
2. 10  For  pass  over  the  isles  of  Chittim,  and  see 

5.  22  a  perpetual  decree,  that  it  cannot  pass  it 

5,  22  they  roar,  yet  can  they  not  pass  over  it? 
3.  13  have  given  them  shall  pass  away  from  them 
9.  10  so  that  none  can  pass  through  (them) ;  n. 
9.  12  like  a  wilderness,  that  none  passeth  th.? 

13.  24  passeth  away  by  the  wind  of  the  wilder. 
iS.  16  every  one  that  passeth  thereby  shall  be 
19.  8  every  one  that  passeth  thereby  shall  be 
22.    8  many  nations  shall  pass  by  this  city,  and 

33.  13  shalithe  flocks  pass  again  under  the  hands 

34.  18  and  passed  between  the  parts  thereof 
34.  19  which  passed  between  the  parts  of  the  c. 
51.  43  neitherdoth(any)sonof  man  pass  thereby 

Lam    1.  12  (Is  it)  nothing  to  you,  allye  that  pass  by? 

2.  15  All  that  pass  by  clap  (their)  hand*  atthee 

3.  44  that  (our)  prayer  should  r->f  passthrough 

4.  21  the  cup  also  shall  poc^  through  unto  thee 
Eze.    5.  14  a  reproach,  .in  ths  sight  of  all  that  pass  by 

6.  17  pestilence  n«:,i  blood  shall  pass  through 

14.  15  that  no  man  may  pass  through  because  of 

16.  6  wheu  I  passed  by  thee,  and  saw  thee  pol. 
16.    8  when  I  passed  by  thee,  and  looked  upon 
16. 15  on  every  one  that  passed  by ;  his  it  was 
16.  -45  hast  opened,  .to  everyone  that  passed  by 


84. 

89. 
103. 
104: 
144. 
148. 
Frov.  4. 


19. 
22, 

26. 

Song  3. 
Isa.  8 

23' 

23 

23 
=3' 
28 
28 
29. 
3i 
33 
34 
35 
40. 
4i 
43 
47 
5*- 


PASS 


733 


PASSOVER, 


Eze.  29.  11  No  foot  of  man  shall  pass  through  it,  nor 
"29. 11  foot  of  beast  shall  pass  through  it,  neither 
33.  2?  be  desolate,  that  none  shall  pass  through 

35.  7  cut  off  from  it  him  that  passeth  out  and 

36.  34  desolate  in  the  sight  of  all  that  passed  by 
39.  15  thepasseugers(that)pass  through  the  land 
47.    5  river  that  I  could  not  pass  over :  for  the 

Ban.  11. 10  certainly  come,  and  overflow,  and  passt. 

11.  40  enter,  .and  shall  overflow  and  pass  over 
Hos.  10.  11  but  I  passed  over  upon  her  fair  neck:  I 
Joel  3.  17  no  strangers  pass  through  her  any  more 
Amos  5.    5  pass  not  to  Beer-sheba :  for  Gilgal  shall 

5. 17  for  I  will  pass  through  thee,  saith  the  L. 

6.  2  Pass  ye  unto  Calneh,  and  see ;  and  from 

7.  8  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more 

8.  2  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more 
Jon.    2.   3  thy  billows  and  thy  waves  passed  over  me 
Mic.   1.  11  Pass  ye  away,  thou  inhabitant  of  Saphlr 

2.   8  from  them  that  pass  by  securely  as  men 
2.  13  have  broken  up,  and  have  passed  through 

2.  13  their  king  shall  pass  before  them,  and  the 
7.  18  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  rem. 

Nah.  1. 12  be  cut  down,  when  he  shall  pass  through 
1. 15  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee 

3.  19  upon  whom  hath  not  thy  wickedness  pa. 
Hab.   1.  11  he  shall  pass  over,  and  offend,  (imputing) 

3.  10  the  overflowing  of  the  water  passed  by 
Zeph.  2.   2  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before  the  fierce 

2.  15  every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  hiss 

3.  6  their  streets  waste,  that  none  passeth  by 
Zech.  7.  14  thatno  man  passed  through  nor  returned 

9.  8  because  of  Mm  that  passeth  by,  and  be. 
9.  •  8  no  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any 

10.  n  shall  pass  through  the  sea  with  affliction 
6.7*0  cause  to  pass  over,  ~aj;  abar,  5. 

Lev.  18.  21  not  let.  .pass  through  (the  fire)  toMolech 
Jer.  46.  17  Pharaoh.,  hath  passed  the  time  appointed 

7 -To pass  by  or  on,  rny  adah. 

Job  28.   8  trodden  it;  nor  the  fierce  lion  passed  by 
3.  To  pass  by  or  on,  rn&  adah. 

Dan.   3.  27  nor  the  smell  of  fire  had  passed  on  them 

7.  14  dominion,  which  shall  not  pass  away 

P.  To  leap  or  2mss  over,  np3  pasach. 

Exodi2. 13  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you 
12. 23  Lord  will  pass  over  the  door,  and  will  not 

12.  27  who  passed  over  the  houses  of  the  childr. 

10.  To  turn  up,  behave,  avao-rpetyai  anastrepho. 

1  Pe.    1. 17  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  (here) 

1 1 .  To  go  up  through,  Sia/Salvco  diabaino. 
Lukei6.  26  so  that  they  which  would  pass  from  hence 
Heb.  11.  29  Ey  faith  they  passed  through  the  Red  sea 

12.7b  pass  over  through,  5m7repaco  diaperao. 

Matt.  9.    1  passed  over,  and  came  into  his  own  city 
Mark  5.  21  when  Jesus  was  passed  over  again  by  ship 
6.  53  when  they  had  passed  over,  they  came 

13. To  2iasson  through,  diaTropevofj,aidiaporeuo)nai. 
LukeiS.  36  hearing  the  multitude  pass  by,  he  asked 

14.  To  come  or  go  through,  Stipxouai  durchomcd. 
Mark  4.  35  saith.  .Let  us  pass  over  unto  the  other  si. 
Luke  4.  30  passing  through  the  midst  of  them  went 

17. 11  passed  through  the  midst  of  Samaria  and 

19.    1  (Jesus)  entered  and  passed  through  Jer. 

19.   4  climbed  up.,  for  he  was  to  pass  that  (way) 

Acts    8.  40  passing  through  he  preached  in  all  the  c. 

9.  32  came  to  pass,  as  Peter  passed  throughout 

14.  24  after  they  had  passed  throughout  Pisid. 

15.  3  theypassed  through  Phenice  and  Samaria 

17.  23  For  as  I  passed  by,  and  beheld  your  dev. 

18.  27  he  was  disposed  to  pass  into  Achaia,  the 

19.  1  Paul  having  passed  through  the  upper  c. 

19.  21  when  he  had  passed  through  Macedonia 
Rom.  5.  12  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all 

1  Co.  10.   1  under  the  cloud,  and  all  passed  through 

16.  5  come  unto  you,  when  I  shall  pass  through 
16.   5  Macedonia :  for  I  do  pass  through  Mace. 

2  Co.  1. 16  [to  pass]  by  you  into  Macedonia,  and  to 

15.  To  travel  through,  SioSeuw  diodeico. 

Acts  17.    1  when  they  had  passed  through  Amphip. 

16.  To  come,  epxofj-ai  erchomai. 

Acts    5.  15  shadow  of  Peter  passing  by  might  oversh. 

17.  To  go  up  over,  f±<=Ta$aiv<a  metabaino. 

1  Jo.  3. 14.  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 

18.  To  lead  along  by,  Trapdyaj  parago. 

Matt.  9.   9  as  Jesus  passed  forth  from  thence,  he  saw 

20.  30  when  they  heard  that  Jesus  passed  by,  c. 
Mark  2. 14  as  he  passed  by,  he  saw  Levi  the  (son)  of 

15.  21  who  passed  by,  coming  out  of  the  country 
John  8.  59  [Jesus  hid  himself .  .aud  so  passed  by] 

9.    1  as  (Jesus)  passed  by,  he  saw  a  man  which 

1  Co.  7.  31  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  aw. 

1  Jo.    2.  17  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  there. 

19. To  He  along  by,  irapa.x4yofj.ai  paralegoriiai. 

Acts  27.    8  hardly  passing  it,  came  unto  a  place  wh. 

20.  T'o  passonalo7ig,Trapairopevofj.at.  pa.raporcuomai. 
Matt  27.  39  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him,  wagging 
Mark  9.  30  departed  thence,  and  [passed]  through 

11.  20  as  they  passed  by,  they  saw  the  fig  tree 
15  29  they  that  passed  by  railed  on  him,  wagging 

21.  T'o  come  or  go  along,  izapipxoy-0.1  parerelio-maA. 
Matt  5. 18  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one 

5. 18  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law 

8.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
24. 34  This  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  t. 


Matt  24.  35  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  a. 
26.  39  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from 

26.  42  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me 
Mark  6.  48  saw  them  toiling,  .would  have  passed  by 

13.  30  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  t. 

13.  31  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  a. 

14.  35  if  it  were  possible,  the  hour  might  pass 
Luken.  42  pass  over  judgment  and  the  love  of  God 

16.  17  it  is  easier  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass 

18.  37  toldhim,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by 

21.  32  generation  shall  not  pass  away  till  all  be 

21.  33  pass  away ;  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  a. 

Acts  16.    8  they  passing  by  Mysia  came  down  to  Tr. 

2  Co.  5. 17  old  things  are  passed  away;  behold,  all 

Jas.     1. 10  because  as  the  flower,  .he  shall  pass  away 

2  Pe.   3. 10  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  no. 

Rev.  21.    1  heaven  and  the  first  earth  [were  passed] 

22.  To  cast  over,  surpass,  inrepfiaWco  huperballd. 
Eph.   3.  19  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge 

23.  T'o  hold  over,  excel,  v-irepex^  huperecho. 

Phil.   4.    7  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  underst. 
PASS,  to  bring  to  — 

1.  To  caicse  to  go  in,  n"12  bo,  5. 

2  Ki.19.  25  now  have  I  brought  it  to  pass,  that  thou  sh. 
Isa.  46. 11  I  will  also  bring  it  to  pass ;  I  have  purpo. 

2.  To  finish,  determine,  rhs  Jcalah,  3. 

Provi6.  30  moving  Ins  lips  he  bringeth  evil  to  pass 

3.  To  do,  make,  "ins;  abad. 

Tsa.  28.  21  and  bring  to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act 

PASS,  to  be  brought  to  — 
T'o  become-,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

1  C0.15.  54  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying 

PASS,  can  — 

T'o  /j«55  through,  Siairepda)  diaperao. 

LukeiS.  26  neither  can  they  pass  to  us,  that  (would 
PASS,  to  come  to  — 
To  be  done,  made,  rt'^n  asah,  2. 

Eze.  12.  25  word  that  I  shall  speak  shall  come  to  pass 
[See  under  Come  to  pass.] 

PASS  (by  or  through),  to  make  or  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  pass  over,  *Oi>  abar,  5. 

Gen.    8.    1  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth 
Exod33. 19  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before 
Num  27.    7  cause  the  inheritance . .  to  pass  unto  them 

27.  8  cause  his  inheritance  to  pass  unto  his  da. 
Deut.  2.  30  would  not  let  us  pass  by  him :  for  the  L. 

18.  10  maketh  his  son.  .to  pass  through  the  Are 

1  Sa.  16.    8  called  Abinadab,  and  made  him  pass  bef . 

16.   9  Then  Jesse  made  Shammah  to  pass  by 
16. 10  Jesse  made  seven  of  his  sons  to  pass  bef. 

2  Sa.  12.  31  made  them  pass  through  the  brick  kiln 
2  Ki.  16.    3  made  his  son  to  pass  through  the  fire,  a. 

17. 17  they  caused  their  sons,  .to  pass  through 
21.  6  he  made  his  son  pass  through  the  fire,  and 
23. 10  no  manmightmakehisson.  .pass  through 

2  Ch.33.    6  caused  his  children  to  pass  through  the 

Psa.  78. 13  caused  them  topassthrough;andhemade 
136. 14  made  Israel  to  pass  through  the  midst  of 

Jer.  15.  14  I  will  make  (theej  to  pass  with  thine  ene. 
32.  35  cause  their  sons,  .to  pass  through  (the  fi.) 

Eze.  5.  1  cause  (it)  to  pass  upon  thine  head  and  up. 
14. 15  If  I  cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through 
16.  21  cause  them  to  pass  through  (the  fire)  for 
20. 26  caused  to  pass  through  (the  fire)  all  that 
20.  31  when  ye  make  your  sons  to  pass  through 
20.  37  I  will  cause  you  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and 
23.  37  caused  their  sons,  .topassfortheinthrou. 
37.  2  And  caused  me  to  pass  by  them  round  ab. 
46.  21  caused  me  to  pass  by  the  four  corners  of 

Zech.  3.    4  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee 
13.    2  will  cause  the  prophets.,  to  pass  out  of  the 

PASS  by  on  the  other  side,  to  — 
T'o  come  along  over  against,  ai/Tnrap4pxo/j.ai  anti. 
Luke  10.  31  saw  him,  he  passed  by  on  the  other  side 
10.  32  looked,  .and  passed  by  on  the  other  side 

PASS  the  flower  of  ons's  age,  to  — 

Beyond  the  point  (of  age),  WzpaKfxos  huperahmos. 

1  Co.  7.  36  if  she  pass  the  flower  of  (her)  age,  and  n. 
PASS,  place  where  it  shall  — 
Passage,  ford,  ~o£D  maabar. 

Isa.   30.  32  place  where  the  grounded  staff  shall  pass 
PASS  on  through  — 
To  come  before  or  fen' ward,  Trpoepxo/j.aL  proercliom. 

Acts  12.  10  went  out,  and  passed  on  through  one  st. 
PASSAGE  — 
1. Passage,  ford,  "12J2.5  maabar. 

1  Sa.  13.  23  garrison,  .went  out  to  the  passage  of  Mi. 
2. Passage,  ford.  n"i2y-p  mabarah. 

Judgi2.    5  Gileadites  took  the  passages  of  Jordan  be. 
12.   6  took  him,  and  slew  him  at  the  passages  of 

i  Sa.  14.   4  between  the  passages,  by  which  Jonathan 

"isa.    10. 29  They  are  gone  over  the  passage  :  they  have 

Jer.  51.  32  passages  are  stopped,  and  the  reeds  they 

3.  Passage,  ~ay  eber. 

Jer.  22.  20  cry  from  the  passages :  for  all  thy  lovers 

PASSAGE,  to  give  — 
To  pass  over,  13JJ  abar. 

Num  20.  21  refused  to  give  Israel  passage  through  bis 


PASSED  (away  or  over),  to  be  — 

1.  To  front,  turn  the  face,  nis  panah. 

Psa.  90.   9  For  all  our  days  are  passed  away  in  thy  w. 

2.  To  pass  over,  ~au  abar. 

Num33.  51  When  ye  are  passed  over  Jordan  into  the 
Deut  27.  3  when  thou  art  passed  over,  that  thou  m. 
Josh.  3.  17  until  all  the  people  were  passed  clean  over 

4.    1,  11  when  all  the  people  were  clean  passed  o. 

4.  23  until  ye  were  passed  over,  as  the  Lord  your 
Isa.  10.  28  He  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  to  Mig. 
Jer.  11.  15  holy  flesh  is  passed  from  thee?  when  thou 

3.7b  be  jwssed  over,  "131/  abar,  2. 

Eze.  47.    5  a  river  that  could  not  be  passed  over 

4.  To  come  or  go  away  or  of,  air e pxofJ.au  aperchomai. 
Rev.  21.    4  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away 

5.  To  come  or  go  through,  5iepX°Mai  dierchomai. 
Heb.  4. 14  high  priest,  that  is  passed  into  the  heavtms- 

6.  7*o  go  up  over,  fj.sra0aii/aj  metabaino. 

John  5.  24  not  come,  .but  is  passed  from  death  unto 
PASSENGER  — 

1.  To  pass  over  tJieway,  X}1  "nu  abar  derek. 

Prov.  9. 15  To  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their 

2.  To  pass  over,  *nj/  abar. 

Eze.  39.  11  valley  of  the  passengers  on  the  east  of  the 
39.  11  it  shall  stop  the  (noses)  of  the  passengers 
39.  14  bury  with  the  passengers  those  that  rem . 
39.  15  passengers  (that)  pass  through  the  land 

PASSING  (over)  — 

l.To  pass  over,  "OJJ  abar. 

Judgig,  18  We  (are)  passing  from  Beth-lehem-judah 
2  Sa.  15.  24  until  all  the  people  had  done  passing  out 
2  Ki.  6.  26  as  the  king  of  Israel  was  passing  by  upon 
Prov.  7.  8  Passingthroughthe  street  near  her  corner 
Eze.  39.  14  passingthroughtheland,tobury  with  the 

2.  T'o  leap  or  pass  over,  nps  pasach. 

Isa.   31.   5  As  birds  flying,  .passing  over  he  will  pre. 
PASSION  — 
To  suffer,  iracx®  pc&scho. 

Acts    1.   3  he  showed  himself  alive  after  his  pas&ioii 
PASSIONS,  of  or  subject  to  like — 
Suffering  like  things,  d/xotowadris  homoupalhes. 

Acts  14.  15  We  also  are  men  of  like  passions  with  you. 

Jas.     5.  17  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions 

PASSOVER  (offering)  — 

l.A  2jassing  over,  the p>assover  festival,  nps pesach, 
Exodi2.  11  eat  it  in  haste :  it  (is)  the  Lord's  passover 
12.  21  take  you  a  lamb . .  and  kill  the  passover 
12.  27  It  (is)  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord's  passover 
12.  43  This  (is)  the  ordinance  of  the  passover 
12.  48  will  keep  the  passover  to  the  Lord,  let  all 

34.  25  sacrifice  of  the  feast  of  the  passover  be 
Lev.  23.    5  first  month  at  even  (is)  the  Lord's  passov 
Num.  g.   2  Let  the  children,  .also  keep  the  passovtr 

9.   4  spake,  .that  they  should  keep  the  passov. 

9.   5  they  kept  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth 

9.    6  that  they  could  notkeep  the  passover  on 

9.  10  yet  he  shall  keep  the  passover  unto  the  L. 

9. 12  according  to  all  the  ordinances  of  the  pa. 

9.  13  forbeareth  to  keep  the  passover,  even  the 

9.  14  and  will  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lok!> 

9.  14  according  to  the  ordinance  of  the  passov. 

28.  16  the  first  month  (is)  the  passover  of  the  L. 

33.    3  on  the  morrow  after  the  passover  the  ch. 

Deuti6.    1  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  thy  G. 

16.   2  Thoushalt  thereforesaerificethepassover 

16.   5  Thou  mayest  not  sacrifice  the  passover  w. 

16.   6  there  thou  shalt  sacrifice  the  passover  at 

Josh.  5. 10  kept  the  passover  ou  the  fourteenth  day 

5. 11  did  eat.  .on  the  morrow  after  the  passo. 

2  Ki.23.  21  Keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  your.G. 

23.  22  there  was  notholdensuchapassover  from 

23.  23  passover  was  holden  to  the  Lord  in  Jerus  - 

2  Ch.30.    1,  5  keep  the  passover  unto  the  Lord  God 

30.    2  keep  the  passover  in  the  second  month 

30.  15  killed  the  passover  on  the  fourteenth  (day) 

30.  17  charge  of  the  killing  of  the  passovers  for 

30.  18  yet  did  they  eat  the  passover  otherwise 

35.  1  kept  a  passover.  .and  they  killed  the  pas. 
35.  6  So  kill  the  passover,  and  sanctify  yoursch 
35.  7  all  for  the  passover  offerings,  for  all  that 
35.  8  gave  unto  the  priestsfor  the  passover  off. 
35.    9  gave  unto  the  Levites  for  passover  offer. 

35. 11  killed  the  passover,  and  the  priests  spri. 

35. 13  roasted  the  passover  with  fire  according 
35.  16  keep  the  passover,  and  to  offer  burnt  off. 
35.  17  kept  the  passover  at  that  time,  and  the 
35.  18  there  was  no  passover  like  to  that  kept  in 
35.  18  keep  such  a  passover  as  Josiah  kept,  and 
35. 19  In  the  eighteenth  year,  .wasthis  passover 

Ezra   6.  19  kept  the  passover  upon  the  fourteenth  . 

6.  20  killed  the  passover  for  all  the  children  of 

Eze.  45.  21  ye  shall havethe passover,  afeastofseven 

2.Passover,  (from  Heb.  nps)  -n-dax^  2}ascna- 

Matt  26.  2  after  two  days  is  (the  feast  of)  the  passo. 
26.  17  we  prepare  for  thee  to  eat  the  passover 
26.  18  will  keep  the  passover  at  thy  house  with 
26.  19  appointed,  .and  they  made  ready  the  pas. 
Marki4.  1  After  two  days  was  (the  feast  of)  the  pas. 
14.  12  when  they  killed  the  passover,  his  discip. 

14. 12  prepare  that  thou  mayest  eat  the  passov. 

14. 14  where  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my  d. 
14.  16  them :  and  they  made  ready  the  passover 

Luke  2.  41  went .  .every  year  at  the  feast  of  the  pas?. 


PAST 


734 


PATRIARCH 


Luke22.  i  feast,  .drew  nigh,  which  is  called  the  pas. 
22.  7  Then  came  the  day.  .when  the  pasaover 
22.  8  Go  and  prepare  us  the  passover,  that  we 
22.  ii  where  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  myd. 
22.  13  them  :  and  they  made  ready  the  passover 
22.  15  have  desired  to  eat  this  passover  with  you 

John  2.  13  passover  was  at  hand;  and  Jesus  went  up 
2.  23  when  he  was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  passover 
6.  4  the  passover,  afeast  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh 
11.  55  Jews'  passover  was  nigh  at  hand  :  and  m. 

11.  55  went,  .up  to  Jerusalem  hefore  the  passo. 

12.  1  six  days  before  the  passover,  came  to  Be. 

13.  1  Now  before  the  feastof  the  passover,  wh. 
18.  28  but  that  they  might  eat  the  passover 

18.  39  release  unto  you  one  at  the  passover :  wi. 

19.  14  it  was  the  preparation  of  the  passover,  and 
1  Co.  5.  7  For  even  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed 
Heb  11.  28  Through  faith  he  kept  the  passover,  and 

PAST  — 

X. There  is  not,  there  are  not,  }'N  aijin. 

Job     9. 10  Which  doeth  greatthingspast  findingout 

2. Before,  D!£  qedem. 

Job  29.    2  Oh  that  I  were  as  (in)  months  past,  as  (in) 

3. First,  |iu\xl  rishon. 

Deut.  4.  32  For  ask  now  of  the  days  that  are  past,  w. 

4. Beyond,  irapd  {accS  para. 

Heb.  11. 11  was  delivered  of  a  child  when  she  was  p. 

5.  To  come  alongside,  irapepxofJ.ai  parerchomai. 

1  Pe.  4.    3  For  the  time  past  of  (our)  life  may  suffice 

6.  To  pass  or  go  along,  Trapolxofxat  p>a-roichomai. 
Acts  14.  16  Who  in  times  past  suffered  all  nations  to 

PAST,  to  be  — 

l.To  turn  aside,  "no  swr. 

*     1  Sa.  15.  32  said,  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past 

2.  To  pass  over,  131/  abar. 

Gen.  50.   4  wheu  the  days  of  his  mourningwere  past 
Nuni2i.  22  will  go  along,  .uutil  we  be  past  thy  border 

2  Sa.  11.  27  wlieu  the  mourning  was  past,  David  sent 

16.  1  when  David  was  a  little  past  the  top  (of 

1  KX18.  29  when  midday  was  past,  and  they  prophe. 
Job  17. 11  My  days  are  past,  my  purposes  are  broken 
Psa.  90.  4  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past,  and  (as)  aw. 
Song  2.  11  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  (and) 
Jer.     8.  20  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended 

3.  To  be  pursued,  Hl"i  radaph,  2. 

Eccl.  3.  15  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  past 

4.  To  turn  back,  liv  shiib. 

Job  14.  13  keep  me  secret,  until  thy  wrath  be  past 
5. To  come  aioay  or  off,  air4pxop.at  aperchomai. 
Rev.    9.  12  One  woe  is  past ;  (and)behold,  there  come 

1 1 .  14  The  second  woe  is  past ;  (and),  behold,  the 

6.  To  become,  yivop.ai  ginomai. 

Luke  9.  36  when  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found 

2  Ti.    2. 18  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  alrea. 

7.  To  become  through  or  past,  Biayivo/xat  diagia  omai. 

M;uki6.    1  when  the  sabbath  was  past,  MaryMagda. 

8.  To  come  through,  Btepxofxai  dierchomai. 

Acts  12. 10  When  they  were  past  the  first  and  these. 

9.  To  lead  alongside,  napdyw  parago. 

1  Jo.   2.    8  because  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true 

10.  To  come  alongside,  1ra.pipxop.a1  parerchomai. 
Matti4.  15  time  is  nowpast;  send  the  multitude  away 
Acts  27.   9  because  the  fast  was  now  already  past,  P. 

11.7*0  become  before,  irpoylvop.ai  proginomai. 

Rom.  3.  25  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,  th. 
PAST  finding  out  — 
Not  to  be  traced  out,  av^^xviacros  anexiehniastos, 

Rom  11.  33  unsearchable,  .his  ways  past  finding  out 
PAST,  in  time  — 
X.Long  ago,  formerly,  anciently,  waAai  palai. 

Heb.  1.    1  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  bythe 
2.0nce,  at  some  time  or  other,  ttot4 pote. 

Rom  11.  30  For  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not  believed 

Gal.     1.  13  For  ye  have  heard,  .in  times  past  in  the 

1.  23  he  which  persecuted  us  in  times  past  now 
Eph.   2.    2  Wherein  in  timepastyewalkedaccording 

2.  3  had  our  conversation  in  time  past  in  the 
2. 11  ye  (being)  in  time  past  Gentiles  in  thefle. 

Phm.      11  in  time  past  was  to  thee  unprofitable,  but 
1  Pe.    2. 10  Which  in  time  past  (were)  not  a  people 

PASTOR  — 

1 .  7*0  feed,  nj-i  raah. 

Jer.     2.    8  the  pastors  also  transgressed  against  me 

3.  15  I  will  give  you  pastors  according  to  mine 
10. 21  the  pastors  are  become  brutish,  and  have 

12.  10  Many  pastors  have  destroyed  my  vineyard 

17.  16  I  have  not  hastened  from  (being)  a  pastor 

22.  22  The  wind  shall  eat  up  all  thy  pastors,  and 

23.  1  Woe  be  unto  the  pastors  that  destroy  and 
23.    2  saith.  .ngainstthepastorsthatfeedmype. 

2,ShrpJierd,  feeder,  izo\.pA\v poimeu. 

Eph.    4,  11  evangelists  ;  and  some,  pastors  and  teac. 

PASTTTRE,  (fat  or  large)  — 

X.Fat  pasture,  ~>3  /car. 

Psa.  65.  13  The  pastures  are  clothed  with  flocks  ;  the 
Isa.  30.  23  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  large  pastures 


2. Pasture,  feeding,  n^.lP  ntinh. 

Gen.  47.    4  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for  their  80. 

1  Ch.  4.  39  they  went,  .to  seek  pasture  for  theirflocks 

4.  40  they  found  fat  pasture  and  good,  and  the 

4.  41  (there  was)  pasture  there  for  their  flocks 

Job   $g.    8  The  range  of  the  mountains  (is)  his  past. 

Isa.   32.  14  dens,  .a  joy  of  wild  asses,  a  pasture  of  Ho. 

Lam.  1.    6  are  become  like  harts  (that)  find  no  pas. 

Eze.  34.  14  I  will  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  and 

34.  14  (in)  a  fat  pasture  shall  they  feed  upon  the 

34. 18  to  have  eaten  up  the  good  pasture,  but  ye 

34.  18  tread  down. .  the  residue  of  yourpastures? 

Joel    1.  18  they  have  no  pasture ;  yea,  the  flocks  of 

3. Pasture,  feeding,  rrjn1?  ina/rith. 

Psa.  74.    1  smoke  against  the  sheep  of  thy  pasture? 

79.  13  So  we  thy  people,  and  sheep  of  thy  past. 

95.    7  we  (are)  the  people  of  his  pasture,  and  the 

100.    3  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture 

Isa.  49.    9  their  pastures  (shall  be)  in  all  high  places 

Jer.    23.    1  destroy  and  scatter  the  sheep  of  my  past. 

25.  36  for  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  their  pasture 
Eze.  34.  31  And  ye  my  flock,  the  flock  of  my  pasture 
Hos.  13.    6  According  to  their  pasture,  so  were  they 
4.  A  watered  country  or  place,  n^pTi  mashqeh. 

Eze.  45. 15  out  of  the  fat  pastures  of  Israel,  for  a  meat. 

v.  Comely  place,  habitation,  pasture,  nxj  naah. 

Psa.  23.    2  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  past. 

65.  12  They  drop  (upon)  the  pastures  of  the  wil. 

Joel    1. 19, 20  devoured  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness 

2.  22  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness  do  spring 

6. Pasture,  feeding  place,  "ifi  rei. 

1  KLi.    4.  23  twenty  oxen  out  of  the  pastures,  and  an 
7.  Pasture,  food,  vopA\  nome. 

Johnio.    9  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture 
PA-TA'-RA,  Yldrapa. 

A  city  on  the  coast  of  Lycia  in  Asia  Minor,  nearly 
opposite  to  Rhodes,  with  a  famous  oracle  of  Apollo, 
about  forty  miles  W.  of  Myra ;  it  is  now  in  ruins. 

Acts  21.    1  we  came . .  unto  Rhodes . .  thence  unto  P. 
PATE  — 
Pate,  crown  of  the  head,  i'p"i|3  qodqod. 

Psa.    7. 16  dealing  shall  come  down  upon  his  own  p. 
PATH,  PATHWAY  — 
X.Path,  customary  road,  rnx  orach. 

Gen.  49.  17  an  adder  in  the  path,  that  biteth  the  horse 
Job     6. 18  The  paths  of  their  way  are  turned  aside 
8.  13  So  (are)  the  paths  of  all  that  forget  God 
13.  27  and  lookest  narrowly  unto  all  my  paths 
33.  11  feet  in  the  stocks,  he  marketh  all  my  paths 
Psa.     8.    8  fish . .  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  seas 
16. 11  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life :  in 
17.   4  I  have  kept  (me  from)  the  paths  of  the  d. 
25.    4  Show  me  thy  ways,  OLord,  teachmethyp. 
25.  10  All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  (are)  mercy  and 
27. 11  lead  me  in  a  plain  path,  because  of  mine 
139.   3  Thou  compassest  my  path  and  my  lying 
Prov.  2.    8  He  keepeth  the  paths  of  judgment,  and  p. 
2.  13  Who  leave  the  paths  of  uprightness,  to 
2.  19  neither  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  life 

2.  20  That  thou  mayest.  .keep  the  paths  of  the 

3.  6  acknowledge  him .  .he  shall  direct  thy  pa. 

4.  18  the  path  of  the  just  (is)  as  the  shining  1. 

5.  6  Lest  thou  shouldest  ponder  the  path  of  1. 
Isa.     2.    3  we  will  walk  in  his  paths:  for  out  ofZion 

3.  12  to  err,  and  destroy  the  way  of  thy  paths 

40.  14  taught  him  in  the  path  of  judgment,  and 
Mic.    4.    2  and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths;  for  the  law 

2.  Highway,  nVpn  mesillah. 

Isa.   59.    7  wasting  and  destruction  (are)  in  their  p. 
Joel    2.    8  they  shall  walk  every  one  in  his  path :  and 

3,  A  path  for  waggons,  broad  path,  *?^'D  magal. 

Psa.  23.    3  Ieadeth  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness 

65.  11  Thou  crownest.  .and  thy  paths  drop  fatn. 

Prov.  2.    9  judgment,  and  equity ;  (yea),  every  good  p. 

4.  11  I  have  taught.  .1  have  led  thee  in  right  p. 
4.  26  Ponder  the  path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy 

Isa.   26.    7  thou,  .dost  weigh  the  path  of  the  just 

<X.A  path  for  itmggons,  broad  path,  n^3J/D  magalah. 

Psa.  17.    5  Holdup  mygoingsin  thy  paths,  (that)  my 

Prov.  2.  15  crooked,  and  (they)  fro  ward  in  their  paths 
2.  18  house  inclineth  unto  death,  and  her  paths 
5. .A  narrow  %)ath,  Siy^D  mishol. 

Nuni22.  24  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  path  of 
G.A  trodden  path,  Tfl3  nathib. 

Job   28.    7  a  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth,  and  which 

41.  32  Hemakethapathtoshineafter  him  ;  (one) 
Psa.119.  35  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments 

7.-1  trodden  path,  ."U'ri;  nethibah. 

Job  19.  8  and  he  hath  set  darkness  in  my  paths 
24. 13  know  not.  .nor  abide  in  the  paths  thereof 
30.  13  They  mar  my  path,  they  set  forward  my 
38.  20  shouldest  know  the  paths  (to)  the  house 
Psa  119. 105  word  (is)  a  lamp,  .and  a  light  unto  my  p. 
142.  3  thou  knewest  my  path.  In  the  way  wher. 
Prov.  1.  15  son.  .refrain  thy  foot  from  their  path 

3. 17  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  (are)  pe. 

7.  25  to  her  ways,  go  not  astray  in  her  paths 

8.  2  by  the  way  in  the  places  of  the  paths 

8.  20  I  lead,  .in  the  midst  of  the  paths  of  judg. 

Isa.   42. 16  I  will  lead  them  inpaths(that)  they  have 

43. 16  which  maketh . .  a  path  in  the  mighty  wat. 

58.  12  called.  .The  restorer  of  the  paths todwell 

59.  8  have  made  them  crooked  paths :  whoso. 


Jer.     6.  16  ask  for  the  old  paths,  where  (is)  the  good 

18.  15  to  walk  in  paths,  (in)  a  way  not  cast  up 
Lam.  3.   9  inclosed  my  ways.,  he  hath  made  my  path 
Hos.    2.    6  make  a  wall,  .she  shallnotfind  her  paths 
8. A  going  on,  path,  753V,  ^'IV  shebil,  sJiebul. 

Psa.  77.  19  thy  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  thy  fo. 
Jer.  18.  15  them  to  stumble,  .(from)  the  ancient  paths 

9.^1  rubbed  or  trodden  path,  rpl&os  tribos. 

Matt.  3.    3  Prepare  ye  the  way.  .make  his  paths  str. 

Mark  1.    3  Prepare  ye  the  way.  .make  his  paths  str. 

Luke  3.   4  Prepare  ye  the  way.  .make  his  paths  str. 
10. A  track,  rpoxtd  trochia. 

Heb.  12.  13  make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lestth. 
11.  A  path  way,  nq:ny^n  derek  nethibah. 

Provi2.  28  (in)  the  patbway(thereof  there  is)nodeath 
PATH'-ROS,  Dnre. 

Upper  Egypt  or  Thebaid,  as  distinguished  from  Mazor, 
Lower  Egypt,  and  Mizraim,  including  both.  See  Jer. 
44. 1;  44.  15 ;  Eze.  29.  14  and  30.  14. 

Isa.    11.  11  his  people,  which  shall  be  left,  from.  .P. 

Jer.  44.    1  at  Noph,  and  in  the  country  of  P.,  saying 
44.  15  all  the  people  that  dwelt,  .in  P.,  answered 

Eze.  29.  14  cause  them  to  return  (into)  the  land  of  P. 
30.  14  And  I  will  make  P.  desolate,  and  will  set 
PATH-RU'-SIM,  D'pirjB. 
A  descendant  of  the  fifth  son  of  Mizraim  son  of  Ham. 

Gen.  10.  14  P.,  and  Casluhim,  out  of  whom  came  Ph. 

1  Ch.    1.  12  P.,  and  Casluhim,  of  whom  came  the  Ph. 

PATIENCE  — 

1. Forbearance,  long  suffering,  /xaKpodv/xta  makroth. 
Heb.  6.  12  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit 
Jas.     5.  10  example  of  sufferingaflliction,  and  of  pa. 
2. Endurance,  continuance,  uiropovr)  hupovwne. 
Luke  8.  15  keep  (it),  and  bring  forth  fruit  with  pat. 

21. 19  In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls 
Rom.  5.    3  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patien. 
5.   4  patience,  experience ;  and  experience,  h. 
8.  25  (then)  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  (it) 
15.    4  we  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the 
15.    5  the  God  of  patience  and  consolation  gra. 

2  Co.  6.    4  much  patience,  in  affiictions,in  necessities 

12.  12  were  wrought  among  you  in  all  patience 
Col.     1.  11  unto  all  patience  and  long  sutferingwith 

1  Th.  1.   3  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

2  Th.  1.    4  for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your 

1  Ti.    6.  11  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meekness 

2  Ti.     3. 10  my.  .faith,  long  suffering,  charity,  pat. 
Titus  2.    2  be.  .sound  in  faith,  in  charity,  in  patience 
Heb.  10.  36  ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye 

12.    1  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is 
Jas.     1.    3  the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh  patience 

1.  4  let  patience  have  (her)  perfect  work,  that 
5.  1 1  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  Job,  and 

2  Pe.  1.    6  to  temperance  patience  ;  and  to  patience 
Rev.    1,    9  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Ch. 

2.  2  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy  patie. 
2.  3  hast  borne,  and  hast  patience,  and  for  my 
2.  19 ;  3.  10 ;  13.  10 ;  14.  12. 

PATIENT  WAITING— 

Endurance,  vttoliovt)  hupom07ie,  2  Th.  3.  5. 

PATIENCE,  to  have  (long)  — 

To  forbear,  bear  long,  paKpodvpew  makrothumeo. 
Matt  t8.  26,  20  have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay 
Jas.     5.    7  hath  long  patience  forit,  until  he  receive 

PATIENT  — 

l.Long,  T)$arek. 

Eccl.  7.   8  the  patient  in  spirit(is)betterthanthe  p. 

2.  Holding  up)  under  evil,  ave^iftaKos  anexikakos. 

2  Ti.   2.  24  gentle  unto  all  (men),  apt  to  teach,  pati. 

3.  Yielding,  lenient,  eVzet/cTJy  epieikes. 

1  Ti.    3.    3  but  patient,  not  a  brawler,  not  covetous 
4. To  remain  lender,  viropevw  hupomeno. 

Rom  12.  12  patient  in  tribulation ;  continuing  instant 
PATIENT,  to  be  — 
To  forbear,  suffer  long,  paKpoBvpsw  makrothumeo. 

1  Th.  5.  14  support  the  weak,  be  patient  toward  all 

Jas.     5.    7  Be  patient  therefore,  brethren,  unto  the 
5.    8  Be  ye  also  patient ;  stablish  your  hearts 
PATIENTLY,  (to  take)  — 

1.  To  wait,  expect,  nijj  qavah,  3. 

Psa.  40.    1  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord  ;  and  he 

2.  Forbear ingly,  with  long  suffering,  paicpoQvpws. 

Acts  26.    3  wherefore  I  beseech  thee  to  hear  me  pat. 

3.  To  remain  wider,  viropevaj  hupomeno. 

1  Pe.  2.  20  ye  shall  take  is  patiently  7.  .ye  take  it  pat. 
[See  also  Continuance,  endure,  wait,  waiting.] 

PAT'-MOS,  Yldrpos. 

A  sterile  island  about  thirty  miles  in  circumference,  in 

the  JEgean  Sea,  S.  W.  of  Samos,  and  forty-five  miles  W.  of 

Miletus;  now  called  Patino,  or  Patimo,  or  Patmosa,  and 

reckoned    among    the    Sporades,    with    an    excellent 

harbour. 

Rev.    1.   9  was  in  the  isle  that  is  called  P.,  for  the 
PATRIARCH  — 
Head  of  a  father  s  house,  iraTpicLpxys  patriarches. 

Acts    2.  29  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  patr. 
7.    8  and  so. .Jacob  (begat)  the  twelve  patria. 


PATRIMONY 


735 


PAY 


Acta    7.   9  the  patriarchs,  moved  with  envy,  sold  Jo. 
Heb.   7:   4  the  patriarch  Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of 

PATRIMONY  — 
A  father,  2N  ab. 

Deut  iS.   S  that  which  cometh  of  the  sale  of  his  pat. 

PA-TRO'-BAS,  XlaTpopas. 

A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom.  16.  14  Salute  Asyncritus..P.,  Hermes,  .aud  the 
PATTERN  — 

1.  Sight,  appearance,  nspo  mar  eh. 

Num.  8.    4  pattern  which  the  Lord  had  showed  Mo 
1. Building,  form,  pattern,  IVJOS  tabnith. 

Josh  22.  28  tlie  pattern  of  the  altar  of  the  Lori>,  wh. 

Exod25.    9  the  pattern  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  p. 
25. 40  look  that  thou  make  (them)  after  their  p. 

2  Ki.  16. 10  the  pattern  of  it,  according  to  all  the 

1  Ch.28.  ii  the  pattern  of  the  porch,  and  of  the  houses 
28.  12  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  spirit 
28.  18  pattern  of  the  chariot  of  the  cherubim 
28.  19  understand . .  all  the  works  of  this  pattern 

3.  Standard,  measurement,  n*555  ioknith. 

Eze.  43.  io  show,  .and  let  them  measure  the  pattern 

4.  .4  type,  model,  rviros  tupos. 

Titus  2.    7  showing  thyself  a  pattern  of  good  works 
Heb.   8.   5  according  to  the  pattern  showed  to  thee 

5. An  exhibition,  pattern,  vir6Sety/xa  hupodeigma. 
Heb.  9.  23  that  the  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens 

6.  An  under  or  lesser  ty2ye,viroTvira>a-is  hupotuptosis. 
1  Ti.    1.  16  a  pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter 

PA'-TT,  PA'-I,  "V3,  iys  a  yawning  deep. 

The  city  of  Hadar,  the  last  of  the  early  kings  of  Edom. 

Gen.  36.  39  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  P.;  and  his  w. 

1  Ch.  1.  50  and  the  name  of  his  city  (was)  P. 

PATJX,  PAULUS,  XlavKos  little. 
l.The  surname  of  the  Roman  deputy  at  Paphas  who 
believed  the  gospel  when  Elymas  the  sorcerer  was 
struck  blind. 

Acts  13.    7  Sergius  P.,  a  prudent  man:  who  called 

2.  The  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  whose  original  name  was 
Saul.  He  was  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  a  Hebrew  of 
the  Hebrews,  born  in  Tarsus,  the  chief  city  of  Cilicia, 
in  Asia  Minor.  He  was  brought  up  a  Pharisee,  and 
educated  at  Jerusalem,  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  a  cele- 
brated Rabbi.  His  vernacular  tongue  was  Greek,  but 
his  residence  iu  Palestine  gave  him  a  knowledge  of  the 
Syro-chaldaic  of  that  day,  which  is  called  in  the  New 
Testament  "  Hebrew."  He  was  acquainted  with  several 
of  the  ancient  Greek  poets,  whom  he  occasionally 
quotes.  Like  all  Jews,  he  was  brought  up  to  a  trade, 
which,  in  his  case,  was  that  of  a  tent  maker.  His  resi- 
dence at  Jerusalem  augmented  his  natural  regard  for 
Judaism,  and  led  him,  while  yet  a  young  man,  to  bear 
his  testimony  against  Christianity,  by  consenting  to  the 
martyrdom  of  Stephen,  and  watching  over  the  clothes 
of  those  who  stoned  him. 

Soon  the  great  landmarks  of  his  life  began  to  appear. 
Foremost  of  all  was  his  conversion,  a.d.  38,  which  became 
the  main  root  of  his  after  life.  Then  his  evangelistic 
labours  at  Antioch,  a.d.  42 ;  his  missionary  journey  in 
the  eastern  part  of  Asia  Minor,  in  which  he  first  assumed 
the  character  of  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles ;  his  visit  to 
Jerusalem,  a.d.  50,  to  settle  the  question  of  the  relation 
of  the  Gentiles  to  the  law  of  Moses ;  his  second  mission- 
ary journey  when  he  introduced  the  gospel  into  Europe, 
with  Ms  visit  to  Phillipi,  Athens,  and  Corinth.  Then 
comes  his  third  great  missionary  journey  which  was 
chiefly  marked  by  a  long  stay  atEphesus,  and  interest- 
ing in  connection  with  the  writing  of  his  four  leading 
Epistles.  Then  followed  his  visit  to  Jerusalem,  a.d. 
58,  and  his  apprehension  there,  with  his  long  confine- 
ment at  Cesarea,  and  his  eventual  imprisonment  at 
Rome,  a.d.  61,  whence  he  wrote  most  of  his  other 
epistles.  Of  his  later  history  we  know  nothing.  As  to 
his  temperament  and  character,  Paul  is  himself  the  best 
painter.  His  humility  induced  him  to  abandon  the 
grand  title  of  "Saul,"  and  assume  the  humble  one  of 
"Paul,"  i.e.,  the  "little  one,"  appropriate,  perhaps, 
from  his  bodily  size,  but  adopted,  no  doubt,  from  that 
humility  which  makes  him  count  himself  to  be  "less 
than  the  least  of  all  saints,  and  not  worthy  to  be 
called  an  apostle."  His  speeches  and  epistles  convey  to 
us  the  truest  impression  of  him.  In  these  we  perceive 
the  warmth  and  ardour  of  his  nature,  his  affectionate 
disposition,  the  tenderness  of  his  sense  of  honour,  the 
courtesy  aud  personal  dignity  of  his  bearing,  and  his 
perfect  frankness.  We  see  also  the  rare  combination 
of  subtility,  tenacity,  and  versatility  existing  in  his 
intellect,  with  a  practical  wisdom  generally  associated 
with  a  cooler  temperament  than  his,  and  a  forbearance 
and  tolerance  seldom  united  with  such  impetuous 
convictions  as  he  entertained. 

Acts  13.  9  ThenSaulwhoalso(iscalled)P.,nlled\vith 
13.  13  Now  whenP. andhiscompanyloosed from 
13.  16  Theu  r.  stood  up,  and  beckoning  with 
13.  43  many  of  the  Jews,  .followed  P.  and  Barn. 
r3-  45  against,  .things  which  were  spoken  by  P. 
13.  46  Then  P.  and  Barnabas  waxed  bold,  and 

13.  50  and  raised  persecution  against  P.  and  B. 

14.  9  The  same  heard  P.  speak:  who  stedfastly 

14. 11  And  when  the  people  saw  what  P.  had 

14. 12  And  they  called . .  P.,  Mercurius,  because 
14. 14  when  the  apostles,  Barnabas  and  P.,  heard 

14.  19  and,  having  stoned  P.,  drew  (him)  out  of 

15.  2  When  therefore  P.  and  Barnabas  had  no 


Acts  15.  2  they  determined  that  P.  and  Barnabas 
15.  12  gave  audience  to  Barnabas  and  P.,  decla. 
15.  22  to  send,  .to  Antioch  with  P.  and  Barnab. 
15.  25  to  send . .  with  our  beloved  Barnabas . .  P. 
15.  3s  P.  also  and  Barnabas  continued  in  Antioch 
15.  36  And  some  days  after,  P.  said  unto  Barna. 
15.  38  But  P.  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with 

15.  40  And  P.  chose  Silas,  and  departed,  being  re. 

16.  3  Him  would  P.  have  to  go  forth  with  him 
16.  9  And  a  vision  appeared  to  P.  in  the  night 
16.  14  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  of  P. 
16.  17  The  same  followed  P.  and  us,  and  cried 
16.  18  But  P.,  being  grieved,  turned  and  said  to 
16. 19  they  caught  P.  aud  Silas,  and  drew  (them) 
16.  25  And  at  midnight  P.  and  Silas  prayed,  aud 
16.  28  But  P.  cried  with  ak>ud  voice,  saying,  Do 
16.  29  and  fell  down  before  P.  and  Silas 

16.  36  And  the  keeper,  .told  this  saying  to  P. 

16.  37  But  Paul  said  unto  them,  They  have  bea. 

17.  2  And  P.,  as  his  manner  was,  went  in  unto 
17.    4  and  consorted  with  P.  and  Silas;  and  of 
17. 10  the  brethren  immediately  sent  away  P. 
17.  13  the  wurd  of  God  was  preached  of  P.  atB. 

17. 14  immediately  the  brethren  sent  away  P. 

17. 15  And  they  that  conducted  P.  brought  him 
17.  16  Now  while  P.  waited  for  them  at  Athens 

17.  22  Then  P.  stood  in  the  midst  of  Mars'  hill 
17-  33  S°  P-  departed  from  among  them 

18.  1  After  these  things  [P.]  departed  from  Atli. 
18.   5  P.  was  pressed  in  the  spirit,  and  testified 
18.   9  Then  spake  the  Lord  to  P.  in  the  night  by 
18.  12  the  Jews  made  insurrection,  .against  P. 
18.  14  And  when  P.  was  now  about  to  open  (his) 

18.  18  And  P.  (after  this)  tarried  (there)  yet  a 

19.  1  P.  having  passed  through  the  upper  coa. 
19.  4  Then  said  P.,  John  verily  baptized  with 
19.  6  AndwhenP.hadlaid(his)handsuponthe. 
19.  11  And  God  wrought,  .by  the  hands  of  P. 
19.  13  We  adjure  you  by  Jesus  whom  P.  preach. 
19. 15  Jesus  I  know,  and  P.I  know;  but  who  are 
19. 21  P.  purposed  in  the  spirit,  when  he  had  p. 
19.  26  this  P.  hath  persuaded  aud  turned  away 
19.  29  men  of  Macedonia,  P.'s  companions  in  tr. 

19.  30  And  when  P.  would  have  entered  in  unto 

20.  1  P.  called  unto  (him)  the  disciples,  and  em. 
20.  7  P.  preached  unto  them,  ready  to  depart 
20.  9  and  as  P.  was  loug  preaching,  he  sunk 
20. 10  And  P.  went  down,  and  fell  on  him,  and 
20. 13  there  intending  to  take  in  P.:  for  so  had 
20.  16  For  P.  had  determined  to  sail  by  Ephesus 

20.  37  and  fell  on  P.'s  neck,  and  kissed  him 

21.  4  who  said  to  P.  through  the  soirit,  that  he 
21.  8  we  thatwere  of  P.'s  company  aeparted,and 
21.  11  hetookP.'sgirdle,  andboundhis  ownhan. 
21. 13  Then  P.  answered,  What  mean  ye  to  weep 
21.  18  And  the  (day)  following  P.  went  in  with 
21.  26  Then  P.  took  the  men,  and  the  next  day 
21.  29  whom  they  supposed  that  P.  had  brought 
21.  30  and  they  took  P.,  and  drew  him  out  of  the 
21. 32  and  when  they  saw.  .they  left  beating  of  P. 
21.  37  And  as  P.  was  to  be  led  into  the  castle,  he 
21.  39  But  P.  said,  I  am  a  man  (which  am)  a  Jew 

21.  40  P.  stood  on  the  stairs,  and  beckoned  with 

22.  25  P.  said  unto  the  centurion  that  stood  bjr 
22.  28  With  agreat  sum .  .And  P.  said,  But  I  was 

22.  30  and  brought  P.  down,  and  set  him  before 

23.  1  And  P.,  earnestly  beholding  the  council 
23.  3  Then  said  P.  unto  him,  God  shall  smite 
23.  s  Theu  said  P.,  I  wist  not,  brethren,  that 
23.  6  But  when  P.  perceived  that  the  one  part 
23. 10  fearing  lest  P.  should  have  been  pulled 
23.  11  Be  of  good  cheer,  [P.]:  for  as  thou  hast 
23.  12  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had  killed  P. 

23.  14  will  eat  nothing  until  we  have  slain  P. 
23. 16  when  P.'s  sister's  son  heard  of  then-  lying 
23. 16  and  entered  into  the  castle,  and  told  P. 
23.  17  Then  P.  called  one  of  the  centurions 
23.  18  P.  the  prisoner  called  me  unto  (him),  and 
23. 20  bring  down  P.  to  morrow  into  the  council 
23.  24  that  they  may  set  P.  on,  and  bring  (him) 
23.  31  Then  the  soldiers,  .took  P.,  and  brought 

23.  33  when  they  came  to  Cesarea.  .presented  P. 

24.  1  who  informed  the  governor  against  P. 

24. 10  Then  P.,  after  that  the  governor  had  bee. 
24.  23  he  commanded  a  centurion  to  keep  [P.] 
24.  24  he  sent  for  P.,  and  heard  him  concerning 
24.  26  money  should  have  been  given  him  of  P. 

24.  27  to  showthe  Jews  apleasure,  left  P.  bound 

25.  2  chief  of  the  Jews  informed  him  against  P. 
25.  4  P.  should  be  kept  at  Cesarea,  and  that 
25.  6  the  next  day.  .commanded  P.  to  be  brou. 
25.  7  [many  and  grievous  complaints  against  P.] 
25.  9  answered  P.,  and  said,  Wilt  thou  go  up  to 
25.  10  Theu  said  P.,  I  stand  at  Cesar's  judgment 
25.  14  Festus  declared  P.'s  cause  unto  the  king 
25. 19  which  was  dead,  whom  P.  affirmed  to  be 
25.  21  P.  had  appealed  to  be  reserved  unto  the 

25.  23  at  Festus'  commandment  P.  was  brought 

26.  1  Agrippa  said  unto  P.,  Thou  art  permitted 
26.  1  P.  stretchedforththehand,  andanswered 
26.  24  P.,  thou  artbeside  thyself;  much  learning 
26.  28  Agrippa  said  unto  P.,  Almost  thou  pers. 

26.  29  P.  said,  I  would  to  God,  that  not  only  thou 

27.  1  delivered  P.  and  certain  other  prisoners 
27.  3  Julius  courteously  entreated  P.,  and  gave 
27.   9  the  fast  was  now.  .past,  P.  admonished 

27. 11  than  those  things  which  were  spoken  by  P. 
27.  21  P.  stood  forth  in  the  midst  of  them,  and 
27.  24  Fear  not,  P. ;  thou  must  be  brought  bef. 
27.  31  P.  said  to  the  centurion  and  to  the  soldi. 
27.  33  P.  besought  (them)  all  to  take  meat,  say. 
27. 43  the  centurion,  willing  to  save  P.,  kept  th. 


Acts  28    3  P.  had  gathered  a  bundle  of  sticks,  and 
28.    8  P.  entered  in,  and  prayed,  and  laid  his  h. 

28. 15  when  P.  saw,  he  thanked  God,  and  took 

28. 16  P.  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself  with 
28.  17  [P.]  called  the  chief  of  the  Jews  together 
28.  25  after  that  P.  had  spoken  one  word,  Well 
28.  30  [P.]  dwelt  two  whole  years  in  his  own  hi. 

Rom.  1.    1  P.,  a  servant  of  JesusChrist.called(tobe) 

1  Co.  1.    1  P.,  called  (to  be)  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Chr. 

1.  12  I  am  of  P.;  and  I  of  Apollos  ;  and  I  of  Ce. 
1. 13  Is  Christ  divided?w'as  P.  crucified  for  you? 
1.  13  or  were  ye  baptized  in  the  name  of  P.? 
3.  4  I  am  of  P.;  and  another,  I  (am)  of  Apollos 
3.  5  Who  then  is  P.,  and  who  (is)  Apollos,  but 
3.  22  Whether  P.,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the 
16.  21  The  salutation  of  (me)  P.  with  mine  own 

2  Co.  1.    1  P.,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will 

10.    1  I  P.  myself  beseech  you  by  the  meekness 

Gal.    1.    1  P.,  an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  man 

5.    2  I  P.  sayuntoyou,  thatifyebecircumcised 

Eph.    1.    1  P.,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  wiU 

3.  1  P.,  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 
Phil.  1.  1  p.  and  Timotheus,  the  servants  of  Jesus 
Col.     1.    1  P.,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will 

1.  23  whereof  I  P.  am  made  a  minister 

4.  18  The  salutation  by  the  hand  of  me  P.  Re. 

1  Th.  1.    1  P.,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timotheus,  unto 

2.  18  we  would  have  come  unto  you,  even  I  P. 

2  Th.  1.    1  P.,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timotheus,  unto 

3.*i7  The  salutation  of  P.  with  mine  own  hand 

1  Ti.    1.    1  P.,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the 

2  Ti.    1.    1  P.,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will 
Titus  1.    1  P.,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of 
Plun.         1  P.,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  Tinio. 

9  being  such  an  one  as  P.  the  aged,  and  now 
19  I  P.  have  written  (it)  with  mine  own  hand 
2  Pe.  3. 15  as  our  beloved  brother  P.  also,  according 
PAVED,  (being)  — 
I.White  work,  run?  libnah. 

Exod24.  10  as  it  were.,  paved  work  of  a  sapphire  stone 

2.  To  pave,  cover,  overlay,  *]xi  ralsaph. 

Song  3.  10  the  midst  thereof  being  paved  (with)  love 
PAVEMENT  — 
1.  Pavement,  rip^iD  martsepheth. 

2  ELi.16.  17  king  Ahaz.  .put  it  upon  a  pavement  of  s. 

^.Pavement,  Jloor,  nsy-i  ritspah. 

2  Ch.  7.    3  with  theirfaces  to  the  ground  upon  the  p. 

Esth.  1.    6  a  pavement  of  red,  aud  blue,  and  white 

Eze.  40.  17  pavement  made  for  the  court  round  about 

40.  1 7  thirty  chambers  (were)  upon  the  pavement 

40. 18  And  the  pavement.. (was)  the  lower  pave. 

42.   3  the  pavement  which  (was)  for  the  outer  co. 

3.  Paved  with  stone,  KidoarpcoTos  lithostrdtos. 

Jolm.19. 13  in  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pavement,  but 
PAVILION  — 
1.^4  covering,  "■]□  sok. 

Psa.  27.    5  he  shall  hide  me  in  his  pavilion :  in  the 
1.A  booth,  rise  sukkah. 

2  Sa.  22.  12  made  darkness  pavilions  round  about  him 

1  Eli. 20.  12  he  and  the  kings  in  the  pavilions,  that  he 

20.  16  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  pavilions 
Psa.  18.  11  his  pavilion  round  about  him  (were)  dark 

31.  20  thou  shaltkeep  them  secretly  in  a  pavilion 
PAW  — 
X.Hand,  T  yad. 

1  Sa.  17.  37  the  paw  of  the  lion,  and  out  of  the  paw  of 
2. Palm  {of  the  hand),  *]3  kaph. 

Lev.  11.  27  whatsoever  goeth  upon  his  paws,  among 
PAW,  to  — 
To  dig,  paw,  isn  chaphar. 

Job  39.  21  He  paweth  in  the  valley,  and  rejoiceth  in 
PAY  — 
To  give  a  price,  ")3£  jn3  nathan  meker. 

Nuni2o.  19  I  will  pay  for  it :  I  will  only,  without . .  a. 
PAY  (again),  to  — 
l.To  give,  jru  nathan. 

Exod2i.  19  only  he  shall  pay(for)theloss  of  his  time 

21.  22  and  he  shall  pay  as  the  judges  (determine) 
Jon.    1.    3  he  paid  the  fare  thereof,  and  went  down 

2.To  give,  }rj4  nethan. 

Ezra   4.  13  will  they  not  pay  toll,  tribv;,';e,  and  custom 

3.  To  make  complete,  d^p  shalam,  3. 

Exod2i.  36  he  shall  surely  pay  ox  for  ox ;  and  the  d. 

22.  7  if  the  thief  be  found,  let  him  pay  double 
22.    9  For.  .he  shall  pay  double  unto  his  neighb. 

Deut23. 21  thou  shalt  not  slack  to  pay  it :  for  the  L. 

2  Sa.  15.    7  let  me  go  and  pay  my  vow,  which  I  have 
2  Ki.  4.    7  and  pay  thy  debt,  and  live  thou  and  thy 
Job  22.  27  hear  thee,  and  thou  shalt  pay  thy  vows 
Psa.  22.  25  I  will  pay  my  vows  before  them  that  fear 

37.  21  The  wicked  borroweth,  and  payeth  not 
50.  14  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the  most  High 
66.  13  I  will  go  into  thy  house . .  I  will  pay  thee 
76. 1 1  pay  unto  the  Lord  your  God :  let  all  that 
116. 14,  18  I  will  pay  my  vows  unto  theLoRDnow 

Prov.  7. 14  offerings  with  me;  thisdayhavelpaidmy 
19.  17  that,  .he  hath  given  will  hepay  him  again 
22.  27  If  thou  hast  nothing  to  pay,  why  should 

Eccl.  5.    4  defer  not  to  pay  it .  .pay  that  which  thou 
5.    5  than  that  thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  p. 

Jon.    2.   9  sacrifice . .  I  will  pay  (that)  that  I  have  v. 


PAY 


736 


PEACE 


4.  To  weigh  out,  b\$  shaqaL 

Exod  22.  17  he  shall  pay  money  according  to  the  dow. 

1  Ki.20.  39  or  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  talent  of  silver 
Esth,  3.    9  I  will  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver 

4.    7  Haniar.  had  promised  to  pay  to  the  king's 

5.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  3*b>  shub,  5. 

2  Ch.27.    s  So  much  did  the  children  of  Amnion  pay 

Q.To  give  away  or  back,  awod't^icfxt  apodidomi. 
Matt.  5.  26  till  thou  hast  paid,  .uttermost  farthing 
18.  25  as  he  had  not  to  pay,  his  lord  commanded 
iS.  26,  29  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee 
18.  28  took  (him).,  saying,  Pay  me  that  thou  ow. 
iS.  30  cast  him  into  prison,  till  he  should  pay 
18.  34  till  he  should  pay  all  that  was  due  unto 
Luke  7.  42  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly 
12.  59  not.  .till  thou  hast  paid  the  very  last  mi. 

7.  To  pay,  re\€Q3  teleo. 

Matt  17.  24  said,  Doth  not  your  master  pay  tribute? 
Rom  13.    6  For,  for  this  cause  pay  ye  tribute  also:  for 

PAY,  to  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  go  up,  impose,  nb'Jt  alah,  5. 

2  Ch.    8.    8  Solomon  make  to  pay  tribute  until  this 

PAYMENT   to  be  made  — 

To  give  aivay  or  back,  airodidco/xt  apodidomi. 

Matt  18.  25  all  that  he  had,  and  payment  to  be  made 

PEACE  — 

l.Rest,  ease,  security,  nv$  shalvah. 

Dan.   8.  25  by  peace  shall  destroy  many  :  he  shall  also 

2.  Completeness,  peace,  ni1?^  shalom. 

Gen.  15.  15  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace ;  thou 
26.  29  have  sent  thee  away  in  peace :  thou  (art) 
26.  31  and  they  departed  from  him  in  peace 

28.  21  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in  peace 

41. 16  G-od  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  answer  ofpeace 

43.  23  Peace  (be)  to  you,  fear  not:  your  God,  and 

44.  17  as  for  you,  get  you  up  in  peace  unto  your 
Exod.  4.  iS  And  Jethro  said  to  Moses,  Go  in  peace 

18.  23  people  shall  also  go  to  their  place  in  peace 
Lev.  26.  6  I  will  give  peace  in  the  land,  and  ye  shall 
Num.  6,  26  lift  up  his  countenance,  .and give  thee  p. 

25. 12  I  give  unto  him  my  covenant  of  peace 
Deut.  2.  26  sent  messengers,  .with  words  of  peace,  s." 
20.  10  When  thou  comest  nigh,  .proclaim  peace 
20. 11  shall  be,  if  it  make  thee  answer  of  peace 
23.    6  Thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace  nor  their 

29.  19  I  shall  have  peace,  though  I  walk  in  the 
Josh,  9.  15  Joshua  made  peace  with  them,  and  made 

10.  21  all  the  people  returned,  .in  peace :  none 
Judg.  4.  17  peace  between  Jab  in  the  king  of  Hazor  and 

6.  23  Peace(be)untothee;  fear  not:  thou  shalt 

8.  9  When  I  come  again  in  peace,  I  will  break 
11. 31  when  I  return  in  peace  from  the  children 

18.  6  Go  in  peace :  before  the  Lord  (is)  your  way 
19. 20  Peace  (be)  with  thee  :  howsoever  (let)  all 

1  Sa.    1.  17  Go  in  peace :  and  the  God  of  Israel  grant 

7.  14  there  was  peace  betweenlsraeland  theA. 
20.  7  thy  servant  shall  have  peace:  but  if  lie  be 
20.  13  that  thou  mayest  go  in  peace :  and  the  L. 
20.  21  for  (there  is)  peace  to  thee,  and  no  hurt 
20.  42  Go  in  peace,  forasmuch  as  we  have  sworn 
25.  6  Peace  (be)  both  to  thee,  and  peace  (be)  to 
25.  6  and  peace  (be)  unto  all  that  thou  hast 
25-  35  Go  up  in  peace  to  thine  house ;  see,  I  have 
29.    7  return,  and  go  in  peace,  that  thou  displ. 

2  Sa.    3.  2i  sent  Abner  away;  and  he  went  in  peace 

3.  22  sent  him  away,  and  he  was  gone  in  peace 

3.  23  sent  him  away,  and  he  is  gone  in  peace 
15.   9  king  said  unto  him,  Go  in  peace.  So  he  a. 
15.  27  return  into  the  city  in  peace,  and  your 

17.  3  returned  :  (so)  all  the  people  shall  be  in  p. 

19.  24  departed,  .the  day  he  came  (again)  in  pe. 
19. 30  my  lord  the  king  is  come  again  in  peace 

1  Ki.  2.    5  shed  the  blood  of  war  in  peace,  and  put 

2.  6  hoar  head  go  down  to  the  grave  in  peace 
2. 33  shall  there  be  peace  for  ever  from  the  L. 

4.  24  had  peace  on  all  sides  round  about  him 

5.  12  was  peace  between  Hiram  and  Solomon 

20. 18  Whether  they  be  come  out  for  peace,  take 

22. 17  return  every  man  to  his  house  in  peace 
22. 27  water  of  affliction,  until  I  come  in  peace 
22.  28  If  thou  return  at  all  in  peace,  the  Lord 

2  Ki.  5.  19  said  unto  him,  Go  in  peace.  So  he  departed 

9.  17  to  meet  them,  and  let  him  say,  (Is  it)  pe. ! 
9.  t8,  19  Thus  saiththeking,  (Is  it)peace?  And 
9.  18,  19  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace?  turn 
9.  22  (Is  it)  peace . .  he  answered,  What  peace,  so 
9. 31  (Had)  Zimri  peace,  who  slew  his  master? 

20. 19  not  (good),  if  peace  and  truth  be  in  my  d.? 

22. 20  shalt  be  gathered  into  thy  grave  in  peace 
1  Ch.12.  18  peace,  peace  (be)  unto  thee,  and  peace(be) 

22.    9  give  peace  and  quietness  unto  Israel  in  his 

t  Ch.15.   5  in  those  times  (there  was)  no  peace  to  him 

18. 16  return .  .every  man  to  his  house  in  peace 

18.  26  water  of  affliction,  until  I  return  in  peace 

18.  27  If  thou  certainly  return  in  peace,  (then) 

19.  1  returned  to  his  house  in  peace  to  Jerusalem 
34.  28  shalt  be  gathered  to  thy  grave  in  peace 

Ezra  9.  12  seek  their  peace  or  their  wealth  for  ever 
Esth.  9.  30  sent  the  letters,  .(with)  words  of  peace 

10.  3  and  speaking  peace  to  all  his  seed 
Job     5.  24  know  that  thy  tabernacle  (shall  be)  in  pe. 

25.  2  with  him  ;  he  maketh  peace  in  his  high  p. 
Psa.    4.    8  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  sleep 

28.    3  which  sspenk  peace  to  their  neighbours,  but 
.   1  \  the  LORD  will  bless  his  people  with  peace 


Psa.  34. 14  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  seek  peace 
35.  20  For  they  speak  not  peace;  but  they  devise 

37.  11  shall  delight,  .in  the  abundance  of  peace 
37-  37  upright:  for  the  end  of  (that)  man(is)pe. 
55.  18  He  hath  delivered  my  soul  in  peace  from 
72.  3  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the  people 
72.  7  abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the  moon  e. 
85.  8  forhewillspeakpeaceuntohispeople,and 
85.  10  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  (each 

1 19. 165  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  thy  law 
120.  6  hath  long  dwelt  with  him  that  hateth  pe. 
120.  7  peace :  but  when  I  speak,  they  (are)  for 
122.  6  Pray forthepeaceof  Jerusalem  :  theyshall 
122.  7  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  .prosperity  wi. 
122.  8  sakes,  I  will  now  say,  Peace  (be)  within 
125.  5  the  workers  of  iniquity,  .peace,  .upon  Isr. 
128.  6  children's  children,  (and)  peace  upon  Isr. 
147.  14  He  maketh  peace  (in)  thy  borders,  (and) 

Prov.  3.  2  long  life,  and  peace,  shall  they  add  to  thee 
3.  17  pleasantness,  andallher  jfdths(are)peace 
i2.  20  butto  the  counsellors  of  peace  (is)  joy 

Eccl.  3.    8  A  time,  .a  time  of  war,  and  a  time  of  pe. 

Isa.  9.  6  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  P. 
9.    7  Of  the  increase  of.  .government  and  peace 

26.  12  thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for  us :  for  thou 

27.  5  makepeace  with  me.  .he  shall  makepeace 

32.  17  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace 

33.  7  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  bitterly 

38.  17  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness  ;  but  thou 

39.  8  there  shall  be  peace  and  truth  in  my  days 
45.    7  I  makepeace,  and  create  evil :  I  the  Lord 
48.  18  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river,  and 
48. 22  (There  is)  no  peace,  saith  the  Lord,  unto 

52.  7  thatpublisheth  peace ;  that  bringeth  good 

53.  5  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  (was)  upon 
54. 10  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be 
£4.  13  and  great  (shall  be)  the  peace  of  thy  chi. 
5V  12  ye  shall  go.,  be  led  forth  with  peace  :  the 
57.  2  He  shall  enter  into  peace :  they  shall  rest 
57.  19  Peace,  peace  to  (him  that  is)  far  off,  and 
57.  21  (There  is)  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the 
59.    8  Thewayof  peace  they  know  not;  and  (th.) 

59.  8  whosoever  goeth  therein.. not  know  peace 

60.  17  I  will  also  make  thy  officers  peace,  and 
66.  12  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  river,  and 

Jer.     4.  10  saying,  Ye  shall  have  peace;  whereas  the 
6. 14  Peace,  peace  ;  when  (there  is)  no  peace 
8. 11  Peace,  peace  ;  when  (there  is)  no  peace 
8.  15  We  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  (came) 
12.    5  in  the  land  ofpeace,  (wherein)  thou  ferus. 

12.  12  sword. .devour,  .no  flesh  shall  have  peace 
14. 13  I  will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this  place 
14. 19  we  looked  for  peace,  and  (there  is)  no  good 
16.  s  I  have  taken  away  my  peace  from  this  p. 
23. 17  The  LORD  hath  said,  Ye  shall  have  peace 

28.  9  The  prophet  which  prophesieth  of  peace 

29.  7  seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have 
29.    7  for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  pe. 

29.  11  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  evil,  to  give 

30.  5  voice  of  trembling,  of  fear,  and  not  of  pe. 

33.  6  reveal  unto  them  the  abundance  of  peace 

34.  5  thou  shalt  die  in  peace  :  and  with  the  1). 
43.  12  and  he  shall  go  forth  from  thence  in  peace 

Lam.  3.  17  hast  removed  my  soul  far  off  from  peace 
Eze.    7.  25  they  shall  seek  peace,  and  (there  shall  be) 

13.  10  saying,  Peace;  and  (there  was)  no  peace 

13.  16  of  peace  for  her,  and  (there  is)  no  peace 
34.  25  I  will  make  with  them  a  covenant  of  peace 
37. 26  I  will  make  a  covenant  of  peace  with  them 

Dan.  10. 19  peace  (be)  unto  thee ;  be  strong,  yea,  be 

Mic.  3.  5  that  bite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry,  Peace 
5.   5  And  this . .  shall  be  the  peace,  when  the  A. 

Nah.  1.  15  feet  of  him.  .that  publisheth  peace  !  O  J. 

Hag.    2.    9  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  L. 

Zech.  6.  13  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them 
8. 10  neither  (was  there  any)  peace  to  him  that 
8.  16  execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace 

8.  19  feasts;  therefore  love  the  truth  and  peace 

9.  10  and  he  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen 
Mai.   2.    5  My  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  and  p. 

2.    6  he  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  equity 

^.Completeness,  peace,  nby  shelam. 

Ezra    4.  17  (unto)  the  rest . .  Peace,  and  at  such  a  time 

5.  7  written  thus;  Unto  Darius  the  king,  all  p. 
Dan .    4.    1  unto  all  people . .  Peace  be  multiplied  unto 

6.  25  Darius  wrote . .  Peace  be  multiplied  unto 

4.  Peace,  unity,  concord,  elp4\vn  eirene. 

Matt  10. 13  letyourpeace come . . let yourpeace return 

10.  34  peace  on  earth :  I  came  not  to  send  peace 

Mark  5.  34  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague 

Luke  1.  79  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace 

2.  14  and  on  earth  peace,  good  mil  toward  men 

2.  29  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  p. 

7.  50  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace 

8.  48  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole;  go  in  p. 
10.    5  whatsoever  house  ye  enter,  first  say,  Peace 

10.  6  if  the  son  of  peace  be  there,  your  peace 

11.  21  keepeth  his  palace,  his  goods  are  in  peace 

12.  51  Suppose  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace 

14.  32  sendeth.  .anddesireth  conditions  ofpeace 
19.  38  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 

19.  42  the  things  (which  belong)  unto  thy  peace 
24. 36  [saith  unto  them,  Peace  (be)  unto  you] 

Johni4.  27  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give 
16.  33  Ihavespoken.  .thatinmeyemighthavep. 

20.  19  and  saith  unto  them,  Peace  (be)  u11^0  V(lU 
20.  21  Peace  (be)  unto  you  :  as  (my)  Father  hath 
20.  26  stood  in  the  midst,  and  said,  Peace  (be) 

Acts  10.  36  preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ :  heisL. 
"12.  20  desired  peace ;  because  their  country  was 
is-  33  they  were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  breth. 


Acts  16.  36  told,  .now  therefore  depart,  and  go  in  p. 
Kom.  1.    7  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our  Fa. 

2. 10  peace,  to  every  man  that  worketh  good 

3. 17  And  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  kno. 

5.    1  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lo. 

8.    6  to  be  spiritually  minded  (is)  life  and  peace 

10.  15  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  [of  peace) 
14. 17  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost 

14. 19  follow  after  the  tilings  which  make  for  p. 
15-  13  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that 

15.  33  Now  the  God  of  peace  (be)  with  you  all 

16.  20  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under 

1  Co.   t.    3  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  (from) 

7. 15  depart,  .but  God  hath  called  us  to  peace 
14.  33  not  (the  author)  of  confusion,  but  of  pea. 

16.  11  conduct  him  forth  in  peace,  that  he  may 

2  Co.  1.   2  peace  from  God  our  Father,  and  (from) 

13. 11  the  God  of  love  and  peace  shall  be  with 
Gal.    1.   3  peace  from  God  the  Father,  and  (from) 

5.  22  peace,  long  suffering,  gentleness,  goodne. 

6.  16  peace  (be)  on  them,  and  mercy,  and  upon 
Eph.   1.   2  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  (from) 

2.  14  he  is  our  peace,  whohath  made  both  one 
2. 15  of  twain  one  new  man,  (so)  making  peace 
2. 17  preached  peace  to  you  which  were  afar  off 
4.  3  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  pe. 
6.  15  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  pe. 
6.  23  Peace  (be)  to  the  brethren,  and  love  with 

Phil.   1.    2  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  (from) 
4.    7  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  unde. 

4.  9  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you 
Col.     1.    2  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 

3.  15  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts 

1  Th.  1.    1  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  the  Lord 

5.  3  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety,  t. 
5. 23  the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly 

2  Th.  1.    2  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 

3.  16  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace 

1  Ti.    1.   2  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  Jesus  C. 

2  Ti.    1.    2  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Clirist  J. 

2.  22  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace 
Titus  1.  4  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord 
Phm.  3  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 
Heb.  7.    2  also  king  of  Salem,  which  is,  king  of  pe. 

11.  31  when  she  had  received  the  spies  with  pe 

12.  14  Follow  peace  with  all  (men),  audholine*- 

13.  20  the  God  ofpeace,  that  brought  again  from 
Jas.     2.  16  Depart  in  peace,  be  (ye)  warmed  and  filled 

3.  18  is  sown  in  peace  of  them  that  make  peace 

1  Pe.  1.    2  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  be  multiplied 

3.  11  do  good;  let  him  seek  peace,  and  ensue  it 

5.  14  Peace  (be)  with  you  all  that  are  in  Christ 

2  Pe.  1.    2  peace  be  multiplied  unto  you  through  the 

3.  14  that  ye  may  be  found  of  him  in  peace 

2  John     3  peace,  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  the 

3  John    14  Peace  (be)  to  thee.   (Our)  friends  salute 
Jude        2  Mercy  unto  you,  and  peace,  and  love,  be 
Ilev.    1.    4  peace,  from  him  which  is,  and  which  was 

6.  4  to  take  peace  from  the  earth,  and  that 

PEACE,  to  be  at,  have,  or  live  in  — 

I. To  be  complete,  at  peace,  ch?  shalam. 

Job  22.  21  beat  peace:  thereby  good  shall  come  unto 
Psa.     7.   4  evil  unto  him  that  was  at  peace  with  me 

2.  To  be  caused  to  be  at  peace,  o^f>  shalam,  6. 
Job     5.  23  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace 

o.To  be  peaceable,  desire  peace,  tlpnvevco  eirmeuo. 
Mark  9.  50  Have  salt  in  yourselves,  and  have  peace 
2  Co.  13.  11  live  in  peace ;  and  the  God  of  love  and 
1  Th.  5. 13  (And)  be  at  peace  among  yourselves 

PEACE,  to  hold  one's  — 

l.To  be  dumb,  silent,  DC}  damam. 

Lev.  10.    3  Then  Moses  said.  .And  Aaron  held  his  p. 

2.  To  become  or  keep  silent,  nort  hasah,  3. 

Neh.  8. 11  saying,  Hold  your  peace,  for  the  day  (is) 

3.7b  hide  the  voice,  ?ip  N3n  chabah  kol,  2. 

Job  29. 10  The  nobles  held  their  peace,  and  their 

4.  To  be  silent,  deaf,  ann  charash. 

Psa.  39.  12  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my  tears  :  for  I  (am) 
83.  1  hold  not  thy  peace,  and  be  not  still,  0  God 
109.    1  Hold  not  thy  peace,  0  God  of  my  praise 

5.  To  keep  silent,  vnn  charash,  5. 

Gen.  24.  21  the  man  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace 
34.    5  Jacob  held  hispeace  until  they  were  come 

Exod  14. 14  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  yourpeace 

Nuni3o.    4  and  her  father  shall  hold  his  peace  at  hei 
30.   7,  14  held  his  peace  at  her  in  the  day  that 
30. 14  hold  his  peace  at  her  from  day  to  day 
30.  14  because  he  held  his  peace  at  her  in  the  d. 

Judgi8.  19  Hold  thy  peace,  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy 

1  Sa.  10.  27  brought.,  no  presents.     Butheheldhisp. 

2  Sa.  13.  20  hold  now  thy  peace,  my  sister:  he  (is)  thy 
2  Ki.18.  36  the  people  held  their  peace,  and  answered 
Neh.   5.    SThenheldtheytheirpeace,  and  found  nt»t. 
Esth.  4.  14  if  thou  altogether  boldest  thy  peace  at 
Job   11.    3  Should  thy  lies  make  men  hold  their  pea. 

13.    5  that  ye  would  altogether  hold  your  peace 
13.  13  Hold  yourpeace,  let  me  alone,  that  I  may 
33.  31  hearken,  .hold  thy  peace,  and  I  will  speak 
33.  33  hold  thy  peace,  and  I  shall  teach  thee  w 
Prov  1 1.  12  a  man  of  understanding  holdeth  his  peat,  e 

17.  28  Even  a  fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace 
Isa.   36.  21  they  held  their  peace,  and  answered  him 
Jer.    4.  19  I  cannot  hold  my  peace,  because  thou  hast 

6. To  be  silent,  npp  chashah. 

Isa.   62.    1  For  Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace 


PEACE 


PELETH 


Isa.   62.    6  shall  never  hold  their  peace  day  nor  night 

64. 12  wilt  thou  hold  thy  peace,  and  afflict  us 

7. To  keep  silent,  riy'n  chashah,  5. 

2  Ki.  2.    3,  5  Yea,  I  know  (it ;)  hold  ye  your  peace 

7.    9  a  day  of  good  tidings,  and  we  hold  our  p. 

Psa.  39.    2  I  held  my  peace,  (even)  from  good ;  and 

Isa.   42.  14  I  have  longtime  holden  my  peace  ;  I  have 

57.  11  have  not  I  held  my  peace  even  of  old,  and 

B.To  be  silent,  not  to  speak,  trtyda  sigao. 

Luke2o.  26  marvelled  at  his  answer,  and  held .  .peace 
Acts  12. 17  heckoning..  with  the  hand.. to  hold.,  pea. 

15. 13  after  they  had  held  their  peace,  James 

1  Co.  14.  30  If. .  be  revealed . .  let  the  first  hold  his  pe. 

5'.  To  be  silent,  cease  speaking,  atuiirdw  siopao. 

Matt  20.  31  because  they  should  hold  their  peace  :but 

26.  63  But  Jesus  held  his  peace.  And  the  high 
.Mark  3.   4  lawful,  .to  kill?  But  they  held  their  pea. 
9.  34  they  held  their  peace:  for  by  the  w.  4.39. 

10.  48  charged  him  that  he  should  hold  his  pe. 

14.  61  But  he  held  his  peace,  and  answered  no. 
Lukei8.  39  rebuke  Ihim,  that  [he should  hold  hisp.] 

19.  40  if  these  should  hold  their  peace,  the  sto. 
Acts  18.    9  Be  not  afraid,  .and  hold  not  thy  peace 

10.2*0  he  quiet,  7]ctvxq-(<*>  hesuchazd. 

Lukei4-  4  they  held  their  peace.  And  hetnok(him) 
Acts  11.  18  they  held  their  peace,  and  glorified  God 

11.2*0  muzzle,  gag,  <pip.6<a  phimoo. 

Mark  r.  25  saying,  Hold  thy  peace,  .come  Lu.  4.  35. 

PEACE,  to  make  (to  be  at\  — 

l.To  cause  or  make  peace,  ny?  shalam,  5. 

Deut  20.  12  if  it  will  make  no  peace  with  thee,  hut 
Josh. 10.    1  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeon  had  made  peace 

10.  4  it  hath  made  peace  with  Joshua,  and  with 

11.  75  There  was  not  a  city  th:t  made  peace  with 

2  Sa.  10. 19  they  made  peace  with  Israel,  and  served 
1  Ki.  22.  44  Jehcshaphatmade  peace  with  the  king  of 
1  Ch.19.  19  they  made  peace  with  David,  and  became 
Provi6.   7  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace 

'l.To  makepeace,  elpijyiir-Jcc  eirenopoieo. 

Col.    1.  20  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of 
PEACE  offering  — 
Peace  offering,  D^y  sheUm. 

Exodeo.  24  thy  peace  offerings,  thy  sheep,  and  thine 
24.  5  sacrificed  peace  offerings  of  oxen  unto  the 
29.  28  of  the  sacrifice  of  their  peace  offerings 
32.  6  And  they  rose,  .and  brought  peace  offer. 
Lev.  3.  1  if  his  oblation  (be)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  off. 
3.  3  offer  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offering 
3.   6  sacrifice  of  peace  offering  unto  the  LORD 

4. 10,  26,  31,  35  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings 
6. 12  he  shall  burn . .  the  fat  of  the  peace  offer. 

7. 11,  20,  2i,  37  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings 
7.  13  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  of  his  peace  off. 
7. 14  sprinkleththe  blood  of  the  peace  offerings 
7. 15,  18,  29,  29  sacrifice  of  his  peace  offerings 
7.  32  the  sacrifices  of  your  peace  offerings 

7.  33  offereth  the  blood  of  the  peace  offerings 
7.  34  from  off  the  sacrifices  of  their  peace  otfe. 
9.  4  Also  a  bullock  and  a  ram  for  peace  offer. 
9.  18  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings  which  (was) 
9.  22  and  the  burnt  offering,  andpeace  offering 
10.  14  out  of  the  sacrifices  of  peace  offerings  of 
17.  5  offer  them  (for)  peace  offerings  unto  the 
19.    5  if  yeoffer  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings  unto 

22.  21  offereth  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings  unto 

23.  19  two  lambs . .  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offer. 
Num.  6.  14  ram  without  blemish  for  peace  offerings 

6.  17  the  ram  (for)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerin. 
6. 18  (is)  under  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offer 

7.  17  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings,  two 
So  in  verse  23,  29,  35,  41.  47,  53,  59,  65,  71.  77.  83. 

7.  S3  oxen,  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offerin. 

10.  10  over  the  sacrifices  of  your  peace  offerings 
13.   8  a  vow,  or  peace  offerings  unto  the  Lord 
79.  39  ye  shall  do.  .for  your  peace  offerings 

Deut 27,    7  thou  shalt  offer  peace  offerings,  and  shalt 

Josh,  8.  31  offered.. and  sacrificed  peace  offerings 

22  23  or  if  to  offer  peace  offerings  thereon,  let 

22.  27  sacrifices,  and  with  our  peace  offerings 

Judgao.  26  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  before 

21     4  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

1  Sa.  10.    8  down.. to  sacrifice  sacrifices  of  peace  oft. 

11.  15  the  sacrificed  sacrifices  of  peace  offerings 
13.    9  burnt  offering  to  me,  and  peace  offerings 

2  Sa.   6.  17  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

6.  18  of  offering  burnt  offerings  andpeace  offer. 

24.  25  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 

1  Ki.  3.  15  offered  peace  offerings,  and  made  a  feast 

8-  63  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offer. 

8.  64,  64  and  the  fat  of  peace  offerings 

9.  25  peace  offerings  upon  the  altar  which  he 

2  Ki  16.  13  sprinkled  the  blood  of  his  peace  offerings 
1  Ch.j6.    1  offered  burnt  sacrifices  andpeaceofferings 

36.    2  the  burnt  offeiings  and  the  peace  offerings 
2t.  26  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings 
2CI1.  7.    7  offered.. the  fat  of  the  peace  offerings 

29.  35  with  the  fat  of  the  peace  offerings,  and  the 

30.  22  offering  peace  offerings,  and  making  con 

31.  2  for  burnt  offerings  and  forpeace  offerings 
33. 16  sacrificed  thereon  peace  offerings,  .thank 

Prov.  7.  14  (I  have)  peace  offerings  with  me  ;  this  day 
Eze.  43.  27  priests  shall  make . .  your  peace  offerings 

45.  15,  17  peace  offerings,  to  make  reconciliation 

46.  2,  12,  burnt  offering,  and  his  peace  offerings 
46. 12  or  peace  offerings  voluntarily  unto  the  L. 

Amos  5-  22  neither,  .the  peace  offeringsof  yourfatbe. 

93 


PEACE,  perfect,  or  such  as  be  at  — 

Completeness,  peace,  DiV^  shalom. 

Psa.  55.  20  against  such  as  be  at  peace  with  him 
Isa.   26.    3  Thou  wilt  keep  fhim)  hi  perfect  peace,  (wh.) 
Obad.       7  men  that  were  at  peace  with  thee  have  d. 

PEACEABLE  — 

\. Completeness,  peace,  niS-J  shalom. 

Isa.   32.  18  my  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  hab. 
Jer.  25.  37  peaceable  habitations  are  cut  down  bee. 

2. At  rest,  at  ease,  vb$s  "\hy  shalev. 

1  Ch.  4.  40  land  (was)  wide,  and  quiet,  and  peaceable 

3.  To  be  comphte:  at  peace,  chtf  shalam. 

2  Sa.  20. 19  peaceable  (and)  faithful  in  Israel :  thou  s. 

^.Complete,  peaceable,  cSc>  shalem. 

Gen.  34.  21  These  men  (are)  peaceable  with  us ;  ther. 

5. Peaceable,  elpnvitcos  eirenikos. 

Heb.  12. 11  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit 
Jas.     3.  17  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  (and) 

6.  Quiet,  Tjauxtos  hesuchios. 

1  Ti.    2.   2  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable 
PEACEABLY  — 
l.Rest,  ease,  security,  nj7B>  shalvah. 

Dan.  11  21  he  shall  come  in  peaceably,  and  obtain 
11.  24  He  shall  euter  peaceably  even  upon  the 

'2.  Completeness,  peace,  DiS^  shalom. 

Gen.  37.    4  and  could  not  speak  peaceably  unto  him 
Judgn.  13  therefore  restore  those  (lands)  again  pea. 

21.  13  Rimmon,  and  to  call  peaceably  unto  them 
1  Sa.  16.    4  trembled,  .and  said,  Comest  thou  peace.? 

16.    5  said,  Peaceably  :  I  am  come  to  sacrifice 
1  Ki.  2.  13  Comest  thou  peaceably  ?  And  he  said,  P. 
1  Ch.  12.  17  If  ye  be  come  peaceably  unto  me  to  help 
J  er.    9.    8  speaketh  peaceably  to  his  neighbour  with 

PEACEABLY,  to  live  — 

To  be  peaceable,  desire  peace,  tlpnvevw  eireneuo. 

Rom.  12.  18  If  it  be  possible,  .live  peaceably  with  all 
PEACEMAKER  — 
A  peacemaker,  €ipT}voTroi.6s  eirenopoios. 

Matt.  5.    9  Blessed  (are)  the  peacemakers  :  for  they 
PEACOCKS  — 

1.  Peacocks,  D'^sn  tukkiyyini. 

1  Ki.  10.  22  and  silver,  ivory,  and  apes,  and  peacocks 

2  Ch.    9.  21  and  silver,  ivory,  and  apes,  and  peacocks 

I.Ostrich  hens,  D*i:"|  renanim. 

Job  39.  13  the  goodly  wings  unto  the  peacocks?  or 
PEARL  — 
l.Chryslal,  c;,23  gabish. 

Job  28.  18  mention  shall  be  made  of  coral,  or  of  pe. 

2.  A  pearl,  fiapyaplrns  margarites. 

Matt  7.    6  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine 
13.  45  a  merchant  man  seeking  goodly  pearls 
13.  46  when  he  had  found  one  pearl  of  great  pr. 

1  Ti.   2.    9  with  broidered  hair,  or  gold,  or  pearls,  or 

Rev.  17.    4  precious  stones,  and  pearls,  having  a  gol. 

18.  12  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and  of  pearls 

18.  16  decked  with.,  precious  stones,  and  pearls 

21.  21  twelve  pearls  ;  every  several  gate . .  one  p. 

PECULIAR  (treasure)  — 

1. Peculiar  treasure,  enclosure,  n^Jp  segullah. 

Exod  19.    5  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me  a. 

Deuti4.    2  ljORDha.th  chosen  thee  to  be  a  peculiar  p. 
26.  iS  avouched  thee  this  day  to  be  his  peculiar 

Psa.  135.    4  hath  chosen . .  Israel  for  his  peculiar  trea. 

Eccl.  2.    8  peculiar  treasure  of  kings  and  of  the  pri. 

^.Peculiar,  beyond  ordinary, irepiovatos periousios. 
Titus  2..  14  andpnrify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people 
3.^4  making  all  around,  acquisition,  irepiTrotnais. 

1  Pe.   2.    9  But  ye  (are). ..a  peculiar^ people  ;  that ;  e 

PE-DA'-HEL,  Sxrin?  God  delivers. 

The  chief  of  Naphtali  chosen  to  divide  the  land  W.  of 

the  Jordan.    B.C.  1452. 

Num.  34.  28  prince  of  the  tribe. .  .P.  the  son  of  Amniih. 

PE-DAH-ZTJR,  to,tt5  the  rock  delivers. 

The  father  of  Gamaliel  the  chief  of  Manasseh,  chosen  to 

number  the  people.    B.C.  1452. 

Num.  1.  10  of  Manasseh  ;  Gamaliel  the  son  of  P. 

2.  20  captain . .  (shall  be)  Gamaliel  the  son  of  P. 
7.  54  eighth  day  (offered)  Gamaliel  the  son  of  P. 
7.  59  the  offering  of  Gamaliel  the  son  of  P. 
10.  23  over  the  host . .  (was)  Gamaliel  the  son  of  P. 

PE-BA'-IAH,  irrif,  n;i?  Jah  delivers 

1.  Grandfather  of  king  Josiah.    B.C.  640. 

2  Ki.  23.  36  (was)  Zebudah,  the  daughter  of  P.  of  Ru 

2.  Son  or  grandson  of  Jeconiah  son  of  king  Jehoiakim, 
and  father  of  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  570. 

1  Ch.    3.  18  and  P.,  and  Shenazar,  Jecamiah,  Hosha. 
3.  19  the  son  of  P.  (were)  Zerubbabel,  and  Shi. 

3.  Father  of  Joel,  ruler  of  Manasseh  W.  of  Jordan  in  the 
days  of  David.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  27.  20  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  ;  J.  the  son  of  P. 

4.  One  of  the  sons  of  Parosh  who  helped  to  repair  the 
wall  after  Nehemiah  came.    B.C.  446. 

Neh.    3.  25  After  him  P.  the  son  of  Parosh 


5.  A  prince,  priest,  or  Levite  who  stood  on  Ezra's  left 
hand  when  he  read  the  law  to  the  people.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.   8.    4  P.,  and  Mishael,  and  Malcliiah,  and  Has. 
13.  13  and  of  the  Levites,  P. :  and  next  to  them 

6.  A  Benjamite  whose  great  grandson  Sallu  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem.    B  C.  530. 

Neh.  n.    7  the  son  of  P.,  the  son  of  Kolaiah,  the  son 
PEDIGREE,  to  declare  — 
To  show  one's  birth  or  pedigree,  ih;  yalad,  7. 

Num.  1.  18  declared  their  pedigrees  after  their  famil. 
PEELED  — 
l.To  pluck  off,  peel,  polish,  trip  marat. 

Eze.  29.  18  every  shoulder  (was)  peeled ;  yet  had  he 
2.  To  be  plucked  off,  peeled,  polished,  trio  marat,  4. 

Isa.   18.    2  to  a  nation  scattered  and  peeled,  to  a  pe. 
18.    7  people  scattered  and  peeled,  aud  from  a 
PEEP,  te  — 
To  chatter,  whisper,  fjsjj  tsaphaph,  3a. 

Isa.     8.  19  unto  wizards  that  peep  and  that  mutter 
10. 14  none  that  moved  the  whig,  .or  peeped. 

PE'-KAH,  npf  watchfulness. 

Son  of  Remaliah,  and  an  officer  of  Pekahiah,  against 

whom  he  conspired  and  reigned  in  his  stead,  and  who 

was  himself  slain  by  Hoshea  son  of  Elah.    B.C.  759-739. 

2  Ki.  15.  25  But  P.  the  son  of  Remaliah,  a  captain  of 

15.  27  P.  the  son  of  Remaliah  began  to  reign  over 

15. 29  In  the  days  of  P.  king  of  Israel  came  Ti. 

15.  30  made  a  conspiracy  against  P.  the  son  of 

15.  31  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  P.,  and  allth. 

15.  32  In  the  second  year  of  P.  the  son  of  Rem. 

15.  37  Rezin  the  king  of  Syria,  and  P.  the  sou  of 

16.  1  In  the  seventeenth  year  of  P.  the  son  of 
16.    s  Then  Rezin  king  of  Syria  and  P.  son  of  R. 

2  Ch.28.   6  For  P.  the  son  of  Remaliah  slew  in  Judah 
Isa.     7.    1  Rezin  the  king  of  Syria,  and  P.  the  son  of 

PE-KAH'-IAH,  n;rjj25  Jah  watches. 
.Son  of  Menahem  king  of  Israel,  and  slain  by  Pekah  son 
of  Remaliah,  after  reigning  two  years.    B.C.  761. 
2  Ki.15.  22  and  P.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

15.  23  P.  the  son  of  Menahem  began  to  reign  o. 

15. 26  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  P.,  and  all  that 

PE'-KOB,  Tip?  visitation. 

A  symbolic  name  for  Chaldea;  perhaps  the  Pactyians, 

whoni  Herodotus  names  with  the  Armenians  anil  Cas- 

pians. 

Jer.   50. 21  Go  up  against . .  the  inhabitants  of  P. :  w. 

Eze.  23.  23  P.,  and  Shoa,  and  Koa,  (and)  all  the  Ass. 

PE-LA'-IAH,  n;7|  Jah  is  distinguished. 
1.  A  son  of  Elivenai,  of  the  family  of  David.    B.C.  445. 
1  Ch.  3.  24  sons  of  Elioenai  (were).  .Eliashib,  and  P. 
■2.  A  priest  who  explained  the  law  when  Ezra  read  it. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  8.    7  P.  and  the  Levites,  caused  the  people  to 
3.  A  Levite  that,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  10  And  then:  brethren . .  Kelita,  P.,  H.-.nan 

FE-LAL-I'AH,  rrbhp  Jah  judges. 

A  priest  whose  grandson  Adaiah  dwelt  in  Jerusalem 

after  the  exile.    B.C.  500 

Neh.  11.  12.  P.,  the  son  of  Amzi,  the  son  of  Zechariah 

PE-LAT-I'AH,  rrvhp,  W;i^3  Jah  delivers. 

1.  Son  of  Hananiah,   descendant  of  Salathiel,   of  the 
family  of  David.    B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.    3.  21  And  the  sons  of  Hananiah  ;  P.,  and  Jesa. 

2.  A  Simeonite  captain.     B.C.  715. 

1  Ch.    4.  42  having  for  their  captains  P.,  and  Neariah 

3.  A  family  that  sealed  the  covenant.     B.C.  445. 
Neh.  10.  22  P.,  Hanan,  Anaiah 

4.  Son  of  Benaiah,  seen  in  vision  by  Ezekiel  the  prophet. 
B.C.  594- 

Eze.  11.    1  P.  the  son  of  Benaiah,  princes  of  the  peo. 
11.  13  came  to  pass.,  that  P.  the  son  of  Benaiah 

PE'-LEG,  ajjs,  :Ss  division. 

A  son  of  Eber,  of  the  family  of  Sheni,  in  whose  days 

the  earth  was  divided.    B.C.  2222. 

Gen.  10.  25  the  name  of  one  (was)  P.;  for  in  his  days 
11.  16  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty... and  begat  P. 

11. 17  And  Eber  lived  after  he  begat  P.  four  hu. 

11. 18  And  P.  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Reu 
11.  19  and  P.  lived  after  he  begat  Reu  two  hun. 

1  Ch.  1. 19  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  P.,  because  in 
1.  25  Eber,  P.,  Rue 

PE'-LET,  bVs  escape. 

1.  A  son  of  Jahdai  of  the  family  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hezron. 
B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch    2.  47  And  the  sons  of  Jahdai.  .P.,  and  Ephah 

2.  A  son  of  Azmaveth,  who  was  also  one  of  David's  cap- 
tains, 1  Ch.  11.  33.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.    3  Jeziel,  and  P.,  the  sons  of  Azmaveth  ;  aud 

PE'-LETH,  nSs  flight,  haste. 

1.  A  Reubenite  and  father  of  On  who  joined  'Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram  against  Moses  and  Aaron.    B.C.  1510. 

Numi6.    1  On  the  son  of  P.,  sons  of  Reuben,  took 

2.  A  son  of  Jonathan,  and  descendant  of  Pharez  son  a. 
Judah.    B.C.  1370. 

1  Ch.  2.  33  .*nd  the  sons  of  Jonathan  ;  P.,  and  Zaza. 


PELBTHITES 


738 


PEOPLE 


PE-LETHITES,  'n1??. 

A  company  of  David's  body  guard,  like  the  Cheretliites 
(i.e.  Cretans)  ;  perhaps  a  contraction  of  Philistines. 
s  Sa.  8.  18  And  Benaiah. .(was  over).. the  P.s;  and 
15.  18  all  the  P.s.  .passed  on  before  the  king 
20.   7  the  P.s,  and  all  the  mighty  men  :  and  the 
20.  23  (was)  over  the  Cheretliites  and  over  the  P. 
1  Ki    1  38  and  the  P. 's,  went  down,  and  caused  Sol. 

1  44  And  the  king  hath  sent  with  him.  .P.s 
1  Ch.18.  17  And  Beuaiah.  .(was)  over,  .the  P.s ;  and 

PELICAN  — 

The  pelican,  nxfj  qaath. 

Lev  n.  18  swan,  and  the  pelican,  and  the  gier  eagle 
Deutij.  17  pelican,  and  the  gier  eagle,  and  the  conn. 
Psa.  102.   6  I  am  like  a  pelican  of  the  wilderness  ;  I 

PE-LON-ITE,  *3i^9. 

1  Vn  appellation  of  Helez  an  Ephraimite,  one  of 
David's  valiant  men;  perhaps  the  same  as  Paltite,  2 
Sam.  3.  26,  and  23.  54. 

1  Ch.ir.  27  Shammoth  the  Harorite,  Helez  the  P, 
27. 10  The  seventh  (captain),  .(was)  Helez  the  P. 

2.  An  appellation  of  Ahijah  the  prophet. 

1  Ch.11.  36  Hepherthe  Mecherathite,  Ahijah  the  P. 
PEN  — 
\.A  graving  tool  or  pen,  ann  cheret. 

Isa.     8.    1  write  in  it  with  a  man's  pen  concerning 

%A  pen,  ay  et. 

.Toll    19.  24  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen  and 
Psa.  45.    1  my  tongue  (is)  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer 
Jer.     8.    8  in  vain  made  he  (it) ;  the  pen  of  the  scribes 
17.    1  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  (and)  with  the 

3.  A  rod,  reed,  B3#  shebet. 

Judg,  5.  14  they  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  writer 

A. A  reed,  pen,  Ka.Kap.os  kalamos. 

3  John   13  I  will  not  with  ink  and  pen  write  unto  t. 

PE-NT'-EL,  S"J9  face  of  God. 

A  city  where  Jacob  wrestled,  S.  of  Jahbok,  some  dis- 
tance from  the  Jordan  and  from  Succoth,  also  called 
Penuel. 

Gen.  32.  30  And  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  P. 
PE-NIN'-NAH,  nj33  coral. 

A  wife  of  Elkanah  father  of  Samuel  the  prophet.  B.C. 
1 170. 

1  Sa.    1.    2  Hannah,  and  the  name  of  the  other  P. 
1.    2  and  P.  had  children,  but  Hannah  had  no 
1.    4  he  gave  to  P.  his  wife,  and  ';o  all  her  sons 

PEN  KNIFE  — 

A  scribe's  knife,  ish  tyn  taar  sopher. 

Jer.   36.  23  cutit  with  the  penknife,  and  cast  (it)  into 

PENNY,  PENCE,  PENNYWORTH  — 
A  denary  (10  asses,  or  l\d.\  h-qvd^iov  denarion. 
Matt  18. 28  owed  hhn  an  hundred  pence;  and  he  lata 
20.    2  when  he  had  agreed . .  for  a  penny  day,  he 
20.    9  hour,  they  received  every  man  a  penny 
20.  10  they  likewise  received  every  man  a  penny 
20.  13  didst  not  thou  agree  with  me  fora  penny? 
22.  19  And  they  brought  unto  him  a  penny 
Mark  6.  37  Shall  we  go  and  buy  two  hundred  penny. 
12.  15  bring  me  a  penny,  that  I  may  see  (it) 
14.    5  sold  for  more  than  three  hundred  pence 
Luke  7.  41  one  owed  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  oth. 
10.  35  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  (them)  to 
20.  24  Show  me  a  penny.    Whose  image  and  su. 
John  6.    7  Two  hundred  penny  worth  of  bread  is  not 

12.    5  ointment  sold  for  three  hundred  pence 
Rev.   6.    6  A  measure  of  wheat  for  a  penny,  and 

6.    6  three  measures  of  barley  for  a  penny,  and 
PENTECOST  — 

Feast  on  fiftieth  day  after  Passover,  Trevr-nKOffTt). 
Acts    2.    1  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come 

20.  16  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  Pentecost 
1  Co.  16.  8  But  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost 

PE-NU'-EL,  Vo?  face  of  God. 

1.  The  same  as  Peniel  above. 

Gen.  32.  31  AndashepassedoverP.  the  sun  rose  upon 
Jud.    8.    8  And  he  went  up  thence  to  P  ,  and  spake 
8.    8  and  the  men  of  P.  answered  him  as  the 
8.    9  And  he  spake  also  unto  the  men  of  P. 
8.  17  And  he  beat  down  the  tower  of  P.,  and 
iKi.  12.  25  and  went  out  from  thence,  and  built  P. 

2.  Father  or  chief  of  Gedar.    B.C.  1450. 

1  Oh.  4.    4  And  P.  the  father  of  Gedor,  and  Ezer  the 

3.  A  Benjamite.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  25  AndIphcdeiah,andP.,thesonsofShashak 
PENURY  — 

l.Lack,  want,  11017.'?  macJisor. 

Prov.14.  23  talk  of  the  lips  (tendeth)  only  to  penury 
2.P<  'iitry,  deficiency,  -a-repvpa  husterema. 

Luke2i.   4  but  she  of  her  penury  hath  cast  in  all  the 
PEOPLE  — 
l.A  man,  individual,  '^'"x  ish. 

2  Sa.  20. 13  all  the  people  went  on  after  Joab,  to  pu. 
%Nation$,  people,  nisx.  a%tp>  ummi?n,ummock. 

\  1111125.  *5  head  over  a  people,  (and)  of  a  chief  house 
rsa.117.    1  all  ye  nations:  praise  him,  all  ye  people 

3  A  (mortal)  man,  »13M  enos.  . 

Jon.    3.    5  Sothepe'ii]cofNuievehbelievedGod,and 


l.N  ks  of  \?5  bene. 

Gen.  29.    1  came  into  the  land  of  the  people  of  the 

5.-4  son  of  the  people,  common  person,  cy*}5  ben-am. 
Lev.  20.  17  shall  be  cutoff  in  the  sight  of  their  people 
2  Ch.35.    5  of  the  fathers  of  your  brethren  the  people 

35.    7  Josiah  gave  to  the  people,  of  the  flock,  1. 

35.  12  to  the  divisions  of  the  families  of  the  pe. 

35.  13  divided  (them)  speedily  among  all  the  pe. 

6. Nation,  corporate  body,  "ia  goi. 

Josh.  3.  17  until  all  the  people  were  passed  clean  over 

4.  1  when  all  the  people  were  clean  passed  o. 

5.  6  till  all  the  people  (that  were)  men  of  war 
5.    8  had  donecircurncisingallthepeople,  that 

10. 13  until  the  people  had  avenged  themselves 
Judg.  2.  20  Because  that  this  people  hath  transgressed 
2  Ki.  6.  18  Smite  this  people,  I  pray  thee,  with  blind. 
Dan.  11.  23  shall  become  strong  with  a  small  people 
Joel  3.  8  shall  sell  them . .  to  a  people  far  off :  for 
Zeph.  2.  9  remnant  of  my  people  shall  possess  them 
Zech.12.   3  thougha'lthepeopleof  the  earth  be  gath. 

7 .Nation,  people,  Dis*7  leom. 

Gen.  25. 23  two  manner  of  people  shall  be  separated 

25.  23  people  shallbestrongerthan(theother)p. 

Psa.    2.    1  Why  do . .  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing  1 

7.    7  So  shall  the  congregation  of  the  people  c. 

9.    8  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  the  people 

44.   2  didst  afflict  the  people,  and  cast  them  out 

44. 14  a  shaking  of  the  head  among  the  people 
65.    7  Which  stilleth.  .the  tumult  of  the  people 

105.  44  and  they  inherited  the  labour  of  the  peo. 

148.  11  Kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  people  ;  prin. 

149.  7  To  execute,  .punishments  upon  the  peop. 
Prov  11.26  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall 

14.  28  in  the  want  of  people  (is)  the  destruction 
14.  34  nation :  but  sin  (is)  a  reproach  to  any  pe. 
Isa.  34.  1  hearken,  ye  people:  let  the  earth  hear,  and 
41.  1  let  the  people  renew  (their)  strength:  let 
43.  4  therefore  will  I  give  men  for  thee,  and  p. 
43.  9  let  the  people  be  assembled  :  who  among 
49.  1  hearken,  ye  people,  from  far  ;  The  Lord 
55-  4  given  him  (for)  a  witness  to  the  people 
55.  4  a  leader  and  commander  to  the  people 
60.    2  gross  darkness  the  people :  but  the  Lord 

8. A  company,  ring  edah. 

Lev.  10.    6  and  lest  wrath  come  upon  all  the  people 

9.  A  people,  an,  DJJ  am. 

Gen.  11.  6  people  (is)  one,  and  they  have  all  one  Ian. 
14.  16  goods,  and  the  woman  also,  and  the  peo. 
17.  14  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people 
17.  16  of  nations :  kings  of  people  shall  be  of  her 
19.  4  both  old  and  young,  all  the  people  from 
23.  7  bowed  himself  to  the  people  of  the  land 
23.  11  in  the  presence  of  the  sons  of  my  people 
23.  12  bowed  down  himself  before  the  people  of 
23.  13  in  the  audience  of  the  people  of  the  land 

25.  8,  17  and  was  gathered  to  his  people 

26.  10  one  of  the  people  might  lightly  have  lien 

26.  11  Abimelech  charged  all  (his)  people,  saying 

27.  29  Let  people  serve  thee,  and  nations  bow  d. 

28.  3  that  thou  mayest  be  a  multitude  of  peop. 
32.  7  he  divided  the  people  that  (was)  with  him 
34.  16  will  dwell  with  you,  and . .  become  one  p. 

34.  22  consent  unto  us.  .to  be  one  people,  if  ev. 

35.  6  he,  and  all  the  people  that  (were)with  him 
35.  29  and  died,  and  was  gathered  unto  his  peo. 
41.  40  according  unto  thy  word  shall  all  mype. 

41.  55  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  bread :  and  P. 

42.  6  thatsoldtoall  the  people  of  the  land:  and 
47.  21  as  for  the  people,  he  removed  them  to  ci. 

47.  23  Then  Joseph  said  unto  the  people,  Behold 

48.  4  I  will  make  of  thee  a  multitude  of  people 

48.  19  he  also  shall  become  apeople,  and  healso 

49.  10  unto  him  (shall)  the  gathering  of  the  peo. 
46.  16  Dan  shall  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the 
49.  29 1  am  to  be  gathered  unto  my  people :  bury 

49.  39  Jacob,  .was  gathered  unto  his  people 

50.  20  as  (it  is)  this  day,  to  save  much  people  a. 
Exod.  1.    9  said  unto  his  people.  Behold,  the  people 

1.  20  people  multiplied,  and  waxed  very  mighty 
1.  22  Pharaoh  charged  all  his  people,  saying 
3.    7  have  surely  seen  the  affliction  of  my  peo. 
3.  10  that  thou  mayest  bring  forth  my  people 
3.  12  When  thou  hast  brought  forth  the  people 

3.  21  will  give  this  people  favour  iu  the  sight 

4.  16  he  shall  be  thy  spokesman  unto  the  peo. 
4.  21  harden,  .that  he  shall  not  let  the  people 
4.  30  did  the  signs  iu  the  sight  of  the  people 

4.  31  people  believed :  and  when  they  heard  th. 

5.  1  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  hold  a. 
5.    4  Wherefore  do  ye.  .let  the  people  from  th. 
5.    5  people  of  the  laud  now  (are)  many,  and 
5.    6  commanded,  .the  taskmasters  of  the  pe. 
5.    7  Ye  shall  no  more  give  the  people  straw 
5.  10  taskmasters  of  the  people  went  out,  and 
5.  10  spake  to  the  people,  saying,  ThussaithP. 
5.  12  So  the  people  were  scattered  abroad  thr. 
5.  16  beaten  ;  but  the  fault  (is)  in  thine  own  p. 
5.  22  wherefore.. thou  (so)  evil  entreated. .p.  1 

5.  23  people  ;  neither  hast  thou  delivered  thy  p. 

6.  7  I  will  take  you  to  me  for  a  people,  and  I 

7.  4  bring  forth .  .my  people  the  children  of  I. 
7.  14  hardened,  he  refuseth  to  let  the  people  go 

7.  16  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 

8.  1 ,  20  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve 
8.  3  upon  thy  people,  and  into  thine  ovens,  and 
8.  4  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  all  thy  serva. 
8.  8  from  my  people ;  and  I  will  let  the  people 


Exod  8.  9  when  shall  I  entreat,  .for  thy  people,  to 
8. 11  frogsshalldepart.  .from  thy  people;  they 
8.  21  Else,  if  thou  wilt  uot  let  my  people  go,  b. 
8.  21  send  swarms  (of  flies),  .upon  thy  people 
8.  22  land  of  Goshen,  in  which  my  people  dwell 
8.  23  division  between  my  people  and  thy  peo. 
8.  2y  swarms  (of  flies)  may  depart,  .from  his  pe. 
8.  29  in  not  letting  the  people  go  to  sacrifice  to 
8.  31  removed. .fromhispeople:  there  remained 

8.  32  also,  neither  would  he  let  the  people  go 

9.  i,  13  Letmypeople  go,  that  they  may  serve 
9.    7  hardened,  aud  he  did  not  let  the  people 
9.  14  send,  .my  plagues,  .uponmy  people  ;  that 
9.  15  that  1  may  smite  thee  and  thy  people  with 
9.  17  exaltest  thou  thyself  against  my  people 
9.  27  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  (are)  wic. 

10.   3  let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 

10.  4  if  thuu  ref  use  to  let  my  people  go,  behold 

11.  2  Speak  now  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  and 
11.  3  gave  the  people  favour  in  the  sight  of  the 
11.   3  very  great,  .in  the  sight  of  the  people 

11.  8  Get  thee  out,  and  all  the  people  that  foil. 

12.  27  people  bowed  the  head  and  worshipped 
12.  31  get  you  forth  from  among  my  people,  both 
12.  33  Egyptians  were  urgent  upon  the  people 
i2.  34  people  took  their  dough  before  it  was  le. 

1 2.  36  gave  the  people  favour  in . .  sight  of  the  E. 

13.  3  said  unto  the  people,  Remember  this  day 
13.  17  when  Pharaoh  had  let  the  peoplego,  that 
13.  17  Lestperadventurethepeopie  repent  when 
13.  18  But  God  led  the  people  about,  (through) 

13.  22  took  not  away  the  pillar,  .before  the  peo. 

14.  5  told  the  king  of  Egypt  that  the  people  fled 
14.  5  turned  against  the  people,  and  they  said 
14.  6  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  took  his  peo. 
14.  13  Moses  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  ye  not 

14.  31  people  feared  the  Lord, and  believed  the  L. 

15.  13  Thou  in  thy  mercy  hast  led  forth  the  pe.. 
15.  14  people  shall  hear,  (and)  be  afraid:  sorrow 
15.  16  till  thy  people  pass  over,  O  Lord,  till  the 

15.  16  people  pass  over,  (which)  thou  hast  pure. 
15.24  people  murmured  against  Moses,  saying 

16.  4  people  shall  go  out  and  gather  a  certain 
16.  27  there  went  out  (some)  of  the  people  on  the 

16.  30  So  the  people  rested  on  the  seventh  day 

17.  1  (there  was)  no  water  for  the  people  to  d 
17.  2  Wherefore  the  people  did  chide  with  M. 
17.  3  people  thirsted,  .and  the  people  murmur. 
17.  4  What  shall  I  do  unto  this  people?  they 
17.  5  Go  on  before  the  people,  and  take  with 
17.    6  water  out  of  it,  that  the  peoplemay  drink 

17.  13  discomfited  Amalek  and  his  people  with 

18.  1  done  for  Israel,  and  for  Israel  his  people 
18.  10  delivered  the  people  from  under  the  hand 
18.  13  sat  to  judge  the  people:  and  the  people 
18.  14  saw  all  that  he  did  to  the  people,  he  said 

18. 14  this  thing  that  thou  doestto  the  people? 
18.  14  people  stand  by  thee  from  morning  unto 
18.  15  Because  the  people  come  untome  to  enq 
18.  18  both  thou  and  this  people  that  (is)  with 
18.  19  Be  thou  for  the  people  to  God  ward,  that 
1S.  21  provideoutof .  .the people  able  men,  such 
iS.  22  let  them  judge  the  people  at  all  seasons 
18.  23  all  this  people  shall  also  go  to  their  place 

18.  25  made  them  heads  over  the  people,  rulers 
iS.  26  judged  the  people  at  all  seasons :  the  hard 

19.  5  peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people 
19.  7  came  and  called  for  the  elders  of  the  pe. 
19.  8  people  answered  together,  and  said,  All 
19.  8  Moses  returned  the  words  of  the  people 
19.  9  that  the  people  may  hear  when  I  speak 
19.  9  told  the  words  of  the  people  unto  the  L. 
1  .  10  Go  unto  the  people,  and  sanctify  them  to 
19.  11  come  down  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people 
19. 12  thou  shalt  set  bounds  untothe  people  ro. 
19.  14  unto  the  people,  and  sanctified  the  people 

19. 15  he  said  unto  the  people,  Be  ready  against 
19.  16  all  the  people  that  (was)  in  the  camp  tre. 
19.  17  Moses  brought  forth  the  people  out  of  the 
19.  21  Go  down,  charge  the  people,  lest  they  br. 
19.  23  people  cannot  come  up  to  mount  Sinai:jfor 
19.  24  let  not  the  priests  and  the  people  break 

19.  25  So  Moses  went  down  unto  the  people,  and 

20.  18  all  the  people  saw  the  thunderiugs,  and 
20. 18  when  the  people  saw  (it),  they  removed 
20.  20  Moses  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  uot :  for 
20.21  people  stood  afar  otf:  and  Mosesdrewnear 

22.  25  If  thou  lend  money  to  (any  of)  my  people 
22.28  Thou  shalt  not.,  curse  the  ruler  of  thy  p. 
23. 11  that  the  poor  of  thy  people  may  eat :  and 

23.  27  will  destroy  all  the  people  to  whom  thou 

24.  2  neither  shall  the  people  go  up  with  him 
24.   3  told  the  people .  .all  the  people  answered 
24.    7  read  in  the  audience  of  the  people  :  and 
24.    8  sprinkled  (it)  on  the  people,  and  said,  Be. 
30. 1,1,,  iS  shall  even  lie  cut  oil'  from  his  people 

31.  14  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  peo. 

32.  1  when  the  people  saw  that  Moses  delayed 
32.    1  people  Leathered  themselves  togetherunto 
32.    3  the  people  brake  oft"  the  golden  ear  rings 
32.    6  the  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink 
32.    7  for  thypeople,  which  thou  broughtest  out 
32.   9  seen  this  people,  .it  (is)  a  stiff  necked  pe. 
32.  11  thy  wrath  wax  hut  against  thy  people,  wh. 
32.  12  and  repent  of  this  evil  against  thy  people 
32.  14  evil  which  lie  thought  to  do  unto  his  pe. 
32.  17  when  Joshuaheaid  the  uoiseof  the  people 
32.  21  What  did  this  people  unto  thee,  that  thou 
32.  22  thou  knowest  the  people,  that  they  (are 
32.  25  when  Moses  saw  that  the  people  (were) 
32.  28  there  fell  of  the  people  that  day  about 
32.  30  Moses  said  unto  the  people,  Ye  have  sin. 


PEOPLE 


739 


3* 


33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33* 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
35- 
34- 
34- 
36. 

Lev.    4. 

4- 
7- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 

JO. 

16. 

1 6. 

16. 
17- 

17- 

18. 
19. 
19. 

19. 


21. 
23- 
=3- 
26. 

Num.  ^. 
5- 
9- 


13- 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14. 

14- 

14 

14 

14 

14 

IS' 

15. 

16. 

16, 

16. 


31  Oh,  this  people  have-  sinned  a  great  sin 

34  lead  the  people  unto  (the  place)  of  which 

35  plagued  the  people,  because  they  made 

1  thou  and  the  people  which  thou  hast  bro. 

3  for  thou  (art)  a  stilf  necked  people  ;  lest  I 

4  when  the  people  heard  these  evil  tidin»s 

5  1  e  (are)  a  stiff  necked  people  :  I  will  come 

8  all  the  people  rase  up,  and  stood  every 
0  people  saw  the  cloudy  pillar,  .people rose 

2  thou  sayest  unto  me,  Bring  up  this  people 
13  and  consider  that  this  nation  (is)  thy  pe 
16  known  here  that  I  and  thy  people  have  ' 
to  so  shall  we  lie  separated,  I  and  thy  peop 
.6  people  that  (are)  upon  the  face  of  the  ea 

9  go  among  us;  for  it  (is)  a  stiff  necked  pe. 
10  before  all  thy  people,  .and  all  the  people 

5  people  bring  much  more  than  enough  for 

6  ho  the  people  were. restrained  from  brin" 

3  do  sin  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people 
27  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin  thr 
20,  2i,  23,  27  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people 

7  atonement  for  thyself,  and  for  the  people 
7  offer  the  offering  of  the  people,  and  make 

.  15  brought  the  people's  offering,  and  took 
15  which  (was)  the  sin  offering  for  the  people 
18  peace  offerings  which  (was)  for  tile  people 

22  lifted  up  his  hand  toward  the  people,  and 

23  came  out,  and  blessed  the  people :  and  the 

23  the  glory,  .appeared  unto  all  the  people 

24  when  all  thepeople  saw,  they  shouted,  and 
3  before  all  the  people  i.  will  be  glorified 

15  goat  of  the  sin  offering  that(is)  for  then 
24  burnt offeringof  thepeople..  andforthep 
33  and  for  all  the  people  of  the  congregation 

4,  9  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people 
10  will  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people 
29  shall  be  cut  off  from  among" their  people 

8  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  peo 

16  a  tale  bearer  among  thy  people;  neither 
iS  grudge  against  the  children  of  thypeople 

2  people  of  the  land  shall  stone  him  withst 
3,  6  will  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people 

4  if  the  people  of  the  land  do  any  ways  hide 

5  will  cut  him  off.  .from amongtheirpeople 
18  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  their  people 
24  which  have  separated  you  from  (other)  p 

26  severed  you  from  (other)  people,  that  ye 
1  be  defiled  for  the  dead  among  hispeople 
4  chief  man  among  his  people,  to  profane 

14  he  shall  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  people 
13  Neither,  .profane  his  seed  among  his  pe 

29  he  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people 

30  soul  will  I  destroy  from  among  his  people 

12  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  my  people 
2i  a  curse  and  an  oath  among  thy  people 

27  woman  shall  be  a  curse  among  herpeople 

13  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people  ■  be 
..  1  peoplecomplained,  it  displeased  the  Lord 
:.  2  people  cried  unto  Moses;  and  when  Moses 
:.  8  people  went  about,  and  gathered  (it)  ami 
:.  10  Moses  heard  the  people  weep  through,  mt 
.  n  layest  the  burden  of  all  this  people  upon 
.  i2  Have  I  conceived  all  this  people  '  have  I 

.  13  should  I  have  flesh  to  give  unto  all  this  p 
.  14  I  am  nou  able  to  bear  all  this  people  alone 
.  16  knowest  to  be  the  elders  of  thepeople  and 
.  17  they  shall  bear  the  burden  of  the  people 
.  iS  say  thou  unto  the  people,  Sanctify  yours 
.  21  people,  among  whom  I  (am,  are)  six  nun 
.  24  told  thepeople  the  wordsof  theLonp  and 
.  24  the  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of  the  peo 
.  29  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were 
.  32  people  stood  up  all  that  day,  and  all  (tint) 
.  33  wrath,  was  kindled  against  the  people 
.  33  smote  the  people  with  a  very  great  plague 

34  there  they  buried  the  people  that  lusted 

35  the  people  journeyed  from  Kibroth-hatt 

15  people  journeyed  not  till  Miriam  was  br' 

16  afterward  the  people  removed  from  Haz,' 
18  and  the  people  that  chvelleth  therein  w' 
28  Nevertheless  the  people  (be)  strong  that' 

30  Caleb  stilled  the  people  before  Moses,  and 

31  We be  not  able  to  go  up  against  the  people 

32  all  the  people  that  we  saw  in  it  (are)  men 
1  cried;  and  the  people  wept  that  night 
9  neither  fear  ye  the  people  of  the  land  ;  for 

n  How  long  will  this  people  provoke  meT 
13  for  thou  broughtestup  this  people  in  thy 
' I4  heard    thou,  Lord,  (art)  among  this    e 

15  Now  (if)  thou  shalt  kill  (all)  this  people 

16  not  able  to  bring  this  people  into  the  land 
19  Pardon    the  iniquity  of  this  people  acco 

19  ?s  thou  hast  forgiven  this  people,  from  E 
39  told  these  sayings . .  and  the  people  mour' 
26  be  forgiven .  .seeing  all  the  people  (were)' 
30  soul  shall  be  cut  off  Iron  among  his  peo 
41  saying,  Ye  have  killed  the  people  of  the  L 
47  the  plague  was  begun  among  the  people' 
47  and  made  an  atonement  for  the  people 

1  people  abode  in  Kadesh ;  and  Miriam  d 

3  people  chode  with  Moses,  and  spake  sav 

20  came  out  against  him  with  much  people 
24  Aaron  shall  be  gathered  unto  his  people 

2  H  wX?" mdeecI deliver this People into 

4  soul  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged 

5  people  spake  against  God,  and  against  Mo 
s  S  sent  neP'  serpents  among  the  people 

6  bit  the  people  ;  and  much  people  of  Israel 

7  people  came. .  And  Moses  prayed  for  the  p. 

9  ™i ;         ?f  upe0ple  together,  and  I  will  give 

ll  b,Vt  11°  the  Pc'°P'e  '"?sed  it,  by  (the  di. 
23  but  Sihon  gatheredall  his  people  together 


PEOPLE 


X111U21 


29  thou  art  undone,  0  people  of  Chemosh!  he 
—  33  he,  and  all  his  people,  to  the  battle  at  E 
21.  34  for  I  have  delivered,  .all  his  people,  and 

21.  35  So  they  smote  him.  .andallhis  people,  uu 

22.  3  Moabwassoreafraidofthepeople,because 
22.  5  of  the  land  of  the  children  of  his  people 
22.  5  thereis  a  people  come  out  from  Egypt?  be 
22.  6,  i7  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  curse  me  this  p 
22.  n  people  come  outof  Egypt,  which  coveretli 
22.  12  thou  shalt  not  curse  the  people  :  for  they 

22.  4i  he  might  see  the  utmost  (part)  of  the  pe 

23.  9  thepeople  shall  dwell  alone,  and  shall  mi 
23-  24  People  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  lion,  and 

24.  14  now  behold,  I  go  unto  my  people:  come 
24- 14  what  this  people  shall  do  to  thy  people  in 

25.  1  people  began  to  commit  whoredom  with 
25.  2  railed  the  people . .  and  the  people  did  eat 
23-  4  Pake  all  the  heads  of  thepeople,  and  han" 
27. 13  thou  also  shalt  be  gathered  unto  thy  peo° 

31.  2  shalt  thou  be  gathered  uuto  thy  people 
31-   3  Moses  spake  unto  the  people,  saying  Arm 

32.  15  leave,  .and  yeshall  destroy  aU  this  people 
Dent33'  '»  Serewasnowaterfor thepeople  to  drink 
Deut.  ,.  28  The  people  (is)  greater  and  taller  than  we 

2.  4  command  thou  the  people,  saying,  Ye  (are) 
2. 10,  21  a  people  great,  and  many,  and  tall  as 
2.  16  consumed  and  dead  from  among  the  peo 
2.  32  he  and  all  his  people,  to  fight  at  Jahaz 

2.  33  smote  him,  and  his  sons,  and  all  his  peo 

3.  1  he  and  all  his  people,  to  battle  at  Edrei 
3.  2  for  I  will  deliver  him,  and  all  his  people 
3-    3  the  kingof  Bashau,  and  all  hispeople:  and 

3.  28  for  he  shall  go  over  before  this  people,  and 

4.  6  nation  (is)  a  wise  and  understanding  peo 
4- 10  Gather  me  the  people  together,  and  I  will 
4.  20  to  be  unto  him  a  people  of  inheritance,  as 

4.  33  Did  (ever)  people  hear  the  voice  of  God 

5.  28  heard  the  voiceof  the  words  of  this  people 
"4  of  the  gods  of  thepeoplewhich(are)rouud 

7.   6  thou  (art)  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord 
7.    6  peop  e  unto  himself,  above  all  people  that 
7.    7  People ;  for  ye  (were)  the  fewestof  all  pe. 
7. 14  Thou  shalt  be  blessed  above  all  people 
7. 16  the  people  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall 
7. 19  all  the  people  of  whom  thou  art  afraid 
9.   2  A  people  great  and  tall,  the  children  of 
9-    6  Understand . .  thou  (art)  a  stiff  necked  peo 
9. 12  thy  people  which  thou  hast  brought  forth 
9- 13  this  people,  .it  (is)  a  stiff  necked  people 
9.  26  destroy  not  thy  people  and  thine  inherit 
9.  27  look  not  uuto  the  stubbornness  of  this  peo 
9  29  they  (are)  thy  people  and  thine  inherit.  ' 
10.  ti  take  (thy)  journey  before  the  people,  that 
10.  iS  he  chose,  .(even)  you  above  all  people,  as 
13-    7  thepeople  which  (are)  round  about  you  n 

13-  9  and  afterwards  thehand  of  all  the  people 

14-  2,  21  thou  (art)  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord 
zi'  .  !,??  Peculiar  people  unto  himself,  ab 
16. 18  shall  judge  the  people  with  just  judgment 
17-  7  and  afterward  the  hands  of  all  the  people 
17-  13  the  people  shall  hear.and  fear,  and  do  no 

17.  16  nor  cause  the  people  to  return  to  Egypt 

18.  3  shall  be  the  priest's  due  from  the  people 
20.    1  a  people  more  than  thou,  be  not  afraid  of 
20.   2  shall  approach  and  speak  unto  the  people 
20.   5  the  officers  shall  speak  unto  the  people 
20.    8  officers  shall  speak  further  unto  the  peo 
20.   9  made  an  end  of  speaking  unto  thepeople 

20.  9  captains  of  the  armies  to  lead  the  people 
20. 11  the  people  (that  is)  found  therein  shall 
20. 16  of  the  cities  of  these  people,  which  the  L 

21.  8  thy  people  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  redee 
21.  8  lay  not  innocent  blood  unto  thy  people  of 
26.  15  bless  thy  people  Israel,  and  the  land  wh 

26.  18  avouched  thee .  .to  be  his  peculiar  people 
26. 19  bean  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

27.  1  the  elders  of  Israel  commanded  the  peo 
27.   9  this  day  thou  art  become  the  people  of  the 
27. 11  And  Moses  charged  thepeople  the  same 
27.  12  These  shall  stand,  to  bless  the  people  w 

27.  15  all  the  peopleshallanswerand say, Alien 
27. 16  And  all  the  people  shall  say,  Amen 

So  in  verse  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24  25  26 

28.  9  establish  thee  an  holy  people  unto  funis 
28. 10  all  people  of  the  earth  shall  see  that  thou 
28.  32  (shall  be)  given  unto  another  people  and 

28.  64  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  all  people 

29.  13  establish  thee ..  for  a  people  unto  himself 
31.    7  thou  must  go  with  this  people  unto  the  la 

31.  12  Gather  the  people  together,  men,  and  w 
31. 16  this  people  will  rise  up,  and  go  a  whorin^ 

32.  6  O  foolish  people  and  unwise?  (is)nothethy 
32.   8  he  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according 
32.   9  For  the  Lord's  portion  (is)  his  people  •  Ja 
32.  21  jealousy  with  (those  which  are)  not  a  pe' 
32.  36  Lorp  shall  judge  his  people,  and  repeit' 
32.  43  Rejoice . .  his  people . .  merciful . .  to  his  p 
32.  44  came  and  spake,  .in  the  ears  of  thepeople 
32.  50  be  gathered  unto  thy  people;  as  Aaron 
32.  50  A.  .died,  .and  was  gathered  unto  his  peo 
33-   3  1  ea,  he  loved  the  people ;  all  his  saints 
33-    5  when  the  heads  of  the  people  (and)  the 
33-    7  of  Judah,  and  bring  him  unto  his  people 
33-  17  he  shall  push  the  people  together  to  the 
33- 19  shall  call  the  people  unto  the  mountain 
33-  21  he  came  with  the  heads  of  the  people  he 
33-  29  0  people  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  shield  of 

Josn.  1.    2  over  this  Jordan,  thou,  and  all  this  people 
1.   6  unto  this  people  shalt  thou  divide  for 
1. 10  commanded  the  officers  of  the  people  say 
1.  11  command  the  people,  saying,  Prepare  yoii 
3.    3  they  commanded  the  people,  saying  When 


Josh. 3 


3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 


5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


10. 


14 
■7 
17 
17 
24. 
24< 
24- 
24- 

24 
24 
24 

24' 

24, 

24. 

Judg.  1. 


4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
8. 

9 
9 
9 
9- 
9' 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9' 
9 
9' 
9- 


5  And  Joshua  said  unto  the  people,  Sanctif  v 

6  before  thepeople.  .and  went  before  then 
14  when  the  people  removed  from  then-  tents 
14  the  ark  of  the  covenant  before  the  people 
16  the  people  passed  over  right  against  Jer 

2  lake  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  people  ' 

10  to  speak  unto  the  people . .  and  the  people 

11  all  the  people,  .iu  the  presence  of  the  pe 
19  the  people  came  up  out  of  Jordan  on  the 
24  that  all  the  peopleof  the  earth  might  kn 

4  All  the  people  that  came  out  of  Egypt 

5  all  the  people  that  came  out  were  circu 
5  all  the  people . .  born  in  the  wilderness  by 
5  the  people  shall  shout  with  a  great  shout 
5  the  people  shall  ascend  up  every  man  str 

7  he  said  unto  the  people,  Pass  on,  and  co' 

8  when  Joshua  had  spoken  unto  the  peoDle 
10  Joshua  had  commanded  thepeople  sayih^ 
16  Joshua  said  unto  the  p'eople,  Shout  ■  for" 
20  the  people  shouted  when  (the  priests)  blew 
20  when  the  people  heard  the  sound  of  the 
20  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  shout,  that 
20  the  people  went  up  into  the  city,  every  m 

3  Let  not  all  thepeople  go  up;  but  let  about 

3  make  not  all  the  people  to  labour  tliither 

4  there  went  up  thither  of  the  people  about 

5  hearts  of  the  people  melted,  aud  became 
7  hast  thou  at  all  brought  this  people  over 

13  UP,  sanctify  the  people,  and  say,  Sanctify 
..    1  take  all  the  people  of  war  with  thee,  anil 
I.    1  and  his  people,  and  his  city,  and  his  land 
.    3  Joshua  arose,  and  all  the  people  of  war,  to. 
.   5  the  people  that  (are)  with  me,  will  appro 
.   9  Joshua  lodged  that  night  among  the  peo." 
.  10  in  the  morning,  and  numl  iered  the  people 
.  10  Joshua,  .went  up.  .before  the  people  to 
.  11  the  people,  .that  (were)  with  him,  went 
.  13  when  they  had  set  the  people,  (even)  all 
'  *i   ,,  ??d  a11  his  People,  at  a  time  appointed 
.  10  all  the  people  that  (were)  in  Ai  were  call 
.  20  the  people  that  fled  to  the  wilderness  tu' 
33  that  they  should  bless  the  people  of  Isra 
7  the  people  of  war  with  him,  and  all  the 
21  the  people  returned  to  the  camp  to  Josh 
33  Joshua  smote  him  and  his  people  until  " 
4  much  people,  even  as  the  sand  that  (is) 

7  came,  and  all  the  people  of  war  with  him 

8  brethren,  .made  the  heart  of  the  people 

14  seeing  I  (am)  a  great  people,  forasmuch 

15  If  thou  (be)  a  great  people,  (then)  get  thee 
17  1  lion  (art)  a  great  people,  and  hast  great 

2,  27  And  Joshua  said  unto  all  the  people 

16  the  people  answered  aud  said,  God  forbid 

17  among  all  the  people  through  whom  we 
'      draye  out  from  before  us  all  the  people 
.  19  And  Joshua  said  unto  the  people,  Ye  can 
.  21  the  people  said  unto  Joshua,  Nay  •  but  we 
.  22  And  Joshua  said  unto  the  people,  Ye  (are) 

24  the  people  said  unto  Joshua,  The  Lord 

25  made  a  covenant  with  the  people  that  d 
28  So  Joshua  let  the  people  depart,  every  m" 
16  and  they  went  and  dwelt  among  the  peo' 

4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 

6  And  when  Joshua  had  let  the  people  go 

7  the  people  served  the  Lord  all  the  davs 

12  of  the  people  that  (were)round  about  them 
18  sent  away  the  people  that  bare  the  prese 

13  people  that  (were)  with  him,  from  Haros 
2  when  the  people  willingly  offered  thems! 
9  that  offered    willingly  among  the  people 

11  people  of  the  Lord  go  down  to  the  gates 
13  dominion  over  the  nobles  among  the  pe 
:i  ?.fter  thee,  Benjamin,  among  thy  people" 
18  Zebnlun  and  Naphtali  (were)  a  people  (t  > 

1  people  that  (were)  with  him,  rose  up  ear 

2  Hie  people  that  (are)  with  thee  (are)  too" 

3  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  saying: 

3  there  returned  of  the  people  twenty  and 

4  the  people  (are)  yet  (too)  many;  bringth 

5  tie  brought  down  the  people  unto  the  wa 
.  6  the  people  bowed  down  upon  their  knees 
.    7  let  all  the  (other)  people  go  every  man  u. 

8  the  people  took  victuals  in  their  hand,  and 

5  Give,  bread  unto  the  people  that  follow 

29  would  to  God  this  people  were  under  my 

32  thou  and  the  people  that  (is)  with  thee 

33  (when)  he  and  the  people  that  (is)  with 

34  and  all  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 

35  rose  up,  and  the  people  that  (were)  with 

36  when  Gaal  saw  the  people . .  come  people 

37  there  come  people  down  by  the  middle  of 

38  this  the  people  that  thou  hast  despised* 

42  the  people  went  out  into  the  field  ;  and 

43  he  took  the  people,  and  divided  them  into 
43  the  people  (were)  come  forth  (out)  of  the 
45  slew  the  people  that  (was)  therein,  and 
48  he  and  all  thepeople  that  (were)  with  hinr 

48  said  unto  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 

49  the  people  likewise  cut  down  every  man 
18  thepeople  (and)princes  of  Gilead  said  one 

.  11  people  made  him  head  and  captain  over 

20  Sihon  gatheredall  his  people  together,  and 

21  and  all  his  people  into  the  hand  of  Israel 

23  the  Amorites  from  before  his  people  Israel 

2  my  people  were  at  great  strife  with  the 

3  of  thy  brethren,  or  among  all  my  people 

16  a  riddle  unto  the  children  of  my  people 

17  the  riddle  to  the  children  of  her  people 

24  when  the  people  saw  him,  they  praised 
30  and  upon  all  the  people  that  (were)  there 

7  saw  the  people  that  (were)  therein,  how 
10  ye  shall  come  unto  a  people  secure,  and 


PEOPLE 


740 


PEOPLE 


JudgiS.  20  and  he.. went  in  the  midst  of  the  people 
18.  27  unto  a  people  (that  were)  at  quiet  and  s. 
20.  2  the  chief  of  all  the  people.. of  all  thetri. 
20.  2  in  the  assembly  of  the  people  of  God,  four 
20.  8  the  people  arose  as  one  man,  saying,  We 
20.  10  to  fetch  victual  for  the  people,  that  they 

20. 16  Among  all  this  people  (there  were)  seven 
20.  22  the  people,  the  men  of  Israel,  encouraged 
20.  26  people,  went  up,  and  came  unto  the  house 
20.  31  Benjamin  went  out  against  the  people, 

20.  31  andtheybegantosmiteof  the  people,  (and) 

21.  2  the  people  came  to  the  house  of  God,  (and) 
21.   4  the  people  rose  early,  and  built  there  an 
21.    9  the  people  were  numbered,  and,  behold 
21.  15  And  the  people  repented  them  for  Beuja. 

Ruth  1.  6  had  visited  his  people  in  giving  them  br. 
1.  10  we  will  return  with  thee  unto  thy  people 

1.  15  sister  in  law  is  gone  back  unto  her  people 
1. 16  thy  people,  .my  people,  and  thy  God  my 

2.  11  people  which  thou  knewest  not  heretofore 

3.  11  the  city  of  my  people  doth  knowthatthou 

4.  4  Buy  (it),  .before  the  elders  of  my  people 
4.  g  said  unto  the  elders,  and  (unto)  all  the  p. 
4.  1 1  the  people  that  (were)  iu  the  gate,  and  the 

1  Sa.  2.  13  the  priest's  custom  with  the  people  (was) 
2.  23  I  hear  of  your  evil  dealings  by  all  this  pe. 
2.  24  ye  make  the  Lord's  people  to  transgress 
2.  29  of  all  the  offerings  of  Israel  my  people 

3  the  people  were  come  into  the  camp,  the 

4  the  people  sent  to  Shiloh,  that  they  might 
17  also  a  great  slaughter  among  the  people 

10  brought,  .to  us,  to  slay  us  and  our  people 

11  that  it  slay  us  not,  and  our  people :  for 
19  he  smote  of  the  people  fifty  thousand  and 
19  the  people  lamented,  because  the  Lord 
19  had  smitten,  .of  the  people  with  a  great  s. 

7  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  people  iu 

10  unto  the  people  that  asked  of  him  a  king 
19  the  people  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  S. 
21  Samuel  heard  all  the  words  of  the  people 

2  (lie  was)  higher  than  any  of  the  people 

12  (there  is)  a  sacrifice  of  the  people  to  day 

13  the  people  will  not  eat  until  he  come 
16  him  (to  be)  captain  over  my  people  Israel 
16  he  may  save  my  people  out  of  the  hand  of 

16  have  looked  upon  my  people,  because  th. 

1 7  Behold . .  this  same  shall  reign  over  my  p. 
24  since  I  said,  I  have  invited  the  people 

11  the  people  said  one  to  another,  What  (is) 

10. 17  Samuel  called  the  people  together  unto 
10.  23  and  when  he  stood  among  the  people,  he 
10.  23  he  was  higher  than  any  of  the  people  from 
10.  24  Samuel  said  to  all  the  people,  See  ye  him 
10.  24  (there  is)  none  like  him  among  all  the  p. 
10.  24  the  people  shouted,  and  said,  God  save  the 

10.  25  Sainutd  told  the  people,  .sent  all  the  peo. 

11.  4  told  the  tidings  in  the  ears  of  the  people 
11.  4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept 
11.  5  What  (aileth)  the  people  that  they  weep? 
11.  7  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fell  on  the  people,  and 
11.  11  Saul  put  the  people  in  three  companies 
11. 12  the  people  said  unto  Samuel,  Who  (is)  he 

11.14  Then  said  Samuel  to  the  people,  Come,  and 

11.  15  the  people  went  to  Gilgal ;  and  there  they 

12.  6  And  Samuel  said  unto  the  people,  (It  is) 

12. 18  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord  and  Sam. 

12. 19  all  the  people  said  unto  Samuel,  Pray  for 
12.  20  Samuel  said  unto  the  people,  Fearnot :  ye 
12.  22  the  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people  for 

12.  22  hath  pleased  the  Lord  to  make  you  his  p. 

13.  2  the  rest  of  the  people  he  sent  every  man 
13.  4  the  people  were  called  together  after  S. 
13-  5  people  as  the  sand  which  (is)  on  the  sea 
13.  6  the  people  were  distressed,  then  the  peo. 
13.  7  and  all  the  people  followedlum  trembling 
13.  8  and  the  people  were  scattered  from  him 
13.  11  that  the  people  were  scattered  from  me 
13.  14  commanded  him  (to  be)  captain  over  his 

13. 15  Saul  numbered  the  people  (that  were)  p. 
13.  16  and  the  people  (that  were)  present  with 

13.  22  people  that  (were)  with  Saul  and  Jonathan 

14.  2  the  people  that  (were)  with  him  (were)a. 
14.  3  people  knew  not  that  Jonathan  was  gone 
14.  15  in  the  field,  and  among  all  the  people 
14.  17  Then  said  Saul  unto  the  people  that  (were) 
14.  20  the  people  that(were)  with  him  assembled 
14.  24  Saul  had  adjured  the  people,  saying,  Cu. 
14.  24  So  none  of  the  people  tasted  (any)  food 
14.  26  when  the  people  were  come  into  the  wood 
14.  26  no  man  put  his  hand,  .for  the  people  fea. 
14.  27  father  charged  the  people  with  the  oath 
14.  28  Then  answered  one  of  the  people,  and  said 
14.  28  straitly  charged  the  people  with  an  oath 
14.  28  eateth.  .food  this  day.  And  the  people  w. 
14.  30  if  haply  the  people  had  eaten  freely  to  day 
14.  31  smote  the  Philistines,  .and  the  people  w. 
14.  32  the  people  flew  upon  the  spoil,  and  took 
14.  32  the  people  did  eat  (them)  with  the  blood 
14.  33  the  people  sin  against  the  Lord,  in  that 
14.  34  Disperse  yourselves  among  the  people 
14.  34  the  people  brought  every  man  his  ox  with 
14.  38  ye  near  hither  all  the  chief  of  the  people 
14.  39  (there  was)  not  a  man  among  all  the  peo. 
14.  40  the  people  said  unto  Saul,  Dowhat  seem. 
14.  41  Saul  and  Jonathan,  .hut  the  peopleesca. 
14.  45  the  people  said  unto  Saul,  Shall  Jonathan 

14.  45  people  rescued  Jonathan,  thathediednot 

15.  1  to  anoint  thee  (to  be)kingover  his  people 
15.    4  Saul  gathered  the  people  together,  and 
15.    8  destroyed  all  the  people  with  the  edge  of 
15.    9  the  people  spared  Agag,  and  the  best  of 
15.  15  people  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep  and 


.  Sh   i5. 

15' 

17- 
17 
18. 


21  the  people  took  of  the  spoil,  sheep  and  o. 
24  feared  the  people,  aud  obeyed  their  voice 
30  before  the  elders  of  my  people,  and  before 
27  the  people  answered  him  after  this  man. 
30  the  people  answered  him  again  after  the 
5  was  accepted  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people 

13  he  went  out  and  came  in  before  the  people 

8  Saul  called  all  the  people  together  to  war 

5  and  the  people  pitched  round  about  him 
7  Abishai  came  to  the  people  by  night :  and 
7  Abner  and  the  people  lay  round  abouthim 

14  David  cried  to  the  people,  and  to  Abner 

15  there  came  one  of  the  people  in  to  destroy 
12  He  hath  made  his  people  Israel  utterly  to 

4  the  people  that  (were)  with  him  lifted  up 

6  the  people  spake  of  stoning  him,  because 

6  the  soul  of  all  the  people  was  grieved,  ev. 
21  and  to  meet  the  people  that  (were)  with 
21  when  David  came  near  to  the  people,  he 

9  house  of  their  idols,  and  among  the  people 
4  the  people  are  fled  from  the  battle,  and 
4  many  of  the  people  also  are  fallen  aud  d. 

12  for  the  people  of  theLORD,  and  for  theh. 

26  bid  the  people  return  from  following  their 

27  the  people  had  gone  up  every  one  from 

28  the  people  stood  still,  and  pursued  after 

30  when  he  had  gathered  all  the  people  tog. 
18  I  will  save  my  people  Israel  out  of  theh. 

31  and  to  all  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 

32  at  the  grave  of  Abner ;  and  all  the  people 

34  And  all  the  people  wept  again  over  him 

35  the  people  came  to  cause  David  to  eatm. 

36  all  the  people  took  notice  (of  it),  and  it 

36  whatsoever  the  king  did  pleased,  .thepe. 

37  the  people,  and  all  Israel,  uuderstoodthat 
2  Thou  shaltfeedmy  people  Israel,  andth. 

12  his  kingdom  for  his  people  Israel's  sake 
2  with  all  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 

18  he  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 

19  ho  dealt  among  all  the  people,  (even)  am. 
19  the  people  departed  every  one  to  his  ho. 

21  ruler  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  over  I. 

7  I  commanded  to  feed  my  people  Israel 

8  I  took  thee,  .to  be  ruler  over  my  people 

10  I  will  appoint  a  place  for  my  people  Israel 

11  judges  (to  be)  over  my  people  Israel,  and 
23  what  one  nation,  .(is)likethy  people,  (e.) 
23  went  to  redeem  for  a  people  to  himself 

23  thy  people,  which  thouredeemedst  to  thee 

24  thy  people  Israel  (to  be)  a  people  unto 
15  judgment  and  justice  unto  all  his  people 
10  the  rest  of  the  people  he  delivered  into  the 

12  let  us  play  the  men  for  our  people,  and  for 

13  drew  nigh,  and  the  people  that  (were)  w. 

7  how  the  people  did,  and  how  the  war  pr. 
17  fell,  .of  the  people  of  the  servants  of  Dav. 

28  gather  the  rest  of  the  people  together,  and 

29  David  gathered  all  the  people  together 
31  brought  forth  the  people,  .all  the  people 
34  there  came  much  people  by  the  way  of  the 

13  thought  such  a  thing  against  the  people 

15  the  people  have  made  me  afraid:  and  thy 
12  people  increased  continually  with  Absa. 

17  went  forth,  and  all  the  people  after  him 
23  all  the  people  passed  over :  the  king  also 

23  all  the  people  passed  over,  toward  the 

24  until  all  the  people  had  done  passing  out 

30  the  people  that  (was)  witli  him  covered 

6  and  all  the  people  and  all  the  mighty  men 

14  the  people  that  (were)  with  him,  came  w. 

15  people  the  men  of  Israel,  came  to  Jerusa. 

18  and  this  people,  and  all  the  men  of  Israel 

2  the  people  that  (are)  witli  him  shall  flue 

3  I  will  bring  back  all  the  people  unto  thee 
3  as  if  all .  .(so)  all  the  people  shall  be  in  p. 

8  thy  father . .  will  not  lodge  with  the  people 

9  Thereisa  slaughteramongthe  people  that 

16  king,  .and  all  the  people  that  (are)  with 

22  and  all  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 
29  for  the  people. .The  people  (is) hungry,  and 

1  numbered  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 

2  part  of  the  people  under  the  hand  of  Joab 

2  the  king  said  unto  the  people,  I  will  sur. 

3  the  people  answered,  Thou  shalt  not  go 

4  all  the  people  came  out  by  hundreds,  and 

5  the  people  heard  when  the  king  gave  all 

6  the  people  went  out  into  the  field  against 

7  Where  the  people  of  Israel  were  slain  bef. 

8  the  wood  devoured  more  people  that  day 

16  people  returned.  .Joab  held  back  the  pe. 

2  unto  all  the  people  :  for  the  people  heard 

3  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  that  day 
3  as  people  being  ashamed  steal  away  when 
8  And  they  told  unto  all  the  people,  saying 

8  the  people  came  before  the  king ;  for  Isr. 

9  all  the  people  were  at  strife  throughout 

39  And  all  the  people  went  over  Jordan.  And 

40  nil  the  people  of  Judah.  .also  half  the  pe. 
12  the  man  saw  that  all  the  people  stood  s. 
1 5  the  people  that  (were)  witli  Joab  battered 
22  went  unto  all  the  people  in  her  wisdom 
28  And  the  afflicted  people  thou  wilt  save 
44  delivered  me  from  the  strivings  of  my  p. 
44  a  people  (which)  I  knew  not  shall  serve 
48  thatbringeth  down  the  people  under  me 

10  the  people  returned  after  him  only  to  sp. 

11  and  the  people  fled  from  before  the  Phil. 
2  to  Beer-sheba,  and  number  ye  the  people 

2  that  I  may  know  the  number  of  the  peo. 

3  the  Lord  thy  God  add  unto  the  people,  how 

4  went  out.  .to  number  the  people  of  Israel 
9  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the  people  unto 


;  Sa.  24 
24. 
24 

24, 

24. 

-  Ki.  1 

1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5' 
5' 
6, 


.  Ki.  3, 
4 
4 
4 
4 
6 
7 
7 
8, 
9 


10  after  that  he  had  numbered  the  people 

15  there  died  of  the  people  from  Dan  even 

16  said  to  the  angel  that  destroyed  the  peo. 

17  wheu  he  saw  the  angel  that  smote  the  pe. 
21  the  plague  may  be  stayed  from  the  people 

39  all  the  people  said,  God  save  king  Solomon 

40  all  the  people,  .and  the  people  piped  with 
2  Only  the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places 

8  thy  people,  .a  great  people,  that  cannot 

9  understanding  heart  to  judge  thy  people 
9  who  is  able  to  judge . .  so  great  a  people  ? 

34  there  came  of  all  people  to  hear  the  wisd . 
7  giveu.  .a  wise  son  over  this  great  people 
16  ruled  over  the  people  that  wrought  in  the 
13  will  dwell,  .and  will  not  forsake  my  peo. 
16  day  that  I  brought  forth  my  people  Israel 
16  I  chose  David  tobe  over  mypeople  Israel 
30  hearken  thou  to.  .thy  people  Israel,  when 

33  When  thy  people  Israel  be  smitten  down 

34  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel,  and 
36  forgive  the  sin.  .of  thy  people  Israel,  that 

36  land,  which  thou  hast  given  to  thy  people 

38  by  any  man,  (or)  by  all  thy  people  Israel 

41  stranger,  that  (is)  not  of  thy  people  Israel 
43  people  of  the  earth  may  know  thy  name 

43  to  fear  thee,  as  (do)  thy  people  Israel ;  and 

44  If  thy  people  go  out  to  battle  against  th. 

50  forgive  thy  people  that  have  sinned  agai. 

51  they  (lie)  thy  people,  and  thine  inheritance 

52  unto  the  supplication  of  thy  people  Israel 

53  separate  them  from  among  all  the  people 
56  that  hath  given  rest  unto  his  people  Israel 

59  cause  of  his  people  Israel  at  all  times,  as 

60  all  the  people  of  the  earth  may  know  that 
66  On  the  eighth  day  he  sent  the  people  away 
66  that  the  Lord  had  done  for.  .his  people 

7  a  proverb  and  a  byword  among  all  people 

20  all  the  people  (that  were)  left  of  the  Am. 
23  bare  rule  over  the  people  that  wrought  iu 

5  Depart  yet  (for)  three  days . .  And  the  peo. 

6  ye  advise  that  I  may  answer  this  people? 

7  If  thou  wilt  be  aservantunto  this  people 
9  that  we  mayanswer  this  people,  who  have 

10  Thus  shalt  thou  speak  unto  this  people  that 

12  allthe people  came toRehoboam  the  third 

13  answered  the  people  roughly,  and  forsook 

15  the  king  hearkened  not  unto  the  people 

16  people  answered  the  king,  saying,  What 

23  Speak  unto,  .the  remnant  of  the  people 
27  If  this  people  go  up  to  do  sacrifice  in  the 

27  then  shall  the  heart  of  this  people  turn 

30  for  the  people  went  (to  worship)  before 

31  made  priests  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 
33  but  made  again  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 

2  toldme  that  (I  should  be)  king  over  thisp 
7  as  I  exalted  thee  from  among  the  people 

7  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  Israel 
2  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  Israel 

2  hast  made  my  people  Israel  to  sin,  to  pro. 

15  people (were)encampedagainstGibbethon 

16  people  (that  were}  encamped  heard  say,  Z. 

21  Then  were  the  people  of  Israel  divided  into 

21  half  of  the  people  followed  Tibni  the  sou 

22  the  people  that  followed  Oniri  prevailed 
22  against  the  people  that  followed  Tibni  the 
21  Elijah  came  unto  all  the  people,  and  said 

21  And  the  people  answered  him  not  a  word 

22  Then  said  Elijah  unto  the  people,  I,  (even) 

24  all  the  people  answered  and  said,  It  is  well 
30  Elijah  said  unto  all  the  people,  Come  near 
30  all  the  people  came  near  unto  him :  and 

37  this  people  may  know  that  thou  (art)  the 

39  when  all  the  people  saw  (it),  they  fell  on 
21  gave  unto  the  people,  and  they  did  eat 

8  all  the  people,  said  unto  him,  Hearken  not 
10  suffice  for  handfuls  for  all  the  people  that 

15  after  them  he  numbered  all  the  people 

42  for  his  life,  and  thy  people  for  his  people 
9,  12  and  set  Xaboth  on  high  among  the  p. 

13  in  the  presence  of  the  people,  saying,  N. 
4  mypeople  as  thy  people,  my  horses  as  thy 

28  said,  Hearken,  O  people,  every  one  of  you 

43  people  offered  and  burnt  incense  yet 

7  mypeople  as  thy  people,  (and)  my  horses  as 
13  answered,  I  dwell  among  mine  ownpeople 

41  Pourout  for  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 

42  Give  unto  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 

43  Give  the  people,  that  they  may  eat:  for 
30  people  looked,  and,  behold,  (hehad)  sack. 

16  people  went  out,  and  spoiled  the  tents  of 
17,  20  people  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate,  and 
21  SoJoram.  .smote,  .andthepeople fled  into 

6  anointed  thee  king  over  the  people  of  the 

9  said  to  all  the  people,  Ye  (be)  righteous 

18  Jehu  gathered  all  the  people  together,  and 

13  the  people,  she  carre  to  the  people  into 

14  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and 

17  a  covenant  between  the  Lord,  .and  the  p. 
17  that  they  should  be  the  Lord's  people 

17  between  the  king  also  and  the  people 

18  all  the  people  of  the  land  went  into  the 

19  he  took,  .all  the  people  of  the  land ;  and 

20  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and 

3  people  still  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense 

8  to  receive  no  (more)  money  of  the  people 

7  Neither  did  he  leave  of  the  people  to  J. 

4  as  yet  the  people  did  sacrifice  and  burnt 

21  all  the  peopleof  Judah  took  Azariah,  wh. 

4  people  sacrificed  and  burntincensestillin 

5  over  the  house,  judging  the  people  of  tlic 
10  smote  him  before  the  people,  and  slew  him 
3>  the  people  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense 


PEOPLE 


741 


PEOPLE 


2  Ki.  16. 
18. 
18. 


23- 
23- 
23- 

24. 

25- 
25. 

25- 
25- 

25. 
iCh.2s 


sCh. 


15  with  the  burnt  offering  of  all  the  people 
26  in  the  ears  of  the  people  that  (are)  on  the 
36  people  held  their  peace, and  answered  him 

5  tell  Hezekiah  the  captain  of  my  people,  T. 

24  people  of  the  land . .  people  of  the  land  ni. 
4  which  the  keepers.. havegathered  of  the  p. 

13  enquire  of  the  Lord,  .for  the  people,  and 

2  and  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great 

3  and  all  the  people  stood  to  the  covenant 

6  upon  the  graves  of  the  children  of  the  pe. 

21  commanded  all  the  people,  saying,  Keep 
30  people  of  the  land  took  Jehoahaz  the  son 

35  exacted  the  silver,  .of  the  people  of  the  1. 

14  save  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the 

3  there  was  no  bread  for  the  people  of  the 
11  Now  the  rest  of  the  people  (that  were)  left 
19  which  mustered  the  people  of  the  land,  and 

19  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  land 

22  people  that  remained  in  the  land  of  Judah 

26  all  the*  people,  both  small  and  great,  and 

25  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  people  of 
q  tidings  unto  their  idols,  and  to  the  people 
2  said.  .Thou  shalt  feed  my  people  Israel 

2  thou  shalt  be  ruler  over  my  people  Israel 

13  the  people  fled  from  before  the  Philistines 

4  thing  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  peo. 
2  lifted  up  on  high,  because  of  his  people  I. 

2  he  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 

8  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people 

20  and  from  (one)  kingdom  to  another  peop. 

26  For  all  the  gods  of  the  people  (are)  idols 

28  ye  kindreds  of  the  people,  give  unto  the 

36  the  people  said,  Amen,  and  praised  the  L. 
43  all  the  people  departed  every  man  to  his 

6  whom  I  commanded  to  feed  my  people,  sa. 

7  thou  shouldest  be  ruler  over  my  people  I. 

9  I  will  ordain  a  place  for  my  people  Israel 

10  commanded  judges  (to  be)over  my  people 

21  what  one  nation .  .(is)  like  thy  people  Isr. 
21  God  went  to  redeem  (to  be)  his  own  peo. 

21  driviug  out  nations  from  before  thy  peo. 

22  people  Israel  didst  thou  make  thine  own 

14  executed  judgment.. among  all  his  people 
7  hired,  .the  king  of  Maachah  and  his  peo. 

11  rest  of  the  people  he  delivered  unto  the 

13  behave  ourselves  valiantly  for  our  people 

14  Joab  and  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 

3  brought  out  the  people,  .all  the  people  re. 

2  said  to  Joab,  and  to  the  rulers  of  the  pe. 

3  make  his  people  an  hundred  times  so  many 

5  gave  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the  people 
17  (Is  it)  not  I  (that)  commanded  the  people 

17  not  on  thy  people,  that  they  should  be  pi. 
22  the  plague  may  be  stayed  from  the  people 

18  the  land  is  subdued,  .before  his  people 
25  hath  given  rest  unto  his  people,  that  they 

2  Hear  me,  my  brethren,  and  my  people 
21  all  the  people  (will  be)  wholly  at  thy  com. 

g  people  rejoiced,  for  that  they  offered  wil. 
14  what  (is)  my  people,  that  we  should  be 

17  now  have  I  seen  with  joy  thy  people,  whi. 

18  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  of  thy  people 
9  thou  hast  made  me  king  over  a  people  like 

10  may  go  out  and  come  in  before  this  people 

10  for  who  can  judge  this  thy  people,  (that  is 

11  that  thou  mayest  judge  my  people,  over 

11  Because  the  Lord  hath  loved  his  people 
18  six  hundred  overseers  to  set  the  people 

5  Since  the  day  that  I  brought  forth  my  p. 

5  any  man  to  be  a  ruler  over  my  people  Is. 

6  chosen  David  to  be  over  my  people  Israel 
21  supplications,  .of  thy  people  Israel,  which 

24  if  thy  people  Israel  be  put  to  the  worse  be. 

25  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel,  and 

27  forgive  the  sin . .  of  thy  people  Israel,  when 

27  whichjthou  hast  given  unto  thy  people  for 

29  made  of  any  man,  or  of  all  thy  people  Is. 

32  stranger,  which  is  not  of  thy  people  Israel 

33  people,  .fear  thee,  as  (doth)  thy  people  I. 

34  If  thy  people  go  out  to  war  against  their 
39  forgive  thy  people  which  have  sinned  ag. 

4  all  the  people  offered  sacrifices  before  the 

5  all  the  people  dedicated  the  house  of  God 
10  he  sent  the  people  away  into  their  tents 
10  and  to  Solomon,  and  to  Israel  his  people 

13  or  if  I  send  pestilence  among  my  people 

14  If  my  people,  which  are  called  by  my  name 

7  all  the  people  (that  were)  left  of  the  Hit. 
to  officers . .  that  bare  rule  over  the  people 

5  said . .  Come  again . .  And  the  people  depar. 

6  give  ye  (me)  to  return  answer  to  this  pe.? 

7  If  thou  be  kind  to  this  people,  and  please 
9  that  we  may  return  answer  to  this  people 

10  Thus  shalt  thou  answer  the  people  that 

12  Jeroboam  and  all  the  people  came  to  R. 

15  So  the  king  hearkened  not  unto  the  peo. 

16  people  answered  the  king,  saying,  What 

3  people  (were)  without  number  that  came 

17  Abijah  and  his  people  slew  them  with  a 

13  Asa  and  the  people  that  (were)  with  him 
10  oppressed  (some)  of  the  people  the  same 

9  they,  .went  about,  .and  taught  the  people 

2  killed  sheep,  .for  the  people  that(he  had) 

3  as  thou  (art),  and  my  people  as  thy  people 
27  And  Micaiahsaid.  .Hearken, all yepeople 

4  he  went  out  again  through  the  people 

7  drive  out.  .before  thy  people  Israel,  and 
21  when  he  had  consulted  with  the  people 
25  when  Jehoshaphat  and  his  people  came 
33  for  as  yet  the  people  had  not  prepared 

14  smite  thy  people,  and  thy  children,  and 
ig  his  people  made  no  burning  for  him,  like 


2  Ch.  23.    5  all  the  people  (shall  be)  in  the  courts  of 
23.    6  all  the  people  shall  keep  the  watch  of  the 
f  3. 10  he  set  all  the  people,  every  man  having 
12  when  Athaliah  heard  the  noise  of  the  pe. 

12  she  came  to  the  people  into  the  house  of 

13  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and 
16  made  a  covenant  between,  .all  thepeople 

16  and.  .that  they  should  be  the  Lord's  pe. 

17  all  the  people  went  to  the  house  of  Baal 

20  governors  of  the  people,  and  all  the  peo. 

21  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced  :  and 

10  princes  and  all  the  people  rejoiced,  and 

20  which  stood  above  the  people,  and  said 
23  the  princes  of  the  people  from  among  the  p. 

11  led  forth  his  people,  and  went  to  the  val. 
15  hast  thou  sought  after  the  gods  of  the  p. 
15  which  could  not  deliver  their  own  people 

1  Then  all  the  people  of  Judah  took  Uzziah 

21  over  the  king's  house,  judging  the  people 

2  And  the  people  did  yet  corruptly 
36  people,  that  God  had  prepared  the  people 

3  neither  had  the  peoplegathered  themsel. 
13  assembled  at  Jerusalem  much  people  to 

18  Fora  multitude  of  thepeople,  (even)  many 
20  the  Lord  hearkened,  .and  healed  the  pe. 
27  the  priests,  .arose  and  blessed  the  people 

4  commanded  the  people  that  dwelt  in  Je. 
8  they  blessed  the  Lord,  and  his  people  I. 

10  for  the  Lord  hath  blessed  his  people;  and 
4  there  was  gathered  much  people  together 
6  he  setcaptainsof  waroverthe  people,  and 
8  people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words 

13  my  fathers  have  done  unto  all  thepeople 

14  could  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine  hand 

1 5  was  able  to  deliver  his  people  out  of  mine 
17  have  not  delivered  their  people  out  of  mine 

17  the  God  of  Hezekiah  deliver  his  people  out 

18  unto  the  people  of  Jerusalem  that  (were) 

19  as  against  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the 

10  Lord  spake,  .to  his  people ;  but  they  wo. 

17  Nevertheless  the  people  did  sacrifice  still 
25  the  people,  .and  the  people  of  the  land 
30  Levites,  and  11  the  people,  great  and  small 

3  serve  now  the  Lord  your  God,  and  his  p. 
8  his  princes  gave  willingly  unto  the  people 

1  Then  the  people  of  the  laud  took  Jehoahaz 

14  people  transgressed  very  much  after  all 

15  because  he  had  compassion  on  his  people 

16  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose  against  his  peo. 
23  who  (is  there)  among  you  of  all  his  people? 

3  Who  (is  there)  among  you  of  all  his  people? 

2  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel 
70  (some)  of  the  people . .  dwelt  in  their  cities 

1  people  gathered  themselves  together  as 

3  fear  (was)  upon  them  because  of  the  peo. 

11  all  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  shout 
13  So  that  the  people  could  not  discern  the 
13  weeping  of  the  people :  for  the  people  sh. 

4  people . .  weakened  the  hands  of  the  people 
8.  15  viewed  the  people  and  the  priests,  and  f. 

8.  36  furthered  the  people,  and  the  house  of  God 

9.  1  people,  .have  not  separated,  .from  the  p. 
9.  2  have  mingled  themselves  with  the  people 
9.  11  with  the  filthiness  of  the  people  of  the  1. 
9. 14  join  in  affinity  with  the  people  of  these  a. 

10.  1  assembled . .  for  the  people  wept  very  sore 
10.  2  have  taken  strange  wives  of  the  people  of 
10.  9  all  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the  house 
10.  11  separate  yourselves  from  the  people  of  the 
10.  13  people  (are)  many,  .(it  is)  a  time  of  much 
Neh.   1. 10  these  (are)  thy  servants  and  thy  people 

6  joined,  .forthe people  hadamind  towork 
13  I  even  set  the  people  after  their  families 
14,  19  said,  .to  the  rest  of  the  people 

22  at  the  same  time  said  I  unto  the  people 
1  there  was  a  great  cry  of  the  people,  and 

13  the  people  did  according  to  this  promise 
15  before  me  were  chargeable  unto  the  peo. 
15  their  servants  bare  rule  over  the  people 

18  the  bondage  was  heavy  upon  this  people 

19  to  all  that  I  have  done  for  this  people 

4  people  (were)  few  therein,  and  the  houses 

5  put  into  mine  heart  to  gather . .  the  people 

7  The  number,  .of  the  men  of  the  people  of 

72  (that)  which  the  rest  of  the  people  gave 

73  So  the  priests,  .and  (some)  of  the  people 
a.  1  all  the  people  gathered  themselves  toge. 
8.  3  ears  of  all  the  people  (were  attentive)  unto 
8.  5  the  people ;  for  he  was  above  all  the  peo. 
8.  s  when  he  opened  it,  all  thepeople  stood  up 
S.  6  all  the  people  answered,  Amen,  Amen,  with 
8.  7  caused  the  people  to  understand,  .the  p. 
8.  9  taught  the  people,  said  unto  all  the  people 
8.  9  all  the  people  wept,  when  they  heard  the 
8.  11  So  the  Levites  stilled  all  the  people,  say. 

8.  12  all  the  people  went  their  way  to  eat,  and 
8. 13  chief  of  the  fathers  of  all  the  people,  the 
8. 16  So  the  people  went  forth,  and  brought  (t.) 

9.  10  showedst  signs . .  on  all  the  people  of  his  1. 
9.  24  with  their  kings,  and  the  people  of  the  1. 
9.  30  gavest  thou  them  into  the  hand  of  the  p. 
9.  32  on  all  thy  people,  since  the  time  of  the  k. 

10. 14  chief  of  the  people ;  Parosh,  Pahath-moab 
10.  28  rest  of  the  people,  the  priests,  the  Levites 
10.  30  not  give  our  daughters  unto  the  people  of 
10-  31  (if)  the  people  of  the  land  bring  ware  or 

10.  34  we  cast  the  lots  among,  .thepeople,  forthe 

11.  1  rulers  of  thepeople.  .rest  of  the  people 
ip.    2  people  blessed  all  the  men  that  willingly 

11.  24  hand  in  all  matters  concerning  the  people 

12.  30  purified  thepeople,  and  the  gates,  and  the 
12.  38  half  of  the  people  upon  the  wall,  from  be. 


Neh.  13. 

13- 

Esth.  1. 


Psa. 


Job 


1  they  read,  .in  the  audience  of  the  people 
24  according  to  the  language  of  each  people 

5  king  made  a  feast  unto  all  the  people  that 
n  show  the  people  and  the  princes  her  bea. 

16  to  all  the  people  that  (are)  in  all  the  pro. 
22  to  every  people,  .the  language  of  every  p. 

10  Esther  had  not  showed  her  people  nor  her 
20  not  (yet)  showed  her  kindred  nor  her  pe. 

6  for  they  had  showed  him  the  people  of  II. 
6  Haman  sought  to  destroy,  .the  people  of 
8  There  is  a  certain  people  scattered  abroad 
8  dispersed  among  the  people  in  all  the  pr. 
8  their  laws  (are)  diverse  from  all  people 

11  silver  (is)  given  to  thee,  the  people  also 

12  every  people,  .and  (to)  every  people 

14  was  published  unto  all  people,  that  they 

8  to  make  request  before  liim  for  her  people 
11  people  of  the  king's  provinces,  do  know 

3  let  my  life  be  given . .  and  my  people  at  my 

4  For  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  people,  to  be 
6  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my  peo. 

9  unto  every  people  after  their  language 
11  all  the  power  of  the  people  and  province 

13  (was)  published  unto  all  people,  and  that 

17  many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became  J. 

2  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all  people 

3  seeking  the  wealth  of  his  people,  and  sp. 

2  No  doubt  but  ye  (are)  the  people,  and  wi 
24  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the  people  of  the 

6  hath  made  me  also  a  byword  of  the  people 

19  son  nornephew  among  his  people,  nor  any 

20  people  shall  be  troubled  at  midnight,  and 

30  That  the  hypocrite  reign  not,  lest  the  pe. 
20  Desire  not  the  night,  when  people  are  cut 

31  by  them  judgeth  he  the  people ;  he  giveth 

6  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands  of  p. 
8  thy  blessmg  (is)  upon  thy  people.     Selah 

8  The  Lord  shall  judge  the  people  :  judge 
11  declare  among  the  people  his  doings 

4  who  eat  up  my  people  (as)  they  eat  bread 

7  bringeth  back  the  captivity  of  his  people 
27  Forthouwiltsavetheafflieted  people;  but 
43  delivered  me  from  the  strivings  of  the  p. 
43  people  (whom)  I  have  not  known  shall  se. 
47  (It  is)  God  that.,  subdueth  the  people  un. 

6  reproach  of  meu,  and  despised  of  the  pe. 
31  unto  a  people  that  shall  be  born,  that  he 

9  Save  thy  people,  and  bless  thine  inherit. 
11  The  Lord  will  give  strength  unto  his  peo. 

11  the  Lord  will  bless  his  people  with  peace 

10  maketh  the  devices  of  the  people  of  none 

12  people  (whom)  he  hath  chosen  for  his  own 

18  I  will  praise  thee  among  much  people 
12  Thou  sellest  thy  people  for  nought,  and 

5  Thine  arrows  (are)  sharp,  .the  people  fall 

10  forget  also  thine  own  people,  and  thy  fa. 

12  rich  among  the  people  shall  entreat  thy 

17  therefore  shall  the  people  praise  thee  for 
1  clap  your  hands,  all  yepeople;  shout  unto 

3  He  shall  subdue  the  people  under  us,  and 
9  princes  of  thepeople.  .thepeople  oftheG. 

1  Hearthis,  all(ye)people;  give  ear,  all  (ye) 

4  He  shall  call.,  that  he  may  judge  his  peo. 

7  Hear,  0  my  people,  and  I  will  speak;  0 
4  who  eat  up  my  people  (as)  they  eat  bread 

6  bringeth  back  the  captivity  of  his  people 

7  in  (thine)  anger  cast  down  the  people,  O 
9  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  among  the  peo. 

1 1  Slaythem  not, lest  mypeople  forget,  scatter 

3  Thou  hast  showed  thy  people  hard  things 

8  yepeople,  pour  out  your  heart  before  him 

8  bless  our  God,  ye  people,  and  make  the 
3,  5  Let  the  people  praise.  .let  all  the  peo. 

4  thou  shalt  judge  the  people  righteously 

7  wheD  thou  wentest  forth  before  thy  peo. 
30  of  the  bulls,  with  the  calves  of  the  people 
30  scatter  thou  the  people  (that)  delight  in 
35  giveth  strength  and  power  uuto  (his)  pe. 

2  He  shall  judge  thy  people  with  righteous. 

3  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  thepeople 

4  He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people,  he 

10  Therefore  his  people  return  hither;  and 

14  gavest  him  (to  be)  meat  to  the  people  in. 

18  foolish  people  have  blasphemed  thy  name 

14  hast  declared  thy  strength  among  the  pe. 

15  hast  with  (thine)  arm  redeemed  thy  peo. 
20  Thou  leddest  thy  people  like  a  flock  by 

1  Give  ear,  0  my  people,  (to)  my  law :  inc. 
20  Behold . .  can  he  provide  flesh  for  his  peo. 
52  made  his  own  people  to  go  forth  like  sheep 
62  He  gave  his  people  over  also  unto  the  sw. 
71  he  brought  him  to  feed  Jacob  his  people 

13  we  thy  people,  and  sheep  of  thy  pasture 

4  be  angry  against  the  prayer  of  thy  people 

8  Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I  will  testify  un. 

1 1  my  people  would  not  hearken  to  my  voice 

13  O  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto  me 
3  have  taken  crafty  counsel  against  thy  pe. 

2  Thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniquity  of  thy  p. 
6  revive  us.  .that  thy  people  may  rejoice 

8  he  will  speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and 

6  shall  count,  when  he  writeth  up  the  peo. 
15  Blessed  (is)  the  people  that  know  the  joy. 

19  I  have  exalted  (one)  chosen  out  of  the  p. 
50  bear,  .(the  reproach  of)  all  the  mighty  p. 

5  They  break  in  pieces  thy  people,  0  Lord 
8  Understand,  ye  brutish  among  the  people 

14  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  his  people 

7  we  (are)  the  people  of  his  pasture,  and 
10  It  (is)  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  heart 

3  Declare,  .his  wouders  among  all  people 

7  0  ye  kindreds  of  the  people,  give  unto  the 


PEOPLE 


742 


PEOPLE 


Paa.  96. 
96. 
97- 
98. 

99- 
99. 

TOO. 
I02. 
I02. 
105. 
I05. 
IO5. 
IO5. 
105. 
105. 
I06. 
I06. 
106. 
I07. 

no. 
III. 
III. 
i*3- 
114. 
116. 
J*5- 
135. 
*35- 
136. 
14.4. 
144. 
144. 
148. 
148. 
149. 

Provn. 

14. 

24. 

28. 

29. 

29. 

29. 

30. 
Eccl.  4. 

12. 
Isa.     1. 


10  Lord,  .shall  judge  the  people  righteously 
13  lie  shall  judge,  .the  people  with  his  truth 

6  declare  his  righteousness,  and  all  the  pe. 

9  judge  the  world,  and  the  people  with  eq. 

1  The  Lord  reigueth  ;  let  the  people  trem. 

2  Lord  (is)  great,  .he  (is)  high  above  all  pe. 

3  (are)  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pa. 
18  the  people  which  shall  be  created  shall 
22  When  the  people  are  gathered  together 

1  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people 

13  went,  .from (one) kingdom  to  another  pe. 
20  the  ruler  of  the  people,  and  let  him  go  f. 

24  he  increased  his  people  greatly,  and  made 

25  He  turned  their  heart  to  hate  his  people 
43  And  he  brought  forth  his  people  with  joy 

4  the  favour  (that  thou  bearest  unto)  thy  p. 
40  was  the  wrath,  .kindled  against  his  people 
48  let  all  the  people  say,  Amen.  Praise  ye 
32  exalt  him . .  in  the  congregation  of  the  pe. 

3  Thy  people  (shall  be)  willing  in  the  day  of 
6  He  hath  showed  his  people  the  power  of 
9  He  seat  redemption  unto  his  people :  he 

8  may  set  (him) . .  with  the-  princes  of  his  p. 

1  house  of  Jacob  from  a  people  of  strange 
14,  iS  pay. .  now  in  the  presence  of  all  his  peo. 

2  round  about  his  people  from  henceforth 
12  And  gave,  .an  heritage  unto  Israel  his  p. 

14  the  Lord  will  judge  hie  people,  and  he 
16  which  led  his  people  through  the  wilder. 

2  and  (lie),  .who  subdueth  my  people  under 

15  Happy  (is  that)  people  that  is  in  such  a 
15  happy  (is  that)  people  whose  God  (is)  the 
14  He  also  exalte th  the  horn  of  his  people 
14  children  of  Israel,  a  people  near  unto  him 

4  the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  people:  lie 

14  Where  noconusel(is),  the  people  fall :  but 
28  In  the  multitude  of  people  (is)  the  king's 

24  him  shall  the  people  curse,  nations  shall 

15  (so  is)  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  people 
2  the  righteous  are  in  authority,  the  people 

2  the  wicked  beareth  rule,  the  people  mourn 

18  Where  (there  is)  no  vision,  the  people  pe. 

25  The  ants  (are)  a  people  not  strong,  yet  they 

16  (There  is)  no  end  of  all  the  people,  .of  all 

9  he  still  taught  the  people  knowledge  ;  yea 

3  doth  not  know,  my  people  dotli  not  cons. 

4  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil 
10  give  ear  unto  the  law.  .people  of  Gomor. 

3  people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let 

4  shull  rebuke  many  people ;  and  they  shall 

6  thou  hast  forsaken  thy  people  the  house 

5  the  people  shall  be  oppressed,  every  one 

7  saying . .  make  me  not  a  ruler  of  the  people 
12  my  people,  children  (are)  their  oppressors 

12  0  my  people,  they  which  lead  thee  cause 

13  The  Lord  standeth  up.  .to  judge  the  pe. 

14  judgment  with  the  ancients  of  his  people 

15  What  mean  ye  (that)  ye  beat  my  people  to 
13  Therefore  my  people  are  goue  into  capti. 
25  is  the  anger,  .kindled  against  his  people 

5  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  uuclean  lips 

9  and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed,  but 

10  Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  and  ma. 
2  was  moved,  and  the  heart  of  his  people 

8  Ephraim  be  broken,  that  it  be  not  a  peo. 

17  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  father's 

6  this  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah 

9  Associate  yourselves,  0  ye  people,  and  ye 
nl  should  uot  walk  in  the  way  of  this  peo. 

1 2  (to)  whom  this  people  shall  say,  A  conf  ed. 

19  should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God? 
2  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have 
9  all  the  people  shall  know,  (even)  Ephraim 

73  the  people  turneth  not  unto  him  thatsm. 

16  the  leaders  of  this  people  cause  (them)  to 

19  the  people  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire 
2  take.,  the  right  from  the  pour  of  my  peop. 
6  agaiust  the  people  of  my  wrath  will  I  give 

13  I  have  removed  the  bouuds  of  the  people 

14  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  the  people 
22  people  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 

24  0  my  people  that  dwellest  in  Zion,  be  uot 

10  shall  stand  [  r  an  ensign  of  the  people 

n  set.  .to  recover  the  remnant  of  his  people 
16  an  highway  for  the  remnant  of  his  people 
4  declare  his  doings  among  the  people,  make 
4  noise,  .like  as  of  a  great  people;  a  tumult. 
14  shall  every  man  turn  to  his  own  people 
2  the  people shalltake  them,  and  bringthem 

6  He  who  smote  the  people  in  wrath  witli 

20  destroyed  thy  land,  (ami)  slain  thy  people 
32  and  the  poor  of  his  people  shall  trust  in 

12  Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many  people,  (w.) 
2,  7  a  people  terrible  from  their  beginning 

7  present . .  of  a  people  scattered  and  peeled 

25  Blessed  (be)  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyria 
4  the  spoiling  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

13  this  people  was  not,  (till)  the  Assyrian 

2  as  with  the  people,  so  with  the  priest ;  as 

4  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish 
i}  the  midst  of  the  land  among  the  people 

3  Therefore  slyill  the  strong  people  glorify 

6  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto  all  pe. 

7  the  face  of  the  covering  cast  overall  the  p. 
3  the  rebuke  of  his  people  shall  he  take  away 

11  be  ashamed  for  (their)envy  at  the  people 
ao  Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy  ch. 

11  for  it  (is)  a  people  of  no  understanding 

5  a  diadem . .  unto  the  residue  of  his  people 
11  another  tongue  will  he  speak  to  this  peo. 

14  rule  this  people  which  (is)  in  Jerusalem 
13  this  people  draw  near  (me)  with  their  m. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


14  to  do  a  marvellous  work  among  this  peo. 

5  of  a  people  (that)  could  not  profit  them 

6  carry,  .to  a  people  (that)  shall  not  profit 
9  this  (is)  a  rebellious  people,  lying  children 

19  people  shall  dwell  in  Zion  at  Jerusalem 
26  Lord  bindeth  up  the  breach  of  his  people 
28  a  bridle  hi  the  jaws  of  the  people,  causing 
13  Upon  the  laud  ofmypeople  shall  come  up 

18  And  my  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable 

3  At  the  noise  of  the  tumult  the  people  fled 

12  the  people  shall  be  (as)  the  burnings  of  I. 

19  shalt  not  see  a  fierce  people,  a  people  of 
24  the  people  that  dwell  therein  (shall  be) 

5  upon  the  people  of  my  curse,  to  judgment 

11  in  the  ears  of  the  people  that  (are)  on  the 
1  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith 

7  grass  wither eth.  .surely  the  people  (is)  g. 

5  giveth  bread  unto  the  people  upou  it 

6  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  for 
22  this  (is)  a  people  robbed  andspoiled;  (th.) 

8  Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have 

20  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  chosen 

21  This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself ;  th. 

7  since  I  appointed  the  ancient  people?  and 

6  was  wroth  with  my  people,  I  have  pollu. 

8  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  to 

13  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people,  and 

22  and  set  up  my  standard  to  the  people 

4  Hearken  unto  me,  my  people  ;  aud  give 

4  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light  of  the  people 

5  mine  arms  shall  judge  the  people  :  the  is. 

7  Hearken,  .the  people  in  whose  heart  (is) 
16  and  say  unto  Zion,  Thou  (art)  my  people 
22  God  (that)  pleadeth  the  cause  of  liis  people 

4  My  people  went  down  aforetime  into  Eg. 

5  that  my  people  is  taken  away  for  nought 

6  my  peopleshallknowmy  name:  therefore 

9  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people,  he 

8  for  the  trangression  of  my  people  was  he 
3  hath  utterly  separated  me  from  his  people 

7  be  called  an  house  of  prayer  forall  people 

14  stumbling  block  out  of  the  way  of  my  pe. 

1  show  my  people  their  transgression,  and 

21  Thy  people  also  (shall  be)  all  righteous 

9  and  their  offspring  among  the  people 

to  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  people ;  cast  up 
10  cast  up . .  lift  up  a  standard  for  the  people 

12  The  holy  people,  The  redeemed  of  the  L. 
3  and  of  the  people  (there  was)  none  with 

6  will  tread  down  the  people  in  mine  anger 

8  they  (are)  my  people,  children  (that)  will  n. 
n  he  remembered.  .Moses,  (and)  his  people 
14  so  didst  thou  lead  thy  people,  to  make  t. 

18  The  people  of  thy  holiness  have  possessed 

9  see,  we  beseech  thee,  we  (are)  all  thy  pe. 

2  have  spread  out.  .unto a  rebellious  people 

3  A  people  that  provoketh  me  to  auger 

10  place . .  for  my  people  that  have  sought  me 

1 3  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a 

19  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  my  people 

22  the  days  of  a  tree  (are)  the  daj's  of  my  p. 

18  brasen  walls,  .against  the  people  of  the  1. 

1 1  my  people  have  changed  then-  glory  for 

13  mypeoplehavecommittedtwo evils;  they 

31  Wherefore  say  my  people,  We  are  lords 

32  my  people  have  forgotten  me  days  with. 

10  greatly  deceived  this  people  and  Jerusa. 

11  that  time  shall  it  be  said  to  this  people 

11  wind,  .toward  the  daughter  of  my  people 

22  people  (is)  foolish,  they  have  not  known  me 

14  I  will  make,  .this  people  wood, and  it  sh. 
2i  foolish  people,  and  without  understand. 

23  people  hath  a  revolting  and  a  rebellious 
26  For  among  my  people  are  found  wicked 
31  my  people  love  (to  have  it)  so :  and  what 

14  the  hurt  (of  the  daughter)  of  my  people 
ig  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  people,  (even) 

21  I  will  lay  stumbling  blocks  before  this  p. 

22  a  people  cometh  from  the  north  country 

26  0  daughter  of  my  people,  gird  (thee)  with 

27  a  tower  (and)  a  fortress  among  my  people 

12  did.  .for  the  wickedness  of  my  people  Is. 
16  pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  neither  lift 

23  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  my  pe. 

33  the  carcases  of  this  people  shall  be  meat 
~  g  Why.  .is  this  people  of  Jerusalem  slidden 

7  my  people  know  not  the  judgment  of  the 
11,  21  the  hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

19  of  the  cry  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 
22  not  the  health  of  the  daughter  of  my  pe. 

1  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 

2  I  might  leave  my  people,  and  go  from  th. 
7  how  shall  I  do  for.  .daughter  of  my  peo. 

15  I  will  feed  them,  (even)  this  people,  with 

3  the  customs  of  the  people  (are)  vain  ;  for 

4  so  shall  ye  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be 

14  pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  neitherlift 
14  have  caused  my  people  Israel  to  inherit 

16  will  diligently  learn  the  ways  of  my  peo. 
10  they  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  Baal 
16  they  be  built  in  the  midst  of  my  people 

10  This  evil  people,  whichrefuse  to  hearmy 

11  they  might  be  unto  me  for  a  people,  and 

10  Thus  saith  the  Loud  unto  this  people,  Th. 

11  Pray  not  for  this  people  for  (their)  g 1 

16  the  people  to  whom  they  prophesy  shall 

17  the  virgin  daughter  of  my  people  is  bro. 
1  my  mind  (could)  not  (be)  toward  this  pe. 
7  I  will  destroy  my  people,  (since)  they  re. 

20  I  will  make  thee  unto  this  people  a  fen. 

5  have  taken  away  my  peace  from  this  pe. 
to  shalt  show  this  people  all  these  words 


Jer.   17. 


26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26.  ] 
26.  ] 
26.  1 
26.  ] 

26.  ; 
26  1 

27.  1 
27.1 
27.  1 
28. 


hi  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the  people 
my  people  hath  forgotten  me,  they  have 
(take)  of  the  ancients  of  the  people,  and 
so  will  I  break  this  people,  and  this  city 
and  he  stood,  .and  said  to  all  the  people 
the  people,  and  (such  as  are)  left  in  this 
unto  this  people  thou  shalt  say,  Thus  sa. 
and  thy  people  that  enter  in  by  these  ga. 
enter,  .he,  and  his  servants,  and  his  peo. 
against  the  pastors  that  feed  my  people 
they  prophesied,  .and  caused  my  people 
had  caused  my  people  to  hear  my  words 
Which  think  to  cause  my  people  to  forget 
cause  my  people  to  err  by  their  lies,  and 
they  shall  not  profit  this  people  at  all 
when  this  people,  or  the  prophet,  or  a  p. 
the  people,  that  shall  say,  The  burden  of 
shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God 
concerning  all  the  people  of  Judah  in  the 
prophet  spake  unto  all  the  people  of  Jud. 
Pharaoh. .and  his  princes,  and  all  his  pe. 
the  people  heard  Jeremiah  speaking  these 
commanded  (him)  to  speak  unto  all  thep. 
all  the  people  took  him,  saying,  Thou  eh. 
the  peopleweregatheredagainst  Jeremiah 
,  12  unto,  .the  princes,  and  to  all  the  peo. 
Then  said  the  princes  and  all  the  people 
spake  to  all  the  assembly  of  the  people 
spake  to  all  the  people  of  Judah,  saying 
body  into  the  graves  of  the  common  peo. 
not  give  him  into  the  hand  of  the  people 
and  serve  him  and  his  people,  and  live 
Why  will  ye  die,  thou  and  thy  people 
spake  to  the  priests,  and  to  all  this  people 
spake,  .in  the  presence,  .of  all  the  people 
in  the  presence  of  all  the  people  that  stood 
that  I  speak . .  in  the  ears  of  all  the  people 
spake  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people 
but  thou  makest  this  people  to  trust  in  a 
to  all  the  people  whom  Nebuchadnezzar 
of  all  the  people  that  dwelleth  in  this  city 
sent  letters  in  thy  name  unto  all  the  peo. 
have  a  man  to  dwell  among  this  people 
behold  the  good  that  I  will  do  for  my  pe. 
bring  again  the  captivity  of  my  people  I. 
ye  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  your 
families  of  Israel,  and  they  shall  be  my  p. 
The  people  (which  were)  left  of  the  sword 
Lord,  save  thy  people,  the  remnant  of  I. 
people  shall  be  satisfied  with  my  goodness 
be  their  God,  aud  they  shall  be  my  people 
hast  brought  forth  thy  people  Israel  out 
they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their 
brought  all  this  great  evil  upon  this  peo. 
Considerest  thou  not  what  this  people  h. 
have  despised  my  people,  that  they  should 
all  the  people,  fought  against  Jerusalem 
covenant  with  all  the  people  which  (were) 
all  the  people,  which  had  entered  into  the 
all  the  people  of  the  land,  which  passed 
this  people  hath  not  hearkened  unto  me 
in  the  ears  of  the  people,  in  the  Lord's 
Lord  hath  pronounced  against  this  people 
people  in  Jerusalem,  aud  to  all  the  people 
Then  read  Baruch . .  in  the  ears  of  all  the  p. 
Baruch  read  the  book  in  the  ears  of  the  p. 
thou  hast  read  in  the  ears  of  the  people 
neither  he,  nor  his  servants,  nor  the  peo. 
came  hi  and  went  out  among  the  people 
separate,  .thence  in  the  midst  of  the  peo. 
against  thy  servants,  oragainst  this  people 
Jeremiah  had  spoken  unto  all  the  people 
he  weakeueth . .  the  hands  of  all  the  people 
mauseekethnotthe  welfare  of  this  people 
burned.. the  houses  of  the  people,  with  fire 
remnant  of  the  people . .  rest  of  the  people 
left  of  the  poor  of  the  people,  which  had 
carry  him  home :  so  he  dwelt  among  the  p. 
dwell  with  him  among  the  people ;  or  go 
dwelt  with  him  among  the  people  that  w. 
residue  of  the  people,  .and  all  the  people 
when  all  the  people  which  (were)  with  I. 
So  all  the  people  that  Ishmael  had  carried 
all  the  remnant  of  the  people  whom  he  had 
8  all  the  people  from  the  least  even  unto 
made  an  end  of  speaking  unto  all  the  pe. 
all  the  people,  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the 
all  the  people  that  dwelt  in  the  land  of  E. 
,  24  Jeremiah  said  unto  all  the  people 
the  people  which  had  given  him  (that)  a. 
people  of  the  land,  did  not  the  Lord  re. 
Arise,  and  let  us  go  again  to  our  own  peo. 
shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  p. 
Moab  shall  lie  destroyed  from  (being)  a  p. 
people  of  Chemosh  perisheth :  for  thy  so. 
doth  their  king  inherit  Gad,  and  his  people 
My  people  hath  been  lost  sheep;  their  s. 
they  shall  turn  every  one  to  his  people,  and 
people  shall  come  from  the  north,  and  a 
My  people,  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her 
people  shall  labour  in  vain,  and  the  folk 
so  that  there  was  no  bread  for  the  people 
people,  and  the  residue  of  the  people  that 
who  mustered  the  people  of  the  land  ;  (and 
threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  laud 
This  (is)  the  people  whom  Nebuehadrezz. 
city  sit  solitary  (that  was)  full  of  people 
when  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the 
All  her  people  sigh,  they  seek  bread;  they 
hear,  I  pray  you,  all  people,  and  behold 
the  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  p, 
I  was  a  derisiou  to  all  my  people,  .their 


PEOPLE 


743 


PEOPLE 


Lam.  3. 
3 
4 
4 
4 

Eze.    3. 

3' 


24. 
25- 
25 
26. 
26, 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
3°- 
31- 
32. 

32' 

32. 
33- 
33' 
33- 
33' 
33' 
33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37^ 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39> 
39- 
39- 
39' 
42. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44, 
45- 
45. 
45- 
45> 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
Dan.  8. 
9' 
9' 
9' 
9> 
9 
9 


45  made  us  (as) . .  refuse  iu  the  midst  of  the  p. 
48  the  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  p. 

3  the  daughter  of  my  people  (is  become)  c. 

6  iniquity  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  is 

10  the  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  p. 

5  thou  (art)  not  sent  to  a  people  of  a  strange 

6  Not  to  many  people  of  a  strange  speech 

11  go,  .unto  the  children  of  thy  people,  and 

27  the  hands  of  the  people  of  the  land  shall 

1  five  and  twenty  men . .  princes  of  the  peo. 
17  I  will  even  gather  you  from  the  people,  and 

20  they  shall  be  my  people, and  I  will  be  their 
19  say  unto  the  people  of  the  laud,  Thus  saith 

9  shall  not  be  in  the  assembly  of  my  people 

10  even  because  they  have  seduced  my  peo. 

17  against thedaughtersof  thypeople,  which 

18  Will  ye  hunt  the  souls  of  my  people,  and 

19  will  ye  pollute  me  among  my  people  for 
19  byyourlyingto  my  people  that  hear  (your) 

21  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hand,  and 

23  will  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hand 

8  cut  him  off  fronv  the  midst  of  my  people 

9  destroy  him  from  the  midst  of  my  people 

11  but  that  they  may  be  my  people,  and  I 

9  without  great  power  or  many  people  to  p. 
15  might  give  him  horses  and  much  people 
18  (that)  which  (is)  not  good  among  his  peo. 

34  I  will  bring  you  out  from  the  people,  and 

35  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the  peo. 
41  when  I  bring  you  out  from  the  people,  and 
,12  for  it  shall  be  upon  my  people,  it  (shall 

12  terrors,  .shall be  upon  my  people:  smite 

29  The  people  of  the  land  have  used  oppres. 

24  with  au  assembly  of  people,  (which)  shall 

18  So  I  spake  unto  the  people  in  the  morn. 

19  people  said  unto  me,  Wilt  thou  not  tell  us 

7  I  will  cut  thee  off  from  the  people,  and  I 

14  by  the  hand  of  my  people  Israel:  and  they 

2  she  is  broken  (that  was)  the  gates  of  the 

7  horsemen,  and  companies,  and  much  peo. 
11  he  shall  slay  thy  people  by  the  sword,  and 

20  bring  thee  down,  .with  the  people  of  old 

3  a  merchant  of  the  people  tor  many  isles 
33  thou  filledst  many  people ;  thou  didst  en. 

36  The  merchants  among  the  people  shall 

19  All  they  that  know  thee  among  the  people 
.  25  from  the  people  among  whom  they  are  s. 

13  from  the  people  whither  they  were  scatt. 

11  He  and  his  people  with  him,  the  terrible 

12  all  the  people  of  the  earth  are  gone  down 
3  over  thee  with  a  company  of  many  peop. 
9  I  will  also  vex  the  hearts  of  many  people 

10  I  will  make  many  people  amazed  at  thee 
2  Speak  to  the  children  of  the  people,  aud 

2  if  the  people  of  the  land  take  a  man  of 

3  he  blow  the  trumpet  and  warn  the  peop. 
6  blow  not  the  trumpet,  and  the  people  be 

12  say  unto  the  children  of  thy  people,  The 

17  Yet  the  children  of  thy  people  say,  The 

30  children  of  thy  people  still  are  talking  a. 

31  they  come  unto  thee  as  the  people  cometh 
31  and  they  sit  before  thee  (as)  my  people 

13  I  will  bring  them  out  from  the  people,  and 
30 (that)  they,  .(are)  my  people,  saith  the  L. 

3  of  talkers,  and  (are)  an  infamy  of  the  pe. 

8  yield  yourfruit  to  my  people  of  Israel;  for 
12  I  will  cause  men.  .(even)  my  people  Israel 

1 5  shalt  thou  bear  the  reproach  of  the  people 

20  These  (are)  the  people  of  the  Lord,  and 

28  ye  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  your 

12  O  my  people,  I  will  open  your  graves,  and 

13  when  I  have  opened  your  graves,  O  my  p. 
i3  when  the  children  of  thypeople  shall  sp. 

23  so  shall  they  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be 
27  be  their  God,  aud  they  shall  be  iny  people 

6  all  his  bands ;  (and)  many  people  with  th 

8  gathered  out  of  many  people,  against  the 
q  all  thy  bands,  and  many  people  with  thee 

12  upon  the  people  (that  are)  gathered  out 

14  In  that  day  when  my  people  of  Israel  dw. 

15  many  people  with  thee,  all  of  them  riding 

16  thou  shalt  come  up  against  my  people  of 

22  upon  the  many  people  that  (are)  with  him 

4  all  thy  bands,  and  the  people  that  (is)  w. 

7  name  known  in  the  midst  of  my  people  I. 

1 3  all  the  people  of  the  land  shall  bury  (them) 
27  I  have  brought  them  again  from  the  peo. 

14  to  (those  things)  which  (are)  for  the  peop. 

11  offering  and  the  sacrifice  for  the  people 
19  go  forth,  .into  the  outer  court  to  the  peo. 

19  they  shall  not  sanctify  the  people  with  t. 

23  they  shall  teach  my  people  (the  difference) 

8  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  pe. 

9  take  away  your  exactions  from  my  people 
16  All  the  people  of  the  land  shall  give  this 
22  and  for  all  the  people  of  the  land  a  bull. 

3  Likewise  the  people  of  the  laud  shall  wo. 

9  when  the  people  of  the  land  shall  come 

18  shall  not  take  of  the  people's  inheritance 
iS  that  my  people  be  not  scattered  every  m. 

20  into  the  outer  court,  to  sanctify  the  peo. 

24  ministers . .  shall  boil  the  sacrifice  of  the  p. 

24  shall  destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  pe. 
6  which  spake . .  to  all  the  people  of  the  land 

15  hast  brought  thy  people  forth  out  of  the 

16  thy  people  (are  become)  a  reproach  to  all 

19  for  thy  city  and  thy  people  are  called  by 
.  20  confessing  my  sin  and  the  sin  of  my  peo, 

24  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  p. 
26  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall 
14  what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter 
14  robbers  of  thy  people  shall  exalt  themsel. 


Dau.  11. 15  not  withstand,  neither  his  chosen  people 
11.  32  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall  best. 

11.  33  they  that  understand  among  the  people 

12.  1  staudeth  for  the  children  of  thy  people 
12.    1  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered 
12.    7  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people 

Hos.    1.   9  for  ye  (are)  not  my  people,  and  I  will  not 

1.  10  Ye  (are)  not  my  people,  (there)  it  shall  be 

2.  23  will  say  to  (them  which  were)  not  my  pe. 
2.  23  Thou  (art  my)  people  ;  and  they  shall  say 
4.  4  for  thy  people  (are)  as  they  that  strive  w. 
4.  6  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  kno. 
4.  8  They  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  people,  and  th. 
4.  9  thereshallbe,  likepeople,  like  priest:  and 
4.  12  My  people  ask  counsel  at  theirstocks,  and 
4.  T4  the  people  (that)  doth  not  understand  sh. 
6. 11  when  I  returned  the  captivity  of  my  peo. 
7.  8  he  hath  mixed  himself  among  the  people 
9.    1  Rejoice  not.. as  (other)  people:  for  thou 

10.  5  for  the  people  thereof  shall  mourn  over  it 
10. 10  the  people  shall  be  gathered  against  them 
10. 14  shall  a  tumult  arise  among  thy  people,  and 

11.  7  my  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  from  me 
Joel    2.    2  a  great  people  and  a  strong ;  there  hath 

2.    5  as  a  strong  people  set  in  battle  array 
2.    6  Before  their  face  the  people  shall  be  much 

2. 16  Gather  the  people,  sanctify  the  congrega. 

2. 17  Spare  thy  people,  0  Lord;  and  give  not 

2. 17  wherefore  should  they  say  among  the  pe. 

2. 18  be  jealous  for  his  land,  aud  pity  his  peop. 

2. 19  the  Lord  will  answer  and  say  unto  his  p. 

2.  26,  27  and  my  people  shall  never  be  ashamed 

3.  2  will  plead  with  them  there  for  my  people 
3.  3  they  have  cast  lots  for  my  people ;  and  h. 
3. 16  but  the  Lord  (will  be)  the  hope  of  his  pe. 

Amos  1.  5  people  of  Syria  shall  go  into  captivity  un. 
3.  6  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown,  .and  the  peop. 
7.   8  set  a  plumb  line  in  the  midst  of  my  people 

7.  15  Lord  said.  .Go,  prophesy  unto  my  people 

8.  2  The  end  is  come  upon  my  people  of  Israel 

9. 10  All  the  sinners  of  my  people  shall  die  by 
9. 14  bring  again  the  captivity  of  my  people  of 

Obad.      13  have  entered  into  the  gate  of  my  people 
Jon.    1.    8  what  (is)  thy  country  ?  and  of  what  people 
Mic.   1.    2  Hear,  all  ye  people  ;  hearken,  0  earth,  and 

1.  9  is  come  unto  the  gate  of  my  people,  (even) 

2.  4  he  hath  changed  the  portion  of  my  people 
2.  8  Even  of  late  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an 

2.  9  The  women  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out 

2. 11  he  shall  even  be  the  prophet  of  this  peo. 

3.  3  "Who  also  eat  the  flesh  of  my  people,  and 

3.  5  the  prophets  that  make  my  people  err 

4.  1  shall  be  exalted.. and  people  shall  flowun. 
4.    3  shall  judge  among  many  people,  and  reb. 

4.  5  For  all  people  will  walk  every  one  in  the 

4. 13  and  thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  many  peop. 

5.  7,  8 remnant.. shall  be  in  the  midst  of.. pe. 

6.  2  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  his  people 
6.    3  O  my  people,  what  have  I  done  unto  thee  ? 

6.  5  O  my  people,  remember  now  what  Balak 
6. 16  ye  shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  people 

7.  14  Feed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock  of 
N"ah.    3.  13  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  thee  (are)  wo. 

3.  iS  thypeople  is  scattered  upon  the  mountains 

Hab.  2.   5  also,  because  he . .  heapeth  unto  him  all  p. 

2.    8  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  shall  spoil 

2. 10  shame,  .by  cutting  off  many  people,  and 

2.  13  the  people  shall  labour  in  the  very  fire,  and 

3.  13  wentest  forth  for  the  salvation  of  thy  pe. 
3. 16  when  he  cometh  up  unto  the  people,  he 

Zeph.  1. 11  all  the  merchant  people  are  cut  down;  all 
2.    8  whereby  they  have  reproached  my  people 

2.  9  residue  of  my  people  shall  spoil  them,  and 
2. 10  magnified  (themselves)  against  the  people 

3.  9  For  then  will  I  turn  to  the  people  a  pure 
3.  12  also  leave,  .an  afflicted  and  poor  people 
3.  20  a  praise  among  all  people  of  the  earth,  w. 

Hag.  1.  2  This  people  say,  The  time  isnot  come,  the 
1.  12  Joshua,  .with  all  the  remnant  of  the  peo. 

1. 12  and  the  people  did  fear  before  the  Lord 

1.  13  iu  the  Lord's  message  unto  the  people 

1. 14  spirit  of  all  the  remnant  of  the  people;  and 

2.  2  Speak  now.  .to  the  residue  of  the  people 
2.  4  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  saith 
2. 14  So  (is)  this  people,  and  so  (is)  this  nation 

Zech.  2. 1 1  nations  shall  be  joined . .  shall  be  my  peo. 

7.  s  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and 
S.  6  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  this  people 
S.    7  I  will  save  my  people  from  the  east  cou. 

8.  8  they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  th. 
8.  11  I  (will)  not  (be)  unto  the  residue  of  this  p. 
8.  12  cause  the  remnant  of  this  people  to  poss. 
8.  20  there  shall  come  people,  and  the  inhabi. 
8.  22  many  people  and  strong  nations  shall  co. 
9. 16  shall  save  them .  .astheflock  of  his  people 

10.  9  I  will  sow  them  among  the  people :  and 

1 1.  10  covenant . .  I  had  made  with  all  the  people 

12.  2  cup  of  trembling  unto  all  the  people  rou. 
12.  3  make . .  a  burdensome  stone  for  all  people 
12.    4  will  smite  every  horse  of  the  people  with 

12.  6  they  shall  devour  all  the  people  round  a. 

13.  9  I  will  say,  It  (is)  my  people ;  and  they  s. 

14.  2  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  cut  off 
14. 12  wherewith  the  Lord  will  smite  all  the  p. 

Mai.  1.  4  people  against  whom  the  Lord  hath  indi. 
2.   9  contemptible  and  base  before  all  the  pe. 

10.  People,  du  am. 

Ezra  5.  12  and  carried  the  people  away  into  Babylon 
6. 12  destroy  all  kings  and  people  thatshall  put 
7.  13  make  a  decree,  that  all  they  of  the  people 
7. 16  withthefreewillofferingof  thepeople,  and 


14. 


Luke 


Ezra   7.  25  judges,  which  may  judge  all  the  people  th. 

Dan.  2.  44  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other  people 
3.  4  To  you  it  is  commanded,  O  people,  nations 
3.    7  when  all  the  people  heard .  .all  the  people 

3.  29  I  make  a  decree,  That  every  people,  nation. 

4.  1  unto  all  people,  nations,  and  languages 

5.  19  for  the  majesty  that  he  gave  him,  all  pe. 

6.  25  king  Darius  wrote  unto  all  people,  nations 

7.  14  all  people,  nations,  andlanguages,  should 
7. 27  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  most  high 

11. People,  populace,  5^os  demos. 

Acts  12.  22  the  people  gave  ashout,  (saying,  It  is)the 
17.  5  and,sought  to  bring  them  out  to  the  peo. 
19.  30  Paul  would  have  eutered  in  unto  the  peo. 
19.  33  would  have  made  his  defence  unto  the  p. 

V2, Nation,  e6vo$  ethnos. 

Acts    8.   9  bewitched  the  people  of  Samaria,  giving 
Rom. 10. 19  provoke  you.  .by  (them  that  are)  no  peo 

13. People,  Xaos  laos. 

Matt.  1.  21  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins 

2.   4  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  of  the  peop. 

2.    6  Governor,  thatshall  rule  my  people  Israel 

4.  16  The  people  which  sat  in  darkness  saw  gr. 

4.  23  and  all  manner  of  disease  among  the  peo. 

9.  35  sickness  and  every  disease,  [amoug  the  p.] 
13.  15  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross,  and 
15.    8  This  people  draweth  nigh  unto  me  with 
si.  23  the  elders  of  the  people  came  unto  him 
26.    3  the  scribes,  and  the  elders  of  the  people 
26.    5  lest  there  be  an  uproar  among  the  people 

26.  47  the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people 

27.  1  the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people 
27.  25  Then  answered  all  the  people,  and  said 
27.  64  steal  him  away,  and  say  unto  the  people 

Mark  7.  6  This  people  hououreth  me  with  (their)  lips 
11.  32  they  feared  the  people  :  for  all  (men)  cou. 
2  Not . .  lest  there  be  an  uproar  of  the  people 
10  the  people  were  praying  without  at  the 
1.  17  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  L. 
1.  21  people  waited  for  Zacharias,  and  marvel. 
1.  68  he  hath  visited  and  redeemed  his  people 

1.  77  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  unto  his  p. 

2.  10  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people 
2.  31  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all  peop. 

2.  32  A  light,  .and  the  glory  of  thy  people  Isr. 

15  as  the  people  were  in  expectation,  and  all 
other  things,  .preached  he  unto  the  peo. 

21  when  all  the  people  were  baptised,  it  ca. 

17  a  great  multitude  of  people  out  of  all  Ju. 

1  his  sayings  in  the  audience  of  the  people 

16  saying.  .That  God  hath  visited  his  people 

7.  29  people  that  heard  (liiin>,  and  the  publicans 

8.  47  declared  uuto  him  before  all  the  people 

9.  13  should  go  and  buy  meat  for  all  this  peop. 
iS.  43  thepeople,  when  they  saw  (it),  gave  praise 
19.  47  chief  of  the  people  sought  to  destroy  him 

19.  48  the  people  were  very  attentive  to  hear  him 

20.  1  he  taught  the  people  in  the  temple,  and 
20.  6  the  people  will  stone  us  :  for  they  be  pe. 
20.  9  Then  began  he  to  speak  to  the  people  this 
20. 19  they  feared  the  people:  for  they  perceived 
20.  26  take  hold  of  his  words  before  the  people 

20.  45  in  the  audience  of  all  the  people,  he  said 

21.  23  there  shall  be.  .wrath  upon  this  people 

21.  38  the  people  came  early  in  the  morning  to 

22.  2  might  kill  him ;  for  they  feared  the  peo. 

22.  66  the  elders  of  the  people,  aud  the  chief  pr. 

23.  5  He  stirreth  up  the  people,  teaching  thro. 
23,  13  chief  priests  aud  the  rulers  and  the  peo. 
23.  14  unto  me,  as  one  that  perverteth  the  peo. 
23.  27  there  followed  him  a  great  company  of  p. 
23.  35  the  people  stood  beholding.  And  the  ru. 
24. 19  a  prophet . .  before  Grid  aud  all  the  people 

John  8.   2  [the  people  came  unto  him;  and  he  sat] 

11.  50  one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  aud 

18. 14  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people 
Acts  2.  47  and  having  favour  with  all  the  people 

3.  9  people  saw  him  walking  and  praising  God 
.  11  the  people  ran  together  unto  them  in  the 

3.  12  he  answered  unto  the  people,  Ye  men  of 

3.  23  shall  be  destroyed  from  among  the  people 

4.  1  as  they  spake  unto  thepeople,  the  priests 
4.  2  that  they  taught  the  people,  and  preached 
4.  8  ye  rulers  of  the  people,  and  elders  of  Isr. 
4.  10  Be  it  known,  .to  all  the  people  of  Israel 
4. 17  it  spread  no  further  among  the  people 
4.  21  might  punish  them,  because  of  thepeople 
4.  25  Why  did.,  the  people  imagine  vain  things 

4.  27  the  people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  toge. 

5. 12  and  wonders  wrought  among  the  people 

5. 13  no  man .  .but  the  people  magnified  them 

5.  20  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  people  all  the 
5.  25  are.  .in  the  temple,  and  teaching  the  pe. 

■  5.  26  they  feared  the  people,  lest  they  should 
5.  34  had  in  reputation  amoug  all  the  people 

5.  37  drew  away  much  people  after  him :  he  also 

6.  8  did.  .wonders  and  miracles  among  the  p. 

6.  12  they  stirred  up  the  people,  and  the  elders 

7.  17  the  people  grew  and  multiplied  in  Egypt 
7.  34  affliction  of  my  people  which  is  in  Egypt 

10.  2  which  gave  much  alms  to  the  people,  and 
10.  41  Not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses 
10.  42  he  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the  pe. 

12.  4  intending,  .to  bring  him  forth  to  the  peo. 
12. 11  the  expectation  of  the  people  of  the  Jews 

13. 15  any  word  of  exhortation  for  the  people 

13.  17  The  God  of  this  people  of  Israel  chose  our 
13.  17  exalted  the  people  when  they  dwelt  as- 
13.  24  of  repentance  to  all  the  people  of  Israel 
13.  31  them,  .who  are  his  witnesses  unto  the  p_ 


PEOPLE 


744 


PERFECT 


Acts  15.  14  to  take  out  of  them  apeople  for  his  name 

18.  10  to  hurt,  .for  I  have  much  people  in  this 

19.  4  saying  unto  the  people,  that  they  should 
21.28  teacheth..  every  where  against  the  people 
21.  30  the  people  ran  together:  and  they  took 
21.  36  the  people  followed  after,  crying,  Away 
21.  39  said,  .suffer  me  to  speak  unto  the  people 
21.  40  beckoned  witli  the  hand  unto  the  people 
23.  5  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of  thy  p. 
26.  17  Delivering  thee  from  the  people,  and  (f.) 

26.  23  should  show  light  unto  the  people,  and 
28.  17  have  committed  nothing  against  the  peo. 
28.  26  Go  unto  this  people,  aud  say,  Hearing  ye 
28.  27  the  heart  of  tins  people  is  waxed  gross 

Rom.  9.  25  call,  my  people,  which  were  not  my  peo. 
9.  26  Ye  (are)  not  my  people ;  there  shall  they 
10. 21  unto  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people 
1 1.  1  Hath  God  cast  away  his  people  ?  God  for. 
11.  2  God  hath  not  east  away  his  people  which 
15.  10  saith,  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with  his  peop. 
15.  11  all  ye  Gentiles  ;  and  laud  him,  all  ye  peo. 

1  Co.  10.    7  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and 

14.  21  With,  .other  lips  will  I  speak  unto.  .peo. 

2  Co.  6.  16  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  peop. 
Titus  2.  14  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people 
Heb.  2.  17  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  p. 

4.  9  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the  people 

5.  3  as  for  the  people,  so  also  for  himself,  to 
7.  5  commandment  to  take  tithes  of  the  peop. 
7.  ii  for  under  it  the  people  received  the  law 
7.  27  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people's 
8. 10  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  apeople 
9.  7  for  himself, and .  .the errors  of  the  people 
9. 19  had  spoken  every  precept  to  all  the  peop. 
9.  19  sprinkled  both  the  book,  and  all  the  peop. 

10.  30  And  again,  The  Lord  shall  judge  his  peo. 
it.  25  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God 

13.  12  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  b. 

1  Pe.    2.   9  priesthood,  .holy  nation,  a  peculiar  peo. 

2. 10  (were)  not  a  people,  but  (are)  now  the  pe. 

2  Pe.  2.  1  there  were  false  prophets  among  the  pe. 
Jude  5  saved  the  people  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
Rev.    5-    9  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  n. 

7.  g  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people 
10. 11  must  prophesy  again  before  many  peoples 

11.  9  the  people,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and 

14.  6  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  pe. 
17-  15  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and 

8.  4  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  he  not 
21.   3  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself 

14.  Crowd,  ox^os  ochlos. 

Matt.  7.  28  the  people  were  astonished  at  his  doctri. 

9.  23  saw  the  minstrels  and  the  people  making 
9. 25  when  the  people  were  put  forth,  he  went 

12.  23  the  people  were  amazed,  and  said,  Is  not 
12.  46  While  he  yet  talked  to  the  people,  behold 
14. 13  when  the  people  had  heard  (thereof),  they 
21. 26  we  fear  the  people ;  for  all  hold  John  as  a 

27.  15  wont  toreleaseuntothe  people  a  prisoner 
Mark  5.  21  much  people  gathered  unto  him  :  and  he 

5.  24  much  people  followed  him,  and  thronged 

6.  33  [the  people]  saw  thero  departing,  and  m. 

6.  34  Jesus,  .saw much  people,  and  was  moved 
6.45  and  to  go.,  while  he  sent  away  the  people 

7.  14  when  he  had  called  all  the  people  (unto 

7.  17  was  entered  into  the  house  from  the  peo. 

8.  6  he  commanded  the  people  to  sit  down  on 
8.    6  the  loaves . .  and  they  did  set . .  before  the  p. 

8.  34  when  he  had  called  the  people,  .with  his 

9.  15  people,  when  they  beheld  him,  were  gre. 
9.  25  saw  that  the  people  came  running  toget. 

10.  1  the  people  resort  unto  him  again :  and,  as 

11.  18  all  the  people  was  astonished  at  his  doc. 

12.  12  to  lay  hold  on  him,  but  feared  the  people 
12.  37  And  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly 
12.  41  how  the  people  cast  money  into  the  trea 

15.  11  the  chief  priests  moved  the  people,  that 
15. 15  Pilate,  willing  to  content  the  people,  re. 

Luke  3.  10  the  people  asked  him,  saying,  What  shall 

4. 42  the  people  sought  him,  and  came  unto  h. 
5.    1  the  people  pressed  upon  him  to  hear  the 

5.  3  sat.  .and  taught  the  people  out  of  the  ship 
7.   9  said  unto  the  people  that  followed  him 

7. 11  his  disciples  went  with  him,  and  much  p. 
7.  12  and  much  people  of  the  city  was  with  her 

7.  24  to  speak  unto  the  people  concerning  John 

8.  4  when  much  people  were  gathered  togeth. 
8.  40  the  people  (gladly)  received  him:  for  they 

8.  42  But  as  he  went  the  people  thronged  him 

9. 11  the  people,  when  they  knew  (it),  followed 
9. 18  saying,  Whom  say  the  people  that  I  am? 

9.  37  when  they  were  come,  .much  people  met 
11.  14  thedumbspake  ;  and thepeople  wondered 

11.  29  when  the  people  were  gathered  thick  to 

12.  1  gathered .  .innumerable  multitude  of  peo. 

12.  54  he  said  also  to  the  people,  When  ye  see 

13.  14  said  unto  the  people,  There  are  six  days 
13.  17  all  the  people  rejoiced  for  all  the  glorious 
23.  4  to  the  chief  priests  and  (to)  the  people,  I 
23.  48  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  si. 

John  6.  22  the  people  which  stood  on  the  other  side 

6.  24  the  people  therefore  saw  that  Jesus  was 

7. 12  murmuring  among  the  people  concerning 

7.  12  others  said,  Nay ;  but  he  deceiveth  the  \>. 
7.  20  The  people  answered  and  said.  Thou  hast 
7.31  the  people  believed  on  him,  and  said,  W. 
7.  32  people  murmured  such  things  concerning 
7.  40  the  people  therefore,  when  they  heard  t. 

7. 43  a  division  among  thepeople  because  of  him 
7.  49  people  who  knoweth  not  the  law  are  cur. 

xz.  42  because  of  the  people  which  stand  by  I  s. 


John  12.  9  Much  people  of  the  Jews  therefore  knew 
12.  12  much  people  that  were  come  to  the  feast 
12.  17  The  people  therefore  that  was  with  him 
12.  18  the  people  also  met  him,  for  that  they  h. 
12.  29  The  people  therefore  that  stood  by,  and 
12.  34  The  people  answered  him,  We  have  heard 

Acts  8.  6  thepeople  with  one  accord  gave  heed  unto 
11.  24  and  much  people  was  added  unto  the  Lo. 
1 1.  26  they  assembled . .  aud  taught  much  people 
1 4.  1 1  when  the  people  saw  what  Paul  had  done 
14.  13  would  have  done  sacrifice  with  thepeople 
14.  14  they,  .ran  in  amongthepeople,  crying  out 
14. 18  scarce  restrained  they  thepeople, that  they 
14.  19  persuaded  the  people,  and,  having  stoned 
17.  8  they  troubled  the  people  and  the  rulers  of 
17.  13  came  thither,  .and  stirred  up  the  people 
19.  26  persuaded  and  turned  away  much  people 
19.  35  when  the  town  clerk  had  appeased  the  p. 
21.  27  stirred  up  all  the  people,  and  laid  hands 
21.  35  was  borne . .  for  the  violence  of  the  people 

24.  12  [neither  raising  up  thepeople,  neither  in] 
Rev.  19.    1  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in  heaven 

PEOPLE,  number  of  or  mingled  — 
1. Mixture,  rabble,  3"$  ereb. 

Jer.   25.  20  the  mingled  people,  and  all  the  kings  of 

25.  24  mingled  people  that  dwell  in  the  desert 
50.  37  mingled  people  that  (are)  in  the  midst  of 

Eze.  30.    5  the  mingled  people,  and  Chub,  and  the 

'l.Croivd,  ox^-os  ochlos. 

Markio.  46  disciples  and  a  great  munber  of  people 
PEOPLE  or  Children  of  the  East  - 

1.  The  inhabitants  of  Haran. 

Gen.  29.    1  Jacob . .  came  into  the  land  of . .  P.  of  the  E. 

2.  A  tribe  dwelling  near  the  Amalekites  and  Midianites. 


Judg 


1  Ki. 

PE'-OR, 


6.    3  C.  of  the  E.,  even  they  came  up  against 
6.  33  the  C.  of  the  E.  were  gathered  together 
7. 12  all  the  C.  of  the  E.  lay  along  in  the  valley 
8.  10  left  of  all  the  hosts  of  the  C.  of  the  E. 
4.  30  excelled  the  wisdom  of  all  the  C.  of  the  E. 

liy?  opening. 

1.  A  mountain  in  Moab,  part  of  the  Abarim  range,  near 
Pisgah. 

Nuni23.  28  Ealak  brought  Balaam  unto  the  top  of  P. 

2.  The  Moabite  god  of  uncleanness. 

Nuni25. 18  they  have  beguiled  you  in.  .matter  of  P. 
25.  18  slain  in  the  day  of  the  plague  for  P.  's  sake 
31. 16  against  the  Lord  in  the  matter  of  P. 

Josh. 22.  17  (Is)  the  iniquity  of  P.  too  little  for  us,  from 
PERADVENTTJRE  — 
1.1/  so  be,  it  may  be,  "hx^hm  ulai. 

Exod32.  30  peradventure  I  shall  make  an  atonement 

Josh.  9.    7  Peradventure  ye  dwell  among  us ;  and  h. 

1  Ki.18.    5  peradventure  we  may  find  grass  to  save 
18.  27  peradventure  he  sleepeth,  and  must  be  a. 

2.  It  may  be,  if,  peradventure,  \H  lu. 

Gen.  50. 15  Joseph  will  peradventure  hate  us,  and  w. 
3. Fronting,  /acing,  lest,  |9  pen. 

Gen.  31.  31  Peradventure  thou  wouldest  takebyforce 
42.    4  Lest  peradventure  mischief  befall  him 

4. Peradventure,  perhaps,  rdxa  tacha. 

Rom.  5.    7  peradventure  for  a  good  man  some  would 
PERCEIVE,  to  — 
l.To  understand,  pa  bin. 

1  Sa.   3.    8  Eli  perceived  thatthe  Lord  had  called  the 

2  Sa.  12.  19  David  perceived  that  the  child  was  dead 
Job     9.  1 1  he  passeth  on  also,  but  I  perceive  him  not 

14.  21  are  brought  low,  but  he  perceiveth  (it)  not 
23.   8  aud  backward,  but  I  cannot  perceive  him 

'2. To  understand,  pa  bin,  7a. 

Job  38. 18  Hast  thou  perceived  the  breadth  of  the  e. 

3.  To  taste,  jjc retire,  cyo  taam. 

Prov3i.  18  perceiveth  that  her  merchandise  (is)  good 

4.2*0  know,  be  acquainted  with,  jn;  yada. 

Gen.  19.  33,  35  he  perceived  not  when  she  lay  down 
Deut29.  4  hath  not  given  you  an  heart  to  perceive 
Josh  22.  31  we  perceive  that  the  Lord  (is)  among  us 
1  Sa.  12.  17  may  perceive  and  see  that  your  wicked. 
28. 14  Saul  perceived  that  it  (was)  Samuel,  and 
.  12  And  David  perceived  that  the  LORD  hail 
.  1  son  of  Zeruiah  perceived  that  the  king's 
,  6  I  perceive,  that  if  Absalom  hadlived,  and 
.  9  perceive  that  this  (is)an  holyman  of  God 
2  David  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  court. 
.  16  they  perceived  that  this  work  was  wrou. 
.  10  I  perceived  that  the  portions  of  the  Lev. 
.  1  When  Mordecai  perceived  all  that  was  d. 
.  7  when  thou  perceivest  not.  .the  lips  of  k. 
.  17  I  perceived  that  this  also  is  vexation  of 
2.  14  perceived  also  that  one  event  happeneth 
Isa.     6.    9  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not 

0.T0  discern,  "CJ  nakar,  5. 

Neh.   6.  12  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  seut  him 

Q.  To  see,  nip,  raah. 

Judg.  6.  22  when  Gideon  perceived  that  he  (was)  an 
1  Ki.22.  33  when  the  captains  of  the  chariots  perce. 
■2  CI1.18.  32  when  the  captains  of  the  chariots  perce. 
Eccl.  3.  22  I  perceive  that  (there  is)  nothing  better 
Jer.   23.  18  For  who.  .hath  perceived  and  heard  his 

l.To  behold,  -flrf  shur. 

Job    33.  14  Godspeaketh  once,  (yet  man) perceiveth 


aSa. 

S 

14. 

IQ. 

2  Ki. 

1  Hi. 

14. 

Heh. 

6 

IS. 

Esth 

4 

Prov  14. 

Eccl. 

I 

8.  To  hear,  hearken ,  H?^  shamea. 

Isa.  33. 19  of  deeper  speech  than  thou  canst  perceive 

9.  To  perceive,  alcQavofxat  aisthanomai. 

Luke  9.  45  was  hid  from  them,  that  they  perceived 

10.  To  see,  perceive,  understand,  {SKciroi  blepo. 

2  Co.  7.  8  perceive  that  the  same  epistle  hath  made 
11,2*0  begin  to  know,  yivwtTKw  giytosko. 

Matt  16.    8  when  Jesus  perceived,  he  said  unto  them 

21.  45  when  the.  .Pharisees  had  heard,  .theype. 

22.  18  Jesus  perceived  their  wickedness  andsaid 
Luke  8.  46  for  I  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of 

20,  19  they  perceived  that  he  had  spoken  this  p. 
John  6.  15  When  Jesus  therefore  perceived  that  they 
Acts  23.  6  when  Paul  perceived  that  the  one  part  w. 
Gal.     2.    9  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given  unto 

1  Jo.  3.  16  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  (of  God),  be. 
12.  To  see,  know,  be  acquainted  ivlth,  oT5o  oida. 

Matti3  14  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  shall  not  perceive 

Mark  4.  12  That  seeing  they  may  see,  and  not  perce. 

12.  28  [perceiving]  that  he  had  answered  them 

Luke  9.  47  Jesus,  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  h. 

Acts  14.    9  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed 

28.  26  and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  not  perceive 

13.7*0  know  about,  fully,  iirtytvd'aKco. 

Mark  2.    8  Jesus  perceived  in  his  spirit  that  they  so 

Luke  1.  22  they  perceived  that  he  had  seen  a  vision 

5.  22  when  Jesus  perceived  their  thoughts,  he 

14.  To  find,  discover,  evpivKv  heumsko. 

Acts  23.  29  Whom  I  perceived  to  be  accused  of  ques. 

15.  TV)  see,  perceive,  duapeay  theoreo. 

John  4. 19  Sir,  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  prophet 
12.  19  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  nothing?  bell. 

Acts  17.  22  perceive  that  in  all  things  ye  are  too  sup. 
27.  10  perceive  that  this  voyage  will  be  with  hurt 

16. To  take  thoroughly,  apprehend,  KaTaAajj-fSavw. 
Acts    4. 13  perceived  that  they  were  unlearned  and 

10.  34  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  resp. 

17.  To  observe  thoroughly  with  the  mind,  Karavo4u.\ 
Luke  6. 41  perceivest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine 

20.  23  he  perceived  their  craftiness,  and  saidu. 

18.  To  observe  with  the  mind,  voea  noeo. 

Mark  7.  18  Do  ye  not  perceive,  that  whatsoever  thing 
8. 17  perceive  ye  not  yet,  neither  understand  r 

19.7*0  see,  dpdeo  horao. 

Acts    8.  23  For  I  perceive  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of 
PERCEIVE  by  the  ear,  to  — 
To  give  ear,  |m  azan,  5. 

Isa.  64.    4  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear 
PERCEIVED,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  heard,  Vfey  shamea,  2. 

Jer.  38.  27  left  off.  .for  the  matter  was  not  perceived 
PERDITION  — 
Loss,  destruction,  aic&Xeta  apoleia. 

John  17. 12  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perd. 

Phil.    1.  28  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition 

2  Th.  2.    3  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdi. 

1  Ti.    6.   9  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and  per. 
Heb.  10.  39  are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  unto  per. 

2  Pe.   3.    7;  Rev.  17.  8;  17.  n. 

PERES— 7*o  divide,  part,  Di?  peres,  Dan.  5.  28. 

PE'-RESH,  trn9  separate. 

A  son  of  Machir,  son  of  Manasseh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7.  16  and  she  called  his  name  P. ;  and  the  name 

PE'-REZ,  JH9  bursting  through. 
An  ancestor  of  Jashobeam,  captain  of  the  first  division 
in  David's  army;  perhaps  the  same  as  Pharezson  of 
Judah,  Gen.  38.  29.   B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.27.  3  Of  the  children  of  P.  (was)  the  chief  of  all 
PE-REZ  UZ-ZAH.  Kju  pa,  njy  ps  breach  of  Uzza, 
A  place  where  the  Lord  smote  Uzzan  for  touching  the 
ark. 

2  Sa.   6.    8  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  P.-TT. 
1CI1.13.  11  wherefore  that  place  is  called  P.-U.  to  this 

PERFECT,  PERFECTLY,  (more) 

1.  Understanding,  rr^a  binah. 

Jer.  23.  20  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it  perfectly 

2.  To  perfect,  complete,  "i?a  grmar. 

Ezra    7.  12  untoEzrathe  priest,  .perfect  (peace),  and 

3.7*0  be  prepared,  pa  him,  2. 

Prov.  4.  18  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect 

±.  Complete,  S^s  kalil. 

Eze.  16.  14  fofit(was)perfect  throughmycomeliness 

27.  3  O  Tyrus,  thou  hast  said,  I  (am)  of  perfect 
28. 12  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum.  .perfect  in  bea. 

^.Completion,  perfection,  ni"??p  mikloth. 

2  Ch.  4.  21  tongs, (madeheof)gold, (and)  that  perfect 
6.  Finished,  per/ect,  whole,  rhy  shalem. 

Deut  25.  15  shalt  have  a  perfect  and  just  weight,  a  p. 

1  Ki.   8.  61  Let  your  heart  therefore  be  perfect  with 

11.  4  his  heart  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord 
15.  3  his  heart  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord 
15.  14  Asa's  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  all 

2  Ki.20.    3  how  I  have  walked.,  with  a  perfect  heart 
1  Ch.  12.  38  came  with  a  perfect  heart  to  Hebron,  to 

28.  9  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  with 

29.  9  because  with  perfect  heart  they  offered 


PERFECT 


745 


PERISH 


i  Ch.  29.  19  give  unto  Solomon  my  sou  a  perfect  hea. 

2  Ch.15.  17  nevertheless  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect 
16.  9  behalf  of  (them)  whose  heart  (is)  perfect 
19.  9  saying,  Thus  shall  ye  do.  .with  a  perfect 
25.   2  he  did.  .right,  .but  not  with  a  perfect  h. 

Isa.  38.    3  how  I  have  walked .  .with  a  perfect  heart 

7 .Perfection,  completion,  rrSsn  taklith. 

Psa.139.  22  I  hate  them  with  perfect  hatred  ;  I  count 

8.  Perfect,  plain,  en  tarn. 

Job     1.   1  that  man  was  perfect  and  upright,  and  one 

1.  8  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that 

2.  3  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that 

8.  20  God  will  not  cast  away  a  perfect  (man) 

9.  20  (if  I  say),  I  (am)  perfect,  it  shall  also  pr. 
9.  21  (Though)  I  (were)  perfect,  (yet)  would  I 

9.  22  He  destroyeththeperfect  and  the  wicked 
Psa.  37.  37  Mark  the  perfect  (raan\  and  behold  the 

64.   4  That  they  may  shoot  in  secret  at  the  pe. 

9.  Perfection,  integrity,  Dh  torn. 

Psa.101.    2  walk  within  my  house  with  a  perfect  he. 

10. Perfect,  plain,  whole,  complete,  D'D$  taviim. 
Gen.    6.    9  Noah  was  a  just  man  (and)  perfect  in  his 

j  7.  1  said . .  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect 
Lev.  22.  21  it  shall  be  perfect  to  be  accepted ;  there 
DeutiS.  13  Thou  shalt  be  perfect  with  the  Lord  thy 

32.   4  (He  is)  the  rock,  his  work  (is)  perfect,  for 

1  Sa.  14.  41  Therefore  Saul  said.  .Give  a  perfect  (lot) 

2  Sa.  22.  31  (As  for)  God,  hisway(is)perfect;  the  word 

22.  33  (and)  power:  and  he  makethmy  way  pe. 
Job  36.    4  he  that  is  perfect  in  knowledge  (is)  with 

37.  16  wondrous  works  of  him  which  is  perfect 
Psa.  iS.  30  (As  for)  God,  his  way  (is)  perfect :  the  w. 

18.  32  (It  is)  God  that,  .iuaketh  my  way  perfect 

19.  7  law  of  the  Lord  (is)  perfect,  converting 
101.  2  I  will  behave  myself  wisely  in  a  perfect 
101.   6  he  that  walketh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  sha. 

Prov.  2.  21  upright  shall  dwell.,  the  perfect  shall  re. 

11.    5  The  righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  di. 

Eze.  28.  15  Thou  (wast)  perfect  in  thy  ways  from  the 

11. Accurately,  diligently,  aKptfi&s  akribos. 

Luke  1.   3  having  had  perfect  understanding  of  all 
Acts  18.  26  expounded,  .the  way  of  God  more  perfe. 

23.  15  would  enquire  something  more  perfectly 

23.  20  enquire  somewhat  of  him  more  perfectly 

24.  22  having  more  perfect  knowledge  of  (that) 

1  Th.  5.  2  For  yourselves  kuow  perfectly,  that  the 

12.  Fitted,  perfected,  &pTtos  artios. 

2  Ti.   3. 17  That  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  th. 

13.  To  Jill,  make  full,  ir\r}p6w  pleroo. 

Rev.   3.    2  for  f  have  not  found  thy  works  perfect  be. 

14.  Ended,  complete,  r4\eios  teleios. 

JIatt.  5.  4S  perfect,  even  as  your  Father,  .is  perfect 

19.  21  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  go  (and)  sell  that 

Rom  12.    2  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of 

Eph.  4.  13  Till  we  allcome.  .unto  a  perfect  man,  unto 

Phil.  3. 15  Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be 

Col.     1.  28  that  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in 

4.  12  that  ye  may  stand  perfect  and  complete 

Heb.  9.  11  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle 

Jas.     1.   4  (her)  perfect  work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect 

1. 17  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is 

1.  25  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  lib. 

3.  2  same  (is)  a  perfect  man,  (and)  able  also 

1  Jo.  4. 18  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear :  because  f  ear 
PERFECT,  to  (be  or  make)  — 

I.  To  perfect,  complete,  TD3  gamar. 

Psa. 138.   8  Lord  will  perfect  (that  which)concerneth 

2.2b  perfect,  y?3  kalal. 

Eze.  27.   4  thy  builders  have  perfected  thy  beauty 
27. 11  the  Gammadims .  .made  thy  beauty  perf. 

3.  To  perfect,  finish,  crri  tamam. 

Isa.   18.    5  afore  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  isperfect 
4.2b  make  perfect,  finish,  D^n  tamam,  5. 

Job  22.   3  gain . .  that  thou  makest  thy  ways  perfect  ? 

5. To  make  an  end  of  complete,  eirtrekea  epiteleo. 

2  Co.  7.  1  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  G. 
Gal.    3.   3  spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perf  ect  by  the  fle. 

6.  To  fit  thoroughly,  adjust,  KarapTifa  katartizo. 
Matter.  16  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes,  .thou  hast  pe. 
Luke  6.  40  every  one  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  his 

1  Co.  1.  10  but  (that)  ye  be  perfectly  joined  together 

2  C0.13. 11  Be  perfect,  be  of  good  comfort,  be  of  one 
1  Th.  3. 10  might  perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in  yoTir 
Heb. 13.  21  Make  you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to 

1  Pe.  5. 10  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen 

7. To  end,  complete,  re\ei6a>  teleioo. 

Lukei3-  32  cures,  .and  the  third  (day)  I  shall  be  per. 
J0I1U17.  23  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one 

2  C0.12.  9  for  my  strength  [is  made  perfect]  in  wea. 
Phil.  3.  12  either  were  already  perfect;  but  I  follow 
Heb.  2.  10  to  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation  pe. 

5.    9  being  made  perfect,  he  became  the  author 
7.  19  For  the  law  made  nothing  perfect ;  but 
9.   9  make  him  that  did  the  service  perfect,  as 

10.  1  can  never,  .make  the  comers  thereunto  p. 
10. 14  For  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for 

11.  40  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  per. 
12. 23  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perf. 

Jas.    2. 22  and  by  works  was  faith  made  perfect 
1  Jo.  4. 17  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we 
4.  18  He  that  feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  lo. 


PERFECT,  that  is  or  are  — 

1.  To  be  completed,  finished,  complete,  chp  shalam,  4. 
Isa.   42.  19  who  (is)  blind  as  (he  that  is)  perfect,  and 
I.Ended,  complete}  perfect,  reAetos  teleios. 

1  Co.  2.    6  speak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  perf. 

13.  10  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come,  then 
PERFECT  manner  — 
Exactness,  accuracy,  aitptfietaakribeia. 

Acts  22.    3  taught  according  to  the  perfect  manner 
PERFECTED,  (to  be)  — 
1.  Lengthening  went  ^(p,  n^TN  niVpi/  alethah arukah. 

2  Ch.24. 13  work  was  perfected  bythem,  and  they  set 
2. Finished,  perfect,  whole,  chip  shalem. 

2  Ch.  S.  16  (So)  the  house  of  the  Lord  was  perfected 
3.2b  end,  complete,  re\€t6o}  teleioo. 

1  Jo.  2.    5  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected 

4. 12  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  perfe. 
PERFECTING  — 
Perfecting,  complete  adjustment,  tear apr 10 fi6s. 

Eph.    4.  12  For  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the 
PERFECTION,  PERFECTNESS  — 

1.  Complete,  vhs  kalil. 

Lam.  2. 15  this  the  city  that  (men)  call  The  perfection 
'2. Perfection,  7J5D  miklal. 

Psa.  50.   2  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God 

3.  Continuance,  possession,  n?^D  minleh. 

Job  15.  29  neither  shall  he  prolong  the  perfection  th. 

4.  Perfection,  rnpFi  tiklah. 

Psa.119.  96  I  have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection,  (but) 

5.  Perfection,  end,  n*^B  taklith. 

Job  11.  7  canst  thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  p. 
28.  3  searcheth  out  all  perfection  :  the  stones 
6. Perfect,  integrity,  Dn  torn. 

Isa.  47.  9  they  shall  come  upon  thee  in  their  perfe. 
7.  Thorough  adjustment,  fitness,  KardpTio-ts  katart. 

2  C0.13.  9  and  this  also  we  wish,  (even)  your  perfe. 
S. Completeness,  reAeioVTjs  teleiotes. 

Col.    3.  14  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness 
Heb.  6.    1  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection  ;  not  laying 

9.  .4  completion,  reKetcoais  teleiosis. 

Heb.   7. 11  If  therefore  perfection  were  by  the  Levi. 
PERFECTION,  to  bring  fruit  to  — 
To  bear  on  to  completion  or  perfection,  TtXso-tyoptw. 

Luke  8. 14  are  choked.,  and  bring  no  fruit  to  perfec. 
PERFORM,  to  — 
1.2b  cut  off,  ys?  batsa,  3. 

Isa.   10. 12  when  the  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole 

2.  2b  complete,  perfect,  ~i£3  gamar. 

Psa.  57.  2  untoGod..thatperformeth(alltliings)for 
3.2b  give,  ]ni  nathan. 

Mic.  7.  20  Thou  wilt  perform  the  truth  to  Jacob,  (a.) 
4. 2b  do,  Ttyii  asah. 

Exodi8. 18  thou  art  not  able  to  perform  it  thyself  a. 
Deut.  4.  13  which  he  commanded  you  to  perform,  (e.) 
23.  23  That  which . .  thou  shalt  keep  and  perform 
2  Sa.  14.  15  will  perform  the  request  of  his  handmaid 
21.  14  they  performed  all  that  the  king  comma. 
2  Ch.34.  31  perform  the  words  of  the  covenant  which 
Esth.  1.  15  she  hath  not  performed  the  commandm. 
5.    8  to  grant  my  petition,  and  to  perform  my 
Psa.119.  II2  I  have  inclined  mine  heart  to  perform 
Isa.     9.    7  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  this 
Jer.     1. 12  for  I  will  hasten  ray  word  to  perform  it 
44.  25  surely  perform  our  vows  that  we  have  v. 
44.  25  accomplish. . and surelyperformyour vows 
Eze.  12.  25  will  I  say  the  word,  and  will  perform  it 
37.  14  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  (it),  and  perform. 
5.2b  separate,  xhspala,  3. 

Num  15.    3  a  sacrifice  in  performing  a  vow,  or  in  a 
15.    8  in  performing  avow,  or  peace  offerings 
6.2b  war,  serve,  perform,  »5?  tsaba. 

Num.  4.  23  all  that  enter  in  to  perform  the  service 
7.2b  raiseup,  confirm,  Dip  gum,  3. 

Psa.119.  106  I  have  sworn,  and  I  will  perform  (it),  that 
8.2b  cause  to  rise  up,  confirm,  Dsp  qum,  5. 

Gen.  26.    3  I  will  perform  the  oath  which  I  sware  u. 

Deut.  9.    5  he  may  perfortnthe  word  which  the  Lord 

1  Sa.    3. 12  I  will  perform  against  Eli  all.  .which  I 

15. 11  and  hath  not  performed  my  commandm. 

15. 13  have  performed  the  commandment  of  the 

1  Ei.  6.  12  then  will  I  perform  my  word  with  thee 

8.  20  hath  performed  his  word  that  he  spake 
12. 15  he  might  perform  his  saying,  which  the 

2  Ej.23.    3  to  perform  the  words  of  tins  covenant  that 

23.  24  that  he  might  perform  the  words  of  the 
2  Ch.  6.  10  performed  his  word  that  he  hath  spoken 

10.  15  the  LORD  might  perform  his  word,  which 
Neh.    5. 13  that  performeth  not  this  promise,  even 

9.  8  and  hast  performed  thy  words ;  for  thou 
Jer.  11.    5  I  may  perform  the  oath  which  I  have  sw. 

23.  20  till  he  have  performed  the  thoughts  of  his 

28.  6  the  Lord  perform  thy  words  which  thou 

29.  10  perform  my  good  word  toward  you,  in  c. 

30.  24  until  he  have  performed  the  intents  of  his 

33.  14  I  will  perform  that  good  thing  which  I  h. 

34.  iS  which  have  not  performed  the  words  of 

35.  16  the  sons  of  Jonadab.  .have  performed  the 


9.  To  finish,  complete,  nhy  shalam,  3. 

Psa.  61.  8  I  sing,  .that  I  may  daily  perform  my  vows 
Isa.  19.  21  vow  avowuntotheLoRD,  and  perform  (it) 
Nah.    1. 15  perform  thy  vows :  for  the  wicked  shall 

10.  To  finish,  complete,  \h#  shalam,  5. 

Job    23. 14  he  performeth  (the  thing  that  is)  appoin 

Isa.   44.  26  performeth  the  counsel  of  his  messengers 

44.  28  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure ;  even  say. 

11.  To  give  away,  aTroSiSctiui  apodidomi. 

ilatt5.  33  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths 

12.  To  make  an  end  of,  complete,  eVjTeAe'a)  epiteleo. 
Rom  15.  28  I  have  performed  this,  and  have  sealed 

2  Co.  8.  11  Now  therefore  perform  the  doing  (of  it) 
Phil.    1.    6  will  perform  (it)  until  the  day  of  Jesus 

13.2b workout  thoroughly,  KaT€pyd£op.at  katergaz. 

Rora.  7.  18  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not 
14.2b  do,  make,  ttoUw  poieo. 

Luke  1.  72  perform  the  mercy  (promised)  to  our  fat. 

Rom.  4.  21  what  he  had  promised,  .also  to  perform 
15.2b  end,  complete,  TeAe'cu  teleo. 

Luke  2.  39  they  had  performed  all  things  according 
PERFORMANCE  — 
1.2b  make  an  end  of,  complete,  eVn-eAew  epiteleo, 

2  Co.  8.  11  (there  may  be)  a  performance  also  out  of 
2.An  ending,  completion,  T€\eiw(ris  teleiosis. 

Luke  1.  45  for  there  shall  be  a  performance  of  those 
PERFORMED,  to  be  — 
1.2b  be  done,  nyy  asah,  2. 

Esth.  5.   6  half  of  the  kingdom  shall  it  be  performed! 

7.  2  it  shall  be  performed,  .to  the  half  of  the 

2.2b  rise  up,  Dip  qum. 

Jer.  51.  29  every  purpose  of  the  Lord  shall  be  perf. 
3.2b  be  raised  up,  confirmed,  Dip  qum,  6. 

Jer.  35. 14  The  words,  .he  commanded,  .are  perfor. 
4.2b  be  completed,  chy  shalam,  4. 

Psa.  65.  1  and  unto  thee  shall  the  vow  be  performed 
5. 2b  become,  happen,  come  to  pass,  yivofxat  ginomai. 

Luke  1.  20  day  that  these  things  shall  be  performed 
PERFUME  — 

1.  Perfume,  incense,  iribp  qetorreth. 

Exod3o.  35  thou  shalt  make  it  a  perfume,  a  confect. 
30.  37  the  perfume  which  thou  shalt  make,  ye 
Prov.27.   9  Ointment  and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart 

2.Confectionaries,  compiowids,  C~j5"!  riqquchim. 

Isa.  57.   9  didst  increase  thy  perfumes,  and  didst  s. 
PERFTJME,  be  perfumed,  to  — 
1.2b  wave,  sprinkle,  *\*2  nuph. 

Prov.  7. 17  I  have  perfumed  my  bed  with  myrrh,  aloes 

2.  2b  be  perfumed,  nap  qatar,  4. 

Song  3.  6  perfumed  with  myrrh  and  frankincense 
PER'-GA,  II6P777. 

The  capital  of  Pamphylia,  situated  on  the  river  Cestrus  r 
it  had  a  famous  temple  of  Diana  or  Artemis. 

Acts  13.  13  they  came  to  P.  in  Pamphylia:  and  John 

13.  14  But  when  they  departed  from  P.,  they  ca. 

14.  25  when  they  had  preached  the  word  in  P. 

PER-GA'-MOS,  Tlepyafios. 

A  celebrated  city  of  Mysia,  near  the  river  Caicus. 
Here  parchment  was  first  perfected,  and  a  library  of 
200,000  volumes  formed,  which  was  eventually  sent  to> 
Alexandria.  It  had  also  a  famous  temple  of  Esculapius, 
who  was  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  serpent. 

Rev.    1.  11  send  (it),  .unto  P.,  and  unto  Thyatira,  and 
2. 12  And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  P,  write 
PERHAPS,  (lest)— 
1. Indeed,  in  truth,  &pa  ara. 

Acts  8.  22  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine  heart  may 
2. Lest  by  any  means,  n-ntr&s  mepos. 

2  Co.  2.  7  lest  perhaps  such  a  one  should  be  swall. 
3.Perhap)S,  Ta^a  tacha. 

Phm.  15  perhaps  he  therefore  departed  for  a  seas. 
PE-RI'-DA,  KT"!9  separation. 

One  of  the  servants  of  Solomon  whose  descendants  re- 
turned with  Zerubbabel ;  called  Peruda  in  Ezra  2.  55. 
B.C.  536. 

Neh.    7.  57  children  of  Sophereth,  the  children  of  F". 
PERIL  — 
Banger,  peril,  kIvZvvos  kindunos. 

Rom.  8.  35  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword 

2  Co.  11.  26  perils  of  waters,  .perils  of  robbers,  .perils 
11.  26  perils  by  the  heathen,  .perils  in  the  city 
11.  26  perils  in  the  wilderness.,  perils  in  the  sea 
11.  26  the  sea,  [in]  perils  among  false  brethren 

FERTLOTJS  — 

Hard,  difficult,  perilous,  fierce,  xaAe7ro's  chalepos. 

2  Ti.   3.    1  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come 
PERISH,  to  — 
1.7b  be  lost,  "HN  abad. 

Lev.  26.  38  ye  shall  perish  among  the  heathen,  and 

Num  16.  33  they  perished  from  among  the  congrega. 
17. 12  Behold,  we  die,  we  perish,  we  all  perish 
21.  30  Heshbonisperished  even  unto  Dibon,  and 

Deut.  4.  26  ye  shall  soon  utterly  perish  from  oft  the 

8.  19  I  testify.,  this.. day.. ye  shall  surely  per. 


PERISH 


iiQ 


PERSECUTE 


3°- 
Josh.  2  3 

23' 

:  5- 


Jud; 
2Sa. 
iKi. 
Esth. 
Job 


Psa. 


Oeut.  8.  20  so  shall  ye  perish  ;  because  ye  would  not 
ii.  17  (lest)  ye  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good 
28.  20  until  thou  perish  quickly  ;  because  of  the 
28.  22  they  shall  pursue  thee,  until  thou  perish 
18  ye  shall  surely  perish,  (and  that)  ye  shall 
13  until  ye  perish  from  off  this  good  land 
16  ye  shall  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good 
31  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  O Lord:  but 
-.7  How  are.  .the  weapons  of  war  perished 
8  the  wholehouseof  Ahab  shall  perish:  and 
16  so  will  I  go  in.  .and  if  I  perish,  I  perish 
3  Let  the  day  perisli  wherein  I  was  born 
7  who  (ever)  perished,  being  innocent  ?  or 
q  By  the  blast  of  God  they  perisli,  and  by 
4  11  The  old  lion  perisheth  for  lack  of  prey,  aud 

1  -o  they  perish  for  ever  without  any  regard. 
6  18  The  paths,  .they  go  to  nothing,  and  per. 

8.  13  and  the  hypocrite's  hope  shall  perish 
18  17  remembrance  shall  perish  from  the  earth 
20.   7  he  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  own  dung 
30.    2  (profit)  me,  in  whom  old  age  was  perished? 
31  10  If  I  have  seen  any  perish  for  waut  of  clo. 

I.  6  but  the  way  of  the  ungodly  shall  perisli 

2  12  lest  he  beangry,  and  ye  perish  (from)  the 

9.  3  they  shall  fall  and  perish  at  thy  presence 
q  6  cities:  their  memorial  is  perished  with  th. 
9  1 8  the  expectation  of  the  poor  shall  (not)  pe. 

10.  16  the  heathen  are  perished  out  of  his  land 
37  20  the  wicked  shall  perish,  aud  the  enemies 
41  5  When  shall  he  die,  and  his  name  perish? 
49.  10  thefool  and  the  brutish  person  perish.and 
68  2  the  wicked  perish  at  the  presence  of  God 
73.  27  they  that  are  far  from  thee  shall  perish 
80.  16  they  perishat  the  rebuke  of  thy  counten. 
83.  17  yea,  let  tliem  be  put  to  shame,  and  perish 
a-.  9  thine  enemies  shall  perish,  all  the  workers 
102.  26  They  shall  perish,  but  thou  shalt  end  are 
11-.  10  the  desire  of  the  wicked  shall  perisli 
ng  92  I  should  then  have  perished  in  mine  affl. 
146.  4  goeth.  .in  that  very  day  his  thoughts  pe. 
Prov  10  28  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  shall  perish 
11     7  shall  perisli:  and  the  hope  of  unjust,  .pe. 

II.  10  when  the  wicked  perish,  (there  is)  shout. 
19    9  and  (he  that)  speaketh  lies  shall  perish 
21.  28  A  false  witness  shall  perish  :  hut  the  man 
28.  28  but  when  they  perish,  the  righteous  incr. 

Eccl  5  14  those  riches  perish  by  evil  travail ;  and 
7  15  there  is  a  just  (man)  that  perisheth  in  his 
9.  6  then-  hatred,  and  their  envy,  is  now  pen. 
Isa  29  14  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  (men)  shall  per. 
41. 11  and  they  that  strive  with  thee  shall  perish 
57  1  The  righteous  perisheth,  and  no  man  lay. 
co  1-  For  the  nation  and  kingdom,  .shall  perish 
4  9  the  heart  of  the  king  shall  perish,  aud  the 
6.  21  the  neighbour  and  his  friend  shall  perish 
7  28  truth  isperished,  and  is  cut  off  from  their 
9  12  the  land  perisheth  (and)  is  burnt  up  like 
10. 15  the  time  of  their  visitation  they  shall  pe. 
18. 18  the  law  shall  not  perish  from  the  priest 
27.  10  should  drive  you  out,  and  ye  should  per. 
27  15  ye  might  perish,  ye,  and  the  prophets  that 
40  15  scattered,  and  the  remnant  in  Judah  per. 
48.  8  the  valley  also  shall  perish,  aud  the  plain 
,S.  36  the  riches  (that)  he  hath  gotten  are  pen. 

48.  46  the  people  of  Chemosh  perisheth  :  for  thy 

49.  7  is  counsel  perished  from  the  prudent?  is 
51.  18  the  time  of  their  visitation  they  shall  pe. 

Lam.  3.  18  and  my  hope  is  perished  from  the  LORD 
Eze     7  26  the  law  shall  perisli  from  the  priest,  and 
Joei    1   11  because  the  harvest  of  the  field  is  perished 
Arnos  1     8  therenmaut  oftherhilistines  shall  pensh 

2  14  the  flight  shall  perish  from  the  swift,  and 
3. 13  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish,  and  the 
1.  6  God  will  think  upon  us,  that  we  perish  11. 
1.  14  let  us  not  perish  for  this  man's  life,  aud 

3  9  will  turn  and  repent,  .that  we  perish  not 

4  10  came,  .in  a  night,  and  perished  in  anight 
4.  9  is  thy  counsellor  perished?  for  pangs  ha. 
7.  2  The  good  (man)  is  perished  out  of  the  ea. 
g.   5  king  shall  perish  from  Gaza,  and  Ashkel. 

l.To  be  lost,  i;s  dbad. 

Jer.   10.  11  they  shall  perish  from  the  earth,  andfroin 


Jer. 


Jon. 


Mic. 

Zech. 


Z.Lost,  perishing,  inn  obed. 

Xnni24.  20  his  latter  end.  .that  he  perish  for  ever 
24.  24  afflict  Eber,  he  also  shall  perish  for  ever 

4.  To  be  lost,  nnx  dbad,  5. 

Dan.    2. 18  his  fellows  should  not  perish  wito  the  re. 

5 .  To  expire,  yia  gava.  ..... 

Josh  22.  20  that  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  miq. 
Job  34.  15  All  flesh  shall  perish  together,  and  man 

6.  To  cease,  be  cut  off,  re?  damah,  2. 

Psa.  49.  12  abidetii  not:  he  is  like  the  beasts  (that)  p. 
49.  20  Man  (that  is) . .  is  like  the  beasts  (that)  per. 

7.7*0  be  cut  off,  n-is  karath,  2. 

Gen.  41.  36' that  the  land  perish  not  through  the  fain. 

8.77)  fall,  S35  naphal. 

Eiodio.  21  lest  they,  .gaze,  and  many  of  them  perish 

Q.To  be  ended,  consumed,  fo  suph, 

Esth.  9.28  memorial  of  them  perish  from  then-  seed 
10.ro  U  ended,  consumed,  rc?S  saphah,  2. 

1  Sa.  =6.  10  he  shall  descend  into  battle,  and  perish 
27.    1  I  shall  now  perisli  one  day  by  the  hand  of 

11.  To  pass  over,  13"  abar. 

Job   33.  18  and  his  life  from  perishing  by  the  sword 
36. 12  they  shall  perish  by  the  sword,  and  they 


12.  To  become  naked,  VI?  para,  2. 

Prov  29.  18  Where  (there  is)  no  vision,  the  people  per. 

13  To  corrupt,  mar,  destroy,  nrja>  shachath,  3. 
Exod2i.  26  if  a  man  smite  the  eye.  .that  it  perish 

14  To  be destroyed,cut  off,  laid  waste, "V}w  shamad,2. 
Psa.  83.  10  (Which)  perished  at  En-dor:  they  became 

15  To  die  off  or  away,  airoBvno-Kin  apothnesko. 
Matt.  8.  32  into  the  sea,  and  perished  in  the  waters 

16.  To  loose, loose  axoay, destroy, ani'KKoy.i  apollumi. 
Matt.  5.  29,  30  that  one  of  thy  members  should  perish 

8.  25  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  save  us:  we  p. 

9.  17  the  wine  runneth  out,  and  the  bottles  pe. 
18  14  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish 
26.  52  they  that  take  the  sword  [shall  perish]  w. 

Mark  4.  38  Master,  carest  thou  not  that  we  perish? 
Luke  5.  37  be  spilled,  and  the  bottle  shall  perish 

8.  24  awoke  him,  saying,  Master,  master,  we  p. 

n   si  perished  between  the  altar  and  the  temp. 

1-     3   5  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall.,  likewise  p. 

13  33  it  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of 

13.  35  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all.  .perish 

15  17  bread  enough.,  and  I  perish  with  hunger 

21.  iS  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  your  head  perish 

John  3  15  whosoever  believeth.. should  not  perish 

3.  16  [whosoever believeth.. should  not  perish] 

6.  27  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth 

10  28  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 

11  50  one.  .and  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not 
Acts  5.  37  he  also  perished ;  and  all,  (even)  as  many 
Rom  2  12  have  sinned  without  law  shall  also  perish 

1  Co    1  i8Forthepreaching..istothem  that  perish 
8  11  shall  the  weak  brother  perish,  for  whom 

13. 18  they  also,  .asleep  in  Christ  are  perished 

2  Co    -.  15  sweet  savour  of  Christ,  .in  them  that  pe. 
2  Th    2.  10  with  all  deceivableness.  .in  them  that  pe. 
Heb     1. 11  They  shall  perish  ;  but  thou  remainest 
Jas.     1.  11  and  the  grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  perisheth 

1  Pe    1     7  more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth 

2  Pe    3    6  being  overflowed  with  water,  perished 
3     9  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 

Jude       1,  and  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  Core 

17.ro  be  for  loss  or  destruction,  el/il  els  a-KioKeiaf. 

Acts    8.  20  Thy  money  perish  with  thee,  because  thou 
1 8  To  make  disappear,  a(pa.vi£a>  aphanizo. 

Acts  13.  41  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and  p. 

19.  To  corrupt  thoroughly,  SiatpSeipu  diaphtheiro. 
2  Co.  4. 16  though  our  outward  man  perish,  yet  the 

20.  Corruption,  <p8opd  phthora. 
Col.    2.  22  Which  all  are  to  perish  with  the  using 

PERISH,  to  cause,  make,  he  ready  to  — 
I.  To  be  lost,  tjx  abad. 

Deut-6.    5  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  (was)  my  father 

Job    -a.  13  The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  pe. 

Prov  31     6  Give . .  drink  unto  him  that  is  ready  to  pe. 

Isa.    27.  13  which  were  ready  to  perish  in  the  land  of 
2.7'o  cause  to  be  lost,  13*<  abad,  3,  5V 

Esth  3.  13  to  cause  to  perish,  all  Jews,  both  young 

7  4  to  be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to  perish 

8  11  to  cause  to  perish,  all  the  power  of  the  p. 
Isa  26  14  hast  thou,  .made  all  their  memory  tope. 
Eze.  25.    7  I  will  cause  thee  to  perish  out  of  the  cou. 

PERISH  utterly,  to  — 

To  corrupt  utterly,  KarafyBtlpa  kakiphthei.ro. 

2  Te.   2.  12  [shall  utterly  perish]  in  their  own  corrup. 
PERISH  with,  to  — 
To  destroy  together,  o-wairoMuu-i  sunapollumi. 

Heb.11.  31  perished  not  with  them  that  believed  not 

FE-RIZ-ZITE,  -119. 

A  tribe  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah  driven  out  by  the 

Epliraimites. 

Gen  13    7CanaaniteandtheP.dweltthenintlielaud 
'  '  13  20  Hittites,  aud  the  P.,  aud  the  Rephaims 
34.  30  among  the  Canaanites  and  the  P. :  and  I 
Bxod  3.    8.  17  Hittites,  and  the  Amontes,  and  the  P. 
-1  23  bring  thee  in  unto,  .the  P.,  and  the  C  ana. 
33.    2  I  will  drive  out.  .the  P.,  the  Hivite,  and 
34. 11  drive  out  before  thee,  .the  P.,  and  the  H. 
Deut? 7.    1  Canaanites,  and  the  P.,  and  the  Hivites 
17  utterly  destroy,  .the  P.,  the  Hivites,  ami 
to  driveout  from  before  you.. the  P.,  aud  the 
1  the  P.,  the  Hivite, and  the  Jebusite,  heard 

3  P    and  the  Jel  aisite  in  the  mountains,  and 
8  the  P  ,  the  Hivites,  and  the  Jebusites 

i5  in  the  land  of  the  P.,  and  of  the  giants,  if 
1 1  P    aud  the  Canaanites,  and  the  Hittites 

4  delivered  the  Canaanites  and  the  P.  into 

5  and  they  slew  the  Canaanites  and  the  P. 
5  Amorites,  and  P.,  and  Hivites,  and  Jebu. 

20  all  the  people  (that  were)  left  of  the.  .P. 

7  all  the  people  (that  were)  left  of  the.  .P. 
1  of  the  Canaanites,  the  Hittites,  the  P.,  the 

8  to  give  the  land  of  the . .  P.,  and  the  Jebu. 
PERJURED  person  — 
Oar  who  lias  broken  an,  oath,  eiriopKos  epiorkos. 

1  Ti.    1.  10  for  perjured  persons,  and  if  their  be  any 
PERMISSION  — 
A  joint  opinion,  concession,  trvyyviip-n  suilgnome. 

1  Co.  7.   6  But  I  speak  this  by  permission,  (and)  not 
PERMIT,  to  — 
To  turn  over  on,  suffer,  cTrirpeirw  epitrepo. 

Acts  26.    1  Thou  art  permitted  to  speak  for  thyself 

1  Co  14  34  it  is  not  permitted  unto  them  to  speak 


Josh.  3. 
9- 


17- 

Judg.  1. 

1. 

3- 
t  Kl.  9. 
a  Ch.  S. 
Ezra  9. 
>ch. 


1  Co  16    7  tarry  a  while  with  you,  if  the  Lord  permit 
Heb.  6.    3  And  this  will  we  do,  if  God  permit 

PERNICIOUS  ways  — 
Destruction,  i.7r<&Aeia  apoleia. 

2  Pe.    2.   2  many  shall  follow  their  [pernicious  ways] 

PERPETUAL  — 

l.To  be  pre-eminent,  perpetual,  rxsinatsach,  2. 

Jer.    8.    5  slidden  back  by  a  perpetual  backslidiug 
2.  Pre-eminence,  perpetuity,  nsj,  nsj  netsach. 

Psa     9     6  destructions  are  come  to  a  perpetual  end 
74.    3  Lift  up  thy  feet  unto  the  perpetual  deso. 
Jer.  15.  18  Why  is  my  pain  perpetual,  and  my  wou. 
Z.An  age,  indefinite  time,  oViu  ohm,. 

Gen.   9.  12  token  of  the  covenant,  .for  perpetual  ge. 
Exocko.    9  priest's  office  shall  be  theirs  for  aperpet. 
31  16  shall  keep  the  sabbath,  .(for)  a  perpetual 
Lev     3  17  perpetual  statutefor  yourgenerationsth. 
24.    9  offerings .  .made  by  fire  by  a  perpetual  st. 
25  34  may  not  be  sold  ;  forit  (is)theirperpetual 
NumiQ.  -1  it  shall  be  a  perpetual  statute  unto  them 
Psa    78  66  smote.,  he  put  them  to  a  perpetual  repro. 
Jer     5  22  the  bouudofthe  seabyaperpetualdecree 
18. 16  make  their  land  desolate,  (and)  a  perpet. 
23.  40  perpetual  shame,  which  shall  not  be  for. 
25     9  make  them  an  astonishment . .  and  perpe. 
25  12  punish,  .and  will  make  it  perpetual  deso. 
40   13  all  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  perpetual 
50.    5  let  us  join  ourselves . .  in  a  perpetual  cov. 
si  39,  57  sleeP  a  perpetual  sleep,  and  not  wake 
Eze    35     5  Because  thou  hast  had  a  perpetual  hatred 
35     9  I  will  make  thee  perpetual  desolations 
A.  14  a  meat  offering  continually  by  a  perpetual 
Hah    3     6  perpetual  hills  did  bow  :  his  ways  (are)e. 
Zeph.  2.   9  Moab  shall  be.  .a  perpetual  desolation 
4  Continuity,  continual,  "vpn  tamid. 

Exod3o.    8  perpetual  incense  before  the  Lord  thro. 
Lev.    6.  20  fine  flour  for  a  meat  offering  perpetual 
PERPETUALLY  — 
1. Perpetuity,  continuity,  "ij2  ad. 

Amos  1. 11  his  anger  did  tear  perpetually,  aud  he  kept 

2.AU  the  days,  o'?;,-]-1??  kol-hayyamim. 

1  Ki    9    3  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually 

2  Ch.  7. 16  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually 
PERPLEXED,  to  he  (much)  — 
l.To  be  perplexed,  entangled,  spa  buk,  2. 

Esth    3. 15  drink;  but  the  city  Shushau  was  perple. 
Joel     1.  iS  herds  of  cattle  are  perplexed,  because  th. 

2  To  be  perplexed,  without  a  passage,  airopeofiai. 
2  Co.  4.    8  (We  are)  troubled.. perplexed,  but  notm 

3  To  be  thoroughly  perplexed,  Stairoptu  diaporeo. 
Luke  9.   7  he  was  perplexed,  because  that  it  was  said 

24.    4  as  [they  were  much  perplexed)  thereabout 
PERPLEXITY  — 
1.  Perplexity,  entanglement,  nsaD'mebukah. 

Isa    22.   5  For  (it  is)  a  day . .  of  perplexity  by  the  L. 

Mic.    7.    4  best  of  them.. now  shall  be  their  perple. 
2  Perplexity,  without  apassage  out,  awopla  aporia. 

Luke2i .  25  distress  of  nations,  with  perplexity ;  the 
PERSECUTE,  to  — 
l.To  bum,  pursue  hotly  after,  pVj  dalaq. 

Psa.  10.    2  The  wicked  in  (his)  pride  doth  persecute  t. 
2.7V)  pursue  after,  irm  tpn  radaph  achat: 

Jer.  29.18  will  persecute  them  with  the  sword,  with 

3.  To  pursue,  n"n  radaph. 

Deut  -o    7  on  them  that  hate  thee,  which  persecuted 

Job   19  22  Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  God,  and  are 
19  28  Why  persecute  we  him,  seeing  the  root  of 

Psa     7    1  save  me  from  all  them  that  persecute  me 
-1   13  deliver  me.,  from  them  that  persecute  me 
35'    3  stop(theway)againstthemthatpersecute 
,3    6  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  persecute 
6q  26  they  persecute  (him)  whom  thou  hast  sm. 
71   11  God  hath  forsaken  him :  persecute  and  ta. 
8,'  15  So  persecute  them  with  thy  tempest,  and 
109.  16  but  persecuted  the  poor  and  needy  man 
119.84  execute  judgment  on  them  that  persecute 
119  86  they  persecute  me  wrongfully  ;  help  thou 
no  161  Princes  have  persecuted  me  without  a  c. 
143    3  For  the  enemy  hath  persecuted  my  soul 
Ter    17  18  Let  them  be  confounded  that  persecute 

Lam    3  43  Thou  hast  covered  witli  anger,  and  pers. 
f .  66  Persecute  and  destroy  them  in  anger  from 

4.  To  pursue,  (m  radaph,  3.  ,      ..  . 

Psa.    7.   5  Let  the  enemy  persecute  my  soul,  aud  take 

5  To  pursue,  Ziwkw  dioko. 

Matt,  3.  10  Blessed  (are)  they  which  arc  persecuted 

S.  1,  Blessed  are  ye  when  (men)  sha  I    persec. 

;  12  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which 

5.  44  and  pray  for  them  which  ..persecute  you 

,0  2I  wheu  they  persecute  you  iu  this  city,  flee 

-3  3.  scourge  in  your  synagogues,  aud  persecute 
Luke-i  ?2  shall  lav  their  hands  on  you,  and  persec. 
John"  ■;  16  therefore  did  the  Jews  persecute  Jesus 

1 3'  20  have  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  perse. 
Acts   %  52  Which,  .haven, .tyurfatherspcrseeuted? 

o     I  saying  unto  him,  Saul,  Saul,  why  persec. 

o     5  Lord  said,  I  am  Jesus  whom  thou  perse. 

22     4  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  death,  bind. 

2-     7  saying  unto  me,  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecu. 

22'    8 1  am  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom  thou  pers. 

26'  11 1  persecuted  (them)  even  unto  strange  c. 


PERSECUTED 


747 


PERVERSE 


Acts  26.  14  why  persecutest  thou  me?  (It  is)  hard  for 

26. 15  he  said,  I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecu. 

Roni.12.  14  Bless  them  which  persecuteyou:  bless.au. 

1  Co.  4. 12  being  reviled,  we  bless  ;  beiug  persecuted 

15.   9  because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God 

2  Co.  4.  9  Persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ;  cast  down 
Gal.     1.  13  how  that  beyond  measure  I  persecuted 

1.  23  that  he  which  persecuted  us  in  times  past 

4.  29  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted 

Phil.    3.    6  Concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  church] 

Rev.  12. 13  persecuted  the  woman  which  brought  fo. 

6. To  chase  out, pursue  diligently,  ixHuoKto  ekdioko. 
Luken.  49  (some)  of  them  that  they  shall  slay  and  p. 

1  Th.  2. 15  have  persecuted  us;  and  theypleasenotG. 

PERSECUTED  — 
Pursued,  fjttd  murdaph. 

Isa.    14.   6  he  that  ruled  the  nations  in  anger,  is  pe. 
PERSECUTION  — 
1. Pursuit,  Sicoy/Aos  diogmos. 

Matt  13.  21  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth 

Mark  4.  17  when  affliction  or  persecution  ariseth  for 
10.  30  receive,  .children,  and  lauds,  with  perse. 

Acts    8.    1  at  that  time  there  was  agreat  persecution 
13.  50  raised  persecution  against  Paul  and  Bar. 

Rom.  8.  35  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or 

2  Co.  12. 10  take  pleasure,  .in  persecutions,  in  distre. 
2  Th.  1.  4  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribula. 
2  Ti.  3. 11  Persecutions,  afflictions,  which  came  unto 

3.  11  what  persecutions  I  endured  ;  but  out  of 

2. Oppression,  ((Miction,  Skills  thlipsis. 

Acts  11. 19  which  were  scattered  abroad  upon  the  p. 
PERSECUTION,  to  be  under  or  suffer  — 
l.To  be  pursued,  *rn  radaph,  2. 

Lam.  5.    5  Our  necks  (are)  under  persecution;  we  la. 

2.To  pursue,  BidrKw  diOkG. 

Gal.     5.  11  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution?  then  is 

6. 12  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution 
2  Ti.    3.  12  all  that  will  live  godly,  .shall  suffer  pers. 
PERSECUTOR  — 
l.To  bum,  pursue  hotly,  pVj  dalaq. 

Psa.     7.  13  ordaineth  his  arrows  against  the  persecu. 
2.  To  pursue,  tyri  radaph. 

Neh.   9. 11  persecutors  thou  threwest  into  the  deeps 
Psa.  119. 157  Many  (are)  my  persecutors  and  mine  ene 
142.    6  deliver  me  from  my  persecutors  ;  for  they 
Jer.   15.  15  revenge  me  of  my  persecutors ;  take  me 
20.  11  therefore  my  persecutors  shall  stumble 
Lam.  1.    3  all  her  persecutors  overtook  her  between 

4.  19  Our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  eag. 

■j. A  pursuer,  Sjwkttjs  divides. 

1  Ti.    1.  13  Who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a  pe. 
PERSEVERANCE  — 
Perseverance,enduring  constancy,  wpoo~KapT€pr}0'LS. 

Eph.  6.  1 8  with  all  perseverance  and  supplication  for 
PERSIA,  D15. 

A  country  in  Asia  (anciently  called  Elam),  receiving  its 
name  from  its  chief  province  called  Fars  or  Farsistan  ; 
now  bounded  on  the  W.  by  Asiatic  Turkey,  >'.  by 
Transcaucasia  and  the  Caspian  Sea,  E.  by  Afghanistan 
and  Beluchoostau,  and  S.  by  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the 
Arabian  Sea :  its  area  is  about  500,000  square  miles ;  it 
has  thirteen  provinces,  viz.,  Azarbyan,  Irak  Ajemi, 
Lrdelan,  Laristan,  Khuzistan,  Ears,  Laristan,  Kerman, 
Gliilan,  Mazauderan,  Astrabad,  Khorasan,  and  Yezd. 
Its  first  ruler  was  Kaiomars,  B.C.  2160;  in  2010  it 
became  subject  to  Syria;  in  1740  its  king  Nodar  is 
attacked  and  defeated  by  Pashang  king  of  Turan ;  in 
1730  Zur  (or  Zoali)  defeats  Afrasiab;  in  1661  the  Pisch- 
dadian  dynasty  is  subverted ;  in  642  Cyaxares  expels 
iheTurano;  and  set  up  the  Kaiauite  dynasty;  in  640 
it  is  subject  to  the  Scythians ;  in  612  they  are  expelled  ; 
in  606  he  takes  Nineveh ;  in  596  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Asia 
Minor  are  subdued  by  the  Persians;  in  559  Cyrus  be- 
came king;  in  551  he  annexes  Media;  in  538  he  con- 
quers Babylon  ;  in  536  Zoroaster  flourishes ;  in  522 
Cambyses  is  slain  and  Smerdis  usurps  authority  ;  in  517 
Darius  takes  Babylon  ;  in  497  a  war  between  Persia  and 
Greece ;  in  480  Xerxes  I.  invades  Greece ;  in  465  he  is 
killed ;  in  458  Ahasuerus  marries  Esther ;  in  401 
occurs  the  retreat  of  the  10,000  Greeks  ;  in  350  Ochus 
subdues  Egypt ;  in  334  Alexander  the  Great  invades 
Persia ;  in  250  it  passes  under  the  Parthian  dynasty  of 
the  Arsacidae. 

In  a.d.  226  Artaxerxes,  or  Ardshir,  founds  the  dynasty 
ol  the  Sassanides ;  in  326  Christianity  is  prohibited ; 
in  430  the  Huns  invade  Persia  ;  in  636  the  Arabs  invade 
it ;  in  651  it  passes  under  the  Saracen  yoke  ;  in  813  the 
Taherite  dynasty  commences ;  in  872  the  Sopharide 
dynasty  ;  in  874  the  Saminide  dynasty;  in  1026  Ferdusi 
flourishes;  in  1038  the  Seljakian  Turkish  dynasty;  in 
1223  the  Mongols  succeed;  in  1393  Timour  reduces  all 
Persia;  in  1502  Ismail  Shah  Soop  expels  the  Turks  of 
the  White  Sheep,  and  sets  up  the  Soofite  dynasty ;  in 
1724  Russia  and  Turkey  agree  to  partition  Persia;  in 
1800  Persia  allies  itself  to  Britain;  in  1826  Russia 
declares  war;  in  1854  a  treaty  is  concluded;  in  1858 
Mahammed  Ediasim  Khan  dies,  aged  12  years. 

2  Ch.36.  20  until  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  P. 

36.  22  king  of  P. .  .the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  P. 

36.  23  Thus  saith  Cyrus  king  of  P.,  All  the  kin. 

Ezra    1 .    1  king  of  P. . .  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  P. 

1.    2  Thus  saith  Cyrus  king  of  P.,  The  Lord  G. 

1.   8  Even  those  did  Cyrus  long  of  P.  bring  fo. 

3.    7  grant  that  they  had  of  Cyrus  king  of  P. 


Ezra  4.   3  as  king  Cyrus  the  king  of  P.  hath  comma. 
4.    5  Cyrus  king  of  P. .  .until. .  Darius  king  of  P. 
4.    7  companions,  unto  Artaxerxes  king  of  P. 
4.  24  the  second  year  of.  .Darius  king  of  P. 

6.  14  and  Darius,  and  Artaxerxes  king  of  P. 

7.  1  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  P.,  Ezra 
9.    9  unto  us  in  the  sight  of  the  kings  of  P.,  to 

Esth.  1.    3  power  of  P.  and  Media,  the  nobles  and  p. 

1. 14  seven  princes  of  P.  and  Media,  which  saw 

1.  18  shall  the  ladies  of  P.  and  Media  say  this 

10.    2  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Media  and  P.  ? 

Eze.  27. 10  They  of  P.  and  of  Lud  and  of  Phut  were 

38.    5  P.,  Ethiopia,  and  Libya  with  them ;  all  of 

Dan.    8.  20  The  ram . .  (are)  the  kings  of  Media  and  P. 

10.    1  In  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  P.  a  th. 

10.  13  of  the  kingdom  of  P. .  .the  kings  of  P. 

10.  20  will  I  return  to  fight  with  the  prince  of  P. 

11.  2  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  P.  ;  and 

PERSIAN,  »pT§n,  DTp,  k;d*i?. 
An  inhabitant  of  Persia. 

Neh.  12.  22  the  priests,  to  the  reign  of  Darius  the  P. 

Esth.  1.  19  written  among  the  laws  of  the  P.  and  the 

Dan.    5.  28  is  divided  and  given  to  the  Medes  and  P. 

6.    8,  12  according  to  the  law  of  the  Medes. .  P. 

6.  15  that  the  law  of  the  Medes  and  P.  (is),  That 

6.  28  Darius,  and  in  the  reign  of  Cyrus  the  P. 

PER'-SIS,  Ileptris. 

A  female  disciple  in  Rome  to   whom  Paul  sends  a 

salutation. 

Rom.  16.  12  [Salute  the  beloved  P.,  which  labouredj 
PERSON  — 
l.A  man,  a  human  being,  D^K  adorn. 

Nuni3i.  28  of  the  persons,  and  of  the  beeves,  and  of 
31.  30  of  the  persons,  of  the  beeves,  of  the  asses 

Prov.  6.  12  A  naughty  person,  a  wicked  man,  walketh 

Eze.  44.  25  they  shall  come  at  no  dead  person  to  def . 

Jon.    4.  11  are  more  than  six  score  thousand  persons 

2.  A  man,  an  individual,  irx  ish. 

Judg.  9.   2  threescore  and  ten  persons,  reign  over  you 

g.    5,  18  threescore  and  ten  persons,  upon  one 

20.  39  began  to  smite . .  about  thirty  persons ;  for 

1  Sa.   9.    2  (there  was)  not . .  a  goodlier  person  than 

9.  22  among  them . .  which  (were)  about  thirty  p. 
16. 18  a  comely  person,  and  the  Lord  (is)  with 
22. 18  slew  on  that  day  fourscore  and  five  pers. 

2  Sa.  4.  11  wicked  men  have  slain  a  righteous  person 
2  EX  10.   6  Now  the  king's  sons,  (hemS)  seventy  per. 

10.   7  slew  seventy  persons,  and  put  their  heads 

3.  A  man,  a  mortal  man,  vug  enosh. 

Judg.  9.    4  Abimelech  hired  vain  and  light  persons 
Zeph.  3.    4  prophets  (are)  light  (and)  treacherous  per. 

4.  Owner,  master,  lord,  Vys  haal. 

Prov.24.   8  He . .  shall  be  called  a  mischievous  person 
5. Men,  D*np  methim. 

Psa.  26.   4  I  have  not  sat  with  vain  persons,  neither 
G.Soul,  breath,  wpi  nephesh. 

Gen.  14.  21  Give  me  the  persons,  and  take  the  goods 

36.  6  Esau  took  his  wives,  .and  all  the  persons 
Exodi6. 16  (according  to)  the  number  of  your  rjersons 
Lev.  27.  2  person  (shall  be)  for  the  Lord  by  thy  est. 
Num.  5.    6  commit  any  sin.  .and  that  person  be  gui. 

31.  19  whosoever  hath  killed  any  person,  and  w. 

35. 11  slayer,  .which  killeth  any  person  at  una. 

35. 15  everyone  that  killeth  any  person  unawa. 

35.  30  Whoso  killeth  any  person,  the  murderer 

35.  30  witness  shall  not  testify  against  any  per. 
Deut  10.  22  went  down.,  with  threescore  and  ten  per. 

27.  25  taketh  reward  to  slay  an  innocent  person 
Josh.  20.    3  slayer  that  killeth  (any)  person  unawares 

20.    9  whosoever  killeth  (any)  person  at  unawa. 

1  Sa.  22.  22  occasioned  (the  death)  of  all  the  persons 

2  Sa.  14.  14  neither  doth  God  respect  (any)  person :  yet 
Prov  28. 17  doeth  violence  to  the  blood  of  (any)  person 
Jer.  43.    6  every  person  that  Nebuzar-adan  the  cap. 

52.  29  eight  hundred  thirty  and  two  persons 
52.  30  persons:  all  the  persons  (were)  four  tho. 
Eze.  16.    5  to  the  loathing  of  thy  person,  iu  the  day 
17. 17  andbuildingforts,  to  cutoff  many  persons 
27. 13  they  traded  the  persons  of  men  and  vessels 

33.  6  come.,  take  (any)  person  from  among  them 

7. Soul  of  man,  D'in  v)$i  nephesh  adam. 

Num3i.  35  thirty  and  two  thousand  persons  in  all,  of 
31. 40  persons(were)  sixteen  thousand ;  of  which 
31.  46  And  sixteen  thousand  persons 

S.Soul  of  man,  b^n  dSj  nephesh  ish. 

Num  19. 18  clean  person  shall  take  hyssop,  and  dip 

9. Face,  n'&  panim. 

Lev.  19.  15  person  of  the  poor,  nor  honour  the  person 

Deut.  1.  17  Ye  shall  not  respect  persons  in  judgment 

10.  17  regardeth  not  persons,  nor  taketh  reward 

16.  i9thoushaltnotrespectpersons,neithertake 

28.  50  which  shall  not  regard  the  person  of  the 

1  Sa.  25.  35  hearkened,  .and  have  accepted  thy  person 

2  Sa.  17. 11  that  thou  go  to  battle  in  thine  own  person 
2  Ch.19.  7  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of  gifts 
Job    13.    8  Will  ye  accept  his  person  ?  will  ye  contend 

13. 10  reprove  you,  if  ye  do  secretly  accept  per. 

34.  19  that  accepteth  not  the  persons  of  princes 
Psa.  82.  2  How  long  will  ye . .  accept  the  persons  of 
Prov  18.    s  not  good  to  accept  the  person  of  the  wic. 

24.  23  not  good  to  have  respect  of  persous  in  j. 

28.  21  To  have  respect  of  persons  (is)  not  good 
Jer.  52.  25  that  (were)  near  the  king's  person,  which 
Lam.  4.  16  they  respected  not  the  persons  of  the  pv 


Mai.    1.    8  will  he.  .accept  thy  person?  saith  the  L0-. 

1.  9  will  he  regard  your  persons?  saith  the  L. 
10. Face,  countenance,  irp6a-tcirov prosopon. 

Matt  22.  16  for  thou  regardest  not  the  person  of  men 
Marki2.  14  for  thou  regardest  not  the  person  of  meu 
Luke2o.  2 1  neither  acceptest  thou  the  person  (of  any) 
2  Co.  1.  ci  by  the  means  of  many  persons  thanks  may 

2.  10  for  your  sakes  (forgave  I  it)  in  the  person 
Gal.    2.    6  God  accepteth  no  man's  person  :  for  they 

11.  Substratum,  what  lies  under,  vTrScrraais  hupos. 
Heb.    1.    3  express  image  of  his  person,  and  uphold. 
[See  also   Brutish,  men's,  perjured,  profane,  respect 
without  respect  of,  uncireunicised,  vile.] 

PERSONS,  to  have  respect  to  — 

To  accept  faces  or  persons,  tt poawTroXTj-n-T e«  proso. 

Jas.    2.    9  if  ye  have  respect  to  persons,  ye  commit 
PERSONS,  respecter  of  — 
Acceptor  of  faces  or  persons,  TrpoffuTroX-iiTTTns  pros. 

Acts  10.  34  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  pe. 
PERSONS,  respect  of  — 
Acceptance  of  faces  or  persons,  irpua-wTroX-n^la. 

Rom.  2.  11  For  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  G. 

Eph.    6.    9  neither  is  there  respect  of  persons  with 

Col.     3.  25  shall  receive,  .there  is  no  respect  of  per. 

Jas.     2.    1  have  not  the  faith,  .with  respect  of  pers. 
PERSUADE,  to  — 

1.  To  move,  persuade,  remove,  no  suth,  5. 

2  Ki.iS.  32  when  he  persuadeth  you,  saying,  The  Lo. 

2  CI1.18.  2  persuaded  him  to  go  up  (with  him)  to  R. 
32.  11  Doth  not  Hezekiah  persuade  you  to  give 
32.  15  let  not  Hezekiah.  .persuade  you  on  this 

Isa.   56. 18  lest  Hezekiah  persuade  you,  saying,  The 

2.  To  entice,  persuade,  nQSpaihah,  3. 

1  Ki.22.  20  Who  shall  persuade  Ahab,  that  he  may 

22.  21  came  forth  a  spirit,  .and  said,  I  will  per. 
22.  22  Thou  shalt  persuade  Oiirn),  and  prevail 
3. To  persuade  again,  avaTretBco  anapeitho. 

Acts  18.  13  This  (fellow)  persuadeth  men  to  worship 
4.  To  persuade,  ire'idco  peitho. 

Matt  27.  20  persuaded  the  multitude  that  they  should 

28.  14  if  this  come,  .we  will  persuade  him,  and 

Acts  13.  43  persuaded  them  to  continue  in  the  grace 

14.  19  who  persuaded  the  people,  and,  having 

18.  4  and  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks 

19.  8  persuading  the  things  concerning  the  ki. 

19.  26  Paul  hath  persuaded  and  turned  away 
26.  28  Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Chris. 
28.  23  persuading  them  concerning  Jesus,  both 

2  C».  5. 11  we  persuade  men :  but  we  are  made  man. 
Gal.     1.  10  For  do  I  now  persuade  men,  or  God?  or  do 

PERSUADED,  to  be  (fully)  — 

l.To  be  enticed,  persuaded,  nns pathah,  4. 

Prov.  25. 15  By  long  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded 

2.  To  persuade,  w e Id a>  peitho. 

Lukei6.  31  neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one 

20.  6  they  be  persuaded  that  John  was  a  prop. 
Acts  21.  14  when  he  would  not  be  persuaded,  we  ce. 

26.  26  for  I  am  persuaded  that  none  of  these  th. 
Rom.  S.  38  For  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death 
14. 14  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord 

15.  14  I  myself  also  am  persuaded  of  you,  my 
2  Ti.    1.    5  and  I  am  persuaded  that  in  thee  also 

1.  12  for  I  know.. and  am  persuaded  that  he  is 

Heb.   6.    9  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  and 

11.  13  [were  persuaded  of  (them)]  and  embraced 

Z.To  bear  through  fully,  irX-npo^opew plerophoreo. 

Rom.  4.  21  being  fully  persuaded  that  what  he  had 
14.   5  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  Ms 
PERSUASION  — 
Persuasion,  Treirr/iovr}  peismone. 

Gal.    5.   8  This  persuasion  (cometh)  not  of  him  that 
PERTAIN,  (to\  to— 
l.To  be,  n;rt  hayah. 

1  Sa.  27.   6  Ziklag  pertaineth  untothe  kings  of  Judah 

2  Sa.   9.    9  given  unto  thy  master's  son  all  that  per. 

^.Instrument,  vessel,  *b$  keli. 

Deut22.    5  woman  shall  not  wear  that  which  pertaL 

3.  To  hold  with? partake  with,  fj.erexco  meteclw. 
Heb.    7.  13  he  of  whom  these  tilings  are  spoken  per. 

L  Toward,  Trp6s  {ace.)  pros. 

Rom  15. 17  glory,  .in  those  things  which  pertain  to 
PERTAINING  — 
About,  concerning,  vepi  (gen.)  peri. 

Acts    1.    3  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the 
PE-RU'-DA,  N"p?  separation,  isolation. 
One  of  the  servants  of  Solomon  whose  descendants 
returned  from  exile  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536.     See 
Perida. 

Ezra    2.  55  children  of  Sophereth,  the  children  of  P. 
PERVERSE,  (to  be,  have,  or  prove)  — 
l.To  be  turned,  overturned,  ~rn  haphak,  2. 

Pro vi  7.  20  he  that  hath  a  perverse  tongue  falleth  into 

2.To  turn  over,  be  perverse,  tsn)  yarat. 

NU11122.  32  went  out.  .because  (thy)  way  is  perverse 

3.  To  be  perverse,  pervertecl,  vhl/m,  2. 

Pro  vi  4.    2  (he  that  is)  perverse  iu  his  ways  despiseth 


PERVERSE 


748 


PETER 


1.  Perverseness,  nil?  lezuth. 

Prov.  4.  24  a  fro  ward  mouth,  and  perverse  lips  put 
5. To  beco?ne  perverse,  nvjr  avah,  2. 

1  Sa.  20.  30  Thou  son  of  the  perverse  rebellious  (wo.) 
Prov  12.   8  he  that  is  of  a  perverse  heart  shall  be  de. 

6. Perversities,  D'yiy  ivim. 

Isa.   ig.  14  Lord  hath  mingled  a  perverse  spirit  in 

7.  To  declare  perverse,  v$y  aqash. 

Job     9.  20  I  (am)  perfect,'  it  shall  also  prove  me  per. 

8.  To  be  perverse,  lypj;  aqash,  2. 

ProV28.  18  (he  that  is)  perverse  (in  his)  ways  shall  f. 
9, Perverse,  perverted,  cJpj;  iqqesh. 

Deut  32.    5  (they  are)  a  perverse  and  crooked  gener. 

Prov.  8.  8  (there  is)  nothing  froward  or  perverse  in 
19.  1  Better,  .than  (he  that  is)  perverse  in  his 
28.    6  Better,  .than  (he  that  is)  perverse  (in  his) 

3  0.  To  tarn  diversely,  perversely,  Siao-rpecpw  diastre. 
Matti7-  17  O  faithless  and  perverse  generation,  how 
Luke  9. 41  0  faithless  and  perverse  generation  !  how 
Phil.    2.  15  iu  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse 

PERVERSE  things  — 

1. Mischief,  calamity,  desire,  njn  hawah. 

Job    6.  30  cannot  my  taste  discern  perverse  things? 

2.  Perverseness,  froioardness,  niD^nri  takpukoth. 

Prov  23.  33  and  thine  heart  shall  utter  perverse  thin. 

3.  To  turn  diversely,  perversely,  $ia<rTp4(pa)  diastre. 

Acts  20.  30  shall  men  arise,  speaking  perverse  things 
PERVERSELY,  to  deal  or  do  — 
l.To  do  perversely,  nij;  avah,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.  19  thy  servant  did  perversely  the  day  that 
1  Ki.   8.  47  We  have  sinned,  and  have  done  pervers. 

2. 7*0  do  perversely,  TflJl  avath,  3. 

Psa  119.  78  dealt  perversely  with  me  without  a  cause 
PERVERSENESS  — 
1.719  be  perverse,  perverted,  ti1?  luz,  2. 

Isa.   30. 12  trust  in  oppression  and  perverseness,  and 
2.  Perverseness,  hed  mutteh. 

Eze.    9.    9  and  llie  city  full  of  perverseness :  for  they 

B.Perverseness,  1?P  seleph. 

Prov  11.    3  the  perverseness  of  transgressors  shall  d. 
15.   4  perverseness  therein  (is)  a  breach  in  the 

^.Perverseness,  perversity,  n?iy  avtah, 

Isa.  59.    3  your  tongue  hath'  muttered  perverseness 

5.  Labour,  perverseness,  misery,  boy  amal. 

Nuni23.  21  neither  hath  he  seen  perverseness  in  Isr. 

PERVERT,  to  — 

1.7*0  turn,  overturn,  *i$n  haphal\ 

Jer.  23.  36  have  perverted  the  words  of  the  living  God 

2.  To  cause  to  incline,  n»]  natah,  5. 

Deut  24.  17  Thou  shalt  not  pervert  the  judgment  of 
27.  19  he  that  perverteth  the  judgment  of  the 
1  Sa.   8.   3  and  took  bribes,  and  perverted  judgment 
Prov. 17.  23  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the  bosom  to  pervert 

3.  7*0  overthrow,  pervert,  *\bo  salaph,  3. 

Exod.23.    8  and  perverteth  the  words  of  the  righteous 
Deut  16.  19  and  pervert  the  words  of  the  righteous 
Prov.  19.    3  The  foolishness  of  man  perverteth  his  way 

4.  7*o  do  perversely,  pervert,  niy  avah,  5. 

Job   33.  27  and  perverted  (that  which  was)  right,  and 
Jer.    3.  21  they  have  perverted  their  way.,  they  have 

5.7*o  use  perversely,  mjf  avath,  3. 

Job     8.   3  Doth  God  pervert  judgment?  or.  .pervert 
34.  12  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert  judgm. 

6.2*0  pervert,  tfpjJ  aqash,  3. 

Prov  10.    0  he  that  perverteth  his  ways  shall  be  known 
Mic.   3.    9  that  abhor  judgment,  and  pervert  all  equi. 

7.  To  turn  or  bring  back,  2-.u  shub,  Sa. 

Isa.   47.  10  it  hath  perverted  thee  ;  and  thou  hast  s. 
8.7*0  change,  transfer,  niy  shanah,  3. 

Prov  31.  5  and  pervert  the  judgment  of  any  of  the 
9,2*0  turn  away  or  off,  a.rro(rrp4<p<a  apostrepho. 

Luke23-  14  this  man.. one  that  perverteth  the  people 
10.7*o  turn  diversely,  perversely,  $ia<jTpe<po)  diastr. 

Lukea3.    2  We  found  this  (fellow)  perverting  the  n. 

Acts  13. 10  not.  .to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  L. 
11.7*o  turn  away,  fxeraarps^cv  mrlastrephG. 

Gal.     1.   7  some  that,  .would  pervert  the  gospel  of 
PESTILENCE  — 
1.  Pestilence,  plague,  Tan  deber, 

Exod  5.    3  lest  he  fall  upon  us  with  pestilence,  or  wi. 
9.  15  smite  thee  and  thy  people  with  pestilence 

Lev.  26.  25  I  willsend  the  pestilence  among  you;  and 

Nunii4.  12  I  will  smite  them  with  the  pestilence,  and 

Deut  28.  21  shall  make  the  pestilence  cleave  unto  thee 

2  Sa.  24. 13  or  that  there  be  three  days'  pestilence  in 
24.  15  So  the  LORD  sent  a  pestilence  upon  Israel 

1  Ki.  8.  37  if  there  be  pestilence]  blasting,  mildew 

1  I'll  21,  12  even  the  pestilence,  in  the  land,  and  the 

si.  14  So  the  Lord  sent  pestilence  upon  Israel 

2  (  li.  6.  28  if  there  be  pestilence,  if  there  be  blasting 

7.  13  or  if  I  send  pestilence  among  my  people 
20.  9  sword,  judgment,  orpcstilcnee,  or  famine 
Psa.  78.  50  but  gave  their  life  over  t<>  the  pestilence 
91.  3  deliver  thee  from  the  noisome  pestilence 
91,   6  for  the  pestilence,  (that)walketh  in  dark. 


Jer.  14. 12 
21.  6 
21.    7 


24. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
32. 
32. 

34- 
38. 
42. 
44. 

Eze.    5. 

5- 

6. 
6. 
7- 

7- 


14. 
14. 
28. 
33- 
1         38" 

Amos  4. 
Hab.  3. 


and  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestilence 
inhabitants . .  shall  die  of  a  great  pestilence 
left  in  this  city  from  the  pestilence,  from 
and  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestilence 
the  sword,  the  famine,  and  the  pestilence 
with  thepestilence,  until  I  have  consumed 
by  the  pestilence,  as  the  Lokd  hath  spoken 
prophesied  both . .  of  evil,  and  of  pestilence 
the  sword,  the  famine,  and  the  pestilence 
with  the  famine,  and  with  the  pestilence 
and  of  the  famine,  and  of  the  pestilence 
and  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestilence 
sword,  to  the  pestilence,  and  to  the  famine 
sword,  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestile. 
,  22  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestilence 
sword,  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestile. 
third  part,  .shall  die  with  the  pestilence 
pestilence  and  blood  shall  pass  through 
sword,  by  the  famine,  and  by  the  pestile. 
He  that  is  far  off  shall  die  of  the  pestilence 
and  the  pestilence  and  the  famine  within 
famine  and  pestilence  shall  devour  him 
from  the  famine,  and  from  the  pestilence 
Or  (if)  I  send  a  pestilence  into  that  land 
the  pestilence,  to  cut  off  from  it  man  and 
For  I  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and 
and  in  the  caves  shall  die  of  the  pestileuce 
I  will  plead  against  him  with  pestilence 
I  have  sent  among  you  the  pestilence  after 
Before  him  went  the  pestilence,  and  bur. 


2.  A  plague,  pestilence,  KoifiSs  loimos. 

Matt24.    7  there  shall  be  famines,  [and  pestilences] 
Luke2i.  11  famines,  and  pestilences ;  and  fearful  si. 

PESTILENT  — 

A  plague,  pestilence,  \oi/j.6s  loimos* 

Acts  24.    5  we  have  found  tliis  man  (a)  pestileut  (fe.) 

PESTLE  — 

A  pestle,  '?w  eli. 

Prov  27.  22  in  a  mortar  among  wheat  with  a  pestle 

PET'-ER,  Uerpos  a  stone. 

The  surname  of  Simon  brother  of  Andrew,  and  son  of 
Jona  (or  Johanan);  a  native  of  Bethsaida,  and  a  fisher- 
man; called  to  be  one  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  Christ; 
follows  him,  leaving  all ;  acknowledges,  and  rebukes 
Christ,  and  is  rebuked;  denies  him;  sees  him  after  the 
resurrection ;  addresses  the  disciples  regarding  the 
choice  of  an  apostle,  also  the  Jews  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost ;  cures  a  lame  man  at  the  gate  of  the  temple ; 
is  imprisoned  with  John ;  performs  many  cures;  is 
again  imprisoned  and  released,  speaks  boldly  before 
the  magistrates,  communicates  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
to  the  Samaritans,  confounds  Simon  Magus,  cures 
jEneas  of  palsy,  raises  Dorcas  to  life,  preaches  to 
Cornelius,  defends  himself  to  the  church ;  is  imprisoned 
by  Herod,  and  freed  by  a  messenger  of  God  ;  addresses 
the  assembly  at  Jerusalem  concerning  circumcision ; 
is  opposed  by  Paul  for  his  inconsistency;  commends 
Paul's  Epistles,  writes  two  Epistles  to  the  Jews 
scattered  abroad.  Tradition  asserts  that  he  died  at 
Rome  a  martyr. 

Matt.  4.  18  saw  two  brethren,  Simon  called  P.,  and 
8. 14  when  Jesus  was  come  into  P.'s  house,  he 

10.    2  The  first,  Simon,  who  is  called  P.,  and  A. 

14.  28  P.  answered  him  and  said,  Lord,  if  it  be 

14.  29  when  P.  was  come  down  out  of  the  ship 

15.  15  Then  answered  P.  and  said  unto  him,  De. 

16.  16  And  Simon  P.  answered  and  said,  Thou 
16. 18  That  thou  art  P.,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will 
16.  22  Then  P.  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke 

16.  23  But  he  turned,  and  said  unto  P.,  Get  thee 

17.  1  Jesus  taketh  P.  ..and  bringeth  them  up 
17.    4  Then  answered  P.,  and  said  unto  Jesus,  L. 
17.  24  came  to  P.,  and  said,  Doth  not  your  mas. 

17.  26  [P.  saith  unto  him,  Of  strangers.    Jesus] 

18.  21  Then  came  P.  to  him,  aud  said,  Lord,  how 

19.  27  Then  answered  P.  and  said  unto  him,  Be. 
26. 33  P.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Though 
26.  35  P.  said  unto  him,  Though  I  should  diewi. 
26.  37  And  he  took  with  him  P.  and  the  two  sons 
26.  40  saitli  unto  P.,  What !  could  ye  not  watch 
26.  58  But  P.  followed  him  afar  off  unto  the  high 
26.  69  Now  P.  sat  without  in  the  palace :  and  a 
26.  73  said  to  P.,  Surely  thou  also  art  (one)  of  th. 
26.  75  P.  remembered  the  word  of  Jesus,  which 

Mark  3.  16  And  Simon  he  surnamed  P. 

5.  37  he  suffered  no  man  to  follow  him,  save  P. 
8.  29  P.  answereth  and  saith  unto  him,  Thou  art 
8.  32  And  P.  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke  him 

8.  33  he  rebuked  P.,  saying,  Get  thee  behind 

9.  2  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  (with  him)  P. 
9.    5  P.  answered  and  said  to  Jesus,  Master,  it 

10.  28  Then  P.  began  to  say  unto  him,  Lo,  we  ha. 

11.  21  P.  calling  to  remembrance  saith  unto  him 

13.  3  P.  and  James  and  John,  .asked  him  priv. 

14.  29  But  P.  said  unto  him,  Although  all  shall 
14.  33  he  taketh  with  him  P.  and  James  and  J. 
14.  37  and  saith  unto  P.,  Simon,  sleepest  thou? 
14.  54  P.  followed  him  afar  off,  even  into  the  p. 
14. 66  as  P.  was  beneath  in  the  palace,  there 
14.  67  when  she  saw  P.  warming  himself,  she  lo. 
14.  70  they  that  stood  by  said  again  to  P. ,  Surely 
14.  72  And  P.  called  to  mind  the  word  that  Jesus 
16.    7  tell  his  disciples  and  P.  that  he  goeth  he, 

Luke  5.  8  When  Simon  P.  saw  (it),  he  fell  down  at 
6. 14  Simon,  whom  he  also  named  P.,  and  A. 
8.  45  When  all  denied,  P.  and  they  that  were 

8.  51  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save  P.  and  Ja. 

9.  20  whom  say  ye  that  I  am'.'  P.  answering  said 


Luke  9.  28  he  took  P.  and  John  and  James,  and  went 
9.  32  But  P.  and  they  that  were  with  him  were 

9.  33  P.  said  unto  Jesus,  Master,  it  is  good  for 

12.  41  Then  P.  said  uuto  him,  Lord,  speakestthou 
18.  28  Then  P.  said,  Lo,  we  have  left  all,  andfol. 
22.  8  he  sent  P.  and  John,  saying,  Go  and  pre. 
22.  34  And  he  said,  I  tell  thee,  P.,  the  cock  shall 
22.  54  Then  took  they  him.  .And  P.  followed  afar 
22.  55  when  they,  .were  set  down  together,  P. 
22.  58  Thou  art  also  of  them.  And  P.  said,  Man 
22.  60  P.  said,  Mau,  I  know  not  what  thou  say. 
22.  61  looked  upon  P.  And  P.  remembered  the 
22.  62  And  [P.]  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 

24. 12  [Then  arose  P.,  and  ran  unto  thesepulc.j 

John  1.  40  One  of  the  two.  .was  Andrew,  Simon  P.'s 

x,  44  Philip  was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of.  .P. 

6.    8  Andrew,  Simon  P.'s  brother,  saith  unto 

6.  68  Then  Simou  P.  answered  him,  Lord,  to  wh. 

13.  6  Then  cometh  he  to  Simon  P. ;  and  [P.]  sa. 
13.  8  P.  saith  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  never  wash 
13.  9  Simon  P.  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  not  my  f. 
13.  24  Simon  P.  therefore  beckoned  to  him,  that 
13.  36  Simon  P.  said  unto  him,  Lord,  whither  go. 
13.  37  P.  said  unto  him,  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow 
1 8.  10  Then  Simon  P.  having  a  sword  drew  it,  and 
18.  11  Then  said  Jesus  unto  P.,  Put  up  thy  swo. 
18.  15  AndSimonP.  followed  Jesus,  and  (so  did) 
18.  16  But  P.  stood  at  the  door  withuut.  Then 
18. 16  disciple,  .spake  unto,  .and  bi ought  in  P. 
18.  17  Then  saith  the  damsel,  .unto  P.,  Art  not 
18.  18  and  P.  stood  with  them,  and  warmed  him. 
18.  25  Simon  P.  stood  and  warmed  himself.  They 
18.  26  being  (his)  kinsman  whose  ear  P.  cut  off 
18.  27  P.  then  denied  again  :  and  immediately 
20.  2  Then  she  runneth,  and  cometh  to  Simon  P. 
20.  3  P.  therefore  went  forth,  and  that  other  d. 
20.    4  the  other  disciple  did  outrun  P.,  and  came 

20.  6  Then  cometh  Simon  P.  following  him,  and 

21.  2  There  were  together  Simou  p.,  and  Tho. 
21.  3  Simon  P.  saith  unto  them,  I  go  a  fishing 
21.  7  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  saith  unto  P. 
21.  7  Nowwhen  Simon  P.  heard  that  it  was  the 
21.  11  Simon  P.  went  up,  and  drew  the  net  to 
21.  is  Jesussaithto  Simon  P.,  Simon,  (son)of  J. 
21.  17  P.  was  grieved  because  he  said  unto  him 
21.  20  Then  P.,  turning  about,  seeth  the  discip 
21.  21  P.  seeing  him  saith  to  Jesus,  Lord,  and 

Acts    1.  13  into  an  upper  room,  where  abode  both  P. 

1.  15  in  those  days  P.  stood  up  in  the  midst  of 

2.  14  But  P.,  standing  up  with  the  eleven,  lif ted 
2.  37  said  unto  P.  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apost. 

2.  38  Then  P.  said  unto  them,  Repent,  and  be 

3.  1  Now  P.  and  John  went  up  together  into 
3.    3  Who  seeing  P.  and  John  about  to  go  into* 
3.   4  P.,  fastening  his  eyes  upon  him  with  J. 
3.    6  Then  P.  said,  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none 
3.  11  which  was  healed  held  P.  and  John,  all 

3.  12  And  when  P.  saw(it),  he  answered  unto  the 

4.  8  Then  P.,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  said 
4.  13  they  saw  the  boldness  of  P.  and  John 

4.  19  But  P.  and  John  answered  and  said  unto 

5.  3  But  P.  said,  Ananias,  why  hath  Satan  fil. 
5.  8  And  P.  answered  unto  her,  Tell  me  whe. 
5.  9  Then  P.  said  unto  her,  How  is  it  that  ye 
5.  15  that  at  the  least  the  shadow  of  P.  passing 
5.  29  Then  P.  andthe(othei)apostles  answered 
8.  14  they  sent  unto  them  P.  and  John 

8.  20  But  P.  said  unto  him,  Thy  money  perish 

9.  32  as  P.  passed  throughout  all  (quarters),  he 
9.  34  And  P.  said  unto  him,  jEneas,  Jesus  Chr. 
9.  38  had  heard  that  P.  was  there,  they  sent 
9.  39  Then  P.  arose  and  went  with  them.  When 

9.  40  But  P.  put  them  all  forth,  and  kneeled 

9.  40  and  when  she  saw  P.,  she  sat  up 

10.  5  call  for  (one)  Simon,  whose  surname  is  P. 
10.  9  P.  went  up  upon  the  house  top  to  pray  a. 
10. 13  came  a  voice  to  him,  Rise,  P. ;  kill,  and 
10.  14  P.  said,  Not  so,  Lord ;  for  I  have  never  e. 
10.  17  P.  doubted  in  himself  what  this  vision 
10.  18  whether  Simon,  which  was  surnamed  T. 
10.  19  While  P.  thought  on  the  vision,  the  spirit 
10.  21  P.  went  down  to  the  men  which  were  sent 

10.  23  [P.]  went  away  with  them,  and  certain  bre. 
10.  25  as  P.  was  coming  in,  Cornelius  met  him 
10.  26  P.  took  him  up,  saying,  Stand  up  ;  I  my. 
10.  32  call  hither  Simon,  whose  surname  is  P. 
10.  34  P.  opened  (his)  mouth,  and  said,  Of  a  truth 
10.  44  While  P.  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy 

10.  45  were  astonished,  as  many  as  came  with  P. 

10.  46  Then  answered  P.,  Can  any  man  forbid  w. 

11.  2  when  P.  was  come  up  to  Jerusalem,  they 
11.  4  P.  rehearsed  (the  matter)  from  the  begin. 
11.    7  voice  sayinguntome,  Arise,  P. ;  slay,  ami 

11.  13  and  call  for  Simon,  whose  surname  is  P. 

12.  3  he  proceeded  further  to  take  P.  also 

12.   5  P.  therefore  was  kept  in  prison :  but  pr. 

12.    6  P.  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers,  b. 

12.    7  he  smote  P.  on  the  side,  and  raised  him 

12.  11  when  P.  wascometohimself.hesaid.Now 

12.  13  as  [P.j  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate,  a 

t2.  14  when  she  knew  P.'s  voice,  she  opened  not 

12.  14  ran. .and  told  how  P.  stood  before  the  g. 

12.  16  P.  continued  knocking:  and  when  they 

12.  iS  was  no  small  stir,  .what  was  become  of  P. 

15.    7  P.  rose  up,  and  said untothem,Men(and) 

Gal.     1. 18  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  [P.],  and  a. 

2.    7  (the gospel) of .  .eiivumcision(was)untol'. 

2.    8  ForhethatwroughteffectuallyinP.  to  the 

2.  11  when[P.]wascometo  Antioch,Iwithstood 

2.  14  I  said  unto  [P.]  before  (them)  all,  If  thou 

1  IV.    1.    1  P.,  an  apostle  of  JesusChiist.to  thestran. 

2  Pe.   1.    1  P.,  a  servant  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Ch. 


PETHAHIAH 


749 


PHARAOH 


PE-THAH -I'AH,  n;n05  Jah  opens. 

1.  A  priest  in  the  days  of  David  appointed  over  the 
nineteenth  charge  of  the  sanctuary.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  16  The  nineteenth  to  P.,  the  twentieth  to  Je. 

2.  A  Levite  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  23  the  same  (is)  Kelita,  P.,  Judah,  and  Elie 

3.  A  Levite  who  regulated  the  devotions  of  the  people 
after  Ezra  had  finished  reading  the  Book  of  the  Law  to 
them.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  9.   5  P.  .said,  Stand  up  (and)  bless  the  Lord  your 

4.  A  son  of  Meshezabeel,  and  of  the  family  of  Zarah  son 
of  Judah,  whom  the  king  of  Persia  employed  in  matters 
concerning  the  returned  exiles.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  24  P.  the  son  of  Meshezabeel,  of  the  children 
PE'-THOR,  "lins  extension. 

A  city  in  Mesopotamia  near  the  Euphrates,  where 
Balaam  the  prophet  the  son  of  Beor  dwelt,  when  Balak 
king  of  Moab  sent  for  him  to  curse  Israel. 

Num22.    5  sent,  .unto  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor,  to  P. 

Deut2^.    4  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  of  P.  of  Mesopo. 
PE-THTJ'-EL,  ^Xin?  God  delivers. 
Father  of  Joel  the  prophet.    B.C.  800. 

Joel    1.    1  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to.,  son  ofP. 
PETITION  — 
1. Petition)  prayer \  ty3  bau. 

Dan.   6.    7  whosoever  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  god 

6.  13  but  maketh  his  petition  three  times  a  day 

%  Ashing j  n^N^p  mishalah. 

Psa.  20.    5  banners :  the  Lord  fulfil  all  thy  petitions 
Z.  Asking,  rhtttf,  nte  shelah,  sheelah. 

1  Sa.   1.  17  grant  (thee)  thy  petition  that  thou  hast 

1.  27  Lord  hath  given  me  my  petition  which 
1  Ki.    2. 16  now  I  ask  one  petition  of  thee,  deny  me 

2.  20 1  desire  one  small  petition  of  thee ;  (I  pr. 
Esth.  5.   6  What  (is)  thy  petition?  and  it  shall  be  g. 

5.    7  answered  Ksther,  and  said,  My  petition 
5.  8  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  petition 

7.  2  What  (is)  thy  petition,  queen  Esther?  and 
7.  3  let  my  life  begivenmeatmypetition,and 
9. 12  what  (is)  thy  petition  ?  and  it  shall  be  gr. 

4. An  ashing,  petition,  air-n}ia  aitema. 

1  Jo.   5. 15  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that 
PE-TJL'-THAI,  '{fcvs  Jah  works. 

A  Kohathite,  son  ot"  Obed-edom,  and  a  gate  keeper  of 
the  tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.   5  Issachar  the  seventh ;  P.  the  eighth :  for 
PHA'-LEC,  <&a\eK  division, 
father  of  Ragau,  an  ancestor  of  Jesus.    See  Peleg. 

Luke  3.  35  which  was  (the  son)  of  P.,  which  was  (the 
PHAX'-TT,  'pS?  Jah  causes  to  escape. 
A  Benjamite  to  whom  Saul  gave  Michal  his  daughter, 
David's  wife.    B.C.  1060.     See  Paltiel. 

1  Sa.  25.  44  had  given  Michal.  .to  P.  the  son  of  Laish 

PHA-NTJ'-EL,  $o.vovt)X, 

An  Asherite,  mother  of  Anna  the  prophetess  who  came 
into  the  temple  when  Jesus  was  presented  there  by  his 
parents,  and  spoke  of  him  to  those  who  looked  for  re- 
demption in  Israel. 

Luke  2.  36  there  was  one  Anna,  .the  daughter  of  P. 
PHAPv'-AOH,  ny-13  gun. 
1.  A  king  of  Egypt  in  the  days  of  Abram.     B.C.  1896. 

Gen.  12. 15  The  princes  also  of  P.  saw  her,  and  com. 
12.  15  before  P. .  .the  woman  was  taken  into  P.'s 

12. 17  Lord  plagued  P.  and  his  house  with  great 

12. 18  P.  called  Abram,  and  said,  What  (is)  this 
12.  20  P.  commanded  (his)  men  concerning  him 

■2.  Another  king  of  Egypt,  in  the  days  of  Joseph.  B.C.  1725. 
Gen.  37.  36  anofficerof  r.'s,(and)captainof  the  guard 
-39.  1  an  officer  of  P.,  captain  of  the  guard 
40.  2  P.  was  wroth  against  two  (of)  his  officers 
40.  7  he  asked  P.'s  officers  that  (were)  with  him 
40. 11  P.'s  cup  (was)  in  my  hand :  and  I  took  the 
40. 11  into  P.'s  cup,  and  I  gave  the  cup  into  P.'s 
40. 13,  19  within  three  days  shall  P.  lift  up  thine 
40.  13  thou  shalt  deliver  P.'s  cup  into  his  hand 
40.  14  make  mention  of  me  unto  P., and  bring  me 
40.  17  (was)  of  all  manner  of  bake  meats  for  P. 
40.  20  the  third  day,  (which  was)  P.'s  birthday 

40.  21  and  he  gave  the  cup  into  P.'s  hand 

41.  1  P.  dreamed:  and,  behold,  he  stood  by  the 
41.  4  kinedid  eat  upthcfatkine.  So  P.  awoke 
41.    7  And  P.  awoke,  and,  behold,  (it  was)  a  dr. 

'41.   8  P.  told  them  his  dreams;  but  (there  was) 
41.    8  none  that  could  interpret  them  unto  P. 
41.   9  Then  spake  the  chief  butler  unto  P.,  say. 
41. 10  P.  was  wroth  with  his  servants,  and  put 
41.  14  P.  sent  and  called  Joseph,  and  they  bro. 
41.  14  changed  his  raiment,  and  came  in  unto  P. 
41.  15  P.  said  unto  Joseph,  I  have  dreamed  a  d. 
41. 16  Joseph  answered  P.,  saying,  (It  is)  not  hi 
41.  16  God  shall  give  P.  an  answer  of  peace 
41.  17  P.  said  unto  Joseph,  In  my  dream,  behold 
41.  25  P.,  The  dream  of  P.  (is)  one :  God  hath  sh. 
41.  28  (is)  the  thing  which  I  have  spoken  unto  P. 
41.  28  What  God  (is),  .to  do  he  showeth  unto  P. 
41.  32  for  that  the  dream  was  doubled  unto  P. 
41.  33  let  P.  look  out  a  man  discreet  and  wise 
41.  34  P.  do  (this),  and  let  him  appoint  officers 
41.  35  lay  up  corn  under  the  hand  of  P.,  and 
41.  37  the  thing  was  good  in  the  eyes  of  P.,  and 
41.  38  P.  saiduntnhis servants, Cauwefind (such 
41.  39  P.  said  unto  Joseph,  .ahere  is)  none  sod. 


Gen.  41.  41  P.  said  unto  Joseph,  See,  I  have  set  thee 
41.  42  P.  took  off  his  ring  from  his  baud,  and 
41.  44  P.  said  unto  Joseph,  I  (am)  P.,  and  with. 
41.45  P.  called  Joseph's  name  Zaphnath-paane. 
41.  46  And  Joseph,  .stood  before  P.  king  of  E. 

41.  46  Joseph  went  out  from  the  presence  of  P. 
41-  55  people  cried  to  P.  for  bread :  and  P.  said 

42.  15  By  the  life  of  P.  ye  shall  not  go  forth  he. 
42.  16  or  else,  by  the  life  of  P.  surely  ye  (are)  s. 

44.  18  not  thine  anger  burn.. thou  (art).. as  P. 

45.  2  the  Egyptians  and  the  house  of  P.  heard 
45.  8  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to  P.,  and  lord 
45.  16  fame,  .was  heard  in  P.'s  house,  .pleased  P. 
45.  17  P.  said  untuJoseph,  Say  unto  thy  brethren 

45.  21  according  to  the  commandment  of  P. 

46.  5  the  wagguns  which  P.  had  sent  to  cai'ry 
4^.  31  I  will  go  up,  and  show  P.,  and  say  unto 

46.  33  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  P.  shall  call 

47.  1  Then  Joseph  came  and  told  P.,  and  said 
47.    2  he  took  some . .  and  presentedthem  unto  P. 
47.   3  P.  said  unto  his  brethren,  What  (is)  your 
47.    3  they  said  unto  P.,  Thy  servants  (are)  she. 
47.    4  They  said,  moreover,  unto  P.,  For  to  soj. 
[j.   5  P.  spake  unto  Joseph,  saying,  Thy  father 
47.    7  set  him  before  P.:  and  Jacob  blessed  P. 
47.    8  And  P.  said  unto  Jacob,  How  old  (art)  t.? 
47.    9  Jacob  said  unto  P.,  The  days  of  the  years 
17.  10  blessed  P.,  and  went  out  from  before  P. 
47.  11  in  the  land  of  Rameses,  as  P.  had  comm. 
47. 14  Joseph  brought  the  money  into  P.'s  house 
47.  19  we  and  our  land,  .will  be  servants  unto  P. 
47.  20  Joseph  bought  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  P. 
47.  20  famine  prevailed,  .so  the  land  became  P.'s 
47.  22  priests  had  a  portion  (assigned  them)  of  P. 
47.  22  did  eat  their  portion  which  P.  gave  them 
47.  23  I  have  bought  you  this  day.  .for  P. :  lo 
47.  24  that  ye  shall  give  the  fifth  (part)  unto  P. 
47.  25  And  they  said,  .we  will  be  P.'s  servants 
47.  26  P.  should  have  the  fifth  (part);  except  the 
47.  26  land  of  the  priests  only,  .became  not  P.'s 
50.    4  Joseph  spake  unto  the  house  of  P.,  saying 
50.    4  speak,  I  pray  you,  in  the  ears  of  P.,  saying 
50.   6  P.  said,  Go  up  and  bury  thy  father,  ace. 
50.    7  with  him  went  up  all  the  servants  of  P. 

3.AthirdkingofEgypt,intheinfancyofMoses.  B.C.  1571. 
Exod  1.  11  they  built  for  P.  treasure  cities,  Pithom 
1.  19  the  midwives  said  unto  P.,  Because  the 

1.  22  P.  charged  all  his  people,  saying,  Every 

2.  5  And  the  daughter  of  P.  came  down  to  w. 
2.  7  Then  saidhis  sister  to  P.'s  daughter,  Shall 
2.  8  P.'s  daughter  said  to  her,  Go.  And  the  m. 
2.  9  P.'sdaughter  said  unto  her,  Take  this  eh. 

2. 10  child  grew,  and  she  brought  him  unto  P.'s 
Heb.  11.  24  Hoses,  .refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  P.'s 

4.  A  fourth  king  of  Egypt,  when  Hoses  was  grown  up. 
B.C.  1531. 

Exod.  2.  1 5  Now  when  P.  heard  this  thing,  he  sought 
2. 15  But  Moses  fled  from  the  face  of  P.,  and 

5.  A  fifth  king  of  Egypt,  who  was  reigning  when  Hoses 
returned.    B.C.  1491. 

Exod  3. 10  Come  now..andIwill  send  thee nnto  P.,  th. 

3. 11  Who  (am)  I.,  that  I  should  go  unto  P.,  and 
4.  21  see.,  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before  P. 

4.  22  thou  shalt  say  unto  P.,  Thus  saith  the  L. 

5.  1  Moses  and  Aaron  went  in,  and  told  P. 

5.  2  P.  said,  Who  (is)  the  Lord,  that  I  should 
5.  5  P.  said,  Behold,  the  people  of  the  land  n. 
5.  6  P.  commanded  the  same  day  the  taskma. 
5.  10  Thus  saith  P.,  I  will  not  give  you  straw 
5.  14  the  officers,  .which  P.'s  taskmasters  had 
5. 15  Then  the  officers,  .came  and  cried  unto  P. 
5.  20  Moses  and  Aaron . .  as  they  came  forth . .  P. 
5.  21  savour  to  be  abhorred  in  the  eyes  of  P. 

5.  23  For  since  I  came  to  P.  to  speak  in  thy  na. 

6.  1  Now  shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do  to  P. 
6.  11  Go  in,  speak  unto  P.  king  of  Egypt,  that 
6.  12  how  then  shall  P.  hear  me,  who  (am)  of 
6.  13  gave  them  a  charge .  .unto  P.  king  of  Eg. 
6.  27  These  (are)  they  which  spake  to  P.  king 
6.  29  speak  thou  unto  P.  kingof  Egypt  all  that 

6.  30  Behold,  .how  shall  P.  hearken  unto  me? 

7.  1  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  P.  ;  and 
7.  2  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  speak  unto  P.,th. 
7.  3  I  will  hearken  P.'s  heart,  aud  multiply 
7.  4  But  P.  shall  not  hearken  unto  you,  that  I 
7.  7  fourscore,  .when  they  spake  unto  P. 

7.    9  When  P.  shall  speak  unto  you,  saying,  S. 
7.  9  Take  thy  rod,  audcast  (it)  before  P.,  (and) 
7.  10  And  Moses  and  Aaron  went  in  unto  P.,  and 
7.  10  Aaron  cast  down  his  rod  before  P.,  aud 
7.  ti  P.  also  called  the  wise  men  and  the  v.  13. 

7. 14  P.'s  heart  (is)  hardened,  he  refuseth  to 

7. 15  Get  thee  unto  P.  in  the  morning ;  lo,  he 
7.  20  he  lifted  up  the  rod . .  in  the  sight  of  P.,  and 
7.  22  P.'s  heart  was  hardened,  neither  did  he 

7.  23  P.  turned  and  went  into  his  house,  neith. 

8.  1  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  Go  unto  P. 
8.    8  Then  P.  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron,  and 
8.    9  Mosessaid  unto  P.,  Glory  over  me  :  when 
8.  i2 Moses.  .Aaron  went  out  from  P.  :  and  M. 
8.  12  the  frogs  which  he  had  brought  against  P. 
8. 15  But  when  P.  saw  that  there  was  respite 
S.  19  Then  the  magicians  said  unto  P. ,  This  (is) 
8.  19  P.'s  heart  was  hardened,  and  he  hearke. 
8.  20  Rise  up  early . .  and  stand  before  P. ;  lo,  he 
8.  24  came,  .swarm  (of  flies)  into,  .house  of  P. 
8.  25  P.  called  for  Moses  and  for  Aaron,  and 
8.  28  P.  said,  I  will  let  you  go,  that  ye  may  sa. 
8.  29  the  swarms  (of  flies)  may  depart  from  P. 
8.  29  but  let  not  P.  deal  deceitfully  any  more 


Exod.  8.  30  Moses  went  out  from  P.  and  entreated 
8.  31  he  removed  the  swarms  (of  flies)  from  P. 

8.  32  P.  hardened  his  heart  at  this  time  also 

9.  1  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Go  in  unto  P. 
9.    7  P.  sent.  And  the  heart  of  P.  was  hard  v.  35 
9.   8  and  let  Moses  sprinkle,  .in  the  sight  of  P. 
9.  10  they  took  ashes . .  and  stood  before  P. ;  and 
9.  12  And  the  Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  P. 
9.  13  Rise  up  early,  .and  stand  before  P.,  and 
9.  20  He  that  feared . .  among  the  servants  of  P. 
9.  27  P.  sent,  and  called  for  Moses  aud  Aaron 
9.  33  Moses  went  out  of  the  city  from  P.,  and 
9.  34  P.  saw  that  the  rain  and  the  hail,  .were 

10.  1  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Go  in  unto  P. 
10.  3  Moses  and  Aaron  came  in  unto  P.,  and  s. 
10.  6  he  tui'ned  himself,  and  went  out  from  P. 
10.  7  P.'s  servants  said  unto  him,  How  long  sh. 
10.  8  Moses  and  Aaron  were  brought,  .unto  P. 
10. 11  And  they  were  driven  out  from  P.'s  pres. 
10. 16  Then  P.  called  for  Moses  "•nd  Aaron  in  h. 
10.  18  he  went  out  from  P.,  andeatreatedtheL. 
10. 20, 27  But  the  Lord  hardened  P.'s  heart,  soth. 
10. 24  P.  called  unto  Moses,  and  said,  Go  ye,  se. 

10.  28  And  P.  said  unto  him,  Get  thee  from  me 

11.  1  Yet.  .1  bring  one  plague  (more)  upon  P. 
11.    3  Moses(was)  very  great.. in.  .sight  of  P.'s 
ix.    5  the  firstborn  of  P.  that  sitteth  upon  his  t. 
11.    8  And  he  went  out  from  P.  in  a  great  anger 
11.    9  the  Lord  said.  .P.  shall  not  hearken  unto 

11.  10  before  P.:  and  the  Lord  hardened  P.'s  he. 

12.  29  first  born  of  P.  that  sat  on  his  throne 

12.  30  And  P.  rose  up  in  the  night,  he,  and  all 

13.  15  when  P.  would  hardly  let  us  go,  that  the 

13.  17  when  P.  had  let  the  people  go,  that  God 

14.  3  P.  will  say  of  the  childreu  of  Israel,  They 
14.  4  I  will  harden  P.'s  heart,  that  he  shall  fo. 
14.  4  I  will  behonoured  upon  P.,  and  upon  all 
14.  5  the  heart  of  P.  and  of  his  servants  was 
14.  8  the  Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  P.  king 
14.  9  horses  (and)  chariots  of  P.,  and  his  horse. 
14.  10  when  P.  drew  nigh,  the  children  of  Israel 
14.  17  I  will  get  me  honour  upon  P.,  and  upon 
14.  18  I  have  gotten  me  honour  upon  P.,  and  up. 
14.  23  P.'s  horses,  his  chariots,  and  his  horsemen 

14.  28  host  of  P.  that  came  into  the  sea  after 

15.  4  P.'s  chariots  and  his  host  hath  he  cast 
15.  19  the  horse  of  P.  went  in  with  his  chariots 
1 3.    ;  ^od.  .delivered  me  from  the  sword  of  P. 
18.    8  aju  that  the  Lord  had  done  unto  P.  and  to 
18.  10  hath  delivered  you . .  out  of  the  hand  of  P. 

Deut.  6.  21  We  were  P.'s  bondmen  in  Egypt;  and  the 

6.  22  upon  P.,  and  upon  all  his  household, before 

7.  8  redeemed,  .from  the  hand  of  P.  kingof  E. 
7.  18  remember  what  theLoRD  thy  God  did  unto 

11.   3  did  in  the  midst  of  Egypt  unto  P.  the  ki. 

29.  2  the  Lord  did.  .in  the  land  of  Egypt  unto 
34.  11  sent  him  to  do  in  the  land  of  Egypt  to  P. 

1  Sa.    2.  27  when  the"  were  in  Egypt,  in  P.'s  house  ? 

6.  6  the  Egyptiansand  P.  hardened  their  hea.? 

2  Ki.  17.  7  from  under  the  hand  of  P.,  king  of  Egypt 
Neh.  9.  10  shewedst  signs  and  wonders  upon  P.,  and 
Psa. 135.    9  tokens.,  upon  P.,  and  upon  all  his  servants 

136.  15  overthrew  P.  and  his  host  in  the  Red  sea 

Acts    7. 10  gave  him  favour,  .in  the  sight  of  P.  king 

7. 13  Joseph's  kindred  was  made  known  unto  P. 

7.  21  P.'s  daughter  took  him  up,  and  nourished 
Rom.  9.  17  For  the  scripture  saith  unto  P.,  Even  for 

G.  A  king  of  Egypt  in  the  days  of  Solomon.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.   3.    1  affinity  with  P.  king  of  Egypt,  and  took  P. 

7.    8  Solomon  made  also  an  house  for  P.'s  dan 
9.  16  (For)  P.  king  of  Egypt  had  gone  up  and 
9.  24  P.'s  daughter  came  up  out  of  the  city  of 
11.    1  together  with  the  daughter  of  P.,  women 
11. 18  they  came  to  Egypt,  unto  P.  king  of  Egy. 
11.  19  found  great  favour  in  the  sight  of  P. 
11.  20  his  son,  whom  Taphenes  weaned  in  P.'s  h. 
11.  20  was  iuP.'shouseholdamongthesonsof  P 
11.  21  Hadad  said  to  P.,  Let  me  depart,  that  I 
11.  22  P.  said  unto  him,  But  what  hast  thou  la. 

2  Ch.   8.  11  Solomon  brought  up  the  daughter  of  P. 
Song  1.    9  to  a  company  of  horses  in  P.'s  chariots 

7.  A  king  of  Egypt  in  the  days  of  Isaiah.    B.C.  720. 
Isa.  19. 11  wise  counsellors  of  P. .  .how  say  ye  to  P. 

30.  2  strengthen themselvesinthestrengthofP. 
30.  3  Therefore  shall  the  strength  of  P.  be  your 

36.  6  so  (is)  P.  king  of  Egypt  to  all  that  trust  in 
S.  Father  of  Bithiah  wife  of  Mered,  who  was  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  iS  the  sons  of  Bithiah  the  daughter  of  P. 
PHAR-AOH  HOPH'-RA,  n?D  n'y-iQ  priest  of  the  sun. 
A  king  of  Egypt  whose  overthrow  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
was   foretold    by    Jeremiah   the    prophet.    B.C.  570. 
Herodotus  reports  his  death  by  a  rival  king,  Amasis. 

Jer.  44.  30  I  will  give  P.  kingof  Egypt  into  the  hand 
PHAR-AOH  (ITECH-OH  or  NECHO),  1D3  or  njj  njrjg, 
A  king  of  Egypt,a  successor  of  Psammetichus,  who  fought 
against  Nabopolassar  king  of  Assyria,  slew  king  Josiab 
at  Megiddo,  bound  Jehoahaz  at  Riblah,  and  made 
Eliakim  his  brother  king  in  his  stead.     B.C.  610. 

2  Ki.  18.  21  so  (is)  P.  king  of  Egypt  unto  all  that  trust 

23. 29  P.  king  of  Egypt  went  up  against  the  ki 
23.  33  P.  put  him  in  bands  at  Riblah  in  the  land 
23.  34  P.  made  Eliakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  in 
23-  35  Jehoiakim  gave  the  silver  and.  .gold  to  P. 
23.  35  money  according  to.  .commandment  of  P. 
23.  35  according  to  his  taxation.. to  give.. untoP. 
Jer.  25.  19  P.  king  of  Egypt,  and  his  servants,  and  his 

37.  5  P.'s  army  was  come  forth  out  of  Egypt:  and 
37.   7  P.  's  army  which  is  come  forth  to  help  you 


PHAEBS 


750 


PHILISTINES 


Jer.  37.  11  army,  .was  broken  up..  forfeai'ofP.'sarmy 
43.   9  at  the  entry  of  P.'s  house  in  Tahpanhes 
46.    z  against  the  army  of  P.  king  of  Egypt  which 
46.  17  P.  king  of  Egypt  (is  but)  a  noise;  he  hath 
46.  25  and  P.,  and   Egypt,  with  their  gods,  and 

46.  25  even  P.,  and  (all)  them  that  trust  in  him 

47.  1  word . .  that  came . .  before  that  P.  smote  G. 
Eze.  17.  17  Neither  shall  P.  with  (his)  mighty  army 

29.  2  set  thy  face  against  P.  king  of  Egypt,  and 
29-    3  P.  king  of  Egypt,  the  great  dragon  that 

30.  21  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  P.  king  of  Egy. 
30.  22  I  (am)  against  P.  king  of  Egypt,  and  will 
30.  24  I  will  break  P.'s  arms,  and  he  shall  groan 

30.  25  the  arms  of  P.  shall  fall  down    and  they 

31.  2  Son.  .speak  unto  P.  king  of  Egypt,  and  to 

31.  18  This  (is)  P.  and  all  his  multitude,  saith 

32.  2  take  up  a  lamentation  for  P.  king  of  Egypt 
32.  31  P.  shall  see  them,  and  shall  be  comforted 
32.  31  P.  and  all  his  army  slain  by  the  sword 
32.  32  (even)  P.  and  all  his  multitude,  saith  the 

PHA'-RES,  tape's  breach  {from  Heb.  p?). 

Elder  son  of  Judah  by  Thamar,  and  father  of  Esrom. 

B.C.  1700.     See  also  the  following. 

Matt.  1.    3  Judas  begat  P..  .P.  begat  Esrom;  and 
Luke  3.  33  Esrom,  which  was  (the  son)  of  P.,  which 

PHA'-REZ,  PE'-REZ,  jns,  p?  breaking  forth. 
Elder  son  of  Judah  by  Tamar  his  daughter  iu  law,  and 
father  of  Hezron  and  Haniul.     B.C.  1700.     See  Perez. 
Gen.  38.  29  therefore  his  name  was  called  P. 

46.  12  And  the  sons  of  P.  were  Hezron  and  Ham. 
46.  12  Onan,  and  Shelah,  and  P.,  and  Zarah 
Nuni26.  20  of  P.,  the  family  of  the  Pharzites  :  of  Ze. 

26.  21  the  sons  of  P.  were;  of  Hezron,  the  fam. 
Ruth  4.  12  let  thy  house  be  like  the  house  of  P.,  wh. 

4.  18  these  (are)  the  generations  of  P.;  P.  begat 
1  Ch.  2.    4  Tamarhisdaughterinlawbare  him  P.  and 
2.    5  The  sons  of  P.;  Hezron,  and  Hamul 

4.  1  P.,  Hezron,  and  Carmi,  and  Hur,  and  Sh. 
9.    4  Bani,  of  the  children  of  P.  the  son  of  Judah 

Neh.  11.    4  son  of  Mahalaleel,  of  the  children  of  P. 
ti.    6  All  the  sons  of  P.  that  dweltat  Jerusalem 

PHA-RI-SEES,  bapiaaiai,  {from  Heb.  tths)  separate. 
The  largest  of  the  three  or  four  Jewish  sects  ;  noted  for 
their  self  conceit  and  loug  prayers;  paid  unnecessary 
tithes,  fasted  often,  made  broad  their  phylacteries, 
held  to  traditions,  &c. 

Matt.  3.    7  he  saw  many  of  the  P.  and  Sadducees  co. 

5.  20  (the  righteousness)  of  the  scribes  and  P. 
9.  11  And  when  the  P.  saw  (it),  they  said  unto 
9.  14  the  P.  fast  oft,  but  thy  disciples  fast  not 
9.  34  the  P.  said.  He  casteth  out  devils  through 

12.    2  But  when  the  P.  saw  (it),  they  said  unto 
12.  14  the  P.  went  out,  and  held  a  council  again. 
12.  24  when  the  P.  heard  (it),  they  said,  This  (f.) 
12.  38  [the  P.]  answered,  sayiug,  Master,  we  wo. 

15.  1  Then  came  to  Jesus  scribes  and  P.,  which 
15. 12  Knowest  thou  that  the  P.  were  offended 

16.  1  The  P.  also  with  the  Sadducees  came,  and 
16.  6,  11  leaven  of  the  P.  and  of  the  Sadducees 
16.  12  the  doctrine  of  the  P.  and  of  the  Sadduc. 
19.    3  The  P.  also  came  unto  him,  tempting  him 

21.  45  when  the  chief  priests  and  P.  had  heard 

22.  15  Then  went  the  P.,  and  took  counsel  how 
22.  34  P.  had  heard  that  he  had  put  the  Saddu. 

22.  41  While  the  P.  were  gathered  together,  Je. 

23.  2  The  scribes  and  the  P.  sit  in  Moses'  seat 
23.  13,  15,  23,  25,  27  woe  unto  you,  scribesand  P. 
23.  14  [Woe unto  you,  scribes  and  P.,  hypocrites] 
23.  26  (Thou)  blind  P.,  cleanse  first  that  (which 
23.  29  Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and  P.,  hypocrites ! 

27.  62  priests  and  P.  came  together  unto  Pilate 
Mark  2.  16  [P.]sawhim  eat  with  publicansandsinne. 

2.  18  disciples  of  John  and  [of. .P.]  used  to  fast 
2.  18  Why  do  the  disciples  of  John  and  of.  .P. 

2.  24  the  P.  said  unto  him,  Behold,  why  dothey 

3.  6  the  P.  went  forth,  and  straightway  took 
7.  1  Then  came  together  unto  him  the  P.,  and 
7.    3  the  P.,  and  all'  the  Jews,  except  they  wash 

7.  5  the  P.  and  scribes  asked  him,  Why 

8.  11  the  P.  came  forth,  and  began  to  question 
8.  15  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  P.,  and  (of)  the 

io.    2  the  P.  came  to  him.  and  asked  him,  Is  it 
12.  13  certain  of  the  P.  and  of  the  Herodians 
Luke  5.  17  there  were  P.  and  doctors  of  the  law 

5.  21  the  P.  began  to  reason,  saying,  Who  is 
5.  30  P.  murmured  against  his  disciples,  saying 

5.  33  and  likewise  (the  disciples)  of  the  P. 

6.  2  the  P.  said  unto  them,  Why  do  ye  that  w. 

6.  7  the  scribes  and  P.  watched  him,  whether 

7.  30  the  P.  and  lawyers  rejected  the  counsel 
7.  36  one  of  the  P.  desired  him  that  he  would 
7.  36  he  went  into  the  P.'s  house,  and  sat  down 
7.  37  that  (Jesus)  sat  at  meat  in  the  P.'s  house 
7.  39  when  the  P.  which  had  hidden  him  saw 

11  37  a  certain  P.  brought  him  to  dine  with  h. 
11.  38  when  the  P.  saw  (it),  lie  marvelled  that  he 
11.  39  ye  P.  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup 
11.  42  But  woe  unto  you,  P.!  foryetithemint 
11.  43  Woe  unto  you,  P.l  for  ye  love  the  upper. 
11.  44  [Woe  nntoyou,  scribes  and  P.,  hypocrites] 

11.  53  the  scribesand  the  P.  began  to  urge  (him; 

12.  1  Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the -P.,  which 

13.  31  The  same  day  there  came  certain  of  the  !'. 

14.  1  went  into  the  bouse  of  one  of  the  chief  P. 

14.  3  Jesus  answering  spake  unto  the.  .P.,  say. 

15.  2  the  P.  andscribesmurmured,  saying,  This 

16.  14  the  P.  also,  .heard  all  these  things :  and 

17.  20  when  he  was  demanded  of  the  P.,  wheu 

18.  xn  the  one  a  P.,  and  the  other  a  publican 


LukeiS.  11  The  P.  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  hims. 

19.  39  some  of  the  r. .  .said  unto  him,  Master 
John  1.  24  And  they  which  were  sent  were  of  the  P. 

3.  1  There  was  a  man  of  the  P.,  named  Nico, 

4.  1  the  Lord  knew  how  the  P.  had  heard  that 
7.  32  The  P.  heard  that  the  people  murmured 
7.  32  the  P.  and  the  chief  priests  sent  officers 
7.  45  Then  came  the  officers  to  the.  .P.;  and 
7.  47  Then  answered  them  the  P.,  Are  ye  also 

7.  4S  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  P.  belie. 

8.  3  [the  scribes  and  P.  brought  unto  him  a  w.  ] 

8.  13  The  P.  therefore  said  unto  him,  Thou  b. 

9.  13  They  brought  to  the  P.  him  that,  .was  Id. 
9.  15  Then  again  the  P.  also  asked  him  how  he 
9.  16  Therefore  said  some  of  the  P.,  This  man 
9.  40  (some)  of  the  P. . .  heard  these  words,  and 

11.46  some  of  them  went  their  ways  to  the  P. 
11.  47  Then  gathered  the.  .P.  a  council,  and  said 

11.  57  Now.  .the  P.  had  given  a  commandment 
12. 19  The  P.  therefore  said  among  themselves 

12.  42  because  of  the  P.  they  did  not  confess 
18.    3  officers  from  the  chief  priests  and  P.,  co. 

Acts   5.  34  stood  there  up  one  in  the  council,  a  P. 
15.    5  there  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of  the  P. 
23.    6  perceived  that  the  one  part  were.  .[P.] 
23.    6  lam  aP.,  [the son  of  a  P.]:  of  the  hope  and 
23.    7  there  arose  a  dissension  between  the  P. 
23.    8  neither  angel,  nor  spirit ;  but  the  P.  con. 
23.    9  the  scribes  (that  were)  of  the  P.s'  part 
26.    5  after  the.  .straitest  sect.  .1  lived  a  P. 

Phil.  3.    5  Circumcised,  .as  touching  the  law,  a  P. 

PHAR'-PAR,  -13-iS  swift. 

The  river  el-Sibarani,  flowing  from  Hermon  past  Da- 
mascus, or  the  little  one  at  el-Faigah  which  falls  into 
the  Barada;  or  the  Aioaj  from  eastern  Hermon,  and 
now  called  Barber. 

2  Ki.  5.  12  (Are)  not  Abana  and  P. .  .better  than  all 

PHAR-ZITES,  ^-)2n  the  Partsi. 
The  family  of  Pharez  son  of  Judah. 

Nuni26.  20  of  Pharez,  the  family  of  the  P.:  of  Zerah 
PHE'-BE,  $oi$T). 

A  female  minister  in  Corinth  or  Cenchrea,  who  had 
helped  Paul,  and  going  to  Rome,  was  recommended  by 
Paul. 

Rom  16.    1  I  commend  unto  you  P.  our  sister,  which 
PHE-NICE,  &o7vi{. 
A  harbour  on  the  S.  of  Crete. 

Acts  27.  12  if  by  any  means  they  might  attain  to  P. 

PHE-NICE,  PHE-NT'-CIA,  ^oivticf]. 
The  E.  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  commencing  at  the 
promontory  of  Carmel,  and  stretching  120  miles  north- 
ward, with  an  average  breadth  of  20  miles ;  Tyre 
and  Sidou  were  its  chief  cities.  It  was  originally 
peopled  by  the  sons  of  Anak,  B.C.  2800 ;  Agenor  was  its 
first  king,  149  ;  in  878  it  sent  forth  a  colony,  led  by 
Elissa  or  Dido,  to  Africa,  which  founded  Carthage ;  in 
721  it  was  invaded  by  Shalmanezer ;  in  587  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar; in  536  by  Lyrus;  in  466  the  Phoenicians 
were  totally  defeated  by  Cimon  at  the  naval  battle  of 
Eurymeclon  ;  in  352  they  revolted  from  Persia ;  in  331 
they  wex-e  subdued  by  Alexander ;  in  323  the  country 
was  annexed  to  Egypt;  in  315  it  was  seized  by  Anti- 
gonus  of  Phrygia  ;  in  83  it  passed  to  Tigranes  king  of 
Armenia;  in  62  it  became  part  of  the  Roman  province 
of  Syria ;  in  20  it  was  deprived  by  Augustus  of  all  its 
liberties.  It  was  annexed  to  Turkey  in  A.D.  1516. 
Acts  11. 19  Now  they,  .travelled  as  far  as  P.,  and  C. 
15.  3  they  passed  through  P.  and  Samaria,  de. 
21.    2  finding  a  ship  sailing  over  unto  P.,  we  we. 

PHI'-BE-SETH,  npn"?  the  cat  goddess  Basht. 

A  capital  city  in  Lower  Egypt,  called  also  Bubastis,  on 

the  E.  of  Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile. 

Eze.  30.  17  The  young  men  of  Aven  and  of  P.  shall 
PHIC'-HOL,  Sirs  great,  strong,  tamarisk. 
Chief  captain  of  Abimelech  king  of  the  Philistines  in 
the  days  of  Abraham.    B.C.  1880. 

Gen.  21.  22  Abimelech  and  P.  the  chief  captain,  .spa. 
21.  32  then  Abimelech  rose  up,  and  P.  the  chief 
26.  26  Abimelech  went,  .and  P.  the  chief  captain 

PHTL-A-DELPH'-IA,  *iAcc8eA4>e£a. 
The  second  city  of  Lydia  in  the  W.  of  Asia  Minor, 
26  miles  S.E.  of  Sardis,  and  70  N.E.  of  Smyrna; 
it  was  founded  by  Attalus  Philadelphus  king  of  Per- 
gamos  ;  in  A.D.  17  it  was  almost  destroyed  by  an  earth- 
quake; it  was  taken  by  Bazazet  I.  in  A.D.  1390",  it  is 
BOW  called  Allah  shair,  "city  of  God,"  and  still  con- 
tains ahout  15,000  inhabitants,  and  the  ruins  of  many 
ancient  churches. 

Rev.    1.  11  unto  Sardis,  and  untn  P.,  and  unto  Laod. 
3.    7  And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  P.  write 

PHTX-E'-MON,  4>t\7ificav. 

A  person  in  Colosse  to  whom  Paul  addressed  a  letter  in 

behalf  of  his  spiritual  son  Onesinms. 

Thm.        1  Paul,  .unto  P.  our  dearly  beloved,  and  f. 
PHLL-E'-TTJS,  &i\t}tos. 

A  person  condemned  (along  with  one  Hymeneus)  by 
Paul  for  error  regarding  the  resurrection. 

2  Ti.    2.  17  of  whom  is  Hymeneus  and  P. 

PHTL'-IP,  *(Ai7T7ros  a  lover  of  horses. 

1.  One  of  the  twelve  apostles,  from  Bethsaida. 

Matt  10.    3  P.,  and  Bartholomew;  Thomas,  and  Ma. 

Mark  3.  [8  P.,  and  Bartholomew,  and  Matthew,  and 


Luke  6.  14  Andrew.  .James  and  John,  P.  and  Barth. 

John  1.  43  tindethP.,and  saith  unto  him, Follow  me 
1.  44  P.  was  off  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew 
1.  45  P.  findeth  Nathanael,  and  saith  unto  him 
1.  46  P.  saith  unto  him,  Come  and  see 
1 .  48  Before  that  P.  called  thee,  when  thou  wast 
6.  5  he  saith  unto  P.,  Whence  shall  we  buy  b. 
6.  7  P.  answered  him.  Two  hundred  penny  w. 
12.  21  The  same  came  therefore  to  P.,  which  was 
12.  22  P.  cometh  and  telleth  Andrew 

12.  22  and  again  Andrew  and  P.  tell  Jesus 

14.    8  P.  saith  unto  him.  Lord,  show  us  the  Fa. 

14.    9  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  P.? 

Acts    1.  13  P.,  and  Thomas,  Bartholomew,  and  Mat. 

2.  A  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  and  husband  of  Hero- 
dias. 

Matt.14.  3  forHerodias'ssake,hisbrother[P.'s]  wife 
Mark  6.  17  for  Herodias'  sake,  his  brother  P.'s  wife 
Luke  3.  19  for  Herodias  his  brother  [P.'s]  wife,  and 

3.  Another  son  who  was  tetrarch  of  Iturea. 

Luke  3.    1  his  brother  P.  tetrarch  of  Ituraea  and  of 

4.  One  of  the  seven  chosen  to  serve  tables ;  he  also 
preached  and  baptized. 

Acts  6.  5  P.,  and  Prochorus,  ami  Nicanor,  and  Ti. 
8.  5  P.  went  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria,  and 
8.  6  gave  heed  unto  those  tilings  which  P.  spa. 
8.  12  when  they  believed  P.  preaching  the  th. 
8.  13  he  continued  with  P.,  and  wondered 
8.  26  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto  P.,  say. 
8.  29  the  Spirit  said  unto  P.,  Go  near,  and  join 
8.  30  P.  ran  thither  to  (him),  and  heard  him  read 
8.  31  he  desired  P.  that  he  would  come  up  and 
8.  34  the  eunuch  answered  P.,  and  said,  I  pray 
8.  35  P.  opened  his  mouth,  and  began  at  thes. 
8.  37  [P.  said,  If  thou  believest  with  all  thine] 
8.  38  both  into  the  water,  both  P.  and  the  eu. 
8.  39  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  P. 
8.  40  P.  was  found  at  Azotus:  and  passing  th. 
21.  8  entered  into,  .house  of  P.  the  evangelist 
PHIL-rp'-PI,  <bi\nnvot. 

A  chief  city  iu  proconsular  Macedonia,  E.  of  Amphi- 
polis  in  ancient  Thrace,  and  about  seventy  miles  N.E. 
of  Thessalonica ;  once  called  Krenides;  fortified  by 
Philip  father  of  Alexander  the  Great,  it  received  his 
name;  near  it  were  mines  of  gold,  silver  &c. ;  Brutus 
and  Cassius  were  here  defeated ;  it  is  now  in  ruins ;  in 
Matt.  16.  13  and  Mark  8.  27  it  is  used  as  an  adjunct  to 
C&sarea,  N.  of  Palestine,  near  the  sources  of  the  Jor- 
dan. 

Acts  16.  12  from  thence  to  P.,  which  is  the  chief  city 

20.  6  we  sailed  away  from  P.  after  the  days  of 
Phil.  1.  1  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are  at  P. 
1  Th.  2.    2  were  shamefully  entreated  as  ye  know  at  P 

PHI-LLP-PIANS,  3>iAnnr-f}o-iot. 

The  (believing)  inhabitants  of  Philippi  in  Macedonia, 

whom  Paul  addresses  in  his  Epistle. 

Phil.   4. 15  ye  P.,  know  also,  that  in  the  beginning  of 

PHI-LIST'-IA,  ni^s  migration. 

The  sea  coast  on  the  west  of  Dan  and  Simeon  ;  from  a 
little  N.  of  Joppa  to  a  little  S.  of  Gaza,  or  about  forty 
miles  long  by  ten  or  twenty  broad ;  its  chief  cities  were 
Ekron,  Ashdod,  Askelon,  Gaza,  and  Gath,  to  which  may 
be  added  Gerar. 

Psa.  60.    8  P.,  triumph  thou  because  of  me 

87.    4  behold  P.,  and  Tyre,  with  Ethiopia ;  this 
108.    9  Moab  (is)  my  washpot.  .over  P.  will  I  tr. 

PHI-LIST-IM,  DPi^V?. 

The  descendants  of  Casluhim  the  sixth  son  of  Mizraim, 
who  migrated  from  Egypt  northward  to  Canaan  keeping 
by  the  sea  coast. 

Gen.  10. 14  Casluhim,  out  of  whom  came  P.,  and  Ca. 

PHT-LIS-TINES,  D'B^1??. 

The  same  as  the  above!.    Pompey  incorporated  then- 
country  into  the  Roman  province  of  Syria,  B.C.  62. 
Gen.  21.  32  and  they  returned  into  the  land  of  the  P. 

21.  34  Abraham  sojourned  in  the  P.'s  land  many 
26.  1  Isaac  went  unto  Abimelech  king  of  the  P. 
26.  8  king  of  the  P.  looked  out  at  a  window,  and 
26.  14  store  of  servants :  and  the  P.  envied  him 
26.  15  the  P.  had  stopped  them,  and  filled  them 
26.  18  the  P.  had  stopped  them  after  the  death 

Exodi3.  17  not  (through)  the  way  of  thelandof  the  P. 

23.  31  the  Red  sea  even  unto  the  sea  of  the  P. 
J0SI113.    2  all  the  borders  of  the  P.,  and  all  Geshuri 

13.  3  five  lords  of  the  P.  ;  the  Gazathites,  and 
Judg.  3.    3  five  lords  of  the  P.,  and  alltheCanaanitcs 

3.  31  which  slew  of  the  P.  six  hundred  men  w. 
10.  6  served,  .and  the  gnds  of  the  P.,  and  fors. 
10.  7  he  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  the  P.,  and 
10.  11  from  the  children  of  Amnion,  .from  the  P.? 
13.    1  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  the  P. 

13.  5  deliver  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the  1'. 

14.  1,  2  woman  in  Tim.  of.  .daughters of  the  P. 
14.    3  to  take  a  wife  of  the  uncircumcised  P.  ? 
14.   4  he  sought  an  occasion  against  the  P. 

14.  4  that  time  the  P.  had  dominion  over  Israel 

15.  3  Now  shall  I  be  more  blameless  than  the  P. 
15.  5  let(them)gointo.  .standing corn  of  the  P. 
15.  6  the  P.  said,  Who  hath  done  this?  And  th. 
15.  6  P.  came  up,  andburnt  her  and  her  father 
15.  9  the  P.  went  up,  and  pitched  in  Judah,  and 
15.  11  Knowest  thou  not.  .P.  (are)rulers  over  us? 
15.  12  may  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  the  P. 
15.  14  the  P.  shouted  against  him:  and  the  spi. 

15.  20  he  judged  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  P. 

16.  5,  18  the  lords  of  the  P.  came  up  unto  her 


PHILISTINES 


751 


PHYGELLUS 


Judgifi.    8  the  lords  of  the  P.  brought  up  to  her 

16.  g,i2, 14, 20  said  unto  him,  The  P.  (be)  upon  th. 
16.  iS  called  for  the  lords  of  the  P. ,  saying,  Come 
16.  21  the  P.  took  him,  and  put  out  his  eyes,  and 
16.  23  the  lords  of  the  P.  gathered  them  together 
16.  27  the  lords  of  the  P.  (were)  there;  and  (t.) 
16.  28  I  may  be  at  ouce  avenged  of  the  P.  for  my 
16.  30  Samson  said,  Let  me  die  with  the  P.  And 

1  Sa.  4.    1  Israel  went  out  against  the  P.  to  battle 
a.    i  Ebenezer:  and  the  P.  pitched  in  Aphek 
2  P.  put  themselves  in  array  against  Israel 

2  Israel  was  smitten  before  the  P. :  and  th. 

3  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us.  .before the  P.? 

6  when  the  P.  heard  the  noise  of  the  shout 

7  the  P.  were  afraid  :  for  they  said,  God  is 
9  quit  yourselves  like  men,  O  ye  P. !  that  ye 

10  the  P.  fought,  and  Israel  was  smitten,  and 
17  Israel  is  fled  before  the  P.,  and  there 
1,  2  the  P.  took  the  ark  of  God,  and  brought 

8  gathered  all  the  lords  of  the  P.  unto  them 
1  gathered  together  all  the  lords  of  the  P. 
1  was  in  the  country  of  the  P.  seven  months 

6.  2  P.  called  for  the  priests  and  the  diviners 
6.  4  (according  to) .  .number  of  the  lords  of.  .P. 
6.  12  the  lords  of  the  P.  went  after  them  unto 
6.  16  when  the  five  lords  of  the  P.  had  seen  (it) 
6.  17  the  golden  emerods  which  the  P.  returned 
6. 18  citiesofthe  P.  (belonging)  to  the  five  lords 

6.  21  The  P.  have  brought  again  the  ark  of  the 
3  will  deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 
7  the  P.  heard  that  the  children  of  Israel 
7  the  lords  of  the  P.  went  up  against  Israel 

7  when  thechildrenof  Israel  heard  (it,) they 

8  he  will  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 
10  the  P.  drew  near  to  battle  against  Israel 

10  a  great  thunder  on  that  day  upon  the  P. 

11  pursued  the  P.,  and  smote  them,  until 

7.  13  the  P.  were  subdued,  and  they  came  no 
7. 13  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  the  P. 
7.  14  the  cities  which  the  P.  had  taken  from 
7.  14  Israel  deliver  out  of  the  hands  of  the  P. 
9.  16  save  my  people  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 

5  the  hill,  .where  (is)  the  garrison  of  the  P. 

9  into  the  hand  of  the  P.,  and  into  the  hand 

3  garrison  of  the  P. . .  in  Geba ;  and  the  P.  h. 

4  Saul  had  smitten  a  garrison  of  the  P.,  and 

4  I. .  .was  had  in  abomination  with  the  P. 

5  the  P.  gathered  themselves  together  to 
3.  11  the  P.  gathered  themselves  together  at 
3.  12  P.  will  come  down  now  upon  me  toGilgal 
3.  16  but  the  P.  encamped  in  Michmash 
3. 17  spoilers  came  out  of  the  camp  of  the  P. 
3.  19  the  P.  said,  Lest  the  Hebrews  make  (them) 
3.  20  all  the  Israelites  went  down  to  the  P.,  to 

3.  23  And  the  garrison  of  the  P.  went  out  to  the 

4.  1  Come,  and  let  us  go  over  to  the  Ps.'  garr. 
4.   4  Jonathan  sought  to  go  over  unto  the  Ps.' 
4.  11  both.,  discovered  themselves  unto.,  the  P. 
4.  ii  the  P.  said,  Behold,  the  Hebrews  come  f. 
4.  19  noise  that  (was)  inthe  liostof  the  P.  went 
:4.  21  Moreover  the  Hebrews,  .were  with  the  P. 
4.  22  (when)  they  heard  that  the  P.  fled,  even 
4.  30  a  much  greater  slaughter  among  the  P.? 
4.  31  they  smote  the  P.  that  day  from  Michm. 
4.  36  Let  us  go  down  after  the  P.  by  night,  and 
4.  37  Shall  I  go  down  after  the  P.?  wilt  thou  de. 
4.  46  Then  Saul  went  up  from  following  the  P. 
4.  46  and  the  P.  went  to  their  own  place 
4.  47  So  Saul.. fought,  .against  the  P.  and 
4.  52  there  was  sore  war  against  the  P.  all  the 
7.   1  Now  the  P.  gathered  together  their  arm. 
7.    2  and  set  the  battle  in  array  against  the  P. 
7.    3  the  P.  stood  on  a  mountain  on  the  one  s. 
7.   4  there  went  out  a  champion,  .of  the  P.,  n. 
7.   8  (am)  not  I  a  P.,  and  ye  servants  to  Saul  ? 
7.  10  the  P.  said,  I  defy  the  armies  of  Israel 
7.  11  all  Israel  heard  those  words  of  the  P. 
7.  16  the  P.  drew  near  morning  and  evening,  a. 
7.  19  Saul,  and  they.. (were).. fighting  with  the  P. 
7.  21  Israel  and  the  P.  had  put  the  battlein  ar. 
7.  23  there  came  up  the  champion  the  P.  of  G. 
7.  23  Goliath,  .out  of  the  armies  of  the  P.,  and 
7.  26  be  done  to  the  man  that  killeth  this  P. 
7.  26  for  who  (is)  this  uncircumcised  P.,  that 
7. 32  thy  servant  will  go  and  fight  with  this  P. 
7.  33  Thou  art  not  able  to  go  against  this  P.  to 
7.  36  this  uncircumcised  P.  shall  be  as  one  of 
7.  37  will  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  this  P. 
7-  40  in  his  hand :  and  he  drew  near  to  the  P. 
7.  41  the  P.  came  on  and  drew  near  unto  David 
7.42  when  the  P.  looked  about,  and  saw  David 
7.  43  the  P.  said  unto  David. .  And  the  P.  cursed 
7.  44  the  P.  said  to  David,  Come  to  me,  and  I 
7. 45  Then  said  David  to  the  P.,  Thou  comest 
7.  46  I  will  give  the  carcases  of.  .the  P. .  .unto 
7.  48  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  P.  arose,  and 
7.  48  D. . .  ran  toward  the  army  to  meet  the  P. 
7.  49  David . .  smote  the  P.  in  his  forehead,  that 
7.  50  So  David  prevailed  over  the  P.  with  a  si. 
7.  50  smote  the  P.,  and  slew  him  ;  but  (there 
7.  51  David  ran,  and  stood  upon  the  P.,  and  to. 
7.  51  when  the  P.  saw  their  champion  was  de. 
7.  52  men  of  Israel,  .pursued  the  P.,  until  tho. 
7.  52  the  wounded  of  the  P.  fell  down  by  the 
7.  53  Israel  returned  from  chasing  after  the  P. 
7.  54  David  took  the  head  of  the  P.,  and  brou. 
7.  55  Said  saw  David  go  forth  against  the  P. 
7.  57  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  P.,  A. 

7.  57  before  Saul,  with  the  head  of  the  P.  in  his 

8.  6  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  P.,th. 
8.  17  Saul  said,  .let  the  hand  of  the  P.  be  upon 
8.  21  that  the  hand  of  the  P.  may  be  against  h. 


25  desireth.  .an  hundred  foreskins  of  the  P. 
25  to  make  David  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  P. 
27  David,  .slew  of  the  P.  two  hundred  men 
30  Then  the  princesof  the  P.  went  forth:  and 

5  for  he.,  slew  the  P.,  and  the  Lord  wroug. 
S  David  went  out  and  fought  with  the  P. 
9  The  sword  of  Goliath  the  P. .  .(is  here)  w. 

10  he.  .gave  him  the  s"word  of  Goliath  the  P. 

1  the  P.  fight  against  Keilah,  and  they  rob 

2  saying,  Shall  I  go  and  smite  these  P.?  And 

2  Go  and  smite  the  P.,  and  save  Keilah 

3  if  we  come . .  against  the  armies  of  the  P.  ? 

4  for  I  will  deliver  the  P.  into  thine  hand 

5  So  David  and  Ins  men.  .fought  with  the  P. 

27  come ;  for  the  P.  have  invaded  the  land 

28  Saul  returned,  .and  went  against  the  P. 
1  Saul  was  returned  from  following  the  P. 
1  speedily  escape  into  the  land  of  the  P.;  and 
7  when  David  dwelt  in  the  country  of  the  P. 

11  while  he  dwelleth  in  the  country  oftheP. 
1  the  P.  gathered  their  armies  together  for 

4  the  P.  gathered  themselves  together,  and 

5  when  Saul  saw  the  host  of  the  P.,  he  was 

15  the  P.  make  war  against  me,  and  God  is 
19,  19  deliver  Israel. into  the  hand  of  the  P. 

1  the  P.  gathered  together  all  their  armies 

2  lords  of  the  P.  passed  on  by  hundreds  and 

3  Then  said  the  princes  of  the  P.,  What(do) 

3  Achish  said  unto  the  princes  of  the  P. 
4.  the  princes  of  the  P.  were  wroth  with  him 

4  princes  of  the  P.  said  unto  him,  Hake  th. 
7  that  +1iou  displease  not  the  lords  of  the  P. 
9  notwithstanding  the  princes  of  the  P.  h. 

11  return  into  the  land  of  the  P.:  and  the  P. 

16  they  had  taken  out  of  the  land  of  the  P. 
1  Nowthe  P.  fought  against  Israel :  and  the 

1  fled  from  before  the  P.,  and  fell  down  si. 

2  the  7.  f    lowed  hard,  .and  the  P.  slew  J. 

7  fl'*'1 ;  and  e  P.  came  and  dwelt  in  them 
31.  8  when  the  P.  came  to  strip  the  slain,  that 
31.  9  sent  into  the  laud  of  the  P.  round  about 
31.  11  heard  of  that  which  the  P.  had  done  to 

>  Sa.    1.  20  lest  the  daughters  of  the  P.  rejoice,  lest 

14  to  me  for  an  hundred  foreskins  of  the  P. 
18  people  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 

17  the  P.  heard  that  they  had  anointed  Dav. 

17  the  P.  came  up  to  seek  David  ;  and  David 

18  The  P.  also  came  and  spread  themselves 

19  Shall  I  go  up  to  the  P. !  wilt  thou  deliver 
19  doubtless  deliver  the  P.  into  thine  hand 
22  P.  came  up  yet  again,  and  spread  thems. 
24  LORD  go  out.  .to  smite  the  host  of  the  P. 

5.  25  smote  the  P.  from  Geba  until  thou  come 
8.    1  David  smote  the  P.,  and  subdued  them 
8.    1  Metheg-ammah  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 
8. 12  of  the  P.,  and  of  Amalek,  and  of  the  spoil 
19.   9  he  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 

21. 12  the  P.  had  hanged  them,  when  the  P.  had 
21. 15  the  P.  had  yet  war  again  with  Israel ;  and 
21. 15  David,  .fought  against  the  P.  :  and  David 
21.  17  smote  the  P.,  and  killed  him.  Then  the 
21.  18,  19  was  again  a  battle  with  the  P.  at  Gob 
23.  9  defied  the  P.  (that)  were  there  gathered 
23.  10  smote  the  P.,  until  his  hand  was  weary,and 
23. 11  the  P.  were  gathered  together  into  a  troop 
23.  11  and  the  people  fled  from  the  P. 

2  7.  12  he  stood . .  and  defended  it,  and  slew  the  P. 
23.  13  troop  of  the  P.  pitched  in  the  valley  of 
23.  14  garrison  of  the  P.  (was)  then  (in)Beth-le. 
23.  16  mighty  men  brake,  .the  host  of  the  P. 

1  Ki.  4.  21  from  the  river  unto  the  land  of  the  P. 

15.  27  at  Gibbethon,  which  (belonged)  to  the  P. 
16. 15  Gibbethon,  which  (belonged)  to  the  P. 

2  Ki.  S.    2  sojourned  in  the  land  of  the  P.  seven  ye. 

8.   3  woman  returned  out  of  the  land  of  the  P. 
18.   8  He  smote  the  P.,  (even)  unto  Gaza,  and 
1  Ch.  1. 12  Casluhim,  of  whom  came  the  P.,  and  Cap. 
10.    1  the  P.  fought  against  Israel ;  and  the  in. 
10.    1  Israel  fled  from  before  the  P.,  and  fell 
10.    2  the  P.  followed  hard  after  Saul,  and  after 
10.    2  P.  slew  Jonathan,  and  Abinadab,  and  M. 
10.    7  and  the  P.  came  and  dwelt  in  them 
10.   8  when  the  P.  came  to  strip  the  slain,  that 

10.  g  sent  into  the  land  of  the  P.  round  about 
10. 11  heard  all  that  the  P.  had  done  to  Saul 

11. 13  the  P.  were  gathered  together  to  battle 

11.  13  and  the  people  fled  from  before  the  P. 

11. 14  slew  the  P. ;  and  the  Lord  saved  (them)  by 

11. 15  theP.  encamped  in  the  valley  of  Rephaini 
11.  16  the  P.s'  garrison  (was)  then  atBeth-lehem 
11.  18  tlrree  brake  through  the  host  of  the  P. 
12. 19  he  came  with  the  P.  against  Saul  to  battle 
12. 19  the  lords  of  the  P.  upon  advisement  sent 

8  the  P.  heard  that  David  was  anointed  k. 

8  the  P.  went  up  to  seek  David :  and  David 

9  the  P.  came  and  spread  themselves  in  the 

10  Shall  Igo  up  against  the  P.?  and  wilt  thou 
13  the  P.  yet  again  spread  themselves  abroad 

15  God  is  gone . .  to  smite  the  host  of  the  P. 

16  they  smote  the  host  of  the  P.  from  Gibeon 
1  David  smote  the  P.,  and  subdued  them 
1  and  her  towns  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 

n  the  children  of  Amnion,  and  from  the  P. 

4  there  arose  war  at  Gezer  with  the  P. ;  at 

5  there  was  war  again  with  the  P.  ;  and  E. 

26  from  the  river  even  unto  the  land  of  the  P. 

11  the  P.  brought  Jehoshaphat  presents,  and 

21. 16  Lord  stirred  up.  .the  spirit  of  the  P. 
26.    6  warredagainsttheP.,andbrakedown  the 
26.    6  built  cities  about  Ashdod,  and  among . .  P. 
26.   7  GodhelpedhimagainsttheP.,  and  against 
28.  18  The  P.  also  had  invaded  the  cities  of  the 


2  Ch.  9. 
17- 


Tsa.  56.  title  Michtam.  .when  the  P.  took  him  in  G. 

83.    7  Amalek  ;  the  P.  with  the  inhabitants  of 
Isa.     2.    6  (are)  soothsayers  like  the  P.,  and  they 

9.  12  The  Syrians  before,  and  the  P.  behind;  and 

11.  14  they  shall  fly  upon  theshoulders  of  the  P. 
Jer.   25.  20  kings  of  the  land  of  the  P.,  and  Ashkelon 

47.    1  word  of  the  Lord.  .came,  .against  the  P. 

47.    4  the  day  that  cometh  to  spoil  all  the  P. 

47.   4  the  Lord  will  spoil  the  P.,  the  remnantof 
Eze.  16.  27  the  daughter  of  the  P.,  which  are  ashamed 

16.  57  the  daughters  of  the  P.,  which  despise 

25.  15  P.  have  dealt  by  revenge,  and  have  taken 

25. 16  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  the  P. 
Amos  1.  8  the  remnant  of  the  P.  shall  perish,  saith 
6.  2  go  down  to  Gath  of  the  P. :  (be  they)  bet. 
9.  7  P.  from  Caphtor,  and  the  Syrians  from  K.  ? 
Obad.  ig  (they  of)  the  plain  the  P. :  and  they  shall 
Zeph.  2.  5  the  laud  of  the  P.,  I  will  even  destroy  thee 
Zech.  9.   6  and  I  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  P. 

PEIL-LO-LO'-GTJS,  $t\o\oyo$  a  lover  of  words. 
A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom.  16. 15  Salute  P.,  and  Julia,  Xereus,  and  his  sis. 
PHILOSOPHER  — 
A  lonrr  of  xvisdom,  <pi\o<r6<po,i  j^^osopkoe. 

Acts  17.  18  Then  certain  philosophers  of  the  Epicur. 
PHILOSOPHY  — 
Love  of  wisdom,  <pi\o<ro<pia  %)hilosophia. 

Col.  2.  8  spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain  d. 
PHI-NE'-HAS,  Dn:*3  orach. 

l.A  son  of  Eleazar,  one  of  Aaron's  sons,  who  slew  Zimri 
and  Cozbi.    B.C.  1452. 

Exod  6.  25  and  she  bare  him  P.:  these  (arc)  the  heads 

Nuni25.  7  when  P...saw(it),  he  rose  up  from  among 
"25. 11  P. .  .hath  turned  my  wrath  away  from  the 
31.   6  Moses  sent  them  to  the  war.  .them  and  P. 

Josh. 22. 13,  31,  32  P.  the  son  of  Eleazar  the  priest 
22. 30  when  P.  the  priest,  .heard  the  words  that 
24.  33  buried  him  in  a  hill  (that  pertained  to)  P. 

Judg2o.  28  P..  .stood  before  it  in  those  days,  saying 

1  Ch.  6.   4  Eleazar  begat  P.,  P.  begat  Abishua 

6.  50  Eleazar  his  son,  P.  his  son,  Abishua  his 
9.  20  P. .  .was  the  ruler  over  them  in  time  past 

Ezra    7.    5  The  son  of  Abishua,  the  son  of  P.,  the  son 

8.    2  Of  the  sons  of  P. ;  Gershom :  of  the  sons  of 

Psa.106.  30  Then  stood  up  P.,  and  executed  judgment 

2.  Younger  son  of  Eli  the  priest  and  judge  of  Israel. 
B.C.  11 40. 

1  Sa.  1.  3  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  HophniandP. .  .(were) 
2.  34  that  shall  come  upon.  .Hophni  and  P.;  v.\ 
4.  4, 11  and  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  F. 
4.  17  thy  two  sons  also,  Hophni  and  P.,  are  d. 
4. 19  Ps.'  wife,  was  with  child,  (near)  to  be  de. 
14.   3  P.,  the  son  of  Eli,  the  Lord's  priest  in  S. 

3.  Father  of  Eleazar,  a  priest  who  returned  with  Ezra. 
B.C.  445. 

Ezra   8.  33  and  with  him  (was)  Eleazar  the  son  of  F. 
PHLE'-GON,  Qhtyaiv  burning. 
A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom.  16.  14  Salute  Asyncritus,  P.,  Hernias,  Patrobas 

FHRY'-GIA,  $pvyla. 

An  inland  province  of  Asia  Minor,  having  Eithynia  anil 
Galatia  on  the  N.,  Cappadocia  and  Lycaonia  on  the  E., 
Lycia,  Pisidia,  and  Isauria  on  the  S.,  and  Caria,  Lydia, 
and  "Mysia  on  the  W.  In  early  times  it  seems  to  have 
included  most  of  Asia  Minor;  latterly  it  was  divided 
into  Phrygia  Majorin  the  S.,  and  PhrygiaMinor  on  the 
K.W.  The  Romans  divided  it  into  three  parts,  Phrygia 
Salutarias  on  the  E.,  Phrygia  Pocatiana  on  the  W.,  and 
Phrygia  Katckekaumene  in  the  middle.  Its  cities  men- 
tioned in  the  New  Testament  are  Laodicea,  Hierapolis, 
and  Colossae,  also  Antioch  of  Pisidia. 

Acts    2.  10  P.,  and  Pamphylia,  in  Egypt,  and  in  the 

16.    6  Now  when  they  had  gone  throughout  P. 

iS.  23  went  over  (all)  the  country  of .  .P.  in  or. 

PHTJ'-RAH,  rna  beauty. 

A  servant  of  Gideon  who  went  down  with  him  to  visit 

the  host  of  Gideon.    B.C.  1249. 

Judg.  7. 10  go  thou  with  P.  thy  servant  down  to  the 

7.  11  Then  went  he  down  with  P.  his  servant 

FHTJT,  PUT,  B19  bow. 

l.The  third  son  of  Ham.    B.C.  2300. 

Gen.  10.    6  Cush,  and  Mizraim,  and  P.,  and  Canaan 
1  Ch.  1.    8  sons  of  Ham ;  Cush,  aud  Mizraini,  P. ,  and 

•2.  His  dwelling  Lybia,  AY.  of  Egypt. 

Eze.  27. 10  They  of  Persia  and  of  Lud  and  of  P.  were 
3.  His  descendants  who  hired  themselves  out  as  mer- 
cenary auxiliaries  to  the  Tyrians,  &c. 

Nah.  3.   9  (it  was)  infinite ;  P.  and  Lubini  were  thy 
PHTJ'-VAH,  PTJ'-A,  FU'-AH,  ns,  n*H9  utterance. 

1.  The  second  son  of  Issachar.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  13  Tola,  and  P.,  and  Job,  and  Shimron 
Nuni26.  23  the  Tolaites  :  of  P.,  the  family  of  the  P. 

1  Ch.  7.    1  Now.  .sons  of  Issachar(were)Tola,  and  P. 

2.  Father  of  Tola  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  who  judged 
Israel  after  the  death  of  Abimelech.     B.C.  1240. 

Judgio.    1  Tola  the  son  of  P.,  the  son  of  Dodo,  a  m. 

PHY-GELLTJS,  QvyeAXos- 

One  who  along  with  Hermogenes  turned  away  from 

Paul  in  Asia. 

2  Ti.    1.  15  of  whom  are  P.  and  Hemiogenes 


PHYLACTERY 


752 


PILLAR 


rHYLACTERY-- 

I'hyhictery,  a  guard,  charm,  <pv\aKrr)piov  phidak. 

Matt23.    5  they  make  broad  their  phylacteries,  and 
PHYSICIAN  — 
I.  To  heal,  repair,  NS"i  rapha. 

Geu.  50.  2  commanded,  .the  physicians,  .and  the  p. 

2  Ch.16.  12  sought  not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  the  phys. 

Job   13.   4  forgers  of  lies,  ye  (are)  all  physicians  of 

Jer.     8.  22  (is  there)  no  physician  there  v  why  then 

2. A  healer,  physician,  iarp6s  iatros. 

Matt  9.  12  They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician 

Mark  2.  17  whole  have  no  need  of  the  physician,  but 
5.  26  suffered  many  things  of  many  physicians 

Luke  4.  23  say  unto  me  this  proverb,  Physician,  heal 
5.  31  They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician 
8.  43  which  had  spent  all  her  living  upon  phy. 

Col.     4.  14  Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  and  Demas 

PICK  out,  to  — 

To  pick  out,  np3  nnqrir. 

Prov. 30.  17  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out 
PICTURE  — 

I .  Imagery,  imagination,  n'9&Q  maskith. 

Num  33.  52  destroy  all  their  pictures,  and  destroy  all 
Pro  v.  25.  11  (is  like)  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver 

-.Picture,  object,  njajp'  sekiyyah. 

Isa.     2.  16  of  Tarsiiish,  and  upon  all  pleasant  pictu. 
PIECE,  (in  pieces)  — 
l.A  separate  piece,  yip  badal. 

Amos  3.  12  two  legs,  or  a  piece  of  an  ear ;  soshall  the 
'l.A  separate  piece,  "in?  bether. 

Gen.  15.  10  and  laid  each  piece  one  against  another 
-!..[  part  cut  off,  iia  gezer. 

Gen.  15.  17  lamp  that  passed  between  those  pieces 
4.  A  piece  cut  off.  c?n  haddam. 

Dan.  2.  s  ye  shall  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  your  houses 
3.  29  shall  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  their  houses 

-">..(  circular  cake,  i£3  kikkar. 

Prov.  6.  26  (a  man  is  brought)  to  a  piece  of  bread,  and 
Jer.  37.  21  they  should  give  him  daily  a  piece  of  br. 
t>.A  measured  thing,  .Tp  middah. 

Neh.  3.  11  repaired  the  other  piece,  and  the  tower 
3. 19  another  piece  over  against  the  going  up 
3.  20  Baruch.  .earnestly  repaired  the  other  pi. 
3.  21  another  piece,  from  the  door  of  the  house 
3.  24  another  piece,  from  the  house  of  Azariah 
3.  27  Tekoites  repaired  another  piece,  over-ag. 
3.  30  repaired  Hananiah  .another  piece.  After 

l.A  part  cut  off,  nni  nethach. 

Exod29-  17  thou  shalt  cut  the  ram  in  pieces,  and  w. 
29. 17  put  (them)  unto  his  pieces,  and  unto  his 
Lev.     1.    6  he  shall  flay,  .and  cut  it  into  his  pieces 
1.  12  he  shall  cut  it  into  his  pieces,  with  his  h. 

8.  20  cut  the  ram  into  pieces,  .and  the  pieces 

9.  13  they  presented,  .the  pieces  thereof,  and 
Judgig.  29  divided  her.  .into  twelve  pieces,  and  sent 
Eze.  24.    4  Gather  the  pieces . .  every  good  piece,  the 

24.   6  bring  it  out  piece  by  piece  ;  let  no  lot  fall 

s..l  slice,  ribs pelach. 

Judg.  9.  53  a  certain  woman  cast  a  piece  of  a  mill  stone 

1  Sa.  30.  12  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  cake  of  figs,  and 

2  Sa.  11.  21  did  not  a  woman  cast  a  piece  of  a  mill  st. 
Job  41.  24  yea,  as  hard  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  (mi.) 
Song  4.   3  like  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate  within  thy 

6.    7  As  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate  (are)  thy  te. 

Q.A  morsel,  ng  path. 

Lev.    2.    6  Thou  shalt  part  it  iu  pieces,  and  pour  oil 

6.  21  the  baken  pieces  of  the  meat  offering  shalt 

1  Sa.    2.  36  Put  me .  .that  I  may  eat  a  piece  of  bread 

Prov  28.  21  for  a  piece  of  bread  (that)  man  will  tran. 

10.  A  morsel,  runs  pethoth. 

Eze.  13. 19  for  handfuls  of  barley  and  for  pieces  of  b. 
1\. Rent  pieces,  rags,  b*y"ij?  qeraim. 

1  Ki.11.  30  Ahijah  caught,  .and  rent  it  (in)  twelve  p. 

11.  31  Take  thee  ten  pieces;  for  thus  saith  the 

2  Ki.  2.12  he  took  hold . .  and  rent  them  in  two  pieces 

12,A  piece  of  silver j  p  rats. 

Psa.  68.  30  (till  every  one)  submit  himself  with  pieces 
13.  To  be  cut,  trip  sarat. 

Zech  12.   3  all  that  buden  .shall  be  cut  in  pieces,  th. 

I I.  .1  patch,  piece  put  upon  another,  eiri^K-qfia. 
Matt.  9. 16  No  manyutteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  unto 
Mark  2.  21  No  man  also  seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth 
Luke  5.  36  No  man  fputteth  a  piece  of  a  new  garment] 

5.  36  [piece]  that  was  (taken)  out  of  the  new  ag. 
lo.Part,  fxtpos  meros. 

Luke24.  42  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  broiled  fish,  and 
{See  also  Beaten  out,  money,  silver,  whole.] 
PIECE  (of  flesh),  good  — 
- '  good  gift  or  present,  12'fN  eshpar. 

2  Sa.   6.  19  to  every  one.  .a good  piece  (of  flesh),  and 

1  Ch.16.    3  a  good  piece  of  flesh,  and  a  flagon  (of  w.) 
PIECE  (of  ground  or  land)  — 

.1  portion,  n$br\  chelqah. 

2  Sa.  23.  11  where  was  a  piece  of  ground  full  of  lent. 
2  Ki.  3.  19  mar  every  good  piece  of  land  with  stones 

3.  25  on  every  good  piece  of  land  cast,  Amos  4.  7, 
Afield,  hypSs  afjms,  Luke  14.  18. 


PIECE  (of  silver)  — 
l.A  wage,  rniag  agorah. 

1  Sa.    2.  36  for  a  piece  of  silver  and  a  morsel  of  bread 

'2. A  drachma,  denarius,  penny,  SpaxfJ-V  drachme. 

Luke  15.    8  having  ten  pieces  of  silver,  .lose  one  p. 
15.    9  for  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  had  1. 
TIECE  that  filled  up  — 
Fulness,  filing  up,  7r\-f)pw/j.a  pleroma. 

Mark  2.  21  new  piece  that  filled  it  up  taketh  away  f. 
PIECES  — 

[Sue  Baken,  beat,  beaten,  break,  broken,  chop,  cut,  cut 
in,  dash,  dashed,  dasheth,  hew,  hew  in,  pull,  pull  in, 
rend  in,  rent  in,  shake,  silver,  strong,  tear  in,  torn  in. J 
PIECES,  to  break  in  — 
To  beat  or  dash  in  pieces,  }'2j  naphats,  3. 

Jer.  51.  20,  21,  21,  22,  22,  22,  23,  23  will  I  break  in  p. 
51.  23  I  will  also  break  iu  pieces  with  thee  the 
PIECES,  cut  in  — 
To  cut  self  off,  S10  mul,  7a. 

Psa.  58.    7  he  bendeth.  .let  them  be  as  cut  in  pieces 
PIERCE  (through),  to  — 
\. To  pierce,  or  as  a  lion,  nxa  or  n"]3  karah  or  kaari. 

Psa.  22. 16  they  pierced  my  hands  "and  my  feet 

2.  Tn  pierce  through,  ipn  daqar. 

Zech  12.  10  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pier. 

3.  To  smite,  dash,  pno  machats. 

Num24.    8  and  pierce  (them)  through  with  his  arrows 
Judg.  5.  26  when  she  had  pierced  and  stricken  thro. 
■£.  To  pierce,  3j3J  naqab. 

2  Ki,  1 8.  2 1  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it :  so 
Job  40.  24  his  eyes;  (his)  nose  pierceth  through  snares 
Isa.    36.    6  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it:  so 

5. To  come  or  go  through,  Siepxo/xai  dierchomai. 
Luke  2.  35  a  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul 

6.  To  arrive  or  come  through,^  uKveofxat  diikneomai. 

Heb.  4.  12  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of 

7.  To  pierce  or  stab  through,  innst/Tew  ekkenteo. 
.John  19.  37  They  shall  look  on  him  whom  they  pierced 
Rev.    1.    7  he  cometh . .  and  they  (also)  which  pierced 

S.To  slab,  pierce,  vvrrw  nutto  vvaccanusso. 

J0I11119.  34  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a  sword  pierced 
9.  To  pierce  all  around,  wepareipa  peripeiro. 

1  Ti.    6.  10  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  s. 
PIERCED,  to  be  — 
To  pick  out,  pierce,  ~>jtj  naqar,  3. 

Job  30.  17  My  bones  are  pierced  in  me  iu  the  night 
PIERCING  — 
\. Fleeing,  n,_)3  bariach. 

Isa.   27.    1  shall  punish  leviathan  the  piercing  serp. 
2. Piercings,  rinjyiD  madqaroth. 

Prov  12.  18  There  is  that  speaketh  like  the  piercings 
PIETY—  [See  Show.] 
PIGEON,  (young)  — 
l.A  young  bird,  Sia  gozal. 

Gen.  15.    9  Take  me  an  heifer,  and  a  young  pigeon 
2.  A  dove,  ruv  yonah. 

Lev.    1.  14  offering  of  turtle  doves,  or  of  young  pig. 

5.    7  he  shall  bring,  .two  young  pigeons,  unto 

5. 11  not  able  to  bring,  .two  young  pigeons 

12.   6  she  shall  bring,  .a  young  pigeon,  or  a  tu. 

12.  8  shall  bring  two  turtles,  or  two  young  pi. 

14.  22  two  young  pigeons,  such  as  he  is  able  to 

14.  30  or  of  the  youug  pigeons,  such  as  he  can 

1 5.  14  shall  take  to  him . .  two  young  pigeons,  and 
1  g.  zg  she  shall  take  unto  her.  .two  young  pige. 

Num.  6. 10  he  shall  bring,  .two  young  pigeons,  to  the 

B.A  dove,  pigeon,  Trepto-repa.  peristera. 

Luke  2.  24  A  pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pig. 
PI  HA-HI'-ROTH,  nVnn  *s  the  place  of  meadoios. 
A  place  on  the  west  side  of  Heroopolis  (the  west  gulf 
of  Red  Sea),  at  its  N.  end. 

Exodi4.    2  Speak,  .that,  .turn  and  encamp  before  P. 

14.  9  overtook  them  encamping,  .beside  P.,  b. 
Nuni33.    7  And  they,  .turned  again  unto  P.,  which 

33.    8  departed  from  before  P.,  ami  passed  fchr, 

PILATE,  iriXdros. 

The  surname  of  the  fifth  Roman  procurator  of  Judea, 
A.  P.  26-36,  who  after  vainly  attempting  to  set  Jesus  free, 
gave  him  up  to  be  crucified  ;  being  accused,  he  was  re- 
called by  Tiberius,  banished  by  Caligula  to  Vienna  in 
Gaul,  where  lie  died  A.D.  41. 

Matt?;.  2  and  delivered  him  to  Pontius  P.  the  gov. 
27.  13  Then  said  P.  unto  him.  Hearest  thou  not 
27. 17  P.  said  unto  them,  Whom  will  ye  that  I 
27.  22  P.  saith  unto  them,  What  shall  I  do  then 
27.  24  When  P.  saw  that  he  could  prevail  noth. 
27.  58  He  went  to  P.,  and  begged  the  body  of  Je. 
27.  58  Then  P.  commanded  the  body  to  be  deli. 
27.  62  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  came . .  unto  P. 
27.  65  P.  said  unto  them.  Ye  have  a  watch  :  go 
Mark  15.    1  carried  (him),  .and  delivered  (him)  to  P. 

15.  2  P.  asked  him,  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  J.? 
15.   4  P.  asked  him  again,  saying,  Answerest 
15.    5  Jesus  yet  answered  nothing ;  so  that  P. 
15.    9  But  P.  answered  them,  sayiug,  Will  ye  th. 
15.  12  P.  answered  and  said  again  unto  them 
15. 14  Then  P.  said  unto  them.  Why,  what  evil 
1=,.  15  P. .  .released  Barabbas  unto  them,  and  de. 


Markig.  43  Joseph,  .came,  and  went  in  boldly  untoP 
15.  44  P.  marvelled  if  he  were  already  dead:  and 

Luke  3.    1  Pontius  P.  being  governor  of  Judea,  and 
13.    1  whose  blood  P.  had  mingled  with  their 
23.    1  the  whole  multitude,  .led  him  unto  P. 
23.    3  P.  asked  him,  saying,  Art  thou  the  king 
23.   4  Then  said  P.  to  the  chief  priests  and  (to) 
23.    6  When  P.  heard  of  Galilee,  he  asked  whe. 
23. 11  set  him  at  nought,  .and  sent  him  again 
23.  12  P.  and  Herod  were  made  friends  together 
23.  13  P. .  .called  together  the  chief  priests  and 
23.  20  P.  therefore,  willing  to  release  Jesus,  sp. 
23.  24  P.  gave  sentence  that  it  should  be  as  they 
23.  52  This  (man)  went  unto  P.,  and  begged  the 

JohmS.  29  P.  then  went  out  unto  them,  and  said  W. 
18.  31  Then  said  P.  unto  them,  Take  ye  him,  and 
18.  33  Then  P.  entered  into  the  judgment  hall 
18.  35  P.  answered, Amla Jew?.. what hLstthou 
18.37  B-  therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  ki. 

18.  38  P.  saith  unto  him,  What  is  truth?  And 

19.  1  Then  P.  theref  ore  took  Jesus,  and  scourged 
19.  4  P.  therefore  went  forth  again,  and  saith 
19.  6  P.  saith  unto  them,  Take  ye  him,  and  er. 
19.  8,  13  When  P.  therefore  heard  that  saying 
19.  10  Then  saith  P.  unto  him,  Speakest  thou  u. 
19.  12  And  from  thenceforth  P.  sought  to  release 
19.  15  P.  saith  unto  them,  Shall  I  crucify  your 
19.  19  P.  wrote  a  title,  and  put  (it)  on  the  cross 
19.  21  Then  said  the  chief  priests,  .to  P.,  Write 
19.  22  P.  answered,  What  I  have  written  I  have 
19.  31  The  Jews,  .besought  P.  that  their  legs  mi. 
19.  38  Joseph .. besought  P. .  .and  P.  gave  (him) 

Acts    3.  13  ye.  .denied  him  in  the  presence  of  P.,  when 
4.  27  Pontius  P.,  with  the  Gentiles,  .weregath. 
13.  28  yet  desired  they  P.  that  he  should  be  si. 
1  Ti.    6.  13  who  before  Pontius  P.  witnessed  a  good 

PLL'-DASH,  v^  flame  of  fire. 

Sixth  son  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother.     B.C.  i860. 

Gen.  22.  22Chesed,  and  Hazo,  and  P.,  and  Jidlaph 
PILE  (for  fire)  — 
A  pile,  dwelling,  TrvpD  medurah. 

Isa.   30.  33  the  pile  thereof  (is)  fire  and  much  wood 

Eze.  24.    g  I  will  even  make  the  pile  for  fire  great 
PLL-E'-HA,  NnL2  worship. 

A  person  or  family  who,  with  Nehemiah,  sealed  the  cave 
nant.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  24  Hallohesh,  P.,  Shobek 
PILGRIMAGE  — 
Sojoicrn,  sojourning,  TUp  magur. 

Gen.  47.  9  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage  (are) 
47.    9  my  fathers  in  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage 

Exod.  6.    4  land  of  their  pilgrimage,  wherein  they 

Psa.  1 19.  54  been  my  songs  iu  the  house  of  my  pilgri. 
PILGRIM  — 
A  sojourner,  ■7ra.peTri8rjfj.os  parepidemos. 

Heb.  11.  13  they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the 

1  Pe.  2.  11  I  beseech  (you)  as  strangers  and  pilgrims 
PILL,  to  — 

To  peel,  h^patsal,  3. 

Gen.  30.  37  pilled  white  strakes  in  them,  and  made 

30.  38  set  the  rods  which  he  had  pilled  before 
PILLAR  — 

1. Pillars,  rriaDK  omenoth. 

2  Ki.18.  16  pillars  which  Hezekiah  kingof  Judahhad 
^.Support,  ij;pp  misad. 

1  K1.10.  12  pillars  for  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  for 
Z.  A  thing set  up,  a  standing pillar,  ft$fo  matsteebah. 

Gen.  28. 18  set  it  up  (for)  a  pillar,  and  poured  oil  upon 
28.  22  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  (for)  a  pillar 

31.  13  where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar,  (and) 
31.  45  Jacob  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  up  (for)  a  p. 
31.  51  Behold  this  heap,  and  behold  (this)  pillar 
31.  52  (this)  pillar  be  witness,  that  I  will  not  p. 
31.  52  shalt  not  pass  over  this  heap  and  this  pil. 
35.  14  set  up  a  pillar,  .(even)  a  pillar  of  stone 
35.  20  Jacob  set  a  pillar. .  that  (is)  the  pillar  of 

Exod24.    4  builded. . twelve  pillars,  according  to  the 
Deuti2.    3  break  their  pillars,  and  burn  their  groves 

2  Sa.  18.  18  Now  Absalom,  .reared  up  for  himselfap. 

18. 18  called  the  pillar  after  his  own  name:  and 
Isa.  19. 19  a  pillar  at  the  border  thereof  to  the  Lord 

i.Any  thing  fixed,  a  fixture,  pWD  matsuq. 

1  Sa.  2.  8  for  the  pillars  of  the  earth  (are)  the  Lord's 
5.  To  be  set  up,  3S)  natsab,  6. 

Judg.  9.  6  by  the  plain  of  the  pillar  that  (was)  in  8. 
6. Any  thing  set  up,  a  monument,  3'VJ  tielsib. 

Gen.  19.  26  looked  back,  .and  she  became  a  pillar  of 
7.  A  pillar,  column,  i*si:  ammiul. 

Exodi3>  21  before  them  by  day  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud 
13.  21  by  night  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give  them 

13.  22  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  by  day,  nor  the  pi. 

14.  19  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  went  from  before 
14.  24  through  the  pillarof  fire  and  of  the  cloud 
26.  32  four  pillars  of  shittim  (wood)  overlaid 

26.  37  shalt  make,  .five  pillars  (of)  shittim  (wo.) 

27.  10  twenty  pillars  thereof,  and  their  twenty 
27.  10,  11  hooks  of  the  pillars  and  their  fillets 
27. 11  twenty  pillars  and  their  twenty  sockets 
27.  12  And.  .their  pillars  ten,  and  their  sockets 
27.  14,  15  pillars  three,  and  their  sockets  three 
27.  16  their  pillars  (shall  be)  four,  and  their  so. 
27. 17  All  the  pillars  round  about  the  court(sh.) 
33.    9  the  Cloudy  pillar  descended,  and  stood 


PILLOW 


i53 


PIT 


Exod33.  10  all  the  people  saw  the  cloudy  pillar  stand  ' 
35. 11  liis  boards,  his  bars,  his  pillars,  and  his  s. 

35.  17  his  pillars,  and  their  sockets,  and  the  ha. 

36.  36  he  made  thereunto  four  pillars  (of)  shittim 
36.  38  And  the  five  pillars  of  it  with  their  hooks 
38. 10  Their  pillars  (were)  twenty,  and  their  hr. 
38.  10,  11,  12,  17  the  hooks  of  the  pillars  and 
38.  11  their  pillars  (were)  twenty,  and  their  soc. 
38.  12  their  pillars  ten,  and  their  sockets  ten 
38.  14,  15  pillars  three,  and  their  sockets  three 
3S.  17  sockets  for  the  pillars,  .hooks  of  the  pill. 

38. 17  pillars  of  the  court  (were)  filleted  with  s. 
38.  19  theirpillars(were)  four,  and  their  sockets 

38.  28  he  made  hooks  for  the  pillars,  and  overl. 
39-  33  his  bars,  and  his  pillars,  and  his  sockets 

39.  40  his  pillars,  and  his  sockets,  and  the  ban. 

40.  18  put  in  the  bars,  .andrearedup  his  pillars 
Num.  3.  36  the  pillars  thereof,  and  the  sockets  ther. 

3.  37  the  pillars  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

4.  31  and  the  pillars  thereof,  and  the  sockets 
4. 32  the  pillars  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

12.  5  LoRDcame  down  in  the  pillar  of  the  cloud 
14. 14  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  and  in  apillarof  fire 
Peut3i.  15  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud :  and  the  pillar  of  the 
Judgio.  25  they  called  and. .set  him  between  the  p. 
16.  26  that  I  may  feel  the  pillars  whereupon  the 
16.  29  middle  pillars  upon  which  the  house  stood 
20.  40  to  arise  up  out  of  the  city  with  a  pillar  of 

1  Ki.  7.    2  pillars,  with  cedar  beams  upon  the  pillars 

7.  3  that  (lay)  on  forty  five  pillars,  fifteen  (in)  a 
7.  6  And  he  made  a  porch  of  pillars,  the  length 
7.  6  the  (other)  pillars  and  the  thick  beam  (w.) 
7. 15  Forhecast  two  pillars  of  brass,  of  eighteen 
7.  16  chapiters,  .to  set  upon  the  tops  of  the  pi. 
7.17,  19,  40.  41,  chapiters,  .upon  the  top  of. .  p. 
7.  18  he  made  the  pillars,  and  two  rows  round 
7.  20  the  chapiters  upon  the  two  pillars  (had 
7.  21  the  pillars,  .the  right  pillar,  .the  left  pil. 
7.  22  top  of  the  pillars,  .the  work  of  the  pillars 
7.  41  The  two  pillars,  and  the  (two)  bowls  of  the 
7.  41  top  uf  the  two  pillars,  top  of  the  pillars 
7.  42  the  chapiters  that  (were)  upon  the  pillars 

2  Ki.n.  14  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  as  the  manner 

23.    3  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  and  made  a 
25.  13  the  pillars  of  brass,  .in  the  house  of  the  L. 
25. 16  The  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  the  bases  w. 
25.  17  The  height  of  the.  .pillar  (was)  eighteen 

25.  17  like  unto  these  had  the  second  pillar  with 

1  Ch.i3.    8  and  the  pillars,  and  the  vessels  of  brass 

2  Ch.  3.  15  two  pillars  of  thirty  and  five  cubits  high 

3.  16  put  (them)  on  the  heads  of  the  pillars;  and 

3.  17  he  reared  up  the  pillar  before  the  temple 

4.  ;2  the  two  pillars,  and  the  pommels,  and  the 
4.  12  top  of  the  two  pillars,  .the  top  of  the  pil. 
4. 13  the  chapters  which  (were)  upon  the  pillars 

23.  13  king  stood  at  his  pillar  at  the  entering  in 

Xeh.    9.  12  a  cloudy  pillar ;  and  in  the  night  by  a  pi. 

g.  19  the  pillar  of  the  cloud,  .the  pillar  of  fire 

Esth.  1. ,  6  fastened  to  silver  rings  and  pillars  of 

Job     9.'  6  shaketh  the  earth.,  and  the  pillars  thereof 

26.  11  The  pillars  of  heaven  tremble  and  are  af. 
Psa.  75.    3  earth..  I  bear  up  the  pillars  of  it.    Selah 

99.   7  He  spake  unto  them  in  the  cloudy  pillar 

Prov.  9.    1  Wisdom,  .hath  hewn  outlier  seven  pillars 

Song  3.  10  He  made  the  pillars  thereof  (of)  silver,  the 

5. 15  His  legs  (are  as)  pillars  of  marble  set  upon 

Jer.     1.  iS  an  iron  pillar,  and  brasen  walls  against 

27.  19  concerning  the  pillars,  and  concerning  the 
52.  17  the  pillars  of  brass  that  (were)  in  the  ho. 
52.  20  The  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  twelve  bra. 
52.  21  the  pillars,  the  height  of  one  pillar  (was) 
52.  22  the  second  pillar  also  and  the  pomegran. 

Eze.  40.  49  pillars  by  the  posts,  one  on  this  side,  and 
42.   6  had  not  pillars  as  the  pillars  of  the  courts 
S.PaZm  trees,  pillars,  rrrp'n  timeroth. 

Song  3.   6  this  that  cometh  out.. like  pillars  of  sin. 

Joel   2.  30  wonders,  .blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars  of 
9.-4  pitta/r,  column,  arv\os  stulos. 

Gal.    2.   9  Cephas,  and  John,  who  seemed  to  be  pil. 

1  Ti.  3. 15  God .  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth 

Rev.    3. 12  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God 
10.    1  as  it  were  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars 
PILLOW  — 
X.A  mattress,  T3?  kebir. 

1  Sa.  19. 13,  16  a  pillow  of  goats'  (hair)  for  his  bolster 
2.Pillows,  ninoa  kesathoth. 

Eze.  13. 18  that  sew  pillows  to  all  arm  holes,  and  m. 
13. 20  I  (am)  against  your  pillows,  wherewith  ye 

Z.  Bolster,  pillow,  nfc'*na  meraashoth. 

Gen.  28.  11  put  (theni  for)  his  pillows,  and  lay  down 

28.  18  the  stone  that  he  had  put  (for)  his  pillows 
4.  A  pilloiv,  stern,  irpoa-KttyaKaiov  jwoskephalaion. 

Mark  4.  38  was  in  the  hinder  part,  .asleepon  apillow 
PILOT  — 
A  pilot,  igh  chobel. 

Eze.  27.  8  thy  wise  (men),  .in  thee,  were  thy  pilots 
27.  27  thy  pilots,  thy  calkers,  and  the  occupiers 
27.  28  shake  at  the  sound  of  the  cry  of  thy  pilots 
27.  29  all  the  pilots  of  the  sea,  shall  come  down 

PLL'-TAI,  *o?!3  Jah  causes  to  escape. 

A  priest  in  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  grandson 

■  >'  Jozadak.    b.c.  600. 

Neh.  12.  17  Zichri;  of  Mmiamin,  of  Moadiah,  P. 
PIN  — 
.1  pin,  nail,  "in;  yathed. 

Exoday.  19  all  the  phis  thereof,  and  all  the  pins  of  the 

35. 18  The  pins  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  pins    I 
95 


E*od38.  20  all  the  pins  of  the  tabernacle,  and  of  the 

38.  31  pins  of  the  tabernacle,  and  all  the  pins  of 

39.  40  his  pins,  and  all  the  vessels  of  the  service 
Num.  3.  37  their  sockets,  and  their  pins,  and  their  c. 

4.  32  their  pins,  and  their  cords,  with  all  their 
Judgi6.  14  she  fastened  (it)  with  the  pin,  and  said  unto 
16. 14  went  away  with  the  pin  of  the  beam  and 
Eze.  15.   3  will  (men)  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any 
PINE  (tree)  — 

1.  Pine,  elm,  plane  or  fir,  vnn  tidluir, 

Isa.   41.  19  (and)  the  pine,  and  the  box  tree  together 
60.  13  the  pine  tree,  and  the  box  together,  to  be. 

2.  A  tree  of  oil,  very  fruitful,  js»  py  ets  sheinen. 

Xeh.  8.  15  pine  branches,  and  myrtle  branches,  and 
PINE  away,  to  — 

1.  To  flow  a/way,  3ii  ztib. 

Lam.  4.   9  these  pine  away,  stricken  through  for  (wa. 

2.  To  become  toasted  or  consumed  away,  p|7?  maqaq,  2. 

Lev.  26.  39  they  that  are  left  of  you  shall  pine  away 

26.  39  and  also,  .shall  they  pine  away  with  them 
Eze.  24.  23  ye  shall  pine  away  for  your  iniquities,  and 

33. 10  sins  (be)  upon  us,  and  we  pme  away  in  th. 

3.  To  dry  up,  wither,  £npalvw  xeraino. 

Mark  9.  18  gnashed  with  his  teeth,  and  pineth  awaj 
PINING  sickness  — 
Weakness,  heaviness,  nVn  dallah. 

Isa.   38.  12  he  will  cut  me  off  with  pining  sickness 
PINNACLE  — 
A  little  wing,  wrepvytov  pterugion. 

Matt.  4.   5  andsettethhimonapinnaeleof  thetemple 

Luke  4.    9  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and 
PI'-NON,  ]'?3  ore  pit 
A  duke  of  Edoni  of  the  family  of  Esau.     B.C.  1470. 

Gen.  36. 41  Duke  Aholibamah,  duke  Elah,  duke  P. 

1  Ch.  1.  52  Duke  Aholibamah,  duke  Elah,  duke  P. 

PIPE— 

l.A  pipe  or  flute,  7*^0  chalil. 

1  Sa.  10.  5  tabret,  and  a  pipe.and  a  harp,  before  them 
1  Ki.  1.  40  the  people  piped  with  pipes,  and  rejoiced 
Isa.  5.  12  the  tabret  and  pipe,  and  wine,  are  in  their 
30.  29  when  one  goeth  with  a  pipe  to  come  into 
Jer.  48.  36  mine  heart  shall  sound  for  Moab  like  pi. 
48.  36  mine  heart  shall  sound  like  pipes  for  the 

2. A  pipe,  a  casting,  ng^D  mutseqeth. 

Zech.  4.    2  seven  pipes  to  the  seven  lamps,  which  (are) 

3.  A  bezal  for  2>recious  stones,  2jii  neqeb. 

Eze.  28. 13  workmanship  trf  thy  tabrets  and  of  thy  p. 

4.  Pipes,  tubes,  TfrtiQSx  tsantaroth. 

Zech.  4.  12  which  through  the  two  golden  pipes  em. 

5.  A  pipe  or  flute,  avKos  aulos. 

1  C0.14.  7  whether  pipe  or  harp,  except  they  give  a 
PIPE,  to—. 

1.  To  pipe,  hbn  chalal,  3. 

1  Ki.  1.  40  the  people  piped  with  pipes,  and  rejoiced 

2.  To  play  on  a  pipe  or  flute,  auheco  aided. 

Matt ix.  17  We  have  piped  unto  you,  and  ye  have  nut 
Luke  7.  32  We  have  piped  unto  you,  and  ye  have  not 

1  Co.  14.    7  shall  it  be  known  what  is  piped  or  harped  ? 

PIPER  — 

One  that  plays  on  a  pipe  or  flute,  avXrjr^sauletes. 

Rev.  18.  22  musicians,  and  of  pipers,  and  trumpeters 
PER'-AM,  Dso?  wild,  roving. 

A  king  of  the  Amorites  or  Canaanites  who  dwelt  at 
Jarmuth  and  was  slain  by  Joshua.    B.C.  1451. 

Josh. 10.    3  Adoni-zedek.  .sent,  .unto  P.  king  of  Jar. 
PLR-A'-THON,  \\r\yi$peak,  top. 

An  elevation  in  the  hill  of  the  Amalekites  in  Ephraim, 
where  Abdon  the  son  of  Hillel  was  buried,  after  judging 
Israel  eight  years ;  now  Ferata. 

Judgi2. 15  And  Abdon.  .was  buried  in  P.  in  the  land 
PrRATHONTTE,  ^inu-jS,  'jhins. 
An  inhabitant  of  the  preceding  place. 

Judgi2.  13,  15  Abdon  the  son  of  Hillel  the  P. 

2  Sa.  23.  30  Benaiah  the  P.,  Hiddai  of  the  brooks  of 
1  Ch.  11.  31  Ithai  the  son  of  Ribai.  .Benaiah  the  P. 

27.  14  The  eleventh  (captain..was)Benaiah  the  P. 

PIS'-GAH,  n&3  peak,  point. 

That  ridge  of  the  mountains  of  Abarini,  of  which  Nebo 
is  the  highest  point,  in  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  which  he 
had  taken  from  Moab. 

Nunisi.  20  fromBamoth  (in)  the  valley .  .to.  .top  of  P. 

23. 14  he  brought  him .  .to  the  top  of  P.,  and  b. 

Deut.  3.  27  Get  thee  up  into  the  top  of  P.,  and  lift  up 

4.  49  sea  of  the  plain,  under  the  springs  of  P. 

34.    1  Moses  went  up . .  to  the  top  of  P.,  that  (is) 

PI-SI-DI'A,  Tlio-iBta. 

A  province  forming  part  of  the  great  table  land  in  Asia 
Minor,  having  Pamphylia  on  the  S.,  Phrygia  on  the  X. ; 
its  chief  city  was  Antioch,  a  Roman  colony. 

Acts  13.  14  they  came  to  Antioch  in  P.,  and  went  into 
14.  24  after  they  had  passed  throughout  P.,  they 

PI'-SON,  \w*$  freely  flotc  in  g. 

•  me  of  the  four  rivers  of  Eden,  supposed  to  have  been 
the  Phasis,  i.e.  Araxes;  the  Besynga,  the  Indus,  the 
Ganges,  the  Hyphaeis,  the  Nile  or  the  Goskap. 

Gen.   2.  11  The  name  of  the  first  (is)  P.  :  that  (is)  t 


PIS'-PAH,  nspa  expansion. 

An  Asherite,  a  son  of  Jether.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.  38  And  the  sons  of  Jether;  Jephunneh,  and  P, 
PISS  — 

\. Urine,  D'ra'  shenim. 

2  Ki.18.  27  they  may.  .drink  then"  own  piss  with  you 
Isa.  36.  12  they  may . .  drink  their  owu  piss  with  you 

2.  Water  of  the  feet,  urine,  B;?3n  'O  me  raglayim. 

2  Ki.18.  27  they  may.  .drink  their  own  piss  with  you? 

Isa.  36. 12  they  may. .drink  their  own  piss  withyou'i 
PISS,  to  — 
To  make  water,  \tw  shaihan,  5. 

1  Sa.  25.  22,  34  any  that  pisseth  against  the  wall 

1  Ki.14. 10  cut  off.  .him  that  pisseth  against  the  wall 

16. 11  he  left  him  not  one  that  pisseth  against  a 
2i.  21  cut  off.,  him  that  pisseth  against  the  wall 

2  Ki.  9.  8  cut  off.  .liini  that  pisseth  against  the  wall 
PIT  — 

\.A  pit  or  well,  ins  beer. 

Gen.  14.  10  the  vale  of  Siddim  (was  full  of)  slime  pits 
Psa.  55.  23  bring  them  down  into  the  pit  of  destruc, 

69. 15  and  let  not  the  pit  shut  her  mouth  upon 
Prov  23.  27  and  a  strange  woman  (is)  a  narrow  pit 

2.-4  pit  or  well,  "lis  bor. 

Gen. 37.  20  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast,  .into  some  pit 

37.  22  cast  him  into  this  pit  that  (is)  in  the  will. 

37.  24  cast  him  into  a  pit :  and  the  pit  (was)  em. 

37.  28  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit,  and  sold 

37.  29  Reuben  returned  into  the  pit ;  and,  beh. 

37.  29  Joseph  (was)  not  in  the  pit ;  and  he  rent 
Exod2i.  33  open  a  pit,  or  if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pic 

21.  34  The  owner  of  the  pit  shall  make  (it)good 
Lev.  11.  36  a  fountain  or  pit,  (wherein  there  is)  plen. 

1  Sa.  13.    6  in  rocks,  and  in  high  places,  and  hi  pits 

2  Sa.  23. 20  slew  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  time 

2  Ki.  10. 14  slew  them  at  the  pit  of  the  shearing  hou. 

1  C'h.n.  22  and  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit  in  a  snowy  day 
Psa.    7.  15  He  made  a  pit,  and  digged  it,  and  is  fall. 

28.    1  I  become  like  them  that  go.  .into  the  pit 

30.  3  that  I  should  not  go  down  to  the  pit 

40.  2  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit 
88.  4  counted  with  them  that  go.  .into  the  pit 
88.    6  Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit,  in  d, 

143.    7  like  unto  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit 
Prov.  1. 12  whole,  as  those  that  go  down  into  the  pit 

28. 17  man  that  doeth  violence,  .flee  to  the  pit 
Isa.    14. 15  be  brought,  .to  hell,  to  the  sides  of  the  pit 

14.  19  that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  pit ;  as 
24.  22  (as)  prisoners  are  gathered  in  the  pit,  and 

38. 18  they  that  go  down  into  the  pit  cannot  hope 
51.    1  the  hole  of  the  pit  (whence)  ye  are  digged 

Jer.  41.   7  into  the  midst  of  the  pit,  he,  and  thelueu 

41.  9  the  pit  wherein  Ishmael  had  cast  all  the 
Eze.  26. 20  down  with  them  that  descend  into  the  pit 

26.  20  with  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit,  that 

31.  14 delivered.. with  them  that  go.  .to  the  pit 

31. 16  with  them  thatdesceud  into  the  pit:  and 

32.  18,  24,25,  29,  30  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit 

32.  23  Whose  graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  thep. 
Zech.  9.  11  sent,  .out  of  the  pit  wherein  (is)  no  water 

o.A  ditch,  marshy  place,  33  geb. 

Jer.   14.   3  they  came  to  the  pits,  (and)  found  no  w. 

4.  A  ditch,  marshy  place,  N3f  gebe. 

Isa.  30.  14  or  to  take  water  (withal)  out  of  the  pit 

o.A  pit,  fS'3  gummats. 

Eccl.io.    8  He  that  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  into  it 

6.  Opening,  hole,  M09 pachath. 

2  Sa.  17.   9  he  is  hid  now  in  some  pit,  or  in  some(o.) 

18.  17  cast  him  into  a  great  pit  in  the  wood,  and 
Isa.  24.  17  the  pit,  and  the  snare,  (are)  upon  thee,  0 
24.  18  he  who  fleeth.. shall  fall  into  the  pit ;  and 
24.  iS  that  cometh  up  out  of  the  midst  of  the  pit 
Jer.  48.  43  the  pit,  and  the  snare,  (shall  be)  upon  thee 
48.  44  He  that  fieeth.  .shall  fall  into  the  pit;  and 
48.  44  he  that  getteth  up  out  of  the  pit  shall  be 

7.  Under  world,  hades,  Vinv  sheol. 

Xunii6.  30  and  they  go  down  quick  into  the  pit ;  then 

16.  33  went  down  alive  into  the  pit,  and  the  ea. 

Job  17. 16  They  shall  go  down  to  the  bars  of  the  pit 

S.,4  pit,  corruption,  mjiW  shuchah. 

Prov  22.  14  The  mouth  of  strange  women  (is)  a  deep  p. 

Jer.     2.   6  led.  .through  a  land  of  deserts  and  of  pits 
18.  20  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  for  my  soul 
18.  22  they  havediggeda  pit  to  take  me,  and  hid 

9.  A  pit,  corruption,  runt?  shechuth. 

Prov  28.  10  he  shall  fall  himself  into  his  own  pit :  but 
10. .4  pit,  corruption,  n'ni?  shechith. 

Lam.  4.  20  the  anointed,  .was  taken  in  their  pits,  of 
11.  A  pit,  corruption,  nn?  shachath. 

Job    33. 18  Hekeepeth  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,  and 

33.  24  Deliver  him  from  going  dowu  to  the  pit ;  I 
33.  28  deliver  his  soul  from  going  into  the  pit,  and 
33.  30  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,  to  been. 

Psa.    9.  15  heathen  are  sunk  down  in  the  pit  (that) 
30.    9  What  profit,  .when  I  go  down  to  the  pit? 
35.    7  they  hid  their  net  for  me  (in)  a  pit,  (which) 
94.  13  rest,  .until  the  pit  be  digged  for  the  wic. 

Prov  26.  27  Whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  therein;  and 

Isa.   38.  17  thou  hast  .".(delivered  it)fromthepit  ofc. 
51. 14  that  he  should  not  die  in  the  pit,  nor  that 

Eze.  19.   4,  8  he  was  taken  in  their  pit 

28.    8  They  shall  bring  thee  down  to  the  pit,  and 


PITCH 


754 


PLACE 


12.  A  pit,  corruption,  rayp  skichah. 

Psa.  57.   6  they  have  digged  a  pit  before  ine,  into  the 

119.  85  The  proud  have  digged  pits  forme,  which 

Jer.   i3.  -2-2.  for  they  have  digged  apit  to  take  me,  and 

XZ.A  deep  place,  (36duvos  bothunos. 

Matt  12.  11  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath  day,  will 

11.  A  pit,  dungeon,  cpptap  phrear. 

Luke  14.    5  shall  have  an  ass  or  an  ox  fallen  into  a  pit 
itev.    9.    1  was  given  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit 
9.    2  [opened  the  bottomless  pit] . .  out  of  the  p. 
9.    2  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the  pit 

PITCH  — 

1, Pitch,  nai  zepheth, 

Exod.  2.   3  daubed  it  with  slime  and  with  pitch,  and 

Isa.    34.    9  streams  thereof  shall  be  turned  into  pitch 

34.   9  laud  thereof  shall  become  burning  pitch 

2.  Cypress,  *isb  koph-er. 

Gen.    6.  14'shalt  pitch  it  within  and  without  with  p. 
PITCH,  be  pitched,  to  — 
I,  To  sink  clown,  encamp,  rr:n  chanah. 

Exod  17.    1  pitched  in  Rephidim :  and  (there  was)  no 

19.  2  had  pitched  in  the  wilderness:  and  there 
Num.  1.  51  when  the  tabernacle  is  to  be  pitched,  the 

1.  52  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  their  te. 

1.  53  Levites  shall  pitch  round  about  the  tabe. 

2.  2  shall  pitch,  .far  off.  .shall  they  pitch 

2.  3  shall  they. .  of  the  camp  of  Judah  pitch 
2.  5  those  that  do  pitch  next  unto  him  (shall 
2.  12  those  which  pitch  by  him  (shall  be)  the  t. 

2.  34  so  they  pitched  by  their  standards,  and 

3.  23  shall  pitch  behind  the  tabernacle  westw. 

3.  29,  35  shall  pitch  on  the  side  of  the  tabern. 
9.  18  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  p. 

is.  16  and  pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 
21.  10  childrenof  Israelset  forward, and  pitched 
21.  11  pitched  at  Ije-abarim,  in  the  wilderness 
21.  12  removed,  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Z. 

21.  13  removed,  and  pitched  on  the  other  side 

22.  1  pitched  in  the  plains  of  Moab  on  this  side 
33.  5  removed  from  Rameses,  and  pitched  in  S. 
33.  6  pitched  in  Etham,  which  (is)  in  the  edge 
33.  7  turned,  .and  they  pitched  before  Migdol 
33.  8  went  three  day's  journey,  .pitched  in  M. 
33.  q  and  came  unto  Elim.  .and  they  pitched 
33.  15  they  departed  from  Rephidim,  and  pitc. 
33.  16  removed,  .and  pitched  at  Kibroth-hatta. 
33.  18  they  departed  from  Hazeroth,  and  pitched 
33.  19  departed  from  Rithmah,  and  pitched  at  R. 
33.  20  departed fromRimmon-parez.audpitched 
33.  21  removed  from  Libnah,  and  pitched  at  R. 
33.  22  journeyed  from  Rissah,  and  pitched  in  K. 
33.  23  went  from  Kehelathah,  and  pitched  in  m. 
33.  25  they  removed  from  Haradah,  and  pitched 
33. 27  departed  from  Tahath,  and  pitched  at  T. 
33.  28  removed  from  Tarah,  and  pitched  in  M. 
33.  29  went  from  Mithcah,  and  pitched  in  Hash. 
33.  31  departed  from  Moseroth.  .pitched  in  Be. 
33.  33  went  from  Hor-hagidgad.  .pitched  in  Jo. 
33.  36  pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  Zin,  which 
33.  37  pitched  in  mount  Hor,  iu  the  edge  of  the 
33.  41  departed  from  mount  Hor,  and  pitched 
33.  42  departed  from  Zalmonah.  .pitched  in  P. 
33.  43  departed  from  Punon,  and  pitched  in  0. 
33.  44  departed  from  Obot'n,  and  pitched  in  Ij. 
23-  45  departed  from  Iim,  and  pitched  in  Dibon. 
33.  47  pitched  in  the  mountains  of  Abarim,  be. 
33.  48  pitched  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  by  Jordan 
33-  49  pitched  by  Jordan,  from  Beth-jesimoth 

Josh.  8.  11  pitched  on  the  north  side  of  Ai :  now(th. 
11.    5  pitched  together  at  the  waters  of  Merom 

Judg  6.  33  went  over,  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of  J. 
7.    1  pitched  beside  the  well  of  Harod  :  so  that 
11. 18  pitched  on  the  other  side  of  Anion,  but 
11.  20  pitched  in  Jahaz,  and  fought  against  Isr. 

15.  9  pitched  in  Judah,  and  spread  themselves 
18. 12  and  pitched  iu  Kirjath-jearim,  in  Judah 

1  Sa.    4.    1  Now  Israel,  .pitched  beside  Eben-ezer 

4.  1  and  the  Philistines  pitched  in  Aphek 

13.  5  pitched  in  Michmash,  eastward  from  Bet. 
17.  1  pitched  between  Shochoh  and  Azekah,  in 
17.  2  pitched  by  the  valley  of  Elah,  and  set  the 
26.  3  Saul  pitched  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  wh. 
26.  5  came  to  the  place  where  Saul  had  pitched 
26.    5  and  the  people  pitched  round  about  him 

28.  4  came  and  pitched  in  Shunem.  .and  they 

29.  1  pitched  by  a  fountain  which  (is)  in  Jezreel 

2  Sa.  17.  26  and  Absalom  pitched  in  the  land  of  Gil. 

23.  13  troop  of  the  Philistines  pitched  in  the  v. 

24.  5  passed  over  Jordan,  and  pitched  in  Aroer 
:  Ki.  20.  27  "pitched  before  them  like  two  little  Hocks 

20.  29  they  pitched  one  over  against  the  other  s. 
2  Ki.25.    1  pitched  against  it;  and  they  built  forts 

1  Ch.19.    7  king,  .who  came  and  pitched  before  Med..-. 
Jer.  52.   4  pitched  against  it,  and  built  forts  against 

2.To  cover,  ~\?3  Idphar, 

Gen.    6.  14  andshalt  pitch  it  within  and  without  with 

3,  T      icline,  nw  itatah. 

Gen  ra.  S  pitched  his  tent,  (having)  Bethel  on  the  w. 
26.  25  pitched  his  tent  there:  and  there  Isaac's  S. 
Ex.  .I33.  7  pitched  it  without  the  camp,  alar  off  from 
Judg  4.  11  pitched  his  tent  unto  the  plain  of  Zaanaiin 
•  .  6,  17  tabernacle  that  David  had  pitched  for  it 
:<  1  ■ .  15.    1  prepared  a  place.,  and  pitched  forit  ate. 

16.  1  midst  of  the  tent  that  David  had  pitched 
a  I  !h.   1.    4  for  he  had  pitched  a  tent  for  it  at  Jems. 

4,2*o  cause  to  stand,  vaise  ttj>,  Dip  quiri,  5. 

Jofth.  4.  20  twelve  stones,  .did  Joshua  pitch  in  Gilgal 


5. To  strike,  fix,  ypJ?  taqa. 

Gen.  31.  25  Jacob  had  pitched.,  his  brethren  pitched 
Jer.     6.    3  they  shall  pitch  (their)  tents  against  her 

6.  To  join  together,  unite, fix,  pitch  a  tent,  ir^y w/xt. 

Heb.  8.    2  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and 
PITCH  a  tent,  to  — 
l.To  move  ones  tent,!?rtH  ahal. 

Gen.  13. 12  and  Lot.,  pitched  (his)  tent  toward  Sodom 

l.To  move  one's  tent,  ^hn  ahal,  3. 

Isa.   13. 20  neither  shall  the  Arabians  pitch  tent  th. 

3.  To  encamp,  sink  clown,  n:ri  chanah. 

Gen.  26.  17  and  pitched  his  tent  in  the  valley  of  Gerar 

33.  18  Jacob,  .pitched  his  tent  before  the  city 
Num  9.  17  the  children  of  Israel  pitched  their  tents 
Deut.  1.  33  search  you  out  a  place  to  pitch  your  tents 

PITCHER  — 

1.-4  pitclier,  nj  kacl. 

Gen.  24.  14  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee,  that  I 
24.  15  Rebekah  came  out.  .withherpitcherupon 
24.  16  went  down  to  the  well,  and  tilled  her  pi. 
24.  17  Let  me . .  drink  a  little  water  of  thy  pitch. 
24.  18  let  down  her  pitclier  upon  her  hand,  and 
24.  20  and  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  trough 
24.  43  Give  me.  .a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher  to 
24.  45  Rebekah  came  forth  with  her  pitcher  on 

24.  46  made  haste,  and  let  down  her  pitcher  fr. 
Judg.  7.  16  empty  pitchers,  and  lamps  within  the  pi. 

7.  19,  20  blew  the  the  trumpets,  and  brake  the  p. 
Eccl.12.    6  or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at  the  fountain 

2.A  bottle,  fiag&n,  ^1,  ^i  nebel. 

Lam.  4.    2  how  are  they  esteemed  as  earthen  pitch. 

Z.A  clay  or  earthen  pitcher,  Kepd/xiov  keramion. 
Mark  14.  13  meet  you  a  man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  wa. 
Luke  22.  10  man  meet  you,  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water 

PI'-THOM,  chs  narrow  pass. 

A  city  in  Lower  Egypt,  in  Goshen,  E.  of  the  Nile, 
twenty  four  miles  from  Heroopolis;  a  city  in  Upper 
Egypt,  three  days'  journey  from  Cairo,  (called  also 
Fayyam),  has  the  same  name. 

Exod.  1. 11  they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure  cities,  P. 

PI'-THON,  fin'S  harmless. 

A  son  of  Micah,  grandson  of  Jonathan  son  of  Saul.  B.C. 

1000. 

1  Ch.  8.  35  the  sons  of  Michah  (were)  P.,  and  Melech 
9.  41  the  sons  of  Micah  (were)  P.,  and  Melech 

PITIED,  to  be  — 

Mercies,  bowels,  D'Orri  rachamim. 

Psa.106.  46  He  made  them  also  to  be  pitied  of  all  th. 
PITIFUL,   (very) — 
\.  Mr  re  if  id,  UOrri  rachmani. 

Lam.  4.  10  The  hands  of  the  pitiful  women  have  so. 
'2.  Tender  hearted,  compassionate,  evo-rrkayxvos- 

1  Pe.    3.    8  love  as  brethren,  (be)  pitiful,  (be)  court. 

3.  Very  tender  hearted,  orcompa.  Tro\vo~it\ayxvos. 
Jas.    5.  11  the  Lord  is  [very  pitiful],  and  of  tender 

PITY  — 

l.Pitij,  rhzri  chemlah. 

Isa.  63' '  9  in  his  love  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed 
%Loving  kindness,  "ion  chesed. 

Job     6.  14  To  him  that  is  afflicted  pity  (should  be  s.) 

3.  Mercies,  bowels,  D'Drjn  rachamim, 

Amos  1.  11  did  cast  oh'  all  pity,  and  his  anger  did  t. 
PITY  (on  or  upon),  to  have  or  take  — 
l.To  spare,  pity,  Din  chus. 

Deut.  7.  16  thine  eye  shall  have  no  pity  upon  them 
13.    8  neither  shall  thine  eye  pity  him,  neither 
19.  13  Thine  eye  shall  not  pity  him  :  but  thou 
19.  21  thine  eye  shall  not  pity.  .life,  .for  life,  e. 

25.  12  cut  off  her  hand,  thine  eye  shall  not  pity 
Eze.  16.    5  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these 
Jon.    4.  10  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the  gourd,  for  the 

2.  To  have  pity,  spare,  7Cg  chamal. 

2  Sa.  12.   6  restore  the  lamb.,  because  he  had  no  pity 
Jer.   13.  14  I  will  not  pity,  nor  spare,  nor  have  meivy 

15.    5  who  shall  have  pity  upon  thee,  0  Jerus.? 
21.    7  shall  not  spare  them,  neither  have  pity 
Lam.  2.   2  Lord.. hath  not  pitied:  he  hath  thrown 
2.  17  hath  thrown  down,  and  hath  not  pitied 

2.  21  thou  hast  slain  (them,  .and)  not  pitied 

3.  43  thou  hast  slain,  thou  hast  not  pitied 
Eze.     5.  11  eye  spare,  neither  will  I  have  any  pity 

7.    4  neither  will  I  have  any  pity:  but  I  will 
7.   9  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I  have  pity 
8. 18  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I  have  pity 
9.    5  let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  have  ye  p. 
9. 10  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I  have  pity 
36.  21  But  I  had  pity  for  mine  holy  name,  which 
Joel    2.  i3  Then  will  the  Lord  be  jealous,  .and  pity 
Zech.11.    5  and  their  own  shepherds  pity  them  not 
11.    6  For  I  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants 
3.7V)  be  gracious,  ]in  chanan. 

Job   19.  21  Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon  me 
Prov  19. 17  He  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poor  lendeth 
28.   8  he  shall  gather  it  for  him  that  will  pity 

■i.I'ft.u.  object  of  pity,  Vsn-:  machmaL 

Eze.  24.  21  that  which  your  soul  piticth;  and  your 


5.  To  move,  bemoan,  to  nud. 

Psa.  69.  20  and  I  looked  (for  some)  to  take  pity,  but 

6.  To  love,  2>ity,  Drn  racham,  3. 

Psa. 103.  13  fatherpitieth  (his)  children,  (so)  the  Lord 
Isa.   13.  18  shall  have  no  pity  on  the  fruit  of  the  womb 

7.  To  be  kind,  tender,  e'Aeew  eleeo. 

MattiS.  33  compassion,  .even  as  I  had  pity  on  thee? 
PLACE  — 
l.A  place,  "inx  athar. 

Ezra   5. 15  let  the  house  of  God  be  builded  in  his  pi. 

6.    3  place  where  they  offered  sacrifices,  and 

6.    5  vessels,  .be  restured.  .(everyone)  to  his  p. 

6.    7  Jews,  build  this  house  of  God  in  bis  pi  ice 

Dan.   2.  35  no  place  was  found  for  them :  and  the  st. 

%A  house,  rv3  bayith. 

Exod25.  27  shall  the  rings  be  for  places  of  the  staves 
26.  29  make  their  rings  (of)  gold  (for)  places  for 
30.    4  they  shall  be  for  places  for  the  staves  to 

36.  34  made  their  rings  (of)  gold  (to  be)  places 

37.  14  the  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  the  tabl 

37.  27  to  be  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  it  with 

38.  5  the  grate  of  brass,  (to  be)  places  for  the 
2  Sa.  15.  17  and  tarried  in  a  place  that  was  far  off 

1  Ch.28. 1 1  thereof,  and  of  the  place  of  the  mercy  seat 
Neh.  2.  3  place  of  my  fathers' sepulchres,  (lieth)wa. 
Esth.  7.  8  returned,  .into  the  place  of  the  banquet 
Job  8.  17  wrapped  about,  .(and)  seeth  the  place  of 
Prov.  8.  2  She  standeth-  .in  the  places  of  the  paths 
Eze.  41.  9  place  of  the  side  chambers  that  (were)  w. 
46.  24  These  (are)  the  places  of  them  that  -boil 

3.  Border,  nSua  gebulah. 

Isa.   28.  25  appointed  barley,  and  the  rye,  in  their  p.? 

■4.  Hand,  T  yad. 

Num.  2.  17  every  man  in  his  place  by  their  standards 
Deut.  2.  37  unto  any  place  of  the  river  Jabbok,  nor 
23.  12  Thou  shalt  have  a  place  also  without  the 

1  Sa.  15.  12  he  set  him  up  a  place,  and  is  gone  about 

2  Sa.  18.  18  it  is  called  unto  this  day,  Absalom's  place 
Psa.141.    6  their  judges  are  overthrown  in  stony  pla. 
Isa.   56.    5  within  my  walls  a  place  and  a  name  better 
Jer.     6.    3  they  shall  feed  every  one  in  his  place 
Eze.  21. 19  choose  thou  a  place,  choose  (it)  at  the  he. 

5.  To  sit  down  or  still,  ng>;  yashab. 

2  Sa.  23.   7  utterly  burned  with  fire  in  the.  .place 

6.  Station,  base,  J3  ken. 

Gen.  40. 13  restore  thee  unto  thy  place :  and  thou  sh. 

7. A  base,  fixed  place,  jirD  makon. 

Exod  15.  17  the  place,  .thou hast  made  for  thee  to  dw. 

1  Ki.   8.  13  a  settled  place  for  thee  to  abide  in  for  ever 

8.  39,  43  hear  thou  iu  heaven  thy  dwelling  pi. 
8.  49  hear,  .in  heaven  thy  dwelling  place,  and 

2  Ch.  6.    2  an  house,  .and  a  place  for  thy  dwelling 

6.  30  hear  thou  from  heaven  thy  dwelling  pla. 
6.  33  hear  thou,  .from  thy  dwelling  place,  and 
6.  39  hear  thou,  .from  thy  dwelling  place,  their 

Ezra    2.  68  for  the  house  of  God  to  set  it  up  in  his  p. 

Psa.  33.  14  From  the  place  of  Ins  habitation  he  look. 

Dan.  8.  11  the  place  of  his  sanctuary  was  cast  down 
S. Habitation,  .*u>yp  meonah. 

Job  37.   8  go  into  dens,  and  remain  in  their  places 

9.  Station,  standing,  T&2.P  maa.mad. 

2  Ch.35.  15  singers. .(we're)intheirplace,accordiugto 

10.  A  place  of  standing,  Dipn  maqom. 

Gen.    1.    9  waters,  .be  gathered  together  unto  one  p. 

12.  6  passed  through  the  laud  unto  the  place  of 

13.  3  unto  the  place  where  his  tent  bad  been  at 
13.  4  Unto  the  place  of  the  altar,  which  he  had 
13. 14  look  from  the  place  where  thou  art  north. 
18.  24  not  spare  the  place  for  the  fifty  righteous 
18.  26  then  I  will  spare  all  the  place  for  their  s. 

18.  33  aud  Abraham  returned  unto  his  place 

19. 12  whatsoever. .  bring  (them)  out  of  this  place 

19. 13  For  we  will  destroy  this  place,  because  the 

19. 14  said,  Up,  get  you  outof  this  place  ;  for  the 

19.  27  to  the  place  where  he  stood  before  the  L. 

20.  11  Surely  the  fear  of  God  (is)  not  in  this  pi. 

20.  13  at  everyplace  whither  we  shall  come,  say 

21.  31  Wherefore  hecalledthat place Beer-sheba 

22.  3  went  unto  the  place  of  which  God  had  t. 
22.  4  lifted  up  bis  eyes,  and  saw  the  place  afar 
22.  9  came  to  the  place  which  God  had  told  him 
22.  14  Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  J. 
26.  7  the  men  of  the  place  asked  (him)  of  his 
26.  7  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for  Rod. 
28.  11  lighted  upon  a  certain  place,  and  tarried 
28.  11  and  he  took  of  the  stones  ot  that place,  and 
28.  11  pillows,  and  lay  down  in  that  place  to  si. 
28.  16  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place ;  and  I  1;. 

28.  17  afraid,  and  said,  How  dreadful  (is)  this  p.! 
2S.  19  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Beth-el 

29.  3  again  upon  the  well's  mouth  in  his  place 

29.  22  gathered  together  all  the  men  of  the  place 

30.  25  I  may  go  unto  mine  own  place,  and  to  my 

31.  55  Laban  departed,  and  returned  unto  his  p. 

32.  2  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Mahan. 

32.  30  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel 

33.  17  therefore  the  name  of  the  place  is  called 
35.  7  built  there  an  altar,  and  called  the  place 
35. 13  God  went  up  from  him  in  the  place  where 
35.  14  set  up  a  pillar  in  the  place  where  he  tal. 

35.  15  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  where 

36.  40  after  their  places,  by  their  names ;  duke 
38.  21  Then  he  asked  the  men  of  that  place,  say. 

38.  22  also  the  men  of  the  place  said,  (that)  there 

39.  20  a  place  where  the  king's  prisoners  (were) 


PLACE 


755 


PLACE 


Gen.  40.  '  3  prison,  the  place  where  Joseph  (was)  bo. 
Exod.  3.  5  place  whereon  thou  stamlest  (is)  holy  gr. 

3.  8  place  of  the  Canaauites,  and  the  Hittites 

16.  29  let  no  man  so  out  of  his  place  on  the  sev. 

17.  7  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Massah 

18.  23  all.  .shall  also  go  to  their  place  in  peace 

20.  24  In  all  places  where  I  record  my  name  I 

21.  13  appoint  thee  a  place  whither  he  shall  flee 

23.  20  thee  into  the  place  which  I  have  prepared 
29.  31  shalt.  .seethe  his  flesh  in  the  holy  place 
33.  21  (there  is)  a  place  by  me,  and  thou  shalt  s. 

Lev,     1.  16  on  the  east  part,  by  the  place  of  the  ashes 

4.  12  without  the  camp  unto  a  clean  place,wh. 
4.  24,  33  in  the  place  where  they  kill  the  burnt 

4.  29  and  slay,  .in  the  place  of  the  burnt  offer. 
6. 11  carry,  .without  the  camp  unto  a  clean  p. 
6.  16  shall  it  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place ;  in  the 
6.  25  In  the  place  where  the  burnt  offeriug  is 
6.  26  in  the  holy  place  shall  it  be  eaten,  in  the 

6.  27  whereon  it  was  sprinkled  in  the  holy  pla. 

7.  2  In  the  place  where  they  kill  the  burnt  of. 
7.    6  it  shall  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place :  it  (is) 

10.  13  ye  shall  eat  it  in  the  holy  place,  because 
10.  14  wave  breast,  .shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place 
10.  17  not  eaten  the  sin  offering  in  the  holy  pla. 
13. 19  in  the  place  of  the  boil  there  be  a  white  r. 
14.  13  in  the  place  where  he  shall  kill  the  sin 
14. 13  and  the  burnt  offering,  in  the  holy  place 
14.  28  place  of  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering 
14.  40  cast  them  into  an  unclean  place  without 
14. 41  off  without  the  city  into  an  unclean  place 
14.  45  forth  out  of  the  city  into  an  unclean  place 
16.  24  wash  his  flesh  with  water  in.  .holy  place 

24.  9  they  shall  eat  it  in  the  holy  place  :  for  it 
Num.  9.  17  in  the  place  where  the  cloud  abode,  there 

10.  29  We  are  journeying  unto  the  place  of  whi. 
ti.  3,  34  And  he  called  the  name  of  the  place 

13.  24  The  place  was  called  the  brook  Eshcol,  b. 

14.  40  the  place  which  the  Lord  hath  promised 
iS.  31  ye  shall  eat  it  in  every  place,  ye  and  your 
ig.  9  lay .  .up  without  the  camp  in  a  clean  pla. 
20.  5  in  unto  this  evil  place?  it  (is)  no  place  of 
2i.   3  he  culled  the  name  of  the  place  Hormah 

22.  26  stood  in  a  narrow  place,  where  (was)  no 

23. 13  Come,  I  pray,  .with  me  unto  another  pla. 

23.  27  Come, I.  .willbringtheeuutoanotherpla. 
24. 11  flee  thou  to  thy  place :  I  thought  to  prom. 

24.  25  returned  to  his  place  :  and  Balak  also  w. 
32.  1  behold,  the  place  (was)  a  place  for  cattle 
32.  17  until  we  have  brought  them  onto  then'  p. 

Deut.  1.  31  that  ye  went,  until  ye  came  into  this  place 

1.  33  to  search  you  out  a  place  to  pitch  your  ten. 

9.    7  until  ye  came  unto  this  place,  ye  have  been 

11.  5  what  he  did . .  until  ye  came  into  this  pla. 
it.  24  Every  place  whereon  the  soles  of  your  fe. 

12.  2  the  places  wherein  the  nations  which  ye 
12.    3  and  destroy  the  names,  .out  of  that  place 
12.    5  the  place  which  the  Lord  your  God  shall 
12. 11  there  shall  be  a  place  which  the  Lord  your 
12.  13  offer  uot  thy  burnt  offerings  in  every  pi. 

12. 14  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose 

12. 18  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall 
12.  21  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen 
12.  26  uuto  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  cho. 
14.  23  the  place  which  he  shall  choose  to  place 
14.  24  if  the  place  he  too  far  from  thee,  which 

14.  25  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 

15.  20  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose 

16.  2  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose  to 
16.    6,  7,  11,  15,  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy 

16.  16  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose ;  in  the 

17.  8  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 

17. 10  of  that  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose 

18.  6  unto  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  cho. 
2i.  19  his  city,  and  unto  the  gate  of  his  place 

■  23.  16  that  place  which  he  shall  choose  in  one 
26.  2  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall 
26.  9  he  hath  brought  us  into  this  place,  and 
29.    7  when  ye  came  unto  this  place,  Sihon  the 

31. 11  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose,  thou 
Josh.  1.    3  Every  place  that  the  sole  of  your  foot  sh. 

3.  3  ye  shall  remove  from  your  place,  and  go 
4. 18  waters  of  Jordan  returned  unto  their  pi. 

5.  9  the  place  is  called  Gilgal  unto  this  day 
5. 15  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  (is)  holy 

7.  26  that  place  was  called,  The  valley  of  Achor 

8.  19  ambush  arose  quickly  out  of  their  place 

9.  27  even,  .in  the  place  which  he  should  choose 
20.   4  give  him  a  place,  that  he  may  dwell  am. 

Judg.  2.  5  they  called  the  name  of  that  place  Bochim 
7.  7  let  all.  .people  go  every  man  unto  his  pla. 
9.  55  they  departed  every  man  unto  his  place 

11. 19  Let  us.  .through  thy  land  into  my  place 
15.  17  that  he.  .called  that  place  Ramath-lehi 

18.  10  a  place  where  (there  is)  no  want  of  any 

18. 12  they  called  that  place  Mahaneh-dan  unto 

19.  13  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these  places  to 
19.  16  but  the  men  of  the  place  (were)  Benjami. 

19.  28  man  rose  up,  and  gat  him  unto  his  place 

20.  22  in  the  place  where  they  put  themselves 
20.  33  men  of  Israel  rose  up  out  of  their  place 
20.  33  liers  in  wait.  .came,  .out  of  their  places 
20. 36  men  of  Israel  gave  place  to  the  Benjamites 

Ruth  1.   7  went  forth  out  of  the  place  where  she  w. 

3.  4  shalt  mark  the  place  where  he  shall  lie 

4.  10  brethren,  and  from  the  gate  of  his  place 
1  Sa.   3.    2  Eli  (was)  laid  down  in  his  place,  and  his 

3.   9  So  Samuel  went  and  lay  down  in  his  place 

5.  3  took  Dagon,  and  set  Mm  in  liis  place  ag. 
5. 11  let  it  go  again  to  his  own  place,  that  it 

6.  2  us  wherewith  we  shall  send  it  to  his  place 

7.  16  and  judged  Israel  in  all  those  places 


[Sa. 


>  Sa. 


Ivi. 


1  Ki. 


23 
1  Ch.13. 

14, 

15 

16. 
17- 


•  Ch. 


Ezra 


Neh. 


Esth. 
Job 


22  the  chiefest  place  among  them  that  were 
8  the  Lord,  .made  them  dwell  in  this  place 
46  the  Philistines  went  to  their  own  place 

19  the  place  where  thou  didst  hide  thyself 
25  by  Saul's  side,  and  David's  place  was  em. 

27  David's  place  was  empty:  and  Saul  said 
37  the  place  of  the  arrow  which  Jonathan 

2  appointed  . .  servants  to  such  and  such  a  p. 

22  see  his  place  where  his  haunt  is,  (and)  w. 

28  they  called  that  place  Sela-hammalilekoth 
5  came  to  the  place  where  Saul  had  pitched 
5  David  beheld  the  place  where  Saul  lay,  and 

25  David  went,  and  Saul  returned  to  Ills  p. 

5  give,  .a  place  in  some  town  in  the  count. 
4  he  may  go  again  to  h'is  place  which  thou 

31  the  places  where  David  himself  and  his 

16  that  place  was  called  Helkath-hazzurim 

23  as  many  as  came  to  the  place  where  Asa. 

20  called  the  name  of  that  place  Baal-pera. 

8  called  the  name  of  the  place  Perez-uz. 

17  set  it  in  his  place,  in  the  midst  of  the  ta. 

10  will  appoint  a  place  for  my  people  Israel 
16  a  place  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men 
19  return  to  thy  place,  and  abide  with  the 

21  in  what  place  my  lord  the  king  shall  be 

9  he  is  hid  now  in  some  pit,  or  in  some .  .p. 
12  in  some  place  where  he  shall  be  found 

39  Barzillai.  .returned  unto  Iris  own  place 

28  uuto  the  place  where  (the  officers)  were 
9  unto  the  place  that  thou  shalt  appoint 

6  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  .unto  his  place 

7  (their)  two  wings  over  the  place  of  the, 

21  And  I  have  set  there  a  place  for  the  ark 

29  the  place  of  which  thou  hast  said,  My  na. 

29  thy  servant  shall  make  toward  this  place 

30  when  they  shall  pray  toward  tins  place 
30  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dweling  place 
35  if  they  pray  toward  this  place,  and  confe. 
19  on  either  side  on  the  place  of  the  seat 

8  eat  bread  nor  drink  water  in  this  place 
16  nor  drink  water  with  thee  in  this  place 

22  the  place  of  the  which  (the  Lord)  did  say 

24  Take  the  kings . .  every  man  out  of  his  pi. 
19  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of 

1 1  strike  his  hand  over  the  place,  and  recover 

1  the  place  where  we  dwell  with  thee  is  too 

2  let  us  make  us  a  place  there,  where  wem. 

6  he  showed  him  the  place.     And  he  cut 

8  In  such  and  such  a  place  (shall  be)  my  ca. 

9  Beware  that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place 

10  the  place  which  the  man  of  God  told  him 

25  Am  I  now  come  up.  .against  this  place  to 

16  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place,  and  upon 

17  wrath  shall  be  kindled  against  this  place 

19  I  spake  against  this  place,  and  against 

20  the  evil  which  I  will  bring  upon  this  pla. 

14  filled  their  places  with  the  bones  of  men 

11  that  place  is  called  Perez-uzza  to  this  day 

11  called  the  name  of  that  place  Baal-peraz. 
1  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  and 

3  unto  his  place  which  he  had  prepared  for 
27  strength  and  gladness  (are)  in  his  place 

9  will  ordain  a  place  for  my  people  Israel 

22  Grant  me  the  place  of  (this)  tlu-eshing  fi. 

25  So  David  gave  to  Oman  for  the  place  six 
1  in  the  place  that  David  had  prepared  in 

7  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant . .  unto  his  place 

8  spread  forth  (their)  wings  over  the  place 
20  the  place  whereof  thou  hast  said  that  thou 

20  which  thy  servant  prayeth  toward  this  p. 

21  place  :  hear  thou  from  thy  dwelling  place 
2D  if  they  pray  toward  this  place,  and  confess 

40  unto  "the  prayer  (that  is  made)  in  this  pi. 

12  have  chosen  this  place  to  mj'self  for  an 

15  uuto  the  prayer  (that  is  made)  in  this  pi. 

18  stays  on  each  side  of  the  sitting  place 

26  the  same  place  was  called,  The  valley  of 

11  took  it,  and  carried  it  to  his  place  again 

19  and  the  places  wherein  he  built,  .and  set 

24  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place,  and  upon 

25  wrath  shall  be  poured  out  upon  this  place 

27  thou  heardest  his  words  against  this  place 

28  the  evil  that  I  will  bring  upon  this  place 

4  remaineth  in  any  place  where  he  sojourn. 
4  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  with  silver 

17  unto  Iddo  the  chief  at  the  place  Casiphia 
17  the  Xethinims,  at  the  place  Casiphia,  that 

8  to  give  us  a  nail  in  his  holy  place,  that  our 

9  the  place  that  I  have  chosen  to  set  my 
14  (there  was)  no  place  for  the  beast  (that 

12  From  all  places  whence  ye  shall  return  u. 

13  iu  the  lower  places  behind  the  wall,  (and) 

20  In  what  place  (therefore)  ye  hear  the  sound 
27  sought  the  Levites  out  of  all  their  places 

14  arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place ;  but 
11  they  came  every  one  from  his  own  place 

17  hot,  they  are  consumed  out  of  their  place 
10  neither  shall  his  place  know  him  anymore 

18  If  he  destroy  him  from  his  place,  then  (it) 
6  Which  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place 

18  and  the  rock  is  removed  out  of  his  place 
1 8  0  earth,  cover  not . .  let  my  cry  have  no  p. 
4  shall  the  rock  be  removed  out  of  his  place? 

2 1  this  (is) . .  place  (of  him  that)  knoweth  not 
9  neither  shall  his  place  any  more  behold 

21  and  as  a  storm  hurleth  him  out  of  his  p. 

23  clap,  .and  shall  hiss  him  out  of  his  place 
1  and  a  place  for  gold  (where)  they  fine  (it) 
6  The  stones  of  it  (are)  the  place  of  sapph. 

12,  20  where  (is)  the  place  of  understanding  ? 

23  Godunderstandeth.  .heknoweththeplace 

1  trembleth,  and  is  moved  out  of  his  place 


Job  38. 

Psa.  24. 
26. 

37- 
44. 
103. 
103. 
104. 
132. 
Prov  15. 

25- 

27. 

Eccl.  1. 

1. 

3- 
3- 
3- 
6. 


Isa. 


26. 

28. 

33- 
45- 

46. 
49. 
54- 
60. 
60. 
66. 
Jei\  4. 
7- 

7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7' 
7- 
8, 
*3- 
14, 
16, 
16. 
16. 
*7- 
19. 
19, 
19. 
19. 


Eze. 


39- 

41. 
42. 
43- 
45- 
46. 
46. 

Hos.    1. 

Joel  3. 
Amos  4. 
8. 
Mic.  1. 
Xah.   1. 

3- 

Zeph.  1. 

2. 

Hag.    2. 

Zech  14. 


12  caused  the  day  spring  to  know  his  place 
19  (for)  darkness,  where  (is)  the  place  thereof 

3  and  who  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place? 
8  and  the  place  where  thine  honour  dwell. 
10  thou  shalt  diligently  consider  his  place 

19  thou  hast  sore  broken  us  in  the  place  of 
16  the  place  thereof  shall  know  it  no  more 

22  his  works  in  all  places  of  his  dominion 

8  place  which  thou  hast  founded  for  them' 

5  Until  I  find  out  a  place  for  the  Lord,  an 

3  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  in  every  place 

6  and  stand  not  in  the  place  of  great  (men) 
8  so  (is)  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his  pi. 

5  and  hasteth  to  his  place  where  he  arose 

7  unto  the  place  from  whence  the  rivers  c. 
16  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of  judgment 
16  and  the  place  of  righteousness,  (that)  ini. 

20  All  go  uuto  one  place ;  all  are  of  the  dust 

6  seen  no  good :  do  not  all  go  to  one  place? 

10  gone  from  the  place  of  the  holy,  and  they 

4  leave  not  thyplace;  for  yielding  pacifleth 
3  in  the  place  where  the  tree  falleth,  there 

8  till  (there  he)  no  place,  that  they  may  be 

23  every  place  shall  be,  where  there  were  a 

13  the  earth  shall  remove  out  of  her  place 

2  bring  them  to  their  place :  and  the  house 

7  to  the  place  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  of 
23  will  fasten  him  (as)  a  nail  in  a  sure  place 
25  the  nail  that  is  fastened  in  the  sure  place 

21  Lord  conieth  out  of  his  place  to  punish 

8  full  of  vomit,  .(so  that  there  is)  no  place 

21  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  (and)  streams 

19  not  spoken  in  secret,  in  a  dark  place  of 

7  and  set  him  in  his  place,  and  he  standeth 

20  shall  say . .  The  place  (is)  too  strait  for  me 

2  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent,  and  let  them 
13  to  beautify  the  place  of  my  sanctuary ;  and 

13  I  will  make  the  place  of  my  feet  glorious 

1  house,  .and  where  (is)  the  place  of  my  r.? 
7  he  is  gone  forth  from  his  place  to  make 

3  and  I  will  cause  you  to  dwell  in  this  place 

6  and  shed  not  innocent  blood  in  this  place 

7  Then  will  I  cause  you  to  dwell  in  this  pi. 

12  go  ye.  .unto  my  place  which  (was)  in  Shi. 

14  the  place  which  I  gave  to  you  and  to  your 
20  firry  shall  he  poured  out  upon  this  place 
32  shall  buryin  Tophet,  till  there  be  no  place 

3  the  places  whither  I  have  driven  them 
7  took  the  girdle  from  the  place  where  I 

13  will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this  place 

2  neither.. sons  or  daughters  in  this  place 

3  the  daughters  that  are  born  in  this  place 

9  I  will  cause  to  cease  out  of  this  place  in 
12  high  throne. .(is)  the  place  of  our  sanctuary 

3  I  will  bringevil  upon  thisplace,  the  which 

4  have  estranged  this  place,  aud  have  burnt 

4  have  filled  this  place  with  the  blood  of 

6  this  place  shall  no  more  be  called  Tophet 

7  will  make  void  the  counsel,  .in  this  place 

11  in  Tophet,  till  (there  be)  no  place  to  bury 

12  Thus  will  I  do  unto  this  place,  saith  the 

13  shall  be  defiled  as  the  place  of  Tophet 

3  neither  shed  innocent  blood  in  this  place 

11  Shallum.  .which  went  forth  out  of  this  p. 

12  place  whither  they  have  led  him  captive 

5  whom  I  have  sent  out  of  this  place  into 
9  in  all  places  whither  I  shall  drive  them 

22  bring  them,  .and  restore  them  to  this  p. 
3  will  I  bring  again  into  this  place  all  the 

3  king  of  Babylon  took  away  from  this  place 

4  I  will  bring  again  to  this  place  Jeconiah 

6  away  captive,  from  Babylon  into  this  place 
10  in  causing  you  to  return  to  this  place 

14  from  all  the  places  whither  I  have  driven 

14  I  will  bring  you  again  into  the  place  wh. 
37  I  will  bring  them  again  unto  this  place 

10  there  shall  he  heard  in  this  place,  which 
12  this  place,  which  is  desolate  without  man 

2  hath  pronounced  this  evil  upon  this  place 
12  all  the  Jews  returned  out  of  all  places  w. 

18  saith  the  Lord,  .ye  shall  seethisplace  no 
22  the  place  whither  ye  desire  to  go  (and)  to 

29  I  will  punish  you  in  this  place,  that  ye 

5  a  prey  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest 
62  thou  hast  spoken  against  this  place,  to 

12  Blessed  (be),  .glory  of  the  Lord  from  his  p. 

13  place  where  they  did  offer  sweet  savour 

11  the  place  whither  the  head  looked  they 

3  remove  from  thy  place  to  another  place 

16  the  place  (where)  the  king  (dwelleth)  that 

30  in  the  place  where  thou  wast  created,  in 

12  will  deliver  them  out  of  all  places  where 

15  come  from  thy  place  out  of  the  north  pa. 
11  a  place  there  of  graves  in  Israel,  the  val. 
11  and  the  breadth  of  the  place  that  was  left 

13  the  trespass  offering; for  the  place  (is)  h. 

7  the  place  of  my  throne,  and  the  place  of 

4  it  shall  be  a  place  for  their  houses,  and 

19  there  (was)  a  place  on  the  two  sides  wes. 

20  This  (is)  the  place  where  the  priests  shall 

10  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them 
15  I  will  go  (and)  return  to  my  place,  till  th. 

7  of  the  place  whither  ye  have  sold  them 

6  and  want  of  bread  in  all  your  places  :  yet 
3  (shall  be)  many  dead  bodies  in  every  pi. 

3  the  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of  his  place 

8  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place  ther. 

17  their  place  is  not  known  where  they  (are) 

4  cut.  .the  remnant  of  Baal  from  thisplace 

11  every  one  from  his  place,  (even)  all  the 

9  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the 
10  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first  gate,  unto 


PLACE 


756 


PLAGUED 


Mai.    i.  ii  in  every  place  incense  (shall  be)  offered 

1  1 .  Standing,  station,  place,  tpy  omed. 

2  Ch.30.  16  they  stood  in  their  place  after  their  man. 

34.  31  the  king  stood  in  his  place,  and  made  a 

35.  10  the  priest  stood  in  their  place,  and  the 
Xeh.  8.    7  law :  and  the  people  (stood)  in  their  place 

g.   3  they  stood  up  in  their  place,  and  read  in 

13.  11  I  gathered,  .and  set  them  iu  their  place 

12.  An  opening,  nr®  jwthach. 

Gen.  38. 14  sat  in  an  open  place,  which  (is)hy  the  w. 

13.  Under,  beneath,  nrm  tachath. 

Lev.  14.  42  and  put  (them)  in  the  place  of  those  sto. 

W.JFole,  opening,  own  ope. 

Jas.     3.  ii  a  fountain  send  forth  at  the  same  place 

15.  Passage,  paragraph,  irepiox^l  perioche. 

Acts   8.  32  The  place  of  the  Scripture  which  he  read 

16.  Place,  rotros  topos. 

Matt  12.  43  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking 

14.  13  departed  thence  by  ship  into  a  desert  pi. 
14. 15  This  is  a  desertplace,  and  the  time  is  now 

14.  35  the  men  of  that  place  had  knowledge  of 
24.  7  pestilences,  and  earthquakes,  in  divers  p. 
24.  15  the  abomination,  .stand  in  the  holy  place 

26.  52  Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place  :for 

27.  33  when  they  were  come  unto  a  place  called 

27.  33  Golgotha,  that  is  to  say,  A  place  of  a  sk. 

28.  6  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 
Mark  1.  35  departed  into  a  solitary  place,  and  there 

1.  45  the  city,  but  was  without  in  desert  places 
6.  31  Come,  .yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  pi. 
6.  32  they  departed  into  a  desert  place  by  ship 
6.  35  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  now  the  time 

13.  8  there  shall  be  earthquakes  in  divers  pla. 

15.  22  they  bring  him  unto  the  place  Golgotha 

15.  22  which  is,  being  interpreted,  The  place  of 

16.  6  Jesus,  .behold  the  place  where  they  laid 
Luke  4.  17  he  found  the  place  where  it  was  written 

4.  37  into  every  place  of  the  country  round  ab. 
4. 42  he  departed  and  went  into  a  desert  place 
9.  10  [desert  place  belonging  to  the  city  called] 
9.  12  victuals :  for  we  are  here  in  a  desert  place 

10.    1  into  every  city  and  place,  whither  he  him. 

10.  32  when  he  was  at  the  place,  came  and  look. 

11.  1  as  he  was  praying  in  a  certain  place,  when 
11. 24  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking  rest 

14.  9  say  to  thee,  Give  this  man  place  ;  and  thou 
16.  28  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  tor. 
19.  5  when  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  he  looked 
21. 11  great  earthquakes  shall  be  in  divers  plac, 
22.  40  when  he  was  at  the  place,  he  said  unto 
23  33  come  to  the  place  which  is  called  Calvary 

John  4.  20  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where  men  ought 

5.  13  away,  a  multitude  being  in  (that)  place 
6. 10  there  was  much  grass  in  the  place.    So 

6.  23  nigh  unto  the  place  where  they  did  eat 

10.  40  into  the  place  where  John  at  first  baptiz. 

11.  6  abode,  .still  in  the  same  place  where  he 
11.  30  was  in  that  place  where  Martha  met  him 

11.  48  and  take  away  both  ourplace  and  nation 
14.    2  mansions.  .1  goto  prepare  aplace  for  you 

14.  3  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will 

18.  2  Judas,  .which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  p. 

19.  13  iu  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pavement,  but 
19.  17  And  he.  .went  forth  into  a  place  called 

19.  20  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified  was 
19. 41  in  the  place  where  he  was  crucified  there 

20.  7  but  wrapped  together  in  a  place  by  itself 
Acts   1.  25  fell,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own  place 

4.  31  place  was  shaken  where  they  were  assem. 
6.  13  blasphemous  words  against  this  holy  place 

6.  14  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  this  place 

7.  7  come  forth,  and  serve  me  in  this  place 

7-  33  place  where  thou  standest  is  holy  ground 
7.  49  what  house,  .what  (is)  the  place  of  my  re.  ? 

12.  17  he  departed,  and  went  into  another  place 

21.  28  the  people,  and  the  law,  and  this  place 
sx.  28  and  further,  .hath polluted thisholyplace 
27.    8  a  place  which  is  called  the  Fair  Havens 
27.  41  falling  into  a  place  where  two  seas  met 

Rom.  9.  26  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them 
12.  19  give  place  unto  wrath  :  for  it  is  written 

15.  23  having  no  more  place  in  these  parts,  and 

1  Co.  1.   2  with  all  that  in  every  place  call  upon  the 

2  Co.  2.  14  savour  of  his  knowledge  by  us  in  every  pi. 
Eph.  4.  27  Neither  give  place  to  the  devil 

1  Th.  1.    8  in  every  piace  your  faith  to  God  ward  is 
Heb.    8.    7  then  should  no  place  have  been  sought 

11.  8  place  which  he  should  after  receive  for 
12. 17  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 

2  Pe.    1.  19  unto  a  light  that  shineth  in  a  dark  place 
Rev.   2.    5  will  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his  pi, 

6. 14  mountain  and  island,  .moved  out  of.  .pi. 

12.  6  where  she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God 
12.  8  neither  was  their  place  found  any  more 
12.  14  into  her  place,  where  she  is  nourished  for 

16.  16  into  a  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue 
20.  11  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them 

17.  A  little  place,  spot,  xup'i0V  chorion. 

Matt  26.  36  with  them  unto  a  place  called  Gethsemane 
Mark  14.  32  came  to  a  place  which  was  named  Geths. 
[See  also  Another,  appointed,  besieged,  broad,  burying, 
certain,  cluefest,  close,  couching,  crooked,  dark,  de- 
cayed, deep,  desolate,  dry,  dwelling,  eminent,  empty, 
even,  every,  feeding,  from,  fruitful,  give,  good,  hearing, 
hiding,  high,  higher,  hollow,  holy,  in,  inhabited,  large, 
lie  down,  lodge,  lodging,  low,  lurking,  market,  miry, 
ordered,  pass,  pleasant,  profane,  refuge,  rest,  resting, 


secret,  separate,  settled,  slippery,  solitary,  steep,  stood, 
strong,  this,  threshing,  void,  waste,  what,  yonder.] 

PLACE,  (to  give  or  have)  — 

1.  To  put  doioji,  leave,  let  alone,  nyr  yanach,  5. 

2  Ch.  1.  14  which  he  placed  in  the  chariot  cities,  and 

4.    8  and  placed  (them)  in  the  temple,  five  on 

Eze.  37.  14  I  shall  place  you  in  your  own  land  :  then 

2.  To  cause  to  sit  down,  3$;  yashab,  5. 

Gen.  47. 11  Joseph  placed  his  father  and  his  brethren 

2  Ki.17.    6  placed  them  in  Halah  and  in  Habor  (by) 

17  24  and  placed  (them)  in  the  cities  of  Samaria 

17.  26  removed,  and  placed  in  the  citiesof  Sam. 

Hos.  11. 11 1  will  place  them  in  their  houses,  saith  the 

3.  To  take,  npV  laqach. 

Eze.  17.    5  he  placed  (it)  by  great  waters,  (and)  set 
•4.  To  put  down,  place,  nrg  nechath,  5. 

Ezra  6.    5  be  restored,  .and  place  (them)  in  the  ho. 

5.  To  give,  jru  nathan. 

2  Ch.17.    2  he  placed  forces  in  all  the  fenced  cities 
Isa.   46. 13  will  place  salvation  in  Zion,  for  Israel 
Eze.  37.  26  I  will  place  them,  and  multiply  them,  and 
Dan.  11.  31  they  shall  place  the  abomination  that 

6.  To  cause  to  stand,  "iDi/  amad,  5. 

1  Ki.  12. 32  he  placed  in  Beth-el  the  priests  of  the 

7.  To  put,  place,  D'b',  Dii?  sum,  sim. 

Exodi8.  21  place  (such)  over  them,  (to  be)  rulers  of 
Jer.     5.  22  which  have  placed  the  sand  (for)  the  bo. 

8. To  tabernacle,  cause  t-o  settle  douyn,  ]^  shaken,  3. 
Deut  14.  23  he  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 
16.  2  Lord  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 
16.  6  thy  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name 
16.  11  God  hath  chosen  to  place  his  name  there 
26.  2  God  shall  choose  to  place  his  name  there 
Psa.  78.  60  Shiloh,  the  tent  (which)  he  placed  among 

9.  To  tabernacle,  cause  to  settle  down,  \yy  shaken,  5. 
Gen.    3. 24  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  E. 

10.  To  give  place,  withdraw,  6Vax&>p€&j  anachoreo. 
Matt.  9.  24  Give  place;  for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  but 

11.77>  have  place  for,  x&>p€0)  choreo. 

John  8.  37  to  kill  me,  because  my  word  hath  no  pi. 
PLACE,  to  bring  again  to  one'a  — 
To  cause  to  sit  down,  3t;;  yashab,  5. 

Zech  10.    6  and  I  will  bring  them  again  to  plase  them 
PLACE,  (dwelling)  — 
A  tent,  bn'H  ohel. 

Job  21.  28  where  (are),  .dwelling  places  of  the  wic? 
PLACE,  in  or  to  this  or  of  that,  where  two  ways  meet — 
l.One  residing  in  a  place,  4vt6ttlos  entopios. 

Acts  21. 12  they  of  that  place,  besought  him  not  to 

2.  Here,  in  this  place,  ojSc  hode. 

Matt  12.    6  in  this  place  is  (one)  greater  than  the  te. 
Luke23-    5  beginning  from  Galilee  to  this  place 

PLACE,  where  one  is,  same  — 
Under,  beneath,  nr.n  tachath. 

2  Sa.    2. 23  he  fell  down .  .and  died  in  the  same  place 
Jer.  38.    9  to  die  for  hunger  in  the  place  where  he  is 

PLACES,  in  all  — 

Every  where,  in  every  place,  irapTaxov  pantachou. 
Acts  24.    3  We  accept  (it)  always,  and  in  all  places 
PLACED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  caused  to  sit  down,  DC1;  yashab,  6. 

Isa.     5.    8  they  may  be  placed  alone  iu  the  midst  of 

2.  To  put,  place,  D'i?,  nYty  sum,  sim. 

Job  20.  4  of  old,  since  man  was  placed  upon  earth 
PLACES  — 

[See  also  Boiling,   desolate,   drawing  water,   highest, 
latest,  parched,  rough,  round,  steep,  walk.] 

PLACES  about  — 
Pound  about,  3*3D  sahib. 

Jer.  17.  26  they  shall  come,  .from  the  places  about  J. 
PLAGUE  — 

1.  Pestilence,  121  deber. 

Hos.  13.  14  o'death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues;  O  grave,  I 

2.  Plague,  smitting,  n?3D  maggephah. 

Exod  9.  14  I  will  at  this  timesendallmy  plagues  upon 
Nunii4.  37  Even  those  men.  .died  by  the  plague  bef. 
16.  48  stood  between  the  dead,  .the  plague  was 
16.  49  they  that  died  in  the  plague  were  fourteen 
16.  50  Aaron  returned . .  and  the  plague  was  sta. 
25.  8  plague  was  stayed  from  the  children  of  T, 
25.   9  those  that  died  in  the  plague  were  twenty 

25.  18  which  was  slain  in  the  day  of  the  plague 

26.  1  came  to  pass  after  the  plague,  that  the  L. 
31. 16  there  was  a  plague  among  the  congreg;). 

1  Sa.   6.   4  for  one  plague  (was)  on  you  all,  and  mi  yo, 

2  Sa.  24.  21  the  plague  may  be  stayed  from thepeople 

24. 25  and  the  plague  was  stayed  from  Israel 

1  Ch.21.  22  the  plague  may  be  stayed  from  the  people 

■2  Ch.21.  14  with  a  great  plague  will  the  Lord  smite 

Psa.  106.  29  they  provoked,  .and  the  plague  brake  in 

106.  30  executed  judgment :  and  (so)  the  plague 

Zech. 14. 12  this  shall  lie  the  plague  wherewith  the  L. 

14.  15  And  so  shall  be  the  plague,  .as  this  plague 

14.  iS  there  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith  the 

%.A  smiting,  nsn  makkah. 

Lev.  26.  2i  I  willbringseven times murcplagucsupon 


Numn.  33  smote  the  people  with  a  very  great  plague 
Deut  28.  59  make  thy  plagues  wonderful,  and  the  pi. 
28.  59  great  plagues,  and  of  long  continuance 

28.  61  every  plague,  which  (is)  not  written  in  the 

29.  22  when  they  see  the  plagues  of  that  land 

1  Sa.  4.   8  smote  the  Egyptians  with  all  the  plagues 
Jer.    19.   8  and  hiss  because  of  all  the  plagues  thereof 
49.  17  and  shall  hiss  at  all  the  plagues  thereof 
50. 13  every  one.  .shall,  .hiss  at  all  her  plagues 

4.A  touch,  smiting,  yj3  nega. 

Gen.  12.  17  with  great  plagues  because  of  Sarai,  Abr. 
Exodn.  1  Yet  will  I  bring  oue  plague  (more)  upon 
Lev.  13.  2  (like)  the  plague  of  leprosy ;  then  he  shall 
13.  3  priest  shall  look  on  the  plague  in  the  skin 
13.  3  hair  in  the  plague  is  turned  white, and  the 
13.  3  plague  in  sight  (be)  deeper  than  the  skin 
13.  3  it  (is)  a  plague  of  leprosy  :  and  the  priest 
13.  4  priest  shall  shut  up  (him  that  hath)  the  p. 
13-  5  (if)theplagueinhissightbeatastay,(and> 
13.  6  plague  spread  not  in  the  skin,  the  priest 
13.  6  plague  (be)  somewhat  dark,  (and)  the  pi. 
13.  9  When  the  plague  of  leprosy  is  in  a  man 
13.  12  the  plague  from  his  head  even  to  his  foot 
13-  13.  17  pronounce.. clean  (that  hath)the  pla. 
13.  17  the  plague  be  turned  into  white  ;  then  t. 
13. 20  plague  of  leprosy  broken  out  of  the  boil 
13.  22  shall  pronounce  him  unclean  :  it  (is)  a  p. 
13.  25,  27  pronounce  him  unclean  :  it  (is)  the  p. 
13.  29  If  a  man  or  woman  have  a  plague  upon 
13.  30  Then  the  priest  shall  see  the  plague:  and 
13.  31  if  the  priest  look  on  the  plague  of  the  sc. 
13.  31  shut  up  (him  that  hath)  the  plague  of  the 
13.  32  seventh  day  the  priest  shall  look  on  the  p. 
13.  44  he  (is)  unclean.. his  plague  (is)in  his  head 
*3-  45  leper  in  whom  the  plague  (is),  his  clothes 
13.  46  All  the  days  wherein  the  plague  (shall  be) 
13.  47  garment  also  that  the  plague  of  leprosy  is 
13. 49  if  the  plague  be  greenish . .  it  (is)  a  plague 
13.  50  And  the  priest  shall  look  upon  the  plague 
13.  50  shut  up  (it  that  hath)  the  plague  seven  d. 
13.  51  look  on  the  plague,  .if  the  plague  be  spr. 
13.  51  plague  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy ;  it  (is)  una 
13.  52  any  thing  of  skin,  wherein  the  plague  is 
J3-  53  the  plague  be  not  spread  in  the  garment 
13.  54  that  they  wash  (the  thing)  wherein  the  pi. 
13.  55  look  on  the  plague.. (if)  the  plague  have 
13-  55  all(l  the  plague  be  not  spread  ;  it  (is)  unc. 
13,  56  plague  (be)  somewhat  dark  after  the  wa, 
13.  57  thou  shalt  burn  that  wherein  the  plague 
13.  58  if  the  plague  be  departed  from  them,  then 

13.  59  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  plague  of  leprosy 

14.  3  the  plague  of  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  If. 
14.  32  law  (of  him)  in  whom  (is)  the  plague  of  1 
14.  34  I  put  the  plague  of  leprosy  in  a  house  of 
14.  35  seemeth  to  me  (there  is)  as  it  were  a  pla. 
14.  36  priest  go  (into  it)  to  see  the  plague,  that 
1 4.  37  look  on  the  plague . .  (if)  the  plague  (he)  in 
14.  39  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  walls  of  the 
14.  40  take  away  the  stones  in  which  the  plague 
14.  43  if  the  plague  come  again,  and  break  out 
14.  44  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  house,  it  (is) 
14.  48  plague  hath  not  spread  in  the  house,  after 
14.  48  the  house  clean,  because  the  plague  is  h. 

14.  54  This  (is)  the  law  for  all  manner  of  plague 
24.   8  Take  heed  in  the  plague  of  leprosy,  that 

1  Ki.  8.  37  whatsoever  plague,  whatsoever  sickness 

8.  38  which  shall  know^  every  man  the  plague 

Psa.  91.  10  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy 

5. A  stumbling,  plague,  f|33  negeph. 

Exodi2. 13  plague  shall  iiot  be  upon  you  to  destroy 

30.  12  that  there beno  plague  among  them.wh. 
Num.  8.  19  that  there  be  no  plague  among  the  child. 

16.  46  there  is  wrath,  .the  plague  is  begun 
16.  47  the  plague  was  begun  among  the  people 
Josh. 22.  17  there  was  a  plague  in  the  congregation  of 

6. A  scourge,  whip,  plague,  h&o-ti£  mastix. 

Mark  3.  10  for  to  touch  him,  as  many  as  had  plagues 
5.  20  felt,  .that  she  was  healed  of  that  plague 
5-  34  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague 

Luke  7.  21  cured  many  of  (their)  infirmities  and  pla. 

7.  A  stroke,  jrfague,  7^77717  plege. 

Rev.    9.  20  which  were  not  killed  by  these  plagues 
11.    6  to  smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues,  as  of. 

15.  1  seven  angels  havingthe  seven  last  plagues 
15.   6  having  the  seven  plagues,  clothed  in  pure 

15.  8  till  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels 

16.  9  which  hath  power  over  these  plagues:  and 
16.  21  because  of  the  plague,  .for  the  plague  th. 
18.    4  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues 
iS.    8  Therefore  shall  her  plagues  come  in  one 

21.  9  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues 

22.  18  God  shall  add  unto  him  the  plagues  that 

PLAGUE,  to  — 

1.  To  touch,  smite,  plague,  JUJ  naga,  3. 

Gen.  12. 17  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  and  his  house  with 

■2.  To  smite,  plague,  *\l$  nagapifi. 

Kxod32.  35  Lord  plagued  the  people,  because  they 
Josh. 24.    5  I  plngued  Egypt,  according  to  that  which 
Psa.  89.  23  I  will  beat  down,  .and  plague  them  that 

PLAGTJED,  to  be  — 

1. Plague,  stroke,  slaughter,  n£3n  maggephah. 
1  Ch.21. 17  not  on  thy  people,  that  they  should  be  p. 

'2. To  be  touched,  smitten,  y::  naga,  4. 

Psa.  73.   5  neither  are  they  plagued  like  (other)  nil  n 

3.7*0  touch,  smite,  PJ3  naga. 

Psa.  73.  14  For  all  the  day  long  have  I  been  plagued 


PLAIN 


757 


PLANTS 


PLAIN,  (low)  — 

l.A  grassy  meadow,   -3N  ahel, 

Judgn.  33  unto  the  plain  of  the  vineyards,  with  a 

2.-4  plain,  p"?N  elon. 

Gen.  12.  6  place  of  Sichem,  uuto  tlie  plain  of  Moreh 
13.  18  and  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plainof  Mamre 
14. 13  he  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre  the  Amo. 

18.  1  appeared  unto  him  in  the  plains  of  Manure 
Deut  11.  30  over  against  Gilgal,  beside  the  plains  of 
Judg.  4.  1 1  pitched  his  tent  unto  the  plain  of  Zaanim 

9.  6  by  the  plain  of  the  pillar  that  (was)  in  S. 
9.  37  another  company  come  along  by  the  plain 

1  Sa.  10.    3  thou  shalt  come  to  the  plainof  Tabor,  and 

S.A  valley,  vale,  K?g3  biqa. 

Dan.    3.    1  he  set  it  up  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  in  the 

4.  A  valley,  vale,  njjga  biqah. 

Gen.  11.  2  they  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar 
Neh.  6.  2  (some  one  of)  the  villages  in  the  plain  of 
Isa.  40.  4  made  straight,  and  the  rough  places  plain 
Eze.    3.  22  Arise,  go  forth  into  the  plain,  and  I  will 

3,  23  I  arose,  and  went  forth  into  the  plain:  and 
8.    4  according  to  the  vision . .  I  saw  in  the  plain 

Amos  1.    5  cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  the  plain  of  A. 

5.-4  circle,  circuit,  "is?  Mkkar. 

Gen.  13.  10  beheld  all  the  plain  of  Jordan,  that  it  (was) 

13.  11  Then  Lot  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan 
13.  12  Lot  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  p. 

19.  17  neither  stay  thou  in  all  the  plain;  escape 
19.  25  overthrew  those  cities,  and  all  the  plain 
19.  28  looked,  .toward  all  the  land  of  the  plain 

19.  29  when  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the  plain 
Deut  34.    3  plain  of  the  valley  of  Jericho,  the  city  of 

2  Sa.  18.  23  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  way  of  the  plain,  and 

1  Ki.  7.  46  In  the  plain  of  Jordan  did  the  king  cast 

2  Ch.  4.  17  In  the  plain  of  Jordan  did  the  king  cast 
Neh.    3.  22  repaired  the  priests,  the  men  of  the  plain 

12.  28  out  of  the  plain  country  round  about  Jer. 

6  .4  plain,  level  place,  tW'9  mislwr. 

Deut.  3.  10  All  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  all  Gilead 

4.  43  Bezer  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  plain  cou. 
Josh  13.    9  and  all  the  plain  of  Medeba  unto  Dibon 

13.  16  midst  of  the  river,  and  all  the  plain  by 
13. 17  her  cities  that  (are)  in  the  plain ;  Dibon 
13.  21  all  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  all  the  ki. 

20.  8  upon  the  plain  out  of  t  e  tribe  of  Reuben 

1  Ki.20.  23  let  us  fight  against  them  in  the  plain,  and 

20.  25  we  will  fight  against  them  in  the  plain 

2  Ch.26.  10  both  in  the  low  country,  and  in  the  plains 
Psa.  27.  11  lead  me  in  a  plain  path,  because  of  mine 
Jer.  2i.  13  against  thee,  O.  .rock  of  the  plain,  saith 

48.    8  plain  shall  be  destroyed,  as  the  LuBD  hath 

48.  21  judgment  is  come  upon  the  plain  country 

Zech.  4.    7  before  Zerubbabel(thou  shalt  become)  a  p. 

7.  A  wilderness,  obscure  place,  ityi^  arabah. 

Num22.  1  pitched  in  the  plains  of  Moab  on  this-  .J. 
26.  3  spake  with  them  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  by 
26. 63  numbered  the  children,  .in  the  plains  of 
3T.  12  unto  the  camp  at  the  plains  of  Moab,  w. 
33.  48  pitched  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  by  Jordan 

33.  49  (even)  unto  Abel-shittim  in  the  plains  of 
33-  50  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  plains  of  Moab 
35.    1  the  plains  of  Moab  by  Jordan  (near)  Jeri. 
36. 13  the  plains  of  Moab  by  Jordan  (near)  Jeri. 

Deut.  1.    1  the  plain  over  against  the  Red  (sea),  bet. 

1.  7  in  the  plain,  in  the  hills,  and  in  the  vale 

2.  8  the  way  of  the  plain  from  Elath,  and  from 
3. 17  The  plain  also,  and  Jordan,  and  the  coast 

3.  17  Chinnereth  even  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain 

4.  49  the  plain  on  this  side  Jordan  eastward 
4.  49  the  sea  of  the  plain,  under  the  springs 

34.  1  Moses  went  up  from  the  plains  of  Moab 
34.   8  And.  .wept  for  Moses  in  the  plains  of  M. 

Josh.  3.  16  came  down  toward  the  sea  of  the  plain 

4.  13  over . .  unto  battle,  to  the  plains  of  Jericho 

5.  10  passover.  .at  even  in  the  plains  of  Jericho 
8. 14  out.  .at  a  time  appointed,  before  the  plain 

11.    2  the  plains  south  of  Chinneroth,  and  in  the 

11.  16  the  plain,  and  the  mountain  of  Israel,  and 

12.  1  unto.  .Hermon,  and  all  the  plain  on  the 
12.   3  from  the  plain  to  the  sea  of  Chinneroth  on 
12.    3  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain,  .the  salt  sea  on 

12.  8  in  the  plains,  and  in  the  springs,  and  in 

13.  32  the  plains  of  Moab,  on  the  other  side  Jo. 

1  Sa.  23.  24  in  the  plain  on  the  south  of  Jeshimon 

2  Sa.   2.  29  walked  all  that  night  through  the  plain 

4.   7  gat  them  away  through  the  plain  all  night 
15.  28  will  tarry  in  the  plain  of  the  wilderness 
17.  16  Lodge  not.  .in  the  plains  of  the  wildern. 

2  Ki.  14.  25  from . .  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain 
25.  4  (the  king)  went  the  way  toward  the  plain 
25.    5  and  overtook  him  in  the  plains  of  Jericho 

Jer.  39.    4  and  he  went  out  the  way  of  the  plain 
39.   5  overtook  Zedekiah  in  the  plains  of  Jeric. 
52.    7  all  the  men .  .went  by  the  way  of  the  pla. 
52.   8  overtook  Zedekiah  in  the  plains  of  Jericho 

Zech.  14. 10  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from 

S.A  low  place  or  plain,  >wS^  skepkelah. 

1  Ch.27.  28  sycamore  trees  that  (were)  in  the  low  pi. 

2  Ch.  g.  27  sycamore  trees  that  (are)  in  the  low  plains 
Jer.  17. 26  from  the  plain,  and  from  the  mountains 
Obad.     19  and  (they  of)  the  plain  the  Philistines:  and 
Zech.  7.    7  (men)  inhabited  the  south  and  the  plain 

9.^4  level  place,  toVou  tt&ivov  topoupedinou. 
Luke  6. 17  stood  in  the  plain,  and  the  company  of  his 


PLAIN  — 

\. Straight  forward,  nbi  nakoach. 

Prov.  8.    9  (are)  all  plaiu  to  him  that  under  stand  eth 

2.  Plain,  perfect,  simple,  Dn  tarn. 

Gen.  25.  27  Jacob  (was)  aplainman,  dwelling  in  tents 

3.  Rightly,  6p86is  orthos. 

Mark  7.  35  his  tongue  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  plain 
PLAIN,  to  make  or  be  made  — 

1.  To  explain,  engrave,  "1x3  baar,  3. 

Hab.   2.    2  make  (it)  plain  upon  tables,  that  he  may 

2.  To  make  level,  equal,  n$  shavah,  3. 

Isa.  28.25  When  he  hath  made  plain  the  face  thereof 
Z.To  exalt,  raise  up,  hbosal&l.    m 

Prov  15.  19  but  the  way  of  the  righteous  (is)  made  p. 
PLAINLY  — 
l.To  say,  "inx  amar. 

Exodai.  5  if  the  servant  shall  plainly  say,  I  love  my 
'l.To  explain,  ~)N3  baar,  3. 

Deut27.    8  write,  .all  the  words  of  this  law  very  pla. 

3.  To  be  uncovered,  revealed,  nS|  galah,  2. 

1  Sa.  2.  27  Did  I  plainly  appear  unto  the  house  of  thy 
i.Toput  before  one,  *i:j  nagad,  5. 

1  Sa.  10.  16  He  told  us  plainly  that  the  asses  were 
5.2*0  spread  out,  bhs perash,  3. 

Ezra  4.  18  letter,  .hath  been  plainly  read  before  me 
Q.Clear,  na  tsach. 

Isa.   32.    4  stammerers  shall  be  ready  to  speak  pla. 
7 .Boldness,  rafiftyaia  parrhesia. 

Johnio.  24  said.  .If  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly 
ci.  14  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  plainly,  Laza. 
16.  25  I  shall  show  you  plainly  of  the  Father 

16.  29  now  speakest  thou  [plainly],  and  speakest 
PLAINNESS  of  speech  — 

Boldness,  wafifacria  parrhesia. 

2  Co.  3.  12  Seeing,  .we  use  great  plainness  of  speech 
PLAISTER,  PLASTER  — 

{.Chalk,  Y|  gir. 

Dan.  5.  5  the  plaster  of  the  wall  of  the  king's  pala. 
2.  Plaster,  lime,  Tty  sid. 

Deut27.  2  great  stones,  and  plaster  them  with  plas. 
27.  4  and  thou  shalt  plaster  them  with  plaster 
PLAISTER  or  PLASTER,  to  (jay  for  a)  — 

1.  To  daub,  plaster,  ma  tuach. 

Lev.  14.  42  other  mortar,  and  shall  plaster  the  house 

2.  To  sjiread  out,  plaster,  rnp  viarach. 

Isa.    38.  21  lay  (it)  for  a  plaister  upon  the  boil,  and 

3.  To  plaster,  i"v  sid. 

Deut  27.  2  great  stones,  and  plaster  them  with  pla. 
27.    4  and  thou  shalt  plaster  them  with  plaster 

PLAISTERED  or  PLASTERED,  to  be  — 
To  be  daubed,  plastered,  ma  tuach,  2. 

Lev.  14.  43  if  the  plague  come,  .after  it  is  plastered 
14.  48  not  spread,  .after  the  house  was  plastered 
PLAIT  or  PLAT,  to  — 
To  plait,  braid,  fold,  twist,  tt\4ku  pleko. 

Matt 27.  29  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns 

Markis.  17  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  ab. 

Johnig.   2  soldiers  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put 

PLATTING  (the  hair)  — 

Plaiting  or  folding  in,  4fnr\oicf}  emploke. 

1  Pe.  3.  3  that  outward  (adorning)  of  plaitingtheh. 
PLANES  — 

Carving  tools,  corners,  niyspp  maqtsuoth. 

Isa.  44. 13  he  fitteth  it  with  planes,  and  he  marketh 
PLANETS  — 
Constellations,  niVjo  mazzaloth. 

2  Ei.23.  5  to  the  planets,  and  to  all  the  host  of  hea. 
PLANK  (thick)  — 

l.Any  thing  thick,  3j>  ab. 

Eze.  41.  26  side  chambers  of  the  house,  and  thick  pi. 
2.-4  tree,  wood.  J'y.  ets. 

Eze.  41. 25  thick  planks  upon  the  face  of  the  porch 
3..4  rib,  side,  J^x  tsela. 

1  Ki.  6. 15  covered  the  floorof  the  house  with  planks 
PLANT,  planting,  plantation  — 
l.A  plant,  planting,  yas matta. 

Isa.  60.  21  the  branch  of  my  planting,  the  work  of 

61.   3  planting  of  the  Lord,  that  he  might  be  g. 

Eze.  17.    7  water  it  by  the  furrows  of  her  plantation 

31.    4  her  rivers  running  round  about  his  plants 

34.  29  I  will  raise  up  for  them  a  plant  of  renown 

Mic.    1.    6  will  make  Samaria . .  asplantings  of  a  vine 

2.  Branches,  tendrils,  twigs,  riW*Ety  netishoth. 

Jer.  48.  32  thy  plants  are  gone  over  the  sea,  they  re. 

3.-4  plant,  ya3  neta. 

1  Ch.  4.  23  those  that  dwelt  amongplants  and  hedges 
Job  14.  9  bud,  and  bring  forth  boughs  like  a  plant 
Isa.     5.    7  and  the  men  of  Judah  his  pleasant  plant 

17.  10  therefore  shalt  thou  plant  pleasant  plants 
17.  11  In  the  day  shalt  thou  make  thy  plant  to 

4. Plants,  D'VP?  netiim. 

Psa.,144. 12  That  our  sons  (may  be)  as  plants  grown 


5. Shrub,  n'b'  stack. 

Gen.    2.    5  every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in  the 

6. A  shoot,  rfcv  shelach. 

Song  4.  13  Thy  plants  (are)  an  orchard  of  pomegran. 

l.A  plant,  Sn^  shethil. 

Psa.  128.   3  children  are  like  olive  plants  round  about 

8. Plant,  plantation,  <pvrtia phuteia. 

Matt  1 5.  13  Every  plant,  which  my  heavenly  Father 

PLANT,  to  — 
X.Tojplant,  j?tt3  nata. 

Gen.  2.  8  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  of  Eden 
9.  20  husbandman,  and  he  planted  a  vineyard 
21.  33  planted  a  grove  in  Beer-sheba,  and  called 
Exodis.  17  plant  them  in  the  mountain  of  thine  inh. 
Lev.  19.  23  shall  have  planted  all  manner  of  trees  for 
Num24-  6  which  the  Lord  hath  planted,  (and)  as  ce. 
Deut.  6.  11  olive  trees,  which  thmiplantedst  not;  wh. 

16.  21  Thou  shalt  not  plant  thee  a  grove  of  any 
20.  6  what  man  (is  he)  that  hath  planted  a  vin". 
28.  30  thou  shalt  plant  a  vineyard,  and  shalt  not 

28.  39  Thou  shalt  plant  vineyards,  and  dress  (th.) 
Josh  24.  13  of  the  vineyards.,  which  ye  planted  not  do 
2  Sa.  7.  10  plant  them,  that  they  may  dwell  in  a  pi. 
2  Ki.19.  29  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruits  thereof 
1  Ch.17.  9  will  plant  them,  and  they  shall  dwell  in 
Psa.  44.    2  drive,  .the  heathen,  .and  plantedstthem 

80.  8  thou  hast  cast  out  the  heathen,  and  plan. 
80.  15  vineyard  which  thy  right  hand  hath  plan. 
94.  9  He  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  ? 
104.  16  cedars  of  Lebanon,  which  he  hath  planted 
107.  37  sow  the  fields,  and  plant  vineyards,  which 
Prov  31.  16  with  the  fruit  of  her  hands  she  planteth 
Eccl.   2.   4  I  builded  me  houses  ;  I  planted  me  vine. 

2.  s  I  planted  trees  in  them  of  all  (kind  of)  f  r. 

3.  2  a  time  to  plant,  and  a  time  to  pluck  up 
Isa.    5.  2  planted  it  with  the  choicest  vine,  and  bu. 

17.  10  therefore  shalt  thou  plant,  .and  shalt  set 
37-  30  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  thereof 

44.  14  he  planteth  an  ash,  and  the  rain  doth  n. 

51. 16  that  I  may  plant  the  heavens,  and  lay  the 
65.  21  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  f. 
65.  22  they  shall  not  plant,  and  another  eat :  for 

Jer.     1.  10  and  to  throw  down,  to  build,  and  to  plant 

2.  21  Yet  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wh. 

11. 17  Lord  of  hosts,  that  planted  thee,  hath  p. 
i2.   2  Thou  hast  planted  them,  yea,  they  have 

18.  9  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  build  and  top. 
24.   6  I  will  plant  them,  and  not  pluck  (them) 

29.  5,  28  plant  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  th. 
31.  5  Thou  shalt  yet  plant  vines  upon  the  mo. 
31.    5  shall  plant,  and  shall  eat  (them)  as  com. 

31.  2S  watch  over  them,  to  build,  and  to  plant 

32.  41  plant  them  in  this  land  assuredly  with 

35.  7  Neither  shall  ye.  .plant  vineyard,  nor  Ii. 
42.  10  will  plant  you,  and  not  pluck  (you)  up 

45.  4  that  which  I  have  planted  I  will  pluck  up 
Eze.  28.  26  shall  build  houses,  and  plant  vineyards 

36.  36  know  that  I.  .plant  that  that  was  desolate 
Dan.  11.  45  he  shall  plant  the  tabernacles  of  his  pal. 
Amos  5. 11  ye  have  planted  pleasant  vineyards,  but 

9.  14  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the 
9.  15  I  will  plant  them  upon  their  land,  and 
Zeph.  1.  13  plant  vineyards,  but  not  drink  the  wine 

2.  To  plant,  hny  shathal. 

Eze.  17.  22  will  plant  (it)  upon  an  high  mountain 
17.  23  In  the  mountain,  .will  I  plant  it ;  and  it 

Z.To  plant,  <pvr€va>  phuteuo. 

Matt  15.  13  which  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not  pla. 

ai.  33  which  planted  a  vineyard,  and  hedged  it 
Mark  12.  1  A  (certain)  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
Luke  1 3.   6  had  a  fig  tree  planted  in  his  vineyard  ;  and 

17.    6  plucked  up.  .and  be  thou  planted  in  the 

17.  28  bought,  they  sold,  they  planted,  they  bu. 

20.   9  A  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
1  Co.  3.   6  I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered ;  but  G. 

3.  7  So  then  neither  is  he  that  planteth  any  ! 
3.  8  he  that  planteth  andhethatwaterethare 
9.    7  who  planteth  a  vineyard,  and  eateth  not 

PLANTED,  to  be  — 

l.To  plant,  fasten,  yai  nata, 

Eccl.   3.    2  a  time  to  pluck  up  (that  which  is)  planted 

2.To  be  planted,  yai  nata,  2. 

Isa.  40.  24  they  shall  not  be  planted ;  yea,  they  shall 

%.  To  plant,  hny  shathal. 

Psa.     1.    3  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water 

92.  13  Those  that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the 

Jer.   17.    8  he  shall  be  as  a  tree  planted  by  the  waters 

Eze.  17.    8  It  was  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  great  w. 

17  10  (being)  planted,  shall  it  prosper?  shall  it 

19.  10  a  vine  in  thy  blood,  planted  by  the  waters 
19.  13  she  (is)  planted  in  the  wilderness,  in  ad. 

Hos.    9. 13  Ephraim,  as  I  saw  Tyrus,  (is)  planted  in 

PLANTED  together  — 

Planted  together,  o-vpcpvTos  sumphutos. 

Rom.  6.    5  if  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the 

PLANTER  — 

To  plant,  s/Bi  nata. 

Jer,  31.    5  the  planters  shall  plant,  and  shall  eat 

PLANTS,  principal  — 
Branches,  w$rty  seruqqim. 

Isa.   16.   8  have  broken  down  the  principal  plants 


PLAT 


75S 


PLEASE 


FLAT  — 

Portion,  njjSn  chelqah. 

2  Ki.  9.  26  I  will  requite  thee  in  this  plat,  saith  the 
9.  26  cast  him  into  the  plat  (of  ground),  aocor. 

PLATE  (thin)  — 

1.  Tablet,  board,  m1?  luach. 

1  Ki.  7.  36  on  the  plates  of  the  ledges  thereof,  and 

%  Axle,  prince,  pp  seren. 

1  Ki.  7.  30  had  four  brasen  wheels,  and  plates  of  br. 

Z.Plate,  n?  pack. 

Exod39.    3  they  did  beat  the  gold  into  thin  plates 
Num  16.  38  broad  plates  (for)  a  covering  of  the  altar 

4.  Blossom,  flower,  icing,  f"S  tsits. 

ExodaS.  3*6  thou  shalt  make  a  plate  (of)  pure  gold,  and 

39.  30  And  they  made  the  plate  of  the  holy  cro. 

Lev.    8.    9  did  he  put  the  golden  plate,  the  holy  cro. 

PLATTER  — 

1..-1  dish  or  platter  for  food,  irapotyis  paropsis. 
Matt  23.  25  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  of  the  platter 
23.  26  that  (which  is)  within  the  cup  [and  plat. 

2.  A  board,  flat  dish,  irtva.%  p>inax. 

Luke  11.  39  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the  pla. 
PLAY,  to  — 

1.  To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  ]n  nagan,  3. 

1  Sa.  16.  16  he  shalfplay  with  his  hand,  and  thou  sh. 

16.  17  Provide  me  now  a  mau  that  can  play  well 
16.  23  David  took  an  harp,  and  played  with  his 

18.  10  David  played  with  his  hand,  as  at  other 

19.  9  sat  in  his  house,  .and  David  played  with 

2  Ki.  3.  15  when  the  minstrel  played,  that  the  hand 
Psa.  33.  3  Sing  unto  him  a  new  song;  play  skilfully 
Eze.  33.  32  song  of  oue  that,  .can  play  well  on  an  in. 

2.  To  play  with,  mock,  pnj"  tsachaq,  3. 

Exod32.   6  the  people  sat  down,  .and  rose  up  to  play 
Z.To  laugh,  play,  deride,  mock,  prtip  sachaq,  3. 

1  Sa.  18.    7  women  answered  (one  another)  as  they  p. 

2  Sa.  2.  14  Let  the  young  menuow  arise  and  play  be. 

6.    5  David  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  played 

6.  21  Israel  :  therefore  will  I  play  before  the  L. 

1  Ch.  13.    8  David  aud  all  Israel  played  before  God  w. 

15.  29  saw  king  David  dancingandplaying;  and 
Job    40.  20  food,  where  all  the  beasts  of  the  held  play 

41.    5  Wilt  thou  play  with  him  as  (with)  a  bird? 
Psa.  104.  26  leviathan,  (whom)  thou  hast  made  to  play 
Zech.  8.    5  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  girls  playing  in 
A.  To  play,  delight  self,  vyy  shaa,  3«. 

Isa.   11.    8  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the 

5.  To  play,  behave  as  a  boy,  iraifa  paizo. 

1  Co.  10.    7  people  sat  down  to  eat.  .and  rose  up  to  p. 
PLAYER  (on  instruments),  playing  — 

1.  To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  |32  nagan. 
Psa.  68.  25  the  players  on  instruments  (followed)  af. 

2.  To  play  on  a  stringed  instrument,  J3J  nagan,  3. 

1  Sa.  16.  16  man,  (who  is)  a  cunning  player  on  an  harp 

16.  18  cunning  in  playing,  aud  a  mighty  valiant 

PLEA  — 

Judgment,  plea,  cause,  jn  din, 

Deuti7.   8  between  plea  and  plea,  and  between  str. 
PLEAD  (the  cause),  to  — 

1.  To  plead,  judge,  strive,  p1]  din. 

Prov  31.   9  plead  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy 
Jer.  30.  13  none  to  plead  thy  cause,  that  thou  may. 

2.  To  reason,  reprove,  decide,  re;  yakach,  5. 

Job    16.  21  Oh  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with 
19.    5  magnify,  .against  me,  and  plead  against 

3.  To  reason,  rn;  yakach,  7. 

Mie.    6.    2  a  controversy,  .and  he  will  plead  with  I. 

4.  T>>  strive,  plead,  3,-i  rib. 

Judg.  6.  31  Will  ye  plead . .  he  that  will  plead  for  him 
6.  31  let  him  plead  for  himself,  because  (one) 
6.  32  Let  Baal  plead  against  him,  because  he 
1  Sa.  24.  15  plead  my  cause,  and  deliver  me  out  of  t. 

25. 39  hath  pleaded  the  cause  of  my  reproach 

Job    13. 19  Who  (is) he  (that)  will  plead  "with  me?  for 

23.   6  Will  he  plead  against  me  with  (his)  great  p.? 

Psa.  35.    1  Plead.  .0  Lord,  with  them  that  strive  w. 

43.    1  plead  my  cause  against  an  ungodly  nation 

74.  22  plead  thine  own  cause :  remember  how  the 

119. 154  Plead  my  cause,  and  deliver  me:  quicken 

Prov  22.  23  For  the  Lord  will  plead  their  cause,  and 

23.  11  Redeemer,  .shall  plead  their  cause  with 

Isa.     1.  17  judge  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow 

3,  13  Loan  standeth  up  to  plead,  and  standcth 

51.  22  thy  God  (that)  pleadeth  the  cause  of  his  p. 

Jer.    2.   9  I  will  yet  plead  witli  you,  saith  the  Loud 

2.    9  with  your  children's  children  will  I  plead 

2.  29  Wherefore  will  ye  plead  with  me?  ye  all 

12.    1  Righteous  (art)  thou,  .when  I  plead  with 

50.  34  he  shall  throughly  plead  thcircause,  that 

51.  36  I  will  plead  thy  cause,  and  take  vengeance 
Lam.  3.  58  thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my  soul 
Hua.   2.    2  Plead  witli  your  mother,  plead  ;  for  Bhe 
Mic.    7.    9  until  he  plead  my  cause,  and  execute  ju. 

5.7*0  be  judged,  to  plead,  897  shaphat,  -. 

Isa.   43.  26  Put  me  in  remembrance  :  let  us  plead  to. 

59.   4  None  calleth  for  justice,  nor  (any)  plead. 

66.  16  will  theLORDplead  with  allhV.sh  :  and  the 
Jer.    2. 35 1  will  plead  with  thee,  because  thou  say. 

?5  31  he  will  plead  witli  all  flesh  ;  he  will  give 


Eze.  17.  20  will  plead  with  him  there  for  his  trespass 
20.  35  and  there  will  I  plead  with  you  face  to  face 
20.  36  Like  as  I  pleaded . .  so  will  I  plead  with  you 
38.  22  I  will  plead  against  him  with  pestilence 
Joel    3.    2  will  plead  witli  them  there  for  my  people 
PLEADING  — 
Strife,  pleading,  cause,  3%  rib. 

Job  13.    6  aud  hearken  to  the  pleadings  of  my  lips 
PLEASANT  vplace  or  thing) — 
1.  Desire,  ion  chemed. 

Isa.   32.  12  for  the  pleasant  fields,  for  the  fruitful  v. 
Amos  5.  11  ye  have  planted  pleasant  vineyards,  but 
'l.Desire,  JTiDn  chemdah. 

2  Ch.32.  27  and  for  all  manner  of  pleasant  jewels 
Psa.  106.  24  Yea,  they  despised  the  pleasant  land,  they 
.Isa.     2.  16  all  the  ships,  .and  upon  all  pleasant  pic. 
Jer.     3. 19  give  thee  a  pleasant  land,  a  goodly  heri. 
12.  10  they  have  made  my  pleasant  portion  a  d. 
25.  34  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  pleasant  vessel 
Eze.  26.  12  destroy  thy  pleasant  houses  :  and  they 
Hos.  13.  15  spoil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant  vessels 
Nah.    2.    9  glory  out  of  all  the  pleasant  furniture 
Zech.  7.  14  for  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate 

3. Desirable  objects,  nnmq  chamudoth. 

Dan.  10.   3  I  ate  no  pleasant  bread,  neither  came  fle. 
11.  38  with  precious  stones,  and  pleasant  things 

4. Grace,  ]n  chen. 

Prov.  5.  19  the  loving  hind  and  pleasant  roe ;  let  her 
5. Delighting,  willing,  desiring,  pan  chejjhcts. 

Isa.  54.  12  and  all  thy  borders  of  pleasant  stones 
Q.Good,  3ia  tob. 

2  Ki.    2.  19  situation  of  this  city  (is)  pleasant,  as  my 

Eccl.11.    7  pleasant  (thing  it  is)  for  the  eyes  to  beho. 

7.  Fair,  ns;  yapheh. 

Eze.  33.  32  song  of  one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and 
8. Precious  thing,  "iao  meged. 

Song  4. 13  with  pleasant  fruits  ;  camphire,  with  sp. 
4.  16  come  into  hisgarden,aud  eat  his  pleasant 
7.  13  at  our  gates  (are)  all  manner  of  pleasant 

9.  Desirable  thing,  "icno  machmad. 

1  Ki.  20.  6  whatsoever  is  pleasant  in  thine  eyes,  they 
Isa.  64.  11  and  all  our  pleasant  things  are  laid  waste 
Lam.  1.  10  his  hand  upon  all  her  pleasant  things :  for 

1.  11  they  have  given  their  pleasant  tilings  for 

2.  4  slew  all  (that  were)  pleasant  to  the  eye  in 
Hos.  9.  6  the  pleasant  (places)  for  their  silver,  net. 
Joel  3.    5  have  carried,  .my  goodly  pleasant  things 

10.  Desirable  things,  D,T]orp  maxhamuddim. 

Lam.  1.   7  all  her  pleasant  things  that  shehad  in  the 
1. 11  they  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for 
11. Comely  place,  rail  naah. 

Jer.  23.  10  pleasant  places  of  the  wilderness  are  dr. 

12.  Comeliness,  rm  naveh. 

Hos.  9.  13  Ephraim.  .(is)planted  in  a  pleasant  place 

13.  Pleasant,  sweet,  D-yi  naim. 

2  Sa.  1. 23  Saul  and  Jonathan  (were)  lovely  and  pie. 
Psa.  16.    6  The  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant 

81.  2  bring  hither  the  timbrel,  the  pleasant  liarp 
133.  1  how  good  and  how  pleasant . .  for  brethren 
135.  3  sing  praises  unto  his  name ;  for  (it  is)  pi. 
147.  1  for  (it  is)  pleasant ;  (and)  praise  is  comely 
Prov22. 18  For  (it  is)  a  pleasant  thing  if  thou  keep  t. 
24.  4  filled  with  all preciousand pleasant  riches 
Song  1. 16  thou  (art)  fair,  my  beloved,  yea,  pleasant 

14.  Pleasantness,  uyi  noam. 

Prov  15.  26  but  (the  words)  of  the  pure  (are)  pleasant 
16.  24  Pleasant  words  (are  as)  an  honey  comb 

15. Pleasant  things,  Dttojy  naamanim. 

Isa.  17.  10  therefore  shalt  thou  plant  pleasant  plants 
16. Delight,  )}V  oneg. 

Isa.  13.  22  dragons  in  (their)  pleasant  palaces :  and 

17. Beauty,  desire,  '3s  tsebi. 

Dan.   8.   9  toward  the  east,  and  toward  the  pleasant 

18.  Delights,  n^&iy  shaashuim. 

Isa.  5.  7  and' the  men  of  Judah  hispleasant  plant 
Jer.   31.  20  Ephraim  my  dear  sou?  (is  he)  a  pleasant 

19.  Desire,  niKE  taavah. 

Gen.  3.  6.  when  the  woman  saw.  .that  it  (was)  plea. 
20. Delight,  luxury,  my.R  taanug. 

Mic.  2.  9  have  ye  cast  out  from  their  pleasant  ho. 
PLEASANT,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  be  desired,  inn  chamad,  2. 

Gen.   2.   9  to  grow  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the 

2.  To  be  pleasant,  oya  naam. 

Gen.  49.  15  the  land  that  (it  was)  pleasant;  and  bowed 
2  Sa.  1.  26  very  pleasant  nasttnou  been  untome:  thy 
Prov.  2.  10  and  knowledge  is  pleasant  unto  thy  soul 
9.  17  sweet,  and  bread  (eaten)  in  secret  is  plea. 
Song   7.    6  How  fair  and  how  pleasant  art  thou,  0  1. 

::,  To  be  sw&et,  in,;  arab. 

Mai.    3.    4  Then  shall  the  offering,  .be  pleasant  unto 

PLEASANTNESS  — 
Pleasantness,  BJJJ  noam, 

Prov.  3.  17  Her  ways  (are)  ways  of  pleasantness,  and 
PLEASE,  to  — 
l.To  have  delight,  to  please,  ran  chaphets. 

Psa. 115.    3  he  hath  done  whatsoever  he  hath  plea  -: ed 


Psa.  135.  6  Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased, (thattdid  he 
Eccl.  8.  3  for  he  doeth  whatsoever  pleaseth  him 
Song  2.  7  charge . .  that  ye  stir  not  up . .  till  he  please 
3.  5  charge . .  that  ye  stir  not  up . .  till  he  please 
8.  4  charge .  that  ye  stir  not  up . .  until  he  pie. 
Isa.   53. 10  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him  ;  he 

55.  11  but  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  pie. 

56.  4  choose  (the  things)  that  please  me,  and 
Jon.    1.  14  thou,  0  Lord,  hast  done  as  it  pleased  thee 

2.  To  be  good,  3io  tob. 

Num  24.    1  when  Balaam  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lo. 

Neh.    2.    5,  7  said  unto  the  king,  If  it  please  the  king 

Esth.  1.  19  If  it  please  the  king,  let  there  go  a  royal 

3.    9  If  it  please  the  king,  let  it  be  written  that 

5.    8  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  petition 

7.    3  if  it  please  the  king,  let  my  life  be  given 

3.  Good,  3ita  tob. 

Esth.  9.  13  If  it  please  the  king,  let  it  be  granted  to 

4.  Delighting,  willing,  j'2n  chaphets. 

1  Ki.  21.   6  if  it  please  thee,  I  will  give  thee  (another) 

5.  To  be  pleased,  desirous,  *?n;  yaal,  5. 

1  Sa,  12.  22  hath  pleased  the  Lord  to  make  you  his  p^ 

2  Sa.   7.  29  let  it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy 

1  Ch.17.  27  let  it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy 
Job     6.    9  Even  that  it  would  please  God  to  destroy 

6.  To  be  good,  39;  yatah. 

Neh.   2.    6  So  it  pleased  the  king  to  send  me  ;  and  I 
Esth.  5.  14  the  thing  pleased  Hainan ;  and  he  caused 

7.  To  be  good  in  the  eyes  of,  \yjJ3  39;  yatab  beene. 

Gen.  34.  iS  their  words  pleased  ilamor,  and  Shechem 
45.  16  it  pleased  Pharoah  well,  and  his  servants 

Josh. 22.  30  And  when  rhinehas.  .heard,  .it  pleased 
22.  33  the  thing  pleased  the  children  of  Israel 

2  Sa.  3.  36  people  took  notice,  .and  it  pleased  them 
1  Ki.  3.  10  speech  pleased  the  Lord,  that  Solomon 
Esth.  1. 21  the  saying  pleased  the  king  and  the  prin. 

2.  4  let  the  maiden  which  pleaseth  the  king  be 
2.  4  the  thing  pleased  the  king  ;  and  he  did  so 
2.   9  maiden  pleased  him,  and  she  obtained 

8.  To  become  or  seem  good,  3t?;  yatab,  5. 

1  Sa.  20.  13  but  if  itplease  my  father  (to  do)  theeevil 

9.  To  be  2)leasing,  nyi  ratsah. 

2  Ch.  10.    7  If  thou  be  kind  to  this  people,  and  please 
Prov  16.    7  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 

10.  To  be  fair,  19&  shephar. 

Dan.   6.    1  It  pleased  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom 

11.  To  be  right  in  the  eyes  of,  "Vy3  "R^  yashar  beene. 
Num  23.  27  peradventure  it  will  please  God  that  thou 
1  Sa.  18.  20  they  told  Saul,  and  the  thing  pleased  him 

1  Ki.  9.  12  had  given  him;  and  they  pleased  him  not 

2  Ch.30.    4  pleased  the  king  and  all  the  congregation 

12.Good  before,  yizb  nta  lob  Upline. 

Eccl.  7.  26  whoso  pleaseth  God  shall  escape  from  her 
lB.Good  in  the  eyes  of,  Ty3  3io  tob  beene. 

Gen.  16.  6  Abram  said . .  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth  thee 
20.  15  before  thee :  dwell  where  it  pleaseth  thee 

2  Sa.    3.  36  whatsoever  the  king  did  pleased  all  the 

1 4.  To  please,  apectcw  aresko. 

Matt  14.    6  danced  before  them,  and  pleased  Herod 

Mark  6.  22  pleased  Herod  and  them  that  sat  with  him 

Acts    6.    5  the  saying  pleased  the  whole  multitude 

Roui.  8.    S  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  G. 

15.    1  ought  to  bear,  .and  not  to  please  ourselves 

15.    2  Let  every  one  of  us  please  (his)  neighbour 

15.    3  For  even  Christ  pleased  not  himself;  but 

1  Co.  7.  32  He . .  careth . .  how  he  may  please  the  Lord 

7.  33  he.  .careth.  .how he  may  please  (his)  wife 

7.  34  careth . .  how  she  may  please  (her)  husband 

10.  33  Even  as  I  please  all  (men)  in  all  (things) . 
Gal.    1.  10  seek  to  please  men?  forif  I  yet  pleased  m. 

1  Th.  2.    4  notaspleasingmen,butGod,  which trieth 

2.  15  they  please  not  God,  and  are  contrary  to 
4.    1  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  God 

2  Ti.    2.    4  that  he  may  please  him  who  hath  chosen 

1 5. To  please  well,  evapeffrew  cuaresteo. 

Heb.  11.    5  had  this  testimony,  that  he  pleased  God 

11.  6  But  without  faith  (it  is)impossible  to  pi. 

16. To  be  2Jl>'('siug,(€l/j,()ape<rT6s  ehni  arestos. 

Acts  12.    3  because  he  saw  it  pleased  the  J.  Jo.  8.  29. 

17. To  think,  deem,  Zoicecc  dokeo. 

Acts  15.  22  Then  pleased  it  the  apostles  and  elders 
15.  34  [Nutwithstandingitpleastd Silas toabide] 

18.  To  think  well,  evboKeca  cudokeo. 

Rom.  1 5.  26  For  ithatli  pleased  them  of  Macedonia  and 
15.  27  It  hath  pleased  them  verily  ;  and  their  d. 
j  Co.  1.  21  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preach. 
Gal.  1.  15  when  it  pleased  God,  who  separated  me 
Col.     1.  19  For  it  pleased  (the  Father)  that  in  him  sh. 

19.7*0  wish,  will,  0eAa>  their,. 

1  Co.  12.  iS  God  set  the  members,  .as  it  hath  pleased 
15.  38  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased  him 
PLEASE  better,  to  — 
To  be  goody  ~-±    </,//<</). 

Psa.  69.  31  (This)  also  shall  please  the  Lord  better 
PLEASE  selves,  to  — 
To  .strike  hands,  p9q?  saphaq,  5. 

Isa.     2.    6  please  themselves  in  the  children  of  stra. 
PLEASE  well,  to  — 
1.7*0  />■■  <ji<<'  I  in  th<-  eyes  of,  'H'3  3ty  yatab  beene. 

Dent.  1.  _'_;  saying  pleased  me  weU :  and  I  took  twelve 


PLEASE 


7olJ 


PLUCK 


2.  To  be  right  in  the  eyes  of,  \py3  na»;  yashar  beene. 

Judgi4-    3  Get  her  for  me  ;  for  she  pleaseth  me  well 

14.    7  with  the  woman ;  and  she  pleased  S.  well 

1  Sa.  iS.  26  pleased  David  well  to  be  the  king's  son  in 

2  8a.  17.    4  the  saying  pleased  Absalom  well,  and  all 

19.   6  died  this  day,  then  it  had  pleased  thee  w. 

Z.  To  please  well,  evapeo-Ttto  euaresteo. 

Heb.  13.  16  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased 
4.  To  be  well  pleasing,  elfit  tvaptarus  elml  euareslos. 

Titus  2.    g  to  please  (them)  well  in  all  (things);  not 
PLEASE,  to  seek  to  — 
To  please,  amuse,  njt*i  ratsah,  Z. 

Job  20.  iq  His  children  shall  seek  to  please  the  poor 
PLEASED,  to  be  (well)  — 
l.To  have  delight,  desire,  j*sn  chaphets. 

Judu'13.23  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us,  he  w. 

1  Ki.  9.    1  Solomon's  desire  which  he  was  pleased  to 

Psa.  51. 19  Then  shalt  thou  be  pleased  with  the  sac. 

Isa.    42.  21  LORD  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness' 

2.  To  be  pleased,  nyi  ratsah, 

Psa.  40. 13  Be  pleased,  O  Lord,  to  deliver  me  :  0  L. 
Mic.  6.  7  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands 
Mai.    1.   8  will  hebe  pleased  with  thee,  or  accept  thy 

3.  To  think  well  together,  wvevSoKea}  suneudokeo. 

1  Co.  7.  12  she  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  him,  let  him 
7.  13  if  he  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her 

4.  To  be  well  pleased,  evSotctco  eudokeo,  Matt.  3.  17; 
:2.  18;  17.  5;  Mr.  1. 11;  Lu.  3.  22;  1  Co.  10.  5;  2  Pe.  1. 17. 

T  LEASED  with,  to  be  — 
To  be  pleased,  r*sn  ratsah. 

Gen.  33.  10  face  of  God,  and  thou  wast  pleased  with 
PLEASING,  (to  be)  — 
l.Good,  3io  tob. 

Esth.  S.   5^  right  before  the  ldng,  and  I  (be)  pleasing  in 
2, To  be  sweet,  jr\%  arab. 

Hos.  g.   4  neither  shall  they  be  pleasing  unto  him 
Z.Pleasing,  pleasure,  apco-iceta  areskeia. 

Col.     1. 10  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing 
4.  Pleasing,  ape&rSs  arestos. 

1  Jo.   3.  22  do  those  tilings  that  are  pleasing  in  his 
PLEASE,  things  that  — 
Pleasing,  apeo-ros  arestos. 

John  8.  29  I  do  always  those  things  that  please  him 
PLEASURE,  (good)  — 

1.  Desire,  inclination,  -tin  avvah. 

Jer.     2.  24  snuff eth  up  "the  wind  at  her  pleasure;  in 

2.  Delight,  pleasure,  j'Drt  cliephets. 

Job    2i.  21  For  what  pleasure  (hath)  he  in  his  house 
22.    3  (Is  it)  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty,  that 

Psa.  1  ir.    2  sought  out  of  all  them  that  have  pleasure 

Eccl.  5.    4  for(he  hath)  no  pleasure  in  fools :  pay  that 
12.    1  thou  shalt  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them 

Isa.  44.  28  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure;  evensaying 
46.  10  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure 
48. 14  he  will  do  his  pleasure  on  Babylon,  and 
53. 10  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his 
58.  3  in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  pleasure,  a  ml 
58.  13  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day ;  and 
58.  13  nor  finding  thine  own  pleasure,  nor  spea. 

Jer.  22.  28;  48.  38  ;  Hos.  8.  8 ;  Mai.  r.  10. 

3.  Desire,  delight,  pvn  chesheq. 

Isa.   21.   4  night  of  my  pleasure  hath  he  turned  into 

4.  Good,  benefit,  nia  tob. 

Job.  21.  25  And  another,  .never  eateth  with  pleasure 
Keel.    2.    1  enjoy  pleasure:  and,  behold,  this  also  (is) 

5. Soul,  breath,  desire,  vsi  nephesh. 

Deut23.  24  eat  grapes  thy  fill  at  thine  own  pleasure 
Psa.  105.  22  To  bind  his  princes  at  his  pleasure,  and 
Jer.  34. 16  whom  he  had  set  at  liberty  at  their  plea. 

6. Delight,  py  eden. 

Psa.  36.   8  make  them  drink  of  the  river  of  thy  pie. 

7.  Delight,  nytJl  ednah. 

Gen.  18.  12  After  lam  waxed  old  shall  I  have  pleas. 

8.  Thought,  will,  desire,  my-j  reuth. 

Ezra    5. 17  let  the  king  send  his  pleasure  to  us  con. 

9.  Good  will  or  pleasure,  Jisrj  ratson. 

Ezra  10. 1 1  make  confession . .  aud  do  his  pleasure ;  and 
Neh.    9. 37  they  have  dominion,  .at  their  pleasure 
Esth.  1.    8  should  do  according  to  every  man's  plea. 
Psa.  51.  18  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Zion 
103.  21  (ye)  ministers  of  his,  that  do  his  pleasure 

10. Pleasant,  sweet,  ays  naim. 

Job  36.  11  they  shall  spend,  .their  years  in  pleasures 
Psa.  16. 11  at  thy  right  hand  (there  are)  pleasures  for 

11. Rejoicing,  joy,  nrpb-  simchah. 

Pi'ov  21.  17  He  that  loveth  pleasure  (shall  be)  a  poor 

\2.Good  thought,  cvSokIcl  eudokia. 

Eph.    1.    5  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will 
1.   9  according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he 
Phil.    2.  13  both  to  will  aud  to  do  of  (his)  good  pleas. 
2  Th.  1.  11  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  (his)  good. 

IS. Sweetness,  pleasure,  ifiovr)  hedone. 

Luke  8. 14  choked  with  cares  and  riches  and  pleasures 
iitus  3.  3  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  living 
2  Pe.   2.  13  they  that  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  the 


14.  Wish,  will,  QzXwfxa  thelema. 

Kev.  4.  11  for  thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were  created 

15.  Grace  favour,  x^Pts  charts. 

Acts  24.  27  Felix,  willing  to  show  the  Jews  a  pleasure 
25.'  9  Festus,  willing  ,to  do  the  Jews  a  pleasure 

PLEASURE,  after  their  own  — 

According  to  their  judgment,  Kara  to  Bokovv  clvt. 

Heb.  12. 10  chastened  (us)  after  their  own  pleasure 
PLEASURE,  to  be  the  good  — 
To  think  well,  evSoKea  eudokeo. 

Lukei2.  32  for  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  g. 
PLEASURE,  to  have,  live  in,  take  — 
l.To  have  delight,  fsn  chaphets. 

Eze.  18.  23  Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked 
18.  32  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  t. 
33. 11 1  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wi. 

2. Delighting,  f*?n  chaphets. 

Psa.  5.  4  For  thou  (art)  not  a  God  that  hath  pleas. 
35.  27  which  hath  pleasure  in  the  prosperity  of 

Z.To  be  sweet,  2-iy  arab. 

Eze.  16.  37  lovers,  with  whom  thou  hast  taken  pleas. 

4.  To  be  pleased,  nyj  ratsah. 

1  Ch.29. 17  I  know  also,  my  God,  that  thou,  .hast  pi. 
Psa.  102.  14  For  thy  servants  take  pleasure  in  her  st. 

147. 10  taketh  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man 

147. 11  taketh  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him,  in 
149.   4  For  the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  peo. 

Hag.    1.    8  will  take  pleasure  in  it,  and  I  will  be  gl. 

5. To  think  well,  evBoKew  eudokeo. 

2  Co. 12.  10  Therefore  I  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in 
2  Th.  2. 12  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure 
Heb.  10.    6  lu  burnt  offerings,  .thou  hast  had  no  pi. 

10.    8  thou  wouldest  not,  neither  hadst  pleasure 
10.  38  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him 

6.  To  live  voluptuously,  <nrara\dw  spatalao. 

1  Ti.    5.   6  she  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while 

7.  To  think  well  together,  o-vy^vhoKeoo  suneudokeo. 

Kom.  1.  32  but  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them 

8.  To  live  honiriously,  rpv(pdw  truphao. 

Jas.    5.   5  Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and 
PLEASURES,  given  to  — 
Given  to  delights,  y~\j  adin. 

Isa,   47.   8  hear  now  this,  thou  (that  art)  given  to  p. 
PLEDGE  — 
1. Pledge,  hhn  chabol. 

Eze.  iS.  12  hath  not  restored  the  pledge,  and  hath  1. 
18. 16  hath  not  withholden  the  pledge,  neither 
33.  15  (If)  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge,  give 
2.  Pledge,  nb'2n  chabolah. 

Eze.  18.    7  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge,hath 
Z.Pledge,  BUJ£  abot. 

Deut24.  10  not  go  into  his  house  to  fetch  his  pledge 
24.  11  shall bringoutthepledge abroad  unto  thee 
24. 12  poor,  thou  shalt  not  sleep  with  his  pledge 
24.  13  thou  shalt  deliver  him  the  pledge  again 

4.  Surety,  nyrj_  aruhbah. 

1  Sa.  17.  iS  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  take  their  pi. 
5. Surety,  p3"iy  erabon. 

Gen.  38.  17  Wilt  thou  give  (nie)a  pledge  till  thou  send 
38.  18  What  pledge  shall  I  give  thee?  And  she 
38.  20  to  receive  (his)  pledge  from  the  woman's 
PLEDGE,  to  lay  to,  or  take  a  — 
To  take  a  pledge,  hnn  chabal.    ■ 

Exods2.  26  take  thy  neighbour's  raiment  to  pledge 
Deut  24.    6  shall  take  the  nether ..  millstone  to  pledge 
24.   6  for  he  taketh  (a  man's)  life  to  pledge 
24.  17  shalt  not . .  take  a  widow's  raiment  to  pie. 
Job   22.    6  For  thou  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  b. 
24.    3  they  take  the  widow's  ox  for  a  pledge 
24.    9  pluck  the  fatherless,  .and  take  apledge  of 
Prov  20.  16  take  a  pledge  of  him  for  a  strange  woman 
27.  13  take  a  pledge  of  him  for  a  strange  woman 
Amos  2.    8  upon  clothes  laid  to  pledge  by  every  altar 
PLEDGES,  to  give  — 
To  give  surety  for  one's  self,  3TJ/  arab,  7. 

2  Ki.  18.  23  give  pledges  to  my  lord  the  king  of  Assy. 
Isa.  36.    8  give  pledges,  I  pray  thee,  to  my  master  the 

PLE-IA-DES,  n&3  the  cluster  of  seven  stars. 
Job    9.    9  Which  iuaketh  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  P. 
38.  31  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  P. 
PLENTEOUS  — 
1. Fat,  firm,  N,"i|  bari. 

Hab.   1.  16  portion  (is)  fat,  and  their  meat  plenteous 
2.  Abundant,  3"i  rob. 

Psa.  86.  5  plenteous  in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  call 
86.  15  long  suffering,  and  plenteous  in  mercy  and 
103.   8  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteoustin  mercy 

3. To  make  abundant,  .*n-j  rabah,  5. 

Psa.130.    7  for  with  the* Lord,  .(is)  plenteous  redem. 

4.  Satiety,  fitness,  yiy  saba. 

Gen.  41.  34  land  of  Egyptiu  the  seven  plenteous  years 
41.  47  in  the  seven  plenteous  years  the  earth  br. 

5.  Oily,  fat,  plenteous,  ]p^  shamen. 

Isa.   30.  23  it  shall  be  fat  and  plenteous :  in  that  day 


Q.Much,  many,  abundant,  tto\v?  polus. 

Matt.  9.  37  The  harvest  truly  (is)  plenteous,  but  the 

PLENTEOUS,  to  n  ake  — 

To  cause  to  remain  over,  "in;  yathar,  5. 

Deut  28.  11  shall  make  thee  plenteous  in  goods,  in  tht 
30.   9  will  make  thee  plenteous  in  every  work 

PLENTE0TJ3NESS  — 

1.  What  remains  over,  superfluity,  "tnin  motha/r. 
Prov2i.    5  thoughts  of  the  diligent  (tend)only  to  pi. 

2.  Satiety,  fulness,  V$y  saba. 

Gen.  41.  53  seven  years  of  plenteousness  that  was  in 

PLENTIFUL  (field)  — 

1. Fruitful  place  or  field,  ^0"]3  karmel. 

Isa.    16.  10  joy  out  of  the  plentiful  field  ;  and  in  the 

Jer.     2.    7  I  brought  you  into  a  plentiful  country,  to 

48.  33  gladness  is  taken  from  the  plentiful  field 

2.  Willing  gift  or  offering,  rcn:  nedabah. 

Psa.  68.    9*  Thou,  O  God,  dids't  send  a  plentiful  rain 
PLENTIFULLY  — 
1.  Superfluity,  "in;  yether. 

Psa.  31.  23  ami  plentifully  rewardeth  the  prouddoer 
2. Abundance,  ah  rob. 

Job  26.   3  hast  thou  plentifully  declared  the  thiug 
PLENTY  — 
1.  Abundance,  ah  rob. 

Gen.  27.  28  fatness  of  the  earth,  and  plenty  of  corn 

2  Ch.31. 10  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have  left  plenty 

2.To  make  abundant,  run  rabah,  5. 

1  Ki.io.  11  great  plenty  of  alniug  trees,  and  precious 

3.  Satiety,  fulness,  y^b-  saba. 

Gen.  41.  29  come  seven  years  of  great  plenty  throug. 
41.  30  all  the  plenty  shall  be  forgotten  in  the 
41. 31  plenty  shall  uot  be  known  in  the  land  by 

Trov.  3.  10  So  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  plenty  * 

4. Heights,  glitterings,  niacin  toaphotlu 

Job  22.  25  defence,  and  thou  shalt  have  plenty  of 

5.  To  eat,  hzK  akal. 

Joel    2.  26  ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  bt  satisfied,  and 

PLENTY  of,  to  have  — 

To  be  satiated,  satisfied,  jn^  sdbea. 

Prov 28.  19  tflleth  his  land  shall  haveplentyof  bread 
Jer.  44. 17  for  (then)  had  we  plenty  of  victuals,  and 

PLENTY  (of  water)  — 

Collection,  rnpp  migvek. 

Lev.  11. 36"  (wherein  there  is)  plenty  of  water,  shall 

PLOT,  to  — 

To  devise,  design,  dct  zamam. 

Psa.  37. 12  wicked  plotteth  against  the  just,  and  g- 

PLOUGH  — 

A  plough,  &poTpov  aroiron. 

Luke  9.  62  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  theplo. 

PLOUGH,  PLOW,  to  — 

l.To  plough,  grave,  vy)  charash. 

Deut22.  10  Thoushalt  not  plow  with  an  oxand  an  ass 
Judgi4.  iS  If  ye  had  not  ploughed  with  my  heifer,  ye 
1  Ki.  iq.  19  who  (was)  ploughing  (with)  twelve  yoke 
Job     1.  14  The  oxen  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  fe. 
4.    8  they  that  plow  iniquity,  and  sow  wicked. 
Psa.  129.    3  The  plowers  plowed  upon  my  back ;  they 
Prov  20.    4  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  the 
Isa.   28.  24  Doth  the  plowman  plow  all  day  to  sow? 
Hos.  10. 11  Judah  shall  plow,  (and)  Jacob  shall  break 
10. 13  Ye  have  ploughed  wickedness,  ye  have  r. 
Amos  6.  12  will  (one)  plow  (there)  with  oxen?  for  ye 

2  To  plough,  'aporpidw  a/rotriad. 

Luke  17.    7  which  of  you,  having  a  servant  plowing 

1  Co.   9. 10  that  he  that  plougheth  should  plow  inli. 
PLOWED,  to  be  — 

To  be  ploughed,  tthn  charash,  2. 

Jer.  26.  18  Zion  shall  be  plowed  (like)  a  field,  and  J. 
Mic.    3. 12  Therefore  shall  Zion  for  your  sake  be  pL 

PLOWER,  PLOWMAN  — 

1. Ploughman,  husbandman,  "DN  iklcar. 

Isa.  61.  5  sons  of  the  alien  (shall  be)  your  plowmen 
Jer.   14.   4  plowmen  were  ashamed,  they  covered  th. 

2.  To  plough,  plow,  ynn  charash. 

Psa.  1 20.    3  The  plowers . .  made  long  their  furrows 
Isa.    28.  24  Doth  the  plowman  plow  all  day  to  sow"? 
Amos  9.  13  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  reaper 

PLOWING,  PLOUGHSHARE  — 

l.Cotdter,  ploughshare,  nx  eth. 

Isa.  2.  4  shall  beat  their  swordsinto  ploughshares 
Joel  3.  to  Eeat  your  ploughshares  into  swords,  and 
Mic.    4.    3  shall  beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares 

2,TUling,  tillage,  ~anir. 

Prov2i.   4  An  high  look,  .(and)  the  plowing  of  the 

PLUCK  (off,  out,  up\  to  — 

l.To  pluck,  h-ix  arah. 

Psa.  80. 12  all  they  which  pass  by  the  way  do  pluck 

2. To  snatch  violently  'away,  hn  gazal. 

2  Sa.  23.  21  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  Egyptian's 
1  Ch.11.  23  plucked  tke  spear  out  of  the  Egyptian's 
Job  24.    9  They  pluck  the  fatherless  from  the  breast 
Mic.    3.   2  who  pluck  off  then*  skin  from  offthem,and 


PLUCK 


760 


POMEGRANATE 


•I.  To  cause  to  go  or  come  out,  tu$l  yqtsa,  5. 

Exod.  4.  7  plucked  it  out  of  his  bosom,  and,  behold 
Psa.  25.  15  for  he  shall  pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  net 

I.  To  make  an  end  of,  remove,  nSa  kalah,  3. 

Psa.  74.  11  even  thy  right  hand?  pluck  (it)  out  of  thy 

5.  To  peel  off,  pluck  out,  anp  marat. 

Ezra  9.  3  plucked  off  the  hair  of  my  head  and  of  my 
Neh.  13.  25  plucked  off  their  hair,  and  made  them  s. 
Isa.   50.    6  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the 

G.  To  pull  aioay  or  down,  npi  nasach. 

Psa.  52.  5  pluck  theeoutof  (thy)  dwelling  place,  and 
7.  To  draw  away  or  out,  pm  nathaq. 

Jer.  22.  24  (As)I  live,  .yet  would  I  pluck  thee  thence 
S.  To  draw  away  or  out,  prij  nathaq,  3. 

Eze.  23.  34  pluck  off  thine  own  breasts :  for  I  have  s. 

9,  To  pluck  lip,  B>0J  nathash. 

Jer.  12. 14  will  pluck  them  out  of  their  land,  and  p. 
12.  15  after  that  I  have  plucked  them  out,  I  will 
12.  17  I  will  utterly  pluck  up  and  destroy  that 
18.  7  to  pluck  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  d. 
24.  6  I  will  plant  them,  and  not  pluck  (them) 
31.  28  to  pluck  up,  and  to  break  down,  and  to 
42.  10  I  will  plant  you,  and  not  pluck  (you)  up 
45.    4  that  which  I  have  planted,  I  will  pluck  up 

Mic.    5.  14  I  will  pluck  up  thy  groves  out  of  the  midst 

10.  To  root  out,  npi;  aqar. 

Eccl.  3.  2  a  time  to  pluck  up  (that  which  is)  planted 
11. TV?  crop,  pluck,  rp$  qataph. 

Deut23-  25  thou  mayest  pluck  the  ears  with  thine  h 

12.  To  cause  to  cast  away,  r\bt  shalak,  5. 

Job    29. 17  and  I.  .plucked  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth 

13.  To  draio  off  or  out,  r\by  shalaph. 

Ruth  4.  7  a  man  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave  (it) 
14.7V)  snatch  at  or  away,  apirdfa  harpazo. 

Johnio.  28  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my 
10.  29  and  none  is  able  to  pluck,  .out  of  my  Fa. 

15.  To  cast  out,  iK^dWw  ekballo. 

Mark  9.  47  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out :  it 

16.  To  take  out  or  away,  t^aipiw  exaireo. 

Matt.  5.  29  pluck  it  out,  and  cast  (it)  from  thee:  for 
18.   9  pluck  it  out,  and  cast  (it)  from  thee  :  it  is 

17.  To  dig  out,  i^opurrco  exorulto. 

Gal.  4.  15  ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes 
IS.  To  pluck  or  pull,  TiWeo  tillo. 

Matt  is.  1  began  to  pluck  the  ears  of  corn,  and  to  eat 
Mark  2.  23  began,  as  they  went,  to  pluck  the  ears  of 
Luke  6.    1  his  disciples  plucked  the  ears  of  corn,  and 

PLUCK  asunder  or  away,  to  — 

X.To  (cause  to)  turn  aside,  110  sur,  5. 

Lev.    1.  16  he  shall  pluck  away  his  crop  with  his  fe. 

2.  T"  draio  asunder,  8ta<nrdai  diaspao. 

Mark  5.    4  chains  had  been  plucked  asunder  by  him 
PLUCK  down,  to  — 
1.7*0  break  or  throw  down,  D"n  haras. 

Prov.14.    1  the  foolish  plucketh  it  down  with  her  h. 

2.  To  destroy,  cut  off,  lay  waste,  iD^  shamad,  5. 
Nun-133.  52  and  quite  pluck  down  all  their  high  places 

PLUCK  off  hair,  to  — 

To  peel,  polish,  try$  marat. 

Neh.  13.  25  plucked  off  their  hair,  and  made  them  s. 
PLUCK  up  by  the  root,  to  — 

1.  To  pluck  up,  i^rn  nathash. 

2  Ch.  7.  20  Then  will  I  pluck  them  up  by  the  roots 

2.  To  root  out,  iKpifyw  ehrizoo. 

Lukei7-   6  Be  thou  plucked  up  by  the  root,  and  be 
J  tide       12  trees,  .twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots 

PLUCKED  (away,  off  or  up),  to  be  — 
1,7V)  he  peeled,  polished,  tn.p  merat,  2. 

Dan.  7.  4  I  beheld  till  the  wings  thereof  were  plu. 
2.7V>  be  2^ died  aioay,  np3  nasach,  2. 

Deut28.  63  ye  shall  be  plucked  from  off  the  land 

3.  To  be  snatched  away,  b$}  natsal,  6. 

Amos  4.  11  as  a  fire  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning 
Zeoh.  3.    2  (is)  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of.  .fire? 

4.7V)  be  drawn  away  or  out,  pm  nathaq,  2. 

Jer.     6.  29  in  vain  ;  for  the  wicked  are  not  plucked  a. 

5.  T>  he  plucked  up,  irm  nathash,  2. 

Jer.  31.  40  it  shall  not  be  plucked  up,  nor  thrown  d. 
Dan.  11.    4  his  kingdom  shall  be  plucked  up,  even  for 

G.  To  be  2>lucked  up,  c?ni  nathash,  6. 

Eze.  19.  12  she  was  plucked  up  in  fury,  she  was  cast 

7.  Torn  off,  q"ja  taraph. 

Gen.    8.  11  in  her  mouth  (was)  an  olive  leaf  plucktoff 

PLUMB  LINE,  PLUMMET  — 
I. Plumb  line,  "-13N  <nml:. 

Amos  7.    7  (made)  by  a  plumb  line,  with  a  plumb  line 

7.   8  what  seest  thou?  And  I  said,  A  plumb  1. 

7.    8  I  will  set  a  plumb  line  in  the  midst  of  my 

2.Ptummet,  balance,  n^^p,  nVp^p  mishqoleth,  mis. 
2  Ki.21.  13  the  line  of  Samaria,  and  the  plummet  of 
Isa.   28.  17  will  I  lay.  .righteousness  to  the  plummet 


3.  A  store  of  tin,  7'"i3  fix  ehen  bedil. 

Zech.  4. 10  and  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the  hand  of 
PLUNGE,  to  — 
To  sptrinkle,  dip,  defile,  73a  tahal. 

Job     9.  31  Yet  shalt  thou  plunge  me  in  the  ditch,  and 

PO-CHE'-RETH,  rrcb  binding. 

A  servant  of  Solomon  whose  descendants  returned  with 

Zerubbabel.    B.C.  636. 

Ezra   2.  57  the  children  of  P.  of  Zebaim,  the  children 
Neh.   7.  59  the  children  of  P.  of  Zebaim,  the  children 

POET  — 

.1  maker,  doer,  poet,  iron}T-r\$  poietes. 

Acts  17.  28  as  certain  also  of  your  owu  [poets]  have 

POINT  — 

1.  Turning,  slaughter,  nrn*<  ibchah. 

Eze.  21.  15  I  have  set  the  point  of  the  sword  against 
'2. Point,  nail,  f~ev  tsipporen. 

Jer.    17.    1  (is)  writteu.  .with  the  point  of  a  diamond 
POINT,  to  be  at  the  — 
1.7V)  go,  go  on,  7\bn  halak. 

Gen.  25.  32  I  (am)  at  the  point  to  die ;  and  what  profit 

2.  To  be  about  to,  jueAAw  niello. 

John  4.47  heal  Ids  son:  for  he  was  at  the  point  of  d. 
POINT  of  death  — 
Last,  extreme  point,  zcrxarcos  eschatCs. 

Mark  5.  23  My. . daughter lieth  at  the  point  of  death 
POINT  out,  to  — 

1 .  To  point  out,  show,  indicate,  nix  avah,  7. 
Nuni34.  10  ye  shall  point  out  your  east  border  from 

2.  To  mark  out,  hnJ?  taah,  3. 

Nuni34.    7  from  the  great  sea  ye  shall  point  out  for 
34.    8  From  mount  Hor  ye  shall  point  out  (your 
POINTED  (sharp)  things  — 
Sharp  pointed,  j'nn  char  tits. 

Job    41.  30  he  spreadeth  sharp  pointed  things  upon 
POINTS,  in  — 
Over  against,  just  as,  n^y  ummah. 

Eccl.  5. 16  iu  all  points  as  he  came,  so  shall  he  go 
POISON  — 
1. Heat,  fury,  ptoison,  nzr\  chemah. 

Deut32.  24  with  the  poison  of  serpents  of  the  dust 
32. 33  Their  wine  (is)  the  poison  of  dragons,  and 

Job     6.    4  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit 

Psa.  58.    4  Their  poison  (is)  like  the  poison  of  a  serp. 
140.    3  adders'  poison  (is)  under  their  lips.  Selah 

2.  Venom,  vta  rosh. 

Job   20. 16  He  shall  suck  the  poison  of  asps :  the  vip. 

3.  Poison,  venom,  16$  ios. 

Bom.  3.  13  the  poison  of  asps  (is)  under  their  lips 
Jas.     3.    8  (it  is)  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison 

POLE  — 

Sign,  banner,  Dy  nes. 

Nuni2i.    8  Make,  .a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  a  p. 
21.    9  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon  a  pole 

POLICY  — 

Cnder standing,  skill,  ?3"^,  hip  sekel. 

Dan.   8.  25  through  his  policy  also  he  shall  cause  or. 

POLISHED,  polishing,  (to  be)  — 
X.To  clear,  purify,  T}3  barar. 

Isa.   49.  2  he  hid  me,  and  made  me  a  polished  shaft 

2.  To  be  hewn,  cwved,  sen  chatab,  4. 

Psa.144.  12  polished  (after)  the  similitude  of  a  palace 

3.  Bright,  hhp  qalal. 

Dan.  10.   6  and  his  feet  like  in  colour  to  polished  br. 
4. Cutting,  form,,  polishing,  rrjra  gizrah. 

Lam.  4.    7  in  body . .  their  polishing  (was)  of  sapphire 

POLL  — 

Scull,  poll,  n/^??  gulgoleth. 

Num.  1.  2  of  (their)  names,  everymale  by  their  polls 
1. 18  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  by  their  p. 
1.  20,  22  the  number  of  the  names,  by  their  p. 
3.  47  even  take  five  shekels  a  piece  by  the  poll 

1  Ch.  23.    3  their  number  by  their  polls,  man  by  man 

23.  24  counted  by  number  of  names  by  their  p. 

POLL,  to  — 

1.  To  cut  off  or  down,  shave,  shear,  in  gazaz. 
Mic.    1.16  and  poll  thee  for  thy  delicate  children 

2.  To  shave,  poll  one^s  head,  n?a  galach,  3. 

2  Sa.  14.  26  And  when  he  polled  his  head,  for  it 

14.  26  was  at  every  year's  end  that  he  polled  (it 

3.7V)  poll  or  shear  the  head,  Dps  kasam. 

Eze.  44.  20  to  grow,  .they  shall 'only  poll  their  heads 
POLLUTE,  to  — 

1.  To  pollute,  hxigaal,  3. 

Mai.    1.    7  and  yesay.Whereinhavewepollutedthee 

2.  To  pierce,  pollute,  h^rj,  chalal,  3. 

Exod2o.  25  lift  up  thy  tool,  .thou  hast  polluted  it 
Numi8.  32  neither  shall  ye  pollute  the  holy  things 
Isa.   47.    6  I  have  polluted  mine  inheritance,  and 
56.    6  kecpeth  the  sabbath  from  polluting  it 
Jer.  34. 16  polluted  my  name,  and  caused  every  man 


Lam    2.    2  hathpollutedthekingdoinandtheprinccs 
Eze.    7.  21  give  it.  .for  a  spoil;  and  they  shall  pollute 
7.  22  they  shall  pollute  my  secret  (place):  for 
13.  19  And  will  ye  pollute  me  among  my  people 
20.  13  my  sabbaths  they  greatly  polluted  :  then 
20.  16  Because  they,  .polluted  my  sabbaths :  for 
20.  21  they  polluted  my  sabbaths  :  then  I  said,  1 
20.  24  had  polluted  my  sabbaths,  and  their  eyes 
20.  39  pollute  ye  my  holy  name  no  more  with 
44.    7  to  be  in  my  sanctuary,  to  pollute  it,  (even) 
Dan.  11.  31  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  of  strength 
Zeph.  3.    4  her  priests  have  polluted  the  sanctuary 

3.  To  profane,  defile,  ^n  chaneph,  5. 

Num35-33  shall  not  pollute  the  land  wherein  ye(are> 
Jer.    3.    2  and  thou  hast  polluted  the  land  with  thy 

4.7V)  defile,  make  unclean,  Npp  tame,  3. 

2  Ki.23.  16  polluted  it,  according  to  the  word  of  the 
2  Ch.36.  14  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  be 
Jer.  7.  30  set.,  abominations  in  the  bouse,  .topollu. 
Eze.  20.  26  I  polluted  them  in  their  own  gifts,  in  that 
36.  18  their  idols  (wherewitli)they  bad  polluted 

5.  To  make  common,  pollute,  Koif6ca  koinoO. 

Acts  21.  28  and  further,  .hath  polluted  this  holypla. 
POLLUTE  selves,  to  — 
1.3*0  be 'polluted,  Vn3  gaal,  2. 

Lam.  4.  14  they  have  polluted  themselves  with  blood 

2.  To  be  defiled,  ND$  tame,  2. 

Eze.  20.  31  ye  pollute  yourselves  with  all  your  idols 
POLLUTED,  to  be  — 
1.  To  be  trodden  down,  D'3  bus,  7a. 

Eze.  16.    6  and  saw  thee  polluted  inthine  ownbloo  ! 
16.  22  and  bare,  (and)  wast  polluted  in  thy  blood 

2.7V)  be  polluted,  ^N3  gaal,  2. 

Zeph.  3.    1  Woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  polluted,  to 

3.  To  be  polluted,  Sn3  gaal,  4. 

Ezra  2.  62  therefore  were  they,  as  polluted,  put  from 
Neh.   7.  64  therefore  were  they,  as  polluted,  put  from 
Mai.    1.    7  Ye  offer  polluted  bread  upon  miue  altar 
1.  12  The  table  of  the  LORD(is)  polluted  ;  and 

4.7V)  be  piei'ced,  polluted,  bhn  chalal,  2. 

Isa.   48.  n  do  (it):  for  how  should  (my  name)  be  po. 
Eze.  20.    9,  14,  22  that  it  should  not  be  polluted 

5.  To  be  profaned,  ^jn  chaneph. 

Psa.  106.  38  and  the  land  was  polluted  with  blood 
Jer.     3.    1  shall  not  that  land  be  greatly  polluted  ? 

6.  To  be  unclean,  Npa  tame. 

Eze.  23. 17  she  was  polluted  with  them,  and  her  m. 
Mic.    2.  10  because  it  is  polluted,  it  shall  destroy  (you) 

7. To  be  or  become  unclean,  Nptt  tame,  2. 

Jer.     2.  23  I  am  not  polluted,  I  have  not  gone  after 

Eze.  20.  30  Are  ye  polluted  after  the  manner  of  your 

23.  30  because  thou  art  polluted  with  their  idols 

S.  To  be  or  become  unclean,  N.po  tame,  4. 

Eze.     4.  14  behold,  my  soul  hath  not  been  polluted 

0.  To  make  self  unclean,  ndd  tame,  7. 

Eze.  14.  11  neither  be  polluted  any  more  with  all  t. 
Hos.   9.    4  all  that  eat  thereof  shall  be  polluted :  for 

10.  Unclean,  NpQ  tame. 

Amos  7.  17  thou  shalt  die  in  a  polluted  laud :  and  I. 
11. Crooked,  slippery,  npJJ  aqob. 

Hos.   6.   8  Gilead  (is)  a  city,  .polluted  with  blood 
POLLUTION  — 

1.  Unclean,  nj?d  tame. 

Eze.  22. 10  humbled  her  that  was  set  apart  for  poll. 
2.Pollution,  a\i(ryn/J.a  alisgeina. 

Acts  15. 20  they  abstain  from  pollutions  of  idols,  and 
3, Defilement,  pollution,  fxlaafia  miasma. 

2  Pe.    2.  20  after  they  have  escaped  the  pollutions  of 
POLLUX,  the  twin  brother  of  Castor. 

Acts  28.  11  in  the  isle,  whose  sign  was  Castor  and  1*. 
POMEGRANATE  (tree)  — 
Pomegranate,  psi  rimmon. 

Exod28.  33  thou  shalt  make  pomegranates  (of)  blue 

28.  34  pomegranate,  a  golden  bell  and  a  pome. 

39.  24  made  upon  the  hems,  .pomegranates  (of) 

39.  25  the  pomegranates  upon  the  hem  of  the  r. 

39.  25  roundabout  between  the  pomegranates 

39.  26  a  pomegranate,  a  bell  and  a  pomegranate 

Num  13. 23  (they  brought)  of  the  pomegranates,  and 

20.    5  orof  figs,  or  of  vines,  or  of  pomegranates 

Deut.  8.    8  and  vines,  and  fig  trees,  and  pomegrana. 

1  Sa.  14.    2  under  a  pomegranate  tree  which  (is)  in 

1  Ki.  7.  18  that  (were)  upon  the  top  with  pomegran. 

7.  20  the  pomegranates  (were)  two  hundred,  in 
7. 42  hundred  pomegranates  for  the  two  net  w. 
7.  42  two  rows  of  pomegranates  for  one  net  w. 

2  Ki.25.  17  and  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiter  roil. 
1  Ch.  3.  16  made  an  hundred  pomegranates,  and  put 

4.  13  hundred  pomegranates  on  the  two  wreaths 
4.  13  two  rows  of  pomegranates  on  each  wreath 
Song  4.  3  temples(are)likeapieceof  apomegranate 
4.  13  Thy  plants  (are)  an  orchard  of  pomegra. 
6.   7  As  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate  (are)  thy  te. 

6.  11  toseewhether.  .the  pomegranates  budded 

7.  12  see.  .(whether),  .the pomegranates  bud  f. 

8.  2  spiced  wine  of  the  juice  of  my  pomegran. 
Jer.    52.  22  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiters  round 

52.  22  and  the  pomegranates  (were)  like  unto  t. 
52.  23  were  ninety  and  six  pomegranates  on  a 


POMMEL 


rci 


POOR 


Jer.  52.  23  the  pomegranates  upon  the  net  work  (w.) 
Joel  1.  12  the  pomegranate  tree,  the  palm  tree  also 
Hag.    2.  19  pomegranate,  andtheolive  tree,  hath  not 

POMMEL  — 

Bowl,  oil  vessel,  njtf  gullah. 

2  Ch.  4.  12  two  pillars,  and  the  pommels,  and  the  c. 

4.  12,  13  to  cover  the  two  pommels  of  the  cha. 

POMP  — 

1. Pride,  rising,  excellency,  ji«3  goon. 

Isa.   14.  n  Thy  pomp  is  brought  down  to  the  grave 
Eze.    7.  24  I  will  also  make  the  pomp  of  the  strong  to 
30.  18  the  pomp  of  her  streugth  shall  cease  in  her 
"  32.  12  they  shall  spoil  the  pomp  of  Egypt,  and 
33.  28  and  the  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  ceass 

"2.  Wasting,  desolation,  noise,  jiNff  shaon. 

Isa.     5.  14  and  their  pomp,  .shall  descend  into  it 
Z» Appearance,  pomp,  cpavraaia  phantasia. 

Acts  25.  23  when  Agrippa  was  come,  .with  great  po. 
POND,  POOL  — 
l.Pond,  djs  again. 

Exod.  7.' 19  stretch  out  thine  hand. .upon  their  ponds 

8.  5  Stretch  forth  thine  hand . .  over  the  ponds 
Isa.    14.  23  I  will  also  make  it.  .pools  of  water :  and 

19.  10  all  that  make  sluices  (and)  ponds  for  fish 

35.  7  the  parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool 

41.  18  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  wat. 

42.  15  rivers  islands,  and  I  will  dry  up  the  pools 

2,  Pool,  nrn  berakah. 

Psa.  84.   6  passing  through,  .rain  also  filleth  the  po. 

2. Pool,  np7?  berekah. 

2  Sa.    2*.  13  met  together  by  the  pool  of  Gibeon  :  and 

2.  13  one  side  of  the  pool,  .other  side  of  the  p. 
4. 12  hanged  (them)  up  over  the  pool  in  Hebron 

1  Ki.22.  38  washed  the  chariot  in  the  pool  of  Samaria 

2  Ki.18.  17  and  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upper  p. 

20.  20  how  he  made  a  pool,  and  a  conduit,  and 
Neh.   2.  14  Then  I  went  on. .to  the  king's  pool:  but 

3.  15  wall  of  the  pool  of  Siloah  by  the  king's  g. 
3.  16  to  the  pool  that  was  made,  and  unto  the 

Eccl.   2.  6  I  made  me  pools  of  water,  to  water  ther. 

Song  7.  4  thine  eyes  (like)  the  fish  pools  in  Heshbon 

Isa.     7.  3  the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool 

22.  9  ye  gathered  together  the  waters  of  the . .  p. 

22.  1 1  the  two  walls  for  the  water  of  the  old  pool 

36.  2  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  in 
Nab,   2.  8  But  Nineveh  (is)  of  old  like  a  pool  of  water 

^.Collection,  ni£D  iniqveh. 

Exod.  7. 19  upon  all  their  pools  of  water,  that  they 

5.  Pool,  bath,  Ko\v/j.fiii8pa  kolumlMhra. 

John  5.    2  Now  there  is  at  Jerusalem,  .a pool,  which 

5.  4  [down  at  a  certain  season  into  the  pool] 
5.    7  have  no  man.  .put  me  into  the  pool :  but 

9.  7  wash  in  the  pool  of  Siloam,  which  is,  by 
9.  11  Go  to  [the  pool  of]  Siloam,  and  wash :  and 

PONDER,  to  — 

1 .  To  ponder,  dSb  pal  as,  3. 

Prov.  4.  26  Ponder  the  path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  all 
5.  6  Lest  thou  shouldest  ponder  the  path  of 
5.  21  the  Lord,  and  he  pondereth  all  his  goings 

2.  To  weigh,  ponder,  pn  takan. 

Prov  21.    2  right.. butthe  Lord  pondereth  the  hearts 
24. 12  doth  not  he  that  pondereth  the  heart  co. 

3.  To  cast  together,  rrv/x^dwoj  sumballo. 

Luke  2.  19  But  Mary,  .pondered  (them)  in  her  heart 

PONTIUS,  U6vtlos. 

The  name  of  the  Roman  governor  of  Judea.  A.D.  26-36. 

See  Pilate. 

Matt 27.    2  they,  .delivered  him  to  P.  Pilate  the  gov. 

Luke  3.    1  P.  Pilate  being  governor  of  Judsea,  and  H. 

Acts    4.  27  P.  Pilate,  with  the  Gentiles,  .were  gathe. 

1  Ti.    6.  13  who  before  P.  Pilate  witnessed  a  good  co. 

PON'-TTTS,  YIovtos. 

The  N.E.  province  of  Asia  Minor,  having  the  Euxine 
Sea  on  the  N.,  Cappadocia  on  the  S.,  Colchis  on  the  E., 
and  Paphlagonia  and  Galatia  on  the  W.  It  was  origin- 
ally a  part  of  Cappadocia,  and  a  satrapy  of  the  Persian 
empire ;  in  480  B.C.  it  was  given  to  Artabazes ;  in  112- 
110  Mithridates  the  Great  greatly  enlarged  it,  and 
assisted  the  Greeks  against  the  Scythians,  and  in  108- 
105  he  formed  connections  as  far  W.  as  the  Danube; 
in  89-85  he  lost  Bithynia,  Cappadocia  and  Paphlagonia ; 
in  S4-81  he  was  still  losing,  and  in  75-64  Pontus  became 
a  Roman  province.  Its  kings  were  Ariobarzanes  II. 
B.C.  363 ;  Mithridates  II.  337 ;  Mithridates  III.  302 ; 
Ariobarzanes  III.  266 ;  Mithridates  IV.  240 ;  Pharnaces 
I.  190,  Mithridates  V.  156;  Mithridates  VI.  120;  Phar- 
naces n.  63. 

Acts    2.    9  the  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  .in  P.,  and 
18.    2  a  certain  Jew  named  Aquila,  born  in  P. 

1  Pe.   1.    1  to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  P. 

POOR  (man)  — 

1.  Desirous,  needy,  poor,  )"T,33£  ebyon. 

Exod  23.   6  shalt  not  wrest  the  judgment  of  thy  poor 

23.  11  that  the  poor  of  thy  people  may  eat :  and 
Deut  15.   4  Save  when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among 

15.  7  If  there  be  among  yo'j  a  poor  man  of  one 
15.  7  nor  shut  thine  hand  from  thy  poor  brother 
15.  9  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  poor  brother 
15.  11  For  the  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the 
Esth.  9.  22  of  sending  portions . .  and  gifts  to  the  poor 

96 


Job  5.  15  But  he  saveth  the  poor  from  the  sword 
29. 16  I  (was)a  fatherto  the  poor :  andthe  cause 
30.  25  was  (not)  my  soul  grieved  for  the  poor? 
31. 19  If  I  have  seen,  .any  poor  without  covering 
Psa.  49.  2  Both  low  and  high,  rich  and  poor,  toget. 
69.  33  For  the  Lord  heareth  the  poor,  and  desp. 
107.  41  Yet  setteth  he  the  poor  on  high  from  atli. 
109.  31  shall  stand  at  the  right  hand  of  the  poor 

112.  9  He  hath  dispersed,  he  hath  given  to  thep. 
132.  15  I  will  abundantly,  .satisfy  her  poor  with 
140. 12  Lord  will  maintain.,  the  right  of  the  poor 

Prov.  1 4.  31  honoureth  him  hath  mercy  on  the  poor 
Isa.  29. 19  poor  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  holy 
Jer.  2.  34  the  blood  of  the  souls  of  the  poor  innoce. 
20.  13  for  he  hath  delivered  the  soul  of  the  poor 
Amos. 2.  6  because  they  sold,  .the  poor  for  a  pair  of 
5.  12  they  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate  (from 

2. Lean,  poor,  weak,  ^  dal. 

Gen.  41.  19  poor  and  very  ill  favoured  and  lean  flesh. 
Exod23.    3  Neither  shalt  thou  countenance  a  poor  m. 

30. 15  poor  shall  not  give  less,  than  half  a  shek. 
Lev.  14.  21  if  he  (be)  poor,  and  cannot  get  so  much 

19.  15  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor 
Judg.  6.  15  my  family  (is)  poor  in  Manasseh,  and  I 
Ruth  3. 10  followedst  not  voung  men,  whether  poor 

1  Sa.  2.    8  He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust 
Job     5.  t6  So  the  poor  hath  hope,  and  iniquity  stop. 

20. 10  His  children  shall  seek  to  please  the  poor 

20.  19  he.  .oppressed  (and)  hath  forsaken  the  p. 

31. 16  If  I  have  withheld  the  poor  from  (their)  d. 
34.  19  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor? 
34.  28  So  that  they  cause  the  cry  of  the  poor  to 

Psa.  41.    1  Blessed  (is)  he  that  considereth  the  poor 
72. 13  He  shall  spare  the  poor  and  needy,  and 
82.    3  Defend  the  poor  and  fatherless ;  do  just. 
82.   4  Deliver  the  poor  and  needy  :  rid  (them) 

113.  7  He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust 
Prov.io.  15  the  destruction  of  the  poor  (is)  their  pov. 

14.31  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth 
ig.  4  the  poor  is  separated  from  his  neighbour 
ig.  17  He  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poorlendeth 

21.  13  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the  poor 

22.  9  for  he  giveth  of  his  bread  to  the  poor 
22. 16  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase 
22. 22  R,obnotthepoor,becausehe(is)poor.  neit. 
28.   3  man  that  oppresseth  the  poor  (is  like)  a 
28.    8  gather  it  for  him  that  will  pity  the  poor 

28. 11  poor  that  hath  understanding  searuheth 

28.  15  (so  is)  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  peop. 

29.  7  righteous  considereth  the  cause  of  the  p. 
29.  14  The  king  that  faithfully  judgeth  the  poor 

Isa.  11.  4  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  po. 
14.  30  first  born  of  the  poor  shall  feed,  and  the 
25.   4  For  thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  poor 

Jer.  5.  4  Surely  these  (are)  poor ;  they  are  foolish 
39. 10  left  of  the  poor  of  the  people,  which  had 

Amos  2.   7  dust  of  the  earth  on  the  head  of  the  poor 

4.  1  which  oppress  the  poor,  which  crush  the 

5.  11  as  your  treading  (is)  upon  the  poor,  and 

8.  6  That  we  may  buy  the  poor  for  silver,  and 
Zeph.  3. 12  leave,  .an  afflicted  and  poor  people,  and 

Z.Lean,  poor,  \oeok,  nji  dallah. 

2  Ki.  25.  12  left  of  the  poor  of  the  land  (to  be)  vine 
Jer.  40.   7  poor  of  the  land,  of  them  that  were  not  c. 

52. 15  carried  away  captive  (certain)  of  the  poor 
52.  \6  left  (certain)  of  the  poor  of  the  land  for 

■£.  Afflicted,  miserable,  unfortunate,  n3?n  chelkah. 

Psa.  10.   8  his  eyes  are  privily  set  against  the  poor 

10.  14  the  poor  committeth  himself  unto  thee 

5.  One  that  lacks,  "nono  machsor. 

Prov2i.  17  Hethatlovethpleasure(shallbe)apoorm. 

ti.Poor,  useful,  l*pn  misken. 

Eccl.  4.  13  Better  (is)  a  poor  and  a  wise  child  than  an 
g.  15  Now  there  was  found  in  it  a  poor  wise  m. 

9.  15  yetnoman remembered thatsamepoorm. 
9.  16  nevertheless  the  poor  man's  wisdom  (is) 

7. Humble,  poor,  nyj__  aneh. 

Dan.    4.  27  by  showing  mercy  to  the  poor ;  if  it  may 

8. Humble,  poor,  13  j;  anav. 

Job  24.  4  poor  of  the  earth  hide  themselves  togeth. 
Psa.  9.  iS  expectation  of  the  poor  shall  (not)  perish 
Prov  14.  21  but  he  that  hathmercyonthepoor,happy 
Isa.  32.  7  deviseth  wicked  devices  to  destroy  the  p. 
Amos  S.    4  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail 

9.  Humble,  poor,  *i%  ani. 

Exod  22.  25  money  to  (any  of)  my  people  (that  is)  poor 
Lev.  19. 10  thou  shalt  leave  them  for  the  poor  and  s. 

23.  22  thou  shalt  leave  them  unto  the  poor,  and 
Deut  15.  11  to  thy  poor,  and  to  thy  needy,  in  thy  land 

24.  12  if  the  man  (be)  poor,  thou  shalt  not  sleep 
24.  14  not  oppress  an  hired  servant(that  is)poor 
24.  15  for  he(is)  poor,  and  setteth  his  heart  upon 

Job  24.    9  Theypluek..and  take  apledgeof  the  poor 
24.  14  rising  with  the  light  killeth  the  poor  and 
29.  12  Because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried 
36.    6  preserveth . .  but  giveth  right  to  the  poor 
36.  15  He  delivereth  the  poor  in  his  affliction,  and 

Psa.  9.  18  expectation  of  the  poor  shal£  (not)  perish 
10.  2  The  wicked,  .doth  persecute  the  poor :  let 
10.  9  he  lieth  in  wait  to  catch  the  poor :  he  do. 
10.  9  catch  the  poor,  when  he  draweth  him  into 
12.  5  For  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  for  the  s. 
14.    6  Ye  have  shamed  the  counsel  of  the  poor 

34.  6  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard 

35.  10  which  deliverest  the  poor  from  him  that 
35.  10  poor  and  the  needy  from  him  that  spoileth 


Psa.  37.  T4  cast  down  the  poor  and  needy,  (and)  to  s 
40. 17  Biit  I  (am)  poor  and  needy  ;  (yet)  the  L.  ' 

68. 10  hast  prepared  of  thy  goodness  for  the  po 

69.  29  But  I  (am)  poor  and  sorrowful :  let  thy  s 

70.  5  But  I  (am)  poor  and  needy ;  make  haste 
72.  2  He  shall  judge,  .thy  poor  with  judgment. 
72.  4  He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people,  he 
72.  12  he  shall  deliver,  .the  poor  also,  and  (him) 
74.  19  forget  not  the  congregation  of  thy  poor 
74.  21  let  the  poor  and  needy  praise  thy  name 
86.    1  Bow  down  thine  ear.. for  I  (am)poorand 

109. 16  but  persecuted  the  poor  and  needy  man 
109.  22  poor  and  needy,  and  my  heart  is  wounded 
Prov  14.  21  he  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor,  happy 
30. 14  to  devourthe  poor  from  off  the  earth,  and 

31.  9  and  plead  the  cause  of  the  poor  aud  needy 
Eccl.  6.  8  what  hath  the  poor,  that  knoweth  to  walk 
Isa.     3.  14  the  spoil  of  the  poor  (is)  in  your  houses 

3. 15  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor?  saith  the  L. 
10.    2  take  away  the  right  from  the  poor  of  my 

10.  30  cause  it  to  be  heard  unto  Laish,  0  poor  A. 
14.  32  and  the  poor  of  his  people  shall  trust  in  it 
26.    6  feet  of  the  poor,  (and)  the  steps  of  the  n. 

32.  7  devices  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  w. 
41. 17  (When)thepoor  and  needy  seek  water,  and 
58.  7  that  thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  cast  out 
66.    2  to  (him  that  is)  poor,  and  of  a  contrite  s. 

Jer.  22.  16  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy 
Eze.  16.  49  strengthen  the  hand  of  thepoorandneedy 
18.  12  Hath  oppressed  the  poor  and  needy,  hath 

18.  17  hathtakenoffhishandfromthepoor,(th.) 
22.  29  have  vexed  the  poor  and  needy;  yea  they 

Amos  8.  4  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail 
Hab.  3.  i4theirrejoicing(was)asto  devour  the  poor 
Zeck.  7.  to  oppress  not  the  widow,  .nor  the  poor;  and 

11.  7  feed  the  flock,  .(even)  you,  O  poor  of  the 

11. 11  so  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon 

10.  To  be  poor,  imp>overished,  ehn  rush. 

1  Sa.  18.  23  seeing  that  I  (am) a  poor  man,  and  lightly 

2  Sa.  12.    1  two  men .  .the  one  rich,  and  the  other  po. 

12.  3  But  the  poor(man)  had  nothing,  save  one 

12.  4  took  the  poor  man's  lamb,  and  dressed  it 
Prov  10.    4  He  becometh  poor  that  dealeth  (with)  a 

13.  8  his  riches :  but  the  poor  heareth  not  reb. 

13.  23  Much  food  (is  in)  the  tillage  of  the  poor 

14.  20  The  poor  is  hated  even  of  his  own  neigh. 

17.  5  Whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproacheth  his 
18.23  Tlie  PO°r  useth  entreaties ;  but  the  rich  a. 

19.  1  Better  (is)  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  i. 
19.  7  All  the  brethren  of  the  poor  do  hate  him 
19.  22  kindness  :  and  a  poor  man  (is)  better  than 
22.  2  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together :  the  L. 
22.  7  The  rich  ruleth  over  the  poor,  and  the  b. 
28.  3  A  poor  man  that  oppresseth . .  (is  like)  a  s. 
28.    6  Better  (is)  the  poor'that  walketh  in  his  u. 

28.  27  He  that  giveth  unto  the  poor  shall  not  1. 

29.  13  The  poor  and  the  deceitful  man  meet  to. 
Eccl.  4. 14  that  is)  born  in  his  kingdom  becometh  p. 

5.  8  If  thou  seest  the  oppression  of  the  poor 

11. Afflicted,  unfortunate,  D'xi^n  chelkaim. 

Psa.  10.  10  that  the  poor  may  fall  by  Ms  strongones 

12. Labourer,  poor  man,  irevns  penes. 

2  Co.  9.    9  he  hath  given  to  the  poor:  his  righteous. 

13.  Very  poor,  -Ktvixpos  penichros. 

Luke2i.    2  saw  also  a  certain  poor  widow  casting  in 

14.  Trembling,  2}°or,  tvrwxSs  jrfochos. 

Matt  5.  3  Blessed(are)thepoorinspirit:  fortheirs 
ti.  5  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  th. 
19.  21  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor 
26.    9  been  sold  for  much,  andgiven  to  the  po. 

26.  11  Forye  have  the  poor  always  with  you ;  but 
Markio.  21  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have  tre. 

12.  42  there  came  a  certain  [poor]  widow,  and 
12.  43  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  more  in  than 
14.    5  have  been  sold.  .and.  .given  to  the  poor 
14.    7  For  ye  havethepoor  with  you  always,  and 
Luke  4.  18  anointed  me  to  preach,  .to  the  poor;  he 

6.  20  Blessed  (be  ye)  poor :  for  yours  is  the  kin. 

7.  22  how  that  .  .to  the  poor  the  gospel  is  pre. 
14.  13  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor 
14.  21  bring  in  hither  the  poor,  andtheniaimed 

18.  22  distribute  unto  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt 

19.  8  the  half  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor 
21.    3  this  poor  widow  hath  cast  in  more  than 

John  12.  5  was  not  this  ointment,  .given to  the  p.  ? 
12.    6  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor,  but 

12.  8  For  the  poor  always  ye  have  with  you;  b. 

13.  29  that  he  should  give  something  to  the  po. 
Roni.15.  26  certain  contribution  for  the  poor  saints 
2  Co.   6.  10  as  poor,  yet  making  manyrich  ;  as  having 
Gal.    2.  10  that  we  should  remember  the  poor  ;  the 
Jas.     2.    2  there  come  in  also  a  poor  man  in  vile  ra. 

2.    3  say  to  the  poor,  Stand  thou  there,  or  sit 
2.   5  Hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  wo. 
2.    6  But  ye  have  dispised  the  poor.     Do  not 
Rev.    3.  17  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor 
13.  16  rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond,  to  receive 

POOR  or  poorer,  to  be,  become,  or  wax  — 
l.To  become  impoverished,  an;  yarash,  2. 

Prov 30.   9  Who  (is)  the  Lord?  or  lest  I  be  poor,  and 

2.  To  be  or  become  low  or  poor,  -po  muk. 

Lev.  25.  25  If  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor,  and  hath 
25-  35  if  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor,  and  fallen 
25.  39  ifthy  brother,  .be  waxen  poor,  and  be  sold 
25.47  thy  brother  (thatdwelleth)  by  him  wax  p. 

27.  8  But  if  he  be  poorer  than  thy  estimation 


POOR 


762 


POSSESS 


3.70  be  or  become  poor,  7TTwxe^w  ptdcheuo, 

2  Co.   8.   g  lie  became  poor,  that  ye  through  his  pov. 

POOR,  to  make  (self)  — 

l.To  dispossess,  ETT  yarash,  5. 

i  Sa.  2.   7  The  Lord  maketh  poor,  and  maketh  rich 

l.To  impoverish  self,  tin  rush,  7a. 

Prov  13.    7  (there  is)  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet 

POOREST  sort  — 

Lean,  poor,  weak,  Tvw  dallah. 

2  Ki.24.  14  the  poorest  sort  of  thepeople  of  the  land 

POPLAR  — 

Poplar,  TKih  libneli. 

Gen.  30.' 37  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar,  and 
Hos.    4.  13  burn  iucense.. under  oaks  and  poplars  and 

POPULOUS  — 

l.A  multitude,  one  nourished,  pon  anion. 

Nali.  3-    8  Art  thou  better  than  populous  No,  that 
2. Numerous,  abundant,  sn  rah. 

Deut  26.    5  became,  .nation,  great, mighty,  and  pop. 
PO-RA'-THA,  NrniB. 
One  of  the  sons  of  Uaman  the  Agagite.     B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    8  And  P.,  and  Adalia,  and  Aridatha 
PORCH  — 
1. Porch,  arch,  D^ttt,  d^>n  ulam. 


:Ki. 


:  Ch. 
■Ch. 


3  the  porch  before  the  temple  of  tbeliouse 
6  he  made  a  porch  of  pillars ;  the  length 

6  the  porch  (was)  before  them ;  and  the  (o.) 

7  he  made  a  porch  for  the  throne  where  lie 

7  the  porch  of  judgment :  and  (it  was)  cov. 

8  house. .(had)  another  court  within  the  po. 
8  made  also  an  house,  .like  unto  this  porch 

12  cedar  beams,  .for  the  porch  of  the  house 
19  chapiters .  .(were)  of  lily  work  in  the  por. 
21  the  pillars  in  the  porch  of  the  temple 

S.  1 1  gave  to  Solomon . .  the  pattern  of  the  po. 

3.    4  porch  that  (was)  in  the  front  (of  the  ho.) 


Ezra 


Neh. 


..  _i  altar,  .which  he  had  built  before  the  po. 
15.    8  altar,  .that  (was)  before  the  porch  of  the 
29.    7  they  have  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  porch 
29. 17  on  the  eighth  day. .came  they  to  the  por. 
Eze.    8. 16  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  (were) 
40.    7  by  the  porch  of  the  gate  within,  .one  reed 
40.    8  measured  also  the  porch  of  the  gate  with 
40.    9  the  porch  of  the  gate,  .the  porch  of  the 
40.  15  unto  the  face  of  the  porch  of  the  inner 
40.  39  in  the  porch  of  the  gate  (were)  two  tallies 
40.  40  side,  which  (was)  at  the  porch  of  the  gate 
40.  48  he  brought  me  to  the  porch  of  the  house 
40.  48  measured  (each)  post  of  the  porch,  five  c. 

40.  49  The  length  of  the  porch  (was)  twenty  cu. 

41.  15  inner  temple,  and  the  porches  of  the  co. 
41.  25  planks  upon  the  face  of  the  porch  without 
41.  26  on  the  sides  of  the  porch,  and  (upon)  the 
44.  3  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)g. 
46.  2  enterbythe  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)gate 
46.    8  go  in  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)  g. 

Joel    2.  17  weep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  and 

2. Porch,  j'vwpB  misderon. 

Judg.  3.  23  Ehud  went  forth  through  the  porch,  and 
3.  Vestibule,  irpoavKiov  proaulion. 

Marki4-  68  went  out  into  the  porch  ;  and  the  cock 
l.A  gateway,  wX&v pulon. 

Matt  26.  71  when  he  was  gone  out  into  the  porch,  an. 

5. A  standing  place,  portico,  (Trod  stoa. 

John  5.    2  Now  there  is.  .a  pool,  .having  five  porches 
10.  23  walked  in  the  temple,  in  Solomon's  porch 
Acts    3. 11  in  the  porch  that  is  called  Solomon's 
5. 12  all  with  one  accord  in  Solomon's  porch 

POR-CI'-TJS,  Tl6pKio$. 

The  procurator  of  the  Jews  who  succeeded  Felix  A.D. 

60,  and  who  sent  Paul  to  Rome. 

Acts  24.  27  after  two  years  P.  Festus  came.into  Felix' 
PORT  — 
Gate,  t&&  shaar. 

Neh.   2.  13  the  dragon  well  and  to  the  dung  port 

PORTER  — 

\.Gate,^V.V  shaar. 

1  Ch.  16. 42  And  the  sons  of  Jeduthun  (were)  porters 

2.  Gate  keeper,  "lulls'  shoer. 

2  Sa.  18.  26  the  watchman  called  unto  the  porter,  and 
2  Ki.  7.  10  came  and  called  unto  the  porter  of  the 

7.  n  he  called  the  porters;  and  they  told  (it) 
i  Ch.    9. 17  the  porters  (were)  Shallum,  and  Akkub 
9. 18  they  (were)  porters  in  the  companies  of 
9.  21  thr  son  of  Meshelemiah(was)porterof  the 
9.  22  All  these,  .chosen  to  be  porters  in  the  g. 
9.  24  In  four  quarters  were  the  porters,  toward 
9.  26  the  four  chief  porters,  were  in  (their)  set 
.15. 18  with  them.  .Obed-edbm,  and  Jeiel,  the  p. 
16.  38  sen  of  Jeduthun,  and  Hosah,  (to  be)  port. 
23.    5  four  thousand  (were)  porters;  and  tour 
26.    1  Cmu-em  in  Lithe  divisions  of  the  porters:  Of 
26. 12  Among  these,  .the divisions  of  the-porters 
26. 19  the  divisions  of  the  porters  among  the  sons 
2  Ch.  8.  14  the  porters  also  by  their  courses  at  every 
23.    4  third  part . .  (shall  be)  porters  of  the  doors 
23.  19  he  set  the  porters  at  the  gates  of  thr  house 

31. 14  the  porter  toward  the  east,  (was)  overthe 
34.  13  (there  were)  scribes,  and  officers,  and  po. 

35. 15  the  porters  (waited)  at  every  gate;  theym 


2  42  The  children  of  the  porters  :  the  children 
2.  70  the  porters,  and  the  Nethinims,  dweltin 
7.  7  singers,  and  the  porters,  and  the  Nethin. 
c.  24  of  the  porters;  Shallum,  and  Telein,  and 
7.  1  the  porters  and  the  singers  and  the  Levi. 
7.  45  The  porters :  the  children  of  Shallum,  the 
7.  73  Levites,  and  the  porters,  and  the  singers 
10.  28  the  porters,  the  singers,  the  Nethinims 
20.  39  the  priests  that  minister,  and  the  porters 
11. 19  porters:  Akkub,  Talinon,  and  their  breth. 
12.  25  Talmon,  Akkub,  (were)  porters,  keeping 
12.  45  the  porters  kept  the  ward  of  their  God,  and 

1 2.  47  the  portions  of  the  singers  and  the  porters 

13.  5  Levites,  and  the  singers,  and  the  porters 
3. Gate  or  door  keeper,  jtji-i  tara. 

Ezra    7.  24  porters,  Nethinims,  or  ministers  of  this 
4. Door  keeper,  gate  keeper,  dvpvpos  thurOros. 
Marki3.  34  and  commanded  the  porter  to  watch 
J  ohn  10.    3  To  him  the  porter  openeth ;  and  the  sheep 

PORTION  — 

l.To  lay  or  keep  hold  on,  thn  ackaz. 

Num  31.  30  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of  fifty,  of 
31. 47  Moses  took  one  portion  of  fifty,  (both)  of 

2.  A  word,  thing,  matter,  "Q"?  dabar. 

2  Ch.31. 16  his  daily  portion  for  their  service  in  their 
Neh.  12.  47  and  the  porters,  every  day  his  portion:  and 
Job   26.  14  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him? 
Jer.  52.  34  every  day  a  portion  until  the  day  of  his 
3.^1  cord,  line,  portion,  hnn,  "?jn  chebel. 

Josh  17.    5  there  fell  ten  portions  to  Manasseh,  besi. 
17. 14  one  portion  to  inherit,  seeing  I  (am)  a 
19.    9  the  portion  of  the  children  of  Judah  (was) 
Eze.  47.  13  the  laud.  .Joseph  (shall  have  two)portions 

4.  A  portion,  share,  pbn  cheleq. 

Gen.  14.  24  the  portion  of  the  men  which  went  with 
14.  24  Eshcol,  and  Manire ;  let  them  take  theirp. 

31.  14  (Is  there)  yet  any  portion  or  inheritance 
Lev.  6.  17  their  portion  of  my  offerings  made  by  fire 
NUH131.  36  the  portion  of  them  that  went  out  to  war 
Deut  18.    8  They  shall  have  like  portions  to  eat,  be. 

32.  9  For  the  Lord's  portion  (is)  his  people ;  J. 

1  Ki.12. 16  saying,  What  portion  have  we  in  David? 

2  Kli.  9.  10  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  in  the  portion  of  J. 
9.  36  In  the  portion  of  Jezreel  shall  dogs  eat 
9.  37  upon  the  face  of  the  field  in  the  portion 

2  Ch.io.  16  saying,  What  portion  have  we  in  David? 

Neh.   2.  20  but  ye  have  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  m. 

Job    20.  29  This  (is)  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  from 

27.  13  This  (is)  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  w. 

31.    2  For  what  portion  of  God  (is  there)  from 

Psa.  "17.  14  men  of  the  world,  (which  have)  their  por. 

73.  26  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for 

119.  57  (Thou  art)  my  portion,  O  Lord  :  I  have 

142.    5  Thou  (art)  my  refuge  (and)  my  portion  iD 


Isa. 


Jer. 


Eccl.  2.  10  and  this  was  my  portion  of  all  my  labour 

2.  21  therein  shall  he  leave  it  (for)  his  portion 

3.  22  for  that  (is)  his  portion  :  for  who  shall 
5.  18  which  God  giveth  him ;  for  it  (is)  his  por. 
5.  19  take  his  portion,  and  to  rejoice  in  his  la. 
9.    6  neither  have  they  any  more  a  portion  for 
9.    9  for  that  (is)  thy  portion  in  (this)  life,  and 

11.  2  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight 
17.  14  This  (is)  the  portion  nf  them  that  spoil  us 
57.  6  of  the  stream  (is)  thy  portion  ;  they,  they 
61.  7  confusion  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  port. 
10.  16  The  portion  of  Jacob  (is)  not  like  them :  for 
51.  19  The  portion  of  Jacob  (is)  not  like  them 
Lam.  3.  24  .oORD  (is)  my  portion,  saith  my  soul ;  the. 
Eze.  45.   7  over  against  one  of  the  portions,  from  the 

48.  21  over  against  the  portions  for  the  prince 
Hos.    5.    7  mouth  devour  them  with  their  portions 
Mic.    2.    4  he  hath  changed  the  portion  of  my  people 
Hab.  1  16  because  by  them  their  portion  (is)fat,  and 
Zech.  2.  12  LOUD  shall  inherit  Judah  his  portion  in 

5. Portion,  share,  P7CI  chaZaq. 

Ezra   4.  16  by  this  means  thou  shalt  have  no  portion 
Dan.   4. 15,  23  and  (let)  his  portion  (be)  with  the  be. 

6. Portion,  share,  np^n  chelaah. 

Deut  33.  21  (in)  a  portion  of  the  law  giver,  (was  he) 
2  Ki.   9.  21  met  him  in  the  portion  of  Naboth  the  Je. 
9.  25  cast  him  in  the  portion  of  the  field  of  N. 
Job   24.  18  their  portion  is  cursed  in  the  earth :  he 
Jer.   12.  10  they  have  trodden  my  portion  under  foot 
12. 10  have  made  my  pleasant  portion  a  desolate 

7.A  statute,  portion,  ph  choa. 

Gen.  47.  22  had  a  portion,  .and  did  eat  their  portion 
Prov  31.  15  She.,  giveth..  a  portion  to  her  maidens 

8.  Course,  division,  np'Sno  machaloqeth. 

Eze.  48.  29  these  (are)  their  portions,  saith  the  Lord 
9. Portion,  part,  n,0  numah. 

1  Sa.  1.   4  to  all  her  sons  and  her  daughters,  portions 

1.    5  unto  Hannah  he  gave  a  worthy  portion 
9. 23  Bring  the  portion  which  I  gave  thee,  of 

2  Ch.  31.  19  to  give  portions  to  all  the  males  among 
Neh.   8.  10  send  portions  unto  them  for  whom  nothing 

8.  12  to  send  portions,  and  to  make  great  mirth 

Esth.  9.  19,  22  and  of  sending  portions  oneto another 

Psa.  i<5.   5  Lord  (is}  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance 

J  cr.  1 3.  25  thy  lot,  the  portion  of  thy  measures  from 

10.  Portion,  part,  nip  menath, 

2  Ch.31.   3  (He  appointed)  also  the  king's  portions  of 
31.    4  to  give  the  portions  of  the  priests  and  the 
Neh.  12.  44  the  portions  of  the  law  for  the  priests 

12.  47  portions  ol  the  singers  and  the  porters 

13.  10  I  perceived  that  the  portions  of  the  Lev. 


Psa.  11.6  Upon  the  wicked . .  the  portion  of  their  c. 
63.  10  They .  .they  shall  be  a  portion  for  foxes 

ll.The  mouth,  nspeh. 

Deut2i.  17  by  giving  him  a  double  portion  of  all 

2  Ki.  2.  9  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  upon 
12.  The  shoulder,  cs;?  shekem. 

Gen.  48.  22  I  have  given  to  thee  one  portion  above  thy 
\Z. Part,  portion,  share,  division,  txtpos  meros. 

Matt24-  51  appoint  (him)  his  portion  with  the  hypo. 

Lukei2.  46  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  unbeli. 
15.  12  give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth 

PORTION  of  meat  — 

l.A  portion  of  food,  3«jjiS  pathbag. 

Dan.    1.    8 -with  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat,  nor 

1. 13  that  eat  of  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat 

1.  15  which  dideat  the  portion  of  the  king's  m. 

1.  16  Melzar  took  away  the  portion  of  their  m. 

11.  26  they  that  feed  of  the  portion  of  his  meat 

2.  A  measure  of  corn,  atrofxerpiop  sitometrion. 

Luke  i2.  42  to  give  (them  their)  portion  of  meat  in  due 
PORTION,  to  take  away  a  — 
To  apportion,  share,  P*?n  chalaq. 

1  Ch.28.  21  took  away  a  portion  (out)  of  the  house  of 

POSSESS,  to  — 

l.To  strengthen,  possess,  }pq  chasan,  5. 

Dan.    7. 18  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever,  even  for  e. 
7.  22  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the  kingd. 

2.  To  possess,  take  possession  of,  Bh;  yarash. 

Gen.  22.  17  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies 
24.  60  possess  the  gate  of  those  which  hate  them 

Lev.  20.  24  I  will  give  it  unto  you  to  possess  it,  a  land 

Num  13.  30  Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess  it ;  for 
21.  24  possessed  his  laud  from  Anion  unto  Jab. 
21.  35  they  smote  him .  .and  they  possessed  his 
27.  11  unto  his  kinsman .  .and  he  shall  possess 
33.  53  for  I  have  given  you  the  land  to  possess 
36.   8  that  possesseth  an  inheritance  in  any  tri. 

Deut."  1.    8  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord  sware 

1.  21  possess  (it),  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fath. 
1. 39  will  I  give  it,  and  they  shall  possess  it 

2.  24  begin  to  possess  (it),  and  contend  with  h. 

2.  31  begin  to  possess,  that  thou  mayest  inner. 

3.  12  this  land,  (which)  we  possessed  at  that  t 
3.  18  God  hath  given  yon  this  land  to  possess 

3.  20  they  also  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord 

4.  1  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord  God  of 
4.    5  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
4. 14  the  land  whither  ye  go  over  to  possess  it 
4.  22  shall  go  over,  and  possess  that  good  land 
4.  26  land  whereunto  ye  go  over  Jordan  to  po. 

4.  47  they  possessed  his  land,  and  the  laud  of 

5.  31  the  land  which  I  give  them  to  possess  it 

5.  33  live,  .in  the  land  which  ye  shall  possess 

6.  1  in  the  land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it 
6. 18  and  possess  the  good  land  which  the  Lord 

7.  1  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

8.  1  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord  sware 

9.  1  to  possess  nations  greater  and  mightier 
9.   4  hath  brought  me  in  to  possess  this  land 
9.    5  Not  for  thy  righteousness . .  dost  thou . .  p 
9.   6  not  this  good  land  to  possess  it  for  thy  ri. 
9.  23  possess  the  land  which  I  have  given  you 

10.  11  possess  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  their 

1 1.  8  possess  the  laud,  whither  ye  go  to  possess 
11.  10  the  land,  whither  thou  goest  into  possess 
11.  11  the  land,  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it,  (is) 
11.  23  shall  possess  greater  nations  and  mightier 
11.  29  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 
11.  31  to  possess  the  land  which  the  Lord  your 

11.  31  and  ye  shall  possess  it,  and  dwell  therein 

12.  1  the  Lord  God.  .giveth  thee  to  possess  it 
12.    2  the  nations  which  ye  shall  possess  served 
12.  29  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  them,  and 
T5.   4  giveth .  .(for)  an  inheritance  to  possess  it 
17. 14  shalt  possess  it,  and  shalt  dwell  therein 

18.  14  these  nations,  which  thou  shalt  possess 

19.  2,  14  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  to  possess 
2i.    1  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  to  possess 
23.  20  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess  it 

25.  19  giveth  thee  (for)  an  inheritance  to  possess 

26.  1  come  in  unto  the  land,  .and  possessest  it 
28.  21,  63  off  the  laud  whither  thou  goest  to  pos. 
30.  5  fathers  possessed,  and  thou  shalt  possess 
30. 16  in  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to  possess 

30.  18  thou  passest  over  Jordan  to  go  to  possess 

31.  3  will  destroy,  .and  thou  shalt  possess  them 

31.  13  whither  ye  go  over  Jordan  to  possess  it 

32.  47  whither  ye  go  over  Jordan  to  possess  it 

33.  23  ONaphtali.  .possess  thou  the  west  and  the 
Josh.  1.  11  to  go  in  to  possess  the  land,  which  the 

1.  11  Lord  your  God  giveth  you  to  possess  it 
1.  15  they  also  have  possessed  the  land  which 
12.    1  possessed  their  land  on  the  other  side  J. 
to.    3  to  goto  possess  the  land,  which  the  Lord 
19.47  smote,  .and  possessed  it,  and  dwelt  ther. 
21.  43  and  they  possessed  it,  and  dwelt  therein 
23-    5  ye  shall  possess  their  land,  as  the  Lord 
24.    4  I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  Seir,  to  possess 
24.    8  that  ye  might  possess  their  land ;  and  I 
Judg.  2.    6  unto  his  inheritance  to  possess  the  land 
3.  13  went. .and  possessed  the  city  of  palm  trees 
11.  21  so  Israel  possessed  all  the  land  of  the  A. 
11.  22  they  possessed  all  the  coasts  of  the  Amo. 
11.  23  dispossessed. . and shouldest thou  possess 
11.  2,;  Wilt  not  thou  possess,  .them  will  we  pos. 
18.    9  slothful  to  go.. to  enter  to  possess  the  la. 
1  Ki.21.  iS  whither  he  has  gtne  down  to  possess  it 


POSSESS 


763 


POT 


2  Ki.17.  24  they  possessed  Samaria,  and  dwelt  in  the 

1  Ch.28.    8  that  ye  may  possess  this  good  land,  and 

Ezra   9.  11  The  land,  unto  which  ye  go  to  possess  it 

Nell.   9. 15  possess  the  land  which  thou  hadst  sworn 

9.  22  they  possessed  the  laud  of  Sihon,  and  the 

9.  23  broughtest . .  that  they  should  go  in  to  po. 

9.  24  So  the  children  went  in  and  possessed  the 

9.  25  possessed  houses  full  of  all  goods,  wells 

Isa.    14.  21  nor  possess  the  land,  nor  fill  the  face  of 

34. 11  the  bittern  shall  possess  it;  the  owl  also 
34.  17  they  shall  possess  it  for  ever,  from  gene. 
61.    7  in  their  land  they  shall  possess  the  double 

63. 18  The  people  of  thy  holinesshave  possessed 
Jer.  30.    3  to  the  land.. and  they  shall  possess  it 

32.  23  they  came  in,  and  possessed  it;  but  they 
Eze.    7.  24  and  they  shall  possess  theirhouses :  I  will 

33.  25  shed  blood :  and  shall  ye  possess  the  land 
33.  26  ye  defile,  .and  shall  ye  possess  the  land? 
35. 10  shall  be  mine,  and  we  will  possess  it 

36. 12  they  shall  possess  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be 
Hos.  9.  6  nettles  shall  possess  them:  thorns  (shall) 
Amos  2.  10  led  you.  .to  possess  the  land  of  the  Amo. 

9.  12  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  Edoni 
Obad.     17  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  po. 

19  shall  possess  the  mount,  .they  shall  poss. 

20  captivity,  .shall  possess  the  cities  of  the  s. 
Hab.  1.   6  to  possess  the  dwelling  places .  .not  theirs 

3.  To(cause  to)2iossess,  take- possession,  vyryarash,  5. 

Numi4.  24  the  land,  .and  his  seed  shall  possess  it 

4.  To  inherits  ?03  naclutl. 

Isa.   57.  13  he  that  putteth . .  trust  in  me  shall  possess 
Zeph   2.    9  remnant  of  my  people  shall  possess  them 

5.  To  inherit  for  one's  self,  hninachal,  7. 

Isa.   14.    2  the  house  of  Israel  shall  possess  them  in 
Q.To  acquire,  set  up,  H3J5  qanah. 

Psa.139.  13  thou  hast  possessed  my  reins:  thou  hasi 
Prov.  8.  22  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning 

7  .To  hold  doion  or  firm,  kclt^x®  katecho. 

1  Co.   7.  30  they  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed 

2  Co.   6.  10  having  nothing,  and  (yet)  possessing  all 
8.  To  acquire,  possess,  Krdofxai  ktaomai. 

Luke  18.  12  I  fast.  .1  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess 

21. 19  In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls 

1  Th.  4.   4  should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in 

POSSESS,  to  cause,  give,  make  — 

l.To  cause  to  take  possession,  ahj  yarash,  5. 

Judg  11.  24  Chemosh  thy  god  giveth  thee  to  possess? 

Job  13.  26  makest  me  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my 

2.  To  cause  to  inherit,  %i  naclial,  5. 

Zech.  8.  12  will  cause  the  remnant,  .to  possess  all  th. 
POSSESS,  to  be  made  to  — 
To  be  caused  to  in/ierit,  Sru  naclud,  6. 

Job     7.   3  So  am  I  made  to  possess  months  of  vanity 
POSSESSED  (with),  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  laid  hold  of  or  on,  Tnx  achaz,  2. 

Josh. 22.   9  whereof  they  were  possessed,  according 

2.  To  take  2>ossession,  ah;  yarash. 

Josh. 13.    1  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  poss. 

3.  To  be  acquired,  piossessed,  ~iq  qanah,  2. 

Jer.  32.  15  vineyards  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this 

4.  To  have,  hold,  e^tu  echo. 

Acts    8.   7  came  out  of  many  that  were  possessed  (w. 
16.  16  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  diviuat. 

POSSESSED  with  or  of  devils,  to  be  — 
To  be  denwnized,  be  as  a  demon,  dai/j.ov((ofiai. 
Matt.  4.  24  those  which  were  possessed  with  devils 
8. 16  manythat  were  possessed  with  devils:  and 

8.  28  there  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils 
8, 33  what  was  befallen  to  the  possessed  of  the  d. 

9.  32  brought  to  him  a.  .man  possessed  with  a  d. 
12.  22  one  possessed  with  a  devil,  blind  and  du. 

Mark  1.  32  and  them  that  were  possessed  with  devils 
5.  15  see  him  that  was  possessed  with  the  devil 
5.  16  befell  tohim  that  was  possessed  with  thed. 
5.  18  he  that  had  been  possessed  with  the  devil 
Luke   8.  36  he  that  was  possessed  of  the  devils  was 
POSSESSETH,  things  which  one  — 
Possessio)is,  subsUxnce,  ret  inrdpxoura  ta  huparchon. 
Luke  12.  15  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  posse. 
Acts    4.  32  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own 
POSSESSION  — 

1. Possession,  what  is  Jield  fast,  nwx  achuzzah. 
Gen.  17.    8  Canaan,  foran  everlasting  possession ;  and 
23-    4  give  me  a  possession  of  a  burying  place 
23.   9,  20  for  a  possession  of  a  burying  place 
36.  43  habitations  in  the  land  of  their  possession 

47.  11  gave  them  a  possession  in  the  land  of  E. 

48.  4 give  this  land,  .(for)  an  everlasting  pos. 

49.  30  nought,  .for  a  possession  of  a  burying  pi. 

50.  13  bought,  .for  a  possession  of  a  burying  p. 
Lev.  14.  34  Canaan,  which  I  give  to  you  for  a  posses. 

14.  34  in  a  house  of  the  land  of  your  possession 
25. 10,  13  shall  return  every  man  unto  his  poss. 
25.  24  in  all  the  laud  of  your  possession  ye  shall 
25.  25  hath  sold  away  (some)  of  his  possession 
25.  27  that  he  may  return  unto  his  possession 
25.  28  and  he  shall  return  unto  his  possession 
25.  32  the  houses  of  the  citiea-^f  their  possession 
25-  33  city  °f  his  possession,  s'fi  31  go  out  in  (the 
25-  33  their  possession  among  tli'J'rhildren  of  I. 
25.  34  may  not  be  sold  ;  for  it  (is)  b.  eir.. posses. 


Lev.  25.  41  unto  the  possession  of  his  fathers  shall  he 
25.  45  land :  and  they  shall  be  your  possession 
25.  46  to  inherit  (them  for)  a  possession ;  they 
27. 16  sanctify,  .(some  part)  of  a  field  of  his  po. 
27.  21  the  possession  thereof  shall  be  the  priest's 
27.  22  which  (is)  not  of  the  fields  of  his  possession 
27.  24  to  him  to  whom  the  possession  of  the  la. 
27.  28  beast,  and  of  the  field  of  his  possession 

NUII127.  4  a  possession  among  the  brethren  of  our 
27.  7  thou  shalt  surely  give  them  a  possession 
32.  5  given  unto  thy  servants  for  a  possession 
32. 22  this  land  shall  be  your  possession  before 
32.  29  give  them  the  land  of  Gilead  for  a  posse. 
32.  32  that  the  possession  of  our  inheritance  on 
35.  2  give,  .of  the  inheritance  of  their  possess. 
35.    8  of  the  possession  of  the  children  of  Israel 

35.  28  shall  return  into  the  land  of  his  possess. 
Deut32.  49  unto  the  children  of  Israel  for  a  possess. 
Josh2i.  12  gave  they  to  Caleb .  .for  his  possession 

21.  41  All  the  cities  of  the  Levites  within  the  p. 

22.  4  unto  the  land  of  your  possession,  which 
22.   9  to  the  land  of  their  possession,  whereof 
22. 19  if  the  land  of  yourpossession(be)unclean 
22. 19  unto  the  land  of  the  possession  of  the  L. 

1  Ch.    7.  28  their  possessions  and  habitations  (were) 

9.   2  inhabitants  that  (dwelt)  in  their  possess. 

2  Ch.11.  14  left  their  suburbs,  and  their  possession 

31.    1  returned,  every  man  to  hispossession,  into 

Neh.  11.    3  dwelt  every  one  in  his  possession  in  their 

Psa.     2.    8  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  (for)  thy  po. 

Eze.  44.  28  no  possession  in  Israel ;  I  (am)  their  pos. 

45.    5  for  a  possession  for  twenty  chambers 

45.    6  ye  shall  appoint  the  possession  of  the  city 

45.    7  of  the  possession .  .before  the  possession 

45.  S  In  the  land  shall  be  his  possession  in  Is. 

46.  16  it  (shall  be)  their  possession  by  inberita. 
46.  18  thrust  them  out  of  their  possession;  (but) 
46.  18  sons  inheritance  out  of  his  own  possession 

46.  18  scattered  every  man  from  his  possession 
48.  20  ye  shall  offer,  .with  the  possession  of  the 
48.  21  of  the  possession  of  the  city,  over  against 
48.  22  from  the  possession,  .and  from  the  poss. 

2,Possessio7i,  occupancy,  nt?*v  yereshah. 

Num24.  iS  Edom  shall  be  a  possession,  Seir  also  shall 

24.  iS  be  a  possession  for  his  enemies ;  and  Isr, 

3. Possession,  occupancy,  n&'v  yerushshah. 

Deut.  2.  5  given  mount  Seir  unto  Esau  (for)  a  poss. 
2.  9  I  will  not  give  thee  of  their  land  (for)  a  p. 
2.  9  Arunto  the  children  of  Lot  (for)  a  posse. 
2. 12  Israel  did  unto  the  land  of  his  possession 
2. 19  for  I  will  not  give  thee,  .(any) possession 

2.  19  unto  the  children  of  Lot  (for)  a  possession 

3.  20  ye  return  every  man  unto  his  possession 
Josh.  1. 15  ye  shall  return  unto  the  land  of  your  po. 

12.    6  gave  it  (for)  a  possession  unto  the  Reub. 

12.    7  gave  unto  the  tribes  of  Israel  (for)  aposs. 

2  Ch.20. 11  to  come  to  cast  us  out  of  thy  possessiou 

4  Possession,  cnis  morash. 

Isa.   14.  23 1  will  also  make  it  a  possession  for  the  b. 

Obad.      17  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  posses. 
o.Possessim,  occupancy,  heHid  morashah. 

Eze.  11. 15  unto  us  is  this  land  given  in  possession 

25.  4  deliver  thee  to  the  men  of  the  east  for  a  p. 
25.  10  will  give  them  in  possession,  that  the  A. 

36.  2  the  ancient  high  places  are  ours  iu  poss. 
36.  3  ye  might  be  a  possession  unto  the  residue 
36.    5  appointed  my  land  into  their  possession 

6.  Work,  deed,  n^p  maascli. 

1  Sa.  25.    2  man  in  Maon,  whose  possessions  (were) 
7 .Acquisition,  possession,  rugp  miqneh. 

Gen.  26.  14  he hadpossession'of  flocks,  andpossession 

1  Ch.28.    1  over  all  the  substance  and  possession  of 

2  Ch.32.  29  possessions  of  flocks  and  herds  in  abund. 
Eccl.  2.    7  also  I  had  great  possessions  of  great  and 

8. Acquisition,  possession,  n^p  miqnah. 

Gen.  23. 18  Unto  Abraham  for  a  possession  in  the  p. 

9. Inheritance,  nbr<2  nachalah. 

Nuni26.  36  According  to  the  lot  shall  the  possession 

10.  Foot,  Sri  regel. 

Deut  n."  6  the  substance  that  (was)  in  their  possess. 

11.  Possessimi,oecvpation,holding  firm,Ka.Ta(rxe<Tls  ■ 
Acts    7.    5  that  he  would  give  it  to  him  for  a  posses. 

7.  45  brought  in  with  Jesus  into  the  possessiou 

12.  Possession,  acqtcisition,  KTrj/xa  ktema. 
Mattig.  22  went  away  sorrowful:  for  he  had  great  p. 
Markio.  22  wrent  away  grieved  :  for  he  had  great  po. 
Acts    2.  45  sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and  pa. 

5.    1  certain  man  named  Ananias,  .sold  a  pos. 
13.-4  little  place,  spot,  x^piov  chorion. 

Acts  28.   7  In  the  same  quarters  were  possessions  of 
POSSESSION,  purchased  — 
Acquirement,  Trepnrolna'Ls  peripoiesis. 

Eph.   1. 14  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  posses. 
POSSESSION,  to  get,  take,  have  in  — 

1.  To  be  laid  or  kept  hold  of  or  not,  TrjN  achaz,  2. 

Gen.  34. 10  trade  ye  therein,  and  get  you  possessions 

47.  27  they  had  possessions  therein,  and  grew 
Nuni32.  30  they  shall  have  possessions  among  you  in 
Josh  22.  19  take  possession  among  us  ;  but  rebel  not 

2.  To  take  or  Iiave  in  possession,  ch;  yarash. 

1  Ki.21. 15  take  possession  of  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 
21.  16  rose  up  to  go  down,  .to  take  possession 
21.  ig  Hast  thou  killed,  and  also  taken  possess. 


Psa.  44.    3  For  they  got  not  the  land  iu  possession 
69.  35  may  dwellthere,andhaveit  in  possession 
83.  12  take  to  ourselves  the  houses  of  God  in  p. 

%.To  inherit,  7ninachal. 

Prov  28. 10  upright  shall  have  good  (things)  in  poss. 
POSSESSOR  — 
l.To  acquire,  get,  set  up,  iTjp  qanah. 

Gen.  14.  19,  22  most  high  God,  possessor  of  heaven 

Zech  11.    5  Whose  possessors  slay  them,  and  hold 
2.  A  possessor,  acquirer,  KTt)Twp  ktetor. 

Acts   4. 34  for  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  lands 
POSSIBLE  — 
1. Powerful,  able,  capable,  Bvuar6s  dunatos. 

Mattig.  26  but  with  God  all  things  are  possible 
24. 24  if  (it  were)  possible,  they  shall  deceive 
26.  39  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me 

Mark  9.  23  all  things  (are)  possible  to  him  that  beli. 

10.  27  with  God  :  for  with  God  all  things  are  p. 

13.  22  to  seduce,  if  (it  were)  possible,  even  the 

14.  35  if  it  were  possible,  the  hour  might  pass 
14.  36  Eather,  all  things  (are)  possible  unto  thee 

Lukei8.  27  impossible  with  men  are.possible  with  G. 
Acts  2.  24  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be  ho. 
20. 16  hasted,  if  it  were  possible  for  him,  to  be  at 
Rorn  12.  18  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you 
Gal.    4. 15  if  (it  had  been)  possible,  ye  would  have  p 

2.  To  be  able,  capable,  h~vva.fj.at  dunamai. 

Acts  27.  39  if  it  were  possible,  to  thrust  in  the  ship 

POSSIBLE,  not  — 

Not  able,  not  capable,  aduvaros  adunatos. 

Heb.  10.    4  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and 

POST,  (door  or  side)  — 

l.A  ram,  post,  S-x  ayil. 

Eze.  40.  9  the  posts  thereof,  two  cubits  ;  and  the  p. 
40. 10  posts  had  one  measure  on  this  side  and 
40. 14  He  made  also  posts  of  threescore  cubits 
40.  14  the  post  of  the  court  round  about  the  gate 
40. 16  to  their  posts,  .and  upon  (each)  post  (w.) 
40.  21,  29,  33,  36  the  posts  thereof,  and  the  arc. 
40.  24  measured  the  posts  thereof,  and  the  arc. 
40.  26  another  on  that  side,  upon  the  posts  th. 
40.  31,  34,  37  and  palm  trees  (were)  upon  the  p. 
40.  37  the  posts  thereof  (were)towrardthe  outer 
40.  38  entries  thereof  (were)  by  the  posts  of  the 
40.  48  measured  (each)  post  of  the  porch,  five  c. 

40.  49  pillars  by  the  posts,  one  on  this  side,  and 

41.  1  measured  the  posts,  six  cubits  broad  on 
41.   3  measured  the  post  of  the  door  two  cubits 

2.  Pedestal,  nsx  ammah. 

Isa.     6.   4  posts  of  the  door  moved  at  the  voice  of 

3.  Side  post,  nyiD  mezuzah. 

Exodi2.    7  strike  (it)  on  the  two  side  posts  and  on 
12.  22  strike  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts 
12.  23  he  seeththe  blood,  .on  the  two  side  posts 
21.   6  bring  him  to  the  door,  or  unto  the  door  p. 

Deut.  6.    9  thou  shalt  write  them  upou  the  posts  of 

11.  20  shalt  write  them  upon  the  door  posts  of 
Judgi6.  3  took  the  doors  ofthegate..andthetwop. 
1  Sa.    1.   9  Eli  the  priest  sat  upon  a  seat  by  a  post  of 

1  Ki.   6.  31  lintel  (and)  side  posts  (were)  a  fifth  part 

6.  33  made  he  for  the  door  of  the  temple  posts 

7.  5  all  the  doors  and  posts  (were)  square,  w 
Prov.  8.  34  my  gates,  waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  doors 
Isa.  57.  8  Behind  the  doors  also  and  the  posts  hast 
Eze.  41.  21  The  posts  of  the  temple  (were)  squared 

43.    8  their  post  by  my  posts,  and  the  wall  be. 
45. 19  put  (it)  upon  the  posts  of  the  house,  and 
45. 19  upon  the  posts  of  the  gate  of  the  inner  c. 
46.    2  shall  stand  by  the  post  of  the  gate,  and 

4.  Threshold,  lintel,  *)p  saph. 

2  Ch.  3.  7  He  overlaid  also  the  house . .  the  posts,  and 
Eze.  41.  16  The  door  posts,  and  the  narrow  windows 
Amos  9.    1  Smite  the  lintel. .that  the  posts  may  shake 

POSTERITY  — 

1.  After,  ™  achar. 

1  Ki.  16.   3  will  take  away  the  posterity.. and  the  po. 

21.  21  will  take  away  thy  posterity,  and  will  cut 
Psa.  49. 13  yet  their  posterity  approve  their  saying 

2. Latter  end,  nnns*  acharith. 

Psa,  109.  «  Let  his  posterity  be  cut  off;  (and)  in  the 
Dan.  11.  4  not  to  his  posterity,  nor  according  to  his 
Amos  4.   2  take  you  away  with  hooks,  and  your  post. 

3.  Generation,  "(h  dor. 

Num.  9. 10  If  anymanof  you  or  ofyour  posterity  shall 

4.  Remnant,  rest,  residue,  rV-iNE*  sheerith. 

Gen.  45.    7  to  preserve  you  a  posterity  in  the  earth 
POSTS  — 
To  run,  yy\  rids. 

2  Ch.30.    6  So  the  posts  went  with  the  letters  from 

30.  10  So  the  posts  passed  from  city  to  city  thr. 

Esth.  3. 13  letters  were  sent  by  posts  into  all  the  ki. 

3. 15  posts  went  out,  being  hastened  by  the  k. 

8.  10  sent  letters  by  posts  on  horseback,  (and) 
8. 14  posts  that  rode  upon  mules  (and)  camels 

Job  9.  25  Nowmydaysareswifterthanapost:  they 
Jer.  51.  31  One  post  shall  run  to  meet  another,  and 

POT  — 

I. Pot,  ^ox  asuk. 

2  Ki.   4.    2  not  any  thing  in  the  house,  save  a  pot  of 

2.  Goblet,  cup,  calyx,  Wl*  gabia. 

Jer.  35.    5  I  set.  .pots  full  of  wine,  and  cups,  and  I 


POTENTATE 


764 


POURED 


$.  Kettle,  basket,  in  dud. 

Job   41.  20  smoke,  as  (out)  of  a  seething  pot  or  cald. 
Psa.  81.   6  his  hands  were  delivered  from  the  pots 

4.  Vessel,  ,!??  heli. 

Lev.    6.  28  and  if  it  be  sodden  in  abrasen  pot,  it  shall 

5.  Pot,  Tp  sir, 

ExodiS.    3  when  we  sat  by  the  flesh  pots,  (and)  when 

38.  3  made  all  the  vessels  of  the  altar,  the  pots 
2  Ki.  7.  45  pots,  and  the  shovels,  and  the  basins :  and 
2  Ki.    4.  38  Set  on  the  great  pot,  and  seethe  pottage 

4.  39  came  and  shred  (them)  into  the  pot  of  po. 
4.  40  man  of  God,  (there  is)  death  iu  the  pot.  And 
4.  41  bring  meal:  and  he  cast  (it)  into  the  pot 
4.  41  eat.  And  there  was  no  harm  in  the  pot 
25.  14  pots,  and  the  shoVels,  and  the  snuffers,  and 
2  Ch.  4.  11  Iliiram  made  the  pots,  and  the  shovels 
4. 16  pots  also,  and  the  shovels,  and  the  flesh 
35. 13  sod  they  in  pots,  and  in  caldrons,  and  in 
Job  41.  31  He  maketh  the  deep  to  boil  like  a  pot;  he 
Psa.  53.    9  Before  your  pots  can  feel  the  thorns,  he 
60.    8  Moab  (is)  my  wash  pot;  over  Edom  will 
108.   9  Moab  (is)  my  wash  pot;  over  Edom  will 
EccL  7.    6  For  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot 
Jer.     1.  13  I  see  a  seething  pot ;  and  the  face  thereof 
Eze.  24.   3  Set  on  a  pot,  set  (it)  on,  and  also  pour  w. 

24.  6  to  the  pot  whose  scum  (is)  therein,  and  wh 
Mic.  3.  3  as  for  the  pot,  and  as  flesh  within  the  ca. 
Zech.14.  20  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like 

14.  21  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  shall 

ft.Pan,  pot,  ins  parur. 

Judg.  6.  19  he  put  the  broth  in  a  pot,  and  brought 
1  Sa.    2.  14  into  the  pan,  or  kettle,  or  caldron,  or  pot 

7 '.  Basket,  pot,  rusay  tsintseneth. 

Exodi6.  33  Take  a  pot,  and  put  an  omer  full  of  man. 

3.  Hooks,  cn^'  shephattayim. 

Psa.  68.  13  Though  ye  have  lien  among  the  pots,  (yet) 
$.A  measure,  (lh  pints  English),  ^earrjs  zestts. 

Mark  7.  4  the  washing  of  cups,  and  pots,  brasen  ve. 
7.    8  [the  washing  of  pots  and  cups  :  and  many) 

10.  A  pot,  jar,  (ttol/jlvos  stamnos. 

Heb.   9.    4  the  golden  pot  that  had  manna,  and  Aar. 
[See  also  Fining,  ointment,  ranges,  washpot.] 
POTENTATE  ~ 
One  that  is  powerful,  Zwdcrr-ns  dunastes. 

1  Ti.  6.  15  the  blessed  and  only  potentate,  the  king 
PO-TI'-PHAR,  15'pis. 

An  officer  of  Pharaoh  and  captain  of  the  guard,  to  whom 
Joseph  was  sold  by  the  Midianites.     B.C.  1730. 

Gen.  37.  36  the  Midianites  sold  him.  .unto  P.,  an  offl. 

39.  1  P. . .  bought  him  of  the  hands  of  the  Ishm. 

PO-TI  PHE'-RAH,  y-]3  ^13. 

A    priest  of    On  (or  Heliopolis),    father  of  Asenath, 

Joseph's  wife.     B.C.  1730. 

Gen.  41.  45  he  gave  him  to  wife,  .the  daughter  of  P. 
41.  50  which  Asenath  the  daughter  of  P..  .hare 
46.  20  which  Asenath  the  daughter  of  P. .  .bare 

POTSHERD  — 

Potsherd,  earthenware,  fcnn  cheres. 

Job     2.    8  he  took  him  a  potsherd  to  scrape  himself 
Psa.  22.  15  My  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd 
Prov.26.  23  (like)  a  potsherd  covered  with  silver  dross 
Isa.   45.   9  the  potsherd  (strive)  with  the  potsherds 

POTTAGE  — 

Pottage,  vn  nazid. 

Gen.  25.  29  Jacob  sod  pottage :  and  Esau  came  from 

25.  34  Jacob  gave  Esau  bread  and  pottage  of  le. 

2  Ki.  4.  38  seethe  pottage  for  the  sonsof  the  prophets 

4.  39  came  and  shred  (them)  into  the  pot  of  po. 

4.  40  as  they  were  eating  of  the  pottage,  that 

Hag.    2.  12  bread,  or  pottage,  or  wine,  or  oil,  orany 

POTTER  — 

1.  To  form,  fashion,  frame,  make,  "is;  yatsar. 
i^Ch.  4.  23  These  (were)  the  potters,  and  those  that 

.   9  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel 

29.  ifi  shall  lie  esteemed  as  the  potter's  clay 

30.  14  the  potter's  vessel  that  is  broken  in  pieces 
41.  25  upon  princes,  .as  the  potter  treadeth  clay 

1  we  (are)theclay,  andthouourpotter;  and 

2  go  down  to  the  potter's  house,  and  there 

3  I  went  down  to  the  potter's  house  ;  and 

4  vessel . .  was  marred  in  the  hand  of  the  p. 
4  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  make  (it) 
6  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  thispotter?  saith 
6  as  the  clay  (is)  in  the  potter's  hand,  so  (are) 

1  Go  and  get  a  potter's  earthen  bottle,  and 
,  n  as  (one)  breaketh  a  potter's  vessel,  that 

2  pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  p. 
1  j  Cast  it  unto  the  potter:  a  goodly  price 

rit  13  cast  them  to  the  potter  in  the  house  of 

2.  Potter,  "irj|  pechar. 

Dan.    2.  41  part  of  potter's  clay,  and  part  of  iron,  the 
Z.A  /»>//>■!-,  Kepap.€vs  kerameus. 

Matt27.    7  and  bought  with  them  the  potter's  field 
27.  io  gave  them  for  the  potter's  field,  as  the  L 
Rom.  9.  21  Hath  uot  the  potter  power  over  the  clay 

4.  Belonging  to  a  potter,  earthen,  Kf-pa.fj.tK6s  keram. 

Rev.   2.  27  as  the  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  they  be  b. 
POUND  — 
l.Manah,  a  pound  weight,  nxomanah. 

j  Ki.io.  17  three  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield 


Psa. 
Isa. 


64. 


Jer. 


19. 

Lam.  4. 
Zech  1 


Ezra    2.  69  five  thousand  pound  of  silver,  and  one 
Neh.   7.  71  thousand  and  two  hundred  pouud  of  silv. 

7.  72  thousand  pound  of  silver,  and  threescore 
2.  A  Mina,  sum  of  money,  fAva  mna. 

Lukeig.  13  delivered  them  ten  pounds,  and  said  unto 
19.  16  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  ten  pounds 
19.  18  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  five  pounds 
19.  20  (here  is)  thy  pound,  which  I  have  kept  1. 
19.  24  said  unto  them . .  Take  from  him  the  pound 
19.  24  and  give  (it)  to  him  that  hath  ten  pouuds 
iq.  25  said  unto  him,  Lord,  he  hath  ten  pounds 
Z.Litra,  a  pound,  \irpa  litra  (Lat.  libra). 

Johni2.    3  a  pound  of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very 
19.  39  and  aloes,  aboutau  hundred  pound(wei.) 
POUR  (down  or  out\  to  — 
1.2*0  drop,  drop  down,  ^  dalaph. 

Job   16.  20  (but)  mine  eyepoureth  out  (tears)  unto  G. 

2.  To  refine.y  pour  down,  pp}  zaqaq. 

Job  36.  27  they  pour  down  rain  according  to  the 

3.  To  pour  or  be  poured  out,  dij  zaram,  3a. 

Psa.  77.  17  the  clouds  poured  out  water;  the  skies 

4.  To  cast,  pour  out,  p*;  yatsaq. 

Gen.  28.  18  stone,  .and  poured  oil  upon  the  top  of  it 

35.  14  drink  offering  thereon,  and  he  poured  oil 

Exod29.    7  and  pour  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  anoint  h. 

Lev.    2.    1  he  shall  pour  oil  upon  it,  and  put  frauki. 

2.    6  Thou  shalt  part  it  in  pieces,  and  pour  oil 

8.  12  he  poured  of  the  anointing  oil  upon  Aar. 

8.  15  poured  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the 

9.  9  poured  out  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the 
14.  15  pour  (it)  into  the  palm  of  his  own  left  h. 

14.  26  the  priest  shall  pourof  theoilinto  thepa. 
Num.  5.  15  he  shall  pour  no  oil  upon  it,  nor  put  fran. 

1  Sa.  10.    1  poured  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  kissed  him 

2  Sa.  13.    9  poured  (them)  out  before  him :  but  he  re. 

1  Ki.18.  33  pour  (it)  ontheburntsacrifice,  and  on  the 

2  Ki.  3.  11  which  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  Eli. 

4.  4  shalt  pour  out  into  all  those  vessels,  and 
4.  40  So  they  poured  out  forthemen  to  eat:  and 
4.41  Pour  out  for  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 
9.  3  pour  (it)  on  his  head,  and  say,  Thus  saith 
9.    6  he  poured  the  oil  on  his  head,  and  said 

Isa.  44.  3  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty 
44.    3  I  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and 

Eze.  24.    3  Set  on  a  pot,  set  (it)  on,  and  also  pour  w. 

5.  To  pour  out,  PV,  yatsaq,  3,  5. 

2  Ki.   4.   5  So  she  went  from  him.  .aud  she  poured 

6.  To  cause  to  flow  out,  in;  naba,  5. 

Prov.  1.  23  I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  unto  you,  I  will 

15.  2  the  mouth  of  fools  poureth  out  foolish. 

15. 28  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  poureth  out  evil 

7.  To  cause  to  run,  pour  out,  ~n3  nagar,  5. 

Psa.  75.  8  he  poureth  out  of  the  same:  but  the  dregs 
Jer.  18.  21  pour  out  their  (blood)  by  the  force  of  the 
Mic.     1.   6  I  will  pour  down  the  stones  thereof  into 

8.  To  give  jru  nathan. 

Lev.  14.  iS'he  shall  pour  upon  the  head  of  him  that 

9.  To  flow,  hn  nazal. 

Num24.  7  He  shall  pour  the  water  out  of  his  buckets 
Isa.   45.    8  and  let  the  skies  pour  down  righteousness 

10.  To  pour  out,  Tipj  nasak. 

Exod3o.  9  neith-rshall  ye  pour  drink  offering  there. 
Isa.   29. 10  the  Lord  hath  poured  out  upon  you  the 

11.  To  pour  out,  7]pi  nasak,  3. 

1  Ch.11. 18  David  would  not  drink  (of)  it,  hut  poured 

12.  To  pour  out,  ^93  nasak,  5. 

Gen.  35.  14  he  poured  a  drink  offering  thereon,  and 

2  Sa.  23.  16  would  not  drink,  .but  poured  it  out  unto 
2  Ki.  16. 13  poured  his  drink  offering,  and  sprinkled 
Jer.     7.  18  to  pouroutdrink offerings  untoothergods 

19.  13  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  gods 

32.29  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  gods 
44.  17,  18,  19,  25  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto 
44. 19  when' we.,  poured  out  drink  offerings  unto 

Eze.  20.  28  and  poured  out  there  their  drink  offerings 

13.  To  pour  out,  melt,  ~m  nathak,  5. 

Job   10.  10  Hast  thou  not  poured  me  out  as  milk,  and 

14.  To  make  naked,  bare,  empty,  n")j/  arah,  5. 

Isa.    53. 12  because  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto 

15.  To  pour  out,  pxx  isuk. 

Job  29.  6  and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil 
Isa.  26.  16  poured  out  a  prayer  (when)  thy  chastening 

16.  To  draw  out,  empty,  p'nruq,  5. 

Mai.    3. 10  pour  you  out  a  blessing,  that  (there  shall) 

17.  To  pour  or  sited  out,  ?[tv  shaphak. 

Exod.  4.    9  pour  (it)  upon  the  dry  (land) :  and  the  w. 
29.  12  pour  all  the  blood  beside  the  bottom  of 
Lev.    4.    7  shall  pour  all  the  blood  of  the  bullock  at 
4.  18,  30,  34  shall  pour  out  all  the  blood 
4.  25  shall  pour  out  his  blood  at  the  bottom  of 

14.  41  and  theyshall  pouroutthedust  thatthey 
17. 13  he  shall  even  pour  out  the  blood  thereof 

I>euti2.  16,  24  shall  pour  it  upon  the  earth  as  water 

15.  23  shalt  pour  it  upon  the  ground  as  water 
Judg.  6.  20  and  pour  out  the  broth.  And  he  did  so 
1  Sa.    1.  15  have  poured  out  mysmil  before  the  LORD 

7.   6  poured  (it)  out  before  the  Lord, 'and  fasted 
Job    12.  21  He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and 

16.  13  he  poureth  out  my  gall  upon  the  ground 
Psa.  42.    4  I  pour  out  my  soul  in  me  :  fori  had  gone 

62.  8  pour  out  your  heart  before  him  :  God  (is) 
69.  24  Pour  out  thine  indignation  up  n  them,  and 


Psa.  79.    6  Pour  out  thy  wrath  upon  the  heathen  that 

102.  title  poureth  outhis  complaint  before  the  L. 

107.  40  He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and 

142.    2  I  poured  out  my  complaint  before  him ;  I 

Isa.  42.  25  poured  upon  him  the  fury  of  his  anger 

57.    6  to  them  hast  thou  poured  a  think  offering 

Jer.     6. 11  will  pour  it  out  upouthe  children  abroad 

10.  25  Pour  out  thy  fury  upon  the  heathen  that 

14.  16  for  I  will  pour  their  wickedness  upon  th. 

Lam.  2.   4  he  stood . .  he  poured  out  his  fury  like  fire 

2.  19  pour  out  thine  heart  like  water  before 

4.  11  he  hath  poured  out  his  fierce  anger,  and 

Eze.    7.    8  Now  will  I  shortly  pour  out  my  fury  upon 

9.    8  thy  pouring  out  of  thy  fury  upon  Jerusa. 

14. 19  and  pour  out  my  fury  upon  it  in  blood 

16.  15  pouredst  out  thy  fornications  on  every  one 

20.    8  I  will  pour  out  my  fury  upon  them,  to  a. 

20.  13,  21  I  would  pour  out  my  fury  upon  them 

21.  31 1  will  pour  out  mine  indignation  upontli. 

22.  22  I  the  Lord  have  poured  out  my  fury  upon 

22.  31  I  poured  out  mine  indignation  upon  them 

23.  8  and  they,  .poured  their  whoredom  upon 

24.  7  she  poured  it  not  upon  the  ground,  to  c. 
30.  15  will  pour  my  fury  upon  Sin,  the  strength 
36. 18  I  poured  my  fury  upon  them  for  theblood 
39.  29  I  have  poured  out  my  spirit  upon  the  ho. 

Hos.    5.  10  I  will  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them  like 
Joel    2.  28  I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh 

2.  29  And. .in  those  days  will  I  pour  out  my  sp. 
Amos  5.    8  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of  the 

g.    6  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of  the 
Zeph.  3.    8  to  pour  upon  them  mine  indignation,  (e.) 
Zech  12.  10  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and 

18.  To  pour  out,  4kx^  ekcheo. 

John  2.  15  poured  out  the  changers' money,  and  over 
Acts    2.  17  I  will  pour  out  of  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh 

2.  18  will  pour  out  in  those  days  of  my  spirit 
Rev.  16.    1  pourout  the  vials  of  the  wrath  ofGodupon 
16.    2,  3,  4,  8, 10, 12,  17  angel  poured  out  his  vial 

19.  To  })0itr  oid,  iKx^vco  ekchimo. 

Acts  10.  45  was  poured  out  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

20.  To  mix,  infuse,  Kepawvyu  kerannumi-Ca\ 
Rev.  14.  10  which  is  poured  out  without  mixture  into 

21.  To  cast,  throw,  jSaAAw  ballo. 

Matt  26.  12  she  hath  poured  this  ointment  on  my  body 
Johni3.    5  he  poureth  water  into  abason,  and  began 

22.  To  pour  down,  Karax*®  kotacheo. 

Matt26.    7  poured  (it)  on  his  head,  as  he  sat  (at  m.) 
Marki4.    3  brake  the  box,  and  poured  (it)  on  his  h. 

POUR  in,  to  — 

To  pour  upon,  i-nix^  epicheo. 

Lukeio.  34  pouring  in  oil  and  wine,  and  set  him  on 
POURED,  (down,  forth,  out),  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  poured  forth,  'HD;  yasak. 

Exod30.  32  Upon  man's  flesh  shall  it  not  be  poured 

2.  To  be  poured  out,  ps;  yatsak,  6. 

Lev.  21.  10  upon  whose  head  the  anointing  oil  was  p. 
Psa.  45.    2  grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips :  therefore 

3.  To  be  poured  out,  ^nj  nathak. 

2  Ch.12.    7  my  wrath  shall  not  be  poured  out  upon 
34.  25  my  wrath  shall  be  poured  out  upon  this 

Job     3.  24  roarings  are  poured  out  like  the  waters 

Jer.  42.  18  so  shall  my  fury  be  poured  forth  upon  you 
44.    6  and  mine  anger  was  poured  forth,  and  was 

Dan,   9.  11  the  curse  is  poured  upon  us,  and  the  oath 
9.  27  that  determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the 

4.  To  be  drawn  away  or  out,  Tjm  nathak,  2. 
Exod  9.  33  the  rain  was  not  poured  upon  the  earth 
2  Ch.34. 21  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is  poured  out 
Jer.     7.  20  fury  shall  be  poured  out  upon  this  place 

42.  18  my  fury  hath  been  poured  forth  upon  the 
Nah.   1.    6  his  fury  is  poured  out  like  fire,  and  the 

5.  To  be  poured  out,  "31  nagar,  6. 

Mic.    1.    4  waters  (that  are)  poured  down  a  steep  p. 

6.  To  be  emptied,  ttj/  arah,  2. 

Isa.  32.  15  Until  the  spirit  be  poured  upon  us  from 

7.  To  be  empitied  out,  p>"\  ruq,  6. 

Song   1.    3  thy  name  (is  as)  ointment  poured  forth 

8.  To  pour  or  shed  out,  r\zy  shaphak. 

Eze.  20.  33  with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule  over  you 
20.  34  stretched  out  arm.  .with  fury  poured  out 

9.  To  be  poured  or  shed  out,  ?&y  shaphak,  2. 

Denti2.  27  the  blood,  .shall  be  poured  out  upon  the 
1  Ki.13.    3  the  ashes,  .upon  it  shall  be  poured  out 

13.    5  and  the  ashes  poured  out  from  the  altar 
Psa.  22.  14  I  am  poured  out  like  water,  and  all  my 
Lam.  2.  11  my  liver  is  poured  upon  the  earth,  for  the 
Eze.  16.  36  Because  thy  filthiness  was  poured  out 

10. 7b  be  poured  or  shed  out,  %*&  shaphak,  4. 
Zeph.  1.  17  their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust 

11.  To  pour  self  out,  TiSf  shaphak,  7. 

Job  30. 16  And  now  my  bouI  is  poured  out  upon  me 

Lam.  2.  12  when  their  soul  was  poured  out  into  their 

4.    1  the  stonesof  the  sanctuaryare  pouredout 

12. Pouring  out,  -lag!  shephek. 

Lev.    4. 12  place,  where  theashesarepouredout.and 
4.  12  where  the  ashes  are  poured  out  shall  he 

POURED,  to  cause  to  be  — 

To  (cause  to)  pov/r  out,  ^  nasak,  5. 

NunizS.    7  cause  the  strong  wine  to  be  poured  unto 


POURTRAY 


765 


POWER 


POTJRTRAY  — 

l.To  grave,  ppn  chaqaq.  ■ 

Eze.  4.    1  pourtray  upon  it  the  city,  (even)  Jerusalem 

23. 14  images  of  the  Chaldeans  pourtrayed  with 

2.  To  be  graved,  njjn  chagah,  4. 

Eze.    8.  10  pourtrayed  upon  the  wall  round  about 

23.  14  when  she  saw  men  pourtrayed  upon  the 

POVERTY  — 

l.Lack,  ipn  cheser. 

Prov  28,  22  considereth  not  that  poverty  shall  come 

2.  Lack,  "TiDrjO  machsor. 

Prov  11.  24  withholdeth.  .but  (it  tendeth)  to  poverty 
'^.Poverty,  PN1  resh. 

Prov.  6.  11  So  shall  thy  poverty  come  as  one  that  tr. 

30.  8  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches  ;  feed 

4.  Poverty,  B>'"i  rish. 

Prov  10. 15  the  destruction  of  the  poor  (is)  their  pov. 
13. 18  Poverty  and  shame  (shall  be)  to  him  that 

24.  34  So  shall  thy  poverty  come  (as)  one  that 

5. Poverty,  »n  resh. 

Prov 28.  19  he  that  followeth.  .shall  have  poverty  en. 

31.  7  Let  him  drink,  and  forget  his  poverty,  and 

6,  Poverty,  beggary,  -KTwx^ia.  ptdclieia. 

2  Co.    8.    2  poverty  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their 
8.   g  that  ye  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich 

Rev.    2.    9  know  thy  works,  and  tribulation,  and  po. 
POVERTY,  to  come  to  — 
To  become  dispossessed,  poor,  vrv  yarash,  2. 

Geu.  45. 11  lest  thou,  and  thy  house. .  .come  to  poverty 

Prov  20.  13  Love  not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  to  poverty 
23.  21  and  the  glutton  shall  come  to  poverty;  and 
POWDER  — 
1. Small  crushed  powder,  p^x  abaq. 

Deut  2G.  24  shall  make  the  rain  of  thy  land  powder 
2. Small  crushed  powder,  np3N  abqah. 

Song   3.    6  perfumed . .  with  all  powders  of  the  mere. 
'3.  Dust,  is)/  aphar. 

2  Ki.23.    6  to  powder,  and  cast  the  powder  thereof 

23. 15  stamped  (it)  small  to  powder,  and  burned 

POWDER,  to  grind  or  beat  to  — 

1.7b  be  small,  beaten  small,  ppi  daqaq. 

Exod32.  20  burnt  (it)  in  the  fire,  and  ground  (it)  to  p. 

2.  To  beat  small,  pp^  daqaq,  5. 

2  Ch.34.  7  had  beaten  the  graven  images  into  powder 

3.7b  winnow,  shatter,  Klk/j-olq)  likmao. 

Matt  21.  44  whomsoever,  .it  will  grind  him  to  powder 
Luke  20.  18  whomsoever,  .it  will  grind  him  to  powder 

POWER  — 

l.Might,  strength,  7S*  el. 

Gen.  31.  29  It  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  you 
Prov.  3.  27  when  it  is  in  the  power  of  thine  hand  to 
Mic.  2.    1  because  it  is  in  the  power  of  their  hand 

•2. Might,  rrina  gebwrah. 

1  Ch.29. 11  Thine,  0  Lord,  (is),  .the  power,  and  the  g. 
Job  26. 14  but  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  u. 
Psa.  21.  13  strength:  (so) -will  we  sing  and  praise  thy  p. 

65.  6  Which. .setteth. .(being)  girded  with  pow, 

66.  7  He  ruleth  by  his  power  for  ever ;  his  eyes 
71.  18  (and)  thy  power  to  every  one  (that  is)  to 

106.    8  that  he  might  make  his  mighty  power  to 
145. 11  They  shall  speak,  .and  talk  of  thy  power 

3.  Word  of  might,  rrjug  "\yi  debar  geburah. 

Job   41.  12  I  will  not  conceal  his  parts,  nor  his  power 

4. Arm,  jrnj  zeroa. 

Psa.  79.  ji  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  power 
Eze.  17.    9  even  without  great  power  or  many  people 
22.    6  every  one  were  in  thee  to  their  power  to 

5. Force,  valour,  h"n  chayil. 

1  Sa.   9.    1  a  Benjamite,  a  mighty  man  of  power 

2  Sa.  22.  33  God  (is)  my  strength  (and)  power :  and  lie 

1  Ch.20.  1  Joab  led  forth  the  power  of  the  army,  and 
Ezra  4.  23  and  made  them  to  cease  by  force  and  po. 
Esth.  1.    3  powerof  Persia  and  Media,  the  nobles  and 

8.  ji  all  the  power  of  the  people  and  province 
Job  21.  7  live,  become  old,  yea,  are  mighty  in  power 
Psa.  59. 11  scatter  them  by  thy  power;  and  bring  them 

1 10.   3  (shall  be)  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power 
Zech.  9.   4  and  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea 
6.  Strength,  J  on  chesen. 

Dan.    2.  37  hath  given  thee  a  kingdom,  power,  and 

4.  30  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the 

7. Sand,  i;  yad. 

Deut 32.  36  when  he  seeth  that  (their)  power  is  gone 
Josh.  8.  20  they  had  no  power  to  flee  this  way  or  that 

2  Ki.19.  26  their  inhabitants  were  of  small  power, they 
Job      1.  12  Behold,  all  that  lie  hath  (is)  in  thy  power 

5.  20  and  in  war  from  the  power  of  the  sword 
Prov  18.  21  Death  and  life  (are)  in  the  power  of  the 
Isa.   37.  27  inhabitants(were)  of  small  power,  they  w. 

47.  14  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from  the  po. 
Dan.  6.  27  who  hath  delivered  Danielfromthe  power 

12.    7  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people 
H03. 13. 14  I  will  ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the 
S.Power,  nb  koach. 

Gen.  31,  6  know  that  with  all  my  power  I  have  served 
Exod  9.  16  for  to  show  (in)  thee  my  power;  and  that 

15.    6  Thy  right  hand,  .is  become  glorious  in  p. 

32.  11  hast broughtforth.  .with great-power,  and 


Numi4.  17  let  the  power  of  my  lord  be  great,  accor. 
Deut.  4.  yj  brought  thee  out.  .with  his  mighty  power 
8. 17  My  power  and  the  might  of  (mine)  hand 

8.  18  for  (it  is)  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get 

9.  29  broughtest  out  by  thy  mighty  power  and 
Josh  17.  17  a  great  people,  and  hast  great  power:  thou 

1  Sa.  30.   4  wept,  until  they  had  no  more  power  tow. 

2  Ki.  17.  36  who  brought  you  up.  .with  great  power 

1  Ch.29. I2  1!l  thine  hand  (is)  power  and  might ;  and 

2  Ch.14.  11  many,  or  with  them  that  have  no  power 

20.  6  in  thine  hand  (is  there  not)  power  and  m, 
22.    9  the  house  of  Ahaziah  had  uo  power  to  k. 

25.  8  God  hath  power  to  help,  and  to  cast  down 

26.  13  that  made  war  with  mighty  power,  to  help 
Neh.   1.  10  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  great  power 
Job    23.    6  Will  lie  plead  against  me  with . .  great  po. 

24.  22  draweth  also  the  mighty  with  his  power 
26.  2  How  hast  thou  helped  (him . . )  without  p. 
26.  12  He  divideth  the  sea  with  his  power,  and 

36.  22  God  exalteth  by  his  power :  who  teacheth 

37.  23  (he  is)  excellent  in  power,  and  in  judgni. 
Psa.  in.    6  showed  his  people  the  power  ofhis  works 

147.    5  Great  (is)  our  Lord,  and  of  great  power 
Eccl.  4.    1  on  the  side  of.  .oppressors  (there  was)  p. 
Isa.   40.  26  for  that  (he  is)  strong  in  power ;  not  one 
40.  29  giveth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to  (them 

50.  2  have  I  no  power  to  deliver?  behold,  at  my 
Jer.    10. 12  He  hath  made  the  earth  by  his  power,pie 

27-  5  hy  my  great  power  and  by  my  outstretch. 
32.  17  by  thy  great  power  and  stretched  out  arm 

51.  15  He  hath  made  the  earth  by  his  power,  he 
Dan     8.    6  and  ran  unto  himin  the  fury  of  his  power 

8.    7  no  power  in  the  ram  to  stand  before  him 
8.  22  kingdoms  shall  stand.. not  in  his  power 
8.  24  power  shall  be  mighty,  .by  his.  .power 
11.    6  she  shall  not  retain  the  powerof  the  arm 

11.  25  shall  stir  up  his  power  and  his  courage 
Mic.    3.    8  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  spirit  of  the  L. 
Nah.  1.    3  Lore  (is)  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in  pow. 

2.  1  make  (thy)  loins  strong,  fortify  (thy)  po. 
Hab.    1.  11  (imputing)  this  his  power  unto  his  god 
Zech.  4.    6  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my 

9. Pahn,  hand,  1?  kaph. 

Hab.  2.   g  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil 

10. Rule,  nS^'pp  memshalah, 

2  Ch.32.  9  against  Lachish,  and  all  his  power  with 
11.  Strong,  hard,  ty  az. 

Gen.  4g.  3  of  dignity,  and  the  excellency  of  power 
12.Strength,  hardness,  iy  oz. 

Lev.  26.  19  I  will  break  the  pride  of  your  power;  and 

Ezra.  8.  22  his  power  and  his  wrath  (is)against  all  th. 

Psa.  59.  16  I  will  sing  of  thy  power  ;  yea,  I  will  sing 

62.  11  heard  this,  that  power  (belongeth)  unto 

63.  2  To  see  thy  power  and  thy  glory,  so  (as)  I 
66.  3  through  the  greatness  of  thy  power  shall 
78.  26  by  his  power  he  brought  in  the  south  w. 
90.  11  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger? 

150.  1  praise  him  in  the  Armament  of  his  power 
Eze.  30.  6  the  pride  of  her  power  shall  come  down 
Hab.   3.    4  and  there  (was)  the  hiding  of  his  power 

IS. Strong,  hard,  inj.'  izzuz. 

Isa.  43.  17  chariot  and  horse,  the  army  and  the  power 

14. Rule,  dominion,  pDpip  shilton. 

Eccl.  8.    4  where  the  word  of  a  king  (is,  there  is)  p. 

8.  8  neither  (hath  he)  power  in  the  day  of  de. 

Id. Might,  substance,  niDsj£n  taatsumoth. 

Psa.  68.  35  giveth  strength  and  power  unto  (his)  pe. 
16. Strength,  might,  *]ph  toqeph. 

Esth  10.  2  the  acts  of  his  power,  and  of  his  might 
Vl.Power  of  the  hand,  t  ^n  el  yad. 

N"eh.    5.    5  neither  (is  it)  in  our  power  (to  redeem  t.) 

18. Regvn/rdng,  principality,  a-px?)  arche. 

Luke2o.  20  the  power  and  authority  of  the  governor 
19.  Ability,  power,  Svvap.is  dunamis. 

Matt.  6. 13  [the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  g.] 
22. 29  not  knoweth  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  pow. 
24. 29  the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken 
24.  30  coming  in.  .with  power  and  great  glory 
26.  64  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and. 
Mark  9.    1  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power 

12.  24  know  not  the  Scriptures,  neither  the  po. 

13.  25  powers  that  are  in  heaven  shall  be  shaken 
13.  26  in  the  clouds  with  great  power  and  glory 
14. 62  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 

Luke  1.17m  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  to  turn 
1.  35  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  t. 
4. 14  Jesus  returned  in  the  power  of  the  spirit 

4.  36  with  authority  and  power  he  commandeth 

5.  17  power  of  the  Lord  was  (present)  to  heal  t. 

9.  1  power  and  authority  over  all  devils,  aud 
10.  19  and  overall  the  power  of  the  enemy':  and 

21.  26  for  the  powers  of  heaven  shall  be  shaken 
21.  27  in  a  cloud,  with  power  and  great  glory 
22. 69  on  the  right  hand  of  the  power  of  God 
24. 49  until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on 

Acts    1.   8  ye  shall  receive  power,  after  that  the 

3.  12  by  our  own  power  or  holiness  we  had  ma. 

4.  7  By  what  power,  or  by  what  name,  have  ye 
4.  33  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles  witness 

6.  8  Stephen,  full  of  faith  and  power,  did  gr. 
8.  10  saying,  This  man  is  the  great  power  of  G. 

10.  38  Jesus,  .with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  p. 

Rom.  1.    4  declared  (to  be)  the  Son  of  God  with  po. 

1. 16  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every 

1.  20 bis  eternal  power  and  Godhead;  so  that 

8.  38  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 


Rom.  9.  17  I  might  show  my  power  in  thee,  and  that 
15.  13  abound.. through  the  power  of  the  Holy 
15. 19  wonders,  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  God 

1  Co.  1.  18  unto  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power 

1.  24  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God 

2.  4  demonstration  of  the  spirit  and  of  powrer 

2.  5  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  powerof  G. 
4.  19  not  the  speech  of  them,  .but  the  power 

4.  20  kingdom  of  God  (is)  not  in  word,  but  in  p. 

5.  4  with  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

6.  14  and  will  also  raise  up  us  by  his  own  power 
15.  24  put  down  all  rule  and.  authority  and  po. 
15.  43  is  sown  in  weakness  ;  it  is  raisedin  power 

2  Co.  4.    7  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  G. 

6.  7  by  the  power  of  God,  by  the  armour  of  r. 
8.    3  For  to  (their)  power,  I  bear  record,  yea 

8.  3  beyond  (tl;eir)  power,  (they  were)  willing- 

12.  9  thatthe  powerof  Christ  may  rest  upon  nit; 

13.  4  crucified,  .yet  he  liveth  by  the  power  of 
13.    4  shall  live,  .by  the  power  of  God  toward 

Eph.   1.  19  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to 

3.  7  given,  .by  the  effectual  working  of  his  p 
3.  20  according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in 

Phil.   3.  10  the  power  of  bis  resurrection,  and  the 

1  Th.  1.    5  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in 

2  Th.  t.  11  and  fulfil,  .the  work  of  faith  with  power 

2.  9  all  power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders 

1  Ti.    1.    7  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  m. 
1.   8  partaker,  .according  to  the  power  of  God 

3.  5  godliness,  but  denying  the  power  thereof 
Heb.  1.    3  upholding  all.  .by  the  word  of  hispower 

6.  5  tasted .  .the  powers  of  the  world  to  come 
7. 16  Who  is  made,  .after  the  power  of  an  end. 

1  Pe.    1.   5  Who  are  kept  by  the  word  of  God  through 

3.  22  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  him 

2  Pe.   1.    3  his  divine  power  hath  given  unto  us  all 

1.  16  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chr. 
Rev.    4.  11  to  receive  giory  and  honour  and  power 

5.  12  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power 
7. 12  power,  aud  might,  (be)  unto  our  God  for 

ti.  17  thou  hast  taken  to  thee  thy  great  power 
13.    2  the  dragon  gave  him  his  power,  and  his 

15.  8  from  the  glory  of  God,  and  from  his  pow. 
17.  13  shall  give  their  power  and  strength  unto 
19.    1  honour,  and  power,  unto  the  Lord  our  G. 

20.  The  power,  to  hwarovto  dunaton. 

Rom.  9.  22  to  make  his  power  known,  endured  with 
21. Privilege,  authority,  i^ouaia  exousia. 

Matt.  9.    6  Son .  .hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sius 

9.  8  God,  which  had  given  such  power  untom. 
10.  1  gave  them  power  (against)  unclean  spirit* 
28.  18  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and 

Mark  2.  10  the  Son .  .hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive 
3. 15  to  have  power  to  heal  sicknesses,  and  t'> 

6.  7  and  gave  them  power  over  unclean  spirits 
Luke  4.    6  this  power  will  I  give  thee,  and  the  glory 

4.  32  astonished,  .for  his  word  was  with  power 

5.  24  hath  power  upon  earth  to  forgive  sins 
10.  19  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  serpents 

12.  5  after  he  hath  killed  hath  power  to  cast 
12. 11  bring  you.. (unto)  magistrates,  and  powers 
22.  53  this  is  your  hour,  and . .  power  of  darknes-s 

John  1.  12  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God 

10.  18  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power 
17.  2  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  tl. 
19.  10  have  power  to  crucify  thee,  and  have  po. 
19. 11  couldest  have  no  power  (at  all)  against  me 

Acts    1.    7  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  p. 

5.  4  was  it  not  in  thine  own  power?  why  hast 

8.  19  Give  me  also  this  power,  that  on  whom. 
26.  18  (from)  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that 

Rom.  9.  21  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay 

13.  1  Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the.  .pow. 
13.  1  there  is  no  power  but  of  God  :  the  powers 
13.  2  Whosoever  therefore  resisteth  the  power 
13.    3  Wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the  power  ? 

1  Co.   7.  37  hath  power  over  his  own  will,  and  hath 

9.  4  Have  we  not  power  to  eat  and  to  drink? 
9.  5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister 
9.  6  or.  .have  not  we  power  toforbearwrorkin.i: 
9.  12  If  others  be  partakers  of  (this)  power  over 
9.  12  we  have  not  used  this  power ;  but  suffer 
9.  18  that  I  abuse  not  my  power  in  the  gospel 

11.  10  ought  the  woman  to  have  power  on  (her) 

2  Co.  13.  10  the  power  which  the  Lord  hath  given  me 
Eph.   1.  21  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  ev. 

2.  2  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the 

3.  10  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly 

6.  12  against  powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the 
Col.     1.  13  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness 

1.  16  or  dominions,  orprincipalities,  or  powers 

2.  10  the  head  of  all  principality  and  power 

2.  15  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers 
2  Th.  3.    9  Not  because  we  have  not  power,  but  to 
Titus  3.    1  be  subject  to  principalities  and  powers 
Jude       25  dominion  and  power,  both  now  and  ever 
Rev.   2.  26  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations 
6.    8  power  was  given  unto  them  over  the  four. 
9.    3  and  unto  them  was  given  power,  as 
g.   3  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have  power 
9.  10  their  power  (was)  to  hurt  men  five  mont. 
9. 19  their  power  is  in  their  mouth,  and  in 
11.    6  These  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it 
11.   6  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them  to 
12. 10  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power 
13.   4  dragon  which  gave  power  unto  the  beast 
13.    5  power  was  given  unto  him  to  continue  f. 
13.    7  power  was  given  him  over  all  kindreds,  and 
13.  12  all  the  power  of  the  firstbeast  before  him 
14. 18  another  angel,  .which  had  power  over  fire 

16.  9  God,  which  hath  power  over  these  plagues 


POWER 


700 


PRAISE 


Rev.  17,  12  receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the 
18.  1  come  down  from  heaven,  having  great  p. 
20.   6  on  such  the  second  death  liath  uo  power 

2%. Strength,  farce,  laxvs  ischus. 

2  Th.  1.    9  be  punished.,  from  the  glory  of  his  power 
2  Pe.  2.  11  which  are  greater  in  power  aud  might 

23.  Strength^  power,  Kpdros  kratos. 

Eph.  1.  19  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  p. 
6.  10  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of 
Col.  1.  ii  according  to  his  glorious  power,  unto  all 
1  Ti.  6.  16  to  whom  (be)  honour  and  power  everlaat. 
Heb.  2.  14  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  deatli 
Rev.    5.  13  glory,  and  power,  (be)  unto  him  that  sit. 

POWER,  in  great  — 
Terrible,  f""tj/  writs. 

l*sa-  37.  35  I  have  seen  the  wickedin  great  power,aud 

POWER  to  stand  -  - 
Upstanding,  noipp  teqninah. 

Lev.  26.  37  ye  shall  have  no  power  to  stand  before  y. 
POWER,  that  hath  — 
Ruler,  tr1?^  shallit. 

Eccl.  8.    8  no  man  that  hath  power  over  the  spirit 

POWER,  mighty  — 

Greatness,  fj-eyaKeiorris  megaleiotes. 

Luke   9.  43  were  all  amazed  at  the  mighty  power  of 
POWER  as  a  prince,  to  have  — 
To  be  prince,  have  princely  power,  rr$  sarah. 

Gen.  32.  28  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power  with  God  and 
POWER,  to  give,  have,  or  be  of  — 
l.To  be  able,  Si;  yakol. 

Nuni22.  38  have  I  now  any  power  at  all  to  say  any 

2.  To  ride,  ^B  mashal. 

Exod2i.    8  lie  shall  have  no  power,  seeing  he  hath 
Dan.  1 1.  43  But  he  shall  have  power  over  the  treasur. 

3.  To  be  prince,  "lib"  sur. 

Hos.  12.    4  had  power  over  the  angel,  and  prevailed 

4.  To  be  prince,  have  princely  power,  n-y  sarah. 
Hos.  12.    3  and  by  his  strength  he  had  power  with  G. 

5.  To  rule,  toby  shalat. 

Esth.  9.    1  Jews  hoped  to  have  power  over  them,  th. 

6.  To  cause  to  rule,   vhp  shalat,  5. 

Eccl.  5.  19  hath  given  him  power  to  eat  thereof,  and 

6.  2  God  giveth  him  not  power  to  eat  thereof 

7. To  rule,  toby  shelet. 

Dan.    3.  27  upon  whose  bodies  the  fire  had  no  power 

8.  To  give,  oit)u>/u.i  dido  mi. 

Rev.  13.  14  had  power  to  do  in  the  sight  of  the  beast 
13.  15  had  power  to  give  life  unto  the  image  of 

9.  To  be  able,  have  power,  dvva/xai  dunamai. 

Rom  16.  25  Now  to  him  that  is  of  power  to  stablish 

10.  To  exercise  privilege  or  authority,  e£ovoia(a>. 

1  Co.  7.    4  The  wife  hath  not  power  of  her  own  body 

7.  4  likewise  alsothe  huvband  hathnotpower 

POWER  of,  to  bring  under  the  — 

To  exercise  privilege  or  authority,  i^ouo-id^w  exou. 

1  Co.  6.  12  will  nut  be  brought  under  the  power  of 

POWERFUL  — 

1.  Power,  na  koach. 

Psa.  29.   4  The  voice  of  the  LORD  (is)  powerful ;  the 

2.  Energetic,  efficacious,  ifipyrjs  energes. 

Heb,   4.  12  For  the  word  of  God  (is)  quick,  and  pow. 

'■j.  Strong,  robust,  iaxupds  ischuros. 

2  Co.  10. 10  For  (his)  letters,  .(are)  weighty  and  pow. 

PRACTISE,  to  — 

l.To  do  over  and  over,  tjV,  alal,  la. 

Psa.  141.    4  to  practise  wicked  works  with  men  that 

2.To  do,  make,  Tfyy  asafo. 

Isa.   32.    6  to  practise  hypocrisy,  and  to  utter  error 
Dan.   8.  12  cast  down,  .and  it  practised,  and  prospe. 

8.  24  shall  prosper,  and  practise,  and  shall  de. 
Mic.    2.    1  when  the  morning  is  light,  they  praotise. 

PRACTISE  secretly,  to  — 

To  keep  silent,  enn  charash,  5. 

1  Sa.  23.    9  David  knew  that  Saul  secretly  practised 
PR-ffiTORIUM  — 

Prator's  iiall,TTpaiTwpiov  pro  itorion{L.2irajtnri  in>i). 
Markis.  16  led  him  away  into  the  hall  called  P.,  and 
PRAISE  — 
I, Praises,  thanksgivings,  D'7^n  hilluUm. 

Lev.  19.  24  shall  be  holy,  to  praise  the  LORD  (withal) 

'l.I'ntisc,  VSqo  maliohd. 

Prov  27.  2'i  "furnace  for  gold  ;  so  (is)  a  man  to  his  p. 

Z.Praise,  2>sahn,  rhnv\  tehillah. 

Exodis.  11  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  (in)  praises 
Deut  10.  21  He  (is)  thy  praise,  and  he  (is)  thy  God 
26.  19  which  he  hath  made,  in  praise,  and  in 

1  C'h.  16.  35  we  may  give  thanks,  .(and)  glory  in  thy 

2  Ch.20.  22  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to  praise 
JS'eh.  9.    5  which  is  exalted  above  all  blessing  and 

12.  46  songs  of  praise  aud  thanksgiving  unto 


Psa.    9.  14  That  I  may  show  forth  all  thy  praisein 
22.    3  (O  thou)  that  inhabitest  the  praises  of  I. 
22.  25  My  praise  (shall  be)  of  thee  in  the  great 

33.  1  Rejoice,  .(for)  praise  is  comely  for  the  up. 

34.  1  his  praise  (shall)  continually  (be)  in  my 

35.  28  torfgue  shall  speak,  .of  thy  praise  all  the 
40.  3  praise  unto  our  God:  many  shall  see  (it) 
4S.  10  so  (is)  thy  praise  unto  the  ends  of  the  ea. 
51.  15  and  my  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy  praise 

65.  1  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  0  God,  in  Zion 

66.  2  Sing  forth  the  honour,  .make  his  praise 
66.    8  and  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  h. 
71.   6  my  praise  (shall  be)  continually  of  thee 
71.    8  Let  my  mouth  be  filled  (with)  thy  praise 
71.  14  and  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more 

78.  4  showing . .  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  and  his 

79.  13  will  show  forth  thy  praise  to  all  generat. 
100.  4  Enter. .into  his  courts  with  praise:  be  th. 
102.  21  declare  the  name,  .and  his  praise  in  Jer. 
106.  2  can  utter,  .(who)  can  show  forth  all  his  p.? 
106.  12  believed  they  his  words ;  they  sang  hisp. 
106.  47  thy  holy  name,  (and)  to  triumph  in  thy  p. 
109.  1  Hold  not  thy  peace,  O  God  of  my  praise 
in.  10  fear  of  the  Loud,  .his  praise eudureth  for 
119. 171  My  lips  shall  utter  praise,  when  thou  h. 
145.  title.  David's  (Psalm)  of  praise 

145.  21  My  mouth  shall  speak  the  praise  of  theL. 

147.  1  for  (it  is)  pleasant ;  (and)praise  is  comely 

148.  14  exalteth.  .the  praise  of  all  his  saints;  (e.) 

149.  1  (and)  his  praise  in  the  congregation  of  sa. 
Isa.   42.    8  neither  my  praise  to  graven  images 

42.  10  Sing,  .his  praise  from  the  end  of  the  earth 

42.  12  give  glory .  .aud  declare  his  praise  in  the 

43.  21  This  people,  .shall  show  forth  my  praise 
48.   9  for  my  praise  will  I  refrain  for  thee 

60.  6  shall  show  forth  the  praises  of  the  Lord 
60. 18  thy  walls  salvation,  and  thy  gates  praise 

61.  3  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of 
61. 11  God  will  cause  righteousness  and  praise 

62.  7  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the 

63.  7  I  will  mention,  .the  praises  of  the  Lord 
Jer.   13.  11  a  name,  and  for  a  praise,  and  for  a  glory 

17.  14  I  shall  be  saved  :  for  thou  (art)  my  praise 
33.    9  a  praise  and  an  honour  before  all  the 

48.  2  (There  shall  be)  no  more  praise  of  Moab 

49.  25  How  is  the  city  of  praise  not  left,  the 
51.  41  and  how  is  the  praise  of  the  whole  earth 

Hab.   3.    3  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  praise 
Zeph.  3.  19  get  them  praise  and  fame  in  every  land 

3.  20  a  praise  among  all  people  of  the  earth 

4.  Confession,  thanksgiving,  rrfp.  todah. 

Psa.  42.    4  with  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  with 

50.  23  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me :  and 
56.  12  0  God :  I  will  render  praises  unto  thee 

100.  title.  A  Psalm  of  praise 

5. Praise,  aXvecris  aineeis. 
Heb.  13. 15  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God 

6. Praise,  aXvos  ainos. 

Matt2i.  16  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes,  .perfected  pr. 
Lukei8.  43  when  they  saw  (it),  gave  praise  unto  God 

7 '.Courage,  excellency,  aperij  arete. 

1  Pe.  2.   9  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of 

8.  Glory,  5iJ|a  doxa. 

John  9.  24  said  unto  him,  Give  God  the  praise :  we 

12. 43  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  p. 
1  Pe.  4.  11  to  whom  be  praise  and  dominion  for  ever 

9. Praise,  commendation,  circuvos  rpainos. 

Rom.  2.  29  whose  praise  (is)  not  of  men,  but  of  God 
13.    3  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the  same 

1  Co    4.    5  then  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God 

2  Co.  8.  18  whose  praise  (is)  in  the  gospel  tluvoughout 
Eph.    1.    6  To  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  w. 

1.  12  That  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  his  g. 
1.  14  possession,  unto  the  praise  of  his  glory 
Phil.    1.  1 1  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God 

4.  8  if  (there  be)  any  praise,  think  on  these  t. 

1  Pe.    1.    7  might  be  found  unto  praise  and  honour 

2. 14  and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well 

PRAISE,  to  — 

l.To  bless,  declare  blessed,  Tl?  barak,  3. 

Judg.  5.   2  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of  I. 

Psa.  72.  15  continually  ;  (and)  daily  shall  he  be  prai. 

2.  To  praise,  V?n  halal,  3. 

Judgio.  24  when  the  people  saw  him,  they  praised 

2  Sa.  14.  25  there  was  none  to  be  so  much  praised  as 

1  Ch.16.  4  to  thank  and  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Isr. 
16.36  all  the  people  said,  Amen,  and  praised  the 
23.  5  four  thousand  praised  the  Lord  with  the 
23.  5  which  I  made,  (said  David) ,  to  praise  the. 
23.  30  stand  every  morning  to  thank  and  praise 
25.    3  to  give  thanks,  and  to  praise  the  Lord 

29.  13  we  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy  glorious  n. 

2  Oh.  5.  13  to  make  one  sound  to  be  heard  in  praising 
5. 13  praised  the  Lord,  (saying),  For  (he  is)g. 

7.  6  whenDavidpraisedbytheirministry  ;  and 

8.  14  to  praise  and  minister  before  priests,  as 
20. 19  stood  up  to  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
20.  21  and thatshould praise thebeautyof  holin. 
23.  12  the  people  running  and  praisingthe  king 

30.  21  Levites  and  the  priests  praised  the  Lord 

31.  2  to  praise  in  the  gates  of  the  tents  of  the  L. 
Ezra   3.  10  to  praise  the  Lord,  after  the  ordinance  of 

3.  11  they  sang  together  by  course  in  praising 
3. 11  praise  the  Lord,  because  the  foundation 
Neh.   5.  13  congregation  said,  Amen,  and  praised  the 
12.  24  to  praise  (and)  to  give  thanks,  according 


Psa.  22.  22  midst  of  the  congregation  will  I  praise  t. 
22.  23  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  praise  him ;  all  ye 
22.  26  they  shall  praise  the  Lord  that  seek  him 
35. 18  I  will  praise  thee  among  much  people 
56.   4  In  God  I  will  praise  his  word :  in  God  I 
56.  10  I  praise  (his)  word ;  in  the  Lord  will  I  p. 
63.    s  my  mouth  shall  praise  (thee)  with  joyful 
69.  30  I  will  praise  the  name  of  God  with  a  song 
69.  34  Let  the  heaven  aud  earth  praise  him,  the 
74.  21  let  the  poor  and  needy  praise  thy  name 
84.    4  they  will  be  still  praising  thee.     Selah 
102.  18  people  which  shall  be  created  shall  praise 
104.  35  Praise  ye  the  Lord 
So  in  105.  45 ;  106.  1,  48;  xxx.  1 ;  112.  1 ;  113.  1,  9 ;  116. 
19;  117.  2;  135.  1,  21;  146.  1,    10;  147.   t  ;  14S.   1,    1,  14; 
149.  1,  9;  150.  1,  6. 

107.  32  praise  him  in  the  assembly  of  the  elders 
109.  30  yea,  I  will  praise  him  among  the  multi. 
113.    1  Praise,  O  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  praise 
115. 17  The  dead  praise  not  the  Lord,  neither  any 
115.  18  But  we  will  bless  the  Lord.  .Praise  theL. 
117.    1  0  praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  nations . .  all  ye  p. 
119.  164  Seven  times  a  day  do  I  praise  thee  beca. 
119. 175  Let  my  soul  live,  and  it  shall  praise  thee 
135.    1  Praise  ye  the  name  of  the  Lord;  praise 
135.    3  Praise  the  Lord ;  for  the  Lord  (is)  good 

145.  2  and  I  will  praise  thy  name  for  ever  and 

146.  1  ye  the  Lord.  Praise  the  Lord,  O  my  soul 

146.  2  While  I  live  will  I  praise  the  Lord  ;  I  will 

147.  12  the  Lord,  0  Jerusalem ;  praise  thy  God 

148.  1  from  the  heavens :  praise  him  in  the  heig. 
148.  2  Praise yehim, all hisangels:  praiseyehim 
148.  3  Praise  ye  him,  sun  and  moon :  praise  him. 
148.  4  Praisehim,  yeheavensof  heavens,  and  ye 
148.   5,  13  Let  them  praise  the  name  of  the  LORD 

148.  7  Praise  the  Lord  from  the  earth,  ye  drag. 

149.  3  Let  them  praise  his  name  in  the  dance:  let 

150.  1  Praise  God  in  his  sanctuary :  praise  him 
150.   2  Praise  him  for  his  mighty  acts:  praise  him 
150.    3  Praise  him  with  the  sound . .  praise  him 
150.    4  Praise  him.  .praise  him  with  stringed  in. 
150.    5  Praise  him . .  praise  him  upon  the  high  so. 
150.    6  Let  every  thing  that  hath  breath  praise 

Prov.27.    2  Let  another  man  praise  thee,  and  not  th. 

28.    4  They  that  forsake  the  law  praise  thewic. 

31.  28  her  husband  (also),  and  he  praiseth  her 

31.  31  let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  gates 
Song  6.  9  daughters  saw  her.  .and  they  praised  her 
Isa.  62.    9  shall  eat  it,  and  praise  the  Lord;  and  they 

64.  11  house  where  our  fathers  praised  thee,  is 
Jer.  20.  13  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  praise  ye  the  Lord 

31.  7  publish  ye,  praise  ye, and  say, 0  LORD, save 
Joel    2.  26  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God 

3.  To  give  praise,  "vstzamar,  3. 

Psa.  21. 13  so  will  we  sing  and  praise  thy  power 

4.  To  stretch  out  the  hand,  confess,  rn;  yadah,  5. 

Gen.  29.35  Now  will  I  praise  the  Lord:  therefore  she 
49.    8  thou  (art  he)  whom  thy  brethren  shall  p. 

2  Ch.  7.  3  praised  the  Lord,  (saying),  For  (he  is)  go. 
7.  6  which  David  the  kinghad  mndeto praise 
20.  21  Praise  the  Lord  ;  for  his  mercy,  .for  ever 

Psa.  7. 17  I  will  praise  the  Lord  according  to  his  r. 
9.  1  I  will  praise  (thee),  O  Lord,  with  my  wh. 
28.  7  rejoiceth ;  and  with  my  song  will  I  praise 
30.  9  Shall  the  dust  praise  thee  V  shall  it  declare 
33.  2  Prajse  the  Lord  with  harp:  sing  unto  him 
42.    5  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him  (for)  the  help  of 

42.  11  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him,  (who  is)  the  he. 

43.  4  upon  the  harp  will  I  praise  thee,  0  God 

43.  5  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him,  (who  is)  the  h. 

44.  8  boast  all  the  day  long,  and  praise  thy  11. 

45.  17  therefore  shall  the  people  praise  thee  for 
49.  18  praise  thee,  when  thou  doest  well  to  thy. 
52.  9  I  will  praise  thee  for  ever,  because  thou 
54.  6  I  will  praise  thy  name,  0  Lord,  for  (it  is) 
57.  9  I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  among  the  p. 
67.  3,  s  praise  thee,  O  God  ;  let  all  the  people  p. 
71.  22  I  will  also  praise  thee  with  the  psaltery 
76. 10  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee 
86. 12  I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord  my  God,  with 

88.  10  shall  the  dead  arise  (and)  praise  thee?  S. 

89.  s  And  the  heavens  shall  praise  thy  wonders 
99.    3  Let  them  praise  thy  great  and  terrible  n. 

107.  8,  15,  21,  31  Oh  that  (men)  would  praise  the 

108.  3  I  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  among  the  p. 

109.  30  I  will  greatly  praise  the  Lord  with  my 
in.    1  I  will  praise  the  Lord  with  (my)  wholeh. 
118.  19  I  will  go  in  to  them,  (and)  I  will  praise 
11S.  21  I  will  praise  thee  :  for  thou  hast  heard 

118.  28  Thou  (art)  my  God,  audi  will  praise  thee 

119.  7  I  will  praise  thee  with  uprightness  of  he. 
138.    1  I  will  praise  thee  with  my  whole  heart 
138.    2  praise  thy  name  for  thy  loving  kindness 
138.   4  All  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  praise  thee 
139. 14  I  will  praise  thee  ;  for  Iain  fearfully  (and) 
142.    7  that  I  may  praise  thy  name :  the  right. 
145.  10  All  thy  works  shall  praise  thee,  O  LoRD 

Isa.  12.  1  shalt  say,  O  Lord,  I  will  praise  thee:  th. 
12.  4  Praise  the  Lord,  call  upon  his  name,  de. 
25.  1  I  will  exalt  thee,  I  will  praise  thy  name 
38.  18  For  the  grave  cannot  praise  thee,  death 
38.  19  The  liviug,  the  living,  he  shall  praise  thee 

Jer.  33. 1 1  Praise  the  Lord  of  hosts :  for  the  Lord  (is) 

5.  To  praise,  glorify,  njy.  shabach,  3. 

Psa.  63.  3  better  than  life,  my  lips  shall  praise  tSiee 
117.  1  all  ye  nations :  praise  him,  all  ye  people 
145.  4  One  generation  shall  praise  thy  works  to 
147. 12  Praise  the  Lord,  O  Jerusalem ;  praise  thy 

Eccl.  4.    2  I  praised  the  dead  which  are  already  dead 


PRAISES 


707 


PRAYER 


5.2*0  give  praise,  rt3t?  skebach,  3. 

Dan.  2.  23  I  thank  thee,  and  praise  thee,  0  thou  God 
4.  34  I  praised  and  honoured  him  that  liveth 

4.  37  Now  I  Nebuchadnezzar  praise  and  extol 

5.  4  They  drank  wine,  and  praised  the  gods  of 
5.  23  thou  hast  praised  the  gods  of  silver,  and 

7.  To  speak  well  of,  evhoyew  eulogeo. 

Luke  1.  64  tongue  (loosed),  aud  he  spake,  and  prais. 

S.  To  piraise,  alveoi  aineo. 

Luke  2.  13  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising 

2.  20  shepherds  returned,  glorifying  and  prais. 

19.  37  began  to  rejoice  and  praise  God  with  a 
24.  53  were  continually  in  the  temple,  praising 

Acts    2.  47  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all 

3.  8  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God 
3.    9  people  saw  him  walking  and  praising  God 

Rom  15. 11  Praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles;  and  laud 
Rev.  19.    5  saying,  Praise  our  God,  all  ye  his  servants 

9.  To  give  praise  to,  iiratyeco  epaineo. 

1  Co.11.    2  Now  I  praise  you,  brethren,  that  ye  rem. 

11. 17  I  praise  (you)  not,  that  ye  come  together 
11.  22  shall  I  praise  you  in  this?  I  praise  (you) 

PRAISES,  to  give  or  sing  — 

1.2*0  give  praise,  "IDT  zamar,  3. 

2  Sa.  22.  50  and  I  will  sing  praises  unto  thy  name 
Psa.     7.  17  will  sing  praise  to  the  name  of  the  Lori> 

9.    2  I  will  sing  praise  to  thy  name,  0  thou 
9. 11  Sing  praises  to  the  Lord,  which  dwelleth 
18.  49  Therefore  will  I .  .sing  praises  unto  thy 
27.   6  yea,  I  will  sing  praises  unto  the  Lord 
30. 12  (my)  glory  may  sing  praise  to  thee,  and  not 
47.    6  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises 
47.    6  sing  praises  unto  our  King,  sing  praises 

47.  7  sing  ye  praises  with  understanding 

57.  7  heart  is  fixed ;  I  will  sing  and  give  praise 

61.  8  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thy  name  for  ever 

68.  4  sing  praises  to  his  name :  extol  him  that 
68.  32  ye  kingdoms,  .sing  praises  unto  the  Lord 

75.  9  I  will  sing  praises  to  the  God  of  Jacob 

92.  1  to  sing  praises  unto  thy  name,  0  Most  H. 

98.  4  make  a.  .noise,  and  rejoice,  and  sing  pra. 
T°4-  33  I  will  smS  praise  to  my  God  while  I  have 

10S.  1  sing  and  give  praise,  even  with  my  glory 

108.  3  I  will  sing  praises  unto  thee  among  the 

135.  3  sing  praises  unto  his  name ;  for  (it  is) 

138.  1  before  the  gods  will  I  sing  praise  unto 

144.  9  upon  a  psaltery,  .will  1  sing  praises 

146.  2  I  will  sing  praises  unto  my  God  while  I 

147.  1  (it  is)  good  to  sing  praises  unto  our  God 
147.  7  sing  praise  upon  the  harp  unto  our  God 
149.  3  sing  praises  unto  him  with  the  timbrel 

2.2*o  boast,  praise.  Tin  halal,  3. 

2  Ch.23. 13  singers . .  and  such  as  taught  to  sing  praise 
29.  30  sing  praise  unto  the  Lord  with  the  words 
29.  30  they  sang  praises  with  gladness,  and  they 

3.7*0  hymn,  v/xveca  humneo. 

Acts  16.  25  Silas  prayed,  and  sang  praises  unto  God 
Heb.  2.  12  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  praise 

PRAISED,  (worthy)  to  be  — 

1.2*0  bless,  declare  blessed,  313  barak,  3. 

Psa.  72. 15  prayer  also.. (and)  daily  shall  he  be  prais. 

2.2*0  be  praised,  bhn  halal,  4. 

2  Sa.22.   4  on  the  Lord,  (who- is)  worthy  to  bepraised 

1  Ch.16.  25  great  (is)  the  Lord,  and. .to  be  praised:  he 
Fsa.  18.   3  upon  the  Lord,  (who  is)  worthy  to  be  pr. 

48.  1  to  be  praised  in  the  city  of  our  God 

96.'  4  Lord  (is)  great,  and  greatly  to  be  praised 
113.    3  the  Lord's  name  (is)  to  be  praised 

145.  3  Great  (is)  the  Lord,  and.  .to  be  praised 

3.  7*o  praise  self,  V~n  halal,  7. 

Prov.31  30  a  woman  (that)  fearetli.  .shall  be  praised 
PRANCE,  to  — 
To  prance,  ~irn  dahar. 

Nan.  3.    2  of  the  prancing  horses,  and  of  the  jump 
PRANCLNG  — 
Prancing,  n'jn'n  daharah. 

Judg.  5.  22  the  means  of  the  pranctngs,  the  prancings 
PRATE  against,  to  — 
7*o  prattle,  prate,  <p\vapew  phluareo. 

3  John  10  prating  against  us  with  malicious  words 
PRATING  — 

Lip,  n^'-j  saphah. 

Pi'ovio.    8 The  wise.. receive,  .but a  prating  fool  sh. 
10.  10  causeth  sorrow :  but  a  prating  fool  shall 
PRAY,  to  — 
1.  To  petition-,  pr ay,  njja,  k^5  oea,  beah. 

Dan.  6.  n  praying  and  making  supplication  before 
2.2*o  entreat  grace,  ]m  chanrm,  7. 

2  Ch.  6. 37  and  pray  unto  thee  in  the  land  of  their 
3.2*o  entreat,  make  supplication,  "in"  athar. 

Job    33.  26  He  shall  pray  unto  God,  and  he  will  be 

4.  To  co?neup,  strike  against,  intercede,  VlSpaga. 
Job  21, 15  and  what  profit,  .if  we  pray  unto  him? 

5.  To  judge  self,  pray  habitually,  bbs  palal,  7. 
Gen.  20.    7  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  live 

20.  17  Abraham  prayed  unto  God :  and  Godliea. 
Xuni  11.   2  when  Moses  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  the 

21.  7  pray  unto  the  Lord.  .And  Moses  prayed 
Deut.  9.  20  and  Iprayed  for  Aaron  also  thesametime 

9.  26  I  prayed  therefore  unto  the  Lord,  and  3. 


1  Sa.   1.  10  and  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  wept  sore 

1.  12  as  she  continued  praying  before  the  Lord 
1.  26  stood  by  thee  here,  praying  unto  the  L. 

1.  27  I  prayed ;  and  the  Lord  hath  given  me 

2.  1  Hannah  prayed,  and  said,  My  heart  rejo. 

7.  5  and  I  will  pray  for  you  unto  the  LORD 

8.  6  a  king  to  judge  us.  And  Samuel  prayed 
12.  19  Pray  for  thy  servants  unto  the  Lord  thy 

12.  23  I  should  sin.  .in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you 

2  Sa.   7.  27  thy  servant  found  in  his  heart  to  pray 

1  EX   8.  28  thy  servant  prayeth  before  thee  to  day 

8.  30  when  they  shall  pray  toward  this  place 
S.  33  pray,  and  make  supplication  unto  thee  in 
8.  35  they  pray  toward  this  place,  and  confess 
8.  42  he  shall  come  and  pray  toward  this  house 

5.  44  shall  pray  unto  the  Lord  toward  the  city 
8.  48  pray  unto  thee  toward  their  land  which 

8.  54  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  praying  all 

13.  6  pray  for  me  that  my  hand  may  be  resto. 

2  Ki.  4.  33  shut  thedoor.  .and prayed  untothe  Lord 

6.  17  And Elisha prayed,  andsaid-.openhiseyes 
6.  18  Elisha  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  S. 

19. 15  Hezekiah  prayed  before  the  Lord,  and  s. 

19.  20  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against  Sennach. 

20.  2  turned,  .and  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  say. 

1  Ch.  17.  25  hath  found  (in  his  heart)to  pray  before  t. 
a  Ch.  6.  19,  20  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  prayeth 

6.  24  pray  and  make  supplication  before  thee 
6. 26  they  pray  toward  this  place,  and  confess 
6. 32  Moreover,  .if  they  come  and  pray  in  this 
6.  34  they  pray  unto  thee  toward  this  city  which 

6.  38  pray  toward  their  land,  which  thou  gavest 

7.  1  when  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  pray. 

7.  14  pray,  and  seek  my  face,  and  turnfrom  their 
30.  18  Hezekiah  prayed  for  them,  saying,  The 
32.  20  the  son  of  Amoz,  prayed  and  cried  to  he. 
32.  24  prayed  unto  the  Lord:  and  he  spake  unto 
33. 13  prayed  unto  him :  and  he  was  entreated 

Ezra  10.    1  when  Ezra  had  prayed,  and  when  he  had 
Neh.    1.   4  fasted,  and  prayed  before  the  God  of  he. 

1.  6  which  I  pray  before  thee  now,  day  and  n. 

2.  4  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven 

Job  42.  8  my  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you;  for 
42. 10  turned  the  captivity  of  Job,  when  he  pr. 

Psa.  5.  2  and  my  God :  for  unto  thee  will  I  pray 
32.    6  shalleveryone  thatisgodlyprayuntothee 

Isa.   16.  12  that  he  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  to  p. 

37. 15  And  Hezekiah  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  say. 

37.  21  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against  Sennach. 

38.  2  turned  his  face,  .and  prayed  unto  the  L. 
44. 17  prayeth  unto  it,  and  saitb,  Deliver  me 
45.  20  and  pray  unto  a  god  (that)  cannot  save 

Jer„     7.  16  pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  neither  lift 
11.  14  pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  neither  lift 

14.  11  Pray  not  for  tins  people  for  (their)  good 
29.    7  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  it :  for  in  the  peace 
29.  12  prayuntome,  and  I  will  hearken  unto  you 
32.  16  I  had  delivered  the  evidence.  .1  prayed 
37.   3  Pray  now  unto  the  Lord  our  God  for  us 
42.    2  and  pray  for  us  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
42.   4  behold,  t  will  pray  unto  the  LORD  your  God 
42.  20  Pray  for  us  unto  the  LORD  our  God ;  and 

Dan.    9.   4  I  prayed untotheLoRDmyGod,andmade 

9.  20  praying,  aud  confessing  my  sin  and  the 
Jon.    2.    1  Jonah  prayed  uuto  the  Lord  his  God  out 

4.   2  And  he  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  I 

6. 2*o  bend,  bate,  pray,  N7?  tsela,  3. 

Ezra   6.  10  pray  for  the'  life  of  the  king,  and  of  his 
Dan,   6. 10  prayed,  and  gave  thanks  before  his  God 

7. 2*o  bow  down,  meditate,  pray,  tvis'  siach. 

Psa.  55.  17  at  noon,  will  I  pray,  and  cry  aloud ;  and 

8. 2*o  ask,  ^Nff  shaal. 

Psa.  122.   6  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  :  they  s. 

9.  2*o  smooth  down,  deprecate,  rv?n  chalah,  3„ 

Zech.  7.    2  When  they  had  sent',  .to  pray  before  the 

8.  21  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  L. 
8.  22  come  to  seek. .  and  to  pray  before  the  L. 

10. 2*o  want,  pray,  beseech,  Seo/xai  deomai. 

Matt.  9.  38  Pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 

Lukeio.    2  pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 

21. 36  Watch  ye  therefore,  and  pray  always,  that 

22-  32  But  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  thatthy  faith 

Acts   4.  31  when  they  had  prayed,  the  place  was  sh. 

8.  22  pray  God,  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine 

8.  24  Pray  ye  to  the  Lord  for  me,  that  noue  of 

8.  34  I  pray  thee,  of  who-i  speaketh  the  prop. 

10.   2  gave  much  alms  to  the  people,  and  prayed 

2  Co.   g.  20  we  pray  (you)  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  rec. 

8.    4  Praying  us  with  much  entreaty  that  we 
1  Til.  3.  10  praying  exceedingly  that  we  might  seey. 

11.2*o  ask,  interrogate,  ipcordo)  erotao. 

Luke  5.    3  prayed  him  that  he  would  thrust  out  a 
14.  18,  19  I  pray  thee  have  me  excused 
16.  27  I  pray  thee  therefore,  father,  that  thou 

John  4.31  In  the  meanwhile  his  disciples  prayed  him 

14. 16  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give 

16.  26  I  say  not  unto  you,  that  I  will  pray  the  F. 

17.  9  I  pray  for  them :  I  pray  not  for  the  world 
17.  15  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest  take  them 
17. 20  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  forth. 

Acts  10.  48  Then  prayed  they  him  to  tarry  certain  d. 
23.  18  prayed  me  to  bring  this  young  man  unto 

1  Jo.   5.  16  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it 

12.  To  pray,  wish,  eijx0^1  f-uchomed. 

2  Co.  13.    7  Now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil ;  not 
Jas.     5.  16  pray  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  he. 


13.  2*o  call  for,  or  alongside  of,  wapaKa\4<o  parah. 
Matt26.  53  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to 
Mark  5.  17  began  to  pray  him  to  depart  out  of  their 

5.  18  prayed  him  that  he  might  be  with  him 
Acts  16.   9  prayed  him,  saying,  Come  over  into  Mac. 

24.    4  I  pray  thee  that  thou  wouklest  hear  us  of 

27.  34  Wherefore  I  pray  you  to  take  (some)  meat 

1 4.  Topray  or  wish  for,  -Kpoo-^vx0^0-1  proseuchomai. 
Matt.  5.  44  pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you 

6.  5  wheu  thou  prayest.  .for  they  love  to  pray 
6.  6  when thouprayest..prayto thy  Father  wh. 
6.  7  when  ye  pray,  use  not  vain  repetitions,  as 
6.  9  After  this  manner  therefore  pray  ye :  Our 

14.  23  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart  to  pray 
19. 13  he  should  put  (his)  hands  on  them,  and 
24.  20  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  wint. 
26.  36  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder 
26.  39  fell  on  his  face,  and  prayed,  saying,  0  my 
26. 41  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into 
26.  42  prayed,  saying,  O  my  Father,  if  this  cup 
26.  44  prayed  the  third  time,  saying  the  same 
Mark  1.  3^  went,  .into  a  solitary  place,  and  there  p. 
6.  46  he  departed  into  a  mountain  to  pray 
11.  24  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  (t.) 
11.  25  when  ye  stand  praying,  forgive,  if  ye  have 
13. 18  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the 

13.  33  watch  and  pray :  for  ye  know  not  wheu 

14.  32  he  saith.  .Sit  ye  here,  while  I  shall  pray 
14.  35  prayed  that,  rf  it  were  possible,  the  hour 
14.  38  Watch  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  te. 
14.  39  he  went  away,  and  prayed,  and  spake  the 

Luke  1.  10  the  people  were  praying  without  at  the 

3.  21  Jesus  also  being  baptized,  and  praying 

5.  16  withdrew,  .into  the  wilderness,  and  pra. 

6.  12  he  went  out  into  a  mountain  to  pray,  and 
6.  28  pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you 
9. 18  as  he  was  alone  praying,  Ins  disciples  we. 
9.  28  and  went  up  into  a  mountain  to  pray 

9.  29  as  he  prayed,  the  fashion  of  his  counten. 
11.    1  as  he  was  praying  in  a  certain  place,  wh. 
11.    1  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  also  taught  Iris 
11.    2  When  ye  pray,  say,  Our  Father  which  art 
18.    1  men  ought  always  (to)  pray,  and  not  to  f. 
18.  10  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pr. 
18.  11  prayed  thus  with  himself,  God,  I  thank 
22.  40  said.  .Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempt. 
22. 41  withdrawn,  .kneeled  down,  and  prayed 
22.  44  [he  prayed  more  earnestly :  and  his  sweat] 
22.  46  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation 
Acts    1.  24  they  prayed,  and  said,  Thou,  Lord,  which 
6.    6  when  they  had  prayed,  they  laid  (their)  h. 
8. 15  prayed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive 
9. 11  Saul,  of  Tarsus :  for,  behold,  he  prayetli 
9.  40  kneeled  down,  and  prayed ;  and  turning 
10.   9  Peter  went  up  upon  the  house  top  to  pray 

10.  30  I  prayed  in  my  house,  and,  behold,  a  man 

11.  5  I  was  in  the  city  of  Joppa  praying  :  and 

12.  12  where  many  were  gathered  together  pra. 

13.  3  when  they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  and  la. 

14.  23  when  they,  .had  prayed  with  fasting,  they 
16.  25  Silas  prayed,  and  sang  praises  unto  God 

20.  36  kneeled  down,  and  prayed  with  them  all 

21.  5  we  kneeled  down  on  the  shore,  and  prayed 
22. 17  while  I  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a 

28.  8  and  prayed,  and  laid  Ms  hands  on  him, and 
1  Co.  11.    4  Every  man  praying  or  prophesying,  having 

11.  5  every  woman  that  prayeth  or  prophesieth 
11. 13  is  it  comely  that  a  woman  pray  unto  God 

14. 13  let  him  that  speaketh.  .pray  that  he  may 

14. 14  pray  in.  .(unknown)  tongue,  niy  spirit  pr. 
14.  15  will  pray  with  the  spirit,  and  I  will  pray 

Eph.  6.  iS  Praying  always  with  all  prayer  and  supli. 

Phil.    1.  9  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  yet  m. 

Col.     1.    3  We  give  thanks,  .praying  always  for  you 

1,   9  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you,  and  to  des. 

4.  3  praying  also  for  us,  that  God  would  open 

1  Tli.  5. 17  Pray  without  ceasing 

5.  25  Brethren,  pray  for  us 

2  Th.  1.  11  pray  always  for  yon,  that  our  God  would 

3.  1  pray  for  us,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may 
1  Ti.  2.  81  will  therefore  that  men  pray  every  wh. 
Heb.  13.  18  Pray  for  us  :  for  we  trust  we  have  a  good 
Jas.  5.  13  Is  any  among  you  afflicted?  let  him  pray 
5.  14  let  them  pray  over  him,  anointing  him 
5.  18  he  prayed  again,  aud  the  heaven  gave  rain 
Jude      20  But  ye,  beloved,  .praying  in  the  Holy  G. 

PRAT  (I,  we)  thee,  you  — 

l.Ahpray!  D|x,  nsn  anna,  annah. 

Gen.  50. 17  we' pray 'thee,  forgive  the  trespass  of  the 
Jon.    4.   2  I  pray  thee,  0  Lord,  (was)  not  this  mys. 

2.0  that!  ib  In. 

Gen.  23. 13  I  pray  thee,  hear  me :  I  will  give  thee 

S.Pray  !  81  na. 

Gen.  12. 13  Say,  I  pray  thee,  thou  (art)  my  sister:  th. 

18.   4  Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched 

Judg.  9.  38  Go  out,  I  pray  now,  and  fight  with  them 

PRAY  earnestly  (or  for),  to  — 

2*o  pray  to  or  toward,  irpoo'evxofj.ai  proseuckomai. 
Rom.  8.  26  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as 
Jas.    5. 17  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not  rain 

FRAYER  — 

l.A  whisper,  urh  lachash. 

Isa.  26. 16  poured  out  a  prayer  (when)  thy  chasten. 

2.  Meditation,  n'i:',  niTi?  sichah,  siach. 

Job    15.   4  Yea,  thou,  .restrainest  prayer  before  God 
Psa.  64.    1  Hear  my  voice,  OGod,  m  my  prayer, pres. 


PRAYER 


768 


PREACHING 


S.  Prayer,  song  of  praise,  n^?P  tephillah. 

■l  Sa.   7.  27  hath..fuuud  in  his  heart  to  pray  this  pra. 

1  Ki.    8.  28  Yet  havetllou  respect  unto  the  prayer  of 

8.  28  to  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  prayeth 

8.  29  the  prayer  Vi  Inch  thy  servant  shall  make 
S.  38  What  prayer  and  supplication  soever  be 
8.45,  49  their  prayer  ami  their  supplication 

5.  54  praying  all  this  prayer  and  supplication 

9.  3  heard  thy  prayer  and  thy  supplication 

2  Ki.19.   4  lift  up  (thy)  prayer  for  the  remnant  that 

20.    5  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy 
n  Ch.  6.  19  Have  respect  therefore  to  the  prayer  of 
6. 19,  20  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  prayeth 

6.  29  what  prayer  (or)  what  supplication  soever 

6.  35,  39  their  prayer  and  their  supplication 
6. 40  the  prayer  (that  is  made)  in  this  place 

7. 12  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  and  have  chosen 

7.  15  the  prayer  (that  is  made)  in  this  place 
30.  27  their  prayer  came  (up)  to  his  holy  dwell. 
33.  18  his  prayer  unto  his  God,  and  the  words  of 
33.  19  His  prayer  also,  and  (how  God)  was  entr. 

Neh.  1.    6  thou  mayest  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  serv. 

1.  1 1  the  prayer  of  thy  servant,  and  to  the  pra. 

11.  17  principal  to  begin  the  thanksgiving  in  p. 

Job  16.  17  Not.  .injustice,  .also  my  prayer  (is)  pure 

Psa.    4.    1  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  hear  my  prayer 

6.    9  heard .  .the  Loud  will  receive  my  prayer 

!7.  title.  A  prayer  of  David.     Hear  the  right 

17.    1  give  ear  unto  my  prayer,  (that  goeth)not 

35- 13  niy  prayer  returned  into  mine  own  bosom 

39. 12  Hear  my  prayer,  O  LORD,  and  give  ear  u. 
42.    8  (and)  my  prayer  unto  the  God  of  my  life 

54.  2  Hear  my  prayer,  0  God  ;  give  ear  to  the 

55.  1  Give  ear  to  my  prayer,  O  God  ;  and  hide 
61.   1  Hear  my  cry,  O  God  ;  attend  unto  my  pr. 

65.  2  thou  that  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall 
06.  19  he  hath  attended  to  the  voice  of  my  pra 

66.  20  which  hath  not  turned  away  my  prayer 

69. 13  as  for  me,  my  prayer  (is)  unto  thee,  O  L. 
72.  20  The  prayers  of  David  the  son  of  Jesse 
80.  4  be  angry  against  the  prayer  of  thy  people 
84.  8  hearmy  prayer  :  give  ear,  O  God  of  Jacob 
86.  title,  A  prayer  of  David.  Bow  down  thine 
86.  6  Give  ear,  O  Lord,  unto  my  prayer  ;  and 
88.  2  Let  my  prayer  come  before  thee  :  incline 
83. 13  in.  .morning  shall  my  prayer  prevent  thee 
00.  title.  A  prayer  of  Moses  the  man  of  God.  L. 

102.  title.  A  prayer  of  the  afflicted,  when  he  is  ov. 
102.  1  Hear  my  prayer,  OLord,  and  let  my  cry 
102.  17  He  will  regard  the  prayer,  .their  prayer 
109.  4  adversaries :  but  I  (give  myself  unto)  pra. 
109.  7  condemned  ;  and  let  his  prayer  become 
141.    2  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  thee  (as) 

141.  5  yet  my  prayer  also,  .in  their  calamities 

142.  title.  David;  A  prayer  when  he  was  in  the  c. 

143.  1  Hear  my  prayer,  0  Lord,  give  ear  to  my 
Prov  15.    8  the  prayer  of  the  upright  (is)  his  delight 

15.  29  he  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  righteous 
28.   9  He  that  turueth  away .  .even  his  prayer 
j.sa.     1.  15  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I  will  not 

37.  4  lift  up  (thy)  prayer  for  the  remnant  that 

38.  5  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy 

56.  7  make  them  joyful  in  my  house  of  prayer 
56.    7  shall  be  called  an  house  of  prayer  for  all 

Jer.     7.  16  neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them 

11.  14  neither  lift  up  a  cry  or  prayer  for  them 

^am.  3.    8  when  I  cry .  .he  shutteth  out  my  prayer 

3.  44  that  (our)  prayer  should  not  pass  through 
Jan.   9.    3  to  seek  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with 

9.  17  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  servant,  and  his  s. 

9.  21  whiles  I  (was)  speaking  in  prayer,  even 
Jon.    2.    7  my  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  into  thine 
Hab.   3.    1  A  prayer  of  Habakkuk  the  prophet  upon 

i. Beseeching ', prayer,  supijrticoAion,  Be-nais  deesis. 
Luke   1.  13  thy  prayer  is  heard ;  and  thy  wife  Elisa. 

2.  37  with  fastings  and  prayers  night  and  day 

5.  33  make  prayers,  and  likewise  (the  disciples) 
ttora  10.  1  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  fori. 
2  Co.  1.  11  Ye  also  helping  together  by  prayer  for  us 

9.  14  by  their  prayer  for  you,  which  loug  after 
Phil.  1.    4  Always  in  everyprayerof  mine  for  youall 

1.  19  turn  to  my  salvation  through  your  prayer 
_■  Ti.  1.  3  have  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers 
Heb.  5.  7  wheu  he  had  offered  up  prayers  and  supl. 
Jas.  5.  16  The  effectual  ferveutprayer  of  a  righteous 
1  Pe.   3. 12  his  ears  (are  open)  unto  their  prayers ;  but 

5. Intercession,  prayert  €Weu£is  enteuxis, 

1  Ti.  4.    5  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer 


6.-1  wish,  supplication,  suxy  euche. 

Jas.    5. 15  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick 

?.  A  prayer,  pouring  out,  irpoo-evx'h  proseuclw. 
Matti7-  21  (goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting] 

21.  13  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer 
2i.  22  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believ. 

Mark  9.  29  by  nothing  but  by  prayer  and  fasting 

11.  17  called  of  all  nations  the  house  of  prayer 
Luke  6.  12  and  continued  all  night  in  prayer  to  God 

19.  46  My  house  is  the  house  of  prayer :  but  ye 

22.  45  when  he  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  was  c. 
Acts    1.  14  with  one  accord  in  prayer  ami  supplication 

2.  42  and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers 

3.  1  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer 

6.  4  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer 
10.  4  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  come  up 
:o.  31  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  thine  alms  are 

12.  ^prayer  was  made  without  ceasing  of  the 
16. 13  river  side,  where  prayer  was  wont  to  be 
16.  16  as\'e  went  to  prayer,  a  certain  damsel 

lloiu.  1.    9  make,  mention  of  you  always  in  my  pray. 


Rom  12.  12  patient,  .continuing  instant  in  prayer 

15.  30  strive  together  with  me  in  (your)  prayers 
1  Co.  7.  5  may  give  yourselves  to  fasting  and  prayer 
Eph.    1. 16  making  mention  of  you  hi  my  prayers 

6.  18  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  spirit 
Phil.  4.    6  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving 
Col.     4.    2  Continue  in  prayer,  and  watch  in  the  same 

4.  12  labouring  fervently  for  you  in  prayers 
1  Th.  1.    2  making  mention  of  you  iu  our  prayers 

1  Ti.    2.    1  prayers,  intercessions,  (and)  giving  of  tha. 

5.  5  supplications  and  prayers  night  and  day 
Phm.        4  making  mention  of  thee,  .in  my  prayers 

22  trust  that  through  your  prayers  I  shall 
1  Pe.  3.    7  dwell . .  that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered 
4.    7  be  ye  therefore  sober,  .watch  unto  prayer 
Rev.   5.    8  odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints 
8.    3  should  offer  (it)  with  the  prayers  of  all  s. 
8.   4  (which  came)  with  the  prayers  of  the  sai. 
PRAYER,  to  make  — 
l.To  smooth  down,  deprecate,  n?n  chalah,  3. 

Dan.    9. 13  made  we  not  our  prayer  before  the  Lord 
'l.To  entreat,  make  supplication,  *in#  alhar,  5. 

Job  22.27  Thou  shaltmake  thyprayeruntohhn,and 
3.  To  judge  self ,  pray  habitually,  hhspalal,  7. 
1  Ki,    8.  29  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  shall  make 
Xeh.  4.    9  we  made  our  prayer  unto  our  God,  and 
Psa.  72.  15  prayer,  .shallbemadeforhimcontinually 

l.To  pray  toward,  pour  out  to,  irpuo'evxo/j.aL  jrros. 

Matt 23.  14  [for  a  pretence  make  long  prayer :  there.] 

Marki2.  40  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayers:  these 

Luke2o.  47  Which,  .forashowmakelong prayers:  the 
PREACH  (good  tidings),  to,  unto,  to  — 
1.7b  bring  or  tell  good  tidings,  "ife'a  basar,  3. 

Psa.  40.    9  I  have  preached  righteousness  in  the  gr. 

Isa.  61.    1  to  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek;  lie 
-.  To  call,  proclaim,  preach,  x"ji2  qa/ra. 

Neh.   6.   7  thou  hast  also  appointed  prophets  to  pre. 

Jon.    3.   2  preach  unto  it  the  preaching  that  I  bid 

3.  To  tell  or  announce  thoroughly,  ZiayydWu  dip.//. 

Luke  9.  60  but  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of 

4.  To  speak  throughout,  81.aAeyofj.cu  dialegomai. 
Acts  20.    7  Paul  preached  untotbem,  ready  to  depart 

20.    9  as  Paul  was  long  preaching,  he  sunk  down 

5.  To  tell  good  news  or  tidings,  zvayykXifa  euajjg. 

Luke  3.  18  many  otherthings.  .preachedhe  unto  the 

4.  43  I  must  preach  the  kingdom  of  God  to  ot. 

16. 16  the  kingdom  of  God  is  preached,  and  ev. 

Acts    5.  42  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus 

8.   4  they,  .went  every  where  preaching  the  w. 

8.  12  preaching  the  tilings  concerning  the  kin. 

8.  35  and  began . .  and  preached  unto  him  Jesus 

8.  40  he  preached  in  all  the  cities,  till  he  came 
10.  36  preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ :  he  is 
11.20  And  some.,  spake,  .preaching  the  Lord  J. 

14.  15  preach  unto  you'that  ye  shouhlturn  from 

15.  35  preaching  the  word  of  the  Lord,  with  many 
17.  18  he  preached  unto  them  Jesus,  and  the  re. 

1  Co.  15.    1  the  gospel  which  I  preached  unto  you 

15.    2  keep  in  memory  what  I  preached  unto  you 

2  Co.  1 1.    7  preached  to  you  the  gospel  of  God  freely 
Gal,     1.    8  than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto 

1. 11  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of  me  is 
1.  16  that  I  might  preach  him  among  the  hea. 
1.  23  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  he  destr. 
Eph.  2. 17  preached  peace  to  you  which  were  afar 

3.  8  I  should  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the 
Heb.  4.    2  unto  us  was  the  gospel  preached,  as  well 

4.  6  they  to  whom  it  was  first  preached 
Rev.  14.   6  to  preach  uuto  them  that  dwell  on  the 

G.r-j  tell  thoroughly,  KctTayyeAAco  kataggello. 
Acts    4.    2  preached  through  Jesus  the  resurrection 
13.    5  they  preached  the  word  of  God  in  the  sy. 

13.  38  through  this  man  is  preached  unto  you  the 

15.  36  we  have  preached  the  word  of  the  Lord 
17.    3  Jesus,  whom  I  preach  unto  you,  is  Christ 
17.  13  word  of  God  was  preached  of  Paul  at  1>. 

j  *'o.  9.  14  they  which  preach  the  gospel  should  live 

Phil.    1.  16  The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention,  not 

1.  18  in  pretence.or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preached 

Col.    1.  28  we  preach,  warning  every  man,  and  teac. 

7.  To  cry  or  proclaim  as  a  herald,  K^pvo-a-aj  Jeerusso. 

Matt.  3.    1  came,  .preaching  in  the  wilderness  of  Jn. 

4.  17  Jesus  began  to  preach,  and  to  say,  Repent 

4.  23  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and 

9.  35  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and 
10.    7  preach,  saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 

10.  27  what  ye  hear  hi  the  ear.  .preach  ye  upon 

11.  1  departed.,  to  teach  and  to  preach  in  their 

24. 14  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached 
26.  13  Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be  preached 

Mark  1.    4  preach  the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the 
1.    7  preached,  saying,  There  cometh  one  mig. 
1.  14  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  of 
1.  38  I  may  preach  there  also :  for  therefore  c. 
1.  39  preached  in  then'  synagogues  throughout 

3.  14  that  he  might  send  them  forth  to  preach 

6.  12  went,  .and  preached  that  men  should  re. 

14.  9  Wheresoever, this  gospel  shall  be  preached 

16. 15  Go  ye.  .and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  c. 

16.  20  theywentfortb^and  preached  everywhere 
Luke  3.    3  preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance  for 

4. 18  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and 

4. 19  To  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord 

4.  44  And  he  preached  in  the  synagogues  of  ft. 


Luke  8.    1  preaching  and  showing  the  glad  tidings 
9.    2  sent  them  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 
24.47  should  be  preached  in  bis  name  among  all 
Acts    8.    5  Philip  went  down,  .and  preached  Christ 
9.  20  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  sy. 
10.  37  after  the  baptism  which  John  preached 
10.  42  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the  people 
15.  21  hath  in  every  city  them  that  preach  him 

19.  13  adjureyou  by  Jesus  whom  Paul  preacheth 

20.  25  among  whom  I  have  gone  preaching  the 
28.  31  Preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teac. 

Rom.  2.  21  thou  that  preachest  a  man  should  not  st. 
10.    8  that  is,  the  word  of  faith,  which  we  preach 

10.  15  how  shall  they  preach  except  they  be  se.2 

1  Co.  1.  23  But  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  unto  the 

g.  27  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself 

15.  11  I  or  they,  so  we  preach,  and  so  ye  believ. 
15. 12  Now  if  Christ  be  preached  that  he  rose 

2  Co.  1.  19  Christ,  who  was  preached  among  you  by 

4.  5  For  we  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ 

11.  4  preacheth  another.. whom  we  havenotp. 
Gal.    2.    2  which  I  preach  among  the  Gentiles,  but 

5.  11  if  I  yet  preach  circumcision,  whydo  I  yet 
Phil.  1.  15  Some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy 
Col.     1.  23  which  was  preached  to  every  creature  w. 
1  Th.  2.    9  we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God 

1  Ti.   3.  16  preached  uuto  the  Gentiles,  believed  on 

2  Ti.  4.    2  Preach  the  wurd;  be  instant  in  season,  out 
1  Pe.  3.  19  he  went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in 

8.7*0  talk,  discourse,  AaAeaj  laleo. 

Mark  2.    2  and  he  preached  the  word  unto  them 
Acts   8.  25  when  they  had  testified  and  preached  the 

11.  19  preaching  the  word  to  none  but  unto  the 

13.  42  might  be  preached  to  them  the  next  sab. 

14.  25  when  they  had  preached  the  word  in  Pe. 

16.  6  were  forbidden  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  pre. 

PREACH  the  gospel  (of,  to,  hi,  into),  to — 
To  tell  or  announce  good  news,  euayytAifa  citagg. 
Matt  11.    5  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  th. 
Luke  4.  18  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
7.  22  raised,  to  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached 
9.    6  preaching  the  gospel,  and  healing  every. 
20.    1  as  he  taught . .  and  preached  the  gospel,  the 
Acts    8.  25  preached  the  gospel  in  many  villages  of 

14.  21  when  they  had  preached  the  gospel  to  v.  - 
16.  10  called  us  for  to  preach  the  gospel  uuto  th 

Rom.  1.  15  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you 
10.  15  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  pe. 

15.  20  so  have  I  strived  to  preach  the  gospel,  not 

1  Co.  1.  17  For  Christ  sent  me.  .to  preach  the  gospel 

9.  16  For  though  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  have  110 
9.  16  woe  is  unto  me,  if  I  preach  notthe  gospel  ' 
9.  18  whenlpreach  the  gospel,  I  may  make  the 

2  Co. 10.  16  To  preach  the  gospel  in  the  (regions)  bey 
Gal.     1.    8  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than 

1.  9  If  any  (mau)  preach  any  other  gospel  unto 
4.  13  I  preached  the  gospel  unto  you  at  the  first 
Heb.  4.  2  For  unto  us  was  the  gospel  preached,  as 
1  1'e.  1.  12  them  that  have  preached  the  gospel  unt<> 
1.  25  word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto 
4.   6  fortius  cause  was  the  gospel  preached  alsi> 

PREACH  before  or  first,  to— 

To  cry  or  proclaim  beforehand,  irpoK-qpvo'aic  prok 

Acts  3.  20  Christ,  which  before  was  preached  unto  you 

13.  24  John  had  first  preached  before  his  coming 

PREACH  before  the  gospel,  to  — 

To  tell  good  news  beforehand,  Trpoevayy(:\i(ot..at. 

Gal.    3.   8  preached  before  the  gospel  unto  Abraham 
PREACH  boldly,  to  — 
To  useboldncss,  be  free  in  speech,Trap{)7}o-ta.£ofj,ai  }>!<<,. 

Acts  9.  27  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  Damascus 
PREACHED  (fully)  — 
\.,Tofill,  make  full,  tt\tjp6cu  plerob. 

Rom. 15. 19  I  have  fully  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ 

"J. Hearing,  what  is  heardby  the  ear,  a.Koi\  akoe. 

Hel>.  4.   2  but  the  word  preached  did  not  profit  them 
PREACHER  — 
1.  Caller,  congrcgator,  preacher,  fyn'p  goheleih. 

Eccl.  1.    1  words  of  the  preacher,  the  son  of  David 

1.  2  Vanity  of  vanities,  saith  the  preacher,  v. 
1. 12  I  the  preacher  was  king  over  Israel  in  J. 
7.  27  Behold,  this  have  I  found,  saith  the  prea. 

12.  8  Vanity  of  vanities,  saith  the  preacher  ;  :i!l 
12.  9  because  the  preacher  was  wise,  he  still  t 
12.  10  preacher  sought  to  find  out  acceptable  \\ 

2.Crier, proclaimed,  herald,  Kripv£  kerux. 

1  Ti.    2,    7  Whereunto  I  am  ordained  apreacber.and 

2  Ti.    1. 11  WhereuntoIamappointedapreaeher.aiKl 
2  Pe.  2.    s  hut  saved  Noah . .  a  preacher  of  righteous. 

3.7V)  cry  or  proclaim  as  a  herald,  KTjpvaao:  kerus. 

Rom.  10.  14  and  how  shall  they  hear  without  a  pre.? 
PREACHING  — 
l.Ory,  proclamation,  preaching,  ■"ix'-ip  qeriafo, 

Jon.    3.  2  preach  uuto  it  the  preaching  that  I  bid  t. 

2.A  cry,  proclamation,  Krjpvyfxa  kerugma. 

Matt  12.  41  because  they  repented  at  the  preaching 
Luke  11.  32  for  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jo. 
Rom  16.  25  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  according 

1  Co.  1.  21  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preach. 

2.  4  my  speech  and  my  preaching  (was)  not 
15.  14  then  (is)  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  fa. 

2  Ti.    4.  17  by  me  the  preaching  might  be  fully  kno. 
Titus  1     ^  manifested  his  word  through  preacninjr 


PRECEPT 


769 


PREPARE 


3.-4  word,  \6yos  logos. 

i  Co.  1. 18  For  the  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them 

PRECEPT  — 

l.C'ommand,  thing  set  up,  rnyn  mitsvah. 

Neh.    9.  14  commandedst  them  precepts, statutes.and 
Isa.   29.  13  fear  toward  me  is  taught  by  the  precept 
Jer.  35.  18  kept  all  his  precepts,  and  done  according 
Dan.   9.    5  even  by  departing  from  thy  precepts  and 
2,Charges,  D'T.pa  piqqudim, 

Psa.119.  4  commauded(us)tokeepthypreceptsdilig. 
119.  15  I  will  meditate  in  thy  precepts,  and  have 
119.  27  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  precepts  :  so 
119.  40  I  have  longed  after  thy  precepts  :  quicken 
1:9.  45  will  walk  at  liberty:  for  I  seek  thy  prec. 
119.  56  This  I  had,  because  I  kept  thy  precepts 
119.  63  companion,  .of  them  that  keep  thy  prece. 
119.  69  will  keep  thy  precepts  with  (my)  whole 
119.  78  (but)  I  will  meditate  in  thy  precepts 
119.  87  consumed,  .but  I  forsook  not  thy  precepts 
119.  93  I  will  never  forget  thy  precepts  :  for  with 
ng.  94  save  me  ;  for  I  have  sought  thy  precepts 
119.  100  I  understand,  .because  I  keep  thy  prec. 
119.  104  Through  thy  precepts  I  get  understand 
z  19.  1 10  laid  a  snare . .  yet  I  erred  not  from  thy  p. 
119.  128  Therefore  I  esteem  all(thy)precepts(e.) 
119.  134  Deliver  me.  .so  will  I  keep  thy  precepts 
119. 141  despised  ;  (yet)  do  not  I  forget  thy  prec. 
119.  159  Consider  how  I  love  thy  precepts:  quic. 
119.  168  I  have  kept  thy  precepts  and  thytestim. 
119. 173  help  me :  for  I  have  chosen  thy  precepts 
-3.  Command,  thing  set  up,  is,  ly  tsav. 

Isa.   28.  10  precept,  .upon  precept,  precept  upon  pr. 

28.  13  precept  upon  precept,  precept  upon  pre. 

4.^  charge,  ivroA-f)  entole. 

Markio.  5  For  the  hard,  .he  wrote  you  this  precept 
Heb.   9.  19  For  when  Moses  had  spoken  every  prece. 

PRECIOUS  (things  or  fruits)  — 
1.  Desire,  n;PJ  chemdah. 

Dan.  11.    8  with  their  precious  vessels  of  silver  and 
'2.  Desired  or  desirable  objects,  nii^Dq  chamudoth. 

2  Ch.20.  25  both  riches  with  the  dead  bodies,  and  pr. 

Ezra   8.  27  two  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  go. 

Dan.  11.  43  and  over  all  the  precious  things  of  Egypt 

Z.Grace,  )n  chen. 

Prov  17.    8  A  gift  (is  as)  a  precious  stone  in  the  eyes 

4. Freedom,  ty?n  chophesh. 

Eze.  27.  20  Dedan  (was)  thy  merchant  in  precious  cl. 

5.  Good,  nia  tob. 

2  Ki.  20.  13  showedthem.  .the  precious  ointment,  and 
Psa.133.  2  (It  is)Iikethepreciousointinent  upon  the 
Isa.  39.    2  showedthem. .thepreciousointment, and 

Q.Rare,  precious,  "ip;  yaqar. 

r  Sa.   3.    1  word  of  the  Lord  was  precious  in  those 

2  Sa.  12.  30  a  talent  of  gold  with  the  precious  stones 

1  Ki.io.    2  she  came  to  Jerusalem  with,  .precious  sto. 

10. 10  she  gave  the  king,  .precious  stones :  there 

10.  11  great  plenty  of  almug  trees,  and  precious 

1  Ch.20.    2  precious  stones  in  it ;  and  it  was  set  upon 

29.  2  all  manner  of  precious  stones,  and  marble 
a  Ch.  3.    6  garnished  the  house  with  precious  stones 

9.    1  gold  in  abundance,  and  precious  stones 
9.    9  she  gavethe  king,  .precious  stones:  neit. 
9. 10  servants,  .brought  alguin  trees  and  prec. 

32.  27  made  himself  treasuries,  .for  precious  st. 
Job  28. 16  It  cannot  be  valued.,  with  the  precious  on. 
Psa.n6.  15  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  LORD  (is)  the 
Prov.  1. 13  We  shall  find  all  precious  substance,  we 

3. 15  She  (is)  morepreciousthanrubies:and  all 
6.  26  the  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the  precious 

12.  27  the  substance  of  a  diligent  man  (is)  prec. 

24.  4  filledjwith  all  precious  and  pleasant  riches 
Isa.  28.  16  a  precious  corner  (stone),  a  sure  founda. 
Jer.  15.  19  if  thou  take  forth  the  precious  from  the 
Lam.  4.  2  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine 
Eze.  27.  22  occupied  in  thy  fairs,  .with  all  precious 

28.  13  every  precious  stone  (was)  thy  covering 
Dan.  11.  38  shall  he  honour  .with  precious  stones 

7.  Rare,  ptrecious,  "ij£  yeqar. 

Job  28. 10  cutteth.  .and  his  eye  seeth  every  precious 
Prov  20.  15  but  the  lips  of  knowledge  (are)  a  precious 
Jer.  20.  5  I  will  deliver,  .all  the  precious  things  th. 
Eze.  22.  25  have  taken  the  treasure  and  precious  th. 

8.  Precious  thing,  *uo  meged. 

Deut33.  13  for  the  precious  things  of  heaven,  for  the 
33. 14  precious  fruits,  .and  for  the  precious  th. 

33.  15  for  the  precious  things  of  the  lasting  hills 
33.  16  for  the  precious  things  of  the  earth  and 

'.'  Precious  things,  rm^o  migdanoth. 

Gen.  24.  53  gave  also . .  to  her  mother  precious  things 

2  Ch.21.  3  their  father  gave  them,  .precious  things 
Ezra  1.    6  precious  things,  besides  all  (that)  was  w. 

10. Acquisition,  scattering,  3^0  meshek. 

Psa.126.   6  He  that  goeth  forth,  .beareth  precious  s. 

ll.Spices,  nb^  nekoth. 

2  Ki.  20.  13  the  house  of  his  precious  things,  the  sil. 

Isa.   39.   2  house  of  his  precious  things,  the  silver 
12.  Held  in  honour  or preciousness,  evrt/ios  enthnos. 

1  Pe.   2.   4  of  men,  hut  chosen  of  God,  (and)  precious 
2.    6  lay  in  Zion  a  chief  corner  stone,  elect,  p. 
13. Honour,  reverence,  preciousn ess,  rifi-f]  time.  . 

1  Pe.   2.   7  Unto  you.  .which  believe  (he  is)  previous 

97 


1  Co. 

1 

Jas. 

s 

iPe. 

z 

T. 

2Pe. 

I 

Rev. 

17 

1 4. Honourable,  honoured,  precious,  rtixtos  timios. 
12  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay 
7  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fr. 
7  being  much  more  precious  than  of  gold 
19  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a 
4  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises 
4  decked  with  gold,  and  precious  stones 
18.  12  merchandise  of  gold,  .and  precious  ston. 
18.  12  all  manner  vessels  of  most  precious  wood 
18.  i6deckedwith  gold,  and  precious  stones,  and 
21.  11  light  (was)  like  unto  a  stone  most  precious 
21.  19  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  st. 

PRECIOUS,  like  — 

Equally  honourable  or  j^ectous,  Icrort/xos  isotimos. 

2  Pe.    1.    1  to  them  that  have  obtained  like  precious 
PRECIOUS,  very  — 
l.Very  p>recious,  f3a.pvTiij.os  barutunos. 

Mat*. 26.  7  an  alabaster  box  of  very  precious  ointme. 
"2.  Very  expensive,  ttoXotcXtis  poluteles. 

\Iark14.    3  box  of  ointment  of  spikenard  very  preci. 
PRECIOUS,  to  be  or  make  — 
1.7*o  be  precious,  rare,  ip;  yaqar. 

1  Sa.  26.  21  because  my  soul  was  precious  in  thine  e. 

2  Ki.  1. 13  pray  thee,  let  my  life,  .be  precious  in  thy 

1.  14  therefore  let  my  life  now  be  precious  in 

Psa.  49.    8  For  the  redemption  of  their  soul  (is)  prec. 

72.  14  and  precious  shall  their  blood  be  in  his 

139.  17  How  precious  also  are  thy  thoughts  unto 

Isa.   43.    4  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  th. 

2.  To  make  precious  or  rare,  "ip;  yaqar,  5. 

Isa.  13.  12  I  will  make  a  man  more  precious  thanfl. 
PREDESTINATE,  to  — 

To  mark  off  first  or  beforehand,  vpoopifa  proorizo. 

Rom.  8.  29  he  also  did  predestinate  (to  be)  conformed 

8.  30  whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also 

Eph.   1.    5  Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adop. 

1.  11  beingpredestinated  according  to  the  pur. 

PRE-EMINENCE  — 

What  is  over  and  above,  "iniD  inothar. 

Eccl.  3.  19  so  that  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  above 

PRE-EMINENCE,  (to  love)  to  have  the  — 
\.To  be  first,  trpwreva  proteuo. 

Col.     1.  iS  in  all  (things)  he  might  have  the  pre-emi. 

2.  To  love  to  be  first,  tptXoirpojTzva)  philqproteuo. 

3  John  9  who  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence  am. 
PREFER,  BE  PREFERRED,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  up,  rky  alah,  5. 

Psa. 137.  6  if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief 
2. To  be  pre-eminent,  run  netsach,  4. 

Dan.  6.  3  Then  this  Daniel  was  preferred  above  the 
■3.7*0  change,  transfer,  nsy  shanah,  3. 

Esth.  2."  9  preferred  her  and  her  maids  unto  the  best 
4.7*0  become,  yivofiat  ginomai. 

John  1.  15  He  that  cometh  after  me  is  preferred  be. 
1.  30  After  me  cometh  a  man  which  is  preferred 
1 .  27  He  it  is,  who  coming  after  me,  is  prefer. 

5.  7*o  lead  before,  TrpoTjyeofxai  proegeomai. 

Rom  12.  10  kindly  affectioned.  .in  honour  preferring 
PREFERRING  one  before  another  — 
Preference,  prejudice,  wp  6  up tfj.cn.  prohrima. 

1  Ti.    5.  21  without  preferring  one  before  another,  d. 
PREMEDITATE,  to  — 
7*o  take  concern,  fxeXerdw  meletao. 

Mark  1 3.  n  neither  do  ye  premeditate;  but  whatsoe. 
PREPARATION  — 
1.  To  prepare,  establish,  \>^kun,  5. 

Nah.   2.   3  flaming  torches  in  the  day  of  his  prepar. 

2. Arrangement,  disposing,  T&P  maarak. 

Prov  16.    1  Thepreparations  of  the  heart  in  man,  and 

3.  Preparation,  state  of  readiness,  kroifxatrla  hetoim. 

Eph.  6. 15  your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the 

4. Preparation,  a  making  ready,  irapao-ncvri  para.. 
Matt27.  62  that  followed  the  day  of  the  preparation 
Mark  15.  42  because  it  was  the  preparation,  that  is,  the 
Luke23.  54  that  day  was  the  preparation,  and  the  s. 
J0IU119.  14  it  was  the  preparation  of  the  passover,  and 
19.  31  because  it  was  the  preparation,  that  the 
19.  42 because oftheJews'preparation(day);  for 

PREPARATION,  to  make  — 

To  prepare,  establish,  p3  kun,  5. 

1  Ch.22.    5  I  will  (therefore)  now  make  preparation 

PREPARE  (self),  be  a  preparing — 

1.7*0  bind,  gird,  "idn  asar. 

1  KX18.  44  Prepare  (thy  chariot),  and  get  thee  down 
2.7*0  appoint,  prepare,  JPi  zeman,  2. 

Dan.  2.  9  for  ye  have  prepared  lying  and  corrupt  w. 
3.7*o  be  prepared,  established,  |13  kun,  2. 

2  Ch.35.    4  prepare  (yourselves)  by  thehousesofyour 
Amos  4. 12  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare  to  meet 

4. 7*o  prepare,  establish,  pa  kun,  Sa. 

Job     8.    8  prepare  thyself  to  the  search  of  their  fat. 

Psa.  9.  7  he  hath  prepared  his  throne  for  judgment 
107.  36  that  they  may  prepare  a  city  for  habitati. 
5.  To  prepare,  establish,  pa  hm9  5. 

Exodi6.    5  they  shall  prepare  (that)  which  they  bring 


Exod23-  20  bring  thee  into  the  place  which  I  have  p. 
^um  23.  1  prepare  me  here  seven  oxen  and  seven  r. 
23.  29  prepare  me  here  seven  bullocks  and  sev. 
Deutig.  3  Thou  shalt  prepare  thee  a  way,  and  divide 
Josh.  1.  11  Prepare  you  victuals;  for  within  threed. 
4.  4  twelve  men,  whom  he  had  prepared  of  the 
1  Sa.  .7.    3  prepare  your  hearts  unto  the  Lord,  and 

23.  22  Go,  I  pray  you,  prepare  yet,  and  know  and 
1  Ki.  5.  iSso  they  prepared  timber  and  stones  tohu. 

6.  19  the  oracle  he  prepared  in  the  house  with 

1  Ch.  9.  32  over  the  show  bread,  to  prepare  (it)  every 

12.  39  for  their  brethren  had  prepared  for  them 
15.  1  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  and 
15.  3  unto  his  place  which  he  had  prepared  for 
15.  12  unto  (the  place  that)  I  have  prepared  for 
22.  3  David  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  the 
22.  5  So  David  prepared  abundantly  before  his 
22.  14  in  my  trouble  I  have  prepared  for  the  h. 
22.  14  timber  also  and  stone  have  I  prepared;  and 
29.  2  Now  I  have  prepared  with  all  my  might 
29.  3  above  all  that  I  have  prepared  for  theh. 
29. 16  all  this  store  that  we  have  prepared  tob. 
29.  18  keep  this,  .and  prepare  their  heart  unto 

2  Ch.  1.    4  (the  place  which)  David  had  prepared  for 

2.  9  Even  to  prepare  me  timber  in  abundance 

3.  1  place  that  David  had  prepared  in  the  th. 
12.  14  he  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  L. 

19.  3  and  hastpreparedthinehearttoseekGod 

20.  33  for  as  yet  the  people  had  not  prepared  th. 

26.  14  Uzziah  prepared  for  them,  throughout  all 

27.  6  became  mighty,  because  he  prepared  his 
29.  19  vessels,  .have  we  prepared  and  sanctified 
29.  36  Hezekiah  rejoiced,  .that  God  had  prepar. 
30. 19  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  God,  the  Lord 
31. 11  commanded  to  prepare,  .and  they  prepar. 
35.   4  And  prepare  (yourselves)  by  the  houses 
35.    6  prepare  your  brethren,  that  (they)  may 
35.  14  therefore  the  Levites  prepared  for  them. 
35. 15  for  their  brethren  the  Levites  prepared 
35.  20  when  Josiah  had  prepared  the  temple,  N. 

Ezra    7.  10  For  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek 
Esth.  6.   4  on  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  for 

7.  10  on  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  for 
Job   11.  13  If  thou  prepare  thine  heart,  and  stretch 

15.  35  conceive  mischief,  .their  belly  prepareth 
27.  16  Though  he  heap  up  silver,  .and  prepare 

27.  17  He  may  prepare  (it),  but  the  just  shall  put 

28.  27  he  prepared  it,  yea,  and  searched  it  out 

29.  7  (when)  I  prepared  my  seat  in  the  street ! 
Psa.     7.  13  He  hath  also  prepared  for  hiin  theinstru. 

10.  17  thou  wilt  prepare  their  heart,  thou  wilt 
57.    6  They  have  prepared  a  net  for  my  steps 
65.   9  thou  preparest  them  corn,  when  thou  ha. 
68.  10  hast  prepared  of  thy  goodness  for  the  po. 
74.  16  thou  hast  prepared  the  light  and  the  sun 

103. 19  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the  he. 

147.  8  who  prepareth  rain  for  the  earth,  who  m. 
Prov.  8.  27  When  he  prepared  the  heavens,  I  (was)  t. 

24.  27  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and  make  it 

30.  25  yet  they  prepare  their  meat  in  the  sumni. 
Isa.    14.  21  Prepare  slaughter  for  his  children  for  the 

40.  20  cunning  workman  to  prepare  a  graven  i. 
Jer.  46. 14  Stand  fast,  and  prepare  thee ;  for  the  sw. 

51.  12  set  up  the  watchmen,  prepare  the  ambu. 
Eze.  38.  7  prepare  for  thyself,  thou,  and  all  thy  co. 
Zeph.  1.    7  for  the  Lord  hath  prepared  a  sacrifice,  he 

6. 7*o  prepare  or  establish  self,  p3  kun,  7a. 

Psa.  59.   4  They  run  and  prepare  themselves  without 
7.7*o  dig,  prepare,  n~)3  karah. 

2  Ki.   6.  23  hepreparedgreatprovisionforthem:and 
S.7*o  number,  count,  appoint,  niQmanah,  3. 

Psa.  61.   7  O  prepare  mercy  and  truth,  (which)  may 
Jon.    1.  17  Now  the  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish 
4.   6  God  prepared  a  gourd,  and  made  (it)  to 
4.    7  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  morning 

4.  8  that  God  prepared  a  vehement  east  wind 

9.7*0  arrange,  set  in  array,  irty  arak. 

Num23.    4  I  have  prepared  seven  altars,  and  I  have 
Psa.  23.   5  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the  p. 
Isa.   21.    5  Prepare  the  table,  watch  in  the  watch  t. 
65. 11  that  prepare  a  table  for  that  troop,  and 

10.7*0  do,  make,  n]yy  asah. 

Gen.  27. 17  bread,  which  she  had  prepared,  into  the 
Exodir  39  neither  had  they  prepared  for  themselves 
Numis.    5  shalt  thou  prepare  with  the  burnt  offer. 

15.    6  thou  shalt  prepare  (for)  a  meat  offering 

15.    8  when  thou  preparest  a  bullock  (for)  a  bu. 

15.  12  According  to  the  number  that  ye  shall  p. 
Josh  22.  26  Let  us  now  prepare  to  build  us  an  altar 
2  Sa.  15.    1  prepared  him  chariots  and  horses,  and  fl. 
1  Ki.  1.    5  he  prepared  him  chariots  and  horsemen 
Neh.  13.    5  had  prepared  for  him  a  great  chamber,  w. 

13.  7  in  preparing  him  a  chamber  in  the  courts 
Esth.  5.    4  unto  the  banquet  that  I  have  prepared  for 

5.  5  to  the  banquet  that  Esther  had  prepared 
5.  8  come  to  the  banquet  that  I  shall  prepare 
5. 12  unto  the  banquet  that  she  had  prepared 
6. 14  unto  the  banquet  that  Esther  had  prepa. 

Isa.  64.  4  he  hath  prepared  for  him  that  waiteth  for 
Eze.  4.  15  and  thou  shalt  prepare  thy  bread  therew. 
12.  3  prepare  thee  stuff  for  removing,  and  rem. 
35.  6  I  will  prepare  thee  unto  blood,  and  blood 
43.  25  shalt  thou  prepare,  .they  shall  also  prep. 
45.  17  he  shall  prepare  the  sin  offering,  ami  the 
45.  22  upon  that  day  shall  the  prince  prepare  for 
45.  23  seven  days  of  the  feast  he  shall  prepare 

45.  24  he  shall  prepare  a  meat  offering  of  an  ep. 

46.  2  the  priests  shall  prepare  his  burnt  offer. 
46.    7  he  shall  prepare  a  meat  offering,  an  eph. 


PREPARE 


770 


PRESENT 


Eze.  46.  12  prince  shall  prepare.,  he  shall  preparehis 
46  13  Thou  shalt  daily  prepare.. thou  shalt  pr. 
46.  14  thou  shalt  prepare  a  meat  offering  for  it 
46.  15  Thus  shall  they  prepare  the  lamb,  and  the 

Hos.    2.    8  multiplied  her  silver,  (which)  they  prep. 

11. To  make  read?/  the  face  or  front,  H39  panah,  3. 

Gen.  24.  31  for  I  have  prepared  the  house,  and  room 

Psa.  80     o  Thou  preparedst  (room)  before  it,  and  d. 

Isa.  40.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  s. 
57.  14  prepare  the  way,  take  up  the  stumbling 
62.  10  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  people:  cast  up 

Mai.    3     1  he  shall  prepare  the  way  before  me :  and 

12.  To  set  apart,  rijj  qadesh,  3. 

Jer.     6.    4  Prepare  ye  war  against  her;  arise,  and  let 

22.   7  I  will  prepare  destroyers  against  thee,  ev. 

51.  27  prepare  the  nations  against  her,  call  toge. 

51.  28  Prepare  against  her  the  nations  with  the 
Joel    3.    9  Prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  men 
ilic.    3.    5  they  even  prepare  war  against  him 

Id.  To  set  apart,  &~}$  qadesh,  5. 

Jer.    12.    3  and  prepare  them  for  the  day  of  slaughter 

14.  To  make  ready,  erotuafa  hetoimazo. 

Matt.  3.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 
20.  23  to  them)  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  F 
22.  4  I  have  prepared  my  dinner:  my  oxen  and 
25. .34  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from 
25.  41  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels 
26. 17  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  thee 

Mark  r.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 
10.  40  (it  shall  be  given  to  them)forwhom  itisp. 
14.  12  Whei*e  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  prepare 

Luke  1.  76  go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  to  prepare 

2.  31  Which  thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face 

3.  4  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 
12.  47  prepared  not  (himself),  neither  did  acco. 
22.    8  Go  and  prepare  us  the  passover,  that  we 

22.  9  said.  .Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare? 

23.  56  prepared  spices  and  ointments;  andrested 

24.  1  bringing  the  spices  which  they  had  prep. 
Johui4.    2  would  have  told  you.     I  go  to  prepare  a 

14.   3  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will 

1  Co.   2.   9  things  whielvGod  hath  prepared  for  them 

2  Ti.  2.  21  meet  for  the  master's  use,  (and)  prepared 
Phm.  22  But  withal  prepare  mealsoa  lodging:  for 
Heb.11.  16  notashamed.  .for  he  hath  prepared  forth. 
Rev.    8     6  the  sevenangels.  .prepared  themselves  to 

9.    7  (were)  like  unto  horses  prepared  untoba. 

9.  15  which  were  prepared  for  an  hour,  and  a 
32.  6  where  she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God 
16.  12  way  of  the  kings  of  the  east  might  be  pr. 
zi.    2  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  bus. 

16. To  ft  or  adjust  thoroughly,  KarapTi£o>  katartizd. 
Heb.  10.    5  wouldest  not,  but  a  body  hast  thou  pre. 

16.  To  make  thoroughly  ready,  KaraaKevafa  katas. 
Matt  ti  10  messenger,  .which  shall  prepare  thy  way 
Mark  1.  2  messenger,  .which  shall  prepare  thy  way 
Luke  1.  17  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  L. 

7.  27  messenger,  .which  shall  prepare  thy  way 
Heb.  11.    7  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  ho. 
1  Pe.  3.  20  while  the  ark  was  a  preparing,  wherein  f. 

17.  To  make  ready  alongside  of,  irapaaKtvafa  para* 

1  Co.  14  8  who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the  battle? 
PREPARE  afore,  to  — 

To  make  ready  beforehand,  irpozroifxafa  proetoim. 

Rom.  9.  23  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto  glory 
PREPARED,  (to  be)  — 
l.To  arm,  yhi)  chalats. 

Josh.  4. 13  About  forty  thousand  prepared  for  war 
2.  To  be  prepared,  established,  pa  hurt,  2. 

2  Ch.  3. 16  Now  all  the  work  of  Solomon  was  prepa. 

35.  10  So  the  service  was  prepared,  and  the  pri. 
35. 16  So  all  the  service  of  the  Lord  was  prepa. 
Neb.  8.  10  unto  them  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared 
Prov  10.  29  Judgments  are  prepared  for  scorners,  and 
Eze.  38.  7  Be  thou  prepared,  .and  all  thy  company 
Hon,    6.    3  his  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning 

3.7*o  be  prepared,  established,  \wkun,  4a. 

Eze.  28.  13  was  prepared  in  thee  in  theday  that  thou 

4.T"  be  prepared,  established,  }13  kun,  6. 

Vrov.21.  31  horse  (is)  prepared  against  the  day  of  ba. 
If  a.  30.  33  yea,  for  the  king  it  is  prepared  :  he  hath 
Nan.  2.    5  thereof,  and  the  defence  shall  be  prepared 

5.  To  prepare  or  establish  self,  [12  fou  ■>,  7a. 

1    1 21.  27  let  the  city  of  Sihonbe  built  and  prepared 

6.  To  arrange,  set  in  order,  Tty  arak. 

Eze.  23.  41  a  stately  bed,  and  a'  table  prepared  before 
7.7*0  compound,  np*i  raqach,  4. 

2  Ch.16.  14  odours,  .prepared  by  the  apothecaries' art 
8.  A'    idy,  prepared,  Itoi/aos  hetoimos. 

Marki4.  15  large  upper  room  furm'shed(and)  [prepa.] 
PREPARED,  ready  — 

7*o  arm,  i'1?™  chalats. 

1  Ch.  17.  18  fourscore  thousand  ready  prepared  for 
PRESBYTERY  — 
An  assembly  of  elders,  vp^trPvrcptov  preslntterion. 

1  Ti.    4.  14  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presby. 
PRESCRIBE,  to— 
1.2*0  write,  uro  hathab,  3. 

Isa.  jo.    1  write  grievousnesa  (which)  they  have  pr. 


2.  A  writing.  3rj3  keihab. 

Ezra  7.  22  baths  of  oil,  and  salt  without  prescribing 
PRESENCE  — 

1.  Before,  over  against,  front,  ~m  neged. 

1  Ki.  S.  22  in  the  presence  of  all  the  congregation  of 
Prov.14.    7  Go  from  thepresenceof  a  foolish  man,  w. 

2.  Eye,  \*m  ayin. 

Gen.  23.  11  in  the  presence  of  the  sons  of  my  people 

23.  18  for  a  possession  in  the  presence  of  the  c. 
r>eut25-  9  come  unto  him  in  the  presence  of  the  el. 
Jer.   28.    1  in  the  presence  of  the  priests,  and  of  all 

28.  5  presence  of  the  priests,  and  in  the  prese. 
28.  ti  spake  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people,  s. 

32.  12  presence  of  the  witnesses  that  subscribed 

Z.Face,  countenance,  D'J3 panim. 

Gen.    3.    8  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the 

4.  16  Cain  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  L. 
16.  12  shall  dwell  in. the  presence  of  all  his  bret. 
25.  18  he  diedin  thepresenceof  all  his  brethren 
27.  30  scarce  gone  out  from  the  presence  of  Isa. 
41.  46  Joseph  went  out  from  the  presence  of  P. 
45.    3  for  they  were  troubled  at  his  presence 

Exodio.  11  were  driven  out  from  Pharaoh's  presence 

33.  14  My  presence  shall  go  (with  thee),  and  I 
33.  15  If  thy  presence  go  not  (with  me),  carry  us 
35.  20  congregation,  .departed  from  the  presence 

Lev.  22.    3  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  my  prese. 

Nuni2o.    6  went  from  the  presence  of  the  assembly 

Josh.  4.  11  andthe priests,  inthe  presence  of  thepeo. 

8.  32  which  he  wrote  in  the  presence  of  the  c. 

1  Sa.  18.  11  And  David  avoided  out  of  Ins  presence  t. 

19.    7  and  he  was  in  his  presence,  as  in  times  p. 

19.  10  but  he  slipped  away  out  of  Saul's  prese. 

2  Sa.  16.  19  (should  I)  not  (serve)  in  the  presence  of 

16.  19  father's  presence,  so  will  I  be  in  thy  pre. 

24.  4  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  king 

1  Ki.  1.  28  came  into  the  king's  presence,  and  stood 

12.  2  for  he  was  fled  from  the  presence  of  king 

2  Ei.  5.  27  went  out  from  his  presence  a  leper  (as  w.) 

13.  23  neither  cast  he  them  from  his  presence 
24.  20  until  he  had  cast  them  out  from  his  pres. 
25. 19  of  them  that  were  in  the  king's  presence 

1  Ch.16.  27  Glory  and  honour  (are)  in  his  presence 

16.  33  sing  out  at  the  presence  of  the  LORD,  be. 

24.  31  cast  lots,  .in  the  presence  of  David  the  k. 

2  Ch.  9.  23  sought  the  presence  of  Solomon,  to  hear 

10.    2  whither  he  had  fled  from  the  presence  of 

20.  9  stand  before  this  house,  and  in  thy  pres. 
Neh.  2.  1 1  had  not  been  (before  time)  sad  in  his  p. 
Esth.  1. 10  served  in  the  presence  of  Ahasuerus  the 

8. 15  Mordecai  went  out  from  the  presence  of 
Job     1. 12  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of  the 

2.  7  So  wentSatan  forth  from  the  presence  of 
23. 15  Therefore  am  I  troubled  at  his  presence 

Psa.   16.  11  show  me  the  path  of  life  :  in  thy  presence 

17.  2  Let  my  sentence  come  forth  from  thy  pr. 
31.  20  shalt  hide  them  in  the  secret  of  thy  pres. 

51.  11  Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  presence;  and 
68.  2  the  wicked  perish  at  the  presence  of  God 
68.  8  heavens  also  dropped  at  the  presence  of 
95.  2  Let  us  come  before  his  presence  with  th. 
97.   5  atthepresence'of  the  Lord, atthe  presence 

114.   7  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  at  the  pres. 

139.  7  or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence? 

140.  13  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  thy  presence 
Prov  17. 18  becometh  surety  in  the  presence  of  his  fr. 

25.  6  Put  not  forth  thyself  in  the  presence  of  the 
25.    7  thou  shouldest  be  put  lower  in  the  pres. 

Isa.   19.  1  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  his  pres. 

63.  9  and  the  angel  of  his  presence  saved  them 

64.  1  mountains  might  flow  down  at  thy  prese. 
64.  2  the  nations  may  tremble  at  thy  presence ! 
64.  3  mountains  flowed  down  at  thy  presence 

Jer.     4.  26  broken  down  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord 

5.  22  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  presence,  which 

52.  3  he  had  cast  them  out  from  his  presence 
Eze.  38.  20  all  the  men.  .shall  shake  at  my  presence 
Jon.    1.    3,  3  unto  Tarshish  from  the  presence  of  the 

1. 10  that  he  fled  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
Nah.   1.    5  earth  is  burned  at  his  presence,  yea,  the 
Zeph.  1.   7  Hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  L. 

4.  Before,  Dnf3.  qodam. 

Dan.  2.  27  Daniel  answered  in  the  presence  of  the  k. 
5. Presence,  a  being  alongside,  irapovala  paroxism. 

2  Co.  10.  10  but  (his)  bodily  presence  (is)  weak,  and 

Phil.  2.  12  not  as  in  niypresence  only  butnowmuch 
6. Face,  countenance,  irp6aco-Kov  prosopon. 

Acts    3.  13  deniedhim  in  thepresenceof  Pilate,  when 

3.  19  shall  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
5.  41  departed  from  the  presence  of  thecouucil 

2  Co.  10.    1  I  Paul,  .who in  presence  (am)base  among 

1  Th.  2.  17  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in  prese. 

2  Th.  1.    9  destruction  from  the  presenceof  the  Lord 
Heb.  9.  24  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for 

PRESENCE  (of),  in  or  before  the  — 
1,0-ver  against,  airivavrt  apenanti. 

Acts  3.  16  perfect  soundness  in  the  presence  of  you 
%  Before,  in  front  of,  in  presence  of,  ZnTrpoaQev. 

1  Th.  2.  19  (Are)  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our 
3.  In  the  face  or  sight  of,  ivwiriw  enopion. 

Luke  1.  19  I  am  Gabriel,  that stand  inthe  presenceof 

13.  26  We  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  thypresence 

14. 10  worship  in  the  presence  of  them  that  sit 

15.  10  There  isjoyin  the  presence  of  the  angels  of 

Johii2o.  30  did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  his  disciples 

Acts  27.  35  gave  thanks  to  God  in  presence  of  them 


1  Co.   1.  29  That  no  flesh  should  glory  in  bis  presence 

Rev.  14.  10  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in  the  p. 
i.Fully  in  the  presence  of,  KaTevuituov  k>< lenopion . 

Jude        24  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory 
PRESENT  UHings,  this) — 
1..1  rca-ard,  ~r-'N  eshkar. 

Eze.  27. 15  they  brought  thee  (for)  a  present  horns  of 
2.  A  blessing,  n:n2  berakah. 

1  Sa.  30.  26  Behold  a  present  for  you  of  the  spoil  of 

2  Ki.  18  31  Made(anagreement  iwithnie by  a  present 
Isa.   36.  16  Make  (an  agreement)  with  me  (by)  a  pre. 

3. Precious  things,  ni3~;.':  migdanoth. 

2  Ch.32.  23  many  brought. .  presents  to  Hezekiahking 
^.Present,  offering,  nn.'p  minchah. 

Gen.  32. 13  and  took,  .a  present  fur  Esau  his  brother 
32. 18  it  (is)  a  present  sent  unto  my  lord  Esau 
32.  20  appease  him  with  the  present  that  goeth 

32.  21  So  went  the  present  over  before  him  :and 

33.  10  then  receive  my  present  at  my  hand  ;  for 
43.  11  carry  down  the  man  a  present,  a  little  ba. 
43.  15  men  took  that  present,  and  they  took  do. 
43.  25  they  made  ready  the  present  against  Jo. 
43.  26  brought  him  the  present  which  (was)  in 

Judg.  3.  15  sent  a  present  unto  Egion  the  king  of  M. 
3.  17  brought  the  present  unto  Eglon  king  of 
3  18  he  had  made  an  end  to  otter  the  present 
3.  18  sent  away  the  people  that  bare  the  pres. 

6.  18  bring  forth  my  present,  and  set  (it)  bef. 
1  Sa.  10.  27  despised  him,  and  brought  him  no  pres. 

1  Ki.   4.  2t  they  brought  presents,  and  served  Solo. 

10.  25  they  brought  every  man  his  present,  ve. 

2  Ki.  8.    8  Take  a  present  in  thine  hand,  and  go,  m. 

8.  9  took  a  present  with  him,  even  of  every 
17.    3  became  his  servant,  and  gave  him  prese. 
17.   4  brought  no  present  to  the  kingof  Assyria 
20.  12  sent  letters  and  a  present  uuto  Hezekiah 

2  Ch.  9.  24  they  brought  every  man  his  present,  ves. 
17.    5  Judah  brought  to  Jehoshaphat  presents 
17.  11  Philistines  brought  Jehoshaphat  presents 
Psa.  72.  10  kings  of  Tarshish.  .shall  inn-  ] a  events 
Isa.   39.    1  sent  letters  and  a  present  to  liezekiah 
Hos.  10.    6  carried  unto  Assyria  (for)  a  present  to  k. 
5. Bribe,  reward,  ~\nt'  shochad. 

1  Ki.15.  19  I  have  sent  unto  thee  a  present  of  silver 

2  Ki.16.    8  sent  (it  for)  a  present  to  the  king  of  Ass. 
6. Sent  away,  cmV^  shilluchim. 

1  Ki.  9.  16  given  it  (for)  a  present  unto  his  daughter 
Mic.    1.  14  Therefore  shalt  thou  give  presents  to  Mo. 

1.A  present,  T  shai. 

Psa.  6S.  29  Because  of  thy  temple. .kings  bring  pre. 

76.  11  all  that  be  round  about  him  bringpresents 

Isa.   18.    7  In  that  time  shall  the  present  be  brought 

8.^4  p?'esent,  rn'&'n  ieshurah. 

1  Sa.   9.    7  not  a  present  to  bring  to  the  man  of  God 

9.7*0  be  found,  a\D  matsa,  2. 

Ezra    8.  25  and  all  Israel  (there)  present,  had  offered 
Psa.  46.    1  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  present 

lO.iVow,  at  present,  already,  aprt  arti. 

1  Co.   4.  11  Even  unto  tlu's  present  hour  we  both  hu 
15.   6  the  greater  part  remain  xuito  this  present 

11.  7*o  put  or  place  in,  iviarn/j-i  en/istem  i. 

Rom.  8.  38  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to 

1  Co.  3.  22  death,  or  things  present,  <  rtii  rigs  to  come 

7.  26  that  this  is  good  for  the  present  distress 
Gal.  1.  4  he  might  deliverus  from  this  presentevil 
Heb.  9.   9  Which  (was)  a  figure  for  the  time  then  p 

12.  To  place  upon,  place  by,  4(P'uttv/ai  epldstenii. 
Acts28.    2  because  of  the  present  rain,  and  because 

13.  AW,  vvv  nun. 

Rom.  8.  18  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present 

11.  s  Even  so  then  at  this  present  time  also  there 

2  Ti.    4.  10  having  loved  this  present  world,  and  is  d. 
Titus  2.  12  should  hive  soberly,  .in  this  present  world 

14.7*0  be  alongside,  -Kapetfxi  pairimi. 

Heb.  12.  11  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to 
2  Pe.    1. 12  and  be  established  in  the  present  truth 

PRESENT  (self),  to  — 

1.7*0  set  np  one's  self,  aj£  yatsab,  7. 

Deutsi.  14  present  yourselves  in  the  tabernacle  of  the 
31.  14  presented  themselves  in  the  tabernacle  of 
Josh. 24.  1  and  they  presented  themselves  before  God 
Judg  20.  2  presented  themselves  in  the  assembly  of 
1  Sa.  10.  19  present  yourselves  before  the  Lord  by 

17.  16  drew  near,  .and  presented  himself  forty 

Job     1.    6  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present  themse. 

2     1  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present  themse. 

2.    1  Satan  came  also,  .to  present  himself  bef. 

2.7*0  set  up,  is;  yatsag,  5. 

Gen.  47.    2  took,  .five  men,  and  presented  them  uuto 
3.7*0  cause  to  find,  present,  *cyo  matsa,  5. 

Lev.    9.  12,  18  Aaron's  sons  presented  unto  him  the 

9.  13  they  presented  tlie  burnt  offering  unto  him 

4.7o  cause  to  come  or  draw  nigh,  l,;j:  nagash,  5. 
Judg.  6.  19  brought  (it)  out  unto  him.  .and  presented 

5.  To  fall,  ^r;  naphal. 

Jer.  36.    7  It  may  be  they  will  present  their  suppli. 

6.7*o  cause  to  fall,  present,  Lt;  naphal,  5. 

Jer.  38.  26  I  presented  my  supplication  before  the 

42.   9  ye  sent  me  to  present  your  supplication 


PRESENT 


771 


PREVAIL 


Dan.   g.  18  for  we  do  not  present  our  supplications 
9.  20  presenting  my  supplication  before  theL. 

7.  To  be  set  up,  3$  nntsab,  2. 

Exotic.    2  present  thyself  there  to  me  in  the  top  of 

S.To  cause  to  stand,  "i?^  amad,  5. 

Lev.  14. 11  shall  present  the  man  that  is  to  be  made 
16.  7  present  them  before  the  Lord  (at)  the  door 
27.  8  then  he  shall  present  himself  before  the 
27. 11  then  he  shall  present  the  beast  before  the 

Num.  3.    6  and  present  them  before  Aaron  the  priest 

9.  To  give,  fn:  nath  •   ■ 

Eze.  20. 28  there  they  presented  the  provocation  of 

10.  To  cause  to  come  or  draw  near,  3Tg  qarab,  5. 
Lev.    2.   8  and  when  it  is  presented  unto  the  priest 

7.  35  in  the  day  (when)  he  presented  them  to 

11.2*0  be  seen,  n$-j  raah,  2. 

Gen.  46.  29  presented  himself  unto  him  ;  and  befell 

12.  To  set,  place,  station,    uttjjm1  histemi. 

Jude      24  able,  .to  present  (you)  faultless  before  the 

13.  To  set  alongside,  vapia-'njfit  paristemi. 

Luke  2. 22  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  to  present  (him) 
Acts    9.  41  when  he  had  called  the  saints,  .he  prese. 

23.  33  when  they  came  to  Cesarea..  presented  P. 
K01U12.  1  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacr. 
2  Co.  4.  14  Knowing  that  he . .  shall  present  (us)  with 

11.   2  that  I  may  present  (you  as)  a  chaste  vir. 

Eph.   5.  27  That  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  gl. 

Col.     1 .  22  to  present  you  holy  and  unblameable  and 

1.  28  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ 

PRESENT  unto,  to  — 

To  bear  toward  or  to,  ■Kpo<x<pepo)  prosphero. 

Matt.  2.  11  they  presented  unto  him  gifts ;  gold,  and 
PRESENT  (with),  to  be  (here)  — 
1.2*0  be  nourisheil,  sustained,  7*3  kul,  3b. 

1  Ki.  20.  27  children  of  Israel,  .were  all  present,  and 
2.2*0  be  found,  Nsa  matsa,  2. 

1  Sa.  13.  15  Saul  numbered  the  people  (that  were)  p. 
13.  16  and  the  people  (that  were)  present  with 
21.    3  bread  in  mine  hand,  or  what  there  is  pr. 

1  Ch.29.  17  people,  which  are  present  here,  to  offer 

2  Ch.  5.  11  for allthe priests  (that  were)present were 

29.  29  king  and  all  that  were  present  with  him 

30.  21  children  of  Israel  that  were  present  at  J. 

31.  1  all  Israel  that  were  present  went  out  to 
34.  32  caused  all  that  were  present  in  Jerusalem 

34.  33  made  all  that  were  present  in  Israel  to  se. 

35.  7  for  all  that  were  present,  to  the  number 
35. 17  children  of  Israel  that  were  present  kept 
35.  18  all  Judah  and  Israel  that  were  present,  and 

Esth.  1.    5  feast  unto  all  the  people  that  were  present 

4.  16  gather  together  all  the  Jews(that  are)  p. 

3.2*0  stand,  "U?JJ  amad. 

2  Sa.  20.  4  Then  said  the  king . .  be  thou  here  present 
4. 2*o  be  among  ones  people,  ivdri/xeai  endemeo. 

2  Co.  5.   8  absent  from  the  body,  and  to  be  present 

5.  9  whether  present  or  absent,  we  may  beac. 
5.  To  remain,  fiivw  mend. 

Johni4.  25  spoken  unto  you,  being  (yet)present  with 
6.2*0  come  alongside,  Trapaytvouai  paraginomai. 

Acts  21. 18  Paul  went  in.  .and  all  the  elders  were  p. 
7.2*0  lie  or  be  laid  alongside,  -jrapdn^ifiai  parakei. 

Rom.  7. 18  for  to  will  is  present  with  me ;  but  (how) 
7.  21  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with 

8.2*0  be  alongside,  wdpeiut  pareimi. 

Lukei3.    1  There  were  present  at  that  season  some 
Acts  10.  33  therefore  are  we  all  here  present  before 

1  Co.   5.    3  as  absent  in  body,  but  present  in  spirit 

5.    3  judged  already,  as  though  I  were  present 

2  Co.  10.    2  that  I  may  not  be  hold  when  I  am  present 

10.  11  (we  be)  also  in  deed  when  we  are  present 

11.  9  when  I  was  present  with  you,  and  wanted 
13.  2  and  foretell  you,  as  if  I  were  present,  the 
13.  10  lest  being  present  I  should  use  sharpness 

Gal.  4.  18  and  not  only  when  I  am  present  with  you 
4. 20  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you  now,  and 

PRESENT  with,  to  be  here  — 

2*o  be  alongside  with,  {rvfj.Trdpeip.1  sumpareimi. 

Acts  25.  24  allmen  which  are  here  present  with  us,  ye 
PRESENTED,  to  be  — 
I.To  be  caused  to  stand,  TDJJ  amad,  6. 

Lev.  16. 10  shall  he  presented  alive  before  the  Lord 
2.  2*o  cause  to  come  or  draw  near,  2~ipr  qarab,  5. 

Lev.     2.    8  when  it  is  presented  unto  the  priest,  he 
PRESENTLY  — 
l.In  the  day,  ova  bayyom. 

Prov.  12. 16  A  fool's  wrath  is  presently  known :  but  a 
2.At  the  same  moment,  i^avrr/s  exaules. 

Phil.  2.  23  Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send  presently 
3. Along  with  the  matter,  irapaxpv/J-a  parachrema. 

Matt.  21.  19  And  presently  the  fig  tree  withered  away 
[See  Give.] 
PRESERVE,  to  — 
1.2*o  give  or  preserve  life,  n;n  chayah,  3. 

Gen.  19.  32,  34  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  fat. 

Neh.    9.   6  preservest  them  all ;  and  the  host  of  he. 

2.2*o  give  ease,  safety,  y»;  yasha,  5. 

•sSa.   8.    6,  i4preservedDavidwhithersoeverhewent 


1  Ch.18.  6,  13  Lord  preserved  David  whithersoever 
Psa.  36.   6  O-Lokd,  thou  preservest  man  and  beast 

3.  2*o  cause  to  be  over  and  above,  "trr  yathar,  5. 
Psa.  79.  11  preserve  thou  those  that  are  appointed  to 

4.2*0  cause  to  slip  away,  D?3  malat,  5. 

Isa.   31.   5  deliver  (it);  and  passing  over  he  will  pre. 

5.2*0  keep,  watch,  reserve,  153  natsar. 

Psa.  12.    7  thou  shalt  preserve  them  from  this  gene. 
25.  21  Let  integrity  and  uprightness  preserve  me 

31.  23  (for)the  Lord  preserveth  the  faithful,  and 

32.  7  thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble ;  thou 

40.  1 1  let  thy  loving  kindness . .  continually  pre. 
61.  7  prepare"  mercy  and  truth,  (which)  may  pr. 
64.    1  preserve  my  life  from  fear  of  the  enemy 

140.    1,  4  0  Lord.  . preserve  me  from  the  violent 
Prov 20.  2S  Mercy  and  truth  preserve  the  king;  and 
22.  12  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve  knowledge 
Isa.   49.    8  preserve  thee,  and  give  thee  for  a  coven. 

6.  To  p ut,  place,  B*&  nito  sum,  sim. 

Gen.  45.   7  God  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve  you 

7.  To  keep,  observe,  "lStf  shamar. 

Josh  24.  17  preserved  us  in  all  the  way  wherein  we  w. 
i  Sa.  30.  23  preserved  us,  and  delivered  the  company 
Job   10. 12  thy  visitation  hath  preserved  my  spirit 

29.   2  as  (in)  the  days  (when)  God  preserved  me 
Psa.  16.    1  Preserve  me,  0  God :  for  in  thee  do  I  put 

41.  2  Lord  will  preserve  him,  and  keep  him  al. 
86.  2  Preserve  my  soul,  for  I  (am)  holy :  O  thou 
97.  10  he  preserveth  the  souls  of  his  saints;  he 

116.  6  Lord  preserveth  the  simple :  I  was  brou. 
121.  7  shall  preserve  thee  from  all  evil :  he  shall 
i2i.   8  shall  preserve  thy  going  out,  and  thy  co. 

145.  20  Lord  preserveth  all  them  that  love  him 

146.  9  Lord  preserveth  the  strangers;  hereliev. 
Prov.  2.    8  keepeth  the  paths  of  judgment,  and  pres. 

2.  11  Discretion  shall  preserve  thee,  understa. 

4.  6  Forsake  her  not,  and  she  shall  preserve 
14.    3  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserveth. 
16. 17  he  that  keepeth  his  way  preserveth  his 

S.To  preserve  alive,  faoyovtai  zoogoneo. 

Luket7-  33  whosoever  shalllose  his  life  shall  preserve 

9.2*0  make  sound  or  whole,  o-<i)fa  sozo. 

2  Ti.  4. 18  will  preserve  (me)  unto  his  heavenly  kin. 
PRESERVE  (alive  or  life),  to  — 

] .  To  give  or  preserve  life,  rfn  chayah,  3. 

Deut.  6.  24  might  preserve  us  alive,  as  (it  is)  at  this 
Job  2>Q-   6  He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the  wicked 
Jer.  49.  11  I  will  preserve  (them)  alive ;  and  let  thy 

2..4  life  preserver,  rrnp  michyah. 

Gen.  45.    5  did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve  life 
PRESERVED,  to  be  — 
l.One  kept,  watched,  reserved,  *i^J  natsir. 

Isa.  49.   6  and  to  restore  the  preserved  of  Israel ;  I 
2.2*0  be  snatched  away,  Skj  natsal,  2. 

Gen.  32.  30  I  have  seen  God.  .and  my  life  is  preserv. 
3.2*o  be  kept,  TDy  shamar*  2. 

Psa.  37.  2S  forsaketh  not  his  saints ;  they  are  preaer. 

Hos.  12. 13  Egypt,  and  by  a  prophet  was  he  preserved 

4.  To  keep  together,  avyrvpew  suntereo. 

Matt.  9.  17  into  new  bottles,  and  both  are  preserved 
Luke  5.  38  intonewbottles;  [and  both  are  preserved] 
5.2*0  keep,  Tr}p4u>  tereo. 

1  Th.  5.  23  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming 
Jude         1  to  them  that  are.  .preserved  in  Jesus  Ch. 

PRESERVER  — 

2*o  keep  watch,  reserve,  1^2  natsar. 

Job     7.  20  O  thou  preserver  of  men  ?  why  hast  thou 

PRESIDENTS  — 

Presidents,  1*9*19  sarekin 

Dan.   6.    2  over  these  three  presidents,  of  whom  D. 
6.   3  Daniel  was  preferred  above  the  presidents 
6.  4  Then  the  presidents  and  princes  sought 
6.   6  Then  these  presidents  and  princes  assem. 
6.   7  All  the  presidents  of  the  kingdom,  the  g. 

PRESS  (fat)  — 

1.  Wine  press  or  vat,  na  gath. 

Joel    3. 13  for  the  press  is  full,  the  fats  overflow :  for 

2.  Wine  err  oil  press  or  vat,  "jfv  yeqeb. 

Prov.  3. 10  thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  new  wine 
Isa.  16. 10  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in  (their)  presses 
Hag.    2.  16  when  (one)  come  to  the  press  fat  for  to 

3.  Wine  press  or  vat,  rrvs  purah. 

Hag.    2. 16  for  to  draw  out  fifty  (vessels)  out  of  the  p. 
PRESS  — 
A  crowd,  ox^-os  ochlos. 

Mark  2.   4  could  not  come  nigh  unto  him  for  the  p. 

5.  27  came  in  the  press  behind,  and  touched 
5.  30  turned  him  about  in  the  press,  and  said 

Luke  8.  19  and  could  not  come  at  him  for  the  press 
ig.   3  could  not  for  the  press,  because  he  was 

PRESS,  (down,  sore,  toward,  upon),  to  — 
1.2*0  come  or  go  down,  nm  nachath. 

Psa.  38.    2  stick  fast.. and  thy  hand  presseth  me  so. 

2. 2*o  press,  "is?  patsar. 

Gen.  19.    3  pressed  upon  them  greatly ;  and  they  feu. 
19.  9  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,  (even)  Lot,  and 


3.2*0  break,  spread,  or  burst  forth,  }'~±B  jiarats. 
2  Sa.  13.  25  pressed  him  :  howbeit  he  would  not  go 
13.  27  Absalom  pressed  him,  that  he  let  Amnon 

4.2*0  distress,  oppress,  straiten,  pw  tsuq,  5. 

Judgio.  16  she  pressed  him  daily  with  her  words,  and 
5. 2*o  press,  »rjg>  sachat. 

Gen.  40.  n  pressed  them  into  Pharaoh  s  cup,  and  I 
6. 2*o  press  away  or  off,  airodAifiw  apothlibo. 

Luke  8. 45  the  multitude  throng  thee  and  press  (th.) 
7.  To  force,  use  force,  fiid&fxai  biazomai. 

Lukei6.  16  preached,  and  every  man  presseth  into  it 
S.To  ptursue,  Stance*  dioko. 

Phil.  3.  14  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of 

9.  To  lie  or  be  laid  upon,  eir'iKetuat  epikeimai. 

Luke  5.    1  pressed  upon  him  to  hear  the  word  of  G. 

10.  To  fall  upon,  simr'tiTTo  epipipto. 

Mark  3.  10  insomuch  chat  they  pressed  upon  him  for 
11.2*0  press  {with  the  foot),  iritfa  piezo. 

Luke  6.  38  good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken 
12.2*0  hold  together,  avvex0*  sunecho. 

Acts  iS.    5  Paul  was  pressed  in  the  spirit,  and  testL 
PRESSED  (on),  to  be  — 
1.2*o  hasten,  press,  *]rn  dachaph. 

Esth.  3.  14  being  hastened  and  pressed  on  by  the  k. 
2.2*0  be  bruised,  ~j.D  maak,  4. 

Eze.  23.    3  there  were  their  breasts  pressed,  and  th. 
S.To  press,  JHJ7  uq,  5. 

Amos  2.  13  I  am  pressed,  .as  a  cart  is  pressed  (that 
4.2*0  be  iceighed  down,  fiapeofxeu  bareomai. 

2  Co.    1.   8  that  we  were  pressed  out  of  measure,  a; 
PRESUME,  U  — 
1.2*0  act  proudly,  presume,  tt,  tii  zud,  zidt  5. 

DeutiS.  20  prophet  which  shall  presume  to  speak  a 
2.2*o  Jill  in,  be  full,  nSd  male. 

Esth.  7.    5  where  is  he,  that  durst  presume  in  his  h. 

3.  To  presume,  UJt  self  up,  7?j;  aphal,  5. 

NUTJQ14.  44  they  presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top 
PRESUMPTUOUS,  PRESUMTUOUSLY,  (to  come)  — 
1.  2*o  act  proudly,  presume,  T|,  *nt  zud,  zid,  5. 

Exod2i.  14  But  if  a  man  come  presumptuously  upon 

Deut.  1.  43  aud  went  presumptuously  up  into  the  h. 
17. 13  and  fear,  and  do  no  more  presumptuously 
I.Proud,  presumptuous,  1]  zed. 

Psa.  19. 13  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presunx 
3. Pride,  presumption,  til]  zadon. 

Deuti7. 12  man  that  will  do  presumptuously,  and  w. 
iS.  22  the  prophet  hath  spoken  it  presumptuos. 

4.  With  a  high  hand,  nc-i  T3  beyad  ramah. 
Nunii5.  30  the  soul  that  doeth  (ought)  presuniptuos. 

5. Bold,  daring,  To\p.r}TT)s  tolmetes. 

2  Pe.  2. 10  Presumptuous  (are  they),  self  willed,  they 

PRETENCE  — 

A  pretence,  pretext,  irpo^aais  prophasis. 

Matt23-  14  [and  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayerj 
Marki2.  40  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayers :  these 
Phil.    1.  18  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preach. 

PREVAIL  (against),  to  — 

1.2*0  be  or  become  strong  or  courageous,  y jamais: 
2  Ch.13.  iS  the  children  of  Judah  prevailed,  because 

2. 2*o  be  or  become  mighty,  133  gabar. 

Gen.  7.  18  the  waters  prevailed,  and  were  increaset? 
7.  19  the  waters  prevailedexeeedingly  upon  the 
7.  20  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  pre- 
7.  24  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  an 
49.  26  The  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed" 
Exodi7.  11  Moses  held  up  his  hand..  Israel  prevailed 
17.  11  when  he  let  down  his  hand,  Amalek  pre. 

1  Sa.    2.   9  silent . .  for  by  strength  shall  no  man  pre. 

2  Sa.  11.  23  the  men  prevailed  against  us,  and  came 
1  Ch.  5.  2  Judah  prevailed  above  his  brethren,  and 
Psa.  65.  3  Iniquities  prevail  against  me:  (as  f  or)  our 
Lam.  1. 16  are  desolate,  because  the  enemy  prevailed) 

3.2*o  make  mighty,  ~>33  gabar,  5. 

Psa.  12.   4  With  ourtongue  will  we  prevail ;  our  lips 

4.  2*o  make  or  show  self  mighty,  133  gabar,  7. 

Isa.  42. 13  The  Lord,  .shall  prevail  against  his  ene. 

5.  To  lay  or  keep  hold  on,  pin  chazaq. 

Gen.  47.  20  because  the  famine  prevailed  over  themr 

1  Sa.  17.  50  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with) 

2  Sa.  24.   4theking'&wordprevai]edagainst  Joab^and 

1  Ki.  16.  22  people  that  followed .  .prevailed  against 

2  Ki.  25.    3  the  famine  prevailed  in  the  city,  and  there 

1  Ch.21.    4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab 

2  Ch.  8.    3  And  Solomon  went. -and  prevailed  against 

27.    5  He  fought,  .and  prevailed  against  theni 

6.  To  make  strong,  take  hold  on,  pin  chazaq,  5. 
Job    18.   9  (and)  the  robber  shall  prevail  against  him 
Dan.  11.    7  shall  deal  against  them,  and  shall  prevail 

7.  To  be  able,  hb;  yakol,  1,  6. 

Gen.  30.    8  I  wrestled  with  my  sister,  and  I  have  pr. 

32.  25  when  he  saw  that  he  prevailed  not  against 

32.  28  hast  thou  power  with  God.  .and  hast  pre_ 

Num22.    6  peradventurelshallprevail,(that)wemay 

Judgi6.    5  by  what  (means)  we  may  prevail  against 


PREVENT 


772 


PRIEST 


i  Sa.  17.    9  if  I  prevail  against  him,  and  kill  him,  then 
26.  25  thou  shalt  both  do  great  (things),  and . .  p. 
i  Ki.  22.  22  Thou  shalt  persuade  (Trim),  and  prevail 
2  Ch.18.  21  thou  shalt  also  prevail:  go  out,  and  do 
Esth.  6. 13  thou  shalt  not  prevail  against  him,  but 
Psa.  13.    4  I  have  prevailed  against  him ;  (and)  those 

129.  2  yet  they  have  not  prevailed  against  me 
Isa.  16.  12  come,  .to  pray ;  but  he  shall  not  prevail 
Jer.     1.  19  they  shall  not  prevail  against  thee  ;  for 

5.  22  toss  themselves,  yet  can  they  not  prevail 
15.  20  they  shall  not  prevail  against  thee  :  for 
20.    7  thou  art  stronger,  .and  hast  prevailed 
20.  10  we  shall  prevail  against  him,  and  we  sh. 

20. 11  and  they  shall  not  prevail  :  they  shall  be 
38.  22  Thy  friends,  .have  prevailed  against  thee 

Hos.  12.    4  had  power  over  the  angel,  and  prevailed 
Obad.       7  deceived  thee,  (and) prevailed  against  thee 

8.  To  be  able,  Vd?  yekil. 

Dan.   7.  21  horn  made  war.  .and  prevailed  against t. 

9.  To  be  heavy,  weighty,  153  kabed. 

Judg.  1.  35  the  hand  of  the  house  of  Joseph  prevailed 

10.  To  eat,  consume,  DnS  lacham,  2. 

Isa.     7.    1  went,  .but  could  not  prevail  against  it 

11. 7*0  be  or  become  or  make  strong,  Uj/  azaz. 

Judg.  3.  10  hand  prevailed  against  Chushan-rishath. 

6.  2  hand  of  Midian  prevailed  against  Israel 

12.  To  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  retain,  -ix#  atsar. 
2  Ch.14. 11  0  Lord,  .let  not  man  prevail  against  thee 

13.  To  few,  be  afraid,  terrified,  p>/  arats. 

Isa.  47. 12  able  to  profit,  if  so  be  thou  mayest  prevail 

14.  To  rule,  cause  to  rule,  nyi  radah. 

Lam.  1.  13  sent  fire,  .and  it'prevaileth  against  them 
15.ro  strengthen,  prevail,  *]pn  taqaph. 

Job  14.  20  Thou  pre vailest  f or  ever  against  him,  and 
15.  24  they  shall  prevail  against  him,  as  a  king 

Eccl.  4.  12  Aud  if  one  prevail  against  him,  two  shall 
1Q.  Sharp,  hard,  hwq  qasheh. 

Judg.  4.  24  and  prevailed  against  Jabin  the  king  of 

17.  To  be  strong,  prevail,  lax^o  ischuo. 

Acts  19.  16  prevailed  against  them,  so  that  they  fled 

19.  20  So  mightily  grew  the  word. .  and  prevailed 

Rev.  12.    8  And  prevailed  not ;  neither  was  their  pi. 

1 8.  To  be  very  strong,  prevail  greatly,  Kariaxvco. 
Matt  16.  18  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it 
Luke23.  23  the  voices,  .of  the  chief  priests  prevailed 

1 9.  To  conquer,  obtain  victory,  vik&w  nikad. 

Rev.   5.    5  hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book,  and  to 

20.  To  profit,  benefit,  afyeKea  opheleo. 

Matt27-  24  he  could  prevail  nothing,  but  (that)  rath. 

John  12. 19  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  nothing?  be. 
PREVENT,  to  — 
l.To  be,  go,  come,  or  put  before,  Dip  qadam,  3. 

2  Sa.22.    6  sorrows,  .the  snares  of  death  prevented 
22. 19  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my  calamity 

Job     3.  12  Why  did  the  knees  prevent  me?  or  why  Hie 

30.  27  boiled.,  the  days  of  affliction  prevented  me 
Psa.  18.    5  sorrows,  .the  snares  of  death  prevented 

18.  18  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my  calamity 
2i,  3  thou  preventest  him  with  the  blessings  of 
59.  10  The  God  of  my  mercy  shall  prevent  me 
79.  8  let  thy  tender  mercies  speedily  prevent  us 
88.  13  in  the  morning  shall  my  prayer  prevent 
119.  147  I  prevented  the  dawning  of  the  morning 
119  148  Mine  eyes  prevent  the  (night)  watches, th. 
Isa.   21.  14  prevented  with  their  bread  him  that  fled 

2.  To  put  before,  wi$  qadam,  5. 

Job  41. 11  Who  hath  prevented  me,  that  I  should  r. 
Amos  9. 10  The  evil  shall  not  overtake  nor  prevent  us 

3.  To  come,  arrive,  happen  before,  irpotyQavca  proph. 

Matt  1 7.  25  Jesus  prevented  him,  saying,  What  think. 

4.  To  come,  arrive,  happen,  <pBdvu>  phthano. 

1  Th.  4.  15  shall  not  prevent  them  which  are  asleep 
PREY  — 

1.  Eating,  food,  *?2N  okel. 

Job  9.  26  are . .  as  the  eagle  (that)  hasteth  to  the  prey 
39.  29  From  thence  sheseeketh  the  prey. .here. 

2.  Prey,  13  baz. 

Numi4.  3  our  wives  and.  .children  should  be  a  prey? 
14-  31  your  little  ones,  .ye  said  should  be  a  prey 

31.  32  the  prey  which  the  men  of  war  had  caught 
Deut.  1.  39  little  ones,  which  ye  said  should  lie  aprey 

2  Ki.  21.  14  a  prey  and  a  spoil  to  all  their  enemies 
Isa.    10.    6  to  take  the  prey,  and  to  tread  them  down 

33.  23  great  spoil  divided  ;  the  lame  take  the  p. 
42.  22  they  are  for  a  prey,  and  none  delivereth 

Jer.  30. 16  all  that  prey  upon  thee  will  I  give  fora  p. 
Eze.     7.  21  I  will  give  it  into  the  hands,  .for  a  prey 
29.  19  take  her  prey ;  and  it  shall  be  the  wages 

34.  8  my  flock  became  a  prey,  and  my  flock  be. 
34. 22  they  shall  no  more  be  a  prey ;  and  I  will 
34.  28  they  shall  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the  heat. 
36.   4  a  prey  and  derision  to  the  residue  of  the 
36.   s  have  appointed .  .to  cast  it  out  for  a  prey 

38. 12  to  take  a  prey  ;  to  turn  thine  hand  upon 
38.  13  thou  gathered  thy  company  to  take  a  p. 

S.Prey,  np  bizzah. 

Neh.  4     4  for  a  prey  in  the  land  of  captivity 
Esth.  9. 15  but  on  the  prey  they  laid  not  then-  hand 
9.  16  but  they  laid  not  their  hands  on  the  prey 
Pan.  11.  24  he  shall  scatter  among  them  the  prey,  and 


4.  What  is  matched  at,  *]jin  chetheph. 

Prov  23.  2S  She  alsolieth  in  wait  as  (for)  a  prey,  and 

5.  To  tear,  tear  off,  ^na  taraph. 

Psa.  17.  12  as  a  lion  (that)  is  greedy  of  his  prey,  and 

6.  Torn  thing,  prey,  *po  tereph. 

Gen.  49.   9  from  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up 

Num  23.  24  not  lie  down  until  he  eat  (of)  the  prey 

Job  4.  11  The  old  lion  perisheth  for  lack  of  prey,  a. 
24.  5  rising  betimes  for  a  prey :  the  wilderness 
38.  39  Wilt  thou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  lion,  or 

Psa.  76.  4  more  glorious,  .than  the  mountains  of  p. 
104.  21  The  young  lions  roarafter  their  prey,  and 
124.    6  hath  not  given  us(as)  a  prey  to  their  teeth 

Isa.     5. 29  lay  hold  of  the  prey,  and  shall  carry  (it) 
31.   4  and  the  young  lion  roaring  on  his  prey 

Eze.  19.  3  it  learned  to  catch  the  prey ;  it  devoured 
19.  6  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  (and)  devoured 
22.  25  like  a  roaring  lion  ravening  the  prey:  th. 
22.  27  like  wolves  ravening  the  prey,  to  shed  bl. 

Amos  3.    4  Will  a  lion  roar,  .when  he  hath  no  prey? 

Kali.    2. 12  filled  his  holes  with  prey,  and  his  dens 

2.  13  I  will  cut  off  thy  prey  from  the  earth 

3.  1  all  full  of  lies  (and)  robbery ;  the  prey  de. 

7.  What  is  taken  or  caught,  nipSp  malqoach. 

Nam  31.  11  and  all  the  prey,(both)of  menandofbea. 
31.  12  they  brought  the  captives,  and  the  prey 
31.  26  Take  the  sum  of  the  prey  that  was  taken 
31.  27  divide  the  prey  into  two  parts,  between 

Isa.  49.  24  Shall  the  prey  be  taken  from  the  mighty 
49.  25  the  prey  of  the  terrible  shall  be  delivered 

8.  Prey,  booty,  *iy  ad. 

Gen.  49.  27  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the  prey 
Isa.  33.  23  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  divided 
Zeph.  3.    8  until  the  day  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey 

9.  Spoil,  77$  shalal. 

Judg.  5.'3ohavethey(not)dividedtheprey;  to  every 
5.  30  a  prey  of  divers  colours,  a  prey  of  divers 
8.  24  give  me  every  man  the  ear  rings  of  his  prey 
8.  25  did  cast  therein .  .the  earrings  of  his  prey 
Isa.   10.    2  that  widows  may  be  their  prey,  and  (that) 
Jer.  21.   9  and  his  life  shall  be  unto  him  for  a  prey 
38.    2  he  shall  have  his  life  for  a  prey,  and  shall 
39. 18  but  thy  life  shall  be  for  a  prey  unto  thee 
45-    5  t>hy  life  will  I  give  unto  thee  for  aprey  in 
PREY,  to  take  for  or  make  (self)  a  — 
1.7*0  take  prey,  t]3  bazaz. 

Deut.  2.  35  Only  the  cattle  we  took  for  a  prey  unto 
3.   7  the  spoil . .  we.took  for  a  prey  to  ourselves 
Josh.  8.    2  shall  ye  take  for  a  prey  unto  yourselves 
8.  27  Israel  took  for  a  prey  unto  themselves 
11.  14  Israel  took  for  a  prey  unto  themselves 
Esth.  3. 13  and  (to  take)  the  spoil  of  them  for  a  prey 
8.  11  and  (to  take)  the  spoil  of  them  for  a  prey 
Jer.   30.  16  and  all  that  prey  upon  thee  will  I  give  for 
Eze.  26. 12  and  make  aprey  of  thy  merchandise;  and 
~2.To  make  self  a  spoil,  bby  shalal,  7a. 

Isa.  59. 15  he  (that)  departeth .  .maktth  himselfap. 
PRICE  — 

1.  Price,  2H'eciousness,  ip?  yeqar. 

Zech.n.  13  a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of 

2.  Silver,  f]£)3  keseph. 

Lev.  25.  50  the  price  of  his  sale  shall  be  according  to 

1  Ch.21.  22  thou  shalt  grant  it  me  for  the  full  price 

21.  24  but  I  will  verily  buy  it  for  the  full  price 

3.  Hire,  price,  Ynp  mechir. 

Deut  23.  18  the  hire  of  a  whore,  or  the  price  of  a  dog 

2  Sa.  24.  24  but  I  will  surely  buy  (it)  of  thee  at  a  pr. 

1  Ki.io.  28  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn  at  a  p. 

2  Ch.  1. 16  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn  at  a  p. 
Job  28. 15  neither  shall  silver  be  weighed.,  the  price 
Psa.  44. 12  and  dost  not  increase,  .by  their  price 
Prov  17.  16  Wherefore,  .a  price  in  the  hand  of  a  fool 

27.  26  and  the  goats  (are)  the  price  of  the  field 
Isa.  45. 13  not  for  price  nor  reward,  saith  the  Lord 

55.    1  buy  wine. .  without  money,  and  without  p. 
Jer.  15. 13  will  I  give  to  the  spoil  without  price,  and 

4.  What  is  to  be  sold,  wares,  price,  "DQ  meker. 
Prov  31. 10  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman?,  .her  p. 

5.  Acquisition,  possession,  njjpD  miqnah. 

Lev.  25. 16  increase  the  price,  .diminish  the  price  of 
6. Acquisition,  scattering,  tj^O  ineshch. 

Job  28.  18  for  the  price  of  wisdom  (is)  above  rubies 
1  .Arrangement,  valuation,  YIV.  erek. 

Job  28.  13  Man  knoweth  not  the  price  thereof ;  nei. 
S.  Hire,  reward,  price,  1?'^  sakar. 

Zech  11.  12  give  (me)  my  price,  .weighed  for  my  pri. 
9.  Honour,  preciousness,  price,  ti/xt)  time. 

-\Iatt27.    0  It  is  not  lawful,  .it  is  the  price  of  blood 
27.   9  the  price  of  him  that  was  valued,  whom 
Acts    4.  34  brought  the  prices  of  the  things  that  wc. 
5.    2  kept  back  (part)  of  the  price,  his  wife  also 
5.   3  keep  back  (part)  of  the  price  of  the  land 
19.  19  they  counted  the  price  of  them,  and  found 
1  Co.  6.  20  For  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  :  therefore 
7.  23  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  be  not  ye  the 
PRICE,  of  great  — 

1.  Wry  expensive,  tto\vt€\7}s  poluteles. 

1  Pe.   3.   4  which  is  inthe  sightof  God  of  great  price 

2.  Very  precious,  TroXuTifios  polntimos. 

Mattij.  46  when  he  had  found  one  pearl  of  great  pr. 


PRICK  — 

l.A  jmck,  i(p  sck. 

Num.33.  55  (shall  be)  pricks  in  your  eyes,  and  thorns 
2.  A  prick,  goad,  nlvrpov  kentron. 

Acts    9.   5  [hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks] 
26.  14  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks 
PRICK,  to  — 
1.2b  act  bitterly,  make  bitter,  inc  maar,  5. 

Eze.  28.  24  a  pricking  brier  unto  the  house  of  Israel 

2.  2b  sharpen  or  prick  self,  JJ£'  shanan,  7. 

Psa.  73.  21  was  grieved,  and  I  was  pricked  in  my  re. 

3.  To  stab,  pierce  thoroughly,  Karavvuau}  katanusso. 
Acts    2.  37  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  sa. 

PRIDE  — 

I.  Pride,  nxa  geah. 

Prov.  3.  13  pride,  and  arrogancy,  and  the  evil  way 
'2.  Pride,  rising,  excellency,  nnja  gaavah. 

Job    41. 15  scales  (are  his)  pride,  shut  up  together  (as 

Psa.  10.  2  The  wicked  in  (his)  pride  doth  persecute 
36.  11  Let  not  the  foot  of  pride  come  against  me 
73.    6  pride  compasseth  them  about  as  a  chain 

Provi4.    3  the  mouth  of  thefoolish  (is)arod  of  pride 

29.  23  A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low:  but 
Isa.      g.    9  that  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of  he. 

25.  11  he  shall  bring  down  their  pride  together 
Jer.  48.  29  his  pride,  and  the  haughtiness  of  his  heart 
Zeph.  3.  11  take  away,  .them  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride 
3. Pride,  rising,  excellency,  pN3  gaon. 

Lev.  26.  19  I  will  break  the  pride  of  your  power;  and 
Job  35.  m  they  cry.  .because  of  the  pride  of  evil  m. 
Psa.  59.  12  let  them  even  be  taken  in  theirpride;  and 
Prov  16.  18  Pride  (goeth)  before  destruction,  and  an 
Isa.    16.   6  We  have  heard  of  the  pride  of  Moab ;  he 

16.    6  of  his  haughtiness,  ancl  his  pride,  and  his 

23.  9  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory,  .to  bringin. 
Jer.  13.   9  the  pride  of  Judah,  and  the  great  pride  of 

48.  29  We  have  heard  the  pride  of  Moab,  he  is 
Eze.  16.  49  pride,  fulness  of  bread,  and  abundance  of 

16.  56  was  not  mentioned,  .in  the  day  of  thy  pr. 

30.  6  the  pride  of  her  power  shall  come  down 
Hos.    5.    5  the  pride  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  his  face 

7.  10  the  pride  of  Israel  testifieth  to  his  face 
Zeph.  2. 10  This  shall  they  have  for  their  pride,  bee 
Zech.  9.    6  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines 
10. 11  thepride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought  down 
11.    3  a  voice. .  for  the  pride  of  Jordan  is  spoiled 

4.  Pride,  rising,  excellency,  niNji  geuth. 

Isa.   28.    1  Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride,  to  the  drunk 

28.  3  The  crown  of  pride,  the  drunkards  of  Ep 

5. Height,  loftiness,  haughtiness,  njli  gobah. 

2  Ch.32.  26  humbledlhiniself  for  the  pride  of  his  hea. 
Psa.  10.    4  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance 

6.  Pride,  lifting  up,  nia  gevah. 

Job  33.  17  may  withdraw,  .and  hide  pride  from  m. 
Jer.  13.  17  shall  weep  in  secret  places  for  (your)  pr. 
Dan.   4.  37  those  that  walk  in  pride  he  is.  .to  abase 

7.  Pride,  presumption,  ]\i}zadon. 

1  Sa.  17.  28 1  know  thy  pride,  and  the  naughtiness  of 
Prov.n.   2  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  shame:  but 

13.  10  by  pride  cometh  contention  :  but  with  the 
Jer.  49.  16  (and)  the  pride  of  thine  heart,  0  thou  that 
Eze.  7.  10  the  rod  hath  blossomed,  pride  hath  bud. 
Obad.       3  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived 

S.To  act  proudly,  presume,  "»i  zud,  5. 

Dan.  5. 20  lifted  up,  and  his  mind  hardened  in  pride 
9. Entanglement,  artifice,  Dri  rokes. 

Psa  31.  20  Thou  shalt  hide  them . .  from  the  pride  of 
10. Pride,  fna*  shachats. 

Job  41.  34  he(is)  a  king  over  all  the  children  of  pride 

II.  Vain  boasting  or  glory,  ostentation,  a\a£oveii. 
1  Jo.    2.  16  the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but 

12.Arrogance,  virepr\(pavia  huperephania. 

Mark  7.  22  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishne^ 
[See  Lift  up  with.] 
PRIEST— 
I. Priest,  prince,  minister,  |nb  kohen. 

Gen.  14. 18  he  (was)  the  priest  of  the  most  high  God 
41.  45,  50  daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest  of  On 

46.  20  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest  of  On 

47.  22  On  the  land  of  the  priests  bought  he  not 
47.  22  the  priests  had  a  portion  (assigned  them) 
47.  26  except  the  land  of  the  priests  only,  (which) 

Exod.  2.  16  the  priest  of  Midian  had  seven  daughters 
I     3.    1  Jethro,  his  father  in  law,  the  priest  of  M . 

18.  i  Jethro  the  priest  of  Midian,  Moses' father 

19.  6  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests 
19.  22  let  the  priests  also,  which  come  near  to 
19.  24  let  not  the  priests  and  the  people  break 

29.  30  that  son  that  is  priest  in  his  stead  shall 
31. 10  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 
35. 19  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 

38.  21  hand  of  Ithamar,  son  to  Aaron  the  priest 

39.  41  the  holy  garments  for  Aaron  the  priest 
Lev.    1.    5,  8,  11  and  the  priests,  Aaron's  sons,  shall 

1.    7  the  sous  of  Aaron  the  priest  shall  putflre 
1.   9  and  the  priest  shall  burn  all  on  the  altar 
1.  12  the  priest  shall  lay  them  in  order  on  the 
1.  13  the  priests  shall  bring  (it)  all,  and  burn 
1.  15  the  priest  shall  bring  it  unto  the  altar,  and 

1.  17  and  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  alt. 

2.  a  he  shall  bring  it  to  Aaron's  sons  the  prie. 
2.    2  the  priest  shall  burn  the  memorial  of  it 


PRIEST 


773 


PRIEST 


lev. 


So  in 


8  when  it  is  presented  unto  the  priest,  he 

9  priest  shall  take  from  the  meat  offering 
16  the  priest  shall  burn  the  memorial  of  it 

2  the  priests  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upon 
ii  And  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  al. 
16  the  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

3  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin  ace. 

5,  16  And  the  priest  that  is  anointed  shall 

6,  17  And  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger 

7  the  priest  shall  put  (some)  of  the  blood 
10,  35  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 
20  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 
25.  30,  34  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood 
26>  31)  35  the  priest  shall  make  an  atoneme. 
31  the  priest  shall  bum  (it)  upon  the  altar 

6,  10,  13,  16,  18  priest  shall  makean  atone. 

8  he  shall  bring  them  unto  the  priest,  who 

12  shall  he  bring  it  to  the  priest,  and  the  p. 

13  shall  be  the  priest's,  as  a*  meat  offering 
16  the  fifth  part.,  and  give  it  unto  the  priest 

18  for  a  trespass  offering,  unto  the  priest 

6  for  a  trespass  offering,  unto  the  priest 

7  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 

10  the  priest  shall  put  on  his  linen  garment 
12  the  priest  shall  burn  wood  on  it  every  m. 

22  the  priest  of  his  sons  that  is  anointed  in 

23  every  meat  offering  for  the  priest  shall  be 
26  the  priest  that  off  ereth  it  for  sin  shall  eat 

29  All  the  males  among  the  priests  shall  eat 

5  the  priest  shall  burn  them  upon  the  altar 

6  Every  male  among  the  priests  shall  eat 

7  priest  that  maketh  atonement  therewith 

8  the  priest  that  off  ereth  any  man's  burnt 

8  the  priest  shall  have  to  himself  the  skin 

9  all.  .shall  be  the  priest's  that  off  ereth  it 

14  it  shall  be  the  priest's  that  sprinkle th  the 

31  the  priest  shall  burn  the  fat  upon  the  al. 

32  right  shoulder  shall  ye  give  unto  the  pr. 

34  have  given  them  unto  Aaron  the  priest 
6  she  shall  bring  a  lamb,  .unto  the  priest 
8  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 

2  the  priest,  or  unto  one  of  his  sons  the  pr. 
3)  3»  5»  6,  25,  27,  32,  34  the  priest  shall  look 
So  in  v.  34,  36,  39,  43,  50,  53,  55. 
4>  31?  33  the  priest  shall  shut  up  (him  that 
5,  21,  26  the  priest  shall  shut  him  up  seven 

6  the  priest  shall  pronounce 

8,  11,  17,  20,  22,  23,  25,  27,  28,  30,  37,  44, 

7  been  seen  of  the  priest. .  of  the  priest  ag. 

8  And  (if)  the  priest  see  that,  behold,  the 

9  then  he  shall  be  brought  unto  the  priest 
10,  17  the  priest  shall  see  (him:)  and,  behold 

12  all  the  skin,  .wheresoever  the  priest  look. 

13  Then  the  priest  shall  consider:  and,  beh. 

15  And  the  priest  shall  see  the  raw  flesh,  and 

16  be  changed . .  he  shall  come  unto  the  prie. 

19  and.  .reddish,  and  it  be  showed  to  the  p. 

20  And  if,  wheu  the  priest  seeth  it,  behold 
zi,  20  if  the  priest  look  on  it,  and,  behold 

30  Then  the  priest  shall  see  the  plague :  and 

31  And  if  the  priest  look  ou  the  plague  of  the 
36  the  priest  shall  not  seek  for  yellow  hair 
49  and  shall  be  showed  unto  the  priest 

54  the  priest  shall  command  that  they  wash 
56  if  the  priest  look,  and,  behold,  the  plague 

2  the  leper,  .shall  be  brought  unto  the  pri. 

3  the  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp 

3  the  priest  shall  look,  and,  behold,  (if)  the 

4  Then  shall  the  priest  command  to  take  for 

5  the  priest  shall  command  that  one  of  the 

11  the  priest  that  maketh  (him)  clean  shall 

12  the  priest  shall  take  one  he  lamb,  and  off. 

13  as  the  sin  offering(is)  the  priest's,  (so  is)  the 

14  the  priest  shall  take  (some)  of  the  blood 

14  the  priest  shall  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of  the 

15  the  priest  shall  take  (some)  of  the  log  of 

16  the  priest  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in  the 

17  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  hand  shall  the  p. 

18  the  remnant  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  pr. 
18,  20,  31  the  priostshall  make  an  atonement 

19  the  priest  shall  offer  the  sin  offering,  and 

20  the  priest  shall  offer  the  burnt  offering 

23  bring  them  on  the  eighth. .unto  the  priest 

24  thepriestshalltake.  .the  priest  shall  wave 

25  the  priest  shall  take  (some)  of  the  blood 

26  the  priest  shall  pour  of  the  oil  into  the  p. 

27  the  priest  shall  sprinkle  with  his  right  ti. 

28  the  priest  shall  put  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in 

29  the  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  priest's 

35  shall  come  and  tell  the  priest,  saying,  It 

36  the  priest  shall  command  that  they  empty 
36  before  the  priest  go  (into  it)  to  see  the  p. 
36  afterward  the  priest  shall  go  in  to  see  the 

38  the  priest  shall  go  out  of  the  house  to  the 

39  the  priest  shall  come  again  the  seventh 

40  the  priest  shall  command  that  they  take 
44  the  priest  shall  come  and  look,  and,  beh. 
48  And  if  the  priest  shall  come  in,  and  look 
48  the  priest  shall  pronounce  the  house  cl. 

14  young  pigeons,  .and  give  them  uuto  the 

15  the  priest  shall  offer  them,  the  one  (for) 
15,  30  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement 

29  bring  them  unto  the  priest,  to  the  door 

30  the  priest  shall  offer  the  one  (for)  a  sin 

32  the  priest  whom  he  shall  anoint,  and  w. 

33  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  pri. 

5  unto  the  priest,  and  offer  them  (for)  pe. 

6  the  priest  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upon 
22  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 

1  Speak  unto  the  priests  the  so^s  of  Aaron 
9  the  daughter  of  any  priest,  if  sh-  profane 
10  the  high  priest  among  his  brethre  .  upon 


Lev.  21.  21  No  man.  .of  the  seed  of  Aaron  the  priest 
22.  10  a  sojourner  of  the  priest,  or  an  hired  ser. 
22.  11  if  the  priest  buy(auy)  soul  with  his  money 
22. 12  If  the  priest's  daughter  also  be  (married) 

22.  13  But  if  the  priests  daughter  be  a  widow,  or 
22. 14  shall  give  (it)  unto  the  priest  with  the  holy 

23. 10  first  fruits  of  your  harvest  unto  the  priest 

23.  11  on  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath  the  prie. 
23.  20  the  priest  shall  wave  them  with  the  bread 

23.  20  they  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord  for  the  p. 
27.  8  before  the  priest,  and  the  priest  shall  va. 
27.    8  according  to  his  ability,  .shall  the  priest 

27. 11  he  shall  present  the  beast  before  the  pri. 

27. 12  the  priest  shall  value  it,  whether  it  be 
27. 12  as  thou  vainest  it,  (who  art)  the  priest,  so 
27.  14  the  priest  shall  estimate  it,  whether  it  be 
27. 14  as  the  priest  shall  estimate  it,  so  shall  it 
27. 18,  23  the  priest  shall  reckon  unto  hirn  the 
27.  21  the  possession  thereof  shall  be  the  priest's 

Num.  3.    3  the  priests  which  were  anointed,  whom  he 
3.    6  presentthem  before  Aaron  the  priest,  that 

3.  32  And  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 
4. 1 5  office  of  Eleazar  the  sou  of  Aaron  the  pri. 

4.  28,  33  Ithamar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 

5.  8  uuto  the  Lord,  .to  the  priest,  beside  the 
5. '  9  offering . .  which  they  bring  unto  the  priest 
5. 10  whatsoever  any  man  giveth  to  the  priest 

5. 15  shall  the  man  bring  his  wife  unto  the  pp. 

5. 16  t?  ■*  priest  shall  bring  her  near,  and  set  her 

5. 17  the  priest  shall  take,  .the  priest  shall  ta. 
5.  18  the  priest  shall  set.  .the  priest  shall  have 
5. 19  the  priest  shall  charge  her  by  an  oath,  and 
5.  21  the  priest  shall  charge,  .the  priest  shall 
5.  23  the  priest  sh.  11  write  these  curses  in  a  b. 
5. 25  Then  the  priest  shall  take  the  jealousy 
5.  26  the  priest  shall  take  an  handful  of  the 

5.  30  the  priest  shall  execute  upon  her  all  this 

6.  10  two  young  pigeons,  to  the  priest,  to  the 
6.  11  the  priest  shall  offer  the  one  for  a  sin  off. 
6.  16  the  priest  shall  bring,  .before  the  LORD 
6.  17  the  priest  shall  offer  also  his  meat  offer. 
6. 19  the  priest  shall  take  the  sodden  shoulder 
6.  20  the  priest  shall  wave  them  (for)  a  wave  of. 

6.  20  this  (is)  holy  for  the  priest,  with  the  wave 

7.  8  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 
10.    8  the  priests,  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets 

15.  25,  28  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for 

16.  37  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest,  that 

16.  39  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  brasen  censers 

18.  28  Lord's  heave  offering  to  Aaron  the  priest 

19.  3  ye  shall  give  her  unto  Eleazar  the  priest 
19.  4  Eleazar  the  priest  shall  take  of  her  blood 
19.  6  the  priest  shall  take  cedar  wood,  and  hy. 
19.    7  the  priest  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  he 

19.  7  the  priest  shall  be  unclean  until  the  even 

25.  7,  11  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 

26.  1  unto  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 
26.  3  Moses  and  Eleazar  the  priest  spake  with 
26.  63  by  Moses  and  Eleazar  the  priest,  who  nu. 

26.  64  whom  Moses  and  Aaron  the  priest  numb. 

27.  2,  22  before  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  before 
27.  19  set  him  before  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  b. 
27.  21  he  shall  stand  before  Eleazar  the  priest 
31.  6  and  Phinehas  the  son  of  Eleazar  the  priest 
31. 12  untc  Moses,  and  Eleazar  the  priest,  and 
31.  13,  31,  51,  54  And  Moses,  and  Eleazar  the  p. 
31.  21  thi  priest  said  unto  the  men  of  war  whi. 
31.  26  tl.  :  priest,  and  the  chief  fathers  of  the  c. 
31.  29  give  (it)  unto  Eleazar  the  priest,  (for)  an 

31.  41  heave  offering,  unto  Eleazar  the  priest 

32.  2  to  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  unto  the  prin. 

32.  28  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  son  of 

33.  38  Aaron  the  priest  went  up  into  mount  Hor 

34.  17  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  sou  of 
35. 25,  28,  28  the  death  of  the  high  priest 

35.  32  again  to  dwell,  .until  the  death  of  the  pr. 
Deuti7.    9  thou  shalt  come  unto  thepriests  the  Lev. 

17.  12  the  priest  that  standeth  to  minister  there 

17.  18  out  of  (that  which  is)  before  the  priests 

18.  1  The  priests  the  Levites,  (and)  all  the  tri. 
18.    3  tins  shall  be  the  priests'  due  from  the  p. 

18.  3  they  shall  give  unto  the  priest  the  shoul. 
19. 17  before  the  priests  and  the  judges  which 

20.  2  the  priest  shall  approach  and  speak  unto 

21.  5  the  priests  the  sons  of  Levi  shall  come  n. 

24.  8  all  that  the  priests  the  Levites  shall  teac. 
26.   3  thoushaltgo  unto  the  priest  that  shall  be 

26.  4  the  priest  shall  take  the  basket  out  of  thine 

27.  9  Moses  and  the  priests  the  Levites  spake 
31.    9  delivered  it  unto  the  priests  the  sons  of 

Josh.  3.    3  and  the  priests  the  Levites  bearing  it 

3.  6  Joshuaspakeuntothepriests,saying,Take 
3.    8,  13,  15,  17  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark 

3.  14  the  priests  bearing  the  ark  of  the  coven. 

4.  3  out  of  the  place  where  the  priests'  feet  s. 
4.   9,  10,  16,  18  the  priests  which  bear  the  ark 
4.  11  the  ark.. passed  over,  and  the  priests,  in 
4.  17  Joshua  therefore  commanded  the  priests 
4.  18  the  soles  of  the  priests'  feet  were  lifted  up 
6.   4  seven  priests  shall  bear  before  the  arkse. 
6.   4  the  priests  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets 
6.    6  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  called  the  priests 
<3.   6  let  seven  priests  bear  seven  trumpets  of 
6.    8,  13  seven  priests  bearing  the  seven  tram. 
6.    9  the  priests  that  blew  with  the  trumpets 
6. 12  the  priests  took  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord 
6.  16  when  the  priests  blew  with  the  trumpets 

8.  33  before  the  priests  the  Levites,  which  bare 
14.  1  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  son  of 
17.   4  they  came  near  before  Eleazar  the  priest 

19.  51  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  son  of 

20.  6  until  the  death  of  the  high  priest  that  sh. 


Josh  21. 


Judgi/. 

17- 
*7' 


23. 

23- 


Ki. 


!  Ki. 


1  unto  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  unto  Joshv.a 
4,  13  the  children  of  Aaron  the  priest 

19  the  cities  of  the  children  of  Aaron,  the  p. 
13,  31,  32  Phinehas  the  son  of  Eleazar  the  p. 
30  when  Phinehas  the  priest,  and  the  princes 

5  made . .  one  of  his  sons,  who  became  his  p. 

10  be  unto  me  a  father  and  a  priest,  and  I 

12  the  young  man  became  his  priest,  and  was 

13  good,  seeing  I  have  a  Levite  to  (my)  priest 

4  Micah.. hath  hired  me,  and  I  am  his  priest 

6  And  the  priest  said  unto  them,  Go  in  pe. 

17  the  priest  stood  in  the  entering  of  the  g. 

18  Then  said  the  priest  unto  them,  What  do 

19  go  with  us.. be  to  us  a  father  and  a  priest 
19  to  be  a  priest  unto  the  house  of  one  man 

19  or  that  thou  be  a  priest  unto  a  tribe  and 

20  the  priest's  heart  was  glad ;  and  he  took 

24  Ye  have  taken  away,  .the  priest,  and  ye 

27  they  took,  .the  priest  which  he  had,  and 

30  he  and  his  sons  were  priests  to  the  tribe 

3  the  two  sons  of  Eli.  .the  priests  of  the  L. 
9  Eli  the  priest  sat  upon  a  seat  by  a  post  of 

11  child  did  minister,  .before  Eli  the  priest 
13  And  the  priest's  custom  with  the  people 

13  the  priest's  servant  came,  while  the  flesh 

14  all.  .brought  up  the  priest  took  for  hims, 

15  the  priest's  servant  came,  and  said  to  the 
15  Give  flesh  to  roast  for  the  priest ;  for  he 

28  (to  be)  my  priest,  to  offer  upon  mine  altar 

35  I  will  raise  me  up  a  faithful  priest,  (that) 

5  neither  the  priests  of  Dagon,  nor  any  that 

2  the  Philistines  called  for  the  priests  and 

3  the  son  of  Eli,  the  Lord's  priest  in  Shiloh 
19  while  Saul  talked  unto  the  priest,  that  the 
19  Saul  said  unto  the  priest,  "Withdraw  thine 

36  Then  said  the  priest,  Let  us  draw  nearh. 

1  came  David  to  Nob  to  Ahimelech  the  pr. 

2  And  David  said  unto  Ahimelech  the  priest 

4  And  the  priest  answered  David,  and  said 

5  David  answered  the  priest,  and  said  unto 

6  So  the  priest  gave  him  hallowed  (bread) 
9  the  priest  said,  The  sword  of  Goliath  the 

11  the  king  sent  to  call  Ahimelech  the  priest 
1 1  and  all  his  father's  house,  the  priests  that 
17  slay  the  priests  of  the  Lord;  because  th. 

17  would  not.  .fall  upon  the  priests  of  theL. 

18  Doeg,  Turn  thou,  and  fall  upon  thepriests 
iS  he  fell  upon  the  priests,  and  slew  on  that 

19  Nob,  the  city  of  the  priests,  smote  he  with 

21  showed,  .that  Saul  had  slain  the  Lord's  p^ 
9  he  said  to  Abiathar  the  priest,  Bring  hit. 

7  And  David  said  to  Abiathar  the  priest 

17  AndZadok.  .and  Ahimelech.  .(were)thep. 
27  The  king  said  also  unto  Zadok  the  priest 
35  (hast  thou)  not  there  with  thee.. the  pr.  ? 
35  tell  (it)  to  Zadok  and  Abiathar  the  priests 
15  said,  .unto  Zadok  and  to  Abiathar  the  p. 
11  sent  to  Zadok  and  to  Abiathar  the  priests 

25  and  Zadok  and  Abiathar  (were)  thepriests 

7  And  he  conferred,  .with  Abiathar  thepr. 
8,  26  the  priest,  and  Benaiah  the  son  of 

I  Abiathar  the  priest,  and  Joab  the  captain 

25  captains  of  the  host,  and  Abiathar  the  p. 
32,  38,  44,  45  the  priest,  and  Nathan  the  pr. 

34  let  Zadok  the  priest,  and  Nathan  the  pr. 
39  Zadok  the  priest  took  an  horn  of  oil  out 
42  Jonathan  the  son  of  Abiathar  the  priest 

22  for  Abiathar  the  priest,  and  for  Joab  the 

26  And  unto  Abiathar  the  priest  said  the  k. 

27  thrust  out  Abiathar  from  being  priest  un. 

35  Zadok  the  priest  did  the  king  put  in  the 

2  Azariah  the  son  of  Zadok  the  priest 

4  and  ZadokandAbiathar(were)the  priests 

3  the  elders  of  Israel  came,  and  the  priests 

4  those  didthepriestsand  the  Levites  bring 

6  the  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  cov. 

10  when  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the  h. 

II  So  that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  m. 

31  made  priests  of  the  lowest  of  the  people 

32  the  priests  of  the  high  places  which  he  had 
2  upon  thee  shall  he  offer  the  priests  of  the 

33  made.,  of  the  lowest  of  the  people  priests 
33  he  became  (one)  of  thepriests  of  the  high 

11  great  men,  and  his  kinsfolks,  and  his  pri. 
19  of  Baal,  all  his  servants,  and  all  his  prie. 

9  to  all. .that  Jehoiada  the  priest  command. 

9  every  man.  .and  came  to  Jehoiada  the  p. 
10  to  the  captains  over  hundreds  did  the  p. 
15  the  priest  commanded  the  captains  of  the 
15  the  priest  had  said.  Let  her  not  be  slain 
iS  slew  Mattan  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the 

18  the  priest  appointed  officers  over  the  ho. 
2  wherein  Jehoiada  the  priest  instructed 

4  Jehoash  said  to  the  priests,  All  the  mon. 

5  Let  the  priests  take  (it)  to  them,  every  m. 

6  the  priests  had  not  repaired  the  breaches 

7  Jehoiada  the  priest,  and  the  (other)  pries. 

8  the  priests  consented  to  receive  no  (more) 

9  the  priest  took  a  chest,  and  bored  a  hole 
9  the  priest  that  kept  the  door  put  therein 

10  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest  came  up 
16 the  trespass  money,  .it  was  the  priests' 

10  Ahaz  sent  to  Urijah  the  priest  the  fashion 

11  Urijah  the  priest,  built  an  altar  according 
11  Urijah  the  priest  made  (it)  against  kingA. 

15  king  Ahaz  commanded  Urijah  the  priest 

16  Thus  did  Urijah  the  priest,  according  to 

27  one  of  the  priests  whom  ye  brought  from 

28  one  of  thepriests,  whom  they  had  carried 
32  made.,  of  the  lowest  of  them  priests  of  the 

2  the  elders  of  the  priests,  covered  with  sa. 
4  Go  up  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  that  he 


PRIEST 


774 


PRIEST 


jKL; 


*3 
23 
=  3 
23 

^3 
23 
23. 
25. 

t  Ch.  9. 
9- 
9> 
13- 
*5- 
i5- 
15- 
16. 
a  6. 
a  8. 

-23- 
24. 
24. 
27. 


Ch 


11. 
*3- 
*3- 
*3- 
13- 
*3- 
*3- 
*5- 
=*7- 
19. 
19. 

22, 
23- 
23- 
23. 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
26, 
26. 
26. 
26. 

26. 
26. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30. 

30. 

30. 

3& 
SI- 
SI- 
3*. 
3i- 
3i- 
3i- 
3i- 
3i- 
34- 
34- 
31- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
)S- 
J5- 

35- 


8  Hilkiah*  the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan 
10  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  delivered  me  a  b. 
12  the  king  commanded  Hilkiah  the  priest 
14  So  Hilkiah  the  priest,  and  Ahikam,  and 
2  the  priests,  and  the  prophets,  and  all  the 

4  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  and  the  priests  of 
8  he  brought  all  the  priests  out  of  the  cities 

8  places  where  the  priests  had  burnt  incense 

9  the  priests  of  the  high  places  came  not  up 
20  he  slew  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places 
24  the  book  that  Hilkiah  the  priest  found  in 

18  chief  priest,  and  Zephaniah  the  second  p. 
2  the  priests,  Levites,  and  the  Nethinims 

10  of  the  priests ;  Jedaiah,  and  Jehoiarib,  and 
30  of  the  sons  of  the  priests  made  the  oint. 

2  to  the  priests  and  Levites  (which  are)  in 

11  called  for  Zadok  and  Abiatharthe  priests 
14  So  the  priests  and  the  Levites  sanctified 

24  the  priests,  did  blow  with  the  trumpets 
6  the  priests  with  trumpets  continually  be. 

39  the  priest,  and  his  brethren  the  priests 

16  Zadok.. andAhimelech.. (were)  the  priests 
2  princes.,  with  the  priests  and  the  Levites 
6  Zadok  the  priest,  and  Ahimelech  the  son 
6,  31  the  fathers  of  the  priests  and  Levites 

5  Beuaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  a  chief  pri. 
13,  21  courses  of  the  priests  and  "ie  Levites 
22  the  chief  governor,  and  Zadok  (to  be)  pr. 

6  but  the  sea  (was)  for  the  priests  to  wash 
9  he  made  the  court  of  the  priests,  and  the 

5  these  did  the  priests  (and)  the  Levites  bring 

7  the  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  cov. 
11  when  the  priests  were  come  out  of  the  h. 

11  the  priests  (that  were)  present  were  san. 

12  and  twenty  priests  sounding  with  trump. 
14  So  that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  m. 
41  let  thy  priests,  0  Lord  God,  be  clothed 

2  the  priests  could  not  enter  into  the  house 

6  And  the  priests  waited  on  their  offices;  the 
6  the  priests  sounded  trumpets  before  them 

14  the  courses  of  the  priests  to  their  service 

14  to  praise  and  minister  before  the  priests 

15  commandment  of  thekinguntothe  priests 

13  the  priests  and  the  Levites  that  (were)  in 

15  ordained  him  priests  for  the  high  places 
g  Have  ye  not  cast  out  the  priests  of  the  L. 
9  and  have  made  you  priests  after  the  man. 
9  may  be  a  priest  of  (them  that  are)  no  gods 

10  the  priests,  whichministerunto the  Lord 
12  his  priests  with  sounding  trumpets  to  cry 

14  and  the  priests  sounded  with  the  trumpets 

3  without  a  teaching  priest,  and  without 

8  with  them  Elishama  and  Jehoram,  priests 
8  (of)  the  priests,  and  of  the  chief  of  the  f. 

1 1  Amaziah  the  chief  priest  (is)  over  you  in  - 
11  So  Jehoshabeath .  .the  wife  of .  .the  priest 

4  third .  .of  the  priests  and  of  the  Levites 
6  save  the  priests,  and  they  that  minister 

8  that  Jehoiada  the  priest  had  commanded 

8  Jehoiada  the  priest  dismissed  not  the  co. 

9  the  priest  delivered  to  the  captains  of  h. 
14  the  priest  brought  out  the  captains  of  h. 

14  the  priest  said,  Slay  her  not  in  the  house 

17  slew  Mattan  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the 
i3  by  the  hand  of  the  priests  the  Levites 

2  right,  .all  the  days  of  Jehoiada  the  priest 

5  he  gathered  together  the  priests  and  the 
1 1  the  high  priest's  officer  came  and  emptied 
20  Zechariah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  the  priest 

25  the  blood  of  the  sons  of  Jehoiada  the  pri. 
17  Azariah  the  priest  went  in  after  him,  and 
17  and  with  him  fuurscore  priests  of  the  L. 
iS  but  to  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron,  that 

19  ami  while  he  was  wroth  with  the  priests 

19  before  the  priests  in  the  house  of  the  Lo. 

20  the  chief  priest,  and  all  the  priests,  look. 
4  he  brought  in  the  priests  and  the  Levites 

16  the  priests  went  into  the  inner  part  of 

21  he  commanded  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aar. 

22  and  the  priests  received  the  blood,  and 
24  the  priests  killed  them,  and  they  made 

26  Levites.  .and  the  priests  with  the  trump. 
34  the  priests  were  too  few,  so  that  they  co. 
34  the  (other)  priests  had  sanctified  themse. 
34  more  upright  in  heart,  .than  the  priests 

3  the  priests  had  not  sanctified  themselves 

1 5  the  priests  and  the  Levites  were  ashamed 

16  the  priests  sprinkled  the  blood,  .of  the  h. 
21  the  priests  praised  the  Lord  day  by  day 

24  a  great  number  of  priests  sanctified  the. 

25  with  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  and  all 

27  the  priests  the  Levites  arose  and  blessed 
2  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites  after  their 

2  the  priests  and  Levites  for  burnt  offerings 

4  the  portion  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites 
9  Hezekiah  questioned  with  the  priests  and 

1 .,  A:  trial)  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of 
15  in  the  cities  of  the  priests,  in.  .set  office 

17  to  the  genealogy  of  the  priests  by  the  h. 
iq  the  priests,  (which  were)  in  the  fields  of 
ig  to  all  the  males  among  the  priests,  and  to 

5  he  burnt  the  bones  of  the  priest  upon  th. 
o  when  they  came  to  Hilkiah  the  high  pri. 

14  nilkiah  the  priest  found  a  book  of  the  1. 
10  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  given  me  a  book 
30  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  all  the 
'2  he  set  the  priests  in  their  charges,  and  e. 

3  unto  the  people,  tothepriests,  and  to  the 
8  gave  unto  the  priests  for  the  passover  off. 

10  the  priests  stood  in  their  place,  and  the 

11  priests  sprinkled  (the  blood)  from  their 
14  fur  the  priests:  because  the  priests  the  sons 


2.CI1.35. 
35- 

36. 

Ezra    1 . 


Keh. 


i3' 
i3' 

*3- 
I3< 

Psa.  7S, 
99. 

no. 

132. 

132. 

Isa.  8, 
24. 
28. 

37< 

61, 

66. 

Jer.     1, 


14  prepared,  .for  the  priests  the  sous  of  Aa. 
iS  the  priests,  and  tl.e  Levites,  and  all  Jud. 

14  the  priests  and  the  people  transgressed 

5  and  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  with  all 
36  The  priests  :  the  children  of  Jedaiah,  of 
61  of  the  children  of  the  priests:  the  children 
63  till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with  Urini  and 

69  They  gave,  .one  hundred  priests'  garme. 

70  So  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  (some) 
2  the  priests,  and  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  S 

8  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  and  all  they' 

10  they  set  the  priests  in  their  apparel  with 
12  of  the  priests  and  Levites,  and  chief  of  the 
20  the  priests  and  the  Levites  were  purified 
20  for  their  brethren  the  priests,  and  for  th. 

5  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the  chief  priest 
7  of  the  prie.  s,  and  the  Levites,  and  the  s. 

1 1  king  Artaxerxes  gave  unto  Ezra  the  priest 

15  I  viewed  the  people  and  the  priests,  and 
24  of  the  priests,  Sherebiah,  Hashabiah.and 

29  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  and  chief 

30  So  took  the  priests  and  the  Levites  the  w. 

33  of  Meremoth  the  sou  of  Uriah  the  priest 
1  and  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  have  not 

7  have  we,  our  kings,  (and)  our  priests,  been 
5  the  chief  priests,  the  Levites,  and  all  Isr. 

10  the  priest  stood  up,  an.  said  unto  them 

16  the  priest,  (with)  certain  chief  of  the  fat. 
iS  among  the  sons  of  the  priests  there  were 
16  nor  to  the  priests,  nor  to  the  nobles,  nor 

1  the  high  priest  rose  up,  with  his  brethren 

1  the  priests,  .they  buihled  the  sheep  gate 
20  door  of  the  house  of  Eliashib  the  high  pr. 
22  after  him  repaired  the  priests,  the  men  of 
28  above  the  horse  gate  repaired  the  priests 

12  I  called  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath  of 
39  The  priests  :  the  children  of  Jedaiah,  of 

63  of  the  priests  :  the  children  of  Habaiah 
65  their  stood  (up)  a  priest  with  Trim  and 
70  five  hundred  and  thirty  priests'  garments 

72  and  threescore  and  seven  priests'  garme. 

73  So  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  the  p. 

2  Ezra  the  priest  brought  the  law  before  t. 

9  Ezra  the  priest  the  scribe,  and  the  Levites 

13  all  the  people,  the  priests,  and  the  Levites 

32  ">n  our  priests,  and  on  our  prophets,  and 

34  neither  have,  .our  priests,  nor  our  fathe. 
38  and  our  princes,  Levites,  (and;  priests,  St. 

8  Bilgni,  Shemaiah :  these  (were)  the  priests 
28  i-»3  priests,  the  Levites,  the  porters,  the 

34  the  priests,  the  Levites,  and  the  people 

36  the  priests  that  minister  in  the  house 

37  u.  .to  the  priests,  to  the  chambers  of  the 

38  the  priest  the  son  of  Aaron  shall  be  with 

39  the  priests  that  minister,  and  the  porters 

3  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  the  Xethin. 
10  Of  the  priests :  Jedaiah  the  son  of  Joiarib 

20  the  priests  (and)  the  Levites,  (were)  in  all 

1  the  priests  an  the  Levites  that  went  up 
7  These,  .the  chief  of  the  priests  and  of  th. 

12  in  the  days  of  Joia  im  were  priests,  the 
22  also  the  priests,  to  ine  reign  of  Pariu.^the 
26  in  the  days. .  f  Ezra  the  priest,  the  scribe 
30  the  priests  and  the  Levites  purified  them. 

35  And.  .of  the  prists'  sons  with  trumpets 
41  the  priests;  Fdiakim,  Maasei.  h,  Miniamin 

4  portions  of  the  law  for  the  priests  and  L. 
44  for  the  priests  and  for  the  Levites  that 

4  the  pries  ,  having  the  oversight  of  the  c. 

5  the  oil.  .and  the  offerings  of  the  priests 

13  Shelemiah  the  priest,  and  Zaaok  the  scr. 

28  Joiada,  the  son   f  Eliashib  the  high  priest 

30  o.  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  every  one 

64  Their  priests  fell  by  the  sword  ;  and  their 

6  Aaron  among  his  priests,  and  Samuel  am. 
4  Thou(art)  a  priest  for  ever  after  theorder 

9  Let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  righteou. 
16  I  will  also  clothe  her  priests  with  salvat. 

2  Uriah  the  priest,  and  Zechariah  the  son 
2  And .  .as  with  the  people,  so  with  the  p. 

7  the  priest  and  the  prophet  have  erred  th. 
2  the  elders  of  the  priests,  covered  with  sa. 
6  ye  shall  be  named  the  priests  of  the  Lord 

21  And  I  will  also  tan.    of  them  for  priests 

1  of  the  priests  that  (were)  in  Anathoth  in 
iS  against  the  priests  thereof,  and  against 

8  The  priests  said  not,  Where  (is)  the  Lord? 
26  their  kings.. and  their  priests,  and  th  ir 

9  the  priests  shall  be  astonished,  and  the 

31  and  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means 
13  from  the  prophet  even  unto  the  priest  ev. 

1  the  bones  of  the  priests,  and  the  bones  of 
10  from  the  prophet  even  unto  the  priest  ev. 
13  the  priests,  and  the  prophets,  and  all  the 

1 3  the  prophet  and  the  priest  go  about  into 
iS  the  law  shall  not  perish  from  the  priest 

1  Go  and  get.,  of  the  ancients  of  the  priests 

1  Pashm  the  son  of  Immer  the  priest,  who 

1  Zepnaniah  the  son  ol  Maaseiah  the  priest 

n  both  prophet  and  priest  are  profane  :  yea 

33  when. .a priest,  shallaskthee,  saying,  Wh. 

34  the  priest,  and  the  people,  that  shall  say 
7,  S  the  priests  am  the  prophets  and  all 

n  Then  spake  the  priests  and  the  prophets 
16  said,  .unto  the  priests  and  to  the  prophets 
16  I  spake  to  the  priests,  and  to  all  this 
i,  5  in  the  presence  of  the  priests,  and 
1  to  the  priests,  and  to  the  prophets,  and  to 
2;  Minaseiati  the  priest,  and  to  all  the  priests 
26  priest  in  the  stead  of  Jehoiada  the  priest 

29  the  priest  read  this  letter  in  the  ears  of  J. 

14  I  will  satiate  the  soul  of  the  priests  with 


Jer.  32. 
33- 
33- 
34- 
37- 
48. 
49. 

Lam.  1. 


4- 

■     4- 

Eze.  1. 
7- 
22. 
40. 
42. 
42. 

43- 
43- 
43- 
44- 
44. 
44. 

44- 
44. 
44. 
45- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
46. 
48, 
48. 
43. 
Hos.    4. 


Joel 


Amos  7. 
Mic.  3 
Zeph.  1 

„  3 
Hag.    1 


Zech. 


Mai. 


32  their  priests,  and  their  prophets,  and  the? 
1 B  N  itlier  shall  the  priests  the  Levites  want 
21  with  the  Levites  the  priests,  my  ministers 
19  the  priests,  and  all  the  people  of  the  land 
3  Zephania-  th    son  of  Maaseiah  the  priest 

7  (with)  his  priests  and  his  princes  together 

3  (and)  his  priests  and  his  princes  together 
24  priest,  and  Lephauiahthe  second  priest 

4  her  priests  sigh,  her  virgins  are  affiicted 

19  my  priests  and  mine  elders  gave  up  the 
6  hath  despised    the  king  and  the  priest 

20  shall  the  priest  and  the  prophet  be  slain 
13  her  priests,  that  have  shed  the  blood  of 

16  respected  not  the  persons  of  the  priests 

3  uuto  Ezekiel  the  priest,  the  son  of  Buzi 
26  the  law  shall  perish  from  the  priest,  and 

26  Her  priests  have  violated  my  law,  and 
45,  46  the  priests,  the  keepers  of  the  charge 

13  the  priests  that  approach  unto  the  Lord 

14  When  the  priests  enter  therein,  then  shall 
19  thou  shalt  give  to  the  priests  the  Levites 
24  the  priests  shall  cast  salt  upon  them,  and 

27  priests  shall  make  your  burnt  offerings 

15  the  priests  the  Levites,  the  sons  of  Zadok 

21  ^Neither  shall  any  priest  drink  wine  when 

22  take,  .a  widow  that  had  a  priest  before 
30  first,  .of  your  oblations,  shall  be  the  prie. 

30  ye  shall  also  give  unto  the  priest  the  first 

31  priests  shall  not  eat  of  any  thing  that  is 

4  shall  be  for  the  priests  the  ministers  of  the 
19  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  sin  of. 

2  thepriestsshallpreparehisburnt  offering 

19  into  the  holy  chambers  of  the  priests,  w. 

20  This  (is)  the  place  where  the  priests  shall 

10  (even)  for  the  priests,  shall  be  (this)  holy 

11  for  the  priests  that  are  sanctified  of  the 
13  overagaiust  the  borders  of  the  priests  the 

4  people  (are)  as  they  that  strive  with  the  p. 
9  there  shall  be,  like  people,  like  priest:  and 
1  Hear  y  this,  O  priests;  and  hearken,  ye 
9  company  of  priests  murder  in  the  way  by 
9  the  pri    ts,  the  Lord's  ministers,  mourn 

I  Gird  yourselves,  and  lament,  ye  priests 

17  .^et  the  priests,  .weep  between  the  porch 

10  Then  Amaziah  the  priest  of  Beth-el  sent 

II  priests  thereof  teach  for  hire,  and  the  p. 
4  the  name  of  the  Chemarims  with  the  pr. 

4  her  priests  have  polluted  the  sanctuary 
1, 12, 14  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech  theh.p. 
2,  4  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech  the . .  pr. 

11  Ask  now  the  priests  (concerning)  the  law 

12  And  the  priests  answered  and  said,  No 

13  priests  answered  and  said,  It  shall  lie  un. 
1  showed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  stand. 

8  Hear  now,  0  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou 
11  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  pr. 
13  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne :  and 

3  speak  unto  the  priests  which  (were)  in  the 

5  Speak  unto,  .the  priests  saying,  When  ye 

6  O  priests,  that  despise  my  name.  And  ye 
1  O  ye  priests,  this  commandment  (is)  for 

7  Fur  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  kuuwle. 


2. Priest,  prince,  minister,  |ns  hahen. 


Ezra 


9  according  to  the  appointment  of  the  pri. 
d.  16  the  priests,  .kept  the  dedication  of  this 

6.  18  set  the  priests  in  their  divisions,  and .  .L. 

7.  12  unto  E  the  priest,  a  scribe  of  the  law 
7.  13  his  prie.  and  Levites,  in  my  realm,  wh. 
7.  16  with  the  freewill  offering,  .of  the  priests 
7.  21  that  whatsoever  Ezra  the  priest,  the  scribe 
7.  24  touching  any  of  the  priests  and  Levites 

Z.TdohiAvous  priests,  DHpa  kemarim. 

Hos.  10.   5  priests  thereof  (that)  rejoiced  on  it,  for 

4..1  priest,  /epeus  Mt 

Matt.  8.    4  show  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  the 
12.    4  which  were  with  him,  but  only  for  the  p.? 
5  how  that  on  the  sabbath  days  the  priests 
show  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  for 
2t,  which  is' not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the  pr. 
5  a  certain  priest  named  Zacharias,  of  the 

5.  14  show  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  for 

6.  4  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the  priests  alone? 
10. 31  by  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  pr. 
17.  14  Go  show  yourselves  unto  the  priests.  And 

John  1.  igVhen..  Jews  sentpriests  and  Levites  from 
Acts   4.    1  spakeuntothepeople,thepriests,andthe 

6.  7  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient  to 
14.  13  Then  the  priest  of  Jupiter,  which  was  be. 

5.   C  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order 

7.  1  For  this  Melchisedec.  .priest  of  the  most 
7.  3  Without  father.,  abideth  a  priest  con  tin, 
7.  11  that  another  priest  should  rise  after  the 
7.  15  after  the  similitude,  .ariseth  another  pr. 
7.  17,  21  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the 
7.  21  For  those  priests  were  made  without  an 

7.  23  they  truly  were  many  priests,  because  t. 

8.  4  be  a  priest,  seeing  that  there  are  [priests] 

0.  6  priests  went  nlwny*  into  the  first  tabern, 
10.  11  every  [priest")  standeth  daily  ministering 
10.  21  (having)  an  high  priest  over  the  house  of 

1.  6  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
5.  10  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests 

20.    6  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ 

PEItST,  chief  or  high  — 

L.l  ehirf priest,  apxtepefe  archiermis. 

Matt.  2.  4  when  lie  had  gathered  all  the  chief  priests 
16.  21  many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests 
20.  18  shall  lie  betrayed  unto  the  chief  priests  and 
21. 15  when  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  saw  the 


Mark 
Luke  ] 


neb. 


Rev. 


PRIEST 


775 


PRINCE 


Mark 


14. 
14. 
14. 
14 
14, 
14 
14. 
14 
14. 
.  14. 
15 
15 
15 
*5 
15 
Luke  3. 
9 
19. 


23. 

~3- 
z3- 
23- 
24. 

John  7. 

7- 
11. 


18. 

18. 

18. 

IS. 

19. 

19. 

19. 
Acts  4. 
4« 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
7- 
9- 
9- 
9- 

19. 

22. 

22. 

23- 

23. 

23- 

23- 

24. 


Eeb. 


23  chief  priests,  .came unto  him  as  he  wast. 

45  when  the  chief  priests,  .had  heard  his  p. 
3  Then  assembled  together  the  chief  priests 
3  unto  the  palace  of  the  high  priest,  who  was 

14  one  of  the  twelve,  .went  unto  the  chief  p. 

47  from  the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  p. 
.  51  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  s. 

57  led  (him)  away  to  Caiaphas  the  high  priest 

58  afar  off  unto  the  high  priest's  palace,  and 

59  Now  the  chief  priests,  and  elders,  and  all 
.  62  the  high  priest  arose,  and  said  unto  him 

63  high  priest  answered  and  said  unto  him 

65  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  say 
1  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people  took 
3  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests 
6  chief  priests  took  the  silver  pieces,  and  s. 

12  when  he  was  accused  of  the  chief  priests 
20  But  the  chief  priests  andelders  persuaded 
41  Likewise  also  the  chief  priests,  mocking 

62  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  came  together 
11  showed  unto  the  chief  priests  all  the  thi. 
26 in  thedaysof  Abiatharthehigh priest, and 
31  be  rejected  of.  .chief  priests,  and  scribes 
^,^  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  chief  priests 
iS  scribes  and  chief  priests  heard  (it),  and  s. 
27  there  come  to  him  the  chief  priests,  and 

1  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  sought  how 
10  went  unto  the  chief  priests,  to  betray  him 
43  from  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribesand 
47  smote  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut 
53  theyled  Jesusawaytothehigh priest :  and 

53  assembled  all  the  chief  priests  and  the  e. 

54  even  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest:  and 

55  chief  priests,  .sought  for  witness  against 

60  high  priest  stood  up  in  the  midst,  and  as. 

61  high  priest  asked  him,  and  said  unto  him 

63  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  and 

66  cometh  one  of  the  maids  of  the  high  priest 

1  chief  priests  held  a  consultation  with  the 

3  the  chief  priests  accused  him  of  many  th. 

10  knew  that  the  chief  priests  had  delivered 

11  chief  priests  moved  the  people,  that  he 

31  chief  priests  mocking  said  among  them. 

2  Annasand  Caiaphas  heingthehigh  priests 

22  rejected  of  the  elders  and  chief  priestsaiid 
47  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  and  the  chief 

1  the  [chief]  priests  and  the  scribes  came 

19  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  the  same  ho. 

2  chief  priests  and  scribes  sought  how  they 

4  communed  with  the  chief  priests  and  ca. 

50  smote  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut 
52  Then  Jesus  said  unto  the  chief  priests,  and 
54  brought  him  into  the  high  priest's  house 
66  chief  priests,  .came  together,  and  led  him 

4  Then  said  Pilate  to  the  chief  priests  and 
10  chief  priests  and  scribes  stood  and  vehe. 

13  when  he  had  called  together  the  chief  p. 

23  voices  of  them  [and  of  the  chief  priests]  p. 

20  how  the  chief  priests  and  our  rulers  del. 

32  and  the  chief  priests  sent  officers  to  take 
45  Then  came  the  officers  to  the  cluef  priests 
47  Then  gathered  the  chief  priests  and  the  P. 
49  being  the  high  priest  that  same  year,  said 

51  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prophesied 
57  Now  both  the  chief  priests;and  the  Phar. 
10  chief  priests  consulted  that  they  might 

3  having  received,  .from  the  chief  priests 
10  smote  the  high  priest's  servant,  and  cut 

13  Caiaphas,  which  was  the  high  priest  that 
15  disciple  was  known  unto  the  high  priest 

15  went  in.  .into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest 

16  disciple  which  was  known  unto  the  h.  pr. 
19  The  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  his  d. 

22  saying.Answerest  thou  the  high  priest  so? 

24  sent  him  bound  unto  Caiaphas  the  high  pr. 

26  One  of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  b. 
35  the  chief  priests  have  delivered  thee  unto 

6  When  the  chief  priests,  .saw  him,  they 
15  chief  priests  answered,  We  have  no  king 

21  Then  said  the  chief  priests  of  the  Jews  .to 
6  Annas  the  high  priest,  and  Caiaphas,  aud 

23  reported  all  that  the  chief  priests  and  el. 

17  high  priest  rose  up,  and  all  they  that  w. 
21  But  the  high  priest  came,  and  they  that 

24  when,  .the  [chief]  priests  heard  these  th. 

27  before  the  council :  and  the  high  priest 
1  Then  said  the  high  priest,  Are  these  thi. 

1  Saul,  yet  breathing . .  went  unto  the  high  p. 

14  authority  from  the  chief  priests  to  bind 
21  might  bring  them  bound  unto  the  chief  p. 
14  a  Jew,  (and)  chief  of  the  priests,  which 

5  As  also  the  high  priest  doth  bear  me  wi. 
30  commanded  the  chief  priests  and  all  their 

2  high  priest  Ananias  commanded  them  t. 

4  they. .said,  Revilestthou  God's  high  pri.? 

5  I  wist  not.  .that  lie  wras  the  high  priest 

14  they  came  to  the  chief  priests  andelders 

1  after  five  days  Ananias  the  high  priest  d. 

2  high  priest  and  the  chief  of  the  Jews  in. 

15  chief  priests  and  the  elders  of  the  Jews 
10  received  authority  from  the  chief  priests 
12  and  commission  from  the  chief  priests 
17  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest  in  th. 

3.  1  consider  the  apostle  and  high  priest  of  our 

4.  14  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  high  p. 

4.  15  For  we  have  not  an  high  priest  which  ca. 

5.  1  For  every  high  priest  taken  from  among 

5.  5  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made  an  high  p. 
5. 10  Called  of  God  an  high  priest  after  the  or. 

6.  20  made  an  high  priest  for  ever,  after  the  0. 

7.  26  Bor  such  an  high  priest  became  us,  (who 
7.  27  Who  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high  pr. 


Heb.  7.  2S  For  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  w. 
8.    1  We  have  such  an  high  priest,  who  is  set 

8.  3  For  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer 

9.  7  But  into  the  second  (went)  the  high  priest 
9.  11  But  Christ  being  come  an  high  priest  of 
9.  25  as  the  high  priest  entereth  into  the  holy 

13. 11  brought  into  the  sanctuary  by  the  high  p. 
2.  P 'nest,  hpevs  hiereus. 

Acts  5.  24  Now  when  [the  high  priest]  and  the  capt. 
PRIEST,  of  the  high  — 

Belonging  to  the  chief  priest?  apxtepartnos  archie. 
Acts    4.   6  as  were  of  the  kindred  of  the  high  priast 
PRIEST,  to  be  — 
To  be  or  act  as  a  priest,  fna  kahan,  3. 

Hos.   4.    6  that  thou  shaft  be  no  priest  to  me  :  seeing 
PRIESTHOOD  — 
1. Priesthood,  hdhs  kshunnah. 

Exod4o.  15  shall  surely  be  an  everlasting  priesthood 

Numio.  10  with  thee :  and  seek  ye  the  priesthood 

18.    1  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  your  priesthood 

25.  13  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  priesthood 

Josh. 18.   7  for  the  priesthood  of  the  Lord  (is)  their 

Ezra  2.  62  therefore  were  they,  .put  from  the  priest. 

Neh.   7.  64  therefore  were  they .  .put  from  the  priest. 

13.  29  because  they  have  defiled  the  priesthood 

13.  29  the  covenant  of  the  priesthood,  aud  of  the 

"2.  Priesthood,  assembly  of  priests,  iepdrenfia  hiera. 

1  Pe.  2.    5  a  spiritual  house,  an  holy  priesthood,  to 

2.  9  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood 
3. Priesthood,  priestly  office,  Upaxivvn  hierosune. 

Heb.  7.  11  perfection  were  by  the  Levitical  priesth. 

7. 12  For  the  priesthood  being  changed,  there 

7.  14  Moses  spake  nothing  concerning  [priest.] 

7.  24  continuethever,  hath  an  unchangeable  p. 

PRIEST'S  OFFICE  — 

1. Priesthood,  nsnz  kehunnah. 

Exodag.   g  priest's  office  shall  be  theirs  for  a  perpet. 
Num.  3.  10  and  they  shall  wait  on  theirpriest's  office 

18.  7  shall  keep  your  priest's  office  for  every  th. 
18.    7  I  have  given yoiu-priest'soffice  (unto you) 

1  Sa.    2.  36  Put  me.  .into  one  of  the  priest's  offices 

2.  Priesthood,  priestly  office,  Uparela  hierateia. 

Luke  1.  9  According  to  the  custom  of  the  priest's  o. 
PRIEST'S  OFFICE,  to  do,  execute  or  minister  in  the  — 
1.7V?  act  as  a  priest,  jn2  kahan. 

Exod28.  1,  3,  4,  41  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  o. 
29.    1  to  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  office 

29.  44  his  sons,  to  minister  to  me  in  the  priest's  0. 

30.  30  may  minister  unto  me  in  the  priest's  office 

31.  10  his  sons,  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office 
35.  19  his  sons,  to  minister  in  the  priest'soffice 
39.  41  garments,  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office 
40. 13,  15  mayministeruntomeinthepriest'sof. 

Lev.    7.  35  minister  unto  the  Lord  in  the  priest's  of. 

16.  32  to  minister  in  the  priest's  office  in  his  fa. 

Num.  3.    3  consecrated  to  minister  in  the  priest's  of. 

3.  4  Ithamar  ministered  in  the  priest'soffice 
Deutio.    6  son  ministered  in  the  priest's  office  in  his 

1  Ch.  6.  10  he  (it  is)  that  executed  the  priest's  office 

24.    2  and  Ithamar  executed  the  priest'soffice 

2  Ch.11.  14  from  executing  the  priest's  office  unto  the 
Eze.  44.  13  to  do  the  office  of  a  priest  unto  me,  nor 

2.  To  act  as  a  priest,  leparev(o  hierateuG, 

Luke  1.    8  while  he  executed  the  priest's  office  before 
PRINCE  — 
1.  Satraps,  N;j?i"^:nx  achashdarpenayya. 

Dan.  3.  2  king  sent  to  gather  together  the  princes 
3.  3  Then  the  princes,  .were  gathered  togeth. 
3.  27  princes,  .being  gathered  together,  saw  th. 
6.  1  an  hundred  and  twenty  princes,  which  sh. 
6.  2  the  princes  might  give  accounts  unto  th. 
6.  3  preferred  above  the  presidents  and  prin. 
6.  4  princes  sought  to  find  occasion  against  D. 
6.  6  princes  assembled  together  to  the  king 
6.  7  princes,  .have  consulted  together  toesta. 
2. Fat  ones,  D'jc^g  chashmannim. 

Psa.  68.  31  Princes  shall  come  out  of  Egypt ;  Ethiopia 

3.  Priest, prince,  minister,  fro  kohen. 

Job  12. 19  He  leadeth  princes  away  spoiled,  and  ov. 
■i.  Leader,  T43  nagid. 

1  Ki  14.   7  and  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  Isr. 

16.  2  and  made  thee  prince  over  my  people  Is. 
Job  31.  37  as  a  prince  would  I  go  near  unto  him 
Psa.  76.  12  He  shall  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes:  he 
Prov  28.  16  prince  that  wanteth  understanding  (is) 
Eze.  28.    2  Sou  of  man,  say  unto  the  prince  of  Tyrus 
Jjau.    9.  25  build  Jerusalem  unto  the  Messiah  the  p. 

9.  26  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall 
ii.  22  broken;  yea,  also  the  prince  of  the  cove 
5.  Willing,  noble,  3"ij  nadib. 

1  Sa.   2.    8  set  (them)  among  princes,  and  to  make 
Job    12.  21  He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and 
2i.  28  For  ye  say.  Where  (is)  the  house  of  the  p.? 
34.  18  (Is  it  fit)  to  say.  .to  princes,  (Ye  are)  un.? 
Psa.  47.    9  princes  of  the  people  are  gathered  toget. 
107.  40  poureth  contempt  upon  princes,  and  ca. 
113.    8  with  princes,  (even)  with  the  princes  of 
11S.    9  (It  is)  better.,  than  to  put  confidence  inp. 
146.    3  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  (nor)  in  the 
Prov.  17.    7  becomethnot.  .much  less  do  lying  lips  a  p. 

17.  26  not  good,  (nor)  to  strike  princes  for  equity 

19.  6  Many  will  entreat  the  favour  of  the  prince  I 


Prov  2 


iCh. 


Ezra 
Eze. 


7  put  lower  in  the  presence  of  the  prince 
song  7.    1  How  beautiful.  .0  prince's  daughter !  the 

6. Anointed,  =j*p3  nasik. 

Psa.  83.  11  all  their  princes  as  Zebah  and  as  Zalmu. 
Eze.  32.  30  There  (be)  the  princes  of  the  north,  all  of 
Dan.  11.    8  their  gods,  with  their  princes,  (and)  with 

7.  Lifted  up,  exalted,  trfc'j  nasi. 

Gen.  17.  20  twelve  princes  shall  he  beget,  and  I  will 
23.  6  Thou  (art)  a  mighty  prince  among  us  :  in 
25.  16  twelve  princes  according  to  their  nations 
34.  2  prince  of  the  country,  saw  her,  he  took  her 
Num.  1.  16  princes  of  the  tribes  of  their  fathers,  heads 
1.  44  princes  of  Israel,  (being)  twelve  men,  each 
7.  2  That  the  princes  of  Israel,  .the  princes  of 
3  a  wagon  for  two  of  the  princes,  and  for  e. 

10  princes  offered,  .even  the  princes  offered 

1 1  offer  their  offering,  each  prince  on  his  day 
18  On  the  second  day.  .prince  of  Issachar,  did 
24.  3°j  36,  42,  48  prince  of  the  children  of 
54,  6o,  66, 72,  78  prince  of  the  cluldren  of 
84  when  it  was  anointed,  by  the  princes  of  I. 

10.    4  princes . .  shall  gather  themselves  unto  thee 

16.  2  two  hundred  and  fifty  princes  of  the  asse. 

17.  2  of  all  their  princes,  according  to  the  house 
17.  6  every  one  of  their  princes . .  for  each  prin ce 
25.  14  prince  of  a  chief  house  among  the  Simeon. 

25.  18  daughter  of  a  prince  of  Midian,  their  sister 
27.    2  before  the  princes  and  all  the  congregation 

31.  13  all  the  princes  of  the  congregation,  went 

32.  2  unto  the  princes  of  the  congregation,  say. 
34.  18  ye  shall  take  one  prince  of  every  tribe,  to 
34.  22,  24,  25,  2'6,  27,  28  the  prince  of  the  tribe  of 
34.  23  The  prince  of  the  children  of  Joseph,  for 

36.  1  spake  before  Moses,  and  before  the  princes 
Josh.  9.  15  princes  of  the  congregation  sware  untot. 

9.  18  princes  of  the  congregation  had  sworn  un. 

9.  18  congregation  murmured  against  the  pri. 

9.  19  all  the  princes  said  unto  all  the  congrega. 

9  21  princes  said  unto  them,  .as  the  princes  had. 
13.  21  whom  Moses  smote  with  the  princes  of  M. 
17.  4  they  came  near  bef  ore.  .theprinces,  saying 
22. 14  ten  princes;  of  eacli  chief  house  a  prince 
22.  30  princes  of  the  congregation,  and  heads  of 
22.  32  princes,  returned  from  the  children  of  R. 
1  Kin.  34  but  I  will  make  him  prince  all  thedaysof 

2.  10  begat  Nahshon,  prince  of  the  children  oi 

4.  38  mentioned  by  (their)  names  (were)  princes 

5.  6  Beerah  his  son . .  he  (was)  prince  of  the  R. 
7.  40  mighty  men  of  valour,  chief  of  theprinces 
1.  8  numbered  them  unto  Sheshbazzar,  the  p. 
7.  27  the  prince  shall  be  clothed  with  desolation 

12.  10  This  burden  (concerueth)  the  prince  in  J. 
12.  i2  prince  that  (is)among  them  shall  bear  upon. 
19.  1  take  thou  up  a  lamentation  for  the  princes 
21.  12  it  (shall  be)  upon  all  the  princes  of  Israel 

21.  25  profane  wicked, prince  of  Israel,  whose  day 

22.  6  princes  of  Israel,  every  one  were  in  thee 

26.  16  Then  all  the  princes  of  the  sea  shall  come 

27.  21  the  princes  of  Kedar,  they  occupied  with 
30. 13  there  shall  be  no  more  a  prince  of  the  land 
32.  29  all  herprinces,  which  with,  their  might  are 
34.  24  my  servant  David  a  prince  among  them  ;  I 

37.  25  my  servant  David  (shall  be)  their  prince 
37.    2,  3  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal 
39.    1  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal 
39.  18  drink  the  blood  of  the  princes  of  the  earth 

44.  3  (It  is)  for  the  prince  ;  the  prince,  he  shall 

45.  7  for  the  prince  on  the  one  side  and  on  the 
45.  8  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  pe. 
45.  o  Let  it  suffice  you,  O  princes  of  Israel,  rem. 
45.  16  shall  give  this  oblation  for  the  priuce  in 

45.  17  it  shall  be  the  prince's  part  (to  give)  burnt 
45. 22  upon  that  day  shall  the  prince  prepare  for 

46.  2  prince  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch. 
46.    4  burnt  offering  that  the  prince  shall  offer 
46.    8  when  the  prince  shall  enter,  he  shall  go 
46.  10  prince  in  the  midst  of  them,  when  they  go 
46.  12  Now  when  the  priuce  shall  prepare  a  vo. 
46.  16  If  the  prince  give  agift  unto  any  of  his  s. 
46.  17  after  it  shall  return  to  the  prince  :  but  his 
46.  18  Moreover  the  prince  shall  not  take  of  the 
48.  21  residue  (shall  be)  for  the  prince,  on  the 
48.  21  over  against  the  portions  for  the  prince 
48.  22  in  the  midst  (of  that)  which  is  the  prince's 
48.  22  border  of  Benjamin,  shall  be  fur  the  prince 

8. Prefects,  D^Jp  seganim. 

Isa.  41. 25  he  shall  come  upon  princes  as  (upon)  mo. 

9. Foremost,  D""fH5  partemim, 

Dan.    1.   3  and  of  the  king's  seed,  and  of  the  princes 

10.  Decider,  consul,  pxp  qatsin. 

Prov.25.  15  By  long  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded 
Dan.  11.  18  but  a  prince  for  his  own  behalf  shall  cau. 
Mic.    3.    1  ye  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  (Is  it) 

3.  9  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel,  that  abhor 

11.  Great,  elder,  an  rob. 

Jer.   39.  13  and  all  the  king  of  Babylon's  princes 

41.    1  princes  of  the  king,  even  ten  men  with  him 

12.  Very  great,  j?l?l  rabreban. 

Dan.   5.    2,  3  king,  and  his  princes,  his  wives,  and  his 

1$.A  secret  or  heavy  one,  noble,  fin  razon. 

Prov  14.  28  want  of  people  (is)  the  destruction  of  the  p. 

14.  To  be  a  noble,  |n  razan. 

Judg.  5.    3  Hear,  O  ye  kings ;  give  ear,  0  ye  princes 

Prov.  8.  15  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  j. 

31.   4  kings  to  drink  wine,  nor  for  princes  stro. 


PRINCE 


776 


PRISON 


Isa.   40.  23  That  bringeth  the  princes  to  nothing ;  he 
'Hah.  1. 10  and  the  princes  shall  be  a  scorn  unto  them 

75.Head,  2)rince,  captain,  !&  sar. 

Gen.  12.  15  princes  also  of  Pharaoh  saw  her,  and  en. 
Exod.  2.  14  Who  made  theea  prince  and  ajudgeover 
Nimi2i.  18  princes  digged  the  well,  the  nobles  of  the 
22.    8  and  the  princes  of  Moab  abode  with  Bal. 
22.  13  said  unto  the  princes  of  Balak,  Get  you 
22.  14  princes  of  Moab  rose  up,  and  they  went 
22.  15  Balak  sent  yet  again  princes,  more,  and 
22.  21  saddled  his  ass,  and  went  with  the  pritt. 
22.  35  So  Balaam  went  with  the  princes  of  Bal. 

22.  40  sent  to  Balaam,  and  to  the  princes  that 

23.  6  he  stood.,  he,  and  all  the  princes  of  Moab 
23. 17  stood  by  his  burnt  offering,  and  the  prin. 

Judg.  5.  15  the  princes  of  Issachar  (were)  with  Debo. 

7.  25  they  took  two  princes  of  the  Midianites 

8.  3  hath  delivered  into  your  hands  the  prin. 
8.   6  princes  of  Succoth  said,  (Are)  the  hands 

8.  14  described  unto  him  the  princes  of  Succoth 
10.  18  princes  of  Gilead  said  one  to  another,  W. 

1  Sa.  18.  30  Then  the  princes  of  the  Philistines  went 

29-    3.  3>  4»  4»  9  tlie  princes  of  the  Philistines 

2  Sa.  3.  38  Know  ye  not  that  there  is  a  prince  and  a 

10.    3  princes  of  the  children  of  Amnion  saidun. 

19.  6  that  thou  regardest  neither  princes  nor  s. 

1  Ki.  4.    2  these  (were)  the  princes  which  he  had;  A. 

9.  22  his  princes,  and  his  captains,  and  rulers 

20.  14,  15,  17,  19  youngmen  of  theprincesof  the 

2  Ei.11. 14  the  princes  and  the  trumpeters  by  the  ki. 

24.  12  his  princes,  and  his  officers:  and  the  king 
24.  14  carried  away  allJentsalem,  and  all  the  p. 

1  Ch.19.    3  But  the  princes  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

22. 17  David  also  commanded  all  the  princes  of 

23.  2  gathered  together  all  the  princes  ot  Israel 

24.  6  wrote  them  before  the  king  and  the  prin. 

27.  22  These  (were)  the  princes  of  the  tribes  of 

28.  1  all  the  princes  of  Israel,  the  princes  of 

28.  21  also  the  princes  and  all  the  people  (will 

29.  6  Then  the  chief  of  the  fathers  and  princes 
29.  24  all  the  princes,  and  the  mighty  men,  and 

2  Ch.12.    5  Then  came  Shemaiah.  .(to)  the  princes  of 

12.  6  Whereupon  the  princes  of  Israel  and  the 
17.    7  third  year  of  his  reign  he  sent  to  his  pri. 

21.  4  and  (divers)  also  of  the  princes  of  Israel 

21.  9  Then  Jehoram  went  forth  with  his  prin. 

22.  8  found  the  princes  of  Judah,  and  the  sons 

23.  13  and  the  princes  and  the  trumpets  by  the 

24.  10  all  the  princes  and  all  the  people  rejoiced 
24.  17  after  the  death  of  Juhoiada  came  the  pri. 
24.  23  destroyed  all  the  princes  of  the  people  f. 
28. 14  before  the  princes  and  all  the  congregat. 

28.  21  took  away  a  portion,  .of  the  princes,  and 

29.  30  Hezekiah  the  king  and  the  princes  com. 

30.  2  king  had  taken  counsel,  and  his  princes 
30.  6  letters  from  the  king  and  his  princes  th. 
30. 12  commandment  of  the  king  and  of  the  pr. 

30.  24  princes  gave  to  the  congregation  a  thous. 

31.  8  when  Hezekiah  and  the  princes  came  and 

32.  3  He  took  counsel  with  his  princes  and  his 
32.  31  ambassadors  of  the  princes  of  Babylon 
35.    8  his  princes  gave  willingly  unto  the  people 

36. 18  the  treasures  of  the  king,  and  of  his  pri. 
Ezra    7.  28  and  before  all  the  king's  mighty  princes 

8.  20  princes  had  appointed  for  the  service  of 

9.  1  princes  came  to  me,  saying,  The  people 
9.    2  hand  of  the  princes  and  rulers  hath  been 

10.  8  according  to  the  counsel  of  the  princes 
Neh.   9.  32  come  upon  us,  «»n  our  kings,  on  our  prin. 

9.  34  Neither  have  our  kings,  our  princes,  our 

9.  38  ourprinces,  Levites,(and)priests,  seal  (un. 
12.  31  Then  I  brought  up  the  princes  of  Judah 
12.  32  went  Hoshaiah,  and  half  of  the  princes  of 

Esth.  1.  3  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and  his 
1.  3iiobles  and  princes  of  the  provinces,  (being) 
1.  11  to  show  the  people  and  the  princes  her  b. 
1. 14  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  Media,  which 
1.  16  answered  before  the  king  and  the  princes 
1.  16  also  to  all  the  princes,  and  to  all  the  peo. 

1.  18  say  this  day  unto  all  the  king's  princes 
1. 21  the  saying  pleased  the  king  and  the  prin. 

2.  18  made  a  great  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and 

3.  1  set  his  seat  above  all  the  princes  that  (w.) 
5. 11  how  he  had  advanced  him  above  the  pri. 
6.   9  of  one  of  the  king's  most  noble  princes 

Job     3.  15  Or  with  princes  that  had  gold,  who  filled 

29.    9  princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid  (their) 

34.  19  that  accepteth  not  the  persons  of  princes 

Psa.  45. 16  whom  thou  mayest  make  princes  in  all 

68.  27  princes  of  .Tudah  (and)  their  council,  the 

68.  27  princes  ofZebulon,  (and)  the  princes  of  N. 

82.   7  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of  the  pri. 

105.  22  To  bind  his  princes  at  his  pleasure,  and 

119.  23  Princes  also  did  sit  (and)  speak  against  me 

119.  161  Princes  have  persecuted  me  without  a 

148.  11  Kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  people ;  prin. 

Prov.  8.  16  By  me  princes  rule  and  nobles,  (even)  all 

19.  10  seemly,  .for  a  servant  to  have  rule  over  p. 

28.    2  many  (are)  the  princes  thereof :  but  by  a 

Eccl.  10.    7  princes  walking  as  servants  upon  the  ea. 

10.  16  whenthyking(is)achild,  and  thyprinces 
10.  17  thy  princes  eat  in  due  season,  for  streng. 

Isa.  1.  23  The  princes  (are)  rebellious,  and  compa. 
3.  4  I  will  give  children  (to  be)  their  princes 
3.  14  ancients  of  his  people,  and  the  princes  th. 
9.  6  The  everlasting  father.The  prince  of  peace 
10.  8  saith,  (Are)not  my  princes  altogether  ki.? 
19. 11  Surely  the  princes  of  Zoan  (are)  fools,  the 
19.  13  princes  of  Zoan  are  become  fools,  the  pr. 
21.  5  eat,  drink:  arise,  ye  princes,  (and)  anoint 
23.    8  whuse  merchants  (are)  princes,  whose  tr 


Isa.  30.    4  For  his  princes  were  at  Zoan,  and  his  am. 

31.  9  princes  shall  be  afraid  of  the  ensign,  saith 

32.  1  reign  in  righteousness,  and  princes  shall 
34.  12  none  (shall  be)  there,  and  all  her  princes 

43.  28  Therefore  I  have  profaned  the  princes  of 
49.    7  princes  also  shall  worship,  because  of  the 

Jer.  1.  iS  against  the  princes  thereof,  against  the 
2.  26  their  princes,  and  their  priests,  and  their 
4.  9  shall  perish,  and  the  heart  of  the  princes 
8.  1  bones  of  his  princes,  and  the  bones  of  the 
17.  25  kings  and  princes.,  they,  and  their  princes 
24.    1  princes  of  Judah,  with  the  carpenters  and 

24.  8  So  will  I  give  Zedekiah.  .and  his  princes 

25.  18  kings  thereof,  and  the  princes  thereof,  to 

25.  19  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  .and  his  princes 

26.  10  When  the  princes  of  Judah  heard  these 
26.  n  Then  spake  the  priests,  .unto  the  princes 
26.  12  Then  spake  Jeremiah  unto  all  the  princes 
26.  '16  Then  said  the  princes  and  all  the  people 
26. 21  with  all  his  mighty  men,  and  all  the  prin. 
29.  2  princes  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and  the 
32.  32  their  princes,  their  priests,  and  their  pro. 
34. 10  Now  when  all  the  princes,  and  all  the  pe. 
34.  19  princes  of  Judah,  and  the  princes  of  Jer. 

34.  21  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah,  and  his  princes 

35.  4  which  (was)  by  the  chamber  of  the  prine. 

36.  12  all  the  princes  sat  there,  .and  all  the  pri. 
36.  14  Therefore  all  the  princes  sent  Jehudi  the 
36.  19  Then  said  the  princes  unto  Baruch,  Go 

36.  21  in  the  ears  of  all  the  princes  which  stood 
37. 14  took  Jeremiah,  and  brought  him  to  the  p. 

37.  15  the  princes  were  wroth  with  Jeremiah,  and 
3S.  4  princes  said  unto  the  king,  We  beseech 

38.  17,  18,  22  forth  unto  the  king  of  Babylon's  p. 
38.  25  But  if  the  princes  hear  that  I  have  talked 

38.  27  Then  came  all  the  princes  unto  Jeremiah 

39.  3,  3  princes,  .with  all  the  residue  of  the  p. 

44.  17  our  fathers,  our  kings,  and  our  princes,  in 
44.  21  your  fathers,  your  kings,  andyour  princes 

48.  7  into  captivity  (with)  his  priests  and  his  p. 

49.  3  (and)  his  priests  and  his  princes  together 

49.  38  destroy  from  thence  the  king  and  the  pr. 

50.  35  and  upon  her  princes,  and  upon  her  wise 

51.  57  I  will  make  drunk  her  princes,  and  her 
51.  59  reign.  And  (this)  Seraiah  (was)  a  quiet  p. 
52. 10  slew  also  all  the  princes  of  Judah  in  Rib. 

Lam.  1.    6  her  priuces  are  become  like  harts  (that) 
2.    2  polluted  the  kingdom  and  the  princes  th. 
2.   9  king  and  her  princes  (are)  among  the  Ge. 
5.  12  Princes  are  hanged  up  by  their  hand :  the 

Eze.  11.  1  five  and  twenty  men.  .princes  of  the  peo. 
17.  12  hath  taken,  .the  primes  thereof,  and  led 
22.  27  Her  princes  in  the  midst  thereof  (are)  like 

Dan.  1 .  7  Unto  whom  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  gave 
1.  8  requested  of  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  that 
1.  9  into  favour  and  tender  love  with  the  pri. 
1. 10  prince  of  the  eunuchs  said  unto  Daniel,  I 
1.  11  Melzar,  whom  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs 

1.  18  then  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  brought 
8.  11  magnified  (himself)  even  to  the  prince  of 

8.  25  stand  up  againsttheprinceofprinces;  but 

9.  6  which  spake  in  thy  name  to.  .our  princes 
9.    8  confusion  of  face,  to  our  kings,  to  our  p. 

10.  13  But  the  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia 
10.  13  one  of  the  chief  princes,  came  to  help  me 
10.  20  now  will  I  return  to  fight  with  the  prince 
10.  20  when  I  am  gone  forth,  lo,  the  prince  of  G. 
10.  21  none  that  holdeth.  .but  Michael  your  pr. 
ti.    5  shall  be  strong,  and  (one)  of  his  princes 

12.  1  great  prince  which  standeth  for  the  chil. 
Hos.    3.    4  shallabide.  .withoutaprince.and  without 

5. 10  princes  of  Judah  were  like  them  that  re. 
7.    3  make  the  king  glad,  .and  the  princes  with 
7.    5  In  the  day  of  our  king  the  princes  have 
7.  16  their  princes  shall  fall  by  the  sword  for 
8. 10  sorrow,  .for  the  burden  of  the  king  of  p. 
9.  15  I  will  love  them  no  more :  all  their  princes 

13.  to  thou  saidst,  Give  me  a  king  and  princes? 
Anios'i.  15  he  and  his  princes  together,  saith  the 

2.  3  will  slay  all  the  princes  thereof  with  him 
Mic.  7.  3  the  prince  asketh,  and  the  judge  (asketh) 
Zeph.  i.    8  that  I  will  punish  the  princes,  and  thek. 

3.  3  Her  princes  within  her  (are)  roaringlions 

1Q.A  warrior,  knight,  v-hy  shalish. 

Eze.  23.  15  all  of  them  princes  to  look  to,  after  the 

17.-4  chief  leader,  apxvyo's  arehegos. 

Acts  3.  15  killed  the  prince  of  life,  whom  God  hath 
5.  31  exalted .  .(to  be)  a  prince  and  a  Saviour,  for 

lS.CInef,  prince,  &px&v  O/rchdn. 

Matt.  9.  34  He  casteth  out  devils  through  the  prince 

12.  24  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  the  devils 

20.  25  Ye  know  that  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles 

Mark  3.  22  by  the  prince  of  the  devils  casteth  he  out 

Johni2.  31  now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  he  cast 

14.  30  for  the  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and 
16.  11  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged 

1  Co.  2.  6  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  that  come 

2.  8  Which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world 

Eph.   2.  2  according  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of 

Rev.    1.  5  and  the  prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth 

19.  A  leader,  ^yeixuiv  hegrmon. 

Matt.  2.   6  art  not  the  least  among  the  princes  of  J.< 
PRINCE,  to  make  (self)  a — 
1.77)  make  prince,  "ttb*  sur,  5. 

Hos.    8.    4  they  have  made  princes,  and  I  knew  (it) 

2.  To  make  self  prince,  Tip  sarar,  7. 

Nnmi6.  13  except  thou  make  thyself  altogether  a  p. 


PRINCESS  — 
Princess,  n*jb'  sarah. 

1  Ki.11.    3  he  had  seven  hundred  wives,  princesses 

Lam/  1.    1  princess  among  the  provinces,  (how)  is 
PRINCIPAL  (thing,  officer,  plant)  — 
1. Father,  3N  ab. 

1  Ch.24.  6  one  principal  household  being  taken  for 
2. Honourable,  mighty,  "V^N  addir. 

Jer.  25.  34  wallow  yourselves,  .ye  principal  of  the  fl. 
25.  35  nor  the  principal  of  the  flock  to  escape 
25.  36  and  an  howling  uf  the  principal  of  the  fl. 

%,  Anointed,  VpJ  iiasik. 

Mic.  5.  5  seven  shepherds,  and  eight  principal  men 
A.Priest,  jmnce,  minister,  }rib  kohen. 

1  Ki.  4.  5  Zabud  the  son  of  Nathan  (was) principal  0. 
5. Head,  chief,  viO  rosh. 

Exod3o.  23  Take  thou  also  unto  thee  principal  spice? 

Lev.    6.    5  he  shall  even  restore  it  in  the  principal 

Num  5.    7  recompense  his  trespass  with  the  princi. 

1  Ch.24.  31  principal  fathers  over  agaiust  their  you. 
Neh.  11.  17  the  principal  to  begin  the  thanksgiving 

6.  Beginning,  PTKl  reshith. 

Prov.  4.  7  Wisdom  (is),  .principal  thing ;  (therefore) 
7. A  rota,  range,  rriYv  sorah. 

Isa.  28.  25  cast  in  the  principal  wheat,  and  the  app 
S.Head,  prince,  chief,  "it?  sar. 

Jer.  52. 25  principal  scribe  of  the  host,  who  mustered 

2K1.25. 19  principal  scribe  of  the  host,  which  mustered 

9. Intertwining  branches,  WfX'iy.  seruqqim. 

Isa.  16.  8  broken  down  the  principal  plants  thereof 
10.  According  to  pre-eminence,  war'  e^oxyv  &v. 

Acts  25.  23  withthechief  captains  and  principal  men 
PRINCIPALITY  — 

1.  Principalities,  nb'SOD  marashoth. 

Jer.  13. 18  for  your  principalities  shall  come  down 

2.  Beginning,  principality,  apx^]  arche. 

Rom.  8.  38  principalities,  nor  powers,  northings  pr. 

Eph.  1.  21  iFar  above  all  principality,  and  power,  and 
3.  10  intent  that  now  unto  the  principalities  and 
6.  12  but  against  principalities,  against  powers. 

Col.  1.  16  principalities,  or  powers :  all  things  were 
2.  10  which  is  the  head  of  all  principality  and 
2.  15  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers 

Titus  3.    1  to  be  subject  to  principalities  and  powers 
PRINCIPLE  — 
I. Step,  element, principle,  crotx^ov  stoicheion. 

Heb.  5.  12  which  (be)  the  first  principles  of  the  ora. 

^.Beginning,  a.px'h  arche. 

Heb.   6.    1  leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
PRINT  — 
A  stroke,  mark,  type,  rviros  tupos. 

John2o.  25  Except  I  shall  see  in  his  hands  the  print 
20.  25  put  my  finger  into  the  [print]  of  the  nails 
PRINT,  to  (set  a)  — 
l.To  seta  circle  or  limit,  npn  chaqah,  7. 

Job   13.  27  thou  settest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my 

2.  To  give,  }ru  nathan. 

Lev.  19.  28  Ye  shall  not  .print  any  marks  upon  you 
PRINTED,  to  be  — 
To  be  graven,  p$n  chaqaq,  6. 

Job  19.  23  now  written !  oh  that  they  were  printed 

PRIS'-CA,  Tlpia-Ka. 

A  female  believer  in  Ephesus  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salu- 
tation ;  without  doubt  the  same  as  Priscilla. 

2  Ti.  4.  ig  Salute  P.  and  Aquila,  and  the  household 
PRIS-CLL'-LA,  Up'to-KtWa. 

The  wife  of  Aquila  of  Pontus,  who  had  been  driven 
from  Rome  by  Claudius,  accompanied  Paul  a  little,  and 
afterwards  instructed  Apollos  of  Alexandria. 

Acts  18.    2  And  found  a  certain  Jew.  .with  his  wife  P. 

18.  18  sailed  thence,  .and  with  him  P.  and  Aqu. 

18.  26  whom  when  Aquila  and  P.  had  heard,  they 

Rom. 16.    3  Greet[r.]and  Aquila  rny  helpers  in  Christ 

1  Co.  16.  19  Aquila  and  P.  salute  you  much  in  the  Lo. 

PRISON  — 

l.To  bind,  ipx  asar. 

Judgi6.  21  and  he  did  grind  in  the  prison  house 

16.  25  they  called  for  Samson  out  of  the  prison 

2.Hou$e  of  tlie  bound  one,  *vidn  n'2  brth  esur. 

Eccl.   4. 14  For  out  of  prison  he  cometh  to  reign ;  w. 
Jer.   37. 15  put  him  in  prison  in  the  house  of  Jonat. 

3.  House  of  restraint,  n^3,  n^?,  n*^3  Jvzbcth  kelu. 

1  Ki.22*.  27  Put  this  (fellow)  in  the  prison,  and  feed 

2  Ki.  17.  4  the  king  of  Assyria.. bound  him  in  prison 

25.  27  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin . .  out  of  pr. 

r  Ch.18.  26  Put  this  (fellow)  in  the  prison,  and  feed 

Jer.  37.    4  people ;  for  they  had  not  put  him  into  p. 

37.  18  this  people,  that  ye  have  put  me  in  prison 

52.31  lifted,  .and  brought  him  forth  out  of  pri 

4.  Round  house,  or  tower,  Tib  n*3  beth  sohar. 

Gen.  39.  20  into  the  prison,  .he  was  there  in  the  pri. 
39.  21  favour  in  tlie  sight  of  the  keeper  of  the  p. 
39.  22  keeperofthe  prison  committed  to  Joseph's 
39.  22  all  the  prisoners  that  (were)  in  the  prison 

39.  23  The  keeper  of  the  prison  looked  not  to 

40,  3  into  the  prison,  the  place  where  Joseph's 
40.    5  butler  and  the  baker . .  bound  in  the  prison 


PRISON 


777 


PROCURE 


^Restraint,  xhs  kele. 

2  Ki.25.  29  And  changed  his  prison  garments:  and  he 

Isa.  42.  7  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison 
42.  22  they  are  hid  in  prison  houses:  they  are  for 

Jer.  52.  33  And  changed  his  prison  garments:  and  he 
6. House  of  inspection,  rng$  nra  beth  pequddah. 

Jer.  52.  11  put  him  in  prison  till  the  day  of  hisdeath 
7.  Tozfare,  stocks,  pillory,  nasnD  mahpeketh. 

_Ji.i6. 10  put  him  in  a  prison  house  ;  for  (lie  was)  in 
"jer.   29.  26  thou  shouldest  put  him  in  prison,  and  in 

8. Prison,  watch,  TTjgD  mattarah. 

Neh.   3.  25  house,  that  (was)  by  the  court  of  the  pri. 

12.  39  gate:  and  they  stood  still  in  the  prison  gate 

Jer.  32.    2  prophet  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  p. 

32.    8  came  to  me  in  the  court  of  the  prison,  a. 

32.  12  the  Jews  that  sat  in  the  court  of  the  pri. 

33.  1  was  yet  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
37.  21  commit  Jeremiah  into  the  court  of  the  p. 

37.  21  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the  p. 

38.  6  that  (was)  in  the  court  of  the  prison  :  and 
38.  13  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the  pr. 

38.  28  Jeremiah  abode  in  the  court  of  the  prison 

39.  14  took  Jeremiah  out  of  the  court  of  the  pr. 
39.  15  while  he  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  p. 

9. Prison,  enclosed  or  secure  place,  naipa  masger. 
Psa.142.   7  Bring  my  soul  out  of  prison,  that  I  may 
Isa.    24. 22  shall  be  shut  up  in  the  prison,  and  after 
42.    7  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison 

10. Restraint,  isy  otser. 

Isa.  53.  8  He  wTas  taken  from  prison  and  from  jud. 
11.  Ward,  ii??;p  mishmar. 

Gen.  42.  19  brethren  be  bound  in  the  house  of  yourp. 

l'2.Band,  prison,  nip  qoach. 

Isa.  61.    1  opening  of  the  prison  to  (them  that  are) 

lZ.Place  of  bonds,  prison,  Sea^/xoT-qptou  desmoterion. 
Matt  1 1.    2  when  John  had  heard  in  the  prison  the 
Acts    5.  21  sent  to  the  prison  to  have  them  brought 

5.  23  prison  truly  found  we  shut  with  all  safety 
16.  26  foundations  of  the  prison  were  shaken 

14. House,  ottcri/ia  oikema. 

Acts  12.    7  light  shined  in  the  prison  :  and  he  smote 
15. .4  keeping,  place  of  keeping,  rripno-is  teresis. 
Acts  5.  18  and  put  them  in  the  common  prison 
18.  A  guarding,  place  of  guarding,  <pv\aKT\j)hulake. 
Matt.  5.  25  lest  at  any  time. .thou  be  cast  into  prison 
14.    3  put  (him)  in  prison  for  Herodias' sake,  his 
14.  10  he  sent,  and  beheaded  John  in  the  prison 
18.  30  but  went  and  cast  him  into  prison,  till  he 
25.  36  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me 
25.  39  Or  when  saw  we  thee  sick,  or  in  prison 
25.  43  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me  not 

25.  44  sick,  or  in  prison,  and  did  not  minister 
Mark  6.  17  bound  him  in  prison  for  Herodias'  sake 

6.  27  he  went  and  beheaded  him  in  the  prison 
Luke  3. 20  this  above  all,  that  he  shut  up  John  in  p. 

12.  58  officer,  and  the  officer  cast  thee  into  pris. 

21.  12  into  prisons,  being  brought  before  kings 

22.  33  ready  to  go  with  thee,  both  into  prison 
23. 19  for  a  certain  sedition .  .was  cast  into  pris. 

23.  25  for  sedition  and  murder  was  cast  into  p. 
John  3.  24  For  John  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison 
Acts    5. 19  angel,  .opened  the  prison  doors,  and  bro. 

5.  22  found  them  not  in  the  prison,  they  retur. 
5.  25  men  whom  ye  put  in  prison  are  standing 
8.  3  men  and  women,  committed  (them)  top. 
12.  4  apprehended  him,  he  put  (him)  in  prison 
12.  5  Peter  therefore  was  kept  in  prison  :  btit 
12.  6  the  keepers  before  the  door  kept  the  pr. 
12.  17  the  Lord  had  brought  him  out  of  the  pr. 
16.  23  cast  (them)  into  prison,  charging  the  jai. 
16.  24  thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison,  and 
16.  27  seeing  the  prison  doors  open,  he  drew  out 
16.  37  havecast(us)intoprison;andnowdothey 
16.  40  they  went  out  of  the  prison,  and  entered 
22.    4  binding  and  delivering  into  prison  both 

26.  10  many  of  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison 
2  Co.  11.  23  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft 

1  Pe.  3. 19  went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in  pr. 

Rev.   2.  10  the  devil  shall  cast  (some)  of  you  into  pr. 
20.    7  Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison 
PRISON,  to  be  put  or  cast  into  — 
To  give  along,  up,  over,  irapa.SiBw/j.t  paradidomi. 

Matt.  4. 12  had  heard  that  John  was  cast  into  prison 

Mark  1.  14  after  that  John  was  putinto prison,  Jesus 

PRISONER  (fellow)— 
l.One  bound,  Tpx  asir. 

Gen.  39.  20  place  where  the  king's  prisoners  (were)  b. 

39.  22  committed,  .all  the  prisoners  that  (were) 

Job     3.  18  prisoners  resttogether;  they  hear  not  the 

Psa.  69.  33  For  the  Lord,  .despiseth  not  his  prisoners 

79. 11  Let  the  sighing  of  the  prisonercome  before 

102.  20  To  hear  the  groaning  of  the  prisoner ;  to 

Isa.  14.  17  (that)  opened  not  the  house  of  his  priso.? 

Lam.  3.  34  To  crush  under  his  feet  all  the  prisoners 

Zech.  9. 11 1  have  seut  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the 

9. 12  Turn  you  to  the  stronghold,  ye  prisoners 

2.0ne  bound,  tsn  assir. 

Isa.  10.  4  they  shall  bow  down  under  the  prisoners 
24.  22  prisoners  are  gathered  in  the  pit,  and  shall 
42.    7  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison 

Z.To  bind,  "ipx  asar. 

Psa. 146.    7  The  Lord  looseth  the  prisoners 

Isa.   49.    9  That  thou  mayest  say  to  the  prisoners,  Go 

98 


■^.Captive,  *2t^  shebi. 

Nuni2i.    1  against  Israel,  and  took(some)of  them  p. 
Isa.  20.   4  lead  away  the  Egyptians  prisoners,  and  the 

5.  One  bound,  SeV^uios  desmios. 

Matt  27.  15  wont  to  release  unto  the  people  a  priso. 

27.  16  they  had  then  a  notable  prisoner,  called 
Markis.  6  released  unto  them  one  prisoner,  whom. 
Acts  16.  25  sang  praises. .and  the  prisoners  heard  th. 

16.  27  supposing thatthe  prisoners  hadbeentied 
23. 18  Paul  the  prisoner  called  me  unto  (him),  and 
25.  27  unreasonable  to  send  a  prisoner,  and  not 

28.  16  [centurion  delivered  the  prisoners  to.  .c] 
28. 17  yet  was  I  delivered  prisoner  from  Jerusa. 

Eph.    3.    1  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you  Gen. 
4.    1  I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord,  be. 
2Ti.    1.    8;  Phm.  1,  9. 
6. Fellow  captive,  0-vva.ixfJ-d-^wTOs,  sunaickmalotos. 

Rom.  16.  7  ;  Col.  4.  10 ;  Phil.  23. 
7. One  bound,  Se(r/j.a>Tns  desmotes. 

Acts  27.    1  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other  prisoners 
27.  42  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  prisoners 

PRIVATE,  PRIVATELY  — 
\. One's  own,  iStos  idios. 

2  Pe.  1.  20  no  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  any  pr. 
'2.  By  ones  self,  kclt   XSiav  kaV  idian. 

Matt24.    3  disciples  came  unto  him  privately,  saying 

Mark  6.  32  departed  into  a  desert  place  by  ship  pri  v. 
9.  28  disciples  asked  him  privately,  Why  could 
13.    3  and  John  and  Andrew  asked  him  privately 

Luke  9.  10  went  aside  privately  into  a  desert  place 
10.  23  said  privately,  Blessed  (are)  the  eyes  wh. 

Acts  23.  19  went  (with  him)  aside  privately,  and  asked 

Gal.    2.   2  privately  to  them  which  were  of  reputation 
PRIVILY  — 
1. Darkness,  hzk  ophel. 

Psa.  11.    2  may  privily  shoot  at  the  upright  in  heart 
2.  Gentleness,  secret,  enchantment,  vh  lat. 

1  Sa.  24.  4  and  cut  off  the  skirt  of  Saul's  robe  privily 
3. Secret,  "Wip  sether. 

Psa.101.   5  Whoso  privily  slandereth  his  neighbour' 
4. Deceit,  nc~i:n  tormah. 

Judg.  9.  31  sent  messengers  unto  Abimelech  privily 
5.Hidingly,  secretly,  \d9pa  lathra. 

Matt.  1. 19  Joseph,  .was  minded  to  put  her  away  pr. 
2.    7  when  he  had  privily  called  the  wise  men 

Acts  16.  37  now  do  they  thrust  us  out  privily?  nay 

PRIVILY  bring  in,  to  — 

To  lead  in  sideways,  nape  tea' y  00  pareisago. 

2  Pe.  2.    1  who  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable  her. 
PRIVY  chamber,  to  enter  a  — 

To  go  into  an  inner  chamber,  *iin  chadar. 

Eze.  ax.  14  which  entereth  into  their  privy  chambers 
PRIVY  MEMBER  — 
Urethra,  npc^  shophkah. 

Deut23.    1  He  that,  .hath  his  privy  member  cut  off 
PRIVY  (to),  to  be  — 
I. To  knoic,be  acquainted  with,  yv  yada. 

1  Ki.  2.  44  wickedness  which  thine  heart  is  privy  to 

2.  To  know  with,  o-uvoiZa  sunoida. 

Acts    5.    2  his  wife  also  being  privy  (to  it),  and  brou. 

PRIZE  — 

.4  prize  crown  or  garland,  fipafisTov  brabeion. 
1  Co.  9.  24  run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize?  So 
Phil.  3.  14  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of 

PRIZED,  to  be  — 

To  be  %)recious,  prized,  priced,  "ip;  yaqar. 

Zech. 11.  13  a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  them 
PROCEED  (forth,  further,  out  of),  to  — 
l.To  add,  *]p;  yasaph. 

Isa.  29. 14  I  will  proceed  to  do  a  marvellous  work 
2.  To  (cause  to)  add,  ^p;  yasaph,  5. 

Job  36.    1  Elihu  also  proceeded,  and  said 

40.    5  yea,  twice  ;  but  I  will  proceed  no  further 

0.T0  go  out  or  forth,  Ny;  yatsa. 

Gen.  24.  50  The  thing  proceedeth  from  the  Lord  :  we 
Exod25.  35  branches  that  proceed  out  of  the  candle. 
Kuni3o.  2  do  according  to  all  that  proceedeth  out  of 
32.  24  do  that  whichhath  proceeded  out  of  your 
Josh.  6. 10  neither  shall  (any)  word  proceed  out  of 
Judgn.  36  that  which  hath  proceeded  out  of  thy  m. 

1  Sa.  24. 13  Wickedness  proceedeth  from  the  wicked 

2  Sa.  7.  12  whiehshallproceedoutof  thybowels,  and 
Eccl.io.    5  an  error  (which)  proceedeth  from  the  ru. 
Isa.  51.    4  a  law  shall  proceed  from  me,  and  I  will 
Jer.     9.  3  for  they  proceed  from  evil  to  evil,  and  t. 

30.  19  out  of  them  shall  proceed  thanksgiving 

30. 21  shall  proceed  from  the  midst  of  them ;  and 

Lam.  3.  38  Out  of  the  mouth,  .proceedeth  not  evil  and 

Hab.   1.    4  righteous  ;  therefore  wrong  judgment  p. 

1.    7  and  their  dignity  shall  proceed  of  thems. 

4. 0  utgoing,  K*io  motsa. 

Num3o.  12  whatsoever  proceeded  out  of  her  lips  co. 
Deut.  8.    3  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Loud 

5.  To  go  on  out  of,  ifaropevofMat  ekpo-reuomai. 

Matt.  4.    4  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the 

15. 18  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  mouth  co. 

Mark  7.  21  out  of  the  heart  of  men,  proceed  evil  tho. 


Luke  4.  22  gracious  words  which  proceeded  out  of  his 
Johnis.  26  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  sh. 
Eph.    4.  29  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed 
Rev.  4.    5  out  of  the  tbrone  proceeded  lightenings 
11.    5  fire  proceedeth  out  of  then-  mouth,  and 
19.  2 1  which  (sword)  [proceeded]  out  of  his  mou. 
22.    1  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  ami 

6.  To  come  or  go  out  of,  i^€pxo/J.at  exerchomai. 

Mattis.  19  Foroutof  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts 
John  8.  42  for  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God 
Jas.     3.  10  Out  of  the  same  mouth  proceedeth  bless. 

7.  To  strike  forward,  ttpokStttw  prokopto. 

2  Ti.    3.    9  But  they  shall  proceed  no  further,  for  t. 

8.  To  put  to  or  toward,  add,  irpoo-Ti8n,u.i  prostithemi. 

Acts  12.   3  he  proceeded  further  to  take  Peter  also 
PROCESS  (of  time)  — 
l.End,  j'p  qets. 

Gen.   4.   3  in  process  of  time  it  came  to  pass,  that 
2.Abundant,  ni  rab. 

Exod.  2.  23  it  came  to  pass  in  process  of  time,  that  the 

3.  To  be  abundant,  nz~]  rabah. 

Gen.  38.  12  in  process  of  time  the  daughter  of  Shuab. 

4.  From  days,  Dp;n  miyyamiin. 

Judgn.   4  it  came  to  pass  in  process  of  time,  that 
2  Ch.21.  19  in  process  of  time,  after  the  end  of  two 

PRO-CHO'-ROS,  Upoxopos. 

One  of  the  seven  chosen  to  serve  tables  for  the  poor. 

Acts   6.   5  they  chose  Stephen.,  and  P.,  and  Nicanor 
PROCLAIM,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  a  voice  to  pass  over,  ?ip  "oj;  abar  qol,  5 . 

Neh.   8.  15  should  publish  and  proclaim  in  all  their 

2.  To  call,  tilQ  qara. 

Exod33.  19  will  proclaim  the  name  of  the  Lord  bef. 
34.  5  stood  with  him  there,  and  proclaimed  the 
34.   6  proclaimed,  The  Lord,  The  LoRDGod,m. 

Lev.  23.    2,  37  ye  shall  proclaim  (to  be)  holy  convoc. 
23.    4  which  ye  shall  proclaim  in  their  seasons 
23.  21  ye  shall  proclaim  on  the  self  same  day 
25. 10  proclaim  liberty  throughout  (all)  the  land 

Deut  20. 10  When  thou  com  est  nigh.,  proclaim  peace 

Judg  7.    3  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  saying 

1  Ki.  21.   9  Proclaim  a  fast,  and  set  Naboth  on  high 

21. 12  proclaimed  afast,  and  set  Naboth  on  high 

2  Ki.  10.  20  assembly  for  Baal.  And  they  proclaimed 

23.  16  man  of  God  proclaimed,  who  proclaimed 
23.  17  proclaimed  these  things  that  thou  hast  d. 

2  Ch.20.    3  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  all  Judah 

Ezra   8.  21  Then  I  proclaimed  a  fast  there,  at  the  ri. 

Esth.  6.    9  proclaim  before  him,  Thus  shall  it  be  do. 
6. 11  and  proclaimed  before  him,  Thus  shall  it 

Pro  v.  12.  23  the  heartof  fools  proclaimeth  foolishness 
20.    6  Most  men  will  proclaim  every  one  his  own 

Isa.   61.    1  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and 
61.    2  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  L. 

Jer.  3.  12  Go  and  proclaim  these  words  toward  the 
7.  2  proclaim  there  this  word,  and  say,  Hear 
11.  6  Proclaim  all  these  words  in  the  cities  of 
19.  2  proclaim  there  the  words  that  I  shall  tell 
34.  8  made  a  covenant,  .to  proclaim  liberty  un. 
34.  15  proclaiming  liberty  every  man  to  his  ne. 
34.  17  proclaiming  liberty.  .1  proclaim  a  liberty 
36.    9  proclaimed  a  fast  before  the  Lord  to  all 

Joel    3.    9  Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  Gentiles ;  Pr. 

Amos  4.    5  proclaim  (and)  publish  the  free  offerings 

Jon.    3.    5  proclaimed  a  fast,  and  put  on  sackcloth 

3.  To  set  apart,  sanctify,  Khjj  qadesh,  3. 

2  Ki.  10.  20  said,  Proclaim  a  solemn  assembly  for  B. 

4.To  cause  to  hear,  j?ps;  shamea,  5. 

Isa.  62. 11  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end  of  the  wo. 

5.  To  cry  or  proclaim  as  a  herald,  Knpvo-<ru  kerusso. 

Lukei2.    3  shall  be  proclaimed  upon  the  house  tops 
Rev.    5.    2  saw  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  a 

PROCLAIMED,  to  cause  to  be  — 
l.To  cause  to  cry,  pyj  zaaq,  5. 

J  on.    3.    7  caused  (it)  to  be  proclaimed  and  published 

2.To  cause  to  pass  over,  ~>3j;  abar,  5. 

Exod36.    6  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed  throughout  the 

PROCLAMATION  - 
1.  Voice,  Vip  qol. 

2  Ch.24.   9  made  a  proclamation  through  Judah  and 
2.Loud  cry,  proclamation,  singing,  n|1  rinnah. 

1  Ki.22.  36  there  wentaproclanration  throughout  the 

PROCLAMATION,  to  make  a  — 

1 .  To  cause  to  cry  as  a  herald,  n?  keraz,  5. 

Dan.    5.  29  and  made  a  proclamation  concerning  him 
2.To  cause  a  voice  to  pass  over,  ?ipT3?  abar,  5. 

2  Ch.30.    5  to  make  proclamation  throughout  all  Is. 

36.  22  that  he  made  a  proclamation  throughout 

Ezra    1.    1  that  he  made  a  proclamation  throughout 

10.   7  they  made  proclamation  throughout  Jud. 

3.  To  call,  K"iij  qara. 

Exod32.    5  Aaron  made  proclamation,  and  said,  To. 

4.  To  cause  to  hear,  szpy  shamea,  5. 

1  Ki.15. 22  made  a  proclamation  throughout  all  Jud. 
PROCURE,  to  — 
l.To  seek,  enquire,  require,  typs  baqash,  3. 

Provn.  27  He  that  diligently  seeketh  goodprocureth 


PRODUCE 


778 


PROMISE 


2.  To  do,  make,  rip%  asah. 

Jer.    2.  17  Hast  thou  not  procured  tliis  unto  thyself 
4.  18  Thy  way  and  thy  doings  have  procured 
26.  19  Thus  might  we  procure  great  evil  against 
33.    9  for  all  the  prosperity,  that  I  procure  unto 

PRODUCE,  to  — 

To  bring  near,  anp  qarab,  3. 

Isa.  41.  21  Produce  your  cause,  .bring  forth  your  str. 
PROFANE  (person  or  place)  — 
1. Common,  polluted,  ?n  chol. 

Eze.  22.  26  no  difference  between  the  holy  and  prof. 
42.  20  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  profane  p. 
44.  23  between  the  holy  and  profane,  and  cause 
48.  15  shall  be  a  profane  (place)  for  the  city,  for 

2.Pterced,  polluted,  common,  77$  chalal. 

Lev.  21.    7  shall  not  take  a  wife'(thatis).  .profane;  n. 

21. 14  widow,  or  a  divorced  woman,  or  profane 
Eze.  21.  25  profane  wicked  prince  of  Israel,  whose  day 

3. Profane,  impious,  $4fl-nAos  bebelos. 

1  Ti.    1.    9  but  for  the.  .unholy  and  profane,  formur. 

4.    7  refuse  profane  and  old  wives'  fables,  and 
6.  20  avoiding  profane  (and)vain  babblings,  and 

2  Ti.    2.  16  But  shun  profane  (and)  vain  babblings;  for 
Heb.  12.  16  profane  person,  as  Esau,  who  for  one  m. 

PROPANE  (self),  cast  as,  to  — 

\,To  be 'polluted.;  common,  Spn  chalal,  2. 

Lev.  21.  4  shall  not  defile  himself,  .to  profane  him. 
21.   9  if  she  profane  herself  by  playing  the  whore 

2.To  pollute,  make  common,  t?t\  chalal,  3. 

Lev.  t8.  21  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of 
-19.   8  because  he  hath  profaned  the  hallowed 

19.  12  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of 

20.  3  defile  my  sanctuary,  and  to  profane  ray  h. 

21.  6  They  shall  be  holy,  .and  not  profane  the 
21.  9  by  playing  the  whore,  she  profaueth  her 
21. 12  nor  profane  the  sanctuary  of  his  God ;  for 
21.  15  Neither  shall  he  profane  his  seed  among 

21.  23  that  he  profane  not  my  sanctuaries :  for 

22.  2  and  that  they  profane  not  my  holy  name 
22.    9  die  therefore,  if  they  profane  it :  I  the  L. 

22. 15  they  shall  not  profane  the  holy  things  of 
22.  32  Neither  shall  ye  profane  my  holy  name 

Neh.  13.  17  What  evil  thing  (is)  this  that  ye  do,  and  p. 
13.  18  bring  more  wrath  upon  Israel  by  profan. 
Psa.  89.  39  thou  hast  profaned  his  crown  (by  casting 
Isa.  43.  28  I  have  profaned  the  princes  of  the  sanct. 
Eze.  22.    8  Thou  hast  despised,  .and  hast  profaned 

22.  26  Her  priests,  .have  profaned  mine  holy  t. 

23.  38  they  have  denied,  .and  have  profaned  my 

23.  39  they  came .  .into  my  sanctuary  to  profane 

24.  21  will  profane  my  sanctuary,  the  excellency 
28.  16  will  cast  thee  as  profane  out  of  the  mou. 
36.  20  whither  they  went,  they  profaned  my  holy 
36.  21  which  the  house  of  Israel  had  profaned 
36.  22  which  ye  have  profaned  among  the  heat. 
36.  23  which  ye  have  profaned  in  the  midst  of 

Amos  2.    7  father  will  go  in . .  to  profane  my  holy  n. 

Mai.    1.  12  But  ye  have  profaned  it,  in  that  ye  say 
2 .  10  by  profaning  the  covenant  of  our  fathers '.' 
2.  11  Judah  hath  profaned  the  holiness  of  the 

3. To  profane,  £e£7jA.oa>  bebeloo. 

Matt  12.    5  priests  in  the  temple  profane  the  sabbath 

Acts  24.    6  also  hath  gone  about  to  profane  the  teui. 
PROFANE,  to  be  — 
To  be  profane,  "in  ehaneph. 

Jer.  23. 11  For  both  prophet  and  priest  are  profane 
PROFANED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  polluted,  ^q  chalal,  2. 

Eze.  22.  26  hid  their  eyes,  .and  I  am  profaned  arao. 

25.  3  against  my  sanctuary,  when  it  was  profa. 
2.To  be  polluted,  hhq  chalal,  4. 

Eze.  36.  23  which  was  profaned  among  the  heathen 
PROFANENESS  — 
Profaneness,  profanity,  nr;~  chanuphah. 

Jer.   23.  15  is  profaneness  gone  forth  into  all  the  land 
PROFESS,  to  — 
l.To  put  h  fore,  133  nagad,  .">. 

Deut26.    3  I  profess  this  day  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 

2. To  tell  upon  or  about,  promise,  eVayyeWo/icu. 
1  Ti.   2.  10  which  becometh  women  professing  godl. 
6.  21  Which  some  professing  have  erred  cone. 

3.  To  speak  the  same  thing,  confess,  6/j.o\oy4(v. 
Matt  7.  23  then  will  I  profess  unto  them,  I  never  k. 
1  Ti.    6.  12  hast  professed  a  good  profession  before 
Titus  1.  16  They  profess  that  they  know  God ;  but  in 

4.  To  say,  assert,  affirm,  <f>do-Kca  phasko. 

Rom.  1.22  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  be. 
PROFESSED,  PROFESSION  — 
A  saying  the  same  thing,  &fio\oyia  homologia. 

1  Ti.    6.  12  hast  professed  a  good  profession  before 

2  Co.  9.  13  they  glorify  God  for  your  professed  subj. 
Heb.   3.    1  consider  the  apostle . .  of  our  profession 

4.  14  Son  of  God,  let  us  hold  fast  (our)  profess. 
10.  23  Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  (our) 
PROFIT  — 
l.Dishonest  gain,  yxa  betsa. 

Gen.  37.  26  What  profit  (is  it)  if  we  slay  our  brother 
Psa.  30.  9  What  profit  (is  there)  in  my  blood,  when 
Mai.   3.  14  what  profit  (is  it)  that  we  have  kept  his 


2.  What  is  over  and  above,  "in'v  yo'her. 

Eccl.  7.  11  (by  it  there  is)  profit  to  them  that  see  the 

S.Top7-oft,  b]£  yaal,  5. 

Isa.    30.    5  nor  be  an  help  nor  profit,  but  a  shame,  and 
Jer.  16. 19  vanity,  .(things)  wherein  (there  is)  no  p. 

4.  What  is  over  and  above,  ptrp  yithron. 

Eccl.  1.  3  What  profit  hath  a  man  of  all  his  labour 
2. 11  vexation  of  spirit,  and  (there  was)  no  pro. 
3.  9  What  profit  hath  he  that  worketh  in  that 
5.  9  Moreover  the  profit  of  the  earth  is  for  all 
5.  16  what  profit  hath  he  that  hath  laboured 

5.  What  is  over  and  above,  into  mothar. 

Prov  14.  23  In  all  labour  there  is  profit :  but  the  talk 

6.  To  be  equal,  prof  table,  compared,  rntr  shavah, 
Esth.  3.   S  tt  (is)  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer  th. 

7. To  bear  together,  advantage,  avfx<p4pa>  sumphero. 

1  Co.  7.  35  this  I  speak  for  your  own  profit ;  not  that 

10.  33  please  all.  .not  seeking  mine  own  [profit] 
Heb.  12.  10  but  he  for  (our)  profit,  that  (we)  might  be 

S.  Useful,  prof  table,  xP^(riljL0S  chresimos. 

2  Ti.    2. 14  they  strive  not  about  words  to  no  profit 

9. Profit,  <u(p€\eia  ophehia. 

Rom.  3.    1  or  what  profit  (is  there)  of  circumcision 
PROFIT,  to  (have),  be  profited — 
l.To  make  or  give  prof  t,  hill  yaal,  5. 

1  Sa.  12.  21  which  cannot  profit  nor  deliver;  for  they 

Job  21. 15  what  profit  should  we  have,  if  we  pray  un 
35.    3  What  profit  shall  I  have,  (if  I  be  cleansed) 

Prov  10.    2  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing 

11.  4  Riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath:  but 
30.  5  ashamed  of  a  people  that  could  not  profit 
30.  6  to  a  people  (that)  shall  not  profit  (them) 
44.  9  and  their  delectable  things  shall  not  pro. 
47.  12  if  so  be  thou  shalt  be  able  to  profit,  if  so 
48. 17  thy  God  which  teacheth  thee  to  profit,  wh. 
57.  12  and  thy  works;  for  they  shall  not  profit 

Jer.  2.  8  and  walked  after  (things  that)  do  not  pr. 
2.  11  their  glory  for  (that  which)  doth  not  profit 

7.  8  ye  trust  in  lying  words,  that  cannot  profit 

12.  13  put  themselves  to  pain,  (but)  shall  not  pr. 
23.  32  therefore  they  shall  not  profit  this  people 

Hah.  2.  iS  What  profiteth  the  graven  image  that  the 

2.  To  profit,  fan  sahan. 

Job  34.    9  It  profiteth  a  man  nothing  that  he  should 

3.  To  be  equal,  profitable,  compared,  njp  shavah. 
Job  33.  27  perverted  (that  which  was)  right,  and  it  p. 

4.  Profit,  u<p€\os  ophelos. 

Jas.  2.  14  What  (doth  it)  profit,  my  brethren,  fcho. 
2.  16  needful  to  the  body;  what  (doth  it)  profit? 

5.  To  bear  together,  advantage,  cvfAfyepw  swmphero, 
1  Co.  12.    7  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal 

Q.To  strike  forward,  TrponSTrrco  prokopto. 

Gal.  1.  14  profited  in  the  Jews'  religion  above  many 
7 .To  profit,  axp£\eo0  qpheled. 

Mattis.  5  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited 
16.  26  what  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the 

Mark  7.  1 1  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited 

8.  36  what  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain 
John  6.  63  flesh  profiteth  nothing :  the  words  that 
Rom.  2.  25  For  circumcision  verily  profiteth,  if  thou 
1  C0.13.   3  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  nothing 

14.  6  what  shall  I  profit  you,  except  I  shall  sp. 

Gal.    5.  2  if  ye  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit 

Heb.   4.  2  but  the  word  preached  did  not  profit  them 

13.  9  not  with  meats,  which  have  not  profited 

8.  To  be  profitable,  eiftt  axpeAtfios  eimi  ophelimos. 

1  Ti.    4.    S  For  bodily  exercise  profiteth  little  ;  but 
PROFITABLE  — 

1.  What  is  over  and  above,  pljri*  yithron. 

Eccl.io.  10  more  strength :  but  wisdom  (is)  profitable 

2.  Very  useful,  e#xp7?o-Tos  euchrestos. 

2  Ti.    4.  11  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry 
Phm.      11  unprofitable,  but  now  profitable  to  thee 

3.  Profitable,  d}<p4ht/j.os  ophelimos. 

1  Ti.   4.    8  but  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things 

2  Ti.   3. 16  and  (is)profttable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof 
Titus  3.   8  These  things  are  good  and  profitable  unto 

PROFITABLE  (for),  to  be  — 

1.7*"  mal  profit,  ^T,  yaal,  5. 

Isa.   44. 10  graven  image(that)  is  profitable  for  not.? 

2.  T  1  profit,  [3D  sakan. 

Job  22.  a  Can  a  man  be  profitable  unto  God,  as  he 
22.    2  is  wise  may  be  profitable  unto  himself 

3.  To  prosper,  r/py  tsalmch. 

Jer.    13.    7  girdle  was  marred,  it  was  profitable  for 

4.  To  bear  together,  ad  c  of  •"/■",  avfj.fp€pw  stimpherd. 

Matt.  5.  29,  30  forit  is  profitable  for  thee  that  one  uf 

Acts  20.  20  I  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profitable 
PROFITING  — 
A  striking  forward,  irpoKowfj  prok  pe. 

1  Ti.   4.  15  that  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  all 
PROFOUND,  to  be  — 
To  make  deep,  ptjJJ  amaq,  5. 

Hos.    5.    2  the  revolters  are  profound  to  make  slau. 


PROGENITOR  — 

To  conceive,  rrijrt  harah. 

Gen.    49.  26  blessings  of  my  progenitors  unto  the  u. 
PROGNOSTICATOR  — 
To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  pT  yada,  5. 

Isa.  47.  13  prognostieators,  stand  up  and  save  thee 
PROLONG,  to  — 
1.7*0  make  long,  prolong,  Tpx  arak,  5. 

Deut.  4.  26  ye  shall  not  prolong  (your)  days  upon  it 
4. 40  that  thou  mayest  prolong  (thy)  days  upon 
5.  33  may  prolong  (your)  days  in  the  land  which 

11.  9  may  prolong  (your)  days  in  the  land  which 
17.  20  he  may  prolong  (his)  days  in  his  kingdom 

22.  7  and  (that)  thou  mayest  prolong  (thy)  days 
30.  18  ye  shall  not  prolong  (your)  days  upon  the 
32.  47  through  this  thing  ye  shall  prolong  (your) 

Job  6.  11  what  (is)  mine  end,  that  I  should  prolong 
Prov  26.  16  hethathateth  co vetousness  shall  prolong 
Eccl.  7.  15  that  prolongeth  (his  life)  in  his  wickedn. 

5.  13  neither  shall  he  prolong  (his)  days,  (which 
Isa.   53. 10  he  shall  prolong  (his)  days,  and  the  plea. 

2.  To  (cause  to)  add,  *]D;  yasaph,  5. 

Psa.  61.    6  Thou  wilt  prolong  the  king's  life;  (and) 
Prov  10.  27  The  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  days :  but 

3.  To  stretch  out,  incline  to,  nsu  natdh. 

Job    15.  29  neither  shall  he  prolong  the  perfection 
PROLONGED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  long,  thx  arak. 

Eze.  12.  22  days  are  prolonged,  and  every  vision  fai.? 
2.To  make  long,  ~ix  arak,  5. 

Deut.  5.  16  days  may  be  prolonged,  and  that  it  may 

6.  2  life ;  and  that  thy  days  may  be  prolonged 
Prov  28.  2  knowledge  the  state  (thereof)  shall  be  p. 
Eccl.  8.  12  his  (days)  be  prolonged,  yet  surely  I  know 

3.  To  give  length,  npnx  in;  yehab  arkah. 

Dan.    7.  12  lives  were  prolonged  for  a  season  and  t. 

4.  To  draw  out,  T|pD  mashak,  2. 

Isa.  13.  22  to  come,  and  her  days  shall  not  be  prolo. 
Eze.  12.  25  it  shall  be  no  more  prolonged ;  for  in  your 

12.  28  There  shall  none  of  my  words  be  prolon. 
PROMISE  — 

1. Saying,  ~i£S  omer. 

Psa.  77.   8  gone  for  ever?  doth  (his)  promise  fail  for 
2.  Word,  13^  dabar. 

1  Ki.  8.  56  not  failed  of  one  word  of  all  his  good  pr. 
Neh.    5.  12  that  they  should  do  according  to  this  pr. 

5.  13  performeth  not  this  promise,  even  thus 
Psa. 105.  42  Forherememberedhisholypromise,(and) 

3..1  promise,  iirayye\ia  epaggelia. 

Luke24.  49  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  y. 

Acts    1.   4  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  which 

2.  33  having  received  of  the  Father  the  prom. 

2.  39  For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your 

7.  17  But  when  the  time  of  the  promise  drew 

13.  23  God,  according  to  (his)promise,  raised  un. 
13.  32  the  promise  which  was  made  unto  the  fa. 

23.  21  ready,  looking  for  a  promise  from  thee 
26.    6  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promise 

Rom.  4.  13  For  the  promise,  that  he  should  be  the 
4.  14  void,  and  the  promise  made  of  none  effect 
4.  16  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be  sure  to 
4.  20  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God  thr. 
9.  4  and  the  service  (of  God),  and  the  promis. 
9.  8  children  of  the  promise  are  counted  for 
9.  9  For  this  (is)  the  word  of  promise,  At  this 
15.    8  confirm  the  promises  (made)  unto  the  fa. 

2  Co.  1.  20  For  all  the  promises  of  God  in  him  (are) 

7.  1  Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly 
Gal.    3.  14  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the 

3.  16  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  prom. 
3.  17  it  should  make  the  promise  of  none  effect 
3.  iS  no  more  of  promise,  .to  Abraham  by  pro. 
3.  21  (Is)  the  law  then  against  the  promises  of 
3.  22  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be 

3.  29  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise 

4.  23  but  he  of  the  free  woman  (was)  by  prom. 
4.  28  as  Isasc  was,  are  the  children  of  promise 

Eph.    1.  13  were  sealed  with  that  holy  spirit  of  pro. 

2.  12  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise 

3.  6  partakers  of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  the 

6.  2  which  is  the  first  commandment  with  p. 

1  Ti.    4.    8  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is.  and 

2  Ti.  1.  1  according  to  the  promise  of  life  which  is 
Heb,    4.    1  promise  Vicing  left  (us)  of  entering  into 

6.  12  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  p. 
6.  15  patiently  endured,  lie  obtained  the  pn  un. 

6.  17  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutabil. 

7.  6  and  blessed  him  that  had  the  promises 

8.  6  which  was  established  upon  better  prom. 
9. 15  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inh. 

10.  36  that,  after,  .ye  might  receive  the  promise 

11.  9  By  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  pro. 
11.  9  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  promise 
11.  13  died  in  faith,  not  having  received  the  pr. 
11.  1-  he  that  had  received  the  promises  offered 
11.  33  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of 
11. 39  through  faith,  received  not  the  promise 

2  Pe.  3.    4  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?  for 
3.  9  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  pro. 

1  Jo.    2.  25  this  is  the  promise  that  he  hath  promised 

i.A  promise,  hrdyye\fia  epaggclma. 

2  Pe.    1.    4  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises 

3. 13  Nevertheless  we,  according  to  his  promise 


PROMISE 


(79 


PROPHESYING 


PROMISE,  to  (make)  — 

I. To  say,  idx  ainar. 

Xuni  14.  40  unto  the  place  which  the  Lord  hath  pro. 
2  Ki.  8.  19  promised  him  to  give  him  alway  a  light 
2  Ch.21.  7  as  he  promised  to  give  a  light  to  him  and 
Neh.   9.  15  promisedst  them  that  they  should  go  in 

9.  23  which  thou  hadst  promised  to  their  fathers 
Esth.  4.   7  promised  to  pay  to  the  king's  treasuries 

2.To  speak,  -a?  dabar. 

Jer.  32.  42  all  the  good  that  I  have  promised  them 

3.  To  speak,  "G^  dabar,  3. 

Exodi2.  25  according  as  he  hath  promised,  that  ye 
Deut   1.  n  and  hless  you,  as  he  hath  promised  you  ! 
6.    3  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  promised 
9. 28  bring  them  into  the  laud  which  he  prom. 
10.   9  according  as  the  Lord  thy  God  promised 
12.  20  enlarge  thy  border,  as  he  hath  promised 

15.  6  thy  God  blesseth  thee,  as  he  promised  th. 
19.  8  give  thee  all  the  land  which  he  promised 
23.  23  which  thou  hast  promised  with  thy  mouth 

26.  iS  peculiar  people,  as  he  hath  promised  thee 

27.  3  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  promised 
Josh. 9.  21  Let  them  live,  as  the  princes  had  prom. 

22.  4  hath  given  rest,  .as  he  promised  them 

23.  5  as  the  Lord  your  God  hath  promised  unto 
23.  10  fighteth  for  yon,  as  he  hath  promised  you 
23. 15  which  the-LoRD  your  God  promised  you 

2  Sa.  7.  28  hast  promised  tliis  goodness  unto  thy  se. 
1  Ki.  2.  24  hath  made  me  an  house,  as  he  promised 

5.  12  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  as  he  promised  b. 
8.  20  sit  on  the  throne,  .as  the  Lord  promised 
8. 24  that  thou  promisedst  him  :  thou  spakest 
8.  25  that  thou  promisedst  him,  saying,  There 
8.  56  according  to  all  that  he  promised  :  there 

8.  56  which  he  promised  by  the  hand  of  Moses 

9.  5  as  I  promised  to  David  thy  father,  saying 

1  Ch.  17.  26  hast  promised  this  goodness  unto  thy  se. 

2  Ch.  6.  10  set  on  the  throne,  .as  the  LORD  promised 

6.  15  hast  kept,  .that  which  thou  hast  prornis. 
6.  16  keep,  .that  which  thou  hast  promised  h. 

Jer.   33. 14  that  good  thing  which  I  have  promised 

4.  To  say  the  same  thing,  assert,  prof  ess,  6j*o\oyea>. 

Matt  14.   7  he  promised  with  an  oath  to  give  her  what. 

5.  To  say  out  the  same  thing,  e£o/j.o\oy€oua.L  exom. 

Luke22.   6  [And  he  promised],  and  sought  opportu. 

6.  To  profess,  promise,  eVayye Wo txai  epaggellomaA. 
5Iarki4.  n  were  glad,  nnd  promised  to  give  him  mo. 
Acts  7.  5  yet  he  promised  that  he  would  give  it  to 
Rom.  4.  21  persuaded  that  what  he  had  promised  he 
Gal.  3.  19  should  come  to  whom  the  promise  was 
Titus  1.  2  which  God.  .promised  before  the  world 
Heb.  6. 13  For  when  God  made  promise  to  Abraham 

10.  23  wavering;  for  he  (is) faithful  that  promised 

11.  n  she  judged  him  faithful  who  had  promised 
12. 26  now  he  hath  promised,  saying,  Yet  once 

Jas.     1.  12  which  the  Lord  hath  promised  to  them  t. 

2.    5  kingdom  which  he  hath  promisedtothem 

2  Pe.  2.  19  "While  they  promise  them  liberty,  they  t. 

1  Jo.   2.  25  this  is  the  promise  that  he  hath  promised 

PROMISE  afore,  to  — 

To  profess  or  promise  before,  irpoe-rrayyeWopai. 
Rom.  1.    2  Which  he  had  promised  afore  by  his  pr. 

PROMISE  life,  to  — 

To  give  or  promise  life,  n;n  cliayah,  5. 

Eze.  13.  22  from  his  wicked  way,  by  promising  him  I. 
PROMOTE,  to  — 

1.  To  make  great,  ?ia  gadal,  3. 

Esth.  3.    1  did  king  Ahasueras  promote  Hainan  the 
5.  11  wherein  the  king  had  promoted  him,  and 

•2.7*0  make  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  155  kabed,  3. 
2sTum24.  11  I  thought  to  promote  thee  unto  great  h. 

3.  To  cause  to  prosper,  rh?  tselach,  5. 

Dan.  3.  30  Then  the  king  promoted  Shadrach,  Mesh. 

4.  To  make  high,  Dn  rum,  3a. 

Prov.  4.    s  Exalt  her,  and  she  shall  promote  thee ;  she 
PROMOTE  to  honour,  to  — 
To  make  heavy,  weighty,  honoured,  ~G3  kabed,  3. 

N"um22.  17  I  will  promote  thee  unto  very  great  hon. 
22.  37  not  able  indeed  to  promotethee  to  honour? 
PROMOTED,  to  be  — 
To  move,  shake,  y*J  nua. 

Judg.9.9, IT'  13  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  trees? 
PROMOTION  — 
To  make  high,  ur\  rum,  5. 

Psa.  75.    6  For  promotion  (cometh)  neither  from  the 

Prov   3.  35  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools 
PRONOUNCE,  to  — 
1.7*0  speak  idly,  np3  balah,  3. 

Lev.    5.   4  swear,  pronouncing  with  (his)  lips  to  do 
5.    4  that  a  man  shall  pronounce  with  an  oath 

2.  7*0  speak,  "Og  dabar,  3. 

Judgi2.  6  he  could  not  frame  to  pronounce  (it)  right 
>"eh,  6. 12  he  pronounced  this  prophecy  against  me 
Jer.    11. 17  hath  pronounced  evil  against  thee,  for  the 

16.  10  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  pronounced  all 

18.  8  If  that  nation,  against  whom  I  have  pro. 

19.  15  all  the  evil  that  1  have  pronounced  agai. 
25. 13  all  my  words  which  I  have  pronounced 
26.  13  repent  him  of  the  evil  that  he  hath  pron. 


Jer.  26.  19  evil  which  he  had  pronounced  against  th.? 
34.  5  for  I  have  pronounced  the  word,  saiththe 
35. 17  all  the  evil  that  I  have  pronounced  agai. 
36.  7  fury  that  the  Lord  hath  pronounced  aga. 
36.  31  evil  that  I  have  pronounced  against  them 
40.   2  God  hath  pronounced  this  evil  upon  this 

3. 7*0  call,  N"J[?  qara. 

Jer.  36. 18  pronounced  all  these  words  unto  me  with 
PROOF  — 
Proof,  trial,  Zoki^  dokime. 

2  Co.  2.  9  that  I  might  know  the  proof  of  you,  wh. 
13.    3  Since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking 

Phil   2.  22  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him,  that,  as  a 

PROOF,  infallible,  to  make  full  — 

1..1  sure  token,  r^Kfi^piov  tekmerion. 

Acts    1.   3  showed  himself,  .by  many  infallible  proo. 
2.A  showing  in,  pointing  out,  eV5ei|is  endcixis. 

2  Co.  8.  24showyeto them. .the proof ofyoui-love,and 
PROPER.  — 
1. Belonging  to  the  city,  well  born,  acrreTos  asteios. 

Heb.  11.  23  because  they  saw  (lie  was)  a  proper  child 
2. One's  own,  ?$los  idios. 

Acts    t.  19  that  field  is  called  in  their  proper  tongue 

1  Co.  7.   7  everymanhathhispropergiftof  God,oue 

PROPER  good  — 

A  peculiar  treasure,  n^:p  segidlah, 

1  Ch.29.    3  I  have  of  mine  own  proper  good,  of  gold 
PROPHECY  — 

1.  What  is  lifted  up,  a  burden,  message,  N&O  massa. 

Prov  30.    1  words  of  Agur.  .(even)  the  prophecy :  the 

2.  Propliecy,  msii  nebuah. 

Prov  31.   1  the  prophecy  that  his  mother  taught  him 

2  Ch.  9.  29  in  the  prophecy  of  Ahijah  the  Shilonite 

15.   8  when  Asa  heard,  .the  prophecy  of  Oded 
Neh.  6. 12  that  he  pronounced  this  prophecy  against 

3.  A  prophet,  k'Sj  noM. 

Dan.  9.  24  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to 

±.Prophecy,publiceX2)osWon,Trpo<\>T]Teia.pro2)heteia. 
Matti3. 14  in  them  is  fulfilledthe  prophecy  of  Esaias 
Rom  12.  5  whether  prophecy,  (let  us  prophesy)  ace. 
1  C0.12.  10  to  another  prophecy ;  to  another  discern. 

13.  8  but  whether  (there  be)  prophecies,  they 

1  TL    i.  18  according  to  the  prophecies  which  went 

4.  14  which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy,  with 

2  Pe.   1.  20  no  prophecy  of  the  scripture  is  of  any 

1.  21  For  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time 
Rev.    1.    3  they  that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy 
11.    6  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  prophecy 

19.  10  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  pr. 
22.  7  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of  the  proph. 
22.  10  Seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  t. 
22.  18  that  heareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of 

22.  19  from  the  words  of  the  book  of  this  proph. 

5.  Prophetic,  irpo<p-nTiK6s  propketbkos. 

2  Pe.    1. 19  We  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of  proph, 
PROPHECY,  (the  gilt  of)  — 
Prophecy,  7rpo<ptjTsta  prop>heteia. 

1  C0.13.    2  though  I  have  (the  gift  of)  prophecy,  and 
PROPHESY,  to  — 
1.  To  see  (in  visioyi),  njn  chazah. 

Isa.   30. 10  Prophesy  not  unto  us  right  things . .  prop. 
%To  prophesy,  flow  forth,  N3J  naba,  2. 

1  Sa.  10. 11  he  prophesied  among  the  prophets,  then 

1  Ki.22. 12  all  the  prophets  prophesied  so,  saying,  Go 

1  Ch.25.    1  who  should  prophesy  with  harps,  with 

25.  2  which  prophesied  according  to  the  order 
25.    3  who  prophesied  with  a  harp,  to  give  tha. 

2  Ch.18.  11  all  theprophetsprophesieclso,  saying,  Go 
Jer.     2.    8  prophesied  by  Baal,  and  walked  after  (t. 

5.  31  prophesy  falsely,  and  the  priests  bear  rule 
11. 21  Prophesynot  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  th. 
14. 14  The  prophets  prophesy  lies  in  my  name:  I 

14.  15  concerning  the  prophets  that  prophesy  in 
14.  16  people  to  whom  they  prophesy  shall  be  c. 
19. 14  whither  the  Lord  had  sent  him  to  proph. 

20.  1  heardthatJeremiahprophesiedthesethi. 
20.  6  friends,  to  whom  thou  hast  prophesied  1. 
23. 16  words  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy  unto 

23.  21 1  have  not  spoken  unto  them,  yet  they  p. 
23.  25  that  prophesy  lies  in  my  name,  saying,  I 
23.  26  in  the  heart  of  the  prophets  that  prophe. 
23.  32  against  them  that  prophesy  false  dreams 

25. 13  which  Jeremiah  hath  prophesied  against 

25.  30  Therefore  prophesy  thouagainstthem  all 

26.  9  "Why  hast  thou  prophesied  in  the  name  of 
26.  11  for  he  hath  prophesied  against  this  city 
26.  12  Lord  sent  me  to  prophesy  against  this  h. 
26.  18  Micah  the  Morasthite  prophesied  in  the 

26.  20  who  prophesied  against  this  city,  and  ag. 
27. 10  For  they  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you,  to  rem. 

27. 14  Ye  shall  not  serve . .  for  they  prophesy  a 

27. 15  yet  they  prophesy  a  lie  in  my  name  ;  that 

27.  15  and  the  prophets  that  prophesy  unto  you 

27.  16  that  prophesy..fortheyprophesyalieun. 

28.  6  perform  thy  words  which  thou  hast  pro. 
28.    8  prophesied  both  against  many  countries 

28.  9  The  prophet  which  prophesieth  of  peace 

29.  9  For  they  prophesy  falsely  unto  you  in  my 
20.  21  which  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you  "in  my  na. 
29.  31  Because  that  Shemaiah  hath  prophesied 
32.    3  Wherefore  dost  thou  prophesy,  and  say 


Jer.  37. 19  Where  (are)  now  your  prophets  which  pr. 
Eze.    4.   7  uncovered,  and  thou  shalt  prophesy  aga. 

6.  2  set  thy  face  toward  the  mountains. .andp. 

1 1.  4  Therefore  prophesy  against  them,  proph. 
11. 13  when  I  prophesied,  that  Pelatiah  the  son 

12.  27  he  prophesieth  of  the  times  (that  are)  far 

13.  2  prophesy  against  the  prophets . .  that  pro. 
13.  16  prophets  of  Israel,  which  prophesy  cone. 
13.  17  set  thy  face,  .and  prophesy  thou  against 
20. 46  prophesy  against  the  forest  of  the  south 
2i.  2  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem,  .and  pro. 
21.  9  Son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  Thus  sa. 
21.  14  prophesy,  and  smite  (thine)  bauds  toget. 

21.  28  thou,  son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  Th. 

25.  2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face,  .and  prophesy 

28.  2i  set  thy  face  against  Zidon,  aud  prophesy 

29.  2  prophesy  against  him,  and  against  all  E. 

30.  2  prophesy  and  say,  Thussaith  the  LordG. 

34.  2  prophesy  against  the  shepherds . .  prophe. 

35.  2  set  thy  face  against  mount  Seir,  and  pro. 

36.  t  prophesy  unto  the  mouDtaius  of  Israel 
36.    3  Therefore  prophesy  and  say,  Thus  saith 

36.  6  Prophesy  therefore  concerning  the  land 

37.  4  Prophesy  upon  these  bones,  aud  say  unto 
37.  7  So  I  prophesied,  .and  as  I  prophesied,  th. 
37.    9  Prophesy  unto  the  wind,  prophesy,  son  of 

37.  12  prophesy  and  say  unto  them,  Thus  saith 

38.  2  set  thy  face  against  Gog.  .and  prophesy 
38.  1 4  prophesy  and  say  uu  to  Gog,  Thus  saith  the 

38.  17  which  prophesied  in  those  days  (many)  y. 

39.  1  prophesy  against  Gog,  and  say,  Thus  saith 
Joel  2.  28  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy 
Amos  2. 12  commanded  the  prophets,  saying,  Proph. 

3.   8  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  pro.  ? 

7. 12  and  there  eat  bread,  aud  prophesy  there 

7. 13  But  prophesy  not  again  any  more  at  Bet. 
7. 15  Lord  said  nntome,  Go,  prophesyunto  my 

7.  16  Prophesy  not  against  Israel,  and  drop  not 
Zech.13.    3  when  any  shall  yet  prophesy,  then  his  f. 

13.   3  shall  thrust  him  through  when  he  proph. 

13.  4  shall  be  ashamed,  .when  he  hath  proph. 

3.  To  show  self  a  prophet,  X3j  naba,  7. 

Nuni  11.  25  when  the  spirit  rested,  .they  prophesied 

it.  26  spiritrested. .and  they  prophesied  in  thee. 

11.  27  Eldad  and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the  ca. 
1  Sa.  10.    5  prophets  coming  down,  .and  they  shall  p. 

10.    6  thou  shalt  prophesy  with  them,  and  shalt 

10.  10  prophets  met  him . .  and  he  projjhesied  am. 

18.  10  and  he  prophesied  in  the  midst  of  the  h. 

19.  21  they  prophesied  likewise,  .they  prophes. 
19.  23  went  on  aud  prophesied,  until  he  came  to 
ig.  24  stripped  off  his  clothes  also,  and  prophe. 

19.  20  messengers  of  Saul,  and  they  also  proph. 

1  Ki.18.  29  they  prophesied  until  the  (time)  of  the  o. 

22.  8  for  he  doth  notprophesygood  concerning 
22.  10  and  all  the  prophets  prophesiedbeforeth. 
22.  18  Did  I  not  tell  thee  that  he  would  proph. 

2  Ch.  18.    7  for  he  never  prophesied  good  unto  me,  but 

18.  9  and  all  the  prophets  prophesied  before 
18. 17  Did  I  not  tell  thee  (that)  he  would  not  pr. 

20.  37  prophesied  against  Jehoshaphat,  saying 
Jer.  14. 14  they  prophesy  unto  you  a  false  vision  and 

23. 13  they  prophesied  in  Baah  and  caused  my 

26.  20  there  was  also  a  man  that  prophesied  in 
Eze.  13. 17  daughters,  .which  prophesy  out  of  their 

37. 10  So  I  prophesied,  as  he  commanded  me,  and 

i.  To  prophesy,  xni  neba,  2. 

Ezra    5.    1  prophesied  unto  the  Jews  that  (were)  in 

5.  To  cause  to  drop,  let  drop,  >~n:  nataph,  5. 

Mic.  2.    6  Prophesy  ye  not,  (say  they  to  them  that) 
2.   6  shall  not  prophesy  to  them,  (that)  they 
2.  11  I  will  prophesy  unto  thee  of  wine  and  of 

Ij.J  prophet,  it'll  nahi. 

Eze.  13.   2  say  unto  them  that  prophesy  out  of  their 

7.  To  proph csy, publicly  expound,,  wpo<pwTevw  proph. 
Matt.  7.  -22  have  wenotprophesiedin  thy  name?  and 

11.  13  For  all  the  prophets  ?rad  theiaw  prophe. 
J5-    7  hypocrites,  well  did  Esaias  prophesy  of 
26.  63  Prophesy  unto  us,  thou  Christ,  Who  is  he 

Mark  7.    6  "Well  hath  Esaias  prophesied  of  you  hyp. 

14.  65  say  unto  him.  Prophesy  :  and  the  servants 
Luke  1.  67  filled  with  the  HolyGhost,and  prophesied 

22.  64  saying,  Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote 
Johnn.  51  he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for 
Acts    2.  17  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy 
2.  18  pour  out  in  those  days,  .and  they  shall  p. 

19.  6  and  they  spake  with  tongues,  and  proph. 

21.  9  four  daughters,  virgins,  which  did  proph. 
1  Co.  11.    4  Everyman prayingorprophesying, having 

11.    5  every  woman  thatprayeth  or  prophesieth 

13.  9  For  we  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in 

14.  1  Follow  after  charity,  .but  rather  that  ye 
14.  3  But  he  that  prophesieth  speaketh  unto 
14.  4  but  he  that  prophesieth  edifieth  the  chu. 
14.  5  prophesied  :  for  greater  (is)  he  that  prop. 
14.  24  if  all  prophesy,  and  there  come  in  one  that 
14.  31  For  ye  may  all  prophesy  one  by  one,  that 
14.  39  covet  to  prophesy,  and  forbid  not  to  speak 

1  Pe.  1.  10  who  prophesied  of  the  grace  (that  should 

Jude       14  prophesied  of  these,  saying,  Behold,  the 

Rev.  10.  11  Thou  must  prophecy  anain  before  many 

11.    3  they  shall  prophesy  a  thousand  two  hund. 

PROPHESYING  — 

1.  To  prophesy,  N33  naba,  2. 

1  Sa.  19.  20  sawthecompany  of  the  prophets  prophes. 

2.  To  show  self  a  proph  t,  hz:  ndja,  7. 

1  Sa.  10.  13  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  prophesying 


PROPHET 


rso 


PROPHET 


S.Prophecy,  rrxu:  nebuak. 

Ezra    6.  14  prospered  through  the  prophesying  of  H. 
4.  Prophecy*  7rpo(pr)Teia  propheteia. 

1  Co.  14.   6  or  hy  knowledge,  or  by  prophesying,  or 
14.  22  prophesying  (serveth)  not  for  them  that 

1  Th.  5.  20  Despise  not  prophesyings 

PROPHET  — 

\.A  seer,  n\h  chozeh. 

Isa.  30.  10  Whichsay.  .to  the  prophets,  Prophesy  nut 

2.  A  prophet,  K'33  nabi. 

Gen.  2c.  7  for  he  (is)  a  prophet,  and  he  shall  pray  for 
Exod  7.  1  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  proph. 
Numn.  29  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets 

12.  6  If  there  he  a  prophet  among  you,  (I)  the 
Deuti3.    1  If  there  arise  among  you  a  prophet,  or  a 

13.  3  not  hearken  unto  the  words  of  that  prop. 
13.  5  that  prophet,  or  that  dreamer  of  dreams 
18.  15  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  prophet  fr. 
18.  18  I  will  raise  them  up  a  prophet  from  amo. 
18.  20  the  prophet  which  shall  presume,  .that  p. 
18. 22  When  a  prophet  speaketh  in  the  name  of 

18.  22  the  prophet  hath  spoken  it  presumptuou. 

34. 10  there  arose  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel 
Judg.  6.    8  the  Lord  sent  a  prophet  unto  the  children 

1  Sa.   3.  20  established  (to  be)  a  prophet  of  the  Lord 

9.   9  a  prophet  was  beforetime  called  a  seer 
10.    5  a  company  of  prophets  coming  down  from 
10.  10  a  company  of  prophets  met  him  ;  and  the 
10.  11  behold,  he  prophesied  among  the  proph. 

10.  11,  12  (Is)  Saul  also  among  the  prophets? 

19.  20  prophets  prophesying,  and  Samuel  stand. 
19. 24  they  say,  (Is)  Saul  also  among  the  proph. 
22.  5  the  prophet  Gad  said  unto  David,  Abide 
28.  6  neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  by  p. 
28.  15  answereth.  .neither  by  prophets,  nor  by 

2  Sa.   7.    2  the  king  said  unto  Nathan  the  prophet,  S. 

12.  25  sent  by  the  hand  of  Nathan  the  prophet 

24. 11  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  the  prophet 

1  Ki.   1.   8  the  prophet,  and  Shimei.and  Rei.and  the 

1.  10  the  prophet,  and  Benaiah,  and  the  mighty 
1.  22  And,  lo.  .Nathan  the  prophet  also  came  in 
1 .  23  told  the  king . .  Behold  Nathan  the  prophet 
1.  32  the  prophet,  and  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jen. 

1.  34,  38,  44,  45  the  priest  and  Nathan  the  pro. 

11.  29  the  prophet  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  found 

13.  11  there  dwelt  an  old  prophet  in  Beth-el,  and 
13.  18  I  (am)  a  prophet  also  as  thou  (art);  and  an 
13.  20,  26  the  prophet  that  brought  him  back 
13.  23  for  the  prophet  whom  he  had  brought  ba. 
13.  25  told,  .in  the  city  where  the  old  prophet  d. 
13.  29  the  prophet  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  man 

13.  29  the  old  prophet  came  to  the  city,  to  mou, 

14.  2  Ahijah  the  prophet,  which  told  me  that 

14. 18  by  the  hand  of  his  servant  Ahijah  the  pr. 
16.    7  also  by  the  hand  of  the  prophet  Jehu  the 

16.  12  spake  against  Baasha  by  Jehu  the  prophet 
18.  4  Jezebel  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord 
18.  4  Obadiah  took  an  hundred  prophets,  and 
18. 13  when  Jezebel  slew  the  prophets  of  the  L. 
18,  13  hid  an  hundred  men  of  the  Lord's  proph. 
18.  19  the  prophets  of  Baal  four  hundred  and  fi. 

18. 19  the  prophets  of  the  groves  four  hundred 
18.  20  gathered  the  prophets  together  unto  m. 
18.  22  I.  .a  prophet  of  the  Lord;  but  Baal's  p. 
18.  25  Elijah  said  unto  the  prophets  of  Baal 
18.  36  the  prophet  came  near,  and  said,  LordG. 

18.  40  Take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one  of 

19.  1  had  slain  all  the  prophets  with  the  sword 
19.  10,  14  and  slain  thy  prophets  with  the  sword 

19.  16  shalt  thou  anoint  (to  be)  prophet  in  thy 

20.  13  there  came  a  prophet  unto  Ahab  king  of 
20.  22  the  prophet  came  to  the  king  of  Israel 
20.  35  a  certain  man  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
20.  38  the  prophet  departed,  and  waited  forthe 
20.  41  discerned  him  that  he  (was)  of  the  proph. 
22.  6  the  king  of  Israel  gathered  the  prophets 
22.  7  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  besides 
22. 10  all  the  prophets  prophesied  before  them 

22. 12  the  prophets  prophesied  so,  saying,  Go  up 
22.  13  the  words  of  the  prophets  (declare)  good 
22.22,  23  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of.  .prophets 

2  Ki    2.    3,  5  the  sons  of  the  prophets  that  (were)  at 

2.  7  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  went,  and  st. 

2.  15  when  the  sons  of  the  prophets  which  (w.) 

3.  11  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Loud,  that  we 

3.  13  the  prophets  of  thy  father,  and  to  the  p. 

4.  1  of  the  wives  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
4. 38  the  sons  of  the  prophets(were)sitting  be. 

4.  38  seethe  pottage  for  the  sons  of  the  proph. 

5.  3  (were)  with  the  prophet  that  (is)  in  Sam. 
5.  8  he  shall  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in 
5.  13  (if)  the  prophet  had  bid  thee  (do  some)g. 

5.  22  two  young  men  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets 

6.  1  the  sons  of  the  prophets  said  unto  Elisha 
6.  12  Elisha,  the  prophet  that  (is)  in  Israel,  tell. 
q.  1  prophet  called  one  of  the  children  of  the 
9.  4  So.  the  prophet,  went  to  Ramoth-gilead 
9.    7  the  blood  of  myservautsthe  prophets,  and 

10. 19  call  uuto  me  all  the  prophets  of  Baal,  all 
14.  25  the  prophet,  which  (was)  of  Gath-hepher 

17.  13  by  all  the  prophets,  (and  by)  all  the  seers 
17.  13  sent  to  you  by  my  servants  the  prophets 
17.  23  as  he  had  said  by  all  his  servants  the  pr. 

19.  2  to  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz 

20.  1  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  came 
20.  11  And  Isaiah  the  prophet  cried  unto  the  L. 

20.  14  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king 

21,  10  the  Lord  spake  by  his  servants  the  prop. 
33,  2  the  prophets,  and  all  the  people,  bothsm. 
23. 18  of  the  prophet  that  came  out  of  Samaria 


2  Ki.24 

1  Ch.16, 

17' 
29, 

2  Ch.  g 


24. 

25- 
25- 

26. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
32- 
32- 
35- 
36- 

Ezra    g. 

Neh.  6. 
6. 
9- 
9- 
9- 

Psa.  51. 

74- 
105. 

Isa.     3. 

9- 

28. 
29. 

37- 
38. 

Jer.     1. 


Sa: 


2  which  he  spake  by  his  servants  the  proph. 
22  Touch  not.  .and  do  my  prophets  no  harm 

1  David  said  to  Nathan  the  prophet,  Lo,  I 
29  in  the  book  of  Nathan  the  prophet,  and 

29  in  the  book  of  Nathan  the  prophet,  and 
5  Then  came  Shemaiah  the  prophet  to  Re. 

15  in  the  book  of  Shemaiah  the  prophet,  and 
22  written  in  the  story  of  the  prophet  Iddo 

8  heard,  .the  prophecy  of  Oded  the  prophet 

5  the  king,  .gathered  together  of  prophets 

6  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  LORD  besides 

9  all  the  prophets  prophesied  before  them 

11  all  the  prophets  prophesied  so,  saying 

12  the  words  of  the  prophets  (declare)  good 
21,  22  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of.  .prophets 
20  believe  his  prophets,  so  shall  ye  prosper 
12  a  writing  to  him  from  Elijah  the  prophet 

19  he  sent  prophets  to  them,  to  bring  them 

15  he  sent  unto  him  a  prophet,  which  said 

16  the  prophet  forbare,  and  said,  I  knowth. 
22  did .  .the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz,  write 

9  But  a  prophet  of  the  LORD  was  there,  wh. 
25  Gad  the  king's  seer,  and  Nathan  the  pro. 

25  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  by  his  pr. 

20  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  sou  of  Amoz,  pra. 
32  in  the  vision  of  Isaiah  the  prophet, the  son 
18  And.,  from  the  days  of  Samuel  the  proph. 

12  humbled  nothimself  before. .the prophet 
16  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of 
1 1  hast  commanded  by  thy  servants  the  pro. 

7  prophets  to  preach  of  thee  at  Jerusalem 

14  prophets,  that  would  have  put  me  in  fear 

26  thy  prophets  which  testified  against  them 

30  testifiedst.  .by  thy  spirit  in  thy  prophets 

32  on  our  prophets,  and  on  our  fathers,  and 
title,  the  prophet  came  unto  him,  after  he  had 

9  (there  is)  no  more  any  prophet :  neither 

15  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my  pro. 

2  the  prophet,  and  the  prudent,  and  the  an. 
15  the  prophet  that  teacheth  lies,  he  (is)  the 

7  the  priest  and  the  prophet  have  erred  tlx. 
10  the  prophets  and  your  rulers,  the  seers 

2  unto  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  sou  of  Amoz 
1  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz,  came  unto 

3  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  king 
5  ordained  thee  a  prophet  unto  the  nations 

8  the  prophets  prophesied  by  Baal,  and  w. 
26  they,  .and  their  priests,  and  their  proph. 

30  your  own  sword  hath  devoured  your  pr. 

9  Arid,  .at that  day.  .the  prophets  shall  w. 

13  the  prophets  shall  become  wind,  and  the 

31  The  prophets  prophesy  falsely,  and  the  p. 
13  from  the  prophet  even  unto  the  priest  e. 
25  seut  unto  yon  all  my  servants  the  proph. 

1  the  bones  of  the  prophets,  and  the  bones 

10  from  the  prophet  even  unto  the  priest  e. 
13  the  prophets,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of 

13  the  prophets  say  unto  them,  Ye  shall  not 

14  The  prophets  prophesy  lies  in  my  name 

15  the  prophets  that  prophesy  in  my  name 
15  By  sword  and  famine  shall  those  prophets 
18  the  prophet  and  the  priest  go  about  into 
18  nor  counsel,  .nor  the  word  from  the  pro. 

2  Pashur  smote  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  and 
9  Mine  heart,  .is  broken  because  of  the  pr. 

11  both  prophet  and  priest  are  profane :  yea 

13  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  prophets  of  Sam. 

14  I  have  seen  also  in  the  prophets  of  Jeru. 

15  saith  the  Lord,  .concerning the  prophets 

15  from  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  is  profan. 

16  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy  unto  you 

21  I  have  not  seut  these  prophets,  yet  they 

25  I  have  heard  what  the  prophets  said,  that 

26  in  the  heart  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy 
26  prophets  of  the  deceit  of  their  own  heart 
28  The  prophet  that  hath  a  dream,  let  him 
30,  31 1(ain)againsttheprophets,saiththe  L. 

33  or  the  prophet,  or  a  priest,  shall  ask  thee 

34  the  prophet,  and  the  priest,  and  the  peo. 
37  Thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the  prophet,  What 

2  the  prophet  spake  unto  all  the  people  of 

4  hath  sent  unto  you  all  his  servants  the  p. 

5  the  prophets,  whom  I  sent  unto  you,  both 

7  So.  .the  prophets  and  all  the  people  heard 

8  the  prophets  and  all  the  people  took  him 
ii  Then  spake  the  priests  and  the  prophets 
16  said,  .unto  the  priests  and  to  the  prophets 

9  hearken  not  ye  to  your  prophets,  nor  to 

14  the  prophets  that  speak  unto  you,  saying 

15  and  the  prophets  that  prophesy  unto  you 

16  of  your  prophets  that  prophesy  unto  you 
18  if  they  (be)  prophets,  and  if  the  word  of 

1  of  Azur  the  prophet,  which  (was)  of  Gil). 
.    5  prophet  Jeremiah  said  unto  the  prophet 
.    6  Even  the  prophet  Jeremiah  said,  Amen 
,    8  The  prophets  that  have  been  before  me  and 
.    9  The  prophet  which  prophesieth  of  peace 
.   9  when  the  word  of  the  prophet  shall  come 
.    9  (then)  shall  the  prophet  be  known,  that 
.  10  prophet  took  the  yoke  from  off  the  proph. 
.  1 1  And  the  prophet  Jeremiah  went  his  way 
.  12  Hananiah  the  prophet  had  broken  the  y. 
.  i2  from  off  the  neck  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah 
.  15  Then  said  the  prophet,  .unto,  .the  proph. 
.  17  So  Hananiah  the  prophet  died  the  same 
.    1  the  prophet  sent  from  Jerusalem  unto  the 
.    1  and  to  the  prophets,  and  to  all  the  people 
.    8  Let  not  your  prophets  and  your  diviners 
.  15  hath  raised  us  up  prophets  in  Babylon 
.  19  which  I  sent,  .by  my  servants  the  proph. 
.  29  read,  in  the  ears  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet 
.    2  the  prophet  was  shut  up  inthe  court  of  the 


Jer,   32.  32  their  prophets,  and  the  men  of  Judah,  aud 

34.  6  the  prophet  spake  all  these  words  unto  Z. 

35.  15  I  have  seut.  .youall my  servants  the  pro. 

36.  8  all  that  Jeremiah  the  prophet  commanded 

36.  26  Baruch  the  scribe,  and  Jeremiah  the  pro. 

37.  2  which  he  spake  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah 
37.  3  And.. the  kingseut. ,tu  the  prophet  Jere. 
37.   6  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  uuto  the  pro. 

37.  13  he  took  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  saying,  Th. 
37. 19  your  prophets  which  prophesied  unto  yen 

u^»  38.   9  the  prophet,  whom  they  have  cast  into 
38. 10  take  up  Jeremiah  the  prophet  out  of  the 
38. 14  took  Jeremiah  the  prophet  unto  him  into 
42.    2  said  unto  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Let,  we 

42.  4  the  prophet  said  unto  them,  I  have  heard 

43.  6  the  prophet,  and  Baruch  the  son  of  Ner. 

44.  4  I  sent  unto  you  all  my  servants  the  proph. 

45.  1  the  prophet  spake  unto  Baruch  the  son  of 

46.  1  which  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet  ag. 

46.  13  that  the  Lord  spake  to  Jeremiah  the  pr. 

47.  1  that  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet  agai. 

49.  34  that  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet  agai. 

50.  1  the  Lord  spake . .  by  Jeremiah  the  prophet 

51.  59  the  prophet  commanded  Seraiah  the  son 
Lam.  2.    9  prophets  also  find  no  vision  from  the  Lord 

2.  14  Thy  prophets  have  seen  vain  and  foolish 
2.  20  shall  the  priest  and  the  prophet  be  slain 
4. 1 3  Eor  the  sins  of  her  prophets,  (and)  the  ini. 
Eze.  2.  5  that  there  hath  been  a  prophet  among  th. 
7.  26  then  shall  they  seek  a  vision  of  the  proph. 
13.  2  the  prophets  of  Israel  that  prophesy,  and 
13.  3  Woe  unto  the  foolish  prophets,  thatfollowr 
13.  4  thy  prophets  are  like  the  foxes  in  the  de. 
13.   9  upon  the  prophets  that  see  vanity,  and 

13.  16  the  prophets  of  Israel,  which  prophesy  c. 

14.  4  Every  .man.  .that,  .cometh  to  the  prophet 
14.  7  and  cometh  to  a  prophet  to  enquire  of  him 
14.  9  if  the  prophet  be  deceived  when  he  hath 
14.  9  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet 
14.  10  the  punishment  of  the  prophet  shall  be 
22.  25  a  conspiracy  of  her  prophets  in  the  midst 
22.  28  her  prophets  have  daubed  them  with  un. 
33.  33  know  that  a  prophet  hath  been  among  th. 

38.  17  the  prophets  of  Israel,  which  prophesied 
Dan.   9.    2  the  word . .  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet 

9.    6  the  prophets,  which  spake  in  thy  name  to 
9.  10  laws,  which  he  set  before  us  by.  .the  pro. 
Hos.    4.    5  the  prophet  also  shall  fall  with  thee  in 

6.  5  Therefore  have  I  hewed  (them)  by  the  p. 
9.    7  the  prophet  (is)  a  fool,  the  spiritual  man 

9.  8  the  prophet  (is)  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all 

12.  10  I  have  also  spoken  by  the  prophets,  and 
12. 10  used  similitudes,  by  the  ministry  of  the  p. 
12. 13  by  a  prophet  the  Lord  brought,  .by  apr. 

Amos  2.  11  I  raised  up  of  your  sons  for  prophets,  and 

2.  12  and  commanded  the  prophets,  saying 

3.  7  he  revealeth  his  secret  uuto.  .the  proph. 

7.  14  I  (was)  no  prophet,  neither  (was)  I  a  pro. 
Mie.    3.    5  the  prophets  that  make  my  people  en* 

3.    6  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophet* 

3. 11  the.'prophets  thereof  divine  formoney:  yet 
Hah.    1.    1  The  burden  which  Habakkuk  the  proph. 

3.  1  A  prayer  of  Habakkuk  the  prophet  upon 
Zeph.  3.  4  Her  prophets  (are)  light  (and)  treacherous 
Hag.    1.    1,  3  word  of  the  LORD  by  Haggai  the  proph. 

1.  12  the  words  of  Haggai  the  prophet,  as  the 

2.  1,  10  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  Ha. 
Zech.  1.    1,  7  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto,  .the  proph. 

1.  4  unto  whom  the  fonner  prophets  have  cr. 
1.    5  and  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever? 

1.  6  which  I  commanded  my  servants  the  pr. 
7.  3  to  speak . .  to  the  prophets,  saying.  Should 
7.    7  Lord  hath  cried  by  the  former  prophets 

7.  12  sent  in  his  spirit  by  the  former  prophets 

8.  9  these  words  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophets 

13.  2  the  prophets  and  the  unclean  spirit  to 
13.   4  the  prophets  shall  be  ashamed  every  one 
13.   5  I  (am)  no  prophet,  I  (am)  an  husbandman 

Mai.    4.    5  I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet  before 

..I  prophet,  x'33  nehL 
Ezra    5.    1  prophets,  Haggai  the  prophet,  and  Zech. 

5.  2  with  them . .  the  prophets  of  God  helping 

6.  14  the  prophet  and  Zechariah  the  son  of  Id. 

.To  (cause  to)  dropt  "t?;  nataph,  5. 
Mic.    2. 11  he  shall  even  be  the  prophet  of  this  peo. 

. .  1  prophet,  public  expounder,  tt po<p-t)Ti)s  proplietes. 
Matt.  1.  22  fulfilled  which  was  spoken,  .by  the  proph. 

2.  5  of  Judea  :  for  thus  it  is  written  by  the  p, 
2.  15  he  fulfilled  which  was  spoken,  .by  the  p. 
2.  17  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  the  p. 

2.  23  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  pr. 

3.  3  this  is  he  that  was  spoken  of  by  the  pro 

4.  14  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 

5.  12  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  wh. 
5.  17  am  come  to  destroy  the  law,  or  the  proph. 

7. 12  do.  .for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets 
8.  17  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 

10.  41  receiveth a  prophet  in,  .name  of  a  proph. 

10.  41  He.  .shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward;  and 

11.  9  A  prophet?  yea.  .and  more  than  a  proph 

11.  13  the  prophets  and  the  law  prophesied  un. 

12.  17  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 

12.  39  no  sign.. but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jo. 

13.  17  That  many  prophets  and  righteous  (men) 
13.  35  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet 

13.  57  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  save  in 

14.  5  because  they  counted  him  as  a  prophet 
16.  4  unto  it,  but  the  sign  of  [the  prophet]  Jonas 
16.  14  and  others,  Jeremias,  or  one  of  the  proph. 
21.   4  fulfilled  which  wasspoken  by  the  prophet 


PROPHET 


781 


PROTECTION 


Mattel,  ii  Jesus  the  prophet  of  ISazareth  of  Galilee 

21.  26  we  fear,  .for  all  hold  John  as  a  prophet 
2i.  46  But.  .because  they  tookhimfora  prophet 

22.  40  On  these,  -hang  all  the  law  and  the  prop. 

23.  29  ye  build  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and 
23.  30  been  partakers,  .in  the  blood  of  the  pro. 
23.  31  children  of  them  which  killed  the  proph. 
23.  34  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men 

23.  37  (thou)thatkillest  the  prophets  and  stonest 

24.  15  desolation,  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  pro. 

26.  56  that  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets  might 

27.  9  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  the  p. 
27.  35  [fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prop.] 

Mark  1.  2  As  it  is  written  in  [the  prophets],  Behold 
6.  4  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  but  in 
6.  15  That  it  is  a  prophet,  or  as  one  of  the  pro. 

8.  28  (say),  Elias,  and  others,  One  of  the  proph. 
11.  32  counted  John,  that  he  was  a  prophet  in. 
13. 14  [desolation,  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  pro.] 

Luke  1.  70  As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  pr. 
1. 76  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  of  the  Highest 

3.  4  in  the  book  of  the  words  of  Esaias  the  p. 

4. 17  delivered  unto  him  the  book  of  the  prop. 

4.  24  No  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own  coun. 
4.  27  lepers. .in  the  time  of  Eliseus  the  prophet 

6.  23  in  the  like,  .did  their  fathers  unto  the  p. 
7. 16  a  great  prophet  is  risen  up  among  us;  and 

7.  26  A  prophet?  Yea.  .much  more  than  a  pro. 
7.  28  not  a  greater  [prophet]  than  John  the  B. 
7.  39  This  man,  if  he  were  a  prophet,  would  h. 

9.  8  that  one  of  the  old  prophets  was  risen  a. 
9.  19  that'One  of  the  old  prophets  is  risen  again 

10.  24  many  prophets  and  kings  have  desired  to 
11. 29  no  sign,  .but  the  sign  of  Jonas  [the  prop.] 

11.  47  for  ye  build  the  sepulchres  of  the  prophets 
11.  49  I  will  send  them  prophets  and  apostles 

11.  50  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets,  which  was 
13.  28  the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
13.  33  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  Jerusalem 
13.  34  which  killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest  t. 
16.  16  The  law  and  the  prophets  (were)  until  J. 
16.  29  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets ;  let  t. 
16.  31  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets 
18.  31  all  things  that  are  written  by  the  proph. 
20.  6  they  be  persuaded  that  John  was  a  proph. 
24. 19  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  word  before 
24  25  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken 
24.  27  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets 
24.  44  and  (in)  the  prophets,  and  (in)  the  Psalms 

John  1.  2r  Art  thou  that  prophet?  And  he  answered 
1.  23  Make  straight  the  way.  .said  the  prophet 
1.  25  not.  .Christ,  nor  Elias,  neither  that  prop. 

1.  45  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law,  and  the  prop. 
4.  19  saith.  .Sir,  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  pr. 
4.  44  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  coun. 

6.  14  prophet  that  should  come  into  the  world 
6. 45  It  is  written  in  the  prophets,  And  they  s. 

7.  40  Mary . .  said,  Of  a  truth  this  is  the  prophet 

7.  52  Search.. for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  pr. 

8.  52  Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets,  and 

8.  53  Abraham,  which  is  dead?  and  the  proph. 

9.  17  What  sayest  thou.  .He  said,  He  is  a  pro. 

12.  38  the  saying  of  Esaias  the  prophet  might 
Acts   2. 16  that  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet  J. 

2.  30  being  a  prophet,  and  knowing  that  God 

3. 18  had  showed  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  pro. 

3.  21  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  pro. 
3.  22  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise 

3. 23  evsry  soul,  which  will  not  hear  that  prop. 

3. 24  the  prophets  from  Samuel  and  those  that 
3.  25  Ye  are  the  children  of  the  prophets,  and 
7.  37  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise 
7.  42  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  proph. 
7.  48  Howbeit  the  most  high . .  as  saith  the  pro. 

7.  52  Which  of  the  prophets  have  not  your  fa. 

8.  28  sitting  in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  pr. 
8.  30  heard  him  read  the  prophet  Esaias,  and 
8.  34  of  whom  speak eth  the  prophet  this?  of  h. 

ic.  43  To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that 
11.  27  these  days  came  prophets  from  Jerusalem 

13.  1  was  at  Antioch  certain  prophets  and  tea. 
13. 15  afterthe  reading  of  the  law  and  the  prop. 
13.  20  he  gave,  .judges,  .until  Samuel  the  prop. 
13.  27  the  prophets  which  are  read  every  sabb. 

13.  40  that,  .which  is  spoken  of  in  the  prophets 
15. 15  And  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the  proph. 
15.  32  being  prophets  also  themselves,  exhorted 
21. 10  from  Judea  a  certain  prophet,  named  A. 
24. 14  written  in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets 
26.  22  than  those  which  the  prophets  and  Moses 
26. 27  believest  thou  the  prophets?  I  know  that 
28.  23  out  of  the  law  of  Moses,  and  (out  of)  the  p. 
28.  25  Well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by.  .the  prop. 

Koni.  1.   2  by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  Scriptures 

3.  21  being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  prop. 

11.  3  they  have  killed  thy  prophets,  and  digged 
1  Co.  12.  28  secondarily  prophets,  thirdly  teachers 

12.  29  all  apostles  ? .  .all  prophets?,  .all  teachers? 

14.  29  Let  the  prophets  speak  two  or  three,  and 
14.  32  spirits  of  the  prophets . .  subject  to  the  pr. 
14.  37  If  any  man  think  himself  to  be  a  prophet 

Eph.  2.  20  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  proph. 
3.  5  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  and  prop. 
4. 11  some,  prophets  ;  and  some,  evangelists 

1  Th.  2. 15  killed  the  Lord  Jesus  and  their  own  pro. 
Titus  1.  12  a  prophet  of  theirown,  said,  TheCretiaus 
Heb.  1.    1  God.,  spake.,  unto  the  fathers  by  the  pro. 

11.  32  David  also,  and  Samuel,  and  (of)  the  pro. 
Jas.  5. 10  the  prophets,  whohavespokeninthename 
i  Pe.  1. 10  the  prophets  have  enquired  and  searched 

2  Pe.  2. 16  dumb  ass.  .forbade  the  madness  of  the  p. 

3.    2  which  were  spoken  before  by  the  holy  p. 


Rev.  10.  7  hath  declared  to  his  servants  the  proph. 
11.  10  two  prophets  tormented  them  that  dwelt 
11. 18  give  reward  unto  thy  servants  the  proph. 
16.  6  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  proph. 
18.  20  heaven,  and  (ye)  holy  apostles  and  proph. 

18.  24  in  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets 
22.  6  the  Lord  God  of  the  holy  prophets  sent 
22.   9  of  thy  brethren  the  prophets,  and  of  them 

6.  Prophetic,  irpotyTjTtxSs  prophetikos. 

Rom.  16.  26  But  now.,  by  the  scriptures  of  the  proph. 
PROPHET,  to  make  self  a  — 
To  show  self  a  prophet,  azi  no.ba,  7. 

Jer.  29.  26  (that  is)  mad,  and  maketh  himself  a  pro. 
29. 27  which  maketh  himself  a  prophet  to  you? 

PROPHET,  false  — 

A  false  prophet,  ipevSoTrpocprjTris  pseudoprophttes. 
Matt.  7.  15  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to 
24.  11  many  false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall 
24.  24  there  shall  arise  false  Christs,  andfalse  p. 
Mark  13.  22  false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall  show 
Luke  6.  26  for  so  did  their  fathers  to  the  false  proph. 
Acts  13.  6  a  false  prophet,  a  Jew,  whose  name  (was) 
2  Pe.  2.    1  were  false  prophets  also  among  the  peo. 

1  Jo.  4.    1  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world 
Rev.  16. 13  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet 

19.  20  the  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles 
20. 10  where  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet 

PROPHETESS  — 

l.A  prophetess,  female  preacher,  n$'4j  nebiah. 

Exod.15.  20  Miriam  the  prophetess,  the  sister  of  Aar. 

Judg.  4.   4  Deborah,  a  prophetess,  the  wife  of  Lapid. 

2  Ki.22.  14  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of  Shallum  the 
2  Ch.34.  22  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of  Shal. 
Neh.  6. 14  on  the  prophetess  Noadiah,  and  the  rest 
Isa.     8.   3  I  went  unto  the  prophetess  ;  and  she  co. 

2.  A  prophetess,  female  preacher,  irpo<priTis  proph. 

Luke  2.  36  Anna,  a  prophetess,  the  daughter  of  Ph. 
Rev.    2. 20  Jezebel,  which  calleth  herself  a  prophet. 

PROPITIATION  — 

1.  What  appeases,  propitiates,  i\aaix6s  hilasmos. 
1  Jo.  2.    2  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  and  not 
'4.  10  his  Son  (to  be)  the  propitiation  for  our  s. 

'2.  Place  of  propitiation,  tXam-nptov  hilasterion. 

Rom.  3.  25  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood 
PROPORTION  — 
l.Void  or  open  space,  !}IQ  maar. 

1  Ki.  7.  36  according  to  the  proportion  of  every  one 
%Array,   tqj;  erek. 

Job  41. 12  nor  his  power,  nor  his  comely  proportion 

3.  Proportion,  equality,  avaKoyia  analogia. 

Romi2.    6  (let. .)  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith 
PROSELYTE  — 

Proselyte,  one  who  comes  toioard,  Trpoa-fi\vTos  pro. 

Matt23.  15  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  prose. 

Acts    2.  10  and  strangers  of  Rome,  Jews  and  prosel. 

6.    5  Parmenas,  and  Nicolas  a  proselyte  of  A. 

13.  43  religious  proselytes  followed  Paul  and  B. 

PROSPECT  — 

Face,  D'33 panim. 

Eze.  40.  44  and  their  prospect  (was)  toward  the  south 
40.  44  one.  .(having) the  prospect  toward  the  n. 
40.  45,  46  chamber,  whose  prospect  (is)  toward 
42. 15  gate  whose  prospect  (is)  toward  the  east 
43.   4  gate  whose  prospect  (is)  toward  the  east 

PROSPER,  to  — 

I.  To  go  on,  ^?n  ludaJc. 

Judg.  4.  24  Israel  prospered,  and  prevailed  against 
2.To  be  or  go  right,  1&3  kasher, 

Eccl.11.    6  for  thou  kiiowest  not  whether  shall  pro. 

3.  To  cause  to  prosper,  rns  tselach,  5. 

Ezra   5.   8  this  work  goeth  fast  on,  and  prospereth 

6.  14  prospered  through  the  prophesying  of  H. 
Dan.  6.  28  So  this  Daniel  prospered  in  the  reign  of 

4.  Togo  on  2irosperously,  nh'i  tsaleach. 

Numi4. 41  ye  transgress,  .but  it  shall  not  prosper 

Isa.  53. 10  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his 
54.  17  No  weapon .  .formed  against  thee  shall  p. 

Jer.  12.  1  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  p.? 
22.  30  a  man  (that)  shall  not  prosper  in  his  days 
22.  30  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  prosper,  sitting 

Eze.  16.  13  and  thou  didst  prosper  into  a  kingdom 

17.  g  Thus  saith  theLordGoD;Shallitprosper? 

17. 10  Yea,  behold,  (being)  planted,  shall  it  pr.? 
17. 15  Shall  he  prosper?  shall  he  escape  that  do. 

Dan.  11. 27  but  it  shall  not  prosper:  for  yet  the  end 

o.To  (cause  to)  go  071  prosperously,  nSy  tsaleach,  5. 

Gen.  24.  40  will  send  his  angel  with  thee,  and  prosper 

24.  42  if  now  thou  do  prosper  my  way  which  I 

24.  56  seeing  the  Lord  hath  prospered  my  way 

Deut  28.  29  thou  shalt  not  prosper  in  thy  ways  :  and 

1  Ki.22.  12  Go  up  to  Ramoth-gilead,  andprosper  :  for 

22.  15  Go,  and  prosper:  for  the  Lord  shall  de. 

1  Cb.22.  11  prosper  thou,  and  build  the  house  of  the 

22. 13  Then  shalt  thou  prosper,  if  thou  takest 
29.  23  Solomon  sat  on  the  throne,  .and  prospered 

2  Ch.13. 12  fight  ye  not.  .for  ye  shall  not  prosper 

14.    7  rest  on  every  side.   So  they  built  and  pr. 

18. 11  Go  up  to  Ramoth-gilead, and  prosper;  for 

18.  14  Go  ye  up,  and  prosper,  and  they  shall  be 
20.  20  believe  his  prophets,  so  shall  ye  prosper 


2Ch.24.  20  Why  transgress  ye.. that  ye  cannot  pro.? 

31.  21  he  did  (it)  with  all  his  heart,  and  prospered 

32.  30  And  Hezekiah  prospered  in  all  his  works 
Neh.  1.  11  prosper,  I  pray  thee,  thy  servant  this  day 

2.  20  will  prosper  us;  therefore  we  his  servants 
Psa.    1.   3  and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper 

37.    7  fret  not  thyself  because  of  him  who  pros. 

Prov28.  13  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper 

Isa.  55.  1 1  shall  prosper  (in  the  thing)  whereto  I  sent 

Jer.    2.  37  Lord  hath  rejected,  .thoushalt  not  pros. 

5.  28  judge  not  the  cause. .yet  they  prosper;  and 

32.    5  though  ye  fight . .  ye  shall  not  prosper 

Dan.   8.  i2castdown.  .and  it  practised,  and  prospered 

S.  24  shall  prosper,  and  practise,  and  shall  de. 

11.  36  shall  prosper  till  the  indignation  be  ace. 

6.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  "?3^  sakal,  5. 

Deut2g.  9  do  them,  that  ye  may  prosper  in  all  that 
Josh.  1.    7  mayest  prosper  whithersoever  thou  goest 

1  Ki.   2.    3  mayest  prosper  in  all  that  thou  doest,  and 

2  Ki.  18.    7  he  prospered  withersoever  he  went  forth 
Prov  17.    8  whithersoever  it  turneth,  it  prospereth 
Jer.  10.  21  therefore  they  shall  not  prosper,  and  all 

20.  11  for  they  shall  not  prosper :  (their)  everla. 
23.    5  a  king  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  shall 

'.To  be  at  rest,  V}$,  nhy  shalah,  shalav. 

Job    12.    6  tabernacles  of  robbers  prosper,  and  they 
Psa.122.   6  peace  of  Jerusalem :  they  shall  prosper 
Lam.  1.    5  her  enemies  prosper;  for  the  Lord  hath 

8. Peace,  completeness,  Di7^  shalom. 

2  Sa.  11.  7  how  the  people  did,  and  how  the  war  p. 
9. Safe,  at  ease,  at  rest,  *hv,  vhip  sluder. 

Psa.  73.  12  ungodly,  who  prosper  in  the  world ;  they 

10.  To  he  complete,  finished,  at  peace,  dS'^>  shalam. 
Job     9.   4  hardened  (himself)  against  him, and.. p.? 

11.  To  have  a  good  journey,  go  on  well,  €vo$6o/j.ai. 

1  Co.  16.    2  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  (God)  hath  prosp 

3  John      2  thou  mayest  prosper,  .even  as  thy  soul  p. 

PROSPER,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  prosper  or  go  on,  nS$  tsaleach,  5. 
Gen.  39.   3  made  all  that  he  did  to  prosper  in  his  h. 
39.  23  which  he  did,  the  Lord  made  (it)  to  pros. 

2  Ch.26.  5  sought  the  LORD,  God  made  him  to  pros 
Dan.    8.  25  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand 

PROSPERITY  — 
l.Good,  3;.d  tob. 

Deut  23.   6  Thou  shalt  not  seek . .  their  prosperity  al  1 

1  Ki.  10.  7  prosperity  exceedeth  the  fame  which  I  h. 
Job  36.  11  they  shall  spend  their  days  in  prosperity 
Eccl.  7.  14  In  the  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in 
Lam.  3.  17  hast  removed  my  soul. .  I  forgat  prosperity 
Zech.  1.  17  My  cities  through  prosperity  shall  yet  be 

2.  Rest,  ease,  security,  1^  shelev. 

Psa.  30.  6  in  my  prosperity  I  said,  I  shall  never  be 
3. Safe,  at  ease,  at  rest,  iS#  shalcv. 

Zech.  7.  7  when  Jerusalem  was.  .in  prosperity,  and 
A.Pest,  ease,  security,  Tvf}p  shalvah. 

Psa.122.    7  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  (and)  prosper. 

Prov.  1.  32  and  the  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy 

Jer.  22.  21  I  spake  unto  thee  in  thy  prosperity ;  (but) 

5. Peace,  completeness,  Difr*'  shalom. 

Job    15.  21  in  prosperity  the  destroyer  shall  come  u. 

Psa.  35.  27  which  hath  pleasure  in  the  prosperity  of 
73.    3  (when)  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 

Jer.  33.   9  for  all  the  prosperity,  that  I  procure  unto 
PROSPERITY,  to  send  — 
To  cause  to  prosper,  nS>*  tsaleach,  5. 

Psa.nS.  25  O  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  send  now  prosp. 
PROSPEROUS,  PROSPEROUSLY,  to  make  — 

1.  To  prosper,  rn*  tsaleach. 

Psa.  45.    4  in  thy  majesty  ride  prosperously,  because 

2.  To  cause  to  2>rosp>er,  ry}"$  tsaleach,  5. 

Gen.  24.  21  had  made  his  journey  prosperous  or  not 

39.    2  he  was  a  prosperous  man ;  and  he  was  in 

Josh.  1.    8  then  thou  shalt  make  thy  way  prosperous 

Judgi8.    5  may  know  whether  our  way.  .shall  be  pr. 

2  Ch.  7.  11  and  in  his  own  house,  he  prosperously  eff. 
Isa.  48.  15  brought  him,  and  he  shall  make  his  way  p. 

3.  To  finish,  complete,  D?»  shalam,  3. 

Job     8.   6  surely . .  make  the  habitation . .  prosperous 

4.  Peace,  completeness,  dS1??  shalom. 

Zech.  8. 12  For  the  seed  (shall  be)  prosperous;  the 
PROSTITUTE,  to  — 
To  pierce,  pollute,  make  common,  77$  clutlal,  3. 

Lev.  iq.  29  Do  not  prostitute  thy  daughter,  to  cause 
PROTECTION  -.- 
Hiding,  secrecy,  mno  sithrah. 

Deut  32.  38  rise  up  and  help  you,  (and)  be  your  prot 
PROTEST  by,  I  — 
Yea,  (adv.  of  affirmation  or  adjuring),  Wj  tie. 

1  Co.  15.  31 1  protest  by  your  rejoicing  which  I  have 
PROTEST     (earnestly),  tc  — 
To  protest,  (cause  to  testify),  tji  ud,  5. 

Gen.  43.    3  The  man  did  solemnly  protest  unto  us,  s. 

1  Sa.    8.    o  howbeit  yet  protest  solemnly  unto,  .and 

1  Ki.   2.  42  protested  unto  thee,  saying,  Know  for  a 

Jer.  11.    7  For  I  earnestly  protested  unto  your  fath. 
11.    7  rising  early  and  protesting,  saying,  Obey 

Zech.  3.   6  angel  of  the  Lord  protested  unto  Joshua 


PROUD 


782 


PROVISION 


PROUD  (thing,  most,  proudly)  — 
l.Gay,  proud,  xa  go. 

Isa.    16.    6  he  (is)  very  proud  :  (even)  of  his  haughti. 
2.  Proud,  gay,  nto  geeh. 

Job    40.  11  behold  every  one  (that  is)  proud,  and  ab. 

40.  iz  Look  on  every  one  (that  is)  proud,  (and) 

Psa.  94.    2  Lift  up  thyself.,  render  a  reward  to  the  p. 

123.    4  filled,  .with  the  contempt  of  the  proud 

140.    5  proud  have  hid  a  snare  for  me,  aud  cords 

Prov  15.  25  The  Lord  will  destroy  the  house  of  the  p. 

16.  19  better . .  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  p. 

Isa.     2.  12  upon  every  (one  that  is)  proud  and  lofty 

Jer.  48.  29  he  is  exceeding  proud,  his  loftiness,  and 

Z.Pride,  riving,  excellency,  pxa  gaon. 

Job    38.  11  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed? 
LPride,  rising,  excellency,  mxa  geuth. 

Psa.  17.  10  with  their  mouth  they  speak  proudly 
5.T-*  be  or  become  proud,  haughty,  high,  nil  gabah. 

Prov  16.    5  Every  one  (that  is)  proud  in  heart  (is)  an 

Eccl.  7.    8  patient  iu  spirit  (is)  better  than  the  proud 

fy.Migh,  haughty,  rca,  nba  gaboah. 

1  Sa.    2.    3  Taik  no  more  so  exceedingly  proudly ;  let 
Psa.  138.   6  but  the  proud  he  knoweth  afar  oft' 

7.  Proud,  it  zed. 

Psa.  86.  14  O  God,  theproud  are  risen  against  me,  and 

119.  21  Thou  hast  rebuked  the  proud  (that  are) 

119.  51  The  proud  havehadmegreatlyinderision 

119.  69  The  proud  have  forged  a  lie  against  me 

119.  78  Let  the  proud  be  ashamed ;  for  they  dealt 

119.  85  Theproud  have  digged  pits  for  me,  which 

119.  122  Be  surety,  .let  not  theproud  oppress  me 

Prov2i.  24  Proud  (and)  haughty  scorner(is)hisname 

Isa.    13.  11  will  cause  the  arrogancy  of  the  proud  to 

Jer.  43.    2  all  the  proud  men,  saying  unto  Jeremiah 

Mai.    3. 15  now  we  call  the  proud  happy;  yea,  they 

4.    1  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wick. 

8. Pride,  preswnplion,  proud  one,  fni  zadon. 

Prov  21.  24  (is)  bis  name  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath 

Jer.    50.  31  I  (am)  against  thee,  (0  thou)  most  proud 

50.  32  most  proud  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  n. 

9.  Great,  Vna  gadol. 

Tsa.  12.    3  (and)  the  tongue  that  speaketh  proud  th. 

10.  Pride,  rising,  excellency,  rroa  gaavah. 

Psa.  31.  18  which  speak  grievous  things  proudly  and 
31.  23  and  plentifully  rewardeth  the  proud  doer 

11.  Proud,  I'vtt  zedon. 

Psa.  124.    5  Then  the  proud  waters  had  gone  over  our 
1% Haughty,  "vn;  yahir. 

Hab.  2.    5  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at  home 
13.  To  oppress,  break,  flj;  yanah, 

Psa.123.   4  filled,  .with  the  contempt  of  the  proud 
14. Breadth,  width,  pride,  urn  rahab. 

Job     9.  13  the  proud  helpers  do  stoop  under  him 
26. 12  by  his  understanding  he  smiteth.  .the  p. 

15.  Broad,  wide,  proud,  nn"i  rahab. 

Psa.  40.   4  respecteth  not  the  proud,  nor  such  as  turn 

16.  To  be  high,  on  fwm. 

Prov   6.  17  A  proud  look,  a  lying  tongue,  and  hands 

17.  Brood,  wide,  proud,  srn  rachab. 

Psa.  101.    5  him  that  hath  an  high  look  and  a  proud 
Prov  21.    4  An  high  look,  and  a  proud  heart,  (and)  the 
28.  25  He  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  stirreth  up  s. 

18.  Exceeding  proud,  virepTjipai'os  hupcrephanos. 
Luke  1.  51  he  hath  scattered  the  proud  in  the  imag. 
Pvom.  1.  30  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  proud,  boasters 

2  Ti.    3.    2  For  men  shall  be.  .proud,  blasphemers 
Jas.    4.   6  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace 
1  Pe.    5.    5  for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth 

PROUD,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  high  or  haughty,  rna  gabah. 

Jer.  13.  15  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear ;  be  not  proud  :  for 

2.  To  be  proud,  ti,  in  zud,  aid. 

Jer.  50.  29  for  she  hath  been  proud  against  the  LORD 

3.  To  be  puffed  up,  rv<puo/xai  tuphoomai. 

1  Ti.   6.    4  He  is  proud,  knowing  nothing,  but  doting 
PROUDLY,  to  deal,  behave  self,  have  spoken — 
l.To  be  proud,  ~ni  mid. 

Exodi8.  11  for  in  the  thing  wherein  they  dealt  proud. 
2,To  actproudly,  ti  zud,  5. 

Neh.    9.  10  for  thou  knewest  that  they  deal  proudly 
9. 16  But  they  and  our  fathers  dealt  proudly 
9. 29  yet  they  dealt  proudly,  and  hearkened 

3.  To  make  great,  *?13  gadal,  5. 

Obad.      12  neither  shouklest  thou  have  spoken  pro. 

4,  To  be  broad,  wide,  proud,  arri  rahab. 

Isa.     3.    5  child  shall  behave  himself  proudly  agai. 
PROVE,  to  — 
l.To  try,  prove,  test,  |B3  bachan. 

Psa.  17.   3  Thou  hast  proved  mine  heart;  thou  hast 

66.  10  For  thou,  <»  God,  hast  proved  us  :  thou 

81.    7  I  proved  thee  at  the  waters  of  Meribah 

95.   9  "When  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved 

Mai.   3.  10  prove  me  dow  herewith,  saith  the  Loud 

2.To  try.  prove,  rrpj  nasah,  3. 

Exodi5.  25  an  ordinance,  and  there  lie  proved  the  n 
16.   4  may  prove  them,  whether  they  will  walk 


Exoobo.  20  God  is  come  to  prove  you,  and  that  his  f. 

Deut.  8.    2  to  prove  thee,  to  know  what  (was)  in  thi. 

8.  16  that  he  might  prove  tbee,  todo thee  good 

13.  3  for  the  Lord  your  God  proveth  you,  to  k. 
33.    8  whom  thou  didst  prove  at  Massah,  (and 

Judg.  2.  22  That  through  them  I  may  prove  Israel 
3.    1  which  the  Lord  left,  to  prove  Israel  by  t. 
3.    4  they  were  to  prove  Israel  by  them,  to  kn. 

6.  39  let  me  prove,  I  pray  thee,  but  this  once 
1  Sa.  17.  39  he  assayed  to  go ;  for  he  had  not  proved 

17.  39  for  I  have  not  proved  (them).  And  David 

1  Ki.io.    1  she  came  to  prove  him  with  hard  quest. 

2  Ch.  9.  1  she  came  to  prove  Solomon  with  hard  411. 
Psa.  26.  2  Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me ;  try 
Eccl.  2.    1  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth 

7.  23  All  this  have  I  proved  by  wisdom :  I  said 
Dan.    1.  12  Prove  thy  servants,  I  beseech  thee,  ten  d. 

1.  14  So  he  consented,  .and  proved  them  ten 

3.  To  show  off,  aTToSeinvvixi  apodcibnumi. 

Acts  25.    7  complaints,  .which  they  could  not  prove 

4.  To  try,  prove,  $0Ki/j.d(a>  dokimazo. 

Luke  14.  19  I  go  to  prove  them  :  I  pray  thee  have  me 
Kora.12.  2  that  ye  may  prove  what  (is)  that  good,  and 
2  Co.   8.    8  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your  love 

8.  22  whom  we  have  oftentimes  proved  diligent 
13-    5  prove  your  own  selves.  Know  ye  not  your 

Gal.     6.    4  let  every  man  prove  his  own  work,  and 
Eph.  5.  10  Proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord 
1  Th.  5.  21  Prove  all  things  :  hold  fast  that  which  is 
1  Ti.    3.  10  these  also  first  be  proved ;  theu  let  them 
Heb.  3.   9  [When  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved] 

5.  To  set  alongside,  prove,  demonstrate,  Trapia'T-n/j.i. 

Acts  24.  13  Neither  can  they  prove  the  things  where. 

6.  To  attempt,  try,  put  to  the  proof,  •jretpd^copeii-azo. 
John  6.    6  this  he  said  to  prove  hini :  for  he  himself 

7. To  cause  to  go  up  together,  construct,  cn>Ju£i/3a(>a>. 

Acts    g.  22  confounded  the  Jews,  .proving  that  this 
PROVE  before,  to  — 
To  accuse  before  or  first,  irpoaiTido/xat  proaitiaomai. 

Rom.  3.    9  for  we  have  before  proved  both  Jews  and 
PROVED,  to  be  — 
To  be  tried,  proved,  tested,  fna  bachan,  2. 

Gen.  42.  15  Hereby  ye  shall  be  proved :  By  the  life  of 
42. 16  that  your  words  may  be  proved,  whether 
PROVENDER  — 
1.  Provender,  mixed  food,  77a.  belli. 

Isa.   30.  24  the  young  asses,  .shall  eat  clean  proven. 

2. Fodder,  provender,  Ni2pp  mispo. 

Gen.  24.  25  We  have  both  straw  and  provender  enou. 
24.  32  gave  straw  and  provender  for  the  camels 

42.  27  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the  inn,  he  e. 

43.  24  their  feet ;  and  he  gave  their  asses  prov. 
Judg  19. 19  Vet  there  is  both  straw  and  provender 

PROVENDER,  to  give  — 

To  mix,  mingle,  SSa  balal. 

Judg  19.  21  gave  provender  unto  the  asses :  and  they 
PROVERB  — 

1.  Acute  saying,  hidden  thing,  .TVn  chidah, 

Hab.    2.  6  take  up.  .a  taunting  proverb  against  him 

2.A  riding  saying,  proverb,  similitude,  7^9  mashal. 

Deut  28.  37  thou  shalt  become,  .a proverb,  and  a  by 

1  Sa.  10.  12  Therefore  it  became  a  proverb,  (Is)  Saul 

24.  13  As  saith  the  proverb  of  the  ancients,  Wic. 

1  Ki.  4.  32  And  he  spake  three  thousand  proverbs 

9.  7  Israel  shall  be  a  proverb  and  a  by  word 

2  Ch.  7.  20  make  it  (to  be)  a  proverb  and  a  by  word 
Psa.  69.  11  made  sackcloth,  .and  I  became  a  proverb 
Prov.  1.    1  proverbs  of  Solomon  the  Bon  of  David,  k. 

1.  6  To  understand  a  proverb,  and  the  interp. 

10.  1  The  proverbs  of  Solomon.  A  wise  son  ma. 

25.  1  These  (are)  also  proverbs  of  Solomon,  w. 
Eccl.  12.  9  sought  out,  (and)  set  iu  order  many  prov. 
Isa.  14.  4  That  thou  shalt  take  up  this  proverb  agai. 
Jer.  24.  9  a  proverb,  a  taunt  and  a  curse,  in  all  pla. 
Eze.  12.  22  what  (is)that  proverb  (that)ye have  in  the 

12.  23  I  will  make  this  proverb  to  cease,  and  t. 

14.  8  and  will  make  him  a  sign  and  a  proverb 

18.  2  What  mean  ye,  that  ye  use  this  proverb 
18.    3  have  (occasion)  any  more  to  use  this  pro. 

3. Parable,  comparison,  similitude,  irapaftoKr)  par. 
Luke  4.  23  Ye  will  surely  say  unto  me  this  proverb 
4. Proverb,  obscure  saying,  Trapotfxla paroimia. 
John  16.  25  things  have  I  spoken  untoyou  in  proverbs 
16.  25  shall  no  more  speak  unto  you  in  proverbs 
16.  29  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speakest  no  p. 
2  Ve,    2.  22  according  to  the  true  proverb,  The  dog 

PROVERB,  to  speak  or  use  as  a  — 

To  use  a  similitude  or  ruling  saying,  7£;£  mashal. 
N111U21.  27  Whereforethey  that  speak  in  proverba  say 
Eze.  12.  23  they  shall  no  more  use  it  as  a  proverb  in 
16.  44  one  that  useth  proverbs  shall  use  (this)  p. 

PROVIDE  (for)  to — 

l.To  see}  look  after,  njrj  chazah. 

ExodiS.  21  Moreover'thou  shalt  provide  outofallthe 

2.  To  prepare,  pa  kun,  5. 

2  Ch.  2.  7  cunning  men . .  whom  D.  my  father  did  p. 
Job  38.  41  Who  provideth  for  the  raven  his  food?  w. 
Psa.  6=;.  9  preparest  them  corn .  .thou  hast  so  prov. 
78.  20  can  be  give  bread  also?  can  he  provide  fl. 
Prov.  6,    8  Provideth  her  meat  iu  the  summer,  (and) 


3.  To  do,  make,  HfF$  asah. 

Gen.  30.  30  now  when  shall  I  provide  for  mine  own  h. 

2  Ch.32.  29  Moreover  he  provided  hini  cities,  and  po. 
4.2*0  see,  look  after,  to  raah. 

Gen.  22.    8  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  bu. 

Deut33.  21  provided  the  first  part  for  himself,  because 

1  Sa.  16.    1  I  have  provided  me  a  king  among  his  sons 

16. 17  Provide  me  now  a  man  that  can  play  well 

5.  To  make  ready,  eroifxdfa  hetoimazo. 

Luke  1 2.  20  those  things  be  which  thou  hast  provided  ? 

6.  To  acquire,  prepare,  possess,  Krao/xai  ktaomai. 
Matt  10.    9  Provide  neither  gold,  nor  silver,  norbrass 

7.  To  set  alongside,  wapicrTwy-i  pa/pistemi* 

Acts  23.  24  provide  (them)  beasts,  that  they  may  set 

8.  To  do,  make,  ttoUw  poieo. 

Lukei2.  33  provide  yourselves  bags  which  wax  not  old 

9.  To  look  before  or  forward,  irpo&Keww  problepo. 
Heb.  11.  40  God  having  provided  some  better  thing 

10.  To  know  or  think  beforehand,  irpovotoo  pronoeo. 
Rom. 12. 17  Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all 

2  Co.    8.  21  Providing  for  honest  things,  not  only  in 
1  Ti.    5.    8  But  if  auy  provide  not  for  his  own,  and 

PROVIDENCE  — 
Forethought,  Trp6vota  pronoia. 

Acts  24.   2  done  unto  this  nation  by  thy  providence 
PROVINCE  — 

1.  Jurisdiction,  nr"ip  medinah. 

1  Ki.20.  14,  15,  17,  19  men  of  the  princes  of  the  prov. 
Ezra   2.    1  these  (are)  the  children  of  the  province 

4. 15  hurtful  unto  kings  and  provinces,  and  that 

5.  8  went  into  the  province  of  Judea,  to  theli 

6.  2  in  the  palace  that  (is)  iu  the  province  of 

7.  16  canst  find  in  all  the  province  of  Babylon 
Neh.   1.    3  left  of  the  captivity  there  in  the  province 

7.  6  These  (are)  the  children  of  the  province, tii. 
11.    3  Now  these  (are)  the  chief  of  the  province 

Esth.  1.  1  an  hundred  aud  seven  and  twenty  provin 
1,  3  nobles  and  princes  of  the  provinces,  (be.) 
1.  16  people  that  (are)  in  all  the  provinces  of 

1.  22  into  all  the  king's  provinces,  into  every  pr 

2.  3  appoint  officers  in  all  the  provinces  of  his 

2.  18  made  a  release  to  the  provinces,  and  gave 

3.  8  dispersed  among  the  people  in  all  the  pr. 
3.  12  governors  that  (were)  over  every  province 
3.  12  to  the  rulers  of  every  people  of  everypro 
3.  13  sent  by  posts  into  all  the  king's  provinces 

3.  14  commandment  to  be  given  me  very  provin. 

4.  3  in  every  province,  whithersoevei  the  ki. 

4.  11  people  of  the  king's  provinces,  do  know 

8.  5  Jews  which  (are)  in  all  the  king's  provin. 
8.  9  deputies  aud  rulers  of  the  provinces  whi. 
8.  9  provinces,  unto  every  province  according 
8.  11  all  the  power  of  the  people  and  province 
8.  12  Upon  one  day,  in  all  the  provinces  of  king 
8. 13  commandment  to  be  given  in  every  prov. 

8.  17  in  every  province,  and  in  every  city,  whi, 

9.  2  throughout  all  the  provinces  of  the  king 
9.  3  rulers  of  the  provinces,  and  the  lieutene. 
9.  4  fame  went  out  throughout  all  the  provin 
9.  12  have  they  done  iu  the  rest  of  the  king's  p. 
9.  16  other  Jews  that  (were)  in  the  king's  pro. 
9.  20  Jews  that  (were)  in  all  the  provinces  of 
9.  28  kept  throughout  every,  .province,  and 

9.  30  to  the  hundred  twenty  and  seven  prov. 
Eccl.  2.    8  peculiar  treasure  of  kings  and  of  the  pr. 

5.  8  perverting  of.  .justice  in  a  province,  ma. 
Lam.  1.    1  princess  among  the  provinces,  (how)  is 
Eze.  19.    8  on  every  side  from  the  provinces,  andsp. 
Dan.   2.  48  made  him  ruler  over  the  whole  province 

2.  49  over  the  affairs  of  the  province  of  Babyl. 

3.  1  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  in  the  province  of  B. 
3.  2  gather  together,  .all  the  rulers  of  the  p. 
3.  3  all  the  rulers  of  the  provinces,  were  gat. 
3.  12  hast  set  over  the  affairs  of  the  province 
3.  30  king  promoted  Shadrach . .  in  the  province 
8.    2  palace,  which  (is)  iu  the  province  of  Elam 

11.  24  even  upon  the  fattest  places  of  the  prov. 

'l.What  is  ruled  over,  a  province,  district,  eVapx'a 

Acts  23.  34  he  asked  of  what  province  he  was.     And 

25.    1  when  Festus  was  come  into  the  province 

PROVISION  (for)  -— 

l.A  word,  matter,  thing,  ^y^dabar. 

Dan.    i.   5  appointed  them  a  daily  provision  of  the 

2. Provision,  what  is  prepared,  .-na  kerah. 

2  Ki.  6.  23  he  preparedgreatprovisionfor  them  :  aud 

3.  Bread,  food,  on  J  lechem. 

1  Ki.  4.  22  Solomon's  provision  for  one  day  was  th. 

4. Hunting,  what  is  gained  by  hunting,  TS  tsayid. 
Josh.  9.    5  all  the  bread  of  their  provision  was  dry 
Psa.  132.  15  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  provision:  I 

5.  Hunting,  what  is  gained  by  hunting,  ny^tsedah. 

Gen.  42.  25  to  give  them  provision  for  the  way:  and 

45.  21  Joseph,  .gave them  provision  for  the  way 

6. Forethought,  trpovota  pronoia. 

Rom  13.  14  make  not  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  (ful.) 
PROVISION,  to  make  or  take  — 
l.To  contain,  comprehend,  provide,  713  kid,  3a. 

1  Ki.  4.   7  each  man  his  month  in  a  year  made  pro. 

2.  To  2>rcpare,  establish,  pa  hwa,  5. 

1  Ch.29. 19  palace,  (for)  the  which  I  have  made  pro. 


PROVOCATION 


rs3 


PUBLISH 


3.  To  hunt  for  one's  self,  "fis  tsud,  7. 

Josh.  g.  12  Tliis  our  bread  we  took  hot  (for)  our  pr. 
PROVOCATION  — 
1. Provocation,  cause  of  anger,  sadness,  oyj  kaas. 

i  Ki.  15.  30  by  his  provocation  wherewith  he  provo. 
21.  22  provocation  wherewith  thou  hast  provo. 

2  Ki.  23.  26  because  of  all  the  provocations  that  Ma. 

Eze.  20.  28  presented  the  provocation  of  their  offer. 

2.7*0  make  bitter,  rrD  marah,  5. 

Job  17.  2  doth  not  mine  eye  continue  in  their  pro. 
3. Strife,  contention,  nano  meribah. 

Psa.  95.  8  Harden  not  your  heart,  as  in  the  provoc. 
4.Despisings,  nix$j  neatsoth. 

Neh.  9.  18  thy  god  that,  .wrought  great  provocatio. 
9.  26  rebelled,  .and  they  wrought  great  provo. 

5.-4  very  bitter  provocation,  -ivapairiKpa.a-tx6s  para. 

Heb.  3.  8,  15  Harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the  pr. 
PROVOKE  (to  anger,  wrath,  emulation,  jealousy),  to  — 
l.To  anger,  provoke,  ox?  kaas,  3. 

t  Sa.  1.  6  her  adversary  also  provoked  her  sore,  for 
2.To  make  angry,  provoke,  D£3  kaas,  5. 

Deut.  4.  25  shall  do  evil,  .to  provoke  him  to  anger 
9.  18  in  doing  wickedly,  .to  provoke  him  to  a. 

31.  29  provoke  him  to  anger  through  the  work 

32.  16  They  provoked  him  to  jealousy  with  str. 
32.  21  they  have  provoked  me  to  anger  withth. 

32.  21 1  will  provoke  them  to  anger  with  a  fool. 
Judg.  2.  T2  bowed  themselves,  .and  provoked  the  L. 
1  Sa.    1.    7  so  she  provoked  her ;  therefore  she  wept 

1  Si.  14.    9  molten  images,  to  provoke  me  to  anger 

14.  15  their  groves,  provoking  the  Lord  to  anger 
15-  3°  provoked  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  anger 
16.    2  to  provoke  me  to  anger  with  their  sins 
16.    7  in  provoking  him  to  anger  with  the  work 
16.  13  provoking  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  an. 

16.  26,  33  provoke  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  an. 
21.  22  wherewith  thou  hast  provoked  (me)  to  a. 
22-  53  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

2  Ki.17.  11  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  Lord  to  an. 

17.  17  sold.. to  do  evil.. to  provoke  him  to  anger 
21.  6  much  wickedness.. to  provoke  (him)  to  an. 
21.  15  have  provoked  me  to  anger,  since  the  day 
22. 17  that  theymight  provoke  me  to  anger  with 
23.  19  Israel,  .made  to  provoke  (the  Lord)  to  an. 
23.  26  that  Manasseh  had  provoked  liim  withal 

2  Ch.  28.  25  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  his 

33.  6  wrought  much  evil,  .to  provoke  him  to  a. 

34.  25  that  they  might  provoke  me  to  anger  with 
Neh.  4.  5  for  they  have  provoked  (thee)  to  anger  b. 
Psa.  78.  58  provoked  htm  to  anger  with  their  high  p, 

106.  29  provoked  (him)  to  anger  with  their  iiive. 
Isa.  63.  3  people  that  provoketh  me  to  anger  cont. 
Jer.     7.  18  gods,  that  they  may  provoke  me  to  anger 

7.  19  Do  they  provoke  me  to  anger?  saiththeL. 

8.  19  Wny  have  they  provoked  me  to  anger  w. 
11.  17  provoke  me  to  anger,  in  offering  incense 
25.  6  provoke  me  not  to  anger  with  the  works 
25.  7  that  ye  might  provoke  me  to  anger  with 
32.  29  unto  other  gods,  to  provoke  me  to  anger 
32.  30  have  only  provoked  me  to  anger  with  the 
32.  32  they  have  done  to  provoke  me  to  anger 
44.  3  have  committed  to  provoke  me  to  anger 
44.    8  In  that  ye  provoke  me  unto  wrath  with 

Eze,    8.  17  have  returned  to  provoke  me  to  anger:  and 

16. 26  thy  whoredoms,  to  provoke  me  to  anger 

Hos.  12.  14  Ephraim  provoked  (him)  to  anger  most  b. 

3.  To  make  bitter,  iTiD  marah,  5. 

Psa.  78.  40  How  oft  did  they  provoke  him  in  the  wil. 
78.  56  Yet  they  tempted  and  provoked  the  most 
iofi.  7  provoked  (liim)  at  the  sea,(even)  at  theR. 
106.  33  Because  they  provoked  his  spirit,  so  that 
106.  43  but'they  provoked  (him)  with  their  coun. 

Isa.     3.   8  against  the  Lord,  to  provoke  the  eyes  of 

4.  To  make  bitter,  Tip  marar,  5. 

Exod.23.  21  Beware  of  him,  and  obey  his  voice,  prov. 

5.  To  despise,  j*i«  naats,  3. 

Kuui  14.  11  How  long  will  this  people  provoke  me? 

14.  23  neither  shall  any  of  them  that  provoked 

16.  30  understand  that  these  men  have  provoked 

Deut  31.  20  serve  them,  and  provoke  me,  and  break 

Isa.     1.   4  provoked  the  holy  one  of  Israel  unto  an. 

6.  To  move,  persuade,  rrtD  suth,  5. 

1  Ch.21.    1  stood  up. .  and  provoked  David  to  number 

7.  To  shov:  self  wroth,  cause  wrath,  tjj;  o.bar,  7. 

Prov  20.    2  provoketh  him  to  anger  sinneth  (against) 

8.  To  moke  angryt  iri  ragaz,  5. 

Job  i2.   6  they  that  provoke  God  are  secure;  into 
9. To  make  angry,  ir\  regaz,  5. 

Ezra  5.  12  after  that  our  fathers  had  provoked  the  G. 

10.  To  rouse  to  strifet  ipe9l£a>  erethizo. 

2  Co.  9.   2  and  your  zeal  hath  provoked  very  many 
Col.    3.  21  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  (to  a.) 

11.  To  be  very  zealous,  irapafoxSw  parazeloo. 
Rom  10.  19  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  (them 

ti.  n  the  Gentiles,  for  to  provoke  them  to  jea. 

11. 14  If  by  any  means  I  may  provoke  toemula. 

1  Co.  10.  22  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy?  are 

12-To  1  rrttate  beyond  mevsure,TrapopyLfa  parorgizd. 
Eph.   6.    4  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  w. 

13.  To  provoke  bitter ly,irapa,TrtKpaiva>  paropikramo. 
Heb.   3  16  some,  when  they  had  heard,  did  provoke 


14.  To  call  forth  or  forward,  irooKa\4ofiai  prokale. 

Gal.    5.  26  provoking  one  another,  envying  one  ano. 
PROVOKE  (to  speak)  unto,  to  — 
l.To  make  to  speak  offhand,  airao-TOfxaTifa  apost. 

Luken.  53  and  to  provoke  him  to  speak  of  many  th. 

2.Paroxysm,  excitement,  irapo^v v/xos  paroxusmos. 
Heb.  10.  24  let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke  un. 
PROVOKED,  to  be  easily  — 
To  be  greatly  excited,  trapo^vfofxai  paroxunomai. 

1  Co.  13.    5  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  evil 
PROVOKING  — 

1. Provocation,  cause  of  anger,  sadness,  D£3  kaas. 
Deut32.  19  because  of  the  provoking  of  his  sons  and 

2.  To  make  bitter,  rnD  marah,  5. 

Psa.  7S.  17  sinned  yet  more  against  him  by  provoking 
PRUDENCE  — 
1. Prudence,  craftiness,  subtility,  nD~\%  ormah. 

Prov.  8. 12  I  wisdom  dwell  with  prudence,  and  find 

2.  Understanding,  wisdom,  meaning,  ^3j?,V3»  seket. 

2  Ch.  2. 12  endued  with  prudence  and  understanding 

3. Prudence,  wisdom,  mental  feeling,  (ppovw&ts. 

Eph.    1.    8  hathaboundedtowardusinall.. prudence 
PRUDENT  — 
l.To  understand,  consider,  p?  bin. 

Jer.  49.   7  is  counsel  perished  from  the  prudent?  is 

2.To  be  intelligent,  have  understanding,  pa  bin,  2. 
Prov  18. 15  The  heart  of  the  prudent  getteth  knowle. 
Isa.  29.  14  understanding  of  their  prudent  (men)  sh. 

3.  Prudent,  crafty,  W15  arum. 

Prov  12.  16  fool's  wrath  is  presently  known :  but  a  p. 

12.  23  A  prudent  man  concealeth  knowledge:  but 

13.  16  Every  prudent  (man)  dealeth  with  know. 

14.  8  wisdom  of  the  prudent  (is)  to  understand 
14. 15  the  prudent  (man)  looketh  well  to  his  go. 
14.  18  but  the  prudent  are  crowned  with  know. 
22.  3  prudent  (man)  forseeth  the  evil,  and  hid. 
27.  12  prudent  (man)  forseeth  the  evil,  (and)  hi. 

4.  To  divine,  use  divination,  Dpf?  kasam. 

Isa.     3,    2  prophet,andtheprudent,and theancient 

5.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  understand,  V?^  sakal,  5. 
Provig.  14  inheritance  of  fathers:  and  a  prudent  wife 
Amos 5.  13  prudentshallkeepsilenceinthattimejfor 

6. Intelligent ,  <twzt6s  sunetos. 

Matt  11.  25  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prud. 

Lukeio.  21  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prud. 

Acts  13.    7  prudent  man ;  who  called  for  Barnabas 

1  Co.   1. 19  to  nothingjthe  understanding  of  the  prud 
PRUDENT,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  intelligent,  have  understanding,  pa  bin,  2. 

1  Sa.  16.  18  prudent  in  matters,  and  a  comely  person 
Prov  16.  'i  The  wise  in  heart  shall  he  called  prudent 
Isa.     5. 21  Woe  unto  (them  that  are),  .prudent  in  th. 

10. 13  fori  am  prudent:  and  I  have  removed  the 
Hos.  14.   9  Who  (is).,  prudent,  and  he  shall  know  th.? 

2.To  act  prudently,  craftily,  uyjr  aram,  5. 

Prov  13.    5  but  he  that  regardeth  reproof  is  prudent 
PRUDENTLY,  to  deal  — 
To  cause  to  act  wisely,  hiy  sakal,  5. 

Isa.   52.  13  my  servant  shall  deal  prudently,  he  shall 
PRUNE,  be  pruned,  to  — 

1.  To  prune,  "idi  zamar. 

Lev.  25.  3  six  years  thou  shalt  prune  thy  vineyard 
25.   4  thou  shalt  neither  sow  thy  field,  nor  prune 

2.To  be  pruned,  tdi  zamar,  2. 

Isa.     5.  6  it  shall  not  be  pruned  nor  digged ;  but  th. 
PRUNING  HOOKS  — 
Pruning  hooks,  ni"iDJa  mazmeroth. 

Isa.     2.   4  shall  beat,  .their  spears  into  pruning  ho. 
18.    5  both  cut  off  the  sprigs  with  pruning  hoo. 

Joel    3.  10  Beat  your . .  pruning  hooks  into  spears:  let 

Mic.    4.    3  shall  beat . .  their  spears  into  pruning  ho. 
PSALM,  PSALMIST  — 
l.A  pruned  song  or  psalm  of  praise,  "Vpl  zemir. 

2  Sa.  23.    1  and  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel,  said 
Psa.  95.   2  make  a  joyful  noise  imto  liim  with  psalms 

2.  A  song  of  praise,  n"V3T  zimrah. 

Psa.  81.    2  Take  a  psalm,  and  bring  hither  the  timb. 
98.    s  Sing  unto  the  Lord  with.,  voice  of  a  psa. 
3.-4  song  of  praise,  "voip  mizmor. 

Psa.     3.  title.  A  Psalm  of  David 
[So  in  Ps.  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  12,  13,  15,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24, 
29>  3T>  38.  39)  4°>  4jj  S1!^,  63,  64,  101,  109,110,  139,140, 
141.  I43-] 

Psa.  30.  title.  A  Psalm  (and)  Song,  .of  David 
[Soin  Ps.  65,  68,  108.] 
47.  title.  A  Psalm,  .for  the  sonsof  Korah 

[So  in  Ps.  48,  49,  84,  85,  87,  88.] 
50.  A  Psalm,  .of  Asaph 
"[So  in  Ps.  73,  75,  76,  77,  79,  80,  82,  83.] 

66.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  a  Song  (or)  Ps. 

67.  „  Musician  on  Neginoth,  A  Psalm  (or)  So. 
92.  „  A  Psalm  (or)  Song  for  the  sabbath  day 
98.    „    A  Psalm 

100.    „    A  Psalm  of  praise.   Make  a  joyful  noise 


■l.A  song  of  2yrraise  (on  an  instrument),  tya\fj.os. 
Luke2o.  42  David  himself  saithiu  the  book  of  Psalms 

24.  44  winch  were  written  in .  .the  Psalms,  con. 
Acts    1.  20  For  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Psalms 

13.  33  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  secund  psalm 
1  Co.  14.  26  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a  d. 
Eph.  5.  19  Speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  h. 
Col.    3.  16  admonishing  one  another  in  psalms  and 

PSALMS,  to  sing  — 

l.To  sing  songs  of  praise,  -ict  zamar,  3. 

1  Ch.16.   9  sing  psalms  unto  him,  talk  ye  of  all  his 
Psa.  105.    2  sing  psalms  unto  him  :  talk  ye  of  all  his 

2.  To  sing  songs  of  praise,  ^d\w  psaalo. 

Jas.    5. 13  let  him  pray..Isanymerry?lethimsingp 

PSALTERY  — 

l.A  wind  instrument,  hl2  *^3  keli  nebel. 

1  Ch.16.    5  Jeiel  with  psalteries  and  with  harps ;  but 
Psa.  71.  22  I  will  also  praise  thee  with  the  psaltery 

2.A  wind  instrument,  lyre,  hni,  *?2i  'nebel. 

1  Sa.  10.    5  prophets  coming  down . .  with  a  psaltery 

2  Sa.  6.   5  played  before  the  Lord.. on  psalteries 

1  Ki.10.  12  harpsalsoandpsalteries  for  singers :  there 

1  Ch.13.   8  with  harps,  and  with  psalteries,  and  with 

15.  z6  psalteries  and  harps  and  cymbals,  sound. 

15.  20  and  Benaiah,  witli  psalteries  on  Alamoth 

15.  28  making  a  noise  with  psalteries  and  harps 

25.  1  should  prophesy  with  harps,  with  psalter. 
25.    6  with  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps,  for 

2CI1.  5.  12  having  cymbals,  and  psalteries,  and  harps 
9.  11  psalteries  for  singers  :  and  there  weren. 

20.  28  came  to  Jerusalem  with  psalteries  and 
29.  25  psalteries,  and  with  harps,  according  to 

Neh. 12.  27  with  singing,  (with)  cymbals,  psalteries 
Psa.  33.    2  sing  unto  him  with  the  psaltery  (and)  an 
57.    8  Awake  up,  my  glory ;  awake,  psaltery  and 
81.    2  the  pleasant  harp  with  the  psaltery 
92.    3  Upon  an  instrument,  .and  upon  the  psal. 
108.    2  Awake,  psaltery  and  harp;  I  (myself)  will 
144.    9  upon  a  psaltery  (and)  an  instrument  often 
150-    3  praise  him  with  the  psaltery  and  harp 
•S.Psaltery,  lyre,  harp,  p")nap?,  p-iajps  pesanterin. 
Dan.   3.    s,  7,  10,  15  sackbut,  psaltery,  .all  kinds  of 
PTO-LE-MA'-IS,  Uto\€/xois. 

A  seaport  in  Asher  between  Carmel  and  Tyre  (about 
twenty-seven  miles  from  the  latter),  once  called  Accho, 
and  now  Acca  or  St  Jean  d'Acre. 

Acts  21.   7  we  came  to  P.,  and  saluted  the  brethren 
PUBLICAN  — 

A  tax  gather-er,  public  official,  reXaivns  telones. 
Matt.  5.  46  what  reward  have  ye?  do  not  even  the  p. 
5.  47  salute  your  brethren . .  do  not  even  the  [p.  ] 
9.  10  many  publicans  and  sinners  came  and  sat 
9.  11  Why  eateth  your  Master  with  publicans 
10.  3  Thomas,  and  Matthew  the  publican ;  Ja. 
it.  19  wine  bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and  s. 
18.  17  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  pub. 

21.  31  That  thepublicansand  the  harlotsgomto 
21.  32  the  publicans  and  the  harlots  believed  him 

Mark  2.  15  many  publicans  and  sinners  sat  also  tog. 
2.  16  saw  him  eat  with  publicans  and  sinners 
Luke  3. 12  Then  came  also  publicans  to  be  baptized 
5.  27  saw  a  publican,  named  Levi,  sitting  at 
5.  29  there  was  a  great  company  of  publicans 
5.  30  Why  do  ye  eat  and  drink  with  publicans 
7.  29  publicans,  justified  God,  being  baptized 
7.  34  wine  bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and  si. 
15.    1  Then  drew  near  unto  him  all  the  publicans 
18.  10  the  one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  publ. 
tS.  11  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this  publi. 
18.  13  publican,  standing  afar  off,  would  not  lift 
PUBLICANS,  chief  among  the  — 
^-1  chief  tax  gatherer,  apx^eKdjuns  architelones. 

Lukeig.   2  which  was  the  chief  among  the  publicans 
PUBLICLY  — 

Publicly,  in  ff  public  place,  Sw/J-oaia  demosia. 
Acts  18.  28  convinced  the  Jews,  (and  that)  publicly 
20.  20  have  taught  you  publicly,  and  from  house 
PUBLISH,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  *icx  amar. 

Jon.    3.    7  published  through  Nineveh  bj  the  decree 

2.  To  tell  good  news,  ~)b3  basar,  3. 

1  Sa.  31.    9  to  publish  (it  in)  the  house  of  their  idols 

2  Sa.    1.  20  publish. (it)  not  in  the  streets  of  Askelon 
Psa.  68.  11  great  (was)  the  company,  .that published 

3.  To  call,  K"i£  gara. 

Deut  32.   3  Because  I  will  publish  the  name  of  the  L. 
4.7*0  cause  to  hear,  ye;r  shamea,  5. 

Neh.  8.  15  they  should  publish  and  proclaim  in  all 
Psa.  26.  7  That  I  may  publish  with  the  voice  of  th. 
Isa.  52.  7  publisheth  peace,  .that  publisheth  salva. 
Jer.  4.  s  Declare  ye  in  Judah,  and  publish  in  Jer. 
4.  15  and  publisheth  affliction  from  mountEp. 

4.  16  publish  against  Jerusalem,  (that)  watch. 

5.  20 Declare  this.. and  publish  it  in  Judah,  s. 
31.   7  publish  ye,  praise  ye,  and  say,  O  Lord,s. 
46.  14  publish  in  Migdol,  and  publish  in  No. 
50.    2  publish,  and  set  up  a  standard  ;  publish 

Amos  3.   9  Publish  in  the  palaces  at  Ashdod,  and  in 
4.    5  proclaim  (and)  publish  the  free  offerings 
Nah.   1.  15  the  feet  of  him.  .that  publisheth  peace  !  0 
5.  To  cry  as  a  herald,  tewpvo-a-ca  kerusso. 

Mark  1.  45  went  out,  and  began  to  publish  (it)much 


PUBLISHED 


784 


PUEE 


Mark.  5.  20  began  to  publish  in  Decapolis  how  great 

7.  36  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal  they  pub. 
Luke  8.  39  published  throughout  the  whole  city  how 

PUBLISHED,  to  be  — 

l.To  uncover,  reveal,  n?a  galah. 

Esth.  3.  14  was  published  unto  all  people,  that  they 

8.  13  copy..(was)publishedunto all  people,  and 

2.  To  speak,  133  dabar,  3. 

Esth.  1.    22  should  be  published  according  to  the  la. 

-j.  To  be  heard,  ypg?  shamea,  2. 

Esth.  1.  20  shall  be  published  throughout  all  his  em. 

1.  To  become,  begin  to  be,  yivofj.aL  ginomai. 

Acts  10.  37  which  was  published  throughout  all  Jud. 

.">.  To  bear  or  carry  through,  8ta<pepoj  diaphcro. 
Acts  13.  49  word  of  the  Lord  was  published  through 

«I.  To  cry  as  a  herald,  K^pva-ato  kerusso. 

Marki3.  10  gospel  must  first  be  published  among  all 

PUB'-LIUS,  TIuttKios  common. 
I'he  chief  man  in  Melita  when  Paul  was  shipwrecked. 
Acts  2S.   7  the  same  quarters  were  possessions  of . .  P. 
28.   8  the  father  of  P.  lay  sick  of  a  fever  and  of 

PU'-DENS,  not/577?  shamefaced. 

A.  believer  in  Rome  who  unites  with  Paul  in  sending 

salutation  to  Timothy. 

2  Ti.    4.  21  Eubulus  greeteth  thee,  and  P.,  and  Linus 
PUFF  (up),  to  — 
1.  To  breathe,  bloui,  puff  up,  rus  puach,  5. 

Psa.  10.    5  (as  for)  all  his  enemies,  he  puff  eth  at  them 

12.  5  will  set  (him)  in  safety  (from  him  that)  p. 

'l.To  breathe,  puff  tip,  (pvat6a>  phusioo. 

1  Co.  4.    6  that  no  one  of  yon  be  puffed  up  for  one 
4.  18  Now  some  are  puffed  up,  as  though  I  w. 

4.  ignotthespeechof  them  which  are  puffed  up 

5.  2  ye  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  m. 
8.    1  Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifl. 

13.  4  charity  vaunteth  not  itself , is  not  puffed  up 
Col.     2,  18  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind 

PUHJ.TES,  VflSn  the  Puthi. 

A    family    in  Kirjath-jearim,  descended  from   Caleb 

son  of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  2.  53  the  Ithrites,  and  the  P.,  and  the  Shuma. 

PUL,  *>*3  strong. 

1.  A  king  of  Assyria  who  invaded  Israel  in  the  days  of 
Menahem,  B.C.  771,  and  was  bribed  to  depart. 

2  Ki.15. 19  P.  the  king  of  Assyria  came  against  the  1. 

15.  19  Menahem  gave  P.  a  thousand  talents  of  s. 
1  Ch.  5,  26  God . .  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  T.  king  of  A. 

2.  A  place  or  tribe  in  Africa  near  Libya. 

Isa.  66. 19  Tarshish,  P.,  and  Lud,  that  draw  the  bow 
PULL,  (be  pulled  away,  down,  in,  off,  out,  up),  to  — 
1 .  To  cause  to  go  or  come  in,  Kia  bo,  5. 

Gen.    8.    9  took  her,  and  pulled  her  in  unto  him  in. 
19.  10  pulled  Lot  into  the  house  to  them,  and  s. 
'2.  To  break  or  throve  down,  Din  haras. 

Isa.    22.  10  from  thy  state  shall  he  pull  thee  down 
Jer.  24.    6  I  will  build  them,  and  not  pull  (them)  d. 
42. 10  then  will  I  build  you,  and  not  pull  (you)  d. 

•3.  To  cause  to  go  out  or  forth,  n$;  yatsa,  5. 

Psa.  31.    4  Pull  me  out  of  the  net  that  they  have  laid 
4. To  pull  away  or  down,  npi  nesach,  2. 

Ezra    6.  1 1  let  timber  be  pulled  down  from  his  house 

5.  To  give,  jru  natkan. 

Zech.  7.  11  pulled  away  the  shoulder,  and  stopped  th. 

6.  To  break  doion,  yn\  nathats. 

Jer.     i.  10  to  pull  down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  throw 
18.    7  to  pluck  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  de. 

7.  To  draw  away,  out,  up,  off,  pm  nathaq,  3. 

Eze.  17.    9  shall  he  not  pull  up  the  roots  thereof,  and 

8.  To  draw  away  or  out,  pro  nathaq,  5. 

Jer.  12.  3  pull  them  out  like  sheep  for  the  slaugh. 
i».  To  be  plucked  up,  c;ro  nathash,  % 

Amos  9.  15  shall  no  more  be  pulled  up  out  of  their 
10.  To  put  or  strip  off,  Btrs  pasha f.  5. 

Mic.    2.    8  ye  pull  off  the  robe  with  the  garment  from 
11.7V)  cause  to  turn  back,  aits'  shub,  5. 

1  Ki.13.    4  so  that  he  could  not  pull  it  in  again  to  him 
12.  To  draw  up  or  back,  avaandct}  anaspao. 

Luke  14.  5  will  not  straightway  pull  him  out  on  the 
13.7*0  snatch  at  or  away,  apird£ce  harpazd. 

Jude  23  pulling  (them)  out  of  the  fire ;  hating  even 
14.710  cast  out  or  forth,  eV/3aAAw  ekballn. 

Matt.  7.    4  Let  me  pull  out  the  mote  out  of  thine  eye 

Luke  6.  42  let  me  pull  out  the  mote  that  is  in  thine 

6.  42  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  pull  out  the 
1  5.  To  take  down,  KaBatpcw  kafhaireu. 

Luke  12.  t8  This  will  I  do :  I  will  pull  down  my  bams 
PULL  (be  pulled)  in  pieces,  to  — 

1.  To  pull  in  pieces,  or  violently,  nvs  pasha  ch,  3. 
Lam.  3.  11  pulled  me  in  pieces  :  he  hath  made  mede. 

2.  To  drav  asunder,  oiao-irda:  diaspao. 

A.ts  23.  10  Paul  should  have  been  pulled  in  pieces  of 


PULLING  down  — 

A  taking  down,  feadaipecrts  kathairesis. 

2  Co.  10.   4  mighty  through  God  to  the  pulling  down 
PULPIT  — 
Sigh  place,  Vj|(?  migdal. 

Neh.    8.    4  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  w. 
PULSE  — 
1.  Seeds,  pulse,  D'jni  zeroim. 

Dan.  1.  12  let  them  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  and  water 
2. Seeds,  pulse,  D\IJH7  zereanim. 

Dan.    1.  16  took  away  the  portion,  .and  gave  them  p. 
PUNISH,  to  — 
1.  To  darken,  keep  back,  restrain,  ~trn  chasak. 

Ezra  9. 13  seeing  thatthou  ourGod  hast  punished  us  ! 
2.7*0  chasten,  instruct,  teach,  ~ip;  yasar,  3. 

Lev.  26,  i8Iwillpunishyouseventimesmoreforyour  , 

3.  To  (cause  to)  smite,  naj  nakah,  5. 

Lev.  26.  24  will  punish  you  yet  seven  times  for  your 

4.  To  fine,  punish,  trjj;  anash. 

Prov.17.  26  Also  to  punish  the  just  (is)  not  good,  (nor) 

5.  To  inspect,  look  after,  ~ips  paqad. 

Isa.   10. 12  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart 
13.  11  I  will  punish  the  worldfor(their)evil,  and 

24.  21  shall  punish  the  host  of  the  high  ones(that 

26.  21  cometh  out  of  his  place  to  punish  the  in. 

27.  1  shall  punish  leviathan  the  piercing  serp. 
Jer.     9.  25  I  will  punish  all  (them  which  are)  circu. 

11.  22  I  will  punish  them  :  the  young  men  shall 
13.  21  What  wilt  thou  say  when  he  shall  punish 
21.  14  punish  you  according  to  the  fruit  of  your 
23.  34  I  will  even  punish  that  man  and  his  house 

25.  12  I  will  punish  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  that 
27.    8  that  nation  will  I  punish,  saith  the  LORD 

29.  32  I  will  punish  Shemaiah  the  Nehelamite 

30.  20  and  I  will  punish  all  that  oppress  them 
36.  31  punish  him  and  his  seed  and  his  servants 
44.  13  I  will  punish,  .as  I  have  punished  Jerus. 
44.  29  punish  you  in  this  place,  that  ye  may  know 
46. 25  will  punish  the  multitude  of  No,  aud  Ph. 

50.  18  I  will  punish,  .as  I  have  punished  the  k. 

51.  44  will  punish  Bel  in  Babylon,  and  I  will  br. 
Hos.    4.    9  punish  them  for  their  ways,  and  reward 

4.  14  punish  your  daughters  when  they  commit 

12.  2  punish  Jacob  according  to  his  ways;  ace. 
Amos  3.    2  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your 
Zeph.  1.    8  punish  the  princes,  and  the  king's  child. 

1.    9  punish  all  those  that  leap  on  the  thresh. 
1.  12  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their 

3.  7  howsoever  I  punished  them :  but  they 
Zech  10.   3  punished  the  goats  :  for  the  Lord  of  hosts 

6.  To  treat  ill,  yy;  raa,  5. 

Zech.  8.  14  As  I  thought  to  punish  you,  when  your 

7.  To  restrain,  punish,  Ko\d£w  kolazo. 

Acts  4.  21  finding  nothing  how  they  might  punish  t. 
S.  To  punish,  avenge,  rtpwptco  timoreo. 

Acts  22.    5  bound  unto  Jerusalem,  for  to  be  punished 
26.11  I  punished  them  oft  in  every  synagogue 
PUNISHED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  avenged,  Cf?3  naqam,  2. 

Exodzi.  20  smite  his  servant,  .he  shall  be  surely  pu. 
2. To  be  avenged,  Dp;  naqam,  6. 

Exod2i.  21  he  shall  not  be  punished  :  for  he  (is)  his 

3.  To  punish,  fine,  b*jJ7  anash. 

Prov2i.  11  When  the  scorner  is  punished,  the  simp. 

4.  To  be  punished,  fined,  b;jj;  anash,  2. 

Exod2i.  22  he  shall  be  surely  punished,  according  as 

Prov  22.    3  but  the  simple  pass  on,  and  are  punished 

27.  12  (but)  the  simple  pass  on,  (and)  are  punis. 

5.  To  pay  justice,  Mktjv  rtta  diken  Ho. 

2  Th.  1.   9  Who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting 

6.  7*0  restrain,  punish,  xo\dfa  kolazo. 

2  Pe.  2.   9  to  reserve  the  unjust,  .to  be  punished 

PUNISHMENT  {of  iniquity,  sin)  — 

1.  Error,  erring,  sin,  Npn  chet. 

Lam.  3.  39  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  sins . 

2.Erring,error,(punishmentfor)si'n,riii::r,  chattath. 
Lam.  4.  6  than  the  punishment  of  the  sin  of  Sodom 
Zech  14.  19  This  shall  be  the  punishment,  .and  the  p. 

3. Perversity,  {punishment  for)  iniquity,  |iu  avan. 
Gen.    4. 13  My  punishment  (is)  greater  than  I  can 
Lev.  26.  41,  43  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  in. 
1  Sa.  28.  10  there  shall  no  punishment  happen  to  thee 
Job   19.  29  for  wrath  (bringeth)  the  punishments  of 
Lam.  4.    6  For  the  punishment  of  the  iniquity  of  the 

4.  22  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  accompli. 
Eze.  14. 10  bear  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity 

14. 10  punishment,  .shall  be  even  as  the  punish. 
4. Punishment,  fine,  viy  onesh. 

Provig.  19  man  of  great  wrath  shall  suffer  punishm. 
§.Reproof,  nn^'m  tokechah. 

Psa.149.  7  To  execute.. punishments  upon  the  peo. 
G.Futl  justice,  €Kb'lKno-is  ekdikesis. 

1  Pe.  2. 14  for  the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  and  for 
7. Penalty,  burden,  i-jriTifxia  rpifimia. 

2  Co.    2.  6  Sufficient  to  such  a  man  (is)  this  punish,  j 
S. Restraint,  t<6\aais  kolasis. 

Matt2>.  46  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishm.     i 


9.  Punishment,  vengeance,  rtfitapia  iimoria. 

Heb.  10.  29  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose 
PUNTTES,  *;isn  the  Punt. 
The  family  of  Pua,  son  of  Issachar. 

Nuni26.  23  the  Tolaites :  of  Pua,  the  family  of  the  P. 
PU'-NON,  [J13  ore-pit. 

A  city  in  the  E.  of  Edom  between  Selah  and  Zoar;  the 
35th  station  from  Egypt,  24th  from  Sinai  and  4th  from 
Eziorf-geber ;  N.  of  M.  Hor,  and  E.  of  S.  and  of  Salt 
Sea;  now  Phanon, 

NUII133. 42  departed  from  Zalmonah,  and  pitched  in  P. 
33. 43  they  departed  from  P.,  and  pitched  in  0. 

PUP.,  PU'-RIM,  lots,  D'T'S,  *HB  lots. 

A  festival  of  the  Jewscommemoratingtheirdeliverance 

from  Hainan. 

Esth.  3.  7  they  cast  P.,  that  (is),  the  lot,  before  H. 
9.  24  had  cast  P.,  that  (is),  the  lot,  to  consume 
9.  26  called  these  days  P.,  after  the  name  of  P. 
9.  28  (that)  these  days  of  P.  should  not  fail  from 
9.  29  to  confirm  this  second  letter  of  P. 
9.  31  To  confirm  these  days  of  P.  in  their  times 
9.  32  decree  of  Esther  confirmed  these .  .of  P. 

PURCHASE  — 

1. Acquisition,  purchase,  nips  m-iqnah. 

Jer.  32. 11  SoItooktheevidenceofthepurchase,(bo.) 
32.  12  gave  the  evidence  of  the  purchase  unto 
32. 12  subscribed  the  book  of  the  purchase,  be. 
32.  14  evidence  of  the  purchase,  both  which  is 

32. 16  delivered  the  evidence  of  the  purchase  un. 

2. Acquisition,  purchase,  nipa  miqneh. 

Gen.  49.  32  The  purchase  of  the  field  and  of  the  cave 
PURCHASE,  (be  purchased),  to  — 
l.To  free,  avenge,  bite  gaol. 

Lev.  25.  33  if  a  man  purchase  of  the  Levites,  then  the 
2.  To  acquire,  purchase,  nap  qanah. 

Gen.  25.  10  field  which  Abraham  purchased  of  the  s. 

Exodis.  16  people  pass  over,  (which)  thou  hast  pur. 

Ruth  4. 10  Ruth  the  Moabitess.  .have  I  purchased 

Psa.  74.    2  congregation,  (which)  thou  hast  purchas. 
78.  54  mountain,  (which)  his  right  hand  had  pu. 

3.7*0  acquire,  prepare,  possess,  Kraofxai  ktaomai. 
Acts    1.  18  this  man  purchased  a  field  with  the  rew, 

8.  20  gift  of  God  may  be  purchased  with  money 

4.  To  acquire,  make  all  around,  Trepnroteonat  p&  i. 
Acts  20.  28  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  hi. 

1  Ti.    3. 13  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  degree,  and 
PURE,  PURER  — 

I.Clear,  choice,  chosen,  *i?  bar. 

Psa.  19.    8  commandment  of  the  Lord  (is)  pure,  en. 
24.   4  He  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  he. 

2.  To  clear,  choose,  "lis  barar. 

Zeph.  3.   9  For  then  will  I  turn  to  the  people  a  pure 

3.7b  be  clear,  Ti3  barar,  2. 

2  Sa.  22.  27  With  the  pure,  .and  with  the  froward  th. 
Psa.  18.  26  With  the  pure,  .and  with  the  froward  thou 

i.Libertv,  mildness,  "vrri  deror. 

Exod3o.  23  Take  thou  also,  .of  pure  myrrh  five  bun. 

S.Pure,  7|T,  TI]  \ak. 

Exod27-  20  bring  thee  pure  oil  olive  beaten  for  the 
30.  34  sweet  spices  with  pure  frankincense :  of 
Lev.  24.    2  bring  unto  thee  pure  oil  olive  beaten  for 

24.  7  thou  shalt  put  pure  frankincense  upon 
Job     8.   6  If  thou  (wert)  pure  and  upright ;  surely 

11.    4  My  doctrine  (is)  pure,  and  I  am  clean  in 
16.  17  Not  for  (any)  injustice,  .my  prayer  (is)  p. 
Prov  20.  1 1  whether  his  work  (be)  pure,  and  whether 
21.    8  strange  :  but  (as  for)  the  pure,  his  work 

6.  Clean,  pure,  "rinta  tahar. 

EXOCI25. 11  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  wife 

25. 17  thou  shalt  make  a  mercy  seat  (of)  pure  g. 

25.  24  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  and 
25.  29  cover  withal :  (of)  pure  gold  shalt  thou  m. 
25.  31  thou  shalt  make  a  candlestick  (of)  pure 
25.  36  all  of  it  (shall  be)  one  beaten  work  (of)  p. 
25.  38  snuff  dishes  thereof,  (shall  be  of)  pure  g. 
25. 39  a  talent  of  pure  gold  shall  he  make  it,  w. 
28.  14  two  chains  (of)  pure  gold  at  the  ends ;  (of) 
28.  22  at  the  ends  (of)  wreathen  work  (of)  pure 
28.  36  thou  shalt  make  a  plate  (of)  pure  gold,  and 
30.    3  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  the 

30.  35  shalt  make  it  a  perfume,  .pure  (and)  holy 

31.  8  the  pure  candlestick  with  all  his  furnit. 
37.   2  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold  within  and  w. 
37.   6  he  made themerey  seat  (of)pure gold :  two 
37.  11  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold,  and  made  th 

37. 16  and  bis  covers  to  cover  withal,  (of)  pure 

37. 17  made  the  candlestick  (of)  pure  gold:  (of) 
37.  22  all  of  it  (was)  one  beaten  work  (of)  pure 
37.  23  snuffers,  and  his  snuff  dishes,  (of)  pure 
37.  24  a  talent  of  pure  gold  made  he  it.  and  all 
37.  26  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold,  (both)  the  top 
37.  29  pure  incense  of  sweet  spices,  according  to 
39.  15  at  the  ends,  (of)  wreathen  work  (of) pure 
39.  25  made  bells(of) pure  gold,  and  put  the  bells 
39.  30  made  the  plate  of  the  holy  crown  (of)  pure 
39.  37  The  pure  candlestick,  (with)  the  lamps 

Lev.  24.    4  He  shall  order  the  lamps  upon  the  pure 
24.   6  six  on  a  row,  upon  the  pure  table  before 

1  Ch.28. 17  Also  pure  gold  for  the  fiesh  hocks,  and  the 

2  Ch.  3.    4  And  he  overlaid  it  within  with  pure  gold 

9.  17  Moreover  the  king,  overlaid  it  with  pure 


PURE 


785 


PURPOSE 


2  Ch.13.  11  also  (set  they  in  order)  upon  the  pure  ta. 
Ezra  6.  20  all  of  them  (were)  pure,  and  killed  the  p. 
Job  28. 19  neither  shall  it  be  valued  with  pure  gold 
Psa.  12.  6  words  of  the  Lord  (are)  pure  words :  (as) 
Prov  15.  26  but  (the  words)  of  the  pure  (are)  pleasant 
30.  12  generation  (that  are)  pure  in  their  own  e. 
Hab.  1.  13  (Thou  art)  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
3J  al.    1 . 1 1  offered  unto  my  name,  and  a  pure  offering 

7.  Beaten,  rrns  kathith. 

1  Ki.  5.  11  twenty  measures  of  pure  oil:  thus  gave  S. 

§. Daubed,  fouled,  ion  chemer. 

Deut  32. 14  thou  didst  drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  g. 

9.  Free j  innocent,  acquitted,  NpJ  neqe. 

Dan.    7.   9  and  the  hair  of  his  head,  like  the  pure  w. 

10.  To  shut  up,  close,  refine,  "up  sagar. 

1  Ki.  6.  20  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold ;  and  (so)  cov. 

6.  21  overlaid  the  house  within  with  pure  gold 

7.  49  candlesticks  of  pure  gold,  five  on  the  right 
7.  50  and  the  spoons,  and  the  censers,  (of)  pure 

jo.  2t  pure  gold ;  none  (were  of)  silver :  it  was 

2  Ch.  4.  20  after  the  manner  before  the  oracle,  of  p. 

4.  22  and  the  spoons,  and  the  censers,  (of)  pure 
9.  20  pure  gold :  none  (were  of)  silver;  it  was 

11. To  refine,  try,  pwrify,  ^py  tsaraph. 

Psa.  119. 140  Thy  word  (is)  very  pure :  therefore  thy 
Prov  30.    5  Every  word  of  God  (is)  pure :  he  (is)  a  s. 

12.Chaste,  pure,  ayi/os  hagnos. 

Phil.    4.    8  whatsoever  things  (are)  pure,  whatsoever 
1  Ti.    5.  22  neither  be  partaker,  .keep  thyself  pure 
Jas.     3. 17  the  wisdom  that  isfrom  above  is  first  pure 

1  Jo.  3.    3  every  man . .  purifieth  himself . .  as  he  is  p. 

13.  Sincere,  pure,  el\iKpwfis  eilikrines. 

2  Pe.  3.    1  in  (both)  which  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds 
li.Clean,  pure,  clear,  Kadap6s  katharos. 

Matt.  5.  8  Blessed  (are)  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they 
Acts  20.  26  that  I  (am)  pure  from  the  blood  of  all(m.) 
Horn  14.  20  All  things  indeed  (are)  pure ;  but  (it  is) 

1  Ti.    1.    5  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  (of)  a  good 

3.    9  Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure 

2  Ti.    1.    3  whom  I  serve  from(my)forefathers.  .pure 

2.  22  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure 
Titus  1.  15  Unto  the  pure  all  things  (are)  pure :  but 

1. 15  are  defiledand  unbelieving  (is)  nothing  p. 
Heb.  10.  22  and  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  water 
Jas.     1.  27  Pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  God 

1  Pe.  1.  22  love  one  another  with  [a  pure]  heart  fer. 
Rev.  15.   6  clothed  in  pure  and  white  linen,  and  ha. 

21.  18  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear 

21.  21  street  of  the  city  (was)  pure  gold,  as  it  w. 

22.  1  showed  me  a  [pure]  river  of  water  of  life 

PURE,  PTJRER,  (to  be,  count,  show  self)  — 

1.  To  purify  self,  show  self  pure,  ~n3  barar,  7. 

2  Sa.  22  27  thou  wilt  show  thyself  pure;andwith  the 
Psa.  18.  26  thou  wilt  show  thyself  pure;  and  with  the 

2.  To  be  {reckoned)  pure,  ?Ul  zakah. 

Mic.    6.  11  Shalllcount  (them)  pure  with  the  wicked 

3.  To  be  pure,  3,37  zakak. 

Job   25.    5  yea,  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight 
Lam.  4.    7  Her  Nazarites  were  purer  than  snow,  th. 

4.  To  be  clean,  cleansed,  "tna  taker. 

Job  4.  17  shall  a  man  be  more  pure  than  his  maker? 
Prov.20.   9  I  have  made  my  heart  clean,  I  am  pure 

PURELY,  PURENESS — 
1.  Cleanness,  purity,  13  bar. 

Job   22.  30  is  delivered  by  the  pureness  of  thine  ha. 

Isa.     1.  25  I  will  turn  my  hand  upon  thee,  and  pur. 
2.Qlean,  pure,  cleanness,  purity,  ~nna  lahor. 

Prov.  22. 11  He  that loveth  pureness  of  heart,  (for) the 
3. Chastity,  purity,  ayvSrys  hagnotes. 

2  Co.  6.   6  By  pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long  suff. 
PURGE  (away,  thoroughly,  out),  to  — 
1.  To  clear,  purify,  chose,  "na  barar* 

Eze.  20.  38 1  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  re. 

2.7b  clear,  cleanse,  T]3  barar,  3. 

Dan.  11.  35  to  try  them,  and  to  purge,  and  to  make 

3.  To  cast  out,  force  away,  nn  duack,  5. 

Isa.     4.   4  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  Jerusalem 

4. To  refine,  pour  down,  ppj  zaqaq,  3. 

Mai.    3.    3  purge  them  as  gold  and  silver,  that  they 

5.7b  cleanse  from  error,  Nan  chata,  3. 

Psa.  51.   7  Purge  me  with  hyssop  and  I  shall  be  clean 

6.7b  cleanse,  pronounce  clean,  *ina  taker,  3. 

2  Ch.34.    3  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jerusalem  from 

34.    8  when  he  had  purged  the  land,  and  the  h. 

Eze.  24.  13  because  I  have  purged  thee,  and  thou  w. 

7.  To  cover,  pacify,  193  kapkar,  3. 

Psa.  65.    3  transgressions,  thou  shalt  purge  them  a. 

79.    9  and  purge  away  our  sins,  for  thy  name's 
Eze.  43.  20  thus  shalt  thou  cleanse  and  purge  it 

43.  26  Seven  days  shall  they  purge  the  altar  and 

8.  To  refine,  try,  purify,  *\l$  tsaraph. 

Isa.     1. 25  purge  away  thy  dross,  and  take  away  all 

9.  To  cleanse  thoroughly,  5ia*a0api£o>  diakatharizo. 

Matt.  3. 12  he  will  thoroughly  purge  his  floor,  and 
Luke  3. 17  he  will  thoroughly  purge  his  floor,  and 

99 


10.7b  cleanse  out,  iKKa8aipa>  ekkatkairo. 

1  Co.  5.   7  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leven,  that  ye 

2  Ti.    2.  21  If  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from  th. 

11.7b  cleanse,  make  a  cleansing,  Kadapifa  kathar. 
Mark  7.  19  goeth  out  into  the  draught,  purging  all 
Heb.   9.  14  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works 
9.  22  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged 

12.  To  cleanse,  KaQaipw  kathairo. 

Johni5.  2  every  (branch)  that  beareth  fruit  he  pur. 
Heb  10.    2  because  that  the  worshippers  once[purged] 

13.  To  make  a  cleansing,  iroUw  Ka.Qapio-y.6v  poieo. 
Heb.    1.    3  when  he  had  by  himself  purged  our  sins 

PURGED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  clean,  cleansed,  *ina  taker. 

Eze.  24. 13  wast  not  purged,  thou  shalt  not  be  purg. 

2.  7b  be  covered,  pardoned,  "133  kaphar,  4. 

Prov  16.    6  By  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is  purged 
Isa.     6.    7  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  purg. 
22.  14  Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged 
27.   9  therefore  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be  p. 

3.7b  he  covered,  pardoned,  153  kaphar,  7. 

1  Sa.  3. 14  iniquity  of  Eli's  house  shall  not  be  purg. 
4.  A  purification,  cleansing,  Ka6apiay6s  katharism. 

2  Pe.    1 .    9  hath  forgotten  that  he  was  purged  from 
PURIFICATION  (for  sin,  things  for)  — 

1.  Offering  for  error  or  sin.  nxan  chattatk. 

NU11119.  9  of  separation :  it  (is)  a  purification  for  sin 
19.  17  of  the  burnt  heifer  of  purification  for  sin 

2.  Cleansing,  purity,  -Tina  tohorah. 

2  Ch.30.  19  according  to  the  purification  of  the  sane. 
Neh.  12.  45  ward  of  the  purification,  according  to  the 

3.  Things  emptied  out,  ointments,  D^pno  meruqim. 
Esth.  2.  12  for  so  were  the  days  of  their  purifications 

4.  Thing  rubbed  in,  ointment,  pnrpn  tamruq. 

Esth,  2.    3  let  their  things  for  purification  be  given 
2.    9  speedily  gave  her  her  things  for  purifiea. 

5. Purification,  ayvto-yos  hagnismos. 

Acts  21.  26  accomplishment  of  the  days  of  purificati. 
Q.A  cleansing,  Ka9aptay6s  katharismos. 

Luke  2.  22  when  the  days  of  her  purification  accord. 
PURrFLED,  to  be  — 
1.7b  clear  or  purify  self,  "n?  barar,  7. 

Dan.  12.  10  Many  shall  be  purified,  and  made  white 
2.7b  be  refined,  pi3]  zaqaq,  4. 

Psa.  12.  6  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth,  purified 
3.7b  shoio  self  clean,  become  cleansed,  Nan  chata,  7. 

Num.  8.  21  Levites  were  purified,  and  they  washed 
31.  23  it  shall  be  purified  with  thewater  of  sep. 

4.7b  cleanse  self,  shoio  self  cleansed,  "irra  taher,  7. 
Ezra   6.  20  the  priests  and  Levites  were  purified  tog. 

5.  To  separate  self,  show  self  separate,  v-\$qadesh,7 . 

2  Sa.  11.   4  for  she  was  purified  from  her  uncleanne. 
PURIFIER  — 
7b  cleanse,  pronounce  clean,  *ina  taker,  3. 

MaL    3.   3  he  shall  sit  (as)  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  s. 
PURIFY  (self),  to  — 
1.7b  shmo  self  clean,  cleanse  self,  Nan  chata,  7. 

Numi9- 12  He  shall  purify  himself  with  it  on  the  th. 

19. 12  but  if  he  purify  not  himself  the  third  day 

19. 13  "Whosoever,  .purifieth  not  himself,  defile. 
19.  20  But  the  man  that,  .shall  not  purify  him. 
31. 19  purify  (both)  yourselves  and  your  captiv. 
31.  20  purify  all  (your)  raiment,  and  all  that  is 

Job  41.  25  by  reason  of  breakings  they  purify  them. 

2.  To  cleanse  from  error  or  sin,  Nan  chata,  3. 

Lev.    8. 15  purified  the  altar,  and  poured  the  blood 

Nuni  19.  19  on  the  seventh  day  he  shall  purify  hinis. 
3. 7b  cleanse^  pronounce  clean,  nna  taher,  3. 

Neh.  12.  30  priests  and  the  Levites.  .purified  thepeo. 

Eze.  43.  26  Seven  days  shall  they,  .purify  it;  andth. 

Mai.  3.  3  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  pur. 
4.  To  cleanse  self,  show  self  clean,  ~>na  taher.  7. 

Neh.  12. 30  purified  themselves . .  and  the  gates,  and 

Isa.  66.  17  purify  themselves  in  the  gardens  behind 

5.7b  cleanse,  make  clean,  ayvifa  hagnizo. 

Johnn.  55  went  out  of  the  country,  .to  purify  them. 

Acts  21.  24  purify  thyself  with  them,  and  be  at  cha. 
21.  26  the  next  day  purifying  himself  with  them 
24. 18  found  me  purified  in  the  temple,  neither 

Jas.     4.    8  and  purify  (your)  hearts,  (ye)  double  mi. 

1  Pet.  1.  22  Seeing  ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  ob. 

1  Jo.   3.    3  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  him. 

6. 7b  make  clean,  KaBaplfa  katharizo. 

Acts  15.  9  put  no  difference,  .purifying their  hearts 
Titus  2.  14  purify  unto  himself  apeculiarpeople,  zea. 
Heb.   9.  23  patterns,  .should  be  purified  with  these 

PURIFYING,  PURITY  — 

1.  Offering  for  error  or  sin,  nxan  chattath. 

Num.  8.    7  Sprinkle  water  of  purifying  upon  them 
2.Cleanness,  cleansing,  ~inb  tohar. 

Lev.  12.    4  until  the  daysof  herpurifyingbe  fulfilled 
12.   6  when  the  days  of  her  purifying  are  fulfil. 
^.Cleansing,  purity,  nnna  tohorah. 

Lev.  12.    4,  5  continue  hi  the  blood  of  herpurifying 

'i  Ch.23.  28  in  the  purifying  of  all  holy  things,  and 


4.  Thing  nibbed  in,  ointment,  pnpn  tamruq. 

Esth.  2. 12  with  (other)  things  for  the  purifying  of 
^.Chastity,  pitrity,  ayueia  hagneia. 

1  Ti.    4. 12  be  thou  an  example . .  in  faith,  in  purity 

5.   2  the  younger  as  sisters,  with  all  purity 

6. A  cleansing,  Kadapicryus  kalhamsmos. 

John  2.    6  after  the  manner  of  the  purifying  of  the 
3.  25  Then  there  arose  a  question,  .about  pur. 
7 '.Cleanness, purity,  /caflccpoTns  katharotes. 

Heb.  9. 13  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh 
PURLOIN,  to  — 
To  purloin,  secrete,  voo-<pi£oya.inosphizomod. 

Titus  2.  10  Not  purloining,  but  showing  all  good  fi. 
PURPLE  — 
l.Purple,  m~$  argevan. 

2  Ch.  2.  7  work  in  gold.,  and  in  purple,  and  crimson 

2.Purple,  red,  fipriN  argaman. 

Exod25.    4  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fineli. 
26.    1,  31  curtains  of  fine  twined  linen.,  and  pu. 

26.  36  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen 

27.  16  hanging  of  twenty  cubits, (of)blue,  and  p. 

28.  5  they  shall  take  gold,  and  blue,  and  purple 
28.  6  make  the  ephod  (of)gold.  .purple,  (of)sc. 
28.  8  purple,  and  scarlet,  andfine  twinedlinen 
28.  15  purple,  and  (of)  scarlet,  and  (of)  fine  tw. 
28.  33  make  pomegranates  (of)  blue,  and  (of)  p. 
35.  6  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  ti. 
35.  25  of  purple,  (and)  of  scarlet,  and  of  fine  li. 

35.  35  in  blue,  and  in  purple,  in  scarlet,  and  in 

36.  8  fine  twined  linen,  and  blue,  and  purple 
36.  35  made  a  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and  sc. 
36.  37  made  an  hanging,  .(of)  blue,  and  purple 
38.  18  needlework,  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and  s. 

38.  23  embroiderer  in  blue,  and  in  purple,  and 

39.  1  of  the  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  they 
39.   2,  5,  8  gold,  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
39.   3  to  work  (it)  in  the  blue,  and  in  the  purple 
39.  24  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  (and)  twi. 
39.  29  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  (of)  needl. 

Nam.  4.  13  altar,  and  spread  a  purple  cloth  thereon 
Judg.  8.  26  purple  raimeut  that  (was)  on  the  kings  of 
2  Ch.  2.  14  skilful  to  work  in  gold . .  in  purple,  in  blue 

3.  14  made  the  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and 
Esth.  1.    6  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and  pu. 

8. 15  with  a  garment  of  fine  linen  and  purple 
Prov  31.  22  tapestry ;  her  clothing  (is)  silk  and  purp. 
Song  3.  10  He  made . .  the  covering  of  it  (of)  purple 

7.  5  hair  of  thine  head  like  purple :  the  king 
Jer.  10.  9  blue  and  purple  (is)  their  clothing :  they 
Eze.  27.    7  blue  and  purple  from  the  isles  of  Elishah 

27.  16  occupied  in  thy  faii-s  with  emeralds,  pur. 

3.  Purple  garment,  Trop<pvpa  porphura. 

Marki5.  17  clothed  him  with  purple,  and  platted  a 

15.  20  took  off  the  purple  from  him,  and  put  his 
Lukei6.i9  rich  man,  which  wasclothed  in  purple,  and 
Rev.  17.    4  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  scarlet 

18.  12  The  merchandise  of  gold,  .and  purple,  and 

'^.Purple,  of  a  purple  colour,  Trop<pvpeos,  Trop<pvpovs. 
Johmg.    2  on  his  head,  and  they  put  on  him  a  purp. 

19.  5  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing,  .the  purple  of 
Rev.  18.  16  that  was  clothed  in  fine  line  linen,  and  p. 

PURPLE,  seller  of  — 

-4  seller  of  purple,  Trop(pvp6ivo>\is  porpkuropolis. 

Acts  16. 14  woman  named  Lydia,  a  seller  of  purple 
PURPOSE  — 
l.A  word,  thing,  -on  dabar. 

Neh    8.   4  which  they  hadmadefor^the  purpose;  and 
2.Device,  thought,  H3t  zim.mah. 

Job  17. 11  My  days  are  past,  my  purposes  are  broken 
3.  Delight,  pleasure,  desire,  j'|tn  chephets. 

Eecl.  3.    1  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  the  heaven 
3. 17  a  time  there  for  every  purpose  and  for  e. 

8.  6  Because  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  and 

LThought,  device,  n3t?n£,  n:nz>nD  machashabah. 
Prov  15.  22  Without  counsel  purposes  are  disappoin. 

20.  18  (Every)  purpose  is  established  by  counsel 
Jer.  49.  20  purposes  that  he  hath  purposed  against 

49.  30  and  hath  conceived  a  purpose  against  you 
50-  45  purposes,  that  he  hath  purposed  against 
51.  29  every  purpose  of  the  Lord  shall  be  pert 

5.  Deed,  act,  icark,  nt'V£  maaseh. 

Job   33. 17  he  may  withdraw  man  (from  his)  purpose 

6.  Counsel,  rr>fy  etsah. 

Ezra  4.  5  frustrate  their  purpose,  all  the  days  of  C. 
Isa.   14. 26  This  (is)  the  purpose  (that  is)  purposed 

7.  Wishj  will,  desire,  -3s  tsebu. 

Dan.    6.  17  purpose  might  not  be  changed  concern. 

8.  Foundation,  prince,  nc'  shath. 

Isa.   19. 10  they  shall  be  broken  in  the  purposes  the. 
Q.Puiyose,  intention,  QovAyya  boidema. 

Acts  27.  43  kept  them  from  (their)  purpose ;  and  co. 

10.  A  setting  before,  purpose,  wpovGCts  protJiesis.    -^ 

Acts  11.  23  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  c. 

27.  13  they  had  obtained  (their)  purpose,  loosing 

Rom.  8.  28  who  are  the  called  according  to  (his)  pur. 

9. 11  that  the  purpose  of  God  according  to  ele. 

Eph.  1.  11  being  predestinated  according  to  the  pur. 

3.  11  According  to  the  eternal  purpose  which 

2  Ti.   1.   9  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  gr. 

3. 10  hast  fully  known  my . .  purpose,  faith,  long 


PURPOSE 


786 


PUT 


PURPOSE,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  *v?n  amar. 

i  Ki.    5.    5I  purpose  to  build  an  house  unto  the  na. 
2  Ch.28.  10  now  ye  purpose  to  keep  under  the  child. 

2.  To  devise,  think,  DD{  zamam. 

Psa.  17     3  I  am  purp'osed  (that)  my  mouth  shall  not 
Jer.    4.  28  I  have  purposed  (it),  and  will  not  repent 

3.  To  think,  reckon,  2pn  chashab. 

Psa. 140.    4  who  have  purposed  to  overthrow  my  go. 

Jer.  26.  3  repent  me  of  the  evil  which  I  purpose  to 
36.  3  will  hear  all  the  evil  which  I  purpose  to 
49. 20  that  he  hath  purposed  against  the  iuhab. 
50. 45  that  he  hath  purposed  against  the  land  of 

Lam.  2.  8  Lord  hath  purposed  to  destroy  the  wall 
A.To  counsel,  py;  yaats. 

Isa.   14.  24  and  as  I  have  purposed,  (so)  shall  it  stand 
14.  26  This  (is)  the  purpose  (that  is)  purposed 
14. 27  For  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed,  and 
19. 12  know  what  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purp. 

23.  9  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed  it,  to  stain 

5.  To  for m,  frame,  *ia;  yatsar. 

Isa.  46.  1 1  will  also  bring  it  to  pass ;  I  have  purposed 

6.  To  set,  place,  D*l?,  bib  sum,  sim. 

Dan.  1.  8  purposed  in  his  heart  that  he  would  not 
7. Face,  Q'lBpanim. 

2  Ch.32.  2  he  was  purposed  to  fight  against  Jerusa. 
8.  To  Counsel,  deliberate,  f3ovKe6ofj.au  bouleuomai. 

2  Co.  1.  17  the  things  that  I  purpose,  do  I  purpose 
$.A  resolution  was  made,  iyevtTo  yVoifir}. 

Acts  20.   3  he  purposed  to  return  through  Macedo. 

10.  To  do,  make,  ttqUui  poieo* 

Eph.  3,  11  which  he  purposed  iu  Christ  Jesus  our  L. 

11.  To  take  beforehand,  determine,  Trpoa.tp4ofj.ai. 

2  Co.  9.    7  Every  man  according  as  he  purposeth  in 

12.  To  put  or  place  before,  propose,  TTporidvfxt  prot. 
Rom.  1.  13  that  oftentimes  I  purposed  to  come  unto 
Eph.    1.   9  good  pleasure  which  he  hath  purposed  in 

13.7fo  'pat,  place,  TiQnfii  tithemi. 

Acts  ig.  21  Paul  purposed  in  the  spirit,  when  he  had  p. 
PURPOSE,  of  ;   to  no  —     . 
l.Emjity,  vain,  to  no  pwpose,  p'")  riq. 

Isa.   30.    7  the  Egyptians  shall  help,  .to  no  purpose 

2.  To  give  spoil,  hbv)  sfialal. 

Ruth  2.  16  let  fall  also  (some)of  the  handfuls  of  pur. 
PURSE  — 
l.Cup,  bag,  purse,  D'3  kis. 

Prov.  1. 14  Cast  in  thy  lot.  .let  us  all  have  oue  purse 
2.-4  bag,  pufse,  {3a\dvTiov  balantion. 

Lukeio.  4  Carry  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes 
22.  35  When  I  sent  you  without  purse,  and  scrip 
22.  36  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him  take  (it),  and 

d.A  girdle,  purse,  fyvn  zone. 

Mattio.    9  Provide  neithergold.  .norbrass  in  your  p. 
Mark  6.    8  no  scrip,  no  bread,  no  money  in  (their)  p. 

PURSUE  (hard  or  hotly),  to  — 

1. After,  "ins:  achar. 

x  Ki.22.  33  that  they  turned  back  from  pursuing  him 
2  Ch.18.  32  they  turned  back  again  from  pursuing  him 

2.2*0  (cause  to)  cleave  to,  p^n  dabaq,  5. 

Judg2o.  45  pursued  hard  after  them  unto  Gidom,  and 

3.  To  burn,  pursue  hotly,  p?^  dcdag\ 

Gen.  31.  36  what  (is)  my  sin,  that  thou  hast  so  hotly  p. 
Lam.  4.  19  theypursuedusupon  the  mountains,  they 

4.  To  go  on,  TjS;  yalak. 

Jer.  48.    2  6  Madmen  ;  the  sword  shall  pursue  thee 

5.  Pursuit,  retirement,  rb"  sig. 

1  Ki.iS.  27  either  he  is  talking,  or  he  is  pursuing,  or 
G.To  2iursuc,  *yn  radaph. 

Gen.  14.  14  armed  his  trained  (servants),  .and  pursued 
14.  15  pursued  them  unto  Hobah,  which  (is)  on 
31.  23  pursued  after  him  seven  days'  journey;  and 
35.    5  they  did  not  pursue  after  the  sons  of  Jac. 

Exodi4-  8  and  he  pursued  after  the  children  of  Isr. 
14.    9  Egyptians  pursued  after  them,  all  the  h. 

14.  23  Egyptians  pursued,  and  went  in  after  th. 

15.  9  enemy  said,  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake 
Lev.  26.  17  and  ye  shall  flee  when  none  pursue  th  you 

26.  36  and  they  shall  fall  when  none  pursueth 
26.  37  And  they  shall  fall,  .when  none  pursueth 
Deutn.    4  to  overflow  them,  as  they  pursued  after 

19.  6  Lest  the  avenger  of  the  blood  pursue  the 
28.  22  and  they  shall  pursue  thee  until  thou  p. 
28.  45  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  shall  pursue 

Josh.  2.   5  pursue  after  them  quickly  ;  for  ye  shall 
2.    7  men  pursued  after  them  the  way  to  Jor. 
2.   7  as  soon  as  they  which  pursued  after  them 
8.  16  to  pursue  after  them :  and  they  pursued 
8. 17  left  the  city  open,  and  pursued  after  Israel 
10. 19  pursue  after  your  enemies,  and  smite  the 

20.  5  if  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  after  him 

24.  6  pursued  after  your  fathers  with  chariots 
Judg.  11   6  they  pursued  after  him,  and  caught  him 

4.  16  Barak  pursued  after  the  chariots,  and  af. 
4.  22  as  Barak  pursued  Sisera,  Jaelcame  out  to 
7.  23  men  of  Israel,  .pursued  after  the  Midian. 

7.  25  pursued  Midian,  and  brought  the  heads 

8.  4  passed  over,  .faint,  yet  pursuing  (them) 
8.    5  I  am  pursuing  aftcr'Zebah  and  Zalmunna 


Judg.  8.  12  pursued  after  them,  and  took  the  two  k. 

1  Sa.    7.  11  pursued  the  Philistines,  and  smote  them 

17.  52  pursued  the  Philistines,  until  thou  come 
23.  25  pursued  after  David  in  the  wilderness  of 

23.  28  Wherefore  Saul  returned  from  pursuing 

24.  14  after  whom  dost  thou  pursue?  after  a  dead 

25.  29  Yet  a  man  is  risen  to  pursue  thee,  and  to 
26. 18  Wherefore  doth  my  lord  thus  pursue  after 
30.  8  Shall  I  pursue . .  he  answered  him,  Pursue 
30.  10  David  pursued,  he  and  four  hundred  men 

2  Sa.    2.  19  Asahel  pursued  after  Abner ;  and  in  going 

2.  24  Joab  also  and  Abishaipursued  after  Abner 
2.  28  pursued  after  Israel  no  more,  neither  fo. 

17.    1  1  will  arise  and  pursue  after  David  this  n. 

18. 16  people  returned  from  pursuing  after  Isr. 

20.    6  pursue  after  him,  lest  he  get  him  fenced  c. 

20.   7  went  out  of  Jerusalem,  to  pursue  after  S. 

20.  10  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brother  pursued  af. 

20.  13  all  the  people  went  on  after  Joab,  to  pur. 
22.  38  I  have  pursued  mine  enemies,  and  destr. 
24. 13  wilt  thou  flee . .  while  they  pursue  thee  ?  or 

1  Ki.20.  20  the  Syrians  fled,  and  Israel  pursued  tliem 

2  Ki.25.  5  army  of  the  Chaldees  pursued  after  the  k. 
2  Ch.13.  19  Abijah  pursued  after  Jeroboam,  and  took 

14. 13  people  that  (were)  with  him  pursued  them 
Job   13.  25  and  wilt  thou  pursue  the  dry  stubble? 

30. 15  Terrors  are  turned  upon  me :  they  pursue 
Psa.  18.  37  I  have  pursued  mine  enemies,  and  over. 

34.  14  Depart  from  evil . .  seek  peace,  and  pursue 
Prov  28.    1  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth 
Isa.   30. 16  therefore  shall  they  that  pursue  you  be 

41.  3  pursued  them,  (and)  passed  safely;  (even) 
Jer.  39.    5  Chaldeans'  army  pursued  after  them,  and 

52.  8  army  of  the  Chaldeans  pursued  after  the 
Eze.  35.  6  blood  shall  pursue.,  even  blood  shall  pur. 
Hos.  8.  3  Israel  hath  cast  off.  .enemy  shall  pursue 
Amos  1.  11  because  he  did  pursue  his  brother  with  the 

7.  To  pursue,  *\Yl  radaph,  3. 

Prov  11.  19  so  he  that  pursueth  evil  (pursueth  it)  to 

13.  21  Evil  pursueth  sinners    but  to  the  righte. 

19.    7  pursueth  (them  with)  words,  (yet)  they 
Nah.   1.    8  and  darkness  shall  pursue  his  enemies 

PURSUER  — 

To  ptirsue,  r\-n  radaph. 

Josh.  2. 16  Get  you  to  the  mountain,  lest  the  pursu. 
2. 16  hide  yourselves . .  until  the  pursuers  be  re. 
2.  22  pursuers  were  returned:  and  the  pursuer 
8.  20  people,  .turned  back  upon  the  pursuers 

Lam.  1.    6  gone  without  strength  before  the  pursuer 

PURTENANCE  — 
Inwards,  heart,  n"ip  qereb. 

Exodi2.   9  with  his  legs,  and  with  the  purtenalice  th. 
PUSH  (away,  down,  used  or  wont  to),  to  — 

1.  To  gore,  push,  rm  nagach. 

Exod2i.  32  If  the  ox  shall  push  a  man  servant  or  maid 

2.  To  gore,  2wsh,  rm  nagach,  3. 

Deut33.  17  with  them  he  shall  push  the  people  toge. 

1  Ki.22.  11  With  these  shalt  thou  push  the  Syrians 

2  Ch.18.  10  With  these  thou  shalt  push  Syria  until 
Psa.  44.   5  Through  thee  will  we  push  down  our  en. 
Eze.  34.  21  pushed  all  the  diseased  with  your  horns 
Dan.   S.   4  I  saw  the  ram  pushing  westward,  and  no. 

3.  To  push  self  on  or  forward,  nii  nagach,  7. 
Dan.  11.  40  shall  the  king  of  the  south  push  at  him 

■i.O?ie  accustomed  to  push,  naj  naggach. 

Exod2i.  29  if  the  ox  were  wont  to  push  with  his  horn 

21.  36  it  be  known  that  the  ox  hath  used  to  push 

5.  To  send  forth  or  out,  n1?^  shalach,  3. 

Job  30.  12  they  push  away  my  feet,  and  they  raise 
PUT,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  go  or  come  in,  Nia  bo,  5. 

Exod25.  14  thou  shalt  putthe  staves  into  theringsby 

26.  11  putthe  tachesintotheloops,andcoupleth. 

37.  5  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  by  the  sides 

38.  7  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  on  the  sides 
Nell.   3.    5  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to.  the  work  of 

2.  To  put,  guide,  rtin  hadah. 

Isa.   11.   8  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den 

3.  To  put,  set,  place,  dv,  cni?*  sum,  sim. 

Mic.    2.  12  will  put  them  together  as  the-sheep  of  B. 

4.  To  bind  up,  v^n  chabash. 

Exodag.  9  put  the  bonnets  on  them :  and  the  priest's 
Lev.    8. 13  girded  them,  .and  put  bonnets  upon  them 

5.  To  put  down,  ru;  yanach,  5. 

Gen.  2,  15  put  him  into  the  garden  of  Eden  to  dress 
Lev.  24.  12  put  him  in  ward,  that  the  mind  of  the  L. 
Nutn  15.  34  put  him  in  ward,  because  it  was  not  dec. 

1  Ki.   8.    9  tables  of  stone,  which  Moses  put  there  at 

2  Ki.  17.  29  put  (them)  in  the  houses  of  the  high  pla. 

0.  To  add,  f]p;  yasaph. 

Lev.  22.  14  tiien  he  shall  put  the  fifth  (part)  thereof 

7.  To  cause  to  go  out,  Jy;  yatsag,  5. 

Judg.  6.  37  will  put  a  fleece  of  wool  in  the  floor ;  (and) 
8.  27  made  an  ephod  thereof,  and  put  it  in  his 
8.7*0  (cause  to)  clothe  or  put  on,  V2b  labesh,  5. 

Gen.  27.  15  and  put  them  upon  Jacobher  younger  son 

27.  16  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  the  goats  upon 
ExocbS.  41  thou  shalt  put  them  upon  Aaron  thy  bro. 

29.    5  put  upon  Aaron  the  coat,  and  the  robe  of 
40. 13  thou  shalt  put  upon  Aaron  the  holy  gar. 
Nuniao.  26,  28  and  put  them  upon  Eleazar  his  sun 


9.  A  sending  forth,  rhyo  mishlach. 

Deuti2.  7  rejoice  in  all  that  ye  put  your  hand  unto 
12.  18  in  all  that  thou  puttest  thine  hands  unto 

15.  10  in  all  that  thou  puttest  thine  hand  unto 

10.  To  lead,  put  in,  nm  nachah,  5. 

2  Ki.  iS.  11  put  them  in  Halah  and  in  Habor  (by)  the 

11.  To  cause  to  reach,  attain,  te'i  nasag,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  26  but  no  man  put  his  hand  to  his  mouth:  for 
12.7b  give,  jru  nathan. 

Gen.  38.  28  that  (the  one)putout  (Ins)  hand:  and  the 
39.   4  and  all  (that)  he  had  he  put  into  Iris  hand 

39.  20  took  him,  and  put  him  into  the  prison  a 

40.  3  put  them  in  ward  in  the  house  of  the  ca. 

41.  10  put  me  in  ward  in  the  captain  of  the  gu. 
41,42  put  it  upon  Joseph's  hand,  and  arrayed 

Exod.  5.  21  to  put  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  slay  us 
16. 33  Take  a  pot,  and  put  an  omerfull  of  man. 
25. 12  put  (them)  in . .  four  corners  thereof ;  and 
25. 16  thou  shalt  put  into  the  ark  the  testimony 
25.  26  put  the  rings  in  the  f  ourcorners  that  (are) 
25.  21  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy  seat  above  upon 

25.  21  in  the  ark  thou  shalt  put  the  testimony 

26.  34  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy  seat  upon  the  a. 

26.  35  thou  shalt  put  the  table  on  the  north  side 

27.  5  thou  shalt  put  it  under  the  compass  of  the 

28.  23  shalt  put  tiie  two  rings  on  the  two  ends  of 
28.  24  shalt  put  the  two  wreathen  (chains)  of  g. 
28.  25  put  (them)  on  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the 
28.  27  shalt  put  them  on  the  two  sides  of  the  e. 

28.  30  thou  shalt  put  in  the  breastplate  of  jud. 

29.  3  shalt  put  them  into  one  basket,  and  bring 
29.    6  and  put  the  holy  crown  upon  the  mitre 
29.  12  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  with 
29.  17  put  (them)  unto  his  pieces,  and  unto  his 

29.  20  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of  A. 

30.  6  thou  shalt  put  it  before  the  veil  that  (is) 
30.  18  thou  shalt  put  it.  .and  thou  shalt  put  wa. 
30.  33  whosoever  putteth  (any)  of  it  upon  a  str. 

30.  36  put  of  it  before  the  testimony  in  the  tab. 

31.  6  in  the  hearts.  .1  have  put  wisdom,  that 

34.  33  (till)  Moses  had  done  speaking,  .he  put  a 

35.  34  he  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  te. 

36.  1  in  whom  the  Lord  put  wisdom  and  und. 

36.  2  in  whose  heart  the  Lord  had  put  wisdom 

37.  13  put  the  rings  upon  the  four  corners  that 
39. 16  put  the  two  rings  in  the  two  ends  of  the 
39.  17  they  put  the  two  wreathen  chains  of  gold 
39. 18  put  them  on  the  shoulder  pieces  of  tlie  e. 
39.  20  put  them  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ephod 

39.  25  put  the  bells  between  the  pomegranates 

40.  7  setthelaver.  .and  shalt  put  water  therein 
40.  18  put  in  the  bars  thereof,  and  reared  up  his 
40.  20  put  the  testimony,  .and  put  the  mercy  s. 
40.  22  put  the  table  in  the  tent  of  the  congrega* 
40.  30  set  the  laver.  .and put  water  there,  to  w. 

Lev.  1.  7  put  fire  upon  the  altar,  and  lay  the  wood 
2.  1  shall  pour  oil  upon  it,  and  put  frankince. 
2.  15  thou  shalt  put  oil  upon  it,  and  lay  frank. 
4.    7  priest  shall  put  (some)  of  the  blood  upon 

4.  18  he  shall  put  (some)  of  the  blood  upon  the 
4-  25,  30,  34  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 

5.  11  neither  shall  he  put  (any)  frankincense  th. 
8i  7  put  upon  him  the  coat,  .and  put  the  ephod 
8.  8  also  he  put  in  the  breastplate  the  Urim 
8.  15  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  round 
8.  23  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of  Aaron's  right  ear 
8.  24  put  of  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of  their  rig. 

8.  27  put  all  upon  Aaron's  hands,  and  upon  his 

9.  9  and  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 

10.  1  put  fire  therein,  and.  .offered  strange  fire 
14. 17,  25  put.  .upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of 
14. 14  priest  shall  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of  the 
14.  28  put  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  hand  upon 
14.  29  he  shall  put  upon  the  head  of  him  that  is 
14.  34  put  the  plague  of  leprosy  in  ahouseof  the 

16.  13  he  shall  put  the  incense  upon  the  fire  be. 
16.  18  put  (it)  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  round 
16.  21  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat 
19.  14  not  curse  the  deaf,  nor  put  a  stumbling 
24.    7  shalt  put  pure  frankincense  upon  (each) 

Num.  4.  6  shall  put  thereon  the  covering  of  badgers' 
4.  7  put  thereon  the  dishes  and  the  spoons,and 
4.  10  they  shall  put  it.  .and  shall  put  (it)  upon 

4.  12  put  (them) in  a  cloth,  .and  shall  put  (the.) 
5. 15  shall  pour  no  oil  upon  it,  nor  put  franki. 

5.  17  priest  shall  take,  and  put  (it)  into  the  Wi 

5.  18  put  the  offering  of  memorial  in  her  hands 

6.  iB  put  (it)  in  the  fire  which  (is)  under  the  s. 
6.  19  put  (them)  upon  the  hands  of  the  Nazar. 
1.  29  the  Lord  would  put  his  spirit  upon  them! 

15-  38  put  upon  the  fringe  of  the  borders  a  rib. 
16.  7  put  fire  therein,  .it  shall  be  (that)  the  m. 
16.  17  put  incense  in  them,  and  bring  ye  before 
16.  18  put  fire  in  them,  and  laid  incense  thereon 
16.  46  Take  a  censer,  and  put  fire  therein  from 

16.  47  put  on  incense,  and  made  an  atonement 
19.  17  running  water  shall  be  put  thereto  in  a 

27.  20  thou  shalt  put  (some)of  thine  hononrup. 
Deut.  2.  25  This  day  will  I  begin  to  put  the  dread  of 

11.  29  shalt  put  theblessinguponmountGerlzim 
18.  18  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth ;  and  he 
23.  24  but  thou  shalt  not  put  (any)  in  thy  vessel 

28.  48  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  neck 
30.    7  will  put  all  these  curses  upon  thine  euem. 

Josh.  6.  24  put  into  the  treasury  of  the  house  of  the 

17.  13  that  they  put  the  Canaanitcs  to  tribute 
Judg.  7.  16  put  a  trumpet  in  every  man's  hand,  with 

1  Sa.  17.  3S  put  an  helmet  of  brass  upon  his  head  ;  a. 

2  Sa.  20.    3  put  them  in  ward,  and  fed  them,  but  w. 
i  Ki.  2.    5  put  the  blood  of  war  upon  his  girdle  that 


PUT 


787 


PUT 


i  Ki.  2.  3s  king  put  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  in 
2.  35  did  the  king  put  in  the  room  of  Abiathar 
5.    3  Lord  put  them  under  the  soles  of  Ids  feet 
7-  39  put  five  bases  on  the  right  side  of  the  ho. 
7.  51  did  he  put  among  the  treasures  of  the  h. 
10.  17  king  put  them  in  the  house  of  the  forest 
10.  24  hear  his  wisdom,  which  God  had  put  in 
12.    4  heavy  yoke  which  he  put  upon  us,  lighter 
12.   9  Make  the  yoke  which  thy  father  did  put 
12.  29  set  the  one  in  Beth-el,  and  the  other  put 

22.  23  Lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth 
2  Ki.16.  14  and  put  it  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar 

16.  17  and  put  it  upon  a  pavement  of  stones 
18. 14  that  which  thou  puttestonmewill  I  bear 

23.  33  Pharaoh-nechoh  put  him  in  hands  at  Eibl. 
2  Chi  3. 16  put  (them)  on  the  heads,  .and  put  (them) 

4.  6  put  five  on  the  right  hand,  and  five  on  the 

5.  1  all  the  instruments,  put  he  among  the  t. 
5.  10  two  tables  which  Moses  put  (therein)  at 
9.  16  king  put  them  in  the  house  of  the  forest 
9.  23  hear  his  wisdom,  that  God  had  put  in  his 

10.    4  ease . .  his  heavy  yoke  that  he  put  upon  us 
10.    9  Ease,  .the  yoke  that  thy  father  did  put 
11. 11  putcaptainsin  them,  and  store  of  victual 

16.  id  put  him  in  a  prison  house  ;  for  (he  was) 

17.  19  besides  (those)  whom  the  king  put  in  the 

18.  22  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of 
22. 11  put  him  and  his  nurse  in  a  bed  "chamber 
23. 11  put  upon  him  the  crown,  and  (gave  him) 

34.  10  put  (it)  in  the  hand  of  the  workmen  that 

35.  3  Put  the  holy  ark  in  the  house  which  Sol. 

36.  -  7  and  put  them  in  his  temple  at  Babylon 
Ezra   1.   7  and  had  put  them  in;the  house  of  his  gods 

7.  27  which  hath  put  (such  a  thing)  as  this  in 
Neh.   2.  12  what  my  God  had  put  in  my  heart  to  do 

7.    5  God  put  into  mine  heart  to  gather  toget. 
Psa.    4.   7  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart,  more 

15.  5  putteth  not  out  his  money  to  usury,  nor 
40.  3  he  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  (e.) 
78.  66  smote  his  enemies,  .he  put  them  to  ape. 

Prov.  8.    1  Doth  not.  .understanding  put  forth  her 

Isa.   42.    1  I  have  put  my  spirit  upou  him  ;  he  shall 

Jer.     1.   9  Then  the  Lord  put  forth  his  hand,  and  t. 

1.   9  Behold,  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mo. 

20.    2  put  him  in  the  stocks  that  (were)  in  tlie 

27.    2  Make  thee  bonds  and  yokes,  and  put  them 

27.  8  that  will  not  put  theirneck  under  the  yo. 

28.  14  I  have  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  the  neck 

29.  26  shouldest  put  him  in  prison,  and  in  the  s. 

31.  33 1  will  put  my  law  in  their  inward  parts 

32.  14  put  them  in  *u  earthen  vessel,  that  they 
32.  40  but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that 

37.  4  among  the  people;  for  they  had  not  put 
37.  15  put  him  in  prison  in  the  house  of  Jonath. 

37.  18  What  have  I  offended,  .that  ye  have  put 

38.  7  heard  that  they  had  put  Jeremiah  in  the 
52. 11  Then  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah;  and 

Lam    3  29  putteth  hismouthiu  the  dust,  if  so  beth. 

Bze.    3.  25  they  shall  put  bands  upon  thee,  and  shall 

4.   9  put  them  in  one  vessel,  and  make  thee  br. 

10.  7  put  (it)  into  the  hands  of  (him  that  was) 

11.  19  will  put  a  new  spirit  within  you  ;  and  I 
14;   3  put  the  stumbling  block  of  their  iniquity 
16. 11 1  put  bracelets  upon  thy  hands,  andach. 

16.  12  I  put  a  jewel  on  thy  forehead,  and  ear  r. 

19.  9  they  put  him  iu  ward  in  chaius.and  brou. 
23.  42  which  put  bracelets  upon  their  hands,  and 

29.  4  will  put  hooks  in  thy  jaws,  and  I  will  ca. 

30.  13  and  I  will  put  a  fear  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
30.  24  put  my  sword  in  his  hand  :  but  I  will  br. 
30.  25  put  my  sword  into  the  hand  uf  the  king 
36.  26  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you  ;  and  I 

36.  27  will  put  my  spirit  within  you,  and  cause 

37.  6  put  breath  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live ;  and 
37. 14  shall  put  my  spirit  in  you,  and  ye  shall 

37.  19  will  put  them  with  him,  (even)  with,  the 

38.  4  put  hooks  into  thy  jaws,  and  I  will  bring 
43.  20  put  (iO  on  the  four  horns  of  it,  and  on  the 
45.  19  put  (it)  upon  the  posts  of  the  house,  and 

Mic.    3.    5  and  he  that  putteth  not  into  their  mouths 
13.  To  turn  aside,  ~np  sur,  5. 

Gen.  38. 14  she  put  her  widow's  garments  off  from  her 
Deutsi.  13  she  shall  put  the  raimentof  her  captivity 
1  Sa.  17.  39  proved  (them).    And  David  put  them  off 

14.7*0  sustain,  support,  ~Dd  samak. 

Exod2g.  10,  15,  19  shall  put  their  hands  upon  the  h. 
Lev.  1.  4  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the 
Num.  8.  10  children  of  Israel  shall  put  their  hands  up. 

15.  To  add,  H2D  sctphah. 

Jer.     7.  21  Put  your  burnt  offerings  unto  your  sacri. 

16.  To  admit,  n£p  saphach. 

1  Sa.   2. 36  Put  me,  I  pray  thee,  into  one  of  the  pri. 

17.  To pour  forth,  gather  together,  nsD  saphach,  3. 
Hab.   2. 15  Woe  unto  him.  .that  puttestthy  bottle  to 

18.  To  caiise  to  go  up,  rhv,  alah,  5. 

Josh.  7.   6  fell  to  the  earth . .  and  put  dust  upon  their 

19.  To  lay  on,  load,  ddj  amas,  5. 

2  Ch.io.  11  For  whereas  my  father  put  a  heavy  yoke 

20.  To  do,  make,  n'p-j;  asah. 

1  Sa.    8. 16  he  will  take,  .your  asses,  and  put  (them) 

21.  To  cause  to  ride,  aan  rakab,  5. 

2  Ki.13. 16  Put  thiue  hand  upon  the  bow.    And  he  put 
22.7*0  set,  put,  place,  DN^,  vXa  sWn,  sim. 

Cten.    2.   8  there  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed 
si.  14  putting  (it)  on  her  shoulder,  and  the  child 


Gen  24.  2  Put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thigh 
24.  9  servautput  his  hand  under  the  thigh  of  A. 
24.  47  put  the  ear  ring  upon  her  face,  and  the  b. 
28.  11  put  (them  for)  his  pillows,  and  lay  down 
28.  18  took  the  stone  that  he  had  put(for)  hisp. 
30.  42  when  the  cattle  were  feeble,  he  put(them) 
34  put  them  in  the  camel's  furniture,  and  sat 

16  and  put  a  space  betwixt  drove  and  drove 
2  put  the  handmaids  and  their  children  fo. 

34  put  sackcloth  upon  his  loins,  and  mourned 
,  1 5  that  they  should  put  me  into  the  dungeon 
42  fine  linen,  and  put  a  gold  chain  about  his 
22  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in  our 

1  put  every  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mo. 

2  put  my  cup.  the  silver  cup,  in  the  sack's 
29  put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thi. 

18  Not  so.  .put  thy  right  hand  upon  his  head 

3  put  the  child  therein;  and  she  laid  (it) in 

22  ye  shall  put  (them)  upou  your  sons,  and 

15  thou  shalt  speak  unto  him,  and  put  words 

21  those  wonders,  .which  I  have  put  in  thine 

23  I  will  put  a  division  between  my  people 
26  I  will  put  none  of  these  diseases  upon  thee 
12  took  a  stone,  and  put  (it)  under  him,  and 

6  put  (it)  in  basins;  and  half  of  the  blood  he 
12  thou  shalt  put  the  two  stones  upou  the  s. 

26  thou  shalt  put  them  upon  the  two  ends  of 

37  thou  shalt  put  it  on  a  blue  lace,  that  it  may 

6  and  put  the  holy  crown  upon  the  mitre 

24  thou  shalt  put  all  in  the  hands  of  Aaron 

27  Put  every  man  his  sword  by  his  side,  (and) 

22  that  I  will  put  thee  in  a  clift  of  the  rock 

7  he  put  them  on  the  shoulders  of  the  ephod 

19  pat  (them)  on  the  two  ends  of  the  breast. 
3  thou  shalt  put  therein  the  ark  of  the  tes. 
5  put  the  hanging  of  the  door  to  the  taber. 

19  put  the  covering  of  the  tent  above  upon 
24  put  the  candlestick  in  the  tent  of  the  co. 
26  put  the  golden  altar  in  the  tent  of  the  co. 
29  put  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (by)  the 

11  he  shall  put  no  oil  upon  it,  neither  shall 
10  his  linen  breeches  shall  he  put  upon  his 

8  And  he  put  the  breastplate  upon  him  :  also 

9  put  the  mitre  upon  his  head ;  also  upon 
9  did  he  put  the  golden  plate,  the  holy 

26  and  put  (them)  on  the  fat,  and  upon 

20  put  the  fat  upon  the  breasts,  and  lie  burnt 

1  put  incense  thereon,  and  offered  strange 
6,  8  and  shall  put  in  the  staves  thereof 

27  shall  put  my  name  upon  the  children  of 

17  will  put  (it)  upon  them;  and  they  shall 
7  put  incense  in  them  before  the  Lord  to. 
9  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon 

38  the  word  that  God  putteth  in  my  mouth 
5  the  Lord  put  a  word  in  Balaam's  mouth 

12  speak  that  which  the  Lord  hath  put  in 

16  put  awor*'  in  his  mouth,  and  said,  Goag. 

21  Strong  isthydwelliug  place,  andthoupu. 
15  will  put  noneof  the  evil  diseases  of  Egypt 

2  I  will  write,  .and  thou  shalt  put  them  in 
5  put  the  tables  in  the  ark  which  I  hadm. 
5  shall  choose  out  of  all  your  tribes  to  put 

21  place  which  the  Lord.,  hath  chosen  to  put 

2  shalt  put(it)  in  a  basket,  aud  shalt  go  unto 
15 man  that  maketh.  .and  putteth  (it)  in  (a) 
19  put  it  iu  their  mouths,  thatthis  songmay 

26  Take  this  book  of  the  law,  and  put  it  in 

10  they  shall  put  incense  before  thee,  and 

11  they  have  put  (it)  even  among  their  own 

24  put  your  feet.  .And  they,  .put  their  feet 

7  he  put  darkness  between  you  and  the  E. 

28  that  they  put  the  Canaanites  to  tribute 
19  flesh  he  put  in  a  basket,  and  he  put  the 
49  put  (them)  to  the  hold,  and  set  the  hold 

3  I  put  my  life  in  my  hands,  and  passed  o. 

4  put  a  fire  brand  in  the  midst  between 
3  put  (them)  upon  his  shoulders,  and  can1. 

21  put  the  little  ones  and  the  cattle  and  the 
3  put  thy  raiment  upon  thee,  and  get  thee 

8  put  the  jewels  of  gold,  which  ye  return 

15  wherein  the  jewels  of  gold  (were),  and  put 
11  Saul  put  the  people  in  three  companies 
40  put  them  in  a  shepherd's  bag  which  he 
54  brought  it  to  Jerusalem  :  but  he  put  his 

5  For  he  did  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  s. 

13  puta  pillow  of  goat's  (hair)  forhisbolster 

6  to  put  hot  bread  in  the  day  when  it  was 
21  have  put  my  life  in  my  hand,  and  have  h. 
10  they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  Ash. 

6  Then  David  put  garrisons  in  Syria  of  Da. 

14  he  put  garrisons  in  Edom . .  all  theyof  Edom 
14  throughout  all  Edom  puthegarrisons  :and 
31  put  (them)  under  saws,  and  under  harr. 
"  3  So  Joab  put  the  words  in  her  mouth 

19  put  all  these  words  iu  themouth  of  thine 
3  to  put  my  name  there  for  ever ;  and  mine 

36  city  which  I  have  chosen  me  to  put  my 
21  city  which  the  Lord  did  choose,  .to  put 
23,  23  and  lay  (it)  on  wood,  and  put  no  fire 

25  call  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  but  put  no 
42  and  put  his  face  between  his  knees 

6  shall  put  (it)  in  their  hand,  and  take  (it) 
24  Take  the  kings  away,  .and  put  captains 
31  let  us,  I  praythee,  put  sackcloth  on  our 

27  put  sackcloth  upon  his  flesh,  and  fasted 

27  Put  this  (fellow)in  the  prison,  and  feedhim 

20  Bring  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt  ther. 
34  put  his  mouth  upon  his  mouth,  and  his 
13  put  (it)  under  him  on  the  top  of  the  stairs 

7  put  their  heads  in  baskets,  and  sent  him 

16  and  he  put  his  hand(upon  it) :  and  Elisha 

28  therefore  I  will  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose 


32- 

33' 

37> 
40, 
41. 

43' 
44< 

44. 

47- 

48. 

Exod.  2, 


28. 
29. 
29, 

32' 

33 

39 

39- 

40, 

40. 

40. 

40. 

40. 

40. 

Lev.    5. 

6, 

8. 


Num.  4. 
6. 
11. 
16. 
21. 
22. 
23. 

23- 

23- 
24. 
Deut.7. 
10. 
10. 
12. 
12. 
26. 
27. 
31- 
3i- 

Josh.  7. 


16. 

18. 

Ruth  3. 

1  Sa.    6. 

6. 

11. 

17- 

17- 

19. 

19. 


3i 

2Sa.  8 


[  Ki 


-Ki. 


2  Ki 

21. 

4 

iCh 

21. 
.10. 

7 
10 

18. 

6 

2Ch 

18. 
.  1. 

13 

6. 

II 

6. 

20 

12. 
iS. 

13 

26 

33- 

7 

Job 

33- 
»5 

14 
'4 

!3- 
2.1- 

27 
6 

33- 

11 

41. 
Psa.  56. 
Prov  23. 
Isa.     5. 

8 
2 
20 

37- 
5i- 

29 
16 

5i- 

=3 

Jer. 

59' 
63. 
13- 

21 
11 

1 

13- 

38. 

12 

Eze. 

40. 
14. 

10 
4. 

ib. 

14 

24. 

17 

Mic. 


the  Lord  said,  In  Jerusalem  will  I  put  my 

In  this  house,  .will  I  put  my  name  for  e. 

they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  their 

Then  David  put  (garrisons)  in  Syria-dam. 

put  garrisons  in  Edom  ;  and  all  the  Edo. 

he  put  before  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 

in  it  have  I  put  the  ark,  wherein  (is)  the 

said  that  thou  wouldest  put  thy  nameth. 

Lord  had  chosen,  .to  put  his  name  there 

Put  this  (fellow)  in  the  prison,  and  feed 

and  in  Jerusalem,  .will  I  put  my  name  for 

and  put  captains  of  war  in  all  the  fenced 

take  my  flesh  in  my  teeth,  and  put  my  1. 

Thou  puttest  my  feet  also  in  the  stocks 

No ;  but  he  would  put  (strength)  iu  me 

He  putteth  my  feet  in  the  stocks,  he  ma. 

Canst  thou  put  an  hook  into  his  nose?  or 

put  thou  my  tears  into  thy  bottle :  (are  t.) 

put  a  knife  to  thy  throat,  if  thou  (be)  a 

that  put  darkness  for  light,  .that  put  bit. 

therefore  will  I  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose 

have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth,  and  h. 

I  will  put  it  into  the  hand  of  them  that 

my  words  which  I  have  put  iu  thy  mouth 

where  (is)  he  that  put  his  holy  spirit  wit. 

put  it  upon  thy  loins,  and  put  it  not  in 

So  I  got  a  girdle,  .and  put  (it)  on  my  loins 

Put  now  (these)  old  cast  clouts  and  rotten 

put  (them)  in  your  vessels,  and  dwell  iu 

,  7  putteth  the  stumbling  block  of  his  in. 

comeliness,  which  I  had  put  upou  thee- 

put  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet,  and  cover 

to  putarollertobind  it,  tomakeit  strong 

I  will  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of 


Exod23- 
Job  = 
Psa. 

9- 
73- 

3- 


Jer. 


23.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  hw)  shuh,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  27  put  his  haud  to  his  mouth ;  and  his  eyes 

24.  To  set,  put,  place,  ri'ty  shith. 

Gen.    3.  15  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  w. 
30.  40  he  put  his  own  flocks  by  themselves 
30.  40  and  put  them  not  unto  Laban's  cattle 
46.    4  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes 
1  put  not  thine  hand  with  the  wicked  to  be 
36  Who  hath  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  pa.? 

6  thou  hast  put  all  (things)  under  his  feet 

20  Put  them  in  fear,  O  Lord  ;  (that)  the  na. 
28 1  have  put  my  trust  in  the  Lord  God,  that 
19  flow  shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children 

25.  To  send  forth,  rh#  sltalach. 

Exod22.    8  whether  he  have  put  his  hand  unto  his  n. 
22.  11  hath  not  put  his  hand  unto  his  neighbo. 
Judg.  5.  26  She  put  her  hand  to  the  nail,  and  her  ri. 
1  Sa.  17.  49  David  put  his  hand  in  his  bag,  and  took 

1  Ch.13.  10  because  he  put  his  hand  to  the  ark :  and 
Eze.     8.  17  and,  lo,  they  put  the  branch  to  then- nose 

26.7*0  send  forth,  nSy  shelach. 

Ezra  6. 12  people  that  shall  put  to  their  hand  to  al 

27.7*0  cast,  throw,  2nd,  $d\\oj  ballo. 

Matt.  9.  17  Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  b. 

9.  17  but  they  put  new  wine  into  new  bottles 

25.  27  Thou  oughtest  therefore  to  have  put  my 

27.   6  It  is  not  lawful  for  to  put  them  into  the 

Mark  2.  22  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles 

7.  33  put  his  fingers  into  his  ears,  and  he  spit 

Luke  5.  37  no  man  putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles 

John  5.    7  I  have  no  man.  .to  put  me  into  the  pool 

12.  6  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put  ther. 

13.  2  devil  having  now  put  into  the  heart  of  J. 
20.  25  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails 

Jas.    3.   3  we  put  bits  in  the  horses'  mouths,  that  t. 
Rev.    2.  24  I  will  put  upon  you  none  other  burden 

28.  To  give,  diSwfxt  diddmi. 

Lukeis.  22  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  (his) 

2  Co.  8. 16  which  put  the  same  earnest  care  into  the 
Heb.   8.  10  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and 

10.  16  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  hearts,  and 
Rev.  17.  17  For  God  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil 

29.  To  do,  make,  iroiiia  poieo. 

Acts    5.  34  commanded  to  put  the  apostles  forth  a  I. 

place,  ridfifii  titliemi. 

15  Neither  do  men  light  a  candle,  and  put 

18  I  "will  put  my  spirit  upon  him,  and  he  sh. 
3  put  (him)  in  prison  for  Herodias'  sake,  his 

21  Is  a  candle  brought  to  be  put  under  a  bu. 

16  put  (his)  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  t. 
16  covereth  it  with  a  vessel,  or  putteth  (it) 
33  when  he  hath  lighted  a  candle,  putteth 

19  Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and  put  (it)  on  the 

7  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  p. 

3  laid  hands  on  them,  and  put  (them)  in  h. 
iS  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles,  and  put 
25  men  whom  ye  put  in  prison  are  standing 

4  put  (him)  in  prison,  aud  delivered  (him) 
13  that  no  man  put  a  stumbling  block,  or  an 
25  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet 
13  not  as  Moses,  (which)  put  a  veil  over  his. 
12  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into  the 

9  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  he  put  in 

PUT  again,  to  — 

To  cause  to  tv/rn  lack,  y\v)  slmb,  5. 

Gen.  29.   3  put  the  stone  again  upon  the  well's  mouth 

Exod  4.    7  said.  Put  thine  hand  into  thy bosoni again 

4.    7  And  he  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom  again 

34.  35  Moses  put  the  veil  upon  his  face  again,  itn. 


30.  TV 

lit. 

Matt 

S- 

12. 

Marl 

4- 

TO. 

Xuke 

8. 

IT. 

John 

iq. 

Acts 

1. 

4- 

5- 

5- 

[2. 

Rom 

1  Co. 

IS- 

2  Co. 

iTi. 

T. 

Rev. 

TI. 

PUT 


788 


PUT 


PUT  altogether,  to  — 
To  gather,  P|D^  asaph. 

Gen.  42. 17  he  put  them  altogether  into  ward  three  d. 

PUT  apart,  to  — 

A  putting  or  driving  away,  fl^u  niddah. 

Lev.  15.  19  she  shall  be  put  apart  seven  days ;  and 

18.  19  as  long  as  she  is  put  apart  for  her  uncle. 

PUT  about,  or  asunder,  to  — 

1.  To  put  around,  7T€piri6T]/j.t  peHHthemi. 
Marki5. 17  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  at). 

2.  To  put  apart,  xmp'lfa  chorizo. 

Matt  19.   6  joined  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder 
Markio.   9  joined  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder 
PUT  (far,  far  away),  to  (be)  — 
l.To  cause  to  bum,  consume,  nya  baar,  3. 

Deut  13.  5  so  shalt  thou  put  the  evil  away  from  the 
17.  7  So  thou  shalt  put  the  evil  away  from  am. 
17.  12  and  thou  shalt  put  away  the  evil  from  I. 
19. 13  thou  shalt  put  away  (the  guilt  of)  innocent 

19.  19  so  shalt  thou  put  the  evil  away  from  am. 

21.  9  put  away  the  (guilt  of)  innocent  blood  fr. 
2i.  21  so  shalt  thou  put  evil  away  from  among 

22.  21  so  shalt  thou  put  evil  away  from  among 
22.  22  so  shalt  thou  put  away  evil  from  Israel 
22.  24  so  thou  shalt  put  away  evil  from  among 
24.    7  thou  shalt  put  evil  away  from  among  you 

Judg  20.  13  that  we  may.  .put  away  evil  from  Israel 
2  Ki.23. 24  Josiah  put  away,  that  he  might  perform 

2.  To  cast  out,  BH3  garash. 

Lev.  21.    7  neither  shall  they  take  a  woman  put  aw. 

Eze.  44.  22  nor  her  that  is  put  away ;  but  they  shall 
3.7*0  cattse  to  go  out,  ht,  yaisa,  5. 

Ezra  10.    3  covenant  with  our  God  to  put  away  all 
10. 19  gave  their  hands  that  they  would  put  aw. 

4.  To  drive  away,  nil  nadah,  3. 

Amos  6.    3  Ye  thatput  far  away  the  evil  day,  and  c. 

5.  To  cause  to  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  na:  natah,  5, 
Psa.  27.  9  put  not  thy  servant  away  in  anger:  thou 

6.  To  cause  to  turn  aside,  "AD  sur,  5. 

Geu.  35.    2  Put  away  the  strange  gods  that  (are)  am. 
Josh. 24.  14  put  away  the  gods  which  your  fathers  s. 
24.  23  put  away,  .the  strange  gods  which  (are) 
Judg  10.  16  put  away  the  strange  gods  from  among 

1  Sa.   1.  14  How  long  wilt  thou  be  drunken?  put  aw. 

7.   3  put  away  the  strange  gods  and  Ashtaroth 
7.    4  children  of  Israel  did  put  away  Baalim 
28.    3  Saul  had  put  away  those  that  had  famil. 

2  Sa.  7. 15  took  (it)  from  Saul,  whom  I  put  away  be. 
2  Ki.  3.  2  put  away  the  image  of  Baal  that  his  fath. 
Psa.  18.  22  and  I  did  not  put  away  his  statutes  from 
Prov.  4.  24  Put  away  from  thee  afrowardmouth.and 
Isa.  1.  16  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  b. 
Jer.  4.  1  if  thou  wilt  put  away  thine  abominations 
Hos.    2.    2  let  her  therefore  put  away  her  whoredoms 

7.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  "ay  abar,  5. 

2  Sa.  12.  13  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thy  sin;  thou 
2  Ch.15.    8  put  away  the  abominable  idols  out  of  all 
Esth.  8.    3  besought  him  with  tears  to  put  away  the 
Eccl.11.  10  put  away  evil  from  thy  flesh:  for  childh. 

8.  To  put  far  of,  prn  rachaq,  3. 

Eze.  43.    9  Now  let  them  put  away  their  whoredom 
9.7b  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Job   11. 14  put  it  far  away,  and  let  not  wickedness 
19. 13  He  hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me 
22.  23  thou  shalt  put  away  iniquity  far  from  thy 

Psa.  88.  8  Thou  hast  put  away  mine  acquaintance 
88. 18  Lover  and  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from 

Prov.  4.  24  a  froward  mouth,  and  perverse  lips  put  far 

10.  To  cause  to  rest  or  keep  sabbath,  ro*£'  shabath,  5. 
Exodi2.  15  even  the  first  day  ye  shall  put  away  leav. 
Psa. 119.  119  Thouputtest  away  all  the  wicked  of  the 

11.  To  send  forth,  rhy  shalach,  3. 

Deut  22.  19,  29  he  may  not  put  her  away  all  his  days 
Isa.   50.    1  whom  I  have  put  away?  or  which  of  my 
Jer.     3.    1  If  a  man  put  away  his  wife,  and  she  go 
3.    8  I  had  put  her  away,  and  given  her  a  bill 

12.ro  be  sent  forth,  nty  shalach,  4. 

Isa.   50.    1  foryom-transgressionsisyourmotherp. a. 

10.. I  putting  away,  rejecting,  aOerwo-ts  athetosis. 
He)).   9.  26  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 

14.  To  lift  up,  cupia  airo. 

Eph.  4.  31  Let  all  bitterness,  .be  put  away  from  you 

15.  To  loose  away,  clttoXvcc  apnluo. 

Matt.  1.  19  Joseph,  .was  minded  to  put  her'away  pr. 
5.  31  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  let 
5.  32  That  whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife 
ig.   3  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  w. 
19.   7  WhydidMosesthencommand.  .to  put  her 
19.   8  suffered  yon  to  put  awayyour  wives  :  but 
19.   9  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  exc. 
19.   9  whoso  marrieth  her  which  is  put  away  d. 
Markio.    2  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  (his) 
10.   4  they  said,  Moses  suffered .  .to  put  (her)  a. 
10.  11  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  and 
10.  12  if  a  woman  shall  put  away  her  husband 
Lukci6. 18  Whosoever  putteth  away  his  wife,  andm. 
16.  18  whosoever  marrieth  her  thai  is  put  away 

16.  To  put  away,  a-Kor[Qi)f.u  apotitheml. 

Eph.  4.  25  putting  away  lying,  speak  every  man  tr. 


17 '.To push  away,  aircoBew  apotheo. 

1  Ti.  1. 19  which  some  having  put  away,  concerning 

18.  To  send  away,  a<pi-nfii  aphiemi. 

1  Co.    7.  11  and  let  not  the  husband  put  away  (his) 

7.  12  let  him  not  put  her  away 

19.  To  take  out,  i^aipca  exairo, 

1  Co.   5. 13  Therefore  put  away  from  among  yourse. 

20.  To  make  thoroughly  idle  or  profitless,  Karapyew. 

1  Co.  13. 11  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  child. 
PUT  down,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  go  down,  tv  yarad,  5. 

Isa.   10. 13  I  have  put  down  the  inhabitants  like  a  v. 

2.  To  cause  to  turn  aside,  ~ud  sur,  5. 

2  Ch.36.   3  king  of  Egypt  put  him  down  at  Jerusale. 
3.7*o  cause  to  rest  or  keep  sabbath,  n^  shabath,  5. 

2  Kl  23.   5  put  down  the  idolatrous  priests,  whom  the 

4.  To  make  low  or  humble,  bzy  shajjJiel,  5. 

Psa.  75.   7  he  putteth  down  one,  and  setteth'up  ano. 

5.  To  make  low  or  humble,  hvy  sJiephel,  5. 

Dan.   5. 19  set  up,  and  whom  he  would  he  put  down 
6.7*o  take  down,  KaBaip4w  kathaireo. 

Luke  1.  52  He  hathput  down  the  mighty  from  (their) 

7.  To  make  thoroughly  idle  or  profitless,  Kdrapyew. 
1  Co.  15.  24  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule  and 

PUT  forth  (self),  to  (be)  — 

1.  What  in  cast  out,  produced,  cna  geresh. 
Deut33.  14  for  the  precious  things  put  forth  by  the 

2.  To  honour  self,  Tin  hadar,  7. 

Prov  25.   6  Put  not  forth  thyself  in  the  presence  of 

3.  To  put  forth  a  riddle,  ~nn  chud. 

Judg  14. 12  will  now  put  forth  a  riddle  unto  you:  if 
14. 13  Put  forth  thy  riddle,  that  we  may  hear  it 

14.  16  thou  hast  put  forth  a  riddle  unto  the  chi. 
Eze.  17.    2  put  forth  a  riddle,  and  spake  a  parable  un. 

4.  To  embalm,  ripen,  Bjn  chanat. 

Song  2.  13  fig  tree  putteth  forth  her  green  figs,  and 

5.  To  give,  ]T\i  nathan. 

Prov.  8.    1  Doth  not.  .understanding  put  forth  her 

6.  To  send  forth,  rhv  slialach. 

Gen.    3.  22  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  take  also 

8.  9  then  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  her 
19.  10  men  put  forth  their  hand,  and  pulled  Lot 

Exod.  4.    4  Put  forth  thine  hand.  .And  he  put  forth 
Deut25-  11  putteth  forth  her  hand,  and  taketh  him 
Judg.  3.  21  Ehud  put  forth  his  left  hand,  and  tookthe 
6.  21  put  forth  the  end  of  the  staff  that  (was) 

15.  15  put  forth  his  hand  and  took  it,  and  slew 

1  Sa.  14.  27  wherefore  he  put  forth  the  end  of  the  rod 

22. 17  servants  of  the  king  would  not  put  forth 
24.  10  will  not  put  forth  mine  hand  against  my 

2  Sa.  6.   6  Uzzah  put  forth  (his  hand)  to  the  ark  of 

15.    5  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  him,  and 

18.  12  would  I  not  put  forth  mine  hand  against 

1  Ki.13.   4  that  he  put  forth  his  hand  from  the  altar 

13.    4  his  hand,  which  he  put  forth  against  him 

1  Ch.13.   9  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  ark 

Job     1.  11  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch 

1.  12  only  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  h. 

2.  5  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch 
28.    9  He  putteth  forth  his  hand  upon  the  rock 

Psa.  55.  20  He  hathput  forth  his  hands  against  such 

125.    3  lest  the  righteous  put  forth  their  hands 
Jer.     1.    9  putforthhishand.andtouchedmymouth 
Eze.    8.    3  put  forth  the  form  of  an  hand,  and  took 

7.  To  cast  out,  itcpaAActj  ekballo. 

Matt.  9.  25  when  the  people  were  put  forth,  he  went 
Johmo.  4  when  he  putteth  forth  his  own  sheep,  he 
Acts    9.  40  Peterputtheniallforth.andkneeleddown 

8.  To  stretch  out,  e/creiVw  ektrino. 

Matt.  8.    3  Jesus  put  forth  (hU)  hand,  and  touched 
Mark  1  41  put  forth  (his)  hand,  and  touch  him,  and 
Luke  5.  13  put  forth  (his)  hand,  and  touched  him,  sa. 

9.  To  put  forth,  produce,  tKcpvta  ekphuo. 

Matt  24.  32  When  his  branch . .  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye 
Marki3.  28  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  putteth  forth  le. 

10.  To  say,  Aeyco  lego*. 

Lukei4.   7  put  forth  a  parable  to  those  which  were 

11.  To  put  alongside,  7rapari6v/j.i   paratitlumi. 
Matt  13.  24,  31  Another  parable  put  he  forth  unto  fch. 

PUT  forward,  from,  to  — 

1.7*0  push  away,  aircod€0/j.ai.  apotJicomai. 

Acts  13. 46  but  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  and  judge 
2.7*0  cast  forth,  irpo^aWw  proballo. 

Acts  19.  33  the  Jews  putting  him  forward.    And  Al. 
PUT  in,  to  — 
1.7*0  send  forth,  nty  shalach. 

Song  5.   4  My  beloved  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole 

Joel    3. 13  Put  ye  in  the  sickle  ;  for  the  harvest  is  r. 

2.7*0  send  forth,  rhy  shalach,  3. 

Exod22.  5  If  a  man.  .shall  put  in  his  beast,  and  shall 
3.7*0  send  forth  or  away,  aTroareWo}  apostello. 

Mark  4.  29  he  putteth  in  the  sickle,  because  the  har. 
4.7*0  cause  to  go  up  on,  or  into,  efifiipafa  embibazo. 

Acts  27.   6  found  a  ship  of  Alex. .  .and  he  put  us.  .in 


[See  also  Away  far,confidence,covering,death, difference 
far  away,  lower,  more,  order,  prison,  silence,  suretv' 
trust.]  J' 

[See  also  Array,  execution,  fear,  mind,  order,  remem- 
brance, subjection.] 

PUT  in  bands  or  in  mind,  to  — 
1.7*0  bind,  ~idn  asar. 

2  Ki.23. 33Fharaoh-nechohputhiminbands  atRiblah 
2.7*0  cause  to  remember  again,  iiravaixiyivi\o'Kw. 

Rom. 15.  15  putting  you  in  mind,  because  of  the  grace 
PUT  off,  to  — 
1.7*o  draw  off,  ybn  chalats. 

Isa.   20.   2  put  off  thy  shoe  from  thy  foot.     And  he 
2.7*0  cause  to  go  or  come  dovm,  TV  yarad,  5. 

Exod33.    5  therefore  now  put  off  thy  ornaments  from 
3.7*0  cover,  pardon,  -ids  kaphar,  3. 

Isa.    47.  1 1  thou  shalt  'not  be  able  to  put  it  off :  and 
4.  7*0  cast  off  or  out,  Van  nashal. 

Exod.3.   5  Draw  not  nigh  hither:  put  off  thy  shoes 
5.7*0  strip,  put  off,  vvs  pashat. 

Lev.    6.  11  he  shall  put  off  his  garments,  .and  carry 
16.  23  shall  put  off  the  linen  garments  whichhe 

Neh.   4.  23  none  of  us  put  off  our  clothes,  (saving  that) 

Song  5.    3  I  have  put  off  my  coat ;  how  shall  I 

Eze.  26.  16  put  off  their  broidered  garments  :  they 
44.  19  they  shallput  off  their  garments  wherein 
6. 7*o  open  up  or  out,  nrjs  pathach,  3. 

1  Ki,2o.  11  boast  himself  as  he  that  putteth  it  off 
Psa.  30.  11  thou  hast  put  off  my  sackcloth,  and  gir. 

7.  What  is  sent  or  put  forth,  rhe?  shelach, 

Neh.  4.  23  (saving  that)  every  one  put  them  off  for 

8.7*0   unclothe    oneself,    aireKbvouat  apekduomai. 
Col.    3.   9  seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man 

9.  A  putting  off,  airodeais  apothesis. 

2  Pe.    1.  14  Knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  off  (this) 

10.  To  put  away,  airoTldefiai  apotithemai. 

Eph.  4.  22  That  ye  put  off,  concerning  the  formerc. 
Col.     3.    8  But  now  ye  also  put  off  all  these  ;  anger 
11.7*o  loose,  Kvw  luo. 

Acts    7.  33  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  thy  feet :  for  the 
PUT,  must  be  — 
7*o  be  thrown  or  cast,  fiArjTsov  bleteon. 

Mark  2. 22  [but  new  wine  must  be  put  into  newbot.] 
Luke  5.  38  But  new  wine  must  be  put  into  new  bot. 
PUT  on  or  upon,  to  — 
1.7*o  clothe,  vih  labesh. 

Gen.  28.  20  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  o. 
38. 19  and  put  on  the  garments  of  her  widowhood 
Exod29-  30  shall  put  them  on  seven  days,  when  hec. 
Lev.    6.  id  priestshall  put  on  his  linen  garment,  and 
6.  10  his  linen  breeches  shall  he  put  upon  his 
6.  11  put  on  other  garments,  and  carry  forth 
16.    4  He  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  coat,  and 
16.    4  washhisfleshinwater,and(so)putthemo. 
16.  23  linen  garments  which  he  put  on  when  he 
16.  24  put  on  his  garments,  and  come  forth,  and 
Lev.  16.  32  put  on  the  linen  clothes,  (even)  the  holy 
21.  10  that  is  consecrated  to  put  on  the  garme. 
Deut22.    5  neither  shall  a  man  put  on  a  woman's  g. 

1  Sa.  28.    8  put  on  other  raiment,  and  he  went,  and 

2  Sa.  14.    2  put  on  now  mourning  apparel,  and  ano. 

1  Ki.22.  30  enter  into  the  battle ;  but  put  thou  on  thy 

2  Ch.18.  29  will  go  to  the  battle;  but  put  thou  on  thy 
Esth.  4.    1  put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes,  and  went  out 

5.    1  Esther  put  on  (her)  royal  (apparel),  and 
Job  27.  17  prepare  (it),  but  the  just  shall  put  (it)  on 
29.  14  I  put  on  righteousness,  and  it  clothed  me 
Song  5.    3  how  shall  I  put  it  on?  I  have  washed  my 
Isa.  51.   9  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord;  a.! 
52.    1  put  on  thy  strength,  O  Zion  ;  put  on  thy 
59. 17  For  he  put  on  righteousness  as  a  breast 
59.  17  and  he  put  on  the  garments  of  vengeance 
Jer.  46.    4  furbish  the  spears,  (and)  put  on  the  brig. 
Eze.  42. 14  shall  put  on  other  garments,  and  shall  ap. 
44.  19  shall  put  on  other  garments ;  and  they  s. 
Jon.    3.   s  put  on  sackcloth,  from  the  greatest  of  th. 

2.  7*o  be  clotJied,  vib  labesh,  4. 

1  Ki.22.  10  having'put  on  their  robes,  in  a  void  place 

3.  To  clothe  one,  C07  labesh,  5. 

Exod29.    8  shalt  bring  his  sons,  and  put  coats  upon 
Lev.    8. 13  put  coats  upon  them,  and  girded  them 

4.  7*o  cover,  wrap  up,  veil,  naj;  atah. 

Jer.  43. 12  as  a  shepherd  putteth  on  his  garment ;  and 
5. 7*o  cause  to  go  up,  rhy  alah,  5. 

2  Sa.    1.  24  who  put  on  ornaments  of  gold  upon  your 
G.7*o  set,  put,  place,  cy,  Dib'  sum,  sim. 

Numi6.  46  put  on  incense,  and  go  quickly  unto  the 
7. 7*o  set,  put,  place,  nv  shith. 

Exod33-   4  and  no  man  did  put  on  him  his  ornaments 
8.7*o  clothe,  go  into  clothing,  eVSvcw  c?idud. 

Matt.  6.  25  Take  no  thought,  .what  ye  shall  put  on 

27.  31  put  his  own  raiment  on  him,  and  led  him 
Mark  6.   9  shod  with  sandals ;  and  not  put  on  twoc. 

15.  20  put  his  own  clothes  on  him,  and  led  him 
Lukei2.  22  neither  for  the  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on 

15.  22  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  (it)  on 
rionii3.  13  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light 

13.  14  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  m. 
1  Co. 15.  53  this  corruptible  mustputonincorruption 

15.  53  and  this  mortal  (must)  put  on  immortality 


PUT 


789 


QUEEN 


i  Co.  15.  54  So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put 

15.  54  thisnaortaLshall  have  put  on  immortality 
Gal.  3.  27  For  as  many  of  you.  .have  put  on  Christ 
Eph.    4.  24  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after 

6. 11  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye 
Col.    3.  10  have  put  on  the  new  (man),  which  is  reu. 

3. 12  Put  on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy 
1  Th.  5.    8  putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love 

9.  To  put  upon,  iieiriBt\fii  epitithemi. 

Matt  19. 13  that  he  should  put  (his)  hands  on  them 
21.  7  put  on  them  their  clothes,  and  they  set 
27.  29  they  put  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  a  reed  in 

Mark  7.  32  they  beseech  him  to  put  his  hand  upon 
8.  23  when  he  had.  .put  his  hands  upon  him,  he 

8.  25  After  that  he  put  (his)  hands  again  [upon] 
John  9.  15  He  put  clay  upon  mine  eyes,  and  I  washed 

19.  2  soldiers  platted  a  crown,  .and  put  (it)  on 
Acts   9.  12  putting  (his)  hand  on  him,  that  he  might 

9.  17  putting  his  hands  on  him,  said,  Brothers. 
15. 10  to  put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disci. 

10.  To  cast  around,  TrepifidWco  periballO. 

Johmg.    2  on  his  head,  and  they  put  on  him  a  purple 

11.  To  put  around,  iv^ptTiQyjfxt  peritithenu. 

Matt  27.  28  they  stripped  him,  and  put  on  him  a  sea. 
27.  48  put  (it)  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink 

Markt5.  36  put  (it)  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink 

John  19.  29  put  (it)  upon  hyssop,  and  put  (it)  to  his 
PUT  on,  to  be  able  to  — 
To  gird,  be  restrained,  i:n  chagar. 

2  Ki.  3.  21  gathered  all  that  were  able  to  put  on  ar. 
PTJT  on  account,  to  — 
To  reckon  in,  bring  into  the  account,  tWoyeoc. 

Phm.      1 8  If  he . .  oweth . .  ought,  put  that  on  mine  a. 
PTJT  out,  to  — 
l.To  quench,  rna  kabah,  3. 

2  Ch.29.   7  put  out  the  lamps,  and  have  not  burnt  in. 

Eze.  32.    7  when  I  shall  shall  put  thee  out,  I  will  cover 

2.  To  wipe  away,  blot  out,  nrrci  machah. 

Exodi7. 14  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  Am. 
Psa.    9.   5  thou  hast  put  out  their  name  for  ever  and 

3.  To  pick  out,  pierce,  npj  naaar,  3. 

Nunii6.  14  wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of  these  men  ? 
Judgi6.  21  Philistiues  took  him,  and  put  out  his  eyes 
4.7*o  cast  out  or  off,  V^J  naslial, 

Deut.  7.  22  will  put  out  those  nations  before  thee  by 

5.  To  blind,  Ttfj  avar,  3. 

2  Ki.  25.    7  put  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah,  and  bound 

Jer.  39.   7  Moreover  he  put  out  Zedekiah's  eyes,  and 

52. 11  then  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah;  and 

6.  To  send  forth,  n^s?  shalach. 

2  Sa.  13.  17  Put  now  this  (woman)  out  from  me,  and 
2  Ki.  6.   7  And  he  put  out  his  hand,  and  took  it 
1  .To  send  forth,  rhy  shalach,  3. 

Num.  5.   2  that  they  put  out  of  the  camp  every  leper 
5.    3  Both  male  and  female  shall  ye  put  out 
5.  4  did  so,  and  put  them  out  without  the  ca. 

8.  To  cast  out,  iKpdAAco  ekballo. 

Mark  5.  40  when  he  had  put  them  all  out,  he  taketh 
Luke  8.  54  [he  put  them  all  out,  and  took  her  by  the] 

9.  To  remove,  transfer,  (x^ia-raw  methistano. 
Lukei6.   4  when!  am  put  outof  the  stewardship,  th. 

PTJT  out,  to  be — 

l.To  be  extinguislied,  7|J,H  daak. 

Job  18.  5  light  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out,  and 
18.  6  and  his  candle  shall  be  put  out  with  him 
21. 17  How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the  wicked  put  o. 
Prov  13.  9  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 
20.  20  lamp  shall  be  put  out  iu  obscure  darkness 
24.  20  the  candle  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 

2.  To  be  quenched,  rns  kabah. 

Lev.    6. 12  fire  upon  the  altar,  .shall  not  be  put  out 

3.  To  be  wiped  away,  blotted  out,  nno  machah,  2. 
Deut25.   6  that  his  name  be  not  put  out  of  Israel 

[See  also  Confusion,  death,  flight,  grief,  shame,  worse.] 

PTJT  to  or  unto,  to  — 

l.To  set, put,  place,  mty  D\&  sum,  sim. 

Num.  4.  11,  14  they  shall  spread,  .and  put  to  the  st. 

2.  To  cast  or  throw  upon,  4irt.j3d\\co  epiballo. 

Matt.  9. 16  putteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  unto  an  old 

Luke  5. 36  No  man  putteth  apiece  of  anew  gar.  up. 

9.  62  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plo. 

3.  To  bear  toward,  irpoatyepo)  prosjjhero. 

John  19.  29  filled  a  sponge . .  and  put  (it)  to  his  mouth 
PUT  to  death,  to  — 
l.To  kill  to  death,  rno  5"in  harag  maveth. 

Jer.  18.  21  let  their  men  be  put  to  death ;  (let)  their 
2.To  lead  away,  destroy,  a-n-dyw  apago. 

Acts  T2. 19  commanded  that(they)6houldbeputtod. 
PTJT  to  more  strength,  to  — 
To  use  might,  T3|  gabar,  3. 

Eccl.  10. 10  then  must  he  put  to  more  strength :  but 
PTJT  to  silence,  to  — 
To  cause  to  be  dumb,  Den  damain,  5. 

Jer.     8. 14  for  the  Lord  out  God  hath  put  us  to  sile. 
PTJT  under,  to  — 
To  arrange  or  set  in  array  under,  {rjroTd<raco  hup. 

1  Co.  15.  27  For  he  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet 


1  Co.  15.  27  saith,  All  things  are  put  under  (him,  it  is) 
15.  27  is  excepted  which  did  put  all  things  under 
15.  28  unto  him  that  put  all  things  under  him 

Eph.  1.  22  hath  put  all  (things)  under  bis  feet,  and 

Heb.   2.   8  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him 
PTJT  under,  not  — 
Xot  put  or  arranged  under,  awiroraKT6s  anupot. 

Heb.  2.    8  he  left  nothing  (that  is)  not  put  under  him 
PTJT  up  self,  to  — 
To  be  gathered,  *]px  asaph,  2. 

Jer.  47.   6  Put  up  thyself  into  thy  scabbard,  rest,  and 
PTJT  (up)  again,  to  — 
l.To  cause  to  turn  back,  39»  shub,  5. 

1  Ch.21.  27  put  up  his  sword  again  into  the  sheath  t. 

2.  To  turn  from,  aTroo-Tp4<po)  apostrepho. 

Matt  26.  52  Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place  :  for 

3.  To  cast,  throw,  @d\\w  ballo. 

JohmS.  11  Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath:  thee. 
PTJT  up  in  bags,  to  — 
To  compass,  bind  up,  "fiztsur. 

2  Ki.12. 10  they  put  up  in  bags,  and  told  the  money 
PTJT,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  caused  to  go  in,  N13  bo,  6. 

Exod27.    7  staves  shall  be  put  into  the  rings,  and  the 
Lev.  11.  32  it  must  be  put  into  water,  and  it  shall  be 

2.7*0  be  added ,  H?'  y asaph,  2. 

Nuni36.  3  shall  be  put  to  the  inheritance  of  thetribe 
36.   4  then  shall  their  inheritance  be  put  unto 

3.  To  (cause  to*)  add,  f]p;  yasaph,  5. 

Eccl.  3.  14  nothing  can  be  put  to  it,  nor  any  thing  t. 

4.  To  put,  place,  bfcn  yasam. 

Gen.  50.  26  and  he  was  put  in  a  coffin  in  Egypt 
5. 7*0  be  brought  nigh,  &n  nagash,  6. 

2  Sa.   3.  34  hands  (were)  not  bound,  nor  thy  feet  put 
6. 7*0  be  given,  ]m  nathan,  2. 

2  Ch.  2. 14  find  out  every  device  which  shall  be  put 

Eze.  32.  25  he  is  put  iu  the  midst  of  (them  that  be)  s. 
7.7*0  be  caused  to  give,  ]m  nathan,  6. 

Lev.  11.  38  if  (any)  water  be  put  upon  the  seed,  and 

8.  To  give,  jru  nathan. 

Nuinig.  17  running  water  shall  be  put  thereto  in  a  v. 

9.  To  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

1  Ch.27.  24  neither  was  the  number  put  in  the  account 
PU-TE-O'-LI,  TIoTioAoi. 

A  seaport  of  Campania  in  Italy,  six  miles  "W.  of  Naples ; 
once  called  Dicas-archia,  now  Pozzuoli  ;  it  was  founded 
by  a  colony  of  Samians,  B.C.  521  ;  in  215  fortified  against 
Hannibal ;  in  212  became  the  chief  port  of  the  Roman 
army.  In  A.D.  16  it  was  passed  by  Paul  on  his 
way  to  Rome ;  in  410  was  captured  by  Alaric  ;  in  455  by 
Genseric  ;  iu  515  by  Totila  ;  in  1119  it  was  destroyed  by 
an  eruption  of  the  Solfatara,  and  in  1538  by  a  volcanic 
disturbance  of  the  Monte  Nuova. 

Acts  28. 13  and  we  came  the  next  day  to  P. 
PU-TI'-EL,  *?x*ui3  God  enlightens. 
Father  in  law  of  Eleazar,  son  of  Aaron.    B.  c.  1500. 

Exod  6.  25  Aaron's  son,  took  him ..  daughters  of  P. 
PTJTRLfc'ViNG  — 
Fresh,  raw,  torn,'"'*®  tori. 

Isa.    1.   6  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrifying  sores 
PUTTING  (away,  forth,  off,  on,  upon)  - 
1.7*0  give,  fru  nathan. 

Lev.  16.  21  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat 
2.  7*o  send  forth,  rhv?  shalach. 

Isa.   58.   9  putting  forth  of  the  finger,  and  speaking 
3.7*o  send  forth,  nSa1  shalach,  3. 

Mai.    2.  16  saith  that  he  hateth  putting  away :  for 
i.A  stripping  off  or  away,  airefcSvo-is  apekdusis. 

Col.     2. 11  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the 
5.^4  putting  off  or  away,  air6d€o~L$  apothesis. 

1  Pe.  3.  21  not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  fl. 
6.^4  puttting  on,  going  into,  frtivtris  endusis. 

1  Pe.  3.    3  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of  app. 
7.  A  putting  on  or  upon,  <M0eim  epithesis. 

2  Ti.     1.6  which  is  in  thee  by  the  putting  on  of  my 
PYGARG  — 

Dishon,  byson,  pygarg,  |it?,i  dishon. 

Deutli4-    5  the  pygarg,  and  the  wild  ox,  and  the  cha. 


Q 

QUAILS  — 

A  quail,  vhi?,  lSe'  selav. 

£xodi6. 13  at  even  the  quails  came  up,  and  covered 

Numn.  31  brought  quails  from  the  sea,  andlet(them) 
11.  32  gathered  the  quails  :  he  that  gathered  le. 

Psa.  105.  40  brought  quails,  and  satisfied  them  with 
QUAKE,  to  — 
1.  To  tremble,  trouble  self,  Tin  charad. 

Exodio.  18  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  greatly 


2.  To  be  angry,  troubled,  to  tremble,  lrj  ragaz. 

1  Sa.  14. 15  and  the  earth  quaked  :  so  it  was  a  very  gr 
Joel    2. 10  earth  shall  quake  before  them ;  the  hea.' 

3.  To  slmlce,  tremble,  tpjri  raash. 

Nan.    1.   5  mountains  quake  at  him,  and  the  hills  m. 

4.  To  slialce,  trouble,  disturb,  o-eia  seio. 

Matt  27.  51  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent 

5.  To  be  frightened,  terrified,  el/il  en-po^os  eimi  ent. 

Heb  12. 21  Moses  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake 
QUAKING  — 
l.Trembling,  fear,  trouble,  rmn  charadah. 

Dan.  10.   7  a  great  quaking  felT  upon  them,  so  that 
2.  A  shaking,  trembling,  vy-\  raash. 

Eze.  12.  18  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking,  and  drink 
QUARREL  — 

1.  Vengeance,  oc;  naqam. 

lev.  26.  25  shall  avenge  the  quarrel  of  (my)  covenant 

2.  Blame,  complaint,  /lo/upfi  niomphe. 

Col.    3. 13  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any 
QUARREL  against,  to  have  or  seek  a  — 
l.To  present  self,  seek  a  quarrel,  n;x  anah,  7. 

2  Ki.  5.   7  see  how  he  seeketh  a  quarrel  against  me 
2.To  hold  in,  €pe'xw  enecho. 

Mark  6. 19  Herodias  had  a  quarrel  against  him.  and 
QUARRIES  — 
Graven  images,  D'7'p?  pesilim. 

Judg.  3.  19  from  the  quarries  that  (were)  by  Gilgal 
3.  26  passed  beyond  the  quarries,  and  escaped 
QUARTER  — 
1. Border,  ?U3  gebul. 

Exodi3.   7  neither . .  leaven  seen . .  in  all  thy  quarters 

2.  Thigh,  .Tin:  yarkah. 

Eze.  38.   6  house  of  Togarmah  of  the  north  quarters 

3.  Wing,  f]J3  kanaph. 

Deut22.  12  make  thee.. upon  the  four  quarters  of  thy 

4.  Side,  border,  -QS  eber. 

Isa.  47. 15  they  shall  wander  every  one  to  his  quar. 
^.Corner,  nss  pea/i. 

Num.34.   3  south  quarter  shall  be  from  the  wildern. 
Josh.  15.    5  border  in  the  north  quarter  (was)  from 
18.  14  Kirjath-jeariru . .  this  (was)  the  west  quar. 
18. 15  And  the  south  quarter(was)  from  the  end 
6. End,  extremity,  n^ij  qatsah. 

Jer.  49.  36  the  four  winds  from  the  four  quarters  of 

7.  End,  extremity,  nxp  qatseh. 

Gen.  19.  4  old  and  young,  .people  from  every  quart. 
Isa.   56. 11  every  one  for  his  gain,  from  his  quarter 

8.  Wind,  nvi  ruach. 

1  Ch.  9.  24  In  four  quarters  were  the  porters,  toward 

9.  Corner,  angle,  juivia  gonia. 

Rev.  20.   8  which  are  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  ea. 
10. Place,  toVos  toiios. 

Acts  16.    3  of  the  Jews  which  were  in  those  quarters 

28.  7  In  the  same  quarters  were  possessions  of 
QUARTER,  from  every  — 

From  every  place,  iravTa.x&8tv  panlachothen. 

Mark  1.  45  and  they  came  to  him  from  every  quarter 
QUARTUS,  Kovapros  fourth. 
A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom.  16.  23  Erastus . .  saluteth  you,  and  Q.  a  brother 
QUATERNION  — 
A  company  of  four,  TtrpaSiov  letradion. 

Acts  12.   4  four  quaternions  of  soldiers  to  keep  him 
QUEEN  — 
l.Mighty  one,  mistress,  iri'33  gebirah. 

1  Ki.n.  19  to  wife.. the  sister  of  Tahpenes  the  queen 

15. 13  her  he  removed  from  (being)  queen,  bee. 

2  Ki.  10.  13  go  down  to  salute . .  the  children  of  the  q. 
2  Ch.15. 16  he  removed  her  from  (being)  queen,  bee. 
Jer.  13.  18  Say  unto  the  king  and  to  the  queen,  Hu. 

29.  2  the  queen,  and  the  eunuchs,  and  the  pri. 
2.  A  queen,  nshri  malkah. 

1  Ki.io.    1  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fa. 

10.  4  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  bad  seen  all  So. 
10.  10  which  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  to  king  S 
10.  13  Solomon  gave  unto  the  queen  of  Shebaall 

2  Ch.  9.    1  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fa. 

9.  3  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  had  seen  the  wi. 
9.  9  as  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  king  Solomon 
9.  12  Solomon  gave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba  all 
Estll.  1.  9  Vashti  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  the  w. 
1. 11  To  bring  Vashti  the  queen  before  the  king 
1.  12  queen  Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  kin. 

1. 15  What  shall  we  do  unto  the  queen  Vashti 

1. 16  the  queen  hath  not  done  wrong  to  the 

1.  17  (tins)  deed  of  the  queen  shall  come  abroad 
1.  17  Ahasuerus  commanded  Vashti  the  queen 
1. 18  which  have  heard  of  the  deed  of  the  que. 
2.22  who  told  (it)  unto  Esther  the  queen  ;  and 

4.  4  Then  was  the  queen  exceedingly  grieved 

5.  2  Esther  the  queen  standing  in  the  court 
5.  3  What  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther  ?  and  what 
5.  12  the  queen  did  let  no  man  come  in  with  t. 
7.  1  Haman .  .to  banquet  with  Esther  the  qu. 
7.  2  What  (is)  thy  petition,  queen  Esther?  and 
7.   3  Esther  the  queen  answered  and  said,  If  I 


QUEEN 


790 


QUIT 


Esth.  7.  5  answered  and  aaid  unto  Esther  the  queen 
7.  6  was  afraid  before  the  king  and  the  queen 
7.    7  request  for  his  life  to  Esther  the  queen 

7.  8  Will  he  force  the  queen  also  before  me 

8.  1  the  house  of  Haman.  .unto  Esther  the  q. 

8.  7  king  Ahasuerus  said  unto  Esther  the  qu. 
9. 12  And  the  king  said  unto  Esther  the  queen 

9.  29  Then  Esther  the  queen,  the  daughter  of 
9.  31  and  Esther  the  queen  had  enjoined  them 

Song  6.    8  Thereare  threescore  queens,  and  fourscore 

6.    g  the  queens,  and  the  concubines,  and  th. 

Dan.    5. 10  the  queen,  by  reason  of  the  words  of  the 

5. 10  the  queen  spake,  and  said,  0  king,  live  for 

Z.Queen,  rg^iD  meleketh. 

Jer.     7. 18  to  makecakes  to  thequeen  of  heaven, and 
44. 17,  i8, 19,  25  incense  unto  the  queen  of  hea. 

4.A  princess,  rri^  sarah. 

Isa.  49.  23  and  their  queens  thy  nursing  mothers 

5. A  wife,  queen,  b$  shegal. 

Neh.  2.  6 the  kiiig  said,  .the  queen  also  sitting  by 
Psa.  45.    9  right . .  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  Op. 

6. A  queen,  {3ao-i\nT(ra  basilissa. 

Matti2.  42  The  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in 
Luken,  31  The  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in 
Acts  8.  27  under  Candace  queen  of  the  Ethiopians 
Rev.  18,    7  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall 

QUEEN,  to  be  or  make  — 

l.To  be  queen,  to  reign,  =]?n  malak. 

Esth.  2.    4  let  the  maiden  which  pleaseth.  .be  queen 
2.To  make  queen,  to  cause  to  reign,  ^]Sp  malak,  5. 

Esth.  2. 17  the  king.,  made  her  queen  instead  of  Va. 
QUENCH,  to  — 
l.To  quench,  nas  kcibah,  3. 

2  Sa.  14.  7  so  they  shall  quench  my  coal  which  is  1. 
21.  17  go.  .that  thou  quench  not  the  light  of  I. 

Song   8.    7  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither 

Isa.     1.  31  and  the  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench 

42,  3  burn  together,  and  none  shall  quench  (t.) 
Jer.     4.    4  burn  that  none  can  quench  (it),  because  of 

21. 12  burn  that  none  can  quench  (it),  because 
Amos  5.    6  and  (there  be)  none  to  quench  (it)  in  Be. 

2.  To  break  in  pieces,  destroy,  13^  shabar. 

Psa.  104. 11  They  give  drink,  .the  wild  asses  quench 

3.  To  quench,  tj&twvfAi  sbennumi. 

Matti2.  20  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  till  he 
Mark  9.  44,  46,  43  [Where,  .the  fire  is  not  quenched] 
Eph.  6.  16  to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked 

1  Th.  5.  19  Quench  not  the  spirit 

Heb.11.  34  Quenched  the  violence  of  fire.escapedthe 
QUENCHED,  (not)  to  be  — 
l.To  be  extinguished,  tjsr  daak,  4. 

Psa. 118. 12  they  are  quenched  as  the  fire  of  thorns 

2.  To  be  quenched,  n33  kabah. 

2  Ki.22.  17  therefore  my  wrath,  .shall  not  be  quen. 
2  Ch.34.  25  therefore  my  wrath,  .shall  not  be  quen. 
Isa.   34.  10  It  shall  not  be  quenched  night  nor  day 

43.  17  they  are  extinct,  they  are  quenched  as  tow 
66.  24  neither  shall  their  fire  be  quenched  ;  and 

Jer.     7.  20  it  shall  burn,  and  shall  not  be  quenched 

17.  27  shall  devour,  .and  it  shall  not  be  quenched 
Eze.  20.  47  the  flaming  flame  shall  not  be  quenched 

20.  48  have  kindled  it :  it  shall  not  be  quenched 

S.To  sink,  ypj  shaqa. 

Nuiuii.    2  when  Moses  prayed,  .the  fire  was  quen. 

4.  Unquenched,  unquenclutble,  &<r&e<TTos  asbestos. 
Mark  9.  43,  45  [the  fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched] 

QUESTION,  (hard)  — 

l.A  word,  matter,  thing,  "i3"i  dabar. 

1  Ki.  10.    3  And  Solomon  told  her  all  her  questions 

2  Oh.  9.    2  And  Solomon  told  her  all  her  questions 

2. Acute  saying,  hidden  thing,  fiTp  chidah. 

t  Ki.  10.  1  she  came  to  prove  him  with  hard  quest. 
2  Ch.  9.    1  came  to  prove  Solomon  with  hard  ques. 

3,  Question,  enquiry,  (itr-njxa  zetema. 

Acts  15.    2  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  .about  this  question 

18.  15  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  names 
23.  29  When  I  perceived  to  be  accused  of  ques. 
25. 19  had  certain  questions  against  him  of  their 
26.   3  and  questions  which  are  among  the  Jews 

4. A  question,  questioning,  enquiry,  tyr-nats  zetesis. 
John  3.25  Then  there  arose  a  question  between  (some) 
Acts  25.  20  because  I  doubted  of  such  manner  of  qu. 

1  Ti.    1.    4  endless  genealogies,  which  minister  que. 

6.    4  doting  about  questions  and  strifes  of  words 

2  Ti.  2.  23  unlearnedquestionsavoid.knowingthat 
Titus  3.   9  foolish  questions,  and  genealogies,  and 

5.vl  word,  matter,  thing,  \6yos  logos. 

Markn.  29  I  will  also  ask  of  you  one  question,  and 
QUESTION  (with),  call  in,  ask,  one  with  another,  to  — 
l.To  seek,  enquire,  require,  cm  darash. 

2  Ch.31.    g  Hezekiah  questioned  with  the  priests  and 
2.  To  call  into  (court),  2yica\ew  cijkaleo. 

Acts  19.  40  to  be  called  in  question  for  this  day's 
2. To  ask  upon  or  about,  ewepcoTdaj  eperotao. 

Luke  2.  46  both  hearing  them,  and  asking  them  qu. 

23.  g  he  questioned  with  him  in  many  words 
4.2*0  judge,  Kpivco  hrino. 

Acts  23.  6  hope.  ,of  the  dead  I  am  called  in  question 

24.  21  Touching,  .the  dead  I  am  called  in  ques. 


5. To  seek  together,  <rvQt)ri(a  suzeteo. 

Mark  1.  27  they  questioned  among  themselves,  say. 

8.  11  began  to  question  with  him,  seeking  of  him 

9.  10  questioning  one  with  another  what  the 

9.  14  hesaw.  .the  scribes  questioning^  ith  them 
9. 16  he  asked.  .What  question  ye  with  them  ? 

QUICK  — 

1.  Alive,  living,  "0  chai. 

Num  16.  30  and  they  go  down  quick  into  the  pit ;  then 

Psa.  55.  1 5  (and)  let  them  go  down  quick  into  hell :  for 

124.   3  they  had  swallowed  us  up  quick,  when  th. 

2. Quickening,  life  giving, preserving,  n;rjD  michyah. 

Lev.  13. 10  and  (there  be)  quick  raw  flesh  in  the  rising 

13.  24  the  quick  (flesh)  that  burnetii  have  a  white 

3.  To  live,  have  life,  fcfo  zao. 

Acts  10.  42  he.  .(to  be)  the  Judge  of  the  quick  and  d. 
2  Ti.    4.    1  who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 
Heb.  4. 12  the  word  of  God  (is)  quick,  and  powerful 
1  Pe.  4.    5  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 

QUICKEN  (together  with),  he  quickened,  to  — 
l.To  keep,  preserve  07'  give  life,  rrrn  chayah,  3. 
Psa.  71.  20  shalt  quicken  me  again,  and  shalt  bring 
80.  18  quicken  us,  and  we  will  call  upon  thy  n, 
119.  25  quicken  thou  me  according  to  thy  word 
119.  37  Turn  away  mine  eyes,  .quicken  thou  me 
119.40  Behold,  .quicken  me  in  thy  righteousness 
1 19.  50  my  comfort . .  for  thy  word  hath  quickened 
119.  88  Quicken  me  after  thy  loving  kindness;  so 
119.  93  for  witli  them  thou  hast  quickened  me 
119.  107  quicken  me,  O  LORD,  according  unto  thy 
119. 149  Lord,  quicken  me  according  to  thy  judg. 
119.  154  deliver,  .quicken  me  according  to  thy  w. 
119.  156  quicken  me  according  to  thy  judgments 
119.  159  quicken  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  thy 
143.  11  Quicken  me,  0  Lord,  for  thy  name's  sake 

%To  give  or  preserve  life,  faoirotea  zdopoieo. 

John  5.  21  raiseth  up  the  dead,  and  quickeneth  (th.) 
5.  21  even  so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will 
6. 63  It  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth ;  the  flesh 

Rom.  4.  17  who  quickeneth  the  dead,  aud  calleth  t. 

8.  11  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by 
1  Co.  1 5.  36  that  which  thou  so  west  is  not  quickened 

15.  45  last  Adam  (was  made)  a  quickening  spirit 
1  Ti.  6. 13  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  [quickeneth]  all 
1  Pe.  3.  18  put  to  death.,  but  quickened  by  the  spirit 

3.  To  give  or  preserve  life  together,  cvfaoiroieto. 
Eph.  2.    5  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ 
Col.    2. 13  hath  he  quickened  together  with  him,  ha. 

QUICKLY  — 

1.  Might,  with  might,  "litp  meod. 

1  Sa.20. 19  thou  shalt  go  down  quickly,  and  come  to 

2.  Hasting,  hastily,  inn  maker. 

Exod32.   S  They  have  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the 

Deut.  9.    3  destroy  them  quickly,  as  the  Lord  hath 

9. 12  Arise,  get  thee  down  quickly  from  hence 

9.  12  they  are  quickly  turned  aside  out  of  the 
9.  16  ye  had  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the 

28.  20  until  thou  perish  quickly  ;  because  of  the 
Josh.  2.    5  pursue  after  them  quickly  ;  for  ye  shall 
Judg.  2.  17  they  turned  quickly  out  of  the  way  which 

3.  Haste,  rnno  meherah. 

Num.16.  46  go  quickly  unto  the  congregation,  andm. 
Deut  11, 17  ye  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good  land 
Josh.  8. 19  ambush  arose  quickly  out  of  their  place 

10.  6  come  up  to  us  quickly,  and  save  us,  and 
23.  16  ye  shall  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good 

2  Sa.  17. 16  send  quickly,  and  tell  David,  saying,  Lo. 

17. 18  they  went  both  of  them  away  quickly,  and 
17.  21  pass  quickly  over  the  waters  for  thus  ha. 
2  Ki.  1.  11  thus  hath  the  king  said,  Come  down  qui. 
Eccl.  4,12  a  three  fold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken 
i.To  hasten,  make  haste,  TD  mahar,  3. 

Gen.  27.  20  How  (is  it),  .thou  hast  found  (it)  so  quic. 
5. Quickly,  speedily  rax^s  tacheos. 

Lukei4.  21  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes 

16.  6  Take  thy  bill,  and  sit  down  quickly,  and 

6.  Afore  quickly  or  speedily,  rdxtou  tachion. 

Johni3.  27  Theu  said  Jesus.  .That  thou  doest,  do  q. 
7. In  or  with  speed,  iv  rdx^t  en  tachei. 

Acts  12.   7  and  raised  him  up,  saying,  Arise  up  quic. 
22.  18  get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem  :  fort. 
S.Qnickly,  speedily,  rax&  tachu. 

Matt.  5.  25  Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly  whi. 
28.    7  go  quickly,  and  tell  his  disciples  that  he 
28.   8  they  departed  quickly  from  the  sepulchre 
Mark  16.    8  they  went  out  [quickly]  and  fled  from  t. 
Johnii.  29  As  soon  as  she  heard,  .she  arose  quickly 
Rev.   2.    5  I  will  come  unto  thee  [quickly],  and  will 
2. 16 1  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will 
3.  11  I  come  quickly  :  hold  that  fast  which  th. 
11. 14  (and),  behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  qui, 
22.    7  I  come  quickly :  blessed  (is)  he  that  kee. 
22. 12  I  come  quickly;  and  my  reward  (is)  with 
22.  20  I  come  quickly.    Amen.    Even  so,  come 
QUICKLY,  to  fetch  or  make  ready  — 
To  make  haste,  came  to  make  haste,  inn  mahar,  3. 
Gen.  18.    6  Make  ready  quickly  three  measures  of  fi. 
2  Ch.18.   8  Fetch  quickly  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imla 
QUICKSANDS  — 
A  sand  bank,  quicksand,  avpris  surtis. 

Acts  27. 17  lest  they  should  fall  into  the  quicksands 


QUIET  (that  are),  at  — 

I.  Rest,  place  of  rest,  nrrnp  menuchah. 

Jer.  51. 59  And  (this)  Seraiah  (was)  a  quiet  prince 
2. Descent,  rest,  quietness,  T\ni  nachath. 

Eccl.  9. 17  The  words  of  wise  (men  are)  heard  in  qu. 

3.  Quiet,  yrj  ragea. 

Psa.  35. 20  against  (them  that  are)  quiet  in  the  land 
4. Quiet,  ease,  ]w#  shaanan. 

Isa.  32. 18  sure  dwellings,  and  in  quiet  resting  plac. 
33.  20  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation 
5. Safe,  at  ease,  at  rest,  vpjj,  iby  shalev. 

Job  21 .  23  One  dieth . .  being  wholly  at  ease  and  quiet 
6. Finished,  perfect,  peaceable,  dS^  shalem. 

Nah.  1. 12  Though  (they  be)  quiet,  and  likewise  ma. 

7.  To  be  quiet,  at  rest,  t:ptf>  shaqat. 

Judg  18.    7  how  they  dwelt  careless.,  quiet  and  secu. 

18.  27  a  people  (that  were)  at  quiet  and  secure 
1  Ch.  4.  40  the  land  (was)  wide,  and  quiet,  and  peaa 

8.  Quiet,  %p€fj.os  eremos. 

1  Ti.  2.   2  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  ail  godliness 
9. Mild,  tranquil,  gentle,  yavxws  hesuchws. 

1  Pe.  3.   4  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the 
QUIET  (self),  to  — 

l.To  cause  or  let  rest,  nw  nuach,  5. 

Zech.  6.   8  have  quieted  my  spirit  in  the  north  cou. 
2.To  be  quiet,  at  rest,  &$$  shaqat,  5. 

Job  37. 17  he  quieteth  the  earth  bythe  south  (wind) 
3.  To  be  silent,  to  cease,  stand  still,  oni  damam,  3«. 

Psa.131.    2  I  have  behaved  and  quieted  myself,  as  a 
4.7*0  send  down,  appease,  pacify,  Kara(neXX(a. 

Acts  19.  36  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  ras. 
QUIET,  to  he  (in)  — 
l.To  keep  self  silent,  Vhft  charash,  7. 

Judgi6.    2  were  quiet  all  the  night,  saying,  In  the 

2.  To  (be  at)  rest,  nu  nuach. 

Job     3.  26  rest,  neither  was  I  quiet ;  yet  trouble  ca. 

3.  To  be  quiet,  at  ease,  secure,  ]i<&  shaan,  Sa. 

Prov.  1 .  33  whoso  hearkeneth . .  shall  be  quiet  from  f. 
Jer.  30.  10  shall  be  in  rest,  and  be  quiet,  and  none 

i.To  be  quiet,  at  rest,  £pij>  shaqat. 

2  Ki.11.  20  city  was  in  quiet :  and  they  slew  Athaliah 
2  Ch.14.    1  In  his  days  the  land  was  quiet  ten  years 

14.    5  and  the  kingdom  was  quiet  before  him 

20.  30  the  realm  of  Jehoshaphat  was  quiet ;  for 

23.  21  the  city  was  quiet,  after  that  they  had 

3.  13  should  I  have  lain  still  and  been  quiet 

14.    7  The  whole  earth  is  at  rest,  (and)  is  quiet 

47.    6  how  long  (will  it  be)  ere  thou  be  quiet? 

47.    7  How  can  it  be  quiet,  seeing  the  Lord  ha. 

16. 42  will  be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  more  angry 

5.  To  cause  to  be  quiet,  or  be  at  rest,  Bp£>  shaqat,  5. 
Isa.  7.  4  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  neither  be  faint  hea. 
Jer.  49.  23  is)  sorrow  on  the  sea ;  it  cannot  be  quiet 

6.  To  cease,  be  quiet,  calm,  pny  shathaq. 

Psa.  107.  30  Then  are  they  glad  because  they  be  quiet 

7.  To  rest  from  labour,  keep  quiet,  Tjffvx&C03  hesuch. 

1  Th.  4. 11  that  ye  study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your 
QUIETLY  — 

Ease,  safety,  *hy  sheli. 

2  Sa.  3.  27  in  the  gate,  to  speak  with  him  quietly 

QUIETNESS  — 

1. Descent,  rest,  quietness,  nnj  nachath. 

Eccl.  4.   6  Better  (is)  an  handful  (with)  quietness,  th. 

2.Safe,  at  ease,  at  rest,  vby,  17^  shalev. 

Job  20.  20  he  shall  not  feel  quietness  in  his  belly 

3. Rest,  ease,  security,  rn^ty  shalvah. 

Prov.17.   1  Better  (is)  a'dry  morsel,  and  quietness  th. 

4.  To  cause  to  be  quiet  or  at  rest,  ttp£>  shaqat,  5. 
Isa.  30.  i5inquietnessandinconfidenceshallbeyour 

32. 17  effect.. quietness  and  assurance  for  ever 
5. Rest,  quietness,  ttpt?  sheqet. 

1  Ch.22.   9  will  give,  .quietness  unto  Israel  in  his  d. 
6. Peace,  concord,  harmony,  elpwvf}  eirene. 

Acts  24.    2  thatby  thee  we  enjoy  great  quietness,  and 
7.Quietness,  silence,  rjavxia.  hesucMa. 

2  Th.  3.  12  with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat  their 
QUIETNESS,  to  give  or  be  in  — 

l.To  be  quiet,  at  rest,  op^  slmqat. 

Judg.  8. 28  the  country  was  in  quietness  forty  years 
2.  To  cause  to  be  quiet  or  at  rest,  ap^  shaqat,  5. 

Job  34.  29  When  he  giveth  quietness,  who  then  can 
QUIT,  (to  be)  — 
1. Innocent,  free,  acquitted,  exempt,  clean,  spinaqit 

Exod2i.  28  but  the  owner  of  the  ox  (shall  be)  quit 

Josh.  2.  20  we  will  be  quit  of  thine  oath  which  thou 

2.  To  be  innocent, free, empty,  acquitted,  ."ipj  naqah,2. 

Exod2i.  19  then  shallhe  that  smote  (him)be  quit :  on. 
QUIT  selves,  to  — 
l.To  be,  n;n  hayah. 

1  Sa.   4.   9  quit  yourselves  like  men,  O  ye  Philistines 
2.7*0  act  like  a  man,  av^pi^ofxai  andrizomai. 

1  Co.  16. 13  Watch  ye.  .quit  you  like  men,  be  strong 


Job 
Isa. 
Jer. 

Eze 


QUITE 


791 


RAIMENT 


QUITE  — 

Naked,  lure,  ftps  eryah. 

Hab.   3.   9  Thy  bow  was  made  quite  naked,  (accord.) 

[See  also  Driven,  take  away.] 

QUIVER  — 

l.A  quiver,  rtS?N  ashpah. 

Job  39.  23  Trie  quiver  rattleth  against  him,  the  glit. 

Psa. 127.    5  Happy  (is)  the  man  that  hath  his  quiver 

Isa.  22.  6  Elam  bare  the  quiver  with  chariots  of  m. 
49.    2  made  me  a  polished  shaft ;  in  his  quiver 

Jer.    5. 16  Their  quiver^is)  as  an  open  sepulchre  they 

Lam.  3.  13  He  hath  caused  the  arrows  of  his  quiver 
2.  A  quiver  or  sword,  79  tell. 

Pen.  27.    3  thy  weapons,  thy  quiver  and  thy  bow,  and 
QUIVER,  to  — 
To  quiver,  tingle,  T>y  tsalal. 

Ifab.  3. 16  my  lips  quivered  at  the  voice  :  rottenness 

R 

RAA'-MAH,  rr^y-i  trembling. 

1.  The  fourth  son  of  Cush  eldest  son  of  Ham.    B.C.  2250. 
Gen.  10.    7  Havilah,  audSabtah,  and  R.,  and  Sabte. 

10.    7  and  the  sons  of  R. ;  Sheba,  and  Dedan 

1  Ch.  1.  9  Havilah,  and  Sabta,  and  R.,  and  Sabte. 

1.   9  And  the  sons  of  R. ;  Sh»ba,  and  Dedan 

2.  A  place  in  the  S.E.  of  Arabia,  or  on  the  Persian 
Gulf. 

Eze.  27.  22  The  merchantsof  ShebaandR.,  they(w). 
RA-AM'-IAH,  rrpyi  Jah  causes  trembling. 
A  chief  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  7.    7  Nehemiah,  Azariah,  R.,  Nahamani,  Mor. 
RA-AM'-SES,  DD?sn  son  of  the  sun. 
A  treasure  city  built  by  the  Israelites,  i.e.  Eelbeis  or 
Pelusium,  a  day's  journey  X.E.  of  Cairo,  on  the  Syro — 
Egyptian  road,  and  capital  of  the  province  Schaikyyak. 

Exod  1.  11  they  built  for  Pharaoh.. Pithom  and  R. 
RAB'-EATH,  RAB'-BAH,  M3T,  ran  great 
1. Chief  city  of  Amnion,  ontheN.  of  Arnon,now^m)H<7?i, 
twenty-two  miles  E.  of  Jordan,  and  fourteen  N.E.  of 
Heshbon. 

Deut  3.  1 1  (is)  it  not  in  R.  of  the  children  of  Amnion? 

Josh.  13.  25  coast  was.. unto  Aroer  that  (is)  before  R. 

2  Sa.  11.    1  and  they,  .besieged  R.  But  David  tamed 

12.  26  Joab  fought  against  R.  of  the  children  of 
12.  27  I  have  fought  against  R.,  and  have  taken 
12.  29  David  gathered,  .people,  .and  went  to  R. 

17.  27  Nahash  of  R.  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

1  Ch.20.    1  Joab  led  forth  the.  .army,  .besieged  R. 

20.    1  And  Joab  smote  R.,  and  destroyed  it 
Jer.  49.    2  cause  an  alarm  of  war  to  be  heard  in  R. 
49.    3  cry,  ye  daughters  of  R. ,  gird  you  with  sa. 
Eze.  21.  20  that  the  sword  may  come  to  R.  of  the  A. 

25.    5  And  I  will  make  R.  a  stable  for  camels 
Amos  1.  14  But  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  R. 
2.  A  city  in  Judah,  near  Kirjath-jearim. 

Josh. 15.  6oKirjath-baaI..Kirjath-jearim,andR.  ;t\vo 
RABBI  — 

A  great  man,  teacher, (from  Ch.  'an),  f>a$&L  rabbi. 
itatt23.    7  greetings.,  be  called  of  men,  Rabbi,  [Rab.] 
23.    8  be  not  ye  calledRabbi :  forone  isyourM. 
John  1.  38  Rabbi,  which  is  to  say,  being  interpreted 
1.  49  Rabbi,  thou  art  the  Son  of  God ;  thou  art 
3.    2  Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher 
3.  26  Rabbi,  he  that  was  with  thee  beyond  Jo. 
6. 25  they  said.  .Rabbi,  when  earnest  thou  hi,  ? 
RAB'-BTTH,  n'rirr  the  great  place. 
A  city  in  Issachar,  near  Kishion  and  Abez  ;  now  called 
A  rrabeh. 

Josh. 19.  20  And  R.,  and  Kishion,  and  Abez 
RABBONT — 
My  rabbi,  (from  Ch.  }ii),  $>a$&owt  rabbouni. 

Johri2o.  16  and  saith.  .Rabboni !  which  is  to  say,  M. 

RAB'-MAG,  Jp-ai  head  of  the  Magi. 

An  officer  of  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Bab3'lon.    B.C.  588. 

Jer.  39.   3  R.,  with  all  the  residue  of  the  princes  of 

39.  13  R.,  and  all  the  king  of  Babylon's  princes 

RAB-SA'-RIS,  DnD-m  head  of  tlie  eunuchs. 

1.  Anofticerof  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon.  B.C.  588. 

Jer.  39.  3  R..  with  all  the  residue  of  the  princes  of 
39. 13  R.  .and  all  the  king  of  Babylon's  princes 

2.  An  officer  of  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria.    B.C.  710. 

2  Ki.  18.  17  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  Tartan,  and  R. 
RAB-SHA'-KEH,  npy:n  head  of  the  cup  bearers. 
An  officer  of  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  in  the  days 
of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  710. 

2  Ki.18.  17  theking  of  Assyria  sent..  R.,froniLachish 
18. 19  R.  said  unto  them,  Speak  ye  now  to  Hez. 
1 8. 26  Then  said  Eliakim . .  unto  R. ,  Speak,  I  pray 

18.  27  But  R.  said  unto  them,  Hath  my  master 
18.  28  Then  R. stood,  and  cried  withaloud  voice 

18.  37  Eliakim.  .and  told  him  the  words  of  R. 

19.  4  Lord  thy  God  will  hear,  .the  words  of  R. 
19.    8  So  R.  returned,  and  found  the  king.  .wa. 

Isa.  36.  2  And  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  R.  from  La. 
36.  4  And  R.  said  unto  them,  Say  ye  now  to  H. 
36. 11  Then  said  Eliakim..  unto  R.,  Speak,  I  pray 
36.  12  But  R.  said,  Hath  my  master  sent  me  to 
36.  13  ThenR.  stood,  and  cried  with  a  loud  vo. 

36.  22  Then  came  Eliakim . .  and  told  him  the  w. 
37-    4  LORD  thy  God  will  hear  the  words  of  R. 

37.  8  So  R.  returned,  and  found  the  king  of  A. 


RACA  — 

Vain,  empty,  {from  Ch.  H^)  paicd  rhaka. 

Matt.  3,  22  whosoever  shall  say  to  bis  brother,  Raca 
RACE  — 
l.Patk,  way,  custom,  rrik  orach. 

Psa.  ig.   5  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race 
2.^1  race,  f'itD  merots. 

Eccl.  9. 11  the  race  (is)  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the  ba. 
3.^4  race  course,  contest,  aySv  agon. 

Heb.  12.    1  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is 
4.A  race  course,  stadium,  furlong,  vraZtov  stadion. 

1  Co.  9,  24  they  which  run  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one 

RA'-CHAL,  by]  place  of  traffic. 
A  city  in  Judah,  near  Eshtemoa. 

1  Sa.  30.  29  And  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  R.,  and  to 
RA'-CHEL,  Srn,  'P«x^A  a  lamb. 
Younger  daughter  of  Laban,  and  the  best  beloved  wife 
of  Jacob,  to  whom  she  bare  Joseph  and  Benjamin.  She 
stole  her  father's  gods,  envied  her  sister's  fruitfulness, 
and  died  in  childbirth  at  Ephratah,  B.C.  1729.  Her 
tomb  is  said  to  be  about  a  mile  !N.  of  Bethlehem;  but 
from  1  Sa.  10.  2  it  would  seem  to  have  been  at  Zelzah. 

Gen.  29.   6  behold,  R.  his  daughter  cometh  with  the 
29.    9  R.  came  with  her  father's  sheep ;  for  she 

29. 10  when  Jacob  saw  R.  the  daughter  of  Laban 

29. 11  And  Jacob  kissed  R.,  and  lifted  up  his  v. 

29. 12  Jacob  told  R.  that  he  (was)  her  father's  b. 

29. 16  and  the  name  of  the  younger  (was)  R. 

29. 17  but  R.  was  beautiful  and  well  favoured 

29. 18  And  Jacob  loved R. ;  andsaid,  I  will  serve 
29.  iS  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  R.  thy 
29.  20  And  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  R. 

29.  25  did  not  I  serve  with  thee  for  R.?  wherefore 
29.  28  and  he  gave  him  R.  his  daughter  to  wife 
29.  29  And  Laban  gave  to  R.  his  daughter  Bil. 
29.  30  And  lie  went  in  also  unto  R. 
29.  30  and  he  loved  also  R.  more  than  Leah 

29.  31  he  opened  her  womb:  but  R.  (was)  barren 

30.  1  when  R.  saw  that  she  bare  J.  no  children 
30.  1  R. .  .said  unto  Jacob,  Give  me  children,  or 
30.  2  And  Jacob's  anger  was  kindled  against  R. 
30.  6  R.  said,  God  hath  judged  me.  .and  hath 
30.  7  And  Bilhah,  R.'s  maid,  conceived  again 
30.  8  R.  said,  With  great  wrestlings  have  I  w. 
30.  14  Then  R.  said  to  Leah,  Give  me,  I  pray  thee 
30.  15  And  R.  said,  Therefore  he  shall  lie  with 
30.  22  God  remembered  R.,  and  God  hearkened 

30.  25  it  came  to  pass,  when  R.  had  born  J. 

31.  4  And  Jacob  sent  and  called  R.  and  Leah 
31.  14  Aud  R.  and  Leah  answered  and  said  unto 
31.  19  R.  had  stolen  the  images  that  (were)  her 
31.  32  For  Jacob  knew  not  that  R.  had  stolen 
31.  33  Then  went  he  out.  .and  entered  into  R.'s 
31.  34  Now  R.  had .  .put  them  in  the  camel's  fu. 
33.    1  hedividedthechildrenuntoLeah,  and..R. 
33.    2  And  he  put.  ,R.  and  Joseph  hindermost 
33.   7  and  after  came  Joseph  near  and  R.,  and 
35. 16  and  R.  travailed,  and  she  had  hard  labour 
35.  19  And  R.  died,  and  was  buried  in  the  way 
35.  20  that  (is)  the  pillar  of  R.'s  grave  unto  this 
35. 24  The  sons  of  R. ;  Joseph  and  Benjamin 
35.  25  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  R.'s  handmaid ;  D. 
46.  19  Thesonsof  R.,  Jacob's  wife;  Joseph,  and 
46.  22  These  (are)  the  sons  of  R.,  which  were  b. 
46.  25  Bilhah,  which  Laban  gave  unto  R.  his  d. 
48.   7  R.  died  by  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the 

Ruth  4.  11  The  Lord  make  the  woman,  .like  R.  and 
1  Sa.  10.  2  thou  shalt  find  two  men  by  R. 's  sepulchre 
Jer.  31.  15  R.  weepingfor  her  children,  refused  to  be 
Matt  2.  18  R.  weeping  (for)  her  children,  and  would 

RAD'-DAI,  *T3  Jah  subdues. 

Fifth  son  of  Jesse  the  father  of  David.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Ch.  2. 14  Nethaneel  the  fourth,  R.  the  fifth 
RAFTER  — 

A  rafter,  gallery,  ^'n-i,  trrn  rahit,  rachit. 

Song  1. 17  The  beams,  .(are)  cedar,  (and) our  rafters 
RAG  (rotten)  — 
1. Cloak,  garment,  covering,  "na  beged. 

Isa.   64.   6  all  our  righteousnesses  (are)  as  filthy  rags 
2.Rotten  rags,  WipD  melachim. 

Jer.  38.  11,  12  old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten  rags 
3. Rents,  pieces,  rags,  D'j-Hi?  qeraim. 

Prov  23.  21  drowsiness  shall  clothe  (a  man)  with  rags 
RA'-GATJ,  'Payav.      See  Rett. 
Father  of  Saruch,  an  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  35  Saruch,  which  was  (the  son)  of  R.,  which 
RAGE,  RAGING  — 
1. Pride,  rising,  excellency,  nixa  geuth. 

Psa.  89.   9  Thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  sea :  when 
2. Indignation,  insolence,  nyi  zaam. 

Hos.    7. 16  shall  fall,  .for  the  rage  of  their  tongue 
3.  Wrath,  rage,  raging,  f]J>t  zaaph. 

2  Ch.16.  10  (lie  was)  ina  rage  with  him  because  of  this 

28.   9  in  a  rage  (that)  reacheth  up  unto  heaven 
Jon.    1.  15  and  the  sea  ceased  from  her  raging 

■4.  Heat,  fury,  poison,  ncn  chemah. 

2  Ki.  5.  12  So  he  turned,  and  went  away  in  a  rage 
Prov.  6.  34  jealousy  (is)  the  rage  of  a  man ;  therefore 

5.  Wrath,  transgression,  .ti^jj  ebrah. 

Job  40.  11  Cast  abroad  the  rage  of  thy  wrath :  and 


Psa.    7.    6  Arise,  .because  of  the  rage  of  mine  enem. 
6. Anger,  U1  regaz. 

Dan.   3. 13  Then  Nebuchadnezzar  in.  .rage  and  fury 
7. To  shmo  self  angry,  Trj  ragaz,  7. 

2  Ki.19.  27  and  thy  coming  in,  and  thy  rage  against 
19.  28  thy  rage  against  me  and  thy  tumult  is  c. 
Isa.  37.  28  and  thy  coming  in,  and  thy  rage  against. 
37. 29  thy  rage  against  me,  and  thy  tumult,  is 

8.  Trembling,  trouble,  anger,  rage,  Jii  rogez. 

Job  39.  24  He  swalloweth  the  ground  with,  .rage 
9. Rural,  rustic,  wild,  &yptos  agnos. 

Jude       13  Raging  wavesofthesea,  foaming  outtheir 
lO.Rushing,  raging,  Khvdwv  kluddn. 

Luke  8.  34  rebuked  the  wind  and  the  raging  of  the 
RAGE,  to  — 
1.7*o  slww  self  foolish,  hbn  halal,  7  a. 

Jer.  46.    9  rage,  ye  chariots ;  and  let  the  mightymen 

Nah.  2.    4  The  chariots  shall  rage  in  the  streets,  they 

'2. To  roar,  sound,  make  a  noise,  n£ri  hamah. 
Psa.  46.    6  The  heathen  raged,  the  kingdoms  were 
Prov 20.    1  strong  drink  (is)  raging;  and  whosoever 

3.  To  show  self  wroth,  13$  abar,  7. 

Prov  14. 16  A  wise  (man)feareth.-butthe  fool  rageth 

4.  To  be  angry,  troubled,  tJ"i  ragaz. 

Prov 29.   9  whether  he  rage  or  laugh,  (there  is)  no  r. 

5.  To  assemble,  c>ri  ragash. 

Psa.    2.    1  "Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  thepeople 
6.7*0  snort,  rage,  (bpvdatra)  phruasso. 

Acts  4.  25  Why  did  the  heathen  rage,  and  the  people 
RA-GTJ'-EL,  ^Vl  Jah  is  friend. 
Father  in  law  of  Moses,  called  also  Jethro  andReuel. 
B.C.  1530. 

Num  10.  29  Moses  said  unto  Hobab,  the  son  of  R. 
RA'-HAB,  nrn  tumult. 
A  poetic  and  symbolic  name  for  Egypt. 

Psa.  87.    4  I  will  make  mention  of  R.  and  Babylon 
89.  10  Thou  hast  broken  R.  in  pieces,  as  one  that 

Isa.   51.    9  (Art)  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  R.,  (and) 

RA'-HAB,  RA'-CHAB,  Drrj  'Paa&  'Paxd&  breadth. 

l.A  woman  in  Jericho  who  received  and  concealed  the 

two  spies.    B.C.  1452. 

Josh.  2.    1  came  into  an  harlot's  house,  named  R. 

2.  3  And  the  king  of  Jericho  sent  unto  R.,  sa. 
6.  17  R.  the  harlot  shall  live .  .because  she  hid 
6.  23  young  men .  .went  in,  and  brought  out  R. 

6.  25  And  J  jshua  saved  R.  the  harlot  alive,  and 
2.The  wife  of  Salmon,  and  mother  of  Booz.     B.C.  1280. 

Matt.  1.  5  And  Salmon  begat  Booz  of  R,  ;  and  Booz 
Heb.  11.  31  the  harlot  R.  perished  not  with  them  that 
Jas.    2.  25  Likewise  also,  was  not  R.  the  harlot  justi. 

RA'-HAM,  crn  pity,  love. 

Son  of  Shema  the  son  of  Hebron,  descended  from  Caleb 

the  grandson  of  Pharez  son  of  Judah,    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2. 44  And  Shema  begat  R.  the  father  of  Jork. 
RAIL  (on),  to  — 

1.7*0  reproach,  *pn  charaph,  3. 

2  Ch.32. 17  letters  to  rail  on  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
2. To  fee  ravenously,  tyy  it. 

1  Sa.  25.  14  salute  our  master;  and  he  railed  on  them 
3.7*o  speak  injuriously,  &\ao-<pwfiew  blasphemed. 
Markis.  29  they  that  passed  by  railed  on  him,  wag. 
Luke23.  39  Andoue  of  the  malefactors . .  railed  on  him 

RATLER,  RAILING  — 

1. Injurious  speaking,  &Xao-<p-nfxla  blasphimia. 

1  Ti.  6.    4  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  evil  surni. 
Jude        9  not  bring  against  him  a  railing  accusation 

2.  Injurious  speaker,  ^\aff(pv/j.6s  hlaspliemos. 

2  Pe.  2. 11  bring  not  railing  accusation  against  them 
3. Reviling,  XoiBopia  loidoria. 

1  Pe.  3.  9  or  railing  for  railing ;  but  contrariwise 
■i.Reviler,  XotSopos  loidoros. 

1  Co.  5. 11  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extort. 
RAIMENT  — 

1.  Cloak,  garment,  covering,  "133  beged. 

Gen.  24.  53  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment,  and  gave  (th.) 
27. 15  took  goodly  raiment  of  hereldestsonEsau 

27.  27  and  he  snielled  the  smell  of  his  raiment 

28.  20  give,  .bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on 
Lev.  11.  32  or  raiment,  or  skin,  or  sack,  whatsoever 
Num3i.  20  purify  all  (your)  raiment,  and  all  that  is 
Deut  24.  17  nor  take  a  widow's  raiment  to  pledge 
Judg.  8.  26  raiment  tbat(was)on  thekings  of  Midian 

1  Sa.  28.   8  put  on  other  raiment,  and  he  went,  and 

2  Ki.  5.    5  (pieces)  of  gold,  and  ten  changes  of  rai. 

7.  8  and  gold,  and  raiment,  and  went  and  hid 
Esth.  4.   4  she  sent  raiment  to  clothe  Mordecai,  and 

2.  Covering,  runs  kesuth. 

Exodai.  10  her  raiment,  and  her  duty  of  marriage 

3.  Clothing,  MhSJ  lebnsh. 

Isa.  14. 19  the  raiment  of  those  that  are  slain,  thrust 

A.Long  robe,  ID  mad. 

Judg.  3.  16  he  did  gird  it  under  his  raiment  upon  his 
5.  Clothing,  e?qSd  malbush. 

Job  27. 16  Though  he.  .prepare  raiment  as  the  clay 


RAIMENT 


792 


RAISE 


Isa.   63.   3  sprinkled,  .and  I  will  stain  all  my  raim. 
Eze.  16. 13  thy  raiment  (was  of)  fine  linen,  and  silk 

6.  Outer  garment,  nnflp  salmah. 

Exod22.    9  raiment,'(or)  for  any  manner  of  lost  thing 

22.  26  take  thy  neighbour's  raiment  to  pledge 
Deut  24. 1 3  that  he  may  sleep  in  his  own  raiment,  and 
Josh  22.    8  and  with  iron,  and  with  very  much  raiment 
2  Ch.  9.  24  raiment,  harness,  and  spices,  horses,  and 

V '. Raiment,  garment,  a  cloth,  npcb'  simlah. 

Gen.  41. 14  changed  his  raiment*  and  came  in  unto  P. 
45.  22  he  gave  each  man  changes  of  raiment ;  but 
45.  22  gave,  .of  silver,  and  five  changes  of  raim. 

Exod  3.  22  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment 
12.  35  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold  and  raiment 
22.  27  it  (is)  his  raiment  for  his  skin  :  wherein 

Dent.  8.  4  Thy  raiment  waxed  not  old  upon  thee,  n. 
10.  18  and  loveth.  .in  giving  him  food  and  rai. 

21.  13  she  shall  put  the  raiment  of  her  captivity 

22.  3  so  shalt  thou  do  with  his  raiment;  and 
Ruth  3.    3  put  thy  raiment  upon  thee,  and  get  thee 

8.C'lothing,  garment,  evSvfia  enduma. 

Matt.  3.    4  John  had  his  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  and 
6,  25  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than  rai. 
6.  28  And  why  take  ye  thought  for  raiment? 
28.   3  was  like  lightning,  and  his  raiment  white 
Lukei2.  23  is  more  than  meat,  and  the  body,  .than  r. 

9. A  role,  raiment,  ia-d-fjs  esthes. 

Jas.    2.    2  there  come  in  also  a  poor  man  in  vile  ra. 
lO.Garment,  ifxdrtov  hi/nation. 

Matt  11.    8  A  man  clothed  in  soft  [raiment]?  Behold 

17.  2  transfigured,  .and  his  raiment  was  white 

27.  31  put  his  own  raiment  on  him,  and  led  him 
Mark  9.  3  his  raiment  became  shining,  exceeding  w. 
Luke  7.  25  A  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment?  Behold 

23.  34  And  they  parted  his  raiment,  and  cast  lots 
John  19.  24  They  parted  my  raiment  among  them,  and 
Acts  18.    6  he  shook  (his)  raiment,  and  said  unto  them 

22.  20  and  kept  the  raiment  of  them  that  slew 
Rev.    3.    5  the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raim. 

3.  18  white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clot. 

4.  4  clothed  in  white  raiment;  and  they  had 

11, Garment j  raiment.,  ifxaria-fiSs  himatismos. 

Luke  9.  29  and  his  raiment  (was)  white  (and)  glister. 
12.  A  covering,  o-Ksiraafxa  skepasma. 

1  Ti.    6.    8  having  food  and  raiment  let  us  be  there. 
RAIMENT  (of  needlework),  change  of  — 
l.Costly  apparel,  nisSfp  machalatsoth. 

Zech.  3.    4  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  raiment 
2.  Embroidery,  ncp~i  riqmah. 

Psa.  45.  14  shall  be  brought.,  in  raiment  of  needle  w. 
RAIN  — 
l.Heav>y  rain,  shower,  Dp* a  geshem. 

Gen.  7.  12  the  rain  was  upon  the  earth  fortydaysand 
8.    2  and  the  rain  from  heaven  was  restrained 

Lev.  26.    4  I  will  give  you  rain  in  due  season,  and  the 

1  Ki.  17.    7  because  there  had  been  no  rain  in  the  1. 

17. 14  (that)  the  Lord  sendeth  rain  upon  the  e. 
iS.  41  for  (there  is)  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain 

18.  44  get  thee  down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  not 
18.  45  there  was  a  great  rain.    And  Ahab  rode 

2  Ki.  3.  17  neither  shall  ye  see  rain ;  yet  that  valley 
Ezra  10.    9  sat.  .trembling because  of.  .the  great  rain 

10.  13  a  time  of  much  rain,  and  we  are  not  able 
Job  37.  6  to  the  small  rain,  and  to  the  great  rain  of 
Psa.  68.   9  didst  send  a  plentiful  rain,  whereby  thou 

105. 32  He  gave  them  hail  for  rain,  (and)  flaming 
Prov  25.  14  (is  like)  clouds  and  wind  without  rain 

25-23  The  north  wind  driveth  away  rain ;  so  (d.) 
Eccl.  11.   3  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 

12.   2  nor  the  clouds  return  after  the  rain 
Song  2. 11  For,  lo,  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  o. 
Isa.   44.  14  he  planteth  an  ash,  and  the  rain  doth  n. 

55.  10  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  f. 
Jer.     5.  24  that  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and  the 

14.  4  there  was  no  rain  in  the  earth,  the  plow. 
Eze.     1.  28  that  is  in  the  cloud  in  the  day  of  rain 

38.  22  an  overflowing  rain,  and  great  hail  stones 
Hos.  6.  3  he  shall  come  unto  us  as  the  rain,  as  the 
Joel  2.  23  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you  the  rain 
Amos  4.  7  Ihavewithholdcn  the  rain  from  you,  when 
Zech  10.    1  give  them  showers  of  rain,  to  every  one  g. 

14.  17  not  come  up.. upon  them  shall  be  no  rain 
2. Sprinkling  rain,  rrfto  moreh. 

Psa.  84.    6  make  it  a  well;  the  rain  also  filleth  the  p. 
Joel    2.  23  the  former  rain . .  the  former  rain,  and  the 
3. Rain,  iipo  matar. 

Exod.  9.33  the  rain  was  not  poured  upon  the  earth 
9. 34  the  rain  and  the  hail  and  the  thunders 
DeutiT.  11  (and)  drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heaven 

11. 14  I  will  give  (you)  the  rain  of  your  land  in  his 

11.  17  that  there  be  no  rain,  and  that  the  land 

28.  12  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land  in  his  season 
28.  24  The  Lord  shall  make  the  rain  of  thy  land 
32.    2  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain,  my  s. 

1  Sa.  12.  17  he  shall  send  thunder  and  rain;  that  ye 

12.  18  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  rain  that  day 

2  Sa.    1.  21  neither  (let  there  be)  rain  upon  you,  nor 

23.  4  out  of  the  earth  by  clear  shining  after  r. 

1  Ki.  8.  35  there  is  no  rain  because  they  have  sinned 

8.  36  give  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou  hast 

1 7.  1  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  yea. 

1 8.  1  Go.  .and  I  will  send  rain  upon  the  earth 

2  Ch.   6.  26  there  is  no  rain,  because  they  have  sinn. 

6.  27  send  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou  hast 
7- 13  If  I  shut  up  heaven  that  there  be  no  rain 


Psa.  72. 

i3S- 

147. 

Prov.  26. 

28. 


Isa. 

Jer. 

Zech 


5. 10  Who  giveth  rain  upon  the  earth,  and  se. 

28.  26  he  made  a  decree  for  the  rain,  and  a  way 

29.  23  they  waited  for  me  as  for  the  rain;  and 

36.  27  they  pour  down  rain  according  to  the  va. 

37.  6  to  the  small  rain,  and  to  the  great  rain 

38.  28  Hath  the  rain  a  father?  or  who  hath  be. 

6  He  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the 

7  he  maketh  lightnings  for  the  rain :  he  br. 

8  who  prepareth  rain  for  the  earth,  who  m. 
1  as  rain  in  harvest ;  so  honour  is  not  see 
3  a  sweeping  rain  which  leaveth  no  food 
6  and  for  a  covert  from  storm  and  from  rain 
6  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it 

23  Then  shall  he  give  the  rain  of  thy  seed 
13  maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  andbringe. 
16  maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  and  brin. 
1  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  the  time  of  the 


4.  Violent  rain,  fipoxy  troche. 

Matt.  7.  25,  27  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  ca. 

5.  A  shower  of  rain,  veros  huetos. 

Acts  14.  17  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  se. 

28.    2  because  of  the  present  rain,  and  because 

Heh.   6.    7  the  rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  it,  and  br. 

Jas.     5.   7  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter[rain] 

5. 18  the  heaven  gave  rain,  and  the  earth  bro. 

RAIN,  first,  former,  latter,  small  — 
1. Sprinkling  rain,  nn'v  yoreh. 

Deut.  11.  14  That  I  will  give  (you),  .the  first  rain,  and 

2.  To  cast  forth  sprinkling  shoivers,  rrr  yarah. 

Hos.  6.    3  come . .  as  the . .  former  rain  unto  the  earth 

3.  Gathered  rain,  8?ip7D  malqosh. 

Deut  li.  14  the  latter  rain,  that  thou  mayest  gather 
Job  29.  23  opened  their  month . .  for  the  latter  rain 
Prov.  16. 15  his  favour(is)as  the  cloud  of  the  latter  r. 
Jer.  3.  3  there  hath  been  no  latter  rain  ;  and  thou 
Hos.  6.  3  come,  .as  the  latter,  .rain  unto  the  earth 
Joel  2.  23  and  the  latter  rain  in  the  first  (month) 
Zech  10.    1  Ask  ye.  .in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain 

4. Showers,  D'TVi?  seiri/n. 

Deut  32.   2  as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb,and 
RAIN,  to  cause  or  send  — 

1.  To  cause  or  send  or  give  rain,  Dri'3  gasham,  5. 
Jer.  14.  22  Are  there  (any),  .that  can  cause  rain  'I  or 

2.2*0  shoot  or  cast  forth  sprinkling  showers,  rrv,  5. 
Hos.  10. 12  till  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon 

3.  To  cause  or  send  or  give  rain,  ~iaa  matar,  5. 
Gen.   2.    5  had  not  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth 

7.    4  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth  forty 
19.  24  Then  the  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  u. 
Exod  9.  18 1  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  very  grievous  hail 
g.  23  Lord  rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 
16.    4  I  will  rain  bread  from  heaven  foryou;  and 
Job   20.  23  shall  rain(it)  upon  him  while  he  is  eating 
38.  26  To  cause  it  to  rain  on  the  earth,  (where) 
11.   6  Upon  the  wicked  he  shall  rain  snares,  fire 
78.  24  had  rained  down  manna  upon  them  to  eat 
78.  27  He  rained  flesh  also  upon  them  as  dust 
5.    6  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it 
22  will  rain  upon  him,  and  upon  his  bands 
7  I  caused  it  to  rain  upon  one  city,  and 
7  caused  it  not  to  rain  upon  another  city 
4.    7  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not  withered 

4.  To  rain,  Qpix^  brecho.     -» 

Matt.  5.  45  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the 
Lukei7.  29  rained  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven 
Jas.     5.  17  that  it  might  not  rain ;  and  it  rained  not 

5.  To  rain  rain,  0pe'xw  ver6v  brecho  hueton. 

Rev.  11.   6  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  prophecy 
RAINBOW  — 
A  rainbow,  Ipts  iris. 

Rev.   4.    3  (there  was)  a  rainbow  round  about  the  t. 
10.    1  a  rainbow  (was)  upon  his  head,  and  his 

RAINED  upon,  (to  he)  — 
I. Rain,  cwz  goshem. 

Eze.  22.  24  nor  rained  upon  in  the  day  of  indignation 

2.  To  be  rained  on,  lap  matar,  2. 

Amos  4.   7  one  piece  was  rained  upon,  and  the  piece 
RAINY,  very  — 
Heavy  shower,  *vtap  sagrir. 

Prov  27. 15  A  continual  dropping  in  a  very  rainy  day 
RAISE  (again,  together,  up),  to  — 
l.To  make  erect,  *]pl  zaqaph. 

Psa.  145.  14  raiseth  up  all  (those  that)  be  bowed  down 
146.    8  Lord  raiseth  (them  that  are)  bowed  do. 

2.  To  lift  up,  xyi  nasa. 

EX01I23,    1  Thou  shalt  not  raise  a  false  report:  put 
Hab.    1.    3  there  are  (that)  raise  up  strife  and  conte. 

3.  To  exalt,  raise  up,  bhv  salal. 

Job   19. 12  raise  up  their  way  against  me,  and  encamp 
30. 12  they  raise  up  against  me  the  ways  of  their 

4.  To  awake  up,  lift  up,  "i*y  ur,  3/7.. 

Job  3.  8  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  their  mourning 
Song  8.  5  I  raised  thee  up  under  the  apple  tree  :  th. 
Isa.  15.  5  for.  .they  shall  raise  up  a  cry  of  destruc. 
Zech.  9. 13  raised  up  thy  sons,  0  Zion, against  thysons 
5. To  awake  up,  iiy  ur,  5. 

Ezra    1.    5  with  all  (them)  whose  spirit  God  had  rai. 
Isa.  41.   2  Who  raised  up  the  righteous  (man)  from 
41.  25  I  have  raised  up  (one)  from  the  mouth,  and  I 


Psa. 


Isa. 

Eze. 

Amos  4. 

4- 


Isa.  45.  13  I  have  raised  him  up  in  righteousness,  and 
Jer.  50.   9  I  will  raise,  and  cause  to  come  up  against 

51.    1  I  will  raise  up  against  Babylon,  and  aga. 

51. 11  LORD  hath  raised  up  the  spirit  of  the  kings 
Eze.  23. 22  I  will  raise  up  thy  lovers  against  thee 
Joel    3.    7  I  will  raise  them  out  of  the  place  whither 

6.  To  stir  up,  tw  ir, 

Hos.    7.    4  (who)  ceaseth  from  raising  after  he  hath 

7.  To  cause  to  go  or  come  up,  rn%  alah,  5. 

1  Ki.  5.  13  king  Solomon  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  Is. 

9.  15  reason  of  the  levy  which.  .Solomon  raised 

2  Ch.32.    5  raised  (it)  up  to  the  towers,  aud  another 

S.  To  cause  to  stand  still,  ioj/  aviad,  5. 

Exod.  9.  16  I  raised  thee  up,  for  to  show  (in)  thee  my 
Psa.  107.  25  raiseth  the  stormy  wind,  which  lifteth  up 

9.2*0  make  bare,  itu  arar,  3a. 

Isa.  23. 13  they  raised  up  the  palaces  thereof.,  he  br. 

10.  To  raise  up,  Dip  qum,  3a. 

Isa.  44.  26  I  will  raise  up  the  decayed  places  thereof 
58.  12  thou  shalt  raise  up  the  foundations  of  ma. 
61.   4  they  shall  raise  up  the  former  desolations 

11. To  cause  to  rise  up,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Gen.  38.    8  marry  her,  and  raise  up  seed  to  thy  bro. 
Deut  18.  15  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  prophet  from 
18.  18  I  will  raise  them  up  a  prophet  from  amo. 

25.  7  to  raise  up  unto  his  brother  a  name  in  I. 
Josh.  5.    7  children,  (whom)  he  raised  up  in  their  st. 

7.  26  they  raised  over  him  a  great  heap  of  stones 

8.  29  and  raise  thereon  a  great  heap  of  stones 
Judg.  2.  16  Lord  raised  up  judges,  which  delivered 

2.  18  when  the  Lord  raised  them  up  judges,  t. 

3.  9  Lord  raised  up  a  deliverer  to  the  childr. 
3.  15  the  Lord  raised  them  up  a  deliverer,  Eh. 

Ruth  4.    5,  10  to  raise  up  the  name  of  the  dead  upon 

1  Sa.  2.    8  He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust 

2.  35  I  will  raise  me  up  a  faithful  priest,  (that) 

2  Sa.  12.  iil  will  raise  up  evil  against  thee  out  of 

12. 17  to  raise  him  up  from  the  earth:  but  he 
1  Ki.14. 14  Lord  shall  raise  him  up  a  king  over  Isra. 
1  Ch.17. 11  I  will  raise  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which 
Psa.  41.  10  and  raise  me  up,  that  I  may  requite  them 

113.    7  Be  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust 
Isa.    14.    9  it  hath  raised  up  from  their  thrones  all 

29.  3  I  will  camp.  .1  will  raise  forts  against  th. 

49.  6  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob 
Jer.  23.    5  will  raise  unto  David  a  righteous  branch 

29. 15  hath  raised  us  up  prophets  in  Babylon 

30.  9  their  king,  whom  I  will  raise  up  unto  th. 

50.  32  and  fall,  and  none  shall  raise  him  up 
Eze.  34.  29  will  raise  up  for  them  a  plant  of  renown 
Hos.    6.    2  he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in 
Amos  2.  11  I  raised  up  of  your  sons  for  prophets,  and 

5.  2  forsaken,  .(there  is)  none  to  raise  her  up 
6. 14  I  will  raise  up  against  you  a  nation,  O 

9.  11  In  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  tabernacle 
9.  11  I  will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I  will  build 

Mic.  5.  5  we  raise  against  him  seven  shepherds,  and 
Hab.  1.  6  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans,  (that}  bitter  and 
Zech.11. 16  I  will  raise-up  a  shepherd  in  the  land 

12.  To  set  or  place  up  again,  avt(?Tr)fj.i  anistetni. 
Matt 22.  24  marry,  .and  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brot. 
John  6.  39  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day 

6.  40,  44,  54  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  da}' 
Acts   2.  24  Whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed 

2.  30  [would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne] 

2.  32  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  all 

3.  22  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up 
3.  26  having  raised  up  his  Son  Jesus,  sent  him 

7.  37  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up 
l3-  33  i'1  that  he  hath  raised  up  Jesus  again  ;  as 
13.  34  he  raised  him  up  from  the  dead,  (now)  no 
17.  31  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

13.  To  raise  or  rouse  up,  iycipu)  egeiro. 

Matt.  3.   9  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  c. 
10.    8  [raise  the  dead], cast  out  devils :  freely  ye 
Luke  1.  69  hath  raised  up  an  horn  of  salvation  for 

3.    8  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  ch. 

John  2.  19  Destroy,  .in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up 

5. 2 1  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead,  and  quickeneth 

12.    1  Lazarus  was.  .whom  he  raised  from  the 

12.   9  Lazarus,  .whom  he  had  raised  from  the 

12.  17  when  he  called,  .and  raised  him  from  the 

Acts    3.  15  prince,  .whom  God  hath  raised  from  the 

4. 10  whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  .by  him 

5.  30  God  of  our  fathers  raised  up  Jesus,  whom 

10.  40  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  andsh. 

12.  7  and  raised  him  up,  saying,  Arise  up  qui. 

13.  22  [he  raised  up]  unto  them  David  to  be  th. 
13.  23  God.  .raised  unto  Israel  a  Saviour,  Jesus 
13.  30  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead 

13.  37  But  he,  whom  God  raised  again,  saw  no 

26.  8  incredible  with  you.that  God  should  raise 
Rom.  4.  24  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  dead 

8.  11  ofhimthatraisedupJesus..fromthedead 
8.  1 1  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  s. 

10.    9  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 

1  Co.  6. 14  God  hath  both  raised  up  the  Lord,  and 

15.  15  raised  up  Christ;  whom  he  raised  not  up 

2  Co.  1.    9  trust,  .in  God  which  raiseth  the  dead 

4. 14  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  raise  up 
Gal.  1.  1  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead 
Eph.  1.  20  he  raised  him  from  thedead.andset(him) 
Col.  2.  12  God,  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead 
1  Th.  1.  10  he  raised  from  the  dead,  (even)  Jesus,  w 
Heb.  11.  19  God  (was)  able  to  raise  (him)  up,  even  from 
Jas.  5.  15  the  Lord  shall  raise  him  up  ;  and  if  he  have 
1  Pe.  1.  21  that  raised  him  up  from  the  dead,  and 


RAISE 


793 


RAMOTH    G-ILEAD 


14.  To  raise  up  upon,  iireyeipw  epegeiro. 

Acts  13.  50  raised  persecution  against  Paul  and  Bar. 

15.  To  set  or  put  up  out,  £l-avl<rT7ifLi  exanistemi. 
Marki2.  19  take,  .and  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother 
Luke2o.  2S  take,  .and  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother 

16.  To  raise  up  out,  e^yeipai  exegeiro. 

Rom.  9.  17  have  I  raised  thee  up,  that  I  mightshow 

1  Co.   6.  14  and  will  also  raise  up  us  by  his  own  power 

17.  To  raise  up  together,  <rvveye(pa>  sunegeiro. 
Eph.  2.    6hathraised(us)uptogether,.andmade(us) 

RAISE  up  self,  great  height,  to  — 

l.To  make  high,  go  up  high,  n?3  gabah,  5. 

2  Ch.33. 14  raised  it  up  a  very  great  height,  and  put 

2.  To  cause  to  rise  up,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Dan.   7.   5  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and  (it  had) 
Z.Risincf,  swelling,  r(w  seth. 

Job    41. 25  When  he  raiseth  up  himself,  the  mighty 
RAISE  to  life  again,  to  — 
A  setting  01'  raising  up>,  avdarains  anastasis  {gen.) 

Heb.  1  r.  35  received  their  dead  raised  to  life  again 
RAISED  (again,  up,)  to  be  — 
l.To  be  awaked  up,  *ny  ur,  2. 

Job    14.  12  not  awake,  nor  be  raised  out  of  their  sleep 

Jer.     6.  22  a  great  nation  shall  be  raised  from  the 
25.  32  a  great  whirlwind  shall  be  raised  up  from 
50.  41  kings  shall  be  raised  up  from  the  coasts 

Zech.  2.  13  he  is  raised  up  out  of  his  holy  habitation 

2.To  be  caused  to  rise,  Dip  qum,  6. 

2  Sa.  23.   1  the  man  (who  was)  raised  up  on  high,  the 

3.  To  raise  up  thoroughly,  Bteyeipw  diageiro. 

Matt.  1.  24  Joseph,  [being  raised]  from  sleep,  did  as 

4.  To  raise  up,  iyeipoj  egeiro. 

Matt  11.    5  the  dead  are  raised  up,  and  the  poor  have 

16.  21  killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third  day 

17.  23  and  the  third  day  [he  shall  be  raised  again] 
Luke  7.  22  dead  are  raised,  to  the  poor  the  Gospel 

9.  22  and  be  slain,  and  [be  raised]  the  third  day 

20.  37  that  the  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  sh. 

Rom.  4.  25  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justification 

6.   4  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the 

6.  9  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more 

7.  4  to  him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead,  that 

1  C0.15.  16  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  raised 

15.  17  if  Christ  be  notraised,  your  faith  (is)  vain 
15.  35  How  are  the  dead  raised  up?  and  with 
15.  42  It  is  sown  in  corruption  ;  it  is  raised  in  in. 
15.  43  sown  in  dishonour ;  it  is  raised  in  glory 
15. 43  sown  in  weakness ;  it  is  raised  in  power 
15.  44  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body.  There  is  a 
15.  52  the  dead  [shall  be  raised]  incorruptible 

2  Ti.    2.    8  Christ  of  the  seed  of  David  was  raised 

RAISER  of  taxes  — 

One  causing  an  exactor  to  pass  over,  fcqia  "T3£o. 

Dan.  11.  20  stand  up  in  his  estate  a  raiser  of  taxes 
RAISING  up  — 
To  make  anuprising,  ttol^co  eirio-varaaij/ poieoepi. 

Acts  24.  12  neither  [raising  up]  the  people,  neither 
RAISINS,  bunches  or  clusters  of  — 
Dried  fruits,  D'pit-ft  tsimmuqim. 

1  Sa.  25.  iS  an  hundred  clusters  of  raisins,  and  two 

30. 12  cake  of  figs,  and  two  clusters  of  raisins 

2  Sa.  16.    1  an  hundred  bunches  of  raisins,  and  an 

1  Ch.  12.  40  bunches  of  raisins,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and 
RA'-KEM,  friendship,  Dj3> 
Son  of  Sheresh  grandson  of  Manasseh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7.  16  and  his  sons  (were)  Ulam  and  R. 
RAK'-KATH,  njji  bank,  flowing. 

A  fenced  city  in  Naphtali  for  Manasseh,  near  Hammath 
and  Chiuneroth ;  supposed  by  the  Rabbins  to  have  been 
afterwards  the  site  of  Tiberias.    Now  called  Kerak. 

Josh  19.  35  And  the  fenced  cities  (are)  ZidcUm.  .R.,  a. 
R&K'-KON,  1'ipnn  well  watered. 
A  city  in  Dan,  near  Joppa ;  now  called  Oyun  Kara. 

Josh.19.46  And  Me-jarkoh,  and  R.,  with  the  border 

RAM,  d~i  high. 

1.  Father  of  Aminadab,  and  son  of  Hezronsonof  Pharez. 

B.C.    1620. 

Ruth.  4.  19  And  Hezron begat  R.,  and  R.  begat  Amm. 
1  Ch.  2.   9  The  sons  also  of  Hezron.  .Jerahmeel.  .R. 
2.  10  And  R.  begat  Amminadab;  and  Ammina. 
2.Son  of  Jerahmeel  brother  of  Ram.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.   2.  25  And  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel . .  were  R.  the 
2.  27  the  sons  of  R.  the  firstborn  of  Jerahmeel 
3.Head  of  the  family  of  Elihu,  who  reasoned  with  Job. 
B.C.  1880. 

Job   32.    2  Darachel  the  Euzite,  of  the  kindred  of  R. 
RAM  — 
l.A  ram,  ??N  ayil. 

Gen.  15.   9  a  ram  of  three  years  old,  and  a  turtledove 
22. 13  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  horns 

22. 13  took  the  ram,  and  offered  him  up  for  a 
31 .  38  and  the  rams  of  thy  flock  have  I  not  eaten 

32. 14  goats,  two  hundred  ewes,  and  twenty  ra. 
Esod25-    srams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 

26. 14  for  the  tent(of)  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and 
29.  1  young  bullock,  and  two  rams  without  bl. 
29.    3  bring,  .with the  bullock  and  thetwo  rams 

29. 15  Thou  shalt  also  take  one  ram ;  andAaron 

100 


Exod29-  15,  19  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  ram 
29. 16  thou  shalt  slay  the  ram,  and  thou  shalt 
29.  17  thou  shalt  cut  the  ram  in  pieces,  and  w. 
29. 18  thou  shalt  burn  the  whole  ram  upon  the 
29.  19  thou  shalt  take  the  otherram;  and  Aaron 
29.  20  Then  shalt  thou  kill  the  ram,  and  take  of 
29.  22  thou  shalt  take  of  the  ram  the  fat,  and 
29. 22  shalt  take,  .for  it  (is)  a  ram  of  consecrat. 
29.  26  breast  of  the  ram  of  Aaron's  consecration 
29.  27  the  ram  of  the  consecration,  (even)  of  (t.) 
29.  31  shalt  take  the  ram  of  the  consecration 
29.  32  his  sons  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  ram 
35.    7  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 

35.  23  and  red  skins  of  rams,  and  badgers'  skins 

36.  19  for  the  tent(of)  rams'  skinsdyed  red,  and 
39.  34  the  covering  of  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and 

Lev.    5.  15,  18  ram  without  blemish  out  of  the  flocks 

5.  16  with  the  ram  of  the  trespass  offering,  and 

6.  6  a  ram  without  blemish  out  of  the  flock 
8.  2  two  rams,  and  a  basket  of  unleavened  b. 
8.  18  he  brought  the  ram  for  the  burnt  offering 
8.  18  laid  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  ram 
8.  20  he  cut  the  ram  into  pieces  ;  and  Moses  b. 

8. 21  Moses  burnt  the  whole  ram  upon  the  al. 

8. 22  he  brought  the  other  ram,  the  ram  of  co. 
8.  22  laid  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  ram 

8.  29  of  the  ram  of  consecration  it  was  Moses' 

9.  2  ram  for  a  burnt  offering,  without  blem. 
9.  4  a  bullock  and  a  ram  for  peace  offerings 
9.  18  the  ram  (for)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings 

9.  19  the  fat  01  the  bullock  and  of  the  ram,  the 
16.   3  bullock . .  and  a  ram  for  a  burnt  offering 

16.  5  kids,  .and  one  ram  for  a  burnt  offering 
19.  21  shall  bring,  .a  ram  for  a  trespass  offering 
19.  22  with  the  ram  of  the  trespass  offering  be. 
23. 18  one  young  bullock,  and  two  rams :  they 

Num.  5.  8  beside  the  ram  of  the  atonement,  where. 
6. 14  ram  without  blemish  for  peace  offerings 
6.  17  the  ram  (for)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings 

6.  19  shall  take  the  sodden  shoulder  of  the  ram 

7.  15  One  young  bullock,  one  ram 

[So  in  verse  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81.] 

7.  17  peace  offerings,  two  oxen,  five  rams 
[So  in  verse  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.] 
7.  87  the  rams  twelve,  the  lambs  of  the  first 
7.  88  the  rams  sixty,  the  he  goats  sixty,  the  la. 
15.   6  for  a  ram,  thou  shalt  prepare  (for)  a  meat 
15.  n  done,  .forone  ram,  or  for  a  lamb,  or  a  kid 
23.    1  prepare  me  here  seven  oxen  and  seven  r. 
23.   2,  4,  14,  30  on  (every)  altar  a  bullock  and  a  r. 
23.  29  prepare  me.  .seven  bullocks  and  seven  r. 
2S.  11,  19,  27  one  ram,  seven  lambs  of  the  first 
28.  12  offering,  mingled  with  oil,  for  one  ram 
28. 14  the  third  (part)  of  an  bin  unto  a  ram,  and 
28.  20  shall  ye  offer,  .two  tenth  deals  for  a  ram 

28.  28  with  oil.  .two  tenth  deals  unto  one  ram 

29.  2, 8, 36  one  ram,  (and)  seven  lambs  of  the  first 
29.  3,  9,withoil..(and)twotenthdealsfora  ram 
29.  13,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32  two  rams,  (and)  fou. 
29.  14  tenth  deals  to  each  ram  of  the  two  rams 
29.  18,  21,  24,  27,  30,  33,  37  for  the  ram,  and  for 

Deut32.  14  rams  of  the  breed  of  Bashan,  and  goats 

1  Sa.  15.  22  (and)  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rains 

2  Ki.  3.    4  an  hundred  thousand  rams,  with  the  w. 

1  Ch.15.  26  they  offered [seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams 

29.  21  a  thousand  rams,  (and)  a  thousand  lambs 

2  Ch.13.    9  withayoungbullockandsevenrams,  (the) 

17.  n  sevenhundred  rams,  and  seven  thousand 
29.  21  seven  rams,  and  seven  lambs,  and  seven 

29. 22  when  they  had  killed  the  rams,  they  spr. 
29.  32  an  hundred  rams,  (and)two  hundred  lambs 

Ezra    8.  35  ninety  and  six  rams,  seventy  and  seven 

10.  19  (they  offered)  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their 
■  Job  42.    8  take  unto  you  now.  .seven  rams,  and  go 

Psa.  66. 15  burnt  sacrifices,  .with  the  incense  of  rams 
114.   4  mountains  skipped  like  rams,  (and)  the 
114.   6  Ye  mountains,  (that)  ye  skipped  like  rams 
Isa.      1.  n  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams 

34.    6  with  the  fat  of  the  kidneys  of  rams :  for 

60.  7  rams  of  Nebaioth  shall  minister  unto  thee 
Jer.  51.  40  I  will  bring  them  down,  .like  rams  with 
Eze.  27.  21  occupied  with  thee  in  lambs,  and  rams 

34. 17  I  judge,  .between  the  rams  and  the  he  g. 

39.  18  drink  the  blood,  .of  rams,  of  lambs,  and 

43. 23  and  a  ram  out  of  the  flock  without  blem. 
43.  25  a  ram  out  of  the  flock,  without  blemish 
45.  23  seven  rams  without  blemish  daily  the  se. 

45.  24  an  ephah  for  a  ram,  and  an  hin  of  oil  for 

46.  4  burnt  offering,  .(shall  be),  .aram  without 
46.  5  meat  offering  (shall  be)  an  ephah  for  a  ram 
46.  6  six  lambs,  and  a  ram ;  they  shall  be  with. 
46.  7  he  shall  prepare,  .an  ephah  for  aram,  and 
46. 1 1  an  ephah  to  a  ram,  and  to  the  lambs  as  he 

Dan.  8.  3  there  stood  before  the  river  a  ram  which 
8.  4  I  saw  the  ram  pushing  westward,  and  no. 
8.  6  came  to  the  ram  that  had  (two)  horns,  wh. 
8.  7  close  unto  the  ram.  .and  smote  the  ram 
8.  7  there  was  no  power  in  the  ram  to  stand 
8.  7  none  that  could  deliver  the  ram  out  of  his 
8. 20  ram  which  thou  sawest  having  (two)  ho. 

Mic.    6.    7  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams 
2. A  ram,  "\T\  dtMtr. 

Ezra  6.   9  both  young  bullocks,  and  rams,  and  lambs 
6. 17  two  hundred  rams,  four  hundred  Iambs 
7.  17  That  thou  mayest  buy.  .rams,  lambs,  with 

3.-4  stout  ram,  "is  kar. 

Eze.    4.    2  set  (battering)  rams  against  it  round  abo. 
21.  22  appoint  (battering)  rams  against  the  gates 

4.  He  goat,  ram,  chief,  uny  attud. 

Gen.  31.  10  rams  which  leaped  upon  the  cattle  (were)  r. 


Gen.  31/12  rams  which  leap  upon  the  cattle  (are)  ri. 

RA'-MA,  'Papa,  from  Reb.  HD"J  height 
A  city  in  Benjamin ;  same  as  succeeding. 

Matt.  2. 18  In  R.  was  there  a  voice  heard,  lamentat. 
RA'-MAH,  nc-jn  the  height. 

1.  A  city  in  Benjamin,  half  an  hour  TV.  of  Gibeon,  and 
forty  stadia  or  two  hours  or  five  miles  N.  of  Jerusalem; 
nowcalled  el-Ham.  It  formed  the  frontierholdbetween 
Israel  and  Judah,  1  Ki.  15.  17. 

Josh. 18.  25  Gibeon,  and  R.,  and  Beeroth 
Judg.  4.    5  the  palm  tree  of  Deborah  between  R.  and 
19. 13  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these  places..  R. 

1  Ki.  15.  17  Baasha  king  of  Israel  went.,  and  built  R. 

15.21  he  left  off  buildingof  R.,and  dwelt  in  T. 

15.  22  and  they  took  away  the  stones  of  R.,  aud 

2  Ch.16.   1  Baasha  king  of  Israel  came,  .and  built  R. 

16.  5  he  left  off  building  of  R.,  and  let  his  work 
16.    6  and  they  carried  away  the  stones  of  R. 

Ezra  2.  26  The  children  of  R.  andGaba,  six  hundred 
Neh.   7.  30  The  men  of  R.  and  Gaba,  six  hundred  tw. 

11.  33  Hazor,  R.,  Gittaim 
Isa.   10.  29  R.  is  afraid ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled 
Jer.  40.    1  captain  of  the  guard  had  let  him  go.  .R. 
Hos.    5.    8  Bio  wye.,  the  trumpet  in  R.:  cry  aloud(at) 

2.  A  city  in  Napthali,  near  Adaniah  and  Hazor;  now 
called  Rameh. 

Josh.  19.  29  And  (then)  the  coast  turnetb  toR.,  and  to 
19.  36  And  Adamah,  and  R.,  and  Hazor 

3.  A  city  in  Ephraim  (also  called  R-amathaim  Zophim), 
where  Samuel  the  prophet  dwelt,  and  near  Bethel. 

1  Sa.   1. 19  they  roseup.. aud cametotheirhousetoR. 

2. 11  And  Elkanah  went  to  R.  to  his  house 

7.  17  And  his  return  (was)to  R.;  for  there  (was) 

8.  4  Then  all  the  elders  of  Israel . .  came . .  R. 

15.  34  Then  Samuel  went  to  R.;  and  Saul  went 

16.  13  So  Samuel  rose  up,  and  went  to  R. 

19. 18  So  David  fled,  .and  came  to  Samuel  toR. 

19. 19  Behold,  David  (is)  at  Naioth  in  R. 

19.  22  Then  went  he  also  to  R.,  and  came  to  a 
19.  22  (one)said, Behold, (they be)  at  Naioth  in  R. 
19.  23  And  he  went  thither  to  Naioth  in  R. 

19.  23  he  went  on . .  until  he  came  to  Naioth  in  R. 

20.  1  And  David  fled  from  Naioth  in  R.,  and 
22.  6  Saul  abode  in  Gibeah  under  a  tree  in  R. 
25.  1  the  Israelites.. buried  him  in  his  house  at  R. 
28.  3  Israelhad  lamented  him,  and  buried. . in  R. 

Jer.  31.  15  A  voice  was  heard  in  R-,  lamentation,  (an.) 

4.  A  contraction  of  Ramoth-Giteatf. 

2  Ki.   8.  29  wounds  which  the  Syrians  had  given.  .R. 
2  Ch.22.    6  of  the  wounds  which  were  given  him  atR. 

RA'-MATK,  nDi  height. 

A  city  in  Simeon  called  Ramoth  "  of  the  south ; "  now 

called  Kumab. 

Josh. 19.  8  R.  of  the  south.    This(is)  the  inheritance 

RA-BLA-THA-LM  ZO'-PHTM,  D'sis  D:ripirr. 
A  city  in  Mount  Ephraim,  where  Samuel  the  prophet 
dwelt,  and  more  commonly  called  simply  Ramah. 
1  Sa.    1.    1  Now  there  was  a  certain  man  of  R.,  of  mo. 

RAM-A-THTTE,  TJCH. 

An  inhabitant  of  Ramah  in  Benjamin 

1  Ch.  27.  27  And  over . .  vineyards  (was)  Shimei  the  R. 

RAM-ATH  LE'-HI  tV?  nan  highplaceof  the  jaw  bone. 
A  place  in  Judah,  near  Dan. 

Judgi5. 17  he  castaway  the  jawbone,  .andcalled.  .R. 
RA-MATH  MIZ'-PEH,n£^sn  T(Q~\p>lace  of  watch  tower. 
A  city  of  Gad  in  Gilead,  fifteen  miles  N.W.  of  Rabbath 
Ammon,  at  the  Jabbok. 

Josh.13.  26  And  from  Heshbon unto  R.,  andBetonim 
RA-ME'-SES,  Dpcyn  son  of  tlie  sun.  See  Raamses. 
A  city  or  district'  in  Goshen,  on  the  E.  of  the  Nile. 
Perhaps  Pelusium  or  Belbeis. 

Gen.  47.  11  Joseph,  .possession,  .in  the  land  of  R. 

Exodi2.  37  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed  from  R. 

Num  33.  3  And  they  departed  from  R.  in  the  first  m. 
33.    5  And.. children  of  Israel  removed  fromR. 

RAM'-IAH,  nTn  Jah  is  high, 

A  son  of  Parosh  who  had  taken  a  strange  wife.  B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  25  of  the  sons  of  Parosh ;  R.,  and  Jeziah,  and 
RA'-MOTH,  ni£iO,  nb-i  h-eights. 

1  .A  Levitical  city  of  Gilead  in  Gad,  the  same  as  R\anioth- 
GUead  and  HsLmoih-mizpeh. 

Deut.  4.  43  and  R.  in  Gilead,  of  the  Gadites ;  and  G. 

Josh.20.   8  and  R.  in  Gilead  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad 

21.  38  And  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad,  R.  in  Gilead 
1  Ch.  6.  80  And  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad ;  R.  in  Gilead 

2.  A  Levitical  city  in  Issachar,  perhaps  the  same  as 
Jarmuth  in  Josh.  21.  29,  and  Remath  in  Josh   19.  21. 

1  Ch.  6.  73  And  R.  with  her  suburbs,  and  Anem  with 

3.  One  of  the  sons  of  Bani  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 
B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  29  of  the  sons  of  Bani  Meshullam.  .andR. 
RA-MOTH  GEL'-EAD,  "ij^a  nbn. 

A  city  of  Gad  in  Gilead;  sometimes  simply  called 
Ramoth. 

1  Ki.  4.  13  ThesonofGeber.inR. ;  to  him  (pertained) 

22.  3  Know  ye  that  R.  in  Gilead  (is)  ours 
22.    4  Wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  battle  to  R.  ? 
22.    6  Shall  I  go  against  R.  to  battle,  or  shall  I 
22.  12  saying,  Go  up  to  R.,  and  prosper 

22. 15  Micaiah,  shall  we  go  against  R.  to  battle 


RAMOTH 


Tdi 


READ 


i  Ki.  22.  20  that  he  may  go  up  and  fall  at  R.? 

22.  29  Jehoshaphat.  .king  of  Judah  went.  .toR. 
2  Ki.   8.  28  went . .  to  the  war  against  Hazael . .  in  R. 
9.    1  Gird  up  thy  loins,  .and  go  to  R. 
9.    4  the  young  man  the  prophet,  went  to  R. 
9. 14  Now  Jorani  had  kept  R.,  he  and  all  Israel 
2  Ch.18.    2  persuaded  him  to  go  up  (with  him)  to  R. 
18.    3  Wilt  thou  go  witli  me  to  R.? 
18.    5  Shall  we  go  to  R.  to  battle,  orshall  I  for.? 
18. 11  saying,  Go  up  to  R.,and  prosper;  for  the 
18. 14  shall  we  go  to  R.  to  hattle,  orshall  I  fo.? 
18. 19  that  he  may  go  up  and  fall  at  R.? 
18.  28  Jehosh.  the  king  of  Judah  went  up  to  R. 
22.    5  to  war  against  llazael  king  of  Syria  at  R. 

RA'-MOTH,  (South),  3JJ  rilffl. 

A  city  of  Simeon  in  the  Negeb  or  south  country.  See 

Jiamath. 

1  Sa.  30.  27  and  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  south  R. 

RAMPART  — 

Army,  force,  hulwark,  hn,  h"n  chel. 

Lam.  2.    8  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall  to  lament 
Nah.  3.   8  whose  rampart  (was)  the  sea,  (aud)  her  w. 

RAM'S  (horn)  — 
Ra?ns  horn,  hiv  yobel. 

Josh.  6.  4  shall  bear . .  seven  trumpets  of  rams'  horns 
6.  5  they  make  a  long  (blast)  with  the  ram's  h. 
6.  6  bear  seven  trumpets  of  rams'  horns  before 
6.  8  bearing  the  seven  trumpets  of  rams'  horns 
6. 13  bearing  seven  trumpets  of  rams'  horns  be. 
RANGE,  to  — 
To  run  to  and  fro,  pptf  shaqaq. 

Prov.28. 15  (As)  a  roaring  lion,  and  aranging  bear;  (so 
RANGE  (for  pots)  — 
1.  Abundance,  range,  lin*  yethur. 

Job  39.    8  The  range  ot  the  mountains  (is)  his  past. 

2. Range  or  row,  nine'  sederah. 

2  Ki.n.    8  he  thatcbmeth  within  the  ranges,  let  him 

11.  15  Have  her  forth  without  the  ranges  :  and 
2  Ch.23.  14  Have  her  forth  of  the  ranges :  and  whoso 

3.  Double  range  for  pots,  D!T9  kirayim. 

Lev.  ii.  35  (whether  it  be)  oveu,  or  ranges  for  pots 

RANK  — 

l.Path,  way,  custom,  traveller,  rnx  orach, 
Joel    2.    7  and  they  shall  not  break  their  ranks 

2. Fat,  firm,  uni  bari. 

Gen.  41.    5  came  up  upon  one  stalk,  rank  and  good 
41.    7  seven  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  rank 

3. Rank,  arrangement,  n:n;;p  maarakah. 

1  Ch.12.  38  All  theseinenof  war,  that  could  keep  rank 

±. Step,  foot,  time,  cj/9  paam. 

1  Ki.  7.   4, 5  and  light(was)  against  light  (in)  three  r. 

o.A  row,  company,  irpaaia  2^asia. 

Mark  6.  40  sat  down  in  ranks,  by  hundreds,  and  by 

RANK,  to  keep  — 

To  keep  rank,  be  in  order,  "nu  adar. 

1  Ch.12. 33  fifty  thousand,  which  could  keep  rank:  (th.) 

RANSOM  — 

I. A  covering,  133  kopher. 

Exod3o.  12  then  shall  they  give  every  man  a  ransom 

Job  33.  24  sailh,  Deliver  him.  .Ihave  found  aransom 
36.  18  then  a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee 

Psa.  49.    7  None  (of  them)  can.  .give  to  God  a  rans. 

Prov.  6.  35  He  will  not  regard  any  ransom  ;  neither 
13.  8  The  ransom  of  a  man's  life  (are)  his  riches 
21.  18  wicked  (shall  be)  a  ransom  for  the  righ. 

Isa.  43.   3  I  gave  Egypt  (for)  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia 

2.Freedom,  ]'v~\$  pidyon. 

Exod2i.  30  then  he  shall  give  for  the  rausora  of  falsi. 

3.^*1  corresponding  price,  avriXinpov  anlilutron. 
1  Ti.    2.    6  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be  test. 

4. A  price,  ransom,  K'urpov  lutron. 

Matt  20.  28  and  to  give  his  life  aransom  for  many 
Mark  10.  45  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom 

RANSOM,  to  — 

1 .  To  free,  *7X3  gaol. 

Isa.   51.  10  depths  of  the  sea  a  way  for  the  ransomed 
Jer.   31. 11  ransomed  him  from  the  hand  of  (him  that 

2.  To  free,  rns  padah. 

Isa.   35.  10  And  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  ret. 
Hos.  13.  14  I  will  ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the 
RA'-PHA,  N9-1,  ns-\fearful 

1.  The  fifth  son  of  Benjamin.    B,0.  1700. 

1  Ch.  8.    2  Nohah  the  fourth,  and  R.  the  fifth 

2.  A  Benjamite  of  Saul's  family.     B.o.  730. 

1  Ch.  8.  37  R.  (was)  his  son,  Eleasah  hisson,  Azel  his 

3.  An  ancestor  of  certain  Philistinewarriorsslain  in  the 
days  of  David,  and  here  translated  "  the  giant." 

2  Sa.  21.  16,  18  which  (was)of  the  sons  of  the  giant 

21. 20  and  he  also  was  born  to  the  giant 
21.  22  These  four  were  born  to  theglantin  Gatfa 
iCh.20.   4  Bippal,  (that  was)  of  the  children  of  theg. 
20.    6  and  he  also  was  the  son  of  the  giant 
ao.   8  These  were  born  unto  the  giant  in  Gath 


RA'-PHTT,  tfiEfi  feared. 

A  Benjamite,  father  of  Palti,  one  of  those  sent  out  to 

spy  the  land  of  Canaan  by  Moses.     B.C.  1500. 

Num  13.   9  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  Palti  the  son  of  R. 
RARE  — 
Hare,  precious,  Vj?:  yaqqir. 

Dan.    2.  11  rare  thing  that  the  king  requireth ;  and 
RASE,  to  — 
To  make  necked  or  bare,  rnjj  arah,  3. 

Psa.137.    7  Rase  (it),  rase  (it,  even)  to  the  foundation 
RASH,  (to  be),  rashly  — 

1,  To  trouble,  hasten,  Sna  bahel,  3. 

Eccl.   5.    2  Be  not  rash  with  thy  month,  and  let  not 

2,  To  be  hasty,  hastened,  ~»np  mahar,  2. 

Isa.  32.  4  heart  also  of  the  rash  shall  understand  k. 

3.  Precipitate,  TrpoTrer^s  propetes. 

Acts  19.  36  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  ras. 

RASOR,  RAZOR  — 

\.A  knife,  razor,  *iyn  taar. 

Num.  6.  5  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head 
Psa.  52.  2  mischiefs;  like  a  sharp  razor,  working  de. 
Isa.  7.  20  Lord  shave  with  a  razor  that  is  hired . .  by 
Eze.    5.    1  take  thee  a  barber's  razor,  and  cause  (it) 

2. A  razor,  rnio  morah. 

Judg  13.    5  uo  razor  shall  come  on  hie  head :   for  the 

16.  17  There  hath  not  come  a  razor  upon  mine 
1  Sa,   1.  ii  and  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his 

RATE  — 

A  toord,  matter,  thing,  "»a*i  dabar. 

Exodi6.   4  gather  a  certain  rate  every  day,  that  I 

1  Ki.io.  25  horses,  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by  year 

2  Ki.25.  30  a  daily  rate  for  everyday,  all  the  days  of 
2  Ch.  8.  13  after  a  certain  rate  every  day,  offering  ac. 
2  Ch.  9.  24  spices,  horses,  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by 

RATHER  (than,  to  be  the) — 
l.iW>,  not,  hi<  at. 

Provi7.  12  meet  a  man,  rather  thanafool  in  hisfolly 
2.  To  choose,  fix  on,  try,  *ioa  bachar. 

Psa.  84.  10  rather,  .than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wi. 
3. Either,  or,  than,  verily,  j]  e. 

Matti8.    8  rather  than  having  two  hands  or  two  feet 
18.   9  rather  than  having  two  Lu.  12.  51 ;  18. 14. 

4.  To  will,  wish,  0eAa>  thelb. 

1  Co. 14. 19  Iliad  rather  speak  five  .'.than  ten  thous. 
5. More,  rather,  fiaWov  mallon. 

Matt  10.  6  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
10.  28  rather  fear  him  which  is  able  to  destroy 
25-  9  g°  ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy 
27.  24  prevail  nothing,  but  (that)  rather  a  turn. 

Mark  5.  26  was  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grew  w. 
15.  11  should  rather  release  Barabbas  unto  them 

Lukeio.  20  [rather]  rejoice,  because  your  names  are 

John  3.  19  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  b. 

Acts    5.  29  said,  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than 

Rom.  8.  34  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  ev. 
14.  13  but  judge  this  rather  that  no  man  put  a 

1  Co.  5.    2  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  mou. 

6.    7  Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong?  why 

6.  7  not  rather  (suffer  yourselves  to)  be  defr. 

7.  21  if  thou  rnayest  be  made  free,  use  (it)  rat. 
9.  12  (are)  not  we  rather?  Nevertheless  we  h. 

14.    1  desire  spiritual  (gifts),  lint  rather  that  ye 
14.   5  but  rather  that  ye  prophesied  :  for  grea. 

2  Co.  2.    7  So  that  contrariwise  ye  (ought)  rather  to 

3.    8  ministration  of  the  spirit  be  rather  glori. 

5.    8  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body 
12.   g  gladly  therefore  will  I  rather  glory  in  my 
Gal.    4.   9  after  that  ye  have  known  God,  or  rather 
Eph.  4.  28  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with 

5.   4  nor  jesting,  .but  rather  giving  of  thanks 

5.  ti  have  no  fellowship  with,  .butrather  rep. 
Phil.  1.  12  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the  furthera. 

1  Ti.    1.    4  rather  than  godly  edifying  which  is  in  fa. 

6.  2  rather  do  (them)  service,  because  they  are 
Phm.  9  Yet  for  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  (thee) 
He)). 11.  25  Choosing  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with 

12.    9  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection 
12.  13  turned  out  of  the  way;  but  let  it  rather 

2  Pe.    1.  10  Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren,  give  di. 

6. More  abundantly,  Trtpio-o-nrepais  perissoteros. 

Heb.  13.  19  But  I  beseech  (you)  the  rather  to  do  this 
RATTLE,  to  — 
1.7*0  sing,  rattle,  nyj  ranah. 

Job   39.  23  quiver  rattleth  against  him,  the  glittering 
2.A  shaking, trembling, rushing, rattling,  tpyn  raash. 

Nah.   3.    2  uoise  of  the  rattling  of  the  wheels,  and  of 
RAVEN  — 

1,  A  raven,  any  orcb. 

Gen.   8.    7  sent  forth  a  raven,  which  went  forth  to 

Lev.  11. 15  Every  raven  after  his  kind 

Deut  14.  14  And  every  raven  after  his  kind 

1  Ki.17.    4  have  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed  thee 

17.  6  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  flesh  in  the 
Job  38.  41  Whoprovideth  for  theraveu  hisfood?  wh. 
Psa.  147.  9  Hegiveth.  .to  the  young  ravens  which  cry 
Prov. 30.  17  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out 
Song  5.  11  his  locks  (are)  bushy,  (and)  black  as  a  ra. 
Isa.   34.  11  the  owl  also  and  the  raven  shall  dwell  in 

2.  A  raven  or  crow,  Kopa£  korax. 

Lukei2.  24  Consider  the  ravens:  for  they  neither  sow 


RAVEN,  RAVIN,  to  — 
l.To  tear,  *pu  taraph. 

Gen.  49.  27  Benjamin  shall  raven  (as)  a  wolf  -.  in  the 

Psa.  22.  i3Theygaped..(as)araveningaudaroaring 

Eze.  22.  25  like  a  roaring  lion  ravening  the  prey :  th. 
22.  27  Her  princes,  .(are)  like  wolves  ravening 
2.A  torn  thing,  prey,  rapine,  naTja  terephah. 

Nah.    2.  12  holes  with  prey,  and  his  deus  with  ravin 
RAVENING,  RAVENOUS  (bird)  — 
\,A  ravenous  bird  or  fowl,  try  ayit. 

Isa.   46.  11  Calling  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  east,  the 

Eze.  39.   4  I  will  give  thee  unto  the  ravenous  birds 
2.  A  burglar,  destroyer,  {""is  parits. 

Isa.  35.   9  nor  (any)  ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  the. 
%.A  snatching  at  or  aivay,  prey,  apwayr)  harpage. 

Luken.  39  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and  wick. 
4,  Snatching,  ravenous,  ap-wa.%  harpax. 

Matt.  7.  15  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves 
RAVISH  (the  heart),  to  — 
l.To  embolden,  give  heart,  aa^>  labab,  3. 

Song.  4.   9,  9  Thou  hast  ravished  my  heart 
2.To  afflict,  humble,  .13"  anah,  3. 

Lam.  5.  liTheyravishedthewomeninZion,  (and)the 
RAVISHED,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  err,  go  astray,  magnify  self,  T\y$  shagah. 

Prov.  5.  19  and  be  thou  ravished  always  with  her  love 
5.  20  why  wilt  thou . .  be  ravished  with  a  strange 

2.7*0  beravished,hyw  or  aat:'  shakab,  2, or  shagal,  2. 
Isa.  13.  16  shall  be  spoiled,  and  their  wives  ravished 
Zech  14.    2  the  houses  rifled,  and  the  women  ravished 

RAW  — 

1. Living,  alive,  'n  chai. 

Lev.  13.  10  (there  be)  quick  raw  flesh  in  the  rising 
13.  14  when  raw  flesh  appeareth  in  him,  he  shall 
13.  15  seethe  raw  flesh,  .the  raw  flesh  (is) uncle. 
13.  :6  Or  if  the  raw  flesh  turn  again,  and  be  ch. 

1  Sa.  2.  15  not  have  sodden  flesh  of  thee,  but  raw 

2,Raw,  Ki  na. 

Exodi2.   g  Eat  not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at  all  with 
REACH  (forth,  to,  unto,  up),  to  — 

I.  7*o  cause  to  fee  or  reach,  rna  barach,  5. 
Exod26.  28  the  middle  bar.  .shall  reach  from  end  to 

2.7*0  smite,  nnp  machah. 

Num  34.  11  shall  reach  unto  the  side  of  the  sea  of  C. 
3. 7*o  reach,  come,  arrive,  nap,  nop  meta,  metah. 
Dan.   4.  11  height  thereof  reached  unto  heaven,  and 
4.  20  whose  height  reached  unto  heaven,  and 
4.  22  reacheth  unto  heaven,  and  thy  dominion 

4.  To  touch,  come  upon,  strike,  yjj  naga. 

Jer.     4.  10  whereas  the  sword  reacheth  unto  the  soul 
4.  18  because  it  reacheth  unto  thine  heart 
48.  32  they  reach  (even)  to  the  sea  of  Jazer :  the 
51.   9  for  her  judgment  reacheth  unto  heaven 

5.7*0  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  Jtj-'J  nasag,  5. 

Lev.  26.   5  reach  unto  the  vintage,  .reach  unto  the 
6.  7*o  touch,  come  upon,  meet  with,  yjs  paga. 

Josh  19.  11  reached  to  Dabasheth,  and  reached  tothe 
19.  22  reacheth  to  Tabor,  and  Shahazimah,  and 
19.  26  reacheth  to  Carmel  westward,  and  to  Sh. 
19.  27  reacheth  to  Zebulun,  and  to  the  valley  of 
19.  34  reacheth  to  Zebulun.  .and  reacheth  to  A. 

7. 7*o  reach  out,  give,  bay  tsabat. 

Ruth  2. 14  he  reached  her  parched  (corn),  and  she  did 

5.  7*o  cause  to  touch  or  come  upon,  yiuiaga,  5. 
Gen.  28.  12  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven :  and  behold 

2  Ch.  3.  11  reaching  to  the  wall,  .reaching  to  the  wi. 

3. 12  reaching  to  the  wall  of  the  house ;  aud 
28.   9  slain  them  in  a  rage  (that)  reacheth  up 
Job  20.   6  Thougti.  .his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds 
Isa.     8.    8  he  shall  reach  (even)  to  the  neck :  and  the 
Zech  14.   5  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  unto 
9. 7*o  send  forth,  nhy  shalach,  3. 

Prov3i.  20  she  reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  n. 
10. 7*o  follow,  a.Ko\ov94u  akoloutheo. 

Rev.  18.    s  For  her  sins  [have  reached]  unto  heaven 

II.  7*o  reach  out,  stretch  out  toward,  iireKTelvopai. 
Phil.  3.  13  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  which 

12.  7*o  come  upon,arrireat,i(piKveofj.at  eiyhilzneomai. 
2  Co.  10.  13  to  us,  a  measure  to  reach  even  unto  you 
10.  14  as  though  we  reached  not  unto  you:  for 
13.7*0  bear,  carry,  tpipot  phero. 

John2o.  27  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  .reach  hither  thy 
READ,  to  (be)  — 
1.7*o  call,  read,  n-jq  qara. 

Exod24.    7  read  in  the  audience  of  the  people :  and 

Deut  17.  19  shall  read  therein  all  the  days  of  his  life 

31.  11  thou  shalt  read  this  law  before  all  Israel 

Josh.  8.  34  afterward  he  read  all  the  words  of  the  law 

8. 35  which  Joshua  read  not  before  all  the  con. 

2  Ki.  5.    7  when  the  king  of  Israel  had  read  the  let. 

19.  14  Hezekiah  received  the  letter,  .and  read  it 

22.    8  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  and  he  read  it 

22.  10  And  Shaphan  rend  it  before  the  king 

22.  16  book  which  the  king  of  Judah  hath  read 

23.  2  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of  the  book 
2  Ch.34. 18  And  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  king 


READING 


795 


REASON 


2  CI1.34.  24  which  they  have  read  before  the  king  of 
34.  30  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of  the  book 
Neh.   8.    3  read  therein  before  the  street  that  (was) 
8.    8  So  they  read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of 
8. 18  he  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God 
g.    3  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  LORD 
Isa.    29.  11,  12  Read  this.  I  pray  thee:  and  hesaith 
34. 16  Seek  ye  out  of  the  book,  .and  read  ;  no  one 
37.  14  received  the  letters,  .and  read  it :  andH. 
Jer.  29.  29  Zephaniah  the  priest  read  this  letter  in 
36.    6  read  in  the  roll .  .shalt  read  them  in  the 
36.    8  reading  in  the  book  the  words  of  theLoRD 
36. 10  Then  read  Baruch  in  the  book  the  words 

36. 13  Baruch  read  the  book  in  the  ears  of  the 

36. 14  the  roll  wherein  thou  hast  read  in  the  e. 

36. 15  read  it  in  our  ears.  So  Baruch  read  (it) 
36.  21  Jehudi  read  it  in  the  ears  of  the  king,  and 
36.  23  when  Jehudi  had  read  three  or  four  leaves 
51.  61  shalt  see,  and  shalt  read  all  these  words 

Hab.  2.    2  plain.,  that  he  may  run  that  readeth  it 

2.  To  be  called,  read,  N"ip  qara,  2. 

Neb.  13.    1  On  that  day  they  read  in  the  book  of  Mo. 
Esth.  6.    1  Chronicles;  and  they  were  read  before  the 

Z.To  call,  read,  N-jp  qera. 

Ezra  4.  18  The  letter,  .hath  been  plainly  read  before 

4.  23  letter  (was)  read  before  Rehum,  and  Shi. 
Dan.   5.    7  "Whosoever  shall  read  this  writing,  auds. 

5.  8  but  they  could  not  read  the  writing,  nor 
5.  15  that  they  should  read  this  writing,  and 

5.  16  now  if  thou  canst  read  the  writing,  and 
5. 17  yet  I  will  read  the  writing  unto  the  king 

4.  To  begin  to  kncno  again,  read,  hvayivwo-Kw. 
Matt  12.    3  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did,  when 
12.    5  Or  have  ye  not  read  in  the  law,  how  that 
19.   4  Have  ye  not  read,  that  he  which  made(t.) 

21. 16  Yea;  have  ye  never  read,  Out  of  the  mo. 

21.  42  Did  ye  never  read  in  the  Scriptures,  The 

22.  31  have  ye  not  read  that  which  was  spoken 
24.  15  whoso  readeth,  let  him  understand 

Mark  2. 25  Have  ye  never  read  what  David  did,  when 

12.  10  have  ye  not  read  this  scripture ;  The  stone 
12. 26  have  ye  not  read  in  the  book  of  Moses,  how 
13. 14  let  him  that  readeth  understand,  then  let 

Luke  4.  16  the  sabbath  day,  and  stood  up  for  to  read 

6.  3  Have  ye  not  read  so  much  as  this,  what 
10.  26  What  is  written  in  the  law?  how  readest 

Johniq.  20  This  title  then  read  many  of  the  Jews ;  for 
Acts    8.  28  sitting  in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  pro. 
8.  30  heard  him  read  the  prophet  Esaias,  aud 
8.  30  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest? 
8.  32  place  of  the  Scripture  which  he  read  was 

13.  27  prophets  which  are  read  every  sabbath  day 
15.  21  being  read  in  the  synagogues  every  sabbath 
15.  31  when  they  had  read,  they  rejoiced  for  the 

23.  34  when  the  governor  had  read  (the  letter),  he 
2  Co.    1. 13  none  other  things,  .than  what  ye  read  or 

3.  2  written  in  our  hearts,  known  and  read  of 
3. 15  even  unto  this  day,  when  Moses  is  read 

Eph.  3.    4  Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  may  underst. 
Col.     4. 16  And  when  this  epistle  is  read  among  you 

4.  16  cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  church 

4.  16  that  ye  likewise  read  the  (epistle)  from 

1  Th.  5.  27  that  this  epistle  be  read  unto  all  the 
Rev.    1.    3  Blessed(is)he  that  readeth,  and  they  that 

5.  4  [to  read]  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon 
READING  — 

\,A  calling,  reading,  topo  miqra. 

Neh.  8.  8  and  caused  (them)  to  understand  the  re. 
2.  To  call,  read,  tcp,  qara. 

Jer.  51.  63  when  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  reading 
3. A  reading,  knoioing  again,  avayvacris  anagnosis. 

Acts  13.  15  the  reading  of  the  law  and  the  prophets 

2  Co.  3.  14  the  same  veil  untaken  away  in  the  read. 

1  Ti.  4. 13  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  exhortation 
READINESS  (of  mind)  — 

1.  Ready,  eroifj.os  etoimos. 

a  Co. 10.   6  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  disobedience 
2. Readiness,  forwardness,  irpodv/xla  2^'othumia. 

Acts  17.  11  received  the  word  with,  .readiness  of  m. 

2  Co.  8. 11  as(therewas)areadiness  to  will,  so  (there 
READY  (mind)  — 

\.To  make  haste,  enjoy,  cnn  chush. 

Nuni32. 17  we  ourselves  will  go  ready  armed  before 
%Oood,  31M  tob. 

Isa.  41.  7  saying,  It  (is)ready  for  the  soldering :  and 
Z.To  he  formed,  prepared,  ready,  J13  kun,  2, 

Exodig.  11  be  ready  against  the  third  day :  for  the 

19.  15  Be  ready  against  the  third  day :  come  not 

34.   2  be  ready  in  the  morning,  and  come  up  in 

Josh.  8.    4  not  very  far  from  the  city,  .be  ye  all  ready 

Job  12.    5  He  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  (his)  feet  (is 

15.  23  the  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  his  hand 

18.  12  destruction  (shall  be)  ready  at  his  side 

Psa.  38.  17  For  I  (am)  ready  to  halt,  and  my  sorrow 

4.  Ready,  hasting,  T#fc>  mahir. 

Ezra  7.   6  (was)  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of  Moses 
Psa.  45.    1  my  tongue  (is)  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer 

5.  To  find,  K^nniatsa. 

2  Sa.  18.  22  seeing  that  thou  hast  no  tidings  ready 
6. Ready  prepared,  chief,  Tflj/,  rnrijj  athud,  athid. 
Esth.  3.  14  that  they  should  be  ready  against  that  day 
8.  13  the  Jews  should  be  ready  against  that  day 
Job     3.    8  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  their  mourning 
15.  24  prevail,  .as  a  king  ready  to  the  battle 


7.  Ready,  prepared,  Thy.  athid. 

Dan.   3. 15  if  ye  be  ready  that  at  what  time  ye  hear 

8.  Nigh,  iyyvs  eygus. 

Heb.  8.  13  that  which  decayeth.  .(is)  ready  to  vanish 
9  Ready,  erot/xos  hetoimos. 

Matt 22.  4  all  things  (are)  ready:  come  unto  the  m. 
22.  8  The  wedding  is  ready,  but  they  which  were 
24.  44  be  ye  also  ready :  for  in  such  an  hour  as 
25. 10  they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to 

Lukei2.  40  Be  ye  therefore  ready  also :  for  the  Son 
14.  17  to  say.  .Come ;  for  all  things  are  now  re. 

22.  33  I  am  ready  to  go  with  thee,  both  into  pri. 
John  7.  6  notyetcome  :  butyourtimeisalwayready 
Acts  23.  15  we,  orever he  come  near,  are  readyto  kill 

23.  21  now  are  they  ready,  looking  for  a  promise 
2  Co.  9.  5  the  same  might  be  ready,  as  (a  matter  of) 
Titus  3.    1  Put  them  in  mind,  .to  be  ready  to  every 

1  Pe.  1.    5  salvation  ready  to  he  revealed  in  the  last 

3. 15  (be)  ready  always  to  (give)  an  answer  to 

10.  Readiness,  forwardness,  Trpo8v/j.ia prothumia. 

2  Co.  8.  19  same  Lord,  and  (declaration  of)  your  ready 

XI. Readily,  eroifiuis  hetoinws. 

Acts  21. 13  I  am  ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also 
2  Co.  12.  14  I  am  ready  to  come  to  you ;  and  I  will  no 

1  Pe.  4.    5  him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  aud 

12.  To  be  about  to,  fieWw  mello. 

Luke  7.    2  centurion's  servant... was  siok,  and  ready 
Acts  20.    7  preached . .  ready  to  depart  on  the  morrow 

IS.  Ready,  prompt,  Trp68u/j.os  prothumos. 

Mark  14.  33  The  spirit  truly  (is)  ready,  but  the  flesh 
Rom.  1.  15  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you 

[See  also  Armed,  burst,  dressed,  fall,  forgive,   made, 

make,  offered,  prepared,  quickly.] 

READY,  to  be  or  become  — 
1.2*0  be  ready,  make,  pn  hun,  5. 

Deut.  1.  41  And.,  ye  were  ready  to  go  up  into  the  hill 

2.  To  form,  prepare,  make  ready,  p3  hun,  Sa. 

Isa.   51. 13  oppressor,  as  if  he  were  ready  to  destroy 
3.2b  move,  slip,  fail,  u'id  mot. 

Prov24.  11  drawn  uuto  death,  and. .ready  to  be  slain 

4.  To  show  self  ready,  "iny  aihad,  7. 

Job  15.  28  houses,  .which  are  ready  to  become  hea. 

5.  To  be  about  to,  jueA\&>  mello. 

Rev.  3.    2  things  which  remain,  that  are  ready  to 
12.   4  woman  which  was  ready  tu  be  delivered 

6. To  make  ready  beside,  Trapacncevdfa  paraskeuazo. 

2  Co.  9.    2  Achaia  was  ready  a  year  ago  ;  and  your 

9.  3  I  sent,  .that,  as  I  said,  ye  may  be  ready 

READY,  to  make  or  be  made  — 

1.  To  gird,  iqn  asar. 

Gen.  46.  29  Joseph  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  went 
Exodi4.    6  he  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  took  his 
2  Ki.  9.  21  Make  ready.  And  his  chariot  was  mader. 

2.T0  form,  prepare,  establish,  \\3kun,  Za. 

Psa.  7.  12  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready 
11.  2  they  make  ready  their  arrowupon  the  st. 
21. 12  thou  shaltmakeready(thinearrows)upou 

3.  To  prepare,  establish,  p3  kun,  5. 

Gen.  43.  16  made  ready  ;  for  (these)  men  shall  dine 
43.  25  they  made  ready  the  present  against  Jos. 

1  Ch.  28.    2  God,  and  had  made  readyforthe  building 

2  Ch.  35. 14  they  made  ready  for  themselves,  and  for 
Eze.     7. 14  blown  the  trumpet,  even  to  make  all  re. 

4.  To  bring  near,  :np  qarab,  3. 

Hos.    7.  6  have  made  ready  their  heart  like  an  oven 
5.2*0  make  ready,  kroifid^  heioimazo. 

Matt 26. 19  the  disciples,  .made  ready  the  passover 
Marki4.  15  a  large  upper  room,  .there  make  ready  for 

14. 16  his  disciples,  .made  ready  the  passover 
Luke   1.  17  to  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the 
9.  52  entered  into  a  village,  .to  make  ready  for 

17.   8  Make  ready  wherewith  I  may  sup,  and  g. 

22. 12  a  large  upper  room . .  there  make  ready 

22.  13  And  they  went,  and.  .made  ready  the  pa. 
Acts  23.  23  Make  ready  two  hundred  soldiers  to  goto 
Rev.  19.    7  and  his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready 

6.  To  make  ready  beside,  Trapao-Kevdfa  paraskeuazo. 

Acts  10.  10  while  they  made  ready,  he  fell  into  a  tr. 
READY  to  our  hand,  made  — 
Ready,  erotfj-os  hetoimos. 

2  Co.  10. 16  another  man's  line.,  made  readyto  ourh. 

READY,  more  — 
Near,  nii^  qarob. 

Eccl.  5.   1  be  more  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  the  s. 
READY  to  distribute  — 
Ready  to  give  over  or  share  with,  e^ie-raSo-ros. 

1  Ti.    6. 18  ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communi. 
RE-A'-IAH,  RE-A'-IA,  n;so  Jah  sees. 

1.  Son  of  Shobal  son  of  Judah.  B.C.  1670. 

1  Ch.  4.   2  And  R.  the  son  of  Shobal  begat  Jahath 

2.  Grandfather  of  Beerah  prince  of  Reuben  when  Israel 
was  carried  away  to  Assyria.  B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  5.    5  Micah  Iris  son,  R.  his  son,  Baal  his  son 

3.  One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.  B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  47  the  children  of  Gahar,  the  children  of  R. 
Neh.   7.  50  The  children  of  R.,  the  children  of  Rezin 


REALM  — 

1.  Kingdom,  *D^B  malku. 

Eze.    7. 13  and  (of)liis  priests  and  Levites,  in  my  rea. 

7.  23  there  be  wrath  against  the  realm  of  the 
Dan.  6.  3  thought  to  set  him  over  the  whole  realm 
2. Kingdom,  no^D  malkuth. 

2  Ch.  20.  30  the  realm  of  Jehoshaphat  was  quiet;  for 

Dan.    1.  20  (and)  astrologers  that  (were)  in  all  his  re. 

9.    1  made  king  over  the  realm  of  the  Chaldea. 

11.   2  shall  stir  up  all  against  the  realm  of  Gre. 

REAP  (wholly,  down),  to  — 

l.Tofnish,  762  kalah,  3. 

Lev.  19.   9  thou  shalt  not  wholly  reap  the  corners  of 

2.  To  shorten,  reap,  ivp  qatsar. 

Lev.  19.   9  wheu  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  land,  th. 
23.  10  "When  ye .  .shall  reap  the  harvest  thereof 

23.  22  when  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  land 
23. 22  not  make  clean  riddance . .  when  thou  re. 
25.   5  thou  shalt  not  reap,  neither  gather  the  g. 
25.  11  neither  reap  that  which  groweth  of  itself 

Ruth  2.    9  thine  eyes  (.be)  on  the  field  that  they  do 

1  Sa.   8.  12  and  to  reap  his  harvest,  and  to  make  his 

2  Ki.  19.  29  reap,  and  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fr. 
Job     4.   8  they  that . .  sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same 

24.  6  They  reap  (every  one)  his  corn  in  the  field 
Psa.  126.  5  Them  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy 
Prov.22.  8  He  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap  vanity 
Eccl.  11.  4  he  that  regardetb  the  clouds  shall  not  re. 
Isa.   17.    5  reapeth  the  ears  with  his  arm ;  and  it  sh. 

37.  30  reap,  and  plaut  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fr. 
Jer.  12.  13  They  have  sown  wheat,  but  shall  reapth. 
Hos.    8.    7  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind :  it  hath  no 

10.  12  reap  in  mercy;  breakup  your  fallow  gro. 

10. 13  ye  have  reaped  iniquity ;  yehaveeaten  the 
Mic.   6. 15  thou  shalt  not  reap ;  thou  shalt  tread  the 

3.  To  reap,  moio,  gather  together,  ct.fj.da>  amao. 
Jas.    5.    4  labourers  which  have  reaped  down  your 

4.2*0  reap,  gather  in  the  harvest,  Qf-pifa  therizo . 
Matt.  6.  26  neither  do  they  reap,  nor  gather  iuto  ba. 

25.  24  reaping  where  thou  hast  not  sown,  and 
25.  26  I  reap  where  I  sowed  not,  and  gather  wh. 

Luke  12.  24  they  neither  sow  nor  reap;  which  neither 
19.  21  thou,  .reapest  that  thou  didst  uot  sow 
19.  22  taking  up.  .and  reaping  that  thou  didst 
John  4.  36  he  that  reapeth  receiveth  wages,  and  ga. 
4.  36  he  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth  may 
4.  37  saying  true,  One  soweth,  and  another  re. 
4.  38  I  sent  you  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  best. 

1  Co.  9.  11  a  great  thing  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal 

2  Co.  9.    6  He  which  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also 

9.   6  he  which  soweth  bountifully  shall  reap 

Gal.     6.    7  whatsoever  a  man  soweth.  .shall  he  also 

6.    8  For  he . .  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption 

6.    8  he.,  shall  of  the  spirit  reap  life  everlasting 

6.    9  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint 

Jas.     5.    4  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped  are  en. 

Rev.  14.  15  Thrust  in  thy  sickle  and  reap:  forthetime 

14. 15  is  come  for  thee  to  reap ;  for  the  harvest 

14. 16  thrust  in  his  sickle,  .and  the  earth  was  r. 

REAPER,  REAPING  — 

1.2*0  shorten,  reap,  *isp  qatsar. 

Ruth  2.    3  gleaned  in  the  field  after  the  reapers :  and 
2.  4  said  unto  the  reapers,  The  Lord  (be)  with 
2.    5,  6  servant  that  was  set  over  the  reapers 
2.    7  let  me  glean  and  gather  after  the  reapers 
2.  14  shesatbesidethereapers:  andhereached 

1  Sa.    6.  13  reaping  their  wheat  harvest  in  the  valley 

2  Ki.  4.  18  he  went  out  to  his  father  to  the  reapers 
Amos  9.  13  that  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  re. 

2. A  reaper,  depio-T-qs  theristes. 

Matt  13.  30  I  will  say  to  the  reapers,  Gather  ye  toge. 
13.  39  is  the  end  of  the  world ;  and  the  reapers 
REAR  (up),  to  — 

1.  2*o  set  up,  2xi  natsab,  5. 

2  Sa.  18. 18  taken  and  reared  up  for  himself  a  pillar 

2.  To  cause  to  rise,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Exod  26.  30  thou  shalt  rear  up  the  tabernacle  accor. 

40. 18  Moses  reared  up  the  tabernacle,  and  fas. 

40.  18  put  in  the  bars  thereof,  and  reared  up  his 

40.  33  he  reared  up  the  court  round  about  the 

Lev.  26.    1  neither  rear  you  up  a  standing  image 

2  Sa.  24.  18  Go  up,  rear  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  in  the 

1  Ki.16.  32  he  reared  up  an  altar  for  Baal  in  the  house 

2  Ki.  21.    3  he  reared  up  altars  for  Baal,  and  made  a 
2  Ch.  3.  17  he  reared  up  the  pillars  before  the  temple 

33.    3  he  reared  up  altars  for  Baalim  and  made 

3.2*o  lift,  raise  or  rouse  up,  iyeipai  egeiro. 

John  2.  20  this  temple . .  wilt  thou  rear  it  up  in  three 

REARED  up,  to  be  — 

1.2*0  cause  to  rise,  cip  qum,  5. 

Num.  9. 15  the  day  that  the  tabernacle  was  reared  up 
2.2*o  be  caused  to  rise,  o^p  qum,  6. 

Exod 40.  17  came  to  pass,  .tabernacle  was  reared  up 
REASON  — 
\.A  icord,  *i;n  dabar. 

1  Ki.  9. 15' this  (is)  the  reason  of  the  levy  which.  .S. 
2.Reason,  device,  reckoning,  ps^n  cheshbon. 

Eccl.   7.  25  andtoseekoutwisdom, and  the  reason 

3.  Taste,  discretion,  Dfa  tao.m. 

Prov  26. 16  than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  reason 
A,  Knowledge,  understanding,  WO  mayida, 

Dan.   4.  36  my  reason  returned  unto  me ;  and  for  the 


REASON 


m 


REBUKE 


5.  Understanding,  skilfulness,  n$W$  tebunah. 

Job   32.  ii  I  gave  ear  to  your  reasons,  whilst  ye  sea. 
f$.  Agreeable,  pleasing,  grateful,  apecrros  arestos. 

Acts   6.    2  It  is  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the 

7.A  word,  \6yos  logos. 

1  Pe.    3.  15  a  reasun  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  with 

REASON  (together,  with),  to  — 

l.To  be  reasoned  with,  n?;  yakach,  2. 

Isa.     1. 18  Comenow,andletusreasontogether,saith 

2.To  reason,  reprove,  decide,  ro;  yakach,  5. 

Job    13.    3  Iwouldspeak. .  I  desire  to  reason  with  God 

15.  3  Should  he  reason  with  unprofitable  talk? 

Z.To  be  judged,  BS(P  shaphat,  2. 

1  Sa.  12.   7  I  may  reason  with  you  before  the  Lord  of 

4.  To  discourse,  reason,  b~iaAeyo/j.ai  dialegomai. 
Acts  17.    2  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures 

18.  4  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every  sabbath 
18. 19  entered  into  the  synagogue,  and  reasoned 
24.  25  as  he  reasoned  of  righteousness,  temper. 

5.  To  reckon,  reason  thoroughly,  Bia\oyi(ofiat. 
Matt  16.    7  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 

16.  8  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves,  because 
21.  25  they  reasoned  with  themselves,  saying 

Mark  2.    6  sitting  there,  and  reasoning  in  their  he. 
2.    8  that  they  so  reasoned  within  themselves 
2.    8  Why  reason  ye  these  things  in  your  hearts? 
8. 16  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 
8.  17  Why  reason  ye  because  ye  have  no  bread? 

Luke  5.  2t  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to  reason 

5.  22  he .  .said . .  Why  reason  ye  in  your  hearts? 

20. 14  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 

6.  To  reckon,  \oyi(ofxat  logizomai. 

Markn.  31  [they  reasoned]  with  themselves,  saying 

7.  To  seek  together,  discuss,  o-v£nr4a>  svzeteo. 
Marki2.  28  having  heard  them  reasoning  together 
Luke  24.  15  while  they  communed  (together)  and  re. 

S. To  reckon  together.  <rv\\oyi£ofiat  sullogizomai. 

Luke  20.    5  they  reasoned  with  themselves,  saying,  If 
REASON  of,  by  — 
I. From,  out  of,  by  reason  of,  |p  min. 

Exod.  2.  23  their  cry  came  up  before  God  by  reas.  of 
2.  With,  Dy  im. 

2  Ch.21.  19  his  bowels  fell  out  by  reason  of  his  sick. 
3. Before,  at  the  front  of,  \1D7  Upline. 

Gen.  41.  31  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land  by  reas.  of 
Exod  3.    7  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their  taskni. 

8.  24  land  was  corrupted  by  reason  of  the  swarm 
Deut.  5.  5  ye  were  afraid  by  reason  of  the  fire,  and 
Psa.  44.  16  For.. by  reason  of  the  enemy  and  avenger 

^.Before,  in  ilic  presence  of  Sap,  \>2$.qobel,  qebel. 
Dan.    5.  10  by  reason  of  the  words  of  the  king  and  his 

5. Because  of,  Std  (ace.)  dia. 

John  12.  11  by  reason  of  him  many  of  the  Jews  went 
Rom.  8.  20  byreason  of  him  who  hath  subjected  (the 
Heb.  5.  3  [by  reason  hereof]  he  ought,  as  for  the  p. 
5. 14  who  by  reason  of  use  have  their  senses  ex. 
2  Pe.   2.  2  by  reason  of  whom  the  way  of  truth  shall 

6. Out  of,  €«  ek. 

Rev.    8.  13  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  tru. 

9.  2  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the 
18.  19  were  made  rich,  .by  reason  of  her  costli. 

7. For  the  sake  of,  evtKo.  heneka. 

2  Co.  3. 10  had.,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth 
REASON  would— 

According  to  reason,  Kara  Xoyov,  Acts  iS.  14. 
REASONABLE  — 
Rational,  reasonable,  \oytK6s  logikos. 

Rom  12.    1  saerillce .  .which  (is)  your  reasonable  ser. 
REASONING  — 
I. Reproof,  correction,  nro'in  tokachath. 

Job    13.    6  Hear  now  my  reasoning,  and  hearken  to 

2.A  reckoning  throughout ,h~ta\oyiafj.6s  diologismos. 

Luke  9.  46  there  arose  a  reasoning  among  them,  w. 
Z.A  seeking  together,  <ru£VjT7jcm  suzetesis. 

Acts  28.  29  [had  great  reasoning  among  themselves] 
RE'-BA,  ya*i  s}irout,  offspring. 

A  king  of  Midian,  slain  by  Israel  while  they  were  in  the 
plains  of  Moab.   B.C.  1456. 

Num3i.    8  Evi,  and  Rekem,  and  Zur,  and  Hur..R. 

Josh. 13.  21  Hur,  andR., (which  were), dukes  of  Sihon 

RE-BEC'-CA,  'Pe/3tKKa.     Same  as  the  succeeding. 
Rom.  9. 10  R.  also  had  conceived  by  one,  (even)  by  our 

RE-BEK'  AH,  .1^3-1  flattering. 

Daughter  of  Bethuel  the  nephew  of  Abraham.      She 

became  wife  of  Isaac,  and  mother  of  Esau  and  Jacob. 

B.C.  1838. 

Gen.  22.  23  AndBethuel  begat R. :  these  eight  Milcah 
24.  15  R.  cameout,  who  was  born  to  Bethuel,  son 
24.  29  R.  had  a  brother,  aud  his  name  (was)  Laban 
24.  30  and  when  he  heard  the  words  of  R.  his  s. 
24.  45  R.  came  forth  with  her  pitcher  on  hersh. 
24.  51  Behold,  R.  (is)  before  thee,  take  (her),  and 
24.  53  servants  brought  forth  jewels,  .to  R.:  he 
24.  58  And  they  called  R.,  and  said  unto  her 
24.  59  And  they  sent  away  R.  their  sister,  and 
24.  60  And  they  blessed  R.,  and  said  unto  her 
24.  61  And  R.  arose,  and  her  damsels,  v.  61,  64- 


Gen.  24. 
25- 
25- 
25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
35- 
49. 

REBEL  — 

l.To  rebel, 

Eze.  20. 

2.To  be  or 

Num  20. 


67  Isaac,  .took  R.,  and  she  became  his  wife 

20  Isaac,  .took  R.  to  wife,  the  daughter  of  B. 

2 1  the  Lord  was  entreated . .  and  R,  his  wife  c. 
28  And  Isaac  loved  Esau . .  but  Ii.  loved  Jacob 

7  the  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for  R. 

8  behold,  Isaac  (was)  sporting  witli  R.  his  w. 
35  were  a  grief  of  mind  unto  Isaac  and  to  R. 

5  R.  heard  when  Isaac  spake  to  Esau  his  s. 

6  And  R.  spake  unto  Jacob  her  son,  saying 

11  And  Jacob  said  to  R.  his  mother,  Behold 
15  R.  took  goodly  raiment  of  her  eldest  son 
42  And  these  words  of  Esau . .  were  told  to  R. 
46  And  R.  said  to  Isaac,  I  am  weary  of  my  1. 

5  he  went,  .unto  Laban.  .the  brother  of  R. 

12  Jacob  told  Rachel,  .that  he(was)  R.'s  son 
8  But  Deborah,  R.'s  nurse,  died,  and  she  was 

31  there  they  buried  Isaac  and  R.  his  wife 

TJp  marad. 

38  I  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  re. 
make  bitter,  provoke,  rebel,  rriD  marah. 
10  Hear  now,  ye  rebels ;  must  we*  fetch  you 

'S.A  son  of  rebellion,  *1P~]2  ben-men. 

Num  17.  10  to  be  kept  for  a  token  against  the  rebels 

REBEL  (against),  to  — 
l.To  rebel,  -no  marad. 

Gen.  14.    4  and  in  the  thirteenth  year  they  rebelled 

Num  14.   9  Only  rebel  not  ye  against  the  Lord,  neith. 

Josh  22.  16  ye  might  rebel  this  day  against  the  Lord 
22.  18  (seeing)  ye  rebel  to  day  against  the  LORD 
22.  19  rebel  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  rebel  ag. 
22.  29  God  forbid  that  we  should  rebel  against 

2  Ki.  18.  7  he  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Assyria.and 
18.  20  whom  dost  thou  trust, that  thou  rebellestja. 
24.  1  then  he  turned  and  rebelled  against  him 
24.  20  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Ba. 

2  Ch.13.    6  Jeroboam,  .hath  rebelled  against  his  lord 

36. 13  he  also  rebelled  against  king  Nebuchad. 
Neh.  2.  19  What  (is)  this,  .will  ye  rebel  against  the 

6.  6  the  Jews  think  to  rebel :  for  which  cause 
9.  26  rebelled  against  thee,  and  cast  thy  law 

Job   24.  13  They  are  of  those  that  rebel  against  the 

Isa.   36.    5  whom  dost  thou  trust,  that  thou  rebell.  a. 

Jer.  52.   3  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  the  king  of  B. 

Eze.  2.  3  a  rebellious  nation  that  hath  rebelled  ag. 
17. 15  herebelled  againsthim  insendinghis  am. 

Dan.    9.    5  have  rebelled,  even  by  departing  from  thy 

9.    9  God . .  though  wehave  rebelled  against  him 

l.To  be  or  make  bitter,  provoke,  rebel,  .Tip  marah. 

Num  20.  24  ye  rebelled  against  my  word  at  the  water 

27. 14  ye  rebelled  against  my  commandment  in 
1  Sa.  12. 15  rebel  against  the  commandment  of  the  L. 
Psa.     5.  10  Destroy,  .for  they  have  rebelled  against 

105.  28  He  sent  darkness,  .they  rebelled  notaga. 
Isa.     1.  20  ye  refuse  and  rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured 

63.  10  they  rebelled,  and  vexed  his  Holy  Spirit 

Lam.  1.  18  have  rebelled  against  his  commandment 

1.  20  I  have  grievously  rebelled :  abroad  the  s. 

3.  42  We  have  transgressed  and  have  rebelled 

Hos.  13.  16  she  hath  rebelled  against  her  God :  they 

3.  To  make  bitter,  provoke,  rebel,  mro  marah,  5. 

Deut.  1.  26,  43  rebelled  against  the  commandment  of 
9.  23  ye  rebelled  against  the  commandment  of 
Josh.  1. 18  that  doth  rebel  against  thy  commandment 
1  Sa.  12.  14  rebel  against  the  commandment  of  the 

Psa.  107.  11  they  rebelled  against  the  words  of  God 
Eze.  20.   8  they  rebelled  against  me,  and  would  not 

20. 13  But.  .rebelled  against  me  in  the  wildern. 

20.  21  the  children  rebelled  against  me :  they  w. 

4.  To  turn  aside,  "»D  stir. 

Hos.    7. 14  they  assemble  themselves,  .they  rebel  ag. 

5.  To  transgress,  rebel,  y£;s  pasha. 

1  Ki.12.  19  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house  of  David 

2  Ki.  1.    1  Moab  rebelled  against  Israel  after  the  de. 

3.    5  king  of  Moab  rebelled  against  the  king 

3.  7  The  king  of  Moab  hath  rebelled  against 

2  Ch.io.  iq  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house  of  David 
Isa.     1.    2  broughtupchiIdren..theyhave  rebelled  a. 
REBELLION  — 

1 .  To  rebel,  Tip  merad. 

Ezra   4.  19  rebellion  and  sedition  have  been  made  th. 

2.  Rebellion,  tt?  mered. 

Josh.  22.  22  in  rebellion,  or  if  in  transgression  against 

3.  Rebellion,  bitterness,  ,-lP  men'. 

Deut  31.  27  Eor  1  know  tliy  rebellion,  and  thy  stiff  n. 

1  Sa.  15.  23  For  rebellion  (is  as)  the  sin  of  witchcraft 

Neh.   9.  17  in  their  rebellion  appointed  a  captain  to 

Prov.  1 7.  1 1  An  evil  (man)  seeketh  only  rebellion ;  th. 
4.^4  turning  aside,  rriD  sarah. 

Jer.   28.  16  thou  hast  taught  rebellion  against  the  L. 
29.  32  he  hath  taught  rebellion  against  the  Lord 
5.  Transgression,  ytrs  pesha. 

Job  34.  37  For  he  addeth  rebellion  unto  his  sin ;  he 
REBELLIOUS,  (to  be  most)  — 
1.  To  rebel,  TiD  marad. 

Eze.    2.    3  to  a  rebellious  nation  that  hath  rebelled 
^.Rebellious,  ~np  marad. 

Ezra    4. 12  building  the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city 

4.  15  the  city  (is)  a  rebellious  city,  and  hurtful 
3.  Rebellion,  nn-ii?  marduth. 

1  Sa.  20.  30  Thou  son  of  the  perverse  rebellious  (wo.) 


4,  To  be  or  make  bitter,  provoke,  rebel,  .Tin  marah. 
Deut  21.  18  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  son 

21.  20  This  our  son  (is)  stubborn  and  rebellious 

Psa.  78.    8  be . .  a  stubborn  aud  rebellious  generation 

Isa.   50.    5  I  was  not  rebellious,  neither  turned  away 

Jer.     4. 17  she  hath  been  rebellious  against  me,  saith 

5.  23  this  people  hath . .  a  rebellious  heart ;  they 

5.  To  make  bitter,  provoke,  rebel,  rnD  marah,  5. 
Deut.  9.    7,  24  Ye  have  been  rebellious  against  the  L. 

31.  27  ye  have  been  rebellious  against  the  Lord 

6. Rebellion,  ,_!0  meri. 

Isa.   30.    9  tliis  (is)  a  rebellious  people,  lying  child. 
Eze.     2.    5  forbear,  for  they  (are)  a  rebellious  house 

2.   6  be  not  afraid,  .though  they  (be)  a  rebell. 

2.    7  will  forbear;  for  they  (are)  most  rebelli. 

2.  8  rebellious  like  that  rebellious  house :  open 

3.  9  fear  them  not.  .though  they  (be)  a  rebel. 
3.  26,  27  for  they  (are)  a  rebellious  house 

12.  2  thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  a  rebellious 
12.  2  hear  not :  for  they  (are)  a  rebellious  house 
12.  3  consider,  though  they  (be)  a  rebelliousho. 
12.    9  hath  not  the  house  of  Israel,  the  rebelli. 

12.  25  in  your  days,  O  rebellious  house,  willlsay 
27.  12  Say  now  to  the  rebellious  house,  Know  ye 

24.  3  utter  a  parable  unto  the  rebellious  house 
44.   6  And  thou  shalt  say  to  the  rebellious 

7.  To  turn  aside,  tid  sarar. 

Psa.  66.    7  let  not  the  rebellious  exalt  themselves 
68.    6  but  the  rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  (land) 
68.  18  (for)  the  rebellious  also,  that  the  LordG. 
Isa.     1.  23  Thy  princes  (are)  rebellious,  and  compa. 
30.    1  Woe  to  the  rebellious  children,  saith  the 

65.  2  I  have  spread  out  my  hands,  .uuto  a  reb. 

REBUKE,  REBUKING  — 
I. Rebuke,  rry/3  gearah. 

2  Sa.  22.  16  at  the  rebuking  of  the  Lord,  at  the  blast 

Psa.  18.  15  foundations,  .were  discovered  at  thy  reb. 

76.   6  At  thy  rebuke,  0  God  of  Jacob,  both  the 

80.  16  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  countenance 

104.    7  At  thy  rebuke  they  fled ;  at  the  voice  of 

Prov  13.    1  but  a  scorner  heareth  not  rebuke 

13.  8  riches :  but  the  poor  heareth  not  rebuke 
Eccl.  7.  5  better  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  wise,  than 
Isa.   30.  17  at  the  rebuke  of  one  ;  at  the  rebuke  of  five 

50.  2  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make  the 

51.  20  fury  of  the  Lord,  the  rebuke  of  thy  God 

66.  15  to  render,  .his  rebuke  with  fiame3  of  fire 

'l.Reproach,  nsin  cherpah. 

Isa.  25.  8  the  rebuke  of  his  people  shall  he  take  a. 
Jer.  15. 15  that  for  thy  sake  I  have  suffered  rebuke 

3. Rebuking,  rnyjo  migereth. 

Deut  28.  20  cursing,  vexation,  and  rebuke,  in  all  that 
•i.Rep>roof,  correction,  nnsin  iokechah. 

2  Ki.  19.    3  day  of  trouble,  and  of  rebuke,  and  blasp. 

Isa.   37.    3  day  of  trouble,  and  of  rebuke,  and  of  bla. 

Hos.  5.  9  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of  r. 
5.Reproof,  correction,  nna'w  tokachath. 

Psa.  39.  11  When  thou  with  rebukes  dost  correct  man 

Prov  27.    5  Open  rebuke  (is)  better  than  secret  love 

Eze.    5.  15  anger  and  in  fury  and  in  furious  rebukes 

25.  17  vengeance  upon  them  with  furious  rebuk. 
REBUKE,  without  — 

Without  blemish,  spotless,  blameless,  aixwfiTjros. 
Phil.  2.  15  without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  acrooked 

REBUKE,  to  — 

1 .  To  rebuke,  "ii'3  gaar. 

Gen.  37.  10  his  father  rebuked  him,  and  said  unto  him 
Ruth  2.  16  she  may  glean  (them),  and  rebuke  her  not 
Psa.    9.    5  Thou  hast  rebuked  the  heathen,  thou  ha. 
68.  30  Rebuked  the  company  of  spearmen,  the 
106.    9  He  rebuked  the  Red  sea  also,  and  it  was 
119.  21  Thou  hast  rebuked  the  proud  (that  are) 
Isa.   17.  13  (God)  shall  rebuke  them,  and  they  shall 
54.    9  would  not  be  worth  with  thee,  nor  rebu. 
Nab.    1.   4  He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  dry 
Zech.  3.    2  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan  ;  even  the 
3.    2  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke 
Mai.    3.  11  will  rebuke  the  devourer  for  your  sakes 

2.  To  reason,  reproof,  decide,  rp;  yakach,  5. 

Gen.  31.  42  God  hath  seen,  .and  rebuked  (thee)  yester. 
Lev.  19.  17  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neigh. 
1  Ch.12.  17  God  of  our  fathers  look,  .and  rebuke  (it) 
Psa.     6.    1  rebuke  me  not  in  thine  anger,  neither  ch. 

38.    1  rebuke  me  not  in  thy  wrath  :  neither  ch. 

Prov.  9.    7  he  that  rebuketh  a  wicked  (man  getteth) 

9.   8  rebuke  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee 

24.  25  to  them  that  rebuke  (him)  shall  be  dehg. 

28.  23  He  that  rebuketh  a  man,  afterwards  shall 
Isa.  2.  4  and  shall  rebuke  many  people;  and  they 
Amos  5.  10  They  hate  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  gate 
Mic.    4.    3  rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off ;  and  they 

3.  To  strive,  plead,  an  rib. 

Neh.  5.   7  I  rebuked  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and 

4.  To  strike  upon,  blame,  chide,  reprove,  cTrnrXriTTtc. 

1  Ti.    5.    1  Rebuke  not  an  elder,  but  entreat  (him)  as 

5.  To  convince,  convict,  £\{yx<»  eJegcho. 

1  Ti.  5.  20  Them  that  sin  rebuke  hefore  all,  that  ot. 
Titus  1.  13  rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be 

2.  15  and  exhort,  and  rebuke  with  all  authority 
Heb.  12,    5  nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him 
Rev.  3.  19  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten 

O.To  have  a  reproof,  ex&j  ekty^tu  echo  elei/xin. 

2  Pe.  2.  16  But  was  rebuked  for  his  iniquity ;  thedu. 


REBUKER 


795 


RECEIVE 


7.  To  set  a  weight  upon,  chide,  iivnifxaoi  epitimaG. 

Matt.  8.  26  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea  ;  and  there 

16. 22  began  to  rebuke  him,  saying,  Be  it  far  fr. 

17. 18  Jesus  rebuked  the  devil,  and  he  departed 

19.  13  children.,  and  the  disciples  rebuked  them 

20.  31  the  multitude  rebuked  them,  because  they 
Mark  1.  25  Jesus  rebuked  him,  saying,  Hold  thypeace 

4.  39  rebuked  the  wind,  and  said  unto  the  sea 
8.  32  Peter  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke  him 

8.  33  he  rebuked  Peter  saying,  Get  thee  behind 

9.  25  he  rebuked  the  foul  spirit,  saying  unto  him 
10. 13  disciplesrebuked  those  that  brought(them) 

Luke  4.  35  Jesus  rebuked  him,  saying,  Hold  thy  pea. 
4.  39  and  rebuked  the  fever;  and  it  left  her 

4.  41  he,  rebuking  (them),  suffered  them  not  to 

5.  24  rebuked  the  wind  and  the  raging  of  the 
9.  42  And  Jesus  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and 
9.  55  rebuked  them,  and  said,  Ve  know  not  wh. 

17.  3  brother  trespass  against  thee,  rebuke  him 

18.  15  when  (his)  disciples  saw  (it),  they  rebuked 

18.  39  they  which  went  before  rebuked  him,  that 

19.  39  said  unto  him.  Master,  rebuke  thy  discip. 
23.  40  the  other  answering  rebuked  him,  saying 

2  Ti.    4.   2  rebuke, exhort,  with  alllongsufferingand 

Jude         9  durst  not.,  but  said,  The  Lord  rebuke  thee 
REBUKER — 
Instruction,  chastisement,  id;d  musar. 

Hos.    5.    2  though  I  (have  been)  a  rebuker  of  them 
RECALL,  to  — 
To  turn  back,  2\&  shub,  5. 

Lam.  3.  21  This  I  recall  to  my  miud,  therefore  have 
RECEIVE,  to  — 
l.To  gather,  *]px  asaph,  3. 

Judg  19.  iS  there  (is)  no  man  that  receivetli  me  to 

2.  To  lay  hold,  seize,  pin  chrtzaq,  5. 

2  Ch.  4.    5  received  ami  held  three  thousand  baths 

3.  To  receive  a  portion,  p^n  chalaq* 

Josh  iS.    2  which  had  not  yet  received  their  inherit. 

4.  To  contain,  bear,  Sia  kid,  5. 

1  Ki.  8.  64  too  little  to  receive  the  burnt  offerings 

2  Ch.  7.    7  was  not  able  to  receive  the  burnt  offer. 

5.  To  take,  receive,  npb  laqach. 

Gen.  4.  n  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thyhand 

33.  10  then  receive  my  present  at  my  hand ;  for 
38.  20  to  receive  (his)  pledge  from  the  woman's 

Exod29.  25  thou  shalt  receive  them  of  their  hands 
32.    4  he  received  (them)  at  their  hand,  and  fa. 
.36.    3  they  received  of  Moses  all  the  offering 
NumiS.  28  which  ye  receive  of  the  children  of  Israel 

23.  20  I  have  received  (commandment)  to  bless    I 

34.  14  have  received  (their  inheritance);  andh.  ! 

34.  15  The  two  tribes  and  the  half  tribe  have  r. 
Deut.  9.  9  "When  I  was  gone  up  into  the  mount  to  r. 
Josh.  1 3.   8  Gadites  have  received  their  inheritance 

18.    7  have  received  their  inheritance  beyond 
Judgi3-  23  would  not  have  received  a  burnt  offering 
1  Sa.  10.   4  which  thou  shalt  receive  of  their  hands 
12.    3  of  whose  hand  have  I  received  (any)  bribe 
25-  35  So  David  received  of  her  hand  (that)  wh. 

1  Ki.10.  28  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn  at  a 

2  Ki.  5.  16  before  whom  I  stand,  I  will  receive  none 

5.  26  time  to  receive  money,  and  to  receive  ga. 
12.    7  now  therefore  receive  no  (more)  money 
12.    8  priests  consented  to  receive  no  (more)  m. 

19. 14  Hezekiah  received  the  letter  of  the  hand 
2  Ch.  1.  16  merchants  received  the  linen  yarn  at  a  p. 
Job     4.  12  a  thing  was.  .brought,  .and  mine  ear  rec. 

22. 22  Receive,  I  pray  thee,  the  law  from  his  m. 
27.  13  (which)  they  shall  receive  of  the  Almighty 

35.  7  If  thou  be  righteous,  .what  receiveth  he 
Psa.    6.   9  Lord  hath  heard,  .will  receive  my  prayer 

49. 15  redeem  my  soul,  .for  he  shall  receive  me 
68.  18  thouhast  received giftsformen;  yea,(for) 
73. 24  guide  me . .  and  afterward  receive  me  (to) 
75,   2  When  I  shall  receive  the  congregation  I 

Prov.  1.    3  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom,  justice 

2.  1  Myson,  if  thou  wiltreceivemy  words,  and 
4.  10  Hear,  0  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings 

8.  10  Receive  my  instruction,  and  not  silver 
10.    8  wise  in  heart  willreceive  commandments 
2i.  11  when  the  wise  is  instructed,  he  receiveth 

24.  32  I  looked  upon  (it,  and)  received  instruct. 
Isa.   37.  14  Hezekiah  received  the  letter  from  the  h. 

40.   2  for  she  bath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand 
Jer.     2.  30  they  received  no  correction :  your  own  s. 
5-    3  they  have  refused  to  receive  correction 
7.  28  obeyeth  n  ot . .  nor  receiveth  correction :  t. 

9.  20  let  your  ear  receive  the  word  of  his  mouth 
17.  23  they  might  not  hear,  nor  receive  instruc. 
32.  33  yet  they  have  not  hearkened  to  receive 

35.  13  Will  ye  not  receive  instruction  to  hearken 
Eze.    3. 10  words  that  I  shall  speak  unto  thee  receive 

16.  61  when  thou  shalt  receive  thy  sisters,  thine 
18. 17  hath  not  received  usurynorincrease, hath 

36.  30  ye  shall  receive  no  more  reproach  of  fa. 
Hos.  10.    6  Ephraim  shall  receive  shame,  and  Israel 

14.  2  receive  (us)  graciously :  so  will  we  render 
Mic.  1.  11  Pass  ye.  .he  shall  receive  of  you  his  stan. 
Zeph.  3.    2  received  not  correction ;  she  trusted  not 

3.  7  thou  wilt  receive  instruction  ;  so  their  d. 
Mai.    2.  13  receiveth  (it)  with  good  will  at  your  hand 

6.  To  find,  n$o  m-atsa. 

Gen.  26. 12  received  in  thesame  yearau  hundredfold 

7.  To  lift  up,  k^i  nasa. 

Deut  33.  3  sat  down  at  thy  feet ;  (every  one)  shall  r. 
1  Ki.  5.  9  be  discharged  there,  and  thou  shalt  rece. 
Psa.  24.    5  He  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the  L. 


8.  To  take,  receive,  bzQ  qabdl,  3. 

1  Ch.12. 18  Then  David  received  them,  and  made  them 

2  Ch.29.  22  priests  received  the  blood,  and  sprinkled 
Esth.  4.  4  sackcloth  from  him :  but  he  received(it)not 
Job  2.  10  shall  we  receive  good.  .and.  .not  receive 
Prov  19.  20  Hear  counsel,  and  receiveinstruction,  th. 

9.  To  take,  receive,  *?3p  qebal,  3. 

Dan.    2.   6  ye  shall  receive  of  me  gifts  and  rewards 

10.  To  weigh  out,  pay,  spend,  Spy"  shaqal. 

2  Sa.  18.  12  Though  I  should  receive  a  thousand  (sh.) 

11.  To  receive  again  or  back,  ava.84xofj.at  a.nadech. 
-     Acts  28.    7  received  us,  and  lodged  us  three  days  co. 

Heb.  11.  17  he  that  had  received  the  promises  offered 

12.iTo  hold  off  or  away,  or  fully,  anexw  apecho. 
Luke  6.  24  woe  unto  you.  .for  ye  have  received  your 
Phm.       15  that  thou  shouldest  receive  him  for  ever 

IZ.To  receive  off  or  away,  or  fully,  atroo^xo/xat. 
Acts  18.  27  exhorting  the  disciples  to  receive  him  :  w. 
28.  30  and  received  all  that  came  in  unto  him 

1 4.  To  receive  or  take  away, off,  or  back,  airoKa/x^dvaj. 
Luke  6.   34  lend  (to  them)  of  whom  ye  hope[toreceive] 

15.  27  because  he  hath  received  him  safe  and  s. 

16.  25  thou  in  thy  life  time  receivedst  thy  good 
18.  30  Who  shall  not  [receive]  manifold  more  in 
23. 41  for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  de. 

Rom.  1.  27  receiving  in  themselves  that  recompence 
Gal.  4.  5  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  s. 
Col.    3.  24  Knowing  that  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive 

2  John     8  lose  not .  .but  that  we  receive  a  full  rew. 

3  John     8  We  therefore  ought  [to  receive]  such,  that 

15.  To  receive,  Se'xo^cu  dechomau 

Matt  10.  14  whosoever  shall  not  receive  you,  nor  hear 
10. 40  He  that  receiveth  you,  receiveth  me ;  and 
10. 40  he  that  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that 
10.  41  He  that  receiveth.  .and  he  that  receiveth 
11. 14  if  ye  will  receive  (it),  this  is  Elias,  which 
18.  5  whoso  shall  receive  one  such,  .receiveth 
Mark  6.  11  whosoever  shall  notreceive  you,  norhear 
9.  37  Whosoever  shall  receive  one.  .receiveth 
9. 37  whosoever  shall  receive  me,  receiveth  not 
10.  15  Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom 
Luke  S.  13  receive  the  word  with  joy;  and  these  have 
9.  5  whosoever  will  not  receive  you,  when  ye 
9.  11  [received]  them,  and  spake  unto  them  of 
9.  48  receive  this  child  in  my  name  receiveth 
9. 48  whosoever  shall  receive  me  receiveth  him 
9.  S3  they  did  not  receive  him,  because  Iris  face 

10.  8,  10  whatsoever  city  ye  enter,  and  they  re. 
16.    4  they  may  receive  me  into  their  houses 
16.   9  they  may  receive  you  into  everlast.  18,17. 

John  4.  45  Galileans  received  him,  having  seen  all 

Acts   3.  21  Whoni  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the 

7.  38  who  received  the  lively  oracles  to  give  u. 

7.  59  and  saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit 

8. 14  Samaria  had  received  the  word  of  God,  t. 

11.  1  heard  that  the  Gentiles  had  also  received 
17. 11  in  that  they  received  the  word  with  all 
zi.  17  when  we  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  .[rece.] 
22.    5  from  whom  also  I  received  letters  unto  the 
28.  21  We  neither  received  letters  out  of  Judea 

t  Co.  2.  14  receiveth  not  the  tilings  of  the  spirit  of 
2  Co.  6.    1  beseech  (you)  also  that  ye  receive  not  the 

7.  15  with  fear  and  trembling  ye  received  him 

8.  4  with  much  entreaty  that  [we  would  rec] 
11. 16  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me,  that 

Gal.  4. 14  but  received  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  (ev.) 
Phil.  4.  18  having  received  of  Epaphroditus  the  thi. 
Col.    4.  10  Marcus,  .if  he  come  unto  you,  receive  him 

1  Th.   1.    6  having  received  the  word  in  much  afflic 

2.  13  ye  received  (it)  not  (as)  the  word  of  men 

2  Th.  2. 10  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the 
Heb.  11.  31  when  she  had  received  the  spies  with  pe. 
Jas.     1.  21  receive  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  word 

lQ.To  give,  8/5w/u  didomi. 

Rev.  13. 16  caused  all.  .to  receive  a  mark  in  their ri. 
17-  To  receive  into,  elaSexo/xai  eisdechomai. 

2  Co.  6. 17  touch  not  the  unclean . .  and  I  will  receive 

18.  Toreceive  on  or  upon,  iiriZixoixat  epidechomai. 

3  John     g  pre-eminence  among  them,  receiveth  us 

10  neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  bret. 

19.  To  bring,  Ko/xifa  komizd. 

Matt  25.  27  at  my  coming  I  should  have  received  mi. 
2  Co.  5. 10  that  everyone  may  receive  the  things  (d.) 
Eph.  6.  8  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  whether 
Heb.  10.  36  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  might  receive  the 

11.  19  from  whence  also  he  received  him  in  a  fi. 

11.  39  having  obtained  a  good  report,  .received 

1  Pe.  1.    9  Receiving  theend  of  yourfaith,  (even)the 

5.   4  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fa. 

2  Pe.  2. 13  shall  receive  the  reward  of  unrighteous. 

20.  To  take,  receive,  XafA&avo}  lamband. 

Matt.  7.   8  For  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth ;  and 
10.    8  cast  out  devils :  freely  ye  have  received 
10.  41  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward  ^  and  he 
1 10. 41  man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  rew. 
13.  20  heareth.  .and  anon  with  joy  receiveth  it 
17.  24  they  that  received  tribute  (money)  came 

19.  29  receive  an  hundredfold,  and  shall  inherit 

20.  7  [whatsoever  is  right,  (that)shall  ye  rece.] 
20.  9  when  theycame.  .they received  everyman 
20.  10  received  more  ;  and  they  likewise  received 

20.  11  when  they  had  received  (it),  they  murm. 

21.  22  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive 
21.  34  that  they  might  receive  the  fruits  of  it 
23- 14  ye  shall  receive  the  greater  damnation] 


Matt  25.  16  Then  he  that  had  received  the  five  talents 
25. 18  he  that  had  received  one  went  and  digged 
25.  20  so  he  that  had  received  five  talents  came 
25.  22  [He  also  that  had  received]  two  talents  c. 
25.  24  Then  he  which  had  received  the  one  taL 

Mark  4.  16  immediately  receive  it  with  gladness 

10.  30  But  he  shall  receive  an  hundredfold  now 

11.  24  believe  that  ye  receive  (them),  and  ye  sh. 

12.  2  that  he  might  receive  from  the  husband. 

12.  40  these  shall  receive  greater  damnation 

15.  23  gave  him  to  drink . .  but  he  received  (it)  not 
Lukei  1.  10  For  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth ;  and 

19.  12  went  into  a  far  country  to  receive  for  hi. 

19.  15  returned,  having  received  the  kingdom,  t. 

20.  47  the  same  shall  receive  greater  damnation 
John  1.  12  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  g. 

1. 16  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  g. 
3.  11  testify  that  we  have  seen :  and  ye  receive 
3.  27  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  gi. 
3.  32  and  no  man  receiveth  his  testimony 

3.  33  He  that  hath  received  his  testimony  hath 

4.  36  he  that  reapeth  receiveth  wages,  and  ga. 

5.  34  But  I  receive  not  testimony  from  man 
5. 41  I  receive  not  honour  from  men 

5. 43  ye  receive  me  not .  .him  ye  will  receive 

5.  44  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  hono. 

6.  21  Then  they  willingly  received  himinto  the 

7.  23  If  a  man  on  the  sabbath  day  receive  cir. 

7.  39  they  that  believe  on  him  should  receive 
10.  18  This  commandment  have  I  received  of 
12. 48  He  that  rejecteth  me,  and  receiveth  not 

13.  20  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send  receiveth 
13.  20  receiveth  me  receiveth  him  that  sent  me 
13.  30  He  then  having  received  thesop  went  im. 

14. 17  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not 

16.  14  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  s. 

16.  24  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy 

17.  8  they  have  received  (them),  and  have  kno. 

18.  3  having  received  a  band  (of  men)  and  offi. 

19.  30  When  Jesus  therefore  had  received  the 

20.  22  saith  unto  them,  Receive  ye  the  Holy  G. 
Acts    1.   8  receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost 

2.  33  having  received  of  the  Father  the  prom. 

2.  38  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Gho. 

3.  s  expecting  to  receive  something  of  them 

7  53  Who  have  received  the  law  by  the  dispo. 
8. 15  prayed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive 

8. 17  them,  and  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost 

8.  19  lay  hands,  he  may  receive  the  Holy  Ghost 
9. 19  when  he  had  received  meat,  he  was  stre. 

10.  43  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive 
10.  47  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as 
16.  24  Who,  having  received  such  a  charge,  th. 
17. 15  receiving  a  commandment  unto  Silas  and 

19.  2  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since 

20.  24  ministry  which  I  have  received  of  the  L. 
20.  35  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive 

26. 10  having  received  authority  from  the  chief 

26. 18  that  they  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins 
Rom.  1.    5  By  whom  we  have  received  grace  and  ap. 

4. 11  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal 
5.  11  by  whom  we  have  now  received  the  ato. 
5.  17  much  more  they  which  receive  abundance 

8.  15  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bo. 
8. 15  but  ye  have  received  the  spirit  of  adopt. 

13.  2  they  that  resist  shall  receive  to  themsel. 

1  Co.  2. 12  Now  we  have  received,  not  the  spirit  of 

3.  8  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward 
3. 14  If  any  man's  work  abide.,  he  shall  receive 

4.  7  what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  rece.? 
4.   7  now  if  thou  didst  receive  (it),  why  dost 
4.   7  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received 

9.  24  run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize?  So 

14.  5  that  the  church  may  receive  edifying 

2  Co.11.   4  receive  another,  .which  ye  have  not  rec. 

1 1. 24  Of  the  Jews  five  times  received  I  forty  (st.) 
Gal.    3.    2  Received  ye  the  spirit  by  the  works  of  the 
3. 14  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the 
Col.    4.  10  touching  whom  ye  received  commandm. 
Heb.    2.   2  received  a  just  recompence  of  reward 
7.    5  who  receive  the  office  of  the  priesthood 
7.    8  herementhatdiereceivetithes;  but  there 
7.   9  who  receiveth  tithes,  payed  tithes  in  Ab. 
9.  15  they  which  are  called  might  receive  the 

10.  26  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  re. 

11.  8  which  he  should  after  [receive]  for  an  in. 

11. 11  Through  faith  also  Sara  herself  received 
11.  13  not[havingreceived]the  promises,  buth. 
II-  35  Women  received  their  dead  raised  to  life 

Jas.     1.    7  let  not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  rec. 

1. 12  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord 

3.  1  knowing  that  we  shall  receive  the  greater 

4.  3  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask 

5.  7  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain 

1  Pe.  4. 10  every  man  hath  received  the  gift,  (even  so) 

2  Pe.   1.  17  For  he  received  from  God  the  Father  ho. 

1  Jo.  2.  27  But  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received 

3.  22  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  b. 
5.   9  Lf  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  wi. 

2  Jo.         4  as  we  have  received  a  commandment  from 

10  receive  him  not  into(your)  house,  neither 
Rev.    2. 17  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth 

2.  27  broken  to  shivers :  even  as  I  received  of 

3.  3  Remember  therefore  how  thou  hast  rece. 

4.  n  Thou  art  worthy,  0  Lord,  to  receive  glory 

5.  12  WorthyistheLamb..toreceivepower,and 
14.  9  receive  (his)  mark  in  his  forehead,  or  in 
14.  11  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of  his  name 

17.  12  received  no  kingdom  as  yet;  but  receive 

18.  4  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues 

19.  20  deceived  them  that  had  received  the  mark 

20.  4  neither  had  received  (his)  mark  upon  their 


RECEIVE 


793 


RECORD 


Gal. 


Phil. 
Col. 


21.ro  take  along  With,  share,  neTa\r.>,fj.$dva>  metal. 
Heb.   6.  7  For  the  earth . .  receiveth  blessing  from  God 

22.  To  receive  beside,  vapaSexofiai  paradechomai. 
Mark  4.  20  such  ashearthe  word,  and  receive  (it),  and 
Acts  16.  21  which  are  not  lawful  for  us  to  receive,  n. 

22. 18  they  will  not  receive  thy  testimony  con. 
1  Ti.    5. 19  Against  an  elder  receive  not  an  accusation 
Heb.  12.   6  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth 

23.  To  take  or  receive  beside,  TTapa\ap.{Sdvo)  parala. 
Mark  7.  4  things  there  be  which  they  have  received 
John  1.  n  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received 

14.  3  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  myself 
1  Co.11.  23  For  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that  wh. 

15.  1  which  also  ye  have  received,  and  wherein 
15.    3  first  of  all  that  which  I  also  received,  how 

1.   9  any  other  gospel.. than  that  ye  haverec. 

1.  12  For  I  neither  received  it  of  man,  neither 
4.    9  Which  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received 

2.  6  As  ye  have  therefore  received  Christ  Jesus 
4. 17  ministry  which  thou  hast  received  in  the 

1  Th.  2.  13  when  ye  received  the  word  of  God  which 

4.   1  that  as  ye  have  received  of  us  how  ye  ou. 

2  Th.  3.    6  after  the  tradition  which  he  received  of 
Heb.  12.  28  we  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be 

24.  To  receive  to  (one's  self),  TrpoffBexo/xat  prosdech. 
Luke  1 5.    2  This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth 
Rom  1 6.   2  That  ye  receive  her  in  the  Lord,  as  beco. 
Phil.  2.  29  Receive  him  therefore  in  the  Lord  with 

25.  To  take  or  receive  to  (ones  self),  Trpoo-\ap.jSdvw. 
Acts  28.  2  received  us  every  one,  because  of  the  pr. 
Rom.  14.    1  Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith  receive  ye 

14.  3  not  judge  him.  .for  God  hath  received 

15.  7  receive  ye  one  another,  as  Christ  also  re. 
Phm.       12  therefore  [receive]  him  that  is  mine  own 

17  if  thou  count  me  therefore  a  partner,  re. 

26.7*o  receive  under  (one^s  roof),  {>Tro84xofJ.ai  hupo. 
Lukeio.  38  certain  woman  named  Martha  received 
19.    6  and  came  down,  and  received  him  joyfu. 
Acts  17.    7  Whom  Jason  hath  received:  and  these 
Jas.     2.  25  when  she  had  received  the  messengers 

27.  To  take  or  receive  under,  viroAap.$di/ui  hupolam. 
Acts    1.9  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight 

28.  To have. •place  for,  contain,  receive ,xwP « w  chared. 
Matt  19.  12  He  that  is  able  to  receive  (it),  let  him  re. 
2  Co.  7.   2  Receive  us ;  we  have  wronged  no  man 

[See  also  Comfort,  damage,  law,  mercy,  seed,  sight, 
strength,  tithes.] 

RECEIVE  (again,  for),  to  — 

1.2*0  take  or  receive  from,  airoAa/j.&dt/u>  apolambano. 
Luke  6.  34  lend  to  sinners,  to  receive  as  much  again 

2.To  bring,  Ko/xlfa  komizo. 

Col.    3.  25  But  he  that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for 
RECEIVE  ashes,  to  — 
To  remove  ashes,  |bh  dashen,  3. 

Exods7.    3  shalt  make  his  pans  to  receive  his  ashes 
RECEIVE  (gladly),  to  — 
To  receive  from,  away,  back,  fully,  awod4xo/j.ai. 

Luke  8.  40  people  (gladly)  received  him  :  for  they 

Acts   2.  41  Then  they  that  gladly  received  his  word 
15.    4  [they  were  received]  of  the  church,  and 

RECEIVE,  can,  to  be  room  to  — 

To  have  place,  contain,  receive,  x&jpe«  choreo. 
Mattig.  11  All  (men)  cannot  receivethis  saying,  save 
Mark  2.    2  insomuch  that  there  was  no  room  to  rec. 

RECEIVED  (up),  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  gathered,  npN  asaph,  2. 

Nunin.  14  and  after  that  let  her  be  received  iu(ag.) 

2.Td  take  or  receive  up  or  up,  ava\ap.fidva)  anaht. 
Mark  16. 19  [he  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat] 
Acts  10.  16  vessel  was  received  up  again  into  heaven 
1  Ti.    3.  16  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into 

3. A  taking  or  receiving  bark,  avaKntyts  analepsis. 

Luke  g.  51  was  come  that  he  should  be  received  up 
4.  To  take,  receive,  ha/updj/w  lawhano. 

1  Ti.    4.    4  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received 
h.A  receiving  or  sharing  with,  /xtr d\v^ is,- Xtuxi// is. 

1  Ti.   4.    3  which  God  hath  created  to  be  received 
RECEIVER,  RECEIVING  — 

l.To  take,  receive,  npS  laqach. 

2  Ki.  5.  20 spared  Naaman.  .in  not  receiving  at  his 
2. 7*0  weigh  out,  pay,  spend,  ^py  skoqal. 

Isa.   33. 18  where  (is)  the  receiver?  where  (is)  hethat 
Z.A  receiving,  reception,  \tji//is  lepsis. 

Phil.   4.  15  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but 
4. A  receiving  to  (one's  self),  ttpoaXn-tyis  proslepsis. 
Romn.  15  what  (shall)  [the  receiving]  (of  them  be) 
RE'-CHAB,  ab"]  companionship. 

1.  A  son  of  Rimmon  the  Beerothite:  with  the  help  of 
his  brother  Baanah  he  assassinated  Ish-bnsheth  son  of 
Saul  in  his  bed,  and  were  put  to  death  for  it  by  David. 
B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.    4.    2  and  the  name  of  the  other  R.,  the  sons  of 
4.    5  And  the  sonsuf  Rimmon. .  R.  and  Baanah 
4.    6  and  R.  and  Baanah  his  brother  escaped 
4.   9  David'answeredR.  and  Baanah  his  brother 


2.  Father  of  Jehonadab,  B.C.  930,  and  founder  of  a  tribe 
whom  hecharged  to  abstain  frum  wine,  live  intents,  disc: 
and  who  are  still  found  N.E.  of  Medina. 

2  Ki.  10. 15  he  lighted  on  Jehonadab  the  son  of  R.  (c.) 
10.  23  Jehu  went,  and  Jehonadab  the  son  of  R. 

Jer.  35.    6  Jonadab  the  son  of  R,  our  father  comma. 
35.    8  obeyed  the  voice  of  Jonadab.  .son  of  R. 
35.  14  The  words  of  Jonadab  the  son  of  R.,  that 
35.  16  the  sobs  of  Jonadab  the  son  of  R.  have  p. 
35. 19  Jonadab  the  son  of  R.  shall  not  wanta  m. 

3.  A  descendant  of  Hemath  a  Eenite.    B.C.  930. 

1  Ch.  2.  55  Hemath,  the  father  of  the  house  of  R. 

4.  Father  of  Malchiah,  a  chief  man  who  returned  from 
exile  and  helped  to  repair  the  wall  after  Nehemiah  came. 
B.C.  455. 

Nehi  3.  14  dung  gate  repaired  Malchiah  the  son  of  R. 

RE-CHAB-ITES,  HJpl. 

The  tribe  or  family  of  the  preceding  Rechab,  and  of 

Jonadab  or  Jehonadab  his  son. 

Jer.   35.   2  Go  unto  the  house  of  the  R.,  and  speak 
35.   3  Then  I  took,  .the  whole  house  of  the  R. 
35.    5  And  I  set  before,  .the  R.  pots  full  of  wine 
35  18  Jeremiah  said  unto  the  house  of  the  R. 

RE'-CHAH,  nri  declivity. 

A  city  in  Judah,  not  yet  identified. 

1  Ch.  4. 12  These  (are)  the  men  of  R. 
RECKON,  to  — 

l.To  reckon,  ivn  chashab,  3. 

Lev.  25.  50  he  shall  reckon  with  him  that  bought  him 
27.  18  priest  shall  reckon  unto  him  the  money 
27.  23  Then  the  priest  shall  reckon  untohimthe 

2  Ki.  t2.  15  Moreover  they  reckoned  not  with  the  men 

2.  To  ninnber,  write,  cypher,  ijd  sap)har* 

Eze.  44,  26  they  shall  reckon  unto  him  seven  days 

3.  To  visit,  inspect,  lay  a  charge  on,  "ipS paqad. 
Num.  4.  32  by  name  ye  shall  reckon,  the  instruments 

A.To  make  equal,  compare,  place,  rtj*'  shavah,  3. 
Isa.  38. 13  I  reckoned  till  morning,  (that.)  as  a  lion 

5.7*o  reckon,  Koyi^ofxai  logizomai. 

Luke22.  37  he  was  reckoned  among  the  transgressors 

Rom.  4.    4  is  the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but 

4.   9  we  say  that  faith  was  reckoned  to  Abrah. 

4.  10  How  is  it  then  reckoned?  when  he  was  in 
6. 11  Likewise  reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be 
8. 18  For  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  p. 

6.  To  take  account  together,  <yvva.'po>  \6yov  sunairo. 

Matt 25. 19  lord  of  those  servants  cometh,  and  reck. 
7.7*0  take  vp  together,  trwatpto  sunairo. 

Matt  18.  24  when  he  had  begun  to  reckon,  one  was  b. 
RECKONED  (by  genealogies),  to  be  — 
1.  To  be  reckoned,  3ts;n  chashab,  2. 

Num  18.  27  your  heave  offering  shall  be  reckoned  un. 

28a.  4.   2  for  Beerothalsowasreckoned  to  Benjamin 
2.7V)  reckon  self,  ifn  chashab,  7. 

Num  23.   9  shall  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations 
Z.To  reckon  self  or  be  reckoned  by  genealogy ,  brj;,  7. 

1  Ch.  5.    1  the  genealogy  is  not  to  be  reckoned  after 

5.  7  genealogy  of  their  generations  was  reck. 
5.  17  All  these  were  reckoned  by  genealogies 
7.    5  reckoned  in  all  by  their  genealogies  four. 

7.  7  were  reckoned  by  their  genealogies  twen. 
9.    1  all  Israel  were  reckoned  by  genealogies 
9.  22  These  were  reckoned  by  their  genealogy 

2  Ch.31.  19  were  reckoned  by  genealogies  among  the 
Ezra  2.  62  those  that  were  reckoned  by  genealogy 

8.  3  were  reckoned  by  genealogy  of  the  males 
Neh.   7.    5  that  they  might  be  reckoned  by  genealogy 

RECKONING,  (to  be  made)  — 
l.To  be  reckoned,  ivn  chashab,  2. 

2  Ki.  22.   7  there  was  no  reckoning  made  with  them 

2. Inspection,  visitation,  charge,  h*j8$ pequctdah. 

1  Ch.23. 11  therefore  they  were  in  one  reckoning,  ac. 
RECOMMENDED,  to  be  — 
7'o  give  beside,  irapa8i'5a>u.i  peradidomi. 

Acts  14.  26  whence  they  had  been  recommended  to 
15.  40  being  reconnheuded  by  the  brethren  uuto 
RECOMPENCE  (of  reward)  — 
l.Jiecompence,  deserving,  deed,  ^b?  gemul. 

Prov  12.  14  recompence  of  a  man's  hands  shall  be  re. 
Isa.   35.    4  vengeance,  (even)  God  (with)  a  recompe. 
59.  18  fury  to  bis  adversaries,  recompence  to  his 
50.  18  to  the  islands  he  will  repay  recompence 
66.    6  that  rendereth  recompence  to  his  enemies 
Jer.  51.   6  he  will  render  unto  her  a  recompence 
Lam    3.  64  Render  unto  them  a  recompence,  OLORD 
Joel.   3.   4  will  ye  render  me  a  recompence?  and  if 
3.    4,  7  return  yourrecompenceuponyourown 

Z.Recompence,  deserving,  deed,  n^D3  gemulah. 
Jer.  51.  56  God  of  recompences  shall  surely  requite 

A. Recompence,  ufap  shillvm. 

Isa.   34.    8  of  recompences  for  the  controversy  of  Zion 
Hos.    9.    7  the  days  of  recompence  are  come ;  Israel 

5.  Recompence,  t(&  shillem. 

Deut32.  35  To  me  (belongeth)  vengeance  and  recom. 
Q.CIiange,  exchange,  recompence,  rr^Dfl  temurah. 
Job  15.  31  Let  not.  .for  vauity  shall* be  his  recomp. 


7.Retaliation,recompence,avTCLTr6§oixa.antapodoma. 
Lukei4  12  bid  thee..audarecompencebemadethee 
Rom  1 1.    9  stumbling  block,  and  a  recompence  unto 

8.  A  coi-responding  retoard,  avr tp.to'dia antimisthia. 
Rom.  1.  27  recompence  of  their  error  which  was  meet 
2  Co.   6. 13  Nowforarecompenceinthesame,Ispeak 

Q.A  giving  away  or  back  a  reioard,  juio-0a7ro5o<n'a. 
Heb.   2.    2  if .  .received  a  just  recompence  of  reward 

10.  35  which  hath  great  recompence  of  reward 

1 1.  26  respect  unto  the  recompence  of  the  reward 
RECOMPENSE  (again),  to  — 

l.To  recompense,  do,  "?S£  gdmal. 

2  Sa.  19.  36  why  should  the  king  recompense  it  me 
Joel    3.    4  if  ye  recompense  me,  swiftly(and)speedily 
2. To  give,  }rn  nathan. 

2  Ch.  6.  23  recompensing  his  way  upon  his  own  head 
Eze.  7.  3  and  will  recompense  upon  thee  all  thine 
7.  4  I  will  recompense  thy  ways  upon  thee,  and 
7.  8  recompense  thee  for  all  thine  abominat. 
7.  9  I  will  recompense  thee  according  to  thy 
9.  10  will  recompense  their  way  upon  their  head 
11.  21 1  will  recompense  their  way  upon  their 

16.  43  will  recompense  thy  way  upon  (thine)  h. 

17.  19  it  will  I  recompense  upon  his  own  head 

22.  31  their  own  way  have  I  recompensed  upon 

23.  49  they  shall  recompense  your  lewdness  upon 

3.  To  turn  back,  3«0  shvb,  5. 

Num.  5.    7  he  shall  recompense  his  trespass  with  the 

5.    8  if  the  man  have  no  kinsman  to  recompense 

2  Sa.  22.  21  to  the  cleanness  of  my  hands,  .he  recom. 

22. 25  Lord  hath  recompensed  me  according  to 

Psa.  t8.  20  to  the  cleanness  of  my  hands,  .he  recom. 

18.  24  Lord  recompensed  me  according  to  my 
Hos.  12.    2  accordiug  to  his  doings  will  he  recomp. 

4.  To  finish,  complete,  recompense,  zh$  shalam,  3. 

Ruth  2. 12  The  Lord  recompense  thy  work,  and  a 
Job  34.  33  he  will  recompense  it,  whether  thou  re. 
Prov  20.  22  Say  not  thou,  I  will  recompense  evil ;  (but) 
Isa.  65.   6  will  recompense,  even  recompense  into 
Jer.  16.  18  I  will  recompense  their  iniquity  and  their 
25. 14  I  will  recompense  them  according  to  their 
32. 18  recompensest  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers 
50.  29  recompense  her  according  to  her  work 

5.  To  give  away,  back,  fully,  awoBidwfxt  apodidomt. 
Rom.  12. 17  Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil 

6. To  give  away  in  return,  avTtnrodiBwiJ.(.  antapod. 
Luke  14.  14  they  cannot  recompense  thee :  for  thou 

14. 14  berecompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the 
Rom.  1 1.  35  it  shall  be  recompensed  unto  him  again 
2  Th.  1.    6  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that 
Heb.  10.  30  I  will  recompense,  saith  the  Lord.  And 

RECOMPENSED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  catised  to  turn  back,  aitf  sluib,  6. 

Num.  5.    8  let  the  trespass  be  recompensed  unto  the 

2.  To  becompletecl,repaicl,recompensed^hv  shalam,4. 

Prov  11.  31  the  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  in  the 
Jer.  18.  20  Shall  evil  be  recompensed  for  good?  for 

RECONCILE  (self),  to  — 

l.To  cover,  make  atonefnent,  "igs  kaphar,  3. 

Lev.    6.  30  isbrought..toreconcile..intheholy(place) 
16.  20  when  he  hath  made  an  end  of  reconciling 

Eze.  45.  20  so  thou  shalt  do.  .so  shall  ye  reconcile  the 

2.  To  make  self  pleasing,  n)fi  ratsah,  7. 

1  Sa.  29.   4  wherewith  should  he  reconcile  himself 
3.7*0  change  thoroughly  from,  a-KOKaraKKaTTta. 

Eph.   2. 16  he  might  reconcile  both  unto  God  in  one 
Col.     1. 20  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  him. 
1.  21  And  you,  that  were . .  enemies . .  hath  he  r. 
4.7*0  change  thoroughly,  KaraWdafrai  katallasso. 

2  Co.  5. 18  who  hath  reconciled  usto  himself  by  Jesus 

5.  19  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not 

RECONCILED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  changed  throughout,  Zia\\drToy.ai  diallatL 

Matt.  5.  24  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then 
2.  7*0  change  thoroughly,  KaraWdao'ca  katallasso. 

Rom.  5. 10  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death 
5.  10  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his 

1  Co.   7. 11  let  her.  .be  reconciled  to  (her)  husband 

2  Co.  5.  20  we  pray,  .in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconc. 
RECONCILING,  RECONCILIATION  — 

A  thorough  change,  KaraWay-ti  katallage. 

Rom  11. 15  if  the  casting  away  of  them  (be)  thereco. 
2  Co.  5.  18  hath  given  to  us  the  ministry  of  reconcil. 

5.  19  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  rec. 

RECONCILIATION  (for),  to  make  — 

1.7*0  offer  or  receive  a  sin  offering,  Kpn  chata,  3. 

2  Ch.29.  24  they  made  reconciliation  with  their  blood 
2.7*0  cover,  make  atonement,  153  kaphar,  3. 

Lev.    8.  15  sanctified  it,  to  make  reconciliation  upon 

Eze.  45.  15  to  make  reconciliation  for  them,  saith  the 
45.  17  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  house  of  I. 

Dan.  9.  24  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and 
3.7*0  appease,  propitiate,  l\do~Ko/j.ai  hilnskomai. 

Heb.   2.  17  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the 
RECORD  — 
l.A  record,  (YTJfl,  njj  dokran,  dikron. 

Ezra  4. 15  made  in  the  book  of  the  records  of  thy  f. 
4.  15  so  shalt  thou  find  in  the  book  of  the  rec. 

6.  2  and  therein  (was)  a  record  thus  written 


RECORD 


(90 


REDEEMER 


2.  A  memorial,  p"i3t  zikkaron. 

Bsth.  6.  i  to  bring  the  book  of  the  records  of  the  C. 
3.^4  testimony,  witness,  irtp'  sahed. 

Job  16. 19  my  witness  (is)  in  heaven,  and  my  record 
■i.A  martyr,  witness,  fxdprvs  ?nartus. 

2  Co.  1.23  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my  soul,  that 
Phil.   1.    8  God  is  my  record,  how  greatly  I  longafter 

5.  Testimony,  witness,  fxaprvpia  marturia. 

John  1. 19  tins  is  the  record  of  John,  when  the  Jews 

8. 13  said  unto  him . .  thy  record  is  not  true 

8.  14  my  record  is  true :  for  I  know  whence  I 
19.  35  his  record  is  true :  and  he  knoweth  that 
1  Jo.   5.  10  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave 
5.  ii  thi*  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to 

3  John   12  good  report,  .and  ye  know  that  our  record 

RECORD,  to  (bear,  call,  take  to)  — 
l.To  cause  to  remember,  ~oi  zakaf,  5. 

Exod2o.  24  In  all  places  where  I  record  my  name  I 

1  Ch.16.    4  to  record,  and  to  thauk  and  praise  the 

2.  To  cause  to  testify,  ~py  ud,  5. 

Deut3o.  19 1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  this  day 

31.  28  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  against  t. 

Isa.     8.    2  I  took  unto  me  faithful  witnesses  to  rec. 

3. To  write,  3rj|  kat/uib. 

Neh.12.  22  (were)  recorded  chief  of  the  fathers:  also 

4.7*o  bear  testimony  or  witness,  fxapTvpew  martured. 

John  1.  32  John  bare  record,  saying,  I  saw  the  spirit 

1.  34  I  saw,  and  bare  record  that  this  is  the  Son 

8.  13  said.  .Thou  bearest record  of  thyself ;  thy 

8. 14  said . .  Though  I  bear  record  of  myself,  (yet) 
12.  17  The  people.,  that  was  with  him.  .bare  rec. 

19.  35  And  he  that  saw  (it)  bare  record,  and  his 
Rom  10.    2  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal 

2  Co.  8.  3  For  to  (their)  power,  I  bear  record,  yea,  and 
Gal.  4.  15  for  I  bear  you  record,  that,  if.  .possible,  ye 
Col.    4.  13  I  bear  him  record,  that  he  hath  a  great 

1  Jo.   5.    7  [there  are  three  that  bear  record  in  hea.] 

3  John  12  we  (also)  bear  record ;  and  ye  know  that 
Rev.    1.    2  Who  bare  record  of  the  word  of  God,  and  of 

5.  To  testify  orbear  witness. /xaprupofxai  marturomai. 

Acts  20.  26  I  take  yon  to  record  this  day,  that  I  (am) 
RECORDER  — 
To  caicse  to  remember,  "O)  zakar,  5. 

z  Sa.   8. 16  Jehoshaphat'the  sou  of  Alihud  (was)  rec. 

20.  24  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Alihud  (was)  rec. 

1  Ki.  4.    3  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Alihud,  the  reco. 

2  Ki.18.  18,  37  and  Joah  the  son  of  Asaph  therecorder 

1  Ch.18.  15  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Alihud,  recorder 

2  Ch.34.  8  and  Joah  the  son  of  Joahaz  the  recorder 
Isa.   36.    3  the  scribe,  and  Joah,  Asaph's  son,  the  r. 

36.  22  scribe  and  Joah  the  sonof  Asaph,  the  rec. 

RECOUNT,  to  — 

To  remember,  ~gt  zakar. 

Nah.   2.   5  He  shall  recount  his  worthies :  they  shall 
RECOVER  (self,  strength),  to  — 
l.To  gather,  ^px  asaph. 

2  Ki.  5.    3  prophet,  .would  recover  him  of  his  lepr. 
5.   6  thou  mayest  recover  him  of  bis  leprosy 
5.    7  that  this  man  doth  send  unto  me  to  rec. 
5. 11  strike  his  hand  over  the  place,  and  reco. 

2.To  brighten  up,  encourage,  a^a  balag,  5. 

Psa.  39.  13  that  I  may  recover  strength,  before  I  go 
3.7*o  live,  revive,  n;n  chayah. 

2  Ki.  1.    2  enquire,  .whether  I  shall  recover  of  this 

8.    8,  9  saying,  Shall  I  recover  of  this  disease 

8.  10  Thou  mayest  certainly  recover :  howbeit 

8.  14  He  told  me.  .thou  shouldest  surely  reco. 

20.   7  took  and  laid  (it)  on  the  boil,  and  he  rec. 

Isa.   38.    g  when  he  had  been  sick,  and  was  recovered 

38.  21  lay  [it]foraplaister.  .and  he  shall  recoYer 

4.7*0  keep  safe,  recover,  chn  chalam,  5. 

Isa.  38. 16  so  wilt  thou  recover  me,  and  make  me  to 
5. Life  preserver,  quickening,  .too  michyah. 

2  Ch.14. 13  that  they  could  not  recover  themselves 
6, To  snatch  away,  deliver,  spoil,  ^sj  natsal,  5. 

Judgn.  26  did  ye  notrecover(them)withinthattime 

1  Sa.  30.    8  overtake  (them),  and  without  fail  recover 

30.  18  David  recovered  all  that  the  Amalekites 
30.  22  not  give . .  of  the  spoil  that  we  have  reco. 
Hos.    2.    9  and  will  recover  my  wool  and  my  flax  (5.) 

7. To  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  1HJJ  atsar. 

2  Ch.13.  20  Neither  did  Jeroboam  recover  strength 

8.  To  get,  acquire,  possess,  nag  qanah. 

Isa.   11. 11  torecoverthe  reinuant  of  his  people,  wh. 

9.  To  cause  to  turn  hack,  any  shub,  5. 

1  Sa.  30. 19  was  nothing  lacking. .  David  recovered  all 

2  Sa.  8.  3  recover  his  border  at  the  river  Euphrates 
2  Ki.  13. 25  beat  him,  and  recovered  the  cities  of  Is. 

14.  28  he  recovered  Damascus,  andHamath,  (w. 
16.   6  Rezin  king  of  Syria  recovered  Elath  to  S. 

Jer.  41.  16  of  thepeoplewhomhehadrecoveredfrom 
10. To  become  sober  again,  avav-qtyoj  ananepho. 

2  Ti.  2.  26  they  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the 
11.  To  hold  well,  e^w  «a\ws  echo  kalos. 

Marki6. 18  [handsonthesick,  and  they  shall  recover] 
RECOVERED,  to  be  — 
1.7*o  he  or  become  strong,  p\y  chazaq, 

Isa.  39.    1  that  he  had  been  sick,  and  was  recovered 


2.  To  go  up,  nSjj  alah. 

Jer.    8.  22  why . .  is  not  the  health  of . .  my  people  re. 

RED  (marble,  wine),  redness  — 

l.Rcd,  ruddy,  din  adorn. 

Gen.  25.  30  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee,  with  that  same  red 
Numi9.  2  that  they  bring  thee  a  red  heifer  without 
2  Ki.  3.  22  saw  the  water  on  the  other  side .  .red  as 
Isa.  63.  2  Wherefore  (are  thou)  red  in  thine  apparel 
Zech.  1.  8  behold  a  man  riding  upon  ared  horse,  and 
1.  8  and  behind  him.  .red  horses,  speckled  and 
6.   2  In  the  first  chariot . .  red  horses,  and  in  the 

2. Red,  ruddy,  'Jb-iN,  ^iniN  admoni. 

Gen.  25.  25  the  first  came  out  red,  all  over  like  an 

3.  Refreshed,  fiery ',  v'^an  choMili. 

Gen.  49.  12  His  eyes,  .red  with  wine,  and  his  teeth 

4.  Refreshment,  fierceness,  rviVSari  chakiiluth. 

PTOV23.  29  who  hath  wounds,  .who  hath  redness  of 
5. Red  or  fouled  wine,  "icn  cltemer. 

Isa.  27.  2  sing  ye  unto  lier,  A  vineyard  of  red  wine 

6.  Fiery,  red,  irvfySs  2^^"''hos. 

Rev.   6.    4  there  went  out  another  horse  (that  was)r. 

12.  3  agreatreddragon,having  seven  heads  and 

7.  White  or  shining  marble,  orta  bahat. 

Esth.  1.    6  a  pavement  of  red,  and  blue,  and  white 
RED  SEA,  qta  D;  yam  suph. 

The  sea  between  Egypt  and  Arabia  :  the  Hebrew  name 
is  lram  Suph,  the  "sea of  weeds."  The  upper  part  of  it 
has  two  arms :  the  western  one  being  called  the  Gulf  of 
Suez,  which  is  190  miles  long ;  while  the  eastern  one  is 
called  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  and  is  about  112  miles  in 
length.  The  head  of  the  former  (over  wliich  Israel 
passed),  is  said  to  have  retired  50  miles  since  the  birth 
of  Christ.  The  name  Red  is  perhaps  a  translation  of 
Edom. 

Exodio.  19  And  the  Lord,  .cast  them  into  the  R.  sea 
[See  under  Sea,  for  other  passages.] 
RED,  to  be  (made)  — 

1.  To  be  made  red,  dtn  adam,  4. 

Exod25.    5  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 

26. 14  make  a  covering,  .(of)  rams'  skins  dyed 
35.    7  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 
35.  23  and  red  skins  of  rams,  and  badgers'  skin 
36. 19  made  a  covering,  .(of)rams'skinsdyedred 
39.  34  the  covering  of  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and 

Nah.  2.   3  The  shield  of  his  mighty  men  is  made  red 

2.  To  make  red,  din  adam,  5. 

Isa.     1. 18  thoughthey  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall 
3.7*0  show  self  red,  din  adam,  7. 

Prov.23.  31  Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  isr. 
4.7o  daub,  be  troubled,  adulterated,  "ion  chamar. 

Psa.  75.    8  and  the  wine  is  red ;  it  is  full  of  mixture 
5.7*0  be  fire-coloured,  irvfifidfa  purrhazo. 

Matt  16.    ?  (It  will  be)  fair  weather;  for  the  sky  is  red 
16.    3  foul  weather  to  day ;  for  the  sky  is  red  and 
REDDISH  (somewhat)  — 
Reddish,  very  red,  c"Din*  adamdam. 

Lev.  13.  19  a  bright  spot,  white,  and  somewhat  red. 

13.  24  bright  spot,  somewhat  reddish,  or  white 
13. 42  if  there  be.  .a  white  reddish  sore :  it  (is)  a 
13-  43  (if)  the  rising  of  the  sore  (be)  white  reddish 

13.  49  if  the  plague  be  greenish  or  reddish  in  the 

14.  37  with  hollow  strakes,  greenish  of  reddish 
REDEEM  (self),  to  — 

l.To  free  (by  avenging  or  repaying},  ^a  gaal. 
Gen.  48.  16  The  angei  which  redeemed  me  from  all 
Exod.  6.    6  will  redeem  you  with  a  stretched  out  arm 

15.  13  led.  .the  people  (which)  thou  hast  redee. 
Lev.  25.  23  come  to  redeem  it,  then  shall  he  redeem 

25.  26  if  the  man  have  none  to  redeem  it,  and  hi. 
25.  48  After,  .oue  of  his  brethren  may  redeem 
25. 49  his  uncle  or  his  uncle's  son,  may  redeem 
27.  13  if  he  will  at  all  redeem  it,  then  he  shall 

27. 15  if  he  that  sanctified  it  will  redeem  his  ho. 
27. 19  if  he.  .will  in  any  wise  redeem  it,  then  he 
27.  20  if  he  will  not  redeem  the  field,  or  if  he  ha. 
27.  31  if  a  man  will  at  all  redeem.. of  his  tithes 

Ruth  4.  4  If  thou  wilt  redeem  (it),  redeem  (it) ;  but 
4.  4  if  thou  wilt  not  redeem  (it,  then)  tell  me 
4.  4  none  to  redeem  (it),  .he  said,  I  will  rede. 
4.  6  I  cannot  redeem  (it)  for  myself,  lest  Imar 
4.  6  redeem  thou  my  right.  .1  cannot  redeem 
Psa.  69. 18  Draw  nigh  unto  my  soul,  (and)  will  rede. 
72. 14  He  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  deceit 
74.  2  thine  inheritance,  (which)  thou  hast  red. 
77.  15  Thou  hast  with  (thine)  armredeemed  thy 
T03.   4  Who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  destruction 

106.  10  redeemed  them  from  the  hand  of  the  en. 

107.  2  whom  he  hath  redeemed  from  the  hand 
Isa.   43.    1  for  I  have  redeemed  thee,  I  have  called 

44.  22  return  unto  me ;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee 
44.  23  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and  glorified 
48.  20  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  servant  Jacob 
52.    9  for  the  Lord,  .he  hath  redeemed  Jerusa. 
63.    9  in  his  pity  he  redeemed  them ;  and  he  b. 

Lam.  3.  58  hast  pleaded.. thou  hast  redeemed  my  1. 

Hos.  13.  14  I  will  redeem  them  from  death :  O  death 

Jlic.   4. 10  Lord  shall  redeem  thee  from  the  hand  of 
2.7*0  be  freed,  *?M  gaal,  2. 

Lev.  25.  49  or,  if  he  he  able,  he  may  redeem  himself 
3. Freedom,  redemption,  n^xj  gcullah. 

Lev.  25.  26  if  the  man .  .himself  be  able  to  redeem  it 


Lev.  25.  29  he  may  redeem  it  within  a  whole  year  a. 
25.  29  (within)  a  full  year  may  he  redeem  it 

25.  32  cities,  .may  the  Levites  redeem  at  any  ti. 

4. To  free,  redeem,  rri9  padah. 

Exodi3.  13  every  firstling  of  an  ass  thou  shalt  redeem 
13. 13  if  thou  wiltuotredeem  it,  thenthoushalt 
13. 13  the  first  born  of  man.  .shalt  thou  redeem 
13.  15  all  the  first  born  of  my  children  I  redeem 
34.  20  the  firstling  of  an  ass  thou  shalt  redeem 
34.  20  if  thou  redeem  (him)  not,  then  shalt  thou 
34.  20  the  first  born  of  thy  sous  thou  shalt  red. 

Lev.  27.  27  he  shall  redeem  (it)  according  to  thine  es. 

Nunii8.  15  first  born  of  man  shalt  thou  surely  rede. 
18.  15  firstling  of  unclean  beasts  shalt  thou  re. 
18. 16  And.  .from  a  month  old  shalt  thou  redeem 
18.  17  firstling  of  a  goat,  thou  shalt  not  redeem 

Deut.  7.    8  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house  of  bond 
9.  26  which  thou  hast  redeemed  through  thy 

13.  5  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house  of  bond. 
15.  15  God  redeemed  thee:  therefore  I  comman. 
21.  8  thy  people  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  rede. 
24. 18  God  redeemed  thee  thence :  therefore  I 

2  Sa.  4.  9  who  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  a. 

7.  23  God  went  to  redeem  for  a  people  to  him. 

7.  23  which  thou  redeemedst  to  thee  from  Eg. 
1  Ki.  1.  29  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  distress 
1  Ch.17.  21  God  went  to  redeem  (to  be)  his  own  peo. 
17.  21  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  out  of  Egypt 
Neh.  1. 10  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  great  power 
Job     5.  20  he  shall  redeem  thee  from  death ;  and  in 

6.  23  or,  Redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mi. 
Psa.  25.  22  Redeem  Israel,  O  God,  out  of  all  his  tro. 

26.  11  But.  .redeem  me,  and  be  merciful  unto 
31.  5  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God  of 
34.  22  Lord  redeemeth  the  soul  of  his  servants 
44.  26  Arise,  .and  redeem  us  for  thy  mercies'  s. 
49.  7  None,  .can  by  any  means  redeem  his  bro. 
49.  15  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from  the  power 
71.  23  and  my  soul,  which  thou  hast  redeemed 

.30.  8  he  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all  his  iniq. 
Isa.  29.  22  thus  saith  the  Lord,  who  redeemed  Abr. 
Jer.  15.  21  I  will  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
31.  11  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and  ransom. 
Hos.  7.  13  though  I  have  redeemed  them,  yet  they 
Jlic.  6.  4  redeemed  thee  out  of  the  house  of  serva. 
Zech.  10.    8  for  I  have  redeemed  them  :  and  they  sh. 

5.  Separation,  redemption,  nit?  peduth. 

Isa.    50.    2  Is  my  hand  shortened,  .that  it  cannot  re. 

6.  7*o  break  off,  rend,  deliver,  pip  par aq. 

Psa. 136.  24  hath  redeemed  us  from  our  enemies:  for 

7.  7*o  acquire,  get,  nap  qanah. 

Neh.  5.    8  have  redeemed  our  brethren  the  jews,  wh. 
8.7*o  acquire  at  the  forum,  ayopd(w  agorazo. 

Rev.   5.   9  hast  redeemed  U3  to  God  by  thy  blood  out 

14.  3  And .  .which  were  redeemed  from  the  ea. 
14.   4  These  were  redeemed  from  among  men 

9.  7*o  acquire  out  of  the  forum,  i£a.yopd£a>  exdgorazo. 
Gal.    3. 13  Clu-ist  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse 
4.   5  To  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law 
Eph.   5.  16  Redeeming  the  time,  because  the  days  are 
Col.    4.    5  Walk  ih  wisdom,  .redeeming  the  time 

10.7*0  loose  by  a  price,  \vrp6w  lutroo. 

Luke24.  21  he  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel 
Titus  2. 14  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  alliuiquity 
1  Pe.   1.  iS  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with 

11. Tomake  a  loosing, ttoi4w  \vrpwaiv poieolutrosin. 

Luke  1.  6S  he  hath  visited  and  redeemed  his  people 
REDEEMED,  to  (let)  be  — 
1.7*0  be  or  become  freed,  hty  gaal,  2. 

Lev.  25.  30  if  it  be  not  redeemed  within  the  space  of 
25.  54  if  he  be  not  redeemed  in  these  (years),  th. 

27.  20  the  field,  .shall  not  be  redeemed  any  mo. 
27.  27  or  if  it  be  not  redeemed,  then  it  shall  be 
27.  28  no  devoted  thing,  .shall  be  sold  or  rede. 
27.  33  if  he  change  it.  .it  shall  not  be  redeemed 

Isa.   52.   3  and  ye  shallbe  redeemed  without  money 

2.7*0  be  freed,  redeemed,  nig  padah,  2. 

Lev.  19.  20  not  at  all  redee'med,  Dor  freedom  giveu 

27.  29  None,  .devoted  of  men,  shallbe  redeemed 
Isa.      1.  27  Zion  shall  be  redeemed  with  judgment 

3.  To  free,  redeem,  rnp^rttftfA,  5. 

Exod2i.   8  If  she  pleasenot.  .lether  be  redeemed:  to 
4. Freed  or  redeemed  ones,  D"n3  pedtiyim. 

Num.  3.  4S  the  odd  numberof  them  isto  be  redeemed 
REDEEMED  'that  are  or  were  to  be)  — 
l.To  free  by  avenging  or  repaying,  7NJ  gaal. 

Psa.  107.    2  Let  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  say  (so) 

Isa.  35.  9  Nolion.  .butthe redeemed  shall walk(th.) 
62. 12  The  holy  people,  The  redeemed  of  the  L. 
63.    4  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come 

2.  To  free,  redeem,  nis  padah. 

Num  iS.  16  those  that  are  to  be  redeemed  from  a  m. 
Isa.    51. 11  Therefore  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall 

3. Free  or  redeemed  ones,  c"ns  peduyim. 

Num.  3.  46  for  those  that  are  to  be  redeemed  of  the 
3.  49  them  that  were  redeemed  by  the  Levite 
3.  sigavethe  muneyof  them  that  were  redeem. 
REDEEMER  — 
To  free  [by  avenging  or  repaying),  ?N3  gaal. 

Job   19.25  Fori  know  (that)my  redeemer liveth,  and 

Psa.  iq.  14  Let.  .acceptable.  .mystrength,andmyrfi. 

78.  _*5  they  remembered .  .the  high  God  their  re. 


REDEMPTION 


800 


REFUSED 


Prov  23.  n  their  redeemer  (is)  mighty;  he  shall  plead 
Isa.   41.  14  and  thy  redeemer,  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

43.  14  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  your  redeemer,  the 

44.  6  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  .and  his  redeemer 
44.  24  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  thy  redeemer,  and 

47.  4  our  redeemer,  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  his  n. 

48.  17  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  thy  redeemer,  the  h. 

49.  7  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  redeemer  of  Is. 
49.  26  thy  redeemer,  the  mighty  one  of  Jacob 
54.    s  thy  redeemer  the  holy  one  of  Israel 

54.    8  will  I  have  mercy  on  thee,  saith.  .thy  re. 

59.  20  the  redeemer  shall  cometoZion,  and  unto 

60.  16  and  thy  redeemer,  the  mighty  one  of  Ja. 
63.  16  thou,  O  Lord,  (art)  our  Father,  our  red. 

Jer.  50.  34  Their  redeemer  (is)  strong ;  The  Lord  of 

REDEMPTION  (price  of),  redeeming  — 

1.  Right  or  price  of  redemption,  hVn?  geullah. 

Lev.  25.  24  ye  shall  grant  a  redemption  for  the  land 
25.  51  he  shall  give  again  the  price  of  his  rede. 
25.  52  give  him  again  the  price  of  his  redempt. 

Ruth  4.    7  concerning  redeeming,  and  concerning  c. 

Jer.  32.  7  for  the  right  of  redemption  (is)  thine  to 
32.    8  right  of  inheritance  (is)  thine,  and  the  re. 

Ll.  Separation,  redemption,  mi$  peduth. 

Psa.ni.    9  He  sent  redemption  unto  his  people:  he 
130.    7  and  with  him  (is)  plenteous  redemption 

3. Separation,  redemption,  Ding  pi dyom. 

Num.  3. 49  Moses  took  theredemption  money  of  them 
^.Separation,  redemption,  p1*!? pidyon. 

Psa.  49.  8  the  redemption  of  their  soul  (is)  precious 
5.  A  loosing  away,  awoAvrpwats  apolntrusis. 

Luke2i.  28  look  up.  .for your  redemption  drawethni. 

Rom.  3.  24  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
8.  23  adoption,  (to  wit),  the  redemption  of  our 

1  Co.  1.  30  made  unto  us.  .sanctification,  and  rede. 
Eph.   1.   7  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  h. 

1. 14  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  p. 

4.  30  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  re. 

Col.     1.  14  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  h. 

Heb.  9.  15  for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions 

6. A  loosing,  \vrpccats  lutrosis. 

Luke  2.  3S  to  all  them  that  looked  for  redemption  in 
Heb.  9.  12  entered.. having  obtained  eternal redem. 
REDOUND,  to  — 
To  be  over  and  above,  Trepiaaeuco  perisseuo. 

2  Co.  4. 15  grace  might,  .redound  to  the  glory  of  God 
REED  — 

\.A  reed,  dik  again. 

Jer.  51.  32  the  reeds  they  have  burned  with  fire,  and 
2.A  stalk,  cane,  reed,  beam,  ru;;  qaneh. 

1  Ki.  14.  15  Lord  shall  smite  Israel,  as  a  reed  is  sha. 

2  Ki.18.  21  trustestupon  thestaff  of  this  bruised  reed 
Job  40.  21  He  lieth.  .in  the  covert  of  the  reed,  and 
Isa.   19.  ,6  dried  up  :  the  reeds  and  flags  shall  wither 

35.  7  where  each  lay,  (shall  be)  grass,  with  re. 

36.  6  trustest  in  the  staff  of  this  broken  reed 
42.    3  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  the 

Eze.  29.  6  because  they  have  been  a  staff  of  reed  to 

40.  3  flax  in  his  hand,  and  a  measuring  reed 

40.  5  breath,  .one  reed ;  and  the  height,  one  r. 

40.  6  (which  was)  one  reed  broad,  and  the  other 

40.  6  threshold  (of  the  gate,  which  was)  one  r. 

40.  7  chamber  (was)  one  reed  long,  and  one  re. 

40.  7  threshold  of  the  gate,  .(was)  one  reed 

40.  8  also  the  porch  of  the  gate  within,  one  re. 

41.  8  foundations,  .a  full  reed  of  six  great  cub. 

42.  16  He  measured,  .with  the  measuring  reed 
42.  16  with  the  measuring  reed  round  about 
42. 17,  18, 19  hundred  reeds,  with  the  measuring 

%.A  stalk,  reed,  cane,  Ka.Ka.fxos  kalamos. 

Matt  11.  7  What  went  ye  out.  to  see?  A  reed  shaken 
12.  20  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  sm. 
27.  29  they  put  (it)  upon  his  head,  and  a  reed  in 
27.  30  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head 
27.  48  put  (it)  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink 

Marki5.  19  they  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a  reed 
i5'  3°  put  (it)  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink 

Luke  7.  24  What  went  ye  out . .  to  see  ?  A  reed  shaken 

Rev.  11.    1  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  unto  a  rod 
21.  15  he  that  talked  with  me  had  a  golden  reed 
21. 16  he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  twe. 
REEL  (to  and  fro),  to  — 
l.Toreelto  and  fro,  Jjn  chagag. 

Psa.  107.  27  They  reel  to  and  fro,  and  stagger  like  a 

2.  To  move,  stagger,  jm  nua. 

Isa.  24.  20  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard,  and 
RE-E-LA'-IAH,  n^yi  Jah  causes  trembling. 
One  of  the  principal  men  that  returned  with  Zerub- 
babel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.    2  Nehemiah,  Seraiah,  R.,  Mordecai,  Belsh. 
REFINE,  (well)  refined,  refiner,  to  — 
I.  To  be  rejined,  p|3i  zaqaq,  4. 

1  Ch.28.  18  for  the  altar  of  incense  refined  gold  by  w. 
29.   4  seven  thousand  talents  of  refined  silver 

Isa.   25.    6  marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined 

%To  refine,  try,  purify,  ^ny  tsaraph. 

Isa.   48.  10  I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver;  I 
Zech.13.    9  through  the  fire,  and  will  refine  them  as 

3.  To  refine,  try,  purify,  rpy  tearqph,  3. 

Mai.  3.  2  for  he  (is)  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fu. 
3.    3  shall  sit  (as)  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver 


REFINED,  to  be  — 

To  refine,  try,  purify,  trj$  tsaraph. 

Zech.13.   9  as  silver  is  refined,  and  will  try  them  as 
REFORMATION  — 
A  making  thoroughly  right,  SiSpOaHris  diorthdsis. 

Heb.   9.  10  imposed  (on  them)  until  the  time  of  refo. 
REFORMED,  to  be  — 
To  be  instructed,  chastised,  *ip;  yasar,  2. 

Lev.  26. 23  if  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  me  by  these 
REFRAIN,  (self,  from),  to  — 

1.  To  refrain  or  force  self,  pSN  aphaq,  7. 

Gen.  43.  31  refrained  himself,  and  said,  Set  on  bread 

45.  1  Joseph  could  not  refrain  himself  before 
Esth.  5.  10  Nevertheless  Hainan  refrained  himself 
Isa.   42.  14  I  have  been  still,  (and)  refrained  myself 

64.  12  Wilt  thou  refrain  thyself  for  these  (thL) 

2.To  refrain,  can  chataiv. 

Isa.  48.   9  for  my  praise  will  I  refrain  for  thee,  that 

3.  To  darken,  keep  back,  %vn  chasak. 

Job  7.  11  Therefore  I  will  not  refrain  my  mouth;  I 
Prov.io.  19  sin  :  but  he  that  refraineth  his  lips(is)  w. 
Jer.  14.  10  they  have  not  refrained  their  feet ;  there. 

4.  To  shut,  restrain,  N^3  kala. 

Psa.  40.    9  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  O  Lord,  t. 
1 19. 101  I  have  refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil 

5.  To  withhold,  keep  back,  J-'JD  mana. 

Prov.  1.  15  My  son.  .refrain  thy  foot  from  their  path 
Jer.  31. 16  Refrain  thy  voice  from  weeping,  and  thi. 

6.  To  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  nxu.  atsar. 

Job  29.    9  princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid  (their) 

7.  To  be  or  keep  far  off,  prn  rachaq. 

Eccl.  3.  5  time  to  embrace,  and  a  time  to  refrain  fr. 
S.To  set  off  from,  a<piaT7}fii  aphistemi. 

Acts  5.  38  Refrain  from  these  men,  and  let  them  al. 
9.  To  cease,  refrain,  iravofxai  paiwmai. 

1  Pe.  3. 10  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and 
REFRESH  (self),  to  — 

l.To  be  refreshed,  a>33  naphash,  2. 

2  Sa.  16.  14  came  weary,  and  refreshed  themselves 

2.  To  suptport,  refresh,  *ij,'D  saad. 

1  Ki.  13.   7  Come  home  with  me,  and  refresh  thyself 

3.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  yw  shub,  5. 

Prov  25. 13  for  he  refresheth  the  soul  of  his  masters 
4.7*0  give  rest  again,  avenrava}  anapauo. 

1  Co.  16.  18  For  they  have  refreshed  my  spirit  and  yo. 

2  Co.  7. 13  because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you 
Phm.       20  Yea,  brother,  .refresh  my  bowels  in  the 

5.  To  cool  or  refresh  again,  a.va^/x>x^  anapsucho. 

2  Ti.    1.  16  for  he  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ash. 

6.  To  obtain  much  attention,  Tvyx^V(Ji  eirt/xeXelas. 

Acts  27.    3  libertytogountohisfriendstorefreshhim 
REFRESHED  (with),  to  be  — 
l.To  be  refreshed,  b-'si  naphash,  2. 

Exod23-  12  and  the  stranger  may  be  refreshed 

31. 17  seventh  day  he  rested,  and  was  refreshed 

2.  To  have  breath,  be  refreshed,  ni"i  ravach. 

1  Sa.  16.  23  so  Saul  was  refreshed,  and  was  well,  and 
Job  32.  20  I  will  speak,  that  I  may  be  refreshed 

S.To  give  rest  again,  ava-Kavai  anapauo, 

Phm.       7  bowels  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by  thee 

4.  Torestagainwith,avvavaTra.vofxaisunanapauomai 
Rom.  15.  32  [come  unto  you.  .and  may  with  you  be  r.] 

REFRESHING  — 

1.  Refreshing,  n^ns  margeah. 

Isa.   28.  12  this  (is)  the  refreshing  :  yet  they  would 

2.  A  cooling  or  refreshing  again,  hva.^u^LS  anapsu. 

Acts    3.  ig  when  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come 
REFUGE,  (place  of)  — 
\.A  refuge,  place,  of  refuge,  nprp  machseh. 

Psa.  14.   6  of  the  poor,  because  the  Lord  (is)  his  re. 

46.  1  God  (is)  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very 
62.  7  rock  of  my  strength,  (and)  my  refuge,  (is) 
62.  8  pour  out  your  heart . .  God  (is)  a  refuge  for 
71.  7  unto  many :  but  thou  (art)  my  strong  ref. 
91.  2  my  refuge  and  my  fortress  :  my  God ;  in 
91.  q  thou  hast  made  the  Lord  (which  is)  my  r. 
94.  22  and  my  God  (is)  the  rock  of  my  refuge 

104.  18  high  hills  (are)  a  refuge  for  the  wild  goats 

142.    5  Thou  (art)  my  refuge  (and)  my  portion  in 

Prov  14.  26  and  his  children  shall  have  a  place  of  re. 

Isa.     4.    6  for  a  place  of  refuse,  and  for  a  covert  from 

35.    4  refuge  from  the  storm,  a  shadow  from  the 

28.  15  for  we  have  made  lies  our  refuge,  andun. 

28.  17  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of 

*2.Flight,  place  of  flight,  D>30  manos. 

2  Sa.  22.  3  my  refuge,  my  saviour ;  thou  savest  me  fr. 
Psa.  59.  16  for  thou  hast  been  mydefenceand  refuge 

142.    4  refuge  failed  me;  no  man  cared  for  my  so. 
Jer.  16.  19  refuge  in  the  day  of  affliction,  the  Gentiles 

3. Habitation,  den,  niijJD  mconah. 

Deut33.  27  eternal  God  (is  thy)  refuge,  and  underlie. 

4,  Asylum,  refuge,  restricted  place,  ttS/pp  miqlat. 
■Xuni35.   6  six  cities  for  refuge,  which*  ye  shall  appo. 
35. 11  appoint  you  cities  to  be  cities  of  refuge 


Num35.  12  they  shall  be  unto  you  cities  for  refuge 
35.  13  shall  give,  six  cities  shall  ye  have  for  ref. 
35.  14  of  Canaan,  (which)  shall  be  cities  of  refuge 
35.  15  These  six  cities  shall  be  a  refuge,  (both) 
35.  25  shall  restore  him  to  the  city  of  his  refuge 
35.  26,  27  the  border  of  the  city  of  his  refuge 
35.  28  have  remained  in  the  city  of  his  refuge 
35.  32  him  that  is  tied  to  the  city  of  his  refuge 

Josh  20.    2  Appoint  out  for  you  cities  of  refuge,  wh. 

20.  3  shall  be  your  refuge  from  the  avenger  of 
21. 13,  21,  27,  32,  38  a  city  of  refuge  for  the  sla. 

1  Ch.  6.  57  Hebron,  (the  city)  of  refuge,  and  Libnah 
6. 67  they  gave  unto  them,  (of)  the  cities  of  re. 

5. High  place,  tower,  nay-p  misgab. 

Psa.    9.   9  will  be  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed,  a  ref. 
46.   7,  11  the  God  of  Jacob  (is)  our  refuge.    Se. 
48.  3  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge 
REFUGE,  to  make  — 
To  take  refuge,  npn  chasah. 

Psa.  57.    1  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  make  my  ref. 
REFUSE,  (to)  — 
1.7*0  refuse,  JND  maan,  3. 

Gen.  27-  35  he  refused  to  be  comforted  :  and  he  said 

39.   8  he  refused,  and  said  unto  his  master's  w. 

48.  19  his  father  refused,  and  said,  I  know  (it) 

Exod.  4.  23  if  thou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  behold,  I  w. 

7. 14  Pharaoh's  heart  (is)  hardened,  he  refuseth 

10.  3  How  long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  th. 
16.  28  How  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my  comman. 
22.  17  If  her  father  utterly  refuse  to  give  her  u. 

Nuni2o.  21  Thus  Edom  refused  to  give  Israel  passage 

22. 13  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  leaveto  go  with 

22. 14  said,  Balaam  refuseth  to  come  with  us 
Deut25.    7  My  husband's  brother  refuseth  to  raise  up 

1  Sa.   8.  19  the  people  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  S. 

28.  23  But,  he  refused,  and  said,  I  will  not  eat 

2  Sa.  2.  23  he  refused  to  turn  aside :  wherefore  Ab. 

13.   9  he  refused  to  eat.  And  Amnon  said,  Have 

1  Ki.20.  35  And  the  man  refused  to  smite  him 

21.  15  which  he  refused  to  give  thee  for  money 

2  Ki.  5. 16  he  urged  him  to  take  (it);  but  he  refused 
Neh.  9. 17  refused  to  obey,  neither  were  mindful  of 
Esth.  1. 12  Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king's  com. 
Job  6.  7  The  things  (that)  my  soul  refused  to  tou. 
Psa.  77.  2  soreran.  .mysoul  refused  to  be  comforted 

78.  10  kept  not.  .and  refused  to  walk  in  his  law 
Prov.  1.  24  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused ;  I  have 

21.    7  destroy,  .because  they  refuse  to  do  judg. 

21.  25  killeth  him;  for  his  hands  refuse  to  lab. 
Isa.     x.  20  if  ye  refuse  and  rebel,  ye  shall  be  devou. 
Jer.     3.   3  thou  hadst  a  whore's  forehead,  thou  ref. 
5.   3  they  have  refused,  .have  refused  to  retu. 

8.  5  they  hold  fast  deceit,  they  refuse  to  ret. 

9.  6  they  refuse  to  know  me,  saith  the  Lord 

11.  10  forefathers,  which  refused  to  hear  my  w. 
15. 18  incurable,  (which)  refuseth  to  be  healed 
25.  28  if  they  refuse  to  take  the  cup  at  thine  h. 
31.  15  refused  to  be  comforted  for  her  children 
50.  33  held  them  fast ;  they  refused  to  let  them 

Hos.  11.  5  shall  be  his  king,  because  they  refused  to 
Zech.  7.  11  they  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled  away 

^.Refusing,  |ND  maen. 

Exod.  8.    2  if  "thou  refuse  to  let  (them)  go,  behold,  I 
9.    2  if  thou  refuse  to  let  (them)  go,  and  wilt 
10.    4  Else,  if  thou  refuse  to  let  my  people  go 
Jer.  38.  21  if  thou  refuse  to  go  forth,  this  (is)  the  w. 

3. Refusing,  C3XD  nwanim. 

Jer.   13.  10  This  evil  people  which  refuse  to  hear  my 
4.  To  loathe,  despise,  reject,  dnd  maas. 

1  Sa.  16.    7  Look  not.  .because.  .1  have  refused  him 

Job  34.  33  whether  thou  refuse,  or  whether  thou  ch. 

Psa.  78. 67  he  refused  the  tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and 
118.  22  The  stone.,  the  builders  refused  is  become 

Isa.     7. 15,  16  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose 
8.   6  as  this  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shi. 

Eze.    5.   6  they  have  refused  my  judgments  and  my 

5.7*0  forsake,  3tu  azab. 

Prov.io.  17  but  he  that  refuseth  reproof  erreth 

6.  To  make  free,  void,  refuse,  yi9  ?>ara. 

Prov.  8.  33  Hear  instruction,  .be  wise,  .refuse  it  nut 

13. 18  shame  (shall  be)  to  him  that  refuseth  ins. 

5.  32  He  that  refuseth  instruction  despisethhis 

7.  To  deny,  disown,  apveofxai  arneomai. 

Acts  7.  3s  This  Moses  whom  they  refused,  saying,  W, 
Heb.  11.  24  refused  to  be  called  the  sou  of  Pharaoh's 

8.7*0  ask  off,  deprecate,  irapaiTeo/j.at  paraiteomai. 

Acts  25.  11  I  refuse  not  to  die  :  but  if  there  be  none 

1  Ti.    4.    7  refuse  profane  and  old  wives'  fables,  and 

5. 11  theyoungerwidowsrefuse :  for  when  they 

Heb.  12.  25  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketli 

12.  25  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  much 
REFUSE  — 

1.7*0  loathe,  despise,  reject,  cxvmaas. 

Lam.  3.  45  Thou  hast  made  us.  .refuse  in  the  midst 
2. 7*o  be  melted,  wasted,  Dpp  masas,  2. 

1  Sa.  15.  9  vile  and  refuse,  that  they  destroyed  utte. 
3. Refuse,  flakes,  Sen  mappal. 

Amos  8.   6  may  buy.  .ana  sell  the  refuse  of  the  wh. 
REFUSED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  loathed,  despised,  rejected,  dnc  maas,  2. 

Isa.   54.    6  a  wife  of  youth,  when  thou  wast  refused 
2,  What  is  to  be  cast  away,  air6@Ar)Tos  apob7etos. 

1  Ti.    4.   4  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received 


REGARD 


801 


REIGN 


REGARD  of,  in  — 

On  account  of  the  matter  of,  rnrn"?"  cd-dibrath. 

Eccl.  8.    2  and  (that)  in  regard  of  the  oath  of  God 
REGARD,  to  (have)  — 
1.7*0  understand,  consider,  attend,  pa  bin. 

Psa.  28.  5  Because  they  regard  not  the  works  of  the 
94.   7  neither  shall  the  God  of  Jacob  regard  (it) 

Prov  29.    7  (but)  the  wicked  regardeth  not  to  know 

Dan.  11.  37  Neither  shall  he  regard  the  God.  .nor  re. 

2.  To  understand,  consider,  attend,  \%  bin,  7a. 
Job  30.  20  I  stand  up,  aud  thou  regardest  me  (not) 

-3.  To  seek,  inquire,  require,  vrw  darash. 

Job     3.    4  let  not  God  regard  it  from  above,  neither 

L  To  let  the  eye  spare,  p"  D*n  chus  ayin. 

Gen. 45.  20  Also  regard  not  your  stuff;  for  the  good 

5.  To  think,  reckon,  esteem,  3^n  chashab. 

Isa.  13.  17  which  shall  not  regard  silver;  and  (as  for) 
33.    8  he  hath  despised  the  cities,  he  regardeth 

6.  To  know,  jn;  yada. 

Prov  12. 10  righteous  (man)  regardeth  the  life  of  his 

7.  To  set  the  taste  or  desire,  d$?  c-i?  sum  teem. 
Dan.  3.  12  these  men,  O  king,  have  not  regarded  thee 

6.  13  regardeth  not  thee.,  O  king,  nor  the  dec. 

8. 7*0  (cause  to)  behold,  033  nabat,  5. 

Isa.  5. 12  but  they  regard  notthe  work  of  the  Lord 
Lam.  4.  16  he  will  no  more  regard  them  :  they  respe. 
Amos  5.  22  neither  will  I  regard  the  peace  offerings 
Hab.   1.   5  regard,  and  wonder  marvellously :  for  (I) 

9.  7*o  discern,  T33.  nakar,  3. 

Job    34.  19 norregardeththerichmorethanthepoor? 

10.  To  lift  up,  tipi  nasa. 

Deutio.  17  which  regardeth  not  persons,  nor  taketh 

28.  50  which  shall  not  regard  the  person  of  the 

2  Ki.  3.  14  were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  presence  of 

Mai.    1.   9  will  he  regard  your  persons?  saith  the  L. 

11.  To  face,  front,  look,  n:$panah. 

Lev.  19.  31  Regard  not  them  that  have  familiar  spir. 
Job   36. 21  Take  heed,  regard  not  iniquity :  for  this 
Psa.  10?.  17  He  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  destitute 
Mai.    2. 13  insomuch  that  he  regardeth  not  the  offe. 

12.  To  lift  up  the  face,  d*jd  tipi  nasaphanim. 
Prov.  6.  35  He  will  not  regard  any  ransom ;  neither 

13.  7b  give  attention,  2$#  qashab,  5. 

Prov.  1.  24  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  reg. 
\\.  Attention,  3^(5  qesheb. 

1  Ki.18.  29  nor  any  to  answer,  nor  any  that  regarded 
15.  To  see,  nxi  raah. 

1  Ch.17. 17  hast  regarded  me  according  to  the  estate 

Psa  66.  18  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord 
106  44  Nevertheless  he  regarded  their  affliction 

Eccl. 11.   4  he  that  regardeth  the*  clouds  shall  notr. 

lG.To  set,  put,  place,  □*»  sum,  5. 

Job    4.  20  they  perish  for  ever  without  any  regarding 

17-  7*0  set  the  heart,  1?  JVC?  or  Q>&  sum  or-  shith  leb. 
hxod.  9.  21  he  that  regarded  not  the  word  of  the  Lo. 

1  Sa.   4.  20  she  answered  not,  neither  did  she  regard 

25.  25  I  pray  thee,  regard  this  man  of  Belial,  (e.) 

2  5a.  13  20  he  (is)  thy  brother;  regard  not  this  thing 
13-  To  behold,  look,  ~nv  shur. 

Job  35.  13  vanity,  neither  mil  the  Almighty  regard 
19.  To  hear,  hearken,  ■Jips*  shamea. 

Job   39.   7  neither  regardeth  he  the  crying  of  the  d. 

20. 7*0  observe,  watch,  take  heed,  keep,  TD»  shamar. 

Psa.  31.   6  I  have  hated  them  that  regard  lying  van. 

Prov.  5.    2  That  thou  mayest  regard  discretion,  and 

13. 18  that  regardeth  reproof  shall  be  honoured 

15.    5  but  he  that  regardeth  reproof  is  prudent 

Eccl.  5.    8  higher  than  the  highest  regardeth ;  and 

•21.7b  look,  glance  at,  nyw  shaah. 

Exod.  5.  9  labour  therein ;  and  let  them  not  regard 
22.7*0  sec,  perceive,  understand,  0\4ira  blepo. 

Matt  22. 16  for  thou  regardest  not  the  person  of  men 

Marki  2. 14  for  thou  regardest  not  the  person  of  men 
23.7*0  turn  self  in  or  away,  ivrpiirofxat  entrepomai. 

Lukei8.   2  which  feared  not  God,  neither  regarded 
18.   4  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man 
24. To  look  upon,  e7ri£A.eVw  epiblepo. 

Luke  1. 48  For  he  hath  regarded  the  low  estate  of 
25.  7*o  hold  toward,  wpoa-ex^  prosecJio. 

Acts  8. 11  to  him  they  had  regard,  because  that  of 
26.7*o  think,  set  Hie  mind,  <ppov4a  phroneo. 

Rom  14.    6  He  that  regardeth  the  day,  regardeth  (it) 
14.   6  [he  that  regardeth  not.  .doth  not  regard] 
REGARD,  not  to  — 

1.  To  be  careless,  a/xe\4co  a  meted. 

neb.  8.    9  and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith  the  Lord 

2.  To  consult  amiss,  irapa$ov\evofiat  parahouleuom. 

Thil.  2.  30  [not  regarding]  his  life,  to  supply  your  I. 
RE'-GEM,  dt*j  friendship,  association. 
A  son  of  Jahdai,  of  the  family  of  Caleb  son  of  Jephun- 
neth.    B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2.  47  And  the  sons  of  Jahdai ;  R.,  and  Jotliam 

101 


RE-GEM  ME'-LECH,  S^D  D3*i. 

One  whom  the  people  sent  into  the  temple  to  pray  and 

to  consult  the  priests  and  prophets  regarding  a  day  of 

humiliation  in  memory  of  the  destruction  of  the  temple. 

B.C.  518. 

Zech.  7.   2  they  had  sent.  .Sherezerand  R.,  and 

REGENERATION  — 

A  re-creation,  regeneration,  TvaXiyyeveala  paliyge. 
Mattig.  28  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  man 
Titus  3.    5  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  ren. 

REGION  that  lieth  (round  about)  — 
l.A  cord,  line,  coast,  ^n,  Ssn  chebel. 

Deut.  3.    4  all  the  region  of  Argob,  the  kingdom  of 
3.  13  all  the  region  of  Argob,  with  all  Bashan 

1  Ki.  4.  13  the  region  of  Argob,  which  (is)  in  Bashan 

2.  An  elevated  place,  nsi  naphah. 

1  KL  4.  11  in  all  the  region  of  Dor ;  which  had  Tap. 

2. A  climate,  region,  district,  kKI/jlol  klima. 

2  Co.  11. 10  of  this  boasting  in  the  regions  of  Aehaia 
Gal.     1.  21 1  came  into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cil. 

i.The  place  all  around,  treplx&pos  pierichoros. 
Matt.  3.    5  Then  went  out.  .all  the  region  round  ab. 
Mark  1.  28  throughout  all  the  region  round  about  G. 

6.  55  ran  through  that  whole  region  [round  a.] 
Luke  4. 14  fame . .  through  all  the  region  round  about 

7.  17  and  throughout  all  the  region  round  about 
Aets  14.   6  and  unto  theregionthatlieth  roundabout 

5.-1  place,  region,  field,  x^P°  chora. 

Matt.  4.  16  to  them  which  sat  in  the  region  and  sha. 

Luke  3.    1  of  the  region  of  Trachonitis,  and  Lysanias 

Acts   8.    1  throughout  the  regions  of  Judea  and  Sa. 

13.  49  was  published  throughout  all  the  region 

16.   6  throughout  Phrygia  and  the  region  of  Ga. 

REGISTER  — 

\.A  writing,  nn?  kethab. 

Ezra   2.  62  These  sought  their  register  (among)  those 

Neh.   7.  64  These  sought  their  register  (among)  those 
2. A  book,  letter,  account,  "i?d  sepher. 

Neh.   7.    5  I  found  a  register  of  the  genealogy  of  them 
RE-HAB'-IAH,  n;:irri,  injnnn  Jah  is  a  widener. 
Eldest  son  of  Eliezer  son  of  Moses.  B.C.  1390. 

1  Ch.23.  17  And  the  sons  of  Eliezer  (were)  R.  the  ch. 

23.  17  but  the  sons  of  R.  were  very  many 

24.  21  of  the  sons  of  R.,  the  first  (was)  Isshiah. 
26.  25  And  his  brethren  by  Elieaer;  R.  his  sou 

REHEARSE,  to  — 

1.7*0  speak,  *n?  ddbar,  3. 

1  Sa.    8.  21  he  rehearsed  them  iu  the  ears  of  the  LORD 
2.7*0  bring  forward,  tell,  declare,  ~m  nagad,  5. 

1  Sa.  17.  31  they  rehearsed  (them)  before  Saul;  and 
3.7*0  sit,  place,  put,  U*&  sum. 

Exodi7. 14  Write,  .and  rehearse,  .in  the  ears  of  Jos. 
i.To  give,  give  forth,  run  tanah,  3. 

Judg.  5. 11  rehearse  the  righteous  acts  of  the  LORD 
5.  7*o  tell  back  or  again,  avayyiWto  anaygetlo. 

Acts  14.  27  rehearsedallthatGod  had  done  with  them 
REHEARSE  from  the  beginning,  to  — 
7*o  begin,  commence,  &pxoy.at  archomai. 

Acts  11.    4  Peter  rehearsed.,  from  the  beginning,  and 

RE'-HOB,  2tr\  width. 

1.  A  Levitical  city  in  Asher,  near  the  source  of  the 
Jordan,  the  farthest  place  northward  to  which  the 
spies  went ;  now  called  Hunin. 

NUHI13.  21  went  up,  and  searched  the  land.. unto  R. 

Josh.T9.  28  And  Hebron,  and  R.,  and  Hammon,  and 
19.  30  Ummah  also,  and  Aphek,  and  R.:  twenty 
21.  31  Helkath  with  her  suburbs,  and  R.  with 

Judg.  1.  31  NeitherdidAsherdriveouttheinh...ofR. 

2  Sa.  10.    8  and  the  Syrians . .  of  R. . .  (were)  by  thems. 

1  Ch.  6.  75  Hukok  with  her  suburbs,  and  R.  with  her 

2.  Father  of  Hadadezer,  king  of  Zobah  in  the  days  of 
David.  B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    8.   3  David  smote  also  Hadadezer.  .son  of  R. 

8. 12  and  of  the  spoil  of  Hadadezer,  son  of  R. 

3.  A  Levite  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed  the  covenant. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10.  11  Micha,  R.,  Hashabiah 
RE-HO-BO'-AM,  Djnn-]  freer  of  the  people. 
Son  and  successor  of  Solomon,  from  whom  the  ten 
tribes  revolted.  B.C.  975. 

1  Ki.  11.  43  and  R.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

12.  1  And  R.  went  to  Shechem  :  for  all  Israel 
12.  3  And  Jeroboam,  .came,  and  spake  untoR. 
12.  6  And  king  R.  consulted  with  the  old  men 
12. 12  Jeroboam,  .came  to  R.  the  third  day,  as 

12. 17  the  cities  of  Judah,  R.  reigned  over  them 

12. 18  Then  king  R.  sent  Adoram,  who(was)over 
12. 18  R.  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to  his  cha. 
12.  21  And  when  R.  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he 
12.  21  to  bring  the  kingdom  again  to  R.  the  son 
12.  23  Speak  unto  R.,  the  son  of  Solomon,  king 
12.  27  the  heart  of  this  people  turn,  .unto  R. 
12.  27  they  shall  kill  me,  and  go  again  to  R.  king 
14.  21  R.  the  son  of  Solomon  reigned  in  Judah 
14.  21  R.(  was)  forty  and  one  years  old  when  he 
14.  25  it  came  to  pass,  in.  .fifth  year  of  king  R. 
14.  27  king  R.  made  in  their  stead  brasen  shie. 
14.  29  Nov/  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  R. .  .(are). .  w. 


1  K.i.14.  30 
14- 31 
15-   6 

1  Ch.  3.  10 

2  Ch.  9.  31 

10.  1 
10.  3 
10.  6 
10.  12 
10.  13 
10.  17 
10.18 

10.  18 

11.  1 
11.  1 
11.  3 
ii-  5 
11.  17 
11.  18 
11.  21 
11.  22 


12.    5 

12.  10 
12.  13 


12.  15 
12.  16 


Matt. 


And  there  was  war  between  R.  and  Jero. 
And  R.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
And  there  was  war  between  R.and  Jeru. 
And  Solomon's  son(\vas)R.,  Abia  his  son 
and  R.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
And  R.  went  to  Shechem:  for  to  Shechem 
Jeroboam  and  all  Israel. . spake  toR., say. 
king  R.  took  counsel  with  the  old  men 
all  the  people  came  to  R.  on  the  third  day 
and  king  R.  forsook  the  counsel  of  the  old 
the  cities  of  J.,  R.  reigned  over  them 
R.  sent  H adoram  that  (was)  over  the  trib. 
R.  made  speed  to  get  him  up  tn(his)cha. 
And  when  R.  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he 
he  might  bring  the  kingdom  again  to  R. 
Speak  unto  R.  the  son  of  Solomon,  king 
And  R.  dwelt  in  Jerusalem,  and  built  cities 
So  they,  .made  R.  the  son  of  Solomon  st. 
And  R.  took  him  Mahalath  the  daughter 
And  R.  loved  Maachah  thedaughterof  A. 
R.  made  Abijah  the  son  of  Maachah  the 
whenR.  had  established  the  kingdom,  .he 
came  to  pass . . iu  the  fifth  year  of  king  R. 
Then  came  Shemaiah  the  prophet  to  R. 
Instead  of  which  king  R.  made  shields  of 
So  king  R.  strengthened  himself  in  Jeru. 
R.  (was)  one  and  forty  years  old  when  he 
Now  the  acts  of  R..  .(are),  .written  in  the 
(there  were)  wars  between  R.  and  Jerob. 
And  R.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  b. 
7  wheu  R.  was  young  and  tender  hearted 
7  And  Solomon  begat  R. ;  and  R.  begat  A. 


RE-HO'-BOTH,  nhrn,  rrairi  enlargement. 

1.  A  city  in  Assyria,  built  in  Nimrod,  near  Nineveh  and 
Calab,  on  the  Euphrates. 

Gen.  10.  11  Asshur.  .builded  Nineveh,  .the  city  R. 

36.  37  and  Saul  of  R. .  .reigned  in  his  stead 
1  Ch.  1.  48  Shaul  of  R.  by  the  river  reigued  in  his  st. 

2.  A  well  which   Isaac    digged,  perhaps    Huchaibah 
three  miles  S.  of  Eltlsa. 

Gen.  26.  22  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  R. ;  and  he 
RE'-HTJM,  cini  pity. 

1.  A  chief  man  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel.  B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.    2  Bilshan,  Mispar,  Bigvai,R.,  Baanah 
Neh.  12.    3  Shechaniah,  R.,  Meremoth 

2.  A  chancellor  of  Artaxerxes.  B.C.  522. 

Ezra    4.    8  R.  the  chancellor,  .wrote  a  letteragainst 
4.    9  Then  (wrote)  R.  the  chancellor,  and  Shi. 
4.  17  (Then)  sent  the  king  an  answer  unto  R. 
4.  23  Artaxerxes' letter(was)read before R., aud 

3.  A  Levite  that  helped  to  repair  the  wall.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  17  after  him  repaired  theLevites.R.theson 

4.  A  person  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10.  25  R.,  Hashabnah,  Maaseiah 
RE'-I,  y~).Jah  is  a  friend. 

A  friend  of  David  when  Adonijah  attempted  to  become 
king.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ki.  1.    8  But  Zadok.  .and  R. .  .were  not  with  Adon. 
REIGU  — 
1.7*0  reign,  be  a  king,  Tibt$  malak. 

1  Ki.  6.   1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign  over 

2  Ki.  24.  12  took  him  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign 

25..  1  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  tenth 

1  Ch.  4.  31  These  (were)  their  cities  unto  the  reign 

2  Ch.  16.  13  in  the  one  and  fortieth  yearof  his  reign 

17.  7  in  the  third  year  of  his  reign  he  sent  to 
£9.  3  He,  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  fi. 
34.  3  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,  while  he 
34.  8  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign,  when 
36.  20  servants,  .until  the  reign  of  the  kingdom 
Esth.  1.  3  In  the  third  year  of  his  reign,  he  made  a 
Jer.     1.   2  came,  .in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign 

51.  59  he  went,  .in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign 

52.  4  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  tenth 
Dan.   9.   2  In  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  I  Daniel  un. 

2.Kingdom,  id?b  malku. 

Eara   4.  24  ceased  unto  the  second  year  of  the  reign 

6. 15  sLxth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius  the  king 

Dan.  6.  28  in  the  reign  of  Darius,  and  in  the  reign  of 

3. Kingdom,  rrtabn  malkuth. 

1  Ch.26.  31  In  the  fortieth  year  of  the  reign  of  David 

29.  30  With  all  his  reign  and  his  might,  and  the 

2  Ch.  3.    2  secondmonth,  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  r. 

15. 10  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Asa 

15.  19  five  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign  of  Asa 

16.  1  In  the  six  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign 
16.  12  in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  his  reign 
29.  19  Aliaz  in  his  reign  did  cast  away  in  his  tran. 
35. 19  In  the  eighteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  J. 

Es'a   4.    5  until  the  reign  of  Darius  king  of  Persia 
4.   6  And  in  the  reign  of  Ahasuerus,  in  the  be. 
4.   6  beginning  of  his  reign,  wrote  they  (unto 

7.  1  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia 

8.  1  chief . .  in"the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  the  king 
Neh.  i2.  22  priests,  to  the  reign  of  Darius  the  Persian 
Esth.  2.  16  was  taken .  .in  the  seventh  year  of  his  re. 
Jer.  49.  34  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah 

52.  31  in  the  (first)  year  of  his  reign  lifted  up  the 

Dan.    1.    1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim 

2.    1  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Nebuc. 

8.    1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  king  Be. 

A. Kingdom,  reign,  napoo  mamlakah. 

Jer.   27.    1  In  the  beginning  of  thereign  of  Jehoiakim 
28.    1  in  the  beginning  of  the  reigu  of  Zedekiah 


REIGN 


802 


REJOICE 


z>.Kingdom,  nUTQQ  mamlakuth. 

Jer.  26.    1  In  th'e  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim 

^Leadership,  ^ye/xovia  hegemonia. 

Luke  3.    1  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tibe. 

BEIGN  (over,  with),  to  — 

1.  To  reign,  be  a  king,  i&p  malak. 

Gen.  36.  31  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Ed. 
36.  31  before  there  reigned  any  king  over  the  c. 
36.  32  And  Bela  the  son  of  Beor  reigned  in  Edom 
36.  33  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah  reigned 
36.  34  Husham  of  the  land  of  Temani  reigned  in 
36.  35  Husham  died,  and  Hadad . .  reigned  in  his 
36.  36  Samlah  of  Masrekah  reigned  in  his  stead 
36.  37  Saul  of  Rehoboth  (by)  the  river  reigned 

36.  38  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  Achbor  reigned  in 
36. 39  Hadarreigned  in  his  stead :  and  the  name 

37,  8  Shalt  thou  indeed  reign  over  us?  or  shalt 
£xodi5. 18  The  Lord  shall  reign  forever  and  ever 
-Josh.  13.  10,  21  king  of  the  Amorites,  which  reigned 

13.  12  which  reigned  in  Ashtaroth  and  in  Edrei 

Judg.  4.   2  Jabin  king  of  Canaan,  that  reigned  in  Ha. 

9.    8  said  unto  the  olive  tree,  Reign  thou  over 

9. 10,  12,  14  said.  .Come  thou,  (and) reign  over 

x  Sa.    8.    7  rejected  me,  that  I  should  not  reign  over 

8.   9  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  reign  over 

8. 11  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  reign 

11. 12  Who  (is)  he  that  said,  Shall  Saul  reign  ov. 

12. 12  said . .  Nay ;  but  a  king  shall  reign  over  us 

12. 14  and  also  the  king  that  reigneth  over  you 

13.    1  Saul  reigned  one  year,  .when  he  had  rei. 

16.    1  have  rejected  him  from  reigning  over  Is. 

2  Sa    2.  10  Ish-bosheth,  Saul's  son.  .reigned  two  ye. 

3.  21  that  thou  mayest  reign  over  all  that  thine 

5.   4  thirty  years  old.  .(and)  he  reigned  forty  y. 

5.   5  In  Hebron  he  reigned  over  Judah  seven 

5.  5  he  reigned  thirty  and  three  years  overall 
8. 15  David  reigned  over  all  Israel ;  and  David 

10.  1  and.  .his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

{So  in  1  Ki.  11.  43;  14.  20,  31;  15.  8,  24;  16.6,  28:22. 
40,  50 ;  2  Ki.  8.  15,  24  ;  10.  35 ;  12.  21 ;  13.  9,  24 ;  14.  16, 
29 ;  15.  7,  22,  38 ;  16.  20  ;  19.  37 ;  -20.  21 ;  21.  18,  26  ;  24. 
6  ;  1  Ch.  19.  1 ;  29.  28  ;  2  Ch.  9.  31 ;  12.  16  ;  14.  1 ;  17.  1 ; 
si.  x  ;  24.  27 ;  26.  23  ;  27.  9 ;  28.  27 ;  32.  33 ;  33.  20 ;  36.  8.] 
2  Sa,  15- IO  ye  shall  say,  Absalom  reigneth  in  Hebron 
16.    8  Saul,  in  whose  stead  thou  hast  reigned 

1  Ki.  1.  11  the  son  of  Haggith  doth  reign,  and  David 

1.  13, 17,  30  thy  son  shall  reign  after  me,  and 
1.  13  saying.,  why  then  doth  Adonijah  reign? 
1.  18  Adonijah  reigneth  ;  and  now,  my  lord  the 

1.  24  Adonijah  shall  reign  after  me,  and  he  ah. 

2.  ri  And  the  days  that  David  reigned  over  Is. 

2.  11  seven  years  reigned  he  in  Hebron,  and  th. 
2. 11  and  three  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem 
2. 15  set  their  faces  on  me,  that  I  should  reign 

6.  1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign  over 

11.  24  dwelt  therein,  and  reigned  in  Damascus 
11.  25  he  abhorred  Israel,  and  reigned  over  Sy. 
11.  37  thou  shalt  reign  according  to  all  that 

11.  42  reigned  in  Jerusalem  over  all  Israel 

12.  17  the  cities  of  Judah,  Rehoboam  reigned  over 
14. 19  how  he  warred,  and  how  he  reigned,  beh. 
14.  20  the  days  which  Jeroboam  reigned  (were) 
14.  21  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solomon  reigned  in 

14.  21  he  reigned  seventeen  years  in  Jerusalem 

15.  1  the  eighteenth  year,  .reigned  Abijam  over 
15.  2  Tliree  yearsreignedhe  in  Jerusalem,  and 
15.  9  twentieth  year  of  Jeroboam . .  re.  Asa  over 
15.  10  forty  and  one  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusa. 
15.  25  And  Nadab.  .reigned  over  Israel  two  ye. 
15.  28  did  Baasha  slay  him,  and  reigned  in  his 

15.  29  when  he  reigned,  (that)  he  smote  all  the 

16.  10  and  killed  him.  .and  reigned  in  his  stead 
16.  15  did  Zimri  reign  seven  days  in  Tirzah.  And 
16.  22  prevailed .  .so  Tibni  died,  and  Omri  reig. 
16.  23  began  Omri.  .six  years  reigned  he  in  Tir. 
16.  29  Ahab  the  son  of  Omri  reigned  over  Israel 
22.  42  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jeru. 
22.  51  Ahaziah.  .reigned  two  years  over  Israel 

2  Ki    1.  17  Jehoram  reigned  in  his  stead,  in  the  sec. 

3.  1  Jehoram  the  son  of  Ahab . .  reigned  twelve 
3. 27  son,  that  should  have  reigned  in  his  stead 
8. 17  and  he  reigned  eight  years  in  Jerusalem 

10.  36  the  time  that  Jehu  reigned  over  Israel  in 

11.  3  And  Athaliah  did  reign  over  the  land 

12.  1  forty  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem.  And 
14.    j  reigned  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of 

14.  2  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerusa. 

15.  2  he  reigned  two  and  fifty  years  in  Jerusa. 
15.    8  did . .  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria  six  mo. 
15. 10,  14,  30  slew  him,  and  reigned  in  his  stead 
15.  13  and  he  reigned  a  full  month  in  Samaria 
15.  25  and  he  killed  him,  andreigned  in  his  room 

15.  33  and  he  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 

16.  2  and  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 
18.    2  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jer. 
21.  1  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jerusalem 

21.  iq  and  he  reigned  two  years  in  Jerusalem 

22.  1  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in  Jerusalem 

23.  31  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  Jerusalem 
23-  33  put  him.  .that  he  might  not  reign  in  Jer. 

23.  36  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 

24.  8  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  three  months 
24.  18  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem' 

i  Ch.  1.  43  these  (are)  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the 
1.  43  before  (any)  king  reigned  over  the  children 
1.  44  Jobab  the  sou  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah  reigned 
1.  45  Husham  of  the  land  of  the  Temanites  re. 
1.  46  Iladad  the  son  of  Bedad.  .reigned  in  his 
1.  47  Sanilah  of  Masrekah  reigned  in  hisstead 
1.  48  Shaul  of  Uehoboth  by  the  river  reigned  in 


1  Ch.  1.  49  And.. the  son  of  Achborreigned  inhisst. 
1.  50  Hadad  reigned  in  his  stead  :  and  the  name 
3.  4  there  he  reigned  seven  years  and  six  mo. 
3.   4  in  Jerusalem  he  reigned  thirty  and  three 

16.  31  say  among  the  nations,  The  Lord  reigneth 
18.  14  So  David  reigned  over  all  Israel,  and  ex. 
29. 26  Thus  David  the  son  of  Jesse  reigned  over 
29.  27  And  the  time  that  he  reigned  over  Israel 
29.  27  seven  years  reigned  he  in  Hebron,  and 
29.  27  thirty  and  three  (years)  reigned  he  in  Je. 

2  Ch.  1.  13  Solomon  came,  .and  reigned  over  Israel 
9.  30  Then  .Solomon  reigned  in  Jerusalem  over 

10.  17  cities  of  Judah,  Kehoboam  reigned  over 
12. 13  Rehoboarn  strengthened  himself,  .and  r. 

12.  13  he  reigned  seventeen  years  in  Jerusalem 

13.  2  He  reigned  three  years  in  Jerusalem.  His 
20.  31  And Jehoshaphat reigned overJudah, (He 

20.  31  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jer. 

21.  5  and  he  reigned  eight  years  in  Jerusalem 

21.  20  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  eight  years,  and 

22.  1  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  Judah  reigned 
22.    2  and  he  reigned  one  year  in  Jerusalem 

22.  12  and  Athaliah  reigned  over  the  land 

23.  3  the  king's  son  shall  reigu,  as  the  Lord  h. 

24.  1  and  he  reigned  forty  years  in  Jerusalem 

25.  1  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jer. 

26.  3  he  reigned  fifty  and  two  years  in  Jerusa. 

27.  1  and  he  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 

27.  8  and  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 

28.  1  andhereigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 

29.  1  he  reigned  nine  and  twenty  years  in  Jer. 
33.    1  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jeiusalem 

33.  21  Am  on  .reigned  two  years  in  Jerusalem 

34.  1  reigned  in  Jerusalem  one  and  thirty  years 
36.  2  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  Jerusalem 
36.  5  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 
36.  9  reigned  three  months  and  ten  days  in  Je. 

36.  11  and  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 
Esth.  1.    1  Ahasuerus  which  reigned  from  India  even 
Job  34.  30  That  the  hypocrite  reign  not,  lest  the  pe. 
Psa.  47.    8  God  reigneth  over  the  heathen :  God  sit. 

93.    1  The  Lord  reigneth ;  he  is  clothed  with 
96. 10  Say  among  the  heathen,  .the  Lord  reign. 
97.  1  The  Lord  reigneth ;  let  the  earth  rejoice 
99.    1  The  Lord  reigneth ;  let  the  people  trem. 
146.  10  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever,  .thy  God 
Prov.  8.  15  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  j. 

30.  22  For  a  servant  when  he  reigneth ;  and  a 
Eccl.  4. 14  For  out  of  prison  he  cometh  to  reign,  whe. 
Isa.  24.  23  when  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  m. 

32.  1  a  king  shall  reigu  in  righteousness,  and 

37.  38  and  Esar-haddou  his  son  reigned  in  his 
52.    7  that  saith  unto  Zion,  Thy  God  reigneth 

Jer.  22.  n  which  reigned  instead  of  Josiah  his  fath. 
22. 15  Shaltthou  reign,  because  thou  closest(t.) 
23.    s  a  king  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  shall 

33.  21  that  he  should  not  have  a  son  to  reign  u. 
37.  1  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Josiah  reigned  inste. 
52.    1  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 

Mic.   4.   7  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Zion 

2. To  rule,  bwa  mashal. 

Deutrs.  6  thou  shalt  reign  over,  .they  shall  not  rei. 
Josh. 12.  5  reigned  in  mount  Hermon,  and  in  Salcah 
Judg.  9.  2  that  all.  reign  over  you,  or  that  one  rei. 
1  Ki.    4.  21  Solomon  reigned  overall  kingdoms  from 

1  Ch.29.  12  thoureignest  over  all ;  and  in  thine  hand 

2  Ch.  9.  26  he  reigned  over  all  the  kings  from  the  ri. 

3.  To  rule,  r\~n  radah. 

Lev.  26. 17  they  that  hate  you  shall  reign  over  you 

4.  To  restrain,  "isjJ  atsar. 

1  Sa.  9.17  Behold . .  this  same  shall  reign  over  my  p. 

5.  To  be  a  prince,  "nE?  sur. 

Judg.  9.  22  When  Abinielech  had  reigned  three  years 

6.  To  be  first  or  chief,  &px®  archd. 

Rom.15. 12  he  that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gent. 

7.  To  reign,  be  a  king,  fSaaiKevcti  basileuo. 

Matt.  2.  22  when  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did  reign 
Luke  1.  33  he  shall  reign  overthe  house  of  Jacob  for 
19. 14  We  will  not  have  this,  .to  reign  over  us 
19.  27  which  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over 
Rom.  5.  14  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  even 
5.  17  if  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by 
5.  17  they,  .shall  reign  in  life  by  one,  Jesus  C. 
5.  21  That  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even 

5.  21  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteous. 

6.  12  Let  not  sin  therefore  reign  in  yourmortal 
1  Co.  4.    8  ye  have  reigned  as  kings  without  us :  and 

4.  8  I  would  to  God  ye  did  reign,  that  we  also 
15.  25  he  must  reign,  till  hehathputallenemies 
Rev.  5.  10  kings  and  priests :  and  we  shall  reign  on 
11.  15  saying.,  and  he  shall  reigu  for  ever  and  e. 
11. 17  taken,  .thy  great  power,  and  hast  reigned 

19.  6  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth 

20.  4  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years 
20.  6  and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand  years 
22.    5  and  they  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever 

S.  To  have  a  kingdom,  e^co  &a<ri\eia  echo  basileia. 

Rev.  17.  18  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth 

9.To  reign  or  be  a  king  with,  o-v/j.fia<Tt\eva)  sumba. 

1  Co.  4.   8  I  would . .  that  we  also  might  reign  with 

2  Ti.  2.  1 2  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  (him) 
REIGN,  to  begin  to,  make  to  — 

I. To  bs  a  king,  reign,  ^bo  malak. 

2  Sa.  2.  10  when  he  began  to  reign. 
[So  in  5.  4;  1  Ki.  14.  21 ;  16.  n ;  22.  42;  2  Ki.  8.  17,  26; 
n.  21;  14.  2;  15.  2,  33;  16.  2;  18.  2;  21.  1,  19;  22.  r;  23. 


31,  36;  24.  8,  18;  25.  27;  2  Ch.  T2.  13 ;  20.  31 ;  21.  5,  20; 
22.  2 ;  24.  1 ;  26.  3 ;  27.  i,  8 ;  28.  1 ;  33.  1,  21 ;  34.  1 ;  36.  2, 
5,  9,  11;  Jer.  52.  1.] 

1  Ki.15.  25  Nadabtheson  of  Jeroboam  began  to  reigu 

22.  41  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Asa  began  to  reigu 
22. 51  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign  over  Israel 

2  Ki.  3.    1  the  sonof  Ahabbegan  to  reign  over  Israel 

8.  1 6  J.  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat . .  began  to  reign 

8.  25  did.  .the  son  of  Jehoram.  .begin  to  reign 

9.  29  the  eleventh  year:,  began  Ahaziah  to  reign 

12.  1  Jehoash  began  to  reigu :  and  forty  years 

13.  1  Jehoahaz  the  son  of  Jehu  began  to  reign 

13.  10  began  Jehoash  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  to  re. 

14.  23  Jeroboam,  .began  to  reign  in  Samaria,  (a.) 

15.  1  began  Azariah  son  of  Amaziah.  .to  reign 
15. 13  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  began  to  reign 
15.  17  began  Menahem  the  son  of  Gadi  to  reign 
15.  23  Pekahiah  theson  of  Menahem  began  to  r, 
15.  27  Pekah  the  son  of  Remaliah  began  to  reign 

15.  32  began  Jotham the  sonof  Uzziah.  .to reign 

16.  1  son  of  Jotham  king  of  Judah  began  to  re. 

17.  1  began  Hoshea  the  son  of  Elahto  reign  iu 

18.  1  son  of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah  began  to  reign 
2  Ch.25.    1  twentyand  five .  .(when)he  began  to  reign 

29.    1  Hezekiah  began  to  reign  (when  he  was) 

2.  To  cause  to  reign,  make  a  king,  tqo  malak,  5. 
2  Ch.   1.    8  and  hast  made  me  to  reign  in  his  stead 

REINS  — 

1.  Loins,  D?K7n  chalatsayim. 

Isa.   11.    5  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  reins 

2. Kidneys,  reins,  nv^s  kelayoth. 

Job    16.  13  he  cleaveth  my  reins  asunder,  and  doth 

19.  27  (though)my  reins  be  consumed  within  me 
Psa.    7.   9  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts  and  reins 

16.    7  my  reins  also  instruct  me  in  the  night  se. 

26.    2  Examine  me.  .try  my  reins  and  my  heart 

73.  21  was  grieved,  and  I  was  pricked  in  my  re. 

139.  13  For  thou  hast  possessed  my  reins :  thou 

Prov  23,  16  my  reins  shall  rejoice  when  thy  lips  speak 

Jer.   11.  20  that  triest  the  reins  and  the  heart,  letme 

12.    2  in  their  mouth,  and  far  from  their  reins 

17. 10  (I)  try  the  reins,  even  to  give  every  man 

20. 12  seest  the  reins  and  the  heart,  let  me  see 

Lam.  3. 13  caused  the  arrows,  .toenter  into  my  reins 

3. Reins,  kidneys,  ve<pp6s  nephros. 

Rev.    2.  23  he  which  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts 

REJECT,  to  — 

1.2*0  loathe,  despise,  reject,  dnd  mesas. 

1  Sa.    8.    7  not  rejected  thee,  but  they  have  rejected 

10. 19  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  God,  who 
15.  23,  26  thou  hast  rejected  the  word  of  the  L. 
15.  23  he  hath  also  rejected  thee  from  (being)k. 

15.  26  LORD  hath  rejected  thee  from  being  king 

16.  1  seeing  I  have  rejected  him  from  reigning 

2  Ki.  17.  15  they  rejected  his  statutes,  and  his  cove. 

17.  20  Lord  rejected  all  the  seed  of  Israel,  and 
Jer.     2.  37  Lord  hath  rejected  thy  confidences,  and 

6.  19  not  hearkened,  .to  my  law,  but  rejected 

6.  30  because  the  Lord  hath  rejected  them 

7.  29  Lord  hath  rejected  and  forsaken  the  gen. 

8.  9  they  haye  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord 
14.  19  Hast  thou  utterly  rejected  Judah?  hath 

Lam.  5.  22  thou  hast  utterly  rejected  us;  thou  art 
Hos.   4.    6  hast  rejected  knowledge,  I  will  also  reject 

2.  To  put  away  or  aside,  hBsTtw  oiheteo. 

Mark  6.  26  for  their  sakes.  .he  would  not  reject  her 

7.   9  Full  well  ye  reject  the  commandment  of 

Luke  7.  30  lawyers  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  agai. 

Johni2.  4S  He  that  rejecteth  me,  and  receiveth  not 

3.7*0  disapprove  of,  aTroSo Kifxdfa  apodoki?nazo. 
Matt  21.  42  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  the 
Mark  8.  31  must  suffer  many  things,  and  be  rejected 

12. 10  stone  which  the  builders  rejected  is  bee. 
Luke  9.  22  must  suffer  many  things,  and  be  rejected 

17.  25  suffer  many  things,  and  be  rejected  of  this 

20.  17  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  thesa. 
Heb.  12.  17  he  was  rejected :  for  he  found  no  place  of 

4.  To  spit  out,  sktttvu  elcptuo. 

Gal.    4. 14  despised  not,  nor  rejected  ;  but  received 

5.  To  ask  off,  deprecate,  irapaireofxat  2Mraiteomai. 
Titus  3.  10  heretic  after  the .  .second  admonition  re. 

REJECTED  — 

l.To  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  "7in  chadcl. 

Isa.  53.   3  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man 
2.ifot  approved  of,  a$6Ki/xos  adokimos. 

Heb.    6.    8  But  that  which  beareth  thorns,  .(is)reje. 
REJOICE  (greatly),  to  — 
l.To  spring  about,  rejoice,  bejoyfxd,  b%  *fii  gul,  gil. 

1  Ch.16.  31  heavens  be  glad,  and  let  the  earth  rejoice 

Psa.    2.  n  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with 
9. 14  daughter  of  Zion :  I  will  rejoice  in  thy  s. 

13.  4  those  that  trouble  me  rejoice  when  I  am 
13-    5  niy  heart  shall  rejoice  in  thy  salvation 

14.  7  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  (and)  Israel  shall  be 
16.   9  my  heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiceth 

21.  1  in  thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  he  rej. 
31.  7  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thy  mercy 
32. 11  Be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice,  ye  rig. 
51.  8  bones  (which)  thou  hast  broken  may  rej. 
53.  6  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  (and)  Israel  shall  be 
89.  16  Iu  thy  name  shall  they  rejoice  all  the  day 
97.  1  let  the  earth  rejoice ;  let  the  multitudeof 
97.   8  daughters  of  Judah  rejoiced  because  of 


REJOICE 


803 


REKEM 


Psa  iiS.  24  Lord  hath  made ;  we  will  rejoice  and  be 
Prov.  2.  14  Who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  .delight  in  the  fr. 
23.  24  The  father  of  the  righteous  shall  greatly  r. 
23.  25  glad,  and  she  that  bare  thee  shall  rejoice 
Isa.  9.  3  as  (men)  rejoice  when  they  divide  the  sp. 
29. 19  pour  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy 
35.  1  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom  as  the 
35.  2  It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and  rejoice 
41.  16  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  (and)  shalt 

65.  18  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  (in  that) 
65. 19  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  my 

Hos.  10.    5  priests  thereof  (that)  rejoiced  on  it,  for 
Zech.  9.    9  Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion ;  ah. 
10.    7  their  heart  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord 

%  To  gird  on  joy,  V*a  "un  chagar  gil. 

Psa.  65. 12  and  the  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  side 

3.  To  rejoice,  rnri  chadah. 

Exodi8.   9  Je'thro  rejoiced  forallthegoodness  which 
A.Joy,  rejoicing,  B'Vs'.p  masos. 

Isa.     8.   6  and  rejoice  in  Rezin  and  Remaliah's  son 

62.  5  (as)  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  b. 

5.  To  rejoice,  exult,  rtyalaz. 

Psa.  28.   7  therefore  my  heart  greatly  rejoiceth,  and 
60.  6  I  will  rejoice,  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and 
68.  4  Sing  unto  God.  .and  rejoice  before  him 
108.   7  I  will  rejoice,  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and 

Prov  23. 16  my  reins  shall  rejoice  wheu  thy  lips  speak 

Isa.   23. 12  Thou  shalt  no  more  rejoice,  O  thou  oppr. 

Jer.  11. 15  when  thou  doest  evil,  then  thou  rejoicest 

15. 17  I  sat  not  in  the  assembly,  .nor  rejoiced 

50. 11  Because  ye  were  glad,  because  ye  rejoiced 
51.  39  make  them  drunken,  that  they  mayrejo. 

Hab.  3.  iS  Yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy 
Zeph.  3. 14  he  glad  and  rejoice  with  all  the  heart,  O 

6.  To  rejoice,  exult,  d^j;  alas. 

Job  20.  iS  restitution  (be),  and  he  shall  not  rejoice 

7.  To  rejoice,  exult,  j'zJJ  alats. 

1  Sa.  2.  1  my  heart  rejoiceth  in  the  LORD ;  mine  h. 
1  Ch.16.  32  let  the  fields  rejoice,  and  all  that  (is)  th. 
Psa.  9.  2  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee  :  I  will 
68.  3  letthem  rejoice  before  God ;  yea,  let  them 
Prov  11.  10  When  it  goeth  well,  .the  city  rejoiceth 

28. 12  When  righteous  (men)  do  rejoice,  (there 

S.To  cry  aloud,  rejoice,  bn-§  tsahal. 

Esth.  8. 15  the  city  of  Shushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad 

9.  To  sing,  cry  aloud,  \p,  ranan. 

Isa.  61.    7  confusion  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  por. 

10.  To  sing,  cry  aloud,  ]r>  ranan,  3. 

Psa.  20.    s  We  will  rejoice  in  thy  salvation,  and  in 
33.-  1  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,0  ye  righteous;  (for) 

63.  7  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice 
71.  23  My  lips  shall  greatly  rojoice  when  I  sing 

89.  12  Tabor  and  Hermon  shall  rejoice  in  thyn. 

90.  14  that  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all  our 
96.  12  then  shallall  the  trees  of  the  wood  rejoice 
98.  4  make  a  loud  noise,  and  rejoice,  and  sing 

11.  TV*  {cause  to)  sing  or  cry  aloud,  \Ti  ranan,  5. 
Deut32,  43  Rejoice,Oye  nations,  (with)  his  people 

12.ro  enjoy,  rejoice,  '&%',  &\&  sus,  sis. 

Deut28.  63  as  the  Lord  rejoiced. .so  the  Lord  will 
30.   9  rejoice  overthee  for  good,  as  he  rejoiced 
Job   39.  21  He  paweth  in  the  valley,  and  rejoiceth  in 
Psa.  19.    5  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race 
35.   9  sonl  shall  be  joyful,  .it  shall  rejoice  in 
40.  16  Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and 
68.   3  before  God ;  yea,  let  them  exceedingly  re  j. 
70.   4  Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and 
119. 14  I  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of  thy  testim. 
119. 162  I  rejoice  at  thy  word,  as  one  that  find. 
Isa.   61.  10  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  LORD,  my  so. 
62.    5  the  bride,  (so)  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over 

64.  5  Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  and  wo. 

66.  10  rejoice  for  joy  with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn 
66.  14  when  ye  see  (this),  your  heart  shall  rejoice 

Jer.  32.  41 1  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good 
Lam.  4.  21  Rejoice  and  be  glad,  0  daughter  of  Edom 
Zeph.  3. 17  he  will  rejoice  overthee  with  joy ;  he  will 

13.7*0  laugh,  deride,  play,  rejoice,  pitfp  sachaq. 
Prov  31.  25  and  she  shall  rejoice  in  time  to  come 

14.  To  laugh,  deride,  play ',  rejoice,  pn'y  sachaq,  3. 
Prov.  8.  30  daily  (his)  delight,  rejoicing  always  before 

8.  31  Rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  his  ea. 

15.  To  shine,  rejoice,  joy,  be  glad,  npy  sameach. 
Lev.  23.  40  ye  shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your  God 
Dent  12.    7  ye  shall  rejoice  in  all  that  ye  put  your  h. 

12. 12  ye  shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your  God 

12. 18  thou  shalt  rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  G. 
14.  26  shalt  rejoice,  thou,  and  thine  household 
16. 11  thou  shalt  rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  G. 
t6.  14  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  thy  feast,  thou,  and 

26.  11  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every  good  (thing) 

27.  7  eat  there,  andrejoice before  the  Lord  thy 
33. 18  Rejoice,  Zebulun,  in  thy  going  out;  and 

Judg.  9. 19  rejoice  ye.  .and  let  him  also  rejoice  in  you 
19.    3  when  the  father. .  saw  him,  he  rejoiced  to 

1  Sa.  2.    1  enlarged.. because  I  rejoice  in  thy  salva. 

6. 13  and  saw  the  ark,  and  rejoiced  to  see  (it) 
11. 15  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  rejoiced  greatly 
19.    5  thou  sawest  (it),  and  didst  rejoice :  wher. 

2  Sa.    1. 20  lest  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines  rej. 

1  EX  5.    7  rejoiced  greatly,  and  said,  Blesaed(be)  the 

2  Ei.iT.  20  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and  the 
1  Oh.  16. 10  let  the  heart  of  them  rejoice  that  seek  t. 

2g.   9  people  rejoiced,  .the  kingalso  rejoiced  w. 


2  Ch.  6.  41  and  let  thy  saints  rejoice  in  goodness 
15.  15  all  Judah  rejoiced  at  the  oath  :  for  they 

23.  21  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced :  and 

24.  10  princes  and  all  the  people  rejoiced,  and 

29.  36  Hezekiah  rejoiced,  and  all  the  people,  that 

30.  25  the  strangers,  .that  dwelt  in  Judah,  rejo. 
Neh.  12.  43  rejoiced,  .and  the  children  rejoiced:  so 
Job  2i.  12  take  the  timbrel  and  harp,  and  rejoice  at 

31.  25  If  I  rejoiced  because  my  wealth  (was)  gr. 
31.  29  If  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  th. 

Psa.  5. 11  all  those  that  put  their  trust  in  thee  rej. 
31.  7  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thy  mercy :  for 
33.  21  ForourheartshaUrejoiceinhim;  because 
35.  15  But  in  mine  adversity  they  rejoiced,  and 
35.  19  Let  not  them,  .wrongfully  rejoice  overme 
35.  24  Judge  me.  .and  let  them  not  rejoice  over 
3S.  16  lest  (otherwise)  they  should  rejoice  over 

40. 16  Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be 
48.  11  Let  mount  Zion  rejoice,  let  the  daughters 

58. 10  righteous  shall  rejoice  when  he  seeth  the 

63. 11  king  shall  rejoice  in  God ;  every  one  that 
66.  6  flood  on  foot :  there  did  we  rejoice  in  him 
85    6  revive  us . .  that  thy  people  may  rejoice  in 

96.  11  Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and  let  the  earth 

97.  12  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  ye  righteous;  and 

104.  31  ever:  the  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  his  works 

105.  3  the  heart  of  them  rejoice  that  seek  the  L 

106.  5  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy 

107.  42  The  righteous  shall  see  (it),  and  rejoice 
109.  28  be  ashamed ;  but  let  thy  servant  rejoice 
149.   2  Let  Israel  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him 

Prov.  5.  18  and  rejoice  with  the  wife  of  thy  youth 

13.  9  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth  :  but  the 
23.  15  thine  heart  be  wise,  my  heart  shall  rejoice 

24. 17  Rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy  falleth,  and 
29.   2  righteous  are  in  authority,  the  people  re. 

Eccl.  3. 12  no  good  in  them,  but  for  (a  man)  to  rejo. 

3.  22  than  that  a  man  should  rejoice  in  his  own 

4.  16  they  also  that  come  aftershall  not  rejoice 
5. 19  take  his  portion,  and  to  rejoice  in  his  la. 

11.   8  live  many  years,  (and)  rejoice  in  them  all 
11.    9  Rejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth,  and 
Song   1.    4  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee ;  we 
Isa,   14.  8  Yea,  the  fir  trees  rejoice  at  thee,  (and)  the 

14.  29  Rejoice  not  thou,  whole  Palestina,because 

25.  9  wewillbe  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation 

65. 13  my  servants  shall  rejoice,  but  ye  shall  be 
66. 10  Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  glad 

Jer.  31. 13  Then  shall  the  virgin  rejoice  in  the  dance 
Eze.    7.  12  let  not  the  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  seller 
25.   6  rejoiced  in  heart  with  all  thy  despite  ag. 

35. 14  When  the  whole  earth  rejoiceth,  I  will 
Hos.  9.  1  Rejoice  not,  0  Israel,  for  joy,  as  (other) 
Joel    2.  21  Fear  not,  0  land ;  be  glad  and  rejoice:  for 

2.  23  Be  glad  then.  .andrejoiceintheLoRDyour 
Obad.     12  neither  shouldest  thou  have  rejoiced  over 
ilic.    7.    8  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy 
Hab.  1.  15  therefore  they  rejoice  and  are  glad 
Zech.  2.  10  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion :  for 

4. 10  for  they  shall  rejoice,  and  shall  see  the 
10.   7  their  heart  shall  rejoice  as  through  wine 

16.ro  make  joyful,  or  glad,  np'£>  sameach,  3. 

Psa,  19.  8  statutes  of  the  Lord  (are)  right,  rejoicing 
86.    4  Rejoice  the  soul  of  thy  servant;  for  unto 

Prov  15.  30  The  light  of  the  eyes  rejoiceth  the  heart 
27.  9  Ointment  and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart 
29.   3  Whoso  loveth  wisdom  rejoiceth  his  father 

Jer.  31. 13  Then  shall  the  virginrejoice  in  the  dance 

17.  Rejoicing,  joy,  nnpb'  simchah. 

Judg  16.  23  to  offer  a  great  sacrifice,  .and  to  rejoice 
Neh.  12.  44  for  Judah  rejoiced  for  the  priests  and  for 
Eze.  35.  15  As  thou  didst  rejoice  at  the  inheritance 

18.  To  leap  much  for  joy,  exult,  ayaXXidco  agalliao. 
Luke  1.  47  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour 

10.  21  In  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and 

John  5.  35  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to  rejoice  in 

8.  56  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my 

Acts  16.  34  he  set  meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced,  be. 

1  Pe.  1.    6  Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice,  though  now 

1.    8  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 

Rev.  19.    7  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  lion. 

19.jTo  make  glad,  well  pleased,  Gv<ppatvQ)  euphraino. 

Acts    2.  26  Therefore  did  my  heart  rejoice,  and  my  t. 

7.  41  rejoiced  in  the  works  of  their  own  hands 

Rom  15.  10  saith,  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  withhis  people 

Gal.     4.  27  Rejoice,  (thou)  barren  that  barest  not,  b. 

Rev.  12. 12  rejoice,  (ye)  heavens,  and  ye  thatdwellin 

18. 20  Rejoice  over  her,  (thou)  heaven,  and  (ye) 

20.  To  boast,  Kavx^iofxaL  kauchomai. 

Rom.  5.    2  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of 
Phil.   3.    3  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  con. 
Jas.     1.    9  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  rejoice  in 
4.  16  But  now  ye  rejoice  in  your  boastings :  all 

21.  A  matter,  cause  of  boasting,  Katixvp-akauchemct. 
Phil.   2.  16  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  t. 

22.  To  rejoice,  be  glad,  xafp<*>  chairo. 

Matt.  2.  10  they  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great  joy 

5. 12  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad  ;  for  great 

18.  13  he  rejoiceth  more  of  that  (sheep),  than  of 
Luke  1.  14  and  many  shall  rejoice  at  his  birth 

6.  23  Rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  joy 
10.  20  in  this  rejoice  not.  .butratherrejoice,  be. 

13.  17  people  rejoiced  for  all  the  glorious  things 

15.  5  lie  layeth  (it)  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing 

19.  37  disciples  began  to  rejoice  and  praise  God 
John  3.  29  rejoiceth  greatly  because  of  the  bridegr. 

4.  36  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth  may  rejoice 

14.  28  If  ye  loved  me,  ye  would  rejoice,  because 


John  16.  20  world  shall  rejoice :  and  ye  shall  be  sorr. 

16.  22  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejo. 
Acts  5.  41  rejoicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy 
8.  39  and  he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing 

15.  31  when  they  had  read,  they  rejoiced  for  the 
Rom  12. 12  Rejoicing  in  hope ;  patient  in  tribulation 

12.  15  Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  w. 

1  Co.  7.  30  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  rejoiced 

13.  6  Rejoice  not  in  iniquity,  but.  .in  thetruth 

2  Co.   2.   3  sorrow  from  them  of  whom  I  ought  to  r. 

6.  10  As  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing ;  as  po. 

7.  7  toward  me ;  so  that  I  rejoiced  the  more 
7.    9  Now  I  rejoice,  not  that  ye  were  made  so. 
7.  16  I  rejoice  therefore  that  I  have  confidence 

Phil.  1.  18  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice 

2.  28  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice 

3.  1  Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord 

4.  4  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  .again  I  say.  Rejoice 
4.  10  But  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,  that 

Col.  1.  24  Who  now  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  you 
1  Th.  5.  16  Rejoice  evermore 

1  Pe.   4. 13  But  rejoice,  inasmuch  as  ye  are  partakers 

2  John    4  rejoiced  greatly  that  I  found  of  thy  child. 

3  John  3  For  I  rejoiced  greatly  when  the  brethren 
Rev.  11.  10  shall  rejoice  over  them,  and  make  them 

REJOICE,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

1.2*0  [cause  to)  sing,  cry  aloud,  JTT  ranan,  5. 
Psa.  65.   8  thou  makest  the  outgoings.. to  rejoice 

2.  To  make  to  rejoice,  make  joyful,  npp'  sameach,.  3. 
2  Ch.20.  27  had  made  them  to  rejoice  over  their  ene. 
Neh.  12.  43  God  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great 
Psa.  30.  1  hast  not  made  my  foes  to  rejoice  overme 
Jer.  31.  13  and  make  them  rejoice  from  their  sorrow 
Lam.  2.  17  hath  caused  (thine)  enemy  to  rejoiceover 

Z.To  cause  to  rejoice,  npiy  sameach,  5. 

Psa.  89.  42  thou  hast  made  all  his  enemies  to  rejoice- 
REJ0ICE,  rejoiced  (that  or  which)  — 

1.  Rejoicing,  exulting,  iSjJ  alez. 

Isa.     5.  14  and  he  that  rejoiceth,  shall  descend  into 

2.  Rejoicing,  exulting,  VjSi  alliz. 

Isa.    13.   3  (even)  them  that  rejoice  in  my  highness 

24.  8  noise  of  them  that  rejoice  endeth,  the  joy 
Zeph.  3.  11  them  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride,  and  thou 

3. Rejoicing,  np'^  sameach. 

Deuti6.  15  hands,  therefore  thou  shalt  surely  rejoice 

1  Ki.   1.  40  rejoiced  with  great  joy,  so  that  the  earth. 

2  EX  11.  14  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and 

2  Ch.23.  13  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  ands. 
Job  3.  22  Which  rejoice  exceedingly,  (and)  are  glad 
Psa.  35. 26  brought  to  confusion  togetherthatrejoice 
Prov.  2.  14  Who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  (and)  delight  in 
29.  6  but  the  righteous  doth  sing  and  rejoice 
Eccl.  2.  10  for  my  heart  rejoiced  in  all  my  labour,  and 
Amos  6. 13  Ye  which  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  nought,  whi. 

REJOICE  against,  in,  with,  to  — 

1.  Toboast against,  KaraKavx^-oixaLkatakauchaomai. 
Jas.    2. 13  and  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment 

2.  To  rejoice  together  with,  o-vyxalpo)  sugchairo. 
Luke  1.  58  Showed  great  mercy,  .andtheyrejoicedw. 

15.   6,  9  saying . .  Rejoice  with  me  ;  for  I  have  f 0. 

1  Co.  12.  26  honoured,  all  the  members  rejoice  with 

13.   6  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth 

Phil,    2.  1 7  if  I  be  offered . . I  joy  and  rejoice  with  yo. 

2. 18  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy  and  rejoice  with 

REJOICING  — 

I.Joy,  rejoicing,  Va  gil. 

Psa.  45. 15  With  gladness  and  rejoicing  (shall)  they 
2.  Joy,  rejoicing,  rvVa  gilah. 

Isa.   65. 18  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her 
3. Rejoicing,  exidting,  Vj%  alliz. 

Zeph.  2. 15  This  (is)  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt  ca. 
4.  Rejoicing,  exultation,  T\V^b\i  alitsiUh. 

Hab.  3.  14  rejoicing  (was)  as  to  devour  the  poor  sec. 

5.Loud  cry,  proclamation,  singing,  np_  rinnah. 

Psa.107.22  let  them,  .declare  his  works  with  rejoic. 

118. 15  voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  (is)  in  the 

126.    6  shall  doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing 

6.  Rejoicing,  npp"  sameach. 

1  Ki.  1.  45  and  they  are  come  up  from  thence  rejoic. 

7.  Rejoicing,  joy,  nnpt?  simchah. 

2  Ch.23.  18  with  rejoicing  and  with  singing,  (asit  was 
Jer.    15.  16  the  joy  and  rejoicingof  mine  heart :  fori 

S.Joy,  rejoicing,  gladness,  pb'p  sason. 

Psa. 119.  in  Thy  testimonies,  .(are)  the  rejoicing  of 
9.  Shout,  shouting,  Mowing,  nj;nn  ierualu 

Job     8.  21  Till  he  fill,  .thy  lips  with  rejoicing 
lO.vl  matter  or  subject  of  boasting,  Kavxnfia  kauch. 

2  Co.  1.  14  that  we  are  your  rejoicing,  even  as  ye  also 

Gal.    6.   4  then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself  al. 

Phil.    1.  26  That  your  rejoicing  may  be  more  abund. 

Heb.  3.   6  if  we  hold  fast  the.,  rejoicing  of  the  hope 

ll.Boasting,  navxyo-ts  kaucliesis, 

1  Co.  15.  31 1  protest  by  your  rejoicing  which  I  have 

2  Co.  1. 12  For  ourrejoicing  is  this,  the  testimony  of 
1  Th.  2.  19  For  what(is)our.  .crown  of  rejoicing ?  are 
Jas.     4.  16  But  now  ye  rejoice,  .all  such  rejoicing  is 

RE'-ZEM,  C|5"i  friendship. 

1.  A  prince  of  Midi  an,  slain  by  Phinehas  when  in  the 

plains  of  Moab.    B.C.  1452. 

Num  31.   8  Evi,  and  R.,  and  Zur,  and  Hur,  and  Reba. 


RELEASE 


804 


REMALIAH 


Josh  13.  21  Evi,  and  R.,  and  Zur,  and  Hur,  and  Reba 

2.  A  son  of  Hebron,  and  father  of  Shammai.    B.C.  1490. 

1  Ch.  2.  43  Korah,  and  Tappuah,  and  R.,  and  Sheina 
2.  44  father  of  Jorkoam,  and  R.  begat  Shammai 

3.  A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Irpeel;  now  called  Ain- 
Karim, 

Josh  18.  27  And  R.,  and  Irpeel,  and  Taralah 
RELEASE  — 
1  .Release,  rest,  nmn  hanachah. 

Esth.  2.  18  and  h'e'made  a  release  to  the  provinces 

2.  Release,  neap  shemitiah. 

Deut  15.  1  end  of.  .seven  years  thou  shalt  make  a  r. 
15.  2  the  manner  of  the  release,  .the Lord's  re. 
15.  9  The  seventh  year,  the  year  of  release,  is 
31. 10  in  the  solemnity  of  the  year  of  release,  in 

RELEASE,  to  — 

1.7V>  release,  let  go,  throw  down,  bd^  shamat. 
Deut  15.    2  Every  creditor,  .shaft  release  (it);  he  sh. 

2.  To  (cause  to)  release,  ca^  shamat,  5. 

Deut  15.   3  with  thy  brother  thine  hand  shall  release 

3.  To  loose  away,  or  off,  airoAvoo  apoluo. 

Matt 27.  15  governor  was  wont  to  release  unto  the  p. 

27. 17  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you?  B. 

27.  21  Whether  of  the  twain  will  ye  that  I  rele. 

27.  26  Then  released  he  Barabbas  unto  them 
Marki5.   6  Now  at  (that)  feast  he  released  unto  them 

15.    9  Will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you  the  king 

15.  11  that  he  should  rather  release  Barabbas 

15.  15  released  Barabbas  unto  them,  and  deliv. 
Luke23.  16  I  will  therefore  chastise  him,  and  release 

23. 17  [For  of  necessity  he-must  release  one  un.] 

23. 18  Away  with  this  (man),  and  release  unto 
23. 20  Pilate  therefore,  willing  to  release  Jesus 

23.  25  released  unto  them  him  that  for  sedition 
John  18.  39  custom,  that  I  should  release  unto  you 

18.  39  will  ye  therefore  that  I  release  unto  you 

19.  10  kno  west  thou  not  that  I  have  power,  .tor. 
19.  12  Pilate  sought  to  release  him ;  but  the  J. 

RELIEF  — 

Thorough  service,  ministration,  SiaKovia  diakonia. 

Acts  11.  29  determined  to  send  relief  unto  the  bret. 
RELIEVE,  to  — 
1.7b  declare  happy,  or  upright,  7&X  ashar,  3. 

Isa.     1.  i7relieve  the  oppressed,  judge  the  fatherless 
2.  To  take  or  keep  firm  hold,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

Lev.  25.  35  thou  shalt  relieve  him ;  (yea,  though  he 
3.7*0  cause  to  stand,  *ny  ud,  Sa. 

Psa.146.   9  The  Lord.  . relieve th  the  fatherless  and 

4.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  2)&  shvJb,  5. 

Lam.  1.  11  pleasant  things  for  meat  to  relieve  the  s. 
1. 16  comforter  that  should  relieve  my  soul  is 
1.  19  they  sought  their  meat  to  relieve  their  s. 

5.  To  suffice  for,  iivapKiw  eparkeo. 

1  Ti.    5. 10  if  she  have  relieved  the  afflicted,  if  she 

5. 16  let  them  relieve  them,  and  let  not  the  c. 

5.  16  it  may  relieve  them  that  are  widows  in. 

RELIGION  — 

Outward  religious  service,  dpnaKtta  threskeia. 
Acts  26.    5  most  straitest  sect  of  our  religion  I  lived 
Jas.     1.  26  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this  man's  reli. 
1.  27  Pure  religion  and  undefined  before  God 

RELIGIOUS  — 

1. Religious,  superstitious,  dpTjvKos  tlvreskos. 

Jas.     1.  26  If  any  man  among  you  seem  to  be  religious 
2.  To  venerate,  worship,  adore,  crefio/iat  sebomai. 

Acts  13.  43  many  of  the  Jews  and  religious  proselytes 
RELY,  to  — 
To  be  supported,  lean  on,  JLV1  shaan,  2. 

2  Ch.13.  18  they  relied  upon  the  Lord  God  of  their 

16.  7  Because  thou  hast  relied  on  the  king  of 

6.  7  not  relied  on  the  Lord  thy  God,  therefore 

16.  8  because  thou  didst  rely  ou  the  Lord,  he 

REMAIN',  {things  which),  to  — 

1.  To  draw  self  up,  sojourn,  TH  gur. 

Judg.  5. 17  why  did  Dan  remain  in  ships?  Asher  00. 

2.  To  sit  down  or  still,  ae*;  yashab. 

Gen.  38.  11  Remain  a  widow  at  thy  father's  house 
Num35.  28  Because  he  should  have  remained  in  the 
Deut2i.  13  shall  remain  in  thine  house,  and  bewail 
Josh.  1.  14  shall  remain  in  the  land  which  Moses  g. 

1  Sa.  20. 19  go  down  quickly.,  and  shalt  remain  by  the 

23. 14  remained  in  a  mountain  in  the  wilderness 

24.  3  his  men  remained  in  the  sides  of  the  cave 

2  Sa.  13.  20  Tamar  remained  desolate  in  her  brother 
1  Ki.11.  16  For  six  months  did  Joab  remain  there  w, 
t  Ch.13.  M  ark  °f  God  remained  with  the  family  of 

32. 16  righteousness  remain  in  the  fruitful  field 
44. 13  beauty  of  a  man ;  that  it  may  remain  in 
65.    4  Which  remain  among  the  graves,  and  lo. 

17.  25  Jerusalem;  and  this  city  shall  remain  for 
30.  18  palace  shall  remain  after  the  manner  th. 
37.  16  and  Jeremiah  had  remained  there  many 

37.  21  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the  p. 

38.  2  He  that  remaineth  in  this  city  shall  die 
38.  13  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the  p. 
51.  30  they  have  remained  in  (their)  holds:  their 
5 1 .  62  to  cut  it  off,  that  none  shall  remain  in  it 

Lam.  5.  19  Thou,  O  Lord,  remainest  forever;  thy  t. 
Eze.    3.  15  remained  there  astonished  among  them 


Isa. 


Jer. 


3.  To  be  left,  "in;  yathar,  2. 

Exodio.  15  there  remained  not  any  green  thing  in 

12. 10  that  which  remaineth  of  it  until  the  mo. 
29.  34  if  ought  of  the  flesh,  .remain  unto  them. 

Lev.  8.  32  that  which  remaineth  of  the  flesh  and  of 
10. 12  Take  the  meat  offering  that  remaineth  of 
19.  6  if  ought  remain  until  the  third  day,itsh. 
27.  18  money  according  to  the  years  that  rema. 

Josh. 18.  2  there  remained  among  the  children  of  I. 
21.  20  which  remained  of  the  children  of  Koha. 
21. 26  of  the  children  of  Kohath  that  remained 

Judgzi.    7,  16  shall  we  do  for  wives  for  them  that  r. 

1  Ki.18.  22  I  only,  remain  a  prophet  of  the  LoRD;but 
Prov.  2.  21  in  the  land,  and  the  perfect  shall  remain 
Isa.     4.    3  (he  that)  remaineth  in  Jerusalem,  shall 
Jer.  27.  19  residue  of  the  vessels  that  remain  in  this 

27.  21  concerning  the  vessels  that  remain  (in) 
Eze.  39.  14  bury  with  the  passengers  those  that  rem. 
Dan.  10.  13  I  remained  there  with  the  kings  of  Persia 
Amos  6.   9  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  one  house,  that 

4.  All  the  days  of,  "a":  Sa  kol  yeme. 

Gen.  8.  22  While  the  earth  remaineth,  seed  time  and 

5.  To  pass  the  night,  p?,  pS  lun,  lin, 

Exod23.  18  neither  shall  the  fat  of  my  sacrifice  rem. 
Deuti6.   4  even,  remain  all  night  until  the  morning 

21. 23  His  body  shall  not  remain  all  night  upon 
Job   19.    4  have  erred,  mine  error  remaineth  with 

41.  22  In  his  neck  remaineth  strength,  and  sor. 
Psa-  55-    7  would  I  wander  far  off,  (and)  remain  in 
Zech.  5.    4  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house 

6.  To  rest,  be  at  rest,  nn  nuach. 

Prov2i.  16  shall  remain  in  the  congregation  of  the  d. 
7.7*0  be  over  and  above,  superfluous,  *p»  adaph. 
Exodi6.  23  that  which  remaineth  over  lay  up  for  you 
26. 12  remnant  that  remaineth  of  the  curtains  of 

26. 12  curtain  that  remaineth  shall  hang  over 

26. 13  that  which  remaineth  in  the  length  of  the 

8.  T'o  stand  still,  "iny,  amad. 

2  Ki.13.    6  there  remained  the  grove  also  in  Samaria 
Eccl.  2.   9  also  my  wisdom  remained  with  me 

Isa.  10.  32  As  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob  that  day 
66.  22  earth,  which  I  will  make,  shall  remain  b. 
66.  22  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  remain 
Jer.  48.  11  therefore  his  taste  remained  in  him,  and 
Dan.  10.  17  straightway  there  remained  no  strength  in 
Hag.    2.    5  so  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you  ;  fear 

9.  To  rise  up,  Dip  qum. 

,    Josh.  2. 11  neither  did  there  remain  any  more  courage 

10.  To  remain  over,  irfy  sarad. 

Josh  10.  20  rest  (which)  remained  of  them  entered 
\\. Remnant,  remaining  one,  "P"Vp  sarid. 

Num.  24.  19  shall  destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  the 

Deut,  2.  34  destroyed  the  men . .  we  left  none  to  rem. 

Josh.  8.  22  so  that  they  let  none  of  them  remain  or 
10.  28  heletnoneremain:andhedidtothekingof 
10.  30  he  let  none  remain  in  it ;  but  did  unto  the 

Jndg.  5.  13  he  made  him  that  remaineth  have  domin. 

Job  27.  15  Those  that  remain  of  him  shall  be  buried 

Jer.  42.  17  none  of  them  shall  remain  or  escape  from 
44.  14  So  that  none,  .shall  escape  or  remain,  that 
47.    4  to  cut  off.  .every  helper  that  remaineth 

Lam.  2.  S2  so  that . .  none  escaped  nor  remained  :  tho. 

Obad.      14  delivered  up  those  of  his  that  did  remain 

12.  T'o  remain,  be  left,  ~ixy  shaar. 

1  Sa.  16. 11  There  remaineth  yet  the  youngest,  and 

13.  To  remain,  be  left,  in?  shaar,  2. 

Gen.    7.  23  Noah  only  remained  (alive),  and  they  that 
14.  10  they  that  remained  fled  to  the  mountain 
Exod  8.    9  (that)  they  may  remain  in  the  river  only? 
8.  11  depart,  .they  shall  remain  in  the  river 

8.  31  from  his  people  :  there  remained  not  one 
10.  5  which  remaineth  unto  you  from  the  hail 
10.  19  there  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  the 
14. 28  there  remained  not  so  much  as  one  of  them 

Lev.  25.  52  if  there  remain  but  few  years  unto  the  ye. 

Num.  11.  26  there  remained  two  (of  the)  men  in  the  c. 

Deut.  3.  11  For  only  Og  king  of  Bashan  remained  of 
19.  20  those  which  remain  shall  hear,  and  fear 

Josh  11.  22  in  Gath,  and  in  Ashdod,  there  remained 
13.  1  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be 
13.  2  This  (is)  the  land  that  yet  remaineth :  all 
13.  12  whoremainedof  the  remnant  of  the  giants 
23.  4  remain,  to  be  an  inheritance  for  your  tribes 
23.    7  these  that  remain  among  you ;  neither 

23.  12  these  that  remain  among  you,  and  shall 
Judg.  7.  3  two  thousand;  and  there  remained  ten  th. 
1  Sa.  11.  11  that  they  wliich  remained  were  scattered 

16. 11  There  remaineth  yet  the  youngest,  and 

1  Ki.  22.  46  remnant  of  the  Sodomites,  which  remain. 

2  Ki.   7.  13  five  of  the  horses  that  remain,  which  are 

10.  11  So  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  of  the  ho. 
10. 17  slew  all  that  remained  unto  Ahab  in  Sam. 

24.  14  none  remained,  save  the  poorest  sort  of 

25.  22  people  that  remained  in  the  land  of  Judah 
Ezra    1.    4  whosoever  remaineth  in  any  place  where 

9.  15  for  we  remain  yet  escaped,  as  (it  is)  this 
Job  21.  34  in  your  answers  there  remaineth  falseh.  ? 
Jer.     8.    3  remain  of  this  evil  family,  which  remain 

24.    8  that  remain  in  this  land,  and  them  that 
34.    7  for  these  defenced  cities  remained  of  the 

37.  10  there  remained  (but)  wounded  men  among 

38.  4  hands  of  the  men  of  war  that  remain  in 

39.  9  remnant  of  the  people  that  remained  in 
39.   9  with  the  rest  of  the  people  that  remained 
41.  10  all  the  people  that  remained  in  Mizpah 
52.  15  residue  of  thepeoplethatremaincdin  the 


1 


Eze.     6.  12  he  that  remaineth  and  is  besieged  shall 

17.  21  they  that  remain  shall  be  scattered  toward 

Dan.  10.    8  there  remained  no  strength  in  me :  for  my 

Zech  9.    7  but  he  that  remaineth,  even  he,  (shall  be) 

12. 14  All  the  families  that  remain,  every  family 

14. Remnant,  rest,  posterity,  ns~\^  sheerith. 
Jer.  44.   7  to  cut  off.  .to  leave  you  none  to  remain 

15.ro  tabernacle,  fa^*  shaken. 

Lev.  16. 16  remaineth  among  them  in  the  midst  of 
Eze.  31. 13  shall  all  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  remain 

16.  T'o  watch,  ip^  shaqad. 

Job  21 .  32  brought  to  the  grave,  and  shall  remain  in 

17.  To  leave  off,  &Tro\ei7rw  apoleipd. 

Heb.  4.  6  Seeing  therefore  it  remaineth  that  some 
4.  9  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the 
10.  26  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  forsins 

18.  T'o  remain  throughout,  5ia,ueVco  diameno. 
Luke  1.  22  beckoned  unto  them,  and  remained  spe. 
Heb.    1. 11  They  shall  perish  ;  but  thou  remainest 

19.  The  things  left,  to  Konra.  ta  loipa. 

Rev.    3.    2  strengthen  the  things  which  remain,  that 

20.  The  thing  left  is,  to  \oltt6v  ianv  to  loipon  estin. 
1  Co.  7. 29  it  remaineth,  that  both  they  that  have  w. 

21.  To  remain,  (Atvca  mend. 

Matt ii.  23  it  would  have  remained  until  this  day 
Luke  10.    7  in  the  same  house  remain,  eating  and  dr. 
John  1.  33  see  the  spirit  descending,  and  remaining 
9.  41  say,  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  remaineth 

15. 11  that  ray  joy  [might  remain]  in  you,  and 

15.  16  your  fruit  should  remain  ;  that  whatsoe. 

19.  31  bodies  should  not  remain  upon  the  cross 
Acts   5.    4  Whiles  it  remained,  was  it  not  thine  0 wn  ? 

27.  41  stuck  fast,  and  remained  immoveable,  but 

1  Co.  7.  11  if  she  depart,  let  her  remain  unmarried 

15.   6  of  whom  the  greater  part  remain  unto  th. 

2  Co.  3.  11  much  more  that  which  remaineth  (is)  gl. 

3. 14  for  until  this  day  remaineth  the  same  veil 
9.    9  his  righteousness  remaineth  for  ever 

Heb.  i2.  27  things  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  rem. 

1  Jo.  2.  24  remain  in  you,  ye  also  shall  continue  in 
3.   9  for  his  seed  remainethin  him  :  and  he  ca. 

22. Tobe  left  aUaround,  ir€pi\€two/j.ai  jjerileipomoi. 

1  Th.  4. 15,  17  we  which  are  alive  (and)  remain  unto 
23.  To  be  over  and  above,  Treptcrcrevw  j/erisscuo. 

Matti4.  20  took  up  of  the  fragments  that  remained 
Luke  9. 17  was  taken  up  of  fragments  that  remained 
John  6. 12  Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain,  th. 

REMAIN,  to  let  or  cause  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  be  abundant,  "in;  yathar,  5. 

Exodi2. 10  ye  shall  let  nothing  of  it  remain  until  the 
Nuni33-  55  that  those  which  ye  let  remain  of  them 

2.  T'o  cause  to  tabernacle,  jp"f  shaken,  5. 

Eze.  32.   4  will  cause  all  the  fowls,  .to  remain  upon 
REMAIN  long,  over  and  above,  to  — 
l.To  be  old,  aged,  \v;  yashan,  2. 

Deut.  4.  25  ye  shall  have  remained  long  in  the  laml 
2.  T'o  be  over  and  above,  Trepio-o-euoj  perisseuO. 

John  6. 13  which  remained  over  and  above  unto  them 
REMAINDER  — 
l.To  be  left,  to  remain,  in;  yathar,  2. 

Exod29.  34  thou  shalt  burn  the  remainder  with  fire 

Lev.  6.  16  the  remainder  thereof  shallAaronandhis 
7. 16  on  the  morrow  also  the  remainder  of  it  s 
7.  17  the  remainder  of  ttie  flesh  of  the  sacrifice 

2.7?emwo;?j£,  n,_)!<tp  sheerith. 

2  Sa.  14.    7  (neither)  name  nor  remainder  upon  the  e. 
Psa.  76. 10  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain 

REMAINING,  (to  be)  — 

l.T'o  set  up  or  station  self,  as;  yatsab,  7. 

e  Sa.  21.    s  we  should  be  destroyed  from  remaining 
2. T'o  be  left  over,  "in;  yathar,  2. 

Josh. 21.  40  which  were  remaining  of  the  families  of 
3. Remaining  one,  remnant,  T"Vp  sarid. 

Deut.  3.    3  until  none  was  left  to  him  remaining 

Josh  10.  33  until  he  had  left  him  none  remaining 
10.  37  he  left  none  remaining,  according  to  all 
10.  39  he  left  none  remaining  :  as  he  had  done 

10.  40  he  left  none  remaining,  but  utterly  dest. 

11.  8  smote,  .until  they  left  themnone  remain. 
2  Ki.io.  11  slew,  .until  he  left  him  none  remaining- 
Job   18. 19  neither,  .any  remaining  in  his  dwellings 
Obad.     18  there  shall  not  be  (any)  remaining  of  the 

4.  To  tabernacle,  J*^  shaken. 

Num.  9.  22  tarried  upon  the  tabernacle,  remaining 
RE-MAL'-IAH.  W^n  Jah  increases. 
Father  of  Pekah  who  slew  Pekahiah  and  reigned  in  his 
stead.     B.C.  769. 

2  Ki.75.  25  ButPekahthesonofR. .  .conspired against 
15.  27  Pekah  the  son  of  R.  began  to  reign'over 
15.  30  a  conspiracy  against  Pekah  the  son  of  R. 
15.  32  In  the  second  year  of  Pekah  the  son  of  R. 

15.  37  the  Lord  began  to  send  against,  .son  of  R. 

16.  1  In  the  seventeenth  year  of . .  the  son  of  R. 
16.    5  Pekah  son  of  R. .  .came  up  to  Jerusalem 

2  Oh.  28.  6  Pekah  the  son  of  R.  slew  in  Judah  an  h. 

Isa.     7.  1  Pekah  the  son  of  R. .  .went  up  toward  J. 

7.  4  for  the  fierce  anger,  .of  the  son  of  R. 

7.  s  Because  Syria,  .and  the  son  of  R.,  have 

7,  g  and  the  head  of  Samaria  (is)  B..'a  son 

8.  6  this  people .  .rejoice  in  Rezin  and  R  s  son 


REMEDY 


805 


REMNANT 


REMEDY —  • 

Healing,  tiBio  marpe. 

2  Ch.36. 16  wrath. .  arose ..  till  (there  was)  no  remedy 
Prov.  6.  15  suddenly  shall  he  be  broken  without  re. 

29.  1  shall .  .be  destroyed,  and  that  without  re. 
REMEMBER-    (earnestly),  to  — 

1  To  remember,  imprint,  "DT  zalcar. 

Gen.  8.  1  God  remembered  Noah,  and  every  living 
9. 15  I  will  remember  my  covenant,  which  (is) 
9.  16  I  may  remember  the  everlasting  covenant 

19.  29  God  remembered  Abraham,  and  seut  Lot 

30.  22  God  remembered  Rachel,  and  God  heark. 
40.  23  Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember  J. 
42.    9  And  Joseph  remembered  the  dreams  wh. 

Exod.  2.  24  God  remembered  his  covenant  with  Abr. 

6.  5  heard,  .and  I  have  remembered  my  cove. 
13.    3  Remember  this  day,  in  which  ye  came  out 

20.  8  Remember  the  sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  h. 
32. 13  Remember  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Israel 

Lev.  26. 42  Then  will  I  remember  my  covenant  with 
26.  42  I  remember;  and  I  will  remember  the  1. 
26.  45  But  I  will  for  their  sakes  remember  the 

Num.  11.  5  We  remember  the  fish  which  we  did  eat 
15.  33  remember,  .the  commandments  of  the  L. 

15.  40  may  remember,  and  do  all  my  command. 
Dcut.  5.  15  remember  that  thou  wast  a  servant  in 

7.  18  shalt  well  remember  what  the  Lord  thy 

8.  2  thou  shalt  remember  all  the  way  which 

8.  18  thou  shalt  remember  the  LORD  thy  God 

9.  7  Remember,  (and)  forget  not,  how  thou  p. 
9.  27  Remember  thy  servants,  Abraham,  Isaac 

15. 15  thou  shalt  remember  that  thou  wast  a 

16.  3  thou  mayest  remember  the  day  when  thou 
16.  12  thou  shalt  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bo. 
24.   9  Rememberwhat  the  LORDthyGoddidun. 

24.  18,  22  thou  shalt  remember  that  thou  wast  a 

25.  17  Remember  what  Amalek  did  unto  thee  by 
32.    7  Remember  the  days  of  old,  consider  the 

Josh.  1.  13  Remember  the  word  which  Moses  the  s. 

Judg.  S.  34  IsraelrememberednottheLoRDtheirGod 

9.    2  remember(also)thatI  (am)yourboneand 

16.  28  rememberme,  I  pray  thee,  and  strengthen 

1  Sa.    1.  11  rememberme,  and  not  forget  thine  hand. 

1.  19  his  wife;  and  the  Lord  remembered  her 
25.  31  my  lord,  then  remember  thine  handmaid 

2  Sa.  14. 11  let  the  king  remember  the  Lord  thy  God 

19. 19  neither  do  thou  remember  that  which  thy 
2  Ki.  9.  25  remember  how  that,  when  I  and  thou  rode 

20.  3  remember  now  how  I  have  walked  before 
i  Ch.16.  12  Remember  his  marvellous  works  that  he 
2  Ch.  6.  42  remember  the  mercies  of  David  thy  serv. 

24.  22  the  king  remembered  not  the  kindness 
Neh.   1.    8  Remember,  I  beseech  thee,  the  word  that 

4.  14  remember  the  LORD,  (which  is)  great  and 
13.  14,  22  Rememberme,  O  my  God,  concerning 
13.  29  Remember  them,  0  my  God,  because  they 

13.  31  Remember  me,  O  my  God,  for  good 
Esth.  2.    1  he  remembered  Vashti,  and  what  she  had 
Job     4.    7  Remember,  I  pray  thee  who(ever)perish. 

7.    7  remember  that  my  life  (is)  wind :  mine  eye 

10.  9  Remember,  I  beseech  thee,  that  thou  h. 

11. 16  (and)  remember  (it)  as  waters  (that)  pass 

14.  13  appoint  me  a  set  time,  and  remember  me 

21.  6  when  I  remember  I  am  afraid,  and  trem. 
36.  24  Remember  that  thou  magnify  his  work 

41.  8  Lay  thine  hand  upon  him,  remember  the 
Psa.    9. 12  he  remembereth  them :  he  forgetteth  not 

20.    3  Remember  all  thy  offerings,  and  accept 

22.  27  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember 

25.  6  Remember,  O  Lord,  thy  tender  mercies 
25.  7  Remember  not  the  sins  of  my  youth,  nor 
25.    7  remember  thou  me  for  thy  goodness'  sake 

42.  4  I  remember  these  (things),  I  pour  out  my 
4.2.  6  I  rememberthee  from  the  land  of  Jordan 
63.  6  I  remember  thee  upon  my  bed,  (and)  m. 
74.  2  Remember  thy  congregation  (which)thou 
74. 18  Remember  this,  .the  enemy  hath  reproa. 
74.  22  remember  how  the  foolish  man  reproach. 

77.  3  I  remembered  God,  and  was  troubled  :  I 
77. 11 1  will  remember  the  works  of  the  Lord 
77. 11  surely  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old 

78.  35  they  remembered  that  God  (was)  their  R. 
78.  39  For  he  remembered  that  they  (were  but) 

78.  42  They  rememberednot  hishand,  (nor)  the 

79.  8  remembernot  against  us  former  iniquities 

88.  5  the  dead,  .whom  thou  rememberest  no 
Sg.  47  Remember  how  short  my  time  is :  where. 

89.  50  Remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  thy  s. 
98.    3  He  hath  remembered  his  mercy  and  his 

103. 14  he  knoweth.  .remembereth  that  we  (are) 
103. 18  to  those  that  remember  his  commandm. 
105.  5  Remember  his  marvellous  works  that  he 
105.    8  He  hath  remembered  his  covenant  for  e. 

105.  42  Forhe'reniemberedhisholypromise,(and) 

106.  4  Remember  me,  O  Lord,  with  the  favour 
106.  7  they  remembered  not  the  multitude  of  thy 
106.  45  he rememberedforthemhis covenant, and 
109. 16  Because  that  he  remembered  not  to  show 
119.  49  Remembertheword  unto  thy  servant,  up. 
119.  52  I  remembered  thy  judgments  of  old,  0 
119.  55  I  have  remembered  thyname  O  Lord, in 
132.    1  Lord,  remember  David . .  all  his  afflictions 

136.  23  Who  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate :  for 

137.  1  yea,  we  wept,  when  we  remembered  Zion 
137.  6  If  I  do  not  remember  thee,  let  my  tongue 
137.  7  Remember,  O  Lord,  the  children  of  Edom 
143.   5  I  remember  the  days  of  old  ;  I  meditate 

Prov  31.    7  Let  him  drink,  .and  remember  his  misery 

Eccl.  5.  20  he  shall  not  much  remember  the  days  of 

9.  15  no  man  remembered  that  same  poorman 

11.  8  let  him  remember  the  days  of  darkness 


Eccl. 12.    1  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days 
Isa.   38.    3  Remember  now,  O  Lord,  I  beseech  thee 
43. 18  Remember  ye  not  the  former  things,  nei. 

43.  25  I,  (am)  he  that,  .will  not  remember  thy 

44.  21  Remember  these,  O  Jacob  and  Israel ;  for 
46.    8  Remember  this,  andshowyourselvesmen 

46.  9  Remember  the  former  things  of  old :  for 

47.  7  neither  didst  remember  the  latter  end  of 
54.   4  shalt  not  remember  the  reproach  of  thy 
57. 11  hast  not  remembered  me,  nor  laid  (it)  to 
63. 11  Then  he  remembered  the  days  of  old,  M. 
64.   5  (those  that)  remember  thee  in  thy  ways 
64.    9  neither  remember  iniquity  for  ever:  be. 

Jer.    2.    2  I  remember  thee,  the  kindness  of  thy  yo. 
3. 16  neither  shall  they  remember  it,  neither 
14. 10  he  will  nowremember  their  iniquity,  and 
14.  2T  remember,  break  not  thy  covenant  with 
15. 15  remember  me,  and  visit  me,  and  revenge 
17.   2  their  children  remember  their  altars  and 
18. 20  Remember  that  I  stood  before  thee  to  sp. 
31. 20  I  do  earnestly  remember  him  still :  there. 
31.  34  and  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more 
44.  21  did  not  the  Lord  remember  them,  and 
51.  50  remember  the  Lord  afar  off,  and  let  Jer. 

Lam.  1.   7  Jerusalem  remembered  in  the  days  of  her 

1.  9  she  remembereth  not  her  last  end ;  ther. 

2.  1  remembered  not  his  footstool  in  the  day 
3. 19  Remembering  mine  affliction  and  my  m. 
5.   1  Remember,  O  Lord,  what  is  come  upon 

Eze.  6.  9  they  that  escape  of  you  shall  remember 
16.  22,  43  thou  hast  not  remembered  the  days 
16.  60  I  will  remember  my  covenant  with  thee 
16. 61  Then  thou  shalt  remember  thy  ways,  and 
16.  63  thou  mayest  remember,  and  be  confoun. 
20. 43  there  shall  ye  remember  your  ways,  and 
23.  27  thou  shalt  not.  .remember  Egypt  any  mo. 
36.  31  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil 
Hos.  7.  2  they  consider  not.  .(that)  I  remember  all 
8.  13  now  will  he  remember  their  iniquity,  and 
g.  9  he  will  remember  their  iniquity,  he  will 
Amos  1.  9  and  remembered  not  the  brotherly  cove. 
Jon.  2.  7  I  remembered  the  Lord:  and  my  prayer 
Mic.  6.  5  remember  now  what  Balak  king  of  Moab 
Hab.  3.  2  revive  thy  work,  .in  wrath  remember  me. 
Zech.io.  9  they  shall  remember  me  in  far  countries 
Mai.    4.   4  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  my  servant 

2.  To  cause  to  remember,  imprint,  ~i?)  zakar,  5. 
Gen.  41.    9  saying,  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  day 
Psa.  20.    7  we  will  remember  the  name  of  the  LORD 

77. 11 1  will  remember  the  works  of  the  Lord 
Song  1.  4  we  will  remember  thy  love  more  than  w. 

3.  To  look  after,  inspect,  "ij3?  paqad. 

i  Sa.  15.   2  I  remember  (that)  which  Amalek  did  to 

4.  To  remind  again,  ai/afxt/j.vfjo'KCiy  anamimne~sko. 

2  Co.   7.  15  he  remembereth  the  obedience  of  you  all 
5.7*0  be  mindful,  fM/j.vfjo-KOfj.at  mimneskomaL 

Heb.  13.   3  Remember  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bo. 

6.  To  remember,  fxvdo/j.ai  mnaoniai. 

Matt.  5.  23  there  rememberest  that  thy  brother  hath 

26.  75  Peter  remembered  the  word  of  Jesus,  wh 

27.  63  we  remember  that  that  deceiver  said,  wh. 
Luke  1.  72  To  perform,  .and  to  remember  his  holy  c. 

16.  25  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime 

23.  42  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy 

24.  6  remember  how  he  spake  unto  you  when 

24.  8  And  they  remembered  his  words 

John  2. 17  And  his  disciples  remembered  that  it  was 
2.  22;  12.  16 ;  Acts  11.  16 ;  1  Co.  n,  2 ;  Heb.  8. 
12  ;  10.  17 ;  Jude  17. 

7.  To  remember,  pvenovevw  mnemoneuo. 

Matt. 16.  9;  Mark  8.  18;  Luke  17.  32;    John  15.  20; 
16.  4,  21;  Acts  20.  31,  35;  Gal.  2.  10;  Eph.  2.  n;  Col.  4. 
18  ;  1  Th.  1.  3  ;  2.  9  ;  2  Th.  2.  s  ;  2  Ti.  2.  8  ;  Heb.  13.  7  ; 
Rev.  2.  5;  3.  3;  18.  5- 
S.Tore7ni?idgradually,virofxtfxvf}orKQ}hnpomimnesko. 

Luke22.  61  Peter  remembered  the  word  of  the  Lord 

3  John    10  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  he  doeth 

REMEMBERED,  (to  make)  to  be  — 
l.Tobe  remembered,  imprinted,  ~nj  zalcar,  2. 
>furaio.   9  ye  shall  be  remembered  before  the  Lord 
Esth.  9.  28  these  days  (should  be)  remembered  and 
Job  24.  20  he  shall  be  no  more  remembered ;  and 
Psa.  109. 14  Let  the  iniquity  of  his  fathers  be  remem. 
Isa.  23. 16  sing,  .that  thou  mayest  be  remembered 

65. 17  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered,  nor 

Jer.   11. 19  that  his  name  may  be  no  more  remembe. 

Eze.     3.  20  his  righteousness . .  shall  not  be  remembe. 

21.  32  thou  shalt  be  no  (more)  remembered  :  for 

25.  10  the  Ammonites  may  not  be  remembered 
33. 13  all  his  righteousnesses  shall  not  be  reme. 

Hos.    2. 17  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered  by  th. 
Zech.13.   2  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered ;  and 
2.  To  cause  to  remember,  imprint,  "131  zakar,  5. 
Psa.  45.  17  I  will  make  thy  name  to  be  remembered 
Eze.  21.  24  have  made  your  iniquity  to  be  remembe. 

3. Remembrance,  ~oi,  "151  zeker. 

Psa. in.  4  hath  made  his  wonderful  works  to  be  re. 
REMEMBRANCE  (again)  of  — 
1.  Remembrance,  "Di,  "DT  zeker. 

Exodi7- 14  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance 
Deut25.  19  thou  shalt  blot  out  the  remembrance  of 
32.  26 1  would  make  the  remembrance  of  them 
Job   18.  17  His  remembrance  shall  perish  from  the  e. 
Psa.    6.    5  For  in  death  (there  Is)  no  remembrance 
30.    4  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his  h. 
34.  16  to  cut  off  the  remembrance  of  them  from 


Psa.  97.  12  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his 
102.  12  and  thy  remembrance  untoallgenerations 
112.   6  the  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  rem. 
Isa.   26.    8  desire  of  (our)  soul  (is),  .to  the  remembr. 
%  Remembrance,  memorial,  }i~i3T  zikkaron. 

Job  13.  12  Your  remembrances  (are)  like  unto  ashes 
Eccl.  1.  11  no  remembrance  of  former,  .neither,  .re. 

2. 16  no  remembrance  of  the  wise  more  than 
Isa.   57.    8  Behind . .  hast  thou  set  up  thy  remembra. 
Mai.    3. 16  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written  befo- 
3.^4  remembering  again,  avafivnais  anamnesis. 
Luke22.  19  saying,  .this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 
1  Co.  11.  24  Take,  eat.  .this  do  m  remembrance  of  me 
11.  25  as  oft  as  ye  drink  (it),  in  remembrance  of 
Heb.  10.    3  (there  is)  a  remembrance  again  (made)  of 

4.  To  remember,  /j,vdo/j.ai  mnaomai. 

Luke  1.  54  holpen  his  servant  Israel,  in  remembr.  of 

5.  Remembrance,  mention,  memory,  fivela  mneia. 

Phil.   1.    3  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  remembrance 

1  Th.  3.   6  ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us  always 

2  Ti.   1.   3  have  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers 
6. Remembrance,  memory,  fivfifitf  mneme. 

2  Pe.  1. 15  have  these  tilings  always  in  remembrance 

7.Remembrance,recollection,vTr6(ivna,Lshupomnesis. 

2  Ti.    1.    5  call  to  remembrance  the  unfeigned  faith 

2  Pe.  1.  13  stir  you  up  by  putting  (you)  in  remembra. 

3.    1  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  rem. 

REMEMBRANCE,  to  bring  or  call  to  — 
I. To  remember,  "i?j  zakar. 

Psa   77.    6  call  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  night 

Eze.  23.  19  in  calling  to  remembrance  the  days  of 
2.  To  cause  to  remember,  "DT  zakar,  5. 

Num.  5.  15  an  offering,  .bringing  iniquity  to  remem. 

1  Kj.  17.  18  come  unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to  rememb. 

Psa.  38.  title.  A  psalm  of  David,  to  bring  to  remem. 
70.  title.  (A  psalm)  of  David,  to  bring  to  remem. 

Eze.  2i.  23  but  he  will  call  to  remembrance  the  ini. 
29.  16  which  bringeth  (their)  iniquity  to  remem. 
Z.To  inspect,  visit,  *ip£  paqad. 

Eze.  23.  21  Thus  thou  calledst  to  remembrance  the  1. 

4.  To  remind  again,  a.va{jn^vi)(rKU)  anamimnesko. 
Markn.  21  Peter  calling  to  remembrance  saith  unto 

1  Co.  4. 17  who  shall  bring  you  into  remembrance  of 
Heb.  10.  32  But  call  to  remembrance  the  former  days 

5. To  remind  gradually,  virofxtfj-vno-Koj  Tiupomim. 

John  14.  26  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance 
REMEMBRANCE,  to  be,  come,  have,  keep,  put,  in  — 
l.To  be  remembered,  "DJ  zakar,  2. 

Psa.  83.    4  name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more  in  remem. 

Eze.  21.  24  that  ye  are  come  to  remembrance,  ye  shall 
2.  To  cause  to  remember,  "Dj  zakar,  5. 

2  Sa.  18. 18  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  remembrance 
Lam.  3.  20  My  soul  hath  (them)  still  in  remembrance 
Isa.   43  26  Put  me  iu  remembrance  :  let  us  plead  to. 

3. To  be  mindful  again,  ava^i^iv^Km  animimnesko. 
2  Ti.    1.6  Wherefore  I  put  thee  in  remembrance  t. 

4.7*0  remember,  fxvdofxai  mnaomai. 

Acts  10.  31  alms  are  had  in  remembrance  in  the  sight 
Rev.  16.  19  great  Babylon  came  in  remembrance  be. 

5.  To  be  privately  mindful,  vtto/j.iij.vtjo'kq)  hupomim. 

2  Ti.  2.  14  Of  thesethingsput(them)inremembrance 
2  Pe.  1.  12  negligent  to  put  you  always  in  remembr. 
Jude        s  I  will  therefore  put  you  in  remembrance 

Q.To  put  or  place  under,  suggest,  v-kotIBv/xi  hvpot. 
1  Ti.   4.    6  If  thou  put  the  brethren  in  remembrance 
RE'-METH,  nnn  height. 

A  Leviticalcityin  Issachar,  near  Engannim ;  now  called 
Yarmuth. 

Josh  19.  21  And  R.,  and  En-gannim,  and  En-haddah 
REMISSION  — 
l.A  sending  away,  a<p€<rts  aphesis. 

Matt  26.  2S  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins 
Mark  1.    4  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission 
Luke  1.  77  knowledge  of  salvation,  .by  the  remission 
3.   3  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of 
24.  47  that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  sh. 
Acts    2.38  be  baptized. .fortheremissionofsins,and 
10. 43  believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remission  of 
Heb.   9.  22  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 
10.  18  Now  where  remission  of  these  (is,  there 
2.A  sending  over,  passing  by,  Trdpea-is  paresis. 
Rom.  3.  25  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission 

REMIT,  be  remitted,  to  — 

To  send  away,  a.cptw/nt  aphiemi. 

John  20.  23  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  [they  are  re.] 

REM'-MON,  pan.     See  Rimman. 

A  city  in  Judah  or  Simeon,  near  Ain  and  Ether ;  now 

called  Romaneh. 

Josh  19.  7  Ain,  R.,  and  Ether,  and  Ashan ;  four  cities 

REM-MON  ME-THO'-AR,  -ixh*?n  JIB"!. 

A  city  in  Zebulun,  N.  of  Nazareth,  now  called  Rum- 

manah. 

Josh  19. 13  Andfrom thence,  .goethout to R.,toNeah 
REMNANT  — 
1.  After,  after  parts,  *"inN  achare. 

1  Ki.  14.  10  will  take  away  the  remnant  of  the  house 


REMNANT 


806 


REND 


2. Latter  end,  fl'IDN  acharith. 

Eze.  23.  25  aud  thy  remnant  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
S.To  be  left  over,  -in;  yathar,  2. 

Lev.  2.  3  remnant  of  the  meat  offering  (shall  be)  A. 
14.  18  remnant  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  thepriest's 

1  Ch.  6.  70  for  the  family  of  the  remnant  of  the  sons 
4.  What  is  left  over,  irj;  yether. 

Deut.  3. 11  remained  of  the  remnant  of  giants;  beh. 

28.  54  toward  the  remnant  of  his  children  which 
Josh  12.   4  of  the  remnant  of  the  giants,  that  dwelt 

13.  12  who  remained  of  the  remnant  of  the  gia. 

23.  12  cleave  unto  the  remnant  of  these  nations 

2  Sa.  21.    2  but  of  the  remnant  of  the  Amorites  ;  and 

1  EX  12.  23  Speak,  .to  the  remnant  of  the  people,  sa. 

22.  46  remnant  of  the  sodomites,  which  remain. 

2  Ki.25. 11  with  the  remnant  of  the  multitude,  did  N. 
Job  22.  20  but  the  remnant  of  them  the  fire  consu. 
Jer.  39.  9  remnant  of  the  people  that  remained  in 
Mic.  5.  3  then  the  remnant  of  Ms  brethren  shall  r. 
Hab.  2.  8  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  shall  spoil 
Zeph.  2.    9  the  remnant  of  my  people  shall  possess 

5.  Loose  or  spread  out  part,  rnp  serach. 

Exod26.  12  remnant  that  remaineth  of  the  curtains 


Jer. 


S.Escape,  escaping,  n&bs peletah. 

Eze.  14.  22  therein  shall  be  left  a  remnant  that  shall 

7 .Remaining  one,  remnant,  T"!'p  sarid. 

Isa.     1.   9  had  left  unto  us  a  very  small  remnant,  we 
Joel    2.  32  in  the  remnant  whom  the  Lokd  shall  call 

S.To  be  left,  to  remain,  ixy  shaar,  2. 

2  Ki.  19.  30  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house  of 
2  Ch.30.  6  he  will  return  to  the  remnant  of  you  that 
Neh.  1.  3  remnant  that  are  left  of  the  captivity  th 
Isa.  37.  31  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house  of 

S.Remnant,  rest,  -nx»  shear. 

Ezra   3.   8  remnant  of  their  brethren  the  priests  and 
Isa.   10.  20  remnant  of  Israel,  and  such  as  are  escaped 

10. 21  remnant  shall  return,  (even)  the  remnant 
10.  22  remnant  of  them  shall  return :  the  consu. 
11. 11  second  time  to  recoverthe  remnautof his 
11. 16  there  shall  bean  highway  for  the  remnant 

14. 22  cut  off  from  Babylon  the  name,  and  rem. 
16. 14  the  remnant  (shall  be)  very  small  (and) 
17-   3  kingdom  from  Damascus,  and  the  reran. 

Zeph.  1.   4  will  cut  off  the  remnant  ofEaal  from  this 

10.  Remnant,  residue,  n'-iNis'  sheerith. 

2  EU.i9.   4  wherefore  lift  up  (thy)  prayer  for  the  re 
19-  31  out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth  a  remnant 
21.  14  forsake  the  remnant  of  mine  inheritance 

2  011.34.  9  of  all  the  remnant  of  Israel,  and  of  all  J 

*zra  9. 14  (there should be)no remnant  norescaping? 

isa.  14.  30  with  famine,  and  he  shall  slay  thy  remnant 
15-   9  lions,  .upon  the  remnant  of  the  land 
37-   4  wherefore  lift  up  (thy)  prayer  for  the  re 
37-  32  out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth  a  remnant 
40.   3  all  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Israel  w 
6.    9  They  shall  throughly  glean  the  remnant 
n.  23  there  shall  be  no  remnant  of  them  ■  for  I 
23.   3  I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my  flock  out 
25.  20  and  Ekron,  and  the  remnant  of  Ashdod 
31.    7  save  thy  people,  the  remnant  of  Israel 
40. 11  king  of  Babylon  had  left  a  remnant  of  J 
40.  15  be  scattered,  and  the  remnant  in  Judah 
41. 16  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  whom  he 
42.    2  pray  for  us.  .(even)  for  all  this  remnant 
42.  15  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  remnant 
42.  19  O  ye  remnant  of  Judah ;  Go  ye  not  into 

43-  5  took  all  the  remnant  of  Judah,  that  were 
44.  12  will  take  the  remnant  of  Judah,  thatliave 

44-  14  bo  that  none  of  the  remnant  of  Judah  \v 
44-  28  all  the  remnant  of  Judah,  that  are  gone 
47-    4  the  remnant  of  the  country  of  Caphtor 
47-    5  Ashkelon  is  cut  off  (with)  the  remnant  of 

5. 10  whole  remnant  of  thee  will  I  scatter  into 
11.  13  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  the  remnant 
25. 16  and  destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea  coast 

Amos  1.  8  remnant  of  the  Philistines  shall  perish 
5.  15  will  be  gracious  unto  the  remnant  of  Jo. 
9-  12  I  hat  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  E 
2.  12  I  will  surely  gather  the  remnant  of  Israel 
4-  7  I  will  make  herthat  halted  a  remnant,  and 
5.  7  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  the  midst  of 
5.  8  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  among  the  G 
7. 18  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remn 

Zeph.  2.    7  coast  shall  be  for  the  remnant  of  the  ho 
3-13  Thereninantoflsraelshallnotdoiniouitv 

Hag.    1.  12  with  all  the  remnant  of  the  people,  obeyed 
1.  i4Spintofalltheremnantofthepeople:and 

zecn.  8.  6  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of 
8.  12  I  mil  cause  the  remnant  of  this  people  to 

11.  To  let  loose,  or  remnant,  nTO.or  mi  sharah    3 
Jer.   15. 11  Verily  it  shall  be  well  with'thy  remnant 

12.  What  is  left  fully,  raTaAciuua  kataleimma. 
Kom.  9.  27  sand  of  the  sea,  [a  remnant]  shall  be  sav. 

13.  What  is  left,  Ae7una  leimma. 
Rom  11.    5  there  is  a  remnaut  according  to  the  elec. 

14. Remaining,  left,  Aoiiro'j  loipns. 

Matt  22.    6  remnant  took  his  servants,  and  entreated 

-Rev.  11.  13  remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave  glory 

12.  17  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her 

■  9-21  remnant  were  slain  with  the  sword  of  him 

REMNAUT,  to  leave  a  — 

To  hi  or  cnvse  to  br  mv.^  nn;  yafhm,  5 

J^e.    6.    8  Yet  will  Heave  a  remnant,  that  ye  may 


Eze. 


ilic 


REMOTE  (away),  to  — 
1.  To  remove,  n^>3  galah. 

Eze.  12.    3  remove  by  day . .  thou  shalt  remove  from 
2. To  cause  to  remove,  nbi  galah,  5. 

2  Ki.17.  26  nations  which  thou  hast  removed,  and 

1  Ch.  8.   6  and  they  removed  them  to  Manahath 

8.    7  he  removed  them,  and  begat  Uzza  and  A. 
•3.  To  roll,  9%  galal. 

Psa.119.  22  Remove  from  me  reproach  and  contempt 

4.  To  remove,  enD  mush. 
Zech.  3.  9  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  d. 

14.    4  half  of  the  mountain  shall  remove  toward 

5.  To  (cause  to)  remove,  pid  mush,  5. 
Isa.  46.    7  from  his  place  shall  he  not  remove  :  yea 
Mic.    2.    3  from  which  ye  shall  not  remove  your  ne. 

2.   4  how  hath  he  removed  (it)  from  me !  turn. 

6.  To  move,  iv  nud. 
Jer.     4.    1  wilt  put  away.. then  shalt  thou  not  rem. 

50.    3  they  shall  remove,  they  shall  depart,  both 
50.   8  Remove  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  and 

7.  To  cause  to  move,  to  nud,  5. 
Psa.  36.11  let  not  the  hand  of  the  wicked  remove  me 

8.  To  move,  shake,  "<:  nna. 
Exod2o.  18  when  the  people  saw  (it),  they  removed 

9.7*0  remove,  jdj  nasag,  5. 

Deut  19.  14  Thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  neighbour's 

27.  17  Cursed  (be)  he  that  removeth  his  neighb. 
Prov  22.  28  Remove  not  the  ancient  landmark, which 

23.  10  Remove  not  the  old  landmark ;  and  enter 
±Los.   s.  10  princes,  .were  like  them  that  remove  the 

10.  To  remove,  journey,  J?DJ  nasa. 
Exodi4.  19  removed  and  went  behind  them  ;  and  the 
I\  urn  12.  16  afterward  the  people  removed  from  Haz 

21. 12,  13  From  thence  they  removed,  and  pitc. 
33-  5  children  of  Israel  removed  from  Rameses 
33-  7)  9>  10, 1 1, 14, 16,  21  And  they  removed  from 
T„5°  m  V-T2V5'  =6.  28,  32,  34,  36,  37,  46,  47.j 
J  osh.  3.  1  Joshua  rose  early . .  aDd  they  removed  from 
3.  3  then  ye  shall  remove  from  your  place  and 
3.  14  when  the  people  removed  from  their  tents 

11.  To  cause  to  remove  or  journey,  "dj  nasa,  5. 
Job    19. 10  mine  hope  hath  he  removed  like  a  tree 
Eccl.  10.   9  Whoso  removeth  stones  shall  be  hurt  th. 

12.  To  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  i&i  nasag,  5. 
Job     24.   2  (Some)  remove  the  landmarks :  they  vi. 

13.  To  be,go,turn  or  bring  round  about,  33D  sabab,2. 
Num  36.    7  remove  from  tribe  to  tribe ;  for  every  one 

36.   g  Neither  shall  the  Inheritance  remove  from 
14.ro  turn  or  bring  round  about,  335  sabab,  5. 

2  Sa.  20. 12  removed  Amasa  out  of  the  highway  into 
15.70  cause  to  turn  aside,  -aa  sur,  5. 

Gen.   8. 13  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark,  and  lo 

30.  35  removed  that  day  the  he  goats  that  were 

48.  17  to  remove  it  from  Ephraim's  head  unto  M. 

Mod.  8.  31  removed  the  swarm  (of  flies)  from  Pharaoh 

Judg.  9.  29  then  would  I  remove  Abimelech.  And  he 

1  ha.  18. 13  Therefore  Saul  removedhimfromhim, and 

2  8a.   6.  10  So  David  would  not  remove  the  ark  of  the 

1  Jti.  15. 12  removed  all  the  idols  that  his  fathers  had 
15-  13  even  her  he  removed  from  (being)  queen 

2  J£i.  16. 17  removed  the  laver  from  off  them ;  and  t 
17.  18  removed  them  out  of  his  sight :  there  was 

17.  23  Until  the  Lord  removed  Israel  out  of  his 

18.  4  removed  the  high  places,  and  brake  the 

23.  27  I  will  remove,  .as  I  have  removed  Israel 

24.  3  to  remove  (them)  out  of  his  sight,  for  the 
2  cn.15.  16  removed  her  from  (being)  queen,  because 

33-    8  Neither  will  I  any  more  remove  the  foot 

35- 12  removed  the  burnt  offerings,  that  they 
Job    12.  20  He  removeth  away  the  speech  of  the  tru. 

27.   5  tall  I  die  I  will  not  remove  mine  integrity 
m-  39- 10  Remove  thy  stroke  away  from  me :  I  am 

81.    6  I  removed  his  shoulder  from  the  burden 
119.  29  Remove  from  me  the  way  of  lying ;  and 
1  roy.  4.  27  Turn  not.  .remove  thy  foot  from  evil 
jumi.ii.  10  Therefore  remove  sorrow  from  thy  heart 
isa.   10.  13  I  have  removed  the  bounds  of  the  people 
Jer.  32.  3I  that  I  should  remove  it  from  before  my 
nze.  21.  26  Remove  the  diadem,  and  take  off  the  or 

45-    9  remove  violence  and  spoil,  and  execute 

16.  To  cause  to  move,  remove,  persuade,  n?D  suth,5. 
Job   36. 16  Even  so  would  behave  removed  thee  out 

17.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  -13$  abar  5 
Gen.  47.  21  removed  them  to  cities  from  (one)  end  of 

18.  To  cause  to  pass  on  or  by,  my  adah,  5. 
nan.    2.  21  he  removeth  kings,  and  setteth  up  kings 

19. To  remove  transcribe,  leave  of,  pna  athaq,  5. 

Gen.  12.   8  he  removed  from  thence  unto  a  mountain 

Toh  „  2  m '"I6  from  t,lenoe>  and  dir-rKed another 
MJ™  J-  5  Which  removeth  themountains,  and  they 
M.Jo  shake,  tremble.  b>jh  ransh. 

Isa.  13. 13  earth  shall  remove  outof  herplace,  in  the 
il.To  move,  shalce,  Kiveu  kineo. 

Kev.    2.    s  will  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his  pi. 

BaSet  orP1"?*  »  or  beyond.  y.Mo-rny.t  methi. 

i  Co  if  2%WThe  hAd  remoraJ  "i,n,  he  raised  up 

1  w>  13.   2  that  I  could  remove  mountains,  and  have 

Z°J°  Vp  Tr  wley°nd,  ^T^a?™  metabaino. 
Matti7.  20  Remove  hence,  and  it  shall  remove-  and 


24.Topvt  over  or  beyond,  ^raW^n,  metatithtmi. 
Gal.  1.  6  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  fr. 
25.  To  bear  alongside  or  beyond,  napatpipa  paraph 
Luke22.  42  if  thou  be  willing,  remove  this  cup  from 
REMOVE  a  tent,  to  — 
To  move  a  tent,  Srw  ahal. 

Gen.  13.  iS  remove'd  (his)  tent,  and  came  and  dwelt 
REMOVE  far  (away  or  off),  to  — 
l.To  east  off,  njj  zanach. 

Lam.  3. 17  thou  hast  removed  my  soul  far  off  from 
2.  To  2nd  far  off,  prrj  rachaq,  3. 

Isa.     6.  12  Lord  haye  removed  men  far  away,  and 
26. 15  thou  hast  removed  (it)  far  (unto)  all  the 
29. 13  but  have  removed  their  heart  far  from 
S.To  put  far  off,  pn-j  rachaq,  5. 

Psa.  103. 12  (so)  far  hath  he  removed  our  transgressi 

Prov.  5.    8  Remove  thy  way  far  from  her  anfeome 

30.   8  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies ;  give 

Jer    27. 10  remove  you  far  from  your  land  ;  and  that 

Joel    2.  20  But  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you  the  n 

3.   6  that  ye  might  remove  them  farfrom  their 

REMOVE  into,  to  — 

To  make  a  cliange  of  dwelling,  /KiWfc  metoikizo. 

Acts    7.   4  removed  him  into  this  land,  wherein  ye 
REMOVED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  removed,  n^a  galah,  2. 

Isa.  38. 12  is  removed  from  me  as  a  shepherd's  tent 
2.Removal,  trembling,  nwj  zaavah. 

Deut  28.  25  shalt  be  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms 

Jer.  15.   4  cause  them  to  be  removed  into  all  kingd 

24.   9  will  deliver  them  to  be  removed  into  all 

29.  18  ml] .deliver  them  to  be  removed  to  all  the 

t™   34'  zl     ™lm?ke  J'ou  to  be  removed  into  all  the 

Eze.  23.  46  and  mil  give  them  to  be  removed  and  sp. 

3.  To  remove,  w;  yagah,  5. 

2  Sa.  20. 13  When  he  was  removed  out  of  the  highway 
i.  To  be  covered  or  removed,  rp3  kanaph,  2. 

Isa.   30.  20  yet  shall  not  thy  teachers  be  removed  into 
5.To  move,  slip,  fail,  bid  mot,  1,  5. 

Psa.104.    s  the  earth,  (that)  it  should  not  be  removed 

12s.    1  cannot  be  removed,  (but)  abideth  for  ever 

Prov.io.  30  Therighteousshallneverberemoved-  but 

Isa.   54.  10  shall  depart.and  the  hills  be  removed ;  but 

54. 10  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  re'nio. 

6.  To  exchange,  change,  TO  mur,  5. 
Psa.  46.   2  though  the  earth  be  removed,  and  though 

7.  To  remove,  depart,  ma  mush. 
Isa.   22.  25  shall thenail thatisfastened.  .beremoved 

S.To  move,  wander  or  flee  away,  -nvnadad. 

Isa.    10.  31  Madmenah  is  removed ;"  the  inhabitants 
9. To  move  or  bemoan  self,  T.i  nud,  7a. 

Isa.   24.  20  shall  be  removed  like  a  cottage ;  and  the 

10.  Separation,  impurity,  nju  niddah. 
Eze.     7.  i9  gold  shall  be  removed :  their  silver  and 

11.  A  removal,  nyi  nidah. 
Lam.  1.   8  therefore  she  is  removed:  all  that  honou. 

12.  To  remove,  journey,  yoj  nasa. 
Isa.  33.  20  not  one  of  the  stakes. 

IS. To  turn  aside,  iid  sur. 

1  Sa.   6.    3  known  to  you  why  his  hand  is  not  rerno 
Amos  6.   7  and  the  banquet . .  shall  be  removed 
ll.To  be  removed,  old,  pny  athaq. 

Job  14.  18  and  the  rock  is  removed  out  of  his  place 
18.   4  shall  the  rock  be  removed  out  of  his  place 
15.  To  lift  up,  carry  away,  aXpm  airo. 

■Matt  21.  21  say  unto  this  mountain,  Be  thou  removed 
llarkn.  23  say  unto  this  mountain,  Be  thou  removed 
REMOVED  woman  — 
Separation,  impurity,  rra  niddah. 

Eze.  36.  17  as  the  uiicleanness  of  a  removed  woman 
REMOTTNG  (to  and  fro)  — 
1. Removal,  exile,  n-jia  golah. 

Eze.  12.    3  prepare  thee  stuff  for  removing,  and 
12.   4  bring  forth,  .as  stuff  for  removing :  and 
2. To  turn  aside,  -BD  sur. 

Isa.  49. 21  a  captive,  and  removing  to  and  fro?  and 
3.  To  cause  to  turn  aside,  ~\10  sur,  5. 

Gen.  30.  32  removing  from  thence  all  the  speckled 
4..1  putting  over,  u-erdBeo-ts  metathesis. 

Heb.  12.  27  signifleth  the  removing  of  those  things 
REM'-PHAN,  'Pe/Kpdi'. 

An  idol  worshipped  by  Israel  in  the  wilderness  ;  perhaps 
the  same  as  Chiun  (Amos  5.  26)  or  Saturn. 

Acts   7.  43  Yea,  ye  took  up . .  the  star  of  your  god  R. 
REND  (off  or  in  pieces),  be  rent,  to  — 
l.To  clean;  rend,  jipa  baqa. 

Eze.  29.    7  didst  break,  and  rend  all  their  shoulder 

2.  To  cleave,  rend.  j;p_3  oaqa,  3. 
Eze.  13.  1,  shall  fall';  and  a  stormy  wind  shall  rend 

13-  13  I  wiir  even  rend  (it)  with  a  stormy  wind 

3.  To  rend,  D"i3  param. 
Lev.  10.   6rncovernotyourheads,neitherrendyour 

21. 10  shall  not  uncover  his  head,  nor  rend'his 


.shall  ever  be  rem. 


RENDER 


807 


REPENT 


4.  To  break  off,  pip  paraq. 

Psa.    7.   2  Lest  he  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion,  rending 

5. To  break  off,  pns  paraq,  3. 

1  Ki.19.  11  greatand  strong  wind  rent  the  mountains 

6.7*o  send  away,  cut  out,  TO  qara. 

Gen.  37.  29  Joseph  (was)  not  in  the  pit;  and  he  rent 
37.  34  Jacob  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  sackcloth 
44.  13  Then  they  rent  their  clothes,  and  laded 
Lev.  13.  56  then  he  shall  rend  it  out  of  the  garment 
NU11114.  6  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb,  .rent 
Josh.  7.  6  Joshua  rent  his  clothes,  and  fell  to  the  e. 
Judgn.  35  rent  his  clothes,  and  said,  Alas,  my  daugh. 

1  Sa.  15.28  The  Lord  hathreut  the  kingdom  of  Israel 

28. 17  for  the  Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom  out 

2  Sa.    1.  11  David  took  hold  on  his  clothes,  and  rent 

3.  31  Rend  your  clothes,  and  gird  you  with  sa. 
13. 19  rent  her  garment  of  divers  colours  that 

1  Ki.  11. 11  I  will  surely  rend  the  kingdom  from  thee 

11.  12  I  will  rend  it  out  of  the  hand  of  thy  son 
11. 13  I  will  not  rend  away  all  the  kingdom  ;(hutj 
11. 30  caught  the  new  garment,  .and  rent  it  (in) 
11.  31  will  rend  the  kingdom  out  of  the  hand  of 
14.  8  rent  the  kingdom  away  from  the  house  of 
zi.  27  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  sackcloth  upon 

2  Ki.  2.  12  he  took  hold,  .and  rent  them  in  two  pie. 

5.  7  rent  his  clothes,  and  said,  (Am)  I  God,  to 
5.    8  heard  that  the  king  of  Israel  had  rent  his 

5.  8  Wherefore  bast  thou  rent  thy  clothes?  let 

6.  30  rent  his  clothes ;  and  he  passed  by  upon 
11.  14  Athaliah  rent  her  clothes,  and  cried,  Tr. 
17. 21  For  he  rent  Israel  from  the  house  of  Dav. 
19.  1  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered  himself  with 
22.  11  when  the  king  had  heard,  .he  rent  his  cl. 
22.  19  hast  rent  thy  clothes,  and  wept  before  me 

*  Ch.23. 13  Athaliah  rent  her  clothes,  and  said,  Tre. 

34. 19  heard  the  words  of  the  law,  that  he  rent 

34.  27  didst  rend  thy  clothes,  and  weep  before 
Ezra  9.  3  rent  my  garment  and  my  mantle,  and  pi. 
9.  5  having  rent  my  garment  and  my  mantle 
Esth.  4.  1  Mordecai  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  on  sa. 
Job  t.  20  Then  Job  arose,  and  rent  his  mantle,  and 
2. 12  rent  every  one  his  mantle,  and  sprinkled 
Eccl.  3.  7  A  time  to  rend,  and  a  time  to  sew ;  a  time 
Isa.   37.    1  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered  himself  with 

64.  1  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  rend  the  heavens 
Jer.     4.  30  though  thou  rentest  thy  face  with  paint. 

36.  24  Vet  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  renttheirg. 
Hos.  13.  8  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and  there 
Joel    2.  13  rend  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments 

7.  To  cleave,  rend,  ypy  shttsa,  3. 

Judgi4.    6  he  rent  him  as  he  would  have  rent  a  kid 
S.To  burst  through,  rend  thoroughly,  diafipyaaa). 

Matt26.  65  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  say. 

Marki4.  63  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  and 

Acts  14.  T4  rent  their  clothes,  and  ran  in  among  the 

9. To  rend  all  around,  irepLpf)r\yvv^tp)erirrhegnumi. 

Acts  16.  22  and  the  magistrates  rent  off  their  clothes 
10.  To  rend,  burst,  ^-qyyv/xi  rhegnumi. 

Matt.  7.    6  trample,  .and  turn  again  and  rend  you 
117b  tear,  lacerate,  (nrapaa<rw  sparasso. 

Mark  9.  26  cried,  and  rent  him  sore,  and  came  out  of 
12.7*0  rent,  tear,  trxKa  schizo. 

Matt27.  51  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from 
27.  51  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent 

Markis.  38  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from 

Luke 23.  45  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  m. 

John  19.  24  Let  us  not  rend  it,  but  cast  lots  for  it,  w. 

RENDER  (again),  to  — ■ 
J. To  give,  |m  nathan. 

2  Ch.  6.  30  render  unto  every  man  according  unto  all 

2.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  nts>  shub,  5. 

XumiS.   9  which  they  shall  render  unto  me,  (shall  be) 

Dem/32.  41  I  will  render  vengeance  to  mine  enemies 

32.  43  will  render  vengeance  to  his  adversaries 

Judg.g.  56  Thus  God  rendered  the  wickedness  of  A. 

9.  57  all  the  evil,  .did  God  render  upon  their 

1  Sa.26.  23  render  to  every  man  his  righteousness 

2  Ki.  3.  4  rendered  unto  the  king  of  Israel  an  hund. 
2  Ch.32.-25  Hezekiah  rendered  not  again  accordingto 
Job  33.  26  he  will  render  unto  man  his  righteousness 
Psa.  28.   4  of  their  hands  ;  render  to  them  their  des. 

79. 12  renderuntoourneighbourssevenfoldinto 
94.   2  Lift  up  thyself,  .render  a  reward  to  the 
116, 12  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  (for) 

ProV24- 12  shall  (not)  he  render  to  (every)  man  acco. 
24.  29  will  render  to  the  man  according  to  his 
26.  16  than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  reason 

Isa.   66. 15  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and  his  rebu. 

Lam.  3.  64  Render  unto  them  '  recompence,  0  Lord 

Zech.  9. 12  even  to  day  do  I  declare  (that)  I  will  ren. 

3.  To  finish,  complete,  uhy  shalam,  3. 

Job  34.  it  For  the  work  of  a  man  shall  he  render  un. 
Psa.  38.  20  They  also  that  render  evil  for  good  are 

56.  12  vows  (are)  upon  me,  O  God  :  I  will  rend. 

62.  12  forthourenderestto  every  man  according 
Isa.  66.  6  voice  of  the  Lord  that  rendereth  recom. 
Jer.  51.   6  he  will  render  unto  her  a  recompence 

51.  24  I  will  render  unto  Babylon  and  to  all  the 
Hos.  14.    2  so  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips 
Joel    3.   4  will  ye  render  me  a  recompence?  and  if 

4.7*o  give  back  in  return,  avraTrodiSo>/j.t  antapodid. 
1  Th.  3.   9  what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God  again 

5.  To  give  back,  itiroBlBafit  apodidomi. 

Matt2i.  41  shall  render  him  the  fruitsintheirseasons 


Matt22.  21  Render  therefore  unto  Cesar  the  things 
Marki2.  17  Render  to  Cesar  the  things  that  are  Ces. 
Luke2o.  25  Render  therefore  unto  Cesar  the  things 
Rom.  2.  6  Who  will  render  to  every  man  according 
13.  7  Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues :  tribu. 
1  Co.  7.  3  renderunto  the  wife  due  benevolence  :  and 
1  Th.  5.15  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto  an. 
1  Pe.  3.   9  Not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or  railing  for 

RENDERED,  to  be  — 

To  (cause  to)  turn  back,  3it?  shub,  1  or  5. 

Provi2. 14  recompence.  .shall  be  rendered  unto  him 
RENEW,  to  — 
\. Renew,  repair,  bin  chadash,  3. 

1  Sa.11. 14  let  us  goto  Gilgal.and  renew  the  kingdom 

2  Ch.15.  8  renewed  the  altar  of  the  Lord  that  (was) 
Job  10.  17  Thou  renewest  thy  witnesses  against  me 
Psa.   51. 10  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  .and  renew  a 

104.  30  and  thou  renewest  the  face  of  the  earth 
Lam.  5.  21  we  shall  be  turned;  reuew  our  days  as  of 

2.  To  change,  pass  on,  ^Sn  clmlaph,  5. 

Isa.  40.  31  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew 
41.   1  let  the  people  renew(their)  strength  :  let 

3.7b  make  new  again,  avaKatvlfa  anakainizo. 

Heb.  6.   6  If  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  a. 
RENEWED,  to  be 
1.7*0  renew  self,  be  renewed,  t?nn  chadash,  7. 

Psa. 103.    5  so  that)thyyouth  is  renewed  like  the  ea. 

2.  7*o  change,  pass  on,  renew,  *y>n  chalaph,  5. 
Job  29.  20  and  my  bow  was  renewed  in  my  hand 

3.  7*o  make  new  again,  avaKaivoai  anakainoo. 

2  Co.  4.  16  yet  the  inward  (man)  is  renewed  day  by 
Col.    3. 10  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 

4.7*o  be  renewed  again,  avavzooiiat  ananeoomai. 

Eph.  4.  23  And  be  renewed  in  the  spiritof  your  mind 
RENEWING  — 
A  making  new  again,  avaKaiuwats  anakainosis. 

Rom  12.    2  but  be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of 

Titus  3.    5  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy 
RENOUNCE,  to  — 
7*o  speak  off  or  away,  a-rr^Trov  apeipon. 

2  Co.  4.   2  have  renounced  the  hidden  things  of  dis. 
RENOWN,  renowned  — 
1.7*0  be  shining,  praised,  *?hn  halal,  4. 

Eze.  26.  17  renowned  city,  which  wast  strong  in  the 

2.  7*o  call,  MT|j  qara. 

Eze.  23.  23  great  lords  and  renowned,  all  of  them  ri. 

3.7*0  be  called,  n";;?  qara,  2. 

Isa.    14.  20  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  never  be  renowned 

4.7*0  call,  or  called,  $*%  or  x*i(5  qara,  or  qari. 

Num  1. 16  These  (were)  the  renowned  of  the  congr. 
5.^4  name,  Dp  shem. 

Gen.  6.   4  men  which  (were)  of  old,  men  of  renown 

Numi6.    2  famous  in  the  congregation,  men  of  ren. 

Eze.  16.  14  thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  heathen 
16. 15  playedst  the  harlot  because  of  thy  renown 
34.  29  I  will  raise  up  for  them  a  plant  of  renown 
39.  13  it  shall  be  to  them  a  renown,  the  day  that 

Dan.  9. 15  aud  hast  gotten  thee  renown,  as  at  this 
RENT  — 
l.A  rope  or  rent  thing,  nspj  niqpah. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  a  girdle  a  rent ;  and  instead  of 
2.7*o  rend,  oisparam. 

Lev.  13.  45  his  clothes  shall  be  rent,  and  his  head  b. 

3.  To  rend  away,  cut  out,  y~ij}  qara. 

1  Sa.  4. 12  his  clothes  rent,  and  with  earth  upon  his 

2  Sa.    1.    2  his  clothes  rent,  and  earth  upon  his  head 

13.  31  servants  stood  by  with  their  clothes  rent 
15.  32  came  to  meet  him  with  his  coat  rent,  and 

2  Ki.  18. 37  came . .  to  Hezekiah,  with  (their)  clothes  r. 

Isa.   36.  22  came,  .to  Hezekiah  with  (their)clothesr. 

Jer.  41.   5  their  beards  shaven,  and  their  clothes  r. 

4.^4  rent,  dissension,  (rx^o-fia  schisma. 

Matt.  9.  16  taketh  from  the  garment,  and  the  rent  is 
Mark  2.  21  taketh  away  from  the  old,  and  the  rent  is 

RENT  (asunder,  in  pieces),  to  be  — 

1.7*0  be  cleft,  J?p3  baqa,  2. 

1  Ki.  1 .  40  that  the  earth  rent  with  the  sound  of  them 
Job  26.  8  the  waters,  .the  cloud  is  not  rent  under 
Eze.  30. 16  and  No  shall  be  rent  asunder,  and  Noph 

2. 7*o  be  cleft,  ypsi  baqa,  4. 

Josh.  9.  4  wine  bottles,  old,  and  rent,  and  bound  up 

3.  7*o  cleave  self,  be  cleft,  ypa  baqa,  7- 

Josh.  9. 13  behold,  they  be  rent :  and  these  our  garm. 

4.  7*o  be  torn,  fpa  taraph,  4. 

Gen.  37.  33  Joseph  is  without  doubt  rent  in  pieces 
5.7*o  be  rent  away,  yijj  qara,  2. 

Exod  28.  32  shall  have  a  binding,  .that  it  be  not  rent 

39.  23  a  band  round,  .that  it  should  not  rend 
1  Sa.  15.  27  he  laid  hold  upon  the  skirt,  .and  it  rent 
1  Ki.13.    3  the  altar  shall  be  rent,  and  the  ashes  that 
13.    5  The  altar  also  was  rent,  and  the  ashes  p. 
RENT,  to  make  a  — 
.  7*o  rend,  <rx*Cw  schizo, 

Luke  5.  36  the  newraaketh  a  rent,  and  the  piece  that 


REPAIR    (earnestly),  to  — 

1.7*o  repair  a  breach,  pis  badaq. 

2  Ch.34. 10  wTought.  .to  repair  and  amend  the  house 

2.7*0  build,  .133  banah. 

Judg2i.  23  and  repaired  the  cities,  and  dwelt  in  them 
2  Ch.  33.  16  he  repaired  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  and  s. 

3. 7*o  renew,  v~}n  chadash,  3. 

2  Ch.24.    4  was  minded  to  repair  the  house  of  the  L. 

24.  12  hired  masons  and  carpenters  to  repairthe 

Isa.   61.    4  they  shall  repair  the  waste  cities,  the  de 

4.  7*o  strengthen,  harden,  fix,  prn  chozaq,  3. 

2  Ki.  12.  5  let  them  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house 
12.  6  the  priests  had  not  repaired  the  breaches 
12.  7  Why  repair  ye  not  the  breaches  of  the  h. 
12.  8  neither  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  ho. 
12. 12  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house  of  the 
12. 14  repair  therewith  the  house  of  the  Lord 
22.  5  give .  .to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house 
22.    6  timber  and  hewn  stone  to  repair  the  ho. 

2  Ch.24.    5  t°  repair  the  house  of  your  God  from  year 
29.   3  opened  the  doors,  .and  repaired  them 
32.    5  repaired  Millo  (in)  the  city  of  David,  and 
34.    8  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord  his  God 

Neh.  3.  19  nest  to  him  repaired  Ezer  the  son  of  Jes. 

5.7*0  strengthen,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

Neh.  3.  4  next  unto  them  repaired  Meremoththe  3. 
3.  4  next  unto  them  repaired  Meshullam  the 
3.  4  next  unto  them  repaired  Zadok  the  son  of 
3.  5  next  unto  them  the  Tekoites  repaired,  but 
3.  6  the  old  gate  repaired  Jehoiada  the  son  of 
3.  7  And  next  unto  them  repaired  Melatiah 
3.  8  Next  untoliim  repaired  Uzziel  the  son  of 
3.  8  Next  unto  him  also  repaired  Hananiah  the 
3.  9  next  unto  them  repaired  Rephaiah  the  s. 
3.  10  next  unto  them  repaired  Jedaiah  the  son 

3. 10  next  unto  him  repaired  Hattush  the  son 

3. 11  repaired  the  other  piece,  aud  the  tower 
3.  12  next  unto  him  repaired  Shallum  the  son 
3. 13  The  valley  gate  repaired  Hanun,  and  the 
3.  14  the  dung  gate  repaired  Malchiah  the  son 
3. 15  the  gate  of  the  fountain  repaired  Shallum 
3.  16  After  him  repaired  Xehemiah  the  son  of 
3.  17  after  him  repaired  the  Levites,  Rehum. 
3.  17  Next  unto  him  repaired  Hasbabiah,  the 
3.  18  After  him  repaired  their  brethren,  Bavai 
3.  20  Baruch  the  son  of  Zabbai  earnestly  repai. 
3.  21  After  him  repaired  Meremoth  the  son  of 
3. 22  after  him  repaired  the  priests,  the  men  of 
3.  23  After  him  repaired  Benjamin  and  Hashub 
3.  23  After  him  repaired  Azariah  the  son  of  M. 
3.  24  After  him  repaired  Binnui  the  son  of  H_ 
3.  27  After  them  the  Tekoites  repaired  another 
3.  28  From  above  the  horse  gate  repaired  the 
3.  29  After  them  repaired  Zadok  the  son  of  Im. 
3.  29  After  him  repaired  also  Shemaiah  the  son 
3.  30  After  him  repaired  Hananiah  the  son  of 
3.  30  After  him  repaired  Meshullam  the  son  of 
3.  31  After  him  repaired  Malchiah  the  goldsm. 
3.  32  repaired  the  goldsmiths  and  the  mercha. 

6. Strength,  firm  hold,  npin  cliezqah. 

2  Ki.  12. 12  all  that  was  laid  out  for  the  house  to  re. 
7-7*0  keep  living  or  alive,  n;n  chayah,  3. 

1  Ch.n.    8  built,  .and  Joab  repaired  the  rest  of  the 

5.  7*o  shut  up  or  in,  ~ud  sagar.  • 

1  Ki.  11.  27  repaired  the  breaches  of  the  city  of  David 
9.7*0  cause  to  stand  still,  "it?y  amad,  5. 

Ezra  9.  9  to  repair  the  desolations  thereof,  and  to 
10.7*o  heal,  N3-i  rapha,  3. 

1  Ki.  18. 30  and  he  repaired  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
REPAIRER,  repairing-- 

1.7*0  wall  or  hedge,  ~na  gadar. 

Isa.  58. 12  The  repairer  of  the  breach,  The  restorer 

^.Foundation,  litf  yesod. 

2  Ch.24.  27  the  repairing  of  the  house  of  God,  behold 
REPAY,  be  repayed,  to  — 

1.7*0  finish,  complete,  repay,  dV^  shalam,  3. 

Deut.  7.  10  repayeth  them  that  hat ;  him  to  their  face 
7.  10  he  will  not  be  slack . .  ho  will  repay  him  to 
Job  21.  31  who  shall  repay  him  (what) he  hath  done 
41.  11  Who  hath  prevented  me,  that  I  should  r. 
Prov  13.  21  but  to  the  righteous  good  shall  be  repaid 
Isa.   59. 18  he  will  repay,  .he  will  repay  recompence 

2.7*0  give  back  in  return,  avTaTro5i$to(j.i  antapodid. 
Rom  12.  19  "Vengeance  (is)  mine;  I  will  repay,  saith 
3. 7*o  give  back  or  away,  a.TroSiSoj/j.1  apodidomi. 

Luke  10.  35  more,  when  I  come  again,  I  will  repay 
4. 7*o  pay  away  or  back,  airorlva  apotino. 

Phni.       19  I  will  repay  (it) :  albeit  I  do  not  say  to 
REPEAT,  to  — 
7*o  do  a  thing  twice,  repeat,  nj&:  shanah. 

Prov  17.  9  buthethatrepeatetha  matter  separateth 
REPENT  (self),  to  — 

1.7*0  bejyenitent,  comforted,  eased,  oru  nacham,  2.. 
Gen.   6.   6  it  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made 

6.  7  for  it  repenteth  me  that  I  have  made  th. 
Exodi3.  17  the  people  repentwhen  they  see  war,and 
32.  12  and  repent  of  this  evil  against  thy  people 
32. 14  the  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  which  he 
Judg.  2. 18  it  repented  the  Lord  because  of  their  gr 
21.  6  Israel  repented  them  for  Benjamin  their 
21.  15  And  the  people  repented  them  for  Eenj. 


REPENTANCE 


808 


REPROACH 


i  Sa.  T5.  n  It  repenteth  me  that  I  have  set  up  Saul 
15.  29  strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent 
15.  29  for  he  (is)  not  a  man,  that  he  should  repe. 
15-  35  the  Lord  repented  that  he  had  made  Saul 
2  Sa.  24.  16  the  Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil,  and 
1  Ch.21.  15  he  repented  him  of  the  evil,  and  said  to 
Job  42.    6  Wherefore  I  abhor,  .and  repent  in  dust 
Psa.  90.  13  let  it  repent  thee  concerning  thy  servants 
106.  45  repented  according  to  the  multitude  of 
no.    4  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  mil  not  repent 
Jer.     4.  28  I  have  purposed  (it),  and  will  not  repent 
8.    6  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wickedness 
j8.    8  I  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to 
18.  10  I  will  repent  of  the  good  wherewith  I  said 

20.  16  which  the  Lord  overthrew,  and  repented 

26.  3  that  I  may  repent  me  of  the  evil  which  I 
26. 13  the  Lord  will  repent  Mm  of  the  evil  that 
26. 19  Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil  which  he 
31. 19  I  repented;  and  after  that  I  was  instru. 
42.  10  I  repent  me  of  the  evil  that  I  have  done 

Eze.  24.  14  neither  will  I  repent :  according  to  thy 
Joel    2. 13  of  great  kindness,  and  repenteth  him  of 

2.  14  (if)  he  will  return  and  repent,  and  leave 
Amos  7.    3  Lord  repented  for  this :  It  shall  not  he 

7.  6  Lord  repented  for  this :  This  also  shall  not 
Jon.    3.    9  God  will  turn  anil  repent,  and  turn  away 

3.  10  God  repented  of  the  evil  that  he  had  said 

4.  2  Knew  that  thou . .  repentest  thee  of  the  e. 
Zech.  8.  14  provoked  me  to  wrath.. and  I  repented 

2.  To  comfort  self,  be  penitent,  Dm  nacham,  7. 
Nuni23.  19  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  r. 
Dent  32.  36  repent  himself  for  his  servants,  when  he 
Psa. 135. 14  he  will  repent  himself  concerning  his  se. 

Z.To  turn  back,  21»  shub. 

1  Ki.  8.  47  repent,  and  make  supplication  unto  thee 
Eze.  14.    6  Repent,  and  turn,  .from  your  idols;  and 

18.  30  Repent,  and  turn .  .from  all  your  transg. 

4.  To  be  careful  or  concerned  with,  ficTaue\ofxat. 
Matt2i.  29  said,  I  will  not:  but  afterward  he  repen. 

21.  32  repented  not  afterward,  that  ye  might  b. 

27.  3  repented  himself,  and  brought  again  the 

2  Co.  7.    8  I  do  not  repent,  though  I  did  repent 
Heb.    7.  21  The  Lord  sware  and  will  not  repent,  Thou 

5. To  have  another  mind,  y.$Ta.voiu>  metanoeo. 
Matt.  3.    2  Repent  ye  :  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
4.  17  Repent:  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
11.  20  to  upbraid,  .because  they  repented  not 

11.  21  they  would  have  repented  long  ago  in  sa. 

12.  41  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas 
Mark  1. 15  saying,  .repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gospel 

6.  12  And  they,  .preached  that  men  should  re. 

Lukeio.  13  they  had  a  great  while  ago  repented,  sit. 

n.  32  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas 

13-   3>  5  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise 

15.  7,  10  joy.  .over  one  sinner  that  repeuteth 

16.  30  if  one  went  unto  them,  .they  will  repent 

17.  3  rebuke  him ;  and  if  he  repent,  forgive  him 
17.    4  turn  again  to  thee,  saying,  I  repent;  thou 

Acts  2.  38  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you 
3.  19  Repent  ye  therefore, and  be  converted, th. 

8.  22  Repent  therefore  of  this  thy  wickedness 
17.  3ocommandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent 
26.  20  they  should  repent  and  turn  to  God,  and 

2  Co. 12.  21  havenotrepentedoftheuncleanness,  and 

Rev.   2.    s  repent,  and  do  the  first  works  ;  or  else  I 

"      2.    5  remove  thy  candlestick,  .except  thou  re. 

2.  16  Repent ;  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  q. 

2.  21  repent  of  her  fornication;  and  she  repen. 

2.  22  I  will  cast . .  except  they  repent  of  their  d. 

3.  3  Remember,  .and  hold  fast,  and  repent 

3.  19  chasten :  be  zealous  therefore,  and  repent 

9.  20  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands 
9.  21  Neither  repented  they  of  their  murders 

16.   9  and  they  repented  not  to  give  him  glory 
16.  11  blasphemed,  .and  repented  not  of  their 
REPENTANCE  — 

1,  Penitence,  comfort,  arrj  nocham. 

Hos.  13.  14  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  mine  eyes 

2.  A  change  of  mind,  ^rdvota  metanoia. 

Matt.  3.    8  Bring  forth,  .fruits  meet  for  repentance 
3.  n  I.,  baptize  you  with  water  unto  repentance 
g.  13  come  to  call  the .  .sinners  [to repentance] 

Mark  1,  4  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission 
2. 17  I  came,  .to  call,  .sinners  [to  repentance] 

Luke  3.  3  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission 
3.    8  Bring  forth . .  fruits  worthy  of  repentance 

5.  32  I  came,  .to  call,  .sinners  to  repentance 
15.  7  just  persons,  which  need  no  repentance 
24.  47  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should 

Acts  5.  31  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness 
11. 18  Then  hath  God.  .granted  repentance  unto 
13.  24  the  baptism  of  repentance  to  all  the  people 

19.  4  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  repentance 

20.  21  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward 
26.  20  turn,  .and  do  works  meet  for  repentance 

Rom.  2.  4  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repenta. 
2  Co.  7.  9  ye  sorrowed  to  repentance  :  for  ye  were 
7. 10  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  sal. 
2  Ti.  2.  25  peradventure  will  give  them  repentance 
Heb.  6.    1  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  works 

6.  6  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance 

12  17  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 
2  Pe.  3.   9  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance 

REPENTANCE  (without!,  not  to  be  repented  of  — 
Xot  to  h^  careful  or  conrrrned  with,  afxerafx^hnros. 

Romii.  29  gifts  and  calling  .(are)  without  repenta. 

2  Co   7. 10  to  salvation  not  to  be  repented  uf ;  but 


REPENTING  — 

l.To  be  penitent,  comforted,  uni  nacham,  2. 

Jer.  15.    6  destroy  thee ;  I  am  weary  with  repenting 
2.  Comforts,  repentmgs,  D'JpytJ  nichumim. 

Hos.  11.    8  How.,  my  repentings  are  kindled  together 
REPETITIONS,  to  use  vain  — 
To  speak  emptily,  QarroXoyew  battologeo. 

Matt.  6.    7  when  ye  pray,  use  not  vain  repetitions,  as 
RE-PHA'-EL,  Sndi  God  is  a  healer. 
A  Kohathite,  son  of  Shemaiah  the  first  born  of  Obed- 
edoru,  and  a  gatekeeper  of  the  tabernacle.    B.C.  1020. 

1  Ch.26.  7  The  sons  of  Shemaiah ;  Othni,  and  R.,  and 
RE'-PHAH,  n*~\  healing,  support. 
A  grandson  of  Ephraim,  tlirough  Beriah.     B.C.  1680. 

1  Ch.  7.  25  And  R.  (was)  his  son,  also  Resheph,  and 

RE-PHA  I'AH,  ire-)  Jah  Iieals. 

1.  A  head  of  a  family  of  the  house  of  David.     B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  3.  21  the  sons  of  R.,  the  sons  of  Arnan,  the  sons 

2.  A  captain  of  Simeon  when  they  smote  the  Axnale- 
kites.    B.C.  715. 

1  Ch.  4.42  Neariah.and  R.,  andI7zziel,the  sons  of  I. 

3.  A  son  of  Tola,  son  of  Issachar.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7.   2  And  the  sons  of  Tola  ;  Uzzi,  and  R.,  and 

4.  A  Benjamite  called  in  1  Ch.  8.  37  Kapha.    B.C.  900. 

1  Ch.  9.  43  R.  his  son,  Eleasah  his  son,  Azel  his  son 

5.  Oue  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  after 
Ndiemiah  came  from  Shushau.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.    9  And  next  unto  them  repaired  R.  the  son 

RE-PHA'-IM,  D'XS"!  strong. 

1.  A  race  dwelling  around  the  S.  of  Jerusalem,  and 
eastward  beyond  Jordan,  in  Bashan,  Amnion  and  Moab, 
in  Ashteroth  Karnaim  and  Shaveh  Kiriathaim;  variously 
called  Zamzummim,  Zuzim,  and  Eniim;  also  Anakim. 

Gen.  14.    5  the  kings,  .smote  the  R.  in  Ashteroth  E. 
15.  20  the  Hittites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  R. 

2.  A  valley  S.W.  of  Jerusalem,  and  N.  of  Bethlehem, 
now  called  el-Bukaa.  This  was  the  bouudary  between 
Judah  and  Benjamin,  Josh.  15.  8. 

2  Sa.    5. 18  Philistines . .  spread  themselves  in  the . .  R. 

5.  22  Philistines,  .spread  themselvesinthe.  .R. 

23. 13  the  Philistines  pitched  in  the  valley  of  R. 
1  Ch.11.  15  Philistines  encamped  in  the  valley  of  R. 

14.  9  Philistines . .  spread  themselves  in  the . .  R. 
Isa.   17.    5  he  that  gatherethears  iuthe  valley  of  R. 

RE-PHT-DIM,  cysn.  plains. 

A  station  of  Israel  where,  after  leavingAlush,  they  fought 
with  Amalek;  near  Horeb,  between  the  wilderness  of 
Sin  and  of  Sinai,  here  they  murmured  for  water,  and 
Moses  struck  a  rock  in  Horeb,  and  supplied  their  need. 
Exodi7.   1  all . .  Israel  journeyed . .  and  pitched  in  R. 

17.    8  came  Amalek,  and  fought  with  Isr.  iu  R. 

19.  2  For  they  were  departed  from  R.,  and  were 
Nuni33.  14  they  removed  from  A  tush . .  encamped  atR. 

33.  15  And  they  departed  from  R.,  and  pitched 

REPLENISH,  to  — 

1.  To  fill,  he  full,  nSd  male. 

Gen.    t.  28  Be  fruitful .  .and  replenish  the  earth,  and 
9.    1  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  aud  replenish 

2.TojM,  make  full,  nbo  male,  3. 

Isa.   23.    2  thou  whom  the  merchants,  .have  replen. 

Jer.   31.  25  I  have  replenished  every  sorrowful  soul 
REPLENISHED,  to  be  — 
I.  To  fill,  be  full,  xbn  male. 

Isa.     2.   6  because  they  be  replenished  from  the  east 
2.To  be  filled,  nl»  male,  2. 

Eze.  26.    2  I  shall  be  replenished,  .she  is  laid  waste 
27.  25  and  thou  wast  replenished,  and  made  v. 
REPLY  against,  to  — 
To  judge  back  in  return,  avrairoKplvofxat  antapoh. 

Rom.  9.  20  but.  .who  art  thuu  that  repliest  against 
REPORT  — 
1.  Word,  "a?  dabar. 

1  Ki.io.    6  It  was  a  true  report  that  I  heard  in  mine 

2  Ch.  9.    5  (It  was)  a  true  report  which  I  heard  in 

2.Xame,  De;  shem. 

Neh.   6.  13  they  might  have  (matter)  for  an  evil  rep. 

3.  What  is  heard,  T\V>'OV  shemuah. 

1  Sa.    2.  24  (it  is)  no  good  report  that  I  hear :  ye  make 

Prov  15.  30  (and)  a  good  report  maketh  the  bones  fat 

Isa.  28.  19  a  vexation  only  (to)  understand  the  rep. 

53.    1  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  w. 

4.  Hearing,  report,  y^t?  shema. 

Exod23.  1  Thou  shalt  not  raise  a  false  report :  put 
Deut.  2.  25  who  shall  hear  report  of  thee,  and  shall 
Isa.  23.  5  As  at  the  report  concerning  Egypt,  (so) 
23.  5  shall  they  be  sorely  pained'at  the  report 
Jer.   50.  43  The  king  of  Babylon  hath  heard  the  rep. 

5. Hearing,  a  rumour,  aKo-f)  akoe. 

John  12.  38  who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  w. 
Rom. 10.  16  saith,  Lord,  who  hath  believed  ourreport? 

6.  Testimony,  witness,  fxaprvpia  marluri-'. 

1  Ti.  3.    7  he  must  have  a  good  report  of  them  which 
REPORT,  (evil)  — 

A  bad  report,  dva^v}J-la  dusphemia. 

2  Co.  6.     8  By  honour  and  dishonour  by  evil  report 


REPORT  (to  have  or  obtain),  good  or  honest  — 
\.A  good  report,  eixpn^ia  eupJiemia. 

2  Co.  6.    8  By  honour"  and  dishonour,  by.  .good  rep. 

2.  Well  reported,  sounding  well,  ev<pnfios  euphemos 

Phil.  4.   8  whatsoever  things  (are)  of  good  report;  if 

3. To  testify,  bear  witness,  jxaprvpim  martureo. 

Acts    6.    3  seven  men  of  honest  report,  full  of  the  H. 

10.  22  of  good  report  among  all  the  nation  of  the 

22.  12  havingagood  report  of  all  the  Jews  which 

Heb.  11.    2  For  by  it  the  elders  obtained  a  good  repo. 

11. 39  having  obtained  a  good  report  through  f. 

3  John    12  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  all.  .and  of 
REPORT,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  "iDN  amar. 

Neh.   6.  19  they  reported  his  good  deeds  before  me 

2.  To  bring  forward,  tell,  declare,  "UJ  nagad,  5. 
Jer.  20. 10  Report,  (say  they),  and  we  will  report  it 

3.  To  tell  or  announce  again,  avayyeKKw  anoggello. 

1  Pe.  1. 12  the  things  which  are  now  reported  unto 

4.  To  tell  off  or  away,  airayyiww  apaggello. 

Acts    4.  23  reported  all  that  the  chief  priests  and  el. 
1  Co.  14.  25  and  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth 

REPORTED,  to  be  slanderously  — 

To  speak  injuriously,  ^\aacp-q/j.4co  blasphemed. 

Rom.  3.    8  as  we  be  slanderously  reported,  and  as 
REPORTED,  to  be  — 
l.To  say,  IDS*  amar. 

Esth.  1. 17  they  shall  despise,  .when  it  shall  be  rep. 
2. To  be  heard,  yc^  shamea,  2. 

Neh.    6.   6  It  is  reported  among  the  heathen,  and  G. 
6.    7  and  now  shall  it  be  reported  to  the  king 
Z.To  hear,  hearken,  clkovw  akouo. 

1  Co.  5.    1  It  is  reported  commonly  (that  there  is)  fo. 
REPORTED  of,  to  be  well  — 
To  testify,  bear  witness,  fxaprvpew  martureo. 

Acts  16.    2  Which  was  well  reported  of  by  the  bret. 

1  Ti.    5. 10  Well  reported  of  for  good  works;  if  she 

REPROACH  — 

1.  Reviling,  fj'na  gidduph. 

Isa.  43.  28  given  Jacob  to  the  curse,  and  Israel  to  re. 

2.  Kindness,  shame,  *ipn  chesed. 

Prov.  14.  34  exalteth  a  nation :  but  sin  (is)  a  reproach 

3.  To  reproach,  *]"vi  charaph,  3. 

Psa.  57.    3  save  me  (from)  the  reproach  of  him  that 
A. Reproach,  nsnn  cherpah. 

Gen.  30.  23  and  said,  God  hath  taken  away  my  repro. 

34.  14  We  cannot . .  for  that  (were)  a  reproach  un. 

Josh.  5.    9  This  day  have  I  rolled  away  the  reproach 

1  Sa.  11.   2  and  lay  it  (for)  a  reproach  upon  all  Israel 

17.  «'5  and  takethaway  the  reproach  from  Israel 
25  39  that  hath  pleaded  the  cause  of  my  repro. 

Neh.   i.    3  remnant,  .(are)  in  great  affliction  and  re 

2.  17  let  us  build,  .that  we  be  no  more  a  rep. 

4.  4  turn  their  reproach  upon  their  own  head 

5.  9  the  reproach  of  the  heathen  our  enemies 
Job   19.    5  and  plead  against  me  my  reproach 

Psa.  15.   3  taketh  up  a  reproach  against  his  neighb. 

22.  6  a  reproach  of  men . .  despised  of  the  peop. 
31.  11  I  was  a  reproach  among  all  mine  enemies 
39.    8  make  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  foolish 
44.  13  Thou  makest  us  a  reproach  to  our  neigh. 
69.    7  for  thy  sake  I  have  borne  reproach  ;  sha. 
69.   9  the  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached 
69.  10  soul  with  fasting,  that  was  to  my  reproach 
69.  19  Thou  hast  known  my  reproach,  and  my 
69.  20  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart,  and  I 
71.  13  let  them  be  covered  (with)  reproach  and 

78.  66  And . .  he  put  them  to  a  perpetual  reproach 

79.  4  We  are  become  a  reproach  to  our  neighb. 
79.  12  render,  .sevenfold  into,  .bosom  their  re. 
89.  41  All.  .spoil  him  :  he  is  a  reproach  to  his 
89.  50  Remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  thy  se. 

109.  25  I  became  also  a  reproach  unto  them :  (wh.) 

119.  22  Remove  from  me  reproach  and  contempt 

119.  39  Turn  away  my  reproach  which  I  fear;  for 

Prov.  6.  33  and  his  reproach  shall  not  be  wiped  away 

18.  3  (then)  cometh  also,  .with  ignominy  repr. 
Isa.     4.    1  called  by  thy  name,  to  take  away  our  re. 

30.  5  nor  profit,  but  a  shame,  and  also  a  repr. 
51.  7  fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  men,  neither 
54.    4  and  shalt  not  remember  the  reproach  of 

Jer.    6.  10  word  of  the  Lord  is  unto  them  a  reproach 

20.  8  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  made  a  reproach 

23.  40  I  will  bring  an  everlasting  reproach  upon 

24.  9  a  reproach  and  a  proverb,  a  taunt  and  a 
29. 18  a  re-proach,  among  all  the  nations  whither 

31.  19  because  I  did  bear  the  reproach  of  my  y. 
42. 18  astonishment,  and  a  curse,  and  a  reproach 
44.  8  a  reproach  among  all  the  nations  of  the 
44.  12  astonishment,  and  a  curse,  and  a  reproach 
49.  13  a  desolation,  a  reproach,  a  waste,  and  a  e. 
51.  51  because  we  have  heard  reproach :  shame 

Lam.  3.  30  smitethhim:  he  is  filled  full  with  reproach 

3.  61  Thou  hast  heard  their  reproach,  O  Lord 
5.    1  0  Lord,  .consider,  and  behold  our  repr. 

Eze.  5. 14  I  will  make  thee  waste,  and  a  reproach 
5.  15  So  it  shall  be  a  reproach  and  a  taunt,  an 
16.  S7  as  at  the  time  of  (thy)  reproach  of  the  da. 

21.  2S  Thus  saith  the  Lord. .concerning  their  re. 

22.  4  I  made  thee  a  reproach  unto  the  heathen 
36.  15  neither  shalt  thou  bear  the  reproach  of 
36.  30  ye  shall  receive  no  more  reproach  of  fam. 


REPROACH 


809 


REREWARD 


\ 


Dan.    9.  16  thy  people  (are  become)  a  reproach  to  all 
11.  18  shall  cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him 
11. 18  without  his  own  reproach  he  shall  cause 
Hos.  12.  14  his  reproach  shall  his  Lord  return  unto 
Joel    2.  17  give  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach,  that 

2.  19  make  you  a  reproach  among  the  heathen 
Alic.   6.  16  ye  shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  people 
Zeph.  2.    8  I  have  heard  the  reproach  of  Moab,  and 

3.  18  (to  whom)  the  reproach  of  it  (was)  a  bur. 

5.  Blushing,  shame,  n*s^3  kelimmah. 

Job  20.    3  I  have  heard  the  check  of  my  reproach,  and 
G.  Lightness,  confusion,  p?[3  qalon. 

Prov  22. 10  Cast  out  the  scorner,  and.,  reproach  shall 

7. Dishonour,  an/ua  atimia. 

2  Co.  11.  2i  I  speak  asconcerningreproaeh.  as  though 

8.  Reproach,  insult,  oj/eiStu/uds  oneidismos. 

Horn  15.    3  The  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached 

1  Ti.    3.   7  lest  he  fall  into  reproach  and  the  snare 
Heb.  10.  33  made  a  gazing  stock  both  by  reproaches 

11.  26  Esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater 
13. 13  Let  us  go  forth.,  without.,  bearing  his  re. 

9. Reproach,  disgrace,  oveiSos  oneidos. 

Luke  1. 25  to  take  away  my  reproach  among  men 
10.  Contumely,  insult,  uBpts  hubris. 

2  C0.12. 10  in  infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities 
REPROACH,  to  (bring  or  suffer)  — 

I, To  revile,  nia  gadaph,  3. 

Kumis.  30  the  same  reproacheth  the  Lord  ;  and  that 
2.7b  make  ashamed,  confound,  "isn  chapher,  5.  - 

Provic}.  26  that  causeth  shame,  and  bnngeth  reproa 

3.  To  reproach,  *pn  ckaraph. 

Job  27.   6  my  heart  shall  not  reproach  (me)  so  long 
Psa.  69.    9  the  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached 
119.  42  to  answer  him  that  reproacheth  me:  for 
Prov  27.  11  that  1  may  answer  him  that  reproacheth 

4.  To  reproach,  ?pn  charaph,  3. 

2  Ki.19.   4  king,  .hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living  G. 
19.  22  Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and  blasph. 

19. 23  By  thy  messengers  thou  hast  reproached 
Neh.  6.  13  an  evil  report,  that  they  might  reproach 
Psa.  42. 10  mine  enemies  reproach  me  ;  while  they 

44.  16  of  him  that  reproacheth  and  blasphemeth 
55. 12  (itwas)not  an  enemy(that)  reproached  me 
74. 10  how  long  shall  the  adversary  reproach  ? 
74. 18  Remember  this .  .the  enemy  hath  reproac. 
79.  12  wherewith  they  have  reproached  thee.  O 
89.  51  Wherewith  thine  enemies  have  reproached 
89.  51  they  have  reproached  thefootsteps  of  th 
102.    8  enemies  reproach  me  all  the  day ;  and  th. 

Prov  14.  31  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth 
17.    5  Whoso  mockeththe  poor  reproacheth  his 

Isa.   37.  4,  17  hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living  God 
37.  23  Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and  blasph. 

37. 24  thou  reproached  the  Lord,  and  hast  said 
Zeph.  2.  8  whereby  they  have  reproached  my  people 

2.  iotheyhavereproachedandmagnifiedi.them) 

5.  Reproach,  n^-jn  cherpah. 

Psa   74.  22  how' the  foolish  man  reproacheth  thee  d. 

6.  To  cause  to  blush,  D73  kalam,  5. 

Ruth  2.  15  Let  her. glean  even,  .and  reproach  her  not 
Job  19.    3  These  ten  times  have  ye  reproached  me 

7. To  reproach,  dve&ifa  oneidizo. 

Luke  6.  22  shall  reproach  (you),  and  cast  out  your 
Rom. 15.    3  The  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached 
1  Ti.    4. 10  we  both  labour  and  (suffer  reproach],  be. 
1  Pe.   4. 14  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Chr. 

8, To  insult,  treat  with  contumely,  vQpifa  hubrizo. 
Luken.  45  Master,  thus  saying  thou  reproachest  us 

REPROACHFULLY,  (to  speak)  — 
1. Reproach,  nsnn  cherpah. 

Jcb    16.  10  smitten  me  uponthe  cheek  reproachfully 
'2. Because  of  reviling,  x&PlU  AotSopiets  charinloid. 

1  Ti.    5  14 give  none  occasion,  .to  speak reproachfu. 
REPROBATE  — 

1.  To  loathe,  despise,  reject,  dno  moos,  2. 

Jer.     6.  30  Reprobate  silver  shall  (men)  call  them 
2. Disapproved,  a5o#ano$  adokimos. 

Rom.  1.  28  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  to 

2  Co.  13.    5  Christ  is  in  you,  except  ye  be  reprobates? 

13.   6  ye  shall  know  that  we  are  not  reprobates 
13.    7  which  is  honest,  though  we  be  as  reprob 

2  Ti.    3.    8  men  of  corrupt  minds  reprohate  concer. 

Titus  1.  16  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  re 

REPROOF  — 

1.  Rebuke,  rryjw\  gearah. 

Job  26. 11  tremble  and  are  astonished  at  his  reproof 
Prov.  17. 10  reproof  entereth  more  into  a  wise  man 

'2.  Reproof,  correction,  nnsifl  iokacluith. 

Psa.  38.  14  and  in  whose  mouth  (are)  no  reproofs 
Prov/ 1.  23  Turn  you  at  my  reproof :  behold,  I  will  p, 
1.  25  But  ye.  .would  none  of  my  reproof 
1.  30  my  couusel ;  they  despised  all  my  reproof 
5. 12  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised  repro 
6.  23  reproofs  of  instruction  (are)  the  way  of  life 
10.  17  but  he  that  refuseth  reproof  erreth 
12.    1  but  he  that  hateth  reproof  (is)  brutish 
13. 18  he  that  regardeth  reproof  shall  be  houou. 
15.    5  but  he  that  regardeth  reproof  is  prudent 
15. 10  (and)  he  that  hateth  reproof  shall  die 
15.31  ear  that  heareth  the  reproof  of  life  abideth 

102 


Prov  15. 32  that  heareth  reproof  getteth understand. 
29. 15  rod  and  reproof  give  wisdom  :but  a  child 

3.  Conviction,  %\eyx°s  clegchos. 

2  Ti.    3. 16  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  [reproofl.  for 
REPROVE,  REPROVER,  to  — 

1.  To  rebuke,  "ijja  gaar. 

Jer.  29.  27  why  hast  thou  not  reproved  Jeremiah  of 

2.  To  reason,  reprove,  decide,  n?;  yakach,  5. 

Gen.  21.  25  reproved  Abimelech  because  of  a  well  of 
2  Ki.  19.   4  will  reprove  the  words  which  the  Lord 

1  Ch.  16.  21  yea,  he  reproved  kings  for  their  sakes 
Job     6.  25  words  !  but  whatdoth  yourarguingrepr. 

6. 26  Do  ye  imagine  to  reprove  words,  and  the 
1 3.  10  He  will  surely  reprove  you,  if  ye  do  seer. 
22  4  Will  he  reprovethee  for  fearof  thee?  will 
40.  2  he  that  reproveth  God,  let  him  answer  it 
Psa.  50.  8  will  not  reprove  thee  for  thy  sacrifices  or 
50. 21  I  will  reprove  thee,  and  set  (them)  in  or. 
105.  14  yea,  he  reproved  kings  for  their  sakes 
141.  5  let  him  reprove  me  ;  (it  shall  be)  an  exc. 
Prov.  9.    8  Reprove  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  hate  thee 

15.  12  scornerloveth  not  one  that  reproveth  him 
19. 25  reprove  one  that  hath  understanding.(and) 
25. 12  (so  is)  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obedient 
30.   6  lest  he  reprove  thee,  and  thou  be  found 

Isa.   11     3  neither  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his 

11.    4  reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the 

29  21  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the 

37.    4  will  reprove  the  words  which  the  Lord 

Jer.    2.  ig  and  thy  backslidings  shall  reprove  thee 

Eze.    3.  26  shalt  not  be  to  them  a  reprover:  for  the 

Hos    4.    4  Vet  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  anot. 

3.  To  instruct,  correct,  ">p;  yasar. 

Prov.  9.   7  He  that  reproveth  a  scorner  getteth  to 
4.7b  convict,  4\iyxto  elegcho. 

Luke  3. 19  being  reproved  by  him  for  Herodias  his 
John  3  20  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved 

16.  8  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
Eph.  5. 11  have  no  fellowship.. but  rather  reprove 

5.  13  But  all  things  that  are  reproved  are  made 

2  Ti.   4    2  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  longsu. 
REPROVED,  to  he  (often)  — 

1.  To  be  reasoned  with,  n?;  yakach,  2. 

Gen.  20.  16  and  with  all  (other):  thus  she  was  repro. 
2.Rep)'oof,  correction,  nroin  tokachath. 

Prov  29.    1  He  that,  beingofteu  reproved,  hardeneth 
Hab.    2.    1  what  I  shall  answer  when  I  am  reproved 

REPUTATION,  (.to  be  of   have  in,  make  of  no)  — 
l.One  rare,  precious,  ip;  yakar. 

Eccl.  10.    1  him  that  is  in  reputation  for  wisdom  (and) 

2.  To  think,  seem,  5ok<fo>  dokeu. 

Gal.     2.    2  privately  to  them  which  were  of  reputa. 

3.  To  have  or  hold  in  honour,  ex«  €urt/xoi-  echo  en. 

Phil.  2.  29  all  gladness;  and  hold  such  in  reputation 
4.7b  empty,  k.sv6<h  kenoo. 

Phil.  2.    7  But  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
5.  Honourable,  prized,  ri/xios  timios. 

Acts    5.  34  had  in  reputation  among  all  the  people 
REPUTED,"to  be  — 
To  think,  reckon,  devise,  zyn  chashab. 

Dan.   4.  35  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  (are)reputed 
REQUEST  — 
\.  Request,  desire,  ns^N  aresheth. 

Psa.  21.   2  hast  not  withholden  the  request  of  his  lips 
2.  Request,  inquiry,  h^BS  baqqashah. 

Ezra.  7.  6  king  granted  him  all  his  request,  accord. 
Esth.  5.  3  what  (is)  thy  request?  it  shall  be  even  giv. 
g.  6  what  (is)  thy  request?  even  to  the  half  of 
5.  7  Then  answered  Esther,  and  said,  .my  re. 
5.  8  if  it  please  the  king,  .to  perform  my  req, 
7.  2  what  (is)  thy  request?  anditshallbeperfo. 
7.  3  petition,  and  my  people  at  my  request 
9. 12  what  (is)  thyrequest  further?  and  itshall 

3.-4  word,  "i;n  dabar. 

2  Sa.  14.  15  king  will  perform  the  request  of  hishand. 
14  22  king  hath  fulfilled  the  request  of  his  serv. 
i.Asking,  request,  demand,  nj'Ny  sheelah. 

Judg.  8.  24  would  desire  a  request  of  you,  that  ye  w. 

Job     6.    8  Oh  that  I  might  have  my  request;  and  that 

Psa  106.  15  he  gave  them  their  request ;  but  sent  lean. 
5.  Request,  petition,  airi]fxa  aitema,. 

Phil.  4.    6  let  yourrequestsbemadeknownuntoGod 
6. Supplication,  Senots  deesis. 

Phil.    1.    4111  every  prayer  of  jine..  making  request 
REQUEST,  to  (make)  — 
l.To  seek,  pray,  nj;5  bea. 

Ban.   2.  49  Then  Daniel  requested  of  the  king.andhe 

2.  To  seek,  inquire,  pps  baqash,  3. 

Neh.   2.    4  For  what  dost  thou  make  request?  So  I 
Esth.  4.    8  to  make  request  before  him  for  her  people 
7.    7  Haman  stood  up  to  make  request  for  his 
Dau.    1.   8  requested  of  the  prince  of  the  eunuchs  th. 

3.  To  ask,  demand,  bity  shaal. 

Judg.  8.  26  of  the  golden  ear  rings  that  he  requested 
1  Ki.  19.    4  he  requested  for  himself  that  he  might  die 
1  Ch.  4.  10  God  granted  him  that  which  herequested 
!  4.  To  be  in  want  of,  to  supplicate,  Ziofiat  deomai. 
Rom.  1.  10  Making  request  if  by  any  means  now  at 


REQUIRE,  to  — 
l.To  say,  T?x  amar. 

Ruth  3.  11  I  will  do  to  thee  all  that  thou  requirest 

2.  To  choose,  try,  fix  on,  "ins  bachar. 

2  Sa.  19.  38  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  require  of  me 

3.  To  seek,  inquire,  t?p3  baqash,  3. 

Gen.  31.  39  of  my  hand  didst  thou  require  it.  (whether) 

43.    9  of  my  hand  shalt  thou  require  him :  if  1 
Josh  22.  23  thereon,  let  the  Lord  himself  require  (it) 

1  Sa.  20.  16  Let  the  Lord  even  require  (it)atthe  hand 

2  Sa.    4.  11  shall  I  not  therefore  now  require  his  bl. 

1  Ch.21.    3  why  then  doth  my  lord  require  this  thing? 
Neh.    5.  12  will  require  nothing  of  them  ;  so  will  we 

5.  18  yet  for  all  this  required  not  1  the  bread 
Esth.  2.  15  she  required  nothing  but  what  Hegai  the 
Eccl.  3.  15  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  past 
Isa.     1. 12  who  hath  required  this  at  your  hand,  to 
Eze.    3. 18  but  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand 

3.  20  but  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand 
33.    S  but  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thine  hand 

4.  To  seek,  inquire,  require,  an!?  darash. 

Gen.  9.  5  surely  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I  re 
9.  5  at  the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I  require 
9.   5  hand  of  every  man's  brother  will  I  require 

Deuti8.  19  speak  in  my  name,  1  will  require(it)ofhim 

23.  21  for  the  Lord  thy  God  will  surely  require 

2  Ch.24.   6  Why  hast  thou  not  required  of  the  Levites 

24.  22  said,  The  Lord  look  upon  (it),  and  require 
Psa.  10.  13  said  in  his  heart,  Thou  wilt  notrequire  (it) 
Eze.  20.  40  there  willl  require  yourofferings,  and  the 

33.  6  his  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchman  s 

34.  10  and  I  will  require  my  flock  at  their  hand 
Mic.   6.    8  what  doth  the  LORD  require  of  thee,  but  to 

5.  To  be,  i"i;n  hayah. 

1  Sa.  21.   8  becausetheking'sbusiness  required  haste 
6.7b  ask,  demand,  bygj  shaaL 

Deut.io.  12  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  Go  1  require  oft. 

2  Sa.   3. 13  but  one  thing  I  require  of  thee,  that  is,  T. 

12.  20  when  he  required,  they  set  bread  before 
Ezra  8.  22  For  I  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  king 
Psa.  40.    6  and  sin  offering  hast  thou  not  required 

137.  3  they  that  carried  us  away  captive  required 
Prov  30.    7  Two  (things)  have  I  required  of  thee ;  deny 

7. To  ask,  demand,  7N«y  sheet. 

Ezra    7.  21  whatsoever  .Ezra,  .shall  require  of  you,  it 
Dan.    2.  11  rare  thing  that  the  king  requireth;  and 

8.  To  ask,  cuTe'to  ailed. 

Luke23.  23  requiring  that  he  might  be  crucified:  and 

1  Co.    1.  22  For  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Gr. 
9. Request,  petition,  an-qua  aitema. 

Luke23-  24  gave  sentence  that  it  should  be  as  they  re. 
10.  To  become,  •ytvofxai  ginomai. 

1  Co.  7. 36  need  so  require,  let  him  do  what  he  will 
11.7b  do,  irpdctTto  prassO. 

Lukeig.  23  might  have  required  mine  own  with  usury? 
REQUIRED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  sought,  effl  darash,  2. 

Gen.  42.  22  therefore,  behold,  also  his  blood  is  requi. 
2. In  its  day,  iova  beyomo. 

1  Ki.   8.  59  at  all  times,  as  the  matter  shall  require 

1  Ch.16.  37  continually,  as  every  day's  work  required 

2  Ch.  8.  14  as  the  duty  of  every  day  required;  the  p 
Ezra  3.    4  custom,  as  the  duty  of  every  day  required 

3.7b  ask  off  or  away,  d-rraiTtou  apaiteo. 

Lukei2.  20  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of 

4.  To  seek  out,  4k(wtco>}  ekzeteo. 

Luke  11.  50  That  the  blood,  .may  be  required  of  this 
n.  51  It  shall  be  required  of  this  generation 

5.  To  seek,  (t}t4cv  ziteo. 

Luke  12.  48  of  him  shall  be  much  required ;  and  to  w 

1  Co.  4.    2  Moreover  it  is  required  in  stewards,  that 
REQUITE,  to  — 

l.To  recompense,  do,  hvs  gamal. 

Deut32.   6  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord,  0  foolish  p 

2.  To  give,  jrg  nathan. 

Psa.  10. 14  to  requite  (it)  with  thy  hand :  the  poor 

3.  To  do,  make,  rtjppjj  asah. 

2  Sa.   2.    6  and  I  also  will  requite  you  this  kindness 

4.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  3'tf  shub,  5. 

Gen.  50. 15  will  certainly  requite  us  all  the  evil  which 

1  Sa.  25.  21  and  he  hath  requited  me  evil  for  good 

2  Sa.  16.  12  will  requite  me  good  for  his  cursing  this 
2  Ch.  6.  23  judge  thy  servants,  by  requiting  the  wic 

5.  To  finish,  complete,  repay,  chy  shalam,  3. 
Judg.  1.    7  as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me 
2  Ki.    9.  26  and  I  will  requite  thee  in  this  plat,  saith 
Psa.  41.  10  and  raise  me  up.  that  I  may  requite  then 
Jer    51.  56  Lord  God  of  recompences  shall  surely  r. 

6.7b  give  back  a  recompence,  awodiow/xt  apLoiQas. 

1  Ti.   5.    4  requite  their  parents :  for  that  is  good 
REREWARD,  (to  be)  — 
1.  Behind,  last,  furthest,  }VinK  acharon, 

1  Sa.  29.    2  men  passed  on  in  the  rere  ward  with  Achish 
2.7b  gather,  F]px  asaph. 

Isa.   58.   8  thegloryoftheLoRDshallbethyrereward 
3.  To  gather,  HPX  asap>h,  3. 

Num  10.  25  the  rereward  of  all  the  camps  throughout 

Josh.  6.   0  rereward  came  after  the  ark,  (the  priests; 


RESCUE 


810 


REST 


Josh.  6.  1 3  the  rereward  came  after  the  ark  of  the  L. 
Isa.    52. 12  and  the  God  of  Israel  (will  be)  your  rere. 
RESCUE,  to  — 

I. To  give  ease,  yty;  yasha,  5. 

Deut  28.  3 1  and  thou  shall  have  none  to  rescue  (them) 

2.  To  snatch  away,  ^jjj  natsal,  5. 

1  Sa.  30.  18  carried  away;  and  David  rescued  his  two 
Hos.    5.  14  I  will  take  away,  and  none  shall  rescue 

Z.To  snatch  away,  733  netsal,  5. 

Dan.    6.  27  He delivereth  andrescueth,  andhe  work. 

4.  To  free,  nns  padah. 

1  Sa.  14. 45  So  the  people  rescued  Jonathan,  that  he 
5. To  cause  to  turn  back,  ate>  shub,  5. 

Psa.  35.  17  rescue  my  soul  from  their  destructions 
6.  To  lake  away,  lift  up  out  of,  i^aipew  exaireo. 

Acts  23.  27  then  came  I  with  an  army,  and  rescued 
RESEMBLANCE  — 
Eye,  }\v  ayin. 

Zech.  5.   6This(is)theirresemblancethroughallthe 

RESEMBLE,  (to)  — 
l.JForm,  T(JR  toar. 

Judg.  8. 18  each  one  resembled  the  children  of  a  king 

2.  To  liken,  6/j.oi6w  homoioo. 

Lukei3- 18  like?  and  whereunto  shall  I  resemble  it? 
RES'-EN,  jcn  fortress. 

A  city  between  Nineveh  and  Caleb,  now  called  Kuy- 
yundshite,  once  Mespila. 

Gen.  10.  12  And  R.  between  Nineveh  and  Calah :  the 
RESERVE,  be  reserved,  to  — 
I. To  keep  back,  lay  up,  b?x  atsal. 

Gen.  27  36  Hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing  forme? 
2.  To  darken,  keep  back,  restrain,  %&n  chasak. 

Job   38.  23  Which  I  have  reserved  against  the  time  ? 
Z.To  be  kept  back,  ^'n  chasak,  2. 

Job  21.  30  That  the  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of 

4.  To  cause  to  be  abundant,  "irv  yathar,  5. 

Ruth  2.  18  gave  to  her  that  she  had  reserved  after 

2  Sa.   8.    4  but  reserved  of  them  (for)  an  hundred  ch. 
1  Ch.18.   4  but  reserved  of  them  an  hundred  chariots 

5.  To  take,  np^  laqach. 

Judg2i.  22  because  we  reserved  not  to  each  man  his 

6.  To  keep,  "iQ3  natar. 

Jer.     3.    5  Will  he  reserve  (his  anger)  for  ever?  will 
Nan.  1.    2  and  he  reserveth  (wrath)  for  his  enemies 

7.  To  leave,  "W  shaar,  5. 

Jer.  50.  20  for  I  will  pardon  them  whom  I  reserve 

8.  To  keep,  Toy  shamar. 

Jer.     5.  24  he  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed  weeks 

9.  To  leave  thoroughly,  KaraAeiTrw  kataleipo. 

Rom  ir.    4  I  have  reserved  to  myself  seven  thousand 

10.  To  keep,  TTjpew  tereo. 

Acts  25.  21  when  Paul  had  appealed  to  be  reserved 

1  Pe.  t.    4  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven 

2  Pe.  2.   4  darkness,  [to  be  reserved]  uuto  judgment 

2.   9  reserve  the  unjust  unto  the  day  of  judgm. 

2.  17  to  whom  the  midst  of  darkness  is  reserved 

3.  7  reserved  unto  lire  against  the  day  of  jud. 
Jude         6  he  hath  reserved  in  everlasting  chains, rm. 

13  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  dar. 

RE'-SHEPH,  v$1  haste. 

A  son  of  Rephah,  grandson  of  Sarah  the  daughter  of 

Ephraini.     B.C.  1680. 

1  Ch.  7.  25  And  Rephah  (was)  his  son,  also  R.,  and 
RESLDTTE— 
1. Latter  end,  2™sterity,  ri'inx  acharith. 

Eze.  23.  25  and  thy  residue  "shall  be  devoured  by  the 

2.  To  be  over  and  above,  "in;  yathar,  2. 

Eze.  34.  18  ye  must  foul  the  residue  with  your  feet 
48  18  residue  in  length  over  against  the  ohlat. 
48.  21  residue  (shall  be)  for  the  prince,  on  the 

3.  What  is  over  and  above,  "in;  yether. 

Exodio.    5  they  shall  eat  the  residue  of  that  which 
Isa.    38.  10 1  am  deprived  of  the  residue  of  my  years 

44.  19  shall  I  make  the  residue  thereof  an  abo 

Jer.  27.  19  concerning  the  residue  of  the  vessels  that 

29.    1  sent  from  Jerusalem  unto  the  residue  of 

52  15  residue  of  the  people  that  remained  In  the 

Eze.  34.  18  must  tread  down  with  your  feet  the  resi 

Zech  14.    2  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  cut  otf 

i.Remnant,  rest,  "iNt^  shear. 

Neh.  11  20  residue  of  Israel,  of  the  priests  (and)  the 
Isa.   21.  17  residue  of  the  number  of  archers  the  mi 
28.   5  diadem  of  beauty,  untn  the  residue  of  his 
Dan.   7.    7  stamped  the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it 
7.  19  and  stamped  the  residue  with  his  feet 
Mai.    2. 15  Yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the  spirit.  And 

5.  Remnant,  residue,  n'lNy  sheerith. 

Isa  44.  17  residue  thereof  he  maketh  a  god,  (even) 
Jer.  8.  3  chosen  rather  than  life  by  all  the  residue 
15.  9  residue  of  them  will  I  deliver  to  the  sword 
24.  8  residue  of  Jerusalem,  that  remain  in  this 
39.  3  residue  of  the  princes  of  the  king  of  Bab. 
41.  10  Ishmael  carried  away  captive  all  the  res. 
Eze.  n.  8  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  residue  of  Israel 
36.  3  might  he  a  possession  unto  the  residue  of 
36.   4  derision  to  the  residue  of  the  heathen  that 


Eze.  36.  5  spoken  against  the  residue  of  the  heathen 
Zeph.  2.  9  residue  of  my  people  shall  spoil  them,  and 
Hag.  2.  2  Speak,  .to  the  residue  of  the  people,  say. 
Zech.  8.  11  But  now  I  (will)  not  (be)  unto  the  residue 

6.  Thoroughly  left,  Karahonros  katidoipos. 

Acts  15.  17  That  the  residue  of  men  might  seek  after 

7. Left,  \0nr6s  loipos. 

Marki6. 13  [they  went  and  told  (it)  uuto  the  residue] 

RESIST,  to  — 

l.To  oppose,  acense,  hate,  |oj?  sedan. 

Zech.  3.   1  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist 

2.  To  set  over  against,  ai/diar-n/xi  anthistemi. 

Matt  5.  39  That  ye  resist  not  evil ;  but  whosoever  s. 
Luke2i.  15  shall  not  be  able  to  gainsay  nor  resist 
Acts  6. 10  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom 
Rom.  9.  19  find  fault?  for  who  hath  resisted  his  will 
13.  2  resisteth  the  ordinance,  .and  they  that  r. 
2  Ti.  3.  8  so  do  these  also  resist  the  truth  :  men  of 
Jas  4.  7  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you 
1  Pe.  5.   9Whom  resist  stedfast  in  the  faith,  know. 

3. To  set  down  over  against,  avTiKadiarw^i  anttka 
Heb.12.    4  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood  stnv 

4.  To  fall  over  against,  avTiiri-rrra  antipipto. 
Acts  7.  51  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost :  as  yo. 

5.  To  set  self  in  array  over  against,  avrndaao/jat 

Rom  13.   2  Whosoever  therefore  resisteth  the  power 
Jas.     4.    6  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace 
5.   6  killed  the  just ;  (and)  he  doth  not  resist 

1  Pe.  5.    5  God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace 
RESOLVED,  to  be  — 

To  begin  to  know,  yiv&VKw  gindsko. 

Luke  16.   4  I  am  resolved  what  to  do,  that,  when  I 
RESORT,  to  — 
1 ;  To  go  or  come  in,  Mia  bo. 

Psa   71.   3  whereunto  I  may  continually  resort :  thou 

2.  To  set  self  up,  av  yatsab,  7. 

2  Ch.11  13  Israel  resorted  to  him  out  ol  all  their  co. 

3.  To  be  squeezed,  gathered  together,  pap  qabals,  2. 
Neh.   4.  20  resort  ye  thither  unto  us:  our  God  shall 

4.  To  come,  ipxofxat  erchomai. 

Mark  2.  13  all  the  multitude  resorted  unto  him,  and 
Johnio.  41  many  resorted  unto  him,  and  said,  John 

5.To  2MSS  through  together,  avp.tr  opevofxat  sumpor. 
Markio.    1  people  resort  unto  him  again :  and,  as  he 

6.  To  lead  together,  trvudya  sunagd. 

John  18.    2  Jesus  ofttimes  resorted  thither  with  his 

7.  To  come  together,  <rvu4pxofiai  sunerchomai. 
JohniS.  20  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always  resort 
Acts  16. 13  spake  unto  the  women  which  resorted 

RESPECT  (of  persons)  without— 

1.  Acceptance  (of  persons),  x&n  rnasso 

2  Ch.19.    7  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of  gifts 

2.  A  part,  particular,  p4pos  meros. 

2  Co.  3.  10  had  no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of 
Col.    2. 16  or  in  respect  of  an  holy  day,  or  of  the  new 

3.A  cceptance  of  faces,  wpoa'coTroXrjrpia  2^rosdpolejisia. 

Rom.  2.  11  Forthere  isnorespectof  persons withGod 

Eph.    6.    9 ;  Col.  3.  25 ;  Jas.  2.  1. 
4.  Without  acceptance  of  faces,  airpoo-wjro\T}Trru)$. 

1  Pe.  1.  17  the  Father,  who  without  respect  of  per. 
RESPECT  to  (persons),  to  have  — 
TO  accept  faces,  7rpoo'a>7ro\??7rTe&>  prosopolepteo. 

Jas.    2.   9  But  if  ye  have  respect  to  persons,  ye  com. 
RESPECT,  to,  to  (have) — 
l.To  know,  be  acquainted  with ,  jn;  yada. 

Exod.  2.  25  God  looked,  .and  God  had  respect  unto 
2.To  (cause  to)  look  attentively,  ttai  nabat,  5. 

Psa.  74.  20  Have  respect  unto  the  covenant :  for  the 
119.  6  when  I  have  respect  unto  all  thy  comma. 
119  15  meditate  in  thy  precepts,  and  have  resp. 

3.  To  discern,  135  nctkar,  5. 

Deut.  1.  17  Ye  shall  not  respect  persons  in  judgment 
16-  19  thou  sbalt  not  respect  persons,  neither  t. 

Prov24.  23  not  good  to  have  respect  of  persons  in  ju. 
28.  21  To  have  respect  of  persons  (is)  not  good 

4.  To  lift  up,  k^3  nasa. 

Lev.  19.  15  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the 
■:  Sa  14  14  neither  doth  Godrespect(any)  person:  yet 
Lam.  4. 16  respected  not  the  persons  of  the  priests 

5. To  face,  front,  look,  niB  panah. 

Lev  26.  9  For  I  will  have  respect  unto  you,  and  m. 
Nunu6  is  Respect  not  thou  their  offering*  I  have 

1  Ki    8  28  Yet  have  thou  respect  unto  the  prayer  of 

2  Ki  13.  23  had  respect  unto  them  because  of  his  co. 
2  Ch.  fi  19  Have  respect  therefore  to  the  prayer  of 
Psa   40  ■  4  respecteth  not  the  proud,  nor  such  as  tu. 

Q.To  see,  rrio  raah. 

Job   17.  24  he  respecteth  not  any  (that  are)  wise  of  h. 

Psa.  1 38.    6  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly .  but 

Isa.    17.    7  shall  have  respect  to  the  Holy  One  of  Is. 

17.    8  neither  shall  respect  (that)  which  his  fin. 

22. 11  neither  had  respect  unto  him  that  fashion. 

l.To  glance,  look,  ptj$  shaah. 

Gen.    4.    4  bad  respect  unto  Abel  and  to  his  offering 

4.    5  to  his  offering  he  had  not  respect.     And 

Psa,  1 1 9.  117  have  respect  unto  thy  statutes  continu. 


8.  To  look  away,  airo^K^tvca  apoblepd. 

Heb.  11.  26  for  he  had  respect  unto  the  recompence 

9.  To  look  upon,  «?Vi,8\e7ra>  epiblepo. 

Jas.     2.    3  ye  have  respect  to  him  that  weareth  the 
RESPECTER  of  persons  — 
Acceptor  of  faces,  irpoorwiroXrjirrrjs  prosdpoleptis. 

Acts  10.  34  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  per. 
RESPITE,  (to  give)  — 
1. Breathing,  respite,  nnn  revachnh. 

Exod.  8.  15  when  Pharaoh  saw  that  there  was  respite 

2.7b  let  fall  or  go,  desist,  n?-i  raphah,  5. 

1  Sa.  11.    3  Give  us  seven  days  respite,  that  we  may 
REST  (of)— 
1. Silence,  V?T|  domi. 

Isa.  62.   7  give  him  no  rest,  till  he  establish,  and  till 

2. To  be  over  and  above,  in;  yathar,  2. 

Gen.  30.  36  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  Laban*s  flocks 

Exod28.  10  six  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone 

Lev.  14.  ?g  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  the  priest  s  nana 

Josh. 17.    2  There  was  also  (a  lot)  for  the  rest  of  the 

17.    6  rest  of  Manasseh's  sons  had  the  laud  of 

21.    5  rest  of  the  children  of  Kohath  (had)  by 

21.  34  rest  of  the  Levites,  out  of  the  tribe  of  Ze, 

1  Ki.20.  30  rest  fled  to  Aphek.into  the  city;  and(th  ) 

2  Ki.  4.  7  and  live  thou  and  thy  children  of  the  rest 
1  Ch.  6.  77  Unto  the  rest  of  the  children  of  Merarl 

24.  20  rest  of  the  sons  of  Levi  (were  these) :  Of 

3.  What  is  over  and  above,  in;  yether. 

Lev.  14.  17  of  the  rest  of  the  oil  that  (is)  in  his  hand 
Num3i.  32  rest  of  the  prey  which  the  men  of  war  had 
Deut.  3.  13  rest  of  Gilead,  and  all  Bashan,  (being)the 
Josh. 13.  27  rest  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  He. 
Judg.  7.    6  rest  of  the  people  bowed  down  upon  their 

1  Sa.  13.    2  rest  of  the  people  he  sent  every  man  to  his 

2  Sa  10.  10  rest  of  the  people  he  delivered  into  trie 

12.  28  Now  therefore  gather  the  rest  of  the  peo. 
1  Ki.11  41  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
[80  in  14.  19;  2  Ki.  8.  23 ;  12   19;  13.  12;  14.  18 ;  15.  6, 

11,  15,  21,26,  31;  20  ?o  ;  2  Ch.  13.  22.] 

1  Ki.  14  29  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
[So  in  15.  7,  31 ;  16.  5,  14,  20,  27;  22.  39,  45  ;  2  Ki.  t.  18; 

10.  34 ;  13.  8 ;  14.  15,  28 ;  15.  36 ;  16.  19 ;  21.  17,  25;  23. 
28;  24.  5;  2  Ch.  20.  34;  25.  26;  26.  22;  27.  7;  32.  32; 
33.  18;  35.26;  36  8.] 

1  Ki.15.23  rest  of  all  the  acts  of  Asa,  and  all  his  mig. 

2  Ki  25.  n  Now  the  rest  of  the  people  (that  were)  left 
1  Ch.19  I7  And  the  rest  of  the  people  he  delivered 
Neh.    2.  16  neither  had  I  as  yet  told  (it)  to.  .the  rest 

4.  14, 19  said  unto  the  nobles,  .and  to  the  rest 

6.    1  rest  of  our  enemies,  heard  that  I  had  bu. 

6  14  rest  of  the  prophets,  that  would  have  put 

Psa.  17  14  leave  the  rest  of  their  (substance)  to  their 

Jer.  39.   9  with  the  rest  of  the  people  that  remained 

52. 15  carried  away  captive. .the  rest  of  the  mu. 

Eze.  48.  23  As  for  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  from  the  east 

4.  Place  of  rest,  rest,  n'up  manoach. 

Gen.  8.  9  But  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of 
Deut  28.  65  neither  shall  the  soul  of  thy  foot  have  re. 
Ruth  3,  1  shall  I  not  seek  rest  for  thee  that  it  may 
I'sa.n6.  7  Return  uuto  thy  rest,  O  my  soul ;  for  the 
Lam.  1.    3  she  fiudeth  no  rest:  all  her  persecutors 

5. Place  of  rest,  rest,  nnus  mennchah. 

Gen.  49.  15  saw  that  rest  (was)  good,  and  the  laud 
Deut  12.    9  For  ye  are  not  as  yet  come  to  the  rest  and 
Ruth  1.    9  Lord  grant  you  that  ye  may  find  rest,  each 
1  Ki.   8.  56  that  hath  given  rest  unto  his  people  Isr 
1  Ch.  22.    9  who  shall  be  a  man  of  rest ;  and  I  will 

28.    2  build  an  house  of  rest  for  the  ark  of  the 

Psa.  95.  11  that  they  should  nut  enter  into  my  rest 

132.    8  Arise,  O  Lord,  into  thy  rest ;  thou,  and 

132. 14  This(is)  myrest  forever:  here  will  I  dw. 

Isa.    11.  10  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek :  aud  his  rest 

28.  12  This  (is)  the  rest  (wherewith)  ye  may  ca. 

66.  1  untome?  aud  where (is)the place  of  niyr.'t 
Jer.  45.  3  I  fainted  in  my  sighing,  and  I  find  no  re. 
Mic.  2. 10  for  this  (is)  not  (your)  rest ;  because  it  is 
Zech.  9.    1  Damascus  (shall  be)  the  rest  thereof:  when 

Q.To  be  over  and  above,  in;  yathar. 

1  Sa  13  15  and  the  rest  we  have  utterly  destroyed 
7. Pest,  yj")0  margoa. 

Jer.    6. 16  walk  therein,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  for 

8. Rest,  nia  noach. 

Esth.  9.  16  had  rest  from  their  enemies,  and  slew  of 
9. A  coming  dmvn,  settling,  nru  nachath. 

Job    17  16  when  (our)  rest  together  (is)  in  the  dust 

Prov29     9  whether  he  rage  or  laugh,  (there  is)  no  r. 

Eccl.  6.    5  this  hath  more  rest  than  the  other 

Isa.   30.  15  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved 
10. Rest,  intermission,  n:is pugah. 

Lam.  2.  18  give  thyself  no  rest ;  let  not  the  apple  of 
11. Remaining  one,  l*$f>  sarid. 

Josh.  10.  20  rest  (which)  remained  of  them  entered  in. 

12.  Cessation,  sabbath,  pnatr  shahbathon. 

Exodi6.  23  Tomorrow  (is)the  restof  the  bolysabbath 
31.  15  but  in  the  seventh  (is)  the  sabbath  of  rest 
35.    2  sabbath  of  rest  to  the  LoKD  :  whosoever 

Lev.  16  31  sabbath  of  rest  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  af. 
23.  3  but  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  r. 
23.  32  unto  you  a  sabbath  of  rest,  and  ye  shall 

25.  4  the  seventh  year  shall  be  a  sabbath  of  rest 
25.    5  (for)  it  is  a  year  of  rest  unto  the  land 


REST 


811 


RESTORE 


l^Compleleness,  peace,  ciSr  shalom. 

Psa.  38.    3  neither  (is  there  any)  rest  in  my  bones  b. 

14.  To  be  left,  remain,  *iNtf  shaar,  2. 

Lev.    5.    9  rest  of  the  blood  shall  be  wrung  out  at 
Zeeh.11.    9  let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  an. 

Id.Remnant,  rest,  in^  shear. 

1  Ch.11.   8  and  Joab  repaired  the  rest  of  the  city 

16.  41  rest  that  were  chosen,  who  were  expressed 

2  Ch.  9  29  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon,  first 

24.  14  they  brought  the  rest  of  the  money  before 
Ezra  4.  3  rest  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel 
4.  7  rest  of  their  companions,  unto  Artaxerxes 
4.  9  and  the  rest  of  their  companions ;  the  D. 
4. 10  rest  of  the  nations,  .and  the  rest  (that  are) 
4.  17  rest  of  their  companions.. and.. the  rest 

6.  16  the  rest  of  the  children  of  the  captivity 

7.  18  to  do  with  the  rest  of  the  silver  and  the 
Neh.  10.  28  rest  of  the  people,  the  priests,  the  Levites 

11.  1  the  rest  of  the  people  also  cast  lots,  t-obr. 
Esth.  9.  12  what  have  they  done  in  the  rest  of  the  ki. 
Isa.  10.  19  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  his  forest  shall  be 
Dan.   218  should  not  perish  with  the  rest  of  the  wise 

7.  12  As  concerning  the  rest  of  the  beasts,  they 

16. Remnant,  residue,  rH*;?  sheerith. 

1  Ch.  4.43  they  smote  the  rest  of  the  Amalekites  that 

17.  38  all  the  rest  also  of  Israel  (were)  of  one  h. 
JSeh.   7.  72  (that)  which  the  rest  of  the  people  gave 

17.-4  ceasing  again,  resting  up,  avd-rravats  anapa. 
Matt  11.  29,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls 

12.  43  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking  rest 
Luke  11  24  walketh  through  dry  places,  seekingrest 
Rev.  14  11  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,  who  w. 

18.  A  sending  up  or  back,  ai>stri$  anesis. 

2  Co.   2.  13  Ihadnorest  in  my  spirit,  because  I  found 

7  5  our  flesh  had  no  rest,  but  we  weretroub. 
2  Th.  1     7  And  to  you  who  are  troubled  rest  with  us 

19. Peace,  concord,  Eiprjvr}  eirene. 

Acts   9  31  Then  had  the  churches  rest  throughout 

20.  Remaining  or  left  upon  or  over,  eViAonros  epil. 
1  Pe.  4.    2  That  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of 

21.  .,4  place  of  resting  downward-travels  katapausis. 
Acts  7  49  what  house . .  what  (is)  the  place  of  my  r. 
Heb    3  11  I  sware.  .They  shall  not  enter  into  my  r. 

3  18  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest 
4.    1  beingleft(us)of  entering  into  his  rest,  any 

4  3  into  rest.  .If  they  shall  enter  into  my  rest 
4.  5  (place)asain,  If  they  shall  enterintomyr. 
4.  10  For  he  that  is  entered  into  his  rest,  he  also 

4  ti  labour  therefore  to  enter  iuto  that  rest 

22.  Remaining,  left,  \0nr6s  loipos. 

!Uatt27.  49  The  rest  said..  Let  be,  let  us  see  whether 
Luke  12  26  least,  why  take  ye  thought  for  the  rest? 

24    9  told  all  these  things  unto,  .all  the  rest 
Acts    7.  37  said  unto  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the  ap. 

5  13  of  the  rest  durst  no  ruaxi  join  himself  to 
27  44  And  the  rest,- some  on  boards,  and  some 

Rom  11.  7  election  hath  obtained  it,  and  the  rest  w. 
1  Co    7.  12  But  to  the  rest  speak  I,  not  the  Lord :  If 

31  34  And  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  c. 

Rev.    2.  24  But  uuto  you  I  say,  and  unto  the  rest  in 

9.  20  rest  of  the  men,  which  were  not  killed  by 

20.   5  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again 

23.-4  sabbath  rest,  craft  Bar  x&tx6s  sabbatismos. 
Heb.   4.    9  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the 

REST,  to  — 

\.To  lay  hold,  lnx  achaz. 

1  Ki.   6.  10  they  rested  on  the  house  with  timber  of 

2.  To  be  still,  keep  silence,  Don  damam. 

Job  30. 27  My  bowels  boiled,  and  rested  not;  thed. 
Psa.  37.    7  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for 

3.  To  cease,  forbear,  leave  off,   ?y)  chadal. 

Job  14.   6  Turn  from  him,  that  he  may  rest,  till  he 

4.  To  be  in  pain,  stay,  V'n,  Vm  chul,  chil. 

2  Sa.  3  29  Let  it  rest  on  the  head  of  Joab    and  on  all 

5.  To  hold  one's  peace,  keep  silent,  itnn  charash,  5. 

Zeph.  3.  17  he  will  rest  in  his  love ;  he  will  joy  over 
6. Rest,  n'u  noach. 

Esth.  9.  17  fourteenth  day  of  the  same  rested  they 
9.  18  the  fifteenth  (day)  of  the  same  they  rested 

7.  To  be  at  rest,  nn  nuach. 

Gen.  8.  4  And  the  ark  rested  in  the  seventh  month 
Exodio.  14  locusts,  .rested  in  all  the  coasts  of  Egypt 

20. 11  rested  the  seventh  day :  wherefore  the 

23. 12  that  thine  ox  and  thine  ass  may  rest,  and 
Numio.  36  when  it  rested,  he  said,  Return,  0  Lord 

11.  25  when  the  spirit  rested  upon  them,  they 
11. 26  spirit  rested  upon  them  ;  and  they  (were) 
Deut.5  14  maid  servant  may  rest  as  well  as  thou 
Josh.  3. 13  sole3  of  the  feet,  .shall  rest  in  the  waters 
2  Sa.  21.  10  suffered  neither  the  birds  of  the  air  to  r. 
2  Ki.  2.  15  The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha 
Esth.  9.  22  As  the  days  wherein  the  Jews  rested  from 
Psa.  125.   3  For  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest 
Prov  14.  33  Wisdom  resteth  in  the  heart  of  him  that 
Eccl.  7.    9  for  anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools 
Isa.     7.  i9  shall  rest  all  of  them  in  the  desolate  val 
11.    2  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  him,  the 
25.  10  shall  the  hand  of  the  LoRDrest.andMoab 
57.    2  they  shall  rest  in  their  beds,  (each  one) 
Ban.  12.  13  for  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot 
Hah.  3. 16  that  I  might  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble 


8.  To  rest,  be  quiet,  J?3"i  raga,  2. 

J  er.  47.   6  Put  up  thyself  into  thy  scabbard,  rest,  and 

9.  To  (cause  to)  rest,  give  quietness,  $U~|  raga,  5. 
Tsa.    34  14  screech  owl  alsoshall  rest  there  and  find 

10.  To  be  at  ease,  quiet,  rest,  ]X'<?  shaan,  Sa. 

Job     3  18  prisoners  rest  together  ;  they  hear  notthe 

11. To  cease,  rest,  keep  sabbath,  r\3$  shabath. 

Gen.  g.    2  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  w. 

2.  3  because  that  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all 
Exodi6. 30  So  the  people  rested  on  the  seventh  day 

23.  12  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest ;  that 
31.  17  seventh  day  he  rested,  aud  was  refreshed 
34.  21  buton  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest :  in 
34.  21  earing  time  and  in  harvest  thou  shalt  rest 
Lev.  26.  34  then  shall  the  land  rest,  and  enjoy  her  sa. 
26.  35  it  shall  rest;  because  it  did  not  rest  in  yo. 

12.  To  tabernacle,  \y&  shaken. 

JSuniio.  12  cloud  rested  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 
Psa.  16.   9  rejoiceth :  my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope 
55.    6  (for  then)  I  would  fly  away,  and  be  at  rest 

13.  To  lean  or  rely  on,  jys'  shaan,  2. 

2  Ch.14. 11  help  us,  0  Lord  our  God ;  for  we  rest  on 
Job  24.  23  whereon  he  resteth,  yet  his  eyes  (are)  up. 

14.ro  be  quiet,  have  rest,  £p^  shaqat. 

Josh.n.  23  their  tribes.  And  the  land  rested  from 
Isa.   62.    1  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  rest 

15.  To  cause  quiet  or  rest,  £&?  shaqat,  5. 

Isa.   57.  20  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest,  whose 

16.  To  have  a  resting  again,  or  back,  exw  cxud-Kavcnv. 
Rev.    4.    8  and  they  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying 

17. To  rest  again  or  back,  t\v air avoncu  anapauomai. 
Mark  6.  3 1  rest  a  while  :  for  there  were  many  coming 
1  Pe.  4.  14  for  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth 
Rev.   6.  1 1  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little  season 

14.  13  that  [they  may  rest]  from  their  labours 

IS.  To  keep  quiet,  rest,  Tjcrvxdfa  hesuchazo. 

Luke23-  56  rested  the  sabbath  day,  according  to  the 

19.  To  rest  down  or  thoroughly,  cease,  KarairahOfxai. 

Heb.    4.    4  G  od  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from  all  his 
20.7*0  tabernacle  down  or  thoroughly,  Karao-KVPOto. 

Acts    2.  26  moreover  also  my  flesh  shall  rest^in  hope 
REST,  to  cause,  give,  have,  let,  make,  take  — 
I.  Rest,  place  of  rest,  nijD  manoach. 

1  Ch.  6.  31  David  set  over.,  after  that  the  arkhad  rest 
2.To  be  at  or  give  rest,  nu  nuach,  ru;  yanach,  5- 

Josh.21. 44  Lord  gave  them  rest  round  about,  accor. 

2  Ch.  14.    7  and  he  hath  given  us  rest  on  every  side 

15.  15  and  the  Lord  gave  them  rest  round  about 
20.  30  quiet ;  for  his  God  gave  him  rest  round 

Neh.  9.  28  after  they  had  rest,  they  did  evil  again 
Isa.   23.  12  Chittim ;  there  also  shalt  thou  have  no  r. 

3.  To  cause  to  rest,  nu  nuach,  5. 

Exod33-  14  shall  go  (with  thee),  andTv.il!  give  thee  r. 

Deut.  3.  20  Until  the  LORD  have  given  rest  uutoyour 

12.  10  giveth  you  rest  from  all  your  enemies  ro. 

25. 19  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee  rest  from 

Josh.  1.  13  Lord  your  God  hath  given  you  rest,  and 

1. 15  the  Lord  have  given  your  brethren  rest 

22.  4  now  the  Lord  your  God  hath  given  rest 

23.  1  after  that  the  Lord  had  given  rest  unto 
2  Sa.   7.    1  Lord  had  given  him  rest  round  about  from 

7. 11  caused  thee  to  rest  fromall  thine  enemies 
1  Ki.   5.    4  my  God  hath  given  me  rest  or.  every  side 

1  Ch.22.    9  give  him  rest  from  all  his  enemies  round 

22.  18  hath  he  (not)  given  you  rest  on  every  side? 

23.  25  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath  given  rest  unto 

2  Ch.14.  6  And.  .because  the  Lord  had  given  him  r. 
Prov  29.  17  Correct  thy  son,  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest 
Isa.   14.    3  Lord  shall  give-thee  rest  from  thy  sorrow 

28.  12  ye  may  cause  the  weary  to  rest ;  and  this 

63.  14  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  caused  him  to  rest 

Eze.     ■;.  13  and  I  will  cause  my  fury  to  restuponthem 

16.  42  will  I  make  my  fury  toward  thee  to  rest 
21  17  cause  my  fury  to  rest :  I  the  Lord  have 

24.  13  till  I  have  caused  my  fury  to  rest  upon 
44.  30  may  cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  thine 

4.7*0  be  caused  to  rest,  have  rest,  n;3  nuach,  6. 

Lam.   5     5  persecution :  we  labour,  (and)  have  no  rest 
5.7*0  cause  to  lie  down,  i'3"J  robots,  5. 

Song  1     7  where  thou  niakest  (thy  flock)  to  rest  at 
6.7*0  (cause  to)  rest,  give  quietness,  j?n  raga,  5. 

Isa.    51.    4  make  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light  of 

Jer.  3T.    2  Israel,  when  I  went  to  cause  him  to  rest 
50.  34  that  he  may  give  rest  to  the  laud,  and  di. 
7.7*0  cause  to  cease  or  rest,  ray'  shabath,  5. 

Exod.  5.    5  and  ye  make  them  rest  from  their  burdens 
8.7*0  release,  let  go,  tO'^  shamat. 

Exod23- 11  But  the  seventh  (year)  thou  shalt  let  it  r. 

9.  To  be  quiet,  have  rest,  cptJ>  shaqat. 
Josh. 14  15  And  the  land  had  rest  from  war 
Judg.  3. 11  land  had  rest  forty  years.  And  Othniel 

3.  30  And  the  land  had  rest  fourscore  years 
5.  31  And  the  land  had  rest  forty  years 

2  Ch.14.  6  for  the  land  had  rest,  and  he  had  no  war 
Job  3.  26  I  was  not  in  safety,  neither  had  I  rest.  n. 
Isa.  18.   4  will  take  my  rest,  and  I  will  consider  in 

10.  To  cause  quiet  or  rest,  Bp¥>  shaqat,  5. 

Psa.  94. 13  That  thou  mayest  give  him  rest  from  the 


\l.To  rest  again  or  back,  avair  avaf, -o/xat. 

Matt  11.  2S  Come  unto  me.  .and  I  will  give  you  rest 

26.  45  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  (your)  rest :  beh. 
Marki4  41  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  (your)  rest:  it  is 

12.TorestdoicnorthM'oiighly,Ka.'ra.ira.votiaikatapau. 

Heb.  4.    8  For  if  Jesus  had  given  them  rest,  then 
REST,  to  beat  or  in  — 

1.  7*o  be  at  rest,  r_P3  nuach. 

Job     3  13  should  have  slept:  then  had  I  been  at  r. 

3.  17  troubling;  and  there  the  weary  be  at  rest 

Isa.    14.    7  whole  earth  is  at  rest,  (and)  is  quiet :  they 

2.7*0  be  at  rest,  thy  shelah. 

Dan    4.   4  Nebuchadnezzar  was  at  rest  in  mine  house 

3.7*0  be  quiet,  have  rest,  £p'^;  shaqat. 

Ruth  3  18  for  the  man  will  not  be  in  rest  until  he 
Jer.  30.  10  shall  be  iu  rest,  and  be  quiet,  and  noDe 

46.  27  Jacob  shall  return,  and  be  in  rest  and  at 
Zech.  1   11  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at  rest 
Eze.  38-  1 1  1  will  go  to  them  that  are  at  rest,  that 

REST  in,  on,  or  upon,  to  — 

1.7*o  leave  or  rely  on,  |jJ»  shaan,  2. 

Job  24  23  whereon  he  resteth.  yet  his  eyes  (are)  upon 

2.7*o  rest  back  upon,  eTra.vcnravofj.ai  e2)anapauo?nai. 
Lukeio.    6  your  peace  shall  rest  upon  it :  if  not,  it 
Rom.  2.  17  restest  in  the  law,  and  makest  thy  boast 

3.7*0  tabernacle  on,  i-maK7)v6w  episkenoo. 

2  Co. 12.   9  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon 
REST,  taking  of  — 
A  lying  down  to  sleep,  Kutfxijcrts  koimesis. 

Johuu.  13  that  he  had  spoken  of  taking  of  rest  in  si. 

REST  content,  to  — 

To  be  willing,  inclined,  nax  abah. 

Prov.  6.  35  neither  will  he  rest  content,  though  thou 
REST  in  a  tent,  to  — 
To  encamp,  pitch,  nin  chanah. 

Nurn  9. 18  as  long.. they  rested  in  their  tents 

9  23  rested  iu  their  tents,  and  at  the  comman. 

REST  selves,  to  — 

1  To  lay  or  support  self  be  supported,  tied  sa?nak,2. 
2  Ch  32.    8  people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words 

2.  7*o  bear  or  rely  on,  ji'iy  shaan,  2, 

Gen.    18.   4  wash  yourfeet  and  rest  yourselves  under 
REST,  resting  place,  place  of  — 
l.Rest,  place  of  rest,  nup  manoach. 

Isa.    34  14  there,  and.  find  for  herself  a  place  of  rest 

2.  Rest,  place  of  rest,  nn^p  menuchah. 

ISuniio  33  to  search  out  a  resting  place  for  them 
Isa.   32.  18  sure  dwellings,  and  in  quiet  resting  places 

3.  Rest,  nil  noach. 

2  Ch.  6  41  arise,  .into  thy  resting  place,  thou,  and 
4. Lying  or  crouching  down,  p31  rebels. 

Prov. 24.  15  Lay  not  wait,  .spoil  not  his  resting  place 

Jer.    50    6  they  have  forgotten  their  resting  place 
RESTITUTION  — 
1. Exchange,  restitution,  nyon  temurah. 

Job    20.  i3  according  to  (his)  substance  (shall)  the  r 

2.  A  putting  down  again,rest07-ation,airoHaTd(TTacrt<:. 

Acts    3.  21  until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things 
RESTITUTION,  to  make  — 
To  make  whole,  complete,  uiy  shalam,  3. 

Exod22.    3  (for)  he  should  make  full  restitution  :  if 

27.  5  aud  of  the  best,  .shall  he  make  restitution 
22.  6  kindled  the  fire  shall  surely  make  restit. 
■22.  12  shall  make  restitution  unto  the  owner  th, 

RESTORE  (again),  to  life,  to  — 

1.7*0  make  alive,  n;n  chayah,  5. 

2  Ki.  8.  1,5  woman,  whose  son  he  had  restored  to  1. 
8.  5  how  he  had  restored  a  dead  body  to  life 
8     <j  her  son,  whom  Elisha  restored  to  life 

2.  To  give,  jru  nathan. 

2  Ch.  8.  2  That  the  cities  which  Huram  had  restored 
3.7*o  cause  to  go  up,  rrjy  alah,  5. 

Jer.  30. 17  For  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee,  and  I 
4.7*o  turn  back,  3>v  shub,  3a. 

Psa.  23.  3  He  restoreth  my  soul :  he  leadeth  me  in 
5.7b  cause  to  turn  back,  2'w  shub,  5. 

Gen.  20.  7  restore  the  man  (his)  wife . .  if  thou  restore 
20.  14  gave  (them)  uuto  Abraham,  and  restored 
40.  13  restore  thee  unto  thy  place  :  and  thou  s. 

40.  21  restored  the  chief  butler  unto  his  butler. 

41.  13  me  he  restored  unto  mine  office,  and  him 

42.  25  to  restore  everyman'smoneyinto  his  sack 
Lev.    6.    4  restore  that  which  he  took  violently  away 

25.  27  restore  the  overplusunto  the  man  to  wh. 

25  28  But  if  he  be  not  ableto  restore(it)  to  him 

Num.35.  25  shall  restore  him  to  the  city  of  his  refuge 

Deut.22.   2  and  thou  shalt  restore  it  to  him  again 

Judgn.  13  therefore  restore  those  (lands)  again  pea. 

17.    3  when  he  had  restored  the  eleven  hundred 

17.    3  now  therefore  I  will  restore  it  unto  thee 

17.    4  Yet  he  restored  the  money  unto  his  mot. 

1  Sa.  12.    3  whose  ox  have  I  taken.. I  will  restore  it 

2  Sa.   g.    7  will  restore  thee  all  the  land  of  Saul  thy 

16.    3  house  of  Israel  restore  me  the  kingdom 

1  Ki.  20.  34  cities  which  my  father  took.  .1  will  rest. 

2  Ki.   8.   6 Restore  all  that  (was)  hers,  and  all  the 


RESTORED 


812 


RETURN 


2KL  14.  22  He  built  Elath,  and  restored  it  to  Judah 

14.  25  He  restored  the  coast  of  Israel  from  the 
2  Ch.26.    2  He  built  Eloth,  and  restored  it  to  Judah 
Neh.   5. 11  Restore,  I  pray  you,  to  them,  even  this 
5. 12  We  will  restore  (them),  and  will  require 
Job    20.  10  and  his  hands  shall  restore  their  goods 

20.  18  That  which  he  laboured  for  shall  he  res. 
Psa.  51.  12  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation 

69.  4  then  I  restored  (that)  which  I  took  not  a. 
Csa.     1.  26  I  will  restore  thy  judges  a3  atthe  first,  and 

42.  22  they  are.  .for  a  spoil,  and  none  saith,  Re. 

49.  6  to  restore  the  preserved  of  Israel  ;  I  will 
Jer.  27.  22  will  I  bring  them  up,  and  restore  them  to 
E^e.  18.    7  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge 

18.  12  hath  not  restored  the  pledge,  and  hath  li. 

33.  15  (If)  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge  giveag. 
Dan.  9.  25  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build  Je. 

6.  To  make  whole,  complete,  ahy  shalam,  3. 

Exod22.    1  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ox,  and 
22.    4  ox,  or  ass,  or  sheep,  he  shall  restore  dou. 
Lev.    6.    5  he  shall  even  restore  it  in  the  principal 

24.  21  that  killeth  a  beast,  he  shall  restore  it :  and 
2  Sa.12.  6  shall  restore  the  lamb  fourfold,  because  he 
Prov.  6.  31  (if)  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sevenfold 
Isa.  57.  18  restore  comforts  unto  him,  and  to  his  m. 
Joel    2.  25  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  thelo. 

7.  To  give  away  or  back,  ottoS/Sw^i  apodidomi. 
Lukeig.  8  if  I  have  taken  any  thing..  I  restore  (him) 

S.  To  place  down  again,  restore,  airoKa6taT7}fj.i. 
Matti  7.  1 1  Elias  truly  shall  first  come,  and  restore  all 
Mark  9.  12  Elias  verily  cometh-first,  and  restorethall 
Acts    1.    6  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the 

9.  To  make  thoroughly  right,  Karapri^w  katartizo. 
Gal.    6.    1  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one 

RESTORED  (again),  to  he  — 

I. To  turn  back,  return,  iw  shub. 

DeutsS.  31  shall  not  be  restored  to  thee  :  thy  sheep 

1  Sa.    7.  14  cities.. were  restored  to  Israel,  from  Ek. 

1  Ki.13.    6  that  my  hand  may  be  restored  me  again 

13.    6  king's  hand  was  restored  him  again,  and 

2.  To  be  caused  to  turn  back,  3W!  shub,  6. 

Gen.  42.  28  My  money  is  restored  ;  and,  lo,  (it  is)  even 

3.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  aw  tub,  5. 

Ezra   6.    5  be  restored,  and  brought  again  unto  the 

4.  To  place  down  again,  restore,  inroKaOiarrjfXi. 
Matt  12,  13  it  was  restored  whole,  like  as  the  other 
Mark  3.    5  his  hand  was  restored  whole  as  the  other 

8.  25  was  restored,  and  saw  every  man  clearly 
Luke  6.  10  his  hand  was  restored  whole  as  the  other 
Heb.  13.  19  that  I  may  be  restored  to  you  the  sooner 

RESTORER  — 

I.  To  turn  back,  3*»  shub,  Sa. 

Isa.   58.  12  called .  .The  restorer  of  paths  to  dwell  iu 

"2.To  cause  lo  turn  back,  aia>  shub,  5. 

Ruth  4.  15  he  shall  be  unto  thee  a  restorer  of  (thy) 

RESTRAIN,  to  — 

X.To  diminish,  VI)  gara. 

Job   15.    4  castest  off  fear,  and  restrainest  prayer  be. 
15.    8  and  dost  thou  restrain  wisdom  to  thyself? 

"2.  To  gird,  "iJn  chagar. 

Psa.  76. 10  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain 
?t.To  make  dim  or  faint,  nns  kahah,  3. 

1  Sa.   3.  13  made  themselves  vile,  and  he  restrained 

4.  To  withhold,  jn?  mono. 

Eze.  31.  15  restrained  the  floods  thereof,  and  the  gr. 

5.  To  shut  up,  restrain,  "ixj;  atsar. 

Gen.  16.    2  LORD  hath  restrained  me  from  bearing:  I 
6.2*0  cause  to  rest  thoroughly,  Ka.Tairavo>  katapaud. 

Acts  14.  18  restrained  they  the  people,  that  they  had 
RESTRAINED,  to  he  — 
1.  To  force  self,  be  restrained,  psx  aphaq,  7. 

Isa.   63.  15  mercies  toward  me?  are  they  restrained? 
'2.To  be  fenced  of,  1^3  batsar,  2. 

Gen.  11.    6  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  them 
.'■.To  he  restrained,  k^|  kala,  2. 

Exod36.    6  So  the  people  were  restrained  from  bring. 

Gen.   8.    2  and  the  rain  from  heaven  was  restrained 

RESTRAINT  — 

Restraint,  hindrance,  "uJffiJ?  maatsor. 

1  Sa.  14.   6  no  restraint  to  tho  Lord  to  save  by  many 

RESURRECTION  — 

\.A  standing  or  rising  up,  avderrao-ts  a?iastasis. 

Matt22.  23  which  say  that  there  is  no  resurrection 

22.  28  in  the  resurrection  whose  wife  shall  she 

22.  30  For  in  the  resurrection  they  neither  marry 

22.  31  as  touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 

Marki2.  18  which  say  there  is  no  resurrection;  and 

12.23  in  the  resurrection  therefore,  when  they 

Luke  1 4.  14  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just 

20.  27  which  deny  that  there  is  any  resurrection 

20.  33  in  the  resurrection  whose  wife  of  them  is 

20.  35  resurrection  from  the  dead,  neither  marry 

20.  36  being  the  children  of  the  resurrection 

John  5.  29  resurrection  of  life .  .resurrection  of  dam. 

11.  24  rise  again  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last 

11. 25  Jesus  said  unto  her,  I  am  the  resurrection 

Acts    1.  22  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resurrection 

2.  31  spake  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that 

4-   2  preached  through  Jesus  the  resurrection 


Acts  4.  33  gave  the  apostles  witness  of  the  resurrec. 
17.  18  because  he  preached  unto  them.,  the  res. 
17.  32  when  they  heard  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
23.    6  of  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead 

23.  8  the  Sadducees  say  that  there  is  no  resur. 

24.  15  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead 
24.  21  Touching  the  resurrection  of.the  dead  I  am 

Rom.  i.  4  declared . .  by  the  resurrection  from  the  tl. 
6.    5  be  also  (in  the  likeness)  of  (his)  resurrec. 

1  Co.  15. 12  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead? 

15. 13  if  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead 
15.  21  by  man . .  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
15.  42  So  also  (is)  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
Phil.   3.  10  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  and  the  f. 

2  Ti.    2.  18  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  aire. 
Heb.   6.    2  of  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  of  eter. 

11.  35  that  they  might  obtain  a  better  resurrec. 

1  Pe.    1.    3  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from 

3.21  save  us.  .by the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Ch. 

Rev.  20.    5  were  finished.  This  (is)  the  first  resurrec. 

20.    6  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection 

2. A  raising,  eyepcts  egersis. 

Matt  27.  53  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrec, 

3. .4  standing  up  out  of,  QavaaraiTis  exanastasis. 

Phil.    3.  11  I  might  attain  unto  the  resurrection  of 
RETAIN,  to  — 
I.  To  take  fast  hold,  piri  chazaq,  5. 

Judg.  7.    8  and  retained  those  three  hundred  men 
19.    4  the  damsel's  father,  retained  him ;  and 

Job     2.    9  Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integrity? 

Mic.    7.  18  he  retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever,  beca. 

2.7b  restrain,  kSs  kala. 

Eccl.  8.    8  no  man  that  hath  power.. to  retain  the 

3.  To  shut  up,  restrain,  "lay  atsar. 

Dan.  10.    8  was  left  alone.,  and  I  retained  no  strength 

10.  16  0  my  lord.. I  have  retained  no  strength 

11.  6  she  shall  not  retain  the  powerof  the  arm 

4.  To  hold  up,  Tpn  tamak. 

Prov.  3. 18  and  happy  (is  every  one)  that  retaineth 
4.  4  Let  thine  heart  retain  my  words  :  keep 
11. 16  retaineth  honour;  andstrong(men)retain 

5.  To  have  or  hold,  ex&>  echo. 

Rom.  1.  28  even  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in 

6.  To  hold  down  or  fast,  /caTe'xw  Hat  echo. 

Phm.       13  Whom  I  would  have  retained  with  me,that 

7.  To  lay  fast  hold  of,  Kparew  krateo. 

Johii2o.  23  whose  soever,  .ye  retain, they  are  retained 
RETIRE,  to  — 
1.7*0  turn,  overturn,  T]5n  haphak. 

Judg2o.  39  when  the  men  of  Israel  retired  in  the  ba. 
2.7*0  cause  to  Jiaste,  ny  uz,  5. 

Jer.     4.    6  retire,  stay  not ;  for  I  will  bring  evil  from 
3.  To  scatter,  ps  puts. 

2  Sa.  20.  22  they  retired  from  the  city,  every  man  to 
•L.To  turn  back,  33P  shub. 

2  Sa.  11.  15  retire  ye  from  him,  that  he  may  be  smit. 
RETURN  — 
l.To  turn  back,  return,  iw  shub. 

Gen.  14. 17  after  his  return  from  the  slaughter  of  C. 
2. A  return,  nyvn  teshubah. 

1  Sa.    7.  17  And  his  return  (was)  to  Ramah  ;  for  there 

1  Ki.  20.  22  at  the  return  of  the  year  the  king  of  Syria 

20.  26  it  came  to  pass  at  the  return  of  the  year 

RETURN  (back  or  again),  to  — 

1.  To  sit,  or  return,  3ie>  shub  or  3B>;  yashdb. 

Eze.  35.    9  thy  cities  shall  not  return;  and  ye  shall 

2.  To  be  turned  round  about,  compassed, 333  $abab,2. 

2  Sa.  14.  24  Absalom  returned  to  his  own  house,  and 
x  Ch.16.  43  and  David  returned  to  bless  his  house 

3.  To  face,  front,  look,  fUSi  panah. 

Josh. 22.   4  return  ye,  and  get  you  unto  your  tents 

4.  To  turn  back,  return,  3*b>  shub. 

Gen.    3.  19  till  thou  return  unto  the  ground ;  for  out 

3.  19  thou  (art),  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  ret. 
8.   3  the  waters  returned  from  off  the  earth  co. 
8.   9  she  returned  unto  him  into  the  ark,  for 
8.  12  which  returned  not  again  unto  him  any 

14.  7  And  they  returned,  and  came  to  En-mis. 
16.  9  Return  to  thy  mistress,  and  submit  thy. 
18.  10  I  will  certainly  return  unto  thee  accord. 
18.  14  I  will  return  unto  thee,  according  to  the 
18.  33  and  Abraham  returned  unto  his  place 
2i.  32  returned  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 
22.  19  Abraham  returned  unto  his  young  men 
31.  3  Return  unto  the  land  of  thy  fathers,  and 
31.  13  and  return  unto  the  land  of  thy  kindred 

31.  55  departed,  and  returned  unto  his  place 

32.  6  the  messengers  returned  to  Jacob,  saying 

32.  9  Return  unto  thy  country,  and  to  thy  kin. 

33.  16  Esau  returned  that  day  on  his  way  unto 
37.  29  Reuben  returned  unto  the  pit;  and.beho. 

37.  30  he  returned  unto  his  brethren,  and  said 

38.  22  he  returned  to  Judah,  and  said,  I  cannot 
42.  24  returned  to  them  again,  and  communed 
43. 10  now  we  had  returned  this  second  time 
44.  13  laded  every  man  his  ass,  and  returned  to 
50. 14  Joseph  returned  into  Egypt,  he,  and  his 

Exod.  4.  18  returned  to  Jethro  his  father  in  law,  and 

4.  18  return  unto  my  brethren  which  (are)  in  E. 
4.  20  Moses,  .he  returned  to  the  land  of  Egypt 


Exod.  4.  19  return  into  Egypt :  for  all  the  men  are 

4. 21  When  thou  goest  to  return  into  Egypt,  see 

5.  22  Moses  returned  unto  the  Lord,  and  said 

13.  17  peradventure  the  people  .  .return  to  Egypt 

14.  27  the  sea  returned  to  his  strength  when 
14.  23  the  waters  returned,  and  covered  the  ch. 
32.  31  Moses  returned  unto  the  Lord,  and  said 

34.  31  all  the  rulers  of  the  congregation  returned 
Lev.  25.  io,  13  ye  shall  return  every  man  unto  his  p. 

25.  10  ye  shall  return  every  man  unto  his  family 
25.  27  the  man.  .that  he  may  return  unto  his  p. 
25.  28  and  he  shall  return  unto  his  possession 
25.  41  shall  return  unto  his  own  family,  and 
25.  41  and  unto  the  possession,  .shall  he  return 
27.  24  shall  return  unto  him  of  whom  it  was 
Num  10.  36  Return,  o  Lord,  unto  themany  thousands 

13.  25  they  returned  from  searching  of  the  land 

14.  3  Were  it  not  better  for  us  to  return  into  E. 
14.  4  Let  us  make  a  captain,  and  let  us  return 
14.  36  who  returned,  and  made  all  thecongreg. 

16.  50  Aaron  returned  unto  Mosesunto  the  door 
23.    5  Return  unto  Balak,  and  thus  thou  shalt 

23.  6  he  returned  unto  him,  and,  lo,  he  stood 

24.  25  returned  to  his  place :  and  Balak  also 
32. 18  We  will  not  return  unto  our  houses,  until 
32.  22  ye  shall  return,  and  be  guiltless  before  the 

35.  28  the  slayer  shall  return  into  the  land  of  his 
Deut.  1.  45  ye  returned  and  wept  before  the  Lord;  but 

3.  20  shall  ye  return  every  man  unto  his  posse. 

17.  16  Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that 
20.  s,  6,  7,  8  let  him  go  and  return  to  his  house 
30.  2  And  shalt  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
30.  3  will  return  and  gather  thee  from  all  the 
30.    8  thou  shalt  return,  and  obey  the  voice  of 

Josh.  1.  15  ye  shall  return  unto  the  land  of  your 

2.  23  So  the  two  men  returned,  and  descended 

4.  18  the  waters  of  Jordan  returned  unto  their 

6.  14  they  compassed  the  city  once,  and  return. 

7.  3  they  returned  to  Joshua,  and  said  unto 

8.  24  the  Israelites  returned  unto  Ai,  and  smote 
10.  15,  38,  43  Joshua  returned,  and  all  Israel  wi. 

10.  21  the  people  returned  tothecamp  to  Joshua 

20.  6  then  shall  the  slayerreturn,  and  come  un. 
22.  8  Return  with  much  riches  unto  your  tents 
22.  9  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  returned,  and 
22.  32  returned  from  the  children  of  Reuben,  and 

Judg.  2. 19  theyreturned,  and  corrupted  (themselves) 
7.  3  let  him  return  and  depart  early  from  mo. 
7.    3  there  returned  of  the  people  twenty  and 

7.  15  returned  into  the  host  of  Israel,  and  said 

8.  13  Gideon  thesonof  Joashreturnedfromba. 

11.  31  I  return  in  peace  from  the  children  of 
xi.  39  she  returned  unto  her  father,  who  did  w. 

14.  8  after  a  time  he  returned  to  take  her,  and 

21.  23  and  returned  unto  their  inheritance,  and 
Ruth  1.   6  that  she  might  return  from  the  country  of 

1.  7  they  went  on  their  way  to  return  unto  the 
1.  8  Go, return  each  to  her  mother's  house:  the 
1.  10  we  will  return  with  thee  unto  thy  people 
1.  15  Behold,  .return  thou  after  thy  sister  in  1. 
1.  16  (or)  to  return  from  following  after  thee 
1.  22  Naomi  returned,  and  Ruth  the  Moabitess 

1.  22  which  returned  out  of  the  country  of  M. 

1  Sa.    1.  19  returned,  and  came  to  their  house  to  R. 

6.  16  the  five  lords.,  returned  to  Ekron  the  same 

7.  3  If  ye  do  return  unto  the  LORD  with  all 

9.  5  Come,  and  let  us  return  ;  lest  my  father 
15. 26  I  will  not  return  with  thee :  for  thou  hast 
17.  15  David  went  and  returned  from  Saul  to  fe. 
17.  53  Israel  returned  from  chasing  after  the  Ph. 
17.  57  as  David  returned  from  the  slaughter  of 
23.  28  Saul  returned  from  pursuing  after  David 
26.  21  return,  my  son  David  ;  for  I  will  no  more 

26.  25  David  went  on  his  way,  and  Saul  returned 

27.  9  And  David.,  returned,  and  came  to  Achish 
29.  7  return,  and  go  in  peace,  thatthoudisplea. 
29.  11  return  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 

2  Sa.    1.  22  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  empty 

2.  26  ere  thou  bid  the  people  return  from  foil 
2.  30  And  Joab  returned  from  following Abner 
3. 16  said  Abner..Go,  return.  And  he  returned 
6.  20  Then  David  returned  to  bless hishouseh. 

8.  13  he  returned  from  smiting  of  the  Syrians 
10.  5  said,  Tarry  at  Jericho,  and  (then)  return 
10.  14  Joab  returned  fmrn  the  children  of  Am. 
ii.  4  with  her.. and  she  returned  unto  her  ho. 
12  23  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not  return 

12.  31  all  the  people  returned  unto  Jerusalem 

15.  19  return  to  thy  place,  and  abide  with  the 
15.  20  return  thou,  and  take  back  thy  brethren 
15  27  return  iuto  the  city  in  peace,  and  your 

15.  34  if  thou  return  to  the  city,  and  say  unto 

16.  8  The  Lord  hath  returned  upon  thee  all  the 

17.  3  the  man  whom  thou  seekest(is).  .returned 

17.  20  when  they  had  sought,  .theyreturned  to 

18.  16  the  people  returned  from  pursuing  after 

19.  14  they  sent.. Return  thou,  and  all  thy  ser. 
19.  15  So  the  king  returned,  and  came  to  Jordan 
19.  39  Barzillai..  he  returned  untohis  own  place 
20  22  Joab  returned  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  ki. 
23.  10  the  people  returned  after  him  only  to  sp. 

1  Ki.  2  33  Their  blood  shall  therefore  return  upon 
8.  48  And  (so)  return  unto  thee  with  all  their 
12.  24  return  every  man  to  his  house  ;  for  this 
12.  24  and  returned  to  depart,  according  to  the 

12.  26  Now  shall  the  kingdom  return  to  the  ho. 

13.  10  returned  not  by  the  way  that  he  came  to 
13.  16  I  may  not  return  with  thee,  nor  go  in  w. 
13.  33  Jeroboam  returned  not  from  his  evil  way 
19.  15  return  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness  of 
io.  21  he  returned  back  from  him,  and  took  a 
22.17  *et  them  return  every  man  to  his  house 


RETURN 


813 


REUBEN 


i  Ki.  22.  28  It"  thou  return  at  all  in  peace,  the  Lord 
2E1.    2.  25  and  from  thence  lie  returned  to  Samaria 

3.  27  they  departed  from  him,  and  returned  to 
'     4.  35  he  returned,  and  walked  in  the  house  to 

5.  15  he  returned  to  the  man  of  God,  he  aud 

7.  15  the  messengers  returned,  and  told  the  k. 

8.  3  the  woman  returned  out  of  the  land  of 

14.  14  took  all  the  gold,  .and  returned  to  Sama. 

18.  14  return  from  me  :  that  which  thou  puttest 

19.  7  shall  return  to  his  own  land ;  and  I  will 
19.  8  Rab-shakeh  returned,  and  found  the  king 
19.  33  by  the  same  shall  he  return,  and  shall  not 

19.  36  went  and  returned,  anddweltat  Nineveh 

20.  10  let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  deg. 

33.  20  he  slew  all  the  priests,  .and  returned  to 
r  Ch.itj.    5  said,  Tarry  at  Jericho,  .and  (then)  return 

20.    3  and  all  the  people  returned  to  Jerusalem 
2  Ch.  6.  24  shall  return  and  confess  thy  name,  and 

6.  38  If  they  return  to  thee  with  all  their  heart 

10.  2  when  Jeroboam,  .heard.  .Jeroboam  retu. 

11.  4  return  every  man  to  his  house;  for  this 
11.  4  and  returned  from  going  against  Jeroboam 
14. 15  smote  also  the  tents . .  and  returned  to  Je. 
18.  16  let  them  return.. "every  man  to  his  house 
18.  26  put.,  in  the  prison.,  until  I  return  in  peace 

18.  27  If  thou  certainly  return  in  peace,  (then) 

19.  1  the  king  of  Judah  returned  to  his  house 

19.  8  did . .  set . .  when  they  returned  to  Jerus. 

20.  27  Then  they  returned,  every  man  of  Judah 
22.  6  And  he  returned  to  be  healed  iu  Jezreel 
25. 10  and  they'returned  home  in  great  anger 
25.  24  took)  all  the  gold . .  and  returned  to  Sam. 
28. 15  brought  them  to  Jericho.. then  they  ret. 
30.   6  he  will  return  to  the  remnant  of  you  that 

30.  9  God  (is)  gracious .  .if  ye  return  unto  him 

31.  1  Israel  returned  every  man  to  his  posses. 

32.  21  he  returned  with  shame  offacetoliisown 

34.  7  And  when  he  had  broken  down. .he  retu. 

34.  9  delivered  the  money,  .and  they  returned 
Neh.   2.    6  For  how  long . .  and  when  wilt  thou  return 

2.  15  and  entered  by  the  gate . .  and  (so)  return. 
4. 12  From  all  places  whence  ye  shall  return 

4.  15  we  returned  all  of  us  to  the  wall,  every 

9.  17  appointed  a  captain  to  return  to  their  b. 
9.  28  when  they  returned,  and  cried  unto  thee 

Esth,  2. 14  she  returned  into  the  second  house  of  the 

7.  8  the  king  returned  out  of  the  palace  garden 

9.  25  should  return  upon  his  own  head,  and  that 
Job     1.  21  Naked  came  I  out.  .naked  shall  I  return 

6. 29  Return,  I  pray  you,  let  it  not  be  iniquity 

6.  29  return  again,  my  righteousness  (is)  in  it 

7.  10  He  shall  return  no  more  to  his  house,  ne. 
10.  21  Before  I  go  (whence)  I  shall  not  return 

15.  22  not  that  he  shall  return  out  of  darkness 

16.  22  then  I  shall  go  the  way.  .Ishallnot  return 

17. 10  do  ye  return,  and  come  now :  for  I  cannot 
22.  23  If  thou  return  tw  the  Almighty,  thou  shalt 

33.  25  he  shall  return  to  the  days  of  his  youth 
36.  10  commandeth  that  they  return  from  iniq. 
39.    4  they  go  forth,  and  return  not  unto  them 

Psa,     6.   4  Return,  0  Lord,  deliver  my  soul:  oh  save 

6. 10  let  them  return  (and)  be  ashamed  suddenly 
7.    7  for  their  sakes  therefore  return  thou  oa 
7.  16  His  mischief  shall  return  upon  his  own 

35.  13  my  prayer  returned  into  mine  own  bosom 
99.   6  Theyreturnatevening:  they  make  a  noise 

59.  14  let  them  return  ;  and  let  them  make  a  n. 

60.  title.  Joab  returned.and  smote  of  Edom  in  the 

73.  10  his  people  return  hither ;  and  waters  of  a 

74.  21  let  not  the  oppressed  return  ashamed:  let 
78.  34  they  returned  and  enquired  early  after  G. 
80.  14  Return,  we  beseech  thee,  O  God  of  hosts 
90.  3  and  sayest,  Return,  ye  children  of  men 
90. 13  Return,  O  Lord,  how  long?  and  let  it  re. 
94.  15  judgment  shall  return  unto  righteousness 

104.  29  thou  takest  away,  .they  die,  and  return 
116.   7  Return  unto  thy  rest,  0  my  soul ;  for  the 
146.   4  he  returned  to  his  earth  ;  in  that  very  day 
Ptjv.  2. 19  None  that  go  unto  her  return  again,  nei. 

26. 11  As  adogreturnethtohis  vomit,  (so)  a  fool 
26. 27  he  that  rolleth  a  stone,  it  will  return  upon 

Eccl.  1.  6  the  windreturnetha^ain  according  to  his 
1 .  7  unto  the  place . .  thither  they  return  again 
4.    1  So  I  returned,  and  considered  all  the  op. 

4.  7  I  returned,  and  I  saw  vanity  under  the  s. 

5.  15  naked  shall  he  return  to  go  as  he  came 

9. 11  I  returned,  and  saw  under  the  sun,  that 
12.    2  be  not  darkened,  nor  the  clouds  return 
12.    7  Then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  earth 
12.    7  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave  it 

Son:*  6.  13  Return,  return,  0  Shulamite ;  return,  ret. 
Isa,     6. 13  (it)  shall  return,  and  shall  be  eaten :  as  a 

10.  21  The  remnant  shall  return,  (even)  the  rem. 
10.  22  a  remnant  of  them  shall  return :  the  con. 
19.  22  they  shall  return,  .to  the  Lord,  and  he 

21. 12  if  ye  will  enquire,  enquire  ye:  return,  come 
35.  10  the  ransomed  of  the  LoRDshall;return,and 
37.   7  he  shall.. return  to  his  own  land;  and  I 
37.    8  Rabshakeh  returned,  and  found  the  king 
37.  34  by  the  same  shall  he  return,  and  shall  not 

37.  37  went  and  returned,  and  dwelt  at  Nineveh 

38.  8  So  the  sun  returned  ten  degrees,  by  which 

44.  22  return  unto  me;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee 

45.  23  the  word  isgoneout. .  and  shall  not  return 
51.  11  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  return 
55.    7  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
55.  10  returneth  not  thither,  but  watereth  the 
55.  11  it  shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it 
63. 17  Return  for  thy  servant's  sake,  the  tribes 

Jer.     3.    1  shall  he  return  unto  her  again?  shall  not 
3.    1  yet  return  again  to  me,  saith  the  Lord 
3.   7  but  she  returned  not.  And  her  treacher. 


Jer.     3.  12  Return,  thou  backsliding  Israel,  saith  the 

3.  22  Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  (and)  I 

4.  1  return,  O  Israel,  saith  the  Lord,  return 

5.  3  0  Lord,  .they  have  refused  to  return 

8.  4  saith.  .shall  he  turn  away.aud  not  return? 
8.    5  they  holdfast  deceit,  they  refuse  to  return 

12.  15  will  return,  and  have  compassion  on  them 

14.  3  they  returned  with  their  vessels  empty 

15.  7  I  will  destroy,  .they  return  not  from  th. 
15.  19  If  thou  return,  then  will  I  bring  thee  again 

15.  19  let  them  return  unto  thee;  but  return  not 
18. 11  return  ye  now  every  one  from  his  evil  way 
22. 10  shall  return  no  more,  nor  see  his  native 
22.  11  Shallum.  .shall  not  return  thither  any 

22.  27  to  return,  thither  shall  they  not  return 
23. 14  that  none  doth  return  from  his  wickedness 

23.  20  The  anger  of  the  Lord  shall  not  return 

24.  7  they  shall  return  unto  me  with  their  wh. 
30. 10  Jacob  shall  return,  and  shall  be  in  rest 

30.  24  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  shallnot  return 

31.  8  Behold,  .a  great  company  shall  return  th. 

35.  15  Return  ye  now  every  man  from  his  evil 

36.  3  may  return  every  man  from  his  evil  way 

36.  7  will  return  every  one  from  his  evil  way 

37.  7  shall  return  to  Egypt  into  their  own  land 

40.  12  Even  all  the  Jews  returned  out  of  all  pi. 

41.  14  returned,  and  went  unto  Johanan  the  son 
44.  14  that  they  should  return  into  the  land  of 
44. 14  a  desire  to  return,  .none  shall  return  but 
44.  28  number  that  escape  the  sword  shall  retu. 
46.  27  Jacob  shall  return,  and  be  in  rest  and  at 
50.    9  their  arrows,  .none  shall  return  in  vain 

Eze.     1.  14  the  living  creatures  ran  and  returned  as 
7. 13  the  seller  shall  not  return  to  that  which 

7.  13  multitude  thereof,  (which)  shall  not  ret. 

8.  17  and  have  returned  to  provoke  me  to  anger 

13.  22  he  should  not  return  from  his  wicked  w. 
l(>.  55.  55  shall  return  to  their  former  estate 

16.  55  then  thou  and  thy  daughters  shall  return 
18.  23  not  that  he  should  return  from  his  ways 
21.  5  out  of  his  sheath :  it  shallnot  return  any 
35.  7  that  passeth  out  and  him  that  returneth 
35.    9  thy  cities  shall  not  return  ;  and  ye  shall 

46.  9  he  shall  not  return  by  Hie  way  of  the  gate 
46. 17  after  it  shall  return  to  the  prince :  but  his 

47.  7  Now  when  I  had  returned,  behold,  at  the 
Dan.  10.  20  return  to  fight  with  the  prince  of  Persia 

ir.  9  the  king  of  the  south  shall  return  into  his 
11.  10  then  shall  he  return,  and  be  stirred  up 
11.  13  the  king'of  the  north  shall  return,  andsh. 
11.  28  Then  shall  he  return  into  his  land  with 
11.  28  and  he  shall  do . .  and  return  to  his  own  I. 
11.  29  he  shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  so. 
11.  30  return,  and  have  indignation  againstthe 
11.  30  he  shall  even  return,  and  have  intellige. 
Hos.   2.    7  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband 

2.  9  Therefore  will  I  return,  and  take  away 

3.  5  Afterward  shall  the  children  of  Israel  re. 

5. 15  I  will  go  (and)  return  to  my  place,  till  th. 

6.  1  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord  :  for  he  hath 
6. 11  when  I  returned  the  captivity  of  my  peo. 

7.  10  they  do  not  return  to  the  Lord  their  God 

7. 16  They  return,  (but)  not  to  the  most  High 

8. 13  and  visit  their  sins  •  they  shall  return  to 

9.  3  Ephraim  shall  return  to  Egypt,  and  they 
11.    5  He  shall  not  return  into  the  land  of  Egy. 
11.   s  his  king,  because  they  refuse  to  return 
11.    9  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim  :  for 

14.  1  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God;  for  thou 
14.    7  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow,  .retu. 

Joel    2.  14  (if)  he  will  return  and  repent,  and  leave 
Amos  4.    6,  8,  9,  10. 11  yet  have  yejnot  returned  unto 
Obad.      15  thy  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own 
Mie.    1.    7  they  shall  return  to  the  hire  of  an  harlot 

5.  3  the  remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  return 
Zedh.  1.   6  they  returned  and  said,  Like  as  the  Lord 

7. 14  no  man  passed  through  nor  returned  ;  for 

9.  8  because  of  him  that  returneth;  and  no  op. 
Hal.    1.   4  will  return  and  build  the  desolate  places 

3.    7  Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  unto 
3.    7  But  ye  said,  Wherein  shall  we  return? 
3. 18  Then  shall  ye  return,  and  discern  between 

5.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  l>v)  shub,  5. 

Exod  19.   8  Moses  returned  the  words  of  the  people 
Judg.  5.  29  yea,  she  returned  answer  to  herself    ■ 

1  Sa.  6.    3  in  any  wise  return  him  a  trespass  offering 

6.  4  offering  which  we  shall  return  to  him 
6.   8  which  ye  return  him. .  a  trespass  offering 

6. 17  the  Philistines  returned  (for)  a  trespass 
25.  39  Lord  hath  returned  the  wickedness  of  N. 

2  Sa.  16.    8  Lord  hath  returned  upon  thee  all  the  bl. 

24. 13  see  what  answer  I  shall  return  to  himth. 

1  Ki    2.  32  Lord  shall  return  hisbloodupon  his  own 

2.  44  Lord  shall  return  thy  wickedness  upon 

2  Ch.io.    6  What  counsel  give  ye  (me)  to  return  ans. 

10.  9  that  we  may  return  answer  to  this  people 
Esth.  4.  15  Esther  bade  (them)  return  Mordecai  this 
Joel    3.    4  speedily  will  I  return  your  recompence 

3.  7  return  your  recompence  upon  your  own 

Q.To  do  a  second  time,  double,  repeat,  n$  shanah. 
PT0V26. 11  As  a  dog.  .(so)  a  foolreturneth  to  his  folly 

7.  To  turn  bach,  return,  yr\  tub. 

Dan.    4.  34  mine  understanding  returned  unto  me 

4.  36  my  reason  returned  unto  me  ;  and  for  the 
4.  36  mine  honour  and  brightness  returned  un. 

8.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  3W  tub,  5. 

Ezra   5.  11  they  returned  us  answer,  saying,  We  are 

9.  To  bend  up  or  back,  ava.Kdjj.irTw  anakampto. 
Matt.  2. 12  that  they  should  not  return  to  Herod,  th. 


Acts  18.  21  I  will  return  again  unto  you,  if  God  Mill 
Heb.  11. 15  have  had  opportunity  to  have  returned 

10.  To  loose  again,  avaXvw  analuo. 

Luke  1 2.  36  when  he  will  return  from  the  wedding 

11.  To  turn  round  again,  a.va<TTpe<pu)  a?iastrepho. 
Acts    5.  22  not  in  the  prison,  they  returned,  and  told 

15.  16  After  this  I  will  return,  aud  will  build  a. 

12.  To  lead  up  or  bccck  upon,  i-n-avdya}  epanago. 
Matt  21. 18  as  he  returned  into  the  city,  he  hungered 

13.  To  come  back  upon,  iiravtpxouat  epanerchomai, 
Lukeig.  15  when  he  was  returned,  having  received 

14.  To  turn  upon,  £Tri<TTp4<pu)  epiitrephd. 

Matt  12.  44 1  will  return  into  my  house  from  10.  13. 

24.  18  Neither  let  him. .  which  is  in  the  field  re. 
Luke  2.  20  And  the  shepherds  [returned],  glorifying 

17.  31  let  him  likewise,  .return  uacK,  1  i'e.  2. 25- 

15.  To  be  about  to  turn  quietly,  fitXXo)  i>7roo-Tpe0e<V- 
Acts  13.  34  no  more  to  return  to  corruption,  he  said 

16. To  turn  quietly  orby  degrees,  vTrocrpecpoj  hupos. 

Marki4.  40  [when  he  returned,  he  found  them  asleep! 

Luke  1.  56  Mary  abode,  .three  months,  and  returned 
2.  39  they  returned  into  Galilee,  to  their  own 
2.  43  as  they  returned,  the  child  Jesus  tarried 
4.    1  returned  from  Jordan,  and  was  led  by  the 
4.  14  Jesus  returned  in  the  power  of  the  spirit 

7.  10  they  that  were  sent,  returning  to  the  ho. 

8.  37  into  the  ship,  and  returned  back  again 

8.  39  Return  to  thine  own  house,  and  show  how 
8. 40  that,  when  Jesus  was  returned,  the  peo. 

9.  10  the  apostles,  when  they  were  returned 

10.  17  the  seventy  returned  again  with  joy,  say. 

11.  24  I  will  return  unto  my  house  whence  I  came 
17. 18  There  are  not  found  that  returned  to  give 
19.  12  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom,  and  to  re. 
23.  46  people.. emote  their  breasts,  and  returned 

23.  56  returned, and  prepared  spices  andointm. 

24.  9  returned  from  the  sepulchre,  and  toid  all 
24.  33  returned  to  Jerusalem,  and  found  the  el. 
24.  52  and  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy 

Acta  1. 12  Then  returned  they  unto  Jerusalem  from 
8.  25  returned  to  Jerusalem,  and  preached  the 
8.  28  Was  returning,  and  sitting  in  his  chariot 

12.  25  Barnabas  and  Saul  returned  from  Jerusa. 

13.  13  departing  from  them  returned  to  Jerusa. 

13.  34  no  more  to  return  to  corruption,  he  sard 

14.  21  returned  again  to  Lystra,  and  (to)  Itoni. 
so.    3  purposed  to  return  through  Macedonia 
21.    6  took  ship  ;  and  they  returned  home  again 
23.  32  left  the  horsemen. .and  returned  to  the 

Gal.    1.  17  went  into  Arabia, and  returned  againunto 

Heb.  7.    1  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings 
RETURN  an  answer,  to  — 
To  cause  to  turn  back,  return,  3>n  tub,  5, 

Ezra    5.    5  they  returned  answer  by  letter  concerning 
RETURN,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 
l.To  turn  back,  return,  3w  shub. 

Jer.  33.  26  cause  their  captivity  to  return,  and  have 

2. To  cause  to  turn  back,  return,  31B>  shub,  5. 

Deuti7-  16  nor  cause  the  people  to  return  to  Egypt 
1  Sa.  29.    4  Make  this  fellow  return,  that  he  may" go 
Jer.    29.  10  in  causing  you  to  return  to  this  place 

30.   3  will  cause  them  to  return  to  the  land  that 

32.  44  for  I  will  cause  their  captivity  to  retmrn 

33.  7  will  cause,  .captivity  of  Israel,  to  return 

33.  11  For  I  will  cause  to  return  the  captivity  of 

34.  11  caused  the  servants,  .to  return,  and  bro. 
34.  16  caused  every  man  his  servant,  .to  return 
34.  22  cause  them  to  return  to  this  city;  and 

37.  20  cause  me  not  to  return  to  the  house  of  J. 

38.  26  that  he  would  not  cause  me  to  return  to 
42. 12  and  cause  you  to  return  to  your  own  land 

Eze.  21.  30  Shalllcause  (it)to  return  into  his  sheath? 
29.  14  cause  them  to  return  (into)  the  land  of  P. 
47.    6  caused  me  *o  return  to  the  brink  of  the  r 

RETURNED,  to  be  — 

To  turn  back,  return,  T-v  shub. 

Gen.  43.  18  the  money  that  was  returned  in  our  sacks 
Lev.  22.  13  and  is  returned  unto  her  father's  house 
Josh.  2.  16  until  the  pursuers  be  returned:  and  after. 

2.  22  until  the  pursuers  were  returned :  and  the 

1  Sa.  18.   6  David  was  returned  from  the  slaughter  of 

24.    1  when  Saul  was  returned  from  following 

2  Sa.    1.    1  David  was  returned  from  the  slaughter  of 

3.  27  when  Abner  was  returned  to  Hebron,  Joab 
2  Ki.   9.  15  Joram  was  returned  to  be  healed  in  Jez. 
Jer.  43.    5  that  were  returned  from  all  nations 
Zech.  1.  16  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies 

8.    3  I  am  returned  unto  Zion,  and  will  dwell 
RETURNING  — 
Returning,  turning  back,  n^W  shubah. 

Isa.   30.  15  In  returningandrestshallye  be  saved ;  in 

RE'-U,  IJH  friendship. 

A  son  of  Peleg,  the  fourth  from  Shezn,  and  father  of 

Sherug.     B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  11. 18  And  Peleg  lived thirtyyears,andbegat  R. 
11. 19  Peleg  lived  afterhe begat  R.  twohundred 
11.  20  And  R.  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and 
11.  21  R.  lived  after  hebegatSerug  twohundred 
1  Ch.   1.  25  Eber,  Peleg,  R. 
RE-U'-BEN,  jaito  behold  a  son.     "Pov^t)v. 
1.  The  eldest  son  of  Jacob  and  Leah.     B.C.  1752. 

Gen.  29.  32  Leah.. barea son, and.  .called  hisnameR. 
30. 14  And  R.  went  in  the  days  of  wheat  harvest 


KBU3BNITBS 


814 


REVIVE 


Gen.  35.  22  R.  went  ami  lay  with  Bilhah  Ms  father's 
35.  23  The  sons  of  Leah  ;  R.,  Jacob's  first  born 
37.  21  R.  heard  (it),  and  lie  delivered  him  out  of 
37.  22  And  R.  said  unto  them,  Shed  no  blood 
37.  29  And  R.  returned  unto  the  pit;  and  beho. 
42.  22  And  R.  answered  them,  saying,  Spake  I 
42.  37  And  R.  spake  unto  his  father,  saying,  Slay 
46.    8  Jacob  and  his  sons ;  R.,  Jacob's  first  born 
46.   9  And  the  sons  of  R. ;  Hanoch,  and  Phallu 

48.  5  as  R.  and  Simeon,  they  shall  be  mine 

49.  3  R.,  thou  (art)  my  first  born,  my  might,  and 
Exod.  1.    2  R.,  Simeon,  Levi,  and  Judah 

6.  14  The  sons  of  R.  the  first  born  of  Israel 

6.  14  these  (be)  the  families  of  R. 

Num.  1.  20  And  the  children  of  R.,  Israel's  eldest  son 

16.    1  Now  Korah.  .and  On.  .sons  of  R.,  took 

26.   5  R.  the  eldest  son  of  Israel 

26.  5  the  children  of  R. ;  Hanoch,  (of  whom  c.) 
Deut  n.  6  he  did  unto,  .sons  of  Eliab,  the  son  of  R. 
Josh  15.    6  went  up  to  the  stone  of  Bohauthesonof  R. 

18.  17  to  the  stone  of  Bohan  the  son  of  R. 
1  Ch.  2.    1  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Israel ;  R.,  Simeon 
5.    1  Now  the  sons  of  R.  the  first  born  of  Israel 

5.  3  The  sons,  (I  say),  of  R.  the  first  born  of  I. 
2.  His  descendants  and  their  territory  E.  of  Jordan  and 
of  the  Salt  Sea. 

Num.  1.    5  of  (the  tribe  of)  R.;  Elizurthe  son  of  She. 

1.  21  that  were  numbered .  .of  the  tribe  of  R. 

2.  10  south  side  (shall  be)  the  standard . .  of  R. 
2.  10  the  captain  of  the  children  of  R.  (shall) 

2.  16  All  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp  of  R. 

7.  30  Elizur.  .prince  of  the  children  of  R.,  (did 

10.  18  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  R.  set  forw. 
13.    4  of  the  tribe  of  R.,  Shammua  the  son  of  Z. 
32.    i  thechildrenof  R. .  .had  a  very  great  mult. 
32.    2  the  children  of  R.  came  and  spake  unto 
32.    6  And  Moses  said,  .to  the  children  of  R. 
32.  25  and  the  children  of  R.  spake  unto  Moses 
32.  29  thechildrenof  R.  will  pass  with  you  over 
32.  31  and  the  children  of  R.  answered,  saying 
32.  33  And  Moses  gave,  .to  the  children  of  R. 

32.  37  And  the  children  of  R.  built  Heshbon 
34, 14  the  children  of  R. .  .have  received  (their 

Deut27. 13  R.,  Gad,  and  Asher,  andZebulun,  Dan,  and 

33.  6  Let  R.  live,  and  not  die ;  and  let  (not)  his 
Josh.  4.  12  the  children  of  R. .  .passed  over  armed  b. 

13.  15  Moses  gave  unto  the.  .children  of  R.  (in.) 
13.  23  And  the  border  of  the  children  of  R.  was 
13.  23  (was)  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  R. 
18.    7  Gad,  and  R. .  .have  received  their  inheri. 

20.  8  they  assigned  Bezer . .  out  of  the  tribe  of  R. 

21.  7  children  of  Merari.  .(had) out. . tribe  of  R. 
2i.  36  And  outof  thetribe  of  R.,  Bezer  with  her 

22.  9,  io,  11  the  children  of  R.,  and  the  children 
22. 13  children  of  Israel  sent  unto  the  chil.  of  R. 
22.  15  And  they  came  unto  the  children  of  R. 
22. 21  Then  the  children  of  R. .  .answered  and 
22.  25  ye  children  of  R.  and  children  of  Gad 
22.  30  P. . .  heard  the  words  that  the  children  of  R. 
22.  31  Phinehas . .  said  unto  the  children  of  R. 
22.  32  Phinehas.  .returned  from .  .children  of  R. 
22.  33  wherein  the  children  of  R.  and  Gad 

22.  34  And  the  children  of  R.  .called  the  altar 
Judg.  5.  15,  16  For  the  divisions  of  R.  (there  were) 

1  Ch.  5. 18  The  sons  of  R.,  aud  the  Gadites,  and  half 

6.  63  Unto  the  sons  of  Merari  (were  given) . .  R. 
6.  78  (were  given  them)  out  of  the  tribe  of  R. 

Eze.  48.  6  the  border  of  Ephraim..  a  (portion  for)  R. 
48.  7  by  the  border  of  R. . .  a  (portion  for)  Judah 
48.  31  one  gate  of  R.,  one  gate  of  Judah,  one  g. 

Rev.  7.  5  Of  the  tribe  of  R.  (were)  sealed  twelve  th. 
The  following  are  the  chief  localities  in  the  territory  of 
Reuben  :  Abarim,  Aroer,  Ashdoth-Pisgah,!  Bamoth 
(Baal),  Beon,  (Beth>Baal-Meon,  Beth-Jeshimoth,  Beth- 
Feor,  Bezer,  Dibou,  Elealeh,  Heshbon,  Jahaza,  Kede- 
moth,  Kirjathaim,  Medeba,  Mephaath,  Nebo,  Sebam, 
(Shibmah  or  Sibmah),  Zaretb-Shahar,  &c. 
REUBENTTES,  'an^'-in  the  Rcuhemte. 
The  descendants  of  Reuben.  With  thetribe  of  Gad  and 
Manasseh  they  applied  to  Moses  for  an  inheritance  on 
the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  and  obtained  it ;  they  were  conse- 
quently the  first  of  the  ten  tribes  that  were  carried  to 
Assyria  by  Tiglath-pileser.     B.C.  740. 

Nuni26.   7  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  R. 

Deut.  3.  12  the  cities  thereof,  gave  I  unto  the  R. 

3.  16  And  unto  the  R. . .  I  gave  from  Gilead  even 

4.  43  (Namely)  Bezer  in  the  wilderness.. of  the  R. 
29.    8  we.  .gave  it  for  an  inheritance  unto  the  R. 

Josh.  1.  12  to  the  R.,  and  to  the  Gadites.  .spake  Jos. 

12.  6  Moses,  .gave  it(for)a  possession  unto  the  R. 

13.  8  With  whom  the  R. .  .have  received  their 
22.    1  Then  Joshua  called  the  R. ,  and  the  Gadites 

2  Ki.  10.  33  all  the  land  of  Gilead,  the  Gadites,  and  R. 
1  Ch.  5.   6  he  (was)  prince  of  the  R. 

5.  26  and  he  carried  them  away,  even  the  R. 

11.  42  Adina  the  son  of  Shiza  the  R. 

11. 42  a  captain  of  the  R.,  and  thirty  with  him 
12.37  And  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  of  the  R, 
26.  32  whom  king  David  made  rulers  over  the  R. 

27. 16  the  ruler  of  the  R.  (was)  Eliezer  the  son 

RE-TJ'-EL,  Vtojn  God  is  friend. 

1.  A  son  of  Esau  by  Bashemath  daughter  of  Ishmael. 
B.C.   1750. 

Gen.  36.    4  and  Bashemath  bare  R. 

36.  io  R.  the  son  of  Bashemath  the  wife  of  Esau 
36.  13  And  these  (are)  the  sons  of  R.;  Nahath 

36. 17  And  these  (are)  the  sons  of  R.  Esau's  son 
36.  17  these  (are)  the  dukes  (that  came)  of  R. 

r  Ch.  1.  35  The  sons  of  Esau  ;  Eliphaz,  R.,  and  Jeush 
1.37  The  sons  of  R.;  Nahath,  Zerah,  Shammah 


2.  Father-in-law    of   Moses,    called    also    Jethro    and 
Raguel.     B.C.  1530. 

Exod.  2.  18  And  when  they  came  to  R.  their  father,  he 

3.  Father  of  Eliasaph,  a  captain  of  Gad,  called  in  Num. 

1.  14  Deuel.    B.C.  1530. 

Num.  2.  14  and  the  captain,  .(shall be) Eliasaph.  .R. 

4.  A  Benjamite  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  536. 

1  Ch.  9.   8  Meshullam  the  son  of  Shephathiah.  .R. 
RE-TJ'-TVTATT,  n^N-)  pearl,  coral. 

A  concubine  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother.    B.C  i860. 
Gen.  22.  24  R. ..bare  alsoTebah,  andGaham, and  Ta. 
REVEAL  (self),  to  — 
1. To  uncover  the  ear,  JiN  nSa  galah  ozen. 

2  Sa.    7.  27  hast  revealed  to  thy  servant,  saying,  I  will 

2.  To  uncover,  remove,  rrSa  galah. 

Ptov.  20.  19  He  that  goeth  about  (as)  a  talebearer  re. 
Amos   3.    7  revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants  the 

3.  To  be  uncovered,  removed,  nSa  golah,  2. 

1  Sa.   3.  21  for  the  Lord  revealed  himself  to  Samuel 

4.  To  uncover,  remove,  nSa  galah,  3. 

Job  20.  27  The  heavens  shall  reveal  his  iniquity;  and 
Prov  11.  13  A  tale  bearer  revealeth  secrets :  but  he 
Jer.  11.  20  for  unto  tftee  have  I  revealed  my  cause 
33.    6  will  reveal  unto  them  the  abundance  of 

5.  To  uncover,  rem-ove,  n^a  gelah. 

Dan.  2.  19  Then  was  the  secret  revealed  unto  Daniel 
2.  22  He  revealeth  the  deep  and  secret  things 
2.  28  there  is  a  God  in  heaven  that  revealeth 
2.  29  he  that  revealeth  secrets  maketh  known 
2.  30  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me  for  (any) 
2.  47  and  a  revealer.  .seeing  thou  couldest  reveal 

6.  To  uncover,unveil,  disclose,  hiroKaKvirra}  apokal. 

Matt  11.  25  because  thou,  .hast  revealed  them  unto 

11.  27  (he)  to  whomsoever  the  Son  [will  reveal] 
16. 17  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  (it) 

Lukeio.  21  thank  thee,  .that thou,  .hast  revealed  th. 

10. 22  (he)  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  (him) 
1  Co.  2.  10  But  God  hath  revealed  (them)  unto  us  by 
Gal.    1.  16  To  reveal  his  Son  in  me,  that  I  might  pr. 
Phil.  3.  15  otherwise  minded,  God  shall  reveal  even 

REVEALED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  uncovered,  rAa  galah,  2. 

Deut  29.  29  but  those  (things  which  are)  revealed  (b.) 

1  Sa.  3.    7  neither  was  the  word,  .yet  revealed  unto 

Isa,   22. 14  it  was  revealed  in  mine  ears  by  the  Lord 

23.    1  from  the  land  of  Chittim  it  is  revealed  to 

40.    5  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and 

53.    1  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ? 

56.    1  and  my  righteousness  to  be  revealed 

Dan.  20.    1  a  thing  was  revealed  unto  Daniel,  whose 

2.  To  uncover,  unveil,  disclose, aTroKaXvTTco  apokal. 

Mattio.  26  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be  revealed 
Luke  2.  35  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be  revealed 

12.  2  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be  revealed 
17.  30  the  day  when  the  Son  'of  man  is  revealed 

Johni2.  33  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been  revealed? 
Rom.  1. 17  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  reve. 

1.  18  For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  h. 
8.  18  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in 

1  Co.  3.  13  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire  ;  and 

14.  30  If  (any  thing)  be  revealed  to  another  that 
Gal.  3.  23  faith  which  should  afterwards  be  revealed 
Eph.'  3.    s  as  it  isnowrevealediunto  hisTioly  apostles 

2  Th.  2.    3  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  pe. 

2.  6  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time 

2.    8  thenshallthat  wicked  be  revealed,  whom 

1  Pe.  1.    5  kept,  .ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time 

1.  12  Unto  whom  it  was  revealed,  that  not  unto 
5.    1  partaker  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  revea. 

3.  An  uncovering,  hiroKaAv^is  apolalupsis. 

2  Th.  1.    7  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  fr. 
1  Pe.  4. 13  when  his  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may 

4.  To  utter  an  oracle,  xpV^ariCoj  chrematizo. 

Luke  2.  26  it  was  revealed  unto  him  by  the  Holy  Gh. 
REVEALER  — 
To  remove,  uncover,  unveil,  rna  gelah. 

Dan.   2.  47  and  a  revealer  of  secrets,  seeing  thou  co. 
REVELATION  — 
An  uncovering,  airoKaKvipis  apokalupsis. 

Rom.  2.    5  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of 
16.  25  according  to  the  revelation  of  the  mystery 

1  Co.  14.    6  I  shall  speak  to  you  either  by  revelation 

14.  26  every  one  of  you.  .hath  a  revelation,  hath 

2  Co.  12.    1  will  come  to  visions  and  revelations  of  the 

12.  7  through  the  abundance  of  the  revelations 
Gal.     1.  12  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ 

2.  2  I  went  up  by  revelation,  and  communica. 
Eph.    1.  17  may  give  unto  you  the  spirit  of.  .revelat. 

3.  3  How  that  by  revelation  he  made  known 
1  Pe.  1.  13  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  J. 
Rev.    1.    1  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  G. 

REVELLING  — 

Revelry,  wantonness,  {from  Lat.  comus),  Kupos. 
Gal.    5.  2iEnvyings, murders, drunkenness,revellings 
1  Pe.  4.    3  when  we  walked  in.. revellings, banquet. 

REVENGE,  REVENGING  — 

1.  Vengeance,  ncija.  neqamah. 

Psa.  79. 10  the  revenging  of  the  blood  of  thy  servants 
Jer.  20.  10  and  we  shall  take  our  revenge  on  him 
Eze.  25.  15  Because  the  Philistines  have  dealt  by  re. 


2.  Locks  of  hair, princes  of  the people,T\WV$  peraoth. 

Deut32.  42  from  the  beginning  of  revenges  upon  the 

3.  Vengeance,  full  justice,  itcS'tKno-ts  ekdikesis. 

2  Co.  7.  11  yea,  (what)  revenge  !  In  all  (things)ye  ha. 
REVENGE  (self),  to  — 
1.2*0  avenge,  Dpi.  naqam. 

Nah.   1.    2  the  Lord  revengeth ;  the  Lord  revengeth 
2. To  be  avenged,  Dpi  naqam,  2. 

Jer.  15.  15  revenge  me  of  my  persecutors;  take  me 
3.2*0  avenge,  exact  full  justice,  4kSik^(o  ekdikeo. 

2  Co.   10.  6  having  in  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  disob. 
REVENGER  — 

l.To  free  (by  avenging  or  repaying),  7^3  gaal. 
NUIU35.  19  revenger  of  blood  himself  shall  slay  the 
35.  21  revenger  of  blood  shall  slay  themurderer 
35.  24  between  the  slayer  and  the  revenger  of  b. 
35.  25  out  of  the  hand  of  the  revenger  of  blood 
35.  27  revenger  of  blood  find  him  without  the  b. 
35.  27  revenger  of  blood  kill  the  slayer ;   he  shall 
2  Sa.14.  11  wouldestnot  suffer  the  revengers  of  blood 
%  Avenger,  exactor  of  full  justice,  izkBikos  ekdikos. 
Rom  1 3.    4  revenger  to  (execute)  wrath  upon  him  that 
REVENUE  — 
1. Revenue  or  i?ico?ne,  ch?N  appeihom. 

Ezra  4.  13  shalt  endamage  the  revenue  of  the  king 

2.  Increase,  revenue,  FiijMp  tebuah. 

Prov.  8.  19  and  my  revenue  than  choice  silver 

15.  6  but  in  the  revenues  of  the  wicked  is  trou. 

16.  8  Better  (is)  a  little .  .than  great  revenues 
Isa.  23.    3  harvest  of  the  river,  (is)  her  revenue;  and 
Jer.  12.  13  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  your  revenues 

REVERENCE  — 

Modesty,  decency,  alBws  aid<~>s. 

Heb.  12.  28  serve  God  acceptably  with  [reverence]  and 
REVERENCE,  to  (do,  give,  be  had  in)  — 
l.To  fear,  be  afraid,  reverence,  tt*v  yare. 

Lev.  19.  30  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence  my 
26.    2  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence  my 

2.7*0  be  feared,  reverenced,  WV  yare,  2. 

Psa.  89.    7  to  be  had  in  reverence  of  all  (them  that 

3.2*0  bow  down  self,  nny  shachah,  7. 

2Sa.  9.   6  fell  on  his  face,  and  did  reverence.    And 

1  Ki.   1.  31  did  reverence  to  the  king,  and  said,  Let 

Esth.  3.    2  bowed, and  reverenced  Haman ;  for  thek. 

3.    2,  5  Mordecaibowednot,nordid(him)reve. 

4.7*0  turn  in  to,  reverence,  4vrpeiro/j.at  entrepomai. 
Matt  21.  37  sent,  .saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son 
Marki2.  6  sent,  .saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son 
Luke2o.  13  it  may  be  they  will  reverence  (him)  when 
Heb.  12.    9  corrected  (us),  and  we  gave  (them)  rever. 

5.7*o  be  terrifed,  affrighted, afraid,  (poBeofiaiphobe. 

Eph.   5.  33  the  wife  (see)  that  she  reverence  (her)hu. 
REVEREND  — 
7*0  be  feared,  reverenced,  nyr  yare,  2. 

Psa.  in.   9  for  ever:  holy  and  reverend  (is)  his  name 
REVERSE,  to  — 
To  cause  to  turn  back,  2>V  &hub,  5. 

Num.  23.  20  he  hath  blessed  ;  and  I  cannot  reverse  it 

Esth.  8.    5  let  it  be  written  to  reverse  the  letters  de. 
8.   8  writing  which  is  written . .  may  no  man  re. 

REVILE  (again),  to  — 

1.  To  declare  light,  despised  or  vile,  t?q  qalal,  3. 

Exod  22.  28  Thou  shalt  not  revile  the  gods,  nor  curse 
2.7*o  revile  in  return,  avTiXo&opew  antiloidoreo. 

1  Pe.  2.  23  Who . .  reviled  not  again ;  when  he  suffer 

3.  7*o  speak  injuriously,  f$hao-<pT}p.tto  blasphemed. 
Matt  27.  39  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him,  wagging 

4.5*0  revile,  rail,  AoiSope'w  hadoreo. 

John  9.  28  Then  they  reviled  him,  and  said,  Thou  art 
Acts  23.  4  they  that  stood  by  said,  Re  vilest  thou  G. 
1  Co.  4.  12  being  reviled,  we  bless;  being  persecuted 
1  Pe.  2.  23  "Who,  when  he  was  reviled . .  when  he  suff. 

5.2*0  upbraid,  revile,  oVei5i£i»  oneidizo. 

Matt.  5.  11  Blessed  are  ye  when  (men)  shall  revile  you 
Mark  15.  32  they  thatwere  crucified  with  him  reviled 

REVELER,  REVILING  — 

1. Reviling,  rp-a  gidduph. 

Isa.   51.   7  neither  be  ye  afraid  of  their  revilings 
Zeph.  2.    8  the  revilings  of  the  children  of  Amnion 

2.Reviling,  railing,  Xo'tSopos  loido-ros. 

1  Co.  6. 10  nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners,  shall  inhe. 

REVIVE,  to  — 

l.To  live,  revive,  n;n  chayah. 

Gen.  45.  27  the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  revived 
Judgis.  19  and. .his  spirit  came  again,  and  he  revived 

1  Ki.17.  22  soul.,  came  into  him  again,  and  he  revived 

2  Ki.  13.  21  when  the  man  was  let  down,  .he  revived 
2.2*o  keep  or  make  alive,  revive,  rt;n  chayah,  3. 

Neh.    4.    2  will  they  revive  the  stones  outof  the  he. 
Psa.  85.   6  Witt  thou  not  revive  us  again,  that  thy  p. 
138.    7  thou  wilt  revive  me;  thou  shalt  stretch 
Hos.    6.    2  After  two  days  will  he  revive  us  :  in  the 
14.   7  they  shall  revive  (as)  the  corn,  and  grow 
Hab.   3.   2  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years 
3.  To  cause  to  live,  n;n  chayah,  5. 

Isa.   57.  is  to  revive  the  spirit,  .and  to  revive  the  h. 


REVIVING 


815 


RICH 


4. To  live  again,  revive,  aua^dta  anazao. 

Horn.  7.    9  when  the  commandment  came,  sin  reviv. 
14.    9  Christ  both  died,  axid  [rose,  and  revived] 
REVIVING  — 
Preservation  or  means  of  life,  .Trja  michyafi. 

Ezra  9.   8  give  us  a  little  reviving  in  our  bondage 

9.  9  give  us  a  reviving,  to  set  up  the  house  of 

REVOLT,  revolted  — 

A  turning  aside,  fria  sarah. 

lsa.     1.    5  ye  will  revolt  more  and  more.  The  whole 

31.    6  from)  whom  the  children.,  have  deeply  re. 

59.  13  seeking  oppression  and  revolt,  conceiving 

REVOLT,  to  — 

To  transgress,  trespass,  ywp  pasha. 

2  Ki.  8  20  In  his  days  Edom  revolted  from  under  the 

8.  22  Yet  Edom  revolted..  Then  Libnah  revolted 
2  Ch.21.  8,  10  the  Edomites  revolted  from  under  the 

21. 10  same  time  (also)did  Libnah  revolt  from 

REVOLTED,  to  lie  — 
To  turn  aside,  "vo  sur. 

Jer.  5.  23  But  this  people,  .are  revolted  and  gone 
REVOLTER,  revolting  — 

I.  To  tarn  aside,  tid  sarar* 

Jer.     5.  23  But  this  people  hath  a  revolting,  .heart 

6.  28  They  (are)  all  grievous  revolters,  walking 
Hos.   9.  15  no  more  :  all  their  princes  (are)  revolters 

2,Turning  aside,  £1?  set. 

Hos.    5    2  revolters  are  profound  to  make  slaughter 
REWARD— 
1. Latter  aid,  rviQN  ackarith. 

Prov.24.  14  there  shall  be  a  reward,  and  thy  expect. 
24.  20  For  there  shall  be  no  reward  to  the  evil 

2.A  gift,  n3nx  ethnah. 

Hos.    2.  12  These(are)my  rewards  thatmy  lovers  have 

3.  A  gift,  )3flN,  ]ir\x  ethnan. 

Eze.  16.  34  that  thou  givest  a  reward,  and  no  reward 
Hos     9.    1  hast  loved  a  reward  upon  every  cornfloor 

^.Recompence,  deed,  *?iD3  gemul. 

Psa.  94.  2  Lift  up  thyself .  .render  a  reward  to  the 
lsa  3.  11  reward  of  his  hands  shall  be  giveu  him 
Obad.     15  thy  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own 

5.  Recompence,  deed,  nS*ra  gemulah. 

2  Sa  19.  36  why.  .recompense  it  me  with  such  a  rew 

6.  What  is  lifted  zep,  rfNfc*a  maseth. 

J  er.   40.    5  the  guard  gave  him  victuals  aud  a  reward 

7.  Wage,  reward,  rqbpo  maskoreth. 

Ruth  2.  12  a  full  reward  be  given  thee  of  the  Lord 

8.^1  gift,  nn?  mattath. 

1  Ki.  1 3.    7  Come  home . .  and  I  will  give  thee  areward 

9.  A  largess,  gift,  n^pi  nebizbah. 

Dan.  2.  6  ye  shall  receive  of  me  gifts  and  rewards 
5  17  give  thy  rewards  to  another ;  yet  I  will 

10.  Heel,  consequence,  2$%  eqeb. 

Psa.  19. 1 1  in  keeping  of  them  (there  is)  great  reward 
40.  15  Let  them  be  desolate  for  a  reward  of  their 
70.   3  let  them  be  turned  back  for  a  reward  of 

II.  Work,  n^yv3  pexdlah. 

Psa.  109.  20  this  (be)  the  reward  of  mine  adversaries 

12.  Fruit,  ,-i3  peri. 

Psa.  58.  1 1  (there  is)  a  reward  for  the  righteous  :  ver. 

IS.Reward,  "l?#  sakar. 

Gen.  15.  1  thy  shield,  (and)  thy  exceeding  great  rew. 
ISumiS.  31  it  (is)  your  reward  for  your  service  in  the 
Psa.  127.  3  (and)  the  fruit  of  the  womb  (is  his)  reward 
Eccl.  4.   9  they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  labour 

9.  5  neither  have  they  any  more  areward ;  for 
lsa.  40.  10  his  reward  (is)  with  him,  and  his  work  be. 

62. 1 1  his  reward  (is)  with  him,  and  his  work  be. 

14.  Reward,  ~g:?  seker. 

Prov.11. 18  to  him  that  sowetli.  .(shall  be)  a  sure  re 
15. Bribe,  "nb>  shochad. 

Deutio.  171'egardeth  not  persons,  nor  taketh  reward 
27.  25  he  that  taketh  reward  to  slay  an  innocent 

Psa.  15.    5  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  innocent 

Prov.21. 14  and  a  reward  in  the  bosom  strong  wrath 

lsa.  5.  23  Which  justify  the  wicked  for  reward,  and 
45. 13  not  for  price  nor  reward,  saith  the  Lord 

Mic;  3.  1 1  The  heads  thereof  judge  for  reward,  aud 
16.. 4  completing,  recompence,  rxhp  shillum. 

Mic.  7.  3  the  judge  (asketh)  for  a  reward ;  and  the 
17.^1  completion,  recompence,  n^w  shillumah. 

Psa.  91.  8  behold  and  see  the  reward  of  the  wicked 
18.  P^ecompences,  D'ab^  shalmonim. 

lsa.     1.  23  followetti  after  rewards :   they  judge  not 

19..4  giving  b  wk  again,  «Wa7ro*W<s-  antapodosis. 

Col.     3.  24  receive  the  reward  of  the  inheritance 
20\7/'7»  wage,  reward,  hht86s  ?nisthos. 

Matt.  5.  I2  great  (is)  your  reward  in  heaven :  for  so 

5.  46  what  reward  have  ye?  do  not  even  the 

6.  1  ye  have  no  reward  of  vour  Father  which  is 
o-    2,  s,  16  I  say  uutoyou.Thev  have  their  rew 

10.  41  lie.  .shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward ;  and 

10.  41  he.  shall  receive  a  righteousman'sreward 

■w^t.1 IO' 42  reTily  ■  he  sha11  in  "°  ^se  Iose  his  reward 
Mark  9.  4;  I  &ay  unto  you,  he  shall  not  lose  his  rew 


Luke  6.  23  your  reward  (is)  great  in  heaven  :  for  in 

6.  35  your  reward  shall  be  great,  aud  ye  shall 
Acts  1.  18  this  man  purchased  a  field  with  the  rew. 
Rom  4.  4  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt 
1  Co.  3.    8  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward 

3.  14  work  abide.. he  shall  receive  a  reward 
9  17  I  do  this  thing  willingly,  I  have  areward 
9. 18  What  is  my  reward  theu?  (Verily)  that 

1  Ti.    5.  18  and,  Thelabourer(is)worthyof  his  reward 

2  Pe.   2.  13  shall  receive  the  reward  of  unrighteous. 
2  John     8  lose  not.  .but  that  we  receive  a  full  reward 
Jude      11  ran  greedily  after  the  error,  .for  reward 
Rev.  11.  18  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  unto  f.Vv 

22.  12  my  reward  (is)  with  me,  to  give  every  n..^ 
REWARD,  be  rewarded,  to  (give)  — 
1.7*0  do,  recomp?nce,  benefit,  *??3  gamal. 

1  Sa.  24.  17  rewarded  me  good,  whereas  I  have  rew. 

2  Sa.  22.  21  The  Lord  rewarded  me  according  to  my 
2  Ch.20.  11  they  reward  us,  to  come  to  cast  us  out  of 
Psa     7.   4  If  I  have  rewarded  evil  unto  him  that  was 

18.  20  The  Lord  rewarded  me  according  to  my 

103.  10  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniqu. 

lsa.     3.   9  they  have  rewarded  evil  unto  themselves 

2.  To  set,  put,  lag,  o^a,  die?  sum,  sim. 

Psa.109.    5  they  have  rewarded  meevil  forgood,  and 

3.  To  hire,  reward,  ~c$  sakar. 

Prov  26. 10  both  rewardeth  the  fool,  and  rewardeth 

4. Hire,  reward,  T3"»  sakar. 

2  Ch.15  7  Beyestrong.  .yourworkshallberewarded 
Jer.  31.  16  thy  work  shall  be  rewarded,  saith  the  L. 

5.  To  {cause  to)  turn  bavk,  2W  shub,  1  or  5. 

Psa.  54.   5  He  shall  reward  evil  unto  mine  enemies 

6. 7*o  cause  to  turn  back,  3*»  shub,  5. 

Prov  17.  13  Whoso  rewardeth  evil  for  good,  evil  shall 
Hos.    4.  9  and  1  will,  .reward  them  their  doings 

7. 7*o  bribe,  hire,  *iit$  shochad. 

Job     6.  22  Give  a  reward  for  me  of  your  substance 

8.7b  make  whole,  complete,  repay,  zh?  shalam,  3. 
Gen.  44.    4  Wherefore  have  ye  rewarded  evil  forgood? 
Deut32.  41  If  I  whet.. I.,  will  reward  them  that  hate 

1  Sa.  24. 19  the  Lord  reward  thee  good  for  that  thou 

2  Sa.  3.  39  Lord  shall  reward  the  doer  of  evil  accor. 
Job  21.  19  he  rewardeth  him,  and  he  shall  know  (it) 
Psa.  31.  23  and  plentifully  rewardeth  the  proud  doer 

35. 12  They  rewardeth  me  evil  forgood,  (to)  the 
137.    8  happy  (shall  he  be)  that  rewardeth  thee 
Prov  25  22  heap  coals  of  fire.  .Lord  shall  reward  thee 

9.  To  be  made  whole,  complete,  perfect,  ch& $halam,4:. 

Prov  13  1 3  but  he  that  f eareth . .  shall  be  rewarded 

10.  To  give  away  or  back,  a7ro5i'5co,ui  apodidomi. 
Matt.  6.    4.  6.  18  thy  Father,  .shall  reward  thee  ope. 

16.  27  he  shall  reward  every  man  according  to 
2  Ti.    4  14  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  works 
Rev.  18.    6  Reward  her  even  as  she  rewarded  you,  and 
REWARDER  — 

A  giver  of  hire  or  wage,  ixio-Qairo§6TT)s  misthapod. 
Heb.  11.    6  he  is  a  rewarcler  of  them  that  diligently 
RE'-ZEPH,  r\f\  stronghold. 

A  city  in  East  Syrian  Palmyrene,  between  Racca  and 
Emesa.  near  Harau  and  Gozan,  and  taken  by  Sennach- 
erib. 

2  Ki.19.  12  (as)  Gozan,  and  Haran,  and  R. .  and  the 
lsa.  37.  12  (as)  Gozan,  and  Haran,  andR.,  and  the  ch. 

REZ'-IA,  n;s"!  Jah  is  pleasing. 

An  Asherite,  a  son  of  Ulla.    B.C.  1452. 

1  Ch.  7.  39  sons  of  Ulla;  Arab,  and  Hannel,  and  R. 
RE'-ZLN",  |T]  dominion. 

1.  The  last  king  of  Syria,  in  the  days  of  Jothan  king  of 
Judah,  and  slain  by  Tiglath  pileser.     B.C.  742. 

2  Ki.  15.  37  the  Lord  began  to  send . .  R  the  king  of  S. 

16.  5  R.  king  of  Syria  .  came  up  to  Jerusalem  to 

16.  6  R.  king  of  Syria  recovered  Elath  to  Syria 

16.  9^heking  of  Assyria  went  up.,  and  slew  R. 

lsa.     7.  1  R.  the  king  of  Syria,  .went  up  toward  J. 

7.  4  fear  not.  .for  the  fierce  anger  of  R.  with 

7.  8  For  the.  .head of  Damascus  (is)  R.;  andw, 

8.  6  and  rejoice  in  R  and  Remaliah's  son 

9  11  the  Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of  R. 
2  One  of  the  Kethinim  whose  descendants  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.    b  c  536 

"Ezr.    2.  4%  The  children  of  R..  the  children  of  Nek. 

Neh.   7.  50  The  children  of  Reaiah,  the  children  of  R. 
RE'-ZON,  pn  prince,  noble. 

Son  of  Eliadah,  and  a  subject  of  Hadadezer  king  of 
Zobah,  from  whom  he  fled  to  Damascus,  where  he 
founded  a  kingdom  and  opposed  Solomon.    B.C.  1000. 

1  Ei.n.  23  God  stirred  himup.  .R.thesonof  Eliadah 
RHE  GI-TJM,  'P-hytov  breach. 

A  port  in  the  S.W.  of  Italy,  opposite  Messina  in  Sicily; 
here  Paul  landed  on  his  way  to  Rome.  It  is  now 
called  Reggio,  aud  is  the  capital  of  Calabria. 

Acts  28.  13  we  fetched  a  compass,  and  came  to  R. 
RHE'-SA,  "Pr}(rd  am  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  27  of  Joanna,  which  was  (the  son)  of  R  ,  wh. 
RHO'-DA,  'P(>5tj  a  rose, 

A  damsel  in  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother  of  John 
Mark,  and  who  opened  the  door  for  Peter. 

Acts  12. 13  And.  .a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named  R 


RHO'-DES,  'PuSos. 

An  island  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  W.  of  Lydia,  and 
75  miles  E.  of  Crete.  It  is  120  miles  in  circumference,  and 
was  held  by  a  branch  of  the  Doric  race  about  the  time 
of  the  Trojan  war,  B.C.  1184;  in  408  its  capital  city  was 
built;  in  431  it  was  compelled  to  pay  tribute  to  Athens; 
in  412  it  changed  sides  ;  in  396  it  changed  sides  again; 
in  390  the  aristocrats  recovered  power;  in  357-355  it 
opposed  Athens  ;  in  323 it  submitted  to  Alexander;  in 
304  it  was  besieged  by  Demetrius  Poliorcetes ;  in  108  it 
fought  against  Mithridites ;  in  50  it  helped  Caesar 
against  Pompey,  but  in  42  it  was  subdued.  In  A.D.  330 
it  was  made  the  capital  of  the  Provincia  Isularium  ;  iu 
616  it  was  taken  by  the  Persians  ;  in  651  by  the  Saracens; 
in  1309  by  the  Knights  of  St  John;  in  1480  it  repelled 
Mohammed  II ;  in  1522  it  was  taken  by  Soliman  II.  It 
was  noted  for  its  colossal  statute  of  Apollos,  70 
cubits  or  105  feet  high  (built  by  Chares,  a  pupil  of 
Lysippus,  and  by  Laches),  which  was  completed  B.C 
280;  it  was  erected  over  the  entrance  of  the  harbour, 
aud  was  overthrown  by  an  earthquake.     B.C.  224. 

Acts  21.    1  we  came,  .unto  R.,  and  from  thence  unto 

RIB  — 

1,  A  rib,  yhn  ala. 

Dan.   7    5  three  ribs  in  the  mouth  of  it  between  the 

2.  A  rib,  yb$  tsela. 

Gen.    2.  21  he  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the 
2.  22  the  rib,  which  the  Lord  God  had  taken 
RI'-BAI,  *yi  Jah  contends. 

Father  of  Ittai  one  of  David's  valiant  men,  from  Gibeah 
of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1070. 

2  Sa.  23.  29  Ittai  the  son  of  R.  out  of  Gibeah  of .  .Be. 

1  Ch.11.  31  Ithai  the  son  of  R.  of  Gibeah.  .of  Benja. 
RIBBAND  — 

A  thread,  ribband,  bsna  pathil. 

N  urn  1 5-  38  they  put  upon  the  fringe . .  a  ribband  of  hi. 
RTB'-LAH,  n^nn  bare  place.     See  Diblath. 
A  city  on  the  Orontes  N.  of  the  Bikea;  now  called 
Ribleh. 

Xum34. 11  And  the  coast  shall  go  down,  .to  R.,  on  the 

2  Kit  23.  33  Pharaoh-nechoh  put  him  in  bands  at  R. 

25.    6,  20  brought . .  to  the  king  of  Babylon  to  R. 

25.  21  And  the  king  of  Babylon. .  slew  them  at  R. 
Jer.   39.    5  they  brought  him . .  to  R.  in  the  laud  of  H. 

39.   6  the  king,  .slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  in  R. 

52.    9  they  took  the  king,  .to  R.  in  the  land  of 

52. 10  he  slew  also  all  the  princes  of  Judah  in  R. 

52.  26  brought  them  to  the  king  of  Babylon  to  R. 

52.  27  And  the  king,  .put  them  to  death  in  R. 
RICH  (man)  — 
l.Rich,  T#J/  ashir. 

EXOCI30.  15  The  rich  shall  not  give  more,  and  the  poor 
Ruth  3.  10  followedst  not.  .men,  whether  poor  or  r. 
2  Sa.  12.    1  There  were  two.  .in  one  city ;  the  one  rich 

12.    2  The  rich,  .had  exceeding  many  flocks  and 

12.  4  there  came  a  traveller  unto  the  rich  man 
Job  27.  19  The  rich  man  shall  lie  down,  but  he  shall 
Psa.   45.  12  the  rich  among  the  people  shall  entreat 

49.  2  Both  lowandhigh,  rich  and  poor,  together 
Prov  10.  15  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 

14.  20  is  hated,  .but  the  rich  (hath)  many  friends 

18.  11  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 

18.  23  The  poor  useth  entreaties;  but  the  rich 
22.  2  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together:  the  L. 
22.  7  The  rich  ruleth  over  the  poor,  and  the  b. 
22  16  he  that  giveth  to  the  rich,  (shall)  surely 
28.  6  perverse  (in  his)  ways,  though  he  (be)  rich 
28.  ii  The  rich  man  (is)  wise  in  his  own  conceit 

Eccl.  5.  12  the  abundance  of  the  rich  will  not  suffer 
10.  6  Folly  is  set  in  great  dignity,  and  the  rich 
10.  20  curse  not  the  rich  in  thy  bed  chamber:  for 

lsa.     53.    9  made  his  grave,  .with  the  rich  in  his  de. 

Jer.      9  23  let  not  the  rich  (man)  glory  in  his  riches 

Mic.  6.  12  the  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  violence 
2. Rich,  wide,  bountiful,  jnc"  shoa. 

Job   34. 19  nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor 

S.Rich,  Trhovo'tos  plousios. 

Matt  19.  23  That  a  rich  man  shall  hardly  enter  into 

19.  24  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kin. 
27.  57  there  came  a  rich  man  of  Arimathea,  na. 

Markio.  25  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kin. 

12.  41  and  many  that  were  rich  cast  in  much 
Luke  6.  24  woe  unto  you  that  are  rich  !  for  ye  have 

12.  16  The  ground  of  a  certain  rich  man  brongl .f 
14.  12  not . .  thy  kinsmen,  nor  (thy)  rich  neighb. 
16.  1  a  certain  rich  man  which  had  a  steward 
16!  19  a  certain  rich  man,  which  was  clothed  in 
16  21  crumbs  which  fell  frcm  the  rich  man's  t. 
1622  the  rich  man  also  died,  rnd  was  buried 
18'  21  he  was  very  sorrowful :  for  he  was  very  r. 
18"  2s  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kin. 
to'  2  a  man  named  Zaccheus..and  he  was  rich 
ax    i  «aw  the  rich  men  casting  their  gifts  into 

2  Co.  8.'  9  though  he  was  rich,  yet  foryour  sakes  he 
Eph.   2.    4  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great 
1  Ti.    6.  17  Charge  them  that  are  rich  iu  this  world 
Jas.     1.  10  But  the  rich,  in  that  he  is  made  low :  be. 

1  11  so  also  shall  the  rich  man  fade  away  in  his 
->     5  the  poor  of  this  world  rich  m  faith,  and 

2  6  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw 

e  1  Go  to  now.  .rich  men,  weep  and  howl  tor 
Rev    2.    9  I  know  thy .  .poverty,  but  thou  art  rich 

3  17  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and 
6  15  the  rich  men,  and  the  chief  captains,  and 

13.  16  both  small  and  great,  rich  and  poor,  free 


RICH 


816 


RIGHT 


4.  To  be  or  become  rich,  tt\ovt€o>  pluteo. 

Luke  i.  53  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent  empty  away 
HIGH  (richer),  to  be,  be  made,  become,  was  — 
1.  Wealthy  substance,  sufficiency,  |in  hon. 

Prov  28.  22  He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  hath  an  evil  eye 
'2.  To  be  heavy,  weighty,  honourable,  "ns  kabed. 

Gen.  13.    2  Abram  (was)  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver 
3.2b  reach  to,  overtake,  fyi  nasag,  5. 

Lev.  25.  47  if  a  sojourner  or  stranger  wax  rich  by  thee 

4.  To  be  rich,  Tgty  ashar. 

Job    15.  29  He  shall  not  be  rich,  neither  shall  his  su. 
Hos.  12.   8  Yet  I  am  become  rich,  I  have  found  me 

5.  To  make  rich,  Tgty  ashar,  5. 

Psa.  49. 16  Be  not  thou  afraid  wheu  one  is  made  rich 
Prov2i.  17  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  rich 

23.  4  Labour  not  to  be  rich ;  cease  from  thine 
28.  20  he  that  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not 

Jer.     5.  27  they  are  become  great,  and  waxen  rich 
Dan.  11.   2  the  fourth  shall  be  far  richer  than  (they) 
Zech.11.    5  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord;  for-Iamrich:and 

6.  To  be  or  become  rich,  w\ovt4g>  plouteo. 

Lukeia.  21  So  (is)  he  that,  .is not  rich  toward  God 
Rom.w.  12  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that 

1  Co.  4.    8  Now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  rich,  ye  have 

2  Co.   8.    9  that  ye  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich 
1  Ti.    6.   9  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 

6.  18  that  they  be  rich  in  good  works,  readyto 

Rev.    3.  iS  that  thou  mayest  be  rich;  and  white  rai. 

18.    3  merchants  of  the  earth  are  waxed  rich  th. 

18.  15  merchaufcs.  .which  were  made  rich  by  her 

18.  19  wherein  were  made  rich  all  that  had  ships 

RICH,  to  make  (self)  — 

l.To  make  rich,  T»j;  ashar,  5. 

Gen.  14.  23  shouldest  say,  I  have  made  Abram  rich 

1  Sa.   2.    7  maketh  poor,  and  maketh  rich :  he  bring. 
Prov  10.    4  but  the  haud  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich 

10  22  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich 

2.  To  mate  self  rich,  iffy  ashar,  7. 

Prov  13.    7  There  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,yet(ha.) 

3.  To  make  rich,  ttKovt'i^q}  plsutizo. 

2  Co.   6. 10  yet  making  many  rich ;  as  having  nothing 
RICHES  — 

1. Substance,  riches,  Jin  hon. 

Psa. 119.  14  I  have  rejoiced,  .as  (much  as)  in  all  riches 
Prov.  8.  iS  (are)  with  me;  (yea),  durable  riches  and  ri. 
11.    4  Riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath :  but 
13.    7  maketh  himself  poor,  yet  (hath)  great  rl. 

19.  14  House  and  riches  (are)  the  inheritance  of 

24.  4  filled  with  all  precious  and  pleasant  riches 
Eze.  27.  12  thy  merchant,  .of  all  (kind  of)riches;  with 

27.  18  for  the  multitude  of  all  riches;  in  the  wi. 
27.  27  Thyriches,  and  thy  fairs,  thy  merchandise 

27.  33  enrich,  .with  the  multitude  of  thy  riches 

2. Multitude,  ]^Dn  hamon. 

Psa.  37. 16  better  than  the  riches  of  many  wicked 

3.  Force,  might,  h*n  chayil. 

Job   20.  15  He  hath  swallowed  down  riches,  and  he 
Psa,  62.  10  if  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart(upon 

73. 12  prosper  in  the  world ;  they  increase  (in)r. 
fta.      8.    4  riches  of  Damascus  and  the  spoil  of  Sam. 

10.  14  my  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches 

30.    6  they  will  carry  their  riches  upon  Uie  sho. 

ox.    6  ye  shall  eat  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
Eze.  26.  12  they  shall  make  a  spoil  of  thy  riches,  and 

28.  4  thou  hast  gotten  thee'riches,  .and  hast  go. 
28.   s  traffic  hast  thou  increased  thy  riches,  and 

28.  5  thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  ri. 

4.  Thing  laid  or  treasured  up,  jDh  chosen. 
Prov.27.  24  For  riches  (are)  not  for  ever:  and  doth  the 

6.  What  is  over  and  above,  ^1^  yithrah. 

Jer.  48.  36  the  riches  (that)  lie  hath  gotten  are  peris. 

6.  Goods,  what  is  covered  or  concealed,  D'prn  nekasim. 

Josh. 22.    8  He  turn  with  much  riches  unto  your  tents 

7.  Jiiches,  TJ»y  osher. 

Gen.  31. 16  For  all  the  riches  which  God  hath  taken 

1  Sa.  17.  25  king  will  enrich  him  with  greatriches,  and 

1  Ki.  3.  ii  neither  hast  asked  riches  for  thyself,  nor 

3.  13  have  also  givenjthee.  .both  richesand  ho. 

10.  23  exceeded  all  the  kings,  .for riches  and  for 
1  Ch,29.  i2~Both  riches  and  honour(come)  of  thee,  and 

29.  28  died.,  full  of  days,  riches,  and  honour:  and 
a  Ch.  1.  1 1  hast  not  asked  riches,  wealth,  or  honour 

1.  12  give  thee  riches,  and  wealth,  and  honour 
9.  22  passed  all  the  kings . .  in  riches  and  wisdom 

17.  5  he  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance 

18.  1  Jehoshaphat  had  riches  and  honour  in  a. 
32.  27  had  exceeding  much  riches  and  honour 

Esth.  1.    4  Whenhe  showed  the  riches  of  his  glorious 
5.  11  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches,  and 
Psa.  49.    6  boast,  .in  the  multitude  of  their  riches 
52.    7  trusted  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches 
ii2,    3  Wealth  and  riches  (shall  be)  in  his  house 
Prov.  3.  16  (and)  in  her  left  hand  riches  and  honour 
8.  18  Riches  and  honour  (are)  with  me ;  (yea) 

11.  16  honour;  and  strong  (men)  retain  riches 
11.  28  He  that  trustethin  his  riches  shall  fall 

13.  8  The  ransom  of  a  man's  life  (are)  his  riches 

14.  24  Thecrown  of  the  wise(is)their  riches;  (but 
22.  1  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches.(and) 
22.  4  fearof  the  Lord,  (are)  riches,  honour,  and 
30.    8  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches ;  feed 

i-ccl.  4.    8  neither  is  his  eye  satisfied  with  riches 


Eccl.  5.  13  riches  kept  for  the  owners  thereof  to  th. 
5.  14  But  those  riches  perish  by  evil  travail 

5.  19  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches  and  we. 

6.  2  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches,  wealth 
g.  11  nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  understanding 

Jer.    9.  23  let  not  the  rich  (man)  glory  in  his  riches 

17.  11  he  that  getteth  riches,  and  not  by  right 
Dan.  11.    2  by  his  strength  through  his  riches  he  sh. 

8. Acquisition,  f^Jp  qinyan. 

Psa.  104.  24  made  them  all :  the  earth  is  full  of  thy  ri. 

9.  What  is  collected,  goods,  substance,  Pi3"i  rehash. 
Gen  36.  7  For  their  riches  were  more  than'theythat 
2  Ch.20.  25  found  among  them . .  both  riches  with  the 
Dan.  11.  13  with  a  great  army  and  with  much  riches 

11.  24  scatter  among  them  the  prey,  .and  riches 
11.  28  he  return  into  his  land  with  great  riches 

10.  filches,  bountifulness ,  jv'b*  skua. 

Job  36.  19  Will  he  esteem  thy  riche3  ?  (no),  not  gold 
11. Riches,  rrKovros  plcnitos. 

Matt"i3.  22  deceitfulness  of  riches,  choke  the  word 

Mark  4,  19  deceitfulness  of  riches,  and  the  lusts  of 

Luke  8.  14  choked  with  cares  and  riches  and  pleas. 

Rom  2.    4  Or  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  good. 
9.  23  that  he  might  make  known  the  riches  of 
11.  12  Now  if  the  fall  of  them  (be)  the  riches  of 
11.  12  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the  G 
11. 33  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisd. 

2  Co.  8.    2  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their  liber. 

Eph.    1,    7  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace 

1.  18  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in 

2  7  might  show  the  exceeding  richesof  hisgr. 
3.  8  I  should  preach .  .the  unsearchable  riches 
3.  16  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to  be 

Phil.  4.  19  supply  all  your  need  according  to  his  ri. 

Col.     1  27  would  make  known  what  (is)  the  riches 

2.  2  unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  un. 
1  Ti.  6.  17  nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the 
Heb.  11.  26  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the 
Jas.  5.  2  Your  riches  are  corrupted,  and  your  gar. 
Rev.   5.  12  that  was  slain  to  receive  power,  and  riches 

18.  17  For  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to 

12. Goods,  xp-hy-a  chrema. 

Markio.  23  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 

10.  24  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  ri. 

Lukei8.  24  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches 

RICHES,  hidden  — 

Hidden  treasures  or  riches,  Jicpp  matmon. 

Isa.  45.   3  I  will  give  thee,  .hidden  riches  of  secret 

RICHLY  — 

Richly,  irKovo'itQS  plonsios. 

Col      3.  16  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly 
1  Ti,    6.  17  who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy 

RED,  to  — 

l.To  snatch  at  or  away,  deliver,  7*j  natsal,  5. 
Gen.  37.  22  that  he  might  rid  him  out  of  their  hands 
Exod.  6.    6  will  rid  you  out  of  their  bondage,  and  I 
Psa.  82.    4  Deliver  the  poor  and  needy :  rid  (them) 

2.  To  02)e7i,  nys  patsah. 

Psa. 144.    7  rid  me,  and  deliver  me  outof  great  waters 
144.  11  Rid  me,  and  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of 

3.  To  cause  to  cease  or  rest,  n^V'  sJiabath,  5. 

Lev.  26.    6  and  I  will  rid  evil  beasts  out  of  the  land 
RIDDANCE,  (to  make  clean)  — 
l.To  end,  consume  nS?  kalah. 

Zeph.  1.  18  for  he  shall  make  even  a  speedy  riddance 

2.  To  make  an  end,  consume,  n?s  kalah,  3. 

Lev.  23.  22  shaltnot  make  clean  riddance  of  the  co. 
REDDLE  — 
A  hidden  saying,  rrvn  chidah. 

Judgi4.  12  I  will  now  put  forth  a  riddle  unto  you  :  if 
14.  13  Put  forth  thy  riddle,  that  we  may  hear  it 
14.  14  could  not  in  three  days  expound  the'rid. 
14.  15  that  he  may  declare  unto  us  the  riddle 
14.  16  thou  hast  put  forth  a  riddle  unto  the  ch. 
14.  17  told  the  riddle  to  the  children  of  her  pe. 
14.  18  If.  .not.  .ye  had  not  found  out  my  riddle 
14.  19  gave,  .unto  them  which  expounded  theri. 
Eae.  17.   2  Son  of  man,  put  forth  a  riddle,  and  speak 

REDE,  to  cause  or  make  — 

To  cause  or  make  to  ride,  2?"j  rakab,  5. 

Gen.  41.  43  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  chariot 
Dent  32.  13  He  made  him  ride  on  the  high  places  of 

1  Ki.  1.  33  cause  Solomon  my  son  to  ride  upon  mine 

1.  38  caused  Solomon  to  ride  upon  king  David's 
1.  44  caused  him  to  ride  upon  the  king's  mule 

2  Ki.io.  16  So  they  made  him  ride  in  his  chariot 
Job    30.  22  thou  causest  me  to  ride  (upon  it),  and  d. 
Psa,  66.fia  Thou  hast  caused  men  to  ride  over  our 
Isa.   58.  14  cause  thee  to  ride  upon  the  high  places  of 
Hos.  10.  11  I  will  make  Ephraim  to  ride;  Judah  shall 

RLDE  (on,  upon,  in  a  chariot),  to  — 
To  ride,  3Ti  rakab. 

Gen.  24.  61  they  rode  upon  the  camels,  and  followed 
Lev.  15.   9  what  saddle  soever  he  rideth  upon  that 
Num'22.  30  upon  which  thou  hast  ridden  ever  since 
Deut33.  26  rideth  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help,  and 
Judg.  5.  10  Speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses,  ye  th. 
10.   4  thirty  sons  that  rode  on  thirty  ass  colts 
12. 14  that  rode  on  threescore  and  ten  ass  colts 
1  Sa.  25.  20  it  was  (so,  as)  she  rode  on  the  ass,  that 
25.  42  hasted,  and  arose,  and  rode'upon  an  ass 
30. 17  young  men,  which  rode  upon  camels,  and 


1  Ki 

il- 

tK. 

a  Ki 

9- 

o. 

.\eh 

2. 

b)sth 

.  6. 

8. 

Psa. 

18. 

4S. 

68. 

68. 

Isa. 

IP- 

1°. 

Jer. 

6. 

TO. 

Hos 

Amos  2. 

Hab 

ft- 

Hap; 

2. 

2  Sa.  16.  2  for  the  king's  household  to  ride  on:  and 
18.  9  Absalom  rode  upon  a  mule,  and  the  mule 
ig.  26  saddle  me  an  ass,  that  I  may  ride  thereon 

11  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly;  and  he 

13  saddled  him  the  ass :  and  he  rode  thereon 
45  And  Ahab  rode,  and  went  to  Jezreel 
16  So  Jehu  rode  in  a  chariot,  and  went  to  J. 
25  when  I  and  thou  rode  together  after  Ah. 

12  with  me,  save  the  beast  that  I  rode  upon 
8  and  the  horse  that  the  king  rideth  upon 

14  posts  that  rode  upon  mules  (and)  camels 
10  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly ;  yea,  he 

4  in  thy  majesty  ride  prosperously,  because 

4  extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens 
33  To  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens  of 

1  the  Lord  rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud,  and 
16  We  will  ride  upon  the  swift ;  therefore  shall 
23  they  ride  upon  horses,  set  in  array  as  men 
42  shall  ride  upon  horses,  (every  one)  put  in 

3  we  will  not  ride  upon  horses ;  neither  will 

15  neither  shall  he  that  rideth  the  horse  de. 
8  that  thou  didst  ride  upon  thine  horses 

23  overthrow  the  chariots,  and  those  that  r. 

REDER,  RIDING  — 

To  ride,  23~±  rakab. 

Gen.  49.  17  biteth  the  horse  heels,  so  that  his  rider 
Exod  1 5.    1,  21  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  in. 
Hum 22.  22  Is'ow  he  was  riding  upon  his  ass,  and  his 
2  Ki.    4.  24  slack  not  (thy)  riding  for  me,  except  I  bid 

18.  23  if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  set  riders 
Esth.  8.  10  riders  on  mules,  camels,  (and)  young  dr. 
Job    39.  18  she  scorneth  the  horse  and  his  rider 
Isa.   36.    8  if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  set  riders 
Oer.   17.  25  ridingin  chariotsandonhorses, they,  and 

22.  4  riding  in  chariots  and  on  horses,  he,  and 
51.  21  break  in  pieces  the  horse  and  his  rider;  and 
51.  21  I  break  in  pieces  the  chariot  and  his  rid. 

Eze.  23.  6  youngmen,  horsemen  riding  upon  horses 
23. 12  horsemen  riding  upon  horses,  all  of  theni 

23.  23  renowned,  all  of  them  riding  upon  horses 
38.  15  all  of  them  riding  upon  horses,  a  great  c. 

Hag.    2.  22  horses  and  their  riders  shall  come  down 

Zech.  1.    8  and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse 
9.   9  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the 
10.    5  the  riders  on  horses  shall  he  confounded 
12.   4  smite  every  horse,  .and  his  rider  with  m. 
RIDGE  — 
A  furrow,  ridge,  C?n  telem. 

Psa.  65.  10  Thou  waterest  the  ridges  thereof  abunda. 
REE,  RYE  — 
Prickly  spelt  or  vetch,  n*D3  kussemeth. 

Exod.  9.  32  But  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  not  sm. 

Isa.   28.  25  appointed  barley,  and  ther  ye,  in  their  p.? 
RIFLED,  to  be  — 
To  be  rifled,  spoiled,  robbed.  Dp^  shams,  2. 

Zech  14.    2  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled 
RIGHT  — 

1.  Truth,  ncx  emeth. 

Gen.  24.  48  which  had  led  me  in  the  right  way  to  take 
.Neh.  9.  33  for  thou  hast  done  right,  but  we  have  d. 
Jer.    2.  21  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right 

2.  Right  of  freeing  or  redeeming,  nVxa  geullah. 

—  Ruth  4.    6  redeem  thou  my  right  to  thyself ;  for  I 

3. Right  hand  or  side,  ]7?;  yamin. 

Gen.  48. 17  saw.thathis  father  laid  his  right  hand  up. 
Exod 29.  22  the  right  shoulder;  for  it  (is)  a  ram  of 
Lev.    7.  32  the  right  shoulder  shall  ye  give  unto  the 

7.  33  shall  have  the  right  shoulder  for  (his)  part 

8.  25  two  kidneys,  and  their  fat,  and  the  right 

8.  26  on  the  fat,  and  upon  the  right  shouldt  r 

9.  21  breasts  aud  the  right  shoulder  Aaron  w. 
Num  18.  18  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right  shoul. 
Judg.  3.  16  gird  it  under  his  raiment  upon  his  right 

3.  21  took  thedagger  from  his  right  thigh,  and 
7.  20  the  trumpets  in  their  right  hands  to  blow 

1  Sa.  11.  2  that  I  may  thrust  out  all  your  right  eyes 

2  Sa.  20.  9  took  Amasa  by  the  beard  with  the  right 
1  Ki.    7.  39  five  bases  on  the  right  side  of  the  house 

7.  49  five  on  the  right  (side),  and  five  on  the  left 
Job  30.  12  Upon  (my) right (hand)rise  the  youth;  th. 
Psa.  73.  23  thou  hast  holden  (me)  by  my  right  hand 

mi.  5  the  Lord  (is)  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  h. 
Jer.  22.  24  were  the  signet  upon  my  right  hand,  yet 
Eze.  39.  3  cause  thine  arrows  to  fall  out  of  thy  right 
Zech.  4.    3  one  upon  the  right  (side)  of  the  bowl,  and 

4.  11  these  two  olive  trees  upon. the  right  (side) 
11. 17  upon  his  right  eye.  .his  right  eye  shall  be 

4.  Right  hand  of  side,  *j"r  yemini. 

Eze.    4.   6  lie  again  on  thy  right  side,  and  thou  shall 
5. Right  hand  or  side,  *$£  yemani. 

Exod2g.  20,  20  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  car  of 

29.  20  thumb  of  their  right:hand.  .right  foot 
Lev.    8.  23  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  "of  Aaron's  right  ear 
8. 23  aud  upon  the  thumb  of  his  rignt  hand 

8.  23  and  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot 
8.  24  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of  their  right  e;n 
8.  24  and  upon  the  thumbs  of  their  righthanda 
8.  24  and  upon  the  great  toes  of  their  right  feet 

14. 14,  17,  25,  28  right  ear ..  right .. right  foot 
14.  16  priest  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in  the  oil 
14.  27  priest  shall  sprinkle  with  his  right  finger 

1  Ki.  6.    8  The  door,  .(was)  in  the  right  side  of  the 

7.  21  he  set  up  the  right  pillar,  and  called  the 
7.  39  put  five  bases  on  the  right  side  of  the  ho. 

2  Ki.  it.  11  from  the  right  corner  of  the  temple  to  tho 
2  Ch.  4.  ic  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  east 


RIGHT 


815 


RIGHTEOUS 


2  Ch.23. 10  from  the  right  side  of  the  temple  to  the 
Eze.    4.    6  lie  again  on  thy  rightside,  and  thou  shalt 
47.    1  from  the  right  side  of  the  house,  at  the 
47.   2  behold,  there  ran  out  waters  on  the  right  s. 

'o.One  right,  upright,  -)&i  yashar. 

Exodi5.  26  and  wilt  do  that  which'is  right  in  his  sig. 

Deut.  6.  18  thou  shalt  do  (that  which  is)  right  and  g. 

12.   8  every  man  whatsoever'(is)rightiu  his  own 

12.  25  (that  which  is^  right  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
.So  in  2r.  9;  1  Ki.  15.  5;  2  Ki.  12.  2  ;  14,  3  ;  15.  3,  34;  16. 
2  ;  18.  3 ;  22.  2;  2  Ch.  20.  32  ;  24.  2;  25.  2  ;  26.  4 ;  27.  2 ;  28. 
1  ;  29.  2;  34.  2. 

Deut  12.  2S  thou  doest  (that  which  is)  good  and  right 

13.  18  to  do  (that  which  is)  right  in  the  eyes  of 

32.  4  and  without  iniquity,  just  and  right  (is) 
•Tosh.  9. 25  as  it  seemeth  good  and  right  unto  thee  to 
Judgi7.    6  every  man  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 

2r.  25  every  man  did  (that  which  was)  right  in 
1  Sa.12.  23  will  teach  you  the  good  and  the  right  way 

1  Ki.n.  33  to  do  (that  which  is)  right  in  mine  eyes 

11.  38  do  (that  is)  right  in  my  sight,  to  keep  my 

14.  8  to  do  (that)  only  (which  was)  right  in  mi. 

15.  11  Asa  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  eyes 
22.  43  doing  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  eyes 

■2  Ki.  10. 15  Is  thine  heart  right,  as  my  heart  (is)  with 
10. 30  done  well  in  executing  (that  which  is)  ri. 

2  Ch.  14.    2  Asa  did  (that  which  was)  good  and  right 

31.  20  wrought  (that  which  was)  good  and  right 
Ezra    8.  2i  to  seek  of  him  a  right  way  for  us,  and  for 
Neh.   9. 13  gavest  them  right  judgments,  and  true 
Job  33.  27  perverted  (that  which  was)  right,  and  it 
Psa.  19.   8  statutes  of  the  Lord  (are)right,  rejoicing 

33.  4  ForthewordoftheLORD(is)right;  and  all 
107.    7  he  led  them  forth  by  the  right  way,  that 

Prov.  8.   9  and  right  to  them  that  find  knowledge 

12. 15  The  way  of  a  fool  (is)  right  in  his  own  eyes 
14.  12  There  is  a  way  which  seemeth  right  unto 
16. 13  and  they  love  him  that  speaketh  right 

16.  25  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto 
20.11  his  work  (be)  pure,  and  whether  (it  be)  r 
21.   2  Every  way  of  a  man  (is)  right  in  his  own 

21.  8  but  (as  for)  the  pure,  his  work  (is)  right 
Jer.  34.  15  had  done  right  in  my  sight,  in  proclaim. 
Hos.  14.   9  for  the  ways  of  the  Lord  (are)  right,  and 

7. Right,  uprightness,^"  yosher. 

Job     6.  25  How  forcible  are  right  words  !  but  what 
Prov.  4.  11  taught  thee .  .1  have  led  thee  in  right  pa. 

H.  To  be  prepared,  ready,  established,  ps  kitn,  2. 
Job  42.    7  not  spoken  of  me  (the  thing  that  is)  right 
42.    8  not  spoken  of  me  (the  thing  which  is)  ri. 
Psa.  51.  10  and  renew  *.  right  spirit  within  me 

78.  37  For  their  heart  was  not  right  with  him 

9. So,  prepared*  right,  ]3  ken. 

Nuni27.    7  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  speak  right 

\Q.Right?iess,  uprightness,  fn#$  Jcishron. 

Eccl.  4.    4  every  right  work,  that  for  this  a  man  is 

11.  Upright  place  or  thing,  nity\?  mishor. 

Psa.  45.    6  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom  (is)  a  right  sceptre 

12.  Judgment,  right,  cause,  manner,  B3^p  mishpat. 
Gen.  18.  25  Shall  not  the  judge  of  all  thejearth  dori.? 
Deut2i.  17  beginning  of  his  strength :  the'  right  of  the 
Job  34.   6  Should  I  lie  against  my  right?  my  wound 

34.  17  Shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  govern? 

35.  2  Thinkest  thou  this  to  be  right,  (that)  thou 

36.  6  the  wicked  :  but  giveth  right  to  the  poor 
Psa.    g.    4  thou  hast  maintained  my  right  and  my 

140.  12  cause  of  the  afflicted,  (and)  the  right  of 
Prov.  12.    5  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  (are)  right 

16.  8  Better,  .than  great  revenues  without  rig. 
Isa.    10.    2  to  take  away  the  right  from  the  poor  of 

32.  7  words,  even  when  the  needy  speaketh  ri. 
Jer.     5.  28  and  the  right  of  the  needy  do  they  not 

17.  11  he  that  getteth  riches,  and  not  by  right 
32.  7  for  the  right  of  redemption  (is)  thine  to 
32.    8  for  the  right  of  inheritance  (is)  thine,  and 

Lam.  3.  35  To  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before 
Eze.  21.  27  until  he  come  whose  right  it  is;  and  I  w. 

13.  Straight  forward,  n'05  nakoach. 

2  Sa.  15.  3  See,  thy  matters  (are)  good  and  right;  but 
Prov  24.  26  shall  kiss  (his)  lips  that  giveth  a  right  an. 
Amos  3. 10  For  they  know  not  to  do  right,  saith  the 

14.  Rightness,  justice,  p*vt  tsedeq. 

Psa.    9.    4  thou  safest  in  the  throne  judging  right 
17.    1  Hear  the  right,  O  Lord,  attend  unto  my 
119.  75  that  thy  judgments  (are)  right,  and  (that) 

15.  Rightness,  justice,  npis  tsedaqah. 

2  Sa.  19.  28  what  right  therefore  have  I  yet  to  cry  any 

Neh.   2.  20  ye  have  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memo. 

Eze.  18.    5,  19,  21,  27  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 

33. 14,  16,  19  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 

IQ.Rifjht  (hand,  foot,  or  side),  St£i6s  dexios. 

Matt.  5.  29  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 
5.  30  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee.cutif  off,and 
5. 39  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right 

Luke  6.   6  wasaman  whoserighthand*was  withered 

22.  50  smote  a  servant . .  and  cut  off  his  right  ear 
Johm8. 10  Then  Simon  Peter,  .cut  off  his  right  ear 

21.   6  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship 

Acts   3.   7  he  took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  lifted 

Rev.    1. 16  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars ;  and 

1.  17  laid  his  right  hand  upon  me,  saying  unto 

10.   2  set  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  (his) 

13. 16  to  receive  a  mark  in  their  right  hand,  or 

17 '.Right,  just,  SiKctios-  dikaios. 

Matt  20.   4  and  whatsoever  is  right  I  will  give  you 

103 


T 


Matt  20.  7  [whatsoever  is  right, (that)  shall  ye  receive] 
Lukei2.  57  of  yourselves  judge  ye  not  what  is  right? 
Acts  4.  19  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to 
Eph.  6.    1  Children,  obey  your  parents . .  this  is  right 

IS. Privilege,  i^ovaia  exousia. 

Heb.  13.  10  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which 
Rev.  22.  14  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may 

19.  Straight,  upright,  correct,  si/6vs  euthus. 

Acts    8.  21  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God 

13.  10  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord 
2  Pe.   2.  15  Which  have  forsaken  the  right  way,  and 

20. Right,  upright,  erect,  opdws  orthOs. 

Lukeio.  28  Thou  hast  answered  right :  this  do,  and 
RIGHT,  to  be,  esteem,  go  on  — 

1.  To  be  right  or  upright,  1#;  yashar. 

1  Ch.13.    4  for  the  thing  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  all 

2.  To  esteem  or  go  right,  i?>;  yashar,  3. 

Psa. 119.  128  I  esteem  all(thy)precepts.  .(to  be)  right 
Prov.  9. 15  To  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their 

Z.To  he  right  or  upright,  ip'a  kasher. 

Esth.  8.    5  and  the  thing  (seem)  right  before  the  king 
RIGHT  (early,  forth,  on)  — 

l.Straightforward,over  againsi,righi on,n?i  nokach. 
Prov.  4.  25  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on,  and  let  thine 
2,  To  face,  front,  look,  hjs  panah. 

Psa.  46.    5  God  shall  help  her,  (and  that)  right  early 
Z.Face,  D':s  panim. 

Jer.  49.    5  shall  be  driven  out  every  man  right  forth 
RIGHT  hand  or  side  — 
1. Right  hand  or  side,  po;  yamin. 

Gen,  13.  9  or  if  (thou  depart)  to  the  right  hand  then 
24.  49  I  may  turn  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the 
4S.  13  Ephraim  in  his  right  hand  toward  Israel's 
48.  13  Manasseh  .towardlsrael'sright hand, and 
4S.  14  Israel  stretched  out  his  right  hand,  and 
48.  18  Not  so.  .put  thy  right  handupon  his  head 
Exod  14.  22,  29  wall  unto  them  on  their  right  hand 

15.  6  Thy  right  hand,  .thy  right  hand,  0  Lord 
15. 12  Thou  stretchedst  out  thy  right  hand,  the 

Nuni2o.  17  we  will  not  turn  to  the  right  hand  nor  to 

22.  26  no  way  to  turn  either  to  the  right  hand 
Deut.  2.  27  will  neither  turn  unto  the  right  hand  nor 

5. 32  ye  shall  not  turn  aside  to  the  right  hand 
17.  11  thou  shalt  not  decline,  .(to)  the  right  ha. 
17.  20  turn  not  aside .  .(to)  the  right  hand,  nor(to) 
28. 14  not  go  aside,  .(to)  the  right  hand  or  (to) 

33.  2  from  his  right  hand  (went)  a  fiery  law  for 
Josh.  1.    7  turn  not  from  it  (to)the  right  hand  or(to) 

17.  7  border  went  along  on  the  right  hand  unto 

23.  6  turn  not  aside  therefrom  (to)  the  right  h. 
Judg.  5.  26  right  hand  to  the  workmen  s  hammer 

16.  29  of  the  one  with  his  right  hand,  and  of  the 

1  Sa.   6. 12  turned  not  aside  (to)  to  right  hand  or  (to) 

2  Sa.    2.  ig  turned  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the 

2.  21  Turn  thee  aside  to  thy  right  hand  or  to 

16.  6  mighty  men  (were)  on  his  right  hand  and 

24.  5  on  the  right  side  of  the  city  that  (lieth)  in 

1  Ki.  2.  19  sat  down,  .and  she  sat  on  his  right  hand 

22.  19  standing  by  him  on  his  right  hand  and  on 

2  Ki.  12.   9  on  the  right  side  as  one  cometh  into  the 

22.  2  turned  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to 

23.  13  which  (were)  on  the  right  hand  of  the  m. 

1  Ch.  6.  39  brother  Asaph,  who  stood  on  his  right  h. 

2  Ch.  3.  17  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 

4.    6,  7,  8  five  on  the  right  hand,  and  five  on 

18.  18  standing  on  his  right  hand  and  (on)  his 

34.  2  declined  (neither)  to  the  right  hand  nor 
Neh.   8.    4  Maaseiah,  on  his  right  hand  ;  and  on  his 

12.  31  weot-on  the  right  hand  upon  the  wall  to. 
Job  23.    9  he  hideth  himself  on  the  right  hand,  th. 

40.  14  that  thine  own  right  hand  can  save  thee 
Psa.  16.    8  is)  at  my  right  hand,  I  shall  not  be  moved 

16. 11  at  thy  right  hand. .  pleasures  for  evermore 

17.  7  thou  that  savest  by  thy  right  hand  them 

18.  35  thy  right  hand  hath  holden  me  up,  and 

20.  6  with  the  saving  strength  of  his  right  hand 

21.  8  thy  right  hand  shall  find  out  those  that 
26.  ioIn whose hands(is)mischief..theirrighth. 

44.  3  thy  right  hand,  and  thine  arm,  and  the 

45.  4  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible 
45.   9  upon  thy  right  hand  did  stand  the  queen 
48.  10  thy  right  hand  is  full  of  righteousness 
60.   5  save  (with)  thy  right  hand,  and  hear  me 
63.    8  folio  weth  hard  after  thee :  thy  right  hand 
74.  11  Why  withdrawest  thou,  .thy  right  hand? 
77. 10  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  most 
78.  54  mountain,  .his  right  hand  had  purchased 
So.  15  vineyard  which  thy  right  hand  hath  pla. 
80. 17  hand  be  upon  the  man  of  thy  right  hand 
89.  13  strong  is  thy  hand . .  high  is  thy  right  ha. 
89.  25  I  will  set.  .his  right  hand  in  the  rivers 
89.  42  Thou  hast  set  up  the  right  hand  of  his  ad. 
gi.   7  and  ten  thousand  atthyrighthand;  (but) 
g8.    1  his  right  hand,  and  his  holy  arm,  hath  g. 

108.  6  save  (with)  thy  right  hand, 'and  answer  me 

109.  6  and  let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand 
109.  31  he  shall  stand  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
no.   1  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make 
no.    s  The  Lord  at  thy  right  hand  shall  strike 
118. 15,  16  right  hand  ofthe  Lord  doeth  valiantly 
118. 16  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  is  exalted 

1 37.  5  If  I  forget  thee . .  let  my  right  hand  forget 

138.  7  stretch  forth,  .thy  right  hand  shall  save 
139. 10  Even  there,  .thy  right  hand  shall  hold  me 
142.    4  I  looked  on  (my)  right  hand,  and  beheld 


Psa.144.    8,  n  right  hand  (is)  a  righthand  of  falseh. 

Prov.  3.  16  Length  of  days  (is)  in .  .right  hand  ;  (and) 
4. 27  Turn  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  totheleffc 
27.  i6and  the  ointment  of  hisrighthand, (which) 

Eccl.  10.    2  A  wise  man's  heart  (is)  at  his  right  hand 

Song  2.    6  and  his  right  hand  doth  embrace  me 
8.    3  and  his  right  hand  should  embrace  me 

Isa.  9/20  he  shall  snatch  on  the  right  hand,  and  be 
41. 10  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness 
41. 13  thy  God  will  hold  thy  right  hand,  saying 

44.  20  say,  (Is  there)  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand 

45.  1  whose  right  hand  I  have  holden,  to  subd. 
48. 13  my  right  hand  hath  spanned  the  heavens 
54.    3  thou  shalt  break  forth  on  the  right  hand 
62.   8  The  Lord  hath  sworn  by  his  right  hand 
63. 12  That  led  (them)  by  the  right  hand  of  Mo. 

Lam.  2.  3  he  hath  drawn  hack  his  right  hand  from 
2.    4  stood  with  his  right  hand  as  an  adversary 

Eze.  1.  10  and  the  face  of  a  lion  on  the  right  side 
10.  3  the  cherubim  stood  on  the  right  side  of 
16.  46  sister,  that  dwelleth  at  thy  right  hand 

21.  22  At  his  right  hand  was  the  divination  for 
Dan.  12.  7  when  he  held  up  his  right  hand  and  his 
Jon.    4.  n  their  right  hand  and  their  lefthand;  and 
Hab.  2. 16  the  cup  of  the  Lord's  right  hand  shall  be 
Zech.  3.   1  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him 

12.    6  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left :  and 

'2.  Right  hand,  side,  TO*,  '3D*  yeviani,  yemini. 

2  Ch.  3.  17  called  the  name  of  that  on  the  right  hand 
3. Right  hand,  side,  Se|ios  dexios. 

Matt.  6.  3  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand 
20.  21  the  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other 
20.  23  to  sit  on  my  right  hand,  and  on  my  left 

22.  44  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand,  till  I  make 
25.  33  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand 

25.  34  the  king  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand 

26.  64  see.  .sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power 

27.  29  they  put.  .a  reed  in  his  right  hand :  and 

27.  38  one  on  the  righthand,  andanother  on  the 
Markio.  37  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 

10. 40  to  sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left 
12.  36  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand,  till  I  make 

14.  62  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 

15.  27  the  one  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  other 

16.  5  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right  side 
16. 19  [up  into  heaven,  andsat  on  the  righthand] 

Luke  1.  n  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar  of 
20.  42  The  Lord  said..  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand 

22.  69  shall  the  Son  of  man  sitontherighthand 

23.  33  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  other  on 
Acts    2. 25  he  is  on  my  right  hand,  that  I  should  not 

2.  33  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted 
2.  34  The  Lord  said..  Sit  thou  on  my  righthand 
5.  31  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  his  right  ha. 
7.  55  Jesus  standing  on  the  righthand  of  God 

7.  56  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of 
Rom.  8.  34  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  w. 
2  Co.  6.  7  armour . .  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  le. 
Gal.  2.  9  they  gave,  .the  right  hands  of  fellowship 
Eph.  1.  20  and  set  (him)  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the 
Col.  3.  1  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
Heb.   1.    3  on  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high 

1.  13  Sit  on  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  thine 

8.  1  who  is  set  on  the  righthand  ofthe  throne 
10. 12  this  man.  .sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of 
12.    2  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God 

1  Pe.  3.  22  Who  is.  .on  the  right  hand  of  God ;  angels 
Rev,    1.  20  stars  which  thou  sawestinmy  right  hand 

2.  1  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand 
5.  1  I  saw  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on 
5.   7  took  the  book  out  of  the  right  hand  of  him 

RIGHT  hand,  to  go,  turn,  or  use  the  — 
l.To  turn  to  the  right  hand,  fDs  aman,  5. 

Isa.   30.  21  when  ye  turn  to  the  righthand,  and  when 
2.  To  go,  turn,  or  use  the  right  hand,  jc;  yaman,  5. 

Gen.  13.    9  then  I  will  goto  the  right;  or  if  (thou  d.) 

2  Sa.  14.  19  none  can  turn  to  the  righthand  or  to  the 
1  Ch.  12.    2  could  use  both  the  right  hand  and  the 
Eze.  21. 16  (either)  on  the  right  hand,  (or)  on  the  left 

RIGHT  thing  — 

1.  Upright  things,  ujmghtness,  0*yJ%£>  mesharim. 

Prov.  8.  6  opening  of  my  lips  (shall  be)  right  things 
23.  16  rejoice  when  thy  lips  speak  right  things 

Isa.  45.  ig  I  the  Lord,  .declare  things  that  are  right 
2. Straightforward,  over  against,  right  on,  rj)Dinak. 

Isa.   30.  10  Prophesy  not  unto  us  right  things,  speak 
RIGHTEOUS  (man  or  cause)  — 
1.  Upright,  right,  "iw;  yashar. 

Js'uni23-  10  Let  me  die  the  death  of  therighteous,  and 

Job  4.  7  Remember,  .where  werethe  righteouscut 
23.    7  the  righteous  might  dispute  with  him ;  so 

Psa.  107.  42  The  righteous  shall  see  (it),  and  rejoice 

Prov.  2.    7  layeth  up  sound  wisdom  forthe  righteous 

3.  32  the  Lord,  .his  secret  (is)  with  the  righte. 
14.  9  but  among  the  righteous  (there  is)  favour 
15. 19  but  the  way  of  the  righteous  (is)  made  p. 

28.  10  Whoso  causeth  the  righteous  to  go  astray 
2. Righteous,  just,  p^x  tsaddiq. 

Gen.    7.    1  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me  in 
18.  23  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the  righteous  with 
18.  24  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  the  city? 
18.  24  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  (are)  therein 
18.  25  That befarfrom thee.. toslaytherighteoun 
18.  25  that  the  righteous  should  be  as  the  wicked 
18.  26  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  withiu 
18.  28  there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  righteous 
20.    4  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteonsna.  ? 

Exod.  9.  27  LoRP  (is)  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people 


RIGHTEOUS 


818 


RIGHTEOUSNESS 


Exod23.  7  the  innocent  and  righteous  slay  thou  not 
23.    8  ami  perverteth  the  words  of  the  righteous 

Deut.  4,  8  judgments  (so)  righteous  as  all  this  law 
16.  19  and  pervert  the  words  of  the  righteous 
25.    1  then  they  shall  justify  the  righteous,  and 

1  Sa.  24   17  Thuu  (art)  more  righteous  than  I ;  for  thou 

2  Sa.    4.  11  wicked  men  have  slain  a  righteous  person 

1  Ki.  2.  33  two  men  more  righteous  aud  better  than 

8.  32  justifying  the  righteous,  to  give  him  ace. 

2  Ki.10.    9  Ye  (be) righteous  :  behold,  I  conspired  ag. 
2Ch.  6  23  by  justifying  the  righteous,  by  giving  him 

12.    6  the  princes . .  said,  The  LORD  (is)  right. 

Ezra    9  15  O  Lord  Godof  Israel,  thou(art)nghteous 

Neb.  9.    8  performed  thy  words  ;  for  thou  (art)  righ. 

Job   17.    9  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way 

22. 19  The  righteous  see  (it),  and  are  glad;  and 

32.    i  because  he(was)righteous  in  his  own  eyes 

36.  7  He  withdraweth  not  bis  eyes  from  the  rig. 
Psa.     1.    5  sinners  in  the  congregation  of  the  right. 

1.  6  the  Lord  kuoweth  the  way  of  the  right. 
5.  12  thou.  Lord  wilt  bless  the  righteous;  with 
7.  9  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts  and  reins 
7. 11  God  judgeth  the  righteous,  and  God  is  an. 
ir.  3  be  destroyed,  what  can  the  righteous  do? 
11.  5  The  Lord  trieth  the  righteous;  but  the 
11.  7  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness 
14.    5  God  (is) In  the  generation  of  the  righteous 

31.  18  and  contemptuously  against  the  righteous 

32.  11  rejoice,  ye  righteous:  and  shout  for  joy 

33.  1  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  O  ye  righteous 

34.  15  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  upon  the  righ. 
34.  19  Many  (are)  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous 
34.  21  they  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  des. 

37.  16  Alittle  that  a  righteous  man  hath  (is)  bet. 
37.  17  but  the  Lord  upholdeth  the  righteous 
37.  21  the  righteous  showeth  mercy,  and  giveth 
37.  25  yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken 
37.  29  The  righteous  shall  inherit  the  land,  and 
37.  30  The  mouth  of  the'righteous  speaketh  wi. 
37.  32  The  wicked  watcheth  the  righteous,  and 
37.  39  the  salvation  of  the  righteous  (is)  of  the 
52.  6  The  righteous  also  shall  see.  and  fear,  and 
55.  22  he  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be 
58.  10  The  righteous  shall  rejoice  when  heseeth 
58.  11  (there  is)  a  reward  for  the  righteous  :  ver. 
64.  10  The  righteous  shall  be  glad  in  the  Lord 

68.  3  lettherighteousbeglad  :  let  them  rejoice 

69.  28  and  not  be  written  with  the  righteous 
72.  7  In  his  days  shall  the  righteous  flourish 
75.  10  the  horns  of  therigbteous  shall  be  exalted 
92.  12  The  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  palm 
94.  21  They  gather,  .against  the  soul  of  the  rig. 
97.  11  Light  (is)  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gl. 
97.  12  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  ye  righteous;  aud 

112.  4  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion,  and  ri. 
112.  6  the  righteous  shall  be  iu  everlasting  rem. 
1 16.    5  Gracious  (is)  the  Lord,  and  righteous ;  yea 

118.  15  voice. .(is)  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  right. 
118  20  This  gate . .  into  which  the  righteous  shall 

119.  137  Righteous  (art)  thou,  O  Lord,  and  upri. 
125.  3  shall  not  rest  upon  the  lot  of  the  righteous 
125.  3  the  righteous  put  forth  their  hands  unto 
129.    4  The  Lord  (is)  righteous  :  he  hath  cut  asu. 

140.  13  the  righteous  shall  give  thanks  unto  thy 

141.  5  Let  the  righteous  smite  me ;  (it  shall  be) 

142.  7  the  righteous  shall  compass  me  about;  for 

145.  17  The  Lord  (is)  righteous  in  all  his  ways 

146.  8  bowed  dowu;  the  Lord  loveth  the  righte. 
Prov.  2.  20  thou  mayest..keep  the  paths  of  the  righ. 

10.    3  suffer  the  soul  of  the  righteous  to  famish 
10.  11  mouth  of  a  righteous  (man  is)  a  well  of 
10.  16  labour  of  the  righteous  (tendeth)  to  life 
10.  21  The  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  many :  but 
10. 24  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted 
10.  25therighteous(is)aneverlastingfoundation 
10.  28  The  hope  of  the  righteous  (shall  be)  glad. 
10.  30  The  righteous  shall  never  be  removed ;  but 

10.  32  The  lips  of  the  righteous  know  what  isac. 

11.  8  The  righteous  is  delivered  out  of  trouble 
11.  10  When  it  goeth  well  with  the  righteous 
11.  21  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  delivered 
11  23  The  desire  of  the  righteous  (is)  only  good 
11.  28  but  the  righteous  shall  flourish  asa  branch 
11.  30  The  fruit  of  therigbteous  (is)  a  tree  of  life 

11.  31  the  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  in  the 

12.  3  the  root  of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  mo. 
12.    5  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  (are)  right 
12.   7  the  house  of  the  righteous  shall  staud 
12.  10  A  righteous  (man)regardeth  thelifeof  his 
12.  12  the  root  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  (fruit) 

12.  26  The  righteous  (is)  more  excellent  than  his 

13.  s  A  righteous  (man)  hateth  lying ;  but  a  wi. 
13.  9  The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth:  but 
13.  21  but  to  the  righteous  good  shall  be  repaid 

13.  25  The  righteous  eateth  to  the  satisfying  of 

14.  19  the  wicked  at  the  gates  of  the  righteous 

14.  32  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death 

15.  6  In  the  house  of  the  righteous  (is)  much 
15.  28  The  heartof  the  righteous  studieth  to  an. 
15.  29  butJieheareththe^prayerof  the  righteous 
18.  5  not  good,  .to  overthrow  the  righteous  in 
18.  10  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe 
21.  12  The  righteous  (man)  wisely  considereth 
21. 18  wicked  (shall  be)a  ransom  for  therigbteous 
21.  26  but  the  righteous  giveth  and  spareth  not 

23.  24  The  father  of  the  righteous  shall  greatly 

24.  15  Lay  not  wait,  against  the  d  welling  of  the  ri. 

24.  24  saithunto  the  wicked.  Thou  (art)  righteo. 

25.  26  A  righteous  man  falling  down  before  the 
2S.  1  flee,  .but  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion 
2S.  12  When  righteous,  .do  rejoice,  (there is) gr. 
28.  23  when  they  perish,  the  righteous  Increase 


Prov  29.    2  When  the  righteous  are  in  authority,  the 
39.   6  but  the  righteous  doth  sing  and  rejoice 
29.    7  The  righteous  considereth  the  cause  of 
29.  16  but  the  righteous  shall  see  their  fall 
ccl.  3.  1 7  God  shall  j  udge  the  righteous  and  the 

7.  i6Beuotrighteousovermuch  ;  neither  make 

8.  14  according  to  the  work  of  the  righteous 

9.  i  the  righteous,  and  the  wise,  and  their  w. 

9.  2  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  w. 
Isa.     3.  10  Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  that  (it  shall  lie) 

g.  23  take  away  the  righteousness  of  the  right. 

24.  16  have  we  heard  songs,  .glory  to  the  right. 
26.  2  that  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth 
41.  26  that  we  may  say,  (lie  is)  righteous?  yea 
53.  11  by  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  ser. 
57.  1  The  righteous  perisheth,  and  uo  man  lay. 
57.  1  the  righteous  is  taken  "away  from  the  evil 
60.  21  Thy  people  also  (shall  be)  all  righteous 

Jer.  12.    1  Righteous  (art)  thou,  O  Lord,  when  I  p. 

20.  12  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triestthe  righteous 
23.    5  will  raise  unto  David  a  righteous  branch 

Lam.  1.  18  The  LORD  is  righteous;  for  I  have  rebel. 

Eze.     3  20  When  a  righteous  (man)  doth  turn  from 
3.  21  warn  the  righteous  (man),  that  the  right. 
13.  22  have  made  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad 
18.  2o.the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall 
18.  24  when  the  righteous  turneth  away  from 
18. 26  When  a  righteous  (man)  turneth  away 

21.  3,  4  will  cut  off  from  thee  the  righteous 
23.  45  the  righteous  men,  they  shall  judge  them 
33. 12  The  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall 
33.  12  neither  shall  therigbteous  be  able  to  live 
33.  13  shall  say  to  the  righteous,  (that)  he  shall 
33.  18  righteous  turneth  from  his  righteousness 

Dan.  9.  14  the  Lord  our  God  (is)  righteous  in  all  his 
Amos  2.   6  they  sold  the  righteous  for  silver,  aud 
Hab.    1.    4  wicked  doth  compass  about  the  righteous 
•   1.  13  (the  man  that  is)  more  righteous  than  he 
Mai.    3.  18  discernbetween  the  righteous  and  thew. 

Z. Rightness,  justice,  pns  tsecleq. 

Psa.  35.  27  be  glad,  that  favour  my  righteous  cause 
119.    7  shall  have  learned  thy  righteous  judgm. 
119.  62  thanks,  .becauseof  thy  righteous  judgm. 
1 19. 106  that  I  will  keep  thy  righteous  judgments 
119.  138  Thy  testimonies,  .(are)  righteous  and 
119.  160  thy  righteous  judgments  (eudureth)for 
119. 164  I  praise  thee  because  of  thy  righteous 
Prov  16.  13  Righteous  lips  (are)  the  delight  of  kings 
Isa.  41.    2  Who  raised  up  the  righteous  (man)  from 

i. Right,  righteous,  just,  Si/catos  di/caios. 

Matt.  9. 13  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but 

10.  41  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righte. 
10.  41  he.  .shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  rew. 
13. 17  many  prophets  and  righteous  (men)  have 
13.  43  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as 
23.  28  Even  so  ye  also  outwardly  appear  righte. 
23.  29  and  garnish  the  sepulchres  of  the  righte. 
23-  35  righteous  blood,  .from  the  blood  of  righ. 

25.  37  Then  shall  the  righteous  answer  him,  say. 
25.  46  these  shall  go  away . .  but  the  righteous  in 

Mark  2.  17  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners 

Luke  1.   6  they  were  both  righteous  before  God,  wa. 

5.  32  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  butsinue. 

18.  9  trusted  in  themselves  that  they  were  rig. 
23,  47  saying,  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  m. 

John  7.  24  appearance,  but  judge  righteous  judgm. 
17.  25  O  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not 

Rom.  3. 10  As  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous 
5.   7  For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one 
5.  19  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  rig. 

2  Th.  1.   5  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgme.] 

1.  6  Seeing  (it  is)  a  righteous  thing  with  God 

1  Ti.    1.    9  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man 

2  Ti.  4.  8  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  sh. 
Ileb.  11.  4  he  obtained  witness  that  he  was  righteo. 
Jas.     5.  16  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much 

1  Ve.    3.  12  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  (are)  over  the  right. 

4. 18  if  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where 

2  Pe.  2.  8  that  righteous  man . .  vexed  (his)  righteous 
1  Jo.    2.    1  have  an  advocate.  .Jesus  Christ  the  righ. 

2.  29  If  ye  know  that  he  is  righteous,  ye  know 

3.  7  he.  .is  righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous 
3.  12  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother's  righte. 

Rev.  16.    5  Thou  art  righteous,  O  Lord,  which  art 
16.    7  Lord  God  Almighty,  true  and  righteous 

19.  2  Fortrueand  righteous(are)hisjudgments 
22. 11  let  him  be  filthy  still :  and  he  that  is  rig. 

RIGHTEOUS  act  or  judgment  — 

1. Rightness,  justice,  nfli?  tsedaqah. 

Judg.  5.  nthere shall theyrehearsetherighteousacts 
5.  11  righteous  acts  (toward  the  inhabitants)  of 

1  Sa.  12.   7  all  the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord,  which 
%.  Right  or  just  judgment,hiKaioKpi(r{adikaiokrisia. 

Rom'2.   5  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  G 
RIGHTEOUS,  to  be  — 

1 .  To  be  right,  just,    pny  tsadaq. 

Gen.  38.  26  She  hath  been  more  righteous  than  I  ;be. 

Job  9.  15  though  I  were  righteous,  (yet)  would  I  not 
10. 15  (if)Iberighteous,(yet)willI  notliftupmy 
15.  14  born  of  a  woman,  that  he  should  be  right? 
22.    3  (Is  it)  any  pleasure,  .that  thou  art  right.? 

34.  5  For  Job  hath  said.  I  am  righteous  :  and  G. 

35.  7  If  thou  be  righteous,  what  gi  vest  thou  him? 
40.   8  condemn'me,ithat  thou  mayest  be  right.  ? 

Psa.  19.  9  judgments  of  the  Lord  (are)  true  (and)r. 
Eze.  16.  52  they  are  more  righteous  than  thou  :  yea 

2.  To  maJce  right,  just,  BiKat/jco  dikaioG. 

Rev.  22.  11  [let  him  be  righteous]  still;  and  he  that  is 


RIGHTEOUSLY  — 

1.  Upright  place  or  thing,  "tlt'D  mishor. 

Psa.  67.    4  for  thou  shall  judge  the  people  righteous. 

2.  Upright  things,  uprightness,  □,-)£i,p  meshari/ffh 
Psa.  96.  10  he  shall  judge  the  people  righteously 

3. Rightness,  justice,  p"i¥  tsedeq. 

Deut.  1.  16  judge  righteously  between  (every)  man 
Prov. 31.    9  Open  thy  mouth,  judge  righteously,  an  I 
Jer.    11.  20  LORD  of  hosts,  that  judgest  righteously 

A.  Rightness,  justice,  npny  tsedaqah. 

Isa.    33.  15  He  that  walketh  righteously,  and  speak. 
5. Rightly,  justly,  SiKatcos  dikaids. 

Titus  3.  12  righteously,  and  godly,  in  this  present  wo. 

1  Pe.   2.  23  committed  (himself),  .that  judgeth  right. 

RIGHTEOUSNESS  — 

1. Rightness,  justice,  pix  tsedeq. 

Lev.  19. 15  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thyne. 
Deut  33. 19  they  shall  offer  sacrifices  of  righteousness 
Job     6.  29  return  again,  my  righteousness  (is)  in  it 

8.  6  make  the  habitation  of  thy  righteousness 
29.  14  I  put  on  righteousness,  and  it  clothed  me 

35.  2  saidst.  My  righteousness  (is)  more  thanG. 

36.  3  and  will  ascribe  righteousness  to  my  ma. 
Psa.     4.    1  Hear  me.  .O  God  of  my  righteousness:  th. 

4.  5  Offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  and 
7.    8  according  to  my  righteousness,  and  acco. 

7.  17  praise  the  Lord  according  to  bis  righteo. 

9.  8  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness 

15.  2  walketh  uprightly,  and  workcth  righteo. 

17.  15  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness :  I 

18.  20  rewarded  me  according  to  my  righteous. 
18.  24  recompensed  me  according  to  my  righte. 
23.  3  leadeth  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness 
35.  24  Judge  me.  .according  to  thy  righteousness 
35.  28  my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  righteousness 

37.  6  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteousness  as 

40.  9  I  have  preached  righteousness  in  the  gr. 
45.  4  because  of  truth  and  meekness  (and)  rig. 
45.  7  Thou  lovest  righteousness,  and  hatest  w. 
48/10  thy  right  hand  is  full  of  righteousness 

50.  6  the  heavens  shall  declare  his  righteousn. 

51.  19  pleased  with  the  sacrifices  of  righteousn. 
52  .  3  lying  rather  than  to  speak  righteousness 
58.  1  Do  ye  indeed  speak  righteousness,  0  con. 
65.  5  terrible  things  in  righteousness  wilt  thou 
72.  2  shall  judge  thy  people  with  righteousness 
85.  10  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  (each 
85.  11  righteousness  shall  look  down  from  hea. 
85.  13  Righteousness  shallgobeforehim.andsh. 
94.  15  But  judgment  shall  return  unto  righteou. 

96.  13  shall  judge  the  world  with  righteousness 

97.  2  righteousness  and  judgment  (are)  the  ha. 

97.  6  The  heavens  declare  his  righteousness,  and 

98.  9  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  w. 

118.  19  Open  to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness:  1 

119.  123  and  for  the  word  of  thy  righteousness  me 
119.  i42aneverlastingrighteousness:  and  thy  law 
119. 144  The  righteousness  of  thy  testimonies  (is) 
119. 172  all  thy  commandments  (are)  righteousn. 
132.    9  Let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  righteou. 

Prov.  2.    9  Then  shalt  thou  understand  righteousness 

8.  8  All  the  words  of  my  mouth  (are)  in  right. 
12.  17  speaketh  truth  showeth  forth  righteous. 

25.  5  throne  shall  be  established  in  righteousn. 
Eccl.  3.  16  place  of  righteousness,(that)iuiquity(was) 

7.  15  just  (man)  that  perisheth  in  his  righteou. 
Isa.     1.  21  righteousness  lodged  in  it ;  but  now  nm. 

1.  26  shalt  be  called,  The  city  of  righteousness 
11.  4  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  poor 
11.    5  righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  lo. 

16.  5  seeking  judgment,  and  hasting  righteou. 

26.  9  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  right. 
26.  10  will  he  not  learn  righteousness :  in  the  la. 

32.  1  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and  pr. 

41.  10  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  myri. 

42.  6  I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in  righteous. 
42.  21  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness'  sake 
45.  8  and  let  the  skies  pour  down  righteousness 
45.  13  I  have  raised  him  up  in  righteousness,  and 
45. 19  I  the  LoRDspeak  righteousness,  I  declare 
51.  1  ye  that  follow  after  righteousness,  ye  that 
51.  5  My  righteousness  (is)  near ;  my  salvation 
51.  7  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  that  know  righteo. 
58.    8  thy righteousnessshallgobeforethee;  the 

61.  3  they  might  be  called  Trees  of  righteousn. 

62.  1  until  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as 
62.  2  the  Gentiles  shall  see  thy  righteousness 
64.  s  that  rejoiceth  and  worketh  righteousness 

Jer.   23.    6  shall  tie  culled  ;  The  Lord  our  righteous. 

33.  16  shall  be  called,  The  Lord  our  righteous. 
Eze.  3.  20  doth  turn  from  his  righteousness,  and  co. 
Dan.  9,  24  and  to  bring  iu  everlasting  righteousness 
Hos.    2.  19  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  righteous. 

10. 12  Sow  to  yourselves,  in  righteousness,  reap 
Zeph.  2.    3  seek  righteousness  seek  meekness:  it  may 

I.Rightncss,  justice,  r\%n$  tsedaqah. 

Gen.  15.    6  and  he  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousn. 

30.  33  So  shall  my  righteousness  answer  for  me 

Deut.  6.  25  it  shall  be  our  righteousness,  ifweobserve 

9.  4  For  my  righteousness  the  Lord  hath  bro. 
9.  5  Not  for  thy  righteousness,  or  for  the  up. 
9.    6  land  to  possess  it  for  thy  righteousness 

24. 13  it  shall  be  righteousness  unto  thee  before 

1  Sa.  26. 23  Lord  render  to  every  man  his  righteous. 

2  Sa.  22.  21  rewarded  me  according  to  my  righteous. 

22.  25  recompensed  me  according  to  my  righteo. 

1  Ki,  3.    6  walked  before  thee,  .in  righteousness,  and 

S.  32  to  give  him  accordingto  his  righteousness 


RiaHTEOUSNESS 


819 


RINGLEADER 


2  Ch.  6. 
Job   27, 

33- 

Psa.    5, 


99, 
103. 
103, 
106. 
106. 
in. 
112. 
119. 
119. 

MS- 
145. 

Prov.  S. 
8. 
10. 


Isa. 


5- 
5- 
5- 
10. 
28. 
32. 
32. 
32. 
33- 
45- 
45- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
48. 
48. 
5*- 
5*- 
54- 
54- 
56. 
57- 
58. 
59- 
59- 
60. 
61. 
61. 
63. 
64. 
4- 
9- 
22. 

33- 
as- 
se- 
s' 
14. 
14. 
18. 
18. 


33- 
33- 
33. 

Dan.  9. 
9- 

^  9' 

Hos.  10. 

Amos  5. 
5- 
6. 

Mic.  6. 
7- 

Zech.  8. 


Jer. 


Eze. 


23  by  giving  him  according  to  his  righteous. 

6  My  righteousness  I  hold  fast,  and  will  not 

26  he  will  render  unto  man  his  righteousness 
8  thy  righteousness  (may  profit)  the  son  of 

8  Lead  me . .  in  thy  righteousness  because  of 

7  For  the  righteous  Lord  Ioveth  righteous. 
31  shall  declare  his  righteousness  unto  a  pe. 

5  receive,  .righteousness  from  the  God  of 

1  ashamed . .  deliver  me  in  thy  righteousness 

5  He  Ioveth  righteousness  and  judgment 

6  Thy  righteousness  (is)  like  the  great  mo. 
10  thy  righteousness  to  the  upright  in  heart 

10  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within 

14  tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  thy  righteous. 

27  let  them  not  come  into  thy  righteousness 

2  Deliver  me  in  thy  righteousness,  and  cause 

15  Sly  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy  righteou. 

16  will  make  mention  of  thy  righteousness 

19  Thy  righteousness  also,  O  God,  (is)  very 

24  Sly  tougue  also  shall  talk  of  thy  righteo. 

1  Give,  .thy  righteousness  unto  the  king's 

2  shall  judge  thy  people  with  righteousness 
12  thy  righteousness  in  the  land  of  forgetfu. 

16  in  thy  righteousness  shall  they  be  exalted 

2  his  righteousness  hath  he  openly  showed 
4  executes!  judgment  and  righteousness  in 

6  executeth  righteousness  and  judgment  for 

17  his  righteousness  unto  children's  children 

3  he  that  doeth  righteousness  at  all  times 
3r  counted  imto  him  for  righteousness  unto 

3  and  his  righteousness  endureth  for  ever 
3,  9  his  righteousness  endureth  for  ever 

40  precepts :  quicken  me  in  thy  righteousn. 
142  Thy  righteousness,  .and  thy  law  (is)  the 

1  in  thy  faithfulness,  .in  thy  righteousness 

11  for  thy  righteousness'  sake  bring  my  soul 

7  utter . .  and  shall  siug  of  thy  righteousness 

18  with  me ;  (yea),  durable  riches  and  righte. 

20  lead  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  in  the 

2  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death 

4  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death 

5  righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  direct 

6  righteousness  of  the  upright  shall  deliver 

18  but  toliim  that  soweth  righteousness  (shall 

19  As  righteousness  \tendeth)  to  life ;  so  he 

28  In  the  way  of  righteousness  (is)  life ;  and 

6  Righteousness  keepeth  (him  that  is)  uprig. 
34  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  :  but  sin 

9  Ioveth  him  that  followeth  after  righteou. 

8  Better  (is)  a  little  with  righteousness,  than 

1 2  the  throne  is  established  by  righteousness 
31  it  he  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness 

21  He  that  followeth  after  righteousness  and 

21  fiudeth  life,  righteousness,  and  honour 
27  and  her  converts  with  righteousness 

7  looked  for.  .righteousness,  but  behold  a 

16  God.  .shall  be  sanctified  iu  righteousness 

23  take  away  the  righteousness  of  the  right. 

22  consumption,  .shall  overflow  with  right. 

17  righteousness  to  the  plummet;  and  the 

16  and  righteousness  remain  in  the  fruitful 

17  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace ;  and 

17  effect  of  righteousness,  quietness  and  as. 

5  filled  Zion  witli  judgment  and  righteous. 

8  and  let  righteousness  spring  up  together 

23  is  gone  out  of  my  mouth  (id)  righteousness 

24  In  the  LORD  have  I  righteousness  and  str. 

12  stouthearted,  that  (are)  far  from  righteo. 

13  I  bring  near  my  righteousness ;  it  shall  not 
1  mention,  .not  in  truth,  nor  iu  righteous. 

18  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea 

6  my  righteousness  shall  not  be  abolished 

8  but  my  righteousness  shall  be  forever,  and 

14  In  righteousness  shalt  thou  be  established 
17  their  righteousness  (is)  of  me,  saith  the 

1  near  to  come,  and  my  righteousness  to  be 
12  will  declare  thy  righteousness,  and  thy 

2  a  nation  that  did  righteousness,  and  fors. 

16  and  his  righteousness,  it  sustained  him 

17  For  he  put  on  righteousness  as  a  breastpl. 

17  peace,  and  thine  exactors  righteousness 

10  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness 

11  cause  righteousness  and  praise  to  spring 

1  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to 

6  and  all  our righteousness(are)  as  filthy  rags 

2  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  iu  righteousn. 

24  judgment  and  righteousness  in  the  earth 

3  Execute  ye  judgment  and  righteousness 

15  will  I  cause  the  branch  of  righteousness 

15  execute  judgment  and  righteousness  iu 
10  Lord  hath  brought  forth  our  righteous. 

20  When  a  righteous  (maw)  doth  turn  from 
14  their  own  souls  by  their  righteousness 
20  deliver  their  own  souls  by  their  righteo. 
20  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be 
22  in~his  righteousness  that  he  hath  done  he 
24,  26  turneth  away  from  his  righteousness 
24  All  his  righteousness  that  he  hath  done 

12  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  not 

13  if  he  trust  to  his  own  righteousness,  and 
13  all  his  righteousness  shall  not  be  remem. 

18  the  righteous  turneth  from  his  righteous. 

7  righteousness  (belongeth}unto  thee,  but 

16  according  to  all  thy  righteousness,  I  be. 
18  supplications  before  thee  for  our  righte. 
12  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness,  reap 

7  and  leave  off  righteousness  in  the  earth 
24  judgment  run  down  as  waters,  and  righ. 
12  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into  hemlock 

5  ye  may  know  the  righteousness  of  the  L. 

9  light,  (and)  I  shall  behold  his  righteous. 

8  their  God,  in  truth  and  in  righteousness 


Mai.   3.    3  they  may  offer,  .an  offering  in  righteous. 

4.  2  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise  with 

S.Rightness,  justice,  n^is  tsidkah. 

Dan.  4.  27  break  oft"  thy  sins  by  righteousness,  and 

4.  Righ  tness,  justice,  htKaioo"uvn  dikaiositne. 

Slatt.  3.  15  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness 

5.  6  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness 
5.  10  they  which  are  persecuted  for  righteous. 

5.  20  except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed 

6.  33  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness 
21.  32  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness 

Luke  1.  75  In  holiness  and  righteousness  before  him 
John  1 6.    8  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment 

16. 10  Of  righteousness,  because  I  go  to  my  Fat. 

Acts  10.  35  worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with 

13.  10  enemy  of  all  righteousness,  wilt  thou  not 

17.  31  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness 

24.  25  he  reasoned  of  righteousness,  temperance 

Rom.  1.  17  For  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  re. 

3.   5  commend  the  righteousness  of  God,  what 

3.  21  But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  without 

3.  22  Even  the  righteousness  of  God  (which  is) 

3.  25  declare  his  righteousnessforthe  remission 

3.  26  declare,  .at  this  time  his  righteousness 

4.  3  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness 
4.    5  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousuess 

4.    6  xmto  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness 
4.    9  reckoned  to  Abraham  for  righteousness 
4.  it  seal  of  the  righteousness^of  the  faith  which 
4. 11  righteousness  might  be  imputed  unto  th. 
4. 13  but  through  the  righteousness  of  faith 

4.  22  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness 

5. 17  receive,  .of  thegift  of  righteousness  shall 

5.  21  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteous. 

6. 13  (as)instrumentsofrighteousnessuntoGod 

6.  16  whether,  .of  obedience  unto  righteousness 

6. 18  ye  became  the  servants  of  righteousness 
6.  19  members  servants  to  righteousness  unto 
6.  20  servants  of  sin,  ye  were  free  from  righte. 

8.  10  the  spirit  (is)  life  because  of  unrighteous. 

9.  28  [cut  (it)  short  in  righteousness :  because] 
9.  30  righteousness,  have  attained  to  righteou. 
9.  30  even  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith 
9.  31  which  followed  after  the  law  of  righteou. 
9.  31  hath  not  attained  to  the  law  [of  righteo.] 

10.    3  they  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteous. 
10.   3  going  about  to  establish  their  own  [rig.] 
10.    3  submitted  themselves  unto  the  righteous. 
10.    4  Christ  (is)  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteo. 
10.    5  Sloses  describeth  the  righteousness  which 

10.  6  righteousness  which  is  of  faith  speaketh 
10. 10  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  right. 
14. 17  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the 

1  Co.   1.  30  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness 

2  Co.  3.   9  much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  rig. 

5.  21  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him 

6.  7  by  the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the  ri. 

6. 14  for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness 
9.   9  poor  ;hisrighteousnessremaineth  forever 
9.  10  increase  the  fruits  of  your  righteousness 

11.  15  transformed  as  the  ministers  of  righteous. 
Gal.    2.  21  for  if  righteousness  (come)  by  the  law,  th. 

3.  6  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness 
3.  21  righteousnessshouldhavebeenbythelaw 
5.    5  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith 

Eph.  4.  24  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteous. 
5.  9  in  all  goodness  and  righteousness,  and  tr. 
6. 14  havingonthebreastplateofrighteousness 

Phil.    1.  11  Being  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteous. 
3.    6  touching  the  righteousuess  which  is  in  the 
3.    9  not  having  thine  own  righteousness  which 
3.    9  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith 

1  Ti.   6. 11  follow  after  righteousness,  godliness,  fa. 

2  Ti.   2.  22  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace 

3.  16  forcorrectiou,forinstructioninrighteous. 

4.  8  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness 
Titus  3.  5  Not  by  works  of  righteousuess  which  we 
Heb.   1.    9  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness,  andhated 

5.  13  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteousness;  for 

7.  2  by  interpretation  King  of  righteousness 
11.    7  became  heir  of  the  righteousness  which 

11.  33  wrought  righteousness, obtained  promises 

12.  11  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteous. 
Jas.    1.  20  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteous. 

2.  23  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteousness 

3.  18  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  peace  of 

1  Pe.  2.  24  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteous. 

3.  14  and  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake 

2  Pe.   1.    1  through  the  righteousness  of  God  and  our 

2.    5  preacher  of  righteousness,  bringing  in  the 

2.  21  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness 

3.  13  new  earth.wherein  dwelleth  righteousness 
1  Jo.  2.  29  everyone  thatdoeth  righteousness  is  born 

3.    7  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous 
3.  10  [whosoeverdoethnotrighteousnessisnot] 
Rev.  19. 11  iu  righteousness  he  doth  judge  aud  make 

5.^4  judicial  sentence,  St/catWjua  dikaioma. 

Rom.  2.  26  if  the  un circumcision  keep  the  righteous. 
5. 18  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  (the 

8.  4  That  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might 
Rev.  19.    8  for  the  fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of 

6. Uprightly,  justly,  rightly,  diKaias  dikaios. 

1  Co.  15.  34  Awake  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not;  for 
1  .Straightforwardness,  rectitude,  evdvrns  euthiites. 

Heb.  1.    8  sceptre  of  righteousness  (is)  the  sceptre 

RIGHTEOUSNESS,  to  turn  to  — 

To  make  righteous  or  just,  pi$  tsadaq,  5. 

Dan. 12.   3  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as 


RIGHTLY  — 
l.That,  '3  ki. 

Gen. 27.  36  Is  not  he  rightly  named  Jacob?  for  he  h. 

I.Rightly,  opQws  orthus. 

Luke  7.  43  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  rightly  judged 
20.  21  know  that  thou  sayest  and  teachest  righ. 
RIGOUR  — 
Rigour,  yip  perek. 

Exod.i.  13  the  children  of  Israel  to  serve  with  rigour 
1.  14  bitter. . all theirservice.  .(was)with rigour 
Lev.  25.  43  Thou  shalt  not  rule  over  him  with  rigour 
25.  46  not  rule  one  over  another  with  rigour 
25.  S3  not  rule  with  rigour  over  him  in  thy  sight 
RIM'-MON,  pan,  jQ~)  pomegranate. 
1.  A  city  in  Simeon,  now  called  Um-er-Rttmamim. 
Josh  15.  32  Lebaoth,  and  Shilhim,  and  Ain,  and  R. 
Zechi4.  10  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain.  .toR. 
2.A  rock  in  Benjamin  near  Gibeah,  now  called  Rummon 
or  Ramnutn. 

Judg  20.  45  they  turned  and  fled . .  unto  the  rock  of  R. 
20.  47  six  hundred  men.  .fled,  .unto  the  rock  R. 

20.  47  and  abode  in  the  rock  R.  four  months 

21.  13  children,  .that  (were)  in  the  rock  R.,  and 

3.  Father  of  two  captains  of  Ish-bosheth,  from  Beerotb. 
in  Benjamin. 

2  Sa.   4.    2  Baanah,  and.  .Rechab,  the  sons  of  R. 

4.   5  the  sons  of  R.  the  Beerothite,  Rechab  and 

4.  9  David  answered .  .the  sons  of  R.  the  Beer. 

4.  A  Syrian    god,    representing  a    certain    aspect   of 
Adonis. 

2  Ki.  5.  18  my  master  goeth  into  the  house  of  R.  to 
5. 18  and  I  bow  myself  in  the  house  of  R.:  when 

5.  18  I  bow  down  myself  in  the  house  of  R.,the 

5.  A  city  in  Simeon,  near  Tochen. 

1  Ch.  4.  32  their  villages  (were),  Etam,  and  Ain,  R. 

6.  A  Levitical  city  in  Zebulon. 

1  Ch.  6.  77  R.  with  her  suburbs,  Tabor  with  her  sub- 
RIM'-MON  PA'-REZ,  pT?  JS"?. 

The  fifteenth  station  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  fourth 
from  Sinai,  between  Rithmah  and  Libnah. 

NunJ33. 19  departed  from  Rithmah,  and  pitched  at  R. 
33.  20  they  departed  from  R.,  and  pitched  in  L. 
RING  — 
l.Rim,  felloe,  33  gab. 

Eze.     1. 18  As  for  their  rings,  .their  rings  (were)  full 

^.Folding  {of  a  door),  cylinder,  S'Sa  galil. 

Esth.  1.    6  fastened.,  to  silver  rings  and  pillars  of  m. 
Song  5.  14  His  hands  (are  as)  gold  rings  set  with  the 

Z.Ring,  n"?o  tabbaath. 

Gen.  41.  42  Pharaoh  took  off  his  ring  from  his  hand 
Exod  25. 12  thou  shalt  cast  four  rings  of  gold  for 
25. 12  two  rings  (shall  be)  in  the  one  side  of 
25  12  and  two  rings  in  the  other  side  of  it 

25. 14  into  the  rings  by  the  sides  of  the  ark 

25. 15  staves  shall  be  in  the  rings  of  the  ark 
25.  26  four  rings  of  gold,  and  put  the  rings  in 

25.  27  against  the  border  shall  the  rings  be 

26. 24  shall  be  coupled  together . .  unto  one  ring 

26.  29  rings  (of)  gold  (for)  places  for  the  bars 

27.  4  brasen  rings  in  the  four  corners  thereof 

27.  7  the  staves  shall  be  put  into  the  rings 

28.  23  upon  the  breast  plate  two  rings  of  gold 
28.  23  shalt  put  the  two  rings  on  the  two  ends 
28.  24  the  two  rings  (which  are)  on  the  ends  of 
28.  26  thou  shalt  make  two  rings  of  gold,  and 
28.  27  two  (other)  rings  of  gold  thou  shalt  make 
28.  28  by  the  rings  thereof  unto  the  rings  of 

30.  4  two  golden  rings  shaltthou  make  to  it 

35.  22  and  rings,  and  tablets,  all  jewels  of  gold 

36.  29  coupled  together  at  the  head . .  to  one  ring- 

36.  34  rings  (of)  gold  (to  be)  places  for  the  bars 

37.  3,  13  And  he  cast  for  it  four  rings  of  gold 
37.  3  even  two  rings  upon  the  one  side  of  it 
37.  3  and  two  rings  upon  the  other"  side  of  it 
37.  5  into  the  rings  by  the  sides  of  the  ark 

37.  13  put  the  rings  upon  the  four  corners  that 
37.  14  against  the  border  were  the  rings,  the 

37.  27  he  made  two  rings  of  gold  for  it  under 

38.  5  he  cast  four  rings  for  the  four  ends  of 

38.  7  he  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  on  the 
3g.  16  two  gold  rings,  and  put  the  two  rings  in 

39.  17  two  rings  on  the  ends  of  the  breastplate 
30.  iq  they  made  two  rings  of  gold,  and  put  (th.) 
30.  20  they  made  two  (other)  golden  rings,  and 
3g  21  by  his  rings  unto  the  rings  of  the  ephod 

Num  31.  50  and  bracelets,  rings,  ear  rings,  and  tablets 

Esth   3.  10  the  king  took  his  ring  from  his  hand,  and: 
3  12  written,  and  sealed  with  the  king's  ring. 
8     2  the  king  took  off  his  ring,  which  he  had 
8!    8  Write  ye  also . .  seal  it  with  the  king's  ring- 
8     8  the  writing . .  sealed  with  the  king's  ring 
8. 10  sealed  (it)  with  the  king's  ring;  and  sent 

Isa.     3.  21  The  rings,  and  nose  jewels 
LA  finger  ring,  SaKTt'Aios  claktulios. 

Luke  15.  22  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  (his) 

RING  again,  to  — 

To  be  moved,  noisy,  Din  hum,  2. 

1  Sa    4    5  °reat  shout,  so  that  the  earth  rang  again 
1  Ki'.    1.  45thecityrangagain.  This  (is)  the  noise  th. 

RINGLEADER  — 

One  who  stands  first,  irpwroo-Tarns  prustostates. 
Acts  24.    5  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes 


RING-STRAKED 


820 


RISE 


RINGSTRAKT.D  — 
Straked,  notched,  ipu  aqod. 

Gen  30.  35  the  he  goats  that  were  ringstraked  ami 
30  39  brought  forth  cattle  ringstraked,  speckled 

30  40  toward  the  ringstraked  and  all  the  brown 
31.    8  The  ringstraked  shall  be  thy  hire 

31.    8  then  bare  all  the  cattle  ringstraked 

31  10  the  cattle  (were)  ringstraked,  speckled 
31. 12  all  the  rams  which  leap,  .(are)  ringstraked 

RDT-WAH,  np  a  shout,  strength. 

A  son    of   Shimon,    a    descendant    of    Caleb    son    of 

Jephunneh     b  0  1400. 

1  Ch.  4  20  the  sons  of  Shimon  (were)  Amnou,  and  R. 
RINSE,  to    - 
To  overflew^  rinse,  r\vy  shataph. 

Lev.  15  11  and  hath  not  rinsed  his  hands  in  water 
RINSED,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  overflowed,  rinsed,  t\wp  shataph,  2. 

Lev.  15. 12  every  vessel  of  wood  shall  be  rinsed  in 

2.  To  be  overfloioed,  rinsed,  *ys&  shataph,  4. 

Lev.    6.  2S  be  both  scoured,  and  riused  in  water 
RIOT,  rioting,  riotous  (livers)  — ■ 

1.  To  flow,  squander,  be  vile,  ^pj  zalal. 
Prov23.  20  Be  not  .among  riotous  eaters  of  flesh 

28.    7  a  compauionof  riotous (men)shameth his 

'2.Spendthnftncss,  extravagance,  aewria  asdtia. 
Titus  1     6  children  not  accused  of  riot  or  unruly 

1  Pe.  4     4  not  with  (them  Ho  the  same  excess  of  riot 

3.7/1  a  spendthrift  manner,  aatibroos  asotos. 

Lukeis.  13  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  living 
^.Revelry,  (Lat.  comus),  kwixos  homos. 

Rom,i3. 13  not  in  rioting  and  drunkenness,  not  in 
5.  Luxurious  living,  expenditure,  Tpvtyi)  truphe. 

2  Pe.  2.  13  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  the  day  time 
RIP  up,  be  ripped  up,  to  — 

1.7*o  cleave  through,  j?pp  baqa. 

Amos  1 .  1 3  they  have  ripped  up  the  women  with  child 
2.7*0  cleave  through,  ypa  baqa,  3. 

2  Ki.  8.  12  and  wilt,  .rip  up  their  women  with  child 
15  16  women,  .that  were  with  child  he  ripped  up 

3. 7*0  be  cleft  through,  ypii  baqa,  4 

Hos.  13,  16  their  women  with  child  shall  be  ripped  up 
RIPE,  to  be  (fuUy)  — 
1.7*0  boil,  ripen,  seethe,  Si£>3  bashal. 

Joel    3.  13  the  harvest  is  ripe;  come   get  you  down 

2.  7*o  make  or  give  ripe  fruit,  W?  bashal,  5. 

Gen.  40  10  clusters  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  grapes 
3.7*0  bloom,  flourish,  arrive  at  maturity.  aK/xafa. 

Rev.  14.  i*3  and  gather,  .for  her  grapes  are  fully  ripe 
RIPEN,  to  — 
l.Tfo  do,  make  ready  or  ripe,  ho$  qainal. 

Isa.   18     5  the  sour  grape  is  ripening  in  the  flower 

2.  7*o  dry  up,  wither,  be  ripe,  f,-qoaiva>  xeraino. 

Rev.  14  15  reap;  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe 
RT-PHATH,  nJH. 

A  son  of  Gomer.  son  of  Japheth,  and  his  descendants 
the  Celts  who  marched  across  the  Riphaen  mountains, 
i.e.  the  Carpathian,  into  the  farthest  regions  of  Europe, 
B.C    2250. 

Gen.  10.    3  And  the  sons  of  Gomer ;  Ashkenaz,  and  R 

1  Ch.  i     6  And  the  sons  of  Gomer:  Ashcheuaz.  and  R. 

RISE  (up,  up  again),  that  should  — 

1 .  7*o  arise,  rnj  zarach. 

Gen  32.  31  the  sun  rose  upon  him  amine  halted  upon 
Deut33.   2  The  Lord.. rose  up  from  Seir  unto  them 

2  Sa.  23.    4  light  of  the  morning  (when)  the  sunriseth 
2  Ch.26. 19  the  leprosy  even  rose  up  in  his  forehead 
Job.    g.   7  commandeth  the  sun,  and  it  riseth  not 
Isa.    58.  10  then  shall  thy  light  rise  in  obscurity 

2.  7*o  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

Judg.  6.  21  there  rose  up  Are  out  of  the  rock,  and 
Neh.  4.  21  from  the  rising  of  the  morning  till  the 
Eccl.io.    4  If  the  spirit  of  the  ruler  rise  up  against 
Jer.  46.   8  Egypt  riseth  up  like  a  flood,  and  (his) 

47.    2  waters  rise  up  out  of  the  north,  and  shall 
Amos  8.   8  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  as  a  flood  ;  and 
9.    5  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  like  a  flood,  and 
Jon.    4.    7  wheu  the  morning  rose  the  next  day,  and 
Zech.14  1  j  rise  up  against  the  hand  of  his  neighbour 

3.7*0  rise  up,  Dip  qum. 

Gen.   4.   8  Cain  rose  up  against  Abelhisbrother, and 
iS.  16  the  men  rose  up  from  thence,  andlooked 
19     1  and  Lot  seeing  (them)  rose  up  to  meet  them 
2i.  32  Abimelech  rose  up.  and  Phichol  the  chief 
22.    3  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 
22. 19  they  rose  up  and  went  together  to  Beer. 
24.  54  they  rose  up  in  the  morning ;  and  he  said 
25. 34  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up,  and 
31.  17  Jacob  rose  up.  and  set  his  sons  and  his 
31.  21  he  rose  up  and  passed  over  the  river,  and 

31.  35  that  I  cannot  rise  up  before  thee;  for  the 

32.  22  he  rose  up  that  night,  and  took  his  two 
37.  35  all  his  daughters  rose  up  to  comfort  him 
43. 15  rose  up,  and  went  down  to  Egypt,  and  at. 
46.    5  Jacob  rose  up  from  Beer-sheba :  and  the 

Exodio.  23  neither  rose  any  from  his  place  for  three 
»«.  y»  Pharaoh  rose  up  in  the  night,  he,  and  all 


Exodi2  31  Rise  up.  (and)  get  you  forth  from  among 

1 5.  7  overthrown  them  that  rose  up  against  thee 

21.  19  If  he  rise  again,  and  walk  abroad  upon  his 
24.  13  Moses  rose  up,  and  his  miuister  Joshua 
32.   6  And  they  rose  up  early  ou  the  morrow,  and 

32.  6  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  rose  up 

33.  8  the  people  rose  up,  and  stood  every  mau 
33. 10  the  people  rose  up  and  worshipped,  every 

Lev.  19.  32  Thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head 
iNuraio.  35  Rise  up.  Lord,  and  let  thine  enemies  be 

16.  2  they  rose  up  before  Moses,  with  certain 
16.  25  Moses  rose  up,  and  weut  unto  Dathau  and 

22.  13, 21  And  Balaam  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and 
22,  14  the  princes  of  Moan  rose  up,  and  they  we 

22.  20  rise  up  (and)  go  with  them ;  but  yet  the 

23.  18  Rise  up.  Balak,  and  hear;  hearken  unto 

23.  24  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  lion 
24. 17  a  sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  Israel,  and  shall 

24.  25  Baalam  rose  up,  and  went  and  returned 

25.  7  he  rose  up  from  among  the  congregation 
Deut.  2.  13  rise  up,  (said  I),  and  get  you  over  the  brook 

2.  24  Rise  ye  up,  take  your  journey,  and  pass 
6.    7  thou  liest  down,  and  when  thou  rfsest  up 
1 1 .  19  thou  liest  down,  and  when  thou  risest  up 
ig.  11  and  rise  up  against  him,  and  smite  him 
19.  15  One  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  a 
19,  16  If  a  false  witness  rise  up  against  any 
22.  26  a  man  riseth  against  his  neighbour,  and 

28.  7  thine  enemies  that  rise  up  against  thee 

29.  22  your  children  that  shall  rise  up  after  you 

31.  16  this  people  will  rise  up.  and  go  a  whoring 

32.  38  let  them  rise  up  and  help  you,  (and)  be 

33.  11  smite  through,  .that  they  rise  not  again 
Josh.   3.  16  rose  up  upon  an  heap  very  far  from  the 

6.  26  riseth  up  and  buildeth  this  city  Jericho 

8.  7  ye  shall  rise  up  from  the  ambush  and 

18.  4  they  shall  rise  and  go  through  the  land 
Judg  8.  2i  Rise  thou,  and  fall  upon  us;  for  as  the 

9.  34,  35  Abimelech  rose  up,  and  the  people  that 
9.  43  he  rose  up  against  them,  and  smote  them 

19.  5  he  rose  up  to  depart :  and  the  damsel's 
19.  7.  9  And  when  the  mau  rose  up  to  depart 
19.  10  but  he  rose  up  and  departed,  and  came 
19.  27  her  lord  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  op. 

19,  28  the  man  rose  up,  and  gat  him  unto  his  p. 

20.  5  the  men  of  Gibeah  rose  against  me,  and 
20. 19  children  of  Israel  rose  up  in  the  morning 
2o,  33  all  the  men  of  Israel  rose  up  out  of  their  p. 

Ruth  3. 14  she  rose  upbeforeonecouldknowanother 

1  Sa.   1.    9  Hannah  rose  up  after  they  had  eaten  in 

16.  13  So  Samuel  rose  up,  and  went  to  Raman 
22.  13  he  should  rise  against  me,  to  lie  in  wait 
24,  7  not  to  rise  against  Saul.  But  Saul  rose 
28.  25  Then  they  rose  up,  and  went  away  that 

2  Sa,i2.  21  when  the  child  was  dead,  thou  didst  rise 

18.  31  of  all  them  that  rose  up  against  thee 
18.  32  that  rise  against  thee  to  do  (thee)  hurt 
22.  40  them  that  rose  up  against  me  hast  thou 
22. 49  high  above  them  that  rose  up  against  me 

1  Ki.  1-  49  and  rose  up,  aud  went  every  man  his  way 

2.  19  the  king  rose  up  to  meet  her,  aud  bowed 

3.  21  when  1  rose  in  the  morning  to  give  my  ch 
2i,  16  Ahab  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the  vineyard 

2  Ki.    3.  24  Israelites  rose  up  and  smote  the  Moabites 

7.  5  they  rose  up  iu  the  twilight,  to  go  unto 

8.  21  he  rose  by  night,  and  smote  the  Edomites 
16.    7  king  of  Israel,  which  rise  up  against  me 

2  Ch.2ia  9  rose  up  by  night,  and  smote  the  Edomites 
28.  15  men  which  were  expressed  by  name  rose  up 

Ezra    1.   5  Then  rose  up  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of 
10.    6  Ezra  rose  up  from  before  the  house  of 

Neh.   2.  18  And  they  said,  Let  us  rise  up  and  build 

3.  1  the  high  priest  rose  up,  with  his  brethren 

4.  14  I  looked,  and  rose  up.  and  said  unto  the 
Job   14. 12  man  lieth  down,  and  riseth  not:  till  the 

16.  8  and  my  leanness  rising  up  in  me  heareth 
24.  14  murderer  rising  with  the  light  killeth  the 
24.  22  he  riseth  up,  and  no  (man)  is  sure  of  life 

30.  12  Upon  (my)  right  (hand) rise  the  youth;  th 

31. 14  What  then  shall  I  do  when  God  riseth  up? 
3,    1  many  (are)  they  that  rise  up  against  me 

18.  38  they  were  not  able  to  rise;  they  are  fallen 

27,  3  though  war  should  rise  against  me,  in  this 

35.  11  False  witnesses  did  rise  up  ;  they  laid  to 

36.  12  cast  down,  and  shall  not  be  able  to  rise 
41.    8  (now)  that  he  lieth  he  shall  rise  up  no 
92  11  of  the  wicked  that  rise  up  against  me 
94.  16  Who  will  rise  up  for  me  against  the  evil 

119.62  I  will  rise  to  givethanksunto  thee  because 
124.   2  on  our  side,  when  men  rose  up  against  us 
127.  2  (It  is)  vain  for  you  to  rise  up  early,  to 
140. 10  into  deep  pits,  that  they  rise  not  up  again 
Prov-24.  22  For  their  calamity  shall  rise  suddenly 

28.  12  but  when  the  wicked  rise(  a  man  is  hidden 
28.  28  When  the  wicked  rise,  men  hide  themse. 

31. 1 5  She  riseth  also  while  it  is  yet  night,  and 
Ecc-l.12.  4  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  the  bird 
Song  2. 10  Rise  up.  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come 

3.   2  I  will  rise  now,  and  go  about  the  city  in 

5.  5  I  rose  up  to  open  to  my  beloved ;  and  my 
Isa,  14.  21  they  do  not  rise,  nor  possess  the  land,  nor 

14.  22  I  will  rise  upagaiust  them,  saith  the  Lord 
24.  20  and  it  shall  fall,  and  not  rise  again 

26.  14  they  shall  not  rise :  therefore  hast  thou 
28. 21  Lord  shall  rise  up  as  (in)  mount  Perazim 
32.  9  Rise  up,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease ;  hear 
33, 10  Now  will  I  rise,  saith  the  Lord  ;  now  will 
43.  17  they  shall  not  rise :  they  are  extinct,  they 
54.  1 7  every  tongue  (that)  shall  rise  against  thee 

Jer.  25.  27  rise  no  more,  because  of  the  sword  which 
26. 17  Then  rose  up  certain  of  the  elders  of  the 
37. 10  they  rise  up  every  man  in  his  tent,  and 


Psa, 


Jer.  49.  14  come  against  her,  and  rise  up  to  the  battle 

51.  64  shall  not  rise  from  the  evil  that  I  will 
Lam.  1.  14  (from  whom)  I  am  not  able  to  rise  up 
Dan.  8  27  I  rose  up,  and  did  the  king's  business 
Amos  5.    2  she  shall  no  more  rise :  she  is  forsaken 

7.  g  I  will  rise  against  the  house  of  Jeroboam 

8.  14  they  shall  fall,  and  never  rise  up  again 
Obad        1  and  let  us  rise  up  against  her  in  battle 
Jon.     1.    3  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto  Tarshish  from 
Mic.    7    6  thedaughterrisethupagainsther  mother 
Nah,    1.    g  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the  second  time 
Hab.   2.    7  Shall  they  not  rise  up  suddenly  that 
Zeph.  3.    8  until  the  day  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey 

4.7*0  raise  self  up,  Dip  qum,  7a. 

Job    20  27  and  the  earth  shall  rise  up  against  him 
Psa.  17.    7  from  those  that  rise  up  (against  them) 

5.  To  rise  up,  Dip  qum. 

Ezra    5     2  Then  rose  up  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Sheal. 
Dan    3  24  rose  up  m  haste,  (and)  spake,  and  said  unto 

6.  To  go  up,  avafiaivto  anabaino. 

Rev.  13.     1  and  saw  a  beast  rise  up  out  of  the  sea 
19     3  And  her  smoke  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever 

7.  A  standing  up,  hvaoraots  anastasis. 

Acts  26.  23  that  he  should  be  the  first  that  should  rise 
8.7*0  rise  or  spring  up,  hvariWw  anatello. 

Luke  12  54  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  west 

9  7*o  set  up,  bifTTT|^(  anistemi. 

Matt  1 2.  41  The  men  of  Nineve  shall  rise  in  judgment 

20.  \g  and  the  third  day  [he  shall  rise  again] 
Mark  1.  35  rising  up  a  great  while  before  day.  he 

3.  20  if  Satan  rise  up  against  himself,  and  be 
8>  31  be  killed,  and  after  three  days  rise  again 

9.  31  after  that  he  is  killed,  he  shall  rise  the 

10.  34  and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise  again 

to.  50  he,  casting  away  his  garment,  [rose],  and 

12.  23  [when  they  shall  rise],  whose  wife  shall 

12.  25  For  when  they  shall  rise  from  the  dead 

Luke  4,  29  roseup.andtlirusthimoutof  thecity,and 

5.  25  immediately  he  rose  up  before  them,  and 

5.28  And  he  left  all,  rose  up,  and  followed  him 

11.  7  Trouble  me  not.  .1  cannot  rise  and  give 
ti.   8  Though  he  will  not  rise  and  give  him,  be. 
11,  32  men  of  Nineve  shall  rise  uplin  the  judgm. 

16.  31  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead 
18.  33  and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise  again 

22.  45  when  he  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  was  co. 
22.  46  rise  and  pray,  lest  ye£enter  into  temptat. 
24.  7  and  be  crucified,  and  the  third  day  rise  ag. 
24.  33  they  rose  up  the  same  hour,  and  returned 
24.  46  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day 
John  11. 23  saith  unto  her.  Thy  brother  shall  rise  ag. 
11. 24  know  that  he  shall  rise  again  in  the  res 

11.  31  that  she  rose  up  hastily  and  went  out,  fo. 

20.  9  that  he  must  rise  again  from  the  dead 
Acts    5.  17  Then  the  high  priest  rose  up,  and  all  they 

5.  36  For  before  these  days  rose  up  Theudas 

5.  37  After  this  man  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee  in 
10.  13  there  came  a  voice  to  him.  Rise,  Peter 

10.  41  drink  with  him  after  he  rose  from  the  de. 

14.  20  rose  up,  and  came  into  the  city :  and  the 

15.  7  Peter  rose  up,  and  said  unto  them.  Men 

17.  3  suffered,  and  risen  again  from  the  dead 
26.  16  But  rise,  and  stand  upon  thy  feet:  for  I 
?6.  30  king  rose  up,  and  the  governor,  and  Ber. 

Rom  14.    g  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died, 'and  [ro.  ] 

15.  12  he  that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gent. 

t  Co.  10.    7  satdown  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up  to 

t  Th.    4. 14  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  ag. 

4.  16  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first 
Heb     7.  it  should  rise  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec 

10.7*0  lift  or  raise  %qj,  iyclpw  egeiru. 

JNIatt  11. 11  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than  John 

12,  42  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the 
24.    7  For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and 
24.  11  many  false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall 

26.  46  Rise;  let  us  begoiug:  behold,  he  is  at  ha. 

27.  63  said. .After  three  days  I  will  rise  again 
Mark  4.  27  should  sleep,  and  rise  night  aud  day.  and 

10.  49  Be  of  good  comfort,  [rise] ;  he  calleth  thee 

12.  26  astouchingthedead.that  they  rise;  have 

13.  8  For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation  and 

13.  22  false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall  show 

14.  42  Rise  up,  let  us  go ;  lo,  he  that  betrayeth 
Luke  5.  23  forgiven  thee ;  orto  say,  [Rise  upl  and  wa. 

6.  8  [Rise  up],  and  stand  forth  in  the  midst 

11.  8  Though  lie  will  not  rise  and  give  him,  be 
11.  31  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the  ju. 

21.  10  Nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and  kin. 
John  5.    8  saith  unto  him.  [Rise],  take  up  thy  bed 

13,    4  He  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  his 
Acts    3.    6  In  the  name  of  Jesus.. [rise up] and  walk 

1  Co.  15.    4  that  he  was  buried,  and  that  he  rose  ag. 

15.  12  Now  if  Christ  be  preached  that  he  rose 
15.  14  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  (is)  our  preac. 
15.  15  raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that  the  dead  rise 
15. 16  For  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ 
15.  29  if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all?  why  are  they 
15. 32  advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead  rise  not? 

2  Co.   5.  15  him  which  died  for  them,  and  rose  again 
Rev.  11.   1  saying,  [Rise],  and  measure  the  temple  of 

11.  7*o  set  up  out  of,  i^aviarnui  exanistemi. 

Acts  15.   5  But  there  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of 

RISE  (up,  against,  together,  with),  to  — 
1.7*0  rise  up,  D>p  qum. 

Exod  15.   7  hast  overthrown  them  that  rose  up  agai. 

Deut  33.  11  through  the  loins  of  them  that  rise  against 


BISE 


821 


RIVER 


2  Sa.  22.  40  them  that  rose  up  against  me  hast  thou 

22.  49  high  above  them  that  rose  up  against  me 

Psa.  18.  39  subdued  under  me  those  that  rose  up  ag. 

18.  48  Uftest  me  up  above  those  that  rise  up  ag. 

44.    5  we  tread  them  under  that  rise  up  against 

74.  23  tumult  of  those  that  rise  up  against  thee 

Prov24.  16  falleth  seven  times,  and  riseth  up  again 

Jer.  51.    1  midst  of  them  that  rise  up  against  me,  a 

Lam.  3.  62  The  lips  of  those  that  rose  up  against  me 

2.7b  raise  self  up,  op  qum,  7  a. 

Job  27.    7  that  riseth  up  against  me  as  the  unright. 
Psa.  59.    1  defend  me  from  them  that  rise  up  against 

Z.A  withstander,  uprisen,  coipfl  teqomem. 

Psa.139.  21  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up  against  th. 

4.  To  rise  up  upon,  or  against,  iiraviarafiai  epanisL 

Mattio.  21  children  shall  rise  up  against  (their)  par. 
Marki3. 12  children  shall  rise  up  against  (their)  par. 

5.  To  place  together  against,  o~vv€<pl<TT-niusune. 
Acts  16.  22  the  multitude  rose  up  together  against  th. 

RISE  (up)  betimes  or  early,  to  — 

I. To  seek  early  or  earnestly,  "in??  shachar,  3. 

Job  24.   5  rising  betimes  for  a  prey  :  the  wilderness 

2.  To  rise  up  early,  {put  on  the  shoulder),  Q3(p,  5. 
Gen.  19.   2  shall  rise  up  early,  and  go  on  your  ways 

20.  8  Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and 

21.  14  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

22.  3  Abrahamrose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 
26.  31  they  rose  up  betimes  in  the  morning,  and 
28.  iS  Jacob  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

31.  55  early  in  the  morning  Laban  rose  up,  and 
Exod.  8.  20  Rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  stand 

9.  13  Rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  stand 
24.   4  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  builded 

32.  6  they  rose  upearlyon  the  morrow,  and  off. 
34.   4  Moses  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

Numi4.  40  they  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  gat 

Josh.  3.    1  Joshua  rose  early  in  the  morning ;  and  th. 

6. 12  Joshua  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and  the 

6.  15  rose  early,  about  the  dawning  of  the  day 

7.  16  So  Joshua  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 

8.  10  Joshua  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 

8.  14  hasted,  and  rose  up  early,  and  the  men  of 
Judg.  6.  38  for  he  rose  up  early  on  the  morrow,  and 

7.    1  rose  up  early,  and  pitched  beside  the  well 

9.  33  thou  shalt  rise  early,  and  set  upon  the  city 
21.   4  people  rose  early,  and  built  there  an  altar 

1  Sa.    1.  19  rose  up  in  the  morning  early,  and  worsh. 

15. 12  rose  early  to  meet  Saul  in  the  morning,  it 
17.  10  Wherefore  men  rise  up  earlyin  the  morn. 
17.  20  David  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 
29.  11  men  rose  up  early  to  depart  in  the  morn. 

2  Sa.  15.  2  Absalom  rose  up  early,  and  stood  beside 
2  Ki.  3.  22  they  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  the 

6.  15  servant  of  the  man  of  God  was  risen  early 
2  Ch.20.  20  they  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and  went 
29.  20  Hezekiah  the  king  rose  early,  and  gathered 
Job  1.  5  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  offered 
Isa.  5.  11  Woe  unto  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the 
Zeph.  3.    7  but  they  rose  early,  (and)  corrupted  all  th. 

RISE  (up),  to  make  to  — 

l.TV)  cause  to  go  up,  nSjf  alah,  5. 

Judg  20.  38  make  a  gre'at  flame . .  to  rise  up  out  of  the 

2.  To  (cause  to)  rise,  spring,  grow  up,  ayareAAoi, 
Matt.  5.  45  he  niaketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and 

RISEN  (up,  again,  with),  to  be  — 

l.To  rise  or  grow  up,  riso  gaah. 

Eze.  47.    5  for  the  waters  were  risen,  waters  to  swim 

2.  To  rise  up,  rni  zarach. 

Exod22.  3  If  the  sun  be  risen  upon  him,  (there  shall 
Isa.  60.    1  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon 

3.  To  go  out  or  forth,  n$;  yatsa. 

Gen.  19.  23  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot  en. 

4.7V?  rise  tup,  op  qum. 

Nuni32.  14  ye  are  risen  up  in  your  father's  stead,  an 
Judg.  9.  18  ye  are  risen  up  against  my  father's  house 
Ruth  2.  15  when  she  was  risen  up  to  glean,  Boaz  co. 

1  Sa.  25.  29  Yet  a  man  is  risen  to  pursue  thee,  and  to 

2  Sa.  14.    7  family  is  risen  against  thine  handmaid 

1  Ki.  8.  20  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  David  my  fat. 

2  Ki.  6.  15  servant  of  the  man  of  God  was  risen  early 
2  Ch.  6.  10  for  I  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  David  my 

13.   6  Yet  Jeroboam . .  is  risen  up,  and  hath  reb. 
21.   4  Now  when  Jehoram  was  risen  up  to  the 
Psa.  20.    8  fallen ;  but  we  are  risen,  and  stand  upri. 
27. 12  for  false  witnesses  are  risen  up  against  me 
54.   3  For  strangers  are  risen  up  against  me,  and 
86. 14  the  proud  are  risen  against  me,  and  the 
Prov.24.  16  falleth  seven  times,  and  riseth  up  again 
Jer.  51.    1  midst  of  them  that  rise  up  against  me 
Lam.  3.  62  The  lips  of  those  that  rose  up  against  me 
Eze.     7.  11  Violence  is  risen  up  into  a  rod  of  wickedn. 

5.7b  raise  up,  Dip  gum,  3«. 

Mic.    2.    8  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy :  ye 

G.To  rise  or  spring  up,  hvareWa  anatello. 

Jas.     1.  11  For  the  sun  is  no  sooner  risen  with  a  bu. 

7.  To  set  up,  hviar-nixt  anistemi. 

Matti7,  9  Son  of  man  [be  risen  again]  from  the  dead 
Hark  9.    5  till  the  Son  of  man  were  risen  from  thed. 

16.    9  [when  (Jesus)  was  risen  early  the  first] 
Luke  9.   8, 19  that  one  of  the  old  prophets  was  risen  a, 


8.7b  lift  or  raise  up,  iytlpw  egeiro. 

Matt  14.    2  he  is  risen  from  the  dead ;  and  therefore 

26.  32  But  after  I  am  risen  again,  I  will  go  bef. 

27.  64  He  is  risen  from  the  dead :  so  the  last  err. 

28.  6  for  he  is  risen,  as  he  said.  Come,  see  the 
28.    7  tell  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen  from  the 

Mark  6.  14  John  the  Baptist  was  risen  from  the  dead 
6.  16  It  is  John,  whom  I  beheaded  ;  he  is  risen 

14.  28  after  that  I  am  risen,  I  will  go  before  you 
16.  6  he  is  risen  ;he  is  not  here ;  behold  the  pi. 
16.  14  [which  had' seen  him  after  he  was  risen] 

Luke  7. 16  That  a  great  prophet  is  risen  up  among 

9.    7  said  of  some,  that  Jobn  was  risen  from 

13.  25  When,  .the  master  of  the  house  isrisen  up 

24.   6  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen  :  remember 

24. 34  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  hath  appeared 

John  2.  22  When  therefore  he  was  risen  from  the 
21. 14  showed  himself,  .after  that  he  was  risen 

Rom.  8.  34  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again 

1  C0.15.  13  no  resurrection,  .then  is  Christ  not  risen 

15.  14  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  (is)  our  preac. 
15.  20  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from.,  dead,  (and) 

9.7b  raise  together  with,  tTvueyeipco  sunegeiro. 
Col.     2.  12  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with  (him)  th. 
3.   1  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those 

RISETH,  whence  — 

Dawn  or  early  morning,  inp  shachar. 

Isa.  47. 11  thou  shalt  not  know  from  whence  it  riseth 
RISING  (again,  early,  up,  betimes)  — 
l.A  rising  up,  rrrr  zerach. 

Isa.  60.    3  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising 

I.Region  of  the  rising  of  the  sun,  rrjjP  mizrach. 
Num.21.  11  (is)  before  Moab,  toward  the  sun  rising 
Deut.  4.  41,  47this  side  Jordan,  toward  the  sun  rising 
Josh.  1.  15  this  side  Jordan  toward  the  sun  rising 

12.  1  toward  the  rising  of  the  sun,  from  the 

13.  5  toward  the  sun  rising,  from  Baal-gad  un. 
19. 12  toward  the  sun  rising  unto  the  border  of 
19.  27  turneth  toward  the  sun  rising  to  Beth-D. 
19.  34  Judah  upon  Jordan  toward  the  sun  rising 

Judg2o.  43  over  against  Gibeah  toward  the  sun  rising 

Psa.  50.    1  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going 
113.    3  From  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  thegoing 

Isa.  41.  25  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  shall  he  call 
45.   6  they  may  know  from  the  risingof  the  sun 
59.  19  and  his  glory  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 

Mai.   1.  11  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  even  unto  the 

3. 7b  go  up,  rhy  alah. 

Neh.  4.  21  from  the  rising  of  the  morning  till  the  s. 

4.  Uprising,  n^p  qimah. 

Lam.  3.  63  their  sitting  down,  and  their  rising  up 

5. Lifting  or  rising  up,  nNy'  seeth. 

Lev.  13.    2  have  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh  a  rising,  a     . 
13.  10  (if)  the  rising  (be)  white  in  the  skin,  and 
13. 10  (there  be)  quick  raw  flesh  in  the  rising 
13. 19  a  white  rising,  or  a  bright  spot,  white 

13.  2S  it  (is)  a  rising  of  the  burning,  and  the 
13. 43  the  rising  of  the  sore  (be)  white  reddish 

14.  56  for  arising,  and  for  a  scab,  and  for  a 
6.7b  rise  up  early,  {put  on  the  shoulder),  Da??,  5. 

2  Ch.36.  15  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending;  because 
Prov27.  14  He  that  blesseth  his  friend,  .rising  early 
Jer.     7.  13  rising  up  early  and  speaking,  but  ye 

7.  25  daily  rising  up  early  and  sending  (them) 
11.  7  rising  early  and  protesting,  saying,  Obey 
25.    3  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  rising  early  and 

25.  4  prophets,  rising  early  and  sending  (them) 

26.  s  Doth  rising  up  early,  and  sending  (them) 
29. 19  prophets,  rising  up  early  and  sending  (th.) 

32.  33  risingupearlyandteaching(theni),yetth. 
35.  14  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  rising  early  and 
35.  15  rising  up  early  and  sending  (them),  saying 
44.    4  prophets,  rising  early,  and  sending  (them) 

7 '.To  go  up,  ascend,  ava^aivoi  anabaino. 

Mark  9.  10  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean 
8.  To  rise  or  spring  up,  kvar4k\a>  anatello. 

Marki6.   2  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the  rising 
9.^4  standing  or  rising  up,  hvdaraats  anastasis. 

Luke  2.  34  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel 
RISING  of  the  sun,  sunrising  — 
Place  of  the  rising  of  the  sun,  the  east,  rnip  mizrach. 

Num.  2.    3  east  side  toward  the  rising  of  the  sun 
34.  15  Jericho  eastward,  toward  the  sun  rising 

RISING  up,  no  — 

No  standing  up,  Dlp?S  alqum. 

Pro  v.  30.  31  king,  against  whom  (there  is)  no  rising  up 

RIS'-SAH,  rrsn  heap  of  ruins. 

The  1 7th  Station  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  6th  from  Sinai, 

between  Libnah  and  Kehelathah. 

Nuni33.  21  removed  from  Libnah,  and  pitched  at  R. 

33.  22  And  they  journeyed  from  R.,  and  pitched 

RITE  — 

Statute,  ngn  chuqqah. 

Num.  9.    3  according  to  all  the  rites  of  it,  and  accord. 
RITH'-MAH,  ncjrri  broom. 

The  14th  station  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  3d  from 
Sinai,  between  Hazeroth  and  Rirnmon-parez ;  perhaps  , 
the  same  as  Kadesh,  Num.  13.  26.  (Erthariah?). 

Num  33,  18  departed  from  Hazeroth.  .pitched  in  R. 
33.  19  And  they  departed  from  R.,  and  pitched 


RIVER  — 

l.What  flows  forth,  a  stream,  canal,  SaiN,  b^Xubal. 
Dan.  8.    2  saw  in  a  vision,  and  I  was  by  the  river 

8.  3  there  stood  before  the  river  a  ram  which 
8.  6  which  I  had  seen  standing  before  the  riv. 

2.  A  channel,  stream,  p"SN  aphiq. 

Song  5.  12  (the  eyes)  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  waters 
Eze.    6.    3  and  to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers,  and  to  the 
31. 12  are  broken  by  all  the  rivers  of  the  land 
32.   6  and  the  rivers  shall  be  full  of  thee 

34.  13  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel  by  the  rivers 

35.  8  in  all  thy  rivers,  shall  they  fall  that  are 

36.  4,  6  to  the  rivers,  and  to  the  valleys,  te  the 
Joel    1.  20  the  rivers  of  waters  are  dried  up,  and  the 

3. 18  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters 

Z.A  shining  brook  or  food,  ^N!  yeor. 

Gen.  41.  1  dreamed  :  and,  behold,  he  stood  by  the  ri. 
41.  2  there  came  up  out  of  the  river  seven  well 
41.  3  kine  came  up  after  them  out  of  the  river 
41.    3  (other)  kine  upon  the  brink  of  the  river 

41. 17  behold,  Istoodupon  the  bank  of  the  river 

41. 18  there  came  up  out  of  the  river  sevenkine 
Exod.  1.  22  Every  son .  .ye  shall  cast  into  the  river 

2.  3  laid  (it)  in  the  flags  by  the  river's  brink 
2.  5  came  down  to  wash  (herself)  at  the  river 
2.  5  maidens  walked  along  by  the  river's  side 
4.  9  thou  shalt  take  of  the  water  of  the  river 
4.  9  water  which  thou  takest  out  of  the  river 
7.  15  stand  by  the  river's  brink  against  he  come 
7.  17  upon  the  waters  which  (are)  in  the  river 
7.  18  the  fish  that  (is)  in  the  river  shall  die,  and 
7. 18  the  river  shall  stink;  and  the  Egyptians 

7. 18  loathe  to  drink  of  the  water  of  the  river 

7. 19  upon  their  rivers,  and  upon  their  ponds 
7.  20  smote  the  waters  that  (were)  in  the  river 

7. 20  the  waters  that  (were)  in  the  river  were 

7. 21  the  fish  that  (was)  in  the  river  died ;  and 
7.  21  and  the  river  stank,  and  the  Egyptians 
7.  21,  24  could  not  drink  of  the  water  of  the  ri. 
7.  24  Egyptians  digged  round  about  the  river 

7.  25  after  that  the  Lord  had  smitten  the  river 

8.  3  river  shall  bring  forth  frogs  abundantly 
8.  5  over  the  rivers,  and  over  the  ponds,  and. 
8.  9  (that)  they  may  remain  in  the  river  only 
8.  11  they  shall  remain  in  the  river  only 

17.    5  thy  rod,  wherewith  thousmotest  the  river 
2  Ki.19.  24  dried  up  all  the  rivers  of  besieged  places 
Job    28.  10  He  cutteth  out  rivers  among  the  rocks 
Psa.  78.  44  And  had  turned  their  rivers  into  blood 
Isa.     7.  18  the  uttermost  part  of  the  rivers  of  Egypt 

23.  3  the  harvest  of  the  river,  (is)  her  revenue 
23. 10  Pass  through  thy  land  as  a  river,  0  dau. 

37.  25  dried  up  all  the  rivers  of  the  besieged  pi. 
Eze.  29.    3  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers 

29.  3  My  river  (is)  mine  own,  and  I  have  made 
29.  4  I  will  cause  the  fish  of  thy  rivers  to  stick 
29.  4  bring,  .up  out  of  the  midst  of  thy  rivers 
29.  4  the  fish  of  thy  rivers  shall  stick  unto  thy 
29.  5  thee  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  rivers :  thou- 
29.    9  said,  The  river  (is)  mine,  and  I  have  made 

29.  10  (am)  against  thee,  and  against  thy  rivers 

30.  12  I  will  make  the  rivers  dry,  and  sell  the 
Dan.  12.    5  on  this  side  of  the  bank  of  the  river,  and 

12.    5  other  on  that  side  of  the  bank  of  the  river 
22.    6,  7  which(was)upon  the  waters  of  the  river 
Nah.    3.    8  No,  that  was  situate  among  the  rivers 
Zech.  10.  11  all  the  deeps  of  the  rivers  shall  dry  up 

±sA  stream,  canal,  *?2V  yubal. 

Jer.   17.    8  (that)  spreadeth  out  her  roots  by  the  river 
5. A  river,  lm  nahar. 

Gen.  2.  10  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  ga. 
2.  13  And  the  name  of  the  second  river  (is)  G. 
2. 14  the  name  of  the  third  river  (is)  Hiddekel 
2.  14  the  east  of  Assyria.  And  the  fourth  river 
15.  18  have  I  given  this  land,  from  the  river  of 
15. 18  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates 

31.  21  passed  over  the  river,  and  set  his  face 
36.  37  Saul  of  Rehoboth  (by)  the  river  reigned  in 

Exod23.  31  boimds.  .from  the  desert  unto  the  river 
Num  22.    5  the  river  of  the  land  of  the  children  of 

24.  6  gardens  by  the  rivers  side,  as  the  trees 
Deut.  1.    7  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates 

11.  24  from  the  river,  the  river  Euphrates,  even 
Josh.  1.  4  even  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Eup. 
2fia.   8.    3  recover  his  border  at  the  river  Euphrates 

10.  16  the  Syrians  that  (were)  beyond  the  river 
1  Ki.  4.  21  reigned  over  all  kingdoms  from  the  river 
4.  24  all  (the  region)  on  this  side  the  river 

4.  24  over  all  the  kings  on  this  side  the  river 
14.  15  and  shall  scatter  them  beyond  the  river 

t  Ki.  5.  12  not  Abana  and  Pharpar,  rivers  of  Dama. 

17.  6  in  Habor  (by)  the  river  of  Gozan,  and  in 

18.  11  in  Habor(by)theriverof  Gozan, andin  the 

23.  29  king  of  Egypt  went,  .to  the  river  Euphr. 

24.  7  had  taken  from,  .the  river  Euphrates  all 

1  Ch.  1.  48  Shaul  of  Rehoboth  by  the  river  reigned 

5.  9  the  wilderness  from  the  river  Euphrates 
5.  26  and  Habor,  and  Hara,  and  to  the  river  G. 

18.   3  went  to  stablish  his  dominion  by  the  river 
19. 16  the  Syrians  that  (were)  beyond  the  river 

2  Ch.  9.  26  reigned  over  all  the  kings  from  the  river 
Ezra    8.  15  gathered  them  together  to  the  river  that 

8.  21  I  proclaimed  a  fast  there,  at  the  river 
8.  31  we  departed  from  the  river  of  Ahava  on 
8.  36  to  the  governors  on  this  side  the  river 
Neh.   2.    7  given  me  to  the  governors  beyond  the  ri. 

2.  9  I  came  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river 

3.  7  of  the  governor  on  this  side  the  river 
Job  40.  23  he  drinketh  up  a  river,  (and)  hasteth  not 


RIVER 


822 


ROBE 


Psa.  46.    4  (There  is)  a  river,  the  streams  wherof  sh. 
7z.   8  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 
74.  15  the  flood :  thou  driedst  up  mighty  rivers 
78.  16  and  caused  waters  to  run  down  like  river* 
80.  11  She  sentout.  .her  branches  unto  the  rivers 
89.  25  I  will  set.  .his  right  hand  in  the  rivers 
105.  41  they  ran  in  the  dry  places  (like)  a  river 
107.  33  He  turneth  rivers  into  a  wilderness,  and 
137.    1  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon,  there  we  sat  do. 
Isa.     7.  20  by  them  beyond  the  river,  by  the  king  of 
8.    7  up  upon  them  the  waters  of  the  river 
11.  15  shall  he  shake  his  hand  over  the  river 
38.    1  which  (is)  beyoud  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia 

18.  2,  7  whose  land  the  rivers  have  spoiled 

19.  5  the  river  shall  be  wasted  and  dried  up 
19.  6  And  they  shall  turn  the  rivers  far  away 
27.  12  beat  off  from  the  channel  of  the  river 
33.  21  (will  be)  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers 
41. 18  I  will  open  rivers  in  high  places,  and 

42.  15  I  will  make  the  rivers  islands,  and  I  will 

43.  2  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee 
43. 19,  20  wilderness,  (and)  rivers  in  the  desert 

44.  27  saith. . .  Be  dry,  and  I  will  dry  up  thy  rivers 

47.  2  uncover  the  thigh,  pass  over  the  rivers 

48.  18  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river,  and 
50.    2  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness  :  their  fish 
65.  12  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  river 

Jer.     2.  18  to  do.  .to  drink  the  waters  of  the  river 
46.   2  was  by  the  river  Euphrates  in  Carchemis 
46.    6  toward  the  north  by  the  river  Euphrates 
46.    7  whose  waters  are  moved  as  the  rivers? 
46.    8  and  (his)  waters  are  moved  like  the  rivers 

46.  10  the  north  country  by  the  river  Euphrates 
Eze.     1.    1  among  the  captives  by  the  river  of  Chebar 

1.  3  laud  of  the  Chaldeans,  by  the  river  Cheb. 
3.  15  I  came  to  them,  .that  dwelt  by  the  river 
3. 23  glory  which  I  saw  by  the  river  of  Chebar 

no.  15  creature  that  I  saw  by  the  river  of  Cheb. 
10.  20  living  creature  that  I  saw.  .by  the  river 

10.  22  faces  which  I  saw  by  the  river  of  Chebar 

31.  4  her  rivers  running  round  abouthisplants 

32.  7  aud  thou  earnest  forth  with  thy  rivers 
32.    2  and  troubledst.  .and  fouledst  their  rivers 
32.  14  and  cause  their  rivers  to  run  like  oil 

43.   3  the  vision  that  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar 
Dan.  10.    4  as  I  was  by  the  side  of  the  great  rivers 
Mic.    7.  12  from  the  fortress  even  to  the  river,  aud 
Nah.   1.    4  maketh  it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  riv. 

2.  6  The  gates  of  the  rivers  shall  be  opened 
Hab.  3.    8  Was  the  Lord  displeased  against.. rivers 

3.  8  (was)  thine  anger  against  the  rivers?  (w.) 

3.  9  Thou  didst  cleave  the  earth  with  rivers 
Zeph.  3.  10  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia  my 
Zech.  9.  10  from  the  river  (even)  to  the  ends  of  the 

6.  A  river,  in;  nehar. 

Ezra    4. 10  the  rest  (that  are)  on  this  side  the  river 

4.  1 1  servants  the  men  on  this  side  the  river 
4. 16  have  no  portion  ou  this  side  the  river 

4.  17  answer,  .(unto)  the  rest  beyond  the  river 

4.  20  ruled  over  all  (countries)  beyoud  the  riv. 

5.  3,  6  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  river 

5.  6  Apharsachites .  .on  this  side  the  river 

6.  6  Tatnai,  governor  beyond  the  river,  Shet. 
6.  6  Apharsachites,  which  (are)  beyond  the  ri. 
6.    8  goods,  (even)  of  the  tribute  beyond  the  ri. 

6.  13  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  river 

7.  21  the  treasurers  which  (are)  beyond  the  ri. 
7.  25  all  the  people  that  (are)  beyond  the  river 

7.i4  dividing  brook  in  a  valley,  7ry  nachal. 

Lev.  11.    9  the  waters,  in  the  seas,  and  in  the  rivers 

11.  10  and  in  the  rivers,  of  all  that  move  in  the 
Niim  34.  5  from  Azmon  unto  the  riverof  Egypt,  and 
Dent.  2.  24  pass  over  the  river  Arnon :  behold,  I  have 

2.  36  (is)  by  the  brink  of  the  riverof  Arnon,  and 
2.  36  (from)  the  city  that  (is)  by  the  river,  even 

2.  37  (nor)  unto  any  place  of  the  river  Jabbok 

3.  8  from  the  river  of  Arnon  unto  mount  He. 
3.  12  Aroer,  which  (is)  by  the  river  Arnon,  and 
3. 16  eveu  unto  the  river  Arnon  half  the  valley 

3.  16  and  the  border  even  unto  the  river  Jabbok 

4.  48  which  (is)  by  the  bank  of  the  river  Arnon 
10.    7  to  Jotbath,  a  laud  of  rivers  of  waters 

Josh.  12.    1  from  the  river  Arnon  unto  mount  Herm. 

12.  2  which  (is)  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  Ar. 
12.    2  from  the  middle  of  the  river,  aud  from 

12.  2  the  river  Jabbok,  (which  is)  the  border  of 

13.  9,  16  that  (is)  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  A. 
13.  9,  16  city  that  (is)  in  the  midst  of  the  river 
15.  4  went  out  unto  the  riverof  Egypt ;  and  the 
15.  7  which  (is)  on  the  south  side  of  the  river 

15.  47  unto  the  riveiof  Egypt,  and  the  great  sea 

16.  8  Tappuah  westward  unto  the  river  Kanah 

17.  9  the  river  Kanah,  southward  of  the  river 
17.  9  coast,  .(was)  on  the  north  side  of  theriver 
19.  11  and  reached  to  the  river  that  (is)  before 

Judg.4.    7  will  draw  unto  thee,  to  the  river  Kishon 

4.  13  from  Harosheth.  .unto  the  river  of  Kish. 

5.  2i  The  river.,  that  ancient  river,  the  river  K. 
2  Sa.  17.  13  we  will  draw  it  into  the  river,  until  there 

24.    5  (lieth)  in  the  midst  of  the  river  of  Gad 
r.  K\.    8.  65  entering  in  of  Hamath  untn  the  river  of 
_2  Ki.  10.  33  from  Aroer,  which  (is)  by  the  river  Anion 

24.   7  takeu  from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto  the  ri. 
2  Ch.  7.    8  entering  in  of  llama  th  unto  the  river  of 
Psa.  36.    8  make  them  drink  of  the  river  of  thy  pie. 
Eccl.    1.    7  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea ;  yet  the 
1.    7  unto  the  place  from  whence  the  rivers 
Jer.  31.    9  will  cause  them  to  walk  by  the  livers  of 
Lam.  2.  iS  let  tears  run  down  like  a  river  day  and 
Eze.  47.    5  riverthatlcouldnotpassover.  .riverthat 

47.  6  caused  me  to  return  to  the  brink  of  the  ri. 


Eze.  47.    7  at  the  bank  of  the  river  (were)  very  many 

47.   9  whithersoever  the  rivers  shall  come,  shall 

47.    9  every  thing  shall  live  whither  theriver  co. 

47.  12  by  the  river  upon  the  bank  thereof,  on 

Amos  6.  14  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the  river  of 

Mic.    6.    7  be  pleased,  .with  ten  thousands  of  rivers 

S.A  brook  in  a  valley,  nbus  nachcd'cch. 

Eze.  47.  19  waters  of  strife  (in)  Kadesh,  the  river  to 
4S.  28  (and)  to  the  river  toward  the  great  sea 

9. A  division,  artificial  water  course,  2^3  pdeg. 
Job  29.    6  and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil 
Psa.     1.    3  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers 

65.    9  the  river  of  God,  (which)  is  full  of  water 

rig.  136  Rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes,  b. 

Prov.  5.  16  dispersed  abroad,  (and)rivers  of  waters  in 

2i.    1  The  king's  heart,  .(as)  the  rivers  of  water 
Isa.   30.  25  rivers  (and)  streams  of  watei'3  in  the  day 

32.    2  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place ;  as  the  sh 
Lam.  3.  43  Mine  eye  runneth  dowu  with  rivers  of  wa. 

10. J.  division,  artificial  water  ourse,nzh-} pelaggah. 
Job  20. 17  He  shall  not  see  the  rivers,  the  floods,  the 

11.^1  jlowing,  a  river,  flood,  torrent,  TroTa.fj.6s  pot  a. 
Mark  1.    5  were  all  baptized  of  him  in  theriver  of  J. 
John  7.  38  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 
Acts  16.  13  we  went  out  of  the  city  by  a  river  side 
Rev.    8.  10  and  it  fell  upon  the  third  part  of  the  riv. 
9.  14  which  are  bound  in  the  great  river  Eup. 
16.   4  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  rivers  and 
16.  12  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great  river 
22.    1  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life 
22.    2  on  either  side  of  the  liver,  (was  there)  the 
RIVER,  little  — 
A  trench  or  conduit,  nS^pi  tealah. 

Eze.  31.    4  sent  out  he'r  little  rivers  unto  all  the  trees 
RIZ'-PAH,  ns^-i  variegated. 

A  daughter  of  Aiah  and  concubiue  of  Sard,  whom  Abner 
took  after  Saul's  death,  and  whose  two  sons  were  given 
up  by  David  to  the  Gibeonites  and  hanged.    B.C.  1070. 
2  Sa.    3.    7  Saul  had  a  concubine,  whose  name.  .R. 
21.    8  But  the  king  took  the  two  sons  of  R.  the 
21.  10  And  R.  the  daughter  of  Aiah  took  sackc. 
21.  11  And  it  wastokl  David  what  R. .  .had  done 
ROAD,  to  make  a  — 
To  strip  off,  fcK>3  p>ashat. 

1  Sa.  27.  10  Whither  have  ye  made  aroadtoday?  And 
ROAR,  to  — 
l.To  meditate,  mutter,  njrr  hagah. 

Isa.   31.    4  Like  as  the  liou  and  the  young  lion  roar. 

2.To  make  a  noise,  nsrr  hamah. 

Psa.  46.    3  the  waters  thereof  roar  (and)  be  troubled 
Isa.   51.  15  that  divided  thesea,  whose  waves  roared 

59.  11  We  roar  all  like  bears,  and  mourn  sore 
Jer.     5.  22  though  they  roar,  yet  can  they  not  pass 
6.  23  their  voice  roareth  like  the  sea ;  and  they 
31.  35  when  the  waves  thereof  roar;  The  Lord 

50.  42  theirvoiceshallroarlike  thesea,  and  they 

51.  55  when  her  waves  do  roar  like  great  waters 
S.To  be  disquieted,  troubled,  err:  naham, 

Isa.     5.  29  like  young  lions;  yea,  they  shall  roar,  and 
5.  30  in  that  day  they  shall  roar  agaiust  them 

4.  To  shriek,  erg  aloud  or  out,  nny  tsarach,  5. 

Isa.   42.  13  shall  cry,  yea,  roar;  he  shall  prevail  ag. 

5.  To  roar,  be  troubled,  D*h  raam. 

1  Ch.16.  32  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 
Psa.  96. 11  let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 
98.    7  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 
6.T0  roar,  JNyJ  shaag. 

Judgi4.    s  behold,  a  young  lion  roared  against  him 
Job  37.    4  After  it  a  voice  roareth :  he  thuudercth 
Psa.  22.  13  gaped,  .(as)  a  ravening  and  a  roaring  lion 
38.    8  I  have  roared  by  reason  of  the  disquiet. 
74.    4  Thine  enemies  roar  in  the  midst  of  thy 
104.  21  The  young  lions  roar  after  their  prey,  and 
Isa.     5.  29  they  shall  roar  like  young  lions ;  yea,  they 
Jer.     2.  15  The  young  lions  roared  upon  him,  (and) 
25.  30  The  Lord  shall  roar  from  on  high,  and 
25.  30  he  shall  mightily  roar  upon  his  habitation 
51.  38  They  shall  roar  together  like  lions    they 
Eze.  22.  25  like  a  roaring  liou  ravening  the  prey :  they 
Hos.  11.  10  roar  like  a  liou  :  wheu  he  shall  roar,  then 
Joel    3.  16  The  Lord  also  shall  roar  out  of  Zion,  and 
Amos  1.   2  Lord  will  roar  from  Zion,  and  utter  his 
3.    4  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest  when  he  hath 
3.   8  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear?  tin? 
Zeph.  3.    3  Her  princes  within  her  (are)  roaring  lions 
7-  To  sound,  i)x*&  echeo. 

Luke2i.  25  perplexity;  theseaandthe  waves  [roaring] 
8.  To  low,  bellow,  roar,  fivKa.ofj.at  m/ukaomai. 

Rev.  10.    3  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  (when)  a  lion 
§.To  roar,  bellow,  howl,  bark,  wpvofiat  vruoncai, 
1  Pe.   5.    8  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring 
ROARING  — 
l.To  be  disquieted,  troubled.,  crn  naham. 

Prov  28.  15  roaring  lion,  and  a  ranging  bear ;  (so  is) 
2, Disquietude,  trouble,  Dn;  naham. 

Prov  19.  12  king's  wrath  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion 
20.    2  fear  of  a  king  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion 
§. Disquietude,  trov.bk\  ron)  nehamah. 

Isa.     5.  30  against  them  like  the  roaring  of  the  sea 


4.  Roar,  roaring,  rnjo  sheagah. 

Job     3.  24  my  roarings  are  poured  out  like  the  waters 
4. 10  The  roaring  of  the  lion,  and  the  voice  of 
Psa.  22.    1  me,  (and  from)  the  words  of  my  roaring 

32.    3  my  bones  waxed  old  through  my  roaring 
Isa.     5.  29  Their  roaring  (shall  be)  like  a  lion,  they 
Eze.  19.    7  was  desolate,  .by  the  noise  of  his  roaring 
Zech  11.    3  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  lions;  for 

ROAST,  to  roast,  — 

l.To  boil,  ripen,  cook,  h&%  bashal,  3. 

Deut  16.    7  thou  shalt  roast  and  eat  (it)  in  the  place 
2  Ch.35. 13  roasted  the  passover  with  fire  according 

2.  To  roast  or  singe,  XV)  charak. 

Prov  12.  27  slothful  (man)  roasteth  not  that  which  he 

3.  To  roast,  rhy  tsalah. 

1  Sa.   2.  15  Give  flesh  to  roast  for  the  priest ;  for  he 
Isa.   44.  16  he  roasteth  roast,  and  is  satisfied :  yea,  he 

44. 19  I  have  roasted  flesh,  and  eaten  (it) :  and 
4. Roasting,  "h"*  tsali. 

Exodi2.    8  roast  with  fire,  and  unleavened  bread,  and 

12.    9  but  roast  (with)  fire ;  his  head  with  his  legs 
Isa.   44.  16  roast,  and  is  satisfied :  yea,  he  warmeth 

5.  To  parch,  roast,  burn,  npp  qalah. 

Jer.  29.  22  whom  the  king*  of  Babylon  roasted  in  the 
ROB,  to  — 

1.  To  take  prey  or  spoil,  iia  bazaz. 

Isa.   10.    2  and  (that)  they  may  rob  the  fatherless ! 

17.  14  that  spoil  us,  and  the  lot  of  them  that  rob 
Eze.  39.  10  rob  those  that  robbed  them,  saith  the  L. 

*2.  To  snatch  away,  l,n  gazal. 

Lev.  19.  13  not  defraud  thy  neighbour,  neither  rob 
Judg.  9.  25  robbed  all  that  came  along  that  way  by 
Prov.22.  22  Robnotthe  poor,  because  he  (is)  poor,  ne. 
28.  24  "Whoso  robbeth  his  father  or  his  mother 
3.  To  surround,  compass,  ensnare,  *iip  ud,  3. 

Psa.119.  61  The  bands  of  the  wicked  have  robbed  me 
4,To  circumvent,  yap  qaba. 

Mai.    3.   8  Will  a  man  rob  God?  Yet  ye  have  robbed 
3.    8  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee?  In 
3.    9  foryehaverobbedme,(even)thiswholena- 
5. To  rifle,  spoil,  rrpip  shasali,  liffi shasah. 

1  Sa.  23.    1  the  Philistines,  .rob  the  threshing  floors 
Isa.    10.  13  robbed  their  treasures,  and  I  have  put  do. 

6.  To  spoil,  rob,  plunder,  o~vAaw  sulao. 

2  Co.  11.    8  robbed  other  churches,  taking  wages  (of 
ROB  of  children  or  whelps,  to  — 

l.To  bereave,  hby  skakol,  3. 

Lev.  26.  22  which  shall  rob  you  of  your  children,  and 
2. Bereaved,  7i3»  shakkul. 

2  Sa.  17.    8  as  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  in  the  field 

Prov  17.  12  Let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a 
ROBBED,  to  be,  that  he  had  — 
l.To  take  as  prey  or  spoil,  ua  bazaz. 

Isa.  42.  22  But  this  (is)  a  people  robbed  and  spoiled 

2.  To  be  taJcen  as  prey  or  spoil,  i]S  bazaz,  4. 

Jer.  50.  37  upon  her  treasures ;  and  they  shall  be  ro. 
3.-4  snatching  aicay,  n^t|  gezelah. 

Eze.  33.  15  give  again  that  he  had  robbed,  walk  in  the 
ROBBER  — 
1.  To  take  prey  or  spoil,  na  bazaz. 

Isa.  42.  24  Jacob  for  a  spoil,  and  Israel  to  the  robbers 
2  A  breaker  vp,  burglar,  p~)E  parits. 

Jer.     7.  11  become  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  eyes?  Be. 

Eze.    7.  22  for  the  robbers  shall  enter  into  it,  and 

18.  10  If  he  beget  a  son  (that  is)  a  robber,  a  she. 
3. Sou  of  a  burglar,  p"i3"fa  ben  pan'ts. 

Dan.  ij.  14  robbers  of  thy  people  shall  exalt  tliemse. 
4.-4  designing  one,  noose,  ces  tsami?n. 

Job     5.    s  the  robber  swalloweth  up  their  substance 
18.    9  (and)  the  robber  shall  prevail  againsthim 

5.  To  sp>oil  or  waste,  7]gr  shadad. 

Job   12.   6  tabernacles  of  robbers  prosper,  and  they 
Obad.       5  If  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  by  night 

6.  Robber,  plunderer,  XrjarTjs  testes. 

John  10.    1  He  that  entereth  not . .  is  a  thief  and  a  ro. 

10.    8  All . .  are  thieves  and  robbers  :  but  the  sh. 

18.  40  but  Barabbas.    Now  Barabbas  was  a  rob. 
2  Co.  11.  26  perils  of  robbers,  (in)  perils  by  (mine  own) 

ROBBERY  — 

l.A  snatching  awayy  Stj  gazel. 

Psa.  62.  10  become  not  vain  in  robbery :  if  riches  in. 

Isa.  61.    8  hate  robbery  for  burnt  offering ;  and  I  w. 

Eze.  22.  29  have  used  oppression,  and  exercised  rob. 
•l.A  breaking  up  or  forth,  p^pereq. 

Nab,  3.    1  it  (is)  all  fidl  of  lies  (and)  robbery ;  the  p. 
3. Spoiling,  waste,  ~\v  shod. 

Prov  21.    7  robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  destroy  them 

Amos  3.  10  store  up  violence  aud  robbery  in  their  pa. 
i.A  snatching  away,  apTra.yf.i6s  harpagmos. 

Phil.  2.    6  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  G. 
ROBE,  (long)  — 
\..\a  ornamental  mantle,  nx  fV<-r. 

Mic.   2.    8  ye  pull  off  the  robe  with  the  garment  from 
2  An  ornamental  mantle,  r\~ni<  addereth. 

Jon.    3.    6  laid  his  robe  from  him,  and  covered  (liim) 


ROBOAM 


822 


ROGELIM 


Lev. 

iSa. 


>Sa. 


3. Garment, .cloth,  1:2  beged. 

1  Ki.22.  10  having  put  on  their  robes,  in  a  void  piace 

22.  30  but  put  thou  on  thy  robes.    And  the  king 

2  Ch.18.    9  clothed  in  (their)  robes,  and  they  sat  in  a 

18.  29  go  to  the  battle  ;  but  put  thou  on  thy  ro. 

4. A  coat,  tunic,  runs,  (aJhs  krthoneth),  kuttoneth. 
Isa.  22.  21  will  clothe  him  with  thy  robe,  and  stren. 

5.  Robe,  mantle,  TJJD  meil. 

ExodsS.  4  robe,  and  a  broidered  coat,  a  mitre,  and 
28. 31  shalt  make  the  robe  of  the  ephod  all  (of) 

28.  34  upon  the  hem  of  the  robe  round  about 

29.  5  put  upon  Aaron  the  coat,  and  the  robe  of 
39.  22  made  the  robe  of  the  ephod  (of)  woven 
39.  23  anhole  in  the  midst  of  the  robe,  as  the  ho. 
39.  24  made  upon  the  hems  of  the  robe  pomegr. 
39.  25  upon  the  hem  of  the  robe,  round  about  b. 

39.  26  round  about  the  hem  of  the  robe  to  min. 
7  clothed  him  with  the  robe,  and  put  the  ep. 
4  Jonathan  stripped  himself  of  the  robe  th. 

24.  4  and  cut  off  the  skirt  of  Saul's  robe  privily 
24. 11  see  the  skirt  of  thy  robe  in  my  hand :  for 
24. 11  for  in  that  I  cut  off  the  skirt  of  thy  robe 
.  13.  18  with  such  robes  were  the  king's  daughters 
1  Ch.15.  27  David  (was)  clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine  li. 
Job  29.  14  my  judgment  (was)  as  a  robe  and  a  diad.j 
Isa.  61. 10  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness 
Eze.  26.  16  lay  away  their  robes,  and  put  off  their  br. 

6.  Garment,  robe,  raiment,  4<rd-hs  esthes. 

Luke23. 11  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe,  and  sent 

7.  Garment,  mantle,  Ifiariov  himation. 

Johnig.    2  head,  and  they  put  on  him  a  purple  robe 

19.  5  the  crown  of  thorns,  and  the  purple  robe 

S.A  long  garment,  robe,  ctoXtj  stole. 

Lukeis.  22  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  (it)  on 

20.  46  which  desire  to  walk  in  long  robes,  and 
Rev.   6.  11  white  robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of 

7.  9  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  th. 
7.  13  are  these  which  are  arrayed  in  white  ro.? 
7.  14  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them 

9,  A  cloak,  robe,  loose  garment,  xAa^iJs  chlamus. 
Matt  27.  28  stripped  him,  and  put  on  him  a  scarlet  ro. 
27.  31  they  took  the  robe  off  from  him,  and  put 

RO-BO'-AM,  'Po$oafi.     See  Rehoboam. 

Son  of  Solomon  and  father  of  Abijah,  kings  of  Judah. 

B.C.  975. 

Matt.  1.    7  And  Solomon  begat  R. ;  and  R.  begat  A. 
ROCK,  (ragged)  — 
I.Flint,  flinty  rock,  e;,?Wj  challamish. 

Job   28.   9  He  putteth  forth  his  hand  upon  the  rock 

2.  Rocks,  D'23  kephim. 

Job  30.    6  To  dwell  in  the  cliffs,  .and  (in)  the  rocks 
Jer.     4.  29  thickets,  and  climb  up  upon  the  rocks 

3.  Strong  place,  strength,  liyb  niaoz. 

Judg.  6.  26  build  an  altar,  .upon  the  top  of  this  rock 

4.  A  cliff,  rock,  (from  its  elewdion),  ySp  seta. 

Nuni2o.  8  speak  ye  unto  the  rock  before  their  eyes 
20.  8  bring  forth  to  them  water  out  of  the  rock 
20.  10  gathered,  .together  before  the  rock,  and 
20.  10  must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock 
20. 11  with  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock  twice ;  and 

24.  21  and  said,  .thou  puttest  thy  nest  in  a  rock 
Deut32.  13  suck  honey  out  of  the  rock,  and  oil  out  of 
Judg.  1.  36  going  up  to  Akrabbim,  from  the  rock,  and 

6.  20  lay  (them)  upon  this  rock,  and  pour  out 
15.  8  went  down  and  dwelt  in  the  top  of  the  ro. 
15. 11  went  to  the  top  of  the  rock  Etam,  and  said 

15.  13  bound.,  and  brought  him  up  from  the  ro. 
20.  45  fled  toward  the  wilderness  unto  the  flock 

20.  47  unto  the  rock,  .aud  abode  in  the  rock  R. 

21.  13  children.,  that  (were)  in  the  rockRhnmon 

1  Sa.  13.   6  hide  themselves.,  in  rocks,  and  in  high  pi. 

14.    4  rock  on  the  one  side,  anda  sharp  rockon 

23.  25  wherefore  he  came  down  into  a  rock,  and 

2  Sa.  22.   2  Lord  (is)  my  rock,  and  my  fortress,  and 

1  £i  19. 11  brake  in  pieces  the  rock,  before  the  Lord 

2  Ch.25.  12  brought  them  unto  the  top  of  the  rock,  and 

25.  12  cast  them  down  from  the  top  of  the  rock 
Neh.  9.  15  water  for  them  out  of  the  rock  for  their 
Job    39.    1  time  when  the  wild  goats  of  the  rock  br. 

39. 28  on  the  rock,  upon  the  crag  of  the  rock 
Psa.  iS.    2  Lord  (is)  my  rock,  and  my  fortress,  and 

31.  3  For  thou  (art)  my  rock  and  my  fortress 

40.  2  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  (and)  established 
42.    9  I  will  say  unto  God  my  rock,  Why  hast 
71.   3  for  thou  (art)  my  rock  and  my  fortress 
78. 16  He  brought  streams  also  out  of  the  rock 

104.  18  refuge  for  the  wild  goat3,  (and)  the  rocks 
Prov.30. 26  yet  make  they  then*  houses  in  the  rocks 
Song  2.  14  my  dove,  (that  art)  in  the  clefts  of  the  ro. 
Isa.     2.  21  and  into  the  tops  of  of  the  ragged  rocks 
7. 19  in  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  and  upon  all  th. 

22.  16  gravethan  habitation  for  himself  in  a  ro.? 

32.  2  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  la. 

33. 16  defence  (shall  be)  the  munitions  of  rocks 

42.  11  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock  sing,  let 

57.    5  in  the  valleys  under  the  clifts  of  the  roc? 

5.    3  made  their  faces  harder  than  a  rock  ;  th. 
13.    4  and  hide  it  there  in  a  hole  of  the  rock 

16.  16  hunt  them . .  out  of  the  holes  of  the  rocks 

23.  29  like  a  hammer  (that)  breaketh  the  rockin 
48.  28  dwell  in  the  rock,  and  be  like  the  dove 
49. 16  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  ro. 
51.  25  roll  thee  down  from  the  rocks,  and  will 

24.  7  she  set  it  upon  the  top  of  a  rock ;  she  po. 
24.    8  have  set  her  blood  upon  the  top  of  a  rock 


Jer. 


Eze. 


Psa. 


Eze.  26.   4  will  also,  .make  her  like  the  top  of  a  rock 

26. 14 1  will  make  thee  like  the  top  of  a  rock  :  th. 

Amos  6. 12  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock';  will  (one) 

Obad.       3  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  ro. 

5.-4  rock,  (from  its  sliarpness),  "fts  tsvr. 

Exodi7.  6  will  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  ro. 
17.  6  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall  come  wa. 
33.  21  by  me,  and  thou  shalt  stand  upon  a  reck 
33.  22  that  I  will  put  thee  in  a  clift  of  the  rock 

2s  um  23.    9  For  from  the  top  of  the  rocks  I  see  him 

Deut.  8.  15  brought  thee  forth  water  out  of  the  rock 
32.  4  (He  is)  the  rock,  his  work  (is)  perfect ;  for 
32.  13  made  him  to  suck,  .oil  of  the  flinty  rock 
32. 15  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  his  salvation 
32.  18  Of  the  rock  (that)  bf  gat  thee  thou  art  un. 
32.  30  except  their  rock  had  sold  them,  and  the 
32.  31  For  their  rock  (is,)  not  as  our  rock,  even 
32. 37  Where(are)  their  gods,  (their)  rock  in  wh. 

Judg.  6.  21  there  rose  up  fire  out  of  the  rock,  andco. 
7.  25  slew  Oreb  upon  the  rock  Oreb,  and  Zeeb 
13. 19  took  a  kid.  .and  offered  (it)  upon  a  rock 

1  Sa.   2.    2  none . .  neither  (is  their)  any  rock  like  our 

24.    2  his  men  upon  the  rocks  of  the  wild  goats 

2  Sa.21. 10  spread  it  for  her  upon  the  rock,  from  the 

22.  3  God  of  my  rock  ;  in  him  will  I  trust :  (he 
22.  32  save  the  LORD?  and  who  (is)  a  rock,  save 
22.  47  The  Lord  liveth  ;  and  blessed  (be)my  ro. 

22.  47  exalted  be  the  God  of  the  rock  of  my  sal. 

23.  3  The  God  of  Israel  said,  the  rock  of  Israel 
1  Ch.n.  15  went  down  to  the  rock  to  David, into  the 
Job    14. 18  and  the  rock,  is  removed  out  of  his  place 

4  shall  the  rock  be  removed  out  of  his  place 
24  they  were  graven,  .in  the  rock  for  ever! 

8  and  embrace  the  rock  for  want  of  a  she. 
10  He  cutteth  out  rivers  among  the  rocks 

6  and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil 
31  save  the  LORD?or  who  (is)a  rocksave  our 
46  The  Lord  liveth ;  and  blessed  (be)  my  ro-. 

5  hide  me  ;  he  shall  set  me  up  upon  a  rock 

1  Unto  thee  will  I  cry,  O  Lord  my  rock;  be 

2  be  thou  my  strong  rock,  for  an  house  of 
2  lead  me  to  the  rock  (that)  is  higher  than 
2  He  only  (is)  my  rock  and  my  salvation  ;  he 

7  rock  of  my  strength,  (and)  my  refuge,  (is) 

15  He  clave  the  rocks  iu  the  wilderness,  and 

20  smote  the  rock,  that  the  waters  gushed 
35  they  remembered  that  God  (was)  their  ro. 

16  with  honey  out  of  the  rock  should  I  have 
26  my  God,  and  the  rock  of  my  salvation 
15  my  rock,  and  (there  is)  no  unrighteousn. 
22  my  defence  ;  and  my  God  (is)  the  rock  of 

1  let  us  make  a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of 
41  opened  the  rock,  and  the  waters  gushed 

8  Which  turned  the  rock  (into)  a  standing 
19  way  of  a  serpent  upon  a  rock,  the  way  of 
10  Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the 
19  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks 

21  To  go  into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and  in. 
14  for  a  rock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses 
26  slaughter  of  Midian  at  the  rock  of  Oreb 
10  hast  not  been  mindful  of  the  rock  of  thy 
21  caused  the  waters  to  flow  out  of  the  rock 
21  clave  the  rock  also,  and  the  waters  gush. 

1  look  unto  the  rock  (w  hence)  ye  are  hewn 
14  (which  cometh)  from  the  rock  of  the  field 
13  I  (am)  against  thee,  O.  .rock  of  the  plain 

6  fury  is  poured  out  like  fire,  and  the  rocks 
stone,  irerpa  petra. 

.  24  man,  which  built  his  house  upon  a  rock 
.  25  fell  not :  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock 

18  and  upon  this  rockl  will  build  mychurch 
.  51  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent 
.  60  tomb,  which  he  had  hewn  out  in  the  rock 
.  46  a  sepulchre  which  was  hewn  out  of  a  rock 

4S  laid  the  foundation  on  a  rock :  and  when 

48  [could  not  shake  it;  for  it  was.  .uponaro.] 
,  6  some  fell  upon  a  rock ;  and  as  soon  as  it 
.  13  They  on  the  rock  (are  they),  which,  when 

33  lay . .  a  stumbling  stone  and  rock  of  offence 
.    4  rock  that  followed  them ;  and  that  rock 

8  a  rock  of  offence,  (even  to  them)  which 
.  15  dens  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  mountains 
.  16  said  to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  Fall  on 

7.  Rough  or  rugged  places,  rpax^s  t6ttoi,s  toptois. 
Acts  27.  29  fearing.,  we  should  have  fallen  upon  rock 

ROD  — 

l.A  rod,  shoot,  twig,  sprout,  "^h  choter. 

Prov  14.    3  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  (is)  a  rod  of 
Isa.   11.    1  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the 

2.  A  staff,  'bfpo  maqgel. 


94- 
95- 
105. 
114. 
Prov.30. 
Isa.     2. 


Jer.  iS. 


Nah. 

1. 

.4  rock, 

JIatt 

7 

7- 

16. 

27 

27. 

Mark 

i<; 

Luke  6. 

6. 

8 

8. 

Horn 

9- 

1  Co. 

10 

1  Pe 

2 

Rev. 

6. 

6. 

Gen. 


Jer. 

43. 

Z.A  rodx 
Exod.  4 

4 


37  Jacob  tookhim  rods  of  green  poplar,  and 

37  made  the  white  appear  which  (was)  in  the 

38  set  the  rods  which  he  had  pilled  before 

39  the  flocks  conceived  before  the  rods,  and 
41  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  eyes  of  the 
41  that  they  might  conceive  among  the  rods 

11  And  I  said,  I  see  a  rod  of  an  almond  tree 
17  strongstaff  broken, (and)  thebeautifulrod 

USD  matteh. 

2  What  (is),  .in  thine  hand?  And  he  said,  Ar. 

4  caught  it,  and  became  a  rod  in  his  hand 
17  thou  shalt  take  this  rod  in  thine  hand 
20  and  Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  his  ha. 

9  Take  thy  rod,  and  cast  (it)  before  Pharaoh 
10  Aaron  cast  down  his  rod  before  Pharaoh 

12  they  cast  down  every  man  his  rod,  and 
12  but  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods 
15  the  rod  which  was  turned  to  a  serpent 


£xo 

J.  7. 

7- 

7- 

8. 

8. 

8. 

9- 

10. 

14. 

>7- 

T7- 

N111U17. 

17- 

'7- 

17- 

17- 

17- 

I7- 

17- 

'7- 

17- 

17- 

J7- 

17- 

20. 

20. 

20. 

1  Sa 

14. 

14- 

Psa. 

110. 

Isa. 

10. 

Eze. 

7- 

7- 

19. 

19. 

19. 

19. 

Mic 

6. 

i.A  scejilr 

Exod2i. 

Lev. 

27- 

2Sa 

7. 

Job 

9- 

21. 

Psa. 

2. 

23. 

74- 

17  I  will  smite  with  the  rod  that  (is)  in  mine 

19  Take  thy  rod,  and  stretch  out  thine  hand 

20  lifted  up  the  rod,  and  smote  the  waters 
5  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  with  thy  rod 

16  Stretch  out  thy  rod,  and  smite  the  dust 

17  Aaron  stretched  out  his  haudwith  his  rod 

23  stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  heaven 

13  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  over  the 
16  lift  thou  up  thy  rod,  and  stretch  out  thine 

5  thy  rod,  wherewith  thou  smotest  the  river 
9  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the  rod 
2  take  of  every  one  of  them  a  rod  according 
2  the  house  of  their  fathers  twelve  rods 

2  write  thou  every  man'sname  upon  his  rod 

3  upon  the  rod  of  Levi:  for  one  rod  (shall  be) 

5  the  man's  rod,  whom  I  shall  choose,  shall 

6  every  one  of  their  princes  gave  him  a  rod 
6  to  their  fathers' houses,  (even)twelverods 

6  and  the  rod  of  Aaron  (was)  amongtheirro. 

7  Moses  laid  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord 

8  the  rod  of  Aaron  for  the  house  of  Levi  was 

9  Moses  brought  out  all  the  rods  from  before 
9  they  looked,  and  took  every  man  his  rod 

10  Bring  Aarons  rod  again  before  the  testim. 

8  Take  the  rod,  and  gather  thou  theassem. 

9  Moses  took  the  rod  from  before  the  Lord 

11  aud  with  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock  twice 
27  the  end  of  the  rod  that  (was)  in  Ins  hand 
43  the  end  of  the  rod  that  (was)  in  mine  hand 

2  send  the  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion 

26  (as)  his  rod  (was)  upon  the  sea,  so  shall  he 

10  the  rod  hath  blossomed,  pride  hath  bud. 

1 1  Violence  is  risen  up|iuto  a  rod  of  wickedness 

11  she  had  strong  rods  for  the  sceptres  of 

12  her  strong  rods  were  broken  and  withered 

14  fire  is  gone  out  of  a  rod  of  her  branches 
14  hath  no  strong  rod  (to  be)  a  sceptre  to  rule 

9  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed 

e,  rod,  b^b?  shebet. 

20  smite  his  servant,  or  his  maid,  with  a  rod 

32  whatsoever  passeth  under  the  rod,  thete. 

14  I  will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  men 
34  Let  him  take  his  rod  away  from  me,  and 

9  (are)  safe  from  fear,  neither  (is)  the  rod  of 
9  Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

4  thou  (art)  with  me  ;  thy  rod  and  thy  staff 

2  the  rod  of  thine  inheritance,  (which)  thou. 
32  I  visit  their  transgression  with  the  rod 

3  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon 
.13  a  rod  (is)  for  the  back  of  him  that  is  void 

24  He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth  his  son 
8  and  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall  fall 

15  the  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it  far 

13  (if)  thou  beatest  him  with  the  rod,  he  shall 

14  Thou  shalt  beat  him  with  the  rod,  and  sh. 

3  a  bridle  for  the  ass,  and  a  rod  for  the  fool's 

15  The  rod  and  reproof  give  wisdom :  but  a 

4  thou  hast  broken,  .the  rod  of  his  oppres. 

5  the  rod  of  mine  anger,  and  the  staff  in 

15  the  rod  should  shake(itself)against  them 
24  he  shall  smite  thee  with  a  rod,  and  shall 

4  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth 
29  the  rod  of  liim  that  smote  thee  is  broken 

27  with  a  staff,  and,  the  cummin  with  a  rod 
31  be  beaten  down,  (which)smote  witharod 

16  and  Israel  (is)  the  rod  of  his  inheritance 
19  and  (Israel  is)  the  rod  of  his  inheritance 

1  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  his  WTath. 

37  I  will  cause  you  to  pass  under  the  rod 

21.  10  it  contemneth  the  rod  of  my  son,  (as)  er. 

21.  13  what  if  (the  sword)  contemn  even  the  rod? 

Mic.    5.    1  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod 

7.  14  Feed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock 

5.A  rod,  staff,  sceptre,  ftdpdos  rhabdos. 

1  Co.  4.  21  shall  I  come  unto  you  with  a  rod,  or  in  love 
Heb.  9.  4  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  the  tables 
Rev.   2.  27  And  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

11.  1  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  unto  a  rod 

12.  5  was  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron 
19.  15  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron. 

ROE,  roebuck,  (young)  — 

1.-4  wild  goat,  roe,  i*nj£;  yaalah. 

Prov.  5.  19  (be  as)  the  ioving  hind  and  pleasant  roe 

2.  Young  roe  or  hart,  njjy  nsj?  opher  tsebiyyah. 
Song  4.    5  (are)  like  two  young  roes  that  are  twins 

7.  3  (are)  like  two  young  roes  (that  are)  twins 

3.^4  roe,  roebuck,  *3¥  tsebi. 

Deut  12.  15  as  of  the  roebuck,  and  as  of  the  hart 

12.  22  Even  as  the  roebuck  and  the  hart  is  eaten 

14.  5  the  roebuck,  and  the  fallow'  deer,  aud  the 

15.  22  shall  eat  it)  alike,  as  the  roebuck,  and  as 

2  Sa.  2.  18  Asahel  (was  as)  light  of  foot  as  a  wild  roe 
1  Ki.  4.  23  roebucks,  and  fallow  deer,  and  fatted  fo. 

1  Ch.12.    8  as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains 
Prov.  6.    5  Deliver  thyself  as  a  roe  from  the  hand 
Song   2.    7  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field 

2.   9  My  beloved  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 

2.  17  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon 

3.  5  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field 

8.  14  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart 
Isa.    13.  14  And  it  shall  be  as  the  chased  roe,  and  as  a. 

RO-GE'-LTM,  D'Sri  fullers*  place. 
A  city  in  Gilead,  in  Gad  or  Manasseh. 

2  Sa.  17.27 thatShobi.. and BarzillaitheGileadite of R. 

19.  31  BarzillaitheGileadite  came  downfrom  R. 


Isa. 


T  5I* 

Lam.  3. 
Eze.  20. 


ROHGAH 


824 


ROPE 


ROH'-GAH,  nffll  outcry,  alarm. 

A  son  of  Shaiuer,  grandson  of  Beriah  son  of  Asher.     B.C. 

1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  34  Alii,  and  R.,  Jehubbah,  and  Aram 
ROLL  — 
1. Polished  writing  table,  {V^a  gillayon, 

Isa.     8.    1  Take  thee  a  great  roll,  and  write  in  it  with 

%A  roll,  volume,  n^jp  megillah. 

Ezra   6.    2  there  was  found  at  Aehmetha . .  a  roll,  and 
Jer-.  36.    2  Take  thee  a  roll  of  a  book,  and  write 

36.   4  and  Baruch  wrote,  .upon  a  roll  of  a  book 
36.   6  read  in  the  roll,  which  thou  hast  written 
36.  14  Take  in  thine  hand  the  roll  wherein  thou 
36.  14  son  of  Neriah  took  the  roll  in  his  hand 
36.  20  they  laid  up  the  roll  in  the  chamber  of 
36.  21  the  king  sent  Jehudi  to  fetch  the  roll 
36,  23  the  roll  was  consumed  in  the  fire  that  (was) 
36.  25  that  he  would  not  burn  the  roll ;  but  he 
36.  27  the  kiug  had  burnt  the  roll,  and  the  words 
36.  28  Take  thee  again  another  roll,  and  write 
36.  28  former  words  that  were  in  the  first  roll 
36.  29  TIiou  hast  burnt  this  roll,  saying,  Why  hast 
36.  32  Then  took  Jeremiah  another  roll,  and  gave 
Eze.    2.   9  and,  lo,  a  roll  of  a  book  (was)  therein 

3.    1  eat  this  roll,  and  go  speak  unto  the  house 
3.    2  mouth,  and  he  cauesd  me  to  eat  that  roll 
3.    3  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  roll  that  I  give 
Zech.  5.    1  Then  I  turned,  .and,  behold,  a  flying  roll 
5.   2  I  see  a  flying  roll ;  the  length  thereof,  the 

%.A  book,  scroll,  i£p  sephar. 

Ezra  6.  1  search  was  made  in  the  house  of  the  rolls 
ROLL  (selves,  away,  back,  down,  to,  together,  unto),  to — - 
I. To  roll,  ^  galal. 

Gen.  29.    3  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth 
29.    8  they  roll  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth 

Josh.  5.    9  I  rolled  away  the  reproach  of  Egypt  from 
10.  18  Roll  great  stones  upon  the  mouth  of  the 

1  Sa.  14.  33  Ye  have  transgressed  :  roll  a  great  stone 

Prov  26.  27  he  that  rolleth  a  stone,  it  will  return  upon 

2.  To  roll,  9?}  galal,  Sa. 

Jer.  51.  25  roll  thee  dowu  from  the  rocks,  and  will 

3.  To  (cause  to)  roll,  ^?3  galal,  5. 

Gen.  29.  10  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth, and 

4.  To  roll  self,  9}%  galal,  7a. 

Job  30.  14  in  the  desolation  they  rolled  themselves 

5.  To  press  or  roll  self  through,  wbp  palash,  7. 

Mic.    1.  jo  in  the  house  of  Aphrah  roll  thyself  in  the 

6.  To  roll  off  or  away,  tnroKv\{fa  apokulizo. 

Matt  28.  2  rolled  back  the  stone  from  the  door,  and 

Mark  16.  3  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  from  the 

16.  4  they  saw  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away 

Luke24.  2  they  found  the  stone  rolled  away  from  the 

7. To  roll  round  or  up,  iixiaaw  heilisso,  khiffaw. 
Rev.    6.  14  as  a  scroll  when  it  is  rolled  together ;  and 

8.7*0  roll  toward,  irpoaKvXico  proskulio. 

Matt  27.  60  he  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of 
Marki5-  46  and  rolled  a  stone  unto  the  door  of  the 

ROLLED  together,  to  be  — 
l.Tobe  rolled,  bbi  galal,  2. 

Isa.   34.    4  shall  be  rolled  together  as  a  scroll,  and 
2.To  be  rolled,  ^3  galal,  4a. 

Isa.     9.    5  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood 
ROLLER,  rolling  thing  — 
l.A  rolling  thing,  wheel,  7373  galgal. 

Isa.  17.  13  like  a  rolling  thing  before  the  whirlwind 
2.A  bandage,  ?wn  chittul. 

Eze.  30.  21  put  a  roller  to  bind  it,  to  make  it  strong 
RO-MAM-TI  E'-ZER,  17V  »{-M*1  highest  help. 
A  son  of  Hemau,  appointed  by  lot  over  the  service  of 
song  in  the  tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  R.,  Joshbekashah,  Mallothi,  Hothir,  (and) 
25.  31  The  four  and  twentieth  to  R.,  (he),  his  sous 

RO'-MAN,  'Pa»^a?oy,  belonging  to  Home. 

John  1 1.  48  R.  shall  come  and  take  away.  .our.  .nat. 
Acts  16.  21  which  are  nut  lawful  for  us.  .being  R. 

16.  37  beaten  us  openly  uucondemned,  being  R. 

16.  38  feared,  when  they  heard  that  they  were  R. 

22.  25  Is  it  lawful,  .to  scourge  a  man  that  is  aR. 

22.  26  saying,  Take  heed . .  for  this  man  is  a  R. 

22.  27  Tell  me,  art  thou  a  R.  ?  He  said,  Yea 

22.  29  afraid,  after  he  knew  that  he  was  a  R. 

23.  27  rescued,  .having  understood,  .he  wasaR. 
25.  16  It  is  not  the  manner  of  the  R.  to  deliver 
28.  17  was  I  delivered .  .into  the  hands  of  the  R. 

ROME,  'Pectin. 

The  capital  of  Italy,  on  the  Tiber,  about  fifteen  miles 
from  its  mouth ;  founded  about  750  B.C.,  and  covered 
seven  hills;  in  716  Romulus  its  founder  was  killed  ;  in 
615  the  Capital  was  founded ;  in  578  the  first  Roman 
money  was  coined ;  in  566  the  first  census  was  taken 
and  its  citizens  were  reckoned  at  84,700;  in  550 
Servius  Tullius  divided  them  into  six  classes,  insti- 
tuted the  Comitia  Centuriata ;  in  520  the  Sibylline  books 
removed  from  Cuma  to  Rome;  in  510  the  Tarquins  ex- 
pelled and  con siilar  government  established ;  in  499  the 
Dictatorship  is  instituted;  493  the  Comitia  Tribute  in- 
stituted; in  486  the  first  law  proposed;  in  451  the 
Decemviri  appointed  ;  in  433  temple  of  Apollo  dedicated; 
in  406  the  army  first  receives  regular  pay ;  in  403  all 


bachelors  taxed ;  in  400  the  first  public  banquet  of  the 
gods  celebrated ;  in  390  Rome  burnt  by  the  Gauls;  in 
387  the  Capitoline  games  established  ;  in  362  M.  Curtius 
leaps  into  the  gulf;  in  269  the  first  silver  coinage  struck 
at  Rome;  in  235  the  temple  of  Janus  closed;  in  181 
discovery  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  Muma  Pompilius ;  in 
167  the  first  public  library  opened ;  in  102  the  eagle 
becomes  the  standard;  in  100  Julius  Csesar  born;  in 
64  Pompey  annexes  Syria  ;  in  55  Csesar  invades  Britain  ; 
in  29  temple  of  Janus  again  closed;  in  12  Augustus 
made  Supreme  Pontiff.  In  a.d.  17  Cappadocia  annexed 
to  Rome ;  in  44  Judea annexed;  in  50 Caractacus  carried 
to  Rome ;  in  64  Rome  nearly  burnt  by  Nero ;  in  65  Paul, 
Peter,  Seneca,  and  Lucan  put  to  death  ;  in  71  Titus  and 
Vespasian  receive  a  triumph,  and  the  temple  of  Janus 
closed;  in  75  the  temple  of  peace  completed;  in  131- 
135  war  with  the  Jews;  in  274  Aurelian  founds  the 
temple  of  the  Sun ;  in  306  Constantine  dies  at  York ;  in 
312  Constantine  establishes  Christianity  as  the  religion 
of  the  state ;  in  330  it  is  again  formally  recognised  at 
Constantinople;  in  360  Julian  abjures  Christianity;  in 
364  division  into  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  Empires  ; 
in  410  Rome  taken  by  Alaric;  in  600,  according  to  Gib- 
bon, Rome  had  reached  its  lowest  point ;  in  728  it  comes 
under  the  sovereignty  of  the  Pope ;  in  846  threatened 
by  the  Arabs;  in  1155  Arnold  of  Brescia  burnt  for  heresy 
and  sedition;  in  1278  Charles  of  Anjou  compelled  to 
abdicate  by  the  Pope;  in  1309  the  Pope  removes  to 
Avignon ;  in  1434  the  Romans  revolt  against  the  Pope ; 
in  1626  dedication  of  St  Peter's  at  Rome;  in  1773  the 
Jesuits  expelled;  in  179S  the  Pope  deprived  of  his  tem- 
poral power;  in  1814  he  returns  to  Rome;  iu  1846  Pius 
IX.  elected  Pope,  and  in  1878  Leo  XIII. 

Acts   2.  10  and  strangers  of  R.,  Jews  and  proselytes 

18.  2  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  from  R. 

19.  21  After  I  have  been  there,  I  must  also  see  R. 
23. 11  so  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  R. 

28. 14  found  brethren,  .so  we  went  toward  R. 
28. 16  And  when  we  came  to  R.,  the  centurion 
Rom.  1.    7  To  all  that  be  in  R.,  beloved  of  God,  cal. 

1.  15  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you.  .at  R. 
2  Ti.    1.  1 7  But,  when  he  was  in  R. ,  he  sought  me  out 

ROOF  (of  the  house,  or  mouth)  — 

X.Rcof  or  top,  upper  part,  Ja  gag. 

Dcut  22.  8  shalt  make  a  battlement  for  thy  roof,  that 
Josh.  2.   6  brought  them  up  to  the  roof  of  the  house 

2.  6  which  she  had  laid  in  order  upon  the  roof 
2.    8  she  came  up  unto  them  upon  the  roof 

Judgi6.  27  upon  the  roof  about  three  thousand  men 

2  Sa.  11.    2  walked  upon  the  roof  of  the  king's  house 

11.    2  from  the  roof  he  saw  a  woman  washing 

18.  24  watchman  went  up  to  the  roof  over  the 

Neh.    8.  16  every  one  upon  the  roof  of  his  house,  and 

Jer.   19.  13  upon  whose  roofs  they  have  burned  inc. 

32.  29  housesupon  whose  roofs  they  have  offered 

Eze.  40.  13  roof  of  (one)  little  chamber  to  the  roof  of 

2. A  beam,  rnip  qorah. 

Geu.  19.    8  came  they  under  the  shadow  of  my  roof 

3.  The  palate,  mouth,  ^n  chek. 

Job  29.  10  tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth 
Psa.  137.  6  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth 
Song  7.  9  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  best  wine  for 
Lam,  4.  4  cleaveth  totheroof  of  his  mouth  for  thirst 
Eze.    3.  26  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  thy  mouth 

4.-4  covering,  fiat  roof,  crrfyrj  siege. 

Matt.  8.    8  that  thou  ahouldest  come  under  my  roof 
Mark  2.    4  they  uncovered  the  roof  where  he  was 
Luke  7.    6  that  thou  shouldest  enter  under  my  roof 
ROOM  (chief,  highest,  large,  upper,  uppermost,inthe) — 
1.^4  place,  standing  ground,  Dips  maqom. 

Geu.  24.  23  is  there  room  (in)  thy  father's  house  for 
24. 25  We  have  both  straw . .  and  room  to  lodge 
24.  31  prepared  the  house,  and  room  for  the  ca. 

2. A  nest,  jp  qen. 

Gen.   6.  14  rooms  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark,  and 

3. Broad  place,  srno  merchab. 

Psa.  31.    8  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  room 

4.  Under,  place  beneath,  nnri  tachath. 

2  Sa.  19.  13  before  me  continually  in  the  room  of  Jo. 

5.  Over  against,  in  the  place  of,  hvri  anti. 

Matt.  2.  22  did  reign  in  Judea  in  the  room  of  his  fa. 

6. Successor,  received  through  another,  dtddoxos. 
Acts  24.  27  Poreius  Festus  came  into  Felix'  room:  and 

7. Foremost  seat  for  reclining,  TrpwTOKAi<rta  proioh. 

Matt  23.    6  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and 

Marki2.  39  chief  seats,  .and  the  uppermost  roomsat 

Luke  14.    7  marked  how  they  chose  out  the  chief  ro. 

14.    8  sit  not  down  in  the  highest  room  ;  lest  a 

20.  46  love  greetings,  .and  the  chief  rooms  at  f. 

S.A  place,  t6-kos  topos. 

Luke  2.    7  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  inn 
14.    9  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  room 
14.  10  go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  room 
14.  22  L01  d,  it  is  done . .  and  yet  there  is  room 
1  Co.  14.  16  how  shall  he  that  occupieth  the  room  of 
0.  An  upper  chamber,  vircp<2ov  huperoon. 

Acts    1. 13  they  went  up  into  an  upper  room,  where 

ROOM,  to  make  — 

To  make  broad  or  wide,  inn  rachab,  5. 

Gen.  26.  22  For  now  the  Lord  hath  made  room  for 
Prov.18.  :6  man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him,  and 


ROOT  — 

I. Root,  v~p  shoresh. 

Deut29.  iS  a  root  that  bearefh  gall  and  wormwood 
Judg.  5.  14  Out  of  Ephraim  (was  there)  a  root  of  th. 
2  Ki.19.  30  house  of  Judah  shall  yet  again  take  root 
Job     8.  17  His  roots  are  wrapped  about  the  heap 
14.    8  Though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the 

18.  16  His  roots  shall  be  dried  up  beneath,  and 

19.  28  seeing  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found  in 

28.  9  overturneth  the  mountains  by  the  roots 

29.  19  My  root  (was)  spread  out  by  the  waters 

30.  4  cut  up  mallows , .  and  juniper  roots  (for) 
Prov.12.   3  root  of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  moved 

12. 12  but  the  root  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  fr. 
Isa.      5.  24  their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness,  and  th. 
11.    1  and  a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots 
11.  10  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse 
14.  29  for  out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall  come 
14.  30  kill  thy  root  witli  famine,  and  he  shall 
37,  31  house  of  Judah  shall  again  take  root  do. 
53.    2  shall  grow  up.  .as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  gro. 
Jer.  17.    8  spreadeth  out  her  roots  by  the  river,  ami 
Eze.  17.    6  roots  thereof  were  under  him :  so  it  bee. 
17.    7  this  vine  did  bend  her  roots  towards  him 
17.    9  shall  he  not  pull  up  the  roots  thereof,  and 
17.    9  people  to  pluck  it  up  bythe  roots  thereof 

31.  7  branches  :  for  his  root  was  by  great  waters 
Dan.  11.  7  But  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  (one) 
Hos.   9. 16  Ephraim  is  smitten,  their  root  is  dried  up 

14.  5  grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth  his  roots 
Amos  2.  9  yet  I  destroyed,  .his  roots  from  beneath 
Mai.    4.    1  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 

2.  A  root,  irjti'  shoresh. 

Dan.  4. 15  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots  in  the  earth 
4.  23  yet  leave  the  stump  of  the  roots  thereof 
4.  26  leave  the  stump  of  the  tree  roots;  thy  ki. 

S.A  root,  $i£a  rhiza. 

Matt.  3. 10  now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of 

13.    6  because  they  had  no  root,  they  withered 

13.  21  Yet  hath  he  not  root  in  himself,  but  dur. 

Mark  4.   6  because  it  had  no  root,  it  withered  away 

4. 17  have  no  root  in  themselves,  and  so  endu. 

11.  20  saw  the  fig  tree  dried  up  from  the  roots 

Luke  3.   9  now  also  the  ax  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the 

8.  13  these  have  no  root,  which  for  a  while  be. 

Rom.i  1.  16  and  if  the  root  (be)  holy,  so  (are)  the  bra. 

11.  17  partakest  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the 

11.  18  thoubearest  not  the  root,  but  the  rootth. 

15.  12  There  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  and  he  that 
1  Ti.    6.  10  Fortheloveof  moneyisthe  root  of  all  evil 
Heb.  12.  15  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up 
Rev.    5.    5  Root  of  David,  hath  prevailed  to  open  the 

22.  16  I  am  the  root  and  the  offspring  of  David 

ROOT,  (to  cause)  to  tike  — 

1.  To  take  root,  v-$  sharash,  3. 

Isa.  40.  24  their  stock  shall  not  take  root  in  the  earth 

2.  To  be  rooted  out,  take  root,  v~$  sharash,  36. 
Jer.   12.    2  planted  them,  yea,  they  have  taken  root 

3. To  cause  to  take  root,  viy  sharash,  5. 

Job     5.    3  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  root^  but 
Psa.  80.   9  didst  cause  it  to  take  deep  root,  and  it  fil. 
Isa.   27.   6  He  shall  cause  them . .  to  take  root :  Israel 

ROOT  out  or  up,  to  — 

\.  To  pluck  up,  s?m  nathash. 

Deut29.  28  Lord  rooted  them  out  of  their  land  in  an. 

1  Ki.14.  15  shall  root  up  Israel  out  of  this  good  laud 
Jer.     1.  10  to  root  out,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  de. 

2.  To   root  up  or  out,    wiy  sharash,  3. 
Job  31. 12  and  would  root  out  all  mine  increase 
Psa.  52.    5  and  root  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  living 

Z.To  root  old,  eKpt£aa>  ekn'zoO. 

Matti3.  29  while  ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root  up 

ROOTED  (out  or  up),  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  plucked  out  or  up,  npj  nasach. 

Prov.  2.  22  the  transgressors  shall  be  rooted  out  of  it 

2.  To  be  broken  off  or  away,  pm  nathaq,  2. 

Job  1?.  14  His  confidence  shall  be  rooted  out  of  his 

3.  To  be  uprooted,  ip^  aqar,  2. 

Zeph.  2.    4  shall  drive  out . .  Ekron  shall  be  rooted  up 

4.  To  be  rooted  up  or  out,  vy&  sharash,  4. 

Job  31.    8  letme  sow.. let  my  offspring  berooted  out 

5.  To  root  out,  ^Kpttyaj  ckrizoo. 

Mattis.  13  said,  Every  plant,  .shall  be  rooted  up 

G.To  be  rooted,  jit£6ofj.at  rhizoomat. 

Eph.    3.  17  that  ye,  beingrootedaudgroundedinlove 
Col.     2.    7  Rooted  and  built  up  in  him,  and  stablis. 

ROOTS,  to  pluck  (or  be  plucked)  up  by  the  — 

1.7*0  pluck  up,  trru  nathash. 

2  Ch.  7.  20  Then  will  I  pluck  them  up  by  the  roots  out 

2.7*0  be  uprooted,  npy  aqar,  2. 

Dan.    7.   8  three.,  horns  plucked  up  by  the  roots;  and 

3.  7*o  root  out,  cKptCoa)  ckrizoo. 

Lukei7.    6  Be  thou  plucked  up  by  the  root,  and  be 
Jude      12  fruit,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots 

ROPE  — 

I.  Cord,  line,  rope,  ?3n  chebcl. 

■2  K,t.i7.  13  then  shall" all  Israel  bring  ropes  to  that 
1  Ki.20.  31  put  sackcloths  on  our  loins,  and  ropes  upon 
20.  32  ropeson  their  heads,  and  came  to  the  kin  3 


ROSE 


825 


ROUND 


2.Thick  band,  7BE  aboth. 

J  udgi6.  1 1  If  they  bind  me  fast  with  uew  ropes  that 
16. 12  Delilah  therefore  took  new  ropes,  and  bo. 
Isa.     5. 18  draw,  .sin  as  it  were  with  a  cart  rope 

3.-4  rope  made  of  bulrushes,  axowlov  sclwinion. 

Acts  27.  32  Then  the  soldiers  cut  off  the  ropes  of  the 
ROSE  — 
Meadow  saffron  or  narcissus,  n?s;n  chabatslsele. 

Song  2.    1  the  rose  of  Sharon,  (and)  the  lily  of  the  va. 

Isa.  35.    1  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom  as  the  r. 

EOSH,  K>>n  Iiead. 

A  son  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  21  And  the  sons  of  Benjamin  (were).  .E.,  M. 
EOT,  (to  make)  to  — 

1.  To  fall,  S?j  naphal. 

Num.  5.  21  Lord  doth  make  thy  thigh  to  rut,  and  thy 
5.  27  belly  shall  swell,  and  her  thigh  shall  rot 

2.  To  cause  to  fall,  hzi  naphal,  5. 

Sum.  5.  22  (thy)  belly  to  swell,  and  (thy)  thigh  to  rot 

3.  To  rot,  2jn  raqab. 

Prov.io.    7  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot 
'  Isa.   40.  20  chooseth  a  tree  (that)  will  not  rot ;  he  se. 

EOTTEN,  to  he  — 

To  be  putrid,  aTJ,  abash. 

Joel    1.  17  seed  is  rotten  under  their  clods,  the  gar. 

ROTTEN,  (rags,  thing,)  rottenness  — 
l.Rags,  tatters,  D'cfe?  melachim. 

Jer.   38. 11  old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten  rags,  and 
38. 12  now  (these)  old  cast  clouts  and  rotten  rags 

2. Rottenness,  putridity,  foetor,  po  maq. 

Isa.     5.  24  their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness,  and  their 

S. Rotten,  2|n  raqab. 

Job   13.  28  as  a  rotten  thing,  consumeth,  as  a  garment 
Prov.12.   4  she  that  maketh  ashamed  (is)  as  rottenn. 

14.  30  but  envy  the  rottenness  of  the  bones 
Hos  .  5.  12  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  as  rottenness 
Hab.  3. 16  rottenness  entered  into  my  bones,  and  I 

i.Rottenness,  Jiafl  riqqabon. 

Job    41.  27  irou  as  straw,  (and)  brass  as  rotten  wood 

ROUGH  (places)  — 

1. Mighty,  jrrN,  }r>x  ethan. 

Deut  21.  4  bring  down  the  heifer  unto  a  rough  valley 
2. Rough,  bristling,  ~i£0  samar. 

Jer.  51.  27  cause  the  horses  to  come  up  as  the  rough 
3.  Gathered  together,  heaped  up,  D'P?"?  rekasim. 

Isa.  40.  4  made  straight,  and  the  rough  places  plain 
4. Sharp,  hard,  n^i;  qasheh. 

Isa.   27.    8  he  stayeth  his  rough  wind  in  the  day  of 

5. Hair,  TSjp  sair. 

Dan.   8.  21  And  the  rough  goat  (is)  the  king  of  Grecia 

6. Hairy,  Tfa  sear. 

Zech.13.   4  neither  shall  they  wear  a  rough  garment 

7. Rough,  rugged,  hard,  uneven,  rpaxvs  trachus. 
Luke  3.   5  andtheroughways(shallbe)madesmooth 

ROUGHLY  — 

l.Strong,  fierce,  1J2  az. 

Prov  18.  23  useth  entreaties,  .rich  answereth  roughly 
2.Sharp,  hard,  n^f)  qasheh. 

Gen.  42.  7  Joseph . .  spake  roughly  unto  them  ;  and  he 
42.  30  spake  roughly  to  us,  and  took  us  for  spies 

1  Sa.  20.  10  what  (if)  thy  father  answer  thee  roughly 

1  Ki.12.  13  the  king  answered  the  people  roughly,  and 

2  Ch.io.  13  the  king  answered  them  roughly  :  and  ki. 

ROUND  (thing)  — 

1.  To  be  scaly,  ospn  chaspas. 

Exodio.  14  a  small  round  thing,  (as)  small  as  the  hoar 
2. Roundness,  "inp  sahar. 

Song  7.  2  Thy  navel  (is  like)  a  round  goblet,  (which) 
3. Round,  Siy  agol. 

1  Ki.   7.  23  (it  was)  round  all  about,  and  his  height 

7.  31  the  mouth  thereof  (was)  round,  (after)  the 
7.  31  with  their  borders,  foursquare,  not  rouud 
7.  35  a  round  compass  of  half  a  cubit  high:  and 
10.  19  the  top  of  the  throne  (was)  round  behind 

2  Ch.  4.  2  he  made  a  molten  sea.  .round  in  compass 
[See  also  Beset,  compass,  go,  inclose,  tires  like  the  moon, 
shine], 

ROUND,  to  — 

To  go  or  compass  round  about,  ipj  naqaph,  5. 

Lev.  19.  27  Ye  shall  not  round  the  corners  of  your 
ROUND  about  — 
\.A  circle,  ball,  yn  dur. 

Isa.  29.    3  I  will  camp  against  thee  roundabout,  and 

2. Environs,  round  about,  a  circle,  ppe  mesab. 
1  Ki.   6.  29  all  the  walls  of  the  house  round  about 
Job   37. 12  it  is  turned  round  about  by  his  counsels 

3.  Round  about,  3'?p  sabib. 

Gen.  23. 17  that  (were)  in  all  the  borders  round  about 
35.  5  the  cities  that  (were)  round  about  them 
41.  48  food  of  the  field,  which  (was)  round  about 
Exod.  7.  24  Egyptians  digged  round  about  the  river 
16. 13  in  the  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about 
19. 12  set  bounds  unto  the  people  round  about 
104 


EXOCI25. 11  make  upon  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 
25.  24  make  thereto  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 
25.  25  a  border  of  an  band  breadth  round  about 
25.  25  crown  to  the  border  thereof  round  about 

27.  17  the  pillars  roundabout  the  court(shall  be) 

28.  32  of  woven  work  round  about  the  hole  of  it 
28.  33  pomegranates . .  round  about  the  hem  the. 
28.  33  bells  of  gold  between  them  round  about 

28.  34  upon  the  hem  of  the  robe  round  about 

29.  16  spriukle  (it)  rouud  about  upon  the  altar 

29.  20  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round  about 

30.  3  and  the  sides  thereof  round  about,  and 
30.   3  make  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  abo. 
37.    2  made  a  crown  of  gold  to  it  round  about 

37. 11  made  thereunto  a  crown  of  gold  round  a. 

37. 12  a  border  of  an  hand  breadth  round  about 
37.  12  a  crown,  .for  the  border  thereof  round  a. 
37.  26  and  the  sides  thereof  round  about,  and 

37.  26  made  unto  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 
38. 16  hangings  of  the  court  roundabout  (were) 

38.  20  taberuacle,  and  of  the  court  round  about 
38.  31  the  sockets  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

38.  31  and  all  the  pins  of  the  court  round  about 

39.  23  a  band  round  about  the  hole,  that  it  sho. 
39.  25  round  about  between  the  pomegranates 

39.  26  round  about  the  hem  of  the  robe  to  min. 

40.  8  thou  shalt  set  up  the  court  round  about 
40.  33  round  about  the  tabernacle  and  the  altar 

lev.  1.  5, 11  sprinkle  the  blood  round  about  upon 
3.  2  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round  a. 
3.  8  blood  thereof  round  about  upon  the  altar 
3. 13  blood  thereof  upon  the  altar  round  about 
7.  2  blood  thereof  shall  he  sprinkle  round  ab. 
8. 15  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  round  about 
8. 19,  24  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round  about 
9. 12  he  sprinkled  round  about  upon  the  altar 
9. 18  he  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  round  about 
14.  41  house  to  be  scraped  within  round  about 
16.  18  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  round  about 
25.  31  villages  which  have  no  wall  round  about 

25.  44  of  the  heathen  that  are  round  about  you 
Num.  1.  50  shall  encamp  round  about  the  tabernacle 

1.  53  the  Levites  shall  pitch  round  about  the 
3.  26  by  the  altar  round  about  and  the  cords 

3.  37  the  pillars  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

4.  26  which  (is),  .by  the  altar  round  about,  and 
4.  32  the  pillars  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

11.  24  and  set  them  round  about  the  tabernacle 
11.  31  on  the  other  side,  round  about  the  camp 

11.  32  theyspread (them),  .round about thecamp 
x6.  34  Israel  that  (were)  round  about  them  fled 

22.  4  company  lick  up  all  (that  are)  round  about 
32-  33  (even)  the  cities  of  the  country  round  ab. 
34. 12  land  with  the  coasts  thereof  roundabout 
35.  2  suburbs  for  the  cities  round  about  them 
35.    4  and  outward  a  thousand  cubits  round  ab. 

Deut.  6. 14  of  the  people  which  (are)  round  about  you 

12.  10  rest  from  all  your  enemies  round  about 

13.  7  gods  of  the  people  which  (are)  round  ab. 
21.  2  the  cities  which  (are)  round  about  him  th. 
25. 19  rest  from  all  thine  enemies  round  about 

Josh.  15. 12  coast  of  the  children  of  Judah  round  ab. 

18.  20  the  coasts  thereof  round  about,  according 

19.  8  the  villages  that  were  round  about  these 
21.  11  with  the  suburbs  thereof  round  about  it 
21.  42  every  one  with  their  suburbs  roundabout 

21.  44  And  the  Lord  gave  them  rest  round  about 

23.  1  rest,  .from  all  their  enemies  round  about 
Judg.  2. 12  of  the  people  that  (were)  round  about  th. 

2.  14  the  hands  of  their  enemies  round  about 
7.  21  stood  every  man  in  his  place  round  about 

20.  29  Israel  set  liers  in  wait  round  about  Gibeah 

1  Sa.  14.  21  into  the  camp  (from  the  country)  round  a. 

26.  5  and  the  people  pitched  round  about  him 
26.  7  Abnerandthepeoplelayroundabout  him 
31.    9  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round  ab. 

2  Sa    5.    9  And  David  built  round  about  from  Millo 

7.    1  the  Lord  had  given  him  rest  round  about 

22.  12  he  made  darkness  pavilions  round  about 

1  Ki.  3.    1  house. .andthe  wallof  Jerusalemrounda. 

4.  24  he  had  peace  on  all  sides  round  about  him 
4.  31  and  his  fame  was  in  all  nations  round  ab. 
6.  5  he  built  chambers  round  about,  (against) 
6.  5  the  walls  of  the  house  round  about,  (both) 
6.    5  oracle  :  aud  he  made  chambers  round  ab. 

6.  6  he  made  narrowed  rests  round  about,  that 

7.  12  the  great  court  round  about  (was)  with 
7.  18  two  rows  round  about  upon  the  one  net 
7.  20  in  rows  round  about  upon  the  other  ch. 
7.  23  (it  was)  round  all  about,  and  his  height 
7.  23  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it  round  about 
7.  24  under  the  brim  of  it  round  about  (there 
7.  24  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round  n. 
7.  36  according  to  the.  .additions  rouud  about 

18.  35  the  waterran  round  about  the  altar;  and 

2  Ki.  6.  17  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about 

11.  8  ye  shall  compass  the  king  round  about 
11.  11  round  about  the  king,  from  the  right  co. 
17. 15  wentafterthe heathen that(were)rounda. 
25.  1  and  they  built  forts  against  it  round  about 
25.  4  Chaldees(were)  against  the  city  round  ab. 
25.  10  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  round  a. 
25.  17  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiter  round  a. 

1  Ch.  4.  33  their  villages  that  (were)round  about  the 

6.  55  and  the  suburbs  thereof  round  about  it 
9.  27  they  lodged  round  about  the  house  of  God 

10.  9  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round  ab. 

11.  8  round  about,  even  from  Millo  round  about 
22.  9  give  him  rest  from  all  his  enemies  rouud  a. 
28. 12  and  of  all  the  chambers  round  about,  of 

2  Ch.  4.  2  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it  round  about 

4.   3  oxen,  which  did  compass  it  round  about 


>Ch.  4. 

14. 
15- 
17- 


34 

Xeh.  12. 


Jer. 


Eze. 


3  ten  in  a  cubit  compassing  the  sea  round  a 

14  they  smote  all  the  cities  round  about  G. 

15  and  the  Lord  gave  them  rest  round  about 
10  of  the  lands  that  (were)  round  about  Ju. 
30  quiet ;  for  his  God  gave  him  rest  round  a. 

7  Levites  shall  compass  the  king  round  ab. 
10  set  all  the  people . .  by  the  king  round  ab. 

6  unto  Naphtali,  with  their  mattocks  ro.  ab- 

28  the  plain  country  round  about  Jerusalem 

29  had  builded  them  villages  round  about  J. 

8  aud  fashioned  me  together  round  about 

12  and  encamp  round  about  my  tabernacle 

10  snares  (are)  round  about  thee,  and  sudd. 

14  his  face?  his  teeth  (are)  terrible  round 
6  have  set  (themselves)  against  me  ro.  abo. 

ii  his  pavilion  round  about  him  (were)  dark 

6  up  above  mine  enemies  round  about  me 

7  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  a. 

13  a  derision  to  them  that  are  round  about 
3  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about 

11  let  all  that  be  round  about  hini  bring  pr. 

28  he  let  (it)  fall . .  round  about  their  habita. 

3  shed  hie  water  round  about  Jerusalem 

4  derision  to  them  that  are  round  about  us- 

8  or  to  thy  faithfulness  round  about  thee  ? 

2  Clouds  and  darkness  (are)  round  about 

3  and  burneth  up  his  enemies  round  about 
2  (As)  the  mountains  (are)  round  about  Je. 

2  so  the  LORD  (is)  round  about  his  people 

3  thy  children  like  olive  plants  round  abo. 

25  it  hath  set  him  on  fire  round  about,  yet 
18  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  beh. 

4  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see 

15  against  all  the  walls  thereof  round  about 
1 7  As  keepers,  .are  they  against  her  round  ab. 

3  pitch  (their)  tents  against  her  round  abo. 

9  the  birds  round  about  (are)  against  her 

14  it  shall  devour  all  things  round  about  it 

9  and  against  all  the  nations  round  about 

5  (for)  fear  (was)  round  about,  saith  the  L. 
14  the  sword  shall  devour  round  about  thee 

14  in  array  against  Babylon  round  about 

15  Shout  against  her  round  about :  she  hath 

29  camp  against  it  round  about,  let  none  th. 
32  and  it  shall  devour  all  round  about  him 

.    2  for.  .they  shall  be  against  her  round  ab. 
.   4  and  built  forts  against  it  rouud  about 
7  Chaldeans  (were)  by  the  city  round  about 
14  brake  down  all  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  ro.a. 
.  22  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiters  round  a. 

23  pomegranates.. (were)  an  hundred  round  a, 
.  17  his  adversaries  (should  be)  round  about 

3  flaming  fire,  (which)  devoureth  round  ab. 
.  22  Thou  hast  called,  .my  terrors  round  abo. 
.  18  their  rings  (were)  full  of  eyes  round  abo. 
.  27  tbe  appearance  of  fire  round  about  within 
.  27  I  saw.  .and  it  had  brightness  roundabout 
.  28  appearance  of  the  brightness  round  about 

2  set  (battering)  rams  against  it  round  ab. 

5  and  countries  that  are  round  about  her 

6  than  the  countries  that  (are)  roundabout 

7  than  the  nations  that  (are)  round  about 
7  of  the  nations  that  (are)  round  about  you 

12  shall  fall  by  the  sword  rouud  about  thee 
14  among  the  nations  that  (are)  round  about 

.  15  unto  the  nations  that  (are)  round  about 
5  I  will  scatter  your  bones  round  about  your 

13  amongtheiridols  roundabout  their  altars 

10  pourtrayed  upon  the  wall  round  about 

12  the  wheels,  (were)  full  of  eyes  roundabout 
12  of  the  heathen  that  (are)  round  about  you 
37  I  will  even  gather  them  round  about  aga. 
57  Syria,  and  all  (that  are)  round  about  her 
57  daughters . .  which  despise  thee  round  ab. 

24  and  shield  and  helmet  round  about 

11  Themen.  .(were)  upon  thy  wallsround  ab. 
11  their  shields  upon  thy  walls  round  about 
24  thorn  of  all  (that  are)  round  about  them 

26  those  that  despise  them  round  about  them 

4  her  rivers  running  round  about  his  plants 

23  and  her  company  is  round  abouthergrave 

24  all  her  multitude  round  about  her  grave 
25,  26  her  graves  (are)  round  about  him;  all 

4  residue  of  the  heathen  that  (are)  round  ab. 
36  the  heathen  that  are  left  round  about  you 

2  caused  me  to  pass  by  them  round  about 

5  on  the  outside  of  the  house  round  about 

14  the  post  of  the  coui  t  round  about  the  gate 

16  to  their  posts  within  the  gate  round  about 

16  and  windows  (were)  round  about  inward 

17  a  pavement  made  for  the  court  round  ab. 
25,  29,  33  and  in  the  arches  thereof  round  ab. 

30  thearchesrouud  about  (were)  five  and  tw. 
^6  the  windows  to  it  round  about :  the  length 
43  within  (were)  hooks,  .fastened  round  ab. 

5  four  cubits,  roundabout  the  house  on  ev. 

6  the  house  for  the  side  chambers  round  ab. 

7  went  still  upward  round  about  the  house 

8  also  the  height  of  the  house  rouud  about 

10  the  wideness  of  twenty  cubits  round  about 

1 1  and  the  breadth . .  (was)  five  cubits  round  a . 

12  the  wall,  .(was)  five  cubits  thick  round  ab. 
16  the  galleries  round  about  on  their  three 

41.  16  the  door,  ceiled  with  wood  round  about 
41. 17  and  by  all  the  wall  round  about,  within 
41. 19  made  through  all  the  house  round  about 

42.  15  toward thegatcandmeasureditround a. 
42. 16,  greeds, with thejmeasuringreedrounda. 

42.  28  it  had  a  wall  round  about,  five  hundred 
43. 12  the  whole  limit  thereof  round  about  (shall 

43.  13  the  border.. by  the  edge  thereof  round  ab. 
43.  20  and  put(it).  .upon the  borderroundabout 


ROUND 


826 


RULE 


Eze.  45.   1  holy  in  all  the  borders  thereof  round  ab. 

45.  2  round  about  ;  and  fifty  cubits  round  ab. 

46.  23  a  row . .  round  about  in  them,  round  about 
46.  23  boiling  places  under  the  rows  round  about 
48. 35  round  about  eighteen  thousand  (measures) 

Joel    3.  11  and  gather  yourselves  together  round  ab. 

3.  12  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen  round  about 
Amos  3.  11  adversary.. even  round  about  the  land 
Nah.  3.    8  the  waters  round  about  it,  whose  rampart 
Zech.  2.    5  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about 

7     7  cities  thereof  round  about  her,  when(m.) 
12.    2  trembling  unto  all  the  people  round  abo. 
12    6  shall  devour  all  the  people  round  about 
14. 14  wealth  of  all  the  heathen  round  about 

4.  Round  about,  kuk\66cv  kuklothen. 

Rev.   4.    3  rainbow  round  about  the  throne,  in  sight 

4.  4  round  about  the  throne  (were)  four  and 

5.  11  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  [round  ab.j 

5.^4  circle,  kvkKos  kuklos,  (dat.) 

Mark  3.  34  looked  round  about  on  them  which  sat 

6.  6  went  round  about  the  villages,  teaching 

6.  36  they  may  go  into  the  country  round  about 
Luke  9.  12  into  the  towns  and  country  round  about 
Rom  15.  19  from  Jerusalem,  and  round  about  unto 
Rev.    4.   6  round  about  the  throne,  (were)  four  bea. 

7. 11  the  angels  stood  round  about  the  throne 

6.  From  every  quarter,  on  all  sides,  irdvToQev. 

Heb.  9.  4  overlaid  round  about  with  gold,  wherein 
7. Surrounding,  round  about,  irepQ  perix. 

Acts    5.  16  the  cities  round  about  unto  Jerusalem 
[See  also  Come,  country,  dwell,  go,  hedge,  look,  region, 
stand]. 

ROUND  about,  to  come,  compass,  or  stand  — 
To  be,  go,  turn  round  about,  33p  sabab. 

Gen.  37.    7  your  sheaves  stood  round  about,  and  ma. 

Job   16.  13  His  archers  compass  me  round  about;  he 
40.  22  the  willows  of  the  brook  compass  him  ab. 

Psa.  83. 17  They  came  round  about  rue  daily  like  w. 

ROUND  about,  to  beset,  close  or  go  — 

l.To  go,  turn,  or  be  turned  round  about,  23b  sabab,2. 
Gen.  19.  4  compassed  the  house  round,  both  old  and 
Judgtg.  22  beset  the  house  round  about,  (and)  beat 

2.  To  be,  go,  turn  round  about,  3?p  sabab,  3a. 
Psa.  59.   6  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go  round  about  the 
Jon.    2.   5  depth  closed  me  round  about,  the  weeds 

ROUND  about,  places  — 

1. Environs,  circle,  3po  mesab. 

2  Ki.  23.  5  places  round  about  Jerusalem  ;  them  also 
^2.  Round  about,  ttSsabib. 

Eze.  34.  26  them  and  the  places  round  about  my  lull 
ROUSE  up,  to  — ■ 
To  cause  to  rise  up,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Gen.  49.   9  as  an  old  lion ;  who  shall  rouse  him  up? 
ROW  — 
l.A  roio,  ira  tur. 

Exod  23. 17  four  rows  of  stones :  (the  first)  row  (shall 
28.  17  a  carbuncle:  (this  shall  be)  the  first  row 
28.  18  second  row  shall  be  an  emerald,  a  sapph. 
28. 19  third  row  a  ligure,  an  agate,  and  an  ame. 
28.  20  fourth  row  a  beryl,  and  an  onyx,  and  a 
39.  10  set  in  it  four  rows  of  stones :  (the  first)  r. 
39. 10  and  a  carbuncle  :  this  (was)  the  first  row 
39.  11  second  row,  an  emerald,  a  sapphire,  and 
39.  12  third  row,  a  ligure,  an  agate,  and  an  am. 
39.  13  fourth  row,  a  beryl,  an  onyx,  and  a  jasper 
t  Ki.  6.  36  three  rows  of  hewed  stone,  and  a  row  of 

7.  2  upon  four  rows  of  cedar  pillars,  with  ce. 
7.  3  that  (lay)  on  forty  five  pillars,  fifteen  (in) 
7.  4  windows  (in)  three  rows,  and  light  (was) 
7.  12  three  rows  of  hewed  stones,  and  a  row  of 
7. 18  made  the  pillars,  and  two  rows  round  ab. 
7.  20  in  rows  round  about  upon  the  other  cha. 
7.  24  knops  (were)  cast  in  two  rows  when  it 

7.  42  two  rows  of  pomegranates  for  one  net  w. 
2  Ch.  4.    3  Two  rows  of  oxen  (were)  cast,  when  it  was 

4. 13  two  rows  of  pomegranates  on  each  wreath 
Eze.  46.  23  a  row  (of  building)  round  about  in  them 

%A  row,  tvo  Utah. 

Eze.  46.  23  boiling  places  under  the  rows  round  ab. 
Z.  Array,  arrangement,  n?"iy.'?  maarakah. 

Lev.  24.  6  And  thou  shalt  set  them  in  two  rows,  six 
4. Array,  arrangement,  Tiyyip  maareketh. 

Lev.  24.  6  six  on  a  row,  upon-  the  pure  table  before 
24.    7  put  pure  frankincense  upon  (each)  row 

5.  A  layer  or  roio,  "HpiJ  nidbak. 

Ezra   6.    4  three  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of 

6.  A  row,  "fin  tor. 

Song  1. 10  Thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  (of  je.) 
ROW.  rowers,  to  — 
l.To  dig,  dig  through,  inn  chathoTr. 

Jon.  1.  13  Nevertheless  the  men  rowed  hard  to  br. 
2.  To  move  to  and  fro,  Qic;  shut. 

Eze.  27.  26  Thy  rowers  have  brought  thee  into  great 
3.7%  drive  or  push  f&rward,  row,  i\avvu>  elauno. 

Mark  6.  48  he  saw  them  boiling  in  rowing ;  for  the 

John  6.  19  So  when  they  had  rowed  about  five  and 

ROYAL  — 

1. Kingdom,   n?^p  melukah. 

2  Ki.2s-  25  Ishmael..  of  the  seed  royal,  came,  and  ten 


Isa.  62.  3  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  G. 
Jer.  41.    1  Ishmael.  .of  the  seed  royal,  and  the  pri. 

l.A  king,  tjSd  melek. 

Gen.  49.  20  (shall  be)  fat,  and  he  shall  yield  royal  da. 
1  Ki.io.  13  which  Solomon  gave  her  of  his  royal  bo. 
Dan.    6.    7  consulted  together  to  establish  a  royal 

3.  Kingdom,  no>p  malkuth. 

Esth.  1.    7  royal  wine  in  abundance,  according  to  the 
1.    9  (in)  the  royal  house  which  (belonged)  to 
1.  11  To  bring  Vasliti. .  with  the  crown  royal 
1.  19  let  there  go  a  royal  commandment  from 

1.  19  let  the  king  give  her  royal  estate  unto 

2.  16  Esther  was  taken . .  into  his  house  royal 
2. 17  he  set  the  royal  crown  upon  her  head,  and 
5.    1  Esther  put  on  (her)  royal  {apparel),  and  st. 

5.  1  upon  his  royal  throne  in  the  royal  house 

6.  8  Let  the  royal  apparel  be  brought  which 
6.    8  the  crown  royal  which  is  set  upon  his  he. 
8. 15  in  royal  apparel  of  blue  and  white,  and 

4.  Kingdom,  reign,  npbco  mamlakah. 

Josh  10.    2  Gibeon(was)agreat  city,  as  one  of  thero. 

1  Sa.  27.    s  why  should  thy  servant  dwell  in  the  royal 

2  Ki.11.  1  she  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal 
2  Ch.22.  10  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house 

5. Belonging  to  the  king,  &a<ri\cto$  basileios. 

1  Pe.  2.   9  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood 
6.  Kingly,  pao-iXttcos  basilikos. 

Acts  12.  21  Herod,  arrayed  in  royal  apparel,  sat  upon 
Jas.    2.    8  If  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law  according  to  the 

ROYAL  CITY,  ns<fo$?\  YJ>  city  of  the  kingdom. 

A  part  of  the  chief  city  of  the  Ammonites,  called  also 

Rabbah  and  the  city  of  Waters. 

2  Sa.  12.  26  And  Joab  fought . .  and  took  the  royal  city 
ROYAL  PAVILION  — 

A  canopy,  arched  roof  viei?',  "in£;i£>  shaphrur. 

Jer.   43. 10  he  shall  spread  his  royal  pavilion  over 
RUB,  to  — 
To  rub,  break  in  pieces,  \pa>x<»>  psocho. 

Luke  6.    1  and  did  eat,  rubbing  (them)  in  (their)hands 
RUBBISH  — 
Dust,  "155  aphar. 

Neh.   4.    2  the  heaps  of  the  rubbish  which  are  burnt 
4. 10  (there  is)  much  rubbish ;  so  that  we  are 

RUBIES  — 

Coral,  red  pearl,  gem,  CJ'i?,  D'y?  peniyyim,peninim 
Job   28.  18  fnr  the  price  of  wisdom  (is)  above  rubies 
Prov.  3.  15  She  (is)  more  precious  than  rubies :  and 
8.  11  For  wisdom  (is)  better  than  rubies ;  and 

20.  15  There  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  rubies 
31.  10  a  virtuous  woman,  .her  price  (is),  .abover. 

Lam.  4.    7  they  weremore  ruddyin  bodythanrubies 

RUDDER  — 

A  rudder,  broad  flat  oar,  irnhaXiov  pedalion. 

Acts  27.  40  loosed  the  rudder  bands,  and  hoised  up 
RUDDY  — 

1.  Red,  ruddy,  oik  adorn. 

Song  5. 10  My  beloved  (is)  white  and  ruddy,  the  ch. 

2.  Red,  'iioiN,  'jms*  admoni. 

1  Sa.  16.  12  Now  he  (was)  ruddy,  (and)withal  of  a  be. 

17.  42  he  was  (but)  a  youth,  and  ruddy,  and  of 
RUDDY,  to  be  — 
To  be  reel,  ruddy,  or  firm,  dtn  adam. 

Lam.  4.    7  they  were  more  ruddy  in  body  than  rubies 
RUDE  — 
Priii  tie,  uninstructed,  Ifiiwrns  idiolts. 

2  Co.  1 1.    6  But  though  (I  be)  rude  in  speech,  yet  not 
RUDIMENT  — 

An  element,  first  step  or  principle,  <ttoix^ov  stoich. 

Col.     2.    8  after  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not 

2.  20  if  ye  be  dead,  .from  the  rudiments  of  the 

RUE  — 

Rue,  -Kr\-ya,vov  peganon. 

Luken.  42  ye  tithe  mint  and  rue,  and  all  manner  of 

RU'-FUS,  'Povtpos  (Lat.  Rufus)  red. 

1.  A  son  of  Simon  the  Cyrenian  who  was  compelled  to 
bear  the  cross  after  Jesus. 

Markis.  21  Simon  a  Cyrenian.  .the  father  of.  ,R. 

2.  A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom.  16.  13  Salute  R.  chosen  in  the  Lord,  and  his  mo. 
RU-HA'-MAH,  ncrn  pitied. 
A  symbolic  name  of  Israel. 

Hob.  2.    1  Say  ye  unto,  .your  sisters,  R. 
RUIN  — 
1..I  min,  npnn  harisah. 

Amosg.  11  I  will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I  will  build 
2. Overthrow,  nrn1?  midcheh. 

Prov  26.  28  and  a  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin 
Z.  Thorn  foil,  nnr£  merhiltah. 

Psa.  89.  40  thou  hast  brought  his  strong  holds  to  ruin 
i.Ruin,  stumbling  stone,  yiir?p  mikshol. 

Eze.  18.  30  so  iniquity  shall  not  be  your  ruin 

21.  15  that  (their)  heart  may  faint,  and  (their)  r. 

5.  What  has  stumbled,  a  ruin,  nj$p3  makshelah. 
Isa.    3.    6  be  thou  our  ruler,  ant!  (let)  this  ruin  (be)  I 


6.  What  has  fallen,  fall,  n^SD  mappelah. 

Isa.  23. 13  palaces  thereof';  (and)  he  brought  it  to  ru. 
25.    2  hast  made,  .(of)  a  defenced  city  a  ruin 

7.  What  has  fallen,  n^sa  mappeleth. 

Eze.  27.  27  the  midst  of  the  seas  in  the  day  of  thy  r. 
31.  13  Upon  his  ruin  shall  all  the  fowls  of  the 

8.  Ruin,  calamity,  T3  pid. 

Prov  24.  22  and  who  knoweth  the  ruin  of  them  both? 
9. To  dig  down,  KaraaKaTrr^  katoskapto. 

Acts  15.  16  I  will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof,  and 
10. Breakage,  a  breaking  down,  f>riy}xa  rhegma. 

Luke  6.  49  fell;  and  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great 
RUIN  of,  to  be  the  — 
To  cause  to  stumble,  S?3  kashal,  5. 

2  Ch.28.  23  they  were  the  ruin  of  him,  and  of  all  Is. 
RUINED,  (to  be)  — 
l.To  be  broken  or  thrown  down,  Di.n  haras,  2. 

Eze.  36.  35  the  waste  and  desolate  and  ruined  cities 
36.  36  I  the  Lord  build  the  ruined  (places,  and) 
2.  To  stumble,  bys  kashal. 

Isa.     3.    8  For  Jerusalem  is  ruined,  and  Judah  is 
RUINOUS  — 
1.  What  has  fallen,  nVso  mappalah. 

Isa.    17.    1  Behold,  Damascus.. shall  be  a  ruinous 
2. To  become  ruinous,  bare,  burnt  up,  nyj  natsah,  2. 

2  Ki.19.  25  lay  waste  fenced  cities  into  ruinous  heaps 

Isa.    37.  26  lay  waste  fenced  cities  (into)  ruinous  he. 
RULE  — 
1.  Restraint,  "^ya  niatsar. 

Prov  25.  28  He'  that  (hath)  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit 
2. Beginning,  pre-eminence,  hp\v  arche. 

1  Co.  15.  24  he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule  and  all 
Z.A  rule  {of  measure  or  of  conduct),  navatv  kanon. 

2  Co.  10.  13  the  measure  of  the  rule  which  God  hath 

10.  15  be  enlarged  by  you  according  to  our  rule 
Gal.     6.  16  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule 
Phil.  3.  16  [let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  usmind 

RULE  (over),  to  (bear  or  have)  — 

1.  To  be  a  king,  reign,  37D  malak. 

Eze.  20.  33  with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule  over  you 

2.  Rule,  dominion,  <-6irpp  meinshaJoh. 

Gen.    1.  16  rule  the' day,  and  the  lesser  light  to  rule 
Psa. 136.    8  The  sun  to  rule  by  day :  for  his  mercy 
136.    9  The  moon  and  stars  to  rule  by  night :  for 

Z.To  ride,  bpG  mashal. 

Gen.    1.  18  to  rule  over  the  day  and  over  the  night 
3. 16  thy  husband,  .he  shall  rule  over  thee 
4.   7  (shall  be)  his  desire,  and  thou  shalt  rule  o. 
24.    2  servant  of  his  house,  that  ruled  over  all 
Josh  12.    2  ruled  from  Aroer,  which  (is)  upon  the  b. 
Judg.  8.  22  Rule  thou  over  us,  both  thou  and  thy  son 
8.  23  I  will  not  rule  over  you,  neither  shall  my 
8.  23  rule  over  you :  the  Lord  shall  ride  over 
2  Sa.  23.    3  He  that  ruleth  over  men  (must  be)  just 
2  Ch.20.    6  rulest  (not)  thou  over  all  the  kingdoms 
Psa.  59.  13  let  them  know  that  God  ruleth  in  Jacob 
66.    7  He  ruleth  by  his  power  forever;  his  eyes 
89.    9  Thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  sea  :  when 
103.  19  prepared  his  throne. .his  kingdom  ruleth  0. 
106.  41  and  they  that  hated  them  ruled  over  them 
Provi2.  24  The  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule 

16.  32  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  ta. 

17.  2  A  wise-servant  shall  have  rule  over  a  son 
19.  10  much  less  for  a  servant  to  have  rule  over 
22.  7  The  rich  ruleth  over  the  poor,  and  the  bo. 
29.    2  when  the  wicked  beareth  rule,  the  people 

Eccl.   9. 17  than  the  cry  of  him  that  ruleth  among  fo. 

Isa.    3.    4  their  princes,  and  babes  shall  rule  over 
3.  12  (As  for)  my  people.,  women  rule  over  them 
19.    4  a  fierce  king  shall  rule  over  them,  saith 
28.  14  that  rule  this  people  which  (is)  in  Jerus. 
40.  10  his  arm  shall  rule  for  him ;  behold,  his 
52.    5  They  that  rule  over  them  make  them  to 
63.  19  thou  never  barest  rule  over  them;  they 

Jer.  22.  30  sitting  upon  the  throne,  .and  ruling  any 

Lam.  5.    8  Servants  have  ruled  overus:  (there  is)  no. 

Eze.  19. 11  rods  for  the  sceptres  of  them  that  bareru. 
19.  14  hath  no  strong  rod  (to  be)  a  sceptre  to  r. 

Dan.  11.    3  that  shall  rule  with  great  dominion,  and 
11.    4  according  to  his  dominion  which  he  ruled 

Joel    2. 17  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  them 

Zech.  6. 13  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne :  and 

4.7*0  rule,  iTTi  radah. 

Lev.  25.  43' Thou  shalt  not  rule  over  him  with  rigour 
25.  46  ye  shall  not  rule  one  over  another  with 
25.  53  the  other)  shall  not  rule  with  rigour  over 

1  KJ.   5.  16  which  ruled  over  the  people  that  wrought 

9.  23  which  bare  rule  over  the  people  that  wre. 

2  Ch.  8.  10  two  hundred  and  fifty,  that  bare  rule  over 
r.sa.no.    2  rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies 
Isa.  14.    2  and  they  shall  rule  over  their  oppressors 

14.  6  he  that  ruled  the  nation  in  anger,  is  pers. 
Jer.  5.  31  and  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means 
Eze.  29.  15  they  shall  no  more  rule  over  the  nations 

34.    4  with  force  and  with  cruelty  have  ye  ruled 

5.  To  rule,  1V1  rud. 

Hos.  11. 12  Judah  yet  ruleth  with  God,  and  is  faithful 

6.  To  he  a  prince,  "tty  sarar. 

Esth.  1.  22  every  man  should  hear  rule  in  his  own 
Prov.  8.  16  By  me  princes  rule,  and  nonics,  (even)  all 
Isa.   32.    1  Behold,  .princes  shall  rule  in  judgment 


RULE 


827 


RUN 


7.  To  rule,  Have  power  or  authority,  B?^  shahti. 
Neh.    5.  15  their  servants  bare  rule  over  the  people 
Esth.  9.    1  the  Jews  had  rule  over  them  that  hated 
Eccl.  2.  19  yet  shall  he  have  rule  over  all  my  labour 

8.  9  one  man  ruleth  over  another  to  his  own 

8.  To  rule,  vbi?  slielet 

Dan.   2.  39  which  shall  bear  rule  over  all  the  earth 

9.  Ruling,  ruler,  &?&  shallit. 

Ezra    4. 20  kings  also  over  Jerusalem,  whichhave  ru. 
Dan.    4.  17,  25,  32  that  the  Most  High  ruleth  iu  the 

4.  26  shall  have  known  that  the  heavens  do  rule 

5.  21  till  he  knew  that  the  Most  High  God  ruled 

10.  To  judge,  be  a  magistrate,  05^  shaphat. 

Ruth  1.    1  in  the  days  when  the  judges  ruled,  that 

11.  To  be  first,  pre-eminent,  &pxw  archo. 

Markio.  42  they  which  are  accounted  to  rule  over  the 
*>%  To  act  as  judge  or  president,  fipa{3€va>brabe'ud. 
Col.     3.  15  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts 
^3.  To  lead,  guide,  govern,  fiyed/iai  hegeomai. 

Heb.  13.    7  Remember  them  which  have  rule  overyou 
13.  17  Obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you 
13.  24  Salute  all  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you 

^i.To  shepherd,  guide,  govern-,  iroifxaivw poimainG. 

Matt.  2.    6  a  governor,  that  shall  rule  my  people  Is. 

Rev.   2.  27  And  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

12.    5  who  was  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of 

ig.  15  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron 

15.  To  set  or  place  over  or  before,  irpottTTWij.t  jrroistemi 

Rom  12.    8  he  that  ruleth,  with  diligence ;  he  that 

1  Ti.    3.    4  One  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house,  hav. 

3.    5  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  ho. 

3.  12  ruling  their  childi-en  and  their  own  houses 

5. 17  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  he  counted 

RTJLE,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  mile,  rn*i  radah,  5. 

Isa.  41.    2  Who  raised  up.,  and  made  (him)  rule  over 

2.  To  cause  to  rule,  b$D  mashal,  5. 

Dan.  11.  39  he  shall  cause  them  to  rule  overmauy,  and 
RULED,  to  be,  or  that  — 

1.  Ruler,  rule,  dominion,  byuft  mimshal. 

1  Ch.26.    6  that  ruled  throughout  the  house  of  their 

2.  To  kiss  or  salute,  pm  nashaq. 

Gen.  41.  40  acording  unto  thy  word  shall  all.  .be  ru. 
RTJLER,  (chief)  — 
l.A  shield,  }3S  magen. 

Hos.    4.  18  her  rulers  (with)  sname  do  love,  Give  ye 
2.  To  rule,  bgte  mashal. 

Gen.  45.    8  and  a  ruler  throughout  all  the  land  of  Eg. 

Judgig.  11  that  the  Philistines  (are)  rulers  over  us 

2  Ch.  7.  18  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  (to  be)  ru. 
Psa. 105.  20  The  king  sent  and  loosed  him;  (even),  .r. 

105.  21  He  made  him  lord  of  his  house,  and  ruler 

Prov.  6.    7  Which  having  no  guide,  overseer,  or  ruler 

23.    1  When  thou  sittest  to  eat  with  a  ruler,  con. 

28.  15  (so  is)  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  people 

29.  12  If  a  ruler  hearken  to  lies,  all  his  servants 
29.  26  Many  seek  the  ruler's  favour :  but  (every) 

Eccl.  10.  4  If  the  spirit  of  the  ruler  rise  up  against  th. 

Isa.   14.  5  hath  bi'oken.  .the  sceptre  of  the  rulers 

16.  1  Send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land 
49.  7  to  a  servant  of  rulers,  kings  shall  see  and 

Jer.  33.  26  I  will  not  take  (any)  of  his  seed(to  be)  ru. 

51.  46  and  violence  in  the  land,  ruler  against  ru. 

Mic.    5.    2  come  forth  unto  me  (that  is)  to  be  ruler  in 

Hab.  1.  14  as  the  creeping  things,  (that  have)  no  ruler 

S.A  leader,  TJ3  nagid. 

1  Sa.  25.  30  shall  have  appointed  thee  ruler  over  Isr. 

2  Sa.  6.  2 1  to  appoint  me  ruler  over  the  people  of  the 

7.    8  to  be  ruler  over  my  people,  over  Israel 
1  Ki.  1.  35  I  have  appointed  him  to  be  ruler  over  Is. 

1  Ch.  5.    2  and  of  him  (came)  the  chief  ruler;  but  the 

9. 11  the  son  of  Ahitub,  the  ruler  of  the  house 

9.  20  the  son  of  Eleazar  was  the  ruler  over  them 
11.   2  thou  shalt  be  a  ruler  over  my  people  Isr. 

17.  7  thou  shouldest  be  ruler  over  my  people 

26.  24  And  Shebuel .  .(was)  ruler  of  the  treasures 

27.  4  of  his  course  (was)  Mikloth  also  the  ruler 

27.  16  the  ruler  of  the  Reubenites  (was)  Eliezer 

28.  4  for  he  hath  chosen  Judah  (to  be)  the  rul. 

2  Ch.  6.    5  neither  chose  I  any  man  to  be  a  ruler  ov. 

11.  22  Rehoboam  made  Abijah.  .(to  be)  ruler 
19.  11  the  sou  of  Ishmael,  the  ruler  of  the  house 
31.  12  over  which  Cononiah  the  Levite(was)  ru. 
31.  13  and  Azariah  the  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 
35.  8  Zechariah  and  Jehiel,  rulers  of  the  house 
Neh.  11. 11  son  of  Ahitub,  (was)  the  ruler  of  the  ho. 

4.  One  lifted  up,  W&i  nasi. 

Exod  16.  22  rulers  of  the  congregation  came  and  told 
22.  28  not  revile  the  gods,  nor  curse  the  ruler  of 

34.  31  all  the  rulers  of  the  congregation  return. 

35.  27  rulers  brought  onyx  stones,  and  for  the 
Lev.    4.  22  When  a  ruler  hath  sinned,  and  done  (so.) 
Num  13.    2  send  a  man,  every  one  a  ruler  among  th. 

5.  Captain,  ruler,  judge,  [*Xj3  qatsin. 

Isa.      1. 10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of 
3.   6  Thou  hast  clothing,  be  thou  our  ruler 
3.    7  nor  clothing  :  make  me  not  a  ruler  of  the 
22.    3  All  thy  rulers  are  fled  together,  they  are 

6.  A  head,  vxh  rosh. 

Deut.  1.  13  and  I  will  make  them  rulers  over  you 
Isa.   29.  10  prophets  and  your  rulers,  the  seers  hath 


7. To  rule,  »yj  radah. 

Psa.  68.  27  There  (is)  little  Benjamin  (with)  their  ru. 

8.  To  be  lean,  be  in  secret,  fn  razan. 

Psa.     2.    2  rulers  take  counsel  together,  against  the 

9.  Prince,  l&  sar. 

Gen.  47.    6  then  make  them  rulers  over  my  cattle 
Exod  18.  21,  25  rulers  of  thousands,  (and)  rulers  of  hu. 

18.  21,  25  rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens 
Judg.  9.  30  when  Zebul  the  ruler  of  the  city  heard 
2  Ki.  10.    1  sent  to  Samaria,  unto  the  rulersof  Jezre. 
11.    4  fetched  the  rulers  overhundreds,  with  the 
11.  19  took  the  rulers  over  hundreds,  and  the  ca. 

1  Ch.  21.    2  David  said  to  Joab,  and  to  the  rulers  of 

27.  31  All  these  (were)  the  rulers  of  the  substa. 
29.    6  with  the  rulers  of  the  king's  work,  offered 

2  Ch.29.  20  gathered  the  rulers  of  the  city,  and  went 
Ezra  10.  1.1  Let  now  our  rulers  of  all  the  congregation 
Neh.  3.    9,  12,  16,  17,  18  the  ruler  of  the  half  part  of 

3.  14  the  ruler  of  part  of  Bethdiaccerem;  hebu. 
3. 15  Shallum  the  son  of  Col-hozeh,  the  ruler 

3.  19  Ezer  the  son  of  Jeshua,  the  ruler  of  Miz. 

4.  16  the  rulers  (were)  behind  all  the  house  of 

7.  2  gave.  .Hananiah  the  ruler  of  the  palace 

11.  1  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 
Esth.  3.  12  to  the  rulers  of  every  people  of  every  pr. 

8.  9  deputies  and  rulers  of  the  provinces  wh. 

9.  3  all  the  rulers  of  the  provinces,  and  the  li. 

10.  To  be  an  overseer,  one  in  authority,  -ibe>  shatar. 
2  Ch.26. 11  Maaseiah  the  ruler,  under  the  hand  of  B. 

11.  Rule,  authority,  ptt;!?  shilton. 

Dan.   3.    2  all  the  rulers  of  the  provinces,  to  come  to 

3.  3  rulers  of  the  provinces,  were  gathered 

12.  Rule,  ruling,  Q^b*  shallit. 

Eccl.  10.  5  an  error(which)  proceeded  from  the  ruler 
Dan.   2.  10  therefore  (there  is)  no  king,  lord,  nor  ruler 

5.  29  should  be  the  third  ruler  in  the  kingdom 

13. Prefects,  D*J3p  seganim. 

Ezra    9.    2  hand  of  the  princes  and  rulers  hath  been 

Neh.    2.  16  rulers  knew  not  whether  I  went,  or  what 

2.  16  nor  to  the  rulers,  nor  to  the  rest  that  did 

4.  14  to  the  rulers,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  people 

4.  19  I  said  unto  the  nobles,  and  to  the  rulers 

5.  7  rebuked  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and 
5.  17  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  Jews  and  rulers 
7.   5  gather  together  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers 

12.  40  and  I,  and  the  half  of  the  rulers  with  me 

13.  11  Then  contended  I  with  the  rulers,  and  said 
Jer.    51.  23  will  I  break  in  pieces  captains  and  rulers 

51.  28  all  the  rulers  thereof,  and  all  the  land  of 
51.  57  her  wise  (men),  her  captains,  and  her  ru. 
Eze.  23.  6  clothed  with  blue,  captains  and  rulers,  all 
23. 12  captains  and  rulers  clothed  most  gorgeo. 
23.  23  captains  and  rulers,  great  lords  and  ren. 

li.  Ruler,  chief  magistrate,  hpyjav  archon. 

Matt.  q.  18  there  came  a  certain  ruler,  and  worship. 

9.  23  when  Jesus  came  into  the  ruler's  house 

Luke  S.  41  ruler  of  the  synagogue :  and  he  fell  down 

18.  18  certain  ruler  asked  him,  saying,  Good  M. 

23.  13  when  he  had  called  together,  .the  rulers 

23.  35  the  rulers  also  with  them  derided  (him) 

24.  20  how  the  chief  priests  and  our  rulers  del. 
John  3.    1  There  was  a  man.  .a  ruler  of  the  Jews 

7.  26  Do  the  rulersknow  indeed  that  this  is  the 
7.  48  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees 

12.  42  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed 
Acts    3. 17  that  through  ignorance . .  (did)  also  your  r. 

4.    5  that  their  rulers,  and  elders,  and  scribes 
4.    8  Ye  rulers  of  the  people,  and  elders  of  Is. 

4.  26  rulers  were  gathered  together  against  the 
7.  27,  35  Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge 
7.  35  the  same  did  God  send  to  be  a  ruler  and 

13.  27  their  rulers,  because  they  knew  Rim  not 

14.  5  also  of  the  Jews  with  their  rulers,  to  use 

16.  19  drew,  .into  the  market  place  unto  the  ru. 
23.    5  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of 

Rom  13.    3  For  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works 

15.  A  leader,  guide,  riyefx&u  hegemon. 

Marki3.  9  ye  shall  be  brought  before  rulers  and  ki. 
Lukesi.  12  brought  before  kings  and  rulers  for  my 

16.  World-ruler,   Koa-^OKparcop  kosviokrator. 

Epn.   5.  12  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this 
RTJLER,  chief  of  the  city,  feast,  synagogue  — 

1.  Chief  of  a  city,  TroMrapxns  politarches. 

Acts  17.   6  drew  Jason . .  unto  the  rulers  of  the  city 

17.  8  troubled  the.  .rulers  of  the  city,  when 

2.  Chief  of  a  festive  party,  apxtTpiicXivos  architrik. 

John  2.   9  When'the  ruler  of  the  feast  had  tested  the 

Z.CJdef  of  a  synagogue,  apxt-vvvaycayos  archisun. 
Mark  5.  22  there  cometh  one  of  the  rulers  of  the  sy. 

5.  35  came  from  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue's 
5.  ^6  he  saith  unto  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue 
5.  38  to  the  house  of  the  ruler  of  the  synagog. 

Luke  8. 49  cometh  one  from  the  ruler  of  the  synago. 
13. 14  ruler  of  the  synagogue  answered  with  in. 
Acts  13.  15  rulers  of  the  synagogue  sent  unto  them 

18.  8  Crispus,  the  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue 
18.  17  Sosthenes,  the  chief  ruler  of  the  synago. 

RTJLER,  to  be  or  make  a  — 

l.To  appoint,  "ipa  paqad,  5. 

2  Ki.  25.  22  made  Gedaliah .  .the  son  of  Shaphan,  ruler 
x  Ch.  26.  32  whom  king  David  made  rulers  over  the  R. 

2.  To  rule,  have  power,  shy  slielet. 

Dan.   5.    7,  16  shall  be  the  third  ruler  in  the  kingdom 


S.To  cause  to  rule,  toby  shelct,  5.  Dan.  2.  38,  48. 
i.To  set  down  Ka6i(TT7}fxi  kathistemi. 

Matt.  24.  45,  47;  25.  21,  23;  Luke  12.  14,  42,  44. 
R  U  JL  J-N  (jr  — 

To  rule,  ^D  mashal. 

2  Sa.  23.    3  (must  be)  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God 

Jer.  22.  30  sitting  upon  the  throne,  .and  ruling  any 
RTJ'-MAH,  nan  height. 

The  native  place  of  Pedaiah  father  of  Zebudah  the 
mother  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  610. 

2  Ki.23.  36  Zebudah,  the  daughter  of  Pedaiah  of  R. 
RTJIOLING  — 
Multitude,  noise,  ficn  hamon. 

Jer.  47.    3  the  rumbling  of  his  wheels,  the  fathers 
RUMOUR  — 

1 .  What  is  heard,  report,  tidings,  nyvip  shemuah. 
2  Ki.19.    7  shall  hear  a  rumour,  and  shall  return  to 
Isa.   37.    7  shall  hear  a  rumour,  and  return  to  his 
Jer.  49.  14  I  have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Lord 

5r.  46  fear  for  the  rumour. .a  rumour  shall  both 
51.  46  afterthatin(auother)year(sliallcome)ar. 

Eze.     7.  26  rumour  shall  be  upon  rumour  ;  then  sh. 

Ohad  1.       We  Have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Lord 

2.  "Wliat  is  heard,  report,  rumour,  atco-f)  akoe. 
Matt24.    6  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wa. 
Marki3.    7  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wa. 

3.^-1  word,  \6yos  logos. 

Luke  7.  17  this  rumour  of  him  went  forth  througho. 
RTJSIP  — 
Rump,  tail,  riy?H  alyah. 

Exod29.  22  shalt  take  of  the  ram  the  fat,  and  the  ru. 

Lev.    3.   9  the  whole  rump,  it  shall  he  take  off  hard 

7.  3  rump,  and  the  fat  that  coverelh  the  inw. 

8.  25  took  the  fat,  and  the  rump,  and  all  the 
g.  19  ram,  the  rump,  and  that  which  covereth 

RUN,  to  — 

l.To  go  in,  Sita  bo. 

Ezra    8.  15  the  river  that  runneth  to  Al;ava;and  th. 

2.  To  go  on,  TjSri  halak. 

Psa.  105.  41  waters  gushed  out ;  they  ran  in  the  dry 
Eccl.  1.  7  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea;  yet  the 
Eze.  31.    4  with  her  rivers  running  round  about  his 

3.  To  go  on,  7|^n  halak,  3. 

Psa.  104. 10  into  the  valleys,  (which)  run  among  the 
i.To  go  on  continually  or  habitually,  rfcn  halak,  7. 
P3a.  58.    7  Let  them  melt  away  as  waters  (which)  run 

5.  To  flow,  3^1  zub. 

Lev.  15.  25  or  if  it  run  beyond  the  time  of  her  separ. 

6.  To  be  poured  or  spread  out,  "133  nagar,  2. 

Psa.  77.    2  my  sore  ran  in  the  night,  and  ceased  not 

7.  To  come  or  fall  up,  come  against,  jns  paga. 

Judgi8.  25  lest  angry  fellows  run  upon  thee,  and  th. 

8.  To  run,  p*i  ruts. 

Gen.  iS.  2  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the  tent  door 
18.  7  Abraham  ran  unto  the  herd,  and  fetched 
24.  17  servant  ran  to  meet  her,  and  said,  Letme 
24.  20  ran  again  unto  the  well  to  draw  (water) 
24.  28  damsel  ran,  and  told  (them  of)  her  moth. 
24.  29  Laban  ran  out  unto  the  man,  unto  the  we. 
29.  12  Rebekah's  sou  :  and  she  ran  and  told  her 
29.  13  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him,  and 
33.   4  Esau  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him 

Num  11.  27  there  ran  a  young  man,  and  told  Moses 
16. 47  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation 

Josh.  7.  22  Joshua  sent  messengers,  andtheyran  un. 
8.  19  they  ran  as  soon  as  he  had  stretched  out 

Judg.  7.  21  and  all  the  host  ran,  and  cried,  and  fled 
13. 10  woman  made  haste,  and  ran,  and  showed 

1  Sa.  3.    5  ran  unto  Eli,  and  said,  Here  (am)  I ;  for 

4.  12  there  ran  a  man  of  Benjamin  out  of  the 
8.  11  and  (some)  shall  run  before  his  chariots 
10.  23  they  ran  and  fetched  himtheuce:  andwh. 
17.  22  ran  into  the  army,  and  came  and  saluted 
17.  48  ran  toward  the  army  to  meet  the  Philist. 

17.  51  Therefore  David  ran,  and  stood  upon  the 
20.  6  that  he  might  run  to  Beth-lehem  his  city 
20.  36  said.  .Run.  .(And)  as  the  lad  ran,  he  shot 

2  Sa.15.    1  prepared  him.  .fifty  men  to  run  before 

18.  19  Let  me  now  run  and  bear  the  king  tidings 
18.  21  Cushi  bowed  himself  unto  Joab,  and  ran 
18.  22  let  me,  I  pray  thee,  also  run  after  Cushi 
18.  22  Joab  said,  Wherefore  wilt  thou  run,  my 
18.  23  let  me  run.  And  he  said  unto  him,  Run 
18.  23  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  way  of  the  plain,  and 

1  Ki.  1.    5  prepared  him .  .fifty  mentorunbeforebim 

18.  46  ran  before  Ahab  to  the  entrance  of  Jezr. 

19.  20  left  the  oxen,  and  ran  after  Elijah,  and 

2  Ki.  4.  22  that  I  may  run  to  the  man  of  God,  and 

4.  26  Run  now,  I  pray  thee,  to  meet  her;  and 

5.  20  will  run  after  him,  and  take  somewhat  of 
Job  15.  26  He  runneth  upon  him,  (even)  on  (his)  ue. 

■   16.14  breach  ;  he  runneth  upon  me  like  a  giant 

Psa.  19.    5  (and)  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a 

59.    4  They  run  and  prepare  themselves  without 

119.  32  I  will  run  the  way  of  thy  commandments 

147.  15  sendeth  forth. .his  word  runneth  very  sw. 

Prov.  1.  16  For  their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  make  haste 

4. 12  when  thou  runnest,  thou  shalt  not  stum. 

18.  10  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe 

Song  1.    4  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee.  The  ki. 

Isa.   40.  31  they  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary  ;  (and) 

55.    s  nations  (that)  knew  thee  not  shall  run 

59.   7  Their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  they  make  ha, 


RUN 


828 


SABBATH 


Jer.  12.    5  If  thou  hast  run  with  the  footmen,  and 

23.  21  have  not  sent  these  prophets,  yet  they  r. 
51.  31  One  post  shall  run  to  meet  another,  and 

Dan.    8.    6  and  ran  unto  him  in  the  fury  of  his  pow, 
Joel    2.    4  and  as  horsemen,  so  shall  they  run 

2.  7  They  shall  ran  like  mighty  men ;  they 
2.  g  they  shall  run  upon  the  wall ;  they  shall 
Amos  6.  12  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock?  will  (one) 
Hab.  2.  2  make  (it)  plain. .that  he  may  run  that  re. 
Hag.  1.  9  and  ye  run  every  man  unto  his  own  hou. 
Zech.  2.    4  Run,  speak  to  this  young  man,  saying,  J. 

9.  To  run,,  pn  ruts,  Sa. 

Nah.  2.    4  seem  like  torches,  they  shall  run  like  the 

10.7b  (cause  to)  run,  pn  ruts,  5. 

1  Sa.17.  17  and  run  to  the  camp  to  thy  brethren 

11.  To  run,  flow,  in  rur. 

Lev.  15.    3  whether  his  flesh  run  with  his  issue,  or 

12.  To  run,  Kin  ratsa. 

Eze.  1.  14  living  creatures  ran  and  returned  as  the 
]  3.  To  overjloio,  rush,  f|Qtf  shataph. 

2  Ch.32.  4  brook  that  ran  through  the  midst  of  the 
1  4.  To  run  to  and  fro,  ppa  shaqaq. 

Isa.   33.   4  to  and  fro  of  locusts  shall  he  run  upon 

15.  To  rush  impetuously,  opfxdoi  hormao. 

Acts    7.  57  stopped  their  ears,  and  ran  upon  him  wi. 

16.  To  run  toward  or  to,  irpoaTptx03  prostrecko. 
Markio.  17  there  came  one  running,  and  kneeled  to 

17.  To  run  together  with,  o-vvrpix0*  suntrecho. 
Mark  6.  33  ran  a  foot  thither  out  of  all  cities,  and 

IS. To  run,  Tpe'x«  trecho. 

Matt  27.  48  straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a 

28.    8  departed,  .and  did  run  to  bring  his  disci. 
Mark  5,    6  when  lie  saw  Jesus  afar  off,  he  ran  and 

15.  36  one  ran  and  filled  a  sponge  full  of  vinegar 
Luke  1 5.  20  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him 

24.  12  [Then  arose  Peter,  and  ran  into  the  sep.] 
John2o.    2  Then  she  runneth,  and  cometh  to  Simon 

20.    4  So  they  ran  both  together :  and  the  other 

Rom.  9.  16  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that 

1  Go.  9.  24  Know . .  that  they  which  run  in  a  race  run 

9. 24  but  one  receiveth  the  prize?  So  run,  that 

9.  26  I  therefore  so  run,  not  as  uncertainly  ;  so 

Gal.     2.    2  by  any  means  I  should  run,  or  had  run 

5.    7  Ye  did  run  well ;  who  did  hinder  you  that 

Phil.    2. 16  that  I  have  not  run  in  vain,  neither  lab. 

Heb  12.    1  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is 

Rev.   9.   9  of  chariots  iof  many  horses  running  to  ba. 

RUN  (aground,  along,  away),  to  — 

'[.To  go  o?i,  t[hn  halak. 

Exod.  9.  23  and  the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  ground 

'1.  T<  fle.e,  rnp  barach. 

i  Ki.  2.  39  ran  away  unto  Achish  son  of  Maachah  ki. 
3.  Todash  against  or  upon,run  aground, iiroKeWw. 

Acts  27.  41  ran  the  ship  aground :  and  the  fore  part 
RUN  (down,  out,  over,  through),  to  — 

1.  To  go  in,  nu  bo. 

Eze.  24.  16  nor  weep,  neither  shall  thy  tears  run  do. 

2.  To  be  rolled,  bha  galal,  2. 

Amos  5.  24  But  let  judgment  ran  down  as  waters,  and 

'■),  To  run  out,  ps;  yatsaq. 

1  Ki  22.  35  blood  ran  out  of  the  wound  into  the  midst 

\.  To  go  or  come  doivn,  tv  yarad. 

Psa.119. 136  Rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes,  be. 
133.    2  ran  down  upon  the  beard,  (even)  Aaron's 

Jer.     9. 18  that  our  eyes  may  run  down  with  tears 
13.  17  run  down  with  tears,  because  the  Lord's 
14. 17  Let  mine  eyes  run  down  with  tears  night 

Lam.  1.  16  mine  eye  runneth  down  with  water,  bee. 

2.  18  let  tears  run  down  like  a  river  day  and  ni. 

3.  48  Mine  eye  runneth  down  with  rivers  of  wa. 

o.  To  flow,  run  out,  ros  pakah,  3. 

Eze.  47.    2  behold,  there  ran  out  waters  on  the  right 

6.  To  step),  tread,  ~iyy  tsaad. 

Gen.  49.  22  bough,  .(whose)brauchesrunoverthe  wa. 

7.  To  run,  pn  ruts. 

2  Sa.  22.  30  For  by  thee  I  have  run  through  a  troop 
Psa.  18.  29  For  by  thee  I  have  run  through  a  troop 

8. Fulness,  rri"i  revayah. 

Psa.  23.   5  ahointest  my  head . .  my  cup  runneth  over 

9,  To  pour  out,  £«x"»>  ekched. 

Matt.  9.  17  the  bottles  break,  and  the  wine  runneth 

10. To  run  down,  Kararptx01  katalrecho. 

Acts  21.  32  ran  down  unto  them:  and  when  they  saw 

11.  To  run  around  about,  irepiTpe'xw  peritrecho. 
Mark  6.  55  ran  through  that  whole  region  round  about 

12.  To  run  over,  overflow,  vwepacxvvofiat  huperek. 
Luke  6.  38  aud  shaken  together,  and  running  over 

RUN  (away  or  down),  to  cause  or  make  to  — 
I. T11  cause  to  go  on,  ?pj  yalak,  5. 

Eze.  32.  14  Then  will  I .  .cause  their  rivers  to  run  like 

2.  To  cause  to  run  dowti,  tv  yarad,  5. 

Psa.  7S,  16  aud  caused  waters  to  run  down  like  rivers 
3.7b  cause  to  run,  pn  ruts,  5. 

Jer.  49.  19  but  I  will  suddenly  make  him  run  away 
30.  44  but  I  will  make  them  suddenly  run  away 


RUN  before,  greedily,  in,  to,  thither  to,  to  — 
1.7*0  pour  out,  iicxvva}  ekchuno. 

Jude       11  ran  greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam 

2.  To  leap  or  rush  in,  tia-7r7j5aw  eispedao. 

Acts  14.  14  and  [ran  in]  among  the  people,  crying 

3.  To  run  to  or  into,  elo-rpex03  eistrecho. 

Acts  12.  14  but  ran  in,  and  told  how  Peter  stood  be. 

4.  To  riui  toward  or  to,  Trpoo-rp4x&  prostrecho. 

Mark  9.  15  were  greatly  amazed,  and  running  to  (him) 
Acts    8. 30  Philip  ran  thither  to  (him),  and  heard  him 

5.  To  run  forward  or  before,  7rpoTpex«  protrecho. 
Lukeig.    4  ran  before,  and  climbed  up  into  a  sycam. 

RUN  to  and  fro,  upon,  to  — 

1.  To  push  against,  stri})  off,  BD:S  pashat. 

Judg  9.  44  two  (other)  companies  ran  upon  all  (the 

2.  To  go  to  and  fro,  aity  shut,  Sa. 

2  Ch.i6.  9  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro 
Jer.  5.  1  Run  ye  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of 
Dan.  12.  4  many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge 
Amos  8.  12  they  shall  run  to  and  fro  to  seek  the  word 
Zech.  4.  10  which  run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole 

3.  To  go  to  and  fro,  Bit?  shut,  7a. 

Jer.  49.    3  lament,  and  run  to  and  fro  by  the  hedges 

4.  To  go  or  run  to  and  fro,  or  along,  pp^*  shaqaq. 

Joel   2.    9  They  shall  run  to  and  fro  in  the  city;  they 
RUN  together,  under,  violently,  with,  to  — 
l.To  rush  impetuously,  dpfidouai  hormaomai. 
Matt.  8.  32  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down 
Mark  5.  13  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place  into 
Luke  S.  33  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place  into 

2.There  was  a  concourse,  iyti/ero  avpSpofirj. 

Acts  21.  30  people  ran  together :  and  they  took  Paul 

3. To  run  together  with,,  o-vvrpix0*  snntrecho. 

Acts    3. 11  all  the  people  ran  together  unto  them  in 

1  Pe.  4.    4  they  think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with 

4.  To  run  under  or  below,  virorpix^  hupotrecho. 

Acts  27. 16  running  under  a  certain  island  which  is 
RUNNING  (together,  to  and  fro),  to  come — 
1. Living,  *rj  chai. 

Lev.  14.  5,  50  in  an  earthen  vessel  over  running  wa. 
14.  6  the  bird  (that  was)  killed  over  the  runn. 
14.  51  dip  them,  .in  the  runniDg  water,  and  sp. 
14.  52  cleanse  the  house,  .with  the  running  wa. 
15. 13  bathe  his  flesh  in  running  water,  and  shall 
Numig.  17  running  water  shall  be  put  thereto  in  a 
2.Running,  n^tn  memdsah. 

2  Sa.  18.  27  running  of  the  foremost  is  like  the  runn. 

3.-4  running  to  and  fro,  pWQ  mashshaq. 

Isa.  33.  4  as  the  running  to  and  fro  of  locusts  shall 
4. 7*0  run,  pi  ruts. 

2  Sa.  18.  24  looked,  and  behold  a  man  running  alone 
18.  26  the  watchman  saw  another  man  running 

18.  26  said,  Behold  (another)  man  running  alone 
2  Ki.    5.  21 ;  2  Ch.  23.  12 ;  Prov.  6.  18. 

5.7*0  run  together,  eVia-ufTpe'xw,  Mark.  9.  25. 

RUNNING  issue,  to  have  a  — 
Tofloio,  issue,  an  zub. 

Lev.  15.    2  When  any  man  hath  a  running  issue  out 
22.   4  What  man.  .hath  arunningissue,  heshall 
RUNNING  water  — 
To  flow  on,  7]3  nazal. 

Prov.  5. 15  and  running  waters  out  of  thine  own  well 
RUSH  — 
l.A  reed,  ]>D3N  agmon. 

Isa.     9. 14  the  Loud  will  cut  off.  .branch  and  rush 

19.  15  whichtheheadortail,branchorrush,niay 

2.-4  rush,  reed,  N£3  gome. 

Job     8.  11  Can  the  rush  grow  up  without  mire?  can 
Isa.   35.    7  where  each  lay,  (shall  be).. reeds  and  ru. 

RUSH,  to  — 

I. To  push  against,  strip  off,  bits  pashat 

Judg.  9.  44  rushed  forward,  and  stood  in  the  entering 

20.  37  the  liers  in  wait  hasted,  and  rushed  upon 

2.  To  be  wasted,  desolate,  ft\jrf  shaah,  2. 

Isa.   17. 13  The  nations  shall  rush  like,  .many  waters 

3.  To  over/low,  rush,  rpv  shataph. 

Jer.  8.  6  turned  to  his  course,  as  the  horse  rusheth 
i.To  rush  impetuously,  6pfj.dof.iat  hormaomai. 

Acts  19.  29  they  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  th. 
RUSHING  (to  make  a)  — 
1.-4  shaking,  trembling,  rushing,  t'JH  raash. 

Jer.  47.    3  at  the  rushing  of  his  chariots,  (and  at)  the 

Eze.    3.  12  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  a  great  rush. 
3.  13  (I  heard)  also,  .a  noise  of  a  great  rushing 

2.  Wasting,  desolation,  noise,  fiN^  shaon. 

Isa.  17.  12  the  rushing  of  nations,  .like  the  rushing 
17.  13  Thenations.  .like  the  rushing  of  many  wa. 

Z.T<>  he  wasted,  desolate,  rusty'  shaah,  2. 

Isa.    17. 12  of  nations,  (that)  make  a  rushing  like  the 

4.  T>>  bear  on,  carry,  <pzpa>  p?u  ro. 

Acts    2.    2  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  it  filled  all 


RUST— 

l.Ectting,  a  devouring,  Qpcoais  brosis. 

Matt.  6.  19  where  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and 
6.  20  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt 
2. Metallic  rust,  ios  ios. 

Jas.    5.   3  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  against 
RUTH,  nil,  'PovB  friendship. 

A  Moabitess  who  became  the  wife  of  Chilion,  younger 
son  of  Elimelech  and  Naomi,  and  afterwards  of  Boaz, 
to  whom  she  bare  Obed  father  of  Jesse  father  of  David. 
B.C.    1312. 

Ruth  1.  4  one  (was)Orpah. .  the  name  of  the  other  R. 
1. 14  Orpah  kissed  her.  .but  R.  clave  unto  her 
1.  16  And  R.  said,  Entreat  me  not  to  leave  thee 

1.  22  So  Naomi  returned,  andR.  the  Moabitess 

2.  2  R.  the  Moabitess. .  Let  me  dow  go  to  the 
2.  8  Then  said  Boaz  unto  R.,  Hearest  thou  not 
2.  21  And  R.  the  Moabitess  said,  He  said  unto 

2.  22  And  Naomi  said  unto  R.  her  daughter  in 

3.  9  And  she  answered,  I  (am)  R.  thine  hand. 

4.  5  thou  mustbuy(it)alsoof  R.  theMoabitess 
4.  10  R.  the  Moabitess.  .have  I  purchased  to 
4.  13  So  Boaz  took  R.,  and  she  was  his  wife 

Matt.  1.    5  Boaz  begat  Obed  of  R ;  aud  Obed  begat  J. 


s 


SABACHTHANI  — 

Mast  thou  forsaken  me  (from  Ch.  ^ripatt')  aafiaxQavi. 
Matt  27.  46  Eli !  Eli !  lamasabachthani?  that  is  to  say 
Marki5.  34  Eloi !  Eloi !  lama  sabachthani 't  which  is 

SA-BA'-OTH,  (TafiawB,  [frmn  Heb.  rnN?^)  hosts. 

An  appellation  of  the  Lord  as  Ruler  over  all. 

Rom.  9.  29  Except  the  Lord  of  S.  had  left  us  a  seed 
Jas.     5.   4  cries . .  entered  into . .  ears  of  the  Lord  of  S. 

SABBATH  (day)  — 

l.Cessation,  sabbath,  nst?  shabbath. 

Exodi6.  23  Tomorrow  (is)  the  rest  of  the  holy  sabbath 
16.  25  today  (is)  a  sabbath  unto  the  Lord:  today 
16.  26  the  seventh  day,  (which  is)  the  sabbath 
16.  29  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  sabbath 
20.    8  Remember  the  sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  holy 
20.  10  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  L. 
20. 11  wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath 
31. 13  my  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep :  for  it  (is)  a  si. 
31.  14  ye  shall  keep  the  sabbath  therefore;  for 
31.  15  the  seventh  (is)  the  sabbath  ofrest.holy  to 
31.  15  whosoeverdoeth(any)  work  in  the  sabbath 
31.  16  keep  the  sabbath,  to  observe  the  sabbath 
35.    2  shall  be  to  you  an  holy  day,  a  sabbath  of 
35-    3  ye  shall  kindle  no  fire,  .upon  the  sabbath  d. 

Lev.  16.31  It  (shall  be)a  sabbath  of  restunto  you.and 
19.  3  and  keep  my  sabbaths :  I  (am)  the  Lord 
19.  30  Ye  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence 
23.  3  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  rest,  an 
23.  3  it  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  in  all  your 
23.  11  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath  the  priest 
23. 15  count,  .from themorrowafter  thesabbath 
23.  15  from  the  day.  .seven  sabbaths  shall  be  co. 
23.  16  unto  the  morrow  after  the  seventh  sabb. 
23.  32  (It  shall  be)  unto  you  a  sabbath  of  rest,  and 
23.  32  unto  even,  shall  ye  celebrate  your  sabbath 

23.  38  Beside  the  sabbaths  of  the  Lord,  and  be. 

24.  8  Every  sabbath  he  shall  set  it  in  order  be. 

25.  2  then  shall  the  land  keep  a  sabbath  unto 
25.  4  a  sabbath  of  rest  unto  the  land,  a  sabbath 
25.  6  the  sabbath  of  the  land  shall  be  meat  for 
25.  8  thou  shalt  number  seven  sabbaths  of  years 

25.  8  the  space  of  the  seven  sabbaths  of  years 
■26.    2  Ye  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence 

26.  34  Then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaths 
26.  34  then  shall  the  land,  .enjoy  her  sabbaths 
26.  35  it  did  not  rest  in  your  sabbaths,  when  ye 
26.  43  shall  enjoy  her  sabbaths,  while  she  lieth 

Xum  15.  32  that  gathered  sticks  upon  the  sabbath  day 
28.    9  on  the  sabbath  day  two  lambs  of  the  first 
28.  10  (This  is)  the  burnt  oifering  of  every  sabb. 
Deut  5.  12  Keep  the  sabbath  day  to  sanctify  it,  as  the 
5.  14  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  L. 
5.  15  commanded  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath  day 
.    2  Ki.   4.  23  to  day?  (it  is)  neither  new  moon  nor  sab. 
11.    5  part  of  you  that  enter  in  on  the  sabbath 
11.   7  of  all  you  that  go  forth  on  the  sabbath 
11.    9  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath 
11.    9  them  that  should  go  out  on  the  sabbath 
16.  18  Aud  the  covert  for  the  sabbath  that  they 

1  Ch.  9.  32  the  show  bread,  to  prepare  (it)  every  sab. 

23.  31  sacrifices  unto  the  Lord  in  the  sabbaths 

2  Ch.  2.    4  on  the  sabbaths,  aud  on  the  new  moons 

8.  13  on  the  sabbaths,  and  on  the  new  moons 
23.  4  third  part  of  you  entering  on  the  sabbath 
2 }.  8  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath 
23.  8  them  that  were  to  go  (out)  on  the  sabbath 
31.  3  the  burnt  offerings  for  the  sabbaths,  and 
36. 21  until  the  land  had  enjoyed  her  sabbaths 
Neh.  9.  14  madest  known  unto  them  thy  holy  sabb. 
10.  31  or  any  victuals  ou  the  sabbath  day  to  sell 
10.  31  would  not  buy  it  of  them  on  the  sabbath 
10.  33  of  the  sabbaths,  of  the  new  moons,  for  the 
13.  15  treading  wine  presses  on  the  sabbath,  and 
13.  15  brought  intoJerusalem  on  the  sabbath  day 
13.  16  sold  on  the  sabbath  unto  the  children  of 
13. 17  that  ye  do,  and  profane  the  sabbath  day  \ 


SABBATH 


829 


SACRIFICE 


Neh 

il- 

13- 

is- 

le- 

's- 

IS- 

Psa. 

i.-i.-i. 

X. 

,6. 

■!&. 

■i«. 

SB. 

66. 

Jer. 

17- 

17- 

17- 

'7- 

17- 

17- 

Lara 

■    2. 

Hid. 

20. 

23' 

44- 
45- 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 

Hos.   2. 
Amos  8. 


18  bring  more  wrath.,  by  profaning  the  sab. 

19  gates,  .began  to  be  dark  before  the  sabb. 
19  should  not  be  opened  till  after  the  sabbath 

19  no  burden  be  brought  in  on  the  sabbath  d. 

2 1  From  that . .  came  they  no  (more)  on  the  sa. 

22  keep  the  gates,  to  sanctify  the  sabbath  day 
92  title.  A  Psalm  (or)  Song  for  the  sabbath  d. 
13  the  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  calling 

2,  6  that  keepeth  the  sabbath  from  pollut. 

4  unto  the  eunuchs  that  keep  my  sabbaths 
13  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  sab. 
13  call  the  sabbatha  delight,  the  holy  of  the 

23  from  one  sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  tie. 

21  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  day,  nor 

22  a  burden  out  of  your  houses  on  the  sabo.  d. 
22  hallow  ye  the  sabbath  day,  as  I  comman. 

24  the  sabbath  day,  but  hallow  the  sabbath  d. 
27  hearken  unto  me  to  hallow  the  sabbath  d. 
27  entering  in  at  the  gates . .  on  the  sabbath  d. 

6  caused  the  solemn  feasts  and  sabbaths  to 

12  also  I  gave  them  ray  sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign 

13  and  my  sabbaths  they  greatly  polluted 

16  polluted  my  sabbaths :  for  their  heart 

20  hallow  my  sabbaths;  and  they  Bhall  be  a 

21  they  polluted  my  sabbatha :  then  I  said,  I 
24  polluted  my  sabbaths,  and  their  eyes  were 

8  despised .  .and  hast  profaned  my  sabbaths 
26  have  hid  their  eyes  from  my  sabbaths,  and 
38  denied  my  sanctuary . .  profaned  my  sabb. 
24  and  they  shall  hallow  my  sabbaths 

17  the  new  moons,  and  in  the  sabbaths,  and 
1  on  the  sabbath  it  shall  be  opened,  and  in 

3  in  the  sabbaths  and  in  the  new  moons 

4  offer  unto  the  Lord  in  the  sabbath  day 
12  shall  prepare,  .as  he  did  on  the  sabbath  d. 
11  and  her  sabbaths,  and  all  her  solemn  fe. 

5  the  sabbath.that  wemayest  set  forth  wh. 


2. A  cessation,  sabbath,  finals'  shabbathon. 

Lev.  23.  24  shall  ye  have  a  sabbath,  a  memorial  of 

23.  39  on  the  first  day  (shall  be)  a  sabbath 

23.  39  and  on  the  eighth  day  (shall  be)  a  sabbath 

Z.Vessations,  desolations,  D*B3^n  mishbatiim. 

Lam.  1.    7  saw  her,  (and)  did  mock  at  her  sabbaths 

4.  Sabbath,  crd&&aTa  sabbata. 

Matt  12.    1  Jesus  went  on  the  sabbath  day  through 
12.    5  on  the  sabbath  days  the  priests  in  the 
12.  10  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  days  ? 
12. 11  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath  day,  will 
12.  12  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the  sabbath  day 
28.    1  In  the  end  of  the  sabbath,  as  it  began  to 

Mark  1.  21  011  the  sabbath  day  he  entered  into  the 
2.  23  went  through  the  fields  on  the  sabbath 

2.  24  why  do  they  on  the  sabbath  day  that  wh. 

3.  2  whether  he  would  heal  him  on  the  sab.  d. 

3.  4  Is  it  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  sabbath  day 
Luke  4.  16  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath  d. 

4.  31  and  taught  them  on  the  sabbath  days 

6.   2  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath  d. 
6.   9  Is  it  lawful  on  the  sabbath  days  to  do  go. 
13. 10  in  one  of  the  synagogues  on  the  sabbath 
Acts  13.  14  wentinto  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbathd. 

16.  13  on  the  sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  city 

17.  2  three  sabbath  days  reasoned  with  them 
Col.    2.  16  or  of  the  new  moon,  or  of  the  sabbath 

5.  Sabbath,  <ra@(3a.Tov  sabbaton, 

Matt  12.    2  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  upon  the  sab.  d. 
12.    5  priests  iu  the  temple  profane  the  sabbath 

12.  8  Son  of  man  is  Lord  even  of  the  sabb.  day 

24.  20  that  your  flight  be  not . .  on  the  sabbath  day 
Mark  2.  27  he  said  unto  them,  The  sabbath  was 

2.  27  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  sabb. 
2.  28  The  Sou  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  sabb. 
6.  2  when  the  sabbath  day  was  come,  he  beg. 
16.  i- when  the  sabbath  was  past,  Mary  Magd. 
Luke  6.  1  on  the  second  sabbath  after  the  first,  that 
6.  5  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  sabba. 
6.   6  it  came  to  pass  also  on  another  sabbath 

6.  7  whether  he  would  heal  on  the  sabbath  day 
13  14  Jesus  had  healed  on  the  sabbath  day,  and 

13. 14  in  them.,  be  healed,  and  not  on  the  sab.  d. 

13. 15  doth  not  each  one  of  you  on  the  sabbath 

13. 16  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the  sabbath  d. 
14.  1  into  the  house . .  to  eat  bread  on  the  sab.  d. 
14.    3  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  day 

14.  s  straightway  pull  him  out  on  the  sabbath  d. 
23.  54  that  day  was  the  preparation,  and  the  sa. 
23.  56  rested  the  sabbath  day,  according  to  the 

John  5.    9  walked  :  and  on  the  same  day  was  the  sa. 

5.  10  It  is  the  sabbath  day  :  it  is  not  lawful  for 
5.  16  he  had  done  these  things  on  the  sabbath 
5.  18  he  not  only  had  broken  the  sabbath,  but 

7.  22  ye  on  the  sabbath  day  circifmcise  a  man 
7.  23  If  a  man  on  the  sabbath  day  receive 

7.  23  every  whit  whole  on  the  sabbath  day 
9.  14  it  was  the  sabbath  day  when  Jesus  made 
9.  16  because  he  keepeth  not  the  sabbath  day 
19.  31  on  the  sabbath  day,  for  that  sabbath  day 
Acts    1.  12  from  Jerusalem  a  sabbath  day's  journey 

13.  27  Prophets  which  are  read  every  sabbath  d. 
13.  42  might  be  preached  to  them  the  next  sab. 
13.  44  the  next  sabbath  day  came  almost  the 

15.  21  read  iu  the  synagogues  every  sabbath  day 

18.  4  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every  sab. 

SABBATH,  day  before  the  — 

Day  before  the  sabbath,  irpoffd0$arov  prosdbbalon. 
Markis.  42  preparation,  that  is,  [the  day  before  the  sa.] 


SABBATH,  to  keep  — 

To  cease,  keep  sabbath,  ro^  shdbath. 

2  Ch.36.  21  as  long  as  she  lay  desolate  she  kept  sabb. 
SA-BE-ANS,  D'lOp. 

The  descendants  of  Seba  (the  eldest  son  of  Cush  or  of 
Sheba  his  grandson)  in  X.  Ethiopia,  including  Meroe. 

Isa.   45.  14  and  merchandise  of  Ethiopia  and  of  the  S. 

Eze.  23.  42  with  the  men.  .(were) brought  S.  from  the 
SA-BE-ANS,  N3^,  P'Nptp. 

The  descendants  of  Sheba,  son  of  Yokshan  son  of  Abra- 
ham, in  Edom  and  Syria  and  Arabia. 

Job     1.  15  the  S.  fell  (upon  them),  and  took  them  aw. 

Joel    3.    8  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  S.,  to  a  people 
SAB'-TAH,  SAB'-TA,  npop,  Nrap. 
Third  son  of  Cush,  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  the 
middle  of  S.  Arabia,  N.  of  Kane  (Penptas).    B.C.  2300. 

Gen.  10.    7  the  sons  of  Cush;  Seba.  .Havilah,  and  S. 

1  Ch.  1 .    9  the  sons  of  Cush ;  Seba . .  Havilah,  and  S. 
SAB-TE'-CHA,  KJFOp. 

Fifth  son  of  Cush  son  of  Ham,  and  his  descendants  on 
the  E.  side  of  Persian  Gulf,  in  Carmania,  or  on  the  E. 
of  Ethiopia.    B.C.  2250. 

Gen.  10.    7  sonsof  Cush.  .Sabtah.andRaamah.and  S. 

1  Ch.  1.    9  the  sons  of  Cush.  .Sabta,  and  Raamah..S. 
SA'  CAR,  hp?  hired. 

1.  Father  of  Ahiham,  one  of  David  s  valiant  men  (in  2  Sa. 
23.  33Sharar).    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  35  Ahiham  the  son  of  S.  the  Hararite,  Eliphal 

2.  A  Kohathite,  son  of  Obed-edom,  a  gatekeeper  of  the 
tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  26.    4  Joah  the  third,  and  S.  the  fourth,  and  N. 
SACK  — 

l.Bag,  sack,  nnnpN  amtachath. 

Gen.  42.  27  for,  behold,  it  (was)  in  his  sack's  mouth 

42.  28  My  money  is  restored.,  (it  is)  even  in  mys. 

43.  12  brought  again  in  the  mouth  of  your  sacks 
43.  18  the  money  that  was  returned  inoursacks 
43.  21  that  we  opened  our  sacks,  and,  behold 
43.  21  (every)  man's  money.,  in  the  mouth  of  hiss. 
43.  22  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in  our  sa. 

43.  23  God.  .hath  given  you"treasure"in  your  sa. 

44.  1  Fill  the  men's  sacks  (with)  food,  as  much 
44.  1  put  every  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mo. 
44.  2  put  my  cup,  the  silver  cup,  in  the  sack's 
44.  8  the  money  which  we  found  in  our  sack's 
44.  11  took  down  every  man  his  sack  to  the  gr. 

44. 11  Then  they,  .opened  every  man  his  sack 

44. 12  and  the  cup  was  found  in  Benjamin's  sa. 

2.  Vessel,  'h?  keli. 

Gen.  42.  25  Joseph  commanded  to  fill  their  sacks  with 

3.  Sack,  py  saq. 

Gen.  42.  25  to  restore  every  man's  money  into  his  sack 
42.  27  as  one  of  them  opened  his  sack,  to  give 
42.  35  as  they  emptied  their  sacks,  that,  behold 
42.  35  everyman'sbundleofmoney(was)inhiss. 
Lev.  11.  32  whether(it  be),  .raiment,  or  skin,  or  sack 
Josh.  9.   4  took  old  sacks  upon  their  asses,  and  wine 
SACXBTTT  — 
Sackbut,  harp-like  instrument,  Rpl'w,  nppp  sdbka. 

Dan.   3.    5,  7,  10,  15  cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psal. 
SACKCLOTH,  sackclothes  — 
l.A  sack,  dress  of  sackcloth,  pw  saq. 

Gen.  37.  34  and  put  sackcloth  upon  his  loins,  and 

2  Sa.    3.  31  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  and  mourn  bef. 

21.  10  the  daughter  of  Aiah  took  sackcloth,  and 

1  Ki.  20.  31  put  sackcloth  on  our  loins,  and  ropes  up. 

20.  32  they  girded  sackcloth  on  their  loins,  and 

21.  27  and  put  sackcloth  upon  his  flesh,  and  fa. 
21.  27  and  lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly 

2  Ki.  6.  30  behold,  (he  had)  sackcloth  within  upon 

19.    1  covered  himself  with  sackcloth,  and  went 

19.  2  And  he  sent  Eliakim . .  covered  with  sack. 
1  Ch.21.  16  elders  (of  Israel,  who  were)  clothedinsa. 
Neh.  9.  1  and  with  sackclothes,  and  earth  upon  th. 
Esth.  4.    1  put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes,  and  went  out 

4.    2  into  the  king's  gate  clothed  with  sackclo. 

4.    3  and  many  lay  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 

4.    4  and  to  take  away  his  sackcloth  from  him 

Job   16.  15  I  have  sewed  sackcloth  upon  my  skin,  and 

Psa.  30.  11  thou  hast  put  off  my  sackcloth,  and  gird. 

35.  13  when  they  were  sick,  my  clothing  (was)  s. 

69.  11  I  made  sackcloth  also  my  garment ;  and 

Isa.      3.  24  instead  of  a  stomacher  a  girding  of  sack. 

15.    3  they  shall  gird  themselves  with  sackcloth 

20.  2  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off  thy  loins,  and 
22. 12  to  boldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth 
37.  1  covered  himself  with  sackcloth,  and  went 
37.  2  And  he  sent  Eliakim . .  covered  with  sack. 
50.  3  I  clothe . .  and  I  make  sackcloth  their  cov. 
58.    5  and  to  spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  (under 

Jer.    4.    8  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  lament  and  howl 
6.  26  gird  (thee)  with  sackcloth,  and  wallow  th. 

48.  37  cuttings,  and  upon  the  loins  sackcloth 

49.  3  gird  you  with  sackcloth ;  lament,  and  run 
lam.  2. 10  they  have  girded  themselves  with  sackcl. 
Eze.    7.  18  They  shall  also  gird  (themselves) with  sa. 

27.  31  gird  them  with  sackcloth,  and  they  shall 
Dan.   9.   3  with  fasting,  and  sackcloth,  and  ashes 
Joel    1.    8  Lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcl. 
1.  13  lie  all  night  in  sackcloth,  ye  ministers  of 
Amoi  8.  10  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth  upon  all  loins 
Jon.    3.    s  put  on  sackcloth,  from  the  greatest  of 
3.   6  covered  (him)  with  sackcloth,  and  sat  in 
3.   8  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with  sackc. 


2.  A  sack,  dress  of  sackcloth,  o-6.kkos  sakkos. 

Matt  11.  21  repented  long  ago  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 
Luke  10.  13  repented,  sitting,  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 
Rev.    6. 12  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  ha. 

11.  3  they  shall  prophesy.,  clothed  in  sackcloth 

SACRIFICE  — 

\.A  slaughter,  slaughtered  animal,  sacrifice,  nyi. 

Ezra    6.    3  the  place  where  they  offered  sacrifices 
%A  slaughter,  slaughtered  animal,  sacrifice,  raj. 

Gen.  31.  54  Jacob  offered  sacrifice  upon  the  mount 
46.    1  offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  fa". 

Exodio.  25  Thou  must  give  us  also  sacrifices  and  bu. 

12.  27  It  (is)  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord's  passover 

18.  12  took  a  burnt  offering  and  sacrifices  forG 

23. 18  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my  sacrifice 
29.  28  of  the  sacrifice  of  their  peace  offerings 
34.  15  (one)  call  thee,  and  thou  eat  of  his  sacri. 
34.  25  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my  sacrifice 
34.  25  neither  shall  the  sacrifice  of  the  feast  of 

Lev.    3.   1  if  his  oblation  (be)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  off. 
3.    3,  9  he  shall  offer  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  pe. 

3.  6  if  his  offering  for  a  sacrificeof  peace  offe 
4. 10  taken  off  from  the  bullock  of  the  sacrifice 

4.  26  as  the  fat  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offering 
4.  31  the  fat  is  taken  away  from  off  the  sacrifice 
4.  35  taken  away  from  the  sacrifice  of  the  pea. 
7.  11  the  law  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings 
7. 12  then  he  shall  offer  with  the  sacrifice  of 
7.  13  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  of  his  peace 
7.  15  And  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  his  peace 
7.  16  if  the  sacrifice  of  his  offering  (be)  a  vow 
7.  16  thesame  day  that  he  offereth  his  sacrifice 
7.  17  the  remainder  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice 
7.  18  (any)  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  his 

7.  20,  21  flesh  of  the  sacrificeof  peace  offerings 

7.  29  He  that  offereth  the  sacrifice  of  his  peace 

7.  29  shall  bring  his  oblation,  .of  the  sacrifice 

7.  32  an  heave  offering  of  the  sacrifices  of  your 

7.  34  from  off  the  sacrifices  of  their  peace  offe. 

7.  37  and  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offerings 

9  18  (for)  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings  which 

10.  14  (which)  are  given  out  of  the  sacrifices  of 

17.    5  Israel  may  bring  their  sacrifices,  which 

17.    7  they  shall  no  more  offer  their  sacrifices 

17.  8  that  offereth  a  burnt  offering  or  sacrifice 

19.  5  if  ye  offer  a  sacrifice  of  peaceofferingsun. 
22. 21  And  whosoever  offereth  a  sacrifice  of  pe. 

22.  29  when  ye  will  offer  a  sacrificeof  thanksgi. 

23. 19  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  sacrifice 

23.  37  a  meat  offering,  a  sacrifice,  and  drink  off. 
Num.  6. 17  he  shall  offer  the  ram  (for)  a  sacrifice  of  pe. 

6. 18  the  fire  which  (is)  under  the  sacrifice  of 
7.  17  And  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings,  two 

[So  in  verse  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83.] 

7.  88  the  oxen,  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  off. 
10.  10  and  over  the  sacrifices  of  your  peace  off. 
15.  3  or  a  sacrifice  in  performing  a  vow,  or  in 
15.  5  prepare  with  the  burnt  offering  or  sacrifl. 
15.  8  or  (for)  a  sacrifice  in  performing  a  vow 
25.    2  they  called  the  people  unto  the  sacrifices 

Deuti2.    6,  11  your  burnt  offerings,  and  your  sacrifl. 
12.  27  the  blood  of  thy  sacrifices  shall  be  poured 

18.  3  from  them  that  offer  a  sacrifice,  whether 

32.  38  Which  did  eat  the  fat  of  their  sacrifices 

33.  19  they  shall  offer  sacrifices  of  righteousness 
Josh 22.  26,  28  notforburntofferings,norfor sacrifice 

22.  27  with  our  sacrifices,  and  with  our  peace  off. 
22.  29  formeatofferings,  or  for  sacrifices,  besides 
Judg.  6.  26  offer  a  burnt  sacrifice  with  the  wood  of 

1  Sa.    1.  21  offer  unto  the  Lord  the  yearly  sacrifice 

2.  13  when  any  man  offered  sacrifice,  the  pri. 

2. 19  she  came,  .to  offer  the  yearly  sacrifice 

2.  29  Wherefore  kick  ye  at  my  sacrifice  and  at 
3. 14  shall  not  be  purged  with  sacrifice  nor  off. 

6.  15  sacrificed  sacrifices  the  same  day  unto  the 

9. 12  (there  is)  a  sacrifice  of  the  people  today 

9. 13  because  he  doth  bless  the  sacrifice ;  (and) 
10.    8  (and)  to  sacrifice  sacrifices  of  peace  offering 

11. 15  they  sacrificed  sacrifices  of  peace  offerings 
15.  22  delight  in  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices 

15.  22  to  obey  (is)  better  than  sacrifice,  (and)  to 

16.  3  call  Jesse  to  the  sacrifice,  and  I  will  show 
16.  5  sanctify,  .and  come  with  me  to  the  sacri. 
16.    5  sanctified,  .and  called  them  to  the  sacrifi. 

20.  6  a  yearly  sacrifice  there  for  all  the  family 
20.  29  for  our  family  hath  a  sacrifice  in  the  city 

2  Sa.  15.  12  sent.,  while  he  offered  sacrifices:  and  the 

1  Ki.  8.  62  all  Israel  with  him,  offered  sacrifice  before 

8.  63  And  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  peace 
12.  27  If  this  people  go  up  to  do  sacrifice  in  the 

2  Ki.  5.  17  offer  neither  burnt  offering  nor  sacrifice 

10.  19  for  I  have  a  great  sacrifice  (todo)to  Baal 
10.  24  when  they  went  in  to  offer  sacrifices  and 
16.  15  sprinkle  upon  it.  .blood  of  the  sacrifice 

1  Ch.29.  21  they  sacrificed  sacrifices  unto  the  Luri> 
29.  21  and  sacrifices  in  abundance  for  all  Israel 

2  Ch.   7.    1  consumed  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sac. 

7.  4  the  people  offered  sacrifices  before  the  L. 
7.  5  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  twenty  and 
7.  12  have  chosen  this. .  for  an  house  of  sacrifice 

29.  31  bring  sacrifices  and  thank  off erings  into 
29.  31  the  congregation  brought  in  sacrifices  and 
Neh.  12.  43  they  offered  great  sacrifices,  and  rejoiced 
Psa.  4.  5  Offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  and 
27.  6  therefore  will  I  offer. .  sacrifices  of  joy 
40.  6  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  des. 
50.   5  have  made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacrifi. 

50.  8  I  will  not  reprove  thee  for  thy  sacrifices 

51. 16  thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I 

51.  17  The  sacrifices  of  God  (are)  a  broken  Bpirit 


SACRIFICE 


830 


SAFE 


Psa.  51.  ig  shalt  thou  be  pleased  with  the  sacrifices 

106.  28  joined  themselves,  .and  ate  the  sacrifices 

107.  22  let  them  sacrifice  the  sacrifices  of  thank. 
116.  17  offer  to  thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving 

Prov  15.  8  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  (is)an  abomination 
17.  1  than  an  house  full  of  sacrifices  (with)  str. 
21.  3  more  acceptable  to  the  Lord  than  sacrifi. 
21.  27  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  (is)  abomina. 

Eccl.  s-    1  more  ready  to  hear  thau  to  give  the  sacr. 

Isa.  1. 11  what,  .(is)the  multitudeof  your  sacrifices 
19.  21  and  shall  do  sacrifice  and  oblation;  yea 
34.  6  the  Lord  hath  a  sacrifice  in  Bozrah,  and 
43.  23  neither,  .honoured  me  with  thy  sacrifices 

43.  24  neither,  .filled  me  with  the  fat  of  thy  sacr. 

56.  7  their  sacrifices  (shall  be)  accepted  upon 

57.  7  even  thither  wentest  thou  up  to  offer  sa. 
Jer.    6.  20  (are)  not  acceptable,  nor  your  sacrifices 

7. 21  Put  your  burut  offerings  unto  your  sacri. 
7.  22  concerning  burnt  offerings  or  sacrifices 
17.  26  sacrifices,  and  meat  offerings,  and  incense 

33. 18  kindle  meat  offerings,  and  to  do  sacrifice 
46. 10  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  hath  a  sacrifice  in 

Eze.  20.  28  they  offered  there  their  sacrifices,  and 

39.  17  gather  yourselves,  .to  my  sacrifice  that  I 
39. 17  a  great  sacrifice  upon  the  mountains  of  Is. 

39. 19  till  ye  be  drunken,  of  my  sacrifice  which 

40.  42  slew  the  burnt  offering  aud  the  sacrifice 

44.  11  slay  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sacrifice 
46.  24  the  ministers,  .shall  boil  the  sacrifice 

Dan.  9.  27  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  aud  the  obla. 
Hos.    3.    4  without  a  sacrifice,  and  without  an  image 

4.  19  shall  be  ashamed  because  of  their  sacrifi. 

6.  6  For  I  desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice ;  and 
8. 13  flesh  (for)  the  sacrifices  of  mine  offerings 
9.   4  their  sacrifices  (shall  be)  unto  them  as  the 

Amos  4.    4  bring  your  sacrifices  every  morning,  (and) 

5.  25  Have  ye  offered  unto  me  sacrifices  and 
Jon.    1.  16  offered  a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  and 
Zeph.  1.    7  the  Lord  hath  prepared  a  sacrifice,  he 

1.    8  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  sacrifice,  that 

3.  To  sacrifice,  n?T  zabach. 

Mai.    1.    8  if  ye* offer  the  blind  for  sacrifice,  (is  it)not 

4.A  festival,  JO  chag. 

Exodz3.  18  neither  shall  the  fat  of  mysacrifice  remain 
Psa. 118.  27  bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  (even)  unto 
Isa.   29.    1  add  ye  year  to  year ;  let  them  kill  sacrifi. 

5.  Offering,  present,  nnp  minchah. 

i  Ki.18.  29,  36  the  offering  of  the  (evening)  sacrifice 
Ezra   9.    4  I  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  sacrifice 
9.    5  at  the  evening  sacrifice  I  arose  up  from 
Psa. 141.    2lifting  up  of  my  hands  (as)  the  evenings. 

6.  A  slaughter,  slaughtered  animal,  sacrifice,  Qvaia. 

Matt.  9.  13  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice :  for 

12.    7  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice,  ye 
Mark  9.  49  [and  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with] 

12.  33  than  all  whole  burnt  offerings  and  sacri. 
Luke  2.  24  offer  a  sacrifice  according  to  that  which 

13.  1  blood  Pilate  had  mingled  with  their  sac. 
Acts    7.41  offered  sacrifice  unto  the  idol,  and  rejoi. 

7.  42  offered  to  me  slain  beasts  and  sacrifices 
Rom  12.    1  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice 
1  Co.  10.  18  are  not  they  which  eat  of  the  sacrifices  p. 
Eph.  5.    2  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sa. 
Phil.  2. 17  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice 

4.  18  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  G. 
Heb.  5.    1  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices 

7.  27  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins 

8.  3  priest  is  ordained  to  offer  gifts  and  sacri. 

9.  9  in  which  were  offered . .  sacrifices,  that  co. 
9.  23  heavenly  things.,  with  better  sacrifices 

9.  26  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 
10.  1  can  never  with  those  sacrifices  which  th. 
10.  5  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouklest  not 
10.  8  Sacrifice  and  offering  and  burnt  offerings 
20. 11  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices 
10.  12  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins 
10.  26  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins 
n.  4  more  excellent  sacrificethan  Cain,  by  wh. 
13- 15  By  him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice 
13.  16  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleas. 
1  Pe.  2.  5  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable 
[See  also  Burn,  burnt,  do,  offer,  whole.] 

SACRIFICE  made  by  fire,  of  praise  — 
l.A  Ji re  offering,  nu'N  ishsheh. 

Lev.  10. 13  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 
Kuniis-  25  sacrifice  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord,  and 
28.  2  my  bread  for  my  sacrifices  made  by  fire 
28.  6,  13  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord 
28.  8  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savour 
28. 19  But  ye  shall  offer  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire 

28.  24  the  meat  of  the  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of 

29.  6  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord 
29.  13,  36  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  sav. 

Josh.  13.  14  sacrifices  of  the  Lord.,  made  by  fire,  (are) 
2.A  thank  offering,  nrn  todah. 

Jer.  17.  26  bringin  \  f  praise,  unto  the  ho. 

33.  11  them  that  shall  bring  the  sacrifice  of  pr. 
SACRIFICE  to  idols,  (offered  in)  — 
What  is  sacrificed  (■>  an  idol,  €i5cn\6Bvrou  eidolof. 
1  Co.  8.    4  that  are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,  we 
10. 19  that  which  is  offered  in  sacrifices  to  idols 
10.  28  This  is  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,  eat 
Rev.   2.  14  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,  and  to 
2.  20  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idohi 
SACRIFICE,  be  sacrificed,  to  (do)  — 
\.To  slaughter,  sacrifu-e,  rci  zabach, 

Exod,  3.  iS  that  wo  m:\y  sacrifice  to  the  LORD  our  G. 


Exod.  5.    3  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  our  God  ;  lest  he 
5.    8  saying,  Let  us  go  (and)  sacrifice  to  our  G. 
5. 17  say,  Let  us  go  (and)  do  sacrifice  to  the  L. 
8.    8  that  they  may  do  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord 
8.  25  Go  ye,  sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  laud 
8.  26  for  we  shall  sacrifice  the  abomination  of 
8. 26  shall  we  sacrifice  the  abomination  of  the 
8.  27  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  our  God,  as  he  shall 
8.  28  that  ye  may  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  your  G. 
8.  29  in  not  letting  the  people  go  to  sacrifice 
13. 15  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  all  that  openeth  the 
20.  24  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  burnt  otierings 
22.  20  He  that  sacrificeth  unto  (any)  god;  save 
24.    5  sacrificed  peace  offerings  of  oxen  unto  the 

32.  8  worshipped  it,  and  have  sacrificed  there. 
34.  15  do  sacrifice  unto  their  gods,  aud  (one)  ca. 

Lev.   9.    4  to  sacrifice  before  the  Lord  ;  and  a  meat 
Deutis.  21  shalt  not  sacrifice  it  unto  the  Lord  thy 
16.    2  Thou  shalt  therefore  sacrifice  the  passover 
16.    4  which  thou  sacrificedst  the  first  day  at 
16.    s  Thou  mayest  not  sacrifice  the  passover 

16.  6  there  thou  shalt  sacrifice  the  passover  at 

17.  1  Thou  shalt  not  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord 
32. 17  They  sacrificed  unto  devils,  not  to  God 

Josh.  8.  31  offered  thereon,  .and  sacrificed  peace  off. 
Judg.  2.    5  and  they  sacrificed  there  unto  the  Lord 

1  Sa.  1.  3  to  worship  and  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord 
2. 15  said  to  the  man  that  sacrificed,  Give  flesh 
6. 15  offered  burnt  offerings  and  sacrificed  sac. 

10.  8  to  offer  burnt  offerings,  (and)  to  sacrifice 

11.  15  there  they  sacrificed  sacrifices  of  peace  off. 
15. 15  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  our  God ;  and 

15.  21  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  in  G. 

16.  2  say,  I  am  come  to  sacrifice  to  the  LORD 

16.  5  I  am  come  to  sacrifice  unto  the  LORD,  sac. 

2  Sa.    6.  13  had  gone  six  paces,  he  sacrificed  oxen  and 

1  Ki.  3.    4  king  went  to  Gibeon  to  sacrifice  there,  for 

2  Ki.  17.  35  Ye  shall  not  fear,  .nor  sacrifice  to  them 

17.  36  ye  worship,  and  to  him  shall  he  do  sacri. 

1  Ch.  21. 28  when  David  saw.  .then  he  sacrificed  the. 
29.  21  they  sacrificed  sacrifices  unto  the  Lord 

2  Ch.11. 16  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  God  of  their  fa. 
28. 23  For  he  sacrificed  unto  the  gods  of  Dama. 

33.  16  sacrificed  thereon  peace  offerings  and  th. 

33.  17  Nevertheless  the  people  did  sacrifice  still 

34.  4  upon  the  graves  of  them  that  had  sacrifi. 
Ezra  4.  2  we  do  sacrifice  unto  him  since  the  days  of 
Neh.  4.  2  will  they  sacrifice  ?  will  they  make  an  end 
Psa.  54.    6  I  will  freely  sacrifice  unto  thee  :  I  will  pr. 

106.  37  sacrificed  their  sons  and  their  daughters 

107.  22  let  them  sacrifice  the  sacrifices  of  thank. 
Eccl.  9.  2  him  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  him  that  sac. 
Isa.   65.    3  that  sacrificeth  in  gardens,  and  burnetii 

66.    3  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  (as  if)  he  cut 
Eze.  16.  20  thou  sacrificed  unto  them  to  be  devoured 
39.  17  to  my  sacrifice  that  I  do  sacrifice  upon  the 
39. 19  my  sacrifice  which  I  have  sacrificed  for 
Hos.    8.  13  They  sacrifice  flesh  (for)  the  sacrifice  of 

13.  2  Let  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the  calves 
Jon.  2.  9  But  I  will  sacrifice  unto  thee  with  the  vo. 
Zech.  14.  21  all  they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take 
Mai.    1.  14  and  sacrificeth  unto  the  Lord  a  corrupt 

2.  To  slaughter,  sacrifice,  H2T  zabach,  3. 

1  Ki.  3.    2  Only  the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places 

3.    3  only  he  sacrificed  and  burnt  iucence  in  hi. 
8.    5  sacrificing  sheep  and  oxen,  that  could  not 

11.  8  which  burnt  incense,  and  sacrificed  unto 

12.  32  sacrificing  unto  the  calves  that  he  had  ma. 

2  Ki.  12.    3  people  still  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense 

14.  4  people  did  saeriik'c  and  burnt  incense  on 
15*   4»  3speoplesacrificedandburntincensestill 
16.   4  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  the  high 

2  Ch.  5.    6  sacrificed  sheep  and  oxen,  which  could 
28.   4  He  sacrificed  also  and  burnt  incense  in  the 
28. 23  will  I  sacrifice  to  them, Jthat  they  may  help 
33.  22  for  Amon  sacrificed  unto  all  the  carved 

Psa.106.  38  whom  they  sacrificed  unto  the  idols  of  C. 

Hos.  4. 13  They  sacrifice  upon  the  tops  of  the  moun. 
4. 14  they  sacrifice  with  harlots  :  therefore  the 
11.  2  they  sacrificed  unto  Baalim,  and  burnt  in. 
12. 11  they  sacrifice  bullocks  in  Gilgal;  yea,  th. 

Hab.  1.  16  Therefore  they  sacrifice  unto  their  net,  and 
3.7*0  do,  make,  n1.?;;  aso.k. 

Lev.  23. 19  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  sacrifice 

2  Ki.17.  32  which  sacrificed  for  them  in  the  houses  of 

4.  To  slaughter,  sacrifice,  6vu>  thud. 

Acts  14. 13  would  have  done  sacrifice  with  the  people 
14.  18  that  theyhad  not  done  sacrifice  unto  them 

1  Co.  5.    7  even  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificedfor 
10.  20  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they  sacrifice 
SACRILEGE,  to  commit  — 
To  rob  a  tempts,  commit  sacrilege,  UpoavXtoi  Met. 

Rom.  2.  22  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou  commit  sacril. 
SAD,  sadly,  sadness  — 
l.To  be  wroth,  sad,  morose,  f]j;i  zaaph. 

Gen.  40.   6  looked  upon  them/. behold,  they  (were)  s. 
2.S0W,  s>dhj,  "ip  $ar. 

1  Ki.21.    5  Why  is  thy  spirit  so  sad,  that  thou  eatest 
3iJ5    \  sad,  in  ra. 

Neh,    j.    1  >'ow  I  had  not  been  (beforetime)  sad  in 
2.    2  Why  (is)  thy  countenance  sad,  seeing  thou 

•l.Frt'I,  sadness,  tfnroa. 

Eccl.  7.    3  for  by  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  the 

5.  Of  a  sad,  rueful,  morose  countenance,  o-Kvdpwrros. 

Luke24. 17  one  to  another,  as  ye  walk,  and  are  sad? 
[See  also  Countenance.] 


SAD,  to  be  or  make  — 
1.7*0  be  sad,  jrv  yara. 

Neh.   2.   3  why  should  not  my  countenance  be  sad 

2.  To  pain,  mar,  1K3  kaab,  5. 

Eze.  13.  22  whom  I  have  not  made  sad ;  and  streng. 

3.  To  give  pain,  nto  kaah,  5. 

Eze.  13.  22  have  made  the  heart  of  the  righteoussad 
4.7*0  be  dark,  gloomy,  arvyvd^w  stugnazo. 

Mark  10.  22  he  was  sad  at  that  saying,  and  went  away 
SADDLE,  (to)  — 
I. Hiding  seat,  saddle,  221Q  merkab. 

Lev.  15.   9  what  saddle  soever  he  rideth  upon  that 

2.  To  bind  up,  gird,  c^n  chabash. 

Gen.  22.  3  saddled  his  ass,  and  took  two  of  his  young 
JN'uni22.  21  saddled  his  ass,  and  went  with  the  princes 
Judgig.  10  two  asses  saddled;  his  concubine  also  (was) 
2  Sa.16.  1  with  a  couple  of  asses  saddled,  and  upon 
17.  23  he  saddled  (his)  ass,  and  arose,  and  gat 
19.  26  I  will  saddle  me  an  ass,  that  I  may  ride 

1  Ki.   2.  40  saddled  his  ass,  and  went  to  Gath  to  Ac. 

13. 13  Saddle  me  the  ass.     So  they  saddled  him 
13.  23  he  saddled  for  him  the  ass,  (to  wit),  for 
13.  27  Saddle  me  the  ass.  And  they  saddled  (him) 

2  Ki.  4.  24  she  saddled  au  ass,  and  said  to  her  servant 

SAD-DTT-CEES,  2a55ou/ca?ot. 

A  sect  of  the  Jews,  denying  the  resurrection  and  the 
existence  of  angels  and  spirits,  who  derived  their  origin 
from  Sadok,  a  follower  of  Antigonus  of  Socho,  B.C. 
250,  a  president  of  the  Sanhedrim. 

Matt.  3.    7  he  saw  many  of  the.  .S.  come  to  his  bapt. 

16.    1  The  Pharisees  also  with  the  S.  came,  and 

16.   6,  11  beware  of  the  leaven.. of  the  S.? 

16.  12  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  S. 

22.  23  The  same  day  came  to  him  the  S.,  which 

22.  34  Pharisees  had  heard  that  he  had  put  the  S. 
Mark  12.  18  Then  come  unto  him  the  S.,  which  say  th. 
Luke  20.  27  Then  came  to  (him)  certain  of  the  S.,  wh. 
Acts    4.    1  the  priests,  .and  the  S.,  came  upon  them 

5. 17  which  is  the  sect  of  the  S.,  and  were  filled 

23.  6  perceived  that  the  one  part  were  S.,  and 
23.    7  dissension  between  thePharisees  and  theS. 

23.  8  For  the  S.  say  that  there  is  no  resurrect. 

SADOC,  2a5w«  (from  Heb.  priy)  righteous,  just. 
Son  of  Azor,  and  father  of  Achim ;  an  ancestor  of  Jesus. 
Matt.  1. 14  And  Azor  begat  S. ;  and  S.  begat  Achim 

SAFE,  safely,  safety  — 

1.  Confidence,  trust,  n&2  betach. 

Lev.  25.  18  and  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  in  safety 

25.  19  eat  your  fill,  and  dwell  therein  in  safety 

26.  5  shall  eat.  .and  dwell  in  your  land  safely 
Deuti2.  10  giveth  you  rest.. that  ye  dwell  in  safety 

33. 12  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety 

33.  28  Israel  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone:  the 

1  Sa.  12.  11  Lord.  .  deliveredyou .  .and  ye  dwelled  safe 

1  Ki.  4.  25  Israel  dwelt  safely,  every  man  under  his 
Job   11.  18  (and)  thou  shalt  take  thy  rest  in  safety 

24.  23  (Though)  it  be  given  him  (to  be)  in  safety 
Psa.    4.    8  thou,  Lord,  only  makest  me  dwell  in  sa. 

78.  53  he  led  them  on  safely,  so  that  they  feared 
Prov.  1.  33  whoso  hearkeneth..  shall  dwell  safely,  and 

3.  23  Then  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  way  safely 
Isa.   14.  30  and  the  needy  shall  lie  down  in  safety 
Jer.  23.    6  Israel  shall  dwell  safely ;  and  this  (is)  his 

32.  37  and  I  will  cause  them  to  dwell  safely 

33.  16  Jerusalem  shall  dwell  safely :  and  this  (is 
Eze.  2S.  26  they  shall  dwell  safely  therein,  and  shall 

34.  25  they  shall  dwell  safely  in  the  wilderness 
34.  27  they  shall  be  safe  in  their  land,  and  shall 
34.  28  they  shall  dwell  safely,  and  none  shall  m. 
38.    8  and  they  shall  dwell  safely  all  of  them 
38. 11  them  that  are  at  rest,  that  dwell  safely 

38.  14  when  my  people  of  Israel  dwelleth  safely 

39.  26  they  dwelt  safely  in  their  land,  and  none 
Hos.    2. 18  and  will  make  them  to  lie  down  safely 
Zech  14.  11  but  Jerusalem  shall  be  safely  inhabited 

2* Safely,  deliverance,  i*^;,  Vti  yesha. 

Job     5.   4  His  children  are  far  from  safety,  and  they 

5.  11  those  which  mourn  may  be  exalted  to  sa. 

Psa.  12.    5  I  will  set  (him)  in  safety  (from  him  that) 

3.  Peace,  completeness,  uiby  shalom. 

2  Sa.  18. 29,  32  Is  the  young  man  Absalom  safe?  And 
Job  21.  9  'Their  houses  (are)  safe  from  fear,  neither 
Isa.  41.    3  pursued  them,  (and)  passed  safely;  even 

4.  Safety,  deliverance,  nj^2>n  tcshuah. 

Psa.  33.  17  An  horse  (is)  a  vain  thing  for  safety:  ne. 

Provn.  14  in  the  multitudeof  counsellors(thereis)s 
21.  31  The  horse  (is)  prepared . .  but  safety  (is)  of 
24.    6  in  multitude  of  counsellors  (there  is)  saf. 

5.  Security ;  firmness,  certainty,  aa-<pd\€iaasphaleia. 

Acts  5.  23  The  prison  truly  found  we  shut  with  all  s. 
1  Th.  5.    3  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety 

Q.Secire,  firm,  certain*  aff<pa\7}$  asphales. 

Phil,    3",    !  to  me.  .not  grievous, but  foryou(it  is)  sa. 

7.  Securely,  firmly,  ao-<£aA<£s  asphalds. 

Marki4.  44  that  same  is  he.  .lead  (him)  away  safely 
Acts  16.  23  charging  the  jailor  to  keep  them  safely 
[See  also  Bring,  carry  away,  escape.] 

SAFE  and  sound  — 

To  be  in  health,  sound,  whole,  vytaivco  hugiaino. 
Luke  15.  27  because  he  hath  received  him  safe  and  so. 


SAFE 


831 


SALMON 


SAFE,  to  be  or  bring 

l.To  be  in  safety,  KP;  yasha,  2. 

Psa.119.  117  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe 

2.  To  be  or  become  high  or  strong,  aa»p  sagab,  2. 

Provi8.  io  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe 
Z.To  become  high,  be  set  on  high,  22&  sagab,  4. 

Prov  29.  25  but  whoso  putteth  his  trust . .  shall  be  safe 
SAFEGUARD  — 
Guard,  charge,  ward,  rnstyp  mishmereih. 

1  Sa.  22.  23  but  with  me  thou(shalt  be)  in  safe  guard 
SAFETY,  to  be  in  — 
To  be  safe,  at  rest,  i^>,  nbv  shalah,  shalav. 

Job    '3.  26  I  was  not  in  safety,  neither  had  I  rest,  ne. 
SAFFRON  — 
Indian  saffron,  crocus,  D3"i?  karkom. 

Song  4.  14  Spikenard  and  saffron;  calamus  and  cin. 
SAID,  (to  be)  — 

l.To  be  said,  ~i»x  amar,  2. 

Gen.  10.    9  it  is  said,  Even  as  Nimrod  the  mighty  hu. 

22.  14  as  it  is  said  (to)  this  day,  In  the  mount  of 
Nuni2i.  14  it  is  said  in  the  book  of  the  wars  of  the 

23.  23  it  shall  be  said  of  Jacob  and  of  Israel,  \V. 
Job  34.  31  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God,  I  have  bo. 
Psa.  87.  5  of  Zion  it  shall  be  said,  This  and  that  man 
Isa.  32.  5  liberal,  nor  the  churl  said  (to  be)  bounti. 
Jer.     4.  11  At  that  time  shall  it  be  said  to  this  peo. 

16. 14  it  shall  no  more  be  said,  The  Lord  liveth 
Eze.  13. 12  shall  it  not  be  said  unto  you,  Where  (is) 
Hos.    1.  10  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  tneni 

1.  10  it  shall  be  said  unto  them,  (Ye  are)  the 
Zeph.  3.  16  it  shall  be  said  to  Jerusalem,  Fear  thou 

2.A  word,  "irn  dabar. 

Gen.  47.  30  And  he  said,  I  will  do  as  thou  hast  said 
1  Sa.   9. 10  Well  said;  come,  let  us  go.  So  they  went 
1  Ki.13. 17  it  was  said  to  me  by  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Ezra  10.  12  with  a  loud  voice,  As  thou  hast  said,  so 
Esth.  5.   8  I  will  do  tomorrow  as  the  king  hath  said 

SAID,  of  the  — 

Of  the  same,  avrris  autes. 
*  Mark  6.  22  the  daughter  of  the  said  Herodias  came 

SAIL  — 

l.Sign,  ensign,  banner,  sail,  Di  7ies. 

Isa.   33.  23  they  could  not  spread  the  sail :  then  is 
Eze.  27.    7  which  thou  spreadest  forth  to  be  thy  sail 

2.A  vessel,  instrument,  ctksvos  skeuos. 

Acts  27. 17  fearing  lest  they  should  fall,  .strake  sail 
SAIL,  away,  by,  thence,  to  — 
l.To  lead  up,  put  to  sea,  avdyw  anago. 

Acts  18.  21  bade  them  farewell . .  And  he  sailed  from 
20.  3  as  he  was  about  to  sail  into  Syria,  he  pu. 
20. 13  we  went  before  to  ship,  and  sailed  unto 

2.To  sail  off  or  away,  airowAew  apopled. 

Acts  13.   4  and  from  thence  they  sailed  to  Cyprus 
14.  26  thence  sailed  to  Antioch,  from  whence 
20.  15  we  sailed  thence,  and  came  the  next(day) 
27.    1  it  was  determined  that  we  should  sail 

Z.To  sail  out,  ^Kirk4oj  ekpleo. 

Acts  15.  39  Barnabas  took  Mark,  and  sailed  unto  C. 
18. 18  sailed  thence  into  Syria,  and  with  him 
20.   6  we  sailed  away  from  Philipin  after  the 

4.  To  sail,  irKeto  pled. 

Luke  8.  23  as  they  sailed  he  fell  asleep :  and  there 
Acts  21.    3  and  sailed  into  Syria,  and  landed  at  Tyre 
27.   2  we  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by  the  coast 
27.   6  found  a  ship  of  Alexandria  sailing  into 
27.  24  God  hath  given  thee  all  them  that  sail 

5.  To  lie  near  to  or  alongside,  TrapaAeyouai  parole. 

Acts  27. 13  loosing  (thence),  they  sailed  close  by  C. 
6.T0  sail  near  or  alongside,  TrapanXeaj  parapleo. 

Acts  20.  16  Paul  had  determined  to  sail  by  Ephesus 
SAIL  over,  slowly,  under  — 
l.To  pass  over,  through,  Stawepda)  didperao. 

Acts  21.    2  findiug  a  ship  sailing  over  unto  Phenicia 
2.To  sail  through,  5ia7rAew  diapleo. 

Acts  27.   5  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  Cilic. 

3.  To  sail  heavily  or  slowly,  &pab*vw\o4eo  braduplo. 
Acts  27.    7  when  we  had  sailed  slowly  many  days 

i.To  sail  under  or  beneath,  virow\4a)  hupopleo. 

Acts  27.    4  we  sailed  under  Cyprus,  because  the  wind 
27.    7  we  sailed  under  Crete,  over  against  Salm. 
SAILING,  sailor  — 
\,A  sailor,  vavr-ns  nautss. 

Rev.  i3. 17  all  the  company  in  ships,  and  sailors,  and 
2.Sailing,  navigation,  w\6os  ploos. 

Acts  27.  9  when  sailing  was  now  dangerous,  because 
SAINT  — 

1. Kind,  pious,  Vaf'ckasicf.^       "" — *  -  <_ 

1  Sa.   2.    9  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  hissaints.  ami  tho 

2  en.   6. 41  and  let  thy  saints  rejoice  in  goodness 
-rsa.  30.   4  Smg  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye  saints  of  his 

31.  23  O  love  the  Lord,  all  ye  his  saints :  (for) 
37.  28  For  the  Lord,  .forsaketh  not  his  saints 
50.   5  Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me  ;  th. 
52.    9  thy  name  ;  for  (it  is)  good  before  the  sa. 
79-    2  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  unto  the  beasts  of 


Psa.  85.    8  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his  saints 
97.  10  he  preserveth  the  souls  of  his  saints  ;  he 
116.  15  Precious.,  (is)  the  death  of  his  saints 
132.    9  Let  thy  priests,  .let  thy  saints  shout  for 
132. 16  and  her  saints  shall  shout  aloud  for  joy 
145.  10  thy  works  shall  praise  thee,  .thy  saints 

148.  14  exalteth.  .the  praise  of  all  his  saints 

149.  1  (and)  his  praise  in  the  congregation  of  sa. 
149.  5  Let  the  saints  be  joyful  in  glory :  let  them 
149.    9  this  honour  have  all  his  saints.  Praise  ye 

Prov.  2.    8  keepeth . .  and  preserveth  the  way  of  his  sa. 

2.  Set  apart,  separate,  holy,  t^np  qadosh. 

Deut  33.    3  his  saints  (are)  in  thy  hand :  and  they  sat 
Job     5.    1  andtowhichof  thesaints  wilt  thou  turn? 
15.  15  he  putteth  no  trustin  hissaints:  yea, the 
Psa.  16.    3  to  the  saints  that  (are)  in  the  earth,  and 
34.    9  fear  the  Lord,  ye  his  saints :  for  (there 
89.    5  also  in  the  congregation  of  the  saints 
89.   7  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints 
106.  16  They  envied.  .Aaron  the  saint  of  the  Lord 
Dan.   S.  13  heard  one  saint  speaking,  and  another  sa. 
Hos.  11.  12  ruleth.  .and  is  faithful  with  the  saints 
Zech  14.    5  God  shall  come,  (and)  all  the  saints  with 

3, Set  apart,  separate,  holy,  ff'ip  qaddish. 

Dan.    7.  18  the  saints  of  the  most  High  shall  take 

7.  21  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints 
7.  22  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the 
7.  22  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the 
7.  25  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  most  High 

7.  27  shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints 

4.  Separation,  holiness,  enp  qodesh. 

Deut33.    2  and  hecame  with  ten  thousands  of  saints 

5.  Set  apart,  separate,  holy,  ayios  hagios. 

Matt27.  52  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  arose 

Acts  9.  13  how  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints 

9.  32  he  came  down  also  to  the  saints  which 

9.  41  when  he  had  called  the  saints  and  widows 

26.  10  many  of  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison 

Rom.  1.    7  To  all  that  be  iu  Rome,  .called  (to  be)sa. 

8.  27  because  he  maketh  intercession  for  the  sa. 

12.  13  Distributing  to  the  necessity  of  saints ;  gi. 
15.  25  But  now  I  go.  .toministerunto  thesaints 
15.  26  for  the  poor  saints  which  areat  Jerusalem 

15.  31  my  service,  .may  be  accepted  of  thesaints 

16.  2  That  ye  receive  her.  .as  becometh  saints 
16.  15  and  all  the  saints  which  are  with  them 

1  Co.  1.   2  to  them  that  are.  .called  (to  be)  saints,  wi. 

6.  1  before  the  unjust,  and  not  before  the  sa. 
6.    2  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saiuts  shall  jud. 

14.  33  of  peace,  as  in  all  churches  of  the  saints 
16.  1  concerning  the  collection  for  the  saints 
16.  15  addicted,  .to  the  ministry  of  the  saints 

2  Co.   i.    1  all  the  saints  which  are  in  all  Achaia 

8.  4  fellowship  of  the  ministering  to  thesaints 

9.  1  touching  the  ministering  to  the  saints 

9. 12  not  only  supplieth  the  want  of  the  saints 

13.  13  All  the  saints  salute  you 

Eph.    1.    1  to  thesaints  which  are  at  Ephesus,  and 
1.  15  I  hearc1.  of  your,  .love unto  all  the  saints 

1.  18  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints 

2.  19  fellow  citizens  with  thesaints,  and  of  the 

3.  8  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  [saints] 

3.  18  May  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  sa. 

4.  12  For  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the 

5.  3  let  it  not  be . .  named . .  as  becometh  sain. 

6.  18  watching,  .with,  .supplication  for  all  sa. 
Phil.  1.    1  to  all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are 

4.  21  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus.  The 
4.  22  the  saints  salute  you,  chiefly  they  that 
Col.      1.    2  To  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren  in 
1.    4  of  the  love  (which  ye  have)  to  all  the  sa. 
1. 32  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints 
1.  26  but  now  is  made  manifest  to  his  saints 

1  Til.  3.  13  coming  of  our  Lord . .  with  all  his  saints 

2  Th.  1.  10  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints 
1  Ti.  5. 10  if  she  have  washed  the  saints'  feet,  if  she 
Phm.        5  toward  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  toward  allsa. 

7  the  bowels  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by 
Heb.   6.  10  that  ye  have  ministered  to  the  saints,  and 

13.  24  Salute  all.  .over  you,  and  all  the  saints 
Jude        3  which  was  once  delivered  unto  thesaints 

14  cometh  with  ten  thousand  of  his  saints 
Rev.    5.    8  odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints 
8.    3  offer  (it)  with  the  prayers  of  all  saints 
8.    4  (which  came)  with  the  prayers  of  the  sa. 
11. 18  the  saints,  and  them  that  fear  thy  name 
13.    7  [to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  ov.] 
13. 10  the  patience  and  the  faith  of  the  saints 
14. 12  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints  :  here 

15.  3  and  true  (are)  thy  ways,  thou  King  [of  s.] 

16.  6  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and 

17.  6  drunken  with  the  blood  of  thesaints, and 

18.  24  of  saints,  and  of  all  that  were  slain  upon 

19.  8  fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  saints 

20.  o  compassed  the  camp  of  the  saints  about 
SAKE  — 

1.  Causes,  reasons,  circumstances,  n'lK  odoth. 

Exodi8.    8  that  the  Lord  had  done.,  for  Israel's  sake 

2.  Word,  matter,  157  dabar. 

Gen.  20.  11  and  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife's  sake 
Nuni25.  18  slain  in  the  day  of  the  plague  for  Peor'ssa. 
peut.  4.  21  the  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sa. 

3  Worf^ma^er>  ,T^  dibrah. 

Dan   '''•  3°  *or  (**ie*r)  sa^es  that  shall  make  known 

4. In  ord'r  ^'  ^°  ^ie^en^  that,  ]U£>b  lemaan. 
1  Ki    h  41  ou*  °^  a  *ar  country  f°r  triy  name's  sake 


5.  Because  of,  for  the  2>urpose  of,  *iuy.  abur. 

Gen.   8.  21  curse  the  ground  any  more  for  man's  sake 
6. Zeal,  jealousy,  envy,  nyjp  qinah. 

ISuni25.  11  while  he  was  zealous  for  my  sake  among 

7.  Which,  whom,  hy  shel. 

Jon.     1.  12  know  that  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest 

8.  Under,  instead  of,  because,  nnJ?  tachath. 
Exod2i.  26  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his  eye's  sake 

9.0naccou?it  of,  because  of,  x°-Ptu  charin. 

Titus  1.  11  which  they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sa. 

10.  Above,  in  behalf  of  vir4p  (gen.)  huper. 

Johni3.  37  now?  I  will  lay  down  my  life  for  thy  sake 

13.  38  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake? 

17.  19  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they 
Acts    9.  16  how.  .he  must  suffer  for  my  name's  sake 

2  Co.  12.  10  take  pleasure,  .in  distresses,  for  Christ's 
Phil.  1.  29  not  only,  .but  also  to  suffer  for  his  sake 
Col.     1.  24  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church 

3  John       7  Because  that  for  his  name's  sake  they  we. 

[See  also  For  the  sake  of.] 
SA'-LA,  SA'-LAH,  SHE'-LAH,  nV^,  rhwt  2aAa. 
Son  of  Arphaxad  third  son  of  Shem,  and  father  of  Eber. 
B.C.  2255. 

Gen.  10.  24  And  Arphaxad  begat  S. ;  and  S.  begat  E. 
11.  12  And  Arphaxad  lived,  .and  begat  S. 
11.  13  And  Arphaxad  lived  after  he  begat  S.  four 
11.  14  And  S.  lived  thirty  years,  aud  begat  Eber 
11.  15  S.  lived  after  he  begat  Eber  four  hundred 
1  Ch.  1.  18  Arphaxad  begat  S.,  and  S.  begat  Eber 

1.  24  Shem,  Arphaxad,  S. 
Luke  3.  35  (the  son)  of  Heber. .  was  (the  son)  of  S. 

SA-LA'-KIS,  2aAajUtY 

A  chief  city  in  the  S.  E.  of  Cyprus;  afterwards  called 

Constantia,  and  Famagusta,  and  now  Eebres. 

Acts  13.    5  And  when  they  were  at  S.,  theypreached 
SA-LA-THI'-EL,     SHE-AL-TI'-EL,    Vffrtfft     V^g', 

2aA.a0i7j\. 
Son  or  grandson  of  Jeconiah  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  580. 

1  Ch.  3.  17  the  sons  of  Jeconiah,  Assir,  S.  his  son 

Ezra   3.   2  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  S.,  and  his  brethren 
3.    8  month,  began  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  S. 
5.    2  Then  rose  up  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  S. 

Nell. '12.    1  that  went  up  with  Zerubbabel ..  son  of  S. 

Hag.   1.    1  the  word  of  the  Lord  . .  unto . .  the  son  of  S. 

1.  12  Then  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  S. .  .obeyed  the 
1. 14  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of . .  the  son  of  S. 

2.  2  Speak  now  to  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  S. 
Matt.  1.  12  Jechonias  begat  S. ;  and  S.  begat  Zorob. 
Luke  3.  27  Zorobabel,  which  was  (the  son)  of  S.,  wh. 

SAL'-CHAH,  SAL'-CAH,  np^p  wandering. 

A  city  of  Gad  in  the  N.E.   of  Bashan;    now  called 

Zalchat,  or  Sulkhad,  seven  miles  E.  of  Bostra. 

Deut.  3.  10  and  all  Bashan,  unto  S.  and  Edrei,  cities 
Josh  12.   5  And  reigned  in  mount  Hermon,  and  iuS. 
13.  11  all  mouutHermon, and  all  Bashan  unto  S. 
1  Ch.  5.  11  dwelt,  .in  the  land  of  Bashan,  unto  S. 

SALE,  (that  which  cometh  of  the)  — 
Sale,  thing  sold,  wares,  "vp*?  mimkar. 

Lev.  25.  27  Then  let  him  count  the  years  of  sale  the. 
25.  50  price  of  his  sale  shall  be  according  unto 

Deut  18.    8  that  which  cometh  of  the  sale  of  his  pat. 
SA'-LEM,  chv,  ~2a\7}u  summit. 

The  city  of  Melchizedek  who  met  Abraham ;  supposed 
to  be  Jerusalem;  rather  the  same  as  the  following 
(Salim). 

Gen.  14.  18  Melchizedek  king  of  S.  brought  forth  br. 

Psa.  76.    2  In  S.  also  in  his  tabernacle,  aud  his  dwel. 

Heb.   7.    1  Melchisedec,  king  of  S. . .  met  Abraham  re. 
7.   2  and  after  that  also  King  of  S.,  which  is 

SA'-LIBl,  2aAei/i,  (from  Heb.  dS^)  comp>leteness. 
A  city  near  M11011,  on  the  W.  of  Jordan;  now  called 
Skalem. 

John  3.  23  John  also  was  baptizing  in  JEnon,  near.  .S. 

SAL'-LAI,  "^p  rejecter. 

1.  A  leading  Benjamite,  son  of  Meshullam,  dwelling  in 
Jerusalem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    8  after  him  Gabbai,  nine  hundred  twenty 

2.  A  priest  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel ;  also  called 
Sallu  in  12.  7.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.  20  Of  S.,  Kallai ;  of  Amok,  Eber 
SAL'-LTT,  iVp  contempt,  rejection.     See  Sallai. 
A  priest  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.    7  S.,  Amok,  Hilkiah,  Jedaiah  These  (were) 
SAL'-LTJ,  nVd,  ni  p  weighed,  dear. 
A  Benjamite,  grandson  of  Joed,  dwelling  in  Jerusalem 
after  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch    0     7  S.  the  son  of  Meshullam,  the  son  of  Hod. 

Neh."  11.    7  S.  the  s  jn  of  Meshullam,  the  son  of  Joed 
SAL'-MA,  NE&i?  strength,  firmness. 
A  son  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur,  and  father  of  Bethlehem. 
B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  2.  51  S.  the  father  of  Beth-lehem,  Hareph 

2.  54  The  sons  of  S. ;  Beth-lehem,  and  the  *et. 
SAL'-MON,  SAL' -MA,  fto^P,  n?fe\  Nate  *2a\p.uv. 
The  father  of  Boaz  husband  of  Ruth,  aud  grandfather 
of  Jesse  father  of  David.     B.C.  1380. 

Ruth  4.  20  A.  begat  Nahshon,  and  Nahshon  begat  S. 
,4.  21  And  S.  begat  Boaz,  and  Boaz  begat  Obed 


SALMON 


832 


SAMARIA 


i  i'h.  2.  ii  And  Nahshon  begat  ft.,  and  S.  begat  Boaz 
Matt.  i.    4  begat  Naasson  ;  and  Naasson  begat  S. 

i.    5  And  S.  begat  liooz  of  Rachab 
Luke  3.  32  Booz,  which  was  (the  son)  uf  ft.,  which  was 

SAL'-MON,  jid^s  terrace,  ascent.     See  Zalmon. 
A  mount  in  Samaria,  near  Shechem. 

Psa.  63.  14  scattered,  .it  was  (white)  as  snow  in  S 

SAL-MO'-NE,   XaKuwvn. 

A  promontory  at  the  E.  of  Crete. 

Acts  27.    7  we  sailed  under  Crete,  over  against  S 

SA-LO'-ME,  SaAw^Tj. 

One  of  the  women  who  followed  Jesus  from  Galilee  and 

who  stood  afar  off  witnessing  his  crucifixion. 

Mark  1 5.  40  the  mother  of  James  the  less  and  of  J.  &S. 
id.    1  and  Mary  the  (mother)  of  James,  and  ft. 

SALT,  (land,  pit)  — 
l.Sdt,  rv?2  melach. 

Gen,  1  (.'  3  Tale  of  ftiddim,  which  is  the  salt  sea 

19.  26  looked  back,  .and  she  became  apillarof  s. 
Lev.  2.  13  every  oblation . .  shalt  thou  season  with  s. 
2.  13  neither  shalt  thou  suffer  the  salt  of  the 
2.  13  with  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer  s. 
Niim  i3.  19  it  (is)  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  before 
34.  3  shall  be  the  outmost  coast  of  the  salt  sea 
34.  12  the  goings  out  of  it  shall  beat  the  salt  sea 
Dent  3.  17  the  salt  sea,  under  Ashdoth-pisgah  eastw. 


29. 

Josh. 
1 

*5- 
15- 
iS. 

Judg.  9. 

aSa.    8 

2  Ki. 


23  salt,  (and)  burning,  (that)  it  is  not  sown 

16  toward  the  sea  of  the  plain,  (even)  the  s. 

.   3  sea  of  the  plain,  (even)  the  salt  sea  on  the 

2  border  was  from  the  shore  of  the  salt  sea 

5  east  border  (was)  the  salt  sea,  (even)  unto 

.  19  north  bay  of  the  salt  sea  at  the  south  end 

.  45  beat  down  the  city,  and  sowed  it  with  salt 

13  smiting  of  the  Syrians  in  the  valley  of  ft. 

20  Bring  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt  the. 

21  cast  the  salt  in  there,  and  said.  Thus  saith 
14.    7  He  slew  of  Edom  in  the  valley  of  Salt 

i  Ch.  1 8.  12  slew  of  the  Edomites  in  the  valley  of  Salt 
2  Ch.  13.    5  to  him  and  to  his  sons  by  a  covenant  of  s.? 

25.  11  went  to  the  valley  of  Salt,  and  smote  of 
Job     6.    6  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  without  sa.? 
Psa.        60  title,  smnte  of  Edom  in  the  valley  of  Salt 
Eze.  43.  24  priests  shall  cast  salt  upon  them,  and  they 

47.  ti  not  be  healed  ;  they  shall  be  given  to  salt 
Zeph.  2.    9  salt  pits,  and  a  perpetual  desolation :  the 

2.  Salt,  rhv  melach. 

Ezra  6.  9  they  have  need  of.  .wheat,  salt,  wine,  and 
7.  22  and  salt  without  prescribing  (how  much) 
2. Salt  place,  barren  land,  nn'rp  melechah. 

Jer.  17.  6  wilderness,  (in)  a  salt  land  and  not  inha. 
i.Salt,  a\as  halas. 

Matt.  5.  13  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth :  but  if  the  s. 

Mai'k  9.  50  Salt  (is)  good  ;  but  if  the  salt  have  lost  his 
9.  50  Have  salt  in  yourselves,  and  have  peace 

Luke  14.  34  Salt  (is)  good :  but  if  the  salt  have  lost  his 

Col.    4.   6  seasoned  with  salt,  that  ye  many  know  how 

f>. Salt,  aAs  hols. 

Mark  9.  49  [and  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  s] 
6. Salt,  brackish,  o.\vk6s  halukos. 

Jas.     3,  12  no  fountainbothyieldsaltwaterandfresh 
SALTED,  to  be  — 
I.To  be  salted,  rubbed  with  salt,  n\lp  malach,  6. 

Eze.  16.  4  thou  wast  not  salted  at  all,  nor  swaddled 
2.To  be  salted,  a.\l^ofj.ai  halizomai. 

Matt.  5.  13  lost  his  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  be  sa. 

Mark  9.  49  For  every  one  shallbe  salted  with  fire,  and 
9.  49  every  sacrifice  [shall  be  salted  with  salt] 
SALTNESS,  to  lose — 
To  become  saltlcss,  yivo/xai  ava\os  ginomai  analos. 

Mark  9.  50  lost  his  saltness,  wherewith  will  ye  seas. 
SA'-LTJ,  n  ^D  miserable,  unfortunate. 
A  Simeonite,  father  of  Zimri  who  was  slain  by  Phinehas 
son  of  Aaron.     B.C.  1492. 

Num  25.  14  name  of  the  Israelite . .  Zimri,  the  son  of  S. 
SALUTATION  — 
A  salutation,  embrace,  aairaa^s  aspasmos. 

Marki2.  38  and  (love)  salutations  in  the  market  pla. 

Luke  1.  29  cast  in  her  mind  what  manner  of  saluta. 
1.  41  -when  Elizabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  M. 
1.  44  as  soon  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  so. 

1  Co.  16.  21  salutation  of  (me)  Paul  with  mine  own  ha. 
Col.     4. 18  The  salutation  by  the  hand  of  me  Paul 

2  Th.  3.  17  The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  ha. 
SALUTE,  to  — 

X.To  bless,  7J13  baraJc. 

1  Sa.  13.  10  to  meet  him,  that  he  might  salute  him 

2.  To  bless,  declare  blessed,  T5?  barak,  3. 

1  Sa.  25.  14  David  sent  messengers,  .to  salute  our  ma. 

2  Ki.  4.  29  salute  him  not ;  and  if  any  salute  thee 

10. 15  he  saluted  him,  and  said  to  him,  Is  thine 

3.  To  ask  the  peace,  enquire  after,  n\hy  *>%&  skoal  sh. 

JudgiS.  15  came  to.,  the  house  of  Micah,  and  saluted 

x  Sa.  :o.   4  they  will  salute  thee,  and  give  thee  two 

17.  22  ran  into  the  army,  and  came  and  saluted 

30.  21  David  came  near  to  the  people,  be  saluted 

2  Sa.   8.  10  to  salute  him,  and  to  bless  him,  because 

4.  Peace,  completeness,  D'i1?;1  shalom. 

2  Ki.  xo.  13  we  go  down  to  salute  the  children  of  the 
5. To  salute,  embraee,  draw  together,  a(nrd(ouai. 
Matt.  5.  47  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do 


Mattro.  12  And  when  ye  come  into  an  houso,  salute 
Mark  9.  15  were,  .amazed,  aud  running  to  (him)  sal. 

15.  18  began  to  salute  him,  Hail,  King  of  the  J. 
Luke  1.  40  And  entered  into  the  house,  .and  saluted 

10.   4  Carry  neither  purse,  norscrip.  .and  salute 
Acts  18.22  when  he  had.  .saluted  the  church,  he  went 
21.    7  we  came  to  Ptolemais,  and  saluted  the 
21.  19  when  he  had  saluted  them,  he  declared 
25.  13  Eernice  came  unto  Cesarea  to  salute  Fes. 
Rom  16.    5  Salute  my  well  beloved  Epenetus,  who 

16.  7  Salute  Andronicusand  Junia,  my  kinsmen 
16.  9  Salute  Urbane  our  helper  in  Christ,  and 
16.  10  Salute  Apelles  approved  in  Christ.  Salute 
16.  11  Salute  Herodion  my  kinsman.  Greet  them 
16. 12  Salute Tryphena  and  Tryphosa,  wholabo. 
16.  12  [Salute  the  beloved  Persis,  which  laboured] 
16.  13  Salute  Rufus  chosen  in  the  Lord,  and  his 
16.  14  Salute  Asyncritus,  Phlegon,  Hernias,  Pa. 
16.  15  Salute  Philologus,  and  Julia,  Nereus,  and 
16.  16  Salute  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss 

16.  16  The  churches  of  Christ  salute  you 
16.  21  Jason,  and  Sosipater,  my  kinsmen,  salute 
16.  22  I  Tertius,  who  wrote  (this)  epistle  salute 
16. 23  mine  host,  and  of  the  whole  church  sal. 
16.  23  the  chamberlain  of  the  city  saluteth  you 

1  Co.  16.  19  salute  yon.     Aquila  and  Priscilla  salute 

2  Co.  13.  13  All  the  saints  salute  you 

Phil.  4.  21  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus.  The 
4.  22  the  saints  salute  you,  chiefly  they  that  are 

Col.  4.  10  my  fellow  prisoner  saluteth  you,  and  M. 
4.  12  a  servant  of  Christ,  saluteth  you,  always 
4.  15  Salute  the  brethren  which  are  in  Laodicea 

2  Ti.  4.  19  Salute  Prisca  and  Aquilia,  and  the  house. 
Titus  3.  15  All  that  are  with  me  salute  thee.  Greet 
Phm  23  There  salute  thee  Epaphras,  my  fellow  p. 
Heb.  13.  24  Salute  all  them  that  have  the  rule  over 

13.  24  and  all  the  saints.    They  of  Italy  salute 

1  Pe.  5.  13  The  (church  that  is) at  Babylon.. saluteth 

3  John    14  (Our)  friends  salute  thee.  Greet  the  friends 

SALVATION  — 

1. Safely,  ease,  nyxv]  yeshitah. 

Gen.  49.  18  I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  0  Lord 
Exodi4.  13  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,  which  he 

15.    2  he  is  become  my  salvation :  he  (is)  my  G. 
Deut32.  15  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  his  salvation 

1  Sa.   2.    1  because  I  rejoice  in  thy  salvation 

14.  45  who  hath  wrought  this  great  salvation  in 

2  Sa.  22.  51  (He  is)  the  tower  of  salvation  for  his  king 

1  Ch.16.  23  show  forth  from  day  to  day  his  salvation 

2  Ch.20.  1 7  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  with  you 
■lob  13.  16  He  also  (shall  be)  my  salvation  :  for  an  by. 
Psa.    3.    8  Salvation  (belongeth)  unto  the  Lord  :  thy 

9.  14  in  the  gates.  .1  will  rejoice  in  thy  salvation 
*3-    5  my  heart  shall  rejoice  in  thy  salvation 
14.    7  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  (were  come) 

20.  5  "We  will  rejoice  in  thy  salvation,  and  in 

21.  1  in  thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  he  rej. 

21.  5  His  glory  is  great  in  thy  salvation,  honour 
35-  3  say  unto  my  S0lll>  !  (ani)  thy  salvation 
35.  9  my  soul,  .it  shall  rejoice  in  his  salvation 
53.  6  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  (were  come) 
62.  1  upon  God  :  from  him  (cometh)my  salvati. 
62.  2  He  only  (is)  my  rock  and  my  salvation;  he. 
68.  19  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord.  .God  of  our  salva. 
69.29  let  thy  salvation,  OGod,  set  me  up  on  high 
70.  4  let  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  contin. 
74.  12  working  salvation  in  themidstof  the  earth 
?S.  22  Because  they . .  trusted  not  in  his  salvation 

1  0  Lord  God  of  my  salvation.  I  have  cried 
26  my  God,  and  the  rock  of  my  salvation 

6  With  long  life  will  I.  .show  him  my  salv. 

2  show  forth  his  salvation  from  day  to  day 
93.  2  The  Lord  hath  made  known  his  salvation 
98.    3  the  ends  of  the  earth  have  seen  the  salv. 

106.  4  Remember  me.  .0  visit  me  with  thy  salv. 
116.  13  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call 
118. 14  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and.  .my  salv. 
118.  15  The  voice  of  rejoicing  aud  salvation  (is) 

118.  21  thou  hast  heard  me,  and  art.  .my  salvat. 

119.  123  Mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  salvation,  and  for 
119.  T55  Salvation  (is)  far  from  the  wicked  :  for 
119.  166  I  havehopedfor  thy  salvation,  and  done 
119.  174  I  have  longed  for  thy  salvation,  O  Lord 
140.  7  0  God  the  Lord,  the  strength  of  my  salv. 
149.   4  he  will  beautify  the  meek  with  salvation 

Isa.    12.  2  God  (is)  my  salvation;  I  will  trust,  and  nut 

12.  2  the  Lord  Jehovah,  .is  become  my  salva. 

T2.  3  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvat 

25.  9  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvat 

26.  1  salvation  will  (God)  appoint  (for)  walls 
33.  2  our  salvation  also  in  the  time  of  trouble 

6  of  thy  times,  (and)  strength  of  salvation 
6  thou  mayest  be  my  salvatiomintothe  end 

5  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I  helped  thee 

6  my  salvation  shall  be  for  ever,  and  my 
8  my  salvation  from  generation  to  generat. 

7  that  publisheth  salvation  ;  that  saith  unto 

52. 10  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvat. 
56.    1  for  my  salvation  (is)  near  to  come,  and  my 

59. 1 1  we  look . .  for  salvation,  (but)  it  is  far  off 

59.  17  and  an  helmet  of  salvation  upon  his  head 

60.  18  thou  shalt  call  thy  walls  salvation,  and 
62.    1  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  (that)  bur. 

Jon.  2.  9  I  will  sacrifice.  .Salvation  (is)of  the  Lord 
Hab.   3.    8  thine  horses,  (and)  thy  chariots  of  salva 

2tSafety,  ease,  Jfth,  j#;  yesha.  vhe  I 

2  Sa.  22.   3  the  horn  of  my  salvation,  my  hLjr^ 

22.  36  also  given  me  the  shield  of  thy 

22.  47  and  exalted  be . .  the  rock  of  my  igh  tower 

23.  5  (this  is)  all  mv  salvation,  and  «v  salvation 

salvation 
11  my  des. 


88. 


91. 

96. 


33- 
49- 
49. 
5'- 
5i. 
5= 


1  Ch.16.  35  Save  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and  gat. 
Psa.  18.    2  the  horn  of  my  salvation,  (and)  my  high 

18.  35  also  given  me  the  shield  of  thy  salvation 
18.  46  and  let  the  God  of  my  salvation  be  exalt. 

24.  5  righteousness  from  the  God  of  his  salvat. 

25.  5  thou  (art)  the  God  of  my  salvation  ;  on 
27.    1  The  Lord  (is)  my  light  and  my  salvation 
27.    9  neither  forsake  me,  O  God  of  my  salvation 

50.  23  to  him.  .will  I  show  the  salvation  of  God 

51.  12  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation 
62.  7  In  God  (is)  my  salvation  and  my  glory:  th. 
65.    5  0  God  of  our  salvation  ;  (who  art)  the  co. 

69. 13  hear  me,  in  the  truth  of  thy  salvation 
79,    9  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation  for  the 
85.   4  Turn  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and  ca 
85.   7  Show  us  thy  mercy,  .grant  us  thy  salvat 
S5.    9  his  salvation  (is)  nigh  them  that  fear  him 
95.    1  a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  salvation 

132.  16  I  willalso  clothe  herpriests  with  salvation 
Isa.  17.  10  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of  thy  salva 

45.  8  and  let  them  bring  forth  salvation,  and 
51.    5  my  salvation  is  gone  forth,  and  mine  ar 

61.  10  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation 

62.  11  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh;  behold,  his 
Mic     7.    7  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my  salvation 
flab.   3.  13  salvation  of  thy  people,  (even)  for  salvat. 

3.  18  Yet.  .1  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvati. 

S.Safely,  deliverances,  niy^iD  moshaoth. 

Psa.  68.  20  our  God  (is)  the  God  of  salvation;  and  un 

4. Safety,  ease,  njntyi?  teshuch. 

x  Sa.  11. 13  the  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation  in  Isr. 

19.  5  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  salvation  for 

2  Ch.  6.  41  let  thy  priests,  .be  clothed  withsalvation 
Psa.  37.  39  the  salvation  of  the  righteous(is)of  the  L 

38.  22  Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord  my  salv 
40.  10  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvat. 
40.  16  let  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  contin. 

51. 14  Deliver  me..O  God,  thou  God  of  my  sal. 

71. 15  thy  righteousness  (and)  thy  salvation  all 
119.  41  Let  thy  mercies  come,  .(even)  thy  salvat. 
119.  81  My  soul  fainteth  for  thy  salvation  ;  (but) 
144. 10  (It  is  he)  that  giveth  salvation  unto  kings 

Isa.  45.  17  be  saved,  .with  an  everlasting  salvation 

46.  13  it  shall  not  be  far  off,  and  my  salvation 
46.  13  I  will  place  salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel 

Jer.     3.  23  in  the  Lord  our  God  (is)  the  salvation  of 
Lam.  3.  26  and  quietly  wait  for  the  salvation  of  the 

5.  Safety,  somidness,  acornpia  sGteria. 

Luke  1.  69  hath  raised  up  an  horn  of  salvation  for  us 
1.  77  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  nnto  his 
ig<    9  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house 

John  4.  22  we  know  what  we  worship  :  for  salvation 

Acts  4. 12  [Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  otherl 
13.  26  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent 
13.  47  thou  shouldest  be  for  salvation  nnto  the 
16.  17  which  show  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation 

Pom.  1.  16  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to 

10.  10  with  the  mouth  confession  is.  .unto  salv. 

11.  11  through  their  fall  salvation  (iscome)unto 
13.  11  now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we 

2  Co.  1.  6,  6  (itis)foryourconsolationandsalvation 
6.    2  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I  succoured 

6.  2  now  (is)  the  accepted  time,  .the  day  ofsa. 

7.  10  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salvation 
Eph.  1.  13  heard,  .the  gospel  of  your  salvation  :  in 
Phil.    1. 19  I  know  that*  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvat. 

1.  28  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God 
2. 12  work  out  yourown  salvation  with  fearand 

1  Th.  5.    8  and  for  an  helmet  the  hope  of  salvation 

5.    9  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 

2  Th.  2. 13  chosen  you  to  salvation  through  sanctifiV. 
2  Ti    2.  10  that  they  may  also  obtain  the  salvation 

"    3. 15  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation  through 
Heb.  1.  14  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation 

2.  3  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation 

2.  10  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation  perf. 

5.  9  he  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation 

6.  9  things  that  accompany  salvation,  though 
9.  28  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvat. 

1  Pe.  1.  s  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be 
1.  9  end  of  your  faith,  (even)  the  salvation  of 
1.  10  Of  which  salvation  the  prophets  have  en. 

?  Te.    3.  15  the  long  suffering  of  our  Lord  (is)  salvat. 

Jude         3  write  unto  you  of  the  common  salvation 

Rev.    7.  10  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon 

12.  10  Now  is  come  salvation,  and  strength,  and 
19.    1  Salvation,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and  po. 

§. Safely,  soundness,  awTyptov  soterion. 

Luke  2.  30  For  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation 

3.  6  And  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  (bit 
Acts  28.  28  that  the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  unto  the 
Eph.    6.  17  take  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the  sw. 

SALVATION,  to  bring  or  have  — 

1. To  be  saved,  have  safety,  y&iyasha,  2. 

Zech.  9.    9  he  (is)  just,  and  having  salvation ;  lowly 
2  To  give  or  cause  safety,  Jfip;  yasha,  5. 

Isa.   59.  16  therefore  his  arm  brought  salvation  unto 

63.  5  therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  salvation 
3.  Saving,  sowid.  ****■£    -*>  e/rj'/r  ■.'.-,<?. 

^^c^^at^e^salvatioutea. 

JSA-MA'-RIA,  fr&  Z"t*M'«  "Capita!  of  the  ten 
1.  A  Ml  an>l  city  »\,^Sue3  N  of/enLlem ;  built 
tribes  of  I«ae  •fcrty  j^S n.,  Ie3  ^  m^j.  ita  m- 

about  B.C.  935  bj  2Sv5£fto  \ssyria  byShalmanezer. 
habitantswere  «■*««« *$&  „>■  person,  from 

BC.   720,  ami  then   i»»^ A5  „„j  smharvann. 

Babylon,  Cuthah,  Aya 


SBsraws-**'- 


SAMARITANS 


833 


SAMSON 


brought  their  gods  with  them.     It  is  six  miles  N.W.  of 

Shechem,  and  nineteen  miles  E.  of  the  Mediterranean; 

the  small  village  of  Sebustieh,   (a  corruption  of  the 

Greek  Sebaste,  which  Herod  called  it  in  honour  of  Cffisar 

Augustus,)  now  occupies  part  of  the  ancient  site. 

i  Ki.  16.  24  And  they  bought  the  hill  S.  of  Shemer 

16.  24  called  the  name  of  the  city  which  he.  .S. 

16.  28  So  Omri  slept,  .and  was  buried  in  S.,  aud 

16.  29  Ahab  the  son  of  Omri  reigned  over,  .in  S. 

16.  32  house  of  Baal,  which  he  had  built  in  S. 
18.    2  And  (there  was)  a  sore  famine  in  S. 

20.  1  and  he  went  up  and  besieged  S.,  aud  wa. 
20. 10  if  the  dust  of  S.  shall  suffice  forhandfuls 
20. 17  told  him.  .There  are  men  come  out  of  S. 
20.  34  shalt  make  streets . .  my  father  made  in  S. 

20.  43  And  the  king  of  Israel,  .came  te  S. 

21.  18  Arise,  go.,  to  meet  Ahab.  .which  (is)  in  S 
22. 10  place  in  the  entrance  of  the  gate  of  S. 

22.  37  brought  to  S. ;  and .  .buried  the  king  in  S. 
22.  38  (one)  washed  the  chariot  in  the  pool  of  S. 
22.  51  Ahaziah.  .began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  S. 

a  Ki.   1.2  a  lattice  in  his . .  chamber  that  (was)  in  S. 

2.  25  Carmel;  and.. thence  he  returned  to  S. 

3.  1  began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  S.  the  eight. 
3.    6  king  Jehoram  went  out  of  Samaria  the  s. 

5.  3  my  lord  (were)  with  the  prophet,  .in  S. ! 
■6.  19  man  whom  ye  seek.  But  he  led  them  to  S. 

6.  20  came  to  pass,  when  they  were  come  into  S. 
6.  20  and,  behold,  (they  were)  in  the  midst  of  S. 

6.  24  that  Ben-hadad. . wentup,  and  besiegedS. 
■6.  25  And  there  was  a  great  famine  in  S. :  and 

7.  1,  18  measures  of  barley,  .in  the  gate  of  S. 
to.   1  Ahab  had  seventy  sons  in  S.  And  Jehu 
10.    1  sent  to  S.,  unto  the  rulers  of  Jezreel 
10.  12  he  arose  and  departed,  and  came  to  S. 
10. 17  when  he  came  to  S.,  he  slew  all  that  rem. 
10. 17  unto  Ahab  in  S.,  till  he  had  destroyed  him 
10.  35  Jehu  slept . .  and  they  buried  him  in  S.  A. 
10.  36  time  that  Jehu  reigned  over  Israel  in  S. 
13.    1  Jehoahaz . .  began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  S. 
13.    6  and  there  remained  the  grove  also  in  S. 
13.    9  Jehoahaz  slept . .  and  they  buried  him  in  S. 
13.  10  began  Jehoash.  .to  reign  over  Israel  in  S. 

13.  13  Joash  was  buried  in  S.  with  the  kings  of 

14.  14  he  took  all  the  gold,  .and  returned  to  S. 
14.  16  Jehoash.  .was  buried  in  S.  with  the  kings 

14.  23  Joash  king  of  Israel  began  to  reign  in  S. 

15.  8  did  Zachariah . .  reign  over  Israel  in  S.  six 
15.  13  Shallum.  .lie  reigned  a  full  month  in  S. 
15.  14  ForMenahem  the  son  of  Gadi.  .came  to  S. 
15.  14  and  smote  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  in  S. 
25. 17  Menahem.  .(reigned)  ten  years  in  S. 

15.  23,  27  Pekahiah . .  began  to  reign  over  Is.  in  S. 

15.  25  conspired  against,  .and  smote  him  in  S. 

17.  1  began  Hoshea..to  reign  in  S.  over  Israel 
17.  5  Then  the  king  of  Assyria,  .went  up  to  S. 
17.    6  the  king  of  Assyria  took  S.,  and  carried 

17.  28  one  of  the  priests,  .from  S.,  came  and  dw. 

18.  9  Shalmaneser.  .of  Assyria  came. .against  S, 
18.  10  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah.  .S.  was  ta. 
18.  34  have  they  delivered  S.  out  of  mine  hand? 

21.  13  I.. stretch  over  Jerusalem  the  line  of  S. 
2  Ch.iS.    2  after,  .years  he  went  down  to  Ahab  to  S. 

18.    9  place  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  S. 

22.  9  and  they  caught  him,  for  he  was  hid  in  S , 
25.  13  the  cities  of  J.,  from  S  even  unto  Beth. 
25.  24  (he  took)  all  the  gold . .  and  returned  to  S. 
28.    8  children  of  Israel . .  brought  the  spoil  to  S. 
28.   9  went  out  before  the  host  that  came  to  S. 
28.  15  brought  them,  .then  they  returned  to  S. 

7.  9  head  of  Ephraim  (is)  S. .  .the  head  of  S. 

8.  4  the  riches,  .of  S.  shall  be  taken  away  be. 

9.  9  the  people  shall  know,  .inhabitants  of  S. 
10.    9  (is)  not  Hamath  as  Arpad '?  (is)  not  S.  as 
10.  10  whose  graven  images  did  excel  them  of . .  S. 
10.  11  Shall  I  not,  as  I  have  done  unto  S  and  her 
41.    5  from  Shiloh,  and  from  S... fourscore  men 

16.  46  thine  eldersister(is)S.,sheandherdaugh 
16.  51  Neither  hath  S.  committed  half  of  thy  s. 
16. 53  and  the  captivity  of  S.  aud  her  daughters 

16.  55  S.  and  her  daughters  shall  return  to  their 

23.  4  S.  (is)  Aholah,  and  Jerusalem  Aholibah 
?3-  33  Thou  shalt  be  filled,  .with  the  cup  of .  .S. 

Hos.  13.  16  S.  shall  become  desolate  ;  for  she  hath  re. 
Amos  3.  12  the  children  of  Israel,  .that  dwell  in  S.  in 
Mic.    x.    1  which  he  saw  concerningS.  and  Jerusalem 

1.    5  the  transgression  of  Jacob?  (isit)  not  S.?j 

1.  6  Therefore  I  will  make  S.  as  an  heap  of  the 
Acts    8.    s  Then  Philip  went  down  to  the  city  of  S. 

8.    9  a  certain  man.. bewitched  the  people  of  S. 

8. 14  the  apostles,  .heard  that  S.  had  received 

2. Their  whole  territory,  but  in  New  Testament  times 
only  the  land  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  W.  of  the  Jor- 
dan, having  Galilee  on  the  N.,  the  Jordan  on  the  E., 
Judea  on  the  S.,  and  the  Mediterranean  on  the  W. 

1  Ki.13.  32  high  places  which  (are)  in  the  cities  of  S. 

21.    1  hard  by  the  palace  of  Ahab  king  in  S. 

2  KJ.  1.   3  to  meet  the  messengers  of  the  king  of  S 

1 7.  24  king  of  Assyria . .  placed . .  in  the  cities  of  S. 
17. 24  they  possessed  S.,  and  dwelt  in  the  cities 
17.  26  thou  hast  removed,  and  placed  in.  .S. 
23.  18  bones  of  the  prophet  that  came  out  of  S. 
23. 19  high  places  that  (were)  in  the  cities  of  S. 

Ezra   4.  10  whom . .  Asnapper .  1  set  in  the  cities  of  S. 
4.  17  rest  of  their  companions  that  dwell  in  S. 
Neh.  4.    2  he  spake  before . .  the  army  of  S. ,  and  said 
Isa.  36.  19  have  they  delivered  S.  out  of  my  hand 
Jer.  23.  13  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  prophets  of  S. 

31.   5  yet  plant  vines  upon  the  mountains  of  S. 

Hos.   7.    1  would  have  healed,  .the  wickedness  of  S. 

8.    5  Thy  calf,  0  S.,  hath  cast,  .off ;  mine  ang. 

105 


Isa. 


Jer. 
Eze. 


Hus.  8.   6  the  calf  of  S.  shall  be  broken  in  pieces 
10.    5  S.  shall  fear  because  of  the  calves  of  Bet. 
10.    7  S.,  her  king  is  cut  off  as  the  foam  upon 
Amos  3.    9  Assem. .  .selves  upon  the  mountains  of  S. 

4.    1  ye  kine . .  that  (are)  iu  the  mountain  of  S. 

6.    1  them  (that),  .trust  in  the  mountain  of  S. 

8.  14  They  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  S.,  and  say 
Obad.      19  and  they  shall  possess,  .the  fields  of  5. 
Lukei7.  11  passed  through  the  midst  of  S.  and  Gali. 
John  4.    4  And  he  must  needs  go  through  S. 

4.    5  Then  cometh  he  to  a  city  of  S.,  which  is 

4.   7  There  cometh  a  woman  of  S.  to  draw  wa. 

4.    9  Then  saith  the  woman  of  S.  unto  him 

4.   9  thuu..askest  drink  of  me.,  a  woman  of  S.? 
Acts    1.    8  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me.  .in  S. 

8.  1  were,  all  scattered  abroad  throughout . .  S. 

9.  31  had  the  churches  rest  throughout.  .S. 
15.   3  they  passed  through  Phenice  and  S.,decl. 

SA-MA-RI-TANS,  D^'lDtf  Sa/iapeiT^y. 
The  inhabitants  of  what  was  afterwards  the  central  pro- 
vince of  Palestine,  or  Ephraim  and  ManassehW.  of  the 
Jordan;  they  were  of  heathen  origin  and  tendencies, 
and  would  hold  no  religious  fellowship  with  the  Jews,  yet 
many  of  them  gladly  embraced  the  Gospel.  At  present 
the  name  Samaritan  is  restricted  to  about  200  persons 
residing  at  Nablous,  the  ancient  Shechem,  who  still 
retain  some  very  ancient  MSS.  of  the  Pentateuch  iu 
Samaritan  churches,  and  rigidly  observe  the  passover 
on  a  sacred  spot  on  Mount  Gerizim. 

2  Ki.17.  29  of  the  high  places  which  the  S.  had  made 
Mattio.    5  into  (any)  city  of  the  S.  enter  ye  not 
Luke  9.  52  went,  and  entered  into  a  village  of  the  S. 
10.  33  But  a  certain  S. .  .compassion  (on  him) 

17.  16  giving  him  thanks:  and  he  was  a  S. 
John  4.    9  for  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  S. 

4.  39  many  of  the  S.  of .  .city believed  on  him 
4.  40  So  when  the  S.  were  come  unto  him 
8.  48  Say  we  not  well  that  thou  art  a  S.,  and 

Acts   8.  25  preached  the  gospel  in.  .villages  of  the  S. 
SAME,  (the  or  that,  this  or  these)  — 
1. Midst,  13  gar. 

Ezra    4.  15  moved  sedition  within  the  same  of  old 
2.  This,  tr  dak. 

Ezra    5. 16  Then  came  the  same  Sheshbazzar,  (and) 
3. This,  \&i  dikken. 

Dan.    7.  21  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints 
4.  Be,  he  himself t  ton  hit. 

Gen.  19.  37  the  same  (is)  the  father  of  the  Moabites 
5.SJic,  it,  K'n,  N'rtn  hahi,  hi. 

Gen.  14.    8  the  king  of  Bela,  the  same  (is)  Zoar  ;  and 

Lev.  23.  30  the  same  soul  will  I  destroy  from  among 

2  Ki.   8.  22  Then  Libnah  revolted  at  the  same  time 

6.  They,  on,  n'pri  hemmah,  hem. 

Gen.    6.    4  the  same  (became)  mighty  men  which  (\v.) 
Eze.  10. 16  the  same  wheels  also  turned  not  from  be. 

10.  22  likeness  of  their  faces  (was)  the  same  fa. 

7.  This,  nirr,  n;  zeh,  hazzeh, 

Gen.    7.  1 1  the  same  day  were  all  the  fountains  of  the 
Psa.  75.    8  poureth  out  of  the  same :  but  the  dregs 

S.This  {Jbn.),  rmi  zoth. 

Eze.  2i.  26  this  (shall)  not  (be)  the  same:  exalt  (him 
9.  Bone,  substance,  D>'J.|  etsem. 

Lev.  23.  28  ye  shall  do  no  work  iu  that  same  day ;  for 
23.  29  shall  not  be  afflicted  in  that  same  day,  he 

23.  30  that  doeth  any  work  in  that  same  day,  the 
Eze.  24.   2  the  name  of  the  day,  (even)  of  this  same 

24.  2  set  himself  against  Jerusalem  this  same 
10. /fa,  he  himself,  it,  it  itself,  avros  autos. 

Matt  25.  16  went  aud  traded  with  the  same,  aud  made 

Luke  7.  21  in  the  same  hour  he  cured  many  of  (their) 

10.  10  go.  .out  into  the  streets  of  the  same,  and 

Rom.  9. 17  Even  for  this  same  purpose  have  I  raised 

12.  16  of  the  same  mind  one  toward  another 

1  Co.    1   10  the  same  thing,  .the  same  mind,  .the  same 

2  Co.  2.    3  I  wrote  this  same  unto  you,  lest,  when  I 
Phil.   4.    2  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  L. 

1  Pe.  4.    1  arm  yourselves  likewise  with  the  same 

11. Tie,  she,  it,  that  very,  iKslvos  eheinos. 

Mattio.  19  for  it  shall  be  given  you  in  [that  same] 

13.  1  The  same  day  went  Jesus  outof  the  house 

15.  22  woman  of  Canaan  came  out  of  the  same 

18.  1  the  same  time  came  the  disciples  unto  J. 
18.  28  the  [same]  servant  went  out,  and  found 
22.  23  The  same  day  came  to  him  the  Sadducees 
26.  55  In  that  same  hour  said  Jesus  to  the  mul. 

Mark  4.  35  the  same  day,  when  the  even  was  come 
John  1.  33  same  said  unto  me,  Upon  whom  thou  shalt 

4.  53  father  knew  that  (it  was)  at  the  same  ho. 

5.  9  and  on  the  same  day  was  the  sabbath 

5. 11  the  same  said  unto  me,  Take  up  thy  bed 

10.  1  climbeth  up  some  other  way,  the  same  is 

11.  49  being  the  high  priest  that  same  year,  said 

12.  48  the  same  shall  judge  him  the  last  day 
18. 13  which  was  the  high  priest  that  same  year 
20.  19  Then  the  same  day  at  evening,  being  the 

Acts   2.  41  same  day  there  were  added  (unto  them) 

12.  6  the  same  night  Peter  was  sleeping  befew. 

16.  33  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  and 
ig.  23  the  same  time  there  arose  no  small  stir 
28.    7  In  the  same  quarters  were  possessions  of 

2  Co.  7.    8  I  perceive  that  the  same  epistle,  Re.  n.  13, 
12. And,  even,  ko.1  kai,  Gal.  2.  S. 

Id. This,  that,  ovtos  houtos. 

Matt.  5.  19  the  same  shall  be  called  great  in  the  king. 

13.  20  the  same  is  he  that  heareth  the  word,  and 


Matt  18.   4  the  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of 
21.42  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  earner 
24.  13  he  that  shall  endure,  .the  same  shall  be 
26.  23  He  that  dippeth.  .the  same  shall  betray 

Mark  3.  35  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  my  sister,  and 

8.  35  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life,  .[the  same] 

13.  13  he  that  shall  endure,  .the  same  shall  be 
Luke  2.  25  the  same  man  (was)  just  and  devout,  wa. 

9.  24  whosoever  will  lose  his  life,  .the  samesh. 
9.  48  least  among  you  all,  the  same  shall  be  gr. 

16.    1  the  same  was  accused  unto  him  that  he 

20.  17  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  cor.? 

23.  51  The  same  had  not  consented  to  the  cou, 
Juhn  1.  2  The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God 
1.  7  The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear  wit. 
1.  33  [the  same]  is  he  which  baptizeth  with  the 
3.  2  The  same  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  sa. 
3.  26  the  same  baptizeth,  and  all  (men)  come 
7.  18  the  same  is  true,  and  no  unrighteousness 

15.   5  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit ;  for 
Acts    1.  11  thissame  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from 
7.  19  The  same  dealt  subtilely  with  our  kindred 

14.  9  The  same  heard  Paul  speak :  who  stedfa. 

1  Co.  8.    3  But  if  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  kn. 

2  Co.  8.  19  administered  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  [s.] 
Eph.  6.  8  thesameshall  hereceive  of  the  Lord,  wh. 
Jag.  3.  2  thesame(is)  aperfectman,(and)ablealso 
1  Pe.  2.  7  the  same  is  made  the  head  of  the  corner 
Rev.    3.    5  He  that  overcometh,  [the  same]  shall  be 

14.  These,  those,  ovrot  houtoi. 

Luke2o.  47  the  same  shall  receive  greater  damnation 

Johni2.  21  The  same  came  therefore  to  P-  Ac.  24.  20. 

Gal.     3.    7  Know  ye.  .the  same  are  the  children  of 
li>.  This,  avr-n  haute. 

Acts  16. 17  The  same  followed  Paul  and  us,  and  cried 
16.  These,  those,  ravra  tauta. 

1  Co.  9.    8  man?  or  saith  not  the  law  the  same  also? 

2  Ti.    2.    2  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men,  who 

l7.In  this,  ravrjj  taute. 

1  Co.  7.  20  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 

2  Co.  9.    4  should  be  ashamed  in  this  same  confident 

IS  .This,  TavTr}v  tauten. 

Acts  13.  33  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their 
2  Co.  8.    6  would  also  finish  in  you  the  same  grace 
9.    5  that  the  same  might  be  ready,  as  (a  mat. 

19.  This,  Taurus  tautis. 

Acts   8.  35  began  at  the  same  scripture,  and  preached 

20.  This  itself,  avro  rovro  auto  touto. 

Gal.  2.  10  the  same  which  I  also  was  for.  Eph.  6.  8. 
Col.     4.    8  Whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same 

21.  This,  tovtov  touton. 

Acts    7.  35  the  same  did  God  send  (to  be)  a  ruler  and 
22.To  this,  TouTO)  touto. 

Acts  21.    9  the  same  man  had  four  daughters,  virgins 

2  Pe.    2.  19  of  the  same  is  he  brought  in  bondage 
[See  also  Body,  care,  cause,  craft,  day,  hour,  manner, 
mind,  place,  purpose,  quarter,  rank,  springeth,springeth 
up,  that. J 

SAM-GAR  NE'-BO,  ttriapD. 

A  prince  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  who  sat  in  the  middle 
gate  of  Jerusalem.     B.C.  588. 

Jer.  39.   3  Nergal-sharezer,  S.,  Sarsechim,  Rabsaris 

SAM'-LAH,  nb^v  garment. 

The  fifth  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Edom,  of  the  city  of 

Masrekah.     B.C.  1500. 

Gen.  36.  36  and  S.  of  Masrekah  reigned  in  his  stead 
36.  37  And  S.  died,  and  Saul,  .reigned  in  his  st. 
1  Ch.  1.  47  S.  of  Masrekah  reigned  in  his  stead 

1.  48  when  S.  was  dead,  Shaul.. reigned  in  his 
SA'-MOS,  ~2,dfxos. 

An  island  in  the  Mgean  Sea,  nine  miles  off  the  coast  of 
Lydia  in  Asia  Minor,  a  few  miles  S.W.  of  Ephesus,  and 
about  seventy-two  miles  in  circumference  ;  noted  for  its 
worship  of  Juno,  its  valuable  pottery,  and  as  the  birth- 
place of  Pythagoras. 

Acts  20. 15  the  next  (day)  we  arrived  at  S.,  and  tarried 
SA-MO-THRA-CI-A,  2ce,uo0pa/c7?. 

A  small  island  in  the  N.E.  of  the  jEgean  Sea,  above  the 
Hellespont,  and  ten  miles  S.  of  Thrace,  seventeen  miles 
in  circumference ;  once  called  Dardana,  Leucania,  and 
also  Samos  ;  now  called  Samandrachi  or  Samothraki. 

Acts  16. 11  we  came  with  astraight  course  to  S.,aud 
SAM- 'SON,  ptstoEJ  distinguished,  strong,  2a,ui//oV. 
A  Danite,  son  of  Manoah  a  native  of  Zorah ;  he  judged 
the  S.W.  of  Israel  twenty  years ;  his  birth  was  foretold, 
also  his  manner  of  life ;  his  great  strength  enabled  him 
to  kill  a  lion,  thirty  Philistines,  to  break  the  strongest 
bands,  to  smite  1000  men,  to  carry  off  the  gates  of  Gaza, 
and  at  last  to  pull  down  the  house  of  Dagon.  B.C.  1120. 
Judgi3.  24  woman  bare  a  son,  andcalled  hisnameS. 
14.    1  S.  went  down  to  Timnath,  and  saw  a  wo. 
14.    3  S.  said  unto  his  father,  Get  her  for  me 
14.    5  Then  went  S.  down,  and  his  father  and 
14.    7  And  he  went  down . .  and  she  pleased  S. 
14.  to  S.  made  there  a  feast ;  for  so  used  theyo. 
14. 12  S.  said  unto  them,  I  will  now  put  forth  a 
14.  15  they  said  unto  S.'s  wife,  Entice  thy  husb. 
14.  16  S.'s  wife  wept  before  him,  and  said,  Thou 

14.  20  S.'s  wife  was  (given)to  his  companion,  wh. 

15.  1  S.  visited  his  wife  with  a  kid ;  and  he  said 
15.  3  S.  said  concerning  them,  Now  shall  I  be 
15.  4  S.  went  and  caught  three  hundred  foxes 
15.  6  they  answered,  S.,  the  son  in  law  of  the 
15.  7  S.  said  unto  them,  Though  ye  have  done 
15.  10  they  answered,  To  bind  S.  are  we  come  up 


SAMUEL 


834 


SANCTIFY 


Judgi5- 1 1  three  thousand  men  of  Judah .  .said  to  S. 
15. 12  S.  said  unto  them,  Swear  unto  me,  that 

15.  16  S.  said,  With  the  jawbone  of  an  ass,  heaps 

16.  1  Then  went  S.  to  Gaza,  and  saw  there  an 
16.    2  (it  was  told)  the  Gazites,  saying,  S.  is  come 
16.   3  S.  lay  till  midnight,  and  arose  at  midnight 
16.    6  Delilah  said  to  S.,  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  wh. 
16.    7  S.  said  unto  her,  If  they  bind  me  with 
16.    9,  12,  14,  20  The  Philistines  (be)  upon  thee  S. 
16. 10  Delilah  said  unto  S.,  Behold,  thou  hast 
16.  13  Delilah  said  unto  S.,  Hitherto  thou  hast 
16.  23  Our  god  hath  delivered  S.  our  enemy  into 
16.  25  Call  for  S.,  that  he  may  make  us  sport 
16.  25  they  called  for  S.  out  of  the  prison  house 
16.  26  S.  said  unto  the  lad  that  held  him  by  the 
16.  27  and  women,  that  beheld  while  S.  madesp. 
16.  28  S.  called  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  O  Lord 
16.  29  S.  took  hold  of  the  two  middle  pillars  upon 
16.  30  S.  said,  Let  me  die  with  the  Philistines 

Heb.  11.  32  to  tell  of  Gideon. .(of)  S.,  and  (of)  JephUi. 

SA-IffU'-EL,  bx"2j  2a;uou^\  heard  of  God. 
A  Levite,  son  of  Elkanah  and  Hannah,  of  rtamathaim- 
Zophim  in  Mount  Ephraim  ;  the  last  of  the  Judges,  and 
the  first  of  the  Prophets  (after  Moses),  a  class  of  men 
who  continued  till  Malachi  and  John  ;  he  was  asked  of 
God,  and  for  him,  was  devoted  to  him  from  childhood, 
spoken  to  by  him,  persuaded  Israel  to  abandon  idolatry 
at  Mizpeh,  had  two  wicked  sons,  explained  the  usages 
of  kings,  received  Saul,  anointed  him,  asserted  his  in- 
tegrity, reproved  Saul,  leaves  him,  anoints  David,  and 
dies.     B.C.  1171-1060. 

1  Sa.   1.  20  she  hare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  S. 
2.  18  S.  ministered  before  the  Lord,  (being)  a 
2.  21  And  the  child  S.  grew  before  the  Lord 

2.  26  the  child  S.  grew  on,  and  was  in  favour 

3.  1  the  child  S.  ministered  unto  the  Lord  be. 
3.  3  went  out . .  and  S.  was  laid  down  (to  sleep) 
3.  4  the  Lord  called  S. :  and  he  answered.  Here 
3.  6  the  Lord  called  yet  again,  S.  And  S.  arose 
3.  7  Now  S.  did  not  yet  know  the  Lord,  neith. 
3.  8  the  Lord  called  S.  again  the  third  time 
3.  9  Eli  said  unto  S.,  Go,  lie  down,  .so  S.  went 
3. 10  the  Lord  . .  called  as  at  other  times,  S  ,  S. 

3. 10  S.  answered,  Speak  ;  for  thy  servant  hear. 

3. 11  the  Lord  said  to  S-,  Behold,  I  will  do  a 
3.  15  S.  lay  until  the  morning. .  And  S.  feared 
3.  16  Then  Eli  called  S.,  and  said,  S.,  my  son 

3. 18  S.  told  him  every  whit,  and  hid  nothing 

3. 19  S.  grew,  and  the  Lord  w;is  with  him,  and 
3.  20  all  Israel . .  knew  that  S.  (was)  established 

3.  21  the  Lord  revealed  himself  to  S.  in  Shiloh 

4.  1  And  the  word  of  S.  came  to  all  Israel 

7.  3  S.  spake  unto  all  the  house  of  Israel,  say. 
7.  5  S.  said,  Gather  all  Israel  to  Mizpeh,  and 
7.  6  S.  judged  the  children  of  Israel  in  Mizpeh 
7.  8  the  children  of  Israel  said  to  S.,  Cease  not 
7.  9  And  S.  took  a  sucking  lamb,  and  offered 
7.   9  and  S.  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  Israel ;  and 

7.  10  as  S.  was  offering  up  the  burnt  offering 

7. 12  S.  took  a  stone,  and  set  (it)  between  Miz. 

7. 13  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days  of  S. 
7. 15  S.  judged  Israel  all  the  days  of  his  life 

8.  1  And  itcame  to  pass,  wheuS.  was  old,  that 
8.   4  Then  all  the  elders,  .came  to  S.  unto  Ra. 
8    6  the  thing  displeased  S. .  .And  S.  prayed 
8.    7  the  Lord  said  unto  S.,  Hearken  unto  the 
8. 10  S.  told  all  the  words  of  the  Lord  unto 

8.  19  the  people  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  S. 
8.  21  S.  heard  all  the  words  of  the  people,  and 
8.  22  the  Lord  said  to  S.,  Hearkeu  unto  their 

8.  22  S.  said  unto  the  men  of  Israel,  Go  ye  ev. 

9.  14  S.  came  out  against  them,  for  to  go  up  to 
9.  15  the  Lord  had  told  S.  in  his  ear  a  day  be. 
9. 17  when  S.  saw  Saul,  the  Lord  said  unto  him 
9.  18  Saul  drew  near  to  S.  in  the  gate,  audsaid 
9.  19  S.  answered  Saul,  and  said,  I  (am)  the  se. 
9.  22  S.  took  Saul  and  his  servant,  and  brought 
9.  23  S.  said  unto  the  cook,  Bring  the  portion 
9.  24  So  Saul  did  eat  with  S.  that  day ;  v.  25. 

9.  26  S.  called  Saul  to  the  top  of  the  house,  say. 

9.  26  they  went  out  both  of  them,  he  and  S.,  ab. 

9.  27  S.  said  to  Saul,  Bid  the  servant  pass  on 
10.  1  S.  took  a  vial  of  oil,  and  poured  (it)  upon 
10.  9  when  he  had  turned  his  back  to  go  from  S. 
10.  14  we  saw  that,  .no  where,  we  came  to  S. 
10.  15  Tell  me,  I  praythee,  whatS.  saiduntoyou 
10.  16  of  the  matter  of  the  kingdom,  whereof  S. 
10.  17  S.  called  the  people  together  unto  the  L, 
10.  20  S.  had  caused  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  toco. 
10.  24  S.  said  to  all  the  people,  See  ye  him  whom 
10.  25  S.  told  the  people  the  manner  of  the  kin. 

10.  25  S  sent  all  the  people  away,  every  man  to 

11.  7  Who.  cometh  not.  .after  Saul  and  after  S. 
11.  12  the  people  said  unto  S.,  Who  (is)  he  that 

11.  14  Then  said  S.  to  the  people,  Come,  and  let 

12.  1  S.said  unto  all  Israel,  Behold,  lhavchear. 
12.  6  S.  said  uuto  the  people,  (It  is)  the  LoRDth. 
12. 11  the  Loud  sent  Jerubbael.  .and  S.,  and  de 
12. 18  So  S.  called  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  the  Lord 
12. 18  the  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord  and  S 

12.  19  all  the  people  said  unto  S.,  Pray  for  thy  se, 
12.20S.  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  not: -ye  have 

13.  "■  ar.-unluufo  the  sot  time  that  s.  (hadap.) 
13.  8butS.  camenottoGilgal;  and  the  people 
13- 10  it  came  topass,. behold,  8.  came;  and  S. 
13.  11  S.  said,  What  hast  thou  done?  And  Saul 
13.  13  S.  said  to  Saul,  Thou  hast  done  foolishly 
13-  15  S.  arose,  and  gat  him  up  from  Gilgal  unto 
15.  1  s.  also  unto  Saul,  The  Lord  sent  me  to  an. 
15.  10  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Loud  unto  S. 
15-  11  grieved  S. ;  and  he  cried  unto  the  Lord 


1  Sa.  T5.  12  when  S.  rose  early  to  meet  Saul  in  the  mo. 
15. 12  it  was  told  S.,  saying,  SaulcametoCarmel 
15.  13  S.  came  to  Saul  :  and  Saul  said  unto  him 
15.  14  S.said,  What.,  then  this  bleating  of  the  sh. 
15.  16  S.  said  unto  Saul,  Stay,  and  I  will  tell  thee 
15.  17  S.  said,  When  thou  (wast)  little  in  thine 
15.  20  Saul  said  unto  S.,  Yea,  I  have  obeyed  the 
15.  22  S.  said,  Hath  the  Lord  (as  great)  delight 
15.  24  Saul  said  unto  S.,  I  have  siuned  :  for  I  h. 
15.  26  S.  said  unto  Saul,  I  will  not  return  with 
15.  27  as  S.  turned  about  to  go  away,  he  laid 
15.  28  S.  said  unto  him.  The  Lord  hath  rent  the 
15.  31  So  S.  turned  again  after  Saul;  and  Saul 
15. 32  Then  said  S.,  Bring  ye  hither  to  me  Agag 
15.  33  S.  said,  As  thy  sword  hath  made  women 
15.  33  S.  hewed  Agag  in  pieces  before  the  Lord 
15. 34  S.  went  to  Ramah  ;  and  Saul  went  up  to 
15.  35  S.  came  no  more  to  see  Said  until.,  his  de. 

15.  35  nevertheless  S.  mourned  for  Saul :  and 

16.  1  the  LoRDsaid  unto  S.,  How  long  wilt  thou 
16.  2  S.  said,  How  can  I  go?  if  Saul  hear  (it),  he 
16.  4  S.  did  that  which  the  Lord  spake,  and  ca. 
16.  7  the  Lord  said  unto  S.,  Look  not  onhis'co. 
16.  8  Abiuadab,  and  made  him  pass  before  S. 
16.  10  made  seven  of  his  sons  to  pass  before  S. 
16.  10  S.  said  unto  Jesse,  The  Lord  hath  uot  ch. 
16. 11  S.  said  unto  Jesse,  Are  here  all  (thy)chi.? 
16.  11  S.  said  unto  Jesse,  Send  and  fetch  him  :  for 
16.  13  Then  S.  took  the  horn  of  oil,  and  anointed 
16.  13  So  S.  rose  up,  and  went  to  Ramah 

19.  18  So  David  fled,  and  escaped,  and  came  to  S 
19.  18  And  he  and  S.  went  and  dwelt  in  Naioth 
19.  20  and  S.  standing  (as)  appointed  over  them 
19.  22  he  asked  and  said,  Where  (are)  S.  andD.? 
19.  24  he.  .prophesied  before  S.  in  like  manner 

25.  1  S.  died  ;  and  all  the  Israelites  were  gath. 
28.  3  Now  S.  was  dead,  and  all  Israel  had  lain. 
28. 11  Whom.  .And  he  said,  Bring  me  up  S. 

28.  12  when  the  woman  saw  S.,  she  cried  with  a 
28.  14  Saul  perceived  that  it  (was)  S.,  and  he  st. 

28. 15  S.  said  to  Saul,  Why  hast  thou  disquieted 

28. 16  Then  said  S.,  Wherefore  then  dost  thou  ask 

28.  20  sore  afraid,  because  of  the  words  of  S. 

1  Ch.  6.  28  the  sons  of  S.  ;  the  first  born  Vashni,  and 

9.  22  whom  David  and  S.  the  seer  did  ordain  in 
11.    3  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  S. 

26.  28  And  all  that  S.  the  seer,  .had  dedicated 

29.  29  they  (are)  written  in  the  book  of  S.  these. 

2  Ch.35.  18  passover  like  to  that,  .from  the  days  of  S. 
Psa.  99.  6  and  S.  among  them  that  call  upon  his  na. 
Jer.  15.  1  Though  Moses.  .S.  stood  before  me,  (yet) 
Acts   3.  24  the  prophets  from  S.  and  those  thatfollow 

13.  20  afterthat  he  gave,  .judges,  .until  S.  the  p. 
Heb.  11.  32  David  also,  and  S.,  and  (of)  the  prophets 

SAN-BAI/-LAT,  E^jp. 

A  Horonite  (from  Bethhoson  in  Ephraim,  or  Horonaim 
in  Moab),  an  enemy  of  the  Jews  who  opposed  Nehemiah 
in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.   2. 10,  iq  When  S.  the  Horonite,  and  Tobiah  the 
4.    1  when  S.  heard  that  we  builded  the  wall 
4.    7  S. .  .heard  that  the  wallsof  Jerusalem  were 
6.    1  when  S.. heard  that  I  had  builded  the  wall 
6.    2  S.  and  Geshem  sent  unto  me,  saying,  Come 
6.    5  Then  sent  S.  his  servant  unto  me  in  like 
6.  12  for  Tobiah  and  S.  had  hired  him 
6.  14  My  God,  think  thou  upon  Tobiah  and  S. 
13.  28  And  (one.  .was)  son  in  law  to  S.  the  Hor. 
SANCTTFICATION  — 

Separation,  a  setting  apart,  ayia<Tfx6s  hagiasmos. 
1  Co.  1.  30  righteousness,  and  sanctiflcation,  and  red. 

1  Th.  4.   3  this  is  the  will  of  God,  (even)  your  sancti. 

4.    4  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  sanctiflcation 

2  Til.  2.  13  chosen  you  to  salvation  through  sanctiftc. 
1  Pe.  1.    2  through  sanctification  of  the  spirit,  unto 

SANCTIFIED,  (to  be)  — 

l.To  be  separate,  set  apart,  enp  qadesh. 

1  Sa.  21.   5  though  it  were  sanctified  this  day  in  the 
2.7V)  be  separated,  set  apart,  bh|3  qadesh,  2. 

Exod2g.  43  (the  tabernacle)  shall  be  sanctified  by  my 

Lev.  10.    3  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh 

Nuni2o.  13  strove  with  the  LORD,  and  he  was  sancti. 

Isa.     5.  16  holy,  shall  be  sanctified  in  righteousness 

Eze.  20.  41  will  be  sanctified  in  you  before  the  heat. 

28.  22  when  I.  .shall  be  sanctified  in  her 

28.  25  shall  be  sanctified  in  them  in  the  sight  of 

36.  23  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  you  before  their 

38.  16  when  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  thee,  0  Gog 

39.  27  am  sanctified  in  them  in  the  sight  of  ma. 

3.  To  be  separated,  set  apart,  chfj  qadesh,  4. 

Eze.  48. 1 1  for  the  priests  that  are  sanctified  of  the 

l.T<>  separate,  set  self  aptart,  eh^  qadesh,  7. 

2  Ch.  5.  11  the  priests  (that  were)  present  were  sane. 

30.  17  many,  .that  were  not  sanctified:  therefore 

5.  To  separate,  set  apart,  aytd(ca  hagiazo. 

Acts  20.  32  inheritance  among  all  them  which  aresa. 
26.  18  inheritance  among  them  which  are  sane. 
Rom  15.  16  being  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost 


1  Co. 


iTi. 
2  Ti. 
Heb. 


Jude 


2  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus 

6.  11  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified 

7.  14  For  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified 
7.  14  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  hus. 
4.    5  For  it  is  sanctified  of  God  and  prayer 

2.  21  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified 
2.  11  they  who  are  sancti  fled  (are)all  ■>*  <i.'f.  fol- 
io. 10  By  the  which  will  we  are  sanetf  01^  J.,''o. 
10. 14  perfected  forever  them  that  are  ied  t}£-  ,m 
io.  29  wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  aaancmne 
to  them  [that  are  sanctified]  b>  unholy 
God  the 


SANCTIFIED  (one)  — 

l.To  be  separated,  set  apart,  vh%  qadesh,  4. 

Isa.    13.    3  I  have  commanded  my  sanctified  ones,  I 
2  To  separate,  set  apart,  ayid^co  hagiazo. 

John'17.  19  also  might  be  sanctified  through  the  truth 
SANCTIFY  (self),  to  — 
l.To  separate,  set  apart,  ttnjj  qadesh,  3. 

Gen.    2.    3  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sancti. 

Exodi3.  2  Sanctify  unto  me  all  the  first  born,  what. 
19. 10  sanctify  them  today  and  to  morrow,  aud 
19.  14  sanctified  the  people  ;  and  they  washed  th. 

19.  23  saying,  Set  bounds,  .and  sanctify  it 

28.  41  sanctify  them,  that  theyniayministerunto 

29.  27  thou  shalt  sanctify  the  breast  of  the  wave 
29.  33  made  to  consecrate  (and)  to  sanctify  them 
29.  36  and  thou  shalt  anoint  it,  to  sanctify  it 

29.  37  atonement  for  the  altar,  and  sanctify  it 

39.  44  sanctify  the  tabernacle,  .will  sanctify  also 

30.  29  sanctify  them,  that  they  maybe  most  holy 

31.  13  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  that  doth  san. 

40.  10  sanctify  the  altar  :  and  it  shall  be  an  altar 
40.  11  anoint  the  laver  and  his  foot,  and  sanctify 
40.  13  sanctify  him  ;  that  he  may  minister  unto 

Lev.  8.  10  anointed  the  tabernacle,  .and  sanctified 
8.  11  both  the  laver  and  his  foot,  to  sanctify  th. 
8.  12  poured  of  the  anointing  oil. .  to  sanctify  th. 
8.  15  sanctified  it,  to  make  reconciliation  upon 
8.  30  sanctified  Aaron,  (and)  his  garments,  and 
10.    3  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh 

20.  8  do  them  :  I  (am)  the  Lord  which  sanctify 

21.  8  Thou  shalt  sanctify,  .fori,  .which  sanctify 

21.  15,  23  for  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  them 

22.  9,  16  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  them 

Num  7.    1  had  anointed  it,  and  sanctified  it,  and  all 

7.    1  and  had  anointed  them,  and  sanctified  th. 

Deut.5.  12  Keep  the  sabbath  day  to  sanctify  it,  asth. 

32.  51  sanctified  me  not  in  the  midst  of  the  chi. 
Josh.  7.  13  sanctify  the  people,  and  say.  .thus  saith 

1  Sa.   7.    1  sanctified  Eleazar  his  son  to  keep  the  ark 

16.  s  sanctified  Jesse  and  his  sons,  and  called 

2  Ch.  29.    5  sanctify  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  your 

29.  17  began,  .to  sanctify,  .so  they  sanctified  the 
Neh.   3.    1  they  sanctified  it,  and  set  up  the  doors  of 

3.    r  unto  the  tower  of  Meah  they  sanctified  it 

13.  22  keep  the  gates,  to  sanctify  the  sabbath  day 

Job     1.    5  Job  sent  and  sanctified  them,  and  rose  up 

Eze.  20.  12  knowthatI(am)theLoRDthatsanctifyth. 

36.  23  I  will  sanctify  my  great  name,  which  was 

37.  28  shall  kuow  that  1  the  Lord  do  sanctify 
44.  19  they  shall  not  sanctify  the  people  with  th. 
46.  20  into  the  outer  court,  to  sanctify  the  peo. 

Joel    1.  14  Sanctify  ye  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 
2.  15  sanctify  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 
2. 16  Gather  the  people,  sanctify  the  congreg. 

2.7*0  separate,  set  apart,  en^  qadesh,  5. 

Lev.  27.  14  when  a  man  shall  sanctify  his  house  (to  be) 
27.  15  if  he  that  sanctified  it  will  redeem  his  ho. 
27.  16  if  a  man  shall  sanctify  unto  the  Lord  (so. 
27.  17  If  he  sanctify  his  field  from  the  year  of  J. 
27.  18  But  if  he  sanctify  his  field  after  the  jubi. 
27.  19  if  he  that  sanctified  the  field  will  in  any 
27.  22  sanctify  unto  the  Lord  a  field  which  he 
27.  26  no  man  shall  sanctify  it :  whether  (it  be) 

Num.  8.  17  all  the  first  born .  .1  sanctified  them  for 
20. 12  Because  ye  believed  me  not,  to  sanctify 
27.  14  sanctify  me  at  the  water  before  their  eyes 

Deuti5.  19  thou  shalt  sanctify  uuto  the  Lord  thy  G. 

1  Ch.23.  13  should  sanctify  the  most  holy  things,  he 

2  Ch.  7.  16  For  now  have  I  chosen  and  sanctified  this 

7.  20  house,  which  I  have  sanctified  for  my  na. 
20. 19  have  we  prepared  and  sanctified,  and,  be. 

30.  8  which  he  hath  sanctified  for  ever ;  and  se. 
30.  17  had  the  charge,  .to  sanctify  (them)  uuto 

Neh.  12.  47  sanctified,  .and  the Levites sanctified  (th.) 

Isa.     8.  13  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts  himself;  and 

29.  23  they  shall  sanctify  my  name,  and  sanctify 

Jer.     1.    5  before  thou  earnest  forth . .  I  sanctified  th. 

Z.To  separate  or  set  self  apart,  u'i'Q  qadesh,  7. 
Exodig.  22  sanctify  themselves,  lest  the  LORD  break 
Lev.  11.  44  therefore  sanctify  yourselves,  and  ye  shall 
20.  7  Sanctify  yourselves  therefore,  and  be  ye 
Numn.  18  Sanctify  yourselves  against  to  morrow,  and 
Josh.  3.  5  Sanctify  yourselves:  for  tomorrow  the  L. 
7.  13  Sanctify  yourselves  against  tomorrow,  for 
1  Sa.  16.    5  sanctify  yourselves,  and  come  with  me  to 

1  Ch.15.  12  sanctify  yourselves,  (both)  ye  and  your 

15.  14  sanctified  themselves  to  bring  up  the  ark 

2  Ch.  5.  11  the  priests  (that  were)  present  were  sane. 

29.  5  sanctify  now  yourselves,  .aud  carry  forth 
29.  15  sanctified  themselves,  and  came,  according 
29.  34  until  the  (other)  priests  had  sanctified  th. 

29.  34  more  upright  in  heart  to  sanctify  themsel. 

30.  3  had  not  sanctified  themselves  sufficiently 
30.  15  sanctified  themselves,  and  brought  in  the 

30.  24  great  number  of  priests  sanctified  thems. 

31.  18  in  their  set  oftice  they  sanctified  themse. 
35.    6  So  kill  the  passover,  and  sanctify  yourse. 

lsa    66.  17  They  that  sanctify  themselves,  and  purify 
Eze.  38-  23  wiU  !  magnify  myself,  and  sanctify  mys. 

4.7*0  set  apart.  ayidCw  hagiazo. 

Matt23.  17  gold,  or  the  temple  that  sanctificth  the  g.? 

23. 10  gift,  or  the  altar  that  sanctificth  the  gift 

Johnm.  36  of  him.  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified 

17.  17  Sanctifythem  through  thy  truth,  thy  word 
17. 10  for  their  sake ;  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they 

Eph.    5.  26  That  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with 

1  Th.  5.  73  the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly 

*-  Heb.  2.  11  For  both  he  that  sauctifieth  and  they  who 


SANCTUARY 


835 


SARON 


Heb.    9.  13  sanctifietli  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh 

13.  12  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  bl. 
1  Pe.  3.  15  But  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts 

SANCTUARY  — 

l.Pl'.ce  set  apart,  e^PP  miqdash, 

Exodis.  17  sanctuary,  .(which)  thy  hands  have  esta. 

25.  8  let  them  make  me  a  sanctuary ;  that  I  may 
Lev.  12.    4  nor  come  into  the  sanctuary,  until  the  da. 

16.  33  make  an  atonementfor  the  holy  sanctuary 

19.  30  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence  my  sail. 

20.  3  defile  my  sanctuary,  and  to  profane  my  ho. 
21. 12  sanctuary,  nor  profane  the  sanctuary  of 
2i.  23  that  he  profane  not  my  sanctuaries :  for  I 

26.  2  keep  my  sabbaths,  and  reverence  my  san. 

26.  31  bring  your  sanctuaries  unto  desolation 
Norn.  3.  33  keepingthe  charge  ofthe  sanctuary  for  the 

10.  21  Kohathites  set  forward,  bearing  the  san. 

18.  1  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  sanctuary 

19.  20  because  he  hath  defiled  the  sanctuary  of 
Josh  24.  26  oak  that  (was)  by  the  sanctuary  of  the  L. 

1  Ch.22. 19  build  ye  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  God,  to 

28.  10  chosen  thee  to  build  an  house  for  the  sa. 

2  Ch.20.    8  dwelt  therein,  and  have  built  thee  a  san. 

26. 18  go  out  of  the  sanctuary ;  for  thou  hast  fcr. 

29.  2i  for  the  sanctuary,  and  for  Judah.  And  he 

30.  8  enter  into  his  sanctuary,  which  he  hath  s. 

36.  17  the  sword  in  the  house  of  their  sanctuary 
Neh.  10. 39  where  (are)  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary 
Psa.  73.  17  Until  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God 

74.   7  Theyhavecastfireinto thy sanctnar}',  they 

78.  69  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high  (palaces) 

96.   6  strength  and  beauty  (are)  in  his  sanctuary 

Isa.     8.  14  he  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary ;  but  for  a  sto. 

16. 12  he  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  to  pray,  but 
60.  13  to  beautify  the  place  of  my  sanctuary,  and 
63. 18  adversaries  haye  trodden  down  thy  sane. 

Jer.  17. 12  high  throne,  .(is)  the  place  of  our  sanctu. 

51.  51  strangers  are  come  into  the  sanctuaries  of 

Lam.  1.  10  heathen  entered  into hersanctuary,  whom 

2.    7  he  hath  abhorred  his  sanctuary,  he  hath 

2.  20  prophet  be  slain  in  the  sanctuary  of  the 
Eze.    5.  11  because  thou  hast  defiled  my  sanctuary 

8.  6  I  should  go  far  off  from  my  sanctuary?  B. 

9.  6  begin  at  my  sanctuary.    Then  they  began 

11.  16  yet  will  I  be  unto  them  as  a  little  sanctu. 
23.  38  nave  denied  my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day 

23.  39  came  the  same  day  into  my  sanctuary  to 
54.  21  I  will  profane  my  sanctuary,  the  excelle. 
25.  3  against  my  sanctuary,  when  it  was  profa. 
28.  18  Thou  hast  defiled  thy  sanctuaries  by  the 

37.  26  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them 

37.  28  when  my  sanctuary  shall  be  in  the  midst 

43.  21  place  of  the  house,  without  the  sanctuary 

44.  1  way  of  the  gate  of  the  outward  sanctuary 
44.  5  with  every  going  forth  of  the  sanctuary 
44.  7  to  be  in  my  sanctuary,  to  pollute  it,  (even) 
44.  8  set  keepers  of  my  charge  in  my  sanctuary 
44.  9  shall  enter  into  my  sanctuary,  of  any  str. 
44. 11  Vet  they  shall  be  ministers  in  my  sanctu. 
44.  15  that  kept  the  charge  of  my  sanctuary  when 

44.  16  They  shall  enter  into  my  sanctuary,  and 

45.  3  in  it  shall  be  the  sanctuary  (and)  the  most 
45.  4  for  the  priests  the  ministers  of  thesanct. 
45.  4  houses,  and  an  holy  place  for  the  sanctu. 
45. 18  without  blemish,  and  cleanse  the  sanctu. 

47.  12  waters  they  issued  out  of  the  sanctuary 

48.  8  and  the  sanctuary  shall  be  in  the  midst  of 
48.  10,  21  the  sanctuary,  .in  the  midst  thereof 

Dan.    8.  11  the  place  of  his  sanctuary  was  cast  down 

9.  17  cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  sanctu. 

11.  31  they  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  of  stren. 

Amos  7.    9  the  sanctuaries  of  Israel  shall  be  laid  wa. 

2.  Separation,  enp  qodesh. 

Esod3o.  13,24  shekel  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
36.    1  of  work  for  the  service  of  the  sanctuary 
36.    3  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  sanctuary 
36.   4  that  wrought  all  the  work  of  the  sanctu. 
36.   6  more  work  for  the  offering  of  the  sanctu. 

38.  24,  25,  26  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
38.  27  were  cast  the  sockets  of  the  sanctuary 

Lev.  4.  6  sprinkle . .  before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary 
5.  15  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
10.    4  carry  your  brethren  from,  .the  sanctuary 

27.  3  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
27.  25  according  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 

Num. 3.  28  keeping  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 

3. 31  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  wherewith 

3.  32  them  that  keep  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 

3.  47,  50  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 

4. 12  wherewith  they  minister  in  the  sanctuary 
4. 15  have  made  an  end  of  covering  the  sanct. 

4.  15  and  all  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  as 
4.  16  of  all  that  therein  (is),  in  the  sanctuary 

7.  9  the  service  of  the  sanctuary belongingun. 

7. 13  shekels,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
[So  in  verse  19,  25,  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61, 67,  73,  79,  85,  86.] 

8.  19  childreii  of  Israel  come.. unto  the  sanctua. 
jD.    3  come  nigh  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary 
18.    5  ye  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary 
18.  16  after  the  shekel  of  tne  sanctuary,  which 

1  Ch.  9.  29  the  instruments  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the 

24.  5  the  governors  of  the  sanctuary,  and  gove. 

2  Ch.30.  19  according  to  the  purification  of  the  sane. 
Psa.  20.    2  Send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary,  and 

63.  2  so  (as)  I  have  seen  thee  in  the  sanctuary 
68.  24  the  goings  of  my  God.  .in  the  sanctuary 
74.    3  enemy  hath  done  wickedly  in  the  sanctu. 

77. 13  Thy  way,  0  God,  (is)  in  the  sanctuary :  who 
78.  54  to  the  border  of  his  sanctuary,  (even  to) 

102. 19  down  from  the  height  of  his  sanctuary 


Psa. 114.  2  Judah  was  his  sanctuary,  (and)  Israel  his 
134.  2  Lift  up  your  hands  (in)  the  sanctuary,  and 
150.  1  Praise  God  in  his  sanctuary:  praise  him 
Isa.  43.  2S  profaned thepriucesof  the  sanctuary,and 
Lam.  4.  1  the  stouesof  the  sanctuary  are  poured  out 
Eze.  41.  21  (were)  squared,  (and)  the  face  of  the  sane. 

41.  23  the  temple  and  the  sanctuary  had  two  do. 

42.  20  a  separation  between  the  sanctuary  and 

44.  27  in  the  day  that  he  goeth  into  the  sanctu. 
44. 27  to  minister  in  the  sanctuary,  he  shall  offer 

45.  2  there  shall  be  for  the  sanctuary  five  hun. 
Dan.   8.  13  to  give  both  the  sanctuary  and*  the  host 

8.  14  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be  cleansed 

g.  26  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary 
Zeph.  3.    4  her  priests  have  polluted  the  sanctuary 

3.  Place  set  apart,  ayiov  hagion. 

Heb.    8.    2  A  minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  of  the 

9.  1  also  ordinances . .  and  a  worldly  sanctuary 
9.    2  the  first,  .which  is  called  [the  sanctuary] 

13. 11  whose  blood  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary 
SAND  — 

1.  Sand,  Vin  choL 

Gen.  22.  17  as  the  sand  which  (is)  upon  the  sea  shore 

32.  12  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which 
41.  49  Joseph  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the 

Exod.  2.  12  slew  the  Egyptian,  and  hidhiminthe  sand 
Deut33.  19  shall  suck.. (of)  treasures. .hid  in  the  sand 
Josh  11.  4  as  the  sand  that  (is)  upon  the  sea  shore  in 
Judg.  7.  12  as  the  sand  by  the  sea  side  for  multitude 

1  Sa.  13.    5  people  as  the  sand  which  (is)  on  the  sea 

2  Sa.  17.  11  as  the  sand  that  is  by  the  sea  shore  for 

1  Ki.   4.  20  as  the  sand  which  (is)  by  the  sea  in  multi. 

4.  29  even  as  the  sand  that  (is)  on  the  seashore 
Job     6.    3  it  would  be  heavier  than  the  sand  of  the 

20. 18  and  I  shall  multiply  (my)  days  as  the  sand 
Psa.  73.  27  feathered  fowls  like  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 

139. 18  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  sand 
Prov.27.  3  A  stone  (is)  heavy,  and  the  sand  weighty 
Isa.  10.  22  though  thy  people  Israel  be  as  the  sand 

48. 19  Thy  seed  also  had  been  as  the  sand,  and 
Jer.     5.  22  which  have  placed  the  sand  (for)  the  bo. 

15.   8  are  increased  to  me  above  the  sand  of  the 

33.  22  neither  the  sand  of  the  sea  measured 
H03.    1. 10  children  of  Israel  shall  be  as  the  sand  of 
Hab.   1.    9  they  shall  gather  captivity  as  the  sand 

2.  Sand,  &/xfj,os  ammos. 

Matt,  7.  26  man,  which  built  his  house  upon  the  sand 
Rom.  9.  27  children  of  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 
Heb.  11.  12  and  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  seashore 
Rev.  13.  1  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea,  and  saw 
20.   8  the  number  of  whom  (is)  as  the  sand  ofthe 

SANDAL  — 

Sandal,  o-a.vZd.hiov  sandalion. 

Mark  6.  9  (be)  shod  with  sandals;  andnotputontwo 
Acts  12.    8  bind  on  thy  sandals.  And  so  he  did    And 

SAN-SAN'-NAH,  njp^p  instruction. 

A  city  in  S.  of  Judah,  near  Madmannah.     See  Kirjath- 

sennek. 

Josh.  15.  31  And  Ziklag,  and  Madmannah,  and 
SAPH,  f]D  preserver. 

A  descendant  of  Rapha  the  progenitor  of  the  giants  or 
Rephaim;  called  Sippai  in  1  Ch.  20.  4.  B.C.  104S. 

2  Sa.  21.  18  then  Sibbechai  the Hushathite  slew  S.,  w. 

SA'-PHXR,  ys$  beautiful,  thorny.     See  Shamir. 
A  city  in  Ephraim  or  Judah,  now  el-Savafir. 

Mic.    1. 11  Pass  ye  away,  thou  inhabitant  of  S.,  hav. 
SAP-PHI'-RA,  2a7n£e[p7j  sapphire. 
Wife  of  Ananias,  who  joined  with  him  in  trying  to  im- 
pose on  the  church,  and  was  subjected  to  the  same 
punishment. 

Acts    5.1a  certain  man . .  with  S.  his  wife,  sold  a  po. 

SAPPHIRE  — 

1.  Sapphire,  Y2p  sappii: 

Exod24- 10  as  it  were  apaved  work  of  a  sapphire  stone 

28. 18  an  emerald,  a  sapphire,  and  a  diamond 
39. 11  an  emerald,  a  sapphire,  and  a  diamond 

Job    28.    6  The  stones  of  it  (are)  the  place  of  sapphi. 

28.  16  with  the  precious  onyx,  or  the  sapphire 
Song    s- 14  (isas)brightivoryoverlaid(with)sapphires 

54. 11  and  lay  thy  foundations  with  sapphires 
Lam.  4.  7  Nazarites.  .their  polishing  (was)  of  sap. 
Eze.     1.  26  as  the  appearance  of  a  sapphire  stone 

10.    1  over  them  as  it  were  a  sapphire  stone 

28.  13  the  sapphire,  the  emerald,  and  the  car. 

2.Sapphvre,  trct7n/>e*poy  sapplieiroa. 

Rev.  21. 19  the  second,  sapphire,  the  third,  a  chal. 

SA'-RAH,  nyy  2appa  princess. 

1.  The  later  name  of  Sarai  wife  of  Abram,  who  bare 
Isaac  when  above  ninety  years  of  age,  and  died  at 
Kirjath-arbaor  Hebron,  aged  127  years,  and  was  buried 
at  Machpelah.    B.C.  1950. 

Gen.  17. 13  thou  shalt  not  call  her  name  Sarai,  but  S. 
17.  17  shall  S.,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  bear? 

17. 19  S.  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son  indeed 

17.  21  Isaac,  which  S.  shall  bear  unto  thee  at 

18.  6  Abraham  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  S. 
18.  9  they  said  unto  him,  Where(is)  S.  thy  wi.? 
1 S.  10  S.  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son.  And  S.  heard 
18. 11  Abraham  andS.  (were)  old.  .well  stricken 
18. 11  it  ceased  to  be  with  S.  after  the  manner 
18.  12  Therefore  S.  laughed  within  herself,  say. 
18. 13  And  the  Lord  said.  .Wherefore  did  S.  la. 
18.  14  I  will  return  unto  thee.  .andS.  shall  have 
iS.  15  Then  S,  denied,  saying,  I  laughed  not 


Gen.  20.   2  Abraham  said  of  S.  his  wife,  She  (is)  my 

20.  2  Abimelech  king  of  Gerar  sent,  and  took  S 
20. 14  And  Abimelech.  .restored  him  S.  his  wife 

20. 16  unto  S.  he  said,  Behold,  I  have  given  thy 
20. 18  closed  up  all  the  wombs,  .because  of  S. 

21.  1  the  Lord  visited  S...the  Lord  diduntoS. 
21.  2  For  S.  conceived,  and  bare  Abraham  a  son 
21.  3  Abraham  called,  .his  son.  .whom  S.  bare 
21.  6  And  S.  said,  God  hath  made  me  to  laugh 
21.  7  that  S.  should  have  given  children  suck  ? 
21.  9  S.  saw  thesonof  Hagarthe  Egyptian, wb. 
21.  12  in  all  that  S.  hath  said  unto  thee,  hearken 
23.  1  S.  was  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty 
23.  1  (these  were)  the  years  of  the  life  of  S. 
23.  2  S.  died  in  Kirjath-arba ;  the  same  (is)  H. 
23.   2  Abraham  cameto mourn  for  S.,  audtowe. 

23.  19  Abraham  buried  S.  his  wife  in  the  cave  of 

24.  36  S.  my  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my  ma. 

24.  67  Isaac  brought  her  into  hismotherS.'s  teut 
25. 10  there  was  Abraham  buried,  and  S.  his  w. 

25.  12  whom  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  S.'s  handmaid 
49.  31  There  they  buried  Abraham  and  S.  his  wi. 

Isa.   51.    a  Look  unto  Abraha.  your  father,  and  unto  S. 
Rom.  4.  19  considered  not .  .thedeadnessof  S.'swomb 
9.   9  At  this  time  will  I  come,  and  S.  shall  have 
Heb.  11. 11  S.  herself  received  strength  to  conceive 
1  Pe.   3.    6  Even  as  S.  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him* 

2.  A  daughter  of  Asher.     B.C.  1690. 

Nuni26.  46  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  Asher  (was)S. 

SA'-RAI,  *"$  Jah  is  prince. 

The  original  name  of  Sarah,  wife  of  Abraham,  and  also 
his  half-sister  on  his  father  Terah's  side.    (Gen.  20.  12). 
Gen.  11.  29  the  name  of  Abram's  wife  (was)  S.;  and 
11.  30  But  S.  was  barren;  she  (had)  no  child 

11.  31  Terah  took  Abram  his  son.  .and  S.  his  da. 

12.  5  Abram  took  S.  his  wife,  and  Lot  his  brot. 
12.  11  it  came  to  pass,  .that  he  said  unto  S.  his 

12. 17  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh,  .because  of  S. 
16.  1  Now  S., Abram's  wife, bare  him  no  children 
16.  2  S.  said  unto  Abram,  Behold  now,  the  Lo. 
16.  2  And  Abram  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  S. 
16.  3  S.,  Abram's  wife,  took  Hagar  her  maid,  the 
16.  5  S.  said  unto  Abram,  My  wrong  (be)  upon 
16.  6  Abram  said  unto  S.,  Behold,  thy  maid(is) 
16.  6  when  S.  dealt  hardly  with  her,  she  fled 
16.    8  he  said,  Hagar,  S.'s  maid,  whence  earnest 

16.  8  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  S. 

17.  15  S.  thy  wife,  thou  shalt  notcallher  name  S. 

SA'-RAPH,  tffl  burning. 

A  descendant  of  Shelah  son  of  Judah,  who  had  do- 
minion in  Moab.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  4.  22  Joash,  and  S.(  who  had  the  dominion  in 

SARDINE,  SARDIUS  — 
l.Ruby,  dh.x  odem. 

Exod2S.  17  (the  first)  row  (shall  be)  a  sardius,  a  topaz 
39.  10  (the  first)  row  (was)  a  sardius,  a  topaz,  and 

Eze.  23.  13  the  sardius,  topaz,  and  the  diamond,  the 

2.Sardi?ie,  o-dpSti/os  sardinos. 

Rev.   4.    3  like  a  jasper  and  a  sardine  stone  :  and 

3.  Sardine,  ffdpftiov,  odpBios  sardion,  sardios. 

Rev.  21. 20  the  sixth,  sardius ;  the  seventh,  chrysop. 

SAR-DI'-TJS,  SapSets. 

The  capital  of  Lydia  in  Asia  Minor,  which  had  Smyrna 
on  the  W.,  Thyatira  on  the  N.,  and  Philadelphia  011 
the  E.,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Tmolus  on  the  river  Pac- 
tolus;  and  now  called  Sest-Ealessi;  it  was  taken  by  the 
Cimmerians  about  635  B.c;  in  617  they  were  expelled: 
in  584  it  was  taken  by  the  Persians;  in  504  by  the 
lonians,  assisted  by  the  Athenians ;  in  395  the  Greeks 
defeated  the  Persians  in  its  vicinity ;  in  334  it  sur- 
rendered to  Alexander ;  in  283  it  was  taken  by  Seleucus ; 
in  214  Antiochus  the  Great  seized  it ;  in  189  it  was  given 
up  to  the  Romans ;  in  a.d.  14-37  it  was  destroyed  by  an 
earthquake  and  rebuilt  by  Tiberius;  it  was  taken  by 
the  Turks  in  the  nth  century,  and  again  in  the  14th; 
it  was  also  taken  by  Tamerlane. 

Rev.    1.  11  send  (it),  .unto  S.,  and  unto  Philadelphia 
3.    1  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  S.  write 
3.    4  Thou  hast  a  few  names  even  in  S.  which 

SAR-DITES,  *Ti&n  the  Sardite. 

The  family  of  Sered,  a  son  of  Zebulun.    B.C.  1700. 

Nuni26.  26  of  Sered,  the  family  of  the  S.:  of  Elon,  the 
SARDONYX  — 
Sardonyx,  aap^uvv^  sardonux. 

Rev.  21.  20  The  fifth  sardonyx,  the  sixth,  sardius,  the 
SA-REP'-TA,  Sape-n-Ta.      See  Zarephath. 
A  city  midway  between  Tyre  and  Sidon,  now  called 
Sarfend  or  Surafend. 

Luke  4.  26  unto  none  of  them  was  Eliassent,  save..S. 
SAR-GJN,  Jianp. 

A  king  of  Assyria,  B.C.  718-715,  successorof  Shalmanezar, 
and  predecessor  of  Sennacherib,  and  whose  general  was 
Tartan. 

Isa.  20.    1  when  S.  the  king  of  Assyriasent  him,  and 

SA'-RTD,  "HV  refuge. 

A  city  in  Zebulun  orlssachar. 

Josh  19.  10  the  border  of  their  inheritance  was  unto  S. 
19. 12  And  turned  from  S.  eastward  toward  the 

SA'-RON,  2ctpo>j/. 

The  sea  coast  between  Joppa  and  Cresarea. 

Acts   9.  35  all  that  dwelt  in  Lydda  and  S.  saw  him 


SARSECHIM 


836 


SAUL 


Pss  105. 

Zech.  3. 

Matt 


SAR-SE'-CHIM,  D,39")"8'  chief  of  the  eunuchs. 
A  prince  of  Babylon  "when  Nebuchadnezzar  took  Jeru- 
salem, and  who  sat  at  the  gate.    B.C.  588. 

Jer.  39.    s  Samgar-nebo,  S-,  Rabsaris,  Nergal-shar. 

SA'-RUCH,  Zapovx*  'S.tpovx-      See  SffTUg. 

Father  of  Nachor  and  son  of  Ragau,  an  ancestor  of 

Jesus.    B.C.  2180. 

Luke  3.  35  Which  was  (the  son)  of  S.,  which  was  (the 

SA'-TAN,  |ab»n  ^aravas,  'S.a.ra.v  the  hater,  accuser, 

1.  An  adversary  of  David.    B.C.  1017. 

1  Ch.21.    1  S.  stood  up  against  Israel,  and  provoked 

2.  An  adversary,  opposing  spirit. 

Job     1.    6  sons  of  God  came.,  and  S  came  also  anions 
1.    7  the  LORD  said  unto  S.,  Whence  comestth  . 
t.    7,  q  S.  answered  the  Lord,  and  said 
1.   8  the  Lord  said  unto  S.,  Hast  thou  consid. 
1. 12  the  Lord  said  unto  S.,  Behold,  all  that 

1.  12  S.  went  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  L. 

2.  1  S.  enme  also  among  them  to  present  him 
2.  2  Lord  said  unto  S..  From  whence  comest 
2.   2  S.  answered  the  Lord,  and  said.  From 

b.  3  the  Lord  said  unto  S, ,  Hast  thou  con.v.  4 
2.   6  Lord  3aid  unto  S. ,  Behold,  he  (is)  in  thine 

2.  7  So  went  S.  forth  from  the  presence  of  the 
6  and  let  S.  stand  at  his  right  hand 

1  S.  standing  at  his  righthand  toresisthim 

2  Lord  said  unto  S.,  The  Lord  rebuke  thee 
4. 10  Thensaith  Jesus  unto  him,  Get.  .hence,  8. 

12.  26  if  S.  cast  out  S.,  he  is  divided  against  him 
16.  23  Get  thee  behind  me,  S. :  thou  art  an  olf 
Mark  r.  13  wastherein the  wilderness,  .temptedof  S. 

3.  23  And  he . .  said . .  How  can  S.  cast  out  S.  ? 

3.  26  if  S.  rise  up  against  himself,  .he  cannot 

4.  15  when  they  have  heard,  S.  cometh  immed. 
8.  33  he  rebuked  Peter.. Get  thee  behind  me,  8. 

Luke  4 .    8  [And  Jesus . .  said .  Get  thee  behind  me,  S.  ] 
jo.  18  I  beheld  S.  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven 

11. 18  If  S.  also  be  divided  against  himself,  how 
13. 16  whom  S.  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen 
22.    3  Then  entered  S.  into  Judas  surnamed  I. 
22.  31  Simon,  behold,  S.  hath  desired  (to  have) 

J0I1I113.  27  And  after  the  sop  S.  entered  into  him 
Acts    5.    3  Ananias,  why  hath  8.  filled  thine  heart 

26.  iS  to  turn,  .(from)  the  power  of  S.  unto  God 
Itonii6.  20  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruiseS.  under  your 

1  Co.  5.    5  To  deliver  such  an  one  unto  S.  for  the'de. 
7.    5  that  8.  tempt  you  not  for  your  incontin. 

2  Co.    2.  11  Lest  S.  should  get  an  advantage  of  us 

11.  14  S.  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel 

12.  7  the  messenger  of  8.  to  buffet  me,  lest  I 

1  Th.  2.  18  we  would  have  come,  .but  S.  hindered  us 

2  Th.  2.    9  whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  S. 
,  20  whom  I  have  delivered  unto  S.,  that  they 

5.  15  For  some  are  already  turned  aside  after  S. 
,  9  and  are  not,  but  (are)  the  synagogue  of  S. 
.  13  where  thou  dwellest,  (even)  where  Satan's 

2.  13  who  was  slain  among  you,  where  S.  dwc. 

2.  24  which  have  not  known  the  depths  of  S. 

3.  9  I  will  make  them  of  the  synagogue  of  8. 
12.  9  and  S.,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world 
20.  2  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon.  ,S.,  and  bound 
20.  7  Aud.  .S.  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison 

SATIATE,  to  — 

\. To  fill,  water,  satisfy,  rrn  ravah,  3. 

Jer.  31.  14  I  will  satiate  the  soul  of  the  priests  with 
2.  To  fill,  water,  satisfy,  rvn  ravah,  5. 

Jer.  31.  25  I  have  satiatedthe  weary  soul,  and  I  have 
SATIATE,  to  be— 
To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  fall,  lllty  sabea. 

Jer.   46.  10  it  shall  be  satiate  and  made  drunk  with 
SATISFACTION  — 
Atonement,  coverhtff,  133  kopher. 

Kuni35.  31  ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life 
35-  32  ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  him  that 
SATISFIED  (abundantly,  with),  to  be  — 
1.2*0  be  full,  »$lp  male. 

Exodis.    9  my  lust  shall  be  satislied  upon  them  ;  I 
2.7*0  be  satisfied,  watered,  nvj  ravah. 

Psa.  36.    8  They  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied  with 

Z.To  be  satisfied,  satiated,  nty  sabea. 

Lev.  26.  26  and  ye  shall  eat,  and  not  be  satisfied 
Dent  14.  29  shall  come,  and  shall  eat  aud  be  satisfied 
Job   19.  22  Whydoye persecute.. andarenotsatis.w. 

27.  14  his  offspring  shall  not  be  satisfied  witli 
31.  31  Oh  that  we  had  of  his  flesh!  we  cannot  bes. 
17. 15  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake,  with 
22.  26  The  meek  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied :  they 

37. 19  in  the  days  of  famine  they  shall  be  satis 
59.  15  Let  them .  .grudge  if  they  be  not  satisfied 
63.    5  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  (with)  marrow 
65.   4  we  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of 

104.  13  the  earth  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy 
Prov  12.  11  ne  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  be  satisfied 

12. 14  A  man  sha.ll  be  satisfied  with  good  bythu 
18.  20  A  man's  belly  shall  be  satisfied  with  the 
20. 13  open  thine  eyes,(and)thoushaltbesat.  w. 
27.  20  so  the  eyes  of  man  are  never  satisfied 

30. 15  Therearethree(things  that)  are  never  sa. 
Keel.  1.    8  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor 

4.  8  neither  is  his  eye  satisfied  with  riches 
5. 10  He  that  loveth  silver  shall  not  be  satis  w. 

Isa.     9.  20  shall  eat.  .and  they  shall  not  be  satisfied 

44. 16  he  roasteth  roast,  and  is  satisfied  :  yea 
53.  ii  He  shall  aee.  .(and)  shall  be  satisfied  :  by 


Isa. 
Jer. 


66. 11  That  ye  may  suck,  and  be  satisfied  with 
31.  14  people  shall  be  satisfied  with  my  goodness 


1  Ti. 
Rev. 


Psa. 


50.  10  all  that  spoil  her  shall  be  satisfied,  saith 
50.  19  his  soul  shall  be  satisfied  upon  mount  E. 

Lam.  5.    6  Wehavegiventhehand-.tobesatisfledw. 

Eze.  16.  28  played  the  harlot.  .yet!couldest  not  be  sa. 
16.  29  and  yet  thou  wast  not  satisfied  herewith 

Joel   2.  19  send  you  corn,  .and  ye  shall  be  satisfied 
2.  26  ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied 

Amos  4.    8  to  drink  water ;  but  they  were  not  satisfi. 

Mic     6. 14  Thou  shalt  eat,  but  not  be  satisfied ;  and 

Hab.   2.    5  (is)  as  death,  aud  cannot  be  satisfied,  but 

i. Satisfied,  satiated,  y?b  sabea. 

Deut-33.  23  O  Naphtali,  satisfied  with  favour,  and 
Prov  19.  23  and  (he  that  hath  it)  shall  abide  satisfied 

SATISFY  (with),  to  — 
1.  To  fill,  nS,?  male,  3. 

Prov.  6  30  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is 
2.To  water,  satiate,  nr\  ravah,  3. 

Prov.  5.  19  let  her  breasts  satisfy  thee  at  all  times 
3.  To  satisfy,  satiate,  ya'y  sabea,  3. 

Psa.  90  14  0  satisfy  us  early  with  thy  mercy;  that 

Eze.    7.  19  they  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls,  neither 

4.7*0  (cause  to)  satisfy,  yric*  scdjea,  5. 

Job  38.  27  To  satisfy  the  desolate  aud  waste  (ground) 
Psa.  81.  16  with  honey. .should  I  have  satisfied  thee 
91.  16  With  long  life  will  I  satisfy  him,  and  sh. 
103.  5  Who  satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  good  (th.) 
105.  40  satisfied  them  with  the  bread  of  heaven 
107.  9  he  satisfieth  the  longing  soul,  and  filleth 
132.  15  I  will  abundantly  bless.  .1  will  satisfy 
145.  16  and  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living  th. 
Isa.  58. 10  (if)  thou,  .satisfy  the  afflicted  soul;  then 
58.  11  satisfy  thy  soul  in  drought,  and  make  fat 

5. Satiety,  satisfaction,  nyity  sobah. 

Isa.   55,    2  your  labour  for  (that  which)  satisfieth  not 
6. To  feed,  fill,  satisfy,  x°PT°-CU}  chortazo, 

Mark  8.    4  whence  can  a  man  satisfy  these  (men)  w. 
SATISFYING  — 
1. Satiety,  satisfaction,  Vl'V  soba. 

Prov  13.  25  The  righteous  eateth  to  the  satisfying  of 
2. Fulness,  ir\ri(rfAOvf}  j>l€smone. 

Col.     s.  23  not  in  any  honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the 
SATYR  — 
Hairy  one,  hid,  goat,  Yyb'  sair. 

Isa.  13.  21  owls  shall  dwell  there,  and  satyrs  shall 
34.  14  the  satyr  shall  cry  to  his  fellow ;  the  sc. 

SATJX,  SHATJX,  *>*$$  SaouA,  'ZavKos  ashed. 

1.  The  sixth  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Kdom,  from  Reho- 
both  on  the  Euphrates.     B.C.  1490. 

Gen.  36.  37  S.  of  Rehoboth.  .reigned  in  his  stead 

36.  38  S.died,  andBaal-hanan.  .reigned  in  his  st. 

1  Ch.  1.  48  S.  of  Rehoboth  by  the  river  reigned  in.  .s. 

1.  49  when  S.  was  dead,  Baal-hanan.  .reigned 

2.  A  Benjamite,  the  first  king  of  Israel.  B.C.  1096-56.' 
He  was  sent  to  seek  his  father's  asses,  applied  to  Samuel, 
was  anointed  byhim.filledwith  the  spirit,  chosen  king, 
restricted  in  his  powers,  delivers  Jabesh-gilead.  arms 
the  people  against  the  Philistines,  defeats  them,  vows 
and  sacrifices  rashly,  his  success,  left  by  Samuel,  sends 
for  David,  tries  to  kill  him,  prophesies,  pursues  David, 
slays  the  priests  of  Nob,  is  spared  by  David  in  the  cave, 
again  at  Hachilah,  consults  a  witch  at  Endor,  is  slain  at 
Gilboawith  his  three  sons,  was  succeeded  by  David. seven 
of  his  sons  given  up  to  the  Gibeonites,  and  hanged. 

1  8a    9.   2  Andhehad  a  son,  whose  name  (was)  S.,  a 
9.   3  the  asses  of  Kish,  S.'s  father,  were  lost 
9.   3  Kish  said  to  8.  his  son .  .go  seek  the  asses 
9.   5  S.  said  to  the  servant  that  (was)  with  him 
9.    7  Then  said  S.  to  his  servant,  But,  behold 
9.    8  the  servant  answered  S.  again,  aud  said 
9.  10  Then  said  S.  to  his  servant,  Well  said;;  co. 
9. 15  Now  the  Lord  had  told  Samuel . .  before  S. 
9. 17  when  Samuel  saw  S.,  the  Lord  said  unto 
9.  18  Then  S.  drew  near  to  Samuel  in  the  gate 
9.  19  Samuel  answered  S.,  and  said,  I  (am)  the 
9.  21  S.  answered  and  said,  (Am)  not  I  a  Benj. 
g.  22  And  Samuel  took  S.  and  his  servant 
9.  24  took  up  the  shoulder.,  and  set  (it)beforeS.' 
9.  24  So  S.  did  eat  with  Samuel  that  day 
9.  25  (Samuel)  communed  with  S.  upon  the  top 
9.  26  Samuel  called  S.  to  the  top  of  the  house 
9.  26  S.  arose,  and  they  went  out  both  of  them 
9.  27  Samuel  said  to  S.,  Bid  the  servant  pass  on 
10.  11,  12  (Is)  S.  also  among  the  prophets? 
10.  14  S.'s  uncle  said  unto  him  and  to  his  serva. 
10. 15  S.'s  uncle  said,  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  what 
10.  16  S.  said  unto  his  uncle.  He  told  us  plainly 
10.  21  S.  the  son  of  Kish  was  taken :  and  when 

10.  26  S.  also  went  home  to  Gibeah ;  and  there 

11.  4  Then  came  the  messengers  to  Gibeah  of  S. 
11.  5  S.  came  after  the  herd  out  of  the  field 
11.  5  S.  said.  What  (aileth)  the  people  that  they 
11.  6  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  S.  when  he 

1 1.  7  Whosoever  cometh  not  forth  after  S.  and 
11. 11  that  S.  put  the  people  in  three  companies 
11.  12  Who  (is)  he  that  said  Shall  S.  reign  over 
ii.  13  S.  said.  There  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to 
11. 15  there  they  made  S.  king  before  the  Lord 
11.  15  there  S.  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  rejoiced 
13.  1  S.  reigned  one  year;  and  when  he  had  re. 
13.  2  S.  chose  him  three  thousand  (men)  of  Is. 
13.  2  (whereof)  two  thousand  were  with  S.  in 
13-   3  S.  blew  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the 


4  S.  had  smitten  a  garrison  of  the  Philistines 
4  the  people  were  gathered  together  after  S. 
7  As  for  S. . .  all  the  people  followed  him  tr. 
9  S.  said,  Bring  hither  a  burnt  offering  to 

10  S.  went  out  to  meet  him,  that  he  might 

11  S.  said,  Because  I  saw  that  the  people  w. 
13  Samuel  said  to  S.,  Thou  hast  done  foolishly 

15  Saul  numbered  the  people  (that  were)pr. 

16  S.,  and  Jonathan,  .abode  in  Gibeah  of  B. 
22  the  people  that  (were)  with  S.  and  Jona. 

.  22  with  S.  and  with  Jonathan  his  son  was 
.  1  S.  said  unto  the  young  man  that  bare  his 
.  2  S.  tarried  in  the  uttermost  part  of  Gibeah 
.  16  the  watchmen  of  S.  in  Gibeah  of  Benjamin 
.  17  S.  said  unto  the  people  that  (were)  with 
.  18  S.  said  unto  Ahiah,  Bring  hither  the  ark 
19  it  came  to  pass,  when  S.  talked  unto  tho 

19  S.  said  unto  the  priest,  Withdraw  thine 

20  S.  and  all  the  people,  .assembled  thems. 

21  the  Israelites  that  (were)  with  S.  and  Jo. 
24  for  S.  had  adjured  the  people,  saying,  C. 

33  Then  they  told  S.,  saying.  Behold,  the  p. 

34  S.  said,  Disperse  yourselves  among  the  p. 

35  And  S.  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 

36  S.  said,  Let  us  go  down  after  the  Philist. 

37  S.  asked  counsel  of  God,  Shall  I  go  down 

38  S.  said,  Draw  ye  near  hither  all  the  chief 

40  the  people  said  unto  S. ,  Do  what  seemeth  g. 

41  Therefore  S.  said  unto  the  Lord  God  of 

41  S.  and  Jonathan  were  taken:  but  the  pe. 

42  S.  said,  Cast  (lots)  between  me  and  Jon. 

43  S.  said  to  Jonathan,  Tell  me  what  thou 

44  S.  answered, Goddosoand  more  also:  for 

45  the  people  said  unto  S.,  Shall  Jonathan 

46  S.  went  up  from  following  the  Philistines 

47  S.  took  the  kingdom  over  Israel,  and  fou. 

49  Now  the  sons  of  S.  were  Jonathan,  and 

50  the  name  of  S.'s  wife  (was)  Ahinoam,  the 

50  captain .  .(was)  Abner,  the  son  of  Ner.  S  s 

51  Kish  (was)  the  father  of  S.  ;  and  Ner  the 

52  And  there  was  sore  war. .  all  the  days  of  S. 
52  when  S.  saw  any  strong  man.  .he  took  him 

1  Samuel  also  said  unto  S.,  The  Lord  sent 

4  S.  gatheredthe  people together.andnum, 

5  S.  came  to  a  city  of  Amalek,  and  laid  wait 

6  S.  said  unto  the  Kenites,  Go,  depart,  get 

7  S.  smote  the  Amalekites  from  Havilah 

9  S.  and  the  people  spared  Agag,  and  the 

1 1  It  repenteth  me  that  I  have  set  up  S.  (to  be) 

12  Samuel  rose  "early  to  meet  S.  in  the  v.  12. 

13  AndSamuelcametoS:andS.saiduntohim 

15  S.  said,  They  have  brought  them  fi*omthe 

16  Samuel  said  unto  S.,  Stay,  and  I  will  tell 
20  S.  said  unto  Samuel,  Yea,  I  have  obeyed 
24  S.  said  unto  Samuel,  I  have  sinned :  for  I 
26  Samuel  said  unto  S.,  I  will  not  return  with 
31  So  Samuel  turned  again  after  S. ;  and  S. 

34  S.  went  up  to  his  house  in  Gibeah  of  S. 

35  SamuelcamenomoretoseeS  until theday 
35  nevertheless  Samuel  mourned  for  S. :  and 
35  the  Lord  repented  that  he  had  made  S. 

1  How  long  wilt  thou  mourn  for  S.,  seeing 

2  How  can  I  go?  if  S.  hear  (it),  he  will  kill 

14  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  S. 

15  S.'s  servants  said  unto  him,  Behold  now 

17  S.  said  unto  his  servants,  Provide  menow 

19  Wherefore  S.  sent  messengers  unto  Jesse 

20  and  sent  (them)  by  David  his  son  unto  S. 

21  David  came  to  S.,  and  stood  before  him 

22  S.  sent  to  Jesse,  saying,  Let  David,  .stand 

23  whenthe(evil)spiritfromGod  wasuponS. 
23  S.  was  refreshed,  and  was  well,  and  the 

2  S.  and  the  men  of  Israel  were  gathered 

8  not  I  a  Philistine,  and  ye  servants  to  S.? 

11  When  S.  and  all  Israel  heard  those  words 

12  man  went,  .an  old  man  in  the  days  of  S. 

13  the  three  eldest  sons,  .followed  S.  to  the 

14  youngest :  and  the  threeeldest  followed.S 

15  David  went  and  returned  from  S.  to  feed 
19  Now  S.,  and  they .  .(were)  in  the  valley  of 

31  words  were  heard,  .rehearsed,  .before  S. 

32  David  said  to  S.,  Let  no  man's  heart  fail 

33  S.  said  to  David,  Thou  art  not  able  to  go 

34  David  said  unto  S.,  Thy  servant  kept  his 

37  S.  said  unto  David,  Go,  and  the  Lord  be 

38  S.  armed  David  with  his  armour,  and  he 

39  David  said  unto  S.,  I  cannot  go  with  th. 
55  when  S.  saw  David  go  forth  against  the  I'. 

57  Abner  took  him.  .brought  him  before  S. 

58  S.  said  to  him,  Whose  son  (art)  thou,  (th  ) 

1  when  he. .  made  an  end  of  speaking  unto  S. 

2  S.  took  him  that  day,  and  would  let  him 
5  David  went  out  whithersoever  S.  sent  him 
5  and  S.  set  him  over  the  men  of  war;  and 

5  was  accepted . .  in  the  sight  of  S.  's  servants 

6  the  women  came  out.,  to  meet  king  S  ,  wi. 

7  S.  hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  David  his 

8  S.  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  disple. 

9  S.  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  forward 
10  that  the  evil  spirit  from  God  came  upon  8. 

10  and  (there  was)  a  javelin  iu  S.'s  hand 

11  S.  cast  the  javelin ;  for  he  said,  I  will 8m. 

12  S.  was  afraid  of  David,  because  the  Lord 

12  was  with  him,  and  was  departed  from  S. 

13  Therefore  S.  removed  him  from  him,  and 
15  when  S.  saw  that  he  behaved  himself  vltv 
17  S.  said  to  David,  Behold  my  elder  daugh 

17  S.  said,  Let  not  mine  hand  be  upon  him 

18  David  said  unto  S.,  Who(am)  I?  and  wh, 

19  S.'s  daughter,  should  have  been  given  to  D. 

20  Ami  Michal  S.'s  daughter  loved  David 

20  and  they  told  S.,  and  the  thing  pleased  him 


SAUL 


837 


SAVE 


i  Sa.  iS. 
18. 


23- 

23. 
23. 
23- 

23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 
23- 

23- 

23- 

23- 
23. 

23- 

23. 
23. 
23- 
23. 
23. 

23- 
23- 

z3- 

24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24, 
24. 


24. 
24. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

z6. 
26. 
26. 
26. 

26. 

26. 
26. 
26 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 

26. 

27. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28, 


21  S.  said,  I  will  give  him  her,  that  she  may 

21  Wherefore  S.  said  to  David,  Thou  shalt 

22  S.  commanded  his  servants.  .Commune 

23  S.'s  servants  spake  those  words  in  the  ears 

24  the  servants  of  S.  told  him,  saying,  On 

25  S.  said,  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  David,  The 
25  S.  thought  to  make  David  fall  by  the  hand 

27  S.  gave  him  Miehal  his  daughter  to  wife 

28  S.  saw  and  knew  that  the  Lord  (was)  with 

28  and  (that)  Miehal,  S.'sdaughter,  loved  him 

29  And  S.  was  yet  the  more  afraid  of  David 

29  and  S.  became  David's  enemy  continually 

30  more  wisely  than  all  the  servants  of  S.,  so 

1  S.  spake  to  Jonathan  his  son,  and  to  all 

2  Jonathan,  S.'s  son.delighted  much  in  David 
2  S.  my  father  seeketh  to  kill  thee :  now 

4  Jonathan  spake  good  of  David  unto  S.,  and 
6  S.  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  Jonathan 

6  S.  sware,  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  he  shall 

7  Jonathan  brought  David  to  S.,  and  he  was 
9  the  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  was  upon  S. 

10  S.  sought  to  smite  David  even  to  the  wall 
10  but  he  slipped  away  out  of  S.'s  presence 
n  S.  also  sent  messengers  unto  David's  ho. 

14  when  S.  sent  messengers  to  take  David 

15  S.  sent  the  messengers  (again)  to  see  Da. 
17  S.  said  unto  Miehal,  Why  hast  thou  dec. 

17  Miehal  answered  S.,  He  said  unto  me,  Let 

18  David,  .told  him  all  that  S.  had  done  to 

19  it  was  told  S.,  saying,  Behold,  David  (is) 

20  S.  sent  messengers  to  take  David  :  and 

20  spirit  of  God . .  upon  the  messengers  of  S. 

21  when  it  was  told  S.,  he  sent  other  messe. 
21  S.  sent  messengers  again  the  third  time 

24  Wherefore  they  say,  (Is)  S.  also  among 

25  Abner  sat  by  S.'s  side,  and  David's  place 

26  Nevertheless  S.  spake  not  anything  that 

27  S.  said  unto  Jonathan  his  son,  Wherefore 

28  Jonathan  answered  S.,  David  earnestly  as. 
30  S.'s  anger  was  kindled  against  Jonathan 

32  Jonathan  answered  S.  his  father,  and  said 

33  And  S.  cast  a  javelin  at  him  to  smite  him 
7  Now  a  certain  man  of  the  servants  of  S. 

7  the  chiefest  of  the  herdmen  that,  .to  S. 

10  arose,  and  fled  that  day  for  fear  of  S. 

11  S.  hathslainhis  thousands,  and  David  his 
6  WTien  S.  heard  that  David  was  discovered 

6  now  S.  abode  in  Gibeah  under  a  tree  in  R. 

7  S.  said  unto  his  servants  that  stood  about 
9  Doeg.  .which,  .set  over  the  servants  of  S. 

12  And  S.  said,  Hear  now,  thou  sou  of  Ahitub 

13  S.  said  unto  him,  Why  have  ye  conspired 

21  Abiathar  showed  David  that  S.  had  slain 

22  I  knew,  .that  day.  .he  would  surely  tell  S. 
7  it  was  told  S.  that  David  was  come  to  R. 

7  S.  said,  God  hath  delivered  him  into  mine 

8  S.  called  all  the  people  together  to  war 

9  David  knew  that  S.  secretly  practised  ni. 

10  thy  servant  hath  certainly  heard  that  S. 

11  will  S.  come  down,  as  thy  servant  hath 

12  Will  the  men.  .deliver,  .into.,  hand  of  S.? 

13  it  was  told  S.that  David  was  escaped  from 

14  S.  sought  him  every  day ;  but  Gud  delive. 

15  D.  saw  that  S.  was  come  out  to  seek  his 

16  Jonathan,  S.'s  son,  arose,  and  went  to  Da. 

17  for  the  hand  of  S.  my  father  shallnotfind 
17  and  that  also  S.  my  father  kuoweth 
19  Then  came  up  the  Zephites  to  S.  to  Gib. 

21  S.  said,  Blessed  (be)  ye  of  the  Lord,  for 

24  they  arose,  and  went  to  Ziph  before  S. 

25  S.  also  and  his  men  went  to  seek  (him) 

25  And  when  S.  heard .  .he  pursued  after  D. 

26  S.  went  on  this  side  of  the  mountain,  and 
26  David  made  haste . .  get  away  for  fear  of  S. 

26  for  S.  and  his  men  compassed  David  and 

27  there  came  a  messenger  unto  S.,  saying 

28  S.  returned  from  pursuing  after  David 

1  when  S.  was  returned  from  following  the 

2  S.  took  three  thousand  chosen  men  out  of 

3  a  cave  :  and  S.  went  in  to  cover  his  feet 

4  David  arose,  and  cut  off  the  skirt  of  S.'s 

5  heart  smote  him,  because  he.  .cutoff  S.'s 
7  David . .  suffered  them . .  to  rise  against  S. 

7  S.  rose  up  out  of  the  cave,  and  went  on 

8  David  also  arose  afterward . .  cried  after  S. 

8  when  S.  looked  behind  him,  David  stoop. 

9  David  said  to  S.,  Wherefore  nearest  thou 
16  David.,  made  an  end  of  speaking.  .untoS. 

16  S.  said,  (Is)  this  thy  voice.  .David?  AndS. 

22  And  David  sware  unto  S.  AndS.  went  ho. 
44  S.  had  given  Miehal  his  daughter,  .to  P. 

1  the  Ziphites  came  unto  S.  to  Gibeah,  say. 

2  S.  arose,  and  went  down  to  the  wildern. 

3  S.  pitched  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  which 

3  he  saw  that  S.  came  after  him  into  the  w. 

4  David,  .understood  that  S.  was  come  in 

5  David,  .came  to  the  place  where  S.  had 
5  and  David  beheld  the  place  where  S.  lay 

5  S.  lay  in  the  trench,  and  the  people  pita 

6  Who  will  go  down  with  me  to  S.  to  the 

7  behold,  S.  lay  sleeping  within  the  trench 
12  David  took,  .the  cruse  of  water  from  S.'s 

17  S.  knew  David's  voice,  and  said,  (Is)  this 
21  Then  said  S.,  I  have  sinned :  return,  my 

.  25  S.  said  to  David,  Blessed  (be)  thou,  my 
25  David  went  on  his  way,  and  S.  returned 
.    1  I  shall,  .perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  S. 
.    1  S.  shalldespair  ofme,  to  seek  me  any  mo. 
.    4  it  was  told  S.  that  David  was  fledfoGath 
.    3  S.  had  put  away  those  that  had  familiar 

4  S.  gathered  all  Israel  together,  and  they 

5  when  S.  saw  the  host  of  the  Philistines 


1  Sa.  28. 


6  when  S.  enquired  of  the  LORD,  the  Lord 

7  Then  said  S.  unto  his  servants,  Seek  me 

8  S.  disguised  himself,  and  put  on  other  ra. 

9  Behold,  thou  knowest  what  S.  hath  done 

10  And  S.  sware  to  her  by  the  Lord,  saying 

12  and  the  woman  spake  to  S. .  .thou  (art)  S. 

13  the  woman  said  unto  S.,  I  saw  gods  asce. 

14  S.  preceived  that  it  (was)  Samuel,  and  he 

15  Samuel  said  to  S.,  Why  hast  thou  disquie. 
15  S.  answered,  I  am  sore  distressed;  for  the 

20  S.  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the  earth 

21  the  woman  came  unto  S.,  and  saw  that 
25  she  brought  (it)  before  S.,  and  before  his 

3  (Is)  not  this  David,  the  servant  of  S.  the 
5  S.  slew  his  thousands,  and  David  his  ten 
2  And  the  Philistines  followed  hard  upon  S. 

2  Philistines  slew  Jonathan. .  Abiuadab . .  S.'s 

3  the  battle  went  sore  against  S.,  and  the 

4  Then  said  S.  unto  his  arniour  bearer,  Draw 

4  Therefore  S.  took  a  sword,  and  fell  upon 

5  when  his  armour  bearer  saw  that  S.  was 

6  S.  died.aud  his  three  sons,  andhisarmour 

7  the  men.  .saw.  .thatS.  and  his  sons  were 

8  they  found  S.  and  his  three  sous  fallen  in 

11  that  which  the  Philistines  had  done  to  S. 

12  the  valiant  men.  .took  the  body  of  S.  and 

1  Now  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of  S. 

2  a  man  came  out  of  the  camp  from  S.,  with 

4  and  S.  and  Jonathan  his  son  are  dead  also 

5  How  knowest  thou  that  S.  and  Jonathan 

6  S.  leaned  upon  his  spear ;  and,  lo,  the  ch. 
12  mourned,  .and  fasted  until  even,  for  S. 
17  David  lamented,  .over  S.  and  over  Jon. 

21  shield,  .vilely  cast  away,  the  shield  of  S. 

22  and  the  sword  of  S.  returned  not  empty 

23  S.  and  Jonathan,  .lovely  and  pleasant  in 

24  Ye  daughters  of  Israel,  weep  over  S.,  who 

4  the  men  of  Jabesh-gilead . .  that  buried  S. 

5  ye  have  showed  this  kindness. .  unto  S., and 

7  for  your  master  S.  is  dead,  and  also  the 

8  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  S.'s  host 

5  took  IsTi-h'  sheth  the  son  of  S. ,  and  brought 
10  S.'s  son  (was)  forty  years  old  when  he  be. 

12  the  servants  of  Ish-bosheth  the  son  of  S. 

15  (pertained)  to  Ish-bosheth  the  sou  of  S. 

1  there  was  a.  .war  between  the  house  of  S. 
1  and  the  house  of  8.  waxed  weaker  and 

6  there  was  war  between  the  house  of  8. 

6  A.  made  himself  strong  for  the  house  of  S. 

7  S.  had  a  concubine,  whose  name  (was)  R. 

8  I.  .show  kindness,  .unto  the  house  of  S. 

10  translate  the  kingdom  from,  .house  ofS. 

13  except  thou  first  briug  Miehal,  S.'s  daug. 

14  David  sent  messengers  to  Ish-bosheth.  S.'s 

1  when  S.'s  son  heard  that  Abner  was  dead 

2  S.'s  son  had  two  men  (that  were)  captains 
4  S.'s  son,  had  ason(that  was)  lame  of  (his) 

4  Ave  years  old  when  the  tidings  came  of  S. 
8  Behold  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth  .  son  of  S. 

8  Lord  hath  avenged  my  lord . .  this  day  of  S. 
10  When  ono  told  me,  saying,  Behold,  S.  is 

2  Also  in  time  past,  when  S.  was  king  over 

16  MichaL  S.  's  daughter,  looked  through  a  wi. 
20  Miehal  the  daughter  of  S.  came  out  to  me. 

23  Therefore  Miehal  the  daughter  of  S.  had 
1  g  as  I  took  (it)  from  S.,  whom  I  put  away 

1  Is  there,  .any  that  is  leftof  thehouseof  S. 

2  And  (there  was)  of  the  house  of  S.  a  serv. 

3  (Is)  there  not  yet  any  of  the  house  of  S. 

6  Mephibosheth . .  son  of  J  onathau . .  son  of  S. 

7  will  restore  thee  all  the  land  of  S.  thy  fa. 

9  Then  the  king  called  to  Ziba,  S.'s  servant 
9  I  have  given.,  all  that  pertained  toS.  and 

7  and  I  delivered  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  S. 

5  thence  came  out  a  man..ofthehouseofS. 

8  hath  returned  upon  thee . .  the  blood,  .of  S. 

17  and  Ziba,  the  servant  of  the  house  of  S. 

24  Mephibosheth  the  son  of  S.  came  down 

1  (It  is)  for  S.,  and  for  (his)  bloody  house 

2  S.  sought  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal  to  the 

4  We  will  have  no  silver  norgold  of  S. ,  nor 

6  hang  them  up  unto. .Lord  in  Gibeah  of  S. 
,  7  spared . .  the  son  of  Jonathan,  the  son  of  S. 
.   7  (was),  .between  David  and.  .the  son  of  S. 

,    8  two  sons  of  Rizpah . .  whom  she  bare  unto  S. 

,    8  the  five  sons  of  Miehal  the  daughter  of  S. 

.  11  what  Rizpah.  .the  concubine  of  S.,  had 

,  12  And  David  went  and  took  the  bones  of  S. 

,  12  when  the  Philistines  had  slain  S.  in  Gil. 

,  13  he  brought  up  from  thence  the  bones  of  S. 

.  14  the  bones  of  S. .  .buried  they  in.  .Ben  jam. 

.  1  Lord  . .  delivered  him.  .out  of  the  hand  of  S. 
10  in  the  days  of  S.  they  made  war  with  the 
33  Ner  begat  Kish,  and  Kish  begat  S.,  and  S. 

.  39  Kish begatS.; and S.begatJonathan,andS. 

.    2  And  the  Philistines  followed  hardafterS. 

.    2  and  the  Philistines  slew,  .the  sons  of  S. 

.    3  the  battle  went  sore  against  S.,  and  the 

.    4  Then  said  S.  to  his  armour  bearer,  Draw 

.    4  So  S.  took  a  sword,  and  fell  upon  it 

.    5  when  his  armour  bearer  saw  that  S.  was 

,    6  So  S.  died . .  and  all  his  house  died  togeth. 

.    7  the  men.  .saw.  .that  S.  and  his  sons  were 

,    8  they  founds,  and  his  sons  fallenin  mount 

,  11  all  that  the  Philistines  had  done  to  S. 

.  1 2  They  arose . .  and  took  away  the  body  of  S. 

.  13  S.  died  for  his  transgression  which  he  co. 

.    2  in  time  past,  even  when  S.  was  king,  thou 

,    1  while  he . .  kept  himself  close  because  of  S. 

,    2  (even)  of  S.'s  brethren  of  Benjamin 
19  he  came  with  the  Philistines  against  S  to 

.  19  He  will  fall  to  his  master  S.  to  (the  jeop. 


52. 
54- 
57- 
59- 
10.  29  J 


1  Ch.i2.  23  ready  armed,  .to  turn  the  kingdom  of  S.  to 

12.  29  children  of  Benjamin,  the  kindred  of  S. 

12.  29  them  had  kept  the  ward  of  the  house  of  S. 

13.  3  for  we  enquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  S. 
15.  29  Miehal  the  daughter  of  S. .  .saw  king  Da. 
26.  28  all  that . .  S.  the  son  of  Kish . .  had  dedica. 

Psa.  18.  title.  Lord  delivered,  .from  the  hand  of  S. 
Doeg  the  Edomite  came  and  told  S.,  and 
when  the  Ziphims  came  and  said  to  S. 
when  he  fled  from  S.  in  the  cave 
when  S.  sent,  and  they  watched  the  ho. 
Isa.    10.  29  Ramah  is  afraid ;  Gibeah  of  S.  is  fled 
Acts  13.  21  and  God  gave  unto  them  S.  the  son  of  Cis 
3.  The  origiual  name  of  PAUL,  a  native  of  Tarsus  in 
Cilicia,  first  a  persecutor,  and  afterwards  an  apostle  of 
Jesus  the  Christ.    See  Paid.  a.d.  3-70. 

Acts    7.  58  at  a  young  man's  feet,  whose  name  was  S. 
8.    1  And  S.  was  consenting  unto  his  death 
8.    3,  As  for  S.,  he  made  havock  of  the  church 
1  And  S.,yet  breathing  out  threatenings  and 
4  saying  unto  him,  S.,  S.,  why  persecutest 
8  S.  arose  from  the  earth;  and  when  his  ey. 
1  in  the  house  of  Judas  for  (one)  called  S. 
17  Brothers.,  the  Lord,  (even)  Jesus.. hath 
19  Then  was  [S.]  certain  days  with  the  disc. 
22  S.  increased  the  more  in  strength,  and 
24  But  their  laying  await  was  known  of  S. 
26  when  [S.J  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he  ass. 
11.  25  departed  Barnabas  to  Tarsus,  .to  seek  S. 

11.  30  sent  it  to  the  elders  by  the  hands  of.  ,S. 

12.  25  Barnabas  and  S.  returned  from  Jerusalem 

13.  1  brought  up  with  Herod  the  tetrach.  .S. 
13.    2  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  S.  for  the  work 
13.    7  who  called  for  Barnabas  and  S.,  and  des. 
13.   9  Then  S.,  who  also  (is  called)  Paul,  filled 
22.    7  saying  unto  me,  S.,  S.,  why  persecutest 
22.  13  and  said  unto  me,  Brother  S.,  receive  thy 
26.  14  saying.  .S.,  S.,  why  persecutest  thou  met 

SAVE,  SAVING,  (for)  save  that,  only  — 
1.0/ily,  ~N  ak. 

Exodi2.  16  save  (that)  which  every  man  must  eat,  th. 

2.  But,  rather,  except,  dx  '3  ki  ivi. 

Gen.  39.    6  he  knew  not  ought  he  had,  save  the  bread 

2  Ch.  2.    6  that  I  should  build  him  an  house,  save 
Eccl.   5.  11  saving  the  beholding  (of  them)  with  their 

3,  End,  cessation,  Dsy;  epJtes. 

Deut  15.    4  Save  when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among 
Amos  9.    8  saving  that  I  will  not  utterly  destroy  the 

i.  Without,  save,  besides,  ny.?5  bilade. 

Gen.  14.  24  Save  only  that  which  the  young  have  eaten 
"Psa.  18.  31  who  (is)  God  save  the  Lord?  or  who  (is) 

5.  Without,  save,  not,  -n??  bilti. 

Exod22.  20  He  that  sacrificeth  unto  (any)  god,  sav; 

6.  Save,  except,  besides,  fijii  zulah. 

Deut.  1.  36  Save  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh;  he  shall 
Josh  11.  13  burned  none  of  them,  save  Hazor  only 
1  Sa.  21.    9  take  (it);  for  (there  is)  no  other  save  that 

1  Ki.   3.  18  no  stranger.,  in  the  house,  save  we  two  in 

2  Ki.  24.  14  save  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the 
Psa.  18.  31  who(is)God..who(is)aroeksaveourGod? 

7.  Therefore,  except,  but,  ]rfo  lahen. 

Dan.    6.    7  whosoever  shall  ask  a  petition,  .save  of 

8. Only,  surely,  nevertheless,  pi  rag. 

1  Ki.   8.    9  (There  was)  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the 

9.  But,  a\\d  alia. 

Matt  19.  11  All  (men)  cannot  receive  this  saying,  save 
Mark  9.    8  they  saw  no  man  any  more,  [save]  Jesus 

10. Tf  not,  except,  el  yA\  eime. 

Matt  11.  27  neither  kuoweth  any  man  thcFather,save 
13.  57  A  prophet  is  not  without  hunour,  save  in 
17.  8  And.  .they  saw  no  man,  save  Jesus  only 
Mark  5.  37  he  suffered  no  man  to  follow  him,  save  P. 
6.  5  save  that  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  si. 
6.  8  nothing  for  their  journey,  save  astaff  only 
Luke  4.  26  unto  none  of  them  was  Elias  sent,  save 

4.  27  none  of  them  was  cleansed,  saving  Naa. 

5.  51  he  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save  Peter  and 

17.  18  There  are  not  found  that  returned,  .save 

18.  19  none  (is)  good,  save  one,  (that  is),  God 
John  6.  22  save  that  one  whereinto  his  disciples  were 

6.  46  save  he  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the 
Acts  21.  25  [save  only  that  they  keep  themselves  from] 

1  Co.   2.    2  not  to  know  any  thing  among  you,  save 

2.  11  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him 
Gal.     1.  19  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none,  save  Ja. 

6.  14  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Rev.    2.  17  which  no  man  kuoweth  saving  he  that 
13.  17  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he 

ll.Than,  %  e. 

Johu  13. 10  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  [save]  to 

V2.To  the  side  of,  wapd  {ace.)  para. 

2  Co.  11.  24  five  times  received  I  forty  (stripes)  save 

13.  Outside,  without,  except,  ira.pt kt 6$  parektos. 
Matt.  5.  32  whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  sav. 

14. But,  yet,  besides,  irX-fjv  plen. 

Acts  20.  23  Save  that  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in 

SAVE  (alive,  life),  to  — 
] .  To  live,  rrn  chayah. 

1  Sa.  10.  24  the  people  shouted,  and  said,  God  save 


SAVE 


838 


SAVIOUR 


■2  Sa.  16.  16  God  save  the  kiug,  God  save  the  king 
i  Ki.    i.  25  they  eat  and  drink . .  and  say,  God  save 
1.  34  blow  ye . .  and  say,  God  save  king  Solomon 
1.  39  the  people  said,  God  save  king  Solomon 
2  Ki.11. 12  clapped  their  hands,  and  said,  God  save 
2  Ch.23.  11  anointed  him,  audsaid,  God  save  the  king 

%To  keep  living,  quicken,  irn  chayah,  3. 

Gen.  12.  12  will  kill  me  but  they  will  save  thee  alive 

Exod.  1. 17  the  midwives.  .saved  the  men  children 
1. 18  and  have  saved  the  men  children  alive 
1.  32  saying,  .every  daughter  ye  shall  save  alive 

Num.  31.  15  said..  Have  ye  saved  all  the  women  alive? 

Deut2o.  16  thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  breat. 

Judg2i,  14  gave  them  wives  which  they  had  saved  a. 

1  Sa.  27.  11  David  saved  neither  man  nor  woman  alive 

1  Ki.  iS.    5  grass  to  save  the  horses  and  mules  alive 

20.  31  the  king..peradventure  he  will  save  thy  1. 

2  Ki.   7.    4  if  they  save  us  alive,  we  shall  live  ;  and 
Eze.    3.  18  speakest  to  warn  the  wicked. .to  save  his  1. 

13.  18  audwillye  save  the  souls  alive  (that  come) 

13.  19  to  save  the  souls  alive  that  should  not  live 
iS.  27  turueth  away . .  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive 

3. To  (jive  or  preserve  life,  n;g  chayah,  5. 

Gen.  19.  19  thou  hast  showed  unto  me  in  saving  my  1. 

45.    7  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  deliverance 

47.  25  Thou  hast  saved  our  lives ;  let  us  lind  gr. 

50.  20  God  meant  it.  .to  save  much  people  alive 

Nuni22.  33  also  I  had  slam  thee,  and  saved  her  alive 

Josh.  2.  13  ye  will  save  alive  my  father,  and  my  mo. 

6.  25  Joshua  saved  Rahab  the  harlot  alive,  and 

Judg  8.  19  if  ye  had  saved  them  alive,  I  would  not 

4.  To  preserve  life,  ':n  chai/ai, 

Neh.  6.  11  would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his  life 

^.Safety  or  case,  njp0<  yeshucch. 

Psa.  80.    2  stir  up  thy  strength,  (and)  come  and  save 

6.  To  save,  give  safety  or  ease,  VV)  yasha,  5. 

Exodi4.  30  the  Lord  saved  Israel  that  day  out  of  the 
Deut2o.    4  to  fight  for  you  against  your  enemies,  to 

22.  27  damsel  cried,  and  (there  was)  none  to  sa. 

28.  29  only  oppressed,  .and  no  man  shall  save 
Josh.  10.    6  come  up  to  us  quickly,  aud  save  us,  and 

22.  22  if  (it  be)  in  rebellion,  .save  us  not  this 
Judg.  6.  14  thou  shalt  save  Israel  from  the  hand  of 

6.  15  wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel?  behold,  my 

6.  31  Will  ye  plead  for  Baal?  will  ye  save  him? 
6-  36,  37  thou  wilt  save  Israel  by  mine  hand,  as 

7.  2  saying,  Mine  own  hand  hath  saved  me 
7.    7  By  the  three  hundred  men.  .will  I  save 

i  Sa.   4.    3  it  may  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  en. 
7.   8  he  will  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 
9. 16  he  may  save  my  people  out  of  the  hand 
10.  19  who  himself  saved  you  out  of  all  your  ad. 

10.  27  How  shall  this  man  save  us?  And  theyde. 

11.  3  if  (there  be)  no  man  to  save  us,  we  will 

14.  6  (there  is)  no  restraint  to  the  LORD  to  save 
14.  23  the  Loud  saved  Israel  that  day:  and  the 
14.  39  (as)  the  Lord  liveth,  which  saveth  Israel 
17.47  the  LoRDsaveth  not  with  sword  and  spear 

23.  2  smite  the  Philistines,  and  save  Keilah 
23.    5  David  saved  the  inhabitants  of  Keilah 

2  Sa.   3.  1 8  I  will  save  my  people  Israel  out  of  the  ha. 
22.    3  mysaviour  ;  thou  savestme  from  violence 
22.  28  the  afflicted  people  thou  wilt  save:  but 
22.  42  They  looked,  but  (there  was)  none  to  save 

2  Ki.14.  27  he  saved  them  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam 
16.    7  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of 
19.  i9«ave  thou  us  out  of  his  hand,  that  all  the 

19.  34  I  will  defend  this  city  tosave  it,  for  mine 

1  Ch.11.  "14  the  Lord  saved  (them)  by  a  great  deliver. 

16.  35  Save  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and  ga. 

2  Ch.32.  22  the  Lord  saved  Hezekiah  and  the  inhab. 
Neh.  9.  27  saved  them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  ene. 
Job     5.  15  he  saveth  the  poor  from  the  sword,  from 

22.  29  and  he  shall  save  the  humble  person 
26.    2  savest  thou  the  arm  (that  hath)  no  stren. 
40.  14  that  thiue  own  right  hand  can  save  thee 
Pfeft,     3.    7  save  me,  O  my  God:  for  thou  hast  smitten 

6.  4  delivermysoul:  oh  save  meforthymerci. 

7.  1  save  me  from  all  them  that  persecute  me 
7.  10  My  defence  (is)  of  God,  which  saveth  the 

17.  7  thou  that  savest  by  thy  right  hand  them 

18.  27  thou  wilt  save  the  afflicted  people;  but 
28.  41  They  cried,  but  (there  was)  none  to  save 

20.  6  Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  an. 
20.  9  Save, Lord:  let  the  king  hearus  when  wee. 
22.  21  Save  me  from  the  lion's  mouth  :  for  thou 
28.  9  Save  thy  people,  and  bless  thine  inheri. 
31.  2  rock,  for  an  house  of  defence  to  save  me 
31.  16  .Make  thy  face  to  shine,  .save  me  for  thy 
34.  6  the  Lord  heard  (him),  and  saved  him  out 
34.  18  and  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite  spirit 
37.  40  andsave  them,  because  they  trust  in  him 
44.  3  neither  did  their  own  arm  save  them ;  but 
44.  6  my  bow,  neither  shall  my  sword  save  me 
44.    7  thou  hast  saved  us  from  our  enemies,  and 

54.  1  Save  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name,  and  judge 

55.  16 1  will  call.,  aud  the  LoKD  shall  save  me 
57.    3  save  me  (from)  the  reproach  of  him  that 

59.  2  Deliverme..andsavemefrombloodymen 

60.  5  save  (with)  thy  right  hand,  and  hear  me 
69,  1  Save  me,  0  God  ;  for  the  waters  are  come 
69.  35  God  will  save  Zion,  and  will  build  the  ci. 
71.    2  incline  thine  ear  unto  me,  and  save  me 

71.  3  thou  hast  given  commandment  to  save 

72.  4  he  shall  save  the  children  of  the  needy 
72.  13  He  shall.. save  the  souls  of  the  needy 
76.    9  God  arose  to  judgment,  to  save  all  the 
86    2  save  thy  servant  that  trusteth  in  thee 


Psa.  S6.  16  give  thy  streugth.  .and  save  the  son  of 
106.  8  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake,  that 
106.  10  he  saved  them  from  the  hand  of  him  that 

106.  47  Save  us,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  gather  us 

107.  13   19  (and)  he  saved  them  out  of  their  dist, 

108.  6  save  (with)  thy  right  hand,  and  answer 

109.  26  Help  me,  O  Lord  my  God :  O  save  me 
109.  31  to  save  (him)  from  those  that  condemn 

118.  25  Save  now,  I  beseech  thee,  OLord  :  OLord 

119,  94  I  (am)  thine,  save  me ;  for  I  have  sought 
119.  146  save  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  testimonies 
138.    7  thou,  .and  thy  right  hand  shall  save  me 
145.  19  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  will  save 

Prov.20.  22  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  save  thee 
Isa.  25.    9  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  lie  will  save 
33.  22  the  Lord  (is)  our  king ;  he  will  save  us 

35.  4  behold,  your  God .  .he  will  come  and  save 
37. 20  save  us  from  his  hand,  that  all  the  kingd. 

37.  35  I  will  defend  this  city  to  save  it,  for  mine 

38.  20  The  Lord  (was  ready)  to  save  me :  theref. 
43.  12  I  have  declared,  and  have  saved,  audi  ha. 
45. 20  and  pray  unto  a  god  (that)  cannot  save 

46.  7  yet  can  he  not  answer,  nor  save  him  out 

47.  13  save  thee  fronV(these  things)  that  shall  co. 
47.  15  they  shall  wander,  .none  shall  save  thee 
49.  25  I  will  contend.  .1  will  save  thy  children 
59.    1  hand  is  notshortened,  that  it  cannot  save 
63.    1  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save 
63.    9  and  the  angel  of  his  presence  saved  them 

Jer.     2.  27  but.  .they  will  say,  Arise,  and  save  us 

2.  28  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  time  of  thy  tr. 

11.  12  they  shall  not  save  them  atallin  the  time 

14.  9  astonied,  as  a  mighty  man  (that)  cannot 

15.  20  I  (am)  with  thee  to  save  thee,  and  to  del. 
17.  14  Heal  me.  .save  me.  .for  thou  (art)  my  pr. 
30.  10  I  will  save  thee  from  afar,  and  thy  seed 

30.  11  I  (am)  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  to  save 

31.  7  Lord,  save  thy  people,  the  remnant  of  Is. 
42.  11  for  I  (am)  with  you  to  save  you,  and  to 
46.  27  I  will  save  thee  from  afar  off,  and  thy  seed 

Lam.  4. 17  watched  for  a  nation  (that)  could  not  save 
Eze.  34.  22  Therefore  will  I  save  my  flock,  and  they 

36.  29  also  save  you  from  all  youruncleannesses 

37.  23  I  will  save  them  out  of  all  their  dwelling 
Hos.   1.    7  will  save  them  by  the  Loi;D  their  God,  and 

1.    7  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword 

13.  10  where  (is  any  other)  that  may  save  thee 

14.  3  Asshur  shall  not  save  us ;  we  will  not  ride 
Hal).  1.  2  cry  out  unto  thee,  .and  thou  wilt  not  save 
Zeph.  3.  17  he  willsave,he  will  rejoice  overthee  with 

3. 19  I  will  save  her  that  halteth,  and  gather 
Zech.  8.    7  I  will  save  my  people  from  the  east  coun. 

8.  13  so  will  I  save  you,  aud  ye  shall  be  a  Dies. 

9.  16  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  as  the  fi 
10.    6  I  will  save  the  house  of  Joseph,  and  I  will 

12.  7  The  Lord  also  shall  save  the  tents  of  Ju. 

7. To  let  or  cause  toescap>e,  slip  away,  shipmalat,  3. 

1  Sa.  19. 11  If  thou  save  not  thy  life  tonight,  tomorrow 

2  Sa.  19.    5  servants, which  this  day  have  savedthy  life 

1  Ki.  1.  12  thou  mayest  save  thine  own  life,  and  the 
Job  20.  20  he  shall  not  save  of  that  which  he  desired 
Jer.  43.    6  save  your  lives,  and  be  like  the  heath  in 

S.To  snatch  atoay,  "?sn  ncctsal,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.    9  The  kiug  saved  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our 

9. To  keep,  preserve,  ivy  shamar. 

Job     2.    6  Behold,he  (is)  in  thine  hand ;  but  save  his  1. 

XO.To  save,  keep  thoroughly  sound,  Siao-w(,o>  diaso, 
Acts  27.  43  the  centurion,  willing  to  save  Paul,  kept 
1  Pe.   3.  20  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls  were  sa. 

11.  To  save,  keep  sound,  criofa  sozo. 

Matt.  1.  21  forhe  shall  save  bis  people  from  their  sins 
8. 25  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  save  us :  we  pe. 

14.  30  beginning  to  sink,  he  cried.  .Lord,  save 
16.  25  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it 

18.  11  [the  son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that  which] 
27.  40  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  .save 
27.  42  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save 
27. 49  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save 

Mark  3.    4  Is  it  lawful,  .on  the  sabbath,  .to  save  life 
8.  35  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it 

8.  35  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life,  .shall  save 

15.  30  Save  thyself,  aud  come  down  from  the  cr. 
15.  31  He  saved  others;  himself  he  cannot  save 

Luke  6.   9  Is  it  lawful  on  the  sabbath,  .to  save  life 
7.  50  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace 

9.  24  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it 
9. 24  whosoever  will  lose  his  life . .  shall  save  it 
9.  36  [notcometodestroymeu'slives,buttos.]? 

J7-  33  "Whosoever  shall  seek  [to  savejhis  life  sh, 
18.42  Receive  thy  sight  :  thy  faith  hath  saved 

19.  10  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
23.  35  He  saved  others  ;  let  him  save  himself,  if 
23.  37  If  thou  be  theking  of  the  Jews,  save  thy. 
23.  39  If  thou  be  Christ,  save  thyself  and  us 

John  12.  27  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour  :  but  for 

12.  47  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save 

Kom.11.  14  If  by  any  means  I.  .might  save  some  of 

1  Co.    1. 21  it  pleased  God. .to  save  them  that  believe 

7. 16,  16  knowest  thou,  .whether  thou  shalt  sa. 

9.  22  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some 

1  Ti.    1.  15  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners 

4.  16  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself,  and  them  th. 

2  Ti.  1.  9  Who  hatli  saved  us,  and  called  (us)  with 
Titus  3.  5  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regenera. 
Heb.   5.    7  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from 

7.  25  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  utter. 

Oas.     1.  21  the  ingrafted  word,  which  is  able  to  save 

2. 14  aud  have  not  works?  can  faith  save  him 


Jas.  4.  12  There  isone  law giver.'who  isable  to  save 
5.  15  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sh  k,  and 
5.  20  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall 

1  Pe.  3.  21  whereunto  (even)  baptism  doth  also.  .s. 
Jude        5  having  saved  the  people  out  of  the  laud 

23  others  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out 
12.  To  guard,  (pv\d<r<ru}  pfvulasso. 

2  Pe.  2.  5  savedNoah,theeighth(person),apreacher 
SAVE  self,  to  — 

l.To  be  kept,  preserved,  idp  shamar,  2. 

2  Ki.  6.  10  saved  himself  there,  not  once  nor  twice 
2.  To  save,  keep  sound,  <ru>£<a  svzo. 

Acta   2.  40  Save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  gen. 
SAVED,  to  be  — 
1.7V)  be  saved  or  eased,  y#*  yasha,  2. 

Num  10.   9  and  ye  shall  he  saved  from  your  enemies 
Dent  33.  29  who  (is)  like  unto  thee,  0  people  saved  by 
2  Sa.  22.    4  so  Khali  I  be  saved  from  mine  enemies 
Psa.  18.    3  so  shall  I  be  saved  from  mine  enemies 
33.  16  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude 
80.    3,  7,  19  Turn  us  again,  .we  shall  be  saved 
Prov  28. 18  Whoso  walketh  uprightly  shall  be  saved? 
Isa.   30.  15  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved 
45. 17  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  the  LORD  with  an 
45.  22  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth;  for 
64.    5  iu  those  is  continuance,  .we shall  be  sav. 
Jer.     4.  14  wash  thine  heart,  .that  thou  mayest  bes. 
8. 20  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not  sav. 
17.  14  and  I  shalt  be  saved  :  for  thou  (art)  my 

23.  6  Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall 
30.   7  trouble.  .But  he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it 
33.  16  In  those  days  shall  Judah  be  saved,  and 

2.7*0  make  or  keep  sound  or  safe,  o-(t>fa  sozo. 

Mattio.  22  he  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  sav. 
19.  25  amazed,  saying,  Who  then  can  he  saved? 

24.  13  But  he  that  shall  endure,  .shall  be  saved 
24.  22  there  should  no  ilesh  be  saved  :  but  for  the 

Markio.  26  saying  among  themselves,  Who.. can  be  s. 
13.  13  but  he  that  shall  endure.. shall  be  saved 
13,  20  no  flesh  should  be  saved :  but  for  the  elect's 
16.  16  [He  thatbelieveth.. shall  be  saved;  but  he] 

Luke  8.  12  lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved 
i3._23  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved?  And 
iS.  26  they  that  heard  (it)  said,  Who.  .can  be  sa. 

John  3.  17  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved 
5.  34  these  things  I  say,  that  ye  might  be  saved 

10.  9  if  any  mau  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and 
Acts    2.  21  (that)  whosoever  shall  call. .  shall  be  saved 

2.  47  to  the  church  daily  such  as  should  be  sa. 

4.  12  none  other  name,  .whereby  we  must  be  sa. 

11.  14  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be  saved 

15.  1  Except  ye  be  circumcised,  .yecannotbes. 
15. 11  we  believe,  .we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they 

16.  30  and  said,  Sirs,  whatmustl  dotobe  saved? 
16.  31  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  aud  thy  house 
27.  20  all  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was  then 
27.  31  Except  these  abide,  .ye  cannot  be  saved 

Rom.  5.    9  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  h. 

5.  10  being  reconciled,  we  shallbe  saved  by  his 

8.  24  we  are  saved  by  hope  :  but  hope  that  is 

9.  27  be  as  the  sand,  .a  remnant  shall  be  saved 
10.    9  if  thou . .  shalt  believe . .  thou  shalt  be  sav. 

10.  13  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved 

11.  26  Israel  shall  be  saved :  as  it  is  written,  Th. 

1  Co.   1.  18  unto  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power 

3.  15  he  himself  shallbe  saved;  yet  so  as  by  fire 
5.   5  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the 

10.  33  the  (profit)  of  many,  that  they  may  besa. 
15.    2  By  which  also  ye  are  saved,  if  ye  keep  in 

2  Co.  2. 15  in  them  that  are  saved,  and  iu  them  that 
Eph.   2.    5  bath  quickened  us.,  by  grace  ye  are  saved 

2.    8  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith ;  and 

1  Th.   2.  16  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  might  be  saved 

2  Th.  2.  10  received  not  the  love.. they  might  lie  sav. 
1  Ti.    2.    4  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and 

2.  15  she  shall  be  saved  in  child  bearing,  if  they 

1  Pe.  4.  18  if  the  righteous  scarely  be  saved,  where 
Rev.  21.  24  the  nations  [of  them  which  are  saved]  sh. 

3.  Safety,  a-wrripla  sdteria. 

Luke  1.  71  That  we  should  be  saved  from  our  enem. 
Rom  10.    1  my.  .prayer,  .is,  that  they  might  be  saved 

SAVING  (health)  — 

1.  Safety,  ease,  n^v]  yeshuah. 

Psa.  28.  8  he  (is)  the  saving  strength  of  his  anointed 
67.    2  thy  saving  health  among  all  nations 

2. Safety,  ease,  y^."  yesha. 

Tsa.  20.    6  with  the  saving  strength  of  his  right  hand 
3.-1  making  all  around,  saving,  -TrepnrolTjo-is. 

Heb.  10.  39  of  them  that  believe  to  the  saving  of  the 

4. Safety,  case,  a-corTjpia  soteria. 

Heb.  ii.    7  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  ho. 
SAVIOUR  — 
l.To  save,  give  ease,  yv*T  yasha,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  3  my  high  tower,  and  my  refuge,  my  savi. 
2  Ki.13.  5  the  Lord  gave  Israel  a  saviour.so  thatth, 
Neh.  9.  27  thougavest  them  saviours,  who  saved  th. 
Psa  106.  21  They  forgatGod  their  saviour,  which  had 
Isa.   19.  20  he  shall  send  them  a  saviour,  and  a  great 

43.  3  God,  the  holy  One  of  Israel,  thy  saviour 
43.  11 1.. (am)  the  Lord  ;  and.. (there  is) no  sav. 
45.  15  hidest  thyself,  0  God  of  Israel,  the  savio. 
45.  21  and  a  saviour;  (there  is)  none  besidesmo 
49.  26  that  I  the  Lord  (am)  thy  saviour  and  thy 
60.  16  that  I  the  Lord  (am)  thy  saviour  and  thy 


SAVOUR 


839 


SAY 


2 

A  savia 
Luke  i 

2. 

Johu  4. 
Acts  5. 

13- 
Eph.   5. 
Phil.   3. 
1  Ti.    1. 

2. 

4- 

zTi.    1. 
Titus  1. 

2  Pe. 


Isa.  63.  8 (are) my  people.. so  he  was  their  saviour 
Jer.  14.  S  O  the  hope  of  Israel,  the  saviour  thereof 
Hos.  13-  4  no  god  but  me ;  for  (there  is)  no  saviour 
Obad,      21  saviours  shall  come  up  on  mount  Zion  to 

ur,  preserver,  o'wrrjp  soter. 
.  47  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  saviour 
.  11  in  the  city  of  David,  a  saviour,  which  is 
,  42  this  is  indeed  the  Christ,  the  saviour  of 
31  (to  be)  a  prince  and  a  saviour,  for  to  give 
.  23  hathGod.  .raised  unto  Israel  asaviour,J. 
,  23  as  Christ,  .he  is  the  saviour  of  the  body 
.  20  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  saviour 
,    1  the  commandment  of  God  our  saviour,  and 
.    3  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  savi. 
.  10  who  is  the  saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of 
.  10  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  our  saviour 
.    3  the  commandment  of  God  our  saviour 
.   4  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  saviour 
,  10  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  saviour  in 
.  13  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  savi. 
.    4  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  saviour 
.    6  Which  he  shed  on  us . .  through . .  our  sav. 
.    1  the  righteousness  of  God  and  our  saviour 
.  11  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  saviour  Jesus 

2.  20  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  saviour 

3.  2  of  us  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  and  saviour 
3.  18  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  saviour 

1  Jo.  4. 14  the  Father  sent  the  Son  (to  be)  the  savio. 
Jude       25  To  the  only  wise  God  our  saviour,  (be)  g. 

SAVOUR,  (ill)  — 

1. Stench,  n^U*  tsachanaJt. 

Joel    2.  20  his  ill  savour  shall  come  up,  because  he 

2.  Smelly  savour,  fragrance,  nn  reach. 

Gen.    8.  21  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour;  and 

Exod.  5.  21  ye  have  made  our  savour  to  be  abhorred 

29. 18,  41  a  sweet  savour,  an  offering  made  by 

29.  25  for  a  burnt  offering,  for  a  sweet  savour 

Lev.    1.   9,  13,  17  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 

2.  2,  9  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  sa. 
2. 12  be  burnt  on  the  altar  for  a  sweet  savour 

3.  5  au  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  sav. 

3.  16  offering  made  by  fire  for  a  sweet  savour 

4.  31  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar  for  a  sweet  sav. 
6.  15  burn  it  upon  the  altar  (for)  a  sweet  sav. 
6.  21  shalt  thou  offer  (for)  a  sweet  savour  unto 
8.  21  it  (was)  a  burnt  sacrifice  for  a  sweet  sav. 
8.  28  they  (were)  consecrations  for  a  sweet  sav. 

17.  6  burn  the  fat  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 
23. 13  offering  made  by  fire .  .(for)  a  sweet  sav. 
23.  18  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  sweet  savour 

26.  31 1  will  not  smell  the  savour  of  your  sweet 
Nuni.15.    3  to  make  a  sweet  savoiu*  unto  the  Lord 

15.  7  an  bin  of  wine,  for  a  sweet  savour  unto 
15.  10,  13,  14  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 

15.  24  a  burnt  offering,  for  a  sweet  savour  unto 

18.  17  an^offering  made  by  fire,  for  a  sweet  sav. 
28.  2  sacrifices  made  by  fire,  (for)  a  sweet  sav. 
28.  6  for  asweet  savour,  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire 
28.  8  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  asweet  savour 
28.  13  a  burnt  offering  of  a  sweet  savour,  a  sav 

28.  24  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savour 
2S.  27  offer  the  burnt  offermgfor  asweet  savour 

29.  2  offer  a  burut  offering  for  a  sweet  savour 
29.   6  for  a  sweet  savour,  a  sacrifice  made  by 
29.  8  offer  a  burnt  offering  .  .(for)  a  sweet  sav. 
29.  13,  36  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  sav. 

Song   1.    3  Because  of  the  savour  of  thy  good  oint. 
Eze.    6.  13  the  place  where  they  did  offer  sweet  sav. 

16.  19  even  set  it  before  them  for  a  sweet  sav. 
20.  28  then-  also  they  made  their  sweet  savour 
20. 41  I  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet  savour 

3.-4  smell,  odour,  bfffxi]  osme. 

2  Co.   2.  14  maketh  manifest  the  savour  of  his  know. 

2.  16  To  the  one  (we  are)  the  savour  of  death 
2.  16  and  to  the  other  the  savour  of  life  unto  li. 

Eph.    5.    2  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  sav. 
SAVOUR,  sweet  — 
l.Rest,  sweetness,  iiirn  nichoach. 

Ezra  6.  10  they  may  offer  sacrifices  of  sweet  savours 
2.  Sweet  smell,  fragrance,  euwSia  euodia. 

2  Co.  2. 15  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ 
SAVOUR,  to  lose  — 
To  make  insipid,  foolish,  fAwpdwoo  morai?w. 

Matt.  5. 13  if  the  salt  have  lost  his  savour,  wherewith 

Luke  14.  34  if  the  salt  have  lost  his  savour,  wherewith 
SAVOTTR,  to  — 
To  set  the  mind  on,  (ppovew  phronco. 

Matt  16.  23  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of 

Mark  8.  33  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of 
SAVOURY  meat  — 
Tasteful  things,  D'JaggD  matammim. 

Gen.  27.    4  make  me  savoury  meat,  such  as  I  love,  and 

27.  7  make  me  savoury  meat,  that  I  may  eat 
27.   9  I  will  make  them  savoury  meat  for  thy 
27.  14  his  mother  made  savoury  meat,  such  asiiis 
27. 17  she  gave  the  savoury  meat  and  the  bread 
27. 31  And  he  also  had  made  savoury  meat,  and 

SAW  — 

l.A  saw,  TrnQ  megerah. 

2  Sa.  12.  31  put  them  under  saws,  and  under  hanows 

1  Ki.  7.    9  sawed  with  saws,  within  and  without,  ev. 

1  Ch.  20.    3  cut  (them)  with  saws  and  with  harrows  of 
2.  A  saw,  Tt?n  massor. 

Isa.  10.  15  shall  the  saw  magnify  itself  against  him 


SAWN  or  sawed  (asunder),  to  be  —  - 
1.7b  sato,  Tia  garar,  3a. 

1  Ki.  7.    9  sawed  with  saws,  within  and  without,  ev. 

2. To  saw,  TTp[(io prizo. 

Heb.  11.  37  they  were  sawn  asunder,  were  tempted,  w. 

SAY,  to  — 

1.  To  say,  lift  up  the  voice,  i.ps  amar. 

Gen.    1.    3  And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light :  and 
See  v.  6,  9,  11,  14,  20,  24,  26,  28,  29;  2.  18,  23;  3.  1,  i, 
2>  3,  4>  9t  io»  iij  12,  13,  13,  14,  16,  17,  22;  4.  1,  6,  8,  9,  9, 

10,  13,  15,  23 ;  6.  3,  7,  13 ;  7.  1 ;  8.  21 ;  9.  r,  8,  12,  17,  25, 
26;  11.  3,  4,  6;  12.  1,  7,  ti,  12,  13,  18,  19;  13.  .8,  14;  14. 

19,  21,  22,  23;  15.  2,  3,  5,  s,  7,  8,  9,  13;  16.  2,  5,  6,  6,  9, 
io,  11,  13;  17.  i,  9,  15,  17,  1 S,  19;  18.  3,  5,  6,  9,  9,  10,  13, 
15,  17,  20,  23,  26,  27,  28,  29,  29,  30,  30,  31,  31,  32,  32;  19. 

2,  2,  5,  7,  9,  9,  12,  14,  17,  18,  2i,  31,  34;  20.  2,  3,  4,  5,  5, 
6,  9,  10,  11,  13,  13,  15,  16;  21.  1,  6,  7,  10,  12,  12,  16,  17, 

24,  26,  29,  30;  22.  1,  1,  2,  5,  7,  7,  8,  11,  11,  12,  16;  24.  2, 

5,  6,  12,  14,  14,  17,  18,  19,  23,  24,  25,  27,  31,  33,  33,  34,  39, 
40,  42.  437  44.  45.  46,  47.  47-  5°.  54.  55.  5°",  57.  57.  60,  65, 
65 ;  25.  22,  23,  30,  31,  32,  33 ;  26.  2,  7,  7,  9,  9,  9,  9,  10,   16, 

22,  24,  27,  28,  28,  32;  27.  I,  I,  2,  IX,  13,  l8,  iS,  ig,  20,  20, 
21,  22,   24,   24,  25,    26,   27,    31,    32,  32,    33,  34,   35,   36,   36,   37, 

35,  39,  41,  42,  46;  28.  i,  13,  16, 17;  29.  4,  4,  5,  5,  6,  6,  7,  8, 
14,  15,  iS,  19,  21,  25,  26,  32,  33,  34,  35;  30.  1,  2,  3,  6,  8,  ir, 

13,  14,  15,  15,  16,  18,  20,  23,  24,  25,  27,  28,  29,  29,  29,  34; 
31-  3»  5.  8,  8,  11,  12,  14,  16,  24,  26,  31,  31,  35,  36,  43,  46, 
48,  49,  51;  32.  2,  4,  8,  9,  9,  12,  16,  18,  20,  20,  26,26,  27,  27, 
28,  29,  29;  33.  5,  5,  8,  8,  9,  10,  12,   13,  15,  15;  34.   11,   ii, 

12,  14,  30,  31;  35.  1,  2,  10,   11,  17;  37.6,  8,  9,  10,  13,  13, 

14,  16,  17,  17,  19,  20,  21,  22,  26,  30,  32,  33,  35;  38.  8,  11, 

11,  16,  16,  17,  17,  21,  22,  22,  23,  24  25,  26,  29;  39.  7,  8; 
40.  8,  8,  9,  12,  16,  18;  41.  15,  15,  24,  25,  38,  39,  41,  44,  54, 
55.  55;  42-  *.  2,  4,  7.  7.  9.  IO»  I2»  13.  M.  18,  21,  28,  31,  33, 

36,  38 ;  43.  2,  5,  6,  7,  7,  8,  11,  16,  18,  20,  23,  27,  29,  29,  31 ; 
44.  4,  4,  7,  10,  15,  16,  17,  18,  20,  21,  22,  23,  25,  26,  27,  28 ; 
45-  3.  4-  4.  9.  *7»  ^  24>  28;  46.2,  2,  3,  30,  31,  31,  33,  34; 
47-  J)  3>  3.  4»  8,  9,  16,  18,  23,  25,  29,  30,  31  ;  48.  2,  3,  4,  8, 
9,  9,  11,  15,  18,  19,  21 ;  49.  1,  29 ;  50.  6,  11,  15,  17,  18,  19, 
24. 

Exod.  1.9,  15,  16,  18,  19,  19;  2.  6,  7,  8,  9  10,  13,  14,  14, 
18,  ig,  20,  22;  3.  3,  4,  4,  5,  6,  7, 11,  12, 13,  13, 13, 13,14, 14, 
J5>  15.  IO»  x7.  18  ',  4-  i»  1,  2,  2,  3.  4,  6,  7,  io,  11,  13,  14,  18, 
18,  19,  21,  22,  22,  23,  25,  26,  27;  5.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  10,  16,  17, 
17,  21,  22;  6.  1,  2,  6,  26,  30;  7.  1,  9,  14,  16,  17,  19;  8. 1,  5, 

8.  9,  10,  10,  16,  16,  19,  20,  20,  25,  26,  28,  29;  9.  1,  1,  8,  13, 

13,  13,  22,  27,  29;  10.  1,  3,  3,  7,  8,  10,  12,  16,  21,  24,  25, 
28,  29;  11.  1,  4,  4,  9;  12.  21,  26,  27,  31,  33,  43;  13.  3.  14; 

14,  3,  5,  11,  13,  15,  25,  26 ;  15.  i,  9,  26;  16.  3,  4,  6,  8,  9,  15, 

15,  19,  23,  25,  2S,  32,  33 ;  17.  2,  2,  3,  5,  8,  10, 14,  16 ;  18.  3, 

6,  10,  14,  15,  17,  24;  19.3,  8,  9,  10,  15,  21,  23,  24;  20. 19, 

20,  22,  22 ;  21.5;  23. 13 ;  24.  1,  3,  7,  8,  12,  14 ;  30.  34 ;  32. 
i,  2,  4,  5,  8,  9,  11,  12,  17,  iS,  21,  22,  23,  24,  26,  27,  27,  29, 
3°»  31.  33,  33-  5.  5.  12,  12,  14,  15,  17.  iS,  19,  20,  21;  34.  1, 

9.  IO>  27;  35- 1-  30- 

Lev.  1.  2;  8.  5,  31 ;  9.  2, 6,  7 ;  10.  3,  4,  6;  15.  2  ;  16.  2; 

17,  2,  8,  12,  14;  iS.  2 ;  19.  2 ;  20.  2,  24;  21. 1,  1 ;  22.  3,  iS ; 

23,  2,  10 ;  25.  2,  20 ;  27.  2 ;  33.  12. 

Num.  3.  40;  5.  12,  19,  21,  22;  6.  2;  7.  n;  8.  2;  9.  7,  8; 

10.  29,  29,  30.  31,  35,  36;  11.  4,  11,  12,  16,  21,  21,  23,  27, 
28,  29;  12,  2,  6, 11,  14;  13.  17,  27,  30,  31 ;  14.  2,  4,  11,  13, 
20,  28,  31,  41 ;  15.  2,  18,  35;  16.  3,  8,  12,  15,  16,  22,  28,  34, 
46;  17.  10;  18.  1,  24,  26,  30;  20. 10,  14,  iS,  19,  20;  21.  2, 7, 
8,27,  34 ;  22.  4,8,9, 10,  i2, 13, 14, 16, 16, 17, 18,  19, 20, 28, 29, 
30*  3o»  3°.  32.  34.  35.  37.  38 ;  23. 1,  3,  4,  5,  7,  11, 12, 13,  15, 

16,  17,  iS,  19,  25,  26,  27,29,30;  24.3,  10,  12,  15,20,21,  23; 

25,  4,  5,  12  ;  26. 65 ;  27.  12,  18 ;  28. 2,  3 ;  31.  15,  21,  49 ;  32. 

5,  6,  16,  20,  29;  33.51;  34.2;  35. 10;  36.2. 

Deut.  1. 14,  20, 22, 25,  27,  29,  39,  41,  42,  42  ;  2.  9, 31 ;  3.  2, 
26 ;  4.  6,  10;  5.  1,  24,  27,  28,  30;  6. 21 ;  7.  17;  8.  17;  9.  12, 

13,  25,  26,  28 ;  10.  1,  11 ;  12.  20 ;  15.  16 ;  17.  14,  16 ;  18.  17, 
21 ;  20.  3,  8;  21.  7,  20;  22  14,  16;  25.  7,  8,  9;  26.  3,  5,  13; 
27.  14,  15,  16,  17,  iS,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26;  28.  67, 
67,  68;  29.  2,  22,  24,  25 ;  31.  2,  2,  7,  14,  16,  17,  23;  32.  20, 

26,  27,  37,  40,  46;  33.  2,  7,  8,  9,  12,  13,  18,  20,  22,  23,  24, 
27;  34.4. 

Josh.  2.  4,9,  16,  17,  21,24;  3-5.  7>9»  Io:  4-51  5-  2- 9.  '3. 

14,  14,  15 ;  6.  2,  6,  16,  22;  7.  3,  7,  8,  10,  13,  13,  19,  20,  25; 
8.  1,  6,  18;  9.6,  7,  8,  8,  9,  11,  19,  21,  24;  10.  8,  12,  18,  22, 

24,  25;  11.  6;  13.  1 ;  14.  6 ;  15.  16,  18;  17.  16;  18.  3;  22. 
2,  ii,  16,  26,  27,  28,  28,  28,  31;  23.  2;  24.  2,  2,  16,  19,  21, 

22,  22,  24,  27. 

Judg.  1.  2,  3,  7,  12,  14,  15,  24;  2.  1,  1,  3,  20;  3.  19,  19, 
20,  24,  28 ;  4.  6,  8,  9,  14,  18,  19,  20,  20,  20,  22 ;  5.  23 ;  6.  8, 
8,  10,  i2,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  20,  22,  23,  25,  29,  29,  30, 
3i»  36,  39.  7-  2>  4.  4.  4.  5-  7.  9.  13.  *4>  15.  17.  18;  8.  1, 
2.  5i  6,  7,  15,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24;  9.  3,  7,  S,  9,10,  ni 

12,  13,  14,  15,  28,  29,  36,  36,  37,  38,  38,  48,  54,  54;  10.  1  1, 

15,  18;  11.  2,  6,  7,8,9,  10,  15,  15,  19,  30,  35,  36,  37,  38; 
12.  1,  2,  4,  5,  5,  5,  6,6,  6;  13.  3,  7,  8,  10,  11,  11, 12,  13,  13, 

15,  16,  17,  18,  22,  23;  14.  2,  3,  3,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  16,  18, 
18;  15.  1,  2,  3,  6,  6,  7,  jo,  11,  11,  12,  12,  13,  16,  18;  16.  5, 

6,  7,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  13,  14,  15,  15,  17,  20,  20,  23,  24,  25, 
26,  2S,  30 ;  17.  2,  2,  3,  9,  9,  10,  13 ;  18.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  14, 

18,  19,  23,  24,  24,  25;  19.  5,  6,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  17,  18,  20, 

23,  28,  30;  20.  3,  4,  18,  18,  23,  28,  32,  32,  39;  21.  3,  5,  6,  8, 

16,  17,  19,  22. 

Ruth  1.  8,  io,  11,  12,  15,  16,  19,  20;  2.  2,  2,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8, 
io,  ii,  13,  14,  ig,  19,  20,  20,  21,  21,  22 ;  3.  1,  5,  9,  10,  14, 

15,  16,  17,  17,  18;  4.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  S,  9,  11,  14. 

1  Sa.  1.  8,  11,  14,  15,  17,  18,  22,  23,  26;  2.  1,  15,  16,  20, 
23,  27,  27,  30,  36;  3.  5,  5,  6,  8,  9,  9,  11,  16,  17,  18;  4.  3,  6, 

7,  7,  14,  16,  16,  17,  22;  5.  7,  8,  11 ;  6.  3,4,  20;  7.  5,  6,  8;  8. 
5.  6,  7,  7,  11,  19,  22,  22;  9.  3,  5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  11,  12,  18, 

19,  21,  23,  23,  24,  24,  27;  10.  1,  2,  ii,  12,  14,  14,  15,  15, 

16,  j8,  18,  19,  24,  24,  27;  11.  1,3,  5,  9,  9,  10,  12,12,  13,  14; 
12.  1,  1,  4,  5,  6,  10,  12,  19,  20;  13.  4,  9,  11,  ii,  12,  13,  19; 
14.  1,  6  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  12, 17,  iS,  19,  28,  29,  33,  34,34; 
14-  36»  3°\  36,  38,  4°.  40,  4*.  42,  43.  43.  455  15-  i>  2,  6,  13, 


14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  18,  20,  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  32,  33;  16. 

1,  2,  2,  2,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  11,  it,   12,  15,  17,  18,  19; 

17.  S,  10,  17,25.  28,  29,  32,  33,  34,  37,  37,  39,  43,  44>  45, 
55.  55.  50.  58 ;  18.  7,  8,  11,  17,  17, 18,  21,  21,  22,  23,  25,  25 ; 

19,  4,  14,  17,  17,  22,  22,  24;  20.  1,  2,  3,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  9,  10, 
11,  12,  18,  21,  22,  27,  29,  30,  32,  36,  37,  40,  42;  21.  1,  2,  2, 
4-  5.  8,  9.  9.  «i  T4.  22.  3,  5,  7,  9,  12,  13,  14,  16,  17,  18,  22; 
23»  2>  3.  4.  7.  9>  IO»  "»  I2>  i2j  J7»  21 ;  24.  4,  4,  6,  9,  10,  13, 
16,  17;  25.  5,  6,  10,  13,  19,  21,  24,  32,  35,  39,  41;  26.  6,  6, 
8,  9,   10,  14,  15,  17,   17,  18,  21,  22,  25;   27.  1,  5,  10,  10; 

28.  1,  2,  2,  7,  7,  8,  9,  11,  11,  13,  13,  14,  14,  15,  16,  21,  23; 

29.  3.  3.  4.  6,  8,  9,  9;  30.  7,  13,  13, 15,  15,  20,  22,  23  ;  31. 
4- 

2  Sa.  1.  3,3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  13,  14,  15,  16;  2.  1,  1,  1,  5, 

14,  14,  20,  21,  26,  27;  3.  7,  8,  13,  16,  21,  24,  28,  31,  33,  38; 

4,  8,  9;  5.  2,  8,  8,  19,  20,  23;  6.  9,  20,  21 ;  7.  2,  3,  5,  8,  8, 
18;  9.  1,  2,  2,  3,  3,  4,  4,  6,  7,  8,  9,  11 ;  10.  2,  3,  5,  11;  11. 
3,  5,  8,  10,  11,  12,  20,  21,  23,  25,  25;  12.  1,  5,  7,  7,  11,  13, 
13,  18,  19,  19,  21,  22,  22,  27;  13.  4,  4,  5,  5,  6,  9,  10,  11,  15, 

16,  17,  20,  24,  25,  26,  26,  28,  32,  35 ;  14.  2,  4,  5,  7,  8,  9,  io, 

11,  11,  12,  12,  13,  15,  17,  18,  18,  19,  19,  21,  22,  24,  24,  30, 
31,  32;  15.  2,  2,  3,  4,  7,  g,  10,  14,  15,  19,  21,  22,  25,  26,  27, 
3r>  33.  34.  l6>  2.  2.  3.  3>  3.  4.  4.  7.  9.  IO»  10>  io.  "»  16,  17, 

18,  20,  21;  17.  1,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  14,  15,  20,  20,  21,  29  ;  18.  2,4, 
10, 11,  12,  14,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  22,  23,  25,  26,  26,  27,  27,  28 

28,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33;  19.  2,  5,  13,  19,  21,  22,  23,  25,  26,  29, 

29,  3°.  33.  34»  4r>  43".  20.  1,  4,  6,  9,  11,   16,    17,    17,   20,  21; 

21.  2,  3,  4,  4,  4,  6;  22.  2;  23.  3,  15,  17;  24.  1,  2,  3,  10,  12, 

13,  14,  16,  17,  18,  21,  21,  22,23,  24. 

1  Ki.  1.  2,  13,  16,  17,  24,  24,  25,  28,  29,  31,  33,  32,  34, 
36.  36.  39.  4i.  42.  43-  43.  52.  53 .  2.  4,  13,  13,  14,  14,  15,  16, 

17,  18,  20,  20,  21,  22,  26,  30,  30,  31,  51,  36,  3S,  42,  42,  44  ; 
3.  5,  6,  11,  17,  22,  22,   23,  23,  24,   25,  26,   26,   27;  5.  7 ;  8. 

12,  15,  18,  23,  29;  9.  3,  8,  13;  10.  6;  11.  2,  11,  21,  22,  31, 
31;  12.  5,  6,  9,  24,  26,  28;  13.  2,  2,  6,  8,  13,  14,  14,  15,  16, 

18,  21,  26;  14.  2,  5,  6,  7,  16,  16;  17.  1,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14, 
18,  19,  20,  21,  23,  24;  18.  5,  7,  9,  10,  11,  14,  15,  17,  21,  22, 

24,  25,  27,  30,  33,  34,  34,  36,  39,  40,  41,  43,  43,  43,  44,  44, 
44.  !9-  4»  5»  7>  9.  10»  Ir»  J3»   *4>   x5>  2°.  20;  20.   2,  2,  4,  5. 

7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  14,  14,  14,  18,  22,  23,  28,  28,  28, 
31.  32.  32,  32,  33.  33.  34.  35.  36.  37.  39.  39.  40,  42,  42;  21. 
3,  4,  6,  7,  15,  19,  19,  20;  22.  3,  4,  4,  5,  6,  6,  7,  8,  8,  8,  g, 
11,  11,  14,  14,  15,  16,  17,  17,  18,  19,  20,  20,  20,  21,  22,  22, 

22,  24,  25,  26,  27,  27,  28,  28,  30,  32,  34,  49. 

2  Ki.  1.  2,  4,  5,  6,  6,  6,  8,  11,  16;  2.  2,  2,  3,  3,  4,  4,  5, 
6,  6,  9,  9,  10,  14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  18,  18,  ig,  20,  21,  21,  23; 
3.  7,  8,  10,  11,  11,  12,  13,  13,  14,  16,  16,  17,  23;  4.  2,  2,  3, 
6,  6,  7,  9,  12,  13,  13,   14,  15,  16,   16,  19,  19,  22,  23,  23,  24, 

25,  26,  27,  28,  28,  29,  30,  36,  36,  38,  40,  41,  41,  42,  43,  43, 
43.  5-  3.  5.  7.  «>  13.  13.  15.  16,  17,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  25, 
25,  26;  6.  1,  3,  5,  6,  7,  11,  12,  13,  15,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  27, 
28,  28,  29,  31,  32,  33;  7.  1,  1,  2,  2,  3,  4,  6,  9,  12,  13,  19,  19; 

8,  5.  8,  9,  10,  10,  12,  13,  14,  14;  9.  1,  3,  3,  5,  5,  5,  6,  6,  ii, 
11,  12,  12,  12,  15,  17,  17,  17,  18,   18,  18,  19,   19,  2i,  22,  23, 

25.  27,  37,  32,  33,  34,  36,  37;  10.  4,  8,  9,  13,  14,  15,  16,  18, 

20,  22,  23,  24,  25,  30;  11.  12,  15,  15;  12.  4,  7;  13.  14,  i5> 
16,  17,  17,  17,  18,  iS,  19;   17.  12;   18.  11,  19,  20,  22,  22,  25, 

26.  27,  29,  31 ;  19.  3,  3,  6,  6,  6,  9,  15,  20,  23,  32;  20.  1,  1, 

5,  7,  8,  9,  14,  14,  14,  15,  16,  17,  19,  19;  21.  4,  7,  12;  22.  8, 

9,  15,  15,  16,  18,  18;  23.  17,  18,  27,  27;  25.  24. 

1  Ch.  10.  41 ;  11.  2,  5,  6,  17,  19 ;  12.  17 ;  13.  2,  4 ;  14.  ,0 

11,  14;  15.  2,  12;  16.  31,  35,  36;  17.  1,  2,  4,  7,  7,  16;  19. 

2,  3,  5,  12;  21.  2,  8,  10,  11,  ii,  13,  15,  17,  22,  23,  24;  22. 
1,  5,  7,  18;  23.  25;  27.  23;  28.  2,  3,  6,  20;  29.  i,  10,  20. 

2  Ch.  1.  7,  8,  11;  2.  12;  6.   1,  1,  4, 'S,  14,  20;  7.  12,  21; 

8,  11;  9.  5  ;  10.  5,  9,  10;  11.  4;  12.  5,  5,  6;  13.  4,  7,  n; 

15.  2;  16.  7;  18.  3,  4,  5,  5,  6,  7,  7,  7,  8,  10,   10,  13,  13,  14, 

14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  20,  21,  21,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27, 

27.  31.  33  J  19*  2,  6;  20.  6,  15,  15,  20,  21 ;  21.  12;  22.  9  ;  23, 

3,  11,  13,  14,  14;  24.  5,  6,  20,  20,  22;  25.  9,  15,  16,  16,  19; 

26.  18,  23;  28.  9,  13,  23;  29.  5,  18,  31;  31.  im\  32.  10;  33„ 

4,  7;  34-  15.  23,  24,  26,  26;  35.  3,  23;  36.  23. 

Ezra  1.2;  2.  63 ;  4.  2,  3 ;  8.  28 ;  9.  6,  10 ;  10.  2,  10,  iz 
Neh.  1.  3,  5;  2.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  17,  18,  19;  2.  20 ;  4.  2,  j 

10,  11,  12,  14,  10,  22;  5.  2,  3,  4,  7,  8,  9,  12,  12,  13,  13;  6. 

6,  8,  10,  11 ;  7.  3,  65;  8.  9,  10;  9.  5,  18 ;  13.  11,  17,  21 ; 
Esth.  1.  13,  iS;  2.  2  ;  3.  3,  8,  n ;  5.  3,  5,  6,  7,  12,  14;  6. 
3-  3.  4.  5,  5.  6.  10.  13  J  7-  2»  3.  6.  8,  9,  9 ;  8.  5,  7 ;  9.  12, 
i3- 

Job  1.  5,  7,  7,  8,  9,  12  14,  16,  17,  18,  2i ;  2.  2,  2,  3,  4, 

6,  9,  10;  3.  2 ;  4.  1 ;  6.  1,  22 ;  7.  4,  13;  8.  1 ;  9.  1,  12,  22, 
27 ;  10.  2  ;  11.  1,  4 ;  12.  1 ;  15.  1  ;  ;6.  1 ;  18.  i_;  19. 1,  28 ;  20. 
1,  7 ;  21.  1,  14.  28 ;  22.  1,  13,  17,  29;  23.  1,  5;  25.  1 ;  26.  1; 

27.  1 ;  28.  14,  22,  28  ;  29.  1,  18 ;  31.  24,  31 ;  32.  6,  7,  10 

13,  33-  24.  27;  34.  1,  5,  9,  18  ;  35.  1,  2;  3.  10,  14  ;  36.  1 
23:  37-  6.   19;  38-  i,  11,  35.  39-  25;  40-  1.  3.  6;  42-   1.  7- 

Psa.  2,  7;  3.  2;  4.  6 ;  10.  6,  11,  13;  11.  1  ;  12.  4,  5; 

13.  14;  14.  1  ;  16.  2;  18.  title;  27.  8;  30.  6 ;  31.  22 ;  32.  5; 
35.  3.  10,  21,  25,  25,  27;  38.  16;  39.  1;  40.  7,  15,  16;  41. 
4 ;  42.  39,  10 ;  50.  16 ;  52.  title ;  53.  1 ;  54.  title ;  55.  6 ; 
58.  11  ;  64.  5;  65.  3;  6S.  22;  70.  3,  4;  73.  11,  15;  74.  8; 
75.4;  77.  10;  78.  19;  79.  10;  82.  6;  83.  4,  12;  89.  2,  19; 
90.  3 ;  91.  2 ;  94.  7,  18  ;  95.  10;  96.  10;  102.  24;  106.  23, 
48;  107.  2;  115.  2 ;  116.  11 ;  118.  2,  3,  4;  119.  57;  122.  1  ; 
124.  1 ;  126.  2;  129.  1,  8 ;  137.  7  ;  139.  11 ;  140.  6  ;  142  5; 
Prov.  1.  11 ;  3.  28;  4.  4;  5.  12 ;  7.  4,  13;  9.  4,  16;  20.  9, 

14,  22;  22.  13;  23.  7;  24.  12,  24,  29;  25.  7  ;  26.  13,  19;  30. 

9,  15,  16,  26;  28.  24. 

Eccl.  1.  2,  10;  2.  1,  2,  15;  3.  17,  18;  5.  6;  6.  3 ;  7.  10, 
23,  27  ;  8.  4,  14;  9.  16;  10.  3  ;  i;.  1,  8 ;  Song  2.  10 ;  7. 
8. 

Isa.  1.  it,  18 ;  2.  3;  3.  10,  16;  5. 19;  6.  3,  5,  7,  8,  9,  n ; 

7.  3,  4,  7,  12,  13 ;  8.  1,  3,  12,  12,  19 ;  9.  9 ;  10.  8,  13,  24 ; 

12.  1,  4;  14.  4,  10,  13 ;  18.  4;  19.  11 ;  20.  3,  6;  21.  6,  9, 
12,  16 ;  22.  4,  14,  15  ;  23.  4,  12 ;  24.  16 ;  25.  9 ;  28.  12,  1 5, 
16;  29.  11,  12,  13,  15,  16,  16,  22;  30.  10,  10,  15,  16,  22;  33. 

10,  24 ;  35.  4 ;  36.  4,  4,  4,  5,  7,  7,  10, 11,  12,  13,  14,  16 ;  37. 

3,  3,  6,  6,  6,  9,  21,  24,  33;  38.  1,  1,  3,  5,  5,  10,  11,  21,  23; 
39-  3.  3.  3.  4.  5.  6,  8,  8 ;  40.  1,  6,  6,  9,  25,  27 ;  41.  6,  9,  21, 

21,  26;  42.  5,  17,  22 ;  43.  i,  6,  9,  14,  16 ;  44  2,  5,  6,  16,  17, 
20,  24,  26,  27,  28;  45.  1,  9,  10,  11,  14,  18,  19J  24;  47.  7,  8, 


SAY 


840 


SAY 


10,  10;  48.  5,  7,  17,  20,  22;  49.  3,  4,  St  o,  7,  8,  9,  14,  20, 
21,  22,  25;  50.  1;  51.  16,  22,  23;  52.  3,  4,  7;  54.  1,  6,  8, 
20;  56.  1,  3,  4;  57.  10,  14,  15,  19,  21,  58.  9;  59.  21,  21; 
62.  11 ;  63.  8,  5;  65.  1,  7,  8,  8,  13,  25 ;  66.  1,  5,  9,  9,  12, 

20,  21,  23, 

Jer.  1.  6,  7,  7,  9,  it,  12,  13,  14 ;  2.  2,  2,  5,  6,  8,  20,  23, 

=5-  27.  3*i  35  5  3-  1.  6.  7>  ">  12>  l6«  J9.  *9  ;  4-  3»  5.  5»  ™> 
27;  5.  2,  4,  12,  14,  19,  24;  6.  6,  9,  15,  16,  16,  17,  21,  22; 
7.  2,  3,  10,  20;  8.  4.  8,  12;  9.  7,  13,  15,  i7t  23J  IO-  2»  l8» 
19;  11.  3,  3,  5,  5,  6,  9,  11,  21,  22;  12.4.  14  ;  13.  1,  6,  9,  12, 

12,  13,  18,  21,  22;  14.  10,  11,  13,  13,  14,  i5»  i5>  J7>  1S-  1. 
2,  2,  11,  19;  16.  3,  5,  9,  10,  11,  19;  17.  5,  15,  19,  20,  21; 
18.  io,  11,  12,  13,  18;  19.  i,  3,  3,  11,  11,  14.  *5  >  2°-  3>  4. 
91  21.  3,  3,  3,  4,  8,  8,   12,  13;  22.  1,  2,  3,  6,  8,  11,  14,  18, 

21,  30;  23.  7,  7,  15,  16,  17,  17,  25,  33,  34,  35,  37,  38,  38, 
38,  38 ;  24.  3,  3,  5,  8 ;  25.  5,  8,  15,  27,  27,  28,  28,  30,  32 ; 
26.  2,  4,  16, 18 ;  27.  2,  4,  4,  4,  16,  19,  21 ;  28.  1,  2,  5,  6, 11, 

13.  14,  15.  16;  29.  4,  8,  10,  15,  16,  17,  21,  25,  31,  32;  31. 

2,  7,  7,  10,  15,  16,  23;  30.  2,  3,  5,  12,  18;  31.  29,  35,  37; 
32.  3,  3,  6,  8,  14,  15,  25,  28,  36,  36,  42,  43 ;  33.  2,  4,  io,  10, 

11,  II,    12,    13,   17,    20f    25;    34.  2,    2,   4,    13,   17;    35.    5,  6,   II, 

*3>  J3>  J7>  I8>   J8>  x9  •  S^*  15,   16,  19,  29,  29,  30;  37.  7,  7, 

9.  14.  *7>  J7>  I7,  18;  38.  2,  3,  4,  s,  12,  14,  15,  17,  17,  19, 
20,  22,  24,  25,  26;  39.  16;  40.  2,  14,  16;  41.  6,  8;  42.  2,4, 

5,  9,  9,  13,  15,  18,  20;  43.  10,  10;  44.  2,  7,  11,  20,  24,  25, 
26,  30;  45.  2,  3,  4,  4;  46.  8,  14,  16,  25;  47.  2;  48.  1,  14, 
17,  19,  40;  49.  1,  2,  7,  12,  18,  28,  35;  50.  2,  7,  18,  33;  51. 

1.  33.  35>  35.  36,  58,  61,  62,  64. 

Lara.  2.  12,  16;  3.  18,  24,  27,  54,  57;  4.  15,20. 
Eze.  2.  1,  3,  4  ;  3.  1,  3,  4,  10,  n,  18,  22,  24,  27;  4.  13, 
T4,  15,   16  ;  5.  5,  7,  8  ;  6.  3,  12,  14;  7.  2,  5  ;  8.  5,  6,  8,  9, 

12,  12,  13,  15,  17;  9.  4,  5,  7,  8,  9,  9;  10.  2  ;  11.  2,3,  5,  5, 

7,  13,  15, 16, 16, 17,  17  ;  12.  9.  10,  10,  11,  19, 19,  23,  27,  28, 
28 ;  13.  2,  3,  7,  7,  8,  ii,  13,  15,  18,  20 ;  14.  4,  6,  6,  17,  21; 

15.  6  ;  16.  3,  6,  6,  36,  59 ;  17.  3,  9,  9, 12,  19, 22 ;  18.  19,  25, 
29;  19.  2,  20,  3,  5,  7,  8,  13,  18,  21,  27,  29,  30,  30,  32,  47, 
47,  49,  49;  21.  3,  3,  7,  9/9,  24,  26,  28,  28,  28;  22.  3,  3,  19, 
24,  28 ;  23.  22,  28,  32,  35,  36,  43,  46  ;  24.  3,  3,  6,  9,  19,  21; 
25-  3.  3»  3.  6,  8,  8,  12,  13,  15,  16  ;  26.  2,  3,  7,  15,  17, 19;  27. 
3>  3»  3  j  28-  2,  2,  2,  6,  9,  12,  12,  22,  22,  25 ;  29.  3,  3,  3,  8,  9, 
13>  x9  >  3°-  2>  2i  6,  10,  13,  22 ;  31.  10, 15 ;  32.  2,  3,  11 ;  33.  2, 

8,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  17,  20,  25,  25,  27,  27534.  2,  10,  11,  17, 
20 !  35-  3*  IO»  *4  i  36-  1,  2,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  6,  7,  13,  13,  20,  22, 
22»  33.  35.  37  ;  37-  3.  4.  4,  5.  9-  9.  ".  "»  *2,   T9.  21  ;  38.  3, 

10,  11,  13.  14,  17;  39.  1,  17,  25;  41.  4;  42.  13;  43.  7,  18, 
18 ;  44.  2,  5,  6,  9 ;  45.  9,  18;  46.  1,  16,  20,  24 ;  47.  6,  8,  13. 

Dan.  1.  10,  11,  18;  2.  3;  8.  13,  14,  16,  17,  19;  9.  4,  22; 
10.  11,  12.  16,  19,  19.  20;  12.  6,  8,  9. 
Hos.  1.  2,  4,  6,  9 ;  2.  1,  5,  7,  12,  23,  23 ;  3.  1,  3;  10.  3,  8; 

12.  8  ;  12.  8 ;  13,  2, 10  ;  14.  2,  3. 

Joel  2.  17,  17,  19,  32;  3  10;  Am°s  i.  2,  3,  5,  6,  8,  9,  11, 

13,  15 ;  2.  1,  3,  4,  6 ;  3.  9,  11,  12 ;  4.  1 ;  5.  3,  4,  14,  16,  16, 
17,  27  ;  6.  10,  to,  io,  13';  7.  2,  3,  5,  6,  8,  8,  8,  11,12,  14,  15, 

16,  17  ;  8.  2,  2,  2,  14 ;  9.  1,  10,  15. 

Obad.  1.  3;  Jon.  1.  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  14  ;  2.  2,  4 ;  3. 
4  ;  4.  2,  4,  8,  9,  9,  10;  Mic.  2.  3,  4;  3.  1,  5,  11  ;  4;  2.   11 ; 

6.  1,  7,  10;  Nah.  1.  12 ;  3.  7 ;  Hab.  2.  2,  6,  19 ;  Zeph.  1. 
12  ;  2.  15  ;  3.  7,  20;  Hag.  r.  2,  5,  7,  8  ;  2.  6,  7,  9,  11,  12, 13, 
13,  14 ;  Zech.  1.  3,  3,  4,  6,  g,  9,  10,  11,  12, 14, 14,  16,17,  19, 
21 ;  2.  2,  2,  4,  8  ;  3.  2,  4,  5,  7 ;  4.  2,  2,  5,  5.  6,  n,  12,  13, 
i3»  14  »  5-  2.  3.  5-  6,  6,  6,  8,  10,  11  ;  6.  4,  5,  7  ;  7.  13;  8.  2, 

3.  4,  6,  7,  9,  14,  14,  19,  20,  23;  11.  4,  5,  9,  12,  13,  15;  12.5; 
13-  3-  5.  6,  9,  9. 

Mai.  1.  2,  2,  4,  4,  5,  6,  6,7,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  13,  13, 
14;  2.  2,  4,  8,  14,  16,  16,  17,  17 ;  3.  1,  5,  7,  7,  8,  10.  11,  12, 
13,  14,  17;  4.  1,  3. 

2.  7b  say,  lift  up  the  voice}  i?«  amar. 

Ezra    5.   3  said  thus  unto  them,  Who  hath  comman. 
5.    4  Then  said  we  unto  them  after  this  man. 
5.    9  Then  asked  we  those  elders,  (and)  said 
5.  15  said  unto  him,  Take  these  vessels,  go  ca. 
Jer.   10. 11  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto  them,  The  gods 
Dan.   2.    5  king  answered  and  said  unto  the  Caldeans 
2.    7  They  answered  again  and  said,  Let  theki. 
2.   8  king  answered  and  said,  I  know  of  certa. 
2. 10  Chaldeans  answered,  .and  said,  There  is 
2. 15  He  answered  audsaid  to  Arioch  the  king's 
2. 20  Daniel  answered  and  said.  Blessed  he  the 
2.  24  he  went  and  said  thus  unto  him  ;  Destroy 
2.  25  said  thus  unto  him,  I  have  found  a  man 
2.  26  king  answered  and  said  to  Daniel,  whose 
2. 27  Daniel  auswered. .  and  said,  The  secret  wh. 

2.  47  The  king  answered  unto  Daniel,  and  said 

3.  9  They  spake  and  said  to  the  kingNebuch. 
3.  14  Nebuchadnezzar  spake  and  said  unto  th. 
3.  16  Abednego,  answered  and  said  to  the  king 
3.  24  said  unto  his  counsellors,  Did  not  we  cast 
3.  24  They  answered  and  said  unto  the  king,  T. 
3.  25  He  answered  and  said,  Lo,  I  see  four  men 
3.  26  spake, andsaid,Shadraeh,Meshach, and  A. 

3.  28  Nebuchadnezzar  spake,  and  said.  Blessed 

4.  14  He  cried  aloud,  and  said  thus,  Hew  down 
4. 19  king  spake,  and  said,  Belteshazzar,  let  not 
4.  19  answered  and  said,  My  lord,  the  dream 

4.  23  saying,  Hew  the  tree  down,  and  destroy 

5.  7  king  spake,  and  said  to  the  wise  (men)  of 
5.  10  queen  spake,  and  said,  0|king,  live  for  ev. 
5.  13  king  spake  and  said  unto  Daniel,  (Art) 

5.  17  Daniel  answered  and  said  before  the  king 

6.  5  Then  said  these  men,  We  shall  not  find 
6.    6  said  thus  unto  him,  King  Darius,  live  for 
6. 12  kinganswered  and  said.  The  thins  (is)  true 
6.  13  said  before  the  king.  That  Daniel,  which 
6.  15  said  unto  the  king.  Know,  0  king,  that 
6.  16  king  spake  and  said  unto  Daniel,  Thy  God 
6.  20  king  spake  and  said  to  Daniel,  0  Daniel 
7-    2  Daniel  spake,  and  said,  I  saw  in  mv  vis. 
7-    5  said  thus  unto  it,  Arise,  devour  much  fl. 
7-  23  Thus  he  said,  The  fourth  beast  shall  be 


3.7V>  speak,  i?"?  dabar. 

Exod.  6.  29  Speak  thou.,  all  that  I  say  unto  thee 
Num  32.  27  before  the  Lord  to  battle,  as  my  lord  sa. 
36.    5  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said  well 

4.  To  speak,  371  dabar,  3. 

Gen.  17.  23  in  the  selfsame  day,  as  God  said  unto  him 
18.    5  shall  pass  on.  .So  do,  as  thou  hast  said 
34.  13  said,  because  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their 
41. 17  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  In  niy  dream 

44.  7  unto  him,  Wherefore  saith  my  lord  these 

45.  27  which  he  had  said  unto  them :  and  when 
Exod.  4.  12  and  I  will,  .teach  thee  what  thou  shalt  s. 

7. 13  he  hearkened  not.  .as  the  Lord  had  said 

7.  22  neither  did  he  hearken.,  as  the  Lord  had  s. 
8. 15,  19  hearkened  not.  .as  the  Lord  had  said 

12.  31  and  go,  serve  the  Lord,  as  ye  have  said 

12.  32  take  your  flocks,  .as  ye  have  said,  and  be 
16.  23  This  (is  that)  which  the  Lord  hath  said 
24.    3  All  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath  said 
24    7  Allthatthe Lord hathsaid will  we  do,  and 
32.    7  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Go,  get  thee  down 

32.  13  saidst  unto  them,  I  wiU  multiply  your  se. 

33.  1  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Depart,  (and)  go 
Lev.  10.    5  So  they . .  carried  them . .  as  M  oses  had  said 

10.  19  Aaron  said  unto  Moses,  Behold,  this  day 
Num  14.  35  I  the  Lord  have  said,  I  will  surely  do  it 

16.  40  the  Lord  said  to  him  by  the  hand  of  M. 
22. 19  that  I  may  know  what  the  Lord  will  say 
22.  20  yet  the  word  which  I  shall  say  unto  thee 

22.  38  have  I  now  any  power  at  all  to  say  any. 

23.  16  said,  Go  again  unto  Balak,  and  say  thus 

24.  13  what  the  Lord  saith,  that  will  I  speak 
32.  31  As  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  thy  servants 

Deut.  1.  21  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  said 
9.    3  quickly,  as  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  thee 

11.  25  lay  the  fear,  .as  he  hath  said  unto  you 
18.    2  LoRD(is),theirinheritance,  as  he  hath  sa. 
29. 13  as  he  hath  said  unto  thee,  and  as  he  hath 
31.    3  go  over  before  thee,  as  the  Lord  hath  said 

Josh.  1.    3  that  have  I  given  unto  you,  as  I  said  unto 

5.  14  What  saith  my  lord  unto  his  servant 

11.  23  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  said  unto 

13.  14,  33  their  inheritance,  as  he  said  unto  them 

14.  6  thing  that  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses  the 
14. 10  kept  me  alive,  as  he  said,  these  forty  and 

14,  12  he  able  to  drive  them  out,  as  the  Lord  sa. 
22.  21  answered  and  said  unto  the  heads  of  the 

Judg.  1.  20  they  gave  Hebron  unto  Caleh,  as  Moses  s. 

2. 15  as  the  Lord  had  said,  and  as  the  Lord 

6.  27  did  as  the  Lord  had  said  unto  him :  and 

6.  36,  37  wilt  save  Israel . .  as  thou  hast  said 

7. 11  thou  shalt  hear  what  they  say ;  and  after. 

8.  3  abated  toward  him,  whenjhehad  said  that 

1  Sa.    3. 17  thing  that  (the  Lord)  hath  said  unto  thee? 

3.  17  of  all  the  things  that  he  said  unto  thee 

4.  20  women  that  stood  by  her  said  unto  her 

9.  6  all  that  he  saith  cometh  surely  to  pass 

15.  16  what  the  Lord  hath  said  to  me  this  night 

2  Sa.    7.  20  what  can  David  say  more  unto  thee?  for 

7.  25  establish  (it),  .and  do  as  thou  hast  said 
14. 10  Whosoever  saith  (ought)  unto  thee,  bring 
24.  12  say  unto  David,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I 

1  Ki.  2»  30  Thus  said  Joab,  and  thus  he  answered  me 

2.  31  Doashehathsaid,  and  fall  upon  him,  and 
12. 10  thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  them,  My  little 
13.  7  the  king  said  unto  the  man  of  God,  If  th. 
13.  12  their  father  said  unto  them,  What  way 

13.  22  the  place  of  the  which  (the  Lord)  did  say 

14.  5  thus  and  thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  her ;  for 

21.  6  he  said  unto  her,  Because  I  spake  unto 

2  Ki.  1.   3  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  Elijah  the 

1.    6  turn  again  unto  the  king,  .and  say  unto 
1.    7  he  said  unto  them.  What  manner  of  man 
1.    9  Thou  man  of  God,  the  king  hath  said,  C. 
1. 10  Elijah  answered  and  said  to  the  captain 
1.  ii  he  answered  and  said  unto  him,  O  man 

1. 12  Elijah  answered  and  said  unto  them,  If 
i.  13  hesought  him,  and  said  unto  him,  O  man 
1.  15  theangelof  the  Lord  said  unto  Elijah,  G. 

1. 16  he  said  unto  him.  Forasmuch  as  thou  ha. 

4.  17  at  that  season  that  Elisha  had  said  unto 

5.  4  thus  said  the  maid  that  (is)  of  the  land  of 

7. 17  he  died,  as  the  man,  of  God  had  said,  who 
1  \.  27  the  Lord  said  not  that  he  would  blot  out 

17.  23  as  he  had  said  by  all  his  servants  the  pr. 
24.  13  carried  out  thence,  .as  the  Lord  had  said 

1  t!h  17.  23  Therefore  now,  LORD.. do  as  thou  hastsa. 

22.  ti  build  the  house .  .as  he  hath  said  of  thee 

2  Ch.18. 15  that  thou  say  nothing  but  the  truth  to 

23.  3asthe  Lord  hath  said  of  the  sons  of  David 
Ezra  8.  17  I  told  them  what  they  should  say  unto  I. 
Esth.  6.  10  take  the  apparel,  .as  thou  hast  said,  and 
Psa.122.  8  For  my  companions'  sakes,  I  will  now  say 
Eccl.  2.  15  I  said  in  my  heart,  that  this  also  (is)  van. 
Isa.  38.  15  What  shall  I  say  ?  he  hath  both  spoken 
Jer.     5. 15  neither  understandest  what  they  say 

23. 17  The  Lord  hath  said,  Ye  shall  have  peace 
38.  25  what  thou  hast  said . .  what  the  king  said 
39. 12  do  unto  him  even  as  he  shall  say  unto  th. 
40.  3  and  done  according  as  he  hath  said  :  be. 
42. 19  The  Lord  hath  said  concerning  you,  O  ye 
Eze.     2.    8  But  thou,  son  of  man,  hear  what  I  say  un. 

6.  10  I  have  not  said  in  vain  that  I  would  do 

12.  23  say  unto  them.  The  days  are  at  hand,  and 
12.  25  will  I  say  the  word,  and  will  perform  it 
21. 17  I  will  also  smite.  .1  the  Lord  have  said 
37.  19  Say  unto  them.  .Behold.  1  will  take  the 
37.  21  And  say  unto  them.  .Behold,  I  will  take 
40.    4  the  man  said  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  beh. 

40.  45  he  said  unto  me,  This  chamber,  whose  pr. 

41.  22  he  said  unto  me,  This  (is)  the  table  that 


Eze.  44.  5  all  that  I  say  unto  thee  concerningallthe 
Jon.  3. 10  the  evil  that  he  had  said  that  he  would  do 
Hab.  2.    1  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  unto 

5.  To  speak,  say,  V,D  malal,  3. 

Gen.  21.    7  Who  would  have  said  unto  Abraham,  th. 

6.T0  speak,  say,  ^t?  metal,  3. 

Dan.    6.  21  Then  said  Daniel  unto  the  king,  0  king 

7.  To  affirm,  idler  an  affirmation,  dnj  naam. 

Gen.  22.  16  By  myself  have  I  sworn,  saith  the  Lord 

Num  14.  28  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  as  ye  have  spoken 

24.    3,  15  Baalam  the  son  of  Beor  hathsaid,  and. 

24.    3,  15  the  man  whose  eyesare  open  hath  said 

24.    4,  16  He  hath  said,  which  heard  the  words 

1  Sa.    2.  30  Wherefore  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  saith 

2.  30  but  now  the  Lord  saith,  Be  it  far  from 

2  Sa.  23.   1  David  the  son  of  Jesse  said,  and  the  man 

23.   1  and  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel,  said 
2  Ki.  9.  26  saith  the  LORD.  .1  will  requite,  .sa'th  the 
19.  33  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  saith  the  L. 

22.  19  I  also  have  heard  (thee),  saith  the  Lord 
2  Ch.34.  27  I  have  even  heard,  .also,  saith  the  Lord 
Psa.  36.    1  saith  within  my  heart,  (that  there  is)  no- 
no.    1  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my 

Isa.     1.  24  saith  the  Lord 

So  in  3.  15  ;  14.  22,  22,  23  ;  17.  3,  6;  19.  4  ;  22. 25 ;  30  1 ; 

31.  9;  37.  34;  41.  14;  43.  10,  12;  49.  18;  52.  5,  5;  54.  17  ; 

55.  8;  59.  20;  66.  2,  17,  22. 

Isa.    56.    8  saith,  Yet  will  I  gather  (others)  to  him 
Jer.     1.    8,  15,  19 ;  2.  3,  9,  12  saith  the  Lord 

So  in  2.  19,  22,  2953.  1,  10,  12,  12,  13,  14,  16,  20;  4.1,9, 

17i  5-9.  IJ»  :5>  J8,  22,  29;  6.  12 ;  7.  11,  13,  19,30,  32;  8.  1, 

3.  13.  17;  9-  3.  6,  9,  22,  24,  25;  12.  17;  13.  ii,  14,  25;  15. 

3,  6,  9,  20;  16.  5,  11,  14,  16;  17.  24 ;   18.  6  ;  19.  6,  12  ;  21 

7,  10,  13,  14  ;  22.  5,  16,  24;  23.  1,  2,  4,  5,  7,  ii,  12,  23,  24, 
24,  28,  29,  30,  31. 

Jer.  23.  31  prophets,  .that  use  their  tongues.  .He  sa. 

23.  32,  32,  33  saith  the  Lord 

So  in  25.  7,  9,  12,  29,  31 ;  27.  8,  n,  15,  22  \  28.  4 ;  29.  9, 
11,  14,  14,  19,  19,  23,  32;  30.  3,  8,  10,  n,  12,  21;  31.  i, 
14,  16,  17,  20,  27,  28,  31,  32,  33,  34,  36,  37,  38;  32.  5,  30, 
44;  33-  34;  34-  5.  *7>  22!  35-  13\  39-  *7.  l8:  42-  n;  44- 
29;  45-  5;  46.  5- 

Jer.  46.  18;  48.  15  ;  51,  57  saith  the  king,  whosename 

46.  23,  26,  28;  48.  12  saith  the  Lord 
So  in  48.  25,  30,  35,  38,  43,  44,  47;  49    2,  5,  6,  13,  16, 
26,  30,  31,  32,  37,  38,  39;  50.  4,  io,  20,  2i;  30,  31,  35,  40; 
51.  24,  25,  26,  39,  48,  52,  53 ;  Eze.  5.  11 ;  n.  8,  21 ;  12.  25, 
28. 

Eze.  13.    6  The  Lord  saith  :  and  the  Lord  hath  not 

13.    7  The  LORD  saith  (it);  albeit  I  have  not  sp. 

13.  8,  16;  14.  n,  14,  16,  18,  20,23  saith  the  Loud 
So  in  15.  8;  16.  8,  14,  19,  23,  30,43,  48;  16.  58,  63. 

17. 16  saith  the  Lord  God 
So  in  18.  3,  9,  23,  30,  32;  20.  3,  31,  33,  36,  40,  44;  21.  7, 
13;  22.  12,  31;  23.  34;  24.  14;  25.  14;  26.  5,  14,  21;  28. 
10;  29.  20,  30.  6 ;  31.  18 ;  32.  8,  14,  16,  31,  32;  33.  n ;  34. 

8,  15.  3°.  31  J  35-  6,  11 ;  36.  14,  15,  23,  32. 

Eze.  37.  14  saith  the  Lord 

38.  18,  21 ;  39.  5,  8,  10, 13,  20,  29 ;  saith  the  L.  G. 
So  in  43.  19,  27;  44.  12,  15,  27;  45.  9,  15;  47.  23;  48. 
29;  Hos.  2.13,  16,  21;  11.  11  j  Joel  2.  12 ;  Amos  2.  n, 
16;  3. 10, 15;  4.  3;  3. 13:4. 5;  8.  3,  9, 11 14. 6,  8, 9,  10, 11 ;  6. 
8, 14:9.  7,8,12, 13;  Obad.  4.  8;  Mic.  4.6;  5. 10;  Nail.  2. 13; 
Zeph.    1.  2,   3,    10;  2,  9;  3.  8;  Hag.  1.  9,  13;  2.  4,  4,  8, 

9,  14,  17,  23,  23,  23;  Zech.  1.  3,  4,  16 ;  2  5,  6,  6,  10;  3.9, 
10;  5.  4;  8.  6,  n,  17 ;  10.  12;  n.  6;  12.  1,  4;  13.  2,  7,  8 ; 
Mai.  1.  2. 

S.To  answer,  respond,  i"UJJ  anah. 

1  Sa.   9.  17  Lord  said  unto  him,  Behold  the  man,  wh. 

9.  To  call,  cry,  tt~i$  qara. 

Job   17. 14 1  have  said  to  corruption,  Thou  (art)  my 

lO.T'o  titter,  speak  s&ntentiously,  aTro(pd4yyo{j.ai. 
Acts   2.  14  Peter.. said  unto  them,  Ye  men  of  Judea 

11.  To  speak,  use  an  expression,  tiroscpos. 

Heb.   7.    9  as  I  may  so  say,  Levi  also,  who  receiveth 

12.70  speak,  elirov  eipon. 

Matt.  2.  5  they  said  unto  him,  In  Bethlehem  of  J. 
2.  8  he  sent  them  to  Bethlehem,  and  said,  Go 
See  also  3.  7,  15;  4.  3,  4;  5-  "»  [22],  22;  8.  10,  13,  19,  21, 
22,  32;  9.  2,  [3,]  4,  5,  5,  [11  ]  12,  15,  22;  11.  3,  4,  25;  12. 
2,  3,  11,  24,  25,  39,  47,  48,  49;  13.  10,  11,  27,  [28,]  37,  [52,1 
57;  14.  2,  16,  18,  28,  29;  15.  3,  5,  10,  [ii,]  13,  15.  16,  24, 
26,  27,  28,  32,  34;  16.  2,  6,  8,  14,  16,  17,  23,  24;  17.  4,  7, 

11,  17,  19,  [20],  22,  24;  18.  3,  21;  19.  4,  5,  n,  14,  16,  17, 
18,  23,  26,  27,  28;  20.  4,  13,  17,  21,  22,  25,  32;  21.  3,  5,  16, 
21,  21,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  30,  38;  22.  13,  18,  24,  29, 
[37,]  44;  23.  39;  24.  2,  4,  23,  26,  48;  25  8,  12,  22,  24,  26; 
26.  1,  10,  15,  18,  18,  21,  23,  25,  25,  26,  33,  35,  49,  50,  55, 
61,  62,  63,  64,  66,  73;  27.  4,  6,  17,  21,  21,  25,  43,  63,  64; 

28.  5,  6,  13. 

Mark  1.  17,  44 ;  2.  [8,]  9,  9,  19;  3.  [32];  4-  39.  4°  I  5-  [7.  J 
34 ;  6.  [16,]  22,  24,  24,  [31,]  37 ;  7-  6.  10.  ">  tz7.]  29 ;  8.  5, 
I20,]  34;  9.  [17,]  21,  23,  29,  36,39;  10.  3,  4,  5,  14,  iS,  [20,] 
21,  [29,]  36,  37,  38,  39,  39,  51,  s2 '.  "-  3.  3-  6-  M»  23,  [23], 

29,  31,  32;  12.  7,  15,  ti6,]  17,  [24,]  32,  32,  34,  36,  [36];  13. 
2,  21 ;  14.  6,  14,  16,  18,  20,  22,  24,  48,  62,  72;  15.  [2,  12,] 
39;  16.  7,  8,  [15]. 

Luke  1.  13,  18,  19,  28,  30,  34,35,  38,  42,  46,  60,  61  ;  2. 

io,  [15,]  28,  34.  48,  49  :  3-  I2»  x3»  14 ;  4-  3-  6,  8.  9,  12,  23, 
24,  43  ;  5-  4.  5»  IO-  [*3i]  2°»  22»  23,  23,  24.  27,  31,  33,  34; 
6.  2,  3.  8,  9,  10;  7.  7,  9,  13.  14.  20,  22,  [31,]  40,  40..  43,  43, 
48,  50;  8.  10,  21,  22,  25,  28,  30,  45,  45,  46,  48,  52;  9.  3,  9, 

12,  n,  13,  14,  19,  20,  20,  33,  41,  43.48,  49.  5°.  54-  [55.157* 
58,  59,  59,  60,  61,  62  ;  10.  10,  18,  21,  23,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30, 
35.  37.  37.  4°.  4i ;  i'-  1.  2-  5.  ts.l  7.  *5.    *7.  27-  28,  39,  46, 


SAY 


841 


SAYING 


ig;  12.  ii,  12,13,  J4>  J5>  Jo,  20,  22,  41,  42,  45;  13.  2,  7, 
12,  15,  20,  23,  23,  32,  35;  14.  [10,]  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20, 

21,  22,   23,   25  ;    15.   II,   12,   [17,]  21,  22,   27,  29,   31  ;    l6.    2,  3, 

6,  6,  7,  7,  15,  24,25,  27,  30,  3r;  17.  1,  5,  6,  14,  17,  19,  20, 

22,  37;  18.  4,  6,  16,  19,  21,  22,  24,  26,  27,  28,  29,  31,  41, 
42;  19.  5,  8,  9,  12,  13,  17,  19,  24,  25,  [30],  32,  33,  34,  39, 
40;  20.  3,  s,  6,  8,  15,  16,  17,  23,  24,  25,  34,  39,  39,  41,  42, 
45;  21.  3,  5,  8;  22.  9,  10,  15,  17,  25,  [31,]  33,  34,  35,  35, 

36,  38,"38,  40,  46,  48,  49,  51,  52,  56,  58,  60,  61,  67.  70.  71; 

23,  4,  14,  22,  28,  43,  46,  46;  24.  5,  17,  18,  19,  19,  24,  25, 
32,  38,  40,  41,  44,  46. 

John  1.  22,  23,  25,  30,  33,  38,  42,  46,  48,  50,  50;  2.  16, 
18, 19,  20,  22;  3.  2,  3,  7,  9,  10,  26,  27,  28;  4.  10,  13,  17, 17, 
27,  32,  48,  52,  53;  5.  11,  12,  14,  ig;  6.  10,  25,  26,  28,  29, 
3°>  32,  34.  35.  36,  41.  43.  53.  59.  60,  61,67;  7-  3»  9.  l6>  t20-'. 
21,  33.  35.  36.  38.  42.  45.  52;  8.  [7,  10,  11,  11,]  13,  14,21, 
£23,]  24,  25,  28,39,  41,  42,  48,  52,  55,  57,  58;  g.  7,  [11,]  11, 

12,  15,  17,  20,  23,  24,  [25],  26,  28,  30,  34,  35,  36,  37,  39,  40, 
41  j  10.  7,  [26,  34,]  36 ;  11.  4,  11,  12,  14,  16,  21,  25,  28,  34, 

37,  40.  41,  42,  49 ;  i2.  6,  7.  19,  27,  30,  35,  39,  41,  44,  49; 

13.  7,  11,  12,  21,  21,  33;  14.  23,  26,  28,  [28];  15.  20;  16.  4, 
15,  17,  ig,  ig;  17.  1;  18.  [4,]  6,  7,  it,  2t,  25,  25,  [29,]  30, 
3r>  3i.  33.  37.  3s;  *9-  2I»  24«  30;  20.  14,  [17,]  20^21,  22, 
25,  26,  28;  21.  6,  17,  17,  20,  23. 

Acts  1.  7,  11,  15,  24;  2.  34,  37;  34.  6,  22;  4.  8,  19,  23, 
=4,  25;  5.  3,  8,  [g,]  19,  29,  35;  6.  2;  7.  1,  3,  7,  33,  37,  56, 
60 ;  8.  20,  24,  29,  30,  31,  34,  [37,  37];  g.  5,  [5,  6,]  10,  10, 15, 
17.  34,  4° !  IO-  4»  4i  M,  J9>  2I»  22»  34  >  IJ-  8,  *3  >  I2-  8,  n, 
15,  J7  J  *3-  2»  ioi  *6*  22,  46;  14.  10;  15.  7,  36;  16.  iS,  31  ; 
17.  32 ;  18.  6,  14 ;  ig.  2,  [2,]  3,  3,  4,  15,  25 ;  20.  10,  18,  35 ; 
21.  11,  20,  37,  39;  22.  8,  10,  10,  13,  14,  19,  21,  25,  27,  23, 
1,  3.  4,  11.  14,  20;,  24.  20,  22 ;  25.  9,  10;  26.  [15,]  15,  [29]; 
27.  21 ;  31 ;  28.  2i,  26,  [29]. 

Rom.  10.  6 ;  1  Co.  1.  15 ;  10.  28 ;  n.  22,  24 ;  12.  3,  15,  16, 
2i ;  15.  27;  2  Co.  4.  6;  6.  16;  Gal.  2.  14;  Col.  4.  7 ;  Ti.  1. 
12  ;  Heb.  1.  12  ;  3. 10 ;  7.  g  ;  10.  7,  30;  12.  21 ;  Jas.  2.  3, 
3,  ii,  n,  16;  1  Jo.  1.  6.  8,  10;  4.  20;  Jude  g;  Rev  7  14; 
17.  7 ;  21.  5,  6;  22.  [6,]  17. 

13.  To  say,  speak,  tell,  declare,  ipw  era,  epew  ereo. 
Matt.  7.  4  Or  how  wilt  thou  say  to  thy  brother,  Let 
7.  22  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  L. 
13.  30  I  will  say  to  the  reapers,  Gather  ye  toge. 
17.  20  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove  he. 
21.    3  ye  shall  say,  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them 

21.  25  will  sayunto  us.  Why  did  ye  not  then  be. 
25.  34  Then  shall  the  king  say  unto  them  on  his 
25.  40  king  shall  answer  and  say  unto  them.Ve. 

25.  41  Thenshallhe  say  also  unto  them  on  them 

26.  75  remembered  the  word  of  Jesus,  which  sa. 
Markn.  31  he  will  say,  Why  then  did  ye  not  believe 
Luke  2.  24  according  to  that  which  is  said  in  the  law 

4.  12  It  is  said,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord 
4.  23  Ye  will  surely  say  unto  me  this  proverb 

12.  19  I  will  say  to  my  soul,  Soul,  thou  hast  mu. 

13.  25  and  he  shall  answer  and  say  unto  you,  I 

13.  27  shall  say,  I  tell  you,  1  know  you  not  wh. 

14.  9  he  that  bade  thee  and  him  come  and  say 
15. 18  "will  say  unto  him,  Father,  I  have  sinned 
17.  7  will  say  unto  him  by  and  by,  when  he  is 
17.  8  will  not  rather  say  unto  him.  Make  ready 
17.  21  Neither  shall  they  say,  Lo  here  !  or.lo  th.! 
17.  23  they  shall  say  to  you.  See  here  !  or,  see 
ig.  31  thus  shall  ye  say  unto  him,  Because  the 
20.   5  he  will  say,  Why  then  believed  ye  him  not? 

22.  11  say  unto  the  good  man  of  the  house,  The 
22. 13  found  as  he  had  said  unto  them :  and  they 

23.  2g  in  the  which  they  shall  say,  Blessed  (are) 
John  4. 18  not  thy  husband  :  in  that  saidst  thou  tr. 

6. 65  Therefore  said  I  unto  you,  that  no  man 
12.  50  even  as  the  Father  said  unto  me,  so  I  sp. 
Acts  13.  34  he  said  on  this  wise,  I  will  give  you  the 

17.  28  poets  have  said,  For  we  are  also  his  offs. 
Rom,  3.    5  what  shall  we  say?  (Is)  God  unrighteous 

4.    1  What  shall  we  then  say  that  Abraham  our 

6.  1  What  shall  we  say  then?  Shall  we  conti. 

7.  7  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  (Is)  the  law  sin  ? 

8.  31  What^hall  we  then  say  to  these  things? 
9.14,  30  What  shall  we  say  then? 

9.  19  Thou  wilt  say  then  unto  me.  Why  doth 
9.  20  Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that 

11.  ig  Thou  wilt  say  then,  The  branches  were 

1  Co. 14.  16  how  shall  he.  .say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of 

14.  23  unbelievers,  will  they  not  say  that  ye  are 
T5*  35  will  say,  How  are  the  dead  raised  up?  and 

2  C0.12.    6  for  I  will  say  the  truth :  but  (now)  I  forb. 

12.  g  said  unto  me,  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
Phil.   4.   4  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway :  (and)  again  I 
Heb.    1.  13  But  to  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any 

4.    3  as  he  said,  As  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath 
4.    7  as  [it  is  said,]  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his 
10.   9  Then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will 

13.  5  for  he  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee 
Jas.  2.  t8  man  may  say,  Thou  hast  faith,  and  I  have 
Rev.    7.  14  said  unto  him.  Sir,  thou  knowest.  And  he 

ip.    3  again  they  said.  Alleluia !  And  her  smoke 

li.To  talk,  speak,  tell,  \a\4a  laleo. 

Mark  9.    6  For  he  wist  not  what  [to  say] ;  for  they 
John  8-  25  Even  (the  same)  that  I  said  unto  you  from 
8.  26  I  have  many  things  to  say  and  to  judge 
16.    6  But  because  I  have  said  these  things  unto 
16.  18  A  little  while  ?  we  cannot  tell  what  he  sa. 

18.  20  resort;  and  in  secret  have  I  said  nothing 
18. 21  ask  them,  .what  I  have  said  unto  them 

Acts    3.  22  hear,  .whatsoever  he  shall  say  unto  you 
23.    7  [when  he  had  so  said,]  there  arose  a  disp. 
23.  18  young  man .  .who  hath  something  to  say 
26.  22  which  the  prophets  and  Moses  did  say 
Rom.  3.  19  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law 
1  Co.  9.    8  Say  I  these  things  as  a  man?  or.  .not  the 
Heb.  5.    5  but  he  that  saith  unto  him,  Thou  art  my 
11. 18  Of  whom  it  was  said,  That  in  Isaac  shall 
106 


15.  To  say,  speak,  declare,  lay  out,  Xeya  lego. 
Matt.  3.  9  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  We 
3.  g  for  I  sayuntoyou,  that  God  is  able  of  th. 
See  also  4.  [6,  9,]  10,  17,  19;  5.  18,  20,  22,  26,  28,  32,  34, 
36,44;  6.  2,  5,  6,  25,  29;  7.  21;  8.  4,  7,  9,  10,  11,  20,  26; 
g.  6,  9,  21,  24,  28,  28,  34,  37;  10.  15,  23,  42;  11.  7,  9,  11, 
18,  19,  22,  24!;  12.  6,  13,23,  31,  36,  44;  13,  14,  17,  [51,]  51, 
54;  14.  4,  17,  31;  15.  5,  33,  34;  16.  2,  13,  15,  15,  18,  28; 

17.  5,  10,  12,  20,  25,  [26];  18.   1,  10,  13,  18,  19,  22,  32;  ig. 

7,  8,  g,  10,  [18,]  20,  23,  24,  28 ;  20.  6,  7,  7,  8,  21,  22,  23,  33 ; 
21.  11,  13,  16,  16,  19,  21,  23,  31,  31,  31,  41,  42,  43;  22.  1, 

8,  12,  20,  2i,  21,  23,  42,  43;  23-  3-  16,  30,  36,  39;  24.  2,  34, 
47;  25.  12,  40,  45;  26.  5,  13,  18,  21,  22,  25,  29,  31,  34,  35, 

36,  38,  40,  45,  52,  64,  64,  70,  71;  27.   11,  13,  22,  22,  [33,] 

41,  47,  [49];  28.  10. 

Mark  1.  37,  38,  41,  44;  2.  5,  to,  ii,  14,  16, 17, 18,  24,  25, 

27J3-  3.  4.  5.  21,  22,  23,  28,  30,  34;  4.  2,  g,  11,  13,   21,  24, 

26,  30,  35,  38,  41;  5.  8,  19,  28,  30,  31,  35,  36,  39,  41,  41; 
6.  4,  10,  [11,]  14,  15,  15,  18,  35,  37,  38,  38,  50;  7.  9,  11,  14, 

18,  20,  28,  34;  8.  1,  12,  12,  17,  19,  21,  [24,]  27,  [29,]  29,  29; 

9,  1,  1,  5,  it,  13,  19,  24,  26,  31,  35,  41 ;  10.  11,  15,  23,  24, 

27,  28,  29,  42,  47,  [51] ;  11.  2,  5,  21,  22,  23,  [23,]  24,  28,  33, 
33 ;  12.  14,  16,  18,  35,  35,  38,  [43,]  43 ;  13.  1,  5,  30,  37,  37 ; 
14.  2,  [4,]  9,  12,  13,  14,  18,  19,  25,  27,  30,  30,  31,  32,  34,  36, 

37,  41-  45.  58,  61.  63,  65/67,  68,  69,  70;  15.  2,  14,  [28],  31, 
35;  16.  3,  6. 

Luke  3.  7,  8,  8,  11,  [22];  4.  21,  22,  24;  5.  24,  39;  6.  5, 
20,  27,  42,  46 ;  7.  8,  9,  14,  26,  28,  33,  34,  47,  49 ;  8.  8,  [20 ;] 

9.  7,  18,  20,  23,  33;  10.  2,  5,  9,  12;  11.  2,  8,  9,  18,  24,  29; 
45-  5*i  [53]  I  I2-  *i  4,  5.  8,  22,  27,  37,  44,  54,  54,  55;  13.  S, 
14,  17,  18,  24,  26,  35 ;  14.  12,  24 ;  15.  7,  10 ;  16.  1,  5,  7,  9, 
29;  17.  6,  10,  13,  37;  18.  6,  17,  29;  19.  22,  26;  20.  21,  41, 
42;  21.  3,  10,  32;  22.  11,  16,  18,  37,60,70;  23.  3,  30,  [34,] 

42,  43;  24.  23,  [30.] 

John  1.  21,  22,  29,  36,  38,  38,  39,  41,  43,  45,  46,  47,  48, 
[49.]  5*.  5i;  2-3.  4,  5-  5»  7.  8,  10,  22;  3.  3,  4,  5,  11  ;  4.  7, 
g,  10,  11,  15,  16,  17,  19,  20,  2i,  25,  26,  28,  33,  34,  35,  35, 
42,  49,  50;  5.  6,  8,  io,  18,  19,  24,  25,  34;  6.  5,  6,  8,  12,  14, 
20,  26,  32,  42,  42,  47,  53,  65 ;  7.  6,  11,  12,  12,  25,  26,  31,  40, 
41,  41,  50;  8.  [4,  5,  6,]  19,  22,  22,  25,  31,  33,  34,  39,  46,  48, 
51.  52»  54>  58 ;  9.  8,  9,  9,  10,  12,  16,  16,  17,  17,  19,  41 ;  10. 

1,  7,  20,  21,  24,  36,  41 ;  11.  7,  8,  11,  23,  24,  27,  34,  36,  39, 
39,  40,  44,  47;  12.  4,  24,  29,  29,  33,  34;  13.  6,  8,  9,  10,  13, 

16.  20,  ?i,  25,  27,  29,  31,  33,  36,  37,  38;  14.  5,  6,  8,  9,  9, 
12,  22;  16.  12,  17,  18,  20,  23,  26,  29;  iS.  5,  17,  26,  34,  37* 
38;  19.  3,  4,  5,  6,  9,  10,  14,  15,  17,  21,  [24],  26,  27,  28,  35, 

37;  20.  2,  13,  13,  15,  15,  l6,  l6,  l6,  17,  22,  25,  27,  29;  2T.  3, 
3i  5,  7,   IO,   12,   15,   15,    15,    l6,   l6,   l6,   17,   17,   l8,   19,   2T,   22. 

Acts  2.  13,  17.  34;  4.  32;  5.  38;  6.  11,  13,  14;  7.  48,  49; 
g.  21 ;  11.  16;  12.  8,  [15 ;]  13,  25,  35 ;  15. 17;  17.  18,  18 ;  21. 

4.  11,  23,  37;  22.  22;  23.  8,  30;  27.  10;  28.  4,  6,  17. 

Rom.  2.  22;  3.  8,  19;  4.  3,  g;  7.  7;    9.  r,  15,  17,  25; 

10.  8,  11,  16,  18,  19,  19,  20,  21;  11.  1,  2,  4,  9,  11;  13.  3,  19; 

14.  11;  15.  8,  10,  12. 

1  Co.  1.  T2,  12 ;  3.  4;  7.  8;  g.  8, 10;  10.  2g;  14.  16,  21,  34 ; 

15.  12. 

2  Co.  6.  2,  17,  18;  9.  3,  4;  ir.  16;  Gal.  1.  9;  3.  \6,  17;  4. 
i,  30;  5-  2,  16;  Eph.  4.  8,  17;  5.  14;  Col.  2.  4;  1  Th.  4.  15; 

5.  3;  1  Ti.  1.7;  5-  i8;'2Ti.  2.  7;  Titus  2.8;  Phil.  ig.  21;  Heb. 
*•  6,  7;  3.7,  15;  5.  6;  7.  21;  8.  8,  8,  9, 10, 13;  10.  5,  8,  16,  [30]; 

11.  14,  32;  13.  6;  Jas.  1.  13;  2.  14.  23;  4.  5.  6,  13,  15;  1  Jo. 

2.  4,  6,  9;  5.  16. 

Rev.  1.  8;  2.  1,  7,  8,  9.  11.  12.  17,  18.  24,  29;  3.  1,  6,  7, 
9,  13,  14,  17,  22;  4.  1;  5.  5,  [4;  6.  3,  15,  6,  7,  16;- 10.  8  9.  g, 
11;  14.  13;  16.  5,  7;  17.  [isl^  '8  7;  19.  9,  9,  10;  21.  5;  22. 
9,  10,  17,  20. 
16. To  speak,  say,  ipw  era,  /5ea>  hreo. 

Matt.  5.  21,  27  ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  by  them 
5. 31  It  hath  been  said,  Whosoever  shall  put 
5-  33>  38.  43  ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been 
Rom.  9. 12  It  was  said  unto  her,  The  elder  shall  serve 

9.  26  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them 
Rev.    6.  11  itwassaiduntothem.thattheyshouldrest 

17.  To  say,  assert,  affirm,  <pdoK&  phasko. 

Rev.  2.  2  [thou  hast  tried  them  which  say  they  are] 

18.  To  say,  affirm,  <t>rjfj.i  phsmi. 

Matt.  4.    7  Jesus  said  unto  him,  It  is  written  again 

8.  8  The  centuriou  answei-ed  and  said,  Lord 
13. 28  The  servants  said  unto  him.  Wilt  thou  th. 

13.  29 he  said.  Nay;  lest,  while  yegatherup  the 

14.  8  she,  being  before  instructed.. said,  Give 
17.  26  Jesus  saith  untohim, Then  are  the  children 
19.  21  Jesus  [said]  unto  him,  If  thou  wilt  be  pe. 

21.  27  he  said  unto  them,  Neither  tell  I  you  by 

25.  21  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  (thou) 
25. 23  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  good 

26.  34  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto 
v.6.  61  This  (fellow)  said,  I  am  able  to  destroy 

27.  11  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews?  Jesus  said 
27.  23  the  governor  said,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he 
27. 65  Pilate  said  unto  them,  Ye  have  a  watch 

Marki4.  29  Peter  said  unto  him,  Although  all  shall 
Luke  7.  40  Simon,  I  have  somewhat . .  And  he  saith 
7.  44  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  untoS. 

22.  58  another  saw  him,  and  said,  Thou  art  also 

22.  70  Art  thou  then  the  Son  of  God?  And  hesa. 

23.  3  And  he  answered  him  and  said,  Thou  sa. 
John  1.  23  He  said,  I  (am)  the  voice  of  one  crying  in 

9.  38  he  said.  Lord,  I  believe.  And  he  worship. 
Acts    2.  38  Peter  [said]  unto  them,  Repent,  and  be 

7.  2  he  said,  Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  hea. 

8.  36  the  eunuch  said, See,  (here is)water:what 

10.  28  he  said  unto  them,  Ye  know  how  that  it 
10.  30  Cornelius  said,  Four  days  ago  I  was  fast. 
10.  31  said,  Cornelius,  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and 
16.  30  brought  them  out,  and  said.  Sirs,  what'mu. 

16.  37  Paul  said  unto  them,  They  have  beaten 

17.  22  said,  (Ye)  men  of  Athens,  I  perceive  that 
19.  35  he  said,  (Ye)  men' of  Ephesus,  what  mnn 
21.  37  captain.  .Who  said,  Canst  thou  speak  G.?. 


Acts  22.    2  they  kept  the  more  silence:  and  he  saith 
22.  27  Tell  me,  art  thou  a  Roman  ?  He  said,  yea 

22.  28  And  Paul  said,  But  I  was  (free)  born 

23.  5  Then  said  Paul,  I  wist  not,  brethren,  that 
23.  17  said,  Bring  this  young  man  unto  the  chief 
23.  18  brought  (him)  to  the  chief  captain,  and 
23.  35  I  will  hear  thee,  said  he,  when  thineacc. 
25.  5  Let  them  therefore,  said  he,  which  among- 
25.  22  Agrippa  [said]  unto  Festus,  I  would  also 
25.  22  To  morrow,  said  he,  thoushalthear  him 

25.  24  Festus  said.  King  Agrippa,  and  all  men 

26.  1  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul,  Thou  art  permi. 
26.  24  Festus  said  with  a  loud  voice,  Paul,  thou 
26.  25  he  said,  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble  Festus 
26.  28  Agrippa  [said]  unto  Paul,  Almost  thou 
26.  32  Then  said  Agrippa  unto  Festus,  This  man 

1  Co.  6.  16  isonebody?  fortwo,  [saith  hejshallbeone 

7.  29  But  this  I  say.  brethren,  the  time  (is)  sh. 
10.  15  I  speak  as  to  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what  I 
10.  19  What  say  I  then  ?  that  the  idol  is  any  th. 
15.  50  this  I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood 

2  Co.  10.  10  (his)  letters,  say  they,  (are)  weighty  and 
Heb.    8.    5  See,  saith  he,  (that)  thou  make  all  things 

19.  The  word,  6  \6yos  ho  logos. 

Heb.  5.  11  we  have  many  tilings  to  say,  and  hard  to 

SAY  against,  to  — 

To  speak  against,  avrtlirov  anteipon. 

Acts   4.  14  And  beholding,  .they  could  say  nothing  a 

SAY  fcefcre,  to — 

To  say  beforehand,  publicly,  irpoepeai  proereo. 

Rom.  9.  29  as  Esaias  said  before,  Except  the  Lord  of 
2  Co.  7.  3  for  I  have  said  before,  that  ye  are  in  our 
Gal.  1.  9  As  we  said  before,  so  say  I  now  again,  If 
Heb.  10.  15  a  witness . .  for  after  that  [he  had  said  be.l 

SAY  on,  to  — 

l.To  sjieak,  "13;|  dabar,  3. 

1  Sa.  15.  16  Stay,  and  I  will  tell  thee.  .Say  on 

2  Sa.  14.  12  speak  (one)  word . .  And  he  said,  Say  on 
1  Ki.  2.  14  I  have  somewhat,  .unto  thee.  .Say  on 

2.  16  now  I  ask  one  petition  of  thee.  .Say  on 

2.  To  speak,  tell,  declare,  ttirov,  eipon. 

Luke  7.  40  Simon,  I  have  somewhat.  .Master,  say  on 
Z.To  lay  out,  say,  sp>eak,  \4yw  lego. 

Acts  13. 15  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation.. say  on 
SAY  anything,  or  what,  to  — 
Word,  nW?  millah. 

Job  32. 11  waited,  .whilst  ye  searched  out  what  to  say 
33.  32  If  thou  hast  any  thing  to  say,  answer  me 

SAY  nay,  to  — 

To  send  back,  cause  to  return,  2W  shub,  5. 

1  Ki.   2. 17  Speak,  .for  he  will  not  say  thee  nay,  that 

2.  20  I  desire  one  small  petition. .say  me  notn. 
2.  20  Ask  on, my  mother.. I  will  not  say  thee  n. 

SAY,  saith,  should  — 
Mouth,  n$peh. 

2  Sa.  17.'   5  and  let  us  hear  likewise  what  he  saith 
Ezra    8.  17  I  told  them  what  they  should  say  unto  I. 

SAY,  somewhat  to  — 
.4  %oord,  "i^ri  dabar. 

1  Ki.   2.  14  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee.  And 
SAYING  — 
l.A  saying,  ~>£N  emer. 

Prov.  4.  10  Hear,  0  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings 
4.  20  My  son. .incline  thine  ear  unto  my  saying: 

2. To  say,  lift  up  tlie  voice,  1DN  amar. 

Gen.  1.  22  And  God  blessed  them,  saying 
See  also  2. 16;  3.  17;  5.  2;  8.  15  ;  g.  8;  15.  1,  4, 18;  17.  3;  18. 
12,  13,  15;  ig.  15;  21.  22;  22.  20;  23.  3,  5, 8,  10,  13, 14;  24. 
7,  30,  37;  26.  11,  20;  27.  6,  6;  28.  6,  20;  31.  1,  29;  32.  4,  6, 
17  i7»  19;  34-  4.  8,  20;  37.  15;  38.  13,  21,  24,  25,  28;  39.  12, 
14,  17,  19;  40.  7;  41.  9,  16;  42.  14,  22,  22,  28,  29,  37;  43. 

3.  3>  7;  44-  1.  J9»  3z;  45-  16,  26;  47.  5;  48.  20,  20;  50.  4,  4, 
5,  16,  16,  25. 

Exod  1.  22;  3.  16;  5.  6,  8,  10,  13,  15;  6.  10,  12,  29;  7.  8, 
g,  16;  g.  5;  11.  8;  12.  1,  3;  13.  r,  8,  14,  ig;  14.  1,  12 ;  15.  1. 
24;  16.  11,  12;  17.  4,  7;  ig.  3,  12,  23;  20.  1;  25.  1;  30.  11, 
17,  22,  31;  31.  1,  12,  13;  33.  1;  35.  4,  4;  36.  5,  6;  40.  1. 

Lev.  1.  1;  4.  1,  2;  5.  14;  6.  1,  8,  g,  10,  24,  25;  7.  22,  23, 
28,  2g;  8.  1,  31;  9.  3;  10.  3,  8,  16;  11.  1,  2;  12.  1,  2;  13.  1; 

14.  1,  33,  35;  15.  1;  17.  1,  2;  18.  1;  19. 1 ;  20.  1;  21.  16,  17; 
22.  1,  17,  26;  23.  1,  g,  23,  24,  26,  33,  34;  24.  1,  13, 15;  25.  1; 
27.  1. 

Num.  1.  i,  48;  2.  1;  3.  5,  11,  14,  44;  4.  t,  17,  21;  5.  1 
5,  11;  6.  1,  22,  23,  23 ;  7.  4;  8.  1,  5,  23;  9.  1,  9,  10;  10.  1; 

11.  13,  18,  20;  12.  13;  13.  1,  32;  14.  7,  15,  17,  26,  40;  15.  1, 
17,  37;  16.  5,  20,  23,  24,  26,  36,  41,  44;  17.  1,  12;  18.  25 ;  19. 
1,  2;  20.  3,  7,  23;  21.  21;  22.  5;  23.  26;  24.  12;  25.  10,  16;  26. 
1,  3i  52;  27.  2,  6,  8,  15;  28.  1;  30.  1,  3,  25;  32.  2,  10,  25,  31 ; 
33-  5°:  34-  1.  *3i  l6;  35-  r-  9  '>  36-  5,  6\ 

Deut.  1.  5,  6,  9,  16,  28,  34,  37;  c.  2,  4,17,  26;  3.  18,  21 
2^;  5.  5;  6.  20;  9-  4»  13.  23;  I2-  30;  13-  2.  6.  I2>  *3J  15-  ?» 
11;  18.  16;  19.  7;  20.  5;  22.  17;  27.  1,  9,  11;  29.  ig;  31.  10 
25;  32.  48;  34-  4- 

Josh.   I.    I,    IO,    IT,   12,    13,   l6;    2.   I,   2,  3;    3.   3,    0,   8,  9;  4. 

r,  3,  6,  15,  17,  21,  21,  22 ;  6.  10,  26;  7.  2;  8.  4;  g.  n,  22,  22; 
10.  3,  6,  17;  14.  9;  17.  4,  14,  17;  18.  8;  20.  1,  2;  21.  2;  22,  8, 

15.  24- 

Judg.  1.  1;  5.  1;  6.  13,  32;  7.  2,  3,  24;  8.  9,  15;  g.  i,  31; 
10.  10;  11.  12,  17;  13.  6;  15.  13;  16.  2,  2,  18;  19.  22;  20.  8 

12,  23,  28;  21.  1,  5,  10,  18,  20. 

Ruth  2.  15;  4.  4,  17;  1  Sa.  4.  21;  5.  to;  6.  2,  21;  7.  3;  9. 
15,  26;  10.  2;  11.  7;  13.  3;  14.  24,  28,  33;  15.  10,  12;  16.  22; 
17.  26,  27;  18.  24;  19.  2,  11,  15,  19;  20.  42;  21.  n;  23.  1,  2, 


SAYING 


842 


SCARLET 


ig,  27;  24.  i,  8,  9;  25.  14,  40;  26.  1,  6,  14,  19;  27.  ii,  11,  12; 
28.  10,  12;  29.  5;  30.  8,  26. 

2  Sa.  1.  16,  2,  r,  4;  3.  12,   12,  14,  17,   iS,  23,  35;  4.   10; 

5.  1,6,  19;  6.12;  7.  4,  26;  11.  10,  15,  19;  13.  7,  28,  30; 
14.  32 ;  15.  8,  10,  13,  31 ;  17.  6,  16;  iS.  5,  12;  19.  8,  9,  11, 
11 ;  20.  18,  iS;  21.  17 ;  24. 11. 

1  Ki.  1.  5,  6,  11,  13,  23,  30,  47,  51,  51;  2.  1,  4,  8,  23,  29, 
30,  39,  42  ;  5.  2,  s,  8 ;  6.  11 ;  8.  15,  25,  47,  55 ;  9.  5  ;  12.  3, 
7,  9,  10,  10,  12,  14,  16,  22,  23 ;  13.  3, 4,  9,  18, 21,  27,  31 ;  15. 
18;  16. 1 ;  1*7.  2,  8 ;  18.  1,  26,  31 ;  19.  2;  20.  5,  5,  17;  21. 

2,  9,  10,  13,  14,  17,  19,  19,  23,  28;  22.  12,  13,  31,  36. 

2  EX  3.  7;  4.  1,  31 ;  5.  4,  6,  8,  10,  22 ;  6.  8,  9,  13,  26;  7. 
10,  i2,  14,  18;  8.  r,  4,  6,  7,  8,  9;  9.  12,  18,  20,  36;  10.  1,5, 

6,  8;  11.  5;  14.  6,  8,  9,  9;  15.  12;  16.  7,  15;  17. 13,  26,27, 
35;  18.  14,  30,  32,  36;  19.  9,  10,  10,  20;  20.  6,  4;  21.  10; 
22.  3,  10,  12;  23.  21. 

1  Ch.  4.  9,  10;  11.  1 ;  12.  19 ;  13. 12;  14.  10;  16.  18 ;  17. 

3,  6,  24;  21.  9,  10 ;  22.  8 ;  2  Ch.  2.  3;  6.  4,  16,  37 ;  7.  18; 

10.  3,  6,  7,  9,  10,  10,  12,  14,  16;  11.  2,  3;  12.  7  ;  16.  2;  18. 

11,  12,  19,  19,  30;  19.  9;  20.  2,  8,  37;  21.  12;  25.  4,  7,  17, 
18,  18 ;  30.  6,  18 ;  32.  4,  6,  9,  n,  12,  17 ;  34.  16,  18,  20;  35. 
21 ;  36.  22. 

Ezra  1.  1;  8.  22;  9.  i,  n;  Neh.  1.  8;  6.  2,  3,  7,8,  9;  8. 
11,  15;  Job  24.  15;  Psa.  71.  11;  105.  11;  119.  82;  Eccl. 
x.  16. 

Isa.  3.  7 ;  4.  1 ;  6.  8;  7.  2,  5,  10;  8.  5,  n  ;  14.  24 ;  16. 
14;  19.  25 ;  20.  2  ;  23.  4 ;  29.  n,  12 ;  30.  21 ;  36.  15,  18,  21 ; 
7.39,  10,  10,  15,  21;  38.  4;  41.  7,  13;  44.  28;  46.  10;  56.  3, 

Jer.  1.4,  11,  13  ;  2.  1,  2,  27 ;  4.  10;  5.  20;  6.  14;  7. 1,  4. 
23 ;  8.  6,  11 ;  11.  1,  4,  6,  7,  21 ;  13.  3,  8 ;  18.  1,  5,  11";  20. 
15 ;  21  1 ;  23.  25  ;  33.  38  ;  24.  4 ;  25.  2 ;  36.  1,  8,  9,  11,  12, 
17,  18;  27.  1,  9,  12,  14,  16,  16;  28.  1,  2,  11,  12,  13;  29.  3, 

22,  24,  25,  25,  28,  30,  31;  30. 1,  2;  31.  34;  32.  3,  6,  7,  13, 
16,  26;  33.  i,  19,  23,  24 ;  34.  1,  12,  13 ;  35  1,  6,  12,  15;  36. 
1,  5,  14,  17,  27,  29,  29;  37.  3,  6,  9,  13,  19;  38.  1,  8,  10,  16; 
39.  11,  15,  16;  40.  9,  15;  42.  14,  20;  43.  8;  43.  2;  44.  i,  4, 
15,  20,  25,  25,  26 ;  45.  1 ;  49.  34. 

Eze.  3  16 ;  6. 1;  7.  119.  1,  11;  10.  6;  n.  14 ;  12.  1,  8,  17, 
21,  22,  26;  13.  i,  6,  10;  14.  2,  12;  15.  1 ;  16.  1,  44;  17.  1, 
ii  ;  18.  1,  2 ;  20.   2,  5,  45 ;  21.  1,  8,   iS ;  22.  1,  17,  23,  28 ; 

23.  1;  24.  1,  15,  20;  25.  1;  26.  1;  27.  1;  28.  i,  11,  20;  29. 
1,  17;  30.  1,  20;  31.  1;  32.  1,  17;  33.  1,10,  21,  23,  24,  30; 
34.  1;  35.  1,  12;  36.  16;  37.  15,  18;  38.  1. 

Amos  2.  12;  3.  1 ;  7.  10;  8.  5;  Jon.  1.  1;  3.  x,  7;  Hag. 
t.  i,  2,  13;  2.  1,  2,10,  11,  20,  21;  Zech.  1.  1,  4,  7,  14,  17, 
21;  2.  4 ;  3.  4,  6;  4.  4,  6,6,  8;  6.  8,  9,  12,  12;  7.  3,  4,  5, 
8,  9;  8.  1,  18,  31,  23. 

3.  To  say,  lift  up  the  voice,  "V?N  amar. 

Ezra    5.  11  they  returned  us  answer  saying  We  are 

A. A  word,  i;n  dabar. 

Gen.  37.  n  envied,  .but  his  father  observed  the  say. 
Num  14.  39  Moses  told  these  sayings  unto  all  the  ch. 
1  Sa.  1 3.    8  Saul  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  dis. 

1  Ki.12.  15  that  he  might  perform  his  saying,  which 

13.  32  the  saying  which  he  cried  by  the  word  of 
15.  29  accordiugunto  the  saying  of  theLonn,  wh. 
17. 15  and  did  according  to  the  saying  of  Elijah 

20.  4  according  to  thy  saying,  I  (am)  thine,  and 

2  Ki.   2.  22  according  to  the  saying  of  Elisha  which 

5.  14  according  to  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God 
8.    2  and  did  after  the  saying  >f  the  man  of  God 

10.  17  accordingto  the  saying  of  the  Lord,  which 

1  Ch.21.  19  David  went  up  at  the  saying  of  God,  wh. 

2  Ch.13.  22  his  sayings,  (are)  written  in  the  story  of 

33.  19  they  (are)  written  among  the  sayings  of 
Esth.  1.  21  the  saying  pleased  the  king  and  the  prin. 
Jon.    4.    2  (was)  not  this  my  saying  when  I  was  yet 

5.  Mouth,  ns  peh. 

Psa.  49.  13  yet  their  posterity  approve  their  sayings 

6.  Talk,  \a\la  lalia. 

John  4.  42  Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying 

7.  Word,  \6yos  logos. 

Matt.  7.  24  whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine 
7.  26  every  one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of 

7.  28  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  sayings,  the 
15.  12  offended,  after  they  heard  this  saying 
19.  1  when  Jesus  had  finished  these  sayings,  he 
19.  11  All  (men)  cannot  receive  this  saying,  save 
19.  22  when  the  young  man  heard  that  saying 
26.  1  when  Jesus  had  finished  all  these  sayings 
28.  15  this  saying  is  commonly  reported  among 

Mark  7.  29  For  this  saying  go  thy  way ;  the  devil  is 

8.  32  he  spake  that  saying  openly.  And  Peter 

9.  10  And  they  kept  that  saying  with  themsel. 
10.  22  he  was  sad  at  that  saying,  and  went  away 

Luke  1.  29  she  was  troubled  [at  his  saying],  and  cast 

6.  47  and  heareth  my  sayings,  and  doeth  them 
9.  28  eight  days  after  these  sayings,  he  took  P. 
9.  44  Let  these  sayings  sink  down  into  your  ears 

John  4.  37  herein  is  thatsayingtrue,  Onesoweth,  and 
4.  39  believed  on  him  for  the  saying  of  thejwu. 

6.  60  This  is  an  hard  saying;  who  can  hear  it? 

7.  36  What  (manner  of)  saying  is  this  that  lie 
7. 40  therefore  when'theylieard  this  saying,  sa. 

8.  51,  52  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  ne. 
8.  55  but  I  kuow  him,  and  keep  his  saying 

10.  19  division,  .among  the  Jews  for  these  say. 

12.  38  That  the  saying  of  Esaias  the  prophet 

14.  24  He  thatlovethme  not  keepeth  not  my  sa. 

15.  20  if  they  have  keptmysaying,  they  will  keep 
18.  9  That  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled  which 
18.  32  That  the  saying  of  Jesus  might  be  fulfilled 
ig.    8,  13  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  sa. 

21.  23  Then  went  this  saying  abroad  among  the 
Acts    6.    5  And  the  saying  pleased  the  whole  multi. 

7.  29  Then  fled  Moses  at  this  saying,  and  was 

16.  36  the  keeper  of  the  prison  told  this  saying 
Eom.  3.    4  thou  mightest  be  justified  in  thy  sayings 

13.  9  it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  sayiug 


1  Co.  15.  54  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  this  saying 

1  Ti.    1.  15  This  (is)  a  faitliful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

3.  1  This  (is)  a  true  saying,  If  a  man  desire  the 

4.  9  This  (is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

2  Ti.  2.  1 1  (It  is)  a  faithful  saying :  For  if  we  be  dead 
Titus  3.  8  (This  is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  these  things 
Rev.  19.    9  saith  unto  me,  These  are  the  true  sayings 

22.    6  These  sayings  (are)  faithful  and  true :  and 
22.    7  blessed  (is)  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of 

22.  9  of  them  which  keep  the  sayings  of  this 
22. 10  Seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  th. 

%. Saying,  speech,  pi\ixa  rhema. 

Mark  9.  32  they  understood  not  that  saying,  and  were 
Luke  1.  65  these  sayings  were  noised  abroad  throug. 
2.  17  they  made  known  abroad  the  saying  wh. 
2.  50  they  understood  not  the  saying  which  he 
2.  51  his  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in  her 
7.  1  when  he  had  ended  all  these  sayings  in  the 
9.  45  they  understood  not  this  saying,  and  it 
9.  45  and  they  feared  to  ask  him  of  that  saying 

18.  34  this  saying  was  hid  from  them,  neither 

9.  To  speak,  tell,  utter,  zlwov  cipon. 

Matt26.  44  prayed  the  third  time,  saying  the  same 
Luke  5.  13  touched  him,  saying,  I  will;  be  thou  clean 
9.  22  Saying,  The  son  of  man  must  suffer  many 
14.    5  answered  them,  saying,  Which  of  yoush. 

19.  30  Saying,  Go  ye  into  the  village  over  against 
Johnn.  28  called  Maryhersister,  secretly,  saying,  T. 

18.  22  saying,  Answerest  thou  thehigh  priest  so? 
Acts  7.  26  saying,  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren ;  why  do  ye 
7.  27  thrust  him  away,  saying,  Who  made  thee 
7. 40  Saying  unto  Aaron,  Make  us  Gods  to  go 
10.  3  coming  in  to  him,  and  sayiug  unto  him 
16.  20  brought  them  to  the  magistrates,  saying 
19  21  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  saying,  After  I  have 

21.  14  we  ceased,  saying,  The  will  of  the  Lord 

23.  23  he  called  unto  (him)  two  centurions,  sa. 

10.  To  lay  out,  say,  speak,  x4-yu>  lego. 

Matt.  1.  20  appeareduuto  him  in  a  dream,  saying,  J. 
Also  in  v.  22;  2.  2,  13,  15,  17,  20;  3.  2,  3,  14,  17;  4.14; 
5.  2  ;  6.  31 ;  8.  2,  3,  6,  17,  25,  27,  29,  31 ;  9.  14,  18,  27,  29, 
30,  331  io-  5.  7';  "•  17;  12.  10,  17;  13.  3,  24,  31,  35,  36; 
14.  15,  26,  27,  30,  33;  15  1,  [4,]  7,  22,  23,  25 ;  16.  7, 13,  22; 
17.  9,  10,  14,  25;  18.  1,  26,28,  29;  19.  3,  25;  20.  12,  30, 
31 ;  21.  2,  4,  9,  10, 15,  20,  25,  37  ;  22.  4,  16,  24,  31,  [35,]  42, 
43;  23.  2;  24.  3,  5;  25.  9,  11,  20,  37,  44,  45;  26.  8,  17,  27, 
39„42,  48,  65,  68,  69,  70;  27.  4,  9,  11,  19,  23,  24,  29,  40,  46, 
54,  63;  28.  9,  13,  18. 

Mark  1.  7,  15,  24,  25, 27,  40;  2.  [12];  3.  11,  33;  5.  9,  12, 
23.  31;  6.  2,  25;  7.  37;  8.  15,  [16,]  26,  27,  33;  9.  [7,]  11, 
25,  38 ;  10.  26.  35,  49;  11.  [9,]  17,  31 ;  12.  6,  18,  26;  13. 
6  ;  14.  44,  57,  60,  68  ;  15.  4,  9,  29,  [34,]  36. 

Luke  1.  24,  63,  66,  67;  2.  13;  3.  [4],  10,  14,  16;  4.  [4,] 
t34']  35>  36>  41  »  5'  8,  12,  21,  26,  [30];  7.  4,  6,  16,  19,  20, 
32.  39;  8.  9,  24,  25,  30,  38,  49,  50,  54;  9.  18,  35,  38;  10. 

17,  25;  11.  45;  12.  16,  17;  13.  25,  31;  14.  [3,]  7,  30;  15. 
2.  3,  6,  9;  17.  4;  18.  2,  3,  13,  18,  38,  [41];  19.  7,   14,  16, 

18,  20,  38,  42,  46;  20.  [2,]  5,  14,  21,  28;  21.  7,  8;  22.  19, 
20,  42,  57,  59,  64,  66;  23.  2,  2,  3,  5,  18,  21,  35,  37,  [39OU0,] 
47;  24.  7,  23,  29,  34. 

John  1.  15,  26,  32;  4.  31,  51;  6.  52;  7.  15,  28,  37;  8. 
12 ;  9.  2,  19 ;  10.  [33,]  11.  3,  [31,]  32 ;  12.  21,  23 ;  18.  40; 

19,  6,  12. 

Acts  1.  6;  2.  7,  12,  40;  3.  25;  4.  16;  5.  23,  [25,]  28;  7; 
56;  8.  10,  19,  26;  9.*4;  10.  26;  11.  3,  4,  7,  18;  12.  7;  13. 
15;  14.  it,  15,  18;  15.  5,  13,  [24];  16.  9,  15,  17,28,  35;  17. 
7,  19;  18.  13;  19.  4,  13,  26,  28;  20.  23,  21,  21,  40;  22.  7, 

l8,   26;    23.    9,     I2J    24.   2J    25.     14;    26.    [14,]  22,    31;    27.   24, 

33;    28.   26. 

Rom.  11.  [2];  1  Co.  11.  25;  2  Ti.  2.  18;  Heb.  2.  6,  12; 
4.  7;  6.  15;  8.  11;  9.  20;  12.  26;  2  Pe.  3.  4;  Jiule  14; 
Rev.  1.  11,  17;  4.  8,  10;  5.  9,  i2,,  13;  6.  1,  10;  7.  3,  10,  12, 
13;  8.  13;  9.  14;  10.  4;  11.  1,  12,  15,  17;  12.  10;  13.  4, 
14 ;  14.  7,  8,  9,  13,  18;  15.  3;  16.  1,  17 ;  17.  1 ;  18.  2,  4,  10, 
16,  18,  ig,  21 J  19.  1,  4,  5,  6,  17;  21.  3,  9. 

11.  To  assert,  affirm,  <pa<rKOi  phasko. 

Acts  24.    9  the  Jews  alscuissented,  saying  that  these 
SAYING,  dark  — 
Acute  or  hidden  thing,  nyn  chidah. 

Psa.  49.    4  I  will  open  my  dark  saying  upon  the  harp 
78.   2  I  will  open.  .1  will  utter  dark  sayings  of 

Prov.  1.   6  words  of  the  wise,  and  their  dark  sayings 
SCAB,  scabbed  — 
1.  Scurvy,  3*ia  gardb. 

Deut28.  27  with  the  emerods,  and  with  the  scab,  and 
1.A  scab,  nrr£pp  mispachath. 

Lev.  13.    6  pronounce  him  clean ;  it  (is  but)  a  scab 
13.    7  if  thf  scab  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin 

13.  .8  that,  behold,  the  scab  spreadeth  in  the  sUin 

Z.A  scab,  nrjSp  sappaclwth. 

Lev.  13.    2  When  a  mau  shall  have  in  the  skin .  .a  sc. 

14.  56  f'.r  a  rising,  and  for  a  scab,  and  for  a  br. 

4.  Itch,  scab,  scurvy,  nsV;  yallepheth. 

Lev.  21.  20  or  be  scurvy,  or  scabbed,  or  hath  his  st. 

22.  22  or  having  a  wen,  or  scurvy,  or  scabbed 
SCAB,  to  smite  with  a  — 

To  scab,  n$y  saphach,  3. 

Isa.     3.  17  the  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab  the  crown 
SCABBARD  — 
Scabbard,  sheath,  "H;n  taar. 

Jer.   47.   6  Putupthyself  into  thy  scabbard,  rest,and 
SCAFFOLD  — 
A  pulpit,  its  kiyyor. 

2  Ch.  6.  13  Solomon  had  made  a  braseD  scaffold,  of 


SCALE,  to  — 

To  go  tip,  rh%  alah. 

Prov.21.  22  A  wise  (man)  scaleth  the  city  of  the  mig. 
SCALES  — 
1. Scales,  armour,  rtb'p'^p  qasqescth. 

Lev.  n.    9  whatsoever  hath  fins  and  scales  in  thewa. 
11.  10  all  that  have  not  fins  and  scales  in  the 
11.  12  Whatsoever  hath  no  fins  nor  scales  in  the 
Deuti4-    9  all  that  have  fins  and  scales  shall  ye  eat 

14.  10  whatsoever  hath  not  fins  and  scales  ye 
Eze.  29.   4  cause  the  fish,  .to  stick  unto  thy  scales 
29.  4  fish  of  thy  rivers  shall  stick  unto  thy  scales 

^.Strong  or  firm  of  shield,  }:D  p'cx  aphiq  viagen. 
Job  41.  15  (His)  scales  (are  his)  pride,  shut  up  toget. 

3.  Balance,  beam  of  scales,  dSq  pclcs. 

Isa.   40.  12  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales,  and  the 

4.  A  scale,  \eirls  lepis. 

Acts    9. 18  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been  sc. 

SCALL  — 

A  scall,  pm  netheq. 

Lev.  13.  30  it  (is)  a  dry  scall,  (even)  a  leprosy  upon 
13.  31  the  priest  look  on  the  plague  of  the  scall 
13.  31  (him  that  hath)  the  plague  of  the  scall  se. 
13.  32  (if)  the  scallspread  not,  and  there  be  in  it 
13.  32  the  scall  (be)  not  in  sight  deeper  than  the 
13.  33  He  shall  be  shaven,  but  the  scall  shall  be 
13.  33  shall  shut  up  (him  that  hath)the  scall  se. 
13.  34  look  onthescall :  and,  behold,  (if)  the  sc. 
13.  35  But  if  the  scall  spread  much  in  the  skin 
13.  36  if  the  scall  be  spread  in  the  skin,  the  pri. 
13.  37  if  the  scall  be  in  his  sight  at  a  stay,  and 

13.  37  scall  is  healed,  he  (is)  clean  :  and  the  pr. 

14.  54  all  manner  of  plague  of  leprosy,  audscall 
SCALP  — 

Crown  of  head,  pate,  TpiiJ  qodqod. 

Psa.  68.  21  hairy  scalp  of  such  an  one  as  goeth  on  st. 
SCANT  — 
Leanness,  scantiness,  J'tfj  razon. 

Mic.    6. 10  and  the  scant  measure  (that  is)  abomin.? 
SCAPE  GOAT  — 
A  goat  for  going  away,  ^intj;.  azazel. 

Lev.  16.  8  Lord,  and  the  other  lot  for  the  scape  goat 
16.  10  on  which  the  lot  fell  to  be  the  scape  goat 
16.  10  let  him  go  for  a  scape  goat  into  the  wild. 
16.  26  he  that  let  go  the  goat  for  the  scape  goat 

SCARCE,  scarcely  — 

l.To  go  out  or  forth,  N*y;  yatsa.    - 

Gen.  27.  30  Jacob  was  yet  searce  gone  out  from  the  pr. 

2. Hardly,  fioKts  molis. 

Acts  14.  18  with  these  sayings  scarce  restrained  thej 

27.  7  scarce  were  come  over  against  Cnidus,  the 
Eom.  5.    7  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die 

1  Pe.    4.  18  if  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where 

SCARCENESS  — 
Scarcity,  riispp  miskenuth. 

Deut.  8.  \  wherein  thou  shalt  eat  bread  without  sc. 
SCARE,  to  — 
To  break  down,  affright,  nnn  chathath,  3. 

Job     7. 14  Then  thou  scarest  me  with  dreams,  and 

SCARLET  (colour  or  thread)  — 

\. Purple,  p,a~]^  '"'!/rmn- 

Dan.    5.  '7,  16  be  clothed  with  scarlet,  and  (have)  a 
5.  29  clothed  Daniel  with  scarlet,  and  (put)  a 

2. Scarlet  or  crimson  stuff,  n»7in  'lip  or  'Jff  shani. 

Gen.  38.  28  bound  upon  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread,  sa. 
38.  30  that  had  the  scarlet  thread  upon  his  hand 

Exod  25.   4  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  tine  li. 
26.    1,  31,  36  blue,  aud  purple,  and  scarlet 
27. 16  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  aud  fine  tw 

28.  5,  8  blue,  aud  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine 
28.  6  (of)  blue,  and  (of)  purple,  (of)  scarlet,  and 
28.  15,  33  (of)  blue,  and  (of)  purple,  and  (of)  sea. 
35.  6,  23  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine 
35.  25  blue,  and  of  purple,  (and)  of  scarlet,  and  of 

35.  35  iu  blue,  and  in  purple,  in  scarlet,  and  in 

36.  8  curtains  (of),  .blue,  and  purple,  and  scar. 
36.  35,  37  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine 
38.  18  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  tw. 

38.  23  embroiderer  in  blue,  .and  in  scarlet,  and 

39.  1  of  the  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  they 
39.  2,  5,  8,  24,  29  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet 
39.    3  iu  the  purple,  and  in  the  scarlet,  and  in 

Lev  14.    4,  49  and  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and  hys. 

14.    6  take  it,  and  the  cedar  wood,  and  the  sea. 

14.  51  take  the  cedar  wood,  .and  the  scarlet,  and 

14.  52  and  with  the  hyssop,  and  with  the  scarlet 
Num.  4.    8  shall  spread  upon  them  a  cloth  of  scarlet 

19.   6  take  cedar  wood,  and  hyssop,  and  scarlet 

Josh.  2.  18  thou  shalt  bind  this  line  of  scarlet  thread 

2.  21  she  bound  the  scarlet  line  in  the  window 

2  Sa.  1.  24  clothed  you  in  scarlet,  with  (other)  delic. 
Prov3i.  21  all  her  household  (are)  clothed  with  sea. 
Song  4.  3  Thy  lips  (are)  like  a  thread  of  scarlet,  and 
Isa.      1. 18  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall 

ZX'rimson,  scarlet,  JpiR  tola. 

Lam.  4.  5  brought  up  iu  scarlet  embrace  dunghills 
4.  To  be  in  scarlet,  dyed,  yh$  tala,  4. 

Nah.  2.  3  valiant  men  (are)  in  scarlet :  the  chariots 
5. Scarlet,  k6kkivos  kokkhos. 

Matt  27.  28  stripped  him,  and  put  on  him  a  scarlet 


SCATTER 


843 


SCORPION 


Hcb.  o.  19  with  water,  and  scarlet  wool,  and  hyssop 
Rev.  17.    3  saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a  scarlet  coloured 

17.  4  was  arrayed  iu  purple  and  scarlet  colour 

18.  12  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  scar 
18.  16  clothed  in  flue  linen,  and  purple,  and  sc. 

SCATTER  (abroad,  away,  into  corners),  to  — 
I.  To  scatter,  -n?  bedar,  3. 

Dan.   4. 14  shake  off  his  leaves,  and  scatter  his  fruit 
2.7b  scatter,  i]3  bazar. 

Dan.  1 1.  24  he  shall  scatter  among  them  the  prey,  and 

3.  To  scatter,  112  bazar,  3. 

Psa.  68-  30  scatter  thou  the  people  (that)  delight  in 

4.  To  scattter,  winnow,  spread,  rrg  zarah. 

i\um  16.  37  scatter  thou  the  fire  yonder ;  for  they  are 
Eze.    5.    2  third  part  thou  shalt  scatter  in  the  wind 

5.  To  scatter,  winnmo,  spread,  rni  zarah,  3. 

Lev.  26.  33  will  scatter  you  among  the  heathen,  and 

1  Ki.  14.  15  and  shall  scatter  them  beyond  the  river 
Psa.  44.  11  and  hast  scattered  us  among  the-heathen 

106.  27  To  overthrow,  .and  to  scatter  them  in  the 
Prov  20.    S  A  king . .  scattereth  away  all  evil  with  his 

20.  26  A  wi3e  king  scattereth  the  wicked,  and 
Jer.  31. 10  He  that  scattered  Israel  will  gather  him 
49.  32  scatter  into  all  winds  them  (that  are)  in 
49.  36  will  scatter  them  toward  all  those  winds 
Eze.    5.  10  remnant  of  thee  will  I  scatter  into  all  the 
5. 12  I  will  scatter.a  third  part  into  all  the4wi 
6.    5  I  willscatteryourbones  round  about  your 
12.  14  I  mil  scatter  toward  every  wind  all  that 
Zech.  r.  19,  21  the  horns  which  have  scattered  Judah 
1.  21  horn  over  the  laud  of  Judah  to  scatter  it 

6.  To  sprinkle,  p"}j  zaraq.    ■ 

Isa.  28.  25  scatter  the  cummin,  and  cast  in  the  prin. 
Eze.  10.    2  scatter  (them)  over  the  city  And  he  went 

7. To  cause  to  ?nove,  shake,  jpa  nua,  5. 

Psa.  59.  11  scatter  them  by  thy  power;  and  bring  th. 

3.  To  dash  or  beat  inpieces,  spread  out,  \'§i  naphats,3. 

Dan.  12.    7  when  he  shall  have  accomplished  to  sea. 

9.  To  blow  away,  7\\&paah,  5. 

Deut  32.  26  I  said,  I  would  scatter  them  into  cornel's 

10.  To  scatter,  p3  puts,  5. 

Gen.  11.  8  So  the  Lord  scattered  them  abroad  from 
11.  9  scatter  them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the 
49.    7  divide  them  in  Jacob,  and  scatter  them  in 

Deut.  4.  27  Lord  shall  scatter  you  among  the  nations 

28.  64  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  all  people 
30.    3  whither  the  LuRD  thy  God  hath  scattered 

2  Sa.  22.  15  sent  out  arrows,  and  scattered  them ;  li 
Nell.  1.  8  I  will  scatter  you  abroad  among  the  nat. 
Job  37.  11  he  wearieth  the  thick  cloud ;  he  scattereth 

38.  24  (which)  scattereth  the  east  wind  upon  the 

Psa.  18.  14  he  sent  out  his  arrows  and  scattered  them 
144.   6  Cast  forth  lightning,  and  scatter  them 

Isa.  24.  1  scattereth  abroad  the  inhabitants  thereof 
41.16  the  whirlwind  shall  scatter  them  :  andth. 

Jer.    9.  16  I  will  scatter  them  also  among  the  heat. 
13.  24  Therefore  will  I  scatter  them  as  the  stu 
18.  17  I  will  scatter  them  as  with  an  east  wind 
23.    1  that  destroy  and  scatter  the  sheep  of  my 
23.   2  Ye  have  scattered  my  flock,  and  driven 
30.  11  end  of  all  nations  whither  I  have  scatte. 

Eze.  11.  16  I  have  scattered  them  among  the  count. 

..  12.  15  Ishallscatterthem  among  the  nations,aud 

"  20.  23  I  would  scatter  them  among  the  heathen 

22. 15  I  will  scatter  thee  among  the  heathen,  and 

29.  12  I  will  scatter  the  Egyptians  among  the  na. 

30.  23,  26  I  will  scatter  the  Egyptians  among  the 
34.  21  pushed,  .till  ye  have  scattered  them  abr 
36. 19  I  scattered  them  among  the  heathen  and 

Hab.   3.  14  they  came  out  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter 
11.2%  scatter,  1T9  pazar,  3. 

Psa.  53.    5  God  hath  scattered  the  bones  of  him  that 
89.  10  thou  hast  scattered  thine  enemies  with 
147. 16  he  scattereth  the  hoar  frost  like  ashes 
Prov  11.  24  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  increa. 
Jer.     3.  13  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the  strangers 
Joel    3.    2  whom  they  have  scattered  among  the  na. 

12.  To  break  off,  p9  jurats. 

Psa.  60.    1  thou  hast  scattered  us,  thou  hast  been  di 

13.  To  spread  out  or  forth,  enp  paras,  3. 

Psa.  68. 14  When  the  Almighty  scattered  kings  in  it 

14. To  scatter  thoroughly,  8iao-nopwi£oj  dktskorpizD. 

Luke  1.  51  he  hath  scattered  the  proud  in  the  imag. 
15.  To  scatter,  o-tcop-rrifa  skorpizo. 

Matt  12.  30 he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth  a. 

Luke  11.  23  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth 

John  10.  12  the  wolf  catcheth  them,  and  scattereth 
SCATTERED  (abroad\  to  be  — 
l.To  be  scattered,  winnowed,  spread,  rnl  zarah,  2. 

Eze.    6.    8  ye  shall  be  scattered  through'the  countr 
2.To  be  scattered,  winnowed,  spread,  rnj  zarah,  4. 

Job  18. 15  brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his  ha 
3.7b  be  prolonged,  drawn  out,  y&Kj  mashak,  4. 

Isa.  18.  2  to  a  nation  scattered  and  peeled,  to  a  pe. 
18.    7  of  a  people  scattered  and  peeled,  and  fr. 

4.  To  dash  or  beat  in  jiieces,  p;  naphats. 

1  Sa.  13. 11  I  saw  that  the  people  were  scattered  from 
Isa-  33-   3  at  the  lifting  up.  .nations  were  scattered 

5.  To  scatter,  be  scattered,  ps  puts. 

Gen.  11.    4  lest  we  be  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face 


Numio.  35  Rise  up.  .let  thine  enemies  be  scattered 

1  Sa.  11.  11  they  which  remained  were  scattered,  so  ' 
Psa  68.  1  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  bescattered 
Eze  34.   5  they  were  scattered,  because  (there  is)  no 

34. 18  they  became  meat,  .when  they  were  scat. 

46. 18  that  my  people  be  not  scattered  every  m. 
Zech  13.    7  smite,  .aud  the  sheep  shall  be  scattered 

6.  To  be  scattered^  yteputs,  2. 

2  Sa.  18.    8  For  the  battle  was  there  scattered  over 

1  Ki.22.  17  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  upon  the  hills 

2  Ki.25.  5  and  all  his  army  were  scattered  from  him 
2  Ch.18.  16  Idid  seealllsrael  scattered  upon  the  mo. 
Jer.  10.  21  therefore,  .their  flocks  shall  be  scattered 

40.  15  that  all  the  Jews,  .should  be  scattered, and 
52.    8  aud  all  his  army  were  scattered  from  him 
Eze.  11.  17  countries  where  ye  have  been  scattered 
20.  34  out  of  the  countries  wherein  ye  are  scatt. 
20.  41  countries  wherein  ye  have  been  scattered 

28.  25  the  people  among  whom  they  were  scatt. 

29.  13  from  the  people  whither  they  were  scatt. 
34.  6  My  flock  was  scattered  upon  all  the  face 
34.  12  all  places  where  they  have  been  scattered 

7.  To  scatter,  break  in  pieces,  pa  puts,  5. 

Exod.5.  i2  the  people  were  scattered  abroad  throug. 
1  Sa  13     8  and  the  people  were  scattered  from  him 

8.  To  scatter  selves,  be  scattered,  WSputs,  la. 

Hab    3     6  the  everlasting  mountains  were  scattered 

9.  To  be  increased,  scattered,  vis  push,  2. 

Kah.  3.  18  thy  people  is  scattered  upon  the  mounta. 

10.  To  scatter,  ijs  pazar. 

Jer   50.  17  Israel  (is)  a  scattered  sheep;  the  lions  have 

11. To  be  scattered,  iispazar,  2. 

Psa.  141.    7  Our  bones  are  scattered  atthegrave'smo. 

12.7*0  be  scattered,  lis  pazar,  4. 

Esth.  3.   8  There  is  a  certainpeople  scattered  abroad 
13.7*0  separate  selves,  "H^jaarad,  7. 

Job      4.  11  the  stout  liou's  whelps  are  scattered  abr. 

Psa    92    9  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  shall  be  scatt. 

14.  To  be  spread  out  or  forth,  ens  paras,  2. 

Eze    17  21  they  that  remain  shall  be  scattered  tow. 

15.  To  be  spread  abroad,  tf"]3  parash,  2. 

Eze.  34  12  he  is  among  his  sheep  (that  are)  scattered 
16.7b  be  dissolved,  oia\vo/j.ai  dialuomaL 

Acts    5.  7,6  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  scattered 
17-  To  scatter  thoroughly,  8 tao-Kopirlfa  diaskorpizo. 

Mattz6.  31  the  sheep  of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered  a. 

Mark  14.  27  smite,  .and  the  sheep  shall  be  scattered 

Johnn.  52  children  of  God  that  were  scattered  abr. 

18.  To  scatter  diversely,  disperse,  diao-rreipoo  diasp. 
Acts    8.    1  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  throughout 

8.    4  they  that  were  scattered  abroad  went  ev. 

11. 19  they  which  were  scattered  abroad  upon 

19.  A  dispersion,  dispersed  portion,  Biatnropd  dias. 
Jas     1,    1  twelve  tribes  which  are  scattered  abroad 

1  Pe    1.    1  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  Pontus 

20.  To  throw  doum,  friirTco  rhipto. 

Matt  9  36  they  fainted,  and  were  scattered  abroad 

21.  To  scatter,  oKopirifa  skorpizo. 

Johni6.  32  y  e  shall  bescattered,  every  man  to  his  own 
SCATTERING  — 
Scattering,  ysi  nepliets. 

Isa.   30  30  (with)  scattering,  and  tempest,  and  hails. 
SCENT  — 

1.  Memorial,  remembrance,  T3J,  131  zeker. 

Hos.  14.  7  thescentthereof(shallbe)asthe  wineof  L. 

2.  Smell,  savour,  fragrance,  nn  reach. 

Job  14  9  through  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud,  and 
Jer.  48  11  his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent 

SCEPTRE  — 

l.Reed,  rod,  sceptre,  t22ti>  shebet. 

Gen-  49. 10  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah 
Nuni24-  17  a  sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  Israel,  and  shall 
Psa.  45.  6  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom  (is)  a  right  sc. 
Isa.  14.  5  The  Lord  hath  broken . .  the  sceptre  of  the 
Eze  19.  1 1  she  had  strong  rods  for  the  sceptres  of 

19. 14  she  hath  no  strong  rod  (to  be)  a  sceptre  to 
Amos  1.  5.  8  aud  him  that  holdeth  the  sceptre  from 
Zech  10.  11  and  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  shall  depart  aw. 

%  Sceptre,  tt,5"i?>  sharbit. 

Esth.  4  11  the  king  shall  hold  out  the  golden  sceptre 
5  2  held  outto  Esther  the  golden  sceptre  that 
5.  2  So-Esther.  .touched  the  top  of  the  sceptre 
8.   4  the  king  held  out  the  golden  sceptre  tow. 

3  Bod,  sceptre,  staff,  frdfidos  rhabdos. 

Deb    1.   8  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  (is)  the  sceptre 

SCE'VA.S/cewas. 

A  Jewish  priest  at  Ephesus,  father  of  seven  sons  who 
attempted  to  cast  out  a  demon  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  but 
who  were  wounded  by  it  and  had  to  flee.    A.D.  58. 
Acts  19.  14  And  there  were  seven  sons  of.  .S.,  a  Jew 

SCHOLAR  — 

l.To  answer,  respond,  n:j;  anah. 

Mai.   2. 12  The  Lord  will  cut  off .  .the  scholar,  out 

2.  One  who  is  being  taught,  *vp?n  talmid. 

1  Ch.25.    8  cast  lots . .  as  well . .  teacher  as  the  scholar 


SCHISM  — 

Rent,  schism,  axfo'fia schisma. 

1  Co.  12.  25  That  there  should  be  no  schism  iu  the  bo. 
SCHOOL  — 
A  school,  ax°^V  scliole. 

Acts  19.    9  disputing  daily  in  the  school  of  oue  Tyr. 
SCHOOLMASTER,  — 
Child  conductor,  traiSaycaySs  paidagogos. 

Gal.    3.  24  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster  (to  bring  us) 
3.  25  we  are  no  longer  under  a  schoolmaster 

SCIENCE  — 

1. Knowledge,  Jft?,  yi?  madda. 

Dan.  1.    4  understanding  scieuce,  and  such  as  (had) 
2.  Knowledge,  yv£>ais  gnosis. 

1  Ti.   6.  20  and  oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  call. 
SCOFF,  to  — 

To  show  self  a  derider,  scoffer,  D?p  qalas,  7. 

Hab.  1.  10  they  shall  scoff  at  the  kings,  and  the  pr. 
SCOFFER  — 
Childish  trifler,,  ifiiraiicTTjs  empaiktes. 

2  Pe.   3.   3  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  sc. 
SCORCH,  be  scorched,  to  — 

To  parch,  wither  with  heat,  Kavfxari(co  kaumatizo. 

Matt.13.    6  when  the  sun  was  up,  they  were  scorched 

Mark  4.   6  But  when  the  sun  was  up,  it  was  scorched 

Rev  16    8  power  was  given  unto  him  to  scorch  men 

16.   9  men  were  scorched  with  great  heat,  and 

SCORN,  scorning,  scornful,  scorner  — 

1. Scorn,  scorning,  ag?  laag. 

Job   34.    7  Job,  (who)  drinketh  up  scorning  like  w. 
Psa.  44.  13  a  scorn  and  a  derision  to  them  that  are 
79.   4  a  scorn  and  derision  to  them  that  are  ro. 
123.  4  with  the  scorning  of  those  that  are  at  ea. 

'2. Laughter,  pHi??  mischaq. 

Hab.  1. 10  the  princes  shall  be  a  scorn  unto  them:  they 

Z.To  scorn,  pS  hits. 

Psa.    1.    1  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful 
Prov.  1.  22  the  scorners  delight  in  their  scorning,  and 
3.  34  he  scorneth  the  scorners :  but  he  giveth 
9.    7  He  that  reproveth  a  scorner  getteth  to 
9.    8  Reprove  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  hate  thee 

13.  1  A  wise  son  (heareth).  .a  scorner  heareth 

14.  6  A  scorner  seeketh  wisdom,  and  (findeth 
15. 12  A  scorner  loveth  not  one  that  reproveth 
19.  25  Smite  a  scorner,  and  the  simple  will  bew. 
19.  29  Judgments  are  prepared  for  scorners,  and 
21.  11  When  the  scoraer  is  punished,  the  simple 

21  24  haughty  scorner  (is)  his  name  who  dealeth 

22  10  CastT  out  the  scorner,  and  contention  shall 
24.    9  and  the  scorner  (is)  an  abomination  to  men 

Isa.    29.  20  the  scorner  is  consumed,  and  all  that  wat. 

4.  Scorning,  psp  latson. 

Prov.  1.  22  delight  in  their  scorning,  and  fools  hate 

29.   8  Scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  asnare  :  but 
Isa.   28. 14  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scornful 

5.  To  be  a,  scorner,  yxb  latsats. 

Hos.   7.   5  he  stretched  out  his  hand  with  scorners 
SCORN,  (to  laugh)  to  — 
l.To  despise,  contemn,  ny^bazah. 

Esth.  3.    6  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Morde. 

2.2*0  scorn,  fr?  hits. 

Prov.  9.  12  but  (if)  thou  scornest,  thou  alone  shalt 

3  To  scorn,  p?  luts,  5. 

Job   16. 20  My  friends  scorn  me  :  (but)  mine  eye  po. 
Prov.  3. 34  Surely  he  scorneth.  .but  he  giveth  grace 
19.  28  An  ungodly  witness  scorneth  judgment 

4.2b  scorn,  tyh  laag. 

2  K.i.19.  21  despised  thee,  (and)  laughed  thee  to  scorn 
Job   22.  19  and  the  innocent  laugh  them  to  scorn 
Isa.   37.  22  despised  thee,  (and)  laughed  thee  to  scorn 

5. 7b  scorn,  aj£  laag,  5. 

Neh.  2.  19  they  laughed  us  to  scorn,  and  despised 
Psa.  22.    7  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scoru 

§.  Laughter,  phz  tsechoq. 

Eze.  23.  32  thou  shalt  be  laughed  to  scorn,  and  had 

l.To  deride,  scoff,  ubp,  qalas,  3. 

Eze.  16.  31  been  as  au  harlot,  in  that  thou  scornest 

8.7b  laugh,  deride,  play,  pry  sachaq. 

Job  39.    7  He  scorneth  the  multitude  of  the  city,  n. 
39.  iS  lif teth  up  herself  on  high,  she  scorneth 

9.  To  laugh,  deride,  play,  p-'y  sachaq,  5. 

2  CI1.30.  10  laughed  them  to  scorn,  and  mocked  them 

SCORPION  — 

l.A  scojpion,  yipy  aqrab. 

Deut  8  15  scorpions,  and  drought,  where(there  was) 

1  Ki.12.  11,  14  but  I  will  chastise  you  with  scorpions 

2  Ch.io.  11,  14  but  I  (will  chastise  you)  with  scorpio. 
Eze.    2.  6  and  thou  dost  dwell  among  scorpions :  he 

2.A  scorpion,  atcopivios  skorpios. 

Lukeio.  19  power  to  tread  on  serpents  and  scorpions 

11.  12  ask  an  egg,  will  he  offer  him  a  scorpion  ? 

Rev.    9.    3  as  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have  power 

9.    5  torment  (was)asthe  tormentof  a  scorpion 

9.  10  they  had  tails  like  unto  scorpions,  aud 


SCOURED 


844 


SEA 


SCOURED,  to  be  — 

To  be  scoured,  polished,  pip  maraq,  4. 

Lev.    6. 28  it  shall  be  both  scoured,  and  rinsed  in  wa. 
SCOURGE,  scourged,  scourging  — 

1.  Investigation,  rnpa  biqqoreth. 

Lev.  19.  20  she  shall  be  scourged  ;  they  shall  not  be 

2. A  scourge,  whip,  rod,  tf\W  shot. 

Job     5.  21  Thou  shalt  be  hid  from  the  scourgeof  the 

0.  23  If  the  scourge  slay  suddenly,  he  will  laugh 

Isa.    10.  26  Lord  of  hosts  shall  stir  up  a  scourge  for 

28.  18  when  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass 

3..4  scourge,  BQtf  shotet. 

Josh. 23. 13  scourges  in  your  sides,  andthornsin  your 
4.  A  scourge,  oar,  bib*,  b;b>  shayit,  shot. 

Isa.   28.  15  when  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass 
5. A  scourge,  whip,  fionrrt^  mastiz. 

Acts  22.  24  he  should  be  examined  by  scourging,  then 

Heb.  11.  36  others  had  trial  of.  .mockings  and  scour. 
6. A  scourge,  whip,  (Lat.  flagellum),  <ppayi\Xiov. 

John  2.  15  when  he  had  made  a  scourge  of  small  co. 
SCOURGE,  to  — 
I. To  tohip,  scourge,  flog,  fxaanyooj  masli-goo. 

Alattio.  17  they  will  scourge  you  in  their  synagogues 
20.  19  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles,  .to  scourge 

23.  34  (some)  of  them  shall  ye  scourge  in  your 
Mark  10.  34  shall  mock  him,  and  shall  scourge  him 
Lukei8.  33  shall  scourge  (him),  and  put  him  to  death 
Johmg.    1  Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus,  aud  scourged 
Heb.  12.    6  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiv. 

2.  To  scourge,  tohip,  /xao-Tifa  viastizo. 

Acts  22.  25  Is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  «.  man  that 

3.  To  flagellate,  <ppay€\\6io  phragelloG. 

Mattz7.  26  when  he  had  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered 
Markis.  15  delivered  Jesus,  when  he  had  scourged 

SCRABBLE,  to  — 

To  make  a  mark,  scribble,  nipi  tavah,  3. 

1  Sa.  21.  13  scrabbled  on  the' doors  of  the  gate,  and 
SCRAPE  (off,  self),  to — 

1.  To  scra.pe  self,  T]a  garad,  7. 

Job      2.    S  took  hiir  apotsherd  to  scrape  himself  wi. 

2.  To  scrape,  nnp  sachah,  3. 

Eze,   26.    4  I  will  also  scrape  her  dust  from  her,  and 

3.  To  scrape  off,  n^qatsah,  5. 

Lev.  14.  41  scrape  off  without  the  city  into  an  uncle. 
14.  43  hath  scraped  the  house,  and  after  it  is  pi. 

SCRAPED,  to  cause  to  be  — 

To  cause  to  le  scraped,  V£|?  qatsa,  5. 

Lev.  14.  41  he  shall  cause  the  house  to  be  scraped  wi. 
SCREECH  OWL  — 
Night  owl,  n'VS  lilith. 

Isa.   34.  14  screech  owl  also  shall  rest  there,  and  find 
SCRIBE  — 
1 .  To  cypher,  number,  write,  15?  saphar. 

2  Sa.   8.  17  (were)  the  priests,  and  Seraiah  (was)  .  sc. 

20  25  Sheva  (was)  scribe;  and  Zadok  and  Abia. 

1  Ki    4.    3  Elihoreph  and  Ahiah.  .scribes  ;  Jehoshap. 

2  Ki.  12.  10  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest  came  up 

18.  18,  37  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joah  the  son 

19.  2  sent  Kliakim  and  Shebna  the  scribe,  and 
22.  3  son  of  Meshullam,  the  scribe,  to  the  ho. 
22.  8  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan  the  scribe 
22.  9  Shaphan  the  scribe  came  to  the  king,  and 
22.  10  Shaphan  the  scribe  showed  the  king,  say. 
22. 12  Shaphan  the  scribe,  and  Asahiah  aservant 

25.  19  principal  scribe  of  the  host,  which  must. 

1  Ch.  2.  55  the  families  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt  at 

18.  16  (were)  the  priests;  and  Shavsha  (was)scr. 

24.  6  the  son  of  Nethaneel  the  scribe,  (one)  of 
27.  32  was  acounsellor,  a  wise  man.  and  ascribe 

2  Ch.24.  11  the  king's  scribe  and  the  high  priest's  off. 

26. 11  their  account  by  the  hand  of  Jeiel  these. 
34.  13  of  the  Levites  (there  were)  scribes,  and 
34.  15  answered  aud  said  to  Shaphan  the  scribe 
34.  18  the  scribe  told  the  king,  saying,  Hilkiah 
34.  20  Shaphan  the  scribe,  and  Asaiah  a  servant 
Ezra   7.    6  he  (was)  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of  Moses 

7.  11  the  scribe,  (even)  a  scribe  of  the  words  of 
Neh.   8.    1  they  spake  unto  Ezra  the  scribe  to  bring 

8.  4  thclseribe  stood  upon  a  pulpitjof  wood,  wh. 
8.  9  Ezra  the  priest  the  scribe,  and  the  Levites 
8.  13  aud  the  Levites,  unto  Ezra  the  scribe,  ev. 

12.  26  in  the  days,  .of  Ezra  the  priest,  the  scribe 

12.  36  David  the  man  of  God,  and  Ezra  the  scri. 

13.  13  Shelemhih  the  priest,  and  Zadok  the  scr. 
Esth.  3.  12  Then  were  the  king's  scribes  called  on  the 

8.    9  Then  were  the  king's  scribes  called  at  that 
Isa.   3^.  iS  Where  (is)  the  scribe?  where  (is)  the  rec? 

26.  3  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joah,  Asaph's'son 

36.  22  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joah  the  son  of  A. 

37.  2  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  the  elders  of  the 
Jer.      8.    8  in  vain  made  he  (it);  the  pen  of  the  scri. 

36.  10  Gemariah  the  son  of  Shaphan  the  scribe 
36.  12  he  went  down .  .into  the  scribe's  chamber 
36.  12  Elishama  the  scribe,  and  Delaiah  the  son 
36.  20  in  the  chamber  of  Elishama  the  scribe 
36.  21  took  it  out  of  Elishama  the  scribe's  cham. 
36.  26  to  take  Baruch  the  scribe,  and  Jeremiah 

36.  32  gave  it  to  Baruch  the  scribe,  the  son  of  N 

37.  15  in  the  house  of  Jonathan  the  scribe;  for' 
37.  20  return  to  the  house  of  Jonathan  the  scri 
52.  25  the  principal  scribe  of  the  host,  who  nut' 


2.Scribe,  toriter,  irp  sapher. 

Ezra  4.  8  Shimshai  the  scribe/wrote  a  letter  against 
4.  9  the  chancellor,  and  Shimshai  the  scribe 
4.  17  (to)  Shimshai  the  scribe,  and  (to)  the  rest 

4.  23  Rehum,  and  Shimshai  the  scribe,  and  th. 
7.  12.  21  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven 

3. Scribe,  writer,  clerk,  ypafx^anvs  grammateus. 
Matt.  2.    4  gathered  all  the  chief  priests  and  scribes 

5.  20  (the  righteousness)  of  the  scribes  and  Ph. 

7.  29  having  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes 

8.  19  a  certain  scribe  came,  and  said  unto  him 

9.  3  certain  of  the  scribes  said  within  themse. 

12.  38  certain  of  the  scribes  and  of  the  Pharisees 

13.  52  everyscribe(which  is)instructed  unto  the 

15.  1  Then  came  to  Jesus  scribes  and  Pharisees 

16.  21  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and  scri bes.and 
T7. 10  Why  then  say  the  scribes  thatElias  must 

20.  18  the  chief  priests  and  unto  the  scribes 

21.  15  when  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  saw  the 
23.  2  The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses' 
23-  13.  i5»  23)  25.  27,  29  woe  unto  you,  scribes  and 
23.  14  [Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  h]. 
23.  34  prophets,  and  wise  men  and  scribes :  and 
26.   3  the  chief  priests,[and  the  scribes,]  and  the 

26.  57  where  the  scribes  and  the  elders  were  as. 

27.  41  mocking  (him),  with  the  scribes  and  elders 
Mark  1.  22  for  he  taught  them .  .not  as  the  scribes 

2.  6  there  were  certain  of  the  scribes  sitting 
2. 16  when  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  saw  him 

3.  22  the  scribes  which  came  down  from  Jeru. 
7     1  certainofthe  scribes,  which  came  from  J. 

7.  5  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  asked  him,  Why 

8.  31  and  (of)  the  chief  priests,  and  scribes,  and 

9.  11  Why  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first 
9. 14  and  the  scribes  questioning  with  them 

9.  16  he  asked  [the  scribes,]  What  question  ye 

10.  33  uutothechief  priests,  and  unto  the  scribes 

11.  18  thescribesand  chief  priests  heard(it),and 

1 1  27  the  chief  priests,  and  the  scribes,  and  the 

12  28  one  of  thescribes  came,  and  having  heard 
12  32  the  scribe  said  unto  him,  Well  Master,  th. 

12.  35  How  say  the  scribes  that  Christ  is  the  son 
12.  38  Beware  of  the  scribes,  which  love  to  go  in 

14.  1  the  scribes  sought  how  they  might  take 
14.  43  from  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  aud 

14.  53  priests  and  the  elders  and  the  scribes 

15.  1  the  elders  and  scribesand  the  whole  con. 
15.  31  said  among  themselves  with  the  scribes 

Luke  5.  2i  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to  re. 

5  30  their  scribesand  Pharisees  murmured  ag. 

6.  7  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  watched  him 

9  22  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and  scribes 
ii.  44  [Woe  unto  you,  scribesand  Pharisees,  hy.] 
11  53  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to  ur. 
15.    2  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  murmured,  sa. 

19.  47  the  scribes  and  the  chief  of  the  people  so. 

20.  1  the  scribes  came  upon  (him)  with  the  el. 
20.  19  the  scribes  the  same  hour  sought  to  lay 
20.  39  certain  of  the  scribes  answering  said,  M. 
20.  46  Beware  of  the  scribes,  which  desire  to  wa. 

22.  2  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  sought  how 
22.66  the  scribes,  came  together,  and  led  him 

23.  10  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  stood  and 
John  8.    3  [the  scribes  and  Pharisees  brought  unto] 
Acts    4.    5  that  their  rulers  and  elders,  and  scribes 

6  12  the  people  and  the  elders,  and  thescribes 

23.  9  [the  scribes  that  were  of  the  Pharisees'  p.] 
i  Co.    1.  20  where  (is)  the  scribe?  where  (is)  the  disp. 

SCRIP  — 

1. Scrip,  bag,  purse,  Mp^»  yalqut. 

1  Sa.  17  40  put  them  in'  a  shepherd's  hag.  .in  a  scrip 

2.  Bag,  satchel,  -rrijpa  %)era. 

Matt  10.  10  Nor  scrip  for  (your)  journey,  neither  uwo 
Mark  6.  8  no  scrip,  no  bread,  no  money  in  (their)  pu 
Luke  9     3  neither  staves,  nor  scrip,  neither  bread 

10.  4  Carry  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  uor  shoes 
22. 35  When  I  sent  you  without  purse, fand  scrip 
22.  36  let  him  take  (it),  and  likewise  (his)  scrip 

SCRIPTURE  — 

1.  Writing,  nn?  kethah. 

Dan.  10.  21  that  which  is  noted  in  the  scriptureof  tr. 

2   W'kat  is  written,  literature,  ypdy./j.a  gramma. 

2  Ti.    3.  15  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  wli 

3,  Writing,  anything  written,  ypcupii  graphe. 
Mattsz.  42  Did  ye  never  read  in  the  scriptures.  The 

22  29  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor 

26.  54  how  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled 

26  56  that  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets  might 

Mark i2.  10  have  ye  not  read  this  scripture;  The  stone 

12.  24  ye  know  not  the  scriptures,  neither  the 

14.  49  ye  took  me  not :  but  the  scriptures  must 

15.  28  [the  scripture  was  fulfilled!  which  saith] 
Luke  4.  21  This  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your 

24.  27  expounded untothem  in  all  the  scriptures 
24  32  aud  while  he  opened  to  us  the  scriptures 
24.  45  that  they  might  understand  the  scriptures 

John  2. 22  they  believed  the  scripture,  aud  the  word 
5.  3g  Search  the  scriptures ;  for  in  them  ye  th. 
7.  38  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  scripture 
7.  42  Hath  not  the  scripture  said,  That  Christ 

10.  35  and  the  scripture  cannot  be  broken 

13.  18  that  the  scripture  may  be  fulfilled,  He 
17.  12  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled 

19.  24,  28  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled 
19.  36  these  things  were  done,  that  the  scripture 

19.  37  another  scripture  saith, They  shall  look  on 

20.  9  they  knewnot  the  scripture,  that  he  must 
Acts    1.  16  this  scripture  must  needs  have  been  fulfi. 


Acts    8.  32  The  place  of  the  scripture  which  he  read 

8.  35"began  at  the  same  scripture,  and  preached 

17.  2  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  scriptures 
1 7. 1 1  searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  th, 
18.24  eloquent  man,  (and)  mighty  in  the  script. 

18.  28  showing  by  the  scriptures  that  Jesus  was 
Rom.  1.    2  afore  by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  scriptu. 

4.    3  what  saith  the  scripture?  Abraham  belie 

9.  17  the  scripture  saith  unto  Pharaoh,  Even 
10. 11  the  scripture  saith,  Whosoever  believeth 

11.  2  Wot  ye  not  what  the  scripture  saith  of  E.? 

1 5.  4  that  we  through . .  comfort  of  the  scriptu. 

16.  26  made  manifest,  and  by  the  scriptures  of 
1  Co.  15.    3  Christ  died,  .according  to  the  scriptures 

15.   4  rose  again . .  according  to  the  scriptures 
Gal.    3.    8  the  scripture,  foreseeing  that  God  would 

3.  22  the  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin 

4.  30  what  saith  the  scripture  ?  Cast  out  the  bo. 

1  Ti.   5.  18  the  scripture  saith.  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle 

2  Ti.   3.  16  All  scripture  (is)  given  by  inspiration  of  G. 
J  as.     2.    8  the  royal  law  according  to  the  scripture 

2.  23  the  scripture  was  fulfilled  which  saith 
4.   5  Do  ye  think  that  the  scripture  saith  in  va. 

1  Pe.   2.    6  it  is  contained  in  the  scripture.  Behold,  I 

2  Pe.    1.  20  no  prophecy  of  the  scripture  is  of  any  pr. 

3. 16  wrest,  as  (they  do)  also  the  other  scriptu. 
SCROLL  — 

1.  Scroll,  roll,  book,  "tap  sepher. 

Isa.   34.    4  heavensshall  be  gathered  together  as  asc. 

2.  Small  scroll,  roll,  booh,  $i$\lov  biblion. 

Rev.    6.  14  the  heaven  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it  is 
SCULL,  SKULL  — 
Scull,  skull,  poll,  npinji  gulgoleth. 

Judg.  9  53  piece  of  a  millstone,  all  to  brake  his  skull 

2  Ki.  9.  35  they  found  no  more  of  her  than  the  skull 
SCUM  — 
Scum,  rust,  ■"non  chelah. 

Eze.  24  6  whose  scum  (is)  therein,  and  whose  scum 
24. 11  may  be  molten  in  it,  (that)  the  scum  of  it 
24.  12  scum  went  not  forth  out  of  her:  her  scum 

SCURVY  — 
Scurry,  3~}i  garab. 

Lev.  21.20  or  be  scurvy,  or  scabbed,  or  hath  his  stones 
22.  22  or  having  a  wen.  or  scurvy,  or  scabbed 

SCY-TH-I-AN,  2*^0775  belonging  to  Sci/thia. 

Col.    3.  11  Where  there  is  neither.  .Barbarian,  S,,  bo. 
SEA  — 

l.Vnan  o;n  hayyam  haggadol,  The  Great  Sea>,  i.e  7 

the  Mediterranean.      QaKaoaa  thalassa. 

.Num^.   6  ye  shall  even  have  the  great  sea  for  a  bor. 

34.    7  from  the  great  sea  ye  shall  point  out  for 

Josh."  1.   4  unto  the  great  sea  toward  the  going  down 

9     1  the  coasts  of  the  great  sea  over  against  L. 

15.  12  And  the  west  border(was)tothegreatsea 

1 5  47  unto  the  river  of  Egypt,  and  the  great  sea 

Eze.  47.  10  fish  shall  be.  .as  the  fish  of  the  great  aea 

47.  15  (shall  be)  the  border,  .from  the  great  Sea 

47.  19  (in)  Kadesh,  the  river  to  the  great  sea 

47.  20  The  west  side  also  (shall  be)  the  great  sea 

48.  28  (and)  to  the  river  toward  the  great  sea 
Acts  10.   6  Simon  a  tanner,  whose  house  is  by  the  sci 

10.  32  the  house  of.  .Simon  a  tanner  by  the  sea 
27.  30  they  had  let  down  the  boat  into  the  sea 
27.  38  And.  .they,  .cast  out  the  wheat  into  the  s 
27.  40  they  committed  (themselves)  unto  the  sea 
28    4  whom,  though  he  hath  escaped  the  sea 

2  Co,  11.  26  (in)  perils  in  the  sea,  (in)  perils  among  fa. 

2.  pt^^C1  D^  hayyam  haacharon,  the  hinder  or  id- 
most  or  uttermost  Sea,  i.e.,  the  Mediterranean. 
Deutn.  24  even  unto  the  uttermost  sea,  shallyourco. 
34.  2  all  the  land  of  Judah,  unto  theutmostsea 
Joel  2.  20  and  hishinder  parttoward  the  utmost  sea 
Zech  14.    8  aud  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea 

3  rib;  d;  yam  yapho,  the  sea  of  Japhn,  i.e.,  th* 
Mediterranean. 
Ezra  3.   7  to  bring  cedar  trees,  .to  the  sea  of  Joppa 

•l.D,np75  □;,  the  sea  of  the  Philistines,  i.e.,  the  Med. 
Exod.23.  31  from  the  Red  sea.  .unto  the  sea  of  the  I'h. 

Li.rf^nD;  the  Salt  Sea, that  into  which  Jordan  falls. 

Nnm  34.    3  shall  be  the  outmost  coast  of  the  saltsea 

34.  12  the  goings  out  of  it  shall  lie  at  the  saltsea 

Dent.  3.  17  (even)  the  salt  sea,  under  Ashdoth-pisgah 

Josh.  3.  16  those  that  came  down  toward .  .the  salt  s. 

15.    2  was  from  the  shore  of  the  salt  sea,  from 

15.    5  the  east  border(  was)  the  salt  sea.,  unto  the 

18.  19  of  the  salt  sea  at  the  south  end  of  Jordan 

6.  ':.-"pn  c;n  hayyam  haqqadmoni,  the  East  or 
farmer  Sea,  that  into  which  the  Jordan  falls. 

Eze.  47.  iS  measure.. from  the  border  unto  the  east  s. 

Joel    2.  20  desolate,  with  his  face  toward  the  east  sea. 

Zech. 14.   8  half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea :  in 
".nrnj/rt  d;  yam  Jiaarabah,  the  Sea  of  the  Plain  or 

of  Arabah,  thai  into  which  the  Jordan  falls. 

Dent.  3.  17  from  Chinnereth.  .tmto  the  sea  of  the  pi. 

Josh   3.  16  that  came  down  toward  the  sea  of  the  pi. 

12.  3  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain,  .the  salt  sea  on 
2  Ki.14.  25  entering  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  pi. 

8.r,1D  □:  yam  suph,  the  Bed  Sea,  i.e.,  the  sea  between 
Egypt  and  Arabia,  the  Gulf  of  Suez.  QaXaaaa. 
F.xodio.  19  wind,  which,  .cast  them  into  the  Red  sea 


o 


SEA 


845 


SEA 


Exodi3-  iS  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  the  Red  sea 
15.  4  his.  .captains  also,  .drowned  in  the  Red  s. 
15.  22  So  Moses  brought  Israel  from  the  Red  sea 

23.  31  I  will  set  thy  bounds  from  the  Red  sea 
NUIU14.  25  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Redsea 

2i.  4  from  Mount  Hor  by  the  way  of  the  Red  s. 
2i.  14  What  he  did  in  the  Red  sea,  and  in  the  br. 
33. 10  removed,  .and  encamped  by  the  Red  sea 
33.  11  they  removed  from  the  Red  sea,  and  enc. 
Deut.  1.    1  in  the  plain  over  against  the  Red  (sea) 

1.  40  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Red  sea 

2.  1  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Red  sea 
11.   4  he  made  the  water  of  the  Red  sea  to  over. 

Josh.  2.  10  dried  up  the  water  of  the  Red  sea  for  you 
4.  23  as  the  Lord  your  God  did  to  the  Red  sea 

24.  6  with  ehariotsand  horsemen  unto  theRed  s. 
Judgn.  16  walked  through  the  wilderness.. theRed  s. 
1  Ki.  9.  26  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  sea,  in  the  land 
Neh.  9.    g  and  heardest  their  cry  by  the  Red  sea 
Psa.io6.    7  provoked  (him)  at  the  sea.  .at  the  Red  sea 

106.   9  He  rebuked  the  Red  sea  also,  and  it  was 

106.22  (and)  terrible  things  by  the  Red  sea 

1 36. 13  To  him  which  divided  the  Red  sea  into  pa. 

136.  15  overthrew  Pharaoh  and.. hostintheReds. 

Jer.  49.  21  the  noise  thereof  was  heard  in  the  Red  sea 

Acts    7.  36  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  Red  sea 

1  Co  10.    1  the  cloud,  and  all  passed  through  the  sea 

10.    2  unto  Moses  in  the  cioud  and  in  the  sea 
Heb.  1  r.  29  By  faith  they  passed  through  the  Red  sea 
ii.nnsp  d;  yam  mitsrayim,  the  Egyptian  Sea,  i.e., 
the  sea  between  .Egypt  and  Arabia. 
Isa.    11. 15  shall  utterly  destroy  the  tongue  of  the  E  s. 

lO.rna?  or  n"l~i33  c;  yam  kinneroth  or  kinnereth,  sea 
of  Chinnereth,  i.e.,  that  through  which  Jordan 
passes. 

Nuni34.  11  unto  the  side  of  the  sea  of  C.  eastward 
Josh.  12.    3  from  the  plain  to  the  sea  of  Con  the  east 
13.  27  unto  the  edge  of  the  sea  of  C.  on  the  other 

ll.Qd\z<ro-a,  tJJs  TaXiXaias,  the  sea  of  Galilee. 

The  same  as  the  preceding,  and  sometimes  called  the 

Lake  of  Gennesereth,  or  of  Tiberias.    It  is  about  thirteen 

miles  long,  six  miles  wide,  and  150  feet  deep.     Its 

surfaceis323feet  below  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean. 

Matt.  4.  i5the  way  of  the  sea,  beyondJordan, Galilee 

4. 18  Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea  of  G.,  saw  two 

8.  24  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,  in. 

8.  26  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  aud  the  sea 

8.  27  that  even  the  winds  and  the  sea  obey  him 

8.  32  violeutly  down  a  steep  place  into  the  sea 

13.  1  out  of  the  house,  and  sat  by  the  sea  side 

14.  24  [the  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea] 
14.  25  Jesus  went  unto  them,  walking  on  the  sea 

14.  26  the  disciples  saw  him  walking  on  the  sea 

15.  29  and  came  nigh  unto  the  sea  of  G.;  and  went 
17.  27  lest  weshould  offend  them,  go.  .to  the  sea 

Mark  1.  16  Now  as  he  walked  bythe  sea  of  G.,  he 

1.  16  he  saw  Simon . .  casting  a  net  into  the  sea 
2. 13  And  he  went  forth  agaiu  by  the  sea  side 

3.  7  withdrew,  .with  his  disciples  to  the  sea 

4.  1  he  began  again  to  teach  by  the  sea  side 
4.    1  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  sat  in  the  sea 
4.    1  the  whole  multitude  was  bythe  sea  on  the 
4.  39  And  he . .  said  unto  the  sea,  Peace,  be  still 

4.  41  that  even  the  wind  and  the  sea  obey  him? 

5.  1  came  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the  sea 
5. 13  into  the  sea. .and  were  choked  in  the  sea 

5.  21  And  when  Jesus,  .was  nigh  unto  the  sea 
6. 47  the  ship  was  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  aud 

6.  48  cometh  unto  them,  walking  upon  the  sea 

7.  31  he  came  uuto  the  sea  of  G.,  through  the 
John  6.    1  went  over  the  sea  of  G.  which  is.  .of  Tib. 

6. 16  And.  his  disciples  went  down  unto  the  sea 
6.  17  entered  unto  a  ship,  and  went  over  the  s. 

6. 18  the  sea  arose,  by  reason  of  a  great  wind 

6. 19  they  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and 
6.  22  which  stood  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea 

21.    1  Jesus  showed  himself,  .at  the  sea  of  Tib. 

21.  7  Simon  Peter,  .did  cast  himself  into  the  s. 

12."iTy:  d;  yam  yazer,  tlie  sea  of  Jazer,  a  small  lake 

in  Gad,  six  hours  from  Heshbon  and  four  from 

Rabbah,where  a  spring, Vf&<\ySeh\  is  still  found. 

Jer.  4S.  32  they  reach,  .to  the  sea  of  Jazer :  the  spo. 

SEA  — 

l.Sea,  lake,  pool,  d;  yam. 

Gen.    1. 10  gathering,  .of  the  waters  called  he  seas 
1.  22  till  the  waters  in  the  seas,  aud  let  fowl 
1.  26,  28  nave  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea 
9.    2  andupon  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea;  nntoyour 
14.    3  the  vale  of  Siddim,  which  is  the  salt  sea 

22.  17  as  the  sand  which  (is)  upon  the  sea  shore 
32.  12  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  wh. 
41. 49  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  very 
49.  13  Zebulun  shall  dwell  at.  .haven  of  the  sea 

Exod  10. 19  And  the  Lord  . .  cast  them  into  the  Red  sea 

13.  18  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  the  Red  sea 

14.  2  between  Migdol  and  the  sea,  over  against 
14.   2  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the  sea 

14.   9  overtook  them  encamping  by  the  sea,  bes. 
14. 16,  26  stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  sea 
14.  16  shall  go.  .through  the  midst  of  the  sea 
14.  21  Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea 
14.  21  the  Lord  caused  the  sea  to  go  (back)  by 
14.  21  made  the  sea  dry  (land),  and  the  waters 
14.  22  Israel  went  into  the  midst  of  the  sea  upon 
14.  23  in  after  them  to  the  midst  of  the  sea 
14.  27  his  hand  over  the  sea,  and  the  sea  retur. 
14.  27  the  Egyptians  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 


Josh. 


Exodi4.  28  the  host  of  Pharaoh  that  came  into  the  sea 
14.  29  walked  upon  .(land)  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

14.  30  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea  sh. 

15.  i,  21  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea 
15.    4  and  his  host  hath  he  cast  into  the  sea 
15.    4  captains  also  are  drowned  in  the  Red  sea 
15.    8  were  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  sea 
15.  10  Thou  didst  blow  with  thy  wind,  the  sea 
15. 19  and  with  his  horsemen  into  the  sea,  and 
15.  19  Lord  brought  again  the  waters  of  the  sea 
15.  19  went  on  dry  (land)  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

15.  22  So  Moses  brought  Israel  from  the  Red  sea 
20. 11  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea 
23. 31  from  the  Red  sea  even  unto  the  sea  of  the 

Lev.  11.  9  in  the  waters,  in  the  seas,  and  in  the  rivers 
11. 10  that  have  not  fins  and  scales  in  the  seas 

Xumii.  22  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered  to. 
11.  31  brought  quails  from  the  sea,  and  let  (them) 

13.  29  the  Caananites  dwell  by  the  sea,  and  by 

14.  25  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Red  sea 
21.   4  from  mount  Hor  bythe  way  of  the  Red  sea 

8  passed  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  into 

10  removed,  .aud  encamped  by  the  Red  sea 

11  they  removed  from  the  Red  sea,  and  en. 

3  the  outmost  coast  of  the  salt  sea  eastward 

5  the  goings  out  of  it  shall  be  at  the  sea 

6  ye  shall  even  have  the  great  sea  for  a  bo. 

7  from  the  great  sea  ye  shall  point  out  for 

11  shall  reach  unto  the  side  of  the  sea  of  C. 

12  the  goingsout  of  it  shall  be  at  the  saltsea 

7  by  the  sea  side,  to  the  land  of  the  Canaa. 
40  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Red  sea 

1  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Redsea 
17  the  sea  of  the  plain,  (even)  the  salt  sea 
49  even  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain,  under  the 

4  how  he  made  the  water  of  the  Red  sea  to 
24  even  unto  the  uttermost  sea,  shall  your 

13  Neither  (is)  it  beyond  the  sea,  that  thou 

13  Who  shall  go  over  the  sea  for  us,  and  br. 
19  shall  suck  (of)  the  abundance  of  the  seas 

2  all  the  land  of  Judah,  unto  the  utmost  sea 
4  uuto  the  great  sea  toward  the  going  down 

10  Lord  dried  up  the  water  of  the  Red  sea 

16  the  sea  of  the  plain,  (even)  the  salt  sea 
23  as  the  Lord  your  God  did  to  the  Red  sea 

1  the  kings  of  the  Canaanites.  .by  the  sea 

1  in  all  the  coasts  of  the  great  sea  over  ag. 
4  as  the  sand  that  (is)  upon  the  sea  shore 

3  from  the  plain  to  the  sea  of  Chinneroth 

3  the  sea  of  the  plain,  (even)  the  salt  sea  on 
27  unto  the  edge  of  the  sea  of  Chinnereth  on 

2  border  was  from  the  shore  of  the  salt  sea 

4  goings  out  of  that  coast  were  at  the  sea 

5  the  east  border  (was)  the  salt  sea,  (even) 

5  from  the  bay  of  the  sea  at  the  uttermost 

1 1  goings  out  of  the  border  were  at  the  sea 

12  the  west  border  (was)  to  thegreat  sea, and 

46  From  Ekron  even  unto  the  sea,  all  that 

47  unto  the  river  of  Egypt,  and  the  great  sea 

3  aud  the  goings  out  thereof  are  at  the  sea 

6  And  the  border  went  out  toward  the  sea 

8  and  the  goings  out  thereof  were  at  the  s. 

9  and  the  outgoings  of  it  were  at  the  sea 

10  northward  (it  was)  Manasseh's,  and  the  s. 

14  compassed  the  corner  of  the  sea  southw. 

19  at  the  north  bay  of  the  salt  sea  at  the  so. 

11  there  border  went  up  toward  the  sea,  and 
29  the  outgoings  thereof  are  at  the  sea  from 

4  cut  off,  even  unto  the  great  sea  westward 
6  ye  came  unto  the  sea ;  and  the  Egyptians 

6  the  Egyptians  pursued,  .unto  the  Redsea 

7  brought  the  sea  upon  them,  and  covered 

17  Asher  continued  on  the  sea  shore,  and  ab. 

12  as  the  sand  by  the  sea  side  for  multitude 
16  through  the  wilderness  unto  the  Red  sea 

5  people  as  the  saud  which  (is)  on  the  sea 
11  as  the  sand  that  (is)  bythe  sea  for  multi. 
16  And  the  channels  of  the  sea  appeared,  the 

20  as  the  sand  which  (is)  by  the  sea  in  mill. 
29  even  as  the  saud  that  (is)  on  the  sea 

9  unto  the  sea.  .convey  them  by  sea  in  flo. 

23  made  a  molten  sea,  ten  cubits  from  the 

24  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 

25  sea  (was  set)  above  upon  them,  and  all  th. 
39  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  house 
44  one  sea,  aud  twelve  oxen  under  the  sea 

26  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  sea,  in  the  land 

27  that  had  knowledge  with  the  sea,  with 
22  For  the  king  had  at  sea  a  navy  of  Thars. 

18.  43  looked  toward  the  sea.     And  he  went  up 
18.  44  there  ariseth  a  little  cloud  out  of  the  sea 
2  Ki.  14.  25  entering  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the 

16.  17  took  down  the  sea  from  off  the  brasen  o. 
25. 13  brasen  sea,  (that  was)  in  the  house  of  the 
25.  16  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  the  bases  which 

1  Ch.16.  32  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 

18.    8  wherewith  Solomon  made  the  brasensea 

2  Ch.  2.  16  we  will  bring  it  to  thee  in  floats  by  sea  to 

4.  2  made  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits  from  br. 
4.  3  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 
4.  4  sea  (was  set)  above  upon  them,  and  all  th. 
4.  6  but  the  sea  (was)  for  the  priests  to  wash 
4. 10  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  east 
4.  15  One  sea,  and  twelve  oxen  under  it 
8. 17  to  Eloth,  at  the  sea  side  in  the  land  of  E. 

8.  18  servants  that  had  knowledge  of  the  sea 
20.   2  against  thee  from  beyond  the  sea  on  this 

Ezra   3.    7  from  Lebanon  to  the  sea  of  Joppa,  accor. 
Neh.  9.    6  the  seas,  and  all  that  (is)  therein,  and  th. 

9.  9  and  heardest  their  cry  by  the  Red  sea 

9.  11  thou  didst  divide  the  sea  before  them,  so 
g,  11  they  went  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  on 


Judg.  5. 
7- 
11. 

1  Sa.  13 

2  Sa.  17. 


Esth  10. 

Job  6. 
7- 
9- 


28. 
36. 
38. 

33. 

41. 

Psa.     8. 

8. 

24. 

33- 
46. 
65. 
65- 
66, 
68. 
69. 
72. 
74 

n- 

78. 
78. 


b9. 
93- 
95- 

96. 

98. 
104. 
106. 
106. 
106. 
107. 
114 
114. 
135- 
136. 
136. 
139- 
146. 


Eccl. 

Isa. 


27. 
3*- 
33' 
46. 
47' 
48 
49, 
49 
50- 
5" 
51- 
52. 
52- 

Lam.  2. 
Eze.  25. 

26. 

26. 

26. 

26. 

26. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 


1  the  land,  and  (upon)  the  isles  of  the  sea 

3  would-be  heavier  than  the  sand  of  the  sea 
12  (Am)  I  a  sea,  or  a  whale,  that  thou  settest 

8  aud  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea 

9  than  the  earth,  and  broader  than  the  sea 
8  the  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto 

11  waters  fail  from  the  sea,  and.  the  flood  de. 

12  divideth  the  sea  with  his  power,  and  by 

14  depth  saith,  It  (is)  not  in  me ;  and  the  sea 

30  Behold,  he.  .covereth  the  bottom  of  the  s. 
8  (who)  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors,  when  it 

16  Hast  thou  entered  into,  .springs  of  the  s.? 

31  he  maketh  the  sea  like  a  pot  of  ointment 
8  The  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  s. 
8  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  seas 

2  For  he  hath  founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and 
7  He  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  sea  toget. 

2  the  mountains  be  carried  into,  .the  sea 

5  and  of  them  that  are  afar'off  (upon)  the  s. 

7  Which  stilleth  the  noise  of  the  seas,  the 

6  He  turned  the  sea  into  dry  (land) :  they 
22  I  will  bring,  .from  the  depths  of  the  sea 
34  the  seas,  and  every  thing  that  movethth. 

8  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea 

13  Thou  didst  divide  the  sea  by  thy  strength 
19  Thy  way  (is)  in  the  sea,  and  thy  path  in 
13  He  divided  the  sea,  and  caused  them  to 
27  feathered  fowls,  .as  the  sand  of  the  sea 
53  but  the  sea  overwhelmed  their  enemies 
11  She  sent  out  her  boughs  unto  the  sea,  aud 

9  Thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  sea  :  when 
25  I  will  set  his  hand  also  in  the  sea,  andhis 

4  (yea,  than)  the  mighty  waves  of  the  sea 

5  The  sea  (is)  his,  and  he  made  it;  and  his 
11  let  the  earth  be  glad ;  let  the  sea  roar,  and 

7  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof 

25  (So  is)  this  great  and  wide  sea,  wherein 
7  provoked  (him)  at  the  sea.  .at  theRed  s. 
9  He  rebuked  the  Red  sea  also,  and  it  was 

22  Wondrous,  .terrible  things  by  the  Red  s. 

23  They  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships,  th. 

3  The  sea  saw  (it.) and  fled :  Jordan  was  dr. 

5  What  (ailed)  thee,  (J  thou  sea,  that  thou 

6  in  earth,  in  the  seas,  and  all  deep  places 

13  To  him  which  divided  the  Red  sea  into  p. 

15  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Red  sea 

9  (and)  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  s. 

6  Which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea 

29  When  he  gave  to  the  sea  his  decree,  that 

34  -he  that  lieth  down  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

19  the  way  of  a  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

7  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea  ;  yet  the  sea 

30  shall  roar,  .like  the  roaring  of  the  sea 

1  grievously  afflict  (her  by)  the  way  of  the  s. 
22  thy  people  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  s. 

26  (as)  his  rod  (was)  upon  the  sea,  so  shall  he 
9  shall  be  full,  .as  the  waters  cover  the  sea 

11  Hamath,  and  from  the  islands  of  the  sea 
15  destroy  the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  sea 

8  her  branches,  .they  are  gone  over  the  sea 

12  make  a  noise  like  the  noise  of  the  sea 

2  That  sendeth  ambassadors  by  the  sea,  ev. 
5  the  waters  shall  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the 

1  The  burden  of  the  desert  of  the  sea.    As 

2  merchants  of  Zidon,  that  pass  over  the  s. 

4  sea  hath  spoken,  .the  strength  of  the  sea 
11  He  stretched  out  his  handoverthesea  ;  he 

14  sing,  .they  shall  cry  aloud  from  the  sea 

1 5  glorify  ye  the  Lord  . .  in . .  isles  of  the  sea 

1  he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that  (is)  in  the  se;i 
10  ye  that  go  down  to  the  sea,  and  all  that 

16  "which  maketh  a  way  in  the  sea,  and  a  pa. 

18  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea 

2  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make  the 
10  (Art)  thou  not  it  which  hath  dried  the  sea 

10  that  hathmadethedepthsof  the  seaaway 

15  the  Lord  thy  God,  that  divided  the  sea 

20  the  wicked(are)  like  the  troubled  sea.wh. 

5  the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  conver. 

11  he  that  brought  them  up-out  of  the  sea  wi. 

22  the  bound  ofthe  sea  by  a  perpetual  decree 

23  their  voice  roareth  like  the  sea ;  and  they 

8  increased. .above the  sand  of  the  seas:  I 
22  kings  of  the  isles  which  (are)  beyond  the 

19  concerning  the  sea,  and  concerning  the 

35  which  divided  the  sea  when  the  waves  th. 

22  neither  the  sand  of  the  sea  measured;  so 
18  and  as  Carmel  by  the  sea,  (so)  shall  he  co. 

7  given  it  a  charge,  .against  the  sea  shore  ? 

32  over  the  sea,  they  reach  (even)  to  the  sea 

21  noise  thereof  was  heard  in  the  Red  sea 

23  sorrow  on  the  sea;  it  cannot  be  quiet 

42  their  voice  shall  roar  like  the  sea,  and  th. 

36  will  dry  up  her  sea,  and  make  herspringa 
42  sea  is  come  up  upon  Babylon:  she  is  cov. 

17  brasen  sea  that  (was)  in  the  house  of  the 

20  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  twelve  brasen 

13  for  thy  breach  (is)  great  like  the  sea ;  who 

16  and  destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea  coast 

3  as  the  sea  causeth  his  waves  to  come  up 
5  spreading  of  nets  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

16  Then  all  the  princes  of  the  sea  shall  come 

17  city,  which  wast  strong  in  the  sea,  Bheand 

18  isles  that  (are)  in  the  sea  shall  be  troubled 

3  thou  that  art  situate  at  the  entry  of  the  sea 

4  Thy  borders  (are)  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 

9  ships  of  the  sea  with  their  mariners  were 

25  made  very  glorious  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 

26  hath  broken  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 

27  shall  fall  into  the  midst  of  the  seas  in  the 
29  all  the  pilots  of  the  sea,  shall  come  down 
32  like  the  destroyed  in  the  midst  of  the  sea? 


SEA 


846 


SEARCH 


Eze.  27. 
27. 
28. 
28 
32' 
38. 
39 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
43, 

Dan.  7. 
7< 
11. 

Hos.  1 
4' 

Joel    2. 

2. 

Amos  5, 


Jon. 


Mic.  ; 
Nah.  i 
Hab.  ' 

Zeph. : 


Hag.  2. 

Zech.  9. 

9- 


33  When  thy  wares  went  forth  out  of  the  seas 

34  thou  shalt  be  broken  by  the  seas  in  the  de. 
2  the  seat  of  God,  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 
8  (them  that  are)  slain  in  the  midst  of  the  s. 
2  thou  (art)  as  a  whale  in  theseas;  and  thou 

20  So  that  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the  fowls 

11  valley.,  on  the  east  of  the  sea;  and  it  sha. 
8  down  into  the  desert,  and  go  into  the  sea 
8  brought  forth  into  the  sea,  and  the  waters 

10  as  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  exceeding  ma. 
15  from  the  great  sea,  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as 

17  border  from  the  sea  shall  be  Hazer-enau 

18  from  the  border  unto  the  east  sea.  And 

19  Kadesh,  the  river  to  the  great  sea.  And 

20  west  side  also  (shall  be)  the  great  sea  from 
28  (and)  to  the  river  toward  the  great  sea 

2  winds  of  the  heaven  strove  upon  the.  .sea 

3  four  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  sea 
45  palace  between  the  seas  in  the  glorious 

10  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be 
3  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be  taken  away 

20  with  his  face  toward  the  east  sea,  and  his 
20  hinder  part  toward  the  utmost  sea,  and  his 

8  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and 

12  they  shall  wander  from  sea  to  sea,  and 

3  hid .  .in  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  thence  will 
6  he  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea 

4  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea 

4  there  was  a  mighty  tempest  in  the  sea,  so 

5  cast  forth  the  wares,  .into  the  sea,  to  lig. 

9  which  hath  made  the  sea  and  the  (land) 

1 1  sea  may  be  calm  unto  us?  for  the  sea  wr. 

12  cast  me  forth  into  the  sea;  so  shall  the  s. 

13  for  the  sea  wrought,  and  was  tempestuous 
15  cast  him  forth  iuto  the  sea;  and  the  sea 
15  cast  him  forth  into  the  sea ;  and  the  sea 

3  into  the  deep,  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 
12  from  sea  to  sea,  and  (from)  mountain  to 
19  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea 

4  He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  dry 
8  the  sea,  (and)  her  wall  (was)  from  the  sea? 

14  makes t  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea.as  the 

14  be  filled,  .as  the  waters  cover  the  sea 
8  thy  wrath  against  the  sea,  that  thou  didst 

15  Thou  didst  walk  through  the  sea  with  th. 

3  I  will  consume  the.,  fishes  of  the  sea,  and 

5  Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  coast 

6  sea  coast  shall  be  dwellings  (and)  cottages 
6  I  will  shake  the  heavens . .  and  the  sea,  and 

4  and  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea 

10  hisdominion(shall  be)fromsea(even)to  s. 

11  shall  pass  through  the  sea  with  affliction 

10.  11  shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea,  and  all 
14.  8  half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea,  and 
14.    8  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea :  in  su. 

%,A  sea,  lake,  pool,  Qd\a<r<ra  ihalassa. 

Matt.  4. 15  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee 
4. 18  Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  saw 
4.  18  casting  a  net  into  the  sea :  for  they  were 
8.  24  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,  in. 
8.  26  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea ;  and  there 
8.  27  that  even  thewindsand  the  sea  obey  him 

8.  32  ran.  .down  a  steep  place  into  the  sea,  and 

13.  1  out  of  the  house,  and  sat  by  the  sea  side 
13. 47  net,  that  was  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gath. 

14.  24  [the  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea] 
14.  25  Jesus  weut  unto  them,  walking  on  the  sea 

14.  26  the  disciples  saw  him  walking  on  the  sea 

15.  29  came  nigh  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee;  and 

17.  27  go  thou  to  the  sea,  and  cast  an  hook,  and 

18.  6  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea 

11.  21  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea ;  it  shall  be  done 
23. 15  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  prose. 

Jlark  1.  16  Now  as  he  walked  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  he 

1.  16  casting  a  net  into  the  sea  :  for  they  were 

2.  13  he  went  forth  again  by  the  sea  side ;  and 

3.  7  Jesus  withdrew  himself,  .to  the  sea :  and 

4.  1  began  again  to  teach  by  the  sea  side:  and 
4.  1  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  sat  in  the  sea 
4.  1  whole  multitude  was  by  the  sea  ou  the  1. 
4.  39  said  unto  the  sea,  Peace,  be  still      And 

4.  41  that  even  the  wind  and  the  sea  obey  him? 

5.  1  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  into 
5. 13  into  the  sea.  .and  were  choked  in  the  sea 

5.  21  unto  him  :  and  he  was  nigh  unto  the  sea 

6.  47  ship  was  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  he 
6,  48  walkiugupon  the  sea,  and  would  have  pa. 

6.  49  when  they  saw  him  walkingupon  the  sea 

7.  31  he  came  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee,  through 

9.  42  his  neck,  and  he  were  cast  into  the  sea 
xr.  23  shall  say.  .be  thou  cast  into  the  sea  ;  and 

Lukei7.  2  he  cast  into  the  sea,  than  that  he  should 
17.  6  be  thou  planted  in  the  sea;  and  it  should 
21.  25  with  perplexity;  the  sea  and  the  waves 
John  6.  1  Jesus  went  over  the  sea  of  Galilee,  which 
6.  16  his  disciples  went  down  unto  the  sea 
6. 17  and  went  over  the  sea  toward  Capernaum 
6.  18  sea  arose,  by  reason  of  a  great  wind  that 

6.  19  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and  drawing 
6.22  which  stood  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea 
6. 25  found  him  on  theotherside  of  the  sen,  th. 

2i.    1  showed  himself  ..at  the  sea  of  Tiberias 
21.   7  Simon  Peter,  .did  cast  himself  into  the  s. 
Acts    4.  24  hast  made,  .the  sea,  and  all  that  iu  them 

7.  36  showed  wonders,  .in  the  Red  sea,  and  iu 
xo.  6  a  tanner,  whose  house  is  by  the  sea  side 
10.  32  house  of  (one)  Simon  a  tenner  by  the  sea 
14.  15  made,  .the  sea,  and  all  things  that  areth. 
17.  14  sent  away  Paul,  to  go  as  it  were  to  the  s. 
27.  30  they  bad  let  down  the  bunt  into  the  sea 
27. 38  and  cast  out  the  wheat  into  the  sea 


Acts  27-  40  they  commited  (themselves)  unto  the  sea 

28.   4  whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  yet 

Rom.  9.  27  number.,  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  a  re. 

i  Co. '10.    1  that  all  our  fathers,  .passed  through  the  s. 

10.  2  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses,  .in  the  sea 
2  Co.  11.  26  perils  in  the  sea,  (in)  perils  among  false 
Heb.  11.  12  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  shore  itmumer. 

11.  29  By  faith  they  passed  through  the  Red  sea 
Jas.  1.  6  like  a  wave  of  the  sea.  driven  with  the  w. 
Jude  13  Raging  waves  of  the  sea,  foaming  out  their 
Rev.   4.    6  before  the  throne  (there  was)  a  sea  of  gl. 

5.  13  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  are  in 
7.  1  not  blow  on  the  earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor 
7.    2  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea 

7.  3  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor 

8.  8  burning  with  Are  was  cast  into  the  sea 
8.    8  and  the  third  part  of  the  sea  became  Wo. 

8  9  of  the  creatures  which  were  in  the  sea,  and 
10.    2  he  set  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and(his) 
10.    5  angel  which  I  saw  stand  upon  the  sea  and 
10.   6  [sea,  and  the  things  which  are  therein] 
10.    8  angel  which  standeth  upon  the  sea  and 

12.  12  the  inhabitersof  the  earth  and  of  the  sea! 

13.  1  sea,  and  saw  a  beast  rise  up  out  of  the  s. 

14.  7  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and 

15.  2  saw  as  it  were  a  seaof  glass  mingled  with 

15.  2  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  har. 

16.  3  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  sea 
16.    3  and  every  living  soul  died  in  the  sea 
18.  17  as  many  as  trade  by  sea,  stood  afar  off 
18.  19  made  rich  all  that  had  ships  in  the  sea  by 
18.  21  cast  (it)  into  the  sea,  saying.  Thus  with 

20.  8  number  of  whom  (is)  as  the  sand  of  thes. 
20. 13  seagaveup  thedead  which  were  in  it,  and 

21 .  1  passed  away ;  and  there  was  no  more  sea 

3.  Tlxe  deep  open  sea,  iriXayos  pclagos. 

Acts  27.    5  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  Cilicia 
SEA  coast  (upon  the)  — 
1  .Along  the  lake,  irapada.\d(Tcrtos  parathalassios. 

Matt  4.  13  Capernaum,  which  is  upon  the  sea  coast 
%  Along  the  (salt)  sea,  irapaAios  par  alios. 

Luke  6.  17  from  the  sea  coastof  Tyre  and  Sidon,  wh. 
SEA,  (things)  in  the  — 
Belonging  to  or  in  the  (salt)  water,  svdkios  enalios. 

Jas.    3    7  every  kind . .  of  tilings  in  the  sea,  is  tamed 
SEA  monster  — 
Howlers,  jackals,  dragons,  pn  tannin. 

Lam    4.    3  the  sea  monsters  draw  out  the  breast,  th. 
SEAFARING  men  — 
Seas,  D'S)  yainmiiu. 

Eze.  26  r7  (that  wast)  inhabited  of  seafaringmen,  the 
SEAL  — 
l.Seal,  signet,  Dnin  chotham. 

1  Ki.21.    8  sealed  (them)  with  his  seal,  and  sent  the 

Job  38.  1 4  It  is  turned  as  clay  (to)  the  seal ;  and  they 

41.  15  pride,  shut  up  together(as with)  aclosese. 

Song  8.    6  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart.,  a  seal 
2.  A  seal,  impression,  inscription,  o-<ppayl$  sphragis. 

Rom.  4.  11  aseal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith  wh. 

1  Co.  9     2  the  seal  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  the 

2  Ti.    2. 19  having  this  seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them 
Rev.    5.    1  and  on  the  back  side,  sealed  with  seven  s. 

5  2  to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seals  t. 

5.  5  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seven  se. 

5.  9  Thou  art  worthy .  .to  open  the  seals  ther, 

6.  1  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the  seals 
6-  V  5-  7.  9.  I2  when  he  had  opened  the.  .seal 

7.  2  angel . .  having  the  seal  of  the  living  God 

8.  1  when  he  had  opened  the  seventh  seal,  th. 

9  4  those  men  which  have  not  the  seal  of  God 
SEAL  (up,  set  a  seal),  to  — 

1.  To  seal,  seal  up,  finish,  Dnrt  chatham. 

Deut32.  34  (Is)  not  this,  .sealed  up  among  my  treas. 

1  Ki.21,    8  wrote  letters  in  Ahab's  name,  and  sealed 

Neh.  9.  38  princes,  Levites,  (and)priests,seal(uutoit) 
10.    1  Now  those  that  sealed  (were)  Nehemiah 

Esth.  8.    8  seal  it  with  the  king's  ring :  for  the  writ. 
8. 10  sealed  (it)  with  the  king's  ring;  and  sent 

Job    9.    7  Whichcommandeththesun..audsealethu. 
14.  17  My  transgression  (is)  sealed  up  in  a  bag 
33. 16  he  openeth  the  ears  of  meu,  and  sealeth 
37.    7  He  sealeth  up  the  hand  of  every  man ;  th. 

Song  4. 12  A  garden,  .(is)  my  sister,  .a  fountain  sea. 

Isa.  8.  16  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law  amo. 
29. 11  as  the  words  of  a  book  that  is  sealed,  wh. 
29. 11  and  he  saith,  I  eannot;  for  it  (is)  sealed 

Jer.   32. 10 1  subscribed  the  evidence,  and  sealed  (it) 
32.  11  that  which  was  sealed  (according)  to  the 
32.  14  both  which  is  sealed,  and  this  evidence 
32.  44  subscribe  evidences,  and  seal  (them),  and 

Eze.  28. 12  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  full  of  wisdom 

Dan,  9.  24  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and 
12.    4  seal  the  book,  (even)  to  the  time  of  the  end 
12.   9  the  words  (are)  closed  up  and  sealed  till 

2.  To  seal,  seal  up,  nnn  chatham. 

Dan.  6. 17  the  king  sealed  it  with  his  own  signet 
Z.Toseal,  impress,  veppayifa  sphragizo. 

Matt27.  66  made  the  sepulchre  sure,  sealing  the  stone 
John  3.  33  He.. hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true 

6.  27  the  Son  . .  him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed 
Rom  15.  28  When  therefore  I.  have  sealed  to  themth. 
2C0.  1.  22  Who  hath  also  sealed  us,  and  given  the  ea. 
Eph.    i.  13  ye  were  sealed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of 

4.  30  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of 
Rev.    7.    3  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  G. 

7.  4  which  were  sealed  :  (and  there  were)sealed 


Rev. 


7.  5,  6,  7,  8  Of  the  tribe,  .(were)  sealed  twelve 

10.  4  Seal  up  those  things  which  the  seven  th. 
20.  3  set  a  seal  upon  him,  that  he  should  dece. 
22.  10  Seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  th. 

SEALED,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  sealed,  sealed  up,  Drjn  chatham,  2. 

Esth.  3.  12  was  it  written,  and  sealed  with  the  king's 

8.  8  is  written  in  the  king's  name,  and  sealed 

2.  To  seal  down,  or  thoroughly,  Karaacppaylfa. 
Rev.   5.    1  written  within  and  on  the  back  side,  sea. 

SEAM,  -without  — 

Without  a  scam,  &p,pa.(po<;  arrhaphos. 

Johni9-  23  the  coat  was  without  seam,  woven  from 
SEARCH,  searching,  secret  — 
\.A  search,  rsri  chephes. 

Psa.  64.   6  they  accomplish  a  diligent  search :  both 
2.^1  search,  searching,  ->arj  cheqer. 

Judg.  5.  16  For  thedivision&(.  .were) great searchings 

Job     8.    8  prepare  thyself  to  the  search  of  their  fath. 

11.  7  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God?  ca. 

38.  16  hast  thou  walked  in  the  search  of  the  de. 
Isa.    40.  28  (there  is)  no  searching  of  his  understand. 

3.  Digging,  or  breaking  through,  nnrinD  machtereth. 

Jer.     2.  34  I  have  not  found  it  by  secret  search,  but 
SEARCH  (diligently,  for,  out),  to  — 
l.To  seek,  inquire,  "ipa  baqar,  3. 

Lev.  27.  33  He  shall  not  search  whether  it  be  good  or 
2.  To  seek,  inquire,  require,  chn  darash. 

1  Ch.28.   9  the  Lord  searcheth  all  hearts,  and  under. 

Job    10.   6  enquires t  after  mine  iniquity,  and  searc. 

39.  8  and  be  searcheth  after  every  green  thing 
Jer.  29.  13  when  ye  shall  search  forme  with  all  your 
Eze.  34.    6  and  none  did  search  or  seek  (after  them) 

34.  8  neither  did  my  shepherds  search  for  my 
34.  11  I,  (even)I,  will  both  search  my  sheep,  and 

3.7*0  seek,  dig,  search,  narj  chaphar. 

Deut.  1.  22  they  shall  search  us  out  the  land,  and 
Josh.  2.    2  there  came  men.  .to  search  out  the  coun. 
2     3  they  be  come  to  searchoutallthe  country 
i.To  search  out  for,  s»pn  chaphas. 

Psa.  64.    6  They  search  out  iniquities ;  they  accompl. 

Prov  2.    4andsearchest  tor  her  as  (for)  hid  treasures 

20.  27  searching  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly 

Lam    3  40  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn 

5.  To  search,  search  out  for,  &?3n  chaphas,  3. 

Gen.  31  35  And  he  searched,  but  found  not  the  im. 
44.  12  he  searched,  (and)  began  at  the  eldest,  and 
1  Sa  23.  23  I  will  search  him  out  throughout  all  the 

1  Ki.  20.    6  they  shall  search  thine  house,  and  the  h. 

2  Ki.  10  23  Search,  and  look  that  there  be  herewith 
Araosg.    3  I  will  search  and  take  them  out  thence 
Zeph.  x.  12 1  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles,  and 

6. To  search,  search  out,  investigate,  ipn  chaqar. 
Judgi8     2  to  spy  out  the  land,  and  to  search  it 

18.  2  they  said  unto  them.  Go,  search  the  land 
2  Sa.  10.  3  to  search  the  city,  and  to  spy  it  out,  and 
1  Ch.  19.  3  his  servants  come  unto  thee  for  to  search 
Job     5.  27  Lo  this,  we  have  searched  it,  so  it  (is) 

13.    9  Is  it  good  that  he  should  search  you  out? 

28.   3  setteth  an  end  to  darkness,  and  searcheth 

28.  27  he  prepared  it,  yea,  and  searched  it  out 

29.  16  the  cause  (which)  1  knew  not  I  searched  0. 
32.  11  I  gave  ear.  .whilst  ye  searched  out  what 

Psa.  44.  21  Shall  not  God  search  this  out?  for  he  kn. 
139.    1  thou  hast  searched  me,  and  known  (me) 
139.  23  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart 
Prov  iS.  17  his  neighbour  cometh  and  searcheth  him 
25.    2  the  honour  of  kings  (is)  to  search  out  a 
2S.  iithathatt  understandingsearchethhimout 
Jer.  17.  10  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  (I)  try  the 
Eze.  39. 14  after  the . .  seven  months  shall  they  search 
7.Searcht  searching,  l^n  cheqer. 

Prov  25.  27  so  (for  men)  to  search  their  own  glory  (is 

8.  To  feel,  search,  grope,  i^c'D  mashash,  3. 

Gen.  31.  34  Laban  searched  all  the  tent,  but  found 
31.  37  Whereas  thou  hast  searched  all  my  stuff 

9.  To  traverse,  spty  out,  ?ri  vagal,  3. 

Deut.  1  24  came  unto  the  valley  of  Eshcol,  and  they 

10.  To  go  about,  spy  out,  search,  ftn  twr. 
JVumio.  33  to  search  out  a  resting  place  for  them 

13.  2  Send  thou  men,  that  they  may  search  the 
13.  21  they  went  up,  and  searched  the  land  from 
13.  25  they  returned  from  searching  of  the  land 
13.  32  of  the  land  which  they  had  searched 

13.  32  through  which  we  have  gone  to  search 

14.  6  (which  were)  of  them  that  searched  the 
14.   7  The  land,  which  we  passed  through  to  se. 
14.  34  the  number  of  the  days  in  which  ye  scar. 
14.  36  the  men  which  Moses  sent  to  search  the 
14.  38  of  the  men  that  went  to  search  the  land 

Deut.  1.  33  to  search  you  out  a  place  to  pitch  your 

Eccl.  1.  13  I  gave  my  heart  to  seek  and  search  out 

7.  25  to  search  and  to  seek  out  wisdom,  and 

11.  To  judge  or  sift  again,  avaKpivw  anakvino. 
Acts  17.  11  searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether 

12.  To  trace  out,  e|epeiWa>  exereimao. 

1  Pe.  1. 10  the  prophets  have  enquired  and  searched 
1 3. 7*0  search  out,  i^erdfa  exetazo. 

Matt.  2.    8  Go  and  search  diligently  for  the  young 
14.  To  trace,  track,  epeiWw  ereunao. 

John   5.  39  Search  the  scriptures;  for  in  them  yeth. 


SEARCH 


847 


SECOND 


John  7.  52  Art  thou  also  of  Galilee?  Search,  and  look 
Rom.  8.  27  he  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knowethwh. 
1  Co.  2. 10  the  spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the 
1  Pe.   1. 11  Searching  what,  or  what  manner  of  time 
Rev.    2.  23  I  am  he  which  searcheth  the  reins  and  the 

SEARCH,  to  make  (diligent)  — 
I.To  seek;  inquire,  1p5  bcqar,  3. 

Ezra  4.  15  That  search  may  be  made  in  the  book  of 
4.  19  I  commanded,  and  search  hath  been  ma. 

6.  1  search  was  made  in  the  house  of  the  rolls 

2.  To  seek,  inquire,  npn  beqar,  4. 

Ezra    5. 17  let  there  be  search  made  in  the  king's 

3.  To  search  out  for,  v$-  ckaphas,  3. 

Psa.  77.    6  and  my  spirit  made  diligent  search 

4.  To  search  out,  investigate,  "ipp  chaqar. 

Deut  13.  14  enquire,  and  make  search,  and  ask  dilig. 
SEARCHED  (out),  to  be  — 
1.2*0  be  searched  out,  i???  chaphas,  2. 

Obad.      6  How  are  (the  things)  of  Esausearchedout! 
2.  To  be  searched  out.  ipn  chaqar,  2. 

Jer.  31.  37  the  foundations  of  the  earth  searched  out 
46.  23  cut  down  her  forest . .  it  caunot  be  searched 

Z.A  search,  searching,  ~ij3~  cheqer. 

Job  36.  26  neither  can  the  number.. be  searched  out 
SEARED  -with  a  hot  iron,  to  be  — 
To  scar,  brand,  burn  with  hot  iron,  icaurvpid^ofiai. 

1  Ti.  4.  2  having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  i. 
SEAS  meet,  where  two  — 
Betwren  two  sea*,  Sidd\acro-os  ditlmlassos. 

Acts  27.  41  falling  into  a  place  where  two  seas  met 
SEASON  appointed,  convenient,  due  — 
l.An  appointed  time  or  season,  \o\  zeman. 

Eccl.  3.    1  To  every  (thing  there  is)  a  season,  and  a 

Dan.    2.  21  And  he  changeth  the  times  and  the  seas. 

7.  12  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a  season  and 

2.  Days,  D*a;  yamim. 

Gen.  40.    4  and  they  continued  a  season  in  ward 
Josh.  24.   7  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long  season 
2Ch.  15.    3  for  a  long  season  Israel  (hath  been)  witho. 
o.An  appointed  time  or  season,  T$nc  nioed. 

Gen.    t  .  14  let  them  be  for  signs,  and  for  seasons,  and 
Exodi3.  10  therefore  keep  this  ordinance  in  his  season 
Lev.  23.    4  which  ye  shall  proclaim  in  their  seasons 
Xum.  9.    2  also  keep  thepassoverat  hisappointed  se. 
9.   3  ye  shall  keep  it  in  iris  appointed  season 
9    7  offer  an  offering,  .in  his  appointed  season 
9. 13  offering  of  the  Lord  in  bis  appointed  sea. 
28.    2  observe  to  offer  unto  me  in  their  due  seas. 
Deut  16.   6  at  the  season  that  thou  earnest  forth  out 
2  Ki.  4.  16  About  this  season,  according  to  the  time 
4.  17  bare  a  son  at  that  season  that  Elisha  had 
Psa.  104.  19  He  appointed  the  moon  for  seasons:  the 
Hos.   2.    9  and  my  wine  in  the  season  thereof,  and 

A.Time,  ny  eth. 

ExodiS.  22  And  let  them  judge  the  people  at  all  sea. 

18. 26  And  they  judged,  the  people  at  all  seasons 
Lev.  26.    4  Then  I  will  give  you  rain  in  due  season 
Dsut'n.  14  the  rain  of  your  land  in  his  due  season 

28.  12  to  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land  in  his  dues. 
1  Ch.21.  29  (were)  at  that  season  in  the  high  place  at 
Job     5  26  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  his  season 

38. 32  Canst  thou  bring .  .Mazzarothinhis  seas.? 
Psa.  1.  3  that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  Ms  season 
104.  27  mayest  give  (them)  their  meat  in  due  se. 
145.  15  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  due  season 
Prov  15.  23  a  word  (spoken)  in  due  season,  how  good 
Eccl.io  17  thy  princes  eat  in  due  season,  for  strength 
Jer.     5.  24  both  the  former  aud  the  latter,  in  his  sea. 

33. 20  should  not  be  day  and  night  in  their  sea. 
Eze.  34.  26  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in  his  se. 

5.  A  fixed,  appointed,  definite  time  or  season,  ucup6$. 

Matt2i.  41  shall  render  him  the  fruits  in  their  seasons 

24.  45  made  ruler.. to  give  them  meat  in  due  se. 

Marki2.   2  at  the  season  he  sent  to  the  husbandmen 

Luke  1.  20  which  shall  be  fulfilled  in  their  season 

4. 13  the  devil . .  departed  from  him  for  a  season 

12.  42  give,  .(their)  portion  of  meat  in  due  season 

13.  1  There  were  present  at  that  season  some 
20.  10  And  at  the  season  he  sent  a  servant  to  the 

John  5.    4  [an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  season] 

Acts    1.    7  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons 

13.  11  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  season 

14. 17  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons 
24.  25  wheu  I  have  a  convenient  season  I  will 

Gal.     6.    9  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint 

1  Th.  5.    1  of  the  times  and  the  seasons,  brethren,  ye 

-  6. Time,  delay,  xp^os  chronos. 

Acts  19.  22  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  season 

20. 18  I  have  been  with  jou  at  all  seasons 
Rev.   6.  11  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little  season 

20.    3  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  season 
7. An  hour,  time,  wpa  Jwra. 

John  5.  35  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to  rejoice  in 

2  Co.   7.    8made  you  sorry,though..butforaseason 
Phm.      15  perhaps  he  therefore  departedfor  a  season 

SEASON,  for  a,  in,  out  of  — 

l.Out  of  season,  in  good  season,  aKaipws,  evtcaipcos. 

2  Ti.  4.    2  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season;  reprove 
2.Little,  bxiyov  oligon. 

1  Pe.  1.   6  ye  greatly  rejoice,  though  now  for  a  seas. 


3.  For  a  tune,  irp6aKa.ipos  jyroshairos. 

Heb.  11.  25  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  forase. 
SEASON,  to  — 
I. To  salt,  nSo  malach. 

Lev.  2.  1 3  every  oblation . .  shalt  thou  season  with  se. 
'1.  To  fit,  prepare,  aprvto  artuo. 

Mark  9.  50  lost  his  saltness,  wherewith  will  ye  season 

Lukei4.  34  his  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  be  season. 

Col.     4.    6  Let  your  speech  (be)  alway  with  grace,  se. 

SEAT,  (seated)  — 

1.  To  sit  down  or  still,  aw;  yashab. 

1  Ki.  10.  19  on  either  side  on  the  place  of  the  seat,  and 
Amos  6.    3  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  come  near 

2.  A  seat,  throne,  NS3  kisse. 

Judg.3.  20  he  was  sitting.  .And  he  arose  out  of  (his)  s. 
1  Sa.   1.   9  Eli  the  priest  sat  upon  a  seat  by  a  post  of 

4. 13  Eli  sat  upon  a  seat  by  the  way  side  watc. 

4.  18  he  fell  from  off  the  seat  backward  by  the 
1  Ki.  2.  19  caused  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the  king's  mo. 
Esth.  3,  1  set  his  seat  above  all  the  princes  that  (w.) 
Prov.  9. 14  on  a  seat  in  the  high  places  of  the  city 

3.  A  seat,  place  of  sitting  down,  aanD  moshab. 

1  Sa.  20.  18  thou  shalt  be  missed,  because  thy  seat 

20.  25  the  king  sat  upon  his  seat,  .a  seat  by  the 
Job  29.    7  (when)  I  prepared  my  seat  in  the  street 
Psa.     1.    1  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful 
Eze.    8.    3  where  (was)  the  seat  of  the  image  of  jeal. 

28.    2  I  sit  (in)  the  seat  of  God,  in  the  midst  of 
A..A  seat,  sitting,  ros*  shebeth. 

2  Sa.  23.   8  The  Tachmonites  that  sat  in  the  seat,  ch. 
^.Prepared  place  or  seat,  niias  tehunah. 

Job   23.   3  Oh.. (that)  I  might  come  (even)  to  his  seat! 

6.  To  cover,  be  concealed,  J?p  saphan. 

Deut  33.  21  (in)  a  portion  of  the  lawgiver,  (washe)se. 

7.  A  seat,  throne,  $p6uos  thronos. 

Luke  1.  52  He  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from.  .se. 

Rev.  2. 13  thou  dwellest,  (even)  where  Satan's  seat 
4.  4  four  and  twenty  seats :  and  upon  the  seats 
11. 16  elders  which  sat  before  God  on  their  seats 
13.  2  dragon  gave  him  his  power,  and  his  seat 
16. 10  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  seat  of 

S..4  seat,  chair,  stool,  KadeSpa  Jcathedra. 

Matt  21.  12  aud  the  seats  of  them  that  sold  doves 

23.   2  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat 
Markn.  15  and  the  seats  of  them  that  sold  doves 

SEAT,  chief,  highest,  uppermost  — 

Foremost  seat  or  chair,  wpccTOKadzb'ptaprdtokathed. 

Matt  23.    6  aud  the  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues 

Marki2.  39  Andthe  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and 

Luken.  43  ye  love  the  uppermost  seats  in  the  synag. 

20.  46  the  highest  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and 

SE'-BA,  sop. 

1.  Eldest  son  of  Cush,  son  of  Ham.    B.C.  2250. 

Gen.  10.    7  And  the  sons  of  Cush;  S.,  and  Havilah 
1  Ch.  1.    9  And  the  sons  of  Cush;  S.,  and  Havilah,  and 

2.  His  land,  the  N.  part  of  Ethiopia,  including  Meroe. 

Psa.  72.  10  the  kings  of  Sheba  and  S.  shall  offer  gifts 

Isa.  43.    3  I  gave  Egypt.. ransom,  Ethiopia  and  S. 
SE'-BAT,  *J3p'. 

The  eleventh  "month  of  the  Jewish  year,  beginning  with 
the  new  moon  of  February. 

Zech.  1.    7  eleventh  month,  which  (is)  the  month  S. 
SE-CA'-CAH,  ~3;p  enclosure. 
A  city  in  the  plain  of  Judah,  near  Middin. 

Josh  15.  61  In  the  wilderness,  Beth-arabah.  .and  S. 

SE'-CHTT,  »£  ivatchplace. 

A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Raniah. 

1  Sa.  19.  22  he.  .came  to  a  great  well  that  (is)  in  S. 
SECOND  (order,  time,  rank)  — 

1,  Second,  a  copy,  double,  n&D  mishneh. 

Gen.  41.  43  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  chariot 

1  Sa.   8.    2  Joel,  and  the  name  of  his  second,  Abiah 

2  Sa.  3.  3  his  second,  Chileab,  of  Abigail  the  wife  of 
2  Ki.  23.    4  and  the  priests  of  the  second  order,  and 

25. 18  Zephaniah  the  second  priest,  and  the  th. 

1  Ch.15. 18  with  them  their  brethren  of  the  second 

2  Ch.35.  24  and  put  him  in  the  second  chariot  that 
Ezra    1.  10  silver  basins  of  a  second  (sort)  four  hun. 
Neh.  11.   9  Judah  the  son  of  Senuah(was)  secondov. 

11. 17  Bakbukiah  the  second  among  his  breth. 
Jer.  52.  24  Zephaniah  the  second  priest,  and  the  th. 
Zeph.  1. 10  an  howling  from  the  second,  and  a  great 

2.  Second,  other,  again,  '$  sheni. 

Gen.   1.   8  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  second 

2. 13  And  the  name  of  the  second  river  (is)  Gi. 
6. 16  (with)  lower,  second,  and  third  (stories) 
7. 11  in  the  second  month,  the  seventeenth  day 

8. 14  in  the  secondmonth,  on  the  seven  and  tw. 
22. 15  Lord  called . .  Abraham . .  the  second  time 
30.  7  conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob  a  second 
30.  12  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  a  second 
32.  19  so  commanded  he  the  second,  and  the  th. 
41.  5  he  slept  and  dreamed  the  second  time 
41.  52  thenameof  the  second  called  heEphraim 
47.  18  they  came  unto  him  the  second  year,  and 

Exod.  2.  13  when  he  went  out  the  second  time,  beho. 
16.  1  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  second  month 
26.  4  and  likewise .  .in  the  coupling  of  the  sec. 
26.   5  that(is)in  thecouplingof  the  second, that 


Exod26. 10  of  the  curtain  which  coupleth  the  second 
26.  20  for  the  second  side  of  the  tabernacle,  on 

28.  18  And  the  second  row  (shall  be)  an  emerald 
36.  ii,  12  in  the  coupling  of  the  second 
36.  17  of  the  curtain  which  coupleth  thesecond 

39.  11  the  second  row,  an  emerald,  a  sapphire 

40.  17  in  the  first  month  in  the  second  year,  on 
Lev.    5.  10  he  shall  offer  the  second  (for)  a  burnt  off. 

13.  58  it  shall  be  washed  the  second  time,  and 
Num.  1.  1,  iS  on  the  first  (day)  of  the  second  month 
1.    1  in  the  second  year  after  they  were  come 
2. 16  And  they  shall  set  forth  in  the  second  ra. 
7. 18  On  the  second  day  Nethaneel  the  son  of 
9.    1  in  the  firstmonth  of  the  second  yearafter 
9.  11  The  fourteenth  day  of  the  second  month 
10.    6  When  ye  blow  an  alarm  the  second  time 
10. 11  of  the  second  month,  in  the  second  year 

29.  17  on  the  second  day  (ye  shall  offer)  twelve 
Josh.  5.    2  circumcise. .  children  of  Israel  a  second  ti. 

6.  14  the  second  day  they  compassed  the  city 
10.  32  which  took  it  on  the  second  day,  and  sin. 

19.  1  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  Simeon,  (even) 
Judg.  6.  25  even  the  second  bullock  of  seven  years  old 

6.  26  take  thesecond  bullock,  and  offer  a burnt 

6.  28  the  second  bullock  was  offered  upon  the 

20.  24  the  children  of  Israel  came.. the  second 
20.  25  Benjamin  went  forth,  .the  second  day,  and 

1  Sa.  20.  27  (which  was)  thesecond  (day) of  the  month 

20.  34  did  eat  no  meat  the  second  day  of  the  mo. 

2  Sa.  14.  29  when  he  sent  again  the  second  time,  he  wo. 

1  Ki.   6.    1  in  the  month  Zif, which  (is)  the  second  m. 

9.   2  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  the  second  ti. 
19.  7  angel  of  the  Lord  came  again  the  second  t. 

2  Ki.   9.  19  he  sent  out  a  second  on  horseback,  which 

10.  6  he  wrote  a  letter  the  second  time  to  them 
ig.  29  in  the  second  year  that  which  springeth 
25. 17  like  unto  these  had  the  second  pillar  with 

1  Ch.  2.  13  Abinadab  the  second,  and  Shimmatheth. 

3.    1  thesecond,  Daniel,  of  Abigail  theCarme. 
3.  15  the  second  Jehoiakim,  the  third  Zedekiah 

7.  15  and  the  name  of  the  second  (was)  Zeloph. 

8.  1  Ashbel  the  second,  and  Aharah  the  third 

8.  39  Ulam  his  first  born,  Jehush  the  second 

12.  9  Ezer  the  first,  Obadiah  the  second,  Eliab 
23.  11  Jahathwasthechief,  and  Zizah the  second 
23.  19  Amariahthe  second,  Jahaziel  the  third 

23.  20  Micah  the  first,  and  Jesiah  the  second 

24.  7  first  lot  came,  .to  Jehoiarib,  the  second 

24.  23  Amariah  the  second,  Jahaziel  the  third 

25.  9  the  second  to  Gedaliab,  who  with  his  br. 

26.  2  Jediael  the  second,  Zebadiah  the  third 
26.    4  Jehozabad the  second,  Joahthe  third,  and 

26.  it  Hilkiah  the  second,  Tebaliah  the  third 

27.  4  over  the  course  of  the  second  month  (was) 

29.  22  the  son  of  David  king  the  second  time 

2  Ch.  3.    2  to  build  in  the  second  (day) of  thesecond 

27-   5  pay  unto  hini,  both  the  second  year  and 

30.  2  to  keep  the  passover  in  the  second  month 
30. 13  to  keep  the  feast,  .in  the  second  month 
30.  15  on  the  fourteenth  (day)of  the  second  rao. 

Ezra    3.    8  in  the  second  year  of  their  coming  unto 

3.    8  in  the  second  month,  began  Zen  ubabel 

Neh.    8.  13  on  thesecond  day  were  gathered  together 

Esth.  2. 14  she  returned  into  the  second  house  of  the 

2. 19  virgins  were  gathered  together  the  second 

7.    2  king  said  again  unto  Esther  on  the  second 

9.  29  wrote,  .to  confirm  this  second  letter  of  P. 
Job  42.  14  the  name  of  the  second,  Kezia;  and  the 
Eccl.  4.    8  There  is  one  (alone),  and  (there  is)  not  a 

4. 15  with  the  second  child  that  shall  stand  up 
Isa.   11. 11  Lord  shall  set  his  hand  again  the  sec.  time 

37.  30  the  second  year  that  which  springeth  of 
Jer.    1.  13  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me  thesec.  ti. 

13.  3  wordof  theLoRDcameuntomethe  sec.  ti. 
33.  1  word .  .came  unto  Jeremiah  the  second  ti. 
41.  4  the  second  day  after  lie  had  slain  Gedaliab 
52.  22  the  second  pillar  also  and  the  pomegran. 

Eze.  10.  14  the  second  face  (was)  the  face  of  a  man 
43. 22  on  the  second  day  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid 
'  Jon.     3.    1  word,  .came  unto  Jonah  the  second  time 
Zech.  6.  2  and  in  the  second  chariot  black  horses 

3.  Two,  both,  c*~l?  shenayim. 

1  Ki.  15.  25  began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  the  second 

2  Ki.    1. 17  Jehorarureignedmhis  stead  in  thesecond 

14.  1  In  the  second  year  of  Joash  son  of  Jehoa. 

15.  32  In  the  second  year  of  Pekah  the  son  of  R. 
Dan.   2.    1  And  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of 
Hag.   1.    1,  15  In  the  second  year  of  Darius  the  king 

2.  10  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the 
Zech.  1.    1,  7  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the 
A.  Second,  j;3Pi  tinyan. 

Dan.    7.    5  another  beast,  a  second,  like  to  a  bear,  and 

5. Second,  |75  teren. 

Ezra   4.  24  it  ceased  unto  the  second  year  of  the  reign 

6.  Second,  Sevrepos  deuteros. 

Matt 21.  30  And  he  came  to  [the  second],  and  said  li. 
22.  26  Likewise  the  second  also,  and  the  third 
22.  39  the  second  (is)  like  unto  it,  Thou  shalt  lo. 
26.  42  He  went  away  again  the  second  time,  and 

Markis.  21  the  second  tock  her,  and  died,  neither  le. 
12.  31  the  second  (is)  like,  (namely)  this,  Thou 
14.  72  the  secondtime  thecockcrew.  And  Peter 

Lukeis.  38  if  he  shall  come  in  the  second  watch,  or 
19. 18  the  second  came,  saying,  Lord,  thypoun^ 
20.  30  second  took  her  to  wife,  and  he  died  chil. 

John  3.  4  can  he  enter  the  second  time  into  his  mo. 
4.  54  This  (is)  again  the  second  miracle  (that) 
21. 16  He  saith  to  him  again  the  second  time 

Acts    7. 13  at  the  second  (time)  Joseph  was  made  kn. 


SECOND 


848 


SEE 


Actsio.  15  voice  (spake)  unto  him  again  the  second 

12.  10  When  they  were  past  the  first  and  the  se. 

13.  33  as  it  is  also  written  in  [the  second]  psalm 

1  Co.  15.  47  the  second  man  (is)  the  Lord  from  heaven 
a  Co.   1. 15  before,  that  ye  might  have  a  second  ben. 

13.  2  as  if  I  were  present,  the  second  time;  and 
Titus  3.  10  after  the  first  and  second  admonition  rej. 
Heb.  8.  7  no  place  have  been  sought  for  the  second 
9.  3  after  the  second  veil,  the  tabernacle  wh. 
9-  7  into  the  second  (went)  the  high  priest  al. 
9.  28  appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto 
10    9  the  first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second 

2  Pe.  3.    1  second  epistle,  beloved,  I  now  write  unto 
Rev.    2.  11  He.  .shall  not  be  hurt  of  tlte  second  death 

4.    7  second  beast  like  a  calf,  and  the  third  be. 

6.    3  when  he  had  opened  the  second  seal,  I 

6.    3  heard  the  second  beast  say,  Come  and  see 

8.    8  secondangelsounded.audasitwereagre. 

11. 14  The  second  woe  ispast ;  (and),  behold,  the 

1-5.    3  second  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the 

20.    6  on  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power 

20.  14  lake  of  fire.    This  is  the  second  death 

21.  8  and  brimstone  :  which  is  the  second  death 
21. 19  second,  sapphire ;  the  third,  a  chalcedony 

SECOND  after  the  first,  the  — 

Second-first,  SeurepSnpojTos  deuteroprotos. 

Luke  6.   1  ou  the  [second]  sabbath  [afterthe  first],th. 

SECOND  time,  (to  do)  the  — 

To  repeat,  do  it  a  second  time,  ?\y$  shanah. 

1  Sa.  26.    8  and  I  will  not  (smite)  him  the  second  time 

1  Ki.18.  34  And  he  said,  Do  (it)  the  second  time :  and 

18.  34  did  (it)  the  second  time.  And  he  said,  Do 

SECONDARILY  — 

Second,  SevTepos  deuleros. 

1  Co. 12. 28  secondarily  prophets,  thirdly  teachers,  af. 
SECRET  (chamber,  counsel,  part,  place,  thing,  in) — 
l.Gentle,  us^,  oxS  laat,  leat 

Job   15.  11  is  there  any  secret  thing  with  thee  ? 

2.  Secret  hiding  place,  nnp?  mistar. 

Psa,  10.    8  inthesecretplacesdoth  hemurderthe  in. 

17. 12  were  a  young  lion  lurking  in  secret  places 
64.   4  That  they  may  shoot  in  secret  at  the  per. 

Isa.  45.    3  hidden  riches  of  secret  places,  that  thou 

Jer.   13.  17  mysoul  shall  weepinsecretplacesfor(yo.) 

23.  24  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places  that 

49. 10  have  uncovered  his  secret  places,  and  he 

Lam.  3.  10  lying  in  wait,  (and  as)  a  lion  in  secret  pi. 

3. Parts  of  shame,  DT3*?  mebushim. 

Deut25.  11  her  hand,  and  taketh  him  by  the  secrets 
4, Secret,  counsel,  niD  sod. 

Gen.  49.  6  0  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  theirsecret 
Job  15.  8  Hast  thou  heard  the  secret  of  God?  and 
29.  4  when  the  secret  of  God  (was)  upon  my  ta. 
Psa.  25.  14  secret  of  the  Lord  (is)  with  them  that  fear 
64.  2  Hide  me  from  the  secret  counsel  ofthe  wi. 
Prov.  3.  32  but  his  secret  (is)  with  the  righteous 

11. 13  tale  bearer  revealeth  secrets :  but  he  that 
20. 19  tale  bearer  revealeth  secrets ;  therefore  m. 
25.   9  and  discover  not  a  secret  to  another 

Amos  3.   7  revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants  the 

5.  To  stop,  hid,  crip  satham. 

Eze.  28.    3  there  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide  from 

C».  To  be  hidden,  absent,  inp  sathar,  2. 

Deut29-  29  secret  (things  belong)  unto  the  Lord  our 
Psa.  19.  12  (his)  errors?  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret 

7.  To  be  hidden,  to  hide,  "irtD  sathar,  4. 

Prov  27.    5  Open  rebuke  (is)  better  than  secret  love 
S.To  hide,  nna  sethar,  3. 

Dan.   2.  22  He  revealeth  the  deep  and  secret  things 
§. Hiding  or  secret  place,  nriD  sether. 

Deut27.  15  putteth  (it)  in  (a)  secret  (place).    And  all 

Judg.  3.  19  I  have  a  secret  errand  unto  thee,  O  king 

1  Sa.  ig.   2  abide  in  a  secret  (place),  and  hide  thyself 

Psa.  18.  11  He  made  darkness  hissecretplace;  his  pa. 

27.    5  in  the  secret  of  his  tabernacle  shall  he  hi. 

31.  20  Thou  shalt  hide  them  in  the  secret  of  thy 

81.   7  answered  thee  in  the  secret  place  of  thun. 

91.    1  He  thatdwellethin  thesecret  place  of  the 

139. 15  when  I  was  made  in  secret,  (and)  curiou. 

Prov.  9.  17  sweet,  and  bread  (eaten)  in  secret  is  plea. 

21.  14  gift  in  secret  pacifteth  anger,  anda  reward 

Song  2.  14  in  the  secret  (places)  of  the  stairs,  let  me 

Isa.   45.  19  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret,  in  a  dark  pi 

48.  16  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret  from  the  beg. 

1  0.  To  be  hidden,  concealed,  D1?"  alam. 

Psa.  90.   8  secret  (sins)  in  the  light  of  thy  countcna. 

11. To  be  hidden,  D^JJ  alam,  2. 

Eccl.  12.  14  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  (it  be) 
\2.Wonderful,  'N??,  'Vs  peli,  pili. 

Judg  13.  18  Why  ask  est  thou,  .seeing  it  (is)  secret? 
13. To  hide,  lay  up,  conceal,  J5y  tsaphan. 

Job    20.  26  darkness  (shall  be)  hid  in  his  secret  pla. 
Eze.     7.  22  and  they  shall  pollute  my  secret  (place) 
\i.A  secret,  l"i  raz. 

Dan.    2.  18  desire  mercies,  .concerning  this  secret 

2. 19  Then  was  the  secret  revealed  into  Daniel 
2.  27  The  secret  which  the  kinghath  demanded 
2.  28  a  God  in  heaven  that  revealeth  secrets 
2.  29  he  that  revealeth  secrets  maketh  known 
2.  30  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me  for  (any) 
2.  47  a  Lord  of  kings,  and  a  revealer  of  secrets 


Dan.   2.  47  seeing  thou  couldest  reveal  this  secret 
4.   9  I  know  that,  .no  secret  troubleth  thee 

15.  Hinge,  opening,  simplicity,  nb  poth. 

Isa.     3.  17  the  Lord  will  discover  their  secret  parts 

16.  Hidden  thing,  secret,  <"IDS5.P1  taalummah. 

Job    11.    6  he  would  show  thee  the  secrets  of  wisdom 
Psa.  44.  21  for  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart 
17-  To  hide,  secrete,  f!?a  taman. 

Job   40. 13  Hide  them,  .(and)  biud  their  faces  in  se. 
IS. Concealed,  hidden,  secret,  KpuwrSs  kruptos. 
Matt.  6.    4  That  thine  alms  may  be  in  secret :  and 
6.    4  thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret  himself 
6.   6  which  is  in  secret,  .which  seeth  in  secret  | 
6.  18  but  unto  thy  Father  which  is  [in  secret] 

6.  18  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  [in  secret] 
Luke  8.  17  nothing  is  secret  that  shall  not  be  made 

11.  33  No  man..putteth  (it)  in  a  secret  place,  ne. 
John  7.    4  no  man  (that)  doeth  any  thing  in  secret 

7.  10  went.. not  openly,  but  as  it  were  in  secret 
18.  20  I  spake  openly,  .in  secret  have  I  said  no. 

Rom.  2.  16  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men 
1  Co.  14.  25  thus  are  the  secrets  of  hislieart  made  ma. 

19.  In  secret,  secretly,  Kpv<pr\  kruphe. 

Eph.    5.  12  things  which  are  done  of  them  in  secret 

20.  A  secret  chamber,  storehouse,  rapzTov  tameion. 
Matt  24.  26  (he  is)  in  the  secret  chambers ;  believe  (it) 

SECRET,  to  keep  or  be  kept  — 

1.7*0  (cause  to)  hide,  ino  sathar,  5. 

Job    14.  13  that  thou  wouldest  keep  me  in  secret, uu. 
2. Hidden  away,  anoKpvfpos  apokruphos. 

Mark  4.  22  neither  was  any  thing  kept  secret,  but 
3.  To  hide,  conceal,  Kpyirrco  kruptto. 

Matt  13.  35  things  which  have  been  kept  secret  from 
4.7*0  be  silent,  quiet,  a-iydai  sigao. 

Rom.  16.  25  which  was  kept  secret  since  the  world  be. 
SECRET  parts,  to  have  in  — 
To  be  hidden,  broken  forth^iSy  sathar,  2. 

1  Sa.    5.   9  and  they  had  emerods  in  their  secret  pa. 
SECRETLY  — 

1.  Silence,  Ehri  cheresh. 

Josh.  2.   1  son  of  Nun  sent,  .two  men  to  spy  secretly 

2.  Gentleness,  secret,  tap  lat. 

1  Sa.  18.  22  Commune  with  David  secretly,  and  say 
3. Secret  hiding  place,  inpp  mistar. 

Psa.  10.    9  He  lieth  in  wait  secretly  as  a  lion  in  his 
Hab.    3.  14  rejoicing  (was)  as  to  devour  the  poor  se. 

A.Secresy,  "inp  sether. 

Deut  13.    6  entice  thee  secretly,  saving,  Let  us  go  and 

27.  24  he'that  smiteth  his  neighbour  secretly.  A. 

28.  57  eat  them . .  secretly  in  the  siege  and  strait. 

2  Sa.  12. 12  For  thou  didst  (it)  secretly ;  but  I  will  do 
■lob    13.  10  reprove  you,  if  ye  do  secretly  accept  per. 

31.  27  my  heart  hath  been  secretly' enticed,  or 
Jer.  37.  1 7  king  asked  hi  m  secretly  in  his  house,  and 
38.  16  So  Zedekiah  the  king  sware  secretly  unto 
40. 15  spake  to  Gedaliah  in  Mizpah  secretly,  say. 

5.  To  hide,  conceal,  Kpvirrco  forupto. 

Johmg.  38  being  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly  for 

6.  Privately,  secretly,  xdOpa  lathra, 

Johnn.  2S  called  Mary  her  sister  secretly,  saying,  T. 
SECRETLY,  to  do,  practise,  be  brought  — 
1.7b  be  furtively  brought,  3J3  ganah,  4, 

Job     4.  12  Now  a  thing  was  secretly  brought  to  me 
2.7*0  be  hidden,  hid  self,  ton  chaba,  2. 

Gen.  31.  27  Wherefore  didst  thou  flee  away  secretly 

3.  To  do  covertly,  N?n  chapha,  3. 

2  Ki.  17.    9  did  secretly  (those)  things  that  (were)  not 
4.7*0  keep  or  remain  silent,  conceal,  c;nn  charash,5. 
1  Sa.  23.  9  knew  that  Saul  secretly  practised  misch. 
SECT  — 
Act  of  choosing,  party,  a'tpeais  hairesis. 

Acts    5.  17  which  is  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees,  and 
15.   s  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of  the  Pharis. 
24.   5  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes 
26.   5  after  the  most  straitest  sect  of  our  relig. 
28.  22  for  as  concerning  this  sect,  we  know  that 

SE-CUN'-DUS,  ^ckovvSos. 

A  believer  of  Thessalonica,  and  companion  of  Paul  on 

his  return  from  Greece  on  his  way  to  Syria. 

Acts  20.   4  of  the  Thcssalonians,  Aristarchus  and  S. 
SECURE,  securely,  (to  be)  — 

1.  Confidence,  trust,  noa  beiach, 

Judg.  8.  1 1  and  smote  the  host :  for  the  host  was  sec. 
Prov.  3.  29  seeing  he  dwelleth  securely  by  thee 
Mic.  2.    8  pass  by  securely  as  men  averse  from  war 

2.  Confidences,  confident  ones,  riyn&zbattuchoth. 
Job   12.    6  they  that  provoke  God'  are  secure ;  into 

3.7*0  lean  on,  trust,  be  confident,  nt?3  batach. 

Judg  18.    7  they  dweltcareless..quietaud  secure;  and 

18.  10  ye  shall  come  unto  a  people  secure,  and 

18.  27  unto  a  people  (that  were)atquiet  and  se. 

Job  11. 18  thou  shalt  be  secure,  because  there  is  ho. 

SECURE,  to  — 

To  make  without  anxiety,  -no Uu>  afxipifxvov poied  am. 
Matt23.  14  we  will  persuade  him,  and  secure  you 


SECURITY  — 

Sufficient,  ikclvos  hikanos. 

Acts  17.    9  when  they  had  takeu  security  of  Jason 
SEDITION  — 
1. Sedition,  innix  eshtaddur. 

Ezra    4.  15  that  they  have  moved  sedition  within  the 
4. 19  rebellion  and  sedition  have  been  made  th. 

2.  A  standing  ajyart,  SLxoaraaia  dichostasia. 

Gal.     5.  20  emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions,  her. 

3.  A  standing  up,  ardais  stasis. 

Luke23.  19  Who  for  a  certain  sedition  made  in  the  ci. 
23. 25  released  unto  them  him  that  for  sedition 

Acts  24.    5  mover  of  sedition  among  all  the  Jews  th. 
SEDUCE,  to  — 
1.7*0  cause  to  err  or  wander,  nyo  taah,  5. 

Eze.  13. 10  even  because  they  have  seduced  my  peo. 

2.  To  cause  to  err  or  wander,  nj;n  taah,  5. 

2  Ki.  21.  9  Manasseh  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil 
Provi2.  26  but  the  wayof  the  wicked  seduceththem 
Isa.   19. 13  they  have  also  seduced  Egypt,  (even  they 

3.  7*o  seduce  away,  lead  away  astray,  airoirXavdw. 
Marki3.  22  to  seduce,  if  (it  were)  possible,  even  the 

4.7*0  seduce,  lead  astray,  TrXavdw  p>lanao. 

1  Jo.    2.  26  written,  .concerning  them  that  seduce 
Rev.    2.  20  seduce  my  servants  to  commit  fornicati. 

SEDUCER,  seducing  — 

\.Groaner,  conjuror,  juggler,  y6ns  goes. 

2  Ti.    3.  13  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse 
2.  Wandering,  seducing,  irXav as  pianos. 

1  Ti.   4.    1  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doc. 
SEE  — 
l.Lo!  nan  hinneh. 

Gen.  19.  21  See,  I  have  accepted  thee  concerning  this 
[This  particle  occurs  very  frequently.] 

2.  See  1  rtVTi  reeh. 

Job  10. 15  confusion;  therefore  see  thou  mine  aftli. 
3. See,  behold,  fiSe  ide. 

Marki3.   1  see  what  manner  of  stones  and  what  bu. 
4. See,  behold,  lo  I  Ihov  idou. 

Lukei7-  23  say  to  you,  See  here !  or,  see  there  !  go 
Acts   8.  36  said,  See,  (here  is)  water ;  what  doth  hi. 
SEE  (to),  to  — 

1 .  7*o  see  (in  vision),  look,  p>rox"ide,  njn  chazah. 
Exod24-  11  also  they  saw  God,  and  did  eatand drink 
Num  24.    4,  16  saw  the  vision  of  the  Almighty,  falling 
Job     8. 17  wrapped  about  the  heap,  (aud)  seeth  the 
15.  17  and  that  (which)  I  have  seen  I  will  decl. 
19.  26  destroy,  .yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God 
19.  27  Whoni  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine 
24.   1  do  they  that  know  him  not  see  his  days  ? 
27. 12  all  ye  yourselves  have  seen  (it);  why  then 
34. 32  I  see  not,  teach  thou  me  ;  if  I  have  done 
36.  25  Every  man  may  see  it,  man  may  behold 
Psa.  "58.    8  pass  away,  .(that)  they  may  not  see  the 

58. 10  righteous  shall  rejoice  when  he  seeth  the 
63.   2  thy  power  and  thy  glory,  so(as)  I  have  se. 

Trov  22.  29  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business 

24.  32  Then  I  saw,  (aud)  considered  (it)  well ;  I 

29.  20  Seest  thou  a  man  (that  is)  hasty  in  his  w.? 

Song  6.  13  What  will  ye  see  in  the  Shulamite  ?  As  it 

Isa.      1.    1  which  he  saw  concerning  Judah  and  Jer. 

2.    1  son  of  Amoz  saw  concerning  Judah  and 

13.    1  which  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  did  see 

26. 11  they  will  not  see  :  (but)  they  shall  see,  and 
33.  17  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  king  in  his  beau. 
48.    6  Thou  hast  heard,  see  all  this ;  and  will 
57.    8  thou  lovedst  their  bed  where  thou  sawest 

Lam.  2.  14  Thy  prophets  have  seen  vain  and  foolish. 
2. 14  have  seen  for  thee  false  burdens,  and  ca. 
Eze.  12.  27  The  vision  that  he  seeth(is)for  nmny  da. 
13.    5  They  have  seen  vanity  and  lying  divinat. 
13.    7  Have  ye  not  seen  a  vain  vision,  and  have 
13.   8  ye  have  spoken  vanity,  and  seen  lies,  th. 
13.  23  Therefore  ye  shall  see  no  more  vanity,  nor 
21.  29  "Whiles  they  see  vanity  unto  thee,  whiles 
Amos  1.    1  which  he  saw  concerning  Israel  in  the 
Mic.    1.    1  which  he  saw  concerning  Samaria  and  J. 
Hab.   1.    1  which  Habakkuk  the  prophet  did  see 
Zech.10.    2  diviners  have  seen  a  lie,  and  havetold  fa. 
2.7*0  see  (in  vision),  nin,  sin  chaza,  chazah. 

Ezra  4. 14  not  meet  for  us'to  see  the  king's  dishon. 
Dan.  2.  8  because  ye  see  the  thing  is  gone  from  me 
2.  26  make  known. .the  dream  which  I  have  se. 
2.  31  Thou,  O  king,  sawest,  and,  behold,  a  gr. 
2.  34  Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out 
2.  41  whereas  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes 
2.  41,  43  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry 

2.  45  Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  that  the  stone 

3.  25  see  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the  midst 

3.  27  saw  these  men,  upon  whose  bodies  the  fire 

4.  5  saw  a  dream  which  made  me  afraid,  and 
4.  9  visions  of  my  di  earn  that  I  have  seen,  and 
4.  10  I  saw,  and  behold  a  tree  in  the  midst  of 
4.  13  I  saw  in  the  visions  of  my  head  upon  my 
4.  18  dream  I  king  Nebuchadnezzar  have  seen 
4.  20  tree  that  thou  sawest,  which  grew,  and 

4.  23  whereas  the  king  saw  a  watcher  and  an 

5.  5  king  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote 
5.  23  praised  the  gods,  .which  see  not,  nor  he. 
7.   2  saw  in  my  vision  by  night,  and,  behold 

7.  7  After  this  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and 
7.  13  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and,  behold,  (one) 


SEE 


849 


SEE 


3.  Vision,  sight,  appearance,  aspect,  ^nio  mar  eh. 
Josh. 22.  io  an  altar  by  Jordan,  a  great  altar  to  see 

4.  To  (cause  to)  behold  attentively,  e?J  nabat,  5. 

i  Sa.   2.  32  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  (in  my)  habitat. 

Psa.  92.  11  Mine  eye  also  shall  see  (my  desire)  on  mi. 

94.    9  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see? 

Isa.   64.    9  see,  we  beseech  thee,  we  (are)  all  thy  pe. 

5.  To  see,  behold,  look,  consider,  enjoy,  nxn  raah. 
Gen.    1.    4  God  saw  the  light,  that(it  was)  good :  and 

1.  10,  12,  18,  21,  25  and  God  saw  that  (it  was) 

1.  31  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  made 

2.  19  brought  (them)  unto  Adam  to  see  what 

3.  6  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  (was) 
6.    2  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men  th. 

6.  5  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  (w.) 

7.  1  for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me 

8.  8  to  see  if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off 

9.  22  saw  the  nakedness  of  his  father,  and  told 
9.  23  andtheysaw  nottheir  father's  nakedness 

11.  5  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the  tower 
12. 12  when  the  Eg3rptians  shall  see  thee,  that 

12.  15  princes  also  of  Pharaoh  saw  her,  and  co. 

13.  15  For  all  the  land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee 
16.    4,  5  when  she  saw  that  she  had  conceived 

18.  2  when  he  saw  (them),  he  ran  to  meet  them 
18. 21  will  go  down  now,  and  see  whether  they 

19.  1  and  Lot  seeing  (them)  rose  up  to  meet 
20. 10  What  sawest  thou,  that  thou  hast  done 

21.  9  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian 
zi.  16  Let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the  child.  And 
21. 19  she  saw  a  well  of  water ;  and  she  went 

22.  4  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  place  afar 
24.  30  when  he  saw  the  earring,  and  bracelets 
24.  63  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  behold 
24.  64  when  she  saw  Isaac,  she  lighted  off  the  ca. 
26.    8  looked  out  at  a  window,  and  saw,  and,  be. 

26.  28  We  saw  certainly  that  the  Lord  was  with 

27.  1  eyes  were  dim,  so  that  he  could  not  see 

27.  27  See,  the  smell  of  my  son  (is)  as  the  smell 

28.  6  When  Esau  saw  that  Isaac  had  blessed  Ja. 

28.  8  Esau  seeing  that  the  daughters  of  Canaan 
29. 10  when  Jacob  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of 

29.  31  when  the  Lord  saw  that  Leah  (was)  hated 

30.  1  when  Rachel  saw  that  she  bare  Jacob  no 

30.  9  When  Leah  saw  that  she  had  left  bearing 

31.  5  I  see  yourfather  s  countenance,  that  it  (is) 
31. 10  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a  dream 
31.  12  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes  and  see,  all  the  ra. 
31. 12  have  seen  all  that  Laban  doethunto  thee 

31. 42  God  hath  seen  mine  affliction  and  the  la. 

31.43  all  that  thou  seest  (is)  mine  :  and  what  can 

31.  50  see,  God  (is)  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee 

32.  2  when  Jacob  saw  them,  he  said,  This  (is) 
32.  20  afterward  I  will  see  his  face ;  peradvent. 

32.  25  saw  that  he  prevailed  not  against  him 
32. 30  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life  is  pre. 

33.  5  saw  the  women  and  the  children,  and  said 
33. 10  seen  thy  face,  as  though  I  had  seen  the  fa. 

34.  1  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land 
34.  2  saw  her,  he  took  her,  and  lay  with  her,  and 
37.  4  when  his  brethren  saw  that  their  father 
37. 14  see  whether  it  be  well  with  thy  brethren 
37.  18  when  they  saw  him  afar  off,  even  before 

37.  20  shall  see  what  will  become  of  his  dreams 

38.  2  saw  there  a  daughter  of  a  certain  Canaan. 

38. 14  for  she  saw  that  Shelah  was  grown,  and 

38. 15  When  Judah  saw  her,  he  thought  her  (to 

39.  3  his  master  saw  that  the  Lord  (was)  with 

39.  13  when  she  saw  that  he  had  left  his  garment 

39. 14  See,  he  hath  brought  in  an  Hebrew  unto 

40.  16  baker  saw  that  the  interpretation  was  go. 

41.  19  such  as  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  Eg. 
41.  22  saw,  in  my  dream,  and,  behold,  seven  ears 

41.  41  See,  I  have  set  thee  over  all  the  land  of  E. 

42.  1  when  Jacob  saw  that  there  was  corn  in  E. 
42.  7  Joseph  saw  his  brethren,  and  he  knew  th. 
42.  9,  12  to  see  the  nakedness  of  the  land  ye  are 
42.  21  in  that  we  saw  the  anguish  of  his  soul,  w. 

42.  35  saw  the  bundles  of  money,  they  were  afr. 

43.  3,  5  Ye  shall  not  see  my  face,  except  your  bi\ 

43. 16  when  Joseph  saw  Benjamin  with  them,  he 

43.  29  saw  his  brother  Benjamin,  his  mother's 

44.  23  come  down  with  you,  ye  shall  see  my  face 
44.  26  for  we  may  not  see  the  man's  face,  except 
44.  28  Surely  he  is  torn  in  pieces ;  and  I  saw  him 
44.  31  when  he  seeth  that  the  lad  (is)  not  (with 

44.  34  lest  peradventure  I  see  the  evil  that  shall 

45. 12  your  eyes  see,  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother 

45. 13  tell  my  father,  .of  all  that  ye  have  seen 
43.  27  whenhesawthewagouswhich  Josephhad 

45.  28  Israel  said.  .1  will  go  and  see  him  before 

46.  30  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face,  be. 
4S.  10  were  dim  for  age,  (so  that)  he  could  not 
48.  11  I  had  not  thought  to  see  thy  face ;  and,  lo 

48. 17  when  Joseph  saw  that  his  father  laid  his 

49. 15  saw  that  rest  (was)  good,  and  the  land  that 
50.  11  saw  the  mourning  in  the  floor  of  Atad, they 
50. 15  when  Joseph's  brethren  saw  that  their  fa. 
50.  23  Joseph  saw  Ephraim's  children  of  the  th. 

Exod.i.  16  see  (them)  upon  the  stools,  if  it  (be)  a  son 
?-  2  when  she  saw  him  that  he  (was  a)  goodly 
2.  5  when  she  saw  the  ark  among  the  flags,  she 
2.   6  when  she  had  opened  (it),  she  saw  the  ch. 

2.  12  when  he  saw  that  (there  was)  no  man,  he 

3.  3  will  now  turn  aside,  and  see  this  great 

3.  4  Lord  saw  thathe  turned  aside  to  see,  God 
3.  7  have  surely  seen  the  affliction  of  mypeo. 
3  9  have  also  seen  the  oppression  wherewith 
4. 14  when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in  his 
4. 18  Let  me  go.  .and  see  whether  they  be  yet 
107 


Exod.  4. 

5- 
6. 


Lev. 


Num.  4, 


24. 


Dent,  ] 


21  see  that  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before 
19  officers  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  see 

1  Now  shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do  to  Ph. 

1  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh 
15  when  Pharaoh  saw  that  there  was  respite 

34  when  Pharaoh  saw  that  the  rain  and  the 

5  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  earth 

6  have  seen,  since  the  day  that  they  were 
23  They  saw  not  one  another,  neither  rose  any 

28  see  my  face  no  more . .  seest  my  face  thou 

29  Thou  hast  spoken  well,  I  will  see  thy  face 
13  when  I  see  the  blood,  1  will  passoveryuu 
23  when  he  seeth  the  blood  upon  the  lintel 

17  the  people  repent  when  they  see  war,  and 
13  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,  which  he 

1 3  seen  today,  ye  shall  see  them  againno  more 

30  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea  sh. 

31  saw  that  great  work  which  the  Lord  did 

7  then  ye  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  LORD 
15  when  the  children  of  Israel  saw  (it),  they 

29  See,  for  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the 

32  that  they  may  see  the  bread  wherewith 

14  when  Moses'  father  in  law  saw  all  that 

4  Ye  have  seen  what  I  did  unto  the  Egypt. 

18  people  saw. .  when  the  people  saw  (it),  they 

22  Ye  have  seen  that  I  have  talked  with  you 

5  If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him  that  hateth  thee 
10  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel :  and  (there  was) 

2  See,  I  have  called  by  name  Bezaleel  the  son 
1  wheu  the  people  saw  that  Moses  delayed 
5  when  Aaron  saw  (it),  he  built  an  alter  be. 
9  have  seen  this  people,  and,  behold,  it  (is) 

19  saw  the  calf,  and  the  dancing:  and  Moses' 
25  when  Moses  saw  that  the  people  (were) 
10  all  the  people  saw  the  cloudy  pillar  stand 
t2  See,  thou  sayest  unto  me,  Bring  up  this 

20  not  see.  .for  there  shall  no  man  see  me 

23  thou  shall  see  my  back  parts ;  but  my  face 
jo  people,  .shall  see  the  work  of  the  Lord 

30  all  the  children  of  Israel  saw  Moses,  be. 

35  children  of  Israel  saw  the  face  of  Moses,  th. 
30  See,  the  Lord  hath  called  by  name  Beza. 

1  whether  he  hath  seen  or  known  (of  it) ;  if 

24  when  all  the  people  saw,  they  shouted:  and 

8  priest  see  that,  behold,  the  scab  spreadeth 

10  priest  shall  see  (him) :  and,  behold,  (if) 

15  priest  shall  see  the  raw  flesh,  and  pronou. 
17  priest  shall  see  him  :  and,  behold,  (if)  the 
20  when  the  priest  seeth  it,  behold,  it  (be)  in 

30  Then  the  priest  shall  see  the  plague :  and 

36  before  the  priest  go  (into  it)  to  see  the  pla. 
36  afterward  the  priest  shall  go  in  to  see  the 
17  see  her  nakedness,  and  she  see  his  naked 

20  they  shall  not  go  in  to  see  when  the  holy  th. 
15  and  let  me  not  see  my  wretchedness 

23  thou  shalt  see  now  whethermy  word  shall 
iS  see  the  land,  what  it  (is) ;  and  the  people 

28  moreover  we  saw  the  children  of  Anak  th. 

32  all  the  people  that  we  saw  in  it  (are)  men 

33  there  we  saw  the  giants,  the  sons  of  Anak 

22  Because  all  those  men  which  have  seen  my 

23  Surely  they  shall  not  see  the  land  which  I 
23  shall  any  of  them  that  provoked  me  see  it 

29  when  all  the  congregation  saw  that  Aaron 

2  Balakthe  son  of  Zippor  saw  all  that  Israel 
23.  25<  27  the  ass  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord 

31  he  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  in 
33  ass  saw  me,  and  turned  from  me  these 
41  he  might  see  the  utmost  (part)  of  the  peo. 

9  For  from  the  top  of  the  rocks  I  see  him 
13  see  them  :  thou  shalt  see  but  the  utmost 
13  shalt  not  see  them  all ;  and  curse  me  them 

2 1  neither  hath  he  seen  perverseness  in  Israel 

1  when  Balaam  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord 

2  saw  Israel  abiding  (in  Ids  tents)  according 
17  shall  see  him.  but  not  now;  I  shall  behold 

7  when  Phinehas.  .saw  (it),  he  rose  up  from 

12  see  the  land  which  I  have  given  unto  the 

1 3  when  thou  hast  seen  it,  thou  also  shalt  be 

1  when  they  saw  the  land  of  Jazer,  and  the 

8  sent  them  from  Kadesh-barnea,  to  see  the 

9  when  they . .  saw  the  land,  they  discourag. 

11  shall  see  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  A. 

23  with  any  stone . .  seeing  (him)  not,  and  cast 
19  which  ye  saw  by  the  way  of  the  mountain 

28  we  have  seen  the  sons  of  the  Anakims  the. 
31  seen  how  that  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee 

35  there  shall  not  one  of  these  men . .  see  that 

36  he  shall  see  it,  and  to  him  will  I  give  the 
21  Thine  eyes  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord  your 

25  let  me  go  over  and  see  the  good  land  that 

20  to  inherit  the  land  which  thou  shalt  see 

3  Your  eyes  have  seen  what  the  Lord  did 
9  forget  the  things  which  thine  eyes  have 

1 2  saw  no  similitude ;  only  (ye  heard)  a  voice 

15  for  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  on  the 
19  when  thou  seest  the  sun,  and  the  moon 
28  which  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  eat,  nor 

24  we  have  seen  this  day  that  God  doth  talk 
19  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes  sa. 

13  seen  this  people,  and,  behold,  it  (is)  a  stiff 

21  terrible  things  which  thine  eyes  have  seen 

2  which  have  not  seen  the  chastisement  of 
7  your  eyes  have  seen  all  the  great  acts  of  th. 

13  offerings  in  every  place  that  thou  seest 

16  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any  more 
1  seest  horses  and  chariots,  (and)  a  people 
7  not  shed,  .neither  have  our  eyes  seen  (it) 

11  seest  among  the  captives  a  beautiful  wo. 
1,  4  Thou  shalt  not  see. .  hide  thyself  from 

14  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  in  thee,  and 
jo  all  people  of  the  earth  shall  see  that  thou 


Deut28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 


Josh." 


23' 

24 

Judg.  1 


Ruth 
1  Sa. 


34,  67  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou  shalt  see 
68  Thou  shalt  see  it  no  more  again  :  and  th. 

2  Ye  have  all  that  the  Lord  did  before  your 

3  tempations  which  thine  eyes  have  seen,the 

4  notgiven  you.. eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  he. 

17  ye  have  seen  their  abominations,  and  th. 
22  when  they  see  the  plagues  of  that  land 
15  See,  I  have  set  before  thee  this  day  life 

19  when  the  Lord  saw  (it),he  abhorred  (them) 

20  I  will  see  what  their  end  (shall  be) :  for 
36  when  he  seeth  that  (their)  power  is  gone 
39  See  now  that  I,  (even)  I,  (am)  he,  and  (th. 
52  Yet  thou  shalt  see  the  land  before  (thee) 

9  said.  .1  have  not  seen  him  ;  neither  did 
3  When  ye  see  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 

2  See,  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  Jericho 

21  When  I  saw  among  the  spoils  a  goodly  B. 
1  see,  I  have  given  into  thy  hand  the  king 
8  shall  ye  do.    See,  I  have  commanded  you 

14  when  the  king  of  Ai  saw  (it),  that  they  h. 

20  they  saw,  and,  behold,  the  smoke  of  the 
2i  when  Joshua  and  all  Israel  saw  that  the 

3  ye  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord  your  God 
7  your  eyes  have  seen  what  I  have  done  in 

24  spies  saw  a  man  come  forth  out  of  the  ci. 

7  who  had  seen  all  the  great  works  of  the 
24  when  they  saw  that,  behold,  the  doors  of 

22  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord  face  to  fa. 
36  when  Gaal  saw  the  people,  he  said  to  Ze. 
36  Thou  seest  the  shadow  of  the  mountains 
48  W'hat  ye  have  seen  me  do,  make  haste 
55  when  the  men  of  Israel  saw  that  Abime. 

35  came  to  pass,  when  he  saw  her,  that  he 

3  when  I  saw  that  ye  delivered  (me)  not,  I 
22  shall  surely  die,  because  we  have  seen  G. 

1  saw  a  woman  in  Timnath  of  the  daught. 

2  I  have  seen  a  woman  in  Timnath  of  the 

8  turned  aside  to  see  the  carcase  of  the  lion 
11  came  to  pass,  when  they  saw  him,  that 

1  saw  there  an  harlot,  and  went  in  unto  h. 

5  see  wherein  his  great  strength  (lieth),  and 

18  when  Delilah  saw  that  he  had  told  her  all 
24  when  the  people  saw  him,  they  praised 

7  saw  the  people  that  (were)  therein,  how 

9  for  we  have  seen  the  land,  and,  behold 
26  Micah  saw  that  they  (were)  too  strong  for 

3  when  the  father  of  the  damsel  saw  him 

17  saw  a  wayfaring  man  in  the  street  of  the 
30  And  it  was  so,  that  all  that  saw  it  said 

36  children  of  Benjamin  saw  that  they  were 

41  they  saw  that  evil  was  come  upon  them 

21  see,  and,  behold,  if  the  daughters  of  Shi. 

18  When  she  sawthat  she  was  stedfastlymi. 
18  mother  in  law  saw  what  she  had  gleaned 

2  began  to  wax  dim,  (that)he  could  not  see 

15  his  eyes  were  dim,  that  he  could  not  see 
7  when  the  men  of  Ashdod  saw  that  (it  w.) 
9  see,  if  it  goeth  up  by  the  way,  of  his  own 

13  and  saw  the  ark,  and  rejoiced  to  see  (it) 

16  when  the  five  lords,  .had  seen  (it),  they 

17  when  Samuel  saw  Saul,  the  Lord  said  unto 

1 1  when  all  that  knew  him  before  time  saw 

14  To  seek  the  asses  :  and  when  we  saw  th. 
24  See  ye  him  whom  the  Lord  hath  chosen 

12  when  ye  saw  that  Nahash  the  king  of  the 

16  Now  therefore  standand  see  this  great  th. 

17  may  perceive  and  see  that  your  wickedn. 

6  When  the  men  of  Israel  saw  that  they  w. 
11  Because  I  saw  that  the  people  were  scat. 

17  Number  now,  and  see  who  has  gone  from 
29  see,  I  pray  you,  how  mine  eyes  have  been 
38  know  and  see  wherein  this  sin  hath  been 
52  when  Saul  saw  any  strong  man,  or  any  va. 
35  Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  Saul  until  the 

7  not  as  man  seeth ;  for  man  looketh  on  the 

18  I  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  the  Beth-lehe. 

24  when  they  saw  the  man,  fled  from  him 

25  Have  ye  seen  this  man  that  is  come  up? 
2S  art  come  down  that  thou  mightest  seethe 

42  when  the  Philistine,  .saw  David,  he  dis. 
51  when  the  Philistines  saw  their  champion 
55  when  Saul  saw  David  go  forth  against  the 

15  when  Saul  saw  that  he  behaved  himself 

28  Saul  saw  and  knew  that  the  Lord  (was) 

3  and  what  I  see,  that  I  will  tell  thee 

5  thou  sawest  (it),  and  didst  rejoice :  where 
15  sent  the  messengers  (again)  to  see  David 

20  they  saw  the  company  of  the  prophets  pr. 

29  let  me  get  away,  .and  see  my  brethren 

14  Lo,  ye  see  the  man  is  mad :  wherefore 

9  I  saw  the  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  Nob,  to 

15  David  saw  that  Saul  was  comeout  to  seek 

22  know  and  see  his  place  where  his  haunt 

22  who  hath  seen  him  there :  for  it  is  told 

23  See  therefore,  and  take  knowledge  of  all 

10  this  day  thine  eyes  have  seen  how  that  the 

11  see,  yea,  see  the  skirt  of  thy  robe  in  my 

11  know  thou  and  see  that  (there  is)  neither 

15  see,  and  plead  my  cause,  and  deliver  me 
23  when  Abigail  saw  David,  she  hasted,  and 
25  thine  handmaid  saw  not  the  young  men 
35  see,  I  have  hearkened  to  thy  voice,  and 

3  saw  that  Saul  came  after  hiai  into  the  wil. 

12  no  man  saw(it),nor  knew  (it),  neither  aw. 

16  now  see  where  the  king's  spear  (is),  and 

5  saw  the  host  of  the  Philistines,  he  was  af. 

12  when  the  woman  saw  Samuel,  she  cried 

13  what  sawest  thou.  .1  saw  gods  ascending 

21  saw  that  he  was  sore  troubled,  and  said 

5  when  his  armour  bearer  saw  that  Saul  was 
7  sawthat  the  men  of  Israel  fled,  and  that  S. 
7  when  he  had  looked  behind  him.  he  saw 


SEE 


850 


SEE 


2.  Sa.   3.  13  Thou  shalt  not  see  my  face,  except  thou 

3. 13  daughter,  when  thou  comes t  to  see  my  fa. 

6.  16  saw  king  David  leaping  and  dancing  be. 

7.  2  See  now,  I  dwell  in  auhouse  of  cedar,  hut 
10.   6  when  the  children  of  Ainmon  saw  thatth. 
10.    9  When  Joab  saw  that  the  front  of  the  ba. 
10.  14  when  the  children  of  Amnion  saw  that 
10. 15  when  the  Syrians  saw  that  they  were  am. 

10.  19  saw  that  they  were  smitten  before  Israel 

11.  2  from  the  roof  he  saw  a  woman  washing 

12.  19  when  David  saw  that  his  servants  whisp. 

13.  5  when  thy  father  cometh  to  see  thee,  say 
13.    5  that  I  may  see  (it),  and  eat  (it)atherhaud 

13.  6  when  the  king  was  come  to  see  him,  Am. 

14.  24  let  him  not  see  my  face.  So  Absalom  re. 
14.  24  to  his  own  house,  and  saw  not  the  king's 
14.  28  dwelt,  .in  Jerusalem,  and  saw  not  theki. 
14.  30  See,  Joab's  field  is  near  mine,  and  he  hath 

14.  32  now  therefore  let  me  see  the  king's  face 

15.  3  See,  thy  matters  (are)  good  and  right;  but 
15. 28  See,  1  will  tarry  in  the  plain  of  the  wild. 
17.  18  Nevertheless  a  lad  saw  them,  and  told  A. 

17.  23  when  Ahithophel  saw  that  his  counsel  was 
1 3. 10  certain  man  saw  (it),  and.  .said. .  I  saw  A. 

18.  11  thou  sa  west  (him),  and  why  didst  thou  not 
18.  21  Go  tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen.  A. 
18  26  watchman  saw  another  man  running :  and 

18.  29  saw  a  great  tumult,  but  I  knew  not  what 

20. 12  when  the  man  saw  that  all  the  people  st. 
20  12  when  he  saw  that  every  ouethat  came  by 
24.   3  that  the  eyes  of  my  lord  the  king  may  see 

24. 13  see  what  answer  I  shall  return  to  him  th. 
24. 17  when  he  saw  the  angel  that  smote  the  pe. 
24.  20  saw  the  king  and  his  servants  coming  on 

1  Ki.  3.  2S  for  they  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  (w.) 

9.  12  came  out  from  Tyre  to  seethe  cities  which 

10.  4  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  had  seen  all  So. 
to.   7  mine  eyes  had  seen  (it) ;  and,  behold,  the 

11.  2Ji  Solomon  seeing  theyoungman  thathewas 

12.  16  So  when  all  Israel  saw  that  the  king  hea. 

12.  16  now  see  to  thine  own  house,  David.     So 

13. 12  For  his  sons  had  seen  what  way  the  man 

13.  25  saw  the  carcase  cast  in  the  way,  and  the 

14.  4  Ahijah  could  not  see ;  for  his  eyes  were  set 

16.  18  when  Zimri  saw  that  the  city  was  taken 

17.  23  and  Elijah  said,  See,  thy  son  liveth 

18. 17  when  Ahab  saw  Elijah,  that  Aliab  said  un. 

18.  39  when  all  the  people  saw  (it),  they  fell  on 

19.  3  when  he  saw  (that),  he  arose,  and  went 

20.  7  see  how  this  (man)  seeketh  mischief :  for 

20. 13  Hast  thou  seen  all  this  great  multitude 

20.  22  see  what  thou  doest:  for  at  the  return  of 

21.  29  Seest  thou  how  Ahab  humbleth  himself 
22. 17  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  upon  the  hills 
22. 19  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  his  throne,  and 

22.  25  thou  shalt  see  in  that  day,  when  thou  sh 
22.  32  when  the  captains  of  the  chariots  saw  J. 

2  Ki.    2.  10  if  thou  see  me  (when  I  am)  taken  from 

2, 12'  Elisha  saw  (it). .  And  he  saw  himno  more 
2.  15  when  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  .saw  him 

2,  19  pleasant,  as  my  lord  seeth  ;  but  the  water 

3. 14  would  not  look  toward  thee,  nor  see  thee 

3.  17  not  see  wind,  neither  shall  ye  see  rain 
3.  22  saw  the  water  on  the  other  side  (as)  red 

3.  26  when  the  king  of  Rloab  saw  that  the  bat 

4.  25  when  the  man  of  God  saw  her  afar  off,  th. 

5.  7  see  how  he  seeketh  a  quarrel  against  me 

5.  21  when  Naaman  saw  (him)  running  after 
6. 17  opcnhiseyes,  that  he  may  secauohesaw 
6.20  Loud,  open  the  eyes,  .that  they  may  see 

6.  20  opened  their  eyes,  and  they  saw;  and,  be 
6.  21  when  he  saw  them,  My  father,  shall  I  s. 

6.  32  See  ye  how  this  son  of  a  murderer  hath 

7.  2  shalt  see  (it)  with  thine  eyes,  but  shalt 
7.13  answered  and  said.,  let  us  send  and  see 

7.  14  and  the  king  sent,  .saying,  Go  and  see 
7. 19  thou  shalt  see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  sh. 

8.  29  went  down  to  see  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab 

9.  16  king  of  Judah  was  come  down  to  see  Jo. 

9.  17  said,  I  see  a  company,     And  Joram  said 
q.  2^  when  Joram  saw  Jehu,  that  he  said,  (Is 
9.  26  Surely  I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of 
9.  27  when  Ahaziah  the  king  of  Judah  saw  (th.) 

10.  16  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  L. 

11.  1  when  Athaliah .  .saw  that  her  son  was  de. 

12.  10  when  they  saw  that  (there  was)  much  m. 

13.  4  for  he  saw  the  oppression  of  Israel,  bee. 

14.  26  saw  tlie  affliction  of  Israel,  (that  it  was) 
16. 10  saw  an  altar  that  (was)  at  Damascus:  and 
16. 12  saw  the  altar:  and  tucking  approached  to 

19.  16 open,  Lord,  thine  eyes,  and  see;  and  he. 

20.  5  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy 

20. 15  said.  What  have  they  seen  in  thiue  house? 

20.  15  All.  .that  (are)  iu  mine  house  have  they  se. 

22.  20  thiue  eyes  shall  not  see  all  the  evil  which 
23. 17  Then  he  said,  What  title(is)  that  that  I  sec 

23.  29  slew  him  at  Megiddo,  wheu  he  had  seen 
%  Ch.io.    5  when  his  armour  bearer  saw  that  Saul  was 

10.  7  men  of  Israel  that  (were)  in  the  valley  saw 

15.  2;  looking  out  at  a  window,  saw  king  David 
19.  6  the  children  of  Amnion  saw  that  they  had 
19.  10  Joab  saw  that  the  battle  was  set  against 
19.  15  the  children  of  Ammou  saw  that  the  Syr. 

19. 16  the  Syrians  Baw  that  they  were  put  to  the 
19. 19  the  servants  of  Hadar-ezer  saw  that  they 

21.  16  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stand  between 
21.  20  Oman  turned  back, and  saw  the  angel;  and 
21.  21  Oman  looked,  and  saw  David,  and  went 
21.  28  David  saw  that  the  Lord  had  answered 
29.  17  now  have  I  seen  with  joy  thy  people,  wh. 

a  Ch.  7.    3  the  children  of  Israel  saw  how  the  fire  ca. 
g.    3  the  queen  of  Sheba  had  seen  the  wisdom 


:Ch. 


24. 

29. 

30. 

3i- 

32. 

34- 

Ezra    3. 

Neli.   2. 

4- 

6, 

9- 

13- 

I3- 

Esth.  1. 

3 
3' 

5' 
5. 


Job 


20. 
20, 
21. 
22. 
22. 
22, 

23- 

28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 

31- 
3'- 
31- 
32- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
35- 
37- 
38. 
38 
42. 


Psa. 


6  until  I  came,  and  mine  eyes  had  seen  (it) 
16  (and)  now,  David,  see  to  thine  own  house 

7  the  Lord  saw  that  they  humbled  themse. 
9  they  saw  that  the  Lord  his  God  (was)with 

16  I  did  see  all  Israel  scattered  upon  the  mo. 
18  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  upon  his  throne 

24  thou  shalt  see  on  that  day  when  thou  sh. 
31  the  captains  of  the  chariots  saw  Jehosh. 

17  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  with  you 

6  went  down  to  see  Jehoram  the  son  of  A. 

10  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw  that  her  son 

1 1  when  they  saw  that  (tliGre  was)  much  mo. 

8  and  to  hissing,  as  ye  see  with  your  eyes 

7  gave  them  up  to  desolation,  as  ye  see 

8  and  the  princes  came  and  saw  the  heaps 
2  Hezekiah  saw  that  Sennacherib  was  come 

28  neither  shall  thine  eyes  see  all  the  evilth. 

12  ancient  men,  that  had  seenthe  first  house 

17  Ye  see  the  distress  that  we  (are)  in,  how 
11  They  shall  not  know,  neither  see,  till  we 
16  the  heathen  that  were  about  ussaw(these)' 

9  didst  see  the  affliction  of  our  fathers  iu  E. 

15  In  those  days  saw  I  in  Judah  (.some)  tr. 

23  In  those  days  also  saw  I  Jews  (that)  had 

14  which  saw  the  king's  face,  (and)  which  sat 

4  to  see  whether  Mordecai's  matters  would 

5  Ham  an  saw  that  Mordecai  bowed  not,  nor 

2  the  king  saw  Esther  the  queen  standing 
9  Hainan  saw  Mordecai  in  the  king's  gate 

13  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's 

7  he  saw  that  there  was  evil  determined  ag. 

6  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  evil  that 

6  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction 

26  (of  that)  which  they  had  seen  concerning 

13  for  they  saw  that  (his)  grief, was  very  great 

9  neither  let  it  see  the  dawning  of  the  day 

16  I  had  not  been ;  as  infants  (which)  never 

8  as  I  have  seen,  they  that  plough  iniquity 

3  I  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  root :  but 
2t  ye  see  (my)  casting  down,  and  are  afraid 

7  remember.,  mine  eye  shall  no  more  see  go. 

8  The  eye  of  him.,  shall  see  me  no  (more),  th. 

18  (it)shall  deny  him, (saying),  lhavenotseen 
[i  he  goeth  by  me,  and  I  see  (him)  not :  he 

25  they  flee  away,  they  see  no  good 

4  Hast  thou  eyes,  .seest  thou  as  man  seeth? 

15  (I  am)  full  of  confusion;  therefore  seeth 

18  given  up  the  ghost,  and  no  eye  had  seen 
11  he  seeth  wickedness  also;  will  he  not  th. 

1  mineeye hath  seen all(this)  miueearhath 

7  they  which  have  seen  him  shall  say,  Wh 

17  He  shall  not  see  the  rivers,  the  floods,  the 

20  His  eyes  shall  see  his  destruction,  and  he 
11  Or  darkness,  (that)  thou  canst  not  see;  and 

14  clouds  (are)  acovering  to  him  that  lie  se. 

19  The  righteous  see  (it),  and  are  glad ;  and 

9  he hideth himself,  .that  I  cannot  see  (him) 
to  and  his  eye  seeth  every  precious  thing 

24  (and)  seeth  under  the  whole  heaven 

27  Then  did  he  see  it,  and  declare  it ;  he 

8  The  young  men  saw  me,  and  hid  themse]. 
11  when  the  eye  saw  (me),  it  gave  witness  to 

4  Doth  not  he  see  my  ways,  and  count  all 
19  If  I  have  seen  any  perish  for  want  of  clot. 

21  If  I  ha>ve  lifted  up  mine  hand .  .when  I  saw 

5  Elihusaw  that  (there  was)  no  answer  in  the 

26  he  shall  see  his  face  with  joy:  for  he  will 

28  deliver  his  soul . .  and  his  life  shall  see  the 
21  eyes  (are)  upon  the  ways  of  man.  and  lie 

5  Look  unto  the  heavens,  and  see;  and  be 

21  (men)  see  not  the  bright  light  which  (is) 
17  hastthou  seen  the  doors  of  the  shadow  of 

22  or  hastthou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  hail 

5  I  have  heard  of  thee,  .mine  eye  seeth  thee 

1 6  saw  his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons,  (even)  fo. 
11  he  hideth  his  face:  he  will  never  see  (it) 
14  Thouhastseen(it) ;  fur  thou  beholdestmi. 

2  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  did  under. 

10  neither,  .suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  co. 

7  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn :  they 
13  unless  I  had  believed  to  see  the  goodness 

11  they  that  did  see  me  without  fled  from  me 

8  O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  (is)  good 

12  (and)  loveth  (many)  days,  thai;  he  may  see 

21  (and) said.  Aha,  aha  !  oureyehathseen(it) 

22  (This)  thou  hast  seen,  O  Lord  :  keep  not 

9  For  with  thee,  .in  thy  light  shall  we  see 

1 3  The  Lord  shall  laugh  at  him ;  for  he  seeth 

25  yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsa. 
34  the  wicked  are  cut  oil,  thou  shalt  see  (it) 
35 1  have  seen  the  wicked  in  great  power 

3  many  shall  see  (it),  and  fear,  and  shall  tr. 

6  if  he  come  to  see  (me,)  he  speaketh  van. 

5  They  saw  (it,  and)  so  they  marvelled;  they 

8  so  have  we  seen  in  the  city  of  the  Lord 

9  should  still  live  for  ever,  (and)  not  see 

10  he  seeth  (that)  wise  men  die,  likewise  the 
19  Ho  shall  go.  .they  shall  never  uee  light 
1 3  When  thou  sawest  a  thief,  then  thou  co. 

6  The  righteous  also  shalt  see,  and  fear,  and 

2  to  see  if  there  were  (any)  that  did  under. 

7  mine  eye  hath  seen  (his  desire)  upon  mine 
9  I  have  seen  violence  and  strife  in  the  city 
?.  To  see  thy  power  and  thy  glory,  so  (as)  I 
5  they  commune,  .they  any,  Who  shall  see 

8  So  they,  .all  that  see"  them  shall  flee  away 
5  Come  and  see  the  works  of  God :  (he  is) 

34  They  have  seen  thy  goings,  O  God ;  (even) 

23  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see 
32  The  humble  shall  see  (this,  and)  be  glad 

3  (when)  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 

9  We  see  not  our  signs ;  (there  is)  no  more 


Psa.  77.  16  The  waters  saw  thee,  0  God,  the  waters  e. 
86. 17  that  they  which  hate  me  may  see  (itj,  aud 

89.  48  What  man  (.  .that)  liveth,  and  shall  not 

90.  15  (and)  the  years  (wherein)  we  have  seenev. 

91.  8  with  thine  eyes  shalt  thou  behold  aud  see 

94.  7  The  Lord  shall  not  see,  neither  shall  the 

95.  9  tempted  me,  proved  me,  and  saw  my  wo. 
97.    4  enlightened  the  world  :  the  earth  saw,  and 

97.  6  The  heaveus  declare,  .the  people  see  his 

98.  3  the  ends  of  the  earth  have  seen  the  salv. 

106.  5  That  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen,  th. 

107.  24  These  see  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  lus 
107.  42  The  righteous  shall  see  (it,)  and  rejoice 
112.    8  until  he  see  (his  desire)upon  hisenemies 
112.  10  The  wicked  shall  see  (it,)  and  be  grieved 

114.  3  The  sea  saw  (it),  and  fled :  Jordan  was  dr. 

115.  5  speak  not;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see 

1 18.  7  therefore  shall  I  see  (my  desire)  upon  them 

119.  74  They,  .will  be  glad  when  they  see  me;  be. 
1 19.  96  I  have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection :  (but) 
128.  5  thou  shalt  see  the  good  of  Jerusalem  all 
128.  6  thou  shalt  see  thychildren's  children,  (and) 
135.  16  speak  not;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see 
139.  16  Thine  eyes  did  see  my  substance,  yet  be. 
139.  24  see  if  (there  be  any)  wicked  way  in  me,  and 

Prov  24.  18  Lest  the  Lord  see(it),  and  it  displease  him 

25.  7  of  the  prince  whom  thine  eyes  have  seen 

26.  12  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit? 
29.  16  but  the  righteous  shall  see  their  fall 

Eccl,  1.    8  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor 

1.  10  whereof  it  may  be  said,  See,  this  (is)  new 
1. 14  I  have  seen  aH  the  works  that  are  done 

2.  3  till  I  might  see  what  (was)  that  good  for 
2.  13  I  saw  that  wisdom  excelleth  folly,  as  far 
2.  24  This  also  I  saw,  that  it  (was)  from  the  ha. 

10  I  have  seen  the  travail  which  God  hath 
16  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of  judgm. 
18  that  they  might  see  that  they  themselves 
22  who  shall  bring  him  to  see  what  shall  be 

3  who  hath  not  seen  the  evil  work  that  is 

7  I  returned,  and  I  saw  vanity  under  the 

8  If  thou  seest  the  oppression  of  the  poor 
13  There  is  a  sore  evil  (which)  I  have  seen 

18  Behold  (that)  which  I  have  seen :  (it  is) 
1  There  is  an  evil  which  1  have  seen  under 

5  he  hath  not  seen  the  sun,  nor  known  (any 

6  yet  hath  he  seen  no  good  :  do  not  all  go 

11  the:-e  is)  profit  to  them  that  see  the  sun 

15  All  (things)  have  I  seen  in  the  days  of  my 

9  All  this  have  I  seen,  and  applied  my  he. 

10  I  saw  the  wicked  buried*,  who  had  come 

16  to  seethe  business  that  is  done  under  the 
16  (there  is  that)  neither  day  nor  night  seeth 

11  I  returned,  and  saw  under  the  sun,  that 
13  This  wisdom  have  I  seen  also  under  the 

5  There  is  an  evil  (which)  I  have  seen  under 

7  I  have  seen  servants  upon  horses,  and  pr. 
3  (I  said),  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  love.? 
9  The  daughters  saw  her,  and  blessed  her 

11  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  valley,  (and)  to  see 

12  let  us  see  if  the  vine  flourish,  (whether) 

19  (and)  hasten  his  work,  that  we  may  see 

1  I  saw  also  the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne 
5  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord 
9  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not 

10  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  wi. 

2  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen 
14.  16  They  that  see  thee  shall  narrowly  look  up. 
18.  3  see  ye,  when  heliftethupanensigu  on  the 
21.  3  Therefore.  .1  was  dismayed  at  the  seeing 
21.   6  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what  he  se. 

21.  7  he  saw  a  chariot  (with)  a  couple  of  horse. 

22.  9  Ye  have  seen  also  the  breaches  of  the  city 
2S.  4  he  that  looketh  upon  it  seeth,  while  it  is 
29.  15  they  say,  Who  seeth  us?  and  who  know. 
29.  18  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  obsc. 

29.  23  when  he  seeth  his  children,  the  work  of 

30.  10  Which  say  to  the  seers,  See  not ;  and  to 
30.  20  but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers 

32.  3  the  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  dim 

33.  ig  Thou  shalt  not  see  a  fierce  people,  a  peo. 
33.  20  thine  eyes  shall  seo  Jerusalem  a  quiet  ha. 
35.    2  they  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  (and) 

37.  17  open  thine  eyes,  O  Lord,  and  see;  and  he. 

38.  5  I  have  heard*  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy 

38.  11  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord,  (even)  the  Lord 

39.  4  Then  said  he,  What  have  they  seen  in  th. 

39.  4  All  that  (is)  in  mine  house  have  they  seen 

40.  5  all  flesh  shall  see  (it)  together  :  for  them. 

41.  5  The  isles  saw  (it),  and  feared ;  the  ends  of 

41.  20  That  they  may  see,  and  know,  and  consi. 

42.  18  Hear,  .and  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see 
44.  9  they  see  not,  nor  know ;  that  they  may  be 
44.  16  Aha,  I  am  warm,  I  have  seen  the  fire 
44.  18  hath  shut  their  eyes,  that  they  cannot  see 
47.  10  thou  hast  said,  None  seeth  me.  Thy  wis. 
49.  7  kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also  sh, 
52.  8  they  shall  see  eye  to  eye,  when  the  Lord 
52.  10  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvat. 

52.  15  (that)  which  had  not  been  told,  .they  see 

53.  2  when  we  shall  see  him,  (there  is)  no  bea. 
53.  10  he  shall  see  (his)  seed,  he  shall  prolong 
53.  11  Heslmllseeof  the  travail  of  hissoul,  (and) 

57.  18  I  have  seen  his  ways, and  will  heal  him;  I 

58.  3  Wherefore  have  we  fasted . .  and  thou  seest 

58.  7  when  thou  seest  the  naked,  that  thou  co. 
59. 15  the  Lord  saw  (it),  and  it  displeased  him 

59.  16  he  saw  that  (there  was)  no  man,  and  wo. 

60.  4  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see 

60.  5  Then  thou  shalt  see,  and  flow  together,  and 

61.  9  all  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge  them 

62.  2  the  Gentiles  shall  see  thy  righteousness 


Isa. 


Song  3- 
6. 

6. 
7 
5- 
6. 
6. 
6 
6- 
9- 


SEE 


851 


SEE 


Isa.   64.    4,  neither  hath  the  eye  seen,  O  God,  hesides 

66.    8  Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing?  who  hath 

66.  14  when  ye  see  (this),  your  heart  shall  rejoice 

66.  18  and  they  shall  come,  and  see  my  glory 

66. 19  not  heard  my  fame,  neither  have  seen  my 

Jer.     1.  10  See,  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  na. 

1.  11  Jeremiah,  what  seest  thou?  And  I  said,  I 

1.  12  Thou  hast  well  seen  :  for  I  will  hasten  my 

1.  13  saying,  What  seest  thou?  And  I  said,  I  see 

2.  10  pass  over  the  isles  of  Chittim,  and  see;  and 
2.  10  consider  diligently,  and  see  if  there  be  su. 
2.  19  see  that  (it  is)  an  evil  (thing)  and  bitter 
2.  23  See  thy  way  in  the  valley,  know  what  th. 

2.  31  0  generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 

3.  2  and  see  where- thou  hast  not  been  lien  with 
3.  6  Hast  thouseen  (that)  which  backsliding  Is. 
3.    7  And  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  saw  (it) 

3.  8  I  saw,  when  for  all  the  causes  whereby  ba. 

4.  21  How  long  shall  1  see  the  standard,  (and) 

5.  1  see  now,  and  know,  and  seek  in  the  broad 
5.  12  neither  shall  we  see  sword  nor  famine 

5.  21  whichhave  eyes,  and  seeuot ;  whichhave 

6.  16  Stand  ye  in  the  ways  and  see,  and  ask  for 

7. 11  Behold,  even  I  have  seen  it  saith  (it),  saith 

7.  12  see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  of 

7.  17  Seest  thou  not  what  they  do  in  the  cities 

31.  20  letmeseeihy  vengeance  on  them;  for  un. 
12.   3  thou  hast  seeu  me,  and  tried  mine  heart 

12.  4  they  said,  He  shall  not  see  our  last  end 

13.  27  I  have  seen  thine  adulteries,  and  thy  nei. 

14. 13  Ye  shall  not  see  the  sword,  neither  shall 
17.    6  shall  not  see  when  good  cometh ;  but  sh. 

17.  8  shall  not  see  when  heat  cometh,  but  her 
20. 12  seest  the  reins  and  the  heai't.  let  me  see 
20. 18  Wherefore  came  I  forth .  .to  see  labour  and 

22. 10  he  shall  return  no  more,  nor  see  his  native 

22. 12  he  shall  die.,  and  shallsee  this  land  no  mo. 
23.  13  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  prophets  of  Sam. 

23. 14  I  have  seen  also  in  the  prophets  of  Jerus. 

23.  24  in  secret  places  that  1  shall  not  see  him 

24.  3  Then  said  the  Lord  unto  me.  What  seest 
30;  6  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail  with  ch.V 
30.    6  wherefore  do  I  see  every  man  with  his  ha, 

32.  24  is  come  to  pass ;  aud,  behold  thou  seest 
39.   4  the  king  of  J  udah  saw  them,  and  all  the 

41. 13  the  people  which(were)  with  Ishmael saw 
42-  14  where  we  shall  see  no  war,  nor  hear  the 
42  18  a  reproach;  aud  ye  shall  see  this  place  no 
44.  2  Ye  have  seen  all  the  evil  that  I  have  bro 
44.  17  for  (then)  had  we  plenty,  .and  sawnoevil 

46.  5  Wherefore  have  I  seen  them  dismayed 
51.  61  and  shalt  see,  aud  shalt  read  all  these  w. 

Jjam.  1.  7  the  adversaries  saw  her,  (and)  did  mock 
1.  8  they  have  seen  her  nakedness  ;  yea,  she 
r.  10  she  hath  seen  (that)  the  heathen  entered 
1.  11  see,  O  Lord,  and  consider ;  for  I  have  bee. 

1. 12  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my 

2  16  day  that  we  looked  for.  .we  have  seen  (it) 
3.  i  I  (am)  the  man  (that)  hath  seen  affliction 
3.  59  thou  hast  seeu  my  wrong ;  judge  thou  my 

3  60  Thouhastseenalltheirvengeance(aud)all 
1.  1  the  heavens  were  opened,  and  I  saw  visi 
1.  27  I  saw  as  the  colour  of  amber  as  the  app 
1.  27  I  saw  as  it  were  the  appearance  of  fire 

1. 28  when  I  saw  (it)  I  fell  upou  my  face,  and 
3,  23  as  the  glory  which  I  saw  by  the  river  ot 

8.  4  according  to  the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the 
8.  6  Son  of  man.  seest  thou  what  they  do?  (e  ) 
8-  6  (and)  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations 
8. 10  I  went  in  and  saw;  and,  behold  every  fo, 
8.  12  hast  thou  seen  what  the  ancients  of  the 

8. 12  The  Lord  seeth  us  not  ;  the  Lord  hath  fo, 

8. 13  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations  that 
8.  15  Then  said  he  unto  me  Hast  thou  seen(th  ) 
8.  15  thou  shalt  see  greaterabominati^ns  than 

8.  17  Hast  thou  seen  (this).  O  son  of  man  ?  Isit 

9.  g  Lord  hath  forsaken . .  the  Lord  seeth  not 
10.  15,  20  This(is)  the  living  creature  that  I  saw 

10.  22  the  same  faces  which  I  saw  by  the  river 

11.  1  among  whom  I  saw  Jaazaniah  the  son  of 

11.  24  the  vision  that  I  had  seen  went  up  from 

12.  2  whichhave  eyes  to  see,  and  see  not;  they 

22.  6  thou  shalt  cover  thy  face,  that  thou  see 

12. 12  he  shall  cover  his  face,  that  he  see  not  the 

22. 13  yet  shallhenot  see  it,  though  he  shall  die 

13.  3  follow  their  own  spirit,  and  have  seen  no 

14.  22  aud  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  doings 
16.  6  and  saw  thee  polluted  in  thine  own  blood 
16.  37  that  they  may  see  all  thy  nakedness 

:6.  50  therefore  I  took  them  away  as  1  saw(go.) 

18.  14  that  seeth  all  his  father's  sins  which  he 

19.  5  when  she  saw  that  she  had  waited,  (and) 

20.  28  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick 
20.  48  all  flesh  shall  see  that  I  the  Lord  have 

23. 11  when  her  sister  Aholibah  saw  (this),  she 

23.  13 1  saw  that  she  was  defiled,  (that)  they  (t.) 
23.  14  she  saw  men  pourtrayed  upon  the  wall 

32.  31  Pharaoh  shall  see  them,  and  shall  be  co. 

33.  3  when  he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the 
33.    6  if  the  watchman  see  the  sword  come,  and 
39.  15  when(any)  seeth  a  man'sbone,  then  shall 

39.  21  the  heathen  shall  see  my  judgment  that 

40.  4  declare  all  that  thou  seest  to  the  house  of 
4iv  8  I  saw  also  the  height  of  the  house  round 
43.  3  the  appearance  of  the  vision  which  I  saw 
43.  3  the  vision  that  I  saw  when  I  came  to  de. 
43.    3  the  vision  that  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar 

47.  6  he  said  unto  me, Sou  of  man, hast  thou  seeu 
Dan.   1- 10  why  should  he  see  yourfaces  worse  liking 

1. 13  and  as  thou  seest,  deal  with  thy  servants 
8.  2  I  sawin  avision;  and  it  came  to  pass,  wh. 
8.   2  I  saw,  that  I  (was)  at  Shushan  (in)  the  pa. 


Dan.  8.  2  I  saw  in  a  vision,  and  I  was  by  the  river 
8.  3  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  beh. 
8.  4  I  sawthe  ram  pushing  westward,  andno. 
8.  6  which  I  had  seen  standing  before  the  ri, 
8.  7  I  saw  him  come  close  unto  the  ram,  and 
8.  15  I  Daniel,  had  seeu  the  vision,  and  sought 

8.  20  The  ram  which  thou  sawest  having  (two) 

9.  21  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  be. 
10.    7  And  I  Daniel  alone  saw  the  vision :  for 
10.    7  the  men  that  were  with  me  saw  not  the 
10.    8  I  was  left  alone,  and  saw  this  great  vision 

Hos.    5.  13  When  Ephraira  saw  his  sickness,  and  Ju. 

6.  10  I  have  seen  an  horrible  thing  in  the  house 
9.  10  I  saw  your  fathers  as  the  first  ripe  in  the 
9.  13  Ephraim,  as  I  saw  Tyrus,  (is)  planted  in 

Joel    2.  28  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see 
Amos  6.    2  Pass  ye  unto  Calneh,  and  see  ;  and  from 

7.  8  Amos,  what  seest  thou?  And  I  said,  A  pi. 

8.  2  Amos,  what  seest  thou?  And  I  said,  A 

9.  1  I  saw  the  Lord  standing  upon  the  altar 
Jon.    3.  10  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned  fr. 

4,    5  till  he  might  see  what  would  become  of 
Mic    6     9  aud  (the  man  of)  wisdom  shall  see  thy  na. 
7.  10  (she  that  is)  mine  enemy  shall  see  it,  and 

7.  16  The  uations  shall  see,  and  be  confounded 
Hab.  2.    1  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  unto 

3.    7  saw  thetentsof  Cushau  in  affliction:  (and) 

3.  10  The  mountains  saw  thee  (and>theytrem 
Zeph.  3.  15  in  the  midst  of  thee  :  thou  shalt  not  see 
Hag.   2.    3  Who  (is)  left  among  you  that  saw  this  ho. 

2.  3  how  do  ye  see  it  now?  (is  it)  not  iu  your 
Zech.  1.    8  I  saw  by  night,  and  behold  a  man  riding 

1.  18  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and 

2.  2  Tomeasure  Jerusalem,  to  see  what  (is)  the 

4.  2  said  unto  me.  What  seest  thou?  Andlsaid 

4.  io  and  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the  hand  of 

5.  2  What  seest  thou?  And  I  answered,  I  see  a 
5.  5  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  see  what  (is) 
9.  5  Ashkelon  shall  see  (it)  andfear;  Gaza  also 
9.    8  for  now  have  I  seeu  with  mine  eyes 

10.  7  yea,  their  children  shall  see  (it),  and  he 
Mai.    1.    5  your  eyes  shall  see,  and  ye  shall  say.  The 

6 .  Sjjeclator,  sight,  appearance,  '^H  roi. 

Gen.  16.  13  she  called  the  name.  .Thou  God  seest  me 

16.  13  Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him  thatse. 
Job     7.   8  The  eye  of  him  that  hath  seen  me  shall 

7. To  hehold,  look,  TW  shur. 

Job     7.    8  The  eye  of  him .  .shall  see  me  no  (more) 

17.  r5  where  (is)  now  my  hope?,  .who  shall  see 
24  15  No  eye  shall  see  me  and  disguiseth  (his) 
35  14  Although  thou  sayest  thou  shalt  not  see 

8.7b  see,  behold,  scorch,  r\yy  shazaph. 

J  oh  20  9  The  eye  also  (which)  sawhim  shalL.no  more 
28     7  and  whichthe  vulture's  eye  hath  not  seen 

9.  To  fear,  reverence,  be  afraid,  n~p  pare. 

Isa.  60  5  thou  shalt  see  and  flow  together  and  th. 
10^  seer,  mn  chozeh. 

Eze  13.  9  shall  be  upon  the  prophets  that  see  vanity 
13  16  and  which  see  visionsofpeaceforher,  and 

11.  To  look  up,  behold  again,  avaBKeirw  anablepo. 
Luke  7.  22  how  that  the  blindsee,  the  lame  walk,  the 

12.7*0  look  away,  look  at,  a-mlhou  or  a<t>opau>, 
Phil    2  23  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with 

Id.  To  see,  perceive,  understand,  $\(ttw  blepo. 
Matt.  6.    4  6.  18  and  thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret 

11.  4  those  things  which  ye  do  hear  and  see 

12.  22  the  blind  and  dumb  both  spake  and  saw 
13  13  theyseeing,  seeuot;  andhearing.theyhear 
13  14  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  shall  not  perceive 

13.  16  blessed  (are)  your  eyes,  for  they  see :  and 
13  17  (those  things)  which  ye  see.  and  have  not 

14.  30  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,  he  was 

15.  31  when  they  saw  thedumb  tospeak,  them. 
15.  31  the  lame  to  walk,  and  the  blind  to  see 
24.   2  Jesus  said  unto  them,  See  yenotall  these 

Mark  4. 12  That  seeing  they  may  see,  aud  not  perce. 
5.  31  Thou  seest  the  multitude  thronging  thee 
8  18  Having  eyes,  see  ye  not?  and  having  ears 

8  23  hands  upon  him,  he  asked  him  if  he  sawo. 
8. 24  he  looked  up.  and  said.  I  see  men  as  trees 

13.    2  Seestthou  these  great  buildings?  there  sh. 
Luke  7.  44  said  unto  Simon.  Seest  thou  this  woman 

8.  10  that  seeing  they  might  not  see,  and  hear. 
8. 16  that  they  which  enter  in  may  see  the  light 

10.  23  the  eyes  which  see  the  things  that  ye  see 

10.  24  those  things  which  ye  see,  and  have  not 

11.  33  that  they  which  comein  may  see  the  light 
21.  30  ye  see  and  know  of  your  own  selves  that 

John  1. 29  John  seeth  Jesus  coming  unto  him,  and 
5.  19  Son  can  do  nothing,  .hut  what  he  seeth 

9.  7  He  went  his  way . .  washed,  and  came  see. 
9. 15  Heputclayupon  mine  eyes,  and  L.dosee 
9. 19  was  born  blind?howthendothhenowsee 
9.  21  by  what  means  he  now  seeth,  we  know  not 
9.  25  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see 

9.  39  that  they  which  see  not  might  see,  and 
9,  39  that  they  which  see  might  be  made  blind 

9  41  butnow  ye  say, We  see;  therefore  your  sin 
11.   9  he  stumbleth  not.  because  he  seeth  the 
20.    1  seeth  the  stone  taken  away  from  the  sep 

20.  5  looking  in),  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying 

21.  9  [they  saw]  a  fire  of  coals  there,  and  fish 
21.  20  seeth  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  foil. 

Acts  2.  33  he  hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see 

8.  6  hearing  and  seeing  the  miracles  which  he 

9.  8  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  he  saw  no  man 


Acts  12.  9  aud  wist  not.  .hut thought  hesawavision 
13.  11  thou  shalt  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for 
28.  26  and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  not  perceive 

Kom.  7.  23  I  see  another  lawin  my  members,  warring 
8.  24  is  seen  is  not  hope :  for  what  a  man  seeth 

8.  25  if  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  (then)  du 

11.  8  eyes  that  they  6hould  not  see,  and  ears  th. 
11. 10  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  may  not  see 

1  Co.  1.  26  ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,  bow  that 

13. 12  now  we  see  through  aglass  darkly;  but  th. 
16.  10  see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear 

2  Co.   4.  18  we  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen 

4.  18  but  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen  ;  for 
4. 18  the  things  which  are  seen  (are)  temporal 
4.  18  the  things  which  are  not  seen  (are)  etei*. 

12.  6  think  of  me  above  that  which  he  seeth  me 
15  See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not 

9  we  see  Jesus,  Who  was  made  a  little  low. 

19  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in  becau. 

25  so  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  appr. 

1  faith  is.  .the  evidence  of  things  not  seen 

3  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of 

7  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not  seen  as 

25  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh 

22  Seest  thouhowfaith  wrought  with  his  wo. 

1 1  What  thou  seest,  write  in  a  book,  and  send 

1.  12 1  turned  to  see  the  voice  that  spake  with 

3.  iS  anoint  thine  eyes,  .that  thou  mayest  see 

6.    1  one  of  the  four  beasts  saying.  Come  and  [s.] 

6.    3  heard  the  second  beast  say,  Come  [and  see] 

6.    5  I  heard  the  third  beast  say,  Come  and  [s.] 

6.    7  heard.. the. fourth  beastsay,Comeand[sj 

9.  20  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk 
11.  g  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and 
16.  15  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his  shame 
18.  9  when  they  shall  see  the  smoke  of  her  bur 
22.  8  1  John  sawthese  things,  and  heard(them) 
22.    8  when  I  had  heard  and  [seen],  I  fell  down 


Eph. 
Heb. 


J  as. 
Eev. 


14.7*0  knew, 
Matt.  2.    2 


4. 18 

4  21 

5  1 
5  16 

8  14 

8.  18 
8.34 

9  2 
9    e 

9     9 

9.  11 
9  22 
9  23 
9-36 

11.  8 
11     9 

12.  2 

L2.  38 
13-  15 
13  I7 
14.  14 
14.  26 
l6-   28 

17  8 

18  31 

20.  3 

21.  15 
21.  39 
21.  20 
21.  32 

21.  38 

22.  11 

23  39 
24.  15 

=4-33 

25  37 

25  38 
25-39 

26  8 
26.  58 
26.  71 
27-  3 
27.24 
27.49 
27-54 
28.    6 

"i  17 


Mark  1. 10 
1. 16 

1.  ig 
2-    5 


2.  14 
2.  16 
6 


5- 

5-  14 
5.16 

5.  22 
5-32 
6-33 

6-  34 
6.38 
6.48 
6.49 

6.  50 


be  acquainted,  see,  elSov  cidon. 
we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and  are 
the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the  east,  went 
when  they  saw  the  star,  they  rejoiced  with 
when  he  saw  that  he  was  mocked  of  the 
And  when  he  saw  many  of  the  Pharisees 
he  saw  the  spirit  of  God  descending  like  a 
The  people  which  sat  in  daikness saw  great 
Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  saw 
he  saw  other  two  brethren,  James  (the  son) 
seeing  the  multitudes,  he  went  up  into  a 
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and 
he  saw  his  wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  of  a 
when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about  - 
when  they  saw  him,  they  besought  (Mni) 
J  esus,  seeing  their  faith ,  said  unto  the  sick 
when  the  multitudes  saw  (it),  they  marv. 
he  saw  a  man,  named  Matthew,  sitting  at 
when  the  Pharisees  saw  (it),  they  said  un. 
when  he  saw  her,  he  said.  Daughter,  be  of 
saw  the  minstrels  and  the  people  making 
when  he  saw  the  multitudes,  he  wasmov. 
what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  man  cloth, 
what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A  prophet 
when  the  Pharisees  saw  (it),  they  said  un. 
saying,  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from 
lest  at  any  time  they  should  see  with(their) 
desired  to  see.  .and  have  not  seen 
Jesus  went  forth,  and  saw  a  great  multi. 
when  the  disciples  saw  him  walking  on  the 
till  they  see  the  son  of  man  coming  in  his 
they  had  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they  saw  no 
when  his  fellow  servants  saw  what  was 
saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market  pi. 
when  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  saw  the 
whenhe  saw  a  fig  tree  in  the  way  he  came 
when  the  disciples  saw  (it,)they  marvelled 
ye,  when  ye  had  seen  (it),  repented  not  after 
when  the  husbandmen  saw  the  son,  they 
he  saw  there  a  man  which  had  not  on  a 
Ye  shall  not  see  me  henceforth,  till  ye  sha. 
When  ye  therefore  shall  see  the  abomin. 
likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall  see  all  these 
,  44  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered 
When  saw  we  thee  a  strauger.  and  took 
when  saw  we  thee  sick,  or  in  prison,  and 
when  his  disciples  saw  (it),  they  had  indi, 
and  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see  the  end 
another  (maid)  saw  him,  and  said  unto  th. 
when  he  saw  that  he  was  condemned,  re. 
When  Pilate  saw  that  he  could  prevail  no. 
let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save 
saw  the  earthquake,  and  those  things  th. 
Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 
when  they  saw  him,  they  worshipped  him 
he  saw  the  heavensopened,  and  the  spirit 
he  saw  Simon,  and  Andrew  Ins  brother  ca, 
he  saw  James  the  (son)  of  Zebedee,  and  J. 
When  Jesus  saw  their  faith,  he  said  unto 
saying,  We  never  saw  it  on  this  fashion 
he  saw  Levi  the  (son)of  Alpheus  sitting  at 
when  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  saw  him 
when  he  saw  Jesus  afar  off,  he  ran  and 
they  went  out  to  see  what  it  was  that  was 
they  that  saw  (it)  told  them  how  it  befell 
and  when  he  saw  him,  he  fell  at  his  feet 
he  looked  round  about  to  see  her  that  had 
the  people  saw  them  departing,  and  many 
Jesus,  when  he  came  out,  saw  much  peo. 
saith . .  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ?  go  and  s. 
he  saw  them  toilingin  rowing;  for  the  wind 
when  they  saw  him  walking  upon  the  sea 
For  they  all  saw  him,  and  were  troubled 


SEE 


852 


SEE 


13- 
*3- 
14. 
14. 
15- 
15- 
IS- 
16. 
Luke  1. 


Mark  7.  2  when  they  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eat 
9,  1  till  they  have  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  co. 
9.  8  they  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus  only 
9.  9  tell  noman  what  thingsthey  hadseen,  till 
9.  14  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  them,  and 
9.  20  when  he  saw  him,  straightway  the  spirit 
9*  25  When  Jesus  saw  that  the  people  came  ru. 
9.  3*  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  name 

ic.  14  when  Jesus  saw  (it),  he  was  much  displea. 

11. 13  seeing  a  flg  tree  afar  off  having  leaves,  he 

11.  20  they  saw  the  flg  tree  dried  up  from  the 
12. 15  bring  me  a  penny,  that  I  may  see  (it) 

12.  34.  when  Jesus  saw  that  he  answered  discre. 

14  But  when  ye  shall  see  the  abomination  of 
29  when  ye  shall  see  these  things  come  top. 
67  when  she  saw  Peter  warming  himself,  she 
69  a  maid  saw  him  again,  and  began  to  say 
32  Let  Christ . .  descend . .  that  we  may  see  and 
36  let  us  see  whether Elias  will  come  totake 
39  saw  that  he  so  cried  out,  and  gave  up  the 
"5  they  saw  a  young  man  sittingon  the  right 
12  when  Zacharias  saw  (him),  he  was  troub. 

29  [when  she  saw  (him,)]  she  was  troubled 

15  see  this  thing  which  is  come  to  pass,  wh. 
17  whenthey  hadseen  (it),  they  made  known 
20  the  things  that  they  had  heard  and  seen 
26  should  not  see  death,  before  he  had  seen 

30  For  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation 

48  when  they  saw  him,  they  were  amazed 

2  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the  lake :  but 

8  When  Simon  Peter  saw  (it),  he  fell  down 

12  who,  seeing  Jesus,  fell  on  (his)  face,  and 
20  when  hesawtheirfaith,  he  said  unto  him 
26  saying,  We  have  seen  strange  things  to. 

13  when  the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had  compass. 
22  tell  John  what  things  ye  have  seen  and 

25  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  A  man  clo. 

26  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  A  prophet? 
39  the  Pharisee  which  had  bidden  him  saw 
20  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to  s. 
28  When  he  saw  Jesus,  he  cried  out,  and  fell 

34  "When  they  that  fed  (them)  saw  what  was 

35  Then  they  went  out  to  see  what  was  done 

36  They  also  which  saw  (it)  told  them  by  wh. 
47  when  the  woman  saw  that  she/was  nothid 

9  but  who  is  this.  .And  he  desired  to  see 

27  which  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they  see 

32  when  they  were  awake,  they  saw  his  gl. 

49  we  sawone  casting  out  devils  in  thyname 
54  when  his  disciples  James  and  John  saw 
24  desired  to  see.  .and  have  not  seen  them 

31  when  he  saw  him,  he  passed  by  on  the 

33  when  he  saw  him,  he  had  compassion  (on 
38  when  the  Pharisee  saw  (it),  he  marvelled 
54  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  west 

12  whenJesussawher,  he  called  (her  tohim) 
35  Ye  shall  not  see  me,  until  (the  time)  come 

1 3  I  must  needs  go  and  see  it :  I  pray  thee 
20  his  father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion 

14  when  he  saw  (them),  he  said  unto  them 

15  one  of  them,  when  he  saw  that  he  was 
22  when  ye  shall  desire  to  see  one  the  days 
15  when  (Ms)  disciples  saw  (it),  they  rebuked 
24  when  Jesus  sawthat  he  was  very  sorrow. 
43  the  people,  when  they  saw  (it),  gave  pra. 

3  he  sought  to  see  Jesus  who  he  was ;  and 

4  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore  tree  to  see 

5  he  looked  up,  and  saw  him,  and  said  unto 
7  when  they  saw  (it),  they  all  murmured,  s. 

37  all  the  mighty  works  that  they  had  seen 
113  they  will  reverence  (him)  [when  they  see] 

20.  14  when  the  husbandmen  saw  him,  they  re. 

21.  1  he  looked  up,  and  saw  the  rich  men  cast. 
21.  2  he  saw  also  a  certain  poor  widow  casting 
21.  20  when  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed 

21.  31  likewise  ye,  when  ye  see  these  things  co. 

22.  49  When  they  which  were  about  him  saw  w. 

22.  58  another  saw  him,  and  said,  Thou  artalso 

23.  8  when  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding 
23.    8  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  long  (se.) 

23.  8  he  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done 
23. 47  when  the  centurion  saw  what  was  done 

24.  24  found  (it)  even  so.  .but  him  they  saw  not 
24.  39  handle  me  and  see  ;  for  a  spirit  hath  not 

John  1.  33  Upon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the  spirit  de. 
1.  39  Come  and  [see].  They  came  and  saw  where 
1.  46  Philip  Baith  unto  him,  Come  and  see 
1.  47  Jesus  saw  Nathaneel  coming  to  him,  and 
1.  48  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree,  I  saw 
1.  50  Because  I  said  unto  thee,  I  saw  thee  under 

3.  3  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 

4.  29  see  a  man  which  told  me  all  things  that 

4.  48  Except  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,  ye  will 

5.  6  When  Jesus  saw  him  lie,  and  knew  that 

6.  14  when  they  had  seen  the  miracle  that  Je. 
6.  22  saw  that  there  was  none  other  boat  there 
6.  24  When  the  people  therefore  saw  that  Je. 
6.  26  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  mir. 
6.  30  What  sign  showest  thou,  .that  we  mays. 

8.  56  rejoiced  to  see  my  day ;  and  he  saw  (it) 

9.  1  he  saw  a  man  which  was  blind  from  (his) 
7 1.  31  when  they  saw  Mary,  that  she  rose  up  h. 
1 1.  32  saw  him,  she  fell  down  at  his  feet,  say. 
11.  33  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  her  weeping 

11.  34  They  said  unto  him,  Lord,  come  and  see 

12.  9  but  that  they  might  see  Lazarus  also,  wh. 
12.  2i  desired,  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see  J. 
12.  40  that  they  should  not  see  with  (their)  eyes 
12.  41  These  things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his 

18.  26  Bid  not  I  see  thee  in  the  garden  with  him 

19.  6  the  chief  priests  therefore  and  officers  saw 
19.  26  When  Jesus  therefore  sawhis  mother,  and 


John  19. 


Acts 


28. 

Rom.  1. 

1  Co.  2, 

8. 

16. 
Gal.     1. 


Th. 


1  Ti. 
3Ti. 

Heb. 


Jas.     5 
1  Pe.    1 

1  Jo.   5. 
3  John 
Rev.    1, 


33  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  that 

8  came  first  to  the  sepulchre,  and  he  Baw 

20  Then  were  the  disciples,  .when  they  saw 
25  Except  I  shall  see  in  his  hands  the  print 

29  blessed  fare)  they  that  have  not  seen,  and 

21  Peter  seeing  him  saith  to  Jesus,  Lord,  and 
27  neither. .  suffer  thiue  Holy  One  to  see  cor. 
31  neither  his  flesh  did  see  corruption 

3  Who  seeing  Peter  and  John  about  to  go 

9  the  people  saw  him  walking  and  praising 
12  when  Peter  saw(it),  he  answered  unto  the 

20  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard 

15  saw  his  face  as-it  had  been  the  face  of  an 
24  seeing  one  (of  them)  suffer  wrong,  he  de. 

31  When  Mose3  saw  (it),  he  wondered  at  the 

34  I  have  seen,  I  have  seen  the  affliction  of 
55  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing 

39  the  eunuch  saw  him  no  more :  and  he  we. 

12  hath  seen  in  a  vision  a  man  named  Ana. 
27  declared  unto  them  how  he  had  seen  the 

35  all  that  dweltin  Lydda  and  Saron  saw  him 

40  she  opened  her  eyes :  and  when  she  saw 
3  He  saw  in  a  vision  evidently,  about  the 

17  what  this  vision  which  he  hadseen  should 

5  in  a  trance  I  saw  a  vision,  A  certain  ves. 

6  I  considered,  and  saw  four  footed  beasts 

13  he  Bhowed  us  how  he  had  Been  an  angel 
23  when  he  came,  and  had  seen  the  grace  of 

3  And  because  he  saw  it  pleased  the  Jews 

16  when  they  had  opened  (the  door),  and  saw 

12  the  deputy,  when  he  saw  what  was  done 

35  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see 

36  was  laid  unto  his  fathers,  and  saw  corru. 

37  he,  whom  God  raised  again,  saw  no  cor. 
45  when  the  Jews  saw  the  multitudes,  they 

I I  when  the  people  saw  what  Paul  had  doue 
10  after  he  had  seen  the  vision,  immediately 

19  when  her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of 
27  awaking  out  of  his  sleep,  and  seeing  the 
40  when  they  had  seen  the  brethren,  they 

21  After  I  have  been  there,  I  must  also  see 

32  when  they  saw  the  chief  captain  and  the 

14  shouldest  know  his  will,  and  see  that  just 

18  saw  him  saying  unto  me,  Make  haste,  and 

13  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light  from  heaven 

16  of  these  things  which  thou  hast  seen,  and 

4  when  the  barbarians  saw  the  (venomous) 

15  whom  when  Paul  saw,  he  thanked  God 

20  have  I  called  for  you,  to  see  (you),  aud  to 
27  lest  they  should  see  with  (their)  eyes,  and 

III  long  to  see  you,  that  I  may  impart  unto 
9  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 

10  if  any  man  see  thee  which  hast  knowledge 

7  For  I  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  way 

19  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none,  save  Ja. 

7  contrariwise,  when  they  saw  that  the  go. 

14  when  I  saw  that  they  walked  not  upright. 

11  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written 

27  that  whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else 

30  Having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw  in 

28  that,  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may  rej. 
9  Those  things,  which  ye  have . .  seen  in  me 

17  endeavoured  the  more  abundantly  to  see 
6  desiring  greatly  to  see  us,  as  we  also  (to) 

10  praying  exceedingly  that  we  may  see  your 

16  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see :  to 

4  Greatly  desiring  to  see  thee,  being  mind. 
9  proved  me,  and  saw  my  works  forty  years 

5  was  translated  that  he  should  not  see  de. 

13  but  having  seen  them  afar  off,  and  were 
23  they  saw  (he  was)  a  proper  child ;  and  they 
it  have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord;  that  the 

8  Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love  ;  in  wh. 
10  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days 

16  If  any  man  see  his  brother  sin  a  sin  (wh. 

14  I  trust  I  shall  shortly  see  thee,  and  we  sh. 
2  bare  record,  .of  all  things  that  he  saw 

12  being  turned  I  saw  seven  golden  candles. 

17  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead 

19  Write  the  things  which  thou  hast  seen, and 

20  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  thou  saw. 
20  the  seven  candlesticks  [which  thou  sawe.] 

4  [I  saw]  four  and  twenty  elders  sitting,  cl. 

1  I  saw  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on 

2  I  saw  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  a 

1  I  saw,  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the 

2  [I  saw,]  and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and 

0  I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them 

1  Isaw  four  angels  standing  on  the  fourco. 

2  I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the 
2  I  saw  the  seven  angels  which  stood  before 
1  I  saw  a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto  the  ea. 

17  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  vision,  and  them 
1  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  come  down 

5  the  angel  which  I  saw  stand  upon  the  sea 

13  when  the  dragon  sawthat  he  was  castun. 

1  saw  a  beast  rise  up  out  of  the  sea,  having 

2  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like  unto  a  le. 

3  [I  saw]  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were  woun. 

6  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of 

1  I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and 

2  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled 
13  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs  (c.) 

3  I  saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a  scarlet  colour. 
6  I  saw  the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood 
6  when  I  saw  her,  I  wondered  with  great 

8  The  beast  that  thou  sawest  was,  and  is 
12  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  are  ten 

15  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,  where  the 

16  the  tenhorns  which  thou  sawest  upon  the 

18  the  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  that  gr. 
1  I  saw  another  angel  come  down  from  lie. 


Rev.  18.  7  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow 
19.  11  I  saw  heaven  opened,  aud  behold  a  white 
19.  17  I  saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  sun  ;  and 

19.  19  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  ea. 

20.  1  I  saw  an  angel  come  down  from  heaven 
20.    4  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them 

20.  11  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that 
20. 12  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  b. 
si.    1  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth :  for 

21.  2  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem 

21.  22  1  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  G 
15.  Tb  look  on,  ifi^Kcwai  emblepo. 

Mark  8.  25  he  was  restored,  and  saw  every  man  clc 
Acts  22.  11  when  I  could  not  see  for  the  glory  of  that 

\Q. To  find  {by  search),  evpicrKw  hcurisko. 

Matt.  2.  11  [they  saw]  the  young  child  with  Mary  hi* 
17. To  view,  behold  attentively,  dedofiat  theaomai. 

Matt  1 1.    7  Whatwent  ye.  .into  the  wilderness  to  seel 

22.  11  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests 
Mark  1 6.  14  [they  believed  not  them  which  had  seen] 
Luke  5.  27  he  went  forth,  and  [saw]  a  publican,  na. 

7.  24  What  went  ye.  .into  the  wilderness,  .tos. 
John  1.  32  I  saw  the  spirit  descending  from  heaven 

1.  38  Jesus  turned,  and  saw  them  following,  ami 
6.    5  Jesus  then  lifted  up  (his)  eyes,  and  saw  a 

8.  10  [When  Jesus  had  lifted  up  himself,  and  s.] 

11.  45  and  had  seen  the  things  which  Jesus  did 
Acts    1. 11  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him 

8.  18  when  Simon  [saw]  that  through  laying  on 

21.  27  the  Jews.,  when  they  saw  him  in  the  tern. 

22.  9  they  that  were  with  me  saw  indeed  the 
Rom  15.  24  I  trust  to  see  you  in  my  journey,  and  to 
1  Jo.  4.  12  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  Ifwe 

4.  14  we  have  seen  and  do  testify  that  the  Fat. 

18.  To  view,  see,  Oewpew  theoreo. 

Matt  28.    1  and  the  other  Mary  to  see  the  sepulchre 
Mark  3.  11  unclean  spirits,  when  they  saw  him,  fell 

5.  15  see  him  that  was  possessed  with  the  devil 

5.  38  seeth  the  tumult,  and  them  that  wept  and 
16.   4  they  saw  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away 

Luke24.  37  and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit 

24.  39  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh,  .as  ye  see  me  have 
John  2.  23  when  they  saw  the  miracles  which  he  did 

6.  19  they  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and 
6.  40  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and 

6.  62  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  ascend  up 

7.  3  that  thy  disciples  also  may  see  the  works 

8.  51  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never 

9.  8  they  which  before  had  seen  him  that  he 
10.  12  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  and  leaveth  the  sh. 

12.  45  he  that  seeth  me  seeth  him  that  sent  me 
14. 17  because  it  seeth  him  not,  neither  know. 
14. 19  the  world  seeth  me  no  more  ;  but  ye  see 
16.  10  because  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me 

16.  16,  17,  19  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see 
20.  6  went  into  the  sepulchre,  aud  seeth  theli. 
20. 12  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting,  the  one 
20.  14  she  turned  herself  back,  and  saw  Jesus 

Acts  3.  16  hath  made  this  man  strong,  whom  ye  see 
4.  13  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and 

7.  56  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of 
g.    7  speechless,  hearing  a  voice,  but  seeing  no 

10.  11  saw  heaven  opened,  and  a  certain  vessel 

17.  16  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  to  ido. 

19.  26  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  Ephes. 

20.  38  that  they  should  see  his  face  no  more 
2i.  20  Thou  seest  brother,  how  many  thousands 

25.  24  ye  see  this  man,  about  whom  all  the 
28.    6  they  had  looked  a  great  while,  and  saw 

1  Jo.  3.  17  whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and  seeth 
Rev.  1 1.  11  great  fear  fell  upon  them  which  saw  thorn 

19.  To  know,  iaropdco  historeo. 

Gal.    1.  18  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter,  and 

20.  To  see,  discern,  take  heed,  6paa>  horao. 

Matt.  5.    8  Blessed  (are)  the  pure,  .for  they  shall  see 

8.  4  See  thou  tell  no  man;  but  go  thy  way,  sh. 

9.  30  charged  them,  saying,  See  (that)  no  man 
24.  6  see  that  ye  be  not  troubled  :  for  all  (these 
24.  30  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in 

26.  64  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sit. 

27.  4  they  said,  What  (is  that)  to  us?  see  thou 

27.  24  saying,  I  am  innocent,  .see  ye  (to  it) 

28.  7  there  shall  ye  see  him:  lo,  I  have  told  you 
28.  10  go  into  Galilee,  and  there  shall  they  see 

Mark  1.  44  See  thou  say  nothing  to  any  man:  but  go 

13.  26  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming 

14.  62  ye  shall  see  the  Sou  of  man  sitting  on  the 
16.    7  there  shall  ye  see  him,  as  he  said  unto  y. 

Luke  1.  22  they  perceived  that  he  had  seen  a  vision 
3.  6  And  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  G. 
9.  36  any  of  those  things  which  they  had  seen 
13.  28  when  ye  shall  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac 

16.  23  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in 

17.  22  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  ye  shall  not  see 
3i.  27  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  man  com. 
24.  23  they  had  also  seen  a  vision  of  angels,  wh. 

John  1.  18  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  anytime;  the 
1.  34  I  saw,  and  bare  record  that  this  is  the 
1.  50  thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  these 
1.  51  ye  shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels 
3.  1 1  We . .  testify  that  we  have  seen  :  and  ye  r. 
}.  32  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard,  that  he  tes. 

3.  36  he  thatbelieveth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see 

4.  45  having  seen  all  the  things  that  he  did  at 

5.  37  neither  heard  his  voice,  .nor  seen  his  sh. 

6.  2  [they  saw]  his  miracles  which  he  did  on 
6.  36  That  ye  also  have  seen  me,  and  believe 
6.  46  Not  that  any  man  hath  seen  the  Father 
6.  46  he  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the  Fa. 


3- 
3- 

4- 

4- 

3  John 
Ilev. 


SEE 

John  a.  38  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  my 
S.  38  ye  do  that  which  [ye  have  seen]  with  yo. 

8.  57  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty,  .and  hast  thou  se. 

9.  37  Thou  hast  both  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  th. 
11.  40  thou  shouldest  see  the  glory  of  God 
14.    7  henceforth  ye  know  him,  and  have  seen 

14.  g  he  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Fat. 

15.  24  now  have  they  both  seen  and  hated  both 

16.  id,  17  again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see 
16.  19  and  again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see 
16.  22  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall 

19.  35  he  that  saw  (it)  bare  record,  and  his  rec. 
20. 18  told  the  disciples  that  she  had  seen  the 

20.  25  said  unto  him,  We  have  seen  the  Lord 
20.  29  because  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou  hast  be. 

Acts   2.  17  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  yo. 

7.  44  according  to  the  fashion  that  he  had  se. 
13.  31  he  was  seen  many  days  of  them  which  ca. 
20.  25  I  know  that  ye . .  shall  see  my  face  no  mo. 
22.  15  unto  all  men  of  what  thou  hast  seen  and 

Rom  15.  21  whom  he  was  notspokeu  of,  they  shall  s. 
1  Co    9.    1  have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord? 

15.    5  he  was  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve 

15.    6  he  was  seen  of  above  five  hundred  breth. 

15.   7  he  was  seen  of  James  ;  then  of  all  the  ap. 

15.  8  he  was  seen  of  me  also,  as  of  one  born  out 
Col.     2.    1  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the 

2.  18  into  those  things  which  he  hath  not  seen 
1  Th.  5.  15  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto 
1  Ti.   3. 16  justified  in  the  spirit,  seen  of  angels,  pre. 
Ileb.  2.   8  But  now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  un 

8.  5  See,  saith  he,  (that)  thou  make  all  things 

11.  27  he  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisi. 

12.  14  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord 
13-  23  with  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I  will  set* 

Jas.  2.  24  Ye  see  then  how  that  by  works  a  man  is 
1  Pe.   1.    8  thoughnowyesee(him)not,  yet  believing 

1  Jo.  1.  1  which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes,  which 
1  2  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  se. 
1.    3  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  dec. 

>  we  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  h. 

6  whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  him,  n. 
.  20  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen 
.  20  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen? 

11  but  he  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God 

7  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  (also)w. 

11.  19  there  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of 

18.  18  cried  [when  they  sawj  the  smoke  of  her 

19.  10  See  (thou  do  it)  not :  I  am  thy  fellow  se. 
22.  4  they  shall  see  his  face ;  and  his  name  (sh. 
22.   9  See  (thou  do  it)  not :  for  I  am  thy  fellow 

SEE  afar  off,  cannot  — 

To  shut  or  wink  the  eyes,  /xviowd^ca  muopazo. 

2  Pe.   1.    9  is  blind,  and  cannot  see  afar  off,  and  hath 

SEE  before,  to  — 

I. To  see  before,  irpoeTSov proeidon. 

Acts    2.  31  He,  seeing  this  before,  spake  of  theresu. 

2.  To  see  before,  Trpoopdca  proorao. 

Acts  21.  29  they  had  seen  before  with  him  in  the  ci. 

SEE  clearly,  to  — 

l.To  see  or  look  through,  BiafiAe-n-Q}  diable2)0. 

Matt.  7.  5  then  shaltthou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the 
Luke  6.  42  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  pull  out  the 

2.  To  see  thoroughly,  KaBopdw  kathorao. 

Horn.  1.  20  invisible  things  of  him.  .are  clearly  seen 

SEE,  to  make,  cause  or  let  — 

l.To  cause  to  see,  nxn  raah,  5. 

Deut34.    4  I  have  caused  thee  to  see  (it)  with  thine 
Psa.  59. 10  God  shall  let  me  see  (my  desire)  upon  mine 
Song  2. 14  let  me  see  thy  countenance,  let  me  hear 

2.  To  enlighten,  4>o>Ti£a>  phutizo. 

Eph.   3.    9  to  make  all  (men)  see  what  (is)  the  fellow. 

SEE  one  another,  to  — ■ 

To  look  at  one  another,  hnh  raah,  7. 

2  Ch.25.  17  Come,  let  us  see  one  another  in  the  face 
25.  21  they  saw  one  another  in  the  face,  (both) 
SEED  (sown,  time)  — 
1 .  Seed,  seed  time,  progeny,  yyi  zera. 

Gen.  1.  11  the  herb  yielding  seed,  (and)  the  fruit  tree 
1.  11  whose  seed  is  in  itself  upon  the  earth 
1.  12  brought  forth  grass,  (and)  herb  yielding  s. 
1.  12  the  tree  yielding  fruit,  whose  seed  (was) 
1.  29  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed 
1.  29  which  (is)  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding  seed 

3.  15  put  enmity,  .between  thy  seed  andherse. 

4.  25  hath  appointed  me  another  seed  instead 

7.  3  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of  all  the  ea. 

8.  22  seed  time  and  harvest,  and  cold  and  heat 

9.  9  with  you,  and  with  your  seed  after  you 

12.  7  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land :  and 

13.  15  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  for 
13.  16  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  e. 
13. 16  (then)  shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered 
15.    3  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed:  and,  lo,  one 

15.  5  and  he  said  unto  him,  So  shall  thy  seed  be 
15.13  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  (that 
IS- 18  Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from 

16.  10  I  will  multiply  thv  seed  exceedingly,  that 

17.  7  between  me  and  thee  and  thy  seed  after 
17-    7  to  be  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  af. 
17-    8  I  will  give  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after 
17-    9  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generat. 
17-  10  between  me  and  you  and  thy  seed  after 
17. 12  of  any  stranger,  which  (is)  not  of  thy  seed 


853 


Gen.  17. 19  will  establish  my  covenant. .  with  his  seed 

19.  32,  34  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  lath. 
21. 12  for  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called 

21.  13  also  of  the  son.  .because  he  (is)  thy  seed 

22.  17  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the 

22. 17  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  ene. 

22. 18  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  ea. 
24.  7  saying,  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land 
24.  60  let  thy  seed  possess  the  gate  of  those  wh. 
26.  3  unto  thy  seed,  I  will  give  all  these  count. 
26.  4  I  will  make  thy  seed  to  multiply  as  the  st. 
26.  4  will  give  unto  thy  seed  all  these  countries 
26.  4  inthyseed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
26.  24  will  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thy  seed,  for 
28.  4  to  thee, and  to  thy  seed  with  thee;  that  thou 
28.  13  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed 

28.  14  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth 

28. 14  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  ea. 
32. 12  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  wh. 

35. 12  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I  give  the  land 
38.  8  marry  her,  and  raise  up  seed  to  thy  bro. 
38.  9  Onan  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his 
38.  9  lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  brother 
46.    6  came  into  Egypt,  Jacob,  and  all  his  seed 

46,  7  all  Iris  seed,  brought  he  with  him  into  Eg. 

47.  19  give  (us)  seed,  that  we  may  live,  and  not 
47.  23  (here  is)  seed  for  you,  and  ye  shall  sowthe 

47.  24  four  parts  shall  be  your  own,  for  seed  of 

48.  4  will  give  this  laud  to  thy  seed  after  thee 
48.  11  and  lo,  God  hath  showed  me  also  thy  seed 
48.  19  his  seed  shall  become  a  multitude  of  nat. 

Exodi6.  31  it  (was)  like  coriander  seed,  white  ;  and  the 
28.  43  a  statute  for  ever  unto  him  and  his  seed 
30.  21  to  his  seed  throughout  their  generations 
32.  13  I  will  multiply  your  seed  as  the  stars  of 

32.  13  all  this  land,  .will  I  give  unto  your  seed 

33.  1  to  Jacob,  saying,  Unto-  thy  seed  will  I  gi. 
Lev.  11,  37  fall  upon  any  sowing  seed  which  is  to  be. 

11.  38  if  (any)  water  be  put  upon  the  seed,  and 

15. 16  if  any  man's  seed  of  copulation  go  out  fr. 

15. 17  every  skin,  whereon  is  the  seed  of  copul. 
15.  18  with  whom  man  shall  lie  (with)  seed  of 

15.  32  (of  him)  whose  seed  goeth  from  him,  and 
18.  21  thou  shalt  not  let  any  of  thy  seed  pass 

20.  2  that  giveth  any  of  his  seed  to  Molech,  he 
20.    3  he  hath  given  of  his  seed  unto  Molech,  to 

20.  4  when  he  giveth  of  his  seed  unto  Molech 

21.  15  Neither  shall  he  profane  his  seed  among 
21.  17  Whosoever  (he  be)  of  thy  seed  in  their  ge. 

21.  21  No  man  that  hath  a  blemish  of  the  seed 

22.  3  Whosoever  (he  be)  of  all  your  seed  among 
22.  4  What  man  soever  of  the  seed  of  Aaron  (is) 
22.    4  or  a  man  whose  seed  goeth  from  him 

26.  16  ye  shall  sow  your  seed  in  vain,  for  your 
27. 16  shall  be  according  to  the  seed  thereof 

27.  16  an  homer  of  barley  seed  (shall  be  valued) 
27-  30  (whether)  of  the  seed  of  the  land,  (or)  of 

Num.  5.  28  she  shall  be  free,  and  shall  conceive  seed 
zi.    7  the  manna  (was)  as  coriander  seed,  and 
14.  24  him  will  I  bring,  .and  his  seed  shall  pos. 

16.  40  no  stranger,  which  (is)  not  of  the  seed  of 

18. 19  unto  thee  and  to  thy  seed  with  thee 

20.  5  it  (is)  no  place  of  seed,  or  of  figs,  or  of  vi. 
24.    7  his  seed  (shall  be)  in  many  waters,  and  his 

25. 13  he  shall  have  it,  and  his  seed  after  him 
Deut.  1.    8  to  give  unto  them  and  to  their  seed  after 

4.  37  he  chose  their  seed  after  them,  and  brou. 

10. 15  he  chose  their  seed  after  them,  (even)  you 
11.   9  to  give  unto  them,  and  to  their  seed,  aland 

.  11.  10  where  thou  sowedst  thy  seed,  and  water. 
14.  22  tithe  all  the  increase  of  thy  seed,  that  the 
22.   9  lest  the  fruit  of  thy  seed  which  thou  hast 

28.  38  Thou  shalt  carry  much  seed  out  into  the 
28.  46  Aud  they  shall  be . .  upon  thy  seed  for  ever 
28.  59  the  plagues  of  thy  teed,  (even)  great  pla. 
30.    6  thine  heart,  and  the  heart  of  thy  seed,  to 

30.  19  choose  life,  that  both  thou  and  thy  seed 

31.  21  forgotten  out  of  the  mouths  of  their  seed 

34.  4  I  will  give  it  unto  thy  seed :  I  have  cau. 
Josh  24.  3  multiplied  his  seed,  and  gave  him  Isaac 
Ruth  4.  12  of  the  seed  which  the  Lokd  shall  giveth. 

1  Sa.   2.  20  The  Lord  give  thee  seed  of  this  woman 

8.  15  he  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  seed,  and 
20.  42  between  my  seed  and  thy  seed  for  ever 

24.  21  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  seed  after  me,  and 

2  Sa.   4.    8  avenged  my  lord . .  of  Saul,  and  of  his  seed 

7.  12  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which 
22.  51  unto  David,  and  to  his  seed  for  evermore 

1  Ki.    2.  33  and  upon  the  head  of  his  seed  for  ever 

2.  33  upon  David,  and  upon  his  seed,  and  upon 

11. 14  the  Edomite:  he  (was)  of  the  king's  seed 
11.  39  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  seed  of  David,  but 
18.  32  as  would  contain  two  measures  of  seed 

2  Ki.   5.  27  shall  cleave  unto  thee,  and  unto  thy  seed 

11.    1  she  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal 

17.  20  the  Lord  rejected  ail  the  seed  of  Israel 

25.  25  the  son  of  Elishama,  of  the  seed  royal,  ca. 

1  Ch.16.  13  O  ye  seed  of  Israel  his  servant,  ye  child 

17.  11  I  will  raise  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which 

2  Ch.20.    7  gavest  it  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  thy  fri, 

22.  10  she  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal 
Ezra    2.  59  they  could  not  show . .  their  seed,  whethe  c 

9.  2  the  holy'seed  have  mingled  themselves  wi. 
Neh.   7.  61  they  could  not  show,  .their  seed,  whether 

9.    2  the  seed  of  Israel  separated  themselves 
9.    8  to  give  (it,  I  say,)  to  his  seed,  and  hast 

Esth.  6.  13  (If)  Mordecai  (be)  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews 
9.  27  took  upon  them,  and  upon  their  seed,  and 
9.  28  nor  the  memorial . .  perish  from  their  seed 
9.  31  decreed  for  themselves,  and  for  their  seed 
10.    3  seeking,  .and  speaking  peace  to  all  his  se. 

Job     5.  25  Thou  shalt  know  also  that  thy  seed  (shall 


SEED 


Job    21.    8  Their  seed  is  established  in  their  sight  wi. 
39.  12  that  he  will  bring  home  thy  seed,  and  ga. 
Tsa.  iS.  50  to  David,  and  to  his  seed  for  evermore 

21.  10  their  seed  from  among  the  children  of  men 

22.  23  all  ye  the  seed  of  Jacob,  glorify  him 
22.  23  and  fear  him,  all  ye  the  seed  of  Israel 
22.  30  A  seed  shall  serve  him  ;  it  shall  be  acco. 
25.  13  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease ;  and  his  seed 
37.  25  yet  have  I  not  seen . .  his  seed  begging  br. 
37.  26  (He  is)  ever  merciful . .  and  his  seed  (is)bl. 
37.  28  but  the  seed  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off 
69.  36  The  seed  also  of  his  servants  shall  inherit 
89.  4  Thy  seed  will  I  establish  for  ever,  and  bu. 
89.  29  His  seed  also  will  I  make  (to  endure)  for 
89.  36  His  seed  shall  endure  for  ever,  and  his  th. 

102.  28  their  seed  shall  be  established  before  th. 

105.  6  O  ye  seed  of  Abraham  his  servant,  ye  ch. 

106.  27  To  overthrow  their  seed  also  among  the 
112.  2  His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  earth,  the 
126.   6  He  that  goeth  forth  . .  bearing  precious  se. 

Prov  11.  21  the  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  delive. 
Eccl.  11.  6  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the 
Isa.     1.    4  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil 

5.  10  the  seed  of  an  homer  shall  yield  an  ephah 

6.  13  the  holy  seed  (shall  be)  the  substance  th. 
14.  20  the  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  never  be  ren. 
17.  11  in  the  morning  shalt  thou  make  thy  seed 
23-    3  by  great  waters  the  seed  of  Sihor,  the  ha. 

30.  23  Thenshallhe  give  the  rain  of  thy  seed,  th. 
41.    8  Jacob  whom  I  have  chosen,  the  seed  of 

43.  5  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east,  and 

44.  3  I  will  pour  my  spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and 

45.  19  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye 

45.  25  In  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be 

48.  19  Thy  seed  also  had  been  as  the  sand,  and 

53.  10  he  shall  see  (his)  seed,  he  shall  prolong 

54.  3  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles,  and 

55.  10  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and 
57.    3  ye  sons  of  the  sorceress,  the  seed  of  the 
57.    4  (are)  ye  not  children  of  transgression,  as. 
59.  21  not  depart,  .out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed 
59.  21  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed's  seed 
61.    9  their  seed  shall  be  known  amoDgthe  Ge. 
61.    9  they  (are)  the  seed  (which)  the  Lord  ha. 
65.    9  I  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of  Jacob,  and 

65.  23  they  (are)  the  seed  of  the  blessed  of  the  L. 

66.  22  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  remain 
Jer.     2.  21  I  had  planted  thee . .  a  right  seed ;  how  th. 

7.  15  all  your  brethren,  (even)  the  whole  seed 
22.  28  wherefore  are  they  cast  out,  he  and  his  se. 

22.  30  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  prosper,  sitting 

23.  8  which  led  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel  out 
29. 32  I  will  punish  Shemaiah . .  and  his  seed :  he 
30. 10  I  will  save  thee  from  afar,  and  thy  seed  from 

31.  27  with  the  seed  of  man,  and  with  the  seed 
31.  36  the  seed  of  Israel  also  shall  cease  from  be. 
31.  37  I  will  also  cast  off  all  the  seed  of  Israel  for 
33.  22  so  will  I  multiply  the  seed  of  David  my 
33.  26  Thenwilllcastaway  theseedof  Jacob, and 
33.  26  (any)  of  his  seed  (to  be)  rulers  over  the  seed 
35.    7  Neither  shall  ye  build  house,  nor  sow  seed 

35.  9  neither  have  we  vineyard .  .field,  nor  seed 

36.  31  I  will  punish  him  and  his  seed  and  his 
41.    1  the  son  of  Elishama,  of  the  seed  royal,  and 

46.  27  I  will  save  thee  from  afar  off,  and  thy  seed 

49.  10  his  seed  is  spoiled,  and  his  brethren,  and 
17.  5  He  took  also  of  the  seed  of  the  land,  and 
17.  13  hath  taken  of  the  king's  seed,  and  made  a 
20.    5  lifted  up  mine  hand  unto  the  seed  of  the 

43.  19  the  priests  the  Levites  that  be  of  the  seed 

44.  22  they  shall  take  maidens  of  the  seed  of  the 
3  and  of  the  king's  seed,  and  of  the  princes 

9.    1  the  son  of  Ahasuerus,  of  the  seed  of  the 
Amos  9.  13  the  treader  of  grapes  him  that  soweth  se. 
Hag.   2.  19  Is  the  seed  yet  in  the  barn  ?  yea,  as  yet 

2  the  seed  (shall  be)  prosperous ;  the  vine 

3  I  will  corrupt  your  seed,  and  spread  dung 
2.  15  That  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed.    There. 

2.  Seed,  progeny,  y"]|  zera. 

Dan.    2.  43  they  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the  se. 

3.  What  are  separated,  n'nn?  perudotk. 

Joel    1. 17  The  seed  is  rotten  under  their  clods,  the 
4, .4  laying  down  of  seed,  JHi  repp  shikbath  zera. 
Lev.  15.  32  (of  him)  whose  seed  goeth  from  him,  andjis 
22.    4  or  a  man  whose  seed  goeth  from  him 

5.  Seed,  progeny,  atrep/j.a  sperma. 

Matti3.  24  a  man  which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field 

13  27  didst  not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field 

13.  32  Which  indeed  is  the  least  of  all  seeds ;  but 

13.  37  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the  Son  of 

1 3  38  the  good  seed  are  the  children  of  the  king. 

22  24  shall  marry  his  wife,  and  raise  up  seed  un. 
Mark  4.  31  (It  is)  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which 

12  19  should  take  his  wife,  and  raise  up  seed  un. 

!•>.  20  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  dying  left  nose. 

1-.  21  took  her,  and  died,  neither  left  he  any  se. 

1^  2-  the  seven  had  her,  and  left  no  seed  :  last 
Luke  1.  55  to  Abraham,  and  to  his  seed  for  ever 

20.  28  should  take  his  wife,  and  raise  up  seed 
John  7.  42  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and 

8.  33  We  be  Abraham's  seed,  and  were  never  in 
8.  37  I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's  seed  ;  but 

Acts    3.  25  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  kindreds  of  the 
7.    5  to  him  for  a  possession,  and  to  his  seed 
7.    6  his  seed  should  sojurn  in  a  strange  land 
1 3.  23  Of  this  man's  seed  hath  God,  according  to 

Rom.  1.  3  which  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  ace. 
4. 13  (was)  not  to  Abraham,  or  to  his  seed,  th. 
4. 16  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed 


Eze. 


Dan. 


Zech. 
Mai 


SEED 


854 


SEEK 


Rom.  4.  iS  that  which  was  spoken,  So  shall  thy  seed 
g.    7  Neither,  because  they  are  the  seed  of  Ab. 
9.    7  hut,  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called 
9.    8  the  children,  .are  counted  for  the  seed 

9.  29  Except  the  Lord . .  had  left  us  a  seed,  we 
11.    1  I  also  am  an  Israelite,  of  the  seed  of  Abr. 

1  Co.  15.  38  God  giveth.  .to  every  seed  his  own  body 

2C0.    9.  10  that  ministereth  [seed]  to  the  sower,  both 

11.  22  Are  they  the  seed  of  Abraham?  so  (am)  I 

Gal.     3.  16  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  prom. 

3. 16  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  .but.  .to thy  seed 

3.  19  till  the  seed  should  come  to  whom  the  pr. 

3.  29  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  He.  2.  16. 
2TL     2.   8  Remember  that  Jesus  Christ  of  the  seed 

11.  n  Sara,  ."received  strength  to  conceive  seed 
11.  18  That  in  Israel  shall  thy  seed  be  called 
1  Jo.     3.    9  his  seed  remaineth  in  him  :  and  he  cannot 
Rev.  12.  17  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed 

6.  Seed  for  sowing,  a-iroph  sj)ora. 

1  Pe.    1.  23  Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed 

1. •Seed  for  soioiug,  o-n-opos  sporos. 

Mark  4.  26  ns  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  ground 

4.  27  and  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up 
Luke   8.    5  A  sower  went  out  to  sow  his  seed :  and 

8.  11  the  parable  is  this  :  The  seed  is  the  word 

2  Co.    9.  10  multiply  your  seed  sown,  and  increase  the 

[See  also  Conceive,  mingled,  divers]. 

SEED,  to  receive  — 

To  be  sown,  receive  seed,  (nretpo/nai  speiromai. 
Matt  1 3. 19  This  is  he  which  received  seed  by  the  way 
13.  20  he  that  received  the  seed  into  stony  pla. 
13.  22  He  also  that  received  seed  among  the  th. 
13.  23  he  that  received  seed  into  the  good  gro. 

SEEING  (that,  then)  — 

\.  After,  after  that,  "inN  achar. 

Judg  19.  23  seeing  that  this  man  is  come  into  mine 
Q.If  since,  nx  im. 

Job   14.   5  Seeing  his  days  (are)  determined,  the  mi. 

3.  That,  >T!  di. 

Dan.    2.  47  seeing  thou  couldest  reveal  this  secret 

4.  Because,  since,  }#:  yaan. 

Eze.  21.   4  Seeing  then  that  I  will  cut  off  from  thee 

5.  That,  because,  "2  ki. 

Exod  23.  9  seeing  ye  were  stFangers  in  the  land  of  E. 
§.Opei\  eyed,  rjiP?  piqqeach. 

Exod.  4.  11  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  the  seeing,  or  the 

7.  To  see,  nto  raah. 

Exod  22.  10  be  hurt,  or  driven  away,  no  man  seeing 

1  Ki.  1.  48  sit  on  my  throne,  .mine  eyes  even  seeing 
Prov  20. 12  The  hearing  ear,  and  the  seeing  eye,  the 
Iaa.   21.    3  it);  I  was  dismayed  at  the  seeing  (of  it) 

33.  15  and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil 

42.  20  Seeing  many  things,  but  thou  observest 

8.  Look,  cast  of  countenance,  {SKefx/xablemma. 

2  Te.  2.  8  in  seeing  and  hearing,  vexed  (his)  right. 
9.For,  yap  gar. 

Acts  2.  15  seeingit  is  (but)  the  third  hourof  the  day 
10.//,  truly,  e5f  7rep  ei  per. 

2  Th.  1.  6  Seeing  (it  is)  a  righteous  thing  with  God 
1\. After  that,  since,  for  then,  4-Kzi  epei. 

Luke  1.  34  How  shall  thisbe,  seeing  I  know  not  a  111. 

2  Co. 11.  18  Seeing  that  many  glory  after  the  flesh,  I 

Heb.  4.    6  Seeing  therefore  it  remaineth  that  some 

5.  11  hard  to  be  uttered,  seeing  ye  are  dull  of 

12.  When  truly,  since  truly,  eireibri  epeide. 

Acts  13.  46  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  and  judge  you. 
1  Co.  14.  16  seeing  he  understaudeth  not  what  thou 

13. Since,  truly,  4m(ir€p  epeiper. 

Rom.  3.  30  Seeing  (it  is)  one  God  which  shall  justify 
SEEK  {after,  carefully,  for),  to  — 
1.7V)  seek,  pray,  fljfS,  k»3  bea, 

Dan.    2.  13  they  sought  Daniel  and  his  fellows  to  lie 
4.  36  my  counsellors  and  my  lords  sought  unto 

6.  4  sought  to  find  occasion  against  Daniel  co. 

2.To  seek,  inquire,  ipg  baqar,  3. 

Lev.  13.  36  the  priest  shall  not  seek  for  yellow  hair 

3,  To  siek,  inquire,  require,  rp3  baqash,  3. 

Gen.  37. 15  the  man  asked  him,  saying,  What  seekest 
37.  16  I  seek  my  brethren  :  tell  me,  I  pray  thee 

43.  30  he  sought  (where)  to  weep;  and  he  ente. 
Exod.  2. 15  when  Pharaoh  heard  this  tiling,  he  soug. 

4.  19  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy  life 
4.  24  the  Lord  met  him,  and  soughttokill  him 
33.   7  every  one  which  sought  the  Lord  went 
Lev.  19.  31  neither  seek  after  wizards,  to  be  defiled  by 
JJumifi.  10  brought  thee .  .seek  ye  the  priesthood  ;ilso 

35. 23  (was)  not  his  enemy,  neither  sought  his 
Deut.  4.  2;  if  from  thence  thou  sho.lt  seek  the  Lord 

13.  10  he  hath  sought  to  thrust  thee  away  from 
Josh.  2.  22  the  pursuers  sought  (them)  throughout 
Judg.  4.  22  I  will  show  thee  the  man  whom  thou  se. 

14.  4  he  sought  an  occasion  against  the  Fhilis. 
18.    1  the  tribe  of  the  Danites  sought  them  an 

Ruth  3.  1  shall  I  not  seek  rest  for  thee,  that  it  may 
1  5a.  9.    3  Kisli  said  to  Saul.. go  seek  the  asses 

10.  2  The  asses  which  thou  wentest  to  seek  are 
10.  14  To  seek  the  asses :  and  when  we  saw  that 
10.  21  when  they  sought  him,  he  could  not  be  fo. 

13.  14  the  Lord  hath  sought  him  a  man  after 

14.  4  by  which  Jonathan  sought  to  go  over  un. 


1  Sa.16. 16  to  seek  out  a  man,  (who  is)  a  cunning  pla. 

19.    2  my  father  seeketh  to  kill  thee :  now  ther. 

19.  10  Saul  sought  to  smite  David  even  to  the 

20.  1  what(is)my  sin  .  .that  he  seeketh  my  life? 

22.  23  he  that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy  life 

23. 10  Saul  seeketh  tocometo  Keilah,  todestroy 

23.  14  Saul  sought  him  every  day ;  but  God  de. 
23.  15  that  Saul  was  come  out  to  seek  his  life 

23.  25  Saul  also  and  his  men  went  to  seek  (him) 

24.  2  went  to  seek  David  and  his  men  upon  the 

24.  9  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt 

25.  26  they  that  seek  evil  to  my  lord,  be  as  Na. 
.25.  29  is  risen  to  pursue  thee,  and  to  seek  thy 

26.  2  to  seek  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph 

26.  20  the  king  of  Israel  is  come  out  to  seek  a 

27.  1  to  seek  me  any  more  in  the  coasts  of  Isr. 

27.  4  and  he  sought  no  more  again  for  him 

28.  7  Seek  me  a  woman  that  hath  a  familar  sp. 

2  9a.  3.  17  Ye  sought  for  David  in  times  past  (to  be) 

4.  8  Saul  thine  enemy,  which  sought  thy  life 
5. 17  all  the  Philistines  came  up  to  seek  David 

16. 11  Behold,  my  son.  .seeketh  my  life  :  how 
17.    3  the  man  whom  thou  seekest  (is)  as  if  all 

17.  20  when  they  had  sought  and  could  not  find 

20.  19  thou  3eekest  to  destroy  a  city  and  a  mot. 

21.  2  Saul  sought  to  slay  them  inhiszealto  the 

1  Ki.  1.    2  Let  there  be  sought  for  my  lord  the  king 

1.  3  they  sought  for  a  fair  damsel  throughout 

2.  40  went  to  Gath  to  Achish  to  seek  his  serva. 

10.  24  all  the  earth  sought  to  Solomon,  to  hear 

11.  22  thou  seekest  to  go  to  thine  own  country 
11. 40  Solomon  sought  therefore  to  killJeroboam 

18.  10  whithermy  lord  hath  not  sent  to  seek  thee 

19.  10,  14  and  they  seek  my  life,  to  take  it  away 

20.  7  and  see  how  this  (man)  seeketh  mischief 

2  Ki.  2.  16  let  them  go,  we  pray  thee,  and  seek  thy 

2. 17  they  sought  three  days,  but  found  him  not 
6. 19  I  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom  ye  seek 

1  Ch.  4.  39  went,  .to  seek  pasture  for  their  flocks 

14.  8  all  the  Philistines  went  up  to  seek  David 
16.  10  let  the  heart  of  them  rejoice  that  seek  the 
16.  11  and  his  strength,  seek  his  face  continually 

2  Ch.  7, 14  pray,  and  seek  my  face,  and  turn  from  th. 

9.  23  the  kings  of  the  earth  sought  the  presence 
11. 16  such  as  set  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord 

15.  '4  and  sought  him,  and  he  was  found  of  th. 
15.  15  and  sought  him  with  their  whole  desire 
20.   4  out  of  all  the  cities  .they  came  to  seek 

22.  9  he  sought  Ahaziah  :  and  they  caught  him 
Ezra   2.  62  These  sought  their  register(ainong)those 

8.  21  to  seek  of  him  aright  way  for  us,  and  for 

8.  22  (is)  upon  all  them  for  good  that  seek  him 
Neh.  2.  10  there  was  come  a  man  to  seek  the  welfare 

7.64  These  sought  their  register  (among)  those 

12.  27  they  soughtthe  Levites  outof  all  their  pi. 
Esth.  2.    2Let  there  be  fair  young  virgins  sought  for 

2.  21  were  wroth,  and  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the 

3.  6  Hainan  sought  todestroy  all  the  Jews  th. 
6.    2  who  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  Ah. 

9.  2  to  lay  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt 
Psa.     4.    2  (how  long)  will  ye  love  vanity,  (and)  seek 

24.  6  This  (is)  the  generation. .that  seek  thy  fa. 
27.  4  One  (thing)  have  I  desired . .  that  will  I  s. 
27.    8  (When  thou  saidst),  Seek  ye  my  face ;  my 

27.  8  Baid  unto  thee,  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  se. 

34.  14  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good  ;  seek  pe. 

35.  4  Let  them  be  confounded,  .that  seek  after 
37.  32  The  wicked  watcheth  the  righteous,  and  s. 

37.  36  I  sought  him,  but  he  could  not  be  found 

38.  12  They  also  that  seek  after  my  life  lay  sn. 
40. 14  Let  them  be  ashamed . .  that  seek  af  termy 
40.  16  Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be 
54.    3  oppressors  seek  after  my  soul :  they  have 
63.    9  those  (that)  seek  my  soul,  to  destroy  (it) 

69.  6  let  not  those  that  seek  thee  be  confounded 

70.  2  Let  them  be  ashamed . .  that  seek  after  my 

70.  4  Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be 

71.  13  covered  (with)  reproach. .  that  seek  my  hu. 
71.  24  they  are  brought  unto  shame,  that  seek 
83. 16  that  they  may  seek  thy  name,  0  Lord 
86. 14  the  assemblies  of  violent  (men)  have  so. 

104.  21  young  lions  roar  after  their  prey,  and  se. 

105.  3  let  the  heart  of  them  rejoice  that  seek  the 
105.  4  and  his  strength  ;  seek  his  face  evermore 
ng.  176  seek  thy  servant ;  for  I  do  not  forget  thy 
J22.   9  Because  of  the  house  of.  .God  I  will  seek 

Prov.  2.    4  If  thou  seekest  her  as  silver,  and  search. 

14.  6  A  scorner  seeketh  wisdom,  and  (findeth 

15.  14  him  that  hath  understanding  seekethkn. 
17.  9  He  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh 
17.  n  An  evil  (man)  seeketh  only  rebellion;  th. 

17.  19  he  that  exalteth  his  gate  seeketh  destru. 
t8.    i  seeketh  (and)intermeddleth  with  all  wis. 

18.  isand  the  ear  of  the  wise  seeketh  knowledge 
21.  6  tossed  to  and  fro  of  them  that  seek  death 
23-  35  when  shall  I  awake?  I  will  seek  it  yetag. 

28.  5  they  that  seek  the  Lord  understand  all 
29. 10  The  blood  thirsty  hate,  .but  the  just  seek 

29.  26  Many  seek  the  ruler's  favour :  but  (every) 
Eccl.  7.25  to  seekout  wisdom,  and  the  reason  (of  th.) 

7.  28  Which  yet  my  soul  seeketh,  but  I  find  not 

7.  29  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions 

8.  17  though  a  man  labour  to  seek  (it)  out,  yet 
12.  10  The  preacher  sought  to  find  out  accepta. 

Song  3.    1  I  sought  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I  so. 
3.   2  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I 

5.  6  I  sought  him,  but  I  could  not  find  him  ;  I 

6.  1  whither  is  thy  beloved,  .that  we  mnyseek 
Isa.   40.  20 he  seeketh  unto  him  a  cunning  workman 

41.  12  Thou  shalt  seek  them,  and  slialt  not  find 
41.  17  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,  and  (the. 
45. 19  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek 


Isa, 


Jer 


Lam. 
Eze. 


Dan 
Hos 


3- 


Mai. 


51.    1  Hearken  to  me.  .ye  that  seek  the  Lord 
65.    1  I  am  found  of  (them  that)  sought  me  not 
2.  24  they  that  seek  her  will  not  weary  them. 

2.  33  Why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  seek  love? 

4.  30  lovers  will  despise  thee,  they  will  seek  thy 

5.  1  seek  in  the  broad  places  thereof,  if  ye  can 
5.    1  (any)  that  executeth  judgment,  that  seek. 

11.  21  the  men  of  Anathoth,  that  seek  my  life 
19.   7  by  tlie  hands  of  them  that  seek  their  lives 
19.    9  they  that  seek  their  lives,  shall  straiten 

21.  7  into  the  hand  of  those  that  seek  their  life 

22.  25  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  thy  life 
26.  21  the  king  sought  to  put  him  to  death,  but 
29.  13  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  find  (me),  when  ye 
34.  20,  21  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  their 
38.  16  into  the  hand  of  these  men  that  seek  thy 
44.  30  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  his  life 

44.  30  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  .that  sought  his  life 

45.  5  seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself?  se. 

46.  26  into  the  hand  of  those  that  seek  their  li. 

49.  37  to  be  dismayed. .  before  them  that  seek  th. 

50.  4  they  shall  go,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God 
1.  11  her  people  sigh,  they  seek  bread;  they  ha. 

1.  19  they  sought  their  meatto  relieve  their  so. 
7.  25  they  shall  seek  peace,  and  (there  shall  be) 

7.  26  then  shall  they  seek  a  vision  of  the  prop. 
22.  30  I  sought  for  a  man  among  them,  that  sh. 
34.  4  neither  have  ye  sought  that -which  was  lo. 
34.  6  and  uoue  did  search  or  seek  (after  them) 
34.  16  I  will  seek  that  which  was  lost,  and  bring 

8.  15  I  Daniel,  had  seen  the  vision,  and  sought 
o.    3  to  seek  by  prayer  and  supplications,  with 

7  she  shall  seek  them,  but  shall  not  find  (th.) 
5  seek  the  Lord  their  God,  and  David  their 
5.    6  They  shall  go  with.,  their  herds  to  seek  the 
5.  15  acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  my 

7.  10  they  do  not  return . .  nor  seek  him  for  all 
Amos  8.  12  they  shall  run  to  and  fro  toseektheword 
Nab.  3.    7  whence  shall  I  seek  comforters  for  thee? 

3.  11  thou  also  shalt  seek  strength  because  of 
Zeph.  1.   6  (those)that  have  uot  sought  the  Lord,  nor 

2.  3.  Seek  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  meek  of  the  ea. 

2.  3  seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness :  it  may 
Zech.  6.    7  the  bay  went  forth,  and  sought  to  go  th. 

8.  21  to  pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to  seek  the 
8. 22  strong  nations  shall  come  to  seek  the  Lo. 

11.  16  neither  shall  seek  the  young  one,  nor  he. 

9  I  will  seek  to  destroy  all  the  nations  that 

7  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth 
_.  15  wherefore  one?  That  he  might  seek  a  go. 

3.  1  the  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly 

4 .  To  seek,  dig,  search,  150  chaphar. 

Job   39.  29  From  thence  she  seeketh  the  prey,  (and) 

5.  To  search,  investigate,  ipij  chaqar. 

Prov  23.  30  that  tarry  long,  .that  go  to  seek  mixed 
Q.To  search,  ipn  chaqar,  3. 

Eccl.  12.    9  he  gave  good  heed,  and  sought  out,  (and) 
7. To  seek,  inquire,  require,  v~f\  darash. 

Lev.  10. 16  Moses  diligently  sought  the  goat  of  the 

Deut.  4.  29  if  from  thence  thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord 

4.  29  if  thou  seek  bun  with  all  thy  heart  and 

12.  5  (even)  unto  his  habitation  shall  ye  seek 

22.  2  shall  be  with  thee  until  thy  brother  seeka. 

23.  6  Thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace  nor  their 

1  Ch.15.  13  we  sought  him  not  after  the  due  order 

16.  11  Seek  the  Lord  and  his  strength,  .contin. 
22. 19  set  your  heartand  your  soul  to  seek  the  L. 
28.  8  seek  for  all  the  commandments  of  the  L. 
28.    9  if  thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  'found  of  thee 

2  Ch.  1.    5  Solonionaudthecongregationsoughtunto 

12. 14  he  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  L. 
14.    4  commanded  Judah  to  seek  the  Lord  God 

14.  7  sought  the  Lord  our  God,  we  have  soug. 

15.  2  if  ye  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  you 

15.  12  they  entered  into  acovenantto  seek  the  L. 
15. 13  whosoever  would  not  seek  the  Lord  God 

16.  12  in  his  disease  he  sought  not  to  the  Lord 

17.  3  he  walked  in  the  first  ways.. and  sought 

4  soughtto  the(LoRD)God  of  his  father,  and 
3  and  hast  prepared  thine  heart  to  seek  God 
3  Jehoshaphat  feared,  and  set  himself  to  se. 
9  who  sought  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart 

5  Why  hast  thou  sought  after  the  gods  of  the 
20  because  they  sought  after  the  gods  of  E. 

5  he  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zecbariah 
5  as  long  as  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made 

30.  19  (That)  prepareth  his  heart  to  seek  God 

31.  21  in  every  work  that  he  began,  .to  seek  his 
3  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  David 

2  we  seek  your  God,  as  ye  (do);  and  we  do 
ji  separated  themselves.. to  seek  the  Lord 

10  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the 
12  nor  seek  their  peace  or  their  wealth  for 

3  seeking  the  wealth  of  his  people,  and  sp. 

8  I  would  seek  unto  God,  and  unto  God  wo. 
9.  10  hast  not  forsaken  them  that  seek  thee 

jo.  4  The  wicked.,  will  notseek  (after  God):  G. 
14.  2  any  that  did  understand,  (and)  seek  God 
22.  26  they  shall  praise  the  Lord  that  seek  him 
24.  6  This  (is)  the  generation  of  them  that  seek 
^4.  4  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me, and 
34.  10  they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  want 
38.  12  they  that  seek  myhurt  speak  mischievous 
53.  2  (any)  that  did  understand,  that  did  seek 
69.  32  and  your  heart  shall  live  that  seek  God 

77.  2  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  sought  the  L. 

78.  34  Whenheslewthem,  then  they  sought  him 
105.  4  Seek  the  Lord, and  his  strength.,  evermore 
109.  10  let  them  seek  (their brcad)also  out  of  th. 


17- 
19. 
20. 
22. 

25- 

=5- 
26. 
26. 


^       34- 

Ezra   4. 

6. 

7- 

9- 


Esth 

Job 

Psa. 


SEEK 


855 


SEER 


Psa.  119 
119. 
119. 
119 

"9 
Prov  11. 

31 
Eccl.  1. 
Isa.     1 


16 

'9 
31 
34 
55. 
58 
65 
Jer.    8, 


29. 

3°. 
30. 
38. 

Lam.  3. 

Eze.  14. 

Hos.  10. 

Amos  5. 
5' 
5- 
5- 


1  Blessed  (are)  they  (.  .that)  seek  him  with 
10  With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee 
45  will  walk  at  liberty:  for  I  seek  thy  pree. 
94  save  me  ;  for  I  have  sought  thy  precepts 
155  far  from  the  wicked :  for  they  seek  not 
27  he that seeketh  mischief,  it  shall  comeun. 
13  She  seeketh  wool  and  flax,  and  worketh 
13  gave  my  heart  to  seek  and  search  out  by 
17  seek  judgment,  relieve  the  oppressed,  ju. 
19  Seek  unto  them  that  have  familiar  spirits 
10  should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God? 

13  neither  do  they  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts 
10  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek :  and  his  rest 

5  seeking  judgment,  and  hasting  righteous. 

3  shall  seek  to  the  idols,  and  to  the  charm. 

1  but  they  look  not . .  neither  seek  the  Lobd  ! 

16  Seek  ye  out  of  the  hook  of  the  Lord,  and 

6  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found 

2  Yet  they  seek  me  daily,  and  delight  tokn. 
10  a  place . .  for  my  people  that  have  sought 

2  whom  they  have  sought,  and  whom  they 
21  For  the  pastors . .  have  not  sought  the  Lo. 

7  seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have 

14  they  seek  thee  not :  for  I  have  wounded 

17  This  (is)Zion,  whom  no  man  seeketh  after 

4  for  this  man  seeketh  not  the  welfare  of  th. 
25  Lord  (is)  good,  .to  the  soul  (that)  seeketh 
10  as  the  punishment  of  him  that  seeketh 
1 2  for  (it  is)  time  to  seek  the  Lord,  till  he  co. 

4  thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Seek  ye  me,  and  ye 

5  seek  not  Bethel,  nor  enter  into  Gilgal,  and 

6  Seek  the  Lord,  and  ye  shall  live  ;  lest  he 
14  Seek  good,  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live 

8.  To  call,  call  for,  meet,  K"iTi?  qara. 

Nuni24.    1  went  not.  .to  seek  for  enchantments,  but 

9.  To  search,  spy  out,  iffl  tfusr- 

Xumi5.  39  seek  not  after  your  own  heart  and  your 
Eccl.  2.    3  sought  in  mine  heart  to  give  myself  unto 

10. To  seek  up,  out,  again,  ava^qreco  auazeteo. 
Luke  2.  44  sought  him  among  (their)  kinsfolk  and  ac. 
Acts  11.  25  departed  Barnabas  to  Tarsus,  for  to  seek 

11.  Tt*  seek  out,  4k(t}t4q}  ekzeted. 

Acts  15.  17  That  the  residue  of  men  might  seek  after 
Rom.  3. 11  there  is  none  that  seeketh  after  12.  17. 

\'2.To  seek  about,  or  after,  iirtfareo  epizeteo. 

Matt.  6.  32  aftsr  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek 

12.  39  evil  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh  af. 

16.  4  adulterous  generation  seeketh  aftei  a  sign 
Mark  3. 12  Why  doth  this  generation  [seek  after]  asi. 
Luken.  29  is  au  evil  generation :  they  seek  a  sign 

12.  30  do  the  nations  of  the  world  seekafter :  and 
Acts  12.  19  when  Herod  had  sough  tf  or  him,  and  found 
Rom  it.    7  not  obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for 
Heb.  11.  14  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  country 

13.  14  no  continuing  city,  but  we  seek  one  to  co. 

13.  To  seek,  desire,  require,   question,  forda  zeteu. 
Matt.  2.  13  will  seek  the  young  child  to  destroy  him 

2.  20  for  they  are  dead  which  sought  the  young 

6.  33  But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 

7.  7  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and  it  sh. 
7.   8  he  that  seeketh  findeth  ;  and  to  him  that 

12. 43  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking  re. 

13.  45  islikeunto  a  merchantman  seeking  goodly 
18. 1 2  goeth  into  the  mountains,  and  seeketh  th. 

21.  46  when  they  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him,  th. 
26.  16  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 
20.  59  the  council,  sought  false  witness  against 

23.  5  "for  I  know  that  ye  seek  Jesus,  which  was 
Mark  1.  37  they  said  unto  him,  All  (men)  seek  forth. 

3.  32  and  thy  brethren  without  seek  for  thee 
S.  11  seeking  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven,  temp. 

11. 18  and  sought  how  they  might  destroy  him 
12. 12  they  sought  to  lay  hold  on  him,  but  feared 

14.  1  the  scribes  sought  how  they  might  take 
14.  11  he  sought  how  he  might  conveniently  be. 

14.  55  the  council  sought  for  witness  against  Je. 

16.  6  Ye  seek  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  which  was  cr. 
Luke  2. 45  turned  back  again  to  Jerusalem,  [seeking] 

2.  48  thy  father  and  I  have  sought  thee  sorrow. 
2.  49  How  is  it  that  ye  sought  me?  wist  ye  not 

4.  42  the  people  [sought]  him,  and  came  unto 

5.  18  theysought(means)tobringhimin,  andto 
6. 19  the  whole  multitude  sought  to  touch  him 

11.  9  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and  it  sh. 
11.  10  he  that  seeketh  findeth;  and  to  him  that 
11.  16  others,  tempting  (him), sought  of  ln^n  a  sign 
11.  24  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking  re. 

11.  54  [seekingjto  catch  something  out  of  his  mo. 

12.  29  seek  not  ye  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye 

12.  31  seek  ye  the  kingdom  of  God;  and  all  these 

13.  6  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  and  fo. 
13.  7  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on 
13.  24  many,  I  say  unto  you,  will  seek  to  enter 

15.  8  sweep  the  house,  and  seek  diligently  till 

17.  33  Whosoever  shall  seek  to  save  his  life,  sh. 
ig.  3  he  sought  to  see  Jesus  who  he  was  ;  and 
19. 10  the  son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save 
19.  47  the  chief  of  the  people  sought  to  destroy 

20. 19  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him;  and  they  fe. 

22.  2  scribes  sought  how  they  might  kill  him 
22.  6  sought  opportunity  to  betray  him  unto 

24.  5  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead? 
John  1.  38  saith  unto  them,  "What  seek  ye?  They  said 

4.  23  fortheFatherseekethsuchtoworshiphim 

4.  27  yet  no  man  said,  What  seekest  thou?  or 

5.  16  [sought  to  slay  him,  because  he  had  done] 
5.  18  Therefore  the  Jews  sought  the  more  to  kill 
5.  30  because  I  seek  not  mine  own  will,  but  the 


John  5.  44  seek  not  the  honour  that  (cometh)  from  G. 
6.  24  and  came  to  Capernaum,  seeking  for  Jesus 

6.  26  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  mir. 

7.  1  because  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  him 

7.    4  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  known  openly 
7.  11  Then  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the  feast 
7. 18  seeketh  his  own  glory  :  but  he  that  seek. 
7.  25  Is  not  this  he  whom  they  seek  to  kill? 
7.  30  Thentheysoughtto  take  him:  butno  man 

7.  34,  36  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not  find 

8.  21  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sins 
8.  37  seek  to  kill  me,  because  thy  word  hath  no 
8.  40  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that  ha. 
8.  50  seeknot  mine  own  glory,  .one  that  seeketh 

10.  39  Therefore  they  sought  again  to  take  him 

11.  8  Jews  of  late  sought  to  stone  thee;  and  go. 
11.  56  Then  sought  they  for  Jesus,  and  spake 
13.  33  Ye  shall  seek  me :  and  as  I  said  unto  the 
18.    4  went  forth,  and  said  unto  them,  Whom  s. 
18.    7  Then  asked  he  them  again,  Whom  seek 

18.  8  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their 

19.  12  sought  to  release  him  :  but  the  Jews  cried 
20. 15  why  weepest  thou?  whom  seekest  thou? 

Acts  10.  19  said  untohim,  Behold,  three  men  seek  th. 
10.  21  said,  Behold,  lam  hewhom  ye  seek:  what 
13.  8  seeking  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  the 
13.  11  seeking  some  to  lead  him  by  the  hand 
17.    5  sought  to  bring  them  out  to  the  people 
17.  27  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  theymight 

Rom.  2.    7  seek  for  glory  and  honour  and  immortality 

10.  20 1  was  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not 

11.  3  and  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek  my  life 

1  Co.  1.  22  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  a. 

7.  27  bound  unto  a  wife?  seek  not  to  be  loosed 

7.  27  Art  thou  loosed  from  a  wife?  seeknot  a 
10.  24  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man 
10.  33  not  seeking  mine  own  profit,  but  the  pr. 

13.  5  seeketh  not  her  own,  is  not  easily  provoked 

14.  12  seek  that  je  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of 

2  Co.  12. 14  for  I  seek  not  yours,  but  you :  for  the  eh. 

13.  3  Since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking 
Gal.     1. 10  do  I  seek  to  please  men?  for  if  I  yet  plea. 

2.  17  But  if,  while  we  seek  to  be  justified  by  C. 
Phil.  2.  21  For  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  wh. 
Col.     3.    1  seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where 

1  Th.  2.    6  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory,  neither  of 

2  Ti.    1.  17  he  sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and  fo. 
Heb.   8.    7  then  should  no  place  have  been  sought  for 

1  Pe.   3.  11  do  good;  let  him  seek  peace,  and  ensue 

5.  8  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  de. 
Rev.   9.   6  in  those  days  shall  men  seek  death,  and 

SEEK  a  quarrel  or  occasion,  to  — - 

I.To  present  self,  seek  a  quarrel,  fi^x  anah,  7. 

2  Ki.  5.    7  see  how  he  seeketh  a  quarrel  against  me 

2.To  roll  self,  SSa  galal,  7a. 

Gen.  43.  18  that  he  may  seek  occasion  against  us,  and 
SEEK  betimes,  diligently,  early  (in  the  morning),  to  — 

1.  To  seek  early  or  earnestly,  "te'  slmchar. 

Prov.  1 1.  27  Hethat  diligently  seeketh  good  procureth 

2.  To  seek  early  or  earnestly,  ~c^  shachar,  3. 
Job     7.  21  and  thou  shalt  seek  me  in  the  morning 

8.  5  If  thou  wouldest  seek  unto  God  betimes 
Psa.  63.  1  early  will  I  seek  thee :  my  soul  thirsteth 
Prov.  1.  28  they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall 

7. 15  diligently  to  seek  thy  face,  and  I  have  fo. 

8.  17  and  those  that  seek  me  early  shall  find  me 
Isa.  26.  9  seek  thee  early:  for  when  thy  judgments 
Hos.    5. 15  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early 

3.  To  seek  out,  ittfrlTea  ekzeted. 

Heb.  11.   6  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 

SEEK  out,  to  — 

~l.2'o  seek,  inquire,  *ij3S  baqar,  3. 

Eze.  34. 11  both  search  my  sheep,  and  seek  them  out 
34.  12  so  will  I  seek  out  my  sheep,  and  will  del. 

2.  .4  seeking,  inquiry,  investigation,  n-1^3  baqqarah. 

Eze.  34.  12  As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  in  the 

3.  To  seek,  inquire,  require,  VT}  da/rash. 

Psa.  10. 15  seek  out  his  wickedness  (till)  thou  fin 
SEEM  (good,  ill),  to  — 
1. Appearance,  nana  mareh. 

Nah.  2.    4  they  shall  seem  like  torches,  they  shall 

2.  To  be  seen,  appear,  nx-i  raah,  % 

Lev.  14.  35  seemeth  to  me  (there  is)  as  it  were  a  plague 

3.  To  be  in  Hie  eyes  of,  TJJ3  n;n  hayah  heme. 
Gen.  19.  14  But  he  seemed  as  one  that  mocked  unto 

27.  12  and  I  shall  seem  to  him  as  a  deceiver;  and 

29.  20  seemed  unto  him  (but)  a  few  days,  for  the 
Josh.  9.  25  as  it  seemetli  good  and  right  unto  thee 

24.  15  if  it  seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord 
Judgio.  15  whatsoever  seemeth  good  unto  thee;  del. 

19.  24  do  with  them  what  seemeth  good  unto 

1  Sa.    1.  23  Do  what  seemeth  thee  good;  tarry  until 

3. 18  the  Lord  :  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him 
11. 10  ye  shall  do  with  us  all  that  seemeth  good 
14  36  Do  whatsoever  seemeth  good  unto  thee 

14.  40  said  unto  Saul,  Do  what  seemeth  good  un. 
18. 23  Seemeth  it  to  you  (a)  light  (thing)  to  be  a 
24.    4  do  to  him  as  it  shall  seem  good  unto  thee 

2  Sa.  3. 19  to  speak . .  all  that  seemed  good  to  Israel 

3.  19  that  seemed  good  to  the  whole  house  of  B. 
10. 12  the  Lord  do  that  which  seemeth  him  good 

15.  26  let  him  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto  him 
19.  37  do  to  him  what  shall  seem  good  unto  thee 


2  Sa.  19.  38  do  to  him  that  which  shall  seem  good  unto 
1  Ki.21.  2  if  it  seem  good  to  thee,  I  will  give  thee  the 
Esth.  3.  11  to  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  toth. 
Jer.  18.   4  as  seemeth  good  to  the  potter  to  make  (it) 

26.  14  do  with  me  as  seemethgood  and  meet  un. 

27.  5  given  it  unto  whom  it  seemed  meet  unto 
40.  4  If  it  seemed  good . .  if  it  seem  ill  unto  thee 
40.    4  whither  it  seemeth  good  and  convenient 

4.  There  was  approval,  iyeveTo  euSo/efa. 

Matt  11.  26  -Eren  so.  ..forso  it  seemeth  goodLu.  10.  21. 

5.  To  seem  good,  Hokgu  dokeS. 

Luke  1.    3  It  seemed  good  to  me  also,  having  had  pe. 

S.  18  taken  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  ha. 

Acts  15.  25  It  seemed  good  unto  us,  being  assembled 

15.  28  For  it  seemed  good  to  the  Eoly  Ghost,  and 

17.  iS  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  go. 

25.  27  Forit  seemeth  to  me  unreasonable  to  send 

1  Co.   3. 18  If  any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  be  wise 

11.  16  But  if  any  man  seem  to  be  contentious 

12.  22  those  members,  .which  seem  to  be  more 

2  Co.io.  9  That  I  may  not  seem  as  if  I  would  terrify 
Gal.     2.   6  But  of  those  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat 

2.  6  for  they  who  seemed  (to  be  somewhat)  in 

2.    9  when  James,  .and  John,  who  seemed  to 

Heb.   4.    1  any  of  you  should  seem  to  come  short  of 

12. 11  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to 

Jas.    1.  26  If  any  man  among  you  seem  to  be  religious. 

6. To  make  to  appear,  to  manifest,  tpalvw  phaino. 

Luke24.  11  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  Idle  tales 
[See  also  Best,  good,  hard,  light  thing,  little,  meat, 
vile.] 

SEEMLY  — 
Comely,  hikj  naveh. 

Prov.  19.'  10  Delight  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool ;  much  less 

26.  1  so  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool 
SEEN,  to  (can)  be  — 

l.Tobe  seen,  ttffa  raah,  2. 

Gen.  8.    5  on  the  first  (day),  .were  the  tops..! seen 
9. 14  that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud 
22. 14  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen 
Exodi3-    7  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  seen  with 

13.  7  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  seen  with 
13.    7  neither  shall  there  be  leaven' seen  with 

33.  23  back  parts;  but  my  face  shall  not  be  seen 

3  neither  let  any  man  be  seen  throughout 
7  after  that  he  hath  been  seen  of  the  priest 

7  cleansing,  he  shall  be  seen  of  the  priest 
14  that  thou,  Lord,  art  seen  face  to  face;  and 

4  there  shall  be  no  leavened  bread  seen  with 

8  spearseen  among  forty  thousand  in  Israel 
19.  30  There  was  no  such  deed  done  nor  seen  fr. 

Sa.  17.  17  for  they  might  not  be  seen  to  come  into 

22.  11  he  was  seen  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind 
Ki.  6.  18  all  (was)  cedar ;  there  was  no  stone  seen 

8.  8  ends  of  the  staves  were  seen  out  in  the 
8.  8  they  were  not  seen  without :  and  there 
10.  12  no  suoh  almug  trees,  nor  were  seen  unto 

9  that  the  ends  of  the  staves  were  seen  from 
5.   9  but  they  were  not  seen  without.     And 
9. 11  there  were  none  such  seen  before  in  the 

18.  15  Then  the  channelsof  waters  wereseen,  and 

16.  12  when  it  is  seen  that  Moab  is  weary  on  the 
47-  3  thy  shame  shall  be  seen:  I  will  take  veng. 
60.    2  and  his  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee 

14  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  them,  and  his  ar_ 

2.  To  be  seen,  ."no  raah,  4. 

Job  33. 21  his'  bones  (that)  were  not  seen  stick  ma 

3.  Vision,  sight,  *t<3  roi. 

Job   33.  21  His  flesh,  .that  it  cannot  be  seen;  and  his 

4.  To  view,  behold  attentively,  dedofxat  theaomai. 

Matt.  6.    1  do  not  your  alms  before  men,  to  be  seen 

23.  5  their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen  cf  men 
Markio.  11  [and  had  been  seen  of  her,  believed  not] 

5. To  cause  to  appear,  be  manifest,  <t>aivcj phaino. 
Matt.  6.    5  that  they  may  be  seen  of  men.     Verily  I 
9-  33  saying,  It  was  never  so  seen  in  Israel 

6.  To  see,  behold,  oirro/iat,  birrdvofxai  optanomai. 

Acts  1.    3  being  seen  of  them  forty  days,  and  speak. 
SEETHE,  to  — 
l.To  boil,  cook,  ripen,  W?  bashal. 

Eze.  24.    5  and  let  them  seethe  the  bones  of  it  thereon. 

2.  To  boil,  cook,  ripen,   "?^3  bashal,  3. 

E.\odi6.  23  seethe  that  ye  will  seethe ;  and  that  whi. 
23. 19  thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's 
29.  31  and  seethe  his  flesh  in  the  holy  place 

34.  26  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  hismother's 
Deuti4.  21  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's 

1  Sa.    2. 13  came,  while  the  flesh  was  in  seething,  was 

2  Ki.  4/38  seethe  pottage  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
Zech  14/21  come  and  take  of  them,  and  seethe  therein 

Z.To  blow,  breathe  out,  boil,  nD3  naphach. 

•lob  41.  20  smoke,  as  (out)  of  a  seething  pot  or  caldron 
Jer.     1.  13  I  see  a  seething  pot ;  and  the  face  thereof 

SEER  — 

1..-I  seer,  nin  chozeh. 

2  Sa.  24.  11  came  unto  the  prophet  Gad,  David's  seer 
2  Ki.  17.  13  by  all  the  prophets,  (and  by)  all  the  seers 

1  Ch.ai.   9  Lord  spake  unto  Gad,  David's  seer,  saying 

25.  5  sons  of  Heman  the  king's  seer  in  the  wor. 
29.  29  written  in  the  book  of  Samuel  the  seer,  and 

2  Ch.   9.  29  in  the  visions  of  Iddo  the  seer  against  Jer* 

12.  15  of  Iddo  the  seer  concerning'genealogies'i 


t       34' 
Lev.  13. 

*3- 

Num  14. 

Deut.i6. 

Judg.  1 


!  Ch.  5. 


Psa. 
Isa. 


Zech. 


SBGUB 


856 


S  E  Xj  Lj  B  K 


2  Ch.ig.   2  Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani  the  seer  went  out 

2g.  25  of  Gad  the  king's  seer,  and  Nathan  the  pr. 

29.  30  words  of  David,  and  of  Asaph  the  seer  :and 

33.  18  words  of  theseersthat  spake  to  him  in  the 

33-  19  (are)  written  among  the  sayings  of  the  see. 

35. 15  and  Heman,  and  .leduthun  the  king's  seer 

Isa.   29.  10  prophets  and  your  rulers,  the  seers  hath 

Amos  7.  12  saith  unto  Amos,  O  thou  seer,  go,  flee  thee 

Mic.    3.    7  Then  shall  the  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the 

2.  A  seer,  nxi  roeh. 

1  Sa.  9.    9  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  the  seer :  for  (he  th. 

9.   9  a  prophet  was  beforetime  called  a  seer 
9. 11  draw  water,  and  said  unto  them,  Is  the  s. 
9  18  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  the  seer's  ho. 
9  19  answered  Saul,  and  said,  I  (am)  the  seer 

2  Sa.15-  27  (Art  not)  thouaseer?  return  into  the  city 

1  Ch.  9.  22  Samuel  the  seer  did  ordain  in  their  set  of. 

26.  28  all  that  Samuel  the  seer,  and  Saul  the  son 
29.  29  written  in  the  book  of  Samuel  the  seer,  and 

2  Ch.  16.    7  at  that  time  Hanani  the  seer  came  to  Asa 

.    16,  10  Then  Asa  was  wroth  with  the  seer,  and 
Isa.  30. 10  Which  say  to  the  seers,  See  not ;  and  to  the 
SE'-GTJB,  3>J!f  might,  protection. 

1.  The  younger  son  of  Hiel  the  Bethelite,  who  rebuilt 
Jericho  in  the  time  of  Ahab  king  of  Israel,  B  c.  918. 

1  Ki.  16  34  set  up  the  gates,  .in  his  youngest  (son)S 

2.  A  son  of  Hezron  grandson  of  Judah.     B.C.  1490. 

1  Ch.  2.  21  whom  he  married,  .and  she  bare  him  S. 
2  22  AudS. begat  Jair,  who  had  threeaudtwen. 

SE'-IR,  tu#  rough,  wooded. 

1.  A  hilly  region  S.  of  the  Salt  Sea  and  reaching  to  the 
Elanitic  Gulf;  it  was  occupied  in  succession  by  the  Ho- 
rites,  Deut.  2.  12,  the  Esauites.  Gen.  32.  4,  and  the 
Edomites,  Deut.  2.  4. 

Gen.  14.   6  And  the  Horites  in  their  mount  S.,  unto 

32.  3  Jacobsent.  .to  Esau,  .unto  the  land  of  S. 

33.  14  on.  .until  I  come  unto  my  lord  unto  S. 
33.  16  Esau  returned  that  day  on  his  way  unto  S. 
36.    3  Thusdwelt  Esau  in  mount  S:  Esau  (is)  E. 
36.    9  Esau,  .father  of  the  Edomites  in  mounts. 
36.  30  these  (are),  .their  dukes  iu  the  land  of  S. 

Num24.  18  S.  also  shall  be  a  possession  for  his  ene. 
Deut.  1.    2  bythewuy  of  mounts. unto  Kadesh-barnea 

1.  44  the  Amorites.  .destroyed  you  in  S. .  .unto 

2.  1  and  we  compassed  mount  S.  many  days 
2.   4,  29  children  of  Esau,  which  dwell  in  S. 

2.    5  I  have  given  mount  S.  unto  Esau,  .a  pos. 

2.    8,  22  children  of  Esau,  which  dwelt  in  S. 

2.  12  The  Horims  also  dwelt  iu  S.  beforetime 
33.   2  The  Lord  .  .rose  up  from  S.  unto  them 
Josh  11.  17  the  mount  Halak,  that  goeth  up  to  S. 
12.    7  unto  the  mount  Halak,  that  goeth  up  to  S. 
1 5.  10  the  border  compassed . .  unto  mount  S. 

24.  4  I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  S.,  to  possess  it 
Judg.  5.    4  when  thou  wentest  out  of  S. .  .the  earth 

1  Ch.  4.  42  five  hundred  men,  went  to  mount  S.,  ha. 

2  Ch.20.  10  the  children  of  Amnion,  .and  mount  S. 

20.  22  children  of  Ammon,  Moab,  andmount  S. 
20.  23  up  against  the  inhabitants  of  mount  S. 
20,  23  had  made  an  end  of  the  inhabitants  of  S. 

25.  11  and  smote  of  the  children  of  S.  ten  thou. 
25.  14  he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children  of  S. 

Tsa.   21. 11  He  calleth  to  me  out  of  S.,  Watchman 
Eze.  25.    8  Because  that  Moab  and  S.  do  say,  Behold 
35.    2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  mount  S, 
35.    3  Behold,  O  mount  S„  I  (am)  against  thee 
35     7  Thu3  will  I  make  mount  S.  most  desolate 

35.  15  thou  shalt  be  desolate,  0  mount  S..  and 

2,  The  grandfather  of  Hori,  ancestor  of  the  Horites. 

B.C.  1840. 

Gen.  36.  20  These  (are)  the  sous  of  S  the  Horite,  who 

36.  21  the  children  of  S.  in  the  land  of  Edom 

1  Ch.  1.  38  the  sons  of  S. ;  lotan,  and  Shobal,  and  Z. 
SE-f-RATH,  Tryy'vn  the  wooded. 
A  city  in  Ephraim,  near  Gilgal. 

Judg.  3.  26  And  Ehud,  .passed.. and  escaped  untoS. 
SEIZE  (on  or  upon),  to  — 
l.To  take  or  keep  fast  hold,  piri  chazaq,  5. 

Jer.    49.  24  fear  hath  seized  on  (her) ;  anguish  and  so. 

2.  To  take  jJosscssion,  Bhj  yarash,  5. 

Josh.  8.    7  rise  up  from  the  ambush,  and  seize  upon 

3.  To  take,  receive,  rtpS  laqach. 

Job   3.    6  let  darkness  seize  upon  it;  let  it  not  he  jo. 

4.  To  take  away,  ttyi  nasha,  5. 

Psa.  55.  15  Let  death  seize  upon  them,  (and)k-t  them 

5.  To  hold  down  or  jinn,  KaTe'x&j  katecho. 

Matt 21.  38  kill  him, and  [let  us  seize  on]  his  inheritance 
SE-LA   HAM-BIAH-LE'-KOTH,  rnp^rten  ySo    rock  of 

the  separations. 
A  hill  in  the  wilderness  of  Maou,  in  the  south  of  Ju- 
dah. 

1  Sa.  23.  28  therefore  they  called  that  place  S.-ham. 

SE'-LA,  SE'-LAH,  yhon  the  rock  or  cliff. 
The  capital  of  Edom,  called  also  Petra,  in  the  valley 
Wady  Mv  si,  between  the  Salt  Sea  and  the  Elanitic  Gulf; 
called  Joktheel  by  Amaziah  king  of  Judah  after  his 
taking  it,  B.C.  839-822. 

2  Ki.  14.    7  He  slew,  .ten  thousand,  and  took  S.  by 
Isa.   16.    1  to  the  ruler  of  the  land  from  S.  to  the  w. 

SELAH  — 

.4  pause,  or  musical  note,  nSp. 

Psa.  3.  2,  4,  3  ;  4.  2,  4 ;  7.  5 ;  9.  16,  20 ;  20.  3 ;  21.  2 ; 
24.  6, 10  ;  32.  4,  5,  7 ;  39.  5,  11;  44.  8 ;  46.  3,  7,  1 1 ;  47.  4  ; 


48.  8 ;  49.  13,  15 ;  50.  6 ;  52.  3,  5  ;  54.  3  ;  55-  7*  19  ;  57-  3. 
6 !  59-  5-  13  ;  60.  4 ;  61.  4  ;  62.  4,  8  ;  66.  4,  7,  15  ;  67.  1,  4 ; 
68.7,19,  32;  75.  3;  76.3,  9;  77.  3.9.15;  81.7;  82.2;  83. 
8;  84.  4,  8;  85.  2;  87.  3,  6;  88.  7,  10;  89.  4,  37,  45,  48; 
140.  3.  5.  8;  143-  6;  Hab.  3.  3,  g,  13. 
SE'-LED,  iSp  exultation. 

A  descendant  of  Jehahmeel,  grandson  of  Pharez  son  of 
Judah.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  2.  30  sous  of  Nadab  ;  S.,  aud  Appaim  ;  but  S. 
SE-LEU-CI-A,  'S.iXevKna. 

A  city  of  Syria,  fourteen  miles  W.  of  Antioch.  and  five 
miles  N.  of  the  mouth  of  theOrontes;  called  also  S. 
Pieria  (from  Mount  Pierius)  and  S.  ad  mare  (from  the 
proximity  to  the  sea,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  others 
of  the  same  name).  Strabo  says  it  was  founded  by  Seleu- 
cus  Nicator,  B.C.  280;  in  245  it  was  taken  by  Ptolemy 
Euergetes;  in  220  by  Antiochus  the  Great. 

Acts  13.    4  sent,  by  the  Holy  CJhost,  departed  untoS. 
SELF,  SELVES  — 

1.  Flesh,  1^3  basar. 

£ccl.  2.   3  I  sought  iu  mine  heart  to  give  myself  un. 

2.  Animal  soul,  #D3  nephesh. 

Lev.  1 1.  43  Ye  shall  not  make  yourselves  abominable 

11.  44  neither  shall  ye  defile  yourselves  with  any 

Deut.  4  1 5  Take  ye  therefore  good  heed  unto  yourse. 

Josh. 23.  11  Take  good  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves 

1  Ki.  19.   4  he  requested  for  himself  that  he  might  die 

Esth.  4.  13  Think  not  withthyself  that  thou  shall  es 

9.  31  as  they  had  decreed  for  themselves,  and 

Job   18.    4  He  teareth  himself  in  his  anger :  shall  the 

32.    2  because  he  justified  himself  rather  than 

Psa.131:.    2  Surely  I  have  behaved  aud  quietedmyself 

Isa      5.  14  Therefore  hell  hath  enlarged  herself ,  and 

46.  2  but  themselves  are  gone  into  captivity 

47.  14  they  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from  the 
Jer.     3.  11  Israel  hath  justified  herself  more  than  tr. 

17.  21  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  and  bear  no  bu. 
37.  q  Deceive  not  yourselves,  saying,  TheChal. 
51.  14  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sworn  by  himself 
Amos  2.  14  neither  shall  the  mighty  deliver  himself 
2.  15  he  that  rideth  the  horse  deliver  himself 
6.  8  The  Lord  GOD  hath  sworn  by  himself,  sai. 
Jon.     4.  8  wished  in  himself  to  die,  and  said,  (It  is) 

B.He,  he  himself,  avi6s  autos. 

1  Pe.  2.  24  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own 
See  also  Herself,  himself,  itself,  mine  own  self,  myself, 
ourselves,  themselves,  thyself,  your  own  self,  yourselves. 
—(Also)  Abase,  acquaint,  advise,  adventure,  afflict, 
auoint,  answer,  array,  assemble,  associate,  avenge,  make 
bald,  bathe,  behave,  bemoan,  be  beside,  bestir,  bethink, 
bewail,  bind,  boast,  bow,  burden,  call,  cast,  catch, 
circumcise,  clad,  clean,  cleanse,  clear,  clearing,  clothe, 
comfort,  commit,  condemned,  corrupt,  cover,  cut,  deck, 
defile,  delight,  deliver,  destroy,  discover,  disguise,  dis- 
perse, divide,  ease,  encourage,  make  fair,  make  fat,  feign, 
fill,  force,  forswear,  fret,  show  (self)  friendly,  show  (self) 
fro  ward,  gather,  gird,  glorify,  hang,  harden,  heed,  hide, 
hire  out,  hold,  honour,  humble,  behave  (self)  ill,  join, 
justify,  keep,  known,  lift,  lift  up,  lifting  up,  loose,  lothe, 
lover  of,  show  (self)  mad,  magnify,  make  (self)  many, 
show  (self)  marvellous,  show  (selves)  men,  show  (self) 
merciful,  mingle,  mix,  make  naked,  make  (self)  odious, 
oppose,  put  selves  to  pain,  present,  make  (self)  a  prey, 
make  (self)  a  prince,  profane,  make  (self)  a  prophet,  be- 
have (self)  proudly,  show  (self)  pure,  purify,  put  forth, 
put  up,  quiet,  quit,  raise  up,  reconcile,  recover,  redeem, 
refrain,  refresh,  repent,  rest,  reveal,  revenge,  make  rich, 
roll,  sanctify,  save,  scrap,  sell,  separate,  separating, 
serve,  set,  sever,  shake,  show,  showing,  shut,  make  sick, 
solace,  sport,  spread,  stay,  stir  up,  make  (self)  strange, 
behave  (self)  strangely,  strengthen,  stretch,  stretch  out, 
strip,  show  (self)  strong,  submit,  thrust,  toss,  turn,  make 
(self)  unclean,  uncover,  show  (self)  unsavoury,  show 
(self)  upright,  behave  (self)  valiantly,  vaunt,  wallow, 
warm,  wash,  weary,  make  wise  behave  wisely,  with- 
draw, withhold,  within,  wrap. 
SELF,  of — 
Of  Us  own  accord,  avrofxaros  automatos. 

Mark  4.  28  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself 
SELF  same  (thing)  — 
I.  This,  nm  hazzeh. 

Lev.  23.'  14  until  the  self  same  day  that  ye  have  brou. 
2. Substance,  d*#  etsem. 

Gen.   7. 13  In  the  self  same  day  entered  Noah,  andS. 
17.  23  flesh  of  their  foreskin  in  the  self  same  day 
17.  26  In  the  self  same  day  was  Abraham  circu. 
Exodi2.  17  for  in  this  self  same  day  have  I  brought 
12.  41  even  the  self  same  day  it  came  to  pass,  th. 
12.  51  it  came  to  pass  the  self  same  day,  (that) 
Lev.  23.  14  until  the  self  same  day  that  ye  have  brou. 
23.  21  ye  shall  proclaim  on  the  self  same  day,(th.) 
Pent  32.  48  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  that  self  same  day 
Josh.  5.  ir  did  eat.  .parched  (corn)  in  the  self  same 
Eze.  40.   1  in  the  selfsame  day  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
3.  This  very  thing,  clvt6  rovro  auto  touto. 

2  Co.   5.    5  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self  same  thing 
i.That  very,  UneTvos  ekeinos. 

Matt.  8.  13  servant  was  healed  in  the  self  same  hour 
SELF  will,  self  willed  — 
l.Oood  will,  good  pleasxtre,  ]is"i  ratson. 

Gen.  49.    6  in  their  self  will  they  digged  down  a  wall 
%Pleasing  one's  self  auBaS-qs  authades. 

Titus  1.    7  not  self  willed,  not  soon  angry,  not  given 
2  Pe.  2. 10  Presumptuous  (are  they),  self  willed,  they 


SELL  (away,  self)  to  — 

l.To  sell,  159  makar. 

Gen.  25.  31*  Jacob  said,  Sell  me  this  day  thy  birthright 
25.  33  sware  unto  him:  and  he  sold  his  birthrig. 
31.  15  for  he  hath  sold  us,  and  hath  quite  devo. 
37.  27  Come,  and  let  us  sell  him  to  the  Ishmeel. 
37.  28  sold  Joseph  to  the  Ishmeelites  fortwenty 
37.  36  sold  him  into  Egypt  unto  Potiphar,  an  offi. 
45.    4  Joseph  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold  into 
45.    5  angry  with  yourselves  that  ye  sold  me  hi. 
47.  20  for  the  Egyptians  sold  every  man  his  field 
47.  22  them;  wherefore  they  soldnot  their  lands 
Exod2i.    7  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  amaidser. 
21.    8  to  sell  her  unto  a  strange  nation  he  shall 
21.  16  he  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  selleth  him 
21.  35  then.they  shall  sell  the  live  ox,and  divide 
22     1  steal  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and  kill  it,  or  sell 
Lev  25.  14  if  thou  sell  ought  unto  thy  neighbour,  or 
25.  15  according  unto  thenumber.  .he  shall  sell 
25.  16  number,  .of  the  fruits  doth  he  sell  unto 
25.  25  hath  sold  away  (some)  of  his  possession 
25.  27  unto  the  man  to  whom  he  sold  it,  thathe 
25.  29  if  aman  sell  adwelling  house  in  a  walled 
27.  20  if  he  have  sold  the  field  to  another  man 
Deut  14.  21  or  thou  mayest  sell  it  unto  an  alien  :  for 
21.  14  thou  shalt  not  sell  her  at  all  for  money,  th. 
24.    7  making  merchandise  of  him,  or  selleth 
32.  30  except  their  Rock  had  sold  them,  andthe 
Judg.  2.  14  sold  them  intothe  hands  of  their  enemies 

3.  8  sold  them  into  the  hand  ofChushan-risha. 

4.  2  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Jabin 
4.   9  fortheLoRD  shallsellSiserainto  the  hand 

10.  7  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines 
Ruth  4.    3  selleth  a  parcel  of  land,  which  (was)  our 

1  Sa.  12.    9  sold  them  unto  the  hand  of  Sisera,  capta. 

2  Ki.  4.    7  Go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  thy  debt,  and  li. 
Neh.  5.    8  will  ye  even  sell  your  brethren?  or  shall 

10.  31  any  victuals  on  the  sabbath  day  to  sell,  th. 

13.  15  in  the  day  wherein  they  sold  victuals 

13. 16  sold  on  the  sabbath  unto  the  children  of 
Psa.  44.  12  Thou  sellest  thy  people  for  nought,  and 
Prov23.  23  Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  (it) not;  (also)  wi. 

31.  24  Sheniakethfinelinen,andselleth(it);and 
Isa.  50.  1  to  whom  I  havesold  you?  Behold,  foryo. 
Eze.  30.  12  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

48.  14  they  shall  not  sell  of  it,  neither  exchange 
Joel    3.   3  sold  a  girl  for  wine,  that  they  might  drink 

3.  6  sold  unto  the  Grecians,  that  ye  might  re. 
3.  7  whether  ye  have  sold  them,  and  will  ret. 
3.  8  I  will  sell  your  sons  and  your  daughters 
3.    8  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  Sabeans,  to  a 

Amos  2.    6  because  they  sold  the  righteous  for  silver 
Nah.   3.    4  selleth  nations  through  her  whoredoms 
Zech.11.    5  they  that  sell  them  say,  Blessed  (be)  the 

2.  To  be  sold,  "on  makar,  2. 

Lev.  25.  47  sell' himself  unto  the  stranger  (or)  sojou. 

3.  To  sell  self  l?p  makar,  7. 

1  Ki.21.  20  because  thou  hast  sold  thyself  to  work  e. 

21.  25  which  did  sellhimself  to  work  wickedness 

2  Ki,i7-  17  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in  the  sight  of 

4.  To  break,  sell  corn,  "i^^  shabar. 

Gen.  41.  56  sold  unto  the  Egyptian  ;  and  the  famine 

5.7*0  break,  sell  corn,  -Q(p>  shabar,  5.1 

Gen.  42.    6  he  (it  was)  that  sold  to  all  the  people  of 
Deut.  2.  28  Thou  shalt  sell  me  meat  for  money,  that 
Provn.  26  upon  the  head  of  him  that  selleth  (it) 
Amos  8.  5  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn  ? 
8.   6  (yea),  aud  sell  the  refuse  of  the  wheat? 

6.  To  give  away,  airodlom/xi  apodidomi. 

Acts    5.    8  Tell  me  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so 

7.    0  patriarchs,  moved  with  envy,  sold  Joseph 
Heb.  12.  16  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birt. 

7.7*0  cause  to  pass  over,  sell,  dispose  of,  Trnrpdo'KO}. 
Matti3.  46  went  and  sold  all  that  he  had,  and  bought 
Acta  2.  45  sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and  pa. 

$,  To  sell,  irw\eco  pott \o. 

Matt  13.  44  selleth  all  that  he  hath,  and  buyeth  that 
19.  21  go  (and)  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to 

21.  12  cast  out  all  them  that  sold  aud  bought  in 
21. 12  overthrew,  .the  seats  of  them  thatsoldd. 
25.    9  but  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and 

Markio.  21  gothy  way,  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast,  and 
11.  15  cast  out  them  that  sold  and  bought  in  the 
11.  15  overthrew,  .the  seats  of  them  that  soldd. 

Lukei2.  ^  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms  ;  provide 

17.  28  they  bought,  they  sold,  they  planted,  they 

18.  22  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  distribute  un. 

19.  45  began  to  cast  out  them  that  sold  therein 

22.  36  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  one 
John  2.  14  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  oxen 

2.  16  said  unto  them  that  sold  doves,  Take  th. 
Acts    4.  34  sold  them,  and  brought  the  prices  of  the 

4.  37  Having  land,  sold  (it),  and  brought  the 

5.  1  certain  man  named  Ananias,  .solda  pos. 
Rev.  13. 17  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he 

SELLER  (of  purple)  — 

1.7*0  sell,  i;p  makar. 

Neh.13.  2osellersof  all  kind  of  ware,  lodged  without 
Isa.  24.   2  as  with  the  buyer,  so  with  the  seller  ;  as 
Eze      7.  12  let  not  the  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  seller 
7.  13  For  the  seller  shall  notreturn  to  that  wh. 

2.A  seller  of  p>ur pie,  iropcpvpSirtoKis  jynrphumpolis. 
Acts  16.  14  woman  named  Lydia,  a  seller  of  purple 


SELVEDGE 


857 


SEND 


SELVEDGE,   selvage  — 
End,  extremity,  nyjj  qatsah, 

Exod26.    4  from  the  selvage  in  the  coupling  ;  and  li. 

36.  11  edge  of  one  curtain  from  the  selvage  in 

SELVES,  themselves,  yourselves  — 

Of  one  another,  a\K7)^cov  allelon. 

Mark  8. 16  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying,  (Itis) 
9.  34  they  had  disputed  among  themselves,  who 

15.  31  said  among  themselves  with  the  scribes 
Luke  4.  36  spake  among  themselves,  saying,  What  a 
John  6.  43  said.  .Murmur  not  among  yourselves 

6.  52  Jews  therefore  strove  among  themselves 

11.  56  spake  among  themselves,  as  they  6tood  in 

16.  17  said,  .among themselves,  What isthis  that 
16.  19  Do  ye  enquire  among  yourselves  of  that  I 
19.  24  Theysaidthereforeamongthemselves.Let 

Acts  4. 15  council,  they  conferred  among  themselves 

26.  31  they  talked  between  themselves,  saying 
28..  4  said  among  themselves,  No  doubt  this  man 
28.  25  when  they  agreed  not  among  themselves 

1  Th.  5.  11  Wherefore  comfort  yourselves  together 
5. 15  that  which  is  good,  both  among  yoursel. 

SEM,  2t?m-      See  Skew* 

Son  of  Noah,  and  father  of  Arphaxad.    B.C.  2448. 

Luke  3.  36  which  was  (the  son)  of  S.,  which  was  (the 

SE-MACH'-IAH,  in;55P  J  ah  supports. 
Son  of  Shemaiah,  a  Kohathite,  a  gatekeeper  of  the  ta- 
bernacle in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.    7  whose  brethren,  .strongmen,  Elihu.andS. 

SE-ME'-I,  Septet.    An  ancestor  of  Jesus.  See  Shimei. 
Luke  3.  26  which  was  (the  son)  of  [S].,  which  was 

SE-NA'-AH,  HN3pn  thorn-hedge.   See  Hassenaah. 
A  city  in  Judah'  some  of  whose  inhabitants  returned 
with  Zerubbabel  from  exile.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  35  children  of  S.,  three  thousand,  .six  hun. 

Neh.    7.  3S  children  of  S.,  three  thousand  nine  hun. 

SENATE,   SENATOR  — 
I.Elder,  aged,  senior,  ]$}  zaqen. 

Psa.  105.  22  To  bind  his  princes,  .and  teach  his  sena. 

2.  Senate,  assembly  of  elders,  yepovo-ta  gerousia. 

Acts    5.  21  and  all  the  senate  of  the  children  of  Israel 
SEND  (again,  away,  earnestly,  forth,  out),  to  — 
I. To  cause  to  go  or  come  in,  Ni2  bo,  5. 

Lev.  26.  36  I  will  send  a  faintness  into  their  hearts 
2.To  go  on,  7]?n  halak. 

Neh.    6.  17  the  nobles  of  Judah  sent  many  letters  un. 

3.  To  cast  up  and  down,  7*a  tulf  5. 

Jon.   1.   4  the  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the 

4.  To  set  over,  or  give  a  charge  to,  rny  tsavah,  3. 

Ezra    8.  17  I  sent  them  with  commandment  unto  I. 

5.  To  belch  out,  send  forth,  VI}  naba.  5. 

Eccl.  10.  1  flies  cause  the  ointment,  .to  send  forth 
<o.To  wave,  sluike  out,  *pi  nuph,  5. 

Psa.  68.  9  Thou,  O  God  didst  send  a  plentiful  rain 
7.  To  give,  jru  nathan. 

Exod.  9.  23  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  hail,  and  the 

Deut  11.  15  I  will  send  grass  in  thy  fields  for  thy  ca. 

1  Sa.  12.  17  I  will  call  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  se. 

12.  18  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  rain  that  day 

2  Sa.  24.  15  the  Lord  sent  a  pestilence  upon  Israel 

1  EX  17. 14- the  day  (that)  the  Lord  sendeth  rain  up. 

18.    x  show  thyself  unto  Ahab ;  and  I  will  send 

2  Ki.  19.    7  I  will  send  a  blast  upon  him,  and  he  shall 

1  Ch.21.  14  the  LORD  sent  pestilence  upon  Israel:  and 

2  Ch.  6.  27  send  rain  upon  thy  land,  which  thou  hast 
Psa.  68.  33  he  doth  send  out  his  voice,  (and  that)  a 

77.  17  the  skies  sent  out  a  sound :  thine  arrows 
Song  1.  12  my  spikenard  sendeth  forth  the  smell  th. 
Isa.   37.    7  I  will  send  a  blast  upon  him,  and  he  shall 

S.To  se?id,  rnifj  shalach. 

Gen.  20.   2  Abimelech  king  of  Gerar  sent  and  took  S. 
24.    7  he  shall  send  his  angel  before  thee,  and 
24.  40  will  send  his  angel  with  thee,  and  prosp. 
27.42  she  sent  and  called  Jacob  her  younger  son 

27.  45  then  I  will  send  and  fetch  thee  from  th. 

28.  5  Isaac  sent  away  Jacob  :  and  he  went  to 

31.  4  Jacob  sent  and  called  Rachel  and  Leah 

32.  3  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Es. 
32.    5  I  have  sent  to  tell  my  lord,  that  I  may  find 

37.  13  come,  and  I  will  send  thee  unto  them 
37. 14  he  sent  him  out  of  the  vale  of  Hebron, and 

38.  17  Wilt  thou  give .  .a  pledge,  till  thou  send 
38.  20  Judah  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  fr. 
38.  23  I  sent  this  kid,  and  thou  hast  not  found 
38.  25  she  sent  to  her  father  in  law,  saying,  By 

41.  8  he  sent  and  called  for  all  the  magicians 
41. 14  Pharaoh  sent  and  called  Joseph,  and.  they 

42.  4  Benjamin,  Joseph's  brother,  Jacob  sent 
42. 16  Send  one  of  you,  and  let  him  fetch  your 

43.  8  Send  the  lad  with  me,  and  we  will  arise 
45.    5  God  did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve 
45.    7  God  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve  you 
45.    8  (it  was)  not  you  (that)  sent  me  hither,  but 
45.  23  And  to  his  father  he  sent  after  this  (m.) 

45.  27  saw  the  wagons  which  Joseph  had  sent 

46.  5  in  the  wagons  which  Pharaoh  had  sent  to 
46.  28  he  sent  Judah  before  him  unto  Joseph,  to 

Exod.  2.    5  when  she  saw  the  ark . .  she  sent  her  maid 
3.  10  I  will  send  thee  unto  Pharaoh,  that  thou 
3.  12  a  token  unto  thee  that  I  have  sent  thee 
3. 13  The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent 

108 


Exod.  3. 
3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
7- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9. 
23- 
■23 
24. 

33- 

33- 

Jsumi3. 

13- 
13- 
13- 
13- 
*3- 
14. 
16. 
16. 


22. 
22. 
24. 
31- 

3*- 

32. 

Deut.  1. 


Josh. 


14. 
14. 
18. 
22. 
24. 

24- 
24. 

Judg.  3. 

4- 

6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
9- 
9- 


:Sa. 


14  Thus  shalt  thou  say.  .1  am  hath  sent  me 

15  the  God  of  Jacob,  hath  sent  me  unto  you 
13  And  he  said,  0  my  Lord,  send,  I  pray  thee 

13  by  the  hand  (of  him  whom)  thou  wilt  se. 
28  the  words  of  the  Lord  who  had  sent  him 
22  Lord . .  why  (is)  it  (that)  thou  hast  sent  me  ? 

16  The  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  sent 

7  Pharaoh  sent,  and,  behold,  there  wasnot 

14  I  will  at  this  time  send  all  my  plagues  up. 
19  Send  therefore  now,  (and)  gather  thy  ca. 

27  Pharaoh  sent,  and  called  for  Moses,  and 
20 1  send  an  angel  before  thee,  to  keep  thee 

28  I  will  send  hornets  before  thee,  which  sh. 
5  he  sent  young  men  of  the  children  of  Isr. 
2  I  will  send  an  angel  before  thee :  and  I 

12  hast  not  let  me  know  whom  thou  wilt  se. 
2  Send  thou  men,  that  they  may  search  the 

2  of  every  tribe  of  their  fathers  shall  ye  se. 

3  sent  them  from  the  wilderness  of  Paran 

16  the  men  which  Moses  sent  to  spy  out  the 

17  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  out  the  land  of  C. 

27  we  came  unto  the  land  whither  thou  sent. 

36  the  men  which  Moses  sent  to  search  the 
12  Moses  sent  to  call  Dathanand  Abiram.the 

28  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  hath  sent  me 

29  If  these  men  die . .  the  Lord  hath  not  sent 

14  Moses  sent  messengers  from  Kadesh  unto 

16  he  heard  our  voice,  and  sent  an  angel,  and 

21  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon  king  of 
32  Moses  sent  to  spy  out  Jaazer,  and  they  to. 

5  He  sent  messengers  therefore  unto  Bala. 

10  Balak.  .kiug  of  Moab,  hath  sent  unto  me 

15  Balak  sent  yet  again  princes,  more  and 

37  Did  I  not  earnestly  send  unto  thee  to  call 
12  thy  messengers  which  thou  sentest  unto 

4  Of  every  tribe  a  thousand,  .shall  ye  send 

6  Moses  sent  them  to  the  war,  a  thousand 

8  when  I  sent  them  from  Kadesh-barneato 

22  We  will  send  men  before  us,  and  they  sh. 
26  I  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wilderness  of 

23  when  the  Lord  sent  you  from  Kadesh-b. 

12  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  send  and  fetch 
Ti  the  wonders  which  the  Lord  sent  him  to 

16  whithersoever  thou  sendest  us  we  will  go 

1  the  son  of  Nun  sent  out  of  Shittim  two  men 
3  the  king  of  Jericho  sent  unto  Rahab,  say. 

17  she  hid  the  messengers  that  we  sent 

25  the  messengers  which  Joshua  sent  to  spy 

2  Joshua  sent  men  from  Jericho  to  Ai,  wh. 

22  Joshua  sent  messengers,  and  they  ran  unto 

3  men  of  valour,  and  sent  them  away  by  ni. 

9  Joshua  therefore  sent  them  forth :  and 

3  Adoni-zedek  king  of  Jerusalem  sent  unto 

6  themen  of  Gibeon  sent  unto  Joshuato  the 

1  he  sent  to  Jobab  king  of  Madon,  and  to 

7  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  sent  me  fr. 

11  this  day  as  (I  was)  in  the  day  that  Moses 

4  I  will  send  them,  and  they  shall  rise  and 

13  the  children  of  Israel  sent  unto  the  chil. 

5  I  sent  Moses  also  and  Aaron,  and  I  plag. 
9  sent  and  called  Baalam  the  son  of  Beorto 

12  I  sent  the  hornet  before  you,  which  drave 

15  by  him  the  children  of  Israel  sent  a  pre. 

6  And  she  sent  and  called  Barak  the  son  of 

8  the  Lord  sent  a  prophet  unto  the  childr. 

14  Go  in  this  thy  might . .  have  not  I  sent  th.? 
35  he  sent  messengers  throughout  all  Mana. 
35  and  he  sent  messengers  unto  Asher,  and 

24  Gideon  sent  messengers  throughout  all 

23  God  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abimelech 
31  he  sent  messengers  unto  Abimelech  priv. 
12  Jephthah  sent  messengers  unto  the  king 
14  Jephthah  sent  messengers  again,  unto  the 

17  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  the  king  of  E. 

17  in  like  manner  they  sent  unto  the  king  of 

19  Israel  sent  messengers  unto  Sihon  king  of 

25  the  words  of  J  ephthah  which  he  sent  him 

38  hesentheraway(for)twomonths:  andshe 
8  let  the  man  of  God  which  thou  didst  send 

18  she  sent  and  called  for  the  lords  of  the  P. 

2  the  children  of  Dan  sent  of  their  family 

12  the  tribes  of  Israel  sent  men  throughall 

10  the  congregation  sent  thither  twelve  th. 

13  the  whole  congregation  sent  (some)  to  sp. 

4  the  people  sent  to  Shiloh,  that  they  mig. 
8  They  sent  therefore,  and  gathered  all  the 

11  they  sent  and  gathered  together  all  the 

21  they  sent  messengers  to  the  inhabitants 

16  I  will  send . .  a  man  out  of  the  land  of  Be. 

3  that  we  may  send  messengers  unto  all  the 
8  the  Lord  sent  Moses  and  Aaron,  which 

11  And  the  Lord  sent  Jerubbaal,  and  Bedan 
1  The  Lord  sent  me  to  anoint  thee  (to  be)  ki. 

18  the  Lord  sent  thee  on  a  journey,  and  said 

20  have  gone  the  way  which  the  Lord  sent 

1  I  will  send  thee  to  Jesse  the  Beth-Iehem. 

11  Send  and  fetch  him  :  for  we  will  not  sit 

12  he  sent  and  brought  him  in.  Now  he  (was) 

19  Saul  sent  messengers  unto  Jesse,  and  said 

20  and  sent  (them)  by  David  his  son  unto  Sa. 

22  Saul  sent  to  Jesse,  saying,  Let  David,  I 

5  David  went  out  whithersoever  Saul  sent 

11  Saul  also  sent  messengers  unto  David's 

14  when  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  David 

15  Saul  sent  the  messengers  (again)  to  seeD. 

20  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  David :  and 

21  he  sent  other  messengers,  and  they  prop. 
21  Saul  sent  messengers  again  the  third  time 

12  and  I  then  send  not  unto  thee,  and  show 
21  I  will  send  alad,(saying,)Go,  findoutthe 
31  send  and  fetch  him  unto  me,  for  he  shall 

2  of  the  business  whereabout  I  send  thee 


iSa. 


i  Ki. 


11  the  king  sent  to  call  Ahimelech  the  priest 
5  David  sent  out  ten  young  men;  and  Dav. 

14  David  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wilder. 

25  saw  not  the  young  men.. thou  didst  send 
32  which  sent  thee  this  day  to  meet  me 

39  David  sent  and  communed  with  Abigail 

40  David  sent  us  unto  thee,  to  take  thee  to 

4  David  therefore  sent  out  spies,  and  und. 

5  David  sent  messengers  unto  the  men  of 

12  Abner  sent  messengers  unto  David  on  his 

14  David  sent  messengers  to  Ish-bosheth,  S. 

15  Ish-bosheth  sent,  and  took  her  from  (her) 

26  he  sent  messengers  after  Abner,  which 

11  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to 
10  Toi  sent  Joram  his  son  unto  king  David 

5  Davidsent,  and  fetched  him  out  of  theh. 

2  Davidsent  to  comfort  him  by  the  hand  of 

3  that  he  hath  sent  comforters  unto  thee? 
3  hath  not  David  (rather)  sent  his  servants 

5  hesenttomeet  them,  because  the  men  we. 

6  the  children  of  Amnion  sent  and  hired 

7  he  sent  Joab,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mi. 

16  Hadarezer  sent,  and  brought  out  the  Syr. 
1  David  sent  Joab,  and  his  servants  with 

3  And  David  sent  and  enquired  after  thew. 

4  And  David  sent  messengers  and  took  her 

5  the  woman  conceived,  and  sent  and  told 

6  David  sent  to  Joab,  (saying),  Send  me  U. 

6  And  Joab  sent  Uriah  to  David 

14  David  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab,  and  sent  (it) 
18  Then  Joab  sent  and  told  David  all  theth. 
22  showed  David  all  that  Joab  had  sent  him 

27  David  sent  and  fetched  her  to  his  house 

1  And  the  Lord  sent  Nathan  unto  David 
25  he  sent  by  the  hand  of  Nathan  the  prop. 
27  Joab  sent  messengers  to  David,  and  said 

7  Davidsenthome  toTamar,  saying,  Go  now 

2  Joab  sent  to  Tekoah,  and  fetched  thence 
29  Absalom  sent  for  Joab,  to  have  sent  him 
29  when  he  sent  again  a  second  time,  he  wo. 
32  Behold,  I  sent  unto  thee,  saying,  Come  hi. 
32  that  I  may  send  thee  to  the  king,  to  say 

10  Absalom  sent  spies  throughout  all  thetr. 

12  Absalom  sent  for  Ahithophelthe  Gilonite 
36  by  them  ye  shall  send  unto  me  every  th. 

16  send  quickly,  and  tell  David,  Baying,  Lo. 
29  When  Joab  sent  the  king's  servant,  and 

11  David  sent  to  Zadok  and  to  Abiathar  the 

14  they  sent  (this  word)  unto  the  king,  Re. 

15  he  sent  out  arrows,  and  scattered  them 

17  He  sent  from  above,  he  took  me ;  he  drew 

13  what  answer  I  shall  return  to  him  thatse. 
44  the  kingliath  sent  with  him  Zadok  thepr. 
53  Solomonsent,  and  they  brought  him  down 
25  Solomon  sent  by  the  hand  of  Benaiahthe 
29  Solomon  sent  Benaiahthe  son  of  Jehoiada 
36  the  king  sent  and  called  for  Shimei,  and 
42  the  king  sent  and  called  for  Shimei  and 

1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  senthis  servants  unto 

2  And  Solomon  sent  to  Hiram,  saying 

8  Hiram  sent  to  Solomon,  saying,  I  have 

8  considered  the  tilings  which  thou  sentest 

14  he  sent  them  to  Lebanon,  ten  thousand  a 
13  Solomonsent  andfetched  Hiram  out  ofT. 

.  44  whithersoever  thou  shalt  send  them,  and 
.  14  Hiram  sent  to  the  king  six  score  talents 
.  27  Hiram  sent  in  the  navy  his  servants,  shi. 
.    3  they  sent  and  called  him.  And  Jeroboam 
.  18  Rehoboam  sent  Adoram,  who  (was)  over 
.  20  they  sent  and  called  him  unto  the  congr. 
.  iS  Asa  sent  them  to  Ben-hadad,  the  son  of 
.  19  I  have  sent  unto  thee  a  present  of  silver 
.  20  sent  the  captains  of  the  host  which  he  had 
.  10  whither  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to  seekth. 
.  19  send,  (and)  gather  to  me  all  Israel  unto 
.  2o  Ahab  sent  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel 
.    2  Jezebel  sent  amessenger  unto  Elijah,  say. 
.    2  he  sent  messengers  to  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
.    5  Although  I  have  sent  unto  thee,  saying 
.    6  I  will  send  my  servants  unto  thee  tomor. 
.    7  he  sent  unto  me  for  my  wives,  and  for  my 
.    9  All  that  thou  didst  send  for  to  thy  serv. 
.  10  Ben-hadad  sent  unto  him,  and  said,  Th 
.  17  Ben-hadad  sent  out,  and  they  told  him 
.    8  sentthe  letters  untothe  elders  and  to  the 
.  11  did  as  Jezebel  had  sent  unto  them,  (and) 
.  11  written  in  the  letters  which  she  had  sent 
.  14  theysent  to  Jezebel,  saying,  Naboth  isst. 
2  he  sent  messengers,  and  said  unto  them 
.    6  turn  again  unto  the  king  that  sent  you 
.   6  thou  sendest  to  enquire  of  Baal-zebub  the 
.    9  the  king  sent  unto  him  a  captain  of  fifty 
.  11  he  sent  unto  him  another  captain  of  fifty 
.  13  he  sent  again  a  captain  of  the  third  fifty 
,  16  thou  hast  sent  messengers  to  enquire  of 
,    2,  4,  6  tarry  here,  .for  the  LORD  hath  sent 
,  16  And  he  said,  Ye  shall  not  send 
.  17  he  said,  Send.  They  sent  therefore  fifty 
7  he  went  and  sent  to  Jehoshaphat  the  king 
22  Send  me,  I  pray  thee  one  of  the  young 

5  I  will  send  a  letter  unto  the  king  of  Israel 

6  I  have  (therewith)  sent  !N  aaman  my  serv. 

7  that  this  man  doth  send  unto  me  to  reco. 

8  he  sent  to  the  king,  saying,  Wherefore  ha. 
10  Elisba  sent  amessenger  unto  him,  saying 
22  My  master  hath  sent  me,  saying,  Behold 

9  the  man  of  God  sent  unto  the  king  of  Is. 
10  the  king  of  Israel  sent  to  the  place  which 

1 3  spy  where  he  (is),  that  I  may  send  and  fet. 

14  Therefore  sent  he  thither  horses,  and  ch 
32  and  (the  king)  sent  a  man  from  before  him 
32  tliis  son  of  a  murderer  hath  sent  to  take 


SEND 


858 


SEND 


2  Ki.     7.  13  take . .  five  of  the  horses . .  anil  let  us  send 

7.  14  the  king  sent  after  the  host  of  the  Syrians 

8.  9  Ben-hadad  king  of  Syria  hath  sent  me  to 


9.  17  Take  an  horseman,  and  send  to  meet  them 
9.  19  he  sent  out  a  second  on  horseback,  which 
to.    1  Jehu  wrote  letters,  and  sent  to  Samaria 
10.    5  thebringersup(of  the  children),  sent  to  J. 
10.    7  put  their  heads  in  baskets,  and  sent  him 
10.  21  And  Jehu  sent  through  all  Israel;  and  all 
1  r.    4  Jehoiada  sent  and  fetched  the  rulers  over 
12.  18  sent  (it)  to  Hazael  king  of  Syria:  and  he 
14.   8  Amaziah  sentmessengers  to  Jehoash,  the 
14.    9  the  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king 
14.    9  thistle  that  (was)  in  Lebanon  sent  to  the 
14.  19  they  sent  after  him  to  Lachish,  and  slew 
16.    7  Ahaz  sent  messengers  to  Tiglath-pileser 
16.    8  sent  (it  for)  a  present  to  the  king  of  Assy. 
16.  10  Ahaz  sent  to  Urijah  the  priest  the  fashion 

16.  11  according  to  all  that  king  Ahaz  had  sent 

17.  4  he  had  sent  messengers  to  So  king  of  Eg. 
17. 13  which  I  sent  to  you  by  my  servants  the  pr. 

18.  14  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  sent  to  the  king 
18.  17  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  Tartan,  and  Rab. 

18.  27  Hath  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  master 

19.  2  he  sent  Eliakim,  which  (was)  over  the  ho. 
19.  4  the  king  of  Assyria  his  master  hath  sent 
19.  9  he  sent  messengers  again  unto  Hezekiah 
19.  16  which  hath  sent  him  to  reproach  the  liv. 

19.  20  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  to  Hezekiah,  saying 

20.  12  sent  letters  and  a  present  unto  Hezekiah 
22.  3  the  king  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah 
22. 15  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Tell  the  man  that  s. 

22.  18  the  king  of  Judah,  which  sent  you  to  enq. 

23.  1  the  king  sent,  and  they  gathered  unto  hirn 

23.  16  sent,  and  took  the  bones  out  of  the  sepu. 

1  Ch.13.    2  letussendabroad  unto  our  brethren  every 

14.    1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to  I). 
18. 10  He  sent  Hadoram  his  son  to  king  David 
19.    2  David  sent  messengers  to  comfort  himco. 
19.    3  that  he  hath  sent  comforters  unto  thee 
19.    5  he  sent  to  meet  them  :  for  the  men  were 
19.    6  the  children  of  Amnion  sent  a  thousand 
19    8  he  sent  Joab,  and  all  the  host  of  the  mig. 
19.  16  they  sent  messengers,  and  drew  forth  the 

21.  12  what  word  I  shall  bring,  to  him  that  sent 
21.  15  God  sent  an  angel  unto  Jerusalem  to  des. 

2  Ch.  2.    3  Solomon  sent  to  Hiiram  the  king  of  Tyre 

2.  3  didst  send  him  cedars  to  build  him  an  ho. 
2.  7  Send  me  now  therefore  a  man  cunning  to 
2.  8  Send  me  also  cedar  trees,  fir  trees,  and 
2.  11  answered  in  writing,  which  he  sent  to  S. 
2. 13  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man,  endued  with 
2.  15  the  oil,  and  the  wine .  .let  him  send  unto 
6.  34  by  the  way  that  thou  shalt  send  them,  and 

8.  18  Huram  sent  him,  by  the  hands  of  his  ser. 
10.  3  they  sent  and  called  him.  So  Jeroboam 
10  18  Rehoboam  sent  Hadoram  that  (was)  over 
16.  2  sent  to  Ben-hadad  king  of  Syria,  that  dw. 
16.    3  I  havesent  theesilverand  gold;go,  break 

16.  4  sent  the  captains  of  his  armies  against  the 

17.  7  he  sent  to  his  princes,  (even)  to  Ben-hail 

24.  19  he  sent  prophets  to  them,  to  bring  them 

25.  15  he  sent  unto  him  a  prophet,  which  said 
25.  17  sent  to  Joash,  the  sonof  Jehoahaz,  theson 
25. 18  Joash  king  of  Israel  sent  to  Amaziah  king 
25.  18  The  thistle  that  (was)  in  Lebanon  sent  to 
25.  27  they  sent  to  Lachish  after  him,  and  slew 
28.  16  At  that  time  did  king  Ahaz  send  unto  the 
30.  1  Hezekiah  sent  to  all  Israel  and  Judah,  and 
32.  9  this  did  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  send 
32.  21  the  Lord  sent  an  angel,  which  cut  off  all 
34.  8  he  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah,  and 
34.  23  saith  the  Lord.  .Tell  ye  the  man  that  sent 
34.  26  the  king  of  Judah,  who  sent  you  to  enquire 

34.  29  thekingsentandgathered  together  all  the 

35.  21  he  sent  ambassadors  to  him,  saying 

36.  10  Nebuchadnezzar  sent  and  brought  him  to 
36.  15  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers  sent  to  them 
36.  15  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending;  because 

Ezra    8.  16  Then  sent  I  for  EUezer,  for  Ariel,  for  Sh. 

Neh.  2.  5  that  thou  wouldest  send  me  unto  Judah 
2.  6  it  pleased  the  king  to  send  me ;  and  I  set 
2.  9  the  king  had  sent  captains  of  the  army  and 
6.  2  Geshem  sent  unto  me,  saying,  Come,  let 
6.  3  I  sent  messengers  unto  them,  saying,  I 
6.  4  they  sent  unto  me  four  times  after  this  so. 
6.  5  Then  sent  Sanballat  his  servant  unto  me 
6.  8  I  sent  unto  him,  saying,  There  are  no  such 
6.  12  lo,  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  sent  him 
6.  19  (And)  Tobiah  sent  letters  to  put  me  in  fear 
8. 10  send  portions  unto  them  for  whom  nothing 

Esth.  1.  22  he  sent  letters  into  all  the  king's  provin. 

4.  4  she  sent  raiment  to  clothe  Mordecai,  and 
5. 10  he  sent  and  called  for  his  friends,  and  Ze. 
8. 10  sent  letters  by  posts  on  horseback,  (and) 

9.  20  sent  letters  unto  all  the  Jews  that  (were) 
9.  30 he  sent  the  letters  unto  all  the  Jews,  to  the 

Job      1.    4  sent  and  called  for  their  three  sisters,  to 
1.    5  Job  sent  and  sanctified  them,  and  rose  up 

5.  10  Whogiveth  rain .  .and  sendeth  waters  up. 
Psa.  18.  14  he  sent  out  his  arrows,  and  scattered  them 

18.  16  He  sent  from  above,  he  took  me,  he  drew 
20.   2  Send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary,  and 
43.    3  O  send  out  thy  light  and  thy  truth  :  let 
57.   3  He  shall  send  from  heaven,  and  save  me 
57.    3  God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  his  tr. 
59.  title,  when  Saul  sent,  and  they  watched 
78.  25  Man  did  eat  angels'  food  :  he  sent  them 

105.  17  He  sent  a  man  before  them,  (even)  Joseph 
105.. 20  The  king  sent  and  loosed  him  ;(evem)  the 
105.  26  He  sent  Moses  his  servant,  (ana)  Aaron 
ios.  28  He  sent  darkness,  and  made  it  dark;  and 


Psa.107.  20  He  sent  his  word,  and  healed  them,  and 
no.  2  The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy  stre. 
in.  9  He  sent  redemption  unto  his  people:  he 
135.  9  (Who)  sent  tokens  and  wonders  into  the 
144.  7  Send  thine  hand  from  above;  rid  me,  and 
147.  15  He  sendeth  forth  his  commandment  (up.) 
147.  18  He  sendeth  out  his  word,  aud  melteth  th. 
Prov.  9.  3  She  hath  sent  forth  her  maidens  :  she  cr. 
10. 26  so  (is)  the  sluggard  totfiem  that  send  him 
22.  21  answer  the  words  of  truth  to  them  that  s. 
25  13  (so  is)  a  faithful  messenger  to  them  that  s. 
26.  6  He  that  sendeth  a  message  by  the  hand 
Isa.     6.    8  heard  the  voice . .  saying,  Whom  shall  I  se. 

6.  8  who  will  go  for  us?  Then  said  I.  .send  me 
9.    8  The  Lord  sent  a  word  into  Jacob,  and  it 

16.    1  Send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land 

18.  2  That  sendeth  ambassadors  by  the  sea,  ev. 

19.  20  shall  send  them  a  saviour,  and  a  great  one 

20.  1  Sargon  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  him,  and 
36.    2  king  of  Assyria  sent  Rabshakeh  from  Lac. 

36.  12  Hath  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  master 

37.  2  sent  Eliakim,  who  (was)  over  the  househ. 
37.   4,  17  hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living  God 
37.    9  he  sent  messengers  to  Hezekiah,  saying 
37.  21  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  unto  Hezek. 
39.    1  sent  letters  and  a  present  to  Hezekiah 
42.  19  deaf,  as  my  messenger  (that)  I  sent?  who 
48.  16  the  Lord  God,  and  his  spirit,  hath  sent 
55.  11  shall  prosper(in  the  thing)  whereto  I  sent 
61.    1  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken  hea. 

Jer.     1.    7  for  thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send 
2.  10  send  unto  Kedar,  and  consider  diligen. 

7.  25  I  have  even  sent  unto  you  all  my  servants 
7.  25  daily  rising  up  early  and  sending  (them) 
9.17  send  for  cunning  (women),  that  they  may 

14.    3  have  sent  their  little  ones  to  the  waters 
14.  14  sent  them  not,  neither  havel  commanded 
14. 15  sent  them  not,  yet  they  say,  Sword  and 
16.  16  I  will  send,  .and  after  I  will  send  forma. 

19. 14  whither  the  Lord  had  sent  him  to  proph. 

21.  1  when  king  Zedekiah  sent  unto  him  Pashur 
23.  21  I  have  not  sent  these  prophets,  yet  they 
23.  32  yet  I  sent  them  not,  nor  commanded  them 
23.  38  I  have  sent  unto  you,  saying,  Ye  shall  nut 
25.  4  Lord  hath  sent  unto  you  all  his  servants 
25.  4  rising  early  and  sending  (themj ;  but  ye 
25.  9  I  will  send  and  take  all  the  families  of  the 
25.  15  cause  all  the  nations,  to  whom  I  send  th. 
25. 16,  27  because  of  the  sword  that  I  will  seud 

25.  17  nations ..  unto  whom  the  Lord  had  sent 

26.  5  seut.  .rising  up  early,  and  sending(them) 
26. 12  Lord  sent  me  to  prophesy  against  this  ho. 

26. 15  hath  sent  me  unto  you  to  speak  all  these 
26.  22  Jehoiakim  the  king  sent  men  into  Egypt 
27. 15  For  I  have  not  sent  them,  saith  the  Lord 
28.    9  known,  that  the  LoRDhath  truly  sent  him 

28.  15  Lord  hath  not  sent  thee  ;  but  thou  mak. 

29.  1  sent  from  Jerusalem  unto  the  residue  of 
29.  3  sent  unto  Babylon  to  Nebuchadnezzar  ki. 
29.   9  I  have  not  sent  them,  saith  the  Lord 

29.  19  sent,  .rising  up  early  and  sending  (them) 
29.  25  sent  letters  in  thy  name  unto  all  the  pe. 
29.  28  For  therefore  he  sent  unto  us  (in)  Babylon 
29.  31  Send  to  all  them  of  the  captivity,  saying 
29.  31  sent  him  not,  and  he  caused  you  to  trust 

35.  15  I  have  sent  also  unto  you  all  my'servants 
35. 15  rising  up  early  and  sending  (them),  saying 
36. 14  the  princes  sent  Jehudi  the  son  of  Neth. 

36.  31  the  king  sent  Jehudi  to  fetch  the  roll:  and 

37.  3  the  king  sent  J  ehucal  the  son  of  Shelemiah 
37.  7  the  king  of  Judah,  that  sent  you  unto  me 
37.  17  the  king  sent,  and  took  him  out ;  and  the 
3S.  14  the  king  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah  the  pr. 
39.  13  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain  of  the  guard  se. 

39.  14  they  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah  out  of  the 

40.  14  the  king  of  the  Ammonites  hath  sent  Is. 
42.  5  for  the  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  send 
42.  6  the  Lord  our  God,  to  whom  we  send  thee 
42.    9  unto  whom  ye  sent  me  to  presentyour  su. 

42.  20  when  ye  sent  me  unto  the  Lord  your  God 
42.21  nor  any(thing)  for  the  which  he  hath  sent 

43.  1  for  which  the  Lord  their  God  had  sent 
43.   2  the  Lord  our  God  hath  not  sent  thee  to 

43.  to  I  will  send  and  take  Nebuchadrezzar  the 

44.  4  I  sent  unto  you  all  myservants  the  prop. 
44.    4  rising  early  and  sending  (them),  saying 

Lam.  1.  13  he  sent  fire  into  my  bones,  and  it  prevail. 
Eze.    2.    3  I  send  thee  to  the  children  of  Israel,  to  a 

2.  4  I  do  send  thee  unto  them  ;  and  thou  sh. 

3.  6  had  I  sent  thee  to  them,  they  would  have 
*3.  6  Lord  hath  not  sent  them  :  and  they  have 
17.  15  But  he  rebelled  against  him  in  sending  his 
23.  16  sent  messengers  unto  them  into  Chaldea 
23.  40  that  ye  have  sent  for  men  to  come  from 

Hos.  5.  13  sent  to  king  Jareb  :  yet  could  he  not  heal 
Joel  2.  19  I  will  send  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and 
Amos  7.  10  sent  to  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel,  saying 
Mic.  6.  4  sent  before  thee  Moses,  Aarou,  and  Mir. 
Hag.  1.  12  as  the  Lord  their  God  had  sent  him,  and 
Zech.  1.  10  whom  the  Lord  hath  sent  to  walk  to  and 
2.  8  After  the  glory  hath  he  sent  me  unto  the 
2.    9,  11  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me 

4.  9  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me 

6.  15  knowthat  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me 

7.  2  When  they  had  sent  unto  the  house  of  God 

7.  12  words  which  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent 
Mai.    3.    1  I  will  send  my  messenger  aud  he  shall  pr. 

4.    5  I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet  before 

.To  send,  nhu  shalach,  3. 
Gen.    3.  23  Therefore  the  Lord  God  sent  him  forth      | 

8.  7  sent  forth  a  raven  which  went  forth  to  and 


Gen.  8.  8  Also  he  sent  forth  a  dove  from  him,  to  see 
8.  10  again  he  sent  forth  the  dove  out  of  the  ark 
8.  12  sent  forth  the  dove;  which  returned  not 
12.  20  sent  him  away,  and  his  wife,  and  all  that 
19.  13  and  the  Lord  hath  sent  us  to  destroy  it 
19.  29  sentLotoutof  the  midst  of  the  overthrow 

21.  14  shoulder,  and  the  child,  and  sent  her  away 
24.  54  he  said,  Send  me  away  unto  my  master 
24.56  send  me  away  that  I  may  go  to  my  master 

24.  59  they  sent  away  Rebekah  their  sister,  and 

25.  6  sent  them  away  from  Isaac  his  son,  while 

26.  27  hate  me,  and  have  sent  me  away  from  you  ? 
26.  29  have  sent  thee  away  in  peace  :  thou  (art) 
26.  31  Isaac  seut  them  away,  and  they  departed 
?8.    6  sent  him  away  to  Padan-aram,  to  take  him 

30.  25  Send  me  away,  that  I  may  go  unto  mine 

31.  27  might  have  sentthee  away  with  mirth,  and 

31.  42  surely  thou  hadst  sent  me  away  now  em. 

37.  32  they  sent  the  coat  of  (many)  colours,  anil 

38.  17  he  said,  I  will  send.. a  kid  from  the  flock 
43.  4  If  thou  wilt  send  our  brother  with  us,  we 
43.  5  Butif  thou  wilt  notsend(him),  we  will  not 
43. 14  that  he  may  send  away  your  other  brother 
45.  24  So  he  sent  his  brethren  away,  and  they  de. 

Exod.  7.  2  that  he  send  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 
12.  33  that  they  might  send  them  out  of  the  land 
15.    7  thou  sentest  forth  thy  wrath,  (which)co 

23.  27  I  will  send  my  fear  before  thee,  and  will 
Lev.  16.  21  send  (him)  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man 

26.  25  I  willsend  the  pestilence  among  you  ;  and 
Num2i.    6  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  the  peo. 

22.  40  sent  to  Balaam,  and  to  the  princes  that 
Deut.  7.  20  will  send  the  hornet  among  them,  until 

15-  r3  when  thousendest  himout  free  from  thee 
15.  18  when  thou  sendesthimaway  free  from  tli. 
14.    1  give  (it)  in  her  hand,  and  send  her  out  of 

24.  3  sendeth  her  out  of  his  house;  or  if  the  la. 
24.  4  formerhusband,  whichsentheraway,  may 
28.  20  Lord  shall  send  upon  thee  cursing,  vexat. 
28.  48  which  the  Lord  shall  send  againsf  thee,  in 

32.  24  I  will  also  send  the  teeth  of  beasts  upon 
Josh.  2.  21  she  sent  them  away,  and  they  departed 

22.    6  Joshua  blessed  them,  and  sent  them  away 

22.    7  when  Joshuasent  themawayalsountotb. 

Judg.  3.  18  sent  away  the  people  that  bare  thepresent 

7.    8  he  sent  all  (the  rest  of)  Israel  every  man 

12.  9  sent  abroad,  and  took  in  thirty  daughters 

19.  29  and  sent  her  into  all  the  coasts  of  Israel 

20.  6  sent  her  throughout  all  the  country  of  the 

1  Sa.    5. 10  Therefore  they  sent  the  ark  of  God  to  Ek 

5. 11  Send  away  the  ark  of  theGod  of  Israel,  and 
6.    2  wherewith  we  shall  send  it  to  his  place 
6.    3  If  ye  send  away . .  send  it  not  empty ;  but 

6.  8  thereof ;  and  send  it  away,  that  it  may  go 
9.  26  saying,  Up,  that  I  may  send  thee  away 

10.  25  Samuel  sent  all  the  people  away,  every 

11.  7  sent  (them)  throughout  all  the  coasts  of 

13.  2  the  rest  of  the  people  he  sent  every  man 
19. 17  sent  away  mine  enemy,  that  he  is  escaped? 
20.  13  I  will  show  it  thee,  and  send  thee  away 
20.  22  thy  way  :  for  the  Lord  hath  sent  thee  away 

30.  26  he  sent  of  the  spoil  unto  the  elders  of  Ju. 

31.  9  sent  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round 

2  Sa.   3.  21  sent  Abner  away ;  and  he  went,  .in  peace 

3.  22  for  he  had  senthim  away,  and  he  was  gone 
3.  23  hath  sent  him  away,  and  he  is  gone  in  pe . 
3.  24  why  (is)  it  (that)  thou  hast  sent  him  away 
10.    4  to  their  buttocks,  and  sent  them  away 
13. 16  this  evil  in  sending  me  away  (is)  greater 

18.  2  David  sentforth  a  third  part  of  the  people 

1  Ki.  8.  66  On  the  eighth  day  he  sent  the  people  away 

20.  34  I  will  send  thee  away  with  this  covenant 

20.  34  he  made  a  covenant,  .and  sent  him  away 

2  Ei.  6.  23  sent  them  away,  and  they  went  to  their 

17.  25  Lord  sent  lions  among  them,  which  slew 
17.  26  therefore  he  hath  sent  lions  among  them 
24.  2  sent  against  him  bands  of  theChaldees,and 
24.    2  sent  them  against  Judah  to  destroy  it,  ac. 

1  Ch.  8.    8  after  he  had  sent  them  away ;  Hushimand 

10.    9  sent  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round 

12.  19  for  the  lords,  .sent  him  away,  sayiug,  He 

19.  4  cut  off  their  garments,  .and  seut  them  a. 

2  Ch.  7.  10  he  sent  the  people  away  into  their  tents 

7.  13  or  if  I  send  pestilence  among  my  people 
24.  23  sent  all  the  spoil  of  ttiem  unto  the  king 

32.  31  who  sent  unto  him  to  enquire  of  the  won. 
Neh.  8.  12  to  send  portions,  and  to  make  great  mirth 
Job    12.  15  also  he  sendeth  them  out,  and  they  over. 

14.  20  his  countenance,  ami  sendeth  him  away 

21.  11  They  send  forth  their  little  ones  like  a  flo. 

22.  9  Thou  hast  sent  widows  away  empty,  and 

38.  35  Canst  thou  send  lightnings,  that  they  may 

39.  5  Who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  ass  free  ?  or 
Psa.  78.  45  He  sent  divers  sorts  of  flies  among  them 

80.  11  She  sent  outlier  boughs  unto  the  sea,  and 
104.  10  He  sendeth  the  springs  into  the  valleys 
104.  30  Thou  sendeth  forth  thy  spirit,  they  are  cr. 
106. 15  gave  them  their  request;  but  sent  leanness 
Isa.  10.  6  I  will  send  him  against  an  hypocritical 
10.  16  send  among  his  fat  ones  leanness;  and  uu 
32.  20  send  forth  (thither)  the  feet  of  the  ox  am 
43.  14  For  your  sake  I  have  sentto  Babylon,  and 
57.  9  didst  send  thy  messengers  far  off,  and  di. 
66.  19  will  send  those  that  escape  of  them  unto 
Jer.  8. 17 1  will  send  serpents,  cockatrices,  among 
9.  16  send  a  sword  after  them,  till  I  have  cons. 
24.  5  Judah,  whom  I  have  sent  out  of  thisplace 
24.  10  I  will  send  the  sword,  the  famine,  and  the 
27.  3  send  them  tothekingof  Edom,  andtothe 
29. 17  will  send  upon  them  the  sword,  the  famine 
29.  so  whom  I  have  sent  from  Jerusalem  to  Bab. 
48. 12  that  I  will  seud  unto  him  wanderers,  that 


SEND 


859 


SEND 


Jer.  49.  37  sent  the  sword  after  them,  till  I  have  co. 

51.    2  will  send  unto  Babylon  farmers,  that  sh. 

Eze.     5.  16  When  I  shall  send  upon  them  the  evil  ar. 

5.  16  Which  I  will  send  to  destroy  you:  and  I 

5.  17  So  will  I  send  upon  you  famine  and  evil 

7.  3 1  will  send  mine  anger  upon  thee,  and  wi. 
14, 19  Or  (if)  I  send  a  pestilence  into  that  land 
14.  21  How  much  more  when  I  send  my  four  so. 
28.  23  For  I  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and 
31.  4  sent  out  her  little  rivers  unto  all  the  trees 
39.   6  will  send  a  fire  on  Magog,  and  among  th. 

Hos.    8.  14  but  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  his  cities,  and 
Joel    2.  25  my  great  army  which  I  sent  among  you 
Amos  1.    4,  7,  10,  12  But  I  will  send  a  fire 

2.    2,  5  But  I  will  send  a  fire,  .and  it  shall 

4.  10 1  have  sent  among  you  the  pestilence  after 
Zech.  9.  11  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the 
Mai.    2.    2  will  even  send  a  curse  upon  you,  and  I 

2.  4  ye  shall  know  that  I  have  sent  this  com. 

10.  To  send  forth,  nSy>  shalach,  5. 

Exod.  8.21  I  will  send  swarms  (of  flies)  upon  thee,  and 
Lev.  26.  22  I  will  also  send  wild  beasts  among  you 
2  Ki.15.  37  the  Lord  began  to  send  against  Judah  E. 
Eze.  14.  13  will  send  famine  upon  it,  and  will  cut  off 
Amos  8.  11  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a  fa. 

l.To  send,  send  forth,  rrSy  shelach. 
Ezra  4.  n  This(is)  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  they  sent 
4. 14  therefore  have  we  sent  and  certified  the 

4. 17  (Then)  sent  the  king  an  answer  unto  Re. 

4. 18  The  letter  which  ye  sent  unto  us  hath  be. 

5.  6  The  copy  of  the  letter  that  Tatnai.  .sent 
5.    7  They  sent  a  letter  unto  him,  wherein  was 

5.  17  let  the  king  send  his  pleasure  to  us  cone. 

6.  13  to  that  which  Darius  the  king  had  sent 
Dan.   3.    2  the  king  sent  to  gather  together  the  prin. 

3.28  who  hath  sent  hisangel,  and  delivered  his 
6. 22  God  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  hath  shut 

12.  To  send  up,  again,  ava.ir4fj.7ra)  anapenxpo. 

Luke23.  7  he  sent  him  to  Herod,  who  himself  also  was 
23.  Ti  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe,  and  sent 
23.  15  I  sentyoutohim;  and,  lo,  nothing  worthy 

Plini.       12  Whom  I  have  sent  [again]:  thou  therefore 

lS.Tb  loose  off  or  away,  airoXvw  apoluo. 

Matt  14.  15  send  the  multitude  away,  that  they  may 
14.  22  go  hef ore. .  while  he  sent  the  multitude  a. 

14.  23  when  he  had  sent  the  multitudes  away 

15.  23  send  her  away;  for  she  crieth  after  us 
15.  32  I  will  not  send  them  away  fasting,  lest 
15.  39  he  sent  away  the  multitude,  and  took  sh. 

Mark  6.  36  Send  them  ?way,  that  they  may  go  into 
6.  45  to  go  to  the  other  side . .  while  he  sent  aw. 

8.  3  if  I  send  them  away  fasting  to  then"  own 

8.  9  aboutfourthousand;  andhesentthemaw. 
Luke  8.  38  that  he  might  bewithhim:  but  Jesus  sent 

9.  12  Send  the  multitudes  away,  that  they  may 
Acts  13.    3  laid  (their)  hands  on  them,  they  sent  (th.) 

14.  To  send  away,  forth,  a-TroarsWcc  apostellv. 
Matt  2. 16  sent  forth,  and  slew  all  the  children  that 
10.    5  Jesus  sent  forth,  and  commanded  them 
to.  16  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 

10.  40  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that  sent  me 

11.  10  I  send  my  messenger  before  thyface,  wh. 
t  3.  41  The  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels 
14.  35  they  sent  out  into  all  that  countryround 
15. 24  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of 

20.  2  when  he  had  agreed .  .he  sent  them  into 

21.  1  when  they  drew  nigh .  .the a  sent  Jesus 
si.    3  Lord  hath  need.,  straightway  he  will  send 
2i.  34  he  sent  his  servants  to  the  husbandmen 
21.  36  Again,  he  sent  other  servants  more  than 

21.  37  he  seut  unto  them  hi3  son,  saying,  They 

22.  3  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  that 
22.   4  he  sent  forth  other  servants,  saying,  Tell 

22.  16  they  sent  out  unto  him  their  disciples  wi. 

23.  34  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men 
23-  37  an,l  stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto  th. 

24.  31  he  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  great  sou. 
27.  19  his  .wife  sent  unto  him,  saying,  Have  thou 

Mark  1.   2 1  send  my  messenger  before  thyface,  wh. 
3. 14  that  he  might  send  them  forth  to  preach 

3.  31  his  brethren,  .sent  unto  him,  calling  him 
5. 10  that  he  would  not  send  them  away  out  of 
6.  7  began  to  send  them  forth  by  two  and  two 
6. 17  Herod  himself  had  sent  forth  andlaid  hold 

6.  27  the  king  sent  an  executioner,  and  comm. 

8.  26  he  sent  him  away  to  his  house,  saying 
g.  37  receiveth  not  me,  but  him  that  sent  me 

11.  1  at  the  mount  of  Olives,  he  sendeth  forth 

11.  3  and  straightway  lie  will  send  him  hither 

12.  2  he  sent  to  the  husbandmen  a  servant,  th. 
12.  3  they  caught.,  and  beat  him,  and  sent.. away 
12.  4  again  he  sent  unto  them  another  servant 
12.  4  and  [sent  (him)  away]  shamefully  handled 
12.  5  he  sent  another ;  and  him  they  killed,  and 

12.  6  he  sent  him  also  last  unto  them,  saying 
12. 13  they  send  unto  him  certain  of  the  Phari. 

13.  27  then  shall  he  send  his  angels,  and  shall 

14.  13  he  sendeth  forth  two  of  his  disciples,  and 
Luke  i.  19  and  am  sent  to  speak  unto  thee,  aud  to 

1.  26  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  from  God  unto 

4.  18  he  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken  hear. 
4. 43  I  must  preach .  .for  therefore  am  I  sent 

7.  3  he  sent  unto  him  the  elders  of  the  Jews 
7.  20  John  Baptist  hath  sent  us  unto  thee,  sa. 
7.  27  I  send  my  messenger  before  thyface,  wh. 

9.  2  he  sent  them  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  G. 
9.  48  shall  receive  me  receiveth  him  that  sent 
9.  52  sent  messengers  before  his  face :  and  they 

.     10.    1  sentthemtwoandtwobeforehisfaceinto 


Lukeio.    3  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  wolves 

10.  16  despiseth  me  despiseth  him  that  sent  me 

11.  49  I  will  send  them  prophets  and  apostles 

13.  34  and  stonest  them  that  are  sent  unto  thee 

14.  17  sent  his  servant  at  supper  time  to  say  to 

14.  32  he  sendeth  an  ambassage,  and  desireth 
19.  14  his  citizens  hated  him,  and  sent  a  message 

19.  29  when  he  was  come  nigh,  .he  sent  two  of 
39.  32  they  that  were  sent  went  their  way,  and 

20.  10  he  sent  a  servant  to  the  husbandmen,  th. 
20. 20  they  watched  (him),  and  sent  forth  spies 
22.  8  he  sent  Peter  and  John,  saying,  Go  and  pr. 
22.  35  I  sent  you  without  purse,  aud  scrip,  and 
24.  49  [I  send]  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon 

John  1.    6  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose 
1.  19  the  Jews  sent  priests  and  Levites  from  J. 
1.  24  they  which  were  seut  were  of  the  Pharis. 
3. 17  God  sent  not  his  son  into  the  world  toco. 
3.  28  I  am  not  the  Christ,  but  that  I  am  sent 

3.  34  he  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the  wo. 

4.  38  I  sent  ye  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  besto. 

5.  33  Ye  sent  unto  John,  and  he  bare  witness 
5.  36  bear  witness,  .that  the  Father  hath  sent 

5.  38  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  believe  not 

6.  29  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  sent 
5.  57  As  the  living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I 

7.  29  for  I  am  from  him,  and  he  hath  sent  me 

7.  32  the  chief  priests  sent  officers  to  take 

8.  42  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  he  sent  me 

10.  36  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified,  and  sent 

11.  3  his  sisters  sent  unto  him,  saying,  Lord,  be. 
11.  42  they  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me 
17.   3  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent 
17.    8  they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  send 
17.  18  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even 
17.  18  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into  the  world 
17.  21  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me 
17.  23  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me 

17.  25  these  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me 

18.  24  Annas  had  sent  him  bound  unto  Caiaphas 
20.  21  ss  (my)  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so 

Acts    3.  20  he  shall  send  Jesus  Christ,  which  before 

3.  26  having  raised  up  his  Son  Jesus,  sent  him 
5.  21  sent  to  the  prison  to  have  them  brought 
7.  14  Then  sent  Joseph,  and  calledhis  father  J. 
7.  34  now  come,  I  will  send  thee  into  Egypt 

7.  35  the  same  did  God  send  (to  be)  a  ruler  and 

8.  14  they  sent  unto  them  Peter  and  John 

9.  17  hath  sent  me,  that  thou  mightest  receive 
9.  38  they  sent  unto  him.  .men,  desiring  (him) 

10.  8  when  he  had  declared  all.  .he  sent  them 
10.  17  the  men  which  were  sent  from  Cornelius 
10.  20  go. .  doubting  nothing:  for  1  have  sentth. 
10.  21  [went  down  to  the  men  which  were  sent] 

10.  36  The  word  which  (God)  sent  unto  the  chil. 
ti.  11  there  were  three  men . .  sent  from  Cesarea 

11.  13  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  Simon 

11.  30  sent  it  to  the  elders  by  the  hands  of  Bar. 
13.  15  rulers  of  the  synagogue  sent  unto  them,  sa. 
13.  26  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  [sent] 

15.  27  We  have  sent  therefore  Judas  and  Silas 

16.  35  the  magistrates  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying 

16.  36  The  magistrates  have  sent  to  let  you  go 

19.  22  he  sent  into  Macedonia  two  of  them  that 
26. 1 7  the  Gentiles,  unto  whom  now  I  send  thee 
28.  28  the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  unto  the  Gen. 

Rom  10.  15  how  shall  they  preach  except  they  be  sent 

1  Co.  1.  17  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  pre. 

2  Co.  12. 17  a  gain  of  you  by  any  of  them  whom  I  sent 
2T1.  4.  12  And  Tychicus  have  I  sent  to  EpHe.  1.  4. 
1  Pe.  1.  12  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  hea. 
1  Jo.   4.    9  God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the 

4. 10  sent  his  Son  (to  be)  the  propitiation  for 

4.  14  the  Father  sent  the  Son  (to  be)  the  Saviour 
Rev.    1.    1  he  sent  and  signified  (it)  by  his  angel  unto 

5.  6  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  God  sentfo. 
22.    6  the  Lord  God  of  the  holy  prophets  sent  his 

15.  To  arrange  off,  a7r0Ta.crcr0fj.at  apotassomai. 
Mark  6.  46  whenhe  had  sent  them  away,  he  departed 

16.  To  send  off  or  away,  let  go,  a<pii)f.u  aphiemi. 
Matti3.  36  Jesus  sent  the  multitude  away,  and  went 
Mark  4.  36  when  they  had  sent  away  the  multitude 

17.7*0  cast,  j3aAAo>  hallo. 

Matt  10.  34  send  peace  on  earth  :  I  came  not  to  send 
Luke  12.  49  I  am  come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth;  and 

18.  To  gush  forth  abundantly,  fipvai  bruo. 

Jas.     3.  11  Doth  a  fountain  send  forth  at  the  same  pi. 

19.  7*0  cast  out,  efcf&aA?\jv  ekballo. 

Matt.  9. 38  that  he  will  send  forth  labourers  into  his 

12.  20  till  he  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory 
Mark  1.  43  charged  him,  and  forthwith  sent  him  away 
Lukeio.  2  thathe  would  send  forth  labourers  intojiis 
Jas.    2.  25  had  received  the  messengers,  and  had  sent 

20.  To  send  out,  iKireuTrco  ehpempo. 

Acts  13.   4  Sothey.beingsentforthbytheHolyGhost 

17. 10  the  brethren  immediately  sent  away  Paul 

21.70  send  away  out,  ^airocrriWca  exapostello. 
Luke  1.  53  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent  empty  away 

20.  10  husbandmen  beat  him,  and  sent . .  away 
20.  11  entreated. .shamefully,andsent..awayem. 

Acts  7. 12  when  Jacob  heard.. he  sent  out  our  fathers 
9.  30  brought  him  down,  .and  sent  him  forth  to 
11.  22  they  sent  forth  Barnabas,  that  he  should 

12. 11  the  Lord  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  hath 

17.  14  the  brethren  sent  away  Paul,  to  go  as  it 
22.  21  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gent. 

Gal.    4.    4  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman 
4.   6  God  hath  sent  forth  the  spirit  of  his  Son 


22.  To  send,  7re/i.7rw  jiempo. 

Matt.  2.    8  he  sent  them  to  Bethlehem,  and  said,  Go 

11.  2  when  John  had  heard,  .he  sent  two  of  his 
14.  10  he  sent,  and  beheaded  John  in  the  prison 

22.  7  he'sentforth  his  armies,  anddestroyed  th. 
Mark  5.  12  Send  us  into  the  wine,  that  we  may  enter 
Luke  4.  26  unto  none  of  them  was  Elias  sent,  save  un. 

7.  6  the  centurion  sent  friends  to  him,  saying 
7. 10  they  that  were  sent,  returning  to  the  hou. 
7.  19  John,  .sent  (them)  to  Jesus,  saying,  Art 

15. 15  and  he  sent  him  into  his, fields  to  feed  sw. 
16.  24  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of 
16.  27  that  thou  wouldest  send  it  to  my  father's 
20.  11  he  sent  another  servant :  and  they  beat  h. 
20.  12  he  sent  a  third  :  and  they  wuunded  him 
20.  13  I  will  send  my  beloved  son :  it  may  be  th. 

John  1.  22  we  may  give  an  answer  to  him  that  sent 

1.  33  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize  with  water,  the 

4.  34  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 

5.  23  honoureth  not  the  Father  which  hath  sent 
5.  24  He  that. . belie veth  on  him  that  sent  me 
5.  30  the  will  of  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me 

5.  37  the  Father  himself,  which  hath  sent  me 

6.  38  I  came,  .to  do.  .the  will  of  him  that  sent 
6.  39  this  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent 
6.  40  this  is  the  will  [of  him  that  sent]  me,  that 

6.  44  except  the  Father  which  hatli  sent  me  dr. 

7.  16  My  doctrine  is  notmine,  butnis  that  sent 
7. 18  he  that  seekethhis  glory  thatsenthim,  the 
7.  28  he  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  know 

7.  33  a  little  while . .  I  go  unto  him  that  sent  me 

8.  16  not  alone,  but  I  and  the  Father  that  sent 
8.  18  the  Father  that  sent  me  beareth  witness 
8.  26  he  that  sent  me  is  true ;  and  I  speak  to 

8.  29  he  thatsentmeis  withme  :  the  Father  ha. 

9.  4  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent 

12.  44  believeth  not  on  me,  but  on  him  that  sent 
12.  45  he  that  seeth  me  seetli  him  that  sent  me 

12.  49  but  the  Father  which  sent  me,  he  gave  me 

13. 16  neither  he.  .greater  thanhethat  sent  him 

13.  20  He  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send  re. 

13.  20  that  receiveth  me  receiveth  him  that  sent 

14.  24  not  mine,  but  the  Father's  which  sent  me 

14.  26  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  se. 

15.  21  because  they  know  not  him  that  sent  me 

15.  26  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Fat. 

16.  5  I  go  my  way  to  him  that  sent  me  ;  and  n. 
16.  7  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you 
20. 21  Then  said  Jesus,  .even  so  send  I  you 

Acts  10.  5  send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  (one)  Sim. 
10. 32  Send  therefore  to  Joppa,  and  call  hitherS. 

10.  33  Immediately  therefore  I  sent  to  thee ;  and 

11.  29  determined  to  send  relief  unto  the  brethr. 
15.  22  to  send  chosen  men  of  their  own  company 

15.  25  to  send  chosen  men  unto  you  with  our 
19. 31  sent  unto  him,  desiring  (him)  that  he  wo. 
20.  17  he  sent  to  Ephesus,  and  called  the  elders 

23.  30  I  sent  straightway  to  thee,  and  gave  com. 
25.  21  commanded,  .to  be  kept  till  [I  might  s.] 
25.25  I  found.  .1  have  determined  to  send  him 
25.  27  it  seemetli  to  me  unreasonable  to  send  a 

Rom.  8.    3  sending  Ins  own  son  in  the  likeness  of  s. 

1  Co.  4. 17  I  sent  unto  you  Timotheus,  who  is  my  be. 

16.  3  them  will  I  send  to  bring  your  liberality 

2  Co.  9.  3  Yet  have  I  sent  the  brethren,  lest  our  b. 
Eph.  6.  22  Whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same 
Phil.    2.  19  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timothy 

2.  23  Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send  presently 
2.  35  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send  to  you 

2.  28  I  sent  him  therefore  the  more  carefully 
4. 16  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again 

Col.     4.    8  Whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same 

1  Th.  3.    2  sent  Timotheus,  our  brother,  and  minister 

3.  5  I  sent  to  know  your  faith,  lest  by  some 

2  Th  2.  11  Godshallsend  them  strong  delusion,  that 
Titus  3. 12 1  shall  send  Artemas  unto  thee,  or  Tych. 
1  Pe.  2.  14  as  unto  them  thatare  sent  by  him  forthe 
Rev.    1.  11  send  itunto  the  seven  churches  which  are 

11. 10  make  merry,  and  [shall  send]  gifts  ore  to 
22. 16  I  Jesus  have  sentmine  angel  to  testifyun. 

SEND  back,  for,  over,  with,  to  — 
l.To  take,  receive,  np?  laqach. 

1  Sa.  17.  31  rehearsed  (thein)  before  Saul . .  he  sent  for 

2.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  "dj;  abar,  5. 

Gen.  32.  23  sent  them  over  the  brook,  and  sent  over 

3.  To  cause  lo  turn  back,  3W  shub,  5. 

2  Ch.25. 13  soldiers  of  the  army  which  Amaziah  sent  b. 

4. To  send  after,  fxer air e /j.tt to  mttapieinijo. 

Acts  10.  22  warnedfromGodbyanholyangeltosend  f. 
10.  29  Therefore  came  I . .  as  soon  as  I  was  s.  for 
10.  29 1  ask.  .forwhat  intentyehave  sent  for  me 

24.  24  he  sent  for  Paul,  and  heard  him  concern. 

24.  26  he  sent  for  him  the  oftener,  and  commuu. 

25.  3  that  be  would  send  for  him  to  Jerusalem 

5.  To  send  with,  ffvfxiriinrw  sumpempo. 

2  Co.  8. 18  And  we  have  sent  with  him  thebrother 

8.  22  And  we  have  sent  with  them  our  brother 

6.  To  send  off  or  away  with,  arwa-KocrTtWu)  szunap. 

2  C0.12.  18  I  desired  Titus,  and  with  (him)  I  sent  a 

SEND  good  speech,  to  — 

To  cause  to  meet,  rnpr  qarah,  5. 

Gen.  24. 12  send  me  good  speed  this  day,  and  show 
SEND  rain,  to  — 
To  rain,  cause  rain,  £pe'x«  brecho. 

Matt.5.  45  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  un. 


SEND 


860 


SEPULCHRE 


SEND  to  descry,  to  — 

To  cause  to  spy  out,  *un  tur,  5. 

Judg.  i.  23  the  house  of  Joseph  sent  to  descry  Beth-el 
BENDING  (away,  forth)  — 
l.A  sending,  nyjn  mishlach, 

Isa.     7.  25  it  shall  be  for  the  sending  forth  of  oxen 

Si.A  sending,  ni?^.p  mishloach. 

Esth.  9.  19,  22  and  of  sending  portions  one  to  anoth. 

2. A  sending,  nnS^p  niishlachath. 

Psa.  78.  49  He  cast  upon  them,  .trouble,  by  sending 

4.  To  send,  rky  shalach,  3. 

2  Sa.  13.  16  this  evil  in  sending  me  away  (is)  greater 
SE'-NEH,  mo  pointed  rock. 

A  rock  in  Benjamin,  near  Gibeah,  at  the  pass  of  Mich- 
mash,  where  the  Philistines  had  a  garrison  in  the  days 
of  Saul. 

1  Sa.  14.   4  one.  .Bozez,  and  the  name  of  the  other  S. 

SE'-NTR,  t'j^  peak  or  snowy  mountain. 

A  mountain  N.E.  of  Jordan,   between  Amanah  and 

Jlermon.    See  Shenir. 

1  Ch.  5.  23  they  increased  from  Bashan unto.  .S.,  and 
Eze.  27.    5  have  made.  .thy.  .boards  of  flr  trees  of  S. 

SENNA-CHE'-RIB,  nnnjp. 

An  Assyrian  king,  B.C.  714-696,  who  invaded  Judah  in 
the  days  of  Hezekiah,  and  whose  army  was  destroyed 
in  one  night;  he  was  slain  by  two  of  his  sons  in  Nine- 
veh in  the  temple  of  Nisroch. 

2  Ki.  18.  13  did  S.  king  of  Assyria  come  up  against 

19.  16  hear  the  words  of  S.,  which  hath  sent  him 
19.  20  against  S.  king  of  Assyria  I  have  heard 
19.  36  S.  king  of  Assyria  departed,  and  went  and 

2  Ch.32.    1  S.  king  of  Assyria  came,  and  entered  into 
32.    2  when  Hezekiah  saw  that  S.  was  come,  and 
32.    9  After  this  did  8..  .send  his  servants  to  J. 
32.  10  Thus  saith  S.  king  of  Assyria,  Whereon 
32.  22  from  the  hand  of  S.  the  king  of  Assyria 

Isa.  36.  1  S. .  .came  up  againstall  the  defenced  cit. 
37. 17  hear  all  the  words  of  S.,  which  hath  sent 
37.  21  Whereas  thou  hast  prayed.,  against  S.  ki. 
37.  37  So  S. .  .departed,  and  went  and  returned 

SENSE,  SENSES  — 

1.  Understanding,  wi$domy  meaning,  ?D^,  bs'ur  sefcel. 
Neh.  8.    8  they  read  in  the  book,  .and  gave  the  sen. 

'2.  Organ  of  sense,  mental  faculty,  alo-d-nrrjptou. 

Heb.  5.  14  havetheir  senses  exercised  to  discern  both 
SENSUAL  — 
Animal,  sensual,  sensuous,  \Luxik6s  psuchikos. 

Jas.     3/15  This  wisdom .  .(is)  earthly,  sensual,  devil. 

Jude      19  These  be  they .  .sensual,  having  not  the 

SENT  (back)  — 

l.To  send,  rh^  shalach. 

Gen.  32.  18  it  (is)  a  present  sent  unto  my  lord  Esau 
1  Ki.14.    6  for  I  (am)  sent  to  thee  (with)  heavy  (tid.) 
Jer.  49.  14  an  ambassador  is  sent  unto  the  heathen 
Eze.    2.    9  behold,  an  hand  (was)  sent  nnto  me,  and 
3.    5  thou  (art)  not  sent  to  a  people  of  a  stran 
23.  40  men.  .unto  whom  a  messenger  (was)  sent 

H.What  are  sent,  D'piW  shilluchim. 

Exod  18.  2  took  Zipporah.  .after  he  had  sent  her  ba. 

3.  To  send  off  or  away,  awooTeWw  apostello. 
John  9.    7  Siloam,  which  is,  by  interpretation,  Sent 

4.  One  sent  off  or  away,  airSaroXos  apostolos. 
Johni3-  16  neither  he  that  is  sent  greater  thanheth. 

SENT  (away,  forth),  to  be  — 
l.To  be  sent,  nSy  shalach,  2. 

Esth.  3.  13  the  letters  were  sent  by  posts  into  all  the 

2.  To  be  sent,  nSf  shalach,  4. 

Gen.  44.    3  the  men  were  sent  away,  they  and  their 
Judg.  5.  15  Barak  :  he  was  sent  on  foot  into  the  val. 
Prov  17.  11  a  cruel  messenger  shall  be  sent  against 
Dan.  10.  1 1  stand  upright :  for  unto  thee  am  I  now  se. 
Obad.       1  an  ambassador  is  sent  among  the  heath. 

?>.To  send,  vhy  shelach. 

Ezra    7.  14  Forasmuch  as  thou  art  sent  of  the  king 
Dan.    5.  24  Then  was  the  part  of  the  baud  sent  from 

1.  To  be  sent  off  or  away,  awoareWopai  apostelloniai '. 

Heb.    1.  14  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  s.  fo. 
SENTENCE,  dark,  divine,  hard  — 
l.An  acute  or  sharp  saying,  ni-nx  achidah, 

Dan.    5.  12  showing  of  hard  sentences,  and  dissolv. 

2.  A  word,  mailer,  "131  dabar, 

Deuti7.  9  they  shall  show  thee  the  sentence  of  jud. 
17  11  shalt  not  decline  from  the  sentence 

3.  Acute  saying,  hidden  thing,  riddle,  MTrj chidah. 

Dan.    8.  23  a  king,  .understanding  dark  sentences 

4.  The  mouth,  n$  peh, 

Dcut  17.  11  According  to  the  sentence  of  the  law  wh. 

5.  Mouth  (or  tenor)  of  the  word,  "lynrj  *$  pi  haddabar. 

Deut  17.  10  thou  shalt  do  according  to  the  sentence 

^.Judgment,  ttsyp  mishpat. 

Psa.  17.    2  Let  my  sentence  come  forth  from  thy  pr. 

Jer.     4. 12  now  also  will  I  give  sentence  against  th. 
7.  Word,  matter,  sentence,  nan?  pithgam. 

Eccl.  8. 11  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is 


8.  Divination,  oath,  DD£  qesem. 

Prov  16.  10  A  divine  sentence  (is)  in  the  lips  of  the  k. 

§.A  judicial  sentence^  anoupifxa  apokrima. 

2  Co.  1.   9  we  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves 
SENTENCE,  to  be  or  give  — 
l.To  judge  upon  or  about,  iwiKpivca  epikrino. 

Luke23.  24  Pilate  gave  sentence  that  it  should  be  as 

l.To  judge,  Kpivta  krino. 

Acts  15.  19  my  sentence  is,  that  we  trouble  not  them 

SE-NU'-AH,  nxiapn  the  violated.     See  Hasenuah. 
A  Benjamite,  father  of  Judah  who  was  second  over 
Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    9  Judah  the  son  of  S.  (was)  second  over  the 

SE-O'-BXM,  D'-iyi?  fear,  distress. 

A  priest  in  the  days  of  David,  to  whom  the  fourth  charge 
of  the  sanctuary  was  given  by  lot.     B.C.  1015. 
1  Ch.24.    8  The  third  to  Harim,  the  fourth  to  S. 

SEPARATE,  separated  — 
Separate,  vy  nazir. 

Gen.  49.  26  of  him  that  was  separate  from  his  bretb. 

Deut  33.  16  of  him  (that  was)  separated  from  his  br. 
SEPARATE  (selves),  to  — 

1.  To  be  separated,  *?T3  badal,  2. 

Numi6.  21  Separate  yourselves  from  among  this  co. 

Ezra   6.  21  all  such  as  had  separated  themselves  un. 
9.    1  have  not  separated  themselves  from  the 
10.   8  himself  separated  from  the  congregation 
10.  11  separate  yourselves  from  the  people  of 

1  Ch.12.    8  there  separated  themselves  unto  David 

Neh.   9.    2  the  seed  of  Israel  separated  themselves 
10.  28  they  that  had  separated  themselves  from 

2.  To  separate,  biy  badal,  5. 

Lev.  20.  24  which  have  separated  you  from  (other)  pe. 

20.  25  which  I  have  separated  from  you  as  unc. 

Num.  8.  14  Thus  shalt  thou  separate  the  Levites  from 

16.  9  that  the  God  of  Israel  hath  separated  you 
Deut  10.    8  the  Lord  separated  the  tribe  of  Levi,  to 

19.    2,  7  Thou  shalt  separate  three  cities  for  th. 

29.  21  the  Lord  shall  separate  him  unto  evil  out 

1  Ki.  8.  53  thou  didst  separate  them  from  among  all 

1  Ch.25.    1  Moreover  David . .  separated  to  the  service 

2  Ch.25. 10  Amaziah  separated  them,  (to  wit),  the  ar. 
Ezra  8.  24  I  separated  twelve  of  the  chief  of  the  pr. 
Neh.  13.  3  thattheyseparatedfrom  Israel  allthemi. 
Isa.   56.   3  The  Lord  hath  utterly  separated  me  from 

59.   2  your  iniquities  have  separated  between 

3.  To  give  or  take  a  portion,  P717  chalaq,  5. 

Jer.  37. 12  to  separate  himself  thence  in  the  midst 

4.  To  be  sejjarated,  "in  nazar,  2. 

Lev.  22.    2  that  they  separate  themselves  from  the 
Eze.  14.    7  which  separateth  himself  from  me,  and 
Hos.    9.  10  and  separated  themselves  unto  (that)  sh. 
Zech  7.    3  separating  myself,  as  I  have  done  these 

5.  To  separate,  "in  nazar,  5. 

Lev.  15.  31  Thus  shall  ye  separate  the  children  of  Is. 

Num.  6.   2  to  vow  a  vow.  .to  separate  (themselves) 

6.    3  He  shall  separate  (himself)  from  wine  and 

6.    5  In  the  which  he  separateth  (himself)unto 

6.    6  All  the  days  that  he  separateth  (himself) 

C.  To  do  any  thing  wonderful,  th§  pala,  5. 

Num.  6.    2  either  man  or  woman  shall  separate  (th. ) 
7.7*o  be  parted,  separated,  "H3  parad,  2. 

Gen.  13.    g  separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me 

13.  11  they  separated  themselves  the  one  from 
Prov  18.    1  a  man,  having  separated  himself,  seeketh 

8.  To  part,  separate,  "ns  parad,  5. 

Gen.  30.  40  Jacob  did  separate  the  lambs,  and  set  the 
Deut  32.  8  when  he  separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  he 
Prov  16.  38  and  a  whisperer  separateth  chief  friends 

17.  9  he  that  repeateth  a  matter  separateth.. f. 

9.  To  border  off  thoroughly,  anoo'Lopifa  apodiorizo. 
Jude      19  These  be  they  who  separate  themselves 

10.  To  border  off,  a<popifa  aphorizo. 

Matt  25.  32  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another 
Luke  6.  22  when  they  shall  separate  you  (from  their 
Acts  13.  2  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the 
19.  9  separated  the  disciples,  disputing  daily 
Rom.  1.  1  an  apostle,  separated  unto  the  gospel  of 
Gal.  i.  15  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's  wo. 
2. 12  he  withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fear. 

11.  To  put  apart,  xwplfa  chorizo. 

Rom.  8.  35  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  C. 
8.  39  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love 
SEPARATE  cities  or  place  — 
l.A  cut  off  place,  .Tin  gizrah. 

Eze.  4:.  12  building  that  (was)  before  the  separate  p. 
41.  13  the  separate  place,  and  the  building,  wi. 
41.  14  and  of  the  separate  place  toward  the  east 

41.  15  the  building  over  against  the  separate  pi. 

42.  1  that  (was)  over  against  the  separate  place 
42.  10  over  against  the  separate  place,  and  over 
42.  13  which  (are)  before  the  separate  place,  the 

^.Separate  cities,  rrtarip  mibdaloth, 

Josh.  16.  9  the  separate  cities  for  the  children  of  E. 
SEPARATE,  separated,  to  he  — 
l.To  be  separated,  Sia  badal,  2. 

1  Ch.23.  13  Aaron  was  separated,  that  he  should  sa. 

Ezra  10.  16  all  of  them  by  (their)  names,  were  separ. 


2.7*0  be  made  wonderful  or  separate,  n?s  palah,  2. 
Exod  33. 16  so  shall  we  be  separated,  I  and  thy  people 

3.  To  be  parted,  *n£  parad,  2. 

Gen.  13.  14  after  that  Lot  was  separated  from  him 

25.  23  two  manner  of  people  shall  be  separated 
Neh.  4.  19  we  are  separated  upon  the  wall,  one  far 
Prov  19.   4  the  poor  is  separated  from  his  neighbour 

4.  To  part,  "ns  purad,  3. 

Hos.  4.  14  themselves  are  separated  with  whores,  and 

5.  To  border  off,  a<f>optfa  aphorizo. 

2  Co.  6.  17  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  touch 

Q.  To  put  apart,  xapK°>  chorizo. 

Heb.    7.  26  holy,  harmless.undefiled,  separate  from 
SEPARATION,  (to  make  a)  — 
1.7*0  cause  a  separation,  !?n?  badal,  5. 

Eze.  42.  20  to  make  a  separation  between  the  sanct. 
2.  Separation,  impurity,  rru  niddah. 

Lev.  12.    2  according  to  the  days  of  the  separation 

12.  5  be  unclean  two  weeks,  as  in  her  separat. 
15.  20  that  she  lieth  upon  in  her  separation 

15.  25  many  days  out  of  the  time  of  her  separa. 
15.  25  if  it  run  beyond  the  time  of  her  separat. 
15.  25  shall  be  as  the  days  of  her  separation 
15.  26  be  unto  her  as  the  bed  of  her  separation 
15.  26  as  the  uncleanness  of  her  separation 
Num  19.  9  shall  be  kept,  .for  a  water  of  separation 
19.  13  the  water  of  separation  was  not  sprinkled 
19.  20  the  water  of  separation  hath  not  been  sp. 
19.  21  the  water  of  separation  shall  wash  hiscl. 
19.  21  he  that  toucheth  the  water  of  separation 

31.  23  be  purified  with  the  water  of  separation 

^.Separation,  *iu  nezer. 

Num.  6.  4  All  the  days  of  his  separation  shall  he  e. 
6.  5  All  the  days  of  the  vow  of  his  separation 
6.  8  All  the  days  of  his  separation  he  (is)  holy 
6.  12  consecrate,  .the  days  of  his  separation 
6.  12  lost,  because  his  separation  was  defiled 
6.  13  when  the  days  of  his  separation  are  fulfi. 
6.  18  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  separation  (at) 
6.  18  take  the  hair  of  the  head  of  his  separati. 
6. 19  after  (the  hair  of)  his  separation  is  shaven 
6.  21  offering  unto  the  Lord  for  his  separation 
6.  21  he  must  do  after  the  law  of  his  separation 
SE'-PHAR,  1DP. 

A  mount  of  the  East  in  the  S.W.  of  Arabia,  on  the  S.  of 
Yemen ;  or  Thafor  in  Hadramaut,  at  the  sea,  in  Arabia 
Felix. 

Gen.  10.  30  as  thou  goest  unto  S.,  a  mount  of  the  east 
SE-PHA'-RAD,  TJDp. 

The  ancient  Iberia  or  Georgia,  between  Colchis  and 
Albania;  or  Spain,  soTargums,  Peshito,  Ben  Gannach, 
Kimchi,  etc. 

Obad.     20  captivity  of  Jerusalem,  which  (is)  in  S. 
SE-PHAR-VA'-IM,  cn.")5P. 

A  city  in  S.   Mesopotamia  (called  also  Sipphara  and 

Sifris),  joined    with  Babylon,   Cutba,   Ava,   Hamath, 

Arpad,  Hena,  Ivah,  Gozan,  Carchemish,  Haran,  Rezeph, 

Telasser,  as  being concpiered  by  Shalmanezer.     B.C.  710. 

2  Ki.17.  24  from  Ava,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from  S. 

17.  31  Adrammelech. .  Anammelech.  .gods  of  S. 

18.34  where  (are)  the  gods  of  S.,  Hena,  andlvah? 

19.  13  Where  (is)  the  king,  .of  the  city  of  S.,  of 

Isa.   36.  19  where  (are)  the  gods  of  S.V  and  have 

37.  13  Where  (is)the  king,  .of  the  city  of  S.,  He. 

SE-PHAR-VITES,   DT)CP- 

The  inhabitants  of  Sepharvaim  ;  they  were  accustomed 
to  burn  their  children  in  the  fire  to  Adrammelech  and 
Anamelech  their  gods,  even  after  their  removal  to 
Samaria. 

2  Ki.  17.  31  the  S.  burnt  their  children  in  fire  to  Adr. 
SEPULCHRE  — 
I. Grave,  n"jop  qeburah. 

Deut  34.    6  no  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto 

1  Sa.io.    2  thou  shalt  find  two  men  by  Rachel's  sep. 

2  Ki.  9.  28  buried  him  in  his  sepulchre  with  his  fat. 

21.  26  he  was  buried  in  his  sepulchre  in  the  ga. 
23.  30  and  buried  liim  in  his  own  sepulchre 

2.  Grave,  *iap,  qeber. 

Gen.  23.    6  in  the  choice  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy 

23.    6  none  of  us  shall  withhold,  .his  sepulchre 

Judg.  8.  32  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  Joash  his 

2  Sa.   2.  32  buried  him  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  father 

4. 12  buried  (it)  in  the  sepulchre  of  Aimer  in 

17.  23  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  father 

21. 14  in  Zelah,  in  the  sepulchre  of  Kish  his  fat. 

1  Ki.13.  22  carcase  shall  not  comeuntothe  sepulchre 

13.  31  bury  me  in  the  sepulchrewhereintheman 

2  Ki  13.  21  they  cast  the  man  into  the  sepulchre  of 

23.  16  he  spied  the  sepulchres  that  (were)  there 
23.  16  took  the  bones  out  of  the  sepulchres,  and 

23.  17  (It  is)the  sepulchre  of  the  man  of  God,wh. 
2  Ch.16.  14  they  buried  him  in  his  ownsepulchres,wh. 

21.  20  but  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings 

24.  25  they  buried  him  not  in  the  sepulchres  of 
28.  27  they  brought  him  not  into  the  sepulchres 

32.  33  buried  him  in  the  chiefest  of  the  sepulch, 
35.  24  was  buried  iu  (one  of)  the  sepulchres  of 

Neh.    2.   3  the  place  of  my  fathers' sepulchres  (lieth) 

2.  5  unto  the  city  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres 

3.  16  (the  place)  over  against  the  sepulchresof 
Psa.  5.  9  their  throat  (is)  an  open  sepulchre ;  they 
Isa.  22.  16  thouhast  hewed  thee  out  a  sepulchrehero 

22.  16  he  that  heweth  him  out  a  sepulchre  on 
Jer.    5.  16  Their  quiver  (is)  as  an  open  sepulchre,  th. 


SEEAH 


861 


SERVANT 


S.Monumcnt,  tomb,  nvijfxa.  mnema. 

Luke23.  53  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre  that  was  hewn  in 
24.   1  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre,  bringing 
Acts  2.  29  and  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  thisd'.y 
7.  16  laid  in  the  sepulchre  that  Abraham  1  jug. 

4, Monument,  tomb,  fivrifie'iov  mnemeion. 

Matt23.  29  and  garnish  the  sepulchres  of  i,he  righteo. 

27.  60  a  great  stone  to  the  door  oi  the  sepulchre 

28.  8  they  departed  quickly  from  the  sepulchre 
Marfcig.  46  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre  which  was  hewn 

15.  46  rolled  a  stone  unto  the  door  of  the  sepul. 

16.  2  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the  rising 
16.  3  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre 
16.  5  entering  into  the  sepulchre,  they  saw  a 
16.  8  fled  from  the  sepulchre;  for  they  trembled 

Luken.  47  ye  build  the  sepulchres  of  the  prophets 

11.  48  killed  them,  and  ye  build  their  [sepulch.J 

23.  55  beheld  the  sepulchre,  and  how  his  body 

24.  2  the  stone  rolled  away  from  the  sepulchre 
24.  9  returned  from  the  sepulchre,  and  told  all 
24.  12  Then  arose  Peter,  and  ran  unto  the  sepul. 
24.  22  women,  .which  were  early  at  the  sepulchre 
24.  24  [certain  of  them,  .went  to  the  sepulchre] 

John  19.  41  in  the  garden  a  new  sepulchre,  wherein 
ig.  42  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  hand 
20.    1  cometh  Mary  Magdalene,  .unto  the  sepu. 
20.    1  seeth  the  stone  taken . .  from  the  sepulchre 
20.   2  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of  the  sepulchre 
20.    3  weut  forth,  .and  came  to  the  sepulchre 
20.    4  other  disciple . .  came  first  to  the  sepulchre 
20.    6  weut  into  the  sepulchre,  and  seeth  the  li. 
20.   8  disciple  which  came  first  to  the  sepulchre 

20. 11  Mary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre  we. 
20.  11  stooped  down,  (and  looked)  into  the  sep. 

Acts  13.29  took  (him)  down.,  and  laid  (him)  in  a  sep. 

5.  Burying  place,  ra<pos  taphos. 

Watt23.  27  ye  are  like  unto  whited  sepulchres,  which 
27.  61  Mary,  sitting  over  against  the  sepulchre 
27.  64  Command,  .that  the  sepulchre  be  made 

27.  66  they  went,  and  made  the  sepulchre  sure 

28.  1  came  Mary  Magdalene,  .to  see  the  sepul. 
Roin.  3. 13  Their  throat  (is)  an  open  sepulchre :  with 

SE'-RAH,  SA'-RAH,  vrto,  rnV  extension. 
A  daughter  of  Asher,  and  sister  of  Jimnah,  Ishuah,  and 
Beriah,  who  went  down  to  Egypt  with  Jacob.    B.C.  1706. 
Gen.  46.  17  Ishuah,  and  Isui,  and  Beriah,  and  S.  their 
Nuni26.  46  name  of  the  daughter  of  Asher  (was)  S. 

1  Ch.  7.  30  Isuah,  and  Ishuai,  and  Beriah,  and  S.  the 

SE-RA'-IAH,  nnfcp,  innfc  Jah  isprince. 

1.  David's  scribe.     B.C.  1020. 

2  Sa.  8. 17  (were)  the  priests ;  and  S.  (was)  the  scribe 

2.  The  Son  of  Azariah,  and  chief  priest  at  Jerusalem 
when  Nebuchadnezzar  took  it.    B.C.  5S8. 

2  Ki,25.  18  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  S.  the  chief 

1  Ch.  6.  14  Azariah  begat  S.,  and  S.  begat  Jehozadak 
Ezra  7.  1  Ezra  the  son  of  S.,  the  son  of  Azariah,  the 
Jer.  52.  24  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  S.  the  chief 

3.  Son  of  Tanhumeth,  from  Netophah,  whom  Gedaliah 
advised  to  submit  to  the  Chaldeans.     B.C.  588. 

2  Ki.25.  23  Johanan..and  S.  the  son  of  Tanhumeth 
Jer.  40.    8  Johanan.. and  S.  the  son  of  Tanhumeth 

4.  A  son  of  Kenaz,  and  brother  of  Othuiel,  and  father  of 
Joab.    B.C-  1450. 

1  Ch.  4. 13  the  sons  of  Kenaz;  Othniel,  and  S. :  and 
4. 14  S.  begat  Joab,  the  father  of  the  valley  of 
f>.  A  Simeonite,  son  of  Asiel.     B.C.  700. 

t  Ch.  4.  35  Josibiah,  the  son  of  S.,  the  sou  of  Asiel 
0.  A  priest  that  returned  with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.    2  Nehemiah,  S.,  Reelaiah,  Mordecai,  Bils. 

Neh.  10.    2  S.,  Azariah,  Jeremiah 

12.  1  these.,  went  up..  Jeshua:  S.,  Jeremiah, E. 

12. 12  of  S.,  Meraiah  ;  of  Jeremiah,  Hananiah 

7.  A  priest,  son  of  Hilkiah,  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  after 
the  exile  and  called  "  ruler  of  the  house  of  God."    B.C. 

445- 

Neh.  11.  11S.  thesonofHilkiah,  thesonofMeshullam 

8.  A  chief  man,  son  of  Aziel,  and  sent  by  Jehoiakim  to 
take  Jeremiah  and  Baruch.    B.C.  606. 

Jer.  36.  26  But  the  king  commanded.  .S.  the  son  of 

9.  A  prince  of  Judah,  and  son  of  Neriah;  he  went  to 
Babylon  with  Zedekiah.     B.C.  595. 

Jer.  51.  59  Jeremiah  the  prophet  commanded  S.  the 
51.  59  And  (this)  S.  (was)  a  quiet  prince 
51.  61  Jeremiah  said  to  S.,  When  thou  coniest  to 
SE-RA'-PHTTVT,  ETEPi?  burning,  noble. 
Symbolic  beings  seen  in  vision,  with  six  wings  each,  in 
attendance  on  the  Lord. 

Isa.     6.    2  Above  it  stood  the  seraphim  :  each  one 
6.    6  Then  flew  one  of  the  seraphim  unto  me 

SE'-RED,  TJD  escape,  deliverance. 

The  eldest  son  of  Zebulun.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  14  the  sons  of  Zebulun;  S.,  and  Elou,  and 
Nuni26.  26  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Sardites :  of  Elon 

SER-Gt-TJS,  2e'p7ios. 

The  Roman  deputy  of  Cyprus  when  Paul  and  Barnabas 
visited  it  in  a.d.  45,  and  who  was  converted  by  Elymas 
or  Bar-Jesus  being  struck  with  blindness. 

Acts  13.    7  was  with  the  deputy  of  the  country,  S.  P. 
SERJEANT  — 
One  holding  a  rod,  licktor,  serjcant,  ^ajSooux09- 

Acts  16.  35  the  magistrates  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying 
16.  38  And  the  Serjeants  told  these  words  unto 


SERPENT,  (fiery)  — 

\.To  be  fearful  or  frightful,  hf\}zachaL 

Deut32.  24  with  the  poison  of  serpents  of  the  dust 

2.  A  serpent)  vt\i  nachush. 

Gen.    3.    1  the  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  be. 
3.   2  the  woman  said  unto  the  serpent,  Wemay 
3.   4  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  Ye  sh. 
3. 13  The  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat 
3.  14  God.  said  unto  the  serpent,  Because  thou 
49.  17  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  wray,  an  ad. 
Exod.  4.    3  it  became  a  serpent ;  and  Moses  fled  from 
7.  15  rod  which  was  turned  to  a  serpent  shalt 
\um21.    6  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  amoDg  the  peo. 
21.    7  that  he  take  away  the  serpents  from  us 
21.    9  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put 
21.    9  that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  wh. 
21.    9  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived 
Deut.  8.  15  (wherein  were)  fiery  serpents,  and  scorp. 
2  Ki.  18.   4  brake  in  pieces  the  brasen  serpent  that  M. 
Job    26.  13  hishandhath  formed  the  crooked  serpent 
Psa.  58.    4  Their  poison  (is)  like  the  poison  of  a  ser. 
140.    3  have  sharpened  their  tongues  like  a  ser. 
Prov  23.  32  At  the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and 

30.  19  the  way  of  a  serpent  upon  a  rock,  the  way 

Eccl.  10.    8  whoso  breaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall 

10. 1 1  Surely  the  serpent  will  bite  without  ench. 

Isa.   14.  29  for  out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall  come 

27.    1  shall  punish  leviathan  the  piercing  serp. 

27.    1  even  leviathan  that  crooked  serpent ;  and 

65.  25  dust  (shall  be)  the  serpent's  meat.    They 

Jer.     8.  17  I  will  send  serpents,  cockatrices,  among 

46.  22  The  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  serpent 

Amos  5.  19  leaned  his  hand  on  the  wall,  and  a  serp. 

9.  3  thence  will  I  command  the  serpent,  and 
Mic.    7.  17  They  shalllick  the  dustlikeaserpent,th. 

3.^  burning,  fiery,  stinging  serpent,  *|"j^  saraph. 
Num  21.    8  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  up. 
Isa.   14.  29  and  his  fruit  (shall  be)  a  fiery  flying  serp. 
30.    6  the  viper  and  fiery  fiying  serpent,  they 

i,Hoii)ler,  dragon,  fan  tannin. 

Exod.  7.  9  before  Pharaoh, (and)itshallbecomease. 
7.  10  castdownhisroiL.and  it  became  a  serpent 
7.  12  they  became  serpents :  but  Aaron's  rod 

5.  A  creeping  thing,  reptile,  epTrerdV  herpeton. 
Jas.     3.    7  For  every  kind  of  beasts . .  and  of  serpents 

G.A  serpent,  6q>i.s  ophis. 

Matt.  7.  10  Or  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  ser. 

10. 16  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents,  and  ha. 
23-  33  serpents,  (ye)  generation  of  vipers,  how 

Marki6.  18  [They  shall  take  up  serpents ;  and  if  they] 

Lukeio.  19  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  serpents 

11. 11  a  fish,  will  he  for  a  fish  give  him  a  serpent 

John  3. 14  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilder. 

1  Co.  10.    9  tempted,  and  were  destroyed  of  serpents 

2  Co.  11.    3  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  his 
Rev.    9. 19  for  their  tails  (were)  like  unto  serpents 

12.    9  that  old  serpent,  called  the  Devil,  and  Sa. 

12. 14  half  a  time,  from  the  face  of  the  serpent 

12. 15  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a 

20.  2  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the  Devil,  and 

SE'-RTJG,  avijp  strength,  firmness. 

Grandson  of  Peleg,  and  father  of  Nahor  father  of  Terah. 

B.C.  2180. 

Gen.  11.  20  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  S. 
11.  21  after  he  begat  S.  two  hundred  and  seven 
11.  22  And  S.  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Nahor 
11.23  S-  lived  after  he  bagat  Nahor  two  hundr. 
1  Ch.  1.  26  S.,  Nahor,  Terah 

SERVANT  — 

1 .  Men,  cv;x  anashim. 

1  Sa.  24.   7  So  David  stayed  his  servants  with  these 

2.  A  young  person,  youth,  servant,  y&naar, 

Nuni22.  22  riding  upon  his  ass.  and  his  two  servants 
■Tiulg.  7.  10  go  thou  with  Phurah  thy  servant  down  to 
7. 11  Then  went  he  down  with  Phurah  his  ser. 
19.  3  having  his  servant  with  him,  and  a  couple 
19.  9  he,  and  his  concubine,  and  his  servant,  his 
19.  11  servant  said  unto  his  master,  Come,  I  pr. 
19. 13  said  unto  his  servant,  Come,  and  let  us 
Ruth  2.    5,  6  servant  that  was  set  over  the  reapers 

1  Sa.   2.  13  priest's  servant  came,  while  the  flesh  was 

2.  15  priest's  servant  came, and  saidtotheman 
9.  3  Take  now  one  of  the  servants  with  thee 
9.  5  Saul  said  to  his  servant  that  (was)  with 
9.  7  Then  said  Saul  to  his  servant,  But  behold 
9.  8  servant  answered  Saul  again,  and  said,  B. 
9.  10  Then  said  Saul  to  his  servant,  Well  said 
9.  22  Samuel  took  Saul  and  his  servant,  and  br. 
9.  27  Bid  the  servant  pass  on  before  us,  and 

10.  14  uncle  said  unto  him  and  to  his  servant 

16. 18  Then  answered  one  of  the  servants,  and 

21.  2  have  appointed  (my)  servants  to  such  and 

25. 19  said  unto  her  servants,  Go  on  before  me 

2  Sa.    9.   9  called  to  Ziba,  Saul's  servant,  and  said 

13. 17  Then  he  called  his  servant  that  minister. 
13. 28  Now  Absalom  had  commanded  his  serva. 
13.  29  servants  of  Absalom  did  unto  Ammon  as 
16.  1  Ziba  the  servant  of  Mephiboshethmethim 
19. 17  servant  of  the  house  of  Saul,  and  his  fift. 

1  Ki.  18.  43  said  to  his  servant,  Go  up  now,  look  tow. 
19.   3  came  to  Beersheba.  .and  left  his  servant 

2  Ki.  4. 12  said  to  Gahazi  his  servant,  Call  this  Shu. 
4.  24  she  paddled  an  ass,  and  said  to  her  serv. 


Neh 


4-  25 

4-38 

5. 20 

5-  =3 
6.  ,5 

8-    4 

19.    6 

4.16 

4.  22 

4-  23 

5.  10 

5-  15 
5    16 

6.  5 
13-  19 

Esth.  2.    2 

6-  3 
6-    5 

Job     1. 15, 

1. 16 

Isa.  37.    6 


that  he  said  to  Gehazi  his  servant,  Behold 
said  unto  bis  servant,  Set  on  the  great  pot 
Gehazi,  the  servant  of  Elisha  the  man  of 
laid  (them)  upon  two  of  his  servants,  and 
his  servant  said  unto  him.  Alas,  my  mas. 
king  talked  with  Gehazi,  the  servant  of 
with  which  the  servants  of  the  king  of  A. 
half  of  my  servants  brought  in  the  work 
Let  everyone  with  his  servant  lodge  witli 
neither  I,  nor  my  brethren,  nor  my  serv. 
I  likewise,  (and)  my  brethren,  and  my  se. 
even  their  servants  bare  rule  over  the  p. 
all  my  servants  (were)  gathered  thither 
Then  sent  Sanballat  his  servant  unto  me 
servants  set  I  at  the  gates,  (that)  there  sh. 
Then  said  the  king's  servants  that  minis. 
Then  said  the  king's  servants  that  minis, 
servants  said  unto  him,  Behold,  Haman 
17  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  theswo. 
burnt  up  the  sheep,  and  the  servants,  ami 
wherewith  the  servants  of  the  king  of  A. 

2>.To  serve,  do,  till,  T3jf  abad. 

Gen.  49. 15  bowed  his  shoulder.,  and  became  a  servant 
2  Ki.  10.  19  call  unto  me.  .all  his  servants,  and  all  his 
Zech.  2.    9  aud  they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  their  servants 

4.-4  servant,  doer,  tiller,  slave,  12JJ  ebed. 

Gen.    9.  25  servant  of  servants  shail  he  be  unto  his 
9.  26,  27  and  Canaan  shall  be  hisservant 
14.  15  divided  himself,  .he  and  his  servants,  by 
iS.    3  pass  not  away,  I  pray  thee,  from  thy  ser. 
iS.    5  for  therefore  are  ye  come  to  your  servant 
19.    2  turn  in,  I  pray  you,  into  your  servant's  ho. 

19.  19  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

20.  8  called  all  his  servants,  and  told  all  these 

21.  25  which  Abimelech's  servants  had  violently 
24.  2  Abraham  said  unto  Ms  eldest  servant  of 
24.  5  servant  said  unto  him,  Peradventure  the 
24.  9  servant  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh  of  A. 

24. 10  servant  took  ten  camels  of  the  camels  of 
24. 14  thou  hast  appointed  for  thy  servant  Isaac 

24. 17  servant  ran  to  meet  her,  and  said,  Letme 
24.  34  And  he  said,  I  (am)  Abraham's  servant 
24.  52  when  Abraham's  servaut  heard  their  wo. 
24.  53  servant  brought  forth  jewels  of  silver,and 
24.  59  sent  away,  .her  nurse,  and  Abraham's  se. 
24.  61  servant  took  Rebekab,  and  went  his  way 
24.  65  For  she  (had)  said  unto  the  servant,  What 
24.  65  servant  (had)  said,  It  (is)  my  master:  the. 
24. 66  servant  told  Isaac  all  things  that  he  had 
26.  15  For  all  the  wells  which  his  father's  serv. 
26. 19  And  Isaac's  servants  digged  in  the  valley 
26.  24  multiply  thy  seed,  for  my  servant  Abrah. 
26.  25  and  there  Isaac's  servants  digged  a  well 

26.  32  the  same  day,  that  Isaac's  servants  came 

27.  37  brethren  have  I  given  to  him  for  servants 
32.  4  Thy  servant  Jacob  saith  thus,  I  have  soj. 
32.  10  which  thou  hast  showed  unto  thy  servant 
32.  16  delivered  (them)  into  the  hand  of  his  ser. 
32.  16  said  unto  his  servants,  Pass  over  before 
32.  18  (They  be)  thy  servant  Jacob's;  it  (is)  a  pr. 

32.  20  Behold,  thy  servant  Jacob  (is)  behind  us 

33.  5  which  God  hath  graciously  given  thy  ser. 
33.  14  Let  my  lord .  .pass  over  before  his  servant 
39.  17  servant,  which  thou  hast  brought  unto  us 

39.  19  After  this  manner  did  thy  servant  to  me 

40.  20  he  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  servants,  and 

40.  20  and  of  the  chief  baker  among  his  servants 

41.  10  Pharaohwas  wroth  with  his  servants,  and 
41.  12  man,  an  Hebrew,  servant  to  the  captain 
41.  37  ^as  good,  .in  the  eyes  of  all  his  servants 

41.  38  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  servants,  Can  we 

42.  10  but  to  buy  food  are  thy  servants  come 

42. 11  we  (are)  true  (men),  thy  servants  are  no 

42.  13  Thy  servants  (are)  twelve  brethren,  the 

43.  28  Thy  servaut  our  father  (is)  in  good  health 

44.  7  God  forbid  that  thy  servants  should  do  ac. 
44.  9  With  whomsoever  of  thy  servants  it  be 
44.  10  he  with  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my  se. 
44.  16  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of  thy  serva. 
44.  16  behold,  we  (are)  my  lord's  servants,  both 
44.  17  he  shall  be  my  servant ;  and  as  for  you 

44. 18  let  thy  servant,  .speak  a  word  in  my  lord's 
44.  18  thine  anger  burn  against  thy  servant,  for 
44.  19  My  lord  asked  his  servants,  saying,  Have 
44.  21  thou  saidst  unto  thy  servants,  Bring  him 
44.  23  thou  saidst  unto  thy  servants,  Except  yo. 
44.  24  when  we  came  up  unto  thy  servant  my  f  \ , 
44.  27  And  thy  servant  my  father  said  unto  us 
44.  30  when  I  am  come  to  thy  servant  my  father 
44.  31  he  will  die :  and  thy  servants  shall  bring; 
44.  31  the  grey  hairs  of  thy  servant  our  father 
44.  32  For  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad 
44.  33  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the  lad  a 
45. 16  it  pleased  Pharaoh  well,  and  his  servants 
46. 34  Thy  servants'  trade  hath  been  about  cat. 
47.  3  Thy  servants  (are)  shepherds,  both.. and 
47.  4  for  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for  their 
47.  4  let  thy  servants  dwell  in  the  land  of  Go. 
47.  19  we  and  our  land  will  be  servants  unto  r. 
47.  25  lord,  and  we  will  be  Pharaoh's  servants 
50.  2  Joseph  commanded  his  servants  the  ph. 
50.  7  with  him  went  up  all  the  servants  of  Ph. 
50.  17  forgive  the  trespass  of  the  servants  of  the 
50.  18  and  they  said,  Behold,  we  (l)e)  thy  serva. 

Exod.  4. 10  thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  servant;  but 
5.  15  Wherefore  dealest  thou  thus  with  thy  se. 
5.  16  There  is  no  straw  given  unto  thy  servants 
5.  16  behold,  thy  servants  (are)  beaten ;  but  the 
5.  21  in  the  eyes  of  his  servants,  to  put  a  sword 
7. 10  down  his  rod.,  before  his  servants,  and  it 


SERVANT 


862 


SERVANT 


Exod.  7 


32- 

Lev.  25 

25- 
25- 

Numn 


31- 

32- 

32- 

32- 

32- 

32- 

Deut.  3. 

5- 

9- 

15- 

23* 

29. 

32- 

32- 

34- 

34- 

Joah.  1. 


Judg.  2. 
3- 
G. 
IS- 
*9 
.  Sa.   3. 

3- 


,  20  in  the  sight  of  his  servants;  and  all  the 

3  into  the  house  of  thy  servants,  and  upon 

4  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  all  thy  serva. 
9  when  shall  I  eutreat.. for  thy  servants,  and 

11  from  thy  servants,  and  from  thy  people 
21  upon  thy  servants,  and  upon  thy  people 
24  servant's  houses,  and  into  all  the  land  of 
29,  31  from  his  servants,  and  from  his  peop. 

14  upon  thy  servants,  and  upon  thy  people 
20  He  that  feared . .  among  the  servants  of  P. 

20  made  his  servants  and  his  cattle  flee  into 

21  left  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  the  field 
30  But  as  for  thee  and  thy  servants,  I  know 
34  hardened  his  heart,  he  and  his  servants 

1  hardened. .the  heart  of  his  servants,  that 

6  fill,  .the  h  .uses  of  all  thy  servants,  and 

7  Pharaoh's  servants  said  unto  him,  How 

3  favour,  .in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh's  serva. 

8  all  these  thy  servants  shall  come  down 

30  Pharaoh  rose  up.  .and  all  his  servants 
44  But  every  man's  servant  that  is  nought 

5  heart  of  Pharaoh  and  of  his  servants  was 

31  believed  the  Lord,  and  his  servant  Moses 

2  If  thou  buy  an  Hebrew  servant,  six  years 

5  if  the  servant  shall  plainly  say,  Hove  my 
20  if  a  man  smite  his  servant,  or  his  maid 

26  if  a  man  smite  the  eye  of  his  servant,  or 
13  Remember  Abraham,  Isaac,  .thy  servants 

6  meat  for  you ;  for  thee,  and  for  thy  serv. 
42,  55  they  (are)  my  servants,  which  I  brou. 
55  unto  me  the  children  of  Israel  (are)  serv. 
11  "Wherefore  hast  thou  afflicted  thy  serva. 

7  My  servant  Moses  (is)  not  so,  who  (is)  fa. 

8  not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  servant 

24  But  my  servant  Caleb,  because  he  had  an. 
18  said  unto  the  servants  of  Balak,  If  Balak 
49  Thy  servants  have  taken  the  sum  of  the 

4  land  for  cattle,  and  thy  servants  have  ca. 

5  let  this  land  be  given  unto  thy  servants 

25  servants  will  do  as  my  lord  commandeth 

27  But  thy  servants  will  pass  over,  every  m. 
31  As  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  thy  servants 
24  thou  hast  begun  to  show  thy  servant  thy 

15  remember  that  thou  wast  a  servant  in 
27  Remember  thy  servants,  Abraham,  Isaac 

1 7  and  he  shall  be  thy  servant  for  ever.  And 
15  servant  which  is  escaped  from  his  master 

2  unto  all  his  servants,  and  unto  all  his  land 
36  repent  himself  for  his  servants,  when  he 
43  for  he  will  avenge  the  blood  of  his  serva. 

5  So  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  died  th. 
11  and  to  all  his  servants,  and  to  all  his  land 

1  after  the  death  of  Moses  the  servant  of 

2  Moses  my  servant  is  dead ;  now  therefore 

7  law  which  Moses  my  servant  commanded 

13  Remember  the  word  of  which  Moses  the  s. 
15  which  Moses  the  Lord's  servant  gave  you 

14  What  saith  my  LORD  unto  his  servant? 

31  As  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  comm. 

33  as  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  had  co. 

8  said  unto  Joshua,  We  (are)  thy  servants 

9  From  a  very  far  country  thy  servants  are 

11  We(are)yourservants:  therefore  now  ma. 
24  Because  it  was  certainly  told  thy  servants 
24  commanded  his  servant  Moses  to  give  you 

6  Slack  uot  thy  hand  from  thy  servants,  come 

12  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  comman. 

15  As  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  his  serv. 
6  Them  did  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord 

6  servant  of  the  Lord  gave  it  (for)  a  posses. 
8  as  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave  th. 

7  Forty  years  old  (was)  I  when  Moses  the  s. 

7  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  gave 

2  Ye  have  kept  all  that  Moses  the  servant 
4,  5  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord 

29  servant  of  the  Lord  died,  (being)  an  hun. 

8  servaut  of  the  Lord  died,  (being)  an  hun. 
24  When  he  was  gone  out,  his  servants  came 
27  Then  Gideon  took  ten  menof  his  servants 

18  deliverance  into  the  hand  of  thy  servant 

19  young  man  (which  is)  with  thy  servants 

9  say,  Speak,  Lord;  for  thyservantheareth 

10  answered,  Speak ;  for  thy  servant  heareth 

14  take  your  fields.  .andgive(them)tohisse. 

15  and  give  to  his  officers,  and  to  his  servants 
17  of  your  sheep  :  and  ye  shall  be  his  servants 
19  Pray  for  thy  servants  unto  the  Lord  thy 
1 5  Saul's  servants  said  unto  him,  Behold  now 
id  Let  our  Lord  now  command  thy  servants 
17  Saul  said  unto  his  servants,  Provide  me 

0  (Min)  in.it  I  a  Philistine,  and  ye  servants  to 
9  kill  me,  then  will  we  be  your  servants,  but 
9  then  shall  ye  be  our  servants,  and  serve  us 

32  servant  will  go  and  fight  with  this  Philist. 

34  thy  servant  kept  his  father's  sheep,  and 
36  Thy  servant  slew  both  the  lion  and  the  bear 
58  son  of  thy  servant  Jesse  the  Beth-lehem. 

5  and  also  in  the  sight  of  Saul's  servants 

22  Saul  commanded  his  servants,  (saying) 

22  delight  in  thee,  and  all  his  servants  love 

23  Saul's  servants  spake  those  words  in  the 

24  servants  of  Saul  told  him,  saying,  On  this 

26  when  his  servants  told  David  these  words 

30  more  wisely  than  all  the  servants  of  Saul 

1  Saul  spake . .  to  all  his  servants,  that  they 
4  Let  not  the  king  sin  against  his  servant 

7  (It  is)  well ;  thy  servant  shall  have  peace 

8  thou  shalt  deal  kindly  with  thy  servant 

3  thou  hast  brought  thy  servant  into  a  cove. 
7  a  certain  man  of  the  servants  of  Saul  (was) 

11  the  servants  of  Achish  said  unto  him,  (Is) 
14  Then  said  Achish  unto  his  servants,  Lo 


1  Sa.  22 


23- 
23- 
23- 
25- 
25- 
=5- 
25- 
25- 
25' 
26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29- 
29. 
29. 
3°- 

•  Sa.   2. 


6  all  his  servants  (were)  standingabout  him 

7  Saul  said  unto  his  servants  that  stood  ad. 

8  my  son  hath  stirred  upmyservantagainst 

9  which  was  set  over  the  servants  of  Saul 

14  who  (is  so)  faithful  among  all  thy  servants 

15  Let  not  the  king  impute,  .unto  his  servaut 
15  thy  servant  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  less 

17  the  servants  of  the  king  would  not  putfo. 

10  thy  servant  hath  certainly  heard  that Saul 

11  will  Saul  come  down,  as  thy  servant  hath 

11  0  Lord.  .1  beseech  thee,  tell  thy  servant 
8  give,  .whatsoever  cometli.  .unto  thy  serv. 

10  Nabal  answered  David's  servants,  and  said 
10  There  be  many  servants  now  a  days  that 

39  and  hath  kept  his  servant  from  evil 

40  when  the  servants  of  David  were  come  to 

4 1  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  servants  of  my  lo. 

18  doth  mylord  thus  pursueafter  his  servant 

19  let  mylord.  .hear  the  wordsof  his  servant 
5  why  should  thy  servant  dwell  in  the  royal 

12  therefore  he  shall  be  my  servant  for  ever 

2  thou  shalt  know  what  thy  servant  can  do 
7  Then  said  Saul  unto  his  servants,  Seek  me 

7  his  servants  said  to  him,  Behold,  (there 

23  But  his  servants,  together  with  the  woman 
25  And  she  brought  (it),  .before  his  servants 

3  (Is)  not  this  David,  the  servant  of  Saul  the 

8  what  hast  thou  found  in  thy  servant,  so 
10  with  thy  master's  servants  that  are  come 

13  I  (am)  a  young  man  of  Egypt,  servant  to 
xi  the  servants  of  Ish-bosheth  the  son  of  Saul 

13  the  servants  of  David,  went  out,  and  met 
15  and  twelve  of  the  servants  of  David 

17  Abner  was  beaten,  .before  the  servants  of 

30  there  lacked  of  David's  servants  nineteen 

31  the  servants  of  David  had  smitten  of  Ben. 

18  By  the  hand  of  my  servant  David  I  will  sa. 
22  the  servants  of  David  and  Joab  came  from 
3S  the  king  said  unto  his  servants,  Know  ye 

20  in  the  eyes  of  the  handmaids  of  his  serv. 

5  tell  my  servant  David,  Thus  saith  the  Lo. 

8  so  shalt  thou  say  unto  my  servant  David 

19  thou  hast  spoken  also  of  thy  servant's  ho. 

20  for  thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy  servant 

21  hast  thou  done  all.  .to  make  thy  servant 

25  thou  hast  spoken  concerning  thy  servant 

26  and  let  the  house  of  thy  servant  David  be 

27  hast  revealed  to  thy  servant,  saying,  I  w. 

27  therefore  hath  thy  servant  found  in  his 

28  hast  promised  this  goodness  unto  thy  se. 

29  to  bless  the  house  of  thy  servant,  that  it 

29  let  the  house  of  thy  servaut  be  blessed  for 
2  (so)the  Moabites  became  David's  servants 

6  Syrians  became  servants  to  David,  (and) 

7  the  shields  of  gold  that  were  on  the  serv. 

14  all  they  of  Edom  became  Da vid's  servants 
2  (there  was)  of  the  house  of  Saul  a  servant 
2  (Art)  thou  Ziba?  And  he  said,  Thy  serva. 
6  And  he  answered,  Behold  thy  servant! 

8  What  (is)  thy  servaut,  that  thou  shouldest 
10  thy  servants,  shall  till  the  land  for  him 

10  Ziba  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  servants 

11  the  king  hath  commanded  his  servant 

12  And  all.  .(were)  servants  unto  Mephibos. 
2  to  comfort  him  by  the  hand  of  his  serva. 

2  David's  servants  came  into  the  land  of  the 

3  hath  not  David  (rather)  sent  his  servants 

4  Hanun  took  David's  servants,  and  shaved 
19  the  kings  (that  were)  servants  to  Hadare. 

1  David  sent  Joab,  and  his  servants  with 

9  t'riah  slept,  .with  all  the  servants  of  his 
11  the  servants  of  my  lord,  are  encamped  in 

13  to  lie  on  his  bed  with  the  servants  of  his 

17  there  fell  (some)  of  the  people  of  the  ser. 
21  Thy  servant  Uriah  the  Hittite  is  dead  al. 

24  shot  from  off  the  wall  upon  thy  servants 
24  the  king's  servants  be  dead,  and  thy  ser. 

18  the  servants  of  David  feared  to  tell  him 

19  David  saw  that  his  servants  whispered 
19  David  said  unto  his  servants,  Isthe  child 

21  Then  said  his  servants  unto  him,  What 
24  Behold  now,  thy  servant  hath  sheep  she. 
24  let.  .his  „ervants  go  with  thy  servant 

31  his  servants  stood  by  with  their  clothes 

35  the  king's  sous  come :  as  thy  servant  said 

36  the  king  also  and  all  his  servants  wept 

19  thy  servant  Joab,  he  bade  me.andhe  put 

20  hath  thy  servant  Joab  done  this  thing 

22  thy  servant  knoweth  that  I  have  found 
22  king  hath  fulfilled  the  request  of  his  ser. 

30  he  said  unto  his  servants,  See,  Joab's  field 

30  And  Absalom's  servants  set  the  field  on 

31  Wherefore  have  thy  servants  set  my  field 

2  Thy  servant  (is)  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  Is. 

3  thy  servant  vowed  a  vow  while  I  abode 

14  David  said  unto  all  his  servants  that 

15  And  the  king's  servants  said  unto  the  ki. 
15  thy  servants  (are  ready  to  do)  whatsoever 
iS  his  servants  passed  on  beside  him;  and 

21  even  there  also  will  thy  servant  he 

34  say  unto  Absalom,  I  will  be  thy  servant 
34  (as)  I  (have  been)  thy  father's  servant  hit. 
34  so  (will)  I  now  also  (be)  thy  servant :  then 

6  he  cast  stones . .  at  all  the  servants  of  king 
n  said  to  Abishai,  and  to  all  his  servants 
20  when  Absalom's  servants  came  to  the  wo. 

7  the  people.,  were  slain  before  the  servants 

9  And  Absalom  met  the  servants  of  David 
29  sont  the  king's  servant,  and  (me)  thy  ser. 

5  shamed  this  day  the  faces  of  all  thy  serv. 

6  thou  regardest  neither  princes  nor  serv. 

7  and  speak  comfortably  unto  thy  servants 


1  Ki. 


'N^, 


2  Sa.  19.  14  (this  word). . Return  thou,  and  all  thy  se. 
19.  17  his  fifteen  sons  and  his  twenty  servants 
19.  19  neither,  .remember  that  which  thy  serv. 
19.  20  thy  servant  doth  know  that  I  have  sinned 
19.  26  my  servant  deceived  me :  for  thy  servant 
19.  26  go  to  the  king ;  because  thy  servant  (is)  la. 
i>  27  he  hath  slandered  thy  servant  unto  my 
19.  *S  yet  didst  thou  set  thy  servant  among  th. 
19.  35  ten  thy  servant  taste  what  I  eat  or  what 
19.  35  wherefore  then  should  thy  servant  be  yet 
19.  36  Thy  servant  will  go  a  little  way  over  Jor. 
19.  37  Let  thy  servaut,  I  pray  thee,  turn  back  ag. 

19.  37  behold  thy  servant  Chimham  ;  let  him  go 

20.  6  take  thou  thy  lord's  servants,  and  pursue 

21.  15  David  went  down,  and  his  servants  with 

21.  22  and  fell,  .by  the  hand  of  his  servants 
24.  10  Lord  take  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  serv. 
24.  20  saw  the  king  and  his  servants  coming  on 
24.  21  Wherefore  is.  .the  king  come  to  his  serv. 

2  his  servants  said  unto  him,  Let  there  be 
9  all  the  men  of  Judah  the  king's  servants 
19  Solomon  thy  servant  hath  he  not  called 
26  But  me,  (even)  me  thy  servant,  and  Zadok 

26  and  thyservantSolomondiathhe  not  called 

27  thou  hast  not  showed  (it)  unto  thy  serv. 
33  Take  with  you  the  servants  of  your  lord 
47  the  king's  servants  came  to  bless  our  lord 
51  that  he  will  not  slay  his  servant  with  the 

38  as . .  the  king  hath  said,  so  will  thy  servant 

39  two  of  the  servants  of  Shimei  ran  away 

39  saying,  Behold,  thy  servants  (be)  in  Gath 

40  went  to  Gath  to  Achish  to  seek  his  serv. 
40  Shimei  went,  and  brought  his  servantsfr. 

6  Thou  hast  showed  unto  thy  servant  David 

7  thou  hast  made  thy  servant  king  instead 

8  thy  servant  (is)  in  the  midst  of  thy  people 

9  Give  therefore  thy  servant  an  understan. 
15  and  made  a  feast  to  all  his  servents 

1  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  his  servants  unto 
6  and  my  servants  shall  be  with  thy  servants 
6  unto  thee  will  I  give  hire  for  thy  servants 
9  My  servants  shall  briug(them)  down  from 
23  who  keepeth  covenant . .  with  thy  servants 
8.  24  Who  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  David  my 
8.  25  keep  with  thy  servant  David  my  father 
8.  26  which  thou  spakest  unto  thy  servant  Da. 
8.  28  have,  .respect  unto  the  prayer  of  thy  ser. 
8.  2S,  29  the  prayer  which  thy  servant 
8.  30  hearken,  .to  the  supplication  of  thy  serv. 
8.  32  judge  thy  servants,  condemning  the  wic. 
8.  36  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  and  of  thy 
8.  52  open  unto  the  supplication  of  thy  servant 
8.  53  spakest  by  the  hand  of  Moses  thy  servant 
8.  56  promised  by  the  hand  of  Moses  his  servant 
8.  59  that  he  maintain;the  cause  of  his  servant 

8.  66  that  the  Lord  had  done  for  David  his  se. 

9.  22  his  servants,  and  his  princes,  and  his  cap. 
9.  27  Hiram  sent,  .his  servants,  .with  the  serv. 

10.  5  the  sitting  of  his  servants,  and  theatten, 
10.    8  happy  (are)  these  thy  servants,  which  st. 

10.  13  went  to  her  own  country,  .and  her  serva. 

11.  it  I  will  surely,  .give  it  to  thy  servant 

11.  13  give  one  trine,  .for  David  my  servant's  sa. 
11.  17  certain  Edomites  of  his  father's  servants 
11.  26  Solomon's  servant,  whose  mother's  name 
11.  32  he  shall  have  one  tribe  for  my  servant  Da. 
11.  34  make  him  prince. .for  David  my  servants 
11.  36  Davidmy  servant  may  have  a  light  alway 

11.  38  keep  my  statutes,  .as  David  my  servant 

12.  7  If  thou  wilt  be  a  servant  unto  this  people 
12.    7  then  they  will  be  thy  servants  for  ever 

14.  8  thou  hast  not  been  as  my  servant  David 
14. 18  which  he  spake  bythe  handof  his  servant 

15.  18  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  his  serv. 

15.  29  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Ahijah  the 

16.  9  his  servant  Zimri,  captain  of  half  (his)ch. 
18.  9  that  thou  wouldest  deliver  thy  servaut  into 
18. 12  I  thy  servant  fear  the  Lord  from  my  yo. 
18.  36  (that)  I  (am)  thy  servant,  and  (that)  I  have 
20.  6  I  will  send  my  servants  unto  thee  tomor. 
20.  6  thine  house,  and  the  houses  of  thy  serva. 
20.  9  All  that  thou  didst  send  for  to  thy  serva. 
20.  12  he  said  unto  his  servants.  Set  (yourselves 
20.  23  the  servants  of  the  king  of  Syria  said  unto 
20.  31  his  servants  said  unto  him,  Behold  now 
20. 32  Thy  servaut  Ben-hadad  saith,  I  pray  thee 
20.  39  Thy  servant  wentout  into  the  midst  of  the 
20.  40  as  thy  servaut  was  busy  here  and  there 

22.  3  the  king  of  Israel  said  unto  his  servants 
22.  49  Let  my  servants  go  with  thy  servants  in 

:  Ki.  1.  13  let.,  the  life  of  these  fifty  thy  servants,  be 

2.  16  there  be  with  thy  servants  fifty  strong  men 

3.  11  one  of  the  king  of  Israel's  servants  answ. 

4.  1  Thy  servant  my  husband  is  dead;  and  thou 

4.  1  knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear  the  L. 

5.  6  sent  Naainan  my  servant  to  thee,  that  th. 
5.  13  servants  came  near,  and  spake  unto  him 
5.  15  I  pray  thee,  take  ablessingof  thy  servant 
5.  17  be  given  to  thy  servant  two  mules'  burden 
5.  17  for  thy  servant  will  henceforth  offer  nei. 
5.  18  Lord  "pardon  thy  servant.,  pardon  thyse. 

5.  25  And  he  said,  Thy  servant  wentno  whither 

6.  3  go  with  thy  servants.  And  he  answered,  I. 

6.  8  took  counsel  with  his  servants,  saying;  In 

6. 11  called  his  servants,  and  said  unto  them 

6. 12  one  of  his  servants  said,  None  my  lord,  0 

7.  12  said  unto  his  servants,  I  will  now  show  you 

7.  13  one  of  his  servants  answered  and  said,  Let 

8.  13  (is)  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do 

8.  19  destroy  Judah  for  David  his  servants' sake 
g.   7  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my  eervgnts 

9.  7  blood  of  all  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  at 


SERVANT 


8G3 


SERVANT 


2  KJ.    9. 
9- 

9> 


22. 
2.3- 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 


25' 
25 

:Ch.  2 


2Ch. 


n  Then  Jehu  came  forth  to  the  servants  of 
28  servants  carried  him  in  a  chariot  to  Jeru. 
36  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Elijah  the 
5  We  (are)  thy  servants,  and  will  do  allthat 
10  (that)  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Elij. 
23  here  with  you  none  of  the  servants  of  the 

20  his  servants  arose,  and  made  a  conspiracy 
2j,  his  servants,  smote  him,  and  he  died ;  and 

5  slew  hisservants  which  had  slain  the  king 

25  which  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  his  servant 

7  I  (am)  thy  servant,  and  thy  son  ;  come  up 

3  became  his  servant,  and  gave  him  presents 
13  which  I  sent  to  you  by  my  servants  the 

23  as  he  had  said  by  all  his  servants  the  pro. 
12  all  that  Moses  the  servant  of  the  LORDco. 

24  captain  of  the  least  of  my  master's  serv. 

26  Speak,  .to  thy  servants  in  the  Syrian  Ian. 

5  So  the  servants  of  kingHezekiah  cameto 
34  for  mine  own  sake,  and  for  my  servant  D. 

6  for  mine  own  sake,  and  for  my  servant  D. 

8  according  to  all  the  law  that  my  servant 
10  Lord  spake  by  his  servants  the  prophets 

23  servants  of  Anion  conspired  against  him 

9  Thy  servants  have  gathered  the  money 

12  scribe,  and  Asahiah  a  servant  of  the  kings 

30  servants  carried  him  in  a  chariot  dead  fr. 

1  Jehoiakiui  became  his  servant  three  years 

2  which  he  spake  by  his  servants  the  prop. 

10  At  that  time  the  servants  of  Nebuchadu 

11  came  against  the  city,  and  his  servants  did 

12  he,  and  his  mother,  and  hisservants,  and 
8  servant  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  unto  Jer. 

24  Fear  not  to  be  the  servants  of  theChaldees 

34  Sheshan  had  a  servant,  an  Egyptian,  wh. 

35  gave  his  daughter  to  Jarha  his  servant  to 
49  Mose3the  servant  of  God.had  commanded 

13  0  ye  seed  of  Israel  his  servant,  ye  children 

4  Go  and  tell  David  my  servant,  Thus  saith 

7  thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  my  servant  Dav. 

17  forthou  hast  (also)  spoken  of  thy  servant's 

18  thy  servant?  for  thou  knowest  thy  serva. 

19  0  LORD,  for  thy  servant's  sake,  and  acco. 

23  thou  hast  spoken  concerning  thy  servant 

24  house  of  David  thy  servant  (be)  established 

25  hast  told  thy  servant,  .thy  servant  hath  fo. 

26  promised  this  goodness  unto  thy  servant 

27  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy  serv. 
2  Moabites  became  David's  servants,  (and) 

6  Syriansbecame  David's  servants,  (and)  br. 

7  shields  of  gold  that  were  on  the  servants 

13  all  the  Edomites  became  David's  servants 

2  servants  of  David  came  intothelandofthe 

3  are  not  his  servants  come  unto  thee  forto 

4  Wherefore  Eanun  took  David's  servants 
19  when  the  servants  of  Hadarezer  saw  that 

8  they  fell,  .by  the  hand  of  his  servants 

3  (are)  they  not  all  my  lord's  servants?  why 
8  do  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant ;  for 

3  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  had 
8  for  I  know  that  thy  servants  can  skill  to 

8  my  servants  (shall  be)  with  thy  servants 
10  will  give  to  thy  servants,  the  hewers  that 

1 5  the  wheat . .  let  him  send  unto  his  servants 

14  mercy  unto  thy  servants  that  walk  before 

15  Thou  which  hast  kept  with  thy  servant 

16  keep  with  thy  servant  David  my  father  th. 

17  which  thou  hast  spoken  untuthy  servant 

19  respect  therefore  to  the  prayer  of  thy  ser. 
19,  20  the  prayer  which  thy  servant  prayeth 

21  unto  the  supplications  of  thy  servant,  and 

23  judge  thy  servants,  by  requiting  the  wic. 
27  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  and  of  thy 
42  remember  the  mercies  of  David  thy  serv. 

9  did  Solomon  make  no  servants  for  his  wo. 

18  sent  him,  by  the  hands  of  hisservants,  sh. 
18  servants  that  had  knowledge  of  the  sea 
iS  they  went  with  the  servants  of  Solomon 

4  sitting  of  his  servants,  and  the  attendance 
7  happy  (are)  these  thy  servants,  which  st. 

10  servants  also  of  Huram,  and  the  servants 
12  and  went  away,  .she  and  her  servants 
21  went  to  Tarshish  with  the  servants  of  H. 

7  be  kind,  .they  will  be  thy  servants  for  ever 

8  Nevertheless  they  shall  be  his  servants 
6  the  servant  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David 
6  of  Moses  the  servant  of  the  LORD,  and  of 

9  Moses  the  servant  of  God  (laid)  upon  Isr. 
25  his  own  servants  conspired  against  him 

3  slew  his  servants  that  had  killed  the  king 
9  did  Sennacherib . .  send  his  servants  to 

16  his  servants  spake . .  against  his  servant 

24  servants  conspired  against  him,  and  slew 
16  All  that  was  committed  to  thy  servants 

20  commanded . .  Asaiah  a  servant  of  the  ki. 

23  king  said  to  his  servants,  Have  me  away 

24  servants  therefore  took  him  out  of  that  c. 
20  where  they  were  servants  to  him  and  his 
55,  58  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 

5  Besides  their  servants  and  their  maids,  of 
it  "Which  thou  hast  commanded  by  thy  ser. 

1.  6  thou  mayest  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  serv. 
1.  -6  for  the  children  of  Israel  thy  servants,  and 
1.  7,  8  thou  commandodst  thy  servant  Moses 
1.  10  Now  these  (are)  thy  servants  and  thy  pe. 
1.  11  be  attentive  to  the  prayer  of  thy  servant 
,1.  11  to  the  prayer  of  thyservantSjWhodesire  to 

1.  11  prosper,  I  pray  thee,  thy  servant  this  day 

2.  5  if  thy  servant  "have  foundfavourin  thy  si. 
2.  io,  19  andTobiah  theservant,  the  Ammonite 
2.  20  therefore  we  his  servants  will  arise  and 
5.    5  bring  into  bondage  our  sons,  .to  be  serv. 
7.  57,  60  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 


Esth. 


Job 


42. 

Psa.  18 
19. 

19. 
27 

a* 

3.4 

36 
69 
69 

78 

79 
79 


90. 

90. 
102. 
102. 
105. 
105. 
105. 
105. 
105. 
109. 

"3- 
116. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
139. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
123. 
132. 
!34* 
*35- 
*35- 
135- 
136. 
MS- 
144. 

Provu. 

12. 

14. 

17- 
19. 
22. 
29. 
29. 
30. 
30- 


Isa.   14 


10  on  all  his  servants,  and  en  all  the  people 
14  and  laws,  by  the  hand  of  Moses  thy  serv. 
36  Behold,  we  (are)  servants  this  day;  and 
36  thereof,  behold,  we  (are)  servants  in  it 
29  which  was  given  by  Moses  the  servant  of 

3  and  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants 
3  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and  his  servants 

18  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and  his  servants 

2  all  the  king's  servants,  that  (were)  in  the 

3  Then  the  king's  servants,  which  (were)  in 

11  All  the  king's  servants,  and  the  people  of 
11  advanced  him  above  the.  .servants  of  the 

8  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job, that 

3  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job,  that 

19  small  and  great  are  there  ;  and  the  serv. 
iS  Behold,  he  put  no  trust  in  his  servants 

2  As  a  servant  earnestly  desireththe  shad. 
16  called  my  servant,  and  he  gave  (me)  no 

4  wilt  thou  take  him  for  a  servant  for  ever 

7  not  spoken  of  me.,  as  my  servant  Job  (ha.) 

8  go  to  my  servant. .  and  my  servant  Job 

8  (the  thing  which  is)  right,  like  my  serva. 
title.  (A  Psalm)  of  David  the  servant  of  the 

11  Moreover  by  them  is  thy  servant  warned 
13  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presum. 

9  put  not  thy  servant  away  in  anger  :  thou 

16  Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  servant 

22  Lord  redeemeth  the  soul  of  his  servants 

27  pleasure  in  the  prosperity  of  his  servant 
titleAA  Psalm)  of  David  the  servant  of  the  L. 

17  hide  not  thy  face  from  thy  servant;  for 
36  The  seed  also  of  his  servants  shall  inher. 
70  He  chose  Davidalsohis servant,  and  took 

2  The  dead  bodies  of  thyservantshave  they 
10  revenging  of  the  blood  of  thy  servants  (wh. 

2  save  thy  servant  that  trusteth  in  thee 

4  Rejoice  the  soul  of  thy  servant:  for  unto 
16  give  thy  strength  unto  thy  servant,  and 

3  I  have  sworn  unto  David  my  servant 

20  I  have  found  David  my  servant;  with  my 
39  hast  made  void  the  covenant  of  thy  serv. 
50  Remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  thy  se. 

13  let  it  repent  thee  concerningthy  servants 

16  Let  thy  work  appear  unto  thy  servants 

14  For  thy  servants  take  pleasure  in  her  st. 

28  children  of  thy  servants  shall  continue 

6  O  ye  seed  of  Abraham  his  servant,  ye  ch. 

17  (even)  Joseph,  (who)  was  sold  for  a  serv. 

25  turned. .to  dealsubtilelywithhis  servants 

26  He  sent  Moses  his  servant,  (and)  Aaron 
42  he  remembered.. Abraham  his  servant 

28  let  them  be  ashamed;  but  let  thy  servant 

1  Praise,  O  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  praise 

16  truly  I  (am)  fhy  servant;  I  (am)  thy  serv. 

17  Deal  bountifully  with  thy  servant,  (that) 

23  thy  servant  did  meditate  in  thy  statutes 
38  Stablish  thy  word  unto  thy  servant,  who 
49  Remember  the  word  unto  thy  servant,  up. 
65  Thou  hast  dealt  well  with  thy  servant,  O 
76  according  to  thy  word  unto  thy  servant 
84  How  many  (are)  the  days  of  thy  servant? 
91  They  continue,  .for  all  (are)  thy  servants 
122  Be  surety  for  thy  servant  for  good :  let 

124  Deal  with  thy  servant  according  unto  thy 

125  I  (am)  thy  servant;  give  me  understand 
135  Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  servant 
140  Thy  word  (is)  very  pure . .  thy  servant  lo. 
176  seek  thy  servant;  for  I  do  not  forget  thy 

2  as  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  hand 
10  For  thy  servant  David's  sake  turn  not  away 

1  bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  (ye)  servants  of  the 

1  praise  (him),  O  ye  servants  of  the  Lord 

9  upon  Pnaraoh,  and  upon  all  his  servants 
14  will  repent  himself  concerning  his  serva. 
22  (Even)  an  heritage  unto  Israel  his  servant 

2  enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant 

12  destroy  all  them,  .for  I  (am)  thy  servant 
10  who  delivereth  David  his  servant  from  the 

29  the  fool  (shall  be)  servant  to  the  wise  of 
9  (He  that  is)  despised,  and  hath  a  servant 

35  The  king's  favour  (is)  toward  a  wise  serv. 
2  A  wise  servant  shall  have  rule  over  a  son 
10  much  less  for  a  servant  to  have  rule  over 

7  and  the  borrower(is)  servant  to  the  lender 

19  A  servant  will  not  be  corrected  by  words 

21  He  thatdelicately  bringethup  his  servant 

10  Accuse  not  a  servant  unto  his  master,  lest 

22  Fora  servant  when  hereigneth;  and  a  fo. 
7  I  got  (me)  servants  and  maidens,  and  had 

21  lest  thou  hear  thy  servant  curse  thee 
7  I  have  seen  servants  upon  horses,  and 

7  princes  walking  as  servants  upon  the  ea. 

2  shall  possess  them .  .for  servants  and  ha. 

3  Likeas  my  servant  Isaiah  hath  walked  na. 

20  I  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  the  son  of 
2  as  with  the  servant,  so  with  his  master 

9  captain  of  the  least  of  my  master's  serv. 

11  Speak,  I  pray  thee,  unto  thy  servants  in 

5  the  servants  of  king  Hezekiah  came  to  I. 

24  By  thy  servants  hast  thou  reproached  the 
35  I  will  defend  this  city,  .for  my  servant  D. 

8  thou,  Israel,  (art)  my  servant,  Jacob  wh. 

9  Thou  (art)  my  servant ;  I  have  chosen  th. 
1  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold ;  mi. 

19  Who  (is)  blind,  but  my  servant?  or  deaf 
19  who  (is),  .blind  as  the  Lord's  servant? 
10  and  my  servant  whom  I  have  chosen 

1  hear,  0  Jacob  my  servant ;  andlsrael,  wh. 

2  Fear  not,  0  Jacob,  my  servant ;  and  thou 

21  thou  (are)  my  servant :  I  have  formed  th. 
21  thou  (art)  my  servant :  0  Israel,  thou  sh. 
26  That  confirmeth  the  word  of  his  servant 


Isa.   45.    4  For  Jacob  my  servant's  sake,  and  Israel 

48.  20  The  Loud  bath  redeemed  his  servant  Ja. 

49.  3  Thou  (art)  my  servant,  O  Israel,  in  whom 
49.  5  formed  me  from  the  womb  (to  be)  his  ser. 
49.  6  that  thou  shouldest  be  my  servant  to  ra. 
49.    7  to  a  servant  of  rulers,  Kings  shall  see  and 

50. 10  that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  his  servant,  that 

52.  13  my  servant  shall  deal  prudently,  he  shall 

53.  11  by  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  ser. 

54.  17  This  (is)  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of 
56.    6  to  be  his  servants,  every  one  that  keepeth 
63. 17  Return  for  thy  servants'  sake,  the  tribes 
65.    8  so  will  I  doior  my  servants'  sakes,  that 
65.   9  mine  elect  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  serv. 
65.  13  my  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be  hu. 
(•5.  13  my  servants  shall  drink,  but  ye  shall  be 

65.  13  my  servants  shall  rejoice,  but  ye  shall  Vic 

65. 14  my  servants  thallsingior  joy  of  heart,  but 

65. 15  God  shall,  .call  his  servants  by  anothern. 

66.  14  shall  be  known  toward  his  servants,  and 
Jer.     2.  14  (Is)  Israel  a  servant?  (is)  he  a  home  born 

7.  25  I  have  even  sent  xintoyou  allmy  servants 

21.  7  Zedckiah  king  of  Judah,  and  his  servants 

22.  2  thou,  and  thy  servants,  and  thypeopleth. 
22.    4  riding  in  chariots,  .be,  and  his  servants 
25.    4  the  Lord  hath  sent  unto  you  all  his  serv. 
25.    9  and  Nebuchadrezzar  the  king,  .my  serv. 

25.  19  his  servants,  and  his  princes,  and  all  his 

26.  5  To  hearken  to  the  words  of  my  servants 

27.  6  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  .my  se. 

29.  19  which  I  sent  unto  them  by  my  servants 

30.  10  fear  thou  not,  O  my  servant  Jacob,  saith 
33.  21  covenant  be  broken  with  David  my  serv. 
33.  22  will  I  multiply  the  seed  of.  .my  servant 

33.  26  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of.  .my  servant 

34.  11  they  turned,  and  caused  the  servants  and 
34.  11  brought  them  into  sub  jectionfbr  servants 
34.  16  caused  every  man  his  servant,  and  every 

34.  16  to  be  unto  you  for  servants  and  for  hand. 

35.  15  I  have  sent  also  unto  yrouall  my  servants 

36.  24  nor  any  of  his  servants  that  heard  all  th. 

36.  31  punish  him  and  his  seed  an'd  his  servants 

37.  2  neither  he,  nor  his  servants,  nor  the  peo. 
37.  18  "What  have  I.  .against  thy  servants,  or  ag. 

43.  iolwillsend  and  take,  .my  servant,  and  will 

44.  4  sent  unto  you  all  my  servants  the  proph. 
46.  26  deliver  them,  .into  the  hand  of  his  serv. 
46.  27  fear  not  thou,  0  my  servant  Jacob,  and 
46.  28  Fear  thou  not,  0  Jacob  my  servant,  saith 

Lam.  5.    8  Servants haveruledover  us: (there  is)no. 
£ze.  28.  25  land  that  I  have  given  to  my  servant  Ja. 

34.  23  he  shall  feed  them,  (even)  my  servant  D. 

34.  24  and  my  servant  David  a  prince  among 

37.  24  David  my  servant  (shall  be)  king  over  th. 

37.  25  that  I  have  given  unto  Jacob  my  servant 

37.  23  my  servant  David  (shall  be)  their  prince 

38.  17  I  have  spoken  in  old  time  by  my  servants 
46. 17  if  he  give  a  gift,  .to  one  of  his  servants 

Dan.  1.  12  Prove  thy  servants,  I  beseech  thee,  ten 
1. 13  and  as  thou  seest,  deal  with  thy  servants 
9.  6  we  hearkened  unto  thy  servants  the  pro. 
9.  10  which  he  set  before  us  by  his  servant  the 
9  11  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  servant 
9.  17  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  servant 
10.  17  how  can  the  servant  of  this  my  lord  talk 

Joel    2.  29  upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  handm. 

Amos  3.    7  he  revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants 

Mic.    6.    4  redeemed  thee  out  of  the  house  of  serva. 

Hag.    2. 23  will  I  take  thee,  O  Zerubbabel,  my  serv. 

Zech.  1.    6  which  I  commanded  my  servants  the  pr- 

3.  8  I  will  bring  forth  my  servant  The  branch 
Mai.    1.   6  A  son  honoureth  (his)  father,  and  a  serv. 

4.  4  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  my  6erv. 

5.-^1  servant,  doer,  tiller,  slave,  "isJ£  dbad. 

Ezra    4.  11  Thy  servants  the  men  on  this  side  the  ri. 

5.  11  "We  are  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven 
D?n.    2.    4  tell  thy  servants  the  dream,  and  we  will 

2.  7  Let  the  king  tell  his  servants  the  dream 

3.  26  ye  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  come 
3.  28  delivered  hisservants  that  trusted  in  him 

6.  20  0  Daniel,  servant  of  the  livingGod,isthy 

6. To  minister,  nTf  sharath,  3. 

Exod33.  11  his  servant  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  a  yo. 
Num  11.  28  the  servant  of  Moses,  (one)  of  his  young 
2  Sa.  13. 17  he  called  his  servant  that  ministered  un. 
13.  18  his  servant  brought  her  out,  and  bolted 
2  Ki.  6. 15  when  the  servant  of  the  man  of  God,  was 
Prov  29. 12  If  a  ruler  hearken  to  lies,  all  his  servants 

7. A  minister,  Siolkovos  diakonos* 

Matt  22.  13  Then  said  the  king  to  the  servant,  Bind 

23. 11  he  that  is  greatest.,  shall  be  your  servant 
Mark  9.  35  (the  same)  shall  be  last  of  all,  and  servant 
John  2.    5  His  mother  saith  unto  the  servants,  "Wh. 

2.    9  but  the  servants  which  drew  the  water  k. 

12.  26  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  servant 
Rom  16.    1  Phebeour  sister,  which  is  a  servant  of  the 

8. A  servant,  enslaved,  Sof-Aoy  dovlcs. 

Rom.  6.  19  yielded  your  members  servants  to  uncle. 
6.  19  yield  your  members  servants  to  righteo. 
9. A  servant,  slave,  Sov\os  doulos. 

Matt.8.  9  to  my  servant,  Do  this,  and  he  doc-th  (it) 
10.  24  is  not  above  (his)  master,  nor  the  servant 
10.  25  as  his  master,  and  the  servant  as  his  lord 

13.  27  the  servants  of  the  householder  came  and 
13.  28  The  [servants]  said  unto  him,  Wilt  thou 
18.  23  which  would  take  account  of  his  servants 
18.  26  The  servant  therefore  fell  down,  and  wo. 
18.  27  the  lord  of  that  servant  was  moved  with 
18.  28  the  same  servant  went  out  and  found  one 
18.  32  0  thou  wicked  servant,  I  forgave  thee  all 


SERVANT 


864 


SERVE 


Matt2o.  27  whosoever  will  be  chief,  .be  your  servant 
21.  34  he  sent  his  servants  to  the  husbandmen 
21.  35  the  husbandmen  took  his  servants,  and 

21.  36  he  sent  other  servantsmore  than  the  first 

22.  3  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  that 
22.  4  hesentforth  other  servants,  saying,  Tell 
22.  6  the  remnant  took  his  servants,  and  entre. 
22.  8  Then  saith  he  to  his  servants,  The  wedd. 
22. 10  those  servants  went  out  into  the  highways 
24-  45  "Who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant 
24.  46  Blessed  (is)  that  servant  whom  his  lord  wh. 
24.  48  if  that  evil  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart 

24.  50  The  lord  of  that  servant  shall  come  in  a 

25.  14  (who)  called  his  own  servants,  and  deliv. 
25.  19  the  lord  of  those  servants  cometh,  and  re. 
25.  2i  Well  done,  (thou)  good  and  faithful  serv. 
25.  23  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant :  th. 
25.  26  (Thou)  wicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou 

25.  30  cast  ye  the  unprofitable  servant  into  outer 

26.  51  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and 
Markio.  44  will  be  the  chiefest,  shall  be  servant  of  all 

12.    2  he  sentto  the  husbandmen  a  servant,  that 
12.   4  he  sent  unto  them  another  servant,  and 
*3-  34  gave  authority  to  his  servants,  and  to  ev. 
14.  47  smote  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut 
Luke  2.  29  now.Iettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  pe. 

7.   2  a  certain  centurion's  servant,  who  wasde. 

7.    3  that  he  would  come  and  heal  his  servant 

7.  8  to  my  servant,  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  (it) 
7. 10  found  the  servant  whole  that  had  been  si. 

12.  37  Blessed  (are)  those  servants,  whom  the 
12.  38  find  (them)  so,  blessed  are  [those  servants] 
12. 43  Blessed  (is)  that  servant,  whom  his  lord 
12. 45  if  that  servant  say  in  his  heart,  My  lord 
12.  46  The  lord  of  that  servant  will  come  in  a  day 

12.  47  that  servant,  which  knew  his  lord's  will 

14. 17  sent  his  servant  at  supper  time  to  say  to 
14.  21  that  servant  came,  and  showed  his  lord 
14.  21  being  angry,  said  to  his  servant,  Go  out 
34.  22  the  servant  said,  Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou 

14.  23  the  lord  said  unto  the  servant,  Go  out  in. 

15.  22  the  father  said  to  his  servants,  Bring  fo. 
17.    7  which  of  you,  having  a  servant  plowing 

17.  9  Doth  he  thank  that  servant  because  he 
17. 10  We  are  unprofitable  servants:  wehavedo. 
19.  13  he  called  his  ten  servants,  and  delivered 
19. 15  he  commanded  these  servants  to becalled 
19.  17  Well,  thou  good  servant :  because  thou 

19.  22  will  I  judge  thee,  (thou)  wicked  servant 
20. 10  he  sent  a  servant  to  the  husbandmen,  th. 

20.  11  he  sent  another  servant:  and  they  beat 
22.  50  one  of  them  smote  the  servant  of  the  hi. 

John  4.  51  his  servants  met  him,  and  told  (him),  say. 

8.  34  Whosoever  committethsin  is  the  servant 
8.  35  the  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for 

13.  16  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord 
15. 15  I  call  you  not  servants  ;  for  the  servant 

15.  20  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord 
18. 10  smote  the  high  priest's  servant,  and  cut 

18.  10  The  servant's  name  was  Malchus 

18. 18  the  servants  and  officers  Btood  there  who 

18.  26  One  of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  be. 
Acts    2.  18  on  my  servants  and  on  my  handmaidens 

4.  29  grant  unto  thy  servants,  that  with  all  bo. 

16.  17  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  most 
Rom.  1.    1  Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  called  (to 

6.  16  servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are  to 
6.  17  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were  the  servants 

6.  20  when  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin,  ye  were 

1  Co.  7.  21  Art  thou  called  (being)  a  servant?  care  not 

7.  22  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  (being)  a  s. 
7.  22  he  that  is  called,  (being)  free,  is  Christ's  s. 
7.  23  Ye  are  bought . .  be  not  ye  the  servants  of 

2  Co.  4.   5  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus' sa. 
Gal.    1.  10  pleased  men,  I  should  not  be  the  servant 

4.    1  the  heir,  .differeth  nothing  from  a  serva. 
4.   7  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but  a  son 
Eph.  6.    5  Servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are  (y.) 

6.  6  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  doinglthe  will  of 
Phil.  1.    1  Paul  and  Timotheus,  the  servauts  of  Jesus 

2.    7  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant 
Col.     3.  22  Servants,  obey  in  all  things  (your)  master 
4.    1  give  unto  (your)  servants  that  which  is 
4. 12  Epaphras,  who  is  (one)  of  you,  a  servant 

1  Ti.    6.    1  Let  a3  many  servants  as  are  under  the 

2  Ti.    2.  24  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive 
Titus  1.    1  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of 

2.  9  (Exhort)  servants  to  be  obedient  unto  th. 
Phm.  16  Not  now  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  serva. 
Jas.     1.    1  James,  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord 

1  Pe.  2. 16  not  using  (your)  liberty,  .but  as  the  serv. 

2  Pe.    1.    1  Simon  Peter,  a  servant  and  an  apostle  of 

2.  19  they  themselves  are  the  servants  of  corr. 

Jude         1  Jude,  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  andbr. 

Rev.    1.    1  to  show  unto  his  servants  things  which 
i.    1  signified  (it)  by  his  angel  unto  his  servant 
2.  20  to  seduce  my  servants  to  commit  fornic. 

7.  3  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  G. 
10.    7  as  he  hath  declared  to  his  servants  the 
ti.  18  shouldest  give  reward  unto  thy  servants 
is.   3  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant 

19.  2  hath  avenged  the  blood  of  his  servants  at 
19.    5  Praise  our  God,  all  ye  his  servants,  and 
22.    3  no  more  curse . .  and  his  servants  shall  se. 
22.   6  sent  his  angel  to  show  unto  his  servants 

lit.Jx  attendant,  servant,  OtpaTrwv  therapon, 
Heb.    3.    5  Moses  verily  (was)  faithful,  .as  a  servant 

W,A  domestic,  house  servant,  oiWttjs  oiketes. 
i.uke  16.  13  No  servant  can  serve  two  masters :  for 
Rom. 14.   4  thou  that  judgest  another  man's  servant? 
1  Pc.    2.  1?  Servants,  (be)  subject  to  your  masters  wi. 


1*2. A  child,  boy,  servant,  irais  pais. 

Matt.  8.    6  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy 
8.    8  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  servant  sh. 
8.  13  his  servant  was  healed  in  the  self  same 
12.  18  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  have  chosen 

14.  2  said  unto  his  servants,  This  is  John  the 
Luke  1.  54  He  hath  holpen  his  servant  Israel,  in  re. 

1. 69  for  us  in  the  house  of  his  servant  David 
7.    7  say  in  a  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be 

15.  26  he  called  one  of  the  servants,  and  asked 
Acts    4.  25  Who  by  the  mouth  of  thy  servant  David 

IZ.Ammder  rower, underling,  virnpir-qs  hvperetes. 
Matt  26.  58  went  in,  and  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see 
Marki4.  54  he  sat  with  the  servants,  and  warmed  hi. 

14.  65  the  servants  did  strike  him  with  the  pal. 
John  18.  36  then  would  my  servants  fight,  that  I  sho. 

SERVANT,  (hired,  horn,  fellow)— 

1. Hired  servant,  hireling,  Vfp  sakir. 

Exodi2.  45  and  an  hired  servant  shall  not  eat  thereof 
Lev.  22.  10  an  hired  servant,  shall  not  eat  (of)  the  holy 
25.    6  and  for  thy  maid,  and. .thy  hired  servant 
25.  40  as  an  hired  servant,  (and)  as  a  sojourner 
25.  50  according  to  the  time  of  an  hired  servant 
25.  53;  Deut.  15.  18;  24.  14. 
2.Fellow  slave,  avvZov\os,  Matt.  18.  2S,  29,  31,  33, 
24,  49;  Col.  1.  7;  4.  7;  Rev.  6.  11  ;  19.  10;  22.  g. 
S.A  son  of  the  house,  n*3"I?  ben-bayith, 

Eccl.  2.    7  and  had  servants  born  in  my  house ;  also 

4,A  hired  servant,  hireling,  /xiadtos  misthios. 
.Luke  15.  17  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's 

15.  19  make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants 

5.A  hireling,  hired  servant,  fjaaOairos  misthotos 
Mark  1.  20  in  the  ship  with  the  lured  servants,  and 

SERVANTS,  to  be,  become,  make  — 
l.To  be  or  become  a  servant,  *"3J;  dbad. 

1  Sa.  4.  9  that  ye  be  not  servants  unto  the  Hebrews 
1  Ch.19.  19  they  made  peace,  .and  became  his  serva. 

2.  To  make  one  a  servant  or  slave,  dov\6(a  douloo. 
Rom.  6.  18  ye  became  the  servants  of  righteousness 

6.  22  made  free  from  sin,  and  become  servants 
1  Co.  9. 19  yet  have  I  made  myself  servant  unto  all 

SERVANTS,  store  of  — 
Service,  si^y.  abuddah. 

Gen.  26. 14  possession  of  herds,  and  great  store  of  se. 

SERVE  (self),  to  — 

1.  To  serve,  12%  dbad. 

Gen.  14.    4  Twelve  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer 
15.  13  Know,  .that  thy  seed,  .shall  serve  them 
15. 14  that  nation,  whom  they  shall  serve,  will 
25.  23  and  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger 
27.  29  Let  people  serve  thee,  and  nations  bow 
27.  40  shalt  thou  live,  and  shalt  serve  thy  bro. 
29.  15  shouldest  thou.therefore  serve  me  for  no. 
29. 18  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel 
29.  20  And  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  Rachel 
29.  25  did  not  I  serve  with  thee  for  Rachel?  wh. 
29.  27  fortheservice  which  thou  shalt  serve  with 

29.  30  and  served  with  him  yet  seven  other  ye. 

30.  26  Give  (me)  my  wives,  .for  whom  I  have  se. 

30.  29  Thou  knowest  how  I  have  served  thee,  and 

31.  6  with  all  my  power  I  have  served  your  fa. 
31.  41  I  served  thee  fourteen  years  for  thy  two 

Bxod,  3.  12  ye  shall  serve  God  upon  this  mountain 
4.  23  Let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  serve  me,  and 

7.  16  that  they  may  serve  me  in  the  wilderness 

8.  1,  20  Letmy  peoplego,  that  they  mayserve 

9.  1,  13  Let  mypeople  go,  that  they  may  serve 
10.  3  let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me 
10.  7  that  they  may  serve  the  Lord  their  God 
10.  8  he  said  unto  them,  Go,  serve  the  LoRDyo. 

10. 11  go  now  ye  (that  are)  men,  and  serve  the 
10.  24  Go  ye,  serve  the  Lord  ;  only  let  your  flo. 
10.  26  thereof  must  we  take  to  serve  the  Lord 
10.  26  we  know  not  with  what  we  must  serve  the 
12  31  and  go,  serve  the  Lord,  as  ye  have  said 

14. 12  Let  us  alone,  that  we  may  serve  the  Egy. 
14. 12  (it  had  been)  better  for  us  to  serve  tlieE. 
21.  2  Hebrew  servant,  six  years  he  shall  serve 
21.  6  bore  his  ear.  .he  shall  serve  him  for  ever 
23-  25  ye  shall  serve  the  Lord  your  God,  and  he 
23.  33  if  thou  serve  their  gods,  it  will  surely  be 

Lev.  25.  40  (and)  shall  serve  thee  unto  the  year  of  ju. 
Num.  4.  24  This  (is)  the   service,  .to  serve,  and  for 

4.  26  that  is  made  for  them  :  so  shall  they  serve 

8.  25  shall  cease  waiting. .and  shall  serve  nom. 

18.    7  ye  shall  serve :  I  have  given  your  priest's 

18.  21  for  their  service  which  they  serve,  (even) 

Deut.  4.  ig  be  driven  to  worship  them,  and  serve  th. 

4.  28  ye  shall  serve  gods,  the  work  of  men's  ha. 

6/-13  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  se. 

7.    4  turn  away,  .thatthey  may  serve  other  go. 

7.  16  neithershaltthouservetheirgods;  for  th. 

8.  19  walk  after  other  gods,  and  serve  them 
10.  12  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 

10.  20  him  shalt  thou  serve,  and  to  him  shalt  th. 

11.  13  to  serve  him  with  all  your  heart  and  with 

11.  16  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship  them 

12.  2  the  places  wherein  the  nations,  .served 

12.  30  How  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods? 

13.  4  ye  shall  serve,  and  cleave  unto  him 

13.  6,  13  Let  us  go  and  serve  othergods,  which 
15.  12  be  sold  unto  thee,  and  serve  thee  six  years 
17.  3  hath  gone  and  served  othergods,  and  wo. 
20. 11  all  the  people,  .they  shall  serve  thee 


•Sa. 


17- 

26. 


Deut28.  14  not  go  aside,  .after  othergods  to  serve  th. 
28.  36  there  shalt  thou  serve  other  gods,  wood 
28.  47  thou  servedst  not  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
28.  48  Therefore  shalt  thou  serve  thine  enemieb 

28.  64  thou  thalt  serve  other  gods,  which  neither 

29.  1 8  to  go  (and)  serve  the  gods  of  these  nations 

29.  26  they  went  and  served  othergods,  and  wo. 

30.  17  and  worship  other  gods,  and  serve  them 

31.  20  serve  them,  and  provoke  me,  and  break 
Josh  16.  10  unto  this  day,  and  serve  under  tribute 

22.  5  serve  him  with  all  your  heart,  and  with 

23.  7  neither  serve  them,  nor  bow  yourselves 

23.  16  have  gone  and  served  other  gods,  and  bo. 

24.  2  Your  fathers  dwelt . .  and  they  served  other 
24,  14  and  serve  him  in  sincerity  and  in  truth 
24.  14  which  your  fathersserved  on  the  other  si. 
24.  14  put  away  the  gods.,  and  serve  ye  the  Lord* 
24. 15  if  it  seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord 
24.  15  choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve 
24.  15  the  gods  which  your  fathers  Berved,  that 

24. 15  as  forme  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the 

24. 16  should  forsake  the  Lord,  to  serve  other 
24.  18  will  we  also  serve  the  Lord;  forhe(is)our 
24.  19  said  unto  the  people,  Ye  cannot  serve  the 
24.  20  forsake  the  Lord,  and  serve  strange  gods 
24.  21  said  unto  Joshua,  Nay ;  but  we  will  serve 
24.  22  have  chosen  you  the  Lord,  to  serve  him 
24.  24  Lord  out  God  will  we  serve,  and  his  voice 

24.  31  Israel  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Jo. 
Judg.  2.    7  people  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Jo. 

2. 11  children  of  Israel  did  evil,  .and  served  Ba. 
2.  13  forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  Baal  and  As. 

2.  19  in  followingothergodsto  serve  them,  and 

3.  6  gavetheir  daughters . .  and  served  their  go. 
3.  7  forgat  the  Lord  their  God,  and  served  Ba. 
3.  8  the  children  of  Israel  served  Cushan-risha. 
3.  14  served  Eglon  the  king  of  Moab  eighteen 
9.  28  who  (is)  Shechem,  that  we  should  serve  him 
9.  28  Serve  the  men.  .for  why  should  we  serve 
9.  38  Who  (is)  Abimelech,  that  we  should  serve 

10.    6servedBaalim,andAshtaroth,andthegods 
10.    6  forsook  the  Lord,  and  served  not  him 
10.  10  forsaken  our  God,  and  also  served  Baalim 
10.  13  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  other  gods 

10.  16  put  away  the  strange  gods,  .and  served 

1  Sa.    7.    3ser\rehimonly;  and  he  will  deliver  you  out 

7.  4  put  away  Baalim .  .and  served  the  Lord 

8.  8  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  other  gods 

11.  1  Make  a  covenant,  .and  we  will  serve  thee 

12.  10  and  have  served  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth 

12. 10  now  deliver  us.  .and  we  will  serve  thee 
12. 14  If  ye  will  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him,  and 
12.  20  turn  not  aside,  .but  serve  the  Lord  with 

12.  24  Only  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  tr. 
9  then  shall  ye  be  our  servants,  and  serve  us 

19  driven  me  out.  .saying,  Go,  serve  other  g. 
19  they  made  peace  with  Israel,  and  served 

8  to  Jerusalem,  then  I  will  serve  the  Lord 
19  whom  should  I  serve,  .served  in  thy  fat. 
44  a  people  (which)  I  knew  not  shall  serve 
21  and  served  Solomon  all  the  days  of  his  1. 

6  but  go  and  6erve  other  gods,  and  worship 

9  have  worshipped  them,  and  served  them 
4  make  thou . .  lighter,  and  we  will  serve  th. 

7  wilt  serve  them,  and  answer  them,  and 
31  went  and  served  Baal,  and  worshipped 
53  For  he  served  Baal,  and  worshipped  him 

18  served  Baal  a  little,  (but)  Jehu  shall  serve 
12  For  they  served  idols,  whereof  the  Lord 
16  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and  s. 
33  They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their 
35  nor  bow  yourselves  to  them,  nor  serve  t. 
41  served  their  graven  images,  both  their  c. 

7  rebelled  against  the  king,  .and  served  him 

3  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and  s. 

21  served  the  idols  that  his  fathers  served 
24  dwell  in  the  land,  and  serve  the  king  of 

9  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  witli 

19  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and  worship  th. 

22  laid  hold  on  other  gods,  .and  served  them 

4  therefore  ease,  .and  we  will  serve  thee 
18  served  groves  and  idols:  and  wrath  came 

8  serve  the  Lord,  .that  the  fierceness  of  his 
3  worshipped  all  the  host.,  and  served  them 

16  commanded  Judahto  servethe  Lord  CJod 
22  for  Anion  sacrificed,  .and  served  them 
33  all  that  were  present,  .to  serve  the  LORD 
3  serve  now  the  LORD  your  God,  and  his  p. 

35  For  they  have  not  served  thee  in  their  k. 
15  What  (is)  the  Almighty,  that  we  should  s. 
11  If  they  obey  and  serve  (Mm),  they  shall 

9  Will  the  unicorn  be  willing  to  serve  thee 
11  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  w. 
43  people  (whom)  I  have  not  known  shall  s. 
30  A  seed  shall  serve  him  ;  it  shall  be  acco. 

11  before  him ;  all  nations  shall  serve  him 
7  Confounded  be  all  they  that  serve  graven 
2  Serve  the  LORD  with  gladness ;  come  be. 

22  are  gathered  together . .  to  serve  the  LORD 

36  served  their  idols  which  were  a  snare  mi. 
Isa.    19.  23  Egyptians  shall  serve  with  the  Assyrians 

12  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  p. 
Jer.     5.  19  Like  as  ye  have,  .served  strange  gods  in 

5.  19  so  shall  ye  serve  strangers  in  a  land  (th. 
8.    2  loved,  and  whom  they  have  served,  and 
11.  10  they, went  after  other  gods  to  serve  them 

13.  10  walk  after  other  gods,  to  serve  them,  and 
16.  11  walked  after  other  gods,  and  have  served 
16.  13  there  shall  ye  serve  other  gods  day  and 
22.    9  and  worshipped  other  gods,  and  served 

25.  6  gonot  after  othergodsto  serve  them,  and 

25. 11  these  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of  Ba. 


=5 

Ch.28, 

•  Ch.  7. 

7 


Neh 
Job 


72. 

1 .  ■■■  1, 
102. 
106. 

19. 

60. 


SERVE 


865 


SET 


Jer.   25.  14  great  kings  shall  serve  themselves  of  th. 
27.    6  the  beasts,  .have  I  given,  .to  serve  them 
27.   7  all  nations  shall  serve  him.and  his  son, and 
27.    7  great  kings  shall  serve  themselves  of  him 
27.    8  nation  and  kingdom  which  will  not  serve 
27.    9  Ye  shall  not  serve  the  king  of  Babylon 
27.  11  the  nations  that. .serve  him,  those  will  I 
27.  12  and  serve  him  and  his  people,  and  live 
27.  13  the  nation  that  will  not  serve  the  king  of 
27.  14  Ye  shall  not  serve  the  king  of  Babylon 
27.  17  serve  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  live:  where. 
28. 14  that  they  may  serve  Nebuchadnezzar  ki. 
28. 14  they  shall  serve  him  :  and  I  have  given 
30.    8  strangers  shall  no  more  serve  themselves 
30.   9  they  shall  serve  the  Lord  their  God,  and 
34.    9  none  should  serve  himself  of  them,  (to 
34. 10  none  should  serve  themselves  of  them  any 

34.  14  when  he  hath  served  thee  six  years,  thou 

35.  15  go  notafterother  gods  to  serve  them, and 
40.   9  Fear  not  to  serve  the  Chaldeans :  dwell 
40.   9  serve  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  it  shall  be 
44.    3  to  serve  other  gods,  whom  they  knew  not 

Eze.  20.  39  serve  ye  every  one  his  idols,  and  hereaf. 

20.  40  there  shall  all  the  house . .  serve  me :  th. 

29. 18  for  the  service  that  he  had  served  against 

29.  20  (for)  his  labour  wherewith  he  served  ag. 

34.  27  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  served  the. 

48.  18  for  food  unto  them  that  serve  the  city 

48.  19  they  that  serve  the  city  shall  serve  it  out 

Hos.  12.  12  Israel  served  for  a  wife,  and  for  a  wife  he 

Zeph.  3.   9  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve 

Mai.   3.  14  It  (is)  vain  to  serve  God ;  and  what  profit 

3.  17  as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serv. 

3.  18  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serv. 

2.  To  be  caused  to  serve,  iny  abad,  6. 

Exod2o.    5  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down,  .nor serve  th. 

23.  24  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down,  .nor  serve  th. 

Deut.  5.    9  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down,  .nor  serve  th. 

13.  2  go  after  other  gods,  .and  let  us  serve  th. 

3.  Service,  rn'iny.  abodah. 

Num.  3.  36  all"  the  vessels  thereof,  and  all  that  serv. 

4.  To  stand  before,  *isjh  Tpu  amad  Upline. 

Jer.  40.  10  I  will  dwell  at  Mizpah,  to  serve  the  Clia. 
52.  12  came  Nebuzar-adan.  .(which)  served  the 

5.  To  do,  T\pHr  asah. 

Judg  8.    1  Why  hasi  thou  served  us  thus,  that  thou 

6.  To  cleave,  break  up,  till,  serve,  n^?  pelach. 

Dan.  3. 12  they  serve  not  thy  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  14  do  not  ye  serve  my  gods,  nor  worship  the 
3.  17  our  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver 
3.  18  we  will  not  serve  thy  gods,  nor  worship 

3.  28  that  they  might  not  serve  nor  worship  any 

6.  16  Thy  God,  whom  thou  servest  continually 
6  2oisthyGocl,  whom  thou  servest  continually 

7.  14  that  all.  .nations,  and  languages,  should  s. 
7.  27  and  all  dominions  should  serve  and  obey 

?.  To  minister,  rniy  sharath,  3. 

Gen,  39.  4  Joseph  found  grace,  .and  he  served  him 
40.  4  charged  Joseph  with  them,  and  he  served 
i  Ch.27.  1  their  officers  that  served  the  king  in  any 
2  CI1.29. 11  chosen  you  to  stand  before  him,  to  serve 
Esth,  1. 10  the  seven  chamberlains  that  served  in  the 
Psa.101.  6  walketh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  shall  serve 
Isa.  56.  6  to  serve  him,  and  to  love  the  name  of  the 
Eze.  20.  32  We  will  be  as  the  heathen,  .to  serve  wood 

8.  To  do  a  deed,  7iDg  S53  gamal  gemul. 

Psa.137.    8  that  rewardeth  thee  as  thou  hast  served 

9.  To  act  as  a  deacon,  ministrant,  dtafcoveco  diako. 

Lukeio.  40  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve  alone 
12.37  that  he  shall  gird  himself,  .and  serve  them 
17.  8  serve  me,  till  I  have  eaten  and  drunken 
22.  26  and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that  doth  servo 
22.  27  he  that  sitteth  at  meat,  or  he  that  serveth 
22.  27  but  I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth 
.  J0I11112.    2  made  him  a  supper;  and  Martha  served 

T2.  26  If  any  man  serve  me. ..if  any  man  serve  me 
Acts   6.    2  It  is  not  reason  that  we  should . .  serve  ta . 

10.  To  serve,  be  a  slave,  BovKevv  douleuo. 

Matt.  6.  24  No  man  can  serve  two  masters:  for  either 

6.  24  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 
Lukei5.  29  Lo,  these  many  years  do  I  serve  thee,  ne. 

16.  13  No  servant  can  serve  two  masters:  foreit. 

16. 13  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon 
Acts  20. 19  Serving  the  Lord  with  all  humility  of  mi. 
Horn.  6.   6  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin 

7.  6  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit,  and 
7.  25  with  the  mind  I  myself  serve  the  law  of 
9. 12  It  was  said.  .The  elder  shall  serve  the  yo, 

12.  11  Not  slothful,  .fervent  in  spirit ;  serving 

14.  18  he  that  in  these  things  serveth  Christ  (is) 
16.  18  they  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Lord  J. 

Gal.    5.  13  (use)  not  liberty .  .but  by  love  serve  one 
Phil.  2.  22  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath  served 
Col.     3.  24  ye  shall  receive  the  re  ward.,  for  ye  serve 
1  Th.  1.    9  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve_theli. 
Titus  3.   3  serving  clivers  lusts  and  pleasures",  living 

ll.To  serve  puhlicly  or  reverentially,  Karp^vw. 
Matt.  4.  10  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve 
Luke  1.  74  that  we.  .might  serve  him  without  fear 
2.  37  served  (God)  with  fastings  and  prayers  ni. 

4.  8  thy  God,  and.  him  only  shalt  thou  serve 

A  cts    7.    7  after  that  shall  they  come  forth,  and  serve 

26.  7  our  twelve  tribes,  instantly  serving  (God) 

27.  23  of  God,  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve 
Rom.  1.    g  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with  my 

1.  25  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Crea. 

1  no 


2  Ti.  1.  3  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from (my)for. 
Heb.   8.    5  Who  serve  unto  the  example  and  shadow 

14  purge  your  conscience,  .to  serve  the  liv. 
28  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve 
10  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the 

15  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  tern. 
3  no  more  curse,  .and  his  servants  shall se. 

12.  To  row  as  an  underling,  inrrjpeTca}  hupereteu. 
Acts  13.  36  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  gen. 

SERVE,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

l.To  serve,  make  to  serve,  3""gj;  abad-be. 

Exod.  1.  14  their  service,  wherein  they  made  them  se. 

2.2*0  cause  to  serve,  "Dj;  abaci,  5. 

Exod.  1. 13  made  the  children  of  Israel  to  serve  with 
2  Ch.34.  33  and  made  all  that  were  present,  .to  serve 
Isa.   43.  23  I  have  not  caused  thee  to  serve  with  an 

43.  24  thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins 
Jer.  17.  4  I  will  cause  thee  to  serve  thine  enemies 
Eze.  29,  18  caused  his  army  to  serve  a  great  service 

SERVE,  to  be  made  to  — 

To  be  made  to  serve,  "OJJ  abad,  4. 

Isa.   14.    3  bondage  wherein  thou  wast  made  to  serve 
SERVED,  to  be  — 
To  be  served,  13)/  abad,  2. 

Eccl.   5.    9  the  king  (himself)  is  served  by  the  field 
SERVICE,  servile,  serving,  servitor,  servitude, divine — 

1.  Hands  or  parts  of  *y.,  11  yad,  yede. 

1  Ch.  6.  31  (they)  whom  David  set  over  the  service  of 

29.  5  who  (then)  is  willing  to  consecrate  his  se. 

2.  To  serve,  "U$!  abad. 

Exod  14.    5  that  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  serving 
Deut  15. 18  a  double  hired  servant  (to  thee),  in  serving 

%.  Service,  n"ib".  abodah. 

Gen.  29.  27  we  will  give  thee  this  also  for  the  service 

30. 26  thou  knowest  my  service.which  I  have  do. 

Exod.  1.  14  and  in  all  manner  of  service  in  the  field 

1.  14  all  their  service  wherein  they  made  them 

12.  25  when  ye  be  come,  .ye  shall  keegthisserv. 

12.  26  say  unto  you,  What  mean  ye  by  this  ser. 

13.  5  thou  shalt  keep  this  service  in  this  mo. 

27.  19  vessels  of  the  tabernacle  in  all  the  service 

30.  16  shalt  appoint  it  for  the  service  of  the  ta. 
35.  21  for  all  his  service,  and  for  the  holy  garni. 

35.  24  shittim  wood,  for  any  work  of  the  service 

36.  1  work  all  manner  of  work  for  the  service 
36.  3  for  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  sanctu. 
36.    5  much  more  than  enough  for  the  service 

38.  21  as  it  was  counted,  .(for)  the  service  of  the 

39.  40  all  the  vessels  of  the  service  of  the  taber. 
Lev.  23.  7,  8,  21,  25,  35,36  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work 
Num.  3.    7,  8,  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 

3.  26  the  cords  of  it,  for  all  the  service  thereof 

3.  31  the  hanging,  and  all  the  service  thereof 

4.  4  This  (shall  be)  the  service  of  the  sons  of 
4.  19  and  appoint  them  every  one  to  his  service 
4. 23  all  that  enter  in  to  perform  the  service 
4. 24,  28,  33  This  (is)  the  service  of  the  families 
4.  26  all  the  instruments  of  their  service,  and 
4.  27  his  sons  shall  be  all  the  service  of  the  sons 
4.  27  all  their  burdens,  and  in  all  their  service 
4.  31,  33  according  to  all  their  service  in  theta. 
4.  32  their  instruments,  and  with  all  their  ser. 
4. 47  the  service  of  the  ministry,  aud  the  serv. 
4. 49  every  one  according  to  his  service,  and 
7.   5  that  they  may  be  to  do  the  service  of  the 
7.    5  give,  .to  every  man  according  to  his  ser. 
7..  7  the  sons  of  Gershon,  according  to  their  se. 
7.    8  he  gave . .  according  unto  their  service,  un. 

7.  9  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  belongingun. 
8. 11  they  may  execute  the  service  of  the  Lord 
8. 19  to  do  the  service  of  the  children  of  Israel 

8.  22  to  do  their  service  in  the  tabernacle  of 
8.  24  shall  go  in  to  wait  upon  the  serviceof  the 
8.  25  they  shall  cease  waiting  upon  the  service 

8.  26  to  keep  the  charge,  and  shall  do  no  serv. 
16.  9  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
18.  4  keep  the  charge.. for  all  the  serviceof  the 
18.  6  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
18.  7  given  your  priest's  office . .  as  a  service  of 
18.  21  service  which  they  serve,  (even)  the  ser. 
18.  23  the  Levites  shall  do  the  service  of  the  ta. 
18.  31  it  (is)  your  reward  for  your  service  in  the 

28.  18  ye  shall  do  no  manner  of  servile  work 

28.  25.  26  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work 

29.  1,  12  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  :  it  is  a  d. 
29.  35  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  (therein) 

Josh. 22.  27  that  we  might  do  the  serviceof  the  LORD 
1  Ki.12.  4  make  thou  the  grievous  service  of  thy  fa. 
1  Ch.  6.  48  (were)  appointed  unto  all  manner  of  ser. 
g.  13  able  men  for  the  work  of  the  service  of 

9.  19  Korahites,  (were)  over  the  work  of  these. 
23. 24  that  did  the  work  for  the  service  of  the 
23.  26  nor  any  vessels  of  it  for  the  service  ther. 

23.  28  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
23. 28  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of 
23. 32  in  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

24.  3  according  to  their  offices  in  their  service 

24.  19  the  orderings  of  them  in  their  service  to 

25.  1  separated  to  the  service  of  the  sons  of  A. 
25.    1  of  the  workmen  according  to  their  serv. 

25.  6  harps,  forthe  service  ofthe  house  of  God 

26.  8  ablemenfor  strengthfortheservice,  (we.) 
26.  30  the  business  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  ser. 
28.  13  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of 
28. 13  the  vessels  of  service  in  the  house  of  the 
2S.  14  for  all  instruments  of  all  manner  of  ser. 


1  Ch.  28.  14  for  all  instruments  of  every  kind  of  serv. 
28.  20  the  work  for  the  service  of  the  house  of 
28.  21  they  shall  be  with  thee)  for  all  the  serv. 

28.  21  willing  skilful  man,  for  any  manner  of  s. 

29.  7  gave  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God 

2  Ch.  8. 14  the  courses  of  the  priests  to  their  service 
10.  4  ease  thou  somewhat  the  grievous  servit. 
12.  8  they  may  know  my  service,  and  the  serv. 
24. 12  gave  it  to  such  as  did  the  work  of  the  se. 
29.  35  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  was 
31.  2  every  man  according  to  his  service,  the 
31.  16  his  daily  portion  for  their  service  in  their 
31.  21  every  work  that  he  began  in  the  service 

34.  13  wrought  the  work  in  any  manner  of  serv. 

35.  2  encouraged  them  to  the  service  of  the  ho. 
35.  10  the  service  was  prepared,  and  the  priests 
35.  15  they  might  not  depart  from  their  service 
35. 16  the  service  of  the  Lord  was  prepared  the 

Ezra  8.  20  the  princes  had  appointed  for  the  service 
Neh.  10.  32  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  our  God 
Psa.104.  14  grass  to  grow.,  and  herb  forthe  service  of 
Lam.  1 .    3  captivity . .  because  of  great  servitude 
Eze.  29.  18  caused  his  army  to  serve  a  great  service 
29. 18  yet  had  he  no  wages . .  for  the  service  that 
44.  14  for  all  the  service  thereof,  audfor  all  that 

4,$  reive,  RV3Jt  abida. 

Ezra  6.  1 8' for  the  service  of  God,  which  (is)  at  Jeru. 
5.  Service,  }rj?9  polchan. 

Ezra  7.  19  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  thy  God 
6.^1  host,  service  of  the  host,  n^>'  tsaba. 

Num.  4.  23  all  that  enter  in  to  perform  the  service,  to 
4-  3°»  35*  39>  43  every  one  that  entereth . .  serv. 

8.  24  they  shall  go  in  to  wait  upon  the  service 

7. Coloured  or  twined  cloth,  T$  serad. 

EXOCI31.  10  the  cloths  of  service,  and  the  holy  garni. 
35.  19  The  cloths  of  service,  .the  holy  garments 
39.  1  of  the  blue .  .they  made  cloths  of  service 
39.  41  The  cloths  of  service,  .and  the  holy  gar. 

S.  To  minister,  trw  sharath,  3. 

2  Ki.  4.  43  his  servitor  said,  What !  should  I  set  this 
9. Ministration,  service,  BiaKovia  diakonia. 

Lukeio.  40  Martha  was  cumbered  about  much  serving 

Rom  15.  31  that  my  [service]  which  (I  have)  for  Jeru. 

Rev.    2.  :g  I  know  thy  works,  and  charity,  and  serv. 

10. Public  or  reverential  service,  Aarpeia  latreia. 
John  1 6.    2  yea.  .will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service 
Rom.  9.    4  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  service  (of 
12.    1  sacrifice,  .(which  is)  your  reasonable  ser. 
Heb.  9.    1  had  also  ordinances  of  divine  service 

9.  6  priests  went,  .accomplishing  the  service 

11. Public  work,  Xtnovyia  leitougia. 

2  Co.  9. 12  the  administration  of  this  service  not  only 

Phil.  2.  17  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  serv. 

2.  30  to  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me 

SERVICE,  to  do  or  use  the  — 

1 .  To  serve,  *inj;  abad. 

Num.  4.  37,  41  all  that  might  do  service  in  the  taber. 

8.  15  go  in  to  do  the  service  ofthe  tabernacle 

18.  23  Butthe  Levitesshall  do  the  service  ofthe 

Jer.  22. 13  useth  his  neighbours  service  without  wa. 

2.  To  minister,  rry$  sharath,  3. 

Exod39-    1  to  do  service  in  the  holy  (place),  andmade 
3. Ministration,  BiaKovia  diakonia. 

2  Co.  1 1.   S  robbed  other  churches.,  to  do  you  service 
4.  To  serve,  be  a  slave,  BovXevta  douleuo. 

Gal.    4.    8  ye  did  service  unto  them  which  by  nature 

Eph.  6.    7  With  good  will  doing  service,  as  men  pie. 

1  Ti.   6.    2  butratherdo  (them)service,  becausethey 
5. To  serve  publicly  or  reverentially,  Xarpevw  latre. 

Heb.  9.   9  not  make  him  that  did  the  service  perfect 
SET  — 

1.  To  be  founded,  ID*  yasad,  4. 

Song  5.  1 5  His  legs  (are  as)  pillars  of  marble  set  upon 

2.  To  be  appointed,  ny;  yaad,  6. 

Eze.  21.  16  Go  thee,  .whithersoever  thy  face  (is)  set 

Z.To  be  filed,  full,  K^a  male,  4. 

Song  5.  14  hands  (are  as)  gold  rings  set  with  the  be. 
4.  Arranged,  fixed,  ranTos  laktos. 

Acts  12.  21  upon  a  set  day  Herod,  arrayed  in  royal 
5. To  arrange,  set  in  array,  rdao-co  tasso. 

Luke  7.    8  For  I  also  am  a  man  set  under  authority 
SET  (self),  to  — 
l.To  set  a  border,  ^33  gdbal. 

Deut  19.  14  which  they  of  old  time  have  set  in  thim 
l.To  grave,  decree,  ppg  chaqaq. 

Prov.  8.  27  when  he  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of 
Z.To  give,  nn;  yahab. 

2  Sb.ii.  15  Set  ye  Uriah  in  the  fore  front  of  the  hot. 

4.  To  put  down,  let  alone,  m;  yanach,  5. 

Gen/19.  16  and  set  him  without  the  city 
Deut26.  10  thou  shalt  set  it  before  the  Lord  thy  God 
Judg.  6.  18  bring  forth  my  present,  andset  (it)before 
Isa.    14.    1  set  them  in  their  own  land :  and  the  str 
46.   7  set  hirn  in  his  place,  and  he  standeth ;  frou 

5.  To  station  self  3s;  yatsab,  7. 

2  Sa.  18. 13  thou  thyself  wouldest  have  set  thyself  ag. 

1  Cb.11.  14  set  themselves  in  the  midst  of  (that)parcel 

2  Ch.20. 17  set  yourselves,  stand  ye  (still),  and  see  the 


SERVANT 


SET 


86G 


SET 


Psa. 


36. 


Hab. 


Deut  2 
Judg.  7. 
iSa.  5. 
zSa.  6. 
1  Ch.16. 
Hos.    2. 


2  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the 

4  he  settetli  himself  in  a  way  (that  is)  not  go. 

1  set  me  upon  the  tower,  and  will  watch  to 

6.  To  set  up,  place,  ;^;  yatsag,  5. 

Gen.  30.  38  set  the  rods  which  he  had  pilled  before  the 
43.    g  if  I  bring  liim  not  unto  thee,  and  set  him 
56  which  would  uot  adventure  to  set  the  sole 

5  him  shalt  thou  set  by  himself;  likewise  ev. 

2  brought  it  into  the  house  of  Dagon,  ands. 
17  set  it  in  his  place,  iu  the  midst  of  the  ta. 

1  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  tent  that  David 

3  set  her  as  in  the  day  that  she  was  born 

7.  To  set  down,  3#;  yashab,  3. 

Eze.  25,    4  they  shall  set  their  palaces  iu  thee,  andm. 
8.T0  cause  to  sit  down,  3^;  yashab,  5. 

1  Sa.   2.    8  to  set(them)  among  princes,  and  to  make 

1  Ki.   2.  24  set  me  on  the  throne  of  David  my  father 

21.  g,  12  and  set  Naboth  on  high  among  the  pe. 
az.  10  set  two  men,  sons  of  Belial,  before  him,  to 

2  Ch.23.  20  set  the  king  upon  the  throne  of  the  king. 
Psa.  68.    6  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families :  he 

113.    8  That  he  may  set  (him)  with  princes,  (even) 
Lam.  3.    6  He  hath  set  me  in  dark  places,  as  (they 
Eze.  26  20  shall  set  thee  in  the  low  parts  of  the  ear. 

9.  To  cause  to  sit  dozen,  an;  yethib,  5. 

Ezra  4.  10  set  in  the  cities  of  Samaria,  aud  the  rest 

10.  To  set  up,  prepare,  p3  kun,  5. 

Ezra    3.    3  they  set  the  altar  upon  his  bases;  for  fear 

Eze.  '  4.    3  and  set  thy  face  against  it,  and  it  shall  be 

4.    7  Therefore  thou  shalt  set  thy  face  toward 

11.  To  fill  up  or  in,  k]?o  male,  3. 

Exod28.  17  thou  shalt  set  it  in  settings  of  stones, (ev.) 
31  5  in  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  (them),  and  in 
35.  33  in  the  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  (them),  and 

39.  10  theysetiuitfourrowsof  stones:  (the first) 
12.7*0  appoint,  niQmanah,  3. 

Dan.    1.  zi  prince  of  the  eunuchs  had  set  over  Dani. 
13.  To  appoint,  X3g  mena,  3. 

Ezra  7.  25  set  magistrates  and  judges,  which  may  ju. 
Dan.   2.  49  set  Shadrach,  Meshaeh,  and  Abed-nego 

3.  12  certain  Jews  whom  thou  hastset  over  the 
li.Any  thing  lifted  up,  nb'O  viassa. 

Eze.  24.  25  and  that  whereupon  they  set  their  minds 

15.  A  sending  forth,  n?v;P  mishlach. 

Deut  23.  20  bless  thee  in  all  that  thou  settest  thine 
28.    8,  20  inallthatthou  settest  thine  hand  unto 

16.  To  cause  to  rest,  ni:  nuach,  5. 

Eze.  40.    2  set  me  upon  a  very  high  mountain,  by  wh. 

17.  To  cause  to  move,  jna  nua,  5. 

Dan.  10. 10  an  hand  touched  me,  which  set  me  upon 

18.  To  pour  out,  anoint,  7|D3  nasak, 

Psa.     2.    6  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill 
19. To  cause  to  stand,  set  up,  3SJ  natsab,  5. 

Gen.  21.  28  Abraham  set-seven  ewe  lambsof  the'flock 

21.  29  these  seven  ewe  lambs  which  thou  hasts. 

35.  20  Jacob  set  a  pillar  upon  her  grave  :  that 
Deut  32.    8  he  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according 
Psa.  41. 12  upholdest  me  in  mine  integrity,  and  set. 

74.  17  Thou  hast  set  all  the  borders  of  the  earth 
Jer.  5.  26  they  lay  wait,  .they  set  a  trap,  they  catch 
Lam.   3.  12  He  hath  bent  his  bow,  aud  set  me  as  a  m. 

20.  To  lift  up,  NV"3  nasa. 

Gen.  31.  17  and  set  his  sons  and  his  wives  upon  cam. 
Deut  24.  15  he  (is)  poor,  and  setteth  his  heart  upon  it 
Hos.    4.    S  and  they  set  their  heart  on  their  iniquity 

21.ro  give,  \v\\  nathan. 

Gen.  1.  17  God  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  lie. 
g.  13  I  do  set  my  bow  in  the  cloud,  and  it  shall 
i3.  8  took  butter  and  milk,  .and  set  (it)  before 
30.  40  and  set  the  faces  of  the  Mocks  toward  the 
41.  41  I  have  set  thee  overall  the  land  of  Egypt 
Exod25  30  thou  shalt  set  upon  the  table  showbread 

40.  5  thou  shalt  set  the  altar  of  gold  for  the  in. 
40.  6  thou  shalt  set  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 
40.  7  thou  shalt  set  the  laver  between  the  tent 
40.  33  and  set  up  the  hanging  of  the  court  gate 

Lev.  17.  10  I  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul 
20.  3  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and 
20.  6  I  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul 
26.  1  neither  shall  ye  set  up  (any)  image  of  st. 
26. 11 1  will  set  my  tabernacle  among  you,  and 
26. 17  I  will  set  my  face  against  you,  and  ye  sh. 

Deut.  1.  8  I  have  set  the  land  before  you :  go  in  and 
z.  21  God  hath  set  the  land  before  thee :  go  up 

4.  8  this  law,  which  I  set  before  you  this  day? 
11.  26  I  set  before  you  this  day  a  blessing  and  a 

11.  32  judgments  which  I  set  before  you  this  day 
Z7.  15  thou  mayest  not  set  a  stranger  over  thee 
28.  1  God  will  set  thee  on  high  above  all  nations 
30.  1  blessing  and  the  curse,  which  I  have  set  b. 
30. 15  I  have  set  before  thee  this  day  life  and  go. 
30.  19  I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death,  hies. 

1  3a,  12.  13  behold,  the  Lord  hath  set  a  king  over  you 

1  Ki.  5.    5  Thy  son,  whom  I  will  set  upon  my  throne 

6.  19  to  set  there  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 

6.  27  he  set  the  cherubim  within  the  inner  ho. 

7.  16  two  chapiters  of  molten  brass,  to  set  up. 
7.  39  he  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  ho. 
9.    6  my  statutes  which  I  have  set  before  you 

-o.    9  which  delighted  in  thee,  to  set  thee  on 
i   1 1  should  l  Bet  this  before  an  hundred  men! 
*■  41  he  Bel  (it  1  before  fchem,  and  they  did  eat 

12.  9  set  it  beside  the  altar,  on  the  right  side 


1  Ki. 


2  Ki.  18.  23  if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  set  riders 

25.  28  set  his  throne  above  the  throne  of  the  ki. 

1  Ch  22.  19  set  yuux  heart  and  your  soul  to  seek  the 

2  Ch   4.    7  set  (them)  in  the  temple,  five  on  the  right 

4. 10  he  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  ea. 
6.  13  and  had  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  court 
7. 19  my  commandments,  which  I  have  set  be. 
9.    8  to  set  thee  on  his  throne,  (to  be)  king  for 

11.  16  such  as  set  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Loud 
17.  2  set  garrisons  in  the  land  of  Judah,  and  in 
20.   3  set  himself  to  seek  the  Lord,  and  procla. 

20.  22  the  LoRDset  ambushments  against  the  ch. 
24.  8  set  it  without  at  the  gate  of  the  house  of 
32.    6  he  set  captainsof  waroverthepeopleand 

Xeh.  2.    6  it  pleased  the  king  to  send  me  ;  and  1  set 

5.  7  And  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  them 
9.  37  unto  the  kings  whom  thou  hast  set  over 

Psa.  8.  1  who  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens 
Eccl.  3.  11  also  he  hath  set  the  world  in  their  heart 
Isa.   27.   4  who  would  set  the  briers  (and)  thorns  ag. 

36.  8  if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  set  riders 
Jer.     1.  15  they  shall  set  every  one  his  throne  at  the 

6.  27  I  have  set  thee  (for)  a  tower  and  a  fortr. 
9.  13  forsaken  my  law  which  I  set  before  them 

21.  8  I  set  before  you  the  way  of  life,  and  the 

26.  4  to  walk  in  my  law,  which  I  have  set  bef. 
35.    5  And  I  set  before  the  sons  of  the  house  of 
44.  10  my  statutes,  that  1  set  before  you  and 
52.  32  set  his  throne  above  the  throne  of  the  ki 

Eze.    4.   2  set  the  camp  also  against  it,  and.  .(batt.) 
4.    3  set  it  (for)  a  wall  of  ironbetweentheeaud 
,  7.  20  therefore  have  I  set  it  far  from  them 

12.  6  1  have  set  thee  (for)  a  sign  unto  the  house 

14.  8  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and 

15.  7  I  will  set  my  face  against  them  ;  they  sh 

16. 18  thou  hast  set  mine  oil  and  mine  incense 

16. 19  thou  hast  even  set  it  before  themforasw 
17.  22  branch  of  the  high  cedar,  and  will  set  (it) 
19.  8  the  nations  set  against  him  on  every  side 
21.  15  I  have  set  the  point  of  the  sword  against 
23-24  I  will  set  judgment  before  them,  and  they 

23.  25  I  will  set  my  jealousy  against  thee,  and 

24.  8  I  have  set  her  blood  upon  the  top  of  a  ro. 
26.    9  he  shall  set  engines  of  war  against  thy  wa. 

26.  20  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living 

27.  10  they  hanged  the  shield,  .in  thee ;  they  set 

28.  2  though  thou  set  thine  heart  as  the  heart 
28.  6  thou  hast  set  thine  heart  as  the  heart  of 
28. 14  I  have  set  thee  (so) :  thou  wast  upon  the 
30.    8  when  I  have  set  a  fire  in  Egypt,  aud  (wh  ) 

30. 14  and  will  set  fire  in  Zoan,  and  will  execute 

30.  16  I  will  set  fire  in  Egypt :  Siu  shall  have  gr. 
32.    8  will  I  make  dark  over  thee,  and  set  dark. 

32.  25  They  have  set  her  a  bed  in  the  midst  of  the 

33.  2  take  a  man  of  their  coasts,  and  sethim  for 
33.    7  I  have  set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  ho. 

37.  26  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them 
39.  21  I  will  set  my  glory  among  the  heathen,  and 

Dan.  9.  3  I  set  my  face  unto  the  LoRDGod.toseekby 
9. 10  to  walk  in  his  laws,  which  he  set  before  us 
10.  12  thou  didst  set  thine  heart  to  understand 

10. 15  I  set  my  face  toward  the  ground,  and  1  be. 

22.7*0  stir  up,  join  together,  "^p  sakak,  Sa. 

Isa.  19.    2  I  will  set  the  Egyptians  against  the  Egy. 
23.7*0  sustain,  support,  lean,  ^9  samak. 

Eze.  24.    2  the  king  of  Babylon  set  himself  against 
2LTo  (cause  to)  Jig,  *]iy  uph,  1,  5. 

Pro\'23.    5  Wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes  upon  that  which 
25. 7*o  cause  to  go  up,  nby  alah,  5. 

2  Ch.  3.   5  and  set  thereon  palm  trees  and  chains 
26.  To  cause  to  stand,  "to;/  amad,  5. 

Gen.  47.    7  brought  in  Jacob.,  and  set  him  before  Ph. 

iNuiu.  5.  16  the  priestshallbringher  near,  and  set  her 

5. 18,  30  shall  set  the  woman  before  the  Lord 

8  13  thou  shalt  set  the  Levites  before  Aaron 

zz.  24  and  set  them  round  about  the  tabernacle 

27.  19  set  him  before  Eleazarthe  priest,  and  be. 

27.22  he  tookJoshua,  andsethimbeforeEleazar 

Judgi6.  25  he  made  them  sport :  and  tbeysethimbe. 

2  Sa.  22.  34  and  setteth  me  upon  my  high  places 

1  Ch.22.   2  he  set  masons  to  hew  wrought  stones  to 

2  Ch.19.    5  he  set  judges  in  the  land,  throughout  all 

ig.    8  in  Jerusalem  did  Jehoshaphat  set  of  the 

23.  10  he  setall  the  people,  every  man  having  his 
23  19  he  set  the  porters  at  the  gates  of  the  house 
24. 13  they  set  the  house  of  God  in  his  state,  ami 
29.25  he  set  the  Levites  in  the  house  of  the  Lo. 
35.    2  he  set  the  priests  in  their  charges,  and 

Ezra  3.  10  they  set  the  priests  in  their  apparel  with 

Keh.   4.    9  and  set  a  watch  against  them  day  and  nig. 

4.  Z3  Therefore  set  I  iu  the  lower  places  behind 

4.  13  I  even  set  the  people  after  their  families 

zg.  11  I  gathered  them  together,  and  set  them  in 

Z3.  19  (some)  of  my  servants  set  I  at  the  gates 

Job    34.  24  break  in  pieces  mighty  men.  .and  setoth. 

Psa.  18.  33  maketh  my  feet  like  hind's  (feet),  and  se. 

31.  8  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  room 
Isa.   21.    6  set  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what  he 
Eze.    2.    2  the  spirit  entered  intome.  .andsetmeup. 

3.  24  the  spirit  entered  unto  me, andsetmeup. 

24.  zi  set  it  empty  upon  the  coals  thereof,  that 
Dan.   S.  18  but  he  touched  me,  aud  set  me  upright 

11. To  do,  make,  use,  rtpy  asah. 

2  Ch.  2.  iS  he  set  threescore  and  ten  thousand  of  th. 
Pro\'22.  28  ancient  laud  mark. .thy  fathers  have  set 
Eccl.  7.  14  God  also  hath  set  the  one  over  agaiust  the 

28.7To  inspect,  appoint,  ipp  paqad. 

Hum 37,  iu  Let  the  Lord,  .set  a  man  over  the  congre. 


20.  To  (cause  lo)  appoint,  ipp  paqad,  5. 

Josh.  10.  18  Itoll  great  stones.,  and  set  men  by  it  for  to 

Psa.  109.    6  Set  thou  a  wicked  man  over  him,  and  let 

Isa.    62.    6  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  O  J. 

er.      1.  10  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  nations 

40.  zz  that  hehadsetoverthemGedaliah  theson 

SO.  To  push  out,  rush,  Bgte  pashat. 

Judg.9.  33  thou  shalt  rise  early,  and  set  upon  the  city 

31.  7*o  cause  to  rise,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Deut 28.  36  thy  king  which  thou  shalt  set  over  thee 


Judj, 
Ezra  6. 
Psa.  40. 
Jer.  6. 
Dan.  6. 
6. 


19  and  they  had  but  newly  set  the  watch 
18  they  set  the  priests  in  their  divisions,  and 

2  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  (and)  established 
17  I  set  watchmen  over  you,  (saying),  Hear. 

1  It  pleased  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom 

3  thekingthoughttosethim  over  the  whole 


32.  To  cause  to  ride,  33pj  rakab,  5. 

Exod.  4.  20  took  his  wife  and  Ins  sens,  and  set  them 
2.  Sa.  6.    3  they  set  the  ark  of  God  upon  a  new  cart 

33.  To  put,  set,  place,  B%;  Dib  sum,  sim. 

Gen.  4.  15  the  Lord  set  a  mark  upon  Cain,  lest  any 
6.  16  the  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  set  in  the 
28.  22  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  (for)  a  pillar* 

30.  36  he  set  three  days' journey  betwixt  himself 

31.  21  and  set  his  face  (toward)  the  mount  Gilead 
31.  37  set  (it)  here  before  my  brethren  and  thy 
44.  21  Bring  him.  .that  I  may  setmineeyesupon. 
48.  20  and  he  set  Ephraim  before  Manasseh 

Exod.  1.  11  they  did  set  over  them  taskmasters  toaffl. 
21.  1  the  judgments  whiehthoushalt  set  before 
26.  35  thou  shalt  set  the  table  without  the  veil 
40.  20  and  set  the  staves  on  the  ark,  and  put  the 
40.  30  he  set  the  laver  between  the  tent  of  the 

Lev.  20.    5  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  and 

24.  6  thou  shalt  set  them  in  two  rows,  six  on  a 
^uni2i.  8  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon 
Deut.  4.  44  this  (is)  the  law  which  Moses  set  before 

14.  24  thy  God  shall  choose  to  set  his  name  the. 

17.  14  I  will  set  a  king  over  me,  like  as  all  then. 
17. 15  Thou  shalt  in  any  wise  set  (him)  king  over 
17  15  from  among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set 
32  46  Set  your  hearts  unto  all  the  words  which 

Josh.  3.  i2  settheni  to  lieiu  ambush  between  Beth- el 

8.  13  when  they  had  set  the  people,  (even)  all 
24  25  set  them  a  statute  and  an  ordinance  in  S. 

Judg.  7.22  set  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow 

9.  25  men  of  Shechem  set  liers  in  wait  for  him 
20.  29  Israel  set  liers  in  wait  round  about  Gibe. 
20.  36  liers  in  wait  which  they  had  set  beside 

1  Sa.    7. 12  took  a  stone,  and  set  (it)  between  Mizpeli 

9.  20  set  not  thy  mind  on  them  ;for  they  are  fo. 
9.  23  of  which  I  said  unto  thee,  set  it  by  thee 
9.  24  set  (it)  before  Saul,  .set  (it) before  thee 
10.  19  said  unto  him,  (Nay),  but  set  aking  over 

18.  5  Saul  set  him  over  the  men  of  war ;  and  he 

25.  22  let  me  set  a  morsel  of  bread  before  thee 

2  Sa.12.  20  they  set  bread  before  him,  and  he  did  eat 

18.    1  set  captains  of  thousands  and  captainsof 

23.  23  and  David  set  him  over  his  guard 

1  Ki.  2.  15  and  (that)  all  Israel  set  their  faces  on  me 

8.  21 1  have  set  there  a  place  for  the  ark,  whe. 

set  the  one  in  Bethel,  and  the  other  put 


Ki 


20.  12  Set  (yourselves  in  array):  and  they  set  (th. 
4-  10  let  us  set  for  him  there  a  bed,  and  a  table 


6.  22  Set  bread  and  water  before  them,  thatth. 
10.  3  set  (him)  on  his  fathers's  throne,  and  fight 
12.  17  Hazael  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
21.    7  set  a  graven  image  of  thegrovethathehad 

1  Ch  ij.  25  and  David  set  him  over  his  guard 

2  Ch.33,    7  set  a  carved  image,  the  idol  which  he  had 
Esth.  2.  17  so  that  he  set  the  royal  crown  upon  her 

3.  1  sethisseataboveall  theprincesthat(were) 

8.    2  Esther  set  Mordecai  over  the  house  of  H. 

7. 12  a  whale,  that  thou  settest  a  watch  over 

7. 20  why  hast  thou  set  me  as  a  mark  against 

19.  8  cannot  pass,  and  he  hath  set  darkness  iu 
28.  3  He  setteth  an  end  to  darkness,  and  sear. 
34.  14  If  he  set  his  heart  upon  man,  (if)he  gather 
38.  10  brakeupfor  it  my  decreed  (place),  and  set 
38.  33  canst  thou  set  the  dominions  thereof  in 
19.  4  In  them  hath  he  seta  tabernacle  for  the 
54.  3  they  have  not  setGod  before  them.  Selah 
78.   7  That  they  might  set  their  hope  in  God,  and 

85.  13  and  shall  set  (us)  in  the  way  of  his  steps 

86.  14  sought  after  my  soul,  and  haveuot  setth. 
89.  25  I  will  set  his  hand  also  in  the  sea,  and  his 

9  Thou  hast  set  a  bound  that  they  may  not 

6  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart,  as  a  seal 
9  I  will  set  in  the  desert  the  fir  tree,  (and) 
4  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth:  and 

7  therefore  have  I  set  my  face  like  a  flint 
7  lTpona..high  mountain  hast  thou  sctthy 

66.  19  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them,  and  I  will 

7.  30  they  have  set  their  abominations  in  the 
21. 10  For  I  have  set  my  face  against  this  city  for 
24.  6  Fori  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  forgo. 
32.  20  Which  hast  set  signs  and  wonders  in  the 
32.  34  they  set  their  abominations  in  the  house 
42. 15  If  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into 
42. 17  men  that  set  their  faces  to  go  into  Egypt 

43.  10  will  set  his  throne  upon  these  stones  that 

44.  11  I  will  set  my  face  against  you  for  evil,  and 
44.  12  that  have  set  their  faces  to  go  into  the  la. 
49.  38  set  my  throne  in  Elam,  and  will  destroy 

4.  2  set  (battering)  rams  against  it  round  abo. 

5.  5  I  have  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  nations 

6.  2  set  thy  face  toward  the  mountains  of  Isr. 

7.  20  As  for  the  beauty  of  his  ornament,,  Lc  set 


Job 


Psa. 


Z04 
Song  £ 
Isa.  41. 
42. 
5°- 
57- 


Jer 


Eze. 


SET 


867 


SET 


Eze.  13. 17  set  thy  face  against  the  daughters  of  thy 
15.  7  will  set  my  face  against  theni;  they  shall 
17.  4  carried  it  into  a  land  of  traffic ;  he  set  it 
17.  5  placed  (it;  by  great  waters,  (and)  set  it  (as) 
=0.  46  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south 
2i.  2  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem,  and  drop 
23.  24  shall  set  against  thee  buckler  and  shield 

23.  41  whereupoH  thou  hast  setmineincenseand 

24.  7  she  set  it  upon  the  top  of  a  rock ;  she  po. 

25.  2  set  thy  face  against  the  Ammonites,  ami 

28.  2i  set  thy  face  against  Zidon,  and  prophesy 

29.  2  set  thy  face  against  Pharaoh  king  of  E" 
35.   2  set  thy  face  against  mount  Seir,  and  pro. 
38.   2  set  thy  face  against  Gog,  the  land  of  Ma. 
40.   4  set  thine  heart  upon  all  that  I  shall  show 
44.    8  ye  have  set  keepers  of  my  charge  in  my 

Dan.    6. 14  set  (his)  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him 

n.  17  He  shallalsoset  his  face  to  enter  with  the 
Hos.  11.  8  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim?  Mine  heart  is 
Amos  7.  8  I  will  set  a  plumb  line  in  the  midst  of  my 
0.  4  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  evil,  anil 
Obad  4  though  thou  set  thv  nest  among  the  stars 
£ah.  3.  6  make  thee  vile,  aud  will  set  thee  as  a  ga 
Hab.  2.  9  that  he  may  set  his  nest  on  high,  that  he 
Zech.  3.    s,  5  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head 

6. 11  set  (them)  upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the 
34,7*0  set,  place,  put,  rro  shavah,  3. 

^  Psa.  16.    8  I  have  set  the  LORDalwaysbeforeme:  be. 
35.  To  set,  put,  place,  rra  shith. 

Gen.  41.  33  let  Pharaoh,  .set  him  over  the  land  of  E 
Exod.  7.  23  neither  did  he  set  his  heart  to  this  also 
23.  31  will  set  thy  bounds  from  the  Red  sea  ev 
A  urn  24.    1  but  he  set  his  face  toward  the  wilderness 

1  Sa.    2.    8  and  he  hath  set  the  world  upon  them 

2  Sa.  19.  28  yet  didst  thou  set  thy  servant  among  th 
Job     7. 17  that  thou  shouldest  set  thine  heart  upon 

30.    1 1  would  have  disdained  to  have  set  with 
Psa.    3.   6  people  that  have  set  (themselves)  against 
12.    5  I  will  set  (him)  in  safety  (from  him  that) 
T7- 11  they  have  set  then-  eyes  bowing  down  to 
21.   3  thou  settest  a  crown  of  pure  gold  on  his 
62.  10  if  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  (up. 
73.  18  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  places 
90.    8  Thou  hast  set  our  iniquities  before  thee 
101.    3  I  will  set  no  wicked  thing  before  mine 
132.  11  Of  the  fruit  of  thy  body  will  I  set  upon 

140.  5  The  proud . .  they  have  set  gius  for  me 

141.  3  Set  a  watch,  0  Lord,  before  my  mouth 
isa.   22.    7  the  horsemen  shall  set  themselves  in  ar 
Jer.  31.  21  set  thine  heart  toward  the  highway,  (ev  ) 
Hos.    2.    3  set  her  like  a  dry  land,  and  slay  her  with 

6.  11  he  hath  set  an  harvest  for  thee,  when  I  re. 

36.  To  cover,  aaw  shakak. 
Jer.     s.  26  they  lay  wait,  as  he  that  setteth  snares 

37.  To  make  to  settle  doion,  tabernacle,  [:»  shaken,  3. 
Nell.  1.  9  that  I  have  chosen  to  set  my  name  there 
Jer.     7.  12  Sliiloh,  where  I  set  my  name  at  the  first 

38.  To  send  out  or  forth,  rhy  shalach,  3. 
Judg.  1.    8  and  smitten,  .and  set  the  city  on  fire 

20.  48  they  set  on  fire  all  the  cities  that  they  ca 
2  Kj.    8. 12  their  strong  holds  wilt  thou  set  on  fire 
Jer.  34. 16  whom  he  had  set  at  liberty  at  their  plea 


39.  To  set,  put,  nnE>  shathath. 
Psa.  73.    9  They  set  theirmouth  against  the  heavens 

40.  To  give,  Si5a/xi  didOmi. 

Rev.    3.    8  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and 

41.  To  go  in  (as  the  sun),  Siva  duno. 

Mark  1.  32  at  even,  when  the  sun  did  set,  they  bro 
-Luke  4.  40  when  the  sun  was  setting,  all  they  that  h. 
42. "To  set,  2)lace,  pat,  larr-rifii  histemi. 

Matt.  4.    s  setteth  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple 
18.    2  called  a  little  child,  and  set  him  in  the 
=5-  33  Jie  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand 
Mark  9.  36  he  took  a  child,  and  set  him  in  the  midst 
Luke  4.    9  and  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple 
9.  47  Jesus,  .took  a  child,  and  set  him  by  him 
John  8.   3  [and  when  they  had  set  her  in  the  midst] 
Acts   4.   7  when  they  had  set  them  in  the  midst,  th 

5.  27  when  they  had  brought  them,  they  set 

6.  6  \\  horn  they  set  before  the  apostles :  and 
22.  30  brought  Paul  do™,  and  set  him  before 

43.  To  cause  to  sit  down,  Ka6i(a  kathizo 

1  Co.  6.    4  set  them  to  Judge  who  are  least  esteemed 
Epn.    i.2oset(lum)athisownrighthandinthehe. 

44.  To  set  down,  KaSlar-nju  kathistemi. 

Heb.   2.    7  [did  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands] 
io.Toput,  set,  place,  ri&rgxi  tithemi. 

Trn  '3'  47o  *  haVS  1?  thee  t0  be  a  usht  of  the  Gent. 
I2-  "|  5°T  ^ath  God  set  the  members  everyone 
t2.  28  God  hath  set  some  in  the  church,  first  a- 

±..ev.  10.    2  he  set  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,and(his) 

dentlv  aiS?e,tf  efiCti0n/   arisht'  in  arra>'-  boUDds,  evi- 
dently, a  feast,  fire,  forward,  fully,  a  kin"   love   open 

work  f  •  *  PriDt'  Sea1'  Bteadfi^  ^  unreal-  at  variance, 

BET  (down),  to  he— 

1.  To  go  in,  N'13  Jo. 

Gen.  28.  n  tarried  there,  .because  the  sun  was  set 
l.To  be  built  up,  nja  banah    2. 

Mai.    3.  i5  they  that  workwickedness  are  set  up ;  yea 
S.To  be  caused  to  rest,  rn;  yanach,  6. 

Zech.  5.  „  shall  be  established,  and  set  there  upon 


4. To  be  set, placed,  put,  b'»,  n>c?  sum,  sun,  6,  or  Ob" 
Gen.  24.  33  there  wasset(meat)beforehimtoeat:  but 

5.  To  sit  down,  abide,  3c>;  yashab. 
2  Ch.  6. 10  am  set  ou  the  throne  of  Israel,  as  the  Lo 
Psa  122.   5  for  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  the 
hong  5. 1 2  of  waters,  washed  with  milk,  (and)  fitly  set 

6.  To  causeto  sit  dozen,  set  down,  ruv  yethib. 
Dan.   7. 10  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were  op. 

7. Fillings  in,  cx^a  milluim. 

Exod25.   7  Onyx  stones,  aud  stones  to  be  set  in  the 
35-    9.  27  stones  to  be  set  fortheephod,  and  for 

1  en.  29.    2  to  be  set,  glistering  stones,  and  of  divers 
8. To  be  set  up,  appointed,  asi  natsab,  2. 

Isa.  a.    8  and  I  am  set  in  my  ward  whole  nights 

S.To  be  given,  fJU  nathan,  2. 

Esth   6.   8  crown  royal  which  is  set  upon  his  head 
Mel.  10.    6  lolly  is  set  in  great  dignity,  and  the  rich 
nze.  32. 23  Whose  graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  the 

10.ro  be  caused  to  go  round,  md  sabab,  6. 

Exod28.  11  thou  shalt  make  them  to  be  set  in  ouches 

11.  An  inspector,  Tp5  paqid. 

2  Ki.25.  19  he  tookanomcerthatwassetoverthemen 

12.  To  rise  or  stand  up,  c?p  qum. 
^  1  Ki.  14.   4  for  his  eyes  were  set  by  reason  of  his  age 

13.ro  be  embroidered,  set,  fastened,  pi?  shabats,  4. 
i\od2s.  20  theyshall  be  set  in  gold  in  their  inclosings 

14.  To  come,  tpxofiai  erchomai. 
Acts  19.  27  our  craft  is  in  danger  to  he  set  at  nought 

15.  To  set  down,  tcaBtfa  kathizo. 
Matt.  5.    1  when  he  was  set,  his  disciples  came  unto 
Heb.  8.    1  who  is  set  on  the  right  hand  of  the  maje. 

16.  To  lie,  be  laid,  Kt7fiai  keimai. 
Matt.  5.  14  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  cannot  he  hid 
Luke  2.  34  this  (child)  is  set  forthe  fall  and  rising  a" 
John  2.   6;  19.  29;  Phil.  1.  17;  Rev.  4.  2. 

17.  To  fall  back,  avairl-ma  anapipto. 
Johni3.  12  So  after,  .he  was  set  down  again 

SET  (a  mark),  to  — 

To  scribble,  make  a  mark,  nm  tavah,  5. 

Eze.    9.    4  set  a  mark  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  men 
SET  a  time,  to  — 
To  cause  to  meet,  convene,  iy;  yaad,  5 

Job    9.  19  if  of  judgment,  wiio  shall  set  me  a  time 
SET  about,  to  — 
I. To  fence,  J?D  sug. 

Song  7.    2  belly  (is  like)  an  heap  of  wheat  set  about 
2.  To  put  around,  irepn-'oVi  perititliemi. 

Marki2.    1  set  an  hedge  about  (it),  and  digged  (a  pi. 
SET  again  (at  one),  to  — 
1.2*o  cause  to  turn  back,  Ms  shub,  5. 

1  Sa.   5.    3  took  Dagon,  and  sethiminhisplaceagain 
2.  To  lead  together  into  peace,  o-vvt\aiva  els  elaiirnv 

Acts  7.  26  [would  have  set  them  at  one  again],  saying 
SET  apart,  or  aside,  to  (be)  — 
l.Separation,  impurity,  ,-ni  niddah. 

Eze.  22.  10  humbled  her  that  was  set  apart  for  pollu. 

2.  To  cause  to  remove,  journey,  ym  iiasa,  5. 

2  Ki.  4.   4  and  thou  shalt  set  aside  that  which  is  full 

3.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  -ny  abar,  5. 

Exodi3. 12  That  thou  shalt' set  apart  unto  the  Lord 
i.To  separate,  rhnpalah,  5. 

Psa.    4.   3kno'wthattheLoRDhathsetaparthinith. 
SET  at  (liberty,  nought),  to  — 
1. Array,  arrangement,  rp\j  erek. 

2  Hi.  1 2.   4  money  that  every  man  is  set  at,  (and)  all 
l.To  free,  make  naked  or  void,  refuse,  yfa  para. 

Pi'ov.  1.  25  But  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel 

3.  To  send  away,  awoirTeWa  apostello. 
Luke  4. 18  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised 

4.  To  make  nobody  or  of  no  importance,  KovSevou 

Mark  9. 12  suffer  many  things,  and  be  set  at  nought 

5.  To  make  nobody  or  of  no  importance,  efooBivia. 
Luke23.  11  Herod,  set  him  at  nought,  and  mocked 
Acts   4.  11  This  is  the  stone  which  was  set  at  nou-ht 
Roni  14.  10  why  dost  thou  set  at  nought  thy  brother 

SET  by,  to  be  (much)  — 

l.To  be  or  become  great,  bii  gadal. 

1  Sa.  26. 24  as  thy  life  was  much  set  by  this  day  in  mi 
20.  24  so  let  my  life  be  much  set  by  in  the  eyes 
2.  To  be  or  become  precious,  ip;  yaqar. 

1  Sa.  18.  30  Saul ;  so  that  his  name  was  much  set  by 
SET,  to  cause  to  be  — 
To  set,  place,  put,  Drer,  c'a  sum,  sim. 

1  Ki.  2.  19  caused  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the  king's  mot. 
SET  before,  down,  together,  fast,  to  — 
1.  To  cause  to  rest,  put  down,  rn;  yanach,  5. 

Deut26.    4  set  it  down  before  the  altar  of  the  LORD 

1  sa.    6. 18  whereon  they  set  down  the  ark  of  the  Lo. 
2.2*o  make  firm,  px;  yatsaq,  5. 

2Sa.  15.  24£etdownthearkofGod;andAbiatharwe 


3.  To  prepare,  establish,  pa  lam,  5. 

Psa.  65.   6byliisstrengthsettethfasttheniountahis 
i.To  cause  to  rest,  pat  dozen,  nil  nuach,  5. 

Eze.  37.    1  set  me  down  in  the  midst  of  the  valley  wh. 

5.  To  set  down,  tcaBlCu  kathizo. 
Heb.  12.   2  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
Rev.   3.  21  am  set  down  with  my  Father  on  his  throne 

6.  To  put  alongside  of,  Trapa-riBy/Mi  paralithemi. 
Mark  6.  41  gave  (them)  to  his  disciples  to  set  before 

8.    6  set  before  (them) ;  and  they  did  set..bef ore 
8.    7  commanded  to  set  them  also  before  (them) 
Luke  9.  16  gave  to  the  disciples  to  set  before  themn 

10.  8  And ..  eat  such  things  as  are  set  before  you 

11.  6  tome.andlhavenoHiingtosetbeforeiiim 
Acts  16.  34  he  set  meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced  be 
1  Co.  10.  27  whatsoever  is  set  before  you  eat,  asking  no 

7.  To  lie  before  or  forward,  Too'/ce^ai  prokeimai. 
Heb.   6. 18  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  be 

12.  1  run  with  the  patience  the  race  that  is  set 
12.    2  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 

S.To  set  down  together,  <rvyKa8i(o>  suglcothizd. 

Luke22.  55  kindled  a  fire,  .and  [were  set  down  tog.] 
SET  eyes  or  foot  on,  to  — 
l.To  gaze  intently,  arevlfa  atenizo. 

Acts  13.   9  SauL.who  also  (is..)  Paul.. set  his  eyes  on 
2.^4  foot  breadth,  /3'ju.a  troUs  bema  podos. 

Acts  7.    5  not  (so  much  as)  to  set  his  foot  on :  vet  he 
SET  (on)  fire,  to  — 
l.To  cause  light,  set  on  fire,  T»  or,  5. 

Isa.   27.  11  the  women  come,  (and)  set  them  on  fire 
'l.To  consume,  cause  to  burn,  ij;a  baar,  3. 

Eze.  39.    9  shall  set  on  fire  and  burn  the  weapons 

3.  Tn  cause  to  burn,  consume,  "n>3  baar,  5. 
Judg  15.   5  when  he  had  set  the  brands  on  fire,  he  let 

4.  To  kindle,  burn,  ns;  yatsath,  5. 
Josh.  8.    8  ye  shall  set  the  city  on  fire  :  according  to 

8.  19  took  it,  and  hasted  and  set  the  city  on  fi 
Judg.  9.  49  set  the  hold  ou  fire  upon  them  :  so  that  ' 
2  Sa.  14.  30  he  hath  barley  there  ;  go  and  set  it  on  fl 
14.  30  And  Absalom's  servants  set  the  field  on  ' 
14. 31  have  thy  servants  set  my  field  on  fire 
Jer.  32.  23  shall  come  and  set  fire  on  this  city,  and 
SET  forth  (evidently),  forward,  to  — 
l.To  be  prepared,  established,  [?3  kun,  2. 

Psa.141.   2  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  thee 

2.  To  overlook,  be  pre-eminent,  nsj  natsach,  3 

1  Cji.23.   4  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the 

2  Ul.34.  IZ  to  set  (it)  forward  ;  and  (other  of)  the  L 
Ezra    3.    8  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the 

3.   9  to  set  forward  the  workmen  in  the  house 

3.  To  give,  [m  nathan. 
Eze.  27. 10  They  of  Persia,  .set  forth  thy  comeliness 

4.  To  cause  to  stand,  nnu  amad,  5. 
Dan.  11. 11  he  shall  set 'forth  a  great  multitude-  but 

11.  13  shall  set  forth  a  multitude  greater  than 

5.  To  open,  open  up,  ms  pathach. 
Amos  S.    5  may  set  forth  wheat,  making  the  ephah 

6.2"o  lead  up  or  forth,  aviyw  anago. 

Acts  21.  2  finding  a  ship..we  went  aboard,  and  set  f. 
7.7*0  show  off,  aTToSeiKi/v/ii  apodeiknumi. 

1  Co.  4.    9  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  last,  as 
S.To  write  or  describe  before,  wpoypanpaproqraphc 

Gal.    3.    1  Christ  hath  been  evidently  set  forth 
9.7*0  lie  or  be  laid  before,  irpoVeiuai  prokeimai. 
Jude        7  are  set  forth  for  an  example,  suffering  the 

10.  To  put  before,  wporienfu  prolithemi. 
Rom.  3.  25  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  (to  be)  a  propit 

11.  To  put,  place,  t/Aijui  tithemi. 
John  2. 10  Every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  forth 

SET  (forth)  in  order  or  frray,  to  — 
1.7"o  bind,  direct,  join,  ipx  asar. 

2  Ch.  13.    3  Abijah  set  the' battle  in  array  with  an  ar. 
2. 2*o  array,  arrange,  ^u  arak. 

Exod  40.    4  bring  in  the  table,  and  set  in  order  the 
40.  23  he  set  the  bread  in  order  upon  it  before 
Lev.  24.    8  he  shall  set  it  in  order  before  the  Lord 
Judg2o.  22  set  their  battle  again  in  array,  in  the  place 

1  Sa.  17.    2  set  the  battle  in  array  against  the  Philist 
17.    8  Why..comeouttoset(your)battleinar' 

2  Sa.  10.  17  theSyrians  set  themselves  in  arraya"ains't 
1CI1. 19. 11  they  set  (themselves)  in  array  against  the 

19. 17  and  set  (the  battle)  in  array  against  them 

2  Ch.13.  3  Jeroboam  also  set  the  battle  in  array  n<-ai 

14.  10  they  set  the  battle  in  array  in  the  valfey 

Job     6.   4  the  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves  in  ar 

33.   s  set  (thy  works)  in  order  before  me  stand 

Psa.  50.  21 1  will  reprove  thee,  and  set  (them)  in  or. 

isa.  44.   7  shall  declare  it.  and  set  it  in  order  for  me 

J  er.     6.  23  they  ride  upon  horses,  set  in  array  as  men 

50.    9  they  shall  set  themselves  in  arrav  against 

Joel.  2.    5  as  a  strong  people  set  in  battle  array 

3. Array,  arrangement,  3.TH  ere/:. 

Exod4o.   4  the  things  that  are  to  be  set  in  order  up. 
40.  23  he  set  the  bread  in  order  upon  it  before 
4.7*o  be  set  up,  prepared,  |»3  /.;<,;,  2. 

2  Ch.29.  35  the  service  of  the  house,  .was  set  in  order 


SET 


868 


SEVEN 


5.  To  set  up,  command,  rn>t  tsavah,  3. 

2  Ki.  20.    i  Set  thine  house  in  order;  for  thou  shalt 
Isa.   38.    1  Set  thine  house  in  order  :  for  thou  shalt 

6.2*0  make  straight  or  right,  ]pn  taqan,  3. 

Eccl.12.  9  sought  out,  (and)  set  in  order  many  pro. 
7.  To  be  joined,  zhp  shalab,  4. 

Exod26. 17  Two  tenons,  .set  in  order  one  against  an. 
S.To  set  up  {or  again)  in  array,  hvaravvofxat. 

Luke  1.    1  to  set  forth  in  order  a  declaration  of  tho. 

9.  To  arrange  throughout  or  thoroughly,  Bta.Ta<r(ro/j.at. 

1  Co.  11.  34  And  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  co. 

10.  To  make  right  also,  eViSiopflJaj  epidiorthoo. 
Titus  1.    5  thatthoushouldestsetiuorderthethings 

SET  light  (by  one),  to  — 

1.  To  esteem  lightly,  nbjj  qalah,  5. 

Deut27. 16  Cursed  (be)  he  that  setteth  light  by  his  fa. 

2.  To  make  light  of,  77$  qalal,  5. 

Eze.  22.    7  In  thee  have  they  set  light  by  father  and 
SET  office  — 
Steadfastness,  stability,  n^DN  emunali. 

1  Ch.  9.  22  whom,  .the  seer  did  ordain  in  their  set  offl. 

9.  26  four  chief  porters,  were  in  (their)  set  office 
9.  31  Mattithiah.  .had  the  set  office  over  the  th. 

2  Ch.31.  15  in  the  cities  of  the  priests,  in  (their)  set  off. 

31.  18  in  their  set  office  they  sanctified  themse. 

SET  on,  to  (be)  — 

l.A  setting  down,  what  is  set  down,  nnj  nachath. 
Job   36  16  that  which  should  be  set  on  thy  table  (sli. 

2.  To  move,  persuade,  ruD  suth,  5. 

Jer.  3S.  22  Thy  friends  have  set  thee  on,  andhave  pr. 
43.    3  the  son  of  Neriah  settetli  thee  on  against 

3.  To  set,  place,  put,  nty,  UY&  sum,  sim. 

Gen.  43.  31  refrained  himself,  and  said,  Set  on  bread 
43.  32  they  set  on  for  him  by  himself,  and  for  th. 

A.  To  set  on,  appoint,  n5y;  shaphalh. 

2  Ki.  4.  38  Set  on  the  great  pot,  and  seethe  pottage 
Eze.  24.    3  set  on  a  pot,  set  (it)on,  and  also  pour  wa. 

5. To  cause  to  go  up  on,  eYtjStjSa^iv  epibibazd. 

Lukeio.  34  set  him  on  his  own  beast,  and  brought  him 

19  35  upon  the  colt,  and  they  set  Jesus  thereon 

Acts  23.  24  that  they  may  set  Paul  on,  and  bring  (him) 

G.To  cause  to  sit  upon,  eirncaOtfa  epikathizo. 

Matt2i.    7  brought  the  ass  .and  [set  (him)  thereon] 

7.  To  put  upon,  4iriTi6r}jj.t  epitithemi. 

Mark  4.  21  Is  a  candle,  .not  to  be  set  on  a  candlestick 
Luke  8.  16  setteth  (it)  on  a  candlestick,  that  they  wh. 
Acts  18.  10  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee 

SET  stedfastly,  to  — 

To  fix  firmly,  a-r-nplfa  sterizo. 

Luke  9.  51  he  stedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  toJerus. 

SET  over,   (to  be)  — 

I. To  be  set,  set  up,  3X3  natsab,  2. 

Ruth  2.  5,  6  servant  that  was  set  over  the  reapers 
1  Sa.  22.    9  which  was  set  over  the  servants  of  .Saul 

2.  To  cause  to  stand,  isy  amad,  5. 

1  Ch.  6.  31  these  (are  they)  whom  David  set  over  the 
3.7*0  inspect,  appoint,  ipa  paqad. 

2  Oh. 23. 14  captains  of  hundreds  that  were  set  over 
SET,  to  be  privily  — 

To  watch  secretly,  jd?  tsaphan. 

Psa.  10.    8  his  eyes  are  privily  set  agaiust  the  poor 
SET  time  — 
.!  limit,  set  or  appointed  time,  ph  choq. 

Job  14.  13  that  thou  wouldest  appoint  me  a  set  time 
SET  up,  to  — 
I. To  build,  build  <'/>,  ":£  "banah. 

Eze.  39.  15  then  shall  lie  set  up  a  sign  by  it,  till  the 

%To  perfect,  finish,  hhlkelal,  8. 

Ezra   5.  11  a  great  king  of  Israel  builded  and  set  up 

S.To  perfect,  finish,  bhi  kelal,  8a. 

Ezra    4.  12  have  set  up  the  walls  (thereof),  and  joined 
4.  13  this  city  be  builded,  and  the  walls  set  up  I 
4. 16  be  builded . .  and  the  walls  thereof  set  up 

l.To  set  up,  as]  natsab,  5. 

Gen.  35.  14  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  in  the  place  where 
Josh.  6.  26  in  his  youugest  (son)  shall  he  set  up  the 
1  Sa.  15.  12  he  set  him  up  a  place,  and  is  gone  about 

1  Ki.  16.  34  set  up  the  gates  thereof  in  his  youngest 

2  Ki.  17.  10  they  set  them  up  images  and  groves  in 
Jer.  31.  21  Set  thee  up  way  marks,  make  thee  high 

5.  To  lift  up,  Mjpj  nasa. 

rsa.    n.  12  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations' 

45.  20  that  set  up  the  wood  of  their  graven 
Jer.    4.   6  Set  up  the  standard  toward  Zion :  retire 
6.    1  and  set  up  a  sign  of  fire  in  LVth-haccerem 

50.  .2  set  up  a  standard;  publish,  (and) conceal 

51.  12  Set  up  the  standard  upon  the  walls  of  B. 
51.  27  Set  ye  up  a  standard  in  the  land,  blow  the 

0  To  give  (up,  forth),  |m  natha/t. 

Dan.  12.  11  abomination  thatmaketh  desolate  setup 
7. 7*0  cause  to  go  up,  rhy  alah,  5. 

Eze    ii.    7  setteth  up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  and  pu. 


5.  To  cause  to  go  tip,  rn3J  alah,  5. 

Eze.  14.    3  these  men  have  set  up  their  idols  in  their 
14.   4  Every  man.  .that  setteth  up  his  idols  in 

0.  To  cause  to  stand,  Tpjf  amad,  5. 

2  Ch.25. 14  set  them  up  (to  be)  his  gods,  and  bowed 
33. 19  set  up  groves  and  graven  images,  before 
Ezra    2.  68  offered.,  for  the  house  of  God  to  set  it  up 
Neh.    3.    1  they  sanctified  it,  and  set  up  the  doors  of 
3-    3t  6,  13,  14,  15  set  up  the  doors  thereof,  the 

6.  1  I  had  not  set  up  the  doors  upon  the  gates 

7.  1  wall  was  built,  aud  I  had  set  up  the  doors 

10.  To  cause  to  rise  up,  mp  qum,  5. 

Exod4o.    2  shalt  thou  set  up  the  tabernacle  of  the  te. 

Num.  1.  51  the  Levites  shall  set  it  up:  and  the  stra. 

7.    1  the  day  that  Moses  had  fully  set  up  the 

10.  21  (the  other)  did  set  up  the  tabernacle  ag. 
Dent  16.  22  Neither  shalt  thou  set  thee  up  (any)  im. 

27.   2  thou  shalt  set  thee  up  great  stones,  and 

27.  4  ye  shall  set  up  these  stones,  which  I  co. 
Josh.  4.    9  Joshua  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  midst 

24  26  set  it  up  there  under  an  oak  that  (was)  by 
JudgiS.  30  the  children  of  Dan  setup  the  graven  im. 
2  Sa.   3.  10  and  to  set  up  the  throne  of  David  over  Is. 

7.  12  1  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which 
1  Ki.   7.  21  he  set  up  the  pillars  in  the  porch  of  the 
7.  21  he  set  up  the  right  pillar,  and  called  the 
7  21  he  set  up  the  left  pillar,  and  called  the 

i=.   4  to  set  up  his  son  after  him,  and  to  estab. 
1  CI1.21. 18  David  should  go  up,  and  set  up  an  altar 
Job   16.  12  shaken  me  to  pieces,  and  set  me  up  for 
Isa.  23.  13  they  set  up  the  towers  thereof,  they  rai. 
Jer.  10.  20  (there  is)  none .  .to  set  up  my  curtains 

23.    4  I  will  set  up  shepherds  over  them  which 

51.  12  Set  up  the  watchmen,  prepare  the  ambu. 
Eze.  34.  23  I  will  set  up  one  shepherd  over  them,  and 
Dan.   2-  21  he  removeth  kings,  and  setteth  up  kings 

2.  44  shall  the  God  of  heaveu  set  up  a  kingdom 

3.  1  he  set  it  up  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  in  the 
3-    2,  3.  3-  7  that  Nebuchadnezzar,  .had  set  up 
3.   5  that  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  hath  setup 
3.  12, 1 8  the  golden  image  which  thou  hast  set  up 

3,  14  the  golden  image  which  I  have  set  up 

4.  17  and  setteth  up  over  it  the  basest  of  men 

11. 7^3  raise  up,  on  rum,  Za. 

Ezra  9-  9  to  set  up  the  house  of  our  God,  and  to  re. 
Psa.  27.  5  hide  me  ;  he  shall  set  me  up  upon  a  rock 
Eze.  31.    4  the  deep  set  him  up  ou  high  with  her  r. 

12.  To  cause  to  rise,  raise  up,  on  rum,  5. 

Gen.  31.  45  Jacob  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  up  (for)  a 
Psa.  75  7  he  putteth  down  one,  and  setteth  up  an. 
89.  42  Thou  hast  set  up  the  right  hand  of  his  a 
Isa.  49  22  I  will,  .set  up  my  standard  to  the  people 
Lam.  2.  17  hath  set  up  the  born  of  thine  adversaries 
Dan.    5  19  whom  he  would  he  set  up,  aud  whom  he 

13.  To  make  or  set  on  high,  34'y  sagab,  3. 

Isa.     9  11  the  Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of 

14.  7*0  set,  place,  put.  DV,  Dfe  sum,  sim. 

Gen.  28.  18  set  it  up  (for)  a  pillar,  aud  poured  oil  up 

Exod4o     8  thou  shalt  set  up  the  court  round  about 

40.  18  set  up  the  boards  thereof,  and  put  in  the 

40.  21  set  up  the  veil  of  the  covering,  and  cove. 

40.  28  he  set  up  the  hanging  (at)  the  door  of  the 

Job     5.  11  To  set  up  on  high  those  that  be  low;  that 

Psa.  74.   4  Thine  enemies . .  they  set  up  their  ensigus 

Isa.    57.    8  Behind  the  doors,  .hast  thou  set  up  thy 

Jer.   11.  13  have  ye  set  up  altars  to  (that)  shameful 

lS.To  cause  to  settle  down,  \iy  shaken,  5. 

Josh.iS.    1  set  up  the  tabernacle  of  thecongregatiou 

16.7*0  make  right  again.,  avopdoco  anorthoO. 

Acts  15.  16  1  will  build  again,  .and  1  will  set  it  up 

17.  7*0  put  over  or  upon,  fwniBrint  epitithemi. 
Matt .27.  37  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation  writ. 

18.  To  set,  place,  put,'i<jT7]ixi  histemi. 

Acts    6.  13  set  up  false  witnesses,  which  said,  This 

SET  up,  to  be  — 

1.7*0  make  erect,  *\p\  zeqaph, 

Ezra    6.  u  being  set  up,  let  him  be  hanged  thereon 

2.  7*o  be  anointed,  r\Cy  nasak,  2. 

Prov.  8  23  I  was  set  up  from  everlasting,  from  the 

3.  To  be  set  up,  y$i  natsab,  5. 

Gen.  28. 12  behold  a  ladder  set  up  on  the  earth,  and 

SET  with,  to  — 
To  sow,  y-11  zara. 

Isa    17.  10  plant  pleasant  plants,  and  shalt  set  it  wi. 

SETH,  SHETH,  ntr  com  pen  sat  ion,  sprout,  2?'j0. 

1.  The  son  of  Adam  and  Eve,  born  after  the  death  of 
Abel.    B,c.  3874-2962. 

Gen.    4.  25  and  she  bare  a  son, and  called  his  name  S. 

4.  26  to  S.,  to  him  also  there  was  born  a  son 

5.  3  after  his  image;  aud  called  his  name  S. 

5.   4  the  days  of  Adam  after  he  had  begotten  S. 
5.    6  And  S.  lived  an  hundred  and  five  years 
5.    7  S.  lived  after  he  begat  Enos  eight  hundred 
5.    8  the  days  of  S.  were  nine  hundred  and  tw. 

1  Ch.   1.    1  Adam,  S.,  Enosh 

Luke  3.  38  of  Enos,  which  was  (the  son)  of  S.,  which 

2,  An  unknowu  king  or  race. 

Nuni24.  17  and  shall,  .destroy  all  the  children  of  S. 


SE'-THTTR,  "WirJ  secreted,  hidden. 

An  Asberite,  sonof  Michael,  whom  Mosessent  to  spy  out 

the  land.     B.C.  1490. 

Num.13.  13  Of  the  tribe  of  Asher  S.  theson  of  Michael 
SETTER  forth  — 
A  teller  forth,  announcer,  Karayyehevs  kataygeleus. 

Acts  17.  18  He  seemeth  tobeasetter  forth  of  strange 
SETTING  — 
1..1  filling  in,  n^So  milluah. 

Exod28.  17  thou  shalt  set  in  it  settings  of  stones,  (e.) 
'2.  To  give,  |m  nathan. 

Eze.  43.    8  In  their  setting  of  their  threshold  by  my 

3.  With,  txtTa  (gen.)  meta. 

Matt  27. 66  sealing  the  stone,  and  setting  a  watch 
SETTLE  — 
A  border,  iTijg.  azarah. 

Eze.  43.  14  (even)  to  the  lower  settle  (shall  be)  two 
43.  14  from  the  lesser  settle  (even)  to  the.. set. 
43.  17  the  settle  (shall  be)  fourteen  cubits  long 
43.  20  on  the  four  corners  of  the  settle,  and  up, 

45.  19  the  four  corners  of  the  settle  of  the  altai 
SETTLE,  to  — 

l.TTs  cause  to  sit  down,  3g^  yashab,  5. 

Eze.  36.  11  I  will  settle  you  after  your  old  estates,  a. 
2.  To  deepen,  make  go  down,  n&3  nachath,  3. 

Psa.  65.  10  thou  settlest  the  furrows  thereof;  thou 

3.7*0  cause  to  stand  still,  "icy  amad,  5. 

2  Ki.   8.  11  he  settled  bis  countenance  stedfastly.  un. 
1  Ch.17.  14  I  will  settle  him  in  mine  house  and  in  my 

4.  To  he  quiet,  at  rest,  spy  shaqat. 

Jer.  48.  11  he  hath  settled  on  his  lees,  and  hath  not 
5.2*0  lay  a  foundation ,  establish  firmly,  BefxeXtow. 

1  Pe.    5.  10  make  you  perfect.. strengthen,  [settle] 
6. To  put,  place,  set,  rid-ntxt  iithemi. 

Luke2i.  14  [Settle]  (it)  therefore  in  your  hearts,  not 
SETTLED,  to  be  — 
X.Tobe  sunk,  settled,  fastened,  JJ3B  taba,  6. 

Prov.  8.  25  Before  the  mountains  were  settled,  before 

2.7*0  be  set  up,  3^3  natsab,  2. 

Psa.  119.  89  For  ever,  0  LORD,  thy  word  is  settled  in 
SETTLED  (place,  that  are)  — 
\,A  prepared  place,  JtorJ  makon, 

1  Ki.  8. 13  a  settledplace  for  thee  to  abide  in  forev. 
2.7*o  be  congealed,  hardened,  n^prqapha. 

Zeph.  1.  12  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their 
3. Seated,  settled,  e5pa?os  hedraios. 

Col.     1.  23  continue  in  thefaith  groundedandsettled 
SEVEN  (fold,  times),  seventh  — 
X,  Seven,  &2W  shabua. 

Eze.  45.  21  have  the  passover,  a  feast  of  seven  days 
2.Seven,  njpe"",  ya»  sheba,  shibah. 

Gen.   4.  24  truly  Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold 

5.    7  Seth  lived.. eight  hundred  and  seven  ye, 
5.  25  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  seven  years 
5.  26  lived  after  he  begat  Lamech  seven  hun. 
5. 31  seven  hundred  seventy  and  seven  years 
7.   2  thou  shalt  take  to  thee  by  sevens,  the  m. 
7.    3  Of  fowls  also  of  the  air  by  sevens,  the  ma. 

7.  4  yet  seven  days,  and  I  will  cause  it  to  rain 
7. 10  it  came  to  pass  after  seven  days,  that  the 

8.  10,  12  And  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days 
8. 14  on  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  the 

11.  21  Reu  lived,  .two  hundred  and  seven  years 
21.  28  Abraham  set  seven  ewe  lambsof  the  flock 
21. 29  What  (mean)  these  seven  ewe  lambs  wh. 
21.  30  For(these)  seven  ewelambs  shalt  thouta. 
23. :  1  Sarah  was  an  hundred  and  seven  and  tw. 

25. 17  an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  years 

29. 18  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel 
29.  20  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  Rachel;  and 
29.  27  thou  shalt  serve  with  me  yet  seven  other 
29.  30  and  served  with  him  yet  seven  other  ye. 
31.23  pursued  after  him  seven  days' journey ;  and 
33.  3  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times 
41.  2, 18  there  came  up  out  of  the  river  seven 
41.  3  seven  other  kine  came  up  after  them  out 
41.  4  did  eat  up  the  seven  well  favoured  and 
41.  5  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up  upon  one  st. 
41.  6  seven  thin  ears  and  blasted  with  the  east 
41.  7  the  seven  thin  earsdevoured  the  seven  r. 
41.  19  seven  other  kine  came  upafterthem,  poor 
41.  20  ill  favoured  kine  did  eat  up  the  first  sev. 
41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and 
41.  23  seven  ears,  withered,  thin,  (and)  blasted 
41.  24  the  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  good  e. 
41.  26  The  seven  good  kine  (are)  seven  3  ears,  a 
41.  26  the  seven  good  ears  (are)seveu  years:  the 
41.  27  And  the  seven  thin  and  ill  favoured  kine 
41.  27  that  came  up  after  them  (are)  sewn  yea. 
41.  27  the  seven  empty  ears,  .shall  be  seven  ye. 
41.  29  there  come  seven  years  of  great  plenty 
41.  30  there  shall  arise  after  them  seven  years 
41.  34  take  up  the  fifth  part,  .in  theseven  plen. 
41.  36  for  store  to  the  land  against  the  seven  y. 
41.  47  in  the  seven  plenteous  years  the  earth  br. 
41.  48  he  gathered  up  all  the  food  of  the  seven 
41.  53  the  seven  years  of  pleuteousness  that  was 
41.  54  the  seven  years  of  dearth  began  to  come 

46.  25  she  bare  these. .all  the  souls  (were)  seven 

47.  28  age  of  Jacob  was  an  hundred  forty  and  s. 
50.  10  lie  made  a  mourning  fur  his  father  seven 


SEVEN 


369 


SEVEN 


Excel.  2 
6. 
6. 
7 


23. 

29, 

29- 

29. 

34- 

37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
Lev.  4. 
4- 


16 
16 
22 
23. 
23, 
23, 
23 

23' 

=3- 

23 
23. 

23' 

2?. 
25 
35- 
25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
Num.  1. 


26. 

26. 
28. 
2S 
28. 
28. 
28. 
•     29. 

-  29 
29. 
29. 
3i- 

31- 
31- 
3i- 

Deut.  7. 


16  Now  the  priest  of  Midian  had  seveu  dau. 
.  to  (were)  an  hundred  thirty  and  seven  years 
.  20  (were)  an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven 
.  25  seven  days  were  fulfilled,  after  that  the 
,  15  Seven  days  shall  ye  eat  unleavened  bread 

.  19  Seven  days  shall  there  be  no  leaven  found 

6  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  br. 

.    7  Unleavened  bread  shallbeeaten  seven  da. 

30  seven  days  it  shall  be  with  his  dam;  on 

15  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread  seven  d. 
37  thou  shalt  make  the  seven  lamps  thereof 

30  shall  put  them  on  seven  days,  when  he 
35  seven  days  shalt  thou  consecrate  them 

37  Seven  days  thou  shalt  make  an  atonein. 

18  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  br. 

23  he  made  his  seven  lamps,  and  his  snuffers 

24  seven  hundred  and  thirty  shekels,  after 

25  a  thousand  seven  hundred  and  threescore 
2S  of  the  thousand  seven  hundred  seventy 

6  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  times  before 

17  sprinkle  (it)  seven  times  before  the  Lord 
11  sprinkled  thereof  upon  the  altar  seven  ti. 
33  ye  shall  not  go  out.  .(in)  seven  days,  until 
33  for  seven  days  shall  he  consecrate  you 

35  Therefore  shall  ye  abide,  .seven  days, and 
2  she  shall  be  unclean  seven  days;  accord. 
4  shut  up  (him  that  hath)  the  plague  seven 
5,  21,  26  priest  shall  shut  him  up  seven  da. 

31  shut  up  (him  that  hath)  the  plague,  .sev. 

33  shut  up  (him  that  hath)  thescall  seven  d. 

50  shut  up  (it  that  hath)  the  plague  seven  da. 
54  and  he  shall  shut  it  up  seven  days  more 

7  he  shall  sprinkle  upon  him.  .seven  times 

8  shall  tarry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  seven  da. 

16  sprinkle  of  the  oil  with  his  finger  seven 

27  spriukle.  .(some)  of  the  oil.  .seven  times 

38  the  priest  shall . .  shut  up  the  house  seven 

51  And  he  shall.. sprinkle  thehouse  seven  ti. 

13  he  shall  number  to  himself  seven  days  for 

19  she  shall  be  put  apart  seven  days;  and 
24  he  shall  be  unclean  seven  days ;  and  all 

28  she  shall  number  to  herself  seven  days,  and 

14  shallhe  sprinkle  of  the  blood,  .seven  times 
19  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood,  .seven  times 
27  then  it  shall  be  seven  days  under  the  dam 

6  seven  days  ye  must  eat  unleavened  bread 
8  ye  shall  offer  an  offering,  .seven  days 

15  seven  sabbaths  shall  be  complete 

18  ye  shall  offer  with  t,v-  bread  seven  lambs 

34  thefeast  oftabernacles(for)seven  daysun. 

36  Seven  days  ye  shall  offer  an  offering  made 

39  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven  days 

40  rejoice  before  the  Lord  your  God  seven 

41  keep  ft  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven  days 

42  ye  shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  days ;  all 

8  thou  shalt  number  seven  sabbaths  of  ye. 
8  seven  times  seven  years;  and  theispace  of 
8  the  seven,  sabbaths  of  years  shall  be  uuto 

1 8  I  will  punish  you  seven  times  more  foryour 

21  I  willbring  seven  times  more  plagues  upon 

24  will  punish  you  yet  seven  times  for  your 

25  I,  will  chasten  you  seven  times  for  your 
31  fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  four  hundred 
39  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 

8  fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  fourhundr. 

26  threescore  and  two  thousaud  and  seven 

31  an  hundred  thousand  and  fifty  and  seven 

22  (were)  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred 
36  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty 

2  the  seven  lamps  shall  give  light  over  ag. 
14  should  she  not  be  ashamed  seven  days? 

14  let  her  be  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 

15  Miriam  was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 
22  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before  Zoau 
49  fourteen  thousand  and  seven  hundred 

4  and  sprinkle  of  her  blood,  .seven  times 
1 1  He  that  toucheth . .  shall  be  unclean  seven 
74  and  all.  .shall  be  unclean  seven  days 

16  whosoever  toucheth.  .be  unclean  seven  da. 

1,  29  said  unto  Balak,  Build  me  here  seven 
1  prepare  me  here  seven  oxen  and  seven 

4  I  have  prepared  seveu  altars,  and  I  have 

14  built  seven  altars,  and  offered  a  bullock 

29  prepare  me  here  seven  bullocks  and  sev. 

7  forty  and  three  thousand  and  seven  him. 
34  fifty  and  two  thousand  and  seven  hundr. 

51  and  a  thousaud  sevenhundred  and  thirty 

1 1  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  sp. 

17  seven  days  shall  unleavened  bread  be  ea. 
19,  27  one  ram,  and  seven  lambs  of  the  first 
21,  29  tenth  deal .  .throughout  the  seven  la. 

24  ye  shall  offer  daily,  throughout  the  seven 

2,  8,  36  one  ram,  (and)  seven  lambs  of  the  fi. 
4,  10  for  one  lamb,  throughout  the  seven 

12  shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  seven 

32  seven  bullocks,  two  rams,  (and)  fourteen 

19  do  ye  abide  without  the  camp  seven  days 
36  three  hundred  thousand  and  seven  and 

43  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 

52  sixteen  thousand  sevenhundred  and  fifty 
1  seven  nations  greater  and  mightier  than 
1  At  the  end  of  (every)  seven  years  thou  sh. 

9  The  seventh  year,  the  year  of  release,  is 

3  seven  days  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened  br 

4  there  shall  be  no  leavened  bread,  .seven 
9  Seven  weeks  shalt  thou  number  unto  th. 
9  begin  to  number  the  seven  weeks  from 

13  observe  the  feast  of  the  tabernacles  seven 

15  Seven  days  shalt  thou  keep  a  solemn  fea. 
7  they  shall,  .flee  before  thee  seven  ways 

25  thou  shalt.  .flee  seven  ways  before  them 

10  At  the  end  of  (every)  seven  years,  in  the 


Josh.  6 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 
iS. 
18. 
18. 
18. 
Judg.  6, 

6. 

8. 


Ruth  4 
1  Sa.   2, 

6. 


i  Ki. 


iKi. 


:  Ch.  3 

3 

5' 
5 
7 
9 

9' 


19. 
26. 
26. 
29 

7. 


3°' 

-,        35- 
nzra    2. 


6, 

7. 

8, 

Xeh.    7 


4  seven  priests  shall  bear  before  the  ark  se. 

4  ye  shall  compass  the  city  seven  times,  and 
6  let  seven  priests  bear  seven  trumpets  of 
8,  13  seven  priests  bearing  the  seven  tram. 

15  and  compassed  the  city,  .seven  times:  on. 
15  that  day  they  compassed  the  city  seven  ti. 

2  among  the  children  of  Israel  seven  tribes 

5  they  shall  divide  it  into  seven  parts :  Ju. 

6  describe  the  land  (into)  seven  parts,  and 
9  described  it  by  cities  into  seven  parts  in 
1  delivered,  .into  the  hand  of  iiidian seven 

25  even  the  second  bullock  ofseven  years  old 

26  a  thousand  and  seven  hundred  (shekels) 
9  and  he  judged  Israel  seven  years 

12  declareit  me  within  the  seven  days  of  the 

17  she  wept  before  him  the  seven  days 

7  If  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  withs 

8  the  lords . .  brought  up  to  her  seven  green 

13  If  thou  weavest  the  seven  locks  of  my  head 
19  caused  him  to  shave  off  the  seven  locks  of 

15  which  were  numbered  seven  hundred  ch. 

16  seven  hundred  chosen  men  left  handed 
15  which  is  better  to  thee  than  seven  sons 

5  the  barren  hath  born  seven ;  and  she  that 
1  in  the  country  of  the  Philistines  seven  mo. 
8  seven  days  shalt  thou  tarry,  till  I  come  to 

3  Give  us  seven  days'  respite,  that  we  may  se. 

8  he  tarried  seven  days,  according  to  the  set 

10  J  esse  made  seven  of  his  sons  to  pass  before 
13  buried  (them)  under  a  tree,  .and  fasted  se. 

11  the  time  that  David  was  king.. was  seven 

5  he  reigned  over  Judah  seven  years  and  six 

4  seven  hundred  horsemen,  and  twenty  th. 

18  David  slew  (the  men  of)  seven  hundred  ch. 

6  Let  seven  of  his  sons  be  delivered  unto  us 

9  they  fell  (all) seven  together,  and  were  put 
39  Uriah  the  Hittite  :  thirty  and  seven  in  all 

13  Shall  seven  years  of  faminecome  unto  thee 

11  seven  years  reigned  he  in  Hebron,  and  th. 

6  the  third  (was)  seven  cubits  broad :  for  wi. 
38  So  was  he  seven  years  in  building  it 

17  seven  for  the  one  chapiter,  and  seven  for 
65  seven  days  and  seven  days,  (even) fourteen 

3  he  had  seven  hundred  wives,  princesses,  a. 
10,  15  in  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Asa 
1 5  did  Zimri  reign  seven  days  in  Tirzah.  And 
43  nothing.  And  he  said,  Go  again  seven  tim. 
iS  I  have  left  (one)  seven  thousand  in  Israel 

15  the  children  of  Israel,  (being)  seven  thou. 

29  pitched  one  over  against  the  other  seven 

30  a  wall  fell  upon  twenty  and  seven  thous. 
9  they  fetched  a  compass  of  seven  day's  jo. 

26  he  took  with  him  seven  hundred  men  that 
35  the  child  sneezed  seven  times,  and  the  chil. 
10  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times.and  thy 

14  and  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  Jordou 

1  it  shall  also  come  upon  the  land  seven  years 

2  sojourned  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines  se. 

3  it  come  to  pass  at  the  seven  years'  end,  that 
21  Seven  years  old  (was)  Jehoash  when  he  b. 

1  In  the  seventh  yearof  Jehu,  Jehoash  be. 

10  In  the  thirtyand  seventh  year  of  Joashki. 
1  In  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Jerob. 

16  all  the  men  of  might,  (even)  seven  thous. 
8  in  the  fifth  month,  on  the  seventh  (day) 

27  the  seven  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  cap. 
27  on  the  seven  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the 

4  there  he  reigned  seven  years  and  six  mo. 

24  And  the  sons  of  Elioenai  (were),  .seven 
13  and  Jachau,  and  Zia,  and  Heber.  seven 

18  four  and  forty  thousand  seven  hundred 

5  reckoned,  .fourscore  and  seven  thousand 
13  a  thousand  and  seven  hundred  audthre. 

25  (were)  to  come  after  seven  day  s  from  time 

12  buried  their  bones,  .and  fasted  seven  da. 

25  men  of  valour  for  the  war,  seven  thousa. 
27  with  him  (were)  three  thousand  and  seveu 

34  with  them,  .thirty  and  seven  thousaud 

26  they  offered  seveu  bullocks  and  seven  ra. 
4  seven  thousand  horsemen,  and  twenty  th. 

18  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  seven  thousand 
30  men  of  valour,  a  thousand  and  seven  nil, 

32  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred  chief 

4  seven  thousaud  talents  of  refined  silver 

27  seven  years  reigned  he  in  Hebron,  and 

8  Solomon  kept  the  feast  seven  days,  and 

9  dedication,  .seven  days,  and  the  feast  se. 
9  with  a  young  bullock  and  seven  rams,  (the 

11  seven  hundred  oxen  and  seven  thousand 
11  seven  thousand  and  seven  hundred  ranis 
11  seven  thousand  and  seven  hundred  he  go. 

1  Joash  (was)  seven  years  old  when  he  be. 

13  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred,  that  ma. 
21  they  brought  seven  bullocks,  and  seven 
2i  seven  lambs,  and  seven  he  goats,  for  a  sin 

21  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 

22  they  did  eat  throughout  the  feast  seven  da. 

23  other  seven  days :  and  they  kept  (other)  s. 

24  a  thousand  bullocks  and  seven  thousand 

17  and  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 

5  The  children  of  Arab,  seven  hundred  se. 
9  the  children  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and 

25  The  children  of .  .Beeroth,  sevenhundred 

33  The  children  of  Lod.  .seven  hundred  tw. 

35  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty  and  seven 

65  seven  thousandthree hundred  thirty  ands. 

66  Their  horses  (were)  seven  hundred  thirty 

67  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty 
22  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 

7  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  ki. 
35  seventy  and  seven  lambs,  twelve  he  goats 

14  The  children  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and 


Esth. 


■t^- 

Psa. 

ii  ). 

Pro\ 

.  6. 

9- 

*4- 

26. 

26. 

Hoc-: 

.IT. 

Isa. 

4- 

II. 

S°. 

Jer. 

"i- 

34- 

52. 

52- 

52- 

52- 

Eze. 


7.  18  Adonikam,  six  hundred  threescore  andse. 
7.  19  Bigvai,  two  thousand  threescore  and  sev. 
7.  29  The  men  of.  .Beeroth,  seven  hundred  fo. 
7.  37  Thechildrenof  Lod.  .seven  hundred twe. 
7.  41  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty  and  seven 
7.  67  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty,  .se 
7.  68  Their  horses,  seven  hundred  thirty  and 
7.  69  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty 

7.  72  and  threescore  and  seven  priest's  garme. 

8.  18  they  kept  the  feast  seven  days ;  and  on 

1  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  provi. 
5  the  king  made  a  feast. .  seven  days,  in  the 

10  the  seven  chamberlains  that  served  in  the 

14  the  seven princesof  Persia andMedia,  wh. 
9  seven  maidens,  (which  were)  meet  to  be 

16  taken,  .into  his  house.,  in  the  seventh  ye. 
9  an  hundred  twenty  and  seven  provinces 
30  to  the  hundred  twenty  and  seven  provin. 

2  there  were  born  unto  him  seven  sons  and 

3  His  substance  also  was  seven  thousand 

13  sat  down  with  him.,  seven  daysand  seven 
19  yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  th. 

8  take  unto  you  now  seven  bullocks  and  se. 
164  Seven  times  a  day  do  I  praise  thee  beca. 
16  yea,  seven  (are)  an  abominationuntohim 

1  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars 
16  a  just  (man)  falleth  seven  times,  and  ris. 
16  than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  reason 

25  (there  are)  seven  abominations  in  his  he. 

2  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight 
1  seveu  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man 

15  shall  smite itintheseven  streams.andma. 

26  light  of  the  sun.  .as  the  light  of  seven  da. 

9  She  that  hath  born  seven  languish eth 

14  At  the  end  of  seven  years  let  ye  go  every 
25  seven  men  of  them  that  were  "near  the  ki. 
2S  In  the  seventh  year  three  thousand  Jews 

30  carried  away  captive.. seven  hundred  fo. 

31  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  ca. 

15  I  sat.  .astonished  among  then,  seven  days 

3.  16  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  seven  days 
29. 17  it  came  to  passin  the  seven  and  twentieth 
30. 20  in  the  first  (month),  in  the  seventh  (day) 
39.  9  they  shall  burn  them  with  fire  seven  yea 
39.  12  seven  months  shall  thehouse  of  Israel  be 

39.  14  after  the  end  of  seven  months  shall  they 

40.  22  and  they  went  up  unto  it  by  seven  steps 

40.  26  (there  were)  seven  steps  to  go  up  to  it,  and 

41.  3  and  the  breadth  of  the  door  seven  cubits 
43.  25  Seven  days  shalt  thou  prepare  every  day 

43.  26  Seven  days  shall  they  purge  the  altar  and 

44.  26  they  shall  reckon  unto  him  seven  days 

45.  20  so  thou  shalt  do  the  seventh  (day) of  the 
45.  23  seven  days  of  the  feast  he  shaU  prepare  a 
45.  23  seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams.,  the  seven 
45.  25  Intheseventh(month),inthefifteenthday 

Dan.  9.  25  (shall be) seven  weeks,  and  threescore  and 
Mic.  5.  5  then  shall  we  raise  against  him  seven  sh. 
Zech.  3.    9  upon  one  stone  (shall  be)  seven  eyes :  be. 

4.  2  seven  lamps,  .and  seven  pipes  to  the  seven 
4.  ioshall  see  the  plummet,  .(with)those  seven 

3. Seventh >  ^tv  shebii. 

Gen.   2.    2  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work 
2.    2  he  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his 
2.    3  God  blessedtheseventhdayandsanctified 
8. '  4  the  ark  rested  in  the  seventh  month, on  the 

Exodi2.  15  from  the  first  day  until  the  seventh  day 

12. 16  in  the  seventh  day  there  shall  be  an  holy 
13.  6  in  the  seventh  day  (shall  be}  a  feast  to  the 
16.  26  on  the  seventh  day,  (which  is)the  sabbath 
16.  27  there  went  out  (some) . .  on  the  seventh  day 
16.  29  let  no  man  go  out  of  his  place  on  the  sev. 
16.  30  So  the  people  rested  on  the  seventh  day 
20. 10  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  theL. 

20.  11  theLoRD.. rested  the  seventhday:  where. 

21.  2  in  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  free  for  no. 
the  seventh  (year)thoushaltletitrestand 
on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest;  that 

16  the  seventh  day  he  called  unto  Hoses  out 
31.  15  but  in  the  seventh  (is)the  sabbath  of  rest 

31. 17  on  the  seventh  day  he  rested,  and  was  re. 

34.  21  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest:  in  ea. 

35.  2  on  the  seventh  day  there  shall  be  to  you 
Lev.  13.   5  the  priest  shall  look  on  him  the  seventh 

13.  6  shall  look  on  him  again  the  seventh  day 
13.  27  thepriestshalllookupon  him  the  seventh 
13.  32,  34  in  the  seventh  day  the  priest  shall  lo. 

13.  51  he  shall  look  on  the  plague  on  the  seventh 

14.  9  it  shall  be  on  the  seventhday,  that  hesh. 
14.  39  the  priest  shall  come  again  the  seventhday 
16.  29  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  tenth  (day) 
23.  3  the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  rest,  an 
23.  8  in  the  seventhday  (is) an  holy  convocation 
23. 16  unto  the  morrowaftertheseventhsabbath 
23.  24  Ln  the  seventh  month,  in  the  first  (day)  of 
23.  27  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  this  seventh  month 
23.  34  The  fifteenth  day  of  this  seventh  month 
23.  39  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month 
23.  41  ye  shall  celebrate  it  in  the  seventh  month 
25.  4  in  the  seventh  year  shall  be  a  sabbath  on 
25.  9  to  sound  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  the  seventh 
25.  20  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year?  be. 

Yum.  6.    9  on  the  seventh  day  shall  he  shave  it 

7.  48  On  the  seventh  day  Elishama  the  son  of 
19.  12  and  on  the  seventh  day  he  shall  be  clean 
19. 12  then  the  seventh  day  he  shall  not  be  clean 
ig.  19  on  the  seventh  day;  and  on  the  seventh  day 

28.  25  on  the  seventh  day  ye  shall  have  an  holy 

29,  1  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  first  (day)  of 
2g.  7  have  on  the  tenth  (day)of  this  seventh  mo. 
29.  12  on  thefifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  ixu  nth 


23- 
23- 

24 


SEVEN 


870 


SHACHIA 


Num  29.  -52  ontheseventhday  seven  bullocks,  twora. 
31,  19  on  the  third  day,  and  on  the  seventh  day 
31.  24  ye  shall  wash  your  clothes  on  the  seventh 

Deut.  5.  14  "the  seventh  day  (is)  the  sabbath  of  the  L. 
15. 12  in  the  seventh  year  thou  shalt  let  him  go 
16.    8  on  the  seventh  day  (shall  be)  a  solemn 

Josh.  6.  4  and  the  seventh  day  ye  shall  compass  the 
6. 15  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day,  that 

6.  16  it  came  to  pass  at  the  seventh  time,  when 
29.  40  the  seventh  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of 

Judg  14.  15,  17  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day  th. 
14. 18  said  unto  him  on  the  seventh  day  before 

2  Sa.  12.  18  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day,  that 
1  Ki,   8.    2  Ethauim,  which  (is)  the  seventh  month 

18.  44  it  came  to  pass  at  the  seventh  time,  that 

20.  29  in  the  seventh  day  the  battle  was  joined 

3  Ki.11.   4  the  seventh  year  Jehoiada  sent  and  fetched 

18.   9  which  (was)  the  seventh  year  of  Hoshea 

25.  25  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  month,  that 

1  Ch.  2.  15  Ozem  the  sixth,  David  the  seventh 

12.  11  Attai  the  sixth,  Eliel  the  seventh 
24.  10  The  seventh  to  Hakkoz,  the  eighth  to  Ab. 
5.  14  The  seventh  to  Jesharelah,  (he)>  his  sons 

26.  3  Jehohanan  the  sixth,  Elioenai  the  seventh 

26.  5  Issachar  the  seventh,  Peulthai  the  e'ghth 

27.  10  The  seventh  (captain)  for  the  seventh  mo. 

2  Ch.  5.    3  the  feast  which  (was)  in  the  seventh  mo. 

7.  10  threeand  twentieth  day  of  the  seventh  mo. 
23.  1  in  the  seventh  year  Jehoiada  strengthened 
31.   7  and  finished  (thein)in  the  seventh  mouth 

Ezra    3.    1  when  the  seventh  month  was  come,  and 

3.  6  From  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 

7.  8  which  (was)  in  the  Seventh  year  of  the  ki. 
Neh.   7.  73  when  the  seventh  month  came,  the  child. 

8.  2  upon  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month 
8.  14  in  booths  in  the  feast  of  the  seventh  mo. 

10.  31  and  (that)  we  would  leave  the  seventh  year 
Esth.  1.  10  On  the  seventh  day,  when  the  heart  of  the 
Jer.   28.  17  died  the  same  year,  in  the  seventh  month 

4t.  1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventhmonth,  (th.) 
Eze.  20.    1  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  year,  in  the 

45.  25  In  the  seventh  (month),  in  the  fifteenth 
Hag.  2.    1  In  theseveuth(month),  in  the  one  and  tw. 
Zech.  7.    5andmournedinthefifth  andseventh(mo.) 
8. 19  the  fast  01  the  seventh  and  the  fast  of  the 

4:. Seven,  nyiy  shibak. 

Ezra   7.  14  sent  of  the  king,  and  of  his  seven  couns. 
Dan.   3.  19  sc  :en  times  more  than  it  was  wont  to  lie 

4.  16  and  let  seven  times  pass  over  him 

4.  23  with  the  beasts,  .till  seven  times  pass  over 
4.  25  seventimes  shall  passover  thee,  till  thou 

Z.Seven,  niipy  shibanah. 

Job  42. 13  He  had  also  seven  sons  and  three daugh. 

6.  Seven fold,  n^T^  shibathayim. 

Gen.   4.  15  vengeance  shall  be  taken  on  himsevenf. 
4.  24  If  Cain  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly 
2  Sa.  21.    9  they  fell  (all)  seven  together,  and  were  put 
Psa.  12.    6  (as)  silver  tried,  .purified  seven  times 

79.  12  render  unto  ourneighbours  sevenfold  into 
Prov.  6.  31  But  (if)  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sev. 
Isa.  30.  26  and  the  light  of  the  tun  shall  be  sevenfold 

7.  The  seventh,  e^o/xos  hebdomos. 

John  4.  52  1'esterday  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever 
Heb.  4.  4  he  spake  in  a  certain  place  of  the  seventh 
4.  4  God  did  rest  the  seventli  day  from  all  bis 
Jude  14  Euoch,  also,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  pr. 
.Rev.  8.    1  when  he  had  opened  the  seventh  seal,  th. 

10.  7  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  an. 

11.  15  the  seventh  angel  sounded;  and  there  we. 
16.  17  the  seventh  an  *v\  poured  out  his  vial  into 

21.  20  the  seventh,  chrysolite;  the  eighth,  beryl 

wen,  err-rct  hepta. 
Matti2.  45  taketh  with  himself  seven  other  spirits 
15.  34  And  they  said,  Seven,  and  a  few  little  ft. 
15.  36  he  took  the  seven  loaves  and  the  fishes 
15.  37  the  broken  (meat)  that  was  left  seven  ba. 
16. 10  Neither  the  seveu  loaves  of  the  four  tho. 
18.  22  Jesus  saith.  .Until  seventy  times  seven 

22.  25  there  were  with  us  seven  brethren  :  and 
22.  26  second  also,  and  the  third,  unto  the  sev. 
22.  28  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of  the  seven?  for 

Mark  8.  5  How  many  loaves  have  ye?,  .they  said,  S. 
8.  6  he  took  the  seven  loaves,  and  gave  thanks 
8.  8  took  up  of  the  broken  (meat) . .  seven  has. 
8.  20  And  when  the  seven  among  four  thousand 
8.  20  howmany  baskets  full..  And  they  said.S. 

12.  20  there  were  seven  brethren  :  and  the  first 
12.  22  And  the  seven  had  her,  and  left  no  seed 

12.  2j  whose  wife  shall  she  be.,  for  the  seven  had 
ib.   q  [Mary.. out  of  whom  he  had  cast  seven] 

Luke  2.  30  had  lived  with  an  husband  seven  years  1 1 . 
8.  2  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went  seven  de. 
11.  26  taketh  (to  him)  seven  other  spirits  more 
20.  29  There  were  therefore  seven  brethren  :  and 
20.  31  in  like  manner  the  seveu  also :  and  they 
20.  33  whose  wife  of  them  is  she?  for  seven  had 

Acts    6.    3  look  ye  out  among  you  seven  men  of  ho. 

13.  19  when  he  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in 
19.14  there wereseven sons  of(one)Sceva,aJew 
20.   6  came.  .toTroas..  where  weabodeseveud. 

1  Hiding  disciples,  wc  tarried  there  seven  d. 

evangelist,  which  was- (one)  of  the  se. 

21.27  "hen  the  seveu  days  were  almost  euded 

28. 14  were  desired  to  tarry  with  them  seven  d. 

iel>.  1 1.  30  after  they  were  compassed  about  seven  d. 

Kov.    1.    4  Juhn  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in 

1.   4  iromthe  seven  spirits  which are  beforehia 

1.  11  send  (it)  unto  the  [seven)  churches  which 

1.  12  being  turned  I  saw  »e\  en  gulden  caudlest 


Rev.   1.  13  in  the  midst  of  the  [seven]  candlesticks 
1.  16  And  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars 
1.  20  The  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  th. 
1.  20  and  the  seveu  golden  candlesticks 
1.  20  seven  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  seven  ch. 

1.  20  the  seven  candlesticks . .  are  the  seven  ch. 

2.  i  he  that  holdethtbeseven  stars  in  his  right 

2.  1  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  go. 

3.  1  the  [seven]  spirits  of  God,  and  the  seven 

4.  5  seven  lamps,  .which  are  the  seven  spirits 
5.1a  book  written . .  sealed  with  seven  seals 

5.  5  to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seven 
5.  6  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes,  which 
5.  6  the  [seven]  spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into 
8.  2  I  saw  theseven  angels  which  stood  before 
8.  2  and  to  them  were  given  seven  trumpets 
8.   6  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  tr. 

10.  3  when  hehadcried,  seven  thunders  uttered 
10.    4  when  the  seven  thunders  had  uttered  their 

10.  4  Seal  up  those  things  which  the  [seven]  th. 

11.  13  in  the  earthquake  were  slain,  .seveu  tho. 

1 2.  3  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  se. 

13.  1  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  up. 
15.  1  seven  aDgels  having  the  seven  last  plagues 
15.  6  the  seven  angels,  .having  the  seven  plag. 
15.    7  gave  unto  the  seven  angels  seven  golden 

15.  8  till  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels 

16.  1  I  heard  a  great  voice,  .saying  to  the  seven 

17.  1  one  of  the  seven  angels  which  had  the^se. 
17.  3  a  scarlet  coloured  beast,  .having  seven h. 
17.  7  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten  hor. 
17.  9  The  seven  heads  are  seven  mountains,  on 
17.  10  there  are  seven  kings:  five  are  fallen,  and 

17.  11  he,  is  the  eighth,  and  is  of  the  seveu,  and 
21.  9  there  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven  an. 
21.   9  the  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  pla. 

9. Seven  times,  kin^Kis  heptaJcis. 

Matt  18.  21  how  oft  shall.  .1  forgive  him?  till  seven  ti. 

18.  22  Until  seven  times;  but,  Until  seventy  ti. 
Lukei7-   4  seventimes  in  a  day,  and  seven  times  in 

SE-VEN  STARS,  ,TD'3  Klmah. 

The  Pleiades :  their  names  are  Alcyone,  Merope,  Maia, 
Electra,  Tayegeta,  Sterope,  and  Celaeno;  they  are  also 
called  Atlantides  and  Hesperides. 

Amos  5.    8  him)  that  mafceth  the  seven  stars  and  0. 

SEVEN  thousand  — 

Seven  thousand,  eirraKitrx^101  hegtaMsckilioi. 
Rom  11.    4  I  have  reserved  to  myself  seven  thousand 

SEVENTEEN,  seventeenth  — 
1. Seven  and  tent  nT^jy  ng^p  shibah  vaasarah. 
Jer.   32.    9  the  money,  (even)  seventeen  shekels  of  si. 

2.  Seventy  and  seven,  njntfh  D'y^ty  shibim  veshibah. 
Judg.  8.  14  he  described,  .threescore  and  seventeen 

o. Seven  {and)  ten,  T$HJ  ntlftV  or  nTjpu  p^p  sheha. 
Gen.   7. 11  in  the  second  month,  the  seventeenth  day 
8.   4  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  up. 

37.  2  Joseph,  (being)  seventeen  years  old,  was 
47.  28  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  sevent. 

1  Ki.  14.  21  Rehoboam.  .reigned  seventeen  years  in  J. 

22  51  the  seventeenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  king 

2  Ki.  13.    r  Jehoahaz.  .began  to  reign,  .seventeen  ye. 

16.    1  In  the  seventeenth  year  of  Pekah  the  son 

1  Ch.  7. 11  seventeen  thousand  and  two  hundred  .fit 

24.  15  The  seventeenth  to  Hezir,  the  eighteenth 

25.  24  The  seventeenth  to  Joshbekashah,  (he) 

2  Ch.12.  13  he  reigned  seventeen  years  in  Jerusalem 
Ezra  2.  39  children  of  Harim,  a  thousand  and  seve. 
Neh,    7.  42  children  of  Harim,  a  thousand  and  seven. 

SEVENTY  (times)  — 
\,  Seventy,  cj/^y'  shibim. 

Gen.  4.  24  truly  Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold 

5.  12  And  Cainan  lived  seventy  years,  and  be. 

5.  31  seven  hundred  seveuty  and  seven  years 

11.  26  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Ab. 

12.  4  Abram  (was)  seventy  and  five  years  old 
Exod.  1.    5  all  the  souls  that  came,  .were  seventy  so. 

24.    1,9  Abihu,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  Is. 

38.  28  of  the  thousand  seven  hundred  seventy 
38.  29  the  brass  of  the  offering  (was)  seventy  ta. 

Num.  7.  13  one  silver  bowl  of  seventy  shekels,  after 
[So  in  verse  19,  25,  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79.] 

7.  85  hundred  and  thirty  (shekels),  each  bowls. 
11.  16  Gather  unto  me  seventy  men  of  the  elders 
1 1.  24  gathered  the  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of 
11.  25  and  gave  (it)  unto  the  seventy  elders;:  and 
31.  32  six  hundred  thousand  and  seventy  thou. 

Judg.  9.  56  which  he  did.  .in  slaying  his  seventy  br. 

2  Sa.  24,  15  there  died  of  the  people.. seventy  thou. 

2  Ki.  10.  1  And  Ahab  had  seventy  sous  in  Samaria 
10.  6  the  king's  sons,  (being)  seventy  persons 
10.    7  slew  seventy  persons,  and  put  their  heads 

1  Ch.21. 14  there  fell  of  Israel  seveuty  thousand  men 

Ezra  2.  3  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 
2.    4  children.. three  hundred  seventy  ami  two 

1.  5  children  of  Aran,  seven  hundred  seventy 

2.  36  The  priests,  .nine  hundred  seventy  and 
2.  40  of  the  children  of  Hodaviah,  seventy  and 

8.  7  the  son  of  Athaliab,  and  with  him  seventy 
S.  14  t'thai,  and  Zabbud,  and  with  them  seve. 
8.  35  seventy  and  seven  lambs,  twelve  be  goats 

Neli.  7.  S  two  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 
7.  0  of  Shephatiah,  three  hundred  seventy  and 
7.  39  The  priests. .  nine  hundred  seventy  and  th. 
7.  43  of  the  children  of  Uodevah  seventy  and 
11. 19  their  brethren,  .(werejanhundredseventy 

Esth.  9.  16  slew  of  their  foes  seveuty  and  five  thous. 


Isa.  23. 15  that  Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  seventy  years 
23.  15  after  the  end  of  seventy  years  shall  Tyre 
23. 17  after  the  end  of  seventy  years,  that  the 

Jer.  25.  11  these  nations  shall  serve,  .seventy  years 
25.  12  when  seventy  years  are  accomplished 
29.  10  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished  at 

Eze.  S.  11  there  stood  before  them  seventy  men  of 
41. 12  the  building,  .(was)  seventy  cubits  broad 

Dan.    9.    2  that  he  would  accomplish  seventy  years 
9.  24  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy 

Zech.  7.  5  When  ye  fasted,  .those  seventy  years,  did 
2.Seeeaty,  ePdofj.i'iKovTa  liebdomekonta. 

Luke  10.    1  the  Lord  appointed  other  seventy  also 
10.  17  the  seventy  returued  again  with  joy,  say. 

'•j. Seventy  times,  e@oofj.rjKovTa.Kts  hebdomekontakis. 

Matt  18.  22  Until  seven  times;  but,  Until  seventy  ti. 
SEVER  (out,  self),  to  — 
1.7*0  separate,  Vn3  badal,  5. 

Lev.  20.  26  haveseveredyoufroni(other)peoplc,that 

Deut.  4.  41  Moses  severed  three  cities  on  this  side  J. 

Eze.  39. 14  they  shall  severout  men  of  continual  em. 

2.  To  separate,  make  wonderful,  rh§  ixdah,  5. 

Exod.3.  22  I  willsever  in  thatdaytheland  of  Goshen 
9.    4  the  Lord  shall  sever  between  the  cattle 

3.7V)  be  parted,  "na  parad,  2. 

Judg.  4.  11  Heber.  .had  severed  himself  from  the  K. 

4,7*0  boundary  off,  a<popifa  apho-rizo. 

Matt  13.  49  and  sever  the  wicked  fromamong  thejust 
SEVERAL,  severally  — 
1. Freedom,  separation,  mc'En  chophshutl \. 

2  Ch.26.  21  and  dwelt  in  a  several  house,  (being)  a 

2. Free,  separate,  nvrn  ehophshith. 

2  Ki.15.   5  he  was  a  leper,  .and  dwelt  in  a  several 

3.  One's  01m,  thios  idios. 

Matt25.  15  to  every  man  according  to  his  severalab. 
1  Co. 12.  11  dividingto  every  man  severallyas  he  will 

SEVERITY  — 

A  cutting  oj \  severity,  airoTOfxlo.  apotomio. 

Rom  11.  22  severity  of  God  :  on  them  which  fell,  sev. 

SEW  (on,  together,  up),  to  — 

l.To  sew  up,  739  taphal. 

Job  14.  17  My  transgressiou(is)sealed..thousewest  up 

2.7*0  sew,  I5iji  taphar. 

Gen.  3.  7  they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made 
Job  16. 15  I  have  sewed  sackcloth  upon  my  skin,  and 
Eccl.  3.    7  A  time  to  rend, and  a  time  to  sew;  a  time 

3.7*0  sew  upon,  iirifipaTrrw  epirrJiapto. 

Mark  2.  21  No  man  also  seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth 
SEW,  (women)  that  — 
7*o  sew,  *i?n  taphar,  3. 

Eze.  13.  1 3  AVoe  to  the  (women)  that  sew  pillows  to 

SEA-A-LAB'-BIN,  paVjy*  jackals. 

A  city  in  Dan,  near  Ajalon,  on  the  slope  of  Mount  Eph- 

raim;  called    Selebi  by  Jerome,   but  now  Silbit ,-  or 

Salaba,    on   the    borders    of   Sebaste,    according    to 

Eusebius. 

Josh.  19.  42  And  S.,  and  Ajalon,  and  Jethlah 

SHA-AL'-BLTil,  D'^c"'.     Same  as  preceding, 

Judg.  1.  35  the  Amorites  would  dwell,  in  S.:  yet  the 

1  Ki.  4.  g  The  son  of  Dekar,  in  Makaz,  and  in  s  ,  and 
SHA-AL-BO-NITE,  ^JBA 

Patronymic  of  Eliahba",  a  native  of  Shaalabbin. 

2  Sa.  23.  32  Eliahba  the  S. ,  of  the  sons  of  Jashen,  Jo. 
1  Ch.  11.  33  Azmaveth  the  Daharumite,  Eliahba  theS. 

SHA'-APH,  *]«E>  union,  friendship. 

1.  A  son  of  Jahdai  sun  of  Caleb  by  his  concubine  Ephah. 

B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  2.  47  andGesham.and  Pelet,  and  Ephah,  and  S. 

2.  Son  of  Caleb  sonof  Hezrou  hyhiscoucubine  Maachah. 
B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch,  2.  49  She  bare  alsoS  the  father  of  Madmaunah 
SHA-A-RA'-m,  SHA-RA'-m,  &*$&  double  cleft. 
A  city  in  Judah  or  Simeon,  near  Adithaim  and  Beth- 
birei ;  now  called  Shilhim 

Josh. 15.  36  S  ,  and  Adithaim,  and  Gcderab,  and  G. 

1  Sa.  17.  52  the  wounded,  .fell  down  by  the  waj  to  S. 

1  Ch.  4.  31  And  at  Beth-marcaboth.  .and  at  S, 

SHA-ASH'-GAZ,  »ap«#i 

A  chamberlain  of  Ahasuerus  king  of  Persia,  who  bad 

the  charge  of  the  kings  concubines.    B.C.  515. 

Esth.  2. 14  to  the  custody  of  S.,  the  king's  chamber! 
SHAR-BE'-THAI,  'O^P.S  ibbath  born. 
1.  A  Levite  who  helped  in  the  matter  of  those  that  had 
taken  strange  wives.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  15  Meshullamaud  S.  the  Levite  helped  them 
■2  One  who  explained  the  law  to  the  people  after  Ezra 
had  read  it  to  them.    B.C.  445" 

Nth.    s.    7  Akkub,  S.,  llndijuh,  Maaseiah,  Kclita  A. 

3.  A  chief  Levite  in  Jerusalem  after  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  16  S.. (had)  the  oversight  of  the  out  ward  ]•!-. 

SHACH'-IA,  ^;ry;,  KJ??*  fame  <f  Jah. 

A  son  of  Shaharaim  a  LVnjamite;  some  Hebrew  copies 

read  Shobia.    B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.    S.  10  Jeuz,and  S.,audMirma.  These(were)his 


SHADE 


871 


SHALL 


SHADE,  shadow,  shadowing1  — 

1. Shadow,  shade,  defence,  h?  isel. 

Gen.  19.    S  therefore  came  they  under  the  shadow  of 
Jud<-  o  15  (then)  come  (and)  putyour  trustinmysh. 
q  36  Thou  seest  the  shadow  of  the  mountains 
2  Ki  20.   9  shall  the  shadow  go  forward  ten  degrees 
->o  10  It  is  a  light  thing  for  the  shadow  to  go 
20.  10  let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  deg. 
20.  n  he  brought  the  shadow  ten  degrees  back. 
1  Ch.29. 15  our  days  on  the  earth  (are)  as  a  shadow 
Job      7.    2  As  a  servant  earnestly  desireth  the  shad. 
8.    g  because  our  days  upon  earth  (are)  a  sha. 
14.    2  he  fleeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  coutinu. 
17.    7  and  all  my  members  (are)  as  a  shadow 
Psa.  17.   3  hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings 
36.    7  put  their  trust  under  the  shadow  of  thy 
57.    1  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  make 
63.    7  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice 
80.  10  The  hills  were  covered  with  the  shadow 
91.    1  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Aim. 
102. 11  My  days  (are)  like  a  shadow  that  decline, 
iop.  23  I  am  gone  like  the  shadow  when  it  decli. 
121.    5  the  Lord  (is)  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  ha. 
144.    4  his  days  (are)  as  a  shadow  thatpasseth  a. 
Eccl.  6.  12  the  days,  .which  he  spendeth  asa  shadow 

5.  13  prolong  (his)  days,  (which  are)  as  a  shad. 
Song   2.   3  I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with  great 

Isa.  4.    6  there  shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a  shadow 

6.  3  make  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  the  mi. 
25.  4  a  shadow  from  the  heat,  when  the  blast 
25.  5  (even)  the  heat  with  the  shadow  of  a  clo. 
30.    2  and  to  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt 

30.  3  the  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt  (your) 
32.  2  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary 
34.  15  lay,  and  hatch,  and  gather  under  her  sh. 
38.  8  I  will  bring  again  the  shadow  of  the  deg. 
49.  2  in  the  shadow  of  hi3  handhath  he  hid  me 
51. 16  have  covered  thee  in  the  shadow  of  mine 

Jer.  48.  45  They  that  fled  stood  under  the  shadow  of 
Lam.  4.  20  Under  his  shadow  we  shall  live  among  the 
Eze.  17.  23  in  the  shadow  of  the  branches  thereof  sh. 

31.  6  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations 
31.  12  the  people,  .are  gone  down  from  his  sha. 
31.  17  (that)  dwelt  under  his  shadow  in  the  mi. 

Hos.    4.  13  under  oaks,  .because  the  shadow  thereof 

14.    7  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall 

Jon.    4.    5  sat  under  it  in  the  shadow,  till  he  might 

4.   6  that  it  might  be  a  shadow  over  his  head 

2.-4  shadow,  Vf$  tselel. 

Job    40.  22  The  shady  tr^es  cover  him  (with)their  sh. 

Song  2.  17  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee 

4.    6  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee 

Jer.     6.    4  the  shadows  of  the  evening  are  stretched 

Z.To  {cause  a)  shadow,  bb'S  tsalal,  5. 

Eze.  31.    3  with  fair  branches,  and  with  a  shadowing 

4. A  shadow,  shadowed,  77S'  tselatso.l. 

Isa,    18.    1  Woe  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings 
5. A  skadoiu,  aTTovKicurfxa.  aposkiasina. 

Jas.    1.  17  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turn 

6.  A  shade,  shadow,  atciaskia. 

Matt.  4. 16  which  sat  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  de. 
Mark  4.  32  the  fowls.. may  lodge  under  the  shadow 
Luke  1.  79  in  darkness  and  (in)  the  shadow  of  death 
Acts  5.  15  that  at  the  least  the  shadow  of  Peter  pa. 
Col.  2.  17  Which  are  a  shadow  of  things  to  come,  but 
Heb.  8.  5  Who  serve  unto  the  example  and  shadow 
10.    1  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  good  tilings 

SHADOW,  to  (have")  — 

l.To  take  shade,  bb$  telal,  5. 

Dan.    4.  12  the  beasts  of  the  field  had  shadow  under 
2.2*0  shadow,  shade  fully,  KaraaKtafa  kataskiazo. 

Heb.   9.    5  over  it  the  cherubim  of  glory  shadowing 
SHADOW  of  death  — 
A  great  sliade  or  shadow,  mD74  tsabnaveth. 

Job  3.  5  Xet  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  st. 
10.  21  land  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow  of  dea. 
10.  22  of  the  shadow  of  death,  without  auy  ord. 

12.  22  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death 
16.  16  and  on  my  eyelids  (is)  the  shadow  of  de. 
24.  17  morning  (is)  to  them  even  as  the  sha.  of  d. 
24.  17  (they  are  in)  the  terrors  of  the  shad,  of  d. 
28.  3  the  stones  of  darkness,  and  the  shad,  of  d. 
34.  22  (There  is)  no  darkness,  nor  shadow  of  de. 
38.  17  hast  thou  seen  the  doors  of  the  shad,  of  d. 

Psa.  23.  4  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  dea. 
44.  19  and  covered  us  with  the  shadow  of  death 

107. 10  Such  as  sit  in  darkness,  and  in  the  sh.  of  d. 

107. 14  out  of  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death 
Isa.  9.  2  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  sh.  of  d. 
Jer.     2.    6  a  land  of  drought,  and  of  the  shadow  of  d. 

13.  16  he  turn  it  into  theshadow  of  death,  (and) 
Amos  5.   8  turneth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  mo. 

SHAD'-RACH,  TTV. 

The  name  which  the  chief  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  eunuchs 
gave  to  Hananiah,  one  of  the  Jewish  princes  who  were 
carried  away  to  Babylon,  and  who  was  cast  into  the 
burning  fiery  furnace.  B.C.  580. 

Dan.  1.  7  to  Hananiah,  of  S. ;  and  to  Mishael,  of  M. 
2.- 49  he  set  S.  .over  the  affairs  of  the  province 
3.  12  thou  hast  set . .  the  affairs . .  of  Babylon,  S. 
3.  13  Then  Nebuchadnezzar.. c  mmanded.  .S. 
3.  14  O  S.,  Meshach,  ^ind  Abednego,  do  not  ye 
3.  16  S. .  .and  Abednego,  answered  and  said  to 
3.  19  form  of  his  visage  was  changed  against  S. 
3.  20  he  commanded,  .mighty  men.  .to  bind  S. 


Dan.  3.  22  those  men  that  took  up  S.,  Meshach,  and 
3.  23  S. . .  fell  down  bound  into  the  midst  of  the 
3.  26  S.,  Meshach,  and  Abednego.  .come  forth 
3.  26  Then  S. . .  came  forth  of  the  midst  of  the 
3.  28  Blessed  (be)  the  God  of  S.,  Meshach,  and 
3.  29  which  speak,  .amiss  against  the  God  of  S. 
3.  30  the  king  promoted  S.,  Meshach,  and  Ab. 
SHADY  trees  — 
Shades,  D'^Ni"  tseelim. 

Job  40.  21  He  lieth  underthe  shady  trees,  in  the  co. 
40.  22  The  shady  trees  cover  him  (with)  their  sh. 
SHAFT  — 
l.A  handle,  arrow,  yn  diets. 

Isa.   49.    2  he  hid  me,  and  made  me  a  polished  shaft 
2.  The  thigh,  irv  yarek. 

Exod2j.  31  his  shaft,  and  his  branches,  his  bowls,  his 

37. 17  his  shaft,  and  his  branch,  his  bowls,  bis  kn. 

Num."  3.  4  (was  of)  beaten  gold,  unto  the  shaft  there. 

SHA'-GE,  n;v;  erring,  wandering. 

Father  of  Jonathan  the  Hararite,  one  of  David's  valiant 

men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.11.  34  Jonathan  the  sou  of  3  the  Hararite 
SHA'-HAR.      See  Aijehth  SJiahar. 

SHA-HA-RA'-IM,  DHqa?  double  daton. 

A  Benjamite  who  went  to  Moab   and   oegat  childreu 

there  of  his  two  wives  Hushim  and  Baara.  B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.    8  S.  begat,  .in  the  country  of  Moab,  after 
SHA-HA-ZI'-MAH,  nSlxne?  heights. 

A  city  in  Issachar,  between  Tabor  and  Beth-shemesh. 

Josh  19.  22  the  coast  reacheth  to  Tabor,  and  S  ,  and 
SHAKE  (off,  together),  to  — 
l.To  shake,  tremble,  v'^  gaash. 

Psa.  18.   7  the  earth  shook  and  trembled ;  the  found. 
2.  To  shake  self,  v^z  gaash,  7. 

2  Sa.  22.    8  Then  the  earth  shook  and  trembled ;  the 

22.  8  foundations  of  heaven  moved  and  shook 

Z.To  pain,  cause  p>ain,  "rn,  h^r\  dnd,  chil,  1,  5. 
Psa.  29.    8  shaketh  the  wilderness;  the  Lord  shaketh 

4.  To  shake  violently,  can  chamas. 

Job   15.  33  He  shall  shake  off  his  unripe grapeas  the 

5.  To  move,  slip,  fail,  aia  mot. 

Psa.  60.    2  heal  the  branches  thereof ;  for  it  shaketh 
G.To  cause  to  move  or  shake,  J.**J  nua,  5. 

2  Ki.  19.  21  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  hath  shaken  h. 
Job    16.   4  heap  up  words  against  you.  and  shake 
Psa.  22.    7  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head 
109.  25  (when)  they  looked  upon  me  they  shaked 
Isa.    37.  22  daughter  of  Jerusalem  hath  shaken  her  h. 

7.  To  wave,  r^a  nuph,  Sa. 

Isa,   10.  32  heshallshakehishand(against)the mount 
S.To  cause  to  wave,  *]M  nuph,  5. 

Isa.   10  15  him  that  shaketh  it?  as  if  the  rod  should  s. 

11.  15  with  his  mighty  wind  shall  he  shake  his 

13.    2  exalt  thevoiceunto  them,  shake  the  hand 

19.  16  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  .which  he  shaketh 

Zech.  2.    9  I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon  them.andth 

9.  To  shake  out  or  off,  "£3  naar. 

Neh.   5.  13  Also  I  shook  my  lap,  and  said,  So  God 
Isa.   33.    9  and  Bashan  and  Carmel  shake  off  (their 
33.  15  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  of 

10.  To  shake  ord  or  off,  tj; :  naar,  3. 

Neh.   5.  13  So  God  shake  out  every  man  from  his  ho. 

11.  To  shake  off,  nri}  nethar,  5. 

Dan.    4. 14  shake  off  his  leaves,  and  scatter  his  fruit 
V2.To  cause  to  shake,  iT\ragaz,  5. 

Job     9.   6  Which  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place 
Isa.  13.  13  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth  sh. 

23.  11  he  shook  the  kingdoms  :  the  Lord  hath 

13.  To  move,  flutter,  *]rj-j  rachaph. 

Jer.  23    9  ail  my  bones  shake  :  I  am  like  a  drunken 

14.  To  shake.,  tremble,  wyr\  raash. 

Psa.  46.  3  the  mountains  shake  with  the  swelling  th. 
68.  8  The  earth  shook,  the  heavens  also  dropp. 
72.  16  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon 
77  18  the  lightnings  lightened,  .earth,  .shook 

Isa.   24,  18  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth  do  sha. 

Eze.  26. 10  thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the 
26. 15  Shall  not  the  isles  shake  at  the  sound  of 
27.  28  The  suburbs  shall  shake  at  the  sound  of 
38.  20  all  the  men.  .shall  shake  at.  my  presence 

Joel    3- 16  and  the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  shake 

Amos. 9.    1  Smite  the  lintel.. that  the  posts  may  sha. 

Ih.To  cause  to  shake  or  trembly  ^21  raash,  5, 
Isa.    14. 16  (Is)  this  the  man.,  that  did  shake  kingdo. 
Hag.  2.    61  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth 
2.    7  I  will  shake  all  nations,  and  the  desire 
2.  21  saying,  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the 

16.  To  throw  down,  ar^  shamat. 

2  Sa.   6-    6  and  took  hold  of  it;  for  the  oxen  shook 

17.7*0  shake  away,  a-roTivao-tjoi  apotinasso. 

Luke  9.    5  shake  off  the  very  dust  from  your  feet  for 
Acts  28.    5  he  shook  off  the  beast  into  the  fire,  and 

15.  To  shake  out  or  off,  eKTivao-aco  eltinasso. 
Matt  10.  14  when  ye  depart,  .shake  off  the  dust  of  yo. 
Mark  6.  n  shake  off  the  dust  under  your  feet  for  a 
Acts  13.  51  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  aga. 

18.   6  he  shook  (his)  raiment, and  said  unto  them 


19.  To  shalce,  agitate,  toss,  aahevco  saleud. 

Matt  11.    7  What  went  ye.  .see  ?  A  reed  shaken  with 

24.  29  the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken 

Marki3.  25  powers  that  are  in  heaven  shall  be  shaken. 

Luke  6.  38  good nieasure,pressed down, andshakent. 

6. 48  could  not  shake  it;  for  it  was  founded  up. 

7.  24  What  went  ye . .  to  see  ?  A  reed  shaken  wi. 

21.  26  for  the  powers  of  heaven  shall  be  shaken 
Acts    4.  31  the  place  was  shaken  where  they  were 

16.  26  the  foundations  of  the  prison  were  shaken 
2  Th.  2.    2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or 
Heb.  12.  26  Whose  voice  then  shook  the  earth,  but 

12.  27  the  removing  of  those  things  that  are  sh. 

12.  27  those  things  which  cannot  be  shaken  may 

20.  To  shake,  tremble,  disturb,  aeicc  seio. 

Matt28.  4  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  did  shake,  and 
Heb.  12.  26  I  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also  hea. 
Rev.  6  13  a  figtree..when  she  is  shaken  of  amighty 

SHAKE,  tj  make  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  slide,  shake,  ij;2  maad,  5. 

Psa.  69.  23  and  make  their  loins  continually  to  shake 
2.  To  cause  to  fear  or  tremble,  "irs  padiad,  5. 

Job  4.  14  trembling,  which  made  all  my  bones  to  sh . 
Z.To  cause  to  shake  or  tremble,  tfjn  raash,  5. 

Eze.  31:  16 1  made  the  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound 
SHAKE  self,  (terribly,  to  pieces),  to  — 
1.2*0  shake  self,  become  shaken,  -iyj  naar,  2. 

Judgi6.  20  and  said,  I  will  go  out.. andshake myself 

2.To  shake  self,  "ijn  naar,  7. 

Isa.  52.  2  Shake  thyself  from  the  dust ;  arise,  (and) 
Z.To  fear,  make  afraid,  terrify,  y~vjT  arats. 

Isa.     2.  19,  21  when  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the 

4.  To  scatter,  break  in  pieces,  |"3  puts,  3a. 

Job   16.  12  shaken  me  to  pieces,  and  set  me  up  forhis 

SHAKEN  (out,  terribly'),  to  be  — 

1.  To  shake  self  be  shaken,  c;j,;a  gaash,  7. 

Psa.  18.    7  the  hillsmoved  and  wereshaken,  because 

2.  To  be  driven  away,  ",x  nadajjh,  2. 

Lev.  26.  36  the  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase  th. 

3.  To  move,  "M  nud. 

1  Ki.14. 15  shall  smite  Israel,  as  a  reed  is  shaken  in 

4.  To  be  moved,  shaken,  y*3  nua. 

Nah.  3.  12  if  they  be  shaken,  they  shall  even  fall  into 
5.7*0  shake  oxd  or  off,  1Q2  naar. 

Neh.  5.  13  even  thus  he  be  shaken  out,  and  emptied 
Q.To  be  shaken  out  or  off,  "iya  naar,  2. 

Job  38.  13  that  the  wicked  might  be  shaken  out  of 

7.  To  be  caused  to  tremble,  ?jri  raal,  6. 

Nah.   2.    3  and  the  fir  trees  shall  be  terribly  shaken 
SHAKING  — 
l.A  moving,  shaking,  "TOO  manod. 

Psa.  44.  14  a  shaking  of  the  head  among  the  people 

2. .4  compassing,  r$i  noqeph. 

Isa.   17.    6  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive  tree,  two  (or) 
24.  13  (there  shall  be)  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive 

3. A  shaking,  trembling,  ViTl  raash. 

Job  41.  29  be  laugbeth  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear 
Eze.  37.    7  there  was  a  noise,  and  behold  a  shaking 
38.  19  there  shall  be  a  great  shaking  in  the  land. 

4.  Waving,  shaking,  nswa  tenuphah. 

Isa.  19. 16  because  of  the  shaking  of  the  hand  of  the 
30.  32  in  battles  of  shaking  will  he  fight  with  it 

SHA'-LEM,  nhv  peaxe,  summit. 

A  city  in  Ephraim   near  Shechem;  now  Salim,  E.  of 

Nablus. 

Gen.  33.  18  Jacob  came  to  3.  a  city  of  Shechem,  wh. 
SHA'-LIH,  whv&jackal. 
A  district  in  Dan,  in  the  way  from  Philistia  to  Ophrah. 

1  Sa.   9.    4  then  they  passed  through  the  land  of  S. 

SHA-LI'-SHA,  n$b$  third  ground. 

1   A  district  in  Ephraim,  containing  Baal-shalishah,  not 

far  from  Gilgal. 

1  Sa.    9.   4  And  he.  .passed  through  the  land  of  S. 

2.  Probably  the  same  as  Beth-Shalisha,  fifteen  Ptoman 
miles  N.  of  Diospolis  in  Lydda. 

2  Ki.  4.42  there  came  a  man  from  Baal-S.,  and  broug;. 
SHALL  (be  or  have,  that,  because,  who,  which) — 

1.  There  is,  there  are,  &l  yesh. 

2  C'h.15.  7  Be  ye  strong.. for  your  work  shall  be  rew. 
16.    9  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  have  wars 

Frov24.  14  there  shall  be  a  reward,  and  thy  expect. 

Jer.  2^.  26  Howlongshall(this)b"e  in  theheartof  tha 
31!  6  there  shall  be  a  day,  (that) the  watchmen 
31"  16  thy  work  shall  be  rewarded,  saith  the  L. 

2. To  be  about  to,  ^eAAw  mello. 

Matt  16  27  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of 
17  12  Likewise  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  suffer 
17  2'  The  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  into  the 
,0  22  to  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of 
0,     6  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars 

MarkW-    4  the  sign  when  all  these  things  shall  be 

Luke  9.  44  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  into  the 
21.  7  sign . .  when  these  things  shall  come  to  pass 
21.  36  all  these  things  that  shall  come  to  pass 

Acts  23;  3  God  shall  smite  thee,  (thou)  whited  wall 
24.  15  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead 


SHALLECHETH 


872 


SHAMMAH 


Acts  26.    2  I  shall  answer  for  myself  this  day  hefore 

Rom.  4  24  for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed 

8.  13  For  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die 

8.  18  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in 

2  Ti.    4.    1  who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 

Heb.   1.  14  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation 

10.  27  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour  the 

Jas.     2.  12  as  they  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law  of 

1  Pe.  5.    1  a  partaker  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  rev. 

Rev.    1.  19  and  the  things  which  shall  be  hereafter 

2. 10  thou  shalt  suffer:  behold,  the  devil  shall 

3.  10  the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall  come 

17.    8  shall  ascend  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and 

3. Kind,  gracious,  hallowed,  <l<rtos  kosios. 

Rev.  16.  5  OLord,  which  art,  and  wast,  and  [shalt  be] 

SHAL  LE'-CHETH,  n^p  casting  out. 
A  gate  of  the  first  temple. 

1  Ch.26.  16  westward,  with  the  gate  S.,  by  the  cause. 

SHAL'-LTJM,  c>p,  why  recompenser. 

1.  A  son  of  Jabesh  who  slew  Zechariah  son  of  Jeroboam 
II.,  and  was  himself  slain  by  Menaheni  son  of  Gadi, 
after  reigning  one  month.     B.C.  772. 

2  KL  15.  10  S.  the  son  of  Jabesh  conspired  against  him 

15.  13  S.  the  son  of  Jabesh  began  to  reign  in  the 
15. 14  Menahem.  .smote  S.  the  son  of  Jabesh  in 
15.  J5  And therestoftheactsof  S...  (are)  written 

2.  The  husband  of  Huldah  the  prophetess  in  the  days  of 
Josiah.    B.C.  624. 

2  Ki.22.  14  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of  S.  the 
2  Ch.34.  22  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of  S.  the 

3.  Son  of  Sisamai  and  father  of  Jakamiah,  a  descendant 
of  Jerahmeel  grandson  of  Pharez.  B.C.  1280. 

1  Ch.  2.  40  Eleasah  begat  Sisamai.  .Sisamai  begat  S. 
2.  41  S.  begat  Jekaniiah,  and  Jekamiah  begat 

4.  Fourth  son  of  king  Josiah.  B.C.  610. 

1  Ch.  3.  15  the  sons  of  Josiah  (were).  .Zedekiah.  .S. 
Jer.  22.  11  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  touching  S.  the 

5.  Grandson  of  Simeon  second  son  of  Jacob.    B.C.  1200. 

1  Ch.  4.  25  S.  his  son,  Mibsamhisson,  Mishmahisson 

6.  Father  of  Hilkiah  the  priest  who  found  the  book  of 
the  law  in  the  temple  in  the  days  of  king  Josiah.  B.C. 
700. 

1  Ch.  6.  12  Ahitub  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  begat  S. 

6.  13  S.  begat  Hilkiah,  and  Hilkiah  begat  Azar. 
Ezra    7.    2  The  son  of  S.,  the  son  of  Zadok,  the  son 

7.  Fourth  son  of  Naphtali  the  second  son  of  Eilhah, 
Rachel's  handmaid;  called  Shillem  in  Gen.  46.  24.  B.C 
1690. 

1  Ch.  7.  13  Guni,  and  Gezer,  and  S-,  the  sons  of  Bil. 

8.  A  Levite,  a  gate  keeper  of  the  tabernacle.    B.C.  536. 

1  Ch.  9  17  the  porters  (were)  S.,  and  Akkub,  and 

9.  17  Ahiham,  and  their  brethren:  S.  (was)the 
9.  19  S.  the  son  of  Kore,  the  son  of  Ebiasaph 
9.  31  Mattithiah . .  the  first  born  of  S.  the  Kor. 
Ezra   2.  42  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Ater 
Keh.  7.  45  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Ater 

9.  Father  of  Jehizkiah  who  opposed  the  reducing  of  the 
Jewish  captives  to  slaves.     B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.28.  12  Jehizkiah  the  son  of  S  ,  and  Amasa  the 

10.  A  gatekeeper  of  the  sanctuary  that  had  taken  a 
strange  wife.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  24  of  the  porters  ;  S.,  and  Telem,  aud  Uri 

11.  One  of  the  sons  of  Bani  who  had  also  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  42  S.,  Amariah,  (and)  Joseph 

12.  A  son  of  Halohesh,  ruler  of  the  half  of  Jerusalem, 
who  with  his  daughters  helped  to  repair  the  wall.  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.  3.  12  next  unto  him  repaired  S.  the  son  of 

13.  Son  of  Col-Hozeh,  ruler  of  part  of  Mizpah,  who  re- 
paired the  gate  of  the  fountain.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.  15  the  gate  of  the  fountain  repaired  S.  the 

14.  Father  of  Hanameel  uncle  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet. 
B.C.  630. 

Jer.  32.    7  Hanameel  the  son  of  S. .  .shall  come  unto 

15.  Father  of  Maaseiah,  an  officer  of  the  temple  in  the 
days  of  Jehoiakim  son  of  Josiah.    B.C.  607. 

Jer.   35.    4  (was)abovethe  chamber  of.  .the  son  ofS. 

SHAX'-MAI,  ^ta»,  v\p,  *£h'P  Jah  is  recompenser. 

One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  with 

Zerubbabel  from  exile.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  46  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Hanan 
Neh.    7.  48  children  of  Hagaba,  the  children  of  S. 

SHAL'-MAN,  }d)p. 

An  Assyrian  king  who  laid  waste  Beth-Arbel,  i.e., 
^ApS^A-a,  near  Gaugamela;  apparently  a  predecessor 
of  J'nl,  and  not  the  same  as  the  following. 

Hos.  10.  14  as  S.  spoiled  Beth-arbel  in  the  day  of  ba. 

SEAL-MAN-E'-SER,  -idx;D^c\ 

Successor  of  Tiglath-pileser,  and  who  invaded  Israel, 

carrying  off  Hoshea  aud  the  ten  tribes  to  Assyria.  B.C. 

730-716. 

2  Hi.17.    3  Against  him  came  up  S.  king  of  Assyria 
28.    9  S.  king  of  Assyria  came  up  against  Sam, 

6HA'-UA,  pD?  hearer. 

One  of  David's  valiantmen,  son  of  Hotham the  Arojerite. 

U.C.  1048. 

1  Ch  1 1.  44  S.  and  Jehiel  the  sons  of  Hothanthe  Ar. 


SHAMBLES  — 

Marketplace,  {Lot.  maccltum),  /iajceAAoy  makellon. 

1  Co.  10.  25  Whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  (th.) 
SHAME,  shameful  thing  — 

1.  Jo  be  ashamed,  viz  bush. 

Jer.  48.  39  how  hath  Moab  turned  the  back  with  sh. 

2. Shame,  n^ia  bushah. 

Psa.  89.  45  thou  hast  covered  him  with  shame.  Selah 
Eze.  7.  18  shame  (shall  be)  upon  all  faces,  and  bald. 
Obad.  10  shame  shall  cover  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be 
Mic.    7.  10  shame  shall  cover  her  which  said  unto  me 

3. Shame,  nipz  boshnah. 

Hos.  10.    6  Ephraim  shall  receive  shame,  and  Israel 

i. Shame,  shameful  thing,  t\Pi  bosheth. 

2  Ch.  1,2.  21  he  returned  with  shame  of  face  to  his  own 
Job  8.  22  They,  .shall  be  clothed  with  shame;  and 
Psa.  35.  26  let  them  be  clothed  with  shame  and  dish. 

40.  15  for  a  reward  of  their  shame  that  say  unto 
44.  15  and  the  shame  of  my  face  hath  covered 

69.  19  Thou  hast  known.,  my  shame,  and  my  dis. 

70.  3  turned  back  for  a  reward  of  their  shame 
132. 18  His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame  :  but 

Isa.    30.    3  the  strength  of  Pharaoh  be  your  shame 

30.    5  nor  be  an  help  nor  profit,  but  a  shame,  and 

54.    4  thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  youth 

61.    7  For  your  shame  (ye  shall  have)  double,  and 

Jer.     3.  24  shame  hath  devoured  the  labour  of  our  f. 

3.  25  We  lie  down  in  our  shame,  and  our  conf. 

11.  13  have  ye  setup  altars  to  (that)  shameful  th. 

20.  18  my  days  should  be  consumed  with  shame 

Hos.   9.  10  and  separated  themselves  unto  (that)  sh. 

Mic.    1. 11  Pass  ye  away,  .having  thy  shame  naked 

Hab.  2.  10  Thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house 

Zeph.  3.    5  failethnot;  but  the  unjust  knoweth nosh. 

5.  Reproach,  n$in  cherpah. 

2  Sa.  13.  13  And  I,  whither  shall  I  cause  my  shame  to 
Isa.  47.  3  thy  shame  shall  be  seen ;  I  will  take  ven. 
Dan.  1 2.   2  some  to  shame  (and)  everlasting  contempt 

6. Blushing,  shame,  n^S?  kelimmah. 

Psa.    4.    2  how  long  (will  ye  turn)  my  glory  unto  sh.? 

69.    7  I  have  borne  reproach  :  shame  hath  cov. 

109.  29  Let  mine  adversaries  be  clothed  with  sh. 

ProviS.  13  He  that  ansvvereth.  .it  (is)  folly  and  shame 

Isa.  50.    6  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting 

Jer.  51.  51  shame  hath  covered  our  faces;  for  stran. 

Eze.  16.  52  bear  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins  that  th. 

16.  52  be  thou  confounded  also,  and  bear  thy  s. 

16.  54  That  thou  mayest  bear  thine  own  shame 

16.  63  never  open  thy  mouth . .  because  of  thy  s. 

32.  24,  25  yet  have  they  borne  their  shame  with 

32.  30  bear  their  shame  with  them  that  go  down 

34.  29  neither  bearthe  shame  of  the  heathen  any 

36.    6  ye  have  borne  the  shame  of  the  heathen 

36.    7  the  heathen . .  they  shall  bear  their  shame 

36.  15  to  hear  in  thee  the  shame  of  the  heathen 

39.  26  After  that  they  have  borne  their  shame 

44.  13  but  they  shall  bear  their  shame,  and  th. 

Mic.    2.   6  not  prophesy . .  they  shall  not  take  shame 

7. Blushing,  shame,  me^s  kelimmvth. 

Jer.  23.  40  a  perpetual  shame,  which  shall  not  be  fo. 
8.Xakedness,  fin",  ervah. 

Isa.  20.  4  naked  and  barefoot,  .to  the  shame  of  Eg. 
9. Lightness,  shame,  confusion,  f^qalon. 

Psa.  83.  16  Fill  their  faces  with  shame;  that  they  m. 

Fro  v.  3.  35  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools 
9.    7  He  that  reproveth  a  scorner  getteth.  .sh. 

11.  2  (When)  pridecometh,  then cometh shame 

12.  16  known :  but  a  prudent  (man)  covereth  sh. 
13. 18  shame  (shall  be)  to  him  that  refuseth  in. 

Isa.   22.  iS  the  chariots  of  thy  glory  (shall  be)  the  sh. 
Jer.   13.  26  discover  thy  skirts,  .that  thy  shame  may 
46.  12  The  nations  have  heard  of  thy  shame,  anil 
Hos.    4.   7  will  I  change  their  glory  into  shame 

4. 18  her  rulers  (with)  shame  do  love,  Give  ye 
Nah.  3.  5  and  I  will  show.. the kingdomsthy  shame 
Hab.    2. 16  Thou  art  filled  with  shame  for  glory:  th*. 

1 0. Contempt,  detestation,  nygrtP  shimtsah. 

Exod32.  as  had  made  them  naked  unto  (their)  shame 
11. Base  thing,  alaxpov  aisehron. 

1  Co.  11.    6  if  it  be  a  shame  for  a  woman  to  be  shoni 

14.  35  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  thech. 
Eph.    5.  12  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those  thin. 

12.  Baseness,  dishonour,  atax^V  aischune. 
I.ukt'14.  9  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest 
Phil.  3.  19  (whose)  glory  (is)  in  their  shame,  who  mi. 
Ueb  12.  2  endured  the  cross,  despisingthe  shame,  and 
Jude  13  Raging  waves,  .foaming  out  their  own  sh. 
Rev.  3.  18  (that)  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not 

13.  Unseemliness^  indecene}/,  a.ax'r\P-0<Jvvf\  aschemo. 
Rev.  16.  15  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his  shame 

1 i. Dishonour,  hrtfxia  atimia. 

1  Co.  11.  14  if  a  man  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame  unto 
15. .1  turning  in,  shrtme,  ivrpowr]  cntrope. 

1  Co.   6.    5  I  speak  to  your  shame.  Is  it  so,  that  there 

15.  34  some  have  not.  .1  speak  (this)  to  your  sh. 

SHAME,  to  bring,  cause,  do,  come,  put  to  — 
\,To  pet  to  slot  me,  make  shame,  WO  bosh,  5. 

1'sa.  14.    6  Ye  have  shamed  the  counsel  of  the  poor 
44.    7  and  hast  put  them  to  shame  that  hated  us 
53.    5  thou  hast  put  (them)  to  shame,  because 
1:9.  31  testimonies:  0  LOBD,  put  me  not  to  sha. 


Prov  10.  5  he  that  slecpeth  in  harvest,  .causeth  sha 
14-  35  wrath  is  (against)him  that  causeth  shame 
17.  2  have  rule  over  a  son  that  causeth  shame 
19.  26  (is)  a  son  that  causeth  shame,  and  bringe. 
29.  15  a  child  left,  .bringeth  his  mother  to  sha. 
2.  Jo put  to  shame,  "icn  chasad,  3. 

Prov.25.  10  Lest  he  that  heareth  (it)  put  thee  to  sha. 
3. To  make  or  become  confounded,  *i2n  chapiter,  5. 

Provi3.    5  but  a  wicked  (man),  .cometh  to  shame 

Isa.  54.   4  thou  shalt  not  be  put  to  shame  :  for  thou 

4.  To  dry  up,  shame,  Ptt  yabash,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.    5  Thou  hast  shamed  this  day  the  faces  of 

5.  To  cause  to  blush,  put  to  shame,  chs  kalam,  5. 

1  Sa.  20.  34  because  his  father  had  done  him  shame 
Judgi8.    7  that  might  put  (them)  to  shame  in  (any) 
Psa.  44.    9  But  thou  hast  cast  off,  and  put  us  to  sha. 
Prov  25.    8  when  thy  neighbour  hath  put  thee  to  sh. 
28.    7  a  companion  of  riotous  (men)  shameth  his 

6.  Jo  turn  inward,  put  to  shame,  ivrptirv  entrepo. 

1  Co.  4. 14  I  write  notthesethiugsto  shame  you,  but 

7.  To  shame,  make  ashamed,  Karata-xvvto  kataisch. 

1  Co.  1 1.  22  despis?  ye  the  church  of  God,  and  shame 
SHAME,  to  be  brought  unto  or  put  to  — 
1. Shame,  shameful  thing,  nspa  bosheth. 

Zeph  3.  19  fame,  .where  they  have  been  put  to  sha. 

2.  To  be  ashamed,  confounded,  i?n  chapher. 

Psa.  71.  24  they  are  brought  unto  shame,  that  seek 
83.  17  yea.  let  them  be  put  to  shame,  and  perish 

3.  To  make  or  become  confounded,  "i?rt  chapher,  5. 
Isa.   54.   4  thou  shalt  not  be  put  to  shame :  for  thou  sh. 

4.  Jo  blush,  be  ashamed,  tkzkadam,  2. 

Psa.  35.    4  Let  them  be  confounded  and  put  to  shame 
40.  14  let  them  be.  .put  to  shame  that  wish  me 
SHAME,  to  put  to  an  open  — 
To  make  a  show  of  openly,  TrapadtEtytxaTifa  parad. 

Heb.   6.    6  they  crucify . .  and  put . .  to  an  open  shame 
SHAMED,  shameful  spewing  — 
1.  Contempt,  despised  thing,  113  buz. 

Gen.  38.  23  Let  her  take  (it)  to  her,  lest  we  be  shamed 
2. Ignominy,  shame,  J'^'P  qiqalon. 

Hab.   2.  16  and  shameful  spewing  (shall  be)onthygl. 
SHA'-MED,  ~\r;p\  (~\?p  watcher,)  destroyer. 
Third  son  of  Elpaal.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8. 12  S.,  who  built  Ono  and  Lod,  with  the  to. 
SHAMEFACEDNESS  — 
Shamefaccdness,  modesty,  aiSws  aidos. 

1  Ti.  2.  9  in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefacedness 
SHAMEFULLY,  to  do,  entreat,  handle  — 

1.  Jo  do  or  act  shamefully,  B>a;  yabash,  5. 

Hos. 2.    5  she  that  conceived,  .hathdoneshamefully 

2.  To  dishonour,  disgrace,  ari^d^w  atimazo. 

Luke2o.  11  entreated  (liini)  shamefully,  and  sent  (him) 

3.  Jo  dishonour,  disgrace.  arty.aos  atimao. 

■  Marki2.   4  and  [sent (him) away  shamefullv  handled] 
SHAMELESSLY  — 
To  be  uncovered,  revealed,  rni  galah,  2. 

2  Sa.    6.  20  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  shamelessly  un. 

SHA'-MER,  ia»  2)resen>er- 

1.  Son  of  Mahli  grandson  of  Merari.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  6.  46  son  of  Anizi,  the  son  of  Bani,  the  sonofS. 

2.  Son  of  Heber,  son  of  Beriah,  son  of  Asher;  in  1  Ch. 
7.  32  it  is  spelt  Shomer.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  34  the  sons  of  S.;  Ahi,  and  Rohgah,  Jehubb. 

SHAM'-GAR,  13l?9  cupbearer,  fleer. 
The  son  of  Anath,  and  third  judge  of  Israel  after  the 
death  of  Joshua.     He  delivered  Israel  from  the  Philis- 
tines.    B.C.  1326. 

Judg.  3.  31  after  him  was  S.  the  son  of  Anath,  which 
5.    6  In  the  days  of  S.  the  son  of  Anath,  in  the 
SHAM'-HTJTH,  fin  Dp  fame,  renown. 
An  Izrahite,  a  captain  of  David's  army,  who  served  in 
the  fifth  month.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.27.  8  fifth  captain  for  the  fifth  month  (was)S. 
SHA'-MIR,  Yp»  thorn  hedge,  apjjrov-sd. 

1.  A  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah,  near  Jattir. 

Josh  15.  48  in  the  mountains,  S.,  aud  Jattir,  and  S. 

2.  A  city  in  Mount  Ephraim. 

Judgio.    1  and  he  dwelt  in  S.  in  mount  Ephraim 
10.    2  judged,  .and  died,  and  was  buried  in  S. 

3.  A  son  of  Micah,  a  Levite  and  descendant  of  Uzzici. 
B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  24  Michah  :  of  the  sons  of  Michah  ;  S. 
SHAM'-MA,  \x&s  fame,  renown. 
A  son  of  Zophah  an  Asherite.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  7.  3"  Bezer,  and  Shod,  and  S.,  and  Shilshah. 
SHAM'  MAH.  SHIM'-MA,  ru*&,  ti^v  fame,  renown. 

1.  A  son  of  Reuel  sou  of  Esau.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.   36.  1^  Nahath,  and  Zerah,  S.,  and  Mizzah :  th. 

36. 17  duke  Nahath,  duke  Zerah,  duke  S.,  duke 

1  Ch.  1.  37  The  sousof  Reuel;  Nahath, Zerah, S.,  and 

2.  Third  son  of  Jesse  father  of  David.     B.C.  1060. 

1  Sa,  16.    9  Then  Jesse  snadeS.  topassby.  Andhesaid 

17.  13  the  names,  .(were).  .Abiuadab  ;  and..S. 
1  i'b.  c.  1  j  Jesse  begat.  .Eliab.aml  Abinadab..and  S. 


SHAMMAI 


873 


SHE 


3.  Son  of  Agee  the  Hararite.  and  one  of  David  s  valiant 
men.     B.C.  1048. 

-  Sa  2-  11  after  him  (was)  S.  the  son  of  Agee  the  H. 

4.  Another  of  the  same  also  a  Hararite;  in  1  Ch.  .1.  27  it 
is  Shammoth.  . .       .,  ,  <-, „ 

-  Sa  2^  33  S.  the  Hararite,  Ahiam  the  son  of  Sharar 
5    knottier  of  the  same,  a  Harodite.    B.C.  104S. 

-  Sa.  23.  25  S.  the  Harodite,  Elika  the  Harodite 
siAM'-MAl,  >s»  celebrated. 
,.  A  son  of  Onan  sou  of  Jerahmeel  grandson  of  Judah. 

B.C.  1440. 

1  Ch.  2.  28  And  the  sons  of  Onam  were  S.,  and  Jada 
2.  28  And  the  sous  of  S. ;  Nadab,  and  Abishur 
2.  32  And  the  sous  of  Jada  the  brother  of  S. 
2.  Father  of  Maon.  and  son  of  Rekem  a  descendant  of 
Caleb  son  of  Hezron.     B.C.  1440. 

1  Ch.  2  4iShemabegatflaham..andEekembegatS. 

2'.  45  the  sou  of  S.  (was)  Maon :  auclMamHwas) 

3.A  son  or  grandson  of  Ezra,  of  the  family  of  Caleb  son 

of  Jephunneh.    B.C.  1400.,  ,,,,   ...    , 

1  Ch.  4.  17  she  bare  Miriam,  and  S..  and  Ishbah  the  f 

SEAM'-MOTH,  n'l^cJ  fame,  renown. 

A  Harorite,  one  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch  11.  27  S.  the  Harorite,  Helez  the  Pelonite 
SHAM-MU'-A,  SHAM-MTJ'-AH,  jptsa  famous. 
1   A  Reubeuite,  son  of  Zaccur,  and  sent  by  Mosesto  spy 
out  the  land.    B.C.  1491. 

Numi3.  4  of  the  tribe  of  Eeuben,  S.  the  son  of  Zac. 
2.  A  son  of  David,  born  to  him  after  he  became  kiug ;  in 
1  Ch.  3.  5  he  is  called  Shimei.     B.C.  1020. 

2  Sa    5  14  S.,  and  Shobab,  aud  Nathan,  and  Solom. 
1  Ch.14.    4  these  (are)  the  names.  .S  ,  and  Shobab 

3  Grandson  of  Juduthun,  and  father  of  Abda  or  Obadiah, 
a  Levite  appointed  to  lead  the  worship  in  the  temple 
after  the  exile.    In  1  Ch.  9.  16  it  is  Shemaiah.    B  C.  470 

Neb.  11. 17  Abda  the  son  of  S.,  the  son  of  Galal.  the 

4  A  priest  in  the  family  of  Bilgah  in  the  days  of  Nehe- 
miah.    B.C.  445. 

Neb.  12  iS  Of  Bilgah,  S. ;  of  Shemaiah,  Jehonathan 

SHAM-SHE'-RAI,  n?D2>  heroic. 

A  son  of  Jeroham,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  26  And  S.,  and  Shehariah,  and  Athaliah 

SHAPE  — 

1.  Appearance,  aspect,  eI8os  eidos. 

Luke  3  22  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  sh. 

John  5  37  neither  heard  his  voice,  .nor  seen  his  sh. 
2. Likeness,  resemblance,  6/xoiwp.a.  homoioma. 

Rev.    9.   7  the  shapes  of  the  locusts  (were)  like  unto 

SHAPEN,  to  be  — 

To  be  formed,  brought  forth,  rn,  b\r\  chid,  chil,  4. 
Psa.  51.    5  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity;  and  in  sin  did 

SHA'-PHAM,  CD?  youthful,  vigorous. 
A  chief  of  Gad,  second  in  rank.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5.  12  Joel  the  chief,  and  S.  the  next,  and  Jaau. 
SHA'-PHAN,  }?y  prudent,  sly. 
1.  A  scribe,  son  ol  Azaliah,  lather  of  Gemariah,  who  lived 
in  the  days  of  king  Josiah.    B.C.  640. 

2  Ki  22.   3  the  king  sent  S.  the  son  of  Azaliah,  the  son 

22     8  Hilkiah  the  high  priest  said  unto  S.  the  s. 
22    8  Hilkiah  gave  the  book  to  S. ,  and  he  read  it 
22    o  S  the  scribe  came  to  the  king,  and  brou. 
22. 10  S.  the  scribe  showed  the  king,  saying,  Hi. 
22.  10  And  S.  read  it  before  the  king 
2-j  12  the  king  commanded.  .S.  the  scribe,  aud 
22.  14  S.,  and  Asahiah,  went  unto  Huldah  the 
2  Ch  34    8  he  sent  S.  the  son  of  Azaliah,  and  Haas. 
34  15  Hilkiah  answered  and  said  to  S.  the  scribe 
34.  1?  And  Hilkiah  delivered  the  book  to  S. 
34. 16  S.  carried  the  book  to  the  king,  and  bro 
34. 18  S.  the  scribe  told  the  king,  saying,  Hilkiah 
34. 18  And  S.  read  it  before  the  king 
34.  20  the  king  commanded.  .S.  the  scribes  and 
Jer    36  10  in  the  chamber  of  Gemariah  the  son  of  S. 
36  11  Alichaiah.  .son  of  Gemariah,  the  son  of  S. 
36  12  Gemariah  the  son  of  S. . .  and  all  the  pri. 
2.  Father  of  Ahikam  a  chief  officer  in  the  court  of 
Josiah.    B.C.  640. 

2  Ki.  -2.  12  king  commanded . .  Ahikam  the  son  of  S. 
25.  22  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the  son  of  S. 
2  Ch  34  20  king  commanded.  .Ahikam  the  son  of  S. 
Jer  26.24  the  hand  of  Ahikam  the  son  of  S.  was  with 
xo  14  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam  the  son  of  S 
40.  5, 9, 1 1  Gedaliah . .  son  of  Ahikam  the  sonof  S 
41'  2  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the  son  of  S. 
43.    6  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the  son  of  S. 

3  Father  of  Elasah  by  w-hoiu  Jeremiah  the  prophet  sent 
a  letter  to  the  exiles  in  Babylon.    B.C.  640. 

Jer.  29.  3  By  the  hand  of  Elasah  the  son  of  S.,  and 
4.  Father  of  Jaazaniah  whom  Ezekiel  saw  iu  avision  en- 
ticing people  to  idolatry.    B  c.  595. 

Eze.  8. 11  in  the  midst  o£  them  stood .  .the  son  of  S. 
SHA'-PHAT,  v?y  judge. 

l.ASimeonite.'son  of  Hori,  and  sent  by  Moses  to  spy 
the  land.   B.C.  1492. 

SU11113.  5  Of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  S.  the  sonof  Hon 
2.  Father  of  Elisha  the  prophet.    B.C.  930. 

1  Ki.  10.  16  Elisha  the  son  of  S.,  of  Abel-meholah.  sh 
19.  19  he.. found  Elisha  the  sonof  S.,  who  (was) 
'   110 


-  Ki.   3.  11  Here  (is)  Elisha  the  son  of  S.,  whichpoured 
6.  31  if  the  head  of  Elisha  the  son  of  S.  shall  st. 

3.  A  grandson  of  Shechaniah,  of  the  family  of  David.  B.C. 
450. 

1  Ch.  3.  22  and  Igeal,  and  Baviah,  and  Neanah,  and  S 

4.  A  chief  Gadite,  in  Bashan.    B.C.  1070. 
■     1  Ch.  5.  12  Joel  the  chief . .  Jaania,  and  S.  in  Bashan 

5.  Son  of  Adlai,  aud  over  David's  herds  in  the  valley. 

iCh.27.  29  over  the  herds.,  in  the  valleys..  S.  the  son 

SHA'-PHER,  so,  ia»"  fair. 

A  mountain  in  the  wilderness,  the  next  station  of  Israel 
after  Kehelathau  and  before  Haradah. 

Nmn33.  23  And  they  went,  .and  pitched  in  mount  S. 
33.  24  they  removed  from  niouut  S. ,  and  encam. 
SHA'-RAI,  '-iy,  n-i  Jah  is  deliverer. 
Cue  of  the  soil's  of  Bani  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 
B  c.  445. 

Ezra  10.  40  Machuadebai,  Shashai,  S. 

SHA'-RAR,  Ttf  strong. 

A  Hararite,  son  of  Ahiam .  and  one  of  David's  valiant  men. 

B.C.    1048. 

2  Sa.  23. 33  Shammah  the  Hararite,  Ahiam  the.  .of  S. 
SHARE  — 
Mattock,  sickle,  ntntp  macharesheth. 

1  Sa.  13.  20  to  sharpen  every  man  his  share,  and  his 
SHAR-E'-ZER,  SHER-E'-ZER,  T^<TB>. 
1   A  son  of  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria,  who  with  his 
brother  Adrammelech  slew  their  father  m  the  temple 
of  Nisroch  at  Nineveh,  and  escaped  into  the  land  ot 
Ararat.    B.C.  710. 

2  Ki  iq  37  Adrammelech  and  S.  his  sons  smote  him 
Isa. '  37.  38  Adrammelech  and  S.  his  sons  smote  him 

•>  One  who  was  sent  to  consult  the  priests  aud  prophets 
in  the  temple  as  to  a  day  of  humiliation.    B.C.  519. 

Zech.  7.    2  they  had  sent  unto  the  house  of  God  S. 
SHA'-RON,  I'nzi  a  plain. 

1  The  W.  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  extending  from 
Joppa  to  Ca-sarea,  noted  for  its  rich  pastures  and  vege- 
tation. In  the  midst  of  the  plain  between  the  model  n 
Lydda  and  Arsuf  lay  the  city  Sharon  (now  a  hamlet), 
supposed  to  be  that  meant  in  Josh.  12.  18. 

Josh.12.  iS  The  king  of  Aphek,  one  ;  the  king  of  L  S 

1  Ch  27.  29  over  the  herds  that  fed  m  S.  (was)  Shitrai 

Song  2.   1 1  (am)  the  rose  of  S.,  (and)  the  lily  of  the 

Isa.   33.   9  S.  is  like  a  wilderness  ;  and  Bashan  and 

«    ~  the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  S. ;  they  shall 

65.  10  S.  shall  be  a  fold  of  flocks,  and  the  valley 

2.  A  plain  or  city  in  the  E.  of  Jordan,  in  Gad. 

1  Ch.  5. 16  they  dwelt,  .in  all  the  suburbs  of  S.,npon 

SHARONTTE,  'j'n^. 

A  patronymic  of  Shitrai  who  was  over  the  king  s  herds 

in  Sharon.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  29  And  over  the  herds,  .(was)  Shitrai  the  S. 

SHARP  (stone),   sharper — 
1. Sharp,  -in  chad. 

Psa  57.    4  and  arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sw. 
Prov  5     4  her  end  is.. sharp  as  a  two  edged  sword 
Isa    49    2  he  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  sw. 
Eze.  5!   1  take  thee  a  sharp  knife,  take  thee  a  barb. 
Z.Sharp  things,  nnsin  chaddudim. 

Job  41.  30  Sharp  stones  (are)  under  him :  he  spread. 
3. .4  sharp  pointed  thing,  pin  charuls. 

Job  41.  3-5  he  spreadeth  sharp  pointed  things  upon 
Isa.   41.  15  I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing 
4.  To  be  sharpened,  c'bS  latash,  4. 

Psa.  52.   2  like  a  sharp  razor,  working  deceitfully 
b.A  rock,  sharpness,  "lis  tsur. 

Josh   3    -  Make  thee  sharp  knives,  and  circumcise 
'  5.   3  made  him  sharp  knives,  and  circumcised 

6. Flint,  ii  tsor. 

Exod.  4.  25  Then  Zipporah  took  a  sharp  stone,  and 

7.A  tooth,  W  shen. 

1  Sa.  14.   4  sharp  rock  on  the  one  side,  and  a  sharp 
8.T0  sharpen,  be  sharp,  \li  shanan. 

Psa    4=;.   5  Thine  arrows  (are)  sharp  iu  the  heart  of 
i~o     4  Sharp  arrows  of  the  mighty,  with  coals  of 
Prov  23  18  a  maul,  and  a  sword,  and  a  sharp  arrow 
Isa.     5  28  Whose  arrows  (are)  sharp,  and  all  their 
O.Sharp,  swift,  acute,  o£u?  oxus. 

Rev    1. 16  out  of  his  mouth  went  a  sharp  two  edged 

2  12  saith  he  which  hath  the  sharp  sword  with 

14  14  golden  crown,  and  in  his  hand  a  sharp  si. 

14.  17  another  angel  came  out.  .having  a  sharp 

14. 18  loud  cry  to  him  that  had  the  sharp  sickle 

14.18  Thrust  in  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather  the 

19. 15  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that 

10.  More  cutting,  sharper,  acute,  ro/uZrepos  tomuter. 

Heb.   4. 12  sharper  than  any  two  edged  sword,  pier. 

SHARPEN,  to  — 

1.  To  make  sharp,  acute,  light,  Tin  chadad. 
Prov  27. 17  Iron  sharpeueth  iron ;  so  a  man .  .the  co. 

2.  To  make  sharp,  "nn  chadad,  5. 
Prov  27.  17  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of 

3.  To  sharpen,  instruct,  tro!?  latash. 
1  Sa  13.  20  to  sharpen  every  man  his  share,  and  his 
Job   16.    9  mine  enemy  sharpeneth  his  eyes  upon  me 


4.  To  set  up,  3sj  natsab,  5. 

1  Sa.  13.  21  and  for  the  axes,  and  to  sharpen  the  goa^s 

5.  To  sharpen,  jS?  shanan. 

Psa. 140.    3  They  have  sharpened  their  tongues  like 

SHARPENED,  to  he  — 

To  be  made  sharp,  Tin  chadad,  6. 

Eze   "i.    9  a  sword  is  sharpened,  and  also  furbished 
'  21. 10  It  is  sharpened  to  make  a  sore  slaughter 
21. 11  sword  is  sharpened,  and  it  is  furbished 

SHARPLY,  sharpness  — 

1  Strength,  with  strength,  njjin  chozqah. 
Judg!  8.    1  And  they  did  chide  with  him  sharply 

2  Cuttingly,  severely,  airoTiiuws  apotomos. 

2  Co  13.  10  lest  being  present  I  should  use  sharpness 
Titus  1. 13  Wherefore  rebuke  them  sharply,  that  th. 

SHA-RtJ'-HEN,  \rmf  dwelling  of  grace. 
A  city  in  Simeon  near  Beth-lebaoth :  perhaps  Shaanm. 
Josh.  19.  6  Beth-lebaoth,  and  S.;  thirteen  cities  and 
SHA'-SHAI,  '&<?  noble,  free. 

One  of  the  sons  of  Bani  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 
B.C.  445- 

Ezra  10.  40  Machnadebai,  Shashai,  S. 
SHA'-SHAK,  pay  assaulter,  runner. 
A  son  of  Elpael,  a  Benjamite.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8  14  And  Ahio,  S.,  and  Jeremoth 

8.  25  Iphedeiah,  and  Penuel,  the  sons  ol  b. 

SHA'-TfL,  'nwf  asked. 

1  A  son  ol  Simeon  by  a  Canaanitish  woman.   B.C.  1690. 

Gen.  46.  10  Zohar.andS.  the  son  ol  aCanaanitishwo. 

Exod  6  13  Zohar,  and  S.  the  son  of  a  Canaanitish  wo. 

Nunl26. 13  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shauhtes 

1  Ch.  4.  24  The  sous  of  Simeou(were).  .Zerah,  (and)S. 

2.  An  ancient  king  of  Edom  called  Saul  in  Gen.  36.  37- 
B.C.  1490. 

1  Ch.  1  48  S.  of  Rehoboth  by  the  river  reigned  in 
1.  49  when  S.  was  dead,  Baal-hauan.  .reigued 

3.  A  son  of  Kohath  son  of  Levi. 
1  Ch.  6.  24  Uriel,  his  son,  Uzziah  Ms  son.  and  S.  his 

SHATJLITES,  ^Kif. 

The  family  ol  the  son  of  Simeon. 

Nuni26. 13  of  Shaul,  the  family  of  the  S. 

SHAVE  (off),  to  — 

I. To  cut  off,  shave,  shear,  i;3  gazaz. 

Job     1.  20  shaved  his  head,  and  fell  down  upon  the 
2.  To  shave,  poll  the  head,  nSa  galach,  3. 

Gen  41.  14  shaved  (himself),  and  changed  his  raiment 
Lev  13.  33  but  the  scall  shall  he  not  shave  ;  and  the 
,1     8  shave  off  all  his  hair,  and  wash  himself  in- 
jl     9  shave  all  his  hair  off  his  head  and  hisbe. 
14.    9  even  all  his  hair  he  shall  shave  off :  and 
21.    3  neither  shall  they  shave  off  the  corner  of 
Xum  6.    9  then  he  shall  shave  his  head  in  the  day  of 
6     9  on  the  seventh  day  shall  he  shave  it 
6  18  Nazarites  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  Sep. 
Deutzi.  12  she  shall  shave  her  head,  and  pare  her 
Judgio. 19  caused  him  to  shave  off  the  seven  locks 
2  Sa  10    4  shaved  off  the  one  half  of  their  beards,  and 
1  Ch  iq.    4  shaved  them,  aud  cut  off  their  garments 
Isa      7  -o  the  LOBD  shave  with  a  razor  that  is  hired 
Eze.  44  20  Neither  shall  they  shave  their  heads,  nor 
3.  To  cause  a  razor  topass  over,^Ji^?i  abartaar,5. 
Num.  8.    7  let  them  shave  all  their  flesh,  and  let  th. 
i.To  scrape,  shave,  typatu  xurao. 

Acts  21.  24  at  charges  with  them,  that  they  may  sh. 

SHA'-VEH,  ntf  level  place. 

A  valley  at  Salem  or  Salim,  near  -Enon. 

Gen.  14. 17  at  the  valley  of  S.,  which  (is)  the  king's  d. 
SHA-VEH  KIR-IA-THA'-IM,  D'nnp  TtVf. 
A.  place  in  Reuben,  where  the  Emim  dwelt,  who  were 
smitten  by  C'hedorlaomer  in  the  days  of  Abraham  and 

Lot.      B.C.  1917. 

Gen.  14.   5  and  smote .  .the  Emims  in  S.  Kinatharm 


^3  galach, 


SHAVEN,  to  be  - 
l.To  be  shaven,  n. 

Judgi6  17  if  I  be  shaven,  then  my  strength  will  go 
16  22  be«an  to  grow  again  after  he  was  shaven 

Jer.  41.'  "5  fourscore  men.havingtheirbeardssliaven 
2  To  shave  self,  be  shaven,  rhi  galach,  7. 

rev     ,  „  j-je  shall  be  shaven,  but  the  scall  shall  lie 

Num  6. 19  alter  (the  hair  of)  his  separation  is  shaven 
3.  To  scrape,  shave,  £vpda  xurao. 

1  Co  11T  s  that  is  even  all  one  as  if  she  were  shaven 
"  '11.  6  shame  for  a  woman  to  be.,  shaven,  lether 
SHAV'-SHA,  spiw  nobility,  splendour,  dominion. 
David's  scribe  ;  perhaps  the  same  as  Seraiah  in  2  Sa.  8. 
,7  ■  Sheva  in  2  Sa.  20.  25 ;  and  Shisha  in  1  Ki  4.  3.  B.C. 
1048.  .  ~ 

1  Ch.iS.  16  Zadok.  .and  Abimelech.  .the  priests,  .tv 

SHE  — 

l.He,  it,  x'^  hit.  ,  „       ,.  s  , 

Job    39.  30  and  where  the  slain  (are),  there  (is)  she 

2. She,  it,  x'n  hi. 

Gen.    3.  12  she  gave  me  ol  the  tree  and  I  did  eat 
20    5  She(is)  mysister?  andshe.  .He(is)my  br. 


3.  This,  nui  zoth. 

4  r^;  ■  '■ 23  rman'  becaus"^  was  taken  out  of  man 
i.To  this,  nxiS  Uzoth. 

5  ^r;/j'^tW3f!D;w-;fleshofmyflesh:  sh"»an 

Lnkfl    '      \aV,T£  (-/e"l-)  aul°°- 

1.57  full  time  came  that  she  should  be  deli™ 

tlTT.      /'   v       yS°n  °'  hlS  m°ther'  a,ld  »»]  ™ 2  a"l 

.:i§ffSf§I 

I -Ones  self,  lavr-f,  heaule. 

Mark  5. 26  and  had  spent  all  that  she  had 

*>•  IS  She,  suppo nLl ffiftte  Wickly 

8HEti39  she  had  a  sister  °au'ed  ■»»*  **<*  -» 

-4  *fc  bm,  strong  one,  |inx  afflon. 

S.'sthnt^Venfe\rdshTSeS> »d 

sheap  _  " yok8  0£  oxea'  «^flM£fi^£S? 

l.-d  sfea/,  rm'fx  alummah. 

=3-  13  shall  offer  that  (Hv,  hi,      °re  the  LoED 

w  i     "'     -  -*■  aremah. 

S^u\lhTiaSiaB  *  Sh6aVeS'  and  ladi^  «*  as 
a±Lt  -AL,  \<«y  request. 

One  ome  sons  of  Rani  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 
&SS-^ttta  their 

1. 14  stirred  ,„,  t\K %,  r  f  „f    V,and  Jushl,a  the 

>  Sa.  25.    a  and  he  was      ni,,",:''?*  the  nratling 
=5.    4  David  heard    that  i  r.if.'n  Pi m  Sa-rmel 
SHEARER,  shearing  house  _  sI^arh,ssh. 

1.2b  cut  off,  Shavei  shmr>  „, 

.I":  ls8:  ^  SftrXfeSfffe-?  * Ti- 

.        =5.  n  my  flesh  tha  ,  -e^,  !   ' "hast  bearers 

n    Isa.   53.    7  as  a  sheep  before    „,        .  ful  .'"r/'iear. 

2  ill.  10.  12  as  he  fwasUt  *».      1      *.  W    @K  '1?  oetft. 

■?• t i "5SV  ""  <""">  «  "»'■  M  «.. 

Oilt-AR  JA  -SHTJB    asm).  iuo!  „ 
A  symbolic  name  <riv»n  tV  . W      remnant  returns. 
before  the  Syr  ans°and M,„  *S?n  of  Isaiab  «»e  prophet 
">  the  days  of  kmg  Aha"    f  pch™,mitea  tawdedjfStah 

SHEATH7!-3  G°  fOTth  Q0W  '° ™*  Allaz.  HW,  and  S. 
CI'— 7  Put  up  his  sword  again  into  the  sheath 


Nell.. 
Hag. 


2.  Scabbard,  1yfi  taar 

1  la.'  £  5S  Sfa^^elXon6^  "/ereof'  and  *«" 
«.  3  Will  dra.fforth  nPrsw„  ,°'„Sf  '"f  ^  she' 
»i.  4  shall  my  sword  ,  'f,?,  m  '  d„?ut,  ^  hl,s  she- 
«.  5  drawn  forth  my  sw ord  out "' uf,hls,sheath 
«.  30  Sha.1 1  cause  K£l^ 

jowa'rVf eath' e^  am 

S^C^I      ^  SW°ld  *to"ath:  the  cuP 
EtUopia!  EBacam2a4OS0n  °'  Cush   s»  of   Ham   in  N 

2.  Son  of  Voktanof  the  family  o7  hem'  ^0  22       '° 

laonrnB°o.'I8°o,oShan'  S°n  °f  Abraha™  ^  Eeturah,  in 
J™-  I  3I  r/«S  ol^hT  ^5^0 

.Jo-^^^^^^ofs1^^- 

»  Ch.  g.    t  the  queen  olsea,  do?  tbe„Df0f  S' a"  her 

9-    q  theoiipm  ,-ii  -1     ,       ot  the  lame  of  Sol 

T  ,      Id    00m      save'tolSfieen  the  wisdom  °f So.' 

^7.23themerc,an?sof1   a^     Eaanlah"  they 
.      *  »*,  and  DedtStfe-S^ 

perhap^B^X011'  "ear  Beersheba  a»d  Moladah 

1  /"so^of  mthr1tXa-ltafe,'rinherita»C-S1-''a 
David  after  A   s  .,,;„■'  L,euJa»"'e  who  rebelled  against 

off  by  the  peopleaofnAbel  atB'cand  ,V'10Se  heaJ  «?«S 

2  Sa'  =o°:   S  SomevVmane  'SSMW  S"  the  s°n  o, 
=0.    6  Now  slnn  a    ■  -/o1101™1!  S.  the  son  of  Bi 

-•  7  weTt.Xursude0aS0srdf!;ami  th?n  W 
20.  xo  So  Joab.  .pursued  after's  f>,S0U  of  Bicllri 
20.  i,  s     hath  is    1       ,  .   er  s-  the  son  of  Bic 

30  22  and  they  cUt  offrh"8,113'1;1  a"ai»«tthek  .' 
3.  A  chief  Gadite  e  head  of  S- the  son  of 

sH;^;^:^°rai-andja^a«d^and 

Judlh"   a'f  ^l8Isaac's  S^™°ts  near  Beer-sheba  in 

Sttlln  I"'  TT  lt  S- :  therefore  the  Dame  ot  the 
bHE-BAM,  ojp-  J«/Mffl. 

^o&f^CSet^'0  if0ab'  tb»  to  the 
was  soo  paces  from  nil  bon  Tn  i  ?S"  'S'!'''""a'''  a,ld 
Moabite  vineyards      IlesuDOU'  and  the  centre  of  the 

m£Z£  T:fles"b0D' amI  Elea,eh- and  s  - aad  ™° 

SHE-BAN  -IAH,  I.Vvirf    -,..,„;    >■  ,    . 

1-  A  priest  who  aided  to  brinL        " [Powerful. 

house  of  Obed-edorn  to  JerSem  "P,  he  ark  fromtbe 

I  A  levfe  4o'Cc  eJdtfdaphat'  and  ^'ba-el,  and 

a-ApHe^^a^^tr^^^^-" 
B.C.  445.       Mat  w,Ul  ^hernial!  sealed  the  covenant 

4  A  T„  -f  .?       1Iebcu. -Jonathan 
l.ALevitethatdidthesame. 
aeh.to.  I2  Zaccur,  Sherebiah,  S 

A  plac    near  A,  ST.  0f  Jericho,  in  Benjamin 
*£*&*&'££  ot  JcP»™-h  by  his  concubine 

2Ki  ,s  .50  .i         "  s  Hezekiah.    bo     ■,„ 

M:263|hetnesaSU  Eh',?""  ^ab  tbe  s°n  of  Asaph 
"8.  37  Si  &*!££?££?££*«  Hilkiah,  apS 
19.  2  he  sent  Elial  im  auTs  if  S™  ■?  Asapb 
3«.  3  S.  the  scribe  a,;,  jld,f'  ,tbe  s,«-'be.  and 
3«.  11  Then  said  El  ■  ,  1  '  '/sap,h  s  so".  the 
3*.  2,  Thencan/eEliak™  an  'I  a»d  Joab  ""«> 
37-  2  he  sent  Eliaki,  ,,d  S  m  thes.™b».and 
2-  The  treasurer  over  tb„  1  !      the  8mbe-  aa(i 

Planted  by  EliaLmlo^fHXulhWh0BrS  '°  be  SUp 
I--iSgetthee«ntothistasurer7ru0atoS.,wh 


:  of  S.,  Joseph 


Isa. 


SHE-BT/-EI    Wit*  n~j  ■ 

2.  A  son  of  Haman  chief  sin 4r   °  ^        S°"  °'  3I°Ses 
days  0,  David  ;  i„  £££%££$&•»*»*  *  the 

1  Ch.23.   4  Mattaniah,  ir22iel   s  ™J  ,    °'  10IS' 
SHE-CHAN'-IAH    n-,  J  Jenmoth,  Ha. 

1.  Hea^l  of  a  family  ofYhe"  houfJofrfavtd"  Tt^' 

Ch- 1: 221 4SHft  PKffS  i  ~  s. 

2-  A  priest  to  whom  the  w^ff,ah :  ami  the  so"s  of 

'  Ch.=4    „  to  Jeshuah_  the  ^.^  tB.C.      0,5 

O^StSfiS  S4^£5*  ^''o-t  Ephraim,  on 

at  present  Nal  fs  a  d  is  thT,  fHd  ^"^  ami 
worship;  it  was  theflrst  citv  in  rfr,"'  °f  -the  Samaritan 
bam,  b.c.  roar-  here  b«h  „l  I]  ,ta,laa»  visited  by  Abra- 
tl.etribeso^sr'aef,  b  c  I4  "  I!  S  :i?rii  for  th«  last  time 
by  its  inhabitants  b.c.  1;,' A'  ,meI«h  was  elected  king 
bled  (here  to  make  Rehobram  til  U  ael  ,vas  assem° 
well,   to  its  vicinitrSanD^nf^,c-97s;  at  Jacobs 

aS'lV,-^  aDd  Ji  ^«6bZm^f 

Genir:aem^^^^,rp--^ich 

37-  12  went  to  feed  th,.  ■  fi.  1  ,dl  ("'as)  byS. 

«.  21  theyglve     em  s' will.  ?°lmt  EPbraim 

9-  :«E5KksSS^SSS 

3  spake.. in  th    eaSof  all ^e-menof  s-  W. 
<5  the  men  of  s  iSS,      51 the  me"  of  S. 

g.  18  made  Al.imdech     l-i. '  .?■'  that  G°d 

9-  20  let  fire  come    and  del?n °Ve.r,the  me»  of  & 
9-  20  let  fire  con  em'    f         ?  "' the  men  of  S: 
9-  23  the  men  of  S     and  t'b»    "  mra  of  S-  and 
9-  24  upon  the  men' of  S    III"]™  -°J  S"  dealt 
9-  25  the  men  of Tset  b'erl-  Ch  a!ded  him  ^ 
9-  =6  went  over  oS     and  ?L'°  wa,t„ for  hi'n  in 
9-  31  Gaal.and  IdVl.ie  i,  b   ?en°f  S-  put  tb- 
9-  34  they  laid  wait    '■,    It  s  t  ?°me  to  S- 
9-  39  Gaal  went  out  b!f ore  the  ,  four /ompa. 
9.  41  that  they  shouldn^c  well W  *'  aud 

-h.ir^ReSo^iS^^Sa 

/er.  41.    5  That  thereto  « &Sta.% 
2.  A  son  of  Hamar  n  n,-,.,-f       ■    tIlum  ,10>nS.,  from 
daughter  Di  ' '    q;„a  "    'teP"nce,  who  defiled  Jacob's 

fU  his  tollowe'rs8^  Saim™nCandlf  ^'f"  fOTitw»h 
brothers,    b.c.  1732.    O,meou  and  Levi  her  maternal 

Gen'  34:  ll  whin  saSi°f  "le  S '!? dren  of  Hamor,  S  's 

34-  24  unto  Hamor,  aucl  unto  S   l,V     gate, of  tb- 

34-  26  they  slew  Hamor  ami  si,-  1S  S0D'  beark- 

T    ,  34-  26  took  Dinah         ,!  I  •  , S'  ,us  son  with  the 

,.  28  s^te^kZl  EtmrSZ 


9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 


SHECHEMITE 


875 


SHEKEL 


3  A  son  of  Gile'ad,  son  of  Mauasseh.    B.C.  145°- 
'   Nam  26  it  and  (of)  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shechemites 

Josh  n.    I  for  the  children  of  S..  and  for  the  childr. 

4  A  son  of  Sheniidah,  a  Manassite.    B.C.  1400. 

i  Ch.  7.  iq  the  sons  of  Shemidah Mere  Alnan,  and  S. 
SHECHEMITE,  't?SB». 
The  family  of  Shechem  son  of  Gilead. 

Num=6.  31  and  (of)  Shechem,  the  family  of  the  S. 
SHED  (abroad,  forth,  out),  he  shea,  to  — 

1  Tn  mute  to  vour  out  or  run,  133  nagar,  0. 

Eze   3"f  5  hast  shed  (the  blood  o'f)  the  children  of  I 

2  To  place,  set,  put,  n"?,  Bie/  sum,  sim. 

,£  2.    5  shed  the  hlood  of  war  in  peace,  and  put 

3  To  vour  or  slied  out,  35?  shaphak. 

Gen    o    6  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  sh 
3?  22  Shed  no  blood,  (but)  cast  him  into  this  pit 
Lev  i7.    +  he  hath  shed  blood;  and  that  man  shall 
%„,    .  33  but  by  the  blood  of  him  that  shed  it 
Dent"     7  Our  hands  have  not  shed  this  blood,  rait. 
i  !a%  3.  either  that  thou  hast  shed  blood  cause 
I  Sa.lo.io  shed  out  his  bowels  to  the  ground  and 
i  Kt    I.  3i  innocent  blood,  which  Joab  shed,  from 
I  Ki'-i.  io  Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood  very  much 
"       V,     •  also  for  the  innocent  blood  that  he  shed 
i  Ch  '--'  8  Thou  hast  shedblood  abundantly,  and  ha. 
'22    8  because  thou  hast  shed  much  blood  upon 
2n    3  (hast  been)  a  man  of  war,  and  hast  shed 
Psa    7o    3  Their  blood  have  they  shed  like  water  ro. 
™.  io  of  the  blood-of  thy  servants  (which  is)  sh 
mo  38  shed  innocent  blood,  (even)  the  blood  of 
Prov  1  16  run  to  evil,  and  make  haste  to  shed  blood 
6'  17  lying  tongue,  and  hands  that  shed  inuoc. 
Isa    30'  -  7  they  make  haste  to  shed  innocent  blood 
Jer'     1    6  shed  not  innocent  blood  in  this  place  ne. 
22    3  neither  shed  innocent  blood  m  this  place 
22  17  for  to  shed  innocent  blood,  and  for  oppre. 
Lam.  4'  13  that  have  shed  the  blood  of  the  just  in 
Eze  16  38  break  wedlock  and  shed  blood  are  judged 
'  22  %  The  city  sheddeth  blood  in  the  midst  of 
2-'   4  guilty  in  thv  blood  that  thou  hast  shed 
22'    6  one  were  in  thee  to  their  power  to  shed 
22'    q  In  thee  are  men  that  carry  tales  to  shed 
22'  12  In  thee  have  they  taken  gifts  to  shed  bl. 
22'  27  to  shed  blood,  (and)  to  destroy  souls  to 
23'  43  after  the  manner  of  women  that  shed  bl. 
,,  23  lift  up  your  eyes . .  and  shed  blood:  and  sh. 
36  18  for  the  blood  that  they  had  shed  upon  the 
Joel    3. 19  because  they  have  shed  innocent  blood 
i.To  be  poured  out,  shed,  35?  shaphak-,  2. 

Gen    q.   6  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed:  for  111 the 
Deut  19. 10  That  innocent  blood  be  not  shed  in  thy 

5  To  be  poured  out,  shed,  35?  shaphak,  i. 

Num.35.  33  cleansed  of  the  blood  that  is  shed  therein 

6  To  pour  out,  shed,  eVxew  ekcheo. 
Acts    2.  33  he  hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see 

22  20  blood  of  thy  martjT  Stephen  [was  shed] 
Rom.  3.  15  Their  feet  (are)  swift  to  shed  blood 
Titus  -     6  Which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through 
Rev.  16.   6  For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and 
7. To  pour  out,  shed,  iicxwai  ekchuno. 

Matt  23  33  may  come  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  up. 

26.  28  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins 
Marki4.  24  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is  sh. 
Lukei  i  30  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation  of  the 

22  20  testament  in  my  blood,  which  is  shed  for 
Rom.  5.    5  because  the  love  of  God  isshed  abroadin 

SHEDDER  — 

To  pour  out,  39?  shaphak. 

Eze.  18. 10  If  he  beget  a  son  (that  is),  .a  shedder  of 

SHEDDING  of  blood —  ; 

1  shedding  or  pouring  out  of  blood,  al^arexxvca- 
Heb.   q.  22  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 
SHE-DE'TJTt,  nix-"!?'  shedder  of  light. 
4.  Reubenite,   fattier  of  Elizur,   chosen  to  assist   m 
numbering  the  people  in  the  days  of  Hoses.      B.C. 

Ii25jum  1     5  (the  tribe  of)  Reuben;  Elizur  the  son  of  S. 
->  10  captain . .  (shall  be)  Elizur  the  son  of  s. 
7  30  On  the  fourth  day  Elizur  the  son  of  S.,  pr. 
7  35  this  (was)  the  offering  of.  .the  son  of  S. 
10.  18  over  his  host  (was)  Elizur  the  son  of  S. 

SHEEP  — 

1.  A  lamb,  cor  kebes. 

Exodi2.    5  ye  shall  take  (it)  out  from  the  sheep,  or 
Job  31.  20  (not)  warmed  with  the  fleece  of  my  sheep 

2.  A  lamb,  3b>3  keseb. 

Gen  30  32'all the  brown  cattle  amongthe  sheep,  and 

.  30  33  one  that  (is)noi.  .brownamong  the  sheep 

30  33  all  the  brown  among  the  sheep,  and  gave 

Lev     1.  10  if  his  offering  (be). -of  the  sheep,  or  of  the 

7  -3  eat  no  manner  of  fat,  of  ox,  or  of  sheep 

2-  19  of  the  beeves,  of  the  sheep,  or  of  the  goats 

22  '7  When  a  bullock,  or  a  sheep,  or  a  goat,  is 

Num  18  17  firstling  of  a  sheep,  or  the  firstling  of  a  g. 

Deut  14.    4  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat :  The  ox,  the  s. 

Z.Shee2J,  liRXjJxx  tson,  tseon. 

Gen.  4.   2  Abel  was  a  keeper  of  sheep,  but  Cain  was 
12. 16  he  had  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  be  asses,  and 

20.  14  Abimelech  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men 

21.  27  Abraham  took  sheep  and  oxeu,  and  gave 
29.  2  there  (were)  three  flocks  of  sheep  lying  by 
29.    3  watered  the  sheep,  and  put  the  stone  ag. 


Gen.  29.   6  Rachel  his  daughter  cometh  with 1  the  sh 
29    7  water  ye  the  sheep,  andgo  (aud)feed(th.) 
20    S  gathered  together . .  then  we  water  the  sh. 
2Q    9  Rachel  came  with  her  father's  sheep,  for 
20  10  and  the  sheep  of  Laban  his  mother  s  bro. 
,i  iq  Laban  went  to  shear  his  sheep:  and  Rac. 
34'  28  They  took  their  sheep,  and  their  oxen,  and 
38  13  goeth  up  to  Timnath  to  shear  his  sheep 
Exod  9.    3  camels,  upon  the  oxen,  and  upon  the  sh. 
20  24  thy  peace  offerings,  thy  sheep,  and  thine 
2->     1  five  oxen  for  an  ox,  and  four  sheep  for  a 
2~  30  Likewise  shalt  thou  do . .  with  thy  sheep 
Lev   2"  21  a  free  will  offering  in  beeves  or  sheep,  it 
Nuni22.  40  offered  oxen  and  sheep,  and  sent  to  Bala. 
-7  17  congregation  of  the  Lord  benot  as  sheep 
31'  28  beeves,  and  of  the  asses,  and  of  the  sheep 
31'  32  seventy  thousand  and  five  thousand  sheep 
31.  36  and  thirty  thousand  and  five  hundred  sh. 
,1.  37  Lord's  tribute  of  the  sheep  was  six  hun. 
-1  43  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 
32  36  Beth-haran,  fenced  cities;  and  foldsforsh. 
Deut   7  13  flocks  of  thy  sheep,  in  the  land  which  he 
14.  26  for  oxen,  or  for  sheep,  or  for  wine,  or  for 
13.  iq  bullock,  nor  shear  the  firstling  of  thy  sh. 
18    4  first  of  the  fleece  of  thy  sheep,  shalt  thou 
08    4  Blessed  (shall  be) . .  the  flocks  of  thy  sheep 
28  18  Cursed  (shall  be),  .the  flocks  of  thy  sheep 
28!  31  thy  sheep  (shall  be)  given  unto  thine  em. 
28  31  not  leave  thee,  .flocks  of  thy  sheep,  until 
32  14  Butter  of  kine,  and  milk  of  sheep,  with 
Josh  V  =4  his  sheep,  and  his  tent,  and  allthathehad 
i  Sa    S  17  He  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  sheep,  and 
'  14  32  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  calves,  and  si. 
13    q  best  of  the  sheep,  and  of  the  oxen,  and  of 
13  14  What(nieaneth)thenthisbleatingofthes. 
1 3  13  people  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep  and  of 
13  21  sheep  and  oxen,  the  chief  of  the  things 

16.  11  keepeththe  sheep.  And  Samuel  said  unto 
1619  Send  me  David . .  which  (is)  with  the  sheep 
1 7  1 3  returned  from  Saul  to  feed  his  father  s  sh. 
1 7  20  left  the  sheep  with  a  keeper,  and  took,  and 
17  28  with  whom  hast  thou  left  those  few  sheep 
17  34  Thy  servant  kept  his  father's  sheep,  and 
23  2  had  three  thousand  sheep,  .shearing  hiss  1. 
23  4  David  heard . .  that  Nabal  did  shear  his  sh. 
-I  16  while  we  were  with  them  keeping  the  sh. 
23  18  fivesheepready  dressed,  and  flvenieasures 
27     9  took  away  the  sheep,  and  the  oxen,  and  the 

7  8  Itookthee..ironifollowingthesheep,tobe 

17,  29  honey,  and  butter,  and  sheep,  and  cheese 
- .  1 7  but  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done  1  Let 

1  9  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  oxen  and  fat  ca. 
1  iq,  25  hath  slain  oxen  and  fat  cattle  and  sheep 
a  -,  an  hundred  sheep,  beside  harts,  and  roeb. 

8  3  sacrificing  sheep  and  oxen,  that  could  not 
8  63  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sheep 

2-.'  17  scattered  upon  the  hills,  assheep  that  ha. 
3  26  (Is  it)  a  time  to  receive,  .sheep,  and  oxen 
3  21  of  sheep  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 

12  40  brought .  .oxen,  and  sheep  abundantly ;  for 

17  7  I  took  thee,  .from  following  the  sheep,  th. 
21  17  but  (as  for)  these  sheep,  what  have  they 

2  Ch  3  6sacriflcedsheepandoxen,whichcouldnot 
7  3  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sheep 
14'  13  carried  away  sheep  and  camels  in  abund. 

13  11  And  they  offered ..  seveu  thousand  sheep 

18  2  killed5heepandoxenforhimin  abundance 
18  16  as  sheep  that  have  no  shepherd  :  and  the 
20  33  consecrated  things  (were),  .three  thous.  s. 
to  24  seven  thousand  sheep,  .ten  thousand  she. 
V    6  also  brought  in  the  tithe  of  oxen  and  sheep 

Neh    3'.   1  they  builded  the  sheep  gate ;  they  sancti. 
3  32  unto  the  sheep  gate  repaired  the  goldsm. 
3  18  six  choice  sheep ;  also  fowls  were  prepar. 
1?  3q  tower  of  Meah,  even  unto  the  sheep  gate 
Job     1     3  substance  also  was  seven  thousand  sheep 
1'  16  hath  burnt  up  the  sheep,  and  the  servants 
42   12  forhehad  fourteen  thousand  sheep,  and  s. 
Psa    44'  11  Thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep  (appointed) 
'  4!  22  we  are  counted  as  sheep  fortius  slaughter 
Io  14  Like  sheep  they  are  laid  in  the  grave ;  death 
74     1  doth  thine  anger  smoke  against  the  sheep 
,8  32  made  his  own  people  to  go  forth  like  sheep 
n  1 3  So  we  thy  people,  and  sheep  of  thy  pasture 
03    7  people  of  his  pasture,  and  the  sheep  of  bis 
iio'    3  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture 
144'.  13  our  sheep  may  bring  forth  thousands  and 
Isa      7  21  shall  nourish  a  young  cow  and  two  sheep 
13  14  as  a  sheep  that  no  man  taketh  up :  they 
2-  13  slayingoxen  and  killing  sheep,  eatmgflesh 

33.  6  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we 
Jer    12.    3  pull  them  out  like  sheep  for  the  slaughter 

23.   1  destroy  and  scatter  thesheep  of  my  past. 

50.   6Mypeoplehathbeenlostsheep;  theirsh. 

Eze   '4    6  My  sheep  wandered  through  all  the  mo. 

34.  11  both  search  mv  sheep,  andseek  them  out 
34  12  in  the  day  that  he  is  among  his  sheep  (that) 
34.  12  so  will  I  seek  out  my  sheep,  and  will  de, 

Joel    1   18  yea,  the  flocks  of  sheep  are  made  desolate 
Mlc    -  1-  I  will  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of 
3    8  younglion  amongtheflocksof  sheep; who 
Zech  13.    7  sheep  shall  be  scattered ;  and  I  will  turn 

4.  Sheep,  ifcs  tseon.  ,       , 

Psa.  144.  1 3  our  sheep  may  bringforth  thousands  and 

5.A  sheep,  sheep,  Nii,  njs  tsoneh,  tsone. 

NU11132.  24  Build .  .folds  for  your  sheep ;  and  do  that 
Psa.    8.   7  All  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the  beasts  01 

6.^1  ewe,  lamb,  Vp.  rachel. 

Son"  6.    6  Thy  teeth  (are)  as  a  flock  of  sheep  which 
Isa    53    7  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb 


2Sa. 


;KU. 


iKi. 
1  Ch. 


7..1  young  lamb,  kid,  sheep,  n?  seh. 

Exod~>.    1  If  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and 
22    1  five  oxen  for  an  ox,  and  four,  .for  a  sheep 
.>„'   4  whether  it  be  ox,  or  ass,  or  sheep,  he  sh. 
22    9  for  ox,  for  ass,  for  sheep,  for  raiment,  (or) 
2-'  10  If  a  man  deliver,  .a  sheep,  orany  beast,  to 
34  19  among  thy  cattle,  (whether)  ox  or  sheep 
Lev    27.  26  whether  (it  be)  ox  or  sheep,  it  (is)  the  L. 
Deuti?.    1  bullock  or  sheep  wherein  is  blemish,  (or) 
18    3  whether  (it  be)ox  or  sheep ;  and  they  sh. 
22     1  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  his  sheep  go 
Josh  6.  21  sheep,  and  ass,  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
Juda  6.   4  no  sustenance  for  Israel,  neither  sheep 
1  Sa!i4.  34  Bring  me  hither,  .every  man  his  sheep 
it.    ,  slay  both,  .ox  and  sheep,  camel  and  ass 
2-  19  oxen,  and  asses,  and  sheep,  with  the  edge 
Psa.nq.  176  Ihave  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep,  seek 
Jer.  50. 17  Israel  (is)  a  scattered  sheep ;  the  lions  hai  e 
8.A  sheep,  sheep,  irp6$aTov  2>robato7i. 

Matt.  7. 15  which  come  to  you  in  sheep  s  clothing,  but 
q.  36  scattered  abroad,  as  sheep  having  no  sh. 
10  6  But  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  ho. 
10. 16  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
1-.  11  What  man . .  that  shall  have  one  sheep,  and 
1-  1-  How  much,  .isa  man  better  than  a  sheep  ( 

13  24  I  am  not  seut  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
18  12  If  a  man  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  one 
-3  32  as  a  shepherd  divideth  (his)  sheep  from 
23.  33  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand 
26  31  sheep  of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered  ab. 

Mark  6.  34  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a 

14  27  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall 
Lukeil    4  What  man .  .having  an  hundred  sheep,  if 

13    6  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost 
John  -.'  14  those  that  sold  oxen  and  sheep  and  doves 
2  13  drove  them  all  out.,  the  sheep,  and  the 
10    -  But  he . .  is  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep 
10    3  sheep  hear  his  voice . .  calleth  his  own  sh. 
10    4  when  he  putteth  forth  his  own  [sheep],  he 
,0    1  sheep  follow  him  :  for  they  know  his  voice 
10.   7  say  unto  you,  I  am  the  door  of  the  sheep 
10    S  robbers  :  but  the  sheep  did  not  hear  them 
10  11  good  shepherd  giveth  his  life  forthe  sheep 
10  1^  hireling,  .whose  own  the  sheep  are  not 
10. 12  seeth  the  wolf .  .and  leaveth  the  sheep 
10  12  [wolf  catcheth  them,  and  scattereth  the  s.] 
10  13  fleeth,becausehe..carethnotforthesheep 
10. 15  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep     . 
10  16  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this 
10.  26  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep 
10  27  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them 
21  16  17  saitli  unto  him,  Feed  my  [sheep] 
Acts    8.  32  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter 
Rom   8  36  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter 
Heb/13.  20  Jesus,  that  great  shepherd  of  the  sheep 
1  Pe    '25  For  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray  ;  but  are 
Rev.'  18.13  sheep,  and  horses,  and  chariots,  and  slaves 
SHEEP  COTE,  (fold,  market) — 
1  A  hedge  or  fence  for  the  flock,  jNsn-n?  gedereth. 
■f  uin  -->  16  We  will  build  sheep  folds  here  for  our  ca. 

1  Sa.  24.  3  came  to  the  sheep  cotes  by  the  way,  where 
2.A  restraint  or  fold  for  the  flock,  \^rh?cmikUith. 

Psa.  78.  70  servant,  and  took  him  from  the  sheep  fold 
3.  Double  places  or  folds,  trrjsifto  mishpethayim. 

Judg.  5.  16  Why  abodest  thou  amongthe  sheep  folds 
LHome,  habitation,  fold,  ny  naveh. 

2  Sa     7    81  took  thee  from  the  sheep  cote,  from  foil. 
1  Ch.  17.    7  I  took  thee  from  the  sheep  cote,  (even)  fr. 

5  Court  of  the  sheep,  avK-h  tSii/  TTpo$a.Ta>v  aide  ton. 

John  10.   1  entereth  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheep  f . 

6.0  for  belonging  to  sheep,  Trpo&a-riKos  probatikos. 

John  5    2  at  Jerusalem,  by  the  sheep  (market),  apo. 
SHEEP  MASTER  or  shearer  — 
1 .  To  cut  off,  share,  shear,  113  gazaz. 

2  Sa  13^3  Absalom  had  sheep  shearers  m  Baal-hazor 
'  13.  24  Behold  now,  thy  servant  hath  sheep  sh. 
2.To  shear  the  fwck,  jas  11;  gazaz  tson. 

Gen.  38. 12  went  up  unto  his  sheep  shearers  to  lim. 
3  Herdsman,  sheep  master,  npi  noqed. 

2  Hi.   3.   4  Mesha  king  of  Moab  was  a  sheep  master 


SHEEP  (skin)  — 

Of  or  belonging  to  a  sheep,  mi^<"t1  nxcLote. 

Heb.  11.  37  they  wandered  about  m  sheep  skins  and 
SHEET  — 

1  Linen  garments,  pp  sadin. 

Jiulgi4  12,  13  thirty  sheets  and  thirty  change  of  ga. 

2  1  niece  of  linen,  a  linen  sheet,  hQovn  othone. 
""'Act's  10  11  agreatsheetknitatthe  four  corners  and 

\°'.    5  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet,  let  down  from 

SEE-HAR'-IAH,  nnPi?  Jah  is  the  dawn. 
A  son  of  Jeroham,  a  Beujamite.    B.C.  1360. 

,  Ch.  8  26  And  Shamsherai,  ana  S„  and  Athaliah 
SHEKEL  — 

4  shekel  florin,  ?P^  sheqel. 
A  *WfW"   ^  ,Jlul  (is  ivoHh)  four  hundred  shekels 

II  16  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  current 
Exod^i  3°  give  unto  their  master  thirty  shekels  of 

to  13  half  a  shekel  after  the  shekel  of  the  san 

30.   3  a "hekel  (is)t« city  gerahs  :  an  half  shekel 

to  13  the  poor  shall  not  give  less,  thanhalf  a  sh. 

V  24  five  hundred,  .after  the  shekel  of  the  sa. 

-s'  24  23,  26  shekels,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sa. 

-3'  29  and  two  thousand  and  four  hundred  she. 


SHEKEL 


876 


SHEMIDAITES 


Lev,    5.  15  shekels  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the 
27.    3  shekels  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the 
27.    4  then  thy  estimation  shall  be  thirty  shekels 
27.    5  twenty  shekels,  and  for  the  female  tens. 
27.    6  five  shekels  of  silver,  .three  shekels  of  si. 
27.   7  fifteen  shekels,  and  for  the  female  ten  sh. 
27.  16  seed  (shall  be  valued)  at  fifty  shekels  of 
27.  25 shekel,  .twenty  gerahs  shall  be  the  shekel 
Num.  3.  47  Thou  shalt  even  take  five  shekels  apiece 
3.  47  after  the  shekel,  .the  shekel  (is)  twenty 
3.  50  took  he . .  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
7. 13  shekels,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
[So  in  verse  19,  25,  3t,  37,  43,  49,  55.  61,  67,  73,  79  ] 
7.  85,  86  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
18.  16  shekels,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary 
31.  52  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty  shekels 
Josh.  7.  21  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  wedge.. fifty  she 

1  Sa.   9.    8  here  at  hand  the  fourth  part  of  a  shekel 

17.   5  weight  of  the  coat  (was)  five  thousand  sh. 
17.    7  spear's  head  (weighed)  six  hundred  shek. 

2  Sa.  14.  26  two  hundred  shekels  after  the  king's  we. 

24.  24  bought  the  threshing  floor,  .for  fifty  shek. 
Ki  7.  1  a  measure  of  fine  flour  (be  sold)  for  a  sh. 
7.  1,16  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel 
7  16  measure  of  fine  flour  was  (sold)  for  a  she 
7.  18  Two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel,  and 
7. 18  measure  of  fine  flour  for  a  shekel,  shall 

15.  20  of  each  man  fifty  shekels  of  silver,  to  give 

1  Ch.21.  25  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold  by  weight 

2  Ch.  3.    9  weight  of  the  nails  (was)  fifty  shekels  of 
Neh.  5. 15  bread  and  wine,  besides  forty  shekels  of 

10.  32  with  the  third  part  of  a  shekel  for  the  se. 
Jer.  32.  9  weighed  him  the  money.. seventeen  she. 
Eze.    4.  10  (shall  be)  by  weight,  twenty  shekels  a  day 

45.  12  shekel  (shall  be)  twenty  gerahs :  twenty 

45.  12  five  and  twenty  shekels,  fifteen  shekels 
Amos  8.   5  making  the  ephah  small,  and  the  shekel 

SHEKEL,  half  a  — 

.1  drachma,  a  shilling,  J'p3  beqa. 

Gen.  24.  22  took  a  golden  earring  of  half  a  shekel  we. 
SHE'-LAH,  rh$  peace. 

1.  Youngest  son  of  Judah,  by  the  daughter  of  Shua  the 
canaanite.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  38-    5  she.  .bare  a  son  ;  and  called  his  name  S. 
38.  ii  Remain  a  widow,  .till  S  my  son  lie  grown 
38. 14  she  saw  that  S.  was  grown,  and  she  was 
38.  26  because  that  I  gave  her  not  to  S.  my  son 

46,  12  the  sons  of  Judah  ;  Er,  and  Onan,  and  S. 
N  urn  26,  20  of  S  ,  the  family  of  the  Shelanites :  of  P. 
1  Ch.  2.    3  The  sons  of  Judah;  Er,  and  Onan,  and  S. 

4,  21  The  sons  of  S.  the  son  of  Judah  (were)  Er 

2.  Son  of  Arphaxad  ;  called  Salah  in  Gen.  10.  24. 

1  Ch.  1. 18  And  Arphaxad  begat  S.,  and  S.  begat  E. 
1.  24  Shem   Arphaxad,  S. 
SHELANITES,   "ibwT\. 
The  family  of  Sheiah  son  of  Judah. 

N'um  26.  20  of  Sheiah,  the  family  of  the  S. :  of  Pharez 

SKE-LEM'-IAH,  n;p^,  livpV^  Jah  is  recompense. 

1 .  A  Levite,  a  gatekeeper  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  days 
of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26. 14  the  lot  eastward  fell  to  S.  Then  for  Zech. 

2.  One  of  the  sons  of  Baui  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.     B.C.  445 

Ezra  10.  39  And  S.,  and  Nathan,  and  Adaiah 

3.  Another  of  the  same  family  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  41  Azareel,  and  S.;  Shemariah 

4.  Father  of  Hauaniah  that  helped  to  repair  the  wall. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  30  After  him  repaired  Hauaniah  thesonof  S. 

5.  A  priest  set  over  thetreasuries  by  Nehemiah.  B.  C.  445. 

Neh.  13.  13  I  madetreasuresoverthe  treasuries,  S.  the 

6.  Son  of  Cushi  and  grandfather  of  Jchudi  who  was  sent 
by  the  princes  of  Judah  to  bring  Baruch  before  their 
council.    B.C.  650 

Jer.  36. 14  Nethaniah,  the  sou  of  S.,  the  son  of  Cushi 

7.  Sou  of  Abdeel,  and  ordered  by  Jehoiakim  to  take 
Baruch  the  scribe  and  Jeremiah  the  prophet.   B.C.  605. 

Jer.  36,  26  the  king  commanded.  .S  the  son  of  Abd. 
S.  Father  of  Jehucal,  who  was  sent  by  Zedekiah  to  ask 
the  prayers  of  Jeremiah.     B.C.  620 

Jer.  37.   3  the  king  sent  Jehucal  the  son  of  S..  and 
38.    1  Jucal  the  son  of  S.,  and  Pashurthe  sou  of 
9.  Father  of  Irijah  captain  of  the  guard  at  the  gate  of 
Benjamin,  who  apprehended  Jeremiah  when  about  to 
leave  Jerusalem     b  c.  620. 

Jer.  37.13  whose  name  (was)  Irijah,  thesonofS.,  the 
SHE'-LEPH,  rfrf  drawn  out. 
A  s )i  Yoktan  of  the  family  of  Shem.     B.C.  2210. 

Gen.  10.  26  Joktan  begat  Almodad,  and  S.,  and  Haz. 

1  CU    1.  20  Joktan  begat  Almodad,  andS.,  and  Ilaza. 
SHE'-LESH,  tsrjBJ  might. 
A  son  of  Ilelem,  grandson   of  Beriah,    son   of   A  slier. 

li.C.   1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  35  Zophah,  and  Imna,  and  S.:  and  Amal 
SHE-L0'-mi,  vfyf  jah  is  peace. 

Father  of  Ahihud.  a  chief  Asherite.  one  of  those  chosen 
to  divide  the  land  W.  of  the  Jordan.     B.C    1510. 

Num34  27  the  prince.,  of  Asher,  Ahihud  the  son  of  S 
SHE-LO'-MITH,  nipfy,  tfffaf  peacefulness. 
:   Tbr  daughter  of  Dibri,  ofthetribeofDan.and  mother 
ol  Mi'  person  stoned  for  blaspheming  the  name  of  the 
1  ord  in  1  in.-  wilderness,  in  the  days ol  Mosep.   v.-c-  1450. 

Lev  ;•.).  :i  his  mother's  name  (was)  S.,  the  dan  [liter 


2.  Daughter  of  Zerubbabel,  grandson  of  Jeconiah  son  of 
Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah.    bc    500, 

1  Ch.  3.  19  Meshullam,  and  Hauaniah,  and  S.  their 

3.  A  son  of  Shimei,  and  descendant  of  Gershon  sou  of 
Levi,  in  the  days  of  David,    b  c    1015. 

1  Ch.23.    9  sonsof  Shimei;  S.,  audHaziel,  and  Haran 

4.  A  son  of  Izhar,  a  Kohathite.     B.C.    1015. 

1  Ch.23. l8  Of  the  sons  of  lzhar  ;  S.  the  chief. 

5.  A  descendant  of  Eliezer  son  of  Moses,  set  over  the 
dedicated  treasures  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.  25  Joram  his  son,  and  Zichri  his  son,  and  S. 

26.  26  S.  and  his  brethren  (were)  over  all  thetr. 
26.  28  it  was)  under  the  hand  of  S.,  and  of  his 
G.  A  son  or  daughter  of  king  Rehoboam.     B.C.  960. 

2  C!h.zi.  20  bare  him  Abijah,  and  Attai.andZiza.andS. 
7.  Ancestor  of  a  family  that  returned  with  Ezra. 
B.C.  536. 

Ezra   8.  10  of  thesonsof  S.;  the  son  of  Josiphiah,  and 
SHE-LO'-MOTH,  nickf  peacefulness. 
A  descendant  of  Izhar'grandson  of  Levi.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  22  Of  the  Izharites;  S.:of  the  sons  of  S. ;  J. 
SHELTER  — 
A  refuge,  nonn  machselu 

Job  24.    8  and  embrace  the  rock  lor  want  of  a  shelter 

Psa.  61     3  For  thou  hastbeeuashelter  for  me,  (and) 

SHE-LTJ-MI'-EL,  SfcV?^  God  is  peace. 
The  son  of  Zurishaddaiaud  a  chief  of  Simeon  appointed 
to  assist  .Moses  in  numbering  the  people.     B.C.  1490. 
Num  1.    6  Of  Simeon ;  S.  the  son  of  Zurishaddai. 

2.  12  the  captain,  .(shall  be)S  the  son  of  Zuri. 
7.  36  S.  the  son  of  Zurishaddai,  prince  of  the 
7.  41  this  (was)  the  offering  of  S.  the  son  of  Zu 

10  19  over.  .Simeon  (was)  S.  the  son  of  Zurisha. 

SHEM,  Dty  name,  renown. 

A  son  of  Noah,  ancestor  of  Elam,  Asshur,  Arphaxad, 

Lud,  and  Aram.    B.C.  2248. 

Gen.  5.  32  and  Noah  begat  S.,  Hani,  and  Japheth 
6. 10  And  Noah  begat  three  sons,  S.,  Ham,  and 
7.  13  In  the  selfsame  day  entered  Noah,  and  S. 
9.  18  the  sonsof  Noah.  .wereS.,  andHam,  and 
9.  23  S.  and  Japheth  took  a  garment,  and  laid 
9.  26  he  said,  Blessed  (be)  the  Lord  God  of  S. 
9.  27  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tentsof  S.,  and  Can. 
10.  1  these  (are),  .the  sons  of  Noah  ;  S.,  Ham 
10,21  Unto  S  also,  thefather  of  allthe  children 
10.  ?2  The  children  of  S.;  Elam,  and  Asshur,  and 
T0.31  These(are)  the  sonsof  S.,  after  their  fam. 

11  10  These  (are)  the  generations  of  S.:  S.  (was) 
1 1. 11  S.  lived  after  he  begat  Arphaxad  five  hu. 

1  Ch.   1.    4  Noah,  S.,  Ham,  and  Japheth 

1.  17  The  sons  of  S. ;   Elam,  and  Asshur.  and 
1.  24  S  ,  Arphaxad,  Sheiah 

SHE'-MA,  yc^,  «£$,  v^V  fame,  repute. 

1.  A  city  in  S.  of  Judah,  near  Auam 

Josh.15.  26  Aniani,  and  S.,  and  Moladah 

2.  A  son  of  Hebron,  and  father  of  Raham      B  C.  1530. 

1  Ch.  2  43  Korah,  and  Tappuah,  and  Rekeni,  and  S. 
2. 44  And  S.  begat  Raham  the  father  of  Jork, 

3.  A  Reubenite,  father  of  Azaz.    B.C.  1230. 

1  Ch.  5.    8  Bela  the  son  of  Azaz.  the  son  of  S.,  the 

4.  A  Benjamite,  head  of  the  inhabitants  of  Aijalon 
B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  8.  13  Beriah  also,  and  S..  who  (were)  heads  of 

5  One  who  stood  at  Ezra's  light  hand.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  8.  4  beside  him  stood  Mattithiah,  and  S.,  and 
SHE  MA'-AH,  n»capri  the  fame. 

A  Gibeathite,  father  of  two  valiant  meu  who  joined 
David  at  Ziklag     B.C.  1088. 

1  Ch.12.  3  chief  (was)  Abiezer.  thenJoash.  .sons  of  S. 
SHE-MA'-IAH,  iryop,  }.Tyr!i?  Jah  is  fame. 

1.  A  prophet  sent  by  God  to  prevent  Rehoboam  warring 
against  Israel.     B.C.  975. 

t  Ki.12.  22  the  word  of  God  came  untoS.  the  man  of 

2  Ch.ii,    2  the  word  of  the  LoRbcame  to  S.  the  man 

12.  5  Then  came  S.  the  prophet  to  Rehoboam 
is.  7  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  S.,  saying 
12, 1 5  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  S. 

2.  Son  of  Shechaniah.  and  father  of  Hattush,  a  descend 
ant  of  David  through  Jehoiakim.     B.C.  480. 

1  Ch.  3.  22  sons  of  Shechaniah;  S  :  and  the  sons  ofS. 

3.  Father  of  Shiniri,  and  head  of  a  family  of  Simeon 
B  C.  800. 

1  Ch,  4, 37  Jedaiah,  the  son  of  Shimri,  the  son  of  S. 

4.  Son  of  Joel,  head  of  a  family  of  Reuben.     B.C.  1640. 

1  Ch.  5.  4  The  sons  of  Joel ;  S.  his  son.  Gog  his  son 
•<■  A  Merarite.     B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.  14  And  of  the  Levite*;  S.  the  son  of  Hasshub 
Neh   11.  15  Also  of  the  Levites:  S.  the  son  of  Hash. 

6  A  Levite,  father  of  Obadiah.     B.C.  470. 

1  Ch.  9.  16  Obadiah  the  son  of  S.,  the  son  of  Galal,  the 
7.  A  Kohathite,  whom  David  called  to  assist  in  bringing 
up  the  ark  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  15.  8  Of  the  sonsof  Elizaphan,  S  the  chief, and 
15.  11  Asaiah  and  Joel,  S..  and  Eliel,  and  Am. 
S-  A  Levite,  son  of  Nathaneel,  who  recorded  the  allot- 
ment of  the  priestly  offices  in  the  days  of  David  B.C 
1015. 

1  Ch.?4.    t  S   the  son  of  Nathaneel  the  scribe,  (one) 


9.  A  Kohathite,  son  of  Obed-edom,  agate  keeper  for  the 
tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.   4  the  sons  of  Obed-edom  (were)  S.  th*e  first 

25.  6  unto  S.  his  son  were  suusborn,  that  ruled 

26.  7  The  sons  of  S. ;  Othni,  and  Raphael,  and 

10.  A  Levite,  whom  Jehoshaphat  sent  to  teach  the  peo- 
ple in  the  cities  of  Judah.     B.C.  941. 

2  Ch.17.    8  with  them  (he  sent)  Levites,  (even)  S.,and 

11.  A  son  of  Jeduthun,  who  assisted  in  cleansing  the 
temple  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.     B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29. 14  and  of  the  sons  of  Jeduthun;  S.  and  Uz. 

12.  A  Levite  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  who  distributed 
the  freewill  offerings  to  the  Levites  in  their  cities.  B.C. 
726. 

2  Ch.31.  15  next  him  (were)  Eden.. and  S.,  Amariah 

13.  A  chief  Levite  in  the  days  of  Josiah.    B.C.  623. 

2  Ch.35.    9  Conaniah  also,  and  S.  and  Nethaneel,  his 

14.  A  son  of  Adonikam  who  returned  with  Ezra  in  the 
days  of  Artaxerxes.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra  8.  13  whose  names  (are).  .Eliphelet,  Jeiel.  .S. 

15.  A  person  whom  Ezra  sent  to  Iddo  to  ask  for  minis- 
ters.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra    8.  16  Then  sent  I  for  Eliezer,  for  Ariel,  for  S. 

16.  A  priest  who  had  married  a  strange  wife.    B.C. 

445- 

Ezra  10.  2r  of  the  sons  of  Harim  ;  Maaseiah.  .and  S 

17.  A  person  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  31  (of)  the  sons  of  Harim  ;  Eliezer.  .S.,  Shi. 

18.  A  person  that  helped  to  repair  the  wall.    B.C.  445. 
Neh.    3.  29  After  him  repaired  also  S.  the  son  of  Sh. 

19.  A  person  that  tried  to  intimidate  Nehemiah.    B.<\ 

445- 

Neh.   6.  10  I  came  unto  the  house  of  S.  the  son  of  D. 

20.  A  priest  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed  the  covenant. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10.   8  Maaziah,  Bilgai.  S-:  these  (were)  thepri. 
12.    6  S,,  and  Joiaifb.  Jedaiah 
12.  18  Of  Bilgah,  Shammua;  of  S.,  Jehonathan 
12.  34  Judah,  and  Benjamin,  and  S  ,  and  Jere. 
12.  35  Zechariah  the  son  of  Jonathan.,  son  of  S. 

21.  One  who  took  part  in  the  purification  of  the  wall. 
B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  36  his  brethren,  S.,  and  Azarael,  Milalai,  G. 

22.  One  that  gave  thanks  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall. 

B.C.  445. 

Neh.  12.  42  Maaseiah,  and  S.,  and  Eleazar,  and  Uzzi 

23  Father  of  Uriah  from  Kirjath-jearim  who  was  slain 
by  Jehoiakim  for  prophesying  against  Jerusalem  and 
Judah.     B.C.  630 

Jer    26.  20  Urijahthesonof  S  of  Kirjath-jearim,  who 

24  A  Nehalamite  that  wrote  from  Babylon  to  the  priests 
in  Jerusalem  to  reprove  Jeremiah.     B.C.  606. 

Jer.  29.  24  (Thus)  shalt  thou  also  speak  to  S.  the  N. 

29.  31  Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  S.  the  N. 

29.  31  S.  hath  prophesied  unto  you,  and  I  sent 

29.  32  I  will  punish  S.  the  Neheiamite,  and  his 

25.  Father  of  Delaiah  a  prince  of  the  Jews  to  whom 

Baruch  read  the  roll  which  he  had  written  from  the 

mouth  of  Jeremiah.     B  c  630. 

Jer.  36. 12  Delaiah  the  son  of  S.,  and  Elnathan  the 

SHE-MAR'-IAH,    SHA-MAR'-IAH,  n;^0;;,  l.T")G^. 

1  A  mighty  man  who  joined  David  in  Ziklag.  B.C.  1048- 

1  Ch.12.    5  Bealiah,  and  S.,  and  Shephatiah  the  Ha. 

2  Son  of  Rehoboam.  son  of  Solomon.     B.C.  975. 

2  Ch.11.  iq  Which  bare  him  children;  Jeush,  and  S- 

3  One  of  the  family  of  Harim  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  32  Benjamin.  Malluch.  (and)  S. 
4.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani  that  had  done  the  same. 
Ezra  10.  41  Azareel,  and  Shelemiah,  S. 

SHEM-E'-BER,  ~axp?y  splendour  of  heroism. 
A  king  of  Zeboim  in  the  days  of  Abraham.     B.C.  1917. 
Gen.  14.    2  these)  made  war  with..S.  king  of  Zebohm 

SHE'-MER,  IDiii  match. 

Owner  of  a  hill  which  Omri  purchased  and  on  which  he 

built  Samaria.     B.C.  925. 

1  Ki.  16.  24  he  bought  the  hill  Samaria  of  S.  for  two 
16.  24  called  the  name,  .after  the  name  of  S  ,  wo. 

SHE-Ml'-DAH,  SHE-MI' -DA  yyKV  fame  of  knowing  Q, 
Son  of  Gilead,  gramlson  of  Mauasseh.     B.C.  1450. 

N'um  -6  32  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shemidaites;  and(of) 
Josh  17.  2  There  was.. (a  lot).. for  the  children  of  S. 
1  Ch.  7,  19  the  sons  of  S.  were,  Ahian,  and  Shechem 

SHE-MI'-NTTH  — 

The  riqhth.  the  octave,  nvptfs hashshemtnith. 

1  Ch  15.  21  Azaziah.  with  harps  on  the  Shemiuith  to 

Psa.    6.  title.  To  the..  Musician  on  Neginothupon  s. 

12.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician  upon  Sheminitlt 

SHEMIDAITES,  '$?%$$. 

Family  of  the  preceding  Shemida'h. 

>  urn  26.  32  And  (of)  Shemicta  the  family  of  the  S 


SHEMIRAMOTH 


87^ 


SHEW 


SUZ-iai-RA'-MOTH,  ritarj'py  fame  of  the  highest. 
1.  A  Levite  appointed  for  the  choral  service  of  the  ta- 
nernacle.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  18  S.,  and  Jehiel,  and  TTnui,  Eliab,  and  Be. 

15.  20  And  Zechariah,  and  Aziel,  and  S.,  and  J. 

16.  5  Asaph  the  chief,  and  next  to  him . .  S.,  and 
•2.  Another,  whom  Jehoshaphat  sent  to  teach  the  people 
in  the  cities  of  Judah.    B.C.  913. 

2  Ch.17.  8  Asahel,  and  S.,  and  Jehonathan,  and  Ad. 
SHE-MTJ'-EL,  hmtyp  heard  of  God. 

1.  A  chief  Sinieonite,  appointed  to  divide  the  land  W. 
of  the  Jordan.     B.C.  1452. 

NU11134.  20  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Simeon,  S. 

2.  -Samuel  the  prophet,  father  of  Joel.    (See  1  Sa.  1.  1 
and  8.  2).    B.C.  1171-1060. 

1  Ch.  6  33  Hemana  singer,  the  sonof  Joel. .sou of  S. 
"J.  Uead  of  a  family  in  Issachar. 

1  Ch.  7.  2  Jibsam,  and  S..  heads  of  their  father's  ho. 
SHEN,  \&  peak,  tooth. 

A  place  in  Benjamin,  near  Mizpeh,  lying  W.  of  Jerusa- 
lem, and  E.  of  Ixirjath-jearim. 

1  Sa.  7. 12  Samuel. .  set  (it)  between  "Mizpeh  and  S. 
SHEN-AZ'-ZAR,  1VW- 

Son  or  grandson  of  Jeconiah  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  580. 

1  Ch.  3.  18  Malcbiram  also,  and  Pedaiah,  and  S.,  Je. 
SHE'-NLR,  SE'-NLR,  Tip,  ^'p  peak,  snoio. 
The  mountain  between  Amanah  and  Hermou,  at  the 
NJ5.  of  Jordan. 

Deut.  3.    9  (Which1)  Hernion .  .the  Amorites  call.  .S. 

1  Ch.  5.  23  they  increased  fromBashan  unto.  .S..  and 
Song  4.  8  from  the  top  of  S.  and  Hermon,  from  the 
Eze.  27.    5  made  all  thy  (ship)  boards  of  fir  trees  of  S. 

SHE'-PHAM,  n?y  fruitful. 

A  place  E.  of  the  sea  of  Cinneroth  at  the  N..  between 

Hazar-enan,  Riblah,  and  Ain. 

Nuni34.  10  shall  point  out  your  east  border,  .to  S. 
34.  11  the  coast  shall  go  down  from  S  toRiblah 

SHE -PH AT' -I AH,  .Tpsy,  in;tp5tf  Jah  is  judge. 

1.  Fifth  son  of  David, "by  Abital.'  B.C.  1030. 

2  Sa.   3.    4  and  the  fifth,  S  the  son  of  Abital 

1  Ch.  3.   3  The  fifth.  S.  of  Abital;  the  sixth,  Ithream 

2.  A  Beujamite,  father  of  Meshullam  that  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem.    B.C.  470 

1  Ch.  9.    8  Meshullam  the  son  of  S. ,  the  son  of  Reuel 

3.  Another,  a  valiant  man  that  joined  David  at  Ziklag. 
B.C.     1048. 

1  Ch.12.    s  Bealiah,  and  Sheniariah,  and  S  the  Har 

4.  A  prince  of  Simeon  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015 

1  Ch.27.  16  of  the  Simeonites;  S.  the  son  of  Maachah 
■5.  A  son  of  king  Jehoshaphat.     B.C.  890. 

2  Ch.21.    2  Zechariah,  and  Azariah,  and  Michael.. S. 

0.  A  person  whose  descendants  returned   with  Zerub- 
babel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  4  The  children  of  S  ,  three  hundred  seventy 
Neh.  7.   9  The  children  of  S  ,  threehundred  seventy 

? .  One  of  Solomon's  servants  whose  descendants  returned 

with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  57  The  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Hattil 
Neh.   7.  59  The  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Hattil 

5.  One  whose"  descendant  Zebadiah  and  eighty  males 
returned  with  Ezra.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra  8.  8  And  of  the  sons  of  S  ;  Zebadiah  the  son  of 
9.  A  descendant  of  Pharez,  some  of  whose  descendants 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  550. 

Neh*.  11,  4  Amariah,  the  son  of  S.,  the  son  of  Maha. 
1C.  Son  of  Mattan,  a  prince  of  Judah  iu  the  days  of 
Zedekiah.     B.C.  600. 

Jer.   38.    1  S.  the  son  of  Mattan,  and  Gedaliah  the 
SHEPHERD  — 

1.  To  feed  sheep,  nyi  raah. 

Gen.  49.  24  from  thence  (is)  the  shepherd,  the  stone 
Exod  2.  17  the  shepherds  came  and  drove  them  aw. 
2.  19  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  shep. 
Nuni27.  17  be  not  as  sheep  which  have  no  shepherd 
1  Sa.  17.  40  put  them  in  a  shepherd's  bag  which  he 
25.    7  now  thy  shepherds  which  were  with  us 

1  Ki.22. 1 7  scattered. .  as  sheep  that  have  not  a  sheph. 

2  Ch.  18. 16  scattered,  .as  sheep  that  have  no  shep. 
Psa.  23.    1  Lord  (is)  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want 

80.    1  Give  ear,  0  shepherd  of  Israel,  thou  that 

Eccl.  12. 11  assemblies,  (which)  are  given  from  onesh. 

Song  1.    8  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents 

Isa.    13.  20  neither  shall  the  shepherds  make  their 

31.   4  when  a  multitude  of  shepherds  is  called 

40.  11  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd ;  he 

44.  28  (He  is)  my  shepherd,  and  shall  perform 

56.  11  they  (are)  shepherds  (that)  cannot  under. 

63. 1 1  out  of  the  sea  with  the  shepherd  of  his  fl .  v 
Jer     6.    3  The  shepherds  with  their  flocks  shall  come 

23.  4  will  set  up  shepherds  over  them  which 
25.  34  Howl  ye  shepherds,  and  cry ;  and  wallow 
25.  35  shepherds  shall  have  no  way  to  flee,  nor 
25.  36  A  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  shepherds,  and 
31.  io  and  keep  him,  as  a  shepherd  (doth)  his  fl. 
33.  12  shall  be  an  habitation  of  shepherds  caus. 

43. 12  as  a  shepherd  putteth  on  his  garment;  and 

49.  19  who  (is)  that  shepherd  that  will  stand  bo. 

50.  6  their  shepherds  have  caused  them  to  z>> 
so.  44  who  (is)  that  shepherd  that  will  stand  be 


Jer.  51. 

23 

Eze.  34. 

2 

34- 

2 

34- 

2 

34- 

5 

34- 

7 

34- 

8 

34- 

8 

34- 

9 

34- 

10 

34- 

12 

34- 

23 

37- 

=4 

Amos  1. 

2 

3- 

12 

Mic.    5. 

■; 

Nali.  3. 

18 

Zeph.  2. 

6 

Zech  to. 

2 

10. 

3 

11. 

3 

it. 

S 

11. 

8 

11. 

■i 

11. 

ib 

13- 

7 

13- 

7 

break  in  pieces  with  thee  the  shepherd 
prophesy  against  the  shepherds  of  Israel 
unto  theshepherds ;  Woe(be)  to  the  shep. 
should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  flocks? 
scattered,  because  (there  is)  no  shepherd 
Therefore,  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word 
no  shepherd,  neither  did  my  shepherds  se. 
but  the  shepherds  fed  themselves,  and  fed 
Therefore,  O  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word 
the  shepherds,  .neither  shall  the  shephe. 
As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  iu  the 
one  shepherd . .  and  he  shall  be  their  shep 
they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd  :  they 
habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall  mourn 
As  the  shepherd  taketh  out  of  the  mouth 
shall  we  raise  agaiust  him  seven  shepherds 
Thy  shepherds  slumber,  O  king  of  Assyria 
cottages  for  shepherds,  and  folds  for  flo. 
were  troubled,  because  (there  was)  no  sh. 
Mine  anger  was  kindled  against  the  shep. 
a  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds 
and  then  own  shepherds  pity  them  not 
Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  mo. 
Take,  .the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shep. 
For,  lo,  I  will  raise  up  a  shepherd  in  the 
Awake,  Osword.agaiust  my  shepherd,  and 
smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall 

2.  Feeding,  *jp  roi. 

Isa.  38.  12  is  removed  from  me  as  a  shepherd's  tent 
Zech  11. 17  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the 

3.  To  feed  a  flock,  JN!»  njfi  raah  (son. 

Gen.  46.  32  the  men  (are)  shepherds,  for  their  trade 

46.  34  every  shepherd  (is)  an  abomination  unto 

47,  3  Thyservauts(are)shepherds,bothwe,(and 

i.A  feeder, shepherd {&v6pomo s)  ttoi/xtjv (anthropos). 
Matt.  g.  36  were  scattered  abroad,  .having  no  sheph. 

25.  32  as  a  shepherd  divideth  (his)  sheep  from  the 

26.  31  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep 
Mark  6.  34  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd 

14.  27  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep 
Luke  2.   8  there  were  in  the  same  country  shepherds 
2.  15  the  shepherds  said  one  to  another,  Let  us 
2.  18  which  were  told  them  by  the  shepherds 
2.  20  the  shepherds  returned,  glorifying  and  pr. 
John  10.    2  he  that  entereth  in .  .is  the  shepherd  of 
10. 11  I  am  the  good  shepherd :  the  good  sheph 
10.  12  he  that  is  an  hireling,  and  not  the  sheph. 
10.  14  I  am  the  good  shepherd,  and  know  my  (s.) 
10.  16  there  shall  be  one  fold,  (and) one  shepherd 
Heb.  13.  20  our  Lord  Jesus,  that  great  shepherd  of 
1  Pe.   2.  25  are  now  returned  unto  the  shepherd  and 

SHEPHERD,  chief  — 

Chief  shepherd,  a.pxmoifx.rji'  archipoimen. 

1  Pe.   5.    4  when  the  chief  shepherd  shall  appear,  ye 

SHE'-PHO,  isy,  'Di?  unconcern. 

A  son  of  Shobal,  son  of  Seir  the  Horite.    B.C.  1740. 
Geu.  36.  23  Alvan.  and  Manahath,  and  Ebal,  S.,  and 
1  Ch.  1.  40  Alian,  and  Manahath,  and  Ebal,  S  ,  and 

SHE-PHTJ'-PHAN,  fBlS;?  serpent. 

A  son  of  Bela,  son  of  Benjamiu.     B.C.  1630. 

1  Ch.  8.    5  And  Gera,  and  S.,  and  Huram 
SHE'-RAH,  nnxaJ  blood- relationship. 
Daughter  of  Beriah,  son  of  Ephraim    or  daughter  of 
Ephraim  and  sister  of  Beriah.     B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  7.  24  his  daughter  (was)  S.,  who  built  Beth-ho. 
SHERD  — 
Earthenware,  potsherd,  b,-jn  cheres. 

Isa.    30.  14  there  shall  not  be  found.,  a  sherd  to  take 

Eze.  23.  34  thoushalt  break  the  sherds  thereof,  and 

SHE-REB'-IAH,  n*2-)V  Jah  is  originator. 

1,  A  priest  with  eighteen  sons  and  brethren  who  were 
brought  to  Ezra  to  return  to  Jerusalem.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  8.  18  S.,  with  his  sous  and  his  brethren,  eight. 
8. 24  S.,  Hashabiah,  and  ten  of  their  brethren 

Neh.  8.  7  Jeshua,  and  Bani,  and  S.,  Jamin,  Akkub 
9.  4  Shebauiah,  Bunui,  S.,  Bani,  (and)  Chenani 
9.    5  Hashabniah,S.,Hodijah,  Shebaniah,(and) 

2.  A  Levite  that  with  Xehemiah  sealed  the  covenant. 
B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10.  12  Zaccur,  S.,  Shebauiah 

12.    8  Jeshua,  Binnui,  Kadmiel.S.,  Judah,  (and) 
12.  24  Hashabiah,  S.,  and  Jeshua  the  son  of  Ka. 

SHE'-RESH,  cn^  union. 

Son  of  Machir  son  of  Manasseh  and  brother  of  Peresh; 

his  sons  were  Ullarn  and  Rekesh.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7. 16  the  name  of  his  brother  (was)  S. :  and  his 
SHERIFFS  — 
Judges,  supreme  masters,  prefects,  N;.n?n  liphtaye. 

Dan.   3.   2,  3  the  sheriffs,  and  all  the  rulers  of  the  p. 
SHE'-SHACH,  -&j. 

A  mystical  name  of  Babylon,  alluding  to  its  iron  gates 
or  idols. 

Jer.    25.  26  and  the  king  of  S.  shall  drink  after  them 
51. 41  How  is  S.  taken ;  and  how  is  the  praise  of 

SHE'-SHAI,  w  free,  noble. 

A  son  of  Auak,  in  Hebron  in  the  days  of  Joshua.   B.C. 

1450. 

NUIH13.  22  where  Ahiman,  S.,  and  Talmai,  the  chil. 
Josh  15.  14  drove  thence  thethreesonsofAnak,S.,anu 
Judg.  1.  10  and  they  slew  S.,  and  Ahiman,  and  Talmai 


SHE-SHAN,  }vv  free,  noble. 

A  descendant  of  Jerahmeel  grandson  of  Pharez  son  of 

Judah.     B.C.  1415. 

1  Ch.  2.  31  the  sons  of  Ishi;  S.  And  the  children  of  S. 

2.  34  S.  had  no  sons,  but  daughters.  And  S.  had 
2.  35  S.  gave  his  daughter  to  Jarlia  his  servant 

SHESH-BAZ'-ZAR,  1S3^g>. 

The  governor  whom  Cyrus  set  over  Judah,  elsewhere 

called  Zerubbabel.     B.C  536. 

Ezra    1.    8  numbered  them  unto  S.,  the  prince  of  J. 

1.  11  (these)  did  S.  bring  up  with  (them  of)  the 
5.  14  (one),  whose  name  (was)  S.,  whom  he  had 
5.  16  Then  came  the  same  S.,  (and)  laid  the  fo. 

SHETH,  ne>. 

Some  Moabite  chief  or  tribe. 

NUIU24.  17  smite.. and  destroy  all  the  children  of  S. 

SHE'-THAR,  irr  star,  commander. 

One  of  the  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  Media  that  saw 

the  king's  face  at  pleasure.     B.C.  510. 

Esth.  1.  14  the  next  unto  him  (was)  Carshena,  S,  Ad. 
SHE-THAR  BOZ'-NAI,  'ilia  TOP  starry  splendour. 
An  official  of  the  king  of  Persia  in  the  district  adjoining 
Judah.     s.C.  445. 

Ezra    5.    3  At  the  same  time  came  to  them.  .S.,  and 

5.  6  S.,  and  his  companions  the  Apharsachites 

6.  6  (therefore).  .S.,  and  your  companions  the 
6  13  Then  Tatnai-.S  .  and  their  companions 

SBZ:'-VA,  x'v,  tty?  self-satisfying. 

1.  A  scribe  or  secretary  of  David.    B.C.  1030. 

2  Sa.  20.  25  And  S.  (was)  scribe ;  and  Zadok  and  Abi. 

2.  Father  of  Machbenah  and  son  of  Maachah  concubine 
of  Caleb  son  of  Jephunueh.     B.C.  1450. 

1  Ch.  2.  49  S.  the  father  of  Machbenah,  and  the  father 
SHEW,  show— 

1.  Discerning,  n"J5D  hakkarah. 

Isa.   3,   9  The  show  of  their  countenance  doth  witness 

2.  Word,  matter,  \6yos  logos. 

Col.  2.  23  Which  things  have  indeed  a  show  of  wis* 
3.Appeara?ice,  pretence,  irp6<pa(ris  prophasis. 

Lukeso.  47  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a  show 
SHEW,  to  — 

l.To  uncover  the  ear,  reveal,  |JN  n?3  galah  ozen. 
1  Sa.  20.  2  do  nothing. .  but  that  fie  will  shew  it  me 
20.  12  I  then  send  not  unto  thee,  and  shew  it 
20.  13  I  will  shew  it  thee,  and  send  thee  away 
22.  8  (there  is)  none  that  sheweth  me  that  my 
22.  8  or  sheweth  unto  me  that  my  son  hath  st 
22. 17  they  knew,  .and  did  not  shew  it  to  me 

2.7b  shew,  indicate,  nin  chavah,  3. 

Job  15  17  I  will  shew  thee,  hear  me ;  and  that(wh.) 
32.  6  I  was  afraid, and  durst  not  shew  you  mint- 
32.  10  Hearken  to  me  ;  I  also  will  shew  mine  op. 

32.  17  (I  said).  .1  also  will  shew  mine  opinion 
36-    2  I  will  shew  thee  that  (I  have)  yet  to  speak 

Psa.  19.    2  and  night  unto  night  sheweth  knowledge 

3.  To  shew,  indicate,  ton,  <"i]n  chava,  3. 

Dan.   2.    4  tell,  .and  we  will  shew  the  interpretation 

2.  11  there  is  none  other  that  caushew  it  before 
2.  24  will  shewuuto  the  kingthe  interpretation 
5.    7  Whosoever  shall  read  this  writing,  and  s 

4.  To  shew,  indicate,  rnn,  n)n  chava,  5. 

Dau.  2.  6  if  ye  shew  the  dream,  and  the  interpreta. 
2.  6  shew  me  the  dream,  and  the  interpretation 
2.  7  and  we  will  shew  the  interpretation  of  it 
2.  9  I  shall  know  that  ye  can  shew  me  the 
2.  10  There  is  not  a  man.  .that can  shew  the  k. 
2.  16  he  would  shewthe  kingthe  interpretation 
2.  27  cannot  the  wise  (men),  .shew  unto  the  k. 

4.  2  I  thought  it  good  to  shew  the  signs  and 

5.  12  shewing  of  hard  sentences,  and  dissolving 
5. 15  they  could  not  shew  the  interpretation  of 

5.  To  cause  lo  knoio,  pT  yada,  5. 

Geu.  41.  39  God  hath  shewed  thee  all  this,  (there  is) 
ExodiS.  20  shalt  shew  them  the  way  wherein  they 

33.  13  shew  me  now  thy  way,  that  I  may  know 
Num.16.  5  the  Lord  will  shew  who(are)his,aud(who) 
1  Sa.  10.    8  till  I  come  to  thee,  and  shew  thee  what 

14. 12  Come  up  to  us,  and  we  will  shew  you  a 

16.  3  and  I  will  shew  thee  what  thou  shalt  do 
i  Ki.  1.  27  thou  hast  not  shewed(it)untothyservant 
Job  10.  2  shewnie  wherefore  thou  contendest  with 
Psa.  16.  11  Thouwiltshewmethepath  of  life  :  in  thy 

25.  4  Shew  me  thy  ways,  0  Lord  ;  teach  me  thy 
25.  14  and  he  will  shew  them  his  covenant 
Isa.  40.  14  shewed  to  him  the  way  of  understanding 
Eze.  20.  11  Igavethemmystatutes.andshewedtheni 
22.  2  thou  shalt  shew  her  all  her  abominations 
22.  26  neither  have  they  shewed  (difference)  be. 
43.  11  shew  them  the  form  of  the  house  and  the 

6. To  cast,  shew,  direct,  H"r  yarah,  5. 

Exodi5.25  the  Lord  shewed  him  a  tree,  (whieh)whcn 
7. To  put  or  place  before^  i:}  nagad,  5. 

Gen.  41.  25  God  hath  shewed  Pharaoh  what  he  (is)  a 
46.  31  I  will  go  up,  and  shew  Pharaoh,  and  say 

Exodi3-    8  thou  shalt  shew  thy  sou  in  that  day,  say 

Deut.  5.    5  Istood. .toshewyouthe  wordof  theLoRD 

17.  9  they  shall  shew  thee  the  sentence  of  jud. 
1 7.  10  which  they  of  that  place . .  shall  shew  thee 
17.  11  from  the  sentence  which  they  shall  shew 
32.    7  ask  thy  father,  aud  he  will  shew  thee 


SHEW 


.Tudg.  4. 

12 

!•!• 

10 

ib. 

18 

Ruth  2. 

19 

iSa 

1- 

»5 

ti 

9 

9 

6 

11. 

9 

19. 

7 

22. 

21 

=4- 

18 

2S- 

8 

2  Si 

[I. 

22 

2  ICi 

.  6. 

11 

7- 

12 

22. 

10 

Ezra 

2. 

S9 

Nell 

7' 

61 

JSstl 

.  2. 

10 

2. 

10 

2. 

20 

1- 

6 

Job 

II. 

6 

Il- 

23 

,6. 

9 

*>• 

33 

i'sa. 

ip. 

1 

71- 

liS 

Q2. 

IS 

III. 

6 

42. 

2 

147- 

19 

Isa. 

41. 

41. 

23 

41- 

26 

44. 

7 

^. 

1 

Jer. 

16. 

10 

33- 

3 

42. 

3 

Si- 

31 

Eze. 

37 

18 

43- 

10 

Dan 

2. 

2 

9- 

23 

Mic.   6.    8 


they  shewed  Siserathat  Barak  the  son  of 
shewed  her  husband,  and  said  unto  him 
Come  up  this  once,  for  he  hath  shewed 
she  shewed  her  mother  in  law  with  whom 
And  Samuel  feared  to  shew  EU  the  vision 
shew  them  the  manner  of  the  king  that 
he  can  shew  us  our  way  that  we  should 
the  messengers  came  and  shewed  (it)  to 
and  Jonathan  shewed  him  all  those  tilings 
Abiathar  shewed  David  that  Saul  had 
thou  hast  shewed  this  day  how  that  thou 
Ask  thy  young  men,  and  they  will  shew 
came  and  shewed  David  all  that  Joab 
Will  ye  not  shew  me  which  of  us  (is)  for 
I  will  now  shew  you  what  the  Syrians  h. 
the  scribe  shewed  the  king,  saying,  Bilk. 
they  could  not  shew  their  father's  house 
they  could  not  shew  their  father's  house 
Esther  hadnotshewed  her  people  nor  her 
charged  her  that  she  should  not  shew  (it) 
Esther  had  not  (yet)  shewed  her  kindred 
they  had  shewed  him  the  people  of  Mor. 
that  he  would  shew  thee  the  secrets  of  w. 
one.  .to  shew  unto  man  his  uprightness 
he  sheweth  them  their  work,  and  their 
The  noise  thereof  sheweth  concerning  it 
and  the  firmament  sheweth  his  handy  w. 
uutil  I  have  shewed  thy  strength  unto 
To  shew  that  the  Lord  (is)  upright :  (he 
He  hath  shewed  his  people  the  power  of 
I  poured  out  my  complaint . .  I  shewed  be. 
He  sheweth  his  word  unto  Jacob,  his  sta. 
shew  us  what  shall  happen  :  let  them  shew 
She  w  the  things  that  are  to  come  hereafter 
(there  is)  none  that  sheweth  ;  yea,  (there 
the  things  that  are  coming,  .let  them  sh. 
shew  my  people  their  transgression,  and 
thou  shalt  shew  this  people  all  these  wo. 
shewthee  great  and mighty;things,  which 
God  mayshew  usthe  way  wherein  wemay 
to  shew  the  king  of  Babylon  that  his  city 
Wilt  thou  not  shew  us  what  thou  (mean.) 
shew  the  house  to  the  house  of  Israel,  that 
to  call  the  magicians,  .to  shew  the  king 
I  am  come  to  shew  (thee);  for  thou  (art) 
I  will  shew  thee  that  which  is  noted  in 
now  will  I  shew  thee  the  truth.    Behold 
He  hath  shewed  thee,  0  man,  what  (is) 


S.To  incline,  stretch  out,  no:  natah. 

Gen.  39.  21  the  Lord  was  with  Joseph,  aud  shewed 

9.  To  give,  |m  nalhan. 

Exod.  7.    9  Pharaoh  shall  speak  unto  you,  saying,  S. 
Deut.  6.  22  the  Lord  she  wed  signs  and  wonders,  great 

13.  17  show  thee  mercy,  and  have  compassion 
Neh.   9.  10  shewedst  signs  aud  wondersupon  Pharaoh 
Jer.  16.  13  a  land,  .where  I  will  not  shew  you  favour 

42.  12  I  will  shew  mercies  unto  you,  that  he 
Joel    2.  30  I  will  shew  wonders  in  the  heavens  and 

10.  To  do,  make,  ntfj>  asah. 

Gen.  19.  19  thy  mercy,  which  thou  hast  shewed  unto 
20. 13  thy  kindness  which  thou  shalt  shew  unto 
24.  12  shew  kindness  unto  my  master  Abraham 
24.  14  thou  hast  shewed  kindness  unto  my  ma. 
32.  10  which  thou  hast  shewed  uuto  thy  servaut 
40.  14  shew  kindness,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me,  and 

Exodi4. 13  salvation  of  the  Lord,  which  he  will  shew 
20.    6  shewing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them 

Numi4.  n  the  signs  which  I  have  shewed  amongth. 

Deut.  5. 10  shewing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them 
34.  12  the  great  terror  which  Moses  shewed  in 

Josh.  2.  12  Now.. since  I  have  shewed  you  kindness 
2. 12  will  also  shew  kindness  unto  my  father's 

Judg.  1.  24  into  tlie  city,  and  we  will  shew  thee  me. 
6.  17  shew  me  a  sign  that  thou  talkest  with  me 
8.  35  Neither  shewed  they  kindness  to  the  ho. 

8.  35  the  goodness  which  he  had  shewed  unto 

1  Sa.  15.    6  ye  shewed  kindness  to  all  the  children  of 

20.  14  thou  shalt  not  only  while  yet  I  live  shew 

2  Sa.   2.    5  ye  have  shewed  this  kindness  unto  your 

2.  6  the  Lord  shew  kindness  and  truth  uuto 

3.  8  which  against  Judahdo  shew  kindness  th. 

9.  1  that  I  may  shew  him  kindness  for  Jon. 

9.  3  that  I  may  shew  the  kindness  of  God  unto 
9.  7  I  will  surely  shew  thee  kindness  for  Jon. 
10.  2  I  will  shew  kindness  unto  Ilanun  the  son 
10  2  as  his  father  shewed  kindness  unto  me 
22.  51  sheweth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  unto  D. 
1  Ki.  2.  7  shew  kindness  unto  the  sons  of  Barzillai 
3.  6  Thou  hast  shewed  unto  thy  servant  David 
16.  27  acts  of  OmrL.and  his  might  that  he  shew. 
22.  45  his  might  that  he  shewed,  and  how  he 

1  Ch.19.    2  I  will  shew  kindness  unto  Hanun  the  son 

19.    2  because  his  father  shewed  kindness  to  me 

2  Ch.  1.    8  Thou  hast  shewed  great  mercy  unto  David 

7. 10  the  goodness  that  the  Loud  had  shewed 
Psa.  t8:  50  sheweth  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to  David 
86.  17  Shew  me  a  token  for  good  ;  that  thev  which 
88.  10  Wilt  thou  shew  wonders  to  the  dead?  shall 
109.  16  that  he  remembered  not  to  shew  mercy 
Jer.  32.  18  Thou  shewest  loving  kindness  unto  thou. 
Eze.  33.  31  with  their  mouth  they  shew  much  love 
Zech.  7.   9  shew  mercy  and  compassions  every  man 

ll.ro  see,  let  see,  nx"i  raah. 

Jer.   18.  17  I  will  shew  them  the  back,  and  not  the  face 
12.  To  cause  to  see,  nx-i  rank,  5. 

Gen.  12.   1  Gettl untaalandthat  Iwillshewthee 

41.28  What  God  (is)  about  to  do  he  sheweth  un. 
48.  ii  lo,  God  hath  shewed  me  also  thy  seed 


Num. 


13- 

23- 

Deut.  1. 

3* 

4> 

5' 

34. 

Josh.  5 

Judg.  1. 


13' 
2  Sa.  15. 
2  Ki.  6. 


Esth. 


Psa.    4. 

50. 
60. 
71- 

7s- 
85- 

T  9I* 

Isa.   30. 

39- 
39- 
39- 

Jer.  n. 
24 

Eze.  11. 

40. 

40. 

Amos  7. 

7- 

8. 
Mic.  7. 
Nah.  3 
Hab.  1. 
Zech.  1. 


878 

Exod  9.  16  have  I  raised  thee  up,  for  to  shew  (in)  thee 
25.  9  According  to  all  that  I  shew  thee,  (after) 
27.  8  as  it  was  shewed  thee  in  the  mount,  so 
n.  18  he  said,  I  beseech  thee,  shewmethy  glory 
4  the  pattern  which  the  Lord  had  shewed 
26  and  shewed  them  the  fruit  of  the  land 

3  whatsoever  he  sheweth  me  I  will  tell  thee 
33  to  shew  you  by  what  way  ye  should  go 
24  thou  hast  begun  to  shew  thy  servant  thy 
36  upon  eartli  he  shewed  thee  his  great  fire 
24  the  Lord  our  God  hath  shewed  us  his  gl. 

1  the  Lord  shewed  him  all  the  land  of  Gilead 
6  he  would  not  shew  them  the  land  which 

24  Shew  us,  we  pray  thee,  the  entrance  into 

25  he  shewed  them  the  entrance  into  the  city 

22  I  will  shew  thee  the  man  whom  thou  seek. 

23  neither  would  he  have  shewed  usall  these 
25  and  shew  me  (both)  it  and  his  habitation 

6  Where  fell  it?  And  he  shewed  him  the  pi. 

10  the  Lord  hath  shewed  me  that  he  shall  s. 
13  The  Lord  hath  shewed  me  that  thou  (shalt 

4  took  an  oath,  .and  shewed  them  the  king's 
13  shewed  them  all  the  house  of  his  precious 
13  nothing,  .that  Heeekiah  shewed  them  not 

15  there  is  nothing. .  I  have  not  shewed  them 
4  he  shewed  the  riches  of  his  glorious  king. 

11  to  shew  the  people  and  the  princes  herb. 

8  to  shew  (it)  unto  Esther,  and  to  declare  (it) 

6  (There  be)  many  that  say,  Who  will  shew 
23  to  him . .  will  I  shew  the  salvation  of  God 

3  Thou  hast  shewed  thy  people  hard  things 

20  (Thou),  which  hast  shewed  me  great  and 
11  and  his  wonders  that  he  had  shewed  th. 

7  Shew  us  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  and  grant  us 

16  With  long  life  will  I  satisfy  him,  and  shew 
30  shall  shew  the  lighting  down  of  his  arm 

2  shewed  them  the  house  of  his  precious  th. 

2  nothing.  .thatHezekiah  shewed  them  not 

4  there  is  nothing.  .1  have  not  shewed  th. 
18  then  thou  shewedst  me  their  doings 

1  The  Lord  shewed  me,  and,  behold,  two 

21  this  (is)  the  word  that  the  Lord  hath  sh. 
25  the  things  that  the  Lord  had  shewed  me 

4  set  thine  heart  upon  all.. I  shall  shewth. 
4  to  the  intent  that  I  might  shew  (them) 
1,  4  Tims  hath  the  Lord  GOD  shewed  unto 
7  Thus  he  shewed  me ;  and,  behold,  the  L. 
1  Thus  hath  the  Lord  GOD  shewed  uuto  me 
15  will  I  shew  unto  him  marvellous  (things) 
.    5  will  shew  the  nations  thy  nakedness,  and 

3  Why  dost  thou  shew  me  iniquity,  and  ca. 

9  said  unto  me,  I  will  shew  thee  what  these 
,  20  And  the  Lord  shewed  me  four  carpenters 

3.    1  he  shewed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  st. 

13. To  set,  place,  put,  dve',  nib  sum,  sim. 

Psa.  105.  27  They  shewed  his  signs  among  [them,  and 
Isa.  47.    6  thou  didst  shew  them  no  mercy ;  upon  the 

14.  To  set,  place,  put,  n"ty  shith. 

Exod  10.    1  that  I  might  shew  these  my  s^gns  before 

15.  To  cause  to  hear,  j/p?'  shamea,  5. 

1  Sa.   9.  27  that  I  may  shew  thee  the  word  of  God 
Isa.   43.    9  who  amongthem  can  declare  this,  and  wh. 
43.  12  I  have  shewed,  when  (there  was)  no  str. 
48.    3  went  forth  out  of  my  mouth,  and  I  shewed 
48.    5  before  it  came  to  pass  I  shewed  (it)  thee 
48.    6  I  have  shewed  thee  new  things  from  this 

16.  To  tell  back  or  again,  aycyyeWa}  anaygello. 
John  16.  13  and  he  will  shew  you  things  to  come 

16.  14  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew 
16.  15  he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  [shew] 
16.  25  but  [I  shall  shew]  you  plainly  of  tiie  Fa. 
Acts  19.  18  and  confessed,  and  shewed  their  deeds 
20.  20  have  shewed  you,  and  have  taught  you 

17 -To  shew  back  or  again,  avab*eiKvvni  anadeiknu. 
Acts    1.  24  shew  whether  of  these  two  thou  hast  ch. 

18.  To  tell  off"  or  away,  a-KayyiWu)  apaygello. 
Matt  12.  18  and  he  shall  shew  judgment  to  the  Gen. 

28.  11  shewed  unto  the  chief  priests  all  the  thi. 

Luke  7.  18  the  disciples  of  John  shewed  him  of  all 
14.  21  that  servant  came,  and  shewed  his  lord 

Acts  11.  13  he  shewed  us  how  he  had  seen  an  angel 
12.  17  shew  these  things  unto  James,  and  to  the 
26.  20  But  shewed  first  unto  them  of  Damascus 
28.  21  neither  any. .  shewed  orspakeanyharm  of 

1  Tli.  1.   9  they  themselves  shew  of  us  what  manner 

1  Jo.    1.    2  shew  unto  you  that  eternal  life  which  was 

19.  To  she%o  off  or  away,  air oZ^'ikvv(jll  apodciknwnii. 

2  Th.  2.    4  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  shewing  lii. 

20.  To  shew,  htiKvvw  deiknuo. 

Matt.  4.    8  sheweth  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  wo. 
8.    4  shew  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  the 
16.  21  that  time  forth  began  Jesus  to  shewunto 
Mark  1.  44  shew  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  for 

14. 15  he  will  shew  you  a  large  upper  room  fur. 

Luke  4.    5  shewed  unto  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 

5.  14  shew  thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  for 

22. 12  And  heshall  shew  you  alargeupper  room 

John  2. 18  What  sign  shewest  thou  unto  us,  seeing 

5.  20  sheweth  him  all  things  that  himself  doeth 

5.  20  he  will  shew  him  greater  works  than  these 

10.  32  Many  good  works  have  I  shewed  you  from 

14.    8  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father,  anditsufnceth 

14.   9  how  sayest  thou  (then),  Shew  us  the  Father 

20.  20  he  shewed  unto  them  (his)  hands  and  his 

Acts  7.    3  come  into  the  land  which  I  shall  shew  th. 

10.  28  God  hath  shewed  me  that  I  should  notca. 


SHEW 


i  Co.  12.  31  yet  shew  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way 

1  Ti.  6.  15  Which  in  his  timeshe  shallshew,  (who  is) 
Heb.  8.  5  the  pattern  shewed  to  thee  in  the  mount 
Jas.    2. 18  shew  me  thy  faith  without  thy  works 

2.  18  and  I  will  shew  thee  my  faith  by  my  wo. 

3.  13  let  him  shew  out  of  a  good  conversation 
Rev.    1.    1  to  shew  unto  his  servants  things  which 

4.  1  I  will  shew  thee  things  which  must  be 

17.  1  I  will  shew  unto  thee  the  judgment  of  the 

21.  9  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wi. 
21. 10  shewed  me  that  great  city,  the  holy  Jeru. 

22.  1  he  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life 
22.  6  sent  his  angel  to  shew  uuto  his  servants 
22.'  8  the  angel  which  shewed  me  these  things 

21. To  manifest,  Srj\6cv  deloo. 

2  Pe.   1. 14  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  shewed  me 

22.  To  give,  5t5co^i  didomi, 

Matt24.  24  and  shall  shew  great  signs  and  wonders 
Marki3.  22  [shall  shewjsigns  and  wonders,  to  seduce 

23.  To  lead  through,  tell  thoroughly,  8ir}yeofj.at. 
Luke  8.  39  shew  how  great  things  God  hath  done  unto 

24. To  manifest  clearly,  ifx<pavi£co  einphaaizo. 
Acts  23.  22  tell  no  man  that  thou  hast  shewed  these 

25.  To  show  clearly  or  inwardly,  4y5eiKt/vfxi  endeiJc. 
Rom.  2.  15  Which  shew  the  work  of  the  law  written 

9.  17  that  I  might  shew  my  power  in  thee,  and 

9.  22  (What)  if  God,  willing  to  shew  (his)  wrath 
a  Co.  8.  24  shew  ye  to  them,  and  before  the  churches 
Eph.  2.  7  he  might  shew  the  exceeding  riches  of  his 
Titus  2.  10  Not  purloining,  but  shewing  all  good  fid. 

3.    2  (but)  gentle,  shewing  all  meekness  unto 
Heb.    6.  10  labour  of  love,  which  ye  have  shewed  to. 

6.  11  we  desire  that  every  one  of  you  do  shew 

26. To  shew  in  addition,  t-mtitiKwiJn  epideiknumi. 
Matt  16.    1  that  he  would  shew  them  a  sign  from  he. 

22.  19  Shew  me  the  tribute  money.  And  they  br. 

24.  1  to  shew  him  the  buildings  of  the  temple 
Lukei7.  14  he  said  unto  them,Goshewyourselvesun. 

20.  24  [Shew]  me  a  penny.  Whose  image  and  su. 

24.  40  [he  shewed  them  (his)  hands  and  (his)  feet  ] 
Acts    9.  39  shewing  the  coats  and  garments  which  D. 

18.  28  shewing  by  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  was 
Heb.  6. 17  willing  more  abundantly  to  shew  unto  the 

27.  To  tell  thoroughly,  KarayyeWco  hataggello. 
Acts  16.  17  which  shew  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation 

26.  23  should  shew  light  unto  the  people,  and  to 
1  Co.  11.  26  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come 

28.  To  put  down,  bestoiv,  KaraTi0r]/j.t  katatithemi. 
Acts  24.  27  willing  to  shew  the  Jews  a  pleasure,  left 

29.  To  lay  out,  say,  tell,  \4yco  lego. 

1  C0.15.  51  I  shew  you  a  mystery;  We  shall  not  all 

30.  To  indicate,  declare,  /j.tjvvw  menud. 

Luke2o.  37  even  Moses  shewed  at  the  bush,  when  he 
Johnn.  57  he  should  shew  (it),  that  they  might  take 

1  Co.  10.  28  eat  not  f  or.his  sake  that  shewed  it,  and  for 

31.  To  hold  alo?igside,  7rape'x&>  parechb. 

Acts  28.  2  barbarous  people  shewed  us  no  little  kin. 
Titus  2.    7  In  all  things  shewing  thyself  a  pattern  of 

32.  To  set,  or  place  near,  Trapi<TTr\}x{.  paristlmi. 
Acts    1.    3  To  whom  also  he  shewed  himself  alive  af . 

2  Ti.    2.  15  Study  to  shew  thyself  approved  unto  God 

33. To  do,  make,  ttoUw  poieo. 

Luke  1.  51  He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his  arm 
*  10. 37  And  he  said,  He  that  shewed  mercy  on 
John  6.  30  What  sign  shewest  thou  then,  that  we  may 
Acts   7.  36  after  that  he  had  shewed  wonders  and  si 
Jas.    2.  13  judgment  without  mercy  that  hath  sh. 

34.  To  shew  quietly,  vtto^^ikvv^l  hupodeiknumi. 
Luke  6.  47  I  will  shew  you  to  whom  he  is  like 
Acts    9.  16 1  will  shew  him  how  greatthings  he  must 

20.  35  I  have  shewed  you  all  tilings,  how  that  so 

35.  To  manifest,  <pavep6tii  phaneroo. 

John  7.    4  If  thou  do  these  things,  shew  thyself  to 

21.  1  Jesus  shewed  himself  again  to  the  disci 
21.  1  After  these  things,  .on  this  wise  shewed 
21.  14  the  third  time  that  Jesus  shewed  himself 

Rom.  1    19  for  God  hath  shewed  (it)  unto  them 

SHEW  again,  before,  forth,  openly,  self,  to  — 

l.To  tell  good  tidings,  ~ib'3  basar,  3. 

1  Ch.16.  23  shew  forth  from  day  to  day  his  salvation 
Psa.  96.  2  shew  forth  his  salvation  from  day  to  day 
Isa.  60.    6  they  shall  shew  forth  the  praises  6f  theL. 

2.  To  be  revealed,  uncovered,  nSa  galah,  2. 

Isa.  49.    9  to  them  that  (are)  indarkness,  Shew  your 

3.  To  uncover,  reveal,  n^a  galah,  3. 

Psa.  98.    2  his  righteousness  hath  he  openly  shewed 

4.  To  (cause  to)  shi)ie,  VS;  yapha,  5. 

Psa.  94.    1  God,  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth,  shew 

5.  To  put  beforei  ~uj  nagad,  5. 

Psa.  51.  is  and  my  mouth  shallshew  forth  thy  praise 

92.    2  To  shew  forth  thy  loving  kindness  in  the 

Prov.12.  17  speaketh  truth  sheweth  forth  righteous. 

6. T<>  number,  recount,  i£p  saphar,  3. 

Psa.    9.    1  I  will  shew  forth  all  thy  marvellous  works 

9.  14  That  I  may  shew  forth  all  thy  praise  in 

71.  15  My  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy  rightco. 

79.  13  we  will  shew  forth  thy  praise  to  all  gen. 

Isa.    43.  21  This  people,  .shall  shew  forth  my  praise 


SHEW 


879 


SHIMEI 


7.  To  be  seen,  ."in~J  raah,  2. 

i  Ki.i8.    i  shew  thyself  unto  Ahab ;  and  I  will  send 

18.    2  And  Elijah  went  to  shew  himself  unto  A. 

Prov  27. 25  the  tender  grass  she  weth  itself ,  and  herbs 

S.To  cause  to  hear,  B$p  shamea,  5. 

Psa  106.  2  Who  can  utter,  (who)eanshew  forth  all  his 
9. To  tell  off  or  away,   cnrayycAAoo  wpaggeUo* 

Matt  1 1.    4  shew  John  again  those  tilings  which  ye  do 

10.  To  shew  inwardly,  ivticixvvfit  endeiknumi. 

1  Ti.   1.  16  Christ  might  shew  forth  all  long  suffering 

11.  To  work  inwardly,  ivepytai  energeo. 

•   Matt  14.    2  mighty  works  do  shew  forth  themselves 
Mark  6.  14  mighty  works  do  shew  forth  themselves 

12.  To  tell  out,  i^ayyeWa  cxaygellU. 

1  Pe.   2.    9  that  ye  should  shew  forth  the  praises  of 
13. 7*0  see,  appear,  oirroy-ai  optomai. 

Acts    7.  26  he  shewed  himself  unto  them  as  they  st. 

14.  To  tell  thoroughly  beforehand,  TrpoKaray^^Ww. 
Acts    3.  18  those  things,  which  God  before  had-.  52. 

15.  To  give  to  become,  Si8a)jj.t  'veveaOai,  Acts  10.  40. 
SHEW'  (light,  more),  to  — 

l.To  give  light,  tk  or,  0. 

Nell.  9.  19  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  to  shew  them  light 
Psa.nS.  27  the  Lord,  which  hath  shewed  us  light 

2.  To  do  good,  no;  yatab,  5. 

Ruth  3.  10  thou  hast  shewed  more  kindness  in  the  lat. 

SHEW  (great,  piety),  to  — 

1.  To  be  pious,  worship  devoutly,  euo-ej3€w  eusebeO. 

1  Ti.   5.    4  let  them  learn  first  to  shew  piety  at  home 

2.  To  make  great,  magnify,  fxtyaXvvw  megaluno. 

Luke  1.  58  the  Lord  had  shewed  great  mercy  upon 
SHEW,  to  make  a  (fair)  — 

1.  To  make  a  slieio  or  example,  Sety/j-ari^a}  deigma. 

Col.    2.  15  he  made  a  shew  of  them  openly,  triump. 

2.  To  have  a  good  appearance,  evir  poo-wire  to  eupros. 

Gal.     6.  12  As  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  shew  in 
SHEW,  (vain)  — 
An  image,  shadoio,  Q?x  tselem. 

Psa.  39.    6  Surely  every  man  walketh  in  a  vain  shew 
SKEW  bread  — 
1. Arrangement,  rqn&o  maareketh, 

1  Ch.23.  16  (he  gave)  gold  for  the  tables  of  shew  bre. 

2  Ch.  2.    4  for  the  continual  shew  bread,  and  for  the 

29.  18  the  shew  bread  table,  with  all  the  vessels 
2. Bread  of  arrangement,  n^c  crp  lechem  maarek. 

1  Ch.  9.  32  (were)  over  the  shew  bread,  to  prepare  (it) 

23.  29  for  the  shew  bread,  and  for  the  fine  flour 

2  Ch.  13.  1 1  the  shew  bread  also  (set  they  in  order)  up. 
Xeh.  10.  33  For  the  shew  bread,  and  for  the  continual 

S.Bread  effaces,  rr:9  en?  lechem  panim. 

■Exod25.  30  thou  shalt  set  upon  thetable  shew  bread 

35.  13  and  all  his  vessels,  and  the  shew  bread 
1  Sa.  21.    6  there  was  no  bread  there  but  the  shew  br. 

1  Ki.    7.  48  table  of  gold,  whereupon  the  shew  bread 

2  Ch.  4.  19  the  tables  whereou  the  shew  bread  (was 

A.Faces,  D'33  panim. 

Exod  39.  36  (and)  all  the  vessels  thereof,  and  the  s.  b. 
Nutn.  4.    7  upon  the  table  of  shew  bread  they  shall 

5. Loaves  to  set  before  (God),  &proi  ttjs  irpoOeo'etos. 
Matt  12.  4  did  eat  the  shew  bread,  which  was  not  la. 
Mark  2.  26  did  eat  the  shew  bread,  which  is  not  la. 
Luke  6.    4  did  take  and  eat  the  shew  bread,  and  ga. 

6.  ..4  setting  forth  of  the  loaves,  irpoQsais  tu>v  aor&v. 

Heb.   9.    2  and  the  table,  and  the  shew  bread,  which 
SHEWED,  to  be  — 
l.To  be  uncovered,  revealed,  n*?3  galah,  2. 

Prov  26.  26  his  wickedness  shall  be  shewed  before  the 
2.To  be  put  before,  ~ix  nagad,  6. 

Ruth  2.  n  It  hath  fully  been  shewed  me  all  that  th. 

3.  To  explain,  be  explained,  iris  paroA 

Lev.  24.  12  that  the  mind  of  the  Lord  might  be  she. 

4.  To  be  seen,  appear^  tint  raah,  2. 

Lev.  13.  ig  a  bright  spot,  .and  it  be  shewed  to  the 

5.  To  be  caused  to  see,  nx"i  raah,  6. 

Exod  25.  40  pattern,  which  was  shewed  thee  in  the 

26.  30  the  fashion  thereof  which  was  shewed  th. 
Lev.  13.  49  it  (is)  a  plague,  .and  shall  be  shewed  un. 
Deut.  4.  35  Unto  thee  it  was  shewed,  that  thou  mig. 

6.  To  become,  happen,  yivo/j.at  ginomai. 

Acts    4.  22  on  whom  this  miracle  of  healing  was  sh. 
SHEWING  (self)  — 
\.A  shewing,  indication,  ^i)r,K  achavayah. 

Dan.    5. 12  shewing  of  hard  sentences,  and  dissolv. 
2.7*0  number,  recount,  *i?p  saphar,  3. 

Psa.  78.    4  shewing  to  the  generation  to  come  the  pr. 
3.7*0  bloom,  flourish,  pre  tsuts,  5. 

Song  2.    9  he  looketh..  shewing  himself  through  the 
4.-4  shewing  again,  dm5e i^is  anadcixis 

Luke  1.  80  was  in  the  deserts  till  the  day  of  his  she. 
SHTB-BO'-LETH,  stream,  ear  of  corn. 
A  word  used  by  the  Gileadites  on  one  occasion  to  dis- 
tinguish the  Ephraimites  (from  other  Israelites)  who 
called  it  Sib-bo-leth.     B.C.  1150. 

Judgi2.    6  Then  said  they  unto  him,  Say  now  Shib. 


SHTB'-KAH,  SEB'-BtAH,  nenb*  balsam. 

A  city  in  .Reuben,  once  Moabite,  near  Kirjathahn  and 

Jazer. 

Nun-132.  38  And  Nebo,  and  Baal-meon.  .and  S. :  and 
SB3C-R0N,  i"i"t?^  f rid  t fulness. 
A  city  in  N.W.  of  Judah. 

Josh.15.  11  the  border  was  drawn  to  S.,  and  passed 

SHIELD  — 

l.H albert,  javelin,  JIT?  kidon. 

1  Sa.  17.  45  Thou  comest  to  me  with . .  a  shield ;  but 
Job  39!  23  the  glittering  spear  and  the  shield 

2.  Shield,  }}0  magen. 

Gen.  15.    1  Fearnot,  Abram :  I  (am)  thy  shield,  (and) 
Deut  33.  29  O  people  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  shield 
Judg.  5.    8  was  there  a  shield  or  spear  seen  among 

2  Sa,  1.  21  for  there  the  shield,  .the  shield  of  Saul 

22.    3  (he  is)  my  shield,  and  the  horn  of  my  sa. 
22.  36  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  shield  of  thy 

1  Ki.io.  17  three  hundred  shields  (of)  beaten  gold 

10.  17  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield ;  and  the 
14.  26  took  away  allthe  slneldsof  gold  whichS. 
14.  27  Rehoboam  made  in  their  stead  brasensh. 
s  Ki.19.  32  nor  come  before  it  with  shield,  nor  cast 

2  Ch.  9.  16  three  hundred  shields  (made  he  of)  beaten 

9.  16  three  hundred,  .went  to  one  shield :  and 
12.    9  he  carried  away  also  the  shields  of  gold 

12. 10  king Rehoboam made  shields  ofbrass,and 
14.  8  out  of  Benjamin,  that  bare  shields  and  dr. 
17. 17  with  him  armed  men  with  bow  and  shield 
26. 14  Uzziah  prepared  for  them,  .shields,  and 
32.  5  and  made  darts  and  shields  in  abundance 
32.  27  forspices,  and  for  shields,  and  for  all  ma. 

Neh.  4.  16  held  both  the  spears,  the  shields,  and  the 
Psa.  3.  3  But  thou,  O  Lord,  (art)  a  shield  for  me 
18.  35  hast  also  given  me  the  shield  of  thy  sal. 
28.  7  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  my  shield 
33. 20  for  the  Lord  :  he  (is)  our  help  and  oursh. 
35.  2  Take  hold  of  shield  and  buckler,  audstand 
47.   9  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  (belong) unto 

59. 11  and  bring  them  down,  O  Lord  ourshield 
76.  3  There  brake  he  the.  .shield,  and  the  sword 
84.  9  God  our  shield,  and  look  upon  the  face  of 
84.  11  For  the  LoRDGod(is)a  sun  and  shield,  the 

115.  9,  10,  11  he  (is)  their  help  and  their  shield 
119.  114  Thou(art)  my  hiding  place  audmyshield 
144.  2  my  shield,  and  (he)  in  whom  I  trust ;  who 
Prov  30.  5  he  (is)  a  shield  unto  them  that  put  their 
Isa.  21.  5  arise,  ye  princes,  (and)  anoint  the  shield 
22.    6  horsemen,  and  Kir  uncovered  the  shield 

37.  33  nor  come  before  it  with  shields,  nor  cast 
Jer.  40.  9  and  the  Libyans,  that  handle  the  shield 
Eze.  23. 24  set  against  thee  buckler  and  shield  and 

27. 10  they  hanged  the  shield  and  helmet  in  thee 

38.  4  great  company  (with)  bucklers  and  shields 

38.  5  Libya  with  them  ;  all  of  them  with  shield 

39.  9  both  the  shields  and  the  bucklers,  the  bo. 
Nah.  2.   3  shield  of  his  mighty  men  is  made  red,  the 

3.-4  buckler,  target,  na*  tsinnah. 

1  Sa.  17.    7  and  one  bearing  a  shield  went  beforehim 
17.  41  man  that  bare  the  shield  (went)  beforehim 

1  Ch.12.    8  that  could  handle  shield  and  buckler,  wh. 

12.  24  children  of  .Tudah  that  bare  shield  and  sp 

12.  34  with  them  with  shieldandspearthirty  and 
2CI1.  11. 12  in  every  several  city  (he  put)  shields  and 

25.  5  go  forth  to  war,  that  could  handle . .  shield 
Psa.    5.  12  wilt  thou  compass  him  as  (with)  a  shield 

91.  4  his  truth  (shall  be  thy)  shield  and  buckler 
Jer.  46.    3  Order  ye  the  buckler  and  shield,  and  dra. 

4.-4  shield  ,  armour,  o^  shelet. 

2  Sa.  8.    7  David  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 
2  Ki.  11.  10  priests  give  king  David's  spears  and  shie. 

1  Ch.  18.    7  David  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 

2  Ch  23.   9  delivered  to  the  captains,  .shields,  that 
Song  4.    4  thousand  bucklers,  all  shields  of  mighty 
Jer.  51-  11  Make  bright  the  arrows  ;  gather  the  shie. 
Eze.  27. 11  they  hanged  their  shields  upon  thy  walls 

5.-4  large  shield,  6vpz6s  thureos. 

Eph.   6.  16  Above  all,  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wh. 

SHTG-GA'-ION,  SHIG-IO'-NOTH,  fvaw  erring. 

Psa.    7.  title,  Shiggaionof  David,  which  he  sangunto 
Hab.    3.    1  A  prayer  of  Habakkuk.  .upon  Shigionoth 

SEI'-HON,  pN*E>  hea^is  of  ruins. 

A  city  in  Issachar,  near  Haphraim,  and  JS".  of  Tabor, 

where  are  ruins  still  called  Khirbah  Shaiin. 

Josh  19.  19  And  Haphraim,  andS.,  and  Anaharath 

SHI-HOE.  LIB'-NATH,  n::;^  "!irr?>  glass  river. 
A  small  river  at  the  S.  of  Asher. 

Josh  19.  26  reacheth  to  Carmel  westward,  and  to  S. 

SHTL'-HI,  "rhj  a  warrior,  one  %oith  darts. 

Father  of  Azubah  mother  of  king  Jehoshaphat.    B.C. 

925-  _      , 

1  Ej.22.  42  name  (was)  Azubah  the  daughter  of  S. 

2  Ch.20.  31  name  (was)  Azubah  the  daughter  of  S. 

STrnV-Hrat,  vrhy  fountains. 

A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah  near  Lebaoth  and  Ain. 

Josh.15.  32  Lebaoth,  and  S.,  and  Ain,  and  Kimmon 

SHLL'-LEM,  SHAL'-LTTM,  tfep,  raVa  recompense. 

The  fourth  son  of  >raphtali.     B.C.  1690. 

Gen.  46.  24  Jahzeel,  and  Guni,  and  Jezer,  and  S. 

-\um26.  49  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  SMllemites 

1  Ch.  7.  13  Jahziel,  and  Guni,  and  Gezer,  and  S.,  th. 


SHLLLEMITES,  »pW\ 

The  family  of  the  preceeding. 

NUIU26.  49  of  Shillem,  the  family  of  the  S. 

SHI-LO'-AH,  nV  sending  forth.     See  Siloa. 
A  fountain  in  the  S.  of  the  valley  of  the  Tyropaeon, 
between  the  upper  and  the  lower  parts  of  Jerusalem 
from  which  flowed  a  little  brook  past  Sion  and  Moriah, 
and  was  lost  in  the  gardens  S.  of  Ophel. 

Isa.     8.    6  this  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  S.  that 

SHI'-LOH,  nSv. 

A  description  of  Messiah,  as  the  Prince  of  Peace ;  or  as 

the  "Seed"  of  Judah,  so  Ben  Gannach,  Kimchi,  &c. 

Gen.  49.  10  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart,  .until  S.  co. 
SHI'-LOH,  nSr,  nVp1,  iLu?,  \Vp. 

A  city  in  Ephraim,  N.  of  Bethel,  and  E.  of  theroadfroni 
Bethel  to  Shechem,  ten  or  twelve  Roman  miles  distant 
from  it,  and  S.  of  Lebonah.  Under  Joshua  it  was  a 
central  city,  aud  till  the  time  of  Samuel  it  was  the  seat 
of  the  tabernacle.  It  was  also  the  residence  of  Ahijah 
the  prophet,  and  is  now  called  iSeilun. 

Josh  18.  1  children  of  Israel  assembled  togetherat  S. 
18.  8  1..  cast  lots  for  you  before  the  Lord  in  S. 
18.    9  came  (again)  to  Joshua  to  the  host  at  S. 

18.  10  cast  lots  for  them  in  S.  before  the  Lord 

19.  51  divided  for  an  inheritance  by  lot  in  S.  be. 

21.  2  spake  unto  them  at  S  in  the  land  of  Can. 

22.  9  children  of  Reuben,  .departed,  .out  of  S. 
22  12  gathered  themselves  togetherat  S.,  logo 

Judg  iS.  31  the  time  that  the  house  of  God  was  in  S. 

21.  12  they  brought  them  unto  the  camp  to  S. 

21.  19  Behold,  (there  is)  a  feast  of  the  Lord  in  S. 

21.  21  daughters  of  S.  come  out  to  dance  in  da. 

21.  21  every  man  his  wife  of  the  daughters  of  S. 

1  Sa.    1.    3  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  S. 

1 .   9  Hannah  rose  up  after  they  had  eaten  in  S. 

1.  24  brought,  .unto  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  S. 

2.  14  So  they  did  in  S.  unto  all  the  Israelites 

3.  21  the  Lord  appeared  again  in  S. :  for  the 

3.  21  revealed  himself  to  Samuel  in  S.  by  the 

4.  3  Let  us  fetch  the  ark . .  out  of  S.  unto  us 
4.   4  So  the  people  sent  to  S.,  that  they  might 
4.  12  came  to  S.  the  same  day,  with  his  clothes 

14.   3  Ahiah..the  Lord's  priest  in  S.,  wearing 
1  Ki.   2.  27  spake  concerning  the  house  of  Eli  in  S. 
14.    2  Arise . .  disguise  thyself. .  and  get  thee  to  S. 

14.  4  Jeroboam's  wife.,  arose,  and  wenttoS.,  and 
Psa.  78.  60  So  that  he  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  S.,  the 
Jer.     7.  12  But  go  ye  now  unto  my  place,  .in  S.,  wh. 

7.  14  Therefore  will  I  do.  .as  I  have  done  to  S. 
26.    6  Then  will  I  make  this  house  like  S.,  and 
26.  9  saying,  This  house  shall  be  like  S.,  and 
41.    5  That  there  came  certain  from.  .S  ,  and  fr. 
SHI-LO'-NI,  ']S'B;n. 

Father  of  Zechariah,  of  the  sons  of  Parez(orPharez)soi: 
of  Judah.    B.C.  630, 

»h.  11.    5  Joiarib,  the  son  of  Zechariah,  the  son  of  S. 
SHLLONITE,  uVtyn,  ^iS^rt,  ui'rtrrr. 
An  inhabitant  of  Shiloh. 

1  Ki.  11.  29  Ahijah  the  S.  found  him  in  the  way;  and 
12.  15  which  the  Lord  spake  by  Ahijah  the  S;  un. 

15.  29  he  spake  by  his  servant  Ahijah  the  S. 

1  Ch.  9.    5  And  of  the  S. ;  Asaiah  the  firstborn,  and 

2  Ch.  9  29  and  in  the  prophecy  of  Ahijah  the  S.,  and 

10.  15  he  spake  by  the  hand  of  Ahijah  the  S.  to 

SHLL'-SHAH,  ny7»  might,  heroism. 

The  ninth  son  of  Zophah  an  Asherite.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.  37  Bezer,  and  Hod,  and  Shamma,  and  S.,  and 
SHXGT'-EAH,  nw?"^  splendour. 

Son  of  Mikloth  a  Beujamite.  of  the  family  of  Saul,  the 
first  king  of  Israel.     B.C.  noo. 

1  Ch.  8.  32  Mikloth  begat  S.  And  these  also  dwelt 
SHIH'-EAH,  nyp?',  "WW,  Hifiv  fame,  rumour. 

1.  One  of  David's  'brothers  (perhaps  Shanunah,  1  Sa.  16. 
9)  and  father  of  Jonadab.    B.C.  1060. 

2  Sa.  13.    3  Amnon  had  a  friend,  .the  son  of  S.,  Da. 

21.  21  Jonathan  the  son  of  S.,  the  brotherof  Da. 
1  Ch.20.    7  Jonathan  the  son  of  S.,  David's  brother 

2.  A  son  of  David  (perhaps  Shamuah,  2  Sa.  5.  14).  B.C. 
1020. 

1  Ch.  3.    5  S.,and  Shobab.and  Nathan,  and  Solomon 

3.  A  Merarite,  father  of  Haggiah,     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  6.  30  S.  his  son,  Haggiah  his  son,  Asaiah  his  sou 

4.  Father  of  Berachiah,  a  Gershonite.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Ch.  6.  39  Asaph  the  son  of  Berachiah,  the  son  of  S. 
SHIM'-EAM,  UVJQpfame,  rumour. 
Son  of  Mikloth,'  a'  Benjamite  whose  family  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem,  same  as  Shimeah,  1  Ch.  8.  32.    B.C.  noo. 

1  Ch.  a.  3S  Aud  Mikloth  begat  S.  And  they  also  dw. 

SHTM'-EATH,  njCT  fame. 

An  Ammonitess,  mother  of  Jozacharwho  was  one  of 

those  that  slew  Jehoash  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  835. 

2  Ki.  12.  21  For  Jozachar  the  son  of  S.,  and  Jehoza. 
2  Ch.24.  26  Zabad  the  son  of  S.  an  Ammonitess,  aud 

SHIMEATHITES,  D\ls;pp:rT. 

A  family  of  scribes  at  Jabez,  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur,  first- 
born of  Ephratah 

1  Ch.  2.  55  the  Tirathites,  the  S.,  (aud)  Suchathites 
SHEH'-EI,  SHIM'-I,  SHUtt'-HI,  'J.'t:c;.  Jah  is  fame. 
l.A  son  of  Gershon,  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1600. 

Exod.6. 17  The  sons  of  Gerslion;  Libni  and  S.,  ace. 


SHIMEON 


880 


SHIP 


Num.  3. 18 names  of.  .sons  of  Gershon.  .Libni,  and  s. 
1  el).  6. 17  names  of.,  sons  of  Gerahom;  Libni, ands. 
6.42  Ethan,  the  son  of  Zimmah,  the  son  of  S. 

23.   7  Of  the  Gershonites  (were)  Laadan  and  S. 

23.  10  the  sons  of  S.  (were)  Jahath,  Zina,  and  J. 

23.  10  These  four  (were)  the  sons  of  S. 

2.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Gera,  who  cursed  David  when 
fleeing  from  Absalom.    B.C.  1012. 

;.i.  16.  5  thenceeame..aman..whosename(was)S. 
16.  7  thus  said  S.  when  he  cursed.  Come  out,  co. 
16  1 3  S.  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  over  against 
m  16  the  son  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite,  which  (was) 
10  iS  S  the  son  of  Gera  fell  down  before  the  ki. 
10  21  Shall  not  S.  be  put  to  death  for  this,  bee. 
10  23  the  king  said  unto  S.,  Thou  shalt  not  die 
1  Ki.  2.  S  (thou  hast)  with  thee  S.  the  son  of  Geia 
2.  36  the  king  sent  and  called  for  S.,  and  said 
2.38  S.  said  unto  the  king,  The  saying  (is)  good 
2.  38  And  S  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  many  days 
2.  39  two  of  the  servants  of  S.  ran  away  unto 
2.  39  they  told  S.,  saying,  Behold,  thy  servants 
2.  40  S.  arose,  and  saddled  his  ass,  and  went  to 
2.  40  S.  went,  and  brought  his  servants  from  G. 
2.  41  it  was  told  Solomon  that  S.  had  gone  from 
2.  42  the  king  sent  and  called  for  S.  and  said  un. 
2.  44  The  king  said  moreover  to  S.,  Thou  kno. 

3.  An   officer  of  David  who  remained  stedfast  when 
Adonijah  usurped  the  throne.    B.C.  1012. 

1  Ki.  1.  8S.,andRei,  and  the  mighty  men  which  (be.) 

4.  A  son  of  Elah,  oneof  the  twelvepurveyorsof  Solomon, 
in  Benjamin.    B.C.  1010. 

1  Ki.   4.  18  S.  the  son  of  Elah  in  Benjamin 

5.  Grandson  of  Jeconiah,  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of 
Judah.    B.C.  536. 

1  Oh.  3.  19  sons  of  Pedaiah  (were)Zerubbabel,  and  S. 
(i.  Son  of  Zacchar,  a  Benjamite  with  sixteen  sons  and 
six  daughters.     B.C.  1040. 

1  Oh.  4.  26  Hamuel  his  son   Zacchur  his  son   S   his 
4.  27  S.  had  sixteen  sonsaud  six  daughters;  but 
7.  A  Reubenite,  son  of  Gog.     B  c  1300. 

1  Cli.  5.  4  Shemaiah  Ills  son.  Gog  his  son,  S-  his  son 
8  A  Merarite,  son  of  Libni     B.O   1012. 

1  Cli.  6.  29  Libni  his  son,  S.  his  son,  Uzza  his  son 
!>.  Father  of  a  chief  family  in  Judah.     B.C.  1300. 

1  Cli.    8.  21  and  Beraiah  and  Shimrath,  the  sons  of  S. 

10.  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  Laadan.     B.C.  1012. 

1  OIK23.    9  The  sons  of  S.;Shelomith,andHaziel,  and 

11.  A  Levite  to  whom  the  tenth  lot  fell  in  the  service  of 
song  in  the  sanctuary  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.  17  The  tenth  to  S  .  (he),  his  sons,  and  his  br. 
1*2.  A  Ramathite,  who  was  over  the  vineyards  in  the 
clays  of  David.    B.C   1015. 

1  Ch.27.  27  over  the  vineyards  (was)  S.  the  Rair.ath. 
13.  A  descendant  of  Heman  who  assisted  in  cleansing 
the  temple  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.     B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29.  14  of  the  sons  of  Heman;  Jehiel  and  S.:  and 
14  A  Levite  with  charge  of  the  offerings  in  the  days 
*if  Hezekiah.    B  C.  726. 

2  Ch.31.  12  Cononiah  the  Levite  (was)  ruler,  and  S. 
31,  13  under  the  hand  of  Cononiah  and  S.  his  br. 
15.  A  Levite  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife.    B  C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  23  Also  of  the  Levites;  Jozabad,  and  S.,  and 
10.  Oneof  the  family  of  Heshum  that  had  donethesame. 

Ezra  10.  33  Z.,  Eiiphelet,  Jeremai,  Manasseh  (and)  S. 

17.  One  of  the  family  of  Bani  that  had  done  the  same, 
Ezra  to.  38  And  Bani,  and  Binnui,  S. 

18.  A  Benjamite,  grandfather  of  Mordecai  who  brought 
up  Esther.    B.C.  550. 

Esth.  2.    5  Jair,  the  sou  of  S.,  the  son  of  Kish  a  Be. 

1 !  1.  Perhaps  the  simple  representative  of  the  Gershonites. 

Zech  12. 13  the  family  of  S.  apart,  and  their  wives  ap. 

SHIM-E'-ON,  i'ii^i:1  hewing. 

One  of  the  family  of  Harim  that  had  taken   a  strange 

wife,    n.c  445. 

Ezra  10.  31  And  (of)  the  sonsof  Harim. .Shemaiah,  S. 
SHIMITES,  'yp^ri. 
The  family  of  Shimei,  son  of  Gershon. 

Nam.  3.  21  Of  Gershon,  (was),  .the  family  of  the  S.; 
SHIM'-MA,  typy  fame,  rumour. 
The  third  sou  of  Jesse,  also  called  Shamma.     b  C  1060. 

1  Oh.   2.  13  Jesse  begat  his  first  horn  Eliab.  .and  S. 

SHI'-MON,  I'VTv  trier,  valve. 
\  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Jephuuneh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Oh.  4.  20  And  the  sons  of  S.(were)  Amnon,  and 
SHIM -RATH,  TTpW  watch. 
A  son  of  Shimri,  a  descendant  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  -300. 

1  Oh.  s.  21  and  Beraiah,  and  S.  the  sons  of  Shiinhi 
shim'-ri,  sim'-ri,  ngp  Jah  is  watching 

I    Head  of  a  family  in  Simeon,     u.  0.  930. 

1  Ch.  4.  37  Allan,  the  son  of  Jedaiah,  the  -un  of  S. 
2,  Father  of  Jediael,  one  of  David  s  valiant  men.    B.C. 
■ 

1  ch.  it.  45  Jediael  thesonof  S.,  andJoha  his  brother 
S,  A  Merarite,  sou  of  Ilosah,  and  gate  keeper  of  the 
tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  i'li   ■•    to  II.isali..li:id  sons  ;  s.  the  chief,  for(though) 


4.  A  Levite,  son  of  Elizaphan,  who  assisted  in  cleansing 
the  temple  iu  the  days  of  Hezekiah.     B.C.  730. 

2  Ch.29.  J3  of  the  sons  of  Elizaphan;  S.andJeiel:  and 
SHIM'-RITH,  •V-ipc'  watch. 

A  Moabitess,  mother  of  Jehozabad  who  slew  Joash  king 
of  Judah.     B.C.  840. 

2  Ch.24.  26  and  Jehozabad  the  son  of  S.  a  Moabitess 
SHTM'-RON,  p-lOtf  watch. 

1.  Fourth  son  of  issachar.     B.C.  1700 

Gen.  46.  13  And  the  sous  of  Issachar.  .Job,  and  S. 
Num.26.  24  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shimronites 

1  Ch.  7.    1  sons  of  Issachar  (were)  Tola  and  Puah..S. 

2.  A  city  inZebulon,  near  Nahallal,  also  called  Shimron- 
meron. 

Josh.  ir.    1  he  sent.,  to  the  king  of  S.,  and  to  the  kin': 
19. 15  Kattath,  and  .Nahallal,  and  S  ,  andldalah 

SHIMRONITES,  'inDB'n. 

The  family  of  Shimron,  son  of  Issachar. 

NUU126. 24  of  Shimrou,  the  family  of  the  S. 
SHIM-RON  MER'-ON,  |iM"H?  fnffi. 
A  city  in  Upper  Galilee,  near  Giscala,  and  now  called 
Marun,  two  hours  \V  of  Zaphet,  where  are  the  reputed 
graves  of  Hillel  and  Shammai,  also  a  very  old  synagogue 
and  an  uncovered  school.  Here  every  year  on  the 
eighteenth  Iyar  is  held  a  Jewish  festival  over  the  grave 
of  Simon  ben  Jochai,  to  which  thousands  of  pilgrims 
resort  from  Aleppo.  Bagdad,  Cairo,  Constantinople, 
Damascus,  &c. 

Josh  12.  20  The  king  of  S  ,  one ;  the  king  of  Achshaph 
SHIM'-SHAI.  V?V  Jah  is  splendour. 
A  scribe  who  along  with  Rehum  wrote  to  the  king  of 
Persia  against  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  by  Nehemiah. 
B  C.  522. 

Ezra  4.  8  S.  the  scribe  wrote  a  letter  against  Jerus. 
4.  9  (wrote)  Rehum  the  chancellor,  and  S.  the 
4. 17  (Then)  sentthe  king  an  answer,  (to)  S.  the 
4  23  Artaxerxes  letter (was)read  before  .S  the 

SHI'-NAB,  2Klp. 

King  of  Admah,  in  the  days  of  Abraham      B.C.  1913. 
Gen.  14.    2  S  king  of  Admah,  and  Shemeber  king  of 

SHI'-NAR,  -ityp. 

Babylonia  in  its  fullest  extent,  not  including  Assyria  or 
Susiana.  Its  chief  cities  were  Babylon,  Erech,  Accad 
and  Calneh. 

Gen.  10.  10  and  Accad,  and  Calneh,  in  the  land  of  S. 

11.    2  that  they  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  S. 

14.    1  in  thedaysof  Amraphelkingof  S.,  Arioch 

14     9  Amraphel  king  of  S.,  and  Arioch  king  of 

Isa.   11   11  recover  the  remnant  of  hispeople.  .fromS 

Dan.    1.    2  which  he  carried  into  the  land  of  S.  to  the 

Zech.  5  1 1  To  build  it  an  house  in  the  laud  of  S. :  and 

SHINE,  to  — 

l.To  shine,  become  bright,  ^nx  ohal,  5. 

Job    25.  5  Behold  even  to  the  moon,  and  it  shineth 

2.  To  be  or  become  bright,  ~nx  or. 

Prov.  4   18  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect 
Isa.  60.    1  Arise,  shine;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and 

3.  To  cause  or  give  light,  lit*  or,  5. 

Psa.139.  12  night  shiueth  as  the  day  :  the  darkness 
Eze    43.   2  and  the  earth  shiued  with  his  glory 

4.  To  shine,  hbn  halal. 

Job   29.    3  When  his  candle  shined  upon  my  head 

5.  T<>  {cause  to)  shine,  hbrj  halal,  5. 

Job  31. 26  If  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or  the 
41.  18  By  his  neesings  a  light  doth  shine,  and  his 

(3.  To  (cause  to)  shine,  in}  zahar,  5. 

Dan  12.    3  they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brig. 

7.  To  rise,  rrTt  zarach. 

2  Ki.  3  22  suu  shone  upon  the  water,  and  the  Moab. 

8.  To  (cause  to)  shine,  1?9*  yapha,  5. 

Job   io.    3  and  shine  upon  the  counsel  of  the  wicked 
Psa.  50.   2  the  perfection  ofbeauty,  Godhath  shined 

9.  To  shine,  HJl  nagah. 

Job    18.   5  and  the  spark  of  his  fire  shall  not  shine 
22. 28  and  the  light  shall  shine  upon  thy  ways 
Isa.     9.    2  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined 

10.  To  shine,  ngty  ashath 

Jer.     5.  28  They  are  waxen  fat,  they  shine :  yea,  they 

11.  To  have  rays,  shine,  ]~i$  qaran. 

Exod34.  29  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone 
34.  30  the  skin  of  his  face  shone ;  and  they  were 
34.  35  that  the  skin  of  Moses'  face  shone  :  and 

12.  To  lighten,  flash  as  lightning,  aa-rpdwrw  astrap. 
Luke24.    4  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining  garni. 

13.7*0  beam  forth,  avydfa  augazo. 

2  Co.  4.    4  lest  the  light,  .(should  shine  j  unto  them 

14.  To  shine,  give  light,  \dfx-nu  lampo. 

Matt. ,5.  16  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that 
17.  2  his  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  his  rai. 
Lukei7.  24  shineth  unto  the  other  (part)  under  hea. 
Acts  12.  7  light  shined  iuthe  prison:  and  hesmote 
2  Co.  4.    6  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine 

4.  6  hath  shined  in  ourhearts,  to  (give)  the  li. 

15.  To  (cause  to)  appear,  shine,  tpaivu pkaino. 
Matt24.  27  shineth  even  unto  the  west ;  so  shall  also 
John  1.    5  light  shineth  in  darkness  ;  and  the  dark. 

5.  35  He  was  a  burning  anda  shining  light:  and 


Phil.  2.  15  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  wo. 
2  Pe.  1.  19  as  unto  a  light  that  shineth  in  a  dark  pi. 

1  Jo.  2.    8  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now 
Rev.    1.  16  his  countenance  (was)  as  the  sun  shineth 

8.  12  day  shone  not  for  a  third  part  of  it,  and 
18.  23  light  of  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more  at 
21.  23  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shiue  init:  for  the 

SHINE,  to  cause,  let  or  make  — 

l.To  cause  or  give  light,  or  cause  to  shine, tnot,  5. 

Num  6.  25  Lord  made  his  face  shine  upon  thee,  and 

Job  41.  32  He  maketha  path  to  shine  after  him;  (one) 

Psa.  31.  16  Make  thy  face  to  shiue  upon  thy  servant 

67.    1  (and)  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us.  Se. 

80.    3,  19  cause  thy  face  to  shine  ;  and  we  shall 

119.  135  Make  thy  face  toshineupon  thy  servant 

Eccl.   8.    1  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine 

Dan.    9.  17  cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  sanctu. 

'2.  To  (cause  to)  shine,  s?9;  yapha,  5. 

Job     3.    4  above,  neither  let  the  light  shine  upon  it 
37.  15  and  caused  the  light  cf  his  cloud  to  shine? 

3.  To  cause  to  shine,  enlighten,  rm  nagah,  5. 

Isa.    13.  10  the  moon  shall  not  cause  her  light  to  sh. 

4.  To  cause  to  rejoice,  make  to  shine,  ^rr-t  tsahal,  5. 
Psa.  104.  15  oil  to  make  (his)  face  to  shiue,  and  bread 

SHINE  forth,  round  about,  to  — 

l.To  (cause  to)  shine,  ys;  yapha,  5. 

Deut33.    2  shined  forth  from  mount  Taran,  and  he 
Psa.  80.    1  Give  ear,  O  shepherd  of  Israel,  .shine  fo. 

2.  To  flee  or  move  quickly,  fpy  uph. 

Job    11.  17  thou  shalt  shine  forth,  thou  shalt  be  as 

3.  To  shine  out,  eKXa/xiroo  eliampo. 

Matt  13.  43  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as 

4.  To  lighten  round  about,  lreptatfT-pdvTaperiastra. 
Acts    9.    3  suddenly  there  shined  round  about  him 

22.    6  there  shone.. a  great  light  round  about 

5.  To  shine  round  about,  TrepiKd/j-Trai  perilampo. 
Luke  2.    9  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  th. 
Acts  26.  13  sliining  round  about  me  and  them  which 

SHINING,  (bright,  clear)  — 

1. Shining,  brightness,  PnJ  nogah. 

2  Sa.  23.  4  out  of  the  earth  by  clear  shining  after  ra. 
Prov.  4.  18  the  path  of  the  just  (is)  as  the  sliining  li 
Isa.  4.  5  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night 
Joel    2.  10  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shin. 

3.  15  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shin. 
Hab.    3.  11  (and)  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  sp. 

2.  A  flash  of  lightning,  bright  shining,  aoTpair^j. 

Luke  11.  36  as  when  the  bright  shining  of  a  candle 

3.  To  shine,  glisten,  vrixfia  stilbo. 

Mark  9.    3  his  raiment  became  shining,  exceeding 

SHIP,  (little,  small)  — 

\,A  ship,  h;jn  oniyyah. 

Gen.  49.  13  and  he  (shall  be)  for  an  haven  of  ships 
Deut28.  68  bring  thee  into  Egypt  again  with  ships,  by 
Judg.  5.  17  why  did  Dan  remain  in  ships?  Asher  co. 

1  Ki.  22.  48  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  of  Tarshish  to 

22.  48  for  the  ships  were  broken  at  Ezion-geber 

22.  49  Let  my  servants  go.  .in  the  ships:  but 

2  Ch    9.  21  the  king's  ships  went  to  Tarshish  with  the 

9.  21  every  three  years  once  came  the  ships  of 

20.  36  he  joined  himself  with  him  to  make  ships 

20.  36  and  they  made  the  ships  in  Ezion  gaber 

20.  37  the  ships  were  broken,  that  they  were  not 

Job     9.  26  They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships 

Psa.  48.    7  Thou  breakest  the  ships  of  Tarshish  with 

104.  26  There  go  the  ships;  (there  is) that  leviat. 

107.  23  They  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships,  that 

Prov  30.  19  the  way  of  a  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

31.  14  She  is  like  the  merchants'  ships;  shebri. 

Isa.     2.  16  upon  all  the  ships  of  Tarshish,  and  upon 

23.  1  Howl,  ye  ships  of  Tarshish ;  for  it  is  laid 
23.  14  Howl,  ye  ships  of  Tarshish  :  for  your  str. 
43.  14  and  the  Chaldeans,  whose  ery(is)inthesh. 
60.   9  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me,  and  the  ships 

Eze.  27.    9  the  ships  of  the  sea  with  their  mariners 
27  25  The  ships  of  Tarshish  did  sing  of  thee  in 
27.  29  the  pilots . .  shall  come  down  from  their  sh. 
Dan.  11.  40  and  with  horsemen,  and  with  many  ships 
Jon.     1.    3  and  he  found  a  ship  going  to  Tarshish 
1.    4  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to  be  broken 
1.    5  cast  forth  the  wares  that(were)intheship 

2>SIiips,  nWix  oniyyoth. 

2  Ch,  8,  18  Huramseuthim.  .ships,  and  servants  that 

Z.A  sliip,  vessel,  what  is  roofed  in,  nr?p  sephinctli. 
Jon.    1     5  was  gone  down  into  the  sides  of  the  ship 

4.-1  ship,  *3  tsi. 

N  urn  24.  24  the  ships  (shall  come)  from  the  coast  ofC. 
Tsa.   ^3.  21  neither  shall  gallant  ship  pass  thereby 
Eze.  30.    0  shall  messengersgoforth  from  me  in  ships 
Dan.  11.  30  theshipsof  Chittim  shall  come  against  him 

5..1  ship,  vavs  naus. 

Acts  27.  41  they  ran  the  ship  aground :  and  the  fore 
b\.l  little  $hij>  or  boat,  ir\oidpiov  jiluiario/i. 

Mark  3.    9  that  a  small  ship  should  wait  on  him  be 

4.  36  were  also  with  him  other  [little  ships) 
John2i.    8  the  other  disciples  came  in  a  little  ship 

7.-1  shij>,  sailing  vessel,  -k\o~iov ploion. 

Matt.  4.  2:  John  his  brother,  in  a  ship  with  Zebedec 
4.  22  they  immediately  left  the  ship  and  their 
8.  23  when  he  was  entered  into  a  ship,  his  dis. 


SHIP 


881 


SHOOT 


Matt.  8.  24  that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves 
g.    i  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  passed  over 

13.  2  so  that  he  went  into  a  ship,  and  sat 

14. 13  he  departed  thence  by  ship  into  a  desert 

14.  22  constrained  his  disciples  toget  into  a  ship 
14.  24  the  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 
14.  29  when  Peter  was  come  down  out  of  the  sh. 
14.  32  when  they  were  come  into  the  ship,  the 

14.  33  they  that  were  in  the  ship  came  and  wo. 

1 5.  39  he  sent  away  the  multitude,  and  took  ship 
Mark  1.  19  who  also  were  in  the  ship  mending  their 

1.  20  they  left  their  father  Zebedeein  the  ship 
4.  1  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  sat  in  the  sea 
4.  36  they  took  him  even  as  he  was  in  the  ship 

4.  37  the  waves  beat  into  the  ship,  so  that  it  was 

5.  2  when  he  was  come  out  of  the  ship,  im. 

5. 18  when  he  was  come  into  the  ship,  he  that 

5.  21  when  Jesus  was  passed  over  again  by  ship 

6.  32  they  departed  into  a  desert  place  by  ship 
6.  45  to  get  into  the  ship,  and  to  go  to  the  other 
6.  47  the  ship  was  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and 
6. 51  And  he  went  up  unto  them  into  the  ship 
6. 54  And  when  they  were  come  out  of  the  ship 

8. 10  he  entered  into  a  ship  with  his  disciples 
8.  13  he  left  them,  and,  entering  [into  the  ship] 
8.  14  neither  had  they  in  the  ship  with  them 

Luke  5.    2  saw  two  [ships]  standing  by  the  lake :  but 
5.    3  he  entered  into  one  of  the  ships,  which 
5.    3  and  taught  the  people  out  of  the  ship 
5.    7  partners,  which  were  in  the  other  ship 

5.  7  they  came,  and  filled  both  the  ships,  so 

5. 1 1  when  they  had  brought  their  ships  to  land 
8.  22  that  he  went  into  a  ship  with  his  disciples 
8.  37  he  went  upjuto  the  ship,  and  returned  ba. 

John  6.  17  entered  intoa  ship,  and  went  overthesea 

6. 19  walking,  .and  drawing  nigh  unto  the  ship 

6.  21  they  willingly  received  him  into  the  ship 
6.  21  immediately  the  ship  was  at  the  land  w. 

21.    3  They  went  forth,  and  entered  into  a  ship 
21.   6  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship 
Acts  20.  13  we  went  before  to  ship,  and  sailed  unto 

20.  38  And  they  accompanied  him  unto  the  ship 

21.  2  finding  a  ship  sailing  over  unto  Phenicia 
21.    3  for  there  the  ship  was  to  unlade  her  bur. 
21.   6  we  took  ship ;  and  they  returned  home 
27.    2  entering  into  a  ship  of  Adramyttium 

27.    6  the  centurion  found  a  ship  of  Alexandria 
27.  10  not  only  of  the  lading  and  ship,  but  also 
27. 15  when  the  ship  was  caught,  and  could  not 
27.  17  they  used  helps,  undergirding  the  ship 
27. 19  we  cast  out.  .the  tackling  of  the  ship 
27.  22  for  there  shallbe  no  loss,  .but  of  the  ship 
27.  30  shipmenwere  about  to  flee  out  of  the  ship 
27.  31  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot 
27.  37  And  we  were  in  all  in  the  ship  two  hun. 
27.  38  they  lightened  the  ship,  and  cast  out  the 
27.  39  they  were  minded,  .to  thrust  in  the  ship 

27.  44  and  some  on  (broken  pieces)  of  the  ship 

28.  11  we  departed  in  a  ship  of  Alexandria,  wh. 
Jas.  3.  4  Behold  also  the  ships,  which  though  (they 
Rev.    8.   9  the  third  part  of  the  ships  were  destroyed 

18.  17  [all  the  company  in  ships,  and  sailors,  and] 
18. 19  wherein  were  made  rich  all  that  had  shi. 
SHIP  master,  owner  of  a  ship  — 
I. Master  of  the  pilots,  ?ah  nn  rab  clwbel. 

Jon.    t.   6  the  ship  master  came  to  him,  and  said 
'1*  Pilot)  steersman,  governor,  KvfiepwfjTrjs  kubernet. 

Rev.  18. 17  every  ship  master,  and  all  the  company 
3.  Master  or  owner  of  a  ship,  vavKKr\pos  naukleros. 

Acts  27. 11  the  master  and  the  owner  of  the  ship 
SHIP  men,  (to  take)  shipping  — 
l.Ship  men,  nvjx  'bjjn  an  she  oniyyoth. 

1  Ki.   9. 27  ship  men  that  had  knowledge  of  the  sea 

2.  To  go  up  into  the  ship,  iiri&aiva  els  rb  tt\o7ov. 
Acts  21.    6  [we  took]  ship  ;  and  they  returned  home 

3.  A  sailor,  vavTys  nautes. 

Acts  27.  27  the  ship  men  deemed  that  they  drew  near 
27.  30  as  the  ship  men  were  about  to  flee  out  of 

4.-4  ship,  sailing  vessel,  ir\oioi>  ploion. 

John  6.  24  they  also  [took  shipping],  and  came  to  C. 
SHLPH'-L,  'i'?"-*  Joh  is  fulness. 
Father  of  Ziza,  a  chief  Simeonite.    B.C.  830. 

1  Ch.  4.  37  Ziza  the  son  of  S.,  the  sonof  Allon.theson 
SHLPH-MITE,  •/3SE?.     See  SJiepham. 
Patronymic  of  Zabdi  who  was  over  the  increase  of  the 
vineyards  for  the  wine  cellars.     B.C.  1015. 

i  Ch.27.  27  over  the  increase,  .(was)  Zabdi  the  S. 
SHIPH'-RAH,  TTgp  beauty. 

<  tne  of  the  Hebrew  midwives  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of 
Moses.    B.C.  1571. 

Exod.  1. 15  of  which  the  name  of  the  one  (was)S.,and 
SHIPH'-TAN,  ]QQp  judge. 

Father  of  Kemuel,  a  chief  Ephraimite  appointed  to 
divide  the  land  W.  of  the  Jordan.    B.C.  1510. 

Nuin  34.  24  prince . .  of  Ephraim,  Kemuel  the  son  of  S. 
SHIPWRECK,  to  make  or  suffer  — 
To  be  shipim-ecked,  vavayew  nauageo. 

2  Co.  11.  25  thrice  I  suffered  shipwreck,  a  night  and 
1  Ti.    1. 19  concerning  faith  have  made  shipwreck 

SHI'-SHA,  KV*l?  distinction,  nobility. 

Father  of  Elihoreph  and  Ahiah,  two  of  Solomon's  scribes. 

B.C.    1048. 

1  Ki.   4.    q  EKhoreph  and  Ahrah,  the  sons  of  S.,  sen. 
Ill 


SHI'-SHAK,  pK>T. 

Sesconchis  I.kingof  the  twenty  second  Bubastic  dynasty 
in  Egypt;  he  protected  Jeroboam  against  Solomon,  in- 
vaded Judea  under  Rehoboam,  took  feuced  cities,  and 
plundered  Jerusalem  and  the  temple.  B.C.  975. 

1  Ki.n.  40  and  Jeroboam  arose,  and  fled,  .unto  S.  ki. 

14.  25  S.  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against  Jerusa. 

2  Ch.12.   2  S.  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against  Jerusa. 

12.    5  that  were  gathered  together . .  because  of  S. 
12.   5  have  I  also  left  you  in  the  hand  of  S. 
12.    7  shall  not  be  poured  out . .  by  the  hand  of  S. 
12.    9  S.  king  of  Egypt  came  up  against  Jerusa. 

SHTT'-RAI,  *y?v  Jah  is  deciding. 

A  native  of  Sharon  who  was  over  the  herds  there  in  the 

days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  29  over  the  herds  that  fed  in  Sharon  (was)S. 

SHIT'-TIM,  D'SI?. 

A  place  in  Moab,  E.  of  the  Salt  Sea,  whence  Joshua 

sent  forth  spies.     See  also  Abel  and  Beth. 

Xuni25.    1  Israel  abode  in  S.,  and  the  people  began 

Josh.  2.    1  Joshua,  .sent  out  of  S.  two  men  to  spy  se. 
3.    1  and  they  removed  from  S.,  and  came  to 

Joel    3. 18  a  fountain,  .shall  water  the  valley  of  S. 

Mic.    6.    5  what  Balaam . .  answered  him  from  S.  unto 

SHITTIM,  shittah  tree  — 

Acacia,  acacia  wood,  nisi?  shittah. 

Exod  25.    5  and  badgers'  skins,  and  shittim  wood 
25.  10  And  they  shall  make  an  ark  (of)  shittim 
25.  13  thou  shalt  make  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
25.  23  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  table  (of)  shittim 
25.  28  thou  shalt  make  the  staves  (of)  shittim  w. 
26. 15  thou  shalt  make  boards.. (of)  shittim  wo. 
26. 26  thou  shalt  make  bars  (of)  shittim  wood 
26. 32  four  pillars  of  shittim  (wood)  overlaid  w. 
26. 37  thou  shalt  make .  .five  pillars  (of)  shittim 
27.    1  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  (of)  shittim  wo. 
27.    6  staves  for  the  altar,  staves  (of)  shittim  w. 
30.    1  (of)  shittini  wood  shalt  thou  make  it 
30.   5  thou  shalt  make  the  staves  (of)  shittim  w. 
35.    7  and  badgers'  skins,  and  shittim  wood 

35.  24  every  man  with  whom  was  found  shittim 

36.  20  he  made  boards,  .(of)  shittim  wood,  stan. 
36.  31  he  made  bars  of  shittim  wood  ;  five  for 

36.  36  he  made  thereunto  four  pillars  (of)  shit. 

37.  1  Bezaleel  made  the  ark  (of)  shittim  wood 
37.   4  15,  28  he  made  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
37.  10  he  made  the  table  (of)  shittim  wood:  two 

37.  25  he  made  the  incense  altar  (of)  shittim  wo. 

38.  1  And  he  made  the  altar.. (of)  shittim  wood 
38.   6  And  he  made  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 

Deut  10.    3  I  made  an  ark  (of)  shittim  wood,  and  he. 
Isa.   41.  19  I  will  plant,  .the  shittah  tree,  and  the 

SHI'-ZA,  xyy  splendour. 

A  Reubenite,  father  of  Adina,  one  of  David's  valiant 
men.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  11. 42  Adina  the  son  of  S.  the  Reubenite,  a  cap. 

SHO'-A,  xna>  rich. 

A  tribe  named  along  with  the  Chaldeans  and  Pekod  as 

an  enemy  of  Israel. 

Eze.  23.  23  Pekod,  and  S.,  and  Koa,  (and)  all  the  As. 

SHO'-BAB,  a^iw  returning. 

1.  A  son  of  David  born  after  he  became  king  of  Israel. 

B.C.    1020. 

2  Sa.    5. 14  Shammuah,  and  S  ,  and  Nathan,  and  Sol, 
1  Ch.  3.   5  Shiniea,  and  S.,  and  Nathan,  and  Solomon 

14.   4  Shammua,  and  S.,  Nathan,  and  Solomon 

2.  A  son  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hezron.    B.C.  1540. 

1  Ch.  2. 18  her  sons  (are)  these  ;  Jesher,  and  S.,  and 

SHO'-BACH,  saw;  eospansion. 

Captain  of  the  hostof  Hadarezer  king  of  Zobah  defeated 
and  slain  by  Joab  ;  called  Shophach,  1  Chron.  19.  16. 
B.C.   1036. 

2  Sa.  10. 16  S.  the  captain  of  the  host.,  (went)  before 

10. 18  David,  .smote  S.  the  captain  of  their  host 

SHO'-BAI,  '3b  Jah  is  glorious. 

A  gate  keeper  of  the  tabernacle  whose  descendants  re- 
turned with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  42  the  children  of  S.,  (in)  all  an  hundred  th. 

Neh.  7. 45  the  children  of  S.,  an  hundred  thirty  and 

SHO'-BAL,  hy\v  wandering. 

1.  A  son  of  Seir.    B.C.  1820. 

Gen.  36.  20  sons  of  S.  ..Lotan,  and  S.,  and  Zibeon,  and 
36.  23  the  children  of  S.  (were)  these;  Alvan,  and 
36.  29  duke  Lotan,  duke  S.,  duke  Zibeon,  duke 

1  Ch.  1.  38  Lotan,  and  S.,  and  Zibeon,  audAnah.aud 

1.  40  The  sonsof  S.;  Allan,  and  Manahath,  and 

2.  A  son  of  Caleb,  son  of  Hur.    B.C.  1480. 

1  Ch.  2.  50  These  were  the  sons  of  Caleb.  .S.  the  fat. 

2.  52  S.  the  father  of  Kirjath-jearim  had  sons 

3.  A  son  of  Judah  and  father  of  Reaiah.    B.C.  1670. 

1  Ch.  4.    1  sons  of  Judah;  Pharez.  .Carmi.  .Hur.  .S. 
4.    2  And  Reaiah  the  son  of  S.  begat  Jaliath 

SHO'-BEK,  p2W  free. 

A  person  or  family  that  with  Nehemiah  "sealed  the 

covenant.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  10.  24  Hallohesh,  Pileha,  S. 
SHO'-BI,  »3tf  Jah  is  glorious. 

A  son  of  Nahash  of  Kabbah  who  received  David  when 
he  fled  from  Absalom  ;  perhaps  the  brother  of  Harun 


who  succeeded  his  father  Nahash,  1  Chron.  19.  1. 
B.C.   1023. 

2  Sa.  17.  27  S.  the  son  of  Nahash  of  Rabbahof  thech. 
SHOCK  (of  corn)  — 
A  stalk,  shock  or  heap  of  corn,  trna  gadish. 

Judg  15.    5  burnt  up  both  the  shocks,  and  also  the 

Job     5.  26  like  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  in  his 
SHO'-CO,  tote.     See  Socho. 
A  fenced  city  in  Judah;  now  Suweikah  near  Beth-zur. 

2  Ch.  11.    7  And  Beth-zur,  and  S.,  and  Adullam 
SHOD,  to  be  — 
To  be  shod,  u-iroSe'o/zat  hupodeomai. 

Mark  6.    9  (be)shod  with  sandals;  and  not  put  on  two 

Eph.   6. 15  your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of 
SHOE,  pair  of  shoes  — 
I. A  shoe,  hyi  naal. 

Exod.  3.    5  put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the 

12.  11  your  shoes  on  your  feet,  and  your  staff  in 
Deut25.    9  loose  his  shoe  from  off  his  foot,  and  spit 

25.  10  The  house  of  him  that  hath  his  shoe  loos. 
29.  5  thy  shoe  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy  foot 
Josh.  5.  15  Loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot ;  for  the 
9.  5  old  shoes  and  clouted  upon  their  feet,  and 
9.  13  our  shoes  are  become  old  by  reason  of  the 
Ruth  4.  7  a  man  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave  (it) 
4.    8  Buy  (it)  for  thee.  So  he  drew  off  his  shoe 

1  Ki.  2.   5  put  the  blood . .  in  his  shoes  that  (were)  on 
Psa.  60.    8  over  Edom  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe  :  Phi. 

108.   9  over  Edom  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe  ;  over 

Song  7.    1  How  beautiful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes.  O 

Isa.     5.  27  nor  the  latchet  of  their  shoes  be  broken 
20.    2  Go.. and  put  off  thy  shoe  from  thy  foot 

Eze.  24.  17  put  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet,  and  cover 
24.  23  tires,  .upon  your  heads,  and  your  shoes 

Amos  2.    6  they  sold,  .the  poor  for  a  pair  of  shoes 
8.   6  we  may  buy .  .the  needy  for  a  pair  of  sh. 
'2. Shoe,  ?#.;?  minal. 

Deut  33'.  25  Thy  shoes  (shall  be)  iron  and  brass  ;  and 
3.-1  sandal,  vTrodrj/xa  hupodema. 

Matt.  3. 11  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear 

10.  10  neither  two  coats,  neither  shoes,  nor  yet 

Mark  r.    7  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  wort. 

Luke  3. 16  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  wor. 
10.   4  Carry  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes 
15.  22  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  (his) 
22.  35  without  purse,  and  scrip,  and  shoes,  lac. 

John   1.  27  whose  shoe's  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to 

Acts    7.  33  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  thy  feet :  for  tJie 

13.  25  whose  shoes  of  (his)  feet  I  am  not  worthy 
SHOE,  to  — 

l.To  shoe,  bjtf  naal. 

Eze.  16. 10  shod  thee  with  badgers' skin,  and  I  girded 
2,To  shoe,  *?yj  naal,  5. 

2  Ch.  28.  15  arrayed  them,  and  shod  them,  and  gave 
SHOE  latchet  — 

A  shoe  latchet,  ?yj  rfrtP  serok  naal. 
Gen.  14.  23  I  will  not  (take),  .even  to  a  shoe  latchet 
Isa.     5.  27  nor  the  latchet  of  their  shoes  be  brokeu 

SHO'-HAM,  doW  leek-green  beryl. 
A  Merarite.    B.C.  1700. 

1  Ch.24.  27  The  sous  of  Merari  by  Jaaziah  ;  Beno.  .S. 

SHO'-MER,  iptf,  npiir  watcher. 

1.  A  Moabitess,  mother  of  Jehozabad,  one  of  those  who 
slew  Jehoash  king  of  Judah  ;  called  Shimrith  in  2  Ch. 
24.  26.    B.C.  870. 

2  Ki.12.  21  Jehozabad  the  son  of  S. .  .smote  him,  and 

2.  A  great  grandson  of  Asher ;  spelt  Shamer  in  ver.  34. 
B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  32  Heber  begat  Japhlet,  and  S.,  and  Hotham 
SHOOT  (forth,  out,  up),  to  — 
l.To  fee,  move  an,  n-i3  barach. 

Exod36.  33  he  made  the  middle  bar  to  shoot  through 
2. To  tread,  rr^darak. 

1  Ch.  5. 18  and  to  shoot  with  bow,  and  skilful  in  war 

3.  To  cast,  throw,  rn;  yadah. 

Jer.   50.  14  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow,  shoot  at  her 

4.  To  go  out  or  forth,  ns;  yatsa. 

Job    8. 16  and  his  branch  shooteth  forth  in  his  gar. 

5.  To  cast,  throw,  K"v  yara. 

2  Ch.26.  15  to  shoot  arrows  and  great  stones  withal 

6.  To  {cause  to)  cast,  throw,  HX  yara,  5. 

2  Sa.  11.  24  the  shooters  shot  from  off  the  waU  upon 

7.  To  cast,  throw,  shoot,  ryv  yarah. 

Nuni2i.  30  We  have  shot  at  them  :  Heshbon  is  peris. 

1  Sa.  20.  36  as  the  lad  ran,  he  shot  an  arrow  beyond 

37  of  the  arrow  which  Jonathan  had  shot 

2  Ki.  13.  17  and  he  opened  (it).    Then  Elisha  said,  S. 
Psa.  11.    2  that  they  may  privily  shoot  at  the  uprig. 

64.    4  That  they  may  shoot  in  secret  at  the  per. 

8.  To  {cause  to)  throiv,  shoot,  nyr  yarah,  5. 

1  Sa.  20.  20  I  will  shoot  three  arrows  on  the  side(th.) 

20.  36  Run,  find  out  now  the  arrows  which  I  sh. 

2  Sa.  11.  20  knew  ye  not  that  they  would  shoot  from 
2  Ki.  13.  17  and  he  shot.     And  he  said,  The  arrow  of 

19.  32  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  nor  shu. 
2  Ch.35.  23  the  archers  shot  at  king  Josiah :  and  the 
Psa.  64.    4  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  him,  and  fear 

64.    7  But  God  shall  shoot  at  them  (with)  an  nr. 


SHOOTER 


862 


SHOUT 


9.  To  give,  |ru  nathan. 

Eze.  31.  io  he  hath  shot  up  his  top  among  the  thick 
31.  14  neither  shoot  up  their  top  among  the  th. 
36.    8  ye  shall  shoot  forth  your  branches,  and 

10.  To  go  up,  nh%  alah. 

Gen.  40. 10  it  budded,  (and)  her  blossoms  shot  forth 
Amos  7.    1  in  the  beginning  of  the  shooting  up  of  the 

11.  To  {cause  to)  open,  ios  patar,  5. 

Pea,  22.    7  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the 

]  2.  To  cast,  shoot,  33"i  rabab. 

Gen.  40.  23  The  archers  have,  .shot  (at  him),  and 
Psa.  18.  14  he  shot  out  lightnings,  and  discomfited 

13.  To  send,  rh$  shalach. 

Psa.  144.    6  shoot  out  thine  arrows,  ami  destroy  th. 

14.  To  send,  nby  shalach,  3. 

1  Sa.  20.  20  And  I  will,  .as  though  I  shot  at  a  mark 
Isa.    27.    3  when  it  shooteth  forth,  thou  wilt  debate 
Eze   17.    6  brought  forth  branches,  and  shot  forth 

17.    7  shot  forth  her  branches  toward  him,  th. 
31.    5  branches  became  long,  .when  he  shot  for. 

15.  To  do,  make,  itoiim  poieo, 

Mark  4.  32  become  th  greater,  .and  shooteth  out  gre. 
16  To  cast  or  throw  forth,  irpo$a\Aw  probcdlo. 

Luke2i.  30  When  they  now  shoot  forth,  ye  see  and 
SHOOTER  — 
To  {cause  to)  cast,  thrvio,  N*v  yara,  5. 

2  Sa.  n.  24  the  shooters  shot  from  off  the  wall  upon 
SHO'-PHACH,  ^Dic*  extension, 

1  'uptain  of  the  host  of  Hadarezer,  king  of  Zobah  in  the 
days  of  David;  called  Sho-bach  in  2  Sam.  10.  16.  B.C. 
1036. 

1  Ch.  19.  16  S.  the  captain  of  the  host  of  Hadarezer 

19.  18  David,  .killed  S,  the  captain  of  the  host 

SHO'-PHAN,  JflW  nakedness. 

A  city  in  Gad  ;  or  a  denominative  of  the  city  Atruth. 
.Num.32.  35  Atroth,  S.,  and  Jaazer,  and  Jogbehah 

SHORE  — 

1.  Haven,  shore,  *]in  choph. 

Judg.  5.  17  Ashcr  continued  on  the  sea  shore,  and 
Jer.  47.    7  against  Ashkelon,  and  against  the  sea  sh. 

'2.  End,  extremity,  nap  qatseh. 

Josh  15.    2  their  south  border  was  from  the  shore  of 

o.Lip,  edge,  nsto  sa/phah. 

Gen.  22  17  as  the  sand  which  (is)  upon  the'sea  shore 
Exodi4-  30  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea  sh. 
Josh  11.  4  as  the  sand  that  (is)  upon  the  seashore  in 
1  Sa.  1 3.  5  people  as  the  sand  which  (is)  on  the  sea  s. 
1  Ki.  4.  29  even  as  the  sand  that  (is)  on  the  seashore 
9  26  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  sea,  in  the  land 

1  Sea  shore,  a\yia\6s  aigialos. 

Matt  13.    2  and  the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  sh. 

13.  48  they  drew  to  shore,  and  sat  down,  and  ga. 

John2i.    4  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore:  but  the  disciples 

Acts  21.    5  wekneeleddownontheshore,  and  prayed 

27.  39  discovered  a  certain  creek  with  a  shore 

27.  40  and  hoised  up.  .and  made  toward  shore 

5. Shore,  x*^os  cheilos, 

Heb.  11.  12  and  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  shore 
SHORE,  to  draw  to  the  — 

■'■  a  ship  to  the  shore,  tr p 0 a op/j.i  fa prosorm izo. 

Mark  6.  53  came  into  the  land,  .and  drew  to  the  sh. 
SHORN,  (to  be,  having)  — 

1.  To  cut,  shear,  D^p  qatsab. 

Song  4.    2  like  a  flock  (of  sheep  that  are  even)  shorn 

2.  To  cut  off,  shear,  shave,  Keipai  keiro. 

Acts  iS.  iS  having  shorn  (his)  head  in  Cenchrea :  for 
1  Co. 11.    6  be  not  covered,  let  her  also  be  shorn 

11.    6  if  it  be  a  shame  for  a  woman  to  be  shorn 

SHORT  (space,  time),  shortly  — 
X.Age,  life  time,  "ori  cheled, 

Psa.  89.  47  Remember  how  short  my  time  is :  where. 
I,  To  haste,  "in»  mahar,  3. 

Gen.  41.  32  and  God  will  shortly  bring  it  to  pass 

3.  Haste,  rrino  meherah. 

Jer.  27.  16  the  vessels.,  shall  now  shortly  be  brought 
I,  Vear,  iWjj  qaroh. 
Job    17. 12  the  light  (is)  short  because  of  darkness 

20.  5  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  (is)  short 
Eze.     7.    8  Now  will  I  shortly  pour  out  my  fury  upon 

■  !  -,-i  Of  an  hoar,  natpds  tfyjets  kctiros  hvras. 
1  Th.  2.  17  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in 

tightly,  euflews  eutheds. 

3  John    14  I  trust  I  shall  shortly  sec  thee,  and  wesh. 
7,L!t>U\  small,  few,  feeble^  6\lyo$  oligos. 

Rev.  12.  12  he  knoweth  that  he  hath  but  a  short  time 
17.  10  he- cometh,  he  must  continue  a  short  sp. 

S.To  cut  off  at  once,  (tuvt^vw  suntemno. 

Rom.  9.  28  Forlie  will.,  cut  (it)  short  in  righteousness 
9.  28  a  short  work  will  the  Lord  make  upon 
■  '.To  contract,  nwreAAw  sustello. 

1  Co.  7  99  But  this  I  say ,  brethren  1  the  time  (is)  short 
XO.Quickly,  speedily,  raxMs  tacheds, 

1  ''"■  +.  1    I  0  yon  shortly,  if  the  Lord  will 

Phil,   2.  1,1  trust,  .to  scud  Timotheus  shortly  unto 


Phil.  2.  24  I  trust.  .1  also  myself  shall  come  shortly 
2  11.    4.    9  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me 

11. Quickly ,"* speedily,  raxtvSs  tachinos. 

2  Pe.  1. 14  Knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  off  (this 

12.  More  quickly,  more  speedily,  rdxtov  tachion. 
1  Ti.    3.  14  write.,  hoping  to  come  unto  thee  [shortly] 
Heb.  13.  23  with  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I  will  see 

IS.With  or  m  speed,  eV  rdxei  en  tachei. 

Acts  25.    4  that  he  himself  would  depart  shortly 
Rom  16.  20  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly 
Rev.    1.    1  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass 
22.    6  the  things  which  must  shortly  be  done 

SHORTEN,  be  shorter,  shortened,  come  short,  to — 
1.2*o  be  or  become  shortened,  njfB  Qatsar,  3. 
Psa.  102.  23  He  weakened  my  strength.. lie  shortened 

2.  To  shorten,  "ISR  qatsar,  5. 

Psa.  89.  45  The  days  of  his  youth  hast  thou  shortened 

3.  To  shorten,  nsp  qatsar. 

Numii.  23  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short?  thoush. 
Prov  10.  27  the  years  of  the  wicked  shall  be  shortened 
lsa.  28.  20  the  bed  is  shorter  than  that  (a  man)  can 

58.  2  Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all,  that  it  can. 

59.  1  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,  that  it 
Eze.  42.    5  the  upper  chambers  (were)  shorter  :  for 

4.  To  cut  off,  shorten,  amputate,  koXo&oco  koloboo. 

Matt  24.  22  except  those  days  should  be  shortened 
24.  22  for  the  elect's  sake,  .shall  be  shortened 
Mark  13.  20  except  that  theLordhad  shortened  v.  20. 
5.Tobe  behind,  uffreptw  hustereo,He.  4.  I ;  Ro.  3.23. 
SHO-SHAN'-NIM  (Eduth),  riny  Q*mv  or  D^tsneJ. 
Psa.  45.  title.  60.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  S 
80.  title.  Io  the  chief  musician  upon  S.-E. 

SHOT  (out),  to  be  — 

1.7V'  !»'  cast,  thrown,  nv  yarah,  2. 

Exodrg.  13  he  shall  surely  be  stoned,  or  shot  through 
2.7*0  slaughter,  ttn$>  shachat. 

J  er.  9.  8  Their  tongue  (is  as)  an  arrow  shot  out ;  it 
SHOULD  (after,  afterwards,  hereafter,  have, what  th, — 
\Jt  behoveth,  it  is  necessary,  5e?  dei. 

Matt  18.  33  Shouldest  not  thou  also  have  had  comp. 
26.  35  Though  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I 

Marki4.  31  If  I  should  die  with  thee,  I  Ac.  27.  21. 

2.  To  be  about  to,  /xeAAoj  mello. 

Markio.  32  to  tell  them  what  things  should  happen 

Luke  9.  31  which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem 

19.  11  the  kingdom  of  God  should  immediately 

22.  23  which  of  them  it  was  that  should  do  this 

24.  21  that  it  had  been  he  which  should  have  r, 

John  6.  71  he  it  was  that  should  betray  him,  being 

7.  39  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  r. 

11.  51  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that 

12.  4  Simon's  (sou),  which  should  betray  him 
12.  33  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 

18.  32  spake,  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 
Acts  11.  2S  that  there  should  be  great  dearth  thro. 

19.  27  her  magnificence  should  be  destroyed,  w. 

20.  38  Sorrowing,  .that  they  should  see  his  face 
22.  29  they  departed  from  him  which  should  h. 
23  27  This  man.  .should  have  been  killed  of  th. 
26.  22  the  prophets  and  Moses  did  say  should 
26.  23  should  show  light  unto  the  people,  and  to 
28.    6  they  looked  when  he  should  have  swollen 

Gal.  3.  23  shut  up  unto  the  faithwhich  should  ait. 
1  Th.  3.    4  we  told  you  before  that  we  should  sutler 

1  Ti.  1.  16  a  pattern  to  them  whichshould  hereafter 
Heb.  11.    8  a  place  winch  he  should  after  receive  for 

2  Pe.  2.  6  unto  those  that  after  should  live  ungodly 
Rev.  6.  11  brethren,  thatshould  be  killed  as  they  (w.) 

3.  To  owe,  be  obliged,  o<pelku}  ophcilo. 

1  Co.  9.  10  he  that  ploweth  should  plow  in  hope 

SHOULDER,  (blade,  piece)  — 

\..\rm,  j/n}  zeroa. 

Nnm.  6.  19  the  priest  shall  take  the  sodden  Bhoulder 
Deut  18     3  they  shall  give  unto  the  priest  the  shoul. 

^.Shoulder,  r,n*  kaiheph. 

Exod28.  7  It 'shall  have  the  two  shoulder  pieces  th. 
28.  12  put  the  two  stones  upon  the  shoulders  o. 
28.  12  bear  theirnames.  .upon  his  two  shoulders 

28.  25  put  (them)  on  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the 
39.  4  They  made  shoulder  pieces  for  it,  to  cou. 
39.  7  heputthemonthe  should ers of  the  ephod 
39.  18  put  them  on  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the  c. 

Num. 7,    9  they  should  bear  upon  their  shoulders 
Deut  33.  12  and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders 
Judg  10.    3  put  (them)  upon  his  shoulders,  and  carr. 
1  Sa.  17.    6  and  a  target  of  brass  between  his  should. 

1  Ch.15,  15  bare  the  ark  of  God  upon  their  shoulders 

2  Ch.35.  3  (it  shall)  not  (be)  a  burden  upon  ( your)  sh. 
Neli.  q.  29  withdrew  the  shoulder,  and  hardened  th. 
Isa.    11.  14  they  shall  fly  upon  the  shoulders  of  the 

30.  6  will  carry  their  riches  upon  the  should. 
46.  7  They  bear  him  upon  the  shoulder,  they  c. 
49.  22  shall  be  carried  upon  (their)  shoulders 
Eze.  12.  6  shalt  thou  bear  (it)  upon  (thy)  shoulders 
12.  7  (and)  I  bare  (it )  up<  id  (my)  shoulder  iu  their 
12/12  the'prince..  shall  bear  upon  (his)  shoulder 
24."  4  every  good  piece,  the  thigh,  .the  shoulder 

29.  7  didst  break,  and  rend  all  their  shoulder 
29.  18  every  head  (was)  made  bald,  and  every  sh. 
34.  21  ye  have  thrust  with  side  and  with  shoul. 

Zech.  7.  11  pulled  away  the  shoulder,  and  stopped 


3.  Leg,  pit?  slwq. 

Exod2g.  22  the  two  kidneys,  .and  the  right  shoulder 

29.  27  the  shoulder  of  the  heave  offering,  which 

Lev.    7.  32  the  right  shoulder  shall  ye  give  unto  the 

7.  33  shall  have  the  right  shoulder  for  (his)  pa. 

7.  34  the  heave  shoulder  have  I  taken  of  the  c. 

8.  25  and  their  fat,  and  the  right  shoulder 

8.  26  on  the  fat,  and  upon  the  right  shoulder 

9.  21  the  right  shoulder  Aaron  waved  (for)  a 
10.  14  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder  shall 
10.  15  The  heave  shoulder  and  the  wave  breast 

Num.  6.  20  with  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder 

18.  18  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right  shou. 

1  Sa.    9.  24  the  cook  took  up  the  shoulder,  and  (that) 

1.  Shoulder,  D?f  shekem. 

Gen.    9.  23  laid  (it)  upon  both  their  shoulders,  and 

21.  14  gave  (it).. putting  (it)  on  her  shoulder 
24.  15  came. .with  her  pitcher  upon  hershould. 

24.  45  came  forth  with  her  pitcher  on  her  shoul. 
49  15  bowed  his  shoulder  to  bear,  and  became  a 

Exodi2.  34  bound  up  in  their  clothes  upon  their  sho. 
Josh.  4.  5  take . .  every  man . .  a  stone  upon  his  shou. 
Judg.  9.  4S  laid  (it)  on  his  shoulder,  and  said  unto  the 
1  Sa.    9.    2  from  his  shoulders  and  upward  (he  was) 

10.  23  he  was  higher,  .from  his  shoulders  and 
Job  31.  36  I  would  take  it  upon  my  shoulder,  (and) 
Psa.  81.    6  I  removed  his  shoulder  from  the  burden 
lsa.     9.    4  hast  broken,  .the  staff  of  his  shoulder 
9.    6  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoul. 

10/27  shall  be  takenawayfrom  off  thy  shoulder 
Isa.    14.  25  his  burden  depart  from  otf  their  should. 

22.  22  And  the  key.,  will  1  lay  upon  his  should. 

6.Shoidder,  HD3tt;  shikmah. 

Job  31.  22  let  mine  arm  fall  from  my  shoulder  blade 

6. Shoulder,  &fxos  dmos. 

Matt  23.    4  they  bind,  .and  lay  (them)  on  men's  sho. 

Luke  15.    5  he  layeth  (it)  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing 
SHOUT,  shouting  — 
\>A  shout  {of  exultation),  ivn  hedad. 

Isa.    16.   9 for  theshoutingforthysummerfruits,and 
16. 10  I  have  made(their  vintage)shoutiug  to  c. 

25.  30  he  shall  give  a  shout,  as  they  that  tread. 
48.  33  none  shall  tread  with  shouting 

48.  33  (their)  shouting  (shall  be)  no  shouting 

51. 14  and  they  shall  lift  up  a  shout  against  th. 

2, Loud  cry,  singing,  nn  Hnnah. 

Prov  11. 10  when  the  wicked  perish,  (there  is)  shout. 

3. Shout,  shouting,  blowing,  nyviR  teruah. 

Xum  23.  21  and  the  shout  of  a  king  (is)  among  them 
Josh.  6.    5  the  people  shall  shout  with  a  great  shout 
6.  20  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  shout 

1  Sa.    4.   5  Israel  shouted  with  a  great  shout,  so  th. 

4.    6  noise  of  the  shout,  .the  noise  of  this.  .sh. 

2  Sa.   6.  15  Israel  brought  upthe  ark .  .with  shouting 

1  Ch.15.  28  Israel  brought  up  the  ark.  .with shouting 

2  Ch.15.  J4  with  a  loud  voice,  and  with  shouting,  and 
Ezra_  3. 11  the  people  shouted  with  a  greatshout,  wh. 

3. 13  the  noise  of  the  shout  of  joy  from  the  no. 

3. 13  the  people  shouted  with  a  loud  shout 
Job  39.  25  the  thunder  of  the  captains,  and  the  sho. 
Psa.  47.    5  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout,  the  Lord 
Jer.  20.  16  let  him  hear. .the  shouting  at  noontide 
Eze.  21.  22  to  lift  up  the  voice  with  shouting,  to  ap. 
Amos  1.  14  with  shouting  in  the  day  of  battle,  with 

2.  2  Moab  shall  die  with  tumult,  with  shout. 

4. Cry,  crying,  noise,  niNir^i  teshuotfe. 

Zech.  4.   7  bring  forth  the  head  stone,  .(with)  shou. 

5.  A  shout  of  encouragement,  Ke\ev(T/.La  keUusma, 
1  Th.  4.  16*  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout 

SHOUT  (for  joy,  give  a),  to  — 

l.To  answer,  respond,  ru;/  anah. 

Exod32.  18  (It  is)  not  the  voice  of  (them  that)  shout 
Jer.  25  30  he  shall  give  a  shout,  as  they  that  tread 

*2. To  cry  aloud,  rejoice,  neigh,  ?D?  tsahal,  3. 

Jer.  31.   7  and  shout  among  the  chief  of  the  nations 

3. To  cry  out,  niit  tsaearli. 

Isa.  42. 11  let  them  shout  from  the  top  of  the  mou. 

4. To  shout,  j?n  rua,  5. 

Josh.  6.    5  all  the  people  shall  shout  with  a  great 
6. 10  Ye  shall  not  shout,  nor  make  any  noise 
6.  10  day  I  bid  you  shout;  then  shall  ye  shout 
6.  ^6  Shout;  for  the  Loiu>  hath  given  you  the 
6.  20  thepeopleshoutedwhen(tliepiK:sts)iaew 
6.  20  aud  the  people  shouted  with  a  great 
Judgis.  14  the  Philistines  shouted  against  him  :  and 
1  SaT  4.    5  when  theark.  .came.  .Israelshouted with 
10.  24  the  people  shouted,  and  said,  God  save 
17.  20  he  came  to  the  trench,  .and  shouted  for 
17.  52  the  men  of  Israel.. shouted,  and  pursued 
-2  Oh.  13.  15  Then  the  men  of  Jndahgavc  a  shout:and 

13. 15  as  the  men  of  Judah  shouted,  it  came  to 
Ezra   3. 11  And  all  the  people  shouted  with  a  great 

3.  13  for  the  people  shouted  with  a  loud 
Job  38.  7  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy 
Psa.  47.  1  shout  unto  God  with  thevoice  of  triumph 
Isa.  44.  23  shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth: break 
Jer.  50.  15  Shout  against  her  rouud  about :  she  hath 
Zeph.  3. 14  shout,  0  Israel ;  be  glad  and  rejoice  with 
Zech    9.    9  shout,  O  daughter  of  Jerusakm  :  behold 

5.  To  shout,  Jpn  rua,  7a. 

Psa.  65.  13  the  valleys,  .shout  for  joy,  they  also  sing 


SHOUTING 


883 


SHUT 


6.  To  cry  aloud,  sing,  fjj  ranan. 

Lev.  g.  24\vhenallthepeoplesa\v,theyshouted,  and 
Psa.  35.  27  Let  them  shout  for  joy,  and  be  glad,  that 
Isa.   12.   6  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion 

7.  7V>  cry  aloud,  sing,  \T\  ranan,  3. 

Psa.     5.  11  let  them  evershout  for  joy,  because  thou 
132.   9  and  let  thy  saints  shout  for  joy 
132. 16  and  her  saints  shall  shout  aloud  for  joy 

8. To  (cause  to)  cry  aloud  or  sing,  )ri  ranan,  5. 

Psa.  32.  11  shout  for  joy,  all  (ye  that  are)  upright  in 
9.  To  cry  aloud,  sing,  \T\ranan,  7a. 

Psa.  78.  65  a  mighty  man  that  shouteth  by  reason  of 

10  .-1  shout,  sn  rea. 

Exo.d.32.  17  heard  the  noise  of  the  people  as  they  sh. 

11.  To  cry  (aloud),  yy?  shava,  3. 

Lam.  3.    8  when  I  cry  and  shout,  he  shutteth  out  my 

12.  A  shout,  BSfrMi  tericah. 

Ezra   3. 12  wept,  .and  many  shouted  aloud  for  joy 

13.  To  sound  over  or  besides,  £iri<p(t}v£a>  epiphoneo. 
Acts  i2,  22  the  people  gave  a  shout,  (saying,  It  is)  the 

SHOUTING,  to  be  — 
To  shout.  En  rua,  4a. 

Isa.   16. 10  no  singing,  neither  shall  there  be  shout. 
SHOVELS  — 
1. "Shovels,  D"y;  yaim. 

Exod27.   3  his  shovels,  and  his  basins,  and  his  flesh 
38.    3  the  pots,  and  the  shovels,  and  the  basins 

Num.  4.  14  the  flesh  hooks,  and  the  shovels,  and  the 

1  Ki.    7.  40  Hiram  made  the  lavers,  and  the  shovels 

7.  45  the  pots,  aud  the  shovels,  and  the  basins 

2  Ki.  25.  14  the  shovels,  and  the  snuffers,  and  the  sp. 
2  Ch.  4.  11  Hurammadethepots,andtheshovels,and 

4. 16  the  shovels,  and  the  flesh  hooks,  and  all 
Jer.   52.  18  the  shovels,  and  the  snuffers  and  the  bo. 

%.A  winnoioing  shovel,  nrn  rachath. 

Isa.  30.  24  which  hath  been  winnowed  with  the  sh. 

SHOW  —  See  to  Shew. 

SHOWER  — 

1. Heavy  rain,  shower,  D^3  geshem. 

Eze.  13. 11, 13  there  shall  be  an  overflowing  shower 
34.  26  I  will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in 

34.  26  there  shall  be  showers  of  blessing 
Zech.io.    1  give  them  showers  of  rain,  to  every  one 

2. Inundation,  flood,  storm,  D"ji  zerem. 

Job  24.   8-They  are  wet  with  the  showers  of  the  mo. 

2. Showers,  D'T?"!  rebibim. 

Deut32.  2  as  the  small  rain,  .and as  the  showers  up. 
Psa.  65.  10  thou  makest  it  soft  with  showers  ;  thou 

72.    6  He  shall  come  down . .  as  showers  (that) 
Jer.     3.    3  the  showers  have  been  withholden,  and 

14.  22  can  the  heavens  give  showers?  (Art)  not 
Mie.    5.    7  as  the  showers  upon  the  grass,  that  tarri. 

4.  A  flowing  together,  heavy  shower,  oujSpos  ombros. 

Lukei2.  54  ye  say,  There  cometh  a  shower ;  and  so 
SHRANK,  which  — 
A  tendon,  ntyj  nasheh. 

Gen.  32.  32  eat  not  (of)  the  sinew  which  shrank,  wh. 
32.  32  touched  the  hollow..in  the  sinew  that  sh. 

SERED,  to  — 

To  split,  rr?;p  palach,  3. 

2  Ki.    4.  39  came  and  shred  (them)  into  the  pot  of  po. 
SHRINE  — 
Dwelling  plo.ee,  inner  shrine,  va6s  naos. 

Acts  19.  24  a  silversmith,  which  made  silver  shrines 

SHROUD  — 

A  bough,  vy\  choresh. 

Eze.  31.    3  cedar,  .with  a  shadowing  shroud,  and  of 
SHRUBS  — 
A  shrub,  rvb*  stack. 

Gen.  21- 15  she  cast  the  child  under  one  of  the  shrubs 
SHU'- A,  Hjfiti  prosperity. 
Daughter  of  Heber,  an  Asherite.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  32  and  Shomer,  and  Hotham,  and  S.  their  s. 
SHU'-AH,  SHU'-A.  spl?  prosperity. 
A  Canaanite  of  Adullam,  whose  daughter  Judah  took 
to  wife.    B  c.  1730 

Gen.  38.   2  Judah  saw  there..  S. ;  and  he  took  her 

35.  12  the  daughter  of  S.,  Judah's  wife  died,  and 
1  Ch.  2.    3  were  born  unto  him  of  the  daughter  of  S. 

SHU'-AH,  SHU'-A,  mtf  depression. 
A  son  of  Keturah  by  Abraham,  and  his  posterity  in 
£dom  ;  comp.  Sakkaia,  E.  of  Bashan,  Shichan in Moab, 
and  Siajcha,  E.  of  Aila.    B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.   2  and  Medan,  and  Midian,  and  Ishbak.  .S. 

1  Ch.   1.  32  and  Medan,  and  Midian,  and  Ishbak.  ,S. 
SHU'-AH,  nrrc*  depression. 

Brother  of  Chelub,  a  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur. 
B.C.  1430. 

1  Ch.  4. 11  Chelub  the  brother  of  S.  begat Mehir,  wh. 
SHU'-AL,  h'^v  jackal. 

1.  A  district  in  Benjamin,  on  the  way  to  Ophrah.    See 
ShaUui  and  Hazar-shual. 

1  Sa.  13.  17  (that  leadeth  to),  .to  the  land  of  S. 


2.  Third  son  of  Zophah,  an  Asherite.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  7.  36  The  sons  of  Zophah  ;  Suah.  .and  S.,  and 

SHU-BA'-EL,  ^K?W. 

1.  A  son  or  descendant  of  Amram  grandson  of  Levi.  B.C. 
1015. 

1  Ch.24.  20  Of  the  sons  of  Amram  ;  S. :  of  the  sons  of  S. 

2.  A  singer  in  the  sanctuary  in  the  days  of  David ;  per- 
haps the  same  as  Shebuel  in  1  Ch.  25.  4.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.  20  The  thirteenth  to  S.,  (he),  his  sons,  and 
SHU'-HAM,  orncr  depression. 

A  son  of  Dan;  perhaps  the  same  as  Euskam,  Gen.  46. 
23.     B.C.  1700. 

Num.26. 42  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shuhamites 

SHUEAMITES,  'prnfc'n  the  Shuchamite. 
The  family  of  the  preceding. 

Nuni.26.  42  of  Shuham,  the  family  of  the  S.     These 

26.  43  the  families  of  the  S  ,  according  to  those 

SHU-BITE,  'rptrn  the  Shuchi. 
A  descendant  of  Shuah  son  of  Keturah.     B.C.  1580. 
Job     2.  11  Bildadthe  S.,andZophar  the  Naamathite 
8.    i  Then  answered  Bildad  the  S.,  and  said 
18.    1  Then  answered  Bildad  the  S.,  and  said 
25.    1  Then  answered  Bildad  the  S.,  and  said 
42.    9  Bildad  the  S.  (and)  Zophar  the  Naamath. 

SHULAMITE,  jra^irn  the  Shidammith. 
A  female  inhabitant  of  Shidem  (or  Shuncm),  in  Issachar. 
Song  6.  1 3  return,  0  S. ;  return,  return,  that  we  may 
6.  13  What  will  ye  see  in  the  S.  ?  As  it  were  the 

SHUMATHITES,  'CiCG'n  tlie  Shumathi. 

A  family  in  Kirjath-jearim,  descended  from  Shobal  son 

of  Caleb,  son  of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  2.  53  the  Puhites,  and  the  S.,  and  the  Mishra. 
SHUN,  to  — 

l.To  set  around,  repress,  restrain,  •kgpuo~tt}{jll  peri. 

2  Ti.    2. 16  shun  profane  (and)  vain  babblings;  forth. 

2.  To  send  back,  decline,  inroaTtKhcc  hupostello. 

Acts  20.  27  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  you 
SHUNAMITE,  n»Bawn  the  Shunammith. 
A  female  inhabitant  of  Shunem. 

1  Ki.   1.    3  found  Abishag  a  S.,  and  brought  her  to 

1. 15  and  Abishag  the  S.  ministered  unto  the 
2. 17  that  he  gave  me  Abishag  the  S.  to  wife 
2.  21  Let  Abishag  the  S.  be  given  to  Adonijah 
2.  22  why  dost  thou  ask  Abishag  the  S.  forAd.? 

2  Ki.  4. 12  said  to  Gehazi . .  Call  this  S.    And  when  he 

4.  25  said  to  Gehazi.  .Behold,  (yonder is) that  S. 
4.  36  he  called  Gehazi,  and  said,  Call  this  S. 

SHU'-NEM,  DME»  -uneven. 

A  city  in  Issachar,  near  Chesulloth,  on  a  steep  slope  of 

Gilboa;  now  called  Sirtim  or  Salem. 

Josh.19. 18  their  border  was  toward  Jezreel.  .and  S. 

1  Sa.  28.   4  the  I  hilistines.  .came  and  pitched  in  S. 

2  Ki.   4.    8  Elisha  passed  to  S.,  where  (was)  a  great 

SHU'-NI,  ^xv  fortunate. 
Third  son  of  Gad.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  46.  16  the  sons  of  Gad;  Ziphion,  and  Haggi,  S. 

Nuni26. 15  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shunites 
SHUNITES,  }$&r\  the  Shuni. 
The  family  of  the  preceding. 

N  urn  26.  15  of  Shuni,  the  family  of  the  S. 
SHUPH'-AM,  vzwj  serpent. 

A  sou  of  Benjamin";  perhaps  the  same  as  Shephaphen  son 
of  Bela,  1  Ch.  8.  5.     B.C.  1700. 

Nuni26.  39  Of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shuphamites:  of  H. 

SHUPHAMITES,  'Ositrn  the  Shuphami. 
The  family  of  the  preceding. 

Nuni26.  39  Of  Shupham,  the  family  of  the  S. :  of 
SHUP'-PIM,  CDC',  C2P  serpent. 

1.  A  Beujamite.     B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.  12  S.  also,  and  Huppim,  the  children  of  Ir 
7. 15  Machir  took  to  wife  (the  sister)  of .  .S. 

2.  A  Levite,  a  gate  keeper  of  the  tabernacle  hi  the  days 
of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26. 16  To  S.  and  Hosah  (the  lot  came  forth)  wre. 
SHUR,  "flcr. 

A -desert  reachiug  from  the  E.  border  of  Egypt  as  far 
as  the  habitations  of  Amalek  aud  Ishmael. 

Gen.  16.    7  found,  .by  the  fountain  in  the  way  of  S. 
20.    1  dwelled  between  Kadesh  and  S.,  and  soj. 
25.  18  they  dwelt  from  Havilah  unto S.,  that(is) 
Exodi5.  22  they  went  out  into  the  wilderness  of  S. 
1  Sa.  15.   7  (until)  thou  comesttoS.,that(is)overag. 

27.  8  as  thou  goest  to  S.,  even  unto  the  land  of 

SHU '-SHAN,  Jt^  lily. 

A  city  (also  called  Sum)  in  Elam,  on  the  river  Ulai  (or 
Eulius),  the  seat  of  the  Persian  government;  now  called 
Sus,  between  the Shapu rand  the  Dizful  in  the  province 
Hus  or  Chusistan. 

Neh.    1.    1  in  the  twentieth  year,  as  I  was  in  S.  the 
Esth.  1.    2  throne  of  hiskingdom,  which  (was)in  S. 

1.  5  the  people  that  were  present  in  S,  the  p. 

2.  3  gather,  .the  fair  young  virgins  unto  S.  the 
2.  5  in  S.  the  palace  there  was  a  certain  Jew 
2.    S  maidens  were  gathered  together  unto  S. 
3. 15  and  the  decree  was  given  in  S.  the  palace 
3. 15  to  drink;  but  the  city  S.  was  perplexed 


Esth.  4.  8  the  decree  that  was  given  at  S.  to  destroy 
4.  1 6  gather.,  the  Jews  (that  are)  present  in  S. 
8.  14  Andthe  decree  was  given  at  S.  the  palace 

8.  15  and  the  city  of  S.  rejoiced  and  was  glad 

9.  6  in  S.  the  palace  the  Jews  slew  and  destr. 
9. 11  the  number  of  those  that  were  slain  in  S. 
9.  12  slain  and  destroyed  five  hundred  men  in  S. 
9.  i3letitbe granted. .the  Jews which(are)in  S. 
9.  14  the  decree  was  given  at  S.;  and  theyhan. 
9.  15  the  Jews  that  (were)  in  S.  gathered  them. 
9.  15  slew  three  hundred  men  at  S.;  but  on  the 
9  1 8  the  Jews  that  (were)  at  S.  assembled  to. 

Dan.    8.   2  I  (was)  at  S.  (in)  the  palace,  which  (is)  in 

SHU'-SHAN  E'-DUTH,  nny  \&w  lily  of  testimony. 
A  temple  music  choir. 

Psa.     60.  title.  To  the  chief  musician  upon  Sh.  E. 
SHUT  (out,  to,  up,  together,  self),  to  — 
l.To  be  narroxo,  shut,  stop,  ddn  atam. 

Prov  17.  28  he  that  shutteth  his  lips  (is  esteemed)  a 

2.  To  shut,  lax  atar. 

Psa.  69. 15  and  let  not  the  pit  shut  her  mouth  upon 

3.  To  cause  to  shut,  *\u  guph,  5. 

Neh.   7.    3  while  they  stand  by,  let  them  shut  the  do 

4.  To  plaster,  da\d>,  overlay,  rno  tuach. 

Isa.  44. 18  he  hath  shut  their  eyes,  that  they  cannot 

5.  To  shut  in  or  up,  restrain,  nVs  kola. 

1  Sa.    6. 10  tied  them  to  the  cart,  and  shut  up  their 

Psa.  88.  8  (I  am)  shut  up,  and  I  cannot  come  forth 

Jer.  32.    2  the  prophet  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the 

32.   3  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah  had  shut  him  up 

6.T0  bolt,  fasten,  hyinaal. 

Song  4. 12  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed 

7.  To  shut  in  or  up,  "iJp  sagar. 

Gen.    7.  16  commanded  him.  .the  Lord  shut  him  i  1 

19.    6  Lot  went  out.  .and  shut  the  door  after  him 

19.  10  pulled  Lot  into  the  house . .  and  shut  to  the 

Exodi4.    3  entangled . .  the  wilderness  hath  shut  them 

Josh.  2.    7  as  soon  as  they.,  were  gone  out.  .they  shut 

Judg.  3.  23shutthedoorsof  theparlouruponhim,  and 

9.  51  shut  (it)  to  them,  and  gat  them  up  to  the 

1  Sa.   1.    5  but  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her  womb 

1.  6  because  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her  womb 

2  Ki.  4.    4  thou  shalt shut  the  door  upon  thee  and  up. 

4.    5  shut  the  door  upon  her  and  upon  her  sons 

4.  21  and  shut  (the  door)  upon  him,  and  went 

4.  33  shut  the  door  upon  them  twain,  andprayed 

6.  32  shut  the  door,  and  hold  him  fast  at  the  do. 

2  Ch.28.  24  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lo. 

29.    7  they  have  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  porch 

Neh.   6.  10  let  us  shut  the  doors  of  the  temple :  for 

Job     3. 10  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my  (mother's) 

12.  14  he  shutteth  up  a  man,  and  there  can  be  no 
41.  15  (His)  scales  (are  his)  pride,  shut  up  toge. 

Isa.   22.  22  none  shall  shut ;  and  he  shall  shut,  aud 
26.  20  shut  thy  doors  about  thee :  hide  thyself 

Eze.  44.  1  gate  of  the  outward  sanctuary,  .(was)shut 
44.  2  This  gate  shallbe  shut,  it  shall  not  be  op. 
44.  2  entered  in  by  it,  therefore  it  shall  be  shut 
46.  1  the  gate,  .shallbe  shut  the  six  working  d. 
46. 12  after  his  going  forth  (one)  shall  shut  the 

Mai.    1. 10  Who  (is  there),  .that  would  shut  the  doors 

8.  To  be  shut  in  or  up,  13  □  sagar,  2. 

Eze.    3.  24  said  unto  me,  Go,  shut  thyself  within  th. 

9.  To  cause  to  shut  in  or  up,  i3p  sagar,  5. 

Lev.  13.   4,  31,  33  the  priest  shall  shut  up  (him  that 

13.  5,  21,  26  the  priests  shall  shut  him  up  seven 
13.  11  shall  not  shut  him  up;  for  he  (is)  unclean 
13.  50  shut  up  (it  that  hath)  the  plague  seven  d. 

13.  54  and  he  shall  shut  it  up  seven  days  more 

14.  38  the  priest  shall,  .shut  up  the  house  seven 
14.  46  the  house  all  the  while  that  it  is  shut  up 

Deut  32.  30  except,  .the  LORD  had  shut  them  up 
Job    11.  10  If  he  cut  off,  and  shut  up,  or  gather  toge. 
Psa.  31.    8  hast  not  shut  me  up  into  the  hand  of  the 

10.  To  shut  in  or  up,  "UD  segar. 

Dan.   6. 22  God  hath  sent  his  angel,  and  hath  shut 

11.  To  (cause  to)  cover,  shut  up,  •!?□  sakak,  5. 

J  ob    38.    8  (who)  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors,  when  it 
12. To  shut,  close,  n*jJ  atsah. 

Prov  16. 30  He  sTiutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  froward  th. 

13.  To  make  firm,  shut,  dhj;  atsavi. 

Isa.   33. 15  and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil 

14.  To  keep  in,  restrain,  "i*j>  atsar. 

Deut  11.  17  he  shut  up  the  heaven,  that  there  be  no 

32.  36  he  seeth  that,  .(there  is)  none  shut  up, or 

1  Ki.  14.  10  (and)  him  that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  Israel 

21.  21  and  him  that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  Israel 

2  Ki.  9.    8  and  him  that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  Israel 

14.  26  (there  was)  not  any  shut  up,  nor  any  left 

17.    4  the  king  of  Assyria  shut  him  up,  and  bo. 

2  Ch.  7.  13  If  I  shut  up  heaven  that  there  be  no  rain 

Isa.  66.    9  shall  I  cause  to  bring  forth,  and  shut  (the 

Jer.  20.    9  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones,  aud 

33.  1  while  he  was  yet  shut  up  in  the  court  of 
36.    5  I  (am)  shut  up ;  I  cannot  go  into  the  house 
39. 15  while  he  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the 

15.  To  bind  up,  distress,  "Hy  tsarar. 

2  Sa.  20.    3  they  were  shut  up  unto  the  day  of  their 

16.  To  shut  out,  up  or  in,  Drip  satham. 

Dan.  8.  26  shut  thou  up  the  vision ;  for  (it  shall  be) 
1 2.   4  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book,  (ev.) 


SHUT 


8S4 


SIDE 


17.  To  shut,  contract,  y$Q  qaphats. 

Deut  is.  7  nor  shut  thine  hand  from  thy  poor  brother 
Psa.  77,  9  hath  he  in  auger  shut  up  his  tender  mer. 
Isa.   52.  15  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him 

IS.  To  delight,  da&Ae,  VW  shaa,  5. 

Isa.     6.  10  make  theirears  heavy,  and  shut  theireyes 

19.  To  shut  up,  out,  in,  cn'v  satham. 

Lam.   3.    8  when  I  cry  and  shout,  he  shutteth  out 

20. To  shut  back,  awoK\cta}  apoklei~>. 

Lnkei3.  25  When  ouce  the  Master,  .hath  shut  to  the 

21.  To  shut  doivn,  KaraKAeiw  katakleid. 

Luke  3.  20  Added  yet  this  above  all,  that  he  shut  up 
Acts  26.  10  many  of  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison 

22.  To  shut,  KXelcv  I'hio. 

Matt.  6.  6  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy 
23. 13  ye  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against 
25. 10  went  in  with  him  .and  the  door  was  shut 

Luke  4.  25  the  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years  and 
11.    7  the  door  is  now  shut,  and  my  children  are 

Johnzo.  19  the  doors  were  shut  where  the  disciples 

20.  26  (Then)  came  Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut 
Acts    5.  23  The  prison  truly  found  we  shut  with  all 

21.  30  drew  him  out.  .and.  .the  doors  were  shut 
1  Jo.  3. 17  shutteth  up  his  bowels  (of  compassion)  fr. 
Kev.   3.    7  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth;  and  shut. 

3.    8  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it 

11.  6  These  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it 
20.  3  shut  him  up,  and  seta  seal  upon  him,  that 
2i.  25  the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by 

23.  To  shut  toe/ether,  o~vyK\eia>  sugkleio. 

Gal.     3.  23  shut  up  unto  the  faith  which  should  aft. 
SHUT  (in,  out,  up),  to  be  — 
I.To  be  shut  in  or  up,  139  sagar,  2. 

Num  12.  14  let  her  lie  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 

12.  15  Miriam  was  shut  out  from  the  camp  seven 
1  Sa.  23.  7  he  is  shut  in,  by  enteringinto  a  town  that 
Nell.  13.  19  I  commanded  that  the  gates  should  be  sh. 
Isa.  45.    1  to  open,  .and  the  gates  shall  not  be  shut 

60.  11  they  shall  not  be  shut  day  nor  night ;  that 
Eze.  46.    2  the  gate  shall  not  be  shut  until  the  even. 

2.  To  be  shut  in  or  up,  ~ijP  sagar,  4. 

Josh.  6.  1  Jericho  was  straitly  shut  up  because  of  the 
Eccl.12.  4  the  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets,  when 
Isa.  24. 10  every  house  is  shut  up,  that  no  man  may 
24.  22  shall  be  shut  up  in  the  prison,  and  after 
Jer.  33. 19  The  cities  of  the  south  shall  be  shut  up 

3.  To  be  kept  in,  restrained,  "ixy  atsar,  2. 

1  Ki.  8.  35  When  heaven  is  shut  up,  and  there  is  no 

2  Ch.  6.  26  When  the  heaven  is  shut  up,  and  there  is 
Neh.  6. 10  the  house  of  Shemaiah . .  who  (was)  shut  up 

SHTJTHALHITES,  fe  the  family  of  Shuthelah. 
Xum26.  35  of  Shuthelah,  the  family  of  the  S.:  of  Bee. 

SHTJ-THE'-LAH,  nSrnt?  setting  ofTclah. 

1.  A  son  of  Ephraim.'    B.C.  1680. 

NU11126.  35  of  S.,  the  family  of  the  Shuthalhites :  of 

26.  36  these  (are)  the  sons  of  S. :  of  Eran,  the  fa. 
1  Ch.  7.  20  the  sonsof  Ephraim;  S.,  andBered hisson 

2.  Son  of  Zabad,  a  descendant  of  Ephraim  in  the  fifth  or 
sixth  remove.     B.C.  1530. 

1  Ch.  7. 21  Zabad  his  son,  and  S.  his  son,  and  Ezer 
SHUTTING  — 
To  shut  in  or  up,  ijp  sagar. 

Josh.  2.   5  (about  the  time)  of  shutting  of  the  gate,  w. 
SHUTTLE  — 
Weaving  machine,  J"ix  creg. 

Job     7.   6  Mydays  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shu. 
SI-A'-HA,  SI'-A,  Knj;;p,  Njrp  congregation. 
One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  with 
Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  44  The  children  of  Keros,  the  children  of  S. 

Neh.  7.  47  The  children  of  Keros,  the  children  of  S, 

SIB-BE'-CHAI,  SIB-BE'-CAI.  »?3p  J 'ah  is  intervening. 
One  of  the  family  of  Hushah  who  slew  Saph  or  Sappai, 
a  Philistine  giant,  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1048. 
1  Sa.  21.  18  S.  the  Hushathite  slew  Saph,  which  (was) 
1  Ch.11.  29  S.  the  Hushathite,  Ilai  the  Ahohite 

20.    4  at  which  time  S.  the  Hushathite  slew  S. 

27.  11  eighth  (captain)  for  the.  .mouth (was)  S. 

SLB-BO'-LETH,  nSap. 

The  Ephraimite  pronunciation  of  Shibboleth,  "an  ear 

of  corn." 

Judgi2.   6  Say  now  Shibboleth  ;  and  he  said  S.,  for 
SLB'-MAH,  npa'p  balsam. 

A  city  in  Reuben,  called  in  Num.  32.  3  Shebam,  and  in 
ver.  ^ZShibmah;  near  Jazer  and  Kirjathaim. 

Josh. 13. 19  Kirjathaim,  and  S.,  and  Zareth-shahar 

Isa.    16.    8  the  fields,  .languish,  (and)  the  vine  of  S. 
16.   9  Therefore  I  will  bewail . .  the  vine  of  S. 

Jer.   48.  32  O  vine  of  8.,  I  will  weep  for  thee  with  the 
SIB-RA'-IM,  onip  double  hill. 
A  city  of  Syria,  between  Damascus  and  Hamath. 

Eze.  47.  16  Hamath,  Bcrothah,  S.,  which  (is) between 

SI'-chem,  pay  ridge,  slwulder. 

A  place  in  the  plain  of  Moreh  in  mount  Ephraim,  now 

called  ATablou8.    See  Shechem. 

Gen.  12.  6  A.  passed  through. .unto  the  place  of  5. 


SICK  (folk,  people),  very,  sickly  — 
l.To  be  or  become  sickly,  e>j$  anash,  2. 

2  Sa.  12. 15  struck  the  child,  .and  it  was  very  sick 
2.Menstruous,  nn  daveh. 

Lev.  15.  33  of  her  that  is  sick  of  her  flowers,  and  of 
3. Sicknesses,  diseases,  D'N^nn  tachaluim. 

Jer.  14. 18  then  behold  them  that  are  sick  with  fam. 
i.Not  robust  or  strong,  afifrwo'TOs  arrhostos. 

Matt  14.  14  Jesus  went  forth,  .and  he  healed  their  s. 

Mark  6.   5  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick  folk 

16.  18  [they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  th.] 

1  Co.11.  30  many  (are)  weak  and  sickly  among  you 

5.  To  be  infirm,  without  strength,  affdeyew  asthenco. 
Mattio.  8  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise 
Mark  6.  56  they  laid  the  sick  in  the  streets,  and  bes. 
Luke  4.  40  they  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  disea. 
9.  2  sent  them  to  preach,  .and  to  heal  [the  si.] 
Johnn.  1  a  certain  (man)  was  sick, (named) Lazarus 
Acts  19.  12  from  his  body  were  brought  unto  the  siek 

2  Ti.    4.  20  but  Trophimus  have  I  left  at  Miletum  si. 

6. Infirm,  without  strength,  ho-devhs  asthenes. 

Matt 25.  39  when sawwethee [sick,]  orin  prison,  and 

25.  43  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me  not 

25.  44  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  prison 

Lukeio.    9  heal  the  sick  that  are  therein  ;  and  say 

Acts    5.  15  they  brought  forth  the  sick  into  the  str. 

5. 16  bringing  sick  folks,  and  them  which  were 

7.  To  be  ill,  e^co  KaKws  echo  kakos. 

Matt.  4.  24  they  broughtunto  him  all  sick  people  th. 
Luke  7.    2  a  certain  centurion's  servant,  .was  sick 

S.To  labour,  suffer  from  fatigue,  Ka.fj.uw  kamno. 

Jas.     5.  15  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick,  and 
SICK,  to  be,  fall,  make  self  — 
l.To  be  sick,  weak,  diseased,  n?n  chalah. 

Gen. '48.    1  told  Joseph,  Behold,  thy  father  (is)  sick 
1  Sa.  19.  14  And  when  Saul  sent,  .she  said,  He  (is)  si. 
30.  13  my  master  left  me,  because . .  I  fell  sick 

1  Ki.  14.    1  Abijah  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell  sick 

14.    5  ask  a  thing,  .for  her  son;  for  he  (is)  sick 

17.  17  the  son  of  the  woman,  .fell  sick;  aud  his 

2  Ki.  1.    2  fell  down  through  a  lattice,  .and  was  sick 

8.   7  and  Ben-hadad  the  king  of  Syria  was  sick 

8. 29  went . .  to  see  Joram . .  because  he  was  sick 

13. 14  Elisha  was  fallen  sick  of  his  sickness  wh. 

20.    1  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  de. 

20.  12  he  had  heard  that  Hezekiah  had  been  si. 

2  Ch.22.    6  went.,  to  see  Jehoram. .  because  he  was  si. 

32.  24  In  those  days  Hezekiah  was  siek  to  the  de. 

Neh.    2.    2  seeingthou(art)notsick?  this(is) nothing 

Psa.  35-  13  when  they  were  sick,  my  clothing  (was)sa. 

Prov.23.  35  They  have  stricken  me.  .(and)  I  was  not  s. 

Song  2.    5  comfort  me  with  apples ;  for  I  am  siek  of 

5.    8  that  ye  tell  him,  that  I  (am)  sick  of  love 

Isa.  23.  24  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick 

38.    1  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  de. 

38.  9  when  he  had  been  sick,  and  was  recovered 

39.  1  he  had  heard  that  he  had  been  sick,  and 
Eze.  34.  4  neither  have,  .healed  that  which  was  sick 

34.  16  and  will  strengthen  that  which  was  siek 
Mai.    1.    8  if  ye  offer  the  lame  and  sick,  (is  it)  not 
1.  13  brought  (that  which  was)  torn.,  and  the  s. 

2.  To  become  sick,  weak,  diseased,  n?n  chalah,  2. 

Dan.   8.  27  I  Daniel  fainted,  and  wassick(certain)da. 
Z.To  cause  sickness,  weakness,  nbn  chalah,  5. 

Prov.13.  12  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick:but 

Hos.    7.    5  the  princes  have  made  (him)  sick  witli  bo. 

Mic.    6.  13  Therefore  also  will  I  make  (thee)  sick  in 

4.  To  become  or  show  self  sick,  nhn  chalah,  7. 

2  Sa.  13.    2  Amnon  was  so  vexed,  that  he  fell  sick  for 
13.   5  Lay  thee  down,  .and  make  thyself  sick: 
13.    6  Amnon  lay  down,  and  made  himself  sick 

6. Sickness,  weakness,  'ttj  choli. 

Isa.     1.    s  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  he. 

6. Not  robust  or  strong,  ap^wcrros  arrhostos. 

Mark  6.  13  anointed withoiImanythatweresick,and 

7.  To  beinjirm,  without  strength,  ao-Qevew  astheneo. 

Matt  25.  36  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me  :  I  was  in 
Luke  7.  10  found,  .servant  whole  [that  had  been  si.] 
John    4.  46  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son  was  sick 
11.    2  Mary . .  whose  brother  Lazarus  was  sick 
]  1.    3  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick 
11.   6  he  had  heard  therefore  that  he  was  siek 
Acts    9.  37  it  came  to  pass,  .that  she  was  sick,  and 
Phil.   2.  26  that  ye  had  heard  that  he  had  been  siek 
2.  27  he  was  sick  nigh  unto  death:  but  God  had 
Jas.    5.  14  Is  any  sick  among  you?  let  him  call  for  the 

8.  To  be  ill,  «xw  KaKws  echo  kakos. 

Matt.  8.  16  and  he.  .healed  all  that  were  sick 

9.  12  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick 

Mark  1,  34  he  healed  many  that  were  sick  of  divers 
2.  17  no  need,  .but  they  that  are  sick :  I  came 
6.  55  carry  about  in  beds  those  that  were  sick 

Luke  5.  31  need  not  a  physician;buttheythat  are  si. 

SICKLE  — 

l.A  sickle,  reaping  hook,  trpin  chermesh. 

Deut  16.    9  thou  beginnest  (to  put)  the  sickle  to  the 
23.  25  not  move  a  sickle  unto  thy  neighbour's  st. 

2.  A  sickle,  scythe,  large  knife,  "?3p  maggal. 

Jer.   50.  16  him  that  handleth  the  sickle  in  the  time 
Joel    3. 13  Putye  in  the  sickle;  for  the  harvest  isripe 


3. A  reaping  liook,  sickle,  dpe-navov  drepanon. 

Mark  4.  29  immediately  he  putteth  in  the  sickle,  bee. 

Rev.  14.  14  Son  of  man,  having.,  in  his  hand  a  sharps. 
14.  15  Thrust  in  thy  sickle,  and  reap:  for  the  ti. 
14,  16  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  in  his  sic. 
14.  17  angel  came . .  also  having  a  sharp  sickle 
14.  18  cry  to  him  that  had  the  sharp  sickle,  say. 
14.  18  Thrust  in  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather  the 
14. 19  angel  thrust  in  his  sickle  into  the  earth 

SICKNESS,  (having)  — 
l.Menstruous,  rm  daveh. 

Lev.  20.  18  lie  with  a  woman  having  her  sickness,  and 
2. Sickness,  weakness,  *?n  choli. 

Deut.  7. 15  Lord  will  take  away  from  thee  all  sickn. 
28.  59  sore  sickness,  and  of  long  continuance 
28.  61  Also  every  sickness,  and  every  plague,  wh. 

1  Ki.17.  17  sickness  was  so  sore,  that  there  was  nobr. 

2  Ki.13.  14  Elisha  was  fallen  sick  of  his  sickness  wh. 
2  Ch.21.  15  thou  (shalt  have)great  sickness  by  disease 

21.  15  fall  out  by  reason  of  the  sickness  day  by 
21.  19  bowels  fell  out  by  reason  of  his  sickness 
Psa.  41.  3  thou  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness 
Eccl.  5.  17  much  sorrow  and  wrath  witli  his  sickness 
Isa.  38.  9  been  siek,  and  was  recovered  of  his  sickn. 
Hos.   5. 13  When  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness,  and  Jud. 

3. Sickness,  disease,  .1702  machalah. 

Exod23.  25  take  sickness  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 

1  Ki.   8.  37  whatsoever  plague,  whatsoever  sickness 

2  Ch.  6.  28  whatsoever  sore,  or  whatsoever  sickness 

A.  Sicknesses,  diseases,  wxbnn  tachaluim. 

Deut  29.  22  sicknesses  which  the  Lord  hath  laid  upon 
5. Infirmity,  d<r0eVeia  astheneia. 

John  11.    4  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  for 
6.  U?i soundness,  sickness,  poo-os  nosos. 

Matt.  4.  23  healing  allmanner  of  sickness  and  allms. 

8.  17  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare(our)  sickn. 

9.  35  healing  every  sickness  and  every  disease 
10.    1  heal  all  manner  of  sickness,  and  all  man. 

Mark  3.  15  to  have  power  [to  heal  sicknesses,  and]  to 

SLB'-DLM,  nsty  extension. 

The  region  on  the  shores  of  the  Salt  Sea  wherein  were 

Sodom,  Gomorrah,  Admah,  aud  Zeboim. 

Gen.  14.    3  were  joined  together  in  the  vale  of  S.,  wh. 

14.    8  joined  battle  with  them  in  the  vale  of  S. 

14.  10  the  vale  of  S.  (was  full  of)  slime  pits,  and 

SIDE,  (farther,  other,  this,  yonder)  — 
l.This,  that,  t^  hallaz. 

1  Sa.  14.    1  garrison,  that  (is)  on  the  other  side.  But 

2.  Hand,  T  yad. 

Exod.  2.    5  maidens  walked  along  by  the  river's  side 

1  Sa.    4.  13  Eli  sat  upon  a  seat  by  the  way  side  watc. 

4.  18  from  off  the  seat  backward  by  the  side  of 

2  Sa.  iS.  4  king  stood  by  the  gate  side,  and  all  the  pc. 
Psa  140.  5  they  have  spread  a  net-by  the  wayside,  th. 
Eccl.  4.  1  on  the  side  of  their  oppressors  (there  was) 
Dan. '10.    4  as  I  was  by  the  side  of  the  great  river,  wh. 

3.  Thigh,  -]"i;  yarek. 

Exod32.  27  Put  every  man  his  sword  by  his  side,  (and) 
40.  22  upon  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  northward 
40.  24  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  southward 

Lev.    1.  11  kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar  northward 

Num. '3.  29,  35  shall  pitch  on  the  side  of  thetabemn. 

2  Ki.  16.  14  and  put  it  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar 

4.  Thigh,  npy_  yarkah. 

Exod  26.  22  for  the  sides  of  the  tabernacle  westward 
26.  23  corners  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  two  sides 

26.  27  the  tabernacle  forthe  two  sides  westward 
36.  27  for  the  sides  of  the  tabernacle  westward 
36.  28  corners  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  two  sides 

36.  32  of  the  tabernacle  for  the  sides  westward 
Judgig.    1  certain  Levite  sojourning  on  the  side  of 

19. 18  from  Beth-lebem-judah  toward  the  side 

1  Sa.  24.    3  his  men  remained  in  the  sides  of  the  cave 

1  Ki.   6. 16  built  twenty  cubits  on  the  side  of  the  ho. 

2  Ki.19.  23  am  come  up .  .to  the  sides  of  Lebanon,  and 
Psa.  48.    2  the  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of  the  gr. 

128.  3  as  a  fruitful  vine  by  the  sides  of  thine  ho. 
Isa.   14.  13  will  sit  also .  .in  the  sides  of  the  north 

14.  15  shalt  be  brought  down  to  hell,  to  the  si. 

37.  24  am  I  come  up . .  to  the  sides  of  Lebanon 
Jer.     6.  22  shall  be  raised  from  the  sides  of  the  earth 
Eze.  32.  23  Whose  graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  the 

46. 19  there  (was)  a  place  on  the  two  sides  wes. 
Amos  6.  10  shall  say  unto  him  that  (is)  by  the  sides 
Jon.    1.    5  Jonah  was  gone  down  intothe  sidesof  the 

5.  Shoulder,  r,ri3  katheph. 

Exod27. 14  hangings  of  one  side  (of  the  gate  shall  be) 

27.  15  on  the  other  side  (shall  be)  hangings  fift. 

28.  27  shalt  put  them  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ep. 
38. 14  hangings  of  the  one  side  (of  the  gate  were) 

38.  15  for  the  other  side  of  the  court  gate,  on 

39.  2oputlrthem  on  the  two  sides  of  theephodup. 
Num34.  1 1  shall  reach  unto  the  side  of  the  sea  of  Ch. 
Josh  15.    8  went  up.  .unto  the  south  side  of  the  Jeb. 

15.  10  passed  along  unto  the  side  of  mount  Jea. 
15. 11  border  went  outuntothe  sideof  Ekron  no. 
18.  12  border  went  up  to  the  side  of  Jericho  on 
18. 13  to  the  side  of  Luz,  which  (is)  Beth-el,  so. 
18. 16  descended.. to  the  side  of  Jebusi  on  the 
iS.  18  passed  along  toward  the  side  over  against 
18.  19  border  passed  along  to  the  side  of  Beth-h. 

1  Ki.*6.    8  The  door,  .(was)  in  the  right  side  of  the  ho. 

"7.  39  side  of  the  house,  and  five  on  the  left  side 

7.  39  he  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  ho. 


SIDE 


885 


SIDON 


2.  Ch.  4.  10  set  the  sea  on  the  right  side  of  the  east  end 

23.  10  right  side  of  the  temple  to  the  left  side  of 
Eze.  25.   9  I  will  open  the  side  of  Moab  from  the  ci. 

40.  18  pavement  by  the  side  of  the  gates,  overag. 
40.  40  at  the  side  without,  .on  the  other  side,  wh. 
40.41  Four  tables  (were).,  by  the  side  of  the  gate 
40.  44  which  (was)  at  the  side  of  the  north  gate 

40.  44  one  at  the  side  of  the  east  gate  (having) 

41.  2  the  sides  of  the  door  (were)  five  cubits  on 
41.  26  the  sides  of  the  porch,  and  (upon)  the.  .c. 
46. 19  the  entry,  which  (was)  at  the  side  of  the 
47.    1  from  the  right  side  of  the  house,  at  the 
47.   2  there  ran  out  waters  on  the  right  side 

6.  Loins,  D'3nD  mothnayim. 

Neh.    4. 18  every  one  had  his  sword  girded  by  his  s. 
Eze.     9.   2  with  a  writer's  inkhorn  by  his  side:  and 

9.    3  which  (had)  the  writer's  inkhorn  by  his  s. 

9.  ii  man . .  which  (had)  the  inkhorn  by  his  side 

7.  Margin,  side,  ~q%eber. 

Exod23.  26  which  (is)  in  the  side  of  the  ephod  inwa. 
32.  15  tables  (were)  written  on  both  their  sides 
39.  19  which  (was)  on  the  side  of  the  ephod  in. 

Num2i.  13  pitched  on  the  other  side  of  Arnon,  whi. 
22.  1  pitched  in  the  plains  of  Moab  on  this  side 
32. 19  on  yonder  side  Jordan,  or  forward  :  bee. 
32. 19  our  inheritance  is  fallen  to  us  on  this  side 
32.  32-possession  of  our  inheritance  on  this  side 
34.  15  received  their  inheritance  on  this  side  J. 

35. 14  Ye  shall  give  three  cities  on  this  side  Jo. 
Deut.  1.    1  Moses  spake  unto  all  Israel  on  this  side  J. 

1.   s  On  this  side  Jordan,  in  the  land  of  Moab 

3.  8  the  land  that  (was)  on  this  side  Jordan,  fr. 

4.  41  Moses  severed  three  cities  on  this  side  Jo. 
4.  46  On  this  side  Jordan,  in  the  valley  over  ag. 
4.  47  which  (were)  on  this  side  Jordan,  toward 

4.  49  all  the  plain  on  this  side  Jordan  eastwa. 

11.  30  (Are)  they  not  on  tlie  other  side  Jordan 
Josh.  x.  14  laud  which  Moses  gave  you  on  this  side 

1.  15  which  Moses,  .gave  you  on  this  side  Jord. 

2.  10  Amorites,  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  J. 

5.  1  Amorites,  which  (were)  on  the  side  of  Jo. 
7.  7  content  and  dwelt  on  the  other  side  Jord. ! 
9.    1  kings  which  (were)  on  this  side  Jordan,  in 

12.  1  possessed  their  land  on  the  other  side  J. 

12.  7  Joshua,  .smote  on  this  side  Jordan  on  the 

13.  27  Chinnereth  on  the  other  side  Jordan  east. 

13.  32  on  the  other  side  Jordan,  by  Jericho,  eas. 

14.  3  an  half  tribe  on  the  other  side  Jordan 
17.  5  Bashan,  which  (were)  on  the  other  side  J. 
■20.  8  on  the  other  side  Jordan  by  Jericho  east. 
22.  4  which  Moses,  .gave  you  on  the  other  side 
22.  7  among  their  brethren  on  this  side  Jordan 

24.  2  Your  fathers  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of 
24.  3  took  your  father. .  from  the  other  side  of 
24.  8  whiehdwelton  the  other  side  Jordan;  and 
24.  14  fathers  served  on  the  other  side  of  the  flo. 

24. 15  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood 
Judg.  7.  25  brought.. to  Gideon  on  the  other  side  Jor. 

10.  8  children,  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  Jo. 

11.  18  pitched  on  the  other  side  of  Arnon,  but 
1  Sa.  14.   1  garrison,  that  (is)  on  the  other  side.   But 

14.    4  (there  was)  a  sharp  rock  on  the  one  side 
14.    4  sharp  rock  on  the  other  side  :  and  the  na. 
14.  40  Be  ye  on  one  side,  and  I  and  Jonathan 
14.  40  son  will  be  on  the  other  side.  And  the  pe. 
26.  13  Then  David  went  over  to  the  other  side 
31.    7  men  of  Israel  that  (were)  on  the  other  si. 
31.    7  (they)  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  Jord. 
1  Ki.  4.  24  dominion  over  all  (the  region)  on  this  si. 
4.  24  over  all  the  kings  on  this  side  the  river 
4.  24  had  peace  on  all  sides  round  about  him 
7.  30  under  the  laver. .  at  the  side  of  every  ad. 
1  Ch.  6.  78  on  the  other  side  Jordan,  by  Jericho   on 

12.  37  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  of  the  Ken. 
26.  30  on  tliis  side  Jordan  westward,  in  all  the 

Ezra    8.  36  and  to  the  governors  on  this  side  the  riv. 

Nell.  3.    7  throne  of  the  governor  on  this  side  the  ri. 

Jer.  48.  28  maketh  her  nest  in  the  sides  of  the  hole's 

49.  32  bring  their  calamity  from  all  sides  there. 

S.  Margin,  side,  "n>7.  abar. 

Ezra   4.  10  rest  (that  are)  on  this  side  the  river,  and 
4.  11  Thy  servants  the  men  on  this  side  the  ri. 

4.  16  shalt  have  no  portion  on  this  side  the  riv. 

5.  3,  6  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  river 

5.  6  which  (were)  on  this  side  the  river,  sent 

6.  13  Then  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  r. 

nxa  peah. 

18  twenty  boards  on  the  south  side  southw. 

20  on  the  north  side,  (there  shall  be)  twenty 
g  for  the  south  side  southward  (there  shall 
9  of  an  hundred  cubits  long  for  one  side 

1 1  likewise  for  the  north  side  in  length  (there 

12  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  west  side 

13  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  east  side 
23  twenty  boards  for  the  south  side  southw. 

9  on  the  south  side  southward  the  hangings 

11  for  the  north  side  (the  hangings  were)  an 

12  for  the  west  side  (were)  hangings  of  fifty 

13  And  for  the  east  side  eastward  fifty  cubits 
5  east  side,  .and  on  the  south  side  two  tho. 
5  west  side.. and  on  the  north  side  two  th. 

12  their  border  on  the  north  side  was  from 
20  Jordan  was  the  border,  .on  the  east  side 
7  west  side  westward,  and  from  the  east  side 
15  border  of  the  land  toward  the  north  side 

17  border  of  Kamath.  And  (thisis)then.  side 

18  the  east  side..  And  (this  is)  the  east  side 

19  south  side  southward,  .south  side  south. 

20  The  west  side . .  This  (is)  the  west  side 


9.  Corner, 
E\-od26. 

26. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

27. 

36. 

38. 

38. 

33. 

33. 
Num.35. 

35' 
Josh.  1 8, 

18. 
Eze.  45. 

47- 
47- 
47> 
47. 

47< 


Eze.  48.    1  for  these  are  his  sides  east  (and)  west ;  a 
48.    2  from  the  east  side  unto  the  west  side 

[So  in  v.  4,  5,  8,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27] 
48.  3, 6, 7  from  the  east  side  even  unto  the  west  s. 
48.  16  north  sidefour  thousand  and  five  hundred 
48.  16  south  side  four  thousand  and  five  hundred 
48.  16  on  the  east  side  four  thousand  and  five 
48. 16  west  side  four  thousand  andflve  hundred 
48.  28  border  of  Gad,  at  the  south  side  southw. 
48.  30  goings  out  of  the  city  on  the  north  side 
48.  32  at  the  east  side  four  thousand  and  five 
48.  33  at  the  south  side  four  thousand  and  five 
48.  34  At  the  west  side  four  thousand  and  five 

10. Side,  "is  tsad. 

Gen.    6. 16  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  set  in  the  side 
Exod2$.  32  six  branches  shall  come  out  of  the  sides 
25.  32  three  branches.,  out  of  the  one  side,  and 

25.  32  three  branches,  .out  of  the  other  side 

26.  13  it  shall  hang  over  the  sides  of  the  tabern. 
30.   4  upon  the  two  sides  of  it  shalt  thou  make 
37.  18  And  six  branches  going  out  of  the  sides 
37.  18  out  of  the  one  side . .  out  of  the  other  side 
37.  27  upon  the  two  sides  thereof,  to  be  places 

Num  33.  55  thorns  in  your  sides,  and  shall  vex  you  in 
Deut3i.  26  put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
Josh  23.  13  scourges  in  your  sides,  and  thorns  in  your 
Judg.  2.    3  but  they  shall  be  (as  thorns)  in  yoursides 

1  Sa.   6.    8  put  the  jewels,  .in  a  cofferby  the  side  th. 

20.  20  I  will  shoot  three  arrows  on  the  side  (th.) 
20.  25  Abner  sat  by  Saul's  side,  and  David's  place 
23.  26  Saul  went  on  this  side  of  the  mountain 
23.  26  David  and  his  men  on  that  side  of  the  m. 

2  Sa.   2.  16  and  (thrust)  his  sword  in  his  fellow's  side 

13. 34  much  people  by  the  way  of  the  hill  side 

Psa.  91.    7  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten 

Isa.  60.   4  thy  daughters  shall  be  nursed  at  (thy)  side 

66.  12  ye  shall  be  borne  upon  (her)  sides,  and  be 

Eze.    4.   4  Lie  thou  also  upon  thy  left  side,  and  lay 

4     6  lie  again  on  thy  right  side,  and  thou  shalt 

4.    8  shalt  not  turn  thee  from  one  side  to  ano. 

4.  9  days  that  thou  shalt  lie  upon  thy  side 
34.  21  Because  ye  have  thrust  with  side  and  with 

11.  Rib,  yhvtsela, 

Exod2j'  12  and  two  rings  (shall  be)  in  the  one  side  of 
25.  12  and  two  rings  in  the  other  side  of  it 

25.  14  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  by  the  sides 

26.  20  And  for  the  second  side  of  the  tabernacle 
26.  26  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 
26.  27  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  other  side 
26.  27  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  side  of  the 
26.  35  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  toward  the 

26.  35  thou  shalt  put  the  table  on  the  north  side 

27.  7  staves  shall  be  upon  the  two  sides  of  the 
36.  25  for  the  other  side  of  the  tabernacle, (which 
36.  31  five  for  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the 

36.  32  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  other  side 

37.  3  even  two  rings  upon  the  one  side  of  it 
37.    3  and  two  rings  upon  the  other  side  of  it 

37.  5  staves  into  the  rings  by  the  sides  of  the 

38.  7  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  on  the  sides 
2  Sa.  16.  13  Shimei  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  over 
Job    18.  12  and  destruction  (shall  be)  ready  at  his  side 

12.  Wall,  Tp  qir. 

Exod3o.    3  sides  thereof  round  about,  and  the  horns 

37.  26  the  top  of  it,  and  the  sides  thereof  round 

Lev.    1.  15  blood,  .shall  be  wrung  out  at  the  side  of 

5.  9  he  shall  sprinkle,  .upon  the  side  of  the  al. 

13, End,  extremity,  n^  qatseh. 

Deut.  4.  32  from  the  one  side  of  heaven  unto  the  oth. 
1-^.  Square,  fourth  part,  V^l  reba. 

Eze.    1.    8  hands,  .under  their  wings  on  their  four  si. 

1.  17  they  went  upon  their  four  sides,  .they  tu. 

10. 11  went  upon  their  four  sides ;  they  turned 

15.  Wind,  rfl~i  ruach. 

Jer.  52.  23  ninety,  .six  pomegranates  on  a  side ;  (and) 
Eze.  42.  16  He  measured  the  east  side  with  the  mea. 
42.  17  He  measured  the  north  side,  five  hundred 
42.  18  measured  the  south  side,  five  hundred  re. 
42.  19  He  turned  about  to  the  west  side,  (and) 
42.  20  He  measured  it  by  the  four  sides :  it  had  a 

16, Zip,  nD'y  saphah, 

EXOCI36. 11  likewise  he  made  in  the  uttermost  side  of 
Judg.  7.  12  as  the  sand  by  the  sea  side  for  multitude 
2  Ch.   8.  17  to  Eloth,  at  the  sea  side  in  the  land  of  E. 

17. Side,  authority,  "12;?  shetar. 

Dan.   7.    5  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and  (it  had) 

IS.  Part,  division,  fxepos  meros. 

John2i.    6  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship 

19.  Beyond,  over,  on  the  other  side,  -rrepav  peran. 
Matt.  8.  18  commandmenttodepartuutotheothersi. 

8.  28  when  he  was  come  to  the  other  side,  into 

14.  22  to  go  before  him  unto  the  other  side,  whi. 

16.    5  his  disciples  were  come  to  the  other  side 

Mark  4.  35  saith.  .Let  us  pass  over  unto theother  side 

5.    1  they  came  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea 

5.  21  passed  over,  .unto  the  other  side,  much 

6.  45  to  go  to  the  other  side  before  unto  Beth. 
8.  13  and,  entering.. departed  to  the  other  side 

10.    1  cometh . .  by  the  farther  side  of  Jordan :  and 

Luke   8.  22  Let  us  go  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the 

John  6.  22  people  which  stood  on  the  other  side  of  the 

6.  25  found  him  on  theother  side  of  the  sea,  th. 

20.  The  side,  ribs,  irXevpd  pleura. 

John  19.  34  one  of  the  soldiers,  .pierced  his  side,  and 
20.  20  showed  unto  them  (his)  hands  and  his  side 


John2o.  25  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not 

20.  27  thrust  (it)  into  my  side  :  and  be  not  faith. 
Acts  12.    7  smote  Peter  on  the  side,  and  raised  him 
SIDE,  by  the  — 
Alongside  of,  napd  (ace.)  para. 

Matt  13.   1  out  of  the  house,  and  sat  by  the  sea  side 
13.    4  some  (seeds)  fell  by  the  way  side,  and  the 

13.  19  is  he  which  received  seed  by  the  way  side 
20.  30  two  blind  men  sittingby  the  way  side,  wh. 

Mark  2.  13  he  went  forth  again  by  the  sea  side  ;  and 
4.    1  began  again  to  teach  by  the  sea  side:  and 
4.   4  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side,  and 
4.  15  these  are  they  by  the  way  side,  where  the 
10.  46  son  of  Timeus,  sat  by  the  highway  side  be. 
Luke  8.    5  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 
8.  12  Those  by  the  way  side  are  they  18.  35.' 
Acts  10.    6  a  tanner,  whose  house  is  by  the  sea  side 
10.  32  he  is  lodged,  .by  the  sea  side:  who,  when 
16. 13  we  went  out  of  the  city  by  a  river  side,  wh. 
[See  also  About  on  every,  by,  east,  every,  farther,  floor, 
left,  north,  on,  on  this,  other,  the  other,  pass  by,  post, 
right,  south,  this,  way  side,  west.] 

SIDE  chamber  — 

Rib,  side  room,  y^x  tsela. 

Eze.  41.  5  breadth  of  (every)  side  chamberfourcubita 
41.  6  side  chambers  (were)  three,  oneover  anot. 
41.  6  which  (was)  of  the  house  for  the  side  ch. 
41.  7  winding  about  still  upward  to  the  side  ch. 
41.  8  foundations  of  the  side  chambers  (were)a 
4T.  9  wall,  which  (was)  for  the  side  chamber 
41.  gleft  (was)  the  place  of  the  side  chambers 
41.  11  the  doors  of  the  side  chambers  (were)  to. 
41.  26  side  chambers  of  the  house,  and  thick  pi. 

SIDE,  on  every  — 

l.To  be  girded,  restrained,  "tfn  chagar. 

Psa.  65.  12  drop,  .the  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  s. 

2.Round  about,  2y20  sabib. 

Xumi6.  27  from  the  tabernacle  of  Korah.  .on  every  s. 
Judg  7.  i3  blow  ye  the  trumpets  also  on  every  side 
8.  34  hands  of  all  their  enemies  on  every  side 
1  Sa.  12.  11  the  hand  of  your  enemies  on  every  side 

14.  47  fought  against,  .his  enemieson  every  side 
1  Ki.  5.    4  my  God  hath  given  me  rest  on  every  side 

1  Ch.22.  18  hatli  he  (not)  given  you  rest  on  every  side? 

2  Ch.14.    7  and  he  hath  given  us  rest  on  every  side 

32.  22  saved,  .and  guided  them  on  every  side 
Job     1.  10  and  about  all  that  he  hath  on  every  side? 

18.  11  Terrors  shall  make  him  afraid  on  every  si. 
19. 10  He  hath  destroyed  me  on  every  side,  and 

Psa.  12.  8  The  wicked  walk  on  everyside,  when  the 
31.  13  fear  (was)  on  every  side:  while  they  took 

Jer.  6.  25  for  the  sword  of  the  enemy . .  (is)  on  every  3. 
20.  10  fear  oneveryside.  Report,  (say  they), and 
49.  29  shall  cry  unto  them,  Fear  (is)  on  every  si. 

Eze.  16.  33  may  come  unto  thee  on  every  side  for  thy 

19.  8  nations  set  against  him  on  every  side  from 
23. 22  will  bring  them  against  thee  on  every  si. 
28.  23  by  the  sword  upon  her  on  every  side ;  and 

36.  3  swallowed  you  up  on  every  side,  that  ye 

37.  21  will  gather  them  on  every  side,  and  bring 
39. 17  gather  yourselves  on  every  side  to  my  sa. 
41.    5,  10  round  about  the  house  on  every  side 

3. From  every  quarter,  -navToQev  pantothen. 

Lukeig.  43  enemies  shall. .keep  thee  in  on  every  side 

SIDE,  right  — 

Right  hand  or  side,  5e£ios-  de-o:ios. 

Marki6.   5  saw  a  young  man  sittingon  the  right  side 
Luke  1.  ii  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar  of 

SIDE,  (sea)  — 

Haven,  shore,  ^in  choph. 

Deut.  1.    7  by  the  sea  side,  to  the  land  of  the  Canaan 

SIDE,  the  one. ..the  other,  this,  that  — 
From  here,  nso,  139  mippo,  mippoh. 

Eze.  40. 10  one  measure  on  this  side  and  on  that  side 
41.  1  six  cubits  broad  on  the  one  side,  and  abc 
41 .    1  cubits  broad  on  the  other  side,  (which  was) 

SI' -DON,  I'tx,  pT?  fortified,  2'W. 

1.  The  eldest  son  of  Canaan  sou  of  Ham.     B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10. 15  Canaan  begat  S.  his  first  born,  and  Heth 

2.  The  city  founded  by  the  Phoenicians,  twenty  miles 
W.  of  Tyre,  aud  twenty  S.  of  Beirut,  now  called  Saida. 
It  was  founded  by  Sidon,  first  born  of  Canaan,  B.C. 
2750;  in  1444  it  fell  to  Asher,  but  was  never  occupied; 
in  1210  it  was  seized  by  the  king  of  Ascalon,  and  its  in- 
habitants lied  to  Tyre ;  in  1157  they  oppressed  Israel ; 
in  728  it  was  taken  by  Shalmanezer;  in  480  it  furnished 
ships  for  the  fleet  of  Xerxes ;  in  332  it  revolted  from 
Persia;  in  351  it  was  betrayed  to  Ochus  by  Tennes, 
when  the  people  burnt  the  city,  and  40,000  perished  by 
the  flames ;  in  333  it  submitted  to  Alexander  the  Great ; 
in  323  it  was  annexed  by  Ptolemy;  in  315  taken  from 
him  by  Antigonus ;  in  65  it  fell  with  the  rest  of  Syria 
into  the  Roman  power;  in  20  it  was  deprived  by 
Augustus  of  its  ancient  privileges;  in  A. P.  1108  it  was 
invested  by  the  Crusaders,  and  in  mi  it  was  taken  by 
Baldwin ;  having  been  retaken  by  the  Saracens  it  was 
recovered  in  1197  by  the  Christians;  in  1291,  they 
abandoned  it;  in  1658  it  established  commercial  rela- 
tions with  France,  which  had  a  monopoly  of  the  trade 
till  1791  when  they  were  driven  out  by  Jezzar  Pasha ; 
in  1840  itwas  bombarded  and  taken  by  Admiral  Napier; 
in  1S39  Lady  Hester  Stanhope  died  at  D'Joun,  eight 
miles  horn  Sidon.    The  manufacture  of  glass,  for  which 


SIDONIANS 


886 


SIGHT 


it  was  renowned,  made  from  the  fine  sand  on  the  coast 
near  Mount  Carmel,  is  referred  to  by  Pliny,  a.d.  77.  See 
Zi&on, 

Gen.  10, 19  the  border  of  the  Canaanites  was  from  S. 
Matt  1  r,  21  mighty  works.,  had.  .done  in  Tyre  and  S. 
n.  22  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  S. 
15.  21  departed  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  S. 
Mark  3.    8  they  about  Tyre  and  S.,  a  great  multitude 
'7.  24  went  into  the  borders  of  Tyre  [and  S.],  and 
7.  31  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre  andS. 
Luke  4.  26  save  unto  Sarepta,  (a  city)  [of  S.],  unto  a 
6.  17  people.,  from  the  sea  coast  of  Tyre  and  S. 
10.  13  mighty  works  had . .  done  in  Tyre  and  S. 
10.  14  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  S. 
Acts  12.  20  highly  displeased .  .them  of  Tyre  and  S. 

27.  3  the  next  (day)  we  touched  at  S.   And  Ju. 

SLDONTANS,     \n%      See  Zidonians. 

The  inhabitants  of  Sidon. 

Deut.  3.    9  (Which)  Hermon  the  S.  call  Sirion,  and 
Josh.  13.    4  Mearah  that  (is)  beside  the  S.,  unto  Ap. 
13     6  the  S.,  them  will  I  drive  out  from  before 
Judg.  3.    3  the  S  ,  and  the  Hivites  that  dwelt  in  mo. 

1  Ki.  5.    6  (there  is)  not  among  us  any.  .like,  .the S. 

SIEGE,  (to  lay)  — 

1. Siege,  bulwark,  "lii'D  matsor. 

Deut  20.  19  not  cut.  .to  employ  (them)  in  the  siege 

28.  53  in  the  siege,  and  in  the  straitness,  where. 
28.  55  he  hath  nothing  left  him  in  the  siege,  and 
28.  57  shall  eat  them,  .secretly  in  the  siege 

2  Ch.32. 10  that  ye  abide  in  the  siege  in  Jerusalem 
Jer.  19.   9  in  the  siege  and  straitness  wherewith  their 
Eze.    4.    2  lay  siege  against  it,  and  build  a  fort  ag. 

4.   7  thou  shalt  set  thy  face  toward  the  siege 

4.  8  till  thou  hast  ended  the  days  of  thy  siege 

5.  2  when  the  days  of  the  siege  are  fulfilled 
Mic.    5.    1  he  hath  laid  siege  against  us;  they  shall 
Nali.   3. 14  Draw  thee  waters  for  the  siege,  fortify  thy 
Zecb.12.    2  when  they  shall  be  in  the  siege  both  ag. 

2.  To  besiege,  lis  tsur. 

1  Ki.15.  27  Nadab  and  all  Israel  laid  siege  to  Gibbe. 
Isa.  29.  3  will  lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  mount 
Eze.    4.    3  and  thou  shalt  lay  siege  against  it 

SIEVE  — 

X. Sieve,  ni^s  kebarah. 

Amos  9.   9  like  as  (corn)  is  sifted  in  a  sieve,  yet  shall 

2.  A  sieve,  fan,  rrffl  naphah. 

Isa.   30.  28tosift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  vanity 
BIFT,  be  sifted,  to  — 

1.  To  be  moved,  shaken,  sifted,  jfl]  nua,  2. 

Amos  9.    9  like  as  (corn)  is  sifted  in  a  sieve,  yet  shall 

2.  To  cause  to  move,  shake,  sift,  j^j  nua,  5. 
Amos  9.    9  I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among  all 

3.  To  wave,  shake,  sift,  *pj  nuph,  5. 

Isa.   30.  28  to  sift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  van. 

4.  To  sift,  shake,  aiviafa  siniazo. 

Luke22.  31  desired  (to  have)  you,  that  he  may  sift  (you) 
SIGH,  sighing*  — 
I.Sigh,  sighing,  nnjN  anaclmh. 

Job     3.  24  For  my  sighing  cometh  before  I  eat,  and 

Psa.  31.  10  spent  with  grief,  and  my  years  with  sig. 

Isa.  21.    2  the  sighing  thereof  have  I  made  to  cease 
35.  10  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away 

Jer.  45     3  I  fainted  in  my  sighing,  and  I  find  no  re. 

Lam.  1.  22  my  sighs  (are)  many,  and  my  heart  (is)  fa. 

2.  Groan,  groaning,  n^  anaqah. 

Psa.  12.    5  for  the  sighing  of  the  needy,  now  will  I 
79  11  Let  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner  come  bef. 
SIGH  (deeply),  to  — 
l.To  sigh,  mx  anach,  2. 

Exod.  2.  2j  the  children  of  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of 
Isa.   24.    7  languisheth,  all  the  merry  hearted  do  sigh 
Lam,  1.    4  her  priests  sigh,  her  virgius  are  afflicted 
in  her  people  sigh,  they  seek  bread;  they 
1.  21  have  heard  that  I  sigh  ;  (there  is)  none  to 
1.    8  yea,  she  sigheth.  and  turueth  backward 
Eze.    g.    4  the  men  that  sigh  and  that  cry  for  all  the 
21.    6  Sigh  therefore,  thou  son  of  man,  with  the 
21.    6  and  with  bitterness  sigh  before  their  eyes 
2i,    7  when  they  say  unto  thee,  Wherefore  sig. 

2.  To  groan  again,  be  indignant,  avaarevafa* 

Mark  8.  12  he  sighed  deeply  in  his  spirit,  and  saith 

3.  To  groan,  be  indignant,   arei/dCw  stenazo. 

Mark  7.  34  he  sighed,  and  saith  unto  him,  Ephpha. 

SIGHT,  (fearful),  in  the  sight  of  — 

1.  Vision^  mm  ckazoth. 

Dan.  4.  11  the  sight  thereof  to  the  end  of  all  the  ea. 
4.  20  and  the  sight  thereof  to  all  the  earth 

2.  Appearance,  nxno  march. 

Gen.  2.  9  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  sight  and 
Exod.  3.  3  and  see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bush  is 
24.  17  the  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  LORD  (was) 
Lev.  13.  3  the  plague  in  sight  (be)  deeper  than  thesk. 
13.  4  in  sight  (be)  not  deeper  than  the  skin,  and 
13.  20  behold,  it  (be)  in  sight  Iowerthantheskin 
13.  25  it  (be  in)  sight  deeper  than  the  skin,  it  (is) 
13.  30  if  it  (be)  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin,  and 
13.  31  it  (be)  not  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 
1  j  3^  seall  (lie)  not  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 
13-  34  »«>r  (be)  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 


Lev.  14.  37  which  in  sight  (are)  lower  than  the  wall 
Deut28.  34  thou  shalt  be  mad  for  the  sight  of  thine 

28.  67  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou  sh. 
Job  41.  9  shall  not  (one)  be  cast  down,  .at  the  sight 
Eccl.  6.    9  Better  (is)  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the 

11.  9  walk  in  the  ways,  .and  in  the  sight  of  th. 
Isa.    11.    3  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  his 

3.  Before,  ~m  neged. 

Psa.  78.  i2  Marvellous  things  did  he  in  the  sight  of 

i.Ege,  pfl  agin. 

Gen.  18.    3  if  now  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight 
19  19  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight 
21. 11  was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's  sight 
21.  12  Let  it  not  be  grievousin  thy  sight  because 
33.   8  (These  are)  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my 

33. 10  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  th. 
33.  15  let  me  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 

38.  7  Judah's  first  born,  was  wicked  in  the  sight 

39.  4  Josephfound  gracein  his  sight,  and  hese. 

39.  21  gave  him  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper 
47.  25  let  us  find  grace  iu  the  sight  of  my  lord 
47.  29  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  put 

Exod.  3.  21  I  will  give  this  people  favour  in  the  sight 
4.  30  and  did  the  signs  in  the  sight  of  the  people 
7.  20  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  sight 
9.  8  sprinkle  it  toward  the  heaven'iu  the  sight 
11     3  Lord  gave  the  people  favour  in  the  sight 

11  3  the  sight  of  Pharaoh's  servants,  .the  sight 

12  36  gave  the  people  favour  in  the  sight  of  the 
15.  26  wilt  do  that  which  is  right  in  his  sight,  and 
17.    6  Moses  did  so  in  the  sight  of  the  elders  of 

19. 11  the  Lord  will  come  down  in  the  sight  of 
33,  j  2  and  thou  hast  also  found  grace  in  my  si. 
33  13  if  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  show 
33  13  that  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight 

33.  16  and  thy  people  have  found  grace  in  thy  si. 
33. 17  thou  hast  found  grace  in  my  sight,  and  I 

34.  9  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  O 

40.  38  fire  was  on  it  by  night,  in  the  sight  of  all 
Lev.  10. 19  should  it  have  been  accepted  in  the  sight 

13.   5.(if)  the  plague  in  his  sight  beat  a  stay, (and) 
13.  37  if  the  scall  be  iu  his  sight  at  a  stay,  and 
20.  17  they  shall  be  cut  off  in  the  sight  of  their 

25.  53  rule  with  rigour  over  him  in  thy  sight 

26.  45  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  in  the  sight  of  the 
Numi  t   1 1  have  I  not  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  that 

11.  15  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight;  and 
13.  33  we  were  in  our  own  sight  as  grasshoppers 
13.  33  and  so  we  were  in  their  sight 

19.  5  (one)  shall  burn  the  heifer  iu  his  sight,  her 

20.  27  they  went  up  into  mount  Hor  in  the  sight 
25.   6  in  the  sight  of  Mioses,  and  in  the  sight  of 

27.  19  and  give  him  a  charge  in  their  sight 

32.  5  if  we  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  let  this 
32. 13  that  had  done  eviliu  the  sight  of  theLoRD 
33  3  weut  out  with  an  high  hand  in  the  sight 
Deut.  4.  6  yourunderstanding  in  the  sight  of  the  na. 
4.  25  shall  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  thy 
6  18  right  and  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
9.  18  in  doing  wickedly  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

12.  25  do  (that  which1  is)  right  in  the  sight  of  the 

12.  28  (that  which  is)  good  and  right  in  thes'ght 

1 7.  2  that  hath  wrought  wickedness  in  the  sight 

21.  9  do  (that  which  is)  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
31.  7  and  said  unto  him  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel 
31.  29  ye  will  doevil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  to 
34.  12  terror  which  Moses  showed  in  the  sight 

Josh.  3.    7  to  magnify  thee  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel 
4.  14  the  Lord  magnified  Joshua  in  the  sightof 
10  12  he  said  in  the  sight  of  Israel,  Sun,  stand 
24.  17  which  did  those  great  signs  in  our  sight 
Judg.  2.  11  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
3.    7  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
3.  12  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the  Lo. 

3.  12  they  had  done  evil  in  the  sightof  the  Lord 

4.  1  the  children  of  Israel  again  did  evil  in  the 
6.    1  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

6.  17  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

6.  2i  angel  of  the  LORD  departed  out  of  his  si. 

10.  6  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

13.  1  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
Bath  2.  13  Let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 

1  Sa.   1. 18  Let  thine  handmaid  find  grace  in  thy  sight 

12.  17  which  ye  have  done  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

15.  17  When  thou(wast) little  in  thineownsight 
15. 19  and  didst  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
16  22  for  lie  hath  found  favour  in  my  sight 

18.  5  he  wasacceptedin  the  sight  of  all  the  pe. 
18.    5  and  also  in  the  sight  of  Saul's  servants 

29.  6  and  thy  going  out.  .(is)  good  in  my  sight 
29.   9  I  know  that  thou  (art)  good  in  my  sight 

2  Sa.  6.  22  And  I  will,  .be  base  in  mine  own  sight 

7.  19  this  was  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight,  0 

12.  9  thou  despised .  .to  do  evil  in  his  sight 

13.  5  dress  the  meat  in  my  sight,  that  I  may  see 
13.    6  makemea  couple  of  cakes  in  my  sight,  th. 

13.  8  made  cakes  in  his  sight,  and  did  bake  the 

14.  22  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 

16.  4  (that)  I  may  find  grace  in  thy  sight,  my 
16.  22  Absalom  went  in.  .in  the  sight  of  all  Is. 

1  Ki.11.    6  Solomon  did  evil  in  the  sight  ofthe  Lord 

11.  19  Hadad  found  great  favour  in  the  sightof 
11.  38  do  (that  is)  right  in  my  sight,  to  keep  my 
14.  22  Judah  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
15  26,  34  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  tlie  Lord 
16.    7  the  evil  that  he  did  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
16. 19  he  sinned  in  doing  evil  in  the  sightof  the 
16.  30  the  son  of  Oznri  did  evil  in  the  sight  ofthe 
21.  20  sold  thyself  to  work  evil  in  the  sight  ol 
21.  25  to  work  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the  L, 


Neh. 

Esth. 


24. 

25- 

26. 
27. 
28. 


33- 
33- 
33- 
34- 
36. 


Job 


Psa. 


1  Ki.22.  52  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  and 

2  Ki.  1.  13  let  my  life,  .be  precious  in  thy  sight 

t.  14  let  my  life  now  be  precious  in  thy  sight 
3.  2  he  wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
3.  18  this  is  (but)  a  light  thing  in  the  sight  of 
S.  18  and  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  LORD 

8.  27  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  as  (did) 

12.  2  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight  of 

13.  2,  11  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  si. 

14.  3  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in the  sight 
14  24  lie  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 
]5-    3.  34  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  si. 

15.  9,  18,24,  28  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 

16.  2  did  not  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

17.  2  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 

17  17  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in  the  sight  of 

18  3  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

20.  3  have  done  (that  which  is)  good  in  thy  si. 

21.  2,  16,  20  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 
21.    6  he  wrought  much  wickedness  in  the  sight 

21.  15  done  (that  which  was)  evil  in  my  sight  of 

22.  2  he  did  (that  which  was) right  iu  the  sight 
23-  32>  37  *ie  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  si. 
24.    9,  19  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  si. 

1  Ch.  2.    3  And  Er.  .was  evilinthesightof  the  Lord 

19. 13  Lord  do  (that  which  is)  good  in  his  sight 

28.  8  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel  the  congregation 

29.  25  magnified  Solomon  exceedingly  in  the  si. 

2  Ch.20.  32  doing  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

22.  4  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  like 
2  Joash  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  si. 
2  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

4  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 
2  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 

1  did  not  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sig. 

2  he  did  (that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 
23  he  was  magnified  in  the  sight  of  all.nati. 

2  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight  of 

6  he  wrought  much  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
22  he  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 

2  he  did  ^that  which  was)  right  in  the  sight 
5,  9,  12  did  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  si. 

5  Ezra  opened  the  book  in  the  sight  of  all 
15  Esther  obtained  favour  in  the  sight  of  all 

2  she  obtained  favour  in  his  sight :  and  the 
8  If  I  have  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  the 

3  If  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  O  ki. 
5  if  I  have  found  favour  in  his  sight,  and 

15  yea,  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  sight 

3  Wherefore  are  we.  .vile  in  your  sight? 
15  a  stranger:  I  am  an  alien  in  their  sight 

5  yea,  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight 
5  The  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight 

4  sinned,  and  done  (this)  evil  in  thy  sight 

14  precious  shall  their  blood  be  in  his  sight 
10  be  known  amongthe  heathen  in  our  sight 

4  a  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  (are  but)as 
2  hath  he  openly  showed  in  the  sight  of  the 

7  telleth  lies  shall  not  tarry  in  my  sight 

15  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  (is)  the 
rrov.  1.  17  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  sight  of 

3.   4  So  shalt  thou  find  favour,  .in  the  sight  of 
Isa.   38.    3  have  done  (that  which  is)  good  in  thy  si. 
43.    4  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  th. 
Jer.    7.  30  the  children,  .have  done  evil  in  my  sight 

19.  10  shalt  thou  break  the  bottle  in  the  sight  of 
32.  12  in  the  sight  of  Hanameelmineuncle's(son) 
34. 15  had  done  right  in  my  sight,  in  proclaiming 
43.  9  in  Taphanhes,  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of 
51.  24  that  they  have  done  in  Zion  in  your  sight 

Eze.    5.    8  in  the  midst  of  thee  in  the  sightof  thena. 
5. 14  a  reproach,  .in  the  sight  of  all  that  pass 
10.    2  said,  Go  in.  .And  he  went  in  iu  my  sight 
io.  19  and  mounted  up  from  the  earth  in  my  si. 
12.    3  remove  by  day  in  their  sight;  and  thou  sh. 
12,    3  remove,  .to  another  place  in  their  sight 
12.   4  bring  forth  thy  stuff  by  day  in  their  sight 
72.    4  thou  shalt  go  forth  at  even  in  their  sight 
12.    5  Dig  thou  through  the  wall  in  their  sight 
12.    6  In  their  sight  shalt  thou  bear  (it)  upon 
12.   7  I  bare  (it)  upon  (my)  shoulder  in  their  si. 
16. 41  execute  judgments  upon  thee  in  the  sight 

20.  9  in  whose  sight  I  made  myself  known  unto 
20.  14,  22  the  heathen,  in  w  hose  sight  I  brought 
20.  22  it  should  not  be  polluted  in  the  sight  cf 

21  23  as  a  false  divination  in  their  sight,  to  them 

22  16  take  thine  inheritance,  .in  the  sightof  the 
28  18  in  the  sight  of  all  them  that  behold  thee 
28.  25  sanctified  in  them  in  the  sight  of  the  hea. 
36  34  it  lay  desolate  in  the  sight  of  all  that  pas. 
39.  27  am  sanctified  in  them  in  the  sight  of  many 
43.  11  write  (it)  in  their  sight,  that  they  may  k. 

Hos.    2.  10  her  lewdness  in  the  sight  of  her  lovers 
Anioso.    3  though  they  be  bid  from  my  sight  in  the 
Jon.    2.    4  I  said,  I  am  cast  out  of  thy  sight;  yet  I 
Mai,    2.  17  one  that  docth  evil  (is)  good  in  the  sight 

b.Faee,  d*ib  /Ktii/'m. 

Gen.  23.    4  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight 

23.  8  I  should  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight 
47   18  there  is  not  ought  left  in  the  sight  of  my 

Num.  3  4  in  the  priest's  office  in  the  sight  of  Aaron 
Deut.  4.  37  brought  thee  out  in  his  sight  with  his  mi. 
Josh. 23  5  drive  them  from  out  of  your  sight ;  and 
2  Sa.   7.   9  cut  off  all  thine  enemies  out  of  thy  sight 

1  Ki    8.  25  There  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  si. 

9.  7  this  bouse.  .1  cast  out  of  my  sight;  and 

2  Ki.  17. 18  the  Lord,  .removed  them  out  of  his  sight 

17.  20  until  he  had  cast  them  out  of  his  sight 
17.  23  the  Lord  removed  Israel  out  of  his  sight 

23.  27  I  will  remove  Judah  also  out  of  my  sight 

24.  3  to  remove  (them)  out  of  his  sight,  for  the 


5- 

5- 

7- 

8. 

*5- 

18. 

19. 

25- 

5- 

5i- 

72 

79- 

90. 

98. 

101. 

116. 


SIGHT 


837 


SIHON 


i  Ch.22.    3  thou  hast  shed  ranch  blood . .  in  my  sight 
2  CIi.  6.  16  There  shall  uot  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  si. 

7.  20  this  house,  .will  I  cast  out  of  my  sight,  and 
Ezra    9.    9  extended  mercy  unto  us  in  the  sight  of 
>~eh.    1. 11  and  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this 

2.    5  if  thy  servant  have  found  favour  in  thy  si. 

Esth.  2.  17  she  obtained  grace  and  favour  in  liis  sig. 

Job  21.    8  There  seed  is  established  In  their  sight 

Psa.    9. 19  let  the  heathen  be  judged  in  thy  sight 

19.  14  Let  the  words,  .be  acceptable  in  thy  sight 

76.    7  who  may  stand  in  thy  sight  when  once  th. 

143.  g.  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justi. 

Prow  4.    3  tender  and  only  (beloved)  in  the  sight  of 

Eccl.  2.  26  giveth  to  a  man  that  (is)  good  in  his  sight 

8.  3  Be  not  hasty  to  go  out  of  his  sight :  stand 
Isa.     5.  21  (them  that  are),  .prudentin  their  own  si. 

26. 17  so  have  we  been  in  thy  sight,  0  LORD 
Jer.     4.    1  put.  .thine  abominations  out  of  my  sight 

7.  15 1  will  cast  you  out  of  my  sight,  as  I  have 
15.  1  cast  (them)  out  of  my  sight,  and  let  them 
iS.  23  neither  blot  out  their  sin  from  thy  sight 

Eze.  20.  43  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight  for 
36.  31  shall  loathe  yourselves  your  own  sight 
Hos.    2.    2  put  away  her  whoredoms  out  of  her  sight 

6.  2  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  sight 

1).  To  see,  hnt  raah. 

Job  34.  26  He|striketh  them . .  in  the  open  sight  of  ot. 
7.  To  see,  (QXeVw  hlepo. 

Acts    9.    9  he  was  three  days  without  sight  Lu.  7.21. 
S. Appearance,  elSos  eidos. 

2  Co.  5.    7  For  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight 
§.  Before,  efXTTpoadev  eniprosthen. 

Matt  11.  26  Even  so.  .for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight 

Lukeio.  21  even  so.  .for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  si. 

1  Til.  1.    3  in  the  sight  of  God  and  our  Father 

10. Before,  hi  over  against,  ivavrlov  enantion. 

Acts    7.  10  favour  aud  wisdom  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh 
XI. In  the  sight  of,  ivSirtov  enopion. 

Luke  1.  15  he  shall  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

15.  21  sinned  against  heaven,  and  in  thy  sight 

16.  15  is  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God 

Acts    4.  19  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to 

8.  21  thy  heart  is  not  right  [in  the  sight  of]  God 
10.  31  are  had  in  remembrance  in  the  sight  of  G. 

Roni.  3.  20  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight 

12.  17  Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all 

2  Co.  4.    2  commending  ourselves . .  in  the  sight  of  G 

7.  12  that  our  care  for  you  in  the  sight  of  God 

8.  21  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  also  in  the  sight  of 
1  T5.  2.    3  this  (is)  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight 

6. 13  I  give  thee  charge  in  the  sight  of  God,  who 
Heb.   4. 13  creature  that  is  not  manifest  in  his  sight 

13.  21  that  which  is  well  pleasing  in  his  sight 
Jas.     4.  10  Humble  yourselves  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
1  Pe.  3.   4  which  is  in  the  sightof  God  of  great  price 

1  Jo.  3.  22  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight 
Rev.  13. 13  maketh  fire  come  down,  .in  the  sight  of 

13. 14  which  he  had  power  to  do  in  the  sight  of 

12.  A  sight,  spectacle,  Beccpia  theoria. 

Luke  23.  48  people  that  come  together  to  that  sight 

13.-4  sight,  vision,  opafxa  horama. 

Acts   7. 31  Moses  saw  (it),  he  wondered  at  the  sight 

14.  Appearance,  vision,  opaats  horasis. 

Rev.    4.   3  a  rainbow,  .in  sight  like  unto  an  emerald 

15. Over  against,  in  theface  of,  Karevumiov  kateno. 

2  Co.    2. 17  [in  the  sight  of]  God  speak  we  in  Christ 
Col.     1 .  22  unblameable  and  unreprovable  in  his  sight 

Id. E<i'-,  6(p6a\fj.6s  ophthalriws. 

Acts    1.   9  and  a  cloud  received  hini  out  of  their  sight 
17. Along  side  of,  Trapa  (dat.) para. 

Gal.    3. 11  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law  in  the  sight 

13.7*0  he  manifested,se€n,<pavTd^ofjLaiphantazf)mai. 
Heh.  12.  21  so  terrible  was  the  sight,  (that)  Moses  said 

19.  Dreadful  sight,  terrific  appearance,  <p6$T\Tpov. 

Luke2i.  11  fearful  sights  and  great  signs  shall  there 
SIGHT,  to  receive,  recovering  of  — 

1.  A  seeing  again,  looking  up,  aud$\e^ts  anablejisis. 

Luke  4. 18  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set 

2.  To  see  again,  look  up,  b.i/a&\4irto  anablepo. 
Mattn.    5  The  blind  receive  their  sight,  and  the  lame 

20.  34  their  eyes  received  sight,  and  they  folio. 
Markio.  51  Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight 

10.  52  he  received  his  sight,  and  followed  Jesus 
LukeiS.  41  he  said,  Lord,  that  I  may  receive  my  sight 

18.  42  Receive  thy  sight :  thy  faith  hath  saved 

18.  43  immediately  he  received  his  sight,  and  fo. 

John  9.  11  I  went  and  washed,  and  I  received  sight 

9. 15  asked  him  how  he  had  received  his  sight 

9.  18  he  had  been  blind,  and  received  his  sight 
9. 18  parents  of  him  that  had  received  his  sight 

Acts    g.  12  on  him,  that  he  might  receive  his  sight 
9.  17  that  thou  niightest  receive  thy  sight,  and 
9.  i3  he  received  sight  forthwith,  and  arose,  and 
22. 13  said  unto  me,  Brother  Saul,  receive  thy  si. 

SIGN,  appointed,  of  fire  — 
1..4  sign,  jvk  oth. 

Gen.   1. 14  let  thembefor  signs,  and  forseasons,  and 

Exod.4.    8  neither  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  first  si. 

4.    8  they  will  believe  the  voice  of  the  latter  si. 

4.    9  they  will  not  believe  also  these  two  signs 

4.  17  this  rod.  .wherewith  thou  shalt  do  signs 


Exod.  4.  28  the  signs  which  he  had  commanded  him 
4.  30  and  did  the  signs  in  the  sight  of  the  peo. 

7.  3  multiply  my  signs  aud  my  wonders  in  the 

8.  23  a  division,  .tomorrow  shall  this  sign  be 
10.    1  I  might  show  these  my  signs  before  him 

10.  2  my  sigus  which  I  have  done  among  them 
13.  9  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  unto  thee  upon  thine 
31.  13  it  (is)  a  sign  between  me  and  you  throug. 

31.  17  It  (is)  a  sign  between  me  and  the  children 
X1U1114. 11  the  signs  which  I  have  showed  among  th. 

16.  38  they  shall  be  a  sign  unto  the  children  of 
Deut.  4.  34  by  signs,  and  by  wonders,  and  by  war,  and 

6.  8  thou  shalt  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  thine 
6. 22  the  Lord  showed  signs  and  wonders,  great 

7.  19  the  signs,  and  the  wonders,  and  the  mig. 

11.  18  bind  them  for  a  sign  upon  your  hand,  that 
13.    1  If .  .a  prophet.,  giveth  thee  a  sign  or  a  wo. 

13.  2  And  the  sign  or  the  wonder  come  to  pass 
26.    8  with  great  terribleness,  and  with  signs,  and 

28.  46  they  shall  be  upon  thee  fora  sign,  and  for 

29.  3  The  great  temptations,  .the signs,  and  th. 
34.  11  the  signs  and  the  wonders  which  the  Lord 

Josh.  4.   6  That  this  may  be  a  sign  among  you,  (th.) 

24. 17  which  did  those  great  signs  in  our  sight 
Judg.  6.  17  show  me  a  sign  that  thou  talkestwithme 

1  Sa.  2.  34  this  (shall  be)  a  sign  unto  thee,  that  shall 

10.    7  let  it  be,  when  these  signs  are  come  unto 

10.  9  and  all  those  sigus  came  to  pass  that  day 
14. 10  Come  up  unto  us.. this  (shall  be)  a  sign 

2  Ki.  19.  29  this  (shall  be)  a  sigu  unto  thee.  Ye  shall 

20.   8  What  (shall  be)  the  sign  that  the  Lord 
20.   9  This  shalt  thou  have  of  the  Lord,  that  the 
Xeh.   9.  10  showedst  signs  and  wonders  upon  Phara. 
Psa.  74.    4  enemies,  .set  up  their  ensigns  (for)  signs 
74.   9  We  see  not  our  signs  :  (there  is)  no  more 
78.  43  How  he  had  wrought  his  signs  in  Egypt 
105.  27  They  showed  his  signs  among  them,  and 
Isa.     7.  11  Ask  thee  a  sign  of  the  Lord  thy  God;  ask 
7. 14  the  Lord  himself  shall  give  you  a  sign 

8.  18  for  signs  and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from 

19.  20  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  and  a  witness  unto 

20.  3  (for)  a  sign  and  a  wonder  upon  Egypt  and 

37.  30  this  (shall  be)  a  sign  unto  thee,  Ye  shall 

38.  7  this  (shall  be)  a  sigu  unto  thee  from  the  L. 
38.  22  What  (is)  the  sign  that  I  shall  go  up  to  the 
55.  13  an  everlasting  sign  (that)  shall  not  be  cut 
66.  ig  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them,  and  I  will 

Jer.  10.    2  be  not  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  heaven 

32.  20  Which  hast  set  signs  and  wonders  in  the 
32.  21  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  signs,  and 
44.  29  this  (shall  be)  a  sign  unto  you,  saith  the 

Eze.    4.   3  This  (shall  be)  a  sign  to  the  house  of  Isr. 

14.  8  will  make  him  a  sign  and  a  proverb,  and 
20. 12  to  be  a  sign  between  me  and  them,  that 

20.  20  they  shall  be  a  sign  between  me  and  yon 

2.  Word  or  /natter  of  a  sign,  tiSk  "C^i  debar  oth. 

Psa.  105.  27  They  showed  Ins  signs  among  them,  and 
3. Signs,  prtx  athin. 

Dan.    4.    2  I  thought  it  good  to  show  the  signs  and 
4.    3.H0W  great  (are)  his  signs !  and  how  mig. 
6.  27  he  worketh  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven 
4.  Wonder,  n^D  moplieth. 

i  Ki.  13.   3  he  gave  a  sign  the  same  day,  saying 

13.    3  This  (is)  the  sign  which  the  Lord  hath  sp. 
13.    5  according  to  the  sign  which  the  man  of 
2  Cli.  32,  24  spake  unto  him,  and  he  gave  him  a  sign 
Eze.  12.   6  I  have  set  thee  (for)  a  sign  unto  the  hou. 

12.  11  Say,  I  (am)  your  sign :  like  as  I  have  done 
24.  24  Ezekiel  is  unto  you  a  sign :  according  to 
24.  27  thou  shalt  be  a  sign  uuto  them ;  and  they 

5. Sign,  ensign,  banner,  sail,  01  nes. 

2s  um26.  10  that  company  died . .  and  they  became  a  s. 
6.-4  lifting  up,  signal,  nxb'c  moseth. 

Jer.    6.    1  and  set  up  a  sign  of  fire  in  Beth-haccerem 
7.  Sign,  monument,  j-!X  tsiyyun. 

Eze.  39.  15  then  shall  he  set  up  a  sign  by  it,  till  the 
8. .4  sign,  mark,  signal,  cr-qixtiov  semeion. 

Matt. 12.  38  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from  thee 
12.  39  An  evil,  .generation  seeketh  after  a  sign 

12.  39  shall  no  sign  be  given  to  it,  but  the  sign 
16.    1  that  he  would  showr  them  a  sign  from  he. 
16.    3  can  ye  not  (discern)  the  signs  of  the  times? 
16.    4  A  wicked,  .generation  seeketh  after  a  sign 
16.    4  no  sign  be  given  unto  it,  but  the  sign  of 
24.   3  what  (shall  be)  the  sign  of  thy  coming,  and 
24.  24  and  shall  show  great  signs  and  wonders 
24.  30  then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of 
26.  48  he  that  betrayed  him  gave  them  a  sign 

Mark  8.  n  seeking  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven,  temp. 
8. 12  Why  doth  this  generation  seek  afterasign 
3. 12  There  shall  no  sign  be  given  unto  tbisge. 

13.  4  what  (shall  be)  the  sign  when  all  these  th. 
13.  22  shall  show  signs  and  wonders,  to  seduce 
16. 17  [these  signs  shall  follow  them  that  beli.] 
16.  20  [confirming  the  word  with  signsfollowing] 

Luke  2. 12  tliis  (shall  be)  a  sign  unto  you ;  Ye  shall 
2. 34  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  spoken  against 
11. 16  others,  tempting  (him),  sought  of  him  as. 

11.  29  an  evil  generation  :  they  seek  a  sign;  and 
11.  29  shall  no  sign  be  given  it,  but  the  sign  of 
11.  30  as  Jonas  was  a  sign  unto  the  Ninevites,  so 

21.  7  whatsign(will  there  be)  when  these  things 
21.  11  and  great  signs  shall  there  befromheaven 
21.  25  there  shaU  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the 

John  2. 18  What  sign  showest  thou  unto  us,  seeing 
4. 4S  Except  ye'see  signs  and  wonders,  ye  will 
6.  30  What  sign  showest  thou  fhen,  that  we  m. 
20.  30  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the 


Acts  2.  19  wonders  in  heaven  above,  and  signs  in  thc- 
2. 22  by  miracles  and  wonders  and  signs,  which 
2.  43  many  wonders  and  signs  were  done  by  the 

4.  30  that  sigus  and  wonders  may  be  done  by 

5.  12  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were  many  s. 

7.  36  he  had  showed  wonders  and  signs  in  the 

8.  13  beholding  the  miracles  and  signs  which 

14.  3  granted  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  by 
Rom.  4.  11  he  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a 

15.  19  Through  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  by  the 

1  Co.  1.  22  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks 

14.  22  tongues  areiorasign.nottothenithatbe. 

2  Co.  12.  12  the  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought  am. 

12.  12  in  signs,  and  wonders,  and  mighty  deeds 
2  Tli.  2.  9  with  all  power  and  signs  and  lying  wond. 
Heb.  2.  4  with  signs  and  wonders,  and  with  divers 
Rev.  15.    1 1  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and 

SIGN  was,  whose  — 

Ensign,  irapdarifxos  jxtrasemos. 

ActS2S.  11  a  ship.,  whose  sign  was  Castor  and  Pollux 
SIGN,  be  signed,  to  \make)  — 
l.T'i  note  down,  write,  sign,  ngn  reskam, 

Dan.    6.    8  and  sign  the  writing/that  it  be  not  chau. 

6.  9  Darius  signed  the  writing  and  the  decree 
6.  10  Daniel  knew  that  the  writing  was  signed 
6.  12  Hast  thou  not  signed  a  decree,  that  every 
6. 13  northe  decree  which  thou  hast  signed,  but 

2.  To  beckon  to,  eVi/euco  enneuo. 

Luke  1.  62  they  made  signs  to  his  father,  how  he  wo. 

SIGNET  — 

1.-4  seal,  signet,  onh  chotham. 

Gen.  38. 18  Thy  signet,  and  thy  bracelets,  and  thy  si 

Exod28. 11,  21,  36  (like)  the  engraving  of  a  signet,  sfi. 

39.   6  ouches  of  gold,  graven,  as  signets  are  gr. 

39.  14  (like)  the  engravings  of  a  signet,  every  one 

39.  30  a  writing,  (like  to)  the  engravings  of  a  si 

Jew  2V.  24  though  Coniah . .  were  the  signet  upon  niy 

Hag.   2.  23  will  make  thee  as  a  signet :  for  I  have  cli. 

2, Seal,  signet,  rcrin  chothemeth. 

Gen.  3S.  25  whose  (are)  these,  the  signet,  and  brace. 

3.  Signet,  Rj5]«  izqa. 

Dan.  6. 17  with  his  own  signet,  aud  withthe  signet 
SIGNIFICATION,  without  — 
Without  sound  or  sense,  6.<pwvos  ((phonos. 

2  Co.  14.  10  and  none  of  them  is  without  signification 
SIGNIFY,  to  — 
l.To  manifest,  StjXo'w  deloo. 

Heb.  9.  8  The  Holy  Ghost  this  signifying,  that  the 
12.  27  this  (word),  Yet  once  more,  signineth  the 

1  Pe.  1. 11  spirit ..  wliich  was  in  them  did  signify 

2.  To  tell  or  declare  thoroughly,  diayyeWcc  diaggd. 
Acts  2i.  26  to  signify  tlie  accomplishment  of  the "days 

Z.To  make  manifest,  tfupavifa  empkanizso. 

Acts  23.  15  Now  therefore  ye  with  the  council  sign 

4.  To  signify,  v-npaivw  semaino. 

Johni2.  33  This  he  said,  signifying  what  death  he  sh. 
18.  32  which  he  spake,  signifying  what  death  lie 
21.  19  This  spake  he,  signifying  by  what  death 

Acts  11.  28  signified  by  the  spirit  that  there  should 
25.  27  not  withal  to  signify  the  crimes  (laid)  a£. 

Rev.    1.    1  signified  (it)  by  his  angel  unto  his  servant 

SI'-EON,  |h*p,  firrp  great,  bold. 

An  Amorite  king  in  Heshbon,  whose  land  lay  X.  of  the 
land  of  Moab,  from  which  he  took  all  that  lay  to  the 
N.  of  the  Arnon.    B.C.  1452. 

Xuni2i.  21  Israel  sentmessengersunto  S.  king  of  the 
21.  23  S.  would  not  suffer  Israel  to  pass  through. 
21.  23  S.  gathered  all  his  people  together,  and  we. . 
21.  26  Eeshlon  (was)  the  city  of  S.  the  king  of 
21.  27  let  the  city  of  S.  be  built  and  prepared 
21. 28  For  there  is.  .a  flame  from  the  city  of  S. 
21.  29  into  captivity  unto  S.kingof  theAmorites 
21.  34  thou  shalt  doto  him  as  thou  didst  unto  S. 
32.  33  the  kingdom  of  S.  king  of  the  Amorites 
Deut.  1.   4  After  he  had  slain  S.  the  king  of  the  Am. 
2.  24  havegiven  iutothinehand  S.  the  Amorite 
2.  26  I  sent  messengers . .  unto  S.  king  of  Hesb . 
2.  30  S.  king  of  Heshbon  would  not  let  uspass 
2.  31 1  have  begun  to  giveS.  and  lus  land  before 

2.  32  S.  came  out  against  us,  he  and  all  his  p. 

3.  2  shalt  do  unto  him  as  thou  didst  unto  S. 

3.  6  utterly  destroyed  them,  as  we  did  unto  S. 

4.  46  in  the  land  of  S.  king  of  the  Amorites 
29.    7  S.  the  kiug  of  Heshbon,  and  Og  the  king; 
31.   4  Lord  shall  do  unto  them  as  he  did  to  8. 

Josh.  2.  10  S.  and  Og,  whom  ye  utterly  destroyed 

9.  10  to  S.  king  of  Heshbon,  and  to  Og  king  of 
12.    2  S.  king  of  the  Amorites,  who  dwelt  in  H. 

12.  5  half  Gilead,  the  border  of  S.  king  of  He. 
13. 10  the  cities  of  S.  king  of  the  Amorites,  wo. 

13.  21  S.  king  of  the  Amorites,  which  reigned  in. 
13!  21  Hur,  and  Reba,  (which  were)  dukes  of  S. 
13.  27  the  rest  of  the  kingdom  of  S.  king  of  H.     . 

Judgn.  19  Israel  sent  messengers  untoS.  king  of  the 
it.  20  S.  trusted  not  Israel  to  pass  through  his 
11.  20  S  gathered  all  his  people  together,  and 
11.  21  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  delivered  8.  and 
1  Ki.  4.  19  (in)the  countryof  S.  kingof  theAmontes. 
Neh.  9.  22  they  possessed  the  land  of  S.,  ancyhe 
Psa  135. 11  S.  king  of  the  Amorites,  and  Og  king  of 
136. 19  S.  king  of  the  Amorites :  for  his  mercy 
•  Jer.  48.  45  shall  come    a  flame  from  the  midst  of  S_ 


SIHOR 


8SS 


SILVER 


SI'-HOR,  SHI'-HOR,  limp  turbid,  slimy. 

The  W'ady-el-Arish  or  Jihinocolura,  the  S.  boundary  of 

Canaan;  also  called  the  "river  of  Egypt,"  Gen.  15.  18. 

The  word  is  also  applied  to  the  Nile  itself. 

Josh  13.   3  From  S.,  which  (is)  before  Egypt,  even 
1  Ch.  13.    5  David  gathered . .  Israel  together,  from  S. 
Isa.    23.    3  by  great  waters  the  seed  of  S.,  the  harvest 
Jer.    2.  18  what  hast  thou.,  to  drink  the  watersofS.? 

SI'-LAS,  2/Aas. 

A  believer  who  accompanied  Paul  through  Asia  Minor 

and  Greece,  and  was  imprisoned  with  him  at  Antioch ; 

a  contracted  form  of  Silvanus. 

Acts  15.  22  Judas  surnamed  Barsabas,  and  S.,  chief 
15.  27  We  have  sent  therefore  Judas  and  S.,  who 
15. 32  Judas  and  S.,  being  prophets  also  them. 
15.  34  [Notwithstanding  it  pleased  S.  to  abide] 

15.  40  Paul  chose  S.,  and  departed,  being  rec. 

16.  19  they  caught  Paul  and  S.,  and  drew  (them) 
16.  25  at  midnight  Paul  and  S.  prayed,  and  sang 

16.  29  came . .  and  fell  down  before  Paul  and  S. 

17.  4  believed,  and  consorted  with  Paul  and  S. 
17.  10  brethren  immediately  sent.  .Paul  and  S. 
17.  14  but  S.  and  Timotheus  abode  there  still 

17.  15  receiving  a  commandment  unto  S.  and 

18.  5  when  S.  and  Timotheus  were  come  from 

SILENCE,  silent  — 
l.Cut  off,  ns^i  dumah, 

Psa.  94.  17  help,  my  soul  had  almost  dwelt  in  silence 
115.  17  neither  any  that  go  down  into  silence 

2. Silence,  iron  dumiyyah. 

Psa.  22.    2  cry  in  the  day  time,  .and  am  not  silent 
39.    2  I  was  dumb  with  silence ;  I  held  my  pe. 

3.  Silence,  "P"?  domi. 

Psa.  83.    1  Keep  not  thou  silence,  0  God :  hold  not 
Isa.   62.    6  ye  that  make  mention . .  keep  not  silence 

A. Silently,  DDvi  dumam, 

Isa.   47.    5  Sit  thou  silent,  and  get  thee  into  darkn. 

5.  Silence,  calm,  nDEffl  demamah. 

Job     4.  16  (there  was)  silence,  and  I  heard  a  voice 

6*.  To  be  or  keep  silent,  non  hasah,  3. 

Amos  8.    3  they  shall  cast  (them)  forth  with  silence 

7. Quietness,  stillness,  Tjo-vx'ta  hesuchia. 

Acts  22.   2  they  kept  the  more  silence  :  aud  he  saith 
1  Ti..  2.  11  Let  the  woman  learn  in  silence  with  all 
2. 12  suffer  not.  .to  teach,  .but  to  be  in  silence 

8.  Silence t  crtyr}  sige. 

Acts  21.  40  when  there  was  made  a  great  silence,  he 
Rev.    8.    1  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the  sp. 

SILENCE,  to  be  brought  to  — 

To  be  cut  off,  silenced,  npn  damah,  2. 

Isa.   15.   1  Moab  is  laid  waste,  (and)  brought  to  sil. 
SILENCE,  to  keep  or  put  to  — 
1.7*0  be  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  dm  damam. 

Job   29.  21  and  waited,  and  kept  silence  at  my  cou. 
31.  34  kept  silence,  (and)  went  not  out  of  the 

Lam.  2.  10  sit  upon  the  ground,  (aud)  keep  silence 
3.  28  He  sitteth  alone  and  keepeth  silence,  be. 

Amos  5.  13  prudent  shall  keep  silence  in  that  time 

2.  To  cause  silence,  put  to  silence,  DCn  damam,  5. 
Jer.    8.  14  for  the  Lord  our  God  hath  put  us  to  sil. 

3.  To  be  or  keep  silent,  norr  hasah,  3. 

■ludg.  3.  19  who  said,  Keep  silence.  And  all  that  st. 
Hab.    2.  20  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  him 

4.  To  be  or  become  silent,  tinn  charash. 

Psa,  35.  22  keep  not  silence:  0  Lori>,  be  not  far  from 
50.    3  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep  silen. 

5.7*o  keep  or  remain  silent,  cnn  charash,  5. 

Psa.  32.    3  When  I  kept  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old 
50.  21  hast  thou  done,  and  I  kept  silence ;  thou 
Isa,   41.    1  Keep  silence  before  me,  O  islands ;  and 

6.  To  be  silent,  n^rj  chashah. 

Eccl.  3.    7  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  speak 
Isa.   65.    6  will  not  keep  silence,  but  will  recompense 

7.7*0  be  boun-dt  silent,  dSn  alam,  2. 

Psa.  31.  18  Let  the  lying  lips  be  put  to  silence;  wh. 

8.7*0  be  silent,  quiet,  (riydta  sigao. 

Acts  15.  12  Then  all  the  multitude  kept  silence,  and 

1  Co.  14.  28  let  him  keep  silence  in  the  church ;  and 

14.  34  Let  your  women  keep  silence  in  the  chu. 

9.  To  muzzle,  silence,  <pi/x6a  pMmoo. 

Matt  22.  34  that  he  had  put  the  Sadducees  to  silence 

1  Pe.  2.  15  that  with  well  doing  ye  may  put  to  sile. 
SILENT,  to  be  — 
1. 7V?  be  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  oeh  damam. 

Psa.  30.  12  may  sing  praises  to  thee',  aud  not  be  sil. 
31.  17  be  ashamed,  (and)  let  them  be  silent  in 
2.7*0  become  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  DD^  damam,2. 

1  Sa.    2,    9  and  the  wicked  shall  be  silent'in  darkness 

Jer.     8.  14  let  us  be  silent  there;  for  the  Lord  our 
3.  7*o  be  or  keep  silent,  npn  hasah,  3. 

Zech.  2.  13  Be  silent,  0  all  flesb,  before  the  Lord  :  for 
\.T>  be  silent,  bhpi  charash. 

Psa.  28.    1  be  not  silent  to  me  :  lest.  .1  become  like 
5.7*0  be  silent,  nyn  cht&kah, 

Psa.  iS.    1  (tf)  thou  be  silent  to  me,  I  become  like  th. 


SILK  — 

I, Figured  silk,  silk,  silk  thread,  '^P  meshi. 

Eze.  16.  10  fine  linen,  and  I  covered  thee  with  silk 

16.  13  thy  raiment  (was  of)  fine  linen,  and  silk 

2.  Fine  white  linen,  v&  shesh. 

Prov3i.  22  coverings  of  tapestry  ;  her  clothing  (is)si. 
B.Sil/c,  silken,  <rnpiK6v  serikon. 

Rev.  18. 12  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  sea. 
SLL'-LA,  n^d  highway. 

A  locality  near  or  in  Jerusalem  ;  the  way  going  from 
the  Jaffa  gate,  and  ascending  to  a  bank  at  the  Haram- 
Area. 

2  Ki.12.  20  the  house  ofMillo,  which  goeth  down  to  S. 
SILLY  (one,  women)  — 
1.7*0  be  enticed,  simple,  nns  pathah. 

Job     5.    2  foolish  man, and  envy  slayeth  the  silly  one 

Hos.    7. 11  Ephraim  also  is  like  a  silly  dove  without 

2.  A  silly  woman,  yvi/amdpiov  gunaikarion. 

2  Ti.    3.    6  lead  captive  silly  womeu  laden  with  sins 
SI-LO'-AH,  rr?a>,  nhy  sending  forth. 
A  pool  at  the  king's  gardens,  S.  of  Jerusalem. 

Neh.  3.  15  the  wall  of  the  pool  of  S.  by  the  king's 

SI-LO'-AM,  ^.iXwd/ui.      Same  as  the  preceding. 

Lukei3.    4  those  eighteen,  upon  whom  the  tower  in  S. 
John  9.    7  said  unto  him,  Go,  was  in  the  poolof  S. 

9.  11  said  unto  me,  Go  to  the  pool  of  S.,  and 

SLL-VA'-NUS,  ~2,L\ovav6s. 

1.  Probably  the  same  as  Silas. 

2  Co.  1. 19  who  was  preached,  .by  me  and  S.  and  T. 

1  Th.  1.    1  Paul,  and  S.  and  Timotheus,  unto  the  ch. 

2  Th.  1.    1  Paul  and  S.  and  Timotheus,  unto  the  ch. 

2.  One  by  whom  Peter  sent  Ins  first  Epistle  to  the  Jews 
scattered  abroad.    A.D.  66. 

1  Pe.  5.  12  By  S.,  a  faithful  brother  uuto  you,  as  I 

SILVER,  silverling,    (piece  of)  — 
1.  Silver,  silverling,     ^93  keseph. 

Gen.  13.    2  Abram  (was)  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver 

20.  16  given  thy  brother  athousand  (pieces)  of  si. 

23.  15,  16  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver 

23.  16  Abraham  weighed  to  Ephron  the  silver 

24.  35  given  him  flocks,  and  herds,  and  silver 

24.  53  servant  brought  forth  jewels  of  silver,  and 

37.  28  sold  Joseph,  .for  twenty  (pieces)  of  silver 
44.   2  put  my  cup,  the  silver  cup,  in  the  sack's 

44.  8  how  then  should  we  steal,  .silver  or  gold? 

45.  22  he  gave  three  hundred  (pieces)  of  silver 
Exod.  3.  22  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  aud 

11.  2  let  every  man  borrow,  .jewels  of  silver 

12.  35  borrowed  of  the  Egyptians  jewels  of  silver 

20.  23  Ye  shall  not  make  with  me  gods  of  silver 

21.  32  shall  give . .  thirty  shekels  of  silver,  and 

25.  3  this  (is)  the  offering . .  gold,  and  silver,  and 

26.  19  thou  shalt  make  forty  sockets  of  silver 
26.  21  their  forty  sockets  (of)  silver;  two  sockets 
26.  25  their  sockets  (of)  silver,  sixteen  sockets 

26.  32  be  of)  gold,  upon  the  four  sockets  of  silv, 

27.  10  the  pillars  and  their  fillets  (shall  be  of)  s. 
27. 11  hooks  of  the  pillars  and  their  fillets  (of)s. 
27.  17  All  the  pillars .  .filleted  with  silver ;  their 
27. 17  hooks  (shall  be  of)  silver,  and  their  sock. 
31.  4  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  br. 
35.  5  an  offering  of  the  Lord  ;  gold,  and  silver 
35. 24  Every  one  that  did  offer  an  offering  of  si. 

35.  32  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  br. 

36.  24  forty  sockets  of  silver  he  made  under  the 
36.  26  their  forty  sockets  of  silver ;  two  sockets 
36.  30  their  sockets  (were)  sixteen  sockets  of  sil. 
36.  36  and  he  cast  for  them  four  sockets  of  silv. 

38.  10  the  hooks,  .and  their  fillets  (were  of)  sil. 
38. 11,  12,  17  the  hooks.. and  their  fillets  (of)  silv. 
38. 17  theoverlayiug  oftheir  chapiters  (of)  silver 
38.  17  pillars  of  the  court  (were)  filleted  with  si. 
38.  19  their  hooks  (of)silver,  and  the  overlaying 
38. 19  their  chapiters  and  their  fillets  (of)  silver 
38.  25  silver  of  them  that  were  numbered  of  the 
38.  27  of  the  hundred  talents  of  silver  were  cast 

Lev.  5.  15  with  thy  estimation  by  shekels  of  silver 
27.  3  estimation  shall  be  fifty  shekels  of  silver 
6  shekels  of  silver,  .three  shekels  of  silver 
16  seed  (shall  be  valued)  at  fifty  shekels  of  si. 
13  his  offering  (was)  one  silver  charger,  the 
19,25,31,37,43,49,  55.  61,67,  73,79onesilver 

84  twelve  charges  of  silver,  twelve  silver  bo. 

85  Each  charger  of  silver  (weighing)  an  bun. 

7.  85  all  the  silver  vessels  (weighed)  two  thou. 

10.  2  Make  thee  two  trumpets  of  silver;  of  a  wh. 

22.  18  would  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and 
24.  13  would  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and 
31.  22  Only  the  gold,  and  the  silver,  the  brass 

Deut.  7.  25  thou  shalt  not  desire  the  silver  or  gold 

8.  13  and  thy  silver  and  thy  gold  is  multiplied 

17.  17  greatly  multiply  to  himself  silver  and  go. 
22.  19  amerce  him  in  an  hundred  (shekels)  of  sil. 
22.  29  the  damsel's  father  fifty  (shekels)  of  silver 
29.  17  their  idols,  wood  and  stone,  silver  and  go. 

Josh,  6.  19,  24  the  silver,  and  gold,  and  vessels  of  brass 
7.  21  two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  wedge 
7.  21  behold,  they  (are)  hid  .  and  the  silver  under 
7.  22  (it  was)  hid  in  his  tent,  and  the  silverun. 
7.  24  the  silver,  and  the  garment,  aud  the  wedge 
22.  8  with  silver,  and  with  gold,  and  with  brass 
,  9.   4  three  score  and  ten  (pieces)  of  silver  out  of 

16.  5  give  thee,  .eleven  hundred  (pieces)  of  sil. 

17.  2  The  eleven  hundred  (shekels)  of  silver  that 


Num. 


27. 

27. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


Judg 


Judgi7.   2  behold,  the  silver  (is)  with  me;  I  took  it 
17.    3  restored  the  eleven  hundred  (shekels)ofs. 
17.   3  I  had  wholly  dedicated  the  silver  unto  the 

17.  4  mother  took  two  hundred  (shekels)  of  si. 
17. 10  I  will  give  thee  ten  (shekels)  of  silver  by 

1  Sa.   2.  36  crouch  to  him  for  a  piece  of  silver  and  a 

9.    8  the  fourth  part  of  a  shekel  of  silver 

2  Sa.   8. 10  (Joram)  brought  with  him  vesselsof  silver 

8.  11  with  the  silver  and  gold  that  he  had  dedi. 

18.  1 1  I  would  have  given  thee  ten  (shekels)  of  s. 
18.  12  a  thousand(shekels)of  silver  in  mine  hand 

21.  4  We  will  have  no  silver  nor  gold  of  Saul 

24.  24  bought,  .the  oxen  for  fifty  shekels  of  sil. 

1  Ki.   7.  51  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels 

10.  21  none  (were  of)  silver:  it  was  nothing  acco. 
10.  22  bringing  gold,  and  silver,  ivory,  and  apes 
10.  25  vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of  gold,  and 
10.  27  the  king  made  silver  (to  be)  in  Jerusalem 
10.  29  came,  .for  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  silver 
15. 15  he  brought,  .silver,  and  gold,  and  vessels 
15. 18  Asa  took  all  the  silver  and  the  gold  (that) 

15.  19  I  have  sent  unto  thee  a  present  of  silver 

16.  24  bought  the  hill . .  for  two  talents  of  silver 
20.  3  Thy  silver  and  thy  gold  (is)mine;  thy  wives 
20.  5  Thou  shalt  deliver  me  thy  silver,  and  thy 
20.  7  he  sent  unto  me  f  or.,  my  silver,  and  for  my 
20.  39  or  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  talent  of  silver 

2  Ki.   5.    5  took  with  him  ten  talents  of  silver,  and 

5.  22  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  a  talent  of  silver 

5.  23  bound  two  talents  of  silver  in  two  bags 

6.  25  an  ass's  head . .  fourscore  (pieces)  of  silver 

6.  25  cab  of  dove's  dung  for  five  (pieces)  of  sil. 

7.  8  carried  thence  silver,  and  gold,  andraim. 
12.  13  bowls  of  silver,  snuffers,  basins,  trumpets 
12.  13  any  vessels  of  gold,  or  vessels  of  silver,  of 

14.  14  he  took  all  the  gold  and  silver,  and  all  the 

15.  19  gave  Pul  athousandtalents  of  silver, that 

15.  20  of  each  man  fifty  shekels  of  silver,  to  give 

16.  8  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold  (that  was) 

18. 14  three  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  thirty 

18. 15  Hezekiah  gave  (him)  all  the  silver  (that 

20.  13  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  spices 

22.  4  that  he  may  sum  the  silver  which  is  bro. 

23.  33  a  tribute  of  an  hundred  talents  of  silver 
23.  35  Jehoiakim  gave  the  silver  and  the  gold  to 

23.  35  he  exacted  the  silver  and  the  gold  of  the 

25.  15  such  things  as  (were). .  of  silver,  (in)  silver 

1  Ch  18.  10  all  manner  of  vessels  of  gold  andsilverand 

18. 11  with  the  silver  and  the  gold  that  he  brou. 
19.  6  sent  a  thousand  talents  of  silver  to  hire 
22.  14  and  a  thousand  thousand  talents  of  silver 
22.  16  Of  the  gold,  the  silver,  and  the  brass,  and 
28,  14  all  instruments  of  silver  by  weight,  for  all 
28.  15  for  the  candlesticks  of  silver  by  weight 
28.  16  and  (likewise)  silver  for  the  tables  of  sil. 

28.  17  and .  .by  weight -for  every  basin  of  silver 

29.  2  the  silver  for  (things)  of  silver,  and  thebr. 
29.  3  of  gold  and  silver,  (which)  I  have  given  to 
29.  4  seven  thousand  talents  of  refined  silver,  to 
29.  5  the  silver  for  (things)  of  silver,  and  for  all 
29.  -  7  of  silver  ten  thousand  talents,  and  of  br. 

2  Ch.    1.  15  the  king  made  silver  and  gold  at  Jerusa. 

1.  17  a  chariot  for  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  sil. 

2.  7,  14  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in 
5.  1  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  all  the  inst. 
9.  14  governors . .  brought  gold  and  silver  to  S. 
9,  20  none  (were  of)  silver ;  it  was  (not)  any  th. 
9.  21  bringing  gold,  and  silver,  ivory,  and  apes 
9.  24  vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of  gold,  and 
9.  27  the  king  made  silver  in  Jerusalem  as  sto. 

15. 18  that  he  himself  haddedicated,  silver,  and 
16.    2  Asa  brought  out  silver  and  gold  out  of  the 

16.  3  I  have  sent  thee  silver  and  gold  ;  go  break 

17.  n  the  Philistines  brought,  .tribute  silver 

21.  3  their  father  gave  themgreat  giftsof  silver 

24.  14  and  spoons,  and  vesselsof  gold  and  silver 

25.  6  hired,  .for  an  hundred  talents  of  silver 
25.  24  (he  took)  all  the  gold  and  the  silver,  and 
27.    5  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  tentho. 
32.  27  he  made  himself  treasuries  for  silver,  and 
36.    3  in  an  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  a  tab 

Ezra    1.    4  let  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  with  sil. 
1.    6  with  vessels  of  silver,  with  gold,  with  go. 

1.9  a  thousand  chargers  of  silver,  nine  andtw. 

1. 10  silver  basins  of  a  second  (sort)  four  him. 

1.  11  All  the  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver  (were) 

2.  69  five  thousand  pound  of  silver,  and  one  hu. 
8.  25  weighed  unto  them  the  silver  and  the  go. 
8.  26  fifty  talents  of  silver,  and  silver  vessels  an 
8.  28  the  silver  and  the  gold(are)  a  freewill  oft". 
8.  30  the  weight  of  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and 

8.  33  on  the  fourth  day  was  the  silver  and  the 
,  Neh.    5.  15  and  wine,  besides  forty  shekels  of  silver 

7.  71  thousand  and  two  hundred  pound  of  sil. 

7.  72  two  thousand  pound  of  silver,  and  three. 

Esth.   1.    6  cords  of  fine  linen  and  purple  to  silver  ri. 

1.    6  the  beds  (were  of)  gold  and  silver,  upon  a 

3.  9  I  will  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver 
3.  11  The  silver  (is)  given  to  thee,  the  people 

Job     3.  15  princes,  .who  filled  their  houses  with  sil. 

22.  25  and  thou  shalt  have  plenty  of  silver 

27. 16  Though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and 

27.  17  and  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  silver 
2S.    1  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  and  a  place 

28.  15  neither  shall  silver  be  weighed  (for)  the 
Psa.  12.    6  (as)  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth,  pu. 

66.  10  thou,  .hast  tried  us,  as  silver  is  tried 
68.  13  (as)  the  wings  of  a  dove  covered  with  sil. 
68. 30  one)  submit  himself  with  pieces  of  silver 
105.  37  He  brought  them  forth  also  with  silver 
115.    4  Their  idols  (are)  silver  and  gold,  the  work 
119.  72  better,  .than  thousands  of  gold  undsilver 


SILVERSMITH 


889 


SIMPLE 


rsa.135- 

Prov.  2, 

3- 


Eccl. 


Song 


Isa. 


.rer. 


3z 

52. 

Eze.    7. 

7- 
16. 
16. 


Dan.  ] 


llos. 


9- 

J3- 

.roel    3. 

Amos  2. 

8. 
Nah.  2. 
Hab.  2. 
Zeph   1. 

1. 
Hag.  2. 
Zech  6. 

9- 


13 

14. 

Mai.    3. 

3- 


15  The  idols  of  the  heathen  (are)  silver  and' 
4  If  thou  seekest  her  as  silver,  and  search. 

14  (is)  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver 
10  Receive  my  instruction,  and  not  silver 

19  gold ;  and  my  revenue  than  choice  silver 

20  Th»  tongue  of  the  just  (is  as)  choice  silver 

16  and  to  get  understanding,  .than  silver 

3  The  fining  pot  (is)  for  silver,  and  the  fur. 

1  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold 

4  Take  away  the  dross  from  the  silver,  and 
n  (is  like)  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver 
23  (are  like)  a  potsherd  covered  with  silver 

21  (As)  the  fining  pot  for  silver,  and  the  fu. 

8  I  gathered  me  also  silver  and.  gold,  and 

10  silver  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  silver 

6  Or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  loosed,  or  the 

11  make.. borders  of  gold,  with  studs  of  silver 

10  He  made  the  pillars  thereof  (of)silver,  the 

9  we  will  build  upon  her  a  palace  of  silver 

11  was  to  bring  a  thousand  (pieces)  of  silver 

22  Thy  silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  mi. 

7  Their  land  also  is  full  of  silver  and  gold 
20  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his 

23  a  thousaud  vines  at  a  thousand  silverlings 

17  the  Medes.  .which  shall  not  regard  silver 
22  the  covering'of  thy  graven  images  of  silver 

7  shall  cast  away  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his 

2  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  spices,  and 
19  and  the  goldsmith,  .casteth  silver  chains 

6  weigh  silver  in  the  balance,  (and)  hire  a 

10  I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver 
9, to  bring  thy  sonsfrom  far,  their  silver  and 

17  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  and  for  wood 

30  Reprobate  silver  shall  (men)  call  them,  be. 

4  They  deck  it  with  silver  and  with  gold ;  th. 

9  Silver  spread  into  plates  is  brought  from 

9  the  money,  (even)  seventeen  shekels  of  sil. 

19  (that)  which  (was)  of  silver(in)  silver,  took 

19  They  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the  streets 

19  their  silver  and  their  gold  shall  not  be  able 
13  Thus  wast  thou  decked  with  gold  and  sil. 

1 7  fair  jewels  of  my  gold  and  of  my  silver,  w. 

18  all  they,  .are  (even)  the  dross  of  silver 

20  they  gather  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron,  and 
22  As  silver  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  the  fu. 

12  with  silver,  iron,  tin,  and  lead,  they  tra. 
4  hast  gotten  gold  and  silver  into  thy  trea 

13  to  carry  away  silver  and  gold,  to  takeaway 

8  their  precious  vessels  of  silver  and  of  gold 
3S  shall  he  honour  with  gold,  and  silver,  and 
43  over  the  treasures  of  gold  and  of  silver 

8  multiplied  her  silver  and  gold,  (which) 

2  bought  her  to  me  for  fifteen  (pieces)  of  s. 

4  of  their  silver  and  their  gold  have  they 

6  the  pleasant  (places)  for  their  silver,  net. 

2  made  them  molten  images  of  their  silver 

5  ye  have  taken  my  silver  and  my  gold, and 

6  they  sold  the  righteous  for  silver,  and  the 
6  That  we  may  buy  the  poor  for  silver,and 

9  Take  ye  the  spoil  of  silver,  take  the  spoil 

19  it  (is)  laid  over  with  gold  and  silver,  and 

11  all  they  that  bear  silver  are  cut  off 

18  their  silver  nor  their  gold  shall  be  able  to 

8  The  silver  (is)  mine,  and  the  gold  (is)mine 

11  take  silver  and  gold,  aud  make  crowns 

3  heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  fine  go. 

12  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  (pieces)  of  si. 

13  I  took  the  thirty  (pieces)of  silver,  andca. 

9  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and 

14  gold,  and  silver,  and  apparel,  in  greatab. 
3  shall  sit  (as)  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  sil. 
3  purge  them  as  gold  aud  silver,  that  they 


2.  Silver,  silverling,  ^93  kesaph. 

Ezra  5.  14  the  vessels  also  of  gold  and  silver  of  the 

6.  5  let  the  golden  aud  silver  vessels  of  the  ho. 
7. 15  to  carry  the  silver  and  gold,  which  the 

7.  16  the  silver  and  gold  that  thou  canst  find 
7.  iS  to  do  with  the  rest  of  the  silver  and  the 
7.  22  Unto  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and 

Dan.  2.  32  his  breast  and  his  arms  of  silver,  his  belly 
2.  35  the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the  go. 
2.  45  the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver,  and  the  go. 
5.  2  to  bring  the  golden  and  silver  vessels  wh. 
5.  4  praised  the  gods  of  gold,  and  of  silver,  of 
5.  23  thou  hast  praised  the  gods  of  silver,  and 

Z.A  qesitah,  a  lamb,  na'^j?  qesitah. 

Josh. 24.  32  bought,  .for  an  hundred  pieces  of  silver 

4. Made  of  silver,  apyvpeos  argureos. 

Acts  ig.  24  a  silversmith,  which  made  silvershrines 
2  Ti.  2.  20  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver,  but 
Rev.   9.  20  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and 

5. Silver,  money,  apyvptov  argurion. 

Matt  26.  15  covenanted . .  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver 
27.    3  brought  again  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver 
27.   5  he  cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver  in  the 
27.   6  the  chief  priests  took  the  silver  pieces 
27.   9  they  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  the 

Acts  3.  6  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none;  but  such  as 
19. 19  and  found  (it)  fifty  thousand  (pieces)  of  sil. 
20.  33  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or 

1  Pet  1. 18  with  corruptible  tilings,  (as)  silver,  and  go. 

fi.  Silver,  tipyvpos  arguros. 

Matt  10.    9  Provideneithergold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass 
Acts  17.  29  silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's 
1  Co.   3.  12  if  any  man  build,  .gold,  silver,  precious 
.Tas.     5.    3  Yourgoldandyoursih'eriscankered;and 
Rev.  18.  12  The  merchandise  of  gold,  and  silver  and 

112 


19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


Judg  1. 


[Ch. 


2  Ch. 


SILVERSMITH  — 

A  worker  in  silver,  apyvpoKoiros  argurokopos. 

Acts  19.  24  certain  (man)  named  Demetrius,  a  silver. 
SLM'-E-ON,  p$H3?J  hearing,  Svficcav. 

1.  The  second  son  of  Jacob  by  Leah.    B.C.  1720. 

Gen.  2g.  33  bare  a  son.  .and  she  called  his  name  S. 
34.  25  S.  and  Levi,  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each 

34.  30  Jacob  said  to  S  and  Levi,  Ye  have  trou. 

35.  23  The  sons  of  Leah.  .S.,  and  Levi,  and Judah 
42. 24  took  from  theruS.,  and  bound  him  before 

42.  36  Joseph(is)  not,  and  S.  (is)  not,  and  ye  will 

43.  23  And  he  brought  S.  out  unto  them 

46. 10  And  the  sons  of  S.;  Jemuel,  and  Jamiu 

48.  5  as  Reuben  aud  S.,  they  shall  be  mine 

49.  5  S.  and  Levi  (are)  brethren ;  instruments 
Exod.  1.   2  Reuben,  S.,  Levi,  and  Judah 

6.  15  the  sons  of  S.;  Jemuel,  and  Jamin,  and 
6. 15  these  (are)  the  families  of  S. 

2.  His  posterity  and  their  land. 

Xum  1.    6  Of  S.;  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Zurishaddai 
1.  22  Of  the  children  of  S.,  by  their  generatious 

1.  23  of  the  tribe  of  S.,  (were)fiftyand  nine  th. 
2. 12  those  which  pitch  by  him  (shall  be).  ,S. 

2.  12  the  captain  of  the  children  of  S.  (shall 

7.  36  Shelumiel.  .prince  of  the  children  of  S. 
10. 19  host  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  S. 

13.    5  Of  the  tribe  of  S.t  Shaphat  the  son  of  Ho. 

26.  12  The  sons  of  S.  after  their  families  :  of  N. 

34.  20  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  S.,  Shemu. 
Deut27.  12  S.,  and  Levi,  and  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and 
Josh.  19.    1  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  S. 

1  (even)  for  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  S. 

8  This  (is)  the  inheritance. . of  S.  according 

9  (was)  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  S. 
9  the  children  of  S.  had  their  inheritance 
4  out  of  the  tribe  of  S.,  and  out  of  the  tribe 
9  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  S.,  th. 
3  Judah  said  unto  S.  his  brother,  Come  up 

1.    3  and  I  likewise  will  go.  .So  S.  went  with 

1.  17  Judah  went  with  S.  hisbrother,  aud  they 
7.    1  Reuben,  S.,  Levi,  and  Judah,  Issachar 
4.  24  The  sons  of  S.  (were)  Nemuel,  and  Jam. 

4.  42  the  sons  of  S.,  five  hundred  men,  went  to 
6.  65  and  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  S. 

2.  25  Of  the  children  of  S.,  mighty  men  of  va. 

5.  9  And  he  gathered,  .the  strangers,  .out  of  S. 
34.    6  cities  of  Manasseh,  and  Ephraim,  and  S. 

Eze.  48.  24  by  the  borderof  Benjamin. .S. (shall  ha.) 

48.  25  by  the  border  of  S.,  from  the  east  side  un. 

48.  33  one  gate  of  S.,  one  gate  of  Issachar,  one 

Rev.    7.   7  Of  the  tribe  of  S.  (were)  sealed  twelve  th. 

The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of  Simeon  : 

Ain,  Ashan,  Azem,  Baalah,   Balah,  Beth-birei,  Beth- 

lebaoth,  Beth-marcaboth,  Bethuel,  Bilhah,  Chorashau. 

Eltolad,  En-rimmon,  Ether,  Hazar-shual,  Hazar-susah, 

Hormab,  Moladah,  Ramah,  Sharuhen,  Tochen,  Tola,  &c. 

3.  A  just  and  devout  man  in  Jerusalem,  waiting  for  the 
consolation  of  Israel,  who  saw  and  blessed  the  child 
Jesus  in  the  temple. 

Luke  2.  25  a  man  in  Jerusalem,  whose  name  (was)  S. 
2.  34  S.  blessed  them,  and  said  unto  Mary  his 

4.  An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  30  Which  was  (the  son)  of  S.,  which  was  (the 

5.  A  disciple  and  prophet  at  Antioch,  and  surnamed 
Niger. 

Acts  13.    1  as  Barnabas,  and  S.  that  was  called  Niger 

6.  The  original  name  of  a  son  of  Jonas  (or  John),  aud 
brother  of  Andrew  an  apostle  of  Christ.     See  Simon. 

Acts  15.  14  S.  hath  declared  how  God  at  the  first  did 

STMEONITES,  »JJHJV. 

The  descendants  of  No.  1  above. 

>'uni25.  14  a  prince  of  a  chief  house  among  the  S. 
26.  14  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  S.,  twenty 

1  Ch.27.  16  of  the  S.;  Shephatiah  the  son  of  Maachah 
SIMILITUDE  — 

1. Likeness,  nvy]  demvih. 

2  Ch.  4.    3  under  it  (was)  the  similitude  of  oxen,  wh. 
Dan.  10. 16  (one)like  the  similitude  of  the  sous  of  men 

2. Pattern,  form,  building,  n^?5  tabnith. 

Psa.iofi.  20  changed  their  glory  into  the  similitude  of 
144.  12  polished  (after)  the  similitude  of  a  palace 

Z.Form,  similitude,  likeness,  n^on  temunah. 

Xum  12.    8  the  similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  he  behold 
Deut.  4.  12  heard  the  voice,  .but  saw  no  similitude 

4. 15  for  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  on  the 

4. 16  make  you.  .the  similitude  of  any  figure 

4:.Likeness,  b{xot6Tt]$  homoiotes. 

Heb.   7.  15  for  that  after  the  similitude  of  Melchise. 
5. Likeness,  dfioitofxa  homoioma. 

Rom.  5.  14  that  had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude 
G. Likeness,  dp.oiooo'is  homoiosis. 

Jas.     3.    9  men,  which  are  made  after  the  similitude 
SIEOLITuTJES,  to  use  — 
To  liken,  compare,  use  similitudes,  nci  damah,  3. 

Hos.  12.  10  used  similitudes,  by  the  ministry  of  the 

SI'-MON,  ~2.ip.uiv  hearing. 

l.An  early  disciple  and  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ;  he  was 
the  son  of  Jonas  (or  John),  and  brother  of  Andrew,  a 
fisherman  at  Bethsaida  by  the  sea  of  Galilee.  He  was 
also  surnamed  Peter,  i.e.  a  "stone,"  and  Cephas,  its 
equivalent  in  Syriac. 


Matt.4. 18  S.  called  Peter,  .and  Andrew  his  brother 

10.  2  The  first,  S.,  who  is  calledPeter,  and  An. 
16.  i5  S.  Peter  answered  and  said,  Thou  art  the 

16.  17  Blessedartthou.S.Bar-jona:  forflesh  and 

17.  25  What  thinkest  thou,  S.  ?  of  whom  do  the 
Mark  1.  16  he  saw  S.,  and  Andrew  his  brother  casti. 

1.  29  they  entered  into  the  house  of  S.  and  An. 
1.  30  S.'s  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fever,  and 
1.  36  S.  and  they  that  were  with  him  followed 
3.  16  And  S.  he  surnamed  Peter 
14.  37  S.,sleepest  thou  ?  couldest  not  thou  wa. 
Luke  4.  38  entered  into  S.'s  house.    And  S.'s  wife's 
5,   3  entered,  .one  of  the  ships,  which  was  S.'s 
5.    4  he  said  unto  S.,  Launch  out  into  the  deep 
5.    5  S.  answering  said  unto  him,  Master,  we 
5.    8  When  S.  Peter  saw  (it),  he  fell  down  at 

5.  10  partners  with  S.  And  Jesus  said  unto  S. 

6.  14  S.,  (whom  he  also  named  Peter),  and  An. 
22.  31  the  Lord  said,  S.,  S.,  behold,  Satan  hath 
24.  34  The  Lord  is  risen . .  and  hath  appeared  to  S. 

John  1.  40  One  of  the  two.  .was  Andrew,  S.  Peter's 
1. 41  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother  S.,  and 
1.  42  Thou  art  S.  the  son  of  Jona:  thou  shalt 
6.   8  Andrew,  S.  Peter's  brother,  saithuntohim 

6.  68  S.  Peter  answered  him,  Lord,  to  whom 
13.   6  Then  cometh  he  to  S.  Peter:  and  Peter 
13.    9  S.  Peter  saith  unto  him.  Lord,  not  my  fe. 
13.  24  S.  Peter  therefore  beckoned  to  him,  that 
13.  36  S.  Peter  said  unto  him,  Lord,  whither  go. 

18.  10  S.  Peter  having  a  sword  drew  it,  and  sin. 
18.  15  S.  Peter  followed  Jesus,  and  (so  did)  an. 

18.  25  S.  Peter  stood  and  warmed  himself.  They 

20.  6  Then  cometh  S.  Peter  following  him,  and 

21.  2  There  were  together  S.  Peter,  and  Thorn. 
21.   3  S.  Peter  saith  unto  them,  I  go  a  fishing 
2i.    7  when  S.  Peter  heard  that  it  was  the  Lord 

21.  11  S.  Peter  went  up,  and  drew  the  net  to  la. 

11.  15  Jesus  saith  to  S.  Peter,  S.,  (son)  of  Jonas 
21. 16,  17  He  saith.  .S.,(son)  of  Jonas.lovest  th. 

Acts  10.    5  send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  (one)  S. 
10.  18  asked  whether  S.,  which  was  surnamed  P. 

10.  32  and  call  hither  S.,  whose  surname  is  Peter 

11.  13  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  S.,  whose 
2  Pe.    1.    1  [S.]Peter,aservantandanapostleof  Jesua 

2.  Another  of  the  twelve  apostles,  called  the ' '  Canaanite," 
from  being  a  native  of  Cana  in  Galilee,  or  rather  from 
the  Hebrew  canna,  "zealous;"  in  Greek,  Zelotes. 

Matt  10.  4  S.  the  Canaanite,  and  Judas  Iscariot,  who 
Mark  3.  18  James,  .and  Thaddeus,  and  S.  the  Canaa. 
Luke  6.  15  James  the  (son)  of  Alpheus,  and  S.  called 
Acts    1.  13  and  S.  Zelotes,  and  Judas  (the  brother)  01 

3.  One  of  the  brethren  of  our  Lord. 

Matti3.  55  hisbrethren, James, andJoses, and S., and 
Mark  6.    3  of  James,  and  Joses,  and  of  Juda,  andS? 

4.  A  person  in  Bethany,  a  leper,  in  whose  house  the 
head  of  Jesus  was  anointed  with  oil. 

Matt  26.  6  Jesus  was  in  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  S. 
Marki4.    3  being  in  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  S.  the 

5.  A  Cyrenian  who  was  compelled  to  bear  the  cross  after 
Jesus. 

Matt  27.  32  they  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  S.  by  name 
Markij.  21  they  compel  one  S.  a  Cyrenian,  who  pas. 
Luke  23.  26  they  laid  hold  upon  one  S.f  a  Cyrenian 

6.  A  Pharisee,  in  whose  house  the  feet  of  Jesus  were 
washed  with  tears  and  anointed  with  ointment. 

Luke  7.  40  S.,  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee.  A. 

7.  43  S.  answered  and  said,  I  suppose  that  (lie) 

7.  44  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  unto  S. 

7.  The  father  of  Judas  Iscariot. 

John  6.  71  He  spake  of  Judas  Iscariot  (the  son)  of  S. 

12.  4  Judas  Iscariot,  S.'s  (son),  which  should 

13.  2  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  S.'s 

13.  26  gave  (it)  to  Judas  Iscariot,  (the  son)  of  S. 

S.  A  sorcerer  in  Samaria,  who  sought  to  purchase  the 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  from  the  apostles  with  money. 

Acts    8.    9  there  was  a  certain  man  called  S.,  which 

8.  13  S  himself  believed  also  :  andwhenhewas 
8.  18  when  S.  saw  that  through  laying  on  of  the 
8.  24  Then  answered  S.,  and  said,  Prayyeto  the 

D.  A  tanner  at  Joppa,  with  whom  Simon  Peter  lodged 

when  sent  for  by  Cornelius  the  centurion  at  Cresarea. 

Acts    9.  43  tarried  many  days  in  Joppa  with  one  S. 

10.    6  He  lodgeth  with  one  S.  a  tanner,  whose 

10. 17  Cornelius  had  made  enquiry  for  S.'s  house 

10.  32  he  is  lodged  in  the  house  of  (one)  S.  a  ta. 

SIMPLE  (one),  simplicity  — 
1.  Simple,  *ns  pethi. 

Psa.  19.    7  testimony,  .(is)  sure,  makiug  wise  the  si. 

116.    6  Lord  preserveth  the  simple  :  I  was  brou. 

119.  130  it  giveth  understanding  unto  the  simple 

Prov.  1.   4  To  give  subtilty  to  the  simple,  to  the  yo. 

1.  22  How  long,  ye  simple  ones,  willyelovesi.? 

1.  32  For  the  turning  away  of  the  simple  shall 

7.  7  beheld  among  the  simple  ones,  I  discern. 

8.  5  0  ye  simple,  understand  wisdom;  and,  ye 

9.  4,  i6Whoso(is)simple,  let  him  turn  in  hither 

14.  15  The  simple  believeth  every  word  :  but  the 
.   14. 18  The  simple  inherit  folly  :  but  the  prude. 

19.  25  Smite  a  scorner,  and  the  simple  will  be. 
21. 11  When  the  scorner  is  punished,  the  simple 

22.  3  but  the  simple  pass  on,  and  are  punished 
27.  12  (but)  the  simple  pass  on,  (and)  are  puuis. 

Eze.  45.  20  so  shalt  thou  do .  .for  (him  that  is)  simple 

'2.  Simplicity ,  simple  om,  nvn?  jiethayyuth. 

Prov.  9.  13  foolish  woman  (is)  clamorous ;  (she  is)  si. 


SIN 

3.  Integrity,  simplicity,  ch  torn. 

2  Sa.  15.  11  they  went  in  then*  simplicity,  and  they 

4.  Harmless,  without  evil,  &k<xkos  akakos. 

Rom  16.  iS  fair  speeches  deceive  the  hearts  of  the  s. 

5.  Harmless,  without  horns,  aicepatos  akeraios. 

Rom  16.  19  that  which  is  good,  and  simple  concern. 

6. Simplicity,  airxSr^-i  haploles. 

Rom  12.    8  hethatgiveth,  (let  him  do  it)  with  simpl. 
2  Co.  1.  12  that  in  [simplicity]  and  godly  sincerity 
11.    3  corrupted  from  the  [simplicity]  that  is  in 

SIN,  yp  cliff,  place. 

1.  A  desert  between  Elim  and  Sinai  on  the  E.  of  the 
gulf  of  Suez. 

Exodi6.    1  Israel  came  unto  the  wilderness  of  S  ,  wh. 

17.    1  Israel  journeyed  from  the  wildernessof  S. 
NU11133.  it  And  they,  .encamped  in  the  wilderness, .S. 

33. 12  their  journey  out  of  the  wilderness  of  S. 

2.  The  most  easterly  border  of  Egypt,  usually  called  Pe- 
iusuim,  i.e.,  marsh  town. 

Eze.  30.  15  IwillpourmyfuryuponS.,thestrengthof 
30.  16  S.  shall  have  great  pain,  aud  No  shall  be 

SIN  — 

1. Guilt,  guilt  offering,  D^N  ashavi. 

Prov  14.  9  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin:  but  among  the 
Isa.  53.  10  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he 
Jer.  51.    5  though  their  land  was  filled  with  sin  aga. 

2.Guilt}  guilt  offering,  nntyx  ashmah. 

Lev.    4.    3  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people ;  then 
2  Ch.28.  10  even  with  you,  sins  against  the  LoRDyo. 
Psa.  69.    5  and  my  sins  are  not  hid  from  thee 
Amos  8.  14  They  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  Samaria,  and 

3.  Sin,  error,  failure,  Npn  chet. 

Lev.  19  17  rebuke  thy  neighbour,  and  not  suffer  sin 

20.  20  shall  bear  their  sin  ;  they  shall  die  child. 

22.  g  lest  they  bear  sin  for  it,  and  die  therefo. 
24.  15  AVhosoevercurseth..God  shall  bear  his  sin 

Num.  9.  13  forbeareth.  .that  man  shall  bear  his  sin 
j 8.  22  Neither .  .come  nigh,  .lest  they  bear  sin 
18  32  ye  shall  bear  no  sin  by  reason  of  it,  when 
27.    3  but  died  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  no  sons 

Deut  15.    9  cry  unto  the  Lord  . .  and  it  be  sin  unto  th. 
19.  15  not  rise  up  against  a  man.  .in  any  sin  th, 

21.  22  if  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of 

22.  26  (there  is)  in  the  damsel  110  sin  (worthy)  of 

23.  21  require  it  of  thee ;  and  it  would  be  sin  in 

23.  22  if  thou  shalt  forbear.,  it  shall  be  no  sin  in 

24.  1 5  lest  he  cry  against . .  and  it  be  sin  unto  th . 
24.  16  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own  sin 

2  Ki.  10.  29  Howbeit  (from)  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the 
14.    6  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own  sin 
2  Ch.25.    4  but  every  man  shall  die  for  his  own  sin 
Psa.  51.    s  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me 
51.   g  Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out 


Isa 


103.  10  He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins 


3*- 


,  18  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  sha. 

7  own  hands  have  made  unto  you  (for)  a  sin 

38.  17  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  ba. 

S3  12  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  interces. 

Eze.  23.  49  ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  idols  ;  and 

Dan     9.  16  because  for  our  sins,  and  for  the  iniquit. 

Hos.  12,    8  find  none  iniquity  in  me  that(were)  sin 

4.  Sin,  nxsn  chataah. 

Gen.  20.   9  brought,  .on  my  kingdom  a  great  sin?  th. 

Exod  32.  21  that  thou  hast  brought  so  great  a  sin  up. 
32.  30  Ye  have  sinned  a  great  sin  :  and  now  I 
32.  31  Oh,  this  people  have  sinned  a  great  sin 

2  Ki.  17.  21  Jeroboam,  .made  them  sin  a  great  sin 

Psa.  32.    1  Blessed  (is  he  whose),  .sin  (is)  covered 
109.    7  condemned ;  and  let  his  prayer  become  s. 

5.  Sin,  nxtsii  chattaah. 

Exod  3-1.    7  forgiving  iniquity,  .and  sin,  and  that  wl 
Isa.     5. 1 8  Woe  unto  them  that  draw . .  sin  as  it  were 

6.  Sin,  sin  offering,  nNtsn  chattath. 

Gen.   4     7  if  thou  deest  not  well,  sin  Iieth  at  the  d. 

18.  20  and  because  their  sin  is  very  grievous 

31.  36  what  (is)  my  sin,  that  thou  hast  so  hotly 
50.  17  trespass  of  thy  brethren,  and  their  sin 

Exodio.  17  forgive,  I  pray  thee,  my  sin  only  this  on. 

32.  30  I  shall  make  an  atonement  for  your  sin 
32.  32  Vet  now,  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin 
32.34  when  I  visit  I  will  visit  their  sin  uponth. 
34.    9  pardon  our  iniquity  and  our  sin,  and  take 

Lev.    4.    3  then  let  him  bring  for  his  sin,  which  he 
4.  14  When  the  sin.. is  known,  then  the  congr. 
4.14  shall  offer  a  young  bullock  for  the  sin,  and 
4.  23,  28  Or  if  his  sin.  .come  to  his  knowledge 
4. 26  make  an  atonement,  .as  concerning  his 
4.  28  Or  if  his  sin,  which  he  hath  sinned,  come 

4.  28  a  female  without  blemish,  for  his  sin  wh. 
4. 35  make  an  atonement  for  his  sin  that  he  h. 

5.  6  offering  unto  the  Lord  for  his  sin  which 
5.    6  an  atonement  for  him  concerning  his  sin 
5.  10  make  an  atonement  for  him  for  his  sin 
5.  13  atonement  for  him  as  touching  his  sin  th. 

16. 16,  :;i  transgressions  in  all  their  sins 

16.  30  be  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  Lo. 

16.  34  make  an  atonement,  .foralltl.tl.  sins,  on. 

19.  22  sin  which  he  hath  done:  and  the  sin  wh. 
26.  18  punish  you  seven  times  more  for  your  si. 
26. 21  plagues  upon  you,  according  to  your  sins 
26.  24  punish  you  yet  seven  times  for  your  sins 
26.  28  will  chasten  you  seven  times  foryoursins 

Num.  5.    6  shall  commit  any  sin  that  men  commit 
5.    7  they;shall  confess  their  sin  which  they  ha. 
12.  11  lay  not  the  sin  upon  us,  wherein  we  have 


890 


Num.  16.  26  lest  ye  be  consumed  in  all  their  sins 
32. 23  and  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out 
eut.  9.  18  because  of  all  your  sins,  which  ye  sinned 
9.  21 1  took  your  sin,  the  calf  which  ye  had  ma 
9.  27  nor  to  their  wickedness,  nor  to  their  sin 

19. 15  not  riseup  against  a  man.  .for  any  sin,  in 
Josh  24.  19  forgive  your  transgressions  nor  your  sins 

1  Sa.   2.  17  the  sin  of  the  young  men  was  very  great 

12. 19  we  have  added  unto  all  our  sins  (this)  evil 

14.  38  see  wherein  this  sin  hath  been  this  day 

15.  23  rebellion  (is  as)  the  sin  of  witchcraft,  and 
15.  25  pardon  my  sin,  and  turn  again  with  me 

20.  1  what  (is)  my  sin  before  thy  father,  that  he 

2  Sa.  12.  13  The  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thy  sin ;  th. 

1  Ki.    8.  34  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel,  and 

8,  35  turn  from  their  sin,  when  thou  afflictest 

8.  36  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  and  of  thy 
12.  30  this  thing  became  a  sin  :  for  the  people 
23  34  this  thing  became  sin  unto  the  house  of 

14  16  he  shall  give  Israel  up  because  of  the  sins 

14.  22  provoked  him  to  jealousy  with  their  sins 

15.  3  he  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father,  wh. 

15  26,  34  aud  in  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Is 
is  30  Because  of  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  which  he 

16.  2  to  provoke  me  to  anger  with  their  sins 
16.  13  all  the  sins  of  Baasha,  and  the  sins  of  E 
16.  19  his  sins  which  he  sinned  in  doing  evil  in 
16.  19  in  his  sin  which  he  did,  to  make  Israel  to 
16.  26  and  in  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Israel 

16.  31  a  light  thing  for  him  to  walk  in  the  sins 

2  Ki.   3.    3  he  cleaved  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the 

10.  31  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam 

12.  16  The  trespass  money  and  sin  money  was  not 

13.  2  followed  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of 
13.    6  they  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  the  ho. 

13.  11  he  departed  not  from  all  the  sins  of  Jero. 

14.  24  he  departed  not  from  all  the  sins  of  J  ero. 

15.  9,  24,  28  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  J. 
15  18  he  departed  not  all  his  days  from  the  sins 

17.  22  Israel  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  Jeroboam 

21.  16  besides  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Judah 
21. 17  all  that  he  did,  and  his  sins  thathesinned 

24.  3  for  the  sins  of  Manasseh,  according  to  all 
2  Ch.  6.  25  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel,  and 

6.  26  turn  from  their  sin,  when  thou  dost  afflict 

6.  27  forgive  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  aud  of  thy 

7.  14  will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  heal  their 
28. 13  ye  intend  to  add  (more)  to  our  sinsandto 

33.  19  his  sins,  aud  his  trespass,  and  the  places 
Neh.    1.  6  confess  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel 

4.    5  let  not  their  sin  be  blotted  out  from  before 

9.  2  confessed  their  sins,  and  the  iniquities  of 
9.  37  thou  hast  set  over  us  because  of  our  sins 

Job    10.   6  enquirest.  .and  searchest  after  my  sin 
13.  23  How  many  (are)  mine  iniquities  and  sins? 

13.  23  to  know  my  transgression  and  my  sin 

14.  16  For  now.  .dost  thoUrnotwatchovermy  sin 

34.  37  he  addeth  rebellion  unto  his  sin;  he  cla 

35.  3  What  profit,  .(if  I  be  cleansed)  from  my  s  ? 
Psa.  25.    7  R.emember  not  the  sins  of  my  youth,  nor 

25.  18  Look  upon. .  my  pains;  and  forgive  all  my  s 
32.   s  I  acknowledged  mysin  unto  thee,  and  mi. 

32.  5  and  thou  forgavestthe  iniquity  of  my  sin 
38.  3  (any)  rest  in  my  bones  because  of  my  sin 
38.  18  I  will  declare.  .1  Will  be  sorry  for  my  sin 
51.  2  Wash  me.  .and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin 
51.  3  acknowledgemy  tranegressionsandmy  sin 
59.  3  not  (for)  my  transgression,  nor  (for)  my  s. 
59. 12  the  sin  of  their  mouth  (and)  the  words  of 
79.  9  and  purge  away  our  sins,  for  thy  name's 
85.   2  hast  forgiven,  .hast  covered  all  their  sin 

109. 14  let  not  the  sin  of  his  mother  be  blotted  out 
Prov.  5.  22  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins 

10. 16  to  life :  the  fruit  of  the  wicked  to  sin 
14.  34  Righteousness  exalteth.  .but  sin  (is)  a  ie. 

20.  9  made  my  heart  clean,  I  am  pure  from  my 

21.  4  (and)  the  plowing  of  the  wicked,  (is)siu 
24.    9  Thethoughtof  foolishness(is)sin:  and  the 

Isa.     3.   9  they  declare  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide 

6.    7  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  purged 

27.   9  this  (is)  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  his  sin 

30.  1  that  cover,  .that  they  may  add  sin  to  sin 
40.    2  hath  received .  .double  for  all  her  sins 
43.  24  thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins 

43.  25  I,  (am)  he  that. .  will  not  remember  thy  si. 

44.  22  I  have  blotted  out.  .as  a  cloud,  thy  sins 
58.*  1  and  show,  .the  house  of  Jacob  their  sins 
59.    2  your  sins  have  hid  (his)  face  from  you.  th. 
59. 12  our  sins  testify  against  us:  for  our  trans. 

Jer.     5.  25  your  sins  have  withholden  good  (things) 

14.  10  will  now  remember,  .and  visit  their  sins 

15.  13  (that)  for  all  thy  sins,  even  in  all  thy  b'or 

16.  10  what  (is)  our  sin  that  we  have  committed 

16.  18  recompense  their  iniquity  and  their  sin 

17.  1  The  sin  of  Judah  (is)  written  with  a  pen  of 

17.  3  thy  high  places  for  sin,  throughout  all  thy 

18.  23  neither  blot  out  their  sin  from  thy  sight 
30  14  wounded  thee . .  (because)  thy  sins  were  in. 
30. 15  thy  sins  were  increased,  I  have  donetnese 

31.  34  and  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more 

36.  3  may  forgive  their  iniquity  and  their  sin 
50.  20  the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  snail  not  be 

Lam.   4.  13  the  sins  of  her  prophets,  (and)  the  iniqui. 
4.  22  O  daughter,  .he  will  discover  thy  sins 

Eze.  3.  20  he  shaU  die  in  his  sin,  and  his  righteous. 
16.  51  Neither  hath  Samaria  committed,  .thy  sins 
16.  52  bear  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins  that  th. 
18.  14  that  seeth  all  his  father's  sins  which  he  ha. 
18.  21  if  the  wicked  will  turn  from  allhissins 
18.  24  in  his  sin  that  he  hath  sinned,  in  them  sh. 
21.  24  so  that  in  all  your  doings  your  sins  do  ap. 

33.  10  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins  (be)  up. 


SIN 


Eze.  33.  14  if  he  turn  from  his  sin,  and  do  that  which 

33.  16  None  of  his  sins  that  he  hath  committed 

Dan.   9.  20  praying,  and  confessing  my  sin  and  the  sin 

9.  24  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make  rec. 

Hos.    4.   8  They  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  people,  and  th. 

8.  13  now  will  he.. visit  their  sins:  they  shall 

9,  9  will  remember,  .he  will  visit  their  sins 

10.  8  The  highplaces  also  of  Aven,  the  sin  of  Is. 
1 3. 12  The  iniquity  of  Ephrai  m . .  his  sin  (is)  hid 

Amos. 5.  12  For  I  know  your,  .mighty  sins:  they  aff 

Mic.    1.    5  For  the  transgression,  .and  for  the  sins  of 

1.  13  she  (is)  the  beginuing  of  the  sin  to  the  da. 

3.  8  his  transgression,  and  to  Israel  his  sin 
6.    7  the  fruit  of  my  body  (for) the  sin  of  my  so 

6.  13  making  (thee)  desolate  because  of  thy  sins 

7.  19  thouwilt  castalltheirsins into  the  depths 
Zech  13.    1  a  fountain  opened,  .for  sin  and  fur  unci 

7.  Sin,  'QQ  chaiai. 

Dan.   4  27  break  off  thy  sins  by  righteousness,  and 

Siltiiquity,  ]i^  avon. 

1  Ki  17.  18  art  thou  come  unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to 

9.  Trespass,  transgression,  y€'$  pesha. 

Prov  10  12  stirreth  up  .but  love  covereth  all  sins 
to.  19  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin 
28.  13  Hethat  covereth  hissmsshallnot  prosper 

10.  A  sin,  transg?  ession,  k/j.apTV]f.<.a  hamartoma. 
Mark  3.  28  All  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto  the  sons  of 

4.  12  and  !(their)sins]  should  beforgiven  them 
Rom.  3.  75  for  the  remission  ol  sins  that  are  past 

i  Co.   6.  18  Every  sin  that  aman  doeth  is  without  the 

11.  Sin,  error,  sin  offering,  afxapria  kamarlia. 
Matt.  1.  21  forhe  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins 

3.    6  baptized  of  him. .  confessing  their  sins 
9.    2  be  of  good  cheer  ;  thy  sins  be  forgiven 
9.    5  to  say,  (Thy) sins  be  forgiven  thee;  or  to 
9.    6  Son  of  man  hath  power,  .to  forgive  sins 

12.  31  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall 
26.  28  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins 

Mark  r.  4  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins 

1.  5  were  all  baptized,  .confessing  their  sins 

2.  5  he  said.  .Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee 
2.  7  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only? 

2.    9  is  it  easier  to  say . .  (Thy)  sins  be  forgiven 

2.  to  Son  of  man  hath  power,  .to  forgive  sins 
Luke  t.  77  knowledge,  .by  theremission  of  theirsins 

3.  3  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sius 

5.  20  he  said  unto  him,  Man,  thy  sins  are  for 
5.  21  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  alone? 

5.  23  to  say,  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee ;  or  to 
5.  24  Son  of  man  hath  power,  .to  forgive  sins 
7.  47  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven 
7.  48  he  said  unto  her.  Thy  siris  are  forgiven 

7.  49  Who  is  this  that  forgiveth  sins  also  ? 

11.  4  forgive  us  our  sins  :  for  we  also  forgive 
24,  47  remission  of  sins  should  lie  preached  m 

John  1.  29  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world 

8.  21  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  die  in  your  pins 
8. 24  that  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins:  for  if 

8.  24  believe  not.  .ye  shall  die  in  your  sins 
8. 34  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  [of  sin) 

8. 46  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin?  And 

9.  34  Thou  wast  altogether  born  in  sins,  and  do. 
9.  41  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin 
9.  41  We  see;  therefore  your  sin  remaineth 

15.  22  If  I  had  not  come . .  they  had  not  had  eia 
15.  22  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  fortheirsiu 

15.  24  they  had  not  had  sin  :  but  now  have  they 
76.    8  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 

16.  9  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me 

19.  ii  he  that  delivered . .  hath  the  greater  sin 

20.  23  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re. 
Acts   2.  38  be  baptized,  .for  the  remission  of  sins 

3.  19  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  whew 
5  31  give  repentance,  and  forgiveness  of  sins 
7  60  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge 
10.  43  in  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins 

13.  38  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
22.  16  wash  away  thy  sins  calling  on  the  name 
26.  18  that  they  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins 

Rom.  3.    9  proved  both,  .that  they  are  all  under  sin 

3.  20  for  by  the  law  (is)  the  knowledge  of  sin 

4.  7  Blessed  (are)  they,  .whose  sins  are  covered 

4.  8  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin 

5.  12  sin  entered.. the  wrorld,  and  death  by  sin 
5. 13  sin  was  in  the  world  :  but  sin  is  not  imp 
5.  20  wheresin  abounded,  grace  didmuch  more 

5.  21  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even  so 

6.  1  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may 
6.  2  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live 
6.  6  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed 
6.  6  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin 
6.  7  For  he  that  is  dead  is  treed  from  sin 

6.  10  For  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin  once 
6.  11  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto 
6.  12  Let  not  sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal 
6.  13  instruments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin 
6.  14  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you:  for 
6.  16  whether  of  sin  unto  death,  orof  obedience 
6.  1 7  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin,  but  ye  have 
6.  18  Being  then  made  free  from  sin,  ye  became 
6.  20  when  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin,  ye  were 
6.  22  now  being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become 

6.  23  the  wages  of  sin  (is)  death ;  but  the  giftcf 

7.  5  the  motions  of  sins,  which  were  by  the  law 
7.  7  What  shall  we  say  then?  (Is)  the  law  sin  ? 
7.  7  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law :  for 
7.  8,  11  sin,  taking  occasion  by  the  command 
7.  8  For  without  the  law  sin  (was)  dead 


SIN 


Horn.  7.   g  when  the  commandment  came,  sin  revived 
7,  13  sin  that  it  might  appear  sin,  working  de. 

7. 13  that  sin  by  the  commandment  might  be. 

7. 14  spiritual:  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin 

7  17,  20  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that 
7.  23  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members 
7.  25  of  God,  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of  sin 

8  2  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin 
8    3  and  for  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh 

8  10  the  body  (is)  dead  because  of  sin;  but  the 
11.  27  covenant.. when  I  shall. take  away  their  si. 

14  23  for  whatsoever  (is)  not  of  faith  is  sin 

1  C0.15.    3  Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 

15.  17  your  faith  (is)  vain;  ye  are  yet  inyoursius 

15  56(is)sin;  and  the  strength  of  sin  (is)  the  law 

2  Co.   5.  21  made  him  (to  be)  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  s 
Gal.     1.    4  Who  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he  mi. 

2. 17  (is)  therefore  Christ  the  minister  of  sin? 

3.  22  the  Scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  s. 
Eph     2.    1  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins 
Col.     1.  14  In  whom  we  have.,  the  forgiveuess  of  sins 

2.  it  in  putting  off  the  body  [of  the  sins]  of  the 

1  Th.  1. 16  might  be  saved,  to  fill  up  their  sins  always 

2  Th.  2.    3  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  pe. 
1  Ti.    5.  22  neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins 

5.  24  Some  men's  sius  are  open  beforehand,  go. 
iTi.  3.  6  lead  captive  silly  women  laden  with  sins 
Heb.   1.    3  when  he  had  by  himself  purged  our  sins 

2.  17  make  reconciliation  forthe  sins  of  the  pe. 

3.  13  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnessof  sin 

4.  15  tempted  like  as  (we  are,  yet)  without  sin 

5.  1  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices  forsins 
5.   3  by  reason  hereof  he  ought,  .to  offer  for  si. 

7.  27  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins 

8.  12  sins  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember 

9.  26  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
9.  28  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins 
9.  2S  appear  the  second  time  without  siu  unto 

10.  2  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of  s. 
10.  3  remembrance  again  (made)  of  sins  every 
10.  4  the  blood. .of  goats  should  take  awaysins 
10.  6  In  burnt  offerings  and  (sacrifices)  for  sin 
10.  8  burnt  offerings  and  (offering)  for  sin  thou 
10. 11  sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  awaysi. 
10.  i2  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins 

10. 17  their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember 

10. 1 8  where  remission . .  no  more  offering  for  sin 

10.  26  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin 

11.  25  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a se. 
12     1  let  us  lay  aside. -the  sin  which  doth  so  ea. 

12.  4  not  yet  resisted.. striving  agaiust  siu 

13.  11  brought  into  the  sanctuary.. [for sin,] are 
Jas.     1.  15  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  fi. 

2.   9  have  respect  to  persons,  ye  commit  sin 

4,  17  knoweth.  .and  doeth(it)  not,  to  him  it  iss. 

1.  t-  if  he  have  committed  sins,  they  shall  be 

5.  20  death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins 
1  Pe.  2.  22  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 

2.  24  bare  our  sins  .  chat  we.  being  dead  to  sins 


i  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  si 
4.    1  suffered  in  the  flesh  nath  ceased  from  sin 

4.  8  charity  shall  cover  tue  multitude  of  sins 
2  Pe.    1.  9 forgotten  that  r.e  waspurged  from,  .[sins] 

2.  14  cannot  cease  from  siu  ;  beguilingunstab. 

1  Jo    1.7  blood  of  Jesus  .  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin 

1.  8  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive 

1.   9  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and 

1.  9  forgive  us  (our)  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  fr 

2.  2  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins;  and 
2. 12  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  his 

3.  4  Whosoever  committeth  sin.  .for sin. is  the 
3.  5  take  away  our  .-ins;  and  in  him  is  no  sin 
3.    8  He  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil 

3.  9  bom  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin  ;  forhis 
4. 10  his  Son  (to  be)  the  propitiation  for.  .sins 

5.  16  a  sin  (which  is)  not  unto  death,  he  shall 

5. 16  There  is  a  sin  unto  death  :  I  do  not  say 

5. 17  unrighteousness  is  sin  ;  and  there  is  a  sin 
Eev.    1.   5  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 

18.  4  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and 
18.    5  For  her  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven 

ffi.Fdll,  offence,  trespass,  irapdvreDfxaparajptoma. 
Eph.    i.    7  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  rich. 

2.    5  Even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath 
Col.     213  being  dead  in  your  sius,  and  the  uncircu. 
[See  also  Offer,  offering,  punishment,  purification.] 
SIN  (already,  heretofore,  ignorantly),  to  — 
1.2*0  sin,  err,  miss  the  mark,  mn  chata. 

Gen.  20.  6  I  also  withheld  thee  from  sinning  against 
39.  9  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against 
42.  22  saying,  Do  not  sin  against  the  child;  and 
Exod.  9.  27  said  unto  them.  I  have  sinned  this  time 
9.  34  when  Pharaoh  saw.  .lie  sinned  yet  more 
10. 16  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  your  God 
20.20  may  be  before  your  faces,  that  ye  siu  not 
32.  30  Ve  have  sinned .  .and  nowl  will  go  upuu. 
32.  31  this  people  have  sinned,  .and  have  made 
32.  33  Whosoever  hath  sinned  against  me.  him 
Lev.    4.   2  If  a  soul  shall  sin  through  ignorance  ag. 

4.  3  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin  acco. 
4.  3  bring  for  his  sin,  which  he  hath  sinned 
4. 14  which  they  have  sinned  against  it,  is  kn. 
4.  22  When  a  ruler  hath  sinned,  and  done  (so  ) 
4.  23  wherein  he  hath  sinned,  come  to  his  kn. 
4.  27  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  siu  thr. 
4.  28  which  he  hath  sinned,  come  to  his  know. 

4.  28  offering,  .for  his  sin  which  he  hath  sinned 

5.  1  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swear. 
5.  5  shall  confess  that  he  hath  sinned  in  that 
5.  6  offering,  .for  his  siu  which  he  hath  sinned 


891 


Lev.  5.  10  for  his  sin,  which  he  hath  sinned,  and  it 
5.  11  then  he  that  sinned  shall  bring  for  his  of. 
5.  13  as  touching  his  sin  that  he  hath  sinned  in 

5.  15  If  a  soul  commit  a  tresspass,  and  sin  thr. 
5. 17  if  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these  th. 

6.  2  If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  a  tresspass  ag. 
6.    3  all  these  that  a  man  doeth,  sinning  ther. 

6.  4  Then  it  shall  be,  because  he  hath  sinned 
Num.  6.  11  for  that  he  sinned  by  the  dead,  and  shall 

12.  11  done  foolishly,  and  wherein  we  have  sin. 

14.  40  Lo,  we . .  will  go  up . .  for  we  have  sinned 
15. 27  if  any  soul  siu  through  ignorance,  then  he 

15.  28  when  he  sinneth  by  iguorance  before  the 

16.  22  shall  oue  man  sin,  and  wilt  thou  be  wroth 
21;  7  We  have  sinned;  for  we  have  spoken  ag. 
22.  34  Balaam  said. .  I  have  sinned  ;  fori  knew 

32.  23  ye  have  sinned  against  the  LORD :  and  be 
Deut.  1.  41  We  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,  we  will 

9.  16  ye  had  sinned  against  the  Lord  your  God 
9.  18  ye  sinned,  in  doing  wickedly  in  the  sight 

19.  15  in  any  sin  that  he  sinneth  :  at  the  mouth 

20.  18  so  should  ye  sin  against  the  Lord  your 
Josh.  7.  11  Israel  hath  sinned,  and  they  have  also  tr. 

7.  20  Indeed  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord 
Judgm.  10  We  have  sinned  against  thee,  both  beca 

10. 15  We  have  sinned  :  do  thou  unto  us  what. 

11.  27  Wherefore  I  have  not  sinned  against  thee 

1  Sa.    2.  25  If  one  man  sin.  .but  if  a  man  sin  against 

7.  6  said  there.  We  have  sinned  against  the  L. 

12.  10  We  have  sinned,  because  we  have  forsaken 
12.  23  God  forbid  that  1  should  sin  against  the  L 
T4-  33  people  sin  against  the  Lord,  in  that  they 

14.  34  sin  not  against  the  Lord  in  eating  with 

15.  24  said  unto  Samuel,  I  have  sinned    for  lha 
15.  30  Then  he  said,  I  have  sinned  :  (yet)  honour 
19.   4  Let  not  the  king  sin  against  his  servant 
19.    4  because  he  hath  not  sinned  against  thee 

19.  5  wherefore  then  wilt  thou  sin  against  iun. 
24.  11  have  not  sinned  against  thee;  yet  thou 
26.  21  Then  said  Saul,  I  have  sinned  :  return,  my 

2  Sa.  12  13  said  unto  Nathan,  I  have  sinned  against 

19  20  thy  servant  doth  know  that  I  have  sinned  i 
24.  10  have  sinned  greatly  in  that  1  have  done 
24.  17  have  sinned,  aud  I  have  done  wickedly 

1  Ki.   8.  33  because  they  have  sinned  against  thee, and 

8.  35  because  they  have  sinned  against  thee ;  if 
8.  46  sin  against  thee,  .no  man  that  sinneth  not 

8  47  We  have  sinned,  and  have  done  pervers. 
8.  50  forgive  thy  people  that  have  sinned  aga. 

14.  16  sins  of  Jeroboam,  who  did  sin,  and  who 

15.  30  sins  of  Jeroboam  which  he  sinned,  and 

16.  13  sins  of  Elah  his  son,  by  which  they  sinned 
16.  19  For  his  sins  which  he  sinned  in  doing  evil 
18.    9  What  have  I  sinned,  that  thou  wouldest 

2  Ei.  17.    7  children  of  Israel  bad  sinned  against  the 

21.  17  all  that  he  did,  and  bis  sin  that  he  sinned 

1  Ch.21.    8  Ihavesinnedgreatly  because  I  have  done 

21.  17  even  I  it  is  that  have  sinned,  and  done  ev 

2  Ch.   6  22  If  a  man  sin  against  bis  neighbour 

6.  24,  26  because  they  have  sinned  against  thee 
6. 36  If  they  sin.  for.  .no  man  which  sinneth  not 
6.  37  We  have  sinned,  we  have  done  amiss,  and 

6.  39  forgive  thy  people  which  have  sinned  ag 
Neh.    1.    6  sins  .which  we  have  sinned  against  thee 

1.  6  both  1  and  my  father's  house  have  sinned 
6  13  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so.  and  sin.  aud 

9  29  sinned  against  thy  judgments  which  if  a 
13  26  Did  not  Solomon  king  of  Israel  sin  by  th 

Job     1     3  It  may  lie  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 

1.  ?2  In  allthisJobsinnednot  norchargedGod 

2.  10  In  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  lips 
5.  24  shalt  visit  thy  habitation,  aud  shalt  not  sin 

7.  20  I  have  sinned:  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee 

8.  4  If  thy  children  have  sinned  against  him 
10.  14  If  I  sin.  then  thou  markest  me.  and  thou 
24.  19  (so  doth)  the  grave  (those  which)  have  si 
31.  30  Neither  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  siu 

33.  27  say,  I  have  sinned,  aud  perverted  (that 
35.    6  If  thou  sinnest.  what  doest  thou  against 

Psa.    4.    4  Stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not:  commune  with 

39.  1  take  heed,  that  I  sin  noi.with  my  tongue 
41.  4  Heal  mysoul;  for  I  havesinned  against  th 
51.  4  Against  thee,  thee  only, havelsinned. and 
78.  r7  sinned  yetmore  against  him  by  provoking 
78.  32  For  all  this  they  sinned  still  and  believed 

106.    6  Wehave  sinned  with  our  fathers,  we  have 

ng  11  have  I  hid.  .that  1  might  not  sin  against 

Prov.  8  36  But  he  that  sinneth  against  me  wrougeth 

14.  21  He  that  despiseth  his  neighbour  sinneth 

19     2  and  he  that  hasteth  with  (his)  feet  sinneth 

20.  2  provoketh  him  to  anger  sinneth  (against) 
Eccl.  7.  20  (there  is)  not  a  just  man.  .that,  sinneth 
Isa.  4224  be  against  whom  we  bave  sinned?  forthey 

43  27  Thy  first  father  hath  sinned,  and  thy  tea. 
64.    5  thou  art  wroth;  for  we  have  sinned:  in  th 
Jer.     2.  35  because  thou  sayest,  I  have  not  sinued 

3.  25  for  we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  our 
8.  14  because  we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord 

14.    7  backslidings  are  many;  we  have  sinned 
14.  20  We  acknowledge,  .for  wehave  sinned  ag 
33.    8  whereby  they  have  sinned  against  me;  and 
33.    8  their  iniquities  whereby  they  have  sinned 

40.  3  ye  havesinned  against  the  Lord  and  have 
44.  23  ye  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  and  have 
50.    7  they  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,  the 
50.  T4  for  she  hath  sinned  against  the  Lord 

Lam.  1.  -8  Jerusalem  hath  grievously  sinned;  there. 
5.  7  Our  fathers  have  sinned,  (and)  are  not 
5.  16  fallen,  .woe  unto  us  that  we  have  sinned 
Eze.  3.  21  the  righteous  sin  not,  and  he  doth  uotsin 
14.  13  the  land  sinneth  against  me  by  trespassing 
18.  4,  20  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die 


Mie. 
Ilab. 
Zeph. 


Rom. 


t  Co. 


5- 
6. 
6. 
7.  28  i 


Eph 
t  Ti. 


>  Pe. 
1  Jo. 


SIN 


Eze.  18.  24  in  his  sin  that  he  hath  sinned,  in  them 

28.  16  thou  hast  sinned  :  therefore  I  will  cast 
33.  12  (righteousness)  in  the  day  that  he  sinneth 
37.  23  dwelling  places,  wherein  they  bave  sinned 

Dan.    9.    5  We  have  sinned,  and  bave  committed  in. 
9.    8  because  we  sinned  against  thee 
o.  11  because  we  have  sinned  against  him 

9.  15  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  wickedly 
Hos.   4     7  As  they  were  increased,  so  theysinned  a. 

8.  11  altars  to  sin,  altarsshall  be  unto  him  to  s. 
10.  9  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Giueah 
n.  2  they  sin  more  and  more,  and  have  made 
.  9  because  I  have  sinned  against  him,  until 
.  10  consulted  shame,  .and  hast  sinned  (agai.) 
.  17  because  they  have  sinned  against  the  Lo. 

"2.  To  do,  make,  7tip%  asoJi. 

Nunii5.  29  shall  have  one  law  for  him  that  sinneth 

3.  To  err,  go  astray,  }yj  shagag. 

Numis-  28  for  the  soul  that  sinneth  ignorantly 

4.  To  err,  go  astray,  na»  shagah. 

Lev.     4  13  if  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  siu  th. 

5-  To  sin,  err,  miss  the  mark,  a/xaprdva  hamartanO. 

Matt  18.  21  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me 

27.   4  I  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the 

Luke  15  iS,  21  Father  I  have  sinned  against  Heaven 

John  5.  14  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thingcomeauto 

8.  ii  (Neither  do  I  condemn  thee  ;  go,  and  sin] 

9.  2  who  did  sin,  this  manor  his  parents,  that 
o.    3  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his. pa. 

12  as  many  as  have  sinned  without  law  shall 
12  as  many  as  have  sinned  in  thelawshallbe 
23  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the 
i2  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned 
14  over  them  that  have  not  sinned  after  the 
16  nut  as  (it  was)  by  one  [that  sinned),  so  is 
5  shall  we  sin,  because  we  are  uot  under 
8  he  that  committeth  fornication  sinneth 
aud  if  thou  marry,  thou  hast  not  sinned 
7.  28  and  if  a  virgin  marry,  she  hath  not  sinned 

7.  36  let  him  do  what  he  will  he  sinneth  not 

8.  12  when  ye  sin  so.  .ye  sin  against  Christ 
15.  34  Awake  to  righteousness,  and  siu  not:  for 

4.  26  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not;  letnot  the  sun 

5.  20  Them  that  sin  rebuke  before  all.  that 
Titus  3.  11  and  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  himself 
Heb.   3.  17  (was  it)  not  with  them  that  had  sinned 

1.  26  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  rec. 
•.   4  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  tinned 
l.  10  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we 
2.    1  these  things  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin 

2.  1  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  anadvocatewith 

3.  6  in  him  sinneth  not :  whosoeversinneth 
3.    8  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning 

3.  g  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  bom  of  God 
5  16  If  any  man  see  his  brother  sin  a  sin  (wb. 
5.  ifi  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  thatsinnofe 
5.  18  whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not 

6.  To  sin  beforehand  or  publicly,  irpoafiapravta. 
2  Co.  12.  21  I  shall  bewail  many  which  have  sinced 
13.    2  to  them  which  heretofore  have  sinned 

SIN,  without  — 

Without  sin,  apafxdpTijros  cniamartelos. 

John  8.    7  [He  thatiswithout  sinamongyou.lethimj 

SIN.  to  cause,  make  to  — 

To  cause  to  sin,  Nan  chata,  5. 

Exod23.  33  lest  they  make  thee  sin  against  me  :  for 
Deut?4.    4  thou  shalt  not  cause  the  land  to  siu,  wli. 

1  Ki  1-4;  16  sins  of  Jeroboam,  .who  made  Israel  to  sin 

15,  26,  34  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Israel  to  s. 

15.  30  which  he  made  Israel  sin,  by  his  provoc. 

16.  2  hast  made  my  people  Israel  to  sin.  to  pr. 
16.  13  by  which  they  made  Israel  to  sin.  in  pra 
16.  19  his  sin  which  he  did,  to  make  Israel  to  s. 

16.  26  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Israel  to  sin 
2i  22  wherewith  thou  hast . .  made  Israel  to  sin 
22  52  the  son  of  Nebat.  who  made  Israel  to  sin 

2  Ki.   3    3  son  of  Nebat,  which  made  Israel  to  sin 

10.  29  the  son  of  "Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin 
10  31  sinsof  Jeroboam,  which  made  Israel  to  sin 
13.    1  son  of  Nebat,  which  made  Israel  to  siu 
13.    6  house  of  Jeroboam,  who  made  Israel  sin 

13.  11  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  sin 

14.  24  the  sou  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin 

15.  9  18.  24  son  of  N.,  who  made  Israel  to  sin 
15.  28  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin 

17.  21  Jeroboam  drave  Israel  .and  madethem  s. 
21.  11  hath  made  Judah  also  to  sin  with  his  id. 
2i.  16  his  sin  wherewith  he  made  Judah  to  sin 
23.  15  son  of  Nebat.  who  made  Israel  tosiu,  had 

Neb.  13  26  him  did  outlaudish  women  cause  to  sin 
Eccl.  5.    6  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  sin;  neither  s. 
Jer.  32.  35  do  this  abomination,  tocause  Judahtosin 

SIN  offering  — 

I. Sin  offering,  n^arr  chotaah, 

Psa.  40.    6  burnt  offering  and  sin  offering  hast  thou 
2. Si)i  offering,  N;un,  nsan  chattaah,  chattayah. 

Ezra'  6. 17  for  a  sin  offering  for  all  Israel,  twelve  he. 
o.Sin  offering,  n&terj  chattath. 

Eiod.20.  14  fire  without  the  camp :  it  (is)  a  sin  offer. 

29.  36  offer  every  day  a  bullock  (for)  a  sin  offer. 
30. 10  with  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  of  ato. 

Lev,    4.   3  bullock,  .unto  the  Lord  for  a  sin  offering 

4.  8  the  fat  of  the  bullock  for  the  sin  offering 
4.  20  did  with  the  bullock  for  a  sin  offering,  so 


SINA 


892 


SING 


Lev.  4.  21  it  (is)  a  sin  offering  for  the  congregation 
4.  24  offering  before  the  Lord  :  it  (is;  a  sin  off. 
4.  25  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering 
4-  29>  33  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sin  offering 
4.  29  bid  offering  in  the  place  of  the  burnt  off. 
4.  32  if  he  bring  a  lamb  for  a  sin  offering,  he  sh. 
4. "33  slay  it  for  a  sin  offering  in  the  place  wh. 

4.  34  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering 

5.  6  a  kid  of  the  goats,  for  a  sin  offering;  and 
5.    7  one  for  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other  for 
5.   8  offer  (that)  which  (is)  for  the  sin  offering 
5.    9  sprinkle  of  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering 
5.    g,  11,  12  it  (is)  a  sin  offering 

5.  11  an  ephah  of  fine  flour  for  a  sin  offering 

6.  17  as  (is)  the  sin  offering,  and  as  the  trespass 
6.  25  This  (is)  the  law  of  the  sin  offering:  In  the 
6.  25  shall  the  sin  offering  be  killed  before  the 

6.  30  no  sin  offering,  whereof  (any)  of  the  bio. 

7.  7  As  the  sin  offering  (is),  so  (is)  the  trespass 

7.  37  This  (is)  the  law . .  of  the  sin  offering,  and 

8.  2  bullock  for  the  sin  offering,  and  two  rams 
8.  14  brought  the  bullock  for  the  sin  offering 

8.  14  the  head  of  the  bullock  for  the  sin  offer. 

9.  2  Take  thee  a  young  calf  for  a  sin  offering 
9.  3  Take  ye  a  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offer. 
9.  7  Go  unto  the  altar,  and  offer  thy  sin  offer. 
9.  8  slew  the  calf  of  the  sin  offering  which  (was) 
<j.  to  the  caul  above  the  liver  of  the  sin  offer. 
9.  15  took  the  goat,  which  (was)  the  sin  offer. 
9. 22  came  down  from  offering  of  the  sin  offer. 

10..16  diligently  sought  the  goat  of  the  sin  offe. 
10.  17  Wherefore  have  ye  not  eaten  the  sin  offe. 
10. 19  this  day  have  they  offered  their  sin  offeri. 
10.  19  I  had  eaten  the  sin  offering  to  day,  should 
12.  6  turtle  dove,  for  a  sin  offering,  unto  the  do. 
12.  8  the  other  for  a  sin  offering  :  and  the  priest 
14. 13  where  he  shall  kill  the  sin  offering  and  the 
24.  13  for  as  the  sin  offering  (is)  the  priest's,  (so 
14.  19  priest  shall  offer  the  sin  offering,  and  ma. 
14.  22  one  shall  be  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 

14.  31  the  one  (for)  a  sin  offering,  and  the  other 
15  15  the  oue  (for)  a  siu  offering,  and  the  other 

15.  30  priest  shall  offer  the  one  (for)  a  sin  offer. 

16.  3  with  a  young  bullock  for  a  sin  offering,  and 
16.  5  two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering,  and 
16.  6  shall  offer  his  bullock  of  the  siu  offering 
16.  9  And  Aaron  shall,  .offer  him  (for)  a  sin  off. 
16.  11  shall  bring  the  bullock  of  the  sin  offering 
36. 11  kill  the  bullock  of  the  sin  offering  which 
16.  15  Then  shall  he  kill  the  goat  of  the  sin  off. 
16.  25  fat  of  the  siu  offering  shall  he  burn  upon 
16.  27  sin  offering,  and  the  goat  (for)  the  sin  off. 
23.  19  sacrifice  one  kill  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  off. 

Num.  6.  11  priest  shall  offer  the  one  for  a  sin  offering 

6.  14  one  ewe  lamb . .  for  a  sin  offering,  and  one 

6  16  offer  his  sin  offering,  and  his  burnt  offeri 

7.  16  One  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 
{So  in  verse  22,  28,  34,  40,  46,  52,  58,  64.  70,  76,  82  ] 

7.  87  kids  of  the  goats  for  sin  offering  twelve 

8.  8  bullock  shalt  thou  take  for  a  siu  offering 
8. 12  thou  shalt  offer  the  oue  (for)  a  sin  offering 

15.  24  and  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering 
15.  25  their  sin  offering  before  the  Lord,  for  til. 
15.  27  she  goat  of  the  first  year  for  a  sin  offering 

18.  9  every  sin  offering  of  theirs,  .which  they 

28  15  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering  un. 

28.  22  one  goat  (for)  a  sin  offering,  to  make  an 

29  5,11  16.  19.  25  kid  of  the  goats  (for)  a  sin  o. 
29  11  beside  the  sin  offering  of  atonement,  and 
29  22,  28,  31,  34   38  one  goat  (for)  a  sin  offering 

2  Ch.  29.  2 1  they  brought  .  seven  he  goats,  for  a  sin  off. 

29.  23  (for)  the  sin  offering  before  the  king  and 
29.  24  burnt  offering  and  the  sin  offering  (should 

Ezra  8.  35  twelve  he  goats  (for)  a  sin  offering :  all  (th. 
Neh.  10.  33  for  the  sin  offerings  to  make  an  atoneme. 
£ze    40.  39  to  slay  thereon.,  the  sin  offering,  and  the 

42.  13  the  sin  offering,  and  the  trespass  offering 

43.  19  shalt  give,  .a  young  bullock  for  a  siu  off. 
43.  21  take  the  bullock  also  of  the  sin  offering 
43.  22  shalt  offer  a  kid . .  for  a  sin  offering 

43.  25  prepare  every  day  a  goat  (for)  a  sin  offer. 

44.  27  he  shall  offer  his  sin  offering,  saith  the  L. 

44.  29  and  the  sin  offering,  and  the  trespass  off. 

45.  17  he  shall  prepare  the  sin  offering,  and  the 
45. 19  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering 
45.  22  for  all.  .a  bullock  (for)  a  sin  offering 

45. 23  a  kid  of  the  goats  daily  (for)  a  sin  offering 

45.  25  according  to  the  sin  offering,  according  to 

46.  20  the  trespass  offering  and  the  sin  offering 

SI'-NA,  SI'-NAI,  TP  cliffs,  ^iva. 
A  mountain  between  the  gulfs  of  Suez  and  AJeaba,  with 
three  large  tops;  the  N. -Eastern  one  is  called  Horeb, 
and  the  S;  -Western  one  St  Catherine.  The  wilderness 
of  Sinai  is  particularly  the  plain  Sebayeh  at  the  south 
of  Gebet  Mousa. 

Exodi6.   1  wilderness  .which (is) between Elim and S, 

19.  i  came  they  (into)  the  wilderness  of  S. 

19.    2  were  come  (to)  the  desert  of  S.,  and  had 
19. 11  the  sight  of.  .the  people  upon  mount  S. 
19.  18  S.  was  altogether  on  a  smoke,  because  the 
19.  20  the  Lord  came  down  upon  mount  S.,  on 
19.  23  The  people  cannot  come  up  to  mount  S 
24. 16  glory  of  the  Loud  abode  upon  mount  S. 
31.  18  of  communing  with  him  upon  mount  S. 
34.   2  come  up  in  the  morning  unto  mount  S. 
34.   4  went  up  unto  mount  S,,  as  the  Lord  had 
34.  29  Moses  came  down  from  mounts  with  the 
34  32  Lord  had  spoken  with  him  in  mount  S. 
Lev.    7.  ?8  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  in  mounts. 

7  38  their  oblations  unto  the  Lord,  iu . .  8 
?b    1  the  Lord  spuke  uuto  Moses  in  mount  S 


Lev.  26.  46  laws  which  the  Lord  made,  .iu  mount  S. 

27.  34  for  the  children  of  Israel  in  mount  S. 
Num.  1.    1  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 

1.  19  numbered  them  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 
3.  1  the  Lord  spake  with  Moses  in  mount  S. 
3.    4  offered  strange  fire.. in.. wilderness  of  S. 

3.  14  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 
9.  1  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  willderness  of  S. 
9.    5  kept  the  passover . .  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 

10.  12  their  journeys  out  of  the  wilderness  of  S. 
26.  64  numbered.  .Israel  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 

28.  6  which  was  ordained  in  mount  S.  for  a  sw. 
33.  15  And  they.,  pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 
33. 16  And  they  removed  from  the  desert  of  S. 

Beut33.    2  And  he  said,  The  Lord  came  from  S.and 
J  udg.  5.    5  mountains  melted,  .(even)  that  S.  from  bef. 
JVeh.  9.  13  Thou  earnest  down  also  upon  mount  S. 
Psa.  68.    8  S.  itself  (was  moved)  at  the  presence  of 
68.  17  the  Lord  (is)  among  them,  (as)  in  S.,  in 
Acts    7.  30  appeared . .  in  the  wilderness  of  mount  S. 
7.  38  which  spake  to  him  in  the  mount  S.,  and 
Gal.    4.  24  the  one  from  the  mounts.,  which  gende. 

4.  25  For  this  Agar  is  mount  S.  in  Arabia,  and 

SINCE,  even,  that  time  — 

l.From  then ,  from  that  time,  1NJ?  meaz. 

Exod.  4.  10  neither  heretofore,  nor  since  thou  hast  sp. 
Josh  14. 10  even  since  the  Lord  spake  this  word  unto 
Isa.   16. 13  spoken  concerning  Moab  since  that  time 

I.  After,  ttjn  achar. 

Gen.  46.  30  let  me  die.  since  I  have  seen  thy  face.  be. 
S.Tf,  cn  im. 

Jer.  23.  38  since yesay,  Theburden  of  theLoRD;  the. 
4.  That,  since,  ^  dai. 

Jer.   20.    8  since  I  spake,  I  cried  out,  I  cried  violence 
31.  20  for  since  I  spake  against  him,  I  do  earne. 
48.  27  since  thouspakest  of  him,  thou  skippedst 
o.From,  |p  min. 

Exodio.    6  since  the  day  that  they  were  upon  the  ea. 

6.  Hitherto,  nir\  ny  ad  hennah. 

Gen.  44.  28  he  is  torn  in  pieces;  and  I  saw  him  not  si. 

7.  That,  because,  '3  ki. 

Josh.  2.  12  since  I  have  showed  you  kindness,  that  ye 
S.From,  )p  min. 

2  Ki.21. 15  since  the  day  their  fathers  came  forth  out 
9.  Even  from,  |p?  lemin. 

Exod.  9. 18  since  the  foundation  thereof  even  until 
10. From,  }?  min. 

Ezra  5. 16  since  that  time  evenuutilnowhathitbeen 

II.  Yet,  still,  again,  while,  any  nwre,  liy  od, 
Deut  34.  10  there  arose  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel 

12.  From,  euro  (ov)  apo  (holt,). 

Matt  24.  21  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this 

Luke  1-  70  which  have  been  since  the  world  began 

7.  45  this  woman  since  the  time  I  came  in  hath 

16.  16  since  that  time  the  kingdom  of  God  is  pr. 

24.  21  to  day  is  the  third  day  since  these  thiugs 

Acts    3.  2t  spoken  by.  .his  holy  prophets  since24.11. 

Col.     1.   6  since  the  day  ye  heard  (of  ifcj,  and  knew 

1.  9  we  also,  since  the  day  we  heard  (it),  do 
Heb.  9.  26  suffered  since  the  foundation  2  Pe.  3.  4. 

lB.Out  of,  e«  el: 

John  9  32  Since  the  world  began  was  it  not  heard 
14.  If  then,  since  then,  eVtt  epei. 

2  Co.  13.    3  Since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking 
15. Since  then,  truly,  eVtiS^  epeide. 

1  Co.  1 5.  2 1  since  by  man  (came)  death,  by  man  (came) 

16.//*/o  the  midst  of,  after,  nerd  (ace.)  metd. 

Heb.   7.  28  the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the 

17.*S*o  that,  ws  has. 

Mark  9.  21  How  long  is  it  ago  since  this  came  unto 

SINCERE,  sincerely,  sincerity  — 

1. Perfect,  whole,  complete,  plain,  D\p$  tamim. 
Josh. 24.  14  and  serve  him  in  sincerity  and  in  truth 
Judg.  9.  16  if  ye  havedonetruly and  sincerely,  in  that 
9  19  If  ye  then  have  dealt  truly  and  sincerely 

2.Guilelcss,  55o\os  adolos. 

1  Pe.   2     2  As  new  born  babes  desire  the  sincere  mi. 
3.  Purely,  ayi/ajy  hagnds. 

Phil.   1.  16  The  one  preach  Christ,  .not  sincerely,  su. 
i.Incorruption,,  atydapaLa  aplitharsia. 

Eph.    6.  24  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sine. 
Titus  2.    7  (showing)  uncorruptness,  gravity,  [since.] 

''.'•'■/nn'iii\  tnu\  yvyaios  gnesios. 

2  Co.   8.    8  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your  love 

6. Sincerity,  unsullied  brightness,  e'thiKpiveta  eilik. 

1  Co.  5.    8  with  the  unleavened  (bread)  of  sincerity 

2  Co.    1.  12  in  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity,  not  wi. 

2.  17  but  as  of  sincerity,  but  as  of  God,  in  the 

^.Sincere,  wnsullied,  eiAttcpivys  eiWcrines. 

Phil.    1.  10  that  ye  may  be  sincere  and  without  offe. 
SINEW  — 
1.  Sinew,  nerve,  t?  gid. 

Gen.  32.  32  theehildren  of  Israel  eat  not<of)thesiue\v 
32.  32  the  hollow  of  Jacob  s  thigh  in  the  sinew 
Job    10.  11  hast  fenced  me  with  nones  and  sinews 
40.  17  the  sinews  of  his  stones  are  wrapped  tog. 


Isa.   48.    4  thy  neck  (is)  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  brow 

Eze.  37.    6  I  will  lay  sinews  upon  you,  and  will  bring 
37.   8  the  sinews  and  the  flesh  came  up  upon  th. 
2.  Toffee,  gnaw,  wink,  pny  araq. 

Job  30.  17  My  bones  are  pierced,  .my  sinews  take  no 
SLNFTJL,  sinner  — 
1. Sinful,  sinner,  erring  one,  NBn  chata. 

Prov.11.  31  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  sinner 
13.  22  the  wealth  of  the  sinner  (is)  laid  up  for  the 

Eccl.   2.  26  to  the  sinner  he  giveth  travail,  to  gather 

7.  26  but  the  sinner  shall  be  taken  by  her 

8.  12  Though  a  sinner  do  evil  an  hundred  times 
g.    2  as  (is)  the  good,  so  (is)  the  sinner;  (and)  he 

9.  18  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good 
Isa.     1.    4  Ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  iu. 

65.  20  the  sinner,  (being)  an  hundred  years  old 

2.  Sinful,  sinner,  erring  one,  KBn  chatta. 

Gen.  13.  13  men  of  Sodom  (were)  wicked  and  sinners 
Xum  16.  38  The  censers  of  these  sinners  against  their 

32.  14  an  increase  of  sinful  men,  to  augmentyet 
1  Sa  15.  18  Go  and  utterly  destroy  the  sinners  the  A. 
Psa.     1.    1  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  si. 

1 .  5  nor  sinners  in  the  congregation  of  the  ri. 

25.  8  therefore  will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  way 

26.  9  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor  my 
si.  13  and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  thee 

104.  35  Let  the  sinners  be  consumed  out  of  the 

Prov.  1.  10  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  th. 

13.  21  Evil  pursueth  sinners :  but  to  the  righte 

23. 17  Let  not  thine  heart  envy  sinners :  but  (lie 

Isa.     1.  28  destruction,  .of  the  sinners  (shall  be)  to. 

13.  9  shall  destroy  the  sinners  thereof  out  of  it 

33.  14  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid ;  fearfulness  ha. 
Amos  9.  10  All  the  sinners  of  my  people  shall  die  by 

Z.Sin,  error,  hnqh  chattaah. 

Amos  9.    8  eyes  of  the  Lord  God  (are)  upon  the  sin. 
A. Sin,  error,  nxan  chattath. 

Prov  13.    6  but  wickedness  overthroweth  the  sinner 

5.  Of  sin,  error,  afxaprlas  (gen.)  hamartias. 

Rom.  8.    3  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  fle. 

6.  Sinful,  sinner, erring  one,  afxaprw\6s  hamart'tlos. 

Matt.  9.  10  many  publicans  and  sinners  came  and  sat 
9.  11  Why  eateth  your  Master  with,  .sinners? 
9.  13  not  come  to  call  therighteous,  but  sinners 

11.  19  Behold,  .a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners 
26.  45  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners 

Mark  2.  15  many  publicans  and  sinners  sat  also  toge. 

2.  16  saw  him  eat  with  publicans  and  sinners 
2.  16  and  drinketh  with  publicans  aud  sinners 
2. 17  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners 

8.  38  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation 

14.  41  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners 
Luke  5.    8  Depart  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man 

5.  30  and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners 

5.  32  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners 

6.  32  for  sinners  also  love  those  that  love  them 
6.  33  what  thank  have  ye?  for  sinners  also  do 

6.  34  sinners  also  lend  to  sinners,  to  receive  as 

7.  34  Behold,  .a friend  of  publicans  and  sinners 
7.  37  a  woman  in  the  city,  which  was  a  sinner 
7.  39  that  toucheth  him ;  for  she  is  a  sinner 

13.    2  these  Galileans  were  sinners  above  all  the 

15.  1  Then  drew  near . .  publicans  and  sinners  for 
15.  2  This  man receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth  wi. 
15-  7  joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  th. 
15. 10  There  is  joy.  .over  one  sinner  that  repen. 

18.  13  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner 

19.  7  to  be  guest  with  a  man  that  is  a  sinner 
24.    7  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  sinful  men 

John  9.  16  How  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such 

9.  24  we  know  that  this  man  is  a  sinner 

9.  25  Whether  he  be  a  sinner  (or  no),  I  know 
9.  31  we  know  that  God  heareth  not  sinners :  but 

Rom   3.    7  why  yet  am  I  also  judged  as  a  sinner  - 
5.    8  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ 
5.  19  For  as  by  one . .  many  were  made  sinners 
7.  13  that  sin.  .might  become  exceeding  sinful 

Gal.    2.  15  We  (who  are)  Jews  by  nature,  and  not  si. 
2.  17  we  ourselves  also  are  found  sinners,  (is) 

1  Ti.    1.    9  for  sinners,  for  unholy  and  profane,  form. 
1.  15  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners 

Heb.   7.  26  separate  from  sinners,  and  made  higher 

12.  -  that  endured  such  contiadiction  of  sinners 
Jas.    4.    8  Cleause(your)hands,(ye)sinners;and  pu. 

5.  20  he  which  cunverteth  the  sinner  from  the 
1  Te.  4.  i8whereshall  the  ungodly  audthesinnerap. 
Jude      15  which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  agai 

7. One  owing,  a  debtor,  b<pet\4rvs  ophedetts. 

Lukei3.    4  that  they  were  sinners  above  all  men  that 

SING  (aloud,  forth,  out),  to  — 

1.  To  sing  praise,  "m  zamar,  3. 

Judg.  5.    3  I  will  sing  (praise)  to  the  Lord  God  of  I. 

Psa.  30.    4  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  0  ye  saints  of  his,  and 
33.    2  sing  unto  him  with  the  psaltery  (and)  an 
57.    9  I  will  sing  unto  thee  among  the  nations 
-',.  17  Unto  thee,  O  my  strength,  will  I  sing:  for 

66.  2  Sing  forth  the  honour  of  his  name ;  make 
66.  4  shall  sing  unto  thee ;  they  shall  sing  (to) 
71.  22  unto  thee  will  I  sing  with  the  harp,  O  thou 
71.  23  My  lips  shall  greatly  rejoice  when  I  sing 
98.    5  Sing  unto  the  Lord  with  the  harp  ;  w  ith 

101.    1  of  merry,  .unto  thee,  O  Lord,  will  I  sing 
Isa.    12.    5  Sing  unto  the  LORD ;  for  he  hath  done  ex. 

2.  To  give  forth  the  voice,  Vip  jru  nathan  got. 
Psa.104.1a  the  fowls,  .(which)  sing  among  the  bran. 


SING 


893 


SISERA 


3.  To  answer,  respond,  n^j;  anah. 

Nunm.  17  Spring  up,  O  well ;  sing  ye  unto  it 

1  Sa.  21.  11  did  they  not  sing  one  to  another  of  him 

29.    s  (Is)  not  this  David,  of  whom  they  sang  one 
Psa.  147.    7  Sing  nuto  the  Lord  with  thanksgiving 
Hos.    2. 15  she  shall  sing  there,  as  in  the  days  of  her 

4.  To  answer,  respond,  n:j;  anah,  3. 

EXOCI32.  18  (but)  the  noise  of  (them  that)  sing  do  I 
Isa.  2/.   2  In  that  day  sing  ye  unto  her,  A  vineyard 
5. Loud  cry  or  singing,  H}1  rinnah. 

2  Ch.20.  22  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to  praise,  the 

6.  To  sing  or  cry  aloud,  } r\  ranan. 

Job    3S.   7  When  the  morning  stars  sang  together 
ProV.29.   6  but  the  righteous  doth  sing  and  rejoice 
Isa.   24. 14  they  shall  sing  for  the  majesty  of  the  Lo. 
35.    6  Then  shall . .  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing 
42.  n  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock  sing,  let 
44.  23  Sing,  0  ye  heavens  ;  for  the  Lord  hath 
49. 13  Sing,  O  ye  heavens;  and  be  joyful,  0  earth 
54.    1  Sing,  0  barren,  thou  (that)  didst  not  bear 
^65. 14  my  servants  shall  sing  for  joy  of  heart,  but 
Jer.   31.   7  Sing  with  gladness  for  Jacob,  and  shout 
Zeph.  3.  14  Sing,  O  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout,  O  Israel 
Zech  2.  10  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion:  for 

7.  To  sing  or  cry  aloud,  ]r\  ranan,  3. 

1  Ch.16.  33  Then  shall  the  trees  of  the  wood  sing  out 
Psa.  51.  14  my  tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  thy  righte. 

59.  16  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  mercy  in  the  mo. 

67. ,  4  O  let  the  nations  be  glad,  and  sing  for  joy 

95.  1  let  us  sing  unto  the  LORD;  let  us  make  a 
145.    7  They  shall,  .sing  of  thy  righteousness 
149.    5  let  them  sing  aloud  upon  their  beds 

Isa.   26. 19  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust 

52.    8  with  the  voice  together  shall  they  sing     - 
52.    9  sing  together,  ye  waste  places  of  Jerusa. 

Jer.  31. 12  they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of 
5r.  4S  all  that  (is)  therein,  shall  singfor  Babylon 

8.  To  cause  to  sing  or  cry  aloud,  jrj  ranan,  5. 
Psa.  8r.  1  Sing  aloud  unto  God  our  strength:  make 

9.  To  sing,  iiff  shur. 

Eze.  27.  25  The  ships  of  Tarshish  did  sing  of  thee  in 

10. To  sing,  Tp  shir, 

E.xodis.    i  Then  saug  Moses  and  the  children  of  Isr. 
15.    1  I  will  sing  unto  the  LoRD.for  he  hath  tr. 

15.  21  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triump. 
Xuni2i.  17  Then  Israel  sang  this  song,  Spring  up,  0 
Judg  5.    1  Then  sang  Deborah  and  Barak  the  son  of 

5.   3  I,  (even)  I,  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  ;  I 
1  Ki.  10. 12  harps  also  and  psalteries  for  singers 
1  Ch.16.    9  Sing  unto  him .  .talk  ye  of  all  his  wondr. 

16.  23  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth  ;  show 
Psa.     7.  title.  Shiggaion  of  David,  which  he  sang  unto 

13.  6  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,  because  he  hath 
21.  13  Be  thou  exalted . .  (so)  will  we  sing  and  pr. 
27.  6  offer . .  sacrifices  of  joy ;  I  will  sing,  yea,  I 
33.  3  Sing  unto  him  a  new  song  ;  play  skilfully 
57.  7  my  heart  is  fixed  ;  I  will  sing  and  give  pr.  • 
59.  16  But  I  will  sing  of  thy  power,  .for  thou  ha. 
65. 13  covered,  .they  shout  for  joy,  they  also  sing 
68.  4  Sing  unto  God.. extol  him  that  rideth  upon 
68.  32  Sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
89.    1  will  sing  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for 

96.  1  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  . .  sing'unto  the  Lord 
g6.  2  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  bless  his  name;  show 
g8.:  1  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song ;  for  he 

101.    1  I  will  sing  of  mercy  and  judgment :  unto 

104.  33  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  as  long  as  I  live 

105.  2  Sing  unto  him,. talk  ye  of  all  his  wondro. 

106.  12  Then  believed  they  his  words  ;  they  sang 
108.    1  I  will  sing  and  give  praise,  even  with  my  * 
I37-    3(SfiyiQgX  Sing  us  (one)  of  the  songs  of  Zion 

137.  4  How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  st. 

138.  5  Yea,  they  shall  sing  in  the  ways  of  the  L. 
144.  9  I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto  thee,  0  God 
149.  1  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song,  (and)  his 

Prov  25. 20  he  that  singeth  songs  to  an  heavy  heart 
Isa.     5.    1  Now  will  I  sing  to  my  well  beloved  a  song 
42. 10  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song,  (and)  his 
Jer.  20. 13  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  praise  ye  the  Lord 

11.  To  sing,  V:r  shir,  3a. 

Zeph.  2.  14  (their)  voice  shall  sing  in  the  windows  ;de. 
12. A  song,  vtyp  shirah. 

Isa.  23. 15  after  the  end.,  shall  Tyre  siug  as  an  harlot 
13.  To  sing  an  ode,  #5a>  add. 

Eph.   5.  19  singing  and  making  melody  in  your  heart 

Col.    3.  16  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  theL. 

Rev.    5.   9  they  sung  a  new  song,  saying,  Thou  art 

14.  3  they  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the 

15.  3  theysingthe  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of 

1  l.Tosing  praisz  witha  musical  i  /istrumen  t,\poi\\cc. 
Rom.  15.    9  I  will  confess.. and  sing  unto  thy  name 

1  Co.  14. 15  will  siug  with  the  spirit,  and  I  will  sing 

SING  for  joy,  to  cause  to  — 

To  cause  to  sing  or  cry  aloud,  ]:"i  ranan,  5. 

Job     29.  13  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  j. 
SING  an  hymn,  praise,  psalms,  to  — 
1.7b  boast,  praise,  S^rr  halal,  S. 

2  CI1.23. 13  singers.,  and  such  as  taught  to  sing  praise 

29.  30  commanded  the  Levites  to  sing  praise  un. 

29.  30  they  sang  praises  with  gladness,  and  they 

2.  To  singpraise  with  a  musical  iyistrument,  \pd\\a>. 

Jas.   5-  1 1  let  him  pray.  Is  any  merry?  let  him  sing  ps. 


3.  To  hymn,  sing  a  hymn,  u/iyito  humneo. 
Matt26.  30  when  they  had  sung  an  hymn,  they  went 
Marki4.  26  And  when  they  had  sung  an  hynin,  they 
Acts  16.  25  Silas  prayed,  and  sang  praises  unto  God 
Heb.   2. 12  in  the  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  pr. 

SING  together  by  course,  to  — 
To  answer,  respond,  .-uj;  anah. 

Ezra  3.  1 1  they  sang  together  by  course  in  praising  and 
SINGED,  to  be  — 
To  be  singed,  ~nn  chared;  2. 

Dan.    3.  27  nor  was  an  hair  of  their  head  singed,  nei. 
SINGER,  (chief,  men,  women)  — 

1.  Singer  of  praise,  musician,  TBI  zammar. 

Ezra  7.  24  any  of  the  priests  and  Levites,  singers,  po. 

2.  To  overlook,  be  pre-eminent,  v&\  natsach,  3. 
Hab.   3. 19  To  the  chief  singer  on  my  stringed  instr. 

S.A  song,  Y»  shir. 

2  Ch.29.  28  the  singers  sang,  and  the  trumpeters  sou. 

4.  To  sing,  *\*p  shir. 

1  Ki.  io.  12  harps  also  and  psalteries  for  singers 

2  Ch.  9. 11  aud  harps  and  psalteries  for  singers 
Psa.  6S.  25  The  singers  went  before,  the  players  on 

87.  7  As  well  the  singers  as  the  players  on  ins. 
Eccl.  2.  8  I  gat  me  men  singers  and  women  singers 
Eze.  40.  44  the  chambers  of  the  singers  in  the  inner 

5.  To  sing,  Tp  shir,  Za. 

1  Ch.  6.  33  Heman  a  singer,  the  son  of  Joel,  the  son 
.  9. 33  tbese(are)  the  singers,  chief  of  the  fathers 

15. 16  (to  be)  the  singers  with  instruments  of  mu. 
15. 19  the  singers,  Heman,  Asaph,  and  Ethan 
15. 27  Levites  that  bare  the  ark,  and  the  singers 
.  15.  27  the  master  of  the  song  with  the  singers 

2  Ch.   5.  12  the  Levites  (which  were)  the  singers,  all 

5. 13  the  trumpeters  and  singers  (were)  as  one 

20.  21  he  appointed  singers  unto  the  Lord,  and 

23.  13  the  singers  with  instruments  of  music,  and 

35.  15  the  singers  the  sons  of  Asaph  (were)  in  tli. 

Ezra    2.  41  The  singers :  the  children  of  Asaph,  anhu. 

2.  70  the  singers,  and  the  porters,  and  the  Net. 

7.    7  the  singers,  and  the  porters,  and  the  Net. 
10. 24  Of  the  singers  also;  Eliashib  :  and  of  the 
Nell.    7.    1  the  s:ngers  and  the  Levites  were  appointed 

7. 44  The  singers:  the  children  of  Asaph, an  bun. 

7.  73  the  singers,  and  (some)  of  the  people,  and 
10.  28  the  singers,  the  Nethininis,  and  all  they 

10.  39  priests,  .and  the  porters,  and  the  singers 

11.  22  the  singers  (were)  over  the  business  of  the 

11.  23  a  certain  portion  should  be  for  the  singers 

12.  28  the  sons  of  the  singers  gathered  themsel. 
12.  29'the  singers  bad  builded  them  villages  ro. 
12.  42  the  singers  sang  loud,  with  Jezrahiah(th.) 
12.  45  the  singers  and  the  porters  kept  the  ward 
12.  46  (there  were)  chief  of  the  singers,  and  songs 

12.  47  gave  the  portions  of  the  singers  and  the 

13.  5  the  singers,  and  the  porters,  and  the  off. 
13.  10  the  singers,  that  did  the  work,  were  fled 

SINGING  (man,  woman) — 

1. Singing,  T?J  zamir. 

Song  2.  12  the  time  of  the  singing  (of  birds)  is  come 

'2.Loud  cry  or  singing,  r\y\  rinnah. 

Psa.  126.   2  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue  with  singing 
Isa.   14.    7  is  quiet:  they  break :forth.into  singing 
44.  23  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  mountains,  0 

48.  20  with  a  voice  of  singing  declare  ye,  tell  th. 

49,  13  and  break  forth  into  singing,  0  mountains 

51. 11  shall  return,  and  come  with  singing  unto 
54.    1  break  forth  into  singing,  and  cry  aloud 

55. 12  shall  break  forth  before  you  into  singing 
'S.To  cry  or  sing  aloud,  Jj"i  ranan,  3. 

Isa.   35.   2  and  rejoice  even  with  joy  and  singing 
4. Singing,  njri  renanah. 

Psa.  100.   2  come  before  his  presence  with  singing 

5.  To  sing,  Yp  shir. 

1  Sa.  18.    6  singing  and  dancing,  to  meet  king  Saul 

2  Sa.  19.  35  the  voice  of  singing  men  and  singing  wo. 
2  Ch.35.  25  the  singing  men  and  the  singing  women 

6.  To  sing,  i"^  shir,  Sa. 

Ezra    2.  65  hundred  singing  men  and  singing  women 
Neh.    7.  67  they  had.  .singing  men  and  singing  wo. 

7.  A  song,  singing,  singer,  Tp  shir* 

1  Ch.  6.  32  they  ministered,  .with  singing,  until  Sol. 

13.   8  with  singing,  and  with  harps,  and  withps. 

2  Ch.23.  18  withrejoicing  and  with  singing,  (as  it  was 
Neh.  12.  27" with  singing,  (with)  cymbals,  psalteries 

SINGING,  to  be  — 

To  be  crying  or  singing  aloud,  j;n  ranan,  4. 

Isa.    16. 10  in  the  vineyards  there  snail  be  no  singing 
SINGLE,  singleness  — 

1.  Freedom  from  duplicity,  airKor-ns  haplotes. 

Eph.  6.    5  with  fear  and  trembling,  in  singleness  of 
Col.    3.  22  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing  God 

2.  Free  from  defect,  unspotted,  airXovs  haplous. 
Matt.  6.  22  if  therefore  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  who. 
Luken.  34  when  thine  eye  is  single,  thy  whole  body 

3.  Freedom,  from  duplicity,  atpexSrns  apJieZoies. 

Acts    2.  46  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart 
SINGULAR,  to  make  — 
To  make  wonderful)  do  wonderfully,  tos  pala,  5. 

Lev.  27.    2  When  a  man  shall  make  a  singular  vow 


SI'-NIM,  DTP. 

A  people  in  the  far  east ;  the  Chinese  ? 

Isa.   49.  12  Behold . .  and  these  from  the  land  of  S. 
SINITES,  Tp. 

A  tribe  of  Cauaanites  in  the  N.  of  Lebanon ;  or  at  Tri- 
polis  or  Orthosia  between  Tripolis  aud  Area. 

Gen.  10.  17  AndtheHivite,  and  theArkite.andtheS. 

1  Ch.  1.  15  And  the  Hivite.and  theArkite,  andtheS. 
SINK  {down,  to  begin  to),  to  (let)— 

1.  To  sink,  ica  taba. 

1  Sa.  17.  49  stone  sunk  into  his  forehead  ;  and  he  fell 
Psa.  69.    2  I  sink  in  deep  mire,  where  (there  is)  no 

69.  14  Deliver  me.  .and  let  me  not  sink :  let  me 
Jer.  38.    6  no  water,  but  mire :  so  Jeremiah  sunk  in 

2.  To  go  down,  tv  yarad. 

Exodis.    5  depths  have  covered  them:  they  sank  in 

3.  To  bend  or  bow  the  knees,  jna  kara. 

2  Ki.  9.  24  smote  Jehoram.  .and  he  sunk  down  in  his 

4.  To  sink,  Vft  tsalal. 

Exodis,  10  sea  covered  them:  they  sank  as  lead  in  the 

5.  To  sink,  ypi?  shaqa. 

Jer.  51.  64  Thus  shall  Babylon  sink,  and  shall  not  rise 

6.  To  go  dovjn,  sink  down,  fivQifa  buthizo. 

Luke  5.    7  both  the  ships,  so  that  they  began  to  sink 

7. To  sink  or  go  down  into  the  sect,  KaraTrovrl^Ofxai. 

Matt  14.  30  beginning  to  sink,  he  cried,  saying,  Lord 

3.7b  bear  or  carry  down,  Kara<p4po}  kataphero. 

Acts  20.  9  sunk  down  with  sleep,  and  fell  down  from 
9.  To  put,  set,  place,  riO^fii  tithemi. 

Luke  9.  44  Let  these  sayings  sink  down  into  your  ears 
SI'-ON,  |N'b'  projecting,  *2,twv. 

1.  The  peak  of  Mount  Hermon ;  called  Sirion  oy  the 
Sidonians,  and  Shcnir  by  the  Amorites. 

Deut.  4.  4S  even  unto  mount  S.,  which  (is)  Hermon 

2.  The  city  of  Zion  or  Jerusalem. 

Matfex.    5  Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  S.,  Behold,  thy 
Johni2.  15  Fearnot.daughterof  S.:  behold,  thy  king 
Rom.  9.  33  I  lay  in  S.  a  stumbling  stone  and  rock  01 

11.  26  There  shall  come  out  of  S.  the  Deliverer 
Heb.  12.  22  But  ye  are  come  unto  mounts.,  and  unto 
1  Pe.  2.    6  Behold,  I  lay  in  S.  a  chief  corner  stone 
Rev.  14.    1  lo ;  aLanibstood  onthe  niountS.,  andwi. 

SLPH'-M0T.H,  THDBty  fruitful. 
A  city  in  Judah. 

1  Sa.30.  28  to(them)  which  (were)inS.,  and  to(them) 
SIP'-PAI,  'Sp  Jah  is  preserver. 

A  son  or  descendant  of  Rapha,  the  gigantic  ancestor  of 
the  Rephaim;  he  is  called  Saph  in  2  Sam.  21.  18,  and 
was  slain  by  Sibbechai  the  Hushathitein  the  days  of 
David.     B.C.  1048. 

1  Ch.20.  4  at  which  time  Sibbechai..  slewS.,  (that  was) 
SLR  — 

I. Lord,  master,  sir,  |Vra  adon. 

Gen.  43.  20  said,  O  sir,  we  came  indeed  down  at  the 
2.A  mem,  male,  husband,  hvrip  aner. 

Acts  7.  26  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren;  whydoye  wrong  one 
14.  15  saying,  Sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things?  We 
19.  25  Sirs,  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have 
27. 10  Sirs,  I  perceive  that  this  voyage  will  be  wj. 
27.  21  Sirs,  ye  should  have  hearkened  unto  me 
27.  25  Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer :  fori  b. 
S.Lord,  master,  sir,  Kvpios  kurios. 

Matt  13.  27  Sir,  didst  not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy 

21.  30  he  answered  and  said,  I  (go)  sir;  and  we. 

27.  63  Sir,  we  remember  that  that  deceiver  said 

John  4.  11  Sir,  thou  hast  nothing  to  draw  with,  and 

4.  15  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not 
4. 19  Sir,  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  prophet 

4. 49  saith  unto  him,  Sir,  come  down  ere  mych. 

5.  7  Sir,  I  have  no  man.  .to  put  me  into  the 

12.  21  desired  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see  Je. 
20. 15  Sir,  if  thou  have  borne  him  hence,  tell  me 

Acts  16.  30  and  said,  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved 
Rev.    7. 14  said  unto  him,  Sir,  thou  knowest.     And 

SI'-RAH,  rnp  turning  aside. 

A  pit,  cistern,  or  well,  near  Hebron. 

2  Sa.   3.  26  brought  him  againfrom  the  well  ofS.:but 

SIR'-ION,  ]:-)b',  \vp  coat  of  mail. 

The  name  given  by  the  Sidonians  to  Hermon,  the  S. 

part  of  Mount  Anti-Libanus. 

Deut.  3.    9  (Which)  Hermon  the  Sidonians  call  S.,  and 
Psa.  29.    6  maketh..  Lebanon  and  S.  likea  youngun. 

SIS-A'-MAIj  *Dpp  Jah  is  distinguished. 

Son  of  Eleasah,  and  father  of  Shallum,  a  descendant  of 

Jerahmeel  son  of  Pharez.    B.C.  1280. 

1  Ch.   2.  40  And  Eleasah  begat  S.,  and  S.  begat  Shal. 

SI-SE'-RA,  JOD'p  mediation,  array. 

1.  Captain  of  the  host  of  Jabin  king  of  Canaan,  and 

killed  by  Jael.    B.C.  1300. 

Judg.  4.  2  the  captain  of  whose  host  (was)  S.,  which 
4.  7 1  will  draw  uuto  thee.  ,S.,  the  captain  of 
j.  9  the  Lord  shall  sell  S.  into  the  hand  of  a 
4.  12  they  showed  S.  that  Barak,  .was  gone  up 

4. 13  S.  gathered  together  all  his  chariots,  (even) 

4. 14  the  Lord  hath  delivered  S.  into  thine  ha. 

4. 15  the  Lord  discomfited  S.,  and  all  (his)  oh. 
4. 15  so  that  S.  lighted  down  (iff  (his)  chariot 


SISTER 


894 


SIT 


Judg.  4.  16  all  the  host  of  S.  fell  upon  the  edge  of  the 
4.  17  S.  fled  away  on  his  feet  to  the  tent  of  Jael 
4.  18  Jael  went  out  to  meet  S.,  and  said  unto 
4,  22  as  Barak  pursued  S.,  Jael  came  out  to  me. 

4.  22  S.  lay  dead,  and  the  nail  (was)  in  his  tern. 

5.  20  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  S. 

5.  26  with  the  hammer  she  smote  S.,  she  smote 

5.  28  mother  of  S.  looked  out  at  a  window,  and 

5.  30  to  S.  a  prey  of  divers  colours,  a  prey  of  di. 

1  Sa.  12.    9  he  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  S.,  captain 

Psa.  83.    9  Do  unto  them . .  as  (to)  S.,  as  (to)  Jabiu,  at 

2.  One  oftheNethinim  whose  descendants  returned  with 
Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  53  The  children  of  Earkos,  the  children  of  S. 

Neh.   7.  55  The  children  of  Earkos,  the  children  ofS. 

SISTER  — 

1.  Sister,  riinx  achoih. 

Gen.  4.  22  and  the  sister  of  Tubal-cain(was)Naaniah 
12.  13  Say,  I  pray  thee,  thou  (art)  my  sister:  that 
12.  19  Why  saidst  thou,  She  (is)  my  sister?  so  I 
20.  2  said  of  Sarah  his  wife.  She  (is)  my  sister 
20.  5  Said  he  not  unto  me,  She  (is)  my  sister? 
20.  12  yet  indeed  (she  is)  my  sister  ;  she  (is)  the 
24.  30  when  he  saw  the .  .bracelets  upon  his  sis. 
24.  30  heard  the  words  of  Rebekah  his  sister,  sa. 
24.  59  they  sent  away  Rebekah  their  sister,  and 

24.  60  Thou  (art)  our  sister,  be  thou  (the  mother) 

25.  20  took  Rebekah  to  wife . .  the  sister  to  Lab. 

26.  7  said,  She  (is)  my  sister :  for  he  feared  to 
26.    9  how  saidst  thou,  She  (is)  my  sister?  And 

28.  9  Mahalath.  .the  sister  of  Nebajoth,  to  be 

29.  13  heard  the  tidings  of  Jacob  his  sister's  son 

30.  1  Rachel  envied  her  sister;  and  said  unto 
30.    8  wrestled  with  my  sister,  and  I  have  pre. 
34.  13  because  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their  sister 
34.  14  to  give  our  sister  to  one  that  isuncircum. 
34.  27  because  they  had  defiled  their  sister 

34.  31  Should  he  deal  with  our  sister  as  with  an 
36.    3  Ishmael's  daughter,  sister  of  Nebajoth 
36.  22  and  Heman ;  and  Lotau's  sister  (was)  Ti. 
46.  17  Isui,  and  Beriah,  and  Serah  their  sister 
Exod.  2.   4  his  sister  stood  afar  off,  to  witjwhat  wo. 
2.    7  Then  said  his  sister  to  Pharaoh's  daughter 

6.  23  Elisheba,  daughter  of  Amminadab,  sister 

15.  20  Miriam  the  prophetess,  the  sister  of  Aar. 
Lev.  18.   9  The  nakedness  of  thy  sister,  the  daughter 

18. 11  she  (is)  thy  sister,  thou  shalt  not  uncover 
18.  12  the  nakedness  of  thy  father's  sister 
18.  13  the  nakedness  of  thy  mother's  sister 
18.  18  Neither  shalt  thou  take  a  wife  to  her  sis. 
20.  17  if  a  man  shall  take  his  sister,  his  father's 
20.  17  he  hath  uncovered  his  sister's  nakedness 

20.  19  mother's  sister,  nor  of  thy  father's  sister 

21.  3  for  his  sister  a  virgin,  that  is  nigh  unto 
Num.  6.    7  his  mother,  for  his  brother,  or  for  his  sis. 

25.  iS  their  sister,  which  was  slain  in  the  day  of 

26.  59  Aaron  and  Moses,  and  Miriam  their  sist. 
Deut  27.  22  Cursed  (be)  he  that  lieth  with  his  sister 
Josh.  2.  13  my  brethren,  and  my  sisters,  and  all  that 
Judg  15.    2  (is)  not  her  younger  sister  fairer  than  she? 
2  Sa.  13.    1  the  son  of  David  had  a  fair  sister,  whose 

13.  2  he  fell  sick  for  his  sister  Tamar ;  for  she 
13.  4  I  love  Tamar,  my  brother  Absalom's  sist. 
13.  5,  6  I  pray  thee,  let  my  sister  Tamar  come 
13.  11  said  unto  her,  Come  lie  with  me,  my  sist. 
13.  20  hold  now  thy  peace,  my  sister :  he  (is)  thy 
13.  22  because  he  had  forced  his  sister  Tamar 
13.  32  the  day  that  he  forced  his  sister  Tamar 
17.  25  the  daughterof  Nahash,. sister  to  Zeruiah 

r  Ki.  11. 19  the  sister  of  his  own  wife,  the  sister  of  T. 
11.  20  the  sister  of  Tahpenes  bare  him  Genubath 

2  Ki.  11.    2  the  daughter  of  king  Joram,  sister  of  A. 

1  Ch.  1.  39  and  Honiara  :  and  Tirana  (was)  Lotan's  si. 

2.  16  Whose  sisters  (were)  Zeruiah,  and  Abigail 

3.  9  sons  of  David  . .  and  Tamar  their  sister. 

3.  19  Hauauiah,  and  Shelomith  their  sister 

4.  3  and  the  name  of  their  sister  (was)  Hazel. 

4.  19  (his)  wife  Hodiali,  the  sister  of  Nahara,  the 

7.  15  Sliuppini,  whose  sister's  name  (was)  Maa. 
7.  iS  his  sister  Hammoleketh  bare  Ishod,  and 

7.  30  Ishuai,  and  Beriah,  and  Serah  their  sister 
7.32  Shomer,  and  Hotham,  and  Shua  their  sis. 

2  Ch.22.  11  for  she  was  the  sister  of  Ahaziah 

Job     1.   4  called  for  their  three  sisters, to  eat  audio 

17.  14  said.  .(Thou  art)  my  mother,  and  my  sis. 

42. 11  all  his  sisters,  and  all  they  that  had  been 

Prov.  7.   4  Sayunto  wisdom, Thou  (art)mysister,and 

Song  4.    9  Thou  hast  ravished  my  heart,  my  sister 

4. 10  How  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  (ray)  spo. 

4. 12  A  garden  inclosed  (is)  ray  sister,  (my)  sp. 

5.  1  I  am  come  into  mygardeii,mysister,(my) 
5.    2  Open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove 

8.  8  We  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  hath  no 
8.    8  what  shall  we  do  for  oursisterin  the  day 

Jer.    3.    7  And  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  saw(it) 
3.    8  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  feared  not 
3.  10  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  hath  not  tu. 
22. 18  (saying),  Ah  my  brother  !  or,  Ah  sister ! 

Eze.  16.  45  and  thou  (art)  the  sister  of  thy  sisters 
16. 4*5  thine  elder  sister  (is)  Samaria,  she  and  her 
16.  46  thy  younger  sister,  that  dwcllcth  at  thy 
16.  48  thy  sister  hath  not  done,  she  nor  her  da. 
x6.  49  this  was  the  iniquity  of  thy  sister  Sodom 
16.  51  hast  justified  thy  sisters  in  all  thine  abo. 
16.  52  Thou  also,  which  hast  judged  thy  sisters 

16.  52  in  tiiat  thou  hast  justified  thy  sisters 

16.  55  Wheu  thy  Bisters,  Sodom  and  her  daugh. 
16.  56  thy  sister  Sodom,  was  not  mentioned  by 
16.  61  wheu  thou  shall  receive'thy sisters,  thine" 

22.  11  another  in  thee  hath  humbled  his  sister 


Eze.  23.    4  Aholah  the  elder,  and  Aholibah  her  sist. 
23.  11  when  her  sister  Aholibah  saw  (this,)  she 
23.  11  in  her  whoredoms  more  than  her  sister 
23.  18  my  mind  was  alienated  from  her  sister 
23.  31  Thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  thy  sister 
23.  32  Thou  shalt  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  deep 
23.  33  filled . .  witli  the  cup  of  thy  sister  Samaria 
44.  25  for  brother,  or  for  sister  that  hath  had  no 

Hos.    2.    1  Say  ye  unto  yuur  brethren,  .your  sisters 

2. Sister j  aSeA^  adelphe. 

Matti2.  50  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,  and 
13.56  And  his  sisters,  are  they  nut  all  with  us? 
19.  29  hath  forsaken  houses,  or  brethren,  or  si. 
Mark  3.  35  the  same  is  ray  brother,  and  my  sister,  and 
6.  3  are  not  his  sisters  here  with  us?  And  til, 
10.29  that  hath  left  house,  or  brethren,  or  sist. 
10.  30  sisters,  and  mothers,  and  children,  and 
Luke  10.  39  she  had  a  sister  called  Mary,  which  also 

10.  40  dost  thou  not  care  that  my  sister  hath 
14.  26  and  children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters 

John  n.    1  the  town  of  Mary  and  her  sister  Martha 

11.  3  his  sisters  sent  unto  hira,  saying,  Lord,  be. 
11.    5  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and 
11.  28  called  Mary hersister secretly,  saying.The 
11.  39  the  sister  of  him  that  wasdead,  saith  unto 
19.  25  his  mother,  and  his  mother's  sister,  Mary 

Acts  23.  16  Paul's  sister's  son  heard  of  their  lying  in 
Rom  16.    1  I  commend  unto  you  Phebe  our  sister,  wh. 

16. 15  Julia,  Nereus,  and  his  sister,  and  Olym. 

1  Co.  7. 15  a  sister  is  not  under  bondage  in  such(ca.) 
9.    5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister 

1  Ti.   5.    2  the  younger  as  sisters,  with  all  purity 
Jas.    2.  15  If  a  brother  or  sister  he  naked,  and  desti. 

2  John    13  The  children  of  thy  elect  sister  greet  thee 
SISTER'S  son  — 

A  cousin -german,  sister  s  son,  avetyws  anepsios. 

Col.    4.  10  Marcus,  sister's  son  to  Barnabas,  touching 
SISTER  in  law  — 
Brother's  wife,  husband's  brothers  wife,  rip?'  yebc, 

Ruth  1.  15  thy  sister  in  law  is  gone backunto  her pe. 
1.  15  said,  .return  thou  after  thy  siste"  inlaw 
SIT  (by,  down,  with,  still,  up,  together*1,  to — 
l.To  brood,  hatch,  lafi  da-gar. 

Jer,  17.  n  (As)  the  partridge  sitteth  (on  eggs),  and 

2.  To  sit  down  or  still,  atf;  yashab. 

Gen.  18.  1  he  sat  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the 
19.  1  Lot  sat  iu  the  gate  of  Sodom :  and  Lotsee. 
ax,  16  satherdownoveragarast(him)agoodway 

21. 16  she  sat  over  against  (him),  and  lift  up  her 
27. 19  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison,  that  thy  soul 

31.  34  had  taken  the  images,  .and  sat  upon  them 

37.  25  they  sat  down  to  eat  bread :  and  they  lif, 

38.  14  satin  au  open  place,  which  (is)  by  the  way 
43.  33  they  sat  before  him,  the  first  horn  accor. 
48.    2  Israel  strengthened  himself,  and  sat  upon 

Exod.  2.  15  But  Moses  fled .  .and  he  sat  down  by  a  w. 

11.  s  the  firstborn  of  Pharaoh  that  sitteth  upon 

12.  29  the  first  born  of  Pharaoh  that  sat  on  his 

16.  3  when  we  sat  by  the  flesh  pots,  (and)  when 

17. 12  put  (it)  under  him,  and  he  sat  thereon 

18. 13  on  the  morrow,  that  Moses  sat  to  judge 

18. 14  why  sittest  thou  thyself  alone,  and  all  the 

32.  6  the  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink 
Lev,  15.    4  every  thing  whereon  he  sitteth  shall  be 

15.  6  that  sitteth  on  (any)  tiling  whereon  he  sat 
15.  20  every  thing  also  that  she  sitteth  upon  sh. 
15.  22  toucheth  any  tiling  that  she  sat  upon  sh. 
15.  23  or  on  any  thing  whereon  she  sitteth,  when 
15.  26  whatsoever  she  sitteth  upon  shall  be  unc. 
Nuni32.  6  your  brethren  go  to  war,  and  shall  ye  sit 
Deut.  6.  7  shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou  sittestinth. 
1 1. 19  speaking  of  them  when  thou  sittest  in  th. 

17.  18  when  lie  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  ki. 
Judg.  3.  20  he  was  sitting  in  asummerparlour,  which 

5. 10  ye  that  sit  in  judgment,  and  walk  by  the 

6.  11  sat  under  an  oak  which  (was)  in  Opnrah 

13.  9  came  again  unto  the  woman  as  she  sat 
19.   6  they  sat  down,  and  did  eat  and  drink  both 

19.  ig  lie  sat  hira  down  in  a  street  of  the  city 

20.  26  sat  there  before  the  LoKl>,  and  fasted  that 
Ruth  2.  14  she  sat  beside  the  reapers:  andhereached 

3.  18  Sitstill,mydaughter,  until  thou  know  how 

4.  1  went  Boaz  up  to  the  gate,  and  sat  him  d. 
4.  1  Ho,  such  a  one  turn  aside,  sit  down  here 
4.    1  And  he  turned  aside,  and  sat  down 

4.   2  said,  Sit  ye  down  here.    And  they  sat  do. 

1  Sa.   1.    9  the  priest  sat  upon  a  seat  by  a  post  of  the 

4.  13  Eli  sat  upon  a  seat  by  the  way  side  watc. 

19.  9  lie  sat  in  his  house  with  his  javelin  in  his 

20.  5  I  should  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king  at  me. 
20.  24  the  king  sat  hira  down  to  eat  meat 

20.  25  the  king  sat  upon  his  seat,  as  at  other  ti. 
20. 25  Abuer  sat  by  Saul's  side,  and  David's  pi. 
28,  23  he  arose  from  the  earth,  and  satupou  the 

2  Sa.    2. 13  they  sat  down,  the  one  on  the  one  side  of 

7.  1  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  sat  in  his 
7.  iS  Then  went  king  David  in,  and  sat  before 

iS.  24  David  sat  between  the  two  gates :  and  the 
19.   8  Then  the  lung  arose,  and  sat  in  the  gate 
23.   8  The  Taehmonite  that  satin  the  seat,  chief 
1  Ki.    1. 13,  17,  24  reign  after  me.  and  he  shall  sit 

1.  20  who  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  my  lord  the 
1.  27  who  should  sit  on  the  throne  of  ray  lord 
1.  30  he  shall  sit  upon  ray  thrune  in  ray  stead 
1.  35  that  he  may  come  and  sit  upon  ray  throne 
1.  46  Solomon  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  the  kin. 

1.  48  which  hath  given  (oue)tositon  my  throne 

2.  i2  Then  sat  Solomon  upon  the  throne  of,Da. 


1  Ki.  2.  19  sat  down  on  his  throne,  and  caused  a  seat 

2.  19  the  king's  mother ;  and  she  sat  on  his  ri. 

3.  6  thou  hast  given  him  a  son  to  sit  on  his  th. 
8.  2osit  on  the  throneof  Israel,  as  the  Lord  pr. 

8.  25  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  sight  to  sit  on 
13.  14  found  him  sitting  under  an  oak  :  and  lie 
13.  20  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  sat  at  the  table 
16.  n  as  soon  as  he  sat  on  his  throne,  (that)  he 
19.   4  came  and  sat  down  under  a  juniper  tree 

21,  13  there  came  in  two  men.,  and  sat  before 

22.  10  the  king  of  Judah  sat  each  on  his  throne 
22. 19  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  his  throne,  and 

2  Ki.  1.   9  and,  behold,  he  sat  on  the  top  of  an  hill 

4.  20  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon,  and  (then) 

4.  38  the  sons  of  the  prophets  (were)  sittingbe. 

6.  32  Elishasat  in  his  house. .the  elders  sat  with 

7.  3  they  said  one  to  another,  Why  sit  we  here 

7.  4  if  we  sit  still  here,  we  die  also.  Now  there. 

9,  5  behold,  the  captains  of  the  host  (were)  s. 

10.  30  children  of.  .fourth  (generation)  shall  sit 

11.  19  And  he  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  kings 
13.  13  Jeroboam  sat  upon  his  throne :  and  Joash 

15. 12  Thy  sons  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel 
18.  27  (hath  he),  .(sent  me)  to  the  men  which  sit 

1  Ch.  17.    1  it  came  to  pass,  as  David  sat  in  his  house 

17. 16  the  king  came  and  sat  before  the  Lord 

28.  5  he  hatli  chosen  Solomon  ray  son  to  sit  up. 

29.  23  Solomon  sat  cm  the  throne  of  the  Lord  as 

2  Ch.  6.  16  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  sight  to  sit  upon 

18.    9  and  Jehoshaphat  king  of  Judah  sateither 
18.   9  they  sat  in  a  void  place  at  the  entering  in 
iS.  18  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  upon  his  throne 
Ezra    9.    3  I  rent  my  garment .  .and  sat  down  aston. 
9.    4  I  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  sacrifice 
10.    9  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the  house 
10. 16  sat  down  in  the  firstday  of  the  tenth  mo. 
Neh.    1.   4  I  sat  down  and  wept,  and  mourned  (cer.) 
2.    9  said  unto  me,  the  queen  also  sitting  by 

8.  17  made  booths,  and  sat  under  the  booths 
Esth.  1.    2  the  king  Ahasuerus  sat  on  the  throne  of 

1.  14  (and)  which  sat  the  first  in  the  kingdom 

2.  19  then  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's  gate 

2.  21  while  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's  gate,  two 

3.  15  the  king  and  Hamau  sat  down  to  drink 

5.  1  the  king  sat  upon  his  royal  throne  in  the 

5.  13  Mordecai  the  Jewsittiugat  theking'sgate 

6.  10  the  Jew,  that  sitteth  at  the  king's  gate 
Job     2.    8  he  took  him  apotsherd.  .andhe  satdown 

2. 13  they  sat  dowu  with  him  upon  the  ground 
29.  25  I  chose  out  their  way,  and  sat  chief,  and 
Psa.     1.    1  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful 

2.    4  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh 

9.  4  thou  satest  in  the  throne  judging  right 
10.    8  He  sitteth  in  the  lurking  places  of  the  vi. 
26.    4  I  have  not  sat  with  vain  persons,  neither 
26.    5  I  have  hated,  .and  will  not  sit  with  the 
29.  10  sitteth  upon  the  flood  ;  yea,  the  LORD  sit. 
47.    8  God  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  holin. 
50.  20  Thou  sittest  (and)  speakest  against  thy 
69.  12  They  that  sit  in  the  gate  speak  against 
99.    1  he  sitteth  (between)  the  cherubim;  let 

107. 10  Such  as  sit  in  darkness,aud  in  the  shadow 
no.  1  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make 
119.  23  Princes  also  did  sit(and)  speak  against  me 
117.  2  to  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows 
132.  12  their  children  shall  also  sit  upon  thy  thr. 
137.  1  we  sat  down :  yea,  we  wept,  when  we  re. 
Prov.  9. 14  she  sitteth  at  the  door  of  her  house,  on  a 

20.  8  A  king  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of  judg. 

23.    1  Wheu  thou  sittest  to  eat  with  a  ruler,  co. 

31.  23  when  he  sitteth  among  the  elders  of  the 
Eccl.io.   6  great  dignity,  and  the  rich  sit  in  low  pla. 
Song  2.    3  I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with  great 
Isa.  „  3.  26  she,  (being)  desolate,  shall  sit  upon  the 

6.    1 1  saw  also  the  Lord  sittingupon  a  throne 

14. 13  I  will  sit  also  upon  the  mount  of  the  con. 

16.  5  he  shall  sit  upon  it  in  truth  in  the  taber. 
28.  6  a  spirit  of  judgment  to  him  that  sitteth 
36.  12  (hath  lie)  not  (sent  me)  to  the  men  that  s. 
40.  22  (It  is)  he  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of 
42.  7  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  pris. 
47.  1  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Bab. 
47.  1  sit  on  the  ground  :  (there  is)  no  throne,  O 
47.    5  Sit  thou  silent,  and  get  thee  into  darkness 

47.  S  I  shall  not  sit  (as)  a  widow,  neither  shall 
4  7. 1 4  (there  shall)  not  (be)  a . .  fire  to  sit  before 
52.    2  sit  down,  0  Jerusalem:  loose  thyself  from 

Jer.  3.  2  in  the  ways  hast  thou  sat  for  them,  as  the 
8. 14  Why  do  we  sit  still?  assemble  yourselves 
13. 13  even  the  kings  that  sit  upon  David's  thr. 
13.  18  Humble  yourselves,  sit  dowu  :  for  your 
15.  17  I  sat  not  in  the  assembly  of  the  mockers  ' 
15.  17  I  sat  alone,  because  of  thy  hand ;  for  thou 
16. "  8  to  sit  with  them  to  eat  and  to  drink 

17.  25  priuces  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David 
22.    2  O  king  of  Judah,  that  sittest  upon  the  th. 
22.    4  kings  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David 
22.  30  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and  ru. 
26.  10  sat  down  in  the  entry  of  the  new  gate  of 

29. 16  the  king  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of 

32.  12  the  Jews  that  sat  in  the  court  of  the  pri. 

33. 17  David  shall  never  want  a  man  to  sit  upon 
36. 12  all  the  princes  sat  there,  (even)  Eliahama 
36. 15  they  said  unto  hira,  Sit  down  now,  and  re. 
36.  22  the  king  sat  in  the  wiuter  house,  in  the, 
36. 30  He  shall  have  none  to  situpon  the  throne 

38.  7  the  king  then  sitting  in  the  gate  of  Beuj. 

39.  3  sat  in  the  middle  gate,(even)Nergal-sha. 

48.  iS  come  down  from  (thy)  glory,  and  sit  in  th. 
Lam.  1,    1  How  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  (that  was) 

2.  10  The  elders  of  the  daughterof  Zion  situp. 

3.  2S  He  sitteth  alone  and  kecpeth  silence,  I  e, 


SIT 


895 


SIX 


Eze.  ,  3. 15  I  sat  where  they  sat,  and  remained  there 
8.    1  in  the  fifth  (day)  of  the  month,  (as)  I  sat  iu 
8.    1  and  the  elders  of  Judah  sat  before  me 
8. 14  behold,  there  sat  women  weeping  for  Ta. 
14.    1  came  certain  of  the  elders,  .andsat  before 
20.    1  came  to  enquire  of  the  Lord,  and  sat  be. 
23.41  satest  upon  a  stately  bed,  and  a  tablepre. 
26.  16  they  shall  sit  upon  the  ground,  and  shall 
28.   2  I  sit  (in)  the  seat  of  God,  iu  the  midst  of 
33.  31  they  sit  before  thee  (as)  my  people,  and 
44.    3  lie  shall  sit  iu  it  to  eat  bread  before  the 
Joel    3. 12  there  will  I  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen 
Jon.    3.   6  covered  (him)  with  sackcloth,  and  sat  in 
4.   5  sat  oa  the  east  side  of  the  city,  and  there 

4.  5  sat  under  it  iu  the  shadow,  till  he  might 
Mic.    4.    4  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine 

7.    8  when  I  sitin  darkuess,  the  LoRD(shallbe) 
Zech.  1. 11  behold,  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is 

3.  8  thou,  and  thy  fellows  that  sit  before  thee 

5.  7  this  (is)  a  woman  that  sitteth  in  the  midst 

6. 13  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne;  and 
Mai.     3     3  he  shall  sit  (as)  a  refiner  and  purifier  of 

3.  To  sit  down  or  still,  3rr  yethib. 

Dan.    7.   9  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  whose  garni. 

7.  26  the  judgment  shall  sit,  and  they  shall  ta. 

4.  To  give  a  place,  Dips  |ra  nathan  maqorn. 

1  Sa.   9.  22  made  them  sitin  the chiefestplace among 

5.  To  be,  come,  go  round  about,  35D  sabab. 

1  Sa,  16.  11  we  will  not  sit  down  till  he  come  hither 
6. To  lie  down,  crouch,  p"i  rabats. 

Deut22.    6  the  dam  sitting  upon  the  young,  or  upon 
7.  To  be  laid  dovm,  nrn  takah,  4. 

Deut33-    3  they  sat  down  at  thy  feet ;  (every  one)sh. 
8.^4  sitting,  session,  rQ^  shebeth. 

Isa.   30.    7  have  I  cried .  .Their  strength  is  (to)  sitst. 

9.  To  sit  up,  ava.<adi fa  anakathizo. 

Luke  7.  islie  that  was  dead  [sat  up],  and  began  tosp. 
Acts   9.  40  eyes :  and  when  she  sawPeter,  she  satup 

10.  To  lie  back,  recline,  avaxtipai  anakeimai. 
Matt  20.  20  when  the  even  was  come,  he  sat  down  wi. 
Mark  14.  iS  as  they  sat  and  did  eat,  Jesus  said,  Verily 

11.  Tolay  down  or  back,  recline,  avaKh'tvco  anaklino. 
Matt.  8.  1 1  That  many . .  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham 

14.  19  commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down  ou 
Luke  1 3.  29  and  shall  sit  dowu  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

12.  To  fall  back,  recline,  avaTriwroi  anapipto. 

Matt  15.  35  he  commanded  the  multitude  to  sit  down 
Mark  6.  40  they  sat  down  in  ranks,  by  hundreds,  and 

8.  6  he  commanded  the  people  to  sit  down  on 
Lukei4.  10  But.  .go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  room 

22.  14  when  the  hour  was  come,  he  sat  down,  and 
John  6.  io,ioMakethemensitdown..Sothemeusatd. 

IB.  To  sit  down,  icadeXo/xat  kathezomai. 

Matt  26.  55  I  sat  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  tern. 

Luke  2.  46  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  both  le. 

John  4.  6  Je.  therefore . .  sat  thus  on  the  well :  (and) 
it.  20  went  and  met  him  :  but  Mary  sat  (still)  in 
20.  12  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting,  the  one 

Acts    6.  15  all  that  sat  iu  the  council,  looking  stedf. 

14.ro  sit  or  put  down,  Ka.9riu.at  kathemai. 

Matt.  4.  16  The  people  which  sat  in  darkness  saw  gr. 

4.  16  to  them  which  sat  in  the  region  and  sha. 

9.  9  saw  a  man  named  Matthew,  sitting  at  the 
11. 16  like  unto  children  sitting  in  the  markets 
13.  1  same  day  went  Jesus .  .and  sat  by  the  sea 
13.    2  so  that  he  went  into  a  ship,  and  sat;  and 

15.  29  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  sat  down 
20.  30  two  blind  men  sitting  by  the  way  side,  wh. 

22.  44  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand,  till  I  make  th. 

23.  22  sweareth.  .by  him  that  sitteth  thereon 

24.  3  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount  of  Olives,  the 
26.  53  went  in,  and  sat  with  the  servants,  to  see 

26.  64  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  ou  the  right  ha. 

25.  69  Now  Peter  sat  without  in  the  palace :  and 
27. 36  And  sitting  down  they  watched  him  v.  iq. 

27.  61  other  Mary,  sitting  over  against  the  sep. 

28.  2  and  rolled  back  the  stone.. and  sat  upon 
Mark  2.   6  there  were  certain  of  the  scribes  sitting 

2. 14  saw  Levi  the  (son)  of  Alpheus  sitting  at 
3.  32  multitude  sat  about  him;  and  they  said 

3.  34  looked  round  about  on  them  which  satab. 

4.  1  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  sat  iu  the  sea 

5.  15  had  the  legion,  sitting,  and  clothed,  and 
10.  46  son  of  Timeus,  sat  by  the  highway  side  be. 

12.  36  [Sit  thou]  on  my  right  hand,  till  I  make 

13.  3  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount  of  Olives,  over 
14. 62  shall  see  the  San  of  man  sitting  on  the  it 

16.  5  they  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right 
Luke  1.  79  To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness 

5.  17  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law  sitting  by 

5.  27  saw . .  Levi,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom 

7.  32  They  are  like  unto  children  sitting  in  the 

8.  35  found  the  man . .  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus 

10.  13  great  while  ago  repented,  sitting  in  sack. 
18.35  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  way  side  be. 
20.  42  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on  my 
22.  55  when  they  h  -1  I  kindled  a  fire..  Peter  sat  do. 
22,  56  certain  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by  the 
22.  6q  Hereafter  shall  the  Son  of  man  sit  on  the 

John  2.  14  And  found  ..the  changers  of  moneysitting 

6.  3  into  a  mountain;  arid  there  he  sat  with  his 

9.  8  said,  Is  not  this  he  that  sat  and  begged? 
12. 15  thy  king  conieth,  sitting  on  an  ass's  colt 

Acts    2.    2  it  filled  all  the  house  where  [they  were  si.] 
2.  34  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  on  my  right 


Rev. 


Acts  3.  10  knew  that  it  was  he  which  sat  for  alms  at 

8.. 28  sitting  in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  pro. 

14.    8  there  sat  a  certain  man  at  Lystra,  impot. 

20.   9  [there  sat]  in  a  window  a  certain  young 

23.   3  for  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after  the  law 

1  Co.  14. 30  be  revealed  to  another  that  sitteth  by,  let 

Col.     3.    1  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 

Heb.    1.  13  Sit  on  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  thine 

Jas.     2.    3  Sit  thou  here  in  a  good  place ;  and  say  to 

2.    3  Stand  thou  there,  or  sit  here  under  myfo. 

2  throne  was  set  in  heaven,  and  (one)  sat  on 

3  [he  that  sat  was  to  look  upon  like  a  jasper] 

4  saw  four  and  twenty  elders  sitting,  clothed 
9  honour  and  thanks  to  him  that  sat  on  the 

10  fall  down  before  him  that  sat  on  the  thr. 

1  saw  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on 

7  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  upon  the  thr. 

1 3  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 

2  behold  a  white  horse  :  and  he  that  sat  on 

4  given  to  him  that  sat  thereon  to  take  pe. 

5  he  that  sat  on  hini  had  a  pair  of  balances 

8  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death,  and 

16  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on 

10  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon 

15  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell 

17  them  that  sat  on  them,  having  breastplates 

16  four  and  twenty  elders  which  sat  before 

14  upon  the  cloud  (one)  sat  like  unto  the  Son 

15  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  sat  on 

16  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  in  his  sic. 

1  great  whore  that  sitteth  upon  many  wat. 

3  saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a  scarlet  coloured 

9  mountains,  on  which  the  woman  sitteth 
15  where  the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and 

7  forshesaith  in  her  heart,  I  sit  a  queen,  and 

4  fell  down  and  worshipped  God  that  sat  on 

11  he  that  sat  upon  him  (was)  called  Faith!. 

18  flesh  of  horses,  and  of  them  that  sat  on  th. 

19  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the  ho. 
21  slain  with  the  sword  of  him  that  sat  upon 

11  great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it 

5  he  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said,  Behold 

or  put  dovm,  Kadi  fa  kathizo. 
4S  sat  down,  and  gathered  the  good  into  ve. 
2S  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  thro. 
28  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  ju. 
21  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the 
23  but  to  sit  on  my  right  hand,  and  on  my  left 

2  The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses' 

31  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  gl. 

36  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder 
35  sat  down,  and  called  the  twelve,  and  saith 

37  Grant  unto  us  that  we  may  sit,  one  on  thy 

40  But  to  sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left 

2  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never  man  sat 
7  brought  the  colt  to  Jesus . .  and  he  sat  up. 

41  Jesus  sat  over  against  the  treasury,  and 

32  saith  to  his  disciples,  Sit  ye  here,  while  I 

19  [received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the] 

20  gave  (it)  again  to  the  minister,  and  sat  do. 

3  sat  down,  and  taught  the  people  out  of  the 
28  which  of  you . .  sitteth  not  down  first,  and 
31  what  king. .  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  co. 

6  Take  thy  bill,  and  sit  down  quickly,  and 
30  a  colt  tied,  whereon  yet  never  man  sat :  1. 
30  sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 

2  [people  came  unto  liim ;  and  he  sat  down] 
14  when  he  had  found  a  young  ass,  sat  there. 

13  sat  down  in  the  judgment  seat  in  a  place 

3  like  as  of  fire,  anditsat  upon  each  of  them 

30  he  would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  thr. 

31  desired  Philip  that  he  would,  .sit  with  him 

21  sat  upon  his  throne,  and  made  an  oration 

14  went  into  the  synagogue,  .and  sat  down 
13  sat  down,  and  spake  unto  the  women  wh. 

6  sitting  on  the  judgment  seat,  commanded 

17  sat  on  the  judgment  seat,  and  commanded 

7  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  10. 
.    4  so  that  he  as  God  sitteth  in  the  temple  of 

3  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 

12  But  this  man . .  satdown  on  the  right  hand 
21  will  I  grant  to  sit..iu  my  throne,  even  asl 

4  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and 

16.  To  lay  or  lie  down,  KaraKtifxai  katakeimai . 
Luke  5.  29  great  company.. that  satdown  with  them 

17. To  lay  dovm,  KaraK\lvo>  kataklino. 

Luke  1 4.   8  sit  not  down  in  the  highest  room;  lest  a 

1 8.  To  sit  down  alongside,  irapaKa9l(co  parako.th izo. 
Lukeio.  39  sister  called  Mary,  which  also  sat  at  Jesus' 

19.  To  lie  back  or  recline  with,  cwavaKeifxat  swnan. 
Matt.  9.  10  came  and  sat  down  with  him  and  his  dis. 
Mark  2.  15  sat  also  together  with  Jesus  and  his  disc. 

6.  22  pleased  Herod  and  them  that  sat  with  him 
6.  26  for  their  sakes  which  [sat  with]  him,  he 

SIT  {down  at  meat  with),  to  — 

1.  To  lie  or  lay  dovm  or  back,  avaxeTfiat  anakeimai. 

Matt.  9.  10  as  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in  the  house,  behold 

26.    7  poured  (it)  on  his  head,  as  he  sat  (at  meat) 

Mark  16.  14  [appeared,  .as  they  sat  at  meat,  andupb.] 

Luke  7.  37  when  she  knew  that  (Jesus)  [sat  at  meat] 

22.  27  whether  (is)  greater  he  that  sitteth  at  meat 

22.  27  (is)  not  he  that  sitteth  at  meat?  but  I  am 

2. To  recline,  ava.Kh.iva  anaklino. 

Luke  7.  36  And  he  went,  .and  [sat  down  to  meat] 

3.7*0  lay  or  lit  dovm,  KaraKeifxat  katakeimai. 
Mark  2.  15  as  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in  his  house,  many 


15.  To  set 

Matt  13 

19. 

19. 


26. 
Mark  9. 


14 

16. 

Luke  4 

5' 
14 
14. 
16, 
19. 
22 

John  8. 


Acts 


1  Co.  10 

2  Th.   2 
Heb.    1 

10 
Kev.   3. 


Mark  14.    3  as  he  sat  at  meat,  there  came  a  woman 

1  Co.   8.  io  if  any  man  see  thee,  .sit  at  meat  in  the  id 

l.To  lay  dovm,  KaraKKivu  kataklino. 

Luke24.  30  as  he  sat  at  meat  with  them,  he  took  bread 

5.  To  fall  back  or  down,  avatriwro}  anapipto. 

Luken.  37  and  he  went  in,  and  sat  down  to  meat 
17.    7  will  say.  .Go  and  sit  down  to  meat 

6.  To  lie  down  with,  avvava.Ketfj.at  sunanak. 

Matti4.    9  for.  .them  which  sat  with  him  at  meat,  he 
Luke  7.  49  they  that  sat  at  meat  with  him  began  to 
14.  10  presence  of  them  thatsitatmeatwith  thee 

14. 15  when  one  of  tliem  that  sat  at  meat  with 

SIT  down  to  meat,  to  make  to  — 
To  lay  down' or  back,  recline,  avaKXivw  anaklino. 
Lukei2. 37  make  them  to  sit  down  to  meat,  and  will 

SIT  (down),  together,  to  make  to  — 

l.To  lay  down  or  back,  avaKhivu  anaklino. 

Mark  6.  39  commanded  them  [to  make  all  sit  down] 
Luke  9.  15  And  they  did  so,  and  [made  them  all  sit  d.] 

2.  To  lay  dovm,  KaraKKiva  kataklino. 

Luke  9.  14  Make  them  sit  down  by  fifties  in  a  comp. 

3.  To  sit  dovm  with,  avyKaBifa  sugkathizo. 

Eph.  2.   6  made  (us)  sit  together  in  heavenly  (places) 
SIT  upon  or  with,  to  — 
I.Togo  up  upon,  mount,  eirtfiatvu  epibaino. 

Matt  21.    5  sitting  upon  an  ass,  and  a  colt  the  foal  of 

l.To  sit  down  vjith,  (TvyKa$7)u.ai  sugkathemai, 
Marki4.  54  sat  with  the  servants,  and  warmed  him. 
Acts  26.  30  and  Bernice,  and  they  that  sat  with  them 

SIT  at  the  table  with,  to  — 

To  recline  with,  avvavdK€t/j.ai  sunanakeimai. 

Johni2.    2  one  of  them  that  [sat  at  the  table  with] 
SITH  — 
If,  dx  im. 

Eze.  35.   6  sith  thou  hast  not  hated  blood,  even  bio. 

SIT'-NAH,  nx&  hatred. 

A  name  given  to  a  well  which  Isaac's  servants  digged 
in  Gerar,  but  which  was  seized  by  the  servants  of 
Abimelech;  still  called  Shutneh,  and  is  on  the  W.  of 
Eehohoth  qt  Ruheibah.    B.C.  1897. 

Gen.  26.  21  digged,  .and  he  called  the  name  of  it  S. 
SITTING  (down)  — 
1.  To  sit  down  or  still,  ?S"T  yashab. 

2  Ch.  9. 18  stays  on  each  side  of  the  sittingplace,and 
Psa.139.  2  Thou  knowest  my  down  sitting  and  miue 
Lam.  3. 63  Behold  their  sitting  down,  and  their  ris. 

2..1  seat,  3ipD  moshab, 

1  EX  10.    5  sitting  of  his  servants,  and  the  attendance 

2  Ch.  9.   4  sitting  of  his  servants,  and  the  attendance 

SITUATE,  situation,  (to  be)  — 

l.To  sit  down  or  still,  2p;  yashab. 

Eze.  27.  3  O  thou  that  art  situate  at  the  entry  of  the 
Nah.    3.    S  that  was  situate  among  the  rivers",  (that 

%A  seat,  2C;ic  moshab. 

2  Ki.  2.  19  situation  of  this  city  (is)  pleasant,  as  my 

3.  What  is  f  zed,  p^sa  matsug. 

1  Sa.  14.   s  fore  front  of  the  one  (was)  situate  north. 

1  ^.Elevation,  r\w  nojph. 

Psa.  48.    2  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  wh. 
SI'-VAN,  ]Vp. 
I  The  third  month  of  the  Hebrew  year,  from  the  new 
I  moon  of  June  to  that  of  July. 

Esth.  S.   9  the  third  month,  that  (is),  the  month  S. 
;  SIX,  sixth  — 
'  l.Six,  sixth,  ns'tr,  t*!ty  shesh,  shishshah. 

Gen.    7.   6  Noah  (was)  sis  hundred  years  old  when 
7. 11  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life 
8.  13  it  came  to  pass  in  the  six  hundredth  and 
16.  16  Abram  Cwas)  fourscore  and  six  years  old 

30.  20  because  I  have  born  him  six  sons  :  and  she 

31.  41  I  served  thee. .  six  yearsior  thy  cattle  :and 
46.  26  all  the  souls  (were)  threescore  and  six 

Exodi2.  37  about  six  hundred  thousand  on  foot  (that 
14.  7  he  took  six  hundred  chosen  chariots,  and 
16.  26  Six  days  ye  shall  gather  it;  but  on  these. 
20.   9  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  all  thy 

20.  11  (in)  six  days  the  Lokp  made  heaven  and 

21.  2  six  years  he  shall  serve  ;  and  in  the  sev. 
23. 10  six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  land,  and  sh. 
23. 12  Six  days  thou  shalt  do  thy  work,  and  on 

24. 16  the  cloud  covered  it  six  days :  and  the  se. 
25.  32  six  branches  shall  come  out  of  the  sides  of 
25.  33  the  six  branches  that  come  out  of  the  ca. 

25.  35  the  six  branches  that  proceed  out  of  the 

26.  9  and  six  curtains  by  themselves,  and  shalt 
26.  22  for  the  sides,  .thou  shalt  make  six  boards 
28.  10  Six  of  their  names  on  one  stone,  and  (the 
28. 10  six  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone 

31. 15  Six  days  may  work  be  done  ;  but  in  the 
31.  17  (in)  six  day  the  LORD  made  heaven  and 

34.  21  Six  days  thou  shalt  work;  but  on  the  se. 

35.  2  Six  days  shall  work  be  done,  but  on  the 

36. 16  five  curtains  by  themselves,  and  six  curt. 

36.  27  And  for  the  sides,  .he  made  six  boards 
37. 18  six  branches  going  out  of  the  sides  thereof 


SIX    SCORE 


896 


SKIN 


Exod^.  ig  throughout  the  six  branches  going  out  of 

37.  21  according  to  the  six  branches  going  out  of 

38.  26  six  hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand 
Lev.  12.    5  shall  continue.. threescore  and  six  days 

23.  3  Six  days  shall  work  be  done:  but  the  sev. 

24.  6  thou  shalt  set  them  in  two  rows,  six  on  a 

25.  3  Six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  field,  and  six 
Num.  1.  21  forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 

1.  25  forty  and  five  thousand  six  hundred  and 

1,  27  threescore  and  fourteen  thousand  and  six 
1.46  six  hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand 

2.  4  and  fourteen  thousand  and  six  hundred 
2.  g  fourscore  thousand  and  six  thousand  and 
2.  11  forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 
2.  15  forty  and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred 
2.  31  fifty  and  seven  thousand  and  six  hundred 

2.  32  six  hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand 

28  eight  thousand  and  six  hundred,  keeping 
34  those  that  were  numbered. .(were)  sixtho. 

40  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  thirty 
3  they  brought,  .six  covered  wagons,  and 

21  The  people,  among  whom  I  (am  are)  six 

41  forty  and  five  thousaud  and  six  hundred 
51  six  hundred  thousand  and  a  thousand  se. 
32  six  hundred  thousand  aud  seventy  thous. 

37  was  six  hundred  and  threescore  and  fift. 

38  And  the  beeves  (were)  thirty  and  six  tho. 
44  And  thirty  and  six  thousand  beeves 

6  there  shall  be  six  cities  for  refuge,  which 
13  of  these  cities,  .six  cities  shall  ye  have  for 

15  six  cities  shall  be  a  refuge,  (both)  for  the 

13  Six  days  thou  shalt  labour,  and  do  all  thy 

12  be  sold  unto  thee,  and  serve  thee  six  ye. 
iS  servant  (to  thee),  in  serving  thee  six  yea. 

8  Six  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread 

3  And  ye  shall  compass  the  city,  .six  days 

14  returned  into  the  camp  :  so  they  did  six 
5  smote  of  them  about  thirty  and  six  men 

59  and  Eltekon,  six  cities  with  their  villages 
62  and  En-gedi ;  six  cities  with  their  villages 
31  slew  of  the  Philistines  six  hundred  men 

7  Jephthah  judged  Israel  six  years.  Then 
11  six  hundred  men  appointed  with  weapons 

16  the  six  hundred  men  appointed  with  th. 

17  the  six  hundred  men  (that  were)  appoin. 

15  twenty  and  six  thousand  meu  that  drew 
47  six  hundred  men  turned  and  fled  to  the 
15  he  measured  six  (measures)  of  barley,  and 

17  These  six  measures  of  barley  gave  he  me 
5  six  thousand  horsemen,  and  people  as  the 

15  present  with  him,  about  six  hundred  men 
2  people. .withhim(were)aboutsix  hundred 

4  Goliath. .whose  height  (was)  six  cubits  and 

7  his  spear's  head  (weighed)  six  hundred  sh. 

13  his  men,  (which  were)  about  six  hundred 

2  he  passed  over  with  the  six  hundred  men 

9  and  the  six  hundred  men  that  (were)  with 
11  David  was  king,  .seven  years  and  six  mo. 

5  he  reigned,  .seven  years  and  six  months 

13  when  they,  .had  gone  six  paces,  he  sacri. 

18  six  hundred  men  which  came  after  him 
20  six  fingers,  and  on  every  foot  six  toes 

6  the  middle  (was)  six  cubits  broad,  and  the 

14  six  hundred  threescore  and  six  talents  of 

16  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  gold  went  to  one 

19  The  throne  had  six  steps,  and  the  top  of 

20  twelve  lious  stood,  .upon  the  six  steps:  th. 

29  went  out  of  Egypt  for  six  hundred  (she.) 
16  six  months  did  Joab  remain  there  with  all 

8  In  the  twenty  and  sixth  year  of  Asa  king 
23  Omri.  .six  years  reigned  he  in  Tirzah 

5  six  thousand  (pieces)  of  gold,  aud  ten  eh. 

3  hid  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  six  years 
19  Thou  shouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six 

8  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria  six  months 
10  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah,  that  (is) 

4  (These)  six  were  born  unto  him  in  Hebr. 
4  there  he  reigned  seven  years  and  six  mo. 

3.  22  Bariah,  aud  Neariah,  and  Shaphat,  six 

4.  27  Shimei  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  daughters 
7.  2  two  and  twenty  thousaud  and  six  hundred 
7.    4  soldiers  for  war,  six  and  thirty  thousand 

7.  40  the  number,  .(was)  twenty  and  six  thous. 

8.  38  Azel  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  th. 

9.  6  and  their  brethren,  six  hundred  and  nin. 
9.  9  brethren,  .nine  hundred  and  fifty  and  six 
9.  44  Azel  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  th. 

12.  24  The  children  of  Judah . .  (were)  sLx  thous. 
12.  26  of  Levi,  four  thousand  and  six  hundred 
12.  35  twenty  and  eight  thousand  and  six  bund. 

20.  6  fingers  aud  toes. .six  (on  each  hand),  and  s. 

21.  25  David  gave  to  Oman  for  the  place  six  hu. 
23.   4  and  six  thousand  (were)  officers  and  jud. 

25.  3  the  sons  of  Juduthun.  .six,  under  the  ha. 

26.  17  Eastward  (were)  six  Levites,  northward 
2  Ch.  1.  17  a  chariot  forsix  hundred  (shekels)  of  silv. 

2.  2  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  to  over. 
2.  17  fifty  thousand  and  three  thousand  and  six 

2.  18  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  overseers 

3.  8  fine  gold,  (amounting)  to  six  hundred  ta. 
9.  13  sixhuudredaud  threescore  and  sixtalents 
9.  15  six  hundred  (shekels)  of  beaten  gold  went 
9.  18  (there  were)  six  steps  to  the  throne,  with 
9. 19  twelve  lions  stood  . .  upon  the  six  steps 

16.    1  In  the  six  aud  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign 

22.  12  he  was.  .hid  in  the  house  of  God  six  years 

26. 12  menof  valour(were)  twothousandandsix 

29.  33  the  consecrated  tbings(were)sixhundred 

35-    8  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  (small  ca.) 

2.  10  The  children  of  Bani,  six  hundred  forty 
-'.  11  The  children  of  Behai,  sixhundred  twenty 
:    '>f  Adonikam,  six  hundred  sixty  and  Lix 


3- 

3- 

4- 

7- 

11. 

26. 

26. 

31. 

3*- 

3*> 

3i- 

35- 

35- 

^      ,35- 

Deut.  5. 

*5- 

15- 

16. 

Josh.  6. 

6. 

7- 

*5- 

*5- 

Judg.  3. 

12. 

18. 

18. 


20. 
Ruth  3. 

3- 

1  Sa.  13. 

*3- 
14. 

17- 

*7- 

23- 
27. 

«     3°" 

2  Sa.   2. 

5- 

6. 

I5- 
ll. 
6. 


Ki 


2  Ki 


tCh 


Esth 
Job 


Jer. 


Eze. 


41. 
41. 
41. 
46. 
46. 
46. 


Ezra 


Ezra    2.  14  of  Bigvai,  two  thousand  fifty  and  six 
2.  22  The  men  of  Netophah,  fifty  and  six 
2.  26  The  children  of  Raman  and  Gaba,  six  hu. 
2.  30  of  Magbish,  an  hundred  fifty  and  six 
2.  35  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  thi. 
2. 60  the  children  of  Nekoda,  six  hundred  fifti. 
2.  66  horses  (were)  seven  hundred  thirty  and  six 
2.  67  (their)  asses,  six  thousand  seven  hundred 
8.  26  I  even  weighed  unto  their  hand  six  hun. 

8.  35  ninety  and  six  rams,  seventy  and  seven  la. 
Neh.    5.  18  one  ox,  (and)  six  choice  sheep;  also  fowls 

7.  10  The  children  of  Aran,  six  hundred  fifty  and 
7.  15  The  children  of  Binnui,  six  hundred  forty 
7.  16  The  children  of  Bebai,  six  hundred  twenty 
7.  18  The  children  of  Adonikam,  sLx  hundred 
7.  20  The  children  of  Adin,  six  hundred  fifty 
7.  30  The  men  of  Ramahand  Gaba,  sixhundred 
7.  62  the  children  of  Nekoda,  six  hundred  forty 
7.  68  Their  horses,  seven  hundred  thirty  and  six 
7.  69  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty 

2.  12  six  months  with  oil  of  myrrh,  and  six  mo. 
5.  19  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  troubles;  yea 

42. 12  six  thousand  camels,  and  a  thousand  yoke 
Prov.  6.  16  These  six  (things)  doth  the  Lord  hate,  yea 
Isa.  6.  2  each  one  had  six  wings ;  with  twain  he  co. 
34. 14  when  he  hath  served  thee  six  years,  thou 
52.  23  there  were  ninety  and  six  pomegranates 
52.  30  persons  (were)  four  thousand  and  six  hu. 

9.  2  six  men  came  from  the  way  of  the  higher 

40.  s  measuring  reed  of  six  cubits  (long)  by  the 
40. 12  six  cubits  on  this  side,  and  six  cubits  on 

41.  1  six  cubits  broad  on  the  one  side,  and  six 

3  door  six  cubits,  and  the  breadth  of  the  do. 

5  measured  the  wall  of  the  house  six  cubits 
8  the  foundations . .  (were)  a  full  reed  of  six 
1  The  gate,  .shall  be  shut  the  six  working 

4  six  lambs  without  blemish,  and  a  ram  wi. 

6  a  young  bullock . .  and  six  lambs,  and  a  ram 

2.  Six,  sixth,  tw,  Tm  sheth,  shith. 

Ezra    6.  15  the  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius  the 
Dan.    3.    1  (and)  the  breadth  thereof  six  cubits :  he 

Z.Sixth,  w  shishshi, 

Gen.    1.  31  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  sixth 

30.  19  conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob  the  sixth 
Exod  16.    5  the  sixth  day  they  shall  prepare  (that)  wh, 

16.  22  the  sixth  day  they  gathered  twice  as  mu. 

16.  29  he  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread 

26.  9  shalt  double  the  sixth  curtain  in  the  fore 
Lev.  25.  21  command  my  blessing  upon  you  in  the  si. 
Num.  7.  42  On  the  sixth  day  Eliasaph  the  son  of  De. 

29.  29  on  the  sixth  day  eight  bullocks,  two  rams 
Josh  19.  32  sixth  lot  came  out  to  the  children  of  Na. 
2  Sa.  3.  5  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  Eglah,  David's  wi. 
1  Ch.  2.  15  Ozem  the  sixth,  David  the  seventh 

3.  3  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  Eglah  his  wife 
12. 11  Attai  the  sixth,  Eliel  the  seventh 

24.  9  The  fifth  to  Malchijah,  the  sixth  to  Mija. 

25.  13  The  sixth  to  Bukkiah,  (lie),  his  sons,  aud 

26.  3  Elam  the  fifth,  Jehohanan  the  sixth,  Eli. 

26.  5  Ammiel  the  sixth,  Issaehar  the  seventh 

27.  9  The  sixth  (captain)  for  the  sixth  month 
Neh.    3.  30  Hanun  the  sixth  son  of  Zalaph,  another 
Eze.    8.    1  in  the  sixth  year,  in  the  sixth  (month),  in 
Hag.    1.    1  in  the  sixth  month,  in  the  first  day  of  the 

1. 15  In  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  sixth 
4.  Six,  e  I  hex. 

Matt  17.  1  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James 
Mark  9.  1  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  (with  him)  P. 
Luke  4.  25  was  shut  up  three  years  and  sixth  months 
13. 14  There  are  six  days  in  which  men  ought  to 
John  2.  6  there  were  set  there  six  waterpots  of  sto. 
2.  20  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  in  bu. 

12.  i  Jesus,  six  days  before  the  passover,  came 
Acts  11.  12  these  six  brethren  accompanied  me,  and 

18.  11  he  continued  (there)a  year  andsixmonths 
Jas.  5.  17  by  the  space  of  three  years  and  six  mont. 
Rev.    4.    8  the  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  win. 

13.  18  and  his  number  (is),  .threescore  and  six 

b. Sixth,  cktos  hektos. 

Matt  20.    5  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  ho. 

27.  45  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness 

Marki5-  33  when  the  sixth  hour  was  come,  there  was 

Luke  1,  26  in  the  sixth  month  the  angel  Gabriel  was 

1.  36  this  is  the  sixth  month  with  her,  who  was 

23.  44  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour,  and  there  was 

John  4.   6  sat  thus,  .it  was  about  the  sixth  hour 

19. 14  it  was. .about  [the  sixth] hour:  and  hesa. 
Acts  10.    9  Peter  went. .  to  pray  about  the  sixth  hour 
Rev.   6. 12  beheld  when  he  had  opened  the  sixth  seal 
9.  12,  14;  16.  12;  21.  20 
SIX  HUNDRED,  e|aKoVioi  hexakosioi,  Rev.  14,  20. 
SIX  HUNDRED  threescore  six,  x£r,  Rev-  13-   lS- 
SLX  SCORE  — 
.1  hundred  and  twenty,  D*")^")  nxo  meah  veesrim. 

1  Ki    9.  14  Hiram  sent  to  the  king  six  score  talents  of 
SIX  SCORE  thousand  — 

Iwclve  myriads,  ia~i  rny'jTD'fl:?  shetcm  esreh  ribbo. 
Jon.    4. 11  wherein  are  more  than  sixscore  thousand 

SIXTEEN,  sixteenth  — 

Sixteen,  sixteenth,  Tf"  riffi,  rnb'j;  rr  shesh  esreh. 
Gen.  46.  18  these  she  bare  unto  Jacob,  (even)  sixteen 
Exod26.  25  their  sockets  (of)  silver,  sixteen  sockets 

36. 30  their  sockets  (were)  sixteen  sockets  of  sil. 
Xum26.  22  threescore  and  sixteen  thousand  and  five 

31.  40  the  persons  (were)  sixteen  thousand;  of  w. 
31.46  Ami  sixteen  thousand  persous 


Num^i.  52  was  sixteen  thousand  and  seven  hundred 

Josh.  15.  41  Makkedah;  sixteen  cities  with  their  vill. 

19.  22  Jordan;  sixteen  cities  with  their  villages 

2  Ki.  13. 10  began  Jehoash..toreign..in  Samaria.. six. 

14.  21  took  Azariah,  which  (was)  sixteen  years 

15.  2  Sixteen  years  old  was  he  when  he  began 
*5-  33  and  ^e  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 

16.  2  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem,  and 

1  Ch    4.  27  Shimei  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  daughters 

24.   4  sixteen  chief  men  of  the  house  of  (their)  fa. 

24.  14  The  fifteenth  to  Bilgah,  the  sixteenth  to 

25.  23  The  sixteenth  to  Hananiah,  (he),  his  sons 

2  Ch.13.  21  begat  twenty  and  two  sons,  and  sixteen  d. 

26.  1  took  Uzziah,  who  (was)  sixteen  years  old 

26.  3  Sixteen  years  old  (was)  Uzziah  when  he 

27.  1,  8  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 

28.  1  and  he  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem 
2g.  17  in  the  sixteenth  day  ofthe  first  month  they 

SIXTEEN,  threescore  and  — 

Seventy-six  e^bofj-vKoi/ra^  hebdomekontaex. 

Acts  27.  37  two  hundred  threescore  and  sixteen  souls 

SIXTH  part,  (to  give  or  leave  but  the)  — 

1.7b  give  or  leave  a  sixth  part,  awy  shasha,  3. 

Eze.  39.   2  leave  but  the  sixth  part  of  thee,  and  will 
2.  To  give  or  leave  a  sixth  part,  Ttffi  shashah,  3. 

Eze.  45.13  give  the  sixth  part  of  anephahof  an  homer 
B.  Sixth,  W  shishshi. 

Eze   4. 11  sixth  part  of  an  hin  :  from  time  to  time  sh. 

45.  13  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  anihomerof 

46.  14  sixth  part  of  an  ephah,  and  the  third  part 

[See  also  Hundred,  thousand.] 

SIXTY  (fold)  — 

1. Sixty,  D'try  shishshim. 

Gen.  5.  15  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty 'and  five  years,  and 
5.  18  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two  ye. 
5.  20  days  of  Jared  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and 
5.  21  Enoch  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat 
5.  23  days  of  Enoch  were  three  hundred  sixty 
5.  27  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  nine  years 
Lev.  27.    3  twenty  years  old  even  unto  sixty  years  old 

27.    7  if  (it  be)  from  sixty  years  old  and  above 
Num.  7.  88  rams  sixty,  .he  goats  sixty,  .lambs,  .sixty 
Ezra    2.  13  children  of  Adonikam,  six  hundred  sixty 

2. Sixty,  e^Kovra  hexekonta. 

Matt  13.   8  some  an  hundred  fold,  some  sixty  fold,  so 

13.  23  some  an  hundred  fold,  some  sixty,sometb. 

Mark  4.    8  broughtforth,  some  thirty,  and  some  sixty 

4.  20  some  thirty  fold,  some  sixty,  and  some  an 

SIZE  — 

1.  Measure,  rnp  middah. 

Exod36.    9  cubits  :  the  curtains  (were)  all  of  one  size 
36. 15  curtain:  the  eleven  curtains  (were).,  ones. 
1  Ch.23.  29  and  for  all  manner  of  measure  and  size 

2.  Cut,  cutting,  3X£  qetseb. 

1  Ki.  6.  25  cherubim,  .of  one  measure  and  one  size 
7.  37  all  of  them  had  one  casting,  .one  size 

SKILFUL,  man  of  skill  — 

1.  To  cause  to  understand,  give  under  standing, ys.,?. 

1  Ch.15.  22  about  the  song,  because  he  (was)  skilful 

2.  Wisdom,  nfoli)  choknxah. 

1  Ch.28.  21  every  willing  skilful  man,  for  any  manner 
3. Engraver,  carver,  artificer,  enfl  charash. 

Eze.  21.  31  into  the  hand  of  brutish  men,  (and)  skilful 

4.  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  yv  yacla. 

2  Ch.  2. 14  skilful  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  in 
Eccl.  9. 11  nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  skill ;  but  time 
Amos  5.  16  such  as  we  are  skilful  of  lamentation  to 

5.  To  learn,  accustom  self,  1D7  lamad. 

1  Ch.  5. 18  skilful  in  war,  (were)  four  and  forty  thor 

6.  To  ccmse  to  act  iviseh/,  Vp'y  sakal,  5. 

Dan.   1.   4  skilful  in  all  wisdom,  and  cunning  in  kn. 

SKLLEULLY,  skilfulness  — 

l.To  do  good  or  well,  nu;  yatcib,  5. 

Psa.  33.   3  Sing  unto  him  a  new  song  ;  play  skilfully 
^.Understanding,  skilfulness,  m'Ofl  tebunah. 

Psa.  78.  72  guided  theni  by  Uie  skilfulness  of  his  hands 

SKILL,  can,  to  give  — 

1.7*0  cause  to  understand,  r?  bin,  5. 

2  Ch.34. 12  all  that  could  skill  of  instruments  of  mu. 

2.  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  yv  y&&a* 

1  Ki.  5.   6  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill  to  hew  t. 

2  Ch.  2.    7  that  can  skill  to  grave  with  the  cunning 

2.   8  know  that  thy  servants  can  skill  to  cut  ti. 

3.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  *?2ty  sakal,  5. 

Dan.    1.  17  gave  them  knowledge  and  skill  in  all  lea. 
9.  22  come  forth  to  give  thee  skill  and  underst. 

SKIN  — 

1. Flesh,  "ty'3  basar. 

Psa.102.   5  my  groaning  my  bones  cleave  to  my  skin 
2. Skin,  enclosure,  *i|?a  gelcd. 

Job  16. 15  have  sewed  sackcloth  upon  my  skin,  and 

3.  Skin,  liy  or. 

Gen.    3.  21  did  the  Lord  God  make  coats  of  skins,  and 

27.  16  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  the  goats  upon 

Exod22.  27  his  raiment  for  his  skin  :  wherein  shall  be 

25.  5  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 

26.  14  covering  for  the  tent(of)rams'  skins  dyed 


SKIP 


897 


SLAUGHTER 


Exoih6.  14  and  a  covering  above  (of)  badgers'  skins 
29.  14  But  the  flesh  of  the  bullock,  and  his  skin 
34.  29  Hoses  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face 
34. 30  skin  of  his  face  shone  ;  and  they  were  af. 

34.  -^  saw.  .that  the  skin  of  Moses'  face  shone 

35.  7  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers'  skins 

35.  23  red  skins  of  rams,  and  badgers'  skins,  br. 

36.  19  covering  for  the  tent  (of)rams'  skins  dyed 
36.  19  audacovering(of)badgers'skiu  above  (th.) 
39. 34  covering  of  rams'  skins ..  badgers'  skins 

Lev.    4.  11  skin  of  the  bullock,  and  all  Ins  flesh,  with 
■7.   8  shall  have  to  himself  the  skin  of  the  burnt 
11.  32  whether  (it  be)  any .  .raiment,  or  skin,  or 
13.   2  When  a  man  shall  have  in  the  skin  of  his 
13.   2  it  be  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh  (like)  the  pla. 
13.    3  priest  shall  look  on  the  plague  in  the  skin 
13-   3  plague  in  sight  (be)  deeper  than  the  skin 
33.   4  If  the  bright  spot  (be)  white  in  the  skin  of 
.  13.   4  in  sight  (be)  not  deeper  than  the  skin,  and 
13-    5  plague  spread  not  in  the  skin  ;  then  the 
13.    6  plague  spread  not  in  the  skin,  the  priest 
13.    7  the  scab  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin 
13.    8  scab  spreadeth  in  the  skin,  then  the  priest 
13. 10  behold,  (if)  the  rising  (be)  white  in  the  skin 
13.  11  an  old  leprosy  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh,  and 
13.  12  if  a  leprosy  break  out  abroad  in  the  skin 
13.  12  leprosy  cover  all  the  skin  of  (him  that  hath) 
13. 18  in  the  skin  thereof,  was  a  boil,  and  is  hea. 
13.  20  behold,  it  (be)  in  sight  lower  than  the  skin 

13. 21  lower  than  the  skin,  but  (be)  somewhat  d. 

13. 22  if  it  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin,  then 
13.  24  Or, if  there  be  (any)  flesh,  in  the  skin  whe. 
13.  25  it  (be  in)  sight  deeper  than  the  skin,  it  (is) 
13. 26  it  (be)  no  lower  than  the  (other)  skin,  but 
13.  27  if  it  be  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin 
13.  28  spread  not  in  the  skin, but  it(be)  somewhat 

13. 30  behold,  if  it  (be),  .deeper  than  the  skin 

13.31  it(be)uot  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin, and 

13. 32  scall  (be)  not  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin 
13.  34  (if)  the  scall  be  not  spread  in  the  skin,  nor 
13.  34  in  sight  deeper  than  the  skin  ;  then  the 
13.  35  But  if  the  scall  spread  much  in  the  skin 
13.  36  if  the  scall  be  spread  in  the  skin,  the  pr. 
13.  38  If  a  man  also  or  a  woman  have  in  the  skin 
13.  39  the  bright  spots  in  the  skin  of  their  flesh 
13. 39  freckled  spot  (that)  groweth  in  the  skin 
13.  43  as  the  leprosy  appeareth  in  the  skin  of  the 
13.  48  whether  in  a  skin,  or . .  any  thing  made  of  s. 
13.  49  in  the  skin . .  or  in  any  thing  of  skin ;  it  (is) 
13.  51  skin,  (or)  in  any  work  that  is  made  of  skin 
13.  52  or  any  thing  of  skin,  wherein  the  plague 
*3-  53.  57  or  "*  the  woof,  or  in  any  thing  of  skin 
13.  56  out  of  the  garment,  or  out  of  the  skin,  or 
13.  58  warp  or  woof,  or  whatsoever  thing  of  skin 
13.  59  in  the  warp,  or  woof,  or  any  thing  of  skin 

15.  17  every  garment,  and  every  skin,  whereon 

16.  27  they  shall  burn  in  the  fire  their  skins,  and 
Num.  4.    6  put  thereon  the  covering  of  badgers' skins 

4.   8,  11,  12  cover,  .a  covering  of  badgers' skins 

4.  10  put.  .within  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 

4. 14  spread  upon  it  a  covering  of  badgers'  sk. 

19.    5  her  skin,  and  her  flesh,  and  her  blood 

31.  20  all  that  is  made  of  skins,  and  all  work  of 

4  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will 

7.   5  my  skin  is  broken,  and  become  loathsome 

10.  11  Thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin  and  flesh 

18.  13  It  shall  devour  the  strength  of  his  skin 

19.  20  Jly  bone  cleave  th  to  my  skin  and  to  my 
19.  20  and  I  am  escaped  with  the  skin  of  my  te. 
19.  26  (though)  after  my  skin  (worms)  destroy 
;o.  30  My  skin  is  black  upon  me,  and  my  bones 
41.  7  Canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  barbed  irons 
13.  23  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the 

3.  4  My  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  old 

4.  8  their  skin  cleave  th  to  their  bones  ;  it  is 

5.  10  Our  skin  was  black  like  an  oven  because 
37.    6  cover  you  with  skin,  and  put  breath  iu 
37.    8  the  skin  covered  them  above  :  but  (there 

3.    2  who  pluck  off  their  skin  from  off  them 
3.    3  Who  also,  .flay  their  skin  from  off  them 

4..1  skin,  hide,  leather,  5ep4tta  derma. 

Heb.  11.  37  wandered  about  in  sheep . .  and  goat  skins 
h. Leathern,  made  of  leatlter,  Bepixdnvos  dermatinos. 

Mark  1.    6  and  with  a  girdle  of  a  skin  about  his  loins 
SKIP  (for  joy,  to  make  to),  to  — 
1.2*0  move  or  bemoan  self,  "i-a  mul,  7a. 

Jer.  48.  27  thouspakest  of  him,  thou  skippedst  for  j. 
2.  To  skip,  spring,  dart,  y*fa  qaphats,  3. 

Song  2.    8  leaping  upon  the  mountains,  skipping  up. 
3.7*0  ship,  dance,  ip*j  raqad. 

Psa.  114.    4  mountains  skipped  like  rams,  (and)  the 
114.   6  mountains,  (that)  ye  skipped  like  rams 

4.  To  cause  to  skip,  "ijyi  raqad,  5. 

Psa.  29.    6  He  uiaketh  them  also  to  skip  like  a  calf 
SKIRT  — 
1.  Winy,  ^33  kanaph. 

Deut  22.  30  man  shall  not.  .discover  his  father's  skirt 

27.  20  because  he  uncovereth  his  father's  skirt 

Ruth  3.    9  spread  therefore  thy  skirt  over  thine  ha. 

1  Sa.  15.  27  he  laid  hold  upon  the  skirt  of  his  mantle 

24.    4  and  cut  off  the  skirt  of  Saul's  robe  privily 

24.    5  smote . .  because  he  had  cut  off  Saul's  skirt 

24. 11  see  the  skirt  of  thy  robe  in  my  hand  :  for 

24.  11  I  cut  off  the  skirt  of  thy  robe,  and  killed 

Jer.     2.  34  in  thy  skirts  is  found  the  blood  of  the  souls 

Eze.     5.    3  also  take,  .and  bind  them  in  thy  skirts 

16.    3  I  spread  my  skirt  over  thee,  and  covered 
Hag.    2.  12  If  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his 
113 


Job 


Jer. 
Lam. 


Eze. 
Mic 


Hag.  2.  12  with  his  skirt  do  touch  bread,  or  pottage 

Zech.  8.  23  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  hini  that  is 
2.Mouth,  n$  peh. 

Psa.133.   2  that  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garni. 
o.IIem,  skirt,  train,  bvj  shut. 

Jer.  13.  22  thy  skirts  discovered,  (and)thyheelsmade 
13.  26  Therefore  will  I  discover  thy* skirts  upon 

Lam.  1.    9  Her  fllthiness(is)  inherskirts;  shereme. 

Nah.   3.   s  I  will  discover  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face 
SKULL  — 
A  scull,  skull,  Kpaviov  kram'on. 

Matt  27.  33  Golgotha,  that  is  to  say.   A  place  of  a  sk. 

Marki5.  22  Golgotha,  which  is.  .The  place  of  a  skull 

Johni9.  17  into  a  place  called  (the  place)  of  a  skull 
SKY  — 

1.  Small  dust,  thin  cloud,  pn?  shachaq. 

Deut.33.  26  (who)  rideth. .  in  his  excellency  on  the  sk. 
2  Sa.  22.  12  dark  waters,  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the  sk. 
Job  37.  18  Hast  thou  with  him  spread  out  the  sky 
Psa.  18.  11  dark  waters  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the  ski. 
77.  17  the  skies  sent  out  a  sound :  thine  arrows 
Isa.  45.  8  and  let  the  skies  pour  downrighteousness 
Jer.  51.    9  judgment.,  is  lifted  up  (even)  to  the  skies 

2. Heaven,  ovpav6s  ouranos. 

Matti6.    2  (It  will  be)  fair  weather ;  for  the  sky  is  red 

16.   3  (It  will  be)  foul  weather  to  day;  for  the  sky 

16.    3  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky ;  but 

Luke  1 2.  56  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  and  of 

Heb. 11.  12  (so  many)  as  the  stars  of  the  sky  in  mult. 

SLACK,  (to)  be  slack,  slackness  — 

l.To  be  behind,  tarry,  delay,  in*?  achar,  3. 

Deut.  7.  10  he  will  not  be  slack  to  him  that  hateth 
23.  21  thou  shalt  not  slack  to  pay  it :  for  the  L. 

2.  To  keep  in,  restrain,  is"  atsar. 

2  Ki.   4.  24  slack  not  (thy)  riding  for  me,  except  I  bid 

3.  To  be  feeble,  faint,  cease,  y*$2m(J- 

Hab.  1.    4  the  law  is  slacked,  and  judgment  doth 

4.  Sloth,  remissness,  rpp-j  remiyyah. 

Prov  10.    4  He  becometh  poor  that  dealeth(with)  a  si. 

5.  To  be  or  become  feeble,  desist,  nrn  raphah. 
Zeph.  3.  10  (and  to)  Zion,  Let  not  thine  hands  be  slack 

6.  To  (cause  to)  become  feeble,  desist,  nD"i  rap/tah,  5. 

Josh.  10.    6  Slack  not  thy  hand  from  thy  servants,  co. 

7.  To  become  or  shoiv  self  feeble,  .15-1  raphah,  7. 
Josh.iS.   3  How  long  (are)  ye  slack  to  go  to  possess 

S.To  be  slow,  delay,  fZpaSvvco  braduno. 

2  Pe.    3.    9  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  pro. 

9. Slowness,  tardiness,  delay,  ^paSvrijs  bradutes. 
2  Pe.  3.   9  Lord  is  not . .  as  some  men  count  slackness 

SLAIN  (man,  beast)  — 

1.2*0  be  pierced,  wounded,  slain,  77Q  chalal,  4. 
Eze.  32.  26  all  of  them  uncircumcised,  slain  by  the  sw. 

2.  Pierced,  wounded,  slain,  SSn  chalal. 

Gen.  34.  27  The  sons  of  Jacob'  came  upon  the  slain 
Nuniig.  16  whosoever  toucheth  one  that  is  slain  with 
19. 18  him  that  touched  a  bone,  or  one  slain,  or 
23.  24  until  he.  .drink  the  blood  of  the  slain 
71.    8  besides  the  rest  of  them  that  were  slain 
9  whosoever  hath  touched  any  slain,  purify 
1  If  (one)  be  found  slain  in  the  land  which 
21.    2  which  (are)  round  about  him  that  is  slain 
21.    3  the  city  (which  is)  next  unto  the  slam  man 

21.  6  the  elders,  .(that  are)  next  unto  the  slain 
32. 42  with  the  blood  of  the  slain  and  of  the  ca. 

Josh.  1  r.    6  will  I  deliver  them  up  all  slain  before  Is. 

13.  22  among  them  that  were  slain  by  them 

1  Sa.  31.    1  and  fell  down  slain  in  mount  Gilboa 

31.   8  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the  si. 

2  Sa.    1. 19  The  beauty  of  Israel  is  slain  upon  thy  high 

1.  22  From  the  blood  of  the  slam,  from  the  fat 

1. 25  0  Jonathan,  (thou  wast)  slain  in  thine  high 

1  Ki.11. 15  Joab.  .was  goneuptobury  the  slain,  after 

1  Ch.  5.  22  there  fell  down  many  slain,  because  the 

10.   1  and  fell  down  slain  in  mount  Gilboa 

10.  8  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the  si. 
it.  11  three  hundred,  slain  (by  him)  at  one  time 

2  Ch.13.  17  there  fell  down  slain  of  Israel  five  hundred 
Job  39.  30  and  where  the  slain  (are),  there  (is)  she 

■"    88.5  Free  among  the  dead,  like  the  slain  that 
89.  10  broken  Rahab  in  pieces,  as  one  that  is  si. 

22.  2  thy  slain  (men  are)  not  slain  with  the  sw. 
34.  3  Their  slain  also  shall  be  cast  out,  and  th. 
66. 16  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  many 

9.    1  weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the 

14.  iS  then  behold  the  slain  with  the  sword,  and 
25.  33  slain  of  the  LoRDshallbe  at  that  day  from 
41.  9  Ishmael..filleditwith(them  thatwere)sl. 
51.  4  Thus  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  land  of  the 
51.  47  all  her  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  her 
51. 49  As  Babylon  (hath  caused)  the  slain  of  Isr. 
51.  49  so  at  Babylon  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all  the 

4.   9  (They  that  be)  slain  with  the  sword  are 
4.   9  slain  with  hunger;  for  these  pine  away 
6.   4  cast  down  your  slain  (men)  before  your 
6.    7  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  you  ;  and 
6. 13  when  their  slain  (men)  shall  be  among  th. 
9.    7  fill  the  courts  with  the  slain:  go  ye  forth 

11.  6  Ye  have  multiplied  your  slain  in  this  city 
n.   6  filled  the  streets  thereof  with  the  slain 
11.    7  Your  slain,  whom  ye  have  laid  in  the  mi. 
21. 14  let  the  sword. .the  sword  of  the  slain:it(is) 
21.  14  sword  of  the  great  (men  that  are)  slain 


31- 
Deut.  2 1. 


Psa. 
Isa. 

Jer. 


Lam. 
Eze. 


Eze.  21.  29  upon  the  necks  of  (them  that  are)  slain 
28.    8  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  (them  that  are)  si. 

30.  4  when  the  slain  shall  fall  in  Egypt,  and  th 
30/11  and  they  shall,  .fill  the  land  with  the  si. 

31.  17  unto  (them  that  be)  slain  with  the  sword 
31. 18  with  (them  that  be)  slain  by  the  sword 
32. 20  fall  in  the  midst  of  (them  that  are)  slaiu 

32.  21  they  lie  uncircumcised,  slain  by  the  sword 
32.  22,  23,  24  all  of  them  slain,  fallen  by  the  sw. 
32.  25  set  her  a  bed  in  the  midst  of  the  slaiu 
32.  25  all  of  themuncircunicised,  slain  by  thesw. 
32.  25  is  put  in  the  midst  of  (them  that  be)  slain 
31. 28  shalt  lie  with  (them  that  are)  slain  with 
32.  29  are  laid  by  (them  that  were)  slain  by  thesw. 
32.  30  which  are  gone  down  with  the  slain 

32.  30  uncircumcised  with  (them  that  be)  slain 

32.  31  Pharaoh  and  all  his  army  slain  by  the  sw. 

32.  32  uncircumcised  with  (them  that  are)  slaiu 

35.    8  rwiltfill  hismoutains  with  his  slain  (men) 

35.    8  shall  they  fall  that  are  slain  witli  the  sw. 

Dan.  11.  26  overflow  ;  and  many  shall  fall  down  slain 

Nah.  3.   3  (there  is)a  multitude  of  slain,  and  a  great 

Zeph.  2.  12  Ye  Ethiopians  also,  ye  (shall  be)  slain  by 

3.2*0  slaughter,  cto  shachat. 

Lev.  14.  51  clip  them  in  the  blood  of  the  slain  bird 

4.-4  slaughtered  animal,  a^dyiou  sphagion. 

Acts    7.  42  have  ye  offered  to  me  slain  beasts  and  sa. 

SLAIN,  to  be  — 

1.2*0  be  slain,  J"].i  harag,  2. 

Isa.  27.  7  is  he  slain  according  to  the  slaughter  of 
Lam.  2.  20  shall  the  priest  and  the  prophet  be  slain 
Eze.  26.    6  her  daughters,  .shall  be  slain  by  the  sw. 

2.Slaughter,  Tm  hereg. 

Prov24.  11  anil  (those  that  are)  ready  to  be  slain 
3.  To  be  wasted,  destroyed,  3~in  chareb,  2. 

2  Ki.  3.  23  the  kings  are  surely  slain,  and  they  have 
4.2*0  die,  rflD  muth. 

1  Sa.  4.  11  and  the  two  sons  of  Eli.  .were  slain 
5.2*0  be  caused,  to  be  put  to  death,  mo  muth,  Q. 

1  Sa.  19.   6  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  he  shall  not  be  slain 

20. 32  Wherefore  shall  he  be  slain?  what  hath  he 

2  Ki.n.    2  among  the.  .slain,  .so  that  he  was  not  s. 

11.   8  cometh  within  the  ranges,  let  him  be  sla. 
11.  15  Let  her  not  be  slain  in  the  house  of  the 
11.  16  went  by  the  way.,  and  there  was  she  slain 
2  Ch.22.  11  from  among  the  king's  sons  that  were  slain 
23.  14  whoso  followeth  her,  let  him  be  slain  with 

6.  To  be  plagued,  ^1  nagaph,  2. 

Lev.  26.  17  and  ye  shall  be  slain  before  your  enemies 
2  Sa.  iS.   7  the  people  of  Israel  were  slain  before  the 
l.To  be  smitten,  npi  nakah,  6. 

>"uni25. 14  Now  the  name  of  the  Israelite  that  was  si. 

25.  14  that  was  slain  with  the  Midianitish  worn. 

25. 15  the  Midianitish  woman  that  was  slain  (w.) 

25. 18  which  was  slain  in  the  day  of  the  plague 

Jer.   18.  21  (let)  their  young  men  (he)  slain  by  the  sw. 

8.  To  slay,  Sag  qetal. 

Dan.    5.  30  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king. .  slain 
7.  11  I  beheld  (even)  till  the  beast  was  slain,  and 

9.  To  be  slain,  Sap  qetal,  2. 

Dan.   2.  13  that  the  wise  (men)  should  be  slain  ;  and 

10.  To  be  slain,  Sag  qetal,  4. 

Dan.  2. 15  sought  Daniel  and  his  fellows  to  be  slain 
11.2*0  be  murdered,  nn"i  ratsach,  2. 

Judg2o.   4  the  husband  of  the  woman  that  was  slain 
Prov  22. 13  (There  is)  a  lion  without,  I  shall  be  slain 

12.  2*0  be  murdered,  nxn  ratsach,  4. 

Psa.  62.  3  ye  shall  be  slain  all  of  you  :  as  a  bowing 
13.2*0  be  slaughtered,  art^  shachat,  2. 

Nuni  11.  22  Shall  the  flocks  and  the  herds  be  slain  for 
14.7*0  die  off  or  away,  airoQwriiTK^  apothnesko. 

Heb.  11.  37  were  tempted,  were  slain  with  the  sword 

SLANDER,  slanderer  — 

l.Evil  account  or  report,  na^  dibbah. 

Nuni  14.  36  by  bringing  up  a  slander  upon  the  land 
Psa.  31.  13 1  have  heard  the  slander  of  many :  fear 
Prov  10.  18  and  he  that  uttereth  slander,  (is)  a  fool 

2.Slander,  traffic,  S'zrj  raMl. 

Jer.     6.  28  grievous  revolters,  walking  with  slanders 
9.   4  every  neighbour  will  walk  with  slanders 

3. Devil,  accuser,  slanderer,  5ta£oA.os  diabolos. 

1  Ti.  3. 11  so  (must  their)  wives  (be)  grave,  not  sla. 
SLANDER,  to  — 

1.2*0  give  forth  slander,  '£n  fm  nathan  dophi. 

Psa.  50.  20  thou  slanderest  thine  own  mother's  son 
2. 7*o  use  the  tongue,  slander,  backbite,  f»S  la$han,3t 

Fsa.101.  5  Whoso  privily  slandereth  his  neighbour 
3.2*0  use  the  feet,  slander,  hr*  ragal,  3. 

2  Sa.  19.  27* he  hath  slandered  thy  servant  unto  my 
SLAUGHTER  — 

I. Slaying,  slaughter,  nn  hereg. 

Esth.  9.    5  with  the  stroke  of  the  sword,  and  slang. 

Isa.  27.    7  is  he  slain  according  to  the  slaughter  of 

30.  25  in  the  day  of  the  great  slaughter,  when 

Eze.  26. 15  when  the  slaughter  is  made  iu  the  midst 

2.  Slaying,  slaughter,  nriD  haregah. 

Jer.     7.  32  but,  The  valley  of  slaughter:  for  they  sh. 
12.    3  and  prepare  them  for  the  day  of  slaugh. 


SLAUGHTER 


898 


SLAY 


Jer.  19. 
Zech  1 


6  be  called  Tophet.  .but  The  valley  of  sla. 
4  saith  the  Loud.  .Feed  the  flock  of  the  si. 
it.    7  I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  (even) 
3.7*0  slaughter,  njrp  tabach. 

Jer.  11.  19  (or)  an  ox  (that)  is  brought  to  the  slaughter 
25.  34  the  days  of  your  slaughter  and  of  your  di. 
51.  40  bring  them  down  like  lambs  to  the  slau. 
4. Slaughter,  slaughtered  animal,  n;p  tebach. 

Prov.  7.  22  as  an  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter,  or  as  a  fo. 
Isa.   34.    2  he  hath  delivered  them  to  the  slaughter 
34.    6  a  great  slaughter  in  the  land  of  Idunica 
53.    7  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter 
65. 12  ye  shall  all  bow  down  to  the  slaughter 
Jer.  48.  15  young  men  are  gone  down  to  the  slaugh. 
50.  27  let  them  go  down  to  the  slaughter :  woe 
Eze.  21.  15  bright,  (it  is)  wrapped  up  for  the  slaugh. 
21.  2S  the  slaughter  (it  is)  furbished,  to  consume 
5. Slaughter,  nrna  tibchah. 

Paa.  44.  =2  we  are  counted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter 
Jer.   12.    3  pull  them  out  Uke  sheep  for  the  slaughter 

S.Plague,  stroke,  n^ao  maggephah. 

1  Sa.   4. 17  there  hath  been  also  a  great  slaughteram. 

2  Sa.  17.    9  There  isa  slaughter  among  thepeople  th. 

18.  7  there  wastherea  great  slaughter  that  day 
7. Slaughter,  -590  matbeach. 

Isa.   14.  21  Prepare  slaughter  for  his  children  for  the 
8. Smiting,  stroke,  blow,  rrjrj  makkah. 

Josh.  10. 10  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter  at  Gib. 

10.  20  slaying  them  with  a  very  great  slaughter 
Judgn.  33  smote  them,  .with  a  very  great  slaughter 

15.    8  he  smote  them . .  with  a  great  slaughter 
1  Sa.    4. 10  there  was  a  very  great  slaughter,  for  there 
6. 19  had  smitten  (many),  .with  a  great  slaugh. 

14.  14  that  first  slaughter,  which  Jonathan  and 

14.  30  a  much  greater  slaughter  among  the  Phi. 

19.  8  went,  .and  slew  them  with  a  great  slaug. 
23.   5  and  smote  them  with  a  great  slaughter 

1  Ki.  20.  21  slew  the  Syrians  with  a  great  slaughter 

2  Ch.13.  17  his  people  slew  them  with  a  great  slaug. 

28.    5  who  smote  him  with  a  great  slaughter  of 
Isa.    10.  26  according  to  the  slaughter  of  Midian  at 

S.Slaughter  axe,  j'e?  mappats, 

Eze.    9.    2  everyman  a  slaughter  weapon  in  hishaud 

10.  To  cause  to  smite,  npj  nakah,  5. 

Gen.  14.  17  return  from  the  slaughter  of  Chedorlaom. 
t  Sa.  17.  57  David  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the 
18.  6  David  was  returned  from  the  slaughter  of 
2  Sa.  1.  1  David  was  returned  from  the  slaughter  of" 
2  Ch.25. 14  Amaziah  was  come  fromthe  slaughter  of 

ll.Slaughter,  killing,  Vbjo  getel. 

Obad.       9  every  one.  .limy  be  cut  oil  by  slaughter 
12.  Murder,  ns";  retsach. 

Eze.  21.  22  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter,  to 
13.^-1  smiting,  slaughter,  kotttj  hope. 

Heb.    7.    1  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings 
li. Slaughter,  atpay-ij  sphage. 

Acts    8.  32  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter 

Rom.  8.  30  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaugh. 

Jas.     5.    5  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day  of  sla. 

15.3furder,  slaughter,  homicide,  tpovos  pilwnos. 

Acts    9.    i  breathing  out  threatening^  and  slaughter 
SLAUGHTER,  to  make  or  he  made  a  — 
l.To  be  slain,  :ni  harag,  2. 

Eze.  20.  15  when  the  slaughter  is  made  in  the  midst 
2. To  slaughter,  n;a  tabach. 

Eze.  21.  10  It  is  sharpened  to  make  a  sore  slaughter 
3.7b  slaughter,  Q~y  shachat. 

Hos.    5.    2  the  revolters  are  profound  to  make  slau. 
SLAVE  — 
Body,  person,  aHfiasOma. 

Rev.  18. 13  horses,  and  chariots,  and  slaves,  and  souls 
SLAY  (utterly),  to  — 
1.  To  slay,  J-57  harag. 

Gen.    4.    8  rose  up  against  Abel  hisbrother,  and  slew 
4.  14  every  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me 
4.  15  whosoever  slayeth  Cain,  vengeance  shall 
4.  23  I  have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding,  and 
4.  25  another,  .instead  of  Abel,  whom  Cain  slew 

20.  4  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  nat.? 
20. 1 1  and  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife's  sake 
27. 41  The  days,  .are  at  hand;  then  I  will  slay 
34.  25  came  upon  the  city  boldly,  and  slew  all 
34.  26  they  slew  Hamor  and  Shechem  his  son 
37.  20  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into  some 
37.  26  What  profit  (is  it)  if  we  slay  our  brother 
49.   6  in  their  anger  they  slew  a  man,  and  in  th. 

Exod.2.  15  when  Pharaoh  heard.. he  sought  to  slay 
4.  23  behold,  I  will  slay  thy  son,  (even)  thy  first 
5=1  to  put  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  slay  us 
13-  15  'he  Lord  slew  all  the  first  born  in  the  la. 

21.  14  But  if  a  man  come,  .to  slay  him  with  gu. 
23-  7  the  innocent  and  righteous  slay  thou  not 
32.  12  to  slay  them  in  themouutains,  and  to  co. 
32.  27  slayevery  mauihis  brother,  and  every  man 

Lev.  20.  15  if  a  man  lie  with  a  beast,  .slay  the  beast 
JMum22.  jurely  now  also  I  had  slain  thee,  and  sav. 
25.  5  Slay  ye  even'  one  his  men  that  were  joined 
31.  7  they  warred,  and  thev  slew  all  the  males 
31.  8  thev  slew  tin-  kings  of  Midian,  besides  the 
31.  8  Baalamalsuthesonof  Beortheyslew  uith 
Josh.  8.  24  when  Israel  had  made  an  end  of  slaying 


Josh.  9.  26  delivered  them . .  that  they  slew  them  not 
10. 11  (they)  whom  the  children  of  Israel  slew 
13.  22  did  the  children  of  Israel  slay  with  the  s. 

Judg.  7.  25-they  slew  Oreb  upon  the  rock  Oreb,  and 

7.  25  Zeeb  they  slew  at  the  wine  press  of  Zeeb 

8.  17  he  beat  down  the  tower,  .aud  slew  the 
8. 18  What  manner  of  men  (were  they)  whom 
8.  19  if  ye  had  saved  them . .  I  would  not  slay 
8.  20  said  unto  Jetherhis  firstborn,  Up,(and)s. 

8.  2i  Gideon  arose,  and  slew  Zebah  and  Zulmu. 

9.  5  slew  his  brethren  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal 
9.  18  have  slain  his  sons,  threescore  and  ten  pe. 
9.  24  Abimelech  their  brother,  which  slew  them 
9. 45  he  took  the  city,  and  slew  the  people  that 
9.  54  that  men  say  not  of  me,  A  woman  slew  him 
9.  56  which  he  did  unto  his  father,  in  slaying 

20.    5  men  of  Gibeah . .  thought  to  have  slain  me 

1  Sa.  22.  21  that  Saul  had  slain  the  Lord's  priests 

2  Sa.   3.  30  So  Joab  and  Abishaihis  brother  slew  Ab. 

4. 10  I  took  hold  of  him,  and  slew  him  in  Ziklag 

4. 11  when  wicked  men  have  slain  a  righteous 

4. 12  they  slew  them,  and  cut  off  their  hands 
10. 18  David  slew  (the  men  of)  seven  hundred  ch. 
12.    9  hast  slain  him  with  the  sword  of  the  chil. 
14.    7  for  the  life  of  his  brother  whom  he  slew 

_    23.  21  plucked. .and  slew  him  with  his  own  spear 

1  Ki.   2.    5  Amasa  the  son  of  Jether,  whom  he  slew 

2.  32  who  fell  upon  two  men . .  and  slew  them 
9. 16  slain  the  Cauaanites  that  dwelt  in  the  city 
11.  24  captain overaband,  whenDavidslewthem 
18. 12  aud  he  cannot  find  thee,  he  shall  slay  me 
iS.  13  when  Jezebel  slew  the  prophets  of  the  L. 
18. 14  Go,  tell  thy  lord,  .and  he  shall  slay  me 
19.  1  he  had  slain  all  the  prophets  with  the  sw. 
19.  10,  14  and  slain  thy  prophets  with  the  sword 

2  Ki.  8. 12  their  young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  the 

9.  31  she  said,  (Had)  Zinrri  peace,  who  slew  his 

10.  9  I  conspired  against  my  master,  and  slew 

11.  18  slew  Mattan  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the 
17.  25  sent  lions  among  them,  which  slew  (some) 

1  Ch.  7.  21  whom  the  men  of  Gath.  .slew,  because  th. 

11.  23  went  down,  .and  slew  him  with  Ids  own 
19.  18  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  seven  thousand 

2  Ch.21.    4  slew  all  his  brethren  with  the  sword,  and 

21.  13  hast  slain  thy  brethren  of  thy  father's  ho. 

22.  1  for  the  band  of  men . .  had  slain  all  the  el. 
22.  8  when  Jehu,  .found  the  princes,  he  slew 
23. 17  slew  Mattan  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the 
24.  22  remembered  not  the  kindness,  .but  slew 

24.  25  slew  him  on  his  bed,  and  he  died :  and  th. 

25.  3  slew  Ills  servants  that  had  killed  the  king 
28.  6  For  Pekah  the  son  of  Remaliah  slew  in  .1. 
28.  7  slew  JIaaseiah  the  king's  son,  and  Azrik. 
28.  9  ye  have  slain  them  in  a  rage  (that)  reaeheth 
36. 17  who  slew  theiryoung  men  with  the  sword 

4. 11  slay  them,  and  cause  the  work  to  cease 
6.  10  shut  the  doors . .  for  they  will  come  to  si. 

6.  10  yea,  in  the  night  will  they  come  to  stay 
9.  26  slew  thy  prophets  which  testified  against 

7.  4  to  be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to  perish 

8.  11  to  stand  for  their  life,  to  destroy,  to  slay 

9.  6  Jewsslewanddestroyedfivehundredmen 
9.  10  The  ten  sons  of  Haman . .  slew  they ;  but 
9.  12  Jews  have  slain  and  destroyed  five  hun. 
9. 15  slew  three  hundred  men  at  Shushau :  but 
9.  16  slew  of  their  foes  seventy  and  five  thou. 

Job  20. 16  of  asps :  the  viper's  tongue  shall  slay  him 

Psa.  59.  11  Slay  them  not,  lest  my  people  forget :  sc. 

78.  31  slew  the  fattest  of  them,  and  smote  down 

78.  34  When  he  slew  them,  then  they  sought  him 

94.   6  Tltey  slay  the  widow  and  the  stranger,  and 

135.  10  smotegreatnations.andslewmighty  kings 

136.  18  slew  famous  kings :  for  his  mercy  (endu.) 
Prov.  1.  32  turning  away  of  the  simple  shall  slay  th. 
Isa.    14.  20  destroyed  thy  land,  (and)slain  thy  people 

14.  30  kill  thy  root,  .and  he  shall  slay  thy  rem. 
22. 13  slaying  oxen  and  killing  sheep,  eating  tl. 

27.  1  he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that  (is)  in  the  sea 
Jer.  13.  3  the  sword  to  slay,  and  the  dogs  to  tear,  and 
Lam.  2.    4  slew  all  (that  were)  pleasant  to  the  eye  in 

2.  21  thou  hast  slain  (them)  in  the  day  of  thine 

3.  43  thou  hast  slain,  thou  hast  uot  pitied 
Eze.    9.    6  Slay  utterly  old  (and)  young,  both  maids 

23. 10  slew  her  with  the  sword :  and  she  became 
23.  47  slay  their  sons  aud  their  daughters,  and 
26.   8  He  shall  slay  with  the  sword  thy  daugh. 

26. 1 1  he  shall  slay  thy  people  by  the  sword,  and 

28.  9  Wilt  thou  yet  say  before  him  that  slayeth 
Hos.  6.  5  slain  them  by  the  words  of  my  mouth  :  and 
Amos  2.    3  will  slay  all  the  princes  thereof  with  him 

4. 10  your  young  men  have  I  slain  with  the  sw. 

9.    1  I  will  slay  the  last  of  them  with  the  sw. 

9.  4  command  the  sword,  aud  it  shall  slay  th. 
Hab.  1.  17  not  spare  continually  to  slay  the  nations 
Zech  11.    5  Whose  possessors  slay  them,  and  hold  th. 

.  To  slaughter,  sacrifice,  rqt  zabach. 

1  Ki.   1.   9  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  oxen  and  fat  ca. 

1. 19  hath  slain  oxen  and  fat  cattle  and  sheep 
1.  25  hath  slain  oxen  aud  fat  cattle  and  sheep 
19.  21  slew  them,  and  boiled  their  flesh  with  the 

2  Ki.  23.  20  he  slew  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places 
To  pierce,  7TQ  chalal. 

Judg  16.  24  destroyer  of  our  country,  which  slew  ma. 
2  Sa.  23.    8  eight  hundred,  whom  he  slew  at  one  ti. 

23.  iS  slew  (them),  and  had  the  name  among  th. 

1  Ch.11.  20  slew  them,  and  had  a  name  among  the  th. 
To  pierce,  S^n  chalal,  3. 

Eze.  28.   9  no  god,  in  the  hand  of  him  that  slayeth 
To  waste,  be  dried  up,  j-jn  charcb. 

Jer.  50.  27  Slay  all  her  bullocks ;  let  them  go  down 


Neh. 


Esth. 


Ki. 


6.  To  (cause  to)  derate  to  God  or  destruction,  ffyj. 
2  Ch.20.  23  Amnion  aud  Moab  stood  up.  .utterly  to  s. 

7.  To  slaughter  a  slaughter,  n;a  reo  tabach  tebach. 
Gen.  43.  i6Bring(these)menh'ome,'andslay,  and  ma. 
Psa.  37. 14  to  slay  such  asbeof  upright  conversation 

S.  To  put  to  death,  n;o  math,  Sa. 

Judg.  9.  54  Draw  thy  sword,  aud  slay  me,  that  men 

1  Sa.  14. 13  and  his  armour  bearer  slew  after  him 
17-  si  slew  him,  and  cut  off  his  head  therewith 

2  Sa.  1.  9  Stand,  I  pray  thee,  upon  me,  and  slay  me 
1. 10  I  stood  upon  him,  and  slew  him,  because 
1. 16  saying,  I  have  slain  the  Lord's  anointed 

Psa.  34.  21  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked;  and  they  that 
109.  16  that  he  might  even  slay  the  broken  in  he. 
Jer.  20.  17  Because  he  slew  me  not  from  the  womb 
9.  To  {cause  to)  put  to  death,  ma  muth,  5. 

Gen.  18.  25  to  slay  the  righteous  with  the  wicked 

37.  18  they  conspired  against  him  to  slay  him 

38.  7  Er.  .was  wicked . .  and  the  Lord  slew  him 

38. 10  displeased  the  Lor-d  :  wherefore  he  slew 
42.  37  Slay  my  two  sons,  if  I  bring  him  not  to 

J." urn  35.  19  The  revenger  of  blood  himself  shall  slay 
35.  19  when  he  meeteth  him,  he  shall  slay  him 
35.  21  the  revenger  of  blood  shall  slay  the  mur. 

Deut.  9.  28  he  hath  brought  them  out  to  slay  them 

Josh. 10.  26  Joshua  smote  them,  aud  slew  them,  and 
11.  17  he  took,  and  smote  them,  and  slew  them 

Judgi6.  30  so  the  dead  whichheslewat  hisdeathwe. 

16.  30  more  than  (they)  which  he  slew  in  hislife 

1  Sa.   2.  25  because  the  Lord  would  slay  them 
5.  10  brought  about  the  ark.  .to  us,  to  slay  us 
5. 11  let  it  go.,  that  it  slay  us  not,  and  our  pe. 

15.    3  slay  both  man  aud  woman,  infant  and  su. 

17.  35  I  caught  (him)  by  his  beard.,  and  slew  him 

17.  50  and  smote  the  Philistine,  and  slew  him 
19.   5  wilt  thou  sin. .to  slay  David  without  a  ca. 

19. 11  to  watch  him,  and  to  slay  him  in  the  mo. 

19.  15  Bring  him  up  to  me. .that  I  mayslayhim 

20.  8  if  there  be  in  me  iniquity,  slaymethyself 
20.  33  it  was  determined  of  his  father  to  slay  D. 
22. 17  Turn,  and  slay  the  priests  oi  the  Lord 
22.  18  slew  on  that  day  fourscore  and  fivepersons 
30.    2  they  slew  not  any,  either  great  or  small 

2  Sa.  3.  30  he  had  slain  their  brother  Asahel  at 

3.  37  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  slay  Abner  the 

4.  7  they  smote  him,  and  slew  him,  and  bell. 

13.  32  Let  not  my  lord  suppose  (that)  they  have 

14.  6  but  the  one  smote  the  other,  andslew  him 

18.  15  compassed  about  and  smote  Absalom. .si. 
1  (It  is)  for  Saul,  .because  he  slew  the  Gib. 

51  he  will  not  slay  his  servant  with  the  sword 

2.  34  went  up,  and  fell  upon  him,  and  slew  him 

3.  26,  27  give  her  the . .  child,  and  in  no  wise  slay 
13.  24  a  lion  met  him  by  the  way,  and  slew  him 

13.  26  which  hath  torn  him,  and  slain  him,  ace. 

15.  28  in  the  third  year,  .did  Baasha  slay  him 
17.  18  call,  .to  remembrance,  and  to  slay  myson 

17.  20  brought  evil  upon  the  widow,  .by  slaying 

18.  9  wouldest  deliver  thy  servant,  .to  slay  me 

19.  17  (that)  him  that  escapeth.  .shall  Jehu  slay 
19.  17  and  him  that  escapeth.  .shall  Elisha  slay 
11.  20  they  slew  Athaliahwiththesword(beside) 

14.  6  the  children  of  the  murderers  he  slew  not 

14.  19  they  sent  after  him  to  Lachish,  and  slew 

15.  10  smote  him  before  the  people,  andslewhini 

15.  14  and  slew  him,  and  reigned  in  his  stead 
15.30  smote  him,  and  slew  him,  and  reigned  in 

16.  9  carried  (the  peopleof)  it  captive.,  and  slew 

17.  26  they  slay  them,  because  they  know  not 
21.  23  conspired  against  him,  and  slew  the  king 
23.  29  he  slew  him  at  Megiddo,  when  l.e  had  seen 
25.  21  slew  them  at  Riblah  in  the  land  of  Ham. 

1  Ch.  2.    3  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  ;  andheslew 
10.  14  he  slewhim,  and  turned  the  kingdomunto 

2  Ch.22.    9  when  they  had  slain  him,  they  buried  him 
22. 11  hid  him  from  Athaliah,  so  that  she  slew 

23. 14  said,  Slay  her  not  in  the  house  of  the  L. 

23. 15  by  the  king's  house,  they  slew  her  there 
23.  21  they  had  slain  Athaliah  with  the  sword 
25.    4  he  slew  not  their  children,  but  (did)  as  (it 
25.  27  sent  to  lachish  after  him,  and  slew  him 
33.  24  conspired  against  him,  and  slew  him  in 

5.  2  killeth  the  foolish  man,  and  envy  slayeth 
23  If  the  scourge  slay  suddenly,  he  will  laugh 
32  The  wicked  watcheth..and  seeketh  to  si. 
29  turneth  their  waters  into  blood,  and  slew 
4  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  alay  the 
15  GOD  shall  slay  thee,  and  call  his  servants 

2  slew  him,  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  had 

4  the  second  dayafterhehad  slain  Gedaliah 
8  Slay  us  not;  for  we  have  treasures  in  the 

5  and  slew  them  net  among  their  brethren 
19  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  die,  and 

3  set  her  like  a  dry  land,  and  slay  her  with 
9.  16  yet  will  I  slay  (even)  the  beloved  (fruit)  of 

10.ro  (cause  to)  smite,  nrj  nakah,  5. 

Gen.  34.  30  they  shall gatherthemselves.  .ar.dslayme 
Exod.  2.  12  he  slew  the  Egyptian,  and  hid  him  in  the 
Deut.  1.    4  After  lie  had  slain  Sihon  the  king  of  the 
ic.    6  Lest  the  avenger  of  the  bh  od.  .slay  him 
27.  25  Cursed  (lie)  he  that  taketh  reward  to  slay 
Josh.  8.  21  they  turned  again,  and  slew  themen  of  Ai 
10.  10  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter  at  Gibe. 
10.  20  Israel  had  made  an  end  of  slaying  them 
Judg.  1.    4  they  slew  of  them  in  Bezek  ten  thousand 
1.    5  they  slew  the  Cauaanites  and  the  Perizz. 
1.  10  they  slew  Sbeshai,  and  Ahinian,  and  Ta. 
1.  17  they  slew  the  Cauaanites  that  inhabited 
3.  29  they  slew  of  Moab  at  that  time  about  ten 
3.  31  which  slew  of  the  Philistines  six  hundred 


i  Ki. 


Job 


Psa 

9 
37 

Isa. 

i°5 
11 

Jer. 

°5- 
41- 

4i- 

41. 

41. 

Eze. 

13- 

Hos 

2. 

SLAYER 


899 


SLEEP 


Judg.  g.* 44  two(other)companiesran.  .and  slewthem 

14.  Tg  slew  thirty  men  of  them,  and  took  their 
15. 15  took  it,  and  slew  a  thousand  men  there. 

15.  16  with  the  jaw  of  an  ass  have  I  slain  a  tho. 

20.  45  and  slew  two  thousand  men  of  them 

1  Sa.   4.   2  they  slew  of  the  army  in  the  field  about 

11.  11  slew  the  Ammonites  until  the  heat  of  the 

17.  36  Thyservant  slew  both  the  lion  and  the  be. 

18.  7  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  David 

18.  27  slew  of  the  Philistines  two  hundred  men 

19.  s  slew  the  Philistine,  and  the  Lord  wrought 

19.  8  and  slew  them  with  a  great  slaughter 

21.  9  whom  thou  slewest  iu  the  valley  of  Elali 
21.  11  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  David 
29.    5  Saul  slew  his  thousands,  and  David  his 
31.    2  the  Philistines  slew  Jonathan,  and  Abina. 

2  Sa.   8.    5  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty 

13.  30  Absalom  hath  slain  all  the  king's  sons,  and 
21.  2  Saul  sought  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal  to  the 
21. 12  when  the  Philistines  had  slain  Saul  in  G. 
21.  16  he,  beinggirded .  .thought  to  have  slain  D. 
21.  iSSibbechaitheHushathiteslewSaph,  which 
21.  19  slew(thebrotherof)GoliaththeGittite,the 
21.  21  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shimeah . .  slew  him 
23.  12  and  defended  it,  and  slew  the  Philistines 
23.  20  he  slewtwo  lion  like  men  of  Moab:  he  we. 
23.  20  slew  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  time 
23.  21  And  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  goodly  man 

1  Ki.16.  ti  he  slew  all  the  house  of  Baasha:  he  left 

16.  16  Zimri  hath  conspired,  and  hath  also  slain 

20.  20  they  slew  every  one  his  man:  and  the  Sy, 
20.  21  slew  the  Syrians  with  a  great  slaughter 
20.  29  the  children  of  Israel  slew  of  the  Syrians 
20.  36  Then  said  he.  .a  lion  shall  slay  thee 

20.  36  as  soon  as  he  was  departed,  .a  lion,  .slew 

2  Ki.  10.   9  Ye  (be)  righteous . .  but  who  slew  all  these  ? 

10. 11  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  of  the  house 
10.  17  he  slew  all  that  remained  unto  Ahab 

10.  25  Go  in  (and)  slay  them ;  let  none  come  forth 

12.  20  slew  Joash  in  the  house  of  Millo,  which 

14.  5  he  slew  his  servants  which  had  slain  the 

14.  7  He  slew  of  Edom  in  the  \  alley  of  salt  ten 

15.  30  smote  him,  and  slew  him,  and  reigned  in 

21.  24  the  people  of  the  land  slew  all  them  that 

1  Ch  10.    2  the  Philistiues  slew  Jonathan,  ami  Abin. 

11. 14  and  delivered  it,  and  slew  the  Philistines 
ii,  22  he  slew  two  lion  like  men  of  Moab 

11,  22  and  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit  in  a  snowy  day 
11.  23  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  amau  of  (great)  sta. 
18.  5  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty 
18.  12  the  sou  of  Zeruiah  slew  of  the  Edomites 
20.  4  Sibbechai  the  Hushathite  slew  Sippai,  (th . ) 
20.  5  the  son  of  Jair  slew  Lahmithe  brother  of 
20.    7  the  son  of  Shimea,  David's  brother,  slew 

2  Ch.  13. 17  Abijah  and  his  people  slew  them  with  a  gr, 

33.  25  the  people  of  the  land  slew  all  them  that 
Job      1. 15  they  haveslainthe  servants  with  the  edge 
1. 17  slain  the  servauts  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
fsa.   66.    3  He  that  killeth  an  ox  (is  as  if)  he  slew  a 
Jer.     s-    6  a  lionoutof  the  forest  shall  slay  them,  (a.) 
20.    4  shall  carry  them  captive,  .and  shall  slay 
26.  23  who  slew  him  with  the  sword,  and  cast 
29.  21  and  he  shall  slay  them  before  your  eyes 
33.    5  whom  I  have  slain  in  mine  anger,  and  in 
40.  15  I  will  slay  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah 

40.  15  wherefore  should  he  slay  thee,  that  all  the 

41.  3  Ishmael  also  slew  all  the  Jews  that  were 
41.  16  he  had  slain  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam 
4T.  iS  the  son  of  Nethaniah  had  slain  Gedaliah 
41.   9  the  men,  whom  he  had  slain  because  of 

Eze.    9.    7  And  they  went  forth,  and  slew  in  the  city 
9.    8  it  came  to  pass,  while  they  were  slaying  th. 

11.  To  smite  tlie  soul,  &3i  nra  nakah  nephesh. 

Jer.  40.  14  sent  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah  to  slay 

12.  To  caicse  to  fall,  ^55  naphal,  5. 

2  Ch.32.  21  they  that  came,  .slew  him  there  with  the 

13.  To  kill,  bvQ  qatal. 

Job   13. 15  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  iu  him 
Psa.139.  19  thou  wilt  slay  the  wicked,  O  God ;  depart 

li.To  kill,  hz$  qctal. 

Dan     5.  19  whom  he  would  he  slew,  and  whom  he 

15.  To  kill,  hv$  qelal,  3. 

Dan.   2.  14  which wasgone  forth  to  slaythewise(m.) 

3.  22  the  flame  of  the  fire  slew  those  men  that 

16.  To  murder  a  soul,  vzi  n^"i  ratsach  nephesh. 
Deut22.  26  riseth  against  his  neighbour,  and  slayeth 

17.  To  slaughter,  vinw  shachat. 

Gen.  22. 10  Abraham,  .took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son 
Exod29,  16  thou  shalt  slay  the  ram,  and  thou  shalt 
Lev.    4.  29  slay  the  sin  offering  in  the  place  of  the 

4.  33  slay  it  for  a  sin  offering  in  the  place  wh. 
8. 15,  23  And  he  slew  (it);  and  Moses  took  the 
g.  8  slew  the  calf  of  the  sin  offering  which  (w.) 
9. 12  he  slew  the  burnt  offering;  and  Aaron's  so. 
9. 15  slew  it,  and  offered  it  for  sin,  as  the  first 
9.  i3  He  slew  also  the  bullock  and  the  ram  (for) 

14.  13  he  shall  slay  the  lamb  in  the  place  where 
Num.  14.  16  therefore  he  hath  slain  them  in  the  wil. 

ig.    3  bring  her . .  and  (one)  shall  slay  her  before 
Judg  12.    6  and  slew  him  at  the  passages  of  Jordan 
1  Si.    1.  25  they  slew  a  bullock,  and  brought  the  ch. 

14,  32  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  calves,  and  si. 

14.  34  slay  (them)  here,  and  eat ;  and  sin  not  ag. 

14.  34  brought  every  man  his  ox.  .and  slew  (th.) 

1  Xi  i3.  40  Elijah  brought  them,  .and  slew  them  th. 

2  Ki.  to.    7  slew  seventy  persons,  and  put  their  heads 

jo.  14  slew  them  at  the  pit  of  the  shearing  house 


2  Ki.  25.  7  they  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  his 
Isa.  57.  5  slaying  the  children  in  the  valleys  under 
Jer.  39.    6  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Zee. 

39.  6  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  all  the  nobles  of 
41.  7  Ishmael  the  sou  of  Nethaniah  slew  them 
52.  10  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Ze. 
52. 10  he  slew  also  all  the  princes  of  Judah  in  R. 

Eze.  16.  21  thou  hast  slain  my  children,  and  deliver. 
23.  39  they  had  slain  their  children  to  their  id. 

40.  39  to  slay  thereon  the  burnt  offering,  and  the 
40.  41  eight  tables,  whereupon,  .slew  (their  sa.) 
40.  42  they  slew  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sac. 
44.  11  shall  slay  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sac. 

18.  To  take  up  or  away,  avaipiw  anaired. 

Matt.  2. 16  slew  all  the  children  that  were  in  Bethl, 

Acts   2.  23  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain 

5.  33  they  were  cut.  .and  took  counsel  to  slay 

5.  36  who  was  slain;  and  all,  as  many  as  obey. 

9.  29  spake  boldly,  .but  they  went  about  to  slay 

10.  39  whom  they  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree 
13.  28  desired  they  Pilate  that  he  should  be  sla. 
22.  20  kept  the  raiment  of  them  that  slew  him 

19.  To  kill  off,  airoKTehoj  apokteino. 

Matt  21.  39  cast  (him)  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew 

22.  6  entreated  (them)  spitefully,  and  slew  (th.) 
Luke  9.  22  and  be  slain,  and  be  raised  the  third  day 

11.  49  (some)  of  them  they  shall  slay  and  perse. 
13.    4  the  tower  in  Siloam  fell,  and  slew  them 

John  5.  16  [sought  to  slay  him,  because  he  had  done] 
Acts  7.  52  they  have  slain  them  which  showed  before 

23.  14  we  willeatnothing  until  we  have  slain  P. 
Rom.  7.  11  For  sin.  .deceived  me,  and  by  it  slew  (me) 
Eph.  2. 16  reconcile  both,  .having  slain  the  enmity 
Rev.    2.  13  my  faithful  martyr,  who  was  slain  among 

9.  15  prepared,  .for  to  slay  the  third  part  of  m. 
11. 13  in  the  earthquake  were  slain  of  men  sev. 
19.  21  the  remnant  were  slain  with  the  sword  of 

20.  To  handle  severely ,5'  ;~  Hpi^ofj-aidiacheirizomai. 
Acts   5.  30  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tr. 

21. To  sacrifice,  slaughter,  Bva  thud. 

Acts  11.    7  a  voice  saying  unto  me,  Arise,  Peter ;  slay 

22.  To  slay  utterly,  KaTaa-cpdrrw  katas2)hattd,-d{w. 
Lukeig.  27  bring  hither,  and  slay  (them)  before  me 

23.  To  slay,  slaughter,  acpdrrw  sphatto,  acpdfa. 

1  Jo.    3.  12  slew  his  brother.    And  wherefore  slew  he 

Rev.    5.    6  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having 

5.   9  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to 

5.  12  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  re. 

6.  9  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the 
13.    8  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of 

18.  24  and  of  all  that  were  slain  upon  the  earth 

24.  To  murder,  (povevca  phoneuo. 

Matt  23.  35  whom  ye  slew  between  the  temple  and 
SLAYER  — 
\.To  slay,  Jin  harag. 

Eze.  21. 11  to  give  it  into  the  hand  of  the  slayer 

2.7b  (cause  to)  smite,  rra  nakah,  5. 

Num  35.  24  shall  judge  between  the  slayerand  the  re. 
3.  To  murder,  nyn  ratsach. 

Num  35. 11  that  the  slayer  may  flee  thither,  which 
35. 25  the  congregation  shall  deliver  the  slayer 
35.  26  if  the  slayer  shall  at  any  time  comewith. 
35.  27  and  the  revenger  of  blood  shall  kill  the  si. 
35.  28  the  slayer  shall  return  into  the  laud  of  his 
Deut.  4.  42  That  the  slayer  might  flee  thither,  which 

19.  3  three  parts,  thatevery  slayer  may  flee  th. 
19.  4  this  (is)  the  case  of  the  slayer  which  shall 

19.  6  the  avenger  of  the  blood  pursue  the  slayer 
Josh  20.    3  the  slayerthat  killeth(any)personunawa. 

20.  5  they  shall  not  deliver  up  the  slayer  into 
20.   6  then  shall  the  slayer  return,  and  come 
21. 13,  21,  27,  32,  38  city  of  refuge  for  the  slayer 

SLEEP,  one  out  of,  sleeping,  slept  — 

1.  Sleeping,  one  asleep,  jc*;  yashen. 

1  Sa.  26.   7  Saul  lay  sleeping  within  the  trench,  and 
1  Ki.  3.  20 took  my  son.. while  thine  handmaidslept 
Psa.  78.  65  the  Lord  awaked  as  one  out  of  sleep,  (and) 

2.  To  be  fast  asleep,  in  a  trance,  □"]"]  radam,  2. 

Jon.    1.   6  What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper?  arise, "call 

Z.Slcep,  kjb*  shena. 

Psa.  127.*  2  (for)  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep 

i.SZeep,  rr.;^'  shenah. 

Gen.  28.  16  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  sa. 

31.  40  and  my  sleep  departed  from  mine  eyes 
Judgi6.  14  he  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  weutaway 
16. 20  he  awoke  out  of  his  sleep,  and  said,  I  will 
Job   14. 12  not  awake,  nor  be  raised  out  of  their  sleep 
Esth.  6.    1  On  that  night  could  not  the  king  sleep 
Psa.  76.    5  The  stout  hearted . .  have  slept  their  sleep 
90.    5  they  are  (as)  asleep;  iu  the  morning  (they) 
Prov.  3.  24  thou  shalt  lie  down,  and  thy  sleep  shall  be 
4.  16  their  sleep  is  taken  away,  unless  they  ca. 
6.    4  Give  not  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber 
6.    9  when  wilt  thou  arise  out  of  thy  sleep? 
6.  10  a  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber,  a  little  fol. 
20.  13  Love  not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  to  poverty 

24.  33  a  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber,  a  little  fol. 
Eccl.  5.  12  The  sleep  of  a  labouring  man  (is)  sweet 

8.  16  neither  daynor  night  seeth  sleep  with  his 

Jer.  31.  26  I  awaked,  and  beheld ;  and  my  sleep  was 

51.  39  may  rejoice,  and  sleep  a  perpetual  sleep 

51. 57  theyshall  sleepa  perpetual  sleep,  andnot 

Dan.    2.    1  his  spirit  was  troubled,  and  his  sleep  br. 

Zech.  4.    1  as  a  man  that  is  wakened  out  of  his  sleep 


5.  Sleep,  njiy  shenah. 

Dan.    6. 18  passed  the  night  fasting.. his  sleep  went 

6.  Sleep,  n$  shenath . 

Psa.  132.    4  I  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine  eyes,  (or)sL 

7. Sleep,  vwvos  hupnos. 

Matt.  1 .  24  Joseph,  being  raised  from  sleep,  did  as  the 
Luke  9.  32  But  Peter  and  they,  .were  heavy  with  si. 
John  11. 13  he  had  spoken  of  taking  of  rest  in  sleep 
Acts  20.    9  Eutychus,  being  fallen  into  a  deep  sleep 
20.   9  he  sunk  down  with  sleep,  and  fell  down 
Rom  13. 11  now  (it  is)  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep 

SLEEP  (on),  to  — 

1 .  To  doze,  nin  hazah. 

Isa.   56.  losleeping,  lying  down,  loving  to  slumber 

2.  To  sleep,  ]W]  yaslien. 

1  Ki.iS.  27  peradventure  he  sleepeth,  and  must  be  a. 
Song  5.  2  I  sleep, but  my  heart  waketh :  (it  is)  the  vo. 
Dan.  1 2.  2  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the 
Hos.    7.    6  their  baker  sleepeth  all  the  night ;  in  the 

3.  To  (make  to)  sleep,  }&i  yashen. 

Gen.    2.  21  sleep-to  fall  upon  Adam,  and  he  slept 
41.    5  he  slept  and  dreamed  the  second  time 

1  Ki.  19.  5  as  he  lay  and  slept  under  a  juniper  tree 
Job  3. 13  I  should  have  slept :  then  had  I  been  at 
Fsa.     3.    5  I  laid  me  down  and  slept ;  I  awaked ;  for 

4.  8  I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  sle. 
13-  3  lighten  mine  eyes,  lest  I  sleep  the  (sleepof) 
44.  23  why  steepest  thou,  O  Lord?  arise,  cast  us 

121.  4  Behold,  he.  .shall  neither  slumber  norsl. 
Prov.  4.  16  they  sleep  not,  except  they  have  done  mi. 
Isa.  5.  27  none  shall  slumber  nor  sleep ;  ueither  sh. 
Jer.  51.  39  that  they  may  rejoice,  and  sleep  a  perpe. 

51.  57  and  they  shall  sleep  a  perpetual  sleep 
Eze.  34.  25  they  shall  dwell  safely,  .and  sleep  in  the' 

4.  To  slumber,  sleep,  D13  num. 

Psa.  76.   s  stout  hearted  are  spoiled,  they  have  slept 

5.  To  be  fast  asleep,  in  a  trance,  cn~i  radam,  2. 

Prov  10.    5  he  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  is  a  sou  that 

6.  To  lie  doum,  2?#  shakab. 

Gen.  28.  11  and  he.  .lay  down  in  that  place  to  sleep 
Exod22.  27  it(is)his  raiment,  .wherein  shall  he  sleep  ? 
Deut  24.  12  if  the  man  (be)  poor,  thou  shalt  not  sleep 
24.  13  that  he  may  sleep  in  his  own  raiment,  and 

31.  16  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers;  and  th. 

2  Sa.   7.  12  and  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers 

1 1.   9  Uriah  slept  at  the  doorof  theking's house 

1  Ki.  1.  21  when  my  lord  the  kingshallsleepwithhis 

2.  10  David  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  bu, 
11.  21  Hadad  heard  in  Egypt  that  David  slept  wt 

11.  43  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
14.  20  he  slept  with  his  fathers ;  and  Nadab  his 

14.  31  R.ehoboani  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 

15.  8  Abijam  slept  with  his  fathers;  and  they 

15.  24  Asa  slept  with  his  f  athers,  and  was  buried 

16.  6  Baasha  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  wasbu. 
16. 28  Omri  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  bur. 
22.  40  Ahab  slept  with  his  fathers  ;  and  Ahaziah, 
22.  50  Jehoshaphat  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 

2  Ki.  8."  24  Joram  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  bu. 

10.  35  Jehu  slept  with  his  fathers :  and  they  bu. 
13.   9  Jehoahaz  slept  with  his  fathers ;  and  they 

13.  13  Joash  slept  with  his  fathers ;  and  Jerobo. 

14.  16  Jehoash  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
14.  22  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 

14.  29  Jeroboam  slept  with  his  fathers,  (even)wi. 

15.  7  Azariah  slept  with  his  fathers;  and  they 
15.  22  Menahem  slept  with  his  fathers  ;  and  Pe. 

15.  38  Jotham  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  wasbu. 

16.  20  Ahaz  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  bu. 

20.  21  Hezekiah  slept  with  his  fathers:  and  Man. 

21.  18  Mauasseh  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
24.    6  Jehoiakim  slept  with  his  fathers :  and  Je. 

2  Ch.  9.  31  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  he 

12.  16  Rehoboam  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  w. 
14.  1  Abijah  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  bu. 
16.  13  Asa  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  died  in  the 

21.  1  Jehoshaphat  slept  with  his  fathers,  and 
26.    2  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers 

26.  23  Uzziah  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  bu. 

27.  9  Jotham  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

28.  27  Ahaz  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  bu. 

32.  33  Hezekiah  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 

33.  20  Manasseh  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they 
Job    7.  21  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the  dust  ;  and  thou 
Prov.  6.    9  How  long  wilt  thou  sleep,  O  sluggard  ?  wh 

6.  10  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep 

6.  22  when  thou  sleepest,  it  shall  keep  thee,  and. 

24.  33  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep 

7.  To  sleep),  /cafleiiSw  katheudo. 

Matt.  9. 24  for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 

1 3.  25  while  men  slept,  his  enemy  came  and  so. 

25.  5  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they . .  slept 

26.  4s  Sleep  on  now,  and  (take)  your  rest;  behold 
Mark  4.  27  And  should  sleep,  and  rise  night  and  day 

5.  39  the  damsel  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 

13.  36  Lest,  coming  suddenly,  he  find  you  sleep. 

14.  37  he  cometh,  and  findeth  them  sleeping,  and 
14.  37  Simon,  sleepest  thou?  couldest  uot  thou 
14.  41  Sleep  on  now,  and  take(your)  rest:  it  is  en. 

Luke  8.  52  Weep  not ;  she  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 

22.  46  Why  sleep  ye  ?  rise  and  pray,lest  ye  enter 
Eph.  5.  14  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from 
1  Th.  5.    6  let  us  not  sleep,  as  (do)  others ;  but  let  us 

5.  7  they  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night ;  and  th. 
5. 10  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live 


SLEEP 


900 


SMELL. 


8.7*0  lie  down  in  sleep,  Koi/j.dojj,ai  koimaomai. 
.Matt  27.  52  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  aro. 
28.  13  disciples,  .stolehim  (away)  while  we  slept 
Luke22.  45  when  he  rose  up . .  he  found  them  sleeping 
John 1 1.  1 1  our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth ;  but  I  go,  th. 
11. 12  Then  said  his  disciples,  Lord,  if  he  sleep 
Acts  12.   6  Teter  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers 
13.  36  fell  on  sleep,  and  was  laid  unto  his  fath. 
1  Co.n.3omany(are)  weak  and  sickly,  .and  many  si. 
i=.  20  become  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept 
15.51  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be 
1  Th.  4.  14  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will 
SLEEP,  to  be,  make,  or  cast  into  a  dead  or  deep  — 
1.7*0  (make  to)  sleepy  \w\  yashen,  3. 

Judgi6. 19  she  made  him  sleep  upon  her  knees:  and 

2.7*0  be  in  a  fast  sleep,  in  a  trance,  Dti  radam,  2. 

Psa.  76.    6  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  dead  si. 

Dan.  8.  18  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my  face  toward 

10.    0  then  was  I  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my  face,  and 

SLEIGHT  — 

Playing  ft  dice,  dlieat,  artifice,  Kvfieta  kubeia. 

Eph.    4.  14  by  the  sleight  of  men,  (and)  cunning  era. 
SLIDE  (back),  to  — 
l.To  move,  slip,  fail,  bto  mot. 

Deut  32.  35  their  foot  shall  slide  in  (due)  time :  for  the 

2.  To  slide,  nyo  mood. 

Psa.  26.    1  I  have  trusted.. (therefore)  I  shall  not  si. 
37.  31  in  his  heart ;  none  of  his  steps  shall  slide 

3.  To  be  refractory,  stubborn,  THD  sarar. 

Hos.    4.  16  Israel  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer 

4.  To  turn  or  bring  bad;  Hits?  shub,  3a. 

Jer.    8.    5  is  tins  people  of  Jerusalem  slidden  back 
SLIGHTLY  — 
To  be  light,  swift,  abated,  lightly  esteemed,  77j?,  2. 

Jer.     6.  14  healed  also  the  hurt.,  of  my  people  slightly 
8. 11  healed  the  hurt,  .of  my  people  slightly 

SLIME  — 

Bitumen,  *i?n  chemar. 

Gen.  11.   3  they  had  brick  for  stone,  and  slime  had  til. 
14. 10  the  vale  of  Siddim  (was  full  of)  slime  pits 

Exod.  2.    3  daubed  it  with  slime  and  with  pitch,  and 

SLING,  slinger,  sling  stone  — 

l.A  sling  stone,  p^jj  [3N  eben  qela. 

Job  41.  28  sling  stones  are  turned  with  him  into  st. 

Zech.  9.  15  devour,  and  subdue  with  sling  stones 

2.  A  sling.  heo,p  of  stones,  npni?  margemah. 

Prov26.    8  As  he  that  bindeth  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so 

3.. I  sling,  vhp,  qela. 

1  Sa.  17.  40  his  sling  (was)  in  his  hand  :  and  lie  drew 

17.  50  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a  sling 
25.  29  sling  out,  (as  out)  of  the  middle  of  a  sling 

2  CI1.26.  14  habergeons,  and  bows,  and  slings  (to  ca.) 

&.A  slinger,  v^P  qalla. 

2  Ki.  3.  25  howbeit  the  slingers  went  about  (it),  and 

SUNG  (out),  to  — 

1.7*0  sling  out,  yhp. 

Judg2o.  16  everyone  could  sling  stones  at  an  hair  (br.) 
Jer.  10.  i3  I  will  slingout  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

2.7b  sling  out,  yhp,  qala,  3. 

1  Sa.  17.  49  took  thence  a  stone,  and  slang  (it),  and 

25.  29  them  shall  he  sling  out,  (as  out)of  the  mi. 
SLIP  — 
.1  branch,  slip,  rvriD]  zemorah. 

Isa.    17.  10  and  shalt  set  it  with  strange  slips 
SLIP  away,  to  (let)  — 
l.To  move,  slip,  fail,  bid  mot. 

Psa.  38.  16  when  my  foot  slippeth,  they  magnify  (th.) 
94.  18  When  I  said,  My  foot  slippeth;  thymercy 

2.To  be  moved,  Bin  mot,  2. 

Psa.  1 7.    5  Hold  up  my  goings . .  (that)  my  footsteps  s. 
Z.To  slide,  "i>v?  maack 

2  Sa.  22.  37  enlarged  my  steps,  .my  feet  did  not  slip 
Job    12.    5  He  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  (his)  feet  (is) 
l'sa.  1 8.  36  enlarged  my  steps . .  my  feet  did  not  slip 

4.  To  cast  out  or  of,  slip  or  fall  off,  ?i?J  nashal. 

Deut  19.    5  the  head  slippeth  from  the  helve,  and  li. 

5.  To  free,  open,  let  away,  "ib?  patar. 

1  Sa.  19. 10  he  slipped  away  out  of  Saul'sprescnce,  ami 

6.  To  be  poured  out,  to  slip,  TjSV'  shaphak,  4. 

Psa.  73.    2  as  for  me . .  my  steps  had  well  nigh  slipped 
7.Tofow  along  or  by,  irapa^etc pararrJieo. 

Heb.  2.    1  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  (them)  slip 
SLIPPERY  (place)  — 
l.A  smooth  thing  orj>lace,  np^n  chelqah. 

Psa.  73.  18  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  places:  th. 

%. Smooth  thing  >„•  places,  nip^Sri  chalaqlaqqoth. 
Tsa.  35.    6  Let  their  way  be  dark  and  slippery  :  and 
Jer.  23.  12  their  way  shall  be  unto  them  as  slippery 

SLOTHFUL,  slothfulness,  to  be  — 
1.  To  be  slothful,  bty  atsal,  2. 

Judg  18.   9  be  not  slothful  to  go,  (and)  to  enter  to  p. 
^.Slothful,  V*y  atsel 

Prov  15.  ig  The  way  of  the  slothful  (man  is)  as  an  he. 


Provig.  24  slothful  (man)  hideth  his  hand  in  (his)  bo. 
21.  25  desire  of  the  slothful  killeth  him ;  for  his 
22. 13  slothful  (man)  saith,  (There  is)  a  lion  with. 
24.  30  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful,  and  by 
26.  13  slothful  (man)  saith,  (There  is)  a  lion  in 
26.  14  door  turneth . .  so  (doth)  the  slothful  upon 
26.  15  The  slothful  hideth  his  hand  in  (his)  bos. 

3. Sloth,  rh?%  atslah. 

Provig.  15  Slothfulness  casteth  into  a  deep  sleep  ;  and 
Eccl.io.  18  Bymuch  slothfulness  the  building  decay. 

4. Remissness,  deceit,  rrp-i  remiyyah. 

Prov  12.  24  bear  rule  :  but  the  slothful  shall  be  under 

12.  27  slothful  (man)  roasteth  not  that  which  he 

5.  To  become  or  shoio  self  feeble,  nsi  raphah,  7. 
Prov  18.   9  He  also  that  is  slothful  in  his  work  is  br. 

6.  Slothful,  sluggish,  vcodpos  nothros. 

Heb.    6.  12  That  ye  be  not  slothful,  but  followers  of 

7.  Motionless,  slothful,  idle,  0Ki/7}p6s  okneros. 

Matt  25.  26  wicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou  knew. 
Rom  12.  11  Not  slothful  in  business ;  fervent  iu  spirit 

SLOW  (to  anger)  — 

1.  Length,  XT$  erek. 

Neh.   9. 17  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and 

Psa.103.    8  gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in 
145.    8  full  of  compassion ;  slow  to  anger,  and  of 

Prov  14.  29  (He  that  is)  slow  to  wrath  (is)  of  great  uu. 
15. 18  but  (lie  that  is)  slow  to  anger  appeaseth 
16.  32  (He  that  is)  slow  to  anger  (is)  better  than 

Joel    2.  13  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kin. 

Jon.    4.    2  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kin. 

Nah.  1.   3  Lord  (is)  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in  pow. 

2. Heavy,  weighty,  "U3  kabed. 

Exod.  4. 10  but  I  (am)  slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow 

3.  Inactive,  unprofitable,  apy6s  argos. 

Titus  1.  12  Cretians  (are)  alway liars,  evilbeasts,  slow 

4. Heavy,  sloiv,  sluggish,  8pa5us  bradus. 

Luke  24.  25  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  pro. 
Jas.     1.  19  swift  to  hear,  slow  tospeak,  slow  to  wrath 

SLUGGARD  — 
Slothful,  hTJ,  otsel. 

ProT.  6.   6  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard  ;  consider 
6.   9  How  long' wilt  thou  sleep,  O  sluggard?  wh. 
10.  26  so  (is)  the  sluggard  to  them  that  send  him 

13.  4  Thesoul  of  the  sluggard  desireth,  and  (ha.) 
20.    4  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  the 
26. 16  sluggard  (is)  wiser  in  his  own  conceit  th. 

SLUICE  — 

Hire,  wage,  reward,  "i^  seker. 

Isa.   19. 10  all  that  make  sluices  (and)  pomis  for  fish 

SLUMBER,  (slumbering,  to)  — 
1.7*o  slumber,  Dia  num. 

Psa.121.    3  he  that  keepeth  thee  will  not  slumber 

121.    4  he  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slum. 
Isa.     5.  27  none  shall  slumber  nor  sleep;  neither 

56.  10  sleeping,  lying  down,  loving  to  slumber 
Nah.  3.  18  Thy  shepherds  slumber,  O  king  of  As>yii;t 

2.  Slumber,  ncisn  tenumah. 

Job    33.  15  falleth  upon  men,  in  slumberings  upon 
Psa. 132.    4  I  will  not  give,  .slumber  to  mine  eyelids 
Prov.  6.   4  Give  not  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber 

6.  10  little  slumber,  a  little  folding  of  the  ban. 
24. 33  little  slumber,  a  little  folding  of  the  han. 

Z.Deep  sleep,  Kardw^is  katanuxis. 

Romn.    8  God  hath  given  them  the  spiritof  slumb. 

4.To  nod,  slumber,  linger,  vvtrrdfa  nustazo. 

Matt  25.    5  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  si. 
2  Pe.  2.    3  and  their  damnation  slumbereth  not 

SMALL  (matter,  one,  quantity,  thing,  very)  — 

l.Lean,  thin,  p"i  claq. 

Exodi6.  14  small  round  thing,  (as)  small  as  the  hoar 
Lev.  16.  12  hands  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten  small 

1  Ki.  19.  12  fire  :  and  after  the  fire  a  still  small  voice 
Isa.   29.    5  multitude . .  shall  be  like  small  dust,  and 

2.  Few,  "ij"B  mizar. 

Isa.   16.'  14  the  remnant  (shall  be)  very  small  (and)  fe. 
3.7*0  do  good  or  well,  2b;  yatab,  5. 

Deut.  9.  21  stamped  it,  (and)  ground  (it)  very  small 

4., 4  little,  fe%v,  ByD  meat. 

Gen.  30. 15  (Is  it)  a  small  matter  that  thou  hast  tak. 
Nunii6.  9  small  thing  unto  you,  that  the  God  of  I. 
16. 13  small  thing  that  thou  hast  brought  us  up 
Job  15.  11  (Are)  the  consolations  of  God  small  with 
Isa.      1.    9  had  leftunto  us  a  verysmallrenmant,  we 

7.  13  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  men,  but  will 
Eze.  16.  20  (Is  this)  of  thy  whoredoms  a  small  matter 

34.  18  small  thing  unto  you  to  have  eaten  up  the 
Dan.  11.  23  shall  become  strong  with  a  small  people 

5. Men,  a  few,  DV"?  mefhim. 

Jer.  44.  28  Yet  a  small  number  that  escape  the  sw. 
6.  Little,  small,  "ij$B  miisar. 

2  Ch.24.  24  came  with  a  small  company  of  men,  and 
Job     8.    7  Though  thy  beginning  was  small,  yet  thy 

7. Little,  small,  young,  *ryy  tsair. 

Psa.119.  141  I  (am)  small  and  despised ;  (yet)  do  not 
Isa.  60.  22  a  small  one  a  strong  nation :  I  the  Lord 

8.  Strait,  close,  "is,  *iy  tsar. 

Prov  24.  io  (If)  thou  faint,  .thy  strength  (is)  small 


9.  Little,  small,  young,  ]B[?  qatan. 

Deut25. 13,  14  shalt  not  have,  .a  great  and  a  small 
1  Sa.    9.  21  a  Benjamite,  of  the  smallest  of  the  tribes 

1  Ki.   2.  20  I  desire  one  small  petition  of  thee,  .say 

2  Ch.31. 15  courses,  as  well  to  the  great  as  to  thesm. 

34.  30  all  the  people,  great  and  small ;  and  he 

36.  18  all  the  vessels,  .great  and  small,  and  the 

Esth.  1.    5  all  the  people. .both  unto  great  and  small 

1.  20  husbands  honour,  both  to  great  and  sm. 

Psa.  104.  25  wherein  (are)  things,  .both  small  and  gr. 

115.  13  He  will  bless  them,  .(both)  small  and  gr. 

Isa.   22.  24  all  vessels  of  small  quantity,  from  the  ve. 

Jer.   16.    6  Both  the  great  and  the  small  shall  die  in 

Zech.  4. 10  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  thi.  ? 

10.  Little,  small,  young,  ]bp  qaton. 

Gen.  19.  11  smote  the  men.  .both  small  and  great;  so 

Exod  18.  22  but  every  small  matter  they  shall  judge 
18.  26  every  small  matter  they  judged  themsel. 

Deut.  1. 17  ye  shall  hear  the  small  as  well  as  the  gr. 

1  Sa.    5.   9  smote  the  men  of  the  city,  both  small  and 
20.   2  will  do  nothing,  either  great  or  small,  but 
30.    2  they  slew  not  any,  either  great  or  small 
30.  19  neither  small  nor  great,  neither  sons  nor 

1  Ki.  22.  31  Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  save 

2  Ki.23.    2  and  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great 

25.  26  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great,  and 

1  Ch.25.    8  as  well  the  small  as  the  great,  the  teacher 

26. 13  cast  lots,  as  well  the  small  as  the  great 

2  Ch.15.  13  whether  small  or  great,  whether  man  or 

18.  30  Fight  ye  not  with  smallorgreat,  saveonl^ 
Job  3.  19  small  and  great  are  there;  and  the  servant 
Isa.   54.    7  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee 

60.  22  asmalloneastrougnation:ItheLoEDwill 
Jer.  49.  15  will  make  thee  small  among  the  heathen 
Amos  7.  2,  5  by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise?  for  he  (is) 
Obad.       2  have  made  thee  small  among  the  heathen 

11. Short,  small,  few,  soon,  i^f?  qatser. 

2  Ki.19.  26  Therefore  their  inhabitants  were  of  small 
Isa.    37.  27  Therefore  their  iuhabitantsj(were)  of  sm. 

12. Smallest,  least,  loicest,  zXaxwros  elachistos. 

1  Co.  4.    3  But  with  me  it  is  a  very  small  thing  that 

6-  2  are  ye  im worthy  to  judge  the  smallest  rua.Y 
Jas.    3.   4  they  turned  about  with  a  very  small  helm 

13. Little,  small,  short,  fitupSs  mihros. 

Acts  26.  22  witnessing  both  to  small  and  great,  sayin  g 

Rev.  11.  18  them  that  fear  thy  name,  small  and  great 

13. 16  caused  all,  both  small  and  great,  rich  and 

19.  5  and  ye  that  fear  him,  both  small  and  great 
19.  18  the  flesh  of  all  (men),  .both  small  and  gre. 
20. 12  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  be. 

14. Little,  small,  few,  feeble,  6\lyos  oligos. 

Acts  12.  18  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  soldiers 
15.  2  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  dissension 
19.  23  same  time  there  arose  no  small  stir  about 
19.  24  brought  no  small  gain  unto  the  craftsmen 
27.  20  no  small  tempest  lay  on  (us),  all  hope  that 

SMALL  towns  — 
Hamlets,  rmri  chawoih. 

NU11132.  41  took  the  small  towns  thereof,  and  called 
SMALL,  to  be,  beat,  make,  stamp  — 
l.To  diminish,  JHJ  gara,  3. 

Job  36.  27  For  he  maketh  small  the  drops  of  water 
2.7*0  be  small,  beaten  small,  p\^  claqaq. 

Deut.  9.  21  until  it  was  as  smalfas  dust:  and  cast  I  the 

Isa.   41. 15  beat  (them)  small,  and  shalt  make  the  hills 

3.  To  beat  smalt,  pp^  dae/aq,  5. 

Exod3o.  36  thou  shalt  beat  (some)  of  it  very  small,  and 

2  Ki.  23.   6  stamped  (it)  small  to  powder,  and  cast  the 

23. 15  stamped  (it)  small  to  powder,  and  burned 

4.  7*o  be  small,  little,  young,  "ij$  tsaar. 

Jer.  30. 19  glorify  them,  and  they  shall  not  lie  small 

5.  To  be  small,  little,  unworthy,  ]bp  qat<">. 

2  Sa.   7.  19  this  was  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight,  0 
1  Ch.17.  17  this  wasa  small  thing  in  thine  eyes,  o 

6.7*0  make  little,  jbp  qaton,  5. 

Amos  8.   5  making  the  ephah  small,  and  the  shekel 
SMART,  to  — 
To  suffer  ceil,  VI 12"  rua  ra,  2. 

Prov  1 1  15  He  that  is  surety  for  a  stranger  shall  sin , 

SMELL,  (sweet),  smelling  — 
1.  Spice,  db^i  bosem. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  sweet  smell  there  shall  be  stink 
2.7*0  go  or  pass  over,  "OJ/  abar. 

Song  5.    5  my  fingers  (with)  sweet  smelling  myrrh 
5.  13  lips  (like)  lillies,  dropping  sweet  smelling 

3.  Smell,  savour,  fragrance,  0*7  reach. 

Geu.  27.  27  the 'smell  of  his  raiment,  and  blessed  him 
27.  27  smell  of  my  son  (is)  as  the  smell  of  a  field 

Song  1.  12  spikenard sendeth  forththesmell  thereof 
2.  13  vines  (with).,  tender  grape  give  a(good)s. 
4.  10  how  much  better  is.  .the  smell  of  thine  0. 
4. 11  smell  of  thy  garments  (is)  like  the  smell 
7.  8  now  also,  .the  smell  of  thy  nose  like  apples 
7.  13  mandrakes  give  a  smell,  and  at  our  gates 

Dan.    3.  27  nor  the  smell  of  fire  had  passed  on  them 

Hos.  14.   6  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell  as  Lcban. 

4. Sweet  smell,  fragrance,  euwSta  euodia. 

Phil.   4.  18  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  ace. 
5.  Smelling,  vo-cppno-is  osphresis. 

1  Co. 12. 17  whole  (were)  hearing,  where  (were)  the  a 


SMELL 


901 


SMITE 


SMELL,  to  — 

To  smell,  refresh,  Oil  ruach,  5. 

Gen.  8.  21  Lord  smellest  a  sweet  savour;  and  theL. 
27.  27  came  near,  and  kissed  him :  aud  he  sm. 

Exod3o.  38  shall  make  like  unto  that,  to  smell  there. 

Lev.  26.  31  will  not  smell  the  savour  of  your  sweet  sa. 

Deut.  4.  28  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  eat,  nor  smell 

Job  39.23  he  smelleth  the  battle  afar  off,  thethun. 

Psa  115.    6  noses  have  they,  but  they  smell  not 

Amos  5.  21  will  not  smell  iu  your  solemn  assemblies 

SMITE,  to  — 

I.  To  bruise,  n:h  daka,  3. 

Psa.  143. .  3  he  hath  smitten  my  life  down  to  the  gro. 

2.2*0  beat,  break,  D?rr  halam. 

Psa.  141.    5  Let  the  righteous  smite  me  ;  (it  shall  be) 
Isa.   41.    7  smootheth  (with)  the  hammer  him  that  sm. 

3.  To  beat  down  or  out,  nris  kathath,  3. 

Zech  11.    6  smite  the  land,'  and  out  of  their  hand  I 

4.  To  smite,  N*rp  media. 

Dan.   2.  34  which  smote  the  image  upon  his  feet  (that 
2.  35  stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a  gr. 

5.To  smite,  dash,  j'ns  machats. 

Stun 24.  17  shall  smite  the  corners  of  Moab,  and  des. 
6.-4  smiting,  stroke,  bloio,  ns?  makkah. 

Isa.  27.    7  as  he  smote  those . .  (or)  is  he  slain  according 

7.  To  plague,  strike,  "33  naga. 

1  Sa.   6.    9,  know  that  (it  is)  not  his  hand  (that!  smote 
Job     1. 19  smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house,  and 

8.  To  plague,  y\\  naga,  3. 

2  Ki.is.    5  Lord  smote  the  king,  so  that  he  was  a  le. 
2  Ch.26.  2ohasted..  because  the  Lord  had  smitten  him 

9.  To  smite,  plague,  ^  nagaph. 

Exod.  8.  2  behold,  I  will  smite  all  thy  borders  with 
12.  23  Lord  will  pass  through  to  smite  the  Egy. 
12.  23  to  come  iu  unto  your  houses  to  smite  (you) 
12.  27  when  he  smote  the  Egyptians,  and  deliv. 

Judg2o.  35  Lord  smote  Benjamin  before  Israel :  and 

1  Sa.  4.   3  "Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us  to 

25.  38  that  the  Lord  smote  Sabal,  that  he  died 

26.  10  Lord  shall  smite  him;  orhisdayshallco. 

2  Ch.13. 15  God  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  Israel  before 

14.  i2  So  the  Lord  smote  the  Ethiopians  before 
2i.  14  with  a  great  plague  will  the  Lord  smite 
2i.  18  after  all  this  the  Lord  smote  him  in  his 
Isa.   19. .22  Lord  shall  smite  Egypt;  he  shall  smite 
Zech  14. 12,  18  plague  wherewith  the  LORD  will  smite 

10.  To  {cause  to)  smite,  ."93  nakalx,  5. 

Gen.  8.  21  neither  will  I  again  smite  anymore  every 
14.  5  smote  the  Rephaims  in  Ashteroth  Kama. 
14.  7  smote  all  the  country  of  the  Amalekites 
14.  15  smote  them,  and  pursued  them  unto  Ho. 
19.  11  smote  the  men  that  (were)  at  the  door  of 
32.  8  If  Esau  come . .  and  smite  it,  then  the  oth. 
32.  11  I  fear  him,  lest  he  will  come  and  smite  me 
36.  35  who  smote  31  idian  in  the  field  of  Moab,  re. 

Esod.  2.  11  spied  an  Egyptian  smiting  au  Hebrew,  one 

2.  13  he  said.  .Wherefore  smitestthou  thyfel. ? 

3.  20  smite  Egypt  with  all  my  wonders  which  I 
7.  17  will  smite  with  the  rod  that  (is)  in  mine 
7.  20  smote  the  waters  that  (were)  in  the  river 

7.  25  after  that  the  Lord  had  smitten  the  river 

8.  16  Stretch  out  thy  rod,  and  smite  the  dust  of 
8. 17  smote  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  it  beca. 

9.  15  smite  thee  and  thy  people  with  pestilence 
9.  25  hail  smote  throughout  all  the  land  of  Eg. 
9.  25  hail  smote  every  herb  of  the  field,  and  br. 

12. 12  will  smite  all  the  first  born  in  the  land  of 

12. 13  destroy  £you),  when  I  smite  theland  of  E. 
12. 29  at  midnight  the  LORD  smote  all  the  first 
17.   5  rod,  wherewith  thou  smotest  the  river,  ta. 
17.   6  thou  shalt  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall 
21.  12  He  that  smite  the  mau  so  that  he  die,  sh. 
21.  15  he  that  smiteth  his  father  or  in  other  shall 
21.  18  one  smite  another  with  a  stone,  or  with 
21.  19  then  shall  he  that  smote  (him)  be  quit 
21.  20  if  a  man  smite  his  servant,  or  his  maid 
21.  26  if  a  man  smite  the  eye  of  his  servant,  or 

Sum.  3. 13  on  the  day  that  I  smote  all  the  first  born 
8. 17  on  the  day  that  I  smote  every  first  born  in 
11.  33  Lord  smote  the  people  with  a  very  great 
14.  12  I  will  smite  them  with  the  pestilence,  and 
14. 45  smote  them,  and  discomfited  them,  (even) 
20. 11  with  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock  twice ;  and 
21. 24  Israel  smote  him  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 

21.  35  So  they  smote  him,  and  his  sons,  and  all 

22.  6  shall  prevail,  (that)  we  may  smite  them 
22.  23  Balaam  smote  the  ass,  to  turn  her  into  the 
22.  25  crushed  Balaam's  foot,  .and  he  smote  her 
22.  27  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  smote  the  ass 
22.  28  that  thou  hast  smitten  me  these  three  ti.  ? 
22.  32  Wherefore  hast  thou  smitten  thine  ass  th. 
25.  17  Vex  the  Midianites,  and  smite  them 

32.  4  Lord  smote  before  the  congregation  of  Is. 

33.  4  which  the  Lord  had  smitten  among  them 
35.  16  if  he  smite  him  with  an  instrument  of  iron 
35.  17  if  hesmitehim  with  throwing  a  stone,  wh. 
35.  18  Or  (if)  he  smite  him  with  an  hand  weapon 
35.  21  in  enmity  smite  him . .  he  that  smote  (him) 

Deut.  2.  33  smote  him,  and  his  sons,  and  all  his  peop. 

3.  3  smote  him  until  none  was  left  to  him  re. 

4,  46  children  of  Israel  smote,  after  they  were 
7.    2  thou  shalt  smite  them,  (and)  utterly  dest. 

13. 15  Thou  shalt  surely  smite  the  inhabitants 
19.  11  smite  him  mortally  that  he  die,  and  flee. 
20. 13  thou  shalt  smite  every  male  thereof  with 


"Deut  25.  11  out  of  the  hand  of  him  that  smiteth  him 

27.  24  Cursed  (be)  he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour 

28.  22  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a  consumpti. 
28.  27  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  botch  of  E. 
28.  28  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  madness,  and 

28.  35  Lord  shall  smite  thee  in  the  knees,  and 

29.  7  against  us  unto  battle,  aud  we  smote  them 
Josh.  7.   3  three  thousand  men  go  up  and  smite  Ai 

7.   5  men  of  Ai  smote  of  them  about  thirty  and 

7,  5  smote  them  in  the  going  down  :  wherefo. 

8.  22  smote  them,  so  that  they  let  none  of  them 

8.  24  and  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

9.  18  children  of  Israel  smote  them  not,  beca. 
10.  4  help  me,  that  we  may  smite  Gibeon :  for 
10.  10  smote  them  to  Azekah,  and  unto  Makked. 
10.  26  afterward.  Joshua  smote  them,  and  slew 
10.  28,  30,  32,  35,  37  smote  it  with  the  edge  of 
10.  33  smote  him  and  his  people,  until  he  had 
10.  39  they  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
10. 40  So  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the  hi. 

10.  41  Joshua  smote  them  from  Kadesh-barnea 

11.  8  smote  them,  and  chased  them  unto  great 
11.   8  smote  them,  until  they  left  themnonere. 
11.  10  smote  the  king  thereof  with  the  sword 
11.  11  smote  all  the  souls  that  (were)  therein  wi. 
11.  12  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
11.  14  every  man  they  smote  with  the  edge  of  the 

11.  17  took,  and  smote  them,  and  slew  them 

12.  1  which  the  children  of  Israel  smote,  and 
12.   6  Them  did  Moses,  .smite :  and  Moses  the 

12.  7  children  of  Israel  smote  on  this  side  Jor. 
13. 12  for  these  did  Moses  smite,  and  cast  them 

13.  21  whom  Mosessmote  with  the  princes  of  M. 
15.  16  He  that  smiteth  Kirjath-sepher,  and  tak. 

19.  47  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and 

20.  5  smote  his  neighbour  unwittingly,  and  ha. 
Judg.  1.    8  smitten  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and 

1. 12  He  that  smiteth  Kirjath-sepher,  and  tak. 

1.  25  smote  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
3.  13  smote  Israel,  and  possessed  the  city  of  p. 
6. 16  thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites  as  one  m. 

7.  13  smote  it  that  it  fell,  and  overturned  it 
8. 11  and  smote  the  host :  for  the  host  was  se. 

9.  43  he  rose  up  against  them,  and  smote  them 
11.  21  smote  them:  so  Israel  possessed  all  the 

11.  33  smote  them  from  Aroer,  even  till  thou 

12.  4  men  of  Gilead  smote  Ephraim,  because 
15.   8  smote  them  hip  and  thigh  with  a  great  si. 
18.  27  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
20.  31  they  began  to  smite  of  the  people,  (aud) 
20.  37  smote  all  the  cityjwiththe  edge  of  the  sw. 
20.  39  Benjamin  began  to  smite  (and)  kill  of  the 
20.  48  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

10  Go  and  smite  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-g. 
8  these  (are)  the  Gods  that  smote  the  Egy. 

6  smote  them  with  emerods,  (even)  Ashdod 
g  smote  the  men  of  the  city,  both  small  and 

19  smote  the  men . .  even  he  smote  of  the  pe. 
to  because  the  Lord  had  smitten  (many)  of 

11  smote  them,  until  (they  came)  Under  Be. 

3  Jonathan  smote  the  garrison  of  the  Phil. 

4  Saul  had  smitten  a  garrison  of  the  Phili. 
31  smote  the  Philistines  that  day  from  Mic. 

48  smote  the  Amalekites,  and  delivered  Is. 
3  Sow  go  and  smite  Amalek,  and  utterly 

7  Saul  smote  the  Amalekites  from  Havilah 
35  smote  him,  and  delivered  (it)  out  of  his 
35  caught  (hini)  byhisbeard,  and  smote  him 
46  will  smite  thee,  and  take  thine  head  from 

49  smote  the  Philistine  in  his  forehead,  that 

50  David,  .smote  the  Philistine,  andslewhim 
11  I  will  smite  David  even  to  the  wall  (with 
10  Saul  sought  to  smite  David  even . .  the  wall 

20.  33  Saul  cast  a  javelin  at  him  to  smite  him 

22.  19  Sob.  .smote  he  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 

23.  2  Shall  I  go  and  smite  these  Philistines?  A. 
23.   2  Go  and  smite  the  Philistines,  and  save  K. 

23.  5  smote  them  with  a  great  slaughter.  So  D. 

24.  5  David's  heart  smote  him,  because  he  had 

26.  8  now  therefore  let  me  smite  him,  I  pray 

27.  9  David  smote  the  land,  andleftneithermau 

30.  1  smitten  Ziklag,  and  burnt  it  with  fire 
30. 17  David  smote  them  from  the  twilight  even 

2  Sa.    1.  15  fall  upon  him.  And  he  smote  him  that  he 

2.  22  wherefore  should  I  smite  thee  to  the  gr.? 
2.  23  with  the  higher  eud  of  the  spear  smote  him 

2.  31  servauts  of  David  had  smitten  of  Benja. 

3.  27  smote  him  there  under  the  fifth  (rib),  th 

4.  6  smote  him  under  the  fifth  (rib) :  and  Re. 

4.  7  smote  him,  and  slew  him,  and  beheaded 

5.  8  Whosoever,  .smiteth  the  Jebusites,  and 
5.  20  David  smote  them  there,  and  said,  The  L. 
5.  24  go  out  before  thee,  to  smite  the  host  of 

5.  25  smote  the  Philistines  from  Geba  until  th. 

6.  7  God  smote  him  there  for  (his)  error;  and 
S.    1  David  smote  the  Philistines,  aud  pursued 

8.  2  smote  Moab,  aud  measured  them  with  a 
8.  3  David  smote  also  Hadadezer,  the  son  of 
8.    9  heard  that  David  had  smitten  all  the  host 
8. 10  fought  against  Hadadezer,  and  smitten 
8.  13  when  he  returned  from  smiting  of  the  Sy. 

10.  18  smote  Shobach  the  captain  of  their  host 

11.  21  Who  smote  Abimelech  the  son  of  Jerub. 

13.  28  Smite  Amnon;  then  kill  him,  fear  not;  have 

14.  6  but  the  one  smote  the  other,  andslewhim 
14.  7  Deliver  him  that  smote  his  brother,  that 
15. 14  smite  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

17.  2  shall  flee  :  and  I  will  smite  the  king  only 
18. 11  why  didst  thou  not  smite  him  there  tothe 

18.  15  compassed  about  and  smote  Absalom,  and 
20. 10  smote  him  therewith  in  the  fifth  (rib),  and 
21. 17  and  smote  the  Philistines,  and  lulled  01 


1  Sa.  4. 
5- 
5' 
6. 
6. 
7 

J3' 
*3' 
14. 
14. 


»  Sa.  23.  10  He  arose,  and  smote  the  Philistines,  unt. 
24.  10  David's  heart  smote  him  after  that  hehad 

24.  17  when  he  saw  the  angel  that  smote  the  pe. 
Ki.11. 15  after  he  had  smitten  every  male  in  Edom 

14. 15  For  the  Lord  shall  smite  Israel,  as  areed 
15.  20  smote  Ijon,  and  Dan,  Abel-beth-maachah 
1 5.  27  smote  him  at  Gibbethon ,  which  (belonged ) 

15.  29  when  he  reigned,  (that)  he  smote  all  the 
16. 10  Zimri  went  in  and  smote  him,  and  killed 
20.  21  smote  the  horses  and  chariots,  and  flew 
20.  35  Smite  me.  .And  the  man  refused  to  smite 
20.  37  found  another  man,  and  said,  Smite  me 
20.  37  smote  him,  so  that  in  smiting  he  wounded 
22.  24  smote  Micaiah  on  the  cheek,  and  said,  wh. 
22.  34  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  and  smote  the 

:  Ki.  2.  8  smote  the  waters,  and  they  were  divided 
2.  14  smote  the  waters,  .when  he  also  had  smi. 
3. 19  ye  shall  smite  every  fenced  city,  and  every 
q.  23  they  have  smitten  one  another  :  now  th. 
24  smote  the  Moabites,  so  that  they  fled  be. 

24  but  they  went  forward  smiting  the  Moab. 

25  howbeit  the  sliugers  went  about  (it),  and 
18  Smite  this  people.  .And  he  smote  them 
2i  father,  shall  I  smite  (them)?  shall  I  smite 

22  shalt  not  smite  (them);  wouldest  thou  sm. 
21  smote  the  Edomites  which  compassed  him 

7  thou  shalt  smite  the  house  of  Ahab  thy 

24  smote  Jehoram  between  his  arms,  and  the 
27  Smite  him  also  in  the  chariot.    (And  they 

25  they  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 

32  Hazael  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  of  Is. 
21  smote  him,  and  he  died ;  and  they  buried 

17  for  thou  shalt  smite  the  Syrians  in  Aphek 

18  Smite  upon  the  ground :  and  he  smote  th. 

19  Thou  shouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six 
19  hadst  thou  smitten  Syria  till  thou  hadsfc 

19  whereas  now  thou  shalt  smite  Syria(but) 
10  Thou  hast  indeed  smitten  Edom, and  thine 
10  smote  him  before  the  people,  and  slew  him 
14  smote  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  in  Sam. 
16  Then  Menahem  smote  Tiphsah,  and  all 

16  therefore  hesmote  (it ;  and)allthe  women 
25  conspired  against  him,  and  smote  him  in 
30  smote  him,  and  slew  him,  and  reigned  in 

8  He  smote  the  Philistines,  (even)  unto  Gaza 

35  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  anh. 
37  Sharezer  his  sons  smote  him  with  the  sw. 
21  king  of  Babylon  smote  them,  and  slew 
25  smote  Gedaliah,  that  he  died,  and  the  J. 
46  which  smote  Midian  in  the  field  of  Moab 
41  smote  their  tents,  and  the  habitations 
43  smote  the  rest  of  the  Amalekites  that  were 

11.  6  Whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusites  first  sh. 
13. 10  smote  him,  because  he  put  his  hand  to  the 
14.  11  came  up  to  Baal-perazim  ;  and  David  sm. 

14. 15  God  is  gone  forth  before  thee,  to  smite  the 
14.  16  smote  the  host  of  the  Philistines  from  G. 
18.  1  David  smote  the  Philistines,  and  subdued 
18.  2  smote  Moab  ;  and  the  Moabites  became 
18.  3  David  smote  Hadarezer  king  of  Zobah  unto 
iS.   9  heard  how  David  had  smitten  all  the  host 

18. 10  foughtagainstHadarezer.andsmitten  him 

20.  1  And  Joab  smote  Kabbah,  and  destroyed 

21.  7  displeased  with  this  thing ;  therefore  he 
2  Ch.14.  14  they  smote  all  the  cities  roundabout  Ge. 

14.  15  They  smote  also  the  tents  of  cattle,  and 

16.  4  they  smote  Ijon,  and  Dan,  and  Abel-maim 
18.  23  smote  Micaiah  upon  the  cheek,  and  said 
18.  33  smote  the  king  of  Israel  between  the  joi. 

21.  9  smote  the  Edomites  which  compassed  him 

22.  5  at  Kamoth-gilead  :  and  the  Syrians  smote 

25. 11  and  smote  of  the  children  of  Seir  ten  tho. 
25. 13  smote  three  thousand  of  them,  and  took 

25. 16  forbear ;  why  shouldest  thou  be  smitten? 
25. 19  Lo,  thou  hast  smitten  the  Edomites ;  and 

25.  5  smote  him,  and  carried  away  a  great  mu. 
28.   5  king  of  Israel,  who  smote  him  with  a  great 

17  again  the  Edomites  had  come  and  smitten 

23  smote  hmi:  and  he  said,  Because  the  gods 

25  smote  certain  of  them,  and  plucked  off 

5  Thus  the  Jews  smote  all  then1  enemies 
7  smote  Job  with  sore  boils  from  the  sole 

10  they  have  smitten  me  upon  the  cheek  re. 

7  for  thou  hast  smitten  all  mine  enemies 
title,  smote  of  Edom  in  the  valley  of  Salt  tw. 

26  persecute  (him)  whom  thou  hast  smitten 

20  smote  the  rock,  that  the  waters  gushed 
51  smote  all  the  first  born  in  Egypt ;  the  ch. 
66  he  smote  his  enemies  in  the  hinder  part 

33  He  smote  their  vines  also  and  their  fig  tr. 

36  He  smote  also  all  the  first  born  in  their 

6  The  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day,  nor 

8  Who  smote  the  first  born  of  Egypt,  both 
10  Who  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  mig. 
10  To  him  that  smote  Egypt  in  their  first  b. 
17  To  him  which  smote  great  kings :  for  his 
25  Smite  a  scorner,  and  the  simple  will  bew. 

7  they  smote  me,  they  wounded  me ;  the 
25  hath  smitten  them  :  and  the  hills  did  tr. 
13  people  turnethnot  onto  him  that  smiteth 
20  no  more  again  stay  upon  him  that  smote 

10.  24  he  shall  smite  thee  with  a  rod,  and  shall 

11.  4  he  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of 
11.  15  and  shall  smite  it  in  the  seven  streams 
14.    6  He  who  smote  the  people  in  wrath  with  a 
14.  29  because  the  rod  of  him  that  smote  thee  is 
27.    7  Hath  he  smitten  him . .  that  smote  him  ? 
30.  31  Assyrian  be  beaten  down,  (which)  smote 
37.  36  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  a  hu. 
37.  38  his  sons  smote  him  with  the  sword  ;  aud 
49. 10  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them 

57. 17  was  I  wroth,  and  smote  him  ;  I  hid  me 


1  Ch.  1 

4 
4 


Seh. 
Esth. 
Jub 


9- 
2. 

16. 
3- 
60. 
69. 
78. 
78. 
78. 


*35 
136 

136. 

Prov  19, 

Song  5 

Isa.     5 

9 


SMITE 


902 


SNARE 


Isa,  58.  4  and  to  smite  with  the  fist  of  wickedness 
60.  ro  for  in  my  wrath  I  smote  thee,  but  in  my 

Jer.  2.  30  In  vain  have  I  smitten  your  children  ;  they 
14.  19  why  hast  thou  smitten  us,  and  (there  is) 
18.  iS  come,  and  let  us  smite  him  with  the  ton. 

20.  2  Then  Pashur  smote  Jeremiah  the  prophet 

21.  6  I  will  smite  the  inhabitants  of  this  city 
21.  7  shall  smite  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
37.  10  For  though  ye  had  smitten  the  whole  army 
37.  j  5  smote  him,  and  put  him  in  prison  in  the 
41.  2  smote  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the 
43.  11  when  he  conieth,  he  shall  smite  the  land 
46.    2  king  of  Babylon  smote  in  the  fourth  year 

46.  13  should  come  (and)  smite  the  land  of  Eg. 

47.  1  cam?  to  Jeremiah.. before  that  Pharaoh  s. 
49.  28  which  Nebuchadrezzar,  .shall  smite, thus 
52.  27  smote  them,  and  put  them  to  death  in  R. 

Lam.  3.  30  giveth  (his)  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him 
JEze.    5.    2  smite  about  it  with  a  knife  ;  and  a  third 

6.  11  Smite  with  thine  hand,  and  stamp  with 

7.  9  shall  know  that  I  (am)  the  Lord  that  sm. 
9.   5  Go  ye  after  him . .  and  smite;  let  not  your 

21. 14  smite  (thine)  hands  together,  and  let  the 

21.  17  I  will  also  smite  mine  hands  together,  and 

22.  13  have  smitten  mine  hand  at  thy  dishonest 
32.  15  when  I  shall  smite  all  them  that  dwell  th. 
39.    3  I  will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand 

Dan.  S.  7  smote  the  ram,  and  brake  his  two  horns 
Hos.  6.  1  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  "ill  bind  us  up 
Amos  3. 15  smite  the  winter  house  with  the  summer 

4.    9  I  have  smitten  you  with  blasting  and  mil. 

6. 11  be  will  smite  the  great  house  with  breac. 

9.    1  Smite  the  lintel  of  the  door,  that  the  posts 
Jon.    4.    7  and  it  smote  the  gourd  that  it  withered 
ilic.    5.    1  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with 

6. 13  also  will  I  make  (thee)  sick  in  smiting  thee 

Hag.   2.  17  I  smote  you  with  blasting  and  with  mild. 

Zech.  9.    4  and  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea ;  and 

10.  11  shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea,  and  all 

12.    4  I  willsmite  everyhorsewithastonishment 

12.  4  will  smite  every  horse  of  the  people  with 

13.  7  smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall 
llaL    4.    6  lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  cu. 

Il.ro  smite,  t?p?  neqash. 

Dan.   5.   6  and  his  knees  smote  one  against  another 

12.  To  strike,  p9p  saphaq. 

Nuni24.  10  smote  his  hands  together:  andBalak  said 
Jer.  31.  19  I  smote  upon  (my)  thigh:  I  was  ashamed 
Eze.  21.  12  my  people:  smite  therefore  upon  (thy)  th. 

13.  To  strike,  clap,  blow,  VpJ?  taqa. 

Judg.  4.  21  smote  the  nail  into  his  temples,  and  fast. 
li.ToJlay,  b^at,  scourge,  strike,  smite,  Sepo?  dcro. 
Luke22.  63  And  the  men  that  held  Jesus.,  smote  (him) 
JohuiS.  23  Jesus  answered  him.  .why  smitest  thou 
2  Co.  11.  20  For  ye  suffer,  .if  a  man  smite  you  on  the 

15.ro  strike,  smite,  beat,  sting,  iraia  paid. 

Matt  26.  68  Saying,  Prophesy.  .Who  is  he  that  smote 
Marki4.  47  smote  aservantof  the  high  priest,  and  cut 
Luke  22.  64  saying,  Prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee? 
John  18  10  smote  the  high  priest's  servant,  and  cut 

16.  To  strike,  smite,  irwrdtnrw  patasso. 

ftl&ttzo*.  31  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  of 
Marki4.  27  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  sh. 
Luke22.  49  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the  sword 

22.  50  one  of  them  smote  a  servant  of  the  high 
Acts    7.  24  avenged  him  that  was  oppressed,  andsm. 

12.    7  smote  Peter  on  the  side,  and  raised  him 
12.  23  immediately  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote 
Itev.  1 1.   6  power . .  to  smito  the  earth  with  all  plagues 
19. 15  that  with  it  he  should  smite  the  nations 

17.  To  slap,  £a7ri'£aj  rkapizo. 

Matt  5.  39  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  ri. 

IS.  TO  StrH'C,    TVITTUi    tl'ptr>. 

Matt  24.  49  shall  begin  to  smite  (his)  fellow  servants 

27.  30  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on  the  head 

Marki5.  19  they  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a  reed 

Luke  6.  29  unt_>  him  that  smiteth  thee  on  the  (one) 

18.  13  sm  ite  upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  he  me. 

23.  43  all  the  people .  .smote  their  breasts,  and 
Acts  23.    2  commanded  them,  .to  smite  him  on  the 

23.    3  God  shall  smite  thee,  (thou)  whited  wall 
SMITE  down,  off,  out,  through,  together,  to  — 
\.T<<  '.•'."'?■.'  to  bo  ''  or  b  ndj  Jna  kara,  5. 

Faa.  73.  31  and  smote  down  the  chosen  (men)  of  Isr. 

2,  To  smite,  dash,  j'~r?  machats. 

Deut33.  11  smite  through  the  lions  of  them  that  rise 
Job   26.  12  by  his  uuderstanding  he  smiteth  through 

I.  '!'   &  rtite  through,  po^  machaq. 
Judg.  5  20  smote  of!  his  head,  when  she  had  pierced 

4.2*0  cause  to  fall,  758  naphal,  5. 

Exodzi.  27  if  he  smite  out  his  man  servant's  tooth,  or 

o.A  f  ■  ■'/  v,  tottering,  p'2j>i-/. 

Nah.   2.  10  heart  meltcth,  and  the  knees  smite  toge. 

6.3"o  take  aioay  or  off,  a<patp€co  aphaireo. 

Matt  rack  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and 

SMITE  with  (the  palm  of  1  the  hand,  to  — 
I. To  qh-e  a  slap,  5i5w/ui  pd-mo-pa  >li'i<~>mi  rhapisma, 

John  19.    3  and  they  smote  him  with  their  hands 
J..T"  shin,  pani(u)  rhapizd. 

Matt  26.  67  smote  (him)  with  the  palms  of  their  hands 


SMITE  with  the  hammer  or  scab,  to  — 

1.  To  beat,  break,  nhy  halam. 

Judg.5.   26  and  with  the  hammer  she  emote  Sisera 

2.  To  scab,  n^'  saphach,  3. 

Isa.     3.  17  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab  the  crown  of 
SMITER  — 
To  (cause  to)  smite,  nbj  nakah,  5. 

Isa.    50.    6  I  gave  my  back  to  thesmiters,  andmych. 
SMITH  — 
l.JSngraruer,  carver,  artificer,  tnn  charash. 

1  Sa.  13.  19  there  was  no  smith  found  throughout  all 
Iaa.  54. 16  I  have  created  the  smith  that  bloweth  the 

2.  To  work  in  iron,  Sn?  ti'in  charash  barzel. 

Isa.   44.  12  The  smith  with  the  tongs  both  workethin 

3.  Smith,  i3p,p  masger. 

2  Ki.  24.  1 4  carried  away,  .all  the  craftsmen  and  smi. 

24.  i6craftsmen  and  smiths  a  thousand,  all  (tliat 
Jer.  24.    1  with  the  carpenters  and  smiths,  from  Je. 
29.    2  the  carpenters,  and  the  smiths,  were  de. 
SMITTEN  (down),  to  be  — 
l.To  be  beaten  clown  or  out  nns  kathath,  6. 

Isa.   24.  12  and  the  gate  is  smitten  with  destruction 
2.  To  be  plagued,  smitten,  *\n  nagaph,  2. 

Numi4.  42  that  ye  be  not  smitten  before  your  enemies 
Deut.  1.  42  lest  ye  be  smitten  before  your  enemies 
28.  7  shall  cause  thine  enemies,  .to  be  smitten 
28.  25  The  Lord  shall  cause  thee  to  be  smitten 
Judg2o.  32  They(are)smittendownbeforeus,asatthe 
20.  36  Benjamin  saw  thatthey  were  smitten:for 
20.  39  they  are  smitten  down  before  us,as(in)the 

1  Sa.    4.    2  Israel  was  smitten  before  the  Philistines 

4. 10  Israel  was  smitten,  and  they  tied  every  man 
7. 10  and  they  were  smitten  before  Israel 

2  Sa.  10. 15  the  Syrians  saw  that  they  were  smitten 

10. 19  saw  that  they  were  smitten  before  Israel 

1  Ki.  8. 33  ^lien  thy  people  Israel  be  smitten  down 

2  Gh.20.  22  set  arabushments.  .and  they  were  smitten 

3.7*0  be  smitten,  nrg  nakah,  2. 

2  Sa.  11.  15  retire  ye  from  him,  that  he  may  be  smit. 

4.  To  be  smitten,  npj  nakah,  4. 

Exod.  9.  31  the  flax  and  the  barley  was  smitten ;  for 
9.  32  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  notsmitten 

5.  To  be  smitten,  n:j3  nakah,  6. 

Exod22.    2  If  a  thief,  .be  smitten  that  he  die,  (there 

1  Sa.    5.  12  the  men  that  died  not  were  smitten  with 
Psa.102.    4  My  heart  is  smitten,  and  witheiTed  likegr. 
Isa.   53,   4  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of 
Eze.  33.  21  came  unto  me,  saying,  The  city  is  smitten 

40.    1  after  that  the  city  was  smitten,  in  the  self 
Hos.    9.  16  Ephraim  is  smitten,  their  root  is  dried  up 

6. To  smite,  strike,  it  At)  <t<t&  2?lesso. 

Rev.    8. 12  and  the  third  part  of  the  sun  wassmitten 

7.  To  strike,  tvwtu}  tupto. 

Acts  23.   3  commandest  me  tobe  smitten  contrary  to 

SMOKE,  smoking  — 

1. !F<  'k,  dim,  ana  keheh. 

Isa.   42.   3  and  the  smokingflax  shall  he  not  quench 

'l.Smoke,  J^#  ashan. 

Gen.  15.  17  behold  a  smoking  furnace,  and  a  burning 
ExodiQ.  18  the  smoke  thereof  ascended  as  the  smoke 
Josh.  8. 20  the  smoke.of  the  city  ascended  up  to  he. 

8.  21  Israel  saw.  .that  the  smoke  of  the  city  as. 
Judg2o.  38  should  make  a  great  flame  with  smoke  to 

20.  40  up  out  of  the  city  with  a  pillar  of  smoke 

2  Sa.  22.  9  There  went  up  asmoke  out  of  his  nostrils 
Job  41.  20  Out  of  his  nostrils  goeth  smoke,  as  (out)  of 
Psa.  18.    8  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils 

37.  20  they  shall  consume ;  into  smoke  shall  they 

68.    2  As  smoke  is  driven  away,  (su)  drive  them 

102.    3  my  days  are  consumed  like  smoke,  and  my 

Provio.  26  As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to 

Song  3.   6  out  of  the  wildernesslikepillars  of  smoke 

Isa.     4.    5  a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day.  and  the  shin. 

6.    4  and  the  house  was  filled  with  smoke 

9.  18  shall  mount  up  (like)  the  lifting  up  of  sm. 
14.  31  there  shall  come  from  the  north  a  smoke 
34.  jo  the  smoke  thereof  shall  go  up  for  ever:  fr. 
51.  6  the  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  smoke 
65.    5  These  (are)  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  fireth. 

Hos.  13.    3  and  as  the  smoke  out  of  the  chimney 
Joel    2.  30  show  wonders,  .fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke 
iv'ah.   2.  13  I  will  burn  her  chariots  in  the  smoke 

Z.Smoking,  )y%  ashen. 

Exod2o.  18  all  the  people  saw.  .the  mountain  smok. 
Isa.     7.    4  the  two  tails  of  these  smoking  firebrands 

4.  Vapourt  smoke,  nia'p  qitor. 

Gen.  19.  28  smoke  of  the  country  wentup  as  the  sm. 
Psa.  119.  83  I  am  become  like  a  bottle  in  the  smoke 

5, Smoke,  icawvos  kapnos. 

Acts  2.  19  show  wonders,  .fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke 
Rev.  8.  4  the  smoke  of  the  incense,  (which  came) 
9.  2  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit,  as  the  smoke  of  a 
9.  2  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the 
9.  3  there  came  out  of  the  smoke  locusts  upon 
9.  17  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire  and  smoke 
9. 18  by  the  Are,  and  by  the  smoke,  and  by  the 

14.  11  the  smoke  of  their  torment  asceudeth  up 

15.  8  the  temple  was  tilled  with  smoke  from  the 
18.    9  when  they  shall  see  the  sniuke  of  her  bu. 

18.  18  cried  when  they  saw  the  smoke  of  herbu. 

19.  3  And  her  smoke  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever 


6. To  smoke,  rixpo/xai  tiqtJiojnai. 

Matt  12.  20  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  till  he 
SMOKE,  to  (be  on  a)  — 
To  smoke,  J^'j;  ashan. 

Exodig.  18  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  smoke,  because 

Deut  29.  20  his  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  man 

Psa.  74.    1  (why)  doth  thine  angersmoke  against  the 
104.  32  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they  smoke 
144.    5  touch  the. mountains,  and  they  shall  sm. 
SMOOTH  (thing)  — 
\.A  smooth  thing,  phn  chalaq. 

G*n.  27.  11  Esau.  ,(i*s)  a  hairy  man,  and  I  (am)  a  sm. 

Prov.  5.  3  a  strange  woman. .lier  mouth  (is)  smooth 
2. A  smooth  thing,  pbn  cheleq. 

Isa.  57.  6  Among  'the  smooth  (stones)  of  the  stream 
3. Smooth,  p^n  challuq. 

1  Sa.  17.  40  chose  him  five  smooth  stones  out  of  the 

4. Smoothness,  smooth  thing,  ^^  chelqah. 

Gen.  27.  16  put  the  skins.,  upon  the  smooth  of  hisne. 

Isa.  30.  10  speak  unto  us  smooth  tilings,  prophesy  de. 
0. Smooth,  p>lain,  \e7os  leios. 

Luke  3.  5  and  the  rough  ways  (shall  be'  made  smo. 
SMOOTH,  be  smoother,  to  — 

1.  To  smooth,  ppn  chalaq. 

Psa.  55.  21  (The  words)  of  his  mouth  were  smoother 

2.  To  make  smooth,  phn  chalaq,  5. 

Isa.  41.  7  he  that  smootheth(with)thehammerhim 
SMYR'-NA.  'Zf.i.vpva  myrrh. 

A  city  of  Ionia,  in  the  W.  of  Asia  Minor,  on  the  E.  of 
JEgeau  Sea,  fiftymiles  N.  cf  Ephesus;  now  called  Ismir. 

Rev.    1.  11  nnto  S.,  and  unto  Pergamos,  and  unto  T. 
2.    8  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  S.  write 
SNAIL  — 
I. Lizard,  ach  chomet 

Lev.  11.  30  and  the  lizard,  and  the  snail,  and  the  mo. 
2.  A  snail,  or  festering  sore,  ^^iw  shablul. 

Psa.  58.    8  As  a  snail  (which)  melteth,  let  (every  one 
SNARE  — 
l.Deslncctian,  snare,  cord,  ?3n,  Van  chebel. 

Job  18. 10  The  snare  (is)  laid  for  him  in  the  ground 
1.A  snare,  fcnvler,  v~\p"Tyaqush. 

Jer.  5.  2*6  they  lay  wait,  as  he  that  setteth  snares ;  th. 
3. A  snare,  fowler,  t^piD  moqesh. 

Exodio.    7  How  long  shall  this  man  be  a  snare  unto 

23.  33  it  will  surely  be  a  snare  unto  thee 

34. 12  lest  it  be  for  a  snare  in  the  midst  of  thee 
Deut.  7.  16  for  that  (will  be)  a  snare  unto  thee 
Judg.  2.    3  and  their  gods  shall  be  a  snare  unto  j'ou 

8.  27  which  thing  became  a  snare  unto  Gideon 

1  Sa,  18.  21  that  she  may  be  a  snare  to  him,  and  that 

2  Sa.  22.  6  compassed  me  about ;  the  snares  of  death 
Job  40.  24  Hetaketh  it..(his)nose pierceth through s. 
Psa.  18.    5  compassed  me  about ;  the  snares  of  death 

64.    5  theycommuneof  laying snaresprivily;  th. 

69.  22  Let  their  table  become  a  snare  before  th. 

106.  36  they  served  their  idols  which  were  a  snare 

Prov  13.  14  a  fountain  of  life,  to  depart  from  the  sn. 

14.  27  a  fountain  of  life,  to  depart  from  the  sn. 

18.    7  A  fool's,  .lips  (are)  the  snare  of  his  soul 

20.  25  (It  is)  a  snare  to  the  man  (who)  devoureth 

■A-z.  25  Lest  thou  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare 

29.    6  In  the  transgression . .  (there  is)  a  snare :  but 

29.  25  The  fearof  man  bringeth  a  snare:  but wh. 

Isa.     8. 14  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusal. 

4. Net,  TisD  matsod. 

Eccl.  7.  26 the  woman whoseheart(is)snaresand  nets 
B.Net,  iTTiaa  metsudah. 

Eze.  12. 13  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  snare :  and  I  w  ill 
17.  20  and  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  snare;  audi 
6.  A  gin,  ns pach. 

Josh  23. 13  they  shall  be  snares  and  traps  unto  you 
Job  22.  10  snares  (are)  round  about  thee,  and  sudden 
Psa.  11.  6  Upon  the  wicked  lie  shall  rain  snares 
69.  22  Let  their  table  become  a  snare  before  th. 
91.  3  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  sn. 
119.  no  The  wicked  have  laid  a  snare  for  me :  yet 
124.    7  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers :  the  snare 

140.  5  The  proud  have  hid  a  snare  for  me,  and 

141.  9  Keepme  from  the  snares,  .they have  laid 

142.  3  In  the  way.  .have  they  privily  laid  a  sua. 
Prov.  7.  23  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the  snare,  and  know. 

22.  5  Thorns,  .snares  (are)  in  the  way  of  the  fr. 
Eccl.  9.  12  as  the  birds  that  are  caught  in  the  snare 
Isa.   24. 17  Fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare  (are)  up. 

24.  iS  midst  of  the  pit  shall  be  taken  in  the  sn. 
Jer.  18.  22  theyhavedigged  a  pit.  .and  hid  snares  for 

48.  43  Fear,  and  the  pit, and  thesuare..uponth. 

48.  44  out  of  the  pit  shall  be  taken  in  the  suare 

Hos.    5.    1  ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Mizpah,  and  a  net 

9.  8  the  prophet  (is)  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all 
Amos  3.    5  Can  a  bird  fall  in  a  suare  upon  the  earth 

3.   5  shall  (one)  take  up  a  snare  from  the  earth 

7..1  pit,  snare,  nns  pachath. 

Lam.    3.  47  a  snare  is  come  upon  us,  desolation  and 

8~iWtf  or  wreathed  work,  sn<r<e,  ^—C'  sebakah- 
Job   18.    8  lus  own  feet,  and  he  walketh  upon  a  snare 

9mA  rope,  snajr,  &p6xos  brochos. 

1  Co.   7  35  not  that  I  may  cast  a  snare  upon  you,  but 


SNARE 


903 


SO 


10.  A  fastening,  net,  snare,  wayis  pagis. 

Luke  21.  35  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all  them  that 
Rom. ii.   9  Let  their  table  be  made  a  snare,  and  a  tr. 
i  Ti.    3.    7  lest  he  fall  into  reproach  and  the  snare 
6.   9  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into,  .a  snare 
2  Ti.   2.  26  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare 

SNARE,  to  bring  into  or  lay  a  — 
l.To  lay  a  snare,  t?p;  yaqosh. 

Jer.  50.  24  I  have  laid  a  snare  for  thee,  and  thou  art 

2.To  lay  a  snare,  v)$)  naqash,  3. 

Psa.  38. 12  They .  .that  seek  after  my  life  lay  snares 

Z.To  lay  a  snare,  ffp;  naqash,  7. 

1  Sa.  28.    9  wherefore  then  layest  thou  a  snare  for  my 

4.  To  breathe,  inflame,  ma  puach,  5. 

Prov  29.    8  Scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare 

5. To  lay  a  snare,  iftp  qosh. 

Isa.   29.  21  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reprove th  in  the 
SNARED,  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  snared,  EJp;  yaqosh,  2. 

Deut.  7. 25  lest  thou  be  snared  therein  :  for  it  (is)  an 
Prov.  6.    2  Thou  art  snared  with  the  words  of  thy  mo. 
Isa.     8.  15  many  among  them  shall,  .be  snared,  and 
28.  13  and  be  broken,  and  snared,  and  taken 

2.  To  he  snared,  vpi  yaqosh,  6. 

Eccl  9.  12  so  (are)  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil 

3.  A  snare,  sn'arer,  vp)D  moqesh. 

Prov  12.  13  The  wicked  is  snared  by  the  transgression 

4.  To  be  snared,  tr'pj  naqash. 

Psa.    9.  16  the  wicked  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his 

5.  To  be  or  become  snared,  trpj  naqash,  2, 

Deut  12.  30  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  be  not  sn. 

6.  To  be  or  become  snared,  nrs  pachach,  5. 

Isa.  42.  22  (they  are)  all  of  them  snared  in  holes,  and 
SNATCH,  to  — 
To  cut  doiun  or  off",  113  gazar. 

Isa.     9.  20  he  shall  snatch  on  the  right  hand,  and  be 
SNEEZE,  to  — 
To  sneeze,  tit  zarar,  3a. 

2  Ki.    4.  35  the  child  sneezed  seven  times  and  the  ch. 
SNORTING  — 

Snorting,  rqru  nacharah. 

Jer.     8.  16  The  snorting  of  his  horses  was  heard  fr. 

SNOTJT  — 

Nose,  ^x  aph. 

Prov  11.  22  (As)  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout,  (so) 

SNOW,  snowy,  (to  be  as)  — 

l.Snow,  &y  sheleg. 

Exod  4."   6  behold,  his  hand  (was)  leprous  as  snow 
Num.  1 2. 10  Miriam  (became)  leprous,  (white)  as  snow 
2  Sa.  23.  20  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  time  of  snow 
2  Ki.   5.  27  from  his  presence  a  leper  (as  white)  as  sn. 
1  Ch.11.  22  and  slew  a  Hon  in  a  pit  in  a  snowy  day 
Job     6. 16  of  the  ice,  (and)  wherein  the  snow  is  hid 
9.  30  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and 
24. 19  Drought  and  heat  consume  the  snow  wa. 

37.  6  he  saith  to  the  snow,  Be  thou  (on)  the  ea. 

38.  22  entered  into  the  treasures  of  the  snow? 
Psa.  51.   7  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  tlian  snow 

147.  16  He  giveth  snow  like  wool :  he  scattereth 
14S.  8  Fire,  and  hail ;  snow,  and  vapour;  stormy 
Prov  25.  13  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest 
26.    1  As  snow  in  summer,  and  as  rain  in  harv. 
31.  21  She  is  not  afraid  of  the  snow  for  her  ho. 
Isa.    1.  iS  Though,  .scarlet,  they  shall  he  as.  .snow 
55. 10  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow 
Jer.  18.  14  AVill  (a  man)  leave  the  snow  of  Lebanon 
Lam.  4.    7  Her  Nazarites  were  purer  than  snow,  they 

*2.  T->  snow,  h$  shalag,  5. 

Psa.  68.  14  scattered  kings  in  it,  it  was  (white)as  sn. 

Z.Snow,  J^J?  telag. 

Dan.   7.    9  whose  garment  (was)  white  as  snow,  and 

A.Snow,  %i&v  chion. 

Matt  28.    3  lightning,  and  his  raiment  white  as  snow 
Mark  9.    3  his  raiment,  .exceeding  white  [as  snow] 
Rev.    1.  14  hairs  (were)  white  like  wool,  as  white  as  s. 

SNUFF  (up),  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  breathe  oid,  snuff  up,  ntynaphach,  5. 
Mai. 1.  13  ye  have  snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  ho. 

2. To  swallow  up,  />•??;(',  T$'?  shao.ph. 

Jer.     2.  24  suuffeth  up  the  wind  at  her  pleasure 
14.    6  they  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  dragons 

SNUFF  DISH,  snuffers  — 

1. Snuffers,  forceps,  nin*pjD  mezammeroth. 

1  Ki.  7.  50  the  snuffers,  and  the  basins,  and  the  spo. 

2  Ki.12.  13  bowls  Of  silver,  snuffers,  basins,  trumpets 

25.  14  the  snuffers,  and  the  spoons,  and  all  the 
2  Ch.  4.  22  the  snuffers,  and  the  basins,  and  the  spo. 
Jer.  52. 18  the  snuffers  and  the  bowls,  and  the  spo. 

2.  Fire,  coal,  incense,  or  snuff  dish,  nrjinc  machtah. 

Exod  25.  38  the  snuff  dishes  thereof,  (shallbe  of)  pure 

37.  23  he  made,  .his  snuff  dishes,  (of)  pure  gold 

Num.  4.    9  his  snuff  dishes,  and  all  the  oil  vesselsth. 

Z.Tongs,  snuffers,  QTrJife  malqachayim. 

Exod  37.  23  he  made  his  seven  lamps,  and  his  snuff. 


SO,   N1D. 

A  king  of  Egypt,  of  Ethiopian  descent;  or  Sccechus,  the 
second  king  of  the  twenty-fifth  dynasty  in  Manetho,  who 
reigned  fourteen  years  and  was  succeeded  byTirhakah; 
his  alliance  was  sought  for  by  Hosea  son  of  Elah,  the 
last  king  of  Israel,  who  had  become  tributary  to  Shal- 
manezer  king  of  Assyria.    B.C.  728. 

2  Ki.  17.  4  he  had  sent  messengers  to  So  king  of  Eg. 
SO^ 

1.  These,  "Sv  click. 

Deut  22.    5  all  that  doso(are)  abomination  unto  the 

2.  This,  rmi"  zoth. 

Gen.  44.  17  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so  :  (but)  the 

3.  This,  nxirt  hazzoth. 

Judgig.  24  but  imto  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 

i.Thus,  rra  koh. 

Gen.  15.    5  aud  he  said  unto  him,  So  shall  thy  seed 
Isa.   18.    4  For  so  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  I  will  take 

o.Thus,  n22  kakah. 

Num  15.  12  so  shall  ye  do  to  every  one  according  to 

6. So,  J3  ken. 

Gen.    1.    7  and  divided  the  waters,  .and  it  was  so 
Deut  22.    3  so  shalt  thou  do  with  his  raiment ;  and 

7. Thus,  |D3  beken. 

Esth.  4.  16  so  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king,  which  (is) 
Eccl.  8.  10  so  I  saw  the  wicked  buried,  who  had  co. 

S.  Thus,  so,  kDjs  kenema. 

Ezra  6.  13  that  which  Darius  the  king  had  sent,  so 
9.  Thus,  according  to  these,  DH3  kaliem. 

Eccl.  9.  12  so  (are)  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil 

10. And,  even,  tcai  kai. 

Matt  27.  64  so  the  last. . shall  be  worse  than  the  first 
[See  also  Luke  n.  [2];  John  6.  57;  13.  33;  15.  9;  Acts 

7.  51;  Rom.  11.  16;  Gal.  1.  9;  Phil.  1.  20;  1  Pe.  1.  15; 
1  Jo.  4.  17]. 

11.  Therefore,  since,  &pa  ara. 

Rom  14. 12  So  [then]  every  one  of  us  shall  give  acco. 
.12.  Indeed,  y.h  men. 

Marki6. 19  [So  then,  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto] 
IS.  Similarly,  likeunse,  Suoiws  homoios. 

Luke  5. 10  so  (was)  also  James  and  John,  the  sons  of 
W.Tlien,  therefore,  ovv  oun. 

Matt.  1.  17  So  all  the  generations  from  Abraham  to 

Lukei4. 33  So  likewise,  whosoever  he  be  of  you  that 

-    John  4. 40  So  when  the  Samaritans  were  come  unto 

4.  46  So  Jesus  came  again  into  Cana  of  Galilee 

4.  53  So  the  father  knew  that  (it  was)  at  the  s. 
6.  10  [So]  the  men  sat  down,  in  number  about  fi. 

6.  19  So  when  they  had  rowed  about  five  and 

7.  43  So  there  was  a  division  among  the  people 
13.  12  So  after  he  had  washed  their  feet,  and  hail 
21. 15  So  when  they  had  dined,  JesU3  saith  to  S. 

Acts  13.  4  So  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Gh. 
15.  30  So  when  they  were  dismissed,  they  came 
23.  iS  So  he  took  him,  and  brought  (him)  to  the 

23.  22  So  the  chief  captain  (then)  let  the  young 
28.    9  [So]  when  this  was  done,  others  also,  win. 

VS.  Thus,  01/Vw,  01/Tws  houio,  houtos. 

Matt.  5.  12  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  whi. 

5.  16  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that 
5.  19  "Whosoever,  .shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall 

5.  47  what  do  ye.  .not  even  the  publicans  [so]  ? 

6.  30  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field,  wh. 
9-  33  saying,  It  was  never  so  seen  in  Israel 

11.  26  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight 

12.  40  so  shall  the  Son  of  mau  be  three  days  and 

13.  40  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this  world 

13.  49  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world :  the 

18.  35  So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do 

19.  8  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so 

19.  10  If  the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  (his)  vr- 

19.  12  which  were  so  born  from  (their)  mother's 

20.  16  So  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last 
20.  26  it  shall  not  be  so  among  you  :  but  whoso. 

24.  27  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man 
24.  33  So  likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall  see  all  these 
24.  37,  39  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of 
24.  46  his  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so  do. 

Mark  2.  [8] ;  4.  26,  [40] ;  7.  18 ;  10.  43 ;  14.  59 ;  15.  39 ; 
Luke  6.  [10];  9.  15;  10.  21;  11.  30;  12.  21,  28,  38,  43,  54; 
17.  10,  24,  26;  21.  31;  22.  26;  24.  24;  John  3.  8,  16;  5. 
21,  26;  8.  [59] ;  12.  50 ;  18.  22 ;  Acts  1. H  ;  3.  18 ;  7.  1,  8; 

8.  32;  12.  8 ;  13.  8,  47 ;  14.  1 ;  17.  n,  33;  19.  20;  20.  11, 
13,  35 ;  21.  11 ;  22.  24  ;  23.  n  ;  24.  9,  14 ;  27. 17,  44;  28. 
14 ;  Rom.  1.  15 ;  4.  18 ;  5.  12,  15,  18,  19,  21 ;  11.  5,  26 ;  12. 
5;  15.  20;  1  Co.  2.  11;  3.  15;  4.  1  ;  5.3,  o.  5;  7.  17,  17, 
26,  36,  40;  8.  12;  9.  14,  15,  24,  26 ;  11.  28;  12.  12 ;  14.  9, 

12,  25;  15.  11,  11,  22,  42,  45;  16.  1;  2  Co.  1.  5,  7 ;  7.  14; 
8.  6,  n ;  10.  7;  11.  [3];  Gal.  1.  6 ;  3.  3 ;  4.  3,  29;  6.  2; 
Eph.  4.  20;  5.  24,  28,  33;  Phil.  3.  17;  4.  1;  Col.  3.  13;  1 
Ti.  2.  8 ;  4.  17 ;  5.  2  ;  2  Th.  3.  17 ;  2  Ti.  3.  8 ;  Heb.  5.  3, 
5 ;  6.  15 ;  9.  28  ;  10.  33 ;  12.  21 ;  Jas.  1.  u ;  2.  12,  12,  17, 
26;  3.  5,  [6J,  10,  [12];  1  Pe.  2.  15  ;  2  Pe.  1.  11;  1  Jo.  2. 
[6];  4.  n  ;  Rev.  2.  15;  3.  j6;  16.  18. 

16. According  to  these,  Kara  ravrakata  tauta. 

Luke  6.  26  for  so  did  their  fathers  to  the  false  prop. 
1".  These  things,  raura  tauta. 

Jofcn.11.  28  when  she  had  so  said,  she  went  her  way 
IS. This,  tovtq  touto. 

John2o.  20  when  he  had  so  said,  he  showed  unto  th. 

Acts  19. 14  And  there  were  seven  sons,  .which  did  so 
23.   7  when  he  had  so  said,  there  arose  a  disse. 


Rom  12  20  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire 
1  Co.    7.  37  hath  so  decreed  in  his  heart  that  he  will 

19. As,  so  that,  ws  has. 

Heb.   3.  11  So  I  sware  hi  my  wrath,  They  shall  not 

[See  also  And,  bad,  called,  evil,  great,  long  as,  mighty, 

much,  not,  soon,  yet]. 

SO... and  — 

Also. ..also,  D3...C3  gam. ..gam. 

Gen.  32.  19  so  commanded  he  the  second,  and  the  th. 
SO  and  much  — 
Th  us . . .  tlrns,  J73 . . .  n's  koh . . .  koh. 

1  Sa.  20.  13  The  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jona. 
SO  as  — 
I. That,  so  that,  so  as,  tVa  hina. 

Rev.    8. 12  so  as  the  third  part  of  them  was  darkened 
2. Such,  such  as,  ota  hoia. 

Mark  9.    3  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 
SO  be  (it)  — 
l.It  is  steadfast  !  be  it  steadfast  I  jipx  amen. 

Jer.  11.  5  Then  answered  I*  and  said*  So  be  it,  0  L. 
2.Then,  therefore,  in  truth,  &pa  ara. 

1  Co.  15.  15  whom  he  raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that  the 
SO  great  — 
1. Heavy,  weighty,  *n3  kabed. 

1  Ki.  3.    9  who  is  able  to  judge  this  thy  so  great  a  p. 
2, So  great,  so  many,  tovovtos  tosoutos. 

Matt.  8.  10  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in 
15.  33  "Whence,  .bread,  .as  to  fill  so  great  a  mu. 

Luke  7.    9  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  ia 

Heb. 12.    1  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud 

Rev.  18. 17  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  is  come  to  no. 
SOI  — 
And  /,  Khyw  kago. 

Johnis.   9  As  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I 
Co.  1 1.  22  Are  they  Hebrews?  so  (am)  I 
11.  22  Are  they  Israelites?  so  (am)  I 

11.  22  Are  they  the  seed  of  Abraham  ?  so  (am)  I 
SO  long  (as)  — 

l.From  the  day,  or  all  the  days,  D'?;n-1?3  kol-hayya. 

1  Sa.  29.    8  so  long  as  I  have  been  with  thee  unto  this 

2  Ch.  6.  31  so  long  as  they  live  in  the  land  which  thou 
Job.  27.    6  my  heart  shall  not  reproach  (me)  so  long 

2.  White)  1"  ad. 

2  Ki.  9.  22  so  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother 

3.  Time,  n»  eth. 

Esth.  5.  13  all  tliis  availetfc  me  nothing,  so  long  as  I 

4.  So  great,  so  many,  tocovtos  tosoutos. 

Johni4.   9  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you,  and 
Heb.  4.    7  saying  in  David,  To  day,  after  so  long  a 

SO  many  (more)  as  — 

1. Like  them,  DH3  kahem. 

1  Ch.21.    3  an  hundred  times  so  many  more  as  they 
2.  .45  many  as,  oo-os  hosos. 

Rom.  6.    3  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus 
3. So  great,  so  many,  too-ovtos  tosotitos. 

John  6.   9  but  what  are  they  among  so  many  ? 

12.  37  though  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  be. 
21. 11  for  all  there  were  so  many,  yet  was  not 

1  Co.  14.  10  There  are,  it  may  be,  so  many  kinds  of  v. 
Gal.   3.    4  Have  ye  suffered  so  mairy  things  in  vain? 

SO   nuch  (as)  — 
l.Aiso,  even,  0?  gam. 

2  Sa.  17.  12  there  shall  not  be  left  so  much  as  one 
2,This,  nut  zoth. 

2  Ch.27.   5  So  much  did  the  children  of  Amnion  pay 
3. Might,  exceedingly,  in'P  nicod. 

2  Sa.  14.  25  there  was  none  to  be  so  much  praised  as 
Jer.     2.  36  Wfcy  gaddcst  thou  about  so  much  to  cha. 

4.  Unto,  1%  ad. 

Exodi4.  28  there  remained  not  so  much  as  one  of  th. 

5. Neither,  nor,  pA\Tz  mete. 

Mark  3.  20  so  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  eat  br. 

6.5b  great,  so  many,  togovtos  tosoutos. 

Matt  15.  33  "Whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread 
Acts    5.    8  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so  much  ? 

5.    8  And  she  said,  Yea,  for  so  much 
Heb.    1.   4  Being  made  so  much  better  than  the  ang. 
7.  22  By  so  much  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of 
10.  25  so  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  Re.  18.  7 
7. Not  even,  ovBe  oude,  Luke  15.   13. 
SO  much  the  more  — 

Much  more,  {woWy)  jxaWov  {polio)  mallnn. 
Luke  5.  15  so  much  the  more  went  there  a  fame  ab. 
18.  39  he  cried  so  much  the  more,  (thou)  son  of 
Mark  7.  36  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal  they  pub. 
SO  sore  — 
Might*  exceedingly,  in?  meod. 

1  Ki.17.  17  his  sickness  was  so  sore,  that  there  was 

SO  that  — 

1.  That,  t^x  ashcr. 

Gen.  13."  i(5  so  that  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of 

2.  That,  *3  ki. 

Deut  14.  24  so  that  thou  art  not  able  to  carry  it 

B.Till,  ny  ad. 

Josh.  S.  22  they  smote  them,  so  that  they  let  none  of 


so 


904 


SOJOURN 


i.Only  if,  ex  p*]  raq  im. 

i  Ki.  8.  25  so  thattbychildrentake  heed  to  their  way 

5.  With  a  view  to,  els  eis. 

Rom.  1.  20  so  that  they  are  without  excuse 
Heb.n.    3  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not 

6.  That,  so  that,  as  thai,  'ivk  hina. 

Rev.  13  13  so  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from 
7. How,  so  that,  Hirws  hopos. 

Iukei6.  26  so  that  they  which  would  pass  from  hence 

8.  As,  so  that,  ws  hos. 

Acts  20.  24  so  that  I  might  finish  my  course  with  joy 
9. As  also,  so  that,  &crre  hoste. 

Matt.  3.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
13.    2  so  that  he  went  into  a  ship,  and  sat 
13.  32  so  that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge 
Mark  3.  20  multitude  cometh  together  again,  so  that 
4.    1  so  that  he  entered  into  a  ship,  and  sat  in 
4.  32  so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  may  lodge  un. 

4.  37  the  waves  beat  into  the  ship,  so  that  it 
15.    5  Jesus  yet  answered  nothing  ;  so  that  Pil. 

Luke  5.    7  rilled  both  the  ships,  so  that  they  began 

Acts  16.  26  so  that  the  foundations  of  the  prison  were 

19. 10  so  that  all  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard 

19.  12  So  that  from  his  body  were  brought  unto 

19.  16  so  that  they  lied  out  of  that  house  naked 

Rom  15.  19  so  that  from  Jerusalem,  and  round  about 

1  Co.  1.   7  So  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  gift ;  wait. 

13.    2  though  I  have  all  faith,  so  that  I  could 

2  Co.  2.    7  So  that  contrariwise  ye  (ought)  rather  to 

3.    7  so  that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not 

7.    7  your  fervent  mind  toward  me  ;  so  that  I 

Phil.  1.  13  So  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest 

1  Tli.  1.    7  So  that  ye  were  eusamples  to  all  that  be. 

1.  8  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any  thing 

2  Th.  1.   4  So  that  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the 

2.  4  ;  Heb.  13.  6. 

SO  it  was,  (TvuBalvu)  to  happen.  Acts  21.  "K. 

SO  (that)  no  —  ? 

Without,  so  that  no,  *?$Q  mibbeli. 

Eecl,  3.  1 1  so  that  no  man  can  find  out  the  work  that 

SO  then  — 

l.Then,  now,  therefore,  fxev  ovv  men  own- 
Mark  16.  19  [So  then,  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto] 

2.As  also,  so  that,  Sxrre  hoste. 

Markio.  8  so  then  they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one 
1  Co.  3.    7;  7.  38;  2  Co.  4.  12  ;  Gal.  3.  9. 

8, Then,  &pa  ara,  Rom.  jo.  17  ;  Gal.  4.  31. 

A.  Then  indeed,  &paolv,  Ro.  7.  3,25;  9.  16;  14.  12. 

SO,  if  — 

If  although,  whosoever,  idu  can. 

Matt  iS.  13  if  so  be  that  he  find  it,  verily  I  say  unto 
SOAKED  — 
To  be  filled,  satisfi 'd,  watered,  nrj  ravah,  3. 

Isa.   34.    7  their  land  shall  be  soaked  with  blood,  and 
SOBER,  soberly,  soberness,  sobriety  — 
X.Soder,  vigilant,  vntyuXeos  nephaleos. 

1  Ti.    3.  11  not  slanderers,  sober,  faithful  in  all  things 

Titus  2.    2  That  the  aged  men  be  sober,  grave,  temp. 

2.To  be  sober,  watchfid,  v-i)<pw  nepho. 

1  Pe.   1. 13  be  sober,  aud  hope  to  the  end  for  the  gr. 
3.  With  a  view  to  oj  sound  minded,  els  to  awtypove'iv. 

Rom  12.    3  to  think  soberly,  according  as  God  ha-h 
4. Soberly,  temperately,  prudently,  craxppovws  sophr. 

Titus  2. 12  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and 
5. Sobriety,  soundness  of  mind,  a-axppoavvn  sophro. 

Acts  26.  25  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  sober. 

t  Ti.   2.   9  with  shamefacedness  and  sobriety 

2,  15  and  charity  and  holiness  with  sobriety 

6.  Sound  minded,  sober,  (ruxppcav  sdphron. 

1  Ti.  3.  2  vigilant,  sober,  of  good  behaviour,  given 
Titus  1.    8  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  te. 

SOBER  (min-led,  to  teach)  to  be  — 

1.7"o  be  sober,  watchfid,  vi)(pu>  nepho. 

1  Th.  5.    6  let  us  not  sleep . .  but  let  us . .  be  sober 

5.  8  let  us,  who  are  of  the  day,  be  sober,  put. 

1  Pe.   5.    8 Be  sober,  be  vigilant;  because  your  adv. 

2.  To  be  sound  minded,  aw<ppove<a  sdph/roTteo. 

2  Co.  5.  13  or  whether  we  be  sober,  (it  is)  for  your  c. 
Titua  2.  6  Voung  men.  .exhort  to  be  sober  minded 
1  Pe.  4.    7  be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  p. 

3.7*0  make  sobc-  minded,  prudent,  o-axppovlfa  sop. 
Titus  2.    4  "aay  teach  the  young  women  to  be  sober 
SO'-CHO,  SHO'-CO,  SHO'-CHO,  "iDlb. 

1.  A  son  of  Heber.    B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  4.  iS  Jehudijah  bare.  .TIeber  the  father  of  S. 

2.  A  city  in  Judah,   rebuilt  by  Rehoboam;  perhaps 
S  te  th,  in  the  X.W.  of  the  plain  of  Judah. 

2  Ch.it.    7  And  Beth-zur,  and  8.,  and  Adullam 

28.  18  Gedoroth,  and  S.  with  the  villages  thereof 

SOCKET  — 

-i  soch  t,  px  eden. 

Exod26.  19  thou  Shalt  make  forty  sockets  of  silver  u. 
26. 19,  21,  25  two  sockets  under  one  board 
26. 19,  2i,  2s  and  two  sockets  under  another  bo. 
26.  21  And  their  forty  sockets  (of)  silver  ;  two 
26.  25  and  their  sockets  (of)  silver,  sixteen  soc. 
26. 32  hooks  (shall  be  of)  gold,  upon  the  four  so. 


Exod26.  37  thou  shalt  cast  five  sockets  of  brass  for 

27. 10  and  their  twenty  sockets,  (shall  be  of)br. 
27.  11  twentypillarsandtheirtwentysockets(of) 
27.  12  their  pillars  ten,  and  their  sockets  ten 
27.  14,  15  their  pillars  three,  and  their  sockets 
27.  16  pillars  (shall  be)  four,  and  their  sockets  f . 
27.  17  hooks  (shall  be  of  silver,)  and  their  sock. 
27.  18  fine  twined  linen,  and  their  sockets(of)  b. 

35. 11  boards,  his  bars,  his  pillars,  and  his  sock. 

35.  17  his  pillars,  and  their  sockets,  and  the  ha. 

36.  24  forty  sockets  of  silver  he  made  under  the 
36.  24,  26  two  sockets  under  one  board  for  his 
36.  26  And  their  forty  sockets  of  silver ;  two 
36.  24,  26  and  two  sockets  under  another  board 
36.  30  their  sockets  (were)  sixteen  sockets  of 
36.  30  their  sockets  (were)  sixteen  sockets  of  sil. 
36.  30  eight  boards,  .under  every  board  two  so. 
36.  36  and  he  cast  for  them  four  sockets  of  silv. 
36.  38  fillets  with  gold :  but  theii-five  sockets  (w. 
38. 10  pillars  (were)  twenty,  and  their  brazen  so. 
38.  11  there  pillars  (were)  twenty,  and  their  so. 
38.  12  their  pillars  ten,  and  their  sockets  ten 
38.  14,  15  their  pillars  three,  and  their  sockets 
38.  17  the  sockets  for  the  pillars  (were  of)  brass 
38. 19  their  pillars  (were)  four,  and  their  sockets 
38.  27  sockets  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  sockets 
3S.  27  an  hundred  sockets.,  a  talent  for  a  socket 
38.  30  he  made  the  sockets  to  the  door  of  the  ta. 
38.  31  the  sockets  of  the  court  round  about,  and 

38.  31  the  sockets  of  the  court  gate,  and  all  the 

39.  33  his  bars,  and  his  pillars,  and  his  sockets 
39.  40  his  pillars,  and  his  sockets,  and  the  hang. 
40. 18  fastened  his  sockets,  and  set  up  the  boards 

Num.  3.  36  the  sockets  thereof,  and  all  the  vessels  th. 

3.  37  their  sockets,  andtheirpins,  and  their  no. 

4.  31  the  pillars  thereof,  and  the  sockets  there. 
4/32  their  sockets,  and  their  pins,  and  their  co. 

Song  5. 15  pillars  of  marble  set  upon  sockets  of  fine 
SO'-COH,  SHO'-CHOH,  SO'-CHOH,  nb'lE',  rbh. 

1.  A  city  in  the  N.W.  of  the  plain  of  Judah,  near  Adul- 
lam or  Azekah. 

Josh. 15.  35  Jarmuth,  and  Adullam,  S.,  and  Azekah 
1  Sa.  17.    1  were  gathered  together  at  S.,  which  (be.) 

17.  1  pitched  between  S.  and  Azekah,  in  Ephes. 

1  Ki.  4.  10  to  him  (pertained)  S.,  and  all  the  land  of 

2.  Another   city  in  the  hill  country  of   Judah,  near 
Jattir. 

Josh.15.  48  in  the  mountains,  Shamir,  and  Jattir.  .S. 
SOD,  be  sodden,  to — 
l.To  boil,  cook,  ^3  bashat,  3. 

2  Ch.35.  13  the  (other)holy  (offerings)  sod  they  in  pots 
Lam.  4.  10  The  hands  of  the  pitiful  women  have  sod. 

*2.  To  be  boiled,  cooked,  Sty?  bashal,  4. 

Exodi2.    9  Eat  not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at  all  with 
Lev.    6.  28  the  earthen  vesstd  wherein  it  is  sodden 

6.  28  if  it  be  sodden  in  a  brasen  pot,  it  shall  lie 
1  Sa.   2.  15  he  will  not  have  sodden  flesh  of  thee,  but 

3.  Boiled,  cooked,  *?$$  bashel. 

Num.  6.  19  the  priest  shall  take  the  sodden  shoulder 

4.  To  (cause)  to  boil,  "M,  ti  zid,  zud3  5. 

Gen.  25.  29  Jacob  sod  pottage  :  and  Esau  came  from 
S0DERING,  soldering  — 
Joint,  joining,  p3*  debeq. 

Isa.  41.    7  saying,  It  (is)  ready  for  the  sodering:  and 
SO'-DI,  n'lD  Jah  determines. 

A  Zebulonite,  father  of  Gaddiel,  one  of  the  twelve  spies 
sent  out  to  view  the  land.     B.C.  1492. 

Numi3-  10  the  tribe  of  Zebuluu,  Gaddiel  the  son  of  S. 
SO'-DOM,  SO-DO'-MA,  Dip  place  of  lime.   2,6Bo/xa. 
A  city  on  the  shore  of  the  Salt  Sea  south  of  Engedi; 
destroyed  in  the  days  of  Abraham  and  Lot  along  with 
Gomorrah,  Admah.'and  Zeboim.     B.C.  1900. 

Gen.  10. 19  as  thougoest,  ontoS.,  and  Gomorrah,  and 
13.  10  before  the  Lord  destroyed  S.  and  Gomor. 

13.  12  Lotdwelt.  andpitched(his)tenttowardS. 
13. 13  the  men  of  S.  (were)  wicked  and  sinners 

14.  2  (these)  made  war  with  Berakingof  S.,  and 
14.  8  there  went  out  the kingof  S.,  andtheking 
14.  10  the  kings  of  S.  and  Gomorrah  fled,  and  fell 
14.  11  they  took  all  the  goods  of  S.  and  Gomorrah 
14.  12  Lot,  Abram's brother's  son  who  dwelt  in  S. 
14.  17  the  king  of  S.  went  out  to  meet  him  after 
14.  21  the  king  of  S.  said  unto  Abram,  Give  me 
14.  22  Abram  said  to  the  king  of  S.,  I  have  lift 

18.  16  rose  up  from  thence,  and  looked  towards 
18.  20  the  cry  of  S.  and  Gomorrah  is  great,  and 
18.  27  And  the  men  turned  . .  and  went  toward  S. 

18.  26  If  I  find  in  S.  fifty  righteous  within  the  ci. 

19.  1  And  there  came  two  angels  to  S.  at  even 
19.    1  Lot  sat  in  the  gate  of  S.:  and  Lot  seeing 
19.    4  the  men  of  S.,  compassed  thehouse  round 
19.  24  the  Lord  rained  upon  S.  and  upon  Gom. 
19.  28  he  looked  towards,  and  Gomorrah,  and 

Deutsg.  23  like  the  overthrow  of  S.,  and  Gomorrah 
32.  32  theirvine  (is)  of  the  vine  of  S.,  and  of  Hie 

Isa.  1.  9  we  should  have  been  asS.,  (and)weshoubl 
1. 10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of  S. 
3,  9  they  declare  their  sin  as  S.,  they  hide  fit"* 
13.  19  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  S.  and  ('•. 

Jcr.  23. 14  they  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as  S.,  and  the 
49. 18  As  in  the  overthrow  of  S.  and  Gomorrah 
50. 40  As  God  overthrew  S.  and  Gomorrah  and 

Lam,  4.    6  than  the  punishment  of  thesinof  S.,  (that 

Eze.  16.  46  thy  younger  sister.  .(is)S.  and  herdan^h. 
16. 48  S.  thy  sister  hath  not  done,  she  nor  her 
16  49  this  was  the  iniquity  of  thy  sister  S.,  pride 


Eze.  16.  53  the  captivity  of  S.  and  her  daughters  and 
16.  55  S.  and  her  daughters,  shall  return  to  their 

16.  56  S.  wasnot  mentioned  by  thy  mouth  in  the 
Amos  4.  11  have  overthrown,  .you,  as  God  Overthrew 
Zeph.  2.  9  Moab  shall  be  as  S.,  and  the  children  of  . 
Matt  10.  15  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  S' 

11. 23  if  the  mighty  works,  .had been  done  in  S. 

11.  24  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  S. 
Mark  6.  n  [It  shall  be  more  tolerable  forS.  and  Go.} 
Luke  10.  12  shall  be  more  tolerable  in  that  day  for  S. 

17.  29  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  S.  it 
Rom.  9.  29  we  had  been  as  S.,and  been  made  like  uu. 
2  Pe.  2.    6  turning  the  cities  of  S.  and  Gomorrah  into 
Jude        7  as  S.  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  cities  about 
Rev.  11.    8  great  city,  whieh  spiritually  is  called  S. 

SODOMITE  — 

Sejmrate,  set  apart,  khr  qadesh. 

Deut23.  17  There  shall  be  no.  .sodomite  of  the  sons 

1  Ki.14.  24  And  there  were  also  sodomitesin  the  land 

15. 12  he  took  away  the  sodomites  out  of  the  1. 
22.  46  the  remnant  of  the  sodomites,  which  re. 

2  Ki.  23.    7  he  brake  down  the  houses  of  the  sodonii. 
SOEVER  — 

If,  eav  eon. 

Mark  6.  10  In  what  place  soever  ye  enter  into  an  ho. 
SOFT,  softly  — 
\.G\  tttly,  UN  at. 

1  Ki.  21.  27  and  lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly 

Isa.     8.   6  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  softly,  and 
2,Ge?itly,  *bxS  leitti. 

Gen.  33. 14  I  will  lead  on  softly,  according  as  the  ca. 

3.  Gentleness,  dnS  lat. 

Judg.  4. 21  went  softly  unto  him,  and  smote  the  nail 

4.  Gentleness,  tt?  lat. 

Ruth  3.   7  she  came  softly,  and  uncovered  his  feet 

5.  Tender,  soft,  timid,  ?n  rah. 

Job    41.   3  will  he  speak  soft  (words)  unto  thee? 
Prov.15.    1  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath  :  but 
25-  1 5  persuaded,  and  a  soft  tongue  breaketh  the 

6.  Soft,  delicate,  juaActKOs  malakos. 

Matt  1 1.    8  A  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment?    Behold 

11.  8  they  that  wear  soft  (clothing)  are  in  kin. 
Luke  7.  25  A  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment  ?    Behold 

SOET,  softer,  to  be  or  make  — 
1.7*0  melt,  soften,  JVD  mug,  Sa. 

Psa.  65. 10  thou  makest  it  soft  with  showers ;  thou 
2.  To  be  tender,  soft,  Tp"i  rakak. 

Psa.  55.  21  his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet  (were) 
3, To  make  tender,  "HD-i  rakak,  5. 

Job  23. 16  God  maketh  my  heart  soft,  and  the  Aim . 
SOIL  — 
A  field,  land,  rnjy  sadeh. 

Eze.  17.    8  It  was  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  great  wa- 
SOJOtTRN  (in),  to  — 
l.To  sojourn,  iw  gur. 

Gen.  12.  10  Abram  went  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn 

19.  9  This  one  (fellow)  came  in  to  sojourn,  and 

20.  1  Abraham  journeyed . .  and  sojourned  in  G. 

21.  23  to  the  land  wherein  thou  hast  sojourned 
21.  34  Abraham  sojourned  in  the  Philistines'  la. 
26.  3  Sojourn  in  this  land,  aud  I  will  be  with  t. 
32.  4  I  have  sojourned  with  Laban,  and  stayed' 
35.  27  where  Abraham  and  Isaac  sojourned 

47.  4  to  sojourn  in  the  land  are  we  come  ;  for 
Exod.  3.  22  and  of  her  that  sojourneth  in  her  house 

12.  48  when  a  stranger  shall  sojourn  with  thee 
12.  49  unto  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 

Lev.  16.  29  or  a  stranger  that  sojourneth  among  you 
17.  8,  10,  13  the  strangers  that  sojourn  among 
17.  12  any  stranger  that  sojourneth  among  you 
18. 26  nor  any  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 

19.  33  if  a  stranger  sojourn  with^thee  in  your  la. 

20.  2  or  of  the  strangers  that  sojourn  in  Israel 
25.    6  for  thy  stranger  that  sojourneth  with  th. 

25.  45  the  strangers  that  do  sojourn  among  you 
Num.  9.  14  if  a  stranger  shall  sojourn  among  you,  and 

15.  14  if  a  stranger  sojourn  with  you,  or  whoso. 
15. 15,  16  for  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  (with 
15.  26,  2othestranger  thatsojonrneth  among  th. 
19.  10  unto  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 
Dent  18.    6  if  aLevite  come  from.,  where  he  sojourn. 

26.  5  he  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  sojourned 
Josh. 20.    9  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among  them 


Judi 


17- 
17- 
17- 

1  o. 
19. 


7  who  (was)  a  Levite,  and  he  sojourned  there 
S  to  sojourn  where  lie  could  find  (a  place) 
9  I  go  to  sojourn  where  I  may  find  (ajdace) 
1  there  was  a  certain  Levite  sojourning  011 
16  he  sojourned  in  Gibcah  :  but  the  men  of 
Unth  1.    1  went  to  sojourn  in  the  country  of  Moab 
2  Ki.  8.    1  sojourn  wheresoever  thou  canst  sojourn 
8.    2  sojourned  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines  se. 
Ezra    1.    4  remnineth  in  any  place  where  he  sojourn. 
Psa.  105.  23  and  Jacob  sojourned  in  the  land  of  Ham 
120.    5  Woe  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,  (th.) 
Isa.   23.    7  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar.,  to  sojo 
52.    4  went  down  aforetime  into  Egypt  to  sojou. 
Jer.   42.  15  enter  into  Egypt,  and  go  to  sojourn  there 
42.  17  set  their  faces  to  go  into  Egypt  to  sojourn 

42.  22  the  place  whither  ye  desire,  .to  sojourn 

43.  2  to  say,  Go  not  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there 

44.  12,  14,  28  into  the  land  of  Egypt  to  sojourn 
Lnm.  4.  15  they  said.. They  shall  no  more  sojourn 
Eze.  14.   7  orofthestrangerthat sojourneth  in  Israel 


SOJOURNER 


905 


SOLOMON 


Eze.  47/22  to  the  strangers  that  sojourn  anions:  you 
47.  23  iu  what  tribe  the  stranger  sojourneth 

2.  To  sojourn-,  assemble  self,  "V&gur,  7a. 

1  Ki.17.  20  evil  upon,  the  widow  with  whom  I  sojourn 
3. Place  of  sojourn,  TUO  magur. 

Eze.  20.  38  out  of  the  country  where  they  sojourn,  and 

4.  To  dwell  alongside,  sojourn,  irapoiKeco  paroikeo. 

Hen.  n.   9  By  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  pro. 
5. To  be  a  sojourner,  elfit  wdpoiKos  eimi  paroikos. 

Acts   7.    6  That  his  seed  should  sojourn  in  a  strange 
SOJOURNER,  sojourning  — 
l.To  sojourn,  "na  gur. 

2  Sa.  4.    3  and  were  sojourners  there  until  this  day 

2.  A  sojourner,  ~ia  ger. 

Lev.  25.  47  if  a  sojourner  or  strangerwax  rich  by  thee 

3.  A  settler,  dwelling,  D#1D  moshab. 

Exodi2.  40  the  sojourning  of  the  children  of  Israel 
4„4  settler,  dweller,  2^in  toshab. 

Gen.  23.   4  I  (am)  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  with  you 

Lev.  22.  10  a  sojourner  of  the  priest,  or  an  hired  ser. 
25.  23  for  ye  (are)  strangers  and  sojourners  with 
25.  35  (though  he  be)  a  stranger,  or  a  sojourner 
25. 40  as  a  sojourner,  he  shall  be  with  thee,  (and) 
25.  47  sell  himself  unto  the  stranger  (or)  sojou. 

Xum35-  15  for  the  stranger,  and  for  the  sojourner  am. 

1  Ch.29.  15  we  (are)  strangers  before  thee,  and  sojou. 

Psa.  39.  12  I  (am)  a  stranger  with  thee,  (and)  a  sojo. 

5.  A  dwelling  alongside,  sojourning,  vapoiietaparo. 

1  Pe.  1.  17  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  (here)  in 
SOLACE  selves,  to  — 

To  delight  self,  rejoice,  D1?^  alas,  7. 

Prov.  7. 18  Come,  .let  us  solace  ourselves  with  loves 
SOLD,  to  be  — 
l.To  come  in  with  a  price,  "Vn£3  tfa  bo  bimechir. 

Lam.  5.    4  water  for  money ;  our  wood  is  sold  unto 

2.To  be  sold,  T3D  malcar,  2. 

Exod22.  3  if  he  have  nothing,  then  he  shall  be  sold 
Lev.  25.  23  The  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  ever :  for 
25.  34  the  field  of  the  suburbs,  .may  not  be  sold 
25.  39  if  thy  brother ..  be  waxen  poor,  and  be  so. 
25. 42  my  servants,  .they  shall  not  be  sold  as  bo. 
25.  48  After  that  he  is  sold  he  may  be  redeemed 

25.  50  from  the  year  that  he  was  sold  to  him  unto 
27.  27  it  shall  be  sold  accordiug  to  thy  estimat. 
27.  28  no  devoted  thing.. shall  be  sold  orredee. 

Deut  15.  12  or  an  Hebrew  woman,  be  sold  unto  thee 
Neh.   5.    8  the  Jews,  which  were  sold  unto  the  heat. 

5.  8  shall  they  be  sold  unto  us  ?  Then  held  they 
Estli.  7.    4  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  people,  to  be  clest. 

7.  4  if  we  had  been  sold  for  bond  men  and  bo. 
Psa.  105. 17  (even)  Joseph,  (who)  was  sold  for  a  servant 
Jer.  34. 14  an  Hebrew,  which  hath  been  sold  unto 

3.7*0  sell  self,  *i:D  malcar,  7. 

Deut 28.  68  ye  shall  be  sold  unto  your  enemies  forbo. 

4.  To  sell,  cause  to  pass  over,  irnrpao'KQ)  piprasko. 
Matt  18.  25  his  lord  commanded  hiiu^to be  sold.and  his 

26.  9  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for  much 
!Marki4.  5  For  it  mighthave  beensold  for  more  than 
Johni2.  5  Why  was  not  this  ointment  sold  for  three 
Acts  4.  34  the  prices  of  the  things  that  were  sold 

5.  4  after  it  was  sold,  was  it  not  in  thine  own 
Rom.  7.  14  spiritual :  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  siu 

5. 7*0  sell,  TwAe'w  poled. 

Matt  10.  29  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing? 
Lukei2.    6  Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  forth.? 

SOLD,  (that  which  is)  — 

Sale,  thing  sold,  ware,  i-;P^  mimhar. 

Lev.  25.  25  shall  he  redeem  that  which  his  brother  so. 
25.  28  that  which  is  sold  shall  remain  in  the  ha. 
25.  29  within  a  whole  year  after  it  is  sold 
25.  33  the  house  that  was  sold,  andthe,Eze.  7. 13. 

7*0  be  sold,  irco\4ofiai  polcomai,  1  Co.  10.  25. 

SOLDIER,  (fellow)— 

I.Bon  of  the  troop,  in|"j|  oen-gedud. 

2  Ch.25  13  the  soldiers  of  the  army  which  Amaziah.se. 
2. Force,  'rn  chayil. 

Ezra    S.  22  to  require  of  the  king  a  band  of  soldiers 
Z.To  arm,  yhn  chalats. 

Isa.    15.    4  the  armed  soldiers  of  Moab  shall  cry  out 
4. Host,  H2?  tsaba. 

1  CI1.7.    4  bands  of  soldiers  for  war,  six  and  thirty  th. 
^.Military  host,  arpdrevfia  strateuma. 

Acts  23.  10  commanded  the  soldiers  to  go  down,  and 
Q.To  serve  in  the  camp  or  host,  o-rparevio  straieuo. 

Luke  3.  14  the  soldiers  likewise  demanded  of  him,sa. 
7.  One  serving  as  a  soldier,  (TTpari^rns  stratiotes. 

Matt.  8.   9  a  man  under  authority,  having  soldiers  un. 

27.  27  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  Jesus 

28.  12  they  gave  large  money  unto  the  soldiers 
Markis.  16  the  soldiers  led  him  away  into  the  hall  ca. 
Luke  7.    8  I  also  ani  a  man .  .havingunderme  soldiers 

23.  36  the  soldiers  also  mocked  him,  coming  to 
John  1 9.  2  the  soldiers  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and 
19. 23  the  soldiers,  when  they  had  crucified  Jes. 
19.23  and  made  four  parts,  to  every  soldier  a 
19.  24  These  things  therefore  the  soldiers  did 
19.  32  Then  came  the  soldiers,  and  brake  the  le. 
19.  34  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a  spear  pierced  his 

114 


Acts  10.  7  a  devout  soldier  of  them  that  waited  on 
12.  4  four  quaternions  of  soldiers  to  keep  him 
12.  6  Peter  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers 
12.  18  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  soldiers 
21.  32  Who  immediately  took  soldiers  and  cent. 
zi.  32  they  saw  the  chief  captain  and  the  soldiers 
21.  35  he  was  borne  of  the  soldiers  for  the  viole. 
23.  23  Make  ready  two  hundred  soldiers  to  go  to 
23  31  the  soldiers,  as  it  was  commanded  them 
27.  31  said  to  the  centurion  and  to  the  soldiers 
27.  32  the  soldiers  cut  off  the  ropes  of  the  boat 

27.  42  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  pris. 

28.  16  to  dwell  by  himself  with  a  soldier, '2  Ti.  2.3. 
8. Fellow  soldier,  arvo-TpaTLWT-ns,Phi\. 2. 2$;  Ph  111.2. 
SOLDIER,  to  choose  to  be  a  — 

7*0  collect  a  camp  or  host,  arparohoyeoj  stratelogeo. 
2  Ti.  2.   4  him  who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier 
SOLE— 
Palm  {of  hand),  sole  {of  foot),  ^3  Jcaph. 

Gen.    8.    9  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her 

Deut  1 1.  24  Every  place  whereon  the  soles  of  yourfe. 

28. 35  from  the  sole  of  thy  foot  unto  the  top  of 

28.  56  to  set  the  sole  of  her  foot  upon  the  grou. 

28.  65  neither  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  re. 

Josh.  1.   3  Every  place  that  the  sole  of  your  foot  sh. 

3. 13  as  soon  as  the  soles  of  the  feet  of  the  pri. 

4. 18  the  soles  of  the  priests'  feet  were  lifted 

2  Sa.  14.  25  from  the  sole  of  his  foot  even  to  the  cro. 

1  Ki.  5.    3  until  the  LORD  put  them  under  the  soles 

2  Ki.  19.  24  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up 
Job  2.  7  smote  J  ob  with  sore  boils  from  the  sole  of 
Isa.     1.    6  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the 

37.  25  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  up 
60.  14  bow  themselves  down  at  the  soles  of  thy 

Eze.  1.  7  the  sole  of  their  feet  (was)  like  the  sole  of 
43.   7  the  place  of  the  soles  of  my  feet,  where  I 

Mai.    4.    3  they  shall  be  ashes  under  the  soles  of  yo. 

SOLEMN  (assembly,  feast,  meeting,  day^,  solemnity  — 
l.Festival,  in,  in  chag. 

Psa.  81.  3  in  the  time  appointed,  on  our  solemn  fe. 
Isa.  30.  29  as  in  the  night,  (when)  a  holy  solemnity 
Nah.  1.  15  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  vows 
Mai.  2.  3  (even)  the  dung  of  yoursolemn  feasts;  aud 
2,  Appointed  time,  place,  sign,  iy.iD  moed. 

Num.  10.  10  in  your  solemn  days,  and  in  the  beginni. 
15.    3  in  your  solemn  feast,  to  make  a  sweet  sa. 
Deut  31.  10  in  the  solemnity  of  the  year  of  release,  in 
2  Ch    2.   4  on  the  solemn  feasts  of  the  Lord  our  God 
Isa.   33. 20  Look  upon  Ziou,  the  city  of  our  solenmit. 
Lam.  1.    4  because  none  come  to  the  solemn  feasts 
2.   6  the  Lord  hath  caused  the  solemn  feasts 
2.7  a  noise . .  as  in  the  day  of  a  solemn  feast 
2.  22  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my 
Eze.  36.  38  as  the  flock.,  in  her  solemn  feasts,  so  shall 

45.  17  in  tlie  sabbaths,  in  all  solemnities  of  the 

46.  9  come  before  the  Lord  iu  the  solemn  fea. 
46. 11  in  the  solemnities,  the  meat  offering  sh. 

Hos.    2.  11  andher  sabbaths,  and  all  her  solemn  feasts 

9.    5  What  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day,  and  in 

12.   9  dwell. .as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn  feasts 

Zeph.  3. 18  I  will  gather  (them),  .for  the  solemn  ass. 

3. Appointed  times,  n'njyD  moadoth. 

2  Ch.  8.  13  the  newmoons,  and  on  the  solemn  feasts 
i.A  restraint,  rnsj;  atsarah. 

2  Ki.  10.  20  Jehu  said,  Proclaim  a  solemn  assembly 
Isa.     1. 13  (it  is)  iniquity,  even  the  solemn  meeting 
Joel.  1.  14  call  a  solemn  assembly,  gather  the  elders 
2.  15  sanctify  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly 

5.-4  restraint,  nrfSJL  alsereth. 

Lev.  23.  36  it  (is)  a  solemn  assembly;  (and)  ye  shall  do 
KUIU29.  35  ye  shall  have  a  solemn  assembly;  ye  shall 
Deut  16.  8  the  seventh  day  (shall  be)  a  solemn  asse. 
2  Ch.  7.  9  the  eighth  day  they  made  a  solemn  assem. 
Neh.  8.  18  on  the  eighth  day  (was)  a  solemn  assembly 
Amos  5.  21 1  will  not  smell  iu  your  solemn  assemblies 

SOLEMN  feast,  to  keep  a  — 

7*0  keep  a  festival,  iin  chagag. 

Deuti6.  15  shalt  thou  keep  a  solemn  feast  unto  the 

SOLEMNLY  — 

To  {cause  to)  testify,  "vy  ud,  5. 

Gen.  43.    3  The  man  did  solemnly  protest  unto  us 
1  Sa.    8.    9  protest  solemnly  unto  them,  and  show 

SOLITARY  (placed,  solitarily  — 

1. Alone,  separate,  "ns  badad. 

Lam.  1.    1  How  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  (that  was) 
Mic.    7.  14  which  dwell  solitarily  (in)  the  wood,  in 

2.  Silent,  "PDpa  galmvxl. 

Job      3.    7  let  that  night  be  solitary ;  let  no  joyful 
30.    3  For  want  and  famine  (they  were)  solitary 

3. Lonely,  singly,  Tir  yachid. 

Psa.  68.    6  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families :  he 
A.  Desolate  place,  \\Wy\  yeshimon. 

Psa. 107.    4  They  wandered  in  the  wilderness  in  a  so. 
5.-1  dry  place,  its  tsiyyah. 

Isa.   35.    1  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them 
6.  Desert,  ^pv/xos  eremos. 

Mark  1.  35  departed  into  a  solitary  place,  and  there 
SOLOMON,  nh7#  peace.  *2,o\ofia>v. 
The  tenth  son  of  David,  and  second  by  Bath-sheba, 
and  the  third  kiug  of  Israel;  born  B.C.  1033,  crowned 
1015,  died  975.  He  was  crowned  king  at  Gihon  by  the 
direction  of  his  father  when  aged  and  infirm;  offered 


sacrifices  at  Gibeon,  chose  wisdom  iu  preference  to  all 
other  things;  judged  wonderfully  between  two  harlots; 
increased  in  power  and  wealth,  had  gold  in  abundance, 
and  weapons  of  war,  a  throne  of  ivory,  scientific 
knowledge  of  botany,  etc.;  congratulated  by  Hiram 
king  of  Tyre,  prepared  for  building  the  temple,  prayed 
at  its  dedication,  sacrificed  on  that  occasion,  God 
appeared  to  him,  warned  him,  covenanted  with  him;  he 
built  his  own  house,  and  the  house  of  Lebanon  for 
Pharaoh's  daughter,  appointed  the  courses  of  the  priests, 
sent  ships  to  Ophir,  received  the  queen  of  Sheba,  gave 
some  cities  to  Hiram,  had  numerous  wives  and  concu- 
bines, countenancedidolatry,  and  was  threatened  for  it, 
opposed  by  Hadad  the  Edomite,  and  by  Rezin  the 
Syrian,  and  by  Jeroboam  an  Ephrathite  of  Zereda ;  died, 
and  was  buried  iu  the  city  of  David,  after  a  reign  of 
forty  years. 

2  Sa.    5. 14  Shammuah,  and  Shobab,  and  Nathan.  .3. 
12.  24  she  bare  a  son,  aud  he  called  Ids  name  S. 
1  Ki,    1.  10  Benaiah,  and  the  mighty  men,  aud  S.  his 
1.  11  spake  unto  Bath-sheba  the  mother  of  S. 
1.  12  thine  own  life,  and  the  life  of  thy  sou  S, 
1. 13,  17,  30  S.  thy  son  shall  reign  after  me,  aud 
1.  19  but  S.  thy  servant  hath  he  not  called 
1.  21  I  and  my  son  S.  shall  be  counted  offenders 
1.  26  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  and  thy  servant  S. 
1.  33  cause  S.  my  son  to  ride  upon  mine  own 
1.  34  blow. .the trumpet,  and  say,  God  save.  ,S. 
1.  37  even  sobe  he  with  S.,  andmakehisthrone 
1.  38  caused  S.  to  ride  upon  king  David's  mule 
1.  39  Zadok  the  priest  took,  .and  anointed  S. 
1.  39  and  all  the  people  said,  God  save  king  S. 
1.  43  Verily  our  Lord  king  David  hath  made  S. 
1.  46  also  S.  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  the  king. 
1.  47  God  make  the  name  of  S.  better  than  thy 
1.  50  Adonijah  feared  because  of  S.,  and  arose 
1.  51  And  it  is  was  told  S.,  saying,  Behold 
1. 51  Adonijah  feareth  king  S.:  for,  lo,  he  hath 
1.  51  Let  king  S.  swear  unto  me  to  day  that  he 
1.  52  S.  said,  If  he  will  show  himself  a  worthy 
1.  53  king  S.  sent,  and  they  brought  him  down 

1.  53  came  and  bowed  himself  to  king  S.:  and  S. 

2.  1  and  he  charged  S.  his  son,  saying 

2.  12  Then  sat  S.  upon  the  throne  of  David  his 
2. 13  came  to  Bath-sheba  the  mother  of  S. 
2.  17  Speak,  I  pray  thee,  unto  S.  the  king,  for 
2.  19  Bath-sheba  therefore  went  unto  king  S. 
2. 22  S.  answered  aud  said  unto  his  mother 
2.  23  S.  sware  by  the  LORD,  saying,  God  do  so 
2.  25  S.  sent  by  the  hand  of  Benaiah  the  son  of 
2.  27  S.  thrust  out  Abiathar  from  being  priest 
2.  29  it  was  told  king  S.  that  Joab  was  fled  unto 
2.  29  S.  sent  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  say. 
2.  41  it  was  told  S.  that  Shiniei  had  gone  from 
2.  45  S.  (shall  be)  blessed,  and  the  throne  of  D. 

2.  46  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand  of  S. 

3.  1  S.  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh  king  of  E. 
3.  3  S.  loved  the  Lord,  walking  in  the  statutes 
3.  4  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  did  S.  offer  up. 
3.    5  the  Lord  appeared  to  S.  in  a  dream  by 

3.    6  S.  said,  Thou  hast  showed  unto  my  serv. 

3.  10  the  speech  pleased  the  LORD,  that  S.  had 
3. 15  S.  awoke;  and,  behold,  (it  was)  a  dream 

4.  1  So  king  S.  was  king  over  all  Israel 

4.   7  S.  had  twelve  officers  overall  Israel, which 
4.  11  which  had  Taphath  the  daughter  of  S.  to 
4.  15  he  also  took  Basmath  the  daughter  of  S.  to 
4.  21  S.  reigned  over  all  kingdoms  from  the  riv. 
4. 21  they  brought  presents,  and  served  S.  all 
4.  22  S.'s  provision  for  one  day  was  thirty  mea. 
4.  25  Israel  dwelt  safely,  .all  the  days  of  S. 
4.  26  S.  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of  horses  for 
4. 27  those  officers  provided  victual  for  king  S. 
4.  27  for  all  that  came  unto  king  S.'s  table,  ev. 
4.  29  God  gave  S.  wisdom  and  understanding 
4.  30  S.'s  wisdom  excelled  the  wisdom  of  all  the 

4.  34  of  all  people  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  S. 

5.  1  king  of  Tyresent  his  servants  unto  S.;  for 
5.    2  And  S.  sent  to  Hiram,  saying 

5.  7  when  Hiram  heard  the  words  of  S.,  that 
5.    8  Hiram  sent  to  S.,  saying,  I  have  conside. 

5. 10  Hiram  gave  S.  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees 

5. 11  S.  gave  Hiram  twenty  thousand  measures 
5.  11  thus  gave  S.  to  Hiram  year  by  year 

5. 12  the  Lord  gave  S.  wisdom,  as  he  promised 

5. 12  there  was  peace  between  Hiram  and  S. 

5. 13  S.  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  Israel;  and  the 
5. 15  S.  had  three  score  and  ten  thousand  that 
5.  16  the  chief  of  S.'s  officers  which  (were)  over 

5.  iS  S.'s  builders  and  Hiram's  builders  did  hew 

6.  1  in  the  fourth  year  of  S.'s  reign  over  Israel 
6.  2  the  house  which  king  S.  built  for  the  Lo. 
6.  11  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  S.,  saying 

6. 14  So  S.  built  the  house,  and  finished  it 

6.  21  S.  overlaid  the  house  within  with  pure  go 

7.  1  S.  was  building  his  own  house  thirteen 
7.  8  S.  made  also  an  house  for  Pharaoh's  dau. 
7.  13  king  S.  sent  and  fetched  Hiram  out  of  T 
7.  14  he  came  to  king  S.,  and  wrought  all  his 
7. 40  work  that  he  made  king  S.  for  the  house 
7.  45  these  vessels,  which  Hiram  made,  .king  S. 
7.  47  S.  left  all  the  vessels  (unweighed),  because 
7.  48  S.  made  all  the  vesselsthat(pertained)un. 
7.  51  work  that  king  S.  made  for  the  house  of 

7.  51  S.  brought  in  the  things  which  David  his 
S.    1  Then  S.  assembled,  .unto  king  S.  in  Jer. 

8.  2  assembled  themselves  unto  Icing  S.  at  the 
8.  5  king  S.,  and  all  the  congregation,  .(were) 
8. 12  Then  spake  S. ,  The  Lord  said  that  he  wo 
3.  22  And  S.  stood  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
8.  54  when  S.  had  made  an  end  of  praying  all 
S.  63  S.  offereda  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings,  wh. 


SOLOMON 


906 


SOME 


i  KJ.  8. 
9- 
9- 
9> 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9 
9 
9> 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9- 


io. 
ii. 


14. 

14. 

>  KL21. 

=3- 

24. 

25- 

i  Ch.  3. 

3- 
6. 
6. 
14. 


tCh 


65  And  at  that  time  S.  held  a  feast,  and  all 

1  S.  had  finished  the  building-  of  the  house 
r  and  all  S.'s  desire  which  he  was  pleased  to 

2  That  the  Lord  appeared  to  S.  the  second 

10  itcametopass.  .when  ft. had  built  tbetwo 

11  Hiram,  .had  furnished  S.  with  cedar  trees 

11  S.  gave  Hiram  twenty  cities  in  the  laud  of 

12  Hiram  came,  .to  see  the  cities  which  S. 

1  s  the  reason  of  the  levy  which  king  ft.  raised 

16  given  it  (for)  a  present.,  his  daughter,  S.'s 

17  S.  built  Gezer,  and  Beth-horon  the  nether 
19  all  the  cities  of  store  that  S.  had,  and  cit. 

19  that  which  S.  desired  to  build  in  Jerusal. 

21  upon  those  did  S.  levy  a  tribute  of  bond. 

22  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  3.  make  no 

23  the  chief  of  the  officers,  .(were)  over  S.'s 

25  three  times  in  a  year  did  S.  offer  burnt 

26  kingS.  made  anavy  of  ships  in  Ezion-geber 
27sent.. his  servants,  .with  the  servantsofS. 

25  fetched. .gold. .and  brought (it)to  king  S. 

1  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame  of  S. 

2  when  she  was  come  to  S  ,  she  communed 

3  S.  told  her  all  her  questions :  there  was 

4  the  queen  of  ftheba  had  seen  all  S.'s  wis. 

10  which  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  to  king  S. 

13  S.  gave  unto  the  queen  of  Sheba  all  herdes. 

13  (that)  which  S.  gave  her  of.  .royal  bounty 

14  Now  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  S.  iu 
16  king  S.  made  two  hundred  targets  (of)  be. 
21  all  kingS.'s  drinking  vessels(were  of) gold 
21  was  nothing  accounted  of  in  the  days  of  S. 

23  S.  exceeded  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  for 

24  all  the  earth  sought  to  S.,  to  hear  his  wi. 

26  S.  gathered  together  chariots  and  horse. 

25  S.  had  horses  brought  out  of  Egypt,  and 

1  S.  loved  many  strange  women,  together 

2  the  nations.  ,S.  clave  unto  these  in  love 

4  came  to  pass,  when  S.  was  old,  (that)  his 

5  S.  went  after  Ashtoreth  the  goddess  of  the 

6  S.  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and 

7  Then  did  S.  build  au  high  place  for  Che. 
9  the  Lord  was  angry  witli  S.,  because  his 

11  the  Lord  said  unto  S.,  Forasmuch  as  this 
14  the  Lord  stirred  up  an  adversary  unto  S. 

25  an  adversary  to  Israel  all  the  days  of  S. 

26  S.'s  servant,  whose  mother's  name  (was) 

27  S.  built  Millo,  (and)  repaired  the  breaches 

28  S.  seeing  the  young  man  that  he  was  iud. 

31  rend  the  kingdom  out  of  the  hand  of  S. 
40  S.  sought  therefore  to  kill  Jeroboam  :  and 

40  Jeroboam,  .iu  Egypt  until  the  death  of  S. 

41  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  S.,  and  all  that  he 

41  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book,  .of  S.? 

42  S.  reigned  in  Jerusalem  over  all  Israel 

43  S.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 
2  he  was  fled  from  the  presence  of  king  S. 

6  old  men,  that  stood  before  ft  his  father 
21  bring  the  kingdom  again  to.  .the son  of  S. 
23  Speak  unto  Rehoboam,  the  son  of  S.,  king 

21  Rehoboam  the  son  of  S.  reigned  in  Judah 
26  took  away  all  the  shields  of  gold  which  S. 

7  which  the  Lord  said  to  David,  and  to  S. 
13  the  high  places,  .which  ft.  the  king  of  Is. 
13  the  vessels  of  gold  which  ft.  king  of  Israel 

16  the  bases  which  S.  had  made  fur  the  house 
5  Shimea,  and  Shobab,  and  Nathan,  and  S. 

10  S.'s  son  (was) Rehoboam,  Abiahisson,  Asa 

10  in  the  temple  that  ft.  built  in  Jerusalem 

32  until-S.  had  built  the  house  of  the  Lord 

4  Shammua,  and  Shobab,  Nathan,  and  S. 

8  S.  made  the  brasen  sea,  and  the  pillars 

5  S.  my  son  (is)  young  and  tender,  and  the 

6  he  called  for  S.  his  son,  and  charged  him 

7  David  said  to  ft. ,  My  son,  as  for  me,  it  was 

9  his  name  shall  be  S.,  and  I  will  give  peace 

17  all  the  prinoes  of  Israel  to  help  S.  his  son 

I  David . .  made  S.  his  sou  king  over  Israel 

5  he  hath  chosen  S.  my  son  to  sit  upou  the 

6  he  said  unto  me,  ft.  thy  son,  he  shall  build 
9  S.  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  fat. 

1 1  David  gave  to  S.  his  son  the  pattern  of  the 

20  David  said  to  S.  his  son,  Be  strong  and  of 
1  S.  my  son,  whom  alone  Gud  hath  chosen 

19  give  unto  ft.  my  son  a  perfectheart,  to  ke. 

22  they  made  S.  the  sou  of  David  king  the 

23  S.  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  Loud  as  king 

24  princes. .submitted  themselves  unto  ft. 

2  s  the  Lord  magnified  S.  exceedingly  in  the 
28  and  S.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

1  S.  the  son  of  David  was  strengthened  in 

2  S.  spake  unto  all  Israel,  to  the  captains  of 

3  ft.,  and  all  the  congregation  with  him 

5  and  S.  and  the  congregation  sought  unto 

6  S.  went  up  thitherto  the  brasen  altar  be. 

7  that  night  did  God  appear  uutoS.,  and  sa. 

8  ft.  said  unto  God,  Thou  hast  showed  great 
11  God  said  to  S.,  Because  this  was  in  thine 

13  S.  came  (from  his  journey)  to  the  high  pi. 

14  S.  gathered  chariots  and  horsemen  :  and 
i5  S.  had  horses  brought  out  of  Egypt,  and 

1  3.  determined  to  build  an  house  for  the 

2  9,  told  out  threescore  and  ten  thousand 

3  S.  sent  to  Huram  the  king  of  Tyre,  saying 
11  answered  in  writing,  which  he  sent  toS. 
17  s.  numbered  all  the  strangers  that  (were) 

1  S.  began  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord 
3  s.  was  instructed  for  the  building  of  the 

II  the  work  that  he  was  to  make  for  king  ft. 
16  instruments,  did  Huram.. make  to  king  S. 
1:  3.  made  all  these  vessels  in  great  abund, 

1 )  s.  nude  all  the  vessels  that  (were  for)  the 
1  the  work  that  S.  made  fur  the  house  of 


2  Ch.  5.    1  S.  brought  in  (all)  the  things  that  David 
5.    2  S.  assembled  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  all 

5.  6  S.,  and  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  that 

6.  1  Then  said  S.,  The  Lord  hath  said  that  he 
6. 13  S.  had  made  a  brasen  scaffold,  of  five  cub. 

7.  1  when  S.  had  made  an  end  of  praying,  the 
7.  5  S.  offered  a  sacrifice  of  twenty  and  two  th. 
7.  7  S.  hallowed  the  middle  of  the  court  that 
7.  7  the  brasen  altar  which  S.  had  made  was 
7.    8  S.  kept  the  feast  seven  days,  and  all  Isr. 

7. 10  Lord  had  showed  unto  David,  and  to  S. 

7. 11  S.  finished  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the 

7.  ii  all  that  came  into  S.'s  heart  to  make  in  the 

7. 12  the  Lord  appeared  to  S.  by  night,  and  said 

8.  1  S.  had  built  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
8.    2  cities  which  Huram  had  restored  to  S.,  S. 
8.   3  S.  went  to  Hamath-Zobah,  and  prevailed 
8.    6  Baalath,  and  all  the  store  cities  that  S.  had 
8.   6  all  that  S.  desired  to  build  in  Jerusalem 
8.    8  them  did  S.  make  to  pay  tribute  until  thi. 
8.    9  of  Israel  did  S.  make  no  servants  for  his 
8.  10  these  (were)  the  chief  of  king  S.'s  officers 
8.  1 1  S.  brought  up  the  daughter  of  P.  out  of  the 
8.  12  S.  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  LORD 
8.  16  the  work  of  S.  was  prepared  unto  the  clay 
8.  17  Then  went  S.  to  Ezion-geber,  and  to  Elo. 
8. 18  they  went  with  the  servants  of  S.  toOph. 
8.  18  talents,  .and  brought  (them)  to  king  S. 

1  heard  of  the  fame  ofS.,  she  came  to  proves 

1  when  she  was  come  to  S.,  she  communed 

2  And  S.  told  her  all  her  questions :  and 

2  there  was  nothing  hid  from  S.  which  he 

3  queen  of  Sheba  had  seen  the  wisdom  of  S. 
9  any  such  spice  as  the  queen. .gave  kingS. 

10  the  servants  of  S.,  which  brought  goldfr. 

12  S.  gave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba  all  her  de. 

13  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  S.  in 

14  the  kings,  .brought  gold  and  silver  to  S. 

15  king  S.  made  twohundred  targets  (of)  be. 
20  the  drinking  vessels  of  king  S.  (were  of) 
20  was  (not),  .accounted  of  in  the  days  of  S. 

22  S.  passed  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  in  ri. 

23  the  kings,  .sought  the  presence  of  S.,  to 

25  S.  had  four  thousand  stalls  for  horses  and 

28  they  brought  unto  S.  horses  out  of  Egypt 

29  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  S.,  first  and  last 

30  S.  reigned  in  Jerusalem  overall  Israel  fo. 

31  S.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  he  was  bur. 

2  he  had  fled  from  the  presence  of  S.  the  ki. 
6  the  old  men  that  had  stood  before  ft.  his 

3  Speak  unto  Rehoboam  the  son  of  S.,  king 
17  made  Rehoboam  the  son  of  S.  strong,  th. 
17  they  walked  in  the  way  of  David  and  S. 

9  also  the  shields  of  gold  which  ft.  had  ma. 

6  Nebat,  the  servant  of  S.  the  sou  of  David 

7  against  Rehoboam  the  son  of  S.,  when  Re. 

26  since  the  time  of  S.  the  son  of  David  king 
7  which  God  had  said  to  David  and  to  ft.  his 

3  Put  the  holy  ark  in  the  house  which  S.  the 

4  and  according  to  the  writing  of  S.  his  sou 
Neh.  12.  45  the  commandment  of  David,  (and)  of  S. 

13.  26  Did  not  S.  king  of  Israel  sin  by  these  th.  ? 
Psa.  72.  title.  (A  Psalm)  for  S. 

127.  title.  A  Song  of  degrees  for  S. 
Prov.  1.    1  The  proverbs  of  ft.  the  son  of  David,  king 

10.  1  The  proverbs  of  S.  A  wise  son  maketh  a 
25.    1  These  (are)  also  proverbs  of  S.,  which  the 

Song  1.    1  The  soug  of  songs,  which  (is)  S.'s 

1.  5  as  the  tents  of  Kedar,  as  the  curtains  of  S. 
3.  7  Behold  his  bed,  which  (is)  S.'s;  threescore 
3.  9  S.  made  himself  a  chariot  of  the  wood  of 
3.  11  behold  king  S.  with  the  crown  wherewith 
8.  11  S.  had  a  vineyard  at  Baabhamon  ;  he  let 
8.  12  thou,  O  S.,  (must  have)  a  thousand,  and 
Jer.  52.  20  which  king  S.  had  made  iu  the  house  of 
Matt.  1.  6  the  king  begat  S.  of  her  (that  had  been  the 
1.    7  S.  begat  Roboam ;  and  Roboam  begat  Ab. 

6.  29  S.  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  likeoue 
12.  42  for  she  came,  .to  hear  the  wisdom  of  ft. 
12.  42  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  S.  (is)  here 

Luken.  31  for  she  came,  .to  hear  the  wisdom  of  S. 

11.  31  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  S.  (is)  here 

12.  27  S.  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one 
Johmo.  23  Jesus  walked  in  the  temple  in  S.'s  porch 
Acts   3.  11  unto  them  in  the  porch  that  is  called  S.'s 

5. 12  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  ft.'sporch 

7.  47  But  S.  built  him  an  house 

SOLOMON'S  servants,  nbV  Hny  abde  Shelomoh. 
Ezra  2.  55  The  children  of  Solomon's  servants 
[So  in  2.  58;  Neh.  7".  57,  60;  n.  3.] 

SOME  (body,  man,  tiling,  sort,  time,  what)  — 
l.One,  in^t  cchad. 

Gen.  37.  20  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into  some 

1  Sa.  27.    5  let  them  give  me  a  place  in  some  town  in 

2  Sa.  17.    9  he  is  hid  now  in  some  pit,  oriusome  (ot.) 

17.  12  So  shall  we  come  upon  him  in  someplace 
2  Ki.  2. 16  upon  some  mountain,  or  into  some  valley 

2.  These,  n^N  elleh. 

Josh.  8.  22  some  on  this  side,  and  some  on  that  side 

3. A  (mortal)  inan,  cnax  eyiosh. 

NUT1131.    3  Arm  someof  yourselves  unto  the  war,  and 
Neli.  12.  44  at  that  time  were  some  appoiuted  over  the 

4..1  word,  matter,  -i;n  dabar. 

Deut-4.    1  he  bath  found  some  oncleannese  in  her 

5.  J  ntft'/'iihi,  ri-2'to  meumuJi. 

2  Ki.  5.  20  I  will  ran  after  him,  and  take  somewhat 


6. Little,  feie,  0jp3  meat. 

2  Ch.12.  7  but  I  will  grant  them  some  deliverance 
Neh.  2.  12  I  arose  in  the  night,  I  and  some  few  men 

7. End,  co:tremity,  n>'p,  nsp  qatseh,  qetsath. 

Gen.  47.    2  he  took  some  of  his  brethren,  (even)  five 
Neh,   7.  70  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  unto 

S. Another,  some,  &\\os  cUlcs.  ?.\\oi  oiled. 

Matt  13.    5  Some  fell  upon  stony  ]  races,  v  here  they 

13.  7  some  fell  among  thorns  ;  and  the  thorns 

16.  14  [some,]Elias;  and  others,  Jeremias,orone 
M  ark  4.    5  some  fell  on  stony  ground,  where  it  had  not 

4.    7  some  fell  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns 

8.  28  some  (say),  Elias  ;  and  others,  One  of  the 
Luke  9.  19  some(say),  Elias  ;  and  others  (say)  that  one 
John   7.  41  [some]  said.  Shall  Christ  come  out  of  Gal. 

9.  9  Some  said,  This  is  he  ;  others  (said),  He 
Acts  19.  32  Some  therefore  cried  one  thing,  and 

21.  34  some  cried  one  thing,  .among  the  multit. 
9.  One,  some,  iv  hen. 

Mark  4.    8  [some]  thirty,  and  [some]  sixty,  and  [some] 

4.  20  [some]  thirty  fold,  [some]  sixty,  and  [some] 

10. Other,  the  other,  eVepo?  heteros. 

Luke  8.    6  some  fell  upon  a  rock ;  and  as  soon  as  it 

8.  7  some  fell  among  thorns ;  aud  the  thorns 
11. Some  indeed,  6  n-eV-.S  5e  ho  men. ..ho  de. 

Matti3.    4  some  [seeds]  fell  by  the  way  side,  and  the 

I3-   5>  8,8,8,23,23;  16. 14;  Mr.  4. 4, 5;  12.5,  5;  Lu. 

8.  5,  6;  Jo.  7. 12;  Ac.  17. 32;  19.  32  (2);  27.  44,44;  28.  24,  24; 

1  Co.  12.  38;  Eph.  4.  11,  11;  2  Ti.  2.  20,  20;  Jude  22,  23. 

12. Tn  jxirt,  a-n-6  pipovs  etpo  merous. 

II  in  15.  15  written,  .boldly  unto  you  in  some  sort 
15.  24  if  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your  (co.) 

IS. Once,  at  some  time  or  other,  irori  pote. 

Eph.    2.  13  ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  made 

5.  8  ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  (are 
Col.    1.  21  you,  that  were  sometime  alienated,  ami 

3.  7  In  the  which  ye  also  walked  sometime,  wh. 
Titus  3.  3  we  ourselves  also  were  sometimes  foolish 
1  Pe.   3.  20  Which  sometimes  were  disobedient,  when 

\i.A  certain,  some,  ris,  ri  tis,  ti. 

Matt  16.  28  There  be  some  standing  here  which  shall 

27.  47  Some  of  them  that  stood  there  when  they 

28.  11  someof  the  watch  came  into  the  city,  and 
Mark  7.    2  they  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eat  bread 

9.  1  there  be  some  of  them  thatstandhere,  wh. 

14.  4  there  were  some  that  had  indignation  wi. 

14.  65  some  began  to  spit  on  him,  and  to  cover 
T5-  35  some  of  them  that  stood  by,  when  they 

Luke  7. 40  Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee 

8.  46  Somebody  hath  touched  me :  for  I  perce. 

9.  7  it  was  said  of  some,  that  John  was  risen 
9.  8  of  some,  that  Elias  had  appeared ;  and  of 
9.  27  there  be  some  standing  here,  which  shall 

n.  15  some  of  them  said,  He  casteth  out  devils 
11.  54  seeking  to  catch  something  out  of  his  mo. 
13.  1  There  were  present  at  that  season  some 
19.  39  someof  the  Pharisees  from  among  theniu. 
21.  5  as  some  spake  of  the  temple,  how  it  was 
23.  8  he  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracle  doue 
Jolin  6.64  But  there  are  some  of  youthat  believenot 
7.  25  Then  said  some  of  them  of  Jerusalem,  Is 

7.  44  And  some  ofthem  would  have  taken  him 
9.  16  Therefore  said  some  of  the  Pharisees,  This 

11.  37  some  of  them  said,  Could  not  this  man 
11.  46  some  of  them  went  their  ways  to  the  Ph. 
13.  29  some  (of  them)  thought,  because  Judas 
13.  29  that  he  should  give  something  to  thepoor 
Acts    3.    5  expecting  to  receive  something  of  them 
5.  15  passing  by  might  overshadow  some  of  them 
5.  36  Theudas,  boasting  himself  to  be  somebody 

8.  9  giving  out  that  himself  was  some  great  <<ne 
8.  31  How  can  I,  except  some  man  should  guide 
8. 34  of  whom,  .of  himself,  orofsomeotherman? 

11.  20  some  of  them  were  men  of  Cyprus  and  C. 

15.  36  some  days  after,  Paul  said  unto  Barnabas 

17.  4  someof  them  believed,  and  consorted  with 
17.  18  Andsomesaid,  What  will  this  babbler  say 
17.  2r  but  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new  th. 
18. 23  after  he  had  spent  some  time  (there),  he 
23.  iS  this  young  man.  .who  hath  something  to 
23.  20  as  though  they  would  enquire  somewhat 
25.  26  that,  after.. I  might  have  somewhat  tow. 
27.  27  deemed  that  they  drew  near  to  some  co. 

Rom.  1.  11  that  I  may  impart  untoyou  somespiritual 
1. 13  I  might  have  some  fruit  among  you  also 
3.  3  what  if  some  did  not  believe?  shall  their 
3.    8  some  affirm  that  we  say.  Let  us  do  evil,  th. 

5.  7  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to 
11.  14  If  by  any  means  I.,  might  save  some  of 
11. 17  if  someof  the  branches-be  broken  "ft,  and 

1  Co.  4.  18  some  are  puffed  up,  as  though  I  Mould 

6.  11  such  were  someof  you;  but  yearc  washed 

8.  7  some  withconscience  of  the  idol  unto  this 

9.  22  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some 

10.  7  Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  as  (were)  some  of 
10.  8  Neither  let  us  commit  fornication,  as  some 
10.  9  Neitherlet  ustempt  Christ,  assome  ofth. 
10. 10  Neither  murmur  ye.  assume  ofthem  also 
15.  6  part  remain . .  but  some  are  fallen  asleep 
15.  12  how  say  some  among  you  that  there  is  no 
15.  34  for  some  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God 
15.  33  some  (man)  will  say.  How  are  the  dead 
15-  37  it  mfl>"  chance  of  wheat,  or  of  some  other 

2  Co.  3.    1  need  we,  as  some  (others),  epistles  of  co. 

10.  2  I  think  to  lie  bold  against  some,  which  th. 
10.  8  For  though  I  should  boast  somewhat  more 
io.  12  or  compare  ourselves  with  some  ti  at  co. 


SON 


907 


SON 


rhil. 

2Th. 

iTi. 


2T1. 

Heb. 


Gal.    1.    7  there  be  some  that  trouble  you,  and  wo. 

2.  6  of  those  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat,  wh. 
6.    3  if  a  man  thiuk  himself  to  be  something 
1.  15  Some  indeed  preach  Christ ..  and  some 

3.  ti  there  are  some  which  walk  among  you 
3  that  thou  mightest  charge  some  that  they 

1.  6  From  which  some  having  swerved  have 
1. 19  which  some  having  put  away,  concerning 

4.  1  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  from 

5.  15  some  are  already  turned  aside  after  Satan 

5.  24  Some  men's  sins  are  open . .  and  some  (men) 

6.  10  which  while  some  coveted  after,  they  have 
6.  21  Which  some  professing  have  erred  conce. 

2.  18  already ;  and  overthrow  the  faith  of  some 

3.  4  every  house  is  builded  by  some(man);  but 

3.  16  some,  when  they  had  heard,  did  provoke 

4.  6  it  remaineth  that  some  must  enter  there. 
8.    3  that  this  man  have  somewhat  also  to  offer 

10.  25  Not  forsaking . .  as  the  manner  of  some  (is) 

11.  40  God  having  provided  some  better  thing 

13.  2  some  have  entertained  angels  unawares 
2  Pe.  3.    9  The  Lord  is  not  slack . .  as  some  men  count 

3.  16  in  which  are  some  things  hard  to  be  under. 
iSee  also  Befall,  dark,  few,  lighter,  reddish,  sort,  these.] 
SON  — 

l.Son,  offspring,  )?  bin. 

Gen.   4.  17  and  called,  .after  the  name  of  his  son,  E. 

4.  25  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth 
4.26  Seth.tohim  also  there  svasborn  ason;  and 

5.  4,  7j  10,  13,16,  19,  22,  26,  30  begat  sons  and 

5.  2S  eighty  and  two  years,  and  begat  a  son 

6.  2  That  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters 

6.  4  sons  of  God  came  in  unto  the  daughters 
6. 10  Noah  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and 
6. 18  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy  sons'  wives  wi. 

7.  7  sous,  and  his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives  wi. 
7. 13  sons  of  Noah,  .and  the  three  wives  of  his 
8. 16  Go  forth. .thou. .thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  w. 

8.  18  his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives 

9.  1  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said 
9.   8  God  spake  unto  Noah,  and  to  his  sons  wi. 
9.  18  sons  of  Noah,  that  went  forth  of  the  ark 
9.  19  These  (are)  the  three  sons  of  Noah :  and 
9.  24  knew  what  his  younger  son  had  done  un. 

10.  1  sous  of  Noah,  .unto  them  were  sons  born 
10.  2  The  sous  of  Japhetli ;  Gomer,  and  Magog 
10.  3  sons  of  Gomer;  Ashkenaz,  and  Kiphath 
10.  4  sons  of  Javan  ;  Elishah,  and  Tarshish,  Ki. 
10.  6  sous  of  Ham ;  Cush,  and  Mizraim,  and  P. 
10.  7  sons  of  Cush.  .and  the  sons  of  Raamah,  S. 
10.  20  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Ham,  after  their 
10.  25  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons  :  thename 
10.  29  Ophir,  and . .  Jobab  :  all  these  (were)  the 
10. 31  These  fare)  the  sons  of  Shem,  after  their 

10.  32  These  {are)  the  families  of  the  sons  of  N. 

11. 11,  13,  15,  17,  19,  21,  23,  25  begat  sons  and  d. 

11.  31  Terah  took  Abram  his  sou,  and  Lot  the  s. 

11.  31  his  son's  son. .his  son  Abram's  wife 

12.  5  Abram  took.  .Lot  his  brother's  son,  and 

14.  12  they  took  Lot,  Abram's  brother's  son,  who 
16.  11  thou,  .shalt  bear  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his 

16.  15  bare  Abram  a  son :  and.  .called  his  son's 

17.  16  bless  her,  and  give  thee  a  son  also  of  her 
17.  19  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son  ind. 
17.  23  Abraham  took  Ishmael  his  son,  and  all 
17.  25  Ishmael  his  sou  (was)  thirteen  years  old 

17.  26  Abraham  circumcised,  and  Ishmael  his  s. 

18.  10  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son.  And  S. 
18. 14  At  the  time . .  Sarah  shall  have  a  son 

19.  12  sons,  and  thy  daughters,  and  whatsoever 
19.  37  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab 
19.  38  bare  a  son,  aud  called  his  name  Ben-am. 
21.  2  bare  Abraham  a  sou  iu  his  old  age,  at  the 
21.  3  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his  son  that 
21.  4  Abraham  circumcised  his  son  Isaac  being 
21.  5  hundred  years  old  when  his  sou  Isaac  was 
21.  7  for  I  have  born  (him)  a  son  in  his  old  age 
21.  9  Sarah  saw  the  sou  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian 
21. 10  Cast  out  this  bond  woman  and  her  son 
21. 10  son.  .shall  notbeheir  with  my  son,  (even) 

21 .  1 1  was  very  grievous . .  because  of  his  son 
21. 13  also  of  the  son  of  the  bond  woman  will  I 

22.  2  Takenowthy  son.  .whomthou  lovest.and 
22.  3  took.  .Isaac  his  son,  aud  clave  the  wood 
22.  6  laid  (it)  upon  Isaac  his  son  ;  and  he  took 
22.  7  he  said,  Here  (am)  I,  my  son.  And  he  sa. 
22.  8  My  son,  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb 
22.  9  bound  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the 
22.  10  Abraham,  .took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son 

22. 12,  16  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only 

22.  13  a  burnt  offering  in  the  stead  of  his  son 

23.  3  Abraham,  .spake  uuto  the  sons  of  Heth 
23.    8  entreat  for  me  to  Ephron  the  son  of  Zoh. 
23.  11  in  the  presence  of  the  sons  of  my  people 
23. 16  namad  in  the  audience  of  the  sons  of  He. 

23.  20  for  a  possession . .  by  the  sons  of  Heth 

24.  3  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  of  the 
24.   4  shalt  go .  .and  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  I. 
24.    5  must  I  needs  bring  thy  son  again  unto  the 
24.    6  Beware  thou  that  thou  bring  not  my  son 
24.   7  shalt  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  from  thence 
24.    8  oath :  only  bring  not  my  son  thither  again 
24.  15  who  was  born  to  Bethuel,  son  of  Milcah 
24.  24  daughter  of  Bethuel  the  son  of  Milcah,  wh. 
24.  36  Sarah  my  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my 
24.  37  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  to  my  son  of 
24.  38  shalt  go . .  and  take  a  wife  unto  my  son 
24.  40  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  for  my  son  of  my 
24.  44  hath  appointed  out  for  my  master's  son 
24.  47  daughter  of  Bethuel,  Nahor's  son,  whom 
24.  48  my  master's  brother's  daughter  unto  his 


Gen.  24. 


51  let  her  be  thy  master's  son's  wife,  as  the 
25.  3  sous  of  Dedau  were  Asshurim,  and  Letus. 
25.  4  sons  of  Midian ;  Ephah,  and  Epher,  and 
25.  6  But  unto  the  sons  of  the  concubines,  wh. 
25.  6  sent  them  away  from  Isaac  his  son,  while 
25.  9  his  sons  Isaac  and  Ishmael  buried  him  in 
25.  9  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar  the 
25. 10  which  Abraham  purchased  of  the  sons  of 
25.  11  God  blessed  his  son  Isaac :  and  Isaac  dw. 
25.  12  generationsof  Ishmael,  Abraham's  son,  w. 
25.  13  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Ishm. 
25. 16  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Ishmael,  aud  these 
25.  19  generations  of  Isaac,  Abraham's  son :  Ab. 
27.  1  his  eldest  son,  and  said  unto  him,  My  sou 
27.  5  heard  when  Isaac  spake  to  Esau  his  son 
27.  6  Rebekah  spake  unto  Jacob  her  son,  saying 
27.  8,  43  Now  therefore,  my  son,  obey  my  voice 
27.  13  Upon  me  (be)thy  curse,  my  son  :  only  ob. 
27.  15  took  goodly  raiment  of  her  eldest  son  E. 
27. 15  and  put  them  upon  Jacob  her  youuger^son 
27.  17  she  gave,  .into  the  hand  of  her  son  Ja'cob 
27.  18  said,  Here  (am)  I;  who  (art)  thou,  my  son? 
27.  20  Isaac  said  unto  his  son,  How  (is  it)  that 
27. 20  found  (it)  so  quickly,  my  sou?  And  he  sa. 
27.  21  my  son,  whether  thou  (be)  my  very  son  E. 
27.  24  he  said,  (Art)  thou  my  very  son  Esau?  And 
27.  25  will  eat  of  my  sou's  venison,  that  my  soul 
27.26  said..  Come  near  now,  and  kiss  me,  my  son 
27.  27  smell  of  my  son  (is)  as  the  smell  of  a  field 
27.  29  let  thy  mother's  sons  bow  down  to  thee 
27.  31  Let  my  father  arise,  and  eat  of  his  son's  v. 
27.  32  hesaid,  I  (am)  thy  son,  thy  firstborn,  Esau 
27.  37  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  son? 
27.  42  these  words  of  Esau  her  elder  son  were 

27.  42  she  sent  and  called  Jacob  her  younger  sou 

28.  5  Laban,  son  of  Bethuel  the  Syrian,  the  br. 

28.  9  the  daughter  of  Ishmael,  Abraham's  son 

29.  s  Know  ye  Laban  the  son  of  Nahor?  And 
29.  12  told  Rachel,  .that  he  (was)Rebekah'sson 
29.  13  heard  the  tidings  of  Jacob  his  sister's  son 
29.  32  bare  a  son,  and  she  called  his  name  Reu. 
29-  33»  34>  35  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son 

29.  34  because  I  have  born  him  three  sous :  th. 

30.  5  Bilhah  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  a  sou 
30.  6  hath  given  me  a  son  :  therefore  called  she 
30.  7  conceived  again.and  bare  Jacob  a  seconds. 
30.  10  And  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  a  son 
30.  12  Zilpah,Leah's  maid, bare  Jacob  a  second  s. 
30. 14  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  of  thy  son's  mandr. 
30.  15  wouklest  thou  take  away  my  son's  maud. 
30.  15  lie  with  thee  to  night  for  thy  son's  mau. 
30.  16  have  hired  thee  with  my  son's  mandrakes 
30.  17  she  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  the  fifth  son 
30.  19  conceived,  .and  bare  Jacob  the  sixth  son 
30.  20  because  I  have  born  him  six  sons :  and  she 
30.  23  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son ;  and  said 
30.  24  The  Lord  shall  add  to  me  another  son 

30.  35  and  gave  (them)  into  the  hand  of  his  sons 

31.  1  he  heard  the  words  of  Labau's  sons,  say. 
31.  17  set  his  sons  and  his  wives  upon  camels 
31.  28  hast  not  suffered  me  to  kiss  my  sons  and 
31.  55  kissed  his  sons  and  his  daughters,  and  bl. 
34.  2  when  Shechem  the  son  of  Hamor  the  Hi. 
34.  5  now  his  sons  were  with  his  cattle  in  the 
34.  7  the  sons  of  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field 
34.    8  The  soul  of  my  son  Shechem  longeth  for 

34. 13  the  sons  of  Jacob  answered  Shechem  and 
34.  18  their  words  pleased.. Shechem,  Hamor's  s. 
34.  20  Shechem  his  son  came  unto  the  gate  of  the 
34.  24  unto  Shechem  his  son,  hearkened  all  that 
34.  25  two  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  Simeon  and  Levi 
34.  26  theyslew  Hamor  and  Shechem  his  son  wi. 

34.  27  The  sons  of  Jacob  came  upon  the  slain,  and 

35.  5  they  did  not  pursue  after  the  sons  of  Ja. 
35.  17  Fear  not;  thou  shalt  have  this  son  also 
35.  22  Now  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  twelve 

35.  23  The  sons  of  Leah ;  Reuben,  Jacob's  first 
35.  24  The  sons  of  Rachel ;  Joseph  and  Benjam. 
35.  25  sons  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's  handmaid;  Dan 
35.  26  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  handmaid ;  Gad 
35. 26  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Jacob,  which  were 

35.  29  and  his  sons  Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him 

36.  5  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Esau,  which  were 
36.  6  Esau  took  his  wives,  and  his  sons,  aud  Ins 
36.  10  the  names  of  Esau's  sons;  Eliphaztheson 
36.  10  Reuel  the  son  of  Bashemath  the  wife  of  E. 
36.  11  the  sous  of  Eliphaz  were  Teman,  Omar,  Z. 
36.  12  And  Timna  was  concubine  to.  .Esau's  son 
36.  12  these  (were)  the  sons  of  Adah,  Esau's  wife 
36.  13  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Reuel;  Nahath,  and 
36.  13  these  were  the  sons  of  Bashemath,  Esau's 

36. 14  these  were  the  sonsof  Aholibamah  the  da. 
36.  15  the  sons  of  Esau :  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  the 
36.  16  the  dukes,  .these  (were)  the  sons  of  Adah 
36.  17  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Reuel,  Esau's  son 
36.  17  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Bashemath,  Esau's 
36. 18  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Aholibamah,  Esau's 
36.  19  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Esau, who  (is)  Edom 
36. 20  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Seir  the  Horite,  w. 
36.  32  And  Bela  the  son  of  Beor  reigned  in  Ed. 
36.  33  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah  reigned 
36.  35  the  son  of  Bedad,  who  smote  Midian  in  the 
36.  38  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  Achbor  reigned  in 

36.  39  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  Achbor  died,  and 

37.  2  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  and  with  the  sonsof  Z. 
37.   3  because  he  (was)  the  son  of  his  old  age 
37.  32  know  now  whether  it  (be)  thy  son's  coat  or 
37-  33  (It  is)  my  son's  coat ;  an  evil  beast  hath 
37.  34  and  mourned  for  his  son  many  days 

37.  35  all  his  sons  and  all  his  daughters  rose  up  to 
37-  35  I  will  go  down  into  the  grave  unto  my  son 

38.  3  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son.  and  he  cal. 


Gen.  38. 
38. 
38. 
33. 
41. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
43- 
43- 
45- 
45- 
.  46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
47- 


48, 
48. 
48. 
48. 
49. 
49. 
49, 
49. 
50. 
50. 
50 

Exod.  1. 


28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29, 


4  And  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son 

5  she  yet  again  conceived,  and  bare  ason 
11  Remain  a  widow,  .till  Shelah  my  son  be 
26  because  that  I  gave  her  not  to .  .my  son 
50  unto  Joseph. were  born  two  sonsbeforethe 

1  Jacob  said  unto  his  sons,  Why  do  ye  look 
5  the  sons  of  Israel  came  to  buy  (corn)  arao. 
11  We  (are)  all  one  man's  sons  :  we  (are)  true 
13  the  sous  of  one  mau  in  the  land  of  Cauaan 

32  We  (be)  twelve  brethren,  sons  of  our  fat. 

37  Slay  my  two  sons,  if  I  bring  him  not  to  th. 

38  My  son  shall  not  go  down  witli  you  ;  for 
29  his  brother  Benjamin,  his  mother's  son 
29  God  be  gracious  unto  thee,  my  son 

9  Thus  saith  thy  son  Joseph,  God  hath  ma. 

28  Joseph  my  son  (is)  yet  alive :  I  will  go  and 
5  the  sons  of  Israel  carried  Jacob  their  fat. 

7  sons,  and  his  sous'  sons.,  and  his  sons' da. 

8  Jacob  and  his  sons ;  Reuben,  Jacob's  first 

9  the  sons  of  Reuben ;  Hanoch,  and  Phallu 
10  the  sons  of  Simeon ;  Jemuel,  and  Jamin 

10  Shaul  the  son  of  a  Canaanitish  woman 

11  the  sons  of  Levi ;  Gershon,  Kohath,  aud 

12  the  sons  of  Judah ;  Er,  and  Onan,  and  S. 

12  the  sons  of  Pharez  were  Hezron  and  Ha. 

13  the  sons  of  Issaehar;  Tola,  and  Phuv. 

14  the  sonsof  Zebulun;  Sered,  aud  Elon,  and 

15  These  (be)  the  sonsof  Leah,  which  she  ba. 

15  the  souls  of  his  sons  and  his  daughters 

16  the  sons  of  Gad  ;  Ziphion,  and  Haggi,  Sh. 

17  the  sons  of  Asher  ;  Jimnah,  and  lshuah 

17  the  sons  of  Beriah  ;  Heber,  and  Malchiel 

18  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  whom  La. 

19  The  sons  of  Rachel,  Jacob's  wife  ;  Joseph. 

21  the  sons  of  Benjamin  (were)  Belah,  and 

22  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Rachel,  which  were 

23  And  the  sons  of  Dan;  Hushim 

24  the  sons  of  Naphtali ;  Jahzeel,  and  Guui 

25  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  which  La. 

26  All  the  souls,  .besides  Jacob's  sons'  wives 

27  the  sons  of  Joseph,  which  were  born  him 

29  he  called  his  son  Joseph,  and  said  unto 

1  he  took  with  him  his  two  sons,  Manasseh 

2  Behold,  thy  son  Joseph  cometh  unto  thee 
5  thytwosons,  Ephraim  andManasseh,  wh. 

8  Israel  beheld  Joseph's  sons,  and  said,  Who 

9  They  (are)  my  sons,  whom  God  hath  given 

19  I  know  (it),  my  son,  I  know  (it):  he  also 

1  Jacob  called  uuto  his  sons,  and  said,  Ga. 

2  Gather,  .together,  and  hear,  ye  sons  of  J. 
9  from  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up 

33  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  his  sons 

12  his  sons  did  unto  him  according  as  he 

13  his  sons  carried  him  into  the  laud  of  Ca. 
23  the  children  also  of  Machir  the  son  of  M. 
16  if  it  (be)  a  son,  then  ye  shall  kill  him,  but 
22  Every  son  that  is  born  ye  shall  east  into 

2  And  the  woman  conceived,  andbare  a  son 
10  she  brought  him . .  and  lie  became  her  son 
22  she  bare  (him)  a  son,  and  he  called  his 
22  ye  shall  put  (them)  upon  your  sons,  and 

20  Moses  took  his  wife  and  his  sons,  and  set 

22  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Israel  (is)  my  son 

23  Let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  serve  me 

23  behold,  I  will  slay  thy  son,  (even)  thy  first 
25  cut  off  the  foreskin  of  her  son,  and  cast 

14  The  sons  of  Reuben  the  first  born  of  Isr. 

15  the  sons  of  Simeon  ;  Jemuel,  and  Jamiu 

15  Shaul  the  son  of  a  Canaanitish  woman 

16  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Levi 

17  The  sous  of  Gershon ;  Libni  and  Shimi 

18  the  sons  of  Kohath;  Amram,  and  Izhar 

19  And  the  sons  of  Merari ;  Mahli  and  Mu. 

21  the  sons  of  Ishar;  Korah,  and  Nepheg 

22  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  Mishael,  and  Elzaph. 

24  the  sons  of  Korah ;  Assir,  and  Elkanah 

25  Aaron's  son, took  him  (one)  of  the  daught. 

2  in  the  ears  of  thy  son,  and  of  thy  son'sson 
9  with  our  sons  aud  with  our  daughters,  wi. 

24  for  an  ordinance  to  thee  and  to  thy  sons 
S  thou  shalt  show  thy  son  in  that  day,  say. 
14  when  thy  son  asketh  thee  iu  time  to  come 

3  her  two  sons ;  of  "which  the  name  of  the 

5  Moses'  father  in  law,  came  with  his  sons 

6  and  thy  wife,  and  her  two  sons  with  her 
10  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  sou,  nor 

4  and  she  have  born  him  sons  or  daughters 
9  if  he  have  betrothed  her  unto  his  son,  he 

31  Whether  he  have  gored  a  son,  or  have  g. 
29  the  first  born  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give 
12  the  son  of  thy  handmaid  and  the  stranger 
2 1  his  sons  shall  order  it  from  evening  to  mo. 

1  Aaron  thy  brother,  and  his  sons  with  him 

1  Eleazar  and  Ithamar,  Aaron's  sons 

4  for  Aaron  thy  brother,  and  his  sons,  that 

40  for  Aaron's  sous  thou  shalt  make  coats 

41  Aaron  thy  brother,  and  his  sons  with  him 
43  shall  be  upon  Aaron,  and  upon  his  sons 

4  his  sons  thou  shalt  bring  unto  the  doorof 

8  thou  shalt  bring  his  sons,  and  put  coats 

9  thou  shalt  gird.  .Aaron  and  his  sons,  and 
9  thou  shalt  consecrate  Aaron  and  his  sons 

10,  15,  191ns  sons  shall  put  their  hands  upon 

20  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of  his  sons 

21  sons,  and  iipon  the  garments  of  his  sons 
21  his  sons,  aud  his  sons'  garments  with  him 

24  shalt  put  all.  .in  the  hands  of  his  sons 

27  Aaron,  and  of  (that)  which  (is)for  his  sons 

25  it  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons'  by  a  stat. 

29  garments  of  Aarou  shall  be  his  sons' after 

30  that  sou  that  is  priest  in  his  stead  shall 

32  his  sons  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  ram 


SON 


90S 


SON 


Exod29. 
=  )■ 
3°' 
3o. 

31- 

3i 
3'- 

32. 

32 
32- 
33- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35 
35- 

33. 
38. 
38. 

39- 
39- 

40. 
40 
40. 


35  thus  shalt  thou  do  unto,  .his  sons,  accor 
44  sanctify  also  both  Aaron  and  his  sons 

19  his  sons  shall  wash  their  hands  and  their 
30  thou  shalt  anoint  Aaron  andhis  sons,  and 

2  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur 
6  I  have  given  with  him  Aholiabthesonof 

10  the  garments  of  his  sons,  to  minister  in 
2  in  the  ears  of  your  wives,  of  your  sons,  and 

26  the  sons  of  Levi  gathered  themselves  to. 

29  even  every  man  upon  his  son,  and  upon 

11  the  son  of  Nun,  a  young  man,  departed 
16  take  of  their  daughters  unto  thy  sons,  and 

16  make  thy  sons  go  a  whoring  after  their  g. 

20  the  first  born  of  thy  sons  thou  shalt  re. 
19  the  garments  of  his  sons,  to  minister  in 

30  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur 
34  the  son  of  Ahisamach,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan 

21  by  the  hand  of  Ithamar,  son  to  Aaron  the 

22  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur 

23  Aholiab,  son  of  Ahisamach,  of  the  tribe  of 

27  made  coats . .  for  Aaron,  and  for  his  sons 
41  his  sons'  garments,  to  miuister  in  the  pr 

12  thou  shalt  bring  Aaron  and  his  sons  unto 

14  thou  shalt  bring  his  sons,  and  clothe  th. 

31  his  sonswashed  their handsand  theirfeet 
Lev.    1     5  Aaron's  sons,'  shall  briug  the  blood,  and 

1,    7  the  sous  of  Aaron  the  priest  shall  put  fire 

1.  8  Aaron's  sons,  shall  lay  the  parts,  the  he. 
1. 11  Aaron's  sons,  shall  sprinkle  his  blood  ro. 

2.  2  he  shall  bring  it  to  Aaron's  sons  the  pri. 
2.   3  remnant,  .(shall  be)  Aaron's  and  hissons' 

2.  10  that  which  is  left .  .(shall  be),  .his  sons':  (it 

3.  2  Aaron's  sons  the  priests  shall  sprinkle  the 
3.    5  Aaron's  sons  shall  burn  it  on  the  altar 

3.  8  Aaron's  sons  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  th. 
3  13  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  sprinkle  the  blood 
6.  9  Command  Aaron  and  hissons,  saying,  This 
6  14  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  offer  it  before  the 
6.  16  the  remainder,  .shall  Aaron  and  his  sons 
6.  20  the  offering  of  Aaron,  and  of  his  sons,  wh. 
6.  22  the  priest  of  his  sons  that  is  anointed  in 

6.  25  Speak  unto  Aaron  and  to  his  sons,  saying 

7. 10  shall  all  the  sons  of  Aaron  have,  one  (as 

7.  31  the  breast  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons' 
7.  33  He  amongthe  sons  of  Aaron  that  offereth 
7.  34  unto  Aaron  the  priest  and  unto  his  sons 

7.  35  of  Aaron,  aud  of  the  anointing  of  hissons 

8.  2  Take  Aaron  and  his  sons  with  him,  and 
8.    6  Moses  brought  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and 
8.  13  Moses  brought  Aaron's  sons,  and  put  co. 
8.  14,  18,  22  his  sons  laid  their  hands  upon  the 
8.  24  he  brought  Aaron's  sons,  and  Moses  put 
8.  27  upon  Aaron's  hands,  and  upon  his  sons' 
8.  30  upon  his  sons,  and  upon  his  sons'  garme, 
8.  30  his  sons,  and  his  sons'  garments  with  him 
S.  31  AndMosessaidunto  Aaronand  to his  sons 
8.  31  saying,  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  eat  it 

8.  36  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  all  things  which 

9.  1  Moses  called  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  the 
9.  9  the  sons  of  Aaron  brought  the  blood  unto 
9.  12,  18  Aaron's  sons  presented  unto  him  the 

10.  1  the  sons  of  Aaron,  took  either  of  them  his 
10.  4  Mishael  and  Elzaphan,  the  sons  of  Uzziel 
10.  6,  12  unto  Eleazar  and  unto  Ithamar,  hiss. 
10.  9  Do  not  drink . .  thou,  nor  thy  sons  with  th. 
10. 13,  14  (is)  thy  due,  aud  thy  sons  due,  of  thes. 
10.  14  thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  daughters  w. 
10.  15  it  shall  be  thine,  and  thy  sons'  with  thee 
10.  16  Eleazar  and  Ithamar,  the  sons  of  Aaron 
12.  6  when  the  days . .  are  fulfilled,  for  a  son,  or 
2  he  shall  be  brought . .  uutoone  of  his  sous 
1  after  the  death  of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron 
?  Speak  unto  Aaron,  and  unto  his  sons,  and 
10  The  nakedness  of  thy  son's  daughter,  or 

15  thy  daughter  in  law  :  she  (is)  thy  son's 

17  neither  shalt  thou  take  her  son's  daught. 

1  Speak  unto  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron 

2  for  his  son,  and  for  his  daughter,  and 

24  Moses  told  (it)  unto  Aaron.. to  his  sons 
2,  18  Speak  unto  Aaron  and  to  his  sons,  th. 
9  it  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons* ;  and  they 

10  son  of  an  Israeli tish  woman,  .and  this  son 

11  the  Israelitish  woman's  sou  blasphemed 
49  his  uncle's  son,  may  redeem  him,  or(any) 

26.  29  ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  your  sons,  and  th 
Num.  1.  5  (the  tribe  of)  Reuben  ;  Elizur  the  son  of 
1.  6  Of  Simeon ;  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Zurish. 
1.  7  Of  Judah;  Nashonthe  son  of  Amminadab 
j.  8  Of  Issachar  ;  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Zuar 
1.  9  Of  Zebulun ;  Eliab  the  son  of  Helon 
1.  10  of  Ephruim  ;  Elishama  the  son  of  Am  mi. 
1.  10  of  Manasseh  ;  Gamaliel  the  son  of  Peda. 

1. 11  Of  Benjamin;  Abidan  the  son  of  Gideoni 
1.  12  Of  Dan;  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Ammishad. 
1.  13  Of  Asher;  Pagiel  the  son  of  Ocran 

1.  14  Of  Gad  ;  Eliasaph  the  son  of  Deuel 

1.  15  Of  Naphtali ;  Ahira  the  son  of  Enau 

2.  3  the  son  of  Amminadab  (shall  be)  captain 
2.    5  the  sou  of  Zuar  (shall  be;  captain  of.  .Iss. 
2-    7  the  sou  of  Helon  (shall  be)  captain  of  the 
2. 10  the  captain  . .  (shall  be)  Elizur  the  son  of 
2.  12  the  captain  .  .(shall  be)  .Shelumiel  the  son 
2.  14  captain  of  the  sons  of  Gad.  .Eliasaph.  .sun 
2. 18  and  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Ephraim 
2. 18  (shall  be)  Elishama  the  son  of  Ammihud 
2.  20  the  captain  . .  (shall  be)  Gamaliel  the  sun 
2.  22  and  the  captain  of  the  sons  of  Benjamin 
2.  22  (shall  be)  Abidan  the  son  of  Gideoni 

2.  25  the  captain  .  .(shall  be)  Ahiezer  the  son  of 
2.  27  the  captain  . .  (shall  be)  Pagiel  the  son  of 

2.  29  the  captain  .  .(.shall  lie)  Ahira  the  son  of 

3.  2,  3  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sous  of  A. 


13- 
16. 
'T- 
18. 
18. 


22. 
24. 

24- 

24. 


Num.  3. 
3- 
3 
3 
3 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3 
3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 


[So  in 


9  thou  shalt  give  the  Levites.  .to  his  sons 
10  thou  shalt  appoint  Aaron  and  his  sons 

17  these  were  the  sons  of  Levi  by  their  na. 

18  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Gers. 

19  the  sons  of  Kohathby  their  families;  A, 

20  the  sons  of  Merari  by  their  families ;  Ma. 

24  the  chief.  .(shal?  be)  Eliasaph  the  son  of 

25  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  Gershon  in  the 

29  The  families  of  the  sons  of  Kohath  shall 

30  the  chief,  .(shall  be)  E4izaphan  the  son  of 
32  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest(shall  be)  chief 

35  the  chief,  .(was)  Zuriel  the  son  of  Abihael 

36  (under)  the  custody  and  charge  of  the  sons 
38  his  sons,  keeping  the  charge  of  the  sauct 
48  thou  shalt  give  the  money,  .to  his  sons 
51  Moses  gave  the  money,  .to  hissons,  acco 

2  Take  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  Kohath  from 
2  among  the  sous  of  Levi,  after  their  famil 

4  This  (shall  be)  the  service  of  the  sons  of 

5  Aaron  shall  come,  and  his  sons,  and  they 
15  when  Aaron  and  his  sons  have  made  an 
15  the  sons  of  Kohath  shall  come  tobear(it) 

15  the  burden  of  the  sons  of  Kohath  in  the 

16  the  office  of  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the 
19  his  sous  shall  go  in,  and  appoint  them  ev. 

22  Take  also  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  Gershon 
27  At  the  appoiutment  of  Aaron  and  his  sons 

27  the  service  of  the  sons  of  the  Gershonites 

28  the  service  of  the  families  of  the  sons  of 
28,  33  under  the  hand  of  Ithamar  the  son  of 

29  As  for  the  sons  of  Merari,  thou  shalt  nu 
33>  42>  45  of  tlie  families  of  the  sons  of  Mer 

34  numbered  the  sons  of  theKohathitesafter 
38  those  that  were  numbered  of  the  sons  of 
41  of  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Gershon,  of 

23  Speak  unto  Aaron,  and  unto  his  sons,  say 

7  he  gave  unto  the  sons  of  Gershon,  accor. 

8  he  gave  unto  the  sons  of  Merari,  according 

8  of  Ithamar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 

9  unto  the  sons  of  Kohath  he  gave  none 

12,  17  Nashon  the  son  of  Amminadab 

18  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Zuar,  prince  of  Issa 

23  the  offering  of  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Zuar 

24  Eliab  the  son  of  Helon,  prince  of  the  chi. 

29  this  (was)  the  offering  of  Eliab  the  son  of 

30  Elizur  the  son  of  Shedeur,  prince  of  the 

35  the  offering  of  Elizur  the  son  of  Shedeur 

36  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Zurishaddai,  prince 

41  the  offering  of  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Zuris. 

42  Eliasaph  the  son  of  Deuel,  prince  of  the 

47  the  offering  of  Eliasaph  the  son  of  Deuel 

48  Elishama  the  son  of  Ammihud,  prince  of 

53  the  offering  of  Elishama  the  son  of  Amm. 

54  Gamaliel  the  sou  of  Pedahzur,  prince  of 

59  the  offering  of  Gamaliel  the  son  of  Ped 

60  Qn  the  ninth  day  Abidan  the  son  of  Gid. 
65  the  offering  of  Abidan  the  son  of  Gideoni 
66,  71  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Aiumishaddai 

72  On  theeleventh  day  Pagiel  the  son  of  Oc. 

77  the  offering  of  Pagiel  the  son  of  Ocran 

78  On  thetwelfth  day  Ahira  the  son  of  Euan 
83  this  (was)  the  offering  of  Ahira  the  son  of 

13,  22  before  Aaron,  and  before  his  sons 

iq  (as)  a  gift  to  Aaron  and  to  his  sons  from 
8  the  sons  of  Aaron,  the  priests,  shall  blow 
14  over  his  host  (was),  .the  son  of 
v.  15,  16,  18,  19,  20,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27.] 

17  the  sons  of  Gershon  and  the  sons  of  Mer 

29  Moses  said  unto  Hobab,  the  son  of  Ragticl 

28  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  the  servant  of  M 

4  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  Shammua  the  son  of 

5  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  Shaphat  the  son  of 

6  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Caleb  the  son  of  Jep. 

7  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  Igal  the  son  of  Jos. 

8  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Oshea  the  son  of  N. 

9  the  tribeof  Benjamin,  Palti  the  son  of  R. 

10  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  Gaddiel  the  son  of 
ti  the  tribe  of  Joseph.  .Gaddi  the  son  of  S. 

12  the  tribe  of  Dan,  Ammiel  the  son  of  Ge. 

13  the  tribe  ot  Asher,  Sethur  the  son  of  M. 

14  the  tribeof  Naphtali,  Nahbi  the  son  of  V. 

15  the  tribe  of  Gad,  Geuel  the  son  of  Machi 

16  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son  of  Nun,  Je. 
33  we  saw  the  giants,  the  sons  of  Anak,  (wh  ) 

6,  38  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  sou  of 

30  the  son  of  Jephunneh,  and  J  oshua  the  sun 
1  son  of  Izhar,  the  son  of  Kohath,  the  son 
1  Dathan  and  Abiram  the  sonsof  Eliab,  and 
1  On  the  son  of  Peleth,  sous  of  Reuben,  took 

7  (ye  take)  too  much  upon  you,  ye  sous  of 

8  Moses  said.  .Hear,  I  pray  you,  ye  sons  of 
10  all  thy  brethren  the  sons  of  Levi  withth 
12  to  call  Dathan  and  Abiram,  the  sons  of  E. 
27  their  wives,  and  theirsons,  and  their  little 

37  Speak  unto  Eleazar  the  sou  of  Aaron  the 
1  Thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  father's  ho. 

1,  2,  7  thou  and  thy  sons  with  thee  shall 

8  have  I  given  them,  .and  to  thy  sous,  by 

9  (shall  be)  most  holy  for  thee  and  for  thy  s. 
11,  19  thy  sons  aud  to*thy  daughters  with  th. 

25  Take  Aaron  and  Eleazar  his  son,  and  br 
26,  28  and  put  them  upon  Eleazar  his  son 

29  he  hath  given  his  sons  that  escaped,  and 
35  they  smote  him,  and  his  sons,  and  all  his 

2,  4,  10,  16  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor 

5  He  sent,  .unto  Baalam  the  son  of  Bcor 

18  hearken  unto  me,  thou  sou  of  Zippor 

19  ueither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  shuuldre 

3,  15  Baalam  the  son  of  Beorhath said,  and 

7,  11  the  son  of  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron 
14  Zimri,  the  son  of  Salu.  a  prince  of  a  chief 

1  unto  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest 


Num  26.   8  And  the  sons  of  Pallu ;  Eliab 

26.    9  the  sons  of  Eliab  ;  Nemuel,  and  Dathan 
26. 12  The  sons  of  Simeon  after  their  families 
26.  19  Thesonsof  Judah(were)Erand  Onamand 
26.  20  the  sons  of  J  udah  after  their  families  were 
26.  21  the  sons  of  Pharez  were  ;  of  Hezron,  the 
26.  23  (Of)  the  sons  of  Issachar,  after  their  fa. 
26.  26  (Of)  the  sons  of  Zebulun  after  their  fam. 
26.  28  The  sons  of  Joseph  after  their  families 
26.  29  Of  the  sons  of  Manasseh  :  of  Machir,  the 
26,  30  These  (are)the  sons  of  Gilead:  (of)  Jeezer 
26.  33  the  son  of  Hepher  had  no  sons,  but  dau. 
26,  35  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Ephraim  after  th. 
26.  36  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Shuthelah:  of  Eran 
26.  37  These  (are)the  families  of  the  sons  of  Ep, 
26.  37  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Joseph  after  their 
26.  38  The  sons  of  Benjamin  after  their  families 
26-  40  the  sons  of  Bela  were  Aid  and  Naaman 
26.  41  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Benjamin  afterth. 
26.  42  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Dan  after  their  fa. 
26. 45  Of  the  sons  of  Beriah:  of  Heber,  the  fam. 
26. 47  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  sons  of  A. 
26.  48  (Of)  the  sons  of  Naphtali  after  their  fam. 

26.  65  the  son  of  Jephunneh,  and  Joshuatheson 

27.  1  Zelophehad,  the  son  of  Hepher,  the  son 
27.    1  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  Manasseh 
27.    1  of  the  families  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  Jo. 
27.   3  but  died  in  Ids  own  sin,  and  had  no  sons 
27.   4  be  done  away,  .because  he  hath  no  son? 
27.    8  If  a  man  die,  and  have  noson,  then  yesh. 
27, 18  Take  thee  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  a  man 
31.    6  Phinehasthe  son  of  Eleazar  the  priest,  to 

31.  8  Balaam  also  the  son  of  Beor  they  slew  wi. 
32. 12  Save  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh  the  Ke. 
32^  12  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  :  for  they  have  wh. 

32.  28  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and  the  chief  fat. 
32.  33  unto  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  the  son 
32.  40  Moses  gave  Gilead  unto  Machir  the  son  of 
32.  41  Jair  the  son  of  Manasseh  went  and  took 
34.  17  Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  son  of 
34.  19  Of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Caleb  the  son  of  J. 
34.  20  the  children  of  Simeon,  Shemuel  the  son 
34.  21  Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  Elidad  the  sou 
34.  22  of  the  children  of  Dan,  Bukki  the  son  of 
34.  23  the  children  of  Manasseh,  Hanniel  theson 
34.  24  children  of  Ephraim,  Kemuel  the  son  of  S. 
34.  25  children  of  Zebulun,  Elizaphan  the  son  of 
34.  26  children  of  Issachar,  Paltielthe  son  of  A. 
34.  27  children  of  Asher,  Ahihud  the  son  of  She 
34.  28  children  of  Naphtali,  Pedahel  the  son  of 
36.    1  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son  of  Manasseh 
36.    1  families  of  the  sons  of  Joseph,  came  near 
36,    3  if  they  be  married  to  any  of  the  sons  of 
36.    5  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said  well 
36.  11  married  unto  their  father's  brother's  sons 
36  12  families  of  the  son's  of  Manasseh  the  sou 

Deut.  1.  28  we  have  seen  the  sons  of  the  Anakims  th. 
1.  31  bare  thee,  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in 
1.  36  Save  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh;  he  sh. 

1.  38  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  which  standeth 
2  33  smote  him,  and  his  sons,  and  all  his  peo. 

14  Jair  the  son  of  Manasseh  tookallthe  con. 
9  teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons 

14  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor 

2  thou,  and  thy  son,  and  thy  son's  son,  all 

20  when  thy  son  asketh  thee  in  time  to  co. 

21  Then  thou  shalt  say  unto  thy  son, We  we. 

3  daughter  thou  shalt  not  give  unto  his  sou 

3  his  daughter  shalt  thou  take  unto  thy  son 

4  they  wiU  turn  away  thy  sou  from  following 

5  as  a  man  chasteneth  his  son,  (so)  the  Lo. 

6  Eleazar  his  son  ministered  in  the  priest's 
6  Abiram,  the  sons  of  Eliab,  the  son  of  Re. 

12  ye,  and  your  sons,  and  your  daughters,  and 
18  son,  and  thy  daughter,  and  thy  man  serv. 

31  for  even  theirsons  and  their  daughters  th. 
6  sou  of  thy  mother,  or  thy  sou,  or  thy  dau. 

11,  14  shalt  rejoice,  .thou,  and  thy  son,  and 
5  in  thenameof  the  Lord,  him  andhis  sons 

10  maketh  his  son  or  his  daughter  to  pass 
5  priests  the  sons  of  Levi  shall  come  near 

15  the  first  born  son  be  hers  that  was  hated 

16  when  he  maketh  his  sons  to  inherit  (that) 

16  son  of  the  beloved,  .before  the  sou  of  the 

17  he  shall  acknowledge  the  son  of  the  hated 

18  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  son 
20  This  our  son  (is)  stubborn  and  rebellious 

4  hired  against  thee  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor 
17  There  shall  be  no.  .sodomite  of  the  sons 

32  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  (shall  be)  gi. 
41  Thou  shalt  beget  sons  and  daughters,  but 
53  flesh  of  thy  sons  and  of  thy  daughters,  wh. 
56  evil,  .toward  her  son,  and  toward  her  da. 

9  delivered  it  unto  the  priests  the  sons  of  L. 
23  gave  Joshua  the  sou  of  Nun  a  charge,  and 

8  when  he  separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  he 

19  because  of  the  provoking  of  his  sons  and 
44  Moses  came,  .he  and  Hoshea  t  lie  son  of  N. 

9  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  was  full  of  the  sp. 
1  the  Lord  spake  unto  Joshua  the  son  of  K. 

2.  1  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  sent  out  of  Shittim 
2.  23  came  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  aud  told 

6.  6  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  called  the  priests 

7.  1,  18  sonof  Carmi,  the  sou  of  Zabdi,  theson 
7.  19  Myson,give,I  praythee, glory  tothe Lord 
7.  24  took  Achan  the  son  of  Zerah,  and  the  sil 
7.  24  his  sous,  and  his  daughters,  and  his  oxen 

13.  22  Balaam  also  the  son  of  Beor,  the  soothsa. 
13.  31  the  children  of  Machir  the  son  of  Manas. 
M  1  I'leaznr  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  son  of 
M-  6  Caleb  the  sun  of  .'ephunneh  the  Kenczit" 
M- 13  gave  unto  Caleb  the  sonof  Jephunneh  E. 


Josh. 


SON 


909 


SON 


Josh  14. 14.  inheritance  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh 
15.  6  went  up  to  the  stone  of  Bohan  the  son  of  R. 
ig.  8  border  went  up  by  the  valley  of  the  son 
15.  13  unto  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh  he  gave 
15.  14  Caleb  drove  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak 
15.  17  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenez,  the  brother  of 
17.  2  male  children  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  Jo. 
17,  3  son  of  Hepher,  the  son  of  Gilead,  the  son 
17.  3  son  of  Manasseh,  had  no  sons,  butdaugh. 
17.   4  before  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  aud  before 

17.  6  his  sons:  and  the  rest  of  Manasseh's  sons 

18.  16  before  the  valley  of  the  sou  of  Hinnom 

18.  17  descended  to  the  stone  of  Buhau  the  son 

19.  49  g*ive  an  inheritance  to  Joshua  the  son  of 
19.  51  which  Eleazar  the  priest,  aud  Joshua  the 

21.  1  uuto  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and  unto  the 
21. 12  gave  they  to  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh 
22.13,  31-  32  Phinehas  the  son  of  Eleazar  the  pri. 

22.  20  Did  not  Achan  the  son  of  Zerah  commit  a 
24.  9  Then  Balak  the  son  of  Zippor,  kiug  of  M. 
24.  9  sent  and  called  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  to 
24.  29  Joshua  the  sou  of  Nun,  the  servant  of  the 
24.  32  which  Jacob  bought  of  the  sons  of  Hamor 
24.  33  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  died  ;  and  they 
24.  33  a  hill  (that  pertained  to)  Phinehas  his  son 

Judg.  1.  13  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz,  Caleb's  younger 
i.  20  he  expelled  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak 

2.  8  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  the  servant  of  the 

3.  6  gave  their  daughters  to  their  sons,  aud  se. 
3.    9  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz,  Caleb's  younger 

3. 11  Aud  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz-  died 

3.  15  Ehud  the  son  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite,  a  in. 

3.  31  Shamgar  the  son  of  Anath,  which  slew  of 

4.  6  she  sent  and  called  Barak  the  son  of  Abi. 

4.  i2  that  Barak  the  son  of  Abiuoam  was  gone 

5.  1  Then  sang  Deborah  and  Barak  the  sou  of 

5.  6  In  the  days  of  Shamgar  the  son  of  Anath 

5. 12  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  thou  son  of  A. 

6.  11  his  son  Gideon  threshed  wheat  by  the  wi. 
6.  29  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash  hath  done  this  th. 
6  30  Bring  out  thy  son,  that  he  may  die  ;  bee. 
7. 14  save  the  sword  of  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash 
S.  13  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash  returned  from 
8. 19  They  (were)  my  brethren,  (even)  the  sons 
8.  22  thou  aud  thy  son,  and  thy  sou's  son  also 
8.  23  I  will  not  rule,  .neither shall  my  son  rule 
S.  29  Jerubaalthe  son  of  Joash  went  and  dwelt 
8.  30  Gideon  had  threescore  and  ten  sons  of  his 
8.  31  she  also  bare  him  a  son,  whose  name  he 

8.  32  Gideon  the  son  of  Joash  died  in  a  good 

9.  1  Abimeleeh  the  son  of  Jerubbaal  went  to 
9.  2  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal,  (which  are)  three. 
g.  5  slew  his  brethren  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal 
9.  5  Jotham  the  youngest  son  of  Jerubbaal  w. 
9. 18  have  slain  his  sons,  threescore  and  ten  pe. 
9.  18  have  made  Abimeleeh,  the  son  of  his  maid 
9.  24  to  the  threescore  and  ten  sons  of  Jerubb. 
9.  26  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed  came  with  his  bret. 
9.  28  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed  said,  Who  (is)  Abi. 
9.  28  (Is)  not  (he)  the  son  of  Jerubbaal?  and  Z. 
9.  30  heard  the  words  of  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed 
9.  31  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed,  and  his  brethren 
9.  35  Gaal  the  son  of  Ebed  went  out,  and  stood 
9.  57  the  curse  of  Jotham  the  son  of  Jerubbaal 

10.    1  Tola  the  sou  of  Puah,  the  son  of  Dodo,  a 

10.  4  had  thirty  sons  that  rode  on  thirty  asses 

11.  1  Now  Jephthah.  .(was)  the  son  of  an  liar. 
11.   2  bare  him  sons :  and  his  wife's  sons  grew 
11.   2  for  thou  (art)  the  son  of  a  strange  woman 
11.  25  any  thing  better  than  Balak  the  son  of  Z. 

11.  34  beside  her  he  had  neither  son  nor  daugh. 

12.  9  he  had  thirty  sons,  and  thirty  daughters 
12.  9  thirty  daughters  from  abroad  for  his  sons 
12.  13  after  him  Abdon  the  son  of  Hillel,  a  Pip. 

12.  14  he  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  nephews,  th. 
12. 15  Abdon  the  son  of  Hillel  the  Pirathonite 
x3-    3i  5>  7  thou  shalt  conceive,  and  bear  a  son 

13.  24  the  woman  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  na. 
17.   2  Blessed  (be  thou)  of  the  Lord,  my  son 
17.    3  dedicated  the  silver .  .for  my  son,  to  make 
17.    5  consecrated  one  of  his  sons,  who  became 

17.  11  and  the  young  man  was.  .as  one  of  his  sons 

18.  30  the  son  of  Gershom,  the  son  of  Manasseh 
iS.  30  his  sons  were  priests  to  the  tribe  of  Dan 

19.  22  certain  sons  of  Belial,  beset  the  house  ro. 

20.  28  the  son  of  Eleazar,  the  sou  of  Aaron,  stood 
Ruth  1.    1  went,  .he,  and  his  wife,  and  his  two  sons 

1.  2  the  name  of  his  two  sons  Mahlon  and  Ch. 
1 .  3  died  ;  aud  she  was  left,  and  her  two  sons 
1.  11  (are)  there  yet  (any  more)  sons  in  my  wo. 
1.  12  have  an  husband,  .and  should  also  bear 

4. 13  gave  her  conception,  aud  she  bare  a  son 
4. 15  which  is  better  to  thee  than  seven  sons 
4.  17  gave  it  a  name,  saying,  There  is  a  son  born 

1  Sa.    1.    1  the  son  of  Jeroham,  the  son  of  Elihu 

1.    1  the  son  of  Tohu,  the  son  of  Zuph ;  an  Ep. 
1.    3  the  two  sous  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phinehas 
1 .   4  he  gave . .  to  all  her  sons  and  her  daughters 
1.    8  (am)  I  not  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons 
1.  20  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Sam. 

1.  23  gave  her  sou  suck  until  she  weaned  him 

2.  12  the  sons  of  Eli  (were)  sons  of  Belial,  they 
2.  21  she  conceived,  and  bare  three  sons  and 
2.  22  heard  all  that  his  sons  did  unto  all  Israel 
2.  24  Nay,  my  sons  ;  for  (it  is)  no  good  report 
2.  29  honourest  thy  sons  above  me,  to  make  yo. 

2.  34  that  shall  come  upon  thy  two  sous,  on  H. 

3.  6  I  called  not,  my  sou ;  lie  down  again 
3. 13  his  sons  made  themselves  vile,  and  he 

3.  16  called  Samuel,  and  said,  Samuel,  my  son 

4.  4.  11  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phine. 
4.  16  Aud  he  said,  What  is  there  done,  my  son? 


25- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
3°' 
3Q' 
3°- 
3°. 
3r: 
3*- 
3i- 
3*. 
3i- 
3i. 

s  Sa.  1. 


17  thy  two  sons  also,  Hophni  and  Phinehas 

20  Fear  not ;  for  thou  hast  born  a  son.  But 
1  sanctified  Eleazar  his  son  to  keep  the  ark 
1  that  he  made  his  sons  judges  over  Israel 
3  his  sons  walked  not  in  his  ways,  but  turn. 
5  thou  art  old,  and  thy  sous  walk  not  in  thy 

1 1  He  will  take  your  sons,  and  appoint  (them) 
1  son  of  Abiel,  the  sou  of  Zeror,  the  son  of 

1  the  son  of  Aphiah,  a  Benjamite,  a  mighty 

2  he  had  a  son,  whose  name  (was)  Saul,  a 

3  Kish  said  to  Saul  his  son,  Take  now  one  of 
2  saying,  What  shall  I  do  for  my  son? 

1 1  What  (is)  this  (that)  is  come  unto  the  son 

21  and  Saul  the  son  of  Kish  was  taken 

2  my  sons  (are)  with  you:  and  I  have  walked 

16  Saul,  and  Jonathan  his  son,  and  the  peo. 

22  and  with  Jonathan  his  son  was  there  fou. 
1  Jonathan  the  son  of  Saul  said  unto  the 

3  Aliiah,  the  son  of  Ahitub,  I-chabod's  bro. 
3  the  son  of  Phinehas,  the  son  of  Eli,  the  L. 

39  though  it  be  in  Jonathan  my  son,  he  shall 

40  Jonathan  my  son  will  be  on  the  other  side 
42  Cast  (lots)  between  me  and  Jonat.  my  son 

49  the  sons  of  Saul  were  Jonathan,  and  Ishui 

50  (was)  Abner,  the  son  of  Ner,  Saul's  uncle 

51  the  father  of  Abner  (was)  the  son  of  Abi. 
1  have  provided  me  a  king  among  his  sons 

5  he  sanctified  Jesse  and  his  sons,  and  cal. 

10  Jesse  made  seven  of  his  sons  to  pass  bef. 

18  I  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  the  Beth-lehe. 

19  Send  me  David  thy  son,  which  (is)  with 

20  and  sent  (them)  by  David  his  son  unto  S. 

12  D.  (was)the  son  of  that  Ephrathite  of  Beth. 

12  whose  name  (was)  Jesse;  and  he  had  eight 

13  the  three  eldest  sons  of  Jesse  went  (aud) 
13  the  names  of  his  three  sons  that  went  to 

17  Jesse  said  unto  David  his  son,  Take  now 

55  Abner,  whose  son  (is)  this  youth?  And  Ab. 

56  the  king  said,  Enquire  thou  whose  son  the 
58  S.  said  to  him,  Whose  sou  (art)  thou,  (thou) 
58  I  (am)  the  son  of  thy  servant  Jesse  the  B. 

1  Saul  spake  to  Jonathan  his  son,  and  to  all 

2  Jonathan,  Saul's  son,  delighted  much  in  D. 
27  And  Saul  said  uuto  Jonathan  his  son 

27  Wherefore  cometh  not  the  son  of  Jesse 
30  Thou  son  of  the  perverse  rebellious  (wo.) 

30  thou  hast  chosen  the  son  of  Jesse  to  thine 

31  as  long  as  the  son  of  Jesse  liveth  upon  the 

7  will  the  son  of  Jesse  give  every  one  of  you 

8  my  son  hath  made  a  league  with  the  son 

8  my  son  hath  stirred  up  my  servant  again. 

9  I  saw  the  son  of  Jesse  coming  to.,  the  son 

11  to  call  Ahimelech  the  priest,  the  son  of 

12  Saul  said,  Hear  now,  thou  son  of  Ahitub 

13  conspired  against  me,  thou  and  the  son 

20  one  of  the  sons  of  Ahimelech  the  son  of 

6  Abiathar  the  son  of  Ahimelech  fled  to  D. 
16  Jonathan,  Saul's  son,  arose,  and  went  to  D. 

16  Saul  said,  (Is)  this  thy  voice,  my  son  D.? 
8  unto  thy  servants,  and  to  thy  son  David 

10  Who  (is)  David  ?  And  who  (is)  the  son  of 

17  he  (is  such)  a  son  of  Belial,  that  (a  man) 
44  to  Phalti  the  son  of  Laish,  which  (was)  of 

5  where  Saul  lay,  and  Abner  the  son  of  Ner 

6  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah,  brother  to  J. 

14  David  cried . .  to  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  sa. 
17  and  said,  (Is)  this  thy  voice,  my  son  Da.? 

21  return,  my  son  David;  for  I  will  no  more 
25  Blessed  (be)  thou,  my  son  David:  thoush. 

2  unto  Achish,  the  son  of  Maoch,  kingof  G. 
19  to  morrow  (shalt)  thou  and  thy  sous  (be) 

3  their  sons,  and  their  daughters,  were  ta. 

6  was  grieved,  every  man  for  his  sons  and 

7  to  Abiathar  the  priest,  Ahimelech's  son 
19  neither  sons  nor  daughters,  neither  spoil 

2  followed  hard  upon  Saul  and  upon  his  sons 
2  Abinadab,  and  Melchi-shua,  Saul's  sons 

6  Saul  died,  and  his  three  sons,  aud  his  ar. 

7  and  that  Saul  and  his  sons  were  dead,  they 

8  they  found  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fallen 
12  body  of  Saul  and  the  bodies  of  hisson3 

4  Saul  and  Jonathan  his  son  are  dead  also 

5  that  Saul  and  Jonathan  his  son  be  dead 

12  for  Saul,  and  for  Jonathan  his  son,  and 

13  I  (am)  the  son  of  a  stranger,  an  Amalek. 

17  over  Saul  and  over  Jonathan  his  son 

8  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  Saul's 
8  took  Ish-bosheth  the  son  of  Saul,  and  br. 
10  Saul's  son,  (was)  forty  years  old,  when  he 
12  Abner  the  son  of  Ner.  .went  out  from  M. 

12  the  servants  of  Ish-bosheth  the  son  of  S. 

13  Joab  the  sou  of  Zeruiah,  and  theservauts 

15  which  (pertained)  to  Ish-bosheth  the  son 

18  there  were  three  sons  of  Zeruiah  there,  J. 

2  unto  David  were  sons  born  in  Hebron 

3  Absalom,  the  son  of  Maachah  the  daughter 

4  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith 
4  and  the  fifth,  Shephatiah  the  son  of  Abi. 

14  messengers  to  Ish-bosheth,  Saul'sson,  say. 

15  took  her.  .from  Phaltiel  the  son  of  Laish 

23  Abnertheson  of  Ner  came  to  the  king,  and 
25  Thou  knowest  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  that 

28  from  the  blood  of  Abner  the  son  of  Ner 
37  not  of  the  king  to  slay  Abner  the  son  of 
39  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  (be)  too  hard  for  me 

1  Saul's  son  heard  that  Abner  was  dead 

2  Saul's  son  had  two  men  (that  were)  cap. 
2  the  sons  of  Rimmon  a  Beerothite,  of  the 

4  Saul's  son  had  a  son  (that  was)  lame  of 

5  the  sons  of  Rimmon  a  Beerothite,  Rechab 

8  Ish-bosheth  the  son  of  Saul  thine  enemy 

9  and  Baanah  his  brother,  the  sousof  Rim. 


5.  13  there  were  yet  sons  and  daughters  born 

6.  3  the  sons  of  Abinadab,  dravethe  new  cart 

7.  14  will  be  his  father,  aud  heshall  be  my  son 
S.    3  David  smote  also  Hadadezer,  the  son  of 

8.  ioToi  sent  Joramhisson  unto  king  David,  to 
8.  12  the  spoil  of  Hadadezer,  sonof  Rehob,  king 
8.  16  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  (was)  over  the 
8.  16  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud  (was)rec. 
8.  i7ttie  son  of  Ahitub,  and  Ahimelech  the  son 
8.  18  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (was  over) 
8.  18  aud  David's  sons  were  chief  rulers 

3  Jonathan  hath  yet  a  son,  (which  is)  lame 

4  he  (is)  in  the  house  of  Machir,  the  son  of 

5  the  house  of  Machir,  the  son  of  Amniiel 

6  Mephibosheth,  the  son  of  Jonathan,  the  s. 
9  I  have  given  unto  thy  master's  sou  all 

10  thy  sons,  and  thy  servants,  shall  tiU  the 
10  that  thy  master's  son  may  have  food  to 
to  thy  master's  son  shall  eat  bread  alway  at 

10  Ziba  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  servants 

11  eat  at  my  table,  as  one  of  the  king's  sons 

12  Mephibosheth  had  a  young  son,  whose 
:>.    1  and  Hanum  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
j.    2  show  kindness  unto  Hanum  the  son  of  N. 
1.  21  Who  smote  Abimeleeh  the  son  of  Jerub. 

1.  27  she  became  his  wife,  and  bare  him  a  son 

2.  24  she  bare  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  S-. 

3.  1  Absalom  the  son  of  David  had  a  fair  sister 
3.    1  and  Amnon  the  son  of  David  loved  her 
3.    3  Jonadab,  the  son  of  Shimeah,  David's  br. 
3.    4  Why  (art)  thou,  (being)  the  king's  son,  le. 
3.  23  and  Absolom  invited  all  the  king's  sons 
3.  25  Nay,  my  son,  let  us  not  all  now  go,  lest 
3.  27  he  let  Amnon  and  all  the  king's  sons  go 
3.  29  the  king's  sons  arose,  aud  every  man  gat 
3.  30  Absalom  hath  slain  all  the  king's  sons 
3.  32  slain  all  the  young  men  the  king's  sons 
3.  33  to  think  that  all  the  king's  sons  are  dead 
3.  35  Behold,  the  king's  sons  come  :  as  thy  ser. 
3.  36  the  king's  sons  came,  and  lifted  up  their 
3.  37  went  to  Talmai,  the  sou  of  Ammihud,  ki. 

3.  37  And  (David)  mourned  for  his  son  every 

4.  1  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  perceived  that 
4.    6  thy  handmaid  had  two  sons,  and  they  two 
4. 11  destroy,  .more,  lest  they  destroy  my  son 
4.  11  there  shall  not  one  hair  of  thy  son  fall  to 
4.  16  (that  would)  destroy  me  and  my  sons  to. 

4.  27  unto  Absalom  there  were  born  three  sons 

5.  27  return  into  the  city,  .and  your  two  sons 
5.  27  Ahimaaz  thy  son,  and  Jonathan  the  son 

5.  36  (they  have)  there  with  them  their  two  sons 

6.  3  kingsaid,  Andwhere(is)thymaster'sson  ? 
6.  5  whose  name  (was)Shhnei,  the  son  of  Gera 
6.  8  kingdom  into  the  hand  of  Absalom  thy  s. 
6.   9  Then  said  Abishai  the  sonof  Zeruiah  unto 

6. 10  What  have  I  to  do  with  you,  ye  sons  of  Z. 

6. 11  my  son,  which  came  forth  of  my  bowels 

6.  19  (should  I),  .in  the  presence  of  his  sou? 

7.  25  Amasa(was)aman's  son  whose  name  (was) 
7.  27  Shobi  the  son  of  Nahash  of  Rabbah  of  the 
7.  27  Machir  the  son  of  Ammiel  of  Lo-debar 

2  under  the  hand  of  Abishai  the  son  of  Ze. 
12  put  forth  mine  hand  against  the  king's  sou 

18  I  have  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  reme. 

19  Then  said  Ahimaaz  the  son  of  Zadok,  Let 

20  no  tidings,  because  the  king's  son  is  dead 
22  Then  said  Ahimaaz  the  son  of  Zadok  yet 
22  Wherefore  wilt  thou  run,  my  son,  seeing 
27  like  the  running  of  Ahimaaz  the  son  of  Z. 
33  0  my  son  Absalom,  my  sou,  my  son  Abs. 
33  would  God  I  had  died,  .my  son,  my  son 

2  heard .  .the  king  was  grieved  for  his  son 

4  myson  Absalom, O  Absalom, my  son,  my  s. 

5  the  lives  of  thy  sons  and  of  thy  daughters 

16  Shimei  the  sou  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite,  wh. 

17  his  fifteen  sons  and  his  twenty  servants 

18  Shimei  the  son  of  Gera  fell  down  before 
2t  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah  answered  and 

22  What  have  I  to  do  with  you,  ye  sons  of  Z. 
24  Mephibosheth  the  sou  of  Saul  came  down 

1,  2,  6,  7,  10,  13,  21,  22  Sheba,  the  son  of  B. 
1  neither  have  we  inheritance  in  the  sonof 

23  Benaiah  theson  of  Jehoiada(was)  over  the 

24  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud  (was)  rec. 

6  Let  seven  men  of  his  sons  be  delivered  unto 

7  Mephibosheth,  the  sonof  Jonathan,  the  s. 

7  between  David  and  Jonathan  the  son  of  S. 

8  the  king  took  the  two  sons  of  Rizpah  the 
8  the  five  sons  of  Michal  the  daughter  of  S. 

8  Adriel  the  son  of  Barzillai  theMeholath. 
12,  13  and  the  bones  of  Jonathan  his  son 
14  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  his  son 

17  the  son  of  Zeruiah  succoured  him,  and 

19  where  El-hanan  the  son  of  Jaare-oregim 

21  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shimeah,  the  brother 
1  David  the  son  of  Jesse  said,  and  the  man 

9  Eleazar  the  sou  of  Dodo  the  Ahothite,  (one) 
11  Shammah  the  son  of  Agee  the  Hararite 

18  the  brother  of  Joab,  the  son  of  Zeruiah 

20  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of  a  valiant 

22  These  (things)  did  Benaiah  the  son  of  Je. 
24  Elhanau  the  son  of  Dodo  of  Beth-lehem 
26  Helez  the  Partite,  Ira  the  son  of  Ikkesh 
29  Heleb  the  son  of  Baanah,  a  Netophathite 
29  Ittai  the  son  of  Ribai  out  of  Gibeah  of  the 

23.  32  Eliahba  the  Shaalbonite,  of  the  sons  of  J. 
23.  33  Shammah  the  Hararite,  Ahiam  the  son  of 
23.  34  the  sou  of  Ahasbai,  the  son  of  the  Maach. 
23.  34  Eliam  the  son  of  Ahithophel  the  Gilonite 
23.  36  Igal  the  son  of  Nathan  of  Zobah,  Bani  the 
23.  37  armour  bearer  to  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah 
Ki.   1.    5  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith  exalted  him. 


SON 


910 


SON 


i  Ki.  i.  7  he  conferred  with  Joab  the  son  of  Zerui. 
i.  8,  26,  32,  36,  38,  44  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jeh. 
1.  9  called  all  his  brethren  the  king's  sons,  and 
1.  it  Adonijah  the  sou  of  Haggith  doth  reign 

1. 12  thine  own  life,  and  the  life  of  thy  son  So. 
i- 13)  *7<  30  Assuredly  Solomon  thy  son  shall 
1.  19  hath  called  all  the  sous  of  the  king,  and 
1.  21  I  and  my  son  Solomon  shall  be  counted 
1.  25  hath  called  all  the  king's  sons,  and  the  ca. 
1.  33  cause  Solomon  my  son  to  ride  upon  mine 

1.  42  Jonathan  the  son  of  Abiathar  the  priest 

2,  1  and  he  charged  Solomon  his  son,  saying 
2.  5  thou  kuowest  also  what  Joab  the  son  of 
2.  5  the  son  of  Ner,  and  unto  Amasa  the  son 
2.  7  show  kindness  unto  the  sons  of  Barzillai 
2.    8  (thou  hast)  with  thee  Shimei  the  son  of  G. 

2. 13  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith  came  to  Ba. 
2.  22  for  Abiathar .  .and  for  Joab  the  son  of  Ze. 
2.  25  sent  by  the  hand  of  Benaiah  the  son  of  J. 
2.  2 1  Salomon  sent  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
2.  32  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  captain  of  the  host 
2.  32  Amasa  the  son  of  Jether,  captain  of  the 
2.  34  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  went  up,  and 
2.  35  the  king  put  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
2.  39  ran  away  uuto  Achish  son  of  Maachah  ki. 

2.  46  the  king  commanded  Benaiah  the  sou  of 

3.  6  thou  hast  given  him  a  son  to  sit  on  his  th. 
3.  20  arose  at  midnight,  and  took  my  son  from 
3.  21  behold,  it  was  not  my  sou  which  I  did  be. 
3. 22  living  (is)  my  sou,  and  the  dead  (is)  thy  s. 
3.  22  the  dead  (is)  thy  sou . .  the  living  (is)  my  s. 
3.  23  This  (is)  my  sou  that  liveth,  and  thy  son 
3.  23  thy  son  (is)  the  dead,  and  my  son  (is)  the 

3.  26  her  bowels  yearned  upon  her  son,  and  she 

4.  2  Azariah  the  son  of  Zadok  the  priest 

4.  3  Elihoreph  and  Ahiah,  the  sons  of  Shisha 
4.  3  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Alihud,  the  reco. 
4.  4  Benaiah  the  sou  of  Jehoiada  (was)  overthe 
4.  5  Azariah  the  son  of  Nathan  (was)  over  the 
4.  5  Zabud  the  son  of  Nathan  (was)  principal 
4.  6  Adoniram  the  son  of  Abda  (was)  over  the 
4.  8  these  (are)  their  names  :  The  sou  of  Hur 
4.  9  The  son  of  Dekar,  iu  Makaz,  and  iuShaal. 
4.  io  The  sou  of  Hesed,  iu  Aruboth  ;  to  him 
4.  11  The  sou  of  Abinadab,  iu  all  the  region  of 
4. 12  Baana  the  son  of  Ahilud  ;  (to  him  pertain.) 
4.  13  The  sou  of  Geber,  in  Ramoth-gilead,  to 
4.  13  the  towns  of  Jair  the  son  of  Manasseh 
4.  14  Ahinadab  the  son  of  Iddo(had)  .Mahanaim 
4. 16  Baauah  the  son  of  Hushai  (was)  in  Asher 
4.  17  Jehoshaphat  the  boh  of  Paruah  in  Issac. 

4. 18  Shinifii  the  son  of  Elah  in  Benjamin 

4. 19  Geber  the  son  of  Uri  (was)  in  the  country 

4.  31  and  Chalcol,  and  Oarda,  the  sons  of  51a. 

5,  5  Thy  son,  whom  I  will  set  upon  thy  throne 
5.  7  hath  given  uuto  David  a  wise  son  over  this 
7.  14  He  (was)  a  widow's  son  of  the  tribe  of  N. 
8. 19  thy  sou,  that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thy 

11.  12  I  will  rend  it  out  of  the  hand  of  thy  son 
11. 13  will  give  one  tribe  to  thy  son  for  David 
11.  20  bare  him  Genubath  his  sou,  whom  Taha. 
11.  20  Genubath  was.  .among  the  sons  of  Phar, 
11.  23  Rezou  the  sou  of  Eliadah,  which  fled  from 
11.  26  Jeroboam  thesonof  Nebat,  an  Ephrathite 
11.  35  I  will  take  the  kingdom  out  of  his  son's 
11.  36  unto  his  son  will  I  give  one  tribe,  that  D. 

11.  43  Rehoboam  his  son  reigned  in  Ills  stead 

12.  2  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  was  yet 
12.  15  spake  by  Ahijah . .  unto  Jeroboam  the  son 
12.  16  neither  (have  we)  inheritance  in  the  son 
12.  21,  23  Rehoboam,  the  son  of  Solomon 

12.  31  the  people,  which  were  not  of  the  sons  of 

13.  11  his  sons  came  and  told  him  all  the  works 

13. 12  his  sons  had  seen  what  way  the  man  of  G. 

13. 13  he  said  unto  his  sons,  Saddle  me  the  ass 
13.  27  he  spake  to  liis  sons,  saying,  Saddle  me 

13.  31  he  spake  to  his  sons,  saying,  When  I  am 

14.  1  Abijah  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell  sick 

14.    5  cometh  to  ask  a  thing  of  thee  for  her  son 
14.  20  and  Nadab  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
14.  21  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solomon  reigned  iu 

14.  31  And  Abijam  his  son  reigued  iu  Ms  stead 

15.  1  of  king  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat 

15.    4  to  set  up  his  son  after  him,  and  to  estab. 
15.    8  and  Asa  his  son  reigued  in  his  stead 
15.  18  Ben-hadad,  the  sou  of  Tabrimon,  the  son 
15.  24  and  Jehoshaphat  his  son  reigned  in  his 
15.25  Nadab  the  sonof  Jeroboam  began  to  reign 
15.27  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahijah,  of  the  house  of 

15.  33  began  Baasha  the  sou  of  Ahijah  to  reign 

16.  1  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jehu  the  son 
16.  3  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 
16.    6  and  Elah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

16.    7  of  the  prophet  Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani 
16.    8  began  Blab  the  son  of  Baasha  to  reign  ov. 
16. 13  sins  of  IJ.ui^ha   . and  the  sins  of.. his  son 
16.  21  the  people  followed  Tibni  the  son  of  Gin. 
16.  22  the  people  that  followed  Tibni  the  son  of 
16.  26  in  all  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Ne. 
16.  28  and  Ahab  his  son  reigued  in  his  stead 
16.  29  began  Ahab  the  sou  of  Omri  to  reigned  ov. 
16.  29  Ahab  the  son  of  Omri  reigued  over  Israel 
16.  30  Ahab  the  son  of  Omri  did  evilin  tin-  sight 
16.  31  in  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat 

16.  3j  which  he  spake  by  Joshua  the  sonof  Nun 

17.  12  may  go  in  and  dress  it  for  meand  mysou 
17.  13  and  after  make  for  thee  and  for  thy  son 
17.  17  the  son  of  the  woman,  the  mistress  of  the 
17.  18  art  thou  come  unto  me.  .to  slay  my  son? 
17  1 »  be  a  ii  1  onto  her,  Give  me  thv  eon.  And 
17.  20  evil  upon  the  widow.. bv  sluvinu:  her  son 
17-  23  and  Elijah  said,  See,  thy  son  liveth 


i.  18.  31  the  number  of  the  tribes  of  the  sons  of  J, 
19.  16  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi  shalt  thou  anoint 

19.  16  Elisha  thesonof  Shaphat, of  Abel-meholah 
19. 19  found  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat,  who(w.) 

20.  35  a  certain  man  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets 

21.  10  set  two  men,  sous  of  Belial,  before  him 
21.  22  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 
21.  22  like  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahij. 

21.  29  in  his  son's  days  will  I  bring  the  evil  upon 

22.  8  Micaiah  the  son  of  Iinlah,  by  whom  we 
22.    9  said,  Hasten  (hither)  Micaiah  the  son  of 
22.  11  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Chenanah  made  him 
22.  24  Zedekiah  the  sou  of  Chenanah  went  near 
22.  26  carry  him  back . .  to  Joash  the  king's  son 
22. 40  Ahaziah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

22.  41  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Asa  began  to  rei. 
22.  49  Then  said  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Ahab  unto 
22.  50  and  Jehorani  his  son  reigned  In  his  stead 
22.  51  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign 
22.  52  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat 
L  1.  17  Jehoram  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of 

1.  17  Jehoram  reigned . .  because  he  had  no  son 

2.  3  the  sons  of  the  prophets  that  (were)  atB. 
2.  5  the  sons  of  the  prophets  that  (were)  at  J. 
2.    7  fifty  men  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  went 

2.  15  the  sons  of  the  prophets  which  (were)  to 

3.  1  Jehoram  the  son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign 
3.    3  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  gou  of  Nebat 

3.  11  EUsha  the  son  of  Shaphat,  which  poured 
3.  27  he  took  his  eldest  son,  that  should  have 
1  of  the  wives  of  the  sous  of  the  prophets 

4  shut  the  door  upon  thee  and  upon  thy  so. 

5  shut  the  door  upon  her  and  upon  her  sons 

6  she  said  unto  her  son,  Bring  me  yet  a  ve. 

16  About  this,  .thou  shalt  embrace  a  son 

17  bare  a  son  at  that  season  that  Elisha  had 
2S  Did  I  desire  a  son  of  my  lord?  did  I  not 

36  when  shewas  come . .  said,  Takeup  thy  son 

37  and  took  up  her  son,  and  went  out 

38  the  sons  of  the  prophets  (were)  sitting  be. 
38  seethe  pottage  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
22  two  young  men  of  the  sons  of  the  proph. 

1  the  sons  of  the  prophets  said  unto  Elisha 
28  Give  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him  to  day 

28  and  we  will  eat  my  son  tomorrow 

29  we  boiled  my  sou,  and  did  eat  him :  and 
29  Give  thy  son.  .and  she  hath  hid  her  son 

31  if  the  head  of  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat 

32  See  ye  how  this  son  of  a  murderer  hath  se. 
8.  1,  5  the  woman,  whose  son  he  had  restored 
8.  5  this  (is)  her  son,  whom  Elisha  restored  to 
8.  9  Thy  son  Ben-hadad  king  of  Syria  hath  sent 
8.  16  of  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
8.  16  Jehoram  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of 
8.  24  and  Ahaziah  Ins  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
0.  25  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Joram  the  son  of  A. 
8.  25  did  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  J. 
8.  28  he  went  with  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab  to  the 
8.  29  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  Judah 

8.  29  to  see  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab  iu  Jezreel 

9.  2,  14  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  sonof  Ni. 
9.  9  like  the  house  of  Jerobuam  the  son  of  Ne. 
9.  9  like  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahi. 
9.  20  the  driving  of  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi 

9.  26  blood  of  Naboth,  and  the  blood  of  his  sous 
9.  29  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Joram  the  son  of 
10.    1  And  Ahab  had  seventy  sons  in  Samaria 
10.    2  seeing  your  master's  sons  (are)  with  you 
10.   3  the  best  and  meetest  of  your  master's  sous 
10.    6  the  heads  of  the  men  your  master's  sons 
10.    6  the  king's  sons,  (being)  seventy  persons 
10.    7  theytook  theking'ssons,audslewseveuty 
10.   8  brought  the  heads  of  the  king's  bous 
10.  15  he  lighted  onJehonadab thesonof  Rechab 
10.  23  Jehu  went,  and  Jehonadabtheson  of  Re. 
10.  29  (from)  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the*son  of  Ne. 

10.  35  And  Jehoahaz  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

11.  1  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw  that  her  son 
n.   2  Jehosheba.  .took  Joash  the  son  of  Ahaziah 
11.   2  stole  himfromamongtheking'ssons(wh.) 
11.    4  took,  .and  showed  them  the  king's  son 

11.  12  he  brought  forth  the  king's  son,  and  put 

12.  21  the  sonof  Shinieath,  and  Jehozabad  the  s. 

12.  21  and  Amaziah  his  sou  reigued  iu  his  stead 

13.  1  Joash  the  son  of  Ahaziah  king  of  Judah 
13.    1  Jehoahaz  the  son  of  Jehu  began  to  reign 
13.    2,  11  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Neba. 
13.    3  into  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad  the  sonof  H. 
13.    9  and  Joash  his  sou  reigned  in  his  stead 
13.  10  began  Jehoash  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  to  reigu 
13.  24  Ben-hadad  his  sun  reigned  in  his  stead 
13.  25  Jehoash  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  took  again 

13.  25  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad  the  son  of  Hazael 

14.  1  In  the  second  year  of  Joash  sou  of  Jehoah. 
14.  1  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah 
14.  8  the  son  of  Jehoahaz,  sou  of  Jehu,  king  of 
14.  9  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife,  and 
14.  13  the  son  of  Jehoash,  the  sonof  Ahaziah,  at 
14. 16  and  Jeroboam  his  son  reigned  in  Ms  stead 
14.  17  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah 
14.  17  of  Jehoash,  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  Israel 
14.  23  In  the  llfteenth  year  of  Amaziah  the  son 
14.  23  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Israel 
14.  24  the  sius  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat 
14.  25  Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai,  the  prophet 
14. 27  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash 

14.  29  Zacluuiah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

15.  1  began  Azariah  son  of  Amaziah  lung  of  J. 
15.   5  Jotham  the  king's  son  (was)  over  the  house 
15.    8  did  Zachariah  the  sou  of  Jeroboam  reign 
15.   9,  18,  24,  28  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat 
15.    7  and  Jotham  bis  son  reigned  in  his  stead 


2  Ki.15.  10  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  conspired  oga. 

15. 12  Thy  sons  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  Isratl 

15. 13  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  began  to  reign 
15.  14  Menahem  the  son  of  Gadi  went  up  from 
15.  14  smote  Shallum  the  son  of  Jabesh  in  Sam. 
15.  17  began  Menahem  the  son  of  Gadi  to  reign 
15.  22  and  Pekahiah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
15.  23  Pekahiah  the  sou  of  Menahem  began  to 
15.  25,  27,  30,  32,  37  Pekah  the  son  of  Remaliah 
15.  30  Hoshea  the  son  of  Elah  made  a  conspiracy 
15.  30,  32  Jotham  the  son  of  Vzziah 

15.  38  and  Ahaz  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

16,  1  In  the  seventeenth  year  of  Pekah  the  son 
16.    1  Ahaz  the  sou  of  Jotham  king  of  Judah 
16.    3  made  his  son  to  pass  through  the  fire,  ae. 
16.    5  Pekah  son  of  Remaliah  king  of  Israel  came 
16.   7  I  (am)  thy  servant,  and  thy  sou;  come  up 

16.  20  and  Hezekiah  his  son  reigued  in  his  stead 

17.  1  began  Hoshea  the  son  of  Elah  to  reign  hi 

17. 17  caused  their  sons  and  their  daughters  to 

17.  21  they  made  Jeroboam  the  sonof  Nebat  ki. 

18.  1,  9  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah  king  of  Isr. 
18.  1  the  son  of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah  began  to  re. 
i3.  18  there  came  out  to  them  Eliakim  the  sou 

18. 18  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joah  the  son  of  A. 
18.  26  Then  said  Eliakim  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  and 

18.  37  Eliakim  the  son  of  Hilkiah . .  and  Joah  Hie 

19.  2  sent. .to  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  A. 
19.  20  Then  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  to  Hez. 
19.  37  Adrammelech  and  Sharezerhis  sons  smote 

19.  37  Esarhaddon,  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

20.  1  prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  came  to 
20.  12  At  that  time Berodach-baladan, thesonof 
20.  18  of  thy  sons  that  shall  issue  from  tbee,  wh. 

20.  21  and  Manasseh  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

21.  6  made  his  son  pass  through  the  fire,  and  ob. 
21.    7  said  to  David,  and  to  Solomon  his  son,  In 
21. 18  and  Anion  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
21.  24  people  of  the  land  made  Josiahhis  son  ki. 

21.  26  and  Josiah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

22.  3  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah,  the  son 
22.  12  son  of  Shaphan,  and  Achbor  the  son  of  M. 

22.  14  thesonof  Tikvah,  the  son  of  Harhas,  keep. 
23. 10  that  no  man  might  make  his  son  or  his  da. 

23.  15  high  place  which  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Ne. 
23-  3°  people  of  the  land  took  Jehoahaz  the  son 

23.  34  made  Eliakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  iu  the 

24.  6  and  Jehoiachin  his  son  reigned  in  his  sfe. 

25.  7  they  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  his 
25.  22  made  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the  son 
25. 23  even  Ishmael  the  son  of  Netlianiah,  and 
25.  23  Johanan  the  son  of  Careah.aud  Seraiah  the 
25.  23  and  Jaazaniah  the  sou  of  a  Maachathite 
25.  25  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah,  the  son  of 

1  Ch.  1.  5  sous  of  Japheth ;  Gomer,  and  Magog,  and 
1.  6  sons  of  Gomer  ;  Ashchenaz,  and  Riphath 
1.  7  sous'of  Javan ;  Elishah,  and  Tarshisli,  Kj. 
1.  8  sons  of  Ham;  Cush,  and  Mizraim.Put.and 
j.  9  sons  of  Cush.  .And  the  sons  of  Raamah 
1.  17  sons  of  Shem ;  Elam,  and  Asshur,  and  A. 
1.  19  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons :  the  name 
1.  23  and  Jobab.  All  these  (were)  the  sons  of 
1.  28  The  sons  of  Abraham;  Isaac,  and  Ishmael 
1.  31  and  Kedemah.  These  are  the  sons  of  Is. 
1.  32  Now  the  sons  of  Keturah,  Abraham's  co. 
1.  32  And  the  sons  of  Jokshan  ;  Sheba,  and  D. 
1.  33  sons  of  Midian  ;  Ephah.  .these  (are)  thes. 
1.  34  Isaac.  The  sons  of  Isaac ;  Esau,  and  Isr. 
1.  35  sons  of  Esau ;  Eliphaz,  Reuel,  and  Jeush 
1.  36  sons  of  Eliphaz  ;  Teman,  and  Omar,  Zep. 
1.  37  sons  of  Reuel ;  Nahath,  Zerah,  Shammah 
1.  38  sons  of  Seir;  Lotan,  and  Shobal,  and  Zibe. 
1.  39  sons  of  Lotau  ;  Hori,  and  Homani :  and 
1.  40  sous  of  Shobal.  .And  the  sons  of  Zibeon 

1. 41  sons  of  Anah;  Dishon.  And  the  sons  of  D. 
1.  42  sons  of  Ezer . .  The  sons  of  Dishan ;  Vz,  and 
1.  43  Bela  the  son  of  Beor :  and  the  name  of  his 
1.  44  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah  reigned 
1.  46  Hadad  the  son  of  Bedad,  which  smote  M". 

1.  49  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  Achbor  reigned  in 

2.  1  These  (are)the  sons  of  Israel ;  Reuben,  S. 
2.  3  sons  of  Judah;  Er,  and  Oman,  and  Sheiah 
2.  4  and  Zerah.  All  the  sons  of  Judah  (were) 
2.  5  The  sons  of  Pharez;  Hezron,  and  Hamul 
2.  6  sons  of  Zerah  ;  Zimri,  and  Ethan,  and  H. 
2.  7  sons  of  Carmi ;  Achar,  the  troubler  of  Is. 
2.    8  And  the  sons  of  Ethan ;  Azariah 

2.   9  The  sons  also  of  Hezron,  that  were  born 
2.  j<5  the  sons  of  Zeruiah ;  Abishai,  and  Joab 
2. 18  Caleb  the  son  of  Hezron  begat  (children) 
2. 18  her  sons  are  these;  Jesher,  and  Shobab 
2.  23  these  (belonged  to)  the  sons  of  Macliir 
2.  25  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel  the  first  born  of  II. 
2.  27  the  sous  of  Ram  the  first  born  of  Jerah. 
2.  28  the  sons  of  Onain  were  Shammai,  and  J. 
2.  28  the  sons  of  Shammai ;  Nadab,  and  Abis. 
2.  30  sons  of  Nadab ;  Seled,  and  Appaim :  hut 
2.  31  the  sons  of  Appaim  ;  Ishi.  And  the  sons 
2.  32  the  sons  of  Jada  the  brother  of  Shammai 
2.  33  And  the  sons  of  Jonathan ;  Peleth,  andZ. 
2.  33  These  were  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel 
2.  34  Now  Sheshan  had  no  sons,  but  daughters 
2.  42  the  sons  of  Caleb  the  brother  of  Jerabm. 

2. 42  the  sons  of  Mareshah  the  father  of  Heb. 
2.  43  the  sons  of  Hebron ;  Korah,  and  Tappuab 
2.  45  the  son  of  Shammai  (was)  Maon :  and  M 
2.  47  the  sons  of  Jahdai ;  Regem,  and  Jotham 
2.  50  These  were  the  sons  of  Caleb  the  sou  of  H. 
2.  52  the  father  of  Kirjath-jearim  bad  sons ;  II. 

2.  54  sons  of  Salma;  Beth-lehem,  and  the  Ne. 
I,    1  these  were  the  sons  of  David,  which  were 

3.  2  Absalom  the  sonof  Maachah  the  daughter 


SON 


911 


SON 


i  Ch.  3.  .2  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  Haggith 
3.   9  all  the  sons  of  David,  besides  the  sons  of 
3.  10  Solomou'ssou(was)Rehoboam,Abiahiss. 
3.  10  Asa  his  son,  Jehoshaphat  his  son 
3.  11  his  son,  Ahaziah  his  sou,  Joash  his  son 
3. 12  his  son,  Azariah  his  son,  Jotliam  his  son 
3.  13  son,  Hezekiah  his  son,  Manasseh  his  son 
3. 14  Anion  his  son,  Josiah  liis  son 
3.  15  the  sons  of  Josiah  (were),  the  first  born  J. 
3.  16  And  the  sous  of  Jehoialum 
3.  16  Jeconiah  his  son,  Zedekiah  his  son 
3.  17  sons  of  Jeconiah  ;  Assir,  Salathiel  his  son 
3.  19  the  sons  of  Pedaiah  (were)  Zerubbabel,  and 
3.  19  the  sons  of  Zerubbabel ;  Meshullam,  and 
3,  21  the  sons  of  Hananiah  ;  Pelatiah,  and  Je. 
3.  21  the  sons  of  Rephaiah,  the  sous  of  Arnan 
3.  21  the  sons  of  Obadiah,  the  sons  of  Shechau. 
3.  22  sons  of  Shechaniah ;  Shemaiah :  and  the 
3.  23  the  sons  of  Neariah  ;  Elioenai,  and  Heze. 

3.  24  the  sons  of  Elioenai  (were)  Hodaiah,  and 

4.  1  The  sous  of  Judah;  Pharez,  ilezron,  and 
4,    2  Keaiah  the  sou  of  Shobal  begat  Jahath 
4.    4  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Hur,  the  firstborn 
4.   6  These  (were)  the  sons  of  Naarah 

4.    7  the  sons  of  Helah  (were)  Zereth,  and  Jez. 
4.   8  the  families  of  Aharhel  the  son  of  Harivni 
4.  13  the  sous  of  Kenaz;  Othniel,  and  Seraiah 
4.  13  and  the  sons  of  Othniel ;  Hathath 
4. 15  And  the  sons  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephun. 
4. 15  Xaam :  and  the  sous  of  Elah,  even  Kenaz 
4.  16  the  sous  of  Jehaleleel ;  Ziph,  and  Ziphah 
4. 17  the  sons  of  Ezra  (were)  J  ether,  and  Mered 
4.  iS  these  (are)  the  sous  ot  Bithiah  the  daugh. 
4.  19  the  sous  of  (his)  wife  Hodiah,  the  sister  of 
4.  20  the  sons  of  Shimon  (were)  Amnon,  aud 
4.  20  the  sons  of  Ishi  (were)  Zoheth,  and  Ben. 
4.  21  The  sous  of  Shelah  the  son  of  Judah(we.) 
4.  24  The  sons  of  Simeon  (were)  Neniuel,  and 
4.  25  his  sou,  Mibsam  his  son,  Alishma  his  sou 
4.  26  And  the  sons  of  Mishma;  Hamuel  hisson 
4.  26  Zacchur  his  son,  Shimei  his  son 
4. 27  Shimei  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  daughters 
4.  34  Jamlech,  and  Joshahthe  son  of  Amaziah 
4.  35  And  Joel,  and  Jehu  the  son  of  Josibiah 
4.  35  the  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son  of  Asiel 
4.  37  son  of  Shiphi,  the  son  of  Allon,  the  son 
4.  37  the  son  of  Sliimri,  the  son  of  Shemaiah 
4.  42  (some)  of  them,  (even)  of  the  sous  of  Sim. 

4.  42  and  Rephaiah,  and  Uzziel,  the  sons  of  Is. 

5.  1  the  sous  of  Reuben,  the  first  born  of  Isr. 
1  unto  the  sons  of  Joseph  the  son  of  Israel 

3  The  sons,  (I  say),  of  Reuben  the  first  born 

4  The  sons  ot  Joel ;  Shemaiah  his  son 

4  Gog  his  son,  Sliimei  his  son 

5  Micah  his  son,  F^eaia  hisson,  Baal  his  son 

6  Beerah  his  sou,  whom  Tilgath-pilneser  ki. 
8  the  son  of  Azaz,  the  son  of  Shema,  the  sou 

5.  14  Abihail  the  son  of  Huri,  the  son  of  Jaro. 

5. 14  the  sou  of  Gilead,  the  son  of  Michael,  the 

5.  14  Jeshishai,  the  son  of  Jahdo,  the  son  of  B. 

5. 15  Alii  the  son  of  Abdiel,  the  son  of  Guni,  ch. 
5. 18  The  sous  of  Reubeu,  and  theGadites,  and 

6.  1,  16  The  sons  of  Levi;  Gershon,  Kohath 
6.   2,  18  the  sons  of  Kohath;  Aniram,  Izhar,  and 
6.   3  The  sons  also  of  Aaron ;  N/adab,  and  Abi. 
6. 17  these  (be)  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Gers. 
6.  19  The  sons  of  Merari ;  Mahli,  and  Mushi 
6.  20  Libuihisson,Jahathhisson,Zimmahhiss. 
6.  21  Joah  his  son,  Iddo  his  son 
6.  21  Zerah  his  son,  Jeaterai  his  son 
6.  22  The  sous  of  Kohath ;  Animinadab  his  son 
6.  22  Koran.  Ids  son,  Assir  his  son 
6.  23  his  sou,  and  Ebiasaph  his  sou,  and.  .hiss. 
6.  24  Tahath  his  son,  Uriel  his  son 
6. 24  Uzziah  his  son,  and  Shaul  his  son 
6.  25  the  sons  of  Elkanah ;  Aniasai,  aud  Ahim. 
6.  26  (As  for)  Elkauah  :  the  sous  of  Elkanah 
6.  26  Zophai  his  son,  and  Nahath  his  son 
6.  27  his  son,  Jeroham  hissou,  Elkanah  his  son 
6.  28  the  sous  of  Samuel ;  the  first  born  Vashni 
6.  29  The  sous  of  Merari;  Mahli 
6.  29  Libui  his  sou,  Shimei  hisson.Uzzahisson 
6.  30  his  son,  Haggiah  his  son,  Asaiah  his  son 
6.  33  of  the  sons  of  the  Kohathites  ;  Heman  a 
6.  33  singer,  the  son  of  Joel, the  sonofShemuel 
6.  34  The  sou  of  Elkanah,  the  sou  of  Jeroham 
6.  34  the  sou  of  Eliel,  the  son  of  Toah 
6.  35  The  son  of  Zuph,  the  son  of  Elkanah 
6.  35  the  sou  of  Mahath,  the  son  of  Amasai 
6. 36  The  son  of  Elkanah,  the  son  of  Joel 
6.  36  the  son  of  Azariah,  the  son  of  Zephaniah 
6.  37  The  son  of  Tahath,  the  son  of  Assir 
6.  37  the  sou  of  Ebiasaph,  the  son  of  Korah 
6. 38  The  sou  of  Izhar,  the  son  of  Kohath 
6.  38  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son  of  Israel 
6.  39  Asaph  the  son  of  Berachiah,  the  son  of  S. 
6.  40  son  of  Michael,  the  sou  of  Baaseiah,  the  s. 
6. 41  The  son  of  Ethni,  the  son  of  Zerah,  the  s. 
6.  42  sou  of  Ethau,  the  son  of  Zinimah.the  sou 
6.  43  The  son  of  Jahath.  .sou  of  Gershom,  the  s. 
6.  44  the  sons  of  Merari  (stood)  on  the  left  hand 
c.  44  the  son  of  Kishi,  the  son  of  Abdi,  the  son 
6.  45  son  of  Hashabiah  .  .son of  Amaziah,  thes. 
6.  46  The  son  of  Amzi,  the  son  of  Bani,  the  son 
6.  47  The  sou  of  Mahli,  the  son  of  Mushi 
6.  47  the  son  of  Merari,  the  son  of  Levi 
6.  49  his  sous  offered  upon  the  altar  of  the  bu. 
6.  50  And  these  (are)  the  sous  of  Aaron  ;  Elea. 
6.  50  his  sou,  Pbiuehas  hisson,  Abishuahis  son 
6.  51  his  son,  Uzzi  his  son,  Zerahiah  his  son 
6.  52  his  son,  Amariah  his  son,  Ahitub  his  son 
6,  53  Zadok  his  son,  Aliimaaz  his  son 


54  of  the  sons  of  Aaron,  of  thefamilies  of  the 

56  they  gave  to  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh 

57  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave  the  cities 

61  unto  the  sons  of  Kohath,  (which  were)  le. 

62  to  the  sons  of  Gershom,  throughout  their 
6$  Unto  the  sons  of  Merari  (were  given)  by 
66  (the  residue)  of  the  families  of  the  sons 
70  the  family  of  the  remnant  of  the  sons  of 

.  71  Unto  the  sous  of  Gershom  (were  given) 

1  the  sous  of  Issachar(were)  Tola,  andPuah 

2  the  sons  of  Tola ;  Uzzi,  and  Rephaiah,  aud 

3  the  sons  of  Uzzi ;  Izrahiah  :  and  the  sons 

4  soldiers. .for  they  had  many  wives  and  sons 

7  the  sons  of  Bela ;  Ezbon,  and  Uzzi,  and 

8  thesonsofBecher;  Zemira,andJoash,aRd 
8  Alameth.  All  these  (are)  the  sous  of  Bech. 

10  sons  also  of  Jediael;  Bilhan:  and  the  sons 

11  All  these  the  sons  of  Jediael,  by  the  heads 

12  the  children  of  Ir,  (aud)  Hushim*  the  sons 

13  The  sons  of  Naphtali;  Jahziel,  aud  Guni. 

13  Gezer,  aud  Shallum,  the  sons  of  Bilhali 

14  The  sons  of  Manasseh ;  Ashriel,  whom  she 
16  Maachah  the  wife  of  Machir  bare  a  son 

16  his  brother  (was)  Sheresh  :  and  his  sons 

17  And  the  sons  of  Ulam  ;  Bedan.  These  (w.) 
17  sons  of  Gilead,  the  son  of  Machir,  the  son 

19  the  sons  of  Shemidah  were  Ahian,  and  Sh. 

20  And  the  sons  of  Ephraim  ;  Shuthelah 
20  and  Bered  his  son,  and  Tahath  his  son 

20  and  Eladah  his  son,  and  Tahath  his  son 

21  Zabad  his  son,  and  Shuthelah  his  son 

23  she  conceived  and  bare  a  son,  and  he  call. 
25  And  Rephah  (was)  his  son,  also  Resheph 

25  and  Telah  his  son,  and  Taliau  liis  son 

26  his  son,  Ammihud  his  son,  EUshama  his  s. 

27  Nou  his  son,  Jehoshua  his  son 

29  the  children  of  Joseph  the  son  of  Israel 

30  The  sons  of  Asher ;  Imnah,  and  Isuah,  and 

31  the  sons  of  Beriah;  Heber,  and  Malchiel 

33  the  sons  of  Japhlet ;  Pasach,  and  Bimhal 

34  the  sons  of  Shamer ;  Ahi,  and  Rohgah,  Je. 

35  the  sonsof  his  brother  Helem;  Zophah,and 

36  The  sons  of  Zophah;  Suah,  and  Harnepher 
3S  the  sons  of  Jether;  Jephunneh,  and  Pisp. 
39  the  sons  of  Ulla  ;  Arab,  and  Hanniel 

3  the  sons  of  Bela  were  Addar,  and  Gera,  and 
6  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Ehud :  these  are 

10  These  (were)  his  sons,  heads  of  the  fathers 
12  The  sons  of  Elpaal ;  Eber,  and  Misham 
16  Michael,  and  Ispah,  and  Joha,  the  sonsof 

18  and  Jezliah.and  Jobab,  the  sonsof  Elpaal 
2 1  Beraiah,  and  Shimrath,  the  sons  of  Shimhi 

25  Iphedeiah,  aud  Penuel,  the  sons  of  Shas. 

27  Eliah,  aud  Zichri,  the  sons  of  Jeroham 
30  his  first  born  son  Abdou,  and  Zur,  aud  K. 

34  Aud  the  son  of  Jonathan  (was)  Merib-baal 

35  the  sons  of  Micah  (were)  Pithon,  and  Me. 

37  (was)  his  sou,  Eleasah  his  son,  Azelhisson 

38  Azel  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  these 

38  and  Hanan.    All  these  (were)  the  sons  of 

39  the  sons  of  Eshek  his  brother  (were)  Ulam 
ro  the  sous  of  Ulam  were  mighty  meu  of  va. 
43  had  many  sons,  and  sons' sons,  an  hundred 

40  All  these  (are)  of  the  sons  of  Benjamin 

4  Uthai  the  sou  of  Animihud,  the  son  of  O. 
4  the  son  of  Iniri,  the  son  of  Bani 

4  of  the  children  of  Pharez  the  son  of  Judah 

5  of  the  Shilonites;  Asaiah.  .and  his  sons 

6  of  the  sons  of  Zerah ;  Jeuel  and  then-  bre. 

7  of  the  sons  of  Benjamin ;  Sallu  the  son  of 

7  the  son  of  Hodaviah,  the  son  of  Hasenuah 

8  the  sou  of  Jeroham,  and  Elah  the  son  of  U. 
8  the  son  of  Michri,  and  Meshullamthe  sou 
8  Shephathiah,  the  son  of  Beuel,  the  son  of 

1 1  Azariah  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  the  son  of  Me. 

11  son  of  Zadok,  the  son  of  Meraioth,  the  son 

12  son  of  Jeroham,  the  son  of  Pashur,  the  sou 
12  son  of  Adiel,  the  sou  of  Jahzerah,  the  son 
12  the  son  of  Meshillemith,  the  son  of  Immer 
14  Shemaiah  the  son  of  Hasshub,  the  son  of 

14  the  son  of  Hashabiah,  of  the  sons  of  Mer. 

15  the  sonof  Micali,theson  ofZichri,  the  son 

16  son  of  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  Galal,  the  son 
16  Berechiah  the  son  of  Asa,  the  son  of  Elk. 

19  sou  of  Kore,  the  son  of  Ebiasaph,  the  son 

20  Phinehas  the  son  of  Eleazar  was  the  ruler 

21  Zechariah  the  son  of  Meshelemiah  (was) 
30  (some)  of  the  son$  of  the  priests  made  the 

32  (other)  of  their  brethren,  of  the  sons  of  the 

36  his  first  born  son  Abdon,  then  Zur,  and  K. 

40  the  son  of  Jonathan  (was)  Merib-baal :  aud 

41  the  sons  of  Micah  (were)  Pithon,  and  Me. 

43  his  son,  Eleasah  his  son,  Azel  his  son 

44  Azel  had  six  sons,  whose  names  (are)  the. 
44  Obadiah,  and  Hanan.  These  (were)  the  s. 

2  Philistines  followed  hard,  .after  his  sons 
2  Abinadab,  and  Malchi-shua,  the  sons  of 

6  Saul  died,  aud  his  three  sons,  and  all  his 

7  and  that  S£.ul  and  his  sons  were  dead,  th. 

8  they  found  Saul  and  his  sons  fallen  hi  m. 
12  took  away.. the  bodies  of  his  sons,  and  br. 
14  turned  the  kingdom  unto  David  the  son 

6  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  went  first  up,  and 
12  after  him  (was)  Eleazar  the  son  of  Dodo 

22  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of  a  valiant 

24  These  (things)  did  Benaiah  the  son  of  Je. 

26  Elhanau  the  son  of  Dodo  of  Beth-lehem 

28  Ira  the  sou  of  Ikkesh  the  Tekoite,  Abi-e. 

30  Heled  the  son  of  Baanah  the  Netophath. 

31  Ithai  the  son  of  Ribai  of  Gibeah,(that  p.) 
34  The  sons  of  Hashem  the  Gizonite 

34  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shage  the  Hararite 


1  Ch.  11.  35  the  son  of  Sacar.  .Eliphal  the  son  of  Vr 
11.  37  Hezro  the  Carmelite,  Naarai  the  son  of 
11.  38  the  brother  of  Nathan,  Mibliar  the  son  of 
11 .  39  the  armour  bearer  of  Joab  the  son  of  Zer. 
11.  41  Uriah  the  Hittite,  Zabad  the  sou  of  Ahl. 
11.  42  Adiua  the  son  of  Shiza  the  Reubenite,  a 
n.  43  Hauan  the  son  of  Maachah,  and  Joshap. 
11.  44  and  Jehiel  the  sons  of  Hothan  the  Aroer. 
11.  45  Jediael  the  son  of  Shiniri,  and  Joha  his 

11,  46  Jeribai  and  Joshaviah,  the  sous  of  Eluat. 

12.  1  kept. .close  because  of  Saul  the  sou  of  K. 
12.  3  Ahiezer,  then  Joash,  the  sons  of  Shemaah 
12.  3  Jeziel,  and  Pelet,  the  sons  of  Azmaveth 
12.  7  Joelah,  and  Zebadiah,  the  sons  of  Jeroh. 
12.  14  These  (were)  of  the  sous  of  Gad,  captaius 
12.  iS  Thine  (are  we),  David,  .thou son  of  Jesse 

14.  3  and  David  begat  more  sons  and  daughters 

15.  5  Of  the  sons  of  Kohath ;  Uriel  the  chief     - 
15.   6  Of  the  sous  of  Merari ;  Asaiah  the  chief 
15.    7  Of  the  sous  of  Gershom ;  Joel  the  chief 
15.    8  Of  the  sons  of  Elizaphan ;  Shemaiah  the 
15.    9  Of  the  sonsof  Hebron;  Eliel  the  chief,  and 

15.  10  Of  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;  Animinadab  the  c. 
10.  17  the  Levites  appointed  Heman  the  son  of 
10.  17  of  liis  brethren,  Asaph  the  son  of  Berech. 
10.  17  of  the  sons  of  Merari.  .Ethan  the  son  of 

16.  38  Obed-edom  also  the  son  of  Jeduthun,  and 
16.  42  And  the  sons  of  Jeduthun  (were)  porters 
17. 11  seed,  .which  shall  be  of  thy  sons ;  aud  I 
17. 13  I  will  be  his  father,  and  he  shall  be  my  s. 
18.  10  He  sent  Hadoram  his  son  to  kiug  David 

1 8.  12  M  oreover  Abishai  the  sou  of  Zeruiah  slew 
iS.  15  sou  of  Zeruiah.  .and  Jehoshaphat  the  son 
18.  16  son  of  Ahitub,  and  Abhnelech  the  son  of 

18.  17  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (was)  over  the 
18. 17  the  sous  of  David  (were)  chief  about  the 
ig.    1  Nahash.  .died,  and  his  son  reigned  in  his 

19.  2  show  kindness  unto  Hanun  the  son  of  NT. 

20.  5  Elhanau  the  son  of  Jair  slew  Lahiui  the 

20.  7  the  son  of  Shimea,  David's  brother,  slew 

21.  20  and  his  four  sons  with  him  hid  themselves 

22.  5  Solomon  my  son(is)  young  and  tender,  and 
22.   6  Then  he  called  for  Solomon  his  son,  and 
22.    7  My  son,  as  for  me,  it  was  in  my  mind  to 
22.   9  son  shall  be  born  to  thee,  who  shall  be  a 

22. 10  he  shall  be  my  son,  and  I  (will  be)  his  fat. 

22. 11  Now,  my  son,  the  Lord  be  with  thee;  and 

22.  17  commanded.,  to  help  Solomon  his  son,  (s.) 

23.  1  he  made  Solomon  his  son  king  over  Israel 
23.  6  divided  them  into  courses  among  the  sons 
23.  8  sons  of  Laadau  ;  the  chief  (was)  Jehiel,  and 
23.  9  sons  of  Shimei ;  Shelomith,  and  Haziel,  and 
23. 10  sons  of  Shimei. .These  four  (were)  the  sons 
23.  12  but  Jeush  aud  Beriah  had  not  many  sons 

23. 12  sons  of  Kohath ;  Aniram,  Izhar,  Hebron 
23.  13  sons  of  Arnrani ;  Aaron  and  Moses :  and 

23. 13  he  aud  liis  sons  for  ever,  to  burn  incense 
23.  14  his  sons  were  named  of  the  tribe  of  Levi 
23.  15  The  sons  of  Moses  (were)  Gershom  and  E. 
23.  16  Of  the  sous  of  Gershom,  Shebuel  (was)the 
23. 17  the  sonsof  Eliezer(were)Rehabiahthe  ch. 
23.  17  Eliezer  had  none  ether  sons ;  but  the  sons 
23.  18  Of  the  sons  of  Izhar ;  Shelomith  the  ch. 
23.  19  Of  the  sons  of  Hebron  ;  Jeriah  the  first 
23.  20  Of  the  sonsof  Uzziel;  Micah  the  first,  and 
23.  21  sons  of  Merari.  .sons  of  Mahli ;  Eleazar 
23.  22  haduosons,  butdaughters:  and..thesons 
23.  23  sons  of  Mushi;  Mahli,  and  Eder,  and  Jere. 
23.  24  These  (were)  the  sons  of  Levi  after  the  h. 
23.  28  Because  their  office  (was)  to  wait  on  the  s. 

23.  32  charge  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  theirbrethren 

24.  1  divisions  of  the  sons  of  Aaron.  The  sous 
24.  3  both  Zadok  of  the  sons  of  Eleazar,  and  A. 
24.  3  of  the  sons  of  Ithamar,  according  to  their 
24 .  4  more . .  of  the  sons . .  than  of  the  sons  of  I. 
24.  4  Among  the  sons  of  Eleazar  (there  were) 
24.  4  eight  among  the  sons  of  Ithamar,  accor. 
24.  s  the  sons  of  Eleazar,  and  of  the  sons  of  I. 
24.  6  Shemaiah  the  son  of  Nethaneel  the  scribe 
24.  6  priest,  and  Ahimelech  the  son  of  Abiath. 
24.  20  rest  of  the  sons  of  Levi.  .Of  the  sons  of  A. 
24.  20  Shubael :  of  the  sons  of  Shubael ;  Jehde. 
24.  21  of  the  sons  of  Rehabiah,  the  first  (was)  I. 
24.  22  Shelomoth :  of  the  sons  of  Shelonioth,  J. 
24.  23  sons  (of  Hebron) ;  Jeriah  (the  first),  Am. 
24.  24  sons  of  Uzziel ;  Michah  :  of  the  sons  of  M. 
24.  25  Isshiah:  of  the  sons  of  Isshiah;  Zechar. 
24.  26  sons  of  Merari.  .sons  of  Jaaziah;  Beno 
24.  27  sons  of  Merari  by  Jaaziah  ;  Beno,  and  S. 
24.  28  Of  Mahli  (came)  Eleazar,  who  had  no  sons 
24.  29  Concerning  Kish :  the  son  of  Kish  (was)  J. 
24.  30  sons  also  of  Mushi . .  These  (were)  the  sons 

24.  31  sonsof  Aaron  in  the  presence  of  David  the 

25.  1  separated  to  the  service  of  the  sons  of  A. 
25.  2  sons  of  Asaph,  .sons  of  Asaph,  under  the 
25.  3  sonsof  Jeduthun  ;  Gedaliah,andZeri,and 
25.  4  sons  of  Heman;  Bukkiah,  Mattaniah,  U. 
25.  5  sons  of  Hemau .  .fourteen  sons  and  three 
25.    9  who  with  his  brethren  and  sous  ( were)  tw. 

25.  10  (lie),  liis  sons,  and  his  brethren,  (were)tw. 
[So  in  verse  n,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18, 19,  20,  21,  22,  23, 
24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31.] 

26.  1  Meshelemiah  the  son  of  Kore,  of  the  sons 
26.  2  sons  of  Meshelemiah  (were)  Zechariah  the 
26.  4  Moreover  the  sons  of  Obed-edom  (were)  S. 
26.  6  Also  unto  Shemaiah  his  son  were  sons  ho. 
26.  7  sons  of  Shemaiah;  Othni,audRephael,and 
26.  8  sons  of  Obed-edom  :  they,  and  their  sons 
26.    9  Meshelemiah  had  sons  and  brethren,  str. 

26. 10  Also  Hosah . .  had  sons ;  Simri  the  chief 

26. 11  the  sons  and  brethren  of  Hosah  (were)th. 
26.  14  Then  for  Zechariah  Iris  son,  a  wise  coun. 


SON 


012 


SON 


%  Ch.26.  15  To  Obcd-edom  southward;  and  to  his  sons 
26.  19  sons  of  tore,  and  among  the  sons  of  M. 
26.  21  sons  of  Laadan;  the  sons  of  the  Gershonite 
26.  22  sons  of  Jehieli ;  Zetham,  and  Joel  his  br. 
26.  24  Shebnel  the  sou  of  Gershom,  the  sou  of  M. 
26.  25  Rehabiah  his  son,  and  Jeshaiah  his  son 
26.  25  his  son .  .Zichri  his  son.  .Shelomithhisson 
26.  28  son  of  Kish..  .son  of  Ner.  .sou  of  Zeruiah 

26.  29  Chenaniah  and  his  sons(were)  for  the  out. 

27.  2  Jashobeam  the  son  of  Zabdiel:  and  in  his 
27.  5  Benaiahtheson  of  Jehoiada,  achief  priest 
27.  6  and  inhiscourse  (was)  Ammizabadhisson 
27.  7  Zebadiah  his  son  after  him  :  and  in  his  co. 
27.    9  Ira  tile  son  of  Ikkesh  the  Tekoite:  and  in 

27. 16  son  of  Zichri.  .Shephatiah  the  son  of  Ma. 
27.  17  Of  the  Levites;  Hashabiah  the  sou  of  Ke. 
27.  iS  David :  of  Issachar;  Omri  the  son  of  Mic. 
27.  i9Sonof  Obadiah. .  Jerimoththe  son  of  Azriel 
27.  20  son  of  Azaziah.  .Joel  the  son  of  Pedaiah 
27.  21  the  son  of  Zechariah.  .the  son  of  Abuer 
27.  22  Of  Dan;  Azareel  the  son  of  Jeroham 

27.  24  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  began  to  number 
27.  25  over  the  king's  treasures  (was),  .the  son 
27.  25  over  the  storehouses,  .(was)..  Jehon.  the  s. 
27.  26  And  over  them.. (was)  Ezri  the  son  of  Che. 
27.  29  over  the  herds,  .(was)  Shaphat  the  son  of 
27.  32  son  of  Hachmoni  (was)  with  the  king's  so. 

27.  34  after  Ahithophel (was)  Jehoiada  the  son  of 

28.  1  possession  of  the  king,  and  of  his  sons,  wi. 
28.  4  among  the  son3  of  my  father  he  liked  me 
28.  5  of  all  my  sons,  for  the  Lord  hath  given  me 
28.  5  many  sons,  he  hath  chosen  Solomon  my  s. 
28.  6  Solomon  thy  son. .chosen  him  (to  be)  my  s. 
28.  9  Solomon  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of 
28.  11  Then  David  gave  to  Solomon  his  son  the 

28.  20  David  said  to  Solomon  his  son,  Be  strong 

29.  1  Solomon  my  son,  whom  alone  God  hath 
29.  19  give  unto  Solomon  my  son  a  perfect  heart 
29.  22  made  Solomon  the  son  of  David  king  the 
29.  24  sons  likewise  of  kingDavid,  submitted  th. 
29.  26  Tims  David  the  son  of  Jesse  reigned  over 
29.  28  and  Solomon  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

2  Ch.   1.    1  Solomon  the  son  of  David  was  strengthened 

1.  5  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Ori,  the  sou  of  Hur,  had 

2.  12  hath  given  to  David  the  king  a  wise  son 
2. 14  son  of  a  woman  of  the  daughters  of  Dan 
5. 12  Jedtithun,  -with  their  sons  and  their  bre. 
6.    9  son,  which  shall  come  forth  out  of  thy  loi. 
9.  29  visions  of  Iddo.  .against  Jeroboam  the  son 
9.  31  and  Rehoboam  his  son  reigned  in  his  ste. 

10.    2  when  Jeroboam  the  sou  of  Nebat,  who 
10.  15  which  he  spake . .  to  Jeroboam  the  son  of 

10.  16  none  inheritance  in thesonof  Jesse:  every 

11.  3  Speak  unto  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solomon 
11.*  14  Jeroboam  and  his  sous  had  cast  them  off 

11. 17  made  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solomon  strong 
11.  18  Jerimoth  the  son  of  David.  .Eliabthesou 
ii.  21  begat  twenty  and  eight  sons,  and  three  sc. 

11.  22  Rehoboam  made  Abijahthe  son  of  Maach. 

12.  16  and  Abijah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

13.  5  to  him  and  to  his  sons  by  a  covenant  of  s. 
13.  6  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  the  servant 
33.  6  Solomon  the  son  of  David,  is  risen  up,  and 
33.  7  strengthened  themselves  against . .  the  son 
13.  8  kingdom. .in  the-  hand  of  the  sons  of  Dav. 
13.    9,  10  the  sons  of  Aaron,  and  the  Levites 

13.  21  begat  twenty  and  two  sons,  and  sLxteen 

14.  1  Asa  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead.     In  Ms 

15.  1  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Azariah  the  son 

17.  1  Jehoshaphat  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

17. 16  next  him  (was)  Amasiah  the  son  of  Zichri 

18.  7  same  (is)  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imla.  And 
18.  8  said,  Fetch  quickly  Micaiah  the  son  of  Im. 
18. 10,  23  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Chenaanah 

18.  25  carry  him  back,  .to  Joash  the  king's  son 

19.  2  Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani  the  seer  went  out 
19. 11  Zebadiah  the  sou  of  Ishmael,  the  ruler  of 

20.  14  sou  of  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Benaiah,  the 
20.  14  son  of  Mattauiah,  a  Levite  of  the  sons  of 
20.  34  written  in  the  book  of  Jehu  the  son  of  II. 

20.  37  Then  Eliezer  the  son  of  Dodavah  of  Mar. 

21.  1  and  Jehoram  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
2  r .    2  sons  of  Jehoshaphat.  .all  these  (were)  the  s. 

21.  7  promised  to  give  a  light,  .to  his  sons  for 

21. 17  sons  also,  .there  was  never  a  sou  left  him 
21.17  S!U'e  Jehoahaz,  the  youngest  of  his  sons 

22.  i  made  Ahaziahhis  youngest  son  king  in  his 
22.  1  SoAhaziahthe  son  of  Jehoram  king  of  Jn. 
22.  5  went  with  Jehoram  the  sou  of  Ahab  king 
22.  6  Azariah  thesonof  Jehoram  kingof  Judah 
22.  6  went  down  to  see  Jehoram  the  son  of  Ah. 
22.  7  against  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi,  whom  the 
22.  8  sons  of  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah,  that  mi. 
22.  9  he  (is)  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat,  who  soug. 
22. 10  mother  of  Ahaziah  saw  that  her  son  was 
22.  11  took  Joash  the  son  of  Ahaziah,  and  stole 

22.  11  from  among  the  king's  sons  that  wore  si. 

23.  1  the  son  of  Jeroham,  and  Ishmael  the  son 
23.  t  the  son  of  Obed,  and  Maaseiah  the  son  of 
23.  1  and  Elishaphat  the  son  of  Zichri,  into 
23.  3  he  said  unto  them,  Behold,  the  kiug's  son 
23.  3  as  the  Lord  hath  said  of  the  sons  of  Dav. 
23.  11  they  brought  out  the  king's  son,  and  put 

23.  11  Jehoiada  and  liis  sons  anointed  him,  aud 

24.  3  And  Jehoiada.. begat  sons  and  daughters 
24.  7  the  sons  of  Athaliah,  that  wicked  woman 
24.  20  Zechariah  the  sou  of  Jehoiada  the  priest 
24.  22  the  king  remembered  not..butslewhiss. 
24.  25  for  the  blood  of  the  sons  of  Jehoiada  the 
24.  26  Zabad  the  son  of  Shhneath  an  Ammonit. 

\.  -•■  Jehozabad  the  aon  of  Shiraritli  a  Moabit. 
1       '.    .1    in i: i  ^ )  his  sons,  ami  the  greatness 


1  Ch.24. 27  And  Amaziah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
25.  17  Joash,  the  son  of  Jehoahaz,  the  son  of  J. 
25.  18  saying,  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to 
25.  23  the  son  of  Joash,  the  son  of  Jehoahaz,  at 
25.  35  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash  king  of  Judah 

25.  25  lived  after  the  death  of  Joash,  son  of  Je. 

26.  18  the  sons  of  Aaron,  that  are  consecrated  to 
26.  21  Jotham  his  son  (was)  over  the  king's  ho. 
26.  22  did  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz 

26.  23  and  Jotham  his  sou  reigned  in  his  stead 

27.  9  and  Ahaz  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

28.  3  he  burnt  incense  in  the  valley  of  the  son 
28.  6  the  sou  of  Remaliah  slew  in  Judah;an  hu. 
28.  7  Zichri.  .slew  Maaseiah  the  king's  son,  and 
28.  8  two  hundred  thousand,  women,  sons,  and 
28.  12  the  son  of  Johanan,  Bereehiah  the  son  of 
28.  12  the  son  of  Shallum,  and  Amasa  the  son  of 

28.  27  aud  Hezekiah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

29.  9  our  sons  and  our  daughters  and  our  wives 

29. 11  My  sons,  be  not  now  negligent;  for  the 
29.  12  Mahath  the  son  of  Amasai,  and  Joel  the 
29.  12  sons  of  the  Kohathites  :  and  of  the  sous 
29.  12  Kish  the  son  of  Abdi,  and  Azariah  the  son 
29.  12  Joah  the  son  of  Zimmah,  and  Eden  the  s. 

29. 13  of  thesonsof  Elizaphan;  Shimri  and  Jeiel 
29.  13  of  the  sous  of  Asaph ;  Zechariah  and  Mat. 

29. 14  of  the  sons  of  Heman;  Jehiel  aud  Shimei 
29.  14  of  the  sons  of  Jeduthun ;  Shemaiah  and 

29.  21  he  commanded  the  priests  the  sons  of  A. 

30.  26  since  the  time  of  Solomon  the  son  of  Da. 

31.  14  Kore  the  son  of  Imnah  the  Levite,  the  p. 

31. 18  their  wives,  and  their  sons,  and  their  da. 

31. 19  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  the  priests,  (which 

32.  20  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz,  pray. 
32.  32  the  vision  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son 
32.  33  of  the  sepulchres  of  the  sons  of  David 

32.  33  And  Manasseh  his  sou  reigned  in  his  stead 

33.  6  through  the  fire  in  the  valley  of  the  son 
33.    7  had  said  to  David  and  to  Solomon  his  son 

33.  20  and  Araou  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
33. 25  people  of  the  laudmade  Josiah  his  sou  ki. 

34.  8  he  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah,  and 
34.  8  aud  Joah  the  son  of  Joahaz  the  recorder 
34.  12  Jahath  and  Obadiah.  .of  the  sons  of  Mer. 

34. 12  Zechariah  and  Meshullaiu,  of  the  sons  of 
34.  20  the  son  of  Shaphan,  and  Abdou  the  son  of 

34.  22  Shallum  the  son  of  Tikvath,  the  sou  of  H. 

35.  3  the  house  which  Solomon  the  son  of  David 
35.  4  according  to.  .writing  of  Solomon  his  sou 
35.  14  the  sons  of  Aaron  (were  busied)  in  offering 
35. 14  and  for  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron 

35.  15  the  singers  the  sons  of  Asaph  (were)  in  th. 

36.  1  took Jehoahazthe  son  of  Josiah,  and  made 
36.  8  and  Jehoiachin  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
36.  20  they  were  servants  to  him  and  his  sons 

Ezra  3.  2  Then  stood  up  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak 
3.  2  Zerubbabel  the  sou  of  Shealtiel,  and  his 
3.  8  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  Jeshua  the  son 
3.  9  Then  stood  Jeshua  (with)  his  sons  and  his 
3.  9  Kadmiel  and  his  sons,  the  sous  of  Judah 
3.  9  the  sons  of  Henadad,  (with)  their  sous  and 
3.  10  the  Levites,  the  sons  of  Asaph,  with  cym. 
7.  1  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son  of  Azariah,  the  son 
7.  2  son  of  Shallum,  the  son  of  Zadok,  the  son 
7.  3  son  of  Amariah.  .son  of  Azariah,  the  son 
7.  4  The  son  of  Zerahiah,  the  sou  of  Uzzi,  the  s. 
7.    5  The  son  of  Abishua,  the  son  of  Phinehas 

7.  5  the  son  of  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the 

8.  2  Of  the  sons  of  Phiuehas;  Gershom 

8.  2  of  the  sons  of  Ithamar,  Daniel:  of  the  sons 
8.  3  the  sons  of  Shechaniah;  of  the  sons  of  Ph. 
8.  4  Of  the  sons  of  Pahath-moab;  Elihoenai 
8.  4  the  son  of  Zerahiah,  and  with  him  two  h. 
8.  s  Of  the  sons  of  Shechaniah;  the  son  of  Jan. 
8.  6  Of  the  sons  also  of  Adin;  Ebed  the  son  of 
8.  7  of  the  sons  of  Elam;  Jeshaiah  the  son  of 
8.  8  the  sous  of  Shephatiah;  Zebadiah  the  son 
8.  9  Of  the  sons  of  Joab;  Obadiah  the  son  of  J. 
8.  10  of  the  sons  of  Shelomith;  the  son  of  Josi. 

8. 11  the  sons  of  Bebai;  Zechariah  the  son  of  B. 

8. 12  of  the  sons  of  Azgad;  Johanan  the  son  of 
8.  13  of  the  last  sons  of  Adonikam,  whose  nam. 
8.  14  Of  the  sons  also  of  Bigvai;  Uthai,  and  Za. 
S.  15  and  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of  Levi 
8.  18  of  thesonsof  Mahli,  the  son  of  Levi,  thes. 
8.  18  Sherebiah,  with  his  sons  and  his  brethren 
8. 19  and  with  him  Jeshaiah  of  the  sons  of 

8.  19  Merari,  hn  brethren,  and  their  sons 
8-  33  by  the  hand  of  Meremoth  the  son  of  Ur, 
8.  33  with  him  (was)  Eleazar  the  son  of  Phine. 

8.  33  the  sou  of  Jeshua,  and  Noadiah  the  sou 
g.    2  taken  of  their  daughters,  .for  their  sons 

9.  12  give  not  your  daughters  unto  their  sous 
9.  12  take  their  daughters  unto  your  sons,  nor 

10.   2  the  aon  of  Jehiel,  (oue)  of  the  sons  of  E. 
io.    6  the  chamber  of  Johanan  the  son  of  Elias. 
1  .  15  the  sou  of  Asahel  and  Jahaziah  the  sou  of 
10. 18  among  the  sons  of  the  priests  there  were 
10.  18  of  the  sons  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak 
10.  20  of  the  sons  of  Immer ;  Hanani  and  Zebe. 
10.  21  of  the  sons  of  Harim ;  Maaseiah,  and  E. 
10.22  of  the  sonsof  Pashnr;Elioenai,  Maaseiah 
10.  25  of  the  sons  of  Parosh ;  Ramiah,  and  Jez. 
10.  26  of  the  sons  of  Elam;  Mattauiah,  Zecbar. 
10.  27  of  the  sons  of  Zattu;  Elioenai,  Eliashib 
io.  28  Of  the  sons  also  of  Bebai;  Jehohanan,  II. 
10.  29  of  the  sons  of  Bani;  Meshullam,  Malluch 
10.  30  of  the  sons  of  Pahath-moab  ;  Adna,  and 
10.31  (of)  the  sous  of  Harim;  Eliezer,  Ishijah 
10.  33  Of  the  sonsof  ila-shum  ;  Mattenai,  Matt. 
10.  34  Of  the  sons  of  Bani ;  Maadai,  Amram.and 
10.  43  Of  the  sonsof  >*ebo  ;  Jeiel,  Mattithiah 


Neb.    1.    1  The  words  of  Nehemiah  the  son  of  Ilaeh. 
3.    2  next  to  them  builded  Zaecur  the  son  of 
3.    3  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons  of  Hassenaah 
3.    4,  21  Meremoth  the  son  of  Vrijah,  the  son 
3.    4  Meshullam  the  son  of  Bereehiah,  the  son 
3.    4  next  unto  them  repaired  Zadok  the  son  of 
3.    6  the  sonof  Paseah,  and  Meshullam  the  son 
3.    8  Next  unto  him  repaired  Uzziel  the  son  of 
3.    8  Hananiah  the  sou  of  (one  of)  the  apothe. 
3.    9  the  son  of  Hur,  the  ruler  of  the  half  part 
3.  10  next  unto  them  repaired  Jedaiah  the  son 
3.  10  next  unto  him  repaired  Hattushthe  son 
3.  11  the  son  of  Harim,  and  Uashub  the  sonof 
3.  12  Shallum  the  son  of  Halohesh.the  ruler  of 
3.  14  Malchiah  the  son  of  Rechab,  the  ruler  of 
3.  15  Shallum  the  son  of  Col-hozeh,  the  ruler 
3.  16  After  him  repaired  Nehemiah  the  son  of 
3.  1 7  after  him  repaired . .  Rehum  the  son  of  B. 
3.  18  Bavai  the  son  of  Henadad,  the  ruler  of 
3.  19  next  to  him  repaired  Ezer  the  son  of  Je. 
3.  20  Baruch  the  son  of  Zabbai  earnestly  repa. 
3.  23  Azariah  the  son  of  Maaseiah  the  sou  of 
3.  24  After  him  repaired  Binnui  the  son  of  H. 
3.  25  Palal  the  son  of  Uzai,  over  against  the  tu. 
3.  25  After  him  Pedaiah  the  son  of  Parosh 
3.  29  After  them  repaired  Zadok  the  son  of  I. 
3.  29  Shemaiah  the  son  of  Shecaniah,  the  keep. 
3.  30  sonof  Shelemiah.andHanunthe'sixthson 
3.  30  After  him  repaired  Meshullam  the  son  of 

3.  31  repaired  Malchiah  the  goldsmith's  son  un. 

4.  14  fightforyour brethren, yoursons,audyour 

5.  2  We,  our  sons,  and  our  daughters,  (are)  m. 

5.  5  we  bring  into  bondage  our  sons  and  om* 

6.  10  Shemaiah  the  son  of  Delaiah  the  son  of  M . 
6.  18  the  son  of  Arah ;  and  his  sou  Johanau 

6.  18  the  daughter  of  Meshullam  the  sou  of  B. 

8.  17  since  the  days  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  Nun 
10.    1  Nehemiah,  the  Tirshatha,  the  son  of  Ha. 
10.    9  the  son  of  Azaniah,  Binnui  of  the  sons  of 
io.  28  their  wives,  their  sons,  and  then'  (laugh. 
10.  30  nor  take  their  daughters  for  our  sons 

10.  36  the  first  born  of  our  sons,  and  of  our  cat. 
10. 38  the  son  of  Aaron  shall  be  with  the  Levit. 

1 1.  4  Athaiah  the  son  of  Uzziab,  the  sou  of  Ze. 
11.    4  the  son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of  Shephat. 
1 1.   4  the  son  of  Mabaleel,  of  the  children  of  P. 
11.    5  Maaseiah  the  son  of  Baruch,  the  son  of  C. 
1 1.    5  the  son  of  Hazaiah,  the  son  of  Adaiah 
11.    5  the  sou  of  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Shiloni 
11.   6  the  sons  of  Perez  that  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 
1 1.    7  the  sons  of  Benjamin ;  Sallu  the  son  of  M. 
11.    7  son  of  Joed,  the  son  of  Pedaiah,  the  son 
11.    7  son  of  Maaseiah.  .sonof  Ithiel,  the  sonof 
11.    9  And  Joel  the  son  of  Zichri  (was)  their  ov. 
11.   9  the  son  of  Senuah  (was)  second  over  the 

1 1. 10  Of  the  priests :  Jedaiah  the  son  of  Joiari 
11.  11  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  the  son  of  Meshullam 
1 1 .  1 1  son  of  Zadok,  the  son  of  Meraioth,  the  son 

11. 12  Adaiah  the  son  of  Jeroham,  the  son  of  P. 
11.  12  the  son  of  Amzi,  the  son  of  Zechariah 
11.  12  the  son  of  Pashur,  the  son  of  Malchiah 
11.  13  Amashai  the  son  of  Azareel,  the  son  of  A. 
1 1.  13  the  son  of  Meshillemoth,  the  son  of  Imin. 

11. 14  Zabdiel,  the  son  of  (one  of)  the  great  men 
11.  15  Shemaiah  the  son  of  Hashub,  the  sonof  A. 

11. 15  the  son  of  Hashabiah,  the  son  of  Buuni 
11. 17  son  of  Micha,  the  sonof  Zabdi,  the  sonof 
11.  17  sonof  Shammua,  the  sou  of  Galal,  the  son 
11. 22  Uzzi  the  son  of  Bani,  the  son  of  Hashab. 
11.  22  the  son  of  Mattauiah,  the  sou  of  Micha 
11.  22  Of  the  sons  of  Asaph,  the  singers  (were) 
11.  24  And  Pethahiahthe  son  ofMeshezabeel,of 

1 1.  24  of  the  children  of  Zerah  the  son  of  Judah 

12.  1  that  went  up  with  Zerubbabel  the  son  of 
12.  23  The  sons  of  Levi,  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
12.  23  the  days  of  Johanan  the  son  of  Eliashib 
12.  24  Sherebiah,  and  Jeshua  the  son  of  Kadm. 
12.  26  Joiakim  the  son  of  Jeshua,  the  son  of  Jo. 
12.  28  the  sons  of  the  singers  gathered  themsel. 
12. 35  (certain)  of  the  priests'  sons  with  trump. 
12.  35  Zechariah  the  son  of  Jonathan,  the  son  of 
12. 3s  the  son  of  Mattauiah,  the  son  of  Michai. 
12. 35  the  sou  of  Zaecur,  the  son  of  Asaph 

12.  45  commandment  of  David,  (and)  of.  .his  s. 

13. 13  Hanan  the  son  of  Zaecur,  the  son  of  Mat. 

13.  25  not  give  your  daughters  unto  their  sons 
13.  25  nor  take  their  daughters  unto  your  sons 
13.  28  (one)  of  the  sons  of  Joiada,  the  son  of  E. 

Esth.  2.    5  son  of  Jair,  the  son  of  Shimei,  the  son  of 
1,  10  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the 
5  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the  Ag. 
10  The  ten  sons  of  Haman  the  sou  of  Ham. 

12  The  Jews  have  slain .  .the  ten  sons  of  Ha. 

13  let  Hainan's  ten  sons  be  hanged  upon  the 

14  and  they  hanged  Haman's  ten  sons 

24  Haman  the  son  of  Hammedatha  the  Aga. 

25  he  and  his  sons  should  be  hanged  on  the 
,  2  there  were  born  unto  him  seven  sons  and 
.  4  his  sons  went  and  feasted  (in  their)  houses 
.  5  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 
.  6  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present  themse. 
.  13  there  was  a  day  when  his  sons  and  his  da. 
.  18  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  (were)  eating 
.  1  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present  themsel. 
.  21  His  sons  come  tohonour,  aud  he  knoweth 
.  6  How  much  less,  .the  son  of  man,  (which 
.  2  the  wrath  of  Elihn  the  son  of  Barachcl  the 
.  6  And  Elihu  the  son  of  Barachel  the  Buzite 
.  8  thy  righteousness  (may  profit)  the  sou  of 
.  7  and  all  the  sons  of  Cod  shouted  for  joy 
.  32  canst  thou  guide  Arcturus  with  his  sor.s? 
.  13  He  had  also  seven  sons  and  three  (taught. 


SON 


913 


SON 


Job   42. 

Psa.  2. 
3- 
4- 
8. 

3>- 

33- 
42- 
44- 
45- 
46. 
47- 
48. 
49. 
SO- 
57- 
58. 
72- 
7=- 
77- 
80. 
84. 
85. 
S6. 
87. 


89. 

IO6. 

io5. 
116. 
144- 
144. 
I45- 
U6. 


16  saw  his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons,  (even;  f. 
7  Thou  (art)  my  Son :  this  day  have  I  bego. 

title,  when  he  fled  from  Absalom  his  son 
2  O  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long,  .my  glory 
4  and  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him 

19  that  trust  in  thee  before  the  sons  of  men 


The  Lord  . .  beholdeth  all  the  sons  of  men 


Prov. 


Eccl. 


s  >ng 
Isa. 


35 


title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  .for  the  sons  of 
title.  To  the  chief  Musician  forthe  sons  ofK. 
title.  To  the  chief  Musician .  .for  the  sons  of 
title.  To  the  chief  Musiciau  for  the  sons  of 
title.  A  psalm  for  the  sons  of  Korah 
title.  A  song(and)  psalm  forthe  sons  of  Korah 
title.  A  psalm  for  the  sons  of  Korah 
20  thou  slanderest  thine  own  mother's  son 
4  the  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  (are)  spears 
1  do  ye  judge  uprightly,  O  ye  sons  of  men  ? 
1  and  thy  righteousness  unto  the  king's  son 

20  The  prayers  of  David  the  son  of  Jesse  are 

15  thy  people,  the  sons  of  Jacob  and  Joseph 

17  the  sou  of  man  (whom)  thou  madest  strong 
title.  A  psalm  for  the  sons  of  Korah 

title.  A  psalm  for  the  sons  of  Korah 

16  give  thy  strength . .  and  save  the  son  of  th. 
title.  A  psalm  (or)  song  for  the  sons  of  Korah 
title.  A  psalm  (or)  song  for  the  sons  of  Korah 

6  (who)  among  the  sons  of  the  mighty  can  be 
22  nor  the  son  of  wickedness  afflict  him 

37  they  sacrificed  their  sons  and  their  dang, 

38  the  blood  of  their  sons  and  of  their  daug. 

16  I  (am)  thy  servant,  (and)  the  son  of  thiue 
3  (or)  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  makest  ac. 

12  That  our  sons  (may  be)  as  plants  grown  up 
12  To  make  known  to  the  sons  of  men  his  mi, 
3  Put  not  your  trust,  .in  the  son  of  man,  in 
1  The  proverbs  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David 
8  My  son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father 

10  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  th. 
15  My  son,  walk  not  thou  in  the  way  with  th. 

1  My  son,  if  thou  wilt  receive  my  words,  and 
1  My  son,  forget  not  my  law;  but  let  thine 

11  My  son,  despise  not  the  chastening  of  the 

12  as  a  father  the  son(iu  whom)he  delighteth 

21  My  son,  let  not  them  depart  from  thine 
3  I  was  my  father's  son,  tender  and  only 

10  Hear.  O  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings 
20  My  son,  attend  to  my  words  ;  incline  thi. 

1  My  son,  attend  unto  my  wisdom,  (and)  bow 
20  why  wilt  thou,  my  sou,  be  ravished  with  a 
1  My  sou,  if  thou  be  surety  for  thy  friend 

3  Do  this  now,  my  sou,  and  deliver  thyself 
20  My  son,  keep  thy  father's  commandment 

1  My  sou,  keep  my  words,  and  lay  up  my 

4  I  call ;  and  my  voice  (is)  to  the  sons  of 
31  and  my  delights  (were)  with  the  sons  of 

1  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father :  but 
1  a  foolish  son  (is)  the  heaviness  of  hismother 

5  He  that  gatheretli  in  summer . .  a  wise  son 
5  he  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  is  a  son  that 

1  A  wise  son  (heareth)  his  father's  instruct. 

24  He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth  his  son 

20  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father:  but  a  fool. 

2  wise  servant  shall  have  rule  over  a  son  that 

25  foolish  son  (is)  a  grief  to  his  father,  and 

13  foolish  son  (is)  the  calamity  of  his  father 

18  Chasten  thy  son  while  there  is  hope,  and 

26  He  that  wasteth  (his)  father . .  (is)  a  son  th. 

27  Cease,  my  son,  to  hear  the  instruction  (th.) 
15  My  son,  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  my  heart 

19  Hearthou,myson,and  be  wise,  and  guide 
26  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart,  and  let  thine 
13  My  son,  eat  thou  honey,  because  (it  is)  go. 

21  My  son,  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  king 

11  My  son,  be  wise,  aud  make  my  heart  glad 

7  Whoso  keepeth  the  law  (is)  a  wise  son:  but 

17  Correct  thy  son,  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest 
1  words  of  Agar  the  son  of  Jakeh,  (even)  the 
4  what  (is)  his  son's  name,  if  thou  canst  tell? 
1  words  of  the  Preacher,  the  son  of  David 

13  sore  travail  hath  God  given  to  the  sons  of 

3  see  what  (was)  that  good  for  the  sons  of 

8  I  gat  me.  .the  delights  of  the  sons  of  men 

10  travail  which  God  hath  given  to  the  sons 
iS  concerning  the  estate  of  the  sons  of  men 

19  For  that  which  befalleth  the  sons  of  men 

14  begetteth  a  son,  and  (there  is)  nothing  in 

11  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  inth. 
3  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  full  of  evil,  and 

12  so  (are)  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil 
17  when  thy  king  (is)  the  son  of  nobles,  and 
12  further,  by  these,  my  son,  be  admonished 

3  so  (is)  my  beloved  among  the  sons.  I  sat 
1  vision  of  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz,  which  he 
1  word  that  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  saw  co. 
1  days  of  Ahaz  the  son  of  Jotham,  the  son 

1  Pekah  the  son  of  Remaliah,  king  of  Israel 

3  Go  forth  now . .  thou,  and . .  thy  son,  at  the 

4  Rezin  with  Syria,  and  of  the  son  of  Rem. 

5  Because  Syria,  Ephraim,  and  the  son  of 

6  set  a  king  in  the  midst  of  it,  (even)  the  son 

9  the  head  of  Samaria  (is)  Remaliah'sson.  If 
14  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,  and 

2  Uriah  the  priest,  and  Zechariah  the  son 

3  conceived,  and  bare  a  son.  Then  said  the 
6  and  rejoice  in  Rezin  and  Remaliah's  son 
6  For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son 

- 1  burden  of  Babylon,  which  Isaiah  the  son 
12  0  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning!  (how)  art 
11 1  (am)  the  son  of  the  wise,  the  son  of  an. 

2  6pake  the  Lord  by  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz 

20  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  the  son  of  H. 

3  came  forth  unto  him  Eliakim,  Hilkiah'sa. 

115 


Isa.  36.   3  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joah,  Asaph's  son 

36.  22  son  of  Hilkiah.  .and  Joah  the  son  of  Asa. 

37.  2  unto  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz 
37.  21  Then  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amozsent  unto 5. 
37. 38  his  sons  smote  him  with  the  sword  ;  and 

37.  38  and  Esar-haddon  his  sou  reigned  in  his 

38.  1  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz,  came 

39.  1  the  son  of  Baladan,  king  of  Babylon,  sent 
39.   7  And  of  thy  sons  that  shall  issue  from  th. 
43.    6  Keep  not  back :  bring  my  sons  from  far 
45.  11  things  to  come  concerning  my  sons,  and 
49.  15  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of 
49.  22  they  shall  bring  thy  sous  in  (their)  arms 
51.  12  of  the  son  of  man  (which)  shall  be  made 
51.  18  none  to  guide  her  among  all  the  sons  (w.) 
51. 18  takethherby  the  handof  allthesons  (th.) 
51.  20  sons  have  fainted,  they  lie  at  the  head  of 
52. 14  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men 
56.   2  son  of  man  (that)  Iayeth  hold  on  it;  that 
56.    3  Neither  let  the  son  of  the  stranger,  that 
56.    5  name  better  than  of  sons  and  of  daughters 

56.  6  Also  the  sons  of  the  stranger,  that  join 

57.  3  draw  near  hither,  ye  sons  of  the  sorceress 
60.    4  sons  shall  come  from  far,  and  thy  daugh. 
60.   9  bring  thy  sons  from  far,  their  silver  and 
60. 10  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  up  thy  walls 

60.  14  sons  also  of  them  that  afflicted  thee  shall 

61.  5  sons  of  the  alien  (shall  be)  your  plowmen 

62.  5  (so)  shall  thy  sons  marry  thee ;  and  (as) 
62.    8  sons  of  the  stranger  shall  not  drink  thy 

Jer.  1.  1  words  of  Jeremiah  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  of 
1.  2  in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Anion  king 
1.  3  days  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king 
1.  3  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah,  unto  the  car. 
24  their  flocks  and  their  herds,  their  sons 

17  sons  and  thy  daughters  should  eat ;  they 

21  fathers  and  the  sons  together  shall  fall 
31  which  (is)  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hin. 

31  to  burn  their  sons  and  their  daughters 

32  no  more  be  called. .  The  valley  of  the  son 

22  their  sons  and  their  daughters  shall  die 
14  even  the  fathers  and  the  sons  together 
16  wives,  nor  their  sons,  nor  their  daughters 

4  because  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah 

2  neither  shalt  thou  have  sons  or  daughters 

3  thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  sons 

2  go  forth  unto  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

5  burn  their  sons  with  fire  (for)  burnt  offer. 

6  no  more  be  called . .  The  valley  of  the  son 
9  cause  them  to  eat  the  flesh  of  their  sons 
1  Now  Pashur  the  son  of  Immer  the  priest 
1  son  of  Melchiah,  and  Zephaniah  the  son 

11  Shallum  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Judah 

18  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Jud. 
24  Coniah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Jud. 

1  Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Ju. 
1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Jud. 

3  Josiah  the  son  of  Anion  kingof  Judah,  ev. 
1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Jud. 

20  t'rijah  the  son  of  Shemaiah  of  Kirjath-j. 
22  Elnathan  the  son  of  Achbor,  and  (certain) 

24  the  hand  of  Ahikam  the  son  of  Shaphan 
1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Jud. 

7  serve  him,  and  his  son,  and  his  son's  son 
20  Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 

1  Hananiah  the  son  of  Azur  the  prophet 

4  Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  J. 
3  the  son  of  Shaphan,  andGemariah  the  son 
6  Take  ye  wives,  and  beget  Bons  and  daug. 

6  take  wives  for  your  sons . .  they . .  bear  sons 
.  21  son  of  Kolaiah,  and  of  Zedekiah  the  son 

25  to  Zephaniah  the  son  of  Maaseiah  the  pr. 

20  (Is)  Ephraim  my  dear  son?  (ib  he)  a  plea. 

7  Hanameel  the  son  of  Shallum  thine  uncle 

8  mine  uncle's  son,  came  tome  in  the  court 

9  the  field  of  Hanameel,  my  uncle's  son,  th. 

12  Baruch  the  sou  of  Neriah,  the  son  of  Ma. 
16  the  purchase  unto  Baruch  the  son  of  Ne. 

19  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons  of  men 
35  which  (are)in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hin. 
35  to  cause  their  sons  and  their  daughters  to 

21  he  should  not  have  a  son  to  reign  upon  his 
1  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  Jud. 
3  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  Jeremiah,  the  son  of 

3  his  brethren,  and  all  his  sons,  and  the  wh. 

4  of  the  sons  of  Hanan,  the  son  of  Igdaliah 

4  the  chamber  of  Maaseiah  the  son  of  Sha. 

5  I  set  before  the  sons  of  the  house  of  the  R. 
6,  8  Jonadab  the  son  of  Rechab  our  father 

6  drink  no  wine,  (neither)  ye,  nor  your  sons 
8  we,  our  wives,  our  sons,  nor  our  daught. 

14  the  son  of  Rechab,  that  he  commanded 
16  the  sons  of  Jonadab  the  son  of  Rechab  ha. 
19  the  son  of  Rechab  shall  not  want  a  man 
1,  9  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  of  J. 
4  Jeremiah  called  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah 
8  Baruch  the  sou  of  Neriah  did  according 
10  the  chamber  of  Gemariah  the  son  of  Sh. 
n  the  son  of  Gemariah,  the  son  of  Shaphan 
12  son  of  Shemaiah,  and  Elnathan  the  son 
12  son  of  Achbor,  and  Gemariah  the  son  of 

12  and  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Hananiah 
14  the  princes  sent  Jehudi  the  son  of  Neth. 
14  the  son  of  Shelemiah,  the  son  of  Cushi 
14  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah  took  the  roll 

26  commanded  Jerahmeel  the  son  of  flamm, 
26  the  son  of  Azriel,  and  Shelemiah  the  son 
32  gave  it  to  Baruch  the  scribe,  the  son  of  N. 

1  And  king  Zedekiah  the  son  of  Josiah  rei. 
1  instead  of  Coniah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim 
3  son  of  Shelemiah,  and  Zephaniah  the  son 

13  the  son  of  Shelemiah.  the  son  of  Hananiah 


Jer.   38 
38. 

38. 

39- 
39- 
40. 

40, 
40, 
40. 
40, 
40 
40, 
40. 


40. 
41. 
41. 
41. 

41. 
41. 
42. 
42. 

43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
45- 
45- 
46. 
48. 

49- 

49. 

49> 
50. 

5;; 
51. 

52 
Lam,  4, 
Eze.    1. 


1  son  of  Mattan,  and  Gedaliah  the  son  of 
1  son  of  Shelemiah,  and  Pashur  the  son  of 
6  the  dungeon  of  Malchiah  the  son  of  Ham. 
6  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Zed. 
14  Gedaliahthesonof  Ahikam,  the  son  of  Sh. 
5,  9  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the  son  of  Shaphan 

6  went  Jeremiah  unto  Gedaliah  the  son  of 

7  had  made  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam  go. 

8  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah,  and  Joha. 
8  thesons  of  Kareah,  and  Seraiah  the  son  of 
8  and  the  sons  of  Ephai  the  Netophathite 

8  and  Jezaniah  the  son  of  a  Maachathite 

11  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam  the  son  of  Sh. 

13  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  captains  of 

14  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam  believed  them 

15  the  son  of  Kareah  spake  to  Gedaliah  in 

15  I  will  slay  Ishmael  the  Bon  of  Nethaniah 

16  son  of  Ahikam  said  unto  Johanan  the  son 
1  the  son  of  Nethaniah  the  son  of  Elishama 

2,  6,  10,  16,  18  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam 
2,  6,  7,  10,  11,  12,  15,  16,  iS  Ishmael  the  son 

9  the  son  of  Nethaniah  filled  it  with  (them 
11,  13,  14,  16  Johanan  the  son  of  Kareah 

1  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  Jezaniah  the  son 

8  Then  called  he  Johanan  the  son  of  Kareah 

2  Then  spake  Azariah  the  son  of  Hoshaiah 
2,  4,  5  the  son  of  Kareah,  and  all  the  capt. 

3  the  son  of  Neriah  fetteth  thee  on  against 
6  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the  eon  of  Shaphan,  and 
6  the  prophet,  and  Bavutli  the  son  of  Neriah 
1  prophet  spake  unto  Baruch  the  son  of  N. 

1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son 

2  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son 
46  for  thy  sons  are  taken  captives,  and  thy 

1  Hath  Israel  no  sons?  hath  he  no  heir? 

18  neither  shall  a  Eon  of  man  dwell  in  it 
33  no  man  abide  there,  nor  (any)  son  of  man 
40  neither  shall  any  son  of  man  dwelltherein 
43  neither  doth  (any)  son  of  man  pass  the. 
59  Seraiah  the  son  of  Neriah,  the  son  of  M. 

10  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah 

2  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine 

3  Ezekiel  the  priest,  the  son  of  Buzi,  in  the 

1  Son  of  man,  stand  upon  thy  feet,  and  I 

3  Son  of  man,  I  send  thee  to  the  children  of 
.   fi  thou,  son  of  man,  be  not  afraid  of  them 
.    8  Butthou,  son  of  man,  hear  what  I  say  un. 
.    1  Son  of  man,  eat  that  thou  findest;  eat  this 
.   3  Son  of  man,  cause  thy  belly  to  eat,  and 
.    4  Son  of  man,  go,  get  thee  unto  the  house 
.  10  Son  of  man,  all  my  words  that  I  shall  sp. 
.  17  Son  of  man,  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman 
.  25  But  thou,  0  son  of  man,  behold,  they  sh. 
.    1  Thou  also,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  tile 
.  16  Son  of  man,  behold,  I  will  break  the  staff 
.    1  thou,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  knife 
.  10  Therefore  the  fathers  shall  eat  the  sons 
,  10  sous  shall  eat  their  fathers;  and  I  will 
.    2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  mo. 
.   2  son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  GODunto 
.    5  Son  of  man,  lift  up  thine  eyes  now  the  way 
.   6  Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  theydo?(ev.) 
;.    8  Son  of  man,  dig  now  in  the  wall :  and  when 
.  11  stood  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  Shaphan,  with 
.  12  Son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  what  the  an. 
!.  15,  17  said.  .Hast  thou  seen  (this),  O  son  of 
.    1  among  whom  I  saw  Jaazaniah  the  son  of 
.   1  Pelatiah  the  son  of  Benaiah,  princes  of 
.    2  Son  of  man,  these  (are)  the  men  that  dev. 
■    4  prophesy  against  them,  prophes}r,  O  son 
.  13  that  Pelatiah  the  son  of  Benaiah  died 
.  15  Son  of  man,  thy  brethren,  (even)  thy  bre. 
.    2  Son  of  man,  thou  dwellest  in  the  midstof 
.    3  son  of  man,  prepare  thee  stuff  forremov. 
.    9  Son  of  man,  hath  not  the  house  of  Israel 
.  18  Son  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking 
.  22  Son  of  man,  what  (is)  that  proverb  (that) 
.  27  Son  of  man,  behold,  (they  of)  the  house 

2  Son  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  proph. 

17  son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the  dau. 

3  Son  of  man,  these  men  have  set  up  their 

13  Son  of  man,  when  the  land  sinneth  agai. 
16,  18  they  shall  deliver  neither  sons  nor  da. 
20  they  shall  deliver  neither  son  nor  daugh. 
23  that  shall  be  brought  forth,  (both)  sons 

2  Son  of  man,  What  is  the  vine  tree  more 
2  Son  of  man,  cause  Jerusalem  to  know  her 
20  thou  hast  taken  thy  sons  and  thy  daugh. 

2  Son  of  man,  put  forth  a  riddle,  and  speak 

4  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine :  the  soul 
10  If  he  beget  a  son  (that  is)  a  robber,  a  sh. 

14  (if)  he  beget  a  son,  that  seeth  all  his  fat. 

19  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 

19  thesonhath  done  that  which  is  lawful  and 

20  The  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
20  the  father  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  son 

3  Son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  elders  of  Isr 

4  Wilt  thou  judge  them,  son  of  man?  wilt 

27  son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  house  of  Isr. 
31  when  ye  make  your  sons  to  pass  through 
46  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south 

2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusal. 
6  Sigh  therefore,  thou  son  of  man,  with  the 

9  Son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  Thus  saith 
10  it  contemneth  the  rod  of  my  son,  (as)  ev. 

12  Cry  and  howl,  son  of  man  ;  for  it  shall  be 
14  son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  smite  (thine) 
19  son  of  man,  appoint  thee  two  ways,  that 

28  son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  Thus  saith 
2  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge,  wilt  thou  ju. 

18  Son  of  man,  the  house  of  Israel  is  to  me 
24.  Son  of  man,  say  unto  her,  Thou  (art)  the 


SON 


914 


SON 


Eze.  23.  2  Son  of  man,  there  were  two  women,  the 
23.  4  they  were  mine,  and  they  bare  sons  and 
23.  10  they  took  her  sons  and  her  daughters,  and 
23.  25  they  shall  take  thy  sons  and  thy  daught. 
23.  36  Son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  Aholah  and 
23.  37  have  also  caused  their  sons,  whom  they 

23.  47  they  shall  slay  their  sons  and  their  daug. 

24.  2  Son  of  man,  Write  thee  the  name  of  the 
24.  16  Son  of  man,  behold,  I  take  away  fromth. 
24.  21  your  sons  and  your  daughters  whom  ye 
24.  25  son  of  man,  (shall  it)  not  (be),  in  the  day 

24.  25  whereupon theysettheirminds,  theirsons 

25.  2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the  Am. 

26.  2  Son  of  man,  because  that  Tyrus  hath  said 

27.  2  son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  T. 

28.  2  Son  of  man,  say  unto  the  prince  of  Tyrus 

28.  12  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  upon 
2S.  21  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Zidon.and 

29.  2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Pharaoh 

29. 1 5  Son  of  man,  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Bab. 

30.  2  Son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say,  Thus  saith 

30.  21  Son  of  man,  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  P. 

31.  2  Son  of  man,  speak  unto  Pharoah  king  of 

32.  2  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  P. 
32. 18  Son  of  man, wail  for  the  multitude  of  Eg. 

33.  2  Son  of  man,  speak  to  the  children  of  thy 
33.    7  son  of  man,  I  have  set  thee  a  watchman 

33. 10  son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  house  of  Isr. 
33.  12  son  of  man,  say  unto  the  children  of  thy 
33. 24  Son  of  man,  they  that  inhabit  those  was. 

33.  30  son  of  man,  the  children  of  thy  people  st. 

34.  2  Son  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  sheph. 

35.  2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  againt  mount  S. 

36.  1  sou  of  man,  prophesy  untothe  mountains 

36.  17  Son  of  man,  when  the  house  of  Israel  dw. 

37.  3  he  said  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  can  these 
37.   9  prophesy,  son  of  man,  and  say  to  the  wind 
37.  11  Son  of  man,  these  bones  are  the  whole  ho. 

37.  16  son  of  man,  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write 

38.  2  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Gog,  the 

38.  14  son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say  unto  Gog 

39.  1  son  of  man,  prophesy  against  Gog,  and 

39.  17  thou  son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

40.  4  Son  of  man,  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and 
40.  46  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Zidok  among  the 
43.  7  Son  of  man,  the  place  of  my  throne,  and 
43.  10  son  of  man,  show  the  house  to  the  house 

43.  18  he  said  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  thus  saith 

44.  5  Son  of  man,  mark  well,  and  behold  with 
44.  15  the  son3  of  Zadok,  that  kept  the  charge 
44.  25  for  father,  or  for  mother,  or  for  son,  or  for 

46. 16  the  prince  give  a  gift  unto  any  of  his  sons 
46.  16  the  inheritance  thereof  shall  be  his  son's 
46.  17  his  inheritance  shall  be  his  sons'  for  them 

46.  iS  he  shall  give  his  sons  inheritance  out  of  his 

47.  6  he  said  unto  me,  Sou  of  man,  hast  thou  se. 

48. 11  the  priests  that  are  sanctified  of  the  sons 
Ban.   8.  17  he  saiduntome,  Understand,  0  son  of  man 

9.  1  In  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  >on  of  Alias. 
10. 16  (one)  like  the  similitude  of  the  sons  of  men 
11.  10  his  sens  shall  be  stirred  up,  and  shall  as. 
Hos.  1.  1  that  came  unto  Hosea  the  son  of  Beeri 
1.  1  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash 
1.  3  which  conceived,  and  bare  him  a  sou 
1.    8  had  weaned  Lo-ruhamah,  she .  .bare  a  son 

1.  10  shall  be  said  unto  them,  (Ye  are)  the  sons 
11.  1  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out  of  Eg. 
13.  13  he  (is)  au  unwise  son;  for  he  should  not 

Joel    1.    1  that  came  to  Joel  the  son  of  Pethuel 

1. 12  joy  is  withered  away  from  the  sons  of  men 

2.  28  your  son?  and  your  daughters  shall  prop. 

3.  8  I  will  sell  your  sons  and  your  daughters 
Amos  1.    1  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash 

2. 11 1  raised  up  of  your  sons  forprophets,  and 

7.  14  no  prophet,  neither  (was)  I  a  prophet's  son 

7.  17  thysonsand  thydaughtersshallfallbythe 

Jon.    1.    1  came  unto  Jonah  the  son  of  Amittai 

Mic.    5.    7  tarrieth  not .  .nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of 

6.  5  what  Baalam  the  son  of  Beor  answered  him 

7.  6  the  son  dishonoureth  the  father,  the  dau. 
Zeph.  1.    1  Zeplianiah  the  son  of  Cushi,  the  son  of 

1.  1  Gedaliah,  the  son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of 
1.    1  in  the  days  oE  Josiahthesonof  Anion,  ki. 

1.  1, 12,  14  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech 
Hag.    1.    1,  12,  14  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel 

2.  2  Speak  now  to  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  She. 
2.  3  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  pri. 
2.   4  be  strong,  O  Joshua,  son  of  Josedech,  the 

2.  23  0  Zerubbabel,  my  servant,  the  son  of  Sh. 
Zech.  1.    1,  7  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Barachiah,  the  son 

6. 10  go  into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Z. 

6. 11  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  pri. 
6. 14  to  Jedaiah,  and  to  Hen  the  son  of  Zepha. 
9.  13  raised  up  thy  sons,  0  Zion,  against  thy  sons 

Mai.    1.   6  A  son  honuureth  (his)  father,  and  a  serva. 

3.  3  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  aud  pur. 
3.  6  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consu. 
3. 17  as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth 

2.A  son,  offspring,  [3  Jirn. 

Ezra   6.  10  for  the  lifo  of  the  king,  and  of  his  sons 

7.  23  against  the  realm  of  the  king  and  his  sons 
Dan.   5.  21  he  was  driven  from  the  sons  of  men ;  and 

3. A  son,  offspring,  "13  h<ir. 

Psa.    2. 12  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  lie  be  angry,  and  ye  pe. 

Prov.31.    2  What,  my  sou?  and  what,  the  son  of  my 
31.    2  and  what,  the  son  of  my  sorrows? 
4,  A  son,  offspring,  13  bar. 

Ezra    5.    1  Zechariah  the  son  of  Iddn,  prophesied  unto 

5.  "2  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  .Teshua  the  son 

6.  14  the  prophet  and  Zechariah  the  son  of  Id. 


Dan.  3.  25  the  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of 
5.  22  thou  his  son,  O  Belshazzar,  hast  not  hxun. 
7.  13  (one)  like  the  Son  of  man  come  with  the 

o.CJiild,  lad,  produce,  "hi  yeled. 

Gen.  32.  22  two  women  servants,  and  his  eleven  sons 
Kuth  1.  5  was  left  of  her  two  sons  and  her  husband 
2  Ki.  4.    1  is  come  to  take  unto  him  my  two  sons  to 

6.  Child,  lad,  produce,  vhl  yelid. 

2  Sa.  21.  16,  18  which  (was)  of  the  sons  of  the  giant 
7  .Continuator ,  Ji3p  manmi. 

Prov  29.  21  shall  have  him  become  (his)  son  at  the  le. 
S.C'ontinicator,  posterity,  ]"i  nin. 

Gen.  21 .  23  not  deal  falsely  with  me,  nor  with  my  son 

Job    iS.  19  He  shall  neither  have  son  nor  nephew  am. 

Isa.    14.  22  the  name,  and  remnant,  and  son,  and  ne. 

9.  Child,  boy,  servant,  ira?s  pais. 

John  4.  51  met  him,  aud  told  (him),  saying,  Thy  son 
Acts    3.  13  God  of  Abraham,  .hath  glorified  his  Son 

3.  26  having  raised  up  his  Son  Jesus,  sent  him 

10.  Child,  descendant,  tzkvov  teltion. 

Matt.  9.  2  said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Son,  be  of 
21.  28  man  had  two  sons  ;  and  he.  .said,  Son,  go 

Mark  2.  5  said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Son,  thy 
13.  12  betray  the  brother,  .andthefathertheson 

Luke  2.  48  mother  said  unto  him,  Son,  why  hast  thou 

15.  31  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I 

16.  25  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime 
John  1.  12  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God 
1  Co.  4.  14  not.  .to  shame  you,  but,  as  my  beloved  s. 

4.  17  Timotheus,  who  is  my  beloved  son,  and  fa. 
Phil.   2.  15  blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons  of  God 

2.  22  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath  served 

1  Ti.    1.    2  Unto  Timothy,  (my)  own  son  in  the  faith 

1. 18  I  commit  unto  thee,  son  Timothy,  accord. 

2  Ti.    1.    2  To  Timothy,  (my)  dearly  beloved  son ;  G. 

2.  1  Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  the 
Titus  1.  4  ToTitus,  (mine)  own  son  after  the  common 
Phil.  10  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus,  whom 
1  Jo.   3.    1  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God 

3.  2  Behold,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God ;  and 

11. Son,  descendant,  offspring,  vl6s  huios. 

Matt.  1.  1  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David,  the  son  of 
1.  20  Joseph,  thou  son  of  David,  fear.uot  to  take 
1.  21  she  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and  thou  shalt 
1.  23  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and  they  shall  call 
1.  25  she  had  brought  forth  her  first  born  son 
2  15  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  my  son 

3.  17  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  w. 

4.  3  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that 
4.    6  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  do. 

7.  9  what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom  if  his  son 

8.  20  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  (his)  he. 

8.  29  "What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  .thou  Son 

9.  6  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  fo. 
9.  27  saying,  (Thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy 

10.  23  Ye  shall  not  have  gone .  .till  the  Sou  of 

10.  37  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than 
11. 19  The  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  drinking 

11.  27  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father 

11.  27  save  the  Son,  and  (he)  to  whomsoever  the  S. 

12.  8  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  even  of  the  sab. 
12.  23  and  said,  Is  not  this  the  son  of  David? 
12.  32  whosoever  speakethaword  against  the  Son 

12.  40  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and 

13. 37  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the  Son 

13.  41  The  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels 

13.  55  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son  ?  is  not  his 

14.  33  saying,  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God 

15.  22  Have  mercy  on  me,  O  Lord,  (thou)  son  of 
16. 13  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  son  of  man 

16.  16  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Sou  of  the  living 
16.  27  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of 

16.  28  till  they  see  the  Sou  of  man  coming  in  his 

17.  5  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  amw. 
17.  9  until  the  Son  of  man  be  risen  again  from 
17.  12  Likewise  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  suffer 
17.  15  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son:  for  he  islu. 
17.  22  The  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  into  the 
18. 11  [the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that  uli.j 

19.  28  when  the  Son  of  mau  shall  sit  in  the  tlir. 

20.  18  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  unto  the 
20.  20  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  with  her  s. 
20.  21  Grant  that  these  my  twosous  may  sit,  the 
20.  28  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered 
20.  30  Have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord,  (thou)  son  of 

20.  31  Have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord,  (thou)  sou  of 
2i.  9  cried,  saying,  Hosanna  to  thes.  of  David! 
21. 15  and  saying,  Hosanna  to  the  son  of  David 

21.  37  son,  saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son 

21. 38  when  the  husbandmen  saw  the  son,  they 

22.  2  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for  his  son 

22.  42  whose  son  is  he?  They  say.  .(The  son)  of 
22. 45  If  David,  .call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his  son? 

23.  35  unto  the  blood  of  Zacharias  son  of  Bara. 

24.  27  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man 
24.  30  then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of 
24.  30  they  shall  Bee  the  Son  of  man  coining  in 
24.  37,  39  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of 
24.  44  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son 
25-  13  [the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of] 
25. 31  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his 
26.   2  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified 
26.  24  The  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  is  written  of 
26.  24  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of 
26.  37  he  took  with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons 
26.  45  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 
26.  63  whether  thou  be  the  Christ,  the  son  of  G. 


Matt  26, 

27. 

27. 

27. 

28. 
Murk  1. 


Luke 


John 


64  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  si. 

40  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  downfr. 

43  will  have  him:  for  he  said,  I  am  the  Son 
54  saying,  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God 

19  baptizing  them  in  the  name. .of  the  Son,  and 

1  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  G. 
ir  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 

10  But  that  yemay  know  that  the  Son  of  man 
28  Therefore  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of 

11  cried,  saying,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God 

17  Boanerges,  which  is,  The  sons  of  thunder 
28  All  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto  the  sons  of 

7  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  the  most  high  God? 

3  Is  not  this  the  carpenter,jthe  son  of  Mary 
31  that  the  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  thin. 

38  of  him  also  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ash. 
7  saying,  This  is  my  beloved  Son:  hear  him 
9  till  the  Son  of  man  were  risen  from  the  de. 

12  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  that 
1 7  have  brought  unto  thee  my  son,  which  hath 

31  Son  of  man  is  delivered  into  the  hands  of 

33  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  ch. 
35  James  and  John,  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  co. 

45  For  even  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be 

46  blind  Bartimeus,  the  son  of  Timeus,  sat 

47  Jesus,  (thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on 

48  (Thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me 

6  Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  liis  well  be. 

6  sent,  .saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son 
35  How  say  the  scribes  that  Christ  is  the  son 

37  whence  is  he  (then)  his  son?  And  the  co. 
26  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  man  comi. 

32  knoweth  no  man.  .neither  the  Son,  but  the 
21  Son  of  man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  is  written 

21  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  man 

41  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of 

61  Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  blessed? 

62  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the 

39  he  said, Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  G. 

13  Elisabeth  shall  bear  thee  a  son,  and  thou 

31  bring  forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name 

32  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest:  and 

35  born  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  G. 

36  she  hath  also  conceived  a  son  in  her  old 

57  be  delivered;  and  she  brought  forth  a  son 

7  she  brought  forth  her  first  born  son,  and 

2  word  of  God  came  unto  John  the  sou  of 

22  Thou  artmy  beloved  Son;intheeI  am  we. 

23  the  son  of  Joseph,  which  was  (the  son)  of 

3  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  this 
9  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself 

22  And  they  said,  Is  not  this  Joseph's  son? 
41  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.     And  he 

10  James  and  John,  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  wh. 

24  But  that  ye  may  know  thatthe  Son  ofman 

5  Thatthe  Son  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  thesa. 
22  cast  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the  Son  of 

12  dead  man  carried  out,  the  only  son  of  his 

34  The  Son  of  man  is  come  eating  and  drink. 
28  Jesus,  (thou)  Son  of  God  most  high?  I  be. 
22  Son  of  man,  must  suffer  many  things,  and 
26  of  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed 

35  saying,  This  is  my  beloved  Son:  hear  him 

38  look  upon  my  son;  for  he  is  mine  only  ch. 
41  Jesus  answering  said . .  Bring  thy  son  hit. 

44  for  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  into 
56  [For  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy] 

58  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay(his)  he. 

6  if  the  son  of  peace  be  there,  your  peace 
22  no  man  knoweth  who  the  Son  is,  but  the 
22  but  the  Son,  and  (he)  to  whom  the  Son  wi. 

11  If  a  son  shall  ask  bread  of  any  of  you  that 
19  by  whom  do  your  sons  cast  (them)  out?  th. 
30  so  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  be  to  this  ge. 

S  liim  shall  the  Son  of  man  also  confess  be. 

10  shall  speak  a  wordagainst  the  Son  of  man 

40  the  Son  of  man  cometh  at  an  hour  when 
53  be  divided  against  the  son,  and  the  son 

11  And  he  said,  A  certain  man  had  two  sons 

13  youuger  son  gathered  all  together,  and 
19,  21  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son 

21  the  son  said  unto  him,  Father,  I  have  si. 

24  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again 

25  Ms  elder  son  was  in  the  field :  and  as  he 
30  as  soon  as  this  thy  son  was  come,  which 

22  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
24  so  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  be  in  hi3  day 

26  so  shall  it  be  also  in  the  days  of  the  Son 

30  in  the  day  when  the  Son  ofman  is  revealed 

8  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find 

31  all  things,  .concerning  the  Son  of  mansh. 
38,  39  (thou)  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me 

9  forsomuch  as  he  also  is  a  son  of  Abraham 
10  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  sa. 
13  I  will  send  my  beloved  son:  it  may  be 

41  How  say  they  that  Christ  is  David's  son? 

44  calleth  him  Lord,  how  is  he  then  his  son? 

27  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  ofman  coming 

36  worthy,  .to  stand  before  the  Son  of  man 
22  the  Sou  of  man  goeth, as  it  was  determined 

48  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss 

69  Hereafter  shall  the  Son  of  mau  sit  on  the 

70  Art  thou  then  the  Son  of  God?  And  he  said 

7  The  Son  of  man  must  be  delivered  into  the 
1 3  the  only  begotten  [Son],  which  is  in  the  b. 
34  and  bare  record  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God 

42  he  said,  Thou  art  Simon  the  son  of  Jona. 

45  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  son  of  Joseph 

49  thou  art  the  Son  of  God ;  thou  art  the  ki. 
51  ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son 

13  (even)  the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heaven 

14  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up 


SON 


915 


SOPB 


John  3.  16  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  who. 
3.  17  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  co. 
3.  18  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
3.  35  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  giv. 
3.  36  He  that  believeth  on  the  Sou  hath  everl. 

3.  36  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see 

4.  5  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  his  son  Joseph 
4.  46  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son  was  sick 
4. 47  that  he  would  come  down,  and  heal  his  s. 
4.  50  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Go  thy  way ;  thy  s. 

4.  53  same  hour . .  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Thy  son 

5.  19  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but 
5. 19  .what,  .he  doeth,  these  also  doeth  the  Son 
5.  20  the  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  showeth 
5.  21  even  so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will 
5,  22  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son 

5.  23  all  (men)  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as 
5.  23  He  that  honoureth  not  the  Son  honoureth 
5.  25  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
5.  26  so  hath  he  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in 

5.  27  judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of 

6.  27  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  give  unto  you 
6. 40  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  beli. 
6.  42  Is  not  this  Jesus,  the  son  of  Joseph,  who. 
6.  53  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man 
6.  62  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  ascend  up 

6.  69  [thou  art  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living] 
8.  28  When  ye  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  man 
8.  35  servant  abideth  not.  .(but)  the  Son  abid. 

8.  36  If  the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free 

9.  19  Is  this  your  son,  who  ye  say  was  born  bli. 
9.  20  We  know  that  this  is  our  son,  and  that  he 
9.  35  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God? 

10. 36  because  I  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God 

11.    4  that  the  Son  of  God  might  be  glorified  th. 

11.  27  thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  whi. 

12.  23  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  man  sh. 

12.  34  The  Son  of  man.  .who  is  this  Son  of  man? 

13.  31  "Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and  God 

14.  13  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Sou 
17.  1  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  maygl. 
17.  12  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perd. 
19.   7  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God 

19.  26  he  saith  unto  his  mother,  .behold  thy  son 

20.  31  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God 
Acts    2.  17  your  sous  and  your  daughters  shall  prop. 

4.  36  which  is,  being  interpreted  ,The  sou  of  co. 

7.  16  bought  for  a  sum  of  money  of  the  sons  of 
7. 21  took,  .and  nourished  him  for  her  own  son 
7.  29  land  of  Madian,  where  he  begat  two  sons 

7.  56  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand 

8.  37  [I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of] 

9.  20  preached  Christ,  .that  he  is  the  Son  of  G. 
13.  21  God  gave  unto  them  Saul  the  son  of  Cis,  a 
13.  33  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
16.  1  Timotheus,  the  son  of  a  certain  woman 
19.  14  there  were  seven  sons  of  (one)  Sceve,  a  J. 
23.  6  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the  son  of  a  Pharisee 
23.  16  Paul's  sister's  son  heard  of  their  lying  in 

Bom.  1.    3  his  son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  which  was 
1.   4  And  declared  (to  be)  the  Son  of  God  with 

1.  9  whom  I  serve,  .in  the  gospel  of  his  Son 
5. 10  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son 
8.    3  God,  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of 
8.  14  by  the  spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of 

8.  19  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons 

5.  29  (to  be)  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son 
8  32  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  del. 

9.  9  At  this  time,  .and  Sara  shall  have  a  son 

1  Co.  1.    9  called  unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus 

1523  then  shall  the  Sou  also  himself  be  subject 

2  Co.   1.  19  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  pr. 

6.  18  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith 
Gal.     1. 16  To  reveal  his  Son  in  me,  that  I  might  pr. 

2.  20  [I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who] 
4.  4  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman 
4.  6  Aud  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent 
4.  6  the  spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,  cry. 
4.  7  a  servant,  but  a  son  ;  and  if  a  sou,  then  an 
4.  22  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  two  sons 
4.  30  the  bondwoman  and  her  son  :  for  the  son 

4.  30  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son 
Eph.   3.    5  was  not  made  known  unto  the  sons  of  men 

4. 13  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God 
Col.    1. 13  translated,  .into  the  kindgom  of  his.  .Son 

1  Th.  1.  10  to  wait  for  his  Son  fromheaven,  whomhe 

2  Th.  2.    3  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of 
Heb.   1.    2  spokenuntou3by(his)Son,  whom  he  hath 

1.  5  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begott. 
1.   5  a  Father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  a  Son 

1.  8  unt)  the  Son  (he  saith),  Thy  throne,  0  God 

2.  6  or  the  Son  of  mau,  that  thou  visitest  him 
2. 10  in  bringing  many  sous  unto  glory,  to  ma. 

3.  6  But  Christ  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house 

4. 14  a  great  High  Priest .  .Jesus  the  son  of  God 

5.  5  Thou  art  my  Son,  today  have  I  begotten 

5.  8  Though  he  were  a  Sou,  yet  learned  he  ob. 

6.  6  they  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God 

7.  3  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God  ;  abideth 
7.  5  they  that  are  of  [the  sons  of]  Levi,  who  re. 
7.  28  (maketh)  the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for 

10.  29  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of 

11.  21  By  faith  Jacob .  .blessed  both  the  sons  of 

11.  24  refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's 

12.  5  My  son,  despise  not  thou  the  chastening 
12.  6  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiv. 
12.  7  with  you  as  with  sons  ;  for  what  son  is  he 
12.    8  then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons 

Jas.    2.  21  when  he  had  offered  Isaac  his  son  upon 

1  Pe.    5. 13  saluteth  you ;  and  (so  doth)  Marcus  my  a. 

2  Pe.    1.  17  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 

1  Jo.   1.   3  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus 


1  Jo.    1.    7  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleans. 

2.  22  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son 

2.  23 Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  the  same  ha. 

2.  24  ye  also  shall  continue  in  the  Son,  and  in 

3.  8  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  he 

3.  23  believe  on  the  name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Ch. 

4.  9  God  sent  Ms  only  begotten  Son  into  the 
4. 10  sent  his  Son  (to  be)  the  propitiation  for 
4. 14  the  Father  sent  the  Son  (to  be)  the  Savio. 

4.  15  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God 

5.  5  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
5.   9  of  God  which  he  hath  testifieth  of  his  S. 
5.  10  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath 
5.  10  he  believeth  not  the  record,  .of  his  Son 
5.  11  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son 

5.  12  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life  ;  (and) 
5. 12  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
5-  [13J  13  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  G. 
5.  20  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and 
5. 20  in  him  that  is  true,  (even)  in  his  Son  Jes. 

2  John     3  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 

9  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son 
Rev.   1. 13  (one)  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  clothed 
2.  18  These  thing3  saith  the  Son  of  God,  who 
14. 14  (one)  sat  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  having 
21.   7  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son 
SON,  (in  law,  to  be)  — 

l.tSo/i  in  law,  bridegroom,  husband,  jnrt  chathan. 

Gen.  19. 12  Hast  thou  here  any  besides  ?  sou  in  law 

19. 14  spake  unto  his  sons  in  law,  which  married 

19.  14  as  one  that  mocked  unto  his  sons  in  law 

Judgi5.    6  Samson,  the  son  in  law  of  the  Timnite 

19.   5  damsel's  father  said  unto  his  son  in  law 

1  Sa.  18. 18  that  I  should  be  son  in  law  to  the  king 

22. 14  as  David,  which  (is)  the  king's  son  in  law 

2  Ki.  8.  27  he  (was)  the  son  in  law  of  the  house  of  A. 
Neli.  6.  18  he  (was)  the  son  in  law  of  Shechaniah  the 

13.  28  (was)  son  in  law  to  Sanballat  the  Horon. 

2.  To  be  son  in  laio,  ]nn  chathan,  7. 

1  Sa.  iS.  21  Thou  shalt  this  day  be  my  son  in  law  in 
18.  22  now  therefore  be  the  king's  son  in  law 
iS.  23  (a)  light  (thing)  to  be  a  king's  son  in  law 
18.  26  pleased  David . .  to  be  the  king's  son  in  law 
18.  27  that  he  might  be  the  king's  son  in  law 

SON  of,  to  be  the  — 

To  be  bom,  begotten,  iS;  yalad,  2. 

1  Ch.20.    6  and  he  also  was  the  son  of  the  giant 

SON,  only  — 

Only,  single,  vn;  yachid. 

Gen.  22.  2  thine  only  (son)  Isaac,  whom  thou  lovest 
Jer.  6.  26  make  thee  mourning,  (as  for)  an  only  son 
Zech  12.  10  as  one  mourneth  for  (his)  only  (son),  and 

SON'S  son  — 

Sons  son,  successor,  sprout, progeny,  "OJ  neked. 
Gen.  21. 23  wilt  not  deal  falsely,  .with  my  son's  son 

SONG  — 

\.A  song  of  praise,  TD]  zemir. 

Job  35. 10  God  my  maker,  who  giveth  songs  in  the 
Psa.119.  54  Thy  statutes  have  been  my  songs  in  the 
Isa.  24.  16  we  heard  songs,  (even)  glory  to  the  righ. 

2.-4  song  of  praise,  rrjOi  zimrath. 

Exodi5.    2  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  song,  and 

3.  What  is  lifted  up,  burden,  KpQ  massa. 

1  Ch.15.  22  (was)  for  song:  he  instructed  about  the  so. 
15.  27  the  master  of  the  song  with  the  singers 

i.Song  accompanied  with  stringed  instrument,  nrJ3. 
Job  30.  9  now  am  I  their  song;  yea,  I  am  theirby. 
Psa.  69.  12  and  I  (was)  the  song  of  the  drunkards 

77.  6  I  call  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  ni. 
Isa.  38.  20  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed  ins. 
Lam.  3.  14  a  derision  to  all  my  people,  (and)  theirso. 

5.-4  loud  cry  or  song,  p  ron. 

Psa.32.    7  thou  shalt  compass  me  about  with  songs  of 
6. A  song,  Ya>  shir. 

Gen.  31.  27  with  mirth,  and  with  songs,  with  tabret 

Judg.  5.  12  utter  a  song:  arise,  Barak,  and  lead  thy  ca. 

1  Ki.   4.  32  and  his  songs  were  a  thousand  and  five 

1  Ch.  6.  31  whom  David  set  over  the  service  of  song 

25.    6  under  the  hands  of  their  father  for  song 
25.   7  that  were  instructed  in  the  songs  of  the 

2  Ch.29.  27  thesongof  the  LORDbegan  (also)  with  the 
Neh.  12. 46  songs  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  unto  G. 
Psa.  28.    7  rejoiceth;  and  with  my  song  will  I  praise 

30.  title.  A  Psalm(and)  Song  (at)  the  dedication 
33.   3  Sing  unto  him  a  new  song;  play  skilfully 
40.    3  hehathputanew  song  in  my  mouth,  (ev.) 
42.    8  and  in  the  night  his  song  (shall  be)  with 
45.  46.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician.  .A  Song 
48.  title.  A  Song  (and)  Psalm  for  the  sons  of 

65.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  APsalm.. Song 

66.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Song  (or) 

67.  75.  76.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician. .A.. Song 

68.  title.  To  the  chief  Musician,  A  Psalm  (or)  S. 

69.  30  I  will  praise  the  name  of  God  with  a  song 
83.  title.  A  Song  (or)  Psalm  of  Asaph 

87.  88.  title.  A  Psahn  (or)  Song  for  the  sons  of  K. 

92.  title.  A  Psalm  (or)  Song  for  the  sabbath  day 

96.    1  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song;  singun. 

98.    1  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song;  for  he 
108.  title.  A  Song  (or)  Psalm  of  David 
120. 121  123.125. 126. 128. 129. 130, 132. 1 34.  (.A  song 
122.  124. 131.  133.  title.  A  Song  of  degreesof  David 
i37>    3  (saymg).  Sing  us  (one)  of  the  songs  of  Ziou 
137.   4  How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a 


Psa.  144.    9  I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto  thee,  0  God 
149.    1  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song,  (and)  his 
Prov  25.  20  so  (is)  he  that  singeth  songs  to  an  heavy 
Eccl."  7.    5  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  song  of  fools 
Song  1.    1  The  Song  of  songs,  which  (is)  Solomon's 
Isa.   23. 16  sing  many  songs,  that  thou  mayest  be  re. 
24.    9  They  shall  not  drink  wine  with  a  song 
26.    1  In  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  the 

30.  29  Ye  shall  have  a  song,  as  in  the  night,  (w.) 
42.  10  Sing  unto  the  LORD  a  new  song,  (and)  his 

Eze.  26.  13  I  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  songs  to  cease 
33.  32  as  a  very  lovely  song  of  one  that  hath  a  pi. 
Amos  5.  23  Take  thou  away . .  the  noise  of  thy  songs 
8.  10  I  will  turn,  .your  songs  into  lamentation 

7.-4  song,  rirrp  shirah. 

Exodis.    1  Then  sang  Moses.,  this  song  unto  the  Lord 
Nuniai.  17  Israel  sang  this  song,  Spring  up,  0  well 
Dent  31.  19  write  ye  this  song  for  you,  and  teach  it  the; 
31. 19  that  this  song  may  be  a  witness  for  me 

31.  21  this  song  shall  testify  against  them  as  a 
31.  22  Moses  therefore  wrote  this  song  the  same 

31.  30  Moses  spake,  .the  words  of  this  song,  un. 

32.  44  spake  all  the  words  of  thissougintheears 
2  Sa.  22.    1  David  spake,  .the  words  of  this  song  in 
Psa.  iS.  title,  unto  the  Lord  the  words  of  this  song 
Isa.     5.    1  a  song  of  my  beloved  touching  his  viney. 
Amos  8.    3  the  songs  of  the  temple  shall  be  howling* 

8.  Word  or  matter  of  a  song,  vt?  iyi  debar  shir. 
Psa.  137.   3  For  there  they,  .required  of  us  a  song 

9. An  ode,  q>8t)  ode. 

Eph.   5.  19  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs 
Col.     3.  16  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs 
Rev.    5.    9  they  sung  a  new  song,  saying,  Thou  art 
14.    3  they  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the 

14.  3  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the  hu. 

15.  3  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses.,  and  the  song 
SONS,  adoption  of  — 

The  placing  as  a  son,  vioBeaia  huiothesia. 

Gal.    4.    5  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons 
SOON,  sooner  — 
1. Hastily,  swiftly,  e?*n  chish. 

Psa.  90. 10  for  it  is  soon  cut  off,  and  we  fly  away 

2. Hastily,  ina  maker. 

Deut.  4.  26  ye  shall  soon  utterly  perish  from  off  the 
3.  Haste,  nnnp  melierah. 

Psa.  37.    2  they  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like  the  grass 
4. .4  little,  Q£D  meat. 

Job    32.  22  (in  so  doing)  my  Maker  would  soon  take 

Psa.  81. 14  I  should  soonhavesubduedtheirenemies 
5.  Short,  isp  qatser. 

Prov.  14.  17  (He  that  is)  soon  angry  dealeth  foolishly 
6. To  hasten,  *irra  mahar,  3. 

Psa.  106.  13  They  soon  forgot  his  works;  they  waited 
7. Along  with  the  thing,  irapaxp'ny-a  parachrema. 

Matit2i.  20  How  soon  is  the  fig  tree  withered  away 
8. Quickly,  speedily,  rax^s  tacJteos. 

Gal.    1.    6  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from 

2  Th.  2.    2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be 

9. More  sunfty,  speedily,  rdxtou  tachion. 

Heb.  13.  ig  that  I  may  be  restored  to  you  the  sooner 
SOON,  to  be  so  — 
To  haste,  igp  mahar,  3, 

Exod  2. 18  How  (is  itthat)ye  are  come  so  soon  to  day 
SOON  as,  as  — 
l.Appea/rance,  nx~o  march. 

Eze.  23. 16  as  soon  as  she  saw  them  withhereyes,  she 

2.  To  become,  yivofxai  ginomai. 

Acts  12. 18  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  there  was  no  small 
[See  As,  as  soon  as.] 
SOOTHSAYER,  soothsaying,  (by)— 
l.To  cut  off  or  down,  decree,  113  gezar. 

Dan.    2.  27  the  astrologers,  the  magicians,  the  sooth. 

4.  7  Then  came.,  the  Chaldeans,  andthesoot. 

5.  7  to  bring,  .the  Chaldeans,  and  the  sooths. 
5.  11  astrologers,  Chaldeans,  (and)  soothsayers 

2.To  observe  the  clouds,  \yjr  anan,  Sa. 

Isa.      2.   6  (and)  are  soothsayers  like  the  Philistines 
Mic.    5. 12  and  thou  shalt  have  no  (more)  soothsayers 

3.  To  divine-)  use  divination,  cpj^  qasam. 

Josh.  13.  22  Baalam  also  the  son  of  Beor,  the  soothsa. 

4:.Todivine,usedivi?iation,fiavTevofAaimaiiteuoi)iaz. 
Acts  16.  16  brought  her  masters,  .gain  by  soothsaying 

SO-PA'-TER,  2w7raTpos. 

A  believer  from  Berea,  who  accompanied  Paul  from 
Greece  to  Asia  on  his  way  to  Syria ;  perhaps  the  same 
as  Sosipater. 

Acts  20.   4  there  accompanied  him  into  Asia,  S.  of  B. 
SOPE,  sop  — 
l.Soap,  rv"!3  borith. 

Jer.     2.  22  though  thou  wash.. and  take  thee  much  s. 

Mai.    3.    2  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's  soap 

2.  A  morsel,  &wp.lov  pisomion. 

John  13.  26  He  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop,  when  I 
13.  26  when  he  had  dipped  the  sop,  he  gave  (it) 
13.  27  And  after  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him 
13.  30  He  then  having  received  the  sop  went  im. 


SOPHERETH 


916 


SORROW 


SO-PHE-RETH,  ITTSBn  learning. 

A  servant  of  Solomon  whose  descendants  returned  with 

Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.  55  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Peruda 
Neh.    7.  57  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Perida 

SORCERER,  sorceress,  (to  use)  sorceries  — 

1.A  wizard,  sorcerer,  r|3*3  kashshaph. 

Jer.  27.    g  nor  to  yourenchauters,  nor  to  your  sore. 

2. To  use  witchcraft  or  sorcery,  *]»3  kashaph,  3. 
Exod.  7.  1 1  also  called  the  wise  men  and  the  sorcerers 
Dan.   2.   2  the  astrologers,  and  the  sorceries,  and  the 
Mai.    3.    5  a  swift  witness  against  the  sorcerers,  and 

3.  Witchcrafts,  sorceries,  D'D^?  keshaphim. 

Isa.  47.  9  for  the  multitude  of  thy  sorceries,  (and) 
47.  12  with  the  multitude  of  thy  sorceries,  whe. 

A. To  observe  the  clouds,  \i]}anan,  2a. 

Isa.  57.   3  draw  near  hither,  ye  sonsof  the  sorceress 

5.  Magic,  fxayeia  mageia. 

Acts    8.  11  he  had  bewitched  them  with  sorceries 

0.7*0  use  magic,  jxayeva  mageuo. 

Acts    8.    9  used  sorcery,  audbewitched  the  people  of 

7. A  magician,  fxdyos  magos. 

Acts  13.  6  they  found  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  pro. 
13.   8  Elymas  the  sorcerer  for  so  is  his  name  by 

P.  Enchantment  with  drugs,  ipapfiaKtia  pharmakeia. 

Eev.   9.  21  nor  of  their  [sorceries],  nor  of  their  forni. 

18.  23  by  thy  sorceries  were  all  nations  deceived 

9.  An  enchanter  with  drugs,  <papfia.Kevspharmak#us. 

Rev.  21.  8  [sorcerers,]  and  idolaters,  and  all  liars,  sh. 

10.  An  enchanter  with  drugs,  <papfiaKos p>harmakos. 
Rev.  22.  15  without  (are)  dogs,  and  sorcerers  and  wh. 

SORE,  (to  be  full  of  sores,  go,  make,  wax)  — 

1. Handy  t  yad. 

Psa.  77.    2  my  sore  ran  in  the  night,  and  ceased  not 

2.-4  great  weeping,  yni  '33  beki  gadol. 

Judg. 21.  2  and  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept  sore 
2  Sa.  1 3.  36  king  also  and  all  his  servants  wept  very  s. 
2  Ki.20.  3  I  beseech  thee..  And  Hezekiah  wept  sore 
Isa.  38.   3  good  in  thy  sight :  and  Hezekiah  wept  sore 

3.  To  be  sick,  rr^n  chalah. 

Eccl.  5.  13  There  is  a  sore  evil  (which)  I  have  seen 
5. 16  this  also  (is)  a  sore  evil,  (that)  in  all  points 

4.  To  be  strong,  pin  chazaq. 

Gen.  41.  56  the  famine  waxed  sore  in  the  land  of  Eg. 
41.  57  because  that  the  famine  was  (so)  sore  in 
2  ICi.   3.  26  saw  that  the  battle  was  too  sore  for  him 
Jer.  52.   6  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  city,  so  that 

5. Strong,  pin  chazaq. 

i"Sa.  14.  52  there  was  sore  war  against  the  Philistines 
1  Ki.17.  17  his  sickness  was  so  sore,  that  there  was 
18.    2  And  (there  was)  a  sore  famine  in  Samaria 

6. Slaughter,  nsa  tehach. 

Eze.  21.  10  It  is  sharpened  to  make  a  sore  slaughter 
7.  To  be  pained,  3N3  kaab. 

Gem'34.  25  on  the  third  day,  when  they  were  sore 
S.To  cause  pain,  mar,  nxj  kaab,  5. 

Job     5.  i3  he  maketh  sore,  and  bindeth  up;  he  wou, 

9.  To  be  heavy,  weighty,  "03  kabed. 

Judg.20.  34  the  battle  was  sore:  but  they  knew  not  th. 
1  Sa.  31.  3  the  battle  went  sore  against  Saul,  and  the 
1  Ch.io.    3  the  battle  went  sore  against  Saul,  and  the 

lO.Heavy,  weighty,  lis  kabed. 

Gen.  43.    i  And  the  famine  (was)  sore  in  the  laud 
47.   4  the  famine  (is)  sore  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
47.  13  the  famine  (was)  very  sore,  so  that  the 
50. 10  mourned  with  a  great  and  very  sore  lam. 

11.  Cause  of  anger,  provocation,  sadness,  Dj?3  kaas. 
1  Sa.  1.  6  her  adversary  also  provoked  her  sore,  for 

12.  Might,  exceedingly,  "ind  meod. 

Gen.  19.  9  they  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,  (even) 
20.    8  told  all.  .and  the  men  were  sore  afraid 

Exod.  14. 10  they  were  sore  afraid:  and  the  children  of 

Num.22.    3  Moab  was  sore  afraid  of  the  people,  beca. 

Josh.   9.  24  we  were  sore  afraid  of  our  lives  because 

Judg.  10.  9  to  fight . .  so  that  Israel  was  sore  distressed 
15.  18  he  was  sore  athirst,  and  called  on  the  L. 

1  Sa.  17. 24  all  the  men  of  Israel . .  were  sore  afraid 
21. 12  was  sore  afraid  of  Achish  the  king  of  Ga. 
28.  15  I  am  sore  distressed;  for  the  Philistines 
28.  20  Saul  fell  straightway . .  and  was  sore  afraid 
28.  21  the  woman,  .saw  that  he  was  sore  troub. 
31.  3  and  he  was  sore  wounded  of  the  archers 
31.   4  would  not;  for  he  was  sore  afraid.  Ther. 

1  Ki.  17.  17  his  sickness  was  so  sore,  that  there  was 

1  Ch.io.   4  would  not;  for  he  was  sore  afraid.    So  S. 

2  Ch.35.  23  Have  me  away ;  for  I  am  sore  wounded 
Neh.  13.    8  it  grieved  me  sore  :  therefore  I  cast  forth 
Tsa.    6.    3  My  soul  is  also  sore  vexed:  but  thou,  OL. 

6.  10  mine  enemies  be  ashamed  and  sore  vexed 
38.    8  I  am  feeble  and  sore  broken :  I  have  ro. 

Isa.  64.  9  Be  not  wroth  very  sore,  0  LORD,  neither 
64.  12  hold  thy  peace,  and  afflict  us  very  sore? 

Jer.  50.  12  Your  mother  shall  be  sore  confounded 

13.  Trespass,  transgression,  hjiSinaaL 

2  CI1.2S.  19  and  transgressed  sore  against  the  Lord 
li.  Stroke,  plague,  jni  nega. 

Lev.  13.  42  In  the  bald  head,  .a  white  reddish  sore 


Lev.  13.  43  (if)  the  rising  of  the  sore  (lie)  white  redd. 

2  Ch.  6.  28  whatsoever  sore,  or  whatsoever  sickness 

6.  29  every  one  shall  know  his  own  soreand-his 

Psa.  3S.  11  my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  sore,  and 

15.X  smiting,  blow,  stroke,  nao  makkah. 

Isa.  1.  6  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrifying  sores 
16. To  be  powerful,  grievous,  pis  marats,  2. 

Mic.  2. 10  destroy  (you),  even  with  a  sore  destruct. 
17.-4  great  displeasure,  Vna  *]*p  qetseph  gadol. 

Zech.  1.  2  The  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased  with 
1.  15  I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heath. 

IS.  To  be  sharp,  hard,  n^p  qashah. 

1  Sa.  5.  7  his  hand  is  sore  upon  us,  and  uponDagon 
19. Sharp,  hard,  naJp  qasheh. 

2  Sa.    2.  17  And  there  was  a  very  sore  battle  that  day 
Isa.   27.    1  the  Lord  with  his  sore  and  great  and  st. 

20.  To  make  abundant  weeping,  H33  n3/i  rabah,  5. 
Ezra  10.    1  for  the  people  wept  very  sore 

21.  Evil,  in  ra. 

Deut.  6.  22  showed  signs  and  wonders,  great  and  sore 
28.  35  with  a  sore  botch  that  cannot  be  healed 
28.  59  sore  sickness,  and  of  long  continuance 

2  Ch.21.  19  so  he  died  of  sore  diseases.  And  his  peo. 

Job     2.    7  smote  Job  with  sore  boil  from  the  sole  of 

Psa.  71.  20  which  hast  showed  me  great  and  sore  tr. 

Eccl.  1.  13  this  sore  travail  hath  God  given  to  the  so. 
4.    8  This  (is)  also  vanity,  yea,  it  (is)  a  sore  tr. 

Eze.  14.  21  when  I  send  myfoursore  judgments  upon 

22.  Great,  much,  many,  N'itr  saggi. 

Dan.  6.  14  the  king,  .was  sore  displeased  with  him. 
23. Fear,  fright,  trembling,  TJj&  saar. 

Eze.  27.  35  their  kings  shall  be  sore  afraid,  they  shall 

24. Sufficient,  coming  up  to,  iKavSs  hikanos. 

Acts  20.  37  they  all  wept  sore,andfell  onPaul'sneck 

25.ro  be  ulcerated,  €\Kdojiai  helkoomai. 

Luke  16.  20  which  was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores 
26. An  ulcer,  '4\kos    helkos. 

Lukeio.  21  moreover,  .dogs came  and  licked  hissores 

Rev.  16.  2  there  fell  a  noisome  and  grievous  sorev.n 
27.  Great  fear,  <po$ov  fxi-y^v  phobon  inegau,  Lu.2.9, 
2S.  Evilly,  wickedly,  kcckus  kakos. 

Matt  17. 15  he  is  lunatic,  and  sore  vexed :  for  oftti. 

•29.  Very,  very  much,  exceedingly,  xlav  lian. 

Mark  6.  51  they  were  [sore]  amazed  in  themselves  be. 
ZO.Much,  many,  iroXvs  polus. 

Mark  9.  26  (the  spirit)  cried,  and  rent  him  sore,  and 
31.  Vehemently,  cr<p6b*pa  spTwdra. 

Matt  1 7.  6  they  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore  af. 
B%Worse,  xelpuv  chwron. 

Heb.  10.  29  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose 
[See  also  Afraid,  amazed,  break,  broken,  displeased 
displeasure,  go,  grieved,  lie,  pained,  press,  troubled 
very], 

SO'-REK,  pTC1  vimyard. 

A  valley  (and  stream)  between  Askelon  and  Gaza,  not 
far  from  Zorah :  the  stream  was  part  of  the  boundary 
line  between  Dan  and  Simeon. 

Judg  16.  4  he  loved  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  S. ,  wh. 
SORROW  — 

1.  Wo,  '13N  aboi. 

Prov23.  29  Who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  sorrow?  who 

2.  Vanity,  iniquity,  |m  aven. 

Psa.  90. 10  yet  (is)  their  strength  labour  and  sorrow 

2. Lamentation,  n;JK  aniyyah. 

Isa.  29.  2  and  there  shall  be  heaviness  and  sorrow 
4.  Grief  n^NH  deahah. 

Job  41.  22  and  his  sorrow  is  turned  into  joy  before 
5. Grief  jia^W  deabon. 

Deut  28.  65  and  failing  of  eyes,  and  sorrow  of  mind 
6.  Sorrow,  fear,  rn^n  dcagah. 

Jer.  49.  23  (there  is)  sorrow  on  the  sea ;  it  cannot  be 

7. Pang,  cord,  hiy,  ?3n  cliebei. 

2  Sa.  22.   6  The  sorrows  of  hell  compassed  me  about 
Job  si.  17  (God)  distributeth  sorrow  in  his  anger 

39.    3  They  bow.  .they  cast  out  their  sorrows 
Psa.  18.    4  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and 

18.   s  The  sorrows  of  hell  compassed  me  about 

116.    3  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and 

Isa.  13.    8  pangs  and  sorrows  shall  take  hold  of  them 

Jer.   13.  21  shall  not  sorrows  take  thee,  as  a  woman 

49.  24  sorrows  have  taken  her,  as  a  woman  in 
Hos.  13.  13  The  sorrows  of  a  travailing  woman  shall 

B.Pain,  V'n  chil. 

Exodis.  14  sorrow  shall  take  hold  on  the  inhabitants 
9. Pain,  n^n  chilah. 

Job     6.' 10  yea,  I  would  harden  myself  in  sorrow:  let 

10.  Affliction,  ]'u;  yagon. 

Gen.  42.  38  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave 

44.  31  the  grey  hairs  of  thy  servant,  .with  sorr. 

Esth.  9.  22  was  turned  unto  them  from  sorrow  to  joy 

Psa.  13.    2  I  take  counsel  in  my  soul,  (having) sorrow 

107.  39  through  oppression,  affliction,  and  sorrow 

116.    3  hold  upon  me;  I  found  trouble  and  sorr. 

lea.   35. 10  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away 

51.  11  (and)  sorrow  and  mourning  shall  flee  aw. 


Jer.  8. 18  (When)  I  would  comfort  myself  against  so. 
20.  18  out  of  the  womb  to  see  labour  and  sorrow 
31.  13  and  make  them  rejoice  from  their  sorrow 

Eze.  23.  33  filled  with  drunkenness  and  sorrow,  with 

11.  Pain,  3K3  keeb. 

Psa.  39.    2  I  held  my  peace,  .and  my  sorrow  was  st. 

Isa.    17.  11  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate  son-. 

65.  14  ye  shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  heart,  and  shall 

12.  Sadness,  Dys  kaas. 

Eccl.  7.    3  Sorrow  (is)  better  than  laughter :  for  by 
11.  10  Therefore  remove  sorrow  from  thy  heart 

13. Sadness,  by  5  kaas. 

Job   17.    7  Mine  eye  also  is  dim  by  reason  of  sorrow 

14.  Blinding,  njp  meginnali. 

Lam.  3.  65  Givethem  sorrow  of  heart,  thy  curse  unto 
15. Pain,  11N3D  makob. 

Exod.  3.    7  heard  their  cry.  .for  I  know  their  sorrow 
Psa.  32. 10  Many  sorrows  (shall  be)tothewicked:  but 
38. 17  and  my  sorrow  (is)  continually  before  me 
Eccl.  1. 18  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow 

2.  23  all  his  days  (are)  sorrows,  and  his  travail 
Isa.  53.   3  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with 

53.  4  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows 
Jer.  30.  15  thy  sorrow  (is)  incurable  for  the  multitude 

45.  3  the  Lord  hath  added  grief  to  my  sorrow 
Lam.  1.  12  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow, 

1.  18  hear,  I  pray  you.  .and  behold  my  sorrow 

16. Grief,  naxj/n  maatsebah. 

Isa.    50.  JI  v^  ^na*  kindle  a  fire,  .lie  down  in  sorrow 

17.  Labour,  ?cj;  amal. 

Job  3.  10  it  shut  not  up . .  nor  hid  sorrow  from  mine 
Psa.  55. 10  mischief  also  and  sorrow  (are)  in  the  mi. 

15.  Grief,  3*y  etseb. 

Gen.  3.  16  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth  children 
Psa. 127.  2  to  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows 
Prov.io.  22  it  maketh  rich,  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow 

19.  Grievous  thing,  y&)j  otseb. 

1  Ch.  4.    9  saying,  because  I  bare  him  with  sorrow 
Isa.  14.    3  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy  sorrow 

20.  Grievous  thing,  foxy  itstsabon. 

Gen.   3.  16  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy 

3.  17  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  (of)  it  all  the  days 

21.Grievous  thing,  n?yy  atstsebeih. 

Job     9.  28  I  am  afraid  of  all  my  sorrows,  I  knowth. 

Psa.  16.    4  Their  sorrows  shall  be  multiplied  (that) 

Prov.io.  10  that  winketh  with  the  eye  causeth  sorrow 
1 5«  13  by  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  broken 
22.  Pain,  pang,  *vir  tsir. 

Dan.  10. 16  by  the  vision  my  sorrows  are  turned  upon 
23. Strait,  close,  is,  tf  tsar. 

Isa.  5.  30  behold  darkness  (and)  sorrow,  and  the  li. 
2LEvil,  bad,  jn  ra.'' 

Gen.  44.  29  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to 

25. Evil,  badness,  y""i  roa. 

Neh.  2.   2  this  (is)  nothing  (else)  but  sorrow  of  heart 

26. Affliction,,  sorrow,  r?aw  tugah. 

Prov.17.  21  that  begetteth  a  fool  (doeth  it)  to  his  sor. 

27. Grief  sorrow,  affliction,  \virw  lupe. 

Luke22. 45  disciples,  he  found  them  sleeping'for  sor. 

Johni6.    6  because  I  have  said  these,  .sorrow  hath  fi. 

16.  20  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy 

16.  21  woman  when  ahe  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow 

16.  22  ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow :  but  I  will 

2  Co.  2.    3  I  should  have  sorrow  from  them  of  whom 

2.  7  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow 
7.  10  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salv. 
7.  10  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death 

Phil.   2.  27  lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow 

28. Pain,  torture,  grief,  sorrow,  hhvvn  odune. 

Rom.  9.  2  That  I  have,  .continual  sorrow  in  my  he. 
1  Ti.    6. 10  and  pierced  themselves,  .with  many  sor. 

29. Sorrow,  grief,  mourning,  irtvdos  penthos. 
Rev.  18.    7  so  much  torment  and  sorrow  give  her 
18.   7  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow 
zi.   4  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying 
30.  Labour,  pain,  sorrow,  wBiv  odin. 

Matt  24.    8  All  these  (are)  the  beginning  of  sorrows 
Marki3.    8  These  (are)  the  beginnings  of  sorrows 

SORROW,  to  (cause,  have)  — 
l.To  be  grieved,  pained,  3!0  dadb. 

Jer.  31. 12  and  they  shall  not  sorrow  any  more  at 

2.  To  be  sorrowful,  afraid,  Jin  daag. 

1  Sa.  10.    2  sorroweth  for  you,'  saying,  What  shall  I 
3.7*0  cause  pain,  sorrow,  3vn  dwb,  5. 

Lev.  26. 16  consume  the  eyes,  and  cause  sorrow  of  he. 

4.7*0  be  pained,  Vn,  ^n  chul,  chil. 

Jer.  51.  29  the  land  shall  tremble  and  sorrow :  for  ev. 

5. To  hegin,  77n  chalal,  5. 

Hos.    8.  10  they  shall  sorrow  a  little  for  the  burden 
6.  To  be  angry,  sad,  Dys  kaas. 

Eccl.  5. 17  (he  hath)  much  sorrow  and  wrath  with  his 
7.7*0  grieve,  make  sad,  \w4a  lupeo. 

2  Co.  7.   9  hut  that  ye  sorrowed  to  repentance :  for 

7.  n  this  self  same  thing,  that  ye  sorrowed  af. 
1  Th.  4. 13  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even"  as  others  which 


SORROWFUL 


917 


SOUL 


8.  To  be  pained,  hZvva.ofj.ai  odunaomai. 

Luke  2.  48  father  and  I  have  sought  thee  sorrowing 
Acts  20.  38  Sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  words  which 

SORROWFTJX,   (exceeding,  less,  very)  — 
l.To  be  grieved,  pained,  3N-)  daab. 

Jer.  31.  25  and  I  have  replenished  every  sorrowful 

2.  Sickness,  T!  devai. 

Job     6.    7  The  things.. (are)  as  my  sorrowful  meat 

0.T0  be  afflicted,  iiv  yagah,  2. 

Zeph.  3.  18  I  will  gather  (them  that  are)  sorrowful 

4.  To  be  pained,  3N3  Jcaab. 

Psa.  69.  29  But  I  (am)  poor  and  sorrowful:  let  thy  sa. 

5.  Sharp,  hard,  nt?p  qasheh. 

1  Sa.    1.  15  I  (am)  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit :  I 
o.Less  {or  not)  sorroiufid,  aKvirorepos  alujwteros. 

Phil.  2.  28  and  that  I  may  be  the  less  sorrowful 
7.  To  grieve,  make  sad,  \virso)  lupco. 

Matt  19.  22  he  went  away  sorrowful :  for  he  had  great 

2  Co.   6.10  As  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing ;  as  po. 

SORROWFUL,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  pained,  b*n,  hm  chid,  chil. 

Zech.  9.    5  Gaza  also  (shall  see  it),  and  be  very  sorr. 
-2,  To  be  pained,  3io  Jcaab. 

Prov  14.  13  Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful 
S.To  grieve,  make  sad,  hvireai  lupeo. 

Matt  26.  22  theywere  exceeding  sorrowful,  and  began 
26.  37  and  began  to  be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy 

Mark  14.  19  they  began  to  be  sorrowful,  and  to  say  un. 

John  16. 20  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  sh. 
4.  Very  or  exceeding  sorrowful,  irept\w!rosperilupos. 

Matt  26.  38  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto 

Marki4. 34  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful  unto  death 

Luke  18.  23  when  he  heard  this,  he  was  very  sorrow. 
18.  24  when  Jesus  saw  [that  he  was  very  sorrow.] 

SORRY,  exceeding,  (to  be  or  make)  — 
l.To  be  sorrowful,  afraid,  3fcn  daag. 

Psa.  38. 18  declare  mine  iniquity;  I  will  be  sorry  for 

2.  To  be  sick,  rhn  chalah. 

1  Sa.  22.   8  none  of  you  that  is  sorry  for  me,  or  sho. 

3.  To  nod,  bemoan,  iu  mid. 

Isa.  51. 19  whoshallbesorryforthee?  desolation, and 

4.  To  be  grieved,  ayj;  atsab,  2. 

Neh.   8.  io  neither  be  ye  sorry;  for  the  joy  of  the  L. 
5.2*0  grieve,  make  sad,  Xvirsai  lupo. 

Matt  14.    9  king  was  sorry:  nevertheless,  for  the  oa. 

17.  23  And  they  were  exceeding  sorry 

18.  31  they  were  very  sorry,  and  came  and  told 
■2  Co.   2.    2  For  if  I  make  you  sorry,  who  is  he  then 

2.  2  but  the  same  which  is  made  sorry  by  me? 

7.  8  For  though  I  made  you  sorry  with  a  let. 

7.  8  that  the  same  epistle  hath  made  you  so. 

7.  9  I  rejoice,  not  that  ye  were  made  sorry,  but 

7.  g  for  ye  were  made  sorry  after  a  godly  ma. 

6.  Very  or  exceeding  sorrowful,  irepi\virj>s  perilupos 
Mark  6.  26  king  was  exceeding  sorry ;  (yet)  for  his  oa. 

SORT,  godly,  this,  what,  some,  all  — 

1.  Circle,  age,  Vi  gil. 

Dan.    1.  10  than  the  children  which  (are)  of  your  so. 

2.  Word,  matter,  iyg  dabar. 

Neh.    6.  4  seut  imto  me  four  times  after  this  sort;  and 

3.  Perfection,  5i^O  miklol. 

Eze.  38.   4  all  of  them  clothed  with  all  sorts  (of  ar.) 

■^.Perfect  things,  D^Vpn  maklulim. 

Eze.  27.  24  These  (were)  thy  merchants  in  all  sorts 

5.  Wing,  ^jp  kanaph. 

Gen.    7.  14  after  his  kind,  every  bird  of  every  sort 
Eze.  39.    4  unto  the  ravenous  birds  of  every  sort,  and 

6.  Mistress,  nyi  shiddah. 

Eccl.  2.    8  musical  instruments,  and  that  of  all  sorts 

7.  Partly,  in  part,  airo  fxtpovs  o,po  merous. 

Romis.  15  more  boldly  unto  you  in  some  sort,  aspu. 
"S.  Worthily,  h^iuis  axios. 

3  John     6  bring  forward .  .after  a  godly  sort,  thou 

9.  Of  these,  e«  tovtwu  ek  toutdn. 

2  Ti.    3.    6  For  of  this  sort  are  they  which  creep  into 

10.  Of  what  kind  or  sort,  SiroTos  hopoios. 

1  Co.   3.  13  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is 
{See  also  After  this,  baser,  flies,  garment,  one,  poorest, 
tbis,  what.] 

SO-SI-PA'-TER,  Swo-nrarpos. 

A  kinsman  of  Paul,  one  whose  salutation  was  sent  to  the 

church  at  Rome. 

Rom  16.  21  Jason,  and  S.,  my  kinsmen,  salute  yon 

SOS-THE'-rTES,  ~2.<jqo-Q£vt)S. 

1.  The  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue  at  Corinth,  who  was 
beaten  by  the  Hellenistic  Greeks  because  of  the  tumult 
of  the  Jews  when  they  brought  Paul  before  Gallioin  his 
second  missionary  journey  into  Greece. 

Acts  iS.  17  the  Greeks  took  S.,  the  chief  ruler  of  the 

2.  A  believer  whom  Paul  unites  with  himself  inaddress- 
ing  the  Corinthian  church. 

1  Co.  1.    1  Paul,  called  (to  be)  an  apostle.. and  S.  (our) 


2.  Animal 
Gen.  2. 
12. 
12. 
*7- 
19. 
27. 
27. 

27- 
27. 

34- 
34- 
35- 
42. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
46. 
49. 
Exod.  1. 
12. 
12. 


SO'-TAI,  'Kb,  *aio  J  ah  is  turning  aside. 

One  of  Solomon's  servants  whose  descendants  returned 

with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  55  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Sophe. 

Neh.   7.  57  the  children  of  S.,  the  children  of  Sophe. 

SOTTISH  — 

Thick  headed,  73D  sakal. 

Jer.    4.  22  they  (are)  sottish  children,  and  they  have 
SOUGHT  (for,  out  or  up),  to  be  — 
l.To  be  sought,  enquired  after,  ■"!£?  baah,  2. 

Obad.  6.  (how)  are  his  hidden  things  sought  up  ! 

2.  To  be  sought,  searched,  eJj22  baqash,  4. 

Jer.   50.  20  the  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for 
Eze.  26.  21  though  thou  be  sought  for,  yet  shaltthou 

3. To  seek,  enquire,  require,  ti'T}  darash. 

Psa  in.    2  sought  out  of  all  them  that  have  pleasure 
Isa.  62. 12  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken 

4.  To  be  sought,  enquired  after,  VT}  darash,  2. 
1  Ch,26.  31  were  sought  for,  and  there  were  found  am. 
Isa.  65.    1  I  am  sought  of  (them  that)  asked  not  (for 

S0TJ1  — 

l.Willing,  liberal  or  noble  one,  nyjj  nedibah. 
Job  30. 15  they  pursue  my  soul  as  the  wind :  and  my 

soul,  vai  nephesh. 

7  breathed,  .and  man  became  a  living  soul 

5  the  souls  that  they  had  gotten  in  Haran 

13  and  my  soul  shall  live  because  of  thee 

14  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people 

20  (is)  it  not  a  little  one  ?  and  my  soul  shall 

4  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die 

19  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison,  that  thy  soul 
25  eat  of  my  son's  venison,  that  my  soul  may 
31  eat  of  his  son's  venison,  that  thy  soul  may 

3  soul  clave  unto  Dinah  the  daughter  of  J. 

8  soul  of  my  son  Shechem  longeth  for  your 
18  came  to  pass,  as  her  soul  was  in  departing 

21  in  that  we  saw  the  anguish  of  his  soul,  wh. 

15  all  the  souls  of  his  sons  and  his  daughters 
18  these  she  bare  unto  Jacob,  (even)  sixteen  s. 

22  born  to  Jacob :  all  the  souls  (were)  fourte. 

25  bare  these  unto  Jacob  :  all  the  souls  (were) 

26  All  the  souls  that  came . .  all  the  souls  (w.) 

27  two  souls  :  all  the  souls  of  the  house  of  J. 

6  0  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  street 

5  all  the  souls,  .were  seventy  souls :  for  Jo. 

4  according  to  the  number  of  the  souls  :  ev. 
15,  19  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  Israel 
12  give  every  man  a  ransomforhis  soul  unto 
15,  16  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls 

14  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his 
2  If  a  soul  shall  siu  through  ignorance  aga. 

1  if  a  soul  siii,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swear. 

2  Or  if  a  soul  touch  any  unclean  thing,  wh. 
4  Or  if  a  soul  swear,  pronouncing  with  (his) 

15  If  a  soul  commit  a  tresspass,  and  sin  thr. 

17  if  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these  th. 

2  If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  a  tresspass  ag. 

18  soul  that  eateth  of  it  shall  bear  his  iniqu. 

20  soul  that  eateth . .  even  that  soul  shall  be 

21  Moreover  the  soul,  .even  that  soul  shall 
25  even  the  soul  that  eateth  (it)  shall  be  cut 
27  Whatsoever  soul . .  even  that  soul  shall  be 
29  shall  afflict  your  souls,  and  do  no  work  at 

31  shall  afflict  your  souls,  by  a  statute  for  ev. 

10  I  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul 

11  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls:  for 

11  (that)  maketh  an  atonement  for  the  soul 

12  No  soul  of  you  shall  eat  blood,  neither  s. 
15  every  soul  that  eateth  that  which  died  (of 
29  even  the  souls  that  commit  (them)  shall  be 

8  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  peo. 

6  soul  that  turneth  after  such  as  have  fain. 
6  I  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul 

25  shall  not  make  your  souls  abominable  by 

3  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  my  prese. 
6  soul  which  hath  touched  any  such  shall 

1 1  But  if  the  priest  buy  (any)  soul  with  his 
27  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls,  and  offer  an  off. 

29  For  whatsoever  soul  (it  be)  that  shall  not 

30  whatsoever  soul..samesoulwillldestroy 

32  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls :  in  the  ninth 

11  set  my  tabernacle,  and  my  soul  shall  not 
15  or  if  your  soul  abhor  my  judgments,  so 
30  your  idols,  and  my  soul  shall  abhor  you 
43  because  their  soul  abhorred  my  statutes 

13  even  the  same  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from 

6  But  now  our  soul  (is)  dried  away :  (there 

27  if  any  soul  sin  through  ignorance,  then  he 

28  atonement  for  the  soul  that  sinneth  ign. 

30  soul  that  doeth . .  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off 

31  broken  his  commandment,  that  soul  shall 
38  of  these  sinners  against  their  own  souls 
13  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  Israel:  because 
20  soul  shall  be  cut  off"  from  among  the  con. 

22  soul  that  toucheth  (it)  shall  be  unclean 

4  soul  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged 

5  and  our  soul  loatheth  tiffs  light  bread 

7  afflict  your  souls:  ye  shall  not  do  any  wo. 
2  swear  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bo. 
4.  4*  5  wherewith  she  hath  bound  her  soul 
6,  7,  8,  11  wherewith  she  bound  her  soul 

9  wherewith  they  have  bound  their  souls 
10  bound  her  soul  by  a  bond  with  an  oath 

12  concerning  the  bond  of  her  soul,  shall  not 

13  every  binding  oath  to  afflict  the  soul,  her 
28  one  soul  of  five  hundred,  (both)  of  the  pe. 


Lev. 


22. 

23. 
23- 
23- 
23- 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 

Num.  9. 
11. 
15- 
15- 
*5- 
IS- 
16. 
19. 
19. 
19. 

21. 

29. 
3°- 

30. 
3°- 
30. 
30. 

SO- 
SO- 


13- 
13- 
14. 
14. 

26. 

3°- 
Josh  10. 


23, 

Judg.  5 


23. 
24. 

25- 

25- 

25- 

26. 

3°- 


Num.31.  50  to  make  an  atonement  for  our  souls  be. 

Deut.  4.  9  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget 
4.  29  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul 
6.    5  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all.  .thy  soul 

10.  12  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul 

11.  13  with  all  your  heart  and  with  all  your  soul 

11.  18  lay  up  these  my  words.. in  your  soul,  and 
12. 15,  20,  21  whatsoever  thy  soul  lusteth  after 

12.  20  because  thy  soul  longeth  to  eatflesh,  thou 
3  with  all  your  heart  and  with  all  your  soul 
6  thy  friend,  which  (is)  as  thine  own  soul 

26  for  whatsoever  thy  soul  lusteth  after,  for 
26  strong  drink,  or  for  whatsoever  thy  soul 
16  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul 
2,  6,  10  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  so. 
28,  30,  32,  35,  37,  37,  39  all.the  souls  that(w.) 
11  they  smote  all  the  souls  that  (were)  the. 

5  with  all  your  heart,  and  with  all  your  so. 

14  ye  know,  .in  all  your  souls,  that  not  one 
21  0  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  str. 
16  his  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  I. 
16  (so)  that  his  soul  was  vexed  unto  death 

10  she  (was)  in  bitterness  of  soul,  and  prayed 

15  have  poured  out  my  soulbefore  the  Lord 
26  Oh  my  lord,  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  my  lord 

16  take  (as  niuch)as  thy  soul  desireth ;  then 
55  (As)  thy  soul  liveth,  0  king,  I  cannot  tell 

1  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the  soul 
1  and  Jonathan  loved  him  as  his  own  soul 
3  because  he  loved  him  as  his  own  soul 

3  (as)  the  Lord  liveth,  and  (as)  thy  soul  li. 

4  Whatsoever  thy  soul  desireth,  I  will  even 

17  for  he  loved  him  as  he  loved  his  own  soul 

20  according  to  all  the  desire  of  thy  soul  to 
ii  against  thee ;  yet  thou  huutest  my  soul 

26  (as)  the  Lord  liveth,  and  (as)  thy  soul  li. 
29  seek  thy  soul :  but  the  soul  of  my  lord  s. 
29  souls  of  thine  enemies,  them  shall  he  si. 

21  because  my  soul  was  precious  in  thine  ey. 

6  because  the  soul  of  all  the  people  was  gr. 
9  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  adver. 

8  (that  are)  hated  of  David's  soul,  (he  shall 

11  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  do  this  thi. 
19  (As)  thy  soul  liveth,  my  lord  the  king,  no. 

29  that  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  di. 
4  with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul 

48  return  unto  thee,  .with  all  their  soul,  in 

37  according  to  all  that  thy  soul  desireth,  and 

21  let  this  child's  soul  come  into  him  again 

22  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  again,  and 
2,  4,  6  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave 

27  her  soul  (is)  vexed  within  her:  and  the  L. 

30  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave  thee 

3  with  all  (their)  heart  and  all  (their)  soul 
25  with  all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  soul 

19  set  your  heart  and  your  soul  to  seek  the 

38  with  all  their  soul  in  the  land  of  their  ca. 

12  with  all  their  heart,  and  with  all  their  so. 

31  with  all  his  soul,  to  perform  the  words  01 

20  misery,  and  life  unto  the  bitter  (in)  soul 

7  The  things  (that)  my  soul  refused  to  touch 

1 1  will  complain  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 

15  So  that  my  soul  chooseth  strangling,  (and) 

21  would  Inot  know  my  soul:  I  would  desp. 
1  My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life:  I  will  leave 

1  I  will  speak  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 
10  In  whose  hand  (is)  the  soul  of  every  living 

22  and  his  soul  within  him  shall  mourn » 

4  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  stead,  I  co. 

2  How  long  will  ye  vex  my  soul,  and  break 
25  another  dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul 

1 3  (what)  his  soul  desireth,  even  (that)  he  do. 

12  soul  of  the  wounded  crieth  out:  yet  God 
2  and  the  Almighty,  (who)  hath  vexed  mys. 

8  gained,  when  God  taketh  away  his  soul? 

16  now  my  soul  is  poured  out  upon  me;  the 
25  Did  not  I  weep..  was(not)mysoul  grieved 
30  to  sin  by  wishing  a  curse  to  his  soul 

18  He  keepethbackhis  soulfrom  the  pit,  and 
20  life  abhorreth  bread,  and  his  soul  dainty 
22  soul  draweth  near  unto  the  grave,  and  his 

28  He  will  deliver  his  soul  from  going  into 
30  To  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,  to  be 

2  Many  (there  be)  which  say  of  my  soul,  (T.) 

3  My  soul  is  also  sore  vexed:  but  thou,  0  L. 

4  Return,  O  Lord,  deliver  my  soul:  oh  save 
2  Lest  he  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion,  rending 

5  Let  the  enemy  persecute  my  soiil,  and  ta. 

1  how  say  ye  to  my  soul,  Flee  (as)  a  bird  to 
5  him  that  loveth  violence  his  soul  hateth 

2  How  long  shall  I  take  counsel  in  my  soul 
10  For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell 

13  deliver  my  soul  from  the  wicked,  (which 
7  law.  .(is)  perfect,  converting  the  soul:  the 

20  Deliver  my  soul  from  the  sword  ;  my  da. 

29  and  none  can  keep  alive  his  own  soul 

3  He  restoreth  my  soul :  he  leadeth  me  in 

4  who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul  from  van. 

1  Unto  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  soul 
13  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease ;  and  his  seed 
20  0  keep  rov  soul,  and  deliver  me:  let  me 

9  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor  my 
3  thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  the  gr. 
7  thou  hast  known  my  soul  in  adversities 

9  consumed  with  grief,  (yea),  my  soul  and 

19  To  deliver  their  soul  from  death,  and  to 

20  Our  soul  waittth  for  the  Lord:  he  (is)  our 

2  My  soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  LORD 
22  Lord  redeemeth  the  soul  of  his  servants 

3  say  unto  my  soul,  I  (am)  thy  salvation 

4  put  to  shame  that  seek  after  my  soul :  let 
7  without  cause  they  have  digged  for  my  s. 


>Sa. 


I7> 

2   Kl.    2. 

4- 
4' 

23' 
23' 

1  Ch.22 

2  Ch.  6. 


Job 


Tsa. 


23. 
24. 

27. 
27. 
3°- 
30. 
3r- 
33- 
33- 
331 

3 

6. 
6. 
7- 


SOUL 


918 


SOUND 


Psa.  35. 
35- 
35- 
35- 
40. 
41. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
42. 
4?- 
43- 
44. 

49- 
49. 
49. 
54- 
54- 
55- 
&• 
56. 
57- 
57- 
57- 
59- 
62. 
62. 
63. 
63. 
63. 
63. 
66. 
66. 
69. 
69. 
69. 
70. 
7i- 
7*- 
7*- 
72. 
72. 
74- 
77- 
78. 
84. 
86. 
86. 
86. 
-86. 
86. 


94. 

94. 

94. 

97- 
103. 
104. 
104. 
106. 
107. 
107. 
107. 
307. 
107. 
109. 
309. 
316. 
116. 
316. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
319. 
319. 
319. 
319. 
319. 
120. 
120. 
121. 
123. 
124. 
124. 
324. 
330. 
330. 

*3*- 

338. 
*39- 
141. 
142. 
142. 
143- 
143- 
143- 
M3- 
*43- 
X46. 

"Prov.  2. 

3- 

6. 
6. 


9  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  the  Lord  :  it  sh. 

12  evil  for  good,  (to)  the  spoiling  of  my  soul 

13  humbled  my  soul  with  fasting ;  and  my 

17  rescue  my  soul  from  their  destructions 

14  that  seek  after  my  soul  to  destroy  it;  let 
4  heal  my  soul ;  for  I  have  sinned  against 

1  so  panteth  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God 

2  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living 
4  pour  out  my  soul  in  me  :  for  I  had  gone 
5,  11  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul? 
6  my  soul  is  cast  down  within  me :  theref. 
sWhy  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul?  and 

25  For  our  soul  is  bowed  down  to  the  dust 
8  For  the  redemption  of  their  soul  (is)  pre. 

15  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from  the  power 

18  Though  while  he  lived  he  blessed  his  so. 

3  oppressors  seek  after  my  soul :  they  have 

4  the  Lord  (is)  with  them  that  uphold  my  s. 
18  He  hath  delivered  my  soul  in  peace  from 

6  mark  my  steps,  when  they  wait  for  my  so. 

13  For  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  de. 

1  for  my  soul  trusteth  in  thee:  yea,  in  the 

4  My  soul  (is)  among  lions ;  (and)  I  lie  (ev. 

6  my  soul  is  bowed  down :  they  have  digged 

3  they  lie  in  wait  for  my  soul:  the  mighty 

1  my  soulwaiteth  upon  God:  from  him (co.) 

5  My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upou  God ;  formy 
1  my  soul  thirsteth  for  thee,  my  flesh  long. 
5  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  (with)  marr. 

8  My  soul  followethhard  after  thee :  thyri. 

9  those  (that)  seekmy  soul,  to  destroy  (it),sh. 
9  Which  holdeth  our  soul  in  life,  and  suff . 

16  will  declare  what  he  hath  done  formy  so. 

1  for  the  waters  are  come  in  unto  (my)  soul 
10  When  I  wept,  (and  chastened)  my  soul  wi. 

18  Draw  nigh  unto  my  soul,  (and)  redeem  it 

2  and  confounded  that  seek  after  my  soul 
10  they  that  lay  wait  for  my  soul  take  conn. 
13  consumed  that  are  adversaries  to  my  soul 
23  and  my  soul,  which  thou  hast  redeemed 

13  and  shall  save  the  souls  of  the  needy 

14  He  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  deceit  and 

19  deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle  dove  unto 
2  day  of  my  trouble . .  my  soul  refused  to  be 

50  he  spared  not  their  soul  from  death,  but 
2  Mysoullongeth,  yea,  even  fainteth  for  the 

2  Preserve  my  soul,  for  I  (am)  holy :  O  thou 

4  Rejoice  the  soul  of  thy  servant :  for 

4  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  soul 

13  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the  low. 

14  violent  (men)  have  sought  after  my  soul 

3  my  soul  is  full  of  troubles,  and  my  life  dra. 

14  whycastest  thou  off  my  soul?  (why)hidest 
48  shall  he  deliver  his  soul  from  the  hand  of 

17  ITnlesstheLoRD(hadbeen)my  help,  mys. 

19  within  me  thy  comforts  delight  my  soul 

21  gather  themselves . .  against  the  soul  of  the 

10  he  preserveth  the  souls  of  his  saints ;  he 
1,  2,  22  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul ;  and  all 

1  Bless theLORD,  Omysoul.  OLoRDmyGod 

35  Bless  thou  the  Lord,  0  my  soul.     Praise 

15  he  gave,  .but  sent  leanness  into  their  soul 

5  Hungry  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in 
9  For  he  satisfleth  the  longing  soul,  and 

9  filleth  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness 

18  Their  soul  abhorreth  all  manner  of  meat 

26  their  soul  is  melted  because  of  trouble 

20  of  them  that  speak  evil  against  my  soul 

31  save  (him)  from  those  that  condemn  his 

4  0  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul 

7  Return  unto  thy  rest,  O  my  soul ;  for  the 

8  thou  hast  delivered  my  soi'il  from  death 
20  My  soul  breaketh  for  the  longing  (that  it 
25  My  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust :  quicken 
28  My  soul  nielteth  for  heaviness :  strengthen 
Si  My  soul  fainteth  for  thy  salvation;  (but)I 
109  Sly  soul  (is)  continually  in  my  hand:  yet 
129  wonderful:  therefore  doth  my  soul  keep 
167  My  soul  hath  kept  thy  testimonies  ;  and 
175  Let  my  soul  live,  and  it  shall  praise  thee 

2  Deliver  my  soul,  0  Lord,  from  lying  lips 

6  My  soul  hath  lung  dwelt  with  hiin  that  ha. 

7  The  Lord,  .he  shall  preserve  Lhy  soul 

4  Our  soul  is  exceedingly  filled  with  the  sc. 

4  Then,  .the  stream  had  gone  over  our  soul 

5  the  proud  waters  had  gone  over  our  soul 

7  Our  soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the 

5  I  wait  for  the  Lord,  my  soul  doth  wait 

6  My  soul  (waiteth)  for  the  Lord  more  than 

2  I  have  behaved,  .my  soul  (is)  even  as  a  w. 

3  strengthenedstme(with)streugth  in  mys. 
14  aud  (that)  my  soul  knoweth  right  well 

8  in  thee  is  my  trust ;  leave  not  my  soul  d. 

4  refuge  failed  me ;  no  man  cared  for  my  so. 

7  Bring  my  soul  out  of  prison,  that  I  may 
3  the  enemy  hath  persecuted  my  soul ;  he 

6  my  soul  (thirsteth)  after  thee,  as  a  thirsty 

8  cause  me  to  know,  .for  I  lift  up  my  soul 

11  for  thy  righteousness'  sake  bring  my  soul 

12  and  destroy  all  them  that  afflict  my  soul 

1  Praise  ye.  .Praise  the  Lord,  O  my  soul 

10  and  knowledge  is  pleasant  unto  thy  s<ml 

22  So  shall  they  be  life  untothysoul,  and  gr. 
30  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  hu 

32  he  (that)  doeth  it  destroyeth  his  own  soul 

36  he  that  sinneth.  .wrongeth  his  own  soul 

3  The  Lord  will  not  suffer  the  soul  of  the 
17  The  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his.,  soul 
25  The  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat ;  and  he 
30  and  he  that  winneth  souls  (is)  wise 

2  the  soul  of  the  transgressors  (shall  eat) 

4  The  soul  of  the  sluggard  desireth.and  (ha.) 


Prov.  1 3. 

*3- 

13- 
14. 

15- 
16. 
16. 
18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 


22. 

23- 

24. 
24. 

25- 

25. 
27. 
27. 
29. 
29. 
29. 

Eccl.  2. 

4- 
6. 
6. 

7- 
Song   1. 

3- 

3. 
3- 
3- 
5- 
6. 
Isa.     1. 


Jer. 


Lam. 


Eze. 


4  the  soul  of  the  diligent  shall  be  made  fat 

19  desire  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the  soul 
25  eateth  to  the  satisfying  of  his  soul, but  the 
25  A  true  witness  delivereth  souls :  but  a  de. 
32  refuseth  instruction  despiseth  his.  .soul 

17  that  keepeth  his  way  preserveth  his  soul 

24  sweet  to  the  soul,  and  health  to  the  bones 

7  A  fool's,  .lips  (are)  the  snare  of  his  soul 
2  (that)  the  soul  (be)  without  knowledge 

8  that  getteth  wisdom  loveth  his  own  soul 

15  and  an  idle  soul  shall  suffer  hunger 

16  He.  .keepeth  his  own  soul ;  (but)  he  that 

18  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  for  his  crying 
2  provoketh  him . .  sinneth  (against)  his . .  so. 

10  The  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  evil,  his 
23  Whoso  keepeth  his  mouth.. keepeth  hiss. 

5  he  that  doth  keep  his  soul  shall  be  farfr. 

23  and  spoil  the  soul  of  those  that  spoiled  th. 

25  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare  to  thy  so. 
14  beat  him . .  and  shalt  deliver  his  soul  from 

12  he  that  keepeth  thy  soul,  doth  (not)  he  k. 
14  So  (shall)  the  knowledge.,  (be)  unto  thy  s. 

13  for  he  refresheth  the  soul  of  his  masters 
25  (As)  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  (is) 

7  The  full  soul  loatheth  an  honey  comb,  but 

7  to  the  hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing  is  s. 
10  hate  the  upright,  .the  just  seek  his  soul 

17  yea,  he  shall  give  delight  unto  thy  soul 

24  partner  with  a  thief  hateth  his  own  soul 

24  (that)  he  should  make  his  soul  enjoy  good 

8  For  whom  do  I . .  bereave  my  soul  of  good  ? 

2  he  wanteth  nothing  for  his  soul  of  all  th. 

3  his  soul  be  not  filled  with  good,  and  also 
28  Which  yet  my  soul  seeketh,  but  I  find  not 

7  Tell  me,  Othou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  wh. 

1  I  sought  him  whom  my  soul  loveth :  I  so. 

2  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  :  I 

3  (I  said),  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  loveth 

4  I  found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth:  I  he. 

6  my  soul  failed  when  he  spake  :  I  sought 
12  my  soul  made  me  (like)  the  chariots  of  A. 

14  and  your  appointedfeasts  my  soul  hateth 

9  Woe  unto  their  soul  1  for  they  have  rew. 
iS  of  his  fruitful  field,  both  soul  and  body 

8  the  desire  of  (our)  soul  (is)  to  thy  name 

9  With  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the 
8  but  he  awaketh,  and  his  soul  is  empty 

8  behold, (heis)faint,  and  his  soul  hath  ap. 

6  to  make  empty  the  soul  of  the  hungry 

15  go  softly,  .in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 
17  thou  hast  in  love  to  my  soul  (delivered 

1  Behold,  .mine  elect,  (in  whom)  my  soul 

20  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul,  nor  say,  (Is  th.) 

23  which  have  said  to  thy  soul,  Bow  down 

10  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for 

11  Heshallseeof  thetravailof  his  soul,  (and) 

12  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death 

2  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness 

3  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live  ;  and  I  will 
3  (wherefore)  have  we  afflicted  our  soul,  and 

5  Is  it. .a  day  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  soul? 
10  (if)  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry 

10  And  (if)  thou,  .satisfy  the  afflicted  soul 

11  satisfy  thy  soul  in  drought,  and  make  fat 
10  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God,  for  he 

3  their  soul  delighteth  in  their  abominati. 
34  the  blood  of  the  souls  of  the  poor  innoc. 

10  whereas  the  sword  reacheth  unto  the  so. 

19  thou  hast  heard,  O  my  soul,  the  sound  of 
31  my  soul  is  wearied  because  of  murderers 

9,  29  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such 

8  lest  my  soul  depart  from  thee  ;  lest  I  m. 

16  walk  therein,  and.  .find  rest  for  your  so. 

9  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a 

7  given  the  dearly  beloved  of  my  soul  into 

17  my  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  placesfor(y.) 

19  hath  thy  soul  loathed  Zion?  why  hast  th 

20  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  for  my  soul 

13  he  hath  delivered  the  soul  of  the  poor  fr. 

19  we  procure  great  evil  against  our  souls 

12  their  soul  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden 

14  I  will  satiate  the  soul  of  the  priests  with 

25  For  I  have  satiated  the  weary  soul,  and 
25  I  have  replenished  every  sorrowful  soul 
41  my  whole  heart  and  with  my  whole  soul 

16  (As)theLoRD  liveth,  thatmadeus  this  so. 

17  thy  soul  shall  live,  and  this  city  shall  not 

20  it  shall  be  well  unto  thee,  aud  thy  soul 

7  commit  ye  (this),  .evil  against  your  souls 
iq  his  soul  shall  be  satisfied  upon  mount  E. 

6  Flee  out.  .and  deliver  every  man  his  soul 
45  deliver  ye  every  man  his  soul  from  the  fi. 

11  their  pleasant  things,  .to  relieve  the  soul 

16  comforter  that  should  relieve  my  soul  is 

19  sought  their  meat  to  relieve  their  souls 

12  their  soul  was  poured  out  into  their  mot. 

17  thou  hast  removed  my  soul  far  off  from 

20  My  soul  hath  (them)  still  in  remembrance 

24  The  Lord  (is)  my  portion,  saith  my  soul 

25  The  LoRD(is)good..to  the  soul  (that)  see. 
58  thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my  soul 
19  die.  .but  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 

21  live,  .also  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 
14  my  soul  hath  not  been  polluted ;  for  f  1  om 

19  they  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls,  neither 
iS  to  bunt  souls,   Will  ye  hunt  the  souls  of 

18  will  ye  save  the  souls  alive  (that  come) 
in  to  slay  the  BOulsthatshouldnotdie,and 
10  to  save  the  souls  alive  that  should  not  li. 

20  wherewith  ye  there  hunt  the  souls  to  make 
20  will  let  the  souls  go,  (even)  the  souls  that 
14  they  should  deliver  (but)  their  own  souls 


Hos. 
J011. 

33- 

9- 
2. 

Mic. 

2. 

6. 

7- 

Hab. 


Eze.  14. 20  they  shall  (but)  deliver  their  own  souls  by 
18.   4  all  souls  are  mine ;  as  the  soul  of  the  fa. 
18.   4  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine 
18.   4,  20  the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die 
18.  27  doeth.  .right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive 
22.  25  they  have  devoured  souls ;  they  have  ta. 
22.  27  to  shed  blood,  (and)  to  destroy  souls,  to 
24.  21  and  that  which  your  soul  pitieth ;  and  yo. 
33.    5  that  taketh  warning  shall  deliver  his  soul 
9  die.  .but  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 

4  their  bread  for  their  soul  shall  not  come 

5  The  waters  compassedme..(even)to the s. 
7  When  my  soul  fainted  within  me  I  rem. 

7  fruit  of  my  body  (for)  the  sin  of  my  aoul 

1  no  cluster  to  eat :  my  soul  desired  the  fir. 
4  his  soul  (winch)  is  lifted  up  is  not  upright 

2.  10  and  hast  sinned  (against)  thy  soul 
Zech.n.    8  my  soul  loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also 

3. Breathy  .1274  neshamah. 

Isa.   57. 16  fail  before  me,  and  the  souls  (which)  I  ha. 

i.Animal  soul,  \pvx~h  psucke. 

Matt  10.  28  body,  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul 

10.  28  which  is  able  todestroy  both  soul  and  bo. 

11.  29  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls 

12.  18  my  beloved,  in  whom  my  soul  is  well  pie. 
16.  26  gain  the.  .World,  and  lose  his  own  soul 
16.  26  or  what  shall  a  man  give,  .for  his  soul? 
22.  37  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul 

26.  38  My  soul  isexceedingsorrowful,  even  unto 
Mark  8.  36  gain  the.  .world,  and  lose  his  own  soul 

8.  37  Or  what  shall  a  man  give,  .for  his  soul? 
12.  30  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind 
12.  33  [withall thesoul, and  withall  the  strength] 
14.  34  My  soulis  exceedingsorrowful  untodeath 
Luke  1.  46  Mary  said,  My  soul  doth  magnify  the  L. 

2.  35  a  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul 
10.  27  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thystrength 
12.  19  I  will  say  to  mysoul,  Soul,  thou  hast  much 

12.  20  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee 
21. 19  In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls 

John  12.  27  Now  is  my  soul  troubled;  and  what  shall 
*  Acts    2.  27  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  nei. 
2.  31  [his  soul]  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither  his 
2. 41  were  added . .  about  three  thousand  souls 

2.  43  fear  came  upon  every  soul:  and  many  wo. 

3.  23  every  soul,  winch  will  not  hear  that  pro. 

4.  32  multitude,  .of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul 
7.  14  his  kindred,  threescore  and  fifteen  souls 

14.  22  Confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples,  (and) 

15.  24  subverting  yoursouls,saying,(Ye  must)  be 

27.  37  two  hundred  threescore  and  sixteen  souls 
Rom.  2.    9  anguish,  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  do. 

13.  1  Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher 

1  Co. 15.  45  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  so. 

2  Co.  1.  23  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my  soul,  that 

1  Th.  2.    8  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were 

5.  23  (I  pray  God)  your  whole  spiiit  and  soul 

4.  12  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and 

6.  19  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  both 
10.  38  if  (any  man)  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  ha. 
10.  39  them  that  believe  to  the  saving  of  the  so. 
13. 17  they  watch  for  your  souls,  as  theythatm. 

1.  21  word,  which  is  able  to  save  your  souls 

5.  20  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall  hi. 
9  your  faith,  (even)  the  salvation  of  (your)s. 

22  ye  have  purified  yoursouls  in  obeying  the 
2. 11  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul 

2.  25  the  shepherd  and  bishop  of  your  souls 

3.  20  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls  were  sa. 

4.  19  commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls(to  him) 

8  vexed  (his)  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day 

14  beguiling  unstable  souls :  an  heart  they 

2  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth 

9  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them  th. 

16.  3  and  every  living  soul  died  in  the  sea 

iS.  13  aud  chariots,  and  slaves,  and  souls  of  men 
18.  14  fruits  that  thy  soul  lusted  after  are  depa. 
so.   4  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the 

SOUND,  sounding,  (high,  joyful,  solemn)  — 

1. Meditation,  utterance,  mourning,  narj  her/eh. 

Job  37.    2  Hear  attentively,  .the  sound  (that)  goeth 
'!.}[•  dilation,  [i'ari  kiggayon. 

Tsa.  92.    3  upon  the  harp  with  a  solemn  sound 
3. Multitude,  noise,  store,  ]Ssn  hamon. 

Isa.  63.  15  sounding  of  thy  bowels  and  of  thy  mere. 
i.Moulh,  n?  pek. 

Amos  6.    5  They  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  (and) 

5.  Voice,  ?>p  qol. 

Exod28.  35  sound  shall  be  heard  when  he  goeth  in 
Lev.  26.  36  the  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shallchase  th. 
Josh.  6.    5  when  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

6.  20  when  the  people  heard  the  sound  of  the 

2  Sa.    5.  24  when  thou  nearest  the  sound  of  a  going 
6.  15  brought  up  the  ark.  .with  the  sound  of 

15.  10  as  ye  hear  the  sound  of  thetiiimpet,  then 

40  the  earth  rent  with  the  s<>und  of  them 

41  when  Joab  heard  the  sound  of  the  trum. 

6  when  Ahijah  heard  the  sound  of  her  feet 
41  for  (there  is)  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain 
32  (is)  not  the  sound  of  his  master's  feet  be. 

15  when  thou  shalt  hear  a  sound  of  going  in 
28  with  sound  of  the  cornet,  and  with  trum 
13  to  make  one  smindtn  be  heard  in  praising 
20  In  what  place  (therefore)  ye  hear  the  so. 

Job    15.  21  A  dreadful  sound  (is)in  his  ears:  in  pros. 
21. 12  They,  .rejoice  at  the  sound  of  the  organ 
39.  24  neither  bclieveth  he  that  (it  is)  the  sound 

Psa.  47.    5  the  Lord  with  the  sound  of  a  trumpet 


Heb. 


J  as. 
1  Pe. 


2Pe. 
3  John 


Rev. 


r  Ki. 


2K1 

iCh 


2  Oh 

-\ch. 


SOUND 


919 


SOUTH 


Psa.  77.  17' skies  sent  out  a  sound:  thine  arrows  also 

9a.    6  With  trumpets  and  sound  of  cornet  make 

Eccl.  12.   4  when  the  sound  of  the  grinding  is  low 

Jer.    4. 19  hast  heard . .  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the 

4.  21  see  the  standard,  (and)  hear  the  sound  of 

6.  17  Hearken  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  B. 
8.  16  trembled  at  the  sound  of  the  neighing  of 

42.  14  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  nor  have 

50.  22  sound  of  battle  (is)  in  the  land,  and  of  gr. 

51.  54  sound  of acry(conieth)froni  Babylon,  and 
Eze.  10.    5  sound  of  the  cherubim's  wings  was  heard 

26. 13  sound  of  thy  harps  shall  be  no  more  hea. 

26.  15  Shall  not  the  isles  shake  at  the  sound  of 

27.  28  suburbs  shall  shake  at  the  sound  of  the 
31. 16  made  the  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound  of 
33.    4  Then  whosoever  heareth  the  sound  of  the 
33.    5  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  took 

Amos  2.   2  Moab  shall  die.  .with the  sound  of  the  tr. 

6.  Voice,  b$  qal. 

Ban.    3.    5,  15  at  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the 

3.  7  when  all  the  people  heard  the  sound  of 
3. 10  that  every  man  that  shall  hear  the  sound 

7 .Blowing,  ypn  teqa. 

Psa.  150.  3  PraiBe  him  with  the  sound  of  the  trump. 
8. Shout,  shouting,  n.ynR  teruah. 

2  Ch.13.  12  priests  with  sounding  trumpets  to  cry  al. 

Psa.  89.  15  the  people  that  know  the  joyfulsound:  th. 
150.  s  praise  him  upon  the  high  sounding  cymb. 
9. Echo,  resounding,  shout,  shouting,  "in  hed. 

Eze.    7.    7  not  the  sounding  again  of  the  mountains 

1Q.A  sound,  report,  fame,  ijx0s  echos. 

Acts  2.  2  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from  heav. 
Heb.  12. 19  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of  wo. 

11.  A  sound,  <pd6yyos  p>hthoygos. 

Kom  10. 18  their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth,  and 
1  Co.  14.   7  they  give  a  distinction  in  the  sounds,  how 

12.-4  voice,  sound,  <pcwr}  phone. 

Matt  "24.  31  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  great  sound 
John  3.  8  nearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not 
1  Co. 14.    7  even  things  without  life  giving  sound, wh. 

14.    8  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound 
Rev.    1.  15  and  his  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  wat. 
g.   9  sound  of  their  wings  (was)  as  the  sound 
18.  22  sound  of  a  millstone  shall  be  heard  no 
SOUND,  (perfect)  soundness,  (to  be)  safe  and — 
l.Healing,  yielding,  n?")D  marpe. 

Prov  14.  30  A  sound  he  art  (is)  the  life  of  the  flesh  :  but 
2.  Soundness,  Drp  methom. 

Psa.  38.    3  no  soundness  in  my  flesh  because  of  thine 

38.    7  and  (there  is)  no  soundness  in  my  flesh 
Isa.     1.   6  even  unto  the  head  (there  is)  no  soundn. 

3. Perfect^  whole,  complete,  plain,  D'pj?  tamim. 
Psa.  1 19.  80  Let  my  heart  be  sound  in  thy  statutes,  th. 

4.  Sound,  healthy,  vytys  hugies. 

Titus  2.    8  Sound  speech,  that  cannot  be  condemned 

5.  To  be  sound,  in  health,  vyiaiv<a  hugiaino. 

Luke  15.  27  because  he  hath  received  him  safe  and  so. 

1  Ti.    1.  10  any  other  thing  that  is  contrary  to  sound 

2  Ti.    1. 13  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words, which 

4.  3  when  they  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine 
Titus  1.    9  he  may  be  able  by  sound  docrine  both 

1. 13  rebuke  them,  .that  they  may  be  sound  in 
2.  1  the  things  which  become  sound  doetrine 
2.    2  temperate,  sound  in  faith,  in  charity,  in 

^.Perfect  soundness,  bKoKKnpia  holokleria. 

Acts    3.  16  hath  given  him  this  perfect  soundness  in 
SOUND  (out),  to  — 
l.To  roar,  move,  sound,  make  a  noise,  r:p.n  hamah. 

Tsa.    16.  11  my  bowels  shall  sound  like  an  harp  for  M. 

Jer.  48.  36,  36  mine  heart  shall  sound  for  Moab  like 

2.  To  bloio  or  sound  a  trumpet,  -raiin  chatsotser,  Z. 

2  Ch.  5.  12  an  hundred  and  twenty  priests  sounding 

7.  6  the  priests  sounded  trumpets  before  them 
13.  14  and  the  priests  sounded  with  the  trumpets 
29.  28  the  singers  sang,  and  the  trumpeters  sou. 

3.  To  search,  investigate,  *ip.n  chaqar. 

1  Sa.  20.  12  when  I  have  sounded  my  father  about  to. 

4.  To  cause  to  hear,  yci?  shamea,  5. 

1  Ch.15. 16  psalteries  and  harps  and  cymbals,  souu. 

15.  19  (were  appointed)  to  sound  with  cymbals 

5.  To  blow,  ypn  taqa. 

2  Ch.23.  13  the  people,  .sounded  with  trumpets,  also 
Neh.   4.  18  he  that  sounded  the  trumpet(was)  by  me 

6.  To  sound  out,  i£nx*ofxat.  execheomai. 

1  Th.  r.    8  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of  the  L. 

7.  To  become,  yli/o/xcu  ginomai. 

Luke  1.  44  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  sounded  in  m. 

8.  To  sound,  roar,  rix*w  echeo. 

1  Co.  13.    1  I  am  become  (as)  sounding  brass,  or  a  ti. 

9. To  blow  or  sound  a  trumpet,  <ra\.Trl£w  salpizo. 
Kev.   8.   6  seven  angels.,  prepared  themselves  to  so. 

8.  7  The  first  angel  sounded,  and  there  follow. 
8.  8  the  second  angel  sounded,  and  as  it  were 
8.  10  the  third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  a 
8.  12  the  fourth  angel  sounded,  and  the  third 

8.  13  of  the  trumpets,  .which  are  yet  to  sound 

9.  1  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I  saw  a  star 
9. 13  the  sixth  angel  sounded,  and  I  heard  a 


Kev.  10.  7  inthedays-.whcnheshallbeginto  sound 
11. 15  the  seventh  angel  sounded;  and  there  we. 

SOUND  an  alarm  or  trumpet,  to  — 
l.To  shout,  an  rua,  5. 

Num.  10.   7  shall  blow,  but  ye  shall  not  sound  an  al. 

Joel    2.    1  and  sound  an  alarm  in  my  holy  mountain 

2.  To  blmo  or  sound  a  trumpet,  atik-nifa  salpizo. 
Matt.  6.    2  do  not  sound  a  trumpet  before  thee,  as 
1  Co.  15.  52  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead 

SOUND,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  pass  over,  I3JJ  abar,  5. 

Lev.  25.  9  cause  the  trumpet . .  to  sound  on  the  tenth 
25.    9  shall  ye  make  the  trumpet  sound  throug. 

2.7V?  cause  to  hear,  j;p^  shamea,  5. 

1  CI1.16.    5  but  Asaph  made  a  sound  with  cymbals 

'   16.  42  for  those  that  should  make  a  sound,  and 
SOUND,  to  — 

To  take  soundings,  use  the  sounding  line,  fSoKtfa. 
Acts  27.  28  And  sounded,  and  found  (it)  twenty  fath. 

27.  28  they  sounded  again,  and  found  (it)  fifteen 

SOUND  mind  or  wisdom  — 
1.  Substance,  sound  wisdom,  rrti'^n  tushiyyah. 
Prov.  2.    7  He  layeth  up  sound  wisdom  for  the  righ. 

3.  21  My  son.  .keep  sound  wisdom  and  discre. 

8.  14  Counsel  (is)  mine,  and  sound  wisdom:  I 

2. Soundness  of  mind,  prudence,  <ra<ppovi<Tfi6s  sop. 

2  Ti.    1.   7  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mi. 
SOUR,  (grape,)  to  be  — 

l.Sour  or  unripe  fruit,  1D^  boser. 

Isa.    18.    5  and  the  sour'grape  is  ripening  in  the  flo. 

Jer.  31.  29  The  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  grape,  and 

31.  30  every  man  that  eateth  the  sour  grape,  his 

Eze.  18.    2  The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and 

2, Turned  aside,  degenerate,  *vid  sur. 

Hos.   4.  18  Their  drink  is  sour :  they  have  committed 

SOUTH  (country,  side,  ward,  west,  wind)  — 

1.  The  soidh  country  or  wind,  cn~n  darom. 

Deut33.  23  possess  thou  the  west  and  the  south 
Job   37.  17  he  quieteththe  earth  by  the  south  (wind) 
Eccl.  1.   6  The  wind  goeth  toward  the  south,  and 

11.    3  the  tree  fall  toward  the  south,  or  toward 
Eze.  20. 46  drop  (thy  word)  toward  the  south,  and  p. 
40.  24  After  that  he  brought  me  toward  the  so. 
40.  24  and,  behold,  a  gate  toward  the  south 
40.  27  a  gate  in  the  inner  court  toward  the  so. 
40.  27  measured  from  gate  to  gate  toward  the  s. 
40.  28  to  the  inner  court  by  the  south  gate 
40.  28  he  measured  the  south  gate  according  to 
40.  44  and  their  prospect  (was)  toward  the  so. 
40.  45  chamber,  whose  prospect  (is)toward  the  s. 
41. 11  another  door  toward  the  south:  and  the 
42.  12  the  chambers  that  (were)  toward  the  so. 
42. 13  the  south  chambers,  which  (are)  before 
42. 18  Hemeasuredthe  south  side,  five  hundred 

2.  Inner  chamber,  ~nn  cheder. 

Job  37.   9  Out  of  the  south  cometh  the  whirlwind 

3. Sea,  d;  yam. 

Psa.  107.    3  the  west,  from  the  north,  and  from  the  s. 

4, Might  hand,  pp;  yamin. 

1  Sa.  23.  19  Hachilah,  which  (is)  on  the  south  of  Je. 

23.  24  Maon,  in  the  plain  on  the  south  of  Jes. 
Psa.  89. 12  The  north  and.  the  south  thou  hast  ere. 

5. Pasture  land,  wilderness,  *i3*io  midbar. 

Psa.  75.    6  east,  nor  from  the  west,  nor  from  the  so. 

6.Negeb,  the  south  (country  of  Judah),  32J  negeb. 

Gen.  12.    9  journeyed,  goiug  on  still  toward  the  sou. 

13.    1  Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt.,  into  the  so. 

13.    3  he  went  on  his  journeys  from  the  south 

13.  14  northward,  and  southward,  and  eastward 

20.  1  journeyed  from  thence  toward  the  south 

24.  62  Isaac  came.,  for  he  dwelt  in  the  south  co. 

28.  14  east,  and  to  the  north,  and  to  the  south 
Exod26.  i8  make,  .twenty  boards  on  the  south  side 

27.  9  for  the  south  side,  .(there  shall  be)  hang. 
36.  23  made,  .twenty  boards  for  the  south  side 
38.  9  on  the  south  side . .  the  hangings  of  the 
40.  24  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  southward 
Numi3- 17  Get  you  up  this  (way)  southward,  and  go 
13. 22  they  ascended  by  the  south,  and  came  un. 
13.  29  Amalekites  dwell  in  the  land  of  thesouth 

21.  1  the  Canaanite,  which  dwelt  in  the  south 

33.  40  which  dwelt  in  the  south  of  the  land  of 

34.  3  your  south  quarter  shall  be  from  the  w. 
34.  3  your  south  border  shall  be  the  outmost 
34.  4  your  border  shall  turn  from  the  south  to 
34.  4  shall  be  from  the  south  to  Kadesh-barnea 
35-  5  the  south  side  two  thousand  cubits,  and 

DeuCi.  7  in  the  south,  and  by  the  seaside,  to  the  land 
34.    3  the  south,  and  the  plain  of  the  valley  of 

Josh.  10.  40  the  country  of  the  hills,  and  of  the  south 
11.    2  of  the  plains  south  of  Chinneroth,  and  in 

11.  16  all  the  south  country,  and  all  the  land  of 

12.  8  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  the  south  country 
15.  1  the  wilderness  of  Ziu  southward  (was)the 
15.  2  their  south  border  was  from  the  shore  of 
15.  2  from  the  bay  that  looketh  southward 

15.   3  it  went  out  to  the  south  side  to  Maaleh. 
15.  3  ascended  up  on  the  south  side  unto  Kadesh. 
15.   4  the  sea  ;  this  shall  be  yoursouth  coast 
15.   7  Adummim,  which  (is)  on  the  south  side 
15.  8  went  up.,  unto  the  south  side  of  the  Jebus.  ' 


Josh.  15.  19  thou  hast  given  me  a  south  land;  give  Dae 
15.  21  toward  the  coast  of  Edom  southward 
17.   9  the  river  Kanah,  southward  of  the  river 

17.  10  Southward  (it  was)  Ephraim's,  and  north. 

18.  5  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the  south 
18.  13  the  side  of  Luz,  which  (is)  Beth-el  south. 

18. 13  the  hill  that  (lieth)  in  the  south  side  of 
18.  14  compassed  the  corner  of  the  sea  southwa. 

18.  14  that  (lieth)  before  Beth-horn  southward. 
18. '15  the  south  quarter  (was)  from  the  end  of 

18. 16  to  the  side  of  Jebusi  on  the  south,  and  des. 
18. 19  south  end  of  Jordan  :  this  (was)  the  south, 
ig.   8  to  Eaalath-beer,  Kamath  of  the  south 

19.  34  reacheth  to  Zebulun  on  the  south  side 
Judg.  1.    9  in  the  mountain,  and  in  the  south,  and  in 

1. 15  thou  hast  given  me  a  south  land,  give  me 

1.  16  Judah,  which  (lieth)  in  the  south  uf  Arad 

21. 19  (a  place)  which  (is),  .on  the  south  of  Leb. 

1  Sa.  14.   5  the  other  southward  over  against  Gibeahr 

20.  41  arose  out  of  (a  place)  toward  the  south 
27. 10  David  said,  Against  the  south  of  Judah 
27. 10  and  against  the  south  of  the  Jerahme elites 

27. 10  and  against  the  south  of  the  Kenites 

30.    1  the  Amalekites  had  invaded  the  south,  and. 

30. 14  We  made  an  invasion  (upon)  the  south  of 

30. 14  upon  (the  coast),  .and  upon  the  south  or 
30.  27  to  (them)  which  (were)  in  south  Ramoth 

2  Sa.  24.    7  they  went  out  to  the  south  of  Judah, (even) 

1  Ki.  7.  25  three  looking  toward  the  south,  and  three 

7.  39  the  sea.  .eastward  over  against  thesouth. 
j  Ch.  9.  24  toward  the  east,  west,  north,  and  south 

26. 15  To  Obed-edom  southward;  and  to  his  sous 

26. 17  northward  four  a  day,  southward  four  a 

2  Ch.  4.    4  three  looking  toward  the  south,  and  three 

4. 10  he  set  the  sea.  .over  against  the  south 

28. 18  of  the  low  country,  and  of  the  south  of  J.. 
Psa.126.  4  Turn  again,  .as  the  streams  in  the  south 
Isa.  21.    1  As  whirlwinds  in  the  south  pass  through. 

30.    6  The  burden  of  the  beasts  of  the  south :  In. 
Jer.  13. 19  The  cities  of  the  south  shall  be  shut  up 
17.  26  and  from  the'mountains,  and  from  the  so. 

32.  44  take  witnesses,  .in  the  cities  of  the  south 

33.  13  in  the  cities  of  the  south,  and  in  the  land 
Eze.  20.  46  prophesy  against  the  forest  of  the  south 

20.47  say  to  the  forest  of  the  south,  Hear  the  wo. 

20.  47  all  faces  from  the  south  to  the  north  shall 

21.  4  against  all  flesh  from  the  south  to  the  no. 
40.  2  (was)  as  the  frame  of  a  city  on  the  south 
46.    9  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  south  gate 

46.  9  he  that  entereth  by  the  way  of  the  south 

47.  1  the  right  side  of  the  house,  at  the  south. 
47.  19  the  south  side .  .from  Tamar  (even)  to, 

47.  19  And  (this  is)  the.  .side  southward 

48.  10  toward  the  south  five  and  twenty  thousa. 

48. 16  the  south  side  four  thousand  and  five  hu. 
48.  17  toward  the  south  two  hundred  and  fifty 
48.  28  at  the  south  side  southward,  the  border 
48.  33  at  the  south  side  four  thousand  and  five 

Dan.    8.    4  westward,  andnorthward,  and  southward 

8.  9  toward  the  south,  and  toward  the  east 
11.   5  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  strong,  and 
11.   6  the  king's  daughter  of  the  south  shall  co^ 
11.   9  the  king  of  the  south  shall  come  into  (his) - 

11. 11  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  moved  with 
11.  14  stand  up  against  the  king  of  the  south 
11.  15  the  arms  of  the  south  shall  not  withstand 
11.  25  his  courage  agaiust  the  king  of  the  south 
11.  25  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  stirred  up  to 
11.  29  shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  south 
11.  40  shall  the  king  of  the  south  push  at  him 

Obad.      19  (they  of)  the  south  shall  possess  the  mount 

20  shall  possess  the  cities  of  the  south 
Zech.  7.   7  when(men)inhabitedthesouthandthepl. 
14.   4  the  north,  and  half  of  it  toward  the  south 

14.  10  from  GebatoRimnionsouthof  Jerusalem 

7.  South,  the  right  hand,  jD'Fi  teman. 

Exod26.  18  make.,  twenty  boards  on  the.,  side  south. 

26.  35  side  of  the  tabernacle  toward  the  south 

27.  9  southward  (there  shall  be)  hangings  for 
36.  23  made.,  twenty  boards  for  the.,  side  south. 

38.  9  southward  the  hangings  of  the  court  (we. 
Num.  2.  10  On  the  south  side  shall  be  the  standard  of 

3.  29  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  southward 

10.    6  the  camps  that  he  on  the  south  side  shall 

Deut.  3.  27  northward,  and  southward,  and  eastward 

Josh. 12.    3  and  from  the  south,  under  Ashdoth-pisg. 

13.    4  from  the  south,  all  the  land  of  the  Canaa. 

15.  1  (was)  the  uttermost  part  of  the  south  co. 
Job     9.    9  Pleiades,  and  the  chambers  of  the  south 

39.  26  (and)  stretch  her  wings  toward  the  south? 
Psa.  78.  26  by  his  power  he  brought  in  the  south  wi. 
Song.  4.  16  Awake,  0  north  wind;  and  come,  thouso. 
Isa.   43.    6  I  will  say.  .to  the  south,  Keep  not  back. 
Eze.  20.  46  set  thy  face  toward  the  south,  and  drop 

47.  19  southward.  .And  (this  is) the  south  side 

48.  28  the  border  of  Gad,  atthe.  .side  southward 
Zech.  6.   6  the  grisled  go  forth  toward  the  south  co. 

9. 14  and  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  of  the  south 

8.  The  south  west  wind,  \ty  lips. 

Acts  27.  12  lieth  toward  the  south  west  and  north  w. 
9. Mid-day,  the  south,  /xeffvfx^pla  mesembria. 

Acts    8.  26  go  toward  the  south,  unto  the  way  that 
10.  The  south,  south  wind,  voros  notos. 

Matt  12.  42  The  queen  of  thesouthshallriseupinthe 

Luken.  31  The  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in 

12.  55  when  (ye  see)  the  south  wind  blow,  ye  say 

13.  29  and  from  the  north,  and  (from)  the  south 
Acts  27.,  13  when  the  south  wind  blew  softly,  suppoa. 

28.  13  after  one  day  the  south  wind  blew,  and 
Rev.  21. 13  on  the  south,  three  gates;  and  on  thew&at 


sow 


920 


SPEAK 


sow  — 

.1  sioine,  boar,  sow,  vs  hus. 

2  Pe.  2.  22  the  sow  was  washed  to  her  wallowing 

SOW,  be  sown,  sower,  to  — 

1.  To  sow,  V1J  zara. 

Gen.  26. 12  Isaac  sowed  in  that  land,  and  received  in 
47.  23  (here  is)  seed  foryou,and  yeshallsowthe 

Exod_>3.  10  six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  land,  andsh. 
23.  16  the  first  fruits . .  which  thou  hast  sown  in 

Lev.  19.  19  thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  mingled 
25.  3  Six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  field,  and  six 
25.  4  thou  shalt  neither  sow  thy  field,  norpru. 
25.  11  ye  shall  nowsow,  neither  reap  that  which 
25.  20  we  shall  not  sow,  neither  gather  in  our  ■ 
25.  22  ye  shall  sow  the  eighth  year,  and  eat  (yet) 
26. 16  ye  shall  sow  your  seed  in  vain,  for  your 

Do'ut  11.  10  thou  sowedst  thy  seed,  and  wateredst  (it) 
22.  9  Thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  vineyard  with  di. 
22.   9  the  fruit  of  thy  seed  which  thou  hast  sown 

.Fudg.  6.    3  (so)  it  was,  when  Israel  had  sown,  that 
9.  45  beat  down  the  city,  and  sowed  it  with  sa. 

2  Ki.19.  29  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and  reap,  and 

Job     4.    8  they  that  plow  iniquity,  and  sow  wicked. 

31.  8  let  me  sow,  and  let  another  eat;  yea,  let 
Tsa.  97. 11  Light  (is)  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gl. 

107.  .37  sow  the  fields,  and  plant  vineyards,  which 
126.    5  They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy 

Prov  11.  18  to  him  that  soweth  righteousness  (shall 
22.    8  He  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap  vanity 

Eccl.  11.    4  He  that  observeth  the  wind  shall  not  sow 

11.  6  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the 
Isa.    28.  24  Doth  the  plowman  plow  all  day  to  sow  ? 

30. 23  that  thou  shalt  sow  the  ground  withal 

32.  20  Blessed  (are)  ye  that  sow  beside  all  wat 
37.  30  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and  reap,  and 
55.  10  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and 

Jer.  2.  2  the  wilderness,  in  aland  (that  was)  not  so. 
4.    3  Break  up  your  fallow  ground,  and  sow 

12.  13  They  have  sown  wheat,  but  shall  reap  th. 
31.  27  I  will  sow  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  ho. 
35.  7  Neither  shall  ye  build  house,  nor  sow  se. 
50.  16  Cut  off  the  sower  from  Babylon,  and  him 

Hos.  2.  23  And  I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth 
8.  7  they  have  sown  the  wind,  and  they  shall 
10. 12  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness,  reap 
Mic.  6.  15  Thou  shalt  sow.  but  thou  shalt  not  reap 
Hag.  1.  6  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  little 
Zech.io.   9  I  will  sow  them  among  the  people:  and 

2.  To  be  sown,  in\  zara,  2. 

Lev.  11.  37  fall  upon  any.  .seed  which  is  to  be  sown 
Deut  21.    4  valley,  which  is  neither  eared  nor  sown 

29.  23  it  is  not  sown,  nor  beareth,  nor  any  grass 
Eze.  36.  9  will  turn  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be . .  sown 
Nah.    1. 14  (that)  no  more  of  thy  name  be  sown :  out 

3.  To  be  sown,  jnj  zara,  4. 

Isa.   40.  24  they  shall  not  be  sown ;  yea,  their  stock 

4.  To  draw  out,  scatter,  r\pD  mashak. 

Amos  9.  13  the  treaderof  grapes  him  that  soweth  se. 

5. To  send,  nhy  shalach,  3. 

Prov.  6.  i4he  deviseth  mischief,  .be  soweth  discord 
6.  19  he  that  soweth  discord  among  brethren 
16.  28  A  froward  man  soweth  strife  ;  and  a  wh. 

6.  To  soio,  a-mipca  speiro. 

Matt. 6.  26  theysownot,  neither  do  they  reap,  nor 

13.  3  saying,  Behold,  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow 
13.    4  when  he  sowed,  some  (seeds)  fell  by  the 
[3. 18  Hear  ye  therefore  the  parable  of  the  sow. 
13. 19  catcheth  away  that  which  was  sown  in 
13.  24  a  man  which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field 
13. 25  his  enemy  came  and  [sowed]  tares  among 
13.  27  didst  not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field 
13.  31  which  a  man  took,  and  sowed  in  his  field 
13.  37  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the  Son 
13.  39  The  enemy  that  sowed  them  is  the  devil 
25.  24  reaping  where  thou  hast  not  sown,  and 
25.  26  thou  knewest  that  I  reap  where  I  sowed 

Mark  4.    3  Behold,  there  went  out  a  sower  to  sow 
4.    4  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 
4.  14  The  sower  soweth  the  word 
4. 15  by  the  way  side,  where  the  word  is  sown 
4.  15  taketh  away  the  word  that  was  sown  in 
4.  16  these  are  they  likewise  which  are  sown  on 
4.  18  these  are  they  which  are  sown  among  th. 
4.  20  these  are  they  which  are  sowu  on  good 
4.  31  which,  when  it  is  sown  in  the  earth,  isle. 
4.  32  But  when  it  is  sown,  it  groweth  up,  and 

Luke  8.    5  A  sower  went  out  to  sow  bis  seed :  and 

8.  s  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 
12.  24  Consider  the  ravens:  for  they  neither  sow 
19. 2i  and  reapest  that  thou  didst  not  sow 

19.  22  taking,  .and  reaping  that  I  did  not  sow 
John  4.  36  that  both  he  that  soweth  and  he  that  re. 
4.  37  herein  is  that  saying  true,  One  soweth 

1  Co.  9.  11  If  we  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual  thin. 

15.  36  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened 
15.  37  that  which  thou  sowest,  thou  sowest  not 
15.  42  It  is  sown  in  corruption  ;  it  is  raised  iti 
15.  43  It  is  sown  in  dishonour;  it  is  raised  in  gl. 
15.  43  it  is  sown  in  weakness  ;  it  is  raised  in  po. 
15.  44  It  is  sown  a  natural  body;  it  is  raised  a 

2  Co.  9.    6  He  which  BO  weth  sparingly  shall  reap  also 

9.  6  he  which  soweth  bountifully  shall  reap 
9. 10  he  that  ministereth  seed  to  the  sower,  bo. 

Gal.  6.  7  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 
6.  8  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  fie. 
6.   8  he  that  Boweth  t<>  the  spirit  shall  of  the 

JM.     3.  18  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sowninpeacc 


SOWING  (time)  — 
I. Seed,  V~i\  zera. 

Lev.  26.  5  the  vintage  shall  reach  unto  the  sowing  t. 

2.  Thing  soion,  j;ni  zerua. 

Lev.  1 1.  37  fall  upon  any  sowing  seed  which  is  to  be 
SOWN  thing  — 

1.  Thing  sown,  jjnj  zerua. 

Isa.  61. 11  causeth  the  things  that  are  sown  in  it  to 
2. Thing  sown,  Snip  mizra. 

Isa.  19.   7  every  thing  sown  by  the  brooks,  shall  wi. 
SPACE  — 
1. Border,  ^34  gebul. 

Eze.  40. 12  space  also  before  the  little  chambers  (was) 
40. 12  and  the  space  (was)  one  cubit  on  that  side 

2.  Day,  dv  yom. 

Gen.  29.  14  he  abode  with  him  the  space  of  a  month 
Lev.  25.  8  space  of  the  seven  sabbaths  of  years  shall 
Deut.  2.  14  space  in  which  we  came  from  Kadesh-bar. 

Z.Fidl,  nSd  male. 

Lev.  25.  30  if  it  be  not  redeemed  within  the  space  of 
i.Place,  standing  place,  DipD  maqom. 

1  Sa.  26. 13  stood  on  the  top . .  a  great  space  (being)  be. 
5. Moment,  y?"i  rega. 

Ezra  9.  8  now  for  a  little  space  grace  hath  been  (sh.) 
6. Space,  respite,  mn  revach. 

Gen.  32.  16  Pass  over  before  me;  and  put  a  space  bet. 
7.  Far  off,  pirn  rachoq. 

Josh.  3.   4  Yet  there  shall  be  a  spacebetweenyouand 
SPACE,  (for  or  by  the,  after  or  little)  — 
l.From,  air6  apo.     ■ 

Rev.  14.  20  by  the  space  of  a  thousand  (and)  six  hun. 
2.  Short,  ppaxvs  brachus. 

Acts    5. 34  to  put  the  apostles  forth  a  little  space 

Z. Interval,  intervening  time,  Btdarn/xa  diastema. 

Acts    5.    7  was  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after 
4. To  put  apart,  separate,  Sd'arwfxi  diistemi. 

Luke22. 59  about  the  space  of  one  hour  after,  another 

5.  Over,  up  to,  against,  for  the  purpose  of,  iwi  epi. 
Acts  19.    8  spake  boldly  for  the  space  of  three  months 

ig.  10  this  continued  by  the  space  of  two  years 
19.  34  with  one  voice  about  the  space  of  two  ho. 

6.  Time,  delay,  xpovos  chronos. 

Acts  15.  33  aftertheyhad  tarried  (there) a  space,  they 
Rev.   2.  21  gave  her  space  torepentof  her  fornication 

SPAIN,  'S.-rravta. 

The  peninsula  at  the  S.W.  of  Europe,  700  miles  long  and 
500  broad  ;  whether  Paul  ever  visited  it  is  uncertain. 
It  was  known  to  the  ancient  Greeks  under  the  name  of 
Iberia,  and  to  the  Romans  by  that  of  Hispania.  In  B.C. 
237  Hamilcar  the  Carthagenian  general  established 
his  authority  in  it ;  in  229  his  son  in  law  Hasdrubal 
founds  Carthagena ;  in  221  Hannibal  succeeds  on  the 
murder  of  his  father;  in  218  he  takes  Saguntuu,  ami 
begins  the  second  Punic  war,  iu  212  Scipio  is  defeated  ; 
in  210  Scipio  Africanus  takes  Carthagena;  in  206  the 
Carthagenians  finally  expelled ;  in  205  it  is  divided  into 
Hither  and  Further  Spain  ;  in  179  the  Celtiberians  revolt, 
but  are  suppressed;  in  145  Viriathus  defeats  the 
Romans;  in  140  he  is  murdered  by  them;  in  133  they 
secure  Central  Spain ;  in  104  it  is  ravaged  by  Cimbrian 
invaders;  in  77  Sertorius  rises  against  Sylla;  in  72  he 
is  defeated  and  murdered;  iu  60  Julius  Caesar  gains 
several  victories ;  in  55  Pompey  invested  with  its  full 
government;  in  27  Augustus  divides  it  into  three 
provinces;  in  25  he  subdued  the  N.  tribes,  theCantabri 
and  the  Astures;  in  A.D.  251  Christianity  is  first  intro- 
duced. 

Rom  15.  24  Whensoever  I  take  my  journey  into  S. 
15.  28  this  fruit,  I  will  come  by  you  into  S. 

SPAN,  (long,  to)  — 
I. A  span,  n"i7  zereth. 

Exod23.  16  span  (shall  be)  the  length  thereof,  and  a  s. 
36.    9  span  (was)  the  length  thoreof,  and  a  span 

1  Sa.  17.    4  whose  height  (was)  six  cubits  and  a  span 

Isa.    40.  12  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  co. 

Eze.  43.  13  edge  thereof  roundabout  (shall be)a span 

2.  To  stretch  out,  swaddle,  train  up,  n^tt  taphach,Z. 
Isa.    48.  13  my  right  hand  hath  spanned  the  heavens 

3. Stretching  out,  training,  D'nDp  tippuchim. 

Lam.  2.  20  eat  their  fruit, (and)children  of  a  span  long 

SPARE,  to  — 

l.To  shelter,  spare,  Din  chus. 

1  Sa.  24.  10  spared  thee;  and  I  said.  I  will  not  put  fo. 
Neh.  13.  22  spare  me  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy 
Psa.  72.  13  He  shall  spare  the  poor  and  needy,  and 
Isa.  13.  18  have  no  pity,  .their  eye  shall  not  spare 
Jer.  13.  14  I  will  not  pity,  nor  spare,  nor  have  mercy 
21.  7  he  shall  not  spare  them,  neither  have  pity 
Eze.  5.  11  neither  shall  mine  eye  spare,  neither  will 
7.    4  mine  eye  shallnot  spare  thee,  neither  will 

7.  9  mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I 

8.  18  mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I 

9.  5  let  notyoureyespare,  neither  have  ye  pity 
o.  10  as  for  me  also,  mine  eye  shall  not  spare 

20. 17  Nevertheless  mine  eye  spared  them  from 
24.  14  neither  will  I  spare,  neither  will  I  repent 
Joel  2. 17  Spare  thy  people,  0  Lord,  and  give  not 
Jonali4.  11  should  I  not  spare  Nineveh,  thatgreat  city 


2.  To  have  pity,  be  mild,  meek,  ^srr  chamal. 

Deut  13.    8  neither  shall  thou  spare,  neither  shalt  th. 

1  Sa.  15.   3  spare  them  not;  but  slay  both  man  and 

15.    9  Saul  and  the  people  spared  Agag,  and  the 

15.  15  forthe  people  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep 

2  8a.  12.    4  spared  to  take  of  his  own  flock,  and  of  his 

21.    7  But  the  king  spared  Mephibosheth,  the 
Job     6.  10  let  him  notspare;  forlhave  notconcealed 

16.  13  doth  notspare;  hepourethoutmygallup. 

20.  13  spare  it,  and  forsake  it  not,  but  keep  it 
27.  22  shaU  castuponhim,  and  not  spare:  he  wo. 

Prov.  6.  34  he  will  not  spare  in  the  day  of  vengeance 
Isa.    9.  19  fuel  of  the  tire:  no  man  shall  spare  his  br. 

30.  14  he  shall  not  spare:  so  that  there  shall  not 
Jer.  50.  14  spare  no  arrows;  for  she  hath  sinned  aga. 

51.    3  spare  ye  not  her  young  men;  destroy  ye 
Hab.    1.  17  not  spare  continually  to  slay  the  nations 
Mai.   3. 17  will  spare  them,  as  a  man  spareth  his  own 

3.7*0  keep  back,  withhold,  ^yn  chasak. 

2  Ki.  5.  20  my  master  hath  spared  Naaman  this  Sy. 
Job  30.  10  flee  far  from  me,  and  spare  not  to  spit  in 
Psa.  78.  50  be  spared  not  their  soul  from  death,  but 
Prov  13.  24  He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth  his  son] 

17.  27  He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  wo. 

21.  26  but  the  righteous  giveth  and  spareth  not 
Isa.   54.    2  spare  not,  lengthen  thy  cords,  and  stre. 

58.    1  Cry  aloud,  spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  like 

4.7*0  lift  up,  xyi  nasa. 

Gen.  18.  24  wilt  thou  also  destroy  and  not  spare  the 

18.  26  then  I  will  spare  all  the  place  for  their 
Prov  19.  18  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  for  his  crying 

5. To  send  atuay,  let  go,  n^D  salach. 

Deutag.  20  Lord  will  not  spare  him,  but  then  the  an. 

6.  To  look  dazzled,  smear,  njjip  shaah,  5. 

Psa.  39. 13  spare  me,  that  I  may  recover  strength,  be. 

7. To  spare,  forbear,  <p4iBo/j.at  pheidomai. 

Acts  20.  29  enter  in  among  you,  not  sparing  the  flock 
Rom.  8.  32  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  de. 

11.  21  spared  not.  .(take  heed)  lest  he  also  spare 

1  Co.  7.  28  have  trouble  in  the  flesh :  out  I  spare  you 

2  Co.  1.  23  to  spare  you  I  came  as  not  yet  unto  Cor. 

13.    2  that,  if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  spare 
2  Pe.  2.   4  For  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sin. 
2.    5  And  spared  not  the  old  world,  but  saved 
SPARTNGLY  — 
Sparingly,  (^eiSo/ieVaiy  pheidomenus. 

2  Co.  9.    6  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly 
SPARK  — 

1.  Son  of  the  fame,  H^TI?  ben-resheph. 

Job     5.    7  born  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upw. 

2,  Sparks,  darts,  firebrands,  nip*]  ziqoth. 

Isa.    50.  11  that  compass  (yourselves)  about  with  sp. 
50.  11  walk,  .in  the* sparks  (that)  ye  have  kin. 
Z.Sjmrk,  flame,  ~riT3  kidod. 

Job   41.  19  Out  of  his  mouth,  .sparks  of  fire  leapout 
-i.Spai'k,  pa*j  nitsots. 

Isa.     1.  31  as  tow.aud  the  maker  of  it  as  a  spark,  and 
5.  Spark,  flame,  Tnip  shabib. 

Job   18.    5  and  the  spark  of  bis  fire  shall  not  shine 
SPARKLE,  to  — 
To  sparkle,  |'S3  natsats. 

Eze.    1.   7  sparkled  like  the  colour  of  burnished  br. 
SPARROW  — 

1.  Bird,  fowl,  s}xtrrow,  ni3*  tsippor. 

Psa.  84.    3  Yea,  the  sparrow  hath  found  an  house 
102.    7  am  as  a  sparrow  alone  upon  the  house  top 

2.  A  young  sptarrow,  crpovQlov  strouthion. 

Matt  10.  29  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing  \ 

10.  31  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 

Lukeis.    6  Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  farth.? 

12.  7  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 

SPEAK,  (against,  of,  often,  to  w'th),  to— 
l.To  say,  (lift  up  the  voice),  ~r?x  amar. 

Gen.    9.   8  spake  unto  Noah,  and  to  his  sous  with  h. 

21.  22  captain  of  his  host  spake  unto  Abraham 

22.  7  Isaac  spake  unto  Abraham  his  father,  ami 
27.  6  Rebekah  spake  untoJacobher  son,  saying 
31. 11  angel  of  God  spake  unto  me  iu  a  dream 

31.  29  God  of  your  father  spake  unto  me  yester. 

32.  4  Thus  shall  ye  speak  unto  my  lord  Esau 

34.  4  Shechem  spake  unto  his  father  Hamor 
39.  14  spake  unto  them,  saying,  See,  he  hath  b. 
42.  22  Spake  I  not  unto  you,  saying,  Do  not  sin 

42.  37  Reuben  spake  unto  Ins  father,  saying,  SI. 

43.  3  Judah  spake  unto  him,  saying,  The  man 
43.  27  old  man  of  whom  ye  spake?  (is)  he  yet 
43.  29  younger  brother,  of  whom  ye  spake  unto 

46.  2  God  spake  unto  Israel  in  the  visions  of  the 

47.  5  Pharaoh  spake  unto  Joseph,  saying,  Thy 
Exod.  1.  15  kins  of  Egypt  spake  to  the  Hebrew  mid. 

5.  10  spake  to  the  people,  saying,  Thus  saith 

7.    8  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses 
So  in  7.  19;  8.  1,  5;  12.  1;  31.  12;  Num.  7.  4;  15.  37; 
20.  12,  23 ;  21.16;  26.  1 ;  27.  6 ;  31.  25. 

15.  1  spake,  saying,  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord 

16.  9  Moses  spake  unto  Aaron,  Say  unto  all  the 
19.25  So  Moses  went  down,  .and  spake  unto  th. 
32.  12  Wherefore  should  the  Egyptians  speak 
32.  13  all  this  land  that  I  have  spoken  of  will  I 

35.  4  Moses  spake  unto  all  the  congregation  of 

36.  5  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  The  people  br. 


SPEAK 


921 


SPEAK 


Lev.  2:. 

Numi2. 
14. 
14. 
16. 

17- 
18. 
20. 
32. 
32- 

Deut.  1. 
2. 

9- 

9- 

28. 

Josh.  1 
1. 

3' 
4' 
4. 
4- 
6. 

7- 

9- 
17- 


Judg.  8 
15. 
*7- 

t  Sa.   7. 


:Ki. 


2  Ki.,  9. 
17- 
18. 
19. 

1  Ch.15. 

2  Ch.  1. 


18. 

32- 
32- 

35- 

Ezra  8. 

Neh.  2. 
4- 
8. 

Esth.  3. 
4- 
5- 
6. 

Job  33. 

37' 
Psa.  29. 

33- 
41. 

45- 
7i- 
105. 
105. 
*39- 
145- 
145. 

Isa.     s. 

8. 
23- 
3i- 

37- 

3?- 
t         55- 

Jer.   13. 

18. 
26. 

£6. 

26. 
26. 
27. 
27. 


1  Speak  unto  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron 
4  Lord  spake  suddenly  unto  Moses,  and  nn. 

7  spake  unto  all  the  company  of  the  childr. 
15  have  heard  the  fame  of  thee  will  speak 
37  Speak  unto  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  the 

12  children  of  Israel  spake  unto  Moses,  say. 

20  spake  unto  Aaron,  Thou  shalt  have  no  in. 

3  spake,  saying,  Would  God  that  we  had  d. 

2  the  children  of  Reuben  came  and  spake 

25  the  children  of  Reuben  spake  unto  Moses 
9  I  spake  unto  you  at  that  time,  saying,  I 
2  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  me,  saying 

4  Speak  not  thou  in  thine  heart,  after  that 

13  the  Lord  spake  unto  me,  saying,  I  have 
68  by  the  way  whereof  I  spake  unto  thee,  Th. 

1  the  Lord  spake  unto  Joshua  the  son  of  N. 

12  to  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  spake  Josh. 
6  Joshua  spake  unto  the  priests,  saying,  T. 

1  that  the  Lord  spake  unto  Joshua,  saying 

15  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Joshua,  saying 

21  he  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  say. 

8  it  came  to  pass,  when  Joshua  had  spoken 

2  spake  unto  them,  saying,  Go  up  and  view 

11  the  inhabitants  of  our  country  spake  to 
17  Joshua  spake  unto  the  house  of  Joseph 

8  he  spake  unto  them,  saying,  Return  with 
24  your  children  might  speak  unto  our  chil. 

9  he  spake  also  unto  the  men  of  Fenuel,  say. 

13  they  spake  unto  him,  saying,  Ko ;  but  we 

2  about  which  thou  cursedst,  and  spakest 

22  spake  to  the  master  of  the  house,  the  old 

3  Samuel  spake  unto  all  the  house  of  Israel 
9  thus  he  spake,  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  the 

17  Behold  the  man  whom  I  spake  to  thee  of ! 

16  But  of  the  matter . .  whereof  Samuel  spake 

26  David  spake  to  the  men  that  stood  by  him 

30  he  turned  from  him.  .and  spake  after  the 

12  the  woman  spake  to  Saul,  saying,  Whyha. 
6  the  people  spake  of  stoning  him,  because 

18  the  Lord  hath  spoken  of  David,  saying,  By 

1  Then  came  all  the  tribes . .  and  spake,  say. 
6  which  spake  unto  David,  saying,  Except 

22  the  maid  servants  which  thou  hast  spoken 

4  when  the  woman  of  Tekoah  spake  to  the 
6  Absalom  spake  unto  him,  saying,  Ahith. 

18  she  spake,  saying,  They  were  wont  to 

17  David  spake  unto  the  Lord,  when  he  saw 

11  Nathan  spake  unto  Bath-sheba  the  mother 
17  Speak,  I  pray  thee,  unto  Solomon  the  ki. 
26  Then  spake  the  woman  whose  the  living 

12  Then  spake  Solomon,  The  Lord  said  that 
10  Thus  shalt  thou  speak  unto  this  people  th. 

23  Speak  unto  Rehoboam,  the  son  of  Solom. 

31  he  spake  to  his  sons,  saying,  "When  I  am 

5  Thus  speaketh  Ben-hadad,  saying,  Altho. 
28  spake  unto  the  king  of  Israel,  and  said,  Th. 
12  Thus  and  thus  spake  he  to  me,  saying,  Th. 
26  they  spake  to  the  king  of  Assyria,  saying 

19  Speak  ye  now  to  Hezekiah,  Thus  saith  the 
10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiah  king  of 

16  David  spake  to  the  chief  of  the  Levites  to 

2  Solomon  spake  unto  all  Israel,  to  the  cap. 
15  the  wine,  which  my  lord  hath  spoken  of 

3  Speak  unto  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solomon 

19  one  spake  saying  after  this  manner,  and 

17  to  speak  against  him,  saying,  As  the  gods 

24  he  spake  unto  him,  and  he  gave  him  a  si. 

25  the  singing  women  spake  of  Josiah  in  th. 
22  we  had  spoken  unto  the  king,  saying,  The 

18  the  king's  words  that  he  had  spoken  unto 

2  he  spake  before  his  brethren  and  the  army 
1  they  spake  unto  Ezra  the  scribe  to  bring 

4  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  spake  daily  un. 
10  Esther  spake  unto  Hatach,  and  gave  him 

14  to  morrow  speak  thou  unto  the  king  that 

4  to  speak  unto  the  king  to  hang  Mordecai 

5  thou  hast  spoken  in  mine  hearing,  and  I 

20  If  a  man  speak,  surely  he  shall  be  swallo. 
9  in  his  temple  doth  everyone  speak  of  (his) 
9  he  spake,  and  it  was  (done);  he  comman. 

5  Mine  enemies  speak  evil  of  me,  When  sh. 
1  I  speak  of  the  things  which  I  have  made 

10  mine  enemies  speakagainst  me  ;  and  they 
31  He  spake,  and  there  came  divers  sorts  of 
34  He  spake,  and  the  locusts  came,  and  cat. 
20  they  speak  against  thee  wickedly,  (and)th. 

6  (men)  shall  sptak  of  the  might  of  thy  ter. 

11  They  shall  speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  king. 
1:  the  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  with  a  strong 
20  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word 

4  the  sea  hath  spoken,  (even)  the  strength 
4  thus  hath  the  LORD  spoken  unto  me,  Like 

10  Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiah  king  of 

15  he  hath  both  spoken  unto  me,  and  himself 

3  Neither  let  the  son  of  the  stranger,  .speak 

12  thou  shaltspeak  unto  them  this  word,  Th. 

11  speak  to  the  men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  in. 

11  Then  spake  the  priests  and  the  prophets 

12  Then  spake  Jeremiah  unto  all  the  princes 

17  spake  to  all  the  assembly  of  the  people,  say. 

18  spake  to  all  the  people  of  Judah,  saying 
9  your  sorcerers,  which  speak  unto  you,  sa. 

14  the  words  of  the  prophets  that  speak  unto 

1  spake  unto  me  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  in 

2  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God 
11  Hananiah  spake  in  the  presence  of  all  the 

24  (Thus)  shalt  thou  also  speak  to  Shemaiah 

25  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God 
2  Thusspeaketh  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  say. 
2  speak  to  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah,  and  tell 

16  Go  and  speak  to  Ebed-melech  the  Ethio. 

15  Johanan  the  son  of  Kareah  spake  to  Ged. 

116 


Jer.  43. 

*      48* 
Eze.  10. 

11. 

i3- 
24. 

3i- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
35- 
37- 
39- 

Dau.    1. 

Amos  5. 

Jon.    2. 

Hag.    1, 


Zech.  1. 
3- 
4- 
4- 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 

%Tosay,  ' 

Dan.    2. 

3- 

4- 

6. 


2  Then  spake  Azariah  the  son  of  Hoshaiah 

8  shall  be  destroyed,  as  the  Lord  hath  spo. 
2  he  spake  unto  the  man  clothed  with  linen 

5  the  spirit . .  said  unto  me,  Speak ;  Thus  sa. 
7  have  ye  not  spokenalying  divination,  wh. 

21  Speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  sai. 

2  speak  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and  to 
10  O  thou  son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  house 
10  Thus  ye  speak,  saying,  If  our  transgressi. 
24  they  that  inhabit  those  wastes . .  speak,  sa. 

12  thy  blasphemies  which  thou  hast  spoken 
18  the  children  of  thy  people  shall  speakunto 
17  Speak  unto  every  feathered  fowl,  and  to 

3  the  king  spake  untoAshpenaz  the  master 
14  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye  have  spoken 
10  the  Lord  spake  unto  the  fish,  and  it  vom. 

2  Thus  speaketh  the  LORD  of  hosts,  saying 

13  Then  spake  Haggai  the  Lord's  messenger 

2  Speak  now  to  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shea. 
21  Speak  to  Zerubbabel,  governor  of  Judah 
21  he  spake,  saying,  These  (are)  the  horns 

4  he  answered  and  spake  unto  those  that 

4  I  answered  and  spake  to  the  angel  that 

6  he  answered  and  spake  unto  me,  saying 
12  speak  unto  him,  saying,  Thus  speaketh 

3  (And)  to  speak  unto  the  priests  which  (w.) 

5  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and 

9  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying 

icx  amar. 

9  "ye  have  prepared  lying,  .words  to  speak 
29  speak  anything  amiss  against  the  God  of 
31  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  to  thee  it  is  spoken 
12  they  came  near,  and  spake  before  the  ki. 

%.To  speak  wrongfully  or  rashly,  NQ3  bata. 

Prov  12.  18  There  is  that  speaketh  like  the  piercings 

\.To  speak,  (lead  forth  words),  17?  dabar. 

Gen.  16.  13  called  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  spake 
Nuni27.  7  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  speak  right 
Deut.  5.  1  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  I  speak 
Eath.io.  3  seeking  the  wealth,  .and  speaking  peace 
Job  2. 13  they  sat  down,  .and  none  spake  a  word  un. 
Psa.  5.  6  Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak  leas. 
15.  2  worketh  righteousness,  and  speaketh  the 
28.   3  which  speak  peace  to  their  neighbours.but 

31. 18  which  speak  grievous  things  proudly  and 
51.  4  mightest  be  justified  when  thou  speakest 
58.    3  as  soon  as  they  be  born,  speaking  lies 

63. 11  the  mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall 
109.  20  and  of  them  that  speak  evil  against  my 
Prov  16. 13  and  they  love  him  that  speaketh  right 
Isa.     9.  17  everyone(is)an  hypocrite.. everymouths. 

33.  15  He  that  walketh  righteously,  and  speak. 

45. 19  I  the  Lord  speak  righteousness,  I  declare 
Jer.  28.    7  that  I  speak  in  thine  ears,  and  in  the  ears 

38.  20  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  which  I  speak  unto 
40. 16  Thou  shalt  not.  .forthou  speakest  falsely 
Dan.  10.  11  understand  the  words  that  I  speak  unto 
Amos  5.  10  they  abhor  him  that  speaketh  uprightly 

5.  To  be  spoken  to,  speak  together,  "13^  dabar,  2. 
Paa.iig.  23  Princes  also  did  sit  (and)  speak  against  me 
Mai.    3.  13  What  have  we  spoken  (so  much)  against 

3. 16  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one 

6.  To  speak,  ini  dabar,  3. 

Gen.    8.  15  And  God  spake  unto  Noah,  saying 

12.   4  Abraham  departed,  as  the  Lord  had  spo. 

18.  19  upon  Abraham  that  which  he  hath  spok. 

18.  27,  31  I  have  taken  upon  me  to  speak  unto 

18.  29  And  he  spake  unto  him  yet  again,  and  sa. 

18. 30,  32  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will 

See  also  19.  14,  21;  21.  1,  2;  23.  3,  13;  24.  7,  15,  30,  33, 

45-  5°>  5i;  27-  5.  6;  28-  *5'>  29-  6;  31.  24,  29;  32.  19;  34. 

3;  35-  15;  37-  4;  39-  IO>  17,  ^91  4*-  9.  28;  42-   7-  M>  3°; 

44.  2,  6,  18 ;  45.  12;  49.  28;  50.  4,  4,  17,  21 ;  Exod.  4.  10, 

14,  15,  30,  30;  5.  23;  6.  2,  9,  10,  i'i,  12,  13,  27,  28,  29,  29; 

7.  2,  2,  7,  9 ;  9.  12,  35 ;  10.  29 ;  11.  2 ;  12.  3 ;  13.  1 ;  14.  1,  2, 
15;  16.  10,  ii,  12;  19.  6,  8,  9,  19;  20.  1,  19,  19;  23.  22;  25. 

1,  2;  28.  3;  29.  42;  30. 11,  17,  22,  31 ;  31.  1, 1,  13;  32.  34;  33. 
11,  11,  17;  34.  32,  33,  34,  34,  35;  40.  1;  Lev.  1.  1,  2;  4.  1, 
2;  5. 14  ",6. 1,  8, 19,  24,25  ;  7.22,  23,28,29;  8.1 ;  9.3  ;  10.3,8, 
11,  12;  it.  1,  2;  12.  1,  2;  13.  1;  14.  1,  33;  15.  1,  2;  16.  1,  2; 
17.  1,  2;  18.  1,  2;  19.  1,  2;  20.  1;  21.  16,  17;  22.  1,  2,  17,  18, 
26;  23.  i,  2,  9,  10,  23,  24,  26,  33,  34;  24.  1,  13,  15,  23;  25. 1, 
2;  27.  1,  2. 

Num.  1.  1,  48;  2. 1;  3.  1,  5,  11,  14,  44;  4.  1, 17,  21;  5.  1, 
4,  s,  6,  11,  12;  6.  1,  2,  22,  23;  7.  89,  89;  8.  1,  2,  5,  23;  9;  1, 

4,  9,  10;  10.  1,  29;  11.  25;  12.  1,  2,  2,  6,  8,  8;  13.  i; 
14.  17,  26,  28;  15.  1,  2,  17,  18,  22,  31,  38;  16.  5,  20,  23,  26, 
36,  44;  17.  1,  2,  6;  18.  8,  25,  26;  19. 1,  2;  20.  7,  8;  21.  5,  7; 
22.  7,  8,  35,  35,  38;  23.  2,  5,  12,  17,  19,  26;  24.  12,  13;  25. 
10,  16;  26.  3,  52;  27.  8,  15;  28.  1;  30.  1;  31.  i,  3;  33.  50, 
51;  34.  1,  16;  35.  1,  9,  10;  36.  1. 

Deut.  1.  1,  1,  3,  6,  14,  43;  2.  1,  17;  3.  26;  4.  12,  15,  33, 
45;  5.  22,  26,  27,  27,  28,  28,  28,  31;  6.  19;  9.  10;  10.  4;  11. 
19;  13.  2,  5;  18.  17,  18,  19,  20,  20,  20,  21,  22,  22,  22;  20.  2, 

5,  8,  9;  25.  8;  26.  19;  27.  9;  31.  1,  28,  30;  32.  1,  44,  45,  48; 
Josh.  4.  8, 10, 12;  9.  22;  10.  12;  14.  12;  17.14;  20.  i,  2,  2;  21. 

2,  45;  22. 15,  30;  23. 14;  24. 27;  Judg.  2.  4;  6.  39;  8. 8;  9. 2,  3, 
37;  13.  11;  15.  17;  19.  3,  30;  21.  13;  Ruth   1.  18;  2.  13:  4.  ij 

1  Sa.  1.  13,  16;  3.  9,  10,  12;  9.  21;  16. 4;  17.  23, 28, 31;  18.  1, 
23, 24:19. 1,4;  20. 23, 26;  24.  16:25. 9>  T7»24»3°>  4°J  28. 17,21; 

2  Sa.  2. 27;  3. 19, 19, 27;  7. 7, 17, 19,  25,  29;  12. 18;  13. 13/22,36; 
14.  3,  12,  15,  15,  18,  19 ;  17.  6,  6 ;  19.  7,  n,  29 ;  20.  16,  18 ; 
22.  1;  23.  2,  3. 

1  Ki.  1.  42;  2.  4,  18,  19,  23,  27;  3.  22;  4.  32,  33,  35;  5. 
5 ;  6.  12 ;  8.  15,  20,  24,  26,  33 ;  12.  3,  7,  7,  9,  10,  10,  14, 15, 
15;  13-  3>  n>  18,  26,  27;  14.  11,  18;  15.  29;  16.  12,  34;  17. 
16;  21.  2,  4,  6,  19,  19,  23;  22.  13,  13,  14,  23,  24,  28,  38;  2 
Ki.  1.  3,  9,  17 ;  2.  22 ;  5.  13 ;  6.  12 ;  7.  17,  18 ;  8.  1 ;  9.  36 ; 


10.  10,  10,  17;  14.  25;  15.  12;  18.  26,  27,  2S;  19.  21;  20. 
9,  19;  21.  10,  19;  24.  2;  25.  28;  1  Ch.  17.  6,  15,  17,  23;  21. 
9,  19;  2  Ch.  6.  4,  10,  15,  17;  10.  3,  7,  7,  9,  10,  10,  15;  18, 
12,  12,  13,  22,  23,  27;  32.  6,  16,  19;  33.  10,  18;  34.  22; 
Neh.  9.  13;  13.  24,  24;  Esth.  6. 10;  7.9;  8.  3;  Job  1.  16. 
17,  18;  2.  10,  10;  7.  11;  9.  35;  10.  1;  11.  5;  13.  3,  7,  13. 
22;  16.  4,  6;  18.  2;  19.  18;  21.  3,  3;  27.  4;  32.  7,  16,  20; 
33-  2,  14,  31.  32;  34-  33»  35!  37-  20;  40.  5:41-3;  42-  4.  71 
7,  8;  Psa.  2.  5;  12.  2,  2,  3;  17.  10;  18.  1;  34.  13;  35: 
20;  38.  12;  39.  3;  40.  5;  41.  6;  49.  3;  50.  1,  7,  20;  52.  3, 
58.  1;  60.  6;  62.  11;  66.  (4;  73.  8,  8;  75.  5;  77.  4, 
78.  19;  85.  8;  89.  19;  94.  4;  108.  7;  109.  2;  115.  5;  116; 
10;  119.  46;  120.  7;  127.  5;  135.^16;  144.  8,  11;  145. 
21;  Prov.  2.  12;  8.  6;  21.  28;  23.  9,  16;  Eccl.  3.  7. 
Song  5.  6;  Isa.  1.  2,  20;  7.  10;  8.  5,  10;  16.  13,  14;  19.  iS; 

20.  2;  21.  17;  22.  15;  24.  3;  25.  8;  28.  11;  29.  4;  30.  10;  32. 
4>  6,  7;  36.  ii,  11,  12;  37.  22;  38.  7;  39.  8;4o.  2.  5,  27;  41.  1; 
45.  19;  46.  11;  48.  15.  16;  52.  6;  58.  9,  13,  14;  59.  3,  4,  13; 
63.  1;  65.  12,  24;  66.  4. 

Jer.  1.  6,  7,  17;  3.  5;  4.  28;  5.  5,  14;  6.  10;  7.  13,  13,  22, 
27;  8.  16;  9.  5,  5,  8,  8,  12,  22;  10.  1,  5;  11.  2;  12.  6;  13.  15; 

14.  14;  18.  7,  9,  20;  19.  5;  20.  8,  9;  22.  1,  21;  23.  16,  21,  28, 

35.  37;  25.  2,  3,  3;  26.  2,  2,  7,  8,  8,  15,  16;  27.  12,  13,  16; 
29.  23;  30.  2,  4;  31.  20;  32.  4,  24;  34.  3,  6;  35.  2,  14,  14,  17; 

36.  2,  2,  4;  37.  2;  38.  1,  4,  8;  43.  1,  2;  44.  16,  25;  45.  1;  46. 
13;  50.  1;  51.  12,  62;  52.  32;  Eze.  1.  28;  2.  1,  2,  7;  3.  1, 
4,  10,  11,  18,  24,  27;  5.  13,  15,  17;  10.  5;  11.  25;  12.  25,  25, 
28;  13.  7,  8;  14.  4,  9;  17. 21,  24;  20.  3,  27;  21.  32;  22.  14,  28; 
23.  34;  24.  14,  18,  27;  26.  5,  14;  28.  10;  29.  3;  30.  12;  32.  21; 
33.  2,  8,  30;  34.  24;  36.  5,  6,  36;  37.  14,  17,  19;  39.  5,  8; 
Dan.  2.  4;  8.  13,  13,  18;  9.  6,  12,  20,  21;  10.  11,  15,  16,  19, 
19;  11.  27,  36;  Hos.  2.  14;  7.  13;  10.  4;  12.  4,  10;  13.  1;  Joel 
3.  8;  Amos  3.  1,  8;  Obad.  iS;  Mic.  4.  4;  6.  12;  Zeph.  3.  13; 
Zech.  2.  4;  6.  8;  8.  16;  9.  10;  10.  2;  13.  2. 

7.To  speak  (for  self),  ini  dabar,  7. 

Num.  7.  89  he  heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking  unto 
2  Sa.  14.  13  the  king  doth  speak  this  thing  as  one  wh. 
Eze.     2.   2  that  I  heard  him  that  spake  unto  me 

43.   6  I  heard  (him)  speaking  unto  me  out  of  the 

S.To  meditate,  utter,  n:a  hagah, 

Psa.  35. 28  my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  righteousn. 

37.  30  The  mouth  of  the  righteous  speaketh  wi. 

115.    7  neither  speak  they  through  their  throat 

Prov.  8.    7  my  mouth  shall  speak  truth;  and  wicked 

9.  Word,  speech,  njp  millah. 

Job   36.   2  I  will  show  thee  that  (I  have)  yet  to  speak 

10.  To  speak,  hbo  wialal. 

Prov.  6.  13  he  speaketh  with  his  feet,  he teacheth  wi. 
11. To  speak,  (bring  forth  speech),  T?D  malal,  3. 
Job     8.   2  How  long  wilt  thou  speak  these  (things)'? 

12.  To  speak,  hbr?  melal,  3. 

Dan.    7. 11  the  great  words  which  the  horn  spake 

7.  20  a  mouth  that  spake  very  great  things  ,wh. 
7.  25  he  shall  speak  (great)  words  against  the 

13.  To  use  similitudes,  htt  mashal. 

Eze.  17.    2  and  speak  a  parable  unto  the  house  of  I. 
1-i.To  use  similitudes,  hz'£  mashal,  3. 

Eze.  20.  49  they  say  of  me,  Doth  he  not  speak  para.? 

15.  To  affirm,  enj  naam. 

Prov. 30.    1  the  man  spake  unto  Ithiel,  even  unto  It. 

16.  To  put  or  bring  before,  1J3  nagad,  5. 

Job   17.    5  He  that  speaketli  flattery  to  (his)  friends 

17.  To  number,  recount,  15?  saphar,  3. 

Psa.  59.  12  and  for  cursing  and  lying  (which)  they  s. 
73. 15  If  I  say,  I  will  speak  thus  ;  behold,  I  sh. 

18.  To  answer,  resptond,  sing,  nx%  anah. 

Exod23-  2  neither  shalt  thou  speak  in  a  cause  to  de. 
Deut  26.    5  thou  shalt  speak  and  say  before  the  LORD 

27.  14  the  Levites  shall  speak,  and  say  unto  all 
Job     3.   2  And  Job  spake,  and  said 

35.    1  Elihu  spake  moreover,  and  said 
Psa.  1 19.  172  My  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  word:  for 
Song  2.  10  My  beloved  spake,  and  said  unto  me,  Rise 
Isa.    14.  10  they  shall  speak,  and  say  unto  thee,  Art 

19.  To  ansioer,  resptond,  rujg.  anah. 

Dan.  3.  9  They  spake  and  said  to  the  kingNebuch. 
3.  14  Nebuchadnezzarspake  and  said  unto  them 
3.  19  he  spake,  and  commanded  that  they  shou. 
3.  24  spake,  and  said  unto  his  counsellors,  Did 
3.  26  Nebuchadnezzar  came  near,  .(and)  spake 

3.  28  Nebuchadnezzarspake,  and  said,  Blessed 

4.  19  The  king  spake,  and  said,  Belteshazzar 

4.  30  The  king  spake,  and  said,  Is  notthisgreat 

5.  7  the  kingspake,  and  said  to  the  wise  (men) 

5.  10  the  queen  spake,  and  said,  O  king,  live 

5. 13  the  king  spake  and  said  unto  Daniel,  (Art) 

6.  16  the  king  spake  and  said  unto  Daniel,  Thy 

6.  20  the  king  spake  and  said  to  Daniel,  0  Da. 

7.  2  Daniel  spake,  and  said,  I  saw  in  my  vision 

20.To  breathe,  break  out  or  forth,  ms  puach,  5. 

Prov.  6. 19  A  false  witness  (that)  speaketh  lies,  and  he 
12.  17  (He  that)  speaketh  truth  showeth  forth 
14.  25  but  a  deceitful  (witness)  speaketh  lies 
19     5  and  (he  that)  speaketh  lies  shall  not  esca. 
19.   9  and  (he  that)  speaketh  lies  shall  perish 

Hab.  2.    3  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie 

21.  To  bow  down,  meditate,  n'tr  siach. 

Judg  5.  10  Speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses,  ye 
Job    12.   8  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  teach  thee 
Psa.  69. 12  They  that  sit  in  the  gate  speak  a.  145.  5. 

22.  To  tell  again,  &ya7€AAa>  anagellO,  Ro.  15. 12. 
22.  To  speak  against  or  in  return,  avrtXtyv  ant/!. 

Johmg.  12  maketh  himself  a  king  speaketh  against 


SPEAK 


922 


SPEAK 


Acts  13.  45  and  spake  [against]  those  things  which 
28.  19  when  the  Jews  spake  against  (it),  I  was 

24.7b  lay  out  throughout,  reason,  b~taAeyo/j.ai  dial. 
Heb.  12.    5  forgotten  the  exhortation  which  speaketh 

25.  To  speak,  tell,  declare,  elirov  eipon. 

Matt.  8.    8  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  servant  shall 
10.  27  What  I  tell  you  in  darkness,  (that)  speak 
12.  32  whosoever  speaketh  a  word  against  the 
12.  32  whosoever  speaketli  against  the  Holy  Gh. 

16.  11 1  spake  (it)  not  to  you  concerning  bread 

17.  13  the  disciples  understood  that  he  spake 

22.  1  Jesus  answered  and  spake  unto  them  ag. 
Mark  1.  42  [as  soon  as  he  had  spoken],  immediately 

3.  9  he  spake  to  his  disciples,  that  asmallship 
9.  iS  [I  spake]  to  thy  disciples  that  they  should 

12.  12  knew  that  he  had  spoken  the  parable  ag. 
12.  26  Godspakeuntohim,sayiug,I(am)  the  God 
14.  39  and  prayed,  and  spake  the  same  words 
Luke  6.  26  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak 

6.  39  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them  :  Can  the 

7.  39  he  spake  within  himself,  saying,  This  man 

8.  4  when  much  people  were  gathered,  .hesp. 
12.    3  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken  in  darkness 
12.  13  Master,  speak  to  my  brother,  that  lie  div. 
12.  16  he  spakeaparableunto  them,  saying, The 

14.  3  Jesus  answering  spake  unto  the  lawyers 

15.  3  And  he  spake  this  parable  unto  them,  say. 

18.  9  he  spake  this  parable  unto  certain  which 
19. 11  he  added  and  spake  a  parable,  because  he 

19.  28  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  went  before 

20.  2  spake  unto  him,  saying,  Tell  us,  by  what 
so.  19  that  he  had  spoken  this  parable  against 
2i.  29  he  spake  to  them  a  parable  ;  Behold  the 
34.  40  [when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  showed] 

John  1.  15  This  was  he  of  whom  I  spake,  He  that 

4.  50  the  word  that  Jesus  had  spoken  unto  him 

7.  39  this  spake  he  of  the  spirit,  which  they 

9.  6  When  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  spat  on  the 
9.  22  These  (words)  spake  his  parents,  because 

10.  6  This  parable  spake  Jesus  unto  them  :  but 
10. 41  all  things  that  John  spake  of  this  man 

11.  43  when  he  thus  had  spoken,  he  cried  with 

11.  51  this  spake  he  not  of  himself :  but  being 

12.  38  That  the  saying  of  Esaias.  .which  he  spake 

13.  28  kuew  for  what  intent  he  spake  this  unto 
18.    1  When  Jesu3  had  spoken  these  words,  he 
18.    9  saying  might  be  fulfilled  which  he  spake 
18.  16  and  spake  unto  her  that  kept  the  door 
18.  22  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  oueof  the  offl. 
18.  32  That  the  saying  of  Jesus,  .which  he  spake 
30.  18  (that)  he  had  spoken  these  things  unto 
8i.  19  This  spake  he,  signifying  by  what  death 
si.  19  when  he  had  spoken  this,  he  saith  unto 

Acta  x.  9  when  he  had  spoken  these  things,  while 
2.  29  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  patr. 

18.  9  Then  spake  the  Lord  to  Paul  in  the  night 

19.  41  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  dismissed 

20.  36  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  kneeled  do. 
zi.  37  said  unto  the  chief  captain,  May  I  speak 
36.  30  [when  he  had  thus  spoken,  the  king  rose] 

27.  35  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  took  bread 

28.  25  departed,  after  that  Paul  had  spoken  one 

26.7b  say,  speak,  tell,  epu>,  epiu  ero,  ereo. 

Luke i2.  10  whosoever  snail  speaka  word  against  the 
Johnn.  13  Jesu3  spake  of  his  death:  but  they  thought 
Acts   2.  16  this  is  that  which  was  spoken  by  the  pr. 

8.  24  none  of  these  things  which  ye  have  spoken 
13.  40  lest  that  come  upon  you  which  is  spoken 
20.  38  Sorrowing . .  for  the  words  which  he  spake 

23.  5  Thou  shaft  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of 
Bom.  4.  18  according  to  that  which  was  spoken,  So 
Heb.   4.    4  he  spake  in  a  certain  place  of  the  seventh 

27.  To  talk  against,  Ka,ra\a\iw  katalaleo, 

1  Pe.   2. 12  they  speak  against  you  as  evil  doers,  they 

28.  7b  talk,  speak,  tell,  \a\4ta  laleo. 

Matt.  9.  18  While  he  spake  these  things  unto  them 

9.  33  when  the  devil  was  cast  out,  the  dumb  s. 
10.  19  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  speak 
10. 19  [shall  be  given  you . .  what  ye  shall  speak] 
10.  20  For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  spirit 
10.  20  spirit  of  your  Father  which  speaketh  in 
12.  22  the  blind  and  dumb  both  spake  and  saw 
12.  34  how  can  ye,  being  evil,  speak  good  things? 
12.  34  for  out  of  the . .  heart  the  mouth  speaketh 
12.  36  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they 
ia.  46  stood  without,  desiring  to  speak  with  him 

12.  47  stand  without,  desiring  to  speak  with  thee 

13.  3  spake  many  things  unto  them  in  parables 
13.  to  Why  speake3t  thou  unto  them  in  parables? 
13.  13  Therefore  speak  I  to  them  in  parables,  be. 
13.  33  Another  parable  spake  he  unto  them;  The 
13.  34  All  these  things  spake  Jesus  unto  the  rnu. 

13.  34  without  a  parable  spake  henot  unto  them 

14.  27  But  straightway  Jesus  spake  unto  them 

15.  31  wondered,  when  they  saw  the  dumb  to  sp. 
17.    5  While  he  yet  spake,  behold,  a  bright  clo. 
2i.    i  Then  spake  Jesus  to  the  multitude,  and 
26.  47  while  he  yet  spake,  lo,  Judas,  one  of  the 
28.  18  Jesus  came  and  spake  uuto  them,  saying 

Mark  x.  34  suffered  not  the  devils  to  speak,  because 
2.  7  Why  doth  this  (man)  thus  speak  blasph.7 
4.  33  with  many  such  parables  spake  he  the  wo. 

4.  3f  without  a  parable  spake  he  not  unto  them 

5.  35  While  he  yet  spake,  there  came  from  the 
5.  36  Jesus  heard  the  word  that  was  spoken,  he 
7.  35  the  string.,  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  pla. 

7.  37  astonished,  saying . .  maketh . .  dumb  to  sp. 

8.  32  spake  that  saying  openly.  And  Peter  took 
13.  11  take  no  thought.,  what  ye  shall  speak,  ue. 


Marki3.  n  whatsoever  shall  be  given  you.  .speak  ye 

13.  11  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Holy  Ghost 

14.  9  (this)  also.. shall  be  spoken  of  for  a  me. 
14.  43  immediately,  while  he  yet  spake,  cometh 
16.  17  [cast  out  devils  ;  they  shall  speak  with] 
16.  19  [So  then,  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  uuto] 

Luke  1.  19  am  sent  to  speak  unto  thee,  and  to  show 
1.  20  thou  shalt  be  dumb,  and  not  able  to  speak 
1,.  22  when  he  came  out,  he  could  not  speak  un. 
1. 55  As  he  spake  to  our  fathers,  to  Abraham 
1.  64  his  tongue  (loosed),  and  he  spake,  and  pr. 

1.  70  As  he  spake  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  pr. 
2. 33  marvelled  at  those  things  which  were  sp. 

2.  38  spake  of  him  to  all  them  that  looked  for 

3.  50  understood  not  the  saying  which  he  spake 

4.  41  rebuking  (them),  suffered  them  not  to  sp. 

5.  4  Now  when  he  had  left  speaking,  he  said 

5.  21  Who  is  this  which  speaketh  blasphemies  ? 

6.  45  abundance  of  the  heart  his  mouth  speak. 

7.  15  that  was  dead  sat  up,  and  began  to  speak 

8.  49  While  he  yetspake,  there  cometh  one  from 

9.  11  spake  uuto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
11.  14  the  dumb  spake  ;  and  the  people  wonde. 

11.  37  as  he  spake,  a  certain  Pharisee  besought 

12.  3  ye  have  spoken  in  the  ear  in  closets  shall 
22.  47  while  he  yet  spake,  behold  a  multitude 
22.  60  immediately,  while  he  yet  spake,  the  cock 
24.  6  remember  how  he  spake  unto  you  when 
24.  25  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken 
24.  36  as  they  thus  spake,  Jesus  himself  stood  in 
24. 44  These  (are)  the  words  which  I  spake  unto 

John  1.  37  disciples  heard  him  speak,  and  they  foil. 

11  We  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify 
31  of  the  earth  is  earthly,  and  speaketh  of 
34  For  he  whom  God  had  sent  speaketh  the 
26  saith  unto  her,  I  that  speak  unto  thee  am 
63  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  (they) 
13  Howbeit  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for 

17  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  (whether)  I  speak 

18  He  that  speaketh  of  himself  seeketh  his 
26  speaketh boldly.andtheysaynothiug  unto 
46  officers  answered,  Never  man  spake  like 

12  Then  spake  Jesus  again  unto  them,  saying 

20  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  treasury 
28,  as  my  Father  hath  taught  me,  I  speak  th. 

30  As  he  spake  these  words  many  believed 
38  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  my  F. 
44  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of 

21  he  is  of  age  ;  ask  him :  he  shall  speak  for 
29  We  know  that  God  spake  unto  Moses  :  (as 

6  what  things  they  were  which  he  spake  un. 
29  others  said,  An  angel  spake  to  him 
36  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  departed 
41  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of  him 

48  word  that  I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall 

49  For  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself ;  but  the 

49  what  I  should  say,  and  what  I  should  sp. 

50  whatsoever  I  speak  therefore,  .so  I  speak 

10  words  that  [I  speak]  unto  you  I  speak  not 
25  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  be. 

3  clean  through  the  word  which  I  have  sp. 

11  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that 

22  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them 
1,  25,  33  These  things  have  I  spokenunto  you 

13  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but  wb. 
13  he  shall  hear,  (that)  shall  he  speak  :  and 

25  These . .  have  I  spoken . .  I  shall  no  more  s. 
29  now  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  speakest 

1  These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up 
13  these  things  I  speak  iu  the  world,  thatth. 

20  spake  openly  to  the  world  ;  I  ever  taught 

23  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the 
19. 10  Speakestthounotuntonie?  knowest  thou 

Acts    2.    4  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the 
2.    6  every  man  heard  them  speak  in  his  own 
2.    7  are  not  all  these  which  speak  Galileans  ! 
2. 11  we  do  hear  them  speak  inour  tongues  the 
2.  31  spake  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that 

21  which  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of 

24  as  many  as  have  spoken,  have  likewise  f. 
1  as  they  spake  unto  the  people,  the  priests 

17  threaten-them.that  they  speak  henceforth 
20  For  we  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which 
29  with  all  boldness  they  may  speak  thy  word 

31  and  they  spake  the  word  of  God  with  bol. 
20  stand  and  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  pe. 
40  commanded  that  they  should  not  speak  in 

10  wisdom  and  the  spirit  by  which  he  spake 

11  We  have  heard  him  speak  blasphemous 
13  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphemous  words 

6  God  spake  on  this  wise,  That  his  seed  sh. 
38  with  the  angel  which  spake  to  him  in  the 
44  speaking  unto  Moses,  that  he  should  make 

26  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto  Philip,  say. 

27  declared,  .that  he  had  spoken  to  him,  and 
29  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Je. 

0.  7  when  the  angel  which  spake  unto  Cornel. 
to.  32  [who,  when  he  cometh,  shall  speak  unto] 
10.  44  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the 

10.  46  For  they  heard  them  speak  with  tongues 

1 1.  15  began  to  speak,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  th. 
11.  20  spake  unto  the  Grecians,  preaching  the 

13.  46  word  of  God  should  first  have  been  spoken 

14.  1  so  spake,  that  a  great  multitude  both  of 
14.  9  The  same  heard  Paul  speak  :  whostedfa. 
16.  13  and  spake  unto  the  women  which  resorted 
16.  14  attended  unto  the  things  which  were  spo. 
16.  32  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the  Lord 
17. 19  this  new  doctrine,  whereof  thou  speakest 
18.    9  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and  hold  not  thy 

18.  25  spake  and  taught  diligently  the  things  of 

19.  6  they  spalce  with  tongues,  and  prophesied 


Acts  ; 


23- 

26. 
26. 
28, 
28, 
Rom.  7. 

r,        I5 

i  Co.  2. 


13- 

13- 
14. 
14. 

14. 
14. 

'  J4- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
■14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14. 
14, 
iCo.   2 


Eph. 


30  speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  away 
39  beseech  thee,  surfer  me  to  speak  unto  the 
9  heard  not  the  voice  of  him  that  spake  to 
9  if  a  spirit  or  an  angel  hath  spoken  to  him 
14  heard  a  voice  [speaking]  unto  me,  and  say. 

26  the  king.. before  whom  also  I  speak  freely 
21  neither  any  of  the  brethren,  .spake  any 
25  Well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by  Esaias  the 

I  for  I  speak  to  them  that  know  the  law.how 
iS  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those 

6  Howbeit  we  speak  wisdom  among  them 

7  But  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  my. 
13  Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  the 

1  could  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spirit. 

3  that  no  man  speaking  by  the  spirit  of  God 

30  do  all  speak  with  tongues?  do  all  inter.? 

1  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 

II  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child,  I 

2  speaketh  in  an(unknown)tongue  speaketh 

2  howbeit  in  the  spirit  he  speaketh  myster. 

3  But  he  that  prophesieth  speaketh  unto 

4  He  that  speaketh  in  an  (unknown)  tongue 

5  I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues 

5  he  that  prophesieth  than  he  that  speaketh 

6  speaking  with  tongues,  .except  I  shall  sp. 
9  known  what  is  spoken  ?  for  ye  shall  speak 

11  shall  be  unto  him  that  speaketh  a  barbar. 

11  he  that  speaketh  (shall  be)  a  barbarian 
13  Wherefore  let  him  that  speaketh  in  an 

18  I  thank  my  God,  I  speak  with  tongues  mo. 

19  Yet  in  the  church  I  had  rather  speak  five 
21  With,  .other  lips  will  I  speak  unto  this 
23  all  speak  with  tongues,  and  there  come  in 

27  If  any  man  speak  in  an  (unknown)  tongue 

28  and  let  him  speak  to  himself,  and  to  God 

29  Let  the  prophets  speak  two  or  three,  and 

34  for  it  is  not  permitted  unto  them  to  speak 

35  for  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  the 
39  and  forbid  not  to  speak  with  tongues 

,  17  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  we  in  Christ 
13  I  believed,  and  therefore  have  I  spoken 

13  we  also  believe,  and  therefore  speak 

14  but  as  we  spake  all  things  to  you  in  truth 
17  That  which  I  speak,  I  speak  (it)  not  after 

23  Are  "they  ministers  of  Christ?  I  speak  as 
19  we  speak  before  God  in  Christ :  but  (we 

3  Since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking 
25  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour 

19  Speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  hy. 

20  that  therein  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ou. 

14  much  more  bold  to  speak  the  word  with. 

3  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,  for  which 

4  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought  to  speak 

8  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any  thing 
2  we  were  bold  in  our  God  to  speak  unto 

4  even  so  we  speak  ;  not  as  pleasing  men 
16  Forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles 

13  speaking  things  which  they  ought  not 
1  But  speak  thou  the  things  which  become 

15  These  things  speak,  and  exhort,  and  reb. 

1  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the 

2  Hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by 

2  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast 

3  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by 

5  the  world  to  come,  whereof  we  speak 
5  those  things  which  were  to  be  spoken  aft. 

8  then  would  he  not  afterward  have  spoken 

9  persuaded  better,  .though  we  thus  speak 

14  Moses  spake  nothing  concerning  priestn. 
19  when  Moses  had  spoken  every  precept  to 

4  and  by  it  he,  being  dead,  yet  [speaketh] 

24  that  speaketh  better  things  than  (that  of) 

25  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh 

7  who  have  spoken  unto  you  the  word  of  G. 
19  let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slowto  sp. 

12  So  speak  ye,  and  so  do,  as  they  that  shall 
10  the  prophets,  who  have  spoken  in  the  na. 

10  evil,  and  his  lips  that  they  speak  no  guile 

11  If  any  man  speak,  (let  him  speak)  as  the 

21  holy  men  of  God  spake  (as  they  were)mo. 

16  iu  all  (his)  epistles, speaking  in  them  of  th. 

5  therefore  speak  they  of  the  world,  and  the 

12  I  trust  to  come  unto  you,  and  speak  face 

14  shall  shortly  see  thee,  and  we  shall  speak 

15  which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  agai. 

16  their  mouth  speaketh  greatswelImg(wo.) 
12  I  turned  to  see  the  voice  that  spake  with 

8  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven  sp. 
5  a  mouth  speaking  great  things  and  bias. 

11  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake 
15  the  image  of  the  beast  should  both  speak 

29.  To  lay  out,  say,  speak,  \4ya>  lego. 

Matt 21.  45  they  perceived  that  he  spake  of  them 
Marki2.    1  he  began  [to  speak]  unto  them  by  parab. 

14.  31  [he  spake]  the  more  vehemently,  If  I  sh. 

14.  71 1  know  not  this  man  of  whom  ye  speak 
Luke  5.  36  he  spake  also  a  parable  unto  them  ;  No 

7.  24  he  began  to  speak  unto  the  people  concer. 
9.  31  spake  of  his  decease  which  he  should  ace. 
9.  34  While  he  thus  spake,  there  came  a  cloud 

11.  27  as  he  spake  these  things,  a  certain  woman 

12.  41  speakest  thou  this  parableunto  us.oreven 

13.  6  He  spake  also  this  parable;  A  certain  (m.) 
18.  1  he  spake  a  parable  uuto  them(to  this  end) 
iS.  34  neitherknew  they  the  things  which  weres 

20.  9  Then  began  he  to  speak  to  the  people  this 

21.  5  as  some  spake  of  the  temple,  how  it  was 

22.  65  many  other  things  blasphemously  spake 
John  2.  21  But  he  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body 

6.  71  He  spake  of  Judas  Iscariot  (the6on)  of  S. 

8.  26  [I  speak]  to  the  world  those  things  which 


Phil. 
Col. 


iTi.     5 
Titus  2 


Heb. 


Jas. 


i  Pe. 
:Pe. 

3* 
4- 
1. 

1  Jo. 

2  Jo. 

3  Jo. 
Jiule 

J- 
4- 

Rev. 

1. 

10. 

13- 
'3- 
13- 

SPEAK 


923 


SPEECHLESS 


John  8.  27  They  understood  not  that  he  spake  to  th. 
11. 13  they  thought  that  he  had  spoken  of  tak. 
11.  56  spake  among  themselves,  as  they  stood  in 
13.  iS  I  speak  not  of  you  all :  I  know  whom  I 
13. 22  disciples  looked . .  doubting  of  whom  he  sp. 
13.  24  ask  who  it  should  be  of  whom  he  spake 
16.  29  disciples  said .  .thou..speakest  no  proverb 
Acts    1.    3  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the 
2.  25  David  speaketh  concerning  him,  I  foresaw 
8.   6  heed  unto  those  things  which  Philip  sp. 
8.  34  I  pray  thee,  of  whom  speaketh  the  pro.? 

13.  45  [those  things  which  were  spoken]  by  Paul 
24. 10  governor  had  beckoned  unto  him  to  speak 

26.  1  Thou  art  permitted  to  speak  for  thyself 

27.  11  those  things  winch  were  spoken  by  Paul 
s8.  24  some  believed  the  things  which  were  sp. 

Roni.  3.    5  (Is)  God  unrighteous.  .1  speak  as  a  man 
6.  19  I  speak  after  the  manner  of  men  because 
10.   6  righteousness  which  is  of  faith  speaketh 
11. 13  I  speak  to  you  Gentiles,  inasmuch  as  I 

1  Co.  1. 10  that  ye  all  speak  the  same  thing,  and 

6.  5  [I  speak]  to  your  shame.  Is  it  so,  that  there 

7.  6  I  speak  this  by  permission,  (and)  not  of 
7. 12  to  the  rest  speak  I,  not  the  Lord :  If  any 
7.  35  this  I  speak  for  your  own  profit ;  not  that 

10.  15  I  speak  as  to  wise  men;  judge  ye  what  I 
15.  34  some  have  not.. [I  speak]  (this)  to  your  sh. 

2  Co.  6.  13  I  speak  as  unto  (my)  children,  be  ye  also 

7.  3  I  speak  not  (this)  to  condemn  (you) :  for 

8.  8  I  speak  not  by  commandment,  but  by  oc. 

11.  21  I  speak  as  concerning  reproach,  as  thou. 
n.  21  whereinsoever  any  is  bold,  I  speak  fooli. 

Gal.     3.  15  I  speak  af  terthe  manner  of  men ;  Though 

Eph.   5.  12  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those  things 

5.  32  I  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  church 

Phil.  4.  11  Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want :  for 

1  Ti.    2.    7 1  speak  the  truth  in  Christ,  (and)  lie  not 

4.    1  the  spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the 
Heb.   7.  13  For  he  of  whom  these  things  are  spoken 

8.  1  of  the  things  which  we  have  spoken  (tins 

9.  5  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particula. 
Rev.    2.  24  have  not  known  the  depths,  .as  they  sp. 

29.ro  sound  aloud,  titter,  <p6 eyy ofxat phtheggomai. 
Acts    4.  18  commanded  them  not  to  speak  at  all  nor 

2  Pe.   2.  16  the  dumb  ass  speaking  with  man's  voice 

2. 18  when  they  speak  great  swelling  (words)  of 

30.2*0  speak  oracularly,  xpV,ua-T^C^  chrematizo. 

Heb.  12.  25  they  escaped  not  who  refused  liim  that  sp. 
SPEAK,  in  season,  not  a  word,  unadvisedly,  to  cause  to  — 
l.To  speak  hastily,  rashly,  NQ3  bata,  3. 

Psa.  io5.  33  so  that  he  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips 
2.  To  cause  to  speak,  strengthen,  3ni  dabab. 

Song  7.  9  causing,  .those  that  are  asleep  to  speak 

3.7*0  keep  silent  or  deaf,  enrj  charash,  5. 

2  Sa.  19.  10  why  speak  ye  not  a  word  of  bringing  the 
4. To  speak  in  season,  haste  to  support,  my  uth. 

Isa.  50.  4  I  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  se. 
SPEAK  among,  before,  can,  for  one's  self,  forth,  out,  to  — 
l.To  sound  up,  back  out,  ava<pcoi/ea),  anaphoneo. 

Lute  1. 42  she  spake  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said 
2.  To  lay  out  for  oneself,  b.iro\oy4of.tai  apologeomoi. 

Acts    26.  24  as  he  thus  spake  for  himself,  Festussaid 

Z.To  titter  out,  airo(pQ4yyo/j.ai  apophtheggomai. 
Acts  26.  25  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  sober. 

A.To  know,  take  cognizance  of,  yivaxrKw  gi?iosko. 

Acts  21.  37  the  chief  captain,  .said,  Canst  thou  speak 
5. To  tell  down  or  thoroughly,  KarayyeWco  katayg. 

Rom.  1.    8  your  faith  is  spoken  of  throughout  the 
6.  To  speak  or  tell  before,  Trpof-tTrov  proeipon. 

Acts  1.  16  the  Holy  Ghost,  .spake before  concerning 
7. To  speak  or  tell  before,  irpotpta)  proereo. 

■^  Pe.  3.   2  the  words  which  were  spoken  before  by 

Jade  17  the  words  which  were  spoken  before  of 
S.To  talk  with,  o-vA\a\4a>  sullaleo. 

Luke  4.  36  they  were  all  amazed,  and  spake  among 
SPEAK  to.  unto,  with,  to  — 
l.To  talk  to,  irpoff\q,K4ta  proslaleo. 

Acts  13.  43  who,  speaking  to  them,  persuaded  them 

28.  20  called  for  you,tosee(you,)andtospeakw. 

2.  To  put  to,  irpoo-TiQrifAL  prostithemi. 

Heb.  12. 19  the  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  them 

3.  To  sound  to,  irpoa-^oiviw  prosphdneo. 
Luke23-  20  Pilate  therefore,  .spake  again  to  them 
Acts  21.  40  he  spake  unto  (them)  in  the  Hebrew  ton. 

22.   2  when  they  heard  that  he  spake  in  the  H. 
SPEAK  blasphemy,  boldly,  evil,  fair,  to  — 
l.To  maize  the  voice  gracious,  Sip  \ jn  chanan  qol,  3. 
Prov.26.  25  When  he  speaketh  fair,  believe  him  not 

2.  To  speak  freely  or  boldly,  irafip'-no-td&paL  parrli. 
Acts   9.  29  he  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

14.  3  therefore  abode  they  speaking  holdly  in 

18.  26  he  began'to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue 

19.  8  spake  boldlyforthe  space  of  three  months 
Eph.    6.  20  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ought  to  speak 

3.  To  speak  injuriously,  blaspheme,  fiAaatynpLsw. 

Matt 26.  65  He  hath  spoken  blasphemy;  what  further 
Rom  14.  16  Let  not  then  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of 
1  Co.  10.  30  why  am  I  evil  spoken  of  for  that  which  I 
Titus  3.  2  To  speak  evil  of  no  man,  to  be  no  brawl. 
1  Pe.  4.   4  they  think  it  strange,  .speaking  evil  of 


1  Pe.  4.  14  [on  their  part  he  is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on] 

2  Pe.  2.    2  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of 

2.  10  they  are  not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of  dign. 

2. 12  speak  evil  of  the  things  that  they  under. 

Jude        S  despise  dominion,  and  speak  evil  of  dig. 

10  they  speak  evil  of  those  things  which  they 

4.  To  speak  evil,  KaKoXoytia  kakologeo. 

Mark  9.  39  no  man.  .that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me 
Acts  in.    9  spake  evil  of  that  way  before  the  multit. 

5.  To  speak  against,  KaraAa\4a3  katalaleo. 

Jas.    4. 11  Speak  not  evil  one  of  another,  brethren 
4.  11  He  that  speaketh  of  (his)brother,  and  ju. 
4. 11  speaketh  evil  of  the  law,  and  judgetn  the 
1  Pe.  2.  12  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as  evil 
3. 16  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you  as  of  evil 
SPEAKING  (lies,  much,  evil),  speaker  — 
l.A  word,  speech,  n?*?  millah. 

Job     4.   2  who  can  withhold  himself  from  speaking 
32.  15  answered  no  more ;  they  left  off  speaking 

2.  To  speak,  ^  metal,  3. 

Dan.  7.  8  in  this  horn,  .a  mouth  speaking  great  th. 
Z.Injurious  speaking,  blasphemy,  fiKaafp-nfx.ia. 

Eph.  4.  31  clamour,  and  evil  speaking,  beput  away 
i.A  talking  against,  KaraAaAia  katalalia. 

1  Pe.   2.    1  layingaside..envies,andaUe\Hspeakings 

5.. 4  word,  speech,  \6yos  logos. 

Act3  14.  12  Mercixrins,  because  he  was  the.  .speaker 

Q. Mitch  speech  or  discourse,  iroAvAoyia  polulogia. 
Matt.  6.    7  shall  be  heard  for  their  much  speaking 

7.  Speaker  of  lies  or  falsehood,  -tyevZo\6yos  pseudol. 
1  Ti.    4.    2  Speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy;  having  their 
SPEARS,  spearman  — 
l.Spiear,  javelin,  rnn  chanith. 

1  Sa.  13. 19  Lest  the  Hebrews  make.. swords  or  spears 

13.  22  there  was  neither  sword  nor  spear  found 
17.    7  the  staff  of  his  spear  (was)  like  a  weaver's 
17.   7  his  spear's  head  (weighed)  six  hundred 
17.  45  Thou  coniest  to  me.  .with  a  spear,  and 
17.  47  the  Lord  saveth  not  with  sword  and  sp. 
2i.   8  is  there  not  here  under  thine  hand  spear 

22.  6  Saul  abode  in  Gibeah.  .having  his  spear 
26.  7  his  spear  stuck  in  the  ground  at  his  bol. 
26.   8  let  me  smite  him.  .with  the  spear  even  to 

26. 11  take  thou  now  the  spear  that  (is)  at  his 

26. 12  David  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of  w. 
26.  16  see  where  the  king's  spear  (is),  and  the 
26.  22  Behold  the  king's  spear  !  and  let  one  of 

2  Sa.    1.    6  behold,  Saul  leaned  upon  his  spear;  and 

2.  23  Abner  with  the  hinder  end  of  the  spear 
2.  23  that  the  spear  came  out  behind  him,  and 
21. 19  the  staff  of  whose  spear  (was)  like  a  wea. 

23.  7  fenced  with  iron  and  the  staff  of  a  spear 
23. 18  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  hundred 
23.  21  Egyptian  had  a  spear  in  his  hand ;  but  he 
23. 21  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  Egyptian's 
23.  21  and  slew  him  with  his  own  spear 

2  Ki.n.  10  did  the  priest  give  king  David's  spears 

1  Ch.11.  11  he  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  nun. 

11.  20  for  lifting  up  his  spear  against  three  hu. 
11.  23  in  the  Egyptian's  hand  (was)  a  spear  like 
11.  23  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  Egyptian's 
11. 23  and  slew  him  with  his  own  spear 
12.34  "w-it-H  them  with  shield  and  spear  thirty 
20.    5  whose  spear's  staff  (was)  like  a  weaver's 

2  Ch.23.    g  priest  delivered,  .spears,  and  bucklers 
Job   39.  23  rattleth  against  him,  the  glittering  spear 

41.  26  the  spear,  the  dart,  nor  the  habergeon 
Psa.  35.  3  Draw  out  also  the  spear,  and  stop  (the  w.) 
46.  9  cutteth  the  spear  in  sunder ;  he  burnetii 
57.  4  whose  teeth  (are)  spears  and  arrows,  and 
Isa.  2.  4  they  shall  beat.,  their  spears  into  prunn. 
Mic.  4.  3  they  shall  beat . .  their  spears  into  prunn. 
Nail.  3.  3  the  bright  sword  and  the  glittering  spear 
Hab.    3. 1 1  (and)  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear 

H.IIalbert,  javelin,  |iT3  kiclon. 

Josh.  8.  18  Stretch  out  the  spear  that  (is)  in  thy  hand 
8. 18  Joshua  stretched  out  the  spear  that  (he 
8.  26  wherewith  he  stretched  out  the  spear,  un. 
Job  41.  29  he  laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear 
Jer.     6.  23  They  shall  lay  hold  on  bow  and  spear 

3.  Spear,  harpoo?i,  byh*  tselatsal. 

Job  41.  7  Can&t  thou  fill.  .Iris  head  with  fish  spears 
l.Spear,  iron  point  of  a  lance,  ]?p  qayin. 

2  Sa.  21. 16  weight  of  whose  spear  (weighed)  three  hu. 
5.^1  reed,  nj|3  qaneh. 

Psa.  68. 30  Rebuke  the  company  of  spearmen,  the 

6.  Javelin,  spear,  lance,  nan  romach. 

Judg.  5.   8  was  there  a  shield  or  spear  seen  among 

1  Ch.12.  24  children,  .that  bare  shield  and  spear  (we.) 

2  Ch.11.  12  in  every'several  city  (he  put),  .spears,  end 

14.  8  an  army  (of  men)  that  bare  targets  and  sp. 

25.  5  choice  (men),  .that  could  handle  spear 

26.  14  Uzziah  prepared  for  them.. shields,  and  sp. 
Nell.   4. 13  with  their  swords,  their  spears,  and  their 

4. 16  other  half  of  them  held  both  the  spears 
4.  21  half  of  them  held  the  spears  from  the  ri. 

Jer.   46.   4  furbish  the  spears,  (and)  put  on  the  brig. 

Eze.  39.    9  arrows,  and  the  hand  staves,  and  the  sp. 

Joel    3.  10  Beat  your. . prunn ing  hooks  into  spears 

7.-4  spearman,  Se^toXafios  dexiolabos. 

Acts  23.  23  Make  ready,  .spearmen  two  hundred,  at 


8.-4  spear  head,  lance,  Aoyxv  logcM. 

John  19.  34  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a  spear  pierced 
SPECIAL,  specially  — 
1. Peculiar  treasure,  nVsp  segullah. 

Deut  7.    6  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  special  people 
%Most  of  all,  chiefly,  p-aKiara  malista. 

Acts  25.  26  brought  him.  .specially  before  thee,  O  ki. 

1  Ti.   4.  10  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially 
5.    8  provide  not . .  specially  for  those  of  his  own 

Tit.     1.  10  deceivers,  specially  they  of  the  circumci. 

Phni.       16  specially  tome,  but  how  muchmoreunto 

Z.Not  ordinary,  ov  ras  ruxovaas  oil  tas  tuchousas. 
Acts  19.  11  God  wrought  special  miracles  by  the  ha. 
SPECKLED  — 
1. Speckled,  ipi  naqod. 

Gen.  30.  32  removing  from  thence  all  the  speckled 
30.  32  the  spotted  and  speckled  among  the  goa. 
30.  33  every  one  that  (is)  not  speckled  and  spot. 
30.  35  she  goats  that  were  speckled  and  spotted 

30.  39  broughtforth  cattle  ringstraked,  speckled 

31.  8  said  thus.  The  speckled  shall  be  thy  wages 
31.    8  then  all  the  cattle  bare  speckled:  and  if 

31.  10,  12  the  rams,  .ringstraked,  speckled,  and 

2.  Spotted,  gay  t-sabua. 

Jer.  12.    9  Mine  heritage  (is)  unto  me  (as)a  speckled 

Z.Bay,  speckled,  ph'p  saroq. 

Zech.  1.    8  behind  him  (were  there)  red  horses,  spe. 
SPECTACLE  — 
Public  spectacle  or  show,  ilieatre,  64arpov  theatron. 

1  Co.  4.   9  we  are  made  a  spectacle  unto  the  world 

SPEECH,   (boldness  of,  fair)  — 

1.-4  saying,  speech,  *idn  emer. 

Job     6.  26  Do  ye  imagine  to  reprove,  .the  speeches 
32. 14  neither  will  I  answer  him  with  your  spe. 

2.  A  saying,  speech,  "i£x  omer. 

Psa.  19.  2  Day  unto'day  uttereth  speech,  and  night 
19.   3  no  speech  nor  language  (where)  then  vo. 

3.  A  saying,  speech,  nicx  imrah. 

Gen.  4.  23  hearken  unto  my  speech :  for  I  have  slain 
Deut  32.  2  my  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew,  as  the 
Psa.  17.  6  incline  thine  ear  unto  me,  (and)  hear  my 
Isa.  28.  23  Give  ye  ear.  .hearken,  and  hear  my  spee. 
29.  4  thy  speech  shall  be  low  out  of  the  dust 
29.    4  and  thy  speech  shall  whisper  out  of  the 

32.  9  hear  my  voice,  .give  ear  unto  my  speech 

4.-4  toord,  *i;n  dabar. 

Gen.  11.    1  And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one.  .speech 

Deut  22. 14  give  occasions  of  speech  against  her,  and 

22. 17  hath  given  occasions  of  speech(againsth.) 

2  Sa.  14.  20  To  fetch  about  this  form  of  speech  hath 

19.  11  seeing  the  speech  of  all  Israel  is  come  to 
1  Ki.  3.  10  speech  pleased  the  Lord,  that  Solomon 
Jer.  31.  23  As  yet  they  shall  use  this  speech  in  the 

5.-4  tumult,  nVcn  hamullah. 

Eze.    1.  24  the  voice  of  speech,  as  the  noise  of  an  ho. 

6.  \Miat  is  received  or  taken,  doctrine,  np?  leqach. 
Prov.  7.  21  With  her  much  fair  speech  shecausedhim 

7.Sp>eech,  tvhat  is  spoken,  Trip  midbar. 

Song   4.   3  thy  speech  (is)  comely :  thy  temples  (are) 
8.-4  word,  n^p  millah. 

Job  13.  i7*Hear  diligently  my  speech,  and  my  decla. 
15-  3  °r  with  speeches  wherewith  he  can  do  no 
21.  2  Hear  diligently  my  speech;  andletthisbe 
24.  25  make  me  a  liar,  and  make  my  speech  no. 
29.  22  spake  not  again ;  and  my  speech  dropped 

33.  1  hear  my  speeches,  and  hearken  to  all  my 

9.  Mouth,  n?  peh. 

Exod.4. 10  but  I(am)slowof  speech,  andofa  slow  to. 

10.  Lip,  ~vy*  saphah. 

Job   12.  20  removeth  away  the  speech  of  the  trusty 
Prov  17.    7  Excellentspeechbecomethnotafool,  mu. 
Isa.   33.  19  people  of  deeper  speech  than  thou  canst 
Eze.    3.   5,  6  people  of  a  strange  speech  and  of  an  h. 

11. Hearing,  what  is  heard,  iXW  she?na. 

Hab.  3.    2  O  Lord,  I  have  heard  thy  speech,  (and)  was 
12.  Eulogy,  fair  talk,  evKoyta  eulogia. 

Rom  16.  18  by  good  words  and  fair  speeches  deceive 

lZ.Talk,  Aahla  lalia. 

Matt.26.  73  thou  also  art  (one)  of  them;  for  thy  speech 
Marki4.  70  thou  art  a  Galilean,  and  thy  speech  agre. 
John  8.  43  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech? 

14.-4  word,  \6yos  logos. 

Acts  20.    7  and  continued  his  speech  until  midnight 

1  Co.  2.    1  came  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of 

2.   4  my  speech  and  my  preaching  (was)  not  wi. 
4.  19  not  the  speech  of  them  which  are  puffed 

2  Co.  10.  10  (his) . .  presence  (is)  weak,  and  (his)  speech 

11.  6  though  (I  be)  rude  in  speech,  yet  not  in  k. 
Col.  4.  6  Let  your  speech  (be)  alway  with  grace,  se. 
Titus  2.    8  Sound  speech,  that  cannot  be  condemned 

SPEECH  of  Lyeaonia  — 

In  the  Lycaonic  dialect,  AvKaovio-ri  lukaonisti. 

Acts  14.  11  saying  in  the  speech  of  Lyeaonia,  The  gods 
SPEECHLESS,  (to  be)  — 
1.   Without  breath  or  speech,  4vv*6s  eneos,  eVeoY 

Acts.  9.   7  the  men.,  stood  speechless,  hearing  a  voi. 


SPEED 


924 


SPIRIT 


^.Stricken,  blunted,  deaf,  dumb,  Kce<p6s  Tcdpfaos. 
Luke  i.  22  for  he  beckoned,  .and  remained  speechl. 

%,To  muzzle,  gag,  silence,  <pip6w  phimoo. 

Matt22.  12  how  earnest  thou  in.  .And  he  was  speech. 
SPEED,  speedily,  speedy  — 
1. Speedily,  KfJ999  osparna. 

Ezra.  6~  12  made  a  decree  ;  let  it  be  done  with  speed 

6.  13  according  to  that. .  so  they  did  speedily 

7.  17  That  thou  mayest  buy  speedily  with  this 
7.  21  shall  require  of  you,  it  be  done  speedily 
7.  26  let  judgment  be  executed  speedily  upon 

2.  To  be  hastened,  troubled,  Sn3  bahal,  2. 

Zeph.  1. 18  he  shall  make  even  a  speedy  riddance  of 

Z.To  go  on,  rjSn  halak. 

Zech.  8.  21  let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lc. 

4.  Hasting,  hastily,  TffiJ  maker. 

Psa.  69. 17  for  I  am  in  trouble  :  hear  me  speedily 
79.    8  let  thy  tender  mercies  speedily  prevent  us 
102.   2  in  the  day  (when)  I  call  answer  me  speed. 
143.    7  Hear  me  speedily,  0  Lord ;  my  spirit  fail. 

5.  Haste,  n~]m  meherah. 

Psa.  31.  2  deliver  me  speedily :  be  thou  my  strongr. 
Eccl.  8.  11  Because  sentence,  .is  not  executed  speed. 
Isa.  5.  26  behold,  they  shall  come  with  speed  swift. 
58.  8  and  thine  health  shall  spring  forth  speed. 
Joel    3.   4  speedily  will  I  return  your  recompence  u. 

6.  To  [make  to)  haste,  ino  mahar,  3. 

Gen.   44.  11  they  speedily  took  down  every  man  his 
7. To  let  escape,  oSs  mala.t,  2. 

1  Sa.  27.    1  I  should  speedily  escape  into  the  land  of 

5.  To  pass  over,  T3JJ  abar. 

2  Sa.  17. 16  speedily  pass  over ;  lest  the  king  be  swa. 

9. Most  speedily,  rdxtara  tachista. 

Acts  17.  15  commandment.. to  come  to  him  with  alls. 

10. In  haste,  speed,  speedily,  ivrdxet  entachei. 
Lukei8.    8  I  tell  you  he  will  avenge  them  speedily 

SPEED,  (to  make)  — 

I. To  strengthen  self,  fDtj  amats,  7. 

iKi.  12.  iS  Rehoboam  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to 
2  Cn.io.  18  Rehoboam  made  speed  to  get  him  up  to 

2.  To  hasten,  "ins  mahar,  3. 

2  Sa.  15.  14  make  speed  to  depart  lest  he  overtake  us 
Isa.     5.  19  Let  him  make  speed,  .hasten  his  work,  th. 

3.  Haste,  rrirra  meherah. 

1  Sa.  20.  3S  Jonathan  cried  after  the  lad,  Make  speed 

4.  To  find,  N>D  matsa. 

Judg.  5.  30  Have  they  not  sped?  have  they  (not)div. 
SPEEDILY,  to  divide  or  give  — 

1.  To  trouble,  Imsten,  Snp  bahel,  3. 

Esth.  2.    9  speedily  gave  her  her  things  for  purifica. 

2.  To  cause  to  run,  |*n  ruts,  5. 

2  Ch.35. 13  divide  (them)  speedily  among  all  the  pe. 
SPEND,  to  — 

1.7*0  separate,  spend,  destroy,  "QN  abad,  3. 

Prov.29.    3  keepeth  company  with  harlots  spendeth 
2.  To  wear  out,  nSp  or  n^3  kalah  or  balah,  3. 

Job   21.  13  They  spend  their  days  in  wealth,  and  in 
Z.To  complete,  finish,  consume,  npa  kalah,  3. 

Deut32.  23  heap  mischiefs  upon  them  ;  I  will  spend 

Job  21. 13  They  spend  their  days  in  wealth,  and  in 
36.  11  they  shall  spend  their  days  in  prosperity 

Psa.  90.    9  we  spend  our  years  as  a  tale  (that  is  told) 

Isa.   49.   4  I  have  spent  my  strength  for  nought,  and 
4.  To  do,  make,  n'p^  asah. 

Eccl.  6.  12  all  the  days  oi  his  vain  life  which  he  sp. 
Si  To  weigh  out,  pay,  spend,  Spy  shaqal. 

Isa.    55.    2  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  (that 

6.  To  spend,  Za-Kavdv  dapanao. 

Mark  5.  26  had  spent  all  that  she  had,  and  was  not. 
Lukeis.  14  when  he  had  spent  all,  ther^  arose  a  mi. 
2  C0.12.  15  And  I  will  very  gladly  spend,  .for  you 

7.  To  do,  make,  -noUai  poieo. 

Acts  iS.  23  after  he  had  spent  some  time  (there),  he 
8.1*0  take  upbesides,  TrpoaavaKiuKta  prosajialiskd. 

Luke  8.  43  a  woman,  .which  had  spent  all  her  living 
SPEND,  more,  time,  up,  to  — 
l.To  swallow  up,  y?2  bala,  3. 

Prov2i.  20  treasure,  .but  a  foolish  man  spendethitup 
2.  To  have  a  good  or  easy  time,   evxaipzw  eukaireo. 

Acts  17.  21  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else,  but  eit. 
3.7V  spend  besides,  -rrpoa-fiairavda}  prosdapanao. 

Lukeio.  35  whatsoever  thou  spendest  more,  when  I 
4.  To  rub,  spend  or  pass  the  time,  xP0U0TPl&w- 

Acts  20.  16  because  he  would  not  spend  the  time  in 
SPENT,  (to  bo)  far  — 
1.  T>>  go  away  or  about,  ?]x  aza.l. 

1  Sa.   o.    7  the  bread  is  spent  in  our  vessels,  and  (th. 

2.7*0  be  completed,  finished,  consumed,  n^s  kalah. 
Gen.  si.  15  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and 
Job     7.    C  My  days.. are  spent  without  hope 
Psa.  31,  10  my  life  is  spent  with  grief,  and  my  years 


3.  To  subdue,  ~yn  radad. 

Judg  19.  11  the  day  was  far  spent;  and  the  servant 
4.7*0  be  perfect,  finished,  consumed,  csn  tamam. 

Gen.  47.  18  "VVe  will  not  hide,  .that  our  money  is  sp. 

Lev.  26.  20  your  strength  shall  be  spent  in  vain 

Jer.  37.  21  until  all  the  bread  in  the  city  were  spent 

5.7*0  come  through  or  over,  diayti/opai  diaginomai. 

Acts  27.  9  when  much  time  was  spent,  and  when  sa. 
6. 7*o  expend,  iKSawavdw  ekdapanao. 

2  Co.  12. 15  And  I  will  very  gladly,  .be  spent  for  you 
7.  7*o  boto  down,  recline,  kXivoj  klino. 

Luke  24.  29  toward  evening.. and  the  day  is  far  spent 
8.7*0  strike  forward,  TrpoKdwrca  prokopto. 

Rom  13. 12  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand 
SPICE,  spiced,  spicery,  (sweet)  — 

1.  Spice,  D73  basam. 

Song  5.    1  I  have  gathered  my  myrrh  with  my  spice 

2.  Spice,  D'^'2  besem. 

Exod  25.  6  spices  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  sweet  in. 
30.  23  Take  thou  also  unto  thee  principal  spices 
35.  8  spices  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  the  sweet 
Ki.  10.  2  with  camels  that  bare  spices,  and  very  mu. 
10.  10  twenty  talents  of  gold,  and  of  spices  very 
10.  25  garments,  and  armour,  and  spices,  horse3 

2  Ki.  20.  13  the  gold,  and  the  spices,  and  the  precious 

1  Ch.  9.  29  oil,  and  the  frankincense,  and  the  spices 

9.  30  And  (some) . .  made  the  ointment  of  the  sp. 

2  Ch.  9.   1  camels  that  bare  spices,  and  gold  in  abu. 

9.  9  twenty  talents  of  gold,  and  of  spices  gr. 
9.  24  raiment,  harness,  and  spices,  horses,  and 
32.  27  for  precious  stones,  and  for  spices,  and  for 

Song  4.  10  smell  of  thine  ointments  than  all  spices 
4. 14  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the  chief  spices 
4.  16  blow  upon  my  garden,  (that)  the  spices 
8. 14  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spic. 

Isa.  39.    2  the  spices,  and  the  preciousointment,  and 

3.  Spice,  D"^2  bosem. 

Exod  35.  28  spice,  and  oil  for  the  light,  and  for  the 

1  Ki.  10.  10,  such  abundance  of  spices  as  these  which 

2  Ch.  9.    9  neither  was  there  any  such  spices  as  the 
Song  5. 13  His  cheeks(are)  as  a  bed  of  spices,  (as)  sw 

6.    2  into  his  garden,  to  the  beds  of  spices,  to 
Eze.  27.  22  theyoccupiedinthyfairswith.  .spices, and 

4.  Spices,  treasury,  nso.3  nekoth. 

Gen.  37.  25  with  their  camels  bearing  spicery  and  ba. 
43. 11  alittlehoney,  spices,  andmyrrh,  nuts,  and 

5. Spices,  perfume,  D*tpo  sammim. 

Exod  30.  34  Take  unto  thee  sweet  spices,  stacte,  and 
30.  34  (these)  sweet  spices  with  pure  frankince. 
37.  29  pure  incense  of  sweet  spices,  according  to 

6.  Compound,  mixture,  sjrice,  npi  reqach. 

Song  8.   2  I  would  cause  thee  to  drink  of  spiced  wi. 

7.  Aroma,  very  fragrant,  &pwfia  aroma. 

Marki6-    1  had  brought  sweet  spices,  that  they  mig. 

Luke  23.  56  they  returned,  and  prepared  spices  and 

24.    1  bringing  the  spices  which  they  had  prep. 

Johmg.  40  wound  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the  spices 

SPICE,  spice  merchant,  to  — 

1.7*0  go  to  and  fro,  be  a  merchant,  ?ti  rakal. 

1  Ki.  10.  15  of  the  traffic  of  the  spice  merchants,  and 
2.7*0  compound,  spice,  npn  raqach,  5. 

Eze.  24.  10  consume  the  flesh,  and  spice  it  well,  and 

SPIDER, — 

l.A  spider,  tr'iisy  akkabish. 

Job     8.  14  and'  whose  trust  (shall    e)  a  spider's  web 
Isa.   59.    5  They,  .weave  the  spider's  web :  he  that 

I.Poisonous  lizard,  spider,  n'CCi?  semamith. 

Prov3o.  28  Thespidertakethholdwithherhands.and 
SPIED,  to  be  — 
7*o  be  seen,  n\f\  raah,  2. 

2  Ki.  23.  24  the  abominations  that  were  spied  in  the 
SPIES  — 

\. Spies,  places  or  districts,  Cs"in^  atharim. 

Nuni2i.    1  that  Israel  came  by  the  way  of  the  spies 
2.7*0  use  the  feet,  travel,  traverse,  ?j"i  ragal,  3. 
Gen.  42.    9  Ye  (are)spies;  tosee  the  nakedness  of  the 
42. 1 1  we  (are)  true  (men),  thy  servants  are  no  sp. 
42.  14  I  speak  unto  you,  saying,  Ye  (are)  spies 
42. 16  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh .  .ye  (are)  spies 
42.  30  spake  roughly  to  us,  and  took  us  for  spies 
42.  31  said.  .We  (are)  true  (men);  we  are  no  sp. 
42.  34  then  shall  I  know  that  ye  (are)  no  spies 
Josh.  6.  23  young  men  that  were  spies  went  in,  and 

1  Sa.  26.    4  David  therefore  sent  out  spies,  and  und. 

2  Sa.  15. 10  Absalom  sent  spies  throughout  all  the  tr. 

3. One  sent  in  (to  spy),  eyKaderos  cukathetos. 

Luke2o.  20  sent  forth  spies,  which  should  feign  them. 

i.A  spy,  KardiTKoiros  kataskopos. 

Heb.  11.  31  when  she  had  received  the  spies  withpeace 

SPIKENARD  — 

l.Xard,  ^"u  nerd. 

Song  1."  12  my  spikenard  sendeth  forth  the  smell  th. 
4.  13  pleasant  fruits  ;  caniphire,  with  spikenard 
4.  14  Spikenard  and  saffron  ;  calamus  and  cin. 

^.Genuine  nard,  vdpSos  ttkttikos  nardos  j'istikos. 
Marki4.    3  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment  of  spikenard 
John  12.    3  a  pound  of  ointment  uf  spikenard,  very 


SPELL,  be  spilled  or  spilt,  to  — 

1.7*0  be  poured  or  spread  out,  -uj  nagar,  2. 

2  Sa.  14. 14  as  water  spilt  on  the  ground,  which  cann. 
2.7*0  corriLpt,  destroy,  n~y  shachath,  3. 

Gen.  38.   9  he  spilled  (it)  on  the  ground,  lest  that  he 
3.7*0  pour  out,  ckx^co  ekcheo. 

Mark  2.  22  [the  wine  is  spilled,  and  the  bottles  will] 
±.To  pyour  out,  iKxvvai  ekchuno. 

Luke  5.  37  wine  will  burst  the  bottles,  and  be  spilled 
SPIN,  to  — 
1.7*0  spin,  aia  tavah. 

Exod35.  25  women  that  were  wise  hearted  did  spin 
35.  26  stirred  them  up  in  wisdom  spun  goata' 

2. 7*o  spin,  vr\Q<a  netho. 

Matt.  6. 28  the  lilies,  .toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin 
Lukei2.  27  the  lilies,  .they  toil  not,  they  spin  not 

SPINDLE  — 

Spindle,  distaff,  li^'a  kishor. 

Prov3i.  19  She  layeth  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  and 
SPIRIT  — 
I. Breath,  "D^  neshamah. 

Job   26.   4  To  whom,  .and  whose  spirit  came  from 
Prov  20.  27  The  spirit  of  man  (is)  the  candle  of  the  L. 
2. Spirit,  wind,  nn  ruach. 

Gen.  1.  2  the  spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of 
6.  3  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  m. 
41.  8  his  spirit  was  troubled ;  and  he  sent  and 
41.  38  Can  we  find,  .a  man  in  whom  the  spirit  of 
45.  27  the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  revived 
Exod.  6.  9  they  hearkened  not.  .for  anguish  of  spirit 
28.  3  whom  I  have  filled  with  the  spirit  of  wis. 
31.   3  I  have  filled  him  with  the  spirit  of  God 

35.  21  every  one  whom  his  spirit  made  willing 
35. 31  he  hath  filled  him  with  the  spirit  of  God 

Num.  5.  14  the  spirit  of  jealousy  come  upon  him,  and 
5.  14  if  the  spirit  oi  jealousy  come  upon  him 
5. 30  when  the  spirit  of  jealousy  cometh  upon 
11.  17  I  will  take  of  the  spirit  which  (is)  upon 
11.  25  took  of  the  spiritthat(was)uponhim,and 
11.  25  when  the  spirit  rested  upon  them,  they 
11.  26  the  spirit  rested  upon  them;  and  they 
11.  29  that  the  Lord  would  put  his  spirit  upon 
14.  24  he  had  another  spirit  with  him,  and  hath 
16.  22  0  God,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh 
24.    2  and  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  him 

27.  16  Let  the  Lord,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of 

27. 18  son  of  Nun,  a  man  in  whom(is)  the  spirit 
Deut.  2.  30  God  hardened  his  spirit,  andmade  his  he. 

34.    9  the  son  of  Nun  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  w. 

Josh.  5.    1  neither  was  there  spirit  in  them  any  mo. 

Judg.  3. 10  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  and 

^^_    6.  34  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Gideon 

^^  9.  23  God  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abimele. 

11.  29  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Jephthah 

13-  25  spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  move  him  at 

14.  6  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon 

14. 19  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  and 
15. 14  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon 
15. 19  spirit  came  again,  and  he  revived :  where. 

1  Sa.    1.  15  I  (am)  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit:  I 

10.   6  spirit  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon  thee 

10.  10  spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  and  he  pro. 

11.  6  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul  when  he  he. 
i5.  13  spirit  oi  Lord  came  upon  David  from  that 
16. 14  spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  SauL  and 
16.  14  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  troubled  him 
16.  15  Behold  now,  an  evil  spirit  from  God  tro. 
i5.  16  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  is  upon  th. 
16. 23  when  the  (evil)  spirit  from  God  was  upon 
16.  23  was  well,  and  the  evil  spirit  departed  fr. 

18.  10  the  evil  spirit  from  God  came  upon  Saul 

19.  9  the  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  was  upon 
19.  20  the  spirit  of  God  was  upon  the  messeng. 

19.  23  the  spirit  of  God  was  upon  him  also,  and 
30.  12  when  he  had  eaten,  his  spirit  came  again 

2  Sa.  23.    2  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  spake  by  me,  and 

1  Ki.io.    5  there  was  no  more  spirit  in  her 

iS.  12  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  carry  theew. 

21.  5  Why  is  thy  spirit  so  sad,  that  thou  eatest 

22.  21  there  caniefortha  spirit, and  stoodbefore 
22.  22  I  will  bea  lying  spirit  inthe  mouth  of  all 
22.  23  the  Lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mo. 
22.  24  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 

2  Ki.  7.    9  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  upon 

2.  15  they  said,  The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on 
2. 16  perad venture  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  hath 

1  Ch.  5.  26  the  God  of  Israel  stirred  up  the  spirit  of 

5.  26  the  spirit  of  Tilgath-pilneser  king  of  Ass. 

12.  18  the  spirit  came  upon  Amasai,  (who  was) 

28.  12  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  spi. 

2  Ch.  9.    4  there  was  no  more  spirit  in  her 

15.  1  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Azariah  the 
iS.  20  there  came  out  a  spirit,  and  stood  before 
iS.  21  I  will  go  out,  and  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the 
i3.  22  the  Lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mo. 
iS.  23  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 

20.  14  came  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  in  the  midst 

21.  16  stirred  up  against  Jehoram  the  spirit  of 
24.  20  the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Zechariah  the 

36.  22  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  ki. 
Ezra    1.    1  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  ki. 

1.    5  with  all  (them)  whose  spirit  God  had  rais. 
Nth.   q.  20  Thou  gavest  also  thy  guod  spirit  to  instr. 

9.  ^o  testinedst  against  them  by  thy  spirit  in 
Jub     4-  15  rt  spirit  passed  before  my  face;  the  hair  of 

6.  4  the  poison  whereof  driuketh  up  my  spirit 


SPIRIT 


925 


SPIRIT 


26. 

27. 

32- 
33- 
34- 
Tsa.  31. 
32- 
34- 
51- 
5i- 
51- 
51- 
76. 
77- 
77- 
78. 

104. 

104. 

106. 

139- 

142. 

143- 
142. 

Frov.  r. 
11. 
14. 
*5- 
J5- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
*7- 
17. 


Job      7.  11 1  will  speak  in  the  anguish  of  ray  spirit 
10.  12  thy  visitation  hath  preserved  my  spirit 

15. 13  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  agaiust  God,  and 

20.  3  the  spirit  of  ray  understanding  causeth  me 

21.  a  if  (it  were  so),  why  should  not  my  spirit 
By  his  spirit  he  hath  garnished  the  heavens 
and  the  spirit  of  God  (is)  in  my  nostrils 
(there)isa  spirit  in  man:  and  the  inspirati. 
I  am  full  of  matter;  the  spirit  within  me 
The  spirit  of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the 
(if)  he  gather  unto  himself  his  spirit  and 
Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit:  thou 
Blessed  (is)  the  man.. in  whose  spirit  (the. 
and  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite  spirit 
OGod;  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me 
Cast  me  not  away,  .take  not  thy  holy  spi. 
and  uphold  me  (with  thy)  free  spirit 
The  sacrifices  of  God  (are)  a  broken  spirit 
He  shall  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes:  (he 
I  complained,  and  my  spirit  was  overwh. 
and  my  spirit  made  diligent  search 
and  whose  spirit  was  not  stedfast  withG. 
Who  raakethhis  angels  spirits;  his  minis. 
Thou  sendest  forth  thy  spirit,  they  are  cr. 
they  provoked  his  spirit,  so  that  he  spake 
Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  spirit  ?  or  wh. 
When  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed  within 
Therefore  is  my  spirit  overwhelmed  with. 
Hear  me  speedily,  O  Lord  ;  my  spirit  fail, 
thou  (art)  my  God  :  thy  spirit  (is)  good 
I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  unto  you,  I  will 
he  that  is  of  a  faithful  spirit  concealeth 
but  (lie  that  is)  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  fo. 
perverseness.  .(is)  a  breach  in  the  spirit 
by  soitow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  brok. 
but  the  Lord  weigheth  the  spirits 
and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall 
Better  (it  is  to  be)  of  an  humble  spirit  wi. 
he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  ta. 
but  a  broken  spirit  drieth  the  bones 
of  understanding  is  of  an  excellent  spirit 

ia.  14  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infir. 

18. 14  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear? 

25.  28  He  that  (hath)  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit 

29.  23  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit 

Eccl.   1.  14  behold,  all  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  sp. 

1.  17  perceived  that  this,  .is  vexation  of  spirit 

2.  11,  17,  26  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

3.  21  Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of  man  that  go. 

3.  21  the  spirit  of  the  beast  that  goeth  downw. 

4.  4  This  (is)  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 
4.    6  full  (with)  travail  and  vexation  of  spirit 
4. 16  this  also  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

6.  9  this  (is)  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

7.  8  patient  in  spirit,  .the  proud  in  spirit 

7.  9  Be  not  hasty  in  thy  spirit  to  be  angry.:  for 

8.  8  over  the  spirit,  to  retain  the  spirit 

10.  4  If  the  spirit  of  the  ruler  rise  up  against 

11.  5  knowest  not.  .the  way  of  the  spirit,  (nor) 

12.  7  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave 
Isa.     4.    4  the  spirit  of  judgment,  and  by  the  spirit 

11.   2  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  him 
1 1.    2  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding 
the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the  spirit 
the  spirit  of  Egypt  shall  fail  in  the  midst 
The  Lord  hath  mingled  a  perverse  spirit 
with  my  spirit  within  me  will  I  seek  thee 
a  spirit  of  judgment  to  him  that  sitteth 
hath  poured  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of 
They  also  that  erred  in  spirit  shall  come 
cover  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  spi. 
and  their  horses  flesh,  and  not  spirit 
Until  the  spirit  be  poured  upon  us  from 
it  hath  commanded,  and  his  spirit  it  hath 
all  these  (things  is)  the  life  of  my  spirit 
because  the  spirit  of  the  LoRDblowethup. 
Who  hath  directed  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 
I  have  put  my  spirit  upon  him ;  he  shall 
giveth.  .spirit  to  them  that  walk  therein 
I  will  pour  my  spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and 
the  Lord  God,  and  his  spirit,  hath  sentme 
as  a  woman  forsaken,  and  grieved  in  spirit 
(that  is)  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit 
to  revive  the  spirit  of  the  humble,  and  to 
the  spirit  should  fail  before  me,  and  the 
the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  upa  stan. 
My  spirit  that  (is)  upon  thee.and  my  words 
The  spirit  of  the  Lord  God  (is)  upon  me 
the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  he. 
they  rebelled,  and  vexed  his  Holy  Spirit 
where  (is)  he  that  put  his  Holy  Spirit  wi. 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caused  him  to  rest 
and  snail  howl  for  vexation  of  spirit 
to  (him  that  is)  poor,  and  of  a  contrite  sp. 
the  Lord  hath  raised  up  the  spirit  of  the 
12  whither,  .spirit  was  to  go,  they  went;  (and) 
,  20  Whithersoever  the  spirit  was  to  go,  they 
,  20  thither  (was  their)  spirit  to  go ;  and  the 
,  20,  21  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  (was) 
,   2  the  spirit  entered  into  me  when  he  spake 
.  12  the  spirit  tookme  up,  and  I  heardbehind 
,  14  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  took  me  away 
.  14  and  I  went,  .in  the  heat  of  my  spirit 
.  24  the  spirit  entered  into  me,  and  set  me  up. 
.    3  the  spirit  lifted  me  up  between  the  earth 
.  17  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  (was)  in 
.    1  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  brought  me 
.   5  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  me,  and 
.  19  and  I  will  put  a  new  spirit  within  you 
.  24  Afterwards  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  br. 
.  24  in  a  vision  by  the  spirit  of  God  into  Cha. 
.   3  prophets,  thatfoUow  their  own  spirit,  aDd 


19. 
19. 
26. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
30. 
31- 
32. 

34- 
38. 
40. 
40. 
42. 
42. 
44- 
48. 
54- 
57- 
57- 
57- 
59- 
59- 
61. 
61. 
$3- 
63- 
63- 
6S- 
66. 

Jer.  51. 

Eze.    1. 


Eze.  18.  31  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit 

21.  7  every  spirit  shall  faint,  and  all  knees  shall 

36.  26  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you 
36. 27  I  will  put  my  spirit  within  you,  and  cause 

37.  1  carried  me  out  in  the  spirit  of  the  Lord,  and 
37.  14  shall  put  ray  spirit  in  you,  and  ye  shall  li. 
39.  29  I  have  poured  out  my  spirit  upon  the  ho. 
43.    5  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me  into 

Dan.   2.    1  his  spirit  was  troubled,  and  his  sleep  brake 

2.    3  my  spirit  was  troubled  to  know  the  dream 

Hos.    4.  12  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  hath  caused  (th.) 

5.  4  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  (is)  in  the  midst 
Joel    2.  28  I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh 

2.  29  in  those  days  will  I  pour  out  my  spirit 
Hie.    2.    7  is  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  (are) 

2.  11  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  falseh. 

3.  8  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  spirit  of  the  L. 
Hag.    1.  14  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubb. 

1. 14  the  spirit  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech 
1. 14  the  spirit  of  all  thereninantof  the  people 
2.    5  So  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you :  fear 
Zech.  4.    6  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  s. 

6.  s  These  (are)  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens 

6.  8  have  quieted  my  spirit  in  the  north  cou. 

7.  12  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  in  his  spirit 
12.    1  and  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him 

12.  10  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications 

13.  2  and  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the 
Mai.    2. 15  Yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the  spirit.  And 

2.  15,  16  therefore  take  heed  to  your  spirit 

1.  Spirit,  wind,  nn  ruack. 

Dan.   4.   8  and  in  whom  (is)  the  spirit  of  the  holy  go. 

4.  9  I  know  that  the  spiritof  the  holygods(is) 

5.  18  for  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  (is)  in  thee 

5. 11  in  whom  (is)  the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods 

5.  12  Forasmuch  as  an  excellent  spirit,  and  kn. 

5. 14  the  spirit  of  the  gods  (is) in  thee,  aud(th.) 

6.  3  because  an  excellent  spirit  (was)  in  him 

7. 15  I  Daniel  was  grieved  in  my  spirit  in  the 

3. Spirit,  7rf6^a^?^»?»rt.  [See  also  Holy]. 

Matt.  3.  16  he  saw  the  spirit  of  God  descending  like 

4.  1  Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  spirit  into 

5.  3  Blessed  (are)  the  poor  in  spirit:  for  theirs 

8.  16  he  cast  out  the  spirits  with  (his)  word,  and 
10.  1  gave  them  power  (against)  unclean  spirits 
10.  20  the  spirit  of  your  Father  which  speaketh 
12.  18  I  will  put  my  spirit  upon  him,  andhesh. 
12.  28  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  spirit  of  God,  th. 

12.  43  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 
12.45  taketh  with  himself  seven  other  spirits 

22.  43  How  then  doth  David  in  spirit  call  him 
26.  41  the  spirit  indeed  (is)  willing,  but  the  flesh 

Mark  1.  10  the  spirit  likeadovedescendinguponhim 

1. 12  the  spirit  drive  th  him  into  the  wilderness 
1.  23  there  was.  .a  man  with  an  unclean  spirit 
1.  26  when  the  unclean  spirit  had  torn  him,  and 

1.  27  commandeth  he  even  the  unclean  spirits 

2.  8  Jesus  perceived  in  his  spirit  that  they  so 

3.  11  unclean  spirits,  when  they  saw  him,  fell 

3.  30  they  said,  He  hath  an  unclean  spirit 

5.  2  met  him.  .a  man  with  an  unclean  spirit 
5.    8  Come  out  of  the  man,  (thou)  unclean  spi. 

5.  13  the  unclean  spirits  went  out,  and  entered 

6.  7  and  gave  them  power  over  unclean  spi. 
7. 25  whose  young  daughter  bad  an  unclean  sp. 
8. 12  he  sighed  deeply  in  his  spirit,  and  saith 

9. 17  brought .  .my son,  which  hath  a  dumb  sp. 

9.  20  the  spirit  tare  him  ;  and  he  fell  on  the 
9.  25  he  rebuked  the  foul  spirit,  saying  unto 
9.  25  (Thou)  dumb  and  deaf  spirit,  I  charge  th. 

14.  38  The  spirit  truly  (is)  ready,  but  the  flesh 
Luke  1. 17  he  shall  go  before  him  in  the  spirit  and 

1.  47  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  ray  Sav. 

1.  80  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  sp. 

2.  27  And  he  came  by  the  spirit  into  the  temple 

2.  40  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  [in  sp.] 

4.  1  was  led  by  the  spirit  into  the  wilderness 
4.  14  Jesus  returned  in  the  power  of  the  spirit 

4. 18  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon  me,  bee. 
4.  33  there  was  a  man  which  had  a  spirit  of  an 
4.  36  he  commandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and 

6.  18  they  that  were  vexed  with  unclean  spirits 

7.  21  cured  many  of.  .plagues,  and  of  evil  sp. 

8.  2  which  had  been  healed  of  evil  spirits  and 
8.  29  he  had  commanded  the  unclean  spirit  to 

8.  55  [her  spirit  came  again,  and  she  arose  st.] 
9. 39  a  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he  suddenly  cr. 
g.  42  Jesus  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and  he. 

9.  55  [Yeknownotwhatmannerofspirityeaie] 
10.  20  rejoice  not,  that  the  spirits  are  subject 

10.  21  In  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and 

11.  13  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him 
11.  24  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 
11.  26  taketh  (to  him)  seven  other  spirits  more 

13.  11  there  was  a  woman  which  had  a  spirit  of 

23.  46  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit 

24.  37  and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit 
24.  39  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see 

John  1.  32  I  saw  the  Spirit  descending  from  heaven 
1.  33  thou  shalt  seethe  Spuit  descending,  and 

3.  s  Except  a  man  be  born .  .(of)  the  spirit,  he 
3.    6  that  which  is  born  of  the  spirit  is  spirit 
3.   8  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  spirit 

3.  34  God  giveth  not  the  spirit  by  measure(unto 

4.  23  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in 
4.  24  God  (is)  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship 
4.  24  must  worship  (hini)  in  spirit  and  in  truth 
6.  63  It  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth;  the  flesh 

6.  63  the  words  that  I  speak . .  (they)  are  spirit 

7.  39  this  spake  he  of  the  spirit,  which  they  that 
11.  33  he  groaned  in  the  spirit,  and  was  troubled 


J0IUI13. 
14. 
15- 
16. 


Rom.v 


14, 
14, 

14. 
14 

14. 

16. 
!  Co.    I. 


21  he  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  testified 
17  (Even)  the  spirit  of  truth  ;  whom  the  wo. 
26  I  will  send,  .the  spirit  of  truth,  which 
13  when  he,  the  spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he 

4  began  to  speak,  .as  the  spirit  gave  them 

17  I  will  pour  out  of  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh 

18  will  pour  out  in  those  days  of  ray  spirit 

9  agreed  together  to  tempt  the  spirit  ofthe 
16  were  vexed  with  unclean  spirits:  andth. 
10  they  were  not  able  to  resist,  .the  spirt  by 
59  and  saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit 

7  For  unclean  spirits,  crying  with  loud  voi. 
29  Then  the  spirit  said  unto  Philip,  Go  near 

39  spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip,  th. 

19  spirit  said  unto  him,  Behold,  three  men 
12  spirit  bade  me  go  with  them,  nothing  do. 
2S  signified  by  the  spirit  that  there  should 

7  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia:  but  the  spi. 
16  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divina. 

18  Paul,  .turned  and  said  to  the  spirit,  I  co. 
16  spirit  was  stirred  in  him,  when  he  saw  the 

5  Paul  was  pressed  [in  the  spirit,]  and  test. 

25  being  fervent  in  the  spirit,  he  spake  and 

12  and  the  evil  spirits  went  out  of  them 

13  to  call  over  them  which  had  evil  spirits 

15  evil  spirit  answered  and  said,  Jesus  I  kn. 

16  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was  leaped 

21  Paul  purposed  in  the  spirit,  when  he  had 

22  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusalem,  not 
4  who  said  to  Paul  through  the  spirit,  that 

8  no  resurrection,  neither  angel,  nor  spirit 

9  if  a  spirit  or  an  angel  hath  spoken  to  him 
4  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the 
9  whom  I  serve  with  ray  spirit  in  the  gospel 

29  inthespirit,  (and)  not  in  the  letter,  whose 

6  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit 

1  [walk  notafterjtbe  flesh,  but  after  the  sp.] 

2  For  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ 

4  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  sp. 

5  are  after  the  spirit  the  things  of  the  spir. 
9  in  the  spirit,  if  so  be  that  the  spirit  of  God 
9  if  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ 

10  the  spirit  (is)  life  because  of  righteousness 

11  if  the  spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus 

1 1  quicken,  .by  his  spirit  that  d welleth  in  you 

13  if  ye  through  the  spirit  do  mortify  the  dc. 

14  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  spirit  of  God 

15  ye  have  notreceived  the  spirit  of  bondage 

15  ye  have  received  the  spirit  of  adoption 

16  spirit,  .beareth  witness  with  our  spirit 

23  which  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  spirit,  ev. 

26  the  spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities,  for 

26  the  spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for 

27  knoweth  what  (is)  the  mind  of  the  spirit 
8  God  hath  given  them  thespiritof  sluniber 

11  Not  slothful  in  business;  fervent  in  spirit 

19  wonders,  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  G. 

30  I  beseech  you.  .for  the  love  of  the  spirit 
4  in  demonstration  of  the  spirit  and  of  pow. 

10  revealed,  .by  his  spirit:  for  the  spiritsea. 

11  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him 

11  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  spirit  of  God 

12  not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  spirit 
14  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  spirit  of  G. 

16  and  (that)  the  spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in 

21  shall  I  come,  .(in)  the  spirit  of  meekness 

3  as  absent  in  body,  bnt  present  in  spirit 

4  my  spirit,  with  the  power  of  our  Lord  Je. 

5  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of 
11  ye  are  justified,  .by  the  spirit  of  our  God 

17  he.  .joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit 

20  [glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  sp.] 
34  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  in  spirit 

40  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  spirit  of  God 

3  no  man  speaking  by  the  spirit  of  God  ca. 

4  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  spirit 

7  the  manifestation  of  the  spirit  is  given  to 

8  to  one  is  given  by  the  spirit  the  word  of 

8  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the  same  spirit 

9  Toanotherfaithbythesamespirit;  toano. 
9  the  gifts  of  healing  by  the  same  spirit 

io  to  another  discerning  of  spirits;  to  another 
11  all  these  worketh.  .the  self  same  spirit 

13  by  one  spuit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one 

13  been  all  made  to  drink  into  one  spirit 

2  howbeitin  the  spirit  he  speaketh  rayster. 

14  ray  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  understanding 

15  I  will  pray  with  the  spirit,  and  I  will  pray 

15  I  will  sing  with  the  spirit,  and  I  will  sing 

16  when  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  spirit,  how 
32  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to 
45  last  Adam  (was  made)  aquickening  spirit 

18  they  have  refreshed  my  spuit  and  yours 

22  given  the  earnest  of  the  spirit  in  ourbea. 
13  I  had  no  rest  in  my  spirit,  because  I  found 

3  but  with  the  spirit  of  the  living  God 

6  made  us  able  ministers . .  of  the  spirit:  for 

6  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  spirit  giveth  li. 
8  shall  not  the  ministration  of  the  spirit  be 

17  the  Lord  is  that  spirit:  and  where  the  sp. 
iS  are  changed.,  (even)  as  by  thespiritof  the 
13  We  having  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  acco. 

5  given  unto  us  the  earnest  of  the  spirit 

1  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit 

13  because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you 

4  (if)  ye  receive  another  spirit,  which  ye  ha . 

18  walked  we  not  in  the  same  spirit  ?  walked 

2  Received  ye  the  spirit  by  the  works  of  the 

3  having  begun  in  the  spirit,  are  yenowma. 

5  He.  .that  ministereth  to  you  the  spirit 

14  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  sp. 

6  God  hath  sent  forth  the  spirit  of  his  Son 


SPIRITUAL 


926 


SPOIL 


Gal.    4.  29  him  (that  was  born)  after  the  spirit,  even 
5.    5  we  through  the  spirit  wait  for  the  hope 

5. 16  Walk  in  the  spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil 
5.  17  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit 
5.  iS  if  ye  be  led  by  the  spirit,  ye  are  not  und. 
5.  22  the  fruit  of  the  spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace 

5.  25  in  the  spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  spirit 

6.  1  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meek. 
6.  8  soweth  to  the  spirit  shall  of  the  spirit  re. 
6.  iS  the  grace  of  our  Lord  .  .(be)  wit*  your  sp. 

Eph.    1.  13  ye  were  sealed  with  the  HolySpirit  ofpr. 

1. 17  may  give  unto  you  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
2.   2  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  child. 
2.  18  we  both  have  access  by  one  spirit  unto 

2.  22  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  sp. 

3.  5  revealed  unto  his . .  prophets  by  the  spirit 

3.  16  strengthened  with  might  by  his  spirit  in 

4.  3  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond 
4.  4  (There  is)  one  body,  and  one  spirit,  even 
4.  23  And  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mi. 

4.  30  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  where. 

5.  g  the  fruit  of  [the  spirit]  (is)  in  all  goodness 

5.  18  be  not  drunk,  .but  be  filled  with  the  spi. 

6.  17  the  sword  of  the  spirit,  which  is  the  word 
6. 18  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  sp. 

Phil.    1.  19  and  the  supply  of  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Chr. 

1.  27  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit,  with  one 

2.  1  if  any  fellowship  of  the  spirit,  if  any  bow. 

3.  3  which  worship  God  in  the  spirit,  and  rej. 
Col.      1.    8  declared  unto  us  your  love  in  the  spirit 

2.    s  yet  am  I  with  you  in  the  spirit,  joying 

1  Th.  4.    8  who  hath  also  given  unto  us  his  Holy  Sp. 

5.  19  Quench  not  the  Spirit 

5-  23  (I  pray  God)  your  whole  spirit  and  soul 

2  Th.  2.    2  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  le. 

2.   3  the  Lord  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of 

2.  13  through  sauctification  of  the  spirit  and 

1  Ti.    3. 16  justified  in  the  spirit,  seen  of  angels,  pr. 

4.  1  the  spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the 
4.  1  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doc. 
4.  12  in  conversation,  in  charity,  [in  spirit],  in 

2  Ti    1.    7  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear 

4.  22  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (be)  with  thy  spirit 

Phil.      25  The  grace  of  our  Lord . .  (be)  with  your  sp. 

Heb.  1.    7  Who  maketh  his  angels  spirits,  and  his 

1.  14  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent 

4.  12  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit 

g.  14  who  through  the  eternal  spirit  offered  hi. 

io.  29  hath  done  despite  unto  the  spirit  of  grace 

12.   o  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits.and 

12.  23  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfe. 

Jas.    2.  26  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so 

4.    5  The  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to 

1  Pe.  1.    2  through  sanctiflcation  of  the  spirit, unto  0. 

1.  11  what  manner  of  time,  the  spirit  of  Christ 

1.  22  hi  obeying  the  truth  [through  the  spirit] 

3.  4  (the  ornament)  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit 
3.  18  put  to  death,  .but  quickened  by  the  spirit 

3.  19  went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  inpr. 

4.  6  but  live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit 

4.  14  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  up. 
1  Jo.  3.  24  we  know,  .by  the  spirit  which  hehath  gi. 
4.  1  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits 
4.  2  know  ye  the  spiritof  God :  Every  spiritth. 
4.  3  every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jes. 
4.    6  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error 

4.  13  because  he  hath  given  us  of  his  spirit 

5.  6  spirit,  .beareth  witness .  .because  the  spi. 
5.   8  the  spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood 

Jude       19  These  be.  .sensual,  having  not  the  spirit 
Rev.    i.    4  the  seven  spirits  which  are  before  his  th. 

1.  10  I  was  in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and 

2.  7,  11, 17,  29  let  him  hear  what  the  spirit  sa. 

3.  1  he  that  hath  the  seven  spirits  of  God,  and 
3.6,  13, 22  let  him  hear  what  the  spirit  saithun. 

4.  2  I  was  in  the  spirit ;  and,  behold,  a  throne 

4.  5  seven  lamps . .  which  are  the  seven  spirits 

5.  6  the  seven  spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into 

1 1. 1 1  the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  th. 
14. 13  Yea,  saith  the  spirit,  that  they  may  rest 
16.  13  Isawthree unclean  spirits  likefrogs(come) 

16.  14  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils,  working  mi. 

17.  3  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  into  the 

18.  2  the  hold  of  every  foul  spirit,  and  a  cage 

19.  10  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  pr. 
21. 10  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  to  a  gre. 
22. 17  And  the  spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come 

'L  Phantasm,  apparition,  (pavraafxa  phantasma. 
Matt  14.  26  they  were  troubled,  saying,  It  is  a  spirit 
Mark  6.  49  they  supposed  it  had  been  a  spirit,  and 

SPIRITUAL  (things),  spiritually — 

X.Man  of  the  spirit,  n'in  ef,N  i$h  haruach. 

Hos.    9.    7  the  spiritual  man  (is)  mad,  for  the  multi. 

2. Spirit,  Trvevf.ia  pneuma. 

1  Co.  14.  12  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual  (gifts),  seek  that 

3. Spiritual,  irvevfxa.Tuc6$  pn&WtnaPikos. 

Rom.  1.  11  may  impart  unto  you  some  spiritual  gift 
7.  14  For  we  knowthatthe  law  is  spiritual:  but 
15.  27  been  made  partakers  of  their  spiritual  th. 
1  Co.   2.  13  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual 
2. 15  he  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  thing,  yet 
3.    1  could  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual 
9.  11  If  webave  sown  unto  you  spiritual  tlnngs 
10.    3  And  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat 
10.    4  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink 
xo.   4  they  drank  of  that  spiritual  rock  that 
12.    1  concerning  spiritual  (gifts),  brethren,  I 
14.    1  desire  spiritual  gifts,  but  rather  that  ye 
M-  37  If  any  man  think  himself .  .spiritual,  let 


1  Co.  15.  44  a  natural  body ;  it  is  raised  a  spiritual 
15.  44  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual 
15.46  that  (was)  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but 
15. 46  and  afterward  that  which  is  spiritual 
Gal.     6.    1  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one 
Eph.  1.   3  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  bl. 
5. 19  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  [spiritual]  songs 
6.  12  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  (pi.) 
Col.     1.   9  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding 
3.  16  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs 
1  Pe.  2.    5  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an  holypr. 
2.    5  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable 

4.  Sjriritually,  in/evpariKws  pneumatikos. 

1  Co.  2.  14  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned 
Rev.  11.    8  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  E. 

SPIRITUALLY  minded  — 

Minding  of  the  spirit,  <pp6wn/j.a  tov  Tryev/xarosphro. 
Rom.  8.    6  but  to  be  spiritually  minded  (is)  life  and 
SPIT  (on  or  upon),  spitting,  spittle,  to  — 

1.  To  spit,  pi;  yaraq. 

Num  12. 14  If  her  father  had  but  spit  in  her  face,  sh. 
Deut25.   9  spit  in  his  face,  and  shall  answer  and 

2.  Sjdttle,  drivel,  vi  rir. 

1  Sa.21. 13  and  let  his  spittle  fall  down  upon  his  bea. 
3. Spittle,  spitting,  ph  roq. 

Job     7.  19  alone  till  I  swallow  down  my  spittle 

30.  10  flee  far  from  me,  and  spare  not  to  spit  in 
Isa.   50.   6  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting 

4.  To  spit,  p\T\  raqaq. 

Lev.  15.    8  if  he  that  hath  the  issue  spit  upon  him 

5.  To  spit  in  or  on,  ^pirrvw  emptuo. 

Matt26.  67  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffe 

27.  30  they  spit  upon  him,  and  took the^eed,  and 
Markio.  34  shall  scourge  him,  and  shall  spit  upon 

14.  65  some  began  to  spit  on  him,  and  to  cover 
15. 19  did  spit  upon  him,  and  bowing  (their)  kn. 
LukeiS.  32  and  spitefully  entreated,  and  spitted  on 

6. Spittle,  irrvapa  2>tusma. 

John  9.   6  made  clay  of  the  spittle,  and  he  anointed 

7.  To  spit,  tttvq)  ptud. 

Mark  7.  33  put  his  fingers  into  his  ears,  and  he  spit 
8.  23  when  lie  had  spit  on  his  eyes,  and  Jo  9.6. 
SPITE,  entreat  spitefully — 

I.  Anger,  provocation,  sadnrss,  0JJ3  kaas. 

Psa.  10.  14  thou  beholdest  mischief  and  spite,  to  re. 
2. To  use  despiteftilly,vf$pt£uJ'M&tt.22.6;  Lu.1S.32, 
SPOIL,  spoiler,  spoiling  — 
I. Spoils,  machmations,  rn3"ix  oraboth. 

Isa.  25. 11  bring  down  their  pride,  .with  the  spoils 
I.Prey,  spoil,  portion,  food,  13,  J?  bag,  baz. 

Eze.  25.    7  will  deliver  thee  for  a  spoil  to  the  heath. 

3.  Prey,  spoil,  73  baz. 

Jer.  15.  13  thy  treasures  will  I  give  to  the  spoil  wit. 

1 7.  3 1  will  give . .  thy  treasures  to  the  spoil,  (and) 

Eze.  26.   5  and  it  shall  become  a  spoil  to  the  nations 

4. Prey,  spoil,  njs  bizzah. 

2  Ch.14.  14  they  spoiled  all  the  cities ;  for  there  was 

25. 13  smote  three  thousand . .  and  took  much  6p. 

28.  14  left  the  captives  and  the  spoil  before  the 
Ezra  9.  7  to  a  spoil,  and  to  confusion  of  face,  as  (it 
Esth.  9.  10  but  on  the  spoil  laid  they  not  their  hand 
Dan.  11.  33  and  by  flame,  by  captivity,  and  by  spoil 

5.  What  is  violently  snatched  away,  nSia  gezelah. 

Isa.  3. 14  the  spoil  of  the  poor  (is)  in  your  houses 
6.Annour,  r\)f'hn  chalitsah. 

Judgi4.  19  took  their  spoil,  and  gave  change  of  gar. 
7 '.Torn  prey,  *pt?  tereph. 

Job  29. 17  and  plucked  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth 

8.  Spoil,  np^*?  meshussah. 

Isa.  42.  24  Who  gave  Jacob  for  a  spoil,  and  Israel  to 

9.  Spoil,  n^c't?  meshissah. 

2  Ki.  21.  14  they  shall  become  a  prey  and  a  spoil  to  all 
Isa.  42.  22  they  are.  .for  a  spoil,  and  none  saith,  Re. 
Jer.  30. 16  they,  .shall  be  a  spoil,  and  all  that  prey 

10. Destruction,  spoiling,  ft?  shod. 

Isa.   16.   4  the  extortioner  is  at  an  end,  the  spoiler 

22.  4  because  of  the  spoiling  of  the  daughter  of 
Jer.     6.    7  violence  and  spoil  is  heard  in  her;  before 

20.  8  I  cried  violence  and  spoil ;  because  the 
48.    3  A  voice  of  crying . .  spoiling  and  great  de. 

Eze.  45.   9  remove  violence  and  spoil,  and  execute 
Hab.  1.   3  for  spoiling  and  violence  (are)  before  me 
2. 17  the  spoil  of  beasts,  (which)  made  them  afr. 

II.  To  destroy,  spoil,  T#  shadad. 

iBa.   16.   4  spoiler  ceaseth,  the  oppressors  are  cons. 

21.  2  dealeth  treacherously,  and  the  spoiler  sp. 
Jer.    6.  26  for  the  spoiler  shall  suddenly  come  upon 

12. 12  spoilers  are  come  upon  all  high  places  th. 
15.  8  brought  upon  them,  .a  spoiler  at  noond. 
48.  8  spoiler  shall  come  upon  every  city,  and 
48.  18  for  the  spoiler  of  Moab  shall  come  upon 
48.  32  spoiler  is  fallen  upon  thy  summer  fruits 
51.  48  for  the  spoilers  shall  come  unto  her  from 
51.  53  from  me  shall  spoilers  come  unto  her,  sa. 
51.  56  Because  the  spoiler  is  come  upon  her,(ev.) 

12.77)  corrupt,  destroy,  mar,  nm?  shachath,  5. 
1  Sa.  13.  17  the  spoilers  came  out  of  the  camp  of  the 
14. 15  the  garrison,  and  the  spoilers,  they  also 


13.  To  take  spoil,  noiy  shasah. 

Judg.  2.  14  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  spoilers 
2  Ki.  17.  20  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  spoilers 

14.  To  be  bereaved,  SbaJ  shakol. 

Psa.  35. 12  rewarded  me  evil  for  good,  (to)  the  spoil. 

15.Spoil,  tyy  shalal. 

Gen.  49.  27  and  at  night  he  shall  divide  the  spoil 
Exodis.    9  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil 
Num3i.  11  they  took  all  the  spoil,  and  all  the  prey 
31. 12  brought  the  captives,  .and  the  spoil,  unto 
Deut.  2.  35  and  the  spoil  of  the  cities  which  we  took 
3.    7  the  spoil  of  the  cities,  we  took  for  a  prey 
13.  16  thou  shalt  gather  all  the  spoil  of  it  into 

13.  16  shalt  burn. .  all  the  spoil  thereof  every  wh. 
o.  14  all  that  is  in  the  city,  (even)  all  the  spoil 

20.  14  thou  shalt  eat  the  spoil  of  thine  enemies 

Josh.  7.  21  I  saw  among  the  spoils  a  goodly  Babylo. 

8.    2  only  the  spoil  thereof,  and  the  cattle  th. 

8.  27  the  spoil  of  that  city,  Israel  took  for  apr. 

11.  14  thespoilof  these  cities,  and  the  cattle,  the 
22.    8  divide  the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with  yo. 

Judg.  5.  30  for  the  necks  of  (them  that  take)  the  sp.? 

1  Sa.  14.  30  had  eaten  freely  today  of  the  spoil  of  th. 

14.  32  the  people  flew  upon  the  spoil,  and  took 

15.  19  didst  fly  upon  the  spoil,  and  didst  evil  in 
15.  21  the  people  took  of  the  spoil,  sheep  and  ox. 
30.  16  the  great  spoil  that  they  had  taken  out  of 
30.  19  neither  spoil,  nor  any  (thing)  that  they 
30.  20  And  David,  .said,  This  (is)  David's  spoil 
30.  22  we  will  not  give  them  (ought)  of  the  spoil 
30.  26  he  sent  of  the  spoil  unto  the  elders  of  Ju. 

30.  26  Behold  a  present  for  you  of  the  spoil  of 

2  Sa.   3.  22  and  brought  in  a  great  spoil  with  them 

8.  12  of  the  spoil  of  Hadadezer,  son  of  Rehob 

12.  30  he  brought  forth  the  spoil  of  the  city  in 
2  Ki.   3.  23  said,  .now  therefore,  Moab,  to  the  spoil 

1  Ch.20.    2  he  brought  also  exceeding  much  spoil  out 

26.  27  Out  of  the  spoils  won  in  battles  did  they 

2  Ch.14.  *3  an(l  they  carried  away  very  much  spoil 

15.  11  they  offered . .  of  the  spoil  (which)  they  had 
20.  25  his  people  came  to  take  away  the  spoil  of 
20.  25  were  three  days  in  gathering  of  the  spoil 
24.  23  sent  all  the  spoil  of  them  unto  the  king 
28.    8  took,  .much  spoil,  .and  brought  the  spoil 

28.  15  with  the  spoil  clothed  all  that  were  naked 
Esth.  3.  13  and  (to  take)  the  spoil  of  them  for  a  prey 

8.  11  and  (to  take)  the  spoil  of  them  for  a  prey 
Psa.  68.  12  she  that  tarried  at  home  divided  the  spoil 

1  zq.  162  I  rejoice . .  as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil 
Prov.  1.  13  we  shall  fill  our  houses  with  spoil 

16.  19  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud 

31.  11  so  that  heshall  have  no  need  of  spoil 
Isa.     8.    4  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be  taken  away 

9.  3  as  (men)  rejoice  when  they  divide  the  sp. 
10.  6  to  take  the  spoil,  and  to  take  the  prey,  and 
33.   4  your  spoil  shall  be  gathered  (like)  the  ga. 

33.  23  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  divided 
53.  12  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong 

Jer.  49.  32  and  the  multitude  of  their  cattle  a  spoil 

50.  10  And  Chaldea  shall  be  a  spoil :  all  that 
Eze.     7.  21  and  to  the  wicked  of  the  earth  for  a  spoil 

29.  iq  take  her  multitude,  and  takeherspoil,  and 

38. 12  To  take  a  spoil,  and  to  take  a  prey;  to  turn 

38. 13  Art  thou  come  to  take  a  spoil?  hast  thou 
38.  13  take  away  cattle,  .to  take  a  great  spoil 

Dan.  ri.  24Scatteramongthemtheprey,andspoil,and 

Zecb.  2.    9  and  they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  their  servants 
14.    1  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of 
16. Dedicated  spoils,  aKpoBiviov  aki'othintoa. 

Heb.   7.    4  whom . .  Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of  the  sp. 
17-4  snatching  away,  what  is  snatched,  apirayf). 

Heb.  10.  34  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goods 
18.  What  is  stripped  or  carried  off,  gkvXqv  skulon. 

Luke  11.  22  taketh  from  him..anddivideth  his  spoils 
SPOIL,  (make  or  take),  to  — 

1 .  To  take  as  sptoil,  N]2  baza. 

Isa.    18.  2,  7  nation,  .whose  land  the  rivers  havesp. 

2.  To  spoil,  seize,  jilunder,  Tia  bazaz. 

Gen.  34.  27  The  sons  of  Jacob,  .spoiled  the  city,  bee. 

34.  29  and  spoiled  even  all  that  (was)  in  the  ho. 
Kuni3i.    9  took  the  spoil  of  all  their  cattle,  and  all 

31.  53  the  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil,  every  man 

1  Sa.  14.  36  spoil  them  until  the  morning  light,  and 

2  Ki.  7.  16  the  people  went  out,  and  spoiled  the  te. 
2  Ch.14.  M  they  spoiled  all  the  cities;  for  there  was 
Psa.109.  11  and  let  the  stranger  spoil  his  labour 
Isa.  11.  14  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the  east  together 
J  er.  20.  5  their  enemies,  which  shall  spoil  them,  and 
Nab.  2.  g  Take,  .the  spoil  of  silver,  take  the  spoil 
Zeph.  2.    9  the  residue  of  my  people  shall  spoil  them 

Z.To  snatch  away,  ^ja  gazal. 

Psa.  35.  10  and  the  needy  from  him  that  spoileth  him 

Eze.  18.    7  hath  spoiled  none  by  violence,  hath  given 

iS.  12  hath  spoiled  by  violence,  hath  not  resto. 

a8.  16  neither  hath  spoiled  by  violence,  (but)  ha. 

18.  18  spoiled  his  brother  by  violence,  and  did 

A.  To  destroy,  i7ijure,  ?nn  chabal,  3. 

Song  2. 15  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,that  spoil  the  vi. 

5. To  match  away,  ^sj  natsal,  3. 

Exod.  3.  22  borrow,  .and  ye  shall  spoil  the  Egyptians 
12.  36  lent  unto  them,  .and  they  spoiled  the  E. 

6. To  strip  of,  v>v3  pashat. 

Hos.    7.    1  (and)  the  troop  of  robbers  spoileth  with. 
Nah.  3. 16  the  canker  worm  spoileth,  and  neethaw. 


SPOILED 


927 


SPREAD 


7.  To  strip  of,  cs1?  pashat,  3. 

2  Sa.  23.  10  people  returned  alter  him  only  to  spoil 

8.7*o  spoil,  deceive,  fix,  "33  qaba. 

Ptov  22.  23  ami  spoil  the  soul  of  those  that  spoiled 

9. Destruction,  spoiling,  IV  sliod. 

H05.  10. 14  as  Shalman  spoiled  Betli-arbel  in  the  day 

10.  To  destroy,  spoil,  11?  shadad. 

Isa.  21.  2  dealeth  treacherously.,  and  the  spoiler  sp. 
23  1  Woe  to  thee  that  spoilest . .  cease  to  spoil 
3|!    1  Woe  to  thee  that  spoilest.  .cease  to  spoil 

Jer    '5.    6  (and)  a  wolf  of  the  evening  shall  spoil  th. 
25  36  for  the  LORD  hath  spoiled  their  pasture 
47  %  to  spoil.. LORD  will  spoil  the  Philistines 
49.  28  go  up  to  Kedar,  and  spoil  the  men  of  the 
51.  55  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  Babylon,  and  des. 

Eze    32. 12  they  shall  spoil  the  pomp  of  Egypt,  and 

Mic.    2.   4  We' be  utterly  spoiled:  he  hath  changed 

11. To  destroy,  sjjoil,  tto  shadad,  3. 

Prov  24.  15  Lay  not  wait . .  spoil  not  his  resting  place 

12.  To  destroy,  spoil,  Tip  shadad,  Set. 

Hos.  10.   2  break  down  their  altars,  he  shall  spoil  th. 

13.70  bereave,  ibp  shakol,  S. 

Eze.  14. 15  they  spoil  it,  so  that  it  he  desolate,  that 

14.  To  spoil,  lake  spoil,  h^y  shulal. 

Jer.  50.  10  all  that  spoil  her  shall  be  satisfied,  saith 
Eze.  26.  12  they  shall  make  a  spoil  of  thy  riches,  and 

39.  10  they  shall  spoil  those  that  spoiled  them 
Hab.    2.    S  Because  thou  hast  spoiled  many  nations 

2.  8  the  remnant  of  the  people  shall  spoil  th. 
Zech.  2.    8  sent  me  unto  the  nations  which  spoiled 

15.ro  take  spoil,  no?  shasah. 

Judg.  2.  16  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  spoiled  them 
1  Sa.  14.  48  out  of  the  hands  of  them  that  spoiled  th. 
Psa.  44. 10  they  which  hate  us  spoil  for  themselves 
Isa.  17. 14  This  (is)  the  portion  of  them  that  spoil  us 
Jer.  30.  16  thevthat  spoil  thee,  .and  all  that  prey  up. 
Hos.  13. 13  he  shall  spoil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant 

16.1*0  take  spoil,  dj»  shasas. 

Judg.  2. 14  into  the  hands  of  spoilers  that  spoiled  th. 
1  Sa.  17.  53  Israel  returned,  .and  they  spoiled  their 
Psa.  89.  41  All  that  pass  by  the  way  spoil  liini :  he  is 
Jer.  30.  16  that  spoil  thee  shall  he  a  spoil,  and  all  th. 

17.ro  strip  off,  unclothe,  hireKOvofiai  opekduomai. 
Col.    2.  15  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers 

13.  To  snatch  away  thoroughly,  Siapira.(a>  diarpazo. 
ilatti2.  29  how  can  one  enter,  .and  [spoil]  his  goods 

12.  29  and  then  [he  will  spoil]  his  house 
Mark  3.  27  No  man  can  enter,  .and  spoil  his  goods 

3.  27  hind  the.  .man  ;  and  then  he  will  spoil 

19.ro  lead  off  as  plunder,  o-v\aya>yio>  sulagSgeo. 

Col.    2.   8  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through  philosop. 
SPOILED,  (to  he)  — 
I. Prey,  spoil,  13  baz. 

Jer.    2.  14  a  home  born  (slave)?  why  is  he  spoiled? 

Eze.  23.  46  give  them  to  he  removed  and  spoiled 

2.  To  be  spoiled,  113  bazaz,  2. 

Isa.  24.  3  The  land  shall  he  utterly,  .spoiled :  for 
Amos  3. 11  saith  the  Lord.. thy  palaces  shall  be  spo. 

S.To  snatch  violently  away,  hn  gazed. 

Deut2S.  29  thou  shalt  he  only  oppressed  and  spoiled 

Jer.  21.  12  deliver  (him  that  is)  spoiled  out  of  the  h. 

22.   3  deliver  the  spoiled  out  of  the  hand  of  the 

i. Destruction,  spoiling,  "ii?  shod. 

Amos  s-    9  That  strengthened  the  spoiled  against 
5.   9  the  spoiled  shall  come  against  the  fortre. 

5.To  destroy,  spoil,  "ni?  shadad. 

Isa.  33.    1  thou  (wast)  not  spoiled  ;  and  dealest  tre. 
Jer.    4.  30  (when)  thou  (art)  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou 

6.T0  be  destroyed,  spoiled,  tyf  sluidad,  2. 

Mic.    2.    4  We  be  utterly  spoiled :  lie  hath  changed 

7.  To  be  destroyed,  spoiled,  13tf  shadad,  4. 
Jer.    4. 13  Woe  unto  us !  foi  we  are  spoiled 

4.  20  is  spoiled :  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled 
9. 19  How  are  we  spoiled  !  we  are  greatly  conf. 

10. 20  My  tabernacle  is  spoiled,  and  all  my  co. 
48.  1  Woe  unto  Nebo  !  for  it  is  spoiled,  Kiriat. 
48. 15  Moan  is  spoiled,  and  gone  up  (out  of)  her 

48.  20  tell  ye  it  in  Arnon,  that  Moab  is  spoiled 

49.  3  Howl,  O  Heshhon,  for  Ai  is  spoiled  :  cry 
49. 10  his  seed  is  spoiled,  and  his  brethren,  and 

Zech.  11.    2  Howl . .  because  the  mighty  are  spoiled 
11.   3  glory  is  spoiled,  .pride  of  Jordan  is  spoiled 

8.  To  be  destroyed,  spoiled,  Tw  shadad,  6. 

Isa.   33.    1  thou  shalt  be  spoiled  ;  (and)  when  thou 
Hos.  10.  14  all  thy  fortresses  shall  be  spoiled,  as  Sh. 

9.  Spoiled,  ijip  sholal. 

Job   12.  17  ne  leadeth  counsellors  away  spoiled,  and 
12. 19  He  leadeth  princes  away  spoiled,  and  ov. 

10.  To  make  self  a  spoil,  hho  shalal,  7a. 

Psa.  76.   5  The  stout  hearted  are  spoiled,  they  have 

11.  To  take  spoil,  nos?  shasah. 

Isa.  42.  22  this  (is)  a  people  robbed  and  spoiled,  (th. 

12.  To  take  spoil,  cej  shnsds.  2. 

Isa.   13.  16  their  houses  .-shall  be  spoiled,  and  their 


SPOKEN  (after,  against,  any  more,  for,  of),  to  be — 

l.To  be  spoken  of  •"'  for,  nj?  dabar,  i. 

Psa.  87.   3  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city 
Song  8.   8  tn«the  day  when  she  shall  be  spoken  for  1 

2.  A  word,  "I3;i  dabar. 

1  Ki.  18.  24  answered  and  said.  It  is  well  spoken 
Job    32.   4  Elihu  had  waited  till  Job  had  spoken,  be. 

3. Mouth,  na  peh. 

Obad.  12  neither  shouldest  thou  have  spoken  pro. 
4.7*0  tell  again,  ai/cryyeAAw  an'atjgello. 

Bom  15.  21  To  whom  he  was  not  spoken  of,  they  shall 
5.7*0  be  spoken  against,  dpi  hvavripp-qros  einii  an. 

Acts  19.  36  that  these  tilings  cannot  be  spoken  agai. 
6.  To  say  or  speak  against,  avriKcyoi  antilego. 

Luke  2.  34  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  spoken  against 

Acts  23.  22  knowthat  everywhere  it  is  spokenagainst 

7.7*0  talk,  s}>eak,  \a\4a>  laleo. 

Marks.  36  as  Jesus  heard  the  word  that  was  spoken 

14.  9  shall  be  spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her 
Luke  2.  33  at  those  things  which  were  spoken  of  him 
Acts  13. 46  word  of  God  should  first  have  been  spoken 

16.  14  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  of  Pa. 
1  Co. 14.  9  how  shall  it  be  known  what  is  spoken?for 
Heb.  2.   2  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast 

2.  3  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by 

3.  5  those  things  which  were  to  be  spoken  af. 

8.  To  lay  out,  say,  speak,  Ktya  lego. 

Luke'iS.  34  neither  knew,  .the  things  which  were  sp. 
Acts  13.  45  those  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul 

27.  11  those  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul 

28.  24  believed  the  things  which  were  spokeu 
Heb.   7. 13  he  of  whom  these  things  are  spoken  per. 

9.  7*0  utter,  pete  rhed,  epw  ero. 

Matt.  1.  22  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  pr. 
2. 15  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  pr. 
2.  17  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  the  pr. 

2.  23  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by 

3.  3  he  that  was  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  E. 
4. 14  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 
8. 17  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 

12. 17  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias  the  prophet 
13.  35  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by 

21.  4  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by 

22.  31  have  ye  not  read  that  which  was  spoken 
24.  15  ;  27.  9  ;  27.  35  ;  Mark  13.  14. 

10.  To  tell  thoroughly,  KarayyeWa,  Rom.  I.  8. 
1\.  To  put  unto,  irpocrTiBnfu,  Heb.  12.  19. 
SPOKES  — 

Spolxs,  felloes  of  a  wheel,  D"!B>n  chishshurim. 

1  Ki.  7.  33  their  felloes,  and  their  spokes,  (were)  all 
SPOKESMAB',  to  be  a  — 
7"o  speak,  "131  dabar,  3. 

Exod.  4.  i6he  shall  be  thy  spokesman  unto  thepeople 

SPONGE  — 

A  spunge,  s-wiyyos  spoggos. 

Matt27-  48  one  of  them  ran  and  took  a  sponge,  and 
Markis-  36  one  ran  and  filled  a  sponge  full  of  vineg. 
'  Johni9.  29  they  filled  aspongewith  vinegar,  and  put 

SPOON  — 

A  hollmo  object,  dish,  pan,  *]3  kaph. 

Exod. 25.  29  shalt  make  the  dishesthereof,  and  the  sp. 
37. 16  his  dishes,  and  his  spoons,  and  his  bowls 
Num.  4.  7  the  dishes  and  the  spoons;  and  the  bowls 
7.  14  One  spoon  of  ten  (shekels)  of  gold,  full  of 
7.  20  One  spoou  of  gold  of  ten  (shekels),  full  of 
7.  26,  32,  38, 44,  50,  56, 62, 68, 74, 80  One  golden  s. 
7.  84  twelve  silver  bowls,  twelve  spoons  of  gold 
7.  86  The  golden  spoons  (were)  twelve,  full  of 
7.  86  the  gold  of  the  spoons  (was)  an  hundred 

1  Ki.  7.  50  the  basins,  and  the  spoons,  and  the  censers 

2  Ki.  25.  14  the  spoons,  and  all  the  vessels  of  brasswh. 
2  Ch.  4.  22  and  the  spoons,  and  the  censers,  (of)  pure 

24.  14  and  spoons,  and  vessels  of  gold  and  silver 

Jer.  52. 18  the  bowels,  and  the  spoons,  and  all  the  ve. 

52. 19  the  candlesticks,  and  the  spoons,  and  the 

SPORT,  (be  in  or  make),  sport  self,  to  — 
1.7*0  delight  self,  ny  anag,  7. 

Isa.   57.   4  Against  whom  do  ye  sport  yourselves?  ag. 

2. Laughter,  derision,  play,  pin'?'  sechoq. 

Prov  10.  23  (It  is)  as  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  mischief:  but 
3.7*0  laugh,  mock,  play  with,  pry  tsachaq,  3. 

Gen.  26.    8  IsaacXwas)sportingwithRebekahhiswife 

Judgi6.  25  he  made  them  sport:  and  they  set  him  be. 
4.7*0  laugh,  deride,  play,  ppjp  sachaq. 

Judg.16.  27  that  beheld  while  Samson  made  sport 
5. 7*0  lough,  deride,  play,  pflV  sachaq,  3. 

Judg.16.  25  Call  for  Samson,  that  he  may  make  us  sp. 

Prov.26. 19  the  man  (that),  .saith,  Am  not  I  in  sport? 
6.7*0  live  in  luxury,  ii/rpvipaoi  entrvphao. 

2  Pe.  2.  13  sporting  themselves  with  their  own  dece. 
SPOT,  (bright,  freckled,  without)  — 
I. A  freckled  spot  of  leprosy,  prra  boliaq. 

Lev.  13.  39  it  (is)  a' freckled  spot  (that)  groweth  in  the 
1.  A  freckled  spot  of  leprosy,  rnns  bahereth. 

Lev.  13.  2  a  rising,  a  seal),  or  bright  spot,  and  it  be 
13.  4  If  the  bright  spot  (be)  white  in  the  skin  of 
13. 10  there  beawhiterising,orabrightspot,wh. 
13.  23  if  the  bright  spot  stay  in  his  place,  (and) 


Lev.  13.  24  (llesh)  that  burnetii  have  a  white  bright  s. 
13.  25  (if)  the  hair  in  the  bright  spot  be  turned 
13.  26  (there  be)  no  white  hair  in  the  bright  spot 
13.  28  if  the  bright  spot  stay  in  his  place,  (and) 
13.  38  have,  .bright  spots,  (even)  white  bright  sp. 

13.  39  bright  spots  in  the  skin  of  their  flesh  (be) 

14.  56  rising,  and  for  a  scab,  and.  .a  bright  spot 

3. Spots,  n'H3~)3n  chabarburoth. 

Jer.   13.  23  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots? 
i.Blemish,  o;D  mum. 

Deut32.    5  their  spot  (is)  not.  .of  his  children  :  (they 

Job  11.  15  shalt  thou  lift  up  thy  face  without  spot 

Song.  4.   7  Thou  (art)all  fair,  my  love;  (there  is)  no  s. 
5. Perfect,  white,  complete,  plain,  D"pn  tamim. 

Nuni  19.    2  they  bring  thee  a  red  heifer  without  spot 
28.    3,  9  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 
28. 11  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 
29. 17,  26  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  spot 
6.  Without  blemish,  unblemished,  &/xnig.os  amdmos. 

Heb.  9. 14  who.  .offered  himself  without  spottoGod 
7. Spotless,  without  spot,  &airt\os  aspilos. 

1  Ti.    6.  14  keep  this  commandment  without  spot,  nil. 

1  Pe.  1.  19  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot 

2  Pe.  3. 14  may  be  founaof  himinpeace,  without  sp. 
8.  A  sunken  rock,  defiled  person,  o-xiXas  spila.s. 

Jude       12  These  are  spots  in  your  feasts  of  charity 
9.A  sj)0t,  stain,  blot,  a-wlKos  spilos, 

Eph.   5.  27  a  glorious  church,  not  having  spot,  or  w. 
2  Pe.  2. 13  Spots  (they  are)  aud  blemishes,  sporting 

SPOT,  be  spotted,  to  — 
1. 7*0  be  spotted,  nSb  tola. 

Gen.  30.  32  the  speckled  and  spotted  cattle,  and  all 
30.  32  the  spotted  and  speckled  among  the  goats 
30.  33  that  (is)  not  speckled  and  spotted  among 
30.  35  goats  that  were  ringstraked  and  spotted 
30.  35  the  she  goats  that  were  speckled  and  sp. 
30.  39  brought  forth  ca  ttle . .  speckled,  and  spot. 
2.  To  spot,  slain,  blot,  o-wi\6o>  spiloo. 

Jude      23  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the 
SPOUSE  — 
Spouse,  bride,  daughter  in  law,  njs  kallah. 

Song  4.    8  Come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  (my)  spouse 
4.    9  ravished  my  heart,  my  sister,  (my)  spouse 

4. 10  How  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  (my)  sp. 

4.11  Thy  lips,  O  (my)  spouse,  drop  (as)  the  bo. 

4.  12  A  garden  inclosed  (is)  my  sister,  (my)  sp. 

5.  1  I  am  come  into  my  garden,  .(my)  spouse 
Hos.   4. 13  and  your  spouses  shall  commit  adultery 

4. 14  nor  your  spouses  when  they  commit  adu. 
SPREAD,  to  — 
1.7*0  scatter,  winnow,  spread,  rn;  zarah,  3. 

Mai.    2.   3  I  will  corrupt  your  seed,  andspread  dung 
2.7*0  be  scattered,  winnowed,  spread,  rn;  zarah,  4. 

Prov.  1. 17  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  sight  of 

3. 7*0  go  on,  ^l1?;  yalak. 

2  Ch.26.    8  his  name  spread  abroad  (even)  to  the  ent. 
Hos.  14.   6  His  branches  shall  spread,  and  his  beauty 

4. To  go  out  or  forth,  Kf'T  yatsa. 

2  Ch.26. 15  his  name  spread  far  abroad;  for  he  was 
5.7*0  coMse  to  go  out  or  forth,  v.y,  yatsa,  5. 

Isa.   58.   5  and  to  spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  (under 
6.7*0  stretch  out,  incline,  rrpj  natah. 

Gen.  33. 19  a  field,  where  he  had  spread  his  tent,  at 

35.  21  Israel  journeyed,  and  spread  Ins  tent  bey. 

Jer.  43. 10  he  shall  spread  his  royal  pavilion  overth. 

7.7*0  (cause  to)  stretch  out,  incline,  nas  natah,  5. 

2  Sa.  16.  22  they  spread  Absalom  a  tent  upon  the  top 

21.  10  took  sackcloth,  and  spread  itfor  her  upon 

8.7*0  break  forth,  finish,  msparach. 

Lev.  13.  57  it  (is)"a  spreading  (plague):  thou  shalt  bu. 
9.7*0  spread  out,  forth,  abroad,  t-B  paras. 

Num.  4.   6  shall  spread  over  (it)  a  cloth  wholly  of  bl. 

4.    7  they  shall  spread  a  cloth  of  blue,  aud  put 

4.    8  they  shall  spread  .upon  them  a  cloth  of  sc. 

4.  11  they  shall  spread  a  cloth  of  blue,  and  co. 

4.  13  the  altar,  and  spread  a  purple  cloth  the. 

4. 14  they  shall  spread  upon  it  a  covering  of  ba. 

Deut22. 17  they  shall  spread  the  cloth  before  the  el. 

Jud".  8  '25  they  spread  a  garment,  and  did  cast  the. 

Ruth  3.    9  soread  therefore  thy  skirt  over  thine  ha. 

-  Sa  17.  19  the  woman  took  and  spread  a  covering 

1  Ki.  8.    7  the  cherubim  spread  forth  (their)  two  wi. 

2  Ki.  8.  15  dipped  (it)  in  water,  and  spread  (it)  on  his 

19. 14  Hezekiah  went,  .and  spread  it  before  the 
Job  36.  30  he  spreadeth  his  light  upon  it,  and  cove. 
Psa.105.  39  He  spread  a  cloud  for  a  covering,  and  fire 
140.  s  naTe  spread  a  net  by  the  way  side ;  they 
Prov  29.  5  A  man  that  fiattereth  his  neighbour  spr. 
Isa.   10.    8  they  that  spread  nets  upon  the  waters  sh. 

33.  23  they  could  not  spread  the  sail :  then  is  the 

37  14  Hezekiah  went,  .and  spread  it  before  the 
Jer.  48.  40  fly  as  an  eagle,  and  shall  spread  his  win. 

49.  22  fly  as  the  eagle,  and  spread  his  wings  ov. 

Lam.  1. 10  The  adversary  hath  spread  out  his  hand 

1. 13  he  hath  spread  a  net  for  my  feet ;  he  hath 

Eze.    2. 10  he  spread  it  before  me  :  and  it  (was)  wn. 

12.  13  My  net  also  will  I  spread  upon  Mm,  and 

16.  8  I  spread  my  skirt  over  thee,  and  covered 

17.  20  I  will  spread  my  net  upon  him,  and  he  sh. 
19.    8  thenations.  .spread theirnetover him  :he 

Hos.    7. 12  I  will  spread  my  uet  upon  them ;  I  will 


SPREAD 


928 


SPRINKLE 


10.  7b  spread  out,  forth,  abroad,  ti>13  2mras>  3. 
Jer.     4.  31  (that)  spreadeth  her  hands,  (saying)  Woe 
Zecli.  2.    6  I  have  spread  you :abroad  as  the  foiirwm. 

11.  To  spread  out,  Ig»"i9  parshez. 

Job  26.   9  He  holdeth  back. .  (and)  spreadeth  his  cl. 

12.  To  (be)  spread,  ripp  pasah. 

Lev.  13.  5,  6  (and)  the  plague  spread  not  in  the  skin 
13.  7  if  the  scab  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin 
13.    8  behold,  the  scab  spreadeth  in  the  skin.th. 

13.  22  if  it  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin,  then 
13'  ?3,  28  bright  spot  stay  in  his  place,  (and)sp. 
13-  32  00 tne  sca11  spread  not,  and  there  be  in 
i5.  35  if  the  scall  spread  muchin  the  skin  after 
14!  48  the  plague  hath  not  spread  in  the  house 

IB. To  spread  out,  subdue,  1T1  radad,  5. 

1  Ki.  6.  32  spread  gold  upon  the  cherubim,  and  upon 
14.7b  spread  out,  support,  iffi  raphad. 

Job  41.  30  he  spreadeth  sharp  pointed  things  upon 
15.7*0  spread  out,  no?  shatach. 

Numn.  32  they  spread  (them)  all  abroad  for  thems. 

2  Sa.  17. 19  and  spread  ground  corn  thereon;  and  the 
Jer.     8.   2  they  shall  spread  them  before  the  sun,  and 

16.  To  be  divulged,  given  throughout,  8tav€uefj.o/j.ai, 

Acts  4.  17  But  that  it  spread  no  further  among  the 
1 ".  To  strew,  (npwvvvyLi  strdnnumi-vvoo. 

Matt 21.   8  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their  garm. 

Mark  1 1.  8  [many  spread  their  garments  in  the  way] 
18.7*0  strew  under,  xmoaTpwvvvpLi  hupostronnumi. 

Luke  19.  36  as  he  went,  they  spread  their  clothes  in  the 
SPREAD  abroad,  (forth,  out,  over,  upon),  to  — 

1.  Spreading,  rnoyp  mishtoach. 

Eze.  47.  10  they  shall  be  a  (place)  to  spread  forth  nets 

2.  Spreading  place,  nay o  mishtach. 

Eze.  26.  14  thou  shalt  be  (a  place)  to  spread  nets  up. 
3.2b  spread  out,  nnn  mathach. 

Isa.  40.  22  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent  to  dwell  in 
4.7*0  stretch  out,  incline,  nipa  naiah. 

Job     9.   8  Which  alone  spreadeth  out  the  heavens 

~>.  To  break  or  burst  forth,  yip  parats. 

Gen.  28.  14  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  west,  and 
6*.  7b  spread  out,  'trys  paras. 

Exod.  9.  29  I  will  spread  abroad  my  hands  unto  the 

9.  33  and  spread  abroad  his  hands  unto  the  Lo. 

37.   9  the  cherubim  spread  out  (their)  wings  on 

40. 19  he  spread  abroad  the  tent  over  the  taber. 

Dent  32.  1 1  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,  taketh  them 

1  Ki.  8.  22  and  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  heaven 

8.  38  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  this  house 

1  Ch.s5.  iS  the  cherubim,  that  spread  out  (their  wi.) 

2  Ch.  5.    8  the  cherubim  spread  forth  (their)  wings 

6.  12  And  he  stood,  .and  spread  forth  his  hands 

u.  13  and  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  heaven 

6.  29  shall  spread  forth  his  handsin  this  house 

Ezra   9.    5  spread  out  my  hands  unto  the  Lorp  my 

Job    11.  13  and  stretch  out  thine  hands  toward  him 

Eze.   32.    3 1  will  therefore  spread  out  my  net  over 

7.7*0  spread  out,  )tn$  paras,  3. 

Isa.     1.  15  when  ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will 

25.  11  he  shall  spread  forth  his  hands  in  the 

25. 11  as  he  that  swimmeth  spreadeth  forth  (his 

65.   2  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  this  day 

Lam.  1. 17  Zion  spreadeth  forth'  her  hands,  and  (th. 

S.To  spread  out  or  over,  j/jr;  raqa. 

2  Sa.  22.  43  stamp  them,  .(and)  did  spread  them  abr. 

Isa.    42.    5  he  that  spread  forth  the  earth,  and  that 

44.  24  that  spreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  my  s. 

9.7b  spread  out  or  over,  VPT  raqa,  3. 

Isa.  40.  19  the  goldsmith  spreadeth  it  over  with  gold 
10.7b  (cause  to)  spread  out  or  over,  V\P,  raqa,  5. 

Job    37.  18  Hast  thou  with  him  spread  out  the  sky 

11.7b  send,  rfey  shalach,  3. 

Jer.  17.    8  (that)  spreadeth  out  her  roots  by  the  ri. 

12.7*0  come  or  go  out,  e|epx°Ata'  cxerchonai. 
Mark  1.  2S  his  fame  spread  abroad  throughout  all 

1  Th,  1.    8  your  faith  to  God  ward  is  spread  abroad 

SPREAD  abroad  fame,  to  — 
7b  make  a  fame  abroad,  8ta<p-n/j.tfa  diaphettlizS. 
Matt.  9.  31  spread  abroad  his  fame  in  all  that  country 

SPREAD  into  plates  — 

7*o  be  spread  out  or  over,  V\T\  raqa,  4. 

Jer.  10.   9  Silver  spread  into  plate3  is  brought  from 
SPREAD  selves  abroad  or  forth,  to  — 
1.7b  (be)  spread  out,  woj  natash,  2. 

Judg  15.    q  the  Philistines,  .spread  themselves  in  L. 

Sa,    5.  18  The  Philistines  also  came  and  spread  th. 

5. 22  spread  themselves  in  the  valley  of  Reph. 

2. 7b  spread  self  out,  expose  self,  rrn;  arah,  7. 
Psa.  37.  35  spreading  himself  like  a  green  bay  tree 

3.  7*o  increase,  scatter,  e*i3  push. 

Hab.    1.    8  their  horsemen  shall  spread  themselves 

4.7*o  spread  abroad  or  forth,  'f"}p  paras. 

2  Ch.  3.  13  wings  of  these  cherubim  spread  thems.  f. 

5.7*o  strip  off,  rush,  fcuJs  pashat. 

1  Ch.  14.   9  tho  Philistines  came  and  spread  themse. 

14.  13  again  spread  themselves  abroad  in  the 


SPREAD  (abroad,  forth,  out),  to  — 
1.7*0  be  caused  to  go  out  or  forth,  «y;  yatsa,  6. 
Isa.    14. 11  the  worm  is  spread  under  thee,  and  the 

2.  7*o  be  stretched  out,  inclined,  no:  natah,  2. 

N  urn  24.    6  As  the  valleys  are  they  spread  forth,  as 

3.  7*o  spread  out,  t?m  natash. 

1  Sa.  30. 16  (they  were)  spread  abroad  upon  all  the 

4.  7*o  pour  out,  spread,  7)p3  nasak. 

Isa.  25.    7  the  veil  that  is  spread  over  all  nations 
5.7*0  be  scattered,  ps  puts. 

Zech.  1.  17  My  cities,  .shall  yet  be  spread  abroad 
6.7*0  be  or  become  scattered,  ps  puts,  2. 

Gen.  10.  18  families  of  the  Canaanites  spread  abroad 
7.7*o  spread  out  or  forth,  bn$  paras. 

1  Ki.  8.  54  kneeling  on  his  knees  with  his  hands  sp. 
Hos.  5.  1  ye  have  been . .  a  net  spread  upon  Tabor 
Joel    2.    2  as  the  morning  spread  upon  the  mounta. 

8. 7*o  spread  out,  n'^s  pasah. 

Lev.  13.  27  if  it  be  spread  much  abroad  in  the  skin 
13.  34  (if)  the  scall  be  not  spread  in  the  skin,  nor 
13.  36  if  the  scall  be  spread  in  the  skin,  the  pr. 
13.  51  if  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  garment 
*3-  53  the  plague  be  not  spread  in  the  garment 

13.  55  and  the  plague  be  not  spread  ;  it  (is)  un. 

14.  39  (if)  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  walls  of 

14.  44  (if)  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  house,  it 

9.7*0  open,  noa  pathach. 

Job    29. 19  My  root  (was)  spread  out  by  the  waters 

SPREADING,  that  which  spreadest  forth  — ■ 

1.  Spreading,  bi£D  miphras. 

Job   36.  29  can  (any)  understand  the  spreadings  of 
Eze.  27.    7  that  which  thou  spreadest  forth  to  be 

2..-I  spreading,  spreading  place,  nopE)  mishtach. 

Eze.  26.  5  It  shall  be  (a  place  for)  the  spreading  of 
3.7*o  spread  out,  mo  sarach. 

Eze.  17.   6  it  grew,  and  became  a  spreading  vine  of 
SPRIG  — 
l.Sprigs,  shoots,  twigs,  D'W?l  zalzallim. 

Isa.  18.  5  he  shall  both  cut  off  the  sprigs  with  pru. 
2. Branch,  leafy  sapling,  rnKS  porah. 

Eze.  17.  6  brought,  .branches,  and  shot  fortli  sprigs 
SPRING,  springing  — 

I.  Spring,  stream,  reveries,  hh£g  ashedoth. 

Deut.  4.  49  all  the  plain,  .under  the  springs  of  Pis. 

Josh  10.  40  smote  all  the  country,  .of  the  springs,  and 
12.    8  in  the  plains,  and  in  the  springs,  aud  in 
2.Billoio,  spring,  wave,  bzgal. 

Song  4. 12  A  garden  inclosed,  .a  spring  shut  up,  a 
Z.Bowl,  spring,  n^a  gulldh. 

Josh  15.  19  Give  me  a  blessing,  .give  me  also  springs 

15.  19  the  upper  springs,  and  the  nether  springs 
Judg.  1.  15  Give  me  a  blessing,  .give  me  also  springs 

1. 15  the  upper  springs  aud  the  nether  springs 

&. Living,  Tj  chai. 

Gen.  26. 19  and  found  there  a  well  of  springing  water 
5. Fountain,  yi2t?  mabbua. 

Isa.  35.  7  andthethirstyland  springs  of  water:  in  the 
49.  10  by  the  springs  of  water  shall  he  guide  th. 

6. Outgoing,  outlet,  ttyiD  motsa. 

2  Ki.  2.  21  he  went  forth  unto  the  spring  of  the  wa. 
Psa.  107.  33  and  the  water  springs  into  dry  ground 

107.  35  turneth.  .dry  ground  into  water  springs 
Isa.    41   18 1  will  make  the.  .dry  land  springs  of  wa. 
58.  11  like  a  spring  of  water,  whose  waters  fail 
1  .Fountain,  j;yiD  mayan. 

Psa.  87.    7  the  singers,  .(shall  be  there):  all^my  spr. 
104.  10  He  sendeth  the  springs  into  the  valleys 

8. Source,  fountain,  lipD  maqor. 

ProV25-  26  a  troubled  fountain,  and  a  corrupt  spring 
Jer.  51.  36  dry  up  her  sea,  and  make  her  springs  dry 
Hos.  13.  15  his  spring  shall  become  dry,  and  his  fou. 

§.A  spring,  depth,  ^a.i  nebeh. 

Job  38.  16  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  of  the 

10.7*0  go  up,  n^y  alah. 

1  Sa.  9.  26  it  came  to  pass,  about  the  spring  of  the 

II.  Shoot,  plant,  plantation,  nox  tsemach. 
Psa.  65. 10  thou  blessest  the  springing  thereof 
Eze.  17.   9  shall  wither  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  spr. 

SPRING  (in,  forth,  out,  up,  with\  to  — 

1.7*0  spring  forth,  N^h  dosha. 

Joel    2,  22  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness  do  spring 

2.7*o  go  out  or  forth,  nx;  yatsa. 

Deut.  8.  7  depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hill  s 
1  Ki.  4.  33  the  hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall 

3.7*o  go  out,  rhy  alah. 

Nuni2i.  17  Israel  sang  this  song,  Spring  up,  0  well 

4. 7*o  break  forth,  flourish,  rn?  parach. 

Lev.  13.  42  it  (is)  a  leprosy  sprung  up  in  his  bald  head 
Psa.  92.  7  When  the  wicked  spring  as  the  grass,  and 
Hos.  10.    4  thus  judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock 

5.7*o  shoot  forth,  sprout  up,  nox  tsamach. 

Gen.  41.   6  behold,  seven  thin  ears,  .sprung  up  after 

41.  23  behold,  seven  ears,  .sprung  up  after  them 

Job     5.   6  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  gr. 


Psa.  S5.  11  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth ;  and 
Isa.  42.    9  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell  you  of  them 

43.  19  it  shall  spring  forth  ;  shall  ye  not  know 

44.  4  they  shall  spring  up  (as)  among  the  grass 
6.7b  cause  to  shoot  forth,  frpy  tsamach,  5. 

Isa.    45.    8  and  let  righteousness  spring  up  together 
58.    8  and  thine  health  shallspring  forthspeed. 

7.7b  leap  up,  spring,  bound,  bubble  up,  aWofiai. 
John  4. 14  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  bat  > 

8.7*o  go  or  come  up,  hvafralva}  anabaino. 

Matti3.    7  the  thorns  sprung  up  and  choked  them 
Mark  4.    8  did  yield  fruit  that  sprang  up  and  incre. 

9.7*0  (cause  to)  rise,  spring  or  grow  up,  auarfWco. 
Matt.  4.  16  and  to  them  which  sat.  .light  is  sprung 
Heb.    7.  14  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  out  of  Jud. 

10.  To(causeto)bud,ger7?iinate,sproutvp,fi\acrTdvoj. 
Matt.  13.  26  when  the  blade  was  sprung  up,  and  br. 
Mark  4.  27  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  how 

11.7b  produce,  beget,  bring  forth,  yevvaui  gennau. 

Heb.  11.  12  Therefore  sprang  there  even  of  one,  and 
12. 7b  leap,  rush  or  spring  into,  elairn^dw  eispedao. 

Acts  16.  29  Then  he  called  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in 
13.7b  cause  to  ?ise  or  spring  out,  ££avarek\w  exa. 

Matt  13.    5  sprung  up,  because  they  had  no  deepness 

Mark  4.    5  immediately  it  sprang  up,  because  it  had 

14. 7*o  grow  or  spring  up  together,  av^vo/j-ai  sum. 
Luke  8.    7  thorns  sprang  up  with  it,  and  choked  it 

15.7*o  spring  up,  sprout,  produce,  <pvcc  phuO. 
Luke  8.    6  as  soon  as  it  was  sprung  up,  it  withered 

8.  8  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  sprang  up 
Heb.  12.  15  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up 

SPRING,  to  begin  to  — 
7*o  go  up,  nhii  alah. 
Judg.  19.  25* when  the  day  began  to  spring,  they  let  her 

SPRING  forth,  to  cause  to  — 

7b  cause  to  sprout  or  grow,  nox  tsamach,  5. 

Job  38.  27  aud  to  cause  the  bud.  .to  spring  forth 

Isa.    61.  11  causeth  the  things,  .in  it  to  spring  forth 
61. 11  Gob  will  cause,  .praise  to  spring  forth  be. 
SPRINGETH  of  the  same,  that  which  — 
1. After  growth,  irnrj  sachish. 

2  Ki.  19. 29  eat.  .that  which  springeth  of  the  same 
2. After  growth,  D'nip  shachis. 

lsa-    37-  3°  eat.  .that  which  springeth  of  the  same 
SPRINKLE,  be  sprinkled,  to  — 
1.7*o  sprinkle,  be  sprinkled,  pi]  zaraq. 

Exod.  9.    8  let  Moses  sprinkle  it  toward  the  heaven 

9.  10  and  Moses  sprinkled  it  up  toward  heaven 
24.  6  half  of  the  blood  he  sprinkled  on  the  alt 
24.  8  Moses  took  the  blood,  and  sprinkled  (it) 
29.  16  and  sprinkle  (it)round  aboutuponthe.il 
29.  20  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  the  altar  round 

Lev.  1.  5  sprinkle  the  blood  round  about  upon  the 
1.  11  sprinkle  his  blood  round  about  upon  the 
3.  2  the  priests  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upon 
3.  8  Aaron's  sons  shall  sprinkle  thebloodthe. 
3.  13  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  sprinkle  the  blood 
7.    2  the  blood  thereof  shall  he  sprinkle  round 

7.  14  it  shall  be  the  priest's  that  sprinkleth  the 

8.  19,  24  Moses  sprinkled  the  blood  upon  the  al. 
9. 12  which  he  sprinkled  round  about  upon  the 

9.  18  which  he  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  round 
17.   6  the  priest  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  upon 

NumiS.  17  thou  shalt  sprinkle  their  blood  upon  the 
2  Ki.  16. 13  sprinkled  the  blood  of  his  peace  offerings 

16.  15  sprinkle  upon  it  all  the  blood  of  the  burnt 
2  Ch.29.  22  priests  received  the  blood,  and  sprinkled 

29.  22,  22  they  sprinkled  the  blood  upon  the  al. 

30. 16  the  priests  sprinkled  the  blood,  (which  th. 

35.  11  the  priests  sprinkled  (the  blood)  from  their 
Job     2.  12  sprinkled  dust  upon  their  heads  toward 
Eze.  36.  25  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you 
43. 18  to  offer  burnt  offerings ..  and  to  sprinkle 
2.7*0  be  sprinkled,  pit   zaraq,i. 

Num.19.  13  the  water  of  separation  was  not  sprinkled 

19.  20  water  of  separation  hath  not  been  sprink. 

3.7*0  be  sprinkled,  nn  nazah. 

Lev.    6.  27  when  there  is  sprinkled  of  the  blood  the. 
6.  27  wash  that  whereon  itwassprinkledinthe 
1  Ki.  9.  33  (some)  of  her  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the 
Isa.  63.    3  their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my 

4. 7*o  sprinkle,  njj  nazah,  5. 

Exod29.  21  sprinkle  (it)  upon  Aaron,  and  upon  his  ga. 
Lev.  4.  6  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  times  before 
4. 17  sprinkle  (it)  seven  times  before  the  LoitD 
5.  9  he  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  of  the  sin 
S.  11  he  sprinkled  thereof  upon  the  altar  seven 
8.  30  sprinkled  (it)  upon  Aaron,  (and)  upon  his 
14.  7  he  shall  sprinkle  upon  him  that  is  to  be 
14.  16  shall  sprinkle  of  the  oil  with  his  finger  se. 
14.  27  the  priest  shall  sprinkle  with  his  right  fl. 
14.  51  dip  them  in  the  blood,  .and  sprinkle  the 
16.  14  sprinkle  (it)  with  his  finger  upon  themer. 

16. 14  before  the  mercy  seat  shall  he  sprinkle  of 

16. 15  sprinkle  it  upon  the  mercy  seat,  and  bef. 
16.  19  he  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  upon  it  wi. 

Num.  8.    7  Sprinkle  water  of  purifying  upon  them 
19.   4  sprinkle  of  her  blood  directly  before  the 

19. 18  sprinkle  (it)  upon  the  tent,  and  upon  all 

19. 19  the  clean  (person)  shall  sprinkle  upon  the 


SPRINKLING- 


929 


STAMP 


Namig.  21  he  that  sprinkleth  the  water  of  separation 

Isa.   52. 15  So  shall  he  sprinkle  many  nations ;  the  ki. 

6. To  sprinkle,  cleanse  by  sprinkling,  hamlQw  rhan. 

Heb.   9.  13  the  ashes  01  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  una 

9.  19  sprinkled  both  the  book,  and  allt.iepeo. 

9.  21  he  sprinkled  likewise  with  blood  both  the 

10. 22  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 

SPRINKLING  — 

l.A  pouring  on  or  over,  irp6(rxvo-ts  prosdvusis. 

Heb.  11.  28  he  kept  the  passover,  and  the  sprinkling 
2.-4  sprinkling,  fauno-pos  rhantismos. 

Heb.  12.  24  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  be. 

1  Pe.   1.   2  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  bio. 

SPROUT,  to  — 

To  [cause  to) pass  on,  change,  substitute,  ^  chalaph. 

Job  14.    7  there  is  hope,  .that  it  will  sprout  again 
SPUE  (out),  to  — 
1.7*/)  vomit,  spread  out,  Nip  go. 

Lev.  18.  28  as  it  spued  out  the  nations  that  (were)  be. 
2.  To  (cause  to)  vomit,  spread  out,  Nip  qo,  5. 

Lev.  18.  28  That  the  laud  spue  not  you  out  also,  when 
20. 22  do  them  :  that  the  land . .  spue  you  not  out 

3. To  vomit,  n;^  qayah. 

Jer.  25.  27  Drink  ye,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and 

4.  Shameful  speicing,ignominy ,shame,]^$yp  qiqalon. 

Hab.    2.  16  and  shameful  spewing  (shall  be)  on  thy 

5.  To  vomit,  ifieta  emen. 

Rev.   3, 16  thou  art  luke  warm . .  I  will  spue  thee  out 

SPUN,  that  which  they  had  — 
Yarn,  what  is  spun,  ."nap  matveh. 

Exod  35.  25  brought  that  which  they  had  spun,  (both) 
SPY  (out),  to  — 
1.2*0  see,  nx"j  radh. 

Exod.  2.  11  he  spied  an  Egyptian  smiting  an  Hebrew 
2  Ki.  6.  13  spy  where  he  (is),  that  I  may  send  and 

9.  17  he  spied  the  company  of  Jehu  as  he  came 
13. 21  as  they  were  burying  a  man . .  they  spied 
23.  16  he  spied  the  sepulchres  that  (were)  there 

2.  To  use  the  feet,  traverse,  Sj"i  raged,  3. 

Ninu  ai.  32  Moses  sent  to  spy  out  Jaazer,  and  they 
Josh.  2.    1  sent  out  of  Shittim  two  men  to  spy  seer. 

6.  22  the  two  men  that  had  spied  out  the  coun. 

6. 25  messengers  which  Joshua  sent  to  spy  out 

Judg  18.   2  from  Eshtaol,  to  spy  out  the  laud,  and  to 

18. 14,  17  the  five  men  that  went  to  spy  out  the 

2  Sa.  10.    3  to  search  the  city,  and  to  spy  it  out,  and 

1  Ch.iQ.    3  and  to  overthrow,  and  to  spy' out  the  land 

3. To  go  about,  trade,  search,  spy  out,  -iw  tur. 
NUUI13.  16  the  men  which  M  oses  sent  to  spy  out  the 
13.  17  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  out  the  land  of  C. 

4.  To  spy,  KaraaKo-Ktiti  kataskopeo. 

Gal.    2.    4  who  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liber. 
SQUARE,  squares,  to  be  squared,  (four)  — 

1.  To  be  four  square,  J,'?"}  raba. 

1  Ki.  7.    5  the  doors  and  posts  (were)  square,  with 
Eze.  41.  21  The  posts  of  the  temple  (were)  squared 
43.  16  twelve  (cubits)  long,  twelve  broad,  square 

2.7*0  be  four  square,  P3"i  raba,  4. 

Eze.  45.    2  five  hundred  (in  breadth),  square  round 

3.  Fourth  part,  side,  square,  ysi  reba. 

Eze.  43.  16  twelve  broad,  .in  the  foursquares  thereof 
43. 17  fourteen  broad  in  the  four  squares  there. 

STABILITY  — 

Stability,  n3«3N,  n;cx  eviunah. 

Isa.   33.    6  knowledge  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  ti. 
STABLE  — 
Habitation,  fold,  nil  naveh. 

Eze.  25.   5  I  will  make  Kabbah  a  stable  for  camels 
STABLE,  to  be  — 
To  be  prepared,  established,  right,  p3  kun,  2. 

1  Ch.16.  30  the  world  also  shall  be  stable,  that  it  be 
STABLISH,  to  — 

l.To  prepare,  establish,  })3  kun,  Sa. 

2  Sa.   7.  13  I  will  stablish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom 

1  Ch.17.  12  and  I  will  stablish  his  throne  for  ever 
Hab.   2.  12  "Woe  to  him  that . .  stablisheth  a  city  by 

2.  To  prepare,  establish,  {is  kun,  5. 

2  Ch.17.   5  the  Lord  stablished  the  kingdom  in  his 

3.  To  set  v.p,  cause  to  stand,  establish,  i&inatsab,  5. 

1  Ch.iS-.    3  he  went  to  stablish  his  dominion  by  the 
4.7*0  raise  up,  establish,  confirm,  cip  qum,  3. 

Esth.  9.  21  To  stablish  (this)  among  them,  that  they 
5. To  raise  up,  establish,  confirm.  Dip  qum,  5. 

2  Ch.  7.  18  Then  will  I  stablish  the  throne  of  thy 
Psa  119.  38  Stablish  thy  word  unto  thy  servant,  who 

6.  To  stand,  153?  ameid,  5. 

Psa.148.    6  He  hath  also  stablished  them  for  everand 

7.  To  confirm,  establish,  &e@at6a}  bebaiou. 

2  Co.    1.  21  he  which  stablisheth  us  with  you  in  Christ 
Col.     2.    7  stablished  in  the  faith,  as  ye  have  been 
&*To  maJcefirm,  confirm,  Gr-npifa  sierizn. 

Rom  16.  25  to  him  that  is  of  power  to  stablish  you 

1  Th.  3.  13  he  may  stablish  your  hearts  unblameable 

2  Th.  2. 17  stablish  you  in  every  good  word  and  work 

117 


2  Th.  3.  3  the  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shall  stablish 
Jas.  5.  a  Be  ye  also  patient;  stablish  your  hearts 
1  Pe.   5.  10  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen 

STA'-CBTYS,  'Xraxvs  ear  of  com. 

A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom.ifi.    9  Salute  Urbane  our  helper  in  Christ,  and  3. 
STACK  of  corn  — 
A  stack,  shock  or  heap  of  corn,  ty'na  gadish. 

Exod. 22.    6  the  stacks  oi  corn,  or  the  standing  corn 
STACTE  — 
.4  drop,  stacte,  an  aromatic  gum,  f]S3  nataph. 

Exod. 30.  34  Take  unto  thee  sweet  spices,  stacte,  and 
STAFF,  staves  — 

I.Bar,  branch,  p>art,  bough,  12  bad. 
Exod.  25.  13  thou  shalt  make  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
25.  14  thoushalt  puttbestaves  intothe  rings  by 
25.  15  The  staves  shall  bein  the  rings  of  the  ark 
25.  27  shall  the  rings  be  for  places  of  the  staves 
25.  28  thou  shalt  make  the  staves  (of)  shittim 
27.  6  thou  shalt  make  staves  for  the  altar,  sta. 
27.  7  And  the  staves  shall  be  put  into  the  rings 

27.  7  the  staves  shall  be  upon  the  two  sides  of 
30.  4  they  shall  be  for  places  for  the  staves  to 
30.  5  thoushaltmake  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wo. 
35.  12  The  ark,  and  the  staves  thereof,  (with) 
35.  13  The  table,  and  bis  staves,  and  all  his  ves. 
35. 15  the  incense  altar,  and  his  staves,  and  the 
35.  16  his  brasen  grate,  his  staves,  and  all  his  ves. 
37.  4',  15,  28  he  made  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
37.  5  he  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  by  the  si. 
37/14  the  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  the  table 

37.  27  to  be  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  it  wit. 

38.  5  four  rings,  .(to  be)  places  for  the  staves 
38.   6  he  made  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wood,  and 

38.  7  he  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  on  the  si. 

39.  35  The  ark  of  the  testimony,  and  the  staves 

39.  39  his  grate  of  brass,  his  staves,  and  all  his 

40.  20  set  the  staves  on  the  ark,  and  put  the  me. 
!Num.  4.   6  cloth.,  of  blue,  and  shall  put  in  the  staves 

4.  8  cover  the  same . .  and  shall  put  in  the  stav. 
4. 11  cover  it.  .and  shall  put  to  the  staves  there. 
4. 14  spread . .  a  covering . .  and  put  to  the  staves 

1  Ki.   8.   7  cherubim  covered  the  ark  and  the  staves 

8.  8  the  staves,  that  the  ends  of  the  staves  we. 

2  Ch.   5.  8  cherubim  covered  the  ark  and  the  staves 

5.  9  And  they  drew  out  the  staves  (of  the  ark) 
5.  9  the  ends  of  the  staves  were  seen  from  the 

2.An  arrow,  handle,  yn  diets. 

1  Sa.  17.    7  the  staff  of  his  spear  (was)  like  a  weaver's 
3.^1  bar,  Bin  mot. 

Num  13. 23  and  they  bare  it  between  two  upon  a  staff 

4.  A  bar,  .ibid  motah. 

1  Ch.  15.  15  bare  the  ark;of  God.  .with  the  staves  the. 

5.  A  bar,  rod,  staff,  tribe,  naa  maiich. 

Gen.  38.  i3  thy  bracelets,  and  thy  staff  that  (is)  in  thy 
38.  25  these,  the  signet,  and  bracelets,  and  staff 

Lev.  26. 26  when  I  have  broken  the  staff  of  your  bread 

Psa.  105. 16  Moreover,  .he  brake  the  whole  staff  of  br. 

Isa.  9.  4  the  staff  of  his  shoulder,  the  rod  of  his  op. 
10.  5  the  staff  in  their  hand  is  mine  indignation 
10. 15  as  if  the  staff  should  lift  up  (itself,  as  if  it 

10.  24  shall  lift  up  his  staff  against  thee,  after 
14.    5  The  Lord  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wie. 

28.  27  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  withastaff,  and 
30.  32  every  place  where  the  grounded  staff  sha. 

Jer.  48.  17  How  is  the  strong  staff  broken,  (and)  the 

Eze.    4.  16  I  will  break  the  staff  of  bread  in  Jerusalem 

5.  16  famine,  .and  will  break  your  staff  of  bread 

14. 13  will  break  the  staff  of  the  bread  thereof 
Hab.   3.  14  Thou  didst  strike  through  with  his  staves 

6. A  rod,  staff,  h$a  maqqel. 

Gen.  32. 10  with  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  Jordan 
Exodi2.  11  your  shoes  on  your  feet,  and  your  staff  in 
>uni22.  27  fell.,  and  he  smote  the  ass  with  a  staff 
iSa.  17.  40  he  took  his  staff  in  his  hand,  and  chose 

17. 43  a  dog,  that  thou  comest  to  me  with  staves? 
Eze.  39.    9  the  arrows,  and  the  hand  staves,  and  the 
Hos.    4.  12  their  staff  declareth  unto  them :  for  the 
Zech.11.    7  I  took  unto  me  two  staves;  the  one  I  cal. 

11.  10  I  took  my  staff,  (even)  Beauty,  and  cut  it 

11. 14  I  cut  asunder  miue  other  staff  (even)  Ba. 

7.-4  stay,  support,  n:j,'p:^  mashenah. 

Isa.    3.    1  from  Judah  the  stay  and  the  staff,  the  wh. 
8.-4  stay,  support,  rtjj^:a  misheneth. 

Exod  21.  10  rise  again",  and  walk  abroad  upon  his  st. 

Num.21.  18  princes  digged  thewell..withtheirstaves 

Judg.  6.  21  the  angel,  .put  forth  the  end  of  the  staff 

2  Ki.  4.  29  Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  my  staff  in 

4.  29  and  lay  my  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  ch. 

4. 31  and  laid  the  staff  upon  the  face  of  the  ch. 
18.  21  thou  trustest  upon  the  staff  of  thisbruis. 
Psa.  23.   4  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me 
Isa.   36.    6  thou  trustest  in  the  staff  of  this  broken 
Eze.  20.    6  they  have  been  a  staff  of  reed  to  the  ho. 
Zech.  8.   4  every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for 

9.  Wood,  tree,  stall;  staff,  j'y  ets. 

2  Sa.  21.  19  the  staff  of  whose  spear  (was)  like  a  weav. 
23.    7  fenced  with  iron  and  the  staff  of  a  spear 

1  CI1.20.    5  whose  spear's  staff  (was)  like  a  weaver's 
10.-4  staff,  distaff,  circuit.  ~^2  pelek. 

2  Sa.    3.  29  a  leper,  or  that  leaneth  on  a  staff,  or  that 
11.  A  reed,  rod,  sceptre,  tribe,  szv  slicbet. 

2  Sa.  23.  21  he  went  down  to  hini  with  a  staff,  and  pi. 
1  Ch.n.  23  he  went  down  to  him  with  a  staff,  and  pi. 


12.  Wood,  timber,  tyAov  xulon. 

Matt  26.  47  a  great  multitude  with  swords  and  staves 

26.  55  Are  ye  come.,  with  swords  and  staves  for 
Mark  14.  43  a  great  multitude  with  swords  and  staves 

14. 4b  Are  ye  come,  with  swords  and  (with)  sta. 
Luke  22.  52  as  against  a  thief,  with  swords  and  staves 

lZ.Slaff,  rod,  sccjitre,  {tdpSos  rhabdos. 

Matt  io.  10  :Nor  scrip  for  (your)  journey,  .nor  yet  st. 
Mark.  6.    8  nothing  for  (their)  journey,  save  a  staff 
Luke  9.    3  neither  staves,  nor  scrip,  neither  bread 
Heb.  11.  21  and  worshipped,  .upon  the  top  of  his  st. 

STAGGER,  to  (make  to)  — 

1.  To  'move,  shake,  stagger,  u^  nua. 

Psa.  107.  27  They  reel  to  and  fro,  and  stagger  like  a 
Isa.   29.   9  they  stagger,  but  not  with  strong  think 

2.  To  wander,  go  astray,  err,  be  deceived,  nun  taah,2. 

Isa.   19. 14  as  a  drunken  (man)  staggereth  in  his  vo. 

3.  To  cause  to  wander,  go  astray,  nujn  taah,  5. 

Job  12.  25  maketh  them  to  stagger  like  (a)  drunken 
■i.To  judge  diversely,  hesitate,  doubt,  StaKpivcc  dial:. 

Rom.  4.  20  He  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God 
STAIN,  to  — 
l.To  pollute,  redeem,  free,  ^xa  gaol. 

Job     3.    5  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  slain  it 

2.  To  pollute,  S*3  gaal,  5. 

Isa.   63.   3mygai'ments;audlwillstainallmyraime. 

3.  To  jrierce,  pollute,  make  common,  hhn  chalal,  3. 

Isa.  23.  9  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory,  (and)  to  br. 
STAIRS,  (winding)  — 

1.  Winding  stairs,  D75?  lulim. 

1  Ki.   6.    S  they  went  up  with  winding  stairs  into  the 

2.  Rocky  ascent,  stair,  nrrrz  mctdregah. 

Song  2.  14  my  dove.,  in  the  secret  (places)  of  thest. 
3.-4  going  up,  ascent,  step,  npi-o  maalah. 

2  Ki.  9.  13  put  (it)  under  him  on  the  top  of  the  stairs 
Neh.    3.  15  stairs  that  go  down  from  the  city  of  Dav. 

12.  37  went  up  by  the  stairs  of  the  city  of  David 

Eze.  40.    6  went  up  the  stairs  thereof,  and  measured 

43.  17  and  his  stairs  shall  look  toward  the  east 

4=.A  going  up,  accent,  stair,  nb%p  maaleh. 

Neb.  9.  4  Then  stood  up  upon  the  stairs,  of  the  L. 
5. An  ascent,  going  up,  hvafiaBfiSs  anabathmos. 

Acts  21.  35  when  he  came  upon  the  stairs,  so  it  was 
21.  40  Paul  stood  on  the  stairs,  and  beckoned 

STAKE  — 

Pin,  nail,  stake,  ")iv  y allied. 

Isa.   33.  20  not  one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  ever 
54.    2  lengthen  thy  cords,  .strengthen  thy  stak. 
STALK  — 

1.  Wood,  tree,  stalk,  staff,  ]"£  ets. 

Josh.  2.  6  hid  them  with  the  stalks  of  flax,  which  she 
2.-4  stalk,  standing  corn,  n~p  qamah. 

Hos.  8.  7  it  hath  no  stalk ;  the  bud  shall  yield  no 
3.-4  stalk,  branch,  cane,  reed,  rnjj  qaneh. 

Gen.  41.  5  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up  upon  one  sta. 
41.  22  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and 

STALL,  stalled  — 

l.To  fatten,  be  fattened,  D2N  abas. 

Prov  15.  17  than  a  stalled  ox  and  hatred  therewith 

2.  Stalls,  ni'"iX',  rrnx  vravoth,  urayoth. 

1  Ki.  4.  26  Solomon  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of  ho. 

2  Ch.  9.  25  Solomon  had  four  thousand  stalls  for  ho. 

32.  28  stalls  for  aU  manner  of  beasts,  and  cotes 

%.A  fattening  stall,  p?~)s  marbeq. 

Amos  6.    4  and  the  calves  out  of  the  midst  of  the  st. 
Mai.    4.   2  ye  shall,  .grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall 

4.  Stalls,  cribs,  D'rjan  rephathim. 

Hab.  3. 17  and  (there  shall  be)  no  herd  in  the  stalls 

5.  Eating  place,  manger,  crib,  tytxrvt)  phatne. 

Luke  13.  15  loose  his  ox  or  (Ids)  ass  from  the  stall,  and 
STAMMERER,  stammering  — 
1.2*0  be  scorned,  stammering,  tyh  laag,  2. 

Isa.   33.  19  astammeringtonguejtthatthoucanstjnot 

2.Scoming,  stammering,  3£7  laeg. 

Isa.  28.  1 1  with  stammering  lips  and  another  tongue 
o.Scorning,  stammering,  :?y  illeg. 

Isa.  32.   4  the  tongue  of  the  stammerers  shall  be  re. 
STAMP  (upon),  stamping,  to  — 
1.7*0  beat  small  or  thin,  pp?  daqaq,  5. 

2  Sa.22. 43  I  did  stamp  them  as  the  mire  of  the  street 

2  Ki.23.  6  stamped  (it)  small  to  powder,  and  cast  the 
23.  15  stamped  (it)  small  to  powder,  and  burned 

2  Ch.  15. 16  Asa  cut  down  her  idol,  and  stamped  (it) 

2.To  beat  down  or  out,  nrj3  kathath. 

Deut.  9.  21  burnt  it  with  fire,  and  stamped  it,  (and)gr. 

3.  7*o  tread,  trample  down,  D£"i  ramas. 

Dan.  8.  7  castliimdowntotheground.andstamped 
8.  10  cast  do  wn  (some)  of  the  host . .  and  stamped 

i.To  trample  on,  OS")  rcphas. 

Dan.  ,7.  7,  19  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped  the  res. 
5. To  spread  out,  stamp,  VjH  raqa. 

Eze.  6. 11  Smite  with  thinehand,andstampwiththy 
25.    6  hast  clapped  (thine)  hands,  and  stamped 


STANCH 


930 


STAND 


6..4  stamping,  nny&  shcatah. 

Jer.   47.    3  the  stamping  of  the  hoofs  of  his  strong 
STANCH,  to  — 
To  set,  place,  'laTTjfxt  Mstemi, 

Luke  8.  44  immediately  her  issue  of  blood  stanched 
STAND  (before,  by,  fast,  firm,  forth,  here,  out),  to  — 

1.  To  be  steady,  faithful,  JDN  avian,  2. 

Psa.  89.  28  and  my  covenant  shall  standfast  with  him 

2.  To  go  out  or  forth,  Ny;  yatsa. 

Psa.  73.    7  Their  eyes  stand  out  with  fatness :  they 
3. To  set  self  up,  station  self,  2x*  yatsab,  7. 

Exod.  2.    4  his  sister  stood  afar  off,  to  wit  what  won. 

8.  20  Rise  up  early.. and  stand  before  Pharaoh 

9. 13  stand  before  Pharaoh,  and  say  unto  him 

19. 17  they  stood  at  the  nether  part  of  the  mou. 

34.   5  stood  with  him  there,  and  proclaimed  the 

Num.  11. 16  that  they  may  staud  there  with  thee 

22. 22  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  the  way 
23.   3  Stand  by  thy  burnt  offering,  and  I  will  go 
23. 15  Stand  here  by  thy  burnt  offering,  while  I 

1  3a.  3.  10  the  Lord  came,  and  stood,  and  called  as 

10. 23  when  he  stood  among  the  people,  he  was 
12.  16  stand  and  see  this  great  thing,  which  the 

2  Sa.  18.  30  king  said  (unto  him),  Turn  aside,  (and)  s. 

23.  12  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  ground,  and 
Job  38.  14  It  is  turned . .  they  stand  as  a  garment 
Psa.     5.   5  The  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight 
Prov22.  29  stand  before  kings;  heshallnotstandbe. 
Jer.  46.    4  get  up,  ye  horsemen,  and  stand  forth  wi. 

46. 14  say  ye,  Stand  fast,  and  prepare  thee ;  for 

4.  To  he  prepared,  established,  p3  kun,  2. 

Judg  16.  26  the  pillars  whereupon  the  house  standeth 

16.  29  middle  pillars  upon  which  the  house  sto. 

5.  To  draw  nigh,  1^33  nagash. 

Gen.  19.   9  they  said,  Stand  back.  And  they  said  (ag.) 

6.  To  be  set  up,  3¥|  natsab,  2. 

Gen.  18.   2  looked,  and,  lo,  three  men  stood  by  him 

24.  13  I  stand  (here)  by  the  well  of  water  ;  and 
24.  43  I  stand  by  the  well  of  water;  and  it  shall 
28. 13  the  Lord  stood  above  it,  and  said,  I  (am) 
45.    1  could  not.  .before  all  them  that  stood  by 

Exod.  5.  20  they  met  "Moses  and  Aaron,  who  stood  in 
7. 15  thou  shalt  stand  by  the  river's  brink  aga. 

17.  9  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the 

1 8.  14  the  people  stand  by  thee  from  morning  un. 
33.  8  the  people  rose  up,  and  stood  every  man 
33. 21  a  place  by  me,  and  thou  shalt  staud  upon 

Nurnui.  27  came  out,  and  stood  in  the  door  of  their 

22.  34  I  knew  not  that  thou  stoodest  in  the  way 

23.  6  he  stood  by  his  burnt  sacrifice,  he,  and  all 
23. 17  he  stood  by  his  burnt  offering,  and  the  pr. 

Deut29-  10  Ye  stand  this  day  all  of  you  before  theLo. 
JudgiS.  16  six  hundred  men.  .stood  by  the  entering 

18.  17  the  priest  stood  in  the  entering  of  the  gate 

j  Sa.   1.  26  I  (am)  the  woman  that  stood  by  thee  here 

4.  20  the  women  that  stood  by  her  said  unto  her 

22.    7  said  unto  his  servants  that  stood  about 

22.  17  said  unto  the  footmen  that  stood  about 
2  Sa.  13.  31  his  servants  stood  by  with  their  clothes 
Psa.  45.    9  upon  thy  right  hand  did  stand  the  queen 

82.    1  God  standeth  in  the  congregation  of  the 
Trov.  8.    2  She  standeth  in  the  top  of  high  places,  by 
Lam.  2.    4  he  stood  with  his  right  band  as  an  adver. 
Amos.  7.    7  the  Lord  stood  upon  a  wall  (made)  by  a 

7.  To  sustain,  support,  ^2?  samak. 

Psa.in.    8They  stand  fastfor  everandever,(andnre) 

8.  To  stand,  stand  still  or  fast,  ")nj;  amad. 

Gen.  iS.    8  he  stood  by  them  under  the  tree,  and  they 
18.  22  but  Abraham  stood  yet  before  the  Lord 
19. 27  to  the  place  where  he  stood  before  the  L. 

24.  30  behold,  he  stood  by  the  camels  at  the  well 
24.  31  wherefore  standest  thou  without?  for  I 
41.  1  Pharaoh  dreamed  :  and,  behold,  he  stood 
41.  3  stood  by  the  (other)  kine  upon  trie  brink 
41.  17  behold,  I  stood  upon  the  bank  of  theriv. 
41.  46  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh  king  of  Eg. 
43.  15  went  down  to  Egypt,  and  stood  before  J. 
45.    1  there  stood  no  man  with  him  while  Jose. 

Exod.  3.  5  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  (is)  holy 
g.  10  tookashesof  the  furnace, andstoodbefore 
9. 11  the  magicians  could  not  stand  before  Mo. 
14.  iq  pillar  of  the  cloud .  .stood  behind  them 

17.  6  I  will  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  ro. 

18.  13  the  people  stood  by  Moses  from  the  mor. 
20.  18  they  removed,  and  stood  afar  pfl 

20.  21  the  people  stood  afar  off :  and  Moses  drew 

32.  26  Moses  stood  in  the  gate  of  the  camp,  and 

33.  9  thecloudy  pillar  descended,  and  stood  (at) 
33.  10  the  people  saw  the  cloudy  pillar  stand  (at) 

Lev.    9.    5  congregation  drew  near  and  stood  before 

18.  23  neither  shall  any  woman  stand  before  a  b. 

19.  16  neither  shaltthou  staud  against  the  blood 
Num.  1.    5  the  names  of  the  men  that  shall  stand  wi. 

12.    5  stood  (in)  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  and 

14. 14  (that)  thy  cloud  standeth  over  them  ;  and 

16.   9  to  stand  before  the  congregation  to  min. 

16.  18  stood  in  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

16. 48  he  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living 

22. 24  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  path  of 

22.  26  the  angel,  .stood  in  a  narrow  pla^-e,  where 

27.   2  they  stood  before  Moses.and  before  Eleazar 

27.  21  he  shall  stand  before  Eleazar  the  priest 

35.  12  until  he  stand  before  the  congregation  in 

Ueut.  i.  38thcsonof  Nun,  which  standeth  before  thee 

4.  xothe  day  that  thou  stoodest  before  the  Lord 

4.  11  ye  came  near  and  stood  under  the  mouuta. 


Deut.  5 


*7- 
18. 
18. 
19. 
24. 
25, 
27. 
27. 
29. 

31- 

Josh.  3 

3- 
3- 

4' 

5- 
5' 


Judg.  2. 
3- 
4- 

6. 

7- 

9- 

9- 

20. 

1  Sa.    6. 

6. 

9- 
16. 
16. 
%7- 
"7- 

n- 
%i> 

17- 
19. 
19. 
26. 

2  Sa.    1. 


•  Ki. 


tCh. 


23 
2  Ch.  3. 

5 
6. 
6. 

6, 
7 


5  I  stood  between  the  Lord  and  you  at  that 
31  stand  thou  here  by  me,  and  I  will  speak 

8  to  stand  before  the  Lord  toministerunto 
1 2  the  priest  that  standeth  to  minister  there 

5  to  stand  to  minister  in  the  name  of  the  L. 

7  as  all  his  brethren . .  (do),  which  staud  there 
1 7  both  the  men . .  shall  stand  before  the  Lord 

11  Thou  shalt  staud  abroad,  and  the  man  to 

8  (if)  he  stand  (to  it),  and  say,  I  like  not  to 

12  These  shall  stand  upon  mount  Gerizim  to 

13  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  Ebal  to  cur. 
15  with  (him)  that  standeth  here  with  us  th. 

15  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  stood  over  the  door 
13  and  they  shall  stand  upon  an  heap 

16  the  waters,  .stood  (and) rose  up  upon  an 

17  stood  firm  on  dry  ground  in  the  midst 

10  the  priests  which  bare  the  ark  stood  in  the 

13  there  stood  a  man  over  against  him  with 
15  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  (is) 
33  their  judges,  stood  on  this  side  the  ark  and 

8  there  shall  not  a  man  of  them  stand  befo. 
4  when  he  that  doth  flee . .  shall  stand  at  the 

6  until  he  stand  before  the  congregation  for 

9  until  he  stood  before  the  congregation 
44  there  stood  not  a  man  of  all  their  enemies 

14  could  not  any  longer  stand  before  their  en. 

19  all  that  stood  by  him  went  out  from  him 

20  he  said  unto  her,  Stand  in  the  door  of  the 
31  Joash  said  unto  all  that  stood  against  him 

21  they  stood  every  man  in  his  place  round 

7  he  went  and  stood  in  the  top  of  mount  G. 
35,  44  stood  in  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the 
28  Phinenas.  .stood  before  it  in  those  days 

14  stood  there,  where  (there  was)  a  great  sto. 

20  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  Lord 

27  stand  thou  still  a  while,  that  I  may  show 

21  David  came  to  Saul,  andstoodbefore  him 

22  Let  David,  I  pray  thee,  stand  before  me 
3  the  Philistines  stood  on  a  mountaiu  on 
3  Israel  stood  on  a  mountain  on  the  other 

8  he  stood  and  cried  unto  the  armies  of  Is. 
26  David  spake  to  the  men  that  stood  by  him 
51  David  ran,  and  stood  upon  the  Philistine 

3  I  will  go  out  and  stand  beside  my  father 
20  Samuel  standing  (as)  appointed  over  them 

13  stood  on  the  top  of  an  hill  afar  off.agreat 

9  Stand,  I  pray  thee,  upon  me,  and  slay  me 

10  I  stood  upon  him,  and  slew  him,  because 
25  became  one  troop,  and  stood  on  the  top  of 

2  rose  up  early,  and  stood  beside  the  way  of 

4  the  king  stood  by  the  gate  side,  and  all 

11  one  of  Joab'smen  stood  by  him,  and  said 

15  cast  up  a  bank,  .and  it  stood  in  the  trench 

2  let  her  stand  before  the  king,  and  let  her 

28  came  into  the  king's  presence,  and  stood 

15  he  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  stood  before 

16  Then  came  there  two  women.. and  stood  b. 
25  It  stood  upon  twelve  oxen,  three  looking 
11  the  priests  could  not  stand  toministerbe. 

14  and  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  stood 
22  Solomon  stood  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
55  he  stood,  and  blessed  all  the  congregation 

8  happy  (are)  these  thy  servants,  which  st. 

19  and  two  lions  stood  beside  the  stays 

20  twelve  lions  stood  there  on  the  one  side 

6  the  old  men,  that  stood  before  Solomon 

8  with  the  young  men.  .which  stood  before 
1  Jeroboam  stood  by  the  altar  to  burn  inc. 

24  the  ass  stood  by  it,  the  lion  also  stood  by 

25  and  the  lion  standing  by  the  carcase:  and 
28  the  ass  and  the  lion  standing  by  the  care. 

1  (As)  the  LoRD..liveth,  before  whom  I  st. 

15  (As)  the  Lord,  .liveth,  before  whom  I  st. 
11  stand  upon  the  mount  before  the  Lord 
13  and  stood  in  the  entering  in  of  the  cave 

.  19  the  host  of  heaven  standing  by  him  on  his 

2 1  there  came  forth  a  spirit,  and  stood  before 

7  stood  to  view  afar,  .and  they  two  stood  by 

13  went  back,  and  stood  by  the  bank  of  J  or. 

1 4  (As)  the  Lord  . .  liveth,  before  whom  i  stand 
21  gathered  all.. and  stood  in  the  border 

12,  15  And  when  he  had  called  her,  she  sto. 

9  and  stood  at  the  door  of  the  house  of  El. 
11  He  will  surely  come  out  tome,  and  stand 

15  returned,  .and  came  andstoodbefore  him 

16  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  sta. 
25  But  he  went  in,  and  stood  before  his  ma. 
31  if  the  head  of  Elisha.  .shall  stand  on  him 

9  came  and  stood  before  him,  and  said,  Thy 

17  there  stood  a  watchman  on  the  tower  in 
4  kings  stood  not.  .how  then  shall  we  stand? 
9  he  went  out,  and  stood,  and  said  to  all  the 

11  the  guard  stood,  every  man  with  his  wea. 

14  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  as  the  manner 
17  they  came  and  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the 
28  Rab-shakeh  stood,  and  cried  with  a  loud 

3  the  king'stood  by  a  pillar,  and  made  aco, 

3  and  all  the  people  stood  to  the  covenant 
39  his  brother  Asaph,  who  stood  on  his  right 

1  Satan  stood  up  against  Israel,  and  provok. 

15  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by  the  thre. 

16  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stand  between 
30  to  stand  every  morning  tn  thank  and  pra. 

13  they  stood  on'thcir  feet,  and  their  faces 

4  It  stood  on  twelve  oxen,threelooking  to. 

12  the  Levites.  .stood  at  the  east  end  of  the 

14  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister 

3  and  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  stood 

12  he  stood  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord  in 

13  upon  it  he  stood,  and  kneeled  down  upon 

6  sounded  trumpets,  .and  all  Israel  stood 

7  happy  (are)  theso  thy  servants,  which  st. 


2  Ch.  9.  i3  and  two  lions  standing  by  the  stays 

9. 19  twelve  lions  stood  there  on  the  one  side 
10.    6  the  old  men  that  had  stood  before  Solona. 
10.    8  with  the  young  men .  .that  stood  before 
iS.  18  the  host  of  heaven  standing  on  his  right 
18.  20  there  came  out  a  spirit,  and  stood  before 
20.    5  Jehoshaphat  stood  in  the  congregation  of 
20.   9  we  stand  before  this  house,  and  in  thy  pr. 
20. 13  Judah  stood  before  the  Lord,  with  their 
20.  17  stand  ye  (still),  and  see  the  salvation  of 
20. 19  stood  up  to  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
20.  20  Jehoshaphat  stood  and  said,  Hear  me,  O 

20.  23  Moab  stood  up  against  the  inhabitantsof 
23.  13  the  king  stood  at  his  pillar  at  the  enter. 
29. 11  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  stand  before 

29.  26  the  Levites  stood  with  the  instruments 

30.  16  they  stood  in  their  place  after  their  man. 

34.  31  the  king  stood  in  his  place,  and  made  a  c. 

35.  5  staud  in  the  holy  (place),  according  to  the 

35.  10  the  priests  stood  in  their  place,  and  the 
Ezra    3.    9  Then  stood  Jeshua  (with)  his  sons  and  his 

9.  15  we  cannot  stand  before  thee  because  of 
10.  13  we  are  not  able  to  stand  without,  neither 
10.  14  Let  now  our  rulers . .  stand,  and  let  all  th. 
Neh.    7.  65  tillthereetoocl(up)a  priest  with  Trim  and 
8.    4  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood 

8.  4  beside  him  stood  Mattithiah,  and  Shema 

9.  2  stood  and  confessed  their  sins,  and  the  in. 

12.  40  So  stood  the  two  (companies  of  them  that 
Esth.  3.    4  whether  Jlordecai's  matters  would  stand 

5.    1  stood  in  the  inner  court  of  the  king's  ho. 

5.  2  the  king  saw  Esther  the  queen  standing 

6.  5  Behold,  Hainan  standeth  in  the  court.  A. 

7.  9  the  gallows,  .standeth  in  the  house  of  H. 

8.  4  So  Esther  arose,  and  stood  before  the  ki. 

8.  11  to  stand  for  their  life,  to  destroy,  to  slay 

9.  16  gathered  themselves  together,  and  stood 
Job  8.  15  lean  upon  his  house,  but  it  shall  not  stand 
Psa.     1.    1  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor 

10.    1  Why  staudest  thou  afar  off,  0  Lord?  (why) 
26.  12  My  foot  standeth  in  an  even  place:  in  the 
33.    9  For.. he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast 
33.  1 1  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever 
38.  11  friends  stand  aloof,  .kinsmen  stand  afar 
76.    7  who  may  stand  in  thy  sight  when  once  th. 
104.    6  the  waters  stood  above  the  mountains 
106.  23  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  stood  before  him 
109.    6  and  let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand 
109.  31  he  shall  stand  at  the  right  hand  of  the  po. 
122.    2  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  OJ 
130.    3  If  thou,  .mark  iniquities,  .who  shall  st  ? 

134.  1  by  night  stand  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

135.  2  Ye  that  stand  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
147.  17  casteth  forth  his  ice.  .who can  stand  bef. 

Prov  12.    7  but  the  house  of  the  righteous  shall  stand 

25.  6  and  stand  not  in  the  place  of  great  (men) 
Eccl.   8.    3  stand  not  in  an  evil  thing;  for  he  doeth 
Song  2.    9  he  standeth  behind  our  wall,  he  looketh 
Isa.      3.  13  The  LORD,  .standeth  to  judge  the  people 

6.  2  Above  it  stood  the  seraphim:  each  one 
11. 10  a  root  of  Jesse,  which  shall  stand  for  an 

21.  8  I  stand  continually  upon  the  watch  tower 

36.  2  he  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upperpool 

36. 13  Then  Rabshakeh  stood,  and  cried  with  a 

46.  7  and  set  him  in  his  place,  and  he  standeth 

47.  12  Stand  now  with  thineenchantments, and 
50.    8  who  will  contend  with  me?  let  us  stand 

59. 14  justice  standeth  afar  off:  for  truth  is  fal. 
61.    5  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed  your  flock. 

Jer.    6.  16  Stand  ye  in  the  ways  and  see,  and  ask  for 

7.  2  Stand  in  the  gate  of  the  Lord's  house,  and 

7. 10  come  and  stand  before  me  in  this  house 

14.  6  the  wild  asses  did  stand  in  the  high  place 

15.  1  Though  Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before 
15.  ig  If  thou  return,  .thou  shalt  stand  before 

17.  19  stand  in  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the 

18.  20  I  stood  before  thee  to  speak  good  for  them 

19.  14  he  stood  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house 
23.  18  who  hath  stood  in  the  counsel  of  the  Lord 
23.  22  if  they  had  stood  in  my  counsel,  and  had 

26.  2  Stand  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house,  and 
28.   5  the  people  that  stood  in  the  house  of  the 

35.  19  shall  not  want  a  man  to  stand  before  me 

36.  21  all  the  princes  which  stood  beside  the  ki. 

46. 15  they  stood  not,  because  the  Lord  did  dr, 
46  21  they  did  not  stand,  because  the  day  of 

48.  19  inhabitantof  Aroer,  standby  the  way,and 

48.  45  They  that  fled  stood  under  the  shadow  of 

49.  19  that  shepherd  that  will  stand  before  me 

50.  44  that  shepherd  that  will  stand  before  me 
Eze.    1.  2 1  when  those  stood,  (these)  stood ;  and  when 

1.  24  when  they  stood,  they  let  down  their  wi. 

1.  25  when  they  stood,  (and)  had  let  down  th. 

2.  1  stand  upon  thy  feet,  and  I  will  speakunto 

3.  23  the  glory  of  the  Lord  stood  there,  as  the 

8. 11  there  stood  before  them  seventy  men  of 

8.  11  in  the  midst  of  them  stood  Jaazaniahthe 

9.  2  they  wentiu,  and  stoodbeside  the  brasen 
10.    3  the  cherubim  stood  on  the  right  side  of 
10.   6  then  he  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  wh. 
10.  17  When  they  stood,  (these)  stood ;  and  when 

10.  18  Then  the  glory .  .stood over  the  cherubim 
10. 19  (every  one)  stood  at  the  door  of  the  east 

11.  23  stood  upon  the  mountain  which  (is)  on  the 

13.  5  to  stand  in  the  battle  in  the  day  of  the  L. 
17.  14  by  keeping  of  his  covenant  it  might  stana 

21.  21  the  king  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  parting 

22.  30  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  land 

27.  29  shall  come,  .they  shall  stand  upon  the  la. 
33.  26  Ye  staud  upon  your  sword,  ye  work  abo. 
40.  3  (there  was)  a  man.  .and  he  stood  in  the  ga. 
43.    6  I  heard  (him),  .and  the  man  stood  by  me 


STAND 


931 


STAND 


44- 
46. 
47- 


Eze.  44-  1*  they  shall  stand  before  them  to  minister 

44.  15  they  shall  stand  before  me  to  otter  unto 

4  in  controversy  they  shall  stand  in  judgm. 

2  shall  stand  by  the  post  of  the  gate,  and  the 

o  the  fishers  shall  stand  upon  it  from  En-g. 

Dan.    1.    4  such  as  (had)  ability  in  them  to  stand  in 

1.  5  at  the  end  thereof  they  might  stand  bef. 
1. 19  therefore  stood  they  before  the  king 

2.  2  So  they  came  and  stood  before  the  king 
8.  3  there  stood  before  the  river  a  ram  which 
8.  4  so  that  no  beasts  might  stand  before  him 
8.  6  which  I  had  seen  standing  before  the  river 
8.  7  no  power  in  the  ram  to  stand  before  him 
8. 15  there  stood  before  me  as  the  appearance 

10.  1 1  understand  the  words . .  and  stand  upright 

10.  11  when  he  had  spoken .  .1  stood  trembling 
10. 16  said  unto  him  that  stood  before  me,  0  my 

11.  6  neither  shall  he  stand,  nor  his  arm  :  but 
11.  14  there  shall  many  stand  up  against  the  ki. 
11.  16  shall  stand  before  him ;  and  he  shall  stand 
11.  17  she  shall  not  stand  (on  his  side),  neither 

1 1.  25  he  shall  not  stand  :  for  they  shall  forecast 
11. 31  arms  shall  stand  on  his  part,  and  they  sh. 

12.  1  stand  up,  the  great  prince  which  standeth 
12.  5  there  stood  other  two,  the  one  on  this  si. 
12. 13  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days 

Hos.  10.  9  there  they  stood:  the  battle  in  Gibeah  ag. 
Amos  2.  15  Neither  shall  he  stand  that  handleth  the 
Obad.  1 1  In  the  day  that  thou  stoodest  on  the  other 
14  Neither  shouldest  thou  have  stood  in  the 
Mic.  5.  4  he  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength  of 
Nah.    1.    6  Who  can  stand  before  his  indignation? 

2.  8  Stand, stand, (shall  they  cry);  but  none  sh. 
Hab.   2.    1  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and  set  me 

3.  6  He  stood,  and  measured  the  earth :  he 
Zech.  1.    8  he  stood  among  the  myrtletreesthat(we.) 

1.  10  the  man  that  stood  among  the  myrtle  tr. 

1.  11  the  angel  of  the  Lord  that  stood  among 
3.  1  the  high  priest  standing  before  the  angel 
3.  1  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist 
3.   3  clothed  with  filthy  garments,  and  stood 

3.  4  spake  unto  those  that  stood  before  him 

4.  14  that  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth 
14.  4  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the 
14.  12  consume  away  while  they  stand  upon  th. 

Hal.    3.    2  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth?  for 

9. To  rise  Up,  stand  firm,  W.p  qum. 

Lev.  27.  14  the  priest  shall  estimate  it,  so  shall  it  st. 

27.  17  according  to  thy  estimation  it  shall  stand 
Num  30.    4,  11  shall  stand,  and  every  bond,  .shall  st. 

30.    5  not  any  of  her  vows,  or.  .bonds.,  shall  st. 
30.    7  shall  stand,  and  her  bonds,  .shall  stand 
30.    9  every  vow  of  a  widow . .  shall  stand  against 
30.  12  shall  not  stand:  her  husband  hath  made 
Josh.  7.  12  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  stand  be. 

7.  13  thou  canst  not  stand  before  thine  enem. 
1  Ch.28.  2  the  king  stood  up  upon  his  feet,  and  said 
Job  19.  25  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  (day)upon  the 
Psa.     1.    5  the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  the  judg. 

24.    3  and  who  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place? 
Prov.19.  21  the  counsel  of  the  Lord,  that  shall  stand 
Isa.     7.    7  It  shall  not  stand,  neither  shall  it  come 

8.  10  speak  the  word,  and  it  shall  not  stand:  for 
14.  24  and  as  I  have  purposed,  (so)  shall  it  stand 

28.  18  your  agreement  with  hell  shall  not  stand 
32.   8  and  by  liberal  things  shall  he  stand 

40.    8  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for 
46.  10  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all 
Jer.  44.  28  shall  know  whose  words  shall  stand,  mi. 
44.  29  my  words  shall  surely  stand  against  you 

10.  To  rise  up,  stand  firm,  Dip  qum. 

Dan.   2.  31  This  great  image,  .stood  before  thee,  and 

2.  44  consume  all.  .and  it  shall  stand  for  ever 

3.  3  they  stood  before  the  image  that  Nebuc. 
7.  to  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stoodbef. 
7.  16  I  came  near  unto  one  of  themthatstoodby 

11.  7*o  be  or  draio  near,  nig  qarab. 

Isa.   65.   5  Stand  by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me;  for 
12.7*0  set  or  place  up,  avtarn/it  anistevvi. 

Acts  14. 10  Said  with  a  loud  voice,  Stand.,  on  thy  feet 
13. 7*0  lift  or  raise  up,  tye(po>  egeiro. 

Mark  3.    3  And  he  saith  unto  the  man . .  [Stand]  forth 

14. 7*0  set  on,  over,  upon,  ^(piarn/iL  ephistemi. 

Luke24.    4  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining  garni. 

Acts  10.  17  had  made  enquiry,  .and  stood  before  the 

22.  13  Came  unto  me,  and  stood,  and  said  unto 

22.  20  1  also  was  standing  by,  and  consenting 

23. 11  the  Lord  stood  by  him,  and  said,  Be  of  go. 

16.  To  set,  place,  'tarn^i  histemi. 

Matt.  2.  o  it  came  and  [stood]  over  where  the  young 
6.  5  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  the  synago. 
12.  25  housedividedagainstitself shall notstand 

12.  26  how  shall  then  his  kingdom  stand? 

12. 46  (his)  mother  and  his  brethren  stood  with. 

12. 47  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  with. 

13.  2  and  the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  sh. 
16.  28  There  be  some  standing  here  which  shall 
20.    3  saw  others  standing  idle  iu  the  market 
20.    6  went  out,  and  found  others  standing  idle 
20.    6  saith  unto  them,  Why  stand  ye  here  all 
24.  15  abomination  of  desolation,  .stand  in  the 

26.  73  came  unto  (him)  they  that  stood  by,  and 

27.  11  Jesus  stood  before  the  governor:  aud  the 
27.  47  Some  of  them  that  stood  there,  when  they 

Mark  3.  24  a  kingdom  be  divided . .  that . .  cannot  stand 
3.  35  against  itself,  that  house  cannot  stand 
3. 26  if  Satan,  .be  divided,  he  cannot  [stand],  but 
3.  31  and.  standing  without,  sent  unto  him,  ca. 


Mark  9.   1  there  be  some  of  them  that  stand  here 
ir.    5  certain  of  them  that  stood  there  said  un. 
13.  14  abomination  of  desolation,  .standing  wh. 

Luke  1.  11  an  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  on  the  rig. 
5.    1  pressed  upon  him  to  hear,  .he  stood  by 

5.  2  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the  lake :  but 

6.  8  stand  forth.  .And  he  arose  and  stood  for. 

6.  17  he  came  down  with  them,  and  stood  in 

7.  38  stood  at  his  feet  behind  (him)  weeping 

8.  20  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to 

9.  27  there  be  some  standing  here,  which  shall 

11. 18  be  divided.,  how  shall  his  kingdom  stand? 

13.  25  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  and  to  knock 

17.  12  men  that  were  lepers,  which  stood  afar 

18.  11  The  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thus  with 

18. 13  the  publican,  standing  afar  off,  would  not 
18.  40  Jesus  stood,  and  commanded  him  to  be 
ig.    8  Zaccheus  stood,  and  said  unto  the  Lord 
21.  36  accounted  worthy.. to  stand  before  the  Son 
33. 10  scribes  stoodand  vehemently  accused  him 
23-  35  the  people  stood  beholding.    And  the  ru. 

23.  49  his  acquaintance,  .stood  afar  off,  behold. 

24.  36  Jesus  himself  stood  in  the  midst  of  them 
John  1.  26  there  standeth  one  among  you,  whom  ye 

t.  35  the  next  day  after,  John  stood,  and  two 
3.  29  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  which  standeth 

6.  22  the  people  which  stood  on  the  other  side 

7.  37  Jesus  stood andcried,  saying,  If  any  man 

8.  9  [alone,  and  the  woman  standingiu  them.] 
56  spake  among  themselves,  as  they  stood  in 
29  The  people  therefore  that  stood  by,  and 

5  Judas  also,  which  betrayed  him,  stood  wi. 

16  Peter  stood  at  the  door  without.     Then 
18  the  servants  and  officers  stood  there,  who 
18  Peter  stood  with  them,  and  warmed  him. 
25  And  Simon  Peter  stood  aud  warmed  him. 
25  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  J  esus  his  mot. 

20.  11  Mary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre  we. 
20.  14  saw  Jesus  standing,  and  knew  not  that  it 

20. 19  came  Jesus  and  stood  in  the  midst,  and 

20.  26  (Then)  came  Jesus,  .and  stood  in  the  mid. 

21.  4  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore  :  but  the  discip. 
Acts    1.  11  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up 

3.  8  he  leaping  up  stood,  and  walked,  and  en. 
4. 14  the  man  which  was  healed  standing  with 
5.  20  stand  and  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  pe. 
5.  23  the  keepers  standing  without  before  the 

5.  25  the  men  whom  ye  put  iu  prison  are  stan. 
7.  33  the  place  where  thou  standest  is  holy  gr. 
7.  55  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
7.  56  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  ha. 

9.  7  men  which  journeyed  with  him  stood  sp. 

10.  30  a  mau  stood  before  me  in  bright  clothing 

11.  13  an  angel  in  his  house,  which  stood  and  sa. 

12. 14  ran  in,  and  told  how  Peter  stood  before 

16.  9  There  stood  a  man  of  Macedonia,  and  pr. 

17.  22  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  Mars'  hill,  and 
21. 40  Paul  stood  on  the  stairs,  and  beckoned  wi. 

22.  25  Paul  said  unto  the  centurion  that  stood  by 
24.  20  any  evil  doing  in  me,  while  I  stood  before 
24.  21  Except.,  that  I  cried  standing  among  them 
25. 10  I  stand  at  Cesar's  judgment  seat,  where 
26.   6  I  stand  and  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the 

26.  16  stand  upon  thy  feet:  for  I  have  appeared 

27.  21  Paul  stood  forth  in  the  midst  of  them,  and 
Horn.  5.    2  access,  .into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand 

11.  20  they  were  broken  off,  and  thou  standest 

1  Co.   7.  37  he  that  standeth  stedfast  in  his  heart,  ha. 

10. 12  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  h. 
15.    1  ye  have  received,  and  wherein  ye  stand 

2  Co.   1.  24  helpers  of  your  joy  :  for  by  faith  ye  stand 
Eph.   6.  11  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the 

6.  13  ye  may  be  able.,  having  done  all,  to  stand 
6. 14  Stand  therefore,  having  your  loins  girt  ab. 

Col.     4.  12  that  ye  may  stand  perfect  and  complete 

2  Ti.    2.  19  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  ha. 

Heb.  10.  11  every  priest  standeth  daily  ministering 

Jas.     2.    3  Stand  thou  there,  or  sit  here  under  my  fo. 

5.    9  behold,  the  Judge  standeth  before  the  do. 

1  Pe.   5.  12  the  true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  stand 

Rev.    3.  20  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock :  if  any  man 

5.    6  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb 

6. 17  the  great  day.  .who  shall  be  able  to  stand 

7.  1  I  saw  four  angels  standing  on  the  four  co. 
7.    9  stood  before  the  throne,  and  before  the 

7.  11  the  angels  stood  round  about  the  throne 

8.  2  I  saw  the  seven  angels  which  stood  before 
8.    3  another  angel  came  aud  stood  at  the  altar 

5  the  angel  which  I  saw  stand  upon  the  sea 
8  the  angel  which  standeth  upon  the  sea  and 
j  [the  angel  stood,  saying,  Rise,  and  measu.] 
4  the  two  candlesticks  standing  before  the 
11  the  spirit,  .entered  into  them,  and  they 
4  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman  which 
1  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea,  and  saw 

1  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Sion,  and  wi. 

2  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  havingtheharps 
10  Standing  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  hertorm. 
15  shall  stand  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  to. 

17  and  as  many  as  trade  by  sea,  stood  afar 
17  I  saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  sun ;  and 

20. 12  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  G. 

16.  7*0  remain,  fxtvo)  menu. 

Rom.  9.  11  that  the  purpose  of  God.. inightstand,  not 

17.7*0  set  alongside,  Trapio-rn/J-i  paristemi. 

Marki4.  47  one  of  them  that  stood  by  drew  a  sword 

14.  69  began  to  say  to  them  that  stood  by,  This 

14.  70  they  that  stood  by  said  again  to  Peter,  Su. 

15.  35  some  of  them  that  stood  by,  when  they 
15. 39  when  the  centurion,  which  stood  over  ag. 


Luke  1.  19  I  am  Gabriel,  that  stand  in  the  presence 

19,  24  he  said  unto  them  that  stood  by,  Take  fr. 

John  18.  22  one  of  the  officers  which  stood  by  struck 

19.  26  and  the  disciple  standing  by  whom  he  lo. 
Acts    1.  10  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white  apparel 

4. 10  by  him  doth  this  man  stand  here  before 
9.  39  the  widows  stood  by  him  weeping,  and  sh. 
23.  2  Ananias  commanded  them  that  stood  by 
23.  4  they  that  stood  by  said,  Revilest  thou  G. 
27.  23  there  stood  by  me  this  night  the  angel  of 
Rom  14.  10  we  shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment  se. 

18. 7b  set  around,  Trepitarrj^t  periistemi. 

Johnn.  42  because  of  the  people  which  stand  by  I  said 

19.  To  stand  firm,  (Tt^koj  steko. 

Markn.  25  when  ye  stand  praying,  forgive,  if  ye  have 
Rom  14.  4  to  his  own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth 
1  Co. 16.  13  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like  men 
Gal.  5.  1  Stand  fast  therefore  in  the  liberty  where. 
Phil.  1.  27  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit,  with  one 
4.    1  so  stand  fast  in  theLord,(my)dearlybelo. 

1  Th.  3.    8  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord 

2  Th.  2. 15  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions  which 

20.  To  set  together,  avvlffr-nyu  sunistemi. 

2  Pe.  3.   s  the  earth  standing  out  of  the  water  aud 

21.  T'o  be,  elfit  eimi. 

1  Co.   2.    5  That  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the 

STAND  over,  round  about,  still,  up,  upright,  with,  to  — 
1.7*0  be  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  Dpi  damam. 
Josh  10. 12  Sun,  stand  thou  still  upo'n  Gibeon;  and 

10.  13  the  sun  stood  still,  and  the  moon  stayed 

2.  T'o  set  self  up,  1VT  yatsab,  7. 

Exodi4.  13  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  L. 
1  Sa.  12.  7  stand  still,  that  Imayreasonwithyoube. 
J°D  33-  5  set  (thy  words)  in  order  before  me,  stand  up 
Psa.  94.  16  who  will  stand  up  for  me  against  the  wo. 

3.  T'o  be  set  up,  2x1  natsab,  2. 

Gen.  37.  7  lo,my  sheaf  arose,  and  also  stood  upright 
Exodi5.  8  the  floods  stood  upright  as  an  heap,  (and) 
Isa.  3.  13  The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead,  and.  .to 
Zech. 11. 16  nor  feed  that  that  standeth  still;  but  he 

4.  To  stand  up  or  erect,  *1DD  samar,  3. 

Job     4. 15  the  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  up 

5.  T'o  station  self,  stand  upright,  "tty  ud,  7a. 

Psa.  20.   8  fallen ;  but  we  are  risen,  and  stand  upri. 

6.  T'o  stand  still,  "lajj  aniad. 

Exod26.  15  make  boards.. (of)shittimwood  stand,  up. 

36.  20  made  boards,  .(of)  shittim  wood,  stand,  up. 
Num.  9.  8  Stand  still,  and  I  will  hear  what  the  Lord 
Josh.  3.    8  When  ye  are  come,  .ye  shall  stand  still  in 

3.  17  the  priests,  stood  firm  on  dry  ground  in 
10. 13  So  the  sun  stood  still  in  the  midst  of  hea. 

11.  13  (as  for)  the  cities  that  stood  still  in  their 
23.    g  no  man  hath  been  able  to  stand  before 

1  Sa.  14.    9  we  will  stand  still  in  our  place,  and  will 

2  Sa.  2.  23  as  many  as  came  to  the  place,  .stood  still 

2.  28  the  people  stood  still,  and  pursued  after 
18.30  And  he  turned  aside,  and  stood  still 

20.  12  the  man  saw  that  all  the  people  stood  st. 

20. 12  that  every  one  that  came  b>  him  stood  st. 
2  Ch.24.  20  Zechariah.  .which  stood  above  the  people 
Ezra  2.  63  till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with  TJrim  and 

3  while  they  stand  by,  let  them  shut  the  do. 

5  when  he  opened  it,  all  the  people  stood  up 
39  and  they  stood  still  in  the  prison  gate 

7  Hainan  stood  up  to  make  request  for  his 
16  It  stood  still,  but  I  could  not  discern  the 

29.  8  and  the  aged  arose,  (and)  stood  up 

30.  20  I  stand  up,  and  thou  regardest  me  (not) 
32.  16  they  spake  not,  but  stood  still,  (and)  an. 

37.  14  standstill,  and  consider  the  wondrous  wo. 
Psa.106.  30  Then  stood  up  Phinehas,  and  executed  j. 
ProV27.  4  Wrath  (is)  cruel..who(is)abletostandbe. 
Eccl.  4.  15  the  second  child  that  shall  stand  upinhis 
Isa.   44.  it  let  them  stand  up;  (yet)  they  shall  fear 

47. 13  Let  now  the  astrologers.. stand  up  and  sa. 
48.  13  (when)  I  call  unto  them,  they  stand  up 

Jer.  44.  15  the  women  that  stood  by,  a  great  multit. 
51.  50  Yethathave  escaped,  .stand  not  still :  re. 

31.  14  neither  their  trees  stand  up  in  their  heig. 
37.  10  they  lived,  and  stood  up  upon  their  feet 


Neh. 


Esth. 

Job 


Eze. 
Dan 


stood  up  for  it.four  kingdoms  shall  stand  u. 
23  king  of  fierce  countenance. .shall  stand  up 

8.  25  he  shall  also  stand  up  against  the  prince 
11.  2  there  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  Pe. 
11.  3  a  mighty  king  shall  stand  up,  that  shall 
11.  4  when  he  shall  stand  up,  his  kingdom  sh. 
11.  7  shall  (one)  stand  up  in  his  estate,  which 
11.  20  Then  shall  stand  up  in  his  estate  a  raiser 
11.  21  in  his  estate  shall  stand  up  a  vile  person 

Zech.  3.  5  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by 

3.    7  places  to  walkamongthese  that  stand  by 
Hab.  3. 11  the  sun  (and)  moon  stood  still  in  their 

7.  T'o  rise  up,  stand  still,  c\p  qum. 

Gen.  23.    3  Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  dead 

23.  7  Abraham  stood  up,  and  bowed  himself  to 
Exod.2.  17  Moses  stoodup  and  helped  them,audwa. 
2  Ki.13.  21  touched  the  bones.. he  revived,  and  st.  up. 
2  Ch.13.   4  Abijah  stood  up  upon  mount  Zemaraim 

28. 12  stoodup  against  them  that  came  from  the 
Ezra    3.    2  Then  stood  up  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak 

10.  10  the  priest  stood  up,  and  said  uuto  them 
Neh.   9.    3  they  stood  up  in  their  place,  and  read  in 

9.  4  Then  stood  up  upon  the  stairs,  of  the  Le. 
9.    5  Stand  up  (and)  bless  the  Lord  your  God 

Esth.  5.   9  that  he  stood  not  up,  nor  moved  for  him 


STAND 


932 


STATUTE 


Job  30.  28  I  stood  up,  (and)  I  cried  in  the  congrega. 

Psa.  35.    2  Take  hold  of  shield,  .and  stand  up  formi. 

Isa.   27.    9  the  groves  and  images  shall  not  stand  up 

51.  17  stand  up,  O  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk 

8. To  set  or  place  up,  avio-rvai  anistemi. 

Marki4.  60  the  high  priest  stood  up  in  the  midst,  and 
Luke  4.  16  went  into  the  synagogue,  .and  stood  up 
10.  25  a  certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted 
Act3    1.  15  Peter  stood  up  iu  the  midst  of  the  discip. 
5.  34  Then  stood  there  up  one  in  the  council,  a 

10.  26  saying,  Stand  up;  I  myself  also  am  a  man 
xi.  2S  there  stood  up  one  of  them  named  Agab. 
13.  16  Paul  stood  up,  aud  beckoning  with  (his)  ha. 

9.  To  set  or  place  on,  i<pla-TVfJ-t  ephistemi. 

Luke  4.  39  he  stood  over  her,  and  rebuked  the  fever 

10.  To  set,  place,  'Lo-T-rgxi  histemi. 

5Iatt2o.  32  Jesus  stood  still,  and  called  them,  and 
Markio.  49  Jesus  stood  still,  and  commanded  him  to 
Luke  7.  14  he  came,  .and  they  that  bare  (him)  stood 
Acts    2.  14  Teter,  standing  up  with  the  eleven,  lifted 

8.  38  he  commanded  the  chariot  to  stand  still 
25.  18  Against  whom,  when  the  accusers  stood  up 

11. To  surround,  encircle,  kvk\6co  Jculdoo. 

Acts  14.  20  as  the  disciples  stood  round  about  him,  he 

12.9*0  set  alongside,  irapio-T-nfJ.1  paristemi. 

Acts  4.  26  The  kings  of  the  earth  stood  up,  and  the 
2  Ti.   4.  1 7  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened 

13.7b  set  around ,  irspiitrniiLi periistemi. 

Acts  25.    7  the  Jews . .  stood  round  about,  and  laid  ma. 

1 4.  To  be  along  with,  (rvfj.irapaytvofj.ai  sumparagi. 
2  Ti.    4.  16  no  man  [stood  with]  me,  but  all  (men)  for. 

15.  To  set  together,  cvvi<rrr]fj.t  sunistemi. 

Luke  9.  32  aud  the  two  men  that  stood  with  him 
STAND,  can,  to  be  able  to  — 
1.7*0  set  self  up,  ny;  yatsab,  7. 

Deut.  7.  24  there  shall  no  man  be  able  to  stand  before 

9.  2  Who  can  stand  before  the  children  of  An. 

11.  25  There  shall  no  man  be  able  to  stand  before 
Josh.  1.  5  There  shall  not  any  man  be  able  to  stand 
Job  41.  10  who  then  is  able  to  stand  before  me? 

2.  To  stand,  "JD^  amad\ 

Josh.23.    9  no  man  hath  been  able  to  stand  before 
STAND  in  awe  or  doubt,  to  — 

1.  To  fear,  contract  self  l«  gur. 

Psa.  33.    8  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  staud  in  awe 
2.7*0  have  no  passage  tlwough,  doubt,  uiroptofiai. 

Gal.     4.  20  to  be  present,  .for  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you 
STAND,  to  cause,  make  or  be  made  to  — 
l.To  set  up,  cause  to  stand,  establish,  3<ja  natsab,  5. 

Psa.  78.  13  and  he  made  the  waters  to  stand  as  an 
2.7*0  cause  to  stand  still  or  firm,  "ID«  amad,  5. 
2CI1.34.  32  he  caused  all  that  were  present.,  to  stand 
Psa.  30.    7  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand  strong 
Eze.  29.    7  and  madest  all  their  loins  to  be  at  a  stand 

o.  To  cause  to  rise  up,  Dip  gum,  5. 

Psa.  89.  43  hast  not  made  hira  to  stand  in  the  battle 
4.7V  be  caused,  to  rise  up,  Dip  qum,  6. 

Dan.   7.    4  made  stand  upon  the  feet  as  a  man,  and 

5. To  set,  place,  ttrrrifii  histemi. 

Rom  1 4.    4  shall .  .for  God  is  able  to  make  him  stand 

STANDARD,  standard  bearer,  (to  lift  up  a)  — 
1..1  banner  or  standard,  ?:n  degel. 

Num.  1.  52  every  man  by  bis  own  standard,  through. 
2.    2  shall  pitch  by  his  own  standard,  with  the 
2.   3  they  of  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  Jud. 
2. 10  On  the  south  side  (shall  be)  the  standard 
2. 17  every  man  in  his  place  by  their  standards 
2.  18  On  the  west  side  (shall  be)  the  standard 
2.  25  The  standard  of  the  camp  of  Dan  (shall 
2.  31  They  shall  go  hindmost  with  their  stand. 
2.  34  they  pitched  by  their  standards,  and  so 
10.  14,  22,  25  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  the 
10. 18  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  Reuben  set 

2.  To  cause  to  flee,  lift  up  an  ensign,  D"3  %us,  da. 

Isa.   59. 19  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  sta. 
Z.Sign,  ensign,  banner,  sail,  ci  nes. 

Isa.    49.  22  I  will,  .set  up  my  standard  to  the  people 

02.  10  Go  through,  .lilt  up  a  standard  for  the 
Jer.     4.    6  Set  up  the  standard  toward  Zion  :  retire 
4.  21  How  long  shall  I  see  the  standard,  (and) 

50.  2  set  up  a  standard  ;  publish,  (and)  eouceal 

51.  12  Set  up  the  standard  upon  the  walls  of  B. 
51.  27  Set  ye  up  a  standard  in  the  laud,  blow  the 

A.  To  set  up  a  standard,  Opj  iiasas. 

Isa.   10.  iS  shall  be  as  when  a  standard  bearer  faint. 
STANDING  (corn,  image,  water) — 
l.Pond,  reed,  c:n  agam. 

Psa.  107.  35  tmiK'th  the  wilderness  into  a  standing  wa. 
114.    8  turned  the  rock  (into)  a  standing  water 

%To  set  self  up,  y^yatsah,  7. 

Zech.  6.    5  w'hieh  go  forth  fixnn  standing  before  the  L. 

Z. Standing,  station,  "i£>?  moomad. 

Psa.  09.   '_■  in  deep  mire,  where  (there  is)  no  standing 
&. Standing  place  or  pillar,  ft^yQ  matstsebah. 

Ley.  26.    1  neither  rear  you  up  a  standing  image,  do. 

3iic.   5. 13  thy  standing  images  out  of  the  midst  of 


5.  To  be  set  up,  3*3  natsab,  2. 

Nura  22.  23,  31  the  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  In  the 
1  Sa.  22.  6  all  his  servants  (were)  standing  about  him 
Amos  9.    1  I  saw  the  Lord  standing  upon  the  altar 

6. Standing,  station,  ■-nt?j?  cmdah. 

Mic.    1.  11  he  shall  receive  of  you  his  standing 

7 '.Standing  corn,  stalk,  ."££  qamah. 

Exod22.  6  the  stacks  of  corn,  or  the  standing  corn 
Deut  23.  25  "When  thou  comest  into  the  standing  co. 

23.  25  a  sickle  unto  thy  neighbour's  standing  co. 
Judges.    5  he  let  (them)  go  into  the  standing  corn 

15.    5  the  shocks,  and  also  the  standing  corn,  wi. 

S..-1  standing,  standing  up,  a-rdo-is  stasis. 

Heb,   9.    8  as  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  standing 
STAR  — 
l.A  star,  3pis  Jcokab. 

Gen.  1.  16  God  made  two  great  lights.,  the  stars  also 
15.  5  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  aide  to  number 
22.  17  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the 

26.  4  make  thy  seed  to  multiply  as  the  stars  of 

37.  9  and  the  eleven  stars,  made  obeisance  to 
Exod32,  13  I  will  multiply  your  seed  as  the  stars  of 
Num. 24.  17  there  shall  come  a  star  out  of  Jacob,  and 
Deut.  1.  10  ye  (are) this  day  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for 

4.  19  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  (ev.) 

10.  22  God  hath  made  thee  as  the  stars  of  hear. 

28.  62  ye  were  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multi. 

Judg.  5.  20  tlie  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  S. 

1  Oh. 27.  23  would  increase  Israel  like  to  the  stars  of 

Neh.  4.  21  the  rising  of  the  morning  till  the  stars  ap. 

9.  23  multipliedst  thou  as  the  stars  of  heaven 

Job     3.    9  Let  the  stars  of  the  twilight  thereof  be  da. 

9.    7  commandeth  the  sun.  .sealeth  up  the  st. 

22.  12  behold  the  height  of  the  stars,  how  high 

25-    5  yea,  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight 

38.  7  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all 
Psa.     8.    3  the  moon  and  the  stars,  which  thou  hast 

136.    9  The  moon  and  stars  to  rule  by  night 

147.  4  He  telleth  the  number  of  the  stars;  he 

148.  3  sun  and  moon :  praise  him,  all  ye  stars  of 
Eccl.  12.  2  or  the  light,  or  the  moon,  or  the  stars,  be 
Isa.   13.  10  the  stars  of  heaven  and  the  constellations 

14.  13  I  will  exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of 
Jer.  31,  35  the  ordinances  of  the  moon  and  of  the  st. 
Eze.  32.  7  cover  the  heaven,  and  make  the  stars  th. 
Dan.   8.  10  cast  down.  .(some).. of  the  stars  to  the  gr. 

12.  3  turnmauy  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for 
Joel    2.  10  and  tliestai-s  shall  withdraw  theirshining 

3.  15  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shining 
Amos  5.  26  the  star  of  your  god,  which  ye  made  to 
Obad.       4  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the  stars 
Nah.    3.  16  multiplied  thy  merchants  above  the  stars 
2.A  star,  luminous  meteor,  acr^p  aster. 

.Matt.  2.  r  we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  cast,  and  are 
2.  7  enquired,  .diligently  what  time  the  star 
2.  9  the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the  east,  went 
2.  10  When  they  saw  the  star,  they  rejoiced  wi. 

24.  29  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the 
Marki3.  25  the  stars  of  heaven  shall  fall,  and  the  po. 

1  Co.  15.  41  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  stars 

15.  41  (one)  star  differeth  from  (another)  star  in 
Jude  13  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is  reserved  the 
Rev.    1.  16  And  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars 

■i.  20  The  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  thou 

1.  20  The  seven  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  sev. 

2.  1  he  that  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in  bis  ri. 
2. 28  And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star 

3.  1  seven  spirits  of  God,  and  the  seven  stars 
6. 13  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth 

8.  10  there  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven,  burn. 
8. 11  And  the  name  of  the  staris  called  Worm. 

8.  12  the  moon,  and  the  third  part  of  the  stars 

9.  1  I  saw  a  star  fall  from  heaven  unto  the  ea. 
12.    1  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars 
12.    4  his  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of 
22. 16  offspring  of  David,  (and)  the.,  morning  st. 

Z.A  constellation,  star,  acrrpov  astron. 

Luke2i.  25  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon,  and  in  the  stars 
Acts    7.  43  tabernacle  of  Moloch,  and  the  star  of  your 

27.  20  neither  son  nor  stars  in  many  daysappea. 
Heb.  11.  12  (so  many)  as  the  stars  of  the  sky* in  mult. 

STAR  gazer,  seven,  day  — 

\.A  star  gazer  or  viewer,  33^33  nih  chozehbakkokab. 

Isa.    47. 13  Let  now  the  astrologers,  the  star  gazers 
2.A  group,  the  Pleiades,  ~'"'r  fcimah. 

Amos  5.   8  (Seek  him)  that  maketh  the  seven  stars 
Z.IAgKt  bearer, morning  star,  tyoiatyipoi  phusphoros. 

2  Pe.   1.  19  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day  star  arise  in 
STARE,  to  — 

7*o  srry  mo  raaJi. 

Psa.  2-.  17  Udlallmy  bones:  they  look  (ami)  stare  up. 
STATE,  stately,  station,  (best)  — 

1. //"/id,   T  J/'id. 

Esth.  1.  7  wine  in  abundance,  according  to  the  state 
2.  18  gave  gifts,  according  to  the  state  of  the  ki. 

2.  Weight,  honour,  n^3|  Jcebuddah. 

Eze.  23.  41  safest  upon  a  stately  bed,  mid  a  table  pr. 
3..-1  base,  station,  |3  Icen. 

Proves.  2  by  a  man  of. .  knowledge  the  state  (thereof) 
■J.. I  standing,  station,  ~d,'.?  maamad. 

Isa.    2:*.  19  and  from  thy  state  shall  he  pull  thee  do. 

5.  Station,  standing  place,  aya  matstsab, 

Isa.   -=.  19  I  will  drive  thee  from  thy  station,  and  fr. 


6.  Proper  state  or  condition,  maro  mathkonetlu 

2  Ch.24. 13  they  set  the  house  of'  God  in  his  state,  and 

7.  To  be  set  up,  Z'41  natsab,  2. 

Psa.  39.    5  every  man  at  his  best  state  (is)  altogether 

S.Face,  O^panim. 

Prov.27.  23  Be  thou  diligent  to  know  the  state  of  tbv 

0.  The  things  rovcrrning  or  around,  ra  ivtpl  taperi. 

Phil.   2.  19, 20  of  good  comfort  when  I  know  your  st, 
10.  Tlie  things  against  me,  ra  Kar'  €/j.€,  Col.  4.  7. 
STATURE,  (great)  — 
I. Measure,  length,  file,  t?  mad,  maclon. 

2  Sa.  21.  20  a  man  of  (great)  stature,  that  had  on  ev. 
2.  Measure,  length,  rns  middah. 

NUUI13.  32  we  saw  in  it.  .men  of  a  great  stature 

1  Ch.  11.  23  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  (great)  hi. 
20.    6  a  man  of  (great)  stature,  whose  fingers 

Isa.   45.  14  merchandise . .  of  the  Sabeans,  men  of  sta. 

Z.Vpstanding,  stature,  height,  rt^p  qomah. 

1  Sa.  16.    7  Look  not.  .on  the  height  of  his  stature,  be. 
Song  7.    7  thy  stature  is  like  to  a  palm  tree,  and  thy 
Isa.    10.  33  the  high  ones  of  stature  (shall  be)  hewn 
Eze.  13. 18  kerchiefs  upon  the  head  of  every  stature 

17.  6  became  a  spreading  vine  of  low  stature 
19.  11  her  stature  was  exalted  among  the  thick 
31.    3  shadowing  shroud,  and  of  an  high  stature 

^.Greatness,  length,  7}\iKta  helikia. 

Matt.  6.  27  Which,  .can  add  one  cubit  unto  his  stat. 

Luke  2.  52  Jesusincreasedinwisdomandstature,and 
12.  25  which  of  you.. can  add  to  his  stature  one 
19.   3  could  not.  .because  he  was  little  of  statu. 

Eph.   4.  13  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of 

STATUTE  — 

1.  Decreed  limit,  portion,  statute,  ph  choq. 

Exodis.  25  he  made  for  them  a  statute'and  an  ordin. 

15.  ?6  If  thou  wilt,  .keep  all  his  statutes,  I  will 

18.  16  I  do  make  (them)  know  the  statutes  of  G. 

29.  28  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons'  by  a  statute  for 

30.  21  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  to  them,  (ev.) 
Lev.    6.  18  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  in  your  ge. 

6.  22  (it  is)  a  statute  for  ever  unto  the  Loup;  it 

7.  34  unto  his  sons  by  a  statute  for  ever  from 
10.  11  tlie  statutes  which  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

10. 15  and  thy  sons'  with  thee,  by  a  statute  for 
24.  9  it  (is)  most  holy,  .by  a  perpetual  statute 
26. 46  the  statutes  and  judgments  and  laws  wh. 

Num  18. 11,  19  thy  daughters  with  thee,  by  a  statute 

30. 16  the  statutes  which  the  Lord  commanded 
Deut.  4.    1  hearken,  O  Israel,  unto  the  statutes  and 

4.  5  I  have  taught  you  statutes  and  judgmen. 
4.  6  nations,  which  shall  hear  all  these  statu. 
4.  8  that  hath  statutes  and  judgments  (so)  ri. 
4.  14  at  that  time  to  teach  you  statutes  and  ju. 
4.  40  Thou  shalt  keep  therefore  his  statutes,  and 

4.  45  These  (are)  the  testimonies,  and  the  stat. 

5.  1  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  I  speak 

5.  31  the  statutes,  and  the  judgments,  which 

6.  1,20  the  statutes,  and  the  judgments,  which 
6.  17  his  statutes,  which  he  hath  commanded 

6.  24  commanded  us  to  do  all  these  statutes,  to 

7.  11  the  statutes,  and  the  judgments,  which  I 
ir.  32  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  I  set 
12.    1  These  (are)the  statutes  and  judgments  wh. 

16.  12  thou  shalt  observe  and  do  these  statutes 

17.  19  the  words  of  this  law  and  these  statutes 
26.  16  commanded  thee  to  do  these  statutes  and 

26.  17  to  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  commandm. 

27.  10  do  his  commandments  and  his  statutes 
Josh  24.  25  set  them  a  statute  and  an  ordinance  inSh. 
iSa.  30.  25  he  made  it  a  statute  and  an  ordinance  for 

1  Ki.  3. 14  to  keep  my  statutes  and  my  commandme. 

8.  58  bis  statutes,  and  his  judgments, which  ho 

8.  61  to  walk  in  his  statutes,  and  to  keep  his 

9.  4  (and)  wilt  keep  my  statutes  and  my  judg. 

2  Ki.17.  15  they  rejected  his  statutes,  and  his  covena 

17.  37  the  statutes,  and  the  ordinances,  and  the 

1  Ch.22. 13  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  the 

29.  19  keep,  .thy  testimonies,  and  thy  statutes 

2  Ch.  7.  17  shalt  observe  my  statutes  and  my  judgm, 

19.  10  between  law  and  commandment,  statutes 

33.  8  according  to  the  whole  law  and  the  statut. 

34.  31  to  keep.. his  testimonies,  and  his  statutes 
Ezra    7.  10  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and  judgments 

7.  11  commandments  of  the  Lord,  and  of  his 
Neh.   1.   7  have  not  kept,  .tlie  statutes,  nor  the  judg. 

9. 13  true  laws,  good  statutes  and  commandm. 

9.  14  commandedst  them  precepts, statutes, and 
10.  29  do  all.  .his  judgments  and  his  statutes 
rsa.~  50. 16  What  hast  thou . .  to  declare  my  statutes 
81.    4  this  (was)  a  statute  for  Israel,  (and)  a  law 
105.  45  That  they  might  observe  his  statutes,  and 
119.    5  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statu. 
119.   8  1  will  keep  thy  statutes  :  O  forsake  me  not 
119.  12  Blessed(art)thou:  O  Lord,  teach  me  thy  s, 
no.  23  thy  servant  did  meditate  in  thy  statutes 
119.  26  thou  heardest  me  :  teach  me  thy  statutes 
119.  33  Teach  me,  O  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  statutes 
119.  48  and  I  will  meditate  in  thy  statutes 
119.  54  Thy  statutes  have  been  my  songs  in  the 
119.  64  is  full  of  thy  mercy :  teach  me  thy  statutes 
119.  68  Thou  (art)  good,  .teach  me  thy  statutes 
no.  71  afflicted  ;  that  I  might  learn  thy  statutes 
119.  80  Let  my  heart  be  sound  in  thy  statutes,  that 
no.  83  (yet)  do  I  not  forget  thy  statutes 
1  iq.  1 12  to  perform  thy  statutes  alway,(even  unto) 
116.  117  I  will  have  respect  unto  thy  statutes  co. 
119.  nS  trodden,  .them  that  err  from  thy  statutes 


STAY 


STEM 


Psa  119.  134  unto  thy  mercy,  an  J  teach  me  thy  statu. 

119.  135  to  shine,  .and  teach  me  thy  statutes 

119.  145  hear  me.  0  Lord  :  I  will  keep  thy  statu. 

119.  155  the  wicked :  for  they  seek  not  thy  statu. 

ng.  171  when  thou  hast  taught  me  thy  statutes 

147.  19  his  statutes  and  his  judgments  unto  Israel 

Eze.  11.12  ye  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  neither 

20.  18  Walk  ye  not  in  the  statutes  of  your  fath. 

20.  25  I  gave  them  also  statutes  (that  were)  not 

3-3.  27  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye 

Zecli.  1.   6  my  statutes,  which  I  commanded  my  ser. 

Hal.    4.   4  which  I  commanded  .  .(with)  the  statutes 

2.  Decreed  limit,  portion,  statute,   ngn  chuqqah. 
Gen.  26.    5  my  commandments,  my  statutes,  aud  my 
Exod27.  21  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  unto  their 

28.  43  (It  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  unto  nun 
2^.    9  shall  be  theirs  for  a  perpetual  statute 
Lev.    3.  17  (It  shall  be)  a  perpetual  statute  for  your 

7.  36  a  statute  for  ever  throughout  their  gener. 
10.  9  (it  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  throughout 
16.  29  (this)  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  you 

16.  31  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls,  by  a  statute  for 
16. 34  this  shall  be  an  everlasting  statute  unto 

17.  7  This  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  UDto  them 

18.  5,  26  Ye  shall  therefore  keep  my  statutes 
19. 19  Ye  shall  keep  my  statutes.  Thoushaltnut 

19.  37  Therefore  shall  ye  observe  all  my  statutes 

20.  8  And  ye  shall  keep  my  statutes,  and  do  th. 
20.  22  Ye  shall  therefore  keep  all  my  statutes 

23.  14,  2i,  31,  41  (it  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever 

24.  3  (it  shall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  in  your  ge. 

25. 18  ye  shall  do  ray  statutes,  and  keep  ray  ju. 

26.  3  If  ye  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  keep  ray  co. 

26. 15  if  ye  shall  despise  my  statutes,  or  if  your 
26. 43  because  their  soul  abhorred  my  statutes 

KumiS.  23  (It  sliall  be)  a  statute  for  ever  throughout 
19.  10  unto  the  stranger . .  for  a  statute  for  ever 

19.  2i  it  shall  be  a  perpetual  statute  unto  them 

27.  11  unto  the  childrenof  Israel  a  statuteof  ju. 
35. 29  these  (things)  shall  be  for  a  statute  of  ju. 

Deut.  6.   2  to  keep  all  his  statutes,  and  his  commau. 

8.  11  his  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this 

10.  13  his  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this 

11.  1  keep  his  charge,  and  his  statutes,  and  his 

28.  15  his  commandments  aud  his  statutes,  wh. 
28.  45  and  his  statutes  which  he  commanded  thee 
30.  10  to  keep  his  commandments  and  his  statu. 
30.  16  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  his  stat. 

2  Sa,  22.  23  {as  for)  his  statutes,  I  did  not  depart  from 

1  Ki.   2.    3  to  keep  his  statutes,  and  his  commandm. 

3.  3  walking  in  the  statutes  of  David  his  father 
6.  12  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  exe. 

9.  6  my  statutes  which  I  have  set  before  you 
11. 11  not  kept  my  covenant,  and  my  statutes 
"•  33  (to  keep)  my  statutes  and  my  judgments 
11.  34  kept  ray  commandments  and  my  statutes 
11.  38  to  keep  ray  statutes  and  my  commandme. 

2  Ki.  17.    8  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  heathen,  wh. 

17. 13  keep  nay  commaudment3(aud)my  statutes 
17.  19  walked  in  the  statutes  of  Israel  which  th. 

17.  34  neither  do  they  after  their  statutes,  or  af. 
23.   3  his  testimonies  and  his  statutes  with  all 

2  Cli.  7.  19  if  ye  turn  away,  and  forsake  my  statutes 

Psa.  18.  22  and  I  did  not  put  away  his  statutes  from 

89.  31  If  they  break  my  statutes,  and  keep  not 

1 19.  16  I  will  delight  myself  in  thy  statutes  :  I  will 

Jer.   44.  10,  23  nor  walked  in  my  law,  norin  my  stat. 

Eze.    5.    6  my  statutes  more  than  the  countries  that 

5.   6  have  refused  my  judgments  and  my  stat. 

5.    7  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  neither 

11.  20  That  they  may  walk  in  my  statutes,  and 

18.  9  Hath  walked  in  my  statutes,  and  hath  ke. 
18.  17  executed  my  judgments. .  walked  in  my  st. 
18  19  hath  kept  all  my  statute?,  aud  hath  done 
18.  21  keep  all  my  statutes,  and  do  that  which 

20.  11 1  gave  them  my  statutes,  and  shewed  th. 
20.  13  they  walked  not  in  my  statutes,  and  they 

20. 16  walked  not  in  my  statutes,  but  polluted 

20. 19  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  keep  my  judg. 
20.  21  they  walked  not  in  my  statutes,  neither 
20.  24  had  despised  my  statutes,  and  had  pollu. 
33.  15  walk  in  the  statutes  of  life,  without  com. 
37.  24  and  observe  my  statutes,  aud  do  them 
44.  24  they  shall  keep  my  laws  and  my  statutes 

Mic.    6.  16  the  statutes  of  Omri  are  kept,  and  all  the 

3.  A  ppointuients,  cJtarges,  precepts,  D*iipa  piqqudim. 

Psa.  19.    8  The  statutes  of  the  Loud  (are)  right,  rej. 

4. Standing  rule  or  custom,  rrp  qeyam. 

Dan.   6.  15  no  decree  nor  statute  which  the  king  es. 
STAY  — 
1.  Handy  "i;  yad. 

1  Ki.  10.  19  (there  were)  stays  on  either  side  on  the  pi. 

10. 19  and  two  lions  stood  beside  the  stays 

2  Ch.  9.  18  and  stays  on  each  side  of  the  sitting  pla. 

9. 18  and  two  lions  standing  by  the  stays 

%Stay,  support,  |jfi?o  mashen. 

Isa.     3.    1  doth  take  away,  .the  stay  and  the  staff 
3. Stay,  support,  JJ#?Q  mishan. 

2  Sa.  22. 19  They  prevented  me . .  the  LORD  was  my  st. 

Psa.  18.  18  They  prevented  me.  .the  Lord  was  my  st. 

Isa.     3.    1  stay  of  bread,  aud  the  whole  stay  of  wat. 

4.  Corner,  chief  one*  n|9  pinnah. 

Isa.   ig.  13  they  that  are)  the  stay  of  the  tribes  there 
STAY  (selve3,  there,  up),  to  — 
l.Tobe  behind,  late,  "inx  achar. 

Gen.  32.   4  sojourned  with  Laban,  and  stayed  there 


2.  To  take  away,  nzn  hagah. 

Isa.  27.    8  he  stayeth  his  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the 

3.  To  {cause  to)  stay,  Sin  chid,  1,  5. 

Gen.    8. 10  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days;  and  again 
Lam.  4.    6  overtlirowu . .  and  no  hands  stayed  on  her 

4. To  wait  with  hope,  stay,  Sir  yachal,  2. 

Gen.   8. 12  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days;  and  sent 

5. To  tarry,  linger,  delay,  nna  mahah,  la. 

Isa.   29.   9  Stay  yourselves,  and  wonder;  cry  ye  out 

G.To  smite,  clap  (the  hand),  xrp  mecha,  3. 

Dan.  4.  35  none  can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him 
7. To  be  supported,  ^?p  samaJc,  2. 

Isa.   48.    2  aud  stay  themselves  upon  the  God  of  Isr. 
8.7b  support,  ^crj  samak,  3. 

Song  2.  5  Stay  me  with  flagons,  comfort  me  with 

9.  To  be  grieved,  solicitous,  \rjt  agan,  2. 

Ruth  1. 13  would  ye  stay  for  them  from  having  bus. 

10.  To  stand,  stand  still,  "Q]f  amad. 

Gen.  19.  17  look  not  behind  thee,  neither  stay  thou  in 
Exod.  9.  28  I  will  let  you  go,  and  ye  shall  stay  me  no 
Lev.  13.23,  28  if  the  bright  spot  stay  in  his  place,  (and) 
Deut.  10. 10  stayed  in  the  mount,  according  to  the  first 
Josh.  10. 13  the  moon  stayed,  until  the  people  had  ave. 
10.  19  stay  ye  not,  (but)  pursue  after  your  ene. 

1  Sa.  20.  38  Jonathan  cried.  ..Make  speed,  haste,  stay 

30.   9  where  those  that  were  left  behind  stayed 

2  Sa.  17. 17  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz  stayed  by  En-rogel 
2  Ki.  4.    6  (There  is)  not  a  vessel  more.    And  the  oil 

13.  18  Smite . .  and  he  smote  thrice,  and  stayed 

15.  20  turned  back,  and  stayed  not  there  iu  the 
Jer.     4.   6  stay  not;  forlwill  bring  evil  from  the  no. 

Hos.    13.  13  he  should  not  stay  long  in  (the  place  of) 

11.  To  keep  back,  Dpy  aqab,  3. 

Job  37.   4  he  will  not  stay  them  when  his  voice  is  he. 

12.  To  make  feeble,  let  go,  nan  raphah,  5. 

1  Sa.  15.  16  Stay,  and  I  will  tell  thee  what  the  Lord 

2  Sa.  24.  16  said  to  the  angel,  .stay  now  thine  hand 
1  Ch.21.  15  said  to  the  angel,  .stay  now  thine  hand 

13.  To  cause  to  lie  dozen,  32^  shakab,  5. 

Job   38.  37  or  who  can  stay  the  bottles  of  heaven 
14.2*0  cleave,  rend,  subdue,  i'C^  sliasa,  3. 

1  Sa.  24.   7  David  stayed  Ms  servants  with  these  words 
lo.To  be  supported,  to  lean,  yjy  shaan,  2. 

Isa.    10.  20  shall  no  more  again  stay  upon  him  that 
10. 20  shall  stay  upon  the  Lord,  the  Holy  One  of 

30.  12  and  trust  in  oppression,  .and  stay  thereon 

31.  1  stay  on  horses,  and  trust  in  chariots,  be. 
50.  10  let  him  trust,  .and  stay  upon  his  God 

16.  To  uphold,  retain,  ^n  tamak. 

Exod  17.  12  Aaron  and  Hur  stayed  up  his  hands,  the 
Prov.28.  17  shall  flee  to  the  pit;  let  no  mau  stay  him 

17.  To  hold  on,  s-n-exoo  epecho. 

Acts  19.  22  but  lie  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  season 

IS.  To  hold  down  or  fast,  kclt4x&  katecho. 

Luke  4.  42  came  unto  him,  and  stayed  him,  that  he 
STAY,  stayed  up,  to  be  at  a  — 
l.To  be  set  up,  stayed,  Js;  yalsag,  6. 

Exodio.  24  only  let  your  flocks  and  your  herds  be  st. 
2.  To  shut,  be  restrained,  nhs  kola. 

Hag.   1  10  is  stayed  from  dew,  and  the  earth  is  stay. 
3. To  be  or  become  restrained,  xbz  kala,  2. 

Eze.  31. 15  restrained  the  floods,  .waters  were  stayed 

4.  To  sustain,  support,  "OD  samak. 

Isa.   26.    3  Thou  wilt  keep  (lnm..  whose)  mind  (is)  st. 

5.  To  stand,  stand  still  or  fast,  lOjj  amad. 

Lev.  13.    5  (if)  the  plague  in  his  sight  be  at  a  stay,  (and) 
13.  37  if  the  scall  be  in  his  sight  at  a  stay,  and 

6.  To  be  caused  to  stand,  TQjy  amad,  6. 

1  Ki.22.  35  the  king  was  stayed  up  in  his  chariot  ag. 

7.  To  be  restrained,  isjj  atsar,  2. 

Num  16.  48  stood  between . .  and  the  plague  was  stay. 

16.  50  Aaron  returned,  .the  plague  was  stayed 
25.    8  the  plague  was  stayed  from  the  children 

2  Sa.  24.  21  the  plague  may  be  stayed  from  the  peop. 

24.  25  and  the  plague  was  stayed  from  Israel 

1  Ch.21.  22  the  plague  may  be  stayed  from  the  people 
Psa.  iod.  30  judgment :  and  (so)  the  plague  was  stay. 

8.T0  set,  put,  place,  n'V  shith. 

Job  38, 11  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stay.? 

STEAD  (of),  in  — 

1.  Under,  in  tlie  stead  of  n~ri  tachath. 

Gen.    4.  25  appointed  me  another  seed  instead  of  A. 
22.  13  for  a  burnt  offering  iu  the  stead  of  his  son 

2.  In  behalf  of ,  vv4p  (gen.)  huper. 

2  Co.  5.  20  we  pray  (you)  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  re. 
Phm.      13  in  thystead  he  might  have  ministered  uu. 

STEADY  — 

Faithfulness,  stability,  steadiness,  njtDK,  emunah. 
Exod  17.  12  his  hands  were  steady  until  the  going  do. 

STEAL  (away,  get  by  stealth),  to  — 

1.  To  steal,  act  furtively,  21}  ganab. 

Gen.  30.  33  the  sheep,  that  shall  be  counted  stolen 
31.  19  Rachel  had  stolen  the  images  that  (were) 
31.  20  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to  Laban  the 


Gen.  31.  26  that  thou  hast  stolon  away  unawares  to 
31.  27  flee  away  secretly,  and  steal  away  from 
31.  30  (yet)  wherefore  hast  thou  stolen  my  gods? 
31.  32  Jacob  knew  not  that  Rachel  had  stolen 
31.  39  (whether)  stolen  by  day,  or  stolen  by  nig. 
44.    8  how  then  should  we  steal  out  of  thy  lord's 

Exod  20. 15  Thou  shalt  not  steal 

21.  16  he  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  selleth  him 

22.  1  If  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and 
Lev.  19. 11  Ye  shall  not  steal,  neither  dealfalsely,  ne. 
Deut.  5.  19  Neither  shalt  thou  steal 

24.  7  If  a  man  be  found  stealing  any  of  his  br. 
Josh.  7.  11  have  also  stolen,  and  dissembled  also,  and 
2  Sa.  19.  41  Why  have,  .men  of  J udah stolen  thee  aw. 

15.   6  Absalom  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Is. 

21.  12  which  had  stolen  them  from  the  street  of 
2  Ki.  11.  2  Jehosheba.  .stole  him  from  among  the  ki. 
2  Ch.22.  11  Jehoshabeath .  .stole him  from  among  the 
Job  27.  20  a  tempest  stealeth  hirn  away  in  the  night 
Prov.  6.  30  (Men)  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to 
9.  17  Stolen  waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  (eaten) 

30.  9  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take  the  na. 
Jer.     7.    9  Will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  commit  adul. 

23.  30  that  steal  my  words  every  onefrora  his  n. 
Hos.  4.  2  killing,  and  stealing,  aud  committing  ad. 
Obad  5  would  they  not  have  stolen  till  they  had 
Zech.  5.    3  every  one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off 

2.  To  steal  self  away,  3j3  ganab,  7. 

2  Sa.  19.    3  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth' that  day 
19.    3  as  people  being  ashamed  steal  away  when 

3.  To  steal,  kX4ttt<o  Hep  to. 

Matt.  6. 19  where  thieves  break  through  and  steal 
6. 20  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  steal 
19.  18  Thou  shalt  not  steal,  Thou  shalt  not  bear 

27.  64  steal  him  away,  and  say  unto  the  people 

28.  13  came  by  night,  and  stole  him  (away)  wh. 
Mark  10.  19  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bear  false  witness 
Luke  18.  20  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bear  false  witness 
Johnio.  10  The  thief  cometh  not,  but  for  to  steal,  and 
Rom.  2.  21  a  man  should  not  steal,  dost  thou  steal? 

13.  9  Thou  shalt  not  steal,  Thou  shalt  not  bear 
Epb.  4.  28  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no  more,  but  rat. 

STEDFAST,  (to  be)  — 

l.To  be  faithful,  steady,  fex  aman,  2. 

Psa.  78.    8  and  whose  spirit  was  not  stedfastwithG. 
78. 37  neither  were  they  stedfast  in  his  covena. 

2. To  be  cast,  firm,  ps;  yatsaq,  6. 

Job   11. 15  yea,  thou  shalt  be  stedfast,  and  shalt  not 

3. Standing,  steady,  established,  D'j?  qayyam. 

Dan.  6.  26  he  (is)  the  living  God,  and  stedfast  for  ever 
i.Firm,  sure,  stedfast;  fiepatos  bebaios. 

2  Co.  1.    7  our  hope  ofyou(is)stedfast,knowing,that 

Heb.  2.    2  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast 

3.  14  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  stedfast 

6.  19  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  st 

5.  Seated,  stedfast,  steady,  settled,  eSpauos  hedraios. 
1  Co.  7.  37  he  that  standeth  [stedfast]  in  his  heart 
15.  58  be  ye  stedfast,  uumoveable,  always  abou 

6. Standing,  settled,  stedfast,  arepeSs  stereos. 

1  Pe.  5.    9  Whoni  resist  stedfast  in  the  faith,  know. 

STEDFASTLY,  to  behold,  look  up,  set,  be  minded,  — 
l.To  strengthen  self  j'£X  amats,  7. 

Ruth  1. 18  she  saw  that  she  was  stedfastly  minded 

2.  To  place,  set,  put,  trip,  D3b*  sum,  sim. 

2  Ki.  8.  11  he  settled  his  countenance  stedfastly,  un. 
3. To  look  intently,  arevifa  atenizo. 

Acts    1.  10  they  looked  stedfastly  toward  heaven  as 

6.  15  looking  stedfastly  on  liira,  saw  his  face  as 

7.  55  looked  up  stedfastly  into  heaven,  and  saw 

14.  9  who  stedfastly  beholding  him,  and  perce. 
2  Co.  3.   7,  13  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  stedf. 

4.  To  settle,  make  stedfast,  ar-npi^u  sterizo. 

Luke  9.  51  he  stedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jerusa. 

STEDFASTNESS  — 

1  .Sted fastness,  arepeca/xa  stereoma. 

Col.   2.    5  and  the  stedfastnessof  your  faith  in  Clirist 

2.  Stability,  stedfastness,  a-r-npty/xSs  st&igmos. 

2  Pe.  3. 17  lest  ye.  .fall  from  your  own  stedfastness 
STEEL  — 
1. Brass,  copper,  ixtfim  nechushah. 

2  Sa.  22.  35  so  that  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine 

Job  20.  24  (and)  the  bow  of  steel  shall  strike  hira  thr. 

Psa.  iS.  34  so  that  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine 
2.  Brass,  copper,  rtffru  nechosheth. 

Jer    15.  12  Shall  iron  break  the.  .Iron  and  the  steel? 
STEEP  (place)  — 
\.  Ascent,  stairs,  rn*yip  madregah. 

Eze.  38.  20  steep  places  shall  fall,  and  every  wall  sh. 
2. A  going  down,  descent,  slope,  tjid  morad. 

Mic.    1.   4  waters  (that  are)  poured  down  a  steep  pi. 
Z.A  steep  place,  -precipice,  Kpn/xvds  kremnns. 

Matt.  8-  32  swine  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place 

Mark  5. 13  the  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place 

Luke  3.  33  the  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steepplace 
STEM  — 
Stick,  stem,  y«3  geza. 

Isa.   11.    1  a  rod  out  oi  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  bra. 


STEP 


934 


STIR 


STEP  — 

l.A  step,  i^:N  ashshur. 

Job  31.    7  If  my  step  hath  turned  out  of  the  way,  and 
Psa.  17. 11  They  have  now  compassed  us  in  our  steps 

2.  A  step,  yS's  ashur. 

Job  23.  11  My  foot  hath  held  his  steps,  his  way  have 

Psa.  37.  31  in  his  heart;  none  of  his  steps  shall  slide 

44.  18  neither  have  onr  steps  declined  from  thy 

73.    2  as  for  me . .  my  steps  had  well  nigh  slipped 

3.  A  going,  ?p ;  C  Gallic. 

Job   29.    6  I  washed  my  steps  with  butter,  and  the 
4..1  step,  tread,  "H^p  mitsad. 

Psa.  37.  23  The  steps  of  a  (good)  man  are  ordered  by 
Ban.  11.  43  and  the  Ethiopians  (shall  be)  at  his  steps 

5.  Heel,  footstep,  trace,  tract,  Dp"  aqeb. 

Psa.  56.  6  they  mark  my  steps,  when  they  wait  for 

6.  A  movement,  step,  foot,  oy?  po.am. 

Psa,  57.    6  They  have  prepared  a  net  for  my  steps 
85.  13  and  shall  set  (us)  in  the  way  of  his  steps 
119.  133  Order  my  steps  in  thy  word  :  and  letnot 
Isa.   26.   6  feetofthepoor,(and)thestepsoftheneedy 

l.A  step,  y&s  pesa. 

1  Sa.  20.   3(there  is)  but  a  step  between  me  and  death 
S.A  footstep,  iffi*  tsaadc 

2  Sa.  22.  37  Thou  hast  enlarged  my  steps  under  me 
Job   14.  16  thou  numberest  my  steps  :  dost  thou  not 

18.    7  The  steps  of  his  strength  shall  be  straite. 

31.    4  Doth  not  he  see . .  and  count  all  my  steps  ? 

31.  37  declare  unto  him  the  number  of  my  steps 
Psa.   18.  36  Thou  hast  enlarged  my  steps  under  me 
Prov.  4. 12  When  thou  goest,  thy  steps  shall  not  be 

5.  5  Her  feet  go  down  to  death ;  her  steps  take 
16.   9  deviseth..but  the  Lord  directeth  his  steps 

Jer.  10.  23  (it  is)  not  in  man . .  to  direct  his  steps 
Lam   4. 18  They  hunt  our  steps,  that  we  cannot  go  in 

9.  A  going  up,  ascent,  rnJLQ  nwalah. 

Exod2o.  26  Neither  shall  thou  go  up  by  steps  unto 

1  Ki.  10.  19  The  throne  had  six  steps,  and  the  top  of 

10.  20  twelve  lions  stood . .  upon  the  six  steps 

2  Ch.  9.  18  (there  were)  six  steps  to  the  throne,  with 

9. 19  twelve  lions  stood . .  upon  the  six  steps 

Eze.  40.  22  they  went  up  unto  it  by  seven  steps;  and 

40.  26  (there  were)  seven  steps  to  go  up  to  it,  and 

40.  31,  34,  37  the  going  up  to  it  (had)  eight  steps 

40.  49  (he  brought  me)  by  the  steps  whereby  th. 

lO.Sole  (of  foot),  track,  trace,  footprint,  1xvo*° 

Rom  4.  12  who  also  walk  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of 

2  Co.  12.  18  spirit?  (walked  we)  not  in  thesamesteps? 

1  Pe.    2.  21  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps 

STEP  (down,  in),  to  — 

l.To  go  into,  4^aiv(a  embaino. 

John  5.    4  [whosoever,  .stepped  in  was  made  whole] 
2.  To  go  down,  Kara^it/w  katabaino. 

John  5.    7  while  I  am  coming,  another  steppeth  do. 
STEPH-A'-NAS,  ~2,re<pavas  crown. 
A  believer  whose  household,  as  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia 
to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  Paul  baptised,  and  whose 
coming  with  Fortunatus  and  Achaicus  made  him  glad. 

1  Co.   1.  16  I  baptized  also  the  household  of  S. :  besi. 
/6.  15  ye  know  the  house  of  S.,  that  it  isthe  first 
16. 17  I  am  glad  of  the  comiug  of  S.  and  Fortun. 
STE'-PHEN,  2,Te<pavos  crown. 

One  of  the  seven  primitive  disciples  chosen  to  serve 
tables,  a  zealous  Hellenist,  and  the  first  martyr  in 
behalf  of  Cbristianity  after  the  death  of  Christ  himself, 
being  stoned  to  death  by  the  Jews.     A.D.  33. 

Acts    6.    5  they  chose  S. ,  a  man  full  of  faith  and  of  the 

6.  8  S.,  full  of  faith  and  power,  did  great  won. 

6.  9  there  arose  certain .  .disputing  with  S. 

7.  59  they  stoned  S.,  calling  upon  (God),  and  sa. 

8.  2  devout  men  carried  S.  (to  his  burial),  and 

11.  19  upon  the  persecution  that  arose  about  S. 
22.  20  when  the  blood  of  thy  martyr  S.  was  shed 

STERN  — 

The  stern,  poop,  irpv/xva  prumna. 

Acts  27.  29  they  castfouranchorsoutofthe stern, and 
STEWARD,  stewardship,  (to  he)  — 
l.The  man  who  is  over,  Sy_  "i^n  e^Kii  hat'sh  asher  at. 

Gen.  43.  19  they  came  near  to  the  steward  of  Joseph's 

2.  Who  is  over  a  house,  rr?  "?y  ic-k  asher  al  bayith. 
Gen.  44.    4  Joseph  said  unto  his  steward,  Up,  follow 

3.  Son  of  acquisition,  acquired  son,  P^p-[3  ben  mesh. 

Gen.  15.  2  the  steward  of  my  house  (is)  this  Eliezer 

4.  Prince,  Jtead,  chief  captain,  nir  sar. 

1  Ch.28.    1  the  stewards  over  all  the  substance  and 
5. One  to  whom  a  thing  is  committed,  iwtTpoTros. 
Matt2o.    8  lord  of  the  vineyard  saith  unto  hisstewa. 
Luke  3.    3  the  wife  of  Chuza  Herod'  a  steward,  and  S. 

6.  To  he  a  house  manager  or  steward,  oiKovoutw. 
Lukeifi.    2  for  thou  mayest  be  no  longer  steward 
I.TT-msc  management,  ohouo^ia  oikonomia. 

Luke  16.  2  give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship,  for 
16.  3  lordtaketh  away  from  me  the  stewardship 
16.  4  when  I  am  put  out  of  the  stewardship,  th. 
S..1  house  manager,  steward*  oikovShos  oikonomos. 
LuktM2.  42  Who  then  is  that  faithful  and  wise  stew. 
16.  1  a  certain  rich  man  which  had  a  steward 
16.    3  the  steward  said  within  himself,  What  sb. 


Lukei6.  8  the  lord  commended  the  unjust  steward 
1  Co,  4.  1  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  stewards  of 
4.  2  it  is  required  in  stewards,  that  a  man  be 
Titus  1.  7  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  asthestewa. 
1  Pe.  4.  10  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 

STICK  — 

I.Wood,  tree,  stick,  }'y  ets. 

Num  15.  32  they  found  a  man  that  gathered  sticks  up 
15.  33  they  that  found  him  gathering  sticks  br. 

1  Ki.  17. 10  widow  woman'(was)  there  gathering  of  st. 

17.  12  I  (am)  gathering  two  sticks,  that  I  may  go 

2  Ki.  6.   6  And  he  cut  down  a  stick,  and  cast  (it)  in 
Lam.  4.    8  it  is  withered,  it  is  become  like  a  stick 
Eze.  37. 16  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write  uponit.  For 

37.  16  then  take  another  stick,  and  write  upon 
37.  16  For  Joseph,  the  stick  of  Fphraim,  aud(for) 
37. 17  join  them  one  to  another  into  one  stick 
37.  19  I  will  take  the  stick  of  Joseph,  which  (is) 
37.  19  the  stick  of  Judah,  and  make  them  one  st. 
37.  20  the  sticks  whereon  thou  writest  shall  be 

2.  A  fagot,  <ppvyavov  phruganon. 

Acts  28.    3  Paul  had  gathered  a  bundle  of  sticks,  and 

STICK,  closer,  fast,  out,  together,  to  cause  to  — 
1.2*0  cleave  to,  adhere,  pursue,  p?n  dabak. 

Psa.119.  31   I  have  stuck  unto  thy'testimonies:  0  L. 

Eze.  29.   4  fish  of  thy  rivers  shall  stick  unto  thy  sea. 

2,7'o  cause  to  cleave  to,  p:n  dabaq,  5. 

Eze.  29.   4  I  will  cause  the  fish  of  thy  rivers  to  stick 

3.  Cleaving  to,  adhering,  pyy  dabeq. 

Prov.18.  24  a  friend  (that)  sticketh  closer  than  a  bro. 

4.  To  become  frozen,  stick  together,  lih  lakad,  7. 

Job  41.  17  they  stick  together,  that  they  cannot  be 

5.  To  crush,  stick  in,  Tjy?  maak. 

1  Sa.  26.  7  hisspearstuck  inthe ground  at  his  bolster 

6. To  go  or  come  down,  nm  nachath,  2. 

Psa.  38.   2  thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  me,  and  thy  hand 

7. To  be  high,  high  place,  's^,  ns$  shaphah,  shephi. 
Job  33.  21  his  bones  (that)  were  not  seen  stick  out 

S.To  support  by  a  prop,  stick  fast,  tptlSai  ereido. 

Acts  27.  41  the  fore  part  stuck  fast,  and  remained  un. 
STIFF,  stiffen,  to  (make)  — 
l.Old,  removed,  pny  alhaq. 

Psa.  75.    5  Lift  not  up.  .speak  (not)  with  a  stiff  neck 
2. Sharp,  hard,  nt^  qasheh. 

Deut3i.27  Fori  know  thy  rebellion,  and  thy  stiff  ne. 
3.7*0  make  sharp  or  hard,  n^p  qashah,  5. 

Deutio.  16  Circumcise,  .and  be  no  more  stiff  necked 

2  Ch.30.    8  be  ye  not  stiff  necked,  as  your  fathers 

36.  13  he  stiffened  his  neck,  and  hardened  his 
Jer.  1 7.  23  made  their  neck  stiff,  that  they  might  not 

STIFF  HEARTED,  stiff  necked  — 
I. Hard  of  heart,  y?  'ptn  chizke  leb. 

Eze.    2.   4  (they  are)  impudent  children,  and  stiff  he. 
2.1Iard  of  neck,  *\iy  na>p  qeshch  oreph. 

Exod  32.    9  and,  behold,  it  (is)  a  stiff  necked  people 

33.  3  not  go  up.  .for  thou  (art)  a  stiff  necked 
33-    5  Ye  (are)  a  stiff  necked  people:  I  will  come 

34.  9  go  among  us ;  for  it  (is)  a  stiff  necked  pe. 
Deut  9.    6  for  thou  (art)  a  stiff  necked  people 

9.  13  and,  behold,  it  (is)  a  stiff  necked  people 
Z.JFard  necked,  o-KAnporpaxy^os  skier  olrachelos. 

Acts    7.  51  Ye  stiff  necked  and  uncircumcised  in  he. 
STILL  — 
1. Silence,  calm,  noDi  demamah. 

1  Ki.19. 12  a  fire,  .and  after  the  fire  a  still  small  voice 

2.  Rest,  place  of  rest,  nnup  menuchah. 

Psa.  23.   2  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters 

3.  To  remove,  journey,  yci  nasa. 

Gen.  12.   9  Abram  journeyed,  going  on  still  toward 
bSlill,  yet,  while,  any  more,  liy  od. 

Lev.  13.  57  if  it  appear  still  in  the  garment,  either  in 
5.  Still,  yet,  in  eti. 

Rev.  22. 11  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still 
22.  11  and  he  which  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  st. 
22. 11  that  is  righteous,  let  him  be  righteous  st. 
22. 11  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy  still 

STILL,  he  still,  to  — 

l.To  be  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  DC?  damam. 

Exod  15.  16  they  shall  be  (as)  still  as  a  stone;  till  thy 
Psa.     4.    4  commune  with  your  own  heart.. and  be  s 
Isa.   23.    2  Be  still,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle,  thou 
Jer.  47.    6  Put.  .thyself  into  thy  scabbard. .be  still 

2.To  still,  silence,  n$g  hasah,  5. 

Num.13.  30  Caleb  stilled  the  people  before  Moses,  and 

3.7V>  keep  or  remain  silent,  deaf,  ir]n  charash,  5. 
Isa.  42. 14  I  have  been  still,  (and)  refrained  myself 

4.  To  be  silent,  nsrrji  chashah. 

Psa. 107.  29  a  calm,  so  that  the  waves  thereof  are  still 

5.  To  keep  silent,  nif'n  chashah,  5. 

Judc.  18.   9  (are) ye  still? be  not  slothful  to  go,  (and)  to 
1  Ki.  22.    3  we  (he)  still,  (and)  take  it  not  out  of  the 
!Neh.  8.  11  the  Levites  stilled  all  the  people,  saying 
Q.  Still,  yet,  white,  any  more,  *iiy  od. 

Psa.  139.  iS  when  I  awake,  I  am  still  with  thee 


7.  To  cause  to  fall,  let  go,  n*r\  raphah,  5. 

Psa.  46.  10  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  (am)  God:  I  will 

8.  To  glorify s  praise,  restrain,  n^v  shabach,  3. 

Psa.  89.    9  the  waves  thereof  arise,  thou  stillest  them 

9.  To  glorify,  praise,  restrain,  my  shabach,  5. 
Psa.  65.    7  Which  stilleth  the  noise  of  the  seas,  the 

10.  To  (cause  to)  keep  sabbath,  rca*  shabath,  5. 
Psa.    8.    2  thou  mightest  still  the  enemy  and  the  av. 

11.  To  give  or  keep  quiet,  bp£*  shaqat. 

Psa.  76.    8  judgment.,  the  earth  feared,  and  was  still 
83.    1  hold  not  thy  peace,  and  be  not  still,  0  God 

12. To  muzzle,  gag,  <pi/j.6co  phimoo. 

Mark  4.  39  and  Baid  unto  the  sea,  Peace,  be  still 
[See  also  Abide,  keep,  lie,  sit,  stand.] 
STING,  (to)  — 
1.7*0  sting,  cut  into,  &ip ^ar«sA,  5. 

Prov.23.  32  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like 

2.  A  sting,  goad,  spur,  nivrpov  kentron. 

1  C0.15.  55  O  death,  where  (is)  thy  sting?  Ograve,  wh. 

15.  56  Thestingof  death(is)sin ;  and  the  strength 

Rev.    9.  10  there  were  stings  in  their  tails ;  and  their 

STINK,  stinking  savour,  to  make  or  cause  a  — 

l.A  stink,  PtiZbeosh. 

Joel    2.  20  his  stink  shall  come  up,  and  his  ill  savour 
Amos_4.  10  I  have  made  the  slink  of  your  camps  to 
Isa.  34.   3  their  stink  shall  come  up  out  of  their  ca. 

2.  To  stink,  c*N3  baash. 

Exod.  7.  18  the  fish.. shall  die,  and  the  river  shall  st. 

7.  21  the  river  stank,  and  the  Egyptians  could 

8.  14  together  upon  heaps;  and  the  land  stank 
16. 20  it  bred  worms,  and  stank :  and  Moses  was 

Isa.  50.   2  their  fish  stinketh,  because  (there  is)  no 

S.To  be  stinking,  abhorred,  t^S'S  baash,  2. 

z  Sa.  10.   6  children  of  Amnion  saw  that  they  stank 

4.  To  cause  to  stink  or  be  abhorred,  E>X3  baash,  5. 

Gen.  34.  30  have  troubled  me  to  makeme  to  stinkam. 

Exod  16.  24  it  did  not  stink,  neither  was  there  any  wo. 

Psa.  38.    5  My  wounds  stink  (and)  are  corrupt  bee. 

Eccl.  jo.    1  Dead  flies  cause . .  a  stinking  savour 
h.Muck,  dung,  corrupition,  po  maq. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  sweet  smell,  .shall  be  stink 
Q.To  give  a  smell,  emit  an  odour,  ofa  ozo. 

John  1 1.  39  he  stinketh :  for  he  hath  been  (dead)  four 
STER  — 
l.Oy,  crying,  noise,  rnNt:;n  teshuoth. 

1  Isa.   22.   2  Thou  that  art  full  of  stirs,  a  tumultuous 
2.  A  disturbance,  stir,  tumult,  rapaxos  tarachos. 

Acts  12.  18  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  soldi. 
19.  23  there  arose  no  small  stir  about  that  way 

STLR  up  (self),  he  stirred  (up),  to  — 
1.77)  stir  up,  iTi|  garah,  3. 

l'rov  15.  18  A  wrathful  man  stirreth  up  strife  :  but 
28.  25  He  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  stirreth  upst. 
29. 22  An  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,  and  a  fu. 
2.7*0  stir  self  up,  nia  garah,  7. 

Dan.  11.  10  his  sons  shall  lie  stirred  up.  .andbe  stirred 
11.  25  he  shall  stir  up  his  power  and  his  courage 

S.To  lift  up,  N^J  nasa. 

Exod35.  21  every  one  whose  heart  stirred  him  up,  and 

35.  26  women  whose  heart  stirred  them  up  in 

36.  2  every  one  whose  heart  stirred  him  up  to 

4.7*0  move,  persuade,  remove,  WD  sv.th,  5. 

1  Sa.  26.  19  If  the  Lord  have  stirred  thee  up  against 
1  Ki.  21.  25  Ahab.  .whom  Jezebel  his  wife  stirred  up 

5.7*0  awake,  stir  up,  liy  ur. 

Job   41. 10  None  (is  so)  fierce  that  dare  stir  him  up 

6.7*0  awaJce,  lift  up,  "l^y  ur,  Sa. 

Psa.  80.    2  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  come  (and)  save 

Prov  10.  12  Hatred  stirreth  up  strifes  :  but  love  cov. 

Isa.  10.  26  the  Loud  of  hosts  shall  stir  up  a  scourge 
14.  9  it  stirreth  up  the  dead  for  thee,  (even)  all 
7.7*0  awake,  stir  up,  iiy  ur,  5. 

Deut32. 11  As  an  angel  stirreth  up  her  nest,  fluttereth, 

1  Ch.   5.  26  the  God  of  Israel  stirred  up  the  spirit  of 

2  Ch.21.  16  the  Lord  stirred  up  against  Jehoram  the 

36,  22  the  Lord  stirred  up  thespiritof  Cyrus  Ki. 
Ezra  1.  1  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  ki. 
Psa.  35.  23  Stir  up  thyself,  and  awake  to  my  judgnu 

78.  38  many  a  time . .  did  not  stir  up  all  his  wrath 
Song  2.    7  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 
3.    5  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  lovo 
8.    4  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  (my)  love 
Isa.   13.  17  I  will  stir  up  the  Medes  against  them,  wh. 

42.13  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war 
Dan  11.    2  he  shall  stir  up  all  against  the  realm  of 

11.  25  he  shall  stir  up  his  power  and  his  courage 
TIag.    1.  14  the  Lord  stirred  up  che  spirit  of  Zerubb. 

5.  7*0  awake  or  stir  self  up,  "iiy  ur,  7a. 

Job   17.    8  the  innocent  shall  stir  up  himself  against 
Isa.  64.    7  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  to. 

9.  7*0  be  troubled,  excited,  1?"  akar,  2. 

Psa.  39.    2  I  held  my  peace,  .my  sorrow  was  st 

10.7*0  cause  to  go  up,  nby  alah,  5. 

Prov  15.    1  but  grievous' words  stir  up  auger 


STOCK 


935 


STONE 


11.  To  cause  to  rise  up,  raise,  Dip  qum,  5. 

Num.  24.    g  lay  down  as  a  lion,  .who  shall  stir  him  up? 
i  Sa.  22.    8  my  son  hath  stirred  up  my  servant  against 
i  Ki.  ii.  14  the  Lord  stirred  up  an  adversary  unto  Sol. 
11.  23  God  stirred  him  up  (another)  adversary 

12.ro  rekindle,  aua^wrrvpea)  anazopureo. 

2  Ti.    1.   6  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which 
Id. To  shake  or  stir  up,   avaaeiw  anaseio. 

Luke  23.    s  He  stirreth  up  the  people,  teaching  thro. 
14.  To  raise  up  thoroughly,   Sie-yeipw  diegeiro. 

2  Pe.    1. 13  to  stir  you  up  hy  putting  (you)  in  remem. 
3.    1  in  (both)  which  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds 

15.7*0  raise  up  upon  or  over,  frreyefpw  epegeiro. 
Acts  14.   2  the  unbelieving  Jews  stirred  up  the  Gent. 

16.  To  be  sharpened  beyond  measure,  irapo£vvofj.at. 
Acts  17.  16  his  spirit  was  stirred  in  him,  when  he  saw 

17.  To  excite  beyond  measure,  icapoTpvvw  parotruno. 
Acts  13.  50  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  devout  and  honou. 

18.  Tb  shake,  agitate,  toss,  traAet'w  saleuo. 

Acts  17.  13  they  came  thither  also,  and  stirred  up  the 
19. 7*0  move  together,  o-vyKtvtw  sughineo. 

Acts    6.  12  they  stirred  up  the  people,  and  the  elders 

20.  To  pour  together,  <rvyx*v>  sugclieo. 

Acts  21.  27  stirred  up  all  the  people,  and  laid  hands 
STOCK,  stocks  — 
1.  Increase,  food,  stock,  713  but, 

Isa.  44.  19  shall  I  fall  down  to  the  stock  of  a  tree? 
2. Stock,  stem,  yia  geza. 

Job  14.    8  and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  ground 

Isa.  40.  24  their  stock  shall  not  take  root  in  the  ear. 

3. Turning,  stocks, pillory,  torture,  n3?np  mahpeche. 

Jer.  20.    2  put  him  in  the  stocks  that  (were)  in  the 

20.    3  brought  forth  Jeremiah  out  of  the  stocks 

4.  Stocks,  fetters,  np  sad. 

Job  13.  27  Thou  puttest  my  feet  also  in  the  stocks 
33.  11  He  putteth  my  f  eet  in  the  stocks,  he  mar. 

X),A  tinkling  ornament,  D3"  ekes. 

Prov.  7.  22  or  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks 
6.  JT00^,  tree,  f*H  ets. 

Jer.    2.  27  Saying  to  a  stock.  Thou  (art)  my  father 
3.    9  adultery  with  stones  and  with  stocks 

10.  8  But.  .the  stock  (is)  a  doctrine  of  vanities 
H03.    4.  12  ily  people  ask  counsel  at  their  stocks,  and 

7.-4  root,  *3j3.w  eqer. 

Lev.  25.  47  or  to  the  stock  of  the  stranger's  family 
8.-4  neck,  collar,  pis  tsinoq. 

Jer.  29.  26  put  him  in  prison,  and  in  the  stocks 

9.  Offspring,  race,  genus,  ylvos  genos. 

Acts  13.  26  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and  wh. 
Phil.    3.    5  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  (of)  the  tribe  of  Be. 

10.  Wood,  tree,  |uAoi/  x'ulon. 

Acts  16.  24  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks 
STOICS,   Srwi'KOf. 

A  sect  of  Greek  philosophers  who  received  their  name 
from  the  Stoa,  a  porch  at  Athens,  where  Zeno  taught. 
They  were  severe  and  lofty  pantheists,  and  affected 
indifference  in  all  circumstances.  Zeno  was  born  at 
Citium,  a  smalltown  in  the  island  of  Cyprus, about  B.C. 
357,  taught  at  Athens  B.C.  299,  and  died  B.C.  263. 

Acts  17. 18  certain  philosophers.. of  the  S.,  encount. 
STOLEN  (away),  to  be  — 
l.TV  be  stolen,  333  ganab,  2. 

Exod  22. 12  if  it  be  stolen  from  him,  he  shall  make  re. 
2.  To  be  stolen,  333  ganab,  4. 

Gen.  40. 15  I  was  stolen  away  out  of  the  land  of  the 

Exod  22.   7  and  it  be  stolenout  of  the  man's  house 

STOMACH,  stomacher  — 

l.A  festive  garment,  stomacher,  Trns  pethigil. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  a  stomacher  a  girding  of  sack. 
2. Stomach,  aru/xaxos  stomachos. 

1  Ti.   5.  23  use  a  little  wine  forthystomach'ssakeand 
STONE,  stony  (ground,  places),  small  — 
l.A  stone,  |3K  eben. 

Gen.   2.  12  there  (is)  bdellium  and  the  onyx  stone 

11.  3  they  had  brick  for  stone,  and  slime  bad 

28. 11  he  took  of  the  stones  of  that  place,  and  put 
28.  18  took  the  stone  that  he  had  put  (for)  his 

28.  22  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  (for)  a  pillar 

29.  2  a  great  stone  (was)  upon  the  well's  mouth 
■  29.    3  they  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mo. 

29.    3  put  the  stone  again  upon  the  well's  mouth 
29.    8  (till)  they  roll  the  stone  from  the  well's 
29. 10  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth, and 
31.  45  Jacob  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  up  (for)  a 
31.  46  Gather  stones;  and  they  took  stones,  and 
35.  14  set  up  a  pillar  . .  (even)  a  pillar  of  stone 
49.  24  from  thence  (is)  the  shepherd,  the  stone 
Exod.  7.  19  in  (vessels  of)  wood,  and  in  (vessels  of)  st. 
15.   5  they  sank  into  the  bottom  as  a  stone 
15  16  they  shall  be  (as)  still  as  a  stone ;  till  thy 

17. 12  they  took  a  stone,  and  put  (it)  under  him 
20.  25  if  thou  wilt  make  me  an  altar  of  stone,  thou 
si.  18  one  smite  another  with  a  stone,  or  with 
24. 12  I  will  give  thee  tables  of  stone,  and  a  law 

'  25.  7  Onyx  stones,  and  stones  to  be  set  in  the 
28.  9  thou  shalt  take  two  onyxstones,  and  gra. 
a3.  10  Six  of  their  names  on  one  stone,  and  (the 


Exod2S. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
3i. 
3*- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
39- 
39- 


24. 

26. 

Num.  14 

r5- 

35> 
^      .35- 

Deut.  4. 
4- 
5. 
8. 
9- 
9- 
9- 


.27- 
27. 
27. 
27. 

27. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
Josh.  4 


15- 
18. 
24. 
24. 

Judg.  9. 
20. 

i  Sa.  6. 
6. 
7- 
14. 
17- 
17- 
*7- 
'7- 
20. 
25' 

2  Sa.  12, 
16. 

16. 

18. 

20, 

1  Ei.  1. 

5 
5' 
6. 
6. 

7- 
7- 
7 
7. 


10  six  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone 

11  With  the  work  of  an  engraver  in  stone 

11  shalt  thou  engrave  the  two  stones  with 

12  thou  shalt  put  the  two  stones  upon  the 

12  stones  of  memorial  unto  the  children  of 

17  settings  of  stones,  (even)  four  rows  of  st. 

21  the  stones  shall  be  with  the  names  of  the 

5  in  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  (them),  and  in 

18  tables  of  stone,  written  with  the  finger  of  G. 

1  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto 
4  he  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto 

4  and  took  in  his  hand  the  two  tables  of  st. 
9  onyx  stones,  and  stones  to  be  set  for  the 

27  the  rulers  brought  onyx  stones,  and  sto. 
33  in  thecuttingof  stones,  to  set  (them),  and 

6  they  wrought  onyx  stones  inclosed  in  ouc. 

7  (they  should  be)  stones  for  a  memorial  to 
10  they  set  in  it  four  rows  of  stones:  (the  fir.) 
14  the  stones  (were)  according  to  the  names 
40  command  that  they  take  away  the  stones 
42  And  they  shall  take  other  stones,  and 

42  put  (them)  in  the  place  of  those  stones 

43  after  that  he  hath  taken  away  the  stones 
45  he  shall  break  down  the  house,  the  stones 

2  the  people,  shall  stone  him  with  stones 

27  they  shall  stone  them  with  stones  ;  their 
23  out  of  the  camp,  and  stone  him  with  st. 

1  neither  shall  ye  set  up  (any)  image  of  st. 
10  congregation  bade  stone  them  with  stones 

35  shall  stone  him  with  stones  without  the 

36  and  stoned  him  with  stones,  and  he  died 
17  if  he  smite  him  with  throwing  a  stoue 

23  Or  with  any  stone,  wherewith  a  man  may 

13  he  wrote  them  upon  two  tables  of  stone 

28  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone 

22  he  wrote  them  in  two  tables  of  stone,  and 
9  a  land  whose  stones  (are)  iron,  and  out  of 
9  to  receive  the  tables  of  stone,  (even)  the 

10  delivered  unto  me  two  tables  of  stone,  wr. 

11  the  Lord  gave  me  the  two  tables  of  ston. 

1  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 

3  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 

10  thou  shalt  stone  him  with  stones,  that  he 

5  shalt  stone  them  with  stones,  till  they  die 
21  men  of  his  city  shall  stone  him  with  sto. 
21  men  of  her  city  shall  stone  her  with  sto. 

24  ye  shall  stoue  them  with  stones  that  they 

2  thou  shalt  set  thee  up  great  stones,  and 

4  ye  shall  set  up  these  stones,  which  I  com. 

5  there  shalt  thou  build . .  an  altar  of  stones 

6  Thou  shalt  build  the  altar,  .of  whole  sto. 

8  thou  shalt  write  upon  the  stones  all  the 

36  shalt  thou  serve  other  gods,  wood  and  st. 
64  shalt  serve  other  gods.. (even)  wood  andst. 

1 7  their  idols,  wood  and  stone,  silver  and  go. 

3  Take  you  hence  out.  .twelve  stones;  and 

5  take  you  up  every  man  of  you  a  stone  up. 

6  saying,  What  (mean)  ye  by  these  stones? 

7  these  stones  shall  be  for  a  memorial  unto 

8  took  up  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of 

9  Joshua  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  midst 

20  those  twelve  stones,  which  they  took  out 

21  shall  ask.  ."What  (mean)  these  stones? 

25  Israel  stoned  hini  with  stones,  and  burned 

25  after  they  had  stoned  them  with  stones 

26  raised  over  him  a  great  heap  of  stones  un. 

29  raise  thereon  a  great  heap  of  stones,  (that 

31  an  altar  of  whole  stones,  over  which  no 

32  he  wrote  there  upon  the  stones  a  copy  of 

11  the  Lord  cast  down  great  stones  from  he. 

18  Roll  great  stones  upon  the  mouth  of  the 

27  laid  great  stones  in  the  cave'smouth,(wh  ) 
6  the  border  went  up  to  the  stone  of  Bohan 

17  descended  to  the  stone  of  Bohan  the  son 

26  took  a  great  stone,  and  set  it  up  there 

27  this  stone  shall  be  a  witness  unto  us ;  for 
5,  18  threescore,  .ten  persons,  upon  one  st. 

16  every  one  could  sling  stones  at  an  hair  (b.) 

14  stood  there,  where  (there  was)  a  great  st. 

15  the  Levites.  .put  (them)  on  the  great  sto. 

12  Samuel  took  a  stone,  and  set  (it)  between 

33  Ye  have  transgressed :  roll  a  great  stone 
40  chose  him  five  smooth  stones  out  of  the 
49  took  thence  a  stone,  and  slang  (it),  and  s 

49  the  stone  sunk  into  his  forehead ;  and  he 

50  David  prevailed . .  with  a  stone,  and  smote 

19  go  down,  .and  shalt  remain  by  the  stoue 

37  his  heart  died..andhebecame(as)astone 

30  a  talent  of  gold  with  the  precious  stones 

6  he  cast  stones  at  David,  and  at  all  the  se. 

13  cursed  as  he  went,  and  threw  stones  at  hi. 

17  laid  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  upon  him 

8  they  (were)  at  the  great  stone  which  (is)  in 

9  Adorn jah  slew  sheep,  .by  the  stone  of  Zo. 

17  great  stones,  costly  stones, (and)  hewed  st. 

18  they  prepared  timber  and  stones  to  build 

7  was  built  of  stone  made  ready  before  it 
18  all  (was)  cedar  ;  there  was  no  stone  seen 

9  All  these  (were  of)  costly  stones,  accordi. 
10  foundation . .  costly  stones,  even  great  sto. 

10  stones  of  ten  cubits,  and  stones  of  eight 

11  And  above  (were)  costly  stones,  after  Mie 
9  save  the  two  tables  of  stone,  which  Moses 
2  and  very  much  gold,  and  precious  stones 

10  spices  very  great  store,  and  precious  ston. 

11  plenty  of  almug  trees,  and  precious  stou. 
27  made  silver  (to  be)  in  Jerusalem  as  stones 
18  Israel  stoned  him  with  stones,  that  he  died 

22  they  took  away  the  stones  of  Eamah,  and 

31  Elijah  took  twelve  stones,  according  to 

32  with  the  stones  he  built  an  altar  in  the 

38  the  wood,  and  the  stones,  and  the  dust 


1  Ki.21.  13  and  stoned  him  with  stones,  that  he  died 

2  Ki.  3.  19  mar  every  good  piece  of  land  with  stones 

3.  25  cast  every  man  his  stone,  and  filled  it 
3.  25  in  Kir-haraseth  left  they  the  stones  there 
12. 12  hewers  of  stone,  and  tot  my.  .hewed  stone 
16.  17  and  put  it  upon  a  pavement  of  stones 

19.  18  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone 
22.    6  to  buy  timber  and  hewn  stone  to  repair 

1  Ch.12.    2  in  (hurling)  stones  and  (shooting)  arrows 

20.  2  (there  were)  precious  stones  in  it ;  and  it 
22.   2  he  set  masons  to  hew  wrought  stones  to 

22. 14  timber  also  and  stone  have  I  prepared 

22. 15  hewers  and  workers  of  stone  and  timber 
29.  2  onyx  stones .  .glistering  stones,  and  of  di. 
29.  2  precious  stones,  and  marble  stones  in  ab. 
29.    8  they  with  whom  (precious)  stones  were  fo. 

2  Ch.  1.  15  gold  at  Jerusalem  (as  plenteous)  as  stones 

2. 14  in  silver,  in  brass,  in  iron,  in  stone,  and 

3.  6  garnished  the  house  with  precious  stones 
9.  1  and  gold  in  abundance,  and  precious  sto. 
9.  9  spices  great  abundance,  and  precious  st. 
9.  10  brought  algum  trees  and  precious  stones 
9.  27  made  silver  in  Jerusalem  as  stones,  and 

10.  18  children  of  Israel  stoned  him  with  stones 
16.   6  they  carried  away  the  stones  of  Hamah 
24. 21  stoned  him  with  stones  at  the  command. 
26.  14  tizziah  prepared,  .slings  (to  cast)  stones 
26.  15  to  shoot  arrows  and  great  stones  withal 
32.  27  for  precious  stones,  and  for  spices,  and 
34.  11  to  buy  hewn  stone,  and  timber  for  coup. 
Neh.  4.    2  will  they  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  he. 

4.  3  he  shall  even  break  down  their  stone  wall 
g.  it  thou  threwest  into  the  deeps,  as  a  stoue 

Job     5.  23  thou  shalt  be  in  league  with  the  stones  of 
6.  12  (Is)  my  strength  the  strength  of  stones? 
8.  17  His  roots,  .seeth  the  place  of  stones 
14.  ig  The  waters  wear  the  stones :  thou  washest 
28.   2  and  brass  (is)  molten  (out  of)  the  stone 
28.    3  the  stones  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow  of 
28.    6  Thestonesof  it(are)theplaeeof  sapphires 
38.    6  Whereupon.,  or  who  laid  the  corner  stone 
38.  30  The  waters  are  hid  as  (with)  a  stcue,  and 
41.  24  His  heart  is  as  firm  as  a  stone;  yea  as  hard 
41.  28  sling  stones  are  turned  with  him  into  st. 
Psa.  91.  12  lest  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 
102. 14  thy  servants  take  pleasure  in  her  stones 
118.  22  Trie  stone  (which)  the  builders  refused  is 
Prov  17.    8  A  gift  (is  as)  a  precious  stone  in  the  eyes 
24.  31  the  stone  wall  thereof  was  broken  down 
26.    8  As  he  that  bindeth  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so 
26.  27  he  thatrolleth  a  stone,  it  will  return  upcn 


Eccl. 
Isa. 


14. 
27. 


Jer. 


Lam. 
Eze. 


3  A  stone  (is)  heavy,  and  the  sand  weighty 

5  to  cast  away  stones,  .to  gather  stones  to. 

9  Whoso  removeth  stones  shall  be  hurt  th. 
14  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  fora  rock  of 
19  that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  pit 

9  the  stones  of  the  altar  as  chalk  stones  that 
28.  16  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a 
34.  11  the  line  of  confusion,  and  the  stones  of 
37.  19  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone 
54. 1 1 1  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours,  and 
54.  12  and  all  thy  borders  of  pleasant  stones 
60.  17  and  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones  iron 
62. 10  gather  out  the  stones  ;  lift  up  a  standard 

2.  27  Saying,  .to  a  stone,  Thou  hast  brought  me 

3.  9  committed  adultery  with  stones  and  with 
43.  9  Take  great  stones  in  thine  hand,  and  hide 
43.  10  will  set  his  throne  upon  these  stones  that 
Si.  26  a  stone  for  a  corner,  nor  a  stone  for  foun. 
51.  63  thou  shalt  bind  a  stone  to  it,  and  cast  it 

3.  53  cut  off  my  life . .  and  cast  a  stone  upon  me 

4.  1  thestonesof  the  sanctuary  are  poured  out 
i.  26  as  the  appearance  of  a  sapphire  stone 

10.  1  over  them  as  it  were  a  sapphire  stone,  as 
10.  9  appearance,  .the  colour  of  a  beryl  stone 
it.  19  I  will  take  the  stony  heart  out  of  their  fl. 
16. 40  they  shall  stone  thee  with  stones,  and  th. 
20.  32  as  the  heathen,  .to  serve  wood  and  stone 
23.  47  the  company  shall  stone  them  with  stones 
26. 12  they  shall  lay  thy  stones  and  thy  timber 

27.  22  and  with  all  precious  stones,  and  gold 

28.  13  every  precious  stone  (was)  thy  covering 
28.  14  hast  walked,  .in  the  midst  of  the  stones 
28. 16  d  estroy  thee . .  from  the  midst  of  the  stones 
36.  26  I  will  take  away  the  stonyheartoutofyour 
40.  42  the  four  tables(were)of  hewn  stoneforthe 
it.  38  and  with  precious  stones,  and  pleasant  th. 

1.  61  will  pour  down  the  stones  thereof  into 

2.  11  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall,  and  the 
2.  19  him  that  saith.  .to  the  dumb  stone,  Arise 

2.  15  a  stone  was  laid  upon  a  stoue  in  the  temple 
Zech.  3.   9  behold  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  J. 

3.  9  upon  one  stone  (shall  be)  seven  eyes,  beho. 

5.  4  with  the  timber  thereof  and  the  stones  th. 
9. 15  devour,  and  subdue  with  sling  stones 

9.  16  (they  shall  be  as)  the  stones  of  a  crown 
12.    3  I  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone  for 
2.  A  stone,  j3x  eben. 

Ezra    5.    8  which  is  build ed  with  great  stones,  and 

6.  4  three  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of 
Dan.   2.  34  Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out 

2.  35  the  stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a 
2.  45  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain  wi, 
5.    4  of  brass,  of  iron,  of  wood,  and  of  stone 

5.  23  and  gold,  of  brass,  iron,  wood,  and  stone 

6.  17  a  stone  was  brought,  and  laid  upon  the 
3, A  testicle,  ^vh  eshek. 

Lev.  21.  20  scurvy,  or  scabbed,  or  hath  his  stones  br. 
4.  A  rugged  stone,  cliff,  y^p  seta. 

Psa.  137.    9  dasheth  thy  little  ones  against  the  stones 
141.    6  judges.,  overthrown  iu  stony  places,  they 


Dan. 
Mic. 

Hab. 

Hag. 


STONE 


93G 


STORM 


o.Fear,  dread,  thigh,  inBpachad. 

Job  40. 17  the  sinews  of  his  stones  are  wrapped  tog. 

6. A  rock,  sharp  stone,  "AS  tsur. 

Job  22.  24  (sold)  of  Ophir  as  the  stones  of  the  brooks 

7.  Earthen  ware,  potsherd,  enrr  chores. 

Job  41.  30  Sharp  stones  (are)  under  liim :  he  spread. 

S..1  little  round  stone,  kernel,  "riiy  tseror. 

2  Sa.  17. 13  until  there  be  not  one  small  stone  found 

9. A  stone,  \l$os  lithos. 

Matt.  3.  9  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  ch. 
4.  3  command  that  these  stones  be  made  bread 
4.   6  lest,  .thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 

7.  9  sou  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  stone  ? 
21.42  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  the 
21.  44  [whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall] 
24.   2  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  up.an, 
27.  60  he  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of  the 

27.  66  sealing  the  stoue,  and  setting  a  watch 

28.  2  came  and  rolled  back  the  stone  from  the 
Mark  5.    5  crying,  and  cutting  himself  with  stones 

12.  10  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected  is 

13.  1  see  what  manner  of  stones,  and  what  bu. 
13.    2  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  an. 

15.  46  rolled  a  stone  unto  the  door  of  the  sepul. 

16.  3  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  from  the 

16.  4  they  saw  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away 
Luke  3.    8  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  ch. 

4.    3  command  this  stone  that  it  be  made  bread 
4.  11  lest,  .thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone 
11.  11  shall  ask  bread.,  will  he  givehima  stone? 
ig.  40  the  stones  would  immediately  cry  out 
19. 44  they  shall  not  leave  in  thee  one  stone  upon 

20.  iS  Whosoevershallfall  upon  that  stone  shall 
20. 17  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  the 

21.  5  how  it  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones 

21.  6  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  an. 

22.  41  was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a  stone's 
24.    2  they  found  the  stone  rolled  away  from  the 

John  S.    7  [He  that  is  without  sin.. cast  a  stone  atl 

8.  59  Theu  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  him 

10.  31  Then  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to  st. 

11.  38  It  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  lay  upon  it 
11.  39  Jesus  said,  Take  ye  away  the  stone.  Mar, 
11.  41  they  took  away  the  stone  (from  the  place) 

20.  1  seeth  the  stone  taken  away  from  the  sep. 
AcU    4.  11  This  is  the  stone  which  was  set  at  nought 

17.  29  like  unto  gold,  or  silver,  or  stone,  graven 

1  Co.  3.  12  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay 

2  Co.  3.    7  if  the  ministration . .  engraven  in  stones 

1  Pe.  2.    4  To  whom  coming,  (as  uuto)  a  living  stum; 

2.  5  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  sp. 

2.  61  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner  stone,  elect 

2.  7  the  stone  which  the  builders  disallowed 

2.  8  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence 

Rev.    4.  3  was  to  look  upon  like . .  a  sardine  stone 

17.  4  decked  with  gold,  and  precious  stones 

18.  12  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and 
18.  16  decked  with  gold,  and  precious  stones 
18.  21  mighty  angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great 

21.  11  her  light  (was)  like  unto  a  st.. .a  jaspers. 
21.  19  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  st. 

21.  11  even  like  a  jasper  stoue,  clear  as  crystal 

10.  Stony,  made  of  stone,  \lQivos  lithinos. 

John  2.    6  were  set  there  six  water  pots  of  stone 

2  Co.  3.    3  not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  in  fleshy  tables 
Rev.  9.  20  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and  stone 

11..  1  (small)  stone,  irerpos  petros. 

John  1.  42  Cephas,  which  is,  by  interpretation,  A  st. 

12.  Stony,  full  of  small  stones,  trerp^-qs  petrodes. 

Matt  13.    5  Some  fell  upon  stony  places,  where  they 

1 3.  20  he  that  received  the  seed  into  stony  places 

Mark  4.  16  they  likewise  which  are  sown  on  stony  gr. 

4.    5  some  fell  ou  stony  ground,  where  it  had 

13. /I  small  pebble,  tyt}<pos  psephos. 

Rev.  2.  17  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the  stone 
[See  also  Adamant,  corner,  gravel,  hail,  head,  hewn, 
mill,  sharp,  sling]. 

STONE,  be  stoned,  to  (cast)  — 
l.T<>  stone,  ^pp  saqal. 

Exod.  8.  26  shall  we  sacrifice.,  will  they  not  stone  us? 
17.    4  this  people?  they  be  almost  ready  to  stoue 
Dout.13.  10  Ami  thou  shalt  stone  him.  .that  he  die 
17.    5  and  shalt  stone  them,  .till  they  die 

22.  21  and  the  men  of  her  city  shall  stone  her 
22.  24  and  ye  shall  stone  them,  .that  they  die 

Josh.  7.  25  after  they  had  stoned  them  with  stones 
1  Sa.  30.    6  the  people  spake  of  stoning  him,  because 
1  Ki.  2i.  10  carry  him  out,  and  stone  him,  that  he  may 
si.  13  they  carried  him  forth,  .and  stoned  him 

2.  To  be  stoned,  ^pa  saqal,  2. 

Exod.  19.  t3  but  he  shall  surely  be  stoned,  or  shot  th. 
21. 28  the  ox  shall  be  surely  stoned,  and  Ids  flesh 
2i.  29  the  ox  shall  be  stoned,  and  his  owner  also 
21.  32  thirty  shekels . .  and  the  ox  shall  be  stoned 

3.  To  be  stoned,  b$g  saqal,  4. 

1  Ki.ai.  14  sent  to  Jezebel,  saying,  Xaboth  is  stoned 
21.  15  Jezebelheard  that  Naboth  was  stoned,  and 

4.  To  collect  or  cast  stows,  nryragam. 

Lev.  20.    2  the  people  of  the  land  shall  stone  him  with 
20.  27  they  shall  stone  them,  .their  blood  (shall 
24. 14  and  let  all  the  congregation  stone  him 
24. 16  all  the  congregation  shall  certainly  stone 
24-  23  they  should  bring  forth  him.  .and  stono 


Xum.  14.  10  But  all  the  congregation  bade  stone  them 
15.  35  all  the  congregation  shall  stone  him  with 
15.  36  brought  him  without  the  camp,  and  stoned 

Deut.  21.  21  all  the  men  of  hiscity  shall  stone  Mm  with 
Josh.  7.  25  all  Israel  stoned  him.  .and  burned  them 

1  Ki.12.  iS  and  all  Israel  stoned  him. .that  he  died 

2  Ch  10.  iS  and  the  children  of  Israel  stoned  him  wi. 

24.  21  conspired  against  him,  and  stoned  him 
Eze.  16.  40  they  shall  stoue  thee . .  and  thrust  thee  th. 
23.  47  And  the  company  shall  stone  them  with 

5.  To  stone  thoroughly,  KaraXidd^co  katjdilhazo. 
Luke2o.    6  the  people  will  stone  us:  for  they  be  per. 

6.T0  stone,  XiQafa  lithazo. 

Johnio.  31  the  Jews  took  up  stones,  again  to  stone 
10.  32  for  which  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me 

10.  33  For  a  good  work  we  stone  thee  not,  but 

11.  8  the  Jews  of  late  sought  to  stone  thee,  and 
Acts    5.  26  feared,  .lest  they  should  have  been  stoned 

14.  19  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  (him)  out  of  the 
2  Co.11.  25  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  suffered  ship. 
Heb.  11.  37  They  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn  asun. 

7.  To  cast  stones.  At0o/3oA.ew  litlioboleO. 

Matt2r.  35  beat  one,  and  killed  another,  and  stoned 
23.  37  killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest  them  wh. 
Marki2.  4  and  [at  him  they  cast  stones,  and]  woun. 
Lukei3.  34  killest  the  prophets,  and  stouest  them  th. 
John  8.  5  commandedus.tliatsuchshouldbestoned 
Acts    7.  58  And  cast  (him)  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned 

7.  59  they  stoned  Stephen,  calling  upon  (God) 
14.  5  to  use  (them)  despitefully,  and  to  stone 

LTeb.  12.  20  it  shall  be  stoned,  or  tlu-ust  through  with 

STONE  SG.TJARER  — 

A  Gtblite  or  BybUan,  *^33  gibli. 

1  Ki.  5. 18  did  hew  (them),  and  the  stone  squarers 
STOOD,  (place  where)  — 

1.  Station,  standing  place,  3!»  matstsab. 

Josh.  4.  3  the  place  wdiere  the  priests'  feet  stood  firm 
4.   9  in  the  place  where . .  the  priests . .  stood 

2. Standing  place,  station,  *i£y  omed. 

Dan.    8.  17  he  came  near  where  I  stood;  and  when  he 
11.    1  (even)I,stoodtoconflrmandtostrengthen 
STOOL  — 
X.Two  children,  ( male  and  female),  P*J3$  obnayim. 

Exod.  1.  16  When  ye.. see  (them)  upon  the  stools,  if 

2.  .1  chair  [of  judge,  king,  or  priest),  »x~s  kisse. 

2  Ki.  4.  10  a  bed,  and  a  table,  and  a  stool,  and  a  ca. 
STOOP  (down,  make  to),  to  — 

l.To  bend  or  bout  (the  knee  or  leg),  yip  kara. 

Gen.  49.    9  he  stooped  down,  he  couched  as  a  lion,  and 

2.  To  bow  (the  head)  ~H[?  qadad. 

1  Sa.  24.    8  David  stooped  with  his  face  to  the  earth 

28. 14  he  stooped  with  (his)  face  to  the  ground 

3.  To  sloojj,  D"if?  qouras, 

Isa.   46.    1  Bel  boweth  down,  Xebo  stoopeth ;  their 
46.    2  They  stoop,  they  bowdowu  together;  th. 

4.  To  cause  to  bow,  nn?  shachah,  5. 

Prov  12.  25  Heaviness  in  the  heart,  .maketh  it  stoop 

5.  To  bow,  be  bowed,  nn^  shachack. 

Job     9.  13  the  proud  helpers  do  stoop  under  him 
6. To  stooj),  bend,  kv-ktw  kupto. 

Mark  1.  7  I  am  not  worthy  to  stoop  down  and  unl. 
John  8.    6  [Jesus  stooped  down,  and  with  (his)fing] 

8.  8  [he  stooped  down,  and  wrote  on  the  gro.j 

7.  To  stoop  or  bend  down,  irapaKvinoj  parakupta. 
Luke  24.  12  [stooping  down,  he  beheld  the  linen  clo.] 
John 20.    5  he  stooping  down,  fand  looking  in),  caw 

20. 11  she  stooped  down,  (and  looked)  into  the 
STOOP  for  age,  to  — 
Grey  headed,  old,  dried  up,  Wp\  yashesh. 

2  Ch.36.  17  no  compassion  upon,  .him  that  st.  for  age 
STOP,  be  stopped,  to  — 

l.To  be  narrow,  shut,  sto}),  cux  atam. 

Prov2i.  13  Whoso  stoppeth  his' ears  at  the  cry  of  the 
Isa.   33.  15  that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing  of  bl. 

2.  To  make  narrow,  shut,  stop,  Dax  atam,  5. 

Psa.  5S.  4  (are)  like  the  deaf  adder  (that)  stoppeth 
Z.To  stop,  muzzle,  Dpri  chasam. 

Eze.  39. 11  and  it  shall  stop  the  (noses)  of  the  passe. 

4.  To  seed,  seal  up,  stop,  crtn  chatham,  5. 

Lev.  15.    3  or  his  flesh  be  stopped  from  his  issue,  it 

5.  To  make  heavy  or  weight;!,  12*  kabed,  5. 

Zech.  7.  11  stopped  their  ears,  that  they  should  not 
v.To  shut  in  or  up,  close,  refine,  ~i:p  sagar. 

Psa.  35.  3  stop  (the  way)  against  them  that  persec. 
7. To  be  sfojiped,  irp  sakar,  2. 

Gen.    8.    2  the  windows  of  heaven  were  stopped,  and 

Psa.  63.  11  but  the  mouth  of  them,  .shall be  stopped 

8.  To  stop,  hide,  enp  satham. 

2  Ki.  3. 19  stop  all  wells  of  water,  and  mar  every  go. 
3.  25  they  stopped  all  the  wells  of  water,  and 
2  Ch.32.    3  to  stop  the  waters  of  the  fountains  which 
32.    4  who  stopped  all  the  fountains,  and  the  br 
32.  30  Hezekiah  also  stopped  the  upper  water 
0.T"  he  stopped,  Dnp  satham,  2. 

Xeh.   4.    7  the  breaches  began  to  be  stopped,  then 


10.  To  stop,  anp  satham,  3. 

Gen.  26.  15  the  Philistines  had  stopped  them,  and  fi. 
26.  18  the  Plulistines  had  stopped  them  after  the 

11.  To  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  isj/  atsar. 

1  KL  iS.  44  get  thee  down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  not 

12.  To  shut,  shut  up,  f?i3  qaphats. 

Job     5.  16  the  poor  hath  hope,  and  iniquity  stopp. 
Psa.  107.  42  and  all  iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth 

13.  To  be  caught,  captured,  '&$$  taphas,  2. 

Jer.  51.  32  passages  are  stopped,  and  the  reeds  they 

14.  To  hold  together,  avvexoi  sunecho. 

Acts    7.  57  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  stopped 

15.  To  hedge  in,  inclose,  stop,  restrain,  <ppdo-<ro>. 
Kom.  3.  19  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all 

2  Co.  11.  10  no  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  boasting  in 
Heb.  11.  33  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths 

STORE,  storehouse,  (old)  — 

1. Store Jiouses,  barns,  D*£px  asamim. 

Deut  28.  S  the  blessing  upon  thee  in  thy  store  hou. 
2.Treasure,  treasury,  "win  otsar. 

1  Ch.27.  25  over  the  storehouses  in  the  fields,  in  the 

2  Ch.11.  11  put  captains  in  them,  and  store  of  victu. 
Psa.  ^2-    7  ne  layeth  up  the  depth  in  storehouses 
Mai.    3.  10  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storeho. 

3. Multitude,  store,  noise,  Jisrr  hamon. 

1  Ch.29.  16  all  this  store  that  we  have  prepared  to 

2  Ch.31.  10  and  that  which  is  left  (is)  this  great  store 

4. Storehouse,  Diss 9  maabus. 

Jer.  50.  26  open  her  storehouses;  cast  her  up  as  he. 
5.St&res,  treasures,  rruspo  miskenoth. 

1  Ki.   g.  19  the  cities  of  store  that  Solomon  had,  and 

2  Ch.  8.    4  all  the  store  cities,  which  he  built  in  Ha. 

8.   6  all  the  store  cities  that  Solomon  had,  and 

16.  4  Abel-maim,  and  all  the  store  cities  of  Na. 

17.  12  built  in  Judah  castles  and  cities  of  store 
32.  28  Storehouses  also  for  the  increase  of  com 

6. Kneading  trough,  rrixtfo  mishereth. 

Deut.28.  5  Blessed  (shali  be)  thy  basket  and  thy  store 
28. 17  Cursed  (shall  be)  thy  basket  and  thy  store 

7. Deposit,  store,  }Vlg9  piqqadon. 

Gen.  41.  36  that  food  shall  be  for  store  to  the  landag. 

8.  Prepared  seat  or  place,  np3£  tekunah. 

Nan.   2.    9  (there  is)  none  end  of  the  store  (and)  glo. 

9.  To  cause  to  multiply,  make  many,  np*i  rabah,  5, 

1  Ki.io.  10  of  spices  very  great  store,  and  precious  st. 

Neh.  5.  18  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  sorts  of  wine 
10. To  be  dried  up,  old,  ]u-t  yashen,  2. 

Lev.  26. 10  ye  shall  eat  old  store,  and  bring  forth  the 
11.  To  treasure  ujy,  6no-avpt£<v  thesaurlzo. 

1  Co.  16.  2  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store 
12.^4  cut  off  place,  storehouse,  Tap.€iov  tameion. 

Lukei2.  24  which  neither  have  store  house  nor  barn 
STORE  up,  keep  or  lay  up  in  store,  to  — 
l.To  treasure  up,  1si<  atsar. 

2  Ki.  20.  17  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store  un. 
Isa.    39.    6  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store 
Amos  3.  10  who  store  up  violence  and  robbery  iu  th. 

2.To  treasure  up>,  store  away,  aTroOrj&avp'tfa apoth. 

1  Ti.    6.  19  Laying  up  in  store  for  themselves  a  good 

3.  To  treasure  up,  Bn<ravpi£a>  thesaurizo. 

2  Pe.  3.  7  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,  rcse. 
STORIES  — 

A  going  up,  ascent,  JiSi'a  maalah. 

Amos  9.    6  (Itis)he  that  buildeth  his  stones  in  the  he. 

STORK  — 

White  goshawk,  kite, stork,  or  heron,  rrrpn  chasidah. 
Lev.  11.  19  the  stork,  the  heron,  after  her  kind,  and 
Deuti4.  18  the  stork,  and  the  heron  after  her  kind 
Psa.104.  17  (as  for)the  stork,  thefir  trees(are)her  ho. 
Jer.  8.  7  the  stork  in  the  heaven  knoweth  her  app. 
Zech.  5.    9  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  stork 

STORM,  stormy  — 

1. Inundation,  flood,  storm,  W}}  zerem. 

Isa.  4.  6  and  for  a  covert  from  storm  and  from  ra. 
25.  4  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  a  shadow  from 
25.    4  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones  (is)  as  a  sto. 

2.^4  hurricane,  hd^d  suphah. 

Job.  21.  iS  and  as  chaff  that  the  storm  carrieth  away 
Psa.  83.  15  and  make  them  afraid  with  thy  storm 
Isa.   2Q.    6  great  noise,  with  storm  and  tempest,  and 

3. To  rush,  njjD  saah. 

Psa.  55.    8  hasten  my  escape  from  the  windy  storm 

4.  'Whirlwind,  rrj^O  seorah. 

Psa.  107.  25  he  eommandeth,  and  raiseth  the  stormy 
107.  29  He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm,  so  that  the 
14S.    8  snow,  and  vapour;  stormy  wind  fulfilling 

Eze.  13.  ti  hailstones,  shall  fall;  and  a  stormy  wind 
13.  13  I  will  even  rend  (it)  with  a  stormy  wind 

5.  Wasting,  desolation,  nvfiv  skoah. 

Eze.  38.  9  Thou  shalt  ascend  and  come  like  a  storm 
G.Shower,  tempest,  ~»>,::,  soar. 

Isa.  28.  2  atempest  of  hail,  (and)adestroyingstorm 
7. Shower,  tempest,  --h;^  seorah. 

Kah.  1.    3  in  the  whirlwind  and  in  the  storm,  and 


STORY 


937 


STRANGE 


8 .Violent  storm,  hurricane,  whirlwind,  \ai\a\\f. 
Mark  4.  37  there  arose  a  great  storm  of  wind,  and  the 
Luke  8.  23  there  came  down  a  storm  of  wind  on  the 

STORY  — 

Inquiry,  investigation,  r"np  midrash. 

2  Ch.13.  22  (are)  written  in  the  story  of  the  prophet 
24.  27  written  in  the  story  of  the  book  of  theki. 

STOUT,  stoutness,  to  be  — 

1.  Greatness,  T}3  godel. 

Isa.     9.    9  that  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of  he. 
10.  12  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart 

2.To  be  strong,  hard,  severe,  pin  chazaq. 

Hal.    3.  13  Your  words  have  been  stout  against  me 
3. Many,  much,  abundant,  great,  :n  rab. 

Dan.    7.  20  whose  look  (was)  more  stout  than  his  fel. 
STOUT  HEARTED  — 
Mighty  of  heart,  n1?  T3*<  abbir  leb. 

Psa.  76.    5  The  stout  hearted  are  spoiled,  they  have 

Isa.    46.  12  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  stout  hearted,  that 

STRAIGHT,  straightway  — 

1. Right,  upright,  straight,  "ia>;  yashar. 

Jer.   37.   9  walk  by  the  rivers  of  waters  in  a  straight 

Eze.     1.    7  their  feet;(were)  straight  feet ;  and  the  so. 

1.  23  their  wings  straight,  the  one  toward  the 

2.  So,  right,  prepared,  [3  ken. 

1  Sa    9.  13  ye  shall  straightway  find  him,  before  he 

3.  To  haste,  hurry,  speed,  ina  mahar,  3. 

1  Sa.  28.  20  Saul  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the  earth 

4.  Uprightness,  a  plain,  "Tib^d  mishor. 

Isa.   40.    4  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
42.  16  I  will  make,  .crooked  things  straight 

5. From  now,  henceforth,  nnj,\p  meattah. 

Dan.  10. 17  straightway  there  remained  no  strengthen 

Q.Over,  over  against,  beyond,  "ny  eber. 

Eze.     1.    9,  12  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 

10.  22  they  went  every  one  straight  forward 

7. Suddenly,  DixriD pithoin. 

Prov.  7.  22  He  goeth  after  her  straightway,  as  an  ox 
8. From  the  same  (moment),  i^avrns  exautes. 

Acts  23.  30  I  sent  [straightway]  to  thee,  and  gave  co. 

9.  Straightway,  ebOecos  eutheos. 

Matt.  4. 20  they  straightway  left  (their)  nets,  and  fo. 

14.  22  straightway  Jesus  constrained  his  discip. 

14.27  [straightway]  Jesus  spake  unto  them,  sa. 

2i.   2  straightway  ye  shall  find  an  ass  tied,  and 

2r.    3  The  Lord  hath  need.,  and  [straightway]  he 

25  15  to  every  man.  .and  straightway  took  his 

27.  48  straightway  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a 

Mark  1.  10  [straightway]  coming  up  out  of  the  water 

1.  18  straightway  they  forsook  their  nets,  and 

1.  20  [straightway]  he  called  them:  and  they 

1.  21  straightway  on  the  sabbatli  day  he  enter. 

2.  2  [straightway]  many  were  gathered  toget- 

3.  6  [the  Pharisees  went  forth,  and  [straight.] 
5.  29  [straightway]  the  fountain  of  her  blood 

5.  42  And  straightway  the  damsel  arose,  and 

6.  25  she  came  in  [straightway]  with  haste  unto 
6.  45  [straightway]  he  constrained  his  disciples 

6.  54  when  they  were  come . .  [straightway]  they 

7.  35  [straightway]  his  ears  were  opened,  and 

8.  10  [straightway]  lie  entered  into  a  ship  with 

9.  15  [straightway]  all  the  people,  when  they 
9.  20  when  he  saw  him,  [straightway]  the  spirit 
9.  24  [straightway]  the  father  of  the  child  cried 

11.  3  and  [straightway]  he  will  send  him  hith. 

14.  45  he  goeth  [straightway]  to  him,  and  saith 

15.  1  [straightway]  hi  the  morning  the  chief  pr. 
Luke  5.  39  No  man  also,  .[straightway]  desireth  new 

12.  54  straightway  ye  say,  There  cometh  a  shower 
14.    5  will  not  straightway  pull  him  out  on  the' 

Acts   9.  20  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  sy. 

22.  29  straightway  they  departed  frum  him  wh. 

Jas.     1.  24  straightway  forge tteth  what  manner  of  in. 

10.  Straight,  upright,  correct,  evdvs  euthus. 
Matt.  3.    3  Prepare  ye.  .make  his  paths  straight 

3. 16  Jesus.,  weut  up  straightway  out  of  the  wa. 
Mark  1.    3  Prepare  ye.  .make  his  paths  straight 
Luke  3.    4  Prepare  ye.  .make  his  paths  straight 

3.  5  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
John  1 3.  32  God  shall  also,  .straightway  glorify  him 
Acts   9. 11  go  into  the  street  which  is  called  Straight 

11.  Upright,  erect,  straight,  opQos  orthos. 

Heb.  12.  13  make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lestth. 

12.  Alongside  of  the  thing,  irapaxprjun  parachrema. 
Luke  8.  55  spirit  came  again,  and  she  arose  straight. 
Acts    5.  10  Then  fell  she  down  straightway  at  his  fe. 

16.  33  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway 
STRAIGHT  course,  (to  come)  with  a — 

To  run  straight,  edOuBpo/xeca  euthudromeo. 

Acts  16.  11  we  came  with  a  straight  course  to  Samo. 
21.    1  we  came  with  a  straight  course  uuto  Coos 
STRAIGHT,  to  bring,  look,  make  — 

1.  To  go  or  make  straight,  iff;  yashar,  3. 

2  Ch.32.  30  brought  it  straight  down  to  the  west  side 
Isa.   40.   3  make  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for 

45.    2  I  will,  .make  the  crooked  places  straight 

2.  To  make  straight,  lit';  yashar,  5. 

Psa.     5.    8  make  thy  way  straight  before  my  face 
Prov.  4.  25  let  thine  eye  lids  look  straight  before  thee 

118 


Z.To  make  straight  or  right,  jpn  taqan. 

Eccl.  1. 15  (which  is)  crooked  cannut  be  made  strai. 
4.  To  make  straight  or  right,  jpn  taqan,  3. 

Eccl.  7. 13  who  can  make  (that)  straight  which  he  hatli 

O.To  make  straight  or  right  again,  avopQou)  anor. 
Lukei3.  13  she  was  made  straight,  and  glorified  God 

G.  To  make  straight  or  right,  euOvuw  euthuno. 

John  1 .  23  Make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord,  as  said 
STRAIGHT  way,  to  take  the  — 
To  be  or  go  straight,  ">»;  yashar. 

1  Sa.  6. 12  the  kine  took  the  straight  way  to  the  way 
STRAIN  at,  to  — 

To  separate  matter, strain  out,filter,  Stvkifadiulizd. 
Matt  23.  24  (\'e)  blind  guides,  which  strain  at  a  gnat 
STRAIT,  straitly,  straitness  — 

1.  Straitness,  anguish,  ps'.n  mutsaq. 

Job   36.  16  broad  place,  where  (there  is)  no  straitne. 

2.  Straitness,  distress,  pisp  matsoq. 

Deut28. 53,  55,  57  the  straitness,  wherewith  thine 
Jer.  "19.  9  in  the  siege  and  straitness  wherewith  th. 

3.  Strait,  distressedperson ,  place,or  thingpxv  metsar. 

Lam.  1.    3  persecutors  overtook . .  between  the  straits 

4.  To  shut  up  or  in,  close,  ~IjD  sagar. 

Josh.  6.    1  Jericho  was  straitly  shut  up  because  of  the 

5.  Strait,  close,  iy,  US  tsar. 

2  Ki.  6.    1  the  place  where  we  dwell,  .is  too  strait 
Job  36. 16  removed  thee  out  of  the  strait  (into)  a  br. 
Isa.   49.  20  The  place  (is)  too  strait  for  me:  give  place 

6.  To  ask,  demand,  7N^  shaal. 

Gen.  43.    7  The  man  asked  us  straitly  of  our  state,  and 

7.  To  satisfy,  fill,  yaw  shaba,  5. 

Exodi3.  19  he  had  straitly  sworn  the  children  of  Isr. 

1  Sa.  14.  28  Thy  father  straitly  charged  the  people  wi. 
S.With  a  threatening,  arretKi)  apeile. 

Acts  4.  17  let  us  [straitly]  threaten  them,  that  they 
9. Much,  ttqXvs  poltts. 

Mark  3.  12  he  straitly  charged  them  that  they  should 
5.  43  he  charged  them  straitly  that  uo  man  sh. 

10.  Strait,  narrow,  restrained,  o~T€v6s  stenos. 
Matt.  7.  13  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate:  for  wide 

7.  14  strait  (is)  the  gate,  and  narrow  (is)  the  way 
Lukei3.  24  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,  for  in. 

STRAIT,  to  be  in  — 

1.7*t>  be  straitened,  distressed,  "is;  yatsar. 

Job  20.  22  In  the  fulness.. he  shall  be  in  straits:  ev. 
2.To  distress,  be  distressed,  ~\Tf  tsarar. 

1  Sa.  13.  6  men  of  Israel  saw  that  they  were  in  a  st. 

2  Sa.  24. 14  I  am  in  a  great  strait :  let  us  fall  now  into 

1  Ch.zi.  13  I  am  in  a  great  strait:  let  me  fall  now 

3.  To  hold  togetJier,  owexco  s-unecho. 

Phil.   1.  23  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  d. 
STRAITEN,  be  straitened,  to  — 
I.  To  be  kept  back,  laid  up,  bsi*  atsal,  2. 

Eze.  42.    6  (the building)  was-s trait ened  more  than 
2.To  be  straitened,  distressed,  ~k>;  yatsar. 

Job   iS.    7  The  steps  of  his  strength  shall  be  straite. 

Prov.  4.  12  thy  steps  shall  not  be  straitened;  and  wh. 

3. Straitness,  anguish,  pym  mutsaq. 

Job  37. 10  and  the  breadth  of  the  waters  is  straite. 
4.7*0  lead  forth,  r\ny  nachah,  5. 

Job  12.  23  enlargeththe  nations,  andstraitenethth. 
5.  To  make  strait,  distress,  ojipress,  p&  tsuq,  5. 

Jer.  19.  9  they  that  seek  their  lives,  shall  straiten 
Q.To  be  or  make  short,  reap,  "isp  qatsar. 

Mic.    2.   7  is  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened?  (are) 

7.  To  hold  together  with,  gvv*xw  sunecho. 

Lukei2.  50  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accompli. 
8. To  be  straitened,  constrained,  arevox^p^o^at. 

2  Co.  6. 12  straitened  in  us,  but  ye  are  straitened  in 
STRAITEST,  most  — 

Most  accurate,  scrupidous,  strict,  aKpLfieararos. 

Acts  26.  5  after  the  most  straitest  sect  of  our  relig. 
STRAKES,  (hollow)  — 

1.  Peelings,  stnpings,  mSys  petsaloth. 

Gen.  30.  37  pilled  white  strakes  in  them,  and  made 

2.  Hollow  places,  riynSijs?  sheqaaruroth. 

Lev.  14.  37  (if)  the  plague  (be),  .with  hollow  strakes 
STRANGE  (thing,  woman),  stranger  — 
1. Another,  "inx  aclier. 

Judg.11.  2  for  thou  (art)  the  son  of  a  strange  woman 
2.A  man,  a  sojourner,  ~ia  wni  enosh  ger. 

2  Ch.  2.  17  Solomon  numbered  all  the  strangers  that 
S.&m  of  a  stranger  or  foreigner,  "13"  ]?  ben  nekar. 

Gen.  17.  12  bought  with  money  of  any  stranger,  wh. 

17.  27  the  men.. bought  with  money  of  the  str. 
Exodi2.  43  There  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof 
Lev.  22.  25  Neither  from  a  stranger's  hand  shall  ye 
2  Sa.  22.  45  Strangers  shall  submit  themselves  unto 

22.  46  Strangers  shall  fade  away,  and  they  shall 
Neh.  9.  2  separated  themselves  from  all  strangers 
Psa.  18.  44  the  strangers  shall  submit  themselves  1111. 

18.  45  The  strangers  shall  fade  away,  and  be  af. 


Eze.  44.    7  have  brought  (into  my  sanctuary)  Strang. 
44.    9  No  stranger . .  of  any  stranger  that  (is)  am, 
4.  A  man,  an  alien,  "Ri  iy'x  ish  zur. 

Lev.  22.  12  daughter  also  be  (married)  unto  a  stran. 
Num  16.  40  no  stranger,  which  (is)  not  of.  the  seed  of 
Deut25-    5  shall  not  marry  without  uuto  a  stranger 

o. A  man, a  stranger,  or  foreigner,^.";}  v*x  ishnokri. 
Deut  17.  15  thou  mayest  uot  set  a  stranger  over  thee 
Eccl.  6.    2  to  eat  thereof,  but  a  stranger  eateth  it 

6. A  man,  a  sojourner,  ~ia  tf'N  ish  ger. 

2  Sa.    1. 13  I  (am)  the  son  of  a  stranger,  an  Amalekite 

7.  To  sojourn,  draw  up  (self),  *ii3  gur. 

1  CI1.16.  19  ye  were  but  few,  even  a  few,  and  Strang. 

2  Ch.15.  9  all  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  the  Strang. 
Psa.  105.  12  When  they  were,  .few,  and  strangers  init 
Isa.  5.  17  waste  places  of  the  fat  ones  shall  Strang 
Jer.  35.   7  may  live,  .in  the  land  where  ye  (be)  stra 

8.  A  sojourner,  13  ger. 

Gen.  15.  13  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  (th. 
23.    4  I  (am)  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  with  you 

Exod.  2.  22  for  he  said,  I  have  been  a  stranger  in  a 
12.  19  whether  he  be  a  stranger,  or  born  in  the 
12.  48  when  a  stranger  shall  sojourn  with  thee 
12.  49  unto  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 
20.  10  nor  thy  stranger  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 
22.  21  Thou  shalt  neither  vex  a  stranger,  nor  op. 

22.  21  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

23.  9  Also  thou  shalt  n  ot  oppress  a  stranger :  for 
23.  9  of  a  stranger,  seeing  ye  were  strangers  in 
23. 12  son  of  thy  handmaid  and  the  stranger  may 

Lev.  16.  29  or  a  stranger  that  sojourneth  among  you 
17.  8,  10,  13  or  of  the  strangers  which  sojourn 
17. 12  neither  shall  any  stranger  that  sojourue. 

17.  15  one  of  your  own  country,  or  a  stranger,  he 

18.  26  nor  any  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 
19. 10  shalt  leave  them  for  the  poor  and  stranger 
19. 33  if  a  stranger  sojourn  with  thee  inyour  land 

19.  34  the  stranger  that  dwelleth  withyou  shall 

19.  34  for  ye  were  strangers  in  theland  of  Egypt 

20.  2  or  of  the  strangers  that  sojourn  in  Israel 

22.  18  of  the  house  of  Israel,  or  of  the  strangers 

23.  22  thou  shalt  leave  them  unto,  .the  stranger 
24. 16  as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  is  born  in 

24.  22  one  manner  of  law, as  well  for  the  stranger 
25. 23  for  ye  (are)  strangers  and  sojourners  with 

25.  35  (yea,  though  he  be)  a  stranger,  or  a  sojour. 
25. 47  sell  himself  unto  the  stranger(or)  sojourn. 

25.  47  or  to  the  stock  of  the  stranger's  family 
Num.  9.  14  ifa  stranger  shall  sojourn  amongyou,  and 

9.  14  both  for  the  stranger,  and  for  him  that  was 

15. 14  if  a  stranger  sojourn  with  you,  orwhosoe. 
15. 15,  16,  26,  29  the  stranger  that  sojourneth 
15-  15  as  ye  (are),  so  shall  the  stranger  be  before 

15.  30  born  in  the  land,  or  a  stranger,  the  same 
19. 10  unto  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 

35. 15  for  the  stranger,  and  for  the  sojourner  am. 
Deut.  1.  16  his  brother,  and  the  stranger  (that  is)with 

5. 14  nor  thy  stranger  that  (is)  within  thy  gates 
10.  18  loveth  the  stranger,  in  giving  him  food 
10.  19  Love,  .the  stranger:  for  ye  were  strangers 
14.  21  thou  shah  give  it  unto  the  stranger  that  (is) 
14.  29  the  stranger,  and  the  fatherless,  and  the 

16.  11,  14,  the  stranger,  and  the  fatherless,  and 

23.  7  because  thou  wast  a  stranger  in  his  land 

24.  14  thy  strangers  that  (are)  in  thy  land  within 
24.  17  not  pervert  the  judgment  of  the  stranger 
24. 19,  20,  21  it  shall  be  for  the  stranger,  for  the 

26.  11  the  Levite,  and  the  stranger  that  (is)  am. 
26.  12  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  wid. 
26.  13  unto  the  stranger,  to  the  fatherless,  and 
27. 19  perverteth  the  judgment  of  the  stranger 

28.  43  The  stranger  that  (is)  within  thee  shall 

29.  11  and  thy  stranger  that  (is)  in  thy  camp,  fr. 
31.  12  thy  stranger  that  (is)  within  thy  gates,  th. 

Josh.  8.  33  as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  was  born 
8.  35  the  strangers  that  were  conversant  amo. 
20.    9  for  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  among 

1  Ch.22.    2  the  strangers  that  (were)  in  the  land  of  Is. 

29.  15  we  (nre)  strangers  before  thee,  and  sojou. 

2  Ch.30.  25  the  strangers  that  came  out  of  the  land 
Job  31.  32  The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street 
Psa.  39.  12  I  (am)  a  stranger  with  thee,  (and)asojo. 

94.    6  They  slay  the  widow  and  the  stranger,  and 
119.  19  I  (am)  a  stranger  in  the  earth:  hide  not 
146.    9  The  LORDpreserveth  the  strangers;  here. 
Isa.    14.    1  the  strangers  shall  be  joined  with  them 
Jer.     7.    6  (10  ye  oppress  not  the  stranger,  the  fath. 

14.   8  why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  stranger  in 

22.  3  do  no  violence  to  the  stranger,  the  fathe. 
Eze.  14.    7  or  of  the  stranger  that  sojourueth  in  Isr. 

22.    7  they  dealt  by  oppression  with  the  stran. 

22.  29  they  have  oppressed  the  stranger  wrong. 

47.  22  to  the  strangers  that  sojourn  among  you 

47.  23  in  what  tribe  the  stranger  sojourneth,  th. 
Zech.  7.  10  oppress  not  the  widow, nor.. the  stranger 
Mai.    3.   5  that  turn  aside  the  stranger  (from  his  rig.) 

9. A  stranger,  alien,  "ht  zur. 

Exod2g.  33  a  stranger  shall  not  eat  (thereof),  because 

30.  9  Ye  shall  offer  no  strange  incense  thereon 
30.  33  whosoever  putteth  (any)  of  it  upon  a  str. 

Lev.  10.  1  ottered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord,  which 
22. 10  There  shall  no  stranger  eat  (of)  the  holy 
22.  13  but  there  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof 
Num.  1.  51  the  strangerthat  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put 
3.  4  they  offered  strange  tire  before  the  Lord 
3.  io,  38  the  strangerthat  cometh  nigh  shallbe 
16.  40  no  stranger,  which  (is)  not  of  the  seed  of 
18.   4  and  a  stranger  shall  not  come  nigh  unto 


STRANGE 


938 


STREET 


NunuS.    7  the  stranger  that  conieth  nigh  shall  be 

26.  6i  when  they  ottered  Btrange  Are  before  the 
Dent  25.    5  shall  not  marry  without  unto  a  stranger 

32.  16  provoked  him  to  jealousy  with  strange 

1  Ki.  3.  18  (there  was)  110  stranger  with  us  in  the  ho. 

2  Ki.  19.  24  I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters 
Job    15.  19  and  no  stranger  passed  among  them 

19.  15  and  my  maids,  count  me  for  a  stranger 
Psa.  44.  20  or  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange 

54.  3  strangers  are  risen  up  against  me,  and  op. 
81.  9  There  shall  no  strange  god  be  in  thee;  ne. 
109. 11  catch  all  that  he  hath  ;  and  let  the  stran. 
Prov.  2.  16  To  deliver  thee  from  the  strange  woman 
5.  3  the  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  (as)  an 
5.  10  Lest  strangers  be  rilled  with  thy  wealth 
5.  17  thine  own,  and  not  strangers'  with  thee 

5.  20  ravished  with  a  strange  woman,  and  em. 

6.  1  hast  stricken  thy  hand  with  a  stranger 

7.  s  may  keep  thee  from  the  strange  woman 
11. 15  He  that  is  surety  for  a  stranger  shall  sin. 

34.  10  a  stranger  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his 

20.  16  his  garment  that  is  surety  (for)  a  stranger 

22.  14  The  mouth  of  strange  women  (is)  a  deep 

23.  33  Thine  eyes  shall  behold  strange  women 

27.  13  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  for  a  str. 
Isa.     1.    7  strangers  devour  it  in  your  presence,  and 

1.   7  (it  is)  desolate,  as  overthrown  by  strangers 

17.  to  plant,  .and  shalt  set  it  with  strange  slips 
25.  2  a  palace  of  strangers  to  be  no  city ;  it  sh. 
25.    5  Thou  shalt  bring  down  the  noise  of  stran. 

28.  21  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  wo. 

29.  5  the  multitude  of  thy  strangers  shall  be  li. 
43.  12  when  (there  was)  no  strange  (god)  among 

61.  5  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed  your  flocks 
Jer.     2. 25  I  have  loved  strangers,  and  after  them  wi. 

3.  13  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the  strangers 

5.  19  so  shall  ye  serve  strangers  in  a  land  (that 

30.  8  strangers  shall  no  more  serve  themselves 
51.  51  strangers  are  come  into  the  sanctuariesof 

Lam.  5.    2  Our  inheritance  is  turned  to  strangers,  our 
Eze.    7.  21  give  it  into  the  hands  of  the  strangers  for 
11.   9  deliver  you  into  the  hands  of  strangers 
16,  32  (which)  taketh  strangers  instead  of  herji. 

28.  7  I  will  bring  strangers  upon  thee,  the  ter. 
28. 10  Thou  shalt  die . .  by  the  hand  of  strangers 

30.  12  the  land  waste .  .by  the  hand  of  strangers 

31.  12  strangers,  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  ha. 
Hos.    5.    7  for  they  have  begotten  strange  children 

7.  9  Strangers  have  devoured  hisstrength,  and 

8.  7  if  so  be  it  yield,  the  strangers  shall  swall. 
8. 12  (but)  they  were  counted  as  a  strange  thi. 

Joel    3.  17  there  shall  no  strangers  pass  through  her 
Obad.      11  the  strangers  carried  away  captive  his  fo. 

10.  To  be  an  alien,  nt  zur,  6. 

Psa.  69.    8  I  am  become  a  stranger  unto  my  brethren 

11. .4  stranger,  one  marked,  a  foreigner,  "133  nehar. 
Gen.  35.    2  Put  away  the  strange  gods  that' (are)  am. 

35.  4  they  gave  unto  Jacob  all  the  strange  gods 
Deutji.  16  go  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  stran. 

32. 12  and  (there  was)  no  strange  god  with  him 
Josh. 24.  20  If  ye  forsake  the  Lord,  and  serve  strange 

24.  23  put  away,  (said  he),  the  strange  gods  wh. 
Judg  10.  16  they  put  away  the  strange  gods  from  am. 

1  Sa.    7.    3  put  away  the  strange  gods  and  Ashtaroth 

2  Ch.14.   3  he  took  away  the  altarsof  the  strange  (g.) 

33.  15  he  took  away  the  strange  gods,  and  the 
Neh.  13.  30  Thus  cleansed  I  them  from  all  strangers 
Psa.  Si.   9  shalt  thou  worship  any  strange  god 

137.    4  shall  we  singthe  LORD'S  song  in  astrange 
144.    7,  11  from  the  hand  of  strange  children 
Isa.   56.   3  Neither  let  the  son  of  the  stranger,  that 
56.    6  the  sons  of  the  stranger,  that  join  thems. 
60. 10  the  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  up  thy 

62.  8  the  sons  of  the  stranger  shall  not  drink 
Jer.     5.  19  forsaken  me,  and  served  strange  gods  in 

8. 19  they  provoked  me.  .with  strauge  vanities 
Dan.  it.  39  Thus  shall  he  do.  .with  a  strange  god,  wh. 
Hal.    2. 11  hath  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange 

12.-4  stranger  or  foreigner,  "ill  neker. 

Job  31.    3  a  strange  (punishment)  to  the  workers  of 

13.  Strange,  a  stranger  or  foreigner,  njj  nokri. 
Gen.  31.  1  g  Are  we  not  counted  of  him  strangers?  for 
Exod.  2.  22  for  he  said,  I  have  been,  .in  a  strange  la. 

18.  3  said,  I  have  been  an  alien  in  a  strange  la 
2t.    8  to  sell  her  unto  a  strange  nation  he  shall 

Deut2  3.  20  Unto  a  stranger  thou  mayest  lend  upon 

29.  22  the  stranger  that  shall  come  from  a  far 
Judg  19.  12  into  the  city  of  a  stranger,  that  (is)  not  of 
Ruth  2.  10  knowledge  of  me,  seeing  I  (am)  a  stranger 
2  Sa.  1=;.  19  for  thou  (art)  a  stranger,  and  also  an  exi. 

1  KI.  8.  41  concerning  a  stranger,  that  (is)  not  of  thy 

8.  43  do  according  to  all  that  the  stranger  cal. 
11.  1  Solomon  loved  many  strange  women,  tog. 
11.   8  likewise  did  he  for  all  his  strange  wives 

2  Ch.  6.  32  concerning  the  stranger,  which  is  not  of 

6.  33  do  according  to  all  that  the  stranger  cal. 
Ezra  10.    2  have  taken  strange  wives  of  the  people 

10.  10  have  taken  strange  wives,  to  increase  the 

10.  11  separate  yourselves,  .from  the  strange  wi. 

10.  14  all  them  which  have  taken  strange  wives 

30. 17  all  the  men  that  hud  taken  strange  wives 

10.  18  there  were  found  that  had  taken  strange 

10.  44  All  these  had  taken  strange  wives:  and 

Nell,  1  -;.  27  to  transgress,  .in  marrying  strange  wives 

Prov.  2.  16  the  stranger  (which)  Hftttereth  with  her 

5.  10  and  thy  labours  (be)  in  the  hniise  of  a  st. 

5.  20  and  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  stranger 

6.  24  flattery  of  the  tongue  of  a  strange  woman 
t.    5  the  stranger  (which)  flattercth  with  her 


Prov 20.  iG  take  a  pledge  of  him  for  a  strange  woman 
23.  27  and  a  strange  woman  (is)  a  narrow  pit 

27.  2  not  thine  own  mouth;  a  stranger,  and  not 
27. 13  take  a  pledge  of  him  for  a  strange  woman 

Isa.     2.   6  please  themselves  in.  .children  of  Strang. 

28.  21  and  bring  to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act 
Jer.  2.  21  into  the  degenerate  plant  of  a  strange  vi. 
Zeph.  1.   8  all  such  as  are  clothed  with  strange  app. 

14:.  Deep,  ps%  anicq. 

Eze.     3.   5  (art)  not  sent  to  a  people  of  a  strange  sp. 

3.  6  Not  to  many  people  of  a  strange  speech 
15.-4  settler,  3v;in  toshab. 

Lev.  25.  6  for  thy  stranger  that  sojourneth  with  th. 
25. 45  the  children  of  the  strangers  that  do  soj. 
25.  47  if  a  sojourner  or  stranger  wax  rich  by  th. 

lQ.A?i  alien,  1J  zar. 

Prov2i.    8  The  way  of  man  (is)  froward  and  strange 
17.  Belonging  to  another  race,  o.\\oyzvr\s  allogenes. 

Lukei7.  18  There  are  not  found,  .save  this  stranger 
IS. Belonging  to  another,  a\\6Tpios  allotrios. 

Matt  17.  25  of  their  own  children,  or  of  strangers? 
17.  26  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Of  strangei-s.    Je. 

John  10.  5  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow,  but  will 
10.    5  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers 

Acts    7.    6  That  his  seed  should  sojourn  in  a  strange 

Heb.  11.   9  he  sojourned,  .as  (in)  a  strauge  country 

19.7*(?  be  among  the  people,  iwiS^fXfw  epidemeo. 

Acts   2. 10  and  strangers  of  Rome,  Jews  and  prose. 
20.  Without,  outside,  l|w  exo. 

Acts  26.  11  I  persecuted  (them)  even  unto  strange  ci. 
21. Other,  (not  the  same),  erepos  heteros. 

Jude        7  going  after  strange  flesh,  are  set  forth  for 
22.  To  receive  strangers,  be  strange,  %evl£w  xenizo. 

Acts  17.  20  thou  bringest  certain  strange  things  to 
2Z.SlfO.nge,  stranger,  foreigner,  £eVos  xenos. 

Matt 25.  35,  43  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me.. in 
25-  38  When  saw  we  thee,  .a  stranger,  and  took 
25.  44  when  saw  we  thee,  .a  stranger,  or  naked 

27.  7  the  potter's  field,  to  bury  strangers  in 
Acts  17.  18  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  g. 

17.  21  the  Athenians  and  strangers  which  were 
Eph.    2.  12  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise 
2.  19  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners 
Heb. 11. 13  confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and 

13.  9  lie  not  carried  about  with  divers  and  str. 
1  Pe.  4. 12  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened 
3  John     5  whatsoever  thou  doest.  .to  strangers 

24. Paradoxical,  irapab'o£os  parodoxos. 

Luke  5.  26  saying,  We  have  seen  strange  things  to  d. 
25.  One  among  thepeople,  a  stranger,  1ra.pt7ri8nfj.os. 

1  Pe.   1.    1  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  Pont. 

26.-4  sojourner,  temporary  resident,  wdpaiKos  p>ar. 

Acts    7.  29  was  a  stranger  in  the  land  of  Madian,  wh. 

1  Pe.   2  nl  beseech  (you)  as  strangers  and  pilgrims 
STRANGE,  to  be,  make  self,  think  it  — 
l.To  be  strange,  estranged,  ~UT  zar. 

Job   19.  17  My  breath  is  strange  to  my  wife,  though 
2.  To  make  self  strange,  "On  hakar,  5. 

Job    19.    3  ashamed  (that) ye  make  yourselves  strange 
0.T0  make  set f  strange,  133  naka/r,  7. 

Gen.  42.    7  made  himself  strange  unto  them,  andsp. 
4. To  reckon  or  be  strange,  £evi£cu  xenizu. 

1  Pe.    4.   4  they  think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with 

4.  12  think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery 

STRANGELY,  to  behave  self  — 

To  make  self  marked,  not  to  know,  ~\3i  nalcar,  3. 

Deut.  32.  27  adversaries,  .behave  themselves  strangely 
STRANGER,  to  be,  become,  dwell  as  — 
l.To  draw  self  up,  sojourn,  T3  gur. 

Exod.  6.    4  the  land,  .wherein  they  were  strangers 
2.  A  (place  of)  sojourn,  dwelling,  iud  magur. 

Gen.  17.    8  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  all 

28.  4  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger 

36.  7  the  land  wherein  they  were  strangers  could 

37.  1  land  wherein  his  father  was  a  stranger 

Z.Onc  marked,  strange,  idj  noker. 

Obad.     i2  in  the  day  that  he  became  a  stranger 
4.  To  dwell  alongside,  sojourn,  wapoiKect)  paroiked. 

Luke24.  18  Art  thou  only  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem, and 
5. In  the  sojourning,  £y  tij  irapoiKia.  en  te paroifcia. 
Acts  13.  17  they  dwelt  as  strangers  in'the  landof  Egypt 
STRANGERS,  to  entertain,  lodge  — 

1.  To  receive  strangers,  £evoH>ox*a>  xenodocheO. 

1  Ti.    5.  ioif  shehavelodgedstrangerSjifshehavewa. 

2.  Friendship  for  strangers,  <pt\o^€via  jihitoxenia. 

Heb.  13.    2  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers 
STRANGLE,  strangled,   strangling,  to  — 

l.'I'n  strangle,  choke,  suffocate,  pj?  chanctq,  3. 
Nah.   2.  u  strangled  for  his  lionesses,  and  filled  his 

"1. Strangling,  pjno  macha  noq. 

Job     7,  15  my  aoul  chooseth  strangling,  (and)  death 

3. Strangled,  ttvikt^s  pniktos. 

Acts  15.  20  [and  (from)  things,  strangled],  and  (from) 
15.  29  from  [things!  strangled,  and  from  fornic. 
21,  25  from  blood, and  from  [strangled],  and  from 


STRAW  — 

l.Straw,  j3riD  malhben. 

Isa.    25.  10  even  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the 
2.Straw,  }2n  teben. 

Gen.  24.  25  We  have  both  straw  and  provender  enou. 

24.  32  gave  straw  and  provender  for  the  camels 

Exod.  5.    7  Ye  shall  no  more  give  the  people  straw  to 

5.    7  let  them  go  and  gather  straw  for  themsel. 

5. 10  saith  Pharaoh,  I  will  not  give  you  straw 

5. 1 1  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find  it:  yet  not 

5.12  people . .  to  gather  stubble  instead  of  straw 
5.  13  Fulfil  your  works . .  as  when  there  was  str. 
5.  16  There  is  no  straw  given  unto  thy  servants 

5.  18  there  shall  no  straw  be  given  you,  yet  sh. 
Judg.  19.  19  there  is  both  straw  and  provender  for  our 

1  Ki.  4.  28  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses  and 
Job  41.  27  He  esteemeth  iron  as  straw,  (and)  brass 
Isa.    11.   7  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox 

65.  25  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bull. 
STREAM  — 

1. Stream,  channel,  tube,  torrent,  p'jpx  aphiq. 

Job     6.  15  (and)  as  the  stream  of  brooks  they  pass  aw. 

Psa.  126.    4  Turn,  .our  captivity,  .as  the  streams  in  the 
2. An  outpouring,  "iu'n  cshed. 

Num. 21. 15  the  stream  of  the  brooks  that  goeth  down 
3,^1  flood,  brook,  "i\K  yeor. 

Isa.  33.  21  a  place  of  broad  rivers  (and)  streams 
i.A  stream,  flowing,  Sn;  yabal. 

Isa.   30.  25  streams  of  waters  in  the  day  of  the  great 
b.A  river,  "irn  nahar. 

Exod.  7.  19  upon  their  streams,  upon  their  rivers,  and 
8.    5  Stretch  forth,  .thy  rod  over  the  streams 
G.A  river,  ID}  nehar. 

Dan.    7. 10  A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth  fr. 
7.  To  flow,  hn  nazal. 

Psa.  78. 16  He  brought  streams  also  out  of  the  rock 

Song  4.  15  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from  Leba 
S.A  valley  or  brook,  hn;  nachal. 

Psa.  78.  20  the  waters  gushed  out,  and  the  streams 

Isa.    11.  15  shall  smite  it  in  the  seven  streams,  and 

27.  12  from  the  channel  of  the  river  unto  thest 
30.  28  his  breath,  as  an  overflowing  stream,  sh. 
30.  33  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of 

34.  9  the  streams  thereof  shall  be  turned  into 

35.  6  waters  break  out,  and  streams  iu  the  de. 
57.    6  Among  the  smooth  (stones)  of  the  stream 

66.  12  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a.  .stream 
Amos  5.  24  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty  stream 

9.-1  valley  or  brook,  nSru  nachlah, 

Psa. 124.   4  Then,  .the  stream  had  gone  over  our  soul 

10.  A  division,  canal,  track,  J?3  pcleg. 

Psa.  46.    4  the  streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the 

11.  A  flowing  river,  torrent,  irora^s  potamos. 
Luke  6. 48  the  stream  beat  vehemently  upon  that  ho. 

6.  49  against  which  the  stream  did  beat  vehe. 
STREET  — 

1. Outside,  without,  street,  YV\  chuts. 

Josh.  2.  19  whosoever  shall  go  out.  .into  the  street 

2  Sa.    1.  20  publish  (it)  not  in  the  streets  of  Askelon 

22.  43  did  stamp  them  as  the  mire  of  the  street 
1  Ki.  20.  34  thou  shalt  make  streets  for  thee  in  Dam. 
.Job  31.  32  The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street 
Psa.  18.  42  did  cast  them  out  as  the  dirt  in  the  stre. 
144. 13  thousands  and  ten  thousands  in  our  streets 
Isa.     5.  25  their  carcases  (were)  torn  in.  .the  streets 

10.  6  tread  them .  .like  the  mire  of  the  streets 
15.  3  In  their  streets  they  shall  gird  themselves 
24.  11  (There  is)  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  streets 
42.  2  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street 
51.  20  they  lie  at  the  head  of  all  the  streets,  as 
51.  23  thou  hast  laid  thy  body,  .as  the  street,  to 

Jer.     5.    1  Run  ye  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of 

7.  17  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of  Jer. 
7.  34  from  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  the  voice 

11.  6  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of  Jer. 
11. 13  (according  to)  the  number  of  the  streets  of 
14.  16  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  streets  of  Jerusa. 

33. 10  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  (that  are)  desoi. 
37.  21  a  piece  of  bread  out  of  the  bakers'  street 
44.    6,  17,  21  and  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem 
44.    9  in  the  land  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets 
51.    4  (that  are)  thrust  through  in  her  streets 

Lam    2.  19  faint  for  hunger  in  the  top  of  every  street 
2. 21  the  old  lie  on  the  ground  in  the  streets 
4.    1  are  poured  out  in  the  top  of  every  street 
4.    5  They,  .are  desolate  in  the  streets:  (they 
4.    8  they  are  not  known  in  the  streets:  their 
4.  14  have  wandered  (as)  blind  (men)  in  the  st. 

Eze.     7.  19  They  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the  streets 
11.    6  ye  have  filled  the  streets  thereof  with  the 

26. 11  shall  he  tread  down  all  thy  streets:  he  sh. 

28.  23  For  I  will  send  . .  blood  into  her  streets 
Mic.    7.  10  trodden  down  as  the  mire  of  the  streets 
Nah.  2.    4  The  chariots  shall  rage  in  the  streets,  th. 

3.  10  were  dashed . .  at  the  top  of  all  the  streets 
Zeph.  3.   6  I  made  their  streets  waste,  that  none  pa. 
Zech.  9.    3  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets 
10.   5  tread  down,  .in  the  mire  of  the  streets  in 

2.Facc  of  the  outside,  pn  "^  pene  chuts. 

Job   18. 17  and  he  shall  have  no  name  in  the  street 

3.-4  broad,  wide  place,  nirn  rechob. 

Gen.  19.  2  but  we  will  abide  in  the  streetall  night 
Dent  13.  16  into  the  midst  of  the  street  thereof,  and 


STRENGTH 


939 


STRENGTH 


19. 

iQ- 

7S.1. 

2T. 

2dl 

20. 

V- 

Ezra 

10. 

Nell 

8. 

8. 

8. 

8. 

Esth 

•  4- 

6. 

Job 

20. 

Psa. 

55- 

: 

44. 

Pro\ 

5- 

7- 

22. 

26. 

Isa. 

IS- 

so. 

Jer. 

Q. 

48. 

49. 

SO. 

Lam 

.  2. 

2. 

4- 

Kze. 

16. 

t6. 

Dan 

C- 

Amos  5. 

Zech.  8. 

Judg'ig.  15  he  sat  him  down  in  .1  street  of  the  city 
17  he  saw  a  wayfaring  man  in  the  street  of 
20  old  man  said .  .lodge  not  in  the  street 
12  which  had  stolen  them  from  the  street  of 
4  and  gathered  them,  .into  the  east  street 
6  gathered  them . .  in  the  street  of  the  gate 
9  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the  house 
1  into  the  street  that  (was)  hefore  the  wat. 
3  he  read  therein  before  the  street  that  (was 
16  in  the  courts,  .and  in  the  street  of  thewa. 
16  and  in  the  street  of  the  gate  of  Ephraim 

6  went  forth  to  Mordecai  unto  the  street  of 
9,  11  on  horseback  through  the  street  of  the 

7  (when)  I  prepared  my  seat  in  the  street 

11  deceit  and  guile  depart  not  from  her  str. 
14  that  (there  be)  no  complaining  in  our  str. 

20  she  uttereth  her  voice  in  the  streets 
16  dispersed  abroad,  (and)  rivers,  .in  the  st. 

12  Now  (is  she)  without,  now  in  the  streets 

13  lion  without,  I  shall  be  slain  in  the  stree. 

13  a  lion  in  the  way;  a  lion  (is)  hi  the  Btreets 
3  in  their  streets,  every  one  shall  howl 

14  truth  is  fallen  in  the  street,  and  equity 

21  to  cutoff,  .the  young  men  from  the  streets 
38  (There  shall  be)  lamentation,  .in  the  str. 
26  her  young  men  shall  fall  iu  her  streets,  and 

30  shall  her  youug  men  fall  in  the  streets,  and 

11  the  sucklings  swoon  in  the  streets  of  the 

12  swooned  as  the  wounded  in  the  streets  of 
18  we  cannot  go  in  our  streets :  our  end  is 

24  hast  made  thee  an  high  place  in  every  st. 

31  and  makest  thine  high  place  in  every  str. 

25  the"  street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the 
.  16  Wailing  (shall  be)  in  all  streets ;  and  they 
.    4  old  women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusa. 

8.  s  And  the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of 
8.   5  and  girls  playing  in  the  streets  thereof 

4.  Street,  place  for  walking  in,  p'ty  shuq. 

Prov.  7.  8  Passing  through  the  streetnearhercomer 

Eccl.12.  4  the  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets,  wh. 

12.  5  and  the  mourners  go  about  the  streets 

.Song  3.  2  go  about  the  city  in  the  streets,  and  in  the 

5.  A  public  place  of  concourse,  ayopd  agora. 

Hark  6.  56  they  laid  the  sick  in  the  streets,  and  bes. 

6.^4  broad,  wide,  open  street,  Tr\are7a  plateia. 
Matt. 6.    5  pray  standing,  .in  the  corners  of  the  str. 

12.  19  neither,  .any  man  hear  his  voice  inthest. 
Lukeio.  10  go  your  ways  out  into  the  streets  of  the 

13.  26  begin  to  say . .  thou  hast  taught  in  our  st. 

14.  21  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes 
Aots  5.  15  they  brought  forth  the  sick  into  the  streets 
Rev.  11.    8  their  dead  bodies  (shall  lie)  in  the  street 

21.  21  street  of  the  city;<was)  pure  gold,  as  it  we. 

22.  2  In  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it,  and  on  ei. 

7. A  narrow  street,  alley,  pvfxn  rhume. 

Matt.  6.   2  do  in  the  synagogues  and  in  the  streets 
Acts    9. 11  go  into  the  street  which  is  called  Straight 
12. 10  went  out,  and  passed  on  through  one  str. 

STRENGTH  — 

1.  Might,  mighty  one,  b)x  ul. 

Psa.  73.   4  no  bands  in  their  deatli ;  but  their  stren. 
^.Strength,  substance,  fmt  on. 

Gen.  49.    3  the  beginning  of  my  strength,  the  excell. 

Deut2i.  17  he  (is)  the  beginning  of  his  strength:  the 

Job    18.    7  The  steps  of  his  strength  shall  be  straite. 
18.  12  His  strength  shall  be  hunger  bitten,  and 

Psa.  78.  51  the  chief  of  (their)  strength  in  the  taber. 
105.  36  He  smote.,  the  chief  of  all  their  strength 

Hos.  12.   3  and  by  his  strength  he  had  power  with  G. 
3. Might,  power,  S;n \  eyal. 

Psa.  8S.    4  I  am  as  a  man  (that  hath)  no  strength 
A.  Might,  m^K  eyaluth. 

Psa.  22. 19OL0RD:  O  my  strength,  haste  thee  to  help 
5.  Perennial,  strength,  JpK,  fn'N  ethan. 

Gen.  49.  24  his  bow  abode  in  strength,  and  the  arms 

Exodi4.  27  the  seareturnedto  his  strength  when  the 
6. Strength,  strong  one,  nspN  amtsah. 

Zech  12.    5  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (shall  be)  my  st. 

7.  Part,  branch,  13  bad. 

Job  18.  13  shall devourthestrengthofhisskin ;  (even) 
18. 13  first  born  of  death  shall  devour  his  stren. 

8,  Might,  mighty  deed,  .Tin?  geburah. 

Judg.  8.  21  Rise,  .for  as  the  man  (is,  so  is)  his  stren. 
2  Ki.  18.  20  (I  have)  counsel  and  strength  for  the  war 
Job   12. 13  With  him  (is)  wisdom  and  strength,  he 

39.  19  Hast  thou  given  the  horse  strength?  hast 
'Psa.  20.    6  with  the  saving  strength  of  his  right  hand 

54.    1  Save  me.. and  judge  me  by  thy  strength 

71. 16  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God 
80.  2  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  come  (and)  save 
go.  10  if  by  reason  of  strength  (they  be)  foursc. 

147.  10  He  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  the 
Prov.  8.  14  Counsel  (is)  mine,  and.  .1  have  strength 
Ecci.  9.  16  Wisdom  (is)  better  than  strength :  never. 

10. 17  thy  princes  eat  in  due  season,  for  streng. 
Isa.   28.   6  for  strength  to  them  that  turn  the  battle 

30.  15  and  in  confidence  shall  be  your  strength 
36.  5  I  say.  .(I  have)  counsel  and  strength  for 
63.  15  where  (is)  thy  zeal  and  thy  strength,  the 

9. Flowing,  wealth,  strength,  old  age,  Hlidobe. 

Deut  33.  25  and  as  thy  days,  (so  shall)  thy  strength  (be) 
10. Arm,  strength,  y/ni  zeroa. 

Psa.  71. 18  I  have  showed  thy  strength  unto  (this)  ge. 


11.  Strengths  pin  cliezeq. 

Psa.  18.    1 1  will  love  thee,  0  Lord,  my  strength 

12.  Strong,  strength,  pin  chozeq. 

Exod  13.    3  byjstrength  of  hand  the  Lord  brought  you 

13.  14,  16  By  strength  of  hand  the  Lord  brought 

Amos  6. 13  not  taken  to  us  horns  byourown  strength 

Hag.    2.  22  I  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  kingd. 

13.  Strength,  n^in  chozqah. 

Dan.  11.    2  by  his  strength  through  his  riches  he  shall 

14. Force,  strength,  army,  "rn  chayil. 

1  Sa.    2.    4  they  that  stumbled  are  girded  with  stren. 

2  Sa.  22. 40  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength  to  bat. 
Psa.  18.  32  (It  is)  God  that  girdeth  me  with  strength 

18.  39  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength  unto 
33. 17  neither  shall  he  deliver  (any)  by  his.  .str. 
84.  7  They  go  from  strength  to  strength ;  (every 
Prov  31.  3  Give  not  thy  strength  unto  women,  nor 
Eccl.io.  10  then  must  he  put  to  more  strength:  but 
Isa.  5.  22  and  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  dr. 
Joel.  2.  22  fig  tree  and  the  vine  do  yield  their  stren. 
Hab.  3. 19  The  Lord  God  (is)  my  strength,  and  he  wi. 

15. Strength,  riches,  Jph  chosen. 

Isa.   33.   6  stability  of  thy  times,  (and)  strength  of  sa. 
Jer.  20.    5  I  will  deliver  all  the  strength  of  this  city 


Gen.  4. 12  shall  not  henceforth  yield,  .her  strength 

Lev.  26.  20  your  strength  shall  be  spent  in  vain :  for 

Josh. 14. 11  as  my  strength  (was)  then,  even  so(is)my 

Judg  16.    5  see  wherein  his  great  strength  (lieth),  and 

16.    6,  15  wherein  thy  great  strength  (lieth) 

16.   9  brake  the  withs.  .so  his  strength  was  not 

16.  17  my  strength  will  go  from  me,  and  I  sball 

16. 19  began  to  afflict  him,  and  his  strength  went 

1  Sa.  2.   9  for  by  strength  shall  no  man  prevail 

28.  20  there  was  no  strength  in  him  ;  for  he  had 

28.  22  thou  mayest  have  strength  when  thou  go. 

Ki.  19.   8  went  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  forty 

Ki.  19.    3  and  (there  is)  not  strength  to  bring  forth 

Ch.26.    8  able  men  for  strength  for  the  service,  (w.) 

2  Ch.13.  20  Neither  did  Jeroboam  recover  strength 
Neh.  4.  10  The  strength  of  the  bearers  of  burdens  is 
Job     6.  11  What  (is)  my  strength,  that  I  should  ho. 

6.  12  (Is)  my  strength  the  strength  of  stones? 

9.  4  (He  is)  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  stre. 
g.  ig  If  (I  speak)  of  strength,  lo,  (lie  is)  strong 

30.  2  whereto  (might)  the  strength  of  their  ha. 
36.    5  Behold,  .(he  is)  mighty  in  strength  (and) 

36.  19  (no),  not  gold,  nor  all  the  forces  of  stren. 

39. 11  Wilt  thou  trust  him,  because  his  strength 
39.21  He  paweth..  and  rejoiceth  in  his  strength 
40.  16  his  strength  (is)  in  his  loins,  and  his  force 

Psa.  22. 15  My  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd; 
31. 10  my  strength  faileth  because  of  mine  iuiq. 
33.  16  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by.  .strength 
38. 10  My  heart  panteth,  my  strength  faileth  me 
65.   6  Which  by  his  strength  setteth  fast  the 
71.    9  forsake  me  not  when  my  strength  faileth 

102.  23  He  weakened  my  strength  in  the  way:  he 

103.  20  his  angels,  that  excel  in  strength,  that  do 
Prov.  1 4.   4  much  increase  (is)  by  the  strength  of  the 

20.  29  The  glory  of  young  men  (is)  their  strength 

24.  s  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  streu. 
24. 10  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity,  thy  strength 

Isa.    10.  13  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done 

37.  3  and  (there  is)  not  strength  to  bring  forth 
40.    9  lift  up  thy  voice  with  strength  ;  lift  (it)  up 

40.  31  they,  .shall  renew  (their)  strength;  they 

41.  1  let  the  people  renew  (their)  strength:  let 
44.  12  and  worketh  it  with  the  strength  of  his  ar. 

44. 12  yea,  he  is  hungry,  and  his  strength  faileth 
49.  4  I  have  spent  my  strength  for  nought,  and 
63.    1  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength 

Lam.  1.  6  they  are  gone  without  strength  before  the 
1. 14  he  hath  made  my  strength  to  fall;  the  Lo. 
Dan.  10.    8  no  strengthinme.  .1  retained  no  strength 
10. 16  0  my  lord.  .1  have  retained  no  strength 

10.  17  there  remained  no  strength  in  me,  neither 
11. 15  neither(shall  there  be  any)  strength  to  wi. 

Hos.   7.   9  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength,  and 

17.  A  girdle,  nip,  rnp  meziach,  mezach. 

Job.  12.21  and  weakeneth  the  strength  of  the  mighty 
Isa.  23. 10  Pass  through . .  (there  is)  no  more  strength 

IS.  Strength,  stronghold,  Viys  viaoz. 

2  Sa.  22.  33  God  (is)  my  strength  (and)  power:  and  he 
Neh.   8. 10  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength 
Psa.  27.   1  the  Lord  (is)  the  strength  of  mylife;of  wh. 

28.    8  and  he  (is)  the  saving  strength  of  his  ano. 

31.    4  Pull  me  out  of  the  net.  .thou  (art)  my  str. 

37.  39  (he  is)  their  strength  in  the  time  of  trouble 
,       43.    2  thou  (art)  the  God  of  mystrength:  whydo. 

52.    7  Lo.  .the  man  (that)  made  not  God  his  str. 

60.    7  Ephraim  also  (is)  the  strength  of  mine  he. 

10S.    8  Ephraim  also  (is)  the  strength  of  mine  he. 

Prov.  10.  29  The  way  of  the  Lord  (is)  strength  to  the 

Isa,    17. 10  not  been  mindful  of  the  rock  of  thy  stren. 

23.   4  the  sea  hath  spoken,  (even)  the  strength 

23.  14  Howl,  ye  ships,  .your  strength  is  laid  wa. 

25.  4  a  strength  to  the  poor,  a  strength  to  the 
27.   5  lethini  take  hold  of  my  strength,  (that)  he 
30.   2  to  strengthen  themselves  in  the  strength 
30.    3  Therefore  shall  the  strength  of  Pharaoh 

Eze.  24.  25  when  I  take  from  them  their  strength,  the 
30. 1 5  I  will  pour  my  fury  upon  Sin,  the  strength 
Dan.  11.  31  they  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  of  stren. 
Joel  3. 16  and  the  strength  of  the  children  of  Israel 
Nah.  3. 11  thou  also  shalt  seek  strength  because  of 


19. Standing,  strength,  FT^kj  nitsbah. 

Dan.   2.  41  there  shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength  of  the 

20.  Preeminence,  prominence,  nsj,  n^  nctsach, 

1  Sa.  15.  29  the  strenth  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repen. 
Lam.  3.  18  My  strength  and  my  hope  is  perished  fro. 
Isa.   63.    6  I  will  bring  down  their  strength  to  the  ea. 

21.  Strength,  might,  hardness,  lj/  oz. 

Exodis.    2  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  song,  and 

15. 13  thou  hast  guided  (them)  iu  thy  strength 
Judg.  5.  2:  O  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  streng. 
1  Sa.    2.  10  he  shall  give  strength  unto  his  kiug,  and 

1  Ch.16. 11  Seek  the  Lord  and  his  strength,  seek  his 

16.  27  strength  and  gladness  (are)  in  his  place 
16.  28  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 

2  Ch.  6.  41  arise,  .thou,  and  the  ark  of  thy  strength 
Job.  12.  16  With  him  (is)  strength  and  wisdom :  the 

26.  2  savest  thou  the  arm  (that  hath)  no  stren. 
37.  6  likewise . .  to  the  great  rain  of  his  strength 
41.  22  In  his  neck  remaineth  streugth,  and  Bor. 
Psa.  8.  2  hast  thou  ordained  strength  because  of 
21.  1  The  king  shall  joy  in  thy  strength,  0  Lord 
21.  13  Be  thou  exalted,  Lord,  in  thine  own  stre. 
28.    7  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  my  shield 

28.  8  Lord  (is)  their  strength,  and  he  (is)  the  sa. 

29.  1  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 
29. 1 1  The  Lord  will  give  strength  unto  his  peo. 
46.    1  God  (is)  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very 
59.    9  (Because  of)  his  strength  will  I  wait  upon 
59.  17  Unto  thee,  O  my  strength,  will  I  sing:  for 
62.   7  the  rock  of  my  strength,  (and)  my  refuge 
68.  28  Thy  God  hath  commanded  thy  strength 
68.  34  Ascribe  ye  strength . .  his  strength  (is)  in 
68.  35  he  that  giveth  strength  and  power  unto 
74.  13  Thou  didst  divide  the  sea  by  thy  strength 

77.  14  thou  hast  declared  thy  strength  among  the 

78.  61  delivered  his  strength  into  captivity,  and 
81.    1  Sing  aloud  unto  God  our  strength :  make 
84.   5  Blessed  (is)  the  man  whose  strength  (is)iu 
86.  16  give  thy  strength  unto  thy  servant,  and 
89.  17  thou  (art)  theglory  of  theirstrength  ;  and 
93.   1  the  Lord  is  clothed  with  strength,  (where.  ' 
96.  6  strength  and  beauty  (are)  in  his  sanctuary 
g6.    7  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength 
99.   4  The  king's  strength  also  loveth  judgment 

105.  4  Seek  the  Lord  and  his  strength ;  seek  his 
1 10.  2  The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy  strength 
118. 14  The  Lord  (is)  my  strength  and  song,  and 
132.  8  Arise,  .thou,  and  the  ark  of  thy  strength 
13S.  3  strengthenedst  me  (with)  strength  in  my 
140.  76  God  the  Lord,  the  strength  of  my  salvat. 
Prov  zi,  22  casteth  down  the  strength  of  the  confid. 
31.  17  She  girdeth  her  loins  with  strength,  and 
31.  25  Strength  and  honour  (are)her  clothing 
12.  2  Jehovah  (is)  my  strength  and  (my)  song 
45.  24  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and  st. 
49.    5  and  my  God  shall  be  my  strength 

51.  9  awake!  put  on  strength,  Oarm  of  the  Lo. 

52.  1  awake!  put  on  thy  strength,  O  Zion;  put 
62.    8  hath  sworn . .  by  the  arm  of  his  strength 
16.  ig  my  strength,  and  my  fortress,  and  my  re. 
51. 53  she  should  fortify  the  height  of  her  stre. 

Eze.  24.  21  the  excellency  of  your  strength,  the  des. 
30.  18  the  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  cease  in 
33.  28  and  the  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  cease 
Amos  3.  11  he  shall  bring  down  thy  strength  from 
Mic.    5.    4  he  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength 

22. Strength,  my  ezuz. 

Psa.  78.   4  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  and  his  strength 
Isa.  42.  25  the  fury  of  his  anger,  and  the  strength  of 

23.  Substance,  o*y  etsem. 

Job    21.  23  One  dieth  in  his  full  strength,  being  wh. 

24.  Substance,  nDyy  otsmah. 

Isa.   40.  29  (thenithathave)no  might  he  increaseth  s. 
Nah.    3.    g  Ethiopia  and  Egypt  (were)  her  strength 

^.Breadth,  pride,  strength,  ^ni  rahab. 

Isa.  30.  7  concerning  this,  Their  strength  (is)  to  sit 
26.  Breadth,  pride,  strength,  irh  rohab. 

Psa.  90. 10  yet  (is)  their  strength  labour  and  sorrow 
27 '.High  2^laces  or  things,  n'lsjnn  toaphoth. 

Num  23.  22  he  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  un. 
24.   8  he  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  uni. 

Psa.  95.    4  the  deep  places  of  the  earth;  Hie  strength 

28. Strength,  might,  ^n  toqeph. 

Dan.  11.  17  set  his  face  to  enter  with  the  strength  of 
29. Strength,  might,  ^'pn  teqoph. 

Dan.  2.  37  a  kingdom,  power,  and  strength,  and  gl 
30. Sharpness,  firmness,  1V£  tsur. 

Psa.  18.   2  my  God,  my  strength,  in  whom  I  will  tr 
ig.  14  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  0  Lord,  my  str 
73.  26  God  (is)  the  strengthof  my  heart,  and  m™ 
144.   1  Blessed  (he)  the  /-.uRDmystrength,  whicn 
Isa.  26.   4  for  in  the  Lord  . .  (isj  everlasting  strength 

31.A  mound,  heap,  %  tel. 

Josh.  11. 13  the  cities  that  stood  still  in  their  strength 

32. Power,  ability,  hvvafxis  dunamis. 

1  Co.  15.  56  sting  of  death  (is)  sin ;  and  the  strength 

2  Co.   1.   8  were  pressed  out  of  measure,  above  stre. 

12.    9  for  mystrength  is  made  perfect  in  weak. 

Heb.  11.  11  Sara  herself  received  strength  to  conce. 

Rev.    1.  16  countenance  (was)  as  the  sun .  .in  his  str. 

3.    8  thou  hast  a  little  strength  and  hast  kept 

12. 10  Now  is  come  salvation,  and  strength,  and 

33.  Privilege,  authority,  i^ovaia  exousia. 

Rev.  17.  13  shall  give  then-  power  and  strength  unto 


Isa. 


Jer. 


STRENGTH 


040 


STRICKEN 


31. Force,  strength,  iVx^s  ischus. 

JIarki2.  30  with  all  thy  mind,  ami  with  all  thy  stre. 

12.  33  with  all  the  soul,  and  with  all  the  stren. 

Lukeio.  27  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  stren. 

K.ev.   5. 12  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  ho. 

35. Strength,  power,  Kparos  kratos. 

Luke  1.  51  He  hath  showed  strength  with  his  arm 
STRENGTH,  to  he  of,  draw  with,  give,  receive  — 
l.JIand,  t  yad. 

2  Ki.  9.  24  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with  his  full  strength 

2.  To  brighten  up,  encourage,  ibi  balag,  5. 

Psa.  39.  13  O  spare  me,  that  I  may  recover  strength 

Z.To  strengthen,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

1  Ch.29.  12  to  make  great,  and  to  give  strength  unto 

4.  To  have  force,  strength,  lcrxut*>  ischuo. 

Heh.  9.  17  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  testa. 

5.  To  make  firm  or  strong,  arepeSu  stereoo. 

Acts  3.    7  his  feet  and  ancle  bones  received  strength 
STRENGTH,  without  — 
Without  strength,  ao-devTjs  asthenes. 

Rom.  5.    6  when  we  were  yet  without  strength,  ind. 
STRENGTHEN  (self),  be  strengthened,  to  — 

1.  To  strengthen,  harden,  j*cn  amats,  3. 

Deut.  3.  23  and  encourage  him,  and  strengthen  him 

2  Ch.24.  13  set  the  house,  .in  his  state,  and  strength. 
Job     4.    4  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  kn. 

16.  5  I  would  strengthen  you  with  my  mouth 
Psa.  89.  21  With  whom,  .mine  arm  also  shall  streng. 
ProV3i.  17  She  girdeth  and  strengthened  her  arms 
Isa.  41.  10  I  will  strengthen  thee  ;  yea,  I  will  help 

44.  14  and  the  oak,  which  he  strengthened  for 
Amos  2  14  the  strong  shall  not  strengthen  his  force 

2.  To  make  strong  or  hard,  pax  amats,  5. 

Psa.  27.  14  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengt. 
31. 24  Be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengt. 

3.7*0  strengthen  self,  fax  amats,  7. 

2  Ch.13.    7  and  have  strengthened  themselves  against 

4.  To  brighten  up,  encourage,  3??  balag,  5. 

Amos  5.    9  That  strengthened  the  spoiled  against  the 

5.  To  make  mighty,  strengthen,  *ua  gabar,  3. 
Zech  10.    6  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of  Judah,  and 

10. 12  I  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord;  and 

6.  To  show  self  mighty,  "123  gabar,  7. 

Job  15.  25  and  strengthened  himself  against  the  A. 

7.  To  be  strong,  strengthen,  harden,  pin  chazaq. 

Judg.  7.  ir  afterward  shall  thine  hands  be  strength. 
2  Sa.  2.  7  let  your  hands  be  strengthened,  and  be 
2  Ch.23.  20  and  distressed  him  but  strengthened  him 

8.  To  strengthen,  harden,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

Judg.  3.  12  the  Lord  strengthened  Eglon,  the  king 

16. 28  remember  me,  I  pray  thee,  and  strength. 
1  Sa.  23. 16  Jonatlian  Saul's  son  arose,  .and  strength. 

1  Ch.29.  I2  make  great,  ami  to  give  strength  unto  all 

2  Ch.n.  17  So  they  strengthened  the  kingdom  of  Ju. 
Ezra    1.    6  all  they  that  (were)  about  them  strength. 

6.  22  to  strengthen  their  hands  in  the  work  of 
Neh.    2. 18  So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  (Ih  ) 

6.  9  Now  therefore,  (0  God),  strengthen  my  h. 
Job  4.  3  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  weak  ha. 
Psa.147.  13  he  hath  strengthened  the  bars  of  thy  ga. 
Isa.   22.  21  clothe  him  with  thy  robe,  and  strengthen 

33.  23  they  could  not  well  strengthen  their  mast 
35.  3  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  court. 
54.   2  lengthen  thy  cords,  and  strengthen  thy 

Jer.  23.  14  they  strengthen  also  the  hands  of  evil  do. 

Eze.  13.  22  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked, th. 

30.  24  I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king  of 

34.  4  The  diseased  have  ye  not  strengthened 
34.  16  and  will  strengthen  that  which  was  sick 

Dan.  10.  i3  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  he  streng. 

10.  19  Let  my  lord  speak  ;  for  thou  hast  streng. 

Hos.    7. 15  I  have  bound  (and)  strengthened  their  ar. 

9.  To  strengthen,  do  mightily,  p]n  chazaq,  5. 

2  Ch.26.   8  for  he  strengthened  (himself)  exceedingly 

Eze.  16  49  neither  did  she  strengthen  the  hand  of  the 

30.  25  I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king  of 

Dan.  11.    6  and  he  that  strengthened  her  in  (these)ti. 

10.  To  strength-en  self,  pin  chazaq,  7. 

Gen.  43.  2  Israel  strengthened  himself,  and  sat  upon 
1  Ki.20.  22  Go,  strengthen  thyself,  and  mark,  and  see 

1  Ch.11. 10  who  strengthenedtbemselves  with  him  in 
s  Ch.  1.    1  Solomon  the  son  of  David  was  strengthe. 

12. 13  So  king  Rehoboam  strengthened  himself 

17.  1  reigned  in  his  stead,  and  strengthened  hi. 
21.  4  strengthened  himself,  and  slew  all  his  br 
23.  1  Jehoiada  strengthened  himself,  and  took 
25. 11  Aroaziah  strengthened  himself,  and  led  fo. 
32.    5  Also  he  strengthened  himself,  and  built 

Ezra  7.  s3  strengthened  as  the  hand  of  the  Lord  my 
Eze.  7.  13  strengthen  himself  in  the  iniquity  of  his 
Dau.  10.  i>;  I  was  strengthened,  and  said,  Let  my  lord 

11.  Strength,  hardness,  n^]n  chozgah. 

2  Ch.12.    1  when  Rehoboam .  .had  strengthened  him. 

12.  A  strength,  stronghold,  Tiya  maoz. 

Dau.  11.    1  stood  to  confirm  and  to  strengthen  him 

13.  To  support,  refresh,  iyp  saad. 

Psa.  20.    2  Send  thee  help,  .and  strengthen  thee  out 
41.    3  Loud  will  strengthen  him  upon  the  bed 
104.  15  and  bread(which)  strengthened  man's  he. 


14.7*o  be  or  become  or  make  strong,  Tj#  azaz. 

Psa.  52.  7  (and)  strengthened  himself  in  his  wicked. 
68.  28  strengthen,  O  God,  that  which  thou  hast 
Prov.  8.  28  he  strengthened  the  fountains  of  the  deep 
Eccl.  7.  19  Wisdom  strengthened  the  wisemorethan 
Isa.  30.  2  to  strengthen  themselves  in  the  strength 
Dau.  n.  12  but  he  shall  not  be  strengthened  (by  it) 

15,  To  raise  up,  c'p  qum,  3. 

Psa.  1 19.  28  strengthen  thou  me  according  unto  thy 

16.ro  puff  tip,  strengthen,  irnraluib,  5. 

Psa.138.    3  strengthenedst  me  (with)  strength  in  my 

17.7*0  make  powerful,  Bvua^.6co  duwmo~>. 

Col.     1.  11  Strengthened  with  all  might,  according  to 

18.  7*o  make  powerful  inwardly,  £vh'vvafj.6w  endum. 
Phil.   4.  13  through  Christ  which  strengthened  me 
2  Ti.    4.  17  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened 

19.7*0  make  strong,  inwardly,  ii/iaxvca  enischuo. 
Luke22.  43  [there  appeared  an  angel . .  strengthening] 
Acts    9.  19  when  he  had  received  meat,  he  was  stren. 

20.  7*o  make  firm  besides,  iwio-TvpiCco  ept'sterizo. 
Acts  18.  23  went  over  all . .  country . .  (.strengthening] 

21.7*0  strengthen,  make  strong,  Kparaiow  krataioo. 
Eph.    3.  16  to  he  strengthened  with  might  by  his  sp. 
22.  7*o  strengthen,  make  strong,  adf-vow  sthenoo. 

1  Pe.   5.  10  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  se. 
23.ro  make  firm,  fix  firmly,  cn-qpi^w  sterizo. 

Luke22.  32  when  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy 
Rev.    3.    2  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things 

STRETCH  (beyond,  forth,  out),  to  — 
1.7*0  draxo  or  stretch  out,  %wd  inashak. 

Hos.    7.    5  he  stretched  out  his  hand  with  scorners 
2.7*0  stretch  out,  incline,  naj  natah. 

Exod.  7.    5  when  I  stretch  forth  mine  hand  upon  E. 

7.  19  stretch  out  thine  hand  upon  the  waters 

8.  5  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  with  thy  rod  over 
8.  6  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  waters  of 
8.  16  Stretch  out  thy  rod,  and  smite  the  dust 

8.  17  for  Aaron  stretched  out  his  hand  with  his 

9.  22  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  toward  heaven 
9.  23  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  he. 

10.  12  Stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  laud  of  E. 
10.  13  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  over  the  la. 
10.  21  Stretch  out  thine  hand  toward  heaven, and 
10.  22  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  lie. 
14.  16,  26  stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  sea 
14.  21  Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea 

14.  27  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand  over  the 

15.  12  Thou  stretchedst  out  thy  right  hand,  the 
Josh.  8.  iS  Stretch  out  the  spear.  .Joshua  stretched 

8.  19  ran  as  soon  as  he  had  stretched  out  his 
8.  26  wherewith  he  stretched  out  the  spear^nn. 

2  Ki.  21.  13  stretch  over  Jerusalem  the  line  of  Sama. 
Job    15.  25  ForhestretehethotithishandagainstGod 

b6.    7  He  stretcheth  out  the  north  over  the  em. 

38.  5  or  who  hath  stretched  the  line  upon  i;V 
Psa.  104.    2  who  stretchest  out  the  heavens  like  a  cu. 
Prov.  1 .  24  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man 
Isa.     5.  25  and  he  hath  stretched  forth  his  hand 

23. 11  He  stretched  out  his  hand  overthesea,  he 
34.  11  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  com. 
40.  22  that  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  as  a  cur. 
42.    5  stretched  them  out;  he  that  spread  forth 

44.  13  carpenter  stretcheth  out  (his)  rule,  he  ma. 
'    44.  24  that  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens  alone 

45.  12  have  stretched  out  the  heavens,  and  all 
51. 13  that  hath  stretched  forth  the  heavens,  and 

Jer.   10.  12  hath  stretched  out  the  heavens  by  his  dl 
10.  20  none  to  stretch  forth  my  tent  any  more 

51. 15  stretched  out  the  heaven  by  his  underst. 
51.  25  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  thee 

Lam.  2.  8  he  hath  stretched  out  a  line,  he  hath  not 
Eze.    6.  14  So  will  I  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  them 

14.  9  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him,  and 
14. 13  then  will  I  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  it 
1 6. 27  therefore  I  have  stretched  out  myhand  over 
25.    7  therefore  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon 
25.  13WHI  also  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  Edom 

25. 16  will  stretchout  mine  hand  upon  the  Phil 
30.  25  shall  stretch  it  out  upon  the  land  of  Egypt 
35-    3 1  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  against  thee 

Zeph.  1.   4  will  also  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  Ju. 

2.  13  will  stretchout  his  hand  against  the  nor, 

Zech. 12.    1  which  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and 

3. To  cause  to  stretch  out,  incline,  nui  natah,  5. 
Isa.   31.    3  When  the  Lord  shall  stretch  out  his  hand 
54.    2  let  them  stretch  forth  the  curtains  of  th. 
Jer.     6.  12  for  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  the 

15.  6  therefore  will  I  stretch  out  my  hand  aga. 
4.7*o  spread  out  or  forth,  'ensparas. 

Kxod2S-  20  cherubimsshall  stretchforth(their)wings 
1  Ki.  6.  27  stretched  forth  the  wings  of  the  cherubim 
Job   11.  13  and  stretch  out  thine  hands  toward  him 

39.  26  Doth  the  hawk,  .stretch  her  wings  toward 
Tsa  44.  20  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange  god 
ProV3i.2o  She  stretcheth  out  her  liaud  to  the  poor 

5.7*o  spread  oat  or  forth,  bnp  paras,  3. 

Psa. 143.    6  I  stretch  forth  my  hands  unto  thee:  my 
6.7*0  spread  out  or  over,  ;'jyj  raqa, 

Psa. 136.   6  To  him  that  stretched  out  the  earth  above 
7.  7*o  spi'ead  out,  ncp1  shatach,  3. 

Psa.  88.    9  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand*  unto  thee 


S.  7*o  send,  rf?y  shalach. 

Gen.  22.  10  Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and 
48.  14  Israel  stretched  out  his  right  hand,  and 
Exod.  3.  20  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  and  smite  Eg. 
y.  15  For  now  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  that 

1  Sa.  24.   6  to  stretch  forth  mine  hand  against  him 

26.   9  Destroy  him  not:  for  who  can  stretch  forth 
26. 11  Lord  forbid  that  I  should  stretch  forth 
26.  23  would  not  stretch  forth  mine  hand  against 

2  Sa.    1. 14  How  wast  thou  not  afraid  to  stretch  forth 

24.  16  when  the  angel  stretched  out  his  hand  up. 
Job  30.  24  Howbeit  he  will  not  stretch  out  (his)  hand 
Psa.  138.  7  thou  shall  stretch  forth  thine  baud  again. 
Eze.  10.  7  cherub  stretched  forth  his  hand  from  be. 
Dan.  11.  42  He  shall  stretch  forth  his  baud  also  upon 

9.  7*o  stretch  out,  expand,  ^Kircrdwufitekpetannw/ii. 
Rom.  10.  21  All  daylong  I  have  stretched  forth  my  ha. 

10.  7*o  extend,  stretchout,  iKTeiva  ekteino. 

Matt.  12. 13  Stretch  forth  thine  hand,  stretched  (it)  fo. 

12.  49  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  his  disci. 

14.  31  immediately  Jesus  stretched  forth  (his) 

26.  51  one  of  them.,  stretched  out  (his)  hand,  and 
Mark  3.    5  Stretch  forth . .  And  he  stretched  (it)  out 
Luke  6.  10  Stretch  forth  thy  hand.  And  he  did  so 

22.  53  ye  stretched  forth  no  hands  against  me 
John  21.  18  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  hands,  and 
Acts    4.  30  By  stretching  forth  thine  hand  to  heal 

26.    1  Paid  stretched  forth  the  hand,  and  anaw. 

11.  7*o  cast  over  or  upon,  eVi/3aAAw  epiballo. 

Acts  12.    1  stretched  forth  (his)  hands  to  vex  certain 

12.  To  stretch  over  much,  v-KtpeKTtivw  huperekteino. 
2  Co.  10.  14  For  we  stretch  not  ourselves  beyond  (our 

STRETCH  self,  to  — 

1.7*0  stretch  out,  bow,  prostrate,  "ins  gahar, 

2  Ki.  4.  34  stretched  himself  upon  the  child,  and  the 
4-  35  went  up,  and  stretched  himself  upon  him 

2.  7*o  measure  or  stretch  self,  "n£  madad,  7a, 

1  Ki.  17.  21  stretched  himself  upon  the  child  three  ti. 

3.  7*o  spread  out,  rno  sarach. 

Amos  6.   4  stretch  them  selves  upon  their  couches,  and 

6.  7  banquet  of  them  that  stretched  themsclve. 

4  7*o  stretch  self  out,  jr$  sard,  7. 
Isa.    28.  20  shorter  than  that  (a  man)  can  stretch  hims. 

STRETCH  out  soon,  to  — 

To  cause  to  run,  pi  ruts,  0. 

Psa.  68.  31  Ethiopia  shall  soon  stretch  outlier  hands 

STRETCHED  out  or  forth,  to  be  — 

1. To  stretch  out,  incline,  nai  natah. 

Exod.  6.   6  will  redeem  you  with  a  stretched  out  arm 
Deut.  4.  34  mighty  hand,  and  by  a  stretched  out  arm 
5  15  a  mighty  hand  and  by  a  stretched  out  arm 

7.  19  the  mighty  hand,  and  the  stretched  out 
9.  29  mighty  power  and  by  thy  stretched  out 

11.    2  his  mighty  hand,  and  his  stretched  out 

1  Ki.   8.  42  strong  hand,  and  of  thy  stretched  out  arm 

2  Ki.  17.  36  with  great  power,  and a  stretched  out  arm 

1  Ch.21.  16  drawn  sword  in  Ms  hand  stretched  out 

2  Ch.  6.  32  thy  mighty  hand,  and  thy  stretched  out 
Psa. 136.  12  strong  hand, and  with  a  stretched  out  arm 
Isa.     3.  16  walk  with  stretched  forth  necks, and  wan. 

5.  25  turned  away,  but  his  hand  (is)  stretched  0. 
9. 12,  17,  21  but  his  hand  (is)  stretched  out  still 
10.  4  turned  away,  butliishand(is)  stretched  0. 
14.  26  hand  (that  is)  stretched  out  upon  all  the 
14.  27  his  hand  (is)  stretched  out,  and  who  shall 
Jer.  32. 17  by  thy  great  power,  and  stretched  out  arm 
32.  21  with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great 
Eze.  1.  22  terrible  crystal,  stretched  forth  over  their 
20.33,  34  with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  withiu. 

2.7*0  be  stretched  out,  inclined,  "19J  natah,  2. 

Jer.    6.    4  shadows  of  the  evening  are  stretched  out 
Zech.  1.  16  line  shall  be  stretched  forth  upon  Jerusa. 

3.7*0  be  spread  out,  left,  raj  natash,  2. 

Isa.   16.   8  branches  are  stretched  out,  they  are  gone 
4.7*0  separate,  part,  "n|  parad. 

Eze.  1. 11  their  wings  (were)  stretched  upward;  two 
STRETCHING  out  — 
Stretching  out,  r»BD  muttoth. 

Isa.     8.   8  stre teliing  out  of  his  wings  shall  fill  the 
STREW,  strow,  to — 

1.  To  scatter,  winnoyj,  spread,  nnj  zarah. 

Exod32  20  strawed(it)upon  the  water,  and  made  the 

2.  7*o  sprinkle,  p"]T  zaraq. 

2  Ch.34.   4  strewed  (it)  upon  the  graves  of  them  that 

3.  7*o  scatter  throughout  or  thoroughly,  Siaa-fcopirifa. 

Matt  25.  24  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  strawed 

25.  26  and  gather  where  I  have  not  strawed 

4.7*o  strew,  rrrpwi>vvf.u  strdnnumi. 

Matt 21.    8  cut  down  branches,  .and  strawed  (them) 
Markn.    8  [branches  off  the  trees,  and  strawed  (th.)] 

STRICKEN  (through,  to  be)  — 

1.7*0  be  pierced  through,  ij3p  daqwr,  4. 

Lam.  4.    9  stricken  through  for  (want  of)  the  fruits 
2.7*0  touch,  come  upon,  strike,  plague,  PQ  71  aga. 

Isa.   53.   4  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten 
3. Stroke,  plague,  y::  nega. 

Isa.   53.    8  for  the  transgression,  .was  he  stricken 


STRICKEN 


941 


STRONG 


4.  To  smite,  toJ  naka. 

Isa.   io~.    7  every  one  shall  howl,  .(they  are)  stricken 

5.7V  be  smitten,  P03  nakah,  6. 

Isa.     i.    5  "Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more  ?  ye 

STRICKEN,  to  be  (-well)  — 
l.To  come  or  go  in,  fttia  bo. 

Gen.  iS.  ii  old  (and)  well  stricken  in  age ;  (and)jt  ce. 
24.  1  Abraham  was  old,  (and)  well  stricken  in 
Josh  13.  1  Now  Joshua  was  old  (and)  stricken  in  ye. 
13.  1  Thou  art  old  (and)  stricken  in  years,  and 
23.  1  that  Joshua  waxed  old  (and)  stricken  in 
23.    2  said  unto  them,  I  am  old  (and)  stricken  in 

1  Ki.  1.    1  Now  king  David  was  old  (and)  stricken  in 

2.  To  go  forward,  Trpofiatva)  probaino. 

Luke  1.    7  they  both  were(now)wellstrickenin  years 
1.  18  an  old  man,  and  my  wife  well  stricken  in 

STRIFE  — 

1. Strife,  plea,  contention,  J*^  din. 

Prov22. 10  contention  shall  go  out ;  yea,  strife  and 

2.  Strife,  contention.,  ji~D  madon. 

Psa.  80.  6  Thoumakestus  a  strife  unto  our  neighb. 
Prov  15.  iS  wrathful  man  stirreth  up  strife  :  bat  (he 

16.  28  froward  man  soweth  strife ;  and  a  whisp. 

1 7.  14  beginning  of  strife  (is  as)  when  one  letteth 
26.  20  where  (there  is)  no  tale  bearer,  the  strife 

28.  25  He  that  isof  a  proud  heart  stirreth  up  st. 

29.  22  An  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,  and  a  fu. 

3. Strifes,  contentions,  D*31D medanim. 

Prov  10.  12  Hatred  stirreth  up  strifes :  but  love  cove. 

4.  A  wringing  out,  debate,  nxo  matstsah. 

Prov  17.  19  He  loveth  transgression  that  loveth  strife 

5.  Strife,  contention,  ~?,"i?  nwribah. 

Gen.  13.  8  Let  there  be  no  strife,  I  pray  thee,  betw. 
Nums?.  14  in  the  strife  of  the  congregation,  to  sane. 
Psa.  106.  32  angered  (him)  also  at  the  waters  of  strife 
Eze.  47.  19  from  Tamar  (even)to  thewaters  of  strife 
48.  28  even  from  Tamar  (unto)  the  waters  of  st. 

6. Strife,  pleading,  cause,  T"?  rib. 

Gen.  13.    7  there  was  a  strife  between  the  herdmen  of 

Ueut.  1.  12  How  can  I  myself  alone  bear,  .your  strife 

Judg  12.    2  I  and  my  people  were  at  great  strife  with 

Psa.  31.  20  keep  them  secretly.. from  the  strife  of  to. 

55.  9  for  I  have  seen  violence  and  strife  in  the 

Prov  15.  iS  but  (he  that  is)  slow  to  anger  appeasethst. 

17.    1  than  an  house  full  of  sacrifices  (with)  st. 

20.   3  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  strife 

26. 17  meddleth  with  strife  (belonging)  not  to 

26.  21  so  (is)  a  contentious  man  to  kindle  strife 

30.  33  so  the  forcing  of  wrath  bringeth  forth  st. 
Isa.  58.  4  ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate,  and  to  smite 
Jer.  15.  10  thou  hast  born  me  a  man  of  strife  and  a 
Hab.    1.   3  there  are  (that)  raise  up  strife  and  conte. 

7. Contradiction,  controversy,  avriXoyia  antilogia. 
Heb.    6.  16  confirmation  (is)  to  them  an  end  of  all  st. 
^.Contention,  strife,  quarrel,  ipiQeia  eritheia. 

2  Co.  12. 20  envyings,  wTaths,  strifes,  backbitings,  wh. 
Gal.  5.  20  emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions,  here. 
Phil.  2.  3  (Let)  nothing  (be  done)  through  strife  or 
Jas.     3.  14  But  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  strife 

3. 16  For  where  envying  and  strife  (is),  there 

3.  Contention,  strife,  quarrel,  epis  eris. 

Rom  13.  13  Let  us  walk  honestly .  .not  in  strife  and 
1  Co.  3.  3  (there  is)  among  you  envying,  and  strife 
Phil.   1.  15  preach  Christ  even.of  envy  and  strife,  and 

1  Ti.    6.    4  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  ev. 

10. Fight,  contention,  battle,  paxv  macJii. 

2  Ti.    2.  23  avoid, 'knowing  that  they  do  gender  stri. 
11.  Love  of  contention  or  dispute,  (pihcvetKLapihilo, 

Luke  22.  24  there  was  also  a  strife  among  them,  wh. 
STRIPE  (of  words),  at  — 

1.  To  be  at  strife,  judged,  j*i  din,  2. 

2  Sa.  19.   9  all  the  people  were  at  strife  throughout 
2. A  fighting  about  words,  Xoyopax'^  loffomachia. 

1  Ti.    6.    4  doting  about  questions  and  strifes  of  wo 
STRIKE  (again,  through},  to  — 

l.To  pass  on,  through,  or  away,  f^ncJialoph. 
Judg.  5.  26  when  she  had  pierced  and  stricken  thro 
Job  20  24  the  bow  of  steel  shall  strike  him  through 

2.  To  smite,  dash.  }'no  machats. 

Psa.  1 10.    s  strike  through  kings  in  the  day  of  his  wr. 
Z.To  touch,  come  upon,  strike,  plague,  i*:j  naga,  5. 

Exod  12.  22  strike  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts 
4. To  smite, plague,  i\q  nagaph. 

2  Sa.  12.  15  Lord  struck  the  child  that  Criah's  wife 
2  Ch.13.  20  and  the  Lord  struck  him,  and  he  died 

5.7*o  wave,  shake  out,  *pa  nuph,  5. 

2  Ej.   5. 11  strike  his  hand  over  the  place,  aud  reco. 

6.  To  smite,  n?3  nakah,  5. 

x  Sa.  2.  14  struck  (it)  into  the  pan,  or  kettle,  or  cal. 
Prov  17.  26  to  punish  the  just  (is)  not  good,  (nor)  to 

23.  35  They  have  stricken  me.  I  was  not  sick;  they 
Jer.     5.    3  thou  hast  stricken  them,  but  they  have 

7. To  pierce,  define,  mark  out,  npj  naqdb. 

Hab.   3.  14  Thou  didst  strike  through  with. his  staves 
8.  To  givet  put,  jni  nathan. 

Exod  12.  7  strike  (it)outhetwo  side  posts  aud  on  the 


9.  To  strike,  p59  saphaq. 

Job  34.  26  striketh  them  as  wicked  men  in  the  open 

10.  To  split,  till,  break  forth,  n^palach,  3. 
Prov.  7.  23  Till  a  dart  strike  through  his  liver;  as  a 

11.  To  change,  repeat,  do  it  again,  -"t:'v;  shanah. 

2  Sa.  20.  10  struck  him  not  again ;  and  he  died.  So  J. 

12.  To  blow,  strike,  clap,  thrust,  i'pn  taqa. 

Prov.  6.  1  thou  hast  stricken  thy  hand  with  a  stran. 
17.  18  man  void  of  understanding  striketh  nan. 
2«.  26  Be  not  thou  (one)  of  them  that  strike  ha. 

IS.  To  be  blown,  struck,  J'i^n  taqa,  2. 

Job    17.    3  who  (is)  he  (that)  will  strike  hands  with 

14.  To  cast,  throw,  pa\\o>  balld. 

Marki4-  65  servants  [did  strike]  him  with  the  palms 

15.  To  give,  8i'5wu.t  didumi. 

JohniS.  22  struck  Jesus  with  the  palm  of  his  hand 

16.  To  strike,  smite,  beat,  sting,  irata  paw. 

Rev.    9.    5  torment  of  a  scorpion,  when  he  striketh 

17.  To  strike,  smite,  iraTaao-a)  patasso. 

Matt 26.  51  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and 
18.2*0  strike,  smite,  tvivtw  tuptO. 

Luke  22.  64  [they  struck  him  on  the  face,  and  asked] 
19.  To  loose,  let  go,  xa^aw  chalao. 

Acts  27.  17  fearing  lest  they  should  fall,  .strake  sail 
STRIKER- — 
A  striker,  revilcr,  •jr\rlKTns  plektes. 

1  Ti.    3.    3  Not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  greedy 
Titus  1.   7  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to 

STRING,  (ten  stringed  instrument)  — 
l.A  cord,  string,  "irp  yether. 

Psa.  11.  2  they  make  ready  their  arrow  upon  the  st. 
2.  A  cord,  string,  ifl'D  metltar. 

Psa.  21. 12  make  ready  (thine  arrows)  upon  thy  stri. 

o.Minnim,  strings,  d*3?  minnim. 

Psa. 150.    4  praise  him  with  stringed  instruments  and 

i.Ten  stringed  instrument,  iib'^  asor. 

Psa.  33.    2  psaltery  (and)  an  instrument  of  ten  strings 
92.    3  Upon  an  instrument  of  ten  strings,  and 
144.    9  upon,  .an  instrument  of  ten  strings  will 

5. Bond,  chain,  ligament,  $e<rp6s  desmos. 

Mark. 7.  35  string  of  his  tongue  wasloosed,  andhe  sp. 

STRIP  (offselves\  to  — 
l.To  snatch  off,  b'si  vatsal,  3. 

2  Ch.20.  25  jewels,  which  they  stripped  off  for  them. 
2.  To  snatch  off  from,  self,  H*i  natsal,  7 . 

E.xod33.  6  strippedthemselves  of  their  ornaments  by 
0.T0  strip  off,  vvspashat. 

1  Sa.  19.  24  stripped  off  his  clothes  also,  and  prophe. 

Isa.  32.  11  strip  you,  and  make  you  bare,  and  gird(s  ) 
i.To  strip  off,  tows pashat,  3. 

1  Sa.  31.    8  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the  si. 

1  Ch.  10.    S  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the  si. 

5.  To  strij)  off,  &&$~pashat,  5. 

Gen.  37.  23  that  they  stripped  Joseph  out  of  his  coat 
Num2o.  26  strip  Aaron  of  his  garments,  and  put  them 
20.  28  Moses  strippedAaron  of  his  garments,  and 
1  Sa.  31.  9  stripped  off  his  armour,  and  sent  into  the 
1  Ch.io.  9  when  they  had  stripped  him,  they  took  his 
Job   19.    9  He  hath  stripped  me  of  my  glory,  and  ta 

22.  6  and  stripped  the  naked  of  their  clothing 
Eze.  16.  39  they  shall  strip  thee  also  of  thy  clothes 

23.  26  They  shall  also  strip  thee  out  of  thy  clot. 
Hos.    2.    3  Lest  I  strip  her  naked,  and  set  her  as  in 

6.  To  strip  self,  z&'B  pashat,  7. 

1  Sa,  18.  a.  Jonathan  stripped  himself  of  the  robe  that 
7. To  put  out,  strip  off,  tV5uo>  ekduo. 

Matt  27.  28  [stripped]  him,  and  put  on  him  a  scarlet 
STRIP  off  raiment,  to  — 
To  put  out,  strip  off,  eVSiioj  ekduo. 

Lukeio  30  thieves,  whichstrippedhimof  his  raiment 
STRIPE,  stripes,  to  give  — 
l.A  bruise,  bandage,  scar,  T£2n,  r,"V3Q  chaburah. 

Exod2i-  25  burning,  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for  str 

Isa.  53.  5  wounded,  .and  with  his  stripes  we  are  he. 
2.  Stripes,  beatings,  nisSrp  mahalummoth. 

Prov  19.  29  prepared  for  scorners,  and  stripes  forthe 
3.-4  smiting,  blow,  stroke,  ns?  makkah. 

Deut25-    3  beat  him  above  these  with  many  stripes 

Prov.20.  30  so  (do)  stripes  the  inward  parts  of  the  be. 
4. A  stroke,  plague,  i'3j  nega. 

2  Sa.    7.  14  with  the  stripes  of  the  children  of  mm 
Psa.  89.  32  will  I  visit,  .their  iniquity  with  stripts 

5. To  smite,  strike,  n;u  nakah,  5. 

Deut'25.    3  Forty  stripes  he  may  give  him.  (and)  not 
Prov  17.  10  more . .  than  a  hundred  stripes  into  a  fool 

6.-4  wound,  scar,  pwXwyp  molops. 

1  Pe  2  24  righteousness :  by  whose  stripes  ye  were 
7. A  stroke,  stripe,  plague,  -rrKvyn  pUge. 

Luke  12  48  did  commit  things  worthy  of  stripes,  shall 

Acts  16-  23  when  they  had  laid  many  stripesuponth. 

lfi.  33  washed  (their)  stripes  ;  and  was  baptized 

2  Co.  6.    5  In  stripes,  in  imprisonments,  in  tumults 

11.  2j  in  stripes  above  measure,  in  prisons  more 


STRIPLING  — 
.4  youth,  cbz  elem. 

1  Sa.  17.  56  Enquire  thou  whose  son  the  stripling  (is)? 
STRIPPED  — 

Spoiled,  ??'&  or  hh'iv  sholal  or  slielal. 

Mic.    1.    8  I  will  go  stripped  and  naked :  I  will  make 
STRIVE  (against,  together  for,  with),  to  — 
1.  To  come  forth  with  force,  n'3,  ma  guach,  giach,  5. 

Dan.    7.    2  four  winds  of  the  heaven  strove  upon  the 

2.To  stir  up  self, strive,  rria  garah,  7. 

Jer.  50.  24  because  thou  hast  striven  against  the  Lo. 

3.  To  strive*  pi  dun. 

Gen.    6.   3  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man 

i.One  striving,  contending,  3*"V  yarib. 

Psa.  35.    1  Plead. .Lord,  with  them  that  strive  with 

5.  To  strive,  nyj  natsnh,  2. 

Exod  2.  13  two  men  of  the  Hebrews,  strove  together 

21.  22  If  men  strive,  and  hurt  a  woman  with  ch. 

Lev.  24.  10  tliis  son.  .and  a  man  of  Israel  strove  tog. 

Deut25. 11  When  men  strive  together  one  with  ano. 

2  Sa.  14.    6  they  two  strove  together  in  the  field,  and 

6.  To  strive,  ns:  natsah,  5. 

Numa6.  9  strove  against  Moses,  when  they  strove  a. 
Psa.  60.  title,  when  he  strove  with  Aram-naharaim 

7. To  strive,  oppress,  pi'V.  asaq,  7. 

Gen.  26. 20  because  they  strove  with  him 

S.  To  strive,  plead,  n'l  rib. 

Gen.  26.  20  herdmen  of  Gerar  did  strive  with  Isaac's 
26.  21  strove  for  that  also:  and  he  called  the  na. 
26.  22  for  that  they  strove  not:  andhe  called  the 
Exodai,  18  if  men  strive  together,  and  one  smite  ano. 
Nuni2o.  13  because  the  chiklrenof  Israel  strove  with 
Deut33.    8  whom  thou  didst  strive  at  the  waters  uf 
Judgu.  25  did  he  ever  strive  against  Israel,  or  did 
Job   33.  13  Why  dost  thou  strive  against  him?  forhe 
Prov.  3.  30  Strive  not  with  a  man  without  cause,  if 
25.    S  Go  not  forth  hastily  to  strive,  lest  (thou 
Isa.   41. 11  and  they  that  strive  with  thee  shall  perish 
45.   9  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  ma. 
Hos.    4.   4  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another 

9.  To  strive,  plead,  nn  rib,  5. 

Hos.    4.   4  people  (are)  as  they  that  strive  with  the 

10. 7o  agonize,  contend,  a.yiovi^op.at  agdnizomai. 
Lukei3-  24  Strive  to  euter  in  at  the  straight  gate,  for 

1  Co.  9.  25  every  man  that  striveth  for  the  mastery 
Col.     1.  29  striving  according  to  his  working,  which 

11.7*0  strive,  contend,  be  a  champion,  aflAc'w  atJrfe<~>. 

2  Tim  2.    5  if  a  man  also  strive . .  not . .  except  he  stri . 

12.  To  agonize  or  contend  against,  avraycoviCopai. 
Heb.  12.    4  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  blood,  striving 

13.  To  fight  thoroughly,  Stapdxofj.at  diamachomai. 
Acts  23.    9  strove,  saying,  We  find  no  evil  in  this  man 

14.  To  contend,  dispute,  cpifa  erizo. 

Matt  12. 19  He  shall  not  strive,  nor  cry;  neither  shall 
lo.Tofight,  fia.xop.at  machomai. 

John  6.  52  Jews  therefore  strove  among  themselves 
Acts  7.  26  showed  himself  unto  them  as  they  strove 
2  Ti.   2.  24  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive ;  but 

16.  To agemize together,  away uvi^o pat sunagonizom. 

Rom  15.  30  strive  together  with  me  in  (your)  prayers 
IT.  To  strive  togcilier,  o-vvaOxioy  sunathleo. 

Phil.   1.  27  with  one  mind  striving  together  for  the 
18.7V>  esteem  as  an  honour,  ^tKorip^opaijyhilolim. 

Rom  1 5. 20  so  have  I  strived  to  preach  the  gospel,  not 
STRIVINGS  — 
1. Strife,  pleading,  T"i  rib. 

2  Sa.  22  44  hast  delivered  me  from  the  strivings  of 

Psa.  18.  43  Thou  hast  deliveredmefromthestrivings 

2. A  fight,  fighting,  fidxv  mache. 

Titus  3.    9  But  avoid,  .strivings  about  the  law.for 
STROKE,  strokes  — 
1.  H and,  T  yad. 

Job   23.    2  my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  groaning 
2. Stroke,  plague,  he:30  maggephah. 

Eze.  24.  16  take  away,  .the  desire  of  thine  eyes  with 
3. Stripes,  beatings,  rnsSn;?  mahalummoth. 

Prov.  18.   6  contention,  and  his  mouth  calleth  for  st. 
4.A  smiting,  \t.d  machats. 

Isa.  30.  26  and  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  wound 
5.  A  blow,  stroke,  nsp  makkah. 

Esth.  9.    5  smote  all  their  enemies  with  the  stroke 

Isa.   14.   6  smote  the  people.,  with  a  continual  stroke 

G,A  stroke,  plague,  yx  nega. 

Deut  17.    8  between  stroke  and  stroke,  (being)  matt. 

21.    5  by  their  word  shall,  .every  stroke  be  (tr.) 

Psa.  39.  10  Remove  thy  stroke  away  from  me:  I  am 

7.  A  sufficiency,  pt'^'  sepheq. 

Job'  36  18  lest  he  take  thee  away  with  (his)  stroke 
STRONG,  (stronger  one,  man,  most)  — 
l.A  mighty  one,  1*3M  abbir. 

Psa   22.  i2  strong  (bulls)  of  Bashan  have  beset  me  ro. 

Jer.    8. 16  sound  of  the  neighing  of  his  strong  ones 
47,   3  stamping  of  the  hoofs  of  his  strong  (hor  ) 


STRONG 


942 


STRONG    HOLD 


2.  Perennial,  enduring,  jnx,  J£PN  ethan. 

Nurn  24.  21  Strong  is  thy  dwelling  place,  and  thou 
Job    33.  19  and  the  multitude  oi  his  bones  with  str. 
Jer.  49. 19  come  up.  .against  the  habitation  of  the  at. 
50.  44  come  up.  .unto  the  habitation  of  the  str. 
Mic.   6.    2  Hear,  .ye  strong  foundations  of  the  earth 

Z.A  mighty  one,  a  god,  7N  el. 

Eze.  32.  21  The  strong  among  the  mighty  shall  speak 

4. Strong  one,  f'SN,  pax  ammits. 

2  Sa.  15.  12  conspiracy  was  strong ;  for  the  people  in. 
Job     9.  19  If  (I  speak)  of  strength,  lo,  (he  is)  strong 
Isa.   28.    2  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty  and  strong  one 
40. 26  for  that  (he  is)  strong  in  power ;  not  one 

5. To  cut  of,  fence,  *is?  batsar. 

Neh.   9.  25" they  took  strong  cities,  and  a  fat  land,  and 
S.Mighty,  "lisa  gihbor, 

1  Sa.  14.  52  when  Raul  saw  any  strong  man,  or  any  va. 

2  Ki.  24. 16  all.  .strong,  .apt  for  war,  even  them  the 
Psa.  19.  5  (and)  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a 
Prov  30.  30  A  lion,  .strongest  among  beasts,  and  tur. 
Keel.  9.  11  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong,  neither  yet 
Joel  3. 10  into  spears :  let  the  weak  say,  I  (am)  strong 

7.  A  bone,  cna  gerem. 

Gen.  49.  14  Issachar  (is)  a  strong  ass  couching  down 
8. Strong,  hard.,  pjn  chazaq. 

Exod.  6.    1  for  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  let  them 

6.    1  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  drive  them 

10.  19  turned  a  mighty  strong  west  wind,  which 

13.    9  for  with  a  strong  hand  hath  the  Lord  br. 

Num  13.  iS  whether  they  (be)  strong  or  weak,  few  or 

13.  31  We  be  not  able,  .for  they  (are)  stronger 

20.  20  with  much  people,  and  with  a  strong  ha. 
Josh  14.  11  As  yet  I  (am  as)  strong  this  day  as  (1  was) 

17. 18  drive  out  the  Canaanites. .  though  they(be) 
JudgiS.  26  when  Mieah  saw  that  they  (were)  too  st. 

1  Ki,   8.  42  For  they  shall  hear,  .of  thy  strong  hand 

19.  11  strong  wind  rent  the  mountains,  and  br. 
Neh.  1.  10  by  thy  great  power,  and  by  thy  strong  ha. 
Job  37.  18  sky,  (which  is)  strong,  (and)  as  a  molten 
Psa.  35.  10  deliverest.  .from  him  that  is  too  strong 

136.  12  With  a  strong  hand,  and  with  a  stretched 
Isa.   27.    1  with  his  sore  ami  great  and  strong  sword 

40.  10  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong  (hand) 
Jer.  21.    5  with  a  strong  arm,  even  in  anger,  and  in 

31.  11  from  the  hand  of  (him  that  was)  stronger 

32.  21  with  a  strong  hand,  and  with  a  stretched 
50.  34  Their  Redeemer  (is)  strong  ;  The  Lord  of 

Eze.    3.    8  have  made  thy  face  strong  against  their 
3.    8  thy  forehead  strong  against  their  forehe. 
26.  17  renowned  city,  which  wast  strong  in  the 
30.  22  will  break  his  arms,  the  strong,  and  that 
34.  16  but  1  will  destroy  the  fat  and  the  strong 

Amos  2.  14  strong  shall  not  strengthen  his  force,  ne. 

9. Strong,  hard,  pin  chazeq. 

2  Sa.    3.    1  but  David  waxed  stronger  and  stronger 
10.  Strength,  hardness,  n^in  chozqah. 

Isa.     8. 11  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  with  a  strong  ha. 
11, Force,  might,  tu  chayil. 

2  Ki.   2.  16  there  be  with  thy  servantsflftystrongmen 

1  Ch.26.    7  whose  brethren  (were)  strong  men,  Elihu 

26.  9  Meshelemiah  had  sons  and  brethren,  str. 
Eccl.  12.  3  strong  men  shall  bow  themselves,  and  the 
Jer.  48.  14  We  (are)  mighty  and  strong  men  for'  the 

12. Strong,  rich,  |'pn  chasin. 

Psa.  89.    8  who  (is)  a  strong  Lord  like  unto  thee?  or 

IS. Strength,  riches,  jbn  chason. 

Isa.  1.  31  strong  shall  be  as  tow,  and  the  maker  of 
Amos  2.    9  strong  as  the  oaks ;  yet  I  destroyed  his 

li. Abundant,  great,  mighty,  most,  "rVjig  habbw. 
Job     8.    2  the  words  of  thy  mouth  (be  like)  a  strong 

15.  Fenced  place,  lyaa  mibtsar. 

Josh  19.  29  turneth  to  Ramah,  and  to  the  strong  city 
Psa.ioS.  10  Who  will  bring  me  into  the  strong  city? 

16. Strength,  stronghold,  liys  maoz. 

Psa.  31.  2  lie  thou  my  strong  rock,  for  an  house  of 
Isa.  17.  9  In  that  day  shall  his  strong  cities  be  as  a 
Dan.  11.  39  Thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strongholds 

17. Siege,  bulwark^  "iteE  mcttsor. 

Psa.  31.  21  his  marvellous  kindness  in  a  strong  city 

60.  9  Who  will  bring  me  (into)  the  strong  city? 

18.  Strong,  fierce,  impudent,  in  az. 

Exod  14.  21  caused  the  sea  to  go  (back)  by  a  strong 
Num  13.  28  people  (be)  strong  that  dwell  in  the  land 

21.  24  border  of  the  children  of  Amnion  (was)  st. 
Judg  14.  14  and  out  of  the  strong  came  forth  sweetn. 

14.  18  what  (is)  stronger  than  a  lion?  And  lie  said 

2  Sa.  22.  18  He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy 
Psa.  18.  17  lie  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy 
Prov  21.  14  and  a  reward  in  the  bosom  strong  wrath 

30.  25  The  ants  (are)  a  people  not  strong,  yet  th. 
Song  8.  6  for  love  (is)  strong  as  death  ;  jealousy  (is) 
Isa.  25.  3  Therefore  shall  the  strong  people  glorify 
Eze.  7.  24  will  also  make  the  pomp  of  the  strong  to 
Amos  5.  9  streugtheneth  the  spoiled  against  the  st. 
1Q. Strength,  hardness;  »jj  0%. 

Judg.  9.  51  But  there  was  a  strong  tower  within  the 
Psa,   30.    7  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand  strong 

61.  3  shelter  for  me,  (and)  a  strong  tower  from 
71.  7  unto  many  :  but  thou  (art)  my  strong  re. 
89.  10  scattered  thine  enemies  with  thy  strong 

rrovio.  15  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 
14-  26  In  the  fear  of  the  LuRD(is)  strong  confld. 


Prov.  i3. 10  The  name  of  the  Lord  (is)  a  strong  tower 
18.  11  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 

18.  19  (is  harder  to  be  won)  than  a  strong  city 

24.  5  A  wise  man  (is)  strong ;  yea,  a  man  of  kn. 
Isa.  26.  1  We  have  a  strong  city ;  salvation  will  (G.) 
Jer.  48.  17  How  is  the  strong  staff  broken,  (and)  the 
Eze.  19.  11  she  had  strong  rods  for  the  sceptres  of  th. 

19.  12  her  strong  rods  were  broken  and  withered 

19.  14  so  that  she  hath  no  strong  rod  (to  be)  asc. 
26. 11  strong  garrisons  shall  go  down  to  the  gr. 

20.  Strong,  my  izzuz. 

Psa.  24.  8  Lord  strougandmighty,theLoRDmighty 
21. Substantial,  bony,  uny  atsum. 

Josh  23.   9  hath  driven  out . .  great  nations  and  strong 

Psa.  10.  10  that  the  poor  may  fall  by  his  strong  ones 

Prov.  7.  26  many  strong  (men)have  been  slain  by  her 

Isa.     8.    7  strong  and  many,  (even)  the  king  of  Ass. 

53.  12  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong 

60.  22  a  small  one  a  strong  nation  :  I  the  Lord 

Joel    1.    6  strong,  and  without  number,  whose  teeth 

2.    2  a  great  people  and  a  strong ;  there  hath 

2.    5  as  a  strong  people  set  in  battle  array 

2.  11  for  (he  is)  strong  that  executethhis  word 

Mid.    4.    3  rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off;  and  they 

4.  7  her  that  was  cast  far  off  a  strong  nation 
Zech.  8.  22  many  people  and,  strong  nations  shall  co. 

22. Substance,  bone,  Dxy  otsem. 

Job  30.  21  with  thy  strong  hand  thou  opposest  thys. 
23. Substantial,  bony  things,  rnoi'y  atstsumoth. 

Isa.  41.21  bring  forth  your  strong  (reasons),  saith  the 
24.  Terrible,  yny  arits. 

Provn.  16  retaineth honour;  and  strong(men)retain 
25. .A  rock,  stone,  lis  tsur. 

Psa.  71.   3  Bethoumystronghabitation,  whereunto 

26.  To  bind,  be  strong,  t^  qasliar. 

Gen.  30.  42  feebler  were  Laban's,  and  the  stronger  J. 

27.  To  be  boitnd,  strong,  ^wq  qashar,  4. 

Gen.  30.  41  whensoever  the  stronger  cattle  did  con. 
28, Strong,  mighty,  fj^fl  taqqiph. 

Dan.   2.  40  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron 

2.  42  kingdom  shall  be  partly  strong,  and  partly 
7.    7  dreadful  and  terrible,  and  strong  exceed. 

29, AbU', powerful,  Swards  dunatos. 

E.om.15.    1  We  then  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the 
2  Co.  12.  10  for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong 
1 3.    9  glad  when  we  are  weak,  and  ye  are  strong 

30.  Energy,  ■inworking,  eVe/ryem  energeia. 

2  Th.  2.  11  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong 

31.  Strong,  robust,  laxvpos  ischuros. 

Matt.  12.  29  Or  else  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strong 

12.  29  except  he  first  bind  the  strong  man?  and 
Mark  3.  27  No  man  can  enter  into  a  strongman's  ho. 

3.  27  except  (he  will  first  bind  the  strong  man 
Luken.  21  When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  pa 
1  Co.  4. 10  we  (are)  weak,  but  ye  (are)strong:  ye  (are) 
Heb.    5.    7  offered  up  prayers,  .with  strong  crying 

6.  18  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who 
1  Jo.  2.  14  written  unto  you.  .because  ye  are  strong 
Rev.   5.    2  saw  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  a  lo. 

18.  8  for  strong  (is)  the  Lord  God  who  judgeth 

32.  Stronger,  more  rolmst,  \axvP°reP°s  ischuroteros. 
Luken.  22  when  a  stronger  than  heshall  come  upon 

1  Co.    1.  25  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men 

10. 22  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord,  .are  we  stronger 

33.  Great,  p.eyas  megas. 

Rev.  18.  2  [cried  mightily  with  a  strong  voice,  saying] 
Si. Firm,  standing,  o-repeos  stereos. 

Heb.    5. 12  have  need  of  milk,  and  not  of  strong  me. 

5.  14  But  strong  meat  belongeth  to  them  that 

STRONG,  stronger,  to  be,  become,  be  made,  be  too  — 
1.7V?  be  or  become  strong,  ]7?n  amats. 

Gen.  25.  23  people  shall  be  stronger  than  (the  other) 

2  Sa.22.  18  delivered  me.  .for  they  were  too  strong 
Psa.  18.  17  delivered  me.  .for  they  were  too  strong 

142.    6  deliver  me.  .for  they  are  stronger  than  I 

2.  To  be  or  become  mighty,  is-i  gabar. 

2  Sa.  1.  23  swifterthan  eagles,  they  were  stronger  th. 
3.7V>  be  or  become  strong,  hard,  pin  chazaq. 

Deutn.    8  that  ye  may  be  strong,  and  go  in  and  pos. 

31.  6,  7,  23  Be  strong,  and  of  a  good  courage 
Josh.  t.    6,  q,  iS  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage 

1.    7  Only  be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous 

10.  25  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage  :  for  thus 

Judg.  1.  28  it  cane  to  pass,  when  Israel  was  strong 

2  Sa.  10.  11  If  the  Syrians  be  too  strong  for  me,  then 

io.  11  children  of  Ammon be  too  strong  for  thee 

13.  14  being  stronger  than  she,  forced  her,  and 
16.  21  hands  of  all  that  (are)  with  thee  be  strong 

1  Ki.   1.    2  lie  thou  strong  therefore,  and  show  thys. 

20.  23  were  stronger  than  we  ;  but  let  us  fight 
20.  23,  25  surely  we  shall  be  stronger  than  they 

1  Ch.19.  i2  If  thr  Syrians  be  too  strong  for  me,  then 

19.  12  children  of  Amnion  be  too  strong  for  thee 
22.  13  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage;  dread  not 
28.  10  chosen  thee  to  build  nn  house.  ■  be  strong 
28.  20  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage  and  do  (it) 

2  Ch.15.    7  Be  ye  strong  therefore,  and  let  not  your 

25.  8  Butif  thou  Wilt  go,  do  (it>,be  strong  for  the 

26.  15  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was  sfcro. 

32.  7  Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid 
Ezra  9.  12  that  ye  may  be  strong,  and  eat  the  good 
Isa.   28.  22  lestyour  bands  be  made  strong,  for  I  have 


Isa.  35.  4  Be  strong,  fear  not:  behold,  your  God  will 
Jer.  20.  7  thou  art  stronger  than  I,  and  hastpreva. 
Eze.    3. 14  but  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  strong  upon 

22.  14  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days  that 
Dan.  10. 19  peace(be)uutothee  ;  be  strong,  .be strong 

11.    5  king  of  the  south  shall  be  strong,  and  (one) 
11.    5  he  shall  be  strong  above  him,  and  have 
Hag.    2.   4  Yet  now  be  strong,  .be  strong,  0  Joshua 
2.   4  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  saith 
Zech.  8.    9  Let  your  hands  be  strong,  ye  that  hear  in 
8.  13  fear  not,  (but)  let  your  hands  be  strong 
4.7V?  cause  to  be  strong  or  hard,  pin  chazaq,  5. 
Dan.  11.  32  people,  .shall  be  strong,  and  do  (exploits) 

5. To  strengthen  self,  pin  chazaq,  7. 

1  Sa.   4.   9  Be  strong,  and  quit  yourselves  like  men 

6. Strength,  npin  chozqah. 

2  Ch.26.  16  But  when  he  was  strong,  his  heart  was 
7.  To  be  or  become  or  make  strong,  i]u  azaz. 

Psa.  89.  13  strong  is  thy  hand,  (and)  high  is  thy  right 
8. To  be  substantial,  bony,  □*»  atsam. 

Psa.  38.  19  mine  enemies  (arc)  lively,  (and)  they  are  s. 

Isa.    31.    1  in  horsemen,  because  they  are  very  stro. 

Dau.    8.    8  when  he  was  strong,  the  great  horn  was 

11.  23  and  shall  become  strong  with  a  small  pe. 

9.7*0  be  moved,  strengthened,  lis  pazaz. 

Gen.  49.  24  arms  of  his  hands  were  made  strong  by 
10.  To  be  or  become  high  or  strong,  2fy  sagafy. 

Deut.  2.  36  there  was  not  one  city  too  strong  for  us 
11.77)  be  or  become  strong,  *)p.B  teqeph. 

Dan.  4.  11  tree  grew,  and  was  strong,  and  the  heig. 
4.  20  which  grew,  and  was  strong,  whose  heig. 
4. 22  thou,  .that  art  grown  and  become  strong 

12.  TV?  make  powerful  inwardly,  £i/$vvafj.6w  endun. 
Rom.  4.  20  but  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to 
Eph.    6.  10  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 
Heb.  11.  34  out  of  weakness  [were  made  strong],  wa. 
2  Ti.   2.    1  my  son,  be  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in 

13.  TV?  make  strong,  strengthen,  Kparat6a)  krataioo. 

1  C0.16. 13  Watch  ye.  .quit  you  like  men,  be  strong 

STRONG,  to  wax,  be  waxen  — 

l.To  be  or  become  strong  or  hard,  pin  chazaq. 

Josh.  1 7.  73  the  children  of  Israel  were  waxen  strong 

2.  To  make  strong,  strengthen,  Kparat6w  krataioo. 
Luke  1.  80  child  grew.andwaxedstrongin  spirit,  and 

2.  40  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  inspirit,  fl. 
STRONG,  stronger,  to  make,  show  self  — 
l.To  strengthen,  harden,  }'i?x  amats,  3. 

2  Ch.11.  17  made  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solomon  str 
Psa.  80. 15  branch  (that)  thou  madest  strong  for  thy. 

80.  17  Son  of  man  (whom)  thou  madest  strong 

2.7*0  be  or  become  strong  or  hard,  pv}  chazaq. 

Eze.  30.  21  bind  it,  to  make  it  strong  to  hold  the  sw. 

3.  To  strengthen,  harden,  pin  chazaq,  3. 

2  Oh.  11.  12  made  them  exceeding  strong,  having  Jn. 
Nab.  2.  1  make  (thy)  loins  strong,  fortify  thy  power 
4.7*0  cause  to  be  strong  or  hard,  pin  chazaq,  5. 
2  Sa.  11.  23  make  thy  battle  more  strong  against  the 
Jer.  51.  12  make  the  watch  strong,  set  up  the  watch. 
Nab.   3.  14  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  brick 

5.7*0  strengthen  self,  pin  chazaq,  7. 

2  Sa.  3.  6  Abner  made  himself  strong  for  the  house 
2  C'h.16.    9  to  show  himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of 

6: To  make  miqhty,  bony,  Gsjj  atsam,  5. 

Psa.  105.  24  and  made  them  stronger  than  their  ene. 

7.  TV?  make  firm,  a-Tepeoto  stereoo. 

Acts    3. 16  hath  made  this  man  strong,  whom  ye  s. 

STRONG  HOLD  — 

l.Cut  of  or  fenced  place,  |Vi£3  bitstsarmu 

Zech.  9. 12  Turn  you  to  the  strong  hold,  yo  prison- 

2.Cut  off  of  fenced  plaee,  *iy?B  mibtsar. 
Num  13.  19  dwell  in,  whether  in  tents,  or  in  strongh. 
2  Sa.24.  7  came  to  the  strong  hold" of  Tyre,  and  toall 
2  Ki.  8.  12  their  strongholds  wilt  thou  seton  Are, and 
Psa.  80.  40  thou  hast  brought  his  strongholds  to  ruin 
Jer.  48.  18  (and)  he  shall  destroy  thy  strong  holds 
Lam.  2.    2  thrown  down  in  bis  wrath  the  strongholds 

2.  5  he  hath  destroyed  hisstrong  holds,  andba. 
Dan.  11.  24  forecast  his  devices  against  the  strong  h. 
Mic.    5.  11  and  throw  down  all  thy  strongholds 
Nah.    3.  12  All  thy  strongholds  (shall be  like)ngtrees 

3.  14  fortify  thy  strong  holds :  go  into  clay,  and 
Hab.    1.  10  they  shall  deride  every  strong  hold;  for 

3.-4  strong  place,  strong  hold,  i^o  maoz. 

Isa.  23.  11  merchant  (city),  to  destroy  the  strong  ho. 
Nah.   1.    7  LORD  (is)  good,  a  strong  hold  in  the  day  of 

4. A  fortress,  "i$[J3  metsad. 

Judg.  6.    2  mountains,  and  caves,  and  strong  holds 

1  Sa.  23.  14  abode  in  the  wilderness  in  strong  holds 

23.  19  David  hide  himself  with  usin  strongholds 
23.  29  And  David.. dwelt  in  strongholds  at  E.-g. 

Jer.  4S.  41  Kerioth  is  taken,  and  the  strong  holds  are 
5.  A  fortress,  ."HisB  mrtsudah. 

2  Sa.    5.    7  Nevertheless  David  took  the  strong  hold 

G.7h/hrark,  115B  tnatsor. 

Zech.  9.    3  Tyrusdid  build  herself  a  strong  hold,  and 
7 .Bulwark,  fTJWD  mctsurah. 

2  Ch.11.  11  fortified  Che  strong  holds,  and  put  captains 


STRONG 


943 


SUBSTANCE 


S.Clif,  rock,  ySp  sela. 

Isa.   31.  g  he  shall  pass  over  to  his  strong  hold  for  fe. 

9.  Sigh  place,  hsy  opkel. 

Mic.   4.   8  stronghold  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  unto 

10.  A  strong  hold,  o^upaj/xct  ochuroma. 

2  Co.  10.  4  mighty,  .to  the  pulling  dowu  of  strong  h. 
STRONG  pieces,  place  — 
1. Strong  one,  bar,  p'SK  aphiq. 

Job  40. 18  His  bones(are  as)  strong  pieces  of  brass 
2.  A  fortress,  nils!?  metsudaji. 

Job  39.  28  dwelleth.  .upon  the  crag,  .the  strong  pi. 
STRONGER  and  stronger,  to  be  — 
To  add  strength,  |*£K  ^p;  yasaph,  5,  omets. 

Job  17.   g  clean  hands  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger 

STRUGGLE  together,  to  — 

To  struggle  together,  ysi  ratsals,  7a. 

Gen.  25.  22  children  struggled  together  within  her 
STUBBLE  — 
I. Stubble,  ti;p  qash. 

Exod.  5. 12  scattered,  .togather  stubble  instead  of  st. 

15-    7  thy  wrath,  (which)  consumed  them  as  st. 

Job  13.  25  and  wilt  thou  pursue  the  dry  stubble? 

41.  28  sling  stones  are  turned  with  him  into  st. 

41.  29  Parts  are  counted  as  stubble:  helaugheth 

Psa.  83.  13  make  them  like  a  wheel ;  as  the  stubble 

Isa.   ;  5.  24  Therefore  as  the  fire  devoureth  the  stub. 

38. 11  ye  shall  bring  forth  stubble  :  your  breath 

40.  24  whirlwind  shall  take  them  away  as  stub. 

41.  2  dust  to  his  sword,  (and)  as  driven  stubble 
47.  14  they  shall  be  as  stubble ;  the  fire  shall  bu. 

Jer.   13.  24  Therefore  will  I  scatter  them  as  the  stub. 
Joel    2.    5  flame  of  fire  that  devoureth  the  stubble 
Obad.      18  house  of  Esau  for  stubble,  and  they  shall 
Nan.    1.  10  they  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully 
Mai.    4.    1  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble :  and 

2.  Straw,  }3B  teben. 

Job  21. 18  They  are  as  stubble  before  the  wind,  and 

Z.Straiu,  stubble,  KaXdfxr}  kalame. 

1  Co.    3.  12  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stub. 
STUBBORN,  stubbornness  — 
l.To  be  refractory,  stubborn,  Tip  sarar. 

Deut  21.  18  If  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  rebellious 
21.  20  This  our  son  (is)  stubborn  and  rebellious 

Tsa.  78.    8  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  generation,  a  g. 

Prov.  7. 11  She  (is)  loud  and  stubborn ;  her  feet  abide 

2.  To  press  in,  be  stubborn,  ")£S  patsar,  5. 

1  Sa.  15.  23  stubbornness  (is  as)  iniquity  and  idolatry 
S.Shaip,  hard,  fif^iJ  qasheh. 

Judg  2.  19  they  ceased  not.  .from  their  stubborn  way 
4. Sharpness,  hardn-ess;  Tp  qeshi. 

Deut.  9. 27  look  not  unto  the  stubbornness  of  this  pa. 
STUCK  — 
To  crush,  strike,  Tiyip  maalc. 

1  Sa.  26.  7-spear  stuck  in  the  ground  at  his  bolster 
STUDS  — 

Engraving,  studs,  ni"i?3  neqitddoth. 

Song   1.  11  will  make  thee  borders  of  gold,  with  studs 
STUDY,  (to)  — 
l.To  meditate,  utter,  mutter,  rnn  hagah. 

Prov.15.  28  heart  of  the  righteous  studieth  to  answer 

24.  2  For  their  heart  studieth  destruction,  and 

2. Study,  :nS  lahag. 

Eccl.12.  12  and  much  study  (is)  a  weariness  of  the  fle. 

3.  To  use  diligence,  make  speed,  o-irovb'dfa  spoudazo. 

2  Ti.    2.  15  Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God 

4.  To  esteem  as  an  honour,  (piKon/Ato/iai.  philotimeo. 

1  Th.  4.  11  that  ye  study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your 
STUFF  — 

1.  Vessel,  instrument,  "b^  keli. 

Gen.  31.  37  Whereas  thou  hast  searched  all  my  stuff 
31. 37  hast  thou  found  of  all  thy  household  stuff 
45.  20  Also  regard  not  your  stuff ;  for  the  good 
Exod22.  7  If  a  man  shall  deliver,  .money  orstuff  to 
Josh.  7  11  have  put  (it)  even  among  their  own  stuff 
1  Sa.  10.  22  Behold,  he  hath  hid  himself  among  the 

25.  13  men  ;  and  two  hundred  abode  by  the  stuff 
30.  24  his  part  (be)  that  tarriethby  thestuff :  th. 

Neh.  13.   8  cast  forth  all  the  household  stuff  of  Tobi. 
Eze.  12.    3  prepare  thee  stuff  forremoving,andremo. 

12.    4  bring  forth  thy  stuff,  .as  stuff  forremovi. 

12.  7  brought  forth  my  stuff  by  day,  as  stuff  for 

2.  Work,  n3N^?  melakah. 

Exod  36.    7'For  the  stuff  they  had  was  sufficient  for 

3.  Vessel,  instrument,  arnevos  skeuos. 

Lukei7  31  his  stuff  in  the  house,  let  him  not  come 
STUMBLE,  to  (cause  to)  — 
l.To  stumble,  hys  kashal. 

Psa.  27.   2  to  eat  up  my  flesh,  they  stumbled  and  fell 

Isa.     5.  27  None  shall  be  weary  nor  stumble  among 

8.  15  many  among  them  shall  stumble,  and  fall 

59.  10  we  stumble  at  noon  day  as  in  the  night,  we 

Jer.  46.   6  they  shall  stumble,  and  fall  toward  the  no. 

46. 12  mighty  man  hath  stumbled  against  the 
50.  32  most  proud  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and 

Nah.   3.    3  corpses;  they  stumble  upon  their  corpses 


l.To  be  stumbled,  ^| kashal,  2. 

1  Sa.  2.  4  they  thatstumbled  are  girded  with  stren. 
Prov.  4.  12  when  thou  runnest,  thou  shalt  not  stumble 
4.  19  they  know  not  at  what  they  stumble 
24.  17  let  not  thine  heart  be  glad  when  he  stum. 
Isa.  63.  13  That  led  them,  .(that)  they  should  not  st. 
Jer.   20. 11  therefore  my  persecutors  shall  stumble 

31.  9  way,  wherein  they  shall  not  stumble;  for 
Dan.  11.  19  heshallstumbleandfall,  and  not  be  found 
Nah.    2.    3  they  shall  stumble  in  their  walk;  they  sh. 

3.  To  cause  to  stumble,  Vps  kashal,  5. 

Jer.   18.  15  have  caused  them  to  stumble  in  their  wa. 

Mai.    2.    8  ye  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the 
\.To  smite,  plague,  *]3j  nagaph. 

Prov.  3.  23  walk,  .safely,  and  thy  foot  shall  not  stu. 
5. To  smite  or  plague  self,  q3j  nagaph,  7. 

Jer.  13.  16  before  your  feet  stumble  upon  the  dark 

6.  To  stumble,  smite  together,  pis  puq. 

Isa.  28.   7  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  (in)  jud. 

7.  To  release,  let  go,  throw  down,  B£y>  shamat. 

1  Cii.  13.    9  hand  to  hold  the  ark;  for  the  oxen  stum. 
3. To  strike  against,  ttpoo-k6ttto)  proskopto. 

Johun.    9  If  any  man  walk  in  the  day,  he  stum,  not 

11.  10  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth 
Rom.  9.  32  for  they  stumbled  at  that  stumbling  stone 

14.  21  whereby  thy  brother  stumbleth,  oris  off. 
1  Pe.  2.   8  which  stumble  at  the  word,  being  disobe. 

9.7*0  stumble,  fall,  irraiw  ptaio. 

Rom.  11.  11  Have  they  stumbled  that  they  should  fall 

STUMBLING  (block  or  stone)  — 
1. Stumbling  block,  Vicgp  mikshol. 

Lev.  ig.  14  Thoushalt  not.  .put  a  stumblingblockbe. 

Isa.   57.  14  take  up  the  stumbling  block  out  of  the 

Jer.    6.  21  I  will  lay  stumbling  blocks  before  this  pe. 

Eze.     3.  20  lay  a  stumbling  block  before  him,  he  shall 

7.  19  because  it  is  the  stumbling  block  of  their 
14.  3  put  the  stumbling  block  of  their  iniquity 
14.   4,  7  putteth  the  stumbling  block  of  his  iniq. 

%  Stumbling  block,  n^c;;D  makshelah. 

Zeph.  1.   3  and  the  stumbling  blocks  with  the  wicked 
%.A  stroke,  plague,  *])}_  negeph. 

Isa.     8.  14  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  for  a  rock  of 

i.A  sinking  against,  stumbling  block,  Tvpoo-KOfxfxa. 
Rom  14.  13  rather,  that  no  man  put  a  stumbling  bl. 
1  Co.  8.  9  liberty  of  yours  become  a  stumbling  block 
1  Pe.  2.   Sa  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence 

D.Stone  of  stumbling,  \iQos  too  'KpoaKoij.fj.a.ros. 
Rom.  9.  32  for  they  stumbled  at  that  stumbling  stone 
9.  33  lay  in  Zion  a  stumbling  stone  and  rock  of 

Q.A  trap,  gin,  stumbling  block,  uKavHaXov  skand. 
Romn.  9  stumbling  block,  and  a  recompence  unto 
1  Co.  1.23  crucified,  unto  the  Jewsastumblingblock 
Rev.  2.  14  taught  Balac  to  cast  a  stumbling  block  be. 

STUMP  — 

Root,  ")py  iqqar. 

Dan.  4. 15  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots  in  the  earth 
4.  23  yet  leave  the  stump  of  the  roots  thereof 
4.  26  commanded  to  leave  the  stump  of  the  tree 

SU'-AH,  ma  riches,  distinction. 

An  Asherite,  eldest  son  of  Zophah.     B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.7.  36  The  sons  of  Zophah;  S.,  and  Harnepher 

SUBDUE  (unto,  be  subdued),  to  — 

l.To  lead  forth,  133  dabar,  5. 

Psa.  18.  47  God  that  avengeth  me,  and  subdueth  the 
47.    3  He  shall  subdue  the  people  under  us,  and 

2.  To  make  feeble,  Styrr  chashal. 
.   Dan.  2. 40  iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  subdueth  all 

3.7*0  go  down,  tv  yarccd. 

Deut  20.  20  shalt  build  bulwarks . .  until  it  be  subdued 

A,  To  subdue,  V23  kabash. 

Gen.    1.  28  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it,  and 
Mic.    7. 19  he  will  subdue  our  iniquities;  and  thou 

'-    Zech.  9.  15  shall  devour,  and  subdue  with  sling  stones 

5.  To  be  subdued,  ea|  kabash,  2. 

Nuni32.  22  land  be  subdued  before  the  Lord;  then 

32.  29  land  shall  be  subdued  before  you;  then 
Josh  i3.    1  And  the  land  Mas  subdued  before  them 

1  Ch.22.  18  land  is  subdued  before  the  Loud,  and  be. 

6.  To  subdue,  Eb|  kabash,  3. 

2  Sa.    S.  11  dedicated  of  all  nations  which  he  subdued 

7.  To  be  humbled,  jn|  kana,  2. 

Judg  3.  30  So  Moab  was  subdued  thatday  under  the 

8.  28  Thus  was  Midian  subdued  before  the  chi. 
11.  33  Thus  the  children  of  Amnion  were  subd. 

1  Sa.   7.  13  So  the  Philistines  were  subdued,  and  they 

1  Ch.20.   4  there  arose  war.  .and  they  were  subdued 
S.To  make  humble,  y:3  kana,  5. 

Judg.  4.  23  So  God  subdued  on  that  clay  Jabin  the  ki. 

2  Sa.   8.    1  smote  the  Philistines,  and  subdued  them 

1  Ch.17.  10  Moreover  I  will  subdue  all  thine  enemies 

18.    t  smote  the  Philistines,  and  subdued  them 
Neh.    9.  24  subduedst  before  them  the  inhabitants  of 
Psa.  81.  14  I  should  soon  have  subdued  their  enemies 
9. To  cause  to  bow  or  bend,  y~]3  kara,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  40  them  that  rose  up.  .hast  thou  subdued 
Psa.  18.  39  thou  hast  subdued  under  me  those  that 

10.  7*o  subdue,  Tnradad. 

Psa.  144.    2  (he)  in  whom  I  trust ;  who  subdueth  my 
Isa.  45.    1  whose  right  hand  I  have  holden,  to  sub. 


11.  To  make  low  or  humble,  Vs^  shephal,  5. 

Dan.   7.  24  diverse  from  the  first,  and  he  shall  subdue 

12.  To  agonize  or  contend  against,  tear  ay  tiivi^ofiai. 
Heb.  11.  33  Wlio  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wr. 

13.ro  set  in  array  under,  virordaaw  hupotasso. 
1  Co.  15.  28  when  all  things  shall  be  subdued  unto  him 
Phil.   3.  21  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  th. 

SUBJECT  (to  or  unto,  to  be  or  make)  — - 

I. Held  in,  subject  or  liable  to,  evoxos  enochos. 

Heb.    2.  15  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bmdage 

2. To  set  in  array  under,  virordcro'co  hupotasso. 

Luke  2.  51  was  subject  unto  them  :  but  his  mother 

10.  17  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto  us  thro. 

10.  20  rejoice  not,  that  the  spirits  are  subject  u. 

Rom,  8.    7  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  ne. 

8.  20  For  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  va. 

13.    1  Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher 

13.    5  Wherefore  (ye)  must  needsbe  subject,  not 

1  Co.  14.  32  spirit  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the 

15.  28  shall  the  Son  also  himself  be  subject  unto 

Eph.   5.  24  Therefore  as  the  church  is  subject  unto  C. 

Titus  3.    1  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  priuc. 

1  Pe.   2.  18  Servants,  (be)  subject  to  (your)  masters 

3.  22  authorities  and  powers  being  made  su.  u. 

5.   5  Yea,  all  (of  you)  [be  subject]  one  to  anot. 

SUBJECT,  to  — 

7*o  set  in  array,  vTrordafrio  hupdtassd. 

Rom.  8.  20  by  reason  of  him  who  hath  subjected  the 
SUBJECTION,  (to  be,  bring,  put,  in,  into,  under)  — 
1.7*0  subdue,  cb3  kabash,  1,  5. 

Jer.  34.  11,  16  to  return,  and  brought  them  into  sub. 
2.7*0  be  humbled,  S?33  kana,  2. 

Psa  106.  42  aud  they  were  brought  into  subjection  un. 
3.  7*o  lead  into  servitude,  BovXaycoyccc  doulagdgcd. 

1  Co.  9.  27  bring  (it)into  subjection ;  lest  that  byany 
4. Subjection,  submission,  {nrorayf)  hupotagc. 

2  Co.  9.  13  glorify  God  for  your  professed  subjection 
Gal.  2.  5  To  whom  we  gave  place  by  subjection,  no 
1  Ti.    2.  11  woman  learn  in  silence  with  all  subjection 

3.    4  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all 

5,  To  put  in  array  under,  v-Kordauta  hupotasso. 
Heb.    2.    5  unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  in  subje. 
2.    8  hast  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his 

2.  8  For  in  that  he  put  all  in  subjection  under 
12.    9  much  rather  be  in  subjection  unto  the  Fa. 

1  Pe.  3.    1  wives,  (be)  in  subjection  to  your  own  hu. 

3.  5  being  in  subjection  unto  their  own  husb. 

SUBMIT  (self,  unto),  to  — 

1.7*0  lie,  feign,  v~3  kachasli,  3. 

Psa.  18.  44  strangers  shall  submit  themselves  unto 

66.   3  thine  enemies  submit  themselves  untoth. 

81.  15 haters,  .should  havesubmittedtheiusel.u 

2. 7*o  feign  self  obedient,  t;ri3  kachash,  7. 

2  Sa.  22.  45  Strangers  shall  submit  themselves  unto 
3.7*o  give  the  hand,  t  jri3  nathan  yad. 

1  Ch.29.  24  submitted  themselves  unto  Solomon  the 
4.7*0  htcmble  self,  nity  anah,  7. 

Gen.  16.  9  Return  to  thy  mistress,  and  submit  thys. 
5.7*0  humble  or  stir  up  self,  cgn  raphas,  7 

Psa.  68.  30  submit  himself  with  pieces  of  silver:  scat. 
6.7*0  yield  under  or  submissively,  un-ef/cw  hupeiko. 

Heb.  13.  17  Obey  them,  .and  submit  yourselves ;  for 
7. 7*o  set  in  array  under,  inroTdtra-co  KupotassG. 

Rom  10.    3  have  not  submitted  themselves  unto  the 

1  Co.  16.  16  That  ye  submit  yourselves  unto  such,  and 

Eph.   5.  21  Submitting  yourselves  one  to  another  in 

5.  22  Wives,  [submit  yourselves  unto]  your  own 
Col.  3.  18  Wives,  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own 
Jas.  4.  7  Submit  yourselves  therefore  to  God.  Res. 
1  Pe.   2.  13  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of 

5-   5  3"e  younger,  submit  yourselves  unto  the 
SUBORN,  to  — 

To  cast  or  throw  under,  suborn,  v-rrofidwu}  hupab. 
Acts   6. 11  Then  they  suborned  men,  which  said  We 
SUBSCRIBE,  to  — 
To  write,  3rj3  kathab. 

Isa.   44.    5  anothershall  subscribe(with)hishand  un. 

Jer.  32.  10  I  subscribed  the  evidence,  and  sealed  (it) 

32.  12  witnessses  that  subscribed  the  book  of  the 

32.  44  subscribe  evidences,  and  seal  (chem),  and 

SUBSTANCE  — 
1.  Strength,  ptt  on. 

Hos.12.  8  I  have  found  me  out  substance  :  (in)all  my 
2. Mischief,  calamity,  desire,  fivj  havvah. 

Prov  10.  3  casteth  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked 
3.  Wealth,  substance,  sufficiency,  fin  hon. 

Prov.  1.  13  We  shall  find  all  precious  substance,  we 
3.   9  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  anil 

6.  31  he  shall  give  all  the  substance  of  his  hou. 
12.  27  the  substance  of  a  diligent  man  (is)  prec. 

28.  8  He  that  by  usury . .  increaseth  his  substance 

29.  3  keepeth  company,  .spendeth  (his)  substa. 
Song  8.    7  if  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of 

4. Force,  might,  wealth,  ?:n  chayil. 

Deut  33. 11  Bless,  Lord,  hissubstance,  and  accept  the 

Job     5.   s  the  robber  swalloweth  up  their  substance 

15.  29  shall  not  be  rich,  neither  shall  Ins  subet* 


SUBSTANCE 


944 


SUCH 


Job    20.  18  according  to  (his)  substance  (shall)  the  re. 
Jer.    15.  13  Thy  substance  and  thy  treasures  will  I 

17.  3  I  will  give  thy  substance  (and)  all  thy  tr. 
obad.  13  nor  have  laid  (hands)  on  their  substance 
Mic   4.  13  consecrate.. their  substance  unto  the  Lo. 

5. Stock,  trunk,  nnsra  matstscbcth. 

Isa.     6. 13  as  an  oak,  whose  substance  (is)  in  them 

6.  13  the  holy  seed  (shall  be)  the  substance  th. 

6.  A  living  substance,  Dip*  yequm. 

Gen.    7.   4  every  living  substance  that  I  have  made 

7.  23  every  living  substance  was  destroyed  wh. 
Deut  11.    6  swallowed  them  up . .  and  all  the  substance 

7. Existence,  substance,  i?'  yesh. 

Prov.  8.  21  cause  those  that  love  me  to  inherit  subst. 
S.Power,  H3  koach. 

Job     6.22  or,  Give  a  reward  for  me  of  your  substance 
§.  Acquisition,  possession,  rrjjrp  iniqneh. 

Job     1.    3  liis  substance  also  was  seven  thousand  sh. 
1.  10  and  his  substance  is  increased  in  the  land 
10. Substance,  bone,  c^y  otsem, 

Psa.139.  15  My  substance  was  not  hid  from  thee,  wli. 
11. Standing  substance,  D'p  qim. 

Job   22.  20  Whereas  our  substance  is  not  cut  down 
V2. Acquisition,  jwssession,  j;:p  qinyan. 

Gen.  34.  23  their  cattle  and  their  substance  and  every 
36.    6  all  his  beasts,  and  all  his  eubstance,  which 

Josh. 14.   4  suburbs  for  their  cattle  and  for  their  sub. 

Psa.  105.  21  made  him  lord,  .and  ruler  of  all  his  subs. 

13.    What  is  gathered  together,  goods,  c:0"t  rekush. 

Gen.  12.    5  all  their  substance  that  they  had  gathered 

13.    6  then?  substance  was  great,  so  that  they  co. 

15. 14  shall  they  come  out  with  great  substance 

1  Ch.27.  31  All  these  (were)  therulersof  thesnbstance 

28.  1  stewards  overall  the  substance  and  posse. 
■x  Ch.21. 17  carried  away  all  the  substance  (that  was) 

31.  3  also  the  king's  portion  of  his  substance  for 

32.  29  for  God  hath  given  him  substauce  very 
35.    7  buUodks :  these  (were)  of  the  king's  subs. 

Ezra  8.  21  inrourlittleones,  andforalloursubstance 
10.    8  all  his  substance  should  be  forfeited,  and 

ll.Substance,  wisdom,  rririn  tushiyyah. 

Job   30.  22  ridc(uponit),anddissolvestmy  substance 
15. Substance,  being,  essence,  ovaia  ousia. 

Lukeis.  13  there  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous 
I  f\. Substance,  goods,  2>roperti(,  vtrap£i$  huparxis. 

Heb.  10.  34  in  heaven  a  better  and  au  enduring  subs. 
17. Things  that  are,  virapxovTa  huparchonta. 

Luke  8.    3  which  ministered  unto  him  of  their  subs. 
IS.  What  stands  under,  substratum,  v-noo-rao-is. 

Heb.  11.   1  Now  faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hop. 
SUBSTANCE,  bein*  yet  imperfect  — 
Embryo,  pW  golem. 

P5X139.  16  did  see  my  substance,  yet  being  imperfect 
SUBTIL,  (to  deal)  subtilely,  subtilty — 
I.Wise,  c?n  chakam. 

2  Sa.  13.    3  and  Jonadab  (was)  a  very  subtil  man 
2.  Deceit,  !"i£-io  mirmah. 

Gen.  27.  35  Thy  brother  came  with  subtilty,  and  hath 
3.7*o  deceive  self,  "?2i  naked,  7. 

Psaio5.  25  turned  their  heart,  .to  deal  subtilely  with 

4.  To  keep,  watch,  reserve,  besiege,  1x3  natsar. 

Prov  7. 10  the  attire  of  an  harlot,  and  subtil  of  hea. 

5.  Subtilty,  crookedness,  nzipu  oqbah. 

2  Ki.  10.  19  Jehu  did  (it)  in  subtilty,  to  the  intentth. 

6.  To  be  crafty,  net  craftily,  n*ii>  aram,  1,  5. 

1  Sa.  23.  22  it  is  told  me  (that)  he  dealeth  very  subtil. 
7. Crafty,  subtile,  qti%  arum. 

Gen.    3.    1  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  beast  of 
8.  Craftiness,  subtilti/,  no-]%  ormah. 

Prov.  1.    4  To  give  subtilty  to  the  simple,  to  the  yo. 
0.  Deceit,  fraud,  guile,  $6\os  dolos. 

Matt26.    4  might  take  Jesus  by  subtilty,  and  kill(h.) 

Acts  13. 10  O  full  of  all  subtilty  and  all  mischief,  (th.) 
10. Unscrujiulousness,  cunning,  wavovpyia  2^anour. 

2  Co.     11.    3  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  bis  subti. 
SUBURB  — 

1. Place  for  driving  out  cattle,  sulncrb,  ehjS  migrash. 
Lev.  25.  34  field  of  the  suburbs  of  their  cities  may  not 
2s  11m  35.    2  unto  the  Levites  suburbs  for  the  cities  ro. 
35.    3  suburbs  of  them  shall  be  for  their  cattle. 
35.  4  suburbs  of  the  cities,  which  ye  shall  give 
35.   5  this  shall  be  to  them  the  suburbs  of  the 
35.   7  cities:  them  (shall  ye  give)  with  their  su. 
Josh.  14.   4  with  their  suburbs  for  their  cattle  and  for 
21.    2  cities.. with  the  suburbs  thereof  for  our 
21.   3  children.,  gave,  .these  cities  and  their  su. 
21.    8  gave,  .these  cities  with  their  suburbs,  as 
21.  11  gave  them  the  city,  .with  the  suburbs  th. 
21.  13  with  her  suburbs.. with  her  suburbs 
[So  inverse  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27, 
28,  29  30,  31   32,  33,  34,  35,  38,  39,  41,  42.] 

1  Cn.  5.  16  they  dwelt,  .in  all  the  suburbs  of  Sharon 
6  55  and  the  suburbs  thereof  round  about  it 
6  57  with  her  suburbs,  .with  her  suburbs 
[So  in  \t-rse  58,   59,  60,  64,  67,   68,  69,  70,  71,  72,   73, 
74i  75.  76,  77.  78,  79.  So,  81J. 


1  Ch.  13.    2  Levites  (which  are)  in  their  cities  (and)  su. 

2  Ch.ir.  14  For  the  Levites  left  their  suburbs,  and  th. 

31. 19  (which  were)  in  the  fields  of  the  suburbs 
Eze.  27.  28  The  suburbs  shall  shake  at  the  sound  of 
45.   2  fifty  cubits  round  about  for  the  suburbs 
48.  15  for  the  city,  for  dwelling,  and  for  suburbs 
48.  17  suburbs  of  the  city  shall  be  toward  the 

2.  Suburb,  or  open  summer  house,  yna  parvor. 

2  Ki.  23.  11  chamber.  .which(was)inthe suburbs, and 
SUBVERT,  subverting,  to  — 
1.  To  deal  or  iise  perversely,  mj;  avath,  3. 

Lam.  3.  36  To  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause,  the  Lord 
2.7*0  subvert,  destroy,  demolish,  avao-Kevdfa  anas. 

Acts  15.  24  subverting  your  souls,  saying,  (Ye  must) 

3.  To  turn  up,  overturn,  avarpeTrv  anatrepo. 

Titus  1.  11  who  subvert  whole  houses,  teaching  thi. 
4.7*o  turn  out  of  the  way,  iKcrrpifpoo  ekst^ho. 

Titus  3. 11  Knowing  that  he  that  is  such  is  subverted 
5.A  turning  down  or  over,  overthrow,  Kara(TTpo(pi}. 

2  Ti.  2.  14  to  no  profit,  (but) to  the  subverting  of  the 
SUCCEED,  to  — 

1.  To  possess,  take  possession,  trv  yarash. 

Deut.  2.  12  but  the  children  of  Esau  succeeded  them 
2.  21  they  succeeded  them,  and  dwelt  in  their 
2.  22  succeeded  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  stead 

i2. 29  succeedest  them,  and  dwellestin  their  la. 

19.   1  succeedest  them,  and  dwellest  in  their 

2.  To  rise  up,  stand  still,  Dip  qum. 

Deut  25.  6  shall  succeed  in  the  name  of  his  brother 
SUC'-COTH,  nap,  ni33  booths. 

1.  A  place  E.  of  Jordan  where  Jacob  went  after  Esau 
departed  from  him,  now  called  Sakut. 

Gen.  33. 17  Jacob  journeyed  to  S.,  and  built  him  an 
33. 17  therefore  the  name  of  the  place  is  called  S. 

2.  The  first  station  of  Israel  after  leaving  Iiameses  in 
Egypt. 

Exod.12.  37  Israel  journeyed  from  Rameses  to  S.,  ab. 

13.  20  they  took  their  journey  from  S.,  and  enc. 
^Iim33-    5  removed  from  Rameses,  and  pitched  in  S. 

33.   6  they  departed  from  S.,  and  pitched  in  Et. 

3.  A  place  in  Gad,  near  Beth-nimrah;  perhaps  the  same 
as  No.  1. 

Josh. 13.  27  Beth-aram,  and  Beth-nimrah,  and  S.,  and 
Jiulg.  8.    5  he  said  unto  the  men  of  S.,  Give,  I  pray 
8.    6  the  princes  of  S.  said,  (Are)  the  hands  of 
8.    8  answered  him  as  the  men  of  S.  had  aus. 
8.  14  caught  a  young  man  of  the  men  of  S.,  and 
8.  14  he  described  unto  him  the  princes  of  S. 
8.  15  he  came  unto  the  men  of  S.,  and  said,  Be. 
8.  16  and  with  them  he  taught  the  men  of  S. 

4.  A  city  in  Ephraim,  near  Zarthan,  now  called  SaJcut. 

1  Ki.  7.  46  in  the  clay  ground  between  S.  and  Zarth. 

2  C'h.  4. 17  in  the  clay  ground  between  .S.  and  Zered. 
Psa.  60.    6  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out.  S. 

108.    7  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out.  .S 
STJC-C0TH  BE'-NOTH,  TfU2  n'i3p  booths  for  the  dang. 
A    Babylonian    god,    mentioned    along'  with  tergal, 
Ashema,  Mbhaz,  Tartah,  Adrummelech,  Annammelech. 
and  other  Assyrian  gods. 

2  Ki.  17.  30  the  men  of  Babylon  made  S.,  and  the  men 
SUCCOUR,  succourer,  to  — 
I. To  gird,  "itn  ozar. 

2  Sa.    8.    5  when  the  Syrians.. came  to  Succour  LTa. 
21. 17  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah  succoured  him 
2.  To  {cause  to)  gird,  *i]K  azar,  5. 

2  Sa.  18.  3  better  that  thou  succour  us  out  of  the  ci. 
3.7*0  come  to  the  help  of,  aid,  assist,  help,  ^oijde'cc. 

2  Co.   6.    2  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I  succoured 

Heb.  2.  18  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted 
4.  One  standing  before,  border,  2^'otector,  irpoararis. 

Rom  16.    2  for  she  hath  beena  succourer  of  many,  and 
SUCH  — 
I. These,  nS<  elleh. 

Deut25.  16  For  all  that  do  such  things,  (and)  allthat 
2.This,  ft  den. 

Dan.  2.  10  asked  such  things  at  any  magician,  or  as. 
o.That,  mmkaliu. 

1  Ki.  10. 10  there  came  no  more  such  abundance  of 
4. As  they,  ens  kahem. 

2  Ch.  9. 11  there  were  none  such  seen  before  in  the 
5. -4s  these,  nan^  kahenvah. 

Gen.  41.  19  such  as  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  Eg. 
Job   23.  14  performeth.  .and  many  such  .(things  are) 

6.  This,  riNin  liazzoth. 

Deut  13.  14  such  abomination  is  wrought  among  you 

7.  This,  JIT  zeh. 

Deut.  5.  29  O  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  thorn 
S.This,  n?rr /,</:;,/,. 

2  Ki.   6.   9  Beware  that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place 

9.  Thus,  n3  koh. 

Isa.  20.    6  Behold,  such  (is)  our  expectation,  whither 

10.  .So,  |3  ken. 

Exod  10.  14  before  them  there  were  no  such  locusts 

11.  Such  and  such,  >±h^  *$ba  peloid  ahnoni. 

1  Sa.  si.   2  appointed  (my)  servantsto  such  and  such 

2  Ki.  6.   8  In  such  and  such  a  place  (shall  be)  my  ca. 


12.  This,  that,  he,  site,  it,  u5<f,  t^vSc  hode,  tende. 

Jas.    4.  13  tomorrow  we  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and 
1Z.  These,  raaJra  tauta. 

1  Co.   6. 11  such  were  some  of  you  ;  but  ye  are  wash, 

14.  Such  as,  roi6a5€  toiosde. 

2  Pe.    1. 17  when  there  came  such  a  voice  to  him  from 

15.  Such  as  this,  toiovtos  toioutos. 

Matt.  q.  8  God,  which  had  given  such  power  unto 
18.  5  whoso  shall  receive  one  such  little  child 
19. 14  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

Mark  4.  33  with  many  such  parables  spake  he  the  wo. 

6.  2  that  even  such  mighty  works  are  wrought 

7.  8  [and  many  other  such  like  things  ye  do] 

7.  13  and  many  such  like  things  do  ye 

9.  37  Whosoever  shall  receive  one  of  such  chi. 

10.  14  forbid  them  not:  for  of  such  is  the  kingd. 

13.  19  affliction,  such  as  was  not  from  the  begin. 
LukeiS.  16  forbid  them  not:  for  of  such  is  the  kingd. 
John  4.  23  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship 

8.  5  [commanded  us,  that  such  should  be  ato.] 

9.  16  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such  mirac. 
Acts  16.  24  having  received  such  a  charge,  thrust  th. 

si.  25  concluded  that  they  observe  no  such  thing 

22.  22  Away  with  such  a  (fellow)  from  the  earth 

26.  29  were  both  almost  and  altogether  such  as 

Rom. 16.  18  For  they  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Lord 

1  Co.  5.    1  such  fornication  as  is  not  so  much  as  na. 

7.  35  a  sister  isnotunder  bondage  in  such(cases^ 

7.  28  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  flesh:  but 
11. 16  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  chur. 
15.  48  As  (is)  the  earthy,  such  (are)  they  also  that 

15.  48  as  (is)  the  heavenly,  such  (are)  they  also 

16.  16  That  ye  submit  yourselves  unto  such,  and 
16.  18  therefore  acknowledge  ye  them  that  are  s. 

2  Co.  2.    6  Sufficient  to  such  a  man  (is)  this  punish. 

3.    4  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God 
3. 12  Seeing  then  that  we  have  such  hope,  we 

10.  11  such  (will  we  be)  also  indeed  when  we  are 

11.  13  For  such  (are) false  apostles,  deceitful  wo. 

12.  3  knew  such  a  man,  whether  in  the  body  or 
Gal.    5.  21  that  they  which  do  such  things  shall  not 

5.  23  Meekness,  temperance:  against  such  there 
Phil.   2.  29  Receive,  .with  all  gladness;  and  hold  such 

2  Th.  3.  12  Now  them  that  are  such  we  commandand 

1  Ti.  6.  5  [gainisgodliness:  fromsuchwithdrawth.] 
Titus  3.  11  Knowing  that  he  that  is  such  is  subvert. 
Heb.   7.  26  For  such  an  high  priest  became  us,  (who 

8.  1  We  have  such  an  high  priest,  who  is  set 

12.  3  For  consider  him  that  endured  such  con. 

13.  16  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased 
Jas.    4.  16  rejoice  in  your  boasting:  all  such  rejoicing 

3  John     8  We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such,  that 

16.  7*o  these,  tovto7s  toutois. 

Gal.     5.  21  drunkenness,  re  veilings,  and  such  like:  of 

17.  These,  tovtovs  loutous. 

2  Ti.   3.    5  denying  the  power  thereof:  from  such  tu. 

IS. Of  these,  rovrtcv  toutdn. 

Acts  iS.  15  I  will  not  be  a  judge  of  s.  1  Th.  4.6;  Re.  20.6. 

SUCH  (a  case,  a  time),  in  or  at  — 
l.Thus,  according  to  this,  n-3  kakah. 

Psa.144. 15  Happy  (is  that)  people  that  is  in  such  a  ca. 

2.2Yow,  so  now,  rviU3  keencth. 

Ezra   4.  io,  n  on  this  side  the  river,  and  at  such  a 
7. 12  unto  Ezra,  .perfect  (peace),  and  at  such  a 

Z.Xow,  so  now,  rU'3  Jceeth. 

Ezra    4.  17  beyond  the  river,  Peace,  and  at  such  ati. 
SUCH  a  man,  such  a  one  — 
I.  This,  m  zeh. 

Job  14.   3  dost  thou  open  thine  eyes  upon  such  an  0. 

2. Any  one,  somebody,  Hetvadeina. 

Matt  26. 18  Go  into  the  city  to  such  a  man,  and  say 

3.  Such  as  this,  rotovros  toiouios. 

1  Co.  5.   5  To  deliver  such  an  one  unto  Satan  for  the 

5. 11  extortioner;  with  such  an  one  no  not  to 

2  Co.  2.    7  lest  perhaps  such  a  one  should  be  2. 6.; 

10. 11  Let  such  an  one  think  this,  that.,  as  we  are 

12.    2  such  an  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven 

12.    5  Of  such  an  one  will  I  glory:  yet  of  myself 

Gal.     6.    1  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one 

Phm.        9  being  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged,  and 

SUCH  and  such  things  — 

.45  these  and  as  these,  njnpl  nsrn  kahennah  vekahen. 

2  Sa.  12.   8  have  given  unto  thee  such  and  such  thi. 
SUCH  as  — 
I.  Such  as,  iD|  kemd. 

Neh.   6. 11  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee?  and  who  (ia 

2.Such,  such  as,  otos  hoios. 

Matt24.  21  such  as  was  not  since  thebeginningof  the 

Marki3-  19  affliction,  such  as  was  not  from  the  begi. 

2  Co.  10.  11  such  as  we  are  iu  word  by  letters  when 
12.  20  I  shall  not  find  you  such  as  I  would,  and 
i2.  20  I  shall  be  found  unto  you  such  as  ye  wo. 

Rev.  16.  iS  such  as  was  not  since  men  were  upon  the 

3.  Of  what  kind  or  sort,  o7ro?o?  KopoiOS. 

Acts  26.  29  were  both  almost  and  altogether  such  as 

4.  Who,  whosoever,  what,  whatsoever,  oo-rts  hostis. 
Mark  4.  20  such  as  hear  the  word,  and  receive(it),  and 

5.  These,  those,  ovrot  houtoi. 

Mark  4. 18  sown  among  thoirs ;  such  as  hear  the  wo 


SUCH 


945 


SUFFERING 


SUCH  deed,  like,  thing  — 
l.Tkcy,  these,  jn  ken. 

Eze.  18.  14  and  considereth,  and  doetli  not  such  like 

2.  Like  this,  nxis  kazoth. 

Judg  19.  30  There  was  no  such  deed  done  nor  seeufr. 

3.  So,  J3  ken. 

2  Sa.  13. 12  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  Israel 

4.  These,  ravra  taitta. 

John  7.  32  heard  that  the  people  murmured  such  th. 
2  Pe.  3.  14  seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,  be 

5.0/  this  kind  or  sort,  such,  toiovtos  toiautos. 

Luke  9.   9  but  who  is  this  of  whom  I  hear  such  th.? 

13.    2  sinners.. because  they  suffered  [such  thi.?] 

Acts  21.  25  written,  .that  they  observe  no  such  thing 

Rom.  1.  32  that  they  which  commit  such  things  are 

2.    2  agaiust  them  which  commit  such  thing3 

2.   3  that  judgest  them  which  do  such  things 

Eph.    5.  27  nothavingspot.orwrinkle,  oranysuchth. 

Heb.  11.  14  For  they  that  say  such  things  de.GaL5.20 

6.  The  things  within,  ra  4v6yra  ta  enonta. 

Luke  11.  41  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye  have 

7. The  things  aloiigside,  to.  trdpovra.  ta  paronta. 

Heb.  13.   5  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have :  for 
SUCHATHITES,  D'n^b'. 
A  family  of  Scribes,  dwelling  at  Jabez  near  Judah. 

1  Ch.  2.  55  the  Tirathites,  the  Shimeathites,  (and)  S. 
SUCK  (up,  give,  make),  to  — 
l.To  wring  or  drain  out,  n$p  matsak. 

Eze.  23.  34  Thou  shalt  even  drink  it  and  suck  (it)  out 

2.  To  suck,  pr  yanaq. 

Deut  33.  19  they  shall  suck  (of)  the  abundance  of  the 

Job     3.  12  or  why  the  breasts  that  I  should  suck? 
20. 16  He  shall  suck  the  poison  of  asps :  the  vi. 

Song  8.    1  that  sucked  the  breasts  of  my  mother ! 

Isa.  60.  16  suck  the  milk  of  the  Gentiles,  and  shalt 
66.  11  That  ye  may  suck,  and  be  satisfied  with 
66.  12  then  shall  ye  suck,  ye  shall  be  borne  upon 

Joel   2. 16  children,  and  those  that  suck  the  breasts 

Z.To  suckle,  give  suck,  p£  yanaq,  5. 

Gen.  21.  7  that  Sarah  should  have'given  children  su.S 
Deut  32.  13  made  him  to  suck  honey  out  of  the  rock 
1  Sa.  1.  23  gave  her  son  suck  until  she  weaned  him 
1  Ki.  3.  21  when  I  arose,  .to  give  my  child  suck,  be. 
Lam.  4.    3  they  give  suck  to  their  young  ones :  the 

4.  To  gulph  down,  swallow,  ViV.  diet,  3. 

Job  39.  30  Her  young  ones  also  suck  up  blood :  and 

5.  To  suckle,  give  suck,  dnXdfa  thelazo. 

Matt  24.  19  woe.,  to  them  that  give  suck,  in  those  days 
Mark  13.  17  woe .  .to  them  thatgive  suck,  in  those  da. 
Luke  11.  27  and  the  paps  which  thou  hast  sucked 

21.  23  woe . .  to  them  that  give  suck,  in  those  da. 
23.  29  and  the  paps  which  never  [gave  suck] 

STICKING  (child),  suckling  — 
l.Fat,  best,  aSn  chalab. 

1  Sa.    7.   9  Samuel  took  a  sucking  lamb,  and  offered 

2.  To  suck,  p£  yanaq. 

Numn.  12  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  the  sucking 
Deut.32.  25  the  suckling  (also)  with  the  man  of  grey 

1  Sa.  15.    3  slay  both,  .infant  and  suckling,  ox  and 

22.  19  smote .  .sucklings,  and  oxen,  and  asses 
Psa.     8.    2  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
Isa.   11.    8  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of 
Jer.  44.    7  to  cut  off  from  you.  .child  and  suckling 
Lam.  2.  11  the  sucklings  swoon  in  the  streets  of  the 

4.    4  tongue  of  the  sucking  child  cleaveth  to 

Z.To  suckle,  give  suck,  Qr)\d^(a  thelazo. 

Mattel.  16  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
SUDDEN,  (very  suddenly,  to  make)  — 

1 .  Ta  a  sudden,  suddenly,  dnjib  yr\$3  bephetha  pithom. 

Num.  6.   9  if  any  man  die  very  suddenly  by  Mm,  and 

2.  Hasting,  "no  maker. 

Deut.  7.   4  kindled  against  you,  and  destroy  thee  su. 

3.  To  hasten,  inp  makar,  3. 

2  Sa.  15.  14  lest  he  overtake  us  suddenly,  and  bring 

4.  Suddenly,  Dixns  pithom. 

Xumi2.  4  Lord  spake  suddenly  unto  Hoses,  andun. 
Josh. 10.    9  Joshua  therefore  came  unto  them  sudd. 

11.   7  So  Joshua  came.,  against  them.,  suddenly 
2  Ch.29. 36  rejoiced . .  for  the  thing  was  (done)  sudde. 
Job     5.    3  root:  but  suddenly  I  cursed  his  habitation 
9. 23  If  the  scourge  slay  suddenly,  he  will  la. 

22. 10  round  about  thee,  and  sudden  fear  trou. 
Psa.  64.   4  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  him,  and  fear 

64.    7  God  shall  shoot . .  suddenly  shall  they  be 
Prov.  3. 25  Be  not  afraid  of  sudden  fear,  neither  of 
6.  15  Therefore  shall  his  calamity  come  sudde. 

24  22  For  their  calamity  shall  rise  suddenly,  and 
Eccl.  9. 12  evil  time,  when  it  falleth  suddenly  upon 
Isa.   29.   5  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  instant  suddenly 

30.  13  whose  breaking  cometh  suddenly  at  an 

47.  11  desolation  shall  come  upon  thee  suddenly 

48.  3  did  (them)  suddenly,  and  they  came  to 
Jer.    4.  20  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  (and)  my 

6.  26  for  the  spoiler  shall  suddenly  come  upon 
15.    8  have  caused  (him)to  fall  upon  it  suddenly 
18.  22  when  thou  shalt  bring  a  troop  suddenly 
51.    8  Babylon  is  suddenly  fallen  and  destroyed 
Mai.    3.    1  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple,  even 

119 


5. Any  instant,  yr\5  petha. 

Nuni35.  22  But  if  he  thrust  him  suddenly  without 
Prov.  6. 15  suddenly  shall  he  be  broken  without  rem. 
29.    1  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without 
Hab.    2.    7  Shall  they  not  rise  up  suddenly  that  sh. 

6.-4  moment,  a  rest,  Vn  rega. 

Psa.    6. 10  let  them  return  (and)  be  ashamed  suddenly 

7.  To  cause  to  rest,  yrj  raga,  5, 

Jer.  49.  19  will  suddenly  make  him  run  away  from 
50. 44  but  I  will  make  them  suddenly  run  away 

Z. Sudden,  unexpected,  atypi'Stos  aiphnidios. 

1  Th.  5.    3  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  th. 
^.Suddenly,  on  a  sudden,  &<pi/a  aphno. 

Acts    2.    2  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from  heav. 
16.  26  suddenly  there  was  a  great  earthquake 
28.    6  swollen,  or  fallen  down  dead  suddenly 

10.  Suddenly,  unexpectedly,  i£ai<pwqs  exaiphnes. 
Marki3.  36  Lest,  coming  suddenly,  he  And  you  sleep. 
Luke  2. 13  suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel  a  mul. 

9.  39  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he  suddenly  crieth 
Acts    9.   3  suddenly  there  shined  round  about  him  a 

22.  6  suddenly  there  shone  from  heaven  a  gre. 

11.  Unexpectedly,  suddenly,  i^d-mva  exapina. 
Mark  9.    8  suddenly,  when  they  had  looked  round 

12.Qiiickly,  speedily,  rax^s  tackeos, 

1  Ti.    5.  22  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither 

SUE  at  the  law,  to  — 

To  judge,  szie  at  laic,  wptVut  krino. 

Matt.  5.  40  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  law,  and 
SUFFER,  to  — 
l.To  be  able,  permit,  ^b;  yakol. 

Psa.  101.   5  him  that  hath,  .a  proud  heart  will  not  I  su. 

2.  To  put  down,  leave,  let  alone,  rn;  yanack,  5. 
Judg  16.  26  Suffer  me  that  I  may  feel  the  pillars  wh. 
1  Ch.16.  21  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong 
Esth.  3.    8  (is)  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer  them 
Psa.105.  14  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong;  yea 
Eccl.  5.  12  abundance  of  the  rich  will  not  suffer  him 

3.  To  compass,  wait,  *irj3  kathar,  3. 

Job  36.   2  Suffer  me  a  little,  and  I  will  show  thee  th. 

4.  To  spread  out,  leave,  vsi  natash. 

Gen.  31.  28  hast  not  suffered  me  to  kiss  my  sons  and 

5.  To  lift  up,  Ntn  nasa. 

Lev.  19.  17  rebuke  thy  neighbour,  and  not  suffer  sin 
Job  21.  3  Suffer  me  that  I  may  speak;  andafter  th. 
Psa.  S3.  15  (while)  I  suffer  thy  terrors  I  am  distract. 
Provig.  19  A  man  of  great  wrath  shall  suffer  punish. 
Jer.  15.  15  know  that  for  thy  sake!  have  suffered  re. 

6.  To  give,  fru  nathan. 

Gen.  20.   6  therefore  suffered  I  thee  not  to  touch  her 

31.    7  but  God  suffered  him  not  to  hurt  me 
Exodi2.  23  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in 
Num.  21.  23  Sihon  would  not  suffer  Israel  to  pass  th. 
Deut  18. 14  thy  God  hath  not  suffered  thee  so  (to  do) 
Josh.  10.  19  suffer  them  not  to  enter  into  their  cities 
Judg.  1.  34  for  they  would  not  suffer  them  to  come 
3.  28  took  the  fords,  .and  suffered  not  a  man  to 
15.    1  but  her  father  would  not  suffer  him  to  go 

1  Sa.  24.    7  and  suffered  them  not  to  rise  against  Saul 

2  Sa.  21.  10  suffered  neither  the  birds  of  the  air  to  rest 
1  Ki.  15. 17  that  he  might  not  suffer  any  to  go  out  or 
Job     9.  18  He  mil  not  suffer  me  to  take  my  breath 

31.  30  Neither  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  sin 
Psa.  16. 10  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  holy  one  to 

55.  22  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be  mo. 

66.    9  holdeth  our  soul  in  life,  and  suffereth  not 

121.   3  He  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to  be  moved :  he 

Eccl.  5.   6  Sufferuot  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to 

7.  To  hold  up,  af€xo/xat  anechomai. 

Matt  17.  17  perverse  generation.,  how  long  shall  I  su. 
Mark  9.  19  faithless  generation . .  how  long  shall  I  su. 
Luke  9.  41  perverse  generation. .how  long  shall  I..su. 

1  Co.   4. 12  we  bless;  being  persecuted,  we  suffer  it 

2  Co.  11. 19  For  ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye  (yo.) 

11.  20  For  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  bring  you  into  bo. 
Heb.  13.  22  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation :  fori  have 

8.  To  send  away,  let  go,  permit,  a<piwui  aphiemi. 
Matt.  3. 15  said  unto  him,  Suffer.  .Then  he  suffered 

19. 14  Jesus  said,  Suffer  little  children,  and  for. 

23.  13  neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering 
Mark  1.  34  suffered  not  the  devils  to  speak,  because 

5.  19  suffered  him  not,  but  saith  unto  him,  Go 
5.  37  suffered  no  man  to  follow  him,  save  Peter 
7. 12  suffer  him  no  more  to  do  ought  for  his  fa. 

10.  14  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  untome 
11. 16  would  not  suffer  that  any  man  should  ca. 

Luke  8.  51  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save  Peter  and  J. 

12.  39  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken 
18. 16  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me,  and 

Re  v.  ii.    9  shall  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  put 

9.  To  give,  BtSwfit  didomi. 

Acts   2.  27  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  holy  one  to 

13.  35  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  thine  holy  one  to  see 

10.  To  permit,  suffer,  let  fall,  idea  eao. 

Matt  24.  43  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  br. 
K  Luke  4.  41  rebuking  (them),  suffered  them  notto  spe. 
22.  51  Jesus  answered  and  said,  Suffer  ye  thus 
Acts  14. 16  Who  in  times  past  suffered  all  nations  to 
16.  7  assayed  to  go.,  but  the  spirit  suffered  them 
ig.  30  the  people,  the  disciples  suffered  him  not 
28.   4  escaped  the  sea,  yet  vengeance  suffereth 


1  Co.  10.  13  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  abo. 
Rev.    2.  20  because  [thou  sufferest]  that  woman  Jeze. 

11.  To  turn  over  on,  commit  to,  eViTpeVco  epitrepo. 
Matt.  8.  21  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  fa. 

8.  31  [suffer]  us  to  goaway  into  the  herd  of  swine 
19.    8  suffered  you  to  put  away  your  wives  :  but 

Markio.  4  Moses  suffered  to  write  a  bill  of  divorce. 
Luke  8.  32  suffer  them  to  enter.  .And  he  suffered  th. 

9.  59  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  fat. 
Acts  21.  39  beseech  thee,  suffer  me  to  speak  unto  the 

28. 16  but  Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself 
1  Ti.    2.  12  suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach  nor  to  usurp 

12.  Able  to  suffer,  tradnrSs  pathetos. 

Act.  26.  23  That  Christ  should  suffer,  (and) that  he  sh. 

13.  To  suffer,  endure,  experience,  irdax^  pasclio. 
Matt  16.  21  suffer  many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief 

17.  12  Likewise  shall  also  the  son  of  man  suffer 

27.  19  for  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  day 

Mark  5.  26  had  suffered  many  thiugsof  many  physic. 

8.  31  that  the  son  of  man  must  suffer  many  th. 

9.  12  that  he  must  suffer  many  things,  and  be 
Luke  9.  22  The  son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things 

13.  2  sinners . .  because  they  suffered  such  things 
17.  25  But  first  niustehsuffermanythings.audbe 
22.  15  to  eat  this  passover  with  you  before  I  su. 
24.  26  Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  these 
24. 46  thus  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise 
Acts  3.  18  that  Christ  should  suffer,  he  hath  so  ful. 
9.16  great  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  name's 
17.    3  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered,  and  risen 

1  Co. 12.  26  whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the  mem. 

2  Co.  1.  6  the  same  sufferings  which  we  also  suffer 
Gal.  3.  4  Have  ye  suffered  so  many  things  in  vain? 
Phil.   1.  29  believe  on  him,  but  also  to  suffer  for  his 

1  Th.  2. 14  forye  also  ha*ve  suffered  like  things  of  yo. 

2  Th.  1.  5  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer 
2  Ti.  1.  12  For  the  which  cause  I  also  suffer  these  th. 
Heb.   2. 18  For  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,being 

5.  8  obedience  by  the  things  whichhe  suffered 
9.26  For  then  must  he  often  have  suffered  since 
13.  12  Jesus  also.. suffered  without  the  gateT 
1  Pe.  2. 19  if  a  man . .  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongf. 
2.  20  but  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  (for  it) 
2. 21  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving 

2.  23  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not;  but 

3.  14  Butandif  ye  suffer  for  righteousness' sake 

3.  17  yesufferfor  welldoing,  than  for  evil  doing 
3. 18  For  Christ  also  hath  once  [suffered]  fors. 

4.  1  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm 
4.  1  for  he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath 
4.  15  But  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer 

4.  19  let  them  that  suffer  according  to  the  will 

5.  10  after  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while,  make 
Rev.   2.  10  none  of  those  things  which  thou  shalt  su. 

14.  To  permit,  let,  irpoaedco  proseuo. 

Acts  27.    7  wind  not  suffering  us,  we  sailed  under  C. 

15.  To  cover,  endure,  sustain,  bear,  <xr4yoj  stego. 

1  Co.  9.  12  suffer  all  tilings,  lest  we  should  hinderthe 

16.  To  hold  up  under,  virexo  hupecho. 

Jude  7  set  forth  for  an  example,  suffering  the  ve. 
17 '.To  remain  under,  sustain,  virofxtvo}  hupomeno. 

2  Ti.  2.  12  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  (him) 
[See  also  Adversity,  affliction,  bear,  decrease,  famish, 
hunger,  lacking,  live,  manners,  reproach,  shipwreck, 
thirst,  tribulation,  trouble,  wrong.] 

SUFFER  before,  long,  loss,  need,  with,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  loss,  {nfxiow  zemioo. 

1  Co.  3.  15  shall  suffer  loss  :  but  he  himself  shall  be 
Phil.   3.   8  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  th. 

2.  To  bear  long,  ixaKpodv/xeco  makrothumeo. 

1  Co.  13.   4  Charity  suffereth  long,  (and)  is  kind ;  ch. 

3.  To  suffer  before,  trpoTrdaxw  propascho. 

1  Th.  2.    2  But  even  after  that  we  had  suffered  before 

4.  To  suffer  with,  <riyi7rd<rx«  sumpascho. 

Rom.  8.  17  if  so  be  that  we  sufferwith  (him),  thatwe 

1  C0.12.  26  all  the  members  suffer  with  it ;  or  one  me. 

5.  To  be  behind,  lack,  vmepioi  hustereo. 

Phil.  4. 12  hungry,  both  to  abound  and  tosufferneed 

SUFFER  not,  prosecution,  shame,  violence,  to  — 
1.2*0  dishonour,  art/xdCco  atimazo. 

Acts    5.41  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  na. 
2. 2*o  be  forced,  urged  vehemently,  @id£ouai  biazomai 
Matt  zi.  12  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and 
3.  2*0  run  quickly,  pursue,  Hiwkoo  dioko. 

Gal.    5.  11  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution?  then  is 
6.  12  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution 

2  Ti.  3. 12  all  that  will  live  godly,  shall  suffer  pers. 
4.2*0  hinder,  restrain,  kw\vu>  kdluo. 

Heb.   7.  23  because  they  were  not  suffered  to  contin. 
SUFFERING  — 
Suffering,  affection,  irdd-nfxa  pathema. 

Rom.  8.  18  Forlreckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  pr. 
2  Co.   x.    s  For  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in 

1.    6  in  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings  wh. 

1.    7  that  as  ye  are  partakers  of  the  sufferings 
Phil.   3.  10  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  being  made 
Col.    1.  24  Who  now  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  you 
Heb.  2.    9  suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and 

2. 10  make  the  Captain,  .perfect  through  suff. 
1  Pe.   1. 11  when  it  testified  beforehand  the  suffering** 

4.  13  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings 

5.  1  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and 


SUFFICE 


946 


SUNDRY 


SUFFICE,  be  sufficed,  to  — 

Nam  ii.  22  the  herds  be  slain  for  them,  to  suffice  th. 
ii.  22  gatliered  together  for  them,  to  suffice  th. 
Judg  21. 14  and  yet  so  they  sufficed  them  not 

2.  Many ,  much,  enough,  ytrab. 

Deut.  3.  26  Let  it  suffice  thee ;  speak  no  more  unto 

Eze.  44.    6  let  it  suffice  you  of  all  yourabomiuations 

45.   9  Let  itsufficeyou,  0  princes  oflsrael :  rem. 

3.  Satisfied,  yn"?  sabea. 

Ruth  2.  14  and  she  did  eat,  and  was  sufficed,  and  Ie. 

4.  Satiety,  y^b-  soba. 

Ruth  2.  iS  that  she  had  reserved  after  she  was  sufii. 

5.  To  suffice,  px>7  saphaq. 

1  Ki.20. 10  dust  of  Samaria  shall  suffice  for  haudfuls 

6.  Sufficient.,  apKer6s  arketos. 

1  Pe.  4.   3  For  the  time  past  of  (our)  life  may  suffice 

7.  To  suffice,  satisfy,  apnea  arkeo. 

Johni4.    8  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufhceth 

SUFFICIENCY,  sufficient,  sufficiently  — 

1.  Sufficiency,  *=l  dai. 

Exod3€.    7  For  the  stuff  they  had  was  sufficient  for 
Deut  15.    8  shalt  surely  lend  him  sufficient  for  hisne. 
Prov25.  16  eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee,  lest 
Isa.   40. 16  And  Lebanon  (is)  not  sufficient  to  burn 
40.  16  beasts  thereof  sufficient  for  a  burnt  offer. 

2.  Sufficiently,  "?D  maddai. 

2  Ch.30.    3  had  uot  sanctified  themselves  sufficiently 

3. Sufficiency,  p3£  sepheq. 

Job  20.  22  In  the  fulness  of  his  sufficiency  he  shall 
i.Many,  much,  enough,  2~t  rob. 

Deut33.  7  let  Ins  hands  be  sufficient  for  him ;  and  be 
5.  Satiety,  nyz'y  sobah. 

Isa.  23.  iS  to  eat  sufficiently,  and  for  durable  cloth. 
6. Sufficient,  apKtrSs  arketos. 

Matt.  6.  34  Sufficient  unto  the  day  (is)  the  evil  there. 

7.  To  suffice,  satisfy,  ap/ceo)  arkeo. 

John  6.   7  not  sufficient  for  them,  that  every  one  of 
2  C0.12.   9  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  my  st. 

8. Set f  sufficient,  avrdpK^ia  autarkeia. 

2  Co.  9.    8  always  having  all  sufficiencyin  all  (things) 

9. Coming  up  to,  sufficient,  iKavos  hikanos. 

3  Co.  2.   6  Sufficient  to  such  a  man  (is)  this  punish. 

2. 16  And  who  (is)  sufficient  for  these  things  1 

3.  5  Not  that  we  are  sufficient  of  ourselves 

10. Sufficiency,  lKav6rris  hikanotes. 

2  Co.  3.    5  of  ourselves ;  but  our  sufficiency  (is)  of 

BUTT,  (to  make)  — 

1.2b  appease,  weaken,  smooth  down,  rshnchalah,  3. 
Job  11. 19  yea,  many  shall  make  suit  unto  thee 

2.  Order,  valuation,  suit,  XVI  erek. 

Judg  17. 10  and  a  suit  of  apparel,  and  thy  victuals.  So 

3. Strife,  pleading,  S"?  rib. 

2  Sa.  15.   4  that  every  man  which  hath  any  suit  or 
ailKKIIMS    D'»?p. 

An    African  or   Egyptian  tribe,  mentioned  with   the 
Lubim.  and  the  Ethiopians;  theSuchce  of  Pliny.  B.C.  29. 

2  Ch.  12.    3  the  Lubims,  the  S.,  and  the  Ethiopians 

BUM  (cf  money),  to  — 

{.Atonement,  price,  satisfaction,  *i£3  kopher. 

Exod  21.  30  If  there  be  laid  on  him  a  sum  of  money 
2.Xumber,  narration,  "isp"?  misp>ar, 

2  Sa.  24.    9  Joab  gave  up  the  sum  of  the  number  of 

1  Ch.21.    5  Joab  gave  the  sum  of  the  number  of  the 

Z.To  inspect,  lay  a  charge  on,  np_£  paqad. 

Exod  38.  21  This  is  the  sum  of  the  tabernacle,  (even) 
i. Covering,  exposition,  ny~\p  parashah. 

Esth.  4.  7  sum  of  the  money  that  Hainan  had  prom. 
5. Head,  sum,  wvh  rosh. 

Exod  30.  12  When  thou  takest  the  sum  of  the  childr. 

Num  1.  2  Take  ye  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation 
1.  49  neither  take  the  sum  of  them  among  the 

4.  2  Take  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  Kohath  from 
4.  22  Take  also  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  Gershon 

26.    2  Take  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation  of 
31.  26  Take  the  sura  of  the  prey  that  was  taken 
31.  49  Thy  servants  have  taken  the  sum  of  the 
Psa.139.  17  O  God .'  how  great  is  the  sum  of  them 
6. Bead,  sum,  b»n~i  resh. 

Dan.  7.  1  wrote  the  dream,  (and)  told  the  sum  of 
7 . Measurement ,  standard,  rn?n  ioha'tJi. 

Eze.  28.  12  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  full  of  wisdom 
%.To  perfect,  finish,  consume,  □?]?  tamam,  5. 

2  Kj.  22.  4  that  he  may  sura  the  silver  which  is  bro. 
9. Sum,  recapitulation,  K€<pd\aiov  kephal"i>m. 

Acts  22.  2S  With  a  great  sum  obtained  I  this  freedom 
Heb.   8.    1  (tliis  is)  the  sum :  We  have  such  an  high 
10. Honour,  value,  rifx-r\  time. 

Acts   7.  16  bought  for  a  sum  of  money  of  the  sons  of 

8UMHER,  (fruit,  house\  to — 
1.-4  cooling,  ^~$^  meqerah. 

Judg.  3.  ie  lie  was  sitting  in  a  summer  parlour,  whl. 


.Summer, 

Gen 

8. 

2Sa 

16. 

16. 

Psa. 

32. 

74- 

Prcn 

.  6. 

10. 

26. 

10. 

Isa. 

16. 

28. 

Jer. 

8. 

40. 

40. 

Judg.  3.  24  Sorely  he  covereth  his  feet  in  his  summer 
'2.  To  pass  the  summer,  pp  quts. 

Isa.   18.    6  fowls  shall  summer  upon  them,  and  all 
3. Summer,  a;p_  qayit. 

Dan.    2.  35  became  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  thr. 

,  early  fruit,  pp  qayits. 

22  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night 

1  an  hundred  of  summer  fruits,  and  a  bot. 

2  bread  and  summer  fruit  for  the  young  men 

4  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought  ofsu. 
17  earth:  thou  hast  made  summer  and  wint. 

8  Provideth  her  meat  in  the  summer,  (and) 

5  He  that  gathereth  in  the  summer  (is)  a 
1  As  snow  in  summer,  and  as  rain  in  harv. 

25  they  prepare  their  meat  hi  the  summer 

9  for  the  shouting  for  thy  summer  fruits 
4  as  the  hasty  fruit  before  the  summer;  wh. 

20  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended 
ic  gather  ye  wine,  and  summer  fruits,  and 
12  gathered  wine  and  summer  fruits  very  mu. 
4B.  32  spoiler  is  fallen  upon  thy  summer  fruits 
Amos  3.  15  smite  the  winter  house  with  the  summer 
8.    1  and  behold  a  basket  of  summer  fruit 
8.    2  And  I  said,  A  basket  of  summer  fruit 
Mic.    7.    1  when  they  have  gathered  the  summer  fr. 
Zech.14.   8  in  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be 

5. Summer,  depos  tlieros. 

Matt 24.  32  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye  know  that  sum. 
Marki3.  28  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye  know  that  sum. 
Luke2i.  30  know,  .that  summer  is  now  nigh  at  hand 

SUMPTUOUSLY  — 

Shining,  brightly,  Ka^iirows  lampros. 

Lukei6.  19  rich  man,  which .. fared  sumptuously 
SUN  — 
1. Light,  -iiK  or. 

Job  31.  26  If  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or 
2.  Heat,  nan  chammah. 

Job  30.  28  I  went  mourning  without  the  sun :  I  sto. 

Song    6.  10  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  (and) 

Isa.   24. 23  sun  ashamed,  when  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
30.  26  light  of  the  sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun 

Z.Itch,  burning  heat,  onn  cheres. 

Judg.  8.  13  returned  from  battle  before  the  sun  (was 

14.  18  on  the  seventh  day  before  the  sun  went 
Job     9.    7  Whichconiniandeth  thesun, and  it  riseth 

k.A  ministrant,  the  sun,  tr^c1  shemesh. 

Gen.  15.  12  when  the  sun  was  going  down,  a  deep  si. 

15.  17  sun  went  down,  and  it  was  dark,  behold 
19.  23  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot 
28. 11  tarried  there  all  night,  because  the  sun 

32.  31  as  he  passed  over  Penuel  the  sun  rose  upon 
37.    9  behold,  the  sun.  .made  obeisance  to  me 

Exod  16.  21  and  when  the  sun  waxed  hot,  it  melted 
17.  12  steady  until  the  going  down  of  the  sun 
22.    3  If  the  sun  be  risen  upon  him,  (there  shall 

22.  26  unto  him  by  that  the  sun  goeth  down 
Lev.  22.    7  when  the  sun  is  down,  he  shall  be  clean 
Nuni25.    4  hang  them  up.  .against  the  sun,  that 
Deut.  4.  19  when  thou  seest  the  sun,  and  the  moon 

11.  30  by  the  way  where  the  sun  goeth  down 
i5.    6  at  even,  at  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  at 
17.    3  either  the  sun,  or  moon,  or  any  of  the  host 

23. 11  when  the  sun  is  down,  he  shall  come  into 
24.  13  when  the  sun  goeth  down,  that  he  may 
24.  15  neither  shall  the  sun  go  down  upon  it ;  for 

33.  14  precious  fruits  (brought  forth)  by  the  sun 
Josh.  1.    4  toward  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  shall 

8.  29  as  soon  as  the  sun  was  down,  Joshua  co. 
10.  12  Sun,  stand  thou  still  upon  Gibeon  ;  and 
10.  13  sun  stood  still.  .So  the  sun  stood  still  in 
10.  27  at  the  time  of  the  going  down  of  the  sun 

12.  1  toward  the  rising  of  the  sun,  from  the  ri. 
Judg.  5.  31  Qet)  them  that  love  him  (be)  as  the  sun 

9.  33  as  soon  as  the  sun  is  up,  thou  shalt  rise 
19.  14  sun  went  down  upon  them  (when  they 

1  Sa.  11.    9  Tomorrow,  by  (that  time)  the  sun  be  hot 

2  Sa.    2.  24  sun  went  down  when  they  were  come  to 

3.  35  taste  bread,  or  ought  else,  till  the  6Un  be 
12.  11  lie  with  thy  wives  in  the  sight  of  this  sun 

12. 12  thing  before  all  Israel,  and  before  the  sun 

23.  4  light  of  the  morning  (when)  the  sun  riseth 

1  Ki.  22.  36  about  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  saying 

2  Ki.  3.  22  sun  shone  upon  the  water,  and  the  Moab. 

23.    5  to  the  sun,  and  to  the  moon,  and  to  the 

23.  11  the  kings  of  Judah  had  given  to  the  sun 

23.  11  and  burned  the  chariots  of  the  sun  with 

2  Ch.18.  34  about  the  time  of  the  sun  going  down  he 

Neh.    7.    3  Let  not  thegates..be  opened  until  thesun 

Job     8. 16  He  (is)  green  before  the  sun,  and  his  bra . 

Psa.  19.    4  them  hath  he  set  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun 

50.    1  from  "the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going 

58.    8  a  woman,  (that)  they  may  not  see  the  sun 

72.    5  They  shall  fear  thee  as  long  as  the  sun 

72. 17  name  shall  be  continued  as  longasthesun 

74.  16  thou  hast  prepared  the  light  and  the  sun 

84.  11  For  the  LoltD  God  (is)  a  sun  and  shield 

89.  36  endure  for  ever,  and  his  throne  as  the  sun 

104.  19  appointed  the  moon  for  seasons:  the  sun 

104.  22  sun  ariseth,  they  gather  themselves  toge. 

113.    3  From  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going 

121.    6  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day,  nor  the 

136.   8  sun  to  rule  by  day:  for  his  mercy  (endur.) 

148.   3  Praise  ye  him.  sun  and  moon:  praise  him 

Eccl.   1.    3  his  labour  which  he  taketh  underthe  sun 

1.    5  suu  also  ariseth,  and  the  sun  goeth  down 

1.   9  and  (there  is)  no  new  (thing)  under  tht  suu 


Song  1. 

Isa.    13. 

38. 

41. 
45. 
49. 

59- 
60. 
60. 

Jer.  8. 
15- 
3i- 

Eze.  8. 
32. 

Joel.  2. 
2. 

3- 
Dan.  6. 
Amos  8. 
Jon.  4. 
Hab.  3. 
Mac.  3. 
Nab.  3. 
Mai.    1. 

4- 


14  all  the  works  that  are  done  underthe  sua 

11  and  (there  was)  no  profit  under  the  sun 

17  the  work  that  is  wrought  under  the  suu 

18  labour  which  I  had  taken  under  the  suu 

19  have  showed  myself  wise  under  the  sun 

20  all  the  labour  which  I  took  under  thesun 
22  wherein  he  hath  laboured  under  the  sun? 

16  moreover  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place 
1  oppressions  that  are  done  under  the  sun 
3  the  evil  work  that  is  done  under  the  sun 
7  returned,  and  I  saw  vanity  underthe  sun 

15  all  the  living  which  walk  under  the  sun 
13  sore  evil(which)Ihaveseen  underthe  sun 

18  his  labour  that  he  taketh  under  the  sun 

1  an  evil  which  I  have  seen  under  the  sun 

5  Moreover  he  hath  not  seen  the  sun,  nor 

12  what  shall  be  after  him  under  the  sun? 
11  and.  .profit  to  them  that  see  the  sun 

9  every  work  that  is  done  under  the  sun 
15  man  hath  no  better  tiling  under  the  sun 

15  life,  which  Godgiveth  him  underthe  sun 

17  find  out  the  work,  .done  under  the  sun 
3  all  (tilings)  that  are  done  under  the  sun 

6  in  any  (thing)  that  is  done  under  the  sun 
9  which  he  hath  given  thee  under  the  sun 
9  labour  which  thou  takest  under  the  sun 

11  returned,  and  saw  under  the  sun,  that 

13  wisdom  have  I  seen  also  under  the  sun 

5  an  evil  (which)  I  have  seen  under  the  sun 

7  pleasant,  .for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun 

2  While  the  sun,  or  the  light,  or  the  moon 

6  because.the  sun  hath  lookeduponnie :  ray 
10  the  sun  shall  be  darkened  in  hisgoingfo. 

8  which  is  gone  down  in  the  sun  dial  of  A. 

8  So  the  sun  returned  ten  degrees,  by  which 
25  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  shall  he  call  up. 

6  may  know  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and 
10  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them 

19  and  his  glory  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 

19  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day 

20  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down ;  neither 
2  they  shallspread  them  before  the  sun,  and 

9  her  sun  is  gone  down  while  (it  was)  yet  d. 
35  which  giveth  the  sun  for  a  light  by  day 

16  they  worshipped  the  sun  toward  the  ea3t 

7  I  will  cover  the  sun  with  a  cloud,  and  the 

10  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  dark,  and  the 
31  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and 
15  The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened 

14  laboured  till  the  going  down  of  the  sun  to 
9  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon 

8  sun  did  arise . .  and  the  sun  beat  upon  the 

11  The  sun  (and)  moon  stood  still  in  their 
6  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets 

17  when  the  sun  ariseth  they  flee  away,  and 
11  For  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  even  unto 

2  unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the  sua 


5. Sun,  solar  light,  "]\ws  heUos. 

Matt.  5.  45  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil 
13.  6  when  the  sun  was  up,  they  were  scorched 
13.  43  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun 
17.  2  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  his  raiment 
24.  29  shall  the  suu  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 

Mark  1.  32  when  the  sun  did  set,  they  brought  unto 
4.  6  But  when  the  sun  was  up,  it  was  scorched 
13.  24  sun  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  moou  shall 
i5.    2  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the  rising  of  the  sun 

Luke  4.  40  Now  when  the  sun  was  setting,  all  they 
21.  25  there  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the 
23.  45  sun  was  darkened,  and  the  veil  of  the  te. 

Acts  2.  20  The  sun  shall  he  turned  into  darkness,  and 
13. 11  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  season 

26.  13  brightness  of  the  sun,  shining  round  about 

27.  20  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days 
1  Co.  15.  41  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  anothergloryof 
Eph.  4.  26  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath 
Jas.  1.  11  For  the  sun  isuo  sooner  risen  withaburn. 
Rev.    1. 16  his  countenance  (was)  as  the  sun  shineth 

6. 12  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair 
neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor 
and  the  third  part  of  the  sun  was  smitten 
sun  and  the  air  were  darkened  by  reason 
face  (was)  as  it  were  the  sun,  and  his  feet 
woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  mo. 
angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  sun 
I  saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  sun,  and 
city  had  no  need  of  thesun,  neither  of  the 
need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun 

SUNRISING  — 

1. Rising  of  the  sun,  V"?y  rnjfi  mizracJi  shemesh. 
Nuni2i.  11  the  wilderness,  .toward  the  sunrising 
Deut.  4.  41,  47  on  this  side  Jordan,  toward  the  sunris. 
Josh.  1.  15  on  this  side  Jordan  toward  the  sunrising 

13.    5  toward  the  sunrising,  from  Baal-gad  un. 

19.  12  toward  the  sunrising  unto  the  border  of 

19.  27  turneth  toward  the  sunrising  to  Beth-da. 

19.  34  Judah  upon  Jordan  toward  the  sunrising 
Judg  20. 43  over  against  Gibeah  toward  the  sunrising 

2,Ri$uig,  rniD  mizrach. 

Num  34. 15  Jericho  eastward,  toward  the  sunrising 

SUNDERED,  to  be  — 

To  part,  separate  self,  "na  parad,  7. 

Job  41. 17  stick  together,  that  they  cannot  be  sund. 

SUNDRY  times,  at  — 

In  many  parts,  iro\v/j.€pws  polumcros. 

Heb.    1.    1  at  sundrytinies  and  in  divers  manners  sp. 


7-1 
8.1 


10.  1 
12.  1 
16.  8 
19.  17 

21.  23 

22.  5 


SUNG- 


947 


SURELY 


SUNG,  to  be  — 

To  be  siing,  i*»  shir,  6. 

Isa.    26.    i  In  that  day  shall  this  song  he  sung  in  the 

SUNK,  to  be  — 

1.2b  sink,  y-n  taba. 

Psa.     o.  15  heathen  are  sunk  down  in  the  pit  (that) 
Lam.  2.    9  Her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  ground  ;  he 

2 .  To  be  sunk,  yaa  taba,  6. 

Jer.    38.  22  thy  feet  are  sunk  in  the  mire,  (aud)  they 

SUP  (up),  to  — 

1.  Desire,  a  crowd,  n§|?  megammah. 

Hab.    1.    9  their  faces  shall  sup  up  (as)  the  east  wind 

2.  To  sup,  take  evening  meal,  Senrvew  deipneo. 

Lukei7.    8  Make  ready  wherewith  I  may  sup,  and  g. 

1  Go.  11.  25  also  (he  took)  the  cup,  when  he  had  sup. 
Rev.    3.  20  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him 

SUPERFLUOUS,  superfluity,  to  have  any  thing  — 
l.To  be  stretched  out,  superfluous,  y~l?  sara. 

Lev.  21.  18  hath  a  fiat  nose,  or  any  thing  superfluous 

22.  23  lamb  that  hath  any  tiling  superfluous  or 
2. Abundance,  superabundance,  irepto-o-zia perisseia. 

Jas.     1.  21  lay  apart  all  filthiness  and  superfluity  of 
Z.Abiuulant,  superfluous,  very  much,  TreptaaSs. 

2  Co.   9.    1  it  is  superfluous  for  me  to  write  to  you 
SUPERSCRIPTION  — 

What  is  written  upon  or  above,  iirtypa<p-f}  epigraphe. 

Matt  22. 20  Whose  (is)  this  image  and  superscription 

Marki2.  16  Whose  (is)  this  image  and  superscription 

15.  26  superscription  of  his  accusation  was  wri. 

Luke  20.  24  Whose  image  and  superscription  hath  it? 

23.  38  superscription  also  was  written  over  him 

SUPERSTITION,  too  superstitious  — 

l.Much  given  to  reverence,  deicritiaif.ioifeo'Tepos. 

Acts  17.  22  perceive  that  in  all  things  ye  are  too  sup. 
2.Revere7iceofde?nQns,Bsio'tBaLiJ.oviadeisidai3nonia. 

Acts  25. 19  questions  against  him  of  their  own  supe. 
SUPPER  — 

1.  Supper,  evening  meal,  Se7irvou  deipnon 

Mark  6.  21  Herod,  on  his  birth  day,  made  a  supper  to 

Lukei.*.  12  When  thou  makest  a  dinner  or  a  supper 
14.  16  certamniaumadeagreatsupper,andbade 
14.  17  sent  his  servant  at  supper  time  to  say  to 
14. 24  which  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my  sup. 

Johni2.  2  There  they  made  him  a  supper;  and  Martha 
13.  2  supper  being  ended,  the  devil  having  now 
13.  4  He  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  his 
21.  20  which  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper 

1  Co.  11. 20  place,  (this)  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  supp. 
11.  21  taketh  before  (other)  his  own  supper:  and 

Rev.  19.  9  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage  supper 
19. 17  Come,  .unto  the  supper  of  the  great  God 

2.  To  suj),  take  evening  meal,  Setirveeo  deipneo. 
Luke22.  20  Likewise  alsothecup  after  supper,  saying 

SUPPLANT,  to  — 

To  take  by  the  heel,  supplant,  trip  up,  2p_y  aqab. 
Gen.  27.  36  for  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  times 
Jer.     9 .   4  for  every  brother  will  utterly  supplan  t,and 

SUPPLE,  to  — 
Ease,  'V.V?  ?nishi. 

Eze.  x6.   4  neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water  to  su. 
SUPPLIANT  — 
Suppliant,  "inj;  athar. 

Zeph.  3.  10  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia  my  suppli. 
SUPPLICATION,  (to  make)  — 
l.To  smooth,  appease,  n^rj  chalah,  3. 

1  Sa.  13. 12  have  not  made  supplication  unto  the  Lo. 
2.  To  show  self  gracious,  entreat  grace,  jjn  chanan,  7. 

1  Eli.  8.  33  make  supplication  unto  thee  in  this  house 

8.  47  make  supplication  unto  thee  in  the  land 

8.  59  wherewith  I  have  made  supplication  be. 

9.  3  heard,  .thy  supplication  that  thou  hast 

2  Ch.  6.  24  make  supplication  before  thee  in  this  ho. 
Esth.  4.  8  to  make  supplication  unto  him,  and  to  ma. 
Job     8.    5  make  thy  supplication  to  the  Almighty 

9. 15  I  would  make  supplication  to  my  judge 
Psa.  30.   8  and  unto  the  Lord  I  made  supplication 
142.   1  with  my  voice,  .did  I  make  my  supplica. 
Hos.  12.    4  made  supplication  unto  him :  he  found 

Z.To  be  gracious,  to  favour,  \in  chanan,  2. 

Dan.    6.  n  praying  and  making  supplication  before 
4.To  judge  self ,  pray  habitually,  7^9  palal,  7. 

Isa.  45.  14  they  shall  make  supplication  unto  thee 
5.  Supplication  for  grace,  n^nj-i  techinnah. 

1  Ki.   8.  28  have  thou  respect,  .to  his  supplication 

8.  30  hearken  thou  to  the  supplication  of  thy 
8.  38  What  prayer  and  supplication  soever  be 
8. 45  hear  thou  in  heaven .  .their  supplication 
8.  49  hear  thou  their  prayer  and  their  supplic. 
8.  52  thine  eyes  maybe  open  unto  the  supplie. 
8.  52  unto  the  supplication  of  thy  people  Isra. 

8.  54  end  of  praying  all  this  prayer  and  suppl. 

9.  3  heard  thy  prayer  and  thy  supplication  th. 

2  Ch.  6.  19  Have  respect  therefore . .  to  his  supplicat. 

6.  29  what  prayer  (or)  what  supplication  soever 
6.  35,  39  Then  hear  thou .  .their  supplication 
33.  13  heard  his  supplication,  and  brought  him 
Psa.    6.    9  Lord  hath  heard  my  supplication ;  the  L. 
55.    1  and  hide  not  thyself  from  my  supplication- 


Psa. 119.  170  my  supplication  come  before  thee,  del. 
Jer.  36.    7  It  may  be  they  will  present  their  suppli. 

37.  20  let  my  supplication,  .be  accepted  before 

38.  26  presented  my  supplication  before  the  ki. 
42.  2  Let,  we  beseech  thee,  our  supplication  be 
42.    9  sent  me  to  present  your  supplication  be. 

Dan.   9.  20  presenting  my  supplication  before  the  L. 

6. Supplications  for  grace,  nia^ng  tachamunoth. 
Psa.  86.   6  and  attend  to  the  voice  of  my  supplicat. 

7 .  Supplications  for  grace,  D*3»3ng  tachanunim. 

2  Ch.  6.  21  Hearken  therefore  unto  the  supplications 

Job  41.    3  Will  he  make  many  supplications  unto 

Psa.  28.    2  Hear  the  voice  of  my  supplications  when 

28.   6  he  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  supplicat. 

31.  22  thou  heardest  the  voice  of  my  supplicati. 

116.    1  hath  heard  my  voice(and)iny  supplications 

130.   2  attentive  to  the  voice  of  my  supplications 

140.    6  hear  the  voice  of  my  supplications,  O  L. 

143.    1  0  Lord,  give  ear  to  my  supplications :  in 

Jer.     3.  21  weeping  (and)  supplications  of  the  child. 

31.    9  with  supplications  will  I  lead  them :  I  will 

Dan.    9.    3  to  seek  by  prayer  and  supplications,  with 

9. 17  hear,  .his  supplications,  and  cause  thy 

9. 18  for  we  do  not  present  our  supplications 
9. 23  At  the  beginning  of  thy  supplications  the 

Zech  12. 10  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications 

8.  Supplication,  deprecation,  BeTj&ts  deesis. 

Acts    1.  14  with  one  accord  in  prayer  [and  supplica.] 
Eph.   6.  18  Praying  always  with  all  prayer  and  sup. 

6. 18  with  all  perseverance  and  supplication 
Phil.  4.    6  in  every  thing  by  prayer  and  supplication 
1  Ti.   2.    1  first  of  all,  supplications,  prayers,  interc. 

5.    5  continueth  in  supplications  and  prayers 

9-  Supplication,  suppliant  branch,  tKernpia  hikete. 
Heb.   5.    7  when  he  had  offered  up  prayers  and  sup. 
SUPPLY,  (to)  — 
l.To  make  fully  up  err  full  again,  avairXvpoaj  ana. 

1  C0.16.  17  lacking  on  your  part  they  have  supplied 
Phil.  2.  30  to  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me 

2.A  supply,  iTrixopnyia  epichoregia. 

Eph.   4. 16  compacted  by  that  which  every  joint  su. 
Phil.  1.  19  and  the  supply  of  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Ch. 

Z.To  make  full,  ^\t\p6w  pleroo. 

Phil.  4. 19  But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need 
4,7*o  make  fully  wp  toioard,  irpoaavairK^piw. 

2  Co.  9.  12  not  only  supplieth  the  want  of  the  saints 

11.   9  lacking  to  me  the  brethren . .  supplied,  and 

SUPPORT,  to  — 

l.To  hold  over  against,  avrexofxai  antechomai. 

1  Th.  5.  14  support  the  weak,  be  patient  toward  all 
2.7*0  take  or  receive  over  against,  avTi\a.f±$a.vop.ai. 

Acts  20.  35  so  labouring  ye  ought  to  support  the  weak 
SUPPOSE,  to  — 
l.To  say,  "i£N  amar. 

2  Sa.  13.  32  Let  not  my  lord  suppose  (that)  they  have 
2.  To  think,  Bok4w  dokeo. 

Mark  6.  49  supposed  it  had  been  a  spirit,  and  cried 
Lukei2.  51  Suppose  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace 

13.  2  Suppose  ye  that  these  Galileans  were  si. 

24.  37  and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit 
John'20. 15  She,  supposing  him  to  be  the  gardener 
Acts '27.  13  supposing  that  they  had  obtained  (their) 
Heb.  10.  29  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose 

3. To  lead,  think,  account,  esteem,  rjyeo/xai  hegeomai. 
Phil.   2.  25  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send  to 

4.  To  reckon,  Xoyi£ofxai  logizomai. 

2  Co. 11.    5  Eor  I  suppose  I  was  not  a  whit  behind 
1  Pe.  5. 12  as  I  suppose,  I  have  written  briefly,  exh. 

5.  To  reckon  as  law,  vofxifa  nomizo. 

Matt  20. 10  when  the  first  came,  they  supposed  that 

Luke  2. 44  supposing  him  to  have  been  in  the  comp. 

3.  23  being  as  was  supposed  the  son  of  Joseph 

Acts    7.  25  For  he  supposedhis  brethren  wouldhave 

14.  19  drew  (him)  out  of  the  city,  supposing  he 
16.  27  supposing  that  the  prisoners  had  been 
21.  29  whom  they  supposed  that  Paul  had  broug, 

1  Co.  7. 26  I  suppose  therefore  that  this  is  good  for 
1  Ti.  6.   5  supposiugthatgamisgodliness:fromsuch 

Q.To  suppose,  be  of  opinion,  otofxat  oiomai,  olfj.ai. 
John2i.  25  suppose  that  even  the  world  itself  could 
Phil.   1. 16  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds 

7. To  take  or  receive  tinder,  appreIie)id,vTro\aij.$duco. 
Luke  7.  43  I  suppose  that  (he)  to  whom  he  forgave 
Acts    2. 15  For  these  are  not  drunken  as  ye  suppose 

8.  To  think  under,  suspect)  suppose,  virovoiw  hupo. 
Acts  25.  18  none  accusation  of  such  things  as  I  supp. 
SUPREME  — 
To  hold  over  or  above,  inrep^x^  huperecho. 

1  Pe.   2.  13  whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as  supreme 
SUR,  t&d  turning  aside,  entrance. 

A  gate  of  the  house  (of  the  king  or  of  the  temple)  in 
Jerusalem,  called  in  2CI1.  23.5  "gate  of  the  foundation." 

2  Ki.  11.    6  a  third  part  (shall  be)  at  the  gate  of  S. 
SURE,   (more)  — 

l.To  be  or  become  faithful,  stedfast,  JQX  oiman,  2. 
1  Sa.   2.  35  will  build  him  a  sure  house,  and  he  shall 

25.  28  will  certainly  make  my  lord  a  sure  house 
1  Ki.  11.  38  build  thee  a  sure  house,  as  I  built  for  D. 


Psa.  19.   7  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  (is)  sure,  making 
in.    7  judgment:  all  his  commandments  (are)  s. 

Isa.   22.  23  I  will  fasten  him  (as)  a  nail  in  a  sure  pi. 
22.  25  the  nail  that  is  fastened  in  the  sure  place 
33.  16  shall  be  given  him,  his  waters  (shall  be)  s. 
55.    3  covenant  with  you,  (even)  the  sure  mercies 

2.7b  remain  faithful,  stedfast,  jdn  avian,  5. 

Dan.  2.  45  certain,  and  the  interpretation  thereof  su. 

3. Faithfulness,  stedfastness,  H3CN  amanah. 

Neh.  9.  38  because  of  all  this  we  make  a  sure  (cove.) 

i.Truth,  stedf astness,  n£w  cmeth. 

Prov.11.  iS  that  soweth  righteousness  (shall  be)  a  sure 

5.  To  be  founded,  laid,  as  a  foundation,  ip;  yasad,  6. 

Isa.   28. 16  a  precious  corner  (stone),  a  sure  foundat. 

6.  Confidence,  trust,  nanp  mibtach. 

Isa.  32. 18  in  sure  dwellings,  and  in  quiet  resting  pi. 

7. Standing,  abiding,  established,  Dt*p  qayyam. 
Dan.  4.  26  thy  kingdom  shall  be  sure  unto  thee,  after 

8.7*0  observe,  watch,  keep,  TD^  shamar. 

2  Sa.  23.   5  covenant,  ordered,  in  all  (things),  and  suro 
9.Firm,  secure,  safe,  certain,  aacpaXris  asphales. 

Heb.   6.  19  both  sure  and  stedfast,  and  which  enter. 
10. Firm,  sure,  stedfast,  £e'£atos  bebaios. 

Rom  4.  16  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed 

2  Pe.    1. 10  make  your  calling  and  election  sure:  for 
1.  19  We  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of  proph. 
11. Faithful,  believing,  ttkttSs  pistos. 

Acts  13.  34  I  will  give  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David 
12. Firm,  solid,  arcpeos  stereos. 

2  Ti.   2.  19  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  bar. 
SURE,  to  be,  make,  or  be  made  — 
l.To  be  faithful,  stedfast,  |cx  aman,  2. 

Psa.  93.    5  Thy  testimonies  are  very  sure:  holiness 
2.To  lean  on,  trust,  be  confident,  hub  batach. 

Prov.  11. 15  and  he  that  hateth  suretiship  is  sure 
3-  To  be  stony,  hard,  pin  chazaq. 

Deut.12.  23  Only  be  sure  that  thou  eat  not  the  blood. 
4.  To  know,  jn;  yada. 

Exod.  3.  19  I  am  sure  that  the  king  of  Egypt  will  not 

Num.32.  23  and  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out 

1  Sa.  20.   7  be  sure  that  evil  is  determined  by  him 

2  Sa.    1.  10  because  I  was  sure  that  he  could  not  live 

5.7*0  rise  up,  standstill,  nip  gum. 

Gen.  23.  17  the  borders  round  about,  were  made  sure 
23.  20  field,  and  the  cave . .  were  made  sure  unto 
Q.To  enlarge,  strengthen,  nrn  rahdb. 

Prov.  6.   3  humble  thyself,  and  make  sure  thy  friend 
7.7*0  make  safe,  secure,  aa<pa\i£a)  asphalizo. 

Matt. 27.  64  that  the  sepulchre  be  made  sure  until  the 
27.  65  said .  .go  your  way,  make  (it)  as  sure  as  ye 
27.  66  made  the  sepulchre  sure,  sealing  the  stone 

8.7*0  know,  take  cognizance  of,  yivoo&Ko>  ginosko. 

Lukeio.  11  be  ye  sure  of  this,  that  the  kingdom  of  G. 

John  6.  6g  we  believe  and  are  sure  that  thou  art  th. 
9.7*0  see,  know,  be  acquainted  with,  olBa,  oida. 

Rom.  2.    2  But  we  are  sure  that  the  judg.  Jo.  16.  30.. 
15.  29  am  sure  that,  wheul  come  unto  you,  I  sh. 
SURELY,  of  a  surety  — 
l.But,  truly,  yet,  chw  ulam. 

Job  13.  3  Surely!  would  speak  to  the  Almighty,  and 
14. 18  surely  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  no. 

2.0?%,  -i»J  ak. 

Gen.  9.  5  surely  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I  re. 
26.  9  Behold,  of  a  surety  she  (is)  thy  wife;  and 
29. 14  Surely  thou  (art)  my  bone  and  my  flesh 

Prov.22. 16  he  that  giveth  to  the  rich,  (shall)  surely 

3.  Surely,  but,  yet,  jsx  aken. 

Gen.  28.  16  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place,  and  Ikn. 

Exod.  2.  14  feared,  and  said,  Surely  this  thing  is  kn. 

1  Sa.  15.  32  said,  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  pa. 

1  Ki.11.    2  surely  they  will  turn  away  your  heart  af. 

Isa.  40.  7  bloweth  upon  it :  surely  the  people  (is) 
49.  4  surely  my  judgment  (is)  with  the  LORD 
53.   4  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs  and  car. 

Jer.     3-  20  Surely  (as)  a  wife  treacherously  departe. 
4. 10  surely  thou  hast  greatly  deceived  this  p. 

4.  Truly,  indeed,  D3DN  umnam. 

Gen.  18.  13  Shall  Ibf  asuretybear  a  child,  which  am 

5.  Truly,  indeed,  mnx  omnam. 

Job  34.  12  Yea,  surely  God  will  not  do  wickedly,  ne. 

6. If  not,  ah  DX  im  Id. 

Is  urn  14.  35  will  surely  do  it  unto  all  this  evil  congre. 

1  Ki.  20.  23  and  surely  we  shall  bestrongerthanthey 

7 .Confidence,  trust,  ns3  betach. 

Prov  10.   9  He  that  walketh  uprightly  walketh  sure. 

8.-4  son  of,  "[?  ben. 

2  Sa.  12.   s  the  man  that  hathdone  this  ..shallsurely 

9.7*o  know,  be  acquainted,  with,  jn;  yada. 

Gen.  15. 13  Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed  shall  be 

10. That,  because,  's  ki. 

Gen.  29.  32  Surely  the  LORD  hath  looked  upon  my  a. 

11 .  Therefore,  \zh  taken. 

1  Sa.  28.  2  Surely  thou  shalt  know  what  thy  servant 


SURELY 


948 


SWEAR 


1'Z.Only,  surely,  nevertheless,  plraq. 

Gen.  20.  11  Surely  the  fear  of  God  (is)  nut  in  this  pi. 

13.  Truly,  really,  certainly,  aKyBus  alethos. 

Matt  26.  73  Surely  thou  also  art  (one)  of  thera;  for 
Marki4.  70  surely  thou  art  (one)  of  them  :  for  thou 
Johui7.    8  have  known  surely  that  I  came  out  from 
Acts  12.  11  Nowl  knowof  a  surety,  that  the  Lord  ha. 

1\.  Indeed,  ^  ftfyv  e  men. 

Heb.    6.  14  Saying,  [Surely]  blessing  I  will  bless  thee 

15.  Verily,  indeed,  truly,  vai  nai. 

Rev.  22.  20  saith,  Surely  I  comequickly.  Amen.  Even 
16. By  all  means,  entirely,  altogetlier,  Travrcos  pan. 

Luke  4.  23  Ye  will  surely  say  unto  me  this  proverb 
SURELY  (believed),  to  be  — 
1. To  be  or  become  faithful,  stedfast,  j£K  aman,  2. 

Hos.   5.    9  I  made  known  that  which  shall  surely  be 
2.Tb  bear  on  fully,  TrKypotyopw  plerophoreo. 

Luke  1.    1  things  which  are  most  surely  believed  am. 

SURELY  (no  more,  none,  not)  — 
If,  dx  im. 

XUIU14.  23  Surely  they  shall  not  see  the  land  which 
32. 11  Surely  none  of  the  men  that  came  up  out 

Isa.  62.    8  Surely  I  will  no moregive  thy  corn(to be) 

STJRETISHLP,  surety  — 

1.  Pledge,  surety,  n^"ji;  arubbah. 

Prov  17. 18  becometh  surety  in  the  presence  of  his  fr. 

2.To  strike,  ypn  taha. 

Prov  11. 15  and  he  that  hateth  suretiship  is  sure 

3.  A  bail,  pledge,  surety,  eyyvos  egguos. 

Heb.  7.  22  By  so  much  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of  a 
SURETY,  to  be,  become,  put  in  — 
To  be  or  become  surety,  2y>?  arab. 

Gen.  43.    9  I  will  be  surety  for  him ;  of  my  hand  shalt 

44.  32  For  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad 
Joh   17.    3  Lay  down  now,  put  me  in  a  surety  with 
Psa.119.  122  Be  surety  for  thy  servant  for  good:  let 
Prov.  6.    1  My  sou,  if  thou  be  surety  for  thy  friend 

11.  15  He  that  is  surety  for  a  stranger  shall  sm. 
ao.  16  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  (for)  a  str. 
22.  26  Be  not  thou . .  of  them  that  are  sureties  for 
27. 13  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  for  a  str. 

SURFEITING  — 

-•1  headache,  Kpanrd\Tj  kraipale. 

Luke2i.  34  hearts  be  overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and 
6URMISINGS  — 
A  sus}ncion,  surmise,  inrSvoia  huponoia. 

1  Ti.    6.    4  whereof  cometh  envy,  .evil  surmisings 
SURNAME,  (be  surnamed, )  to  — 
1.  To  surname,  give  flattering  titles,  rua  kanah,  3. 

Isa.   44.    5  surname  (himself)  by  the  name  of  Israel 

45.  4  surnamed  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  kn. 

2.7*0  call  xq)on,  be  surnamed,  £wLKa\eo/j.at  epikale. 

Matt  10.    3  Lebbeus,  [whose  Burname  was  Thaddeus] 

Luke22.    3  Then  entered  Satan  into  Judas  [surnam.j 

Acts    1.  23  called  Barsabas,  who  was  surnamed  Jus. 

4.  36  Joses,  who  by  the  apostles  was  surnamed 

10.    5  call  for  (one)  Simon,  whose  surname  is  P. 

10.  18  whether  Simon,  which  was  surnamed  Pe. 

10.  32  call  hither  Simon,  whose  surname  is  Pet. 

11. 13  and  call  for  Simon,  whose  surname  is  Pe. 

12.  12  mother  of  John,  whose  surname  was  Ma. 
12.  25  took  with  them  Johu,  whose  surname  was 
15.  22  Judas  [surnamed]  Barsabas,  andSilas,  ch. 

3.  To  put  a  name  upon,  iTrtriQntxi  fivofia  epitithemi. 
Mark  3.  16  And  Simon  he  surnamed  Peter 

3.  17  surnamed  them  Boanerges,  which  is,  The 

4.7*0  call,  Ka\€w  kaleO. ' 

Acts  15.  37  take  with  them  John,  whose surnamewas 
SURPRISE,  be  surprised,  to  — 
1.  7*o  lay  hold,  thn  achaz. 

Isa.  33.  14  tearfulness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites 
2.7*0  be  caught,  captured,  c'5J?  taphas,  2. 

Jer.  48.  41  strongholds  are  surprised,  and  the  migh. 
51.  41  the  praise  of  the  whole  earth  surprised  I 

SUSANCHTTES,  M£XtaF- 

The  inhabitants  of  the  city  Shushan  or  Susi,  or  of  the 

province  Susiana,  who  were  transplanted  to  Samaria  by 

Shalnianezer. 

Ezra  4.   9  the  S.,  the  Dehavitcs,  (and)  the  Elamites 
SU-SAN'-NA,  'Xovaavua.  lily. 

one  of  the  women  who  ministered  to  Christ  of  their 
substance,  and  who  followed  him  in  his  journeyings. 

Luke  8.    3  S.,  and  many  others,  which  ministered 
SU'-SI,  'p'D  Jah  is  swift  or  rejoicing. 
A  Mauassite,  father  of  Gaddi,  one  of  the  twelve  men 
sent  to  spy  out  the  land.     B.C.  1492. 

Numi3.  11  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  Gaddi.. sou  of  S- 
6U  STAIN,  to  — 
1.7*0  contain,  sustain,  ba  hut,  Za. 

iKi.  17.    g  commanded  a  widow  woman  there  to  s. 

Neh.  9.  21  forty  years  didst  thou  sustain  them  in  the 

Psa.  55.  22  shall  sustain  thee  :  he  Bhall  never  suffer 

rrov.ifj.  14  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infir, 
2.7*o  support,  T|Cij  samak. 

Gen.  27.  37  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  sustained  him 


Psa.    3.    5  slept;  I  awaked  ;  for  the  Lord  sustained 

Isa.   59.  16  and  his  righteousness,  it  sustained  him 
SUSTENANCE,   (to  provide)  — 
l.To  contain,  sustai?i,  ^13  kid,  3a. 

2  Sa.  19.  32  provided  the  king  of  sustenance  while  he 
2. Life  preserver,  sustenance,  quickening,  n;np, 

Judg.  6.  4  left  no  sustenance  for  Israel,  neither  sh. 
3. .Food,  sustenance,  %6pTa<r^a  chortasma. 

Acts    7.  1 1  affliction :  and  our  fathers  found  no  sust. 
SWADDLED,  to  be  swaddled,  to  — 
1.7*o  be  swaddled,  bm  chathal,  4,  6. 

Eze.  16.    4  wast  not  salted  at  all,  nor  swaddled  at  all 

2. 7b  stretch  out,  swaddle,  n?o  taphach,  3. 

Lam.  2.  22  those  that  I  have  swaddled  and  brought 

SWADDLING  band,  to  wrap  in  swaddling  clothes  — 
l.A  swaddling  band,  '"t^nn  chathullah. 

Job  3S.    9  thick  darkness  a  swaddling  baud  for  it 
2.7*0  swaddle,  airapyavoco  sparganoo. 

Luke  2.    7  wrapped  him  in  swaddling  clothes,  and 
2. 12  fiud  the  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling  clot. 
SWALLOW  — 
l.A  swallow,  wild  pigeon,  yrn  deror. 

Psa.  84.    3  found  an  house,  and  the  swallow  a  nest 

Prov26.    2  as  the  swallow  by  flying,  so  the  curse  ca. 

2.  A  crane,  swallmo,  "naj|  agur. 

Isa.   38.  14  Like  a  crane  (or)  a  swallow,  so  did  I  cha. 
Jer.    8.    7  the  crane  and  the  swallow  observe  the  ti. 

SWALLOW  (down,  up),  to  — 

1.  7*o  swallow,  yra  bala. 

Exod  7.  12  hut  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods 

15.  12  thy  right  hand,  the  earth  swallowed  them 
Numi6.  30  earth  open  her  mouth,  and  swallow,  .up 

16.  32  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed  them  up 
16.  34  they  said,  Lest  the  earth  swallow  us  up 
26. 10  swallowed  them  up  together  with  Korah 

Deut  11.    6  swallowed  them  up,  and  their  households 

Job     7.  19  let  me  alone  till  I  swallow  down  my  spit. 

20.  15  He  hath  swallowed  down  riches,  and  he 

20. 18  he  restore,  and  shall  not  swallow  it  down 

Psa.  69.  15  neither  let  the  deep  swallow  me  up,  and 

106.  17  The  earth  opened  and  swallowed  up  Dat. 

124.   3  Then  they  had  swallowed  us  up  quick, wh. 
Prov.  1.  12  Let  us  swallow  them  up  alive  as  the  grave 
Jer.   51. 34  he  hath  swallowed  me  up  like  a  dragon 
Hos.    8.    7  it  yield,  the  strangers  shall  swallow  it  up 
Jon.    1.  17  had  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  up 

2.  To  be  sicalloiced,  y1?;  bala,  2. 

Isa.    28.    7  they  are  swaUowed  up  of  wine,  they  are 
Hos.    8.    8  Israel  is  swallowed  up:  now  shall  they  be 

3.7*0  swallow-,  y^3  bala,  3. 

2  Sa.  20.  19  why  wilt  thou  swallow  up  the  inheritance 

20.  20  far  be  it  from  me,  that  I  should  swallow 

Psa.  21.   9  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in  his  wrath 

35.  25  them  not  say,  We  have  swallowed  him  up 

Eccl.io.  12  but  the  lips  of  a  fool  will  swallow  up  him. 

Isa.   25.    8  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory;  and 

49.  19  they  that  swallowed  thee  up  shall  be  far 

Lam.  2.    2  Lord  hath  swallowed  up  all  the  habitat. 

2.    5  swaUowed  up  Israel,  he  hath  swallowed  up 

2.  16  We  have  swallowed  (her)  up;  certainly 

4.7*0  swallow  up,  run  siciftly,  ND3  gama,  3. 

Job  39.  24  He  swalloweth  the  ground  with  fierceness 
5.  7*o  sioallow  up,  be  rash,  yi1?  lua. 

Obad.  16  shall  swallow  down,  and  they  shall  he  as 
§.Topant,  desire,  swallow  up,  r\ity  shaaph. 

■Job     5.    5  the  robber  swalloweth  up  their  substance 

Psa.  56.    1  for  man  would  swallow  me  up ;  he  fight. 

56.  2  Mine  enemies  would  daily  swallow,  .up 

57.  3  reproach  of  him  that  would  swallow,  .up 
Eze.  36.    3  swallowed  you  up  on  every  side,  that  ye 
Amos  8.    4  Hear  this,  0  ye  that  swallow  up  the  nee. 

7.  7*o  drink  down,  swallow  up,  Karairivta  katapino. 
Matt  23.  24  which  strain  at  a  gnat,  and  swallow  a  ca. 
Rev.  12.  16  swallowed  up  the  flood  which  the  dragon 

SWALLOWED  up,  (to  be)  — 

1.7*o  be  sicallowed  up,  yS?  bala,  A. 

2  Sa.  17.  16  lest  the  king  be  swallowed  up,  and  all  the 
Job    37.  20  speak,  surely  he  shall  be  swallowed  up 

2.  Swallowing  up,  yS?  beta. 

Jer.  51.  44' that  which  he  hath  swallowed  up:  and  the 

3.  7*o  swallow  up,  be  rash,  ]pb  lua. 

Joh     6.    3  therefore  my  words  are  swallowed  up 
4.7*o  drink  dawn,  sicallmo  up,  KaraTvivu>  katapind. 

1  Co.  15.  54  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory 

2  Co.    2.    7  perhaps  such  a  one  should  be  swallo.  up 

5.    4  that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of 

SWAN  — 

CJutmeleon,  oiol,  rirptrin  tanshemeth. 

Lev.  11.  18  the  swan,  and  the  pelican,  and  the  gier 
Deut  14.  16  little  owl,  and  the  great  owl,  and  the  sw. 

SWARM  — 

1.  Company,  swarm,  congregation,  rrv&edaJi. 

Judg  14.  8  swarm  of  bees  and  honey  in  the  carcase 
2..4  beetle,  dog  fly,  3hy  arob. 

Exod  8.  21  I  willsendswarms'(offiies)uponthee,  and 
8.  21  houses,  .shall  be  full  of  swarm  (of  flies) 


Exod. 8.  22  that  no  swarms(of  flies)  shall  be  there,  to 
8.  24  there  came  a  grievous  swarm  (of  flies)  into 
8.  24  corrupted  by  reason  of  the  swarm  (of  flies) 
8.  29  entreat  the  Lord  that  the  swarms  (of  fl.) 
8.  31  he  removed  the  swarms  (of  flies)  from  Ph. 
SWEAR,  (to  cause  or  make)  to  — 
1.7*o  appeal  to  God,  take  oath,  rhx  alah. 

Hos.    4.   2  By  swearing,  and  lying,  and  killing,  and 
10.    4  swearing  falsely  in  making  a  covenant 
2.  7*o  cause  to  appeal  to  God,  n^N  alah,  5. 

1  Ki.    8.  31  be  laid  upon  him  tocause  him  to  swear 

2  Ch.  6.  22  oath  be  laid  upon  him  to  make  him  swear 

3.7*0  swear  (in  order  to  satisfy  one),  ynty  shaba. 
Eze .  2 1 .  23  to  them  that  have  sworn  oaths :  but  he  w. 

4.7*0  be  or  become  sworn,  swear,  yiy  shaba,  2. 

Gen.  21.  23  therefore  swear  unto  mehere  by  God,  that 
21.  24  And  Abraham  said,  I  will  swear 

21.  31  hecause  there  they  sware  both  of  them 

22.  16  By  myself  have  I  sworn,  saith  the  Lord 
24.    7  spake  unto  me,  and  that  sware  unto  me 

24.  9  and  sware  to  him  concerning  that  matter 

25.  33  Swear  to  me  this  day ;  and  he  sware  unto 

26.  3  perform  the  oath  which  I  sware  unto  A. 
26. 31  rose  up  betimes,  .and  sware  one  to  anot. 

31.  53  Jacob  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isa. 
47.  31  Swear  unto  me.  And  he  sware  unto  him 
50.  24  which  he  sware  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and 

Exodi3     5  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers  to  give 
13. 11  sware  unto  thee  and  to  thy  fathers,  and 

32.  13  to  whom  thou  swarest  by  thiue  own  self 

33.  1  land  which  I  sware  unto  Abraham,  to  I. 
Lev.    5.    4  Or  if  a  soul  swear,  pronouncing  with  (his) 

6.    3  sweareth  falsely;  in  any  of  all  these  that 

6.    5  Or  all  that  about  which  he  hath  sworn  fa. 

19.  12  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  name  falsely 

Nuuiix.  12  unto  the  land  which  thou  swearest  unto 

14.  16  into  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  them 

14.  23  shall  not  see  the  landwhichl  sware  unto 

30.    2  swear  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bo. 

32.  10  was  kindled  the  same  time,  and  he  sware 

32.  11  shall  see  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  A. 

Deut.  1.    8  Lord  sware  unto  your  fathers,  Abraham 

1.  34  Lord  heard  the  voice,  .and  sware,  saying 

1.  35  land,  which  I  sware  to  give  unto  your  fa. 

2.  14  among  the  host,  as  the  Lord  sware  unto 
4.  21  sware  that  I  should  not  go  over  Jordan 

4.  31  covenant  of  thy  fathers  which  he  sware 
6. 10  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers,  to  Abr. 
6.  13  and  serve  him,  and  shalt  swear  by  his  na. 
6.  18  good  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy 

6.  23  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  our  fathers 

7.  8  oath  which  he  had  sworn  unto  your  fath. 
7.  12  the  mercy  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fath. 

7.  13  land  which  he  sware  unto  thy  fathers  to 

8.  1  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  your  fa. 

8.  18  covenant  whichhe  sware  unto  thyfathers 

9.  5  word  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fat. 
10.  11  land  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathers  to 

10.  20  shalt  thou  cleave,  and  swear  by  his  name 

11.  9,  21  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  your 

13.  17  multiply  thee,  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy 
19.  8  enlarge  thy  coast,  as  he  hath  sworn  unto 
26.  3  country  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  our 
26.  15  as  thou  swarest  unto  our  fathers,  a  land 
28.  9  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thee,  if  thou  shalt 
28.  11  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fat. 
29. 13  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers,  to  Ab. 

30.  20  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy  fath 

31.  7  land  which  the  Lord  hath  sworn  untoth. 
31.  20  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathers 
31.  21  brought  them  intotheland  which  I  sware' 
31.  23  into  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  them 

34.  4  This  (is)  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  Ab. 
Josh.  1.    6  laud  which  I  sware  unto  their  fathers  to 

2.  12  swear  unto  me  by  the  Lord,  since  I  have 

5.  6  unto  whom  the  Lord  sware  that  he  would 

5.  6  land  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  their  fa. 

6.  22  bring  out  thence  the  woman . .  as  ye  sware 
9.  15  princes  of  the  congregation  sware  untoth. 
9.  18  princes  of  the  congregation  had  sworn un. 
9. 19  We  have  sworn  unto  them  by  the  Lord 
9.  20  because  of  the  oath  which  we  sware  unto 

14.  9  Moses  sware  on  that  day,  saying,  Surely 
21.  43  which  he  sware  to  give  unto  their  fathers 
21.  44  according  to  all  that  he  sware  unto  their 

Judg.  2.    1  unto  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  your  fa. 
2. 15  as  the  Lord  had  sworn  unto  them :  and 

15.  12  Swear  unto  me,  that  ye  will  not  fall  upon 
21.    1  menof  Israel  had  sworn  in  Mizpeh.saying 
21.    7  seeing  we  have  sworn  by  the  Lord  that 
21 .  18  for  the  children  of  Israel  have  sworn,  say. 

1  Sa.   3.  14  therefore  I  have  sworn  unto  the  house  of 

19.  6  and  Saul  sware,  (As)  the  Lord  liveth,  he 

20.  3  David  sware  moreover,  and  said,  Thy  fa. 

20.  42  forasmuch  as  we  have  sworn  both  of  us  in 
24.  21  Swear  now  therefore  unto  me  by  the  Lord 
24.  22  David  sware  unto  Saul.  And  Saul  went 
28.  10  Saul  sware  to  her  by  the  Lord,  saying 
30.  15  Swear  unto  me  by  God  that  thou  wilt  ne. 

2  Sa.   3.   9  as  the  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David,  even  so 

3.  35  David  sware,  saying,  So  do  God  to  me,  and 
19.  7  fori  swear  by  the  Lord,  if  thou  go  not  fo. 
19.  23  Thou  shalt  not  die.    And  the  king  sware 

21.  2  the  children  of  Israel  had  sworn  unto  them 
21.  17  Then  the  men  of  David  sware  unto  him 

1  K.i.  1.  13  Didst  not  thou.. swear  unto  thine  handm. 
1.  17  thou  swarest  by  the  Lord  thy  God  unto 
1.  29  the  king  sware  andsaid..  the  Lord  liveth 
1.  30  as  I  sware  unto  thee  by  the  Lord  Gcd  of 


SWEARER 


949 


SWIFT 


i  Ki.    i.  51  Let  king  Solomon  swear  unto  me  to  day 

2.    8  I  sware  to  him  by  the  Lord,  saying,  I  will 

2.  23  Then  king  Solomon  sware  by  the  Lord 

2  Ki.25.  24  Gedaliah  sware  to  them,  and  to  their  men 

a  Ch.15. 14  they  sware  unto  the  Lord  with  aloud  vo. 

15.  15  for  they  had  sworn  with  all  their  heart 
Ezra  10.    5  do  according  to  this  word  And  they  sware 
Psa.  15.    4  swearetli  to  (his  own)  hurt,  andchangeth 
24.   4  who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul,  .nor  sworn 
63. 11  every  one  that  sweareth  by  him  shall  gl. 
89.    3  I  have  sworn  unto  David  niy  servant 
89.  35  Once  have  I  sworn  by  my  holiness  that  I 
8g.  49  thou  swarest  unto  David  in  thy  truth  ? 
95. 11  Unto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  that  th. 
102.    8  they  that  are  mad  against  me  are  sworn 
no.   4  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repent 
1 19.  106 1  have  sworn,  and  I  will  perform  (it),  that 
132.    2  How  he  sware  unto  the  Lord.. vowed  unto 
132.  n  Lord  hath  sworn  (in)  truth  unto  David 
Eccl.  9.    2  he  that  sweareth,  as  (he)  that  feareth  an 
Isa.   14.  24  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sworn,  saying,  Surely 
19.  18  shall  five  cities  in  the  land  of  Egypt.. sw. 
45.  23 1  have  sworn..  That,  .every  tongue  shall  sw. 

48.  1  which  swear  by  the  name  of  the  Lord 
54.   9  I  have  sworn  that . .  so  have  I  sworn  that 
62.    8  Lord  hath  sworn  by  his  right  hand,  and 
65.  16  he  that  sweareth  in  the  earth  shall  swear 

Jer.     4.    2  thou  shalt  swear,  The  Lord  liveth,  in  tr. 
5.    2  they  say,  The  Lord,  .surely  they  swear 

5.  7  thy  children  have  forsaken  me.andsworn 

7.  9  "Will  ye  steal,  murder. .  and  swear  falsely 
n.  5  I  may  perform  the  oath  which  Ihavesw. 
12. 16  to  swear  by  my  name.,  to  swear  by  Baal 

22.  s  I  swear  by  myself,  saith  the  Lord,  that 
32.  22  which  thou  didst  swear  to  their  fathers 
38.  16  Zedekiahthe  king  sware  secretly  unto  Je. 
40.    9  Gedaliah.  .sware  unto  them, and  to  their 
44. 26  I  have  sworn  by  my  great  name,  saith  the 

49.  13  I  have  sworn  by  myself,  saith  the  Lord 
51.  14  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sworn  by  himself 

Eze.  16.   8  I  sware  unto  thee,  and  entered  into  a  co. 
21.  23  it  shall  be. .to  them  that  have  sworn  oaths 
Dan.  12.    7  aud  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever 
Hos.    4.  15  neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-avan,  nor  swear 
Amos  4.    2  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  his  holiness 

6.  8  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  himself,  saith 

8.  7  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  J. 
8.  14  They  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  Samaria 

Mic.    7.  20  which  thou  hast  sworn  unto  our  fathers 
Zeph.  1.    5  that  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  that  swear 
Zech.  5.    3  every  one  that  sweareth  shall  be  cut  oft3 
5.   4  into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth  fal. 

5.  A  hand  is  against  the  throne,  D3-1?^  X  Va&  <&  kes. 

Exodi7.  *6  For  he  said,  Because  the  Lord  hath  sworn 

6.  Master  or  possessor  of  an  oath,  nyu?  7J23  baal  sh. 

N"eh.    6.  18  For  (there  were)  many  in  Judah  sworn 

7.  To  lift  tip  {the  hand),  (t)  k^i  nasa  (yad), 
Exod.  6.    8  theland.concerningthewhich  I  did  swear 
Numi4.  30  which  I  sware  to  make  you  dwell  therein 
Neh.  9.  15  land  which  thouhadst  sworn  to  give  them 
Isa.    3.    7  In  that  day  shall  he  swear,  saying,  I  will 

8.  To  cause  to  swear,  y?^  shaba,  5. 

Gen.  24.    3  I  will  make  thee  swear  by  the  LORD,  the 
24,  37  my  master  made  me  swear,  saying,  Thou 

50.  5  My  father  made  me  swear,  saying,  Lo,  I 
50.    6  Go.,  bury  thy  father,  .as  he  made  thee  sw. 

Exodi3<  19  he  had  straitly  sworn  the  children  of  Is. 
Josh.  2.  17,  20  oath  which  thou  hast  made  us  swear 

23.  7  nor  cause  to  swear . .  neither  serve  them 
1  Sa.  20.  17  Jonathan  caused  David  to  swear  again 

1  Ki.  2.  42  Did  I  not  make  thee  to  swear  by  the  Lord 

2  Ch.36.  13  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  had  made  him  sw. 
Ezra  10.  5  Then  arose  Ezra,  and  made. .Israel,  to  sw. 
Neh.13.  25  I  contended .  .and  made  them  swear  by  G. 

9.  To  swear,  ofivufii  omnumi. 

Matt.  5.  34  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all,  neither 

5.  36  Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  be. 
23.  16  Whosoever  shall  swear.,  whosoever  shalls. 
23.  18  Whosoever  shall  swear . .  whosoever  swea. 
23.  20  Whoso. .shallswearby  the  altar,  sweareth 
23.  21  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  swear. 
23.  22  he  that  shall  swear  by  heaven,  sweareth 
26.  74  Then  began  he  to  curse  and  to  swear 

Mark  6.  23  he  sware  unto  her,  Whatsoever  thou  shalt 
14.  71  he  began  to  curse  aud  to  swear.  .1  know 
Luke  1.  73  The  oath  which  he  sware  to  our  father 
Acts  2.  30  knowing  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  oa. 
7.  17  which  God  [had  sworn]  to  Abraham,  the 
Heb.  3.  n  So  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  They  shall  not 

3.  18  to  whom  sware  he  that  they  should  not 

4.  3  As  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath,  If  they  shall 

6.  13  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by 
6. 16  For  men  verily  swear  by  the  greater,  and 

7.  21  The  Lord  sware  and  will  not  repent.  Thou 
Jas.  5.  12  swear  not,  neither  by  heaven,  neither  by 
Rev.  10.   6  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever 

SWEARER,  swearing  — 

\.An  appeal  to  God,  rkx  alah. 

Lev.    5.    1  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swearing,  and 

Jer.  23.  10  for  because  of  swearing  the  land  mourn. 
2.  To  be  sworn,  swear,  y?c?  shaba,  2. 

l\lal.    3.    5  against  false  swearers,  and  against  those 
SWEAT,  (anything  that  causeth)  — 
1. Sweat,  r\'jr\  zeah. 

Gen.    3.  19  in  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  br. 
2.  Sweat,  yi*  yeza. 

Eze.  44.  iS  gird .  .with  any  thins  that  causeth  sweat 


3. Sweat,  ISpws  hidros. 

Luke  22.  44  [sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood] 

SWEEP,  to  be  swept  (away),  sweeping  — 

1.  To  sweep  away,  fpa  garaph. 

Judg.  5.  21  river  of  Kishon  swept  them  away,  that 

2.  To  sweep,  daub,  niu  tu,  Za. 

Isa.    14.  23  will  sweep  it  with  the  besom  of  destruct. 

3.  To  sweep  away,  nyr;  yaah. 

Isa.   28.  17  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies 
i.To  sweep  away,  ^na  sachaph. 

Prov  28.  3  a  sweeping  rain  which  leaveth  no  food 
5.  To  be  swept  away,  *]np  sacJuqih,  2. 

Jer.  46. 15  Why  are  thy  valiant  (men)  swept  away? 
6. To  sweep,  <rap6w  saroo. 

Matt  12.  44  he  findeth  (it)  empty,  swept,  and  garnis. 

Luke  1 1.  25  when  he  cometh,  he  findeth  (it)  sweptand 
15.    8  sweep  the  house,  and  seek  diligently  till 

SWEET,  sweeter  — 
1.  Spice,  D^3  besem. 

Exod  30.  23  of  sweet  cinnamon  half  so  much,  (even) 

2.Spice,  niiQ  bosem. 

Exod3o.  23  of  sweet  calamus  two  hundred  and  fifty 

3.  Good,  ate  tob. 

Jer.    6.  20  and  the  sweet  cane  from  a  far  country? 

4. Sweet  things,  O'pnpo  mamtaqqim. 

N"eh.   8.  10  eat  the  fat,  and  drink  the'sweet,  and  send 
Song  5.  16  His  mouth  (is)  most  sweet;  yea,  he  (is)  al. 

5.  Sweet,  pinn  mathoq. 

Judg.14.  18*  What  (is)  sweeter  than  honey?  and  what 
Psa.  19.  10  sweeter  also  than  honey,  and  the  honey 
Prov.16.  24  sweet  to  the  soul,  and  health  to  the  bones 
24.  13  the  honeycomb,(which  is)  sweet  to  thy  ta. 

27.  7  the  hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing  is  sweet 
Eccl.  5.  12  The  sleep  of  a  labouring  man  (is)  sweet 

11.    7  Truly  the  light  (is)  sweet,  and  a  pleasant 
Song  2.    3  delight,  and  his  fruit  (was)  sweet  to  my 
Isa.     5.  20  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter 

6.  Rest,  sioeelness,  sweet  thing,  nirn  nichoach. 

Gen.    8.  21  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour;  and  the  Lo. 
Exod2g.  i8,  41  a  sweet  savour,  an  offering  made  by 

29.  25  for  a  sweet  savour  before  the  Lord:  it  (is) 
Lev.    1.    9,  13,  17  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 

2.  2,  9  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savour 
2. 12  not  be  burnt  on  the  altar  for  a  sweet  sav. 

3.  5  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savour 

3,  16  offering  made  by  fire  for  a  sweet  savour 

4.  31  burn  (it)  upon  the  altar  for  a  sweet  savour 
6.  15  burn  it  upon  the  altar  (for)  a  sweet  savour 
6.  21  shalt  thou  offer  (for)  a  sweet  savour  unto 
8.  21  it  (was)  a  burnt  sacrifice  for  a  sweet  sav. 
8.  28  they  (were)  consecrations  for  a  sweet  sa. 

17.    6  burn  the  fat  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 
23.  13  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord  (for)  a  sweet 
23.  18  offering  made  by  fire,  of  sweet  savour  unto 
Numis.    3,  7,  io,  13,  14,  24  a  sweet  savour  unto  the 
18. 17  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 

28.  2  a  sweet  savour  unto  me,  shall  ye  observe 
28.   6,  13  a  sweet  savour,  a  sacrifice  made  by 

28.  8,  24,  27  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 
79.    2,  13,  36  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 

29.  6  for  a  sweet  savour,  a  sacrifice  made 

29.  8  (for)  a  sweet  savour,  one  young  bullock 
Eze.    6.  13  place  where  they  did  offer  sweet  savour 

16.  19  even  set  it  before  themfora  sweet  savour 
20.  28  there  also  they  made  their  sweet  savour 
20.  41  I  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet  savour 

7.  Pleasant,  n'yj  naim. 

2  Sa.  23.    1  David,  .the  sweet  Psalmist  of  Israel,  said 
Prov  23.    8  shalt  thou  vomit  up,  aud  loose  thy  sweet 

S.Sjnces,  perfumes,  D*t?p  sammim. 

Exod25.    6  spices  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  sweet  in. 

30.  7  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  sweet  incense 

30.  34  Take  unto  thee  sweet  spices.,  sweet  spices 

31.  11  the  anointing  oil,  and  sweet  incense  for 
35.   8  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  the  sweet  ince. 
35.  15,  28  the  anointing  oil,  and  the  sweet  ince. 
37.  29  he  made,  .the  pure  incense  of  sweet  spi. 

39.  38  the  anointing  oil,  and  the  sweet  incense 

40.  27  he  burned  sweet  incense  thereon;  as  the 
Lev.   4.    7  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  inc. 

16.  12  his  hands  full  of  sweet  incensebeaten  sm. 
Num.4.  l6  the  oil  for  the  light,  and  the  sweet  incense 
2  Ch.  2.   4  to  burn  before  him  sweet  incense,  and  for 

13. 11  burn,  .burnt  sacrifices  and  sweet  incense 

9.S\veet,  sure,  xij;  areb. 

Prov  20.  17  Bread  of  deceit  (is)  sweet  to  a  man;  but 
Song  2.  14  sweet  (is)  thy  voice,  and  thy  countenance 

10.  Compounds,  perj 'nines,  DTiT)?  merqachim. 
Song  5.  13  His  cheeks  (are)  as  abed  of  spices,  .sweet 

11.  Sweet,  y\vtc6s  glukus. 

Jas.    3.  11  send.. at  the  same  place  sweet.. and  bitter? 
Rev.  10.   9  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  sweet  as  honey 
10. 10  it  was  in  my  mouth  sweetas honey,  and  as 

SWEET,  to  be,  make,  take  — 

l.To  make  good,  do  well,  sa;  yatab,  5. 

Isa.  23.  16  makesweetmelody,singnianysongs,  that 

'2. To  be  sweet,  }'bn  malats,  2. 

Psa.  1 19. 103  How  sweet  are  thy  words  unto  my  taste 

3.  To  be  sweet,  pns  maffiaq. 

Exodi5.25  when  he.,  cast.,  the  waters  were  made  sw. 


Job  21.  33  The  clods  of  the  valley  shall  be  sweet  unto 
Prov.  9.  17  Stolen  waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  (eaten) 

4.  To  make  sweet,  p0£  malhaq,  5. 

Job  20. 12  Though  wickedness  be  sweet  in  his  mouth 
Psa.  55.  14  We  took  sweet  counsel  together,  .walked 

5. To  be  pleasant,  Dya  naem. 

Psa.141.    6  they  shall  hear  my  words;  for  they  aresw. 

6.  To  make  sweet  or  sure,  Tiy  ardb. 

Psa.104.  34  My  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet 
Prov.  3.  24  shalt  lie  down,  and  thy  sleep  shall  be  sw. 
13.  19  The  desire  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the 
Jer.     6.  20  not  acceptable,  nor  your  sacrifices  sweet 
31.  26  I  awaked . .  and  my  sleep  was  sweet  unto 

SWEET  incense,  odours,  smell,  smelling,  savour,  wine  — 

l.Spice,  CfZ  besem. 

2  Ch.16.  14  bed  which  was  filled  with  sweet  odours 
Esth.  2.  12  six  months  with  sweet  odours,  and  with 

2Jncense,  rnbp  qetoreth. 

Exod3i.  11  the  anointing  oil,  and  sweet  incense  for 
Lev.    4.    7  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  inc. 

3.  To  pass  over,  overpass,  "ny,  abar. 

Song  5.    5  sweet  smelling  myrrh,  upon  the  handles 
5.  13  his  lips ..  dropping  sweet  smelling  myTrh 

4. .4  possession,  mead,  new  wine,  ty'n'n  tirosh. 

Mic.  6.  15  and  sweet  wine,  but  shalt  not  drink  wine 
5.Siccet  smell  or  odour,  eua>5ta  euodia. 

2  Co.  2. 15  For  we  are  untoGod  a  sweet  savour  of  Ch. 

Eph.  5.2  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  sa. 

Phil.  4.  iS  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  ace. 
[See  also  Odour,  savour,  smell,  spices,  wine]. 

SWEETLY,  (to  feed)  — 

1,  Upright  things,  D,"ii£i,D  mesharim. 

Song  7.  9  that  goeth.  .sweetly,  causing  the  lips  of 
2. To  be  sweet,  prtp  mathaq. 

Job  24.  20  the  worm  shall  feed  sweetly  on  him,  he 

SWEETNESS  — 

1.  Sweet,  p'lntt  mathoq. 

Judg  14. 14  out  of  the  strong  came  forth  sweetness 
Eze.    3.    3  it  was  in  my  mouth  as  honey  for  sweet. 

2.  Sweetness,  pnp  metheq. 

Prov.16.  21  the  sweetness  of  the  lips  increaseth  lear. 
27.   9  the  sweetness  of  a  man's  friend  by  hearty 

3.  Sweetness,  prib  motheq. 

Judg.  9.  11  Should  I  forsake  my  sweetness,  and  my 
SWELL  (out,  to  make),  to  — 
I.To  be  swelled  out,  njj3  baah,  2. 

Isa.  30. 13  a  breach  ready  to  fall,  swelling  out  in  a 
2.To  swell,  pv?  batseq. 

Deut.  8.   4  neither  did  thy  foot  swell,  these  forty  ye. 

Neh.  9.  21  clothes  waxed  not  old,  and  their  feet  sw. 

3.  To  swell,  nnx  tsabah. 

Num.  5.  27  her  belly  shall  swell,  and  her  thigh  shall 

4.  To  cause  to  swell,  n^s  tsabah,  5. 

Num.  5.  22  make  (thy)  belly  to  swell,  and(thy)  tliigh 
5. Swelling,  n^y  tsabeh. 

Num.  5.  2i  make  thy  thigh  to  rot,  and  thy  belly  to  sw, 
SWELLING,  (great)  — 

1.  Rising,  excellency,  pride,  ftisa  gaavah. 

Psa.  46.  3  the  mountains  shake  with  the  swelling 
2. Rising,  excellency,  pride,  pN3  gaon. 

Jer.  12.    5  then  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of 

49.  ig  come  up  like  a  lion  from  the  swelling  of 

50.  44  come  up  like  a  lion  from  the  swelling  of 

3.  Over-swelling,  virtpoyttos  huperogkos. 

2  Pe.  2.  18  when  they  speak  great  swelling  (words) 

Jude  16  their  mouth  speaketh  great  swelling  (wo.) 
4. A  puffing  up,  ^vaiwo'ts  phusiosis. 

2  Co.  12. 20  backbitings,  whisperings,  swellings,  turn. 
SWERVE,  to  — 
To  go  irregularly,  miss  a  mark,  aarox^  astocheo. 

1  Tim.  1,    6  From  which  some  having  swerved  have 

SWIFT,  swifter,  swiftly,  to  be  — 
l.A  reed,  enmity,  nax  ebeJi. 

Job    9.  26  They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships 

2.  Splendour,  glitter,  v\y\  yeaph. 

Dan.   9.21  being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touchedmeab. 

3.  To  hasten,  ins  mahar,  3. 

1  Ch.12.  8  (we're)  as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  raou. 
Mai.  3.  5  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  the  sore. 
Prov.  6.  18  feet  that  be  swift  in  running  to  mischief 

i.Raste,  ninp  meherah. 

Psa.147.  15  earth ;  his  word  runneth  very  swiftly 

5. Light,  swift,  ?j3  qal. 

Job  24. 18  He  (is)  swift  as  the  waters;  their  portion 
Eccl.   9.  11  race  (is)  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle 
Isa.     5.  26  behold,  they  shall  come  with  speed  swif. 

18.  2  Go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  nation  sea. 

19.  1  Lord  rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud,  and  shall 
30.  16  We  will  ride  upon  the  swift;  therefore  sh. 

Jer.     2.  23  a  swift  dromedary  traversing  her  ways 

46.  6  Let  not  the  swift  flee  away,  nor  the  mig. 
Lam.  4.  19  Our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  ea. 
Joel    3.    4  swiftly  (and)  speedily  will  I  return  your 


SWIFT 


950 


SWORD 


Amos  2.  14  the  flight  shall  perish  from  the  swift,  and 
2.  15  swiftoffootshallnotdeliver (himself), ne. 

6.  To  be  light,  swift',  hb$  qalat. 

2  Sa.  1.  23  they  were  swifter  than  eagles,  they  were 
Job  7.  6  My  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shu. 
9.  25  Now  my  days'are swifter  thanapost,  they 
Jer.  4. 13  whirlwind  :  his  horses  are  swifter  than  ea. 
Hab.    1.    8  Their  horses  also  are  swifter  than  the  le. 

7.  To  be  or  become  light,  swift,  7?B  qab'K  2. 
Isa.   30.  16  shall  they  that  pursue  you  be  swift 

8. Sharp,  swift,  acute,  b^vs  oxus. 

Rom.  3.  15  Their  feet  (are)  swift  to  shed  blood 

Q.Swift,  speedy,  rax«ris tackdnvs. 

2  Pe.  2.    1  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction 

10.  Swift,  raxvs  tachvs, 

Jas.  *  1.  19  let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slowto  sp. 
BWTFT  beast  — 

1.  Dromedaries,  nnsri?  Icirkaroth. 

Isa.  66.  20  upon  swift  beasts,  to  my  holy  mountain 

2.  A  courser,  ty3"J  refresh. 

Mic.    1. 13  bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast:  she 

B¥IM  (in  or  out,  to  make),  to  — 

\.  To  cause  to  flow,  swim,  f\\s  tsuph,  5. 

2  Ki.   6.    6  cast  (it)  in  thither ;  and  the  iron  did  swim 

2.Floiuing,  swimming,  nc^t  tsaphah. 

Eze.  32.    6  water,  .the  land  wherein  thou  swimmest 

3.  To  swim,  nn'£'  sachah. 

Isa.  25. 11  swimmeth  spreadeth  forth  (his  hands)  to  sw. 
4.7*o  cause  to  swim,  nnp*  sachah,  5. 

Psa.    6.   6  all  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  swim ;  I 
^.Swimming,  in;^  sachu. 

Eze.  47.    5  "waters  to  swim  in,  a  river  that  could  not 

6.  To  swim  out,  off,  away,  4kko\v/j.0o.co  ekkolumbao. 
Acts  27.  42  lest  any  of  them  should  swim  out,  and  es. 

7. To  swim,  KoXvpfidaj  Icolumhao. 

Acts  27.  43  commanded  that  they  which  could  swim 

SWINE — 

l.Sow,  boar,  Ytrj  chazir. 

Lev.  it.    7  swine,  though  he  divide  the  hoof,  and  be 
Deut.14.   8  swine,  because  it  divideth  thehoof.yet  ch. 
Provn.  22  (As)  a  jewelof  gold  in  a  swine's  snout,  (so 
Isa.  65.   4  which  eat  swine's  flesh,  and  broth  of  ab. 
66.   3  (as  if  he  offered)  swine's  blood ;  he  that 
66, 17  eating  swine's  flesh,  and  the  abomination 

%.A  hog,  pig,  x°^P0S  cJwiros, 

Matt.  7.    6  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine 

8.  30  there  was.  .an  herd  of  many  swine  feed. 

8.  31  suffer  us  to  go  away  into  the  herd  of  sw. 

8.  32  they  went  into  the  herd  of  swine,  and 

8. 32  the  whole  herd  [of  swine]  ran  violently 
Mark  5.  n  there  was.  .a  great  herd  of  swine  feeding 

5. 12  Send  us  into  the  swine,  that  we  may  en. 

5. 13  went  out,  and  entered  into  the  swine,  and 
5.  14  they  that  fed  [the  swine]  fled,  and  told  (it) 
5.  16  told  them,  .(also)  concerning  the  swine 

Xuke  8.  32  there  was  there  an  herd  of  many  swine  fe. 
8.  33  entered  into  the  swine  :  and  the  herd  ran 

15. 15  andhesenthim  into  his  fields  to  feed  sw. 

15. 16  filled,  .with  the  husks  that  the  swinedid 

SWOLLEN  — 

To  be  burning,  enflamed,  swollen,  •7rifX7rp7)ij.t. 

A(.ts  28.   6  they  looked  when  lie  should  have  swollen 
SWOON  to— 
J.  To  be  or  !» come  feeble,  ^ay  ataph,  2. 

Lam,  2.  n  children  and  the  sucklings  swoon  in  the 
2.7*o  show  self  feeble,  tyag  ataph,  7. 

Lam.  2.  12  when  they  swooned  as  the  wounded  in 
SWOHD,  (drawn,  glittering)  — 

1. Lightning,  brightness,  pns  bewaq, 

Job   20.  25  the  glittering  sword  eometh  out  of  his 

2.  .1  sword,  destroying  weapon,  ^~  chorea. 

Gen.   3.  24  a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way 
27.  40  by  thy  sword  shalt  thou  live,  and  shalt 

31.  26  daughters,  as  captives  (taken)  with  thesw. 
34.  25  took  each  man  his  sword,  and  came  upon 
34.  26  slew  Hamor.  .with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
48.  22  hand  of  the  Amorite  with  my  sword  and 

Exod.  5.  3  said,  .lest he  fall  upon  lis.  .with  the  sw 
5. 21  to  put  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  slay  us 
15.    9  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  destroy 

17.  13  discomfited  Amalek.  .the  edge  of  the  sw. 

18.  4  and  delivered  me  from  the  sword  of  Phar. 
22.  24  kill  you  with  tin-  sword  ;  and  your  wives 

32.  27  Put  every  man  his  sword  by  Ms  side,  (and) 
Lev.  26.    6  neither  shall  the  sword  go  through  your 

26.  7  and  they  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  sword 
26.  8  enemies  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  sword 
26.  25  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you,  that  shall 
26. 33  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  you  :  and  your 
26.  36  they  shall  flee,  as  fleeing  from  a  sword 
26.  37  fall,  .as  it  were  before  a  sword,  when  none 
N11UI14.  3  to  fall  by  the  sword,  that  our  wives  and 
14.  43  shall  fallby  the  sword,  because  ye  are  tur. 

19.  16  touchethone  that  ia slain  with  ;i  sword  in 

20.  18  lestleomeout  againstthecwiththesword 

21.  24  smote  him  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and 

22.  23  stand ing  in  the  way,  and  his  sword  drawn 
22. 29  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 


Nura  22.  31  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand  :  and  he  bow. 

31.  8  the  son  of  Beor  they  slew  with  the  sword 
Deut  13.  15  smite,  .with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  destr. 

13.  15  the  cattle  thereof,  with  the  edge  of  thesw. 
20.  13  smite  every  male,  .with  the  edge  of  thesw. 
28.  22  an  extreme  burning,  and  with  the  sword 

32.  25  The  sword  without,  and  terror  within,  sh. 
32.  41  If  I  whet  my  glittering  sword,  and  mine 

32.  42  my  sword  shall  devour  flesh ;  (and  that) 

33.  29  and  who  (is)  the  sword  of  thy  excellency 
Josh.  5.  13  man  over  against  him  with  his  sword  dr. 

6.  21  destroyed,  .with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
8.  24  were  all  fallen  on  the  edge  of  the  sword 
8.  24  and  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

jo.  11  thechildrenof  Israel  slew  with  the  sword 

10.  28,  30,  32,  35,  37,  39  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
11. 10  smote  the  king  thereof  with  the  sword 

11.  11  that  (were)  therein  with  the  edge  of  thesw. 
11.  12  smote  them  with,  .edge  of  the  sword,  (and) 
11.  14  smote  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  until 
13.  22  slay  with  the  sword  among  them  that  we. 
19. 47  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and 

24.  12  (but)  not  with  thy  sword,  nor  with  thy  bow 
Judg.  1.    8  smitten  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and 

I.  25  they  smote  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the 
4. 15  discomfited,  .with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
4.  16  fell  upon  the  edge  of  the  sword  ;  (and)  th. 

7.  14  This  (is)  nothing  else  save  the  sword  of 
7.  20  cried,  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gid. 

7.  22  set  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow 
8. 10  and  twenty  thousandmen  that  drewsword 

8.  20  but  the  youth  drew  not  his  sword  ;  for  he 
9. 54  Draw  thy  sword,  and  slay  me,  that  men 

18.  27  they  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
20.  2  hundred  thousand  footmen  that  drew  sw. 
20.  15  six  thousand  men  that  drew  sword,  besi. 
20.  17  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew  sword 
20.  25,  35  men ;  all  these  drew  the  sword 
20.  37  smote  all  the  city  with  the  edge  of  thesw. 
20. 46  five  thousand  men  that  drew  the  sword 

20.  48  and  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
21. 10  Go  and  smite.,  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

1  Sa.  13.  19  Lest  the  Hebrews  make  (them)  swords  or 

13.  22  there  was  neither  sword  nor  spear  found 

14.  20  every  man's  sword  was  against  his  fellow 

15.  8  all  the  people  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 
15.  33  As  thy  sword  hath  made  women  childless 
17.  39  David  girded  his  sword  upon  his  armour 
17.  45  Thoucomesttome  with  a  sword,  and  with 
17.  47  the  Lord  saveth  not  with  sword  and  sp. 
17.  50  (there  was)  no  sword  in  the  hand  of  David 

17.  51  took  his  sword,  and  drew  it  out  of  the  sh. 

18.  4  even  to  his  sword,  and  to  his  bow,  and  to 

21.  8  not  here  under  thine  hand  spearorsword? 
21.    8  I  have  neither  brought  my  sword  nor  my 

21.  9  The  sword  of  Goliath  the  Philistine,  wh. 

22.  10  gave  him  the  sword  of  Goliath  the  Phili. 
22.  13  thou  hast  given  him  bread,  and  a  sword 
22.  19  smote  he  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  bo. 
22. 19  asses,  and  sheep,  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 

25.  13  David  said.  .Gird  ye  on  every  man  hissw. 
25.  13  And  they  girded  on  every  man  his  sword 
25.  13  David  also  girded  on  his  sword  :  and  th. 
31.  4  Draw  thy  sword.  .Saul  took  a  sword,  and 
31.    5  fell  likewise  upon  his  sword,  and  died  wi. 

2  Sa.    1.  12  because  they  were  fallen  by  the  sword 

1.  22  and  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  empty 
2. 16  and  (thrust)  his  sword  in  his  fellow's  side 

2.  26  Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?  knowest 

3.  29  that  falleth  on  the  sword,  or  that  lacketh 

11.  25  the  sword  devoureth  one  as  well  as  anot. 

12.  9  killed  Uriah  the  Hittite  with  the  sword 
12.    9  slain  him  with  the  sword  of  the  children 
12.  10  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  house 

15. 14  smite  the  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

18.  8  more  people  that  day  than  the  sword  de. 
20.    8  sword  fastened  upon  his  loins  in  the  she. 

20.  10  Amasa  took  no  heed  to  the  sword  that 
23. 10  hand  clave  unto  the  sword :  and  the  Lo. 
24.   9  valiant  men  that  drew  the  sword ;  and  the 

1  Ki.  1.  51  he  will  not  slay  his  servant  with  the  sw. 

2.    B  will  not  put  thee  to  death  with  the  sword 

2.  32  slew  them  with  the  sword,  my  father  Da. 

3.  24  Bring  me  a  sword . .  they  brought  a  sword 

19.  1  had  slain  all  the  prophets  with  the  sword 
19. 10, 14  slain  thy  prophets  with  the  sword;  and 
19.  17  him  that  escapeth  the  sword  of  Hazael  sh. 
19.  17  him  that  escapeth  from  the  sword  of  Je. 

2  Ki.  3.  26  seven  hundred  men  that  drew  swords,  to 

6.  22  thou  hast  taken  captive  with  thy  sword 
8.  12  young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  the  sword 
10.  25  smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword 

11. 15  him  that  followeth  her  kill  with  the  swo. 

II.  20  slew  Athaliah  with  the  sword  (beside)  the 
19.  7  cause  him  to  fall  by  the  sword  in  his  own 
19.  37  his  sons  smote  him  with  the  sword:  and 

1  Ch.  5.  18  men  able  to  bear  buckler  aud  sword,  aud 

10.  4  Draw  thy  sword . .  Saul  took  a  sword,  and 
10.    5  he  fell  likewise  on  the  sword,  and  died 

21.  5  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew  sword 
21.  5  and  ten  thousand  men  that  drew  sword 
21. 12  while  that  the  sword  of  thine  enemies  ov. 
a  1. 12  or  else  three  days  the  sword  of  the  Lord 
zi.  16  having  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  stretc. 
21.  27  put  up  his  sword  again  into  the  sheath  th. 
21.  30  for  he  was  afraid  because  of  the  sword  of 

2  Ch.20.    9  evil  eometh  upon  us,  (as)  the  sword,  jud. 

ax.    4  slew  all  his  brethren  with  the  sword,  and 
23.  14  let  him  be  slain  with  the  sword.    l\>v  the 
23.  21  they  had  slain  Athaliah  with  the  sword 
29.    9  lo,  our  fathers  have  fallen  by  the  sword 
32.  21  they,  .slew  lum  there  with  the  sword 


2  Ch.  36. 17  slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword  in 

36.  20  them  that  had  escaped  from  the  sword 
Ezra    9.   7  to  the  sword,  to  captivity,  and  to  a  spoil 
Neh.    4.  13  with  their  swords,  their  spears,  and  their 

4.  18  every  one  had  his  sword  girded  by  his  side 
Esth.  9.  5  Jews  smote . .  with  the  stroke  of  the  sword 
Job     1.  15  slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 

I.  17  slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  thesw. 
5. 15  But  he  saveth  the  poor  from  the  sword,  fr. 

5.  20  and  in  war  from  the  power  of  the  sword 
15.  22  darkness,  and  he  is  waited  for  of  the  sw. 
19.  29  Be  ye  afraid  of  the  sword :  for  wrath  (br.) 
19.  29  punishment  of  the  sword,  that  yemaykn. 
27.  14  children  be  multiplied, (itis)forthe  sword 

39.  22  neither  turneth  he  back  from  the  sword 

40.  19  he  that  made  him  can  make  his  sword  to 

41.  26  The  sword  of  him  that  layeth  at  him  can. 
Psa.    7. 12  If  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  hissword,  he 

17.  13  soul  from  the  wicked,  (which  is)  thy  sw. 
22.  20  Deliver  my  soul  from  the  sword ;  my  da. 

37.  14  The  wicked  have  drawn  out  the  sword 
37.  15  Their  sword  shall  enter  into  their  own  he. 
44.    3  got  not  the  land . .  by  their  own  sword,  ne. 

44.  6  not  trust  in  my  bow,  neither  shall  my  sw, 

45.  3  Gird  thy  sword  upon  (thy)  thigh,  O(most) 
57.    4  and  arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sw. 
59.    7  swords  (are)  in  their  lips  :  for  who,  (say 
63. 10  They  shall  fall  by  the  sword;  they  shall 

64.  3  Who  whet  their  tongue  like  a  sword,  (and) 
76.    3  the  bow,  the  shield,  and  the  sword,  and 
78.  62  gave  his  people  over  also  unto  the  sword 
78.  64  Their  priests  fell  by  the  sword ;  and  their 
89.  43  hast  also  turned  theedgeof  his  sword,  and 

144.  10  who  delivereth  David. .from  the  hurtful  s. 
149.   6  in  their  mouth,  and  a  two  edged  sword 
Prov.  5.    4  end  is  bitter,  .sharp  as  atwo  edged  sword 
12.  18  that  speaketh  like  the  piercings  of  a  sw. 
15.  18  (is)  a  maul,  and  a  sword,  and  a  sharp  ar. 
30. 14  a  generation  whose  teeth  (are  as)  swords 
Song    3.    8  They  all  hold  swords,  (being)  expert  in 
3.    8  every  man  (hath)  his  sword  upon  his  th. 
Isa.      1.  20  ye  shall  be  devoured  with  the  sword,  for 
2.    4  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plough. 

2.  4  nation  shall  not  lift  upsword  against  na. 

3.  25  Thy  men  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  thy 
13- 15  joined  (unto  them)  shall  fallby  the  sword 
14.  19  that  are  slain,  thrust  through  with  a  sw. 

21.  15  fled  from  the  swords,  from  the  drawn  sw. 

22.  2  thy  slain  (men  are)  not  slain  with  the  sw. 
27.  1  with  his  sore  and  great  and  strong  sword 
31.  8  Then  shall  the  Assyrian  fall  with  the  sw. 
31.  8  the  sword,  not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  dev. 
31.  8  he  shall  flee  from  the  sword,  and  his  yo. 
34.  5  my  sword  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven,  be. 
34.  6  The  sword  of  the  Lord  is  filled  with  bl. 
37.    7  I  will  cause  him  to  fall  by  the  sword  in 

37.  38  his  sons  smote  lum  with  the  sword,  and 
41.    2  he  gave  (them)  as  the  dust  to  his  sword 
49.    2  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  sword 
51.  19  destruction,  and  the  famine,  and  the  sw. 

65.  12  Therefore  will  I  number  you  to  the  sw. 

66. 16  by  his  sword,  will  the  Loi'id  plead  with 
Jer.     2.  30  your  own  sword  hath  devoured  your  pr. 

4.  10  whereas  the  sword  reacheth  unto  the  so. 
5. 12  neither  shall  we  see  sword  nor  famine 

5. 17  impoverish  thyfenced  cities. .with  thesw. 
6.  25  the  sword  of  the  enemy  (and)  fear  (is)  on 
9.  16  I  will  send  a  sword  after  them,  till  1  have 

I I.  22  the  youngmen  shall  die  by  the  sword,  they 
12. 12  the  sword  of  the  Lord  shall  devour  from 

14. 12  I  will  consume  them  by  the  sword,  and  by 
14.  13  Ye  shall  not  see  the  sword,  neither  shall 
14.  15  Sword  and  famine  shall  not  be  in  tins  la. 
14.  15  By  sword  and  famine  shall  thoseprophets 
14.  16  out.  .because  of  the  famine  and  the  sword 

14.  iS  then  behold  the  slain  with  the  sword  !  and 

15.  2  such  as  (arc)  forthe  sword,  to  the  sword 
15.    3  the  sword  to  slay,  and  the  dogs  to  tear,  and 

15.  9  residue  of  them  will  I  deliver  to  the  sword 

16.  4  they  shall  be  consumed  by  the  sword,  and 
iS.  21  pour  out.  .(blood)  by  the  force  of  the  sw. 

18.  21  (let)  their  young  men  (be)  slain  by  thesw. 

19.  7  I  will  cause  them  to  fall  by  the  sword  be. 

20.  4  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  of  their  ene. 

20.  4  carry  them,  .and  shall  slay  them  with  the 

21.  7  from  the  pestilence,  from  the  sword,  and 
21.  7  shall  smite  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sw. 
21.  9  shall  die  by  the  sword,  and  by  the  famine 
24. 10  I  will  send  the  sword,  the  famine,  and  the 
25.  16  because  of  the  sword  that  I  will  send  am. 
25.  27  because  of  the  sword  which  I  will  send 
25.  29  I  will  call  for  a  sword  upon  all  the  inhab. 

25.  31  will  give  them  (that  are)  wicked  to  the  sw. 

26.  23  who  slew  him  with  the  sword,  and  cast 

27.  8  with  the  sword,  and  with  the  famine,  and 

27. 13  Why  will  ye  die.  .by  the  sword,  by  the  fa. 
29.  17  I  will  send  upon  them  the  sword,  the  fa. 
29.  18  I  will  persecute  them  with  the  sword,  wi. 

31.  2  The  people  (which  were)  left  of  the  sword 

32.  24  because  of  the  sword,  and  of  the  famine 

32.  36  by  the  sword,  and  by  the  famine,  and  by 

33.  4  thrown  down  by  the  mounts,  by  the  sw. 

34.  4  saith  the  Lord.  .  Thou  shalt  not  die  by..s. 

34. 17  to  the  sword,  to  the  pestilence,  and  to  the 

38.  2  shall  die  by  the  sword,  by  the  famine,  and 

39.  iS  thou  shalt  not  fall  by  the  sword,  but  thy 

41.  2  smute  Gedaliah.  .with  the  sword,  and  slew 

42.  16  the  sword,  which  ye  feared,  shall  overtake 
42.  17  they  shall  diu  by  the  sword,  by  the  famine 

42.  22  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die  by  thesw. 

43.  11  such  (as  are)  for  the  sword  to  the  sword 

44.  12  they  shall  (even)  be  consumed  by  the  sw. 


SYCAMINE 


951 


SYRIA 


Jer.  44. 12  they  shall  die.  .by  the  sword  and  by  the 
44.  13  I  have  punished  Jerusalem,  by  the  sword 
44.  i3  have  been  consumed  by  the  sword  and  by 
44.  27  shall  be  consumed  by  the  sword  and  by 
44.  28  a  small  number  that  escape  the  sword 
46.  10  the  sword  shall  devour,  aud  it  shall  be  sa. 
46. 14  the  sword  shall  devour  round  about  thee 

46.  16  let  us  go  again,  .from  the  oppressing  sw. 

47.  6  O  thou  sword  of  the  LORD,  how  long  (will 

48.  2  thou  shalt  be  cut  down,  .the  sword  shall 
43.  10  cursed  (be)  he  that  keepeth  back  his  sword 

49.  37  I  will  send  the  sword  after  them,  till  I  have 

50.  16  forfearofthe  oppressing  sword  they  shall 
50.  35  A  sword  (is)upon  the  Chaldeans,  saith  the 
50.  36  A  sword  (is  upon  the  liars ;  and  they  shall 
50.  36  asword(is)uponhermightynien, and  they 
50.  37  A  sword  (is)  upon  their  horses,  and  upon 

50.  37  asword(is)  upon  her  treasures ;  and  they 

51.  50  Ye  that  have  escaped  the  sword  go  away 
Lam.  1.  20  abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home  (th. 

2.  21  my  young  men  are  fallen  by  the  sword 

4.  9  (They  that  be)  slain  with  the  sword  are  be. 

5.  9  because  of  the  sword  of  the  wilderness 
Eze,    5.   2,  12  and  I  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  them 

5.  12  a  third  part  shall  fall  by  the  sword  round 
5. 17 1  will  bring  the  sword  upon  thee.  I  the  Lord 

6.  3  I,  (even)  I,  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you 
6.    8  (some)  that  shall  escape  the  sword  among 
6.  11  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  by  the  famine 

6.  12  and  he  that  is  near  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

7.  15  The  sword  (is)  without,  and  the  pestilence 
7. 15  he  tluit(is)in the  field  shall  die  with  the  sw. 

11.  8  feared  the  sword;  and  I  will  bring  a  sword 
11. 10  Ye  shall  fall  by  the  sword:  I  will  judge  you 
12. 14  and  I  will  draw  out  the  sword  after  them 

12. 16  will  leave  a  fewmen  of  them  from  the  sw. 

14. 17  (if)  I  bring  a  sword . .  and  say.  Sword,  go 
14.  21  the  sword,  and  the  famine,  and  thenoiso. 

16.  40  and  thrust  thee  through  with  their  swords 

17,  21  his  fugitives,  .shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and 
21.  3  will  draw  forth  my  sword  out  of  his  shea. 
21.  4  therefore  shall  my  sword  go  forth  out  of 
21.  5  ItheLORDhavedrawnforthmy  swordout 
2i.  9  A  sword,  a  sword  is  sharpened,  and  also 
21.  11  thisswordis  sharpened,  and  it  is  furbished 
21.  12  terrors  by  reason  of  the  sword  shall  be  up. 
21. 14  let  the  sword  be  doubled,  .the  sword  of  the 

21. 14  it  (is)  the  sword  of  the  great  (men  that  are) 

21. 15  I  have  set  the  point  of  the  sword  against 
21.  19  that  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  may 
21.  20  that  the  sword  may  come  to  Rabbathof  the 
21.  28  The  sword,  the  sword  (is)  drawn  :  for  the 
23.  xotookhersons.  .and  slew  her  with  the  sword 
23.  25  thy  remnant  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  they 

23.  47  dispatch  them  with  their  swords  ;  they  sh. 

24.  21  whom  ye  have  left  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

25.  13  and  they  of  Dedan  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

26.  6  her  daughters,  .shall  be  slain  by  the  sword 
26  8  He  shall  slay  with  the  sword  thy  daughters 
26.  ii  he  shall  slay  thy  people  by  the  sword 

28.    7  they  shall  draw  their  swords  against  the 

28.  23  judged  in  the  midst  of  her  by  the  sword 

29.  8  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  thee,  and  cut 

30.  4  the  sword  shall  come  upon  Egypt,  andgr. 
30  5  the  men . .  shall  fall  with  them  by  the  sw. 
30.  6  shall  they  fall  in  it  by  the  sword,  saith  the 
30.  11  they  shall  draw  their  swords  against  Eg. 
30.  1 7  young  men  of  Aven . .  shall  fall  by  the  sw. 
30.  21  bind  it,  to  make  it  strong  to  hold  the  sw. 
30.  22  I  will  cause  the  sword  to  fall  out  of  his 
30.  24  I  will  put  my.  .sword  in  his  hand:  but  I 

30.  25  I  shall  put  my  swordinto  the  hand  of  the 
31. 17  unto  (them  that  be)  slain  with  the  sword 

31.  18  with  (them  that  be)  slain  by  the  sword 
32. 10  I  shall  brandish  my  sword  before  them 

32.  11  The  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  shall 
32.  12  By  the  swords  by  the  mighty  will  I  cause 
32.  20  midst  of  (them  that  are)  slain  by  the  sw. 
32.  20  she  is  delivered  to  the  sword :  draw  her 
32.  21  they  lie  uncircumcised,  slain  by  the  swo. 
32,  22,  23,  24  all  of  them  slain,  fallen  by  the  sw. 
32.  25,  26 all.  .uncircumcised,  slain  by  the  sword 
32.  27  they  have  laid  their  swords  under  their 
32.  28,  32  with  (them  that  are)  slain  with  the  sw. 
32.  29  laidby(them  that  were)  slain  by  the  sword 
32.  30  with  (them  that  be)  slain  by  the  sword 
32.  31  Pharaoh  aud  all  his  army  slaiu  by  the  sw. 

32.  32  with  (them  that  are)  slain  with  the  sword 

33.  2  When  I  bring  the  sword  upon  a  land,  if 
33.  3  when  he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the 
33.  4  if  the  sword  come  and  take  him  away,  his 
33.  6  if  the  watchman  see  the  sword  come,  and 
33.  6  if  the  sword  come  and  take  (any)  person 
33.  26  Ye  stand  upon  your  sword,  ye  work  abo. 
33.  27  they,  .in  the  wastes  shall  fall  by  the  swo. 
35.  5  by  the  force  of  the  sword  in  the  time  of 
35.  8  shall  they  fall  that  are  slain  with  the  sw. 
38.  4  great  company . .  all  of  them  handling  sw. 
38.  8  the  land  (that  is)  brought  back  from  the  s. 
38.  21  I  will  call  for  a  sword  against  him  throu. 

38.  21  everyman's  sword  shall  be  against  his  br. 

39.  23  trespassed,  .so  fell  they  all  by  the  sword 
11. 33  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  by  flame 

Hos.    1.   7  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword 

2. 18  I  will  break  the  bow" and  the  sword  and 

7. 16  their  princes  shall  fall  by  the  sword  for 

11.   6  the  sword  shall  abide  on  his  cities,  and 

13.  16  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword;  their  infants 

Joel    3.  10  Beat  your  ploughshares  into  swords,  and 

Amos  1.  11  he  did  pursue  his  brother  with  the  sword 

4.  10  your  young  men  have  I  slain  with  the  sw. 

7.    g  will  rise  against  the  house,  .with  the  sw.  I 


Amos  7.  11  Jeroboam  shall  die  by  the  sword,  and  Isr. 
7.  17  thy  daughters  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and 
9.  1  I  will  slay  the  last  of  them  with  the  sword 
9.  4  thence  will  I  command  the  sword,  and  it 
9. 10  All  the  sinners,  .shall  die  by  the  sword 

Mia    4.    3  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plough  sh. 

4.  3  nation  shall  not  lift  up  a  sword  against 

5.  6  waste  the  land  of  Assyria  with  the  sword 

6.  14  thou  deliverest  will  I  give  up  to  the  sword 
Nah.  2.  13  the  sword  shall  devour  thy  young  lions 

3.    3  lifteth  up  both  the  bright  sword  and  the 

3.  15  the  sword  shall  cut  thee  off,  it  shall  eat 

Zeph.  2.  12  Ye  Ethiopians,  .(shall  be)slain  bymy  sw. 

Hag.    2.  22  every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  brother 

Zech.  9. 13  made  thee  as  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man 

11.  17  the  sword  (shall  be)  upon  his  arm,  and 

13.  7  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  shepherd 

3.  Murder ',  murderous  weapon,  ran  retsach. 

Psa.  42. 10  (As)  with  a  sword  in  my  bones,  mine  ene. 
4. Missile,  dart,  spear,  tv?v  skelach. 

Job  33.  18  and  his  life  from  perishing  by  the  sword 
36. 12  they  shall  perish  by  the  sword,  and  they 

Joel    2.    8  (when)  they  fall  upon  the  sword,  they 

5.  Open  siuords,  rnnns  pethichoth. 

Psa.  55.  21  softer  than  oil,  yet  (were)  they  drawn  sw. 

6.  Fighting  weapon,  stoord,  fxdxaipa  machaira. 

Matt  10.  34  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword 
26.  47  a  great  multitude  with  swords  and  staves 
26.  51  drew  Ins  sword,  and  struck  a  servant  of 
26.  52  Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place  :  for 
26.  52  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with . .  p. 
26.  55  as  against  a  thief  with  swords  and  staves 

Marki4-  43  with  him  a  great  multitude  with  swords 

14.  47  one  of  them  that  stood  by  drew  a  sword 
14.  48  with  swords  and  (with)staves  to  take  me  ? 

Luke2i.  24  they  shall  fall  by  the  edge  of  the  sword 

22.  36  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  g. 

22.  38  they  said,  Lord,  behold,  here  (are)  two  sw. 

22.  49  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the  sword? 

22.  52  come  out,  as  against  a  thief,  with  swords 
JohniS.  to  Peter  having  a  sword  drew  it,  and  smote 

18.  11  Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath  :  the 
Acts  12.    2  killed..the  brother  of  John  with  the  sword 

16. 27  he  drew  out  his  sword,  and  would  have 
Rom.  8.  35  or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sw.? 

13.  4  he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain :  for  he 
Eph.  6.  17  the  swrord  of  the  spirit,  which  is  the  word 
Heb.   4.  12  sharper  than  any  two  edged  sword,  pier. 

ii.  34  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of  we. 

11.  37  were  tempted,  were  slain  with  the  sword 
Rev.    6.    4  there  was  given  unto  him  a  great  sword 

13. 10  with  the  sword .  .killed  with  the  sword 

13. 14  which  had  the  wound  by  a  sword,  and  did 

7.  A  brandishing  weapon,  sword,  sabre,  £>ofx(paia. 

Luke  2.  35  a  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  so. 

Rev.  1. 16  out  of  his  mouth  went  a.  .two  edged  sw. 
2. 12  he  which  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  two 
2.  16  will  fight  against  them  with  the  sword  of 
6.    8  to  kill  with  sword,  and  with  hunger,  and 

19.  15  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that 
19.  21  the  remnant  were  slain  with  the  sword 

SYCAMINE  tree  — 

Sycamine,  fig  or  mulberry  tree,  avuafxivos  sukami. 
Luke  17.    6  ye  might  say  unto  this  sycamine  tree,  Be 

SYCAMORE  (fruit,  tree)  — 

l.A  sycamine,  Jig  or  mulberry  tree,  nppp*  shiqmah. 

1  Ki.  10.  27  cedars  made  he  (to  be)  as  the  sycamore 

i  Ch.27.  28  over  the  olive  trees  and  the  sycamore  tr. 

2  Ch.  1.  15  cedar  trees  made  he  as  the  sycamore  trees 

9.  27  cedar  trees  made  he  as  the  sycamore  trees 
Psa.  78.  47  He  destroyed,  .their  sycamore  trees  with 
Isa.  9.  10  the  sycamores  are  cut  down,  but  we  will 
Amos  7.  14  an  herdman,  and  a  gatherer  of  sycamore 

2.  A  sycamore,  fig  or  mulberry  tree,  avK0fj.wpd.1a. 
Lukeig.    4  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore  tree  to  see 

SY'-CHAR,  2ux«j«- 

A  city  of  Samaria,  where  Jesus  met  with  a  woman,  and 
stayed  two  days  teaching  the  people;  perhaps  Asker, 
wiiose  ruins  are  on  mount  Ebal. 

John  4.    5  a  city  of  Samaria,  which  is  called  S.,  near 

SY'-CHEH,  2ux€V 

A  city  (or  person)  in  Samaria,  called  also  Shechem. 

1  Ch.  7. 16  of  the  sons  of  Emmor  (the  father)  of  S. 

Acts    7.  16  were  carried  over  into  S.,  and  laid  in  the 

SY-E'-NE,  .™p. 

A  city  in  the  S.  of  Egypt  towards  Ethiopia,  as  Migdol 
was  toward  the  north  of  the  land ;  now  called  Asouan 
or  Asivan. 

Eze.  29. 10  from  the  tower  of  S.  even  unto  the  bor. 
30.   6  from  the  tower  of  S.  shall  they  fall  in  it 

SYtf  AGOGTTE  — 

1.  Appointed  place  of  meeting,  luto  moed. 

Psa.  74.    8  they  have  burnt  up  all  the  synagogues  of 

2.  Place  where  people  are  led  together,  o'vi/arywyr]. 

Matt  4.  23  teaching  in  their  synagogues,  and  preach. 
6.  2  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  synagogues 
6.    5  love  to  pray  standing  in  the  synagogues 
9.  35  teaching  in  their  synagogues,  and  preach. 
10,  17  they  will  scourge  you  in  their  synagogues 

12.  9  departed  thence,  he  went  into  theirsyn. 

13.  54  he  taught  .them  in  their  synagogue,  inso. 
23.    6  And  love.,  the  chief  seats  in  thesyuagog. 


Matt23.  34  (some),  .shall  ye  scourge  in  your  synago. 

Mark  1.  21  he  entered  intothesynagogue,  and  taught 
1.  23  there  was  in  their  synagogue  a  man  with 
1.  29  when  they  were  come  out  of  the  synago. 
1.  39  he  preached  in  their  synagogues  through 

3.  1  And  he  entered  again  into  the  synagogue 
6.    2  he  began  to  teach  in  the  synagogue,  and 

12.  39  the  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and  the 

13.  9  and  in  the  synagogues  ye  shall  be  beaten 
Luke  4.  15  hetaught  in  their  synagogues,  being  glor. 

4.  16  he  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  eabb. 
4.  20  the  eyes  of  all  them  that  were  in  the  syii. 
4.  28  all  they  in  the  synagogue,  when  they  he. 
4.  33  in  the  synagogue  there  was  a  man  which 
4.  38  he  arose  out  of  the  synagogue,  and  ente. 

4.  44  he  preached  in  the  synagogues  of  Galilee 

6.  6  he  entered  into  the  synagogue  and  taught 

7.  5  he  loveth  our  nation,  and.  .built  us  a  sy 

8.  41  he  was  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  and  he 

11.  43  ye  love  the  uppermosts  seats  in  the  syna. 

12.  1 1  when  they  bring  you  unto  the  synagogues 

13.  10  he  was  teaching  in  one  of  the  synagogues 

20.  46  the  highest  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and 

21.  12  delivering.  .uptothesynagogues,andinto 
John  6.  59  These  things  said  he  in  the  synagogue 

iS.  20  I  ever  taught  in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the 
Acts    6.    9  Then  there  arose  certain  of  the  syiiagcg. 

9.  2  desired,  .letters  to  Damascus  to  the  syn. 
9.  20  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  thesy 

13.  5  they  preached  the  word  of  God  in  the  sy 
13.  14  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath 

13.  42  [when  the  Jews  wrere  gone  out  of  the  sy.] 

14.  1  they  went  botli  together  into  the  synag. 

15.  21  being  read  in  the  synagogues  every  sab. 
17.  1  came  to  Thessalonica,  where  was  a  syna. 
17.  10  who.  .went  into  the  synagogue  of  the  Je. 

17.  17  Therefore  disputed  he  in  the  synagogue 

18.  4  lie  reasoned  m  the  synagogue  every  sab. 
18.    7  whose  house  joined  harof  to  the  synagogue 

18.  iq  hehimself  entered  into  the  synagogue, and 
iS.  26  he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue 

19.  8  he  went  into  the  synagogue,  and  spake 

22.  19  I  imprisoned  and  beat  in  every  synagogue 
24. 12  neither  in  the  synagogues,  nor  iu  the  city 
26.  11  I  punished  them  oft  in  every  synagogue 

Rev.  2.  9  are  not,  but  (are)  the  synagogue  of  Satan 
3.  9  I  will  make  them  of  the  synagogue  of  S. 

SYNAGOGTJE,  (chief)  ruler  of— 
Chief  leader  in  the  synagogue,  apx^vvdycoyos. 
Mark  5.  22  one  of  the  rulers  of  the  synagogue,  Jairus 

5.  35  there  came  from  the  ruler  of  the  synago. 
5.  36  he  saith  unto  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue 
5.  38  to  the  house  of  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue 

Luke  S.  49  from  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue's  [house] 
13.  14  And  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  answered 

Acts  13. 15  the  rulers  of  the  synagogue  sent  unto  th. 
18.  8  Crispus,  the  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue 
18. 17  Sosthenes,  the  chief  ruler  of  the  synago. 

SYNAGOGUE,  put  out  of  the  — 

One  put  away  from  the  synagogue,  airoffwdywyos. 
John  c.  22  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue 
12.  42  they  should  be  put  out  of  the  sjTiagogue 

16.  2  Theyshall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogues 

SYN-TY'-CHE,  'Zvvtvx7)- 

A  female  believer  in   Philippi  whom  Paul  beseeches 

along  with  Euodiasto  be  of  the  same  mind. 

Phil.  4.    2  I  beseech  Euodias,  and  beseech  S.,  that 
SY-RA'-CTJSE,  ZvpaKovtrai. 

A  city  on  the  S.E.  corner  of  the  island  of  Sicily,  with  a 
capacious  harbour  ;  birthplace  of  Archimedes,  B.C.  250- 
212.  It  was  the  most  ancient  of  the  Greek  colonies  in 
the  island,  and  founded  by  the  Corinthians  under 
Archias,  B.C.  734 ;  in  648  the  party  called  the  Myletidae 
were  expelled;  in  4S6also  the  oligarchy  called  Geomori 
or  Gamori;  in  478-467  Hieron  patronises  literature  and 
the  arts;  in  414  it  is  besieged  by  the  Athenians  ;  in  394 
i  t  wars  against  Carthage;  in  344,  fio.coo  immigrants  intro- 
duced ;  in  275-2 16  Hieron  II.  makes  a  treaty  with  Rome; 
in  214-212  it  is  taken  by  the  Romans;  in  21  Augustus 
sends  a  Roman  colony  to  revive  it. 

Acts  28.  12  landing  at  S.,  we  tarried  (there)  three  d. 

SYRIA,  Dix  the  high  land,  2vpia. 
The  Hebrew  Aram,  is,  strictly  speaking,  bounded  by 
Atnanus  and  Taurus  on  the  N.,  by  the  Euphrates  and 
the  Arabian  Desert  on  the  E.,  by  Palestine  on  the  S., 
and  by  the  Mediterranean  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Orontes,  and  then  by  Phoenicia  on  the  W.;  this  is 
about  300  miles  from  N.  to  S.,  and  from  50  to  150 
from  E  to  W.,  or  an  area  of  about  30,000  square  miles — 
the  size  of  Scotland.  Its piincipaldivisions  were— Syria 
of  Damascus  Syria  of  Zobah,  the  Plain  of  Aram,  and 
Aram  of  the  two  Rivers  (the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris). 
The  name  Si/ria  is  evidently  derived  from  the  city  Tyre 
(or  Tzur),  with  which  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Remans 
traded.  In  1921  B.C.  Abraham  leaving  Cr  came  to 
Haran;  in  1S57  his  servant  goes  to  get  a  wife  for  Isaac; 
in  1760  Jacob  visits  Laban  ;  in  14^2  Balaam  is  called  to 
curse  Israel  ;  in  1040  David  subdues  Zobah  and  Da- 
mascus;  in  975  these  recover  their  independence;  in 
83S-836  Joash  or  Jehoash  obtained  three  important 
victories  over  Benhadad  ;  in  740  Tiglath-pilezer  defeats 
Rezin  its  last  independent  ruler,  and  reduces  it  to  a 
dependency  of  Assyria ;  in  604  attacked  by  Pharaoh 
Xecho  it  is  captured  by  Nebuchadnezzar;  in  333  it 
comes  under  Alexander  the  Great;  in  323  Seleucus 
Nicator  founds  his  dynasty;  in  301  he  founds  Antioch 
as  its  capital;  in  114  Antiochus  Cyzicenus  sets  himself 
up  at  Damascus;  in  65  the  country  becomes  subject  to 


SYRIAC 


952 


TABERNACLE 


Borne ;  in  47  Julius  Cnesar  confirms  the  rights  of  many 
cities.  In  A.b.  6  Judea  and  Samariaare  added  to  Syria; 
in  117  Hadrian  fixes  its  E.  boundary  at  the  Euphrates; 
in  258  it  is  overrun  by  Sapor  I.  king  of  Persia ;  in  264 
Odenathus  delivers  it;  in  611  Chosroes  II.  destroys 
Antioch;  in  614  he  subdues  Palestine;  in  630  Ma- 
hommed  takes  some  places  in  Syria ;  in  661  Damascus 
becomes  its  capital ;  in  762  Bagdad  becomes  the  capital; 
in  868  the  Tulonides  dynasty  set  up;  in  906  recovered 
by  Caliph  Moktofee ;  in  970  Fatimite  dynasty  set  up, 
with  Cairo  for  capital ;  in  1076  Syria  invaded  by  the 
Turks;  in  1096  Caliph  Mostali  dispossessed  by  the 
Crusaders;  in  1039  the  Christian  kingdom  of  Jerusalem 
set  up;  in  n87Saladin  founds  the  Eyoobite  dynasty; 
in  1250  it  is  partially  destroyed  by  the  revolt  of  the 
Baharite  Mamlooks;  in  1400  Tamerlane  invades  it;  in 
1516  Selim  I.  unites  it  to  the  Ottoman  empire;  in  1799 
Bonaparte  invades  it  from  Egypt;  in  1831  Ibrahim 
Pasha  invades  it;  iu  1841  it  reverts  to  Turkey;  in  1868 
n  general  attack  on  the  Maronites  near  Beyrout  and 
Lebanon  was  made  by  the  Druses,  when  1200  persons 
were  murdered :  altogether  about  12,000  persons  lost 
their  lives,  200 of  whom  were  priests;  163  villages,  224 
churches,  and  seven  convents,  were  destroyed. 

Judgio.    6  the  godsof  S.,  and  thegods  of  Zidon,  and 
2  Sa.  8.   6  David  put  garrisons  in  S.  of  Damascus 
8.  12  Of  S.,  and  of  Moab,  and  of  the  children 
15.  8  vowed  avow  while  I  abode  at  Geshuriu  S. 
1  Ki  10.  29  for  the  kings  of  S.,  did  they  bring  (them) 

11.  25  he  abhorred  Israel,  and  reigned  over  S. 
15. 18  Tabrimon,  the  son  of  Hezion,  kingof  S. 
19. 15  thou  comest,  anoint  Hazael.  .king over S. 
20.    1  the  king  of  S.  gathered  all  his  host  toge. 
20.  20  the  king  of  S.  escaped  on  an  horse  with 
20.  22  the  king  of  S.  will  come  up  agaiust  thee 
20.  23  the  servants  of  the  king  of  S.  said  unto 
22.    1  three  years  without  war  between  S.  and 
22.   3  take  it  not.  .of  the  hand  of  the  kingofS.? 
22.  31  the  kingof  S.  commanded  his  thirty  aud 

2K1.  5.   1  Naaman,  captain  of  the  host.,  of  S.,  was 
5.   1  the  Lord  had  given  deliverance  unto  S. 

5.  5  the  king  of  S.  said,  Go  to,  go,  and  I  will 

6.  8  the  king  of  S.  warred  against  Israel,  and 
6. 11  the  king  of  S.  was  sore  troubled  for  this 
6.  23  the  bands  of  S.  came  no  more  into  the  la. 

6.  24  Ben-hadad  king  of  S.  gathered  all  his  ho. 

7.  s  to  the  uttermost  part  of  the  camp  of  S. 

8.  7  Beu-hadad  the  king  of  S.  was  sick;  and 
8.    9  Ben-hadad  king  of  S. ,  hath  sent  me  to  th. 
8.  13  showed,  .that  thou  (shalt  be)  kingoverS. 
8.  28  the  war  against  Hazael  king  of  S.  in  Earn. 
8.  29  when  he  fought  against  Hazael  king  of  S. 

9. 14  kept  Eamoth.. because  of  Hazael  kingof  S. 

9. 15  when  he  fought  with  Hazael  king  of  S. 

12.  17  Hazael  king  of  S.  went  up,  and  fought 

12. 18  Jehoash.  .sent  (it)  to  Hazael  king  of  S. 

13.  3  into  the  hand  of  Hazael  king  of  S.,  aud 
13.  4  because  the  king  of  S.  oppressed  them 
13.  7  the  king  of  S.  had  destroyed  them,  and 
13. 17  and  the  arrow  of  deliverance  from  S. 

13. 19  then  hadst  thou  smitten  S.  till  thou  hadst 
13. 19  whereas  nowthou  shalt  smite  S.  (but)th. 
13.  22  Hazael  kingof  S.  oppressed  Israel  all  the 
13.  24  Hazael  king  of  S.   died  ;  and  Ben-hadad 

15.  37  send  against  Judah  Eezin  the  king  of  S. 

16.  5  Eezin  king  of  S.  and  Pekah  son  of  Eem. 
16.  6  Eezin  king  of  S.  recovered  Elath  to  S.,and 
16.   7  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  S. 

1  Ch.18.   6  David  put  (garrisons)  in  S.  damascus,  and 

19.  6  out  of  Mesopotamia,  and  out  of  S.-maac. 

2  Ch.  1. 17  so  brought  they  . . for  the  kings  of  S.,  by 

16.  2  sent  to  Ben-hadad  king  of  S.,  that  dwelt 
16.    7  thou  hast  relied  on  the  king  of  S.,  and 

16.  7  the  host  of  the  king  of  S.  escaped  out  of 
18.  10  With  these  thou  shalt  push  S.  until  they 
18.  30  the  king  of  S.  had  commanded  the  cap. 

20.  2  There  cometh  a . .  multitude . .  from . .  S. 
22.   5  to  war  against  Hazael  king  of  S.  at  Earn. 
22.   6  when  he  fought  with  Hazael  king  of  S. 
24.  23  (that)  the  host  of  S.  came  up  against  him 
28.   5  delivered . .  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  S. 
28.  23  the  gods  of  the  kings  of  S.  help  them,  (th.) 

Isa.     7.    1  the  king  of  S.,  and  Pekah  the  son  of  Ee. 
7.    2  saying,  S.  is  confederate  with  Ephrairn 
7.  4  the  tierce  anger  of  Eezin  with  S.,  and  of 
7.  s  S.,  Ephrairn,  and  the  son  of  Eemaliah 
7.    8  the  head  of  S.  (is)  Damascus,  and  the  head 

17.  3  kingdom  frou  Damascus  . .  remnant  of  S. 
Eze.  16.  57  of  (thy)  reproach  of  the  daughters  of  S. 

27. 16  S.  (was)  thy  merchant  byreasonof  themu. 
H03.  12. 12  Jacob  fled  into  the  country  of  S.,  and  Is. 
Amos  1.  5  the  peoplcof  S.  shall  go  into  captivity  un. 
Matt.  4.  24  his  fame  went  throughout  all  S. :  and  they 
Luie  2.  2  made  when  Cyrenius  was  governor  of  S. 
Acts  15.23  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch  and  S.  and  Oil. 

15.  41  he  went  through  S.  and  Cilicia,  confirm. 

18.  iS  sailed  thence  into  S.,  and  with  him  l'r. 

20.  3  as  he  was  about  to  sail  into  S.,  he  pur. 

21.  3  left  it  on  the  left  hand,  and  sailed  into  S. 
Gal.    1.  21  I  came  into  the  regions  of  S.  aud  Cilicia 

SYRIAC,  SYRIAN,  nvnx  aramith. 

The  language  used  in  Aram  or  Syria;  substantially  the 

sanie  as  Chaldse. 

a  K  i,  is.  26  Speak    to  thy  servants  in  the  S.  language 

Ezra  4.    7  in  the  S.  tongue,  aud  interpreted  in  the  S. 

isa.   36.  11  Speak.,  unto  thy  servants  in  the  S.  langu. 

u.in.  2.    4  ThenspaketheClialdeanstothekiuginS. 
SYBIAN.  SYRIANS,  -ens,  D'inx,  oik. 
The  people  of  Aram  or  Syria. 

Gen.  25.  20  of  BethueltheS. .  .sister  to  Labanthe  S. 


Gen.  28.    5  Laban,  son  of  Bethuel  the  S„  the  brother 

31.  20  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to  Laban  the  S. 

31.  24  God  came  to  Laban  the  S.  in  a  dream  by 

Deut.26.    5  A  S.  ready  to  perish  (was)  my  father;  and 

2  Sa.    8,    5  the  S.  of  Damascus  came  to  succour  Hada. 

8.    5  David  slew  of  the  S.  two  and  twenty  tho. 

8.    6  the  S.  became  servants  to  David,  (and)  or. 

8. 13  when  he  returned  from  smiting  of  the  S. 

10.   6  the  S.  of  Beth-rehob,  and  the  S.  of  Zoba 

10.    8  the  S.  of  Zoba,  and  of  Eehob,  and  Ish-tob 

10.    9  he.  .put  (them)  in  array  against  the  S. 

10.  1 1  If  the_S.  be  too  strong  for  me,  then  thou 

10.  13  drew  nigh . .  unto  the  battle  against  the  S. 

10. 14  children  of  Amnion  saw  that  the  S.  were 

10. 15  the  S.  saw  that  they  were  smitten  before 
10.  16  Hadarezer  sent,  and  brought  out  the  S. 

10. 17  the  S.  set  themselves  in  array  against  D. 

10. 18  the  S.  fled  before  Israel;  and  David  slew 

10. 18  (men  of)  seven  hundred  chariots  of  the  S. 

10. 19  the  S.  feared  to  help  the  children  of  Am. 

1  Ki.  20.  20  the  S.  fled  and  Israel  pursued  them;  and 

20.21  the  king.. slew  the  S.  with  a  great  slaugh. 
20.  26  Ben-hadad  numbered  the  S.,  and  went  up 
20.  27  but  the  S.  filled  the  country 
20.  28  the  S.  have  said,  The  Lord  (is)  God  of  the 
20.  29  Israel  slew  of  the  S.  an  hundred  thousand 

22. 11  With  these  shalt  thou  push  the  S.,  until 
22. 35  stayed  up  in  his  chariot  against  the  S. 

2  Ki.  5.    2  the  S.  had  gone  out  by  companies,  and  had 

5.  20  my  master  hath  spared  Naaman  this  S. 

6.  9  Beware.. for  thither  the  S.  are  come  down 

7.  4  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the  S.:  if  they 
7.  5  they  rose,  .to  go  unto  the  camp  of  the  S. 
7.  6  the  Lord  had  made  the  host  of  the  S.  to 
7. 10  We  came  to  the  camp  of  the  S.,  and,  beh. 

7.  1 2  I  will  now  show  you  what  the  S.  have  do. 

7. 14  the  king  sent  after  the  host  of  the  S.,  sa. 

7. 15  which  the  S.  had  cast  away  in  their  haste 

7. 16  the  people,  .spoiled  the  tents  of  the  S. 

8.  28  went  with  Joram . .  and  the  S.  wounded  J. 
8.  29  wounds  which  the  S.  had  given  him  at  Ea. 
9. 15  wounds  which  the  S.  had  given  him,  when 

13.  5  they  went  out  from  under  the  hand  of.  ,S. 
13.  17  thou  shalt  smite  the  S.  in  Aphek,  till  thou 
16.  6  the  S.  came  to  Elath,  and  dwelt  there  unto 
24.   2  bands  of  the  S.,  and  bands  of  the  Moabites 

1  Ch.18.   5  the  S.  of  Damascus  came  to  help  Hadare. 

18.   5  David  slew  of  the  S.  two  and  twenty  tho. 

18.  6  the  S.  became  David's  servants,  (and)  bro. 
19. 10  he . .  put  (them)  in  array  agaiust  the  S. 

19. 12  IftheS.be  too  strong  for  me,  then  thoush. 

19.  14  Joab . .  drew  nigh  before  the  S.  unto  the  ba. 
19.  1 5  the  children  of  Amnion  saw  that  the  S.  we. 
19.  16  the  S.  saw  that  they  were  put  to  the  worse 
19.  16  they  sent  messengers,  and  drew  forth  the  S. 
19. 17  put  the  battle  in  array  against  the  S. 

19.  18  But  the  S.  fled  before  Israel 

19.  18  David  slew  of  the  S.  seven  thousand  (men 

19. 19  neither  would  the  S.  help  the  children  of  A. 

2  Ch.  18.  34  stayed . .  up  in  (his)  chariot  against  the  S. 

22.  5  to  waragaiust  Hazael  kingof  S.  at  Eamoth 
24.  24  the  S.  came  with  a  small  company  of  men 

Isa.     9.  12  The  S.  before,  and  the  Philistines  behind 

Jer.  35. 1 1  let  us  go ..  for  fear  of  the  army  of  the  S. 

Amos  9.    7  the  Philistines  from  Caphtor,  and  the  S. 

Luke  4.  27  uone  of  them  was  cleansed,  saving,  .the  S. 

SY-RO-PHE-NI-CI-AN,  2i)ppo<f>oiW(Ta. 
Belonging  to  Phenicia  (in  Syria),  on  the  N.  of  Carmel. 
Mark  7.  26  The  womau  was  a  Greek,  a  S.  by  nation 


TA-A'-NACH,  -])p,  HISS  battlement. 

A  Levitical  city  on  the  W.  of  the  Jordan  in  Manasseh 

or  Isaachar.    On  the  slope  of  the  western  mountains 

that  bound  the  plain  of  Jezreel  over  against  Gilboa,  aud 

now  called  Taanuk,  is  a  small  village  on  the  S.  of  el- 

Lejjun. 

Josh  12.  21  The  king  of  T.,  one ;  the  king  of  Megiddo 
17.  11  and  the  inhabitants  of  T.  and  her  towns 
21.  25  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  T.  with  her 
Judg.  1.  27  Neither.. Beth-shean  and  her  towns..!. 

5.  19  then  fought  the  kings  of  Canaan  in  T. 
1  Ki.  4.  12  (to  him  pertained)  T.  and  Megiddo,  and 
1  Ch.  7.  29  Beth-shean  and  her  towns,  T.  and  her  to. 
TA-A-NATH  SHI'-LOH,  rfo  rgxn  circle  of  Sliiloh. 
A  city  on  the  borders  of  Ephrairn  and  Benjamin ;  now 
called  luna,  between  Shechem  and  the  Jordan,  and  W 
of Janohah. 

Josh.  16.    6  the  border  went  about  eastward  unto  T. 
TAB-BA'-OTH,  hijIIJB  spots. 

One  of  the  Nethinini  whose  descendants  returned  with 
Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  43  children  of  Hasupha.  the  children  of  T. 

Neh.   7.  46  children  of- Hashupha,  the  children  of  T. 
TAB'-BATH,  n?B  extension. 

A  city  S.   of  Abel-nieholah,  in  Issachar  or  Ephrairn : 
Tubukhet  Fahill 

Judg.  7.  22  to  the  border  of  Abel-meholah,  unto  T. 
TA-BE'-AL,  Sxitj  God  is  good. 

Father  of  one  whom  Syria  and  Ephrairn  sought  to  make 
king  in  Judah  instead  of  Ahaz.     B.C.  742. 

Isa.     7.   6  and  set  a  king  in  the  midst.,  the  son  of  T. 


TA-BE'-EL,  bxna  Ood  is  good. 

An  official  in  Samaria  who  wrote  agaiust  the  Jews  to  the 

king  of  Persia.    B.C.  522. 

Ezra   4.   7  wrote.. T... unto  Artaxerxes  king  of  Per. 
TABER,  to  — 
To  mince,  trip  daintily,  rpa  taphaph,  Za. 

Nah.   2.   7  her  maids.. tabering  upon  their  breasts 
TAB-ER'-AH,  mjnB  place  of  feeding. 
A  place  three  days'  journey  N.  of  Sinai',  where  Israel  was 
punished  for  murmuring. 

Num  11.    3  And  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  T. 

Deut.  9.  22  at  T. .  .ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath 

TABERNACLE  — 
l.A  tent,  "?nit  ohel. 
Exod.  26.    9  curtain  in  the  fore  front  of  the  tabernacle 
27.  21  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation 
[So  in  28.  43;  29.  4,  10,  11,  30,  32,  42,  44;  30.  16, 18,  20,  26, 
36;   3i-  7;  33-  7.  7;  35-  21;  38.  8,  30;  40.  12;  Lev.  1.  1,  3,  5; 
3.  2,  8,  13;  4.  4,  5,  7,  7, 14,  16,  18,  18;  6.  16,  26,  30;  8. 3,  4,  31, 
33.  35;  9-  5»  23;  i°-  7.  9;  12.  6;  14.  ii,  23;  15.  14,  29;  16.  7, 
16,  17,  20,   23,  33;  17.  4,  5,  6,  9;  ig.  21;  24.  3;  Num.  1.  1; 
2-  2,  17;  3.  7,  8,  25,  25,  38;  4.  3,  4,  15,  23,  25,  25,  28,  30,  31, 
33.  35.  37,  39.  41.  43.  47;  6.  10,  13,  18;  7.  5,  89;  8.  9,  15,  19, 
22,  24,  26;  10.    3;  11.  16;  12.  4,  5;  14.  10;  16.  18,  19,  42,  43, 
50;  17.  4;  18.  4,6,  21,  22,  23,  31;  19.  4;  20.  6;  25.  6;  27.  2;  31. 
54;  Deut.  31. 14,  14;  Josh.  18. 1;  19.  51;  1  Sa.  2.  22;  1  Ki.  2. 
30;  8.  4;  1  Ch.  6.  32;  0.  21;  23.  32;  2  Ch.  1.  3,  6,  13;  5.  5.] 
Exod. 31.    7  and  all  the  furniture  of  the  tabernacle 
33.    7  Moses  took  the  tabernacle,  and  pitched 
33.    8  when  Moses  went  out  unto  the  tabernacle 
33.   8  until  he  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle 
33.   9  as  Moses  entered  into  the  tabernacle,  the 
33.    9  and  stood  (at)  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
33.  10  cloudypillarstand  (at)  the  tabernacle  door 
33. 11  Joshua,  .departed  not  out  of  the  tabern. 
36.  37  he  madeanhangingforthe  tabernacle  door 
39.  38  and  the  hanging  for  the  tabernacle  door 
Num.  9.  17  cloud  was  taken  up  from  the  tabernacle 
11.  24  and  set  them  round  about  the  tabernacle 

11.  26  but  weut  not  out  unto  the  tabernacle 

12.  10  the  cloud  departed  from  off  the  taberna. 
17.   7  before  the  Lord  in  the  tabernacle  of  wit. 

17.  8  Moses  went  into  the  tabernacle  of  witness 

18.  2  (minister)  before  the  tabernacleof  witness 
18.  3  keep,  .the  charge  of  all  the  tabernacle 
18.  4  for  all  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 

Deut  31.  15  stood  over  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 

2  Sa.    6.  17  in  the  midst  of  the  tabernacle  that  David 

1  Ki.    1.  39  took  an  horn  of  oil  out  of  the  tabernacle 

2.  28  Joab  fled  unto  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 

2.  29  that  Joab  was  fled  unto  the  tabernacle  of 

8.  4  holy  vessels  that  (were)  in  the  tabernacle 

1  Ch.  9. 19  keepers  of  the  gates  of  the  tabernacle 

9.  23  the  house  of  the  tabernacle,  by  wards 

2  Ch.  5.    5  holy  vessels  that  (were)  in  the,tabemaele 

24.    6  the  collection . .  for  the  tabernacle  of  wit. 
Job     5.  24  And  thou  shalt  know  that  thy  tabernacle 

11.  14  let  not  wickedness  dwell  in  thy  taberna. 

12.  6  The  tabernacles  of  robbers  prosper,  and 
15.  34  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of  bribe. 
18.  6  The  light  shall  be  dark  in  his  tabernacle 
18.  14  shall  be  rooted  out  of  his  tabernacle 

18.  15  It  shall  dwell  in  his  tabernacle,  because 

19.  12  aud  encamp  round  about  my  tabernacle 

20.  26  with  him  that  is  left  in  his  tabernacle 
22.  23  put  away  iniquity  far  from  thy  tabernac. 
29.    4  when  the  secret  of  God  (was)  upon  my  ta. 
31.  31  If  the  men  of  my  tabernacle  said  not,  Oil 

Psa.  15.    1  Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  ? 
19.    4  In  them  hath  he  set  a  tabernacle  for  the 
27.    5  in  the  secret  of  his  tabernacle  shall  he 
27.    6  offer  in  his  tabernacle  sacrifices  of  joy 
61.    4  I  will  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  for  ever 
78. 51  (their)  strength  iii  the  tabernacles  of  Ham 
78.  67  Moreover  he  refused  the  tabernacle  of  J. 
83.   6  The  tabernacles  of  Edom,  and  the  Ishni. 
118. 15  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous 
132.    3  Surely  I  will  not  come  into  the  taberna. 

Trov  14.  11  tabernacle  of  the  upright  shall  flourish 

Isa.   16.    5  in  the  tabernacle  of  David,  judging,  and 
33.  20  a  tabernacle  (that)  shall  not  be  taken  do. 

Jer.   10.  20  My  tabernacle  is  spoiled,  and  all  my  eo. 

Lam.  2.    4  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  daughter  of  Zion 

Eze.  41.    1  (which  was)  the  breadth  of  the  taberna. 

Dan.  11.  45  he  shall  plant  the  tabernacles  of  his  pal. 

Hos.    9.   6  possess  them . .  thorns  (shall  be)  iu  their 
12.   9  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabernac. 

Mai.    2.  12  the  scholar,  out  of  the  tabernacles  of  Ja. 

^.Tabernacle,  dwelling  place,  }|i?e  mishkan. 

Exod25.  9  the  pattern  of  the  tabernacle,  and  thepa. 
26.  1  thou  shalt  make  the  tabernacle  (with)  ten 
26.  6  couple  the  curtains . .  it  shall  be  one  tab 
26.  7  curtains,  .to  be  a  covering  upon  the  tab. 
26.  12  hang  over  the  back  side  of  the  tabernacle 
26.  13  it  shall  hang  over  the  sides  of  the  taber. 
26.  15  thou  shalt  make  boards  for  the  taberna. 
26.  17  make  for  all  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle 
26.  iS  thou  shalt  make  the  boards  for  the  tabe. 
26.  20  for  the  second  side  of  the  tabernacle,  on 
26.  22  for  the  sides  of  the  tabernacle  westward 
26.  23  make  for  the  corners  of  the  tabernacle  in 
26.  26  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the  tabern. 
26.  27  the  boards  of  the  other  side  of  the  taber. 
26.  27  for  the  boards  of  the  side  of  the  taberna. 
26.  30  thou  shalt  rear  up  the  tabernacle  accord. 

26.  35  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  toward  the 

27.  9  thou  shalt  make  the  court  of  the  tabern. 
27.  19  the  vessels  of  the  tabernacle  in  all  these. 


TABERNACLE 


953 


TACHES 


EXO1I35.  11  The  tabernacle,  his  tent,  and  his  covering 

35.  15  the  door  at  the  entering  in  of  the  taberna. 

35. 18  The  pins  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  pins 

36.  8  them  that  wrought  the  work  of  the  taber. 
36.  13  fifty  taches .  .so  it  became  one  tabernacle 
36.  14  curtains.,  for  the  tent  over  the  tabernacle 
36.  20,  23  And  he  made  boards  for  the  tabernacle 
36.  22  make  for  all  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle 
36.  25  for  the  other  side  of  the  tabernacle,  (which 
36.  27  for  the  sides  of  the  tabernacle  westward 
36.  28  for  the  corners  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  two 
36.  31  the  boards  of  the  one  side  of  the  tabern. 
36.  32  the  boards  of  the  other  side  of  the  taber. 
36.  32  five  bars  for  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle 
38.  20  the  pius  of  the  tabernacle,  and  of  the  co. 
38.  21  the  sum  of  the  tabernacle,  (even)  of  the 

38.  31  the  pins  of  the  tabernacle,  and  all  the  pins 

39.  32  Thus  was  all  the  work  of  the  tabernacle 
39-  33  they  brought  the  tabernacle  unto  Moses 

39.  40  the  vessels  of  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 

40.  2,  6,  29  the  tabernacle  of  the  tent  of  the  co. 
40.  5  put  the  hanging  of  the  door  to  the  taber. 
40.  9  anoint  the  tabernacle,  and  all  that  (is)  th. 
40.  17  the  second  year,  .the  tabernacle  was  rea. 
40.  18  Moses  reared  up  the  tabernacle,  and  fast. 

40. 19  he  spread  abroad  the  tent  over  the  taber. 
40.  21  he  brought  the  ark  into  the  tabernacle,  and 
40.  22  upon  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  northward 
40.  24  the  table,  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle  so. 
40.  28  the  hangiug  (at)  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
40.  33  the  court  round  about  the  tabernacle  and 
40.  34,  35  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  taber. 
40.  36  cloud  was  taken  up  from  over  the  tabern. 
40.  38  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  (was)  upon  the  ta. 

JjQV.    8.  10  anointed  the  tabernacle  and  all  that  (was) 

15.  31  they  defile  my  tabernacle  that  (is)  among 
17.  4  to  offer,  .before  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lo. 
26. 11  I  will  set  my  tabernacle  among  you,  and 

Num.  1.  50  shalt  appoint  the  Levites  over  the  taber. 
1.  50  they  shall  bear  the  tabernacle,  and  all  the 
1.  50  and  shall  encamp  round  about  the  taber. 
1.  51  when  the  tabernacle  setteth  forward,  the 
1.  51  when  the  tabernacle  is  to  be  pitched,  the 
1.  53  Levites  shall  pitch  round  about  the  tab. 

1.  53  Levites  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  tab. 
3.   7,  8  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 

3.  23  the  Gershonites  shall  pitch  behind  the  ta. 
3.  25  the  tabernacle,  and  the  tent,  the  covering 
3.  26  the  court,  which(is)by  the  tabernacle,  and 
3.  29  shall  pitch  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle 
3.  35  shall  pitch  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle 
3.  36  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  bars 

3.  38  those  that  encamp  before  the  tabernacle 

4.  16  the  oversight  of  all  the  tabernacle,  and 
4.  25  they  shall  bear  the  curtains  of  the  taber. 
4.  26  gate  of  the  court,  which  (is)  by  the  taber. 
4.  31  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  bars 

5. 17  the  dust  that  is  in  the  floor  of  the  tabern. 
7.  1  Moses  had  fully  set  up  the  tabernacle,  and 
7.  3  they  brought  them  before  the  tabernacle  1 
9.  15  the  day  that  the  tabernacle  was  reared  up 
9.  15  the  cloud  covered  the  tabernacle,  (nam.) 
9.  15  there  was  upon  the  tabernacle  as  it  were 

9. 18  as  long  as  the  cloud  abode  upon  the  tab. 
9.  19  the  cloud  tarried  long  upon  the  taberna. 
9.  20  the  cloud  was  a  few  days  upon  the  taber. 
9.  22  the  cloud  tarried  upon  the  tabernacle,  re. 

10. 11  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  off  the  tab. 
10.  17  the  tabernacle  was  taken  down  ;  and  the 
10.  17  sonsofMerariset  forward,  bearing  the  ta. 
10.  21  (the  other)  did  set  up  the  tabernacle  aga. 

16.  9  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

16.  24,  27  the  tabernacle  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and 

17.  13  cometh  any  thing  near  unto  the  tabern. 
19.  13  purifteth  not  himself,  defileth  the  taber. 
24.   5  How  goodly  are . .  thy  tabernacles,  O  Isra. ! 
31.  30  47  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  L. 

Josh. 22  19  the  land .  .wherein  the  Lord's  tabernacle 

2.  .9  the  altar,  .that  (is)  before  his  tabernacle 
2  Sa.   7.    6  have  walked  in  a  tent  and  in  a  tabernacle 

1  Ch.  6.  4S  all  manner  of  service  of  the  tabernacleof 

16.  39  before  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  in  the 

17.  5  from  tent  to  tent,  and  from  (one)  taberna. 
21.  29  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  which  Moses 
23.  26  they  shall  no  (more)  carry  the  tabernacle 

2  Ch.  1.    5  he  put  before  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 
Psa.  43.    3  unto  thy  holy  hill,  and  tothytabernacles 

46.  4  the  holy  (place)  of  the  tabernacles  of  the 
78.  60  he  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh,  the 
84.  1  How  amiable  (are)  thy  tabernacles,  0  Lo. 
132.  7  "We  will  go  into  his  tabernacles;  we  will 
Eze.  37.  27  My  tabernacle  also  shall  be  with  them;  yea 

3.  A  covering,  covert,  booth,  ^b  sok. 

Psa.  76.    2  In  Salem  also  is  his  tabernacle,  and  his 

4. A  covering,  covert,  booth,  nsp  sukkah. 

Lev.  23.  34  (shall  be)  the  feast  of  tabernacles  (for)  Be. 
Deuti6.  13  Thoushaltobservethefeastoftabernacles 

16.  16  the  feast  of  weeks,  and  in  the  feast  of  ta. 

31.  ro  of  the  year  of  release,  in  the  feast  of  tab. 
2  Ch.  8. 13  feast  of  weeks,  and  in  the  feast  of  taber. 
Ezra  3.  4  They  kept  also  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
Job  36.  29  can(any)understand.. the  noise  of  his  tab. 
Isa.  4.  6  there  shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a  shadow 
Amos  9.  11  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  tabernacle  of 
Zech  14. 16,  18,  19  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

5.  Covering,  covert,  booth,  ni3p  sihkuth. 

Amos  5.  26  ye  have  borne  the  tabernacle  of  your  Mo. 

6.  A  covering,  covert,  booth,  ty  sok. 

Lam.  2.    6  he  hath  violently  taken  away  his  taberna. 

120 


7  .Tabernacle,  dwelling  place,  (tktjvtj  sketie. 

Matt  17.    4  let  us  make  here  three  tabernacles;  one  for 

Mark  9.    5  let  us  make  three  tabernacles ;  one  for  th. 

Luke  9.  33  let  us  make  three  tabernacles,;  one  forth. 

Acts    7.  43  ye  took  up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch,  and 

7.  44  Our  fathers  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness 

15.  16  will  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David 

Heb.    8.    2  the  true  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitc. 

it.    5  when  he  was  about  to  make  the  tabernacle 

9.    2  there  was  a  tabernacle  made ;  the  first,  wh. 

9.    3  the  tabernacle  which  is  called  the  holiest 

9.    6  the  priests  went  always  into  the  first  tab. 

9.    8  while  as  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  stan. 

9.  11  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle 

g.  21  the  tabernacle  and  all  the  vessels  of  the 

11.   9  dwelling  hi  tabernacles  with  Isaac  and  Ja. 

13.  10  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  tabernacle 

Rev.  13.    6  to  blaspheme  his  name,  and  his  tabernacle 

15.    5  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testi. 

21.   3  the  tabernacle  of  God  (is)  with  men,  and 

8.  Tabernacle,  dwelling  place,  o-Krjvos  skenos. 

2  Co.  5.    1  if  our  earthly  house  of  (this)  tabernacle 
5.   4  we  that  are  in  (this)  tabernacle  do  groan 

9.  Tabernacle,  dwelling  place,  o-Ki\v<ti[j.a.  skendma. 

Acts    7.  46  desired  to  find  a  tabernacle  for  the  God 
2  Pe.    1.  13  as  long  as  I  am  in  this  tabernacle,  to  stir 
1.  14  I  must  put  off  (this)  my  tabernacle,  even 

10.  A  fixing  up  of  tabernacles,  o-K-nvo7niyia  slcenop. 
John  7.   2  Now  the  Jews'  feast  of  tabernacles  was  at 

TA-BI'-THA,  TaQiBd  gazelle. 

A  female  in  Joppawho  was  restored  to  life  by  the  prayer 

of  Peter ;  called  also  Dorcas;  she  was  full  of  good  deeds. 

Acts    9.  36  there  was.  .a  certain  disciple  named  T. 

9.  40  and  turning,  .to  the  body  said,  T.,  arise 

TABLE,  (at  the)  — 

1. Tablet,  board,  rrh  luach. 

Exod24-  12  I  will  give  thee  tables  of  stone,  and  a  law 

31.  18  two  tables  of  testimony,  tables  of  stone 

32.  15  the  two  tables  of  the  testimony  (were)  in 
32.  15  the  tables  (were)  written  on  both  their  si. 
32. 16  the  tables  (were)  the  work  of  God,  and  the 
32. 16  the  writing  of  God,  graven  upon  the  tab. 
32. 19  he  east  the  tables  out  of  his  hands,  and 
34..  1  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto 
34.    1  and  I  will  write  upon  (these)  tables  the 
34.    1  words  that  were  in  the  first  tables,  which 
34.   4  he  hewedtwo  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 
34.   4  and  took  in  his  hand  the  two  tables  of  st. 
34.  28  He  wrote  upon  the  tables  the  words  of  the 

34.  29  the  two  tables  of  testimony  in  Moses'  ha. 
Deut.  4. 13  and  he  wrote  them  upon  two  tables  of  st. 

5.  22  he  wrote  them  in  two  tables  of  stone,  and 
9.   9,  11  the  tables  of  stone,  (even)  the  tables 
9. 10  Lord  delivered  unto  me  two  tables  of  st. 

9.  15  the  two  tables  of  the  covenant  (were)  in 
q.  17  I  took  the  two  tables,  and  cast  them  out 

10.  1  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 
10.  2  And  I  will  write  on  the  tables  the  words 
10.  2  were  in  the  first  tables  which  thou  brak. 
10.  3  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 
10.  3  went  up.  .having  the  two  tables  in  mine 
10.  4  he  wrote  on  the  tables,  according  to  the 
10.    5  put  the  tables  in  the  ark  which  I  had  made 

1  Ki.   8.    9  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables  of 

2  Ch.  5.  10  nothing  in  the  arksave  the  two  tables  wh. 
Prov.  3.    3  write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart 

7.    3  write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart 

Isa.   30.    8  write  it  before  them  in  a  table,  and  note 

Jer.  17.    1  (it  is)gravenupon  thetableof  their  heart 

Hab.  2.    2  make  (it)  plain  upon  tables,  that  he  may 

2.  A  circle,  round  table,  3pp  mesab. 

Song    1. 12  While  the  king  (sitteth)  at  his  table,  my 
-3.  A  table,  \nbv  shulchan. 

Exod25.  23  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  table  (of)  shittim 
25.  27  for  places  of  the  staves  to  bear  the  table 
25.  28  overlay  them  with  gold,  that  the  table  may 

25.  30  thou  shalt  set  upon  the  table  showbread 

26.  3.s  thou  shalt  set  the  table  without  the  veil 
26.  35  the  candlestick  over  against  the  table  on 
26.  35  thou  shalt  put  the  table  on  the  north  side 

30.  27  the  table  and  all  his  vessels,  and  the  can. 

31.  8  the  table  and  his  furniture,  and  the  pure 

35.  13  The  table,  and  his  staves,  and  all  his  ves. 
37. 10  And  he  made  the  table  (of)  shittim  wood 
37. 14  the  places  for  the  staves  to  bear  the  table 
37.  15  overlaid  them  with  gold,  to  bearthe  table 
37. 16  the  vessels  which  (were)  upon  the  table 

39.  36  The  table,  (and)  all  the  vessels  thereof,  and 

40.  4  thou  shalt  bring  in  the  table,  and  set  in 
40.  22  he  put  the  table  in  the  tent  of  the  congr. 
40.  24  over  against  the  table,  on  the  side  of  the 

Lev.  24.    6  six  on  a  row,  upon  the  pure  table  before 
Num.  3.  31  the  ark,  and  the  table,  and  the  candlestick 
4.    7  upon  the  table  of  showbread  they  shall  sp. 
Judg.  1.    7  kings . .  gathered  (their  meat)  under  my  ta. 

1  Sa.  20.  29  therefore  he  cometh  not  unto  the .  .table 

20.  34  Jonathan  arose  from  the  table  in  fierce  an. 

2  Sa.   9.    7  thou  shalt  eat  bread  at  my  table  contin. 

9. 10  master's  son  shall  eat  bread . .  at  my  table 

9. 11  he  shall  eat  at  my  table,  as  one  of  the  ki. 
9.  13  for  he  did  eat  continually  at  the  king's  ta. 

19.  28  among  them  that  did  eat  at  thine  own  ta. 
1  Ki.  2.   7  let  them  be  of  those  that  eat  at  thy  table 
4.  27  all  that  came  unto  king  Solomon's  table 
7. 48  the  table  of  gold,  whereupon  the  showbr. 

10.  5  the  meat  of  his  table,  aud  the  sitting  of 
13.  20  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  sat  at  the  table 


1  Ki.iS.  19  four  hundred,  which  eat  at  Jezebel's  table 

2  Ki.  4.  10  let  us  set  for  him  there  a  bed,  and  a  table 

1  Ch.28. 16  for  the  tables  of  showbread,  for  every  ta. 

28.16  and  (likewise)  silver  for  the  tables  of  silver 

2  Ch.  4.   8  He  made  also  ten  tables,  audplaced(them) 

4.  19  the  tables  whereon  the  showbread  (was 
o.   4  the  meat  of  his  table,  aud  the  sitting  of 

13. 11  also  (set  they  in  order)  upon  the  pure  ta. 

29.  18  the  showbread  table,  with  all  the  vessels 
Neh,  5.  17  (there  were)  at  my  table  an  hundred  and 
Job  36.  16  that  which  should  be  set  on  thy  table  (sh.) 
Psa.  23.    5  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the 

69.  22  Let  their  table  become  a  snare  before  th. 

78.  19  Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness 
128.   3  like  olive  plants  round  about  thy  table 
Prov.  9.   2  wine ;  she  hath  also  furnished  her  table 
Isa.    21.   5  Prepare  the  table,  watch  iu  the  watch-to. 

28.    8  all  tables  are  full  of  vomit  (and)  filthinesB 

65.  11  prepare  a  table  for  that  troop,  and  that 
Eze.  23.  41  a  table  prepared  before  it,  whereupon  th. 

39.  20  ye  shall  be  filled  at  my  table  with  horses 
40. 39  two  tables  on  this  side,  and  two  tables  on 

40.  40  And  at  the  side  without,  .(were)  two  tab. 
40.  40  and  on  the  other  side,  .(were)  two  tables 
40.41  Four  tables.,  on  this  side,  and  four  tables 
40. 41  eight  tables,  whereupon  they  slew  (their 
40.  42  the  four  tables  (were)  of  hewn  stone  for 

40.  43  upon  the  tables  (was)  the  flesh  of  the  off. 

41.  22  This  (is)  the  table  that  (is)  before  the  Lo. 
44. 16  they  shall  come  near  to  my  table,  to  min. 

Dan.  11.  27  they  shall  speak  lies  at  one  table;  but  it 

Mai.    1.    7  ye  say,  The  table  of  the  Lord  (is)  contem. 

1. 12  The  table  of  the  LORD  (is)  polluted ;  and 

4.  To  lie  down  or  bach,  recline,auaKetfj.ai  analceimai. 

John  13.  28  no  man  at  the  table  knew  for  what  intent 

5.  A  reclining  couch  or  bed,  K\ivq  Mine. 

Mark  7.    4  the  washing  of . .  brazen  vessels,  and  of  ta. 
6.-4  broad  slab  or  table,  ir\d£plax. 

2  Co.   3.   3  not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  in  fleshy  tables 
Heb.  9.   4  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  the  tableB 

7.  A  table  (with  four  feet),  rpdire^a  trapeza. 

Matt  15.  27  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  masters'  ta. 

21.  12  overthrew  the  tablesof  the  money  chang. 
Mark  7.  28  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the  child. 

11.  15  overthrew  the  tables  of  the  money  chan. 
Luke  16.  21  crumbs  which  fell  from  the  rich  man's  ta. 

22.  21  betrayeth  me  (is)  with  me  on  the  table 
22.  30  That  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in 

John  2.  1 5  poured  out . .  money,  and  overthrew  the  ta. 

Acts    6.   2  leave  the  word  of  God,  and  serve  tablea 

Horn,  1 1.    9  Let  their  table  be  made  a  snare,  andatr. 

1  Co.  10.  21  of  the  Lord's  table,  and  of  thetableof  de. 

Heb.   9.    2  the  candlestick,  and  the  table,  and  the  eh. 
TABLET,  writing  table  — 
1. House  of  the  soul,  smelling  box,  ipw  rva  beth  nep. 

Isa.     3.  20  the  head  bands,  and  the  tablets,  and  the 
2.  Buckle,  bracelet,  necklace,  1913  kumaz. 

Exod35_  22  ear  rings,  and  rings,  and  tablets,  all  jewe. 

Num3i.  50  bracelets,  rings,  ear  rings,  and  tablets,  to 

Z.A  small  writing  tablet,  -mvaKiSiov pinakidion. 
Luke  1.  63  he  asked  for  a  writing  table,  and  wrote 
TA'-BOR,  li^ri  mountain  height. 

1.  An  isolated  mountain  in  Zebulun  and  Issachar  be- 
tween the  plains  of  Jezreel  and  Scythopolis.inthe  midst 
of  Galilee ;  now  called  et-Tur. 

Josh. 19.  22  the  coast  reacheth  to  T.,  and  Shahazimah 

Judg.  4.   6  Go  and  draw  toward  mount  T.,  and  take 

4.  12  showed.. Barak.,  wasgoneup  to  mount  T. 

4. 14  So  Barak  went  down  from  mount  T.,  and 

8.  18  What  manner  of  men.,  whom  ye  slew  at  T.? 

Psa.  89. 12  T.  and  Hermon  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name 

Jer.   46. 18  Surely  as  T.  (is)  among  the  mountains 

Hos.   5.    1  because  ye  have  been . .  net  spread  upon  T. 

2.  A  plain  or  place  in  Benjamin  S.  of  Bethel. 

1  Sa.  10. f  3  thou  shalt  come  to  the  plain  of  T.,  and 

3.  A  Levitical  city  in  Zebulun,  at  the  east. 

1  Ch.  6.  77  E-immon  with  her  suburbs,  T.  with  her 
TABRET  — 
l.Tabret,  timbrel,  *ft  toph. 

Gen.  31.  27  with  mirth,  and  with  songs,  with  tabret 

1  Sa.  10.    5  with  a  psaltery,  and  a  tabret,  and  a  pipe 

iS.    6  to  meet  king  Saul,  with  tabrets,  with  joy 

Isa.      5. 12  the  tabret  and  pipe,  and  wine,  are  in  their 

24.    8  The  mirth  of  tabrets  ceaseth,  the  noise  of 

30.  32  (in)  every  place.. (it)  shall  be  with  tabret3 

Jer.  31.    4  shalt  again  be  adorned  with  thy  tabrets 

Eze.  28. 13  the  workmanship  of  thy  tabretsandof  thy 

2.  Spittle,  wonder,  tabret,  ngn  topheth. 

Job    17.   6  a  byword,  .and  aforetime  I  was  as  a  tab. 
TAB-RIM'-MOK,  jb-inp  Rimmon  is  good. 
Sou  of  Hezion,  and  father  of  Benhadad  king  of  Syria, 
in  the  days  of  Asa.     B.C.  951. 

1  Ki.  15. 18  Asa  sent  them  to  Ben-hadad,  the  son  of  T. 
TACHES  — 
Hoops,  loopis,  D'pnp  qerasim. 

Exod26.    6  And  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  gold 
26.   6  couple  the  curtains  together  with . .  taches 
26. 11  make  fifty  taches  of  brass,  and  put  the  ta. 
26.  33  shalt  hang  up  the  veil  under  the  taches 

35.  11  his  tent,  and  his  covering,  his  taches,  and 

36.  13  And  he  made  fifty  taches  of  gold,  and 
36.  13  coupled  the  curtains,  .with  the  taches:  80 
36. 18  he  made  fifty  taches  (of)  brass  to  couple 
39.  33  all  his  furniture,  his  taches,  his  boards 


t  A  c  z  :■:  r  x :  r  z 


"- 


; 


".:.•  *-;  at 


- 
v*.  a Kachmonit? 

Isa.    :>  i;  Inyt^-frftrirrean;  lowod;  thaw  con&l  not 

•  mi. 

A;ss  - 

- 

■    - 
was.-laasM  u  Panayt: 
to***»  :-.-:-:  j     W    let       Si-.-r    ,      - 

lank  ft;   23   ---    .--..:    i_:   :    re  ■  ;  7;  ::      --    -    -7  -    ■■•  "V 
7~e-  ataajdert  ;  .  -        .         -         .'        .  .^ 

... 

««sited  is.      Its  rains  caaar  seTeral  miles :  *  has  an 

1313l,;3s>:  tatoaa   ::    „:  si        ic  ;       ;:;";.-- 

atttt  ramm:   it  ties  no  the  great 
niaaiiiin.  Pati  rniin»  «at  laager 

I  m  toe  wilderness,  ia  the 
h  omit  T.  ia  the  wilderness,  an.: 

7  J?     -  - 

I .  die  ini^v  .;  as  rahanites 
1  A  ie  sceadan;  of  toe  same  in  die  foozia.  cnnecanwa. 

" :  .- 

■-<-•■>■ 
"■•an"  39  a^datafta     at  "khan,  :•  i  boat] 

BB    -  ---    r-  --- 
-*•  -  '  -  ; 

- 

-.'_. :  '-:       -     '      -■  -V  '        -    "    ^   riiliela?. 

_-.-:  —  '--  • —  .  ;--  =  -;---— -i^-ii'.Lri.j    - 

^  jpk  and  T.  haw  Brate»e 

■ 
- 
- 

d  tie  Jews.. wto:: 

:iaceye..aiidmiulisitHN.n?hMrf  —  j 
-A--J.—    —  -Vr-raRi-t.  hm ■- 

Israel  fhm  Brmt  and 

tile  -  .  -   . 

-ad  die?  remwroi . .  and  encamped  at  T 
Pitched  at  ' 

■-- 

-'"  **~*"-fal> 

S   .   --- 

-       "  -   - 

scen- 
oant  ot  die  sai^ 

- 

-edinPhacaohsioose:  and 
"    "  E    ± 

-iS.  grandson  of  Jonathan  son  of  SanL    B.C. 

Ji  iwewk,  Kticsn.  ■ 

- 

.--ad.  and  to  die  land 

I    take  it  6y  the  an 

■  lead,  and  thou,  .the  tail 
■        ■ 
-     ■---.- 
-.^moTetahistaaKkea 
la.     -    .arnlaer 

ruphet :  that  teacheth  lies 
vhiehtheheadortaitiira. 

**T-  -.ails  like  anw  scornnwa 

- 



_ 

- 

-■•••■-.--  -...,. 


:Asr 


-  s.    -  . 

-  .  i  . 
- 

- 

- 


-i  - 

:■»  »  m  yr  mw  ia.  >  : 

- 

.     - 

-        .  ■    -  - 

Isa. 

■ 

- 

■ 

: 

- 


anai  :i-  aattt 


s 


■ 


aavnna.  -  - 

..     . 

- 

■  -  -  ; 

--ittecfc.  forth  her  fci: 

.  the  spoiK-Kx 

lsi-    -  I  haT«  tate^ 

-     -.'re  i£T>  that  taketh  her ))« 
Btembrtae 

-- 

-- 

-iest  sftafl  ih'i lalthattheTtatoawar 

tSer  that  ha  hadt  tatea>  a»>.T  the  streei 

:rxtw  bx>  or  «a*V  to otosaja*. 
.-  to  take  waier  *withal»  a>a  of  the  pit 
... 

|a-  5=.    ?  he  shatt  take  thee  away,  aibi  pmefc  Oee 

■      - 
-      -  - 

- 

J«o  7i  awaj.  who  aa  hinder  1: 

arajilll 

Take  Ton  wisenten.  and 

- 

ieant  or  aftS,  ^  jo.- 

iTe  taken  strange  eoaa»»» 

;matet  stra-jw  wires. 

•  -era  which  hare  taken  strange  wt 
■  .  -      - 
and  that  had  taken  strange 

.: 

Sam  ii.  ja  they:- 

■      .       -       ,  ■• 

- 
33.  *x  >ohaa  wot  and  tsok  Kenath.  and  das 
Peat-  -•  ?4  we  uvk  all  his  oities  at  that  tune  and 

- 
.    .    J-   »  we  took  ail  his  ctnee  at  that  time  th*r* 

:e  6«na>  whkktte  laao  shaft  tak? dt 

"   -      ■- 

"    ■•■  -         ■-■   ■--■      ---     .::.»,::    ; 
-idhadntterirde. 


"       '       . 

e*  »w*  ».  and  saaMe  »  with  ta*  edsce 

- 

-     '     -■ 

- 

- 
- 

- 
•^^^tiwltrongrlBMaeSSilhe 

-        -       - 
:.'  .-jtakeit:  kst  I  take  ta»  raw.  and  »  "-■ 

-        - 
- 
"  "«■*•»- «"»  »««**a»aa«5t  G«h 

I  the  kuer  of  Assxrafcx*  Sanaaravaad  ca. 

-- 

.^TMrcvkt^mhimatiSSnd^rkK 
^  hetoektaaJnattaieanWann^toSaS 


5 *~-~iittl«i  nihil  I  A.Ul* 

^.>hed«rnSh^W«S«rttta^r 
:  and  IV^gat  a^atnra  J^aVtodTaS  to*  tt 
--      ' 
-•okiag «  Ba>r*«. aad ae sanl  take » 
-'  e»  ire  come  unto  the  oity  to  lake  it -and 
haw  shall  %*t  against*,  and  tai 
-        -       -        - 

■.".--- 
^^^S-  4WiUaTocmrIion.rT.  if  he  hare  : 

-*■    1  !  ^ 

■      . 


•Taa*. 

fndt  there- 

st  he  pot  fixth  his  hand,  and  take  ak» 

- 

.dEnvx-h 

'ey  took  tk^r 

ererr  ofcanbeastttton:  shaft  ta_> 
-       - 
:ao  teast.  andefercrrck 

<     -----  .    • 
- 
•-  reran  took  .V.-rant  his  an.  a^ 

■  - 
- 


-  ■  ■ :  *    :  *■  •  -  a  and 


.  -«.  «.^  S.WW9VE  cwauaai  am  ^o. 

•      ■ 


■-•  cvvk  Nttter.  and  met  and  the  caKwh. 
I  lie  thy  wis?,  and  tt 
.-iae^-hkiagof. 
a>  the  woman;  which,  then  fct^t  >^-— 

- 

-s  nwtaer  took  him  a  wae  one  at  Ma  had 
- 

eiaaths  shaft  thon  take 
.-..  thant  anfej   sonl  Is     • 
wa-  toaaxhhia,  ud 
laflaehaxatcU. 


>.  lie  w^.c  .;  ta, -  :     1 

■■  '-    ■     '     ■ 

...took  the  kniie  w  slay  his 
:azi-..  i  aha  taaj    indat 


^d  Ah   " 

■ 
tie  G»>  at  ate.  and". 
■ 
and  take  a  wife  c-J 
•f  heaTen.  which  taakaaa 

.'  serrant  took  ten  camels  oi  thecanHht 


TAKE 


Qcn.  34. 
114. 
n- 
14, 

=4 

a.|. 
»4. 

»5- 

96. 
»7- 
*7- 
»7- 
37. 


38, 
a8. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39. 
30. 

30. 
30. 
SI- 
V- 
V- 
3'- 
3'- 
3'- 
3"- 
32- 

3=- 

33- 
34- 

31- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 

3i- 

36. 

37- 

3l 
38. 

3l 

3l- 
38. 

39- 
4°- 
4*- 
4=- 
42. 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
43- 
44. 
45- 
45- 
46. 
47- 
48. 
48. 
48. 

Bxod.a. 
3. 

2. 

4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 


12. 
'3- 
'4- 
14. 
14. 
IS- 
16. 
16. 
»7- 
>7- 
17. 
18. 


(s  thou  shale  go.  anil  toka  awtfountomyioii 
40  iIimii  ahnll  1  .'I.-   1  wlfoformy sonof  itiy[ki 

,,:;  had  led  me  in  Hie  righl  way  i"  cak j 

,i  K.-i.rk.ih  ii.i  1 .■  1  in  1  ;  lull  (her),  and 

.,  1  in-   ri> .mi  took  ftoboknh,  and  wonl  his 

I  j  1  ii. 'i  1  inn-  .in-  took  .1  vi'M,  and  covei  'id  r 
I,;  inn!  took  Rebolcah,  1  she  booama  in  1 

1  \iiriih.ini  book  a  wife,  and  her  name  (was) 
.-,,  [aaao  was  tori v  : ear  1  old  when  he  in  1, 
14  in-  took  i"  win-  .Iih  1 11I1  1  in-  daughter  of 

,  ,  Rebekah  took  v, Ilj  ralmonl  ol  hor  old 

js  Thy  brother,  ,hath  taken  away  thy  bless. 
,   he  took  away  my  blrtnrlgbl  ;  and,  behold 
ii,..-,  he  hath  takon  away  my  1  *  1 «    hig 
1,  Jacob  take  a  wife  ol  the  u&ughtors  "f 

1,  ',  11 1 1  hi  ghalt  nut  take  a  \\ 1  the  dau. 

take  11 i  \\-ift;  frniii  thence  oi  the  dau. 

'■  sent  him  away  ,to  tnke  him  a  wife  it 

,  took  unto  til--  wIvob  which  he  had  Itfalia, 

1 ,  he  took  -ii  the  ton  "i  thai  placo,  nnil 
18  took  iln-  Btone  thai  in-  had  pul  (for)  lil« 

;  I,,,  took  1  -'ill  iii   daughter,  and  brou  hi 
,  ,ii,,  1, mi.  /.iip.iii  her  in  H'l,  and  gave  ii  r 

1    ,   (  III  il  )   ,'l'fllllll    III   til  IT  lll.lt     I  1 1" 'II    lit!  ll    Ilk,    0 

I-  .'iini  wouldest  thou  take  away  my  hum'h 
17  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar,  and 

1  Jacob  hath  takon  away  all  that  (was)  our 
a  <  in'  took  bis  brethren  "  ii  i>  htm,  and  purs. 
j.-  dlBoem  thou  what  (ls)th1ne  and  takei  if  1 
1;  1  hoi  had  taken  the  Images,  and  pul  th. 
.(,;  Jacob  took  a  Btone,  and  set  it  up  (for)  ■< 
46  and  they  took  atones,  and  made  an  heap 

.111  huii  shall  t  .1...  (ol  her)  h  I       bi   Idi  1 

,  ;  1,.,'k  i.l  Mini   wliii'li  .'iiiiii'  In  hut  li.'tml  :i 

.-  ■  took  his  two  wives,  and  Ins  two  women 
.■ ;  In-  tooktthem,  anil  aent  them  over  tin- in-. 
n  Take,  I  pray  thee,  my  blessing,  .and  net, 
a  In-  took  nex,  .'mil  lay  with  her,  ami  defiled 

1  give  ,\ rdanghters  untona  .ami  tak ir 

ii.  we  win  tiki-  your  daughters  to  an,  and 

17  then  will  we  take  our  daughter,  ami  we 

-.-i  Jut  ns  tuke  tlli-ii-  iI.iiikIiIi-i  s  tu  lis  fur  wl. 

35  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each  man  his  aw. 

ae  took  Dinah  out  of  Bheohem'a  t bo,  ami 

.■"'  They  took  their  sheep,  ami  their  oxen 

1     in  I'luk  his  wives  of  the  ilau«htin-s  uf 
6  l''.sau  tnukliis  wi vi 'i,  a m I  his  suns,  anil  his 
.-.|  they  tnuk  liiin,  and  t-ast  liim  Into  n  pit 
31  they  took  Joseph's  coat,  and  killed  n  kid 

2  anil  he  tnuk  her,  ami  wont  in  unto  her 

6  .Iml.'ih  took  a  will-  for  Br  liiHllrsthurn.wh. 

13  t.i't  lift'  la!..'  (it  a  to  her,  lest  we  be  shamed 

:  tit.'  midwife  took  ami  bound  upon  his  h, 

20  Joseph's  master  took  him,  and  put  him 

II  I  took  tin-  grapes,  ami  pressed  them  Into 

:■  1  took  from  tin-in  all n,  and  bound  him 

33  tako  (food  fur)  tile  famine  of  your  house. 
(6  Simeon  (Is)  not,  and  ye  will  take  Benjam. 
"11  take  of  the  best  fruits  iutln-  land  In  pour 
13  take  1  huii  ile  money  In  your  hand,  and  the 
13  Tako  also  your  brother,  and  arise, - 

1  j  the  men  took  that  present,  and  tin ly  In  ik 

18  fall  upon  us,  and  take  us  for  liund  men 
20  if  ye  take  this  also  from  me,  ami  mi  ichief 

I  ;  lake  your  father,  and  your  households,  and 
10  take  vim  wagons  out,  of  tin-  land  of  Egypt 

6  they  took  their  cattle,  and  their  goods,  wh, 

2  lie  took  some  uf  hin  hri'tliren,  (even)  live 

1  In-  took  with  him  his  two  suns,  Manasseh 

I I  Joseph  took  them  both,  Bphralm  In  his 
.-j  whieli  1  took  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Am. 

1  there  wont  a  man. .and  took  (to  will)  a  .1. 

i  she  took  for  him  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  ami 

o  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  nursid  it 

u  thou  slialt  take  of  the  water  of  the  river 

9  the  water  which  thou  takestout  ol  the  rl, 

17  thou  shalt  take  this  rod  in  thine  hand.wli, 

20  Moses  took  his  wife  anil  his  sons,  and  set 

20  and  Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  his  ha. 

2^  Zlpporah  t k  a  sharp  stone,  anil  cutoff 

7  T  will  take  you  to  in.,  for  a  people,  and  f 

20  Amram  took  Mm  Jochebed  his  father's 

• ;  Aaron  took  him  Klishelia,  daughter  of  A. 
-.•5  Aaron's  son.  tnuk  him  (one)  of  the  daugh. 

o  Take  thy  rod.. and  east  (il)  ln-fore  Pharaoh 
15  and  the  rod.  .slialt  thou  take  in  thine  ha. 
xo  Take  thy  rod,  and  stretch  out  thine  hand 

8  Take  to  you  haudfiils  of  ashes  of  the  fur. 

10  they  took  ashes  of  the  famace,  and  stood 
:'",  fur  thereof  must  we  take  to  serve  the  Lo. 

3  they  shall  take  to  tlicm  every 1  a  lamb 

4  take  (it)  according  to  the  number  of  the 

5  ye  shall  tako  (It)  out  from  the  sheep,  or 
7  they  shall  take  of  tin-  Id I,  and  strike 

21  tako  you  a  lamb  according  to  your  famil. 

■::  ye  shall  take  a  lolm-li  of  hyss-.p,  an. I  dip 

is  take  your  flocks  ami  your  herds, , is  ye  ha. 

19  Mobcb  took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with  him 

6  made  ready  bis  chariot,  ami  took  his  peo. 

7  he  took  six  hundred  chosen  chariots,  and 

11  hast  thou  taken  us  away  to  die  in  the  w  il. 

20  the  sister  of  Am ,  took  a  timbrel  in  her 

10  take-  ye  every  man  for  (them)  which  fare) 
33  Take  a  pof,  and  put  an  omerfull  of  man. 

S  and  lake  with  thee  of  the  ciders  of  I  laid 
5  anil  thy  rod,   take  in  thine  hand,  anil  go 

12  they  took  a  stone,  and  put  fit!  under  him 

2,  12  And  Jethro,  Bfoses' father  In law,  took 

to  If  In-  take  him  another  (wile) ;  her  final 
1  j  thou  shalt  take  him  from  mine  altar,  that 

8  thou  Shalt  lake  no  gift  :  for  the  gift  liliii. 
C  Moses  took  half  of  the  blood,  and  put  (it) 


I        1 

3,|. 
»J. 

38. 

28. 

29. 

'" 
39. 

' 

39. 
39. 
39. 
39. 

30. 

29. 

I 

29. 

30. 

3°- 

30. 

32- 
33- 

31- 
34- 
IS' 

■I"' 

-I" 

4. 

4- 
7- 


I.,  v 


21. 

21. 
=3- 
24. 
35- 
Num.  1. 

3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
3- 
4- 
4- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 


988 


7  he  i""iv  tin- 1  "-"it  "f  iii*1  coTtnanti  and  re. 

>i<<  <    tooh  iii>  "i 1,  and  i  prlnkled (it) 

■  I  ovi '  \  man    \>-  shall  fcnkfl  m\  offei  Ii  ■ 

i  iii  in  (i'i)  the  "tin v.  huii  ye  shall  take 

s  they  shall  take  ffoldi  and  blue,  ami  purple 
g  1  it, hi   hall  take  I  wo  onj  v  stone  i,  and  ■  ■ . « 

1  Pake ■  young  bullock,  and  two  ram 

.,  1  hou  1  hall  take  I  he  garments,  and  pul  up, 
7  Then  shalt  thou  take  the  anointing  oil 
r,  thou  shall  take  ol  the  blood  o!  the  bullo, 
1  '  1  hou  shall  take  all  i  he  Fal  i  ha!  i  >•••  en  i  h 
1  ,  'I'M mi  1  : 1 1.1  it  also  take  one  ram  ;  and  Aaron 

16  thou  shalt  take  his  blood,  ami  sprinkle 
n,  thou  niiaii  tako  1  he  other  i am  ;  and  Aar 

1  hen  ihait  Hiou  kill  the  ram.  ami  take  of 

■  thon  shalt  takeoi  the  bl i  thai  (I  >  upon 

■  thou  shall  take  of  the  para  the  fat,  ami  tho 
'.  1  h ihall  take  I  he  bri  asl  *it  i  he  nun  of 

,i  t imii  • .  1 1  - 1 1 1  take  1  Ik-  nun  "i  the  con  • '  ■  it 
in  thou  shalt  take  Hie  atonement  money  "f 
- ;  Take  1  hou  a]  <■>  unit,  thee  \<\  Im  Ipal  plci 
i !  Take  unto  thee  sweol  i  pices,  stacte,  and 
.  he  i""i^  thecal!  which tnej  had  mad<  .  and 
;  Mo  e  ■  tooh  1  he  tauei run  le,  ami  pltenod 
.1  ami  took  in  IiIh  hand  the  two  tables  ofst. 
if,  iln, 11  take  i.r  their  daughters  unto  tii\  bo, 
-i  Take  ye  from  among  you  an  offoi  Inj  unto 
i)  thou  shalt  take  the  anolnMngoil,  andan. 
• .  in'  took  and  pul  the  testimony  Into  I  he 

5  the  priont  that  In  anointed  shall  take  "i" 

l  the  prlcHt  mIi til t  take  nf  tlir   hi 1 

1  (  th-'  heave  i  houlder  have  i  taken  <>i  the  i  h, 
a  Take  Aaron  ami  hh  sons  with  him,  ami 

io  Moses  took  Hi"  anointing  oil,  and In. 

15  M08C8  took  Mm  iiio.ui,  anil  pul  (it)  upon 

it  In'  took  all  tho  fat  that  (wan)  1 1 j I  In  in 

m.'  es  took  "i'  the  blood  <.f  It,  and  pul  Cii.j 
he  took  iin-  i'at ,  and  the  rump,  and  all  the 
.  f,  in-  took  'mo  unleavened  cake,  ami  a  cake 

28  Moaoatook  them  from  offtheir  hands,  iuhI 
.,  \ln  ,r  ,  took  lln-  breast;  ami  waved  It  (f<»r) 

I..  Moses  tnuk  oftheanolntlngoll,  and  01  the 
1  ake  1  ii«*<'  a  young  calf  tor  a  win  offering 

[  Take  ye  a  kid  of  tin-  f,'fmtn  for  a  ■ n<  i 

i  ;  took  iin-  goat,  \\iuiii  (wan  the  Hin  offeri, 

1  the  Him»  i»f  Aarnn,  I  m  >k  iii  In  r  «.l  I  in  in  \w\ 
i.'  Take-  tin-  nif;i)  niiriin^  Unit  ivmuim  lh  i-l 
.1  Then  Shall  the  j*ii* -hI.  eummand  tu  take 

6  he  Hliall  tako  It,  ami  the  cedar  wood,  ami 
10  he  shall  take  two  he  lambs  without  hi  cm 
12  the  priest  Hhaii  take  one  he  lamb,  and  oft. 
Mi  Ts-  25  A,|i'  tne  priest  Himii  lake  (sonn  |  of 
,■1  he  shall  take  one  lamb  (for) a  treHpaHH  <»if. 
7.)  the  priest  shall  take  the  lamb  nf  the  tresp. 
,)  ithej  shall  takeoi  herfstones,  ami  put  (them) 

.).■  he  hIihII  tako  Other  mortar,  and  Bball  jila. 

,],,  he  shall  take  to  cleanse  the  house  two  hi. 

51  he  shall  lake  tho  CedBT  WOOd,  ami  I  In   hj  - 

n  in;  ahaU  take  tn  him  two  turtle  doves,  or 

29  Hhu  filial  I  lain1  111  In  In  r  feWO  turtles,  Or 

5  he  Hhall  taku  of  tho  congrcKntlon  of  the 

7  he  shall  take  the  two  ^oatH,  and  present 

12  heflhall  take  a  censer  full  of  burning  coals 
i,|  lie  shall  taku  of  (!,.■  hlood  of  tin-  hnlloek 
18  shall  take  Of  th©  blood  of  the  bullock,  ami 

17  m-ithi-r  shalt  thou  take  her  son's  dau^ht. 

[ther  shalt  thou  take  a  wife  to  her  sister 
j  I  il  a  man  take  a  wife  ami  her  mother,  it  (in) 
17  if  a  man  shall  take  his  sister,  his  father's 
;•[  if  a  man  shall  take  his  brother's  wife,  it 

7  They  shall  nut  take  a  wife  (that  Is)  a  wh. 
;  mil  her  shall  they  lake  a  woman  put  aw. 

13  And  he  shall  take  a  wife  in  her  virginity 

14  a  widow,  .an  harlot,  theseehaUhenotta. 
14  he  shall  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  people  tu 
,y>  ye  shall  lake  you  on  (he  llr.il  day  tin-  1  >•<. 

5  thou  shall  take  line  Hour,  ami  bake  i  welve 

30  Take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase 
17  Aaron  took  theso  men  whieh  are  expressed 
i-j  I  have  taken  the  I.evites  from  among  the 
41  Ami  thou  shalt  take  the  Levites  for  me 
45  Take  the  Levites  instead  of  all  the  ilrst 
47  Thou  shalt  (Veil  take  five  shekelB  a  pfeeo 

49Mosestonk  the  redemption  money  of  them 
50  Of  the flrat born  .  took  he  the  money,  ath. 
9  they  shall  tako  a  cloth  of  blue,  ami  cover 
12  they  shall  take  all  the  instruments  of  mi. 
17  the  priest  shall  lake  holy  water  in  an  ea. 

17  the  priest  shall  take,  ami  put  (it)  into  tho 
-•-,  tin-  priest  shall  take  the  jealousy  offering 

18  shall  take  tin-  hair  of  the  head  of  his  sep. 
ig  Hie  priest  shall  lake  the  Bodden  shoulder 

5  Take  (it)  of  them,  that  they  may  he  to  do 
'  Mo  B  took  tho  wagons  and  the  oxen,  and 
fi  'lake  tin:  Levites  from  among  the  childr. 

8  let  tin m  take  a  young  bullock,  w|th  hla 

8  anotheryouutf  bullock  shalt  thou  take  for 
1'  im  itead  of)  the  first  horn,  have  I  taken 
18  I  have  taken  the  J.evite*  for  all  I  la1  first 

1  On  thesoii  of   I'eletli,     uii  ,0!  KeiiL.  11,  look 

6  Take  you  censers,  Koran,  and  all  his  CO. 
17  take  every  man  his  ((user,  amlputinccnso 
tfl  they  took  every  man  his  censer,  ami  jiut 
I-,  1  in-  priest  took  th(]  hrascn  censers,  where. 
1    Take  a  ci  user,  and  put  Ore  I  herein  from 

,i .'  Aaron  took  as  Moses  commanded,  and  ran 

3  take  of  ..'very  one  of  them  a  rod  according 

9  they  looked,  and  took  cv^ry  man  his  rod 
(>  T  have  taken  yoUT  brethren  the  I.evites 

■J.C  When  ye  take  of  the  children  of  Israel  tho 

4  the  priest  shall  tal  e  of  her  hlood  with  his 
6  the  priest  shall  take  cedar  wood,  and  hya. 


TAKE 


17  tfaey  1  hall  take  nf  III"  ;i'ln:i  of  i  In-  1, 111  Ol 

19.  ift  a  1  I.  .,n  |.i  t    mi     hn  1 1  take  Ii1.      OP,  and  di[, 

20.  8  Take  1  he  rod.  and  gal  in  r  I  hou  1 1 

.'...  o  Mo,  01  tooh  1  he  1  od  from  bi  fore  the  Loi  d 
20.  25  Take  Aaron  and  Bloazar  in     on,  and  bj  h  g 

it.  35  i:  raol  took  all  thoi  ocltfcs  1  and  laraoldwe. 

taken  all  his  land  out  ol  his  hand,  ovi  n  an. 

22. 41  Balak  took  Balaam,  and  brought  hi p 

33.  II    1    look   tin  i'   In  em     -■  mill,    1   ni  mil      ,       1     I 

25.  4  Take  all  th-.'  imad.'.  of  ike  people,  and  hang 
25.  7  he  rose  up.  .and  took  a  Javefin  In  his  hand 

27.  18  Take  Me  e  .lo  bun  i  ll(        ni      i,n,  a  man 

.'7  32  he  loot.  Joshua,  and  set  him  before  i  leazai 
31.  11  they  took  :'ii  tne   poll,  ami  all  the  prey 

31.  29  'lake  dt)  01   then    hall,  nml  give  Ml,  1,1.1. 

3:.  30  thou  slialt  take  one  poi  tlon  oi  Bfty,  of  tho 
31. 47  lVfose  1  took  one  porl  Ion  of  fifty,  (both)  of 

31,  51,  5 1  and  ii  azar  tin  prli  t  tooh  the  gold  of 

34. 18  ye  shall  rake  one  pi icf  every  tribe,  to 

35,  31  ye  1  hall  take  no  sail  fai  1  Ion  for  the  lift  of 
35. 39  yo  shall  tako  no  sat!  taction  for  him  iimt 

Pout,  1.  1  ,  1  look  1  he  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise  men 
1.  23  I  took  twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  ii  il,,j 

I.  25  the;    tOOk   ol    Hi,'  null   of  the   I., ml    in   Iln  11 

3,  4  Ami  vre  tm-k  ail  in  1  eltle  i  at  that  t  Imo 
3.  4  there  was  oof  a  eltj  which  wo  took  not 

3.     8  We  tOOk  at  that  lime  on  I  of  I  In- hand  of  thu 

3,  14  tin  :  .11  nr  m  hi. 1  soli  took  aii  1  in-  count i  y 

4. 20  the  Loup  hath  taken  you,  ami  brought  you 
4. 34  hath  God  assayed  to  go  (and)  take  him  a 
7.  3  nor  bis  daughtoi  halt  thou  take  unto  thy 
7.  25  nor  take  r  1 1 ,  unto  thee,  U  1  1  hou  1 1  aar 
9.  21  I  took  your  sin,  the  calf  which  ye  had  made 
10. 17  which  regard)  thnoi  pel  on  .  noi  takoth 

15. 17  thon  Bhalt  take  an  awl,  and  thru  t(ltjthr 

16. 19  shalt  not  respect  pei  on  ,  neither  take  a 
20.  7  hath  betrothed  a  wife,  and  hath  nol  taken 

20.  7  die  in  tin'  battle,  and  another  man  take 

21.  3  the-  elders  "f  that  city  shall  take  an  heifer 

•j-i.    '1  thou  shalt  nol  take  I  lie  <lain  with  I  lie  -..  <  .\\ 

22.  7  let  the  dam  go,  and  tnta  the  young  to  th. 
22.  13  If  any  man  takfl  a  wlfl  ,  and  go  m  unto 

22. 14  I  took  this  woman,  ami  when  I  came  to 

22. 15  take  ami  bring  forth  (the  tokoni  of)  the 

22. 18  the  elders  of  that  d^  shall  take  thai  man 

32.  30  A  man  shall  not  lake  hlfl  (alher's  wife,  nor 
34,     1   When  a  man  hath  taken   a  wife,  and  111a. 

24.  3  if  tin-  latter  husband  die,  whieh  took  her 

34.  4  may  not  take  her  again  lo  he  his  wife,  nt. 

24.  5  "When  a  man  hath  taken  a  m  w  wife,  he 

24.  5  shall  cheer  up  his  v.  in    which  he  hath  la 

25.  5  shall  v,u  in  unto  her,  am!  take  (hi  to  him 

25.  7  if  the  man  like  imi  to  take  hi1,  brother's 

25.  8  flf)he  stand  (to  il ),  and  say,  I  like  nol  to  t. 

26.  2  thou  shalt  take  <d  the  first  of  all  the  fruit 

26.  4  the  priest  shall  take  the  hasket  nut  of  th. 

27.  25  Cursed  (be)  he  that  taketh  reward  to  slay 
29.    8  we  took  their  land,  and  gave  it  for  an  In. 

31.  3d  Take  this  hook  of  the  law,  ami  put.  it  in 

32.  n  spread eth  abroad  her  wings,  takelh  them 
Joah.  2.    4  the  woman  took  the  two  men,  and  hid  th. 

3.  12  tak©  yOU  twelve  men  out  of  I  he  till, en  <,i  1, 

4.  2  Take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  people 
4.  20  twelve  stoneH,  whieh  they  took  out  of  Jo. 
6. 18  when  ye  take  of  i  he  accursed  thing,  ami 
7.   1  Achat  1 .  took  '.f  the  accursed  thing, and 
7.  11  they  have  even  taken  of  the  accursed  th. 
7.  21  I  coveted  them,  and  took  them ;  ami,  le. 

7     .   1  tiny  took  fhejn  out  of  the  midhl  of  (he  |e. 

7.  24  Joshua,  .took  Achan  the  son  ofZerah,  and 

8.  1  take  all  the  people  of  war  with  tin  e,  m,,| 

8.  12  he  took  abOUt  live  thOUBand  men,  ami  BI  t 

9.  4  took  old  sacks  upon  their  asses,  and  w  Ine 

.,.  1  r  Taki  victuals  with  you  for  the  ion  in  1  y,  and 
cj,  14  the  men  took  of  their  victuals,  and  ahkeil 
11.  16  Joshua  took  all  that  land,  the  hills,  ami 

,  -  1  ,  avo  the  invites.. all  (other)  they  took  in 
1 ,  .I-,  hua  took  the  whole  land,  according  to 
24,  1  1  look  your  father  Abraham  from  'he  ofe 
24.  26  took  a  great  i  tone,  and  i  tit  up  then  un 
Judg.  3.   (>  they  took  their  daughters  to  he  their  wi. 

3.21  took  tin:  dagger  from  his  rkht  thigli,  and 

3.  25  they  took  a  key,  ami  opened  'Iln  n,  i.     1 1  <  I 

4.  6  take  with  thee  ten  thousand  men  01  the 
4.  21  Jael.  Heber'  '■■  [fe,  took  a  nail  of  the  tent 
v  19  The  kings  came,  .tiny  took  do  gain  of  mo. 

6.  20  Take  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  1  ak<  ;•. 
6.25  Take  thy  father's  young  hnlloek,  even  tho 
C.  26  take  the  second  hnlloek,  and  offer  a  burnt 

(j.  27  Gideon  t-""i^  ten  men  of  hi .  servant  .  and 

7.  8  tin:  people  took  victuals  in  their  band,  and 

8.  16  he  took  the  elders  of  the  city,  and  thorns 

8.  21  took  away  the  ornaments  that  (>,. ,  j,  )  ,  1, 

9.  43  he  toed':  the  people,  and  divided  (In  m  into 
ry,  .(,•;'  Ahiimdech  lock  an  a\  in  his  hand,  arid  cut 

u.  13  [oraeltook  away  my  land,  when  theycamo 

11.15  Israel  took  not  away  the  land  of  Moah,  m  r 

13. 19  Manoah  took  a  kid  with  a  on  ;it  offering 

14.     3  that,  thon  gno;-,t  to  t^ke  a  wife  of  the  nm'. 

14.  8  after  a  time  he  returned  to  take  1  er,  and 

14.  19  took  their  spoil,  and  gave  change  of  gnr. 

15.  4  took  firebrands,  and  turned  tail  to  I  ail,  and 
15.  6  because  he  had  taken  his  wife,  ami  gii  BD 
15.  15  put  forth  his  hand  and  took  it,  and  slew 

Te  , ..  Delilah  therefore  took  new  ropes,  and  bo. 
I7.  v  behold,  the  sllve*  (la)  with  me :  i  took  it 

17.  4  Ids  mother  took  two  hundred  MiekcIsW 
if.  17  came  In  thither,  (and)  took  the  gravi  □  im. 

18. 20  he  took  the  ephod,  and  tlie  teraphim,  and 

18.  24  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods  which  I  ma. 
18.  27  they  took  (the  things)  which  Micih  had 
jo.    1  who  took  to  hlm  a  concubine  out  of  Beth*. 


TAKE 


95G 


TAKE 


Judgig. 

19. 

20. 

Ruth  4. 

4- 

4- 

1  Sa.    2. 


:Ki. 


28  the  man  took  her  (up)  upon  an  ass,  and  the 

29  he  took  a  knife,  and  laid  hold  on  his  con. 
10  we  will  take  ten  men  of  an  hundred  thro. 

2  he  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 

13  Boaz  took  Ruth,  andshe  washiswife:  and 
16  Naomi  took  the  child,  and  laid  it  in  her 

14  all.  .brought  up  the  priest  took  for  hims. 
16  and  (then)  take  (as  much)  as  thy  soul  desi. 
16  give  (it  me)  now :  and  if  not,  I  will  take 

1  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God,  and 

2  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God,  they 

3  they  took  Dagon,  and  set  him  in  his  place 

7  take  two  milch  kine,  on  which  there  hath 

8  take  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  and  lay  it  upon 

10  took  two  milch  kine,  and  tied  them  to  the 

9  Samuel  took  a  sucking  lamb,  and  offered 

12  Samuel  took  a  stone,  and  set  (it)betweeu 
14  the  cities  which  the  Philistines  had  taken 

3  turned  aside  after  lucre,  and  took  brines 

11  He  will  takeyoursons,andappoint(them) 

13  he  will  take  your  daughters  (to  be)  confe. 

14  he  will  take  your  fields,  and  your  vineyards 

16  he  will  take  your  men  servants,  and  your 
3  Take  now  one  of  the  servants  with  thee 

22  took  Saul  and  his  servant,  and  brought 

1  Samuel  took  a  vial  of  oil,  and  poured  (it) 
7  he  took  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  hewed  them 

3  ox  have  I  taken?  or  whose  ass  have  I  ta.? 

4  neither  hast  thou  taken  ought  of  any  man's 
32  flew  upon  the  spoil,  and  took  sheep,  and 
21  the  peopletook  of  the  spoil,  sheep  and  ox. 

2  Take  an  fieifer  with  thee,  and  say,  I  am 
13  Samuel  took  the  horn  of  oil,  andanointed 
20  Jesse  took  au  ass  (laden)  with  bread,  and 

23  David  took  an  harp,  and  played  with  his 

17  Take  now  for  thy  brethren  an  ephah  of 
iS  look  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  taketh. 
40  he  took  his  staff  in  his  hand,  and  chose 
40  took  thence  a  stono,  and  slang  (it),  and  s. 
51  stood  upon  the  Philistine,  and  took  his  sw. 
54  David  touk  the  head  of  the  Philistine,  and 
57  Abner  took  him.  and  brought  him  before 

2  Saul  took  him  thatday.andwouldlethim 

13  Michal  tuok  au  image,  and  laid  (it)  in  the 

14  when  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  David 

20  Saul  sent  messengers  to  take  David  :  and 

21  the  arrows  (are)  on  this  side  of  thee,  take 
9  if  thou  wilt  take  that,  take  (it);  for  (there 
2  Saul  took  three  thousand  chosen  men  out 

11  yet  thou  huntest  my  soul  to  take  it 

11  Shall  I  then  take  my  bread,  audniy  water 

18  Abigail  made  haste,  and  took  twohundr. 

39  communed  with  Abigail,  to  take  her  to 

40  David  sent  us  unto  thee,  to  take  thee  to 
43  David  also  took  Ahinoam  of  Jezreel ;  and 
n  take  thou  now  the  spear  that(is)at  his  bu 

12  David  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of  wa, 
9  took  away  the  sheep,  and  the  oxen,  and 

24  killed  it,  and  took  flour,  and  kneaded  (it) 
16  the  great  spoil  that  they  had  taken  out  of 
iq  nor  any  (thing)  that  they  had  taken  fcoth. 
20  David  took  all  the  flocks  and  the  herds 

4  Therefore  Saul  took  a  sword,  and  fell  up. 

12  went  all  night,  and  took  the  body  of  Saul 

13  they  took  their  bones,  and  buried  (them) 
.  10  I  took  the  crown  that  (was)  upou  his  head 

,  8  Abner.  .took  Ish  bosheth  the  son  of  Saul 
,  21  lay  thee  hold  on  one    and  take  thee  his 

15  Ishbosheth  sent,  and  took  her  from  (her) 
.    7  beheaded  him,  and  took  his  head,  and  g 

,  12  they  took  the  head  of  Ish  boshetb,  and  bu. 
,  13  David  took  (him)  more  concubines  and 
,  8  I  took  thee  from  the  sheep  cote,  from  to 
.  1  David  took  Metheg-ammah  out  of  the  ha. 
.  7  David  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 
,    8  king  David  took  exceeding  much  brass 

4  Hanun  took  Davids  servants,  and  shaved 
,  4  David  sent  messengers,  and  took  her  :  aud 
,  4  he  spared  to  take  of  his  own  flock,  aud  of 
.  B4  took  the  poor  mans  lamb,  and  dressed  it 

9  hast  taken  his  wife  (to  be)  thy  wife,  and 
.  10  hast  taken  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  Hittite 
.  11  I  willtakethy  wivesbeforetliineeyes,  and 
.  30  he  took  their  king's  crown  from  off  his  he. 
,    8  she  took  flour,  and  kneaded  (it),  aud  ma. 
.    9  she  took  a  pan,  and  poured  (them)out  be 
.  10  Tamar  took  the  cakes  which  she  had  ma 
.  19  the  woman  took  and  spread  a  covering 
.  14  he  took  three  darts  in  his  hand,  and  thr. 
.  17  they  took  Absalom,  and  cast  him  into  a 
.  18  Absalom  in  his  life  time  had  taken  and 
.  30  let  him  take  all,  forasmuch  as  my  lord 
.    3  the  king  took  the  ten  women  (his)  concu. 
.    6  take  thou  thy  lord's  servants,  and  pursue 
.    8  the  king  took  the  two  sons  of  Rizpah  the 
.  10  the  daughter  of  Aiah  took  sackcloth,  and 
.  12  David  went  and  took  the  bones  of  Saul 
,  17  He'sent  from  above,  he  took  me ;  he  drew 
.    6  because  they  cannot  be  taken  with  hands 
.  22  Let  my  lord  the  king  take  and  offer  up  wh 
.  33  Take  with  you  the  servants  of  your  lord 
.  39  the  priest  took  an  horn  of  oil  out  of  the 
.   1  took  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  brought  her 
.  20  she  arose  at  midnight,  and  took  my  son 
,  15  he  also  took  Basmath  the  daughter  of  S. 
.    8  Pharaoh's  daughter,  whom  he  had  taken 
.  18  they  took  men  with  them  out  of  Paran 
.  31  he  said  to  Jeroboam,  Take  thee  ten  pieces 
.  34  I  will  not  take  the  whole  kingdom  out  of 
.  35  I  will  take  the  kingdom  out  of  his  son's 
.  37  I  will  take  thee,  and  thou  shalt  reign  ac. 
.    3  take  with  thee  ten  loaves,  and  cracknels 


:  Ki.'i4.*26  he  took  away  the  treasures  of  the  house 

14.  26  he  even  took  away  all :  aud  he  took  away 

15.  18  Asa  took  all  the  silver  aud  the  gold  (that 

16.  31  he  took  to  wife  Jezebel,  the  daughter  of 

17.  19  he  took  him  out  of  her  bosom,  aud  carr. 

17.  23  Elijah  took  the  child,  and  brought  him 

18.  4  Obadiah  took  an  hundred  prophets,  and 
18.  26  they  took  the  bullock  which  was  given 

18.  31  Elijah  took  twelve  stones,  according  to 

19.  4  take  away  my  life  ;  for  I  (am)  not  better 
19.  10,  14  aud  they  seek  my  life,  to  take  it  away 

19.  21  took  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  slew  them,  and 

20.  6  they  shall  put  (it)  in  their  hand,  and  take 
20.  34  The  cities  which  my  father  took  from  thy 
22.  3  we  (be)  still,  (and)  take  it  not  out  of  the 
22.  26  'Lake  Micaiah,  and  carry  him  back  unto 

>  Ki.  2.    3,  5  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  master 
2.    8  Elijah  took  his  mantle,  and  wrapped  (it) 
2.  12  he  took  hold  of  his  own  clothes,  and  rent 

14  he  took  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that  fell  from 

26  he  took  with  him  seven  hundred  men  that 

27  he  took  his  eldest  son,  that  should  have 

1  the  creditor  is  come  to  take  unto  him  my 
29  Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  my  staff  in  th. 

5  he  departed,  and  took  with  him  ten  tale. 

15  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  take  a  blessing  of 

16  And  he  urged  him  to  take  (it);  but  he  re. 

20  I  will  ruu  after  him,  and  take  somewhat 

23  Aud  Xaaman  said,  Be  content,  take  two 

24  he  took  (them)  from  their  hand,  aud  besto. 

2  Let  us  go.  .and  take  thence  every  man  a 

7  And  he  put  out  his  hand,  and  took  it 

13  Let  (some)  take,  I  pray  thee,  five  of  the 

14  They  took  therefore  two  chariot  horses 

8  Take  a  present  in  thine  hand,  and  go,  meet 

9  Hazael  went  to  meet  him,  aud  took  a  pr. 

15  he  took  a  thick  cloth,  and  dipped  (it)  in 

1  Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  this  box  of  oil 

3  take  the  box  of  oil,  and  pour  (it)  on  his 

13  they  hasted,  aud  took  every  man  his  gar. 

17  Take  an  horseman,  and  seud  to  meet  them 

6  take  ye  the  heads  of  the  men  your  master's 

7  tbeytooktheking'ssons,  and  slewseventy 

2  Jehosheba.  .took  Joashthesonof  Ahaziah 
9  they  took  every  man  his  men  that  were 

19  he  took  the  rulers  over  hundreds,  and  the 
5  Let  the  priests  take  (ii)  to  them,  every  man 
9  the  priest  took  a  chest,  and  bored  a  hole 

18  Jehoash  king  of  Judah  took  all  the  hall, 

15  Take  bow  and  arrows:  and  he  took  unto 
18  And  he  said,  Take  the  arrows:  and  he  took 

25  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  took  again  out  of  the 
2s  the  cities  which  he  had  taken  out  of  the 

14  he  took  all  the  gold  and  silver,  and  all  the 

21  the  people  of  Judah  took  Azariah,  which 

29  took  Ijou,  and  Abel-beth  maachah,  and 

8  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold  (that  was) 
32  Until  I  come  and  take  you  away  to  a  land 

7  Take  a  lump  of  figs.  And  they  took  and 
18  thy  sons,  .shall  they  take  away;  and  they 

16  sent,  and  took  the  bones  out  Of  the  sepul. 

30  the  people  of  the  laud  took  Jehoahaz  the 
34  made  Eliakim.  .king,  .and  took  Jehoahaz 

7  the  king  of  Babylon  had  taken  from  the 
12  the  king  of  Babylon  took  him  in  the  eighth 

14  all  the  vessels  of  brass  .  took  they  away 

15  fire  pans,  .the  captain  of  the  guard  took 

18  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Seraiah  the 

19  he  took  an  officer  that  was  set  over  the  men 

20  Nebuzar-adan .  .took  these,  and  brought 

:  Ch.  2.  19  Caleb  took  unto  him  Ephrath.  which  bare 
23  he  took  Geshur,  and  Aram,  with  the  towns 
18  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  which  Mered  took 
15  Machir  took  to  wife  (the  sister)  of  Huppim 

2 1  they  came  down  to  take  away  their  cattle 

4  So  Saul  took  a  sword,  and  fell  upon  it 

3  And  David  took  more  wives  at  Jerusalem 
7  I  took  thee  from  the  sheep  cote,  (even)fr. 
1  subdued  them,  and  took  Gath  and  her  to. 

7  David  took  the  shields  of  gold  that  were 

4  Hanun  took  David's  servants,  and  shaved 

20.  2  David  took  the  crown  of  their  king  from 

21,  23  Take  (it)  to  thee,  and  let  my  loi  d  the  king 
2  Ch.  8.  18  took  thence  four  hundred  and  fifty  talents 

11. 18  Rehoboam  took  him  Mahalath  the  daugh. 

11.  20  after  her  he  took  Maachah  the  daughterof 

12.  9  took  away  the  treasures  of  the  house  of 
12.    9  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house;  he  took 
16.    6  Asa  the  king  took  all  Judah;  and  they  ca. 
iS.  25  Take  ye  Micaiah,  and  carry  him  back  to 
22. 11  Jehoshabeath .  .took  Joash  the  son  of  Ah. 

1  strengthened  himself,  and  took  the  capt. 

8  took  every  man  his  men  that  were  to  come 
20  he  took  the  captains  of  hundreds,  and  the 

1  the  people  of  J  udah  took  Uzziah,  who  (was) 

1  the  people  of  the  land  took  Jehoahaz  the 
4  Necho  took  Jehoahaz  his  brother,  and  ca. 

6t  which  took  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Ba. 

2  we  take  up  corn  (for  them),  that  we  may 
15  had  taken  of  them  bread  and  wine,  besi. 
18  Johanau  had  taken  the  daughter  of  Mes. 
63  which  took  (one)  of  the  daughters  of  Bar. 
30  nor  take  their  daughters  for  our  sons 

7  whom  Mordecai..  took  for  his  own  daugh. 
2.  15  Mordecai,  who  had  takeu  her  for  his  da. 
6.  10  Make  haste,  (and)  take  the  apparel  and 
6.  11  Then  took  Hainan  the  apparel  and  the  ho. 
1.  15  the  Sabeans  fell  (upon  them),  and  tookth 

1.  21  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  take 

2.  8  he  took  him  a  potsherd  to  scrape  himself 
5.    5  the  hungry  eateth  up,  and  taketh  it  even 

12.  20  taketh  away  the  understanding  of  the  ag 


23- 
23- 
=3- 
26. 

36. 

Ezra   2. 
Keh.    s 

5- 


Esth. 


Job  38. 

40. 

41. 

42. 
Psa.  15. 

18. 

31- 

50. 

5i- 

78. 

109. 

Prov.  1. 

6. 

7- 

17- 


27. 
Isa.    6. 


Jer 


Eze 


20  That  thou  shouldest  take  it  to  the  bound 

24  He  taketh  it  with  his  eyes;  (his)  nose  pie. 

4  wilt  thou  take  him  for  a  servant  for  ever? 

8  take  unto  you  now  seven  bullocks  and  se. 

5  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  iunocent 
16  He  sent  from  above,  he  took  me,  he  drew 
13  while,  .they  devised  to  take  away  my  life 

9  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house 

1 1  Cast  me  not  away . .  take  not  thy  Holy  Sp. 
70  He  chose  David . .  and  took  him  from  the 

8  Let  his  days  be  few.  .let  another  take  his 

19  (which)  taketh  away  the  life  of  the  own. 

25  neither  let  her  take  thee  with  her  eyelids 

20  He  hath  taken  a  bag  of  money  with  him 
23  A  wicked  (man)  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the 
16  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  (for)  a  st. 
27  why  should  he  take  away  thy  bed  from 

13  Take  his  garment  that  is  surety  fora  stra. 

6  (which)  he  had  taken  with  the  tongs  from 

1  Take  thee  a  great  roll,  and  write  in  it  with 

2  the  people  shall  take  them,  and  bringth. 

16  Take  an  harp,  go  about  the  city,  thou  ha. 

19  the  time  that  it  goeth  forth  it  shall  take 

17  Until  Icome  and  take  you  away  to  aland 

7  thy  sons . .  shall  they  take  away ;  and  they 

14  taketh  the  cypress  aud  the  oak,  which  he 

15  he  will  take  thereof,  and  warm  himself 

2  Take  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal :  un. 

3  I  will  take  vengeance,  and  I  will  not  me. 
22 1  have  taken  out  of  thiue  hand  the  cup 

13  vanity  shall  take  (them) :  but  he  that  put. 
21 1  will  also  take  of  them  for  priests,  (and) 

14  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of 

4  Take  the  girdle  that  thou  hast  got,  which 

6  go  to  Euphrates,  and  take  the  girdle  from 

7  took  the  girdle  from  the  place  where  I  had 

15  take  me  not  away  in  thy  long  suffering 

2  Thou  shalt  uot  take  thee  a  wife,  neither 

5  which  shall  spoil  them,  and  take  them   . 

10  and  we  shall  take  our  revenge  on  him     ' 

9  I  willjsend  and  take  all  the  families  of  the 
15  Take  "the  wine  cup  of  this  fury  at  my  na 

17  Then  took  I  the  cup  at  the  Lord's  hand 
28  if  they  refuse  to  take  the  cup  at  thiue  ha 

20  NebuchadDezzarkingof  Babylon  took  nut 
3>Tebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon  took  aw. 

10  the  prophet  took  the  yoke  from  off  tnepi 

6  Take  ye  wives,  and  beget  sons  and  dau. 
6  take  wives  for  your  sons,  and  give  your 

11  I  tooktheevidenceof  the  purchase,  (botn) 
14  Take  these  evidences,  this  evidence  of  the 
26  I  will  not  take  (any)  of  his  seed  (to  be)  ru. 

3  I  took  Joazaniah  the  son  of  Jeremiah,  the 
2  Take  thee  a  roll  of  a  book,  and  write  th. 

14  Take  in  thine  hand  the  roll  wherein  thou 
.  14  So  Baruch.  took  the  roll  in  his  hand 

21  he  took  it  outof  Elishamathescribes  ch. 
26  to  take  Baruch  the  scribe,  and  Jeremiah 

28  Take  thee  again  another  roll,  and  write 

.  32  Then  took  Jeremiah  another  roll,  andga. 
.  17  Then  Zedekiah  the  king  sent,  and  took 
6  Then  took  they  Jeremiah,  and  cast  him 

10  Take  from  hence  thirty  men  with  thee 

11  Ebed  melechtook  the  men  with  him, and 

11  took  thence  old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten 
14  the  king  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah  the  pr. 

S  when  they  had  taken  him,  they  brought 

12  Take  him,  and  look  well  to  him,  and  do 
14  they  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah  out  of  the 

1  when  he  had  taken  him,  being  bound  in 

2  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Jeremiah 
12  they  took  all  the  men,  and  went  to  fight 

.  16  Thentook  Johanau  the  sonof  Kareah,  and 
5  the  captains  of  the  forces,  took  all  there. 
9  Take  great  stones  in  thine  hand,  and  hide 
io  I  will  send  and  take  Nebuchadrezzar  the 
12  I  will  take  the  remnant  of  Judah,  that  ha. 
.  11  take  balm,  O  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Eg. 

29  their  flocks  shall  they  take  away :  they 

5  take  balm  for  her  pain,  if  so  be  she  may 
26  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  stone  for  a 

18  all  the  vessels  of  brass,  .took  they  away 

19  silver   took  the  captain  of  the  guard  aw. 

24  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Seraiah  the 

25  He  took  also  out  of  the  city  an  eunuch 

26  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  them,  and 
14  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  took  me  aw. 

1  son  of  man.  take  thee  a  tile,  and  lay  it  be. 

3  take  thou  unto  thee  an  iron  pan,  and  set 
9  Take  thou  also  unto  thee  wheat,  and  ba.1 
1  take  thee  a  sharp  knife,  take  thee  a  bar. 

1  take  thee  balances  to  weigh,  and  divide 

2  thou  shalt  take  a  third  part,  (and)  smite 

3  Thou  shalt  also  take  thereof  a  few  in  mi. 

4  take  of  them  again,  and  cast  them  into  the 
3  put  forth  the  form  of  an  hand,  and  took 

6  Take  fire  from  between  the  wheels,  from 

7  clothed  with  linen ;  who  took  (it),  and  we. 
3  or  will  (men)  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any 

h6  of  thy  garments  thou  didst  take,  and  de. 
17  Thou  hast  also  taken  thy  fair  jewels  of 
iS  tookest  thy  broidered  garments,  and  cov. 

20  thou  hast  taken  thy  sons  and  thy  daugh. 
32  (which)  taketh  strangers  instead  of  her 
39  shall  take  thy  fair  jewels,  and  leave  thee 

3  and  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar 

5  He  took  also  of  the  seed  of  the  land,  and 

12  hath  taken  the  king  thereof,  and  the  pri. 

13  And  hath  taken  of  the  king's  seed,  and 
13  he  hath  also  taken  the  mighty  of  the  land 

22  I  will  also'take  of  the  highest  branch  of 
S  neither  hath  taken  any  increase,  (that) 


TAKE 


TAKE 


Eze.  18.  13  given  forth  upon  usury,  and  hath  taken 

19.  5  she  took  another  of  her  whelps,  (and)  ma. 
22.  12  taken  gifts  to  shed  blood;  thou  hast  tak. 
22.  12  thou  hast  taken  usury  and  increase,  and 
22.  16  thou  shalt  take  thine  inheritance  in  thy 

22.  25  they  have  taken  the  treasure  and  precious 

23.  10  they  took  her  sous  and  her  daughters,  and 
23.  25  they  shall  take  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters 
23.  26  They  shall  also .  .take  away  thy  fan-  jew. 

23.  29  shall  take  away  all  thy  labour,  and  shall 

24.  5  Take  the  choice  of  the  flock,  and  bum  also 
24.  16  I  take  away  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine 
24.  25  the  day  when  I  take  from  them  their  str. 
27.    5  they  have  taken  cedars  from  Lebanon  to 

30.  4  they  shall  take  away  her  multitude,  and 
33.   2  if  the  people  of  the  laud  take  a  man  of  th. 
33.    4  whosoever  heareth  . .  and  taketh  not  war. 
33.    4  if  the  sword  come  and  take  him  away 
33.    6  if  the  sword  come  and  take  (any)  person 
36. 24  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  heathen 
37.  16  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write  upon  it,  For 
37.  16  take  another  stick,  and  write  upon  it,  For 
37.  19  I  will  take  the  stick  of  Joseph,  which  (is) 
37.  21  I  will  take  the  children  of  Israel  from  am. 
38. 13  silver  and  gold,  to  take  away  cattle  and 
43.  20  thou  shalt  take  of  the  blood  thereof,  and 

43.  21  Thou  shalt  take  the  bullock  also  of  the 

44.  22  Neither  shall  they  take  for  their  wives  a 

44.  22  they  shall  take  maidens  of  the  seed  of  the 
45. 18  thou  shalt  take  a  young  bullock  without  bl. 

45.  19  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the 

46.  18  the  prince  shall  not  take  of  the  people's 
Hos.    1.    2  take  unto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms  and 

1.  3  he  went  and  took  Gomer  the  daughter  of  I 

2.  9  take  away  my  corn  in  the  time  thereof 
4. 11  and.  wine  and  new  wiue  take  away  the  he. 

11.    3  I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them 

13.  11  I  gave  thee  a  king. .and  took  (him)  away 

14.  2  Take  with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the  L. 
Joel  3.  5  ye  have  taken  my  silver  and  my  gold,  and 
Amos  5.  11  and  ye  take  from  him  burdens  of  wheat 

5.  12  they  take  a  bribe,  and  they  turn  aside  the 

6.  13  Have  we  not  takento  us  horns  by  our  own 

7.  15  the  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock 
9.  2  into  hell,  thence  shall  minehand  take  th. 
9.    3  I  will  search  and  take  them  out  thence 

Jon.  4.  3  take,  I  beseech  thee,  my  life  from  me,  for 
Mic.  2.  9  from  their  children  have  ye  taken  away 
Hag.  2. 23  In  that  day .  .will  I  take  thee,  O  Zerubb. 
Zech.  6. 10  Take  of  (them  of)  the  captivity,  (even)  of 
6.  11  take  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns,  and 

11.  7  I  took  unto  me  two  staves;  the  one  I  cal. 
11, 10  I  took  my  staff,  (even)  Beauty,  and  cut  it 
11. 13  I  took  the  thirty  (pieces)  of  silver,  and  ca. 

1 1. 15  Take  unto  thee  yet  the  instruments  of  a 

14.  21  they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take  of 

21.  To  feel,  touch,  cno  mush,  5. 

Exod  13.  22  He  took  not  away  the  pillar  of  the  cloud 
25. To  lift  ujj,  lay  on,  Sus  natal* 

Isa.   40.  15  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing 
26.7b  remove,  lift  up,  Jp3  nasag. 

Mic.    2.   6  not  prophesy .  .(that)  they  shall  not  take 
21  .To  (cause  to)  remove,  pw  nesaq,  5. 

Dan.    3.  22  slew  those  men  that  took  up  Shadraeh 
6.  23  they  should  take  Daniel  up  out  of  the  den 

28.  To  take  away,  spoil,  V?3  natsal,  5. 

Gen.  31.    9  God  hath  taken  away  the  cattle  of  your  fa. 

31. 16  the  riches  which  God  hath  taken  from  our 

29.  To  lift  up,  Mjpj  nasa* 

Gen.  27.   3  take,  I  pray  thee,  thy  weapons,  thy  quiver 
43.  34  he  took  (and  sent)  messes  unto  them  from 
Exodio.  19  wind,  which  took  away  the  locusts,  and 

12.  34  the  people  took  their  dough  before  it  was 

20.  7  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 

20.  7  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his 
30. 12  When  thou takest  the  sum  of  the  children 

Num.  1.    2  Take  ye  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation 
e.  49  neither  take  the  sum  of  them  among  the 

3.  40  Number  all  the  first  born  . .  and  take  the 

4.  2  Take  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  Kohath  from 
4.  22  Take  also  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  Gershon 

16.  15  I  have  not  taken  one  ass  from  them,  net 

23.  7,  18  And  he  took  up  his  parable,  and  said 

24.  3, 15,  20,  21, 23  took  up  his  parable,  and  said 
26.    2  Take  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation  of 

31.  26  Take  the  sum  of  the  prey  that  was  taken 
31.  49  Thy  servants  have  taken  the  sum  of  the 

Deut.  5.  11  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 

5. 11  will  not  hold  (him)  guiltless  that  taketh 

12.  26  thy  vows,  thou  shalt  take,  and  go  unto 
Josh.  3.   6  Take  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  pass 

3.  6  they  took upthe ark  of  the  covenant,  and 

4.  3  Take  you  hence  out  of  the  midst  of  Jord. 
4.  8  took  up  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of 
6.   6  Take  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  let 

6. 12  and  the  priests  took  up  the  ark  of  the  L. 
Judg.  9. 48  cut  down  a  bough . .  and  took  it,  and  laid 

16.  31  came  down,  and  took  him,  and  brought 

21.  23  took  (them)  wives,  according  to  their  nu. 
Ruth  1.   4  they  took  them  wives  of  the  women  of  IT. 

2. 18  she  took  (it)  up,  and  went  into  the  city 

1  Sa.  17.  20  took,  and  went,  as  Jesse  had  commanded 

17.  34  there  came  a  lion  and  a  bear,  and  took  a 

2  Sa.   2.  32  they  took  up  Asahel,  and  buried  him  in 

4.   4  his  nurse  took  him  up,  and  fled :  and  it  e. 
23.  16  and  took  (it)  and  brought  (it)  to  David 
1  Ki.   8.    3  the  elders . .  came,  and  the  priests  took  up 

13.  29  the  prophet  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  man 

15.  22  and  they  took  away  the  stones  of  Kamah 


2  Ki.  2.  16  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  taken  him  up 
4.  20  when  he  had  taken  him,  and  brought  him 
4.  36  when  she  was  come  in.  .he  said,  Take  up 

4.  37  bowed  herself  to  the  ground,  and  took  up 
9.  25  Take  up,  (and)  cast  him  in  the  portion  of 
9.  26  take(and)cast  him  into  the plat(of  ground) 

1  Ch.io.   9  they  took  his  head,  and  his  armour,  and 

10.12  took  awaythebodyof  Saul,  and  the  bodies 
11.  18  and  took  (it),  and  brought  (it)  to  David 
21.  24  I  will  not  take  (that)  which  is  thine  for  the 

23.  22  their  brethren  the  sons  of  Kish  took  them 
27.  23  David  took  not  the  number  of  them  from 

2  Ch.  5.    4  the  elders . .  came ;  and  the  Levites  took  up 

11.  21  he  took  eighteen  wives,  and  threescore  co. 

24.  3  Jehoiada  took  for  him  two  wives ;  aud  he 
24. 11  came  and  emptied  the  chest,  and  took  it 

Ezra  9.    2  they  have  taken  of  their  daughters  for  th. 
9.  12  neither  take  their  daughters  unto  your  so. 
10.  44  All  these  had  taken  strange  wives :  and 
Neh.   2.    1  I  took  up  the  wine,  and  gave  (it)  unto  the 

13.  25  nor  take  their  daughters  unto  your  sons 
Job   13.  T4  Wherefore  do  I  take  my  flesh  in  my  teeth 

21.  12  They  take  the  timbrel  and  harp,  and  rej. 
24. 10  and  they  take  away  the  sheaf  (from)  the 

31.  36  Surely  I  would  take  it  upou  my  shoulder 

32.  22  (so  doing)  my  Maker  would  soon  take  me 
Psa.  15.    3  nor  taketh  up  a  reproach  against  his  nei. 

16.  4  nor  take  up  their  names  into  my  lips 

50.  16  (that)  thou  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in 

81.    2  Take  a  psalm,  and  bring  hither  the  timb. 

n6. 13  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call 

139.   9  (If)  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  (and) 

139.  20  (and)  thine  enemies  take  (thy  name)  in  vain 

Eccl.  5. 15  shall  take  nothing  of  his  labour,  which  he 

5. 19  to  take  his  portion,  aud  to  rejoice  in  his 

Song   5.    7  the  keepersof  the  walls  took  away  my  veil 

Isa.     8.   4  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be  taken  away 

14.  4  thou  shalt  take  up  this  proverb  against 

38.  21  Let  them  take  a  lump  of  figs,  and  lay  (it) 
40.  24  the  whirlwind  shall  take  them  away  as  st. 
64.   6  and  our  iniquities,  .have  taken  us  away 

Jer.     7.  29  and  take  up  a  lamentation  on  high  places 

9.  10  For  the  mountains  will  I  take  up  a  weep. 

9.  18  let  them  make  haste,  and  take  up  a  wail. 

49.  29  they  shall  take  to  themselves  their  cur. 

Lam.  5.  13  They  took  the  young  men  to  grind,  and 

Eze.    3.  12  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  I  heard  behind 

10.  7  took  (thereof),  and  put  (it)  into  the  hands 

11.  24  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me  in 

19.  1  take  thou  up  a  lamentation  for  theprin. 
26. 17  they  shall  take  up  a  lamentation  for  thee 
27.    2  son  of  mau,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  T. 

27.  32  they  shall  take  up  a  lamentation  forthee 

28.  12  take  up  a  lamentation  upon  the  king  of 
29. 19  and  he  shall  take  her  multitude,  and 

32.  2  take  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh  king 

39.  10  they  shall  take  no  wood  out  of  the  field 
43.   5  the  spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me 

Dan.    1.  16  Melzar  took  away  the  portion  of  their  ni. 
Hos.    i.   6  no  more  have  mercy.  .1  will  utterly  take 

5.  14  I  will  take  away,  and  none  shall  rescue 
14.   2  Take  away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  (us) 

Amos  5.    1  Hear  ye  this  word  which  I  take  up  agai. 

6.  10  a  man's  uncle  shall  take  him  up,  and  he 
Jon.    1. 12  Take  me  up,  and  cast  me  forth  into  the 

1.  15  they  took  up  Jonah,  and  cast  him  forth 
Mic.    2.    2  they  covet . .  houses,  and  take  (them)  away 

2.  4  In  that  day  shall  (one)  take  up  a  parable 
Hab.  2.  6  Shall  not  all  these  take  up  a  parable  aga. 
Mai.    2.    3  and  (one)  shall  take  you  away  with  it 

30.  To  be  lifted  up,  N'^3  nasa,  2. 

Dan.  11.  12  when  he  hath  taken  away  the  multitude 

31.  To  lift  2(2?,  toyi  nasa,  3. 

Amos  4.   2  he  will  take  you  away  with  hooks,  and 

32.  To  lift  up,  n'y;  nesa. 

Ezra   5.  15  Take  these  vessels,  go,  carry  them  into 
33.7V)  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  iv}  nasag,  5. 
Psa.    7.    5  Letthe  enemy  persecutemy  soul,  and  ta. 

Si.  To  (cause  to)  turn  aside,  take  away,  -ad  sur,  5. 
Exod.  8.    8  Entreat  the  Lord,  that  he  may  take  away 
to.  17  that  he  may  take  away  from  me  this  de. 
23.  25  I  will  take  sickness  away  from  the  midst 

33.  23  I  will  take  away  minehand,  and  thoush. 
Lev.    3.   4,  10,  15  with  the  kidneys,  it  shall  he  take 

4.  9  with  the  kidneys,  it  shall  he  take  away 
4-  311  35  he  shall  take  away  all  the  fat  thereof 

7.  4  with  the  kidneys,  it  shall  he  take  away 
Nuni2i.   7  pray  unto  the  Lord,  that  he  takeaway  the 
Deut.  7. 15  the  Lord  will  take  away  from  thee  all  si. 
Josh    7.  13  until  ye  take  away  the  cursed  thing  from 
iSa.  17.  26  and  taketh  away  the  reproach  from  Israel 

17.  46  I  mil  smite  thee,  and  take  thine  head  fr. 
2  Sa.    5.    6  Except  thou  take  away  the  blind  and  the 

7. 15  as  I  took  (it)  from  Saul,  whom  I  put  away 

1  Ki.  2.  31  that  thou  mayest  take  away  the  innocent 

20.  24  Take  the  kings  away,  every  man  out  of  his 
20.  41  he  hasted,  and  took  the  ashes  away  from 

2  Ki.  6.  32  son  of  a  murderer  hath  sent  to  take  away 

18.  22  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  taken  away 
23. 19  Josiah  took  away,  and  did  to  them  accor. 

1  Ch.17. 13  and  I  will  not  take  my  mercy  away  from 

17. 13  as  I  took  (it)  from  (him)  that  was  before 

2  Ch.14.    3  he  took  away  the  altars  of  the  strange  (go.) 

14.  5  he  took  away  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Judah 
17.  6  he  took  away  the  high  places  and  groves 
30.  14  took  away  the  altars  that  (were)  in  Jerus. 

30. 14  the  altars  for  incense  tookthey  away,  and 
32.  12  Hath  not  the  same  Hezekiah  taken  away 

33. 15  he  took  away  the  strange  gods,  and  the 


2  Ch.34.  33  Josiah  took  away  all  the  abominations  oui 
Esth.  3.  10  the  king  took  his  ring  from  his  hand,  and 

4.  4  and  to  take  away  his  sackcloth  from  him 
Job     9.  34  Let  him  take  his  rod  awayfrom  me,  and 

12.  24  He  taketh  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of 
19.   9  stripped  me  of  my  glory,  and  taken  the 
27.    2  (As)  God  liveth,  (who)  hath  taken  away 
34.    5  and  God  hath  taken  away  my  judgment 
Isa.   1.  25  purge  away  thy  dross,  and  take  away  all 

3.  1  the  Lord  of  hosts,  doth  take  away  from 
3. 18  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  bravery  of 

5.  5  I  will  take  away  the  hedge  thereof,  and  it 

5.  23  take  away  the  righteousness  of  the  righte. 
18.  5  and  take  away  (and)  cut  down  the  branches 
25.  8  the  rebuke  of  his  people  shall  he  take  aw. 
27.  9  and  this  (is)  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  his 
36.  7  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  taken  away 
58.   9  If  thou  take  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 

Jer.     4.    4  take  away  the  foreskins  of  your  heart,  ye 

5. 10  take  away  her  battlements  ;  for  they  (are) 

Eze  "11.  18  they  shall  take  away  all  the  detestable  th. 

11. 19  I  will  take  the  stony  heart  out  of  their  fle. 

16.  50  therefore  I  took  them  away  as  I  saw  (good) 

23.  25  they  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine 

36.  26  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of 

Dan.  xi.  31  shall  take  away  the  daily  (sacrifice),  and 

Hos.    2.  17  I  will  take  away  the  names  of  Baalim  out 

Amos  5.  23  Take  thou  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy 

Zeph.  3.  11 1  will  take  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee 

3. 15  The  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy  judgments 

Zech.  3.   4  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him 

9.    7  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mo. 

35. To  (cause  to)  move,  persuade,  remove,  masuth,5. 

Job  36.  18  (beware)  lest  he  take  thee  away  with  (his) 

36.7b  cause  to  go  or  pass  over,  *ujj  abar,  5. 

2  Sa.  24.  10  take  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant ;  for 

1  Ki.  15.  12  he  took  away  the  sodomites  out  of  the 

2  Ch.35.  24  His  servants  therefore  took  him  out  ofth. 
Esth  8.  2  his  ring,  which  he  had  taken  from  Hainan 
Job     7.  2i  why  dost  thou  not.  .take  away  mine  iniq. 

37.7b  cause  to  pass  away,  rnjJ  adah,  5. 

Prov25.  20  (As)  he  that  taketh  away  a  garment  in  cold 

38.7b  cause  to  pass  away  or  on,  tt\]}_  adah,  5. 
Dan.   5.  20  was  deposed,  .and  they 'took  his  glory  fr. 
7.  26  they  shall  take  away  his  dominion,  to  co. 

39.  7b  go  up,  rh%  alah. 

Amos  3.    5  shall  (one)  take  up  a  snare  from  the  earth 

40.  To  cause  to  go  up,  nby,  alah,  5. 

1  Sa.    1.  24  she  took  him  up  with  her,  with  three  bu. 

2  Ki.  2.  1  when  the  Lord  would  take  up  Elijah  into 
Psa.  102.  24  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  days 
Jer.  38.  13  drew  up  Jeremiah,  .and  took  him  up  out 
Hab.    1.  15  They  take  up  all  of  them  with  the  angle 

41.7b  do,  make,  njfjj  asah. 

Judg  11.  36  the  Lord  hath  taken  vengeance  for  thee 
Isa.   30.    1  that  take  counsel,  but  notof  me ;  and  that 

42.  To  hunt,  fat  tsud. 

Gen.  27.   3  and  take  me  (some)  venison 

43.  7b  accept,  take,  receive,  "?3i7  aabal,  3. 

Esth.  9.  27  The  Jews  ordained,  and  took  upon  them 

44.  To  accept,  take,  receive,  *??j?  qebal,  3. 

Dan.    5.31  Darius  the  Median  took  the  kingdom,  (be) 
7.  18  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  shall  take  the 

45.7b  gather,  bring  together,  collect,  ym  qabats,  3. 

Isa.   13. 14  and  as  a  sheep  that  no  man  taketh  up 
46.7b  cause  to  draw  near,  3"ij3  qarab,  5. 

Exod  28.    1  take  thou  unto  thee  Aaron  thy  brother 
47.7b  take  down,  cause  to  come  down,  nyi  radah. 

Judg  14.   9  he  took  thereof  in  his  hands,  and  went 
14.   9  that  he  had  taken  the  honey  out  of  the 

48. 7b  cause  to  be  high,  lift  up),  on  rum,  5. 

Lev.    2.   9  the  priest  shall  take  from  the  meat  offer. 

4.  19  shall  take  all  his  fat  from  him,  and  burn 

6.  10  take  up  the  ashes  which  the  fire  hath  co. 
6.  15  he  shall  take  of  it  Iris  handful,  of  the  flour 

Num  16.  37  that  he  take  up  the  censers  out  of  the  bu. 
Josh.  4.    5  take  you  up  every  man  of  you  a  stone  up. 

1  Sa.   g.  24  the  cook  took  up  the  shoulder,  and  (that) 

2  Ki.   2.  13  He  took  up  also  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that 

6.    7  Therefore  said  he,  Take  (it)  up  to  thee 
Eze.  45.    9  take  away  your  exactions  from  my  people 
Isa.   57.  14  take  up  the  stumbling  block  out  of  the 
49.  To  take  captive,  capture,  n^p  shabah. 

Num  21.  1  he  fought  against  Israel,  and  took  (some) 
Deut 21.  10  enemies,  .and  thou  hast  taken  them  cap. 

1  Ch.  5.  21  they  took  away  their  cattle ;  of  their  ca. 

50.. 4  captive,  captivity,  "7V  shehL 

Amos  4.  10  have  taken  away  your  horses ;  and  I  have 
51.70  cease,  rest,  keep  sabbath,  ret?  shabath,  5. 

2  Ki.  23. 1 1  he  took  away  the  horses  that  the  kings  of 
52.  To  set,  place,  put,  c*^,  me>  sum,  sim. 

Judg.  4. 2i  Heber's  wife . .  took  an  hammer  in  her  hand 
53.7b  set,  place,  put,  riT  shith. 

Psa.  13.   2  How  long  shall  I  take  counsel  in  my  soul 

54. 7b  be  at  rest,  safe,  nSu>  slialah. 

Job  27.    8  what  (is)  the  hope.,  when  God  taketh  aw. 

55. 7b  catch,  capture,  keep  hold,  handle,  b-sn  faphas, 

Num  31.  27  between  them  that  took  the  war  upon  th. 

Deut.  9.  17  I  took  the  two  tables,  and  cast  them  out 

20.  19  When  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city.. to  take  - 


TAKE 


958 


TAKE 


Josh.  8.    8  it  shall  be,  when  ye  have  taken  the  city 

8.  23  the  king  of  Ai  they  took  alive,  and  brought 

1  Sa.  15.    8  he  took  Agag  the  king  of  the  Amalekites 

23.  25  compassed,  .his  men  round  about  to  take 

1  Ki.  18.  40  Take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one  of 

18.  40  they  took  them ;  and  Elijah  brought  them 
20. 18  Whether  they  be.  .for  peace,  take  them 
20.  18  whether  they  be.  .for  war,  take  them  al. 

2  Ki.  10.  14  he  said,  Take  them  alive.  And  they  took 

14.    7  took  Selah  by  war,  and  called  the  name 
14.  13  Jehoash  king  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king 
16.    9  wentupagainst  Damascus,andtookit,and 
18.  13  did  Seuuaolierib .  .come  up.  .and  took  th. 
25.    6  they  took  the  king,  and  brought  him  up  to 

■2  Ch.25.  23  the  kiug  of  Israel  took  Amaziah  king  of  J. 

Psa.  71.  1 1  persecute  aud  take  him  ;  for  (there  is)  no. 

Prov  30.    9  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take  the  na. 

Isa.   36.    1  defeneed  cities  of  Judah,  and  took  them 

Jer.  26.    8  the  people  took  him,  saying,  Thou  shalt 
37.  13  took  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  saying,  Thou 
37.  14  Irijah  took  Jeremiah,  and  brought  him  to 
40.  10  dwell  in  your  cities  that  ye  have  taken 
52.    9  they  took  the  king,aud  carried  him  upun, 

Eze.  14.    5  That  I  may  take  the  house  of  Israel  in  th. 
56.ro  lift  or  take  up  or  away,  atpou  aird. 

Matt.  9.  6  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thine 
g.  16  that  which  is  put  in . .  taketh  from  the  ga. 
n.  29  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 
14.  12  his  disciples  came,  and  took  up  the  body 

14.  20  they  took  up  of  the  fragments  that  rema. 

15.  37  they  took  up  of  the  broken  (meat)  that 

16.  24  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cr. 

17.  27  cast  an  hook,  and  take  up  the  fish  that  fl. 
20. 14  Take  (that)  thine  (is),  and  go  thy  way ;  I 
22. 13  [take  him  away],  and  cast  (him)  into  outer 
24.  17  Let  him.  .not  come  down  to  take  any  th. 
24.  18  Neither  let  him.  .return  back  to  take  his 

24.  39  until  the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all 

25.  28  Take  therefore  the  talent  from  him,  and 
Mark  2.   9  or  to  say,  Arise,  and  take  up  thy  bed,  and 

2.  n  Arise,  aud  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  thy  w. 
2. 12  he  arose,  took  up  the  bed,  and  went  forth 
2.  21  the  new  piece . .  taketh  away  from  the  old 

4.  15  taketh  away  the  word  that  was  sown  in 
6.   8  they  should  take  nothing  for  (their)  jour. 
6.  29  they  came  aud  took  up  his  corpse,  v.  30. 
6.43  they  took  up  twelve  baskets  full  of  the  fr. 
8.    8  they  took  up  of  the  broken  (meat)  that 
8, 19,  20  How  many  baskets  full.,  took  ye  up? 

8.  34  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cr. 

10.  21  and  come,  [take  up  the  cross],  and  follow 
13.  15  neither  enter  (therein),  to  take  anything 
13.  16  not  turn  back  again  for  to  take  up 'his  ga. 

15.  24  casting  lots.,  what  every  man  should  take 

16.  18  [They  shall  take  up  serpents ;  and  if  they] 
Luke  5.  24  Arise,  and  take  up  thy  couch,  aud  go  un. 

5.  25  he  rose  up  before  them,  and  took  up  that 

6.  29  him  that  taketh  away  thy  cloak  forbid  not 
6.  30  of  him  that  taketh  away  thy  goods  ask 

8. 12  taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts 

9.  3  Take  nothing  for  (your)  journey,  neither 
9.  23  [let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  a] 

11.  22  he  taketh  from  him  all  his  armour  wherein 
11.  52  ye  have  taken  away  the  keyof  knowledge 

17.  31  let  him  not  come  down  to  take  it  away 
19.  21  thou  takest  up  that  thou  layedst  not  do. 
19.  22  taking  up  that  I  laid  not  down,  aud  reap. 
19.  24  Take  from  him  the  pound,  and  give  (it)  to 

22.  36  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him  take  (it),  and 
John  1.  29  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the 

2. 16  Take  these  things  hence  ;  make  not  my 
5.    8  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Rise,  take  up  thy 
5.   9  the  man  was  made  whole,  and  took  up  his 
5.  11  the  same  said  unto  me,  Take  up  thy  bed 

5.  12  What  man  is  that  which  said.. Take  up 
8.  59  Then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  him 

10.  18  No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  itdo. 
ix.  39  Jesus  said,  Take  ye  away  the  stone. 

11.  41  fcheytook  away  the  stone  (from  the  place) 
11.  48  the  Romans  shall  come  and  take  away  bo. 

15.  2  that  beareth  uot  fruit  he  taketh  away 

16.  22  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you 

17.  15  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest  take  them 
19.  3S  besought  Pilate  that  he  might  take  away 

19.  38  He  came  therefore,  and  took  the  body  of 

20.  2  They  have  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of 
20.  13  they  have  taken  away  my  lord,  and  I  kn 
20. 15  tell  me  where.,  and  I  will  take  him  away 

Acts  21. 11  he  took  Paul's  girdle,  and  bound  hiso\i  ii 
27.  17  Which  when  they  had  taken  up,  they  us. 

1  Co.  6.  15  shall  I  then  take  the  members  of  Christ 
Col.     2. 14  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  cr. 
i  Jo.   3.    5  he  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins 
Rev.  i3.  21  a  mighty  angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a  gr. 

57.  To  lead  up  or  back,  hvdyw  anagd. 

Luke  4.  5  the  devil,  taking  him  up  into  an  high  mo. 
53.  To  take  up  or  off,  ai/cuptw  anaireo. 

Acts    7.  21  Pharaoh's  daughter  took  him  up,  and  no. 

Heb.  10.  9  He  taketh  away  the  first,  that  he  may  es. 
59. To  take  or  receive  up  or  back,  hvaXajx^dva. 

Acts    7. 43  ye  took  up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch,  and 

23.  31  took  Paul,  aud  brought  (him)  by  night  to 
i'.ph.   6.  13  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God 

6.  16  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  ye 

2  a.  4.  11  Take  Mark,  aud  bring  him  with  thee :  for 
60.Tolcad  away  or  off,  airdya  apago. 

Acts  24.  7  [with  great  violence  took  (him)  away  out] 
61.ro  take  away  or  off,  a<paipea>  apliaireO. 

Luke  1.  2S  to  take  away  my  reproach  among  men 


Lukei6.    3  my  lord  taketh  away  from  me  the  stewa. 
Rom. xi.  27  this  (is)  my  covenant,  .when  I  shall  take 
Heb.  io.    4  (it  is)  not  possible  that  the  blood,  .take 
Rev.  22.  19  if  any  man  shall  take  away  from  the  wo. 
22.  19  God  shall  take  away  his  part  out  of  the 

62. To  bear  up,  take  up,  carry  away,  ^curra^to  bos, 

John  10.  31  Then  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to  st. 
63.  To  receive,  Bexofiai  dechomai. 

Luke  2.  28  Then  took  he  him  upjin  his  arms,  and  bles. 
16.   6,  7  he  said  unto  him,  Take  thy  bill,  and 
22.  17  be  took  the  cup  and  gave  tha.  Eph.  6. 17. 
64*.  To  give,  SiSwfit  dddomi,  2  Th.  1.  8. 
64.ro  grasp  in  or  with  the  fist,  8pda<ro{Aai  drasso. 

1  Co.  3.  19  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness 
65. To  lift  or  raise  up,  iyeipw  egeiro. 

Acts  10.  26  Peter  took  him)up,  saying,  Stand  up;  I  m. 

66.  To  takeholdupon,€iri\afxfidvofj.ai  epilambanomai . 
Luke  9.  47  And  Jesus,  .took  a  child,  and  set  him  by 

14.  4  he  took  (him),  and  healed  him,  and  let  him 
Acts  9.  27  Barnabas  took  him,  and  brought  (him)  to 
17. 19  they  took  him,  and  brought  him  unto  A.r. 
18.  17  the  Greeks  took  Sosthenes,  the  chief  rul. 
21.  30  they  took  Paul,  and  drew  him  out  of  the 

21.  33  the  chief  captain  came  near,  and  tookhim 

67.  To  bear  upon  or  against,  iirttpspot  epiphero. 
Rom.  3.    5  (Is)  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  vengea. 

68. To  take  doion,  apprehend,  KaraXa/x^dyai. 
Mark  9.  18  wheresoever  he  taketh  him,  he  teareth 

69, To  hold  dovm,  nar4x^  katecho. 

Lukei4.    9  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest 
70.  To  lay  or  keep  hold,  Kpareaj  krateo. 

Matt 22.  6  the  remnant  took  his  servants,  and  entr. 
26.  4  consulted  that  they  might  take  Jesus  by 
26.  50  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus,  and  took  him 

Mark  9.  27  Jesus  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  lifted 
14.    1  the  scribes  sought  how  they  might  take 
14.  44  that  same  is  he;  take  him,  aud  lead  (him) 
14.  46  they  laid  their  hands  on  him,  aud  tookhim 
14.  49  I  was  daily  with  you.  .and  ye  took  me  not 

Acts  24.    6  whom  we  took/and  would  have  judged  ac. 

Rev.  10.  10  I  took  the  little  book  out  of  the  angel'sha. 
11. 17  thou  hast  taken  to  thee  thy  great  power 

22.  17  whosoever  will,  let  hini  take  the  water  of 
71.7V?  take,  receive,  XanfSdyco  lamband. 

Matt.  5. 40  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  (thy)  cl. 
8.  17  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare 
10.  38  [he  that  taketh]  not  his  cross,  and  follow. 
13.  31  which  a  man  took,  and  sowed  in  his  field 

13.  33  which  a  woman  took  andhid  in  three  me. 

14.  19  took  the  five  loaves,  and  the  two  fishes 

15.  26  It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread 

15.  36  he  took  the  seven  loaves  and  the  fishes 

16.  5  disciples,  .they  had  forgotten  to  take  br. 
16.    7  saying,  (It  is)  because  we  have  taken  no 

16.  9,  10  and  how  many  baskets  ye  took  up  ? 

17.  25  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take 
17.  27  that  take,  and  give  unto  them  for  me  and 

21.  35  the  husbandmen  took  his  servants,  and 

22.  15  took  counsel  how  they  might  entangle 
25.    1  ten  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps,  and 
25.    3  took  their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  with 

25.  4  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  th. 

26.  26  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  (it),  and  b. 
26.  26  gave  (it)  to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take 
26.  27  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  g. 

26.  52  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with 

27.  1  elders  of  the  people  took  counsel  against 
27.    6  the  chief  priests  took  the  silver  pieces 
27.    7  they  took  counsel,  and  bought  with  them 
27.   9  they  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  the 
27.  24  he  took  water,  and  washed  (his)  hands 
27.  30  they  spit  upon  him,  and  took  the  reed 
27.  48  one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a  sponge,  and 

27.  59  when  Joseph  had  taken  the  body,  he  wr. 
28. 12  when  they  were  assembled,  .and  had  taken 

28.  15  they  took  the  money,  and  did  as  they  w. 
Mark  6.  41  when  he  had  taken  the  five  loaves  and  the 

7.  27  it  is  not  meet  to  take  the  childrens's  bread 

8.  6  he  took  the  seven  loaves,  and  gave  thanks 

5.  14  (the  disciples)  had  forgotten  to  take  bread 

9.  36  he  took  a  child,  and  set  him  in  the  midst 
12.  8  they  took  him,  and  killed  (hh«).  and  cast 
12.  19  that  his  brother  should  take  his  wife,  and 
12.  20  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  dying  left  no  s. 

12.  21  the  second  took  her,  and  died,  neither 
14.  22  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  aud  brake 
14.  22  gave  to  them,  aud  said,  Take,  eat;  this 
14.  23  he  took  the  cup,  and  when  he  had  given 

Luke  5.   5  toiled  all  the  night,  and  have  taken  not. 

6.  4  [did  take]  and  eat  the  shewbread,  and  g. 
9.  16  he  took  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes 
9.  39  a  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he  suddenly  cri. 

13.  19  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took 
13.  21  It  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman  took  aud 
20.  28  his  brother  should  take  his  wife,  and  raise 
20.  29  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  died  without  ch. 
20.  30  [the  second  took  her  to  wife,  and  he  died] 
20.  31  the  third  took  her  :  and  in  like  manner 
22.  17  and  said.  Take  this  and  divide  it  among 
22.  19  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake 
24.  30  he  took  bread,  and  blessed  (it),  and  brake 
24.  43  Aud  he  took  (it),  and  did  eat  before  them 

John  6.  7  that  every  one  of  them  may  take  a  little 
6.  11  Jesus  took  the  loaves  ;  and  when  he  had 
zo.  17  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it 


John  10.  18  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again 

12.    3  Then  took  Mary  a  pound  of  ointment  of 

12.  13  Took  branches  of  palm  trees,  and  went 

13.  4  laid  aside  his  garments,  and  took  a  towel 

13.  12  he  had  washed  their  feet,  and  had  taken 
16. 15  he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  show  (it) 

18.  31  Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to 

19.  1  Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus,  and  scourged 
19.   6  Take  ye  him,  and  crucify  (him):  for  I  find 
19. 23  took  his  garments,  and  made  four  pails 
19.  27  from  that  hour  tnat  disciple  took  her  unto 
19.  40  Then  took  they  the  body  of  Jesus,  and 
21.  13  Jesus  then  cometh,  and  taketh  bread,  and 

Acts    1.  20  and,  His  bishopric  let  another  take 

1.  25  That  he  may  take  part  of  this  ministry  and 

2.  23  Him.  .[ye  have  taken]  and  by  wicked  hands 
9.  25  the  disciples  took  him  by  night,  and  let 

15.  14  to  take  out  of  them  apeople  forhis  name 

16.  3  took  and  circumcised  him  because  of  the 

17.  9  when  they  had  taken  security  of  Jason 
27*  35  ne  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks  to  God 
28.  15  saw,  he  thanked  God,  and  took  courage 

Rom.  7.   8,  11  sin,  taking  occasion  by  the  command. 

1  Co.io.  13  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but 

11.  23  the  Lord  Jesus  the  (same)night.  .took  b. 

11.  24  [Take]  eat :  this  is  my  body,  which  is  br. 

2  Co.  11.    8  I  robbed  other  churches,  taking  wages 

ix.  20  if  a  man  devour  (you),  if  a  man  take  (of 
Phil.  2.    7  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and 
Heb.   5.    1  every  high  priest  taken  from  among  men 
5.    4  no  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself 
9.  19  he  took  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  goats 
Jas.     5.  10  Take,  my  brethren,  the  prophets,  who 

3  John     7  they  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of  the  G. 
Rev.   3.  11  hold  that  fast,  .that  no  man  take  thy  cr. 

5.    7  he  came  and  took  the  book  out  of  the  ri. 
5.    8  when  he  had  taken  the  book,  the  four  be 

5.  9  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  t 

6.  4  (power)  was  given  to  him . .  to  take  peace 

8.  5  the  angel  took  the  censer,  and  filled  it 
10.    8  take  the  little  book  which  is  opeu  in  the 
10.    9  he  said  unto  me,  Take  (it),  and  eat  it  up 

72.  To  take  along  with,  /xcraXa/x$dycc  metalawbano. 

Acts  27.  33  Paul  besought,  .all  to  take  meat,  saying 

IZ.Tolake  alongside  of ',irapaXafi&dywparalambano. 

Matt  2.  13,  20  Arise,  and  take  the  young  child  and  his 

2. 14,  21  took  the  young  child  and  his  mother 

4.    5  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy  city 

4.  8  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding 

12.  45  Then  goeth  he,  and  taketh  with  himself 
17.    1  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James,  and  John  hia 
iS.  16  if  he  will  not  hear  (thee,  then)  take  with 
20. 17  Jesus  going  up  to  Jerusalem  took  the  tw. 
27.  27  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  Jesus 

Mark  4.  36  they  took  him  even  as  he  was  in  the  ship 

5.  40  he  taketh  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the 

9.  2  Jesus  taketh  (with  him)  Peter,  and  James 

10.  32  he  took  again  the  twelve,  and  began  to 

14.  33  he  taketh  with  him  Peter  and  James  and 
Luke  9.  10  he  took  them,  and  went  aside  privately 

9.  28  he  took  Peter  and  John  and  James,  and 

11.  26  Then  goeth  he,  and  taketh  (to  him)  seven 
iS.  31  Then  he  took  (unto  him)  the  twelve,  and 

Johnig.  16  [And  they  took  Jesus,  and  led  (him)  aw.] 
Acts  15.  39  Barnabas  took  Mark,  and  sailed  unto  Cy. 
16.  33  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night 
21.  24  Then  take,  and  purify  thyself  with  thern 
21.26  Then  Paul  took  the  men,  and  the  next  day 
21.  32  Who  immediately  [took]  soldiers  and  ce. 
23.  18  he  took  him,  and  brought  (him)  to  the  ch. 

74.  To  bear  alongside  of,  trapa<p4pw  paraphero. 
Marki4.  36  take  away  tins  cup  from  me:  nevertheless 

75.  To  take  away  round  about,  ■n-eptaipeco periaireo. 
Acts  27.  40  when  they  had  taken  up  the  anchors,  th. 
Heb.  10.  11  sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  away  si. 

76.  To  press,  take  or  lay  hold,  7udfa  piazo. 

John  7.  30  they  sought  to  take  him :  but  no  man  laid 

7. 32  the  chief  priests  seut  officers  to  take  him, 

7. 44  some  of  them  would  have  taken  him  ;  but 

10. 39  they  sought  again  to  take  him :  but  he  es. 

11.  57  he  should  show  (it),  that  they  might  take 

Acts  3.    7  he  took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  lifted 

77.7*o  do,  make,  Troi4w  poieo. 

Mark  3.   6  [took]  counsel  with  the  Herodians  against 

78.  To  receive  besides,  irpoao'exofxai  prosdec/wmat. 
Heb.  10.  34  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goods 

79.  To  take  besides,  irpoaXafx^dyu  proslambano. 
Matt  16.  22  Peter  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke  him 
Mark  8.  32  Peter  took  him,  and  began  to  rebuke  him 
Acts  27.  33  continued  fasting,  having  taken  nothing 

27.  34  I  pray  you  [to  take]  (some) meat;  for  this 
27.  36  all  of  good  cheer,  and  they  also  took  (so) 

80.  To  take  together,  o-vXXafifSdvic  sulambano. 
Matt  26.  55  I  sat  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  temp. 
Marki4.  48  with  swords  and  (with)  staves  to  take  me '1 
Luke  5.    9  draught  of  the  fishes  which  they  had  tak. 

22.  54  Then  took  they  him,  and  led  (him),  and 
John  1 8.  1 2  officers  of  the  Jews  took  Jesus,  and  bound 
Acts    1.  16  which  was  guide  to  them  that  took  Jesus 

12.    3  he  proceeded  further  to  take  Peter  alsu 

81.  To  take  together,  <rvvalp&  sunairo. 

Matt  18.  23  which  would  take  account  of  his  servants 
[See  also  Accusation,  advice,  ashes,  captive,care,  counsel, 
courage,  crafty,  delight,  ease,  fill,  hand,  handful,  heed, 
hold,  hold  on,  hold  upon,  indignation,  inheritance, 
journey,  knowledge,  much,  notice,  oath,  oversight,  part. 


TAKE 


959 


TAKEN 


pity,  pleasure,  pledge,  possessions,  provision,  record, 
rest,  route,  spoil,  straightway,  sweet,  tenth,  thought, 
ties,  throat,  vengeance,  violence,  witness,  wrong.] 

TAKE  away  as  with  a  whirlwind,  to  — 
To  whirl  or  be  whirled  away,  i$r  soar. 

Psa.  58.    9  he  shall  take  them  away  as  with,  a  whirl. 
TAKE  away  (violently,  by  violence),  to  quite  — 
1.2*0  take  violently  away,  rob,  plunder,  Sja  gazed. 

Gen.  21.  25Abimelech'sservantshadviolentlytakena. 

Lev.     6.    4  restore  that  which  he  took  violently  aw. 

Deut23.  31  thine  ass  (shall  be)  violently  taken  away 

Job   20.  19  he  hath  violently  taken  away  an  house  wh. 
24.   2  they  violently  take  away  flocks,  and  feed 

Mie.    2.    2  they  covet  fields,  and  take  (them)  by  vio. 

l.To  complete,  finish,  remove,  r6s  kalah,  3. 

Kumi7.  10  thou  shalt  quite  take  away  their  niurniu. 
TAKE  aside,  back,  to  — 

1.  To  stretch  out,  cause  to  turn  aside,  nc:  natah,  5. 
2  Sa.   3.  27  Joab  took  him  aside  in  the  gate,  to  speak 

2.  To  cause  to  turn  back,  2V&  shub,  5. 

2  Sa.  15.  20  return  thou,  and  take  back  thy  brethren 
3.7*0  take  of  or  away,  airo\afj.$dvco  apolambano. 

Mark  7.  33  he  tookMniasidefroin  the  multitude,  and 
TAKE  before  or  by,  to  — 

l.To  take  hold  on,  4iri\a/j.^dvo/j.ai  epilambanomai. 
Mark  8.  23  he  took  the  blind  man  by  the  hand,  and 
Acts  23.  :g  the  chief  captain  took  him  by  the  hand 
Heb.    8.   9  when  I  took  them  by  the  hand  to  lead  th. 

2.  To  lay  fast  hold  on,  Kpareco  krateo. 

Matt.  9.  25  he  went  iu,  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  and 

Mark  1.  31  he  came  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  li. 

5.  41  he  took  the  damsel  by  the  hand,  and  said 

Luke  S.  54  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  called,  saying 

3.  To  take  before,  irpoXafifidvoj  prolambano. 

1  Co. 11.  21  every  one  taketh  before  (other)  his  own 
TAKE  by  force,  to  — 
1.2*0  take  violently  away,  ?]3  gazal. 

Gen.  31.  31  thou  wouldest  take  by  force  thy  daughters 

2.  To  snatch  away,  ap-rrdfa  harpazd. 

Matt  xi.  12  kingdom  of  heaven.,  violent  take  it  by  fo. 
John  6.  15  they  would  come  and  take  him  by  force 
Acts  23.  10  to  take  him  by  force  from  among  them  • 

TAKE  down,  for,  forth,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  go  down,  ~n;  yarad,  5. 

Gen.  44.  11  they  speedilytookdowneverymanhissa, 

Isum.  1.  51  the  tabernacle.  .Levites  shall  take  it  do. 

4.    5  they  shall  take  down  the  covering  veil,  and 

Josh.  8.  29  that  they  should  take  his  carcase  down  fr. 

fo.  27  they  took  them  down  of  the  trees,  and  ca. 

1  Sa.   6. 15  the  Levites  took  down  the  ark  of  the  Lo. 

2  Ki.  16. 17  took  down  the  sea  from  off  the  brasen  oxen 

2.7*0  cause  to  go  out  or  forth,  «>•;  yatsa,  5. 

Jer.  15. 19  if  thou  take  forth  the  precious  from  the 

3.  To  cause  to  go  forth,  p?3  nephaq,  5. 

Ezra  6.   5  Nebuchadnezzar  took  forth  out  of  the  te. 
4.2*0  hold,  have,  €X<*>  echo. 

Matt  21.  46  because  they  took  him  for  a  prophet 
5. To  take  down,  na6atp€to  kathaireo. 

Mai'ki5.  36  whether  Elias  willcome  to  take  him  down 
15.  46  took  him  down,  and  wrapped  him  in  the 

Luke23.  53  he  took  it  down,  and  wrapped  it  in  linen 

Acts  13.  29  they  took  (hini)  down  from  the  tree,  and 

TAKE  heed  (to),  to  — 
l.To  be  warned,  in?  zehar. 

Ezra    4.  22  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this 
2.  To  see,  look,  perceive,  0AeVu  blepo. 

Matt  24.    4  said  unto  them,  Take  heed  that  no  man  d. 

Mark.  4.  24  Take  heed  what  ye  hear:  with  what  mea. 

13.    5  began  to  say,  Take  heed  lest  any  (man)de. 

13.   9  take  heed  to  yourselves:  for  they  shall  de. 

13.  23  Take  ye  heed;  behold,  I  have  foretold  you 

J3.  33  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and prayiforyeknow 

Luke  3.  18  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear:  for  wh. 

21.    8  Takeheedthat  ye  be  not  deceived:  forma. 

1  Co.  3. 10  let  every  man  take  heed  how  he  buildeth 

8.   9  take  heed,  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty 

10. 12  let  him  that  thinkethhe  standeth  take  h. 

Gal.    5. 13  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of 

Col.     4.  17  Take  heed  to  the  ministry  whieh  thou  hast 

Heb.   3. 12  Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any 

3.2*o  hold  on  or  upon,  imejgtD  epecJw. 

1  Ti.   4. 16  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the  do. 

4.  To  see,  look,  take  heed,  bpdea  horao. 

Matt  16.    6  Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
iS.  10  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  the. 
Mark  8.  15  Take  heed,  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  P. 
Lukei2. 15  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness 
Acts  22.  26  [Take  heed]  what  thou  doest;  for  this  man 

6.  To  hold  toward,  7rpo<r4xt*i  prosecho. 

Matt.  6.    1  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  alms  before 
Lukei7.    3  Take  heed  to  yourselves:  If  thy  brother 

21.  34  take  heed  to  yourselves,  lest  at  any  time 
-A-"3    5-  35  Ye  men  of  Israel,  take  heed  to  yourselves 

20.  28  Take  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves,  and 

2  Pe.  1.  19  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed,  as  unto  a  li. 

6.2*0  look  at,  view,  observe,  <tkoit€q>  skopeo. 

Luken.  35  Take  heed  therefore  that  the  light  which 


TAKE  hold  (of,  on,  upon),  to  — 
1.2*0  lay  or  keep  hold,  inx  achaz. 

Gen.  25.  26  his  hand  tookhold  on  Esau's  heel ;  and  Ins 
Esodis.  14  sorrow  shall  take  hold  on  the  inhabitants 
15.  15  trembling  shall  take  hold  upon  them;  all 
Deut.32.  41  and  mine  hand  take  hold  on  judgment 
2  Sa.    4. 10  I  took  hold  of  him,  and  slew  hini  in  Zikl. 
6.    6  Uzzah  put  forth  (his  hand) . .  and  took  ho.  of 
Job  21.   6  and  trembling  taketh  hold  on  my  flesh 
30.  16  the  days  of  affliction  have  taken  hold  upon 
38.  13  That  it  might  take  hold  of  the  ends  of  the 
Psa.  48.    6  Fear  took  hold  upon  them  there,  (and)  p. 
119.  53  Horror  hath  taken  hold  upon  nie  because 
Eccl.  7. 18  (It  is)  good  that  thou  shouldest  take  hold  o. 
Song.  7.    8  I  will  take  hold  of  the  boughs  thereof 
Isa.   13.   8  sorrows  shall  take  hold  of  them  ;  they 
21.   3  pangs  have  taken  hold  upon  me,  as  the 

2. To  cause  to  lay  or  keep  hold.,  pin  chazaq,  5. 

2  Sa.    1.  11  David  took  hold  on  his  clothes,  and  rent 
13. 11  he  took  hold  of  her,  and  said  uutoher,  C. 

1  Ki.  9.    9  have  taken  hold  upon  other  gods,  and 

2  Ki.  2.  12  he  took  hold  of  his  own  clothes,  and  rent 
Psa.  35.  2  Take  hold  of  shield  and  buckler,  and  stand 
Isa.    4.    1  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man 

27.    5  let  him  take  hold  of  my  strength,  (that) 
56.   4  that  please  me,  and  take  hold  of  my  cov. 
56.    6  every  one  that . .  taketh  hold  of  my  cove. 
64.    7  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of 
Jer.    6.  24  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  (and)  pain 
8.  21  astonishment  hath  taken  hold  on  me 
50.  43  anguish  took  hold  of  him,  (and)  pangs  as 
Zech.  S.  23  ten  men  shall  take  hold  out  of  all  langu. 
8.  23  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is 
S.ToJind,  nxe  matsa. 

Psa. 119. 143  Trouble  and  anguish  have  taken  hold  on 
4.2*0  remove,  :pj  nasag,  5. 

Mic.  6. 14  thou  shalt  take  hold,  but  shalt  not  deliver 
5.2*o  cause  to  reach,  attain,  overtake,  yJi  nasag,  5. 
Job  27.  20  Terrors  take  hold  on  it  as  waters,  a  temp. 
Psa.  40.  12  mine  iniquities  have  taken  hold  upon  me 
69.  24  let  thy  wrathful  anger  take  hold  of  them 
Prov.  2.  19  neither  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  life 
Zech.  1.   6  did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fathers? 

6.T0  accept,  take,  *7ap  qabal,  5. 

Exocb6.    5  the  loops  may  take  hold  one  of  another 

7. To  hold,  uphold,  retain,  Tji^n  tamoik. 

Job  36. 17  judgment  and  justice  take  hold  (on  thee) 
Prov.  5.   5  down  to  death  ;  her  steps  take  hold  on 

S.2*o  catch,  capture,  keep  hold,  iyzy  taphas. 

Isa.     3.    6  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  his  brother,  of 
Eze.  29.    7  they  took  hold  of  thee  by  thy  hand,  thou 

9.2*0  catch,  capture,  keep  hold,  ban  taphas,  3. 
Prov.30.  28  The  spider  taketh  hold  with  her  hands 

10.2*0  take  hold  of,  iiriAa/j.0dvo/*aL  epilamha,nomai. 
Luke2o.  20  that  they  might  take  hold  of  his  words 
20.  26  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  words  be. 

TAKE  in,  into,  to  — 

1.2*0  cause  to  go  or  come  in,  sia  bo,  5. 

Judg  12.    9  took  in  thirty  daughters  from  abroad  for 
2.2*0  gather,  f]px  asaph,  3. 

Judg  19. 15  (there  was)  no  man  that  took  them  into 
3.2*0  take  up,  ava\at±fSdvw  analarnbano. 

Acts  20.  13  sailed  unto  As.,  there  intending  to  take  in 
20. 14  when  he  met  with  us  at  As.,  we  took  him  in 

4.  2*o  lead  up,  awdyco  sunago. 

Matt  25.  35  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in 
25.  38  "When  saw  we  thee,  .and  took  (thee)  in 
25. 43  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in 

TAKE  leave  of,  to  — 

1.2*0  arrange  off,  awoTdo'aop.at  apotassomai. 

Acts  i8.  18  took  hisjeave  of  the  brethren,  aud  sailed 
2  Co.  2. 13  taking  my  leave  of  them,  I  went  from  th. 

2.2*0  draw  together,  embrace,  salute,  ao-7rd(op.ai. 

Acts  21.    6  when  [we  had  taken  our  leave  one  of]  ano. 
TAKE  off,  from,  on,  out,  to  — 
1.2*0  come  or  bring  forth,  drazv  up,  n%  rjH  guach. 

Psa.  22.    9  thou  (art)  he  that  took  me  out  of  the  wo. 
2.2*0  cause  to  go  out  or  forth,  ttfi  yatsa,  5. 

Esod.  4.   6  when  he  took  it  out,  behold,  his  hand 

3.2*0  cause  to  go  or  come  forth,  p?i  nephaq,  5. 
Ezra   5.  14  which  Nebuchadnezzar  took  out  of  the  t. 
5.  14  those  did  Cyrus  the  king  take  out  of  the 
Dan.   5.    2  Nebuchadnezzar  had  taken  out  of  the  te. 

4. 2*0  cause  to  turn  aside,  "VD  sur,  5. 

Gen.  41.  42  Pharaoh  took  off  his  ring  from  his  hand 
Exodi4.  25  took  off  their  chariot  wheels,  that  they 
34.  34  he  took  the  veil  off,  until  he  came  out 
Lev.    3.   9  it  shall  he  take  off  hard  by  the  back  bone 
2  Sa.  16.    9  let  me  go  over,  .and  take  off  his  head 
Esth.  8.    2  And  the  king  took  off  his  ring,  which  he 

5,2*0  cause  to  go  high,  en  rum,  5. 

Lev.    4.    8  he  shall  take  off  from  it  all  the  fat  of  the 

Eze.  21.  26  Hemove  the  diadem,  and  take  off  the  cr. 
6. To  cause  to  turn  back,  T*v  shub,  5. 

Eze.  18.  17  (That)  hath  taken  off  his  hand  from  the 
7.2*0  cast  out  or  forth,  eVjSaAAco  ekballo. 

Lukeio.  35  he  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  (them) 


5.  To  2nd  off,  unclothe,  itcSvw  ekduo. 

Ma«27.  31  they  took  the  robe  off  from  him,  and  put 
Marki5.  20  they  took  off  the  purple  from  him,  and 

9.2*0  take  on  or  ujjon,  4iri\a^.^dvofiai  epilambano. 

Heb.   2.  16  he  took  not  on  (him  the  nature  of)  angeU 
2. 16  but  he  took  on  (him)  the  seed  of  Abraham 
TAKE  patiently,  rest,  ship,  shipping,  to  — 
1.2*0  lie  doion,  22%}  shakab. 

Eccl.    2.  23  yea,  his  heart  takethnot  rest  in  the  night 

Job    11. 18  (and)  thou  shalt  take  thy  rest  in  safety 
30. 17  bones  are  pierced,  .my sinews  takenorest 
2.2*0  go  in  unto,  eppatveo  eh  embaino  eis, 

Matti5.  39  hesentawaythemultitude,and[took]sh. 

John  6.  24  they  also  took  shipping,  and  came  to  Ca. 

3.2*0  qo  up  into,  eiri&aivo}  eis  epibaino  eis. 

Acts  21.    6  [we  took]  ship ;  and  they  leturned  home 
4.2*0  remain  under,  sustain,  uTro^ueV&j  hupomeno. 
1  Pe.    2.  20  when  ye  be  buffeted . .  ye  shall  take  it  pati. 
2.  20  if,  when  ye  do  well,  .ye  take  it  patiently 
TAKE  unto,  upon,  with,  to,  self  to — 
l.To  begin,  be  pleased,  desirous,  Vn;  yaal,  2. 

Gen.  18.  27,  31  I  have  taken  it  upon  me  to  speak  unto 
2.2*0  take  in  or  on  hand,  eVi^'pew  epicheireo. 

Acts  19. 13  took  upon  them  to  call  over  them  which 

Z.Totake  alongside  of ,  irapaha}xf$dvw  ptaralambano. 

Matt.  1.  20  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife 

1.  24  Then  Joseph,  .took  unto  him  his  wife 

26.  37  he  took  with  hini  Peter  and  the  two  sons 

4.2*0  take  besides,  Trpoa\afj.$dvfo  2M'oslambano. 
Acts  17.    5  took  unto  them  certain  lewd  fellows  of 
18.  26  they  took  him  unto  (them),  and  expoun. 

5.2*0  take  along  with,  avfxirapa\afx^dvca  sumparal. 

Acts  12.  25  took  with  them  John,  whose  sur  Gal.  2. 1. 

15.  37  Barnabas  determined  to  take  with  them 

15.  3S  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with 

6.  To  tak;  receive,  Xafj.^dvo>,  Phil.  2.  7;  Ke.  1 1.  17. 
TAKE  in  hand,  to  — 

2*o  take  on  or  in  hand,  i-Kix^ipea}  epicheireo. 

Luke  1.    1  many  have  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in 
TAKE  up  one's  carriage  — 
2*0  take  up  one's  goods,  airoffKevd^ofxat. 

Acts  21. 15  after  those  days  [we  took  up  our  carriages] 

TAKEN  (away,  from,  off,  up),  to  be  — 
1.2*0  be  taken  hold  of,  inx  acliaz,  2. 

Eccl.  9. 12  as  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net 
2.2*0  be  gathered,  qpx  asaph,  2. 

Isa.   16.  10  gladness  is  taken  away,  and  joy  out  of  the 

"57.    1  merciful  men  (are)  taken  away,  none  co. 

57.    1  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evil 

Jer.  48.  33  gladness  is  taken  from  the  plentiful  field 

Hos.    4.   3  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be  taken  away 

3.2*0  be  taken  violently  away,  *?]3  gazal,  2. 

Prov.  4. 16  their  sleep  is  taken  away,  unless  they  ca. 

4.  To  be  withdrawn,  diminished,  jna  gara,  2. 

Nuni36.  3  then  shall  their  inheritance  be  taken  fr. 
36.  3  so  shall  it  be  taken  from  the  lot  of  our  in. 
36.    4  so  shall  their  inheritance  be  taken  away 

5.  To  be  captured,  caught,  *i?^  lakad,  2. 

Josh.  7. 15  he  that  is  taken  with  the  accursed  thing 
6.2*0  he  taken,  received,  accepted,  np7  laqach,  2. 

1  Sa.  4.  11  the  ark  of  God  was  taken  ;  and  the  two 

4. 17  sons,  .are  dead,  and  the  ark  of  God  is  ta. 
4. 19  the  tidings  that  the  ark  of  God  was  taken 
4.  21  because  the  ark  of  God  was  taken,  and  bee. 
4.  22  glory  isdeparted.  .the  ark  of  Godistaken 
21.    6  bread  in  the  day  when  it  was  taken  away 

2  Ki.   2.   9  Ask  what  I  shall  do.  .before  I  be  taken f. 
Esth.  2.  16  Esther  was  taken  unto  king  Ahasuerus 
Eze.  33.   6  he  is  taken  away  in  his  iniquity  but  bis 

7.2*0  be  taken,  received,  accepted,  npS  laqach,  4. 
Gen.    2.  23  Woman,  because  she  wastakenoutof  man 
3. 19  the  ground ;  for  out  of  it  wast  thou  taken. 
3.  23  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  he  was  ta. 
Judgi7.    2  (shekels)  of  silver  thatweretakenfronith. 
2  Ki.    2. 10  if  thou  see  me  (when  I  am)  taken  from 
Isa.   52.    5  that  my  people  is  taken  away  for  nought  ? 
53.    8  He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  jud. 
Jer.  29.  22  of  them  shall  be  taken  up  a  curse  by  all 
48. 46  thy  sons  are  taken  captives,  and  thy  dau. 

8.2*0  be  taken,  received,  accepted,  rp?  laqach,  6. 

Gen.  12.  15  the  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's  ho. 

Job    28.    2  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  brass 

Isa.  49.  24  Shall  the  prey  be  taken  from  the  mighty 
49.  25  the  captives  of  the  mighty  shall  betaken  a. 

Eze.  15.  3  Shall  wood  be  taken  thereof  to  do  any  w.  ? 
9.2*0  be  taken  up,  pp?  nesaq,  6. 

Dan.  6.  23  So  Daniel  was  taken  up  out  of  the  den 

lO.2*o0e  snatched  or  taken  away,  hsi  natsat,  2. 

Amos  3. 12  so  shall  the  children  of  Israel  be  taken  a. 
11.2*0  be  given,  jra  nathan,  6. 

2  Sa.  iS.  9  he  was  taken  up  between  the  heaven  and 
12.7*0  turn  aside,  be  turned  aside,  "I'D  sur. 

Exod25. 15  The  staves.,  they  shall  not  be  taken  from 

1  Ki.22.  43  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away,  (for) 

2  Ki.  14.    4  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away;  as 
2  Ch.  15.  17  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away  out 


TAKEN 

i  Sh'2?'  33  K1?  h'sh. places  wele  not  taken  away;  for 
Isa.     6.    7  thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin 
10.  27  lus  burden  shall  be  taken  away  from  off 
13.  To  be  turned  aside,  ~i9D  sur   6. 

1  Sa.  21.  6  shewbread,  that  was  taken  from  before 
Isa.  17.  1  Damascus  is  taken  away  from  (being)  a 
m.  12.  n  the  daily  (sacrifice)  shall  be  taken  away 


960 


1  i.  To  be  gone  up,  rhv,  alah,  2. 

Exod  40.  36  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  over  the  ta. 

40.  37  But  if  the  cloud  were  not  taken  up,  then 

4°-  37  they  journeyed  not  till . .  it  was  taken  up 

Num.  9.  17  when  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  the  ta. 

9.  21  (that)  the  cloud  was  taken  up  in  the  mo. 

9.  21  or  by  night  that  the  cloud  was  taken  up 

9.  22  but  when  it  was  taken  up,  they  journeyed 

10.  11  that  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  off  the 

Eze.  30.   3  and  ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers 

15.  To  cause  to  go  high,  nn  ram,  5  or  6. 

Dan.    8.  1 1  by  him  the  daily  (sacrifice)  was  taken  away 
IS.To  be  caused  to  go  high,  on  rum,  6. 

Lev.    4. 10  As  it  was  taken  off  from' the  bullock  of 
17.ro  be  caught,  captured,  'csn  tajjhas   2 

Num.  5.  13  (there  be)  no  witness,  .neither  she  be  ta. 
Psa.  10.  2  let  them  be  taken  in  the  devices  that  they 
Jei.  34.    3  shalt  surely  be  taken,  and  delivered  into 

33.  23  shalt  be  taken  by  the  hand  of  the  king 
hze.  12.  13  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  snare:  and  I  will 
17.  20  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  snare ;  and  I  will 
19.  4  he  was  taken  in  their  pit,  and  they  brou. 
19-  8  spread  their  net  over  him  ;  he  was  taken 
2 1.  23  to  remembrance . .  that  they  may  be  taken 
21.  24  (I  say),  .ye  shall  be  taken  with  the  hand 
18.  To  lift  up,  aipw  airo. 

Matt  13. 12  from  him  shall  be  taken  away  even  that 
21.  43  rhe  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 
urari/5'  29  6h'1"   '?  ta  ke"  »™y  even  that  which  he 
Mark  4.  25  from  him  shall  be  taken  even  that  which 
Luke  8.  18  from  him  shall  be  taken  even  that  which 

™    'I  tw'i  "'f  &k<Ln  ,up  of  figments  that  re. 

19.  26  that  he  hath  shall  be  taken  away  from 
Juhnij.  3:  and  (that)  they  might  be  taken  away 

let*  2?    '  le-et '  Vle  stone  takeu  away  f™  the  sep 

Acts    8.  33  his  judgment  was  taken  away :  and  who 

8.  33  for  his  life  is  taken  from  the  earth 

20.  9  from  the  third  loft,  and  was  taken  up  d. 

^.Totakcuptakeagain,kuaXau0^aa,uil(tnibau,\ 

Acts    1.   2  Until  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  un 

1.  11  this  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from 

1.  22  that  same  day  that  he  was  taken  up  from 

20.3b  be  taken  off  or  away,  «*aip0/xal  apairomai. 

m£*  9-  I5  e  ]"'■'  OS™0™  sha11  be  taken  from  them 
tSv.  2°  %e  ,r!deS™om  shall  be  taken  away  from 
Luke  5.  35  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away  from 

21  .To  take  off  or  away,  a<paip4o>  aphaireo. 

LukeIO,  42  which  shall  not  be  taken  away  from  her 

22.ro  take  out  or  forth,  4£aipu  exairo 

1  Co.   5.    2  that  he . .  [might  be  taken  away]  from  amo. 

23.  To  lift  up,  tiraipu  epairo. 

Acts    1.    g  while  they  beheld,  he  was  taken  up-  and 

Mmf  f  rhv';,"fT 'W  *«™*<WB<fc«  katal. 

J  01m  8.    3  [hi  ought  unto  him  a  woman  taken  in  ad  1 

8.    4  [tins  woman  was  taken  in  adultery,  in  the] 

25.Totake  alongside,  Traoa\a^civa  paralambano. 

Matt  24.  40,  4,  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other 

Luke  17.  34,  35,  [36]  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other 
26.ro  take  round  about,  irepiatp^  periaireo. 

Acts  27.  20  all  hope .  .was  then  taken  away 

2  Co.   3.  16  T>  evertheless . .  the  veil  shall  be  taken  aw 
27.  To  use  jiressure,  take  liold  on,  Tn&Cu  piazo 

■Rev.  19.  20  the  beast  was  taken,  and  with  him  the  fa 
28.ro <take  together,  iruAAau^™  sullambano. 

Acts  23.  27  This  man  was  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  sh 

29.  With  a  view  to  capture,  eis  Swiv  eis  halosin. 
2  Fe.    2.  12  brute  beasts,  made  to  be  taken  and  des 

30.  Not  to  uncover,^  a^aAo,™  me  anakalupto. 
2  Co.    3.  ,4  remaiueth  the  same  veil  untaken  away 

31.  To  make  a  very  orphan,  airopQavi&uca  aporph. 

1  ill.  ..  ,7  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in 

32.  To  become,  ytvo/jiai  ginomai. 

2  Th.  2.    7  (will  let),  until  he  be  takeu  out  of  the  way 
33. To  hold  together,  o-vvix"  swnechS 

K'  *■  *t  «-Ck  p?opI.e.  t.hat  were  taken  with  divers 

Luke  4.  38  Simon's  wife  a  mother  was  taken  with  a 
8.  37  they  were  taken  with  great  fear    And  he 

TAKEN  away,  to  have 

To  cause  to  pass  on  or  by,  take  away,  few    xiv 

Dan.    7.  ,2  they  had  their  dominion  takenawar  yet 
TAKEN,  being  — 
Capture,  -fj?  leked. 

Prov.  3.  26  and  shall  keep  thy  foot  from  being  taken 
TAKEN  down,  out  of  (the  way),  to  be  — 

1.  To  be  cutised  to  go  down,  Tv  yarad,  6 
Num.10.  17  the  tabernacle  was  taken  down;  and  the 

2.  To  cause  to  go  forth,  psi  nephag,  5. 

fan.    5.    3  the  golden  vessels  that  were  taken  out  of 

3.  To  be  taken  down,  \Uf  tsaan. 
Isa.    33.  20  a  tabcrnacie(that)snall  not  be  taken  down 


TALKER 


i.  To  be  shut  up,  fsp  qaphats,  2. 

Job    24.  24  they  are  taken  out  of  the  way  as  all  (other) 
TAKEN,  (thing  that  was)  — 
l.To  withdraw,  diminish,  jna  gara 

Eccl.  3. 14  nothing,  .put  to  it,  nor  any  thing  taken 
2.Captive,  captivity,  '?»  shebi. 

Num.31.  26  the  sum  of  the  prey  that  was  taken    of 
TAKING  — 
1.7b  take,  receive,  npb  laqach. 

Hos.  11.  3  taking  them  by  their  arms 
2.  A  taking,  receiving,  n,?p  miqqach. 

2  Ch.  19.   7  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of  gifts 
A.  To  be  caught  captured,  handled,  i?$Q  ta2Aas,  2 
J  er.   50. 46  At  the  noise  of  the  taking  of  Babylon  the 
TALE  — 
l.A  meditation,  utterance,  run  hegeh. 

Psa.  90.   9  we  spend  GUI-year's  as  a.taie(thatistold) 
2.  Number,  narration,  1S0D  mispar 

1  Ch.  9.  28  they  should  bring  them  in  and  out  by  tale 
^.Measure,  proper  quantity,  n^pa  mathkoneth. 

Exod.  5.    8  the  tale  of  the  bricks,'  which  they  did  ma. 
4.  A  weight,  measure,  ph  token. 

Exod.  5. 18  no  straw.,  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  of  b 
TALE  bearer,— 

l.Talebearer,  whisperer,  busybody,  \<ra  nirqan 
Prov  18.    8  The  words  of  a  tale  bearer  (are)  as  wounds 
26.  20  where  (there  is)  no  tale  bearer,  the  strife 
26.  22  The  words  of  a-  tale  bearer  (are)  as  wounds 
2.Slanderer,  yyj  rakil. 

pfov  I9''6  lh°k  s?alt  ?£4  g0  up  and  (,own  W  a  t.  b. 
P10V20.  i9  He  that  goeth  about  (as)  a  tale  bearer  re 

3.To  go  a  slanderer,  Va-i  ^n  halak  rakil. 

Prov  11.  i3  A  talebearerrevealeth  secrets :  but  heth 
TALENT,  (weight  of  a)  — 
l.A  circuit,  cake,  talent,  13s  kikkar. 

iwod25.  39  (Of)  a  talent  of  pure  gold  shall  he  make  it 
37-  24  (Of)  a  talent  of  pure  gold  made  he  it,  and 
38.  24  twenty  and  nine  talents,  and  seven  hund 
38.  25  an  hundred  talents,  and  a  thousand  seven 
38.  27  of  the  hundred  talents  of  silver  were  cast 
38.  27  the  hundred  talents,  a  talent  for  a  socket 
,  Sa  ,  2g  i?  as?  ?f  lhe  offeri'ig  (was)  seventy  ta. 
2  Sa  12.  30  the  weight  whereof  (was)  a  talent  of  gold 

1  Kl.  9.  ,4  Hiram  sent  to  the  king  six  score  talents 
9-  28  gold,  four  hundred  and  twenty  talents 

10.  10  an  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold,  and 
jo.  14  six  hundred  threescore  and  six  talents  of 
16.  24  he  bought  the  hill,  .for  two  talents  of  sil. 
20.  39  or  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  talent  of  silver 

2  m.  5.    5  took  with  him  ten  talents  of  silver,  and 
5-  22  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  a  talent  of  silver 
5-  23  Naaman  said,  Be  content,  taketwotaleuts 
5-  23  he  urged  him,  and  bound  two  talents  of 

15. 19  Menahem  gave  Pul  a  thousand  talents  of 
18.  14  talents  of  silver,  and  thirty  talents  of  gold 

1  Ph  ™  33;  nwl\Undre,dAtalents  of  silver-  and  a  talent 
1  Ch.19.  6  children  of  Amnion  sent  a  thousand  tale 
20.  2  found  it  to  weighatalentof  gold,  and  (th' 
22. 14  an  hundred  thousand  talents  of  gold,  and 
22. 14  a  thousand  thousand  talents  ofsilver:  and 
29-  4  three  thousand  talents  of  gold,  of  the'gold 
29.  4  seven  thousand  talents  of  refined  silver  to 
29-  7  Ave  thousand  talents  and  ten  thousand  dr 
20.    7  and  of  silver  ten  thousand  talents,  and 

29.  7  of  brass  eighteen  thousand  talents 
-  r-i,  *9'   1 1      one  hundred  thousand  talents  of  iron 

I'   I  ♦     .  s.f  d'  (amounting)  to  six  hundred  tal. 

8.  18  took  thence  four  hundred  and  fifty  talents 
9-   oanhundredandtwentytalentsofgold  and 

9.  13  six  hundred  and  threescore  and  six  talents 
=5-  6  He  hired.. for  an  hundred  talents  of  silver 
25.  9  what  shall  we  do  for  the  huudred  talents 
27.   5  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  ten  th 

30.  3  an  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  a  talent 
Ezra  8.  26  six  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  silver,  and 
w„«,  ia,e.nts'  (and)  of  gold  an  huudred  talents 
7»S'  3'  9  }  wlILpS  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver 
/ecn.  5.    7  behold,  there  was  lifted  up  a  talent  of  I. 

2.A  circuit,  cake,  talent,  133  kikkar. 

Ezra  7.  22  Unto  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  to 
Z.  A  talent,  weight,  balance,  r&Xavrov  talanton. 

Matt  18.  24  one.. which  owed  him  ten  thousand  talents 

25. 15  unto  one  he  gave  Ave  talents,  to  another 

25. 16  Then  he  that  had  received  the  five  talents 
11'  It  ZTa  ;  and  ?iade  (them)  other  five  [talents] 
25-  20  And  so  he  that  had  received  five  talents 
II'  Tr,  l  n,,.\e  iV!d  ,)r°usht  other  Ave  [talents],  say. 
25.20  Lord,  thou  dehveredst  unto  me  five  tale 
11'  f  frilaie  »lain.e?  besides  them  five  talents 
l\'  II  ?orS Is°  tha*,h,ad  reoeived  'wo  talents  ca. 
25.  22  Lord,  thou  dehveredst  unto  me  two  tale. 
25.  22  I  have  gained  two  other  talents  besides 
25.  24  he  which  had  received  the  one  talent  ca 
2?  II  r",t^  afnd  hid  th*  talent  "1  the  eai-th 
ll'  ll  Jiv   ',  (;''K'  "rf-,he  talent  fr°m  him,  and 
25.  28  give  (it)  unto  him  which  hath  ten  talents 

4.  Weighing  a  talent,  raXavriaios  talantiaios. 

ta£s';  to  Sa^cSw  °- ' about  the  weighto£  a  ta,ent 

1.  Slanderer,  ^'3-1  rakil. 

Eze.  22.   9  In  thee  are  men  that  carry  tales  to  shed 


2.  Idle  or  trifling  talk,  Kf/pos  leros. 

Luke24.  u  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales 


TA-Lr-THA  CTj;-MI,  TaKl6d  Koi      y  „ 

TALK-''  4I         Uat° her'  T  ' ' "*""*"« 

1.  Word,  matter,  1^1  dabar. 
P?nv  '5'   3  fh°uld 'he  reason  with  unprofitable  talk 
Prov  14.  23  the  talk  of  the  lips  (tendeth)  only  to  pen 

2.  Mouth,  nspeh. 
Eccl.  10. 13  the  end  of  his  talk  (is)  mischievous  mad 

A.  Lip,  nsp  saphah. 

Job    11.    2  and  should  amanfull  of  talkbe  justified' 
4.  H  ord,  matter,  \6yos  logos. 

Matt22.  is  how  they  might  entangle  him  in  (uis)talk 
TALK  (with),  to  — 
l.To  say,  (lift  up  the  voice),  inx  amor. 

0-en.    4.    8  And  Cain  talked  with  Abel  his  brother 
2.  To  speak,   (lead  out  words),  -131  dahar_ 

^ech.  1.    9  the  angel  that  talked 'with  me  said  unto 

1.  13  the  Lord  answered  the  angel  that  talked 
i.  19  I  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked  with  me 

2.  3  the  ange  that  talked  with  me  went  forth 
4-    .  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  came  again 

4.  4  spake  to  the  angel  that  talked  with  me 
4-    5  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  answered 

5.  5  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth 

5.  ic  Then  said  I  to  the  angel  that  talked  with 

6.  4  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked  with  me 

3.  To  be  spoken,  speak  together,  -im  dabar   2 
ize.  33.  30  children  of  thy  peopIe'stiU  are  talking 

4.  To  speak,  IS?  dabar,  3. 
Gen.  17.    3  Abranifell  on  his  face:  and  God  talked  wi 

1 7.  22  he  left  off  talking  with  him,  and  God  went 

35- 13  God  went  up  from  him.  .where  he  talked 

35- 14  a  pillar  111  the  place  where  he  talked  with 

Fvort45'  '5  and  after  that  Ms  brethren  talked  with 

Lxod2o.  22  1e  haveseen  thatl  have  talked  with  you 

33-    9  s,t"t"Hat)thedoor..andtheLOKDtalkedw 

34.  29  skmof  Ins  face  shone  while  he  talked  witli 

N,,m34'3'  ?all?d lmto  them. .andMoses talked  witl, 

IW  "'  1?  ™Wl   C°m?  d,mvn  and  talk  with  thee  the 

Deut.  5.   4  The  Loed  talked  witli  you  face  to  face  in 

5.  24  haveseen  thisdaythat  God  doth  talk  with 

r„,i,  k'    7  shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou  sittest  in  th 

Judg.  6.  17  show  me  a  sign  that  thou  talkest  withnie 

,  <s„   U'    7  he  went  down  and  talked  with  the  woman 

1  sa.   2.    3  ialk  no  more  so  exceeding  proudly  let 

14-  19  "  came  to  pass.while  Saul  talked  unto  the 

17.  23  as  he  talked  with  them,  behold,  there  ca 

1  Ki.  1.  ,4  while  thou  yet  talkest  there  with  the  kin- 

,  Ki     I-  "  !hi'  SlKVVn'  talk:ed  with  the  kiuK.  Nathan 

2  Ki.  2.  11  as  they  stillwent  on, and  talked,  that,  be 
6.  33  while  he  yet  talked  with  them,  behold  the 
8.   4  the  king  talked  with  Gehazi,  the  servant 

,  rh  f.  '♦  not  with  us  in  the  Jews'  language  in 
2  Ch.25  ,6  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  talked  with  him,  th 
th  "4  while  they  (were)  yet  talking  with  him 

Job    13.    7\Vill  ye  speak  wickedly ..  and  talk  deceit 
Psa    37.  30  righteous    his  tongue  talketh  of  judgment 
145-  1.  They  shall  speak.. and  talk  of  thy  power 
Prov.24.    2  heart  studieth  destruction.  .Ups  talt  of 
Jer.   ,2.    ,, (yet)  let  me  talk  witl,  thee  of  (thy)  jud„ 

38.  =s  if  the  princes  hear  that  I  have  talked  with 

Eze.     3.  22  go  forth,  .and  I  will  there  talk  with  thee 

Dan.    9.  22  he  informed  (me),  andtalked  with  me  and 

10.  17  can  the  servant  of  this  my  lord  talk  witli 

o.To  meditate,  titter,  run  hagah. 

Psa.  71.  24  My  tongue'also  shaU  tahVof  tiiy  righteou. 
6.T0  member,  recount,  nsp  saphar,  3 

Psa.  69.  26  they  talk  to  the  grief  of  those  whom  thou 
l.To  bow  down,  meditate,  n't?  siach. 

1  Ch.  16.    9  sing  psalms  unto  him,  talk  ye  of  all  his 
Psa.  77.  12  meditate  also  of  all  thy  work  and  talk 
105.    2  sing  psalms  unto  him :  talk  ye  of  all  his 
1 19.  27  so  shall  I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works 
irov.  6.  22  (when)  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with 
8.  To  talk,  \a\4a  laleo. 

Mart'?'  46  w'u",  ye\, faJked  t0  the  people.  beh°l<! 
Mark  6.  50  he  talked  with  them,  andsaith  unto  them 
Luke24.  32  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way  ami 
.1 01m   4.  27  and  marvelled  that  he  talked  with  the  w,  1 
4.  27  yet  no  man  said.  .Why  talkest  thou  with 
9.  37  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh  with 
14-  3°I  will  not  talk  much  with  you:  for  the  pr 
Acts  26.  31  they  talked  between  themselves,  sayiu--  ' 
Kev.    4.    1  as  it  were  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  ml 
17.    1  talked  with  me,  saying  untome,  Come  hi 
21.   9  talked  with  me,  saying,  Come  hither,  I 
21.  15  he  that  talked  with  me  had  agolden  reed 
9.To  converse  with,  Sp.i\cw  homileo. 

Luke24.  M  they  talked  together  of  all  these  things 
Acts  20.  11  talked  a  long  while,  even  till  break  of  day 

10.  To  talk  together,  o-uXAaAe'o>  sullaleo. 
Matt  17.    3  there  appeared.  .Moses  and  Elias  talking 
Mark  9.    4  appeared . .  they  Mere  talking  with  Jesus' 
Luke  9.  30  there  talked  with  him  two  men,  which  we. 

11.  To  converse  together,  cvvouiKea  sunomileo. 
Acts    10.  27  as  he  talked  witli  him,  he  went  in,  and 

TALKER,  (vain)  — 
I.Tongue,  \^cb  lashon. 

Eze.  36.    3  ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers,  and 


TALKING 


961 


TARSUS 


2.A  vain  speaker,  fxaraioXSyos  mataiologos. 

Titus  i.  ro  there  are  many  unruly  and  vain  talker3 

TALKING,  (foolish)  —   ' 

\.A  word,  speech,  n?D  w/illah. 

Job   29.    9  The  princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid 
2. Meditation,  utterance,  \?y  siach. 

1  Ki.  18.  27  either  he  is  talking,  or  he  is  pursuing,  or 

3. Foolish  speaking,  p.a>po\oyia  morologia. 

Eph.  5.   4  Neither  filthiness,  nor  foolish  talking,  nor 

TALL,  taller  — 

1.  Height,  stature,  no\p  qomah. 

2  Ki.  19. 23  will  cut  down  the  tall  cedar  trees  thereof 
Isa.  37.  24  I  will  cut  down . .  tall  cedars  thereof,  (and) 

"2.  To  be  high,  on  rum. 

Deut.  1.  28  The  people  (is)  greater  and  tallerthan  we 
2.  10  a  people  great,  and  many,  and  tall,  as  the 
2.  21  A  people  great,  and  many,  and  tall,  as 
9.    =  A  people  great  and  tall,  the  children  of 

tat/ -MAT,  vp^n  bold,  spirited. 

1.  A  son  of  Anah,  in  Hebron,  in  the  days  of  Joshua. 
B.C.  1450. 

Numi3.  22  where  Ahiman,  Sheshai,  and  T.,  thechil. 
Josh  15.  14  Caleb  drove  thence.. Ahiman,  and  T.,  the 
Judg.  1. 10  they  slew  Sheshai,  and  Ahiman,  and  T. 

2.  A  king  of  Geshur,  father  of  Maacah  one  of  David's 
wives.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.   3.    3  Maacah  the  daughter  of  T  ,  king  of  Geshur 

13.  37  Absalom  fled,  and  went  to  T.,  the  son  of 

1  Ch.  3.    2  Maacah  the  daughter  of  T.  king  of  Geshur 

TAL'-MON,  I'lo'pa,  ]bbv  oppressor,  violent. 
A  Levite  in  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Ezra.    B.C.  536-445. 
1  Ch.  9.  17  the  porters  (were).  .T.,  and  Ahiman,  and 
Ezra   2.  42  children  of  T.,  the  children  of  Akknb 
Neh.    7.  45  children  of  T.,  the  children  of  Akkub 
it.  19  Akkub,  T.,  and  their  brethren  that  kept 
12.  25  T.,  Akkub .  .porters,  keeping  the  ward  at 

TA'-TffATt.    n.ppi  palm. 

l.Wife  of  Er  the  eldest  son  of  Judah,  and  mother  of 

Pharez  and  Zarah.     B.C.  1670. 

Gen.  36.   6  Judah tooka  wifeforEr.  .whosename.  .T. 
38.  11  Then  said  Judah  to  T.  his  daughter  in  law 
38. 11  T.  went  and  dwelt  in  her  father's  house 
38.  13  it  was  told  T.,  saying,  Behold,  thy  father 
38.  24  T.  thy  daughter  in  law  hath  played  the  ha. 
Ruth  4.  12  of  Pharez,  whom  T.  bare  unto  Judah,  of 
1  Ch.  2.    4  T.  his  daughter  in  law  bare  him  Pharez 
-2.  Daughter  of  David  violated  by  Arnnon,  and  avenged 
by  Absalom.    B.C.  1022. 


2  Sa. 


*3- 
13- 
13- 

13- 

13- 
*3- 
13- 


1  had  a  fair  sister,  whose  name  (was)  T. 

2  Arnnon.  .fell  sick  for  his  sister  T.;  for  she 

4  I  love  T.,  my  brother  Absalom's  sister 

5  let  my  sister  T.  come  and  give  me  meat 

6  Arnnon  said  unto  the  king,  .let  T.  my  sis. 
j  David  sent  home  toT.,  saying,  Go  nowto 
8  So  T.  went  to  her  brother  Amnon's  house 

.  10  Amnon  said  unto  T.,  Bring  the  meat  into 
_.  10  T.  took  the  cakes  which  she hadinade,  and 
13. 19  And  T.  put  ashes  on  her  head,  and  rent 
13.  20  So  T.  remained  desolate  in.  .Absalom's 
13.  22  because  he  had  forced  his  sister  T. 
13. 32  from  the  day  that  he  forced  his  sister  T. 

1  Ch.  3.    9  besides  the  sons  of  the  concubines,  and  T. 

3.  A  daughter  of  Absalom.    B.C.  1010. 

2  Sa.  14.  27  and  one  daughter,  whose  name  (was)  T. 

4.  A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  near  the  Salt  Sea;  perhaps 
En-gedi. 

Eze.  47.  19  from  T. .  .to  the  waters  of  strife  (in)  Kad. 
48.  28  the  border  shall  be  even  from  T.  (unto) 

TAME,  be  tamed,  to  — 

To  tame,  subdue,  Safxdfa  damazo. 

Mark  5.    4  fetters  broken,  .neither  could,  .(man)ta. 

Jas.     3.    7  is  tamed,  and  hath  been  tamed  of  man. 
3.   8  the  tongue  can  no  man  tame ;  (it  is)  an 

TAM-MTJZ,  nsa. 

A  Syrian  and  Phoenician   idol;    the    Adonis  of   the 

Greeks. 

Eze.    8. 14  behold,  there  sat  women  weeping  for  T. 

TAN-HTT'-KETH,  npmri  comfort. 

A  Netophathite,  whose  son  Seraiah  was  one  of  the  cap- 
tains whom  Gedaliah  tried  to  persuade  to  serve  the 
Chaldeans.    B.C.  620. 

2  Ki.25.  23  Seraiah  the  son  of  T.  the  Netophathite 
Jer.  40.    8  Seraiah  the  son  of  T.,  and  the  sons  of  E. 

TANKER,  — 

A  tanner,  dresser  of  hides,  {Svpaevs  burseus. 

Acts   9.  43  tarried,  .in  Joppa  with  one  Simon  a  tan. 

10.    6  Helodgeth  with  one  Simon  a  tanner,  wh. 

10.32  lodged  in  the  house  of  (one)  Simon  a  tan. 

TAPESTRY,  coverings  of  — 
Coverings,  D^3"]5  marbaddim. 

Prov.  7.  16  decked  my  bed  with  coverings  of  tapestry 
31.  22  She  maketh  herself  coverings  of  tapestry 

TA'-PHATH,  nsa  ornament. 

A  daughter  of  Solomon  who  became  the  wife  of  one  of 
lii3  officers.    B.C.  1000. 

1  Ki.  4. 11  which  had  T.  the  daughter  of  Solomon  to 

121 


TAP-PTJ'-AH,  msn  apple,  hill  place. 

1.  A  city  in  W,  of  Judah  near  Hebron,  and  now  called 
Teffuk. 

Josh.  12. 17  The  king  of  T.,  one ;  the  king  of  Hepher 
15.  34  And  Zanuah,  and  En-gannim,  T.,  and  E. 

2.  A  city  in  Ephraim  or  Manasseh,  now  called  Atuf. 

Josh.  16.    8  The  border  went  out  from  T.  westward 
17.    8  Manasseh  had  the  land  of  T.:  but  T.  on 

3.  A  son  of  Hebron.    B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  2.  43  Korah,  and  T.,  and  Rekem,  and  Shenia 
TA'-RAH,  rnn  turning,  duration,  wandering. 
The  twenty-third  station  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  the 
twelfth  from  Sinai ;  between  Tahath  and  Mithcah. 

Nuni33.  27  And  they  departed,  .and  pitched  at  T. 
33.  28  they  removed  from  T.,  and  pitched  in  M. 

TAR-A'-LAH,  Hytrin  power  of  God. 

A  city  in  Benjamin,  near  Irpeel. 

Josh. 18.  27  And  Rekem,  and  Irpeel,  and  T. 

TA-RE'-A,  U^n flight.     See  Tahrea. 

A  son  of  Micah,  grandson  of  Jonathan  son  of  Saul.  B.C. 

1000. 

1  Ch.  8.  35  the  sons  of  Micah  (were).  .Melech,  and  T. 

TARES  — 

Darnel,  a  weed  like  corn,  fy^aviov  zizanion. 

Matti3.  25  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares  among 
13.  26  blade,  .sprung  up.. then  appeared  the  ta. 
13.  27  sow  good  seed,  .whence  then  hath  it  tares? 
13.  29  lest,  while  ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root 
13.  30  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares,  andbi. 
13.  36  Declare  unto  us  the  parable  of  the  tares 
13.  38  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked 

13.  40  the  tares  are  gathered  and  burned  in  the 

TARGET  — 

l.Halbert,  javelin,  pT?  kidon. 

1  Sa.  17.   6  and  a  target  of  brass  between  his  shoul. 
2.  Target s  buckler,  n|S  tsinnah. 

1  Ki.io.  16  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets  (of) 

10.  16  hundred  (shekels)  of  gold  went  to  one  ta. 

2  Ch.  9.  15  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets  (of) 

9. 15  six  hundred  (shekels) . .  went  to  one  target 

14.  8  an  army  (of  men)  that  bare  targets  and 
TARPEUTES,  N^9*1B. 

An  Assyrian  tribe,' in  Tapur,  E.  of  Elam,  or  in  Tarpet 
in  the  Maeotic  swamp ;  transported  to  Samaria  by  Shal- 
maneser.    B.C.  678. 

Ezra    4.   9  theT.,  the  Apharsites,  the  Archevites,  the 
TARRY  (all  night,  behind,  for,  long,  longer),  to  — 
1.7*0  be  or  keep  behind,  late,  ~i~n  achar,  5. 

2  Sa.  20.    5  he  tarried  longer  than  the  set  time  which 

2,  To  keep  behind,  tarry,  "i~x  achar,  3. 

Judg.  5.  28  cried,  .why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  char.? 
Psa.  40.  17  thou  (art)  my  help .  .make  no  tarrying,  O 
70.    5  thou  (art)  my  help.  .0  LORD,  make  no  ta. 
Prov  23.  30  They  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine  ;  they 
Isa.  46.  13  my  salvation  shall  not  tarry :  and  I  will 
Hab.   2.    3  vision . .  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry 

3.  To  cause  to  be  long,  prolong,  "nx  arak,  5. 

Num.  9.  19  when  the  cloud  tarried  long  upon  the  ta. 
9.  22  the  cloud  tarried  upon  the  tabernacle,  re. 

4.7b  be  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  C£n  damam. 

1  Sa.  14.    9  Tarry  until  we  come  to  you ;  then  we  will 

5.  To  stag,  hyn,  Vin  chid,  chil,  1,  5. 

Judg.  3.  25  they  tarried  till  they  were  ashamed ;  and 

6.  To  wait  earnestly,  n*n  chakah,  3. 

2  Ki.  7.    9  if  we  tarry  till  the  morning  light,  some 

9.    3  Then  open  the  door  and  flee,  and  tarry 

7.  To  wait  with  hope,  stay,  ?n;  yachal,  2. 

1  Sa.  13.   S  he  tarried  seven  days,  according  to  the 
8.7b  cause  to  wait  with  hope,  Vn;  yachal,  5. 

1  Sa.  10.    8  seven  days  shalt  thou  tarry,  till  I  come 

2  Sa.  18. 14  Then  said  Joab,  I  may  not  tarry  thus  wi. 

9.  To  be  behind,  late,  "in;  yachar. 

2  Sa.   20.    5  he  tarried  longer  than  the  set  time  which 

10.  To  sit  down  or  still,  2&l  yashab. 

Gen.  27.  44  tarry  with  him  a  few  days,  until  thy  br. 
Exod24.  14  Tarry  ye  here  for  us,  until  we  come  again 
Lev.  14.  8  shall  tarry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  seven 
Nuni22.  19  tarry  ye  also  here  this  night,  that  I  may 
Judg.  6.  iS  he  said,  I  will  tarry  until  thou  come  again 
Ruth  2.    7  until  now,  that  she  tarried  a  little  in  the 

1  Sa.    1.  23  Do  what  seemeth  thee  good ;  tarry  until 

14.  2  Saul  tarried  in  the  uttermost  part  of  G. 
30.  24  so(shall)his  part  (be)  that  tarrieth  by  the 

2  Sa.  10.    5  Tarry  at  Jericho  until  your  beards  be  gr. 

11.  1  But  David  tarried  still  at  Jerusalem 

11.  12  Tarry  here  to  day  also,  and  to  morrow  I 

15.  29  again  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  they  tarried  th. 
2  Ki.  2.  2,  4,  6  Tarry  here,  I  pray  thee  ;  for  the  Lord 

2.  18  they  came  again  to  him,  for  he  tarried  at 
14. 10  tarry  at  home  ;  for  why  shoxddest  thou 
1  Ch.ig.   5  Tarry  at  Jericho  until  your  beards  be  gr. 
20.    1  besieged  Kabbah.  But  David  tarried  at  J. 

11.  To  be  prepared,  established,  pa  kun,  2. 
Psa.101.  7  he  that  telleth  lies  shall  not  tarry  in  my 

12.  To  pass  the  night,  p?,  pS  lun,  lin. 

Gen.  19.  2  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet,  and 
24-  54  they  did  eat  and  drink,  .and  tarried  all 
28.  11  tarried  there  all  night,  because  the  sun 


Gen.  31.  54  they  did  eat  bread,  and  tarried  all  night 

Judgip.    6  tarry  all  night,  and  let  thine  heart  bemer. 
19.    g  I  pray  you  *arry  all  night :  behold,  the 
19  10  the  man  would  not  tarry  that  night,  bufe 

Ruth  3.  13  Tarry  this  night,  and  it  shall  be  in  the  m. 

2  Sa.19.    7  there  will  not  tarry  one  with  thee  this  ni. 

Jer.  14.  8  man  (that)  turneth  aside  to  tarry  for  a  ui. 
13.7*0  tarry,  linger,  delay,  Finn  mahah,  7a. 

Exodi2.  39  could  not  tarry,  neither  had  they  prepa. 

Judg.  3.  26  Ehud  escaped  while  they  tarried,  and  pa. 

19.  8  they  tarried  until  afternoon,  and  they  did 
2  Sa.  15.  28  I  will  tarry  in  the  plain  of  the  wilderness 
Hab.  2.   3  though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it ;  because  it  will 

11.  Dweller  at  home,  rm  naveh. 

Psa.  68.  12  she  that  tarried  at  home  divided  the  sp. 

15.7*0  stand,  stand  firm,  "idj;  amad. 

Gen.  45.    9  Thus  saith  thy  son. .come  down. .tarry  not 
2  Sa.  15.  17  and  tarried  in  a  place  that  was  far  off 

16.7*0  wait,  eoipect,  nip  qavah,  3. 
■,  Mic.  5.    7  as  the  showers.,  that  tarrieth  not  for  man 

17.7*0  hope,  wait,  look  for,  "i?a"  sabar,  3. 

Ruth  1.  13  Would  ye  tarry  for  them  till  they  wero 
IS.  7*0  be  slow,  to  delay,  &pa$vva>  braduna. 

1  Ti.   3.  15  if  I  tarry  long,  that  thou  mayest  know  how 
19. 7*o  rub  through,  pass  the  time,  StaTplfico  diatribO. 
John    3.  22  there  he  tarried  with  them,  and  baptized 
Acts  25.    6  when  he  had  tarried  among  them  more 
20.7*0  remain  on  or  upon,  ewifxeuco  epimeno. 

Acts  10.  48  Then  prayed  they  him  to  tarry  certain  da. 
2i.  4  finding  disciples,  we  tamed  there  seven 
21. 10  as  we  tarried  (there)  many  days,  there  ca. 
28.  12  landing  at  Syracuse,  we  tarried  (there)  th. 
28.  14  were  desired  to  tarry  with  them  seven  da. 
1  Coai6.  7  I  trust  to  tarry  a  while  withyou,  if  theL. 
16.    8  But  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentec. 

21.7*0  sit  or  set  down,  ttaQifa  kathizo. 

Luke24.  49  tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  until  ye 
22.7*0  be  about  to,  delay,  /itAAw  niello. 

Acts  22.  16  why  tarriest  thou?  arise,  and  be  baptized 

23.  To  receive  in,  £nh'£xofJ-ai  ckdechomai. 

1  Co.11. 33  when  ye  come  together  to  eat,  tarry  one 

24.  7*o  remain,  /xevca  mend. 

Mattel.  38  Then  saith  he.  .tarry  ye  here,  and  watch 
Marki4. 34  saith  unto  them,  .tarry  ye  here,  and  watch 
Luke24. 29  And  he  went  in  to  tarry  with  them 
John  4.  40  they  besought  him  that  he  would  tarry  wi. 

21.  22,  23  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what 
Acts    9.  43  he  tarried  many  days  in  Joppa  with  one 

iS.  20  they  desired  (him)  to  tarry  longer  time  wi. 

20.  5  These  going  before  tarried  for  us  at  Troas 
20.  15  we  arrived  at  Samos,  and  tarried  at  Trog. 

25.7*0  do,  make,  irotiw  poieo. 

Acts  15.  33  after  they  had  tarried  (there)  a  space,  they 
26.7*0  look  toioard,  expect,  irpoab'oKdcx}  prosdokao. 

Acts  27.  33  that  ye  have  tarried  and  continued  fasting 
17. To  remain  toward,  ■npoafj.ei/o}  prosmeno. 

Acts  18.  18  Paul  (after  this)  tarried  (there)  yet  a  good 

28.  7*0  remain  under,  behind,  virofxivoi  hupomeno. 
Luke  2. 43  the  child.  Jesus  tarried  behind  in  Jerusa* 

29.  7*0  delay,  defer,  tarry,  xpovtfa  chronizo, 
Matt25.    5  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  si. 
Luke  1.  21  marvelled  that  he  tarried  so  long  in  the 
Heb.  10.  37  yet  a  little  while,  and  he.  .will  not  tarry 

TAR'-SHISH,  THAR'-SHISH,  tf'chn  hard. 

1.  A  son  of  Javan  grandson  of  Noah;  his  descendants 
the  Tyrseni  in  Western  Italy. 

Gen.  10.    4  the  sons  of  Javan ;  Elishah,  and  T.,  Kitt. 
1  Ch.  1.    7  the  sons  of  Javan  ;  Elishah,  and  T.,  Kitt. 

2.  Mighty  ships  fitted  for  long  voyages. 

1  Ki.io.  22  For  the  king  had  at  sea  a  navy  of  T.  with 

10.  22  once  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of  T. 

22.  48  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  of  T.  to  go  to  O. 

2  Ch.  9.  21  For  the  king's  ships  went  to  T.  with  the 
Psa.  48.   7  Thoubreakest  the  ships  of  T,  with  an  east 
Isa.     2. 16  upon  all  the  ships  of  T.,  and  upon  all  pi. 

23.  1,  14  Howl,  ye  ships  of  T. 

60.  9  ships  of  T.  first,  to  bring  thy  sons  from  far 
Eze.  27.  25  ships  of  T.  did  sing  of  thee  in  thy  market 

3.  Son  of  Bilhan  the  grandson  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7. 10  Chenaanah,  and  Zethan,  and  T.,  and  Ah. 

4.  Tartessus  in  Spain;  or  Carthage  in  N.  of  Africa,  or 
Ceylon  in  S.  of  India. 

[2  Ch.  9.  21;  20.  36,  37;  Ps.  72.  10;  Isa.  23.6,  10;  66.  19; 
■ler  10.  9;  Eze.  27.  12;  38.  13;  Jon.  1.  3,  3,  3;  4.  2.] 

5.  One  of  the  seven  princes  of  Persia  who  saw  the  king's 
face  at  pleasure.    B.C.  520. 

Esth.  1.  14  the  next  unto  him  (was).  .T.,  Meres,  Ma. 
TARSUS,  Tap<r6s. 

The  birthplace  of  Paul  the  Apostle,  and  the  capital  of 
Cilicia  in  Asia  Minor  on  the  river  Cydnus.  It  was  a 
noted  seat  of  philosophy  and  literature,  ranking  with 
Athens  and  Alexandria.  Was  made  a  free  city  by  Augus- 
tus, being  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Sardanapalus 
B.C.  820;  in  401  it  was  taken  and  plundered  by  the 
younger  Cyrus;  in  333  it  was  taken  by  Alexander  the 
Great ;  in  47  it  sided  with  Caesar  against  Pompey,  and 
took  the  name  of  Juliopolis.  It  was  seized  by  the  Sara- 
cens in  the  early  days  of  their  empire,  was  taken  from 
them  In  the  second  half  of  the  tenth  century,  but  re- 
stored; councils  were  held  here  in  a.  D.  431,  435.  and  1177, 


TARTAK 


962 


Acta   g.  ii  enquire.. for.. Saul, ofT.:  for.behold.hepr. 
9.  30  brought  him.  .and  sent  him  forth  to  I 
11.  25  Then  departed  Barnabas  to  T.,  for  to  seek 

21.  39  Paul  said,  I  am  a  man.  .a  Jewof  T. .  .inC. 

22.  3  I  am  verily  a  man . .  a  Jew,  born  in  T. . .  in 

TAR'-TAK,  prnn  hero  of  darkness. 

A  god  worshipped  by  the  Avites  whom  Shalmaneser  re- 
moved to  Samaria. 

2  Ki.  17.  31  the  Avites  made  Nibhaz  and  T.,  and  the 


TEACH 


TAR'- TAN,  -tfia. 
An  official  of  Sargon  and  of  Sennacherib,  kings  of  As- 
syria, sent  to  Hezekiah.    B.C.  710. 

2  Ki.  iS.  17  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  T.,  and  Rabsaris 
Isa.  23.    1  In  the  year  tliatT.  came  unto  Ashdod,  \vh 
TASK,  taskmaster  — 
l.^i  wordy  matter,  "n^i  dabar. 

Exod.  5. 13  Fulfil  your  works,  (your)  daily  tasks,  as 
5.  19  shall  not  minish  (ought) . .  of  your  daily  ta. 
2. A  statute,  statutory  work,  ph  choq. 

Exod.  5.  14  Wherefore  have  ye  not  fulfilled  yourtask 
3.  To  exact,  e>ij  nagas. 

Exod.  3.   7  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their  taskm 
5.    6  commanded  the  same  day  the  taskmaste 
5.  10  the  taskmasters  of  the  people  went  out 
5.  13  the  taskmasters  hasted  (them),  saying  P 
5.14  winch  Pharaoh's  taskmasters  had  set  over 
i.Head  or  chief  of  the  burden  or  levy,  on  -iv  sar  mas. 
Exod.  1.  11  they  did  set  over  them  taskmasters  to  aril 
TASTE  (to)  — 
1. Palate,  taste,  in  chek. 

Job  6.  30  cannot  my  taste  discern  perverse  things? 
Isa.  1 19. 103  How  sweet  are  thy  words  unto  mv  taste1 
Prov  24.  13  the  honeycomb,  (which  is)sweetftothyta' 
bong  2.  3  I  sat  down.. his  fruit  (was)  sweet  to  my  ta. 
I.To.ste,  reason,  djjb  laam. 

?id,('  3'  the  taste  of  it  (was)  like  wafers  (made)wi. 
a  1  1111 1.    8  the  taste  of  it  was  as  the  taste  of  fresh  oil 
Job     6.    6  or  is  there  (any)  taste  in  the  white  of  an 
Jer.  4s.  11  his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent 

3.  To  taste,  perceive,  nap  taam. 

1  Sa.  14.  24  So  none  of  the  people  tasted  (any)  food 

14.  29  enlightened,  because  1  tasted  a  little  of 
14.  43  I  did  but  taste  a  little  honey  with  the  end 

2  sa.    3.  35  if  I  taste  bread,  or  ought  else,  till  the  sun 

19.  33  can  thy  servant  taste  what  I  eat  or  what 
Job    12. 11  Doth  not.  .the  mouth  taste  his  meat' 

-p„„    34'   |  the  ear  triethwoids,  as  the  mouth  tas'teth 
Psa.  34.   8  O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  (is)  good 
Jon.    3.    7  Let  neither  mau  nor  beast.,  taste  any  th. 

4.  Taste,  djjb  teem. 

Dan.   5.   2  Belshazzar,  whiles  he  tasted  the  wine,  0. 
5.To  taste,  experience,  yevo/iaL  geuomai. 

Matti6.  28  There  be  some,  .which  shall  not  taste  of 

At,,  u7'  34  7h  Q  \V  had  tast^  C«'ereof),  he  would 
Mai  k  9.  ,  there  be  some . .  which  shall  uot  taste  of 
Luke  9.  27  there  be  some,  .which  shall  not  taste  of 

t,i,„  I4'  24  w?e-  •^hich  were  bidaei>  shall  taste  of 
John.  2.   9  When  the  ruler  of  the  feast  had  tasted 
8.  52  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  ta 
2.  21  Touch  not;  taste  not;  handle  not 
2.    9  he  by  the  grace  of  God  should  taste  death 
6.   4  have  tasted  ofthe  heavenly  gift,  and  were 
6.   5  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and 
3  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  (is) 
TAT'-NAI,  <:nn. 

A  governor  of  the  king  of  Persia  on  the  W.  of  the  Jor- 
fe„'",Sa™ana!  wh0  opposed  the  Jews,  and  wrote  to 
Danus  to  stop  the  temple.    B.C.  520. 

Ezra    5.    3  At  the  same  time  came  to  them  T    eov 
5.    6  The  copy  of  the  letter  that  T. . .  sent  unto 
«       1r,ow' J'^aniyour  companions,  .be  ye 
msT.^TT.i'  '3  ■ '  -knethar-boznai,  and  their  com. 

TATTLER.  — 

A  prater,  tattler,  ipxiapos  phluaros. 

1  Ti.    5.  I3  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also  and  busy 
TAUGHT,  (to  be)  — 
1.  To  be  chastised,  instructed,  ID;  yasar,  2 

Eze.  23.  48  that  all  women  may  be  taught  not  to  do 
2.To  be  taught,  -n;h  lamad,  4. 

Isa.   29.  ,3  their 'fear  toward  me  is  taught  bythe  pr 

Hos.  10.  1,  Ephraim  (is  as)  an  heifer  (that  is)  taught 
S.Taught,  learned,  iio1?  limmud. 

Isa.   S4.  13  all  thy  children  (shall  be)  taught  of  tile 
i.Causing  to  understand,  O'rirD  mebonim 

2  Ch.35.    3  said  unto  the  Levites  that  taught  all  Is 
5.  Taught.  SiSauros  didaktos. 

John  6.  45  It  is  written,  .they  shall  be  all  taught  of 
TAUGHT,  as  hath  been  — 
TeacMng,  doctrine,  Kari  SiSaxi,u  kata  didaehm. 

iitus  1.    9  Holding  fast.,  as  he  hath  been  taught,  that 
TAUGHT  of  God  — 

'      'taught,  BeoSiSaKTos  theodidaktos. 

1     11.  4.    9  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love 
TAUNT,  taunting  — 

LSeoiling,  ngnj  geduphah. 

Eze.    5,s  So  it  shall  be  a  reproach  and  a  taunt,  an 

a*D.  =.    6  Shall  not  all  these  take  up.,  a  taunting  pr 


Col. 

IJeb. 


1  Pe. 


9. 


3. Sharp  saying,  byeword,  nyw  sheninah. 

Jer.   24.   9  (to  be)  a  reproach  aud  a  proverb,  a  taunt 
TAX,  be  taxed,  taxation  — 
l.To  set  in  array,  value,  T!%  arak,  5. 

2  K1.23.  35  he  taxed  the  land  to  give  the  money  ace. 
2.  Array,  valuation,  1-1%  erek. 

2  Ki.  23.  35  exacted . .  of  every  one  according  to  his  ta. 
3.A  writing  off,  register,  iwoypatpri  apographs. 
Luke  2.    2  this  taxing  was  first ruade  when  C'yrenius 
Acts    5.  37  rose  up  Judas,  .in  the  days  of  the  taxing 
4.  To  write  off,  register,  i.-iroypa<pu  apographs 
Luke  2.    1  a  decree. .  that  all  the  world  should  be  ta 
2.   3  all  wentto  be  taxed,  every  one  into  his 
2.    5  lo  be  taxed  with  .Alary  his  espoused  wife 
TEACH,  to  — 
l.To  teach,  if}*  alaph,  3. 

•T°b  33-  33  hold  thy  peace,  and  I  shall  teach  thee  wi 
35.  11  Who  teacheth  us  more  than  the  beasts  of 
l.To  cause  to  understand,  j'3  bin,  5. 

Jr0?'3!'    3  salt' unto  the  Levites  that  taught  all  Isr 
Neh.   8.  9  the  Levites  that  taught  the  people,  said 
3.  To  speak,  n;n  dabar,  3. 

Jer.  28.  16  thou  hast  taught  rebellion  against  the  L 
29.  32  he  hath  taught  rebellion  against  the  Lord 
i.To  warn,  cause  to  shine,  "im  zaliar,  5. 

ExodiS.  20  thou  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and  la. 

5.  To  cause  lo  knovj,  in;  yada,  5. 

Deiit.  4.  9  but  teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  so 
Judg.  8. 16  and  with  them  he  taught  the  men  of  Sue 
2  tn.23.  13  the  singers,  .and  such  as  taught  to  sin"- 
Job  32.  7  and  multitude  of  years  should  teach  wis 
37.  19  Teach  us  what  we  shall  say  unto  him  ;  (for) 
Psa.  90.  12  So  teach  (us)  to  number  our  days,  that  we 
Prov.  9.  9  teach  a  just  (man),  and  he  will  increase 
Isa.  40.  13  or,  (bemg)  his  counsellor,  hath  taught  him? 

6.  To  cause  to  know,  yv  yeda,  5. 

Ezra   7.  25  and  teach  ye  them  that  know  (them)  not 

7.  To  chastise,  instruct,  teach,  id>  yasar,  3 

Prov3i.   1  the  prophecy  that  his 'mother' taught  him 

8.  To  cast,  show,  direct,  teach,  m-  yarah,  5 

Exod.  4.  12  I  will  be  with  thy  mouth,  and  teach  thee 
4.  15  and  will  teach  you  what  ye  shall  do 

24. 12  commandments,  .that  thou  mavest  teach 

35-  34  he  hath  put  in  hisheart  that  hernav  teach 
Lev.  10.  11  that  ye  may  teach  the  children  nf  Israel 

14-  57  To  teach  when  (it  is)  unclean,  and  when 
L>euti7. 11  sentence  of  the  law  which  they  shall  teach 

24.  8  all  that  the  priests  the  Levites  shall  teach 
t  a  33- 10  They  shall  teach  Jacob  thv  judgments,  and 
Judgi3.    8  teach  us  what  we  shall  do  unto  the  child 

1  SV  o2'  2i  tl,Vl1,teach  you  tlle  good  and  the  right 

1  Ki.  8.  36  that  thou  teach  them  the  good  wav  wher 

2  Ki.,7.  27  let  him  teach  them  the  manner  of  the  God 

17.  28  taught  them  how  they  should  fear  the  L. 
2  th,  6.27  when  thou  hast  taught  them  the  good  way 
J  OD     6.  24  Teach  me,  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue 

8.  10  Shall  not  they  teach  thee,  (aud)  tell  thee 

12.   7  ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach 

12.   8  speak  to  the  earth,  aud  it  shall  teach  thee 

27'  XI  in?1?  teach  -vou  oy  the  hand  of  God  :  (that) 

34.  32  (That  which)  1  see  not,  teach  thou  me 

•D,-    3     22  ?,od  e/a'teth  by  his  power:  who  teacheth 

Psa.  25.   8  therefore  will  he  teach  sinners  hi  the  way 

25.  12  him  shall  he  teach  in  theway(that)  hesh 

27. 11  Teach  me  thy  way,  O  Lord,  and  lead  me' 

32.    8  I  will  instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the 

45-   4  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible 

86.  n  Teach  me  thy  way,  O  Lord;  I  will  walk 

119.  33  Teach  me,  O  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  statut. 

119. 102  I  have  not  departed,  .for  thou  hast  tau.l 

Prov.  4.    4  He  taught  me  also,  audsaiduntome,  Let 

4. 11  1  have  taught  thee  in  the  way  of  wisdom 

6.  13  he  speaketh  with  his  feet,  he  teacheth  wi 

isa.     2.    3  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will 

9.  15  the  prophet  that  teacheth  lies,  he  (is)  the 

28.   9  «  horn  shall  he  teach  knowledge?  and  w 

28.  26  God  doth  instruct.,  (and)doth  teachhim' 

Eze.  44.  23  they  shall  teach'my  people(thediirerence) 

Mic.    3. 1 1  the  priests  thereof  teaehfor  hire,  and  the 

4.    2  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will 

-Uab.  2. 19  to  the  dumb  stone,  Arise,  it  shall  teach ! 

To  teach,  in1?  lamad,  3. 

Deut.  4.    1  aiid  unto  the  judgments,  which  I  teach 

4.  5  I  have  taught  you  statutes  ami  judgments 
4. 10  and  (that)  they  may  teach  their  children 
4. 14  commanded  me  at  that  time  to  teach  you 

5.  31  the  judgments,  which  thou  shalt  teach 

6.  1  the  Lord  your  God  commanded  to  teach 
"'  '§  H  ,u  teiu'h  them  your  children,  speak. 
20.  iB  Inat  they  teach  you  not  to  do  after  all  tli 
31.  19  write  ye  this  song  for  you,  and  teach  it 

T,„i„31'  22  Moses  therefore . .  taught  it  the  children  of 
Juclg.  3.  2  the  children  of  Israel  might  know  to  tea. 
2  ha.   1.  18  he  bade  them  teach  the  children  of  Judah 

22.  35  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war;  so  that  a 
2  on.  17.   7  he  sent  to  his  princes . .  to  teach  in  the  ci. 

17-    9  they  taught  in  Judah,  and  (had)  the  book 
it™  *7'   9  alu  lvent  ""out.  .and  taught  the  people 
tm,      '■  IOo,nd,w  te;u'h  in  Israel  statutes  and  judg. 
Psa    *  "  1  W  '  (any)  teach  God  knowledge?  seeiiig 
I  sa.  18.  34  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  so  that  a 

25.    4  Show  me  thy  ways,  0  LORD :  teach  me  thy 

as-   5  Lead  me  in  thy  truth,  and  teach  me  ■  for 


Psa.  25.    9  and  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  way 

34- 11  hearken  unto  me;  I  will  teach  youthefo 
r  J?,  t" IrV-  t.eatl1  transgressors  thv  ways 
60.  title.  lothc .chief  Musician.,  to  teach:  when 
71.  .7  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  youth  :  and 
94- 10  he  that  teacheth  man  knowledge,  (shall 
94- 12  thou.  .Lord,  .teachest  him  oatof  thy  law 
19.  i2,  26,  64,  68,  124  ,35  teach  me  thy  statutes 
119.  66  Teach  me  good  judgment  and  knowledge 
119. 108  I  beseech  thee,  .teach  me  thv  iudjanenta 
119.  17.  when  thou  hast  taught  me  th  sSutes 
132.  12  andmy  testimony  that  I  shall  teachthem 
143-  10  Teach  me  to  do  thy  will ;  for  thou  (ait)n^ 
Feci  44'  °h  tea,cheth  my  hands  to  war,  (and)7 

Ecd.12.    9  the  preacher  was  wise,  he  still  H ueiittne 

48'  \i  hefc,  orhr!nf,  "^  r'at"  °'  ^  »'™t  "nl 
Jer  4f'  II  *hf™ ?  D  ,hytGi'd  whiel»  teacheth  theeto 
Jer.  2.  33  therefore  hast  thou  also  taught  the  wic. 
9-  5  they  have  taught  their  tongue  to  speak 
9.  .4  after  Baalim  which  their  fathers  taught 
9-  20  teach  your  daughters  wailing,  aud  every 
12.  16  as  they  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  B 

If  "  tbev  ha  n  *augilt  them  <t0  be'  captains  ' 
31.  34  they  shall I  teach  no  more  every  man  his 

t>,„  32'  33     fallghJ  them'  risi"S  up  eaily  and  teach. 
Dan.    1.    4  "horn  they  might  teach  the  learning  and 
10.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  >?psakal,  5 

TYm.'3,?'  22tiK'  ;-t-vi'cs 'hat  taught  the  good  know. 
Pro\  10.  23  The  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  hismouth 
11. Taught,  SiSaitTos  didaktos. 

1  Co.  2.  13  not  111  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  te 
2.  13  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth;  com. 
12.ro  teach,  StSdaKui  didasko. 

Matt.  4.  23  teaching  in  their  synagogues,  and  preach 

5.    2  he  opened  hismouth,  and  taught  them 

5.  19  \\  hosoever.  shall  teach  men  so,  heshall 

5.  19  whosoever  shall  do  aud  teach(them),  the 

7.  29  he  taught  them  as  (one)having  authority 

9.  35  teaching  in  their  synagogues.and  preach 

11.  1  he  departed  thence,  to  teach  aud  to  preach 

13-  54  ne  taught  them  in  their  synagogue,  inso 

15-    9  teaching  (for)  ductrinesthe  commandme' 

21.  23  the  elders,  .came  unto  him  as  he  was  te 

22.  16  thou  art  true,  and  teachest  the  way  of 
26.  55  I  sat  daily  with  you  [teaching)  in  the  te. 
28.  15  took  the  money,  and  did  as  they  were  ta 

nr„  1       2°  ,  eaching  them  to  observe  all  things  wh. 
Mark  1.  21  he  entered  into  the  synagogue,  and  tau 

1.  22  for  he  taught  them  as  one  that  had  auth 

2.  13  resorted  unto  him,  and  he  taught  them  ' 
4.  1  he  began  again  to  teach  bv  the  sea  side 
4.  2  he  taught  them  many  things  by  parables 
6.  2  he  began  to  teach  in  the  synagogue  :  and 
6.  6  he  went  round  about  the  villages,  teach 
6.  30  what  they  had  done,  and  what  they  had  t 

6.  34  and  he  began  to  teach  them  many  things 

7.  7  teaching  (for)  doctrines  the  commandm 

8.  31  he  began  to  teach  them,  that  the  Sou  of 

9.  31  he  taught  his  disciples,  aud  said  unto  th 

10.  1  and,  as  he  was  wont,  he  taught  them  ag 

11.  17  he  taught,  saying  unto  them,  Is  itnot  wr 

12.  14  for  thou,  .teachest  the  wayof  God  in  tru 
12.  35  Jesus  answered  and  said,  while  he  taught 
14.49  I  was  daily  with  you.. teaching,  and  ye 

Luke  4.  15  he  taught  in  their  synagoguesrbeing  glo 
4.  31  and  taught  them  on  the  sabbath  days 
5-   3  lie  sat  down,  and  taught  the  people  out 
5. 17  on  a  certain  day,  as  he  was  teaching,  that 
6.    6  he  entered  into  thesyuagogue  and  taught 

11.  1  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  also  taught  his 

12.  1 2  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  teach  you  inthesame 
13. 10  he  was  teaching  in  one  of  the  symwues 

13.  22  teaching  and  journeying  toward  Jerusal 
13.26  «e  have  eaten.,  and  thou  hast  taught  in 

19.  47  And  he  taught  daily  in  the  temple 

20.  1  he  taught  the  people  in  the  temple,  and 
20.  21  thou  sayest  and  teachest  rightly,  neither 

20.  21  we  know  that  thou,  .teachest  tlie  way  of 

21.  37  111  the  day  time  he  was  teaching  in  the  te 
t  v  2J-  5  S.e  s,m'eth  up  the  people,  teaching  thro. 
John  6.  59  These  things  said  he.  .as  he  taught  in  Ca 

7. 14  Jesus  went  up  into  the  temple  and  tau 
7.  2S  Then  cried  Jesus  in  the  temple,  as  he  ta 

7.  35  will  he  go.  .among  the  Gentiles,  and  tea 
S.    2  [people  came  unto  him  ;  and  he . .  taught] 

8.  20  These  words  spake  Jesus,  .as  he  taught  in 
8.  28  as  my  Father  hath  taught  me,  I  speak  th 
9-  34  born  in  sins,  and  dost  thou  teach  us? 

14-  26  he  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  brin"- 
a  „.    l8'  2°  r, wf ''  taught  in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the 
Acts    1.    1  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  teach 
4.    2  Being  grieved  that  they  taught  the  peop. 

4.  iS  commanded  them  not  to.. teach  in  the  na 

5.  21  they  entered  into  the  temple,  .and  taught 
5.  25  standing  in  the  temple,  and  teaching  the 
5.  28  command  you,  that  ye  should  not  teach 
5.  42  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus 

11.  26  they  assembled,  .and  taughtmuch people 
15.  1  certain  men  which  came,  .taught  the  br. 
15-  35  teaching  and  preaching  the  word  of  the' 
18. 11  he  continued,  .teaching  the  word  of  God 
18.  25  taught  diligently  the  things  of  the  Lord 

20.  20  have  taught  you  publicly,  and  from  hou. 
21.21  thou  teachest  all  the  Jews  which  are  among 

21.  28  This  is  the  man  that  teacheth  all  (men)  ev 
28.  31  teaching  those  things  which  concern  the 

Rom.  2.  21  Thou.. which  teachest  another,  teachest 

12.  7  Or  ministry.. or  he  that  teacheth,  on 

1  to.   4.  17  my  ways. .as  I  teach  even-  where  in  every 
11. 14  Dothnot  even  nature  itself  teach  you,  that 


TEACH 


963 


TELL 


Gal.  i.  12  neither  was  I  taught  (it),  but  by  the  rev. 
Eph.  4.  21  ye  have  heard  him,  and  have  been  taught 
Col.     i.  2  3  warning  every  man,  and  teaching  every 

2.  17  stablishedin  the  faith,  as  ye  have  beenta. 

3.  16  teaching  and  admonishing  one  another  in 
2  Th.  2.  15  the  traditions  which  ye  have  been  taught 

1  Ti.    2. 12  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  us. 

4.  n  These  things  command  and  teach 

6.    2  do  (them)  service.  These  things  teach  and 

2  Ti.  2.  2  faithful  men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach 
Titus  i.  11  teaching  things  which  they  ought  not,  for 
Heb.   5. 12  ye  have  need  that  one  teach  j'ou  again  wh. 

8.  11  they  shall  not  teach  every  man  his  neigh. 

1  Jo.   2.  27  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you 
2. 27  as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all 
2.  27  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide 

Rev.    2.  14  who  taught  Balao  to  cast  a  stumbling  bl. 

Key.   2.  20  to  teach  and  to  seduce  my  servants  to  co. 

13.  To  tell  down  or  thoroughly,  Karayy^Ww  katay. 
Acts  16.  21  teach  customs,  which  are  not  lawful  for 

li.To  sound  down,i?istruct  orally,  Kar^x^oikatecheO. 
1  Co.  14. 19  that  (by  my  voice)  I  might  teach  others 
Gal.     6.   6  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word 

6.    6  communicate  unto  hini  that  teacheth  in 

15.  To  he  or  make  a  disciple,  teach,  ^aO-nrevajmath. 
Matt.  28.  19  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  ba. 
Acts  14.  21  when  they  had  preached . .  and  had  taught 

16.7*0  train,  instruct,  Traio'eva>  paideuo. 

Acts  22.    3  taught  according  to  the  perfect  manner  of 

Titus  2.  12  Teaching  us  that,  denying  ungodliness  and 
TEACH  diligently,  to  — 
To  sharpen,  repeat,  Jji?  shanan,  3. 

Deut.  6.    7  thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  unto  thy 
TEACH  other  doctrine  or  otherwise,  to  — 
To  teach  other  or  different  things,  €Tepo5i5aa7<:aAew. 

1  Ti.    1.    3  charge  some  that  they  teach  no  other  doctr. 
6.   3  If  any  man  teach  otherwise,  and  consent 
TEACHER,  teaching  — 

1.  To  cause  to  understand,  pa  bi?t,  5. 

1  Ch.25.    8  the  small  as  the  great,  the  teacher  as  the 

2.  To  cast,  show,  direct,  teach,  n-v  yarak,  5. 

2  Ch.15.  3  without  a  teaching  priest,  andwithout  law 
Prov.  5. 13  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers 
Isa.   30.  20  yet  shall  not  thy  teachers  be  removed  in. 

30. 20  but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers 
Hah.    2. 18  the  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  lies 

3.  To  interpret,  pS  hits,  5. 

Isa.  43.  27  thy  teachers  have  trangressed  against  me 

4.  To  teach,  "127  lamad,  3. 

P3a.n0.  99  more  understanding  than  all  my  teachers 

5.  Teacher,  instructor,  SiScuncuAo?  didaskalos. 
John  3.    2  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come  fr. 
Acts  13.   1  there  were . .  certain  prophets  and  teach. 
Bom.  2.  20  a  teacher  of  babes,  which  hast  the  form 

1  Co.  12.  28  secondarily  prophets,  thirdly  teachers,  af. 

12.  29  (are)  all  prophets?  (are)  all  teachers?  (are) 

Eph.   4. 11  evangelists  ;  and  some,  pastors  and  teac. 

1  Ti.   2.    7  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  ve. 

2  Ti.    1.  11  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles 

4.    3  shall  they  heap  to  themselves  teachers 
Heb.  5.  12  when  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  teachers 

6.  Teaching,  instruction,  StSaovfaAia  didaskalia. 

Rom  12.    7  (let  us  wait)  on  (our)  ministering . .  on  te. 
TEACHER  (of  the  law,  of  good  things,  false)  — 
1. Teacher  of  good,  KaAoStBdo-KaAos  kalodidaskalos. 

Titus  2.    3  not  given  tomuch  wine,  teachers  of  good  t. 

2.  Teacher  of  law,  pofAodtSdo-icaAos  nomodidaslcalos. 

1  Ti.    1.  7  Desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  law;  unde. 

3.  .A  teacher  of  lies  or  falsehood,  ipsvdoSiddo-KaAos. 

2  Pe.   2.    1  there  shall  be  false  teachers  among  you 
TEAR  (in  pieces,  be  torn),  to  — 

1 .  To  cleave,  rend,  rip  up,  hatch,  i'pa  baqa,  3. 

2  Ki.   2. 24  and  tare  forty  and  two  children  of  these 
Hos.  13.    8  devour  them . .  the  wild  beast  shall  tear 

2.  To  take  violently  away,  bn  gazal. 

Mai.   1. 13  ye  brought  (that  which  was)  torn,  and  the 

3.  To  tread  down,  thresh,  B»n  dush. 

Judg  8.    7  I  will  tear  your  flesh  with  the  thorns  of 

4.  To  tear,  r\yi  taraph. 

Deut  33.  20  teareth  the  arm  with  the  crown  of  the  he. 
Job   16.   9  He  teareth  (me)  in  his  wrath, who  hateth 

18.    4  He  teareth  himself  in  his  anger:  shall  the 
Psa.    7.    2  Lest  he  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion,  rending 

50.  22  lest  I  tear  (you)  in  pieces,  and  (there  be) 
Hos.    5.  14  I,  even  I,  will  tear  and  go  away ;  I  will 

6.  1  he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us ;  he  hath 
Amos.  1. 11  hisangerdid  tear  perpetually,  andhekept 
Mic.  5.  8  both  treadeth  down,  and  teareth  in  pieces 
Nah  2. 12  The  lion  did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his 

5.Tobetorn,  Fjna  taraph,  2. 

Exod22.  13  If  it  be  torn  in  pieces,  .let  him  bring  it 
Jer.    s-    6  every  one  that  goeth.  .shall  be  torn  in  pie. 

6.  To  be  torn,  tptp  taraph,  4. 

Gen.  44.  28  Surely  he  is  torn  in  piecesf  and  I  saw  him 

7.  To  drew,  tear,  ano  sachab. 

Jer.  15.   3  the  sword  to  slay,  and  the  dogs  to  tear 

8.  To  deed  out,  ona  paras. 

Jer.  16.   7  Neither  shall  (men)  tear  (themselves)  for 


9.  To  break  off,  rend,  p-i9  paraq. 

Zee.  11.  16  of  the  fat,  and  tear  their  claws  in  pieces 

10.  To  rend  away,  cut  off,  jnp  qara. 

2  Sa.13.  31  the  king  arose,  and  tare  his  garments,  and 

Psa.  35.  15  the  abjects..  they  did  tear  (me),  and  ceased 

Eze.  13.  20  I  will  tear  them  from  your  arms,  and  will 

13.  21  Your  kerchiefs  also  will  I  tear,  and  deliver 

11.  To  break  in  pieces,  *ia^  shabar. 

1  Ki.  13.  26  the  lion,  which  had  torn  him,  and  slain 

13.  28  had  not  eaten  the  carcase,  nortorn  the  ass 

12.  To  break,  burst,  rend,  tear,  pi\yvvp.L  rhegnumi. 
Mark  9. 18  wheresoever  he  taketh  him,  he  teareth 

13.  To  draw  out  and  beat,  tear,  lacerate,  o-trapdoam. 
Mark  1.  26  when  the  unclean  spirit  had  torn  him,  and 

9.  20  when  he  saw  him.  .the spirit  [tare]  him 
Luke  9.  39  it  teareth  him  that  he  foameth  again,  and 

14.  To  tear  or  lacerate  together,  o-vo-Trapdaaw  SUsp. 
Lukeg.  42  the  devil  threw  him  down,  anu  tare  (him) 

TEARS,  (with)  — 
l.To  weep,  naa  bakah. 

Esth.  8.   3  besought  him  with  tears  to  put  away  the 

2.^4  tear,  n«J3^  dimah. 

2  Eli.  20.   5  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have'seen  thy  te. 
Psa.     6.    6  I  am  weary .  .1  water  my  couch  with  my 

39. 12  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my  tears:  for  I  (am) 
42.   3  My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  ni. 
56.    8  put  thou  my  tears  into  thy  bottle  :  (are 
80.    5  Thou  feedest  them  with  the  bread  of  tea. 
80.   5  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  meas. 
no.    8  mine  eyes  from  tears,  (and)  my  feet  from 
126.    s  They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy 
Eccl.  4.    1  behold  the  tears  of  (such  as  were)  oppre. 
Isa.   16.   9  I  will  water  thee  with  my  tears,  0  Hesh. 
25.   8  the  Lord  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from 
38.    5  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy  tears 
Jer.     9.    1  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I 
9. 18  that  our  eyes  may  run  down  with  tears 
13. 17  shall  weep  sore,  and  run  down  with  tears 
14. 17  Let  mine  eyes  run  down  with  tears  night 
31. 16  Refrain .  .thine  eyes  from  tears:  for  thy 
Lain.  1.   2  weepeth  sore  in  the  night,  and  her  tears 
2.  11  Mine  eyes  do  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels 
2.  iS  let  tears  run  down  like  a  river  day  and 
Eze.  24.  16  nor  weep,  neither  shall  thy  tears  run  do. 
Mai.   2.  13  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  tea. 

3.  A  tear,  Sdttpv  dakru. 

Mark  9.  24  the  father.  .criedout,andsaid[withtears] 

Luke  7.  38  began  to  wash  hisfeet  with  tears,  and  did 

7.  44  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with  tears,  and 

Acts  20. 19  Serving  the  Lord,  .with  many  tears,  and 

20.  31  warn  every  one  night  and  day  with  tears 
2  Co.  2.  4  I  wrote  unto  you  with'many  tears,  not  th. 
2  Ti.  1.  4  being  mindful  of  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be 
Heb.   5.    7  supplications,  with  strong  crying  and  te. 

12,  17  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears 
Rev.  7. 17  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 

21.  4  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
TEAT  — 

1.  Breast,  teat,  *n  dad. 

Eze.  23.    3  there  they  bruised  the  teats  of  their  virg. 
23.  21  in  bruising  thy  teats  by  the  Egyptiansfor 
2. Breast,  teat,  "ic?  shad. 

Isa.  32. 12  They  shall  lament  for  the  teats,  for  the 
TE'-EAH,  nat?  thick,  strong. 
A  son  of  Nahor  the  brother  of  Abraham.     B.C.  i860. 

Gen.  22.  24  she  bare  also  T.,  and  Gaham,  and  Thah. 
TE-BAL'-IAH,  vi;bat?  Jah  is  protector. 
A  son  of  Hosah,  a  Merarite,  a  gatekeeper  for  the  taber- 
nacle in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.  11  Hilkiah  the  second,  T.tlie  third,  Zechariah 
TE'-BETH,  nao  winter. 

The  tenth  Jewish  month,  from  the  new  moon  of  January 
till  that  of  February. 

Esth.  2.  16  the  tenth  month,  which  (is)  the  month  T. 

TEDIOUS  unto,  to  be  — 

To  cut  in,  interrupt,  ey/coVTa)  egkopto. 

Acts  24,   4  that  I  be  not  further  tedious  unto  thee 
TEETH,  (cheek,  great,  jaw)  — 
1. Possessor  of  edges,  nvs*?  *?^2  baal  piphiyyoth. 

Isa.   41. 15  sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth 

2.  Jaw  cr  great  teeth,  rnyrra  maltaoth. 

Psa.  58.   6  break  out  the  great  teeth  of  the  young 

3.  Jaw  or  great  teeth,  niy^rt?  methalleoth. 

Prov. 30. 14  and  their  jaw  teeth  (as)  knives,  to  devour 
Joel     1.    6  he  hath  the  cheek  teeth  of  a  great  lion 
.     [See  also  Tooth.] 

TE-HAPH-NE'-HES,  Druortfi. 
Another  form  of  Tahpanhes. 

Eze.  30. 18  At  T.  also  the  day  shall  be  darkened,  wh. 

TE-HIN'-KAH,  n^nfl  entreaty. 

A  son  of  Eshton,  a  descendant  of  Judah  and  father  of 

Ir-na-hash.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4. 12  and  T.  the  father  of  Ir-nahash.  These(are) 

TEIL  tree  — 

An  oak,  nhx  clah. 

Isa.     6/13  as  ateil  tree,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  sub. 
TE'-KEL,  bp$  weighed. 

Dan.    5.  25  this  (is)  the  writing.  .Mene,  Mene,  T.,  TJ-. 
5.  27  T.;  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and 


TE-KO'-AH,  TE-KO'-A,  wpnfnn,  settlement. 

1.  A  city  in  Judah,  six  miles*  S.E.  of  Bethlehem,  and 
twelve  S.  of  Jerusalem,  and  now  called  Tehua;  hero 
dwelt  the  wise  woman  who  interceded  with  David;  also 
the  prophet  Amos. 

2  Sa.  14.  2  Joab  sent  to  T.,  and  fetched  thence  a  wise 
14.  4  when  the  woman  of  T.  spake  to  the  king 
14.    9  the  woman  of  T.  said  unto  the  king.  My 

2  Ch.11.  6  He  built.  .Beth-lehem,  and  Etam,  and  T. 
20.  20  went  forth  into  the  wilderness  of  T. 

Jer.     6.    1  blow  the  trumpet  in  T.,  and  set  up  a  si^n 

Amos  1.    1  Amos,  who  was  among  the  herdmen  of  1. 

2.  Family  or  possession  of  Asshur,  a  descendant  of  Hez- 
ron  grandson  of  Judah. 

1  Ch.  2.  24  Hezron's  wife  bare. .  Ashurthefatherof  T, 

4.    5  Ashur  the  father  of  T.  had  two  wives,  He, 
TEKOITE,  'JJpfl,  *J/ip8. 
An  inhabitant  of  the  preceding  city. 

2  Sa.  23.  26  Helez.  .Ira  the  son  of  Ikkesh  the  T. 

1  Ch.  11.  28  Ira  the  son  of  Ikkesh  the  T.,  Abi-ezer  the 

27.   9  sixth,  .(was)  Ira  the  son  of  Ikkesh  the  T, 

Neh.   3.    5  next  unto  them  the  T.  repaired;  but  the 

3.  27  After  them  the  T.  repaired  another  piece 

TEL  A'-BEB,  2'3k  ^n  hill  of  grass. 

A  height  on  the  river  Chebar  or  Chaboras,  where  Eze 

kiel  stayed  with  the  Jewish  exiles  a  week. 

Eze.    3.  13  I  came  to  them  of  the  captivity  atT.,  th, 

TEL  HA-RE'-SHA,  K^nrj  %  hill  of  the  magics. 

A  height  on  the  river  Chebar  or  Chaboras,  whence  some 

Jewish  exiles  returned  to  Jerusalem.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.  59  these  (were)  they  which  went  up  from . .  T. 

Neh.   7.  61  they  which  went  up .  .from  Tel-melah,  T. 

TEL  ME'-LAH,  nSp  %  hill  of  salt. 

A  height  on  the  river  Chebar  or  Chaboras,  whence  some 

Jewish  exiles  returned  who  could   not   prove    their 

genealogy. 

Ezra   2.  59  these  (were)  they  which  went  up  from  T 

Neh.   7.  61  these  (were)  they  which  wentup.  .fromT 
TE'-LAH,  n"?Pi  vigour. 

Father  of  Tahan,  and  a  descendant  of  Ephraim  through 
Beriah.    B.C.  1640. 

1  Ch.  7.  25  Resheph,  and  T.  his  son,  and  Tahan  his 
TE-LA'-IM,  c'N^p  lavibs.     See  Telem. 
A  place  in  Judah,  near  Edom,  where  Saul  assembled 
his  forces  against  Amalek. 

1  Sa.  15.   4  Saul.,  numbered  them  in  T.,two  hundred 
TE'-LEM,  D?B  a  lamb.     See  Telahn. 

1.  A  city  in  Judah  near  Ziph  or  Bealoth. 

Josh.15.  24  Ziph,  and  T.,  and  Bealoth 

2.  A  gatekeeper  of  the  sanctuary  who  returned  from 
exile,  and  had  married  a  strange  wife.    B.C.  445. 

Eze.  10.  24  of  the  porters;  Shallum,  and  T.,  and  TJrl 
TELL  (out),  to  — 
l.To  say,  (lift  up  the  voice,),  hcn  amar. 

Gen.  22.   2  the  mountains  which  I  will  tell  thee  of 
22.    3  unto  the  place  of  which  God  hadtoldhfm 

22.  9  came  to  the  place.  .God  had  told  him  of 
26.   2  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  shall  tell  thee  of 
41.  24  I  told  (this)  unto  the  magicians;  but(th.) 
48.    1  that  (one)  told  Joseph,  Behold,  thy  father 

Exod.  5.    1  Aaron  went  in,  and  told  Pharaoh,  Thus 
Numi4.  14  they  will  tell  (it)  to  the  inhabitants  of  th. 

29.  40  Moses  told  the  children  of  Israel  accord. 
Deut  1 7.  11  the  judgment  which  they  shall  tell  thee 

32.    7  ask.  .thy  elders,  and  they  will  tell  thee 
Judg  13,    6  the  woman  came  and  told  her  husband 

1  Sa.    8. 10  Samuel  told  all  the  words  of  the  Loud  un. 

23.  22  it  is  told  me  (that)  he  dealeth  very  subti 

2  Sa.   7.    5  tell  my  servant  David,  Thus  saith  the  L. 

12.  18  how.. if  we  tell  him  that  the  child  is  dead? 

1  EJ.14.    7  tell  Jeroboam,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God 

18.  8,  11,  14  go,  tell  thy  lord,  Behold,  Elijah  (is 
20.  9  Tell,  my  lord  the  king,  All  that  thou  didst 
22. 18  Did  I  not  tell  thee  that  he  would  proph. 

2  Ki.   6. 10  the  place  which  the  man  of  God  told  Mm 

8. 14  He  told  me  (that)  thou  shouldest  surely 
20.    5  tell  Hezekiah  the  captain  of  my  people 
22. 15  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Tell  the  man  that 
23.  17  the  men  of  the  city  told  him,  (It  is)  the 

1  Ch.  17.    4  tell  David  my  servant,  Thus  saith  the  LORD 

2  Ch.18.  17  Did  I  not  tell  thee  (that)  he  would  not  pr. 

34.  23  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  .Tell  ye  the  man  th. 
Job     8. 10  Shall  not  they  teach  thee,  (and)  tell  thee 

34.  34  Let  men  of  understanding  tell  me,  and 
Psa.  50. 12  If  I  were  hungry,  I  would  not  tell  thee 
Isa.     6.    9  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  und. 
Jer.  15.    2  thou  shalt  tell  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 

28. 13  tell  Hananiah,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lo. 

34.   2  speak  to  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah,  and  tell 

35. 13  tell  the  men  of  Judah,  and  the  iuhabitan. 
Eze.    3. 11  tell  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  whe. 

12.  23  Tell  them  therefore,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 

17.  12  tell  (them),  Behold,  the  king  of  Babylon 

l.To  say,  ton  amar, 

Dan/  2.  4  "tell  thy  servants  the  dream,  and  we  will 
2.  7  Let  the  king  tell  his  servants  the  dream 
2.  9  tell  me  the  dream,  and  I  shall  kuow  that 
2.  36  we  will  tell  the  interpretation  thereof  be. 

4.  7  I  told  the  dream  before  them,  but  they  did 
4.    8  and  before  him  I  told  the  dream,  (saying) 
4.   9  tell  me  the  visions  of  my  dream  that  I  h. 
7.    1  he  wrote  the  dream,  (and)  told  the  sum 
7. 16  he  told  me,  and  made  me  know  the  inte. 


TELL 


964 


TELL 


3.  To  remove,  uncover,  (jjit-riM)  fra,  #afoA  (eth  ozen). 
i  Sa.   9.  15  the  LORD  had  told  Samuel  in  his  car  a 
1  Ch.17.  25  thou,  0  my  God,  has  told  thy  servant  th. 

4. To  speak,  {lead  forth  words),  "133  dabar. 

Psa.101.    7  he  that  telleth  lies  shall  not  tarry  in  my 

6.T0  speak  {lead  forth  words),  133  dabar,  3. 

Gen.  20.    8  called  all  his  servants,  and  told  all  these 

24.  33  I  will  not  eat,  until  I  have  told  mine  err. 

45  27  they  told  him  all  the  words  of  Joseph;  wh. 
Exod.o.    1  Go  in  unto  Pharaoh,  and  tell  him,  Thus 

14.  12  (Is)  not  this  the  word  that  we  did. tell  th. 
Lev.  2t.  24  Moses  told  (it)  unto  Aaron,  and  tohis  sons 
Numn.  24  Moses  went  out,  and  told  the  people  the 

14.  39  Moses  told  these  sayings  unto  all  the  chi. 

23. 26  Told  not  I  thee,  saying,  All  that  the  Lord 
Judg  16.  10,  13  thou  hast  mocked  me,  and  told  me  lies 

20.   3  Then  said  the  children  of  Israel,  Tell  (us) 

1  Sa.  10.  25  Samuel  told  the  people  the  manner  of  the 

11.  4  told  the  tidings  in  the  ears  of  the  people 

2  Sa.  11.  19  When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  telling 

1  Ki.  13.  25  they  came  and  told  (it)  in  the  city  where 

14.    2  the  prophet,  which  told  me  that  (I  should 

20.  11  Tell  (him),  Let  not  himthatgirdethnn(his 

22. 16  I  adjure  thee  that  thou  tell  me  nothing  . 

2  Ki.   1.    7  came  up  to  meet  you,  aud  told  you  these 
1  Ch.21. 10  Go  and  tell  David,  saying,  Thus  saith  the 
Psa.  41.    6  (when)  he  goeth  abroad,  he  telleth  (it) 
Jer.   19.    2  proclaim  there  the  words  that  I  shall  tell 
Zech.io.    2  have  seen  a  lie,  and  have  told  false  drea. 

6.  To  cause  to  know,  jn;  yada,  5. 

1  Sa.  6.  2  tell  us  wherewith  we  shall  send  it  to  his 
Isa.     5.    5  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vine. 

7.  To  number,  count,  appoint,  hjp  manah. 

2  Ki.'i2.  10  theyputupinbags,andtoldthemoney(th. 
Psa. 147.  4  He  telleth  the  number  of  the  stars;  heca. 
Jer.  33. 13  under  the  hands  of  him  that  telleth  (them) 

8.7*0 put  before,  declare,  *\±inagad,  5. 

Gen.    3. 11  Who  told  thee  that  thou  (wast)  naked? 

9.  22  Aud  Ham .  .told  his  two  brethren  without 

12.  18  why  didst  thou  not  tell  me  that  she  (was) 
14.  13  there  came  one  that  had  escaped,  and  told 

21.  26  neither  didst  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  he. 
24.  23  "Whose  daughter  (art)  thou?  tell  me,  I  pray 
24. 28  the  damsel  ran,  and  told  (them  of)  hermo. 
24.49  tell  me  :  and  if  not,  tell  me;  that  I  may 
26.  32  told  him  concerning  the  well  which  they 

29. 12  Jacob  tohl  Rachel. .and  she  ran  and  told 
29.  15  Laban  said . .  tell  me,  what  (shall)  thy  wa. 
31.  20  Jacob  stole  away,  .in  that  he  told  him  not 

31.  27  didst  not  tell  me,  that  I  might  have  sent 

32.  s  I  have  sent  to  tell  my  lord,  that  I  may  find 
32.  29  Jacob  asked  (him),  and  said,  Tell  (me),  I 
37.  5  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream,  and  lie  told  (it) 
37.  16  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  they  feed  (th. 

42.  2p  and  told  him  all  that  befell  unto  them 

43.  6  (as)  to  tell  the  man  whether  ye  had  yet  a 

43.  7  we  told  him  according  to  the  tenor  of  th. 

44.  24  when  we  came . .  we  told  him  the  words  of 

45.  13  ye  shall  tell  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in 
45.  26  told  him,  saying,  Joseph  (is)  yet  alive,  and 
47.    1  Joseph  came  aud  told  Pharaoh,  and  said 

"  2  (one)  told  Jacob,  aud  said,  Behold,  thy  son 
1  that  I  may  tell  you  (that)  which  shall  bef. 
)  Moses  told  Aaron  all  the  words  of  the  L. 
;  the  rulers  of  the  congregation,  .told  Moses 

3  Thus  shalt  thou,  .tell  the  children  of  Isr. 
9  Moses  told  the  words  of  the  people  unto 

Lev.  14.  35  he  that  owneth  the  house  shall,  .tell  the 
Numn.  27  there  ran  a  young  man,  and  told  Moses 

23.    3  whatsoever  he  showeth  me  I  will  tell  thee 
Josh.  7.  19  tell  me  now  what  thou  hast  done ;  hide 
Judg.  9.    7  whentheytold  (it)  toJotham,hewentand 
9  42  the  people  went  out.  .and  they  told  Abi. 

13.  6  asked,  .not.  .neither  told  heme  his  name 

14.  2  he  came  up,  and  told  his  father  and  his 
14.    6  he  told  not  his  father  or  his  mother  what 
14.   9  he  told  not  them  that  he  hadftaken  the  ho. 
1 4  16  put  forth  a  riddle . .  and  hast  not  told  (it) 
14.  16  I  have  not  told  (it),  .shall  I  tell  (it)  thee? 

14. 17  he  told  her,  because  she  laysore  upon  him 
14.  17  she  told  the  riddle  to  the  children  of  her 
16.    6  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  wherein  thy  great 
16.  10  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  wherewith  thou  mi. 

16. 13  tell  me  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  bound 
16.  15  hast  not  told  me  wherein  thy  great  stre. 
16.  17  he  told  her  all  his  heart,  and  said  unto  her 
16.  18  Delilah  saw  that  he  had  told  her  all  his 

Ruth  3.    4  and  he  will  tell  thee  what  thou  shalt  do 
.  16  she  told  her  all  that  the  man  had  done  to 

4  tell  me,  that  I  may  know  :  for  (there  is) 
,  13  I  have  told  him  that  I  will  judge  his  ho. 

18  Samuel  told  him  every  whit,  and  hid  no. 
.  13  the  man  came  into  the  city,  and  told  (it) 
.  14  Aud  the  man  came  in  hastily,  and  told  Eli 
,    8  (that)  will  I  give  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell 

_,  18  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  the  seer's  ho. 

9.  19  and  will  tell  thee  all  that  (is)  in  thine  he. 

10.  15  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  what  Samuel  said 
10.  16  He  told  us  plainly  that  the  asses  were  fo. 
10. 16  the  matter  of  the  kingdom.. he  told  him 
14.  1  let  us  go  over . .  But  he  told  not  his  father 
14.  33  theytold  Saul,  saying,  Behold,  the  people 
14.  43  Saul  said  to  Jonathan,  Tell  me  what  thou 
14.  43  Jonathan  told  him,  and  said,  I  did  but  ta. 
15. 16  I  will  tell  thee  what  the  Lord  hath  said 
18.  20  they  told  Saul,  and  the  thing  pleased  him 
iS.  24  the  servants  of  Saul  told  him,  saying,  On 


48. 
V,      349' 

Exod.  4. 
16. 
19. 
19. 


iSa. 


t  Sa.  18. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
20. 


-Sa. 


2  Ki. 


4- 
5- 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9' 
9- 
10. 
18. 

[  Ch.17. 
19. 

•  Ch.  9. 
9- 


Nell. 


34 


Estli. 


Job 


Psa. 

■!»■ 

Ecu 

.  6. 

8. 

10. 

10. 

Song  1, 

Isa. 

19 

36. 

4S- 

Jer. 

,6. 

36. 

3b 

38 

48 

Eze 

=4 

Jon 

1 

26  when  his  servants  told  David  these  words 

2  Jonathan  told  David,  saying,  Saul  m!y  fa. 

3  and  what  I  see,  that  I  will  tell  thee  - 

1 1  David's  wife,  told  him,  saying,  If  thou  sa. 

18  told  him  all  that  Saul  had  done  to  him 

21  when  it  was  told  Saul,  he  sent  other  men 

9  if  I  knew,  .then  would  not  I  tell  it  thee 
io  Who  shall  tell  me  ?  or  what  (if)  thy  father 

22  I  knew,  .that  he  would  surely  tell  Saul 

1  they  told  David,  saying,  Behold,  the  Ph. 

11  0  Lord  God.  .1  beseech  thee,  tell  thy  se. 
25  they  told  David :  wherefore  he  came  do. 

1  it  was  told  him,  saying,  Behold,  David  (is) 

12  and  came  and  told  him  all  those  sayings 

14  one  of  the  young  men  told  Abigail,  Nab. 

19  But  she  told  not  her  husband  Nabal 

36  she  told  him  nothing,  less  or  more,  until 

37  and  his  wife  had  told  him  these  things,  that 
1 1  Lest  they  should  tell  on  us,  saying,  So  did 

4  How  went  the  matter?  I  pray  thee,  tell 
5,  1 3  said  unto  the  young  man  that  told  him 

6  the  yonng  man  that  told  him,  said,  As  I 
2b  Tell  (it)  not  in  Gath,  publish  (it)  not  in  the 

4  they  told  David,  saying,  (That)  the  men 

23  told  Joab,  saying,  Abner  the  son  of  Ner 

10  When  one  told  me,  saying,  Behold,  Saul 

11  the  LORD  telleth  thee  that  he  will  make 

5  When  they  told  (it)  unto  David,  he  sent 
5  the  woman  conceived,  and  sent  and  told 

10  when  they  had  told  David,  saying,  Uriah 
18  Joab  sent  and  told  David  all  the  things 
18  the  servants  of  David  feared  to  tell  him 

4  he  said  unto  him.  .wilt  thou  not  tell  me? 
33  So  Joab  came  to  the  king,  and  told  him 
31  (one)  told  David,  saying,  Ahithophel  (is) 

35  thou  shalt  tell  (it)  to  Zadok  and  Abiathar 

16  tell  David,  saying,  Lodge  not  this  night 

17  told  them;  and  they  went  and  told  king 

18  a  lad  saw  them,  and  told  Absalom :  but 
21  went  and  told  king  David,  and  said  uuto 

10  a  certain  man  saw  (it),  and  told  Joab,  and 

11  Joab  said  unto  the  man  that  told  him,  And 

21  Then  said  Joab  to  Cushi,  Go  tell  the  king 
25  And  the  watchman  cried,  and  told  the  ki. 

5  they  told  unto  all  the  people,  saying,  Be. 

13  Gad  came  to  David,  and  told  him,  and  said 

20  that  thou  shouldest  tell  them  who  shall 
23  they  told  the  king,  saying,  Behold  Nathan 
39  they  told  Shimei,  saying,  Behold,  thy  se. 
~3  And  Solomon  told  her  all  her  questions 

3  there  was  not  (any)  thing,  .he  told  her  not 

3  he  shall  tell  thee  what  shall  become  of  the 

12  when  I  come  and  tell  Ahab,  aud  he  cann. 

16  Obadiah  went  to  meet  Ahab,  and  told  him 

1  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  Elijah  had  done 

17  they  told  him,  saying.  There  aremen  come 

2  What  shall  I  do  for  thee  ?  tell  me,  what 

7  Then  she  came  and  told  the  man  of  God 

27  hath  hid  (it)  from  me,  and  hath  not  told 
31  he  went  again  to  meet  him,  and  told  him 

4  (one)  went  in,  and  told  his  lord,  saying 
12  Elisha.  .telleth  the  king  of  Israel  the  wo. 

9  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king's  household 

10  they  told  them,  saying,  We  came  to  the 

11  and  they  told  (it)  to  the  king's  house  wit. 

15  the  messengers  returned,  and  told  the  king 

12  And  they  said,  (It  is)  false ;  tell  us  now 

15  let  none  go  forth,  .to  tell  (it)  in  Jezreel 
iS  the  watchman  told,  saying,  Themessenger 
20  the  watchman  told,  saying,  He  came  even 

36  Wherefore  they  came  again,  and  told  him 

8  there  came  a  messenger,  and  told  him,  sa. 

37  Then  came  Eliakim . .  and  told^him the  wo. 

10  I  tell  thee  that  the  Lord  will  builc1  *hee 

5  there  went  (certain)  and  told  David  how 
2  And  Solomon  told  her  all  her  questions 

2  there  was  nothing  hid . .  which  he  told  her 
2  there  came  some  that  told  Jehoshaphat 
iS  the  scribe  told  the  king,  saying,  Hilkiah 
12  neither  told  I  (any)  man  what  my  God  had 

16  neither  had  I  as  yet  told  (it)  to  the  Jews 
iS  I  told  them  of  the  hand  of  my  God  which 

22  Mordecai,  who  told  (it)  unto  Esther  the 

4  they  told  Hanian,  to  see  whether  Morde. 
4  for  he  had  told  them  that  he  (was)  a  Jew 
4  and  her  chamberlains  came  and  told  (it) 
7  Mordecai  told  him  of  all  that  had  happe. 

9  Hatach  came  and  told  Esther  the  words 
12  And  they  told  to  Mordecai  Esther's  words 

2  Mordecai  had  told  of  Bigthana  and  Tex. 

1  for  Esther  had  told  what  he  (was)  unto 

15,  16,  17,  19  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell 

7  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they  shall  tell 

18  Which  wise  men  have  told  from  their  fa. 
title.  Doeg  the  Edomite  came  and  told  Saul 
12  who  can  tell  a  man  what  shall  be  after  him 

7  for  who  can  tell  him  when  it  shall  be? 

14  what  shall  be  after  him,  who  can  tell  him? 

20  that  which  hath  wings  shall  tell  the  mat. 

7  Tell  me,  Othou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  wh. 

8  I  charge  you.  .that  yetellhim,thatl(ani) 
12  let  themttell  thee  now,  and  let  them  know 
22  Then  came  Eliakim.  .and  told  him  the  wo. 

21  Tell  ye . .  (who)  hath  told  it  from  that  time? 

16  We  will  surely  tell  the  king  of  all  these 

17  Tell  us  now,  Kow  didst  thou  write  all  th. 
20  and  told  all  the  words  in  the  ears  of  the 
27  he  told  them  according  to  all  these  words 
20  tell  ye  it  in  Anion,  that  Moab  is  spoiled 

19  Wilt  thou  not  tell  us  what  these  (things 
.   8  Tell  us,  we  pray  thee,  for  whose  cause 

10  For  the  men  knew,  .because  he  had  told 


9. To  number,  write,  cypher,  150  saphar. 

Gen.  15.    5  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number 
2  Ch.  2.    2  Solomon  told  out  threescore  and  ten  tin*. 
Psa.  48.  12  go  round  about  her:  tell  the  towers  the. 
56.   8  Thou  tellestmy  wanderings :  put  thou  my 

10, To  number,  recount,  "ipp  saphar,  3. 

Gen.  24.  66  the  servant  told  Isaac  all  things  that  he 
29. 13  ADd  he  told  Laban  all  these  things 
37.   9  he  dreamed  yet  another  dream,  and  told 
37.  10  he  told  (it)  to  his  father?- and  to  his  bret. 
40.    8  (Do)  not  interpretations  (belong)  to  God? 

40.  9  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph 

41.  8  Pharaoh  told  them  his  dreams;  but  (there 
41. 12  we  told  him,  and  he  interpreted  to  us  our 


Exod  1 


18. 


2  that  thou  mayest  tell  in  the  ears  of  thy 
8  Moses  told  his  father  in  law  all  that  the  L. 

24.    3  Moses  came  and  told  the  people  all  the 
N urn  13.  27  they  told  him,  and  said,  We  came  unto 
Josh.  2.  23  and  told  him  all  (things)  that  befell  them 
Judg.  6.  13  liis  miracles  which  our  fathers  told  us  of 

7.  13  (there  was)  a  man  that  told  a  dream  unto 
1  Sa.  11.    5  they  told  him  the  tidings  of  the  men  of 

1  Ki.13.  11  his  sons  came  and  told  him  all  the  works 

13.  11  words.,  them  they  told  also  to  their  father 

2  Ki.  8.   4  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  all  the  great  things 

8.  5  as  he  was  telling  the  king  how  he  had  re. 
8.    6  when  the  king  asked  the  woman,  she  told 

Esth.  5.  11  Haman  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches 
6. 13  Hanian  told  Zeresh  his  wife  and  all  his  fr. 

Psa.  22.  17  I  may  tell  all  my  bones:  they  look  (and) 
26.  7  That  I  may . .  tell  of  all  thy  wondrous  wo. 
44.  1  our  fathers  have  toldus,  (what)  work  thou 
48.  13  that  ye  may  tell  (it)  to  the  generation  fo. 
78.  3  we  have  heard . .  and  our  fathers  have  told 
23.  27  their  dreams  which  they  tell  every  man 
23.  28  The  prophet  that  hath  a  dream,  let  him 
23.  32  that  prophesy  false  dreams,  .and  do  tell 

3  Tell  ye  your  children  of  it,  and  (let)  your 


Jer 


Joel 


11.7V?  put  a  word  in  the  mouth,  i3i  n§?  DlK 

Ezra    8.  17  I  told  them  what  they  should  say  unto  I. 

12.  To  cause  to  hear,  yp(p  shamea,  5. 

Judgi3.  23  nor  would,  as  at  this  time,  have  told  us(su. 
Isa.  42.    9  before  they  spring  forth  1  tell  you  of  them 

44.  8  have  not  I  told  thee  from  that  time,  and 

45.  21  hath  told  it  from  that  time?  (have)  not  I 
48.  20  tell  this,  utter  it  (even)  to  the  end  of  the 

13.7*0  tell  again,  avayy4\\w  anapgello. 

Mark  5.  14  [told]  (it)  in  the  city,  and  in  the  country 

5.  19  [tell]them  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath 

John  4.  25  when  he  is  come,  he  will  tell  us  all  things 

5.  15  [told]  the  Jews  that  it  was  Jes\is  which 
Acts  16.  38  the  Serjeants  [told]  these  words  unto  the 
2_Co.   7.    7  he  told  us  your  earnest  desire,  your  mo. 
14.7*0  tell  away  or  off,  airayyiWui  apaff gelid. 
Matt.  8.  33  told  every  thing,  aud  what  w,as  befallen 

14.  12  and  buried  it,  and  went  and  told  Jesus 
28.    9  [as  they  went  to  tell  his  disciples,  behold] 
28. 10  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  Galilee 

Mark  6.  30  told  him  all  things,  both  what  they  had 
16.  10  [she  went  and  told  them  that  had  been] 
16.  13  [they  went  and  told  (it)  unto  the  residue] 
Luke  7.  22  tell  John  what  things  ye  have  seen  and 
8. 20  it  was  told  him  (by  certain),  which  said 
8.  34  went  and  told  (it)  in  the  city  and  in  the 

8.  36  They  also  which  saw  (it)  told  them  by 

9.  36  they  kept  (it)  close,  and  told  no  man  in 
13.    1  There  were,  .some  that  told  him  of  the 
18.  37  they  told  him,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  pa. 
24.    9  told  all  these  things  unto  the  eleven,  and 

John 4.  51  his  servants  met  him,  and  [told]  (him),  sa. 

20.  18  Mary  Magdalene  came  and  [told]  the  dis. 
Acts   5.  22  and  found  them  not.  .they  returned,  and 

5.  25  Then  came  one  and  told  them,  saying,  B. 
12. 14  and  told  how  Peter  stood  before  thegate 

15.  27  who  shall  also  tell  (you)  the  same  things 

16.  36  the  keeper  of  the  prison  told  this  saying 

22.  26  he  went  and  told  the  chief  captain,  saying 
23. 16  wentand  entered  into  the  castle,  and  tohl 

23.  17  for  he  hath  a  certain  thing  to  tell  him 
23. 19  (him),  What  is  this  that  thou  hast  to  tell 

15. 7*0  lead  through,  relate,  Biijyco/uu  diegeomai. 
Mark  5.  16  they  that  saw  (it)  told  them  how  it  befell 
9.    9  he  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no 
Luke  9. 10  the  apostles,  .told  him  all  that  they  had 
Heb.  11.  32  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  Gedeou,  and 

16.  To  see,  know,  be  acquainted  with,  olda,  oida. 
Matt 21.  27  they  answered,  .and  said,  We  cannot  tell 
Markn.33  they  answered  and  said.  .We  cannot  tell 
Luke2o.    7  That  they  coidd  not  tell  whence  (it  was) 
John  3.    8  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whi. 

8.  14  ye  cannot  tell  whence  I  come,  and  whit. 

16.  18  What  is  this,  .we  cannot  tell  what  he  sa, 

2  Co.  12.   2  whether  in  the  body,  I  cannot  tell. .  I  can. 

12.    3  out  of  the  body,  [I  cannot  tell] :  God  kno. 

17.  To  talk  out,  4K\a\(ta  eklalco. 

Acts  23.  22  tell  no  man  that  thou  hast  showed  thes 

18.  To  lead  cut,  bring  forth,  ^nyco/iai  ezegeomai. 
Luke24.  35  they  told  what  things  (were  done)  in  the 

19.  To  speak,  tell,  say,  eJ-rrov  eipon. 

Matt.  8.    4  See  thou  tell  no  man;  but  go  thy  way,  sh, 
12.  48  answered  and  said  unto  him  that  [told] 

16.  20  they  should  tell  no  man  that  he  was  Jesus 

17.  9  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man,  until  the  son  of 

18.  17  if  he  shall  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  (it) 

21.  s  Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion,  Behold,  thy 


TELL 


965 


TEMPLE 


Matt  2 


24. 

26. 

28. 

28. 

Mark  5. 

7- 

8. 

9- 

*3- 

t6. 

Luke  5. 

7- 


22.  67 

22.  67 

John  3. 12 


14. 

16. 
18. 
18. 
20. 
Acts    5. 


wiU  ask  you  one  thing,  which  if  ye  tell  me 
Tell  them  which  are  bidden,  Behold,  I  ha. 
Tell  us  therefore.  What  thinkest  thou?  Is 
Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be?  and 
that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the  Ch. 
tell  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen  from  the 
there  shall  ye  see  him:  lo,  I  have  told  you 
and  fell  down. .and  told  him  all  the  truth 
he  charged  them  that  they  [should  tell] 
Neither  go  into  the  town,  nor  tell  (it)  to 
he  answered  and  told  them,  Elias  verily 
Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be?  and 
tell  his  disciples  and  Peter  that  he  goeth 
he  charged  him  to  tell  no  man:  but  go,  and 
[Tell]  me  therefore,  which  of  them  will  lo. 
he  charged  them  that  they  should  tell  no 
commanded  (them)  [to  tell]  no  man  that 
tell  that  fox,  Behold,  I  cast  out  devils,  and 
Tell  us,  by  what  authority  doest  thou  th. 
Saying,  Art  thou  the  Christ?  tell  us.   And 
he  said  unto  them,  If  I  tell  you,  ye  will 
If  I  have  told  you  earthly  things,  and  ye 
how  shall  ye  believe,  if  I  tell  you  (of)  he. 
see  a  man  which  told  me  all  things  that 
which  testified,  He  told  me  all  that  ever 
I  have  told  you  already,  and  ye  did  not 
said. .If  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly 
I  told  you,  and  ye  believed  not:  the  works 
and  told  them  what  things  Jesus  had  done 
if  (it  were)  not  (so),  I  would  have  told  you 
ye  may  remember  that  I  told  you  of  them 
Jesus  answered,  I  have  told  youthatl  am 
Sayest  thou  this . .  or  did  others  tell  it  thee 
tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  him,  and  I 
Tellnie  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so  mu.? 


20.7*0  say,  speak,  tell,  epico  ereo. 

Matt  21.  24  I  in  likewise  will  tell  you  by  what  autho. 
Markn.  29  I  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do  these 
Johni4.  29  I  have  told  you  before  it  come  to  pass,  th. 
Rev.  17.    7  I  will  tell  thee  the  mysteryof  the  woman 

21.  To  talk,  \a\eaj  laleo. 

Matt  26.  13  (there)  shall  also  this,  .be  told  for  a  me. 

Luke  1 .  45  those  things  which  were  told  her  from  the 

2.  17  the  saying  which  was  told,  them  concern. 

2. 18  those  things  which  were  told  them  by  the 

2.  20  had  heard  and  seen,  as  it  was  told  unto 

John  S.  40  a  man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth,  which 

16.   4  these  things  have  I  told  you.  that  when 
Acts    9.   6  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  must  do 
to.    6  [he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to] 
11.  14  Who  shall  tell  thee  words,  whereby  thou 
22.  10  it  shall  be  told  thee  of  all  things  which 
27.  25  I  believe,  .it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told 

22.  To  lay  out,  say,  speak,  \eyai  lego. 

Matt  10.  27  What  I  tell  you  in  darkness,  (that)  speak 

21.  27  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 
Mark  1.  30  lay  sick  of  a  fever,  and  anon  they  tell  him 

8. 30  he  charged  them  that  they  [should  tell] 

10.  32  began  to  tell  them  whatthings  should  ha. 

11.  33  Neither  do  I  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 
Luke  4.  25  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  many  widows  were 

9.  27  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  there  be  some  stan. 
10.  24  I  tell  you,  that  many  prophets  and  kings 

12.  51  to  give  peace  on  earth?  I  tell  you,  Nay 

12.  59  I  tell  thee,  thou  shalt  not  depart  thence 

13.  3,  5  I  tell  you,  Nay;  but,  except  ye  repeut 
13. 27  I  tell  you,  I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are 
17.34  I  tell  you,  in  that  night  there  shallbe  two 

18.  8  I  tell  you  that  he  will  avenge  them  spee. 
18. 14  I  tell  you,  this  man  went  down  to  his  ho. 

19.  40  I  tell  you  that,  if  these  should  hold  their 

20.  8  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

22.  34 1  tell  thee,  Peter,  the  cock  shall  not  crow 
24.  10  which  told  these  things  unto  the  apostles 

John  3.  45  because  I  tell  (you)  the  truth,  ye  believe  me 

12.  22  telleth  Andrew.  .Andrew  and  Philip  tell 

13.  19  I  tell  you  before  it  come,  that,  when  it  is 
16.    7  I  tell  you  the  truth;  It  is  expedient  for 

Acts  17.  21  but  either  to  tell,  or  to  hear  some  new  thi. 
22.  27  said  unto  him,  Tell  me,  art  thou  a  Roman 
Gal.     4.  21  Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the 
Phil.   3.  iS  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you 
2  Til.  2.    5  when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these 
Jude      18  they  told  you  there  should  be  mockers  in 

23.  To  indicate,  declare,  y.f\vvm  menuo. 

Acts  23.  30  it  was  toldmehow  that  the  Jews  laid  wa. 

TELL  (a  fault),  in  time  past,  to  — 
l.To  convict,  convince,  e\4yx<o  elegclw. 

MattiS.  15  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee 

2.  To  say,  speak  or  tell  before,  wpoeirw  proepo. 
Gal.     5.  21  I  have  also  told  (you)  in  time  past,  that 

TELL  before  or  unto,  to  — 

I. To  make  thoroughly  manifest,  8tao*a(p€U)  diasph. 
MattiS.  31  cameand  told  unto  their  lord  all  that  was 

2.  To  say,  specck  or  tell  before,  irpoepeo)  jwoereo. 
Matt24.  25  Behold,  I  have  told  you  before 
2  Co.  13.   2  I  told  you  before,  and  foretell  you,  as  if 

3.7*0  lay  out,  say  or  spco,k  before,  irpoKeyuprolego. 
Gal.    5.  21  of  the  which  I  tell  you  before,  as  I  have 
1  Th.  3.    4  we  told  you  before  that  we  should  suffer 

TELLING  — 

Kumber.  narration,  "I5pp  mispar. 

Judg.  7.  15  when  Gideon  heard  the  telling  of  the  dr. 


TE'-MA,  NC'n,  tcsn  sun  burnt, 

1.  A  son  of  Ishmael  and  his  posterity  at  the  Persian  Gulf. 

B.C   1840. 

Gen.  25. 15  Hadar,  and  T.,  Jetur,  Naphish,  and  Ked, 
1  Ch.  1.  30  Mishma,  and  Duniah,  Massa,  Hadad.  .T. 

2.  A  city  or  district  on  the  N.  of  Arabia,  near  the  desert 
of  Syria;  perhaps  Teyma,  on  the  Haj  route. 

Job    6.  19  The  troops  of  T.  looked,  the  companies  of 
Isa.  21. 14  The  inhabitants,  .of  T.  brought  water  to 
Jer.  25.  23  Dedan,  and  T.,  and  Buz,  and  all.. in  the 
TE'-MAN,  TE-MA'-NI,  \&$,  »JO^. 

1.  A  son  of  Eliphaz  son  of  Esau.    B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  11  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  were  T.,  Omar,  Zepho 

36. 15  duke  T.,  duke  Omar,  duke  Zepho,  duke 
1  Ch.  1.  36  The  sons  of  Eliphaz;  T.,  and  Omar,  Ze. 

2.  An  Edomite  chief.     B.C.  1480. 

Gen.  36.  42  Duke  Kenaz,  duke  T.,  duke  Mibzar 
1  Ch.  1.  53  Duke  Kenaz,  duke  T.,  duke  Mibzar 

3.  A  race  and  district  in  or  at  the  N.E.  of  Edom. 
Gen.  36.  34  Hushani  of  the  land  of  T.  reigned  in  his 
Jer.  49.    7  (Is)  wisdom  no  more  in  T.?  is  counsel  per. 

49.  20  purposed  against  the  inhabitants  of  T. 
Eze.  25.  13  I  will  make  it  desolate  from  T.;  and  they 
Amos  1.  12  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  T.,  which  shall  de. 
Obad.        9  thy  mighty  (men),  0  T.,shallbedismayed 
Hab.    3.    3  God  came  froniT.,  and  the  holy  One  from 

TEMANTTE,  'ip'Fi. 

An  inhabitant  of  Teman. 

1  Ch.  1.  45  Husham .  .of  the  T.  reigned  in  lus  stead 
Job     2.  11  Eliphaz  the  T.,  and  Bifdad  the  Shuhite 
4.    1  Then  Eliphaz  the  T.  answered  and  said 
15.    1  Then  answered  Eliphaz  the  T.,  and  said 
22.    1  Then  Eliphaz  the  T.  answered  and  said 
42.    7  the  LORDsaid  to  Eliphaz  theT.,Mywrath 
42.   9  Eliphaz  the  T.  and  Bildad  the  Shuhite 
TE-ME'-NI,  'i^'pi  fortunate. 
A  son  of  Ashur,  and  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur. 

1  Ch.  4.    6  Ahuzam,  and  Hepher,  and  T.,  and  Haah. 
TEMPER,  to  — 
1. To  mix,  mingle,  hh*\balal. 

Exod29.    2  cakes  unleavened  tempered  with  oil,  and 
2.  To  sprinkle,  temper,  DD"i  rasas. 

Eze.  46. 14  the  third  part  of  an  bin  of  oil,  to  temper 
TEMPER,  tempered  (together),  to  (he)  — 

1.  To  be  salted,  tempered,  rns  malach,  4. 

Exod3o.  35  shalt  make  it  a  perfume,  .tempered  toge. 

2.  To  mix  with,  compound,  ffvyKepavvvfu  suyJceran. 

1  Co.  12.  24  God  hath  tempered  the  body  together 
TEMPERANCE,  to  be  temperate  — 

1.  Self  restraint,  continence,  iyKpdreta  eykrateia. 

Acts  24.  25  he  reasoned  of  righteousness,  temperance 
Gal.     5.  23  Meekness,  temperance :  against  such  th. 

2  Pe.   1.   6  to  knowledgetemperance;  and  totemper. 

2.7*0  be  self  restrained,  continent,  syKpa.Tevoij.ai. 

1  Co.   9.  25  every  man  that  striveth . .  is  temperate  in 

3.  Self  restrained,  continent,  iyKpar-qs  egkrates. 

Titus  1.    8  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  te. 
A.Sound  minded,  prudent,  <ru><ppa>v  sdphrdn. 

Titus  2.    2  That  the  aged  men  be  sober,  grave,  tern. 
TEMPEST,  (tossed  with)  — 
l.A?i  inundation,  food,  storm,  dti  zerem. 

Isa.   28.    2  (which)  as  a  tempest  of  hail  (and)  a  des. 
30.  30  a  devouring  fire,  (with)  scattering,  and  te 
32.   2  an  hiding  place,  .and  a  covert  from  the  te. 
2. Hurricane,  nffiD  suphah. 

Job  27.  20  a  tempest  stealeth  him  away  in  the  night 
3.  To  be  tossed  about,  tempestuous,  "lyp  saar. 

Isa.   54. 11  Othouafflicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  (and) 
i.A  tchirhcind,  tempest,  ~i£D  saar. 

Psa.  55.    8  I  would  hasten  my  escape  from  the.  .te. 
83.  15  persecute  them  with  thy  tempest,  and  ma. 

Amos  1.  14  with  a  tempest  in  the  day  of  the  whirlw. 

Jon.    1.    4  there  was  a  mighty  tempest  inthesea,  so 
1.  12  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest  (is)  upon 
5.-4  whirlwind,  tempest,  rnj;i?  searah. 

Isa.   29.   6  with  storm  and  tempest,  and  the  flame  of 
6.^1  wind,  nn  ruach. 

Psa.  11.   6  fire  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tern. 
7.  A  tempest,  whirhcind,  nTu^  searah. 

Job     9. 17  he  breaketh  me  with  a  tempest,  andmul. 
8. A  rushing,  storm,  tempest,  QviWa  thuella. 

Heb.  12.  iS  nor  unto  blackness,  and  darkness,  and  te. 
9.-1  violent  storm,  \al\aty  lailaps. 

2  Pe.  2.  17  clouds  that  are  carried  with  a  tempest;  to 
10.^4  shaking,  agitation,  <r€io-y.6$  scismos. 

Matt.  8.  24  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,  in. 
11.  To  be  in  awinter  storm,  x^^^C0,aai  cheimazom. 

Acts  27.  18  we  being  exceedingly  tossed  with  a  tern. 
V2AYinter,  a  pouring  storm,  yeifid^v  cheimon. 

Acts  27.  20  no  small  tempest  lay  on  (us),  all  hope  th. 
TEMPESTUOUS,  (to  he)  — 
l.To  be  tossed  about,  be  tempestuous,  nyD  saar. 

Jon.    1. 11,  13  for  the  sea  wrought,  and  was  tempes. 

2.  To  be  tempestuous,  frightful,  ijjiy  saar,  2. 

Psa.  50.    3  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about 


3. Smoking,  violent,  whirling,  rvcpwviKos  tuphonikos. 
Acts  27.  14  there  arose  against  it  a  tempestuous  wind 

TEMPLE  — 

1. House,  n;a  bayith. 

2  Ki.  11.  10  shields,  that  (were)  in  the  temple  of  the 
1 1 .  1 1  from  the  right  corner  of  the  temple  to  the 
11.  11  the  temple,  (along)  by  the  altar  and  the 
11.  13  she  came  to  the  people  into  the  temple  of 

1  Ch.  6. 10  the  temple  that  Solomon  built  in  Jerusa. 

id.  10  fastened  his  head  in  the  temple  of  Dagon 

2  Ch.23.  10  of  the  temple  to  the  left  side  of  the  tern. 

23. 10  along  by  the  altar  and  the  temple,  by  the 

35.  20  when  Josiah  had  prepared  thetemple,  N. 

2.  Palace,  temple,  *?yn  hekal. 

1  Sa.   1.  9  sat  upon  a  seat  by  a  post  of  the  temple  of 

3.  3  the  lamp  of  God  went  out  in  the  temple 

2  Sa.  22.   7  he  did  hear  my  voice  out  of  histemple.and 

1  Ki.   t.    3  the  porch  before  the  temple  of  the  house 

6.  5  round  about,  (both)  of  the  temple  and  of 
6.  17  the  temple  before  it,  was  forty  cubits  (lo.) 

6.  33  also  made  he  for  the  door  of  the  temple 

7.  21  set . .  the  pillars  in  the  porch  of  the  temple 
7.  50  the  doors  of  the  house,  (to  wit),  of  the  te. 

2  Ki.  18.  16  cut  off  (the  gold  from)  the  doorsof  thete. 

23.  4  to  bring  forth  out  of  the  temple  of  the  L. 

24. 13  which  Solomon.,  had  made  in  thetemple 
2  Ch.  3. 17  he  reared  up  the  pillars  before  the  temple 

4.  7  set  (them)  in  the  temple,  five  on  the  right 
4.    8  placed  (them)  in  the  temple,  five  on  the 
4.  22  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  temple,  (we. 

26.  16  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn 

27.  2  he  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the  Lo. 
29. 16  that  they  found  in  the  temple  of  the  Lo. 

36.  7  and  put  them  in  his  ten:  pie  at  Babylon 
Ezra    3.    6  the  foundation  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord 

3. 10  builders  laid  the  foundation  of  the  temple 

4.  1  builded  the  temple  unto  the  Lord  God  of 
Neh.    6.  10  Let  us  meet  together,  .within  the  temple 

6.  10  let  us  shut  the  doors  of  the  temple :  for 

6.  11  would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his  life 
Psa.     5.    7  will  I  worship  toward  thy  holy  temple 

11.  4  The  Lord  (is)  in  his  holy  temple,  the  Lo. 
18.  6  he  heard  my  voice  out  of  his  temple,  and 
27.  4  to  behold,  .and  to  enquire  in  his  temple 
29.  9  in  his  temple  doth  every  one  speak  of  (his) 
48.  9  We  have  thought,  in  the  midst  of  thyte. 

65.  4  goodness  of  thy  house . .  of  thy  holy  temple 
68.  29  Because  of  thy  temple  at  Jerusalem  shall 
79.    1  thy  holy  temple  have  they  defiled ;  they 

138.  2  I  will  worship  toward  thy  holy  temple, and 

Isa.     6.  1  and  lifted  up,  and  his  train  filled  the  te. 

44.  28  to  thetemple,  Thyfoundation  shall  be  laid 

66.  6  a  voice  from  the  temple,  a  voice  of  the  L. 
Jer.     7.  4  lying  words,  saying,  The  temple  of  the  L. 

7.  4  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  The  temple  of 

24.  1  baskets  of  figs  (were)  set  before  thetemple 

50.  28  to  declare .  .the  vengeance  of  his  temple 

51.  11  because  it  (is),  .the  vengeance  of  his  tern. 
Eze.  ,8.  16  the  door  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  betw. 

8. 16  their  backs  toward  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
41.  1  he  brought  me  to  the  temple,  and  meas. 
41.  4  the  breadth,  twenty  cubits,  before  the  te. 
41.  15  with  the  inner  temple,  and  the  porchesof 
41.  20  palm  trees  made,  and  (on)  the  wall  of  the 
41.  21  The  posts  of  the  temple  (were)  squared 
41.  23  the  temple  and  the  sanctuary  had  two  do. 

41.  25  made  on  them,  on  the  doors  of  the  tern. 

42.  8  before  the  temple  (were)  an  hundred  cu. 
Eos.  S.  14  forgotten  lus  Maker,  and  buildeth  temp. 
Joel  3.  5  have  carried  intoyour  temples  my  goodly 
Amos  S.  3  the  songs  of  thetemple  shallbe  howlings 
Jon.    2.    4  I  will  look  again  toward  thy  holy  temple 

2.    7  came  in  unto  thee,  into  thine  holy  tern. 
Mic.    1.    2  be  witness  against  you .  .from  his  holy  te. 
Hab.   2.  20  the  Lord  (is)  in  his  holy  temple :  let  all 
Hag.    2.  15  was  laid  upon  a  stone  in  the  temple  of  the 

2. 18  the  foundation  of  the  Lord's  temple  was 
Zech.  6. 12  and  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord 

6. 13  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  theL0RD;and 

6. 14  a  memorial  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord 

6. 15  shall  come  and  build  in  the  temple  of  the 

8.  9  the  foundation .  .was  laid,  that  the  tern. 
Mai.   3.    1  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple,  even 

3. Palace,  temple,  73*n  hekal. 

Ezra    5.  14  Nebuchadnezzar  took  out  of  the  temple 

5.  14  brought  them  into  the  temple  of  Babymii 
5.  14  those  did  Cyrus,  .take  out  of  the  temple 

5.  15  carry  them  into  the  temple  that  (is)  in  J". 

6.  5  Nebuchadnezzar  took  forth  out  of  the  te. 
6.   5  brought  again  unto  the  temple  which  (is) 

Dan.  5.  2  Nebuchadnezzar  had  taken  out  of  the  te. 
5.    3  vessels  that  were  taken  out  of  thetemple 

4. Sacred,  priestly  edifice,  temple,  Upov  hieron. 
Matt.  4.    5  setteth  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  thetemple 

12.  s  the  priests  in  the  temple  profane  the  sa. 
12.  6  in  this  place  is  (one)  greater  than  the  te. 
at.  12  Jesus  went  into  the  temple  of  God,  and 
21. 12  bought  in  the  temple,  and  overthrew  the 

21. 14  and  the  lame  came  to  him  in  the  temple 

21. 15  the  children  crying  in  the  temple,  and  sa. 
2i.  23  when  he  was  come  into  the  temple,  the 
24.    1  Jesus  wentout,  and  departed  from  the  te. 
24.    1  to  show  him  the  buildings  of  the  temple. 
26.  55  sat  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple 

Markn.  n  entered  into  Jerusalem,  and  into  thete. 
11.  15  Jesus  went  into  the  temple,  and  began  to 
11.  15  them  that  sold  and  bought  in  the  temple 

11. 16  should  carry  (any)  vessel  through  the  te. 


TEMPLES 


966 


TEN 


Markri.  27  as  he  was  walking  in  the  temple,  there 

12.  35  and  said,  while  he  taught  in  the  temple 

13.  1  as  he  went  out  of  the  temple,  one  of  his 

13.  3  And  as  he  sat.  .over  against  the  temple 

14.  49  I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple  teach. 
Luke  2.  27  And  he  came  by  the  spirit  into  the  temp. 

2.  37  departed  not  from  the  temple,  hut  served 

2.  46  they  found  him  in  the  temple,  sitting  in 

4.  g  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and 

18.  10  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray 

19.  45  he  went  into  the  temple,  and  began  to  ca. 

19.  47  he  taught  daily  in  the  temple.  But  the  ch. 

20.  1  he  taught  the  people  in  the  temple,  and 
2i,   5  assome  spake  of  the  temple,  how.it  was  ad. 

21.  37  the  day  time  he  was  teaching  in  the  tern. 

21.  38  people  came  early .  .to  him  in  the  temple 

22.  52  chief  priests,  and  captains  of  the  temple 
22.  53  When  I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple 
24.  53  were  continually  in  the  temple,  praising 

John  2.  14  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  oxen 
2. 15  he  drove  them  all  out  of  the  temple,  and 

5.  14  Jesus  findeth  him  in  the  temple,  and  said 
7.  14  Jesus  went  up  iuto  the  temple,  and  taught 

7.  28  Then  cried  Jesus  iu  the  temple,  as  he  ta. 

8.  2  [he  came  again  into  the  temple,  and  all] 
8.  20  spake  Jesus,  .as  he  taught  in  the  temple 
8.  59  went  out  of  the  temple,  going  through  the 

10.  23  Jesus  walked  in  the  temple,  in  Solomon's 

11.  56  spake,  .as  they  stood  iu  the  temple,  What 

18.  20  in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always 
Acts    2.  46  continuing.,  with  one  accord  in  the  temple 

3,  1  went  up  together  into  the  temple  at  the 
3.  2  the  gate  of  the  temple  which  is  called  Be. 
3.  2  alms  of  them  that  entered  into  the  temple 
3.   3  Peter  and  John  about  to  go  into  the  temple 

3.  8  entered  with  them  into  the  temple,  walk. 
3. 10  for  alms  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the  tern. 

4.  1  the  captain  of  the  temple,  and  the  Saddu. 

5.  20  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  people  all  the 
5.  21  they  entered  into  the  temple  early  in  the 
5.  24  the  captain  of  the  temple  and  the  chief  pr. 
5.  25  men  whom  ye  put  inprison  are.  .in  thete. 

5.  42  in  the  temple,  and  in  every  house,  they 

19.  27  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  sh. 
2r.  26  entered  into  the  temple,  to  signify  the  ac. 
21.  27  the  Jews.,  when  they  saw  him  in  the  tern. 
21.  28  brought  Greeks  also  iuto  the  temple,  and 
21.  29  that  Paul  had  brought  into  the  temple 

21.  30  took  Paul,  and  drew  him  out  of  the  temp. 

22.  17  while  I  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a 
24.   6  also  hath  gone  about  to  profane  the  temp 

24.  12  they  neither  found  me  in  the  temple  disp. 
24. 18  certain  Jews,  .foundme  purified  in  thete. 

25.  8  neither  against  the  temple, noryet  against 

26.  21  the  Jews  caught  me  iu  the  temple,  and 

1  Co.  9.  13  that  they..live(of  the  things)of  the  tern. 
5.  A  dwelling  j tlace,  inner  sanctuary,  vaos  naos. 
Matt  23. 16  Whosoever  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it 

23.  16  shall  swear  by  the  gold  of  the  temple,  he 
23.  17  whether  is  greater,  the  gMd,  <>r  the  temple 
23.  21  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  temple, sweareth 
23.  35  whom  ye  slew  between  the  temple  and 

26.  61  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God 

27.  5  he  cast  down  the.  .silver  in  the  temple 
27.  40  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and  bu. 
27.  51  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 

Marki4. 58  I  will  destroy  this  temple  that  is  made 

15.  29  thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and  bu. 
15.  38  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 

Luke  1.    9  when  he  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
1.  21  marvelled  that  he  tarried,  .in  the  temple 

1.  22  that  he  had  seen  a  vision  in  the  temple 
23.  45  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  mi. 

John  2.  19  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I 

2.  20  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  in  b. 

2.  21  But  he  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body 
Acts    7.  48  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  [temples) 

17.  24  dwelleth  not  iu  temples  made  with  hands 

3.  16  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God 
3.  17  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him 
3.  17  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which,  .ye 

6.  19  know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple 
6.  16  what  agreement  hath  the  temple  of  God 

6.  16  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God 
2.  21  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord 

2.  4  so  that  he  as  God  sitteth  in  the  temple  of 

3.  12  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my 

7.  15  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple 
11.  1  measure  the  temple  of  God,  and  the  altar 
11.  2  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  le. 
11.  10  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven 
11.  19  there  was  seen  iu  his  temple  the  ark  of 

14.  [15],  17  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple 

15.  5  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testi. 
15.  6  the  seven  angels  came  out  [of  the  temple] 
1 5.    3  the  temple  was  filled  with  smoke  from  the 

15.  S  no  man  was  aide  to  enter  into  the  temple 

16.  1  I  heard  a  great  voice  [out  of  the  temple] 
16  17  there  came  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple 
21. 22 1  saw  :     tuple  therein:  for  the  Lord 
21.  22  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  tern. 

J.  HoUSGi  oinos  0  " 

Luke-11.  51  perished  between  the  altar  and  the  temple 
TEMPLES  — 

ks,  ~H  raqqak. 

!         1        smote  the  nail  into  his  temples,  and  fast, 

a.  22  lay  dead,  and  the  nail  (was)  in  his  temples 

5.  26  pierced  and  stricken  thiough  his  temples 

Song  4.   3tli>  temples  (are)  like  a  piece  of  a  pomeg. 

6.'  7  As  a  pioce  of  a  pomegranate  (are)  thy  te. 


:  Co. 


2  Co. 

Eph. 

2  rii. 
1;  \ 


TEMPORAL  — 

For  a  season  or  time,  irpoo-naipos  2)roskairos. 

2  Co.  4.  18  for  the  things  which  are  seen  (are)  temp. 
TEMPT,  (not)  to  be  tempted,  to  — 
l.To  prove,  try,  test,  }n3  baehan. 

Mai.   3. 15  (they  that)  tempt  God  are  even  delivered 
2. To  try,  prove,  nm  nasah,  3. 

Gen.  22.    1  God  did  tempt  Abraham,  and  said  unto 

Exodi7.    2  Moses  said,  .wherefore  do  ye  tempt  the 

17.  7  they  tempted  the  Lord,  saying,  Is  the  L. 
Nixing.  22  have  tempted  me  now  these  ten  times, and 
Dent.  6.  16  Ye  shall  not  tempt,  .as  ye  tempted  (him) 
Psa.  78. 18  they  temptedGod  in  their  heart,  by  asking 

78.  41  they  turned  back,  and  tempted  God,  and 
78.  56  they  tempted  and  provoked  the  most  high 
95-  9  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved  me,  and 
106.  14  lusted  exceedingly,  .and  tempted  God  in 
Isa.     7. 12  I  will  not  ask,  neither  will  I  tempt  the  L. 

3. Not  to  be  tempted  or  tried,  aireipao-ros  apteirastos. 
Jas.     1.  13  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither 

4.  To  try,  prove  exceedingly,  eKireipdfa  elpeirazo. 

Matt.  4.   7  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 

Luke  4.  12  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God 

10.  25  a  certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted 

1  Co.  10.    g  Neither  let  us  tempt  Christ,  as  some  of 

5.  To  try,  prove,  iretpdfa  peirazo. 

Matt.  4.    1  Then  was  Jesus  led . .  to  be  tempted  of  the 
16.    1  the  Sadducees  came,  and  tempting  desired 

19.  3  The  Pharisees  also  came  unto  him,  temp. 
22.  18  and  said,  Why  tempt  ye  me,  (ye)hypocr.? 
22.  35  asked  (hini  a  question),  tempting  him,  and 

Mark  1. 13  he  was  there,  .forty  days, tempted  of  Satan 
8.  11  seeking  of  him  a  sign,  .tempting  him 

10.  2  And  the  Pharisees  came  to  him.  .tempting 
12. 15  Why  tempt  ye  me?  bring  me  a  penny,  that 

Luke  4.    2  Being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil 

11.  16  others,  tempting  (him),  sought  ot  him  a 

20.  23  [and  said  unto  them,  Why  tempt  ye  me?] 
John  8.  6  [This  they  said,  tempting  him,  that  they] 
Acts   5.    9  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt  the  sp. 

15.  10  why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put  a  yoke  upon  the 
1  Co.  7.    5  that  Satan  tempt  you  not  for  your  incon. 

10.   9  as  some  of  them  also  [tempted],  and  were 

10.  13  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  ab. 
Gal.  6.  1  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tern. 
1  Th.  3.  5  lest,  .the  tempter  have  tempted  you,  and 
Heb.  2.  18  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tem. 

2.  18  he  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  temp. 

3.  9  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved  me,  and 

4.  15  was  in  all  points  [tempted]  like  as(we  are 

11.  37  they  were  sawu  asunder,  were  tempted 
Jas.    1.  13  Let  no  man  say  when  he  is  tempted,  lam  t. 

1.  13  God  cannot,  .neither  tempteth  he  anymau 
1.  14  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn 

TEMPTATION,  tempter  — 

I. A  trying,  trial,  nsa  massah, 

Deut.  4.  34  by  temptations,  by  signs,  and  by  wonders 

7.  19  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes 

29.   3  The  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes 

Psa.  95.    8  (in)  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wilder. 

%Trial,  proof,  ireipaa-/x6s peirasmos. 

Matt.  6.  13  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver 

26.  41  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptat. 

Mark  14.  38  Watch  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  te. 

Luke  4.  13  when  the  devil  had  ended  all  the  tempt. 

5.  13  have  no  root,  .and  in  time  of  temptation 
ii.  4  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver 
22.  28  have  continued  with  me  in  my  temptati. 
22. 40  Pray  ye  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation 
22.  46  riseandpray,  lestyeenterintotemptation 

Acts  20.  19  with  many  tears,  and  temptations,  which 
1  Co. 10. 13  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but 
10. 13  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way 
Gal.  4.  14  my  temptatiou  which  was  in  my  flesh  ye 
1  'i'i.  6.  9  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 
Heb.  3.  S  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wilderness 
Jas.  1.  2  coxmt  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into,  .tempt. 
1. 12  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  endureth  temp. 

1  Pe.  1.    6  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptati. 

2  Pe.  2.    9  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of. temptations 
Rev.  3.  io  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  temptat. 

Z.To  fry,  prove,  weipafa  pevrazd. 

Matt.  4.    3  when  the  tempter  came  to  him,  he  said 
1  Th.  3.    5  sent  to  know,  .lest  by  some  means  the  te. 

TEN  (strings,  instrument  of)  — 
1.  Ten,  tenth,  ten  stringed  instrument,  "llfe^  asor. 
Gen,  24.  55  Let  the  damsel  abide,  .at  the  least  ten 
Psa.  33.    2  psaltery  (and)auinstrumentof  ten  strings 
92.    3  Upon  an  instrument  of  ten  strings,  and 
144.    9  upon,  .an  instrument  of  ten  strings  will 
\L.Trti,  n-i;;'j/,  n^j;  eser,  asarah. 

Gen.    5.  14  the'days.  .were  nine  hundred  and  ten  ye. 

16.  3  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  land  of 

18.  32  Peradventure  ten  shall  be  found  there 
18.  32  he  said,  I  will  not  destroy  (it)  for  ten's  s. 
24.  10  the  servant  took  ten  camels  of  the  camels 
24.  22  two  bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten(shekels) 
31.    7  deceived  me,  and  changed  my  wages  ten 

31.  41  and  thou  hast  changed  my  wages  ten  ti. 

32.  15  ten  bulls,  twenty  she  asses,  and  ten  foals 
42.  3  Joseph's  ten  brethren  went  down  to  buy 
45.  23  ten  asses  laden  with  the  good  things  of  E. 
45.  2j  ten  she  asses  laden  with  com  and  bread 
50.  22  and  Joseph  lived  an  hundred  and  ten  ye. 
50,  26  Joseph  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten 


Deut. 

4- 

10. 

Josh.  15. 

17- 


Judg.  1. 
2. 

3- 
4- 
4- 
4- 
6. 
7- 


Ki. 


ExodiS.  21,  25  rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens 

26.    1  shalt  make  the  tabernacle  (with)  ten  cur. 

26.  16  Ten  cubits  (shall  be)  the  length  of  a  board 

27. 12  their  pillars  ten,  and  their  sockets  ten 

34.  28  wrote  upon  the  tables,  .the  ten  coxnman. 

36.    8  every  wise  hearted  man.  .made  ten  curt. 

36.  2 1  The  length  of  a  board  (was)  ten  cubits,and 

38.  12  their  pillars  ten,  and  their  sockets  tea 

Lev.  26.  26  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one 

27-    5.  7  thy  estimation,  .for  the  female  ten  sh. 

Num.  7.  14  One  spoon  of  ten  (shekels)  of  gold,  full  of 

7.  20  One  spoon  of  gold  of  ten  (shekels),  full  of 

7.  26,  32,  38,  44,  50,  56  One  golden  spoon  of  ten 

7.  62,  68,  74,  8oOnegoldeu  spoon  of  ten  (shekels) 

7.    86  The  golden  spoons,  .(weighing)  ten  (sh.) 

11.  19  Ye  shall  not  eat  one  day.  .neither  ten  d. 

11.  32  he  that  gathered  least  gathered  ten  horn. 

14.  22  have  tempted  me  now  these  ten  times,  and 
29.  23  ten  bullocks,  two  rams,  (and)  fourteen  la. 

15  captainsover  fifties, and  captains overtens 

1 3  declared  unto  you  his  covenant . .  ten  com. 

4  the  first  writing,  the  ten  commandments 
57  Cain,  Gibeah,  and  Tinman ;  ten  cities  with 

5  there  fell  ten  portions  to  Manasseh,  besi. 

5  outof  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh, ten  cities 

26  All  the  cities  (were)  ten  with  their  suburbs 

14  with  him  ten  princes,  of  each  chief  house 
29  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  years 

4  they  slew  of  them  in  Bezek  ten  thousand 
8  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  years 

29  they  slew  of  Moab.  about  ten  thousand 

6  take  with  thee  ten  thousand  men  of  the 
10  he  went  up  with  ten  thousand  men  at  his 
14  Barak  went,  and  ten  thousand  men  after 

27  Gideou  took  ten  men  of  his  servants,  and 
3  and  there  remained  ten  thousand 

12.  11  after  him  Elon.  .he  judged  Israel  ten  ye. 
17. 10  I  will  give  thee  ten  (shekels)  of  silver  by 
20. 10  we  will  take  ten  men  of  an  hundred  thr. 
20.  34  there  came  against  Gibeah  ten  thousand 

Ruth  1.   4  and  they  dwelt  there  about  ten  years 

4.    2  he  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 
1  Sa.   1.    8  (am)  not  I  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons? 

15.  4  numbered  them . .  ten  thousand  men  of  J. 
17. 17  Take  now.  .these  ten  loaves,  and  run  to 

17.  18  carry  these  ten  cheeses  unto  the  captain 
25.  5  David  sent  out  ten  young  men;  and  Dav. 
25.  38  it  came  to  pass  about  ten  days  (after),  th. 

Sa.  15. 16  the  king  left  ten  women,  (which  were)  co. 

18.  3  (thou  art)  worth  ten  thousand  of  us:  the. 
iS.  11  I  would  have  given  thee  ten  (shekels)  of 

ten  young  men  that  1  are  Joab's  armour 
We  have  ten  parts  in  the  king,  and  we  ha. 
the  king  took  the  ten  women  (his)  concu. 
Ten  fat~oxen,  and  twenty  oxen  out  of  the 
he  sent  them  to  Lebanon,  ten  thousand  a 
ten  cubits  (was)  the  breadth  thereof  bef. 
two  cherubim  (of)  olive  tree,  (each)  ten  cu. 
unto  the  uttermost  part,  .(were)  ten  cub. 
the  other  cherub  (was)  teu  cubits:  both 
The  height  of  the  one  cherub  (was)ten  cu. 
stones  of  ten  cubits,  and  stones  of  eight 
ten  cubits  from  the  one  brim  to  the  other 
(there  were)  knops  compassing  it,  ten  m 
he  made  teu  bases  of  brass;  four  cubits 
After  this  (manner)  he  made  the  ten  bas. 
Then  made  he  ten  lavers  of  brass:  one  Ta. 
upon  every  one  of  the  ten  bases  onelaver 
the  ten  bases,  and  ten  lavers  on  the  bases 
he  said  to  Jeroboam,  Take  thee  ten  piec. 
rend  the  kingdom . .  and  will  give  teu  tri. 
and  will  give  it  unto  thee,  (even)  ten  tri. 
take  with  thee  ten  loaves,  aud  cracknels 
he  departed,  and  took  with  him  ten  tal. 
six  thousand  (pieces)  of  gold,  aud  ten  ch. 
ten  chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen 
He  slew  of  Edom..ten  thousand,  and  to. 
Menahem.  .(reigned)ten  years  in  Samaria 
go  forward  ten  degrees,  or  go  back  ten  de. 
for  the  shadow  to  go  down  teu  degrees 

10  let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  deg. 
[i  he  brought  the  shadow  teu  degrees  back. 
14  ten  thousand  captives,  and  all  the  crafts. 
35  Ishmael-.came,  aud  ten  men  with  him 
5i  the  half  (tribe)  of  Manasseh,  by  lot,  ten 

7  of  silver  ten  thousand  taleuts,  and  of 

1  twenty  cubits  the  breadth,  .and ten  cub. 

2  he  made  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits  from 

3  ten  in  a  cubit,  compassing  the  sea  round 

6  He  made  also  ten  lavers,  and  put  five  on 

7  he  made  ten  candlesticks  of  gold  acconli. 

8  He  made  also  ten  tables,  and  placed  (th.) 
1  In  his  days  the  land  was  quiet  ten  years 

11  smote  of  the  children  of  Seir  ten  thousand 

12  (other)  ten  thousand  (left), 'i  live  did  the  eli. 

5  ten  thousand  measures  of  wheat,  and  ten 
24  a  thousand  bullocks  and  ten  thousand  sh, 

9  he  reigned  three  months  and  ten  days  iu 
to  silver  basins,  .four  hundred  aud  ten,  (ami) 
1-  and  with  him  an  hundred  and  ten  males 
24  Sherebiah,  Hashabiah,  and  ten  of  their 
12  they  said  unto  us  teu  times.  From  all  pi. 
iS  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  sorts  of  wine 

1  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem 
9  I  will  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver 
10  The  ten  sons  of  Hainan  the  son  of  Ham. 
12  The  Jews  have  slain,  .the  ten  sons  of  Ha. 
ij  let  Hainan's  ten  sons  be  hangedupon  the 
14  decree  was  given,  .and  they  hanged  Ha. 
3  ten  times  have  ye  reproached  me :  ye  are 
19  Wisdom  strengthened,  .more  than  ten 
10  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath 


5- 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
7- 
7- 

7- 
7- 

7- 
7- 
7- 

1 1. 
ii. 
14. 
2Ki.  5. 
5- 
13- 
14. 


:  Ch.  6 


25- 
27. 

36. 


Ezra 
8. 

s. 

Neh.   4. 

5- 
n. 

Esth.  3. 
9- 
9- 
9- 
9. 

Job   19. 

EJccl.  7. 

Isa.     5. 


TEN 


967 


TENTH 


Isa.   3S 
Jer.  41 

41. 

41 

Eze.  40. 
41 

42 

45> 
45> 
45' 
45' 
48. 
4S 
48. 


Dan. 


Amos  5. 

6 
Hag.  2 
Zech.  5 


S  ten  degrees  backward,  .sun  returned  ten 
i  ten  men  with  him,  came  unto  Gedaliah 
2  Then  arose  Ishmael . .  and  the  ten  men  th. 

8  ten  men  were  found  among  them  that  sa. 
7  it.canie  to  pass  after  ten  days  that  the  wo. 

11  And  he  measured  the  breadth .  .ten  cubits 

2  the  breadth  of  the  door  (was)  ten  cubits 

4  before  the  chambers  (was)  a  walk  of  ten 

1  thousand  (reeds),  aud  the  breadth,  .ten 

3  shalt  thou  measure.. breadth  of  ten  tho. 

5  the  ten  thousaud  of  breadth,  shall  also  the 
14  an  homer  of  ten  baths;  for  ten  baths  (are) 

9  twenty  thousand  in  length,  and  of  ten  th. 
10  ten  thousand  in  breadth,  and  toward 

10  the  east  ten  thousand  in  breadth,  and  to 
13  twenty  thousand  in  length,  and  ten  thou. 

13  twenty  thousand,  and  the  breadth  ten  th. 
18  ten  thousand  eastward,  and  ten  thousand 

12  Prove  thy  servants,  I  beseech  thee,  ten 

14  So  he  consented,  .and  proved  them  ten 

15  at  the  end  of  ten  days  their  countenances 
20  he  found  them  ten  times  better  than  all 

3  went  forth  (by)  anjhundred  shall  leave  ten 
9  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  one  house,  that 

16  heap  of  twenty(meas.),  there  were  (but)  ten 

2  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  thereof  t. 
23  ten  men  shall  take  hold  out  of  all  langu. 


Dan.    7.    7 

7.  20 
7.  24 

4.  Ten,  5eKa 

Matt  20.  24 

25.   1 

25.28 

Mark  10.  41 

Luke  14.  31 

15.    8 

17.  12 

17.  17 

*9-  13 

IQ.  l6 

ig.   17 

I9.24 

J      I9-25 

Acts  25.  6 
Rev.  2.  10 
*  12.  3 
13-  1 
17-  3 
17.  7 
17.  12 
17.  16 


"itySL  asar,  asrak. 

behold  a  fourth  beast . .  and  it  had  ten  ho. 
of  the  ten  horns  that  (were)  in  his  head 
ten  horns  out  of  this  kingdom  (are)  ten 

deka. 

when  the  ten  heard  (it),  they  were  moved 
ten  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps,  and 
give  (it)  unto  him  which  hath  ten  talents 
when  the  ten  heard  (it),  they  began  to  be 
whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to 
what  woman,  having  ten  pieces  of  silver 
there  met  him  ten  men  that  were  lepers 
Were  there  not  ten  cleansed?  but  where 
his  ten  servants,  and  delivered  them  ten 
Lord,  thy  pouud  hath  gained  ten  pounds 
he  said,  .have  thou  authority  over  ten  ci. 
and  give  (it)  to  him  that  hath  ten  pounds 
they  said  unto  him,  Lord,  he  hath  ten  po. 
tarried  among  them  more  than  ten  days 
ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  clays :  be  thou 
having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns, -and  se. 
ten  horns,  and  upon  his  horns  ten  crowns 
beast. . having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten  horns 
the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  are  ten 
the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  upon  the 


TEN  thousand  — 

1.2'o  become  a  myriad,  ten  thousand,  32t  rabab,  4. 
Psa.144.  13  bring  forth  thousands  and  ten  thousands 

1.A  myriad,  ten  thousand,  nrirn  rebdbah. 

Lev.  26.    8  an  hundred  of  you  shall  put  ten  thousand 

Deut  32.  30  How  should . .  two  put  ten  thousand  to  Hi. 

33.    2  and  he  came  with  ten  thousands  of  saints 

33. 17  they  (are)  the  ten  thousands  of  Ephraim 

Judg2o.  10  we  will  take,  .a  thousand  out  of  ten  tho. 


18. 
21. 

29. 

3- 

91 ' 
Song  5. 

Mic.    6. 


Psa. 


;  Sa.  18.    7  slain  his  thousands,  and  David  his  tenth. 

3  They  have  ascribed  unto  David  ten  thou. 

,  11  slain  his  thousands,  and  Davidhis  ten  th. 

5  slew  his  thousands,  aud  Davidhis  ten  th. 

6  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands  of  pe. 

7  A  thousand  shall  fall,  .and  ten  thousand 
.  10  My  beloved  (is) . .  the  chief  est  among  ten  t. 

7  (or)  with  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil? 

Z.A  myriad,  ten  thousand,  *03"%  i3~i  ribbo, 

1  Ch.29.    7  five  thousand  talents  andten  thousand  dr. 
Dan.  11.  12  he  shall  cast  down  (many)  ten  thousands 

4.  Ten  thousand,  ^.vpioi  murioi. 

Matt  1 8.  24  one  was  brought . .  which  owed  him  ten  th. 

1  Co.    4.  15  though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instructors 

14.  19  than  ten  thousand  words  in  an  (unknown) 

5. 2V H-  thousand,  /xvpids  murias. 

Jude       14  the  Lord,  cometh  with  ten  thousand  of  his 

TEN  thousand  times  ten  thousand  — 

A  myriad  of  myriads,  fp~)  i3"i  ribbo  ribvan. 

Dan.   7.  10  tenthousand  times  ten  thousand  stood  be. 

TENDER  (one),  tenderness  — 

1.  Tender,  soft,  timid,  ^n  rah. 

Gen.  18.  7  fetched  a  calf  tender  and  good,  and  gave 
29.  17  Leah  (was)  tender  eyed ;  but  Rachel  was 
33. 13  lord  knoweth  that  the  children  (are)  tender 

Deut  28.  54  the  man  (that  is)  tender  among  you,  and 

28.  56  The  tender  and  delicate  woman  among 

1  Ch.22.    5  my  son  (is)  young  and  tender,  and  the  ho. 

29.  1  my  son .  .(is  yet)  young  and  tender,  and 
Prov.  4.    3  I  was  my  father's  son,  tender  and  only 
Isa.   47.    1  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  and 
Eze.  17.  22  I  will  crop  off  from  the  top.  .a  tender  one 

2.  Tenderness,  1p  rok. 

Deut 28.  56  would  not.. for  delicateness  and  tender. 
Z.Soft,  tender,  aira\ds  hapalos. 

Matt  24.  32  "When  his  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  put. 
Marki3.  28  When  her  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  put. 

TENDER  branch,  hearted,  mercy,  plant  — 
\. Suckling,  tender  branch  or  plant,  piv  yoneq. 
I6a.   53.   2  shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a  tender  p. 


2.  Suckling,  tender  branch  or  plant,  np:*v  yoneqcth. 

Job   14.    7  that  the  tender  branch  thereof  will  not 

3.  Tender  of  heart,  SIT?  !]"]  rah  lebab. 

2  Ch.  13.   7  Rehoboam  was  young  and  tender  hearted 
^.Compassionate, merciful,  e^o"ir\ayxvos  eusplaych. 

Eph.    4.  32  be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender  hearted 
5.  Pitiful,  oIkt(p/j.oov  oiktirmon. 

Jas.     5. 1 1  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mer. 

Q.Boivels  of  kindness,  cnrXdyxva  £\eovs  sphlaychna 
Luke  1.  78  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God,  wh. 

TENON  — 

Hand,  V  1/&&- 

Exod.26.  17  Two  tenons  (shall  there  be)  in  one  board 
26.  19  sockets  under  one  board  for  his  two  tenons 
26.  19  sockets  under  another. .  forhis  two  tenons 
36.  22  One  board  had  two  tenons,  equally  distant 
36.  24  sockets  uuderoneboardforhis  two  tenons 
36.  24  sockets  under  another,  .for  his  two  tenons 

TENOR  — 

Mouth,  nspek. 

Gen.  43!    7  we  told  him  according  to  the  tenor  of  these 
Exod.34.  27  after  the  tenor  of  these  words  I  have  made 
TENT  — 
l.Tent,  hnttohel. 

Gen.   4.  20  he  was  the  father  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents 
9.  21  and  he  was  uncovered  within  his  tent 
9.  27  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem 

12.  8  pitched  his  tent,  (having)  Beth-el  on  the  w. 

13.  3  unto  the  place  where  his  tent  had  been 
13.  5  Lot  also . .  had  flocks,  aud  herds,  and  tents 
18.  1  he  sat  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the 
18.  2  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the  tent  door 
18.  6  Abraham  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  Sa. 
18.  9  Where(is)Sarah..hesaid,  Behold,  in  the  t. 
18.  10  Sarah  heard  (it)  in  the  tent  door,  which 
24. 67  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah's  tent 

25.  27  Jacob  (was)  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  tents 

26.  25  builded  an  altar,  .and  pitched  his  tentth. 
31.  25  Jacob  had  pitched  his  tent  in  the  mount 
3*.  33  went  into  Jacob's  tent,  and  into  Leah's  t. 
31.  33  into  the  two  maid  servants'  tents;  but  he 
31.  33  Leah's  tent,  and  entered  into  Rachel's  te. 
31.  34  Laban  searched  all  the  tent,  but  found  (th.) 
33.  19  a  field,  where  he  had  spread  his  tent,  at 
35.  21  and  spread  his  tent  beyond  the  tower  of 

Exod.16.  16  take  ye.  .for  (them)  which  (are)  in  his  te. 

18.  7  (their)  welfare;'and  they  came  into  the  tent 
26.  11  couple  the  tent  together,  that  it  may  be 
26. 12  that  remaineth  of  the  curtains  of  the  tent 
26.  13  in  the  length  of  the  curtains  of  the  tent 
26.  14  thou  shalt  make  a  covering  for  the  tent 
26.  36  make  an  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  tent 
33.   8  stood  every  man  (at)  his  tent  door,  and  lo. 
33. 10  and  worshipped,  every  man  (in)  his  tent 

35.  11  his  tent,  and  his  covering,  his  taches,  and 

36.  14  made  curtains  of  goats'  (hair)  for  the  tent 
36.  18  fifty  taches  of  brass  to  couple  the  tent  to. 
36.  19  he  made  a  covering  for  the  tent  (of)  rams' 
39.  32  the  tabernacle  of  the  tent  of  the  congreg. 
39.  33  the  tent,  and  all  his  furniture,  his  taches 

39.  40  the  tabernacle,  for  the  tent  of  the  congre. 

40.  2,  6,  7,  22,  24,  26  the  tent  of  the  congregation 
40. 19  he  spread  abroad  the  tent  over  the  taber. 
40.  19  put  the  covering  of  the  tent  above  upon 
40.  29,  30,  32,  34,  35  the  tent  of  the  congregation 

Lev.  14.  8  snail  tarry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  seven 
Num.  3.  25  the  tabernacle,  and  the  tent,  the  covering 
9. 15  the  tabernacle,  (namely),  the  tent  of  the 
11. 10  weep.. every  man  in  the  door  of  his  tent 
16.  26  Depart,  I  pray  you,  from  the  tents  of  th. 
16.  27  stood  in  the  door  of  their  tents,  and  their 
19. 14  when  amandiethiu  a  tent :  all  that  come 

19.  14  into  the  tent,  and  all  that  (is)  in  the  tent 

19.  18  sprinkle  (it)  upon  the  tent,  and  upon  all 
24.    5  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  0  Jacob!  (and) 

Deut.  i-  27  ye  murmured  in  your  tents,  and  said,  Be. 
5.  30  say  to  them,  Get  you  into  yourtents  again 
11.   6  their  tents.andall  the  substance  that  (was) 

16.  7  turn  in  the  morning,  and  go  unto  thy  te. 
33.  18 Rejoice,  Zebulun..and,  Issachar,  inthyte. 

Josh.  3.  14  the  people  removed  from  their  tents,  to 
7.  21  hid  in  the  earth,  in  the  midst  of  my  tent 
7.  22  ran  unto  the  tent . .  (it  was)  hid  in  his  tent 
7.  23  tookthemoutof  the  midstof  the  tent,  and 
7.  24  his  sheep,  and  his  tent,  and  all  that  he  had 

22.   4  get  you  unto  your  tents,  (and)  unto  the 

22.    6  blessed  them . .  and  they  went  unto  their  t. 

22.    7  Joshua  sent  them  away  also  unto  their  te. 

22.    8  Return  with  much  riches  unto  your  tents 

Judg.  4.  11  pitched  his  tent  unto  the  plain  of  Zaana. 

4.  17  Sisera  fled  away  on  his  feet  to  the  tent  of 

4. 18  he  had  turned  in  unto  her  into  the  tent 

4.  20  Stand  in  thedoor  of  the  tent;  and  it  shall 

4.  21  Heber's  wife,  took  a  nail  of  the  tent,  and 

5.  24  blessed  shall  she  be  abovewomen  in  the  t. 

6.  5  came  up  with  their  cattle  and  their  tents 

7.  8  and  he  sent  all. .  everyman  unto  his  tent 
7.  13  came  unto  a  tent,  and  smote  it  that  it  fell 

7.  13  and  overturned  it,  that  the  tent  lay  along 

8.  11  them  that  dwelt  in  tents  on  the  east  of  N. 

20.  8  We  will  not  any  (of  us)  go  to  his  tent,  ne. 
1  Sa.   4.  10  they  fled  every  man  into  his  tent  :  and 

13.    2  the  people  he  sent  every  man  to  his  tent 

17.  54  And  David . .  put  his  armour  in  his  tent 

3  Sa.    7.   6  have  walked  in  a  tent  and  in  a  tabernacle 

16.  22  they  spread  Absalom  a  tent  upon  the  top 
18. 17  and  all  Israel  fled  every  one  to  his  tent 


2  Sa.  19.   8  for  Israel  had  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 
20.    1  no  part  in  David,  .every  man  to  his  tents 
20.  22  retired  from  the  city,  every  man  to  his  tent 

1  Ki.  8.  66  went  unto  their  tents  joyful  and  glad  of 

12.  16  to  your  tents,  0  Israel :  now  see  to  thine 

12.  16  So  Israel  departed  unto  their  tents 

2  Ki.  7.    7  left  their  tents,  and  their  horses,  andtheir 

7.   8  they  went  into  one  tent,  and  did  eat  and 
7.    8  entered  into  another  tent,  and  carried 

7.  10  and  asses  tied,  and  the  tents  as  they  (we.) 

8.  21  smote. . andthe  people  fled  into  theirtents 

13.  5  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  tents 

14. 12  and  they  fled  every  man  to  their  tents 

1  Ch.  4.  41  smote  their  tents,  and  the  habitations 

5. 10  they  dwelt  in  their  tents  throughout  all 

15.  1  prepared  a  place,  .and  pitched  for  it  a  tent 

16.  1  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  tent  that  David 

1 7.  5  have  gone  from  tent  to  tent,  and  from  (one) 

2  Ch.  1.   4  for  he  had  pitched  a  tent  for  it  at  Jerusa. 

7.  10  he  sent  the  people  away  into  their  tents 
10. 16  to  yourtents,  O  Israel,  .went  to  their  tents 

14.  15  They  smote  also  the  tents  of  cattle,andcar. 
25.  22  Judah.  .they  fled  every  man  to  his  tent 

Psa.  69.  25  desolate;  (and)  let  none  dwell  in  then-  te. 
78.  55  and  made  the  tribes . .  to  dwell  in  their  te 
78.  60  the  tent  (which)  he  placed  among  men 
84.  10  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness 
106.  25  murmured  in  their  tents,  (and)  hearkened 
120.    5  Woe(is)me.  .(that) I  dwell  in  the  tents  of 
Song  1.    5  as  the  tents  of  Kedar,  as  the  curtains  of 
Isa.   38.  12  is  removed  from  me  as  a  shepherd's  tent 
40.  22  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent  to  dwell  in 
54.    2  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent,  and  let  them 
Jer.    4.  20  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  (and)  my 
6.    3  they  shall  pitch  (their)  tents  against  her 
10.  20  (there  is)  none  to  stretch  forth  my  tent 
30.  iS  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob's  tents 
35.    7  all  your  days  ye  shall  dwell  in  tents ;  that 
35.  10  we  have  dwelt  in  tents,  and  have  obeyed 
37.  10  should  they  rise  up  every  man  in  his  tent 
49.  29  Their  tents  and  their  flocks  shall  they  take 
Hab.    3.    7  saw  the  tents  of  Cushan  in  affliction  :  (and) 
Zech. 12.    7  The  Lord  also  shall  save  the  tents  of  Ju. 

2.Tabernacle,  dwelling  place,  \3ipl?  mishkan. 

Song  1.  8  feed  thy  kids  beside*  the  shepherds' tents 
3.  Covering,  booth,  nap  sukkah. 

2  Sa.  11. 11  Israel,  and  Judah,  abide  intents;  andmy 
i.Hollow  place,  belly,  nsfj  qubbah. 

ISuni25.    8  went  after  the  man  of  Israel  into  the  tent 

TENTS,  (to  abide  in)  — 

l.To  incline,  encamp,  njn  chanah. 

Num.  9.  20  they  abode  in  their  tents,  and  according 

9.  22  children  of  Israel  abode  in  their  tents 
Ezra    8.  15  there  abode  we  in  tents  three  days :  and 

2.Camp>,  rnqi?  machaneh. 

Numi3.  19  what  cities  (they  be),  .whether  in  tents,  or 

1  Sa.  17.  53  returned,  .and  they  spoiled  their  tents 

2  Ki.  7.  16  people  went  out,  and  spoiled  the  tents 
2  Ch.31.  2  to  praise  in  the  gates  of  the  tents  of  the 
Zech.  14.  15  all  the  beasts  that  shall  be  in  these  tents 

TENTH  deal,  part  — 

\.A  tenth  part,  ~w?H.o  maaser. 

Kura  18.  21  given  the  children  of  Levi  all  the  tenth 

18.  26  ye  shall  offer,  .a  tenth  (part)  of  the  tithe 
Eze.  45.  1 1  that  the  bath  may  contain  the  tenth  part 

45.  14  (ye  shall  offer)  the  tenth  part  of  a  bath 
2.  Ten,  niiyj/  asor. 

Exodi2.  3  In  the  tenth  (day)  of  this  month  they  sfi. 
Lev.  16.  29  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  the  mouth,  ye  shall 

23.  27  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  this  seventh  month 
25.    9  tosound  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  the  seventh 

Nuni2g.  7  ye  shall  have  on  the  tenth  (day)  of  this  se. 
Josh.  4.  19  came  up  out  of  Jordan  on  the  tenth  (day) 
2  Ki.  25.  1  it  came  to  pass,  .in  the  tenth  (day)  of  the 
Jer,  52.    4  it  came  to  pass. .  in  the  tenth  (day)  of  the 

52.  12  in  the  fifth  month,  in  the  tenth  (day)  of 
Eze.  20.    1  in  the  fifth  (month),  the  tenth  (day)  of  the 

24.  1  in  the  tenth  (day)  of  themonth,the  word 
40.    1  in  the  tenth  (day)  of  the  month,  in  the  fo. 

S.Tenth,  yyW.  asiri. 

Gen.  8.  5  until  the  tenth  month :  in  the  tenth  (mo.) 
Exodi6.  36  Now  an  omer  (is)  the  tenth  (part)  of  an  ep. 
Lev.    5.  11  bringfor  his  offering  the  tenth  part  of  an 

6.  20  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour 

27.  32  concerning  the  tithe,  .the  tenth  shall  be 
Num.  5.  15  the  tenth  (part)  of  an  ephah  of  barley  meal 

7.  66  On  the  tenth  day  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Am. 

28.  5  a  tenth  (part)  of  an  ephah  of  flour  for  a 
Deut  23.    2  to  his  tenth  generation  shall  he  not  enter 

23.  3  to  their  tenth  generation  shall  they  not  e« 
2  Ki.25.  1  the  ninthyear  of  hisreignin  the  tenth  m. 
1  Ch.12.  13  Jeremiah  the  tenth,  Machbanai  the  elev. 

24.  ri  The  ninth  to  Jeshuah.the  tenth  to  Sheca. 

25.  17  The  tenth  to  Shimei,  (he),  his  sons,  and 

27. 13  The  tenth . .  for  the  tenth  month  (was)  if. 
Ezra  10.  16  sat  down  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  mo. 
Esth.  2.  16  the  tenth  month,  which  (is)  the  month  T. 

6. 13  in  it  (shall  be)  a  tenth,  and  (it)  shall  return 

32.  1  in  the  tenth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Ju. 
39.  1  in  the  tenth  month,  came  Nebuchadrezzar 
52.  4  ninth  year  of  his  reign  in  the  tenthmonth, 
24.    1  in  the  ninth  year,  in  the  tenth  month,  in. 

29.  1  In  the  tenth  year,  in  the  tenth  (month),  in 

33.  21  in  the  tenth  (month),  in  the  fifth  (day)  of 
45.  11  and  the  ephah  the  tenth  part  of  an  homer 
.  8. 19  the  fast  of  the  tenth,  shall  be  to  the  house 


Isa. 
Jer. 


Eze. 


Zech 


TENTH 


968 


TESTIFY 


4.A  tenth  part,  pniyy  issaron* 

Exod2g.  40  a  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with  the  fo. 
Lev.  14. 10  three  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  (for)  a  meat 

14.  21  one  tenth  deal  of  fine  flour  mingled  with 
23. 13  two  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  mingled  with 

23.  17  bring,  .two  wave  loaves  of  two  tenth  deals 

24.  5  bake  twelve  cakes,  .two  tenth  deals  shall 
Rum  15.    4  a  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with  the  fo. 

15.  6  two  tenth  deals  of  flour  mingled  with  the 
15.    9  three  tenth  deals  of  flour  mingled  with 
28.    9  two  tenth  deals  of  flour  (for)  a  meat  offer. 
28. 12  three  tenth  deals  of  flour  (for)  a  meat  off. 

28. 12  two  tenth  deals  of  flour  (for)  a  meat  offer. 

28. 13  a  several  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled  with 
28.  20  three  tenth  deals,  .and  two  tenth  deals 
28.  21  A  several  tenth  deal  shaltthou  offer  for 
28.  28  three  tenth  deals,  .two  tenth  deals  unto 

28.  29  A  several  tenth  deal  unto  one  lamb,  thro. 

29.  3  three  tenth  deals,  .(and)  two  tenth  deals 
29.  4  one  tenth  deal  for  one  lamb,  throughout 
29.  9  three  tenth  deals,  .two  tenth  deals  to  one 
29. 10  A  several  tenth  deal  for  one  Iamb,  throu. 
29.  14  three  tenth  deals  unto  every  bullock  of  the 

29. 14  two  tenth  deals  to  each  ram  of  thettwora. 

29. 15  a  several  tenth  deal  to  each  lamb  of  the 

$.A  tenth  part,  beKarn  dekate. 

Heb.   7.   2  To  whom  also  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  pnrt 
7.  4  unto  whom.  .Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of 

6.  A  tenth,  5e'«ctTos  dekatos. 

John  1.  39  and  abode,  .for  it  was  about  the  tenth  hour 
Rev.  11.  13  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  fell,  and  in  the 
21.  20  the  tenth,  a  chrysoprasus ;  the  eleventh 
TENTH,  to  give  or  take  the  — 
l.?*o  receive  a  tenth,  1&J£  asar. 

1  Sa.    8.  15  he  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  seed,  and 
8. 17  He  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  sheep  :  and 
2.To  give  a  tenth,  "iw'jj  asar,  3. 

Gen.  28.  22  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee 
TENTMAKER  — 
A  tentmakcr,  rrKrivoirotSs  slcenopoios. 

Acts  18.    3  by  their  occupation  they  were  tent  mak. 
TE'-RAH,  rnn,  rnn  turning,  duration,  wandering. 
Son  of  Nahor,   and  father  of  Abraham,  Nahor,  and 
Haran ;  he  died  in  Haran  aged  205  years.     B.C.  2000. 
Gen.  11.  24  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and  begatT. 
11.  25  Nahor  lived  after  he  begat  T.  an  hundred 
11.  26  T.  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Abram 
11.  27  these  (are)  the  generations  of  T.:  T.  begat 
11.  28  Haran  died  before  his  father  T.  in  the  la. 
11.  31  T.  took  Abram  his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of 
11. 32  the  days  of  T.  were  two  hundred,  .and  T. 
Josh  24.    2  T.,  the  father  of  Abraham,  and  the  fath. 

1  Ch.  1.  26  Serug,  Nahor,  T. 

TE-RA'-PHTM,  D'En^i  nourisliers. 

A  kind  of  household  gods,  probably  in  the  human 

form. 

Judgi7-    5  Micah..made  an  ephod,  and  teraphim 
18. 14  ye  knowthat  there  is  in  these  houses,  .t. 
18.  17  the  five  men.  .took,  .the  teraphim,  and 
18.  18  these,  .fetched. .  the  teraphim,  and  the 
1 8.  20  priest's  heart  was  glad ;  and  he  took . .  the  t. 
Hos.    3.   4  the  children  of  Israel  shall  abide.. (wi.)t. 
TE'-RESH,  tnn  strictness,  reverence. 
A  chamberlain  at  the  court  of  Persia  that  combined 
against  Ahasuerus  along  with  Bigthana,  and  was  de- 
feated by  Mordecai  discovering  the  plot.     B.C.  510. 
Esth.  2.  21  T. .  .sought  to  lay  hold  on  the  king  Alias. 

6.  2  Mordecai  had  told  of  Bigthana  and  T.,  two 

TERMED,  to  be  — 

To  be  said,  i^N  amar,  2. 

Isa.   62.    4  neither  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  termed 
62.    4  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken 
TERRACE  — 
Highway,  place  raised  up,  n?p*?  m-esillah. 

2  Ch.  9.  11  the  king  made  (of)  the  algum  trees  terra. 
TERRESTRIAL  — 

Upon  or  belonging  to  the  earth,  eViyeio?  epigeios. 
1  Co.  15.  40  also  celestial  bodies,  and  bodies  terrestrial 
15.  40  and  the  (glory)  of  the  terrestrial  (is)  anot. 

TERRIBLE  (acts,  things),  terribleness  — 
1.  Terrible,  awe-inspiring,  D'X  ayom. 

Song  6.    4  comely  as  Jerusalem,  terrible  as  (an  army) 
6. 10  clear  as  the  sun,  (and)  terrible  as  (an  ar.) 

Hab.    1.   7  They  (are)  terrible  and  dreadful :  their  ju. 

2.Terror,  awe,  dread,  rpp'N  emah. 

Job    39.  20  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  (is)  terrible 

41. 14  Who  can  open,  .his  teeth  (are)terhblero. 

Z.Terrible,  fearful,  'lopx  enithani. 

Dan.   7.    7  a  fourth  beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and 

4.  To  be  afraid,  terrible,  Vrr  dechal. 

Dan.    2.  31  stood  before  thee,  and  the  form,  .(was)  t. 

5.  Horror,  heat,  wrath,  raging,  naj?^  zalajphah. 

Lam.  5.  10  skin  was  black,  .because  of  the  terrible 

Q.To  be  feared,  reverenced,  N"v  yare,  2. 

Exod34<  IO  it  (is)  a  terrible  thing  that  I  will  do  with 
Deut.  1.  19  went  through  all  that  great  and  terrible 

7.  21  God  (is)amon^  you,  a  mighty  God  and  te. 
8. 15  led  thee  through  that  great  and  terrible 

io.  17  a  greatGod,  a  mighty,  and  a  terrible,  wh. 
10.  21  these  great  and  terrible  things  which  th. 


Judgi3.    6  countenance  of  an  angel  of  God,  very  te. 
2  Sa.    7. 23  to  do  for  you  great  things  and  terrible 

1  Ch.17.  21  to  make  thee  a  name  of.  .terribleness,  by 
Neh.    1.    5  the  great  and  terrible  God,  that  keepeth 

4. 14  the  Lord,  (which  is)  great  and  terrible 
9.  32  the  terrible  God,  who  keepest  covenant 
Job  37.  22  out  of  the  north  :  with  God  (is)  terrible 
Psa.  45.    4  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  theeterrible  t. 
47.    2  the  Lord  most  high  (is)  terrible ;  (he  is) 
65-    5  CBy)  terrible  things  in  righteousness  wilt 
66.    3  Say  unto  God,  How  terrible  (art  thou  in) 
66.   5  (he  is)  terrible  (in  his)  doing  toward  the 
68.  35  0  God,  (thou  art)  terrible  out  of  thy  holy 
76.  12  (he  is)  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth 
99.    3  Let  them  praise  thy  great  and  terrible 
106.  22  Wondrous  works,  .(and)  terrible  things 
145.    6  shall  speak  of  the  might  of  thy  terrible  a. 
Isa.    18.    2,  7  a  people  terrible  from  their  beginning 
21.    1  itcometh  from  thedesert,  from  a  terrible 
64.   3  When  thou  didst  terrible  things  (which) 
Eze.     t.  22  (was)  as  the  colour  of  the  terrible  crystal 
Joel    2. 11  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  great  and  very  terr. 
2.  31  before  the  great andth*  terrible  day  of  the 
Zeph.  2.  11  The  Lord  (will  be)  terrible  unto  them 

7.  Fear,  reverence,  «"]'id  merra. 

Deut  26.    8  with  great  terribleness,  aud  with  signs 

8.  Terrible,  p~!J>  arits. 

Isa.  13. 11  will  lay  low  the  haughtiness  of  the  terr. 
25.  3  the  city  of  the  terrible  nations  shall  fear 
25.  4  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones  (is)  as  a  st. 
25.  5  the  branch  of  the  terrible  ones  shall  be  br. 
29.  5  the  multitude  of  the  terrible  ones(shall be) 
29.  20  the  terrible  one  is  brought  to  nought,  and 
49.  25  the  prey  of  the  terrible  shall  be  delivered 

Jer.  15.  21  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  terri. 
20. 11  the  Lord  (is)  with  me  as  a  mighty  terrible 

Eze.  28.  7  bring,  .upon  thee,  the  terrible  of  the  nat. 
30. 11  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  shall  be  brou. 

31.  12  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  have  cut  him 

32.  12  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  all  of  them 

9.  A  cause  of  terror,  rraS^pi  tiphletseth. 

Jer.  49. 16  Thy  terribleness  hath  deceived  thee,  (and) 
10. Fearful,  dreadful,  <pofiep6s  phoberos. 

Heb.  12.  21  so  terrible  was  the  sight,  (that)  Moses  sa. 

TERRIBLY,  to  shake  — 

To  fear,  be  afraid,  terrify,  jn;;  arats. 

Isa.     2. 19,  21  when  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the 

TERRIFY,  be  terrified,  to  — 

I. To  terrify,  frighten,  nys  baath,  3. 

Job     3.    5  let  the  blackness  of  the  day  terrify  it 

7.  14  thou  scarest  me.  .and  terrifiest  me  through 
9.  34  Let  him  take,  .let  not  his  fear  terrify  me 
2.To  cause  to  break  down,  affright,  nrjn chathath,  5. 
Job  31.  34  did  the  contempt  of  families  terrify  me 

3.  To  fear,  be  afraid,  terrified,  pv^  arats. 

Deut. 20.    3  do  not  tremble,  neither  be  yeterrified  be. 

4.  To  terrify  exceedingly,  fK(po&4to  ekphobeo. 

2  Co.  10.    9  That  I  may  not  seem  as  if  I  would  terrify 
5.7*0  be  affrighted,  terrified,  ttt 0 4o fxai  ptoeomai. 

Luke2i.    9  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  .be  not  terri. 
24.  37  they  were  terrified  and  affrighted,  and  su. 
Q.To  be  affrighted,  startled,  terrified,  irrvpo/xai. 

Phil.   1.  28  And  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adver. 
TERROR  — 

1.  Terror,  np'N  emah. 

Deut  32.  25  The  sword  without,  and  terror  within,  sh. 
Josh.  2.  9  that  your  terror  is  fallen  upon  us,  andth. 
Job  20.  25  cometh  out  of  his  gall:  terrors  (are)  upon 

33.  7  my  terror  shall  not  make  thee  afraid,  ne. 
Psa.  55.    4  and  the  terrors  of  death  are  fallen  upon 

83.  15  (while)  I  suffer  thy  terrors  lam  distracted 
Isa.    33.  18  Thine  heart  shall  meditate  terror.  Sv'here 

2.  Trouble,  haste,  n^n|  behalah. 

Lev.  26.  16  I  will  even  appoint  over  you  terror,  con. 
Jer.  15.   8  caused  (him)to  fall,  .and  terrors  upon  the 

ZtA  worn  out  or  wasted  thing,  nrn3  ballahah. 
Job    18.  11  Terrors  shall  make  him  afraid  on  every  si. 

18.  14  and  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  king  of  terr. 

24.  17  (they  are  in)  the  terrors  of  the  shadow  of 

27.  20  Terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  waters,  a  te. 

30.  15  Terrors  are  turned  upon  me  :  they  pursue 
Psa.  73.  19  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors 
Eze.   26.  21  I  will  make  thee  a  terror,  and  thou  (shalt 

27.  36  thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  and  never  (shalt 

28.  19  thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  and  never  (shalt) 
4.  Terrors,  D'rn;'2  biuthim. 

Job  6.  4  the  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves  in  ar. 
Psa.  88. 16  goeth  over  me;  thy  terrors  have  cut  me 

5.yl  cause  of  staggering,  ton  chogga. 

Isa.   19.  17  the  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a  terror  unto 
6.  Terror,  fright,  ni?n  chittah. 

Gen.  35.    5  the  terror  of  God  was  upon  the  cities  that 
7-  Terror,  rrnn  chittith. 

Eze.  26.  17  which  cause  their  terror  (to  be)  on  all  th. 
32.  23  which  caused  terror  in  the  land  of  the  li. 
32.  24,  26  caused  their  terror  in  the  land  of  the 
32.  25  their  terror  was  caused  in  the  land  of  the 
32.  27  (they  were)  the  terror  of  themightyin  the 
32.  30  with  their  terror  they  are  ashamed  of  th. 
32.  32  I  have  caused  my  terror  in  the  land  of  the 


8.  Fear,  iiJD  magor. 

Jer.   20.  4  I  will  make  thee  a  terror  to  thyself,  and 
Lam.  2.  22  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my  terrors 

9.  To  cast  down,  "U0  magar. 

Eze.  21. 12  terrors  by  reason  of  the  sword  shall  be  up. 
10,Fear,  «ilD  mora. 

Deut.  4.  34  by  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  by  great  ter. 
34.  12  in  all  the  great  terror  which  Moses  show. 

Jer.  32.  21  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great  terr. 
11. Cause  of  terror  or  ruin,  nnrp  viechittah. 

Isa.   54.  14  from  terror;  for  it  shall  not  come  near 

Jer.   17.  17  Be  not  a  terror  unto  me :  thou  (art)  my 

12.  Violence,  terror,  rvpjip  maaratsah. 

Isa.    10.  33  the  Lord,  .shall  lop  the  bough  with  terr. 

13.  Fear,  dread,  "ins  pachad. 

Job  31.  23  destruction  (from)  God  (was)  a  terror  to 
Psa.  91.   5  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by 

ll.Fear,  (p6&os  phobos. 

Rom  13.  3  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but 
2  Co.  5.  11  Knowing  therefore  theterrorof  theLord 
1  Pe.   3.  14  be  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither  be 

TER-TI'-TJS,  Teprtos  {Latin,  third). 

The  person  who  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  from 

Paul's  dictation  at  Corinth,  and  thought  to  have  been. 

Silas. 

Rom  16.  22  I  T.,  who  wrote  (this)  epistle  salute  you 

TER-TTJL'-LTJS,  TepTuXXos. 

A  (Roman)  orator  who  went  with  the  high  priest  and 
elders  from  Jerusalem  to  Cresareato  accuse  Paul  before 
Felix  the  Roman  governor.     B.C.  60. 

Acts  24.  1  and.  .a  certain  orator.  .T.,  who  informed 
24.    2  T.  began  to  accuse  (him),  saying,  Seeing 

TESTAMENT  — 

Dispensation,  full  arrangement,  $ta9r}Kn  diatheke. 

Matt  26.  28  this  is  myhlood  of  the  new  testament,  wh. 

Marki4.  24  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  w. 

Luke22.  20  This  cup  (is)  the  new  testament  in  my  bl. 

1  Co.  11.  25  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  bio. 

2  Co.  3.    6  made  us  able  ministers  of  the  new  testa. 

3. 14  in  the  reading  of  the  Old  Testament,  wh. 
Heb.  7.  22  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of  a  better  test. 

9. 15  he  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  testament 
9.  15  transgressions,  .under  the  first  testament 

9.  16  where  a  testament  (is),  there  must  also  of 
9. 17  a  testament  (is)  of  force  after  men  are  de. 
9.20  This  (is)  the  blood  of  the  testament  which 

Rev.  11.  19  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  testame. 

TESTATOR  — 

To  arrange  fully  or  throughout,  Siarld^/jai, 

Heb.  9.  16  there  must,  .be  the  death  of  the  testator 
9. 17  of  no  strength,  .while  the  testator  liveth 

TESTIFY,  (beforehand,  unto),  to  be  testified,  to  — 

1.  To  (cause  to)  testify,  attest,  iiy  ud,  5. 

Deut.  8. 19  I  testify  against  you  this  day,  that  ye  sh. 

32. 46  the  words  which  I  testify  among  you  thia 

2  Ki.  17.  13  the  Lord  testified  against  Israel  and  aga. 

17.  15  his  testimonies  which  he  testified  against 
2  Ch.24. 19  they  testified  against  them :  but  they  wo. 
Neh.   9.  26  slew  thy  prophets  which  testified  against 

9.  29  testifiedst  against  them,  that  thou  migh. 
9.  30  testifiedst  against  them  by  thy  spirit  in 
9.  34  wherewith  thou  didsttestify  against  them 
13.  15  I  testified  (against  them)  in  the  day  whe. 
13.  21  I  testified  against  them,  and  said  unto  th. 
Psa.  50.    7  I  will  testify  against  thee :  I  (am)  God 

81.  8  Hear,  O  my  people,  and  I  will  testify  un. 
Amos.  3.  13  testify  in  the  house  of  Jacob,  saith  the 

2.  To  be  testified,  "»y  ud,  6. 

Exod2i.  29  it  hath  been  testified  to  his  owner,  that 
Z.To  answer,  respond,  nju  anah. 

Num35.  30  one  witness  shall  not  testify  against  any 
Deut  19.  16  to  testify  against  him  (that  which  is)  wro. 

19.  18  (and)  hath  testified  falsely  against  his  br. 
31.  21  this  song  shall  testify  against  them  as  a 

Ruth  1.  21  the  Lord  hath  testified  against  me,  and 
2  Sa.    1.  16  thy  mouth  hath  testified  against  thee,  sa. 
Job    15.   6  yea,  thine  own  lips  testify  against  thee 
Isa.    59.  12  our  sins  testify  against  us :  for  our  trans. 
Jer.  14.   7  though  our  iniquities  testify  against  us 
Hos.    5.    5  the  pride  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  his  face 

7.  10  the  pride  of  Israel  testifleth  to  his  face 
Mic.    6.   3  wherein  have  I  wearied  thee?  testifyaga. 

4.  To  bear  thorough  witness.  Siaixaprvpo/iai  diamar. 
Lukei6.  28  that  he  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they 
Acts   2.  40  with  many  other  words  did  he  testify  and 

8.  25  when  they  had  testified  and  preached  the 

10.  42  to  testify  that  it  ishe  which  was  ordained 

18.  5  testified  to  the  Jews  (that)  JeBUs(was)Ch. 

20.  21  TestifyingbothtotheJews, and  also  tothe 
20.  24  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
23.  11  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jerusalem 
28.  23  to  whom  he  expounded  and  testified  the 

t  Th.  4.   6  we  also  have  forewarned  you  and  testified 
Heb.  2.    6  oneinacertain  place  testified,  saying,  Wh. 

5.  To  bear  witness  upon  or  besides,  eiri/.iapTvpe(a  epi. 

1  Pe.  5.  12  testifying  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God 

6.  To  bear  witness,  ^aprvpiui  mnrtured. 

John  2.  25  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man 
3.  11  We  speak,  .and  testify  that  we  have  seen 
3.  32  what  he  hath  seenand  heard,  that  he  tea. 


TESTIMONY 


969 


THANKFUL 


John  4.  39  the  woman,  which  testified.  He  told  me  all 

4.  44  Jesus  himself  testified,  that  a  prophet  ha. 

5.  39  and  they' are  they  which  testify  of  me 
7.    7  me  it  hateth,  because  I  testify  of  it,  that 

13.  21  he  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  testified,  and 
15.  26  the  spirit  of  truth,  .shall  testify  of  me 

21.  24  This  is  the  disciple  which  testifieth  of  th. 
Acts  26.  5  if  they  would  testify,  that  after  the  most 
1  C0.15.  15  we  have  testified  of  God  that  he  raised  up 
Heb.    7.  17  he  testifieth,  Thou  (art)  a  priest  for  ever 

11.    4  obtained  witness.. God  testifying  of  his 
1  Ju.    4.  14  we  have  seen  and  do  testify  that  theFath- 

5.  9  the  witness  of  God  which  he  hath  testified 
3  John  3  the  brethren  came  and  testified  of  the  tr. 
Rev.  22.  16  I  Jesus  have  seut  mine  angel  to  testify 

22.  20  He  which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Su. 
7.  To  hear  -witness,  pLaprvpofiai  niarturomai. 

Gal.    5.   3  I  testify  again  to  every  man  that  is  circn. 
Eph.  4.  17  I  say  therefore,  and  testify  in  the  Lord 
S.TVte  witness  bearing,  to  fiaprvpiov  to  marturioii, 
x  Ti.  2.   6  a  l-anaoni  for  all,  [to  be  testified]  in  due  time 

9.  To  bear  witness  before,  irpo/j.apTvpu/j.ai  pronmrtur. 

1  Pe.    1. 11  it  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of 

10.  To  bear  witness  together,  trutifxapTvpea)  summa. 
Rev.  22.  iS  [1  testify  unto]every  man  thatheareth  the 

TESTIMONY",  {to  give  or  have)  — 

1.  Witness,  testimony,  rny  edah. 

Deut.  4.  45  These  (are)  the  testimonies,  and  the  stat. 

6.  17  his  testimonies,  and  his  statutes,  which  he 
6. 20  What  (mean)  the  testimonies,  and  the  st. 

Psa.  25.  10  such  as  keep  his  covenant  and  his  testim. 

78.  56  provoked.  .God,  and  kept  not  his  testim. 

93.   5  Thy  testimoniesarevery  sure:  holiness  be. 

99.  7  they  kept  his  testimonies,  and  the  ordin. 
119.  2  Blessed  (are)  they  that  keep  his  testhno. 
119.  22  Remove  .reproach.  .1  have  kept  thy  test. 
119.  24  Thy  testimonies  also  (are)my  delight,  (and) 
no.  46 1  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies  also  before 
119.  59  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  testimonies 
119.  79  and  those  that  have  known  thy  testimon. 
1 19. 95  waited  for  me . .  I  will  consider  thy  testi. 
119. 119  puttest  away  all  the  wicked,  .love  thy  t. 
119.  125  give  me.  .that  I  may  know  thy  testimon. 
1 19. 138  Thy  testimonies  (that)  thou  hast  comma. 
119.  146  save  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  testimonies 
119. 152  Concerning  thy  testimonies,  I  have  known 
119.  167  My  soul  hath  kept  thy  testimonies;  and 
1 19/168 1  have  kept  thy  precepts  and  thy  testim. 
132.12  my  covenant  and  my  testimony  that  I  sh. 

2.  Witness,  testimony,  wiy  eduth. 

Exodio.  34  Aaron  laid  it  up  before  the  testimony,  to 
25.  16  thou  shalt  put  into  the  ark  the  testimony 
25. 2T  in  the  ark  thou  shalt  put  the  testimony  th. 

25.  22  cherubim,  .upon  the  ark  of  the  testimony 

26.  33  bring,  .within  the  veil  the  ark  of  the  test. 

26.  34  the  ark  of  the  testimony  in  the  most  holy 

27.  21  without  the  veil,  which  (is)  before  the  te. 
30.  6  veil  that  (is)  by  the  ark  of  the  testimony 
30.  6  before  the  mercy  seat  that  (is)  over  the  te. 
30.  26  thou  shalt  anoint,  .the  ark  of  the  testim. 

30.  36  put  of  it  before  the  testimony  in  the  tab. 

31.  7  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  and  the  mercy 
31. 18  two  tables  of  testimony,  tables  of  stone 
32. 15  the  two  tables  of  the  testimony  (were)  in 
34.  29  with  the  two  tables  of  testimony  in  Moses' 

38.  21  the  sum.  .of  the  tabernacle  of  testimony 

39.  35  The  ark  of  the  testimony,  and  the  staves 

40.  3  shalt  put  therein  the  ark  of  the  testimony 
40.  5  the  incense  before  the  ark  of  the  testim. 
40. 20  he  took  and  put  the  testimony  into  the  ark 
40.  21  covered  the  ark  of . .  testimony ;  as  the  L. 

Lev.  16.  13  the  mercy  seat  that  (is)  upm  the  testim. 
24.   3  the  veil  of  the  testimony,  in  the  taberna. 

Num.  1.  50  the  Levites  over  the  tabernacle  of  testi. 
1.  53  round  about  the  tabernacle  of  testimony 
1.  53  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle  of  testimony 
4.   5  and  cover  the  ark  of  testimony  with  it 

7.  89  mercy  seat  that  (was)  upon  the  ark  of  te. 
9.  15  tabernacle,  (namely),  the  tent  of  the  tes. 

10.  11  up  from  off  the  tabernacle  of  the  testim. 

17.   4  the  tabernacle . .  before  the  testimony,  wh. 

17. 10  Bring  Aaron's  rod  again  before  the  testi. 

Josh.  4.  16  the  priests  that  bear  the  ark  of  the  testi. 

1  Ki.  2.    3  to  keep,  .his  testimonies,  as  it  is  written 

2  Ki.  11.  12  (gave  him)  the  testimony  :  and  they  made 

17.  15  his  testimonies  which  he  testified  against 

23.  3  his  commandments  and  his  testimonies 

1  Ch.29.  19  to  keep  thy  commandments,  thy  testimo. 

2  Ch.23.  11  (gave  him)  the  testimony,  and  made  him 

34.  31  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  his  test. 

Neh.    9.  34  thy  commandments,  and  thy  testimonies 

Psa.  19.   7  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  (is)  sure,  mak. 

78.    5  he  established  a  testimony  in  Jacob,  and 

81.    5  This  he  ordained  in  Joseph  (for)  a  testim. 

119.  14  I  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of  thy  testim. 

119.  31  I  have  stuck  unto  thy  testimones  :  OLord 

119.  36  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies,  and 

119.  88  so  shall  I  keep  the  testimony  of  thy  mo. 

119.99  more  understanding.,  for  thy  testimonies 

119.  in  Thy  testimonies  have  I  taken  as  an  her. 

119.  129  Thy  testimonies  (are)  wonderful :  there. 

119.  144  The  righteousness  of  thy  testimonies  (is) 

119. 157  (yet)  do  I  not  decline  from  thy  testimo. 

122.   4  the  tribes  go  up.  .unto  the  testimony  of  Is. 

Jer.  44.  23  nor  in  his  statutes,  nor  in  bis  testimonies 

B.WitnesSt  testunony,  rn)y$  teudah. 

Ruth  4.   7  gave  (it) to  his  neighbour,  .this  (was)  a  te. 

Tsa.     8.  16  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law  am. 

8. 20  to  the  testimony:  if  they  speak  not  acco. 

1*22 


4. To  bear  witness,  fMaprvpew  martured. 

Acts  13.  22  to  whom  also  he  gave  testimony,  and  said 

14.   3  which  gave  testimony  unto  the  word  of 
Heb.  n.   5  before  his  translation  he  had  this  testim. 

5.  Witness,  testimony,  [xaprvpla  marturia. 

John  3.  32  testifieth;  and  no  man  receiveth  his  tes. 
3.  33  He  that  hath  received  his  testimony  haWi 

5.  34  I  receive  not  testimony  from  man:  but 

8.  17  written,  .that  the  testimony  of  two  men 
21.  24  and  we  know  that  his  testimony  is  true 

Acts  22.  18  they  will  not  receive  thy  testimony  con. 
Rev.    1.   2  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of 

1.  9  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testim. 

6.  9  and  for  the  testimony  which  they  held 
11.    7  when  they  shall  have  finished  their  testim. 
12. 11  overcame  him.  .by  the  word  of  their  tes. 

12. 17  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ 
19. 10  thy  brethren  that  have  the  testimony  of 
19. 10  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  pr. 

6.  Witness,  testimony,  fiaprvptov  marturion. 
Matt.  8.    4  offer  the  gift,  .for  a  testimony  uuto  them 

10. 18  for  a  testimony  against  them-and  the  Ge. 
Mark  r.  44  offer,  .those  things,  .for  a  testimony  unto 

6.  11  shake  off  the  dust,  .for  a  testimony  agai. 
13.   9  brought  before  rulers,  .for  a  testimony 
Luke  5.  14  as  Moses  commanded,  for  a  testimony  nn. 

9.  5  shake  off  the  very  dust,  .for  a  testimony 
21.  13  And  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony 

Co.    1.   6  as  the  testimony  of  Christ  was  confirmed 

2.  1  declaring  unto  you  the  [testimony]  of  God 
2  Co.  1.  12  our  rejoicing  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our 
2  Th.  1.  10  our  testimony  among  you  was  believed 

2  Ti.  1.  8  Be  not  thou,  .ashamed  of  the  testimony 
Heb.  3.  5  for  a  testimony  of  those  things  which  were 
Rev.  15.    5  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testi. 

TETRARCH,  (to  be)  — 

I. To  be  a  tetrarch,  r^rpapx^  tctrarcJieo. 

Luke  3.    1  Herod  being  tetrarch  of  Galilee,  and  his 

3.  1  Philip  tetrarch  of  Iturea  and  of  the  region 
3.    1  and  Lysanias  the  tetrarch  of  Abilene 

I.Chief  or  rider  of  a  fourth  part,  rerpapxys  tetra. 

Matt  14.    1  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  fame  of 

Luke  3.  19  Herodthetetrareh,beingreprovedbyhim 

9.    7  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  all  that  was 

Acts  13.    1  had  been  brought  up  with  Herod  the  tet. 

THAD-DE'-TJS,  OaSoatos  (from  Syr.  ng)  breast. 

One  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  Christ,  and  called  also 

Lebbeus:    perhaps  the  same  as  Jude,  who  wrote  the 

Epistle. 

Mattio.    3  James,  .and  Lebbeus.  .[surname  was  T.] 
Mark  3.  18  James,  .and  T.,  and  Simon  the  Canaanite 

THA'-HASH,  trrr?  reddish. 

AsonofReumah  concubine  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother. 

B.C.  i860. 

Gen.  22.  24  she  bare  also  Tebah,  and  Gaham,  and  T. 
THA'-MAH,  TA'-MAH,  ro?  combat 
One  of  the  Nethinim  whose  descendants  returned  with 
Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  53  children  of  Sisera,  the  children  of  T. 

Neh.    7.  55  children  of  Sisera,  the  children  of  T. 

THA'-MAR,  ediiap  {from  Heb.  "£.?)  a  palm  tree. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus.     See  Tamar. 

Matt.  1.  3  Judas  begat  Phares  and  Zara  of  T. ;  and 
THAN,  (rather) — 

1.  That,  that  which,  ^  di. 

Dan.   3.  19  seven  times  more  than  it  was  wont  to  be 

2.  From,  jS  min. 

Lev.  14.  37  which  in  sight  (are)  lower  than  the  wall 

3.  Upon,  above,  h%  al. 

Num.  3. 46  children  of  Israel,  which  are  more  than 

Eccl.  5.  8  regardeth;  and(therebe)higherthanthey 
±. From  above,  "?j.'a  meal. 

Eccl.   5.    8  for  (he  that  is)  higher  than  the  highest 
5. Either,  or  ;  (after  a  comparative)  than,  jj  e. 

Mattio.  15  for  the  land  of  Sodom .  .than  for  that  city 
See  also  n.  22,  24 ;  18.  8,  9,  13;  19.  24;  26.  [53];  Mark  6. 
[11];  9.  43,  45,  47 ;  10.  25 ;  15.  7 ;  Luke  10.  12,  14 ;  16. 17 ; 
17.  2 ;  18.  14,  25 ;  John  3.  10 ;  4.  1 ;  Acts  4. 19 ;  5.  29 ;  25. 
[6];  27.  n;  Rom.  13.  n;  1  Co.  7.  9;  9.  15;  14.  5,  iq; 
2  Co.  1.  13;  Gal.  4.  27;  1  Ti.  1.  4;  2  Ti.  3.  4;  Heb.  11. 
25 ;  1  Pe.  3.  17 ;  2  Pe.  2.  21 ;  1  Jo.  4.  4. 

Q.Or,  than,  truly,  tftrep  eper. 

John  12.  43  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than 

7.  To  the  side  of,  beyond,  irapd  (ace.)  para. 

Luke  3.  13  Exact  no  more  than  that  which  is  appoi. 
1  Co.  3. 11  other  foundatio7i  can  no  man  lay  than 
Gal.    1.    8,  9  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than 
Heb.  1.    4  obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they 
2.    7  Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the 
2.   9  Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than 
*3-   3  worthy  of  more  glory  than  Moses  ;  12. 24. 
9.  23  heavenly  things,  .with  better  sacrifices 
11.   4  offered . .  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than 
\.But  rather,  &A.A.'  ij  alV  e,  I  Co.  I.  13. 
9. Beyond,  tr\4\v  plen. 

Acts  15.  28  no  greater  burden  than  these  necessary 
10. Above,  virzp  (ace.)  huper. 

Lukei6.    8  are  in  their  generation  wiser  than  the  ch. 

Heb.  4. 12  sharper  than  any  two  edged  sword,  pier. 

[See  also  Conqueror,  more,  rather.] 


THAN  that  — 
But,  »3  ki. 

1  Sa.  27.    1  (there  is)  nothing  better  for  me  than  that 
THANK,  give  thanks,  to  — 

l.To  bless,  declare  blessed,  rp.^  barak,  3. 

2  Sa.  14.  22  and  bowed  himself,  and  thanked  the  king 
2. To  confess,  thank,  precise,  wy.  yeda,  5. 

Dan.  2.  23  I  thank  thee,  and  praise  thee,  0  thou  God 
6.  10  gave  thanks  before  his  God,  as  he  did  af. 
B.To  confess,  thank,  praise,  rvr  yadoh,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  50  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  am. 

1  Ch.:6.    4  to  thank  and  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Isr. 

16.  7  David  delivered  first  (this  psalm),  to  thank 
16.  8  Give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  call  upon  his 
16.  34  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord;  for(he  is)  go. 
16.  35  that  we  may  give  thanks  to  thy  holy  name 
16.  41  to  give  thanks  to  the  Lord,  because  his 
23.  30  to  stand  every  morning  to  thank  and  praise 
25-  3  prophesied  withaharp.togivethanhsaud 
29. 13  we  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy  glorious  na. 

2  Ch.   5.  13  one  sound  to  be  heard  in  praising  and  th. 

31.    2  to  minister,  and  to  give  thanks,  and  to  pr. 

Ezra   3.  11  in  praising  and  giving  thanks  unto  the  L. 

Neh.  12.  24  to  praise  (and)  to  give  thanks,  according 

Psa.     6.    5  in  the  grave  who  shall  give  thee  thanks1.' 

18.  49  Therefore  will  I  give  thanks  unto  thee,  0 

30.   4  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his 

30. 12  O  Lord  my  God,  I  will  give  thanks  unto 
35.  18  I  will  give  thee  thanks  in  the  great  cong. 
75.    1  we  give  thanks,  (unto  thee)  do  we  giveth. 

79. 13  we  thy  people,  .will  give  thee  thanks  for 
92.  1  (It  is  a)  good  (thing)  to  give  thanks  unto 
97. 12  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his  ho. 

1C5.   1  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  call  upon  his 
106.    1  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for  (he  is)go. 

106.  47  to  give  thanks  unto  thy  hoiy  name,  (and) 

107.  1  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  (he  is)  go. 
118.  1  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for  (he  is)  go. 
118.  29  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord;  for  (lie  is)  go. 
119. 62  At  midnight  I  will  rise  togive  thanks un. 
122.  4  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord 
136.  1  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;for  (heis)go. 
136.  2  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  gods:  for  his 
136.  3  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  of  lords :  for  his 
136.  26  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  heaven  :  for 
140. 13  the  righteous  shall  give  thanks  unto  thy 

4.  To  profess,  confess,  give  glory  to,  i£op.o\oyeofj.at. 
Mattn.  25  I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven 
Lukeio.  21  I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven 

o.Grace,  thanks,  x^-PLS  charts. 

Rom.  6. 17  But  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were  the 
f\.To  thank,  be  thankful,  zhxapMnzw  eucharisted. 
Matt.  15.  36  took  the  seven  loaves,  .and  gave  thanks 

26.  27  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  ga. 
Mark  8.   6  he  took  the  seven  loaves,  and  gave  than. 

14.  23  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  gave  (it)  to 
Luke  17.  1 6  fell  down  on  (his)  face.,  giving  him  thanks 

18.  11  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men 

22.  17  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  s. 

22.  19  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  bra. 
John   6.  11  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  distributed 
6.  23  after  that  the  Lord  [had  given  thanks] 

11.  41  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard 
Acts  27.  35  gave  thanks  to  God  in  presence  of  them 

28.  15  whom  when  Paul  saw,  he  thanked  God 
Rom.  1.    8  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ  for 
7.25  [I  thank]  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  L. 

14.   6  eateth  to  the  Lord . .  he  giveth  God  thanks 

14.    6  he  eateth  not,  and  giveth  God  thanks 

i5.    4  unto  whom  not  only  I  give  thanks,  but 

1  Co.    1.    4  I  thank  my  God  alw  ays  on  your  behalf 

1.  14  I  thank  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you 

10.  30  spoken  of  for  that  for  which  I  give  thanks 

11.  24  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  brake  (it) 
14.  17  thou  verily  givest  thanks  well,  but  the 
14. 18  I  thank  myGod,  I  speak  with  tongues  mo. 

2  Co.    1. 11  thanks  may  be  given  by  many  on  our  be. 
Eph.    1.  16  Cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  making 

5. 20  Giving  thanks  always  for  all  things  unto 
Phil.    1.    3  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  reinembia. 
Col.     1.   3  We  give  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  of 

1. 12  Giving  thanks  untcthe  Father,  which  ha. 

3.  17  giving  thanks  to  God*ind  the  Father  by 

1  Th.    1.   2  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all 

2.  13  For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without 
5.  18  In  every  thing  give  thanks:  for  this  is  the 

2  Th.   1.    3  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for 
2.  13  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God 

4  I  thank  my  God,  making  mention  of  thee 
17  We  give  thee  thanks,  0  Lord  God  Almig. 

7.  To  have  grace,  favour,  exw  X^Ptv  echo  charin. 
Lukei7.    9  Doth  he  thonktbatservantbecausehedid 

1  Ti.    1.  12  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  who  hath 

2  Ti.    1.    3  I  thank  God,  whonil  serve  from  (my)for. 
S.7V)  confess  correspondingly,   aj/6ofioXoj€o/j.ai. 

Luke  2.  38  she  coming  in  that  instant  gave  thanks 

9.  To  confess,  profess,  say  the  same  thing,  6p.o\oyeoj. 

Heb.  13.  15  the  fruit  of  "(our)  lips  giving  thanks  to  his 
THANKTTJL,"  (to  be)  — 
l.To  thank,  p>raise,  confess,  rn;  yadoh,  5. 

Psa. 100.   4  be  thankfuiuntohiin,(aud)blesshisname 
2.  To  thank,  be  thankful,  euxctpio-Teoj  evcharisteo. 

Rom.  1.  21  they  glorified  (hhn)not..  neither  were  tha. 
3. Thankful,  evxaptffTos  eucharistos. 

Col.    3. 15  let  the  peace  of  God  rule,  .be  ye  thankful 


Phm. 
Rev.  1 


THANKS 


970 


THAT 


THAKKS  (giving,  offering,  worthy),  thankfulness  — 
l.Choir,  choir  of  singing,  rinjri  huyyedoth. 

Neh.  12.  8  Mattauiah,  (which  was)  over  the  thauks. 
2.7*0  thank,  praise,  confess,  Fn;  yatlah,  5. 

Neh,  ii.  17  the  principal  to  begin  the  thanksgiving 
12. 46  songs  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  uuto  G. 

3.  Confession,  thanksgiving,  choir,  niin  todah. 

Lev.    7.  12  If  he  offer  it  for  a  thanksgiving,  then  he 

7.  12  shall  offer  with  the  sacrifice  of  thanksg. 

7.  i3  with  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  of  his 

7.  15  sacrifice  of  his  peace  offerings  for  thanks 

22.  29  when  ye  will  offer  a  sacrifice  of  thanksg. 
2  Ch.29.  31  bring  sacrifices  and  thank  offerings  into 

29.  31  brought  in  sacrifices  and  thank  offerings 
33. 16  sacrificed,  .peace  offerings  and  thank  off. 
Neh/  :2.  27  with  thanksgivings,  and  with  singing,  (wi.) 
12.  31  great  (companies  of  them  that  gave)  tha. 
12.  38  the  other  (company  of  themthatgave)th. 
12.  40  two  (companies  of  them  thatgave)thanks 
Fas.  26.    7  I  may  publish  with  the  voice  of  thanksg. 
50.  14  Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving;  and  pay 
69.  30  and  will  magnify  him  with  thanksgiving 
95.    2  Let  us  come  before  his  presence  with  th. 
100.    4  Enter  into  his  gates  with  thanksgiving 
107.  2  j  let  them  sacrifice  the  sacrifices  of  thanks. 
116.  17  X  will  offer  to  thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanks. 
147.    7  Sing  unto  the  Lord  with  thanksgiving 
Isa.    51.    3  gladness  shall  be  found  therein,  thanks. 
Jer.  30. 19  out  of  them  shall  proceed  thanksgiving 
Amos  4.    5  offer  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  with  lea. 
Jon.    2.    9  will  sacrifice  unto  thee..with.. thanksgiving 

^.Thanksgiving,  thankfulness,  (vxapto-ria  euchar. 
Acts  24.   3  We  accept  (it)  always,  .with  all  thankfu. 

1  Co.  14.  16  how  shall  he.  .say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of 

2  Co.   4.  15  might  through  the  thanksgiviug  of  many 

9.  11  which  causeth  through  us  thanksgiving 
9. 12  is  abundant  also  by  many  thanksgivings 
Eph.    5.   4  nor  jesting,  .but  rather  giving  of  thanks 
Phil.  4.    6  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be 
Col.     2.   7  abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving 

4.   2  and  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving 

1  Th.  3.    9  what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God  again 

1  Ti.    2.    1  (and)  giving  of  thauks,  be  made  for  all  men 

4.    3  created  to  be  received  with  thanksgiving 

4.    4  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving 

Rev.    4.    9  honour  aud  thauks  to  him  that  sat  on  the 

7.  12  glory,  and  wisdom,  and  thanksgiving,  aud 

5.  Grace,  favour,  x°-Pls  charis. 

Luke  6.  32,  33,  34  what  thank  have  ye?  for  sinners 

1  Co. 15.  57  thauks  (be)  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the 

2  Co.  2.  14  thanks  (be)  unto  God,  which  always  can 

8.  16  thanks  (be)  to  God,  which  put  the  same 

9.  15  Thanks  (be)  unto  God  for  his  unspeakable 
1  Pe.  2.  19  this  (is)  thankworthy,  if  a  man  for  consc. 

THA'-RA,  &apd.       See  Terah. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Luke  3.  34  Abraham,  which  was  (the  son)  of  T.,  wh. 
r'HAT  (man,  thing,  same,  may,  could) — 

1.  Concerning,  "?n  el. 

1  Sa.   4.  19  she  heard  the  tidings  that  the  ark  of  God 

2.  That,  that  which,  "k?n  asher. 

Gen.  1.  31  God  saw  every  thingthathehadmade.and 
11.    7  that  they  may  not  understand  oneanoth. 

EKOtbo.  4  any  likeness  {of  any  thing)  that  (is)  in  he. 
20.    4  or  that  (is)  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  that 

Num.  6. 11  make  an  atonement  for  him,  for  that  he 

Z.So  that,  to  the  intent  that,  "c"'x  [KB?  lemaan  asher. 
Gen.  18.  79  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his 
Num  16.  40  that  no  stranger,  which  (is)  not  of  these. 

i.  Which,  that,  ,<!!  dt. 

Ezra    4.  11  This  (is)  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  they 
4. 12  Be  it  known,  .that  the  Jews  which  came 

5.  This,  that,  }3"i  dihken, 

Dan.    7.  20  even  (of)  that  horn  that  had  eyes,  and  a 

6.  He,  it,  ton  hu. 

Gen.  2.  11  that  (is)  it  which  compasseth  the  whole 
2. 19  whatsoever  Adam  called,  .that  (was)  the 
7. That  {very),  Ninn  hahu,  in. 

Gen.  19.  35  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that 
8.  She,  it,  N'n  hi. 

1  Ki.  3.  4  went  toGibeon.  .that  (was) the  great  high 
9.That  (very),  nvth  hahi,  f. 

Gen.    2.  12  the  gold  of  that  land  (is)  good  :  there  (is) 

10. This  or  that  (very),  tfcj  hallaz. 

2  Ki.   4.  25  man  of  God.  .said.  .Behold,  .that  Shuna. 

23.  17  Then  he  said,  What  title  (is)  that.  .1  see? 
11. This,  nxi  zoth,  f. 

Lev.  26.  44  yet  for  all  that,  when  they  be  in  the  laud 

12.  This  (very),  nxin  hazzoth,  f 

Gen.  43. 15  tiie  men  took  that  present,  and  they  took 

13.  This,  r\\  zeh,  m. 

Exodi3.  T8  (This  is  done)  because  of  that  (which)  the 

14.  This  (very),  njrr  hazzeh,  m. 

Gen.  24.  9  and  sware  to  him  concerning  that  matter 
1 5.77ns,  17,  n)  zoh,  zo. 

Psa.132.  12  aud  my  testimony  that  I  shall  teach  them 
16.  This,  17  zu. 

Paa,  10.    2  let  them  be  taken  in  the  devices  that  th. 


Psa.  17.   9  From  the  wicked  that  oppress  me,  (from) 
31.    4  Pull  meout  of  the  net  that  they  have  laid 

17.  That,  *?  hi. 

Gen.    1.   4  God  saw  the  light,  that(it  was)  good :  and 

IS. To  the  intent,  jypS  lemaan. 

Gen.  12.  13  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake 

19./?;.  consequence,  on  account  of,  "VO£3  baabur. 
Gen.  21.  30  that  they  may  be  a  witness  unto  me 

20.  Until,  "ij;  ad. 

Lev.  23. 14  until  the  selfsame  day  that  ye  have  broxi. 

21.  This  word,  nn  na^n  haddabar  hazzeh. 

Judg.  8.  3  anger  was  abated,  .when he  had  said  that 
22. To  the  intent  that,.~\wx  Jj£  yaan  asher. 

Eze.  12.  12  that  he  see  not  the  ground  with  (his)  eyes 

23. iw  this  reason,  nja  ^5iT^|  hoi  qebel  denah. 
Ezra  7. 17  That  thou*  mayest  buy  speedily  with  this 

2^. He,  she,  it,  avrSs  autos. 

Luke  2.  38  she  coming  in  that  instant  gave  thanks  li. 

25.//,  elei. 

Mark  9.  42  that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  hi 
Lukei7.    2  that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his 
Acts  26.    8  incredible  with  you,  that  God  should  r-a. 
26.  23  That  Christ  should  suiter,  (and)  that  he 

26.  With  a  view  to,  els  to  eis  to. 

1  Co.  9.  18  that  I  abuse  not  my  power  in  the  gospel 
Eph.    1.  18  that  ye  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his 
Phil.    1.  10  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  exc 

1  Th.  3. 10  praying  exceedingly  that  we  might  seeyo. 

2  Th.  1.   5  that  ye  may  he  counted  worthy  of  the  ki. 

2.    2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or 
2.    6  ye  know  what  withholdeth  that  he  might 
2.  11  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe 

Heb.12.  10  that  (we)  might  be  partakers  of  his  holin. 

Jas.     1.  18  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of 

1  Te.   3.    7  as  being  heirs,  that  your  prayers  be  not 

4.    2  That  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of 

27.  That,  that  very,  he,  she,  it,  ckcTvos  ekeinos. 
Matt.  7.  22  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day.  Lord 

See  also  7.  25,  27 ;  8.  28;  9.  22,  26,  31 ;  10.  14,  15;  11.  25; 
12.  1,45;  13-  44;  14-  ii  35;  17-  27;  18.  [7,  27],  32;  22. 
46 ;  24.  36,  46,  48,  50 ;  26.  24,  24,  29 ;  27.  8,  19,  63  ;  Mark 
3.  24,  25;  6.  [11],  55 ;  7.  20;  13.  11,  24,  32  ;  14.  21,  21,  25; 
Luke  6.  23,  48,  49 ;  9.  5 ;  10".  12,  12,  31 ;  xi,  26 ;  12.  43,  45, 
46,  47;  14.  [»i];  15.  14,  15;  17-  LqJt  31;  '8.  3;  19.  4; 
20.  18,  35;  21.   34;  22,  22;  John  1.  39 ;  4.  39;  6.  [22]; 

11.  5*»  S3!  14.  20;  16.  23,  26;  18.  15 ;  19.  27,  31 ;  21.  3,  7, 
23 ;  Acts  1.  19 ;  3.  23  ;  8.  1,  8 ;  12.  1 ;  14.  21 ;  19.  16 ;  22. 
11 ;  Eph.  2.  12 ;  2  Th.  1.  10;  2  Ti.  1.  12,  18;  4.  8;  Heb.  3. 
[io] ;  4.  11 ;  8.  7;  11.  15;  Jas.  1.  7;  4. 15;  Rev.  16.  [14]. 

2S.ln  the,  eV  tijj  en  to. 

Luke  1.  21  marvelled  that  he  tarried  so  long  in  the 
29, By  reason  of,  on  account  of,  eVe«a  (gen.)  heneka. 

2  Co.  7.  12  that  our  care  for  you  in  the  sight  of  God 

30.  Either,  or,  than,  verily,  ij  e. 

Luke22.  34  before  that  thou  si  alt  thrice  deny  .  .thou 
Acts  25.  16  before  that  he  which  is  accused  have  the 

31.  In  order  that,  so  that,  'Iva  hina. 

Matt.  1.  22  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  wasspok. 
2.  T5  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spok. 
4.    3  command  that  these  stones  be  made  br. 
4.  14  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was 
5  29,  30  it  is  profitablefor  thee  that  oue  of  thy 
7.    1  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged 

7.  12  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do 

8.  8  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldestcoine 

9.  6  that  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  of  man 
10.  25  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be 
12. 10  they  asked  him.  .that  they  might  accuse 
12. 16  charged  them  that  they  should  not  make 
14.  15  that  they  may  go  into  the  villages,  and 
14.  36  besoughthim  that  they  might  only  touch 
16.  20  Then  charged  he  his  disciples  that  they  sh. 
18.  6  it  were  better  for  him  that  a  millstone  we. 
18.  14  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish 

18.  16  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witne. 

19.  13  that  he  should  put  (his)  hands  on  them 

19.  16  what  good  thing  shall  I  do,  that  I  may 

20.  21  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit 
20.  33  They  say  unto  him,  Lord,  that  our  eyes 
2i.    4  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  sp. 

23.  26  that  the  outside  of  them  may  be  clean 

24.  20  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  wi. 
26.  4  consulted  that  they  might  take  Jesus  by 
26.  41  Match  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  iutote. 
26.  56  that  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets  might 

26.  63  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  theCh. 

27.  20  persuaded  the  multitude  that  they  shou. 

27.  35  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spo. 

28.  10  go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  G. 
Mark  1.  38;  2.  10;  3.  2,  9,  12,  14,  14;  4.  12,  22;  5.  10, 

12,  18.  43;  6.  8,  12,25,  36*  56;  7.  9,  26,  36;  8.  30;  9.  9, 
12,  18,  30;  10.  13,  17,  35,  37,  48,  51;  11.  16,  25;  12.  2,  15, 
19;  13.  18;  14.  12,  35;  15.  11,  32;  16.  1. 

Luke  1.  4,  43;  4.  3 ;  5-24;  6.  7,  31 ;  7.  6,  36;  8.  10,  16, 
31,  32;  9.  12,  45;  10.  40;  11.  33,  50,  [54];  12.  36;  14.  10, 
23 ;  15.  29 ;  16.  4,  9,  24,  27 ;  17.  2 ;  18.  15,  39,  41 ;  19.  15 ; 
20.  10,  14,  20,  20;  21.  36;  22.  8,  30,  32. 

John  1.  7,  22,  31 ;  2.  25 ;  3.  15,  16,  17,  21 ;  4.  15,  36,  47; 
S.  20,  23,  34,  40;  6.  5,  7,  12,  28,  29,  30,  39,  40,  50;  7.  3, 
23;  8.  [6];  9.  2,  3,  22,  36,  39;  10.  10,  17,  38;  11.  4,  11,  16, 
37.  42,  5°.  52.  57;  12-  9>  10.  23,  36,  38,  40,  46;  13.  1,  15, 

18,  19,  29,  34,  34;  14.  3,  13,  16,  29,  31;  15.  2,8,  11,  12,13, 
16,  16,  17,  25;  16.  1,  a,  4,  7,  24,  30,  32,  33;  17.  i,  [2],  3,  11, 


12,  13,  15,  15,  19,  21,  21,  22,  23,  23,  24,  24,  26;  18.  o,  [28], 
32'  36.  37>  39;  19-  4.  24,  28,  31,  31,  35,  36,  38;  20.  31,  31. 

Acts  2.  25;  4.  17;  5.  15;  8.  19;  9.  21 ;  19.  4;  21.  24 ;  22. 
24;  23.  24;  24.  4. 

Horn.  1.  11,  13 ;  3.  8,  19;  4.  16;  5.  20,  21 ;  6.  1,  4,  6;  7. 
4)  13.  13;  8.  4,  17;  9.  ii,  23;  11. 11,  19,  31,  32 ;  14.  9;  15. 
4,  6,  16,  31,  [311,32;  16.  2;  1  Co.  1. 10,  31 ;  2.  5,  12;  3. 18; 
4.  2,  3,  6,  6,  8;  5.  2,  5,  7;  7.  5,  5,  29,  34,  35;  9.  [15],  15, 
18,  19,  20,  20,  21,  22,  22,  23,  24 ;  10.  33 ;  11.  19,  32,  34 ;  12. 
25;  14.  1,  5,  5,  12,  13,  19,  31 ;  15.  28;  16.  2,  6,  10,  11,  16; 
2  Co.  1.  9,  11,  15,  17;  2.  4,  4,  5,  9;  4.  7,  io,  11,  15;  5.  4, 
jo,  12,  15,  21;  6.  3;  7.  9;  8.  6,  7,  9,  13,  14;  9.  3,  4,  5,  8; 
10.  9;  11.  7,  12,  12,  16;  12.  8,  9;  13.  7,  7;  Gal.  1.  16;  2. 
[4],  5,  9,  10,  16,  19;  3.  14,  14,  22,  24;  4.  s,  17;  6. 13;  Eph. 

1.  17;  2.  7,  to;  3.  [16],  17,  19;  4.  10,  14,  28,  29;  5.25,  27, 
27>  33!  °-  I3L  i3i  19,  20,  21,  22;  Phil.  t.  9,  10,  26,  27;  2. 

2,  10,  15,  19,  28;  3.  8;  Col.  1.  9,  18,  28;  2.  2;  4.  3,  4,  8, 
12,  16,  16,  17;  1  Th.  2.  16;  4.  1,  12,  13;  5.  4,  10;  2  Th.  1. 
11;  2.  12;  3.  1,  2,  12,  14;  1  Ti.  1.  3,  16,  18,  20;  2.  2;  3. 
15>  4-  J5 '  5-  7>  16,  20,  21 ;  6.  1,  19;  2  Ti.  1.  4;  2.  4,  10; 

3.  17;  4.  17;  Titus  1.  5,  9,  13;  2.  4,  5,  8,  10,  12,  14;  3.  7, 

8,  13,  14;  Phni.  13,  14,  15. 

Heb.  2.  14,  1 7 ;  4.  16 ;  5.  1 ;  6.  12,  iS ;  9. 25 ;  10.  0,  36 ; 
ii-  35»  4°»  i2-  27;  13.  12,  17,  19;  Jas.  1.  4;  4.  3;  1  Pe.  1. 
7;  2.  2,  12,  2T,  24;  3.  [1],  9,  16,  18;  4.  6,  11,  13;  5.  6;  2 
Pe.  1.  4 ;  1  Jo.  1.  3,  4;  2.  1,  19,  27,  28;  3.  1,  8,  11,  23;  4. 

9,  17,  21 ;  5.  3,  13,  [13],  16,  20;  2  Jo.  5,  6,  6,  8,  12;  3  Jo. 
8;  Rev.  2.  10;  3.  11,  iS,  18;  6.  [4],  [ii];  7.  1;  8.  [3];  9. 

4,  [5],  20;  11.  6;  12.  6,  14,  15;  13.  15,  15, 17;  14.  [13],  13; 
16.  12 ;  18.  4,  4;  19.  8,  15,  18;  20.  3;  22.  14. 

o2.And,  Kai  kai. 

Mark  9.  39  there  is  no  man.  .that  can  lightly  speak 
Luke  5.    1  it  came  to  pass,  that,  as  the  people  pres. 
8.    1  that  he  went  throughout  every  city  and 
10.  38  that  he  entered  into  a  certain  village 

33.5b  that,  to  the  end  that,  Uttws   hojyos. 

Matt.  2.    8  bring  me  word  again,  that  I  may  come 
See  also  v.  23;  5.  16, 45;  6.  2, 4,  5.  16,  18;  8.  17,  [34];  9.  38; 
12.  L17];  13-  35;  23.  35;  Mark  5.  [23];  Luke  2.  35;  7.  3; 
io.  2;  16.  28;  John  11.  57;  Acts  8.  15,  24;  9.  2,  12,  17; 

15.  17 ;  23  15,  20;  24.  [26];  25.  3,  26;  Rom.  3.  4;  9.  17,  17; 
1  Co.  1.  20;  2  Co.  8.  11,  14;  Gal.  1.  4;  2  Th.  1.  12;  Phm. 
6;  Heb.  2".  9   ;  9.  15;  James  5.  16;  1  Pe.  2.  9. 

34. As  much,  as  ma?iy,  '60-os  hosos. 

Jlatti3. 44  goeth  and  selleth  all  that  he  hath.and  bu. 
13. 46  went  and  sold  all  that  lie  had, and  bought 
18.  25  his  wife  and  children,  and  all  that  he  had 

Marki2. 44  she  of  her  want  did  cast  in  all  that  she 

Luke  4.  40  they  that  had  any  sick  with  divers  disea. 
18. 12  I  fast.  .1  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess 
18.  22  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  distribute  un. 

John  10.  41  all  things  that  John  spake  of  this  man  we. 

16.  15  All  tilings  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine 

35.  Any  one  who,  ocrrts  hostis. 

Matt.  2.    6  a  governor,  that  shall  rule  my  people  Is. 

18.  28  took  (him),  .saying,  Pay  me  [that]  thou  owe. 

27.  62  the  next  day,  that  followed  the  day  of  the 
Luke  7.  39  what  manner  of  woman  (this  is)  that  ton. 
John  S.  25  (the  same)  that  I  said  unto  you  from  the 
Rom.  6.   2  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live 
Rev.    1.  12  I  turned  to  see  the  voice  that  spake  with 

17.  8  when  they  behold  the  beast  [that]  was, and 

36.  When,  orav  hot'"'. 

Marki4.  25  day  that  I  drink  it  new  in  the  kingdom 

37.  When,  ore  hote. 

Mark  6. 21  when  a  convenient  day  was  come,  that  H. 
38. Because,  that,  on  hoti. 

Matt.  2.  16  Herod,  when  he  saw  that  he  was  mocked 

2.  22  when  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did  reign 

See  also  3.  9;  4.  12;  5.  17,  20,  21,  22,  23,  27,  28,  32,  33, 

38.  43  ;  6.  29,  32 ;  8.  u,  27 ;  9.  6,  28 ;  10.  34 ;  n.  24 ;  12. 

6,  36;  13.  17;  15.  12,  17;  16.  11,  i2,  18,20;  17.  10,  12,  13; 

18.  10,  19;  19.  4,  23,  28 ;  20.  10.  25,  30;  21.  31,  45;  22.  16, 
34;  23.  31;  24.  32,  33,  43,  47;  25.  24,  26;  26.  2,  21,  34,53, 
54;  27.  3,  18,  24,  63;  ?8.  5,  7. 

Mark  2.  1,  8,  io,  16;  4.  38,  41 ;  5.  29;  6.  [2],  14,  15,  15; 

7.  18;  8.  31  ;  9.  i,  11,  13,  25;  10.  42,  47 ;  11.  3,  23,  24,  32 ; 
12. 12,  14,  26,  28,  34,  35,  43;  13.  28,  29,30;  14.30;  15. 10, 39; 

16.  4,  7,  [ill;  Luke  1.  22;  2.  49,  49 ;  3.  8 ;  4.  4;  5.  24 ;  6. 
[5];  7.  4,  16,  16,  37,  43;  8.  47,  53;  9.  7,  8,  8,  19;  10.  11, 
12,  20,  21,  24,40;  11.  38;  12.  37,  39.  40,  44,  51;  13.  2,  4; 
14.  24;  15.  7;  16.  25;  17.  15;  18.  8,  9,  11,  37;  19.  7,  22, 
26,  [40];  20.  19,  21,  37;  21.  3,  20,  30,  31;  22.  37,  70;  23. 
7;  24.  21,  39,  44. 

Julm  1.  34;  2.  17,  18,  22,  25;  3.  2,  7,  19,  21,  28,  28,  33 ; 
4-  1,  19,  20,  25,  27,  42,  44,  47,  53;  5.  6,  15,  32,  36,  4-.  45  : 
6.  1 5,  22,  22,  24,  36,  46,  6i,  65,  69 ;  7.  7,  26,  35,  42 ;  8.  1 7, 
24,  24,  27,  28,  37,  48,  52,  54;  9.  8,  17,  18,  20,  2c,  24,  25, 
29.  30,  31.  32>  35  5  10-38;  11.  6,  13,  15,  20,  22,  24,  27,  31, 
40,  41,  42,  42,  50,  56;  12.  6,  9,  12,  16,  34,  50;  13.   1,  3,  3, 

10,  21,  29,  35 ;  14.  10,  11,  20,  22,  31 ;  15.  18;  16.  4,  15,  19, 
20,  21,  26,  27,  30,  30;  17.  7,  8,  8,  21,  23,  25;  18.  8,  14,37  '> 

19.  4,  io,  21,  28,  35;  20.  9,  14,  18,  31 ;  21.  4,  7,  12,  15,  16, 
i7»  23.  24. 

Acts  2.  29,  30,  31,  36;  3.  10,  17;  4  i°.  r3>  i3>  l6;  5.  9, 
41 ;  6.  14  ;  7.  6;  8.  14,  18;  9.  20,  22,  26,  27,  38;  10.  34, 
42;  11.  1;  12.9,  11;  13.  38;  14.9,  22;  15.  5,24;  16.  3, 
10,  19,  38;  17.  3,  3,  13 ;  19-  25)  26»  26,  34  ;  20.  23,  23,  25, 
26,  29,  31,  34,  38;  21.  21,  22,  24,  29,  31 ;  22.  2,  19,  29;  23. 

5,  6,  22,  27,  34;  24.  11,  14,  26;  26.  5,  27;  27.  10,  25;  28. 
i,  22,  28. 

Rom.  1.  8,  13,  32;  2.  2,  3,  4;  3.  2,  19;  4.  [9,]  21,  23;  5.  3; 

6.  3,  6,  8,  9,  16,  17;  7.  14,  16,  18,  21;  8.  16,  18,  22,  28,  38;  9. 
2,  30;  10.  2,  5,  9,  9;  11.  25;  13.  11;  14.  14;  15.  14,  29;  1  Co. 
1.  5,  11,  12,  14,  15;  3.  16,  20;  4.  [9];  5.  6;  6.  2,  3,  9, 15,  16, 
19;  7.  26;  8. 1,  4,4;  9.  io,  13,  24;  10.  [19,]  20;  n.  2,  3,  14, 
17,23;  12.  2,  3;  14.  23,  25,  37;  15.  4,  4,  5,  12,  12,  15,  27,  50, 


THAT 


971 


THEE 


58;   16.   15;  2  CO.  *I.   7,   S,   [io],    12,    14, 

x,  6,  14,  19;  7.  3,  8,  9,  9,  16;  8.  9;  9.  : 
13.  19;  13.  2,  6,  6;  Gal.  1.  6,  11,  23;  2 
15,  22;  5.  2,  3,  10,  21;  Eph.  2. 


!3J2-  3;  3-  5;  4- MI  5- 
;  10.  7,  n;  11.  31;  12, 
7,  14,  16;  3.  7,  8,  11; 
9;  5-  5;  6.  8,  9; 


Phil.  1.6,  12,  17,  19,  20,  25,  27;  2.  11,  16,  22,  24,  26;  4.  10,  ti, 
15;  Col.  3.  24;  4.  1,  13;  1  Th.  2.  153.  3,  4,  6;  4.  14,  15;  5.  2; 
2  Th.  2.  2,  4,  5;  3.  4,  10;  1  Ti.  1.  8,  9,  15;  4.  1;  2  Ti.  1.  5,  12, 
15;  2.  23;  3.  1,  15;  Tit.  3.  11;  Phm.  21,  22. 

Heb.  2.  6,  6;  3.  19;  7.  8, 14;  it.  6,  13,  14,  18,  19;  Jas.  1. 
3,  7;  2.  19,  "20;  3.  1;  4.  4,  5;  5.  11,  20;  1  Pe.  1.  12;  2.  3;  3.  9; 

2  Pe.  1. 14,  20;  3.  3,  5,  8;  1  Jo.  1.  5,  6,  8,  10;  2.  3,  5,  18,  iS, 
19,  21,  22,  29,  29;  3.  2,  5,  14,  15,  19,  24;  4.  3,  10,  10,  13, 
[14],  15;  5.  1,  2,  5,  11,  13,  14,  15,  15,  18,  19,  20;  2  Jo.  4; 

3  Jo.  12;  Rev.  2.  6,  23;  3.  i,  1,  9,  15,  17;  10.  6;  12.  12,  13. 

Zty.Toioard,  to  the  intent  that,  irpos  rb  j^'os  to. 
2  Co.  3. 13  veil.,  that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not 
Eph.   6. 11  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the 
2  Th.  3.    8  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any 
Jas.    3.    3  we  put  bits  in  the  horses'  mouths,  [that] 

40. How,  na<s  pos. 

Eph.  5.  15  See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as 

41.  Th.es-3  things,  ravra  tauta. 

Marki6. 12  After  that  he  appeared  in  another  form 
Lukei2.   4  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they 
Acts    7.    7  after,  .shall  they  come,  13.  20;  1  Co.  6.  8. 
Rev.  15.    5  after  that  I  looked,  and,  behold,  the  temple 
20.  3  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  season 

42.7h.  these,  ravrats  tautais. 

Luke23.    7  who  himself  also  was  at  Jerusalem  at  that 

43.  To  that,  ravrr]  taute. 

Lukei3.  32  tell  that  fox,  Behold,  I  cast  outdevils,  and 

17.  34  that  night  there  shall  be  two  (men)inone 

Acts  16.  i2  we  were  in  that  city  abiding  certain  days 

44.  That,  TavT-nv  tauten. 

Luke  23.  48  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  si. 
45.77i;'s,  that,  tovto  touto. 

Marki3.  n  that  speak  ye ;  for  it  is  not  ye.  .but  the  H. 

Luke  9.  21  and  commanded,  .to  tell  no  man  that  thi. 

John  3.  [32];  4. 18;  11.  7,  11 ;  14. 13;  Rom.  1.  12 ;  7. 
[15].  15.  16,  10,  20;  10.  6,  7,  8;  13.  11;  1  Co.  6.  6;  Gal.  6.  7; 
Eph.  2.  8;  Phil.  1.  28;  1  Ti.  5.  4;  Phm.  18;  Heb.  13.  17. 
46.  This,  that,  tovtov  touton. 

John  19.   8  "When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  saying 
19. 13  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  saying 

Acts    2.  36  Godhath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye 

2  Th.  3.  14  note  that  man,  and  have  no  company  wi. 

47.0/  this,  of  that,  tovtov  toutou. 

John  6. 66  From  that  (time)  many  of  his  disciples 
16.  19  Do  ye  enquire  among  yourselves  of  that  I 

Rom  11.    7  Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  se. 
4S..4s,  so  that,  us  hos. 

Acts  28.  19  not  that  I  had  ought  to  17.  22;  Lu.  16.  1. 

Rom.  1.    9  that  without  ceasing  I  make  mention  of 

2  Ti.    1.    3  that  without  ceasing  I  have  remembrance 

49.  So  that,  as  also,  &o~Te  hoste. 

John.  3.  16  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his 

.    Acts  14.    1  thatagreatinultitudebothoftheJewsand 

13.  39  that  they  departed  asunder  one  from  the 

Rom.  7.  ~6  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit 

1  Co.  5.    1  that  one. ..his  father's  wife,  1  Pe.  1.  21. 

50.  From  which,  a<p'  $s  apti  lies,  Acts  20.  iS. 
[See  also  According  to,  after,  all,  as,  because,  before, 
but,  except,  for,  he,  how,  in,  oh,  oh  that,  side,  so,  way.] 

THAT,  after  — 
Thus,  ovtws  kouto. 

1  Co.  7.    7  one  after  this,  .and  another  after  that 

THAT  ever  — 

As  much,  as  many,  Hcos  hosos. 

John  4.  29  which  told  me  all  things  [that  ever]  I  did 
4.  39  which  testified,  He  told  me  [all  that]  ever 
10.   8  All  that  ever  came  before  me  are  thieves 
THAT  have  — 

1.  There  is,  tr  ycsh. 

Isa.  43.    8  Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have  eyes 

2.  To  them,  iD^>  lamo. 

Isa.   43.    8  Bring  forth .  .the  deaf  that  have  ears 
THAT  he. ..again  — 
With,  fitTo.  ineta. 

Luke.  9.  39  it  teareth  him  that  he  foameth  again,  and 
THAT  if  — 
If,  jn  hen. 

Ezra   4. 13  Be  it  known,  .that  if  this  city  be  builded 
4. 16  if  this  citybe  builded  (again),  and  the  wa. 
THAT  is  — 
l.To  say,  "icx  amar. 

2  Sa.    3. 13  one  thing  I  require  of  thee,  that  Is,  Thou 

2.  That  is,  tovtIvti  toutesti. 

Acts  19.   4  believe  on  him.  .that  is,  on  Christ  Jesus 
Rom.  7.  iS  I  know  that  in  me  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dw. 
9.   8  That  is,  They  which  are  the  children  of 
10.  6  "Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven?  that  is,  to 
10.    7  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep?  that  is 
10.  8  that  is,  the  word  of  faith,  which  we  prea. 
Phm.      12  therefore  receive  him  that  is  mine  own 
Heb.   2. 14  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is 
7.    5  that  is,  of  their  brethren,  though  they  co. 
11. 16  they  desire  a  better  (country),  that  is,  an 
13.  15  that  is,  the  fruit  of  (our)  lips  giving  tha. 
1  Pe.  3-  20  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls  were  sa. 


THAT  is  to  say  — 

1.  Which  is,  '6  4o-ti  ho  esti. 

Mark  7.  n  (It  is)  Corban.that  is  to  say,  a  gift,  by  wh. 

2.  That  is,  tovt€Ctti  toutesti. 

Jlatt27.  46  Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani?  that  is  to  say 
Mark  7.  2  defiled,  that  is  to  say,  with  unwashen  ha. 
Acts  1.  19  Aceldama.that  is  to  say,  The  field  of  blood 
Heb.  9.  11  not  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say,  not 

10.  30  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh 
THAT... it  — 

lie,  it,  *&n  hu. 

Gen.   2.  11  that  (is)  it  which  compasseth  the  whole 
THAT  manner,  on  — 
Thus,  nj?  bekoh. 

1  Ki.22.  20  one  said  on  this,  .another.. on  that  man. 
THAT. ..no  or  not,  none,  no  one  — 
1.7/,  ex  im. 

Gen.  14.  23  ThatIwillnot(take)fromathreadevento 
14.  23  that  I  will  not  take  anything  that(is)th. 

1  Sa.  24.  21  that  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  seed  after 

•l.Not,  *??  bal. 

Isa.   14.  21  that  they  do  not  rise,  nor  possess  the  land 

3.7;i  order  not,  *£?57  lebilti. 

Gen.    3.  11  I  commanded .  .thatthoushouldestnote.? 

Exod.  8.  22  the  land,  .that  no  swarms,  .shall  be  there 
4.  Lest,  \$  pen. 

Gen.  24.    6  Bewarethouthatthoubringnotmysonth. 

5.7??  order  not,  so  as  not,  'tva  fxi)  hina  me. 
Matt.  7.    1  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged 

26.  41  "Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  te. 

John  3. 15,  16  That  whosoever  believeth.  .should  not 

4. 15  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not 

6.  50  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  die 

7.  23  that  the  law  of  Moses  should  not  he  broken 

11.  37  that  even  this  man  should  not  have  died? 

12.  46  that  whosoever  believeth.  .should  not  ab. 
16.  1  These,  .havelspoken.  .that  ye  should  not 
18.  36  that  I  should  not  be  delivered  to  the  Jews 

Acts    4.  17  that  it  spread  no  further  among  the  peo. 
24.   4  that  I  be  not  further  tedious  unto  theo 

1  Co.  2.    5  That  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the 

4.  6  that  ye  might  learn . .  that  no  one  of  you 
7.  5  that  Satan  tempt  you  not  for  your  incon. 
11.  32  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with 

11.  34  that  ye  come  not  together  unto  condem. 

12.  25  That  there  should  be  no  schism  in  the  bo. 
16.   2  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come 

2  Co.  1.   9  that  we  should  not  trust  in  ourselves, but 

2.  5  in  part ;  that  I  may  not  overcharge  you 

6.  3  Giving  no  offence,  .that  the  ministry  be 

9.  4  we  that  we  say  not  ye  should  be  ashamed 

10.  9  That  I  may  not  seem  as  if  I  would  terrify 
1  Th.  4.  13  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  which 
1  Ti.  6.  1  that  the  uameof  God .  .be  not  blasphemed 
Titus  2.  5  that  the  word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed 

3. 14  good  works,  .that  they  be  not  unfruitful 
Phm.  14  that  thy  benefit  should  not  be  as  it  were 
Heb.  6. 12  That  ye  be  not  slothful,  but  followers  of 

11.  40  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made 

1  Jo.   2.    1  these,  .write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not 

2  John     8  that  we  lose  not  those  tilings  which  we 
Rev.    7.    1  that  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  ea. 

11.  6  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  prop. 

18.  4  Come  out.  .that  ye  be  not  partakers  of 

18.  4  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues 

20.  3  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more 

6.iV*b,  not,  fx-fj  me. 

MattiS.  10  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  24.  6. 
Mark  5.    7  I  adjure  thee,  .that  thou  torment  me  not 
Lukesi.    8  Take  heed  that  ye  be  not  deceived :  for 
Gal.     5.  15  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one 
2  Ti.    4.  16  CI  pray  God)  that  it  may  not  He.  12. 75. 

7.  Kotany,iLi}Ti$,M\,.  24. 4;  2  Co.  8.  20;  1  Th.5.15. 

THAT  same  — 

That,  that  very,  he,  she,  it,  IkcTvos  ekeinos. 

Mattio.  19  [it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour] 

26.  55  In  that  same  hour  said  Jesus  to  the  mul. 
Johni:.  49  Caiphas,  being  the  high  priest  that  same 

18. 13  which  was  the  high  priest  that  same  year 

THAT  (thing)  -which  — 
1.  That  which,  "ly'x  asher. 

Gen.  14.  24  Save  only  that  which  the  young  Jos.  24.  5. 

18. 17  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing  wh. 

27.  8  obey  my  voice  according  to  that  which  I 
2.1  f  any,  «5f  tis  ei  it's,  Eph.  4.  29. 

3-  What,  that  which,  no  mah. 

Ezra  6.   9  that  which  they  have  need  of,  both  young 
THAT  time  — 
Then,  Tore  tote. 

Matt.  4,  17  From  that  time  Jesus  began  to  preach,  and 

16.  21  From  that  time  forth  began  Jesus  to  show 

26. 16  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 

Lukei6.  16  since  that  time  the  kingdom  of  God  is  pr. 

THAT,  (to  this  end)  — 

Toward,  to  the  intent,  irpos  pros. 

Luke  18.    1  spake  a  parable . .  (to  this  end),  that  men 
THAT  very  — 
That,  that  very,  he,  she,  it,  e/cetyos  ekeinos. 

Mattis.  28  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that  very 

17. 18  and  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very 


THAT  wherein  — 

That  which,  "i^x  asher. 

Eccl.  3.   9  he  that  wor!:eth  in  tliat  wherein  ii3  iabo. 

THAT  (which)  one- has  — 

Possessi07is,  substance,  property,  virdpxoi'Ta  hupa. 
Mattig.  21  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor 
Luke  12  33  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  12. 44;  14.  33. 

THAT  then  was— 6  ToVe  ho  tote,  2  Pe.  3.  6. 

THAT  way—  St  e/ceiV^s  cU  ekelnes,  Luke  19.  4. 

THE  — 

1.  These,  pVx  illen. 

Dan.  6.  2  that  the  princes  might  give  accounts  unto 
2.These,  TavTa  tauta. 

Gal.    2.  18  if  I  build  again  the  things  which  I  destr 
5. 17  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye 
3.  This,  TavTTjv  tauten. 

Luke24.  21  to  day  is  the  third  day  since  these  things 
THE  same  — 
These,  ovtoi  outoi. 

Luke2o.  47  the  same  shall  receive  greater  damnation 

Johnis.  21  The  same  came  therefore  to  Philip,  which. 

Gal.    3.   7  Know  ye  therefore,  .the  same  are  the  ch. 
THE  space  of  (for)  — 
Over,  above,  up  to,  for,  iirl  (ace.)  epi. 

Acts  19.   8  spake  boldly  for  the  space  of  three  mon. 
19. 10  this  continued  by  the  space  of  two  years 
19.  34  about  the  space  of  two  hours  cried  out 
THEATRE  — 
A  public  show  or  spectacle,  QeaTpov  iheatron. 

Acts  19.  29  they  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  thea. 

19.  31  would  not  adventure  himself  into  the  th. 

THE'-BEZ,  pn  seen  afar. 

A  city  in  Epnraim,  four  hours  N".  of  Shechem  and  thir- 
teen miles  S.W.  of  Beth-shean,  now  called  Tubaz,  where 
Abimelech  was  killed  by  a  woman.    B.C.  1236. 

Judg.  9.  50  went.  .toT.,  and  encamped  against T.  and 
2  Sa.  11.  21  millstone  upon  him.. that  he  died  in  T? 
THEE,  (as  for)  — 
l.Thou,  hj^n  ant. 

Dan.   2.  29  As  for  thee,  0  king,  thy  thoughts  came 
2. Thy  hand,  ?|T  yadeka,  1\Tt  yadek. 

1  Sa.  10.    7  do  as  occasion  serve  thee  ;  for  God  (is) 

16.    2  Take  an  heifer  with  thee,  and  say,  I  am 
Jer.   38.  10  Take  from  hence  thirty  men  with  thee 
Eze.  27.  21  they  occupied  with  thee  in  lambs,  and  r. 

Z.From  with  thee,  ^m?  levathak. 

Ezra  4. 12  the  Jews  which  came  up  from  thee  to  ua 
4. In  thine  eyes,  T^.?,  *1TH3  oeenecha,  beenayik. 

Gen.  16.    6  Abram  said . .  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth  thee- 

20.  15  Abimelech  said,  .dwell  where  it  pleaseth 
Josh.  9.  25  as  it  seemeth  good  and  right  unto  thee  to 
Judgio.  15  do.  .whatsoever  seemeth  good  unto  thee 

1  Sa.    1.  23  Do  what  seemeth  thee  good ;  tarry  until 

14.  36  said,  Do  whatsoever  seemeth  good  unto 
14.  40  people  said.  .Do  what  seemeth  good  unto 
24.    4  do  to  him  as  it  shall  seem  good  uuto  thee 

2  Sa.  19.    6  all  we  had  died,  .it  hadpleased  thee  well 

19.  37  do  to  him  what  shall  seem  good  unto  thee 
19.  38  that  which  shall  seem  good  unto  thee 
1  Hi.  21.    2  if  it  seem  good  to  thee,  I  will  give,  .money 
Esth.  3.  11  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee 
Jer.  40.    4  If  it  seem  good  unto  thee  to  come  with 
40.    4  if  it  seem  ill  unto  thee  to  come  with  mo 
4c.    4  whither  it  seemeth  good,  .for  thee  to  go 
40.    5  wheresoever  it  seemeth  convenient  unto 
5.  Thy  face,  T^s  paneka. 

Gen.  19.  21  Ihave  accepted  thee  concerning  this  thing 
Deut.  7.  23  God  shall  deliver  them  unto  thee,  and  sh. 
1  Sa.  29.  8  so  long  as  I  have  been  with  thee  unto  this 
1  Ki.  2.  17  Solomon  the  king,  .will  not  say  thee  nay 
2.  20  Ask  on,  mymother;  for  I  will  not  say  thee 
Job   11.  19  lie  down.,  many  shall  make  suit  unto  thee 

Q.Her,  avTTjv  auten. 

Matt23.  37  and  stonr-  l  them  which  are  sent  unto  thee 
Lukei3.  34  and  stonest  them  that  are  sent  unto  thee 

7. Thee,  tre  se. 

Matt.  4.    6  in  (their)  hands  they  shall  bear  thee  up 
5.  25  lest  at  anytime  the  adversary  deliver  thee 
5.  25  the  judge  deliver  [thee]  to  the  officer,  and 
5.  29  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 
5.  30  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 
5.  39  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right 
5.  41  whosoever  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile 
5.  42  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee,  and  from 
See  also  9.  22 ;  14.  28;  18.  8,  9,  [15],  33  ;  20.  13 ;  25.  21, 
=3»  24,  37,  38,  39,  39,  44 ;  26.  35,  63,  68,  73 ;  Mark  1.  24; 
3.  32  ;  5.  7,   19,  31,  34 ;  9.  17,  43>  45,  47  I  IO-  49.  5Z  5  *4- 
31;  Luke  1.  19,  35;  2.  48;  4.   10,  11,  34;  6.  29,  30;  7.  7, 

20,  50;  8.  20,  45,  48;  11.  27,  36;  12.  58,  58,  5S;  13.  31  ; 
14.  9,  10,  12,  18,  19 ;  16.  27 ;  17.  [3],  4,  [4],  19 ;  18.  42  ;  19. 

21,  22,  43,  43,  43,  44  ;  22.  64 ;  John  1.  48,  48,  50 ;  7.  20 ;  8. 
[10,  11];  to.  33;  11.  8,  28;  13.  8;  16.  30;  17.  1,  3,  4,  11, 
j3j  25>  25>  I8-  26,  35  ;  19.  10,  10;  21.  15,  16,  17,  18,  20,  22, 

23- 

Acts  5.  9;  7.  27,  34,  35;  9.  34;  10.  i9,  22,  33;  11.  14; 
13-  IT>  33»  47  5  l8-  IO  >  2I-  37 ;  22.  14,  19,  21 ;  23.  3,  18,  20, 
30;  24.  4,  [8],  25 ;  26.  3,  16,  17,  17,  24  ;  Rom.  2.  4,  27 ;  4. 
17  ;  9.  17;  11.  18,  22;  15.  3  ;  1  Co.  4.  7 ;  8.  [10] ;  Phil.  4. 
3;  iTi.  1.  3,  iS;  3.  14;  2  Ti.  1.  4,  6;  3.  15  ;  4.  21;  Titus 
1.5;  3. 12,  15 ;  Phm.  10,  18,  23 ;  Heb.  1.  5,  8 ;  2.  12 ;  5. 
5 ;  6.  14,  14  j  13. 5,  5 ;  2  Jo.  5,  13  ;  3  Jo.  14,  14 ;  Rev,  3 
[3L  3.  9»  IO»  lfi;  T5-  [4]- 


THEFT 


972 


THEN 


S.  Of  thyself,  a-eavrov  seautou. 

i  Ti.   4. 11  Take  Mark,  and  bring  htm  with  thee  :  for 

9.  To  thee,  vol  soi. 

Matt.  2. 13  be  thou  there  until  I  bring  thee  word:  for 

4.  9  All  these  tilings  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 

5.  26  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Thou  slialt  by  no 
5.  29,  30  it  is  profitable  for  thee  that  one  of  thy 

5.  40  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  law,  and 

6.  4  thy  Father . .  himself  shall  reward  thee  op. 
6.  6  and  thv Father,  .shall reward  thee  openly 
6.  1 8  and  thy  Father . .  shall  reward  thee  openly 
6.  23  If  therefore  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be 

8.  13  asthouhast  believed. .be  it  done  unto  thee 
8.  19  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  go. 

8.  29  What  havewe  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou 

9.  2  be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  [th.] 

9.  5  to  say,  (Thy)  sins  be  forgiven  [thee] ;  or  to 
See  also  11.  21,  21,  23,  24,25;  12.  47;  14.  4;  15.  28;  16. 
17,  18,  19,  22,  22  ;  17.  4;  18.  8,  9,  17,  22,  [26],  29;  18.  32; 

10.  27;  20.  14;  21.  5,  23;  25.  44;  26.  17,  33,  34,  35;  Mark 

I.  24 ;  2.  [5,  9],  11 ;  5.  7,  19,  41 ;  6.  18,  22,  23  ;  9.  5,  25,  43, 
45,  47 ;  10.  28,  51 ;  n.  28  ;  14.  30,  31,  36;  Luke  1.  3,  13, 
19,  35  ;  3.  22  ;  4.  6,  34 ;  5.  20,  23,  24 ;  7.  14,  40,  47  ;  8.  28, 

39  I  9-  33.  57.  6l !  IO-  T3>  J3-  2I»  35 '»  "•  7>  351  12-  59 :  M- 

9,  10,  10,  12,  14,  15,  29 ;  18.  11,  28,  41  ;  19.  43,  44,  44 ;  20. 
2;  22.  11,  34;  23.43;  John  1.  50;  2.  4;  3.  3,  g.  7,  11  ;  4. 

10,  10,  26 ;  5.  10,  12,  14  ;  6.  30  ;  9.  26 ;  n.  22,  40,  41 ;  13. 
37,  3S;  17.  5,  21 ;  18.  30,  34;  19.  11,  11 ;  21.  3,  18. 

Acts  3.  6 ;  7.  3 ;  8.  20,  22  ;  9.  5,  6,  17 ;  10.  [6],  32,  33 ; 

16.  18;  18.  10;  21.  23  ;  22.  10,  10;  23.  18 ;  24.  14  ;  26.  14, 

16,  16;  27.  24;  Rom.  9.  17  ;  13.  4;  15.  9;  2  Co.  6.  2 ;  12. 
9 ;  Gal.  3.  8 ;  Eph.  5.  14 ;  6.  3 ;  1  Ti.  1.  18  53.  14 ;  4.  14, 
14;  6.  13  ;  2  Ti.  1.  5,  5,  6;  2.  7;  Titus  1.  5;  Phni.  8,  n, 

I I,  16,  19,  21 ;  Heb.  8.  5 ;  Jas.  2.  t8  ;  2  Jo.  5  ;  3  Jo.  12,  14; 
Jude  9  ;  Rev.  2.  5,  10,  16;  3.  18;  4.  1;  11.  17;  14.  15; 

17.  i,  7;  18.  22,  22,  22,  23,  23;  21.  9. 

Id.  Of  thee,  thy,  thine,  trov  sou. 

Mitt,  2.   6  outofthee  shall  come  a  governor,  thatsh. 
3. 14  I  have  ueed  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and 

4.  6  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning  t. 
See  also  5.  23,  29,  30,  42;  6.  2;  11.  10;  12.  38;  17.  27 ;  18. 

0.  15,  15,  16;  21.  19;  26.  62;  27.  13;  Mark  1  [2];  n.  14;  14. 
60;  15.  4;  Luke  1.  28,  [35];  4.  10;  7.  27;  8.  28;  9.  38;  12 
20;  15.  18;  16.  2;  22.  33;  John  3.  26;  9.  37;  17.  7,  8;  Acts 
8.  34;  10.  22;  17.  32;  18.  10;  21.  21,  24,  39;  23.  21,  30,  35; 
24.  2,  19;  25.  26;  26.  2,  [3];  27.  24;  28.  21,  21,  22;  Rom.  10. 
8;  11.  21;  1  Co.  12,  21;  2  Co.  6.  2;  1  Ti.  4.  16;  6.  [21];  2 
Ti.  1.3;  Titus  2.  15;  Phm.  4,7,  20;  3  Jo.  3;  Rev.  2.  4,  &c, 

THEFT  — 

1.  Theft,  thing  stolen,  H333  genebah. 

Exod22.    3  nothing,  then  lie  shall  be  sold  for  his  th. 
22.    4  If  the  theft  be  certainly  found  in  his  hand 

2.  A  theft,  Kkcfxfia  klemma. 

Rev.   9.  21  Neither  repeuted  they,  .of  their  thefts 

3.  .-1  theft,  kKottt}  hlope. 

Matt  15.  19  fornications,  thefts,  false  witness,  blasp. 

Mark  7.  22  Thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit 
THEIR,  THEIRS  — 
l.They,  en  hem. 

Isa.   30.    7  concerning  this,  Their  strength  (is)  to  sit 
2.  TJiey,  njn  hennah. 

Lev.  18. 10  not  uncover:  for  theirs  (is)  thine  own  na. 
3. He,  they,  avr6s  autos,  avroi  autoi. 

Matt.  5.    3  Blessed  (are)  the  poorin  spirit :  for  theirs 

5.  10  Blessed,  .for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  lie. 
Marki2.  44  For  all  (they)  did  cast  in  of  their  abund. 

1  Pe.    4.  14  on  their  part  he  is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on 

i.  Of  self t  selves,  aurov  hautou. 

Matt.  2.  11  when  they  had  opened  their  treasures,  th. 

3.  6  were  baptized  of  him.  .confessing  their 

4.  21  mending  their  nets  ;  and  he  called  them 
4.  22  immediately  left  the  ship  and  their  father 

6.  2,  5,  16  I  say  unto  you,  They  have  their  re. 

6.  16  disfigure  their  faces,  that  they  may  app. 

7.  6  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet 
10.  17  they  will  scourge  you  in  their  synagogues 

Sjealso  11.  16;  13.  15,  43;  15.  2,  8, 27;  17. 6, 8;  18.  31;  21.  7; 
22.  16 ;  23.  4,  5,  5,  5 ;  25.  1,  4,  7 ;  27.  39 ;  Mark  1.  18,  20 ; 
2.  6;  11.  7,  8 ;  14.  46;  15.  29;  Luke  1.  66 ;  2.  8 ;  3.  15;  5. 
15;  6.  17;  ig.  36;  21.  1,  12;  John  15.  22;  Acts  5.  18;  7. 
T9.  39.  57.  58;  13-  5o-  Si;  14-  Il>  MI  *5-  26;  16.  19  ;  19. 
18 ;  22.  22 ;  28.  27 ;  Rom.  1.  21,  27,  27  ;  2.  15;  3.  13  ;  Eph. 

4.  17 ;  1  Th.  2.  16;  Heb.  7.  5;  ri.  35;  2Pe.  3.  3,  16;  Rev. 
2.  22 ;  3.  4;  4.  4,  10;  6.  14 ;  7.  11,  14;  9.  4,  20,  21,  21,  2i, 
21 ;  11.  7,  11,  16,  16;  12.  11,  11 ;  14.  1,  2,  13;  16.  10, 11, 11, 
11 ;  17.  17;  18.  19  ;  20.  4,  4 ;  21.  24. 

5.  That,  that  very,  he,  site,  it,  ifcuvos  eheinos. 

2  Co.  8.  14  for  their  want,  that  their  abundance  also 
2  Ti.    3.    9  for  their  folly  shall  be  manifest  unto  all 

6.  Of  self \  selves,  kavrov  heautou. 

Matt.  8.  22  Follow  me;  and  let  the  dead  bury  their 

21.  S  very  great  multitude  spread  their  garni. 
25.    3  They  that  (were)  foolish  took  [their]  lamps 

Luke  9.  60  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead  :  but .go  thou 
12.  36  like uuto  men  that  wait  for  their  lord,  wh. 

16.  8  children  of  this  world  are  in  their  gener, 
19.  35  theycasttheirgarments upon thecolt,  and 

22.  66  came  together,  and  led  him  into  their  co. 

23.  48  beholding.. smote  their  breasts,  and  ret. 
Eph.  5.  28  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives.  .lie  that 
1  Pe.  4.  19  commit  the  keeping  of  theirsouls  (to  him) 
Jude  6  the  angels  which  kept  net  their  first  estate 
Rev.  10.    3  cried,  seven  thunders  uttered  their  voices 

10.  4  the  seven  thunders  had  uttered  their  vo. 

17.  13  give  their  power  and  strength  unto  the  be. 


7. One's  own,  proper,  peculiar,  totos  idios. 

1  Co.  14.  35  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  home :  for 

1  Ti.    4.    2  having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot 
8.0/  them.,  rovrav  {gen.)  touton. 

Rom. 11.  30  now  obtained  mercy  through  their  unbe. 
THEIR  own  (selves)  — 
1. Of  self  selves,  avrov  hautou. 

Mark  8.    3  send  them  away  fasting  to  their  own  ho. 

2  Pe.  2.  12  shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  corrupt. 

2. 13  sporting  themselves  with  their  own  dece. 
2.0/ oumself  selves,  eavrov  heautou. 

Johmo.  10  disciples  went  away  again  unto  their  own 
Rom.  16.  4  Who  have  formy  life  laid  down  their  own 
16.  18  serve  not  our  Lord,  .but  their  own  belly 
2  Co.  8.  5  but  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord 
Eph.  5.  28  to  love . .  wives  as  their  own  bodies.  He  th. 
Phil.  2.  21  For  all  seek  their  own,  not  thethings  wh. 
2  Th.  3.  12  with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat  their  0. 
Jude  13  foaming  out theirown shame ;  wandering 
18  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts 

3.  One's  own,  proper,  peculiar,  tSios  idios. 

Acts  4.  23  went  to  their  own  company,  and  reported 
R,om  10.  3  going  about  to  establish  their  own  right. 
11.  24  shall  be  grafted  into  their  own  olive  tree 
Eph.  5.  24  wives  (be)  to  their  own  husbands  in  every 
1  Th.  2.  15  killed  the  Lord  Jesus  and  their  own  pro. 

1  Ti.   3.  12  ruling  their  children  and  their  own  hou. 

6.  1  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  ho. 

2  Ti.    4.    3  but  after  their  own  lusts  shall  they  heap 
Titus  2.    5  good,  obedient  to  their  own  husbands,  th. 

2.   9  servants  to  be  obedient  unto  their  own 

1  Pe.   3.    5  being  in  subjection  unto  their  own  bus. 
Jude        6  but  left  their  own  habitation,  he  hath  re. 

THE-LAS'-AR,  TE  LAS'-SAR,  nbw^t,  -,^R 
A  city  and  district  in  Mesopotamia,  inhabited  by  the 
children  of  Eden,  and  once  subject  to  Assyria;  perhaps 
Theleda  or  Thelesa,  S.E.  of  Racca  near  Palmyra;  or  in 
Artemita  in  S.  Assyria,  N.  of  Babylonia;  others  say  Resen, 
now  called  Kalah  Shergat. 

2  Ki.19.  12  the  children  of  Eden  which  (were}  in  T.  ? 
Isa.  37.  12  the  children  of  Eden  which  (were)  in  T.  ? 

THEM  — 

1.  These,  n^N  elleh. 

Eze.    4.    6  when  thou  hast  accomplished  them,  lie 

2.  They,  f3N,  p3N  innin,  innun. 

Dan.   6.  24  cast,  .them,  their  children,  and  their  wi. 

3.  They,  they  themselves,  Dn  hem. 

Gen.  14.  24  Eshcol,  and  Ma  rare ;  let  them  take  their 

4.  They,  they  themselves,  nsn  Jiemmah. 

Judg  10.  14  let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of  your 

5.  They,  they  themselves,  Jisri,  isn  himmo,  hirmnon. 
Ezra    4.  23  and  made  them  to  cease  by  force  and  po. 

5.    5  that  they  could  not  cause  them  to  cease 
5.  12  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  Nebucha. 

5.  14  brought  them  into  the  temple  of  Babylon 
5. 15  carry  them  into  the  temple  that  (is)  in  J. 

7.  17  offer  them  upon  the  altar  of  the  house  of 
Dan.    2.  34  iron  and  clay,  and  brake  them  to  pieces 

2.  35  the  wind  carried  them  away,  that  no  pi. 

6. In  their  eyes,  orrry.3  beenehem. 

Josh  22.  30  when.,  the  princes,  .heard.,  it  pleased  th. 
7 '.Their  face,  cn\i3  penekem. 

Gen.   6. 13  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through  them 

8.  To  them,  outoTj  autois. 

Matt.  3.    7  said  unto  them,  0  generation  of  vipers 

9.  Of  self,  selves,  ai/Tov  hautou. 

Mark  9. 16  he  asked.  .What  question  ye  with  them? 

Acts  13.  42  might  be  preached  to  them  the  next  sab. 

20.  30  things,  to  draw  away  disciples  after  them 

Rev.    7.  14  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  La. 

9. 11  they  had  a  king  over  them,  (which  is)  the 

10.  That,  that  very  ;  he,  she,  it,  tttzivos  ekeinos. 
Matt  13.  11  given  unto  you.  .but  to  them  it  is  not  gi. 

20.  4  said  unto  them,  Go  ye  also  into  the  vine. 
Mark  4.  n  but  unto  them  that  are  without,  all  (th.) 

16.  13  [the  residue:  neither  believed  they  them] 
Luke  8.  32  suffer,  .to  enter  into  them.  And  he  suff. 
Johmo.  16  them  also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall  be. 

10.  35  If  he  called  them  gods  unto  whom  the 
Acts  18.  19  he  came  to  Ephesus,  and  left  them  there 
1  Co.  10. 11  Now  all  these  things  happened  unto  them 
Heb.  4.    2  word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not 

6.  7  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them  by  wh. 

11.  0 f  020)1  self,  selves,  eavrov  heautou. 

Mattis.  30  having  with  them  (those  that  were)1ame 
25.  3  took  their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  with  th. 
27.  35  They  parted  my  garments  among  them 

Mark  2.  19  as  they  have  the  bridegroom  with  them 

8.  14  neither  had  they  in  the  ship  with  them 
John  19.  24  They  parted  myraimcntamongthem.and 
Acts  21.  23  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on  them 
Rev.   4.    8  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  wings 

12.  And  these,  KatteTvos  Jcctkeinos. 

Heb.    4.    2  For  unto  us.  .as  well  as  unto  them:  but 

13.  These,  ravra  tauta. 

1  Co.    6.  13  shall  destroy  both  it  and  them,  Ro.  10.  4. 

14.  In  these,  ravrats  tautais. 

Lukei3- 14  Tin  them]  therefore  come  and  be  healed, and 
15./«  these,  iv  tovtois  en  toutois. 

1  Ti.    4.15  give  thyself  wholly  to  them ;  that  thy  pr. 


16.  These,  rSvrovs  toutous. 

Rom    8.30  them  he  also  called.,  them  he,  Acts  21-  24. 

8.  30  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified 
1  Co.    6.    4  set  them  to  judge  who  are  least  esteemed 

16.    3  them  will  I  send  to  bring  your  liberality 
Heb.   2.  15  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death 

THEMSELVES  — 

l.They,  they  thnnselres,  en  hem, 

Exod  18.  26  every  small  matter  they  judged  themselv. 

2.  His  hands,  vr  yadav. 

Eze.  43.  26  and  they  shall  consecrate  themselves 

3.  Unto  their  heart,  C3b-I?x  el-lihbam. 

1  Ki.  8.  47  if  they  shall  bethink  themselves  in  the  la. 
4.//;  their  face,  crn??  biphnehem. 

Eze.  6.  9  they  shall  loathe  themselves  for  the  evils 
5. Their  soul,  c^D2  naphsham. 

Esth.47.  14  as  they  had  decreed  for  themselves,  and 

Isa.      9.  31  they  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from 

6.  Of  self,  selves,  avrov  hautou. 

Mark  1.  27  they  questioned  among  themselves,  sayi. 
Johni7.  13  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves 

7.  Of  oumself,  selves,  savTOv  heautou. 

Matt.  9.    3  certain  of  the  scribes  said  within  themse. 
14.  15  go  into  the  villages,  and  buy  themselves 

16.  7  they  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying 
19.  12  which  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for 
21.  25  they  reasoned  with  themselves,  saying.  If 
21.  38  they  said  among  themselves,  This  is  the 

Mark  2.  8,  11,  31;  4.  17;  6.  36,51;  9.  8,  to;  10.  26;  11.  31; 

12.  7;  14.  4;  16.  3;  Luke  7.  30,  49;  18.  9;  20.  5,  [14],  20; 

22.  23 ;  23.  [12] ;  John.  7.  35  ;  11.  55 ;  12.  19 ;  Acts  23.  12, 

21 ;  28.  [29] ;  Rom.  1.  [24],  27 ;  2.  14 ;  13.  2;  1  Co.  16.  15 ; 

2  Co.  5.  15;  10.  12,  12,  12,  12;  Eph.  4.  19  ;  Phil  2.  3  ;  1  Ti. 

2-  9  ;  3-  13  ;  6.  10,  19  ;  2  Ti.  4.  3 ;  Heb.  6.  6 ;  1  Pe.  r. 

12;  3.  5;  2Pe.  2.  1 ;  Jude  12,  [19];  Rev.  6,  15;  8.  [6.] 

THEMSELVES,  by — 

Alone,  fxovos  monos. 

Mark  9.    2  an  high  mountain  apart  by  themselves 
Luke  24. 12  beheld  the  linen  clothes  laid  by  themselves 

THEN  (not,)  so  — 

1.  Then,  p"]K  cdayi'n. 

Ezra    4.   9  Then  (wrote)  Rehum  the  chancellor,  and 

4.  24  Then  ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  God 

5.  2  Then  rose  up  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shea. 
5.  4  Then  said  we  unto  them  after  this  manner 
5.  5  then  they  returned  answer  by  letter  cone. 
5.  9  Then  asked  we»thoseelders,(and)said  unto 

5.  16  Then  came  the  same  Sheshbazzar,  (and)la. 

6.  1  Then  Darius  the  king  made  a  decree,  and 

6.  13  Then  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  theri. 
Dan.  2.  14,  15, 17,  19,  19,  25,  35,  46,  48;  3.  3,  13,  13,  19, 

21,  24,  26,  26,  30;  4.  7,  19;  5.  3,  6,  8,  9,  13,  17,  24,  29;  6,  3, 

4.  5,  6,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  18,  19,  21,  23,  25;  7.  1,  11,  19. 

2.  Or,  \x  0. 

Eze.  21. 10  should  wethen  makemirth?  itcontemneth 
o.Then,  is  az. 

Gen.  12.  6  And  the  Canaanite  (was)  then  in  the  land 
Exodis.  15  Then  the  dukes  of  Edom  shall  be  amazed 
Eccl.  2.  15  it  happeneth.  .to  me ;  and  why  was  I  then 

4.  Then,  \tn  azai. 

Psa.  124.  3  Then  they  had  swallowed  us  up  quick,  wh. 
124.  4  Then  the  watershad  overwhelmed  us,  the 
124.   5  Then  the  proud  waters  had  gone  over  our 

5.  Also,  D3  gam. 

Jer.  33.  26  Then  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of  Jacob 
6. That  day,  cvn  hayyom. 

1  Sa.22. 15  Did  I  then  begin  to  enquire  of  God  forh.t 
7.  That,  becatise,  for,  '3  hi. 

Jer.  8.  22  why  then  is  not  the  health  of  the  daughter 
8. Indeed,  in  truth,  then,  therefore,  apa  ara. 

Matt  1 2.  28  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  you 

17.  26  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Then  are  the  chil. 
19.  25  amazed,  saying,  Who  then  can  be  saved  ? 
24.  45  Who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant 

Luke  1 2.  42  Who  then  is  that  faithful  and  wise  steward 
Acts  11. 18  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  gran. 
Rom.  7.    3  Ro  then  if,  while  (her) husband  liveth,  she 

7.  21  I  find  then  a  law,  that,  when  I  would  do 
7.  25  So  then  with  the  mind  I  myself  serve  the 

9.  16  So  then  (it  is)  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor 
10. 17  So  then  faith  (cometh)  by  hearing,  and  he. 

14.  12  So  then  every  oneof  us  shall  give  account 

1  Co.   5. 10  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  wo. 

15.  14  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  (is)  ourpreac. 
15.  18  Then  they  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in 

2  Co.  5.  14  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead 
Gal.    2.  21  if  righteousness  (come)  by  the  law,  then 

3.  29  if  ye  (be)  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's 

4.  31  So  then,  brethren,  we  are  not  children  of 

5.  11  why  do  I  yet  suffer,  .then  is  the  offence 
Heb. 12.    8  without  chastisement,  .then  are  ye  bast. 

9.  For,  yap  gar. 

Phil.    1.  iS  What  then?  notwithstanding,  every  way 

10.  But,  now,  then,  8e  dr. 

Acts  12.    3  Then  were  the  days  of  unleavened  bread 
1  Co.  1 5.  13 1  if  there  be  no  resurrection,  .then  is  Christ 
15.  16  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  ra. 
Gal.    5.  16  I  say  then,  Walk  in  the  spirit,  and  ye 

11. If  then,  afterwards,  furthermore,  e?ra  eita. 
Mark  4,28  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear.  after  that  the 
Luke  S.  12  then  cometh  the  devil,  and  taketh  away 


THENCE 


973 


THEREIN 


J0I11119.  27  Tlien  saith  he  to  the  disciple,  Behold  thy 
20. 27  Then  saith  he  to  Thomas,  Reach  hither  thy 

1  Co. 12.  28  after  that  miracles,  then  gifts  of  healings 
15.  5  he  was  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve 
15.  7  he  was  seen  of  James;  then  of  all  the  ap. 
15.  24  Then  (cometh)  the  end,  when  he  shall  ha. 

1  Ti.    2. 13  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve 
3.  10  then  let  them  use  the  office  of  a  deacon 

Jas.     1-  15  Then,  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bring. 

V2.Then,  afterwards,  eneira  epeita. 

Mark  7.  5  [Then]  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  asked  him 
Luke  16.  7  Then  said  he  to  another,  And  how  much 
John  1 1.  7  Then  after  that  saith  he  to  (his)  disciples 
Gal.  1.  18  Then  after  three  years  I  went  up  to  Jeru. 
2.  1  Then  fourteen  years  after  I  went  up  aga. 
1  Th.  4. 17;  Heb.  7.  27;  Jas.  3.  17;  4.  14. 

IS. And,  also,  Kai  kai,  Luke  19.  15;  Jas.  2.  4. 

l^.Neiiher,  ohhi  oude,  1  Co.  15.  13,  16. 

15. ..Is  to  the  rest,  henceforth,  AonroV  loipon. 

Acts  27.  20  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was  then 
16.7'./  \refores  then,  not  so  then,  ovkovv  oukoun. 

JohmS.  37  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  king  then?  Je. 
17 .Therefore,  then,  now,  oiv  oun. 

Matt.  7. 11  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
12.  12  How  much  then  is  a  man  better  than  a 

12.  26  he  is  divided,  .how  shall  then  his  kkigd. 

13.  27  didst  not  thou  sow  good  seed.,  whence  th. 
13.  28  Wilt  thou  then  that  we  go  and  gather  th. 
13.  56  Wheuce  then  hath  this  (man)  all  these 

Sue  also  17.  10;  iq.  7;  21.  25;  22.  43,  45;  26.  54;  27.  22; 
Hark  3.  [31];  11.  [31];  15.  12;  Luke  3.  7,  10;  6.  [9];  7.  31; 
i°-  t37];  «■  13;  i2-  26;  13.  [15];  20.  [5,]  17;  23.  [36],  70; 
John  1.  21,  [22],  25;  2.  18,  20;  3.  25;  4.  5,  9,  11,  28,  [30], 
45-  48,  52;  5-  U.  12],  19;  6.  5, 14,  21, 28, 30,  [32],  34,  41,  [42], 
53.  67,  [68];  7.  [6],  11  25,  28,  30,  33,  35,  45,  [47];  8.  12,  19, 
21,  22,  25,  28,  31,  [41I,  48,  52,  57,  59;  9.  [12],  15,  19,  24, 
[28];  10.  7,  24,  [31];  11.  12,  [14],  16,  17,  20,  21,  31,  32,  36, 
4i»  45.  47.  53.  56;  12.  1,  3,  4,  7,  28,  35;  13.  6,  14,  [22],  27, 

30;   16.   17;    l8.   3,   6,     7,   IO,     II,     12,   16,     17,    19,    27,    [28],  2Q, 

(31].  33.  40i  19-  5.  [10].  20,  21,  23,  32,  40;  20.  2,  6,  10,  19, 
2d,  21;  21.  5,  9,  [13],  23. 

Acts  2.  41;  9.  31;  10.  23 ;  11.  17;  17. 29;  19.  3,  36;  22.  29; 
23.  31;  Rom.  3.  1,  9,  27,  31;  4.  1,  9,  id;  5.  9;  6.  i,  15,  21;  7. 
7»  13;  8.  31;  9.  14,  19,  30;  10.  14;  11.  1,  5,  7,  11,  19;  14.  16; 

1  Co.  3.  5;  6.  4,  15;  p.  18;  10.  19;  14.  15,  26;  2  Co,  3.  12; 
Gal.  3-  19,  21;  4.  i5;Eph.5.  15;  Col.  3.1;  iTh.  4.  1;  1  Ti. 
3.  2;  Heb.  2.  14;  4.  14;  9.  1;  1  Pe.  4.  1;  2  Pe.  3.  n. 

IS. And,  also,  tc  te. 

Acts  23.  5  Then  said  Paul,  I  wist  not,  brethren,  that 
27. 29  Then  fearing  lest  we  should  have  fallen  up. 

\9.Xoiv  tndy,  therefore,  therefore  now,  roivvv. 

Jas.  2. 24  Ye  see  [then]  how  that  by  works  a  man  is 
2-0.  Then,  roVe  tote. 

Matt.  2.  7  Then  Herod,  when  he  had  privily  called 
2, 16  Then  Herod,  when  he  saw  that  he  was 

2.  17  Then  was  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken 

3.  5  Then  went  out  to  hirn  Jerusalem,  and  all 
3. 13  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  Jor. 

3.  15  Suffer  (it  to  be  so) . .  Then  he  suffered  him 

4.  1  Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  spirit  into 
4.  5  Then  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  ho. 
4. 10  Then  saith  Jesus  unto  him,  Get  thee  he. 
4.  11  Then  the  devil  leaveth  him;  and,  behold 

See  also  5.24;  7.  5,  23;  8.  26;  9.  6,  14,  15,  29,  37;  n. 
20 ;  12.  13,  22,  29,  38,  44,  45 ;  13.  26,  36,  43 ;  15.  1,  12,  28  ; 
16.  12,20,  24,  27;  17.  13,  19;  18.  21,  32;  19.  13,  27;  20. 
20;  21.  1 ;  22.  8,  13,  15,  21;  23.  1;  24.  9,  10,  14,  16,  21, 
23.  30.  30.  40;  25-  i>  7>  3i»  34.  37»  4*.  44.  451  26.  3,  14, 
31.  36.  38,  45.  50,  52.  56,  65.  67,  74;  27.  3,  9,  13,  16,  26, 
27>  38,  58;  Mark  2.  20;  3.  27;  13.  14,  21,  26,  27;  Luke  5. 
35;  6.42;  11.26;  13.  26;  14.10,  21;  21.  10,20,  21,  27; 
23.  30 ;  24.  45;  John  2.  [10];  7.  10;  8.  28;  11.  14;  12.  16; 
19.  1,  16;  20.  8;  Acts  1.  12;  4.  8;  5.  26;  6.  n;  7.  4; 
8.  17;  10.  46,  48;  13.  12;  15.  22  ;  17.  14;  21.  26,  33 ;  23. 
3 ;  25.  12;  26.  1 ;  27.  32 ;  28. 1 ;  Rom.  6.  21 ;  1  Co.  4.  5 ;  13. 
[10],  12,  12;  15.  2S,  54;  2  Co.  12.  10;  Gal.  4.  8,  29;  6.  4; 
Col.  3.  4 ;  1  Th.  5.  3 ;  2  Th.  2.  S ;  Heb.  10.  7,  9 ;  12.  26 ; 

2  Pe.  3.  6. 

THENCE,  thenceforth,  (from)  — 
l.From  them,  n^rri?  mehennah. 

Jer.    5.    6  every  one  that  goeth  out  thence  shall  be 

2.  There,  Dp  sham. 

Gen.  11.    8  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence  upou 

3.  From  there,  D'f  0  mishsham. 

Gen.  26. 17  Isaac  departed  thence,  and  pitched  his 

4.  There,  on  tarn. 

Ezra  6.  6  (therefore),  Tatnai . .  be  ye  far  from  thence 
f>.  Yonder,  liereafter,  ns<^n  halah. 

Lev.  22.  27  from  the  eighth  day  and  thenceforth  it 

6.  From  thence,  sKeiBev  ekeithen. 

Matt.  5.  26  Thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out  thence 
9.  27  when  Je3us  departed  thence,  two  blind 

11.  1  he  departed  thence,  to  teach  and  to  pr. 

12.  9  when  he  was  departed  thence,  he  went 
33-  53  when  Jesus  had  finished,  .he  departed  th. 
14. 13  he  departed  thence  by  ship  into  a  desert 
15. 21  Then  Jesus  went  thence,  and  departed 
19.  15  laid  (his)  hands  on  them,  and  departed  th. 

Mark  1.  ig  when  he  had  gone  a  little  farther  [thence] 
6.  11  when  ye  depart  thence,  shake  off  the  dust 
9.  30  they  departed  thence,  and  passed  10.  1. 

Luke  9.  4  enter  into,  there  abide,  and  thence  depart 
12.59  thou  shalt  not  depart  thence,  till  thou 


John  4.  43  he  departed  thence,  and  went  into  Gal. 

11.  54 ;  Acts  7.  4;  14.   26 ;  18.  7 ;  20.  15  ;  21.  1  ; 
27.  4,  12;  28.  15. 

7. From  this,  e/c  rovrov  eh  toutou,  John  19.   12. 

8.  Whence,  oQev  hothen,  Acts  28.  13. 

9.  Yet,  still,  hitherto,  eti  eii. 

Matt.  5.  13  it  is  thenceforth  good  for  nothing,  buttj 
THE-O-PHTL'-TJS,  0eo>i\os-  loved  by  God. 
A  nobleman  for  whuse  use  the  Evangelist  Luke  wrote 
his  "Gospel"  and  the  "Acts  of  the  Apostles;"  anearly 
couvert. 

Luke  1.    3  to  write  unto  thee  in  order,  .excellent  T. 

Acts    1.    1  The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  0  T.,  of 
THERE  — 

1.  There,  c^  sham. 

Gen.   2.   8  there  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  for. 

2.  There,  dpi  tain. 

Ezra    5.  17  treasure  house,  which  (is)  there  at  Baby. 
6.  12  that  hath  caused  his  name  to  dwell  there 

3.  There,  in   that  place,  avrov  autoxc. 

Acts  15.  34  >'ot  withstanding  it  pleased  S.  to  abide  th. 
18.  19  he  came  to  Ephesus,  and  left  them  [there] 

21.  4  finding  disciples,  we  tarried  there  seven 

4.There,  thither,  e/ce?  ekei. 

Matt.  2.  13  be  thou  there  until  Ibriug  thee  word :  for 
2.  15  was  there  until  the  death  of  Herod :  that 

5.  23  there  rememberest  that  thy  brother  hath 
5. 24  Leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and 

6.  21  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  lie. 
8.  12  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 

10.  11  enquire  who  in  it  is  worthy ;  and  there 

12.  45  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there  :  and  the 

13.  42,  50  there  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing  of 

13.  58  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there,  be. 

14.  23  when the  evening  was  come,  he  was  there 

15.  29  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  sat  down  th. 
18.  20  where  two  or  three  are.  .there  am  I  in  the 

See  also  19.  2;  21. 17122.  n,  13;  24.  28,  51;  25.  30;  26. 71;  27. 
36,  4^,  55,  61;  28.  7, 10;  Mark  1.  [13],  35,  38;  2. 6;  3.  1;  5. 11; 
6.  5,  10;  11.  5;  13.  21;  14.  15;  16.  7;  Luke  2.  6;  6.  6;  8.  32; 
9.4;  10.  6;  11.  26;  12.  18,  34;  13.  28;  15.  13;  17.  21,  23;  22. 
12;  23.  33;  John  2.  1,  6,  12;  3.  22,  23;  4.  6,  40;  5.  5;  6.  3,  2£, 
24;  10.  40,  42;  11.  15,  31,  54;  12.  2,  9,  26;  19.  42;  Acts  9.  33; 
14.  7,  [28];  16.  1;  17.  14;  19.  21;  22.  10;  25.  9,  14,  20;  27.  6; 
Rom.  9.  26;  2  Co  3.  [17];  Titus  3.  12;  Heb.  7.  S;  Jas.  2.  3; 
3.  16;  4.  13;  Rev.  2.  14;  12.  6;  21.  25;  22.  [5]. 

b.From  thence,  eKeidev  ekeithen. 

Acts  20.  13  there  intending  to  take  in  Paul :  for  so  had 

6.  Thither,  to  that  very  place,  efceTci  ekeise. 

Acts  21.    3  there  the  ship  was  to  unlade  her  burden 

22.  5  to  bring  them  which  were  there  bound 

7.  In  it,  ii>  avrrj  en  ante. 

Luke24.  18  the  tilings  which  are  come  to  pass  therein 
Acts  9.  3S  disciples . .  heard  that  Peter  was  th.  20.  22. 

8.  To  lie,  be  laid,  Ke?fj.at  kelmai,  John  21.  9. 

9.  Here,  ivdaSe  enthade. 

Acts  10.  18  and  asked  whether  Simon.,  was  lodged  th. 
lO.Here,  thither,  £5e  hode. 

JIatt24-  23  any  man  shall  say.  .here  (is)  Christ,  or  t. 
THEREBY  — 
l.In  them,  therein,  jrr3  boJien, 

Jer.  51.  43  neither  doth  (any)  son  of  man  pass  thereby 
2. Through  it,  51  avr^s  di*  antes. 

Johni  1.    4  the  Son  of  man  might  be  glorified  thereby 

Heb.  12.  11  unto  them  which  are  exercised  thereby 

3.  Through  this,  Sta  ravrins  dia  tautes.     . 

Heb.  12.  15  trouble  (you),  and  thereby  many  be  defiled 
13.    2  thereby  some  have  entertained  angelsun. 

i.Tn  it,  eV  avry  en  auto. 

Eph.   2. 16  the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  thereby 
1  Pe.  2,    2  desire .  .the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  ther. 

THEREABOUT,  thereat  — 

1.  Through  it,  81  avrjjs  di  aides. 

Matt.  7.  13  and  many  there  be  which  go  in  thereat 
^.Concerning  this,  irepi  rovrov  peri  toutou. 

Luke24.   4  as  they  were  much  perplexed  thereabout 
THEREFORE,  and — 
l.Also,  ca  gam. 

1  Sa.  12.  16  therefore  stand  and  see  this  great  thing 

2.  Therefore,  n  ^2g"b|  kol-qebel  di. 

Dan.  2.  10  therefore  (there  is)  no  king,  lord,  nor  ru. 
oJa  this,  nsis  bazoth. 

2  Ch.19.    2  therefore  (is)  wrath  upon  thee  from  before 

4.  That,  because,  "3  lei. 

Gen.  29.  32  now  therefore  my  husband  will  love  me 

5.  Therefore,  ]rb  lahen. 

Dan.    2.   6  therefore  showme  the  dream,  and  the  int. 

2.  9  therefore  tell  me  the  dream,  and  I  shall 

6. Because-  of  this,  n^r^u  al-denah. 

Ezra    4.  14  therefore  have  we  sent  and  certified  the 
'.Therefore,  nrq  Ssp-^b  kolqebel  denah. 

Dan.    3.    7  Therefore  at  that  time,  when  all  the  peo. 

3.  22  Therefore  because  the  king's  comiuandm. 

S.But,  accept,  unless,  a\\d  alia. 

Acts  10.  20  Arise  therefore,  and  get  thee  down,  and 
2  Co.  8.  7  Therefore,  as  ye  abound  in  every  (tiling 
Eph.   5.  24  Therefore  asthechurchis subject  untoC. 


y. Indeed,  in  truth,  then,  therefore,  apa,  apa  ara. 
Mattig.  27  followedthee;  whatshall  we  havetheref.? 
Rom.  8.    1  (There  is)  therefore  now  no  condemnation 
Gal.     2. 17  (is)  [therefore]  Christ  the  minister  of  3in  ? 

3.  7  Know  ye  therefore  that  they  which  are  of 
Eph.    2.  19  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and 
Heb.  4.    9  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the  pe. 

10  So  then,  now  tliercfore,  &pa  ovv  ara  oun. 

Rom.  5.  18  Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one  (judg. 

8.  12  Therefore,  brethren,  we  are  debtors,  not 

9. 18  Therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  whom  he  will 

14.  19  Let  us  therefore  follow  after  the  things 

Gal.    6.  10  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us 

1  Th.  5.    6  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  (do)  others 

2  Th.  2.  15  Therefore,  brethren,  stand  fast,  and  hold 

11.  For,  yap  gar. 

Mark  S.  38  Whosoever  therefore  shall  be  ashamed  of 
ll.Truly,  certainly,  therefore,  brj  de. 

1  Co.  6.  20  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and 
13. On  account  of  which,  wherefore,  Bid  dio. 

Luke  1.  35  therefore  also  that  holy  thing  which  shall 
Acts  10.  29  Therefore  came  I  (unto  you)  without  ga. 
20.  31  Therefore  watch,  and  remember,  that  by 
Rom.  2.    1  Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable,  0  man 

4.  22  therefore  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  rig. 

2  Co.    4. 13  I  believed,  and  therefore  have  I  spoken 

4.  13  we  also  believe,  and  therefore  speak 
12. 10  Therefore  I  take  pleasure  in  infirmities 
Heb.  11.  12  Therefore  sprang  there  even  of  one  6.  1. 

14.  Wherefore,  because,  BiSrt  dioti. 

Rom.  3.  20  Therefore  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there 

15.  Therefore,  then,  now,  ovv  oun. 

Matt.  3.  8  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  meet  for  rep. 
See  also  3.  10;  5.  19,  23,  48;  6.  2,  8,  9,  22,  23,  31,  34;  7. 

12.  24;  9.  38;  10.  16,  26,  31,  32;  13.  18,  40;  18.  4,  26;  19. 
6;  21.  40;  22.  9,  17,  31,  28;  23.  3,  20;  24.  15,  42;  25.  13, 
27,  28;  27,  17,  64;  28.  [19];  Mark  10.  9;  12.  [6],  9,  23,  27, 
[37];  13.  35 ;  Luke  3.  8,  9;  4.  7;  6.  [36];  7.  42 ;  8.  18;  10. 
[2],  2,  40;  11.  [34],  35,  36;  12.  [7],  40;  13.  14;  15.  [28];  16. 
11,  27;  19.  12;  20.  15,  29,  33,  34;  2i.  [8],  14,  [36];  23.  16, 

20.  22;  John  2.  22;  3.  29;  4.  1,6,  33;  5.  10;  6.  13,  15,  24, 
30.  U3.  451,  52,  60;  7.  3,  40;  8.  13,  24,  36;  9.  7,  8,  10,  16, 
[41];  10.  [19,  39];  11.  3,  6,33,38,  54;  12.9, 17,  19,  21,  [29], 
50;  13.  24,  [31J;  16.  18,  22;  18.  4,  8,  25,  [31],  37,  39;  19. 
*>  [4L  6,  8,  13,  16,  24,  24,  26,  30,  31,  38,  42;  20.  3,  25;  21. 

6,7. 

Acts  1.  6;  2.  30,  33,  36;  3.  19;  8.  4,  22;  10.  29,  32,  33, 
33;  12.  5;  13.  38,  40;  14.  3;  15.  [2],  10,  27;  16.  [11],  36; 

17.   12,   17,   20,  23;    ig.  32;    20.   [28];    21.   22,   23;    23.   15;    25. 

5,  17 ;  26.  22 ;  28.  20,  28 ;  Rom.  2.  21,  26 ;  3.  [28] ;  5.  1 ;  6. 
4,  12;  11.  22;  12.  1,  [20];  13.  7,  10,  12;  14.  8,  13;  15.  17, 
28;  16.  19;  1  Co.  5.  [7] ;  6.  7;  7.  26;  8.  4;  10.  31 ;  n.  20; 
14.  11,  23;  15.  11 ;  16.  11,  18;  2  Co.  1.  17;  5.  6, 11 ;  7.  1 ; 
9.  5;  11.  15;  12.  9;  Gal.  3.  5;  5.  [1];  Eph.  4.  1,  17;  5.  1, 
7 ;  6.  14 ;  Phil.  2.  i,  23,  28,  29 ;  3.  15 ;  Col.  2.  6,  16 ;  3.  5, 
12 ;  1  Ti.  2.  1,  8 ;  5.  14 ;  2  Ti.  1.8;  2.  1,  [3],  21 ;  4.  [1] ; 
Phm.  17 ;  Heb.  4.  1,  6,  11,  16 ',  y.  11 ;  9.  23 ;  10.  19,  35 ; 

13.  15  ;  Jas.  4.  4,  7,  17  ;  5.  7  ;  1  Pe.  2.  7  ;  4.  7  ;  5.  6  ;  2  Pe. 

3.  17 ;  1  Jo.  2.  [24] ;  3  Jo.  8 ;  Rev.  2.  5 ;  3.  3,  3,  19. 

16. Therefore  truly,  wherefore  truly,  rotyapovv. 
1  Th.  4.    8  He  therefore  that  despiseth,  despiseth  not 

17 '.  Therefore  now,  truly  now,  roivvv  toinun. 

Luke2o.  25  Render  therefore  unto  Cesar  the  things 
1  Co.  9.  26  I  therefore  so  run,  not  as  uncertainly ;  so 
Heb. 13. 13  Let  us  go  forth  therefore  unto  him  with. 

IS. For  this    81a.  rovro  dia  touto. 

Matt.6.  25  Therefore  I  say  unto  you,  Take  no  thought 
See  also  12.  27 ;  13.  13,  52  ;  14.  2;  18.  23  ;  21.  43  ;  23.  [14]; 
24.  44 ;  Mark  6.  14  ;  n.  24 ;  Luke  n.  19,  49 ;  12.  22 ;  14. 
20;  John  1.  31 ;  5.  16,  18;  6.  65 ;  7.  22 ;  8.  47  ;  9.  23 ;  10. 
17;  12.  39;  13.  11;  15.  19;  16.  15;  19.  n;  Acts  2.  26; 
Horn.  4.  16;  2  Co.  4.  1  ;  7.  13 ;  13.  10;  1  Th.  3.  7 ;  2  Ti- 
2.  20 ;  Phm.  15 ;  Heb.  1.  9;  2.  1 ;  1  Jo.  3.  1 ;  4.  5  ;  Rev. 
7.  15  ;  12.  12;  18.  8. 

19.  With  a  view  to  this,  els  rovro  eis  touto. 
Mark  1.  38  I  may  preach  there  also :  for  therefore 
Luke  4.  43  I  must  preach,  .for  [therefore]  am  I  sent 
1  Ti.   4.  10  therefore  we  both  labour  and  surfer  rep. 

20. So  that,  wherefore,  Sere  hoste. 

Mark  2.  28  ;  Rom.  13.  2;  1  Co.  3.  21 ;  4.  5  ;  5.  8;  15. 
5S ;  2  Co.  5.  17 ;  Gal.  4.  16;  Phil.  4.  1. 

21.  Therefore,  because,  avd'wv  anth'  hon,  Luke  12.3. 

22.  But,  Ude,  I  Co.  7.  8. 

23. And,  also,  Kai  kai,  2  Co.  S.  11. 

24.  Because  of  this,  Sia,  rovro  dia  toute. 

Matt.  6.  25;  12.  27;  13.  13,  52;  14/2;  18.  23;  21.  43;  23. 

14;  24.  44;  Mr.  6.  14 ;  11.  24;  12.  24;  Lu.  11.  19,  49,  &c. 

THEREIN,  thereunto— 

l.In  its  midst,  B«3  begarvah. 

Ezra   6.    2  and  therein  (was)  a  record  thus  written 

2.1n  them,  fna  bahen. 

Lev.  10.    1  put  fire  therein,  and  put  incense  thereon 

Nunn6.    7  put  fire  therein,  and  put  incense  hi  them 

Jer.     4.  29  (be)  forsaken,  and  not  a  man  dwell  ther. 

48.    9  be  desolate,  without  any  to  dwell  therein 

'B.In  them,  n^ris  bahennah. 

Lev.   6.   3  all  these  that  a  man  doeth,  sinning  therein 

4.  In  its  midst,  n;np3  beqirbah. 

Gen.  18.  24  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  (are)  therein? 
Judg  18.   7  saw  the  people  that  (were)  therein,  how 

5.  There,  w#  sham. 

EX0040.   3  thou  shalt  put  therein  the  ark  of  the  tea. 


THEREIN 


974 


THEY 


6.  In  its  midst,  pbins  betokah. 

Zech.  2.    4  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle  therein 

7.  With  or  in  these,  rovrots  totitois. 

a  Pe.    2.  20  they  are  again  entangled  therein,  and  ov. 

Z.In  this,  ev  tovto)  en  touts. 

i  Co.    7.  24  let  every  man.  .therein  abide  with  God 
Phil.    1.  iS  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice 

9.  In  it,  ev  avrrj  en  ante. 

Lukeio.    9  heal  the  sick  that  are  therein;  and  sayim. 

10.  45  [began  to  cast  out  them  that  sold  therein] 
Acts    1.  20  let  no  man  dwell  therein  :  and,  His  bish. 

14.  15  and  the  sea,  and  all  things  that  are  ther. 

17.  24  that  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein 
Rom.  1.  17  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  Godrevea. 

6.    2  How  shall  we.  .live  any  longer  therein? 
Eph.   6.  20  that  therein  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ou. 
Col.    2.    7  abounding  [therein]  with  thanksgiving 
2  Pe.    3.  10  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burnt 
Rev.    1.  3  keep  those  things  which  are  written  ther. 

10.  6,  6,  6  and  the  things  that  therein  are 

11.  1  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship  therein 
13.  12  the  earth  and  them  which  dwell  therein 
21.  22  I  saw  no  temple  therein :  for  the  Lord  G. 

10.  Into  it,  els  avr-qu  eis  auten. 

Mark  10. 15  asa little  child,  he  shall  not  enter  therein 

LukeiS.  17  as  a  little  child  shall  in  no  wise  enter  th. 

21.  21  let  not  them  that  are  in.,  enter  thereinto 

Heb.  4.    6  it  remaineth  that  some  must  enter  therein 

11. In  which,  ev  oh  en  hois. 

Heb.  13.    9  them  that  have  been  occupied  therein 

THEREIN,  all  that  is  — 
Its  fulness,  pinV?  melah. 

Isa.   34.    1  let  the  earth  hear,  and  all  that  is  therein 
42.  10  that  go  down  to  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  th. 
Jer.  47.    2  overflow  the  land,  and  all  that  is  therein 
Eze.  12. 19  may  be  desolate  from  all  that  is  therein 

30.  12  make  the  land  waste,  and  all  that  is  the. 
Amos  6.  8  deliver  up  the  city,  with  all  that  is  ther. 
Mic.     1.    2  hearken,  0  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is 

THEREOF,  thereon,  thereout  — 
1.0»  it^rhu,  alohi. 

Ezra   6.  ii  being  set  up,  let  him  be  hanged  thereon 

2.  From  thence,  cwo  mishsham. 

Lev.    2.    2  he  shall  take  thereout  his  handful  of  the 
1  Ki.17. 13  make  me  thereof  a  little  cake  first,  and 

3.  In  it,  ev  avrji  en  ante. 

Matt  2i.  19  he  came  to  it,  and  found  nothing  thereon 

Mark  1 1.  13  he  might  find  any  thing  thereon,  Lu.  13.6. 

i.Out  of  it,  e£  avTov,  Lu.  22.  16;  Jo.  4.  12;  6.  50. 

5.  Upon  or  above  them,  eiravco  avrvv  {or  aurov). 
Mattai.    7  ass.  .and  they  set  (him)  thereon,  23.  20,22. 

6.  Upon  it,  eir'  avru  &p  auto. 

Johni2.  14  when. he  had  found  a  young  ass,  sat  ther. 
Rev.    6.    4  (power)  was  given  to  him  that  sat  [thereon] 

/.  Concerning  it,  trepi  avrov  peri  autou. 

Matt  12.  36  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  d. 
THEREUNTO,  therewith  — 

1.  With  a  view  to  this  very  thing,  els  clvt6  tovto. 
Eph.  6.  iS  watehing[thereunto]withall  perseverance 

2.  With  a  view  to  this,  els  tovto  eis  touto. 

1  Th.  3.    3  yourselves  know  that  we  are  appointed  t. 
1  Pe.    3.    9  knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto  called,  th. 

Z.In  it,  ev  ai/Ty  en  mite. 

Jas.    3.    9  Therewith  bless  we  God.  .and  therewith 

4.  Over  or  with  these,  (eVf)  tovtois  {epi)  ioutois. 

1  Ti.   6.    8  having  food  and  raiment  let  us  therewith 
3  John   10  not  content  therewith,  neither  doth  he 

THESE  (things,  matters) — 
1.  These,  Sx  el. 

Gen.  19.   8  unto  these  men  do  nothing:  for  therefore 

26.    3  unto  thy  seed,  I  will  give  all  these  count. 

26.   4  will  give  unto  thy  seed  all  these  countries 
Lev.  18.  27  all  these  abominations  have  the  men  of 
Deut.  4.  42  that  fleeing  unto  one  of  these  cities  he  mi. 

19.  11  smite,  .and  fleeth  unto  one  of  these  cities 
1  Ch.20.    8  These  were  born  unto  the  giant  in  Gath 
Ezra    5. 15  Take  these  vessels,  go,  carry  them  into  the 

Z.These,  those,  n^  elleh. 

Gen.   2.   4  These  (are)  the  generations  of  theheaveus 

44.   6  and  he  spake  unto  them  these  same  words 

Lev.  18.  24  in  any  of  these  things ;  for  in  all  these  the 

Jer.   10.  ti  they  shall  perish .  .from  underthese  heav. 

3.  These,  those,  H?y  illen. 

Dan.    2.  40  as  iron  thatbreaketh  all  these,  shall  itbre. 

2.  44  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these  ki. 
6.  6  these  presidents  and  princes  assembled  to. 
7. 17  These  great  beasts,  which  are  four,  (are) 

£. These,  those,  t/px  illeh. 

Ezra  4.  ii  Give. .commandment  to  cause  these  men 
6.  8  ye  shall  do  to  the  elders  of  these  Jews  for 
6.    8  forthwith  expenses  be  given  unto  these 

Dan.    3.  12  these  men,  O  king,  have  not  regarded 
3  13  they  brought  these  men  before  the  king 

3.  2 1  these  men  were  bound  in  their  coats,  their 
3.  23  these  three  men,  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and 
3.  27  saw  these  men,  upon  whose  bodies  the  Are 
6.    5  Then  said  these  men.  We  shall  not  And 
6.  11  these  men  assembled,  and  found  Daniel 
6.  15  these  men  assembled  unto  the  king,  and 


5. These,  those,  J'3N,  \&x  innun,  innin. 

Dan.   2.  44  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God 
6. This,  nn,  y*  den,  denah. 

Ezra  5.   9  Who  commanded . .  to  make  up  these  walls! 
5. 11  the  house  that  was  builded  these  many 

Dan.   2.  28  visions  of  thy  head  upon  thy  bed,  are  th. 

7.  He  himself,  the  same,  Nin  hu. 

Exod.  6.  26  These  (are)  that  Aaron  and  Moaes,  towh. 

3. They  themselves,  the  same,  cr\  hem. 

Exod.  6.  27  These  (are)  they  which  spake  to  Pharaoh 
Lev.  16.   4  these(are)holy garments;  therefore  shall 

9.  They  themselves,  the  same,  nnn  hahem. 

Deut  2S.  65  among  these  nations  shalt  thou  find  no  r. 

10.  They  themselves,  the  same,  ?vpn  hemmah. 

1  Ch.  2.  55  These  (are)  the  Kenites  that  came  of  He. 
Eccl.  12.  12  further,  by  these,  my  son,  be  admonished 

11.  They  themselves,  the  same,  nBnn  haJiemmah. 
Zech  14.  15  all  the  beasts  that  shall  be  in  these  tents 

12.  They  themselves,  nin  hennah. 

Nu.11131.  16  these  caused  the  children  of  Israel,  thro. 
Isa.  34.  16  no  one  of  these  shall  fail,  none  shall  want 
Eze.  42.    5  the  galleries  were  higher  than  these,  than 

13.  This,  the  same,  nxr  zoth. 

Lev.  11.  2  These  (are)  the  beasts  which  ye  shall  eat 
Judgi3.  23  nor  would.. have  told  us  (..things)  as  th. 

14.  This,  the  same,  nxin  hazzoth. 

Deut.  6.  25  if  we  observe  to  do  all  these  commandm. 

15.  This,  the  same,  ni  zeh. 

Gen.  27.  36  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  times 
16.Tkis,  the  same,  run  hazzeh. 

1  Sa.  17. 17  Take  now.  .these  ten  loaves,  and  run  to 

17.  From,  J p  win. 

Dan.   6.    2  over  these  three  presidents,  of  whom  Da. 

18.  This,  that,  he,  she,  it,  these,  TaBe,  '6$e  fade  (kode). 
Rev.   2.    1  These  tilings  saith  he  that  holdeth  the  se. 

2.  8  These  things  saith  the  First  and  the  Last 
2. 12  These  things  saith  he  which  hath  the  sh. 

2.  18  These  things  saith  the  Son  of  God,  who  ha 

3.  1  These  things  saith  he  that  hath  the  seven 
3.  7  These  things  saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  th. 
3. 14  These  things  saith  the  Amen,  the  faithful 

19.  These,  those,  ovtoi  houtoi. 

Matt.  4.    3  command  that  these  stones  be  made  bre. 
20.  12  These  last  have  wrought  (but)  one  hour 
20.  21  Grant  that  [these]  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the 
2i.  16  said  unto  him,  Hearest  thou  what  these 

25.  46  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  pun. 

26.  62  what  (is  it  which)  these  witness  against 
Mark  4. 15, 16,  [18,  20];  12.  40;  14.  60;  Luke  8. 13,  21;  13. 

2;  19.  40;  2i.  4;  24.  17,  44;  John  6.  5;  17.  n,  25;  Acts  1. 
14;  2.  7,  15;  n.  12;  16.  17,  20;  17. 6,  7,  nj  20.  5;  24.  20;  25. 
iij  27.  31;  Rom.  2.  [14];  n.  24,  31;  Col.  4.  11;  1  Ti.  3. 
10;  2  Ti.  3.  8;  Heb.  n.  13,  39;  2  Pe.  2.  12,  17;  1  Jo. 
5.  7;  Jude  8,  10,  12,  16,  19;  Rev.  7.  13,  14;  n.  4,  6,  10;  14. 
4,  4,  4;  17.  13,  14,  16;  19.  9;  21    5;  22.  6. 

20.  These,  avTat  hautai. 

Luke2i.  22  these  be  the  days  of  vengeance,  that  all 
Acts  20.  34  these  hands  have  ministered  unto  my  ue. 
Gal.    4.  24  these  are  the  two  covenants;  the  one  from 

21.  These,  those,  raiira  tauta. 

Matt  10.   2  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  are  these 
See  also  11.  25;  13.  34,  51,  56;  15.  20;  19.  20;  21.  23,  24,  27; 

23.  23, 23, 36;  24.  2,  3,  8, 33,  34;  Mark  2.  8;  6. 2;  7.  23;  10. 20; 
ti.  28,  28,  29,  33;  13.  4,  4,8,  29, 30;  16.  [17];  Luke  1. 19,20, 
66;  2.  191  [51V,  4.  28;  5.  27;  7.  9;  8.  8;  10.  1,  21;  11.  27,  42, 
[53];  12.  30,  31;  13.  17;  14.  6;  15.  26;  16.  14;  18.  21, 
[22];  ig.  11;  20.  2,  8;  21.  6,  7,  7,  9,  31,  36;  23.  31,  49; 

24.  9,  10,  21,  26;  John  i.  28;  2.  16,  18;  3.  2,  9, 10,  22;  5.  16, 
19,  34;  6.  1,  59;  7.  1,  4;  8.  20,  28,  30;  9.  22,  40;  10. 21;  11. 
11;  12. 16, 16, 16,  36, 41;  13. 17;  14.  25;  15.  11,  17,  21;  16. 1, 3, 

4,  4,  6,  25,  33;  17.  1,  13;  18.  1;  19.  24,  36;  20.  18,  31;  21.  1, 
24;  Acts  1.  9;  5.  [5],  11;  7.  1,  50,  54;  10.  44;  11.  18;  12.  17; 
13.  [42];  14. 15, 18;  15.  17;  16.  38;  17.  8,  20;  18.  1;  19.  21;  21. 
12;  23. 22;  24. 19,  [22];  28.  [29];  Rom.  8.  31;  9.  8;  1  Co.  4. 6, 14; 
9.  8,  15;  10.  6,  11;   12.  11;  13.  13;  2  Co.  2.  16;  13.  10;  Gal. 

5.  17;  Eph.  5.  6;  Phil.  4.  8;  2  Th.  2.  5;  1  Ti.  3.  1414.  6,  11 
15;  5-  7,  21;  6.  2,  11;  2  Ti.  1.  12;  2.  14;  Titus  2.  15;  3.  8; 
Heb.  7.  13;  Jas.  3.  10;  2  Pe.  1.  8,  9,  10;  1  Jo.  1.  4;  2.  1, 
26;  5.  13;  Rev.  7.  [1];  18.  1;  19.  1;  22.  8,  8,  16,  [18],  20 

22.  To  these,  TavTats  tauta  is. 

Matt  22. 40  On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the 
Luke24.  *  S  which  are  come  to  pass  there  in  these  days 
John  5.    3  In  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  impot. 

1  Th.  3.  3  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these  afflict. 
Rev.    9.  20  the  men,  which  were  not  killed  by  these 

2^. These,  ravTas  tautas. 

Matti3.  53  when  Jesus  had  finished  these  parables 
Murki3.    2  Seest  thou  these  greatbuildings?  there  bIi. 
Acts    3.  24  the  prophets,  .have  likewise  foretold  oft. 

2  Co.  7.  1  Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly 
Heb.  9.  23  heavenly,  .with  better  sacrifices  than  th. 
Rev.  16.    9  God,  which  hathpower  over  these  plagues 

24.  To  these,  tovtois  ioutois. 

Acts    4.  16  Wliat  shall  we  do  to  these  men?  n.  27. 
5.  35  what  ye  intend  to  do  as  touching  these 
Rom.  8.  37  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  con. 

14.  iS  he  that  in  (these  thingsl  serveth  Christ  (is) 

15.  23  now  having  no  more  place  in  these  parts 
1  Co.  12.  23  upon  these  we  bestow  more  abundant  ho. 
Col.  3.  14  above  all  these  things  (put  on)  charity,  wh. 
1  Th.  4.  18  comfort  one  another  with  these  words 


Heb.   9.  23  patterns,  .should  be  purified  with  these 
Jude       14  Enoch  also,  .prophesied  of  these,  saying 

25.  These,  tovtovs  toutous. 

Matt.  7.  24  whosoever  heareth  [these]  sayings  of  mine 

7.  26  every  one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of  m. 

7.  28  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  sayings,  the 

10.    5  These  twelve  Jesus  sent  forth,  and  comni. 

19.    1  when  Jesus  had  finished  these  sayings  he 

26.    1  whenJesus  had  finished  all  these  sayings 

Mark  8.    4  whence  can  a  man  satisfy  these  men  with 

Luke  9.  28  eight  days  after  these  sayings,  he  took  Pe. 

9.  44  Let  these  sayings  sink  down  intoyour  ears 
19.  15  he  commanded  these  servants  to  be  called 
20  16  He  shall  come  and  destroy  these  husban. 

John  10.  19  There  was  a  division .  .for  these  sayings 

18.  8  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  then- 
Acts  2.  22  Yemen  of  Israel,  hear  these  words;  Jesus 
5.  5  Ananias  hearing  these  words  fell  v.  25. 
10. 47  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  ah, 
*9-  37  ye  have  brought  hither  these  men,  which 
26. Of  these,  tovtwv  iouton. 

Matt.  3.    9  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  ch. 
5.  19  shall  break  one  of  these  least  commandm. 

5.  37  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of 

6.  29  Solomon,  .was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  th. 
6,  32  after  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek 

10.  42  whosoever  shall  give  to.  .one  of  these  lit. 
18.  6  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little  ones 
iS.  10  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones 
18.  14  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  peri&h 
25.  40  done  (it)  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my 
25-  45  ye  did  (it)  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  these 

Mark  12.  31;  Luke  3.  8  ;  7.  18;  10.  36;  12.  27,  30;  17.  2; 
18.  34;  21.  12,  28;  24.  14,  48 ;  John  1.  50;  5.  20 ;  7.  [31] ; 
14.  12 ;  17.  20 ;  21.  15,  24 ;  Acts  1.  21,  24 ;  5.  32,  36,  38 ;  14. 
15  ;  *5*  [28] ;  18. 17 ;  19.  36  ;  21.  38 ;  24.  8  ;  25.  9,  20;  26.  21, 

26,  26,  29;  1  Co.  9.  15;  13.  13;  2  Ti.  2.  21  ;  Titus  3.  8; 
Heb.  i.  2  ;  9.  6 ;  10. 18;  2  Pe.  1.  4, 12, 15  ;  3.  n,  16;  Rev. 
9.  18;  18.  15. 

THESE  many  — 

So  great,  so  many,  too-ovtos  tosoutos. 

Luke  15.  29  these  many  years  do  I  serve  thee,  neither 

THESSA10NIANS,  Be<T<ra\oviKe7s. 
The  inhabitants  of  Thessalouica. 

Acts  20.    4  and  of  the  T.,  Aristarchus  and  Secundus 

1  Th.  1.    1  the  church  of  the  T. .  .in  God  the  Father 

2  Th.  1.    1  unto  the  church  of  the  T.  in  God  our  Fa. 

THES-SA-LO-NI-CA,  deo-(ra\ovlKn. 
A  city  of  Macedonia  on  the  shore  of  the  ^Egean  Sea,  at 
the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Salonika,  its  modern  name. 
Cassander  called  it  Thessalonica  after  his  wife,  Philip's 
daughter.  Under  the  Romaus  it  was  the  capital  of  one 
of  the  four  divisions  of  Macedonia,  and  the  station  of  a 
Roman  pnetor  and  questor.  lu  ancient  times  it  was 
variously  called  Emathia  Helta,  and  Thenna;  in  B.C. 
481  Xerxes  rested  here  in  his  invasion  of  Greece  ;  in  479 
it  was  taken  by  Pausanius ;  in  421  by  the  Athenians ;  in 
315  it  was  rebuilt;  in  168  it  surrendered  to  Rome;  in 
58  Cicero  found  refuge  in  it ;  in  42  it  was  made  a  free 
city ;  in  a.d.  52-53  Paul  addressed  two  Epistles  to  the 
Christians  there ;  in  the  third  century  it  was  made  a 
Roman  colony;  In  313  Diocletian's  widow  and  daughter 
were  beheaded  here  ;  in  390  its  inhabitants  were  put  to 
death  for  sedition  by  Theodosius  the  Great;  in  479 
Sabinianus  defeated  the  Ostrogoths  ;  in  904  the  Saracen 
fleet  attacked  it ;  in  1 1 85  the  Normans  of  Sicily  took  it ; 
m  1204  Boniface  founded  the  Latin  kingdom  of  Thessa- 
lonica; in  1222  Theodore  Angelus  became  emperor;  in 
1234  it  was  united  to  the  empire  of  Niciea;  in  1284  it  was 
given  up  to  Andronicus ;  in  1430  it  was  taken  from  tho 
Venetians  by  Sultan  Amurath  II. 

Acts  17.  11  These  were  more^noble  than  those  in  T. 
17. 13  theJewB  ofT.  had  knowledge  that  v.  1. 
27.    2  Aristarchus,  a  Macedonian  of  T.  being 

Phil.   4.  16  in  T.  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my  ne. 

2  Ti.    4.  10  For  Demas . .  is  departed  unto  T. ;  Crescens 

THEU'-DAS,  0eu5oy. 

A  Jewish  impostor,  mentioned  by  Gamaliel  before  the 
Sanhedrim  as  having  stirred  up  400  men,  who  were  des- 
troyed with  him. 

Acts   5.  36  before  these  days  rose  up  T.,  boasting 
THEY,  (but)— 
1.  These,  nVx  elleh. 

Isa.   28.  27  they  also  have  erred  through  wine,  and 
2. He  himself,  the  same,  x%n  hu. 

Exod.  1.  10  they  join  also  unto  our  enemies,  and  fight 

3. They  themselves,  nn  hem. 

Gen.  3.    7  knew  that  they  (were)  naked  ;  and        ■•■    d 

Eccl.  3.  18  might  see  that  they  themselves  an 

Song  6.    5  Turn  away  thine  eyes.. they  have  overco. 

4.  They  themselves,  nsri  hemmah. 

Gen.    7.  14  They,  and  every  beast  after  his  kind,  and 

5,They  themselves,  njrr  hennah. 

Gen.  6.    2  sawthe  daughtersof  men  that  they  (were) 
Exod.  9.  32  werenot  smitten;  for  they(were)  not  gro. 

6.  Their  soul,  np*}  naphsham. 

Job  36. 14  They  die  in  youth,  and  their  life  (is)  amo. 

7.  lie  himself,  the  same,  air 6s  autos. 

Matt.  5.    4  that  mourn ;  for  they  shall  be  comforted 
Mark  1 6.  14  he  appeared  unto  the  eleven  as  they  sat 

8.  Of  self,  selves,  avTov  hautoa. 

Acts  27.  27  the  shipmen  deemed  that  they  drew  near 


THEY 


975 


THING 


Q.Ofown  self,  selves,  eavrov  ke.oittou. 

Rev.  2.  9  which  say  "they  are  Jews,  ami  are  not,  but 
3.    9  which  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not,  but 

10.  That,  that  very,  he,  ixcTvos  ekehws. 

Marki6.  20  [they  went  forth,  and  preached  every  wh.] 
Luke  9.  34  feared  as  [they]  entered  into  the  cloud 
John  5.  39  Search  the  Scriptures,  .they  are.  .which  te. 
7.  45  they  said  uuto  them,  Why  have  ye  not  br. 

10.  6  but  they  understood  Dot  what  things.,  we. 

11.  13  they  thought  that  he  had  spoken  of  tak. 
20. 13  they  say  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest 

Acts  10.  9  [theyjwentontheir  journey,anddrewuigh 
10.  10  while  [they]  made  ready,  he  fell  into  a  tr. 
21.    6  we  took  ship ;  and  they  returned  home 

Horn  11.  23  they  also,  if  they  abide  not  still  inunbe. 

1  Co.    9.  25  they  (do  it)  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown 

15.  11  whether  (it  were)  I  or  they,  so  we  pre. 
Heb.  12.  25  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused  him  that 

11.  They  also,  even  they,  KaKe7i/ot  kaikcinoi. 

Matt  15.  iS  come  forth  from  the  heart;  and  they  de. 
Marki6.  11  [they,  .had  heard  that  he  was  alive,  and] 

16.  13  [they  -went  aud  told  (it)  unto  the  residue] 
Acts  15.  11  we  believe. .we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  th. 

12. These,  those,  ovroi  houtui. 

Luke  S.  14  that  which  fell  among  thorns  are  they 

8. 15  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they,  which 

13.    4  think  ye  that  [they]  were  sinners  above  all 

JohrnS.  21  ask  them  which  heard  me.  .they  know  wh. 

Acts  13.    4  [they,]  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost 

24.  15  which  they  themselves  also  allow,  that 

Rom.  8. 14  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  spirit.,  they  are 

g.    6  For  they  (are)  not  all  Israel  which  are  of 

1  Co.  16.  17  that  which  was  lacking  on  your  part  [they] 

Gal.    6.  12  they  constrain  you  to  be  circumcised,  only 

13.  These,  ravTa  touta. 

John  6.    9  two  small  fishes ;  but  what  are  they,  10. 25. . 

14.  But  they,  61  Se  hoi  de,  Matt.  9.  31. 
15-  Ofihese,  rovroiv  touton. 

Matt  n.    7  as  they  departed,  Jesus  began  to  say  unto 
THEY  also,  that,  which  — 
l.The  men,  cre^K  anashim. 

Isa.  41. 11  they  that  strive  with  thee  shall  perish 
41. 12  they  that  war  against  thee  shall  he  as  no. 

2.  They  also,  even  they,  KaKeivoi  kaikcinoi. 

J0I1U17.  24  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou 
1  Co.  10.    6  we  should  not  lust  after  evil . .  as  they  also 

Z. Those,  cCtrivts,  oTrwes  haitines,  hoitines. 

Matt25.    3  [They  that]  (were)  foolish  took  their  lamps 

Eev.    1.    7  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  (also) 
THICKET,  thickness,  thick  — 
1.  Thick  darkness,  gloominess,  n^ax  aphelah. 

Exod  10.  22  there  was  a  thick  darkness  in  all  the  land 
2. Heavy,  weighty,  123  kabed. 

Exod  19.  16  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  mount,  and  the 

3.  Thicket,  thickness,  ^]2p  sebak. 

Gen.  22.  13  behind  (him)  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by 
Psa.  74.    5  had  lifted  up  axes  upon  the  thick  trees 
Isa.     9.  i3  and  shall  kindle  in  the  thickets  of  the  fo. 
10. 34  he  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the  for. 

i.Thicket,  thickness,  ^?b  sobek. 

Jer.     4.    7  The  lion  is  come  up  from  his  thicket,  and 
5. Thorn,  bramble,  thicket,  rjin  choach. 

1  Sa.  13.    6  hide  themselves  in  caves,  aud  in  thickets 

6.  Thick  clovA,  rope,  place,  thicket,  thickness,  2$  ab. 
Exodig,   9  I  come  unto  thee  in  a  thick  cloud,  that 
iKi.   7.    6  the(other)pillarsandthethickbeam(we.) 
Jer.     4.  29  they  shall  go  into  thickets,  and  climb  up 
Eze.  41.  25  (there  were)  thick  planks  upon  the  face 

41.  26  windows  aud  palm  trees,  .and  thick  pla. 

7.  Thickness,  '^.  obi.    , 

Job    15.  26  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his  bucklers 

8.  Thickness,  '-j/  obi. 

1  Ei.   7.  26  it  (was)  an  hand  breadth  thick,  and  the 

2  Ch.  4.    5  the  thickness  of  it  (was)  an  hand  breadth 
Jer    52.  21  the  thickness  thereof  (was)  four  fingers 

9.  Thick,  interwoven,  nas?  ohoth. 

Lev.  23.  40  the  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and  willows  of 
Neb..    S.  15  palm  branches,  and  branches  of  thick  tr. 
Eze.    6.  13  under  every  thick  oak,  the  place  where 
20.  28  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick  trees 

10.  Thick  bc&id,  wreath,  branch,  ruj;  aboth. 

Eze.  19.  11  stature  was  exalted  among  the  thick  br. 

31.    3  and  his  top  was  among  the  thick  boughs 

31.  10  he  hath  shot  up  his  top  among  the  thick 

31.  14  shoot  up  their  top  among  the  thick  bou. 

11. Sweet  smell,  "in>;  athar. 

Eze.    8. 11  and  a  thick  cloud  of  incense  went  up 
12.  Breaxlth,  broad  place,  2rh  roc-hob. 

Eze.  41.  9  The  thickness  of  the  wall,  which  (was)  for 
41. 12  wall  of  the  building(was)  five  cubits  thick 

42.  10  The  chambers  (were)  in  the  thickness  of 
[See  also  Beam,  bough,  boughs,  branch,  clay,  cloth, 
cloud,  darkness,  gathered,  plank.] 

THICK:,  to  be  thicker,  be  grown — 
To  be  thick,  n^  abah. 

Deut32.  15  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art  grown  thick 

1  Ei.12. 10  My  little  (finger)  shall  be  thicker  than 

2  Ch.io.  10  My  little  (finger)  shall  be  thicker  than  my 
THIEF  — 

1..4  thief,  233  gannab. 
Exod.  22.    2  If  a  thief  be  found  breaking  up,  and  be  sm. 


Exod22.    7  if  the  thief  be  found,  let  him  pay  double 

22.    S  If  the  thief  be  not  found,  then  the  master 
Dent 24.    7  that  thief  shall  die;  and  thou  shalt  put 
Job   24.  14  The  murderer,  .in  the  night  is  as  a  thief 

30.    5  they  cried  after  them  as  (after)  a  thief 
Psa.  50.  18  When  thou  sawest  a  thief,  then  thou  con. 
Prov.  6.  30  (Men)  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to 

29.  24  Whoso  is  partner  with  a  thief  hateth  his 
Isa.  1.  23  Thy  princes  (are),  .companions  of  thieves 
Jer.     2.  26  As  the  thief  is  ashamed  when  he  is  found 

4S.  27  was  he  found  among  tine ves?  for  since  th. 

49.   9  if  thieves  by  night,  they  will  destroy  till 
Hos.    7.    1  the  thief  cometh  in,  (and)  the  troop  of  ro. 
Joel    2.   9  shall  enter  in  at  the  windows  like  a  thief 
Obad.       5  If  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  by  ni. 
Zech.  5.   4  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief 

2.  A  thief '  robber,  k\4tttt]s  kleptes. 

Matt.  6. 19  and  where  thieves  break  through  and  st. 

6.  20  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor 
24. 43  had  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  would 

Lukei2.  33  where  no  thief  approacheth,  neither  moth 
12.  39  had  known  what  hour  the  thief  would  co. 

Johnio.  1  climbethupsomeotherway.  .is  a  thief  and 
10.  8  All  that  ever  came  before  me  are  thieves 
10. 10  The  thief  cometh  not,  but  for  to  steal,  aud 
12.    6  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the  bag,  and  bare 

1  Co.  6. 10  Nop  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards 

1  Th.  5.  2  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief 
5.    4  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief 

1  Pe.   4. 15  let  noue  of  you  suffer  as  a.  .thief,  or  (as) 

2  Pe.   3.  10  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief 
Rev.    3.    3  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou 

16.  15  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief.  Blessed  (is)  he 

3.^4  robber,  plunderer,  A.-jjo't^s'  testes. 

Matt.  21.  13  My  house.,  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thie. 

26,  55  Are  ye  come  out  as  against  a  thief  with 

27.  38  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified  wi. 
27.  44  The  thieves  also,  which  were  crucified  wi. 

Markn.  17  My  house,  .ye  have  made  it  a  deuof  thie. 

14.  48  Are  ye  come  out,  as  against  a  thief,  with 

15.  27  with  him  they  crucify  two  thieves;  theone 
Lukeio.  30  fell  among  thieves,  which  stripped  him  of 

10.  36  unto  him  that  fell  among  the  thieves 
19.  46  My  house,  .ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thi. 
22. 52  Be  ye  come  out,  as  against  a  thief,  with 
THIGH  — 
1.  Thigh,  lfV  yarek. 

Gen.  24.    2  Put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thigh 
24.    9  the  servant  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh 
32.  25  he  touched  the  hollow  of  his  thigh;  and 
32.  25  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  was  out  of  joint 
32.  31  the  sun  rose,  .and  he  halted  upon  Ins  th. 
32.  32  which  (is)  upon  the  hollow  of  the  thigh 
32. 32  he  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  in 
47. 29  put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thigh 
Exod  28.  42  from  the  loins  even  unto  the  thighs  they 
Num.  5.  21  when  the  Lord  doth  make  thy  thigh  to 
5.  22  to  make  (thy)  belly  to  swell,  and  (thy)  thigh 
5.  27  her  belly  shall  swell,  and  her  thigh  shall 
Judg  3.  16  and  he  did  gird  it.  .upon  his  right  thigh 
3.  21  took  the  dagger  from  his  right  thigh,  and 
15.   8  he  smote  them  hip  and  thigh  with  a  great 
Psa.  45.    3  Gird  thy  sword  upon  (thy)  thigh,  0(most) 
Song  3.    8  every  man  (hath)  his  sword  upon  his  thi. 

7.  1  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  (are)  like  jewels 
Jer.  31.  19  I  smote  upon  (my)  thigh:  I  was  ashamed 
Eze.  21.  12  Cry.. howl.. smite  therefore upon(thy)th. 

24.  4  every  good  piece,  the  thigh,  and  the  sho. 

2.Thigh,  n;-)!  yarkah. 

Dan.   2.  32  his  arms  of  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs 
B.Leg,  pitf  shoq. 

Isa.    47.    2  make  bare  the  leg,  uncover  the  thigh,  pass 
4.  Thigh,  (xr}p6s  meroSt 

Eev.  19. 16  hath  on  (his)  vesture  and  on  his  thigh  a 
THIM-NA'-THAH,  np;pn. 
A  city  in  Dan,  near  Elon  or  Ekron.    See  Timnath. 

Josh  19.  43  And  Elon,  aud  T.,  and  Ekron 
THIN,  (  to  be  made)  — 
l.To  become  lean,  thin,  poor,  weak,  77H  dedal,  2. 

Isa.    17.  4  the  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  made  thin,  and 
2. Lean,  thin,  small,  dwarfish,  p*i  daq. 

Gen.  41.  6  seven  thin  ears  and  blasted  with  the  east 
41.  7  theseven  thin  ears  devoured  the  seveura. 
41.  23  seven  ears, withered,  thin, (and)  blasted  wi. 
41.  24  the  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  good  ears 

Lev.  13.  30  if.  .(there  be)  in  it  a  yellow  thin  hair;  then 

3.^4  slope,  going  down,  descent,  *rva  morad. 

1  Ki.   7.  29  (were)  certain  additions  made  of  thin  wo. 
i.Zeati,  thin,  p~\raq. 

Gen.  41.  27  the  seven  thin  and  ill  favoured  kine  that 
THINE  (ownl  — 
l.Thy  hand.  T):  yadeka. 

1  Ch.29. 14  all  things  (come)  of  thee,  and  of  thine  own 

2.  Of  own  self,  selves,  kavTou  heautou. 

1  Co.  10.  29  Conscience,  I  say,  not  thine  own,  but  of 

3.  One's  own,  proper,  peculiar,  ?5tos  idios. 

Luke  6.  41  perceivest  not  the  beam . .  in  thine  own  eye 

4.  To  thee,  vol  soi. 

Acts   5.    4  remained, was  it  not  thine  own, Jo.  17.6,9. 

5.  Thy,  thine,  <tos  sos. 

Matt.  7.  4  and,  behold,  a  beam  (is)  in  thine  own  eye 
20.  14  Take  (that)  thine  (is),  and  go  thy  way :  I 

25.  25  hid  thy  talent,  .thou  hast  (that  is)  thine 


Luke  5.  33  disciples  of  John  fast. .  thine  eat  and  dr. 
15.  31  thou  art  ever  with  me,  aud  all.  .is  thine 
22.  42  nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  do. 

Johni7.    6  thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me 
17.    9  whichthouhastgivenme;  for  they  are  tin. 

17.  ioall  mineare  thine, and  thine  aremine;  and 

18.  35  Thine  ownnatiouand  the  chief  priests  ha. 
Acts   5.   4  after  it  was  sold,  was  it  not  in  thine  owu 

6.  Of  thee,  o~ov  soit. 

Matt.  5.  25  Agree  withthine  adversary  quickly  whiles 

5.  33  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths 
5.43  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine 

6.  4  That  thine  alms  may  be  in  secret :  and  thy 
6.  13  [thine  is  the  kingdom,  aud  the  power,  and] 
6.  17  when  thou  fastest,  anoint  thine  head,  and 
6.  22  if  therefore  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole 

6.  23  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall 

7.  4  Let  me  pull  out  the  mote  out  of  thine  eye 
7.   4  and,  behold,  a  beam  (is)  in  thine  own  eye 
7.   5  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 
9.   6  take  up  thy  bed,  aud  go  unto  thine  house 

12. 13  Stretch  forth  thine  hand.  And  he  stretc. 

18.  9  if  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,  and 
20.  15  Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good  ? 
22.  44  till  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool 

See  also  Mark  2.  n;  3.  [5];  9.47;  12.  36;  Luke 4. 7;  5. 24;  6. 
42,42,  42;  7. 44;  8.  39;  n.34;  12.  58;  13. 12;  19.22,  [421,43; 
20.  43;  John  2.  17;  8.  [10] ;  9.  [10],  17,  26;  17.  n  ;  Acts  2. 
27 1  4-  [3°]  '■>  5-  3>  4  '■>  8.  22 ;  10.  31 ;  1  ^.  35 ;  23  35 ;  Rom. 
10.6,9;  11.  3;  12.20;  1  Ti.  5.  [23];  Heb.  1.  10,  13;  Rev. 

3-  18. 

THINE  own  self  — 

Of  thyself ,  aeavTov  seautou. 

Jolmi7.    5  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  owu  self  with 

Phm.      19  thou  owest  unto  me  even  thine  own  self 
THING  — 
l.A  saying,  command,  "i?x  omer. 

Job  22.  28  Thou  shalt  also  decree  a  thing,  and  it  sh. 
2.-4  word,  matter,  thing,  "c?  dabar. 

Gen.  15.    1  After  these  things  the  word  of  the  Lord 

19.  21  accepted  thee  concerning  this  thing  also 

20.  8  Abimelech.  .told  all  these  things  in  their 
20.  10  What  sawest  thou,  that . .  hast  done  this  t. 
ex.  11  the  thing  was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's 
ex.  26  I  wot  not  who  hath  done  this  thing ;  nei. 
22.    1  it  came  to  passafter  these  things  that  God 

22. 16  because  thou  hast  done  tliis  thing,  and 
22.  20  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  that  it 
24.  28  told  (them  of)  her  mother!s  house  these  th. 
24.  50  The  thing  proceedeth  from  the  Lord  :  we 
24.  66  the  servant  told  Isaac  all  things  that  he 

29. 13  And  he  told  Laban  all  these  things 

30.  31  If  thou  wilt  do  this  thing  for  me,  I  will 

34.  14  We  cannot  do  this  thing,  to  giveoursister 
34. 19  the  young  man  deferred  not  to  do  the  th. 

39.  7  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  that  his 

40.  1  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  (that)  the 

41.  28  This(is)thethingwhichIhavespokenuuto 
41.  32  (it  is)  because  the  thing  (is)  established  by 
41.  37  the  thing  was  good  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh 
44.  7  servants  should  do  accordingto  thisthiug 
48.    1  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  that 

Exod.  1.  18  Why  have  ye  done  this  thing,  and  havesa. 
2.  14  feared,  and  said,  Surely  this  thing  is  kuo 
2.  15  when  Pharaoh  heard  this  thing,  he  sought 
9.  5  TomorrowtheLoRD  shall  do  this  thing  in 
9.  6  the  Lord  did  that  thing  on  the  morrow 
12.  24  ye  shall  observe  this  thing  for  an  ordina. 
16. 16,  32  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  LORD 
18. 11  in  the  thing  wherein  they  dealt  proudly 

18. 14  What  (is)  this  thing  that  thou  doest  to  the 
18.  17  The  thing  that  thou  doest  (is)  not  good 
18.  18  this  thing  (is)  too  heavy  for  thee;  thou  art 
18.  23  If  thou  shalt  do  this  thing,  and  God  com. 

29.  i  this  (is)  the  thing  that  thou  shalt  do  unto 

33. 17  I  will  do  this  thing  also  that  thou  hastsp. 

35.  4  This  (is)  the  thing  winch  the  Lord  com 
Lev.    4.  13  the  thing  be  hid  from  the  eyes- of  the  ass. 

5.  2  Or  if  a  soul  touch  any  unclean  thing,  wh. 
8.    5  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  comm. 

8.  36  his  sons  did  all  things  which  the  Lord  co. 

9.  6  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  comm. 
17.  2  This  (is)  the  tiling  which  the  Lord  hath 
23.  37  drink  offerings,  every  thing  upon  his  day 

NumiS.    7  keep  your  priest's  office  forevery  thing  of 

30.  1  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  hath 

31.  23  every  thing  that  may  abide  the  fire,  ye  sh. 

32.  20  If  ye  will  do  this  tiling,  if  5-e  will  go  armed 

36.  6  This  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  doth 
Dent.  1.  14  The  thingwhichthouhastspoken(is)good 

1.  18  commanded  you  at  that  time  all  the  things 
1.  32  Yet  in  this  thingye  did  not  believe  the  L. 
4.    g  lest  thou  forget  the  things  which  thine 
4.  30  and  all  these  things  are  come  upon  thee 
4.  32  as  this  great  thing(is),  or  hath  beeu  heard 

12.  32  What  thing  soever  I  command  you,  obse. 

13.  14  (if  it  be)  truth,  (and)  the  thing  certain 
15. 10  because  that  for  this  thing  the  Lord  thy 
15.  15  therefore  I  command  thee  this  thing  to  d. 

17.  4  the  thing  certain,  (that)  such  abomination 
T7.    5  which  have  committed  that  wicked  thing 

18.  22  if  the  thing  follow  not,  nor  come  to  pass 
18.  22  that  (is)  the  thing  which  the  Lord  hath 

22.  20  But  if  this  thing  be  true  (and  the  tokens 

23.  9  then  keep  thee  from  every  wicked  thing 
23.  14  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  in  thee,  and 
23.  19  usury  of  anything  that  is  lent  uponusury 
24. 18,  22  thereforel  command  thee  to  dc  this  th. 
30.    1  when  all  these  tilings  are  come  upon  thee 


THING 


976 


THINGS 


Deut32. 


22. 

23- 
23- 

23- 
23- 
24. 

Judg.  6. 
6. 

1 1, 

18. 

i3. 

19. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

Ruth  3. 

4- 


2  Sa. 


zKi. 


aKi.  5. 

5- 
6. 
7- 
7- 
8. 
1 1. 
i7- 
"7- 

*7- 

,-,,    23- 

1  Ch.  4. 

*3- 

17- 
21. 
21. 

2  Ch.n. 

12. 
19. 
23- 
23- 
29. 
3°- 

Ezra   9. 

Weh.   2. 

6. 

EsLli.  2. 


Job 


Psa,  101. 

j:  .  1.  1 


47  For  it  (is)  not  a  vain  thing  for  you ;  because 
47  through  this  thing  ye  shall  prolong  (your) 
10  until  every  thing  was  finished  that  the  L. 
24  were  sore  afraid,  .and  have  done  thisthi. 

6  Thou  knowest  the  thing  that  the  Lord  sa. 
45  There  failed  not  ought  of  any  good  thing 
24  done  it  for  fear  of  (this)  thing,  saying,  In 
33  thing  pleased  the  children  of  Israel ;  and 
14  good  things  which  the  Lord  your  God  sp. 

14  all  are  come  to  pass,  .not  one  thing  hath 

15  (that)  as  all  good  things  are  come  upon 

15  the  Lord  bring  upon  you  all  evil  things 
29  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  that  Josh. 
29  Who  hath  done  this  thing?  And  when  they 

29  the  son  of  Joash  hath  done  this  thing 

37  Let  this  thing  be  done  forme:  let  me  alo. 

7  that  might  put  (them)  to  shame  in  (any) 

10  place  where  (there  is)  no  want  of  any  thing 

19  thyservauts:  (there  is)  no  want  of  any  thin. 

24  but  unto  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 
9  But  now  this  (shall  be)  the  thing  which 

1 1  this  (is)  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do,  Ye  sh. 
iS  until  he  have  finished  the  thing  this  day 

7  for  to  confirm  all  things,  a  man  plucked 

23  Why  do  ye  such  things?  for  I  hear  of  yo. 

1 1  will  do  a  thing  in  Israel,  at  which  both  t. 
17  What  (is)  the  thing  that  (the  LORD)  hath 

17  hide  (any)  tiling  from  me  of  all  the  things 

6  But  the  thing  displeased  Samuel,  when 

16  therefore  stand  and  see  this  great  thing 

12  Come . .  and  we  will  show  you  a  thing.  And 

20  they  told  Saul,  and  the  thing  pleased  him 

7  and  Jonathan  showed  him  all  those  thin. 

2  why  should  my  father  hide  this  thing  from 

15  Let  not  the  king  impute  (any)  thing  unto 
6  forbid  that  I  should  do  this  thing  unto 

37  his  wife  had  told  him  these  things,  that 

16  This  thiug  (is)  not  good  that  thou  hast  do. 

10  punishment  happen  to  thee  for  this  thing 
iS  hath  the  Lord  done  this  thing  unto  thee 

6  requite,  .because  ye  have  done  this  thing 

I  *  but  one  thing  I  require  of  thee,  that  is 

11  (as)  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  do  this  th. 

25  Let  not  this  thing  displease  thee ;  for  the 
27  But  the  thing  that  David  had  done  displ. 

6  because  he  did  this  thing,  and  because 

12  but  I  will  do  this  thing  before  all  Israel 

21  What  thing  (is)  this  that  thou  hast  done? 

20  he  (is)  thy  brother;  regard  not  this  thing 

21  when  king  David  heard  of  all  these  things 
33  let  not  my  lord  the  king  take  the  thing  to 

13  the  king  doth  speak  this  thing  as  one  whi. 
15  I  am  come  to  speak  of  this  thing  unto  my 

18  Hide  not  from  me.  .the  thing  that  I  shall 

20  hath  thy  servant  Joab  done  this  thing:  and 

21  Behold  now,  I  have  done  this  thing:  go 

II  they  went. .and  they  knew  not  any  thing 

35  what  thing  soever  thou  shalt  hear  out  of 

36  by  them  ye  shall  send  unto  me  every  thi. 

19  spread  a  covering,  .and  the  thing  was  not 

3  doth  my  lord  the  king  delight  in  this  thi. 
27  Is  this  thing  done  by  my  lord  the  king 

10  pleased,  .that  Solomon  had  asked  this  th. 

11  Because  thou  hast  asked  this  thing,  and 

10  commanded  him  concerning  this  thing 

24  return,  .for  this  thing  is  from  me.     They 

30  this  thing  became  a  sin  :  for  the  people 

33  After  this  thing  Jeroboam  returned  not 

34  this  thing  became  sin  unto  the  house  of 
5  wife  of  Jeroboam  cometh  to  ask  a  thing 

13  there  is  found  (some)  good  thing  toward 
9  I  will  do  :  but  this  thing  I  may  not  do.  A. 
24  do  this  thing ;  Take  the  kings  away,  eve. 

1  came  to  pass  after  these  things,  (that)  N". 
13  prophet  had  bid  thee  (do  some)  great  thi. 
iS  In  this  thing  the  Lord  pardon  thy  servant 
ri  the  king,  .was  sore  troubled  for  this  thing 

2  windows  in  heaven,  might  this  thing  be? 
19  windows  in  heaven,  might  such  a  thing 

13  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing? 
5  saying,  This  (is)  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do 
9  did  secretly  (those)  things  that  (were)  not 

1 1  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  L. 

12  said  unto  them,  Ye  shall  not  do  this  thi. 

17  proclaimed  these  things  that  thou  hast 

22  And  (these  are)  ancient  things 

4  the  thing  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  all  the 

23  let  the  thing  that  thou  hast  spoken  con. 

7  God  was  displeased  with  this  thing;  the. 

8  sinned. .because  I  have  done  this  thing 

4  return  every  man . .  for  this  thing  is  done 
12  and  also  in  Judah  things  went  well 

3  there  are  good  things  found  in  thee,  in  th. 

4  This  (is)  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do;  A  third 

19  none  (which  was)  unclean  in  any  thing  sh. 
36  prepared  the  people  :  for  the  thing  was 

4  the  thing  pleased  the  king  and  all  the  co. 
1  After  these  things,  and  the  establishment 
3  when  I  heard  this  thing,  I  rent  my  garni. 
10  What  (is)this  thing  that  yedo?\villyere. 

3  There  are  no  such  things  done  as  thou  sa. 
1  After  these  things,  when  the  wrath  of  ki. 

4  the  thing  pleased  the  king;  and  he  did  so 
22  the  thing  was  known  to  Mordecai,  who 

1  After  these  things  did  king  Ahasuerus  pr. 

14  the  thing  pleased  Hamau;  and  he  caused 

5  the  thing  (seam)  rigflt  before  the  king,  and 

20  Mordeoai  wrote  these  things,  and  sent  le. 
12  a  thiug  was  secretly  brought  to  me,  and 
n  is  there  any  secret  thing  with  thee? 

3  I  will  set  no  wicked  thing  before  mine 
S  All  things  (are)  full  of  lab<mr;  man  can. 


Keel.  1.  10  Is  there  (any)  thing  whereof  it  may  be  said 

5.  2  be  hasty  to  utter  (any)  thing  before  God 

6.  11  there  be  many  things  that  increase  vanity 

7.  8  Better  (is)  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  be. 

8.  1  who  knoweth  the  interpretation  of  a  thi. 
8.    3  stand  not  in  an  evil  thing ;  for  he  doeth 

8.  5  Whoso  keepeth .  .shall  feel  no  evil  thing 
Isa.   38.   7  the  Lord  will  do  this  thing  that  he  hath 

42.  16  These  things  will  I  do  unto  them,  and  not 

Jer.     7.  23  this  thing  commanded  I  them,  saying,  Ob. 

20.    1  heard  that  Jeremiah  prophesied  these  th. 

22.  4  if  ye  do  this  thing  indeed,  then  shall  th. 
26.  10  the  princes  of  Judah  heard  these  things 

32.  27  I  (am)  the  Lord,  .is  there  any  thing  too 

33.  14  I  will  perform  that  good  thing  which  I 
38.  5  the  king(is)  not  (he  that)  can  do  (any)  th. 
40.  3  therefore  this  thing  is  come  upon  you 
40.  16  Thou  shalt  not  do  this  thing ;  for  thou  sp. 
42.  3  may  show  us.  .the  thing  that  we  may  do 
44.  4  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hate 
44. 17  certainly  do  whatsoever  thiug  goeth  forth 

Eze    11.  25  spake,  .all  the  things  that  the  Lord  had 

14.  9  deceived  when  he  hath  spoken  a  thing,  I 
38.  10  at  the  same  time  shall  things  come  into 

Dan.  10.    1  thing  was  revealed.. and  the  thing  (was) 
10.    1  understood  the  thing,  and  had  understa. 
Amos  6.  13  Ye  which  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  nought,  wh. 
Zech.  8. 16  These  (are)  the  things  that  ye  shall  do 

3.  Vessel,  '"p?  keli. 

Lev,  13.  49,  52,  53,  57,  50  or  in  any  thing  of  skin ;  it 
13.  58  whatsoever  thing  of  skin  (it  be),  which 

15.  4  every  thing  whereon  he  sitteth  shall  be 
15.    6  he  that  sitteth  on  (any)  thing  whereon  he 
15.  22  whosoever  toucheth  any  thing  that  she  sat 
15.  23  or  on  any  thing  whereon  she  sitteth,  when 

Kum  35.  22  or  have  cast  upon  him  any  thing  without 

i.  Work,  njK^D  melakah. 

Lev.  13.  48  whether  in  a  skin,  or  in  any  tiling  made 
1  Sa.  15.   9  every  tiling  (that  was)  vile  and  refuse,  that 

5.A  word,  speech,  matter,  njQ  nullah. 

Dan.  2.  5  The  thing  is  gone  from  me :  if  ye  will  not 
2.  8  because  ye  see  the  thing  is  gone  from  me 
2. 10  nor  ruler,  (that)  asked  such  things  at  any 
2.  11  (it  is)  a  rare  thing  that  the  king  requireth 
2.15  Then  Arioch  made  the  tiling  kn^wn  to  Da. 
2. 17  made  the  thing  known  to  Hananiah,  Mi. 

4.  33  Thesaniehourwasthethingfnlfilledupon 

5.  15  could  not  show,  .interpretation  of  the  th. 

5.  26  This  (is)  the  interpretation  of  the  thing 
6. 12  The  thing  (is)  true,  according  to  the  law 
7.  16  made  me  know  the  interpretation  of  the 

6. Animal  soul,  ^23  ne})hesh. 

Lev.  11.  10  of  any  living  thing  which  (is)  in  the  wat. 

Eze.  47.  9  every thingthatliveth,  which moveth.wh. 
7. A  loan,  debt,  nx^D  mushshemh. 

Deut  24. 10  When  thou  dost  lend  thy  brother  any  th. 
S..-1  word,  matter,  thing,  \oyos  logos. 

Matt2i.  24  I  will  also  ask  you  one  thing,  which  if  ye 

Luke  1.    4  know  the  certainty  of  those  things,  whe. 

20,  3  I  will  also  ask  you  one  thing ;  aud  answer 
Acts   5.  24  the  chief  priests  heard  these  things,  they 

Q.Adeed,  doing,  anything  done.  Trpay/j.a  jpragma. 
MattiS.  19  shall  agree  on  earth  as  touching  any  thing 
Luke  1.    1  a  declaration  of  those  things  which  are 
Acts    5.    4  why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in  th. 
Heb.   6.  18  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which 

10.  1  not  the  very  image  of  the  things,  u.  1. 
10.  Any  thing,  ti  ti,  Acts  25.  26. 

1 1. Saying,  matter,  }>v/j.a  rheina. 

Luke  2.  15  see  this  thing  which  is  come  to  pass,  wh. 
2.  19  Mary  kept  all  these  things,  and  pondered 

Acts  5.  32  we  are  his  witnesses  of  these  things ;  and 
12.  These,  avra  auta. 

1  Pe.  1.  12  theydidministerthethingswhkharenow 
THINGS,  these  — 
1. These,  these  things,  ravra  taut". 

Matt.  1.  20  while  he  thought  on  these  things,  behold 
4.    9  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 

6.  32  after  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek 

6.  33  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto 

9.  18  While  he  spake  these  things  unto  them 

11.  25  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 
13.  34  these  things  spake  Jesus  unto  the  multi. 

13.  51  Have  ye  understood  all  these  things?  Th. 
13  56  Whence  then  hath  thi?  (man)  all  these  th.? 
19.  20  All  these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  yo. 

21.  23  By  what,  .doest  thou  these  things?  and 
21. 24,  27  tell,  .by  what  authority  I  do  these  th. 

23.  36  All  these  things  shall  come  upon  this  ge. 

24.  2  See  ye  not  all  these  things?  Yerily  I  say 

14.  3  when  shall  these  things  be?  and  what(sh. 
24.  33  when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things,  know 
24.  34  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  fuL 

Mark  2.    8  Why  reason  ye  these  things  in  your  he.  ? 

.6.   2  From  whence  hath  this(man)these  things. 

11.  28  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  thi.? 

xr.  28  gave  thee  this  authority  to  do  these  thi. 

11.  29,  33  tell,  .by  what  authority  I  do  these  th. 

13.   4  when  shall  these  things  be  ?  and  what  (sh. 

13.    4  the  sign  when  all  these  things  shall  befu. 

13.  29  when  ye  shall  see  these  things  come  to 

13.  30  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  do. 
Luke  1.  20  until  the  day  that  these  things  shall  be 

4.  28  when  they  heard  these  things,  were  filled 

5.  27  after  these  things  he  went  forth,  and  saw 

7.  9  When  Jesus  heard  these  things,  he  mar. 


Luke  8. 


John 


5- 

5- 

7- 

7- 

7- 

11. 

12. 

14. 

15- 

17- 

17- 

18. 

19. 

21. 

=3- 
24. 

2*- 

Rom.  8. 

1  Co.  4. 
4- 
9- 
9- 


2  Co. 


Eph. 
Phil. 
2TI1. 
1  Ti. 


4 

5 
5 
6. 
6. 
2TL    1. 

Titus  2. 
3- 
Heb.  7. 
Jas.  3. 
2  Pe.    1 


8  when  he  had  said  these  things  he  cried 

1  After  these  things  the  Lord  appointed  ot. 
21  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 

27  as  he  spake  these  things,  a  certain  woman 

53  (as  he  said  these  things  unto  them,  the  sc.] 
1,0  all  these  things  do  the  nations  of  the  wo. 
31  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto 

17  when  he  had  said  these  things,  all  his  ad. 
6  could  not  answer  hiniagain  to  these  thi 

15  one  of  them . .  with  him  heard  these  things 

21  servant  came,  and  showed  his  lord  these  t. 
26  he  called.. and  asked  what  these  things 

14  the  Pharisees  also . .  heard  all  these  things 

22  when  Jesus  heard  [these  things],  he  said 
11  as  they  heard  these  things,  he  added  and 

2  by  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things 

8  tell .  .by  what  authority  I  do  these  things 

6  (As  for)  these  things  which  ye  behold,  the 

7  Master,  but  when  shall  these  things  be? 

7  what  sign  (will  there  be)  when  these  thi. 

9  these  things  must  first  come  to  pass ;  but 
3:  when  ye  see  these  things  come  to  pass 
36  worthy  to  escape  all  these  things  that  sh. 
31  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree,  wh. 

49  women,  stood  afar  off,beholdingtheseth. 
9  told  all  these  things  unto  the  eleven,  ami 

10  which  told  these  things  unto  the  apostles 

21  to  day  is  the  third  day  since  these  things 
■36  Ought.  .Christ  to  have  suffered  these  th. 
2S  These  things  were  done  in  Bethabara  be. 

16  Take  these  things  hence;  make  not  my 

18  sign.,  seeing  that  thou  doest  these  things 
9  aud  said  unto  him,  How  can  these  things 

10  thou  a  master,  .knowest  not  these  things 

22  After  these  things  cameJesus  and  his  di. 
16  he  had  done  these  things  on  the  sabbath 
34  these  things  I  say,  that  ye  might  be  saved 

1  After  these  things  Jesus  wentover  the  sea 
.  59  These  things  said  he  in  the  synagogue,  as 
1  Afterthesethings  Jesus  walked  in  Galilee 
4  If  thou  do  these  things,  show  thyself  to 

28  as  my  Father,  .taught.  .1  speak  these  th. 

11  These  things  said  he  :  and  after  that  he 
16  These  things  understood  not  his  disciples 
16  theu  remembered  they  that  these  things 

16  (that)  they  had  done  these  things  unto 
36  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  departed 
41  These  things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his 

17  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if 
25  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  be. 
11  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  th. 

17  These  things  I  command  you,  that  ye  lo. 
21  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you  for  my 

1  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that 

3  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you,  because 

4  these  things  have  I  told  you,  that,  when 

4  these  things  I  said  not  unto  you  at  the  be. 
6  becausel  have  said  these  things  unto  you 

25  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  in 
33  These  thingsl  have  spoken  unto  you,  that 

13  these  things  I  speak  in  the  world,  thatth. 
24  These  things  therefore  the  soldiers  did 
36  these  things  were  done,  that  the  scripture 
iS  (that)  he  had  spoken  these  things  unto  her 

1  After  these  things  Jesus  showed  himself 
24  the  disciple  which,  .wrote  these  things 
9  when  he  had  spoken  these  things,  while 

5  came  on  all  them  that  heard  [these  things] 

11  and  upon  as  many  as  heard  these  things 
1  Then  said  the  high  priest,  Are  these  thi. 

50  Hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  things? 

54  When  they  heard  these  things,  they  were 

18  When  they  heard  these  things,  they  held 
17  Go  show  these  things  unto  James,  and  to 

15  Sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things?  We  also  are 
17  saith  the  Lord,  who  doeth  allthesethings 

8  they  troubled .  .when  they  heard  these  th. 

20  would  know  therefore.wliat  these  things 

1  After  these  things  Paul  departed  from  A. 

21  After  these  things  were  ended,  Paul  pur. 

12  when  we  heard  these  things,  both  we,  and 

22  that  thou  hast  showed  these  things  tome 

9  also  assented,  saying  that  these  things  we. 
22  Felix  heard  [these  thiugs,]haviugmorepe. 

.  31  What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things? 

6  these  things,  brethren,  I  have  in  a  figure 

14  I  write  not  these  things  to  shame  you,  but 
8  Say  I  these  things  as  a  man?  or  saith  not 

15  neither  have  I  written  these  things,  that 
6  these  things  were  our  examples,  to  the  in. 

11  these  things  happened  unto  them  for  en. 

16  And  who  (is)  sufficient  for  these  things? 

10  I  write  these  things  being  absent,  lest  be. 
6  because  of  these  tilings  cometh  the  wrath 
8  if  (there  be)  any  praise,  think  on  these  th. 

5  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things 

14  These  things  write  I  unto  thee,  hoping  to 

6  If  thou  put.  .in  remembrance  of  these  th. 

11  These  things  command  and  teach 

15  Meditate  upon  these  things,  give  thyself 

7  these  things  give  in  charge,  that  they  may 
21  that  thou  observe  these  things  without 

2  do  (them)service . .  These  things  teach  and 

1 1  flee  these  things;  and  follow  after  righte. 

12  For  the  which  cause  I.  suffer  these  things 

14  Of  these  things  put  (them)  in  rcniembra. 

15  These  things  speak,  and  exhort,  and  rebu. 

8  These  things  are  good  and  profitable  unto 

13  he  of  whom  these  things  are  spoken  pe. 
10  My  brethren,  these  things  ought  not  so  to 

8  if  these  things  be  in  you,  and  abound, th. 

9  he  that  lacketh  these  things  is  blind,  and 


THINGS 


977 


THIRD 


2  Pe.   i.  10  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall 

i  Jo.   i.    4  these  things  write  we  unto  you,  that  your 

2.    i  these  things  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  siu 

5. 13  These  thiugshave  I  written  unto  you  that 

Rev.   7.    1  after  [these  things]  I  saw  four  angels  stan. 

18.    1  after  these  things  I  saw  another  angel  co. 

xg.    1  after  these  things  I  heard  a  great  voice  of 

22.   8  I  John  saw  these  things,  and  heard  (them) 

22.    8  the  angel  which  showed  me  these  things 

22. 16  to  testify  unto  you  these  things  in  the  ch. 

22.  18  If  any  man  shall  add  unto  [these  things] 

22.  20  He  which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Su. 

2.0/ 'these,  tovtm  touton. 

Matt.    6.  32  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things 
See  also  Luke  7.  18;  12.30;  18.  34;  21.  28;  24.  14,  48; 
John  21.  24;  Acts  19.  36;  24.  S;  25.  9;  26.  26,  26;  1  Co. 

0.  15 ;  Titus  3.  8;  Heb.  9.  6;  2  Pe.  1.  12,  15;  3.  n,  16; 
Rev.  18.  15. 

THINGS,  the,  such  — 

1.  These  things,  ravra  tauta. 

John  7.  32 ;  Gal.  2.  ib;  5.  17  ;  2  Pe.  3.  14. 

2.  The,  these,  ra  ta,  Matt.  6.  34;  16.  23,  23;  22. 
21,  21;  Mr.  8-  33,  33 ;  12.  17, 17;  Lu.  20.  25;  Ko.  2. 14*  &c. 

[See  also  Any,  certain,  committed,  creeping,  draw, 
formed,  high,  holy,  incredible,  nought,  one,  what.  Also 
All,  base,  boast  of,  to  come,  good,  great,  hoped  for, 
move,  those,  weak.] 

THING  of  nought  — 
Nought,  h'bx  elil. 

Jer.   14.  14  a  thing  of  nought,  and  the  deceit  of  their 
THINGS  that  we  have  — 
The  things  possessed,  ra.  ivovra  ta  enonta. 

Luken.  41  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye  have 
THINK  (of,  on),  to — 

1 .  To  say,  ion  amar. 

Gen.  20.  11 1  thought,  Surely  the  fear  of  God  (is)  not 
Nuni24. 11I  thought  to  promote  thee  unto  great  ho. 
Judgis.  2  I  verily  thought  that  thou  hadst  utterly 
Ruth  4.    4  I  thought  to  advertise  thee,  saying,  Buy 

1  Sa.  20.  26  he  thought,  Something  hath  befallen  him 

2  Sa.    5.    6  thinking,  David  cannot  come  in  hither 

13.  33  to  think  that  all  the  king's  sons  are  dead 
21. 16  he,  being  girded,  .thought  to  have  slain 
2  Ki.  5.  ir  I  thought,  He  will  surely  come  out  tome 
2  Ch.13.  8  ye  think  to  withstand  the  kingdom  of  the 
32.  1  encamped,  .and  thought  to  win  them  for 
Esth.  6.  6  Hainan  thought  in  his  heart,  To  whom 
Eccl.  8.  17  though  a  wise  (man)  think  to  know  (it) 

2.  To  understand,  consider,  f'2  bin,  la. 

Job  31.   1  why  then  should  I  think  upon  a  maid? 
3.7b  speak,  ~cn  dabar,  3. 

Exod32.  14  repented  of  the  evil  which  he  thought  to 

4.  To  liken,  think,  devise,  HOT  dccmah,  3. 

Num33.  56  I  shall  do  unto  you,  as  I  thought  to  do 
Judg2o.  5  beset  the  house .  .(and)  thought  to  have 
Esth.  4.  13  Think  not  with  thyself  that  thou  shalt 
Psa.  48.    9  We  have  thought  of  thy  loving  kindness 

50.  21  thou  thoughtest  that  I  was  altogether 
Isa.    14.  24  as  I  have-thought,  so  shall  it  come  to  pa. 

5.  To  devise,  design,  cDi  zamam. 

Deut  19.  19  do  unto  him  as  he  had  thought  to  have 
Zech.  1.    6  Like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  thought  to  do 

8.  14  I  thought  to  punish  you,  when  your  fath. 

8.  15  again  have  I  thought  in  these  days  to  do 

6.  To  think,  reckon,  n^n  chashab. 

Gen.  38. 15  When  Judah  saw  her,  he  thought  her  (to 
50.  20  But  as  for  you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me 

1  Sa.    1.  13  therefore  Eli  thought  she  had  been  drun. 

18.  25  Saul  thought  to  make  David  fall  by  the 

2  Sa.  14.  13  Wherefore  then  hast  thou  thought  such 
Neh.  6.    2  But  they  thought  to  do  me  mischief 

6.   6  thou  and  the  Jews  think  to.rebel :  forwh. 
Job  35.   2  Thinkest  thou  this  to  be  right,  (that)  thou 
41.  32  (one)  would  think  the  deep  (to  be)  hoary 
Psa.  40. 17  the  Lord  thiuketh  upon  me :  thou  (art) 
Isa.   10.    7  meaneth  not  so,  neither  doth  his  heart  th. 
Jer.  iS.    8  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to 
23. 27  Which  think  to  ciuse  my  people  to  forget 
2g.  11 1  know  the  thoughts  that  I  think  toward 
Eze.  38. 10  and  thou  shalt  think  an  evil  thought 
Mai.    3. 16  that  feared  the  Lord,  and  that  thought 

7.  To  think,  devise,  ivn  chashab,  3. 

Psa.  73.  j6  When  I  thought  to  know  this,  it  (was)  too 
119.  59  I  thought  on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  feet 
8.7b  hope,  jjwpose,  "iipscbar. 

Dan.  7.  25  he  shall,  .think  to  change  times  and  laws 

9.  To  think,  purpose,  nvy.  ashith. 

Dan.  6.    3  the  king  thought  to  set  him  over  the  wh. 

10.  To  bethink  self,  W%  ashath,  7. 

Jon.    1.   6  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us,  that 

11.  To  judge,  adfudge,  hh^  paled,  3. 

Gen.  48.  11  Thad  not  thought  to  see  thy  face;  and,  lo 
12. Before  me,  *£"}?,.  qodamai. 

Dan.  4.   2  I  thought  it  good  to  show  the  signs  and 
13.7b  think,  estimate,  "ly;?  shaar. 

Prov23.   7  as  he  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  (is)  he  :  Eat 
14.  To  see,  nip,  raah. 

2  Sa.  18.  27  Me  thinketh  the  running  ofelhe  foremost 
15. in.  the  eyes  of,  TJ!?  beene. 

-ftuiU36.    6  Let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  best 

123 


2  Sa.  4. 10  one  told  me . .  thinking  to  have  brought  go. 

10.  3  Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy 
13.  2  Aninon  thought  it  hard  for  him  to  do  any 
19. 18  and  todo  what  he  thought  good.  And  Sh. 

1  Ch.19.  3  Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy 
Esth.  3.  6  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Morde. 
Zech  11. 12  If  ye  think  good,  give  (me)  my  price;  and 

16.7b  reckon  through,  reason,  hiaKoyi^ofxai  dialog. 
Luke  12.  17  he  thought  within  himself,  saying,  What 

17.  To  think,  5o«e'cu  dokeo. 

Matt.  3.   9  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  We  ha. 

6.  7  they  think  that  they  shall  be  heard  forth. 

17.  25  What  thinkest  thou,  Simon?  of  whom  do 

18.  12  How  think  ye?  If  a  man  have  an  hundred 

21.  28  what  think  ye?  A  (certain)  man  had  two  so. 

22.  17  What  thinkest  thou?  Is  it  lawful  to  give 
22. 42  Saying,  What  think  ye  of  Christ?  whose 
24.  44  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son 
26.  53  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to 
26.  66  What  think  ye?  They  answered  and  said 

Luke  10.  36  Which  now  of  these  three,  thinkest  thou 

12.  40  cometh  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not 

13.  4  think  ye  that  they  were  sinners  above  all 

19.  11  they  thought  thatthe  kingdom  of  God  sh. 
John  5. 39  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life 

5.  45  Do  not  think  that  I  will  accuse  you  to  the 
11. 13  they  thoughtthat  hehadspokenof  taking 

11.  56  What  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to 
13.  29  some  (of  them)  thought,  because  Judas 

16.  2  whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he 
Acts  12.    9  and  wistuot.  .butthoughthe  sawavision 

26.    9  I  verily  thought  with  myself,  that  I  ought 

1  Co.   4.    9  I  think  that  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  ap. 

7.  40  and  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  Spirit  of 

8.  2  if  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  any  th. 
10. 12  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take 
12  23  those  (members),  .which  we  think  to  be 
14. 37  If  any  man  think  himself  to  be  a  prophet 

2  Co.  11. 16  Let  no  man  think  me  a  fool:  if  otherwise 

12.  19  think  ye  that  we  excuse  ourselves  unto 
Gal.  6.  3  if  a  man  think  himself  to  be  something 
Phil.  3.  4  If  any  other  man  thinketh  that  he  hath 
Jas.     4.   5  Do  ye  think  that  the  Scripture  saith  in 

IS. To  bear  or  have  in  the  mind,  4v6v/j.eouat  enthu. 
Matt.  1.  20  while  he  thought  on  these  things,  behold 

9.  4  Wherefore  think  ye  evil  in  your  hearts? 
Acts  10. 19  While  Peter  thought  on  the  vision,  the  S. 

19.  To  lead,  account,  esteem,  rjyeo/iiat  hegeomai. 
Acts  26.    2  I  think  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  bee. 
2  Co.  9.    5  I  thought  it  necessary  to  exhort  the  bret. 
Phil.   2.    6  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
2  Pe.   1.  13  I  think  it  meet,  as  long  as  I  am  in  this 

20.  To  judge,  Kpivco  krino. 

Acts  26.    8  Why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incred. 

21.  To  reckon,  Xoyl£o/j.aL  logizomai. 

Bom.  2.    3  thinkest  thou  this,  O  man,  that  judgest 

1  Co.  13.    5  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  evil 

13.  11  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  ch. 

2  Co.   3.    5  sufficient  of  ourselves  to  think  any  thing 

10.  2  think  to  be  bold  against  some,  which  th. 
10.  7  let  him  of  himself  think  this  again,  that 
10. 11  Let  such  an  one  think  this,  that,  such  as 
12.  6  lest  anyman  should  think  of  me  above  th. 
Phil.   4.    8  if  (there  be)  anypraise.think  on  these  things 

22.7b  ponder,  understand,  think,  conceive,  voiui. 
Eph.   3.  20  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think 

23.  7b  account,  reckon  in  law,  vo/j-tfa  nomizo. 
Matt.  5. 17  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the 
10.  34  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace 
Acts    S.  20  thou  hast  thought  that  the  gift  of  God  may 

17.  29  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead 
1  Co.  7. 36  if  any  man  think  that  he  behaveth  him. 

2  J.  To  be  of  opinion,  think,  suppose,  oiofxai  oiomai. 
Jas.     1.    7  let  not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  rece. 

25.  To  ponder  under,  sus%)ect,  suj^pose,  bitovoiw. 
Acts  13.  25  he  said,  Whoni  think  ye  that  I  am?  I  am 

26.  To  make  to  appear,  <paiva)  phaino. 

Marki4.  64  Ye  have  heard  the  blasphemy:  what  think 

27.  To  be  of  ojrinion,  set  the  affections  on,  <ppov4w. 
Acts  28. 22  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  thi. 
Bom.12.  3  highlythanhe  oughtto  chink, butto think 
j  Co.  4.   6  that  ye  might  learn  in  us  not  [to  think]  (of 

13. 11  I  thought  as  a  child ;  but  when  I  became 
Phil.  1.    7  as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think  this  of  you 
THINK  evil,  good,  more  highly,  on,  upon,  to  — 

1.  To  be  mindful,  remember,  ~ot  zakar. 

Gen.  40.  14  think  on  me  when  lit  shall  be  well  with 
ieh.   5. 19  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good,  (accor). 
6. 14  My  God,  think  thou  upon  Tobiah  and  Sa. 

2.  To  devise,  desire,  CD:  zamam. 

Prov.30.  32  if  thou  hast  thought  evil,  (lay)  thine  hand 
Z.To  he  or  appear  good  or  acceptable,  ~i*W  shephar. 
Dan.    4.    2  I  thought  it  good  to  show  the  signs  and 

4.  To  cast  or  throw  upon,  iirifSaWo}  epiballo. 

Marki4.  72  And  when  he  thought  thereon,  he  wept 

5.  To  think  well,  euSo/ceai  eudokeo. 

1  Th.  3.    1  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens 

6.  To  think  too  highly,  virep^poveoo  huperphroneo. 
Bom  1 2.    3  not  to  think,  .more  highly  than  he  ought 


THIRD  {part,  rank,  time,  loft\  thirdly  — 

1.  Three,  n^iW,  v)hp  shedosh,  sheloshah. 

Exodig.  15  Be  ready  against  the  third  day:  come  not 

1  K.i.15.  28,  33  in  the  third  year  of  Asa  king  of  Judah 

2  Ki.18.    1  in  the  third  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah 

1  Ch.26.  11  Hilkiah  the  second,  Tebaliah  the  third 

2  Ch.17.    7  in  the  third  year  of  his  reign  he  sent  to 
Esth.  1.    3  In  the  third  year  of  his  reign,  he  made  a 
Dan.    1.    1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim 

8.    1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  king  Bel. 

10.  1  In  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 

2.  Third,  why  shelishi. 

Gen.    1.  13  evening  and . .  morning  were  the  third  day 

2.  14  the  name  of  the  third  river  (is)  Hiddekel 

6.  16  lower,secoud,  and  third . .  shalt  thou  make 
22.    4  on  the  third  day  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes 

31.  22  it  was  told  Laban  on  the  third  day  that 

32.  19  so  commanded  he  the  second,  and  the  th. 
34.  25  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day,  when 
40.  20  it  came  to  pass  the  third  day.  .Pharaoh's 
42.  iS  Joseph  said  unto  them  the  third  day,  Tina 

Exodig.    1  In  the  third  month,  when  the  children  of 
19.  11  be  readyagainst  the  third  day :  forthethe 
19. 16  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day,  in  the 
28. 19  the  third  row  a  ligure,  an  agate,  and  an. 
39.  12  the  third  row,  a  ligure,  an  agate,  and  an 

Lev.    7.  17  the  remainder,  .on  the  third  day  shall  be 

7.  18  if.  .the  flesh,  .be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third 
19.  6  if  ought  remain  until  the  third  day,  it  sh*. 
ig.    7  if  it  be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third  day,  it  (is) 

Num.  2.  24  they  shall  go  forward  in  the  third  rank 

7.  24  On  the  third  day  Eliab  the  son  of  Helon 
15.    6  mingled  with  the  third,  .of  an  hin  of  oil 
15.    7  thou  shalt  offer  the  third,  .of  an  hin  of 
19. 12  on  the  third  day.  .but  if  ..not.  .the  third 
19.  19  sprinkle  upon  the  unclean  on  the  third 

25.  14  and  the  third  (part)  of  an  hin  unto  a  ram 

29.  20  on  the  third  day  eleven  bullocks,  two  rams 
31.  19  on  the  third  day,  and  on  the  seventh  day 

Deut  23.   8  The  children . .  in  their  third  generation 

26.  12  the  tithes  of  thine  increase  the  third  year 
Josh.  9.  17  and  came  unto  their  cities  on  the  third 

19.  10  the  third  lot  came  up  for  the  children  of 
Judg2o.  30  Israel  went  up . .  on  the  third  day,  and  put 

1  Sa.   3.    8  Lord  called  Samuel  again  the  third  time 

.17.  13  and  the  third,  Shammah 

19.  21  Saul  sent  messengers  again  the  third  time 

20.  5  that  I  may  hide  myself,  .unto  the  third 
20.  12  about  tomorrow  any  time,  (or)  the  third 

30.  1  it  came  to  pass . .  on  the  third  day,  thatthe 

2  Sa.    1.    2  It  came  even  to  pass  on  the  third  day.that 

3.  3  the  third,  Absalom,  the  sou  of  Maacah 
18.    2  sent.. a  third  part.. a  third  part.. a  third 

1  Ki.  3.  iS  the  third  day  after  that  I  was  delivered 

6.  6  the  third  (was)  seven  cubits  broad,  for  wi. 
6.  8  went  up.  .out  of  the  middle  into  the  third 
12.  12  third  day.  .saying,  Come. .again  the  third 

18.  1  the  word . .  came  to  Elijah  in  the  third  year 

22.  2  it  came  to  pass  in  the  third  year,  that  Je. 

2  Ki.   1.  13  the  third  fifty.,  the  third  captain  of  fifty 

11.  5  A  third  part  of  you  that  enter  in  on  the 

11.  6  a  third  part,  .a  third  part  at  the  gate 

19.  29  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and  reap,  and 

20.  5  on  the  third  day  thou  shalt  go  up  unto  the 
20.    8  and  that  I  shall  go  up.  .the  third  day? 

1  Ch.  2. 13  Abinadab  the  second.and  Shimma  theth. 

3.    2  The  third,  Absalom  the  son  of  Maacbah 
3.  15  the  second  Jehoiakim,  the  third  Zedekiah 

8.  1  Ashbel  the  second,  and  Aharah  the  third 
8.  39  Jehush  the  second,  and  Eliphelet  the  third 

1 2.  9  the  first,  Obadiah  the  second,  Eliab  the  th. 

23.  19  first,  Amariah  the  second,  Jahaziel  the  th. 

24.  8  The  third  to  Harim,  the  fourth  to  Seorim 

24.  23  Jahaziel  the  third,  Jekameam  the  fourth 

25.  10  The  third  to  Zaccur,  (he),  his  sons,  and 

26.  2  Zebadiah  the  third,  Jathniel  the  fourth 
26.    4  Joah  the  third,  and  Sacar  the  fourth,  and 

26.  11  Hilkiah  the  second,  Tebaliah  the  third 

27.  5  The  third  captain  of  the  host  for  the  third 

2  Ch.io.  12  the  third  day.. saying,  Come.. the  third 

15.  10  in  the  third  month,  in  the  fifteenth  year 
23  4  A  third  part  of  you  entering  on  the  sabbath 
23.  5  a  third  part . .  and  a  third  part  at  the  gate 
27-    5  Pay.  .both  the  second  year  and  the  third 

31.  7  In  the  third  month  they  began  to  lay  the 
Neh.  10.  32  with  the  third  part  of  a  shekel  for  the  ser. 
Esth.  5.    1  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day,  that  Es. 

8.   9  in  the  third  month,  that  (is),  the  month 
Job  42.  14  and  the  name  of  the  third,  Keren-happuch 
Isa.   19.  24  In  that  day  shall  Israel  be  the  third  with 
37.  30  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and  reap,  and  pi. 
Jer.  38.  14  into  the  third  entry  that  (is)  in  the  house 
Eze.    5.    2,  12  a  third  part.,  a  third  part.,  a  thirdpart 
10.  14  the  third  the  face  of  a  Hon,  and  the  fourth 
21. 14  let  the  sword  be  doubled  the  third  time 
31.    1  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  third  (month) 
46. 14  the  third  part  of  an  hin  of  oil,  to  temper 
Hos.  6.    2  in  the  third  day  he  will  raise  us  up,  and 
Zech.  6.    3  in  the  third  chariot  white  horses,  and  in 

13.  8  it  shall  come  to  pass,  .the  third  shall  be 
13.   g  I  will  bring  the  third  part  through  the 

3.  Those  of  a  third  generation,  D'^tw  shilleshim. 

Gen.  50.  23  Joseph  saw  Ephraim's  children  of  the  th. 
Exod2o.  5  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fo. 
34.  7  upon  the  children's  children,  unto  the  th. 
Xumif  18  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fo. 
Deut.  5.    g  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  feu. 

i.Third,  w^i  telithai. 

Dan.   2.  39  another  third  kingdom  of  brass,  which 


THIRD 


97S 


THIRTY 


5.  Three,  n^i,  n?5l  tetato. 

Ezra  6. 15  tliis  house  was  finished  on  the  thin!  day 
Dan.    5.  16  and  shalt  be  the  third  ruler  in  the  kiugd. 

5.  29  he  should  be  the  third  rider  in  the  king. 

e.Third,  '^n  talH. 

Dan.    5.    7  and  shall  be  the  third  ruler  in  the  kingd. 

7.  Third,  rpirov  triton, 

1  Co.  12.  28  thirdly  teachers,  after  that  miracles,  then 

8.  Tliird,  rpiros  trltos. 

Matt  16.  21  be  killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third 

17.  23  the  third  day  he  shall  be  raised  again 
20.    3  he  went  out  about  the  third  hour,  and  saw 
20.  19  crucify,  .and  the  third  day  he  shall  rise 
22. 26  the  second  also,  and  the  third,  unto  the 
26. 44  went  away  again,  and  prayed  [the  third  ti  ] 
27.  64  sepulchre  be  made  sure  until  the  third 

Mark  9.  31  after  that  he  is  killed,  he  shallrise  the  th. 
10.  34  shall  kill  him :  and  [the  third  day]  he  shall 
12.  21  neither  left  he  any  seed,  and  the  third  li. 

14.  41  he  cometh  the  third  time,  and  saith  unto 

15.  25  it  was  the  third  hour,  and  they  crucified 
Luke  9.  22  and  be  slain,  and  be  raised  the  third  day 

12.  38  if  he  shall  come-  .in  the  third  watch,  and 

13.  32  and  the  third  (day)  I  shall  be  perfected 

18.  33  and  the  third  day  lie  shall  rise  again 

20.  12  again  he  sent  a  third  :  and  they  wounded 

20.  31  the  third  took  her  ;  and  in  like  manner  the 

23.  22  he  said  unto  them  the  third  time,  Why 

24.  7  and  be  crucified,  and  the  third  day  rise 
24. 21  to  day  is  the  third  day  since  these  things 
24. 46  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day 

John  2.    1  the  third  day  there  was  a  marriage  in  Cana 

21.  14  This  is  now  the  third  time  that  Jesus  sh. 
21.  17  He  saith  unto  him  the  third  time,  Simon 
21. 17  he  said  unto  him  the  third  time,  Lovest 

Acts   2.  15  seeing  it  is  (but)  the  third  hour  of  the  day 

10.  40  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and 
23.  23  Make  ready,  .at  the  third  hour  of  the  ni. 
27.  19  the  third  (day)  we  cast  out  with  our  own 

1  Co.  15.    4  he  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to 

2  C0.12.   2  such  an  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven 

12. 14  the  third  time  I  am  ready  to  come  to  you 

13.  1  This  (is)  the  third  (time)  I  am  coming  to 
Rev.    4.    7  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  man,  and 

6.  5  opened  the  third  seal,  I  heard  the  third 
8.  7  the  third  part  of  trees  was  burnt  up,  and 
8.  8  and  the  third  part  of  the  sea  became  bio. 
8.  9  the  third  part  of  the  creatures  which  were 
8.  9  and  the  third  part  of  the  ships  were  des. 
8.  10  the  third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  a 
8.  10  it  fell  upon  the  third  part  of  the  rivers,  and 
8.  11  the  third  part  of  the  waters  became  worm. 
8.  12  the  third  part  of  the  sun  was  smitten,  and 
8.  12  the  third  part  of  the  moon,  and  the  third 
8.  12  the  third  part  of  them,  .third  part  of  it 

8.  12  day  shone  not  for  a  third  part  of  it 

9.  1 5  were  loosed . .  to  slay  the  third  part  of  men 
9.  18  By  these  three  was  the  third  part  of  men 

11.  14  behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  quickly 

12.  4  his  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of 

14.  9  the  third  angel  followed  them,  saying  wi. 

16.  4  the  third  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon 
zi.  19  the  second,  sapphire;  the  third, a  chalce. 

9.  Third  story  {of  a  building),  rptareyou  tristegon. 

Acts  20.    9  fell  down  from  the  third  loft,  and  was  ta. 
THIRD  time,  to  do  it  a  — 
To  d'>  a  thine/  a  third  time,  why  shedash,  3. 

i  ivi.  10.34  Do  (it)  the  third  time.. did  (it)  the  third  t. 
THIRST,  to  (suffer)  thirst  — 

1.  Thirst,  N^y  tsama. 

Exodi7.  3  to  kill  us  and  our  children,  .with  thirst? 
Deut2§.  48  in  hunger,  and  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness 
Judgij.  18  now  shall  Idie  for  thirst,  and  fall  into  the 
2  Ch.32.  11  to  dieby  famine  and  by  thirst,  saying,  The 
Neh.  9.  15  broughtest  forth  water,  .for  their  thirst 

9.  20  and  gavest  them  water  for  their  thirst 
Psa.  69.  21  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  dr. 
104.  11  They  give  drink.,  asses  quench  theirthirst 
Isa.  41.  17  their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  I  the  Lord 

50.    2  their  fish  stinketh . .  and  dieth  for  thirst 
Jer.  48.  iS  come  down  from  (thy)  glory,  and  sitin  th. 
Lam.  4.   4  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth  for  tin. 
Hos.   2.   3  like  a  dry  land,  and  slay  her  with  thirst 
Amos  S.  11  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for 

8. 13  fair  virgins  and  young  men  faint  for  thirst 

2.  Thirsty,  MOJ  (same. 

Deut29. 19  though  I  walk,  .to  add  drunkenness  to  th. 
Isa.   55.    1  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to 

3.  To  thirst,  be  thirsty,  Nay  tsame. 

Exodi7.    3  the  people  thirsted  there  for  water;  and 

Job   24.  11  tread  (their)  wine  presses,  and  suffer  thi. 

Psa.  42.    2  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living 

63.    1  my  soul  thirsteth  for  thee,  my  flesh  long. 

Isa.   48.  21  they  thirsted  not  (when)  he  led  them  thr. 

49.  10  They  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst ;  neither 

^.Thirst,  nxr.;  tsim  >h. 

Jer.     2.  2*5  Withhold.,  thy  throat  from  thirst:  butth. 
5.  Thirst,  Roy  Uamah. 

Esa.     5.  13  and  their  multitude  dried  up  with  thirst 
6.7*0  thirst,  Be  thirsty,  St^au  dipsao. 

Matt.  5,    6  Blessed  (are)  they  which  do.  .thirst  after 

John  4.  13  Whosoever  drmkethof  thi- water    thirst 

4.  14  [drinketh  of  the  water.. shall  never  thirst] 

4.  15  give  me  this  water,  that  1  thirst  not,  ne. 

6.  35  nethatbelievetb  on  me  shall  never  thirst 


John   7.  37  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me 

19.  28  After  this.  Jesus  knowing,  .saith,  I  thirst 

Rom  12.  20  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink  :  for  in  so  do. 

1  Co.  4.  11  we  both  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  are  nak. 
Rev.    7.  16  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any 

7.  Thirst,  Styos  dipsos. 

2  Co.  11.  27  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst 
THIRSTY  (land),  to  be  thirsty  — 

1.  Weary,  wearied,  na  ayepk. 

Psa.  63.    1  longeth  for  theein  a  dry  and  thirsty  land 
143.   6  my  soul  (thirsteth)  after  thee,  as  a  thirsty 
Prov25.  25  (As)  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  (is) 

2.  TJiirst,  xa*  tsama. 

Eze.  19. 13  she  (is)  planted,  .in  a  dry  and  thirsty  gr. 

3.  Thirsty,  kO$  tsame. 

2  Sa.  17.  29  The  people  (is)hungry,  and  weary,  andth. 

Psa.  107.    5  Hungry  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in 

Prov  25.  21  and  if  he  be  thirsty,  give  him  water  to  dr. 

Isa.   2i.  14  brought  water  to  him  that  was  thirsty 
29.    8  as  when  a  thirsty  (man)  dreameth,  and 
32.    6  he  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  thirsty  to  fail 
44.   3  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty 

4.  To  thirst,  be  thirsty,  Npy  tsmne. 

Judg.  4.  19  Give  me.  .a  little  water,  .for  I  am  thirsty 
Isa.   65.  13  servants  shall  drink,  but  ye  shall  be  thir. 

5. Thirst,  thirsty,  p«©S  tsimmaon. 

Isa.  35.   7  and  the  thirsty  land  springs  of  water :  in 

Q.To  thirst,  be  thirsty,  5«//aa>  dipsao. 

Matt  25.  35  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink :  I 
25.  37  when  saw  we  thee.. thirsty,  and  gave  (th.) 
25.  42  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink 

THIRTEEN,  thirteenth  — 

Three  (and)  tcn,-\?y  w'hy,  rnipu  wbvshelosh  esrek. 
Gen.  14.   4  and  in  the  thirteenth  year  they  rebelled 

17.  25  his  son  (was)  thirteen  years  old  when  he 
Num.  3.  43,  46  two  hundred  and  threescore  and  thir. 

29.  14  unto  every  bullock  of  the  thirteen  bullocks 

Josh.  19.    6  Sliaruhen;  thirteen  cities  and  their  villa. 

21.   4  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  thirteen  cities 

21.    6  and  out  of  the  half  tribe . .  thirteen  cities 

21.  19  (were)  thirteen  cities  with  their  suburbs 

2t.  33  according  to  their  families  (were) thirteen 

1  KL  7.    1  was  building  his  own  house  thirteen  years 

1  Ch.  6. 60  cities  throughout  their  families  (were)th. 

6.  62  out  of  the  tribe  of  Mauasseh .  .thirteen  ci. 

24. 13  The  thirteenth  to  Huppah,  the  fourteenth 
25.  20  The  thirteenth  to  Shubael,  (he),  his  sons 

Esth.  3.  12  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  first  month 

3.  13  inoneday,(even)uponthe  thirteenth(day) 
8. 12  upon  the  thirteenth  (day)  of  the  twelfth 
9.    1  the  month  Adar,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of 
9.  17  On  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  Adar 
9.  18  assembled  together  on  the  thirteenth  (d.) 

Jer.     1.    2  word  of  the  Lord  came. .in  the  thirteenth 

-5     3  From  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  the  son 

Eze.  40.  11  (and)  the  length  of  the  gate,  thirteen  cu. 

THIRTY,  thirtyfold,  thirtieth  — 
1. Thirty,  DrpW  sheloshim. 

Gen.   5.    3  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years 
5.    5  days,  .were nine  hundred  and  thirty  years 

5.  16  lived,  .eight  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and 

6.  15  fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cu. 
11.  12  Arphaxad  lived  five  and  thirty  years,  and 

11. 14  And  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 
ti.  16  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  be. 
11.  17  Eber  lived. .fonrhundred  and  thirty  years 
11.  18  And  Peleg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 
11.  20  And  Reu  lived  two  and  thirty  years 

11.  22  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Nahor 

18.  30  Peradveuture  there  shall  thirty  be  found 
18. 30  he  said,  I  will  not  do  (it)  if  I  find  thirty 

25.  17  an  hundred  aud  thirty  and  seven  years 

32. 15  Thirty  milch  camels  with  their  colts,  forty 
41.  46  Joseph  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  st. 
46. 15  sons  and  his  daughters  (were)  thirty  and 
47.    9  The  days,  .(are)  an  hundred  and  thirty 

Exod.6.  16,  20  (were)  an  hundred  thirty  and  seven  ye. 
6. 18  the  years,  .(were)  an  hundred  thirty  and 

12.  40  sojourning,  .(was) four  hundred  and  thirty 
12.  41  the  end  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty 
21.  32  he  shall  give  unto  their  master  thirty  she. 

26.  8  length  of  one  curtain  (shall  be) thirty  cub. 
36,  15  The  length  of  one  curtain  (was)  thirty  1 11b. 
38.  24  seven  hundred  and  thirty  shekels,  after 

Lev.  12.    4  shall  then  continue,  .three  and  thirty  days 

27.  4  then  thy  estimation  shall  be  thirty  shek. 
Xum.  1.  35  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  two  hundred 

1.  37  thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundred 

2.  21  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  two  hundred 
2.  23  thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundr. 
4-  3>  23.  30.  35.  39.  43-  47  From  thirty  years  old 

4.  40  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  thirty 

7.  13  the  weight.. (was)  an  hundred  and  thirty 
So  in  verse  19,  25,  31,  37,  4^,  49,  S5l  61,  67.  73.  79-  85- 

20.  29  they  mourned  for*  Aaron  thirty  days,  (even) 
26.    7  three  thousand  and  sevi  11  hundred  and 
26.  37  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  five  hundred 
26.  51  and  a  thousand  seven  hundred  and  thirty 
31.  35  thirty  and  two  thousand  persons  in  all,  of 
31.  36  and  thirty  thousand  and  five  hundred  sh. 
31.  38  the  beeves  (were)  thirty  and  six  thousand 
31.  39  the  asses  (were)  thirty  thousand  and  live 
31.  40  of  which  the  Lord's  tribute  (was)  thirty 
31.  43  thirty  thousand  (and)  seven  thousand  and 
31.  44  And  thirty  and  six  thousand  beeves 
31.  45  And  thirty  thousand  assesaud  live  hund. 


Deut.  2.  14  the  space,  .(was)  thirty  and  eight  years 

34.  8  And  the  children  of  Israel  wept.. thirty 
Josh.  7.    5  men  of  Ai  smote  of  them  about  thirty 

8.  3  Joshua  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty 
12.  24  king  of  Tirzah,  one  :  all  the  kings  thirty 

Judgio.   4  he  had  thirty  sons  that  rode  on  thirty 

10.  4  they  had  thirty  cities,  which  are  called 
12.   9  he  had  thirty  sons,  and  thirty  daughters 
12.   9  took  in  thirty  daughters  from  abroad  for 

12.  14  he  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  nephews,  that 
14.  11  they  brought  thirty  companionstobewith 
14. 12,  13  thirty  sheets  and  thirty  change  of  ga. 

14.  19  slew  thirty  men  of  them,  and  took  their 
20.  31  began  to  smite . .  about  thirty  men  of  Is. 
20.  39  kill  of  the  men  of  Israel  about  thirty  pe. 

1  Sa.    4.  10  there  fell  of  Israel  about  thirty  thousand 

9.  22  were  bidden,  which  (were)  about  thirty  pe. 

11.  8  and  the  men  of  Judah  thirty  thousand 

13.  5  thirty  thousand  chariots,  andsixthousand 

2  Sa.    5.    4  David  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  be. 

3.  5  he  reigned  thirty  and  three  years  overall 
6.    1  all  (the)  chosen  (men)  of  Israel,  thirty  tho. 

23.  13  three  of  the  thirty  chief  went  down,  and 
23.  23  He  was  more  honourable  than  the  thirty 
23.  24  the  brother  of  Joab,  (was)  one  of  the  th. 
z3-  39  Uriah  the  Hittite  :  thirty  and  seven  in  all 

1  Ki.   2.  11  thirty  and  three  years  reigned  he  in  Jer. 

4.  22  Solomon's  provision  for  one  day  was  th. 
5. 13  and  the  levy  was  thirty  thousand  men 

6.  2  the  house,  .the  height  thereof  thirty  cu. 

7.  2  the  height  thereof  thirty  cubits,  upon  four 
7.    6  the  breadth  thereof  thirty  cubits  :  and 

7.  23  aline  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it  rou. 
16.  23  In  the  thirty  and  first  year  of  Asa  kingof 
16.  29  in  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Asa  king 
20.    1  (there  were)  thirty  and  two  kings  with  him 

20. 15  and  they  weretwuhundred  andthirty  two 

20. 16  the  thirty  and  two  kings  that  helped  him 
22.  31  the  king  of  Syria  commanded  his  thirty 
22.  42  Jehoshaphat  (was)  thirty  and  five  years 

2  Ki.  8.  17  Thirty  and  two  years  old  was  he  when  lie 

13.  10  In  the  thirty  and  seventh  year  of  Joash 

15.  8  In  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Azariah 

15.  13  began  to  reign  in  the  nine  and  thirtieth 
is.  17  In  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  Azariah 

18. 14  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  thirty  tab 

22.  1  he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in  Jems. 

25.  27  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  cap. 
i  Ch.  3.    4  in  Jerusalem  be  reigned  thirty  and  three 

7.   4  soldiers  for  war,  six" and  thirty  thousand 
7.   7  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  thirty  and 

11. 15  Now  three  of  the  thirty  captains  went  do. 
11.  25  he  was  honourable  among  the  thirty,  but 

11.  42  captain  of  the  Reubenites,  and  thirtywith 

12.  4 mighty,  .among  the  thirty,  and  over  theth. 

12.  34  shieldandspearthirty  and  seven  thousand 

35.  7  and  bis  brethren  an  hundred  and  thirty 

19.  7  So  they  hired  thirty  and  two  thousand  ch, 

23.  3  from  the  age  of  thirty  years  and  upward 
23.  3  their  number. .  was  thirty  and  eight  thous. 
27.  6  mighty  (among)  the  thirty,  and  above  the  t. 
29.  27  thirty  and  three  (years)  reigned  he  in  Je. 

2  Ch.  3. 15  made  before  the  house  two  pillars  of  thirty 
4.  2  line  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass  it  round 
15. 19  no  (more)  war  uuto  the  live  and  thirtieth 

16.  1  In  the  six  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign 
16.  12  Asa  in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  his  re. 

20.  31  (He  was)  thirty  and  five  years  old  when  he 

21.  5  Jehoram  (was)  thirty  and  two  years  old 
21.  20  Thirty  and  two  years  old  was  lie  when  he 
24. 15  an  hundred  and  thirty  years  old  (was  he) 

34.  1  reigned  in  Jerusalem  one  and  thirty  yea. 

35.  7  to  the  number  of  thirty  thousand,  and 
Ezra    1.   9  number  of  them:  thirty  chargers  of  gold 

1.  10  Thirty  basins  of  gold,  silver  basins  of  a  se. 

2.  35  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  thi. 
2.  42  porters,  .all  an  hundred  thirty  and  nine 
2.  65  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and 
2.  66  Their  horses  (were)  seven  hundred  thirty 
2.  67  Their  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and 

Neh.  5.  14  even  unto  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of 
7.  38  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty 
7.  45  children  of  Shobai,  an  hundred  thirty  and 
7.  67  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and 
7.  68  Their  horses,  seven  hundred  thirty  and 
7.  69  camels,  four  hundred  thirty  and  five;  six 
7.  70  five  hundred  and  thirty  priests'  garments 

13.  6  inthetwoand  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes 
Esth.  4. 11  to  come  in  unto  the  king  these  thirty  days 
Jer.   3S.  10  Take  from  hence  thirty  men  with  thee" 

52.  29  from  Jerusalem  eight  hundred  thirty  and 
52.  31  came  to  pass  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth 
Eze.    1.    1  Now  it  came  to  pass  in  the  thirtieth  year 

40.  17  thirty  chambers  (were)  upon  the  pavement 

41.  6  one  over  another,  and  thirty  in  order;  and 
46.  22  of  forty  (cubits)  long,  and  thirty  broad 

Ban.  12.  12  thousand  three  hundred  and  five  and  thi. 

Zech.11.  12  So  they  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  (pie.) 

11. 13  took  the  thirty  (pieces)  of  silver,  and  cast 

2.Thirty,  yn^  telathin. 

Dan.    6.    7  ask  a  petition  of  any  god  or  man  for  thirty 
6.  12  ask.  .of  any  god  or  man  within  thirty  days 

3.  Thirty,  Tpt&Kovra  tridhmta. 

Matt  13.    S  hundred  fold,  some  sixty  fold,  some  thir. 
13.  23  an  hundred  fold,  some  sixty,  some  thirty 

26.  15  covenanted  with  him  for  thirty  pieces  of 

27.  3  brought  again  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver 
27.    9  And  they  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver 

Mark  4.    8  brought  forth,  some  thirty,  and  some  six. 

4.  «>  bring  forth  fruit,  some  thirty  fold.  s<  me 

Luke  3.  23  Jesus  himself  began  to  be  about  thirty  ye. 


THIS 


979 


THISTLE 


John  s.    s  which  had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight 

6.  19  rowed  about  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  fu. 
GaL    3. 17  which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 

THIS  — 

1.  These,  ?19N  clleh. 

Exod3S.  21  This  is  the  sum  of  the  tabernacle,  (even) 

2.  This,  n?  or  .13  geh  or  zeh. 

Eze.  47*  13  This  (shall  be)  the  border  whereby  ye  sh. 

3, This,  *n  da. 

Dan.   4*  30  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  bu. 

7.  8  in  this  horn  (were)  eyes  like  the  eyes  of 

i. This,  ?Fy  Tprdafc,  deh. 

Ezra  4. 13  if  this  city  be  builded,  and  the  walls  set 
4,  15  know,  that  this  city  (is)  a  rebellious  city 
4.  15  for  which  cause  was  this  city  destroyed 
4.  16  certify  the  king,  that  if  this  city  be  buil. 
4. 19  it  is  found  that  this  city  of  old  time  hath 

4.  21  that  this  city  be  not  builded,  until  (ano.) 

5.  S  tins  work  goeth  fast  on,  and  prospereth 

5.  17  to  build  this  house  of  God  at  Jerusalem 

6.  7  Let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  alone 
6.  7  governor,  .build  this  house  of  God  in  his 
6.  8  for  the  building  of  this  house  of  God;  th. 
6.  12  destroy  this  house  of  God  which  (is)  at  J. 

5. This,  J 31  dikJc&K. 

Dan.    2.  31  This  great  image,  whose  brightness  (was) 

6.  This ,  \n  den. 

Ezra    4.  11  This  (is)  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  they 

4. 16  by  this  means  thou  shalt  have  no  portion 

4.  22  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this 

5.  3  build  this  house,  and  to  make  up  this  wall 
5.  4  names  of  the  men  that  make  this  building? 
5.    5  returned  answer  by  letter  concerning  this 

5.  9  Who  commanded  you  to  build  this  house 

5. 12  who  destroyed  tins  house,  and  carried  the 

5. 13  king  Cyrus  made  a  decree  to  build  this 

6.  11  whosoever  shall  alter  this  word,  let  timb. 
6.  11  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  tins 

6. 15  this  house  was  finished  on  the  third  day 

6.  16  kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God 

6. 17  offered  at  the  dedication  of  this  house  of 

7.  17  thou  mayest  buy  speedily  with  this  money 
7.  24  touching  any  of  the . .  ministers  of  this  ho. 

Dan    2.  12  For  this  cause  the  king  was  angry  and  ve. 

2. 18  would  desire  mercies . .  concerning  this  se. 
2.  30  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me  for  (any) 
2.  36  This,(is)  the  dream;  and  we  will  tell  the 

2.  47  seeing  thou  conldest  reveal  this  secret 

3. 16  we  (are)  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this 
4.  18  This  dream  I  king  Nebuchadnezzar  have 

4.  24  This  (is)  the  interpretation  Oking.and.  .the 

5.  7  Whosoever  shall  read  this  writing,  and  sh. 

5. 15  that  they  should  read  this  writing;  and 
5.  22  not  humbled.. though  thou  knewest  all  th. 

3.  24  sent  from  him ;  and  this  writing  was  wri. 
5.  25  this  (is)  the  writing  that  was  written,  M. 

5.  26  This  (is)  the  interpretation  of  the  thing 

6.  3  Then  this  Daniel  was  preferred  above  the 
6.   5  shall  not  find  any  occasion  against  this  D. 

6.  28  So  this  Daniel  prospered  in  the  reign  of  D. 

7.  6  After  this  I  beheld,  and  lo  another,  like 
7.    7  After  this  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and 

7. 16  asked  him  the  truth  of  all  this.  So  he  told 

7. He  himself,  the  same,  itin  hit. 

Gen.  15.    2  steward  of  my  house  (is)  this  Eliezer  of  Da. 
B.IIe  himself,  the  same,  ttinn  hahu. 

1  Sa.  x.    3  this  man  went  up  out  of  his  city  yearly  to 

9.  She,  it,  herself,  itself,  the  same,  x'n  hi. 

Josh  10.  13  (Is)  not  this  written  in  the  book  of  Jasher? 

Jer.  29.  28  This  (captivity  is)  long:  build  ye  houses 

Dan.    4.  24  this  is  the  decree  of  the  most  high,  which 
Id. She  herself,  itself,  the  same,  i^rtri  hahi. 

iMim.  5.  31  and  this  woman  shall  bear  her  iniquity 

ll.This,  that,  »Vn  hallaz. 

Judg.6.  20  lay  (theni)uponthis  rock, andpour  out  the 
1  Sa.  17. 26  to  the  man  that  killeth  this  Philistine,  and 
Dan.  S.  16  make  this  (man)  to  understand  the  vision 
Zech.  2.    4  Run,  speak  to  this  young  man,  saying-,  Je. 

12.This,  that,  nijfn  hallazeh. 

Gen.  24.  65  What  man  (is)  this  that  walketh  in  the  fi. 
37. 19  said  one  to  another,  Behold  this  dreamer 

13.  This,  that,  «k?  hallezu. 

Eze.  36.  35  This  land  that  was  desolate  is  become  li. 
1-i.TJiey  themselves,  riiprj  hemmah. 

Xum2o.  13  This  (is)  the  water  of  Meribah;  because 
15.  This,  that,  nit?  zoth. 

Gen.    2.  23  This  (is)  now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh 

29.  27  we  will  give  thee  this  also  for  the  service 
34.  15  But  in  this  will  we  consent  unto  you:  If 
45.  23  to  his  father  he  sent  after  this  (manner) 

Exod  7.  23  neither  did  he  set  his  heart  to  tins  also 

1  Sa.  11.    2  On  this  (condition)  willl  make  (a  coven.) 

2  Ch.  20.  17  Ye  shall  not  (need)to  fight  in  this  (battle) 
Job    37.   1  At  this  also  my  heart  trembleth,  and  is 
Isa.   27.    9  By  this  therefore  shall  the  iniquity  of  J. 

30.  7  therefore  have  I  cried  concerning  this,  T. 
Jer.  5.  7  How  shall  I  pardon  thee  for  this?  thy  ch. 
Eze.  21.  26  this(shall)not(be)thesame:exalthimthat 

IQ.This,  that,  rtKin  hazzoth. 

Gen.  12.    7  TJnto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land:  and 
17.  As  this,  thus,  riKTS  kazoth. 

Judg  15.    7  Though  ye  have  done  this,  yet  will  I  he 


IS.  This,  mzeh. 

Gen.  5.  1  This  (is)  the  book  of  the  generations  of  A. 
38.  21  they  said,  There  was  no  harlot  in  this  pL 
41. 38  Can  we  find  (such  a  one)  as  this  (is),  a  man 

1  Sa.  25.  21  in  vain  have  I  kept  all  that  this  (fellow) 
Eccl.  6.    5  not  seen  the  sun.  .this  hath  more  rest  th. 

19.  This,  nrn  hazzeh. 

Gen.    7. '  1  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  in  this  gener. 

20.This,  n?  zoh. 

2  Ki.  6. 19  This  (is)  not  the  way,  neither  (is)  this  the 
Eccl.   2.  24  This  also  I  saw,  that  it  (was)  from  the  ha. 

5.  16  this  also  (is)  a  sore  evil,  (that)  in  all  poi. 
5.  19  to  rejoice  in  his  labour  ;  this  (is)  the  gift 
7.  23  AH  this  have  I  proved  by  wisdom:  I  said 
9. 13  This  wisdom  have  I  seen  also  under  the 
Eze.  40.  45  This  chamber,  whose  prospect  (is)  toward 

21.  This,  vj  zo. 

Hos.    7. 16  This  (shall  be)  their  derision  in  the  land 

22.  This,  »  zu. 

Psa.  12.  7  thou  shalt  preserve  them  from  this  gene. 
62.  11  twice  have  I  heard  this,  thatpower(belo.) 

Isa.    43.  21  This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself ;  th. 

Hab.  1. 11  offend,  (imputing)  this  his  power  unto  his 
23.Thus,  rt'3koh. 

2  Ch.  19.  10  warn  them,  .this  do,  and  ye  shall  not  tr. 

Lam.  2.  20  and  consider  to  whom  thou  hast  done  th. 
2±.So,  J 3  hen. 

Amos  4.  5  for  this  liketh  you,  0  ye  children  of  Israel 
25. This,  it,  avr6  auto. 

John  12.  7  against,  .my  burying  hath  she  kept  this 
26.  That,  that  very  ;  he,  she,  it,  £ne?pos  ekeinos. 

Matt 24.  43  But  know  this,  that  if  the  goodman  of 
27. This,  that,  ovtos  houtos. 

Matt.  3.  3  For  this  is  he  that  was  spoken  of  by  the 
Also  in  v.  17;  7.  [12] ;  8.  27;  9.  3;  n.  10;  12.  23,  24; 
I3-  *9>  55  »  M*  2  >  I5*  8 ;  17  5 1  21.  10,  it,  38  ;  26.  61,  71 ; 
27-  37>  47.  54;  28.  15;  Mark  2.  7;  4.  41 ;  6.  3 ;  7.  6;  9.  7; 
12.  7 ;  14. 69;  Luke  r.  29,  36;  2.  34 ;  4. 22,  36 ;  5.  21 ;  7. 17, 27, 
49 ;  8.  25  ;  9.  9,  35  ;  14.  30 ;  15.  24,  30,  32  ;  17.  18;  18.  n ; 
20. 14;  22. 59  ;  23.  [38],  47,  52;  John  1.  15,  30,  34;  2.  20;  4. 
29,  42;  6.  14,  42,  50,  58,  60;  7.  25,  26,  31,  36,  40,  41,  [46], 
49 ;  9.  8,  9,  16,  19,  20,  24  ;  11.  47 ;  12.  34 ;  21.  23,  24 ;  Acts 

4.  11 ;  6.  13,  14;  7.  37,  38,  40;  9.  21,  22 ;  17.  3,  18;  18. 13 ; 

19.  26;  21.  28 ;  22.  26;  26.  31,  32 ;  28.  4;  Rom.  4.  9;  9.  9; 
Heb.  3.  3  ;  7. 1;  2  Pe.  1.  17;  1  Jo.  5.  6,  20;  2  Jo.  7;  Rev. 

20.  14. 

•28.  This,  that,  avrv  haute. 

Matti3.  54  Whence,  .this  wisdom,  and  (these)  mighty 
Also  in  21.  42;  22.  20,  38;  24.  34;  26.  8;  Mark  1.  [27];  8. 
12;  12.  11,  16,  [30,  31,]  43 ;  13.  30;  14.  4;  Luke  2.  2:4.  21 ; 

5.  g,  11 ;  11.  2g ;  21.  3,  32;  22.  53;  John  i.  ig;  3.  19,  29; 

8.  [4];  11.  4;  12.  30;  15.  12;  17.  3;  Acts  5.  [38];  8.  32; 
17.  19;  21.  11  ;  Rom.  11.  27;  1  Co.  8.  9;  9.  3;  2  Co.  1. 
12;  2.  6;  11.  io;Eph.  3.  8;  Titus  1.  13;  Heb.  8. 10;  10.16; 
Jas.  r.  27  ;  3.  15  ;  1  Jo.  1.  5;  2.  25;  3.  11,  23 ;  5.  3,  4,  9, 

11,  11,  14;  2  Jo.  6,  6;  Rev.  20.  5. 

29.  These  things,  ravra  tauta. 

LukeiS.  23  when  he  heard  this,  he  was  very  sorrow. 
John  5.  1  After  this  there  was  a  feast  of  the  Jews 
19.  38  after  this,  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  being  a 
Acts  15.  16  After  this  I  will  return,  and  will  build  ag. 
Rev.  4.  1  After  this  I  looked,  and,  behold,  a  door 
7.    9  After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great  mult. 

0O.I71  this,  ravrrj  taute. 

Matt.  10.  23  when  they  persecute  you  in  this  city,  flee 
Also  in  12.  45;  16.  18;  26.  31,  34;  Mark  8.  12,  38;  14.  [27], 
30;  Luke  11. 30;  12.  20;  13.  7;  16.  24;  17.  6;  19.  42;  Acts  18. 
10;  22.  3;  27.  23;  1  Co.  9.  12;  15.  19;  2  Co.  1.  15;  8.  7,  19, 
20;  11.  17. 
SI.  This,  ravTTjv  tauten. 

Matt.  1 1. 16  But  whereunto  shall  I  liken  this  generat.? 
See  also  15.  [15];  21.  23;  23.  36;  Mark  4. 13;  10.  5;  11.  28; 

12.  10;  Luke  4.  6,  23;  7.  44;  12.  41;  13.  6,  16;  15.  3;  18.  5, 
g;  20.  2,  9, 19;  John  2.  11;  7.  [8],  8;  10.  6,  18;  12.  27;  Acts  1. 
[16];  3- 16;  7.  4,  60;  8.  19;  22.  4,  28;  23.  13;  27.  21;  28.20, 
20;  Rom.  5.  2;  2  Co.  4.  1;  12.  13;  1  Ti.  1.  18;  2  Ti.  2.  19;  1 
Pe.  5.  12;  2  Pe.  1.  18;  3.  1;  1  Jo.  3.  3;  4.  21;  2  Jo.  10;  Rev. 
2.  24;  12.  15. 

32.  Of  this,  ravTTjs  tautes. 

Matt.  12. 41  men . .  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  this  ge. 
See  also  v.  42;  Luke  7.  31;  ri.  31,  32, 50,  51;  17.  25;  John  10. 
16;  12.  27;  15.  13;  Acts  1.  17,  25;  2.6,  29,  40;  5.  20;  6.  3;  8. 
22;  Acts  10.  30;  13.  26;  19.  25,  40;  23.  1;  24.  21;  26.  22;  28. 
22;  2  Co.  9.  12,  13;  Heb.  9.  xi;  Rev.  22.  19. 

33.  This,  rovro  touto. 

Matt.  1.  22  Now  all  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be 
See  also  8.  9",  9. 28;  13.28;  15. 11:16.22;  17.  [21];  18.  4; 
19.  26;  21.  4;  24.  14;  26.  9,  12,  13,  26,  28, 39,  42,  56;  28. 14; 
Mark  1.  [27];  5.  32;  9.  21,  29;  n.  [3];  14.  [9],  22,  24,  36; 
Luke  1.  18,  34,  43,  66;  2.  12,  15;  3,  20;  5.  6;  6.  3;  7.  4,  8; 

9.  45,  48;  10.  11,  28;  12.  18,  39;  13.  8;  16.  2;  18.  34;  20.  17; 
22.  15,  17,19,  19,  20,  23,  37,  42;  John  2.  12,  22;  4.  15,  54; 
5.  28 ;  6.  6,  29,  39,  40, 61 ;  7.  39 ;  8.  [6],  40 ;  11.  26,  51 ;  12. 
5,  6,  18,  18,  27,  33;  13.  28  ;  16.  17,  18;  18.  34,  37,  37,  38; 
19.  28 ;  20.  22 ;  21.  14,  19,  19 ;  Acts  2. 12,  14,  16,  33 ;  4.  7, 
22  ;  5.  4,  24,  38 ;  7.  60 ;  8.  34 ;  9.  21 ;  10.  16  ;  n.  10 ;  16. 
18;  19.  10,  17,  27 ;  20.  [29] ;  ax.  23  ;  24.  14;  26.  16,  26;  27. 
34;  Rom.  1.  12,  26 ;  2.  3 ;  6.  6;  9.  17;  11. 25;  13.  6,  6;  14.  9, 
:3  i  x5-  9>  28  ;  1  Co.  1. 12;  4. 17 ;  5.  2,  3;  7.  6,  26,  29,  35;  9. 
*7>[23];  10.  28;  11.  10, 17,  24,  24,  25,  25,  [26],  30;  15.  50,53, 
53,  54,  54 ;  2  Co.  2.  1,  3,  9 ;  4. 1 ;  7.  1 1 ;  8.  10,  20 ;  9.  6  ;  10.  7, 
11 ;  13.  1,  9;  Gal.  3.  2,  17;  Eph.  4.  17;  5.  5,  32;  6.  1;  Phil. 
1. 6,  7,  9, 19,  22,  25  ;  2.  5, 15  ;  Col.  1.  9 ;  2.  4 ;  3.  20 ;  1  Ti.  2. 
J3i  3-5 '»  4-  3»  15:  5-  18;  2  Th.  2.  11;  3.  10;  1  Ti.  1.  9,  16; 
2.  3 ;  4.  16 ;  2  Ti.  1. 15 ;  3,  1 ;  Heb.  6.  3^7.  27 ;  9,  8,  15, 


20,27;  x3-  T9 »  ^as-  4-  T5-  T  ^e'  r-  25!  2.  19*  20;  4.  6* 
2  Pe.  1.  5,  20;  3.  3,  5,  8;  1  Jo.  3.  8;  4.  3;  Jude  4,  [5]; 
Rev.  2.  6. 

34.  To  these,  rovrots  toutois. 

Lukei6.  26  besides  all  this,  between  us  and  you  there 
24. 21  besides  all  this,  to  day  is  the  third  day  si. 

35.  This,  tovtov  touton. 

Matt  19.  11  All.  .cannot  receive  [this]  saying,  save 
Seealso2i.  [44];  Mark  7.  29;  14.  58,  71;  Luke 9. 14;  12.  56; 
16.  28;  ig.  14;  23.  2,  14,  18;  John  2.  19;  6.  34,  58;  7.  27;  9, 
29,  30 ;  18.  40 ;  19.  12,  20  ;  Acts  2.  32 ;  3.  16  ;  5.  37  ;  6.  14; 
7.  35 ;  21. 28 ;  23.  17,  18,  25,  27;  24.  5  ;  25.  24  ;  28. 26 ;  Rom. 

9.  9;  15.  28;  1  Co.  3.  [12];  11.  26,  [27];  2  Co.  4.  7;Heb.S.  3. 

36.  Of  this,  tovtov  toutou. 

Matti3. 15  For  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross,  and 
See  also  [22],  [40];  19.  5;  26.  29;  27.  24;  Mark  4.  [19]; 

10.  7;  Luke  2.  17;  9.  45;  13.  16;  16.  8;  20.  34;  John  4. 
13;  6.  51;  8.  23;  10.  41;  11.  9;  12.  [31],  31;  13.  1;  14. 
[30] ;  16.  11 ;  18.  17,  29,  36,  36 ;  Acts  5.  28 ;  6.  [13J ;  9.  13 ; 
*3-  7)  23>  38 1  15.  2,  6 ;  17.  32 ;  21.  28 ;  22.  22 ;  28.  9,  27 ; 
Rom.  7.  24;  11.  7;  1  Co.  1.  [20],  20;  2.  6,  6,  8;  3.  19;  5. 
10;  7.  31;  2  Co.  4.  4;  12.  8;  Eph.  2.  2;  3. 1, 14  ;  5.  31 ;  6. 
12;  Col.  1.  27;  Titus  1.  5;  Jas.  1.  26;  2.  [5];  Rev.  22.  7, 
9,  10,  18. 

37-  These,  tovtovs  toutous. 

Acts  16.  36  the  keeper  of  the  prison  told  [this]  saying" 
38. To  this,  tovtcv  touto. 

Matt.  8.    9  I  say  to  this.  .Go,  and  he  goeth ;  and  to 
See  also  12.   32;    13.  54,    56;    17.  20;   20.  14;   21.   21; 
Mark  6.  2;  10.  30;  11.  23;  Luke  1.  61;  4.  3;  10.  5,  20; 
14.  9;  18.  30;  19.  9;  21.  23;  23. 4,  14;  John  4.  20,  21,  27  ; 
12.  25;   13.  35;  16.  30;  20.  30;  Acts  1.  6;  3.  12;  4.  17; 

5.  28;  7.  7,  29;  8.  21,  29;  15.  15;  23.  g;  24.  2,  10;  Rom. 
12.2;  13.9;  1  Co.  3.  18;  7.  [31];  11.  22;  14.  21;  2  Co. 
3.  10;  5.  2;  9.  3;  Gal.  6.  16;  Heb.  4.  5;  1  Pe.  4.  16 ; 
2  Pe.  1.  13 ;  1  Jo.  3.  10 ;  4.  9,  17 ;  5.  2 ;  Rev.  22.  18,  19. 
[See  also  After,  cause,  day,  hour,  means,  place,  once, 
aide,  time,  way,  wise], 

THIS  man,  woman,  matter,  thing,  deed — 
l.This,  nj  zeh. 

2  Ki.  5.  7  God.,  that  this  man  doth  send  unto  me  to 
2,This,  \iden. 

Ezra  5.  17  send,  .his  pleasure,  .concerning this  mat. 

3.  This,  nxi  zoth. 

1  Ch.11. 19  God  forbid  it  me,  that  I  should  do  this  th. 

4.  Tints,  as  thus,  naa  kakah. 

Esth.  9.  26  which  they  had  seen  concerning  this  ma. 

5. At  this,  tovtw  touto. 

Acts    3.  12  Yemen  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye  at  this  ? 

6.  This,  he,  ovtos  houtos. 

Markij.  39  said.  Truly  this  man  was  the  son  of  God 
Luke  7.  39;  14.30;  15.  2;  18.  14;  22.  56;  23.  41;  John 
6-  52 ;  7-  r5 ;  9-  2>  3.  33 1  "■  37*  37  i  21.  21 ;  Acts  1. 18 ;  4. 
10;  8.  10;  iS.  25;  Heb.  7.  4;  10.  12;  Jas.  i.  25. 

7.  This,  she,  avr-r\haute,  Mt.26. 13;  1.11.7.45,46,  &c. 

8.  This,  she,  ravrnv  tauten,  Luke  1 3.   16. 

9.  This,  she,  tovto  touto,  Mark  5.  32;  Lu.  22. 23,  &c. 

10.  This,  she,  tovtv  touto,  Luke  14.  9. 
THIS  fashion,  manner,  sort,  time,  wise  — 
l.Thus,  rokoh. 

Xum.  6.  23  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless  the  children  of 
1  Ki.22.  20  one  said  on  this  manner,  and  another  said 

2. Thus,  so,  NS33  kenema. 

Ezra    4.    8  wrote,  .to  Artaxerxes  the  king  in  this  sort 
5.    4  Then  said  we  unto  them  after  this  manner 

Z.Now,  vvv  nun. 

Matt24.  21  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  time 
Marki3.  19  God  created  unto  this  time,  neither  shall 
Acts  24.  25  Go  thy  way  for  this  time ;  when  I  have  a 

1  Co.  16.  12  his  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this  time 

4.  Thus,  so,  ovrws,  ovroi  houtos,  houto. 

Matt.  1. 18  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  wise 
Mark  2.  12  saying,  We  never  saw  it  on  this  fashion 
John2i.    1  After  these  things,  .on  this  wise  showed 
Acts    7.    6  God  spake  on  this  wise,  That  his  seed  sh. 

13.  34  he  said  on  this  wise,  I  will  give  you  the 
Rom  10.    6  which  is  of  faith  speaketh  on  this  wise 
Heb.    4.   4  Forhespake.  .oftheseventh.  .onthiswise 
Rev.  11.    5  will  hurt  them,  he  must  in  this  manner 

5.  Of  these,  rovrcuy  touton. 

2  Ti.  3.  6  For  of  this  sort  are  they  which  creep  into 
THIS  place,  side,  way  — 

I.Here,  hither,  run  hennah. 

Josh.  8.  20  and  they  had  no  power  to  flee  this  way  or 
Eze.  1.  23  everyone.  .two,which  covered  on  this  side 
Dan.  12.    5  one  on  this  side  of  the  bank  of  the  river 

2.  This,  n\  zeh. 

Exod.26'.  13  on  this  side  and  on  that  side,  to  cover  it 

3.  Thus,  to  koh. 

Exod.  2. 12  he  looked  this  way and  that  way,  and  wh. 
Xuniii.  31  as  it  were  a  day's  journey  on  this  side 

i.Here,  hither,  £5e  hode 

Matt  12.  6  in  this  place  is  (one)  greater  than  the  te. 
Luke  23.  5  beginning  from  Galilee  to  this  place 

THISTLE  — 

1. Thistle,  bramble,  T*TC  dardar. 

Gen.   3. 18  Thorns  a]so  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  fo. 

Hos.  10.    8  the  thistle  shall  come  up  on  their  altars 


THITHER 


980 


THOUGH 


2.  Thorn,  bramble,  thicket,  nin  choach. 

2  Ki.  14.    g  The  thistle  that  (was)  in  Lebanon  sent  to 

14.   9  there  passed  by . .  and  trode  down  the  tin. 

a  Ch.25.  18  The  thistle  that  (was)  in  Lebanon  sent  to 

25.  18  there  passed  by.  .and  trode  down  the  th. 

Job  31. 40  Let  thistles  grow  instead  of  wheat,  and 

3. ..4  thistle,  Tpi&o\os  tribolos. 

Matt.  7.  16  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  flgs  of  thistles  ? 

THITHER,  thitherward  — 
I.Here,  hitlier,  cbn  halom. 

1  Sa.  10.  22  further,  if  the  man  should  yet  come  thi. 

2.  Here,  hitlier,  rtiri  hennah. 

Jer.  50.    5  they  shall  ask.  .with  their  faces  thitherw. 

3.  There,  D^  shorn. 

Deut.  1.  37  saying,  Thou  also  shalt  not  go  in  thither 
i.There,  thither,  ewe?  ekei. 

Matt.  2.  22  when  he  heard,  .he  was  afraid  to  go  thit. 
Mark  6.  33  many  knewhim,  andran  afoot  thither  out 
Lukei7-  37  thither  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  toget. 

21.    2  a  certain  poor  widow  casting  in  thither 

Johnn.    8  sought  to  stone  thee;  and  goest  thou  th. 

18.   2  Jesus ofttimes resorted  thither  with  hisdi. 

18.   3  cometh  thither  with  lanterns  and  torches 

Acts  17. 13  they  came  thither  also,  and  stirred upthe 

Romi5.  24  to  be  brought  on  my  way  thitherward  by 

THO'-MAS,  0w,uas  twin. 

One  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  Jesus,  and  called  also 
Didymus;  he  was  zealous  and  inquisitive,  yet  at  first 
incredulous  at  the  report  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 
Matt  10.    3  T.,  and  Matthew  the  publican  ;  James 
Mark  3.  18  Matthew,  and  T.,  and  James  the  (son)  of 
Luke  6.  15  Matthew,  and  T.,  James  the  (son)  of  Al. 
John  11.  16  Then  said  T.,which  is  called  Didymus.uuto 
14.    5  T.  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  we  know  notwh. 
20.  24  But  T. .  .was  not  with  them  when  Jesus 
20.  26  again  his  disciples  were  within,  and  T. 
20.  27  Then  saith  he  to  T.,  Reacb  hither  thy  ha. 
20.  28  T.  answered  and  said  unto  him,  My  Lord 

20.  29  [T.,]  because  thou  hast  seen  me,thou  hast 

21.  2  There  were  together  Simon  Peter,  andT. 
Acts    1.  13  John,  aud  Andrew,  Philip,  and  T.,  Barth. 

TH0NG3  — 

A  thong,  strap,  latchet,  luds  himas. 

Acts  22.  25  as  they  bound  him  with  tlmngs,  Paul  said 

THORN,  (of  thonw)  — 
\.A  bramble,  lax  atad. 

Psa.  58.    9  Before  your  pots  can  feel  the  thorns,  he 

2.  A  brier,  p^n,  pnrt  chedeq. 

Prov  1 5.  19  way  of  the  slothful . .  as  an  hedge  of  thorns 

3.  Thorn,  bramble,  thicket,  nin  choach. 

2  Ch.  33.  11  which  took  Manasseh  among  the  thorns 
Job  41.    2  or  bore  his  jaw  through  with  a  thorn? 
Prov  26.    9  (As)  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  a 
Song  2.   2  As  the  lily  among  thorns,  so  (is)  my  love 
Hos.    9.    6  For,  lo.  .thorns (shall  be)  iu  their  tabern. 

4.  A  thorn,  psjn  naaisuts. 

Isa.     7. 19  and  upon  all  thorns,  and  upon  all  bushes 
55. 13  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir 

5.  A  thorn,  hook,  YD  sir. 

Eccl.  7.  6  For  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot 
Isa.  34.  13  And  thorns  shall  come  up  in  her  palaces 
Hos.  2.  6  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns,  and 
Nah.  1. 10  For  while  (they  be)  folden  together(as)th. 

6.  Briers,  thorns,  DMi^D  sallonim. 

Eze.  2.    6  thoughthorusandbriers(be)withthee,aud 

7.  Thorn,  |8  tsen. 

Job  s-  5  taketh  it  even  out  of  the  thorns,  and  the 
Prov  22.   5  Thorns.  .snares(are)inthe  way  of  thefrow. 

8.  Thorns,  D*3*ia  tseninim. 

Nuni33.  55  pricks  iu  your  eyes,  and  thorns  in  your  si. 
Josh  23. 13  scourges  in  your  sides,  and  thorns  in  your 

9. A  thorn,  pp  qots. 

Gen.  3. 18  Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  fo. 
Exod22.  6  If  fire  break  out,  and  catch  in  thorns,  so 
Judg.  8.    7  I  will  tear  your  flesh  with  the  thorns  of 

8.  16  and  thorns  of  the  wilderness  and  briers 

2  Sa.  23.   6  all  of  them  as  thorns  thrust  away,  because 
Psa.118.  12  they  are  quenched  as  the  fire  of  thorns 
Isa.   32.  13  shall  come  up  thorns  (and)  briers;  yea 

33.  12  thorns  cut  up  shall  they  be  burned  in  the 

Jer.    4.    3  thus  saith  the  Lord,  .sow  not  among  th. 

13.  13  They  have  sown  wheat,  but  shall  reap  th. 

Y.zc.  28.  24  nor.  .grieving  thorn  of  all.  .round  about 

Hos.  10.    8  the  thorn  and  the  thistle  shall  come  up 

'  I  Nettle,  thorn,  )W$P  qimmashon. 

Prov  24.  31  Aud  lo,  it  was  all  grown  over  with  thorns 
]  1..-1  thorn,  rvy  shayith. 

Isa.     5.    6  but  there  shall  come  up  briers  and  thorns 
7.  23  it  shall  (even)  be  for  briers  and  thorns 
7.  24  the  laud  shall  become  briers  and  thorns 
7.  25  there  shall  not  come .  .the  fear  of.. thorns 

9.  18  it  shall  devour  the  briers  and  thorns,  and 
10.  17  burn  and  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers 
27.    4  who  would  set  the  briers  (and)  thorns  ag. 

12..1  thorn,  brier,  &KavOa  akanOv. 

Matt.  7.  16  Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  flgs  of 
13.  7  some  fell  among  thorns;  and  the  thorns 
13.  22  also  that  received  seed  among  the  thorns 
27.  29  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns 

Mark  4.    7  some  fell  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns 


Mark  4.  18  these  are  they  which  are  sown  among  th. 

Luke  6.  44  For  of  thorns  men  do  not  gather  flgs,  nor 
8,  7  some  fell  among  thorns;  and  the  thorns 
8.  14  that  which  fellamong  thorns  are  they,  wh. 

Johnig.    2  soldiers  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put 

Heb.  6.    S  But  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers 

13.  Thorny,  made  of  thorns,  amavdivos  akanthinos. 
Marki5.  17  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  ab. 
John  19.    5  wearing  the  crown  of  thorns,  and  the  pu. 

W.A  sharp  stake,  palisade,  GKoXo-ty  skolops. 

2  Co.  12.    7  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  iu  the  flesh 
THORN  hedge  — 
.4  thorn  hedge,  npiDp  mesukah. 

Mic.    7.    4  most  upright  (is  sharper)  than  a  thorn  he. 
THOROUGHLY  — 
1.2*0  do  good  or  well,  Do;  yatab,  5. 

2  Ki.  11.  18  his  images  brake  they  in  pieces  thoroug. 
2.  To  heal,  repair,  N2"i  rapha,  3. 

Exod2i.  19  and  shall  cause  (him)  to  be  thoroughly 
THOSE  (men,  things)  — 

1.  These,  *?x  el 

Gen.  19.  25  he  overthrew  those  cities,  and  all  the  pi. 
Deut.  7.  22  Lord  thy  God  will  put  out  those  nations 

2.  These,  nV*j  elleh. 

Gen.  33.   5  Who  (are)  those  with  thee?  Aud  he  said 

3.  These,  ^  illek. 

Ezra   5.   9  Then  asked  we  those  elders,  (and)  said  un 

Dan.    3.  22  flame  of  the  fire  slew  those  men  that  took 

6.  24  they  brought  those  men  which  had  accus. 

4.  The  men,  D-trjNn  haanashim. 

Num.14,  22  Because  all  those  men  which  have  seen 
14.  37  Even  those  men  that  did  bring  up  the  evil 

5. He,  he  himself,  ttfnn  hahu. 

1  Sa.  30.  20  they  drave  before  those ..  cattle,  and  said 

6.  They  themselves,  on  hem. 

Lev.  11.  27  that  go  on  (all)  four,  those  are  unclean  un. 

7.  They  themselves,  Drtn  hahem. 

Gen.   6.   4  There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those 
8. They  themselves,  |sn,  ten  himmo,  himmon. 

Ezra    5.  14  those  did  Cyrus  the  king  take  out  of  the 

9.  They  themselves,  njrr  hennah. 

1  Sa.  27.    8  for  those,  .of  old  the  inhabitants  of  the 

10.  They  themselves,  n^rtri  hahennah. 

1  Sa.  17.  28  with  whom  hast  thou  left  those  few  sheep 
W.Them,  avrovs  autous. 

Matt  21.  41  will  miserably  destroy  those  wicked  men 
John  17. 11  keep  through  thine  own  name  those  whom 

l'2.That,  that  very,  he,  she,  it,  cKewos  ehemos. 

Matt.  3.  1  In  those  days  came  John  the  Baptist,  pr. 
See  also  21.  40;  22.  7,  10;  24.  19,  22,  22,  29;  25.  7,  19; 
Mark  r.  9;  2.  20;  7.  [15];  8.  1 ;  12.  7;  13.  17,  19,  24;  Luke 
2. 1;  4-  2;  5-  35;  9-  36;  12.  37,  38;  13.  4;  14.  24;  19.  27; 
20.  [1];  21.  23;  John  8.  [10];  Acts  2.  18;  7.  41;  9.  37;  16.  3, 
35;  20.  2;  Rom.  6.  21;  Heb.  8.  10;  10.  16;  Rev.  9.  6. 

13. As  much,  as  great,  '6<tos  Jwsos. 

Jude       10  But  these  speak  evil  of  those  things  wh. 

11.  These,  those,  ravra  tauta. 

John  8.  26  I  speak  to  the  world  those  things  which 
Acts  17. 11  searched,  .daily,  whether  those  things  we. 
Phil.    3.    7  what  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  co. 

4.  9  Those  things,  which  ye  have  both  learned 
15. In  these,  those,  ravrais  tautais. 

Luke  1.  39  Mary  arose  in  those  days,  and  went  into 

6. 12  it  came  topassinthose  days,  that  he  went 
Acts    1.  15  in  those  days  Peter  stood  up  in  the  midst 

6.    1  in  those  days,  when  the  number  of  the  di. 

16.  These,  those,  ravras  tautas. 

Luke  1.  24  after  those  days  his  wife  Elisabeth  conce. 
Acts  21.  15  after  those  days  we  took  up  our  carriages 

17.  Tii  tliese,  tovtois  toutois. 

Jude      10  in  those  things  they  corrupt  themselves 

18.  0/ these,  tovtwv  touton. 

Acts  18.  17  And  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  those  things 
Heb.  13.  1 1  the  bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood  is 

THOU  — 

I.  Thou,  thyself,  fljN  ant. 

Ezra    7.  25  Thou,  Ezra,  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God 

See  also  Dan.  2.  31,  37,  38;  3.  10;  4.  18,  18,  22;  5.  13,  18, 

22,  23;  6.  16. 

2.Thou  thyself,  matt. 

Gen.  24.  23  Whosedaughter(art)  thou?  Tell  me,  I  pr. 
24.  60  and  said  unto  her,  Thou  (art)  our  sister,  be 
39.   9  because  thou  (art)  his  wife:  how  then  can 
Z.Thou  thyself,  nnN  attah. 

Gen.    3. 14  thou(art)cursedaboveallcattle,amlabove 
3.  19  for  dust  thou  (art),  and  unto  dust  shalt 
6. 18  thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy 
4.  Thee,  <t4  se. 

Matti8.  33  Shouldest  not  thou  also  have  hadcompas. 
25.  27;  Acts8.  23;  9.  6;  10.  [6];  13.  47;  22.  14;  23. 11;  24.  4, 
10;  26.  29;  27.  24;  Rom.  3.  4;  1  Ti.  6.  14;  Titus  3.  8;  3  Jo.  2. 

5. To  thee,  aoi  soi. 

Matt.  1 7.  25  What  thinkest  thou,  Simon  ?  of  whom  do 
See  also  22.  16,  17;  27.  19;  Mark  4.  38;  10.  [21];  Luke  10. 
36,  40;  14.  io,  14;  18.  22;  Acts  8.  21;  26.  z. 


6.  Of  thee,  gov  sou. 

Matt.  6.  3  when  thou  doest  alms,  let  not  thy  left  hand 
19.  21  go.  .sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  po. 

Lukei4.    8  lest  amore  honourable  than  thou  Jo.  7. 3. 

Acts  17.  19  this  new  doctrine,  whereof  thou  speakest 
24. 11  that  thou  mayest  understand,  that  there 

7. Thou  thyself,  av  su. 

Matt.  2.    6  thou,  Bethlehem,  (in)  the  land  of  Juda 
See  also  3.  14;  6.  6,  17;  n.  3,  23;  14.  28;  16.  16,  18;  26.  25, 
39,  63,  64,  69,  73;  27.  4, 11,  11;  Mark  1. 11;  3.  n;  8.  29;  14 
36,  61,  67,  68;  15.  2,  2;  Luke  1.  [28],  42,  76;  3.  22;  4.  7,  41; 

7.  19,  20;  9.  60;  10.  15.  37;  15.  31;  16.  7,  [25],  25;  17.  8;  19. 
19,  42;  22.  32,  58,  67,  70;  23.  3,  3,  37,  39,  40;  24.  iS;  John  1. 

19,  21, 21,  25,  42,  42,  49,  49;  2.  10,  20;  3.  2,  10,  26;  4.  9,  10, 
12,  19;  6.  30,  69;  7.  52;  8.  [5],  13,  25,  33,  48,  52,  53,  [53];  9. 
i7»  28,  34,  34,  35;  10.  24,  33;  11.  27,  42;  12.  34;  13.  6,  7;  14. 
9;  17.  5,  8,  21,  21,  23,  23,  25;  18.  17,  25,  33,  34,  37,  37;  19. 
9;  20. 15;  21. 12,  15,  16,  17,  17,  22;  Acts  1.  24;  4.  24;  7.  28; 

9.  5;    IO.  15,   33;    II-  9,   14;    13.   33;    l6.  31;    21.  38;    22\   8,   27; 

23-  3»  21;  25.  10;  26.  15;  Rom.  2.  3,  17;  9.20;  11.17,18, 

20,  22,  24;  14.  4,  10,  10,  32;  1  Co.  14.  17;  15.  36;  Gal.  2.  14; 
6.  1;  1  Ti.  6.  11;  2  Ti.  1.  18;  2.  1,  [3];  3.  10,  14;  4.  5,  15; 
Titus  2. 1;  Phm.  [12];  Heb.  1.  5,  10,  11,  12;  5.  5,  6;  7.  17, 
21;  Jas.  2.  3,  3,  18,  19;  4. 12;  3  Jo.  3;  Rev.  2.  15;  3.  17;  4. 
11;  7.  14. 

THOU  thyself  — 

Thou  thyself,  creavToy  seauton. 

Rom.  2.  19  art  confident  that  thou  thyself  art  a  guide 
THOUGH  — 
I. If,  dx  im. 

Judg.  13,  16  Though  thou  detain  me,  I  will  not  eat  of 

2. That,  TEJg  asher. 

Zech.io.    6  they  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  th. 

3.  Also,  03  gam. 

Neh.  6.  1  though  at  that  time  I  had  not  set  up  the 
4. If,  though,  jn  hen. 

Job  13. 15  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  Itrustin  him 
5.  That,  because,  though,  *3  ki. 

Deut.29.  ig  though  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine 
G.Though,  if,  )b,  nV  Iu. 

2  Sa.  18.  12  Though  I  should  receive  a  thousand  (sh.) 

7 .Therefore,becausc,  although,  «j  hip-^s  kol  qebel  di. 
Dan.   5.  22  thou,  .hast  not  humbled  thine  heart,  th. 

8.  Through,  during,  Sid  (gen)  dia. 

Rom.  4.  nthe  father  of  all  them  that  believe,  though 

9.7/,  though,  idv  ean. 

Lukei6.  31  neither  will  they  be  persuaded,  though 
Acts  13.  41  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe,  though 
Rom,  9.  27  Though  the  number  of  the  children  of  Is. 

1  Co.   4. 15  For  though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instruc. 

9.  16  For  though  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  have  no. 
13.  1  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 
13.  2  though  I  have  (the  gift  of)prophecy,  and 
13.  2  though  1  have  all  faith,  so  that  I  could  re. 
13.  3  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  (the 
13.    3  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and 

2  Co.  10.    8  Forthoughl  should  boast  somewhat  more 

12.  6  For  though  I  would  desire  to  glory,  Ishall 
Gal.  1.  8  though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  pre. 
Jas.     2. 14  What  (doth  it)  profit,  .though  a  man  say 

10.  Even  if,  et  Kai  ei  kai. 

Matt26.  33  [Though]  all.  .shall  be  offended  because  of 
Luken.    8  Though  he  will  not  rise  and  give  him,  be. 

18.  4  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man 
2  Co.  4.  16  but  though  our  outward  man  perish,  yet 
5.  16  though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the 
7.  8  For  though  I  made  you  sorry  with  a  letter 
7.  8  not  repent,  though-I  did  repent:  fur  I  pc. 
7,  8  made  you  sorry,  though  (it  were)  but  for 
7.  12  though  I  wrote  unto  you,  (I  did  it)  not 

11.  6  But  though  (I  be)  rude  in  speech,  yet  not 
12. 11  verychiefest  apostles,  though  I  be  nothing 

12.  15  [though]  the  more  abundantly  I  love  you 
Col.  2.  5  Forthoughl  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet  am 
Heb.  6.   9  accompany  salvation,  though  we  thus  sp. 

11. If  truly,  efrrep  eipier. 

1  Co.  8.  5  For  though  there  be  that  are  called  gods 
12.  And  truly,  although,  Kantip  kaiper. 

Phil.    3.    4'Though  I  might  also  have  confidence  in 
Heb.    5.    8  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  ob. 
7.    5  though  they  come  out  of  the  loins  of  Abrah. 
12.  17  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears 

2  Pe.   1.  12  though  ye  know  (them)  and  be  established 

~13.And  though  indeed,  nalToiye  kaitoige. 

John  4.  2  Though Jesushimselfbaptizednot,  buthis 
Acts  1 7.  27  [though]  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  un 

14. Even  if  nav  kan. 

Matt 2 6.  35  Though  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I 
John  8.  14  Though  I  bear  record  of  myself,  (yet)  my 

10.  38  though  ye  believe  not  me,  believe,  n.  25. 
\5.And,  also,  though,  Kai  kai,  Luke  18.  7. 

16. Because,  that,  ort  hoti. 

Rom.  9.  6  Not  as  though  the  word  of  God  hath  taken 
2  Co.  11.  21  I  speak  as  concerning  reproach,  as  though 
Phil.  3.  12  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  eit. 

\7.If  elci. 

2  Co.  13.   4  For  [though]  he  was  crucified  through  xe. 
THOUGH...  but  — 
Yet,  nevertheless,  but,  Hfxtcs  homos. 

Gal.    3.  15  Though . .  but  a  man's  covenant,  yet  (if  it 


THOUGHT 


981 


THOUSAND 


21. 

55- 
55- 

55- 
59- 

65. 


THOUGHT  —  - 

l.A  wordy  I??  dabar. 

Deutis.   9  Beware  that  there  be  not  a  thought  in  thy 

2.  Thought,  conception,  imagination,  "lino  harkor. 
Dan.    4.    5  the  thoughts  upon  my  bed  and  the  visions 

3.  Thought,  device,  TO!  zimmah. 

Prov  24.   9  The  thought  of  foolishness  (is)  sin,  and 

4.  .4  cutting^  decree,  resolution,  p$n  cheqeq. 

Judg.  5.  15  For  the  divisions  of  Reuben,  .great  thou. 
^.Knowledge,  mind,  jrp,  jrn  madda. 

Eccl.io.  20  Curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in  thy  thought 
6. Possession,  inheritance,  eniD  mo-rash. 

Job   17.  11  my  purposes  are  broken  off.,  the  thoughts 

7.  Device,  thoughtfulness,  natD  mezimmali. 

Job  42.  2  no  thought  can  be  withholden  from  thee 
Psa.  10.  4  The  wicked.  .God  (is)  not  in  all  his  thou. 
Jer.  23.  20  till  he  have  performed  the  thoughts  of  his 

8.  Thought,  device,  njtrrp  machashebeth. 

Gen.    6.    5  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his 

1  Ch.28.    9  understaudeth.  .imaginations  of  the  tho. 

29.  18  in  the  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the 

Job   21.  27  I  know  your  thoughts,  and  the  devices 

Psa.  33.  11  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  generati. 

40.    5  thy  thoughts  (which  are)  to  us  ward  :  they 

56.    5  all  their  thoughts  (are)  against  me  for  evil 

92.   5  how  great  are  thy  works !  (and)  thy  tho. 

94. 11  The  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  man 

Prov  12.    5  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  (are)  right 

15.  26  The  thoughts  of  the  wicked  (are)  an  abo. 

16.  3  and  thy  thoughts  shall  be  established 
21.    5  The  thoughts  of  the  diligent  (tend)  only 

Isa.   55.    7  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts  :,and 

8  my  thoughts  (are)  not  your  thoughts,  ne. 

9  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts 
7  their  thoughts  (are)  thoughts  of  iniquity 
2  which  walketh . .  after  their  own  thoughts 

66. 18  For  I  (know)  their  works  and  their  thou. 
Jer.    4. 14  how  long  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge 
6. 19  I  will  bring,  .(.even)  the  fruit  of  their  th. 
29.  11 1  know  the  thoughts  that  I  think  toward 
29.  11  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  evil,  to  give 
Eze.  38.  10  and  thou  shalt  think  an  evil  thought 
Mic    4. 12  they  know  not  the  thoughts  of  the  Lord 
9. Doubts,  ojrinions,  D'?2.p  seaphim. 

Psa.119.  113  I  hate,  .thoughts:  but  thy  law  do  I  love 
10. Thoughts,  purposes,  niaius'jg  eshtonoth. 

Psa. 146.  4  forth,  .in  that  very  clay  his  thoughts  per. 
11.  Thoughts,  purposes,  nifflPS  ashtoth. 

Job  12.  5  a  lamp  despisecfin  the  thought  of  him  that 
1*2.  Thought,  will,  desire,  jn  rea. 

Psa.  139.  2  thou  understandest  my  thoughts  afar  off 
139.  17  How  precious  also  are  thy  thoughts  unto 

13.  Thought,  Ji'yn  rayon. 

Dan.   2.  29  As  for  thee,  O  kiug,  thy  thoughts  came 
2.  30  thou  mightest  know  the  thoughts  of  thy 

4.  10  was  astonied.  .and  his  thoughts  troubled 

5.  6  his  thoughts  troubled  him,  so  that  the  jo. 
5.  10  let  Dot  thy  thoughts  trouble  thee,  nor  let 

1±. Meditation,  nto  seach. 

Amos  4.  13  and  declareth  unto  man  what(is)  Ins  tho. 
15. Doubts,  opinions,  csj'b'  seippim. 

Job  4.  13  In  thoughts  from  the  visions  of  the  night 
20.    2  Thereforedomythoughtscause  me  to  an. 

16.  Doubts,  opinions,  D'SJHi?  sarappim. 

Psa.  94.  19  In  the  multitude  of  my  thoughts  within 
139.  23  Search  me,  0  God . .  know  my  heart ;  try 

17. Reasoning,  bia\o"yi(r/j.6s  dialogismos. 

Matt  15.  19  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts 
Mark  7.  21  out  of  the  heart  of  men,  proceed  evil  th. 
Luke  2.  35  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be  revealed 

5.  22  But  when  Jesus  perceived  their  thoughts 

6.  8  But  he  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  to 
9.  47  Jesus,  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  he. 

24.  38  and  why  do  thoughts  arise  in  your  hearts 

1  Co.   3.  20  The  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  the 
Jas.    2-   4  and  are  become  judges  of  evil  thoughts 

13.  Thought,  reflemon,  Stavoijfxa  dianoema. 

Luken.  17  he,  knowing  their  thoughts,  said  unto  th. 
19.  Reflection,  tlwught,  £vQv}xy)<ris  enthumesis. 

Matt.  9.  4  Jesus,  knowing  their  thoughts,  said,  Wh. 
12  25  Jesus  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  unto 

Heb.    4. 12  a  disceruer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents 
^.Thought,  contrivance,  device,  iwivoia  epinoia. 

Acts  S.  22  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine  heart  may 
21.  Computation,  reckoning,  hoyta-fios  logismos. 

Rom.  2.  15  thoughts  the  mean  while  accusing  or  else 
22. A  thought,  contrivance,  understanding,  v6nfxa. 

2  Co.  10.  5  bringing  into  captivity  every  thought  to 
THOUGHT  (beforehand),  to  take  — 

l.To  be  sorrowful,  afraid,  jsh  daag. 

1  Sa.   9.    5  leave . .  the  asses,  and  take  thought  for  us 
2. To  be  over  anxious,  very  careful,  fxepifit/dco  meri. 
Matt.  6.  25  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye 

6.  27  Which  of  you,  by  taking  thought,  can  add 
6.  28  why  take  ye  thought  for  raiment?  Const 
6.  31  take  no  thought,  saying,  What  shall  we 
6  34  Taketherefore  no  thought  forthe  morrow 
6.  34morrowshall  takethought  forthe  things 


Matt  10.  19  take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  sp. 
Lukei2. 11  take  ye  no  thought  how  or  what  thing  ye 
12.  22  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye 
12.  25  which  of  you  [with  taking  thought]  can  a. 
12.  26  least,  why  taKe  ye  thought  for  the  rest? 
3.7*0  be  very  anxious  beforehand,  ■Kpofx^pifii/dw. 

Marki3.  11  take  no  thought  beforehand  what  ye  sh. 
THOUSAND  — 
l.A  thousand,  *\bi<  eleph. 

Gen.  20. 16  Behold,  I  have  given  thy  brother  a  thou. 

24.  60  be  thou  (the  mother)  of  thousauds  of  mil. 
Exodi2.  37  about  six  hundred  thousand  on  foot  (that 

18.  21  rulers  of  thousands,  (and)  rulers  of  hund. 
18.  25  rulers  of  thousands,  rulers  of  hundreds 
20.    6  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them 
32.  28  fell,  .that  day  about  three  thousand  men 

34.  7  Keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving 
38.  25  thousand  seven  hundred  and  threescore 
38.  26  hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand  and 
38.  28  of  the  thousaud  seven  hundred  seventy 
38.  29  and  two  thousand  and  four  hundred  she. 

Num.  1.  16  tribes  of  their  fathers,  heads  of  thousands 
1.  21  forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 
1.  23  fifty  andninethousandand  three  hundred 
1.  25  forty  and  five  thousand  six  hundred  and 
1.  27  threescore  and  fourteen  thousand  and  six 
1.  29  fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hundred 
1.  31  fiftyand  seven  thousand  and  four  hundred 
1.  33  (were)  forty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
1.  35  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  two  hundred 
1.  37  thirty  andfive  thousand  and  four  hundred 
1.  39  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 
1.  41  forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 
1. 43  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundred 

1.  46  six  hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand 

2.  4  threescore  and  fourteeu  thousand  and.  six 
2.  6  fifty  and  four  thousand  and  four  hundred 
2.  8  fifty  and  seven  thousaud  and  four  hund. 
2.  9  hundred  thousand  and  fourscore  thousand 
2.  9  six  thousand  and  four  hundred,  through. 
2. 11  forty  and  six  thousand  and  five  hundred 
2. 13  fifty  and  nine  thousand  and  three  hund. 
2.  15  forty  and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred 
2. 16  fifty  and  one  thousand  and  four  hundred 
2. 19  (were)  forty  thousand  and  five  hundred 
2.21  (were)  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  two 
2.  23  thirty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundr. 
2.  24  hundred  thousand  and  eight  thousand 

»     2.  26  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 
2.  28  forty  and  one  thousand  and  five  hundred 

2. 30  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundr. 

2. 31  thousand  and  fifty  and  seven  thousand 

2.  32  six  hundred  thousand  and  three  thousand 

3.  22  (were)  seven  thousand  aud  five  hundred 
3.  28  eight  thousand  and  six  hundred,  keeping 
3.  34  (were)  six  thousand  and  two  hundred 

3.  39  all  the  males,  .(were)  twenty  and  two  th. 
3.  43  twenty  and  two  thousand  two  hundred 

3.  50  thousand  three  hundred  and  threescore 

4.  36  were  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
4.  40  were  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  and 
4.  44  Even  those,  .were  three  thousand  and  two 
4.  48  eight  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fo. 
7.  85  all  the  silver  vessels  (weighed)  twothous. 

10.    4  heads  of  the  thousands  of  Israel,  shall  gat. 

10.  36  Return .  .unto  the  many  thousands  of  Is. 

11.  21  The  people,  .six  hundred  thousand  foot. 
16.  49  they  that  died,  .were  fourteen  thousand 

25.  9  those  that  died . .  were  twenty  and  four  th. 

26.  7  forty  and  three  thousand  and  seven  hun. 
26. 14  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  two  hund. 
26. 18  numbered  of  them,  forty  thousand  and 
26.  22  threescore  and  sixteen  thousand  and  five 
26.  25  threescore  and  four  thousand  and  three 
26.  27  threescore  thousand  and  five  hundred 
26.  34  fiftyand  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred 
26  37  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  five  hundred 
26.  41  forty  and  five  thousand  and  six  hundred 
26.  43  threescore  and  four  thousand  andfour  hu. 
26.  47  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hund. 
■26  50  forty  and  five  thousand  and  four  hundr. 
26.  51  six  hundred  thousand  and  a  thousand  se. 
26.  62  twentyand  three  thousand,  all  males  from 
3:.    4.  Of  every  tribe  a  thousand,  throughout  all 
jr.    -  were  delivered  out  of  the  thousands  of  I. 
31.    53  thousand  of  (every)  tribe,  twelve  thou. 
31.    6  Moses  sent  them  to* the  war,  a  thousand 
31. 14  was  wroth,  .(with)  the  captains  over  tho. 
31.  32  the  booty,  .wassixhundredthousandand 
31.  32  seventy  thousand  andfive  thousand  sheep 
31.  33  threescore  and  twelve  thousand  beeves 
31.  34  rind  threescore  and  one  thousand  asses 
31.  15  thirty  and  two  thousand  persons  in  all,  of 
31.  36  thousand  and  seven  and  thirty  thousand 
31.  38  beeves  (were)  thirty  and  six  thousand;  of 
31.  39  asses  (were)  thirty  thousand  and  five  hu. 
31.  40  persons  (were)  sixteen  thousand,  of  which 
31.  43  three  hundred  thousand  and  thirty  thou. 

31. 43  seven  thousand  and  five  hundred  sheep 

31.44  And  thirty  and  six  thousand  beeves 

31.  45  And  thirty  thousand  asses  and  five  hund. 
31. 46  And  sixteen  thousand  persons 
31.  48  officers  which  (were)  over  thousands  of 
31.  48  captains  of  thousands,  and  captains  of  h. 
31.  52  of  the  captains  of  thousands,  and  of  the 
31.  52  was  sixteen  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
31.  54  took  the  gold  of  the  captains  of  thousands 

35.  4  and  outward  a  thousand  cubits  round  ab. 
35.  5  on  the  east  side  two  thousand  cubits,  and 
~5-  5  on  the  south  side  two  thousand  cubits,  and 
^5.   5  on  the  west  sidetwothousand  cubits,  and 


Judg. : 


:  Sa. 


Xum.35.    5  on  the  north  side  two  thousand  cubits 
Deut.  x.  11  make  you  a  thousand  times  so  many  more 
1. 15  captains  over  thousands,  and  captains  over 
5. 10  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them 
7.   9  keep  his  commandments,  to  a  thousand 
32. 30  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put  ten  thou. 
33. 17  and  they  (are)  the  thousandsof  Manasseh 
Josh.  3.    4  about  two  thousand  cubits  by  measure 
4.  13  About  forty  thousand  prepared  for  war 
7.   3  let  about  two  or  three  thousand  men  go 

7.  4  of  the  people  about  three  thousand  men 

8.  3  Joshua  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty 
8.  12  took  about  five  thousand  men,  and  set  th. 
8.  25  twelve  thousand,  (even)  all  the  men  of  Ai 

22.  14  house  of  their  fathers  among  the  thousa. 
22.  21,  30  heads  of  the  thousands  of  Israel 
10  One  man  of  you  shall  chase  a  thousand 

4  slew  of  them  in  Bezek  ten  thousand  men 
29  they  slew,  .about  ten  thousand  men,  all 

,   6  take  with  thee  ten  thousand  men  of  the 
.  10  went  up  with  ten  thousand  men  at  his  fe. 
14  Barak  went  down,  .and  ten  thousand  men 

8  spear  seen  among  forty  thousand  in  Israel? 
.    3  thousand;  and  there  remained  ten  thous. 
.  10  their  hosts  with  them,  about  fifteen  tho. 
.  10  there  fell  an  hundred  and  twenty  thous. 
.  26  weight,  .was  a  thousand  and  seven  hund. 
.  49  died  also,  about  a  thousand  men  and  wo. 
.    6  aud  there  fell,  .forty  and  two  thousand 
.  11  Then  three  thousand  men  of  Judah  went 
.  15  took  it,  and  slew  a  thousand  men  there. 
.  16  with  the  jaw  of  an  ass  have  I  slain  a  tho. 
.  27  upon  the  roof  about  three  thousand  men 
.    2  fourhundredthousandfootmenthat  drew 
.  10  we  will  take,  .an  hundred  of  a  thousand 
.  10  a  thousand  out  of  ten  thousand,  to  fetch 
.  15  twenty  and  six  thousand  men  that  drew 
.  17  numbered  four  hundred  thousand  men 
.  21  that  day  twenty  and  two  thousand  men 
.  25  eighteen  thousand  men;  all  these  drew 
.  34  came  agaiust  Gibeah  ten  thousand  chosen 
•  35  twenty  and  five  thousand  aud  an  hundred 
.  44  there  fell  of  Benjamin  eighteen  thousand 
.  45  they  gleaned  of  them,  .five  thousand  men 
.  45  pursued,  .and  slew  two  thousand  men  of 
.  46  twenty  and  five  thousand  men  that  drew 
.  to  congregation  sent  thither  twelve  thousa. 
,.    2  slew  of  the  army,  .about  four  thousand 
.  10  for  there  fell  of  Israel  thirty  thousand  fo. 
.  19  even  he  smote  of  the  people  fifty  thousa. 
.  12  he  will  appoint  him  captains  over  thous. 
.  19  therefore  present  yourselves . .  by  your  th . 
.    8  three  hundred  thousand,  and.  .thirty  th. 
.    8  and  the  men  of  Judah  thirty  thousand 
.    2  Saul  chose  him  three  thousand  (men)  of  Is. 
.    2  two  thousand  were  with  Saul,  .and  a  th. 
.   5  thirty  thousand  chariots,  and  six  thous. 
.    4  thousand  footmen,  and  ten  thousandmen 
.    5  weight  of  the  coat  (was)  five  thousand  sh. 
.  18  ten  cheeses  unto  the  captain  of  (their)  th. 
!.    7  his  thousands,  and  David  Ins  ten  thous. 
.    8  and  to  me . .  (but)  thousands :  and 
.  13  and  made  him  his  captain  over  a  thous. 
.  11  his  thousands,  and  David  his  ten 
.    7  make  you  all  captains  of  thousands,  and 
23  search  him  out  throughout  all  the  thous. 

2  Saul  took  three  thousand  chosen  men  out 

2  three  thousand  sheep,  and  a  thousand  go. 

2  having  three  thousand  chosen  men  of  I. 

2  passed  on  by  hundreds  and  by  thousands 

5  his  thousands,  and  David  his  ten? 
1  all  (the)  chosen  (men)  of  Israel,  thirty  th. 

S.   4  thousand  (chariots),  .and  twenty  thous. 

8.    5  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty  thou. 

8.  13  smiting  of  the  S. . .  (being)  eighteen  thou. 
10.   6  Syrians  of  Zoba,  twenty  thousaud  foot. 
10.    6  thousand  men,  and  of  Ish-tob  twelve  th. 
10. 18  David  slew,  .forty  thousand  horsemen 

17.  1  Let  me  now  choose  out  twelve  thousand 

18.  1  set  captains  of  thousands  aud  captains  of 
18.  3  but  now  (thou  art)  worth  ten  thousand  of 
18.  4  came  out  by  hundreds,  and  by  thousands 
18.  7  great  slaughter  that  day  of  twenty  thous. 
18.  12  Though  I  should  receive  a  thousand  (sh.) 

19. 17  thousand  men  of  Benjamin  with  him,  and 
24.    9  there  were  in  Israel  eight  hundred  tho. 
24.    9  men  of  Judah  (were)  five  hundred  thous. 
24.  15  even  to  Beersheba  seventy  thousand  men 

1  Ki.  3.   4  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  did  Solomon 

4.  26  forty  thousand . .  and  twelve  thousand  ho. 
4.  32  And  he  spake  three  thousand  proverbs 

4.  32  and  his  songs  were  a  thousand  and  five 

5.  11  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  thousand 
5. 13  and  the  levy  was  thirty  thousaud  men 

5.  14  ten  thousand  a  month  by  courses;  a  mo. 
5.  15  Solomon  had  threescore  and  ten  thous. 
5.  15  fourscore  thousand  hewers  in  the  mount. 
5.  16  three  thousand  and  threehundred,  which 

7.  26  of  lilies  :  it  contained  two  thousand  bat. 

8.  63  offered,  .two  and  twenty  thousand  oxen 
8.  63  an  hundred  aud  twenty  thousand  sheep 

10.  26  he  had  a  thousand  and  four  hundred  ch. 
10.  26  twelve  thousand  horsemen,  whom  he  be. 
12. 21  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  chosen 

19. 18  I  have  left  (me)  seven  thousand  in  Israel 
20. 15  the  children  of  Israel,  (being)seven  thou. 
20.  29  slew  of  the  Syrians  an  hundred  thousand 
20.  30  fell  upon  twenty  and  seven  thousand 

2  Ki.  3.   4  thousand  lambs,  and  an  hundred  thous. 

5.    5  six  thousand  (pieces)  of  gold,  and  ten  ch. 

13.  7  ten  thousand  footmen ;  forthe  king  of  S. 

14.  7  He  sle w of  Edom.  .ten thousand,  and touk 


•23 
24 

25 
26. 
29 

2  Sa.  6. 


THOUSAND 


982 


THREE 


=3- 
23- 
=3- 

23. 
26. 


2  EX  15.  19  Menahem  gave  Pul  a  thousand  talents  of 

18.  23  I  will  deliver  thee  two  thousand  horses 

19.  35  an  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand 
24.  14  ten  thousand  captives  and  all  the  crafts. 

24.  16  seven  thousand,  .and  smiths  a  thousand 
1  Ch.  5.  18  four  and  forty  thousand  seven  hundred 

5.  21  took,  .of  their  camels  fifty  thousand, and 
5.  21  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  and  of 
5.  21  thousand,  and  of  men  an  hundred  thous. 
7.    2  two  and  twenty  thousand  and  six  hun. 
7.   4  six  and  thirty  thousand  (men) :  for  they 
7.    5  reckoned,  .fourscore  and  seven  thousand 
7.   7  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  thirty  and 
7.    9  (was)  twenty  thousand  and  two  hundred 
7.  11  seventeen  thousand  and  two  hundred  (so.) 
7.  40  number,  .(was)  twenty  and  six  thousand 
9.  13  thousand  and  seven  hundred  and  three. 
12.  14  hundred,  and  the  greatest  over  a  thous. 
12.  20  captains  of  the  thousands  that  (were)  of 
12.  24  six  thousandand  eight  hundred,  readyar. 
12.25  Of  the  children  of  Simeon.. seven  thous. 
12.  26  Of  thechildren  of  Levi,  fourthousand  and 
12.  27  withhim  (were)  three  thousand  andseven 
12.  29  of  thechildrenof  Benjamin,  .three thous. 
12.  30  children  of  Ephraimtwentythousandand 
12.31  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  eighteen  thousand 
12.  33  fifty  thousand,  which  could  keep  rank,  (th- 
is. 34  of  Naphtali  a  thousand  captains,  and  with 
12.  34  shield  and  spear  thirty  and  seven  thous. 
12.  35  twenty  and  eight  thousand  aud  six  hund. 

12.  36  suchas  went  forth  to  battle,  .forty  thous. 
12. 37  the  battle,  an  hundred  and  twenty  thous. 

13.  1  consulted  with  the  captains  of  thousands 

15.  25  captains  over  thousands,  went  to  bring 

16.  15  word  (which)  he  commanded  to  a  thous. 
18.  4  David  took  from  him  a  thousand  chariots 
18.  4  seven  thousand  horsemen,  and  twenty  th. 
18.   5  David  slew.. two  and  twenty  thousand  men 

18.  12  slew,  .in  the  valley  of  Salt  eighteen  tho. 

19.  6  the  children  of  Ammou  sent  a  thousand 
19.    7  they  hired  thirty  and  two  thousand  char. 
19. 18  seventhousand  (men),  .andforty  thousand 
21.    5  thousand  thousand  and  an  hundred  tho. 

21.  5  four  hundred  threescore  and  ten  thousand 
21. 14  and  there  fell  of  Israel  seventy  thousand 

22.  14  an  hundred  thousand  talents  of  gold 

22.  14  and  a  thousand  thousand  talents  of  silver 

3  their  number.,  was  thirty  and  eight  thou. 

4  twenty  and  four  thousand  (were)to  set  fo. 

4  and  six  thousand  (were)  officers  aud  judges 

5  four  thousand  (were)  porters,  and  four  th. 
26  the  captains  over  thousands  and  hundreds 

26.  30  a  thoiisandand  seven  hundred, (were) ofti. 

26.  32  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred  chief  fa. 

27.  1  the  chief  fathers  and  captains  of  thousands 
27.  1  every  course  (were)  tweuty  and  four  tho. 
27.    2  and  in  his  course  (were)  twenty  and  fourt. 

[So  in  verse  5,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15.] 

27.  4  in  his  course.. (were)  twenty  and  four  tho. 

28.  1  the  captains  over  the  thousands,  and  cap. 

29.  4  three  thousand  talents  of  gold,  of  the  gold 
29.  4  seven  thousand  talents  of  refined  silver 
29.  6  the  captains  of  thousands  and  of  hundreds 
29.  7  five  thousand  talents  and  ten  thousand  d. 
29.  7  ten  thousand  talents,  .eighteen  thousand 
29.  7  and  one  hundred  tbousand  talents  of  iron 
29.  21  (even)  athousand  bullocks,  a  thousand  ra. 
29.  21  a  thousand  lambs,  with  their  drink  offer. 

;  Ch,  1 .    2  the  captains  of  thousands  and  of  hundreds 
1.   6  offered  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  upon  it 

1.  14  he  had  a  thousand  and  four  hundred  ch. 
1. 14  twelve  thous.  horsemen,  which  he  placed 

2.  2  told  out  threescore  and  ten  thousand  men 
2.  2  fourscore  thousand  to  hew  in  the  mount. 
2.  2  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  to  oversee 
2. 10  twenty  thousand  measures  of  beaten  wh. 
2.  10  and  twenty  thousand  measures  of  barley 
2.  10  tbousand  baths  of  wine,  and  twenty  tho. 
2.  17  fifty  thousand  and  three  thousand  and  six 
2.  18  he  set  threescore  and  ten  thousand  of  th. 
2. 18  fourscore  thousand  (to  be)  hewers  in  the 
2.  18  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  overseers 
4.  5  it  received  and  held  three  thousand  baths 
7.  5  a  sacrifice  of  twenty  and  two  thousand  ox. 
7.  5  and  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sh. 
9.  25  Solomon  had  four  thousand  stalls  for  ho. 
g,  25  and  chariots,  aud  twelve  thousand  horse. 

11.  1  an  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  cho. 

12.  3  chariots,  and  threescore  thousand  horse. 

13.  3  (even)  four  hundred  thousand  chosen  men 

13.  3  eight  hundred  thousaud  chosen  men,  (be.) 
13. 17  there  fell  down  slain,  .five  hundred  thou. 

14.  8  out  of  Judah  three  hundred  thousand 
14.  8  two  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand,  all 
14.  9  with  an  host  of  a  thousand  thousand,  and 
15. 11  seven  hundred  oxen  and  seven  thousands. 
17ml  seven  thousand  and  seven  hundred  rams 
17. 11  seven  thousand  and  seve  1  hundred  he  go, 

17.  14  of  Judah,  the  captains  of  thousands;  Ad. 
17.  14  mi^lity  men  of  valour  three  hundred  tho. 
17.  15  with  him  two  hundred  and  fourscore  tho. 
17. 16  two  hundred  thousand  mighty  men  of  va. 
17.  17  with  him  armed  men.  .1  wo  hundred  thou. 
17.  18  an  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  ready 

25.  5  made  them  captains  over  thousands,  and 
25.  5  found  them  throe  hundred  thousand  cho. 
25.   6  He  hired  also  an  hundred  thousand  mig. 

25.11  smote  of  the  children  (A  ^eirten  thousand 

25. 12  (other)  ten  thousand  (left)  alive  did  the  ch, 

25.  13  smote  three  thousand  of  them,  and  took 

26.  12  men  of  valour  (were)  frwo  thousand  and 
26.  13  hundred  thousand,  and  seven  thousand 


2  Ch.27. 
28. 
28. 
-c9. 
3"- 
30- 

35' 

35^ 
35' 

Ezra   1. 


Neh. 


Esth 
Job 


42. 

42. 

Psa.  50. 

60. 

68. 

84, 

90. 

91, 

105. 

119, 

Eccl.  6. 

7' 

Song.  4, 


Isa.  7. 
3°- 
36. 
37- 
60. 
32. 
52' 
52- 

Eze.  45. 


Jer. 


4S, 
Dan.    8 


Mic.    5, 
6. 


5  thousand  measures  of  wheat,  and  ten  th. 

6  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  in  one 

5  two  hundred  thousand,  women,  sons,  and 

33  six  hundred  oxen  and  three  thousand  sh. 
24  a  thousand  bullocks  and  seven  thousand 

24  a  thousand  bullocks  and  ten  thousaud  sh. 

7  thirty  thousand,  and  three  thousand  bul. 

8  two  thousand  and  sixhundred  (small  cat.) 

9  five  thousand  (small  cattle),  and  five  hun. 

9  a  thousand  chargers  of  silver,  nine  and  t\v. 

10  Thirty  basins,  .(and)  other  vesselsathou. 

11  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver  (were)  five  th. 
3  two  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 

6  two  thousaud  eight  hundred  and  twelve 

7  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 

12  a  thousand  two  hundred  twenty  and  two 

14  children  of  Bigvai,  two  thousand  fifty  and 
31  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 
35  three  thousandand  sixhundred  and  thirty 

37  The  children  of  Immer,  a  thousand  fifty 

38  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty  and  seven 

39  Thechildrenof  Harim,  a  thousand  andse. 

64  forty  aud  two  thousand  three  hundred 

65  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and 
67  (their)  asses,  six  thousaud  seven  hundred 
69  one  thousand  drams  of  gold,  and  five  tho. 

27  tweuty  basins  of  gold  ofa  thousaud  drams 

13  a  thousand  cubits  on  the  wall  unto  the  du. 

5  two  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 

11  two  thousand  aud  eight  hundred  (and)  ei. 

12  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 

j  7  two  thousand  three  hundred  twenty  and 

19  The  children  of  Bigvai,  two  thousand  th. 

34  a  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  and  four 

35  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty 

40  The  children  of  Immer,  a  thousand  fifty 

41  a  thousand  two  hundred  forty  and  seven 

42  The  children  of  Harim,  a  thousand  ands. 

66  forty  and  two  thousand  three  hundred  and 

67  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and 

69  six  thousaud  seven  hundred  and  twenty 

70  gave  to  the  treasure  a  thousand  drams  of 

71  two  thousaud  and  two  hundred  pound  of 

72  two  thousand  pound  of  silver,  and  three. 
9  I  will  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver 

16  slew  of  their  foes  seventy  and  five  thous. 
3  seven  thousand  sheep,  and  three  thousand 

3  he  canuot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand 
23  one  among  a  thousand,  to  show  unto  man 
12  fourteen  thousand  sheep,  and  six  thousa. 
12  a  thousaud  yoke  of  oxen,  and  a  thousaud 

10  (is)  mine,  (and)  the  cattleupon  athousand 
title,  smote,  .in  the  valley  of  Salt  twelve  th. 

17  The  chariots  of  God  (are),  .thousands  of  a. 

10  a  day  in  thy  courts  (is)  better  thau  a  tho. 

4  a  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  (are  but)  as 

7  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  .at  thy 

8  the  world  (which)  he  commanded  to  a  th. 
72  (is)  better  unto  me  than  thousands  of  gold 

6  though  he  live  a  thousand  years  twice  (t.) 

28  oue  man  among  a  thousand  have  I  found 

4  whereon  there  hang  a  thousand  bucklers 

1 1  every  oue . .  was  to  bring  a  thousand  (pie.) 

12  thou,  0  Solomon,  (must  have)  a  thousand 
23  a  thousand  vines  at  a  thousand  silverlings 
17  Oue  thousand  (shall  flee)at  the  rebuke  of 

8  I  will  give  thee  two  thousand  horses,  if 

36  a  hundred  and  fourscore  and  five  thousa. 
22  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousaml,  and 
iS  showest  loving  kiuduess  unto  thousands 

25  In  the  seventh  year  three  thousand  Jews 
3c  all  the  persons,  .four  thousand  and  six  h. 

,    1  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  thousaud 
1  (reeds),  and  the  breadth  (shall  be)  ten  th. 
3  thousand,  and  the  breadth  of  ten  thousa. 

5  twenty  thousand  of  length,  and  the  ten 

6  thousand  broad,  and  five  aud  twenty  tho. 
3  he  measured  a  thousand  cubits,  and  he  br. 
4,  4  he  measured  a  thousand,  and  brought 
5  he  measured  a  thousand  ;  (and  it  was)  a 

8  fiveand  twenty  thousand(reedsin)bread. 

9  thousand  in  length,  and  of  ten  thousand 
10  toward  the  north  five  and  twenty  thousa. 
10  toward  the  west  ten  thousand  in  breadth 
10  toward  the  east  ten  thousand  in  breadth 
10  toward  the  south  five  and  twenty  thous. 

13  thousand  in  length,  and  ten  thousand  in 
13  twenty  thousand,  aud  the  breadth  tenth, 

15  the  five  thousand  (that  are)  left  in  the  br. 

15  over  against  the  five  and  twenty  thousand 
.  16  the  north  side  four  thousand  and  five  hu. 

16  the  south  side  four  thousand  and  five  hu. 
16  on  the  east  side  four  thousand  and  five  h. 
16 the  west  side  fourthousand  and  five  hun. 

10  ten  thousand  eastward,  and  ten  thousand 

20  twenty  thousand  by  five  and  twenty  thou. 
21,  21  over  against  the  five  and  twenty  thou. 

.  30,  33  four  thousand  and  five  hundred 

.  32  at  the  east  side  four  thousaud  and  five  h, 

34  At  the  west  side  four  thousand  and  five 

35  (It  was)  round  about  eighteen  thousand 

.  14  Unto  two  thousand  and  three  hundred  da. 

11  (there  shall  be)  a  thousand  two  hundred 

12  cometh  to  the  thousand  three  hundred 
.    3  The  city  that  went  out  (by)  a  thousand 

^  (though) thou  be  little  among  the  thousa. 

7  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands 


2..I  thousand)  n?*?,  ^Sx  alaph,  elepk. 

Dan.    5.    1  made  a  great  feast  to  athousand  of  hislo. 
5.    1  and  drank  wine  before  the  thousand 
7.  10  thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him 


3.  Thousands,  xi^L&8es  chiliades. 

Luke  14.  31  whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to 

14.  31  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  thousaud 

Acts   4.   4  number  of  the  men  was  about  five  thous. 

1  Co.  10.    8  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand 
Rev.    5.  1 1  number  of  them  was . .  thousands  of  thou. 

7.    4  an  hundred  (aud)  forty  (and)  four  thous. 
7-    5>  5»  5>  6,  6,  6,  7,  7,  7,  8,  8,  S  twelve  thousand 

11.  13  in  theearthquake  were  slain,  .seven  thou. 
14.  1  an  hundred  forty  (and)  fourthousand,  ha. 
14.  3  the  hundred  (and)  forty  (and)  four  thou. 
21. 16  he  measured  the  city,  .twelve  thousand 

LA  thousand,  x'l^l0L  chilioi. 

2  Pe.    3.    8  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  ye. 
Rev.  11.    3  they  shall  prophesy  a  thousand  two  hun. 

12.  6  they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand  two 
14.  20  the  space  ofa  thousand  {and)  six  hundred 
20.  2  and  Satan,  and  bound  hima  thousand  ye. 
20.  3  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled 
20.  4  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousaud  years 
20.  5  lived  not  again  until  the  thousand  years 
20.  6  and  shall  reign  with  him  athousand  years 
20.  7  when  the  thousand  years  are  expired,  Sa. 

5./1  myriad,  ten-  thousand,  fxvpids  murias. 

Acts  21.  20  how  many  thousands  of  Jews  there  are 
THOUSAND,  fifty  — 
Five  myriads,  (xvpidbas  7reVre  muriadas  pente. 

Acts  19.  19  and  found  (it)  fifty  thousand  (pieces)  of 
THOUSAND,  ten,  five  — 
\.A  myriad,  ten  thousand,  fivptas  murias. 

Jude       14  the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousand  of  his 
2.A  myriad,  ten  thousand,  fxvpioi  murioi. 

Matt.  18. 24;  1  Co.  4. 15;  14.  19. 
%.Five  thousand,  irevraKurxi^ioi  pentakischilioi. 

Matt.  14.  21 ;  16.  9  ;  Mr.  6. 44 ;  8. 19  ;  Lu.  9. 14 ;  Jo.  6.  10 
THOUSANDS,  to  bring  forth  — 
To  bear  thousavids,  f]|?n  ataph,  5. 

Psa.  144.  13  our  sheep  may  bring  forth  thousands  and 
THREAD  — 
\.A  thread,  cord,  E'n  chut. 

Gen.  14.  23  I  will  not  (take)  from  a  thread  even  to  a 

Josh.  2.  iS  thou  shalt  bind  this  line  of  scarlet  thread 

Judg  16.  12  brake  them  from  off  his  arms  like  a  thr. 

Song   4.    3  Thy  lips  (are)  like  a  thread  of  scarlet,  and 

2.  Wire,  ribbon,  thread,  7*59 pathil. 

Judg  16.    9  as  a  thread  of  tow  is  broken  when  it  ton. 

THREATEN  (further,  to)  — 

\.To  threaten,  menace,  aireiXew  qpeileo. 

Acts   4.  17  let  us  straitly  threaten  them,  that  they 
1  Pe.   2.  23  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not ;  but 

2.  To  threaten  further,  irpco-airetAtofxai  prosapeiol. 
Acts    4.  21  when  they  had  further  threatened  them 

THREATENING  — 

Threatening,  menace,  atreiAr)  apeife. 

Acts   4.  29  now, Lord, beholdtheirthreatenings :  and 
9.    1  Saul,  yet  breathing  out  threatenings  and 

Eph.   6.   9  do  the  same  things . .  forbearing  threaten. 

THREE — 

1.  Three,  n^i?p,  ^i?^  shalosh,  sheloslwh. 

Gen.    5.  22  Enoch  walked  with  God.  .three  hundred 

5.  23  the  days  of  Enoch  were  three  hundred  si. 

6.  10  Noah  Vjegat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and 
6. 15  The  length  of  the  ark  (shall  be)  three  hu. 

7.  13  the  three  wives  of  his  sons  with  them,  into 
9.  19  These  (are)  the  three  sous  of  Noah  :  and 
9.  28  Noah  lived  after  the  flood  three  hundred 

11. 13  Arphaxad  lived,  .four  hundred  aud  three 
11.  15  Salah  lived,  .four  hundred  aud  three  ye. 
T4.  14  armed  his  trained  (servants),  .three  hun. 
18.  2  looked,  and,  lo,  three  men  stood  by  him 
18.  6  Make  ready  quickly  three  measures  of  fi. 
29.    2  there  (were)  three  flocks  of  sheep  lying  by 

29.  34  because  I  have  born  him  three  sons :  th. 

30.  36  lie  set  three  days' journey  betwixt  himself 
3S.  24  it  came  to  pass,  about  three  months  after 
40.  10  in  the  vine  (were)  three  branches :  and  it 
40.  12  Joseph  said . .  The  three  branches  (are)  th. 
40. 13,  iq  Vet  within  three  days  shall  Pharaoh 
40.  16  behold,  (I  had)  three  white  baskets  on  my 
40.  rS  Joseph  answered.  .The  three  baskets(are) 
42.  17  lie  put  them  altogether  into  ward  three 

45.  22  to  Benjamin  he  gave  three  hundred  (pi.) 

46.  15  sons  and  his  daughters,  .thirty  and  three 
Exod.  2.    2  when  she  saw  him . .  she  hid  him  three  mo. 

3.  18  let  us  go,  we  beseech  thee,  three  days' jo. 

5.  3  let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  three  days"  jour. 

6.  18  (were)  an  hundred  thirty  and  three  years 

7.  7  and  Aaron  fourscore  and  three  years  old 

8.  27  We  will  go  three  days'  journey  into  the 
10.  22  darkness  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  three 
10.  23  neither  rose  any  from  his  place  for  three 
15.  22  theywentthreedaysinthewilderiu is  1,1  nd 
21. 11  if  he  do  not  these  three  unto  her,  then 
23.  14  Three  times  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  unto 
23.  17  Three  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  sh. 
~5-  32*  ^2  three  branches  of  the  candlestick  out 
25.  33  Three  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds,(wi.) 
25.  33  three  bowls  made  like  almonds  in  the  ot. 
27.    1  and  the  height  thereof  (shall  be)  three  cu. 
2;.  14,  15  pillars  three,  and  their  sockets  three 
jb,  38  there  fell  of  the  people.. three  thousand 
37. 18,  18  three  branches  of  the  candlestick  cut 
37.  19  Three  bowls  made  after  the  fashion  of  al. 


THREE 


983 


THREE 


Exod37-  ig  three  bowls  made  like  almonds  in  another 
38.    1  (it  was)  foursquare;  and  three  cubits  the 
38.  14,  15  pillars  three,  and  their  sockets  three 
38.  26  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty 

Lev.  12.    4  shall  then  continue.,  three  and  thirty  days 

14.  10  three  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  (for)  a  meat 
19.  23  three  years  shall  it  be  as  uncircumcised 

25.  21  and  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  three  ye. 

27.  6  thy  estimation  (shall  be)  three  shekels  of 
Num.  1.  23  fifty  and  nine  thousand  and  three  hund. 

1.  43  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundr. 

1.  46  three  thousand  andfive  hundred  and  fifty 

2.  13  fifty  and  nine  thousand  and  three  hundred 
2.  30  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundr. 

2.  32  three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty 

3.  50  a  thousand  three  hundred  and  threescore 

4.  44  were  three  thousand  and  two  hundred 
10.  33  they  departed  fn^m  the  mount.,  three  days' 
10. 33  went  before  them  in  the  three  days'  jour. 

12.  4  Come  out  ye  three,  .they  three  came  out 

15.  9  a  meat  offering  of  three  tenth  deals  of  fl. 
22. 28  thou  hast  smitten  me  these  three  times 
22.  32  hast  thou  smitten  thine  ass  these  three  ti. 
22.  33  saw  me,  and  turned  from  me  these  three 
24.  10  hast  altogether  blessed  (them),  these  three 

26.  7  forty  and  three  thousand  and  seven  huu. 
26.  25  threescore  aud  four  thousand  and  three 
26.  47  fifty  and  three  thousand  and  four  hundr. 
26.  62  twenty  and  three  thousand,  all  males  from 
28. 12  three  tenth  deals  of  flour  (for)  a  meat  ofl. 

28.  20  three  tenth  deals  shall  ye  offer  for  a  bul. 

28.  28  three  tenth  deals  unto  one  bullock,  two 

29.  3  three  tenth  deals  for  a  bullock,  (and)  two 
29.  9  three  tentli  deals  to  a  bullock,  (and)  two 
29. 14  three  tenth  deals  unto  every  bullock  of 
31.36  three  hundred  thousand  and  seven  andth. 
31.  43  three  hundred  thousand  and  thirty  thou. 
33.  8  went  three  days'  journey  in  the  wilderu. 
33.  39  an  hundred  aud  twenty  and  three  years 

35. 14  three  cities  on  this  side  Jordan,  and  three 
Deut.  4.  41  Moses  severed  three  cities  on  this  side  J. 

14.28  At  the  end  of  three  years  thou  shalt  bring 

16.  16  Three  times  in  a  year  shall  all  thy  males 

17.  6  At  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses,  or  three 
ig.    2  Thou  shalt  separate  three  cities  for  thee 
19.   7  Thou  shalt  separate  three  cities  for  thee 
19.   9  add  three  cities  more . .  besides  these  three 
19.  15  at  the  mouth  of  three  witnesses,  shall  the 

Josh.  1. 11  within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over  this 
2.  16  hide  yourselves  there  three  days,  until  the 

2.  22  abode  there  three  days,  until  the  pursuers 

3.  2  it  came  to  pa^s  after  three  days,  that  the 
7.  3  let  about  i  .to  or  three  thousand  men  go  up 
7.  4  there  went  up . .  about  three  thousand  men 
9. 16  at  the  end  of  three  days  after  they  had  ma. 

15.  14  Caleb  drove  thence  the  three  sous  of  Anak 

17.  11  Megiddo  and  her  towns,  (even) three  con. 

18.  4  Give  out  from  among  you  three  men  for 
21.  32  and  Kartan  with  her  suburbs;  three  cities 

Judg.  1.  20  he  expelled  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak 
7.   6  the  number  of  them . .  were  three  hundred 
7.    7  By  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped 
7.    8  and  retained  those  three  hundred  men 
7.  16  divided  the  three  hundred  men  (into)three 
7.  20  the  three  companies  blew  the  trumpets 

7.  22  the  three  hundred  blew  the  trumpets,  aud 

8.  4  he,  and  the  three  hundred  men  that  (were) 

9.  22  Abimelech  had  reigned  three  years  over 
9.  43  divided  them  into  three  companies,  and 

10.  2  he  judged  Israel  twenty  and  three  years 

11.  26  "While  Israel  dwelt.,  three  hundred  years? 

14.  14  they  could  not  in  three  days  expound  the 

15.  4  Samson  went  and  caught  three  hundred 

15.  11  three  thousand  men  of  Judah  went  to  the 

16. 15  thou  hast  mocked  me  these  three  times 

16.  27  about  three  thousand  men  and  women 

19.  4  he  abode  with  him  three  days:  so  they  did 

1  Sa.   1.  24  took  him  up  with  her,  with  three  bullocks 

2.  13  with  a  flesh  hook  of  three  teeth  in  his  ha. 
2.  21  she  conceived,  and  bare  three  sons  and  two 
9.  20  as  for  thine  asses  that  were  lost  three  days 
10.    3  there  shall  meet  thee  three  men  going  up 

10.  3  three  kids,  and  another  carrying  three 

11.  8  the  children  of  Israel  were  three  hundred 

11. 11  Saul  put  the  people  in  three  companies 

13.  2  Saul  chose  him  three  thousand  (men)  of  Is. 

13.  17  the  spoilers  came  out.  .in  three  companies 
17. 13  the  three  eldest  sons  of  Jesse  went  (aud) 

17. 13  the  names  of  his  three  sons  that  went  to 

17. 14  David  (was)  the  youngest.,  the  three  eldest 
20. 20  J  will  shoot  three  arrows  on  the  side  (th.) 
20. 41  fell . .  to  the  ground ,  and  bowed . .  three  ti. 

24.  2  Saul  took  three  thousand  chosen  men  out 

25.  2  he  had  three  thousand  sheep,  and  a  th. 

26.  2  having  three  thousand  chosen  men  of  Isr. 

30. 12  nor  drunk  (any)  water,  three  days  andth. 

30. 13  my  master  left  me,  because  three  daysag. 
31.  6  Saul  died,  aud  his  three  sous,  aud  his  ar. 
31.   8  they  found  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fallen 

2  Sa.  2.  iS  there  were  three  sons  of  Zerniah  there,  J. 

2.  31  three  hundred  and  threescore  men  died 
5.   s  he  reigned  thirty  and  three  years  over  all 
6. 11  ark.  .continued  in  the  house. . three mon. 
13-  33  went  to  Geshur,  and  was  there  three  years 

14.  27  unto  Absalom  there  were  born  three  sons 

18. 14  he  took  three  darts  in  his  hand,  and  thr. 

20.  4  Assemble  me  the  men.  .within  three  days 

21.  1  a  famine  in  the  days  of  David  three  years 

21. 16  whose  spear(weighed)three  hundred  (sh.) 
23.  9  (one)  of  the  three  mighty  men  with  David 
23.  13  three  of  the  thirty  chief  went  down,  and 
23.  16  the  three  mighty  men  brake  through  the 


>Sa.23. 


24. 
24. 

IT'24* 

[  Ki.  2. 
2. 
4- 
5- 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
9- 


15. 

*7- 

22. 

1  Ki.  2. 


rCh.  2 


>Ch. 


3i- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 

Ezra  2. 


17  These  things  did  these  three  mighty  men 

18  the  son  of  Zeruiah,  was  chief  among  three 
iS  he  lifted  up  his  spearagainst  three  huud. 

18  slew  (them),  and  had  the  name  among  th. 

19  "Was  he  not  most  honourable  of  three? 
19  howbeit  he  attained  not  unto  the  (first)  th. 

22  and  had  the  name  among  three  mighty 

23  but  he  attained  not  to  the  (first)  three 

12  I  oiler  thee  three  (things) ;  choose  thee 

13  wilt  thou  flee  three  months  before  thine 

13  or  that  there  be  three  days'  pestilence  in 

11  thirty  and  three  years  reigned  he  hi  Jer. 
39  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  three  years 
32  he  spake  three  thousand  proverbs :  and 

16  three  thousand  and  three  hundred,  which 
36  he  built  the  inner  court  with  three  rows 

4  And  (there  were)  windows  (in)  three  rows 
4,  5  light  (was)against  light  (in)three  ranks 

12  three  rows  of  hewed  stones,  and  a  row  of 
25  three  looking  toward  the  north,  and  three 
25  three  looking  toward  the  south,  and  three 
27  four  cubits  the  breadth,  .and  three  cubits 
25  three  times  in  a  year  did  Solomon  offer 

17  (Ire  made)  three  hundred  shields  (of)  bea. 
17  three  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield 
22  once  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of  Th. 

3  princesses,  and  three  hundred  concubines 

5  Depart  yet  (for)  three  days,  then  come  ag. 

2  Three  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem :  and 

21  stretched  himself  upon  the  child  three  t. 

I  they  continued  three  years  without  war 
17  and  they  sought  three  days,  but  found 
10,  13  hath  called  these  three  kings  together 

32  there  looked  out  tohim  two  (or)  three eu. 

6  in  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Icing 

1  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Joash 
25  three  times  did  Joash  beat  him,  and  rec. 

5  went  up  to  Samaria,  and  besieged  it  three 

10  And  at  the  end  of  three  years  they  took  it 

14  three  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  thirty 
31  Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years 
31  and  he  reigned  three  months  in  Jerusalem 

1  Jehoiakim  became  his  servant  threeyears 
8  and  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  three  months 

17  and  the  height  of  the  chapiter  three  cub. 
iS  took  Seraiah.  .and  the  three  keepers  of 

3  three  were  born  unto  him  of  the  daughter 

16  Abishai,  and  Joab,  and  Asahel,  three 

22  Jair,  who  had  three  and  twenty  cities  in 

4  in  Jerusalem  he  reigned  thirty  and  three 

23  Elioenai,  and  Hezekiah,  and  Azrikam,  thr. 

6  Bela,  and  Eecher,  and  Jediael,  three 

6  So  Saul  died,  aud  his  three  sons,  and  all 

11  lifted  up  his  spear  against  three  hundred 

12  Ahohite,  who  (was  one)  of  the  three  migh. 

15  Now  three  of  the  thirty  captains  went  do. 

18  three  brake  through  the  host  of  the  Phil. 

19  These  things  did  these  three  mightiest 

20  chief  of  the  three,  .a  name  among  the  th. 

20  for  lifting  up  his  spear  against  three  hu. 

21  Of  the  three  he  was  more  honourable  th. 
2i,  25  attained  not  to  the  (first)  three 

24  and  had  a  name  among  the  three  might. 
27  with  him  (were)  three  thousand  and  seven 

29  of  the  children  of  Benjamin .  .three  thou. 
39  there  they  were  with  David  three  days 
14  ark  of  God  remained,  .threemonths.  And 
10  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  offer  thee  three 
12  Either  three  years'  famine;  or  three  mo. 

12  or  else  three  days  the  sword  of  the  Lord 

8  chief  (was)  Jehiel . .  Zethain,  and  Joel,  th. 

9  Shelomith,  aud  Haziel,  and  Haran,  three 
23  Mahli,  and  Eder,  and  Jeremoth,  three 
iS  The  three  and  twentieth  to  Delaiah,  the 

5  gave  to  Henian  fourteen  sons  and  three 

30  The  three  and  twentieth  to  Mahazioth 

4  three  thousand  talentsof  gold,  of  the  gold 
27  thirty  and  three  (years)  reigned  he  in  Je. 

2  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  to  oversee 

17  fiftythousand  and  three  thousand  andsix 

18  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  overseers 
4  three  looking  toward  the  north,  and  three 

4  three  looking  toward  the  south,  and  three 

5  it  received  and  held  three  thousand  baths 

13  made  a  brasen  scaffold,  of.  .three  cubits 
10  ou  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the  se. 

13  three  times  in  the  year,  (even)  in  the  fea. 

16  three  hundred  shields(madehe  of)  beaten 

16  three  hundred  (shekels)  of  gold  went  to 
21  every  three  years  once  came  the  ships  of 

5  Come  again  unto  me  after  three  days. 

17  three  years:  for  three  years  they  walked 
2  He  reigned  three  years  in  Jerusalem.  His 

8  out  of  Judah  three  'hundred  thousand;  and 

9  thousand  thousand,  and  three  hundred  c. 

14  mighty  men  of  valour  three  hundred  th. 

25  they  were  three  days  in  gathering  of  the 
5  found  them  three  hundred  thousand  ch. 

13  smote  three  thousand  of  them,  and  took 
13  under  their  baud  (was)  an  army  three  hu. 

33  six  hundred  oxen  and  three  thousand  sh. 
id  from  three  years  old  and  upward,  (even) 

7  thirty  thousand,  and  three  thousand  bul. 

8  gave  unto  the  priests,  .three  hundred  ox. 
2  Jehoahaz  (waV)  twenty  and  three  years  old 
2  andhereigned  three  months  in  Jerusalem 

9  reigned  three  months  and  ten  days  in  J. 
4  children  of  Shephatiah,  three  hundred  s. 

II  of  Bebai,  six  hundred  twenty  and  three 
17  of  Bezai,  three  hundred  twenty  and  three 

19  of  Hashum,  two  hundred  twenty  and  th. 
21  Beth-lehem,  an  hundred  twenty  and  thr. 


Ezra  2.  25  Beeroth,  seven  hundred  and  forty  and  th. 
2.  28  and  Ai,  two  hundred  twenty  and  three 
2. 32  children  of  Harim,  three  hundred  and  tw. 
2.  34  children  of  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty 
2.  35  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  and  tli. 
2. 36  of  Jeshua,  nine  hundred  seventy  and  th. 
2.  50  Xethinims .  .(were)  three  hundred  ninety 
2.  64  two  thousand  three  hundred  (and)  tliree. 
2.  G5  seven  thousand  three  hundred  thirty  and 
8.  5  sou  of  Jahaziel,  and  with  him  three  hum 
8.  15  and  there  abode  we  hi  tents  three  days 
8.  32  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  abode  there  thr. 
10.  8  whosoever  would  not  come  within  three 
10.   9  together  unto  Jerusalem  within  three  da. 

Neh.  2.  11  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  was  there  three 
7.  9 "children  of  Shephatiah,  three  hundred  se. 
7.  17  two  thousand  three  hundred  twenty  and 
7.  22  of  Hashum,  three  hundred  twenty  and 
7.  23  children  of  Bezai,  three  hundred  twenty 
7.  29  Beeroth,  seven  hundred  forty  and  three 
7.  32  men  of .  .Ai,au  hundred  twenty  and  three 
7.  35  children  of  Harim,  three  hundred  and  tw. 
7.  36  children  of  Jericho,  three  hundred  forty 
7.  38  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty 
7.  39  The  priests,  .nine  hundred  seventy  and  t. 
7.  60  Kethinims.  .(were)  three  hunched  ninety 
7. 66  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  threesc. 

7.  67  of  whom  (there  were)  seven  thousand  th. 
Esth.  4.  16  neither  eat  nor  drink  three  days,  night  or 

8.  9  on  the  three  and  twentieth  (day)  thereof 
9. 15  slew  three  hundred  men  at  Shushan:  but 

Job      1.   2  born  unto  him  seven  sons  and  three  dau. 
1.    3  His  substance  also  was.  .three  thousand 

1.  4  sent  and  called  for  their  tliree  sisters,  to 
1. 17  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands,  and  fell 
2. 11  Kow  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  of  all 

32.  1  So  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  Job 
32.  3  Also  against  his  three  friends  was  his  wr. 
32.    5  answer  in  the  mouth  of  (these)  three  men 

42. 13  He  had  also  seven  sons  and  three  daught. 
Prov.30.  15  There  are  three  (things  that)  are  never  s. 

30. 18  There  be  three  (things  which)  are  too  wo. 

30.  21  For  three  (things)  the  earth  is  disquieted 

30.  29  Therebe  three  (things)  which  go  well,  yea 
Isa.   16.  14  Within  three  years,  as  the  years  of  an  hir. 

17.    6  two  (or)  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  up. 

20.    3  walked  naked  and  barefoot  three  years  (for) 
Jer.   25.    3  that  (is)  the  three  and  twentieth  year,  the 

36.  23  when  Jehudi  had  read  tliree  or  four  leav. 

52.  24  second  priest,  and  the  three  keepers  of 

52.  28  three  thousand  Jews,  and  three  and  twe. 

52.  30  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Neb. 
Eze.    4.    5  three  hundred  and  ninety  days :  so  shalt 
4.    9  three  hundred  and  ninety  days  shalt  thou 

14. 14  Though  these  three  men,  Noah,  Daniel 

14.  16,  18  these  three  men  (were)  in  it,  (as)  I  live 
40.  10,  21,  three  on  this  side,  and  three  on  that 
40. 10  they  three  (were)  of  one  measure:  and  the 

40.  48  breadth  of  the  gate  (was)  three  cubits  on 
40. 4S  and  three  cubits  on  that  side 

41.  6  side  chambers  (were)  three,  one  over  ano. 
41. 16  galleries  round  about  on  their  three  sto. 
41.  22  altar  of  wood  (was) three  cubits  high,  and 
48.  31  three  gates  northward ;  one  gate  of  Reu. 
4S.  32  at  the  east  side,  .three  gates;  and  one  ga. 
48.  33  three  gates;  one  gate  of  Simeon,  ouegate 
48.  34  three  gates ;  one  gate  of  Gad,  one  gate  of 

Dan.    1.   5  so  nourishing  them  three  years,  that  at 
8. 14  TTnto  two  thousand  and  tliree  hundred  d. 
10.   2  I  Daniel  was  mourning  three  full  weeks 

10.  3  anoint  myself  at  all,  till  three  whole  wee. 

11.  2  there  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  P. 
12. 12  cometh  to  the  thousand  three  hundred 

Amos  1.    3,  6,  9,  11,  13  For  three  transgressions  of 

2.  1,  4,  6 1  saith  the  Lord,  For  three  transgress. 
4.    4  and  bring,  .your  tithes  after  three  years 
4.    7  when  (there  were)  yet  three  months  to  the 
4.    8  two  (or)  tliree  cities  wandered  unto  one 

Jon.    1.  17  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  three  days  and  th. 

3.  3  was  an  exceeding  great  city  of  three  days' 
Zech  11.    8  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  mo. 

2. Tliree,  ''<?.:;,  wwr>&  sheloshran,  sheloshah. 

2  Sa.  23.  13  three  of  the  thirty  chief  went  down,  and 

3.  Third,  why  shclishi. 

2  Sa.  23.  iS  Abishai..  son  of  Zeruiah..  chief  among  th. 
Eze.  42.    3  gallery  against  gallery  in  three  (stories) 

4>To  be  threefold,  three  years  old,  whw  sho.lash,  4. 
Eze.  42.    6  For  they  (were)  iu  three  (stories),  buthad 
S.Three,  the  telath. . 

Ezra    6.'  4  three  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of 

Dan.    3.  23  these  three  men,  Shadrach,  Meshachand 

3.  24  Did  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  in  to  the 

6.   2  over  these  three  presidents,  of  whom  Da. 

6.  10  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a  day 
6. 13  but  maketh  his  petition  three  times  a  day 

7.  5  (it  had)  three  ribs  in  the  mouth  of  it  bet. 
7.    8  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns  pluck. 
7.  20  which  came  up,  and  before  whom  three 
7.  24  be  diverse,  .and  he  shall  subdue  three  ki. 

6, Three,  rpe?s  tret's. 

Matt  12.  40  as  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights 

12.  40  so  shall  the  Son .  .be  three  days  and  three 
13.33  leaven,  which  awoman  took  and  hid  in  th. 

15.  32  because  they  continue  with  me  three  days 

17.  4  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  three  tabernac. 

18.  16  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
18.  20  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together 
26.  61  said,  I  am  able.. to  build  it  in  three  days 
27.40  Thou  that.. buildest(it)iu  three  days,  save 


THREE 


984 


THRONE 


Matt  27.  63  that  deceiver  said.  .After  three  days  I  will 
Mark  8.    2  they  have  now  been  with  me  three  days 

8.  31  be  killed,  and  after  three  days  rise  again 

9.  5  let  us  make  three  tabernacles ;  one  for  th. 

14.  58  within  three  days  I  will  build  another  ma. 

15.  29  that  destroyest. .  and  buiUlest  (it)  in  three 
Luke  1.  56  Mary  abode  with  her  about  three  months 

2.  46  after  three  days  they  found  him  in  the  te. 

4.  25  the  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years,  and 
9.  33  let  us  make  three  tabernacles ;  one  for  th. 

10.  36  Which  now  of  these  three,  thinkest  thou 

11.  5  say  unto  him,  Friend,  lend  me  three  loa. 

12.  52  three  against  two,  and  two  against  three 

13.  7  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on 

13.  21  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal 
John  2.    6  containing  two  or  three  firkins  apiece 

2.  19  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I 
2.  20  and  wilt  thou  rear  it  up  in  three  days? 
2i.  11  fishes,  an  hundred  and  fifty  and  three 
Acts    5.    7  it  was  about  the  space  of  three  hours  af. 

7.  20  nourished  up  in  his  father's  house  tliree 
9.    9  he  was  three  days  without  sight,  and  ne. 

10.  ig  said  unto  him,  Behold,  [three]  men  seek 

11.  11  there  were  three  men  already  come  unto 
17.    2  three  sabbath  days  reasoned  with  them 

19.  8  spake  boldly  for  the  space  of  three  mon. 

20.  3  (there)  abode  three  months.    And  when 

25.  1  after  three  days  he  ascended  from  Cesarea 
28.  7  received  us,  and  lodged  us  three  days  co. 
28. 11  after  three  months  we  departed  in  a  ship 
28.  12  landing  at  Syracuse,  we  tarried  (there)  th. 
28.  17  after  three  days  Paul  called  the  chief  of 

1  Co.  10.    8  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand 

13.13  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these  th. 

14.  27  at  the  most  (by)  three,  and  (that)  by  cou. 

14.  29  Let  the  prophets  speak  two  or  three,  and 

2  Co.  13.  1  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  sh. 
Gal.  1.  iS  after  three  years  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem 
1  Ti.  5.  19  receive  not.  .but  before  two  or  three  wit. 
Heb.  10.  28  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three 
Jas.  5.  17  by  the  space  of  three  years  and  six  mon. 
1  Jo.    5.    7  there  are  three . .  [and  these  three  are  one] 

5.  8  there  are  three,  .and  these  three  agree  in 
Rev.    6.    6  and  three  measures  of  barley  for  a  penny 

8.  13  voices  of  the  trumpet  of  the  three  angels 
9. 18  By  these  three  was  the  third  part  of  men 

11.  9  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and 
11.  n  after  three  days  and  an  half  the  spirit  of 
16.  13  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs  (co.) 
16.  19  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  pa. 

21.  13  the  east,  three  gates ;  on  the  north,  three 
21.  13  south,  three  gates;  and  on  the  west,  three 

THREE  (hundred,  thousand)  — 

1.  Three  hundred,  Tpta/coVtoi  triakosioi. 

Marki4.    5  sold  for  more  than  three  hundred  pence 
John  1 2.    5  Why  was  not  this . .  sold  for  three  hundred 

%Three  thousand,  rpurx^101  trischilioi. 

Acts    2.  41  there  were  added,  .about  three  thousand 
THREE  days,  months,  times,  years  old,  space  of  — 
1. Third,  V'^fJ  shetishi. 

Isa.    15.    5  an  heifer  of  three  years  old  :  for  by  the  m. 

Jer.  48.  34  an  heifer  of  three  years  old 

2.  To  be  threefold,  three  years  old,  thy  shalash,  4. 

Gen.  15.   9  Take  me  an  heifer  of  three  years  old,  and 

15.  9  of  three  years  old . .  of  three  years  old,  and 

3.  Third,  tivshp  shilshom. 

1  Sa.  21.   5  kept  from  usabout  these  three  days,  since 
i.Three  months,  Tpifxnvov  trimnion. 

Heb.  11.  23  Moses,  .was  hid  three  months  of  his  par. 
Z.Thrice,  rpls  tris. 

Acts  11.  10  this  was  done  three  times,  and  all  were 
Q.Three  years,  rpierla  trietia. 

Acts  20.  31  by  the  space  of  three  years  I  ceased  not 
THREE  days  or  parts,  to  stay  or  divide  into  — 
To  put  into  three,  stay  three  days,  vh'J  shalash,  3. 

Deut  19.    3  Thou  shalt.  .divide  the  coasts,  .into  three 

1  Sa.  20.  19  And  (when)  thou  hast  stayed  three  days 
THREE  TAVERNS,  Tpels  TaQcpvai. 

A  place  thirty-two  miles  S.  of  Rome,  on  the  road  which 
Paul  travelled  after  he  landed  at  Puteoli,  and  where 
some  brethren  met  him. 

Acts  28.  15  they  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as.  .TheT.  T. 
THREEFOLD  — 
To  be  threefold,  vby  shalash,  4. 

Eccl.   4.  12  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken 
THREESCORE  — 
1.  Sixty,  Wfip  shishshim. 

Gen.  25.  26  Isaac  (was)  threescore  years  old  when  she 
46.  26  wives,  all  the  souls  (were)  threescore  and 

Lev.  i2.    5  shall  continue,  .threescore  and  six  days 

Num.  1.  39  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 

2.  26  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 

3.  50  thousand  three  hundred  and  threescore 

26.  25  threescore  and  four  thousand  and  three 
26.  27  threescore  thousand  and  five  hundred 
26.  43  threescore  and  four  thousand  and  four  h. 
31.  34  And  threescore  and  one  thousand  asses 
31.  39  of  which  the  Lord's  tribute  (was)  threes. 

Deut.  3.    4  threescore  cities,  all  the  region  of  Argob 
Josh  13.  30  which  (are)  in  Bashan,  threescore  cities 

2  Sa.    2.  31  three  hundred  and  threescore  men  died 
1  Ki.   4.  13  threescore  great  cities  with  walls  and  br. 

4.  23  thirty  measures  of  fine  flour,  and  threes. 

6.  2  leugththereof(was)threescorecubits,and 


1  Ki.  10.  14  six  hundred  threescore  and  six  talents  of 

2  Ki.25. 19  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  land 

1  Ch.  2.  21  whom  he  married  when  he  (was)  threesc. 

2.  23  and  the  towns  thereof,  (even)  threescore 

5.  18  seven  hundred  and  threescore,  that  went 
9.  13  thousand  and  seven  hundred  and  threes. 

16.  38  with  their  brethren,  threescore  and  eight 
26.    8  (were)  threescore  and  two  of  Obed-edom 

2  Ch.  3.    3  length,  .(was)  threescore  cubits,  and  the 

9. 13  six  hundred  and  threescore  and  six  talents 

11.  21  threescore  concubines;  and  begat,  .thre. 

12.  3  chariots,  and  threescore  thousand  horse. 
Ezra  2.    9  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and  threescore 

2.  64  two  thousand  three  hundred  (and)  three. 

8.  10  witbhimanhundredaudthreescoremales 
8. 13  Sheraaiah,  and  with  them  threescore  ma. 

Neh.  7. 14  of  Zaccai,  seven  hundred  and  threescore 
7.  18  of  Adonikam,  two  thousand  threescore 
7. 19  of  Bigvai,  threescore  and  six  hundred 
7.  66  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  threes. 

7.  72  and  threescore  and  seven  priests' garments 

11.  6  four  hundred  threescore  and  eight  valiant 
Song  3.    7  threescore  valiant  men  (are)  about  it,  of 

6.  8  There  are  threescore  queens, and  fourscore 
Isa.     7.  ■  8  within  threescore  and  five  years  shall  Ep. 
Jer.  52.  25  threescore  men  of  the  people  of  the  land 
Eze.  40.  14  He  made  also  posts  of  threescore  cubits 
Dan.   9.  25  seven  weeks,  and  threescore  and  two  we. 

9.  26  after  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall  Me. 

2.Sixty,  I'Rr  shitlin. 

Ezra   6.   3  threescore  cubits.. breadth.. threescore 
Dan.    3.    1  whose  height  (was)  threescore  cubits,(and) 
5.  31  (being)  about  threescore  and  two  years  old 

3. Sixty,  e^-fjKovra  hexikonta. 

Luke24.  13  which  was  from  Jerusalem,  .threescore  f. 
1  Ti.  5.  9  Let  not  a  widow  be  taken,  .under  threes. 
Rev.  11.   3  a  thousand  two  hundred  (and)  threescore 

12.  6  a  thousand  two  hundred  (and)  threescore 
13. 18  his  number(is)six  hundred  threescore(and) 

THREESCORE  and  ten  — 

1. Seventy,  D'ysy'  shibim. 

Gen.  46.  27  the  souls,  .which  came.,  threescore  and  t. 
50.  3  mourned  for  him  threescore  and  ten  days 
Exodis.  27  wells,  .and  threescore  and  ten  palm  trees 
Nuni33.  9  in  Elim  (were).. threescore  and  ten  palm  t. 
Deut  10.  E2  down  into  Egypt  with  threescore  and  ten 
Judg.  1.    7  Threescore  and  ten  kings,  having  their  t. 

8.  30  Gideon  had  threescore  and  ten  sons  of  his 

9.  2  threescore  and  ten  persons,  reign  over  you 
9.  4  they  gave  him  threescore  and  ten  (pieces) 
9.  5,  18  threescore  and  ten  persons,  upon  one 
9.  24  to  the  threescore  and  ten  sons  of  Jerubbaal 

12. 14  that  rode  on  threescore  and  ten  ass  colts 
1  Sa.  6.  19  fifty  thousand  and  threescore  and  ten  men 
1  Ki.   5.  15  Solomon  had  threescore  and  ten  thousand 

1  Ch.21.    5  Judah  (was)  four  hundred  threescore  and 

2  Ch.  2.    2  Solomon  told  out  threescore  and  ten  tho. 

2.  18  he  set  threescore  and  ten  thousand  of  them 

29.  32  was  threescore  and  ten  bullocks,  an  hun. 

36.  21  kept  sabbath,  to  fulfil  threescore  and  ten 

Tsa.  90.  10  The  days,  .(are)  threescore  years  and  ten 

Zech.  1.  12  had  indignation  these  threescore  and  ten 

2.  Seventy,  ^^do^Kovra  hebdomekonta. 

Acts  23.  23  Make  ready . .  horsemen  threescore  and  ten 

THREESCORE  thousand  — 

Six  myriads,  rrixia-]  b>b>  shesh  ribboth. 

Ezra    2.  69  threescore  and  one  thousaud  drams  of  go. 

THREESCORE  and  fifteen  — 

1.  Seventy  and  five,  iyprn  D'y^  shibim  veehamesh. 
Gen.  25.    7  an  hundred  threescore  and  fifteen  years 
Exod38.  25  seven  hundred  and  threescore  and  fifteen 
Nuni3i.  37  was  six  hundred  and  threescore  and  fifteen 

2. Seventy five,  hffioiinKovTairevT*  hebdomekontapen. 

Acts    7.  14  all  his  kindred,  threescore  and  fifteen  so. 
THREESCORE  and  fourteen  — 
Four  and  seventy,  cjJTy'i  'li^lN  arbaah  veshibim. 

Num.  1.  27  threescore  and  fourteen  thousand  and  six 
2.   4  threescore  aud  fourteen  thousand  and  six 

THREESCORE  and  seventeen  — 

Seventy  and  seven,  nj;n?;i  nyip  shibim  veshibah. 
Judg.  8.  14  elders  thereof,  (even)  threescore  and  sev. 

THREESCORE  and  sixteen  — 

l.Six  and  seventy,  D'yiiti'i  rvfp  shishshah  veshibim. 
Nuni26.  22  threescore  and  sixteen  thousaud  and  five 

%  Seventy  six,  ^Bo/j-ypcot/ra^  Iwhdomekontaex. 
Acts  27.  37  two  hundred  threescore  and  sixteen  souls 

THREESCORE  and  thirteen  — 

Three  and  seventy,  D'l'Str]  ntfhip  sheloshah  veshibim. 
Num.  3.  43,  46  two  hundred  and  threescore  and  thir. 

THREESCORE  and  twelve  — 

Two  and  seventy,  □"yrip'i  D'jis'  shenayim  veshibim. 
Num. 31.  33  threescore  and  twelve  thousand  beeves 
31.  38  the  Lord's  tribute  (was)  threescore  and  t. 

THRESH,  be  threshed,  to  — 

\.To  tread  down,  thresh,  ts»n  dush. 

2  Ki.13.    7  had  made  them  like  the  dust  by  threshing 

1  Ch.21.  20  Now  Oman  was  threshing  wheat 

Isa.   28.  28  because  he  will  not  ever  be  threshing  it 

41.  15  thou  shalt  thresh  themountains,  and  beat 
Amos  1.  3  because  they  have  threshed  Gilead  with 
Mic.  4. 13  Arise  and  thresh,  0  daughter  of  Zion :  for 
Hab.    3.  12  thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  anger 


2.  To  be  trodden  down,  threshed,  eftl  dush,  6. 
Isa.   28.  27  For  the  fitches  are  not  threshed  with  a 

3.  To  cause  to  go,  tread,  tjti  darak,  5. 

Jer.  51.  33  daughter  of  Bebylon..  (it  is)  time  to  thresh 

4.  To  beat  out  or  off,  oziri  chabat. 

Judg.  6.  11  Gideon  threshed  wheat  by  the  wine  press. 

5.  To  tread  down,  thresh,  a\o<Lu>  aloao. 

1  Co.  9.  10  that  he  that  thresheth  in  hope  should  be 
THRESHING  (floor,  instrument,  place)  — 
\. Threshing  floors,  pT!*$  idderin. 

Dan.   2.  35  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing  ft 

2.  Threshing  floor,  \"$  goren. 

Gen.  50.  10  they  came  to  the  threshing  floor  of  Atad 
Num  15.  20  the  heave  offering  of  the  threshing  floor 

iS.  27  though  (it  were)  the  corn  of  thethreshingf. 

18.  30  as  the  increase  of  the  threshing  floor,  and 
Ruth  3.    2  hewinnoweth  barley.. in  the  threshing  fl. 

1  Sa.  23.    1  fight.. and  they  rob  the  threshing  floors 

2  Sa.    6.   6  when  they  came  to  Nachon's  threshing  fl. 

24.  16  angel  of  theXORD  was  by  thethreshingpl. 
24.  18  rear  an  altar,  .in  the  threshing  floor  of  A. 
24.  21  To  buy  the  threshing  floor  of  thee,  to  bu. 
24.  24  David  bought  the  threshing  floor  and  the 

1  Ch.13.    9  when  they  came  unto  the  threshing  floor 

21.  15  stood  by  the  threshing  floor  of  Oman  the 
21.  18  in  the  threshing  floor  of  Oman  the  Jebu. 
21.  21  wentoutof  the  threshing  floor,  and  bowed 
21.  22  Grantme  the  place  of  (this)threshingfloor 
21.  28  had  answered  him  in  the  threshing  floor 

2  Ch.  3.  1  had  prepared  in  the  threshing  floor  of  Or. 
Jer.   51. 33  daughter  of  Babylon .  .like  a  threshing  fl. 

3.  Treading  down,  threshing,  tfa  dayish. 

Lev.  26.   5  your  threshing  shall  reach  unto  the  vin. 

4.  A  threshing  roller,  pin  charuts. 

Isa.  28.  27  not  threshed  with  athreshing  instrument 
Amos  1.    3  have  threshed  Gilead  with  threshing  in. 

5.  What  is  trodden  doxon  or  threshed,  hbho  medushah. 

Isa.  21. 10  0  my  threshing,  and  the  corn  of  my  floor 
6. A  threshing  instrument,  J71D  morag. 

2  Sa.  24.  22  behold . .  threshing  instruments  and  (ot.) 
1  Ch.21.  23  the  threshing  instruments  for  wood,  and 
Isa.   41. 15  a  new  sharp  threshing  instrument  having 
THRESHOLD  — 

1.  Gatherings,  store  chambers,  O'Epi*  asuppim. 
Neh.  12.  25  keeping  the  ward  at  the  thresholds  of 

2.  Threshold,  entrance,  space,  rpsaph. 

Judgig.  27  behold. .her  hands(were)upon  the  thres. 

1  Ki.14.  17  when  she  came  to  the  threshold  of  the 

Eze.  40.    6  measured  the  threshold  of  the  gate,  (wh. 
40.    6  the  other  threshold  (of  the  gate,  which 
40.    7  the  threshold  of  the  gate,  by  the  porch 
43.   8  setting  of  their  threshold  by  my  thresh. 

Zeph.  2.  14  desolation  (shall  be)in  the  thresholds :  for 

^Threshold,  sill,  jn?p  mi])hta7i. 

1  Sa.   5.    4  his  hands  (were)  cut  off  upon  the  thresh. 

5.    5  tread  on  the  threshold  of  Dagon  in  Ash. 
Eze.    9.    3  was  gone  up.  .to  the  threshold  of  the  ho. 
10.    4  (and  stood)  over  the  threshold  of  the  ho. 
10.  18  departed  from  off  the  threshold  of  the 

46.  2  he  shall  worship  at  the  threshold  of  the 

47.  1  waters  issued  out  from  under  the  thresh. 
Zeph.  1.    9  punish  all  those  that  leap  on  the  thresh. 

THRICE  — 

I.  Three  beats,  times,  dv?s>9  vrpjp  shalash  peamim. 
Exod34. 23  Thrice  in  the  year  shall  all  your  men  ch. 
34.  24  appear  before  the  Lord  thy  God  thrice    - 

2  Ki.13.  ]8  Smite  upon  the  ground  :  and  he  smote  t. 

13. 19  whereas  now  thou  shalt  smite.. (but)  th. 

2.Thrice,  rpis  tris. 

Matt.26.  34  before,  .cockcrow,  thou  shalt  denymeth. 

26.  75  Before . .  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me  th. 
Marki4.  30  before  the  cock  crow,  .shalt  deny  me  th. 

14.  72  Before  the  cock  crow,  .shalt  deny  me  th. 
Luke22.  34  thou  shalt  thrice  deny  that  thou  knowest 

22.  61  Before  the  cock  crow,  .shalt  deny  metlr. 
J0I11113.  3S  not  crow,  till  thou  hast  denied  me  thrice 
Acts  10.  16  This  was  done  thrice :  and  the  vessel  was 
2  Co. 11.  25  Thrice  was  I  beaten,  thrice  I  suffered  sh. 

12.    8  For  this  thing  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice 

THROAT,  (to  take  by  the)  — 

1.  The  throat,  neck,  j'na  garon. 

Psa.     5.    9  their  throat  (is)  an  open  sepulchre ;  they 
69.    3  I  am  weary  of  my  crying;  my  throat  is 
115.    7  neither  speak  they  through  their  throat 
Jer.     2.  25  Withhold .  .thy  throat  from  thirst :  but 

2.  Throat,  gullet,  y*>  loa. 

Prov  23.    2  put  a  knife  to  thy  throat,  if  thou  (be)  a 

3.  Throat,  upper  part  of  windpipe,  \dpvy£  larugx. 

Rom.  3.  13  Their  throat  (is)  an  open  sepulchre :  with. 

4.  To  p>ress  the  throat,  irviya}  pniga. 

Matt.  1 S.  28  and  took,  .by  the  throat,  saying.  Pay  me 

THRONE  — 

I. Seat  of  king,  judge  or  2)riest,  Np3  kisse. 

Geu.  41.  40  only  in  the  throne  will  I  be  greaterthan 
Exodn.  5  the  first  born,  .that  sitteth  upon  his  th. 
12.  29  from  tlie  first  born,  .that  sat  on  histhr. 
Deut.17.  18  when  he  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his 
1  Sa.  2.  8  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory 
■2  Sa.  3.  10  to  set  up  the  throne  of  David  over  Israel 
7.  13  I  will  stablish  the  throne  ot  his  kingdom 


THRONE 


985 


THROUGH 


2  Sa.  7. 16  thy  throne  shall  he  established  for  ever 
14.    9  ami  the  king  ami  his  throne  (be)  guiltless 

1  Ki.  1.  13,  17,  24,  30  he  shall  sit  upon  my  throne 
1.  20,  27  sit  on  the  throne  of  my  lord  the  king 
1.  35  that  he  may  come  and  sit  upon  my  thro. 
1.  37  make  his  throne  greater  than  the  throne 
1.  46  Solomon  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  the  kin. 
1.  47  make  his  throne  greater  than  thy  throne 

1.  48  hath  given  (one)  to  sit  on  my  throne  this 

2.  4  there  shall  not  fail . .  a  man  on  the  throne 
2.  12  Then  sat  Solomon  upon  the  throne  of  D. 
2.  19  satdowuon  his  throne,  and  caused  aseat 
2.  24  set  me  on  the  throne  of  David  my  father 
2.  33  upon  his  house,  and  upon  his  throne,  sh. 

2.  4s  the  throne  of  David  shall  be  established 

3.  6  thou  hast  given  him  a  son  to  sit  on  histh. 
5.    5  Thy  sou,  whom  I  will  set  upon  thy  throne 

7.  7  he  made  a  porch  for  the  throne  where  he 

8.  20  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel,  as  the  Lord 

8.  25  a  man.  .to  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel;  so 

9.  5  I  will  establish  the  throne  ofthykingdom 
9.   5  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  upon  the  throne 

10.  9  to  set  thee  on  the  throne  of  Israel :  beca. 

10. 18  Moreover  the  king  made  a  great  throne 

16. 11  as  soon  as  he  sat  on  his  throne,  (that)  he 
22. 10  sat  each  on  his  throne,  having  put  on  th. 

22.  19  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  his  tin-one,  and 
2  Ki.io.    3  set  (him)  on  his  father's  throne,  and  fight 

10.  30  children ..  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel 

11. 19  And  he  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  kings 

13. 13  Jeroboam  sat  upon  his  throne:  and  Joash 

15. 12  Thy  sons  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel 
25.  28  set  his  throue  above  the  throne  of  the  ki. 

1  Ch.17. 12  aud  I  will  stablish  his  throne  for  ever 

17. 14  throne  shall  be  established  for  evermore 
22. 10  will  establish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom 

28.  5  chosen  Solomon . .  to  sit  upon  the  throne 

29.  23  Then  Solomon  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  L. 

2  Ch.  6. 10  am  set  on  the  throne  of  Israel,  as  the  Lo. 

6. 16  not  fail  thee  a  man.,  to  sit  upon  the  thro. 
7.  18  Then  will  I  stablish  the  throne  of  thy  kin. 
9.  8  to  set  thee  on  his  throne,  (to  be)  king  for 
9.  17  Moreover  the  king  made  a  great  throne 
9. 18  steps  to  the  throne,  .fastened  to  the  thr. 
iS.  9  sat  either  of  them  on  his  throne,  clothed 
18. 18  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  upon  his  throne 

23.  20  set  the  king  upon  the  throne  of  the  king. 
Nell.  3.    7  unto  the  throne  of  the  governor  on  this 
Esth.  1.    2  Ahasuerussat  on  the  throne  of  his  king. 

5.    1  king  sat  upon  his  royal  throne  in  the  ro. 
Job  36.   7  but  with  kings  (are  they)  on  the  throne 
Psa.    9.  4  thou  safest  in  the  throne  judging  right 

9.    7  hath  prepared  his  throne  for  judgment 

11.  4  the  Lord's  throne  (is)  in  heaven  :  his  eyes 
45.  6  Thy  throne,  O  God,  (is)  for  ever  and  ever 
47.  8  God  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  holin. 
89.  4  and  build  up  thy  throne  to  all  generatio. 
89. 14  the  habitation  of  thy  throne  :  mercy  and 
89.  29  and  his  throne  as  the  days  of  heaven 

89.  36  endure  for  ever,  and  his  throne  as  the  sun 
89.  44  and  cast  his  throne  down  to  the  ground 

93.  2  Thy  throne  (is)  established  of  old :  thou 

94.  20  Shall  the  throne  of  iniquity  have  fellows. 
97.   2  judgment  (are)  the  habitation  of  his  thr. 

103. 19  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the  he. 
122.    5  thrones  of  judgment,  the  thrones  of  the 
132. 1 1  fruit  of  thy  body  will  I  set  upon  thy  throne 
132.  12  children  shall  also  sit  upon  thy  throne  for 
Prov  16.  12  for  the  throne  is  established  by  righteous. 
20.    8  A  king  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of  jud. 
20.  28  and  his  throne  is  upholden  by  mercy 
25.    5  throne  shall  he  established  in  righteous.' 
29. 14  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  ever 
Isa.     6.   1  saw  also  the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne 
9.    7  upon  the  throne  of  David,  aud  upon  his 
14.    9  it  hath  raised  up  from  their  thrones  all 
14. 13  I  will  exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of 

16.  5  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  established 
22. 23  he  shall  be  for  a  glorious  throne  to  his  fa. 
47.    1  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the  Chaldeans 
66.    1  The  heaven  (is)  my  throne,  and  the  earth 

Jer.     1.  15  they  shall  set  every  one  his  throne  at  the 
3. 17  they  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  throne  of 

13.  13  even  the  kings  that  sit  upon  David's  throne 

14.  21  do  not  disgrace  the  throne  of  thy  glory 

17.  12  A  glorious  high  throue  from  the  beginning 
17.  25  kings  and  princes  sitting  upon  the  throne 
22.  2  that  sittest  upon  the  throne  of  David,  th. 
22.  4  kings  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David 
22.  30  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and  ru. 
29.  16  king  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  David 
33.  17  never  want  a  man  to  sit  upon  the  throne 
33.  21  not  have  a  son  to  reign  upon  his  throne 

.  36.  30  shall  have  none  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
43.  10  will  set  his  throne  upon  these  stones  that 
49.  38  will  set  my  throne  in  Elam,  and  will  dest. 
52.  32  set  his  throne  above  the  throne  of  the  kin. 
Lam.  5. 19  thy  throne  from  generation  to  generation 
Eze.    1.  26  the  likeness  of  a  throne,  as  theappearance 
1.  26  upon  the  likeness  of  the  throne  (was)  the 
10.    1  the  appearance  of  the  likenessof  a  throne 
26. 16  shall  come  down  from  their  thrones,  and 
43.    7  place  of  my  throne,  and  the  place  of  the 
Jon.    3.   6  arose  from  his  throne,  and  he  laid  his  ro. 
Hag.  3.  22  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms 
Zech.  6.  13  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne  ;  and 
6.  13  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne 

2.  Seat,  throne,  ns?  h'sseh. 

1  Ki.io.  19  throne  had  six  steps,  .the  top  of  the  thr. 
Job  26.    9  He  holdeth  back  the  face  of  his  throue 

124 


3. Seat,  throne,  m-)3  horse, 

Dan.  5.  20  he  was  deposed  from  his  kingly  throne 
7.  9  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  cast  down 
7.    9  his  throne  (was  like)  the  fiery  flame,  (and) 

i.A  judgment  seat,  tribunal,  ffrjfiabema. 

Acts  12.  21  Herod,  .sat  upon  Iris  throne,  and  made  an 

5.  Throne,  seat,  Spuyos  thronos. 

Matt.  5.  34  neither  by  heaven  ;  for  it  is  God's  throne 

19.  28  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  thr. 

19.  28  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  ju. 

23.  22  sweareth  by  the  throne  of  God,  and  by  hi. 

25.  31  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
Luke  1.  32  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his  fat. 

22.  30  sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelves  tribes 
Acts    2.  30  he  would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  thro. 

7.  49  Heaven  (is)  my  throne,  and  earth  (is)myfo. 
Col.     1. 16  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities 
Heb.    1.   8  Thy  throne,  0  God,  (is)  for  ever  and  ever 

4.  16  come  boldly  unto  the  tlu-one  of  grace,  that 

8.  1  who  is  set  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
12.    2  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 

Rev.    1.   4  seven  spirits  which  are  before  his  throne 
3.  21  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne 

3.  21  am  set  down  with  my  Favher  in  his  throne 

4.  2  throue  was  set. .  and  (one)  sat  on  the  tin-. 
4.  3  rainbow  round  about  the  throne,  in  sight 
4.  4  round  about  the  throne  (were)  four  aud 
4.  5  outofthethroneproceededlightningsand 
4.  5  lamps  of  Are  burning  before  the  throne 
4.  6  before  the  throne  (there  was)  a  sea  of  glass 
4.  6  midst  of  the  throue,  and  round  about  the  t. 

4.  9  and  thanks  to  hiin  that  sat  on  the  throne 
4. 10  fall  down  before  him  that  sat  on  the  thro. 

4. 10  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne,  sayi. 
5.1,7  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  the  throne 

5.  6  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four 

5. 11  many  angels  round  about  the  throne  and 

5.  13  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 

6.  16  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne 

7.  9  [stood  before  the  throne,  and  before  the] 
7.  10  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon  the  throne 
7. 11  the  angels  stood  round  about  the  throne 
7.  1 1  fell  before  the  throne  on  their  faces,  and 
7. 15  Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne  of 

7.  15  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell 
7. 17  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne 

8.  3  golden  altar  which  was  before  the  throne 
12.  5  was  caught  up  unto  God,  and  (to)  his  thr. 
14.  3  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the  th. 
14.  5  [they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne] 
16. 17  came  a  great  voice .  .from  the  throne,  say. 
19.    4  worshipped  God  that  sat  on  the  throne 

19.  5  voice  came  out  of  the  throne,  saying,  Pra. 

20.  4  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and 
20. 11  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that 

21.  5  he  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said,  Behold 

22.  1  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and 
22.    3  but  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  sh. 

THRONG  — 

\.To  squeeze,  piress,  9\i0u  thlibo. 

Mark  3.   9  should  wait . .  lest  they  should  throng  him 

2.  To  press  together,  o-vinrviyu  sumpnigo. 

Luke  8.  42  But  as  he  went  the  people  thronged  him 

3. To  hold  together,  avi/ixa  mnccho. 

Luke  8.  45  the  multitude  throng  thee  and  press  (thee) 

i  To  squeeze  together,  avv6\lftu  sunthlibo. 

Mark  5.  24  ranch  people  followed  him,  and  throng. 
5.  31  Thou  seest  the  multitude  thronging  thee 
THROUGH  (the  midst  of  I,  throughout  (every)  — 

1.  Unto,  W  el. 

J<"um  25.    S  thrust . .  the  man . .  and  the  woman  throu. 

2.  Into,  id?  bemo. 

Isa.  43.'  2  when  thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou 
3. At,  beside,  through,  "t"3  bead. 

Josh.  2.  15  she  let  them  down  by  a  cord  through  the 
4.  The  way,  T{7*  derelc, 

2  Sa.'  4.  7  gat  them  away  through  the  plain  all  nig. 
a.  By  the  hand  of,  by  means  of,  -ra  beyad. 

Zech.  4. 12  What,  .two  olive  branches  which  through 
6. To  shoot,  cast,  rrr  yarah. 

Exodi9. 13  he  shall  surely  be  stoned,  or  shot  through 
7.  From,  [0  min. 

Isa.  28.  7  the  prophet  have  erred  through  strong  dr. 
S.Over,  b$  al. 

2  Ch.20.    3  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  all  Judah 

Jer.  52.    3  through  the  anger  of  the  Lord  it  came  to 

9.  From  the  face  of,  'J5P  mippene. 

Gen.  6. 13  for  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  thro. 

10.  In  the  heart  of,  n-ijja  beqereb. 

Deut29. lS  how  we  came  through  the  nations  which 
Josh.  1. 11  Pass  through  the  host,  and  command  the 
24. 17  among  all  the  people  through  whom  we 

11. In  the  midst  of,  "ins  bethoh. 

Exod36.  33  he  made  the  middle  bar  to  shoot  through 
Nuni33.    8  passed  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  into 
Neh.    9.  n  so  that  they  went  through  the  midst  of 
Eze.    9.    4  said  unto  him,  Go  through  the  midst  of 
9.  4  through  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  set 

12.  Up,  through,  avd  ana. 

Mark  7.  31  he  came,  .through  the  midst  of  the  coasts 


13. Through,  Sid  (gen.)  dia. 

Matti2.   1  Jesusweutonthesnbbathdaythrouehthe 

12.  43  he  walketh  through  dry  places,  seeking 

19.  24  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the 
Mark  2.  23  he  went  through  the  com  fields  on  thesa. 

9.  30  they  departed  thence,  and  passed  through 

10.  25  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the 

11.  16  any  man  should  carry  (any)  vessel  throu. 
Luke  4.  30  he  passing  through  the  midst  of  them  we. 

5. 19  let  him  down  through  the  tiling  with  (his) 

6.  1  he  went  through  the  corn  fields  ;  and  his 
11.  24  he  walketh  thrtughdry  places,  seeking  re. 
17.    1  but  woe  (unto  him)  through  whom  they 
17.  11  he  passed  through  the  midst  of  Samaria 

1 S.  25  it  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  a  ne. 
John   1.    7  that  all  (men)  through  him  might  believe 

3.  17  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  sav. 

4.  4  And  he  must  needs  go  through  Samaria 
8.  59  went  out  of  the  temple,  going  through  the 

17.  20  which  shall  believe  on  me  through  their 
19.23  coat  was.,  woven  from  the  top  throughout 

Acts  1.  2  after  that  he  through  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
8.  18  Simon  saw  that  through  laying  on  of  the 
9-  32  it  came  to  pass,  as  Peter  passed  through. 

10.  43  through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in 

13.  38  through  this  man  is  preached  unto  you 

13.  49  the  word,  .was  published  throughout  all 

14.  22- we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter 

15.  11  we  believe  that  through  the  grace  of  the 

18.  27  helped'them.  .which  had  believed  throu. 

20.  3  he  purposed  to  return  through  Macedon. 

21.  4  who  said  to  Paul  through  the  Spirit,  that 
Rom.  1.    8  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ  for 

2.  23  through  breaking  the  law  dishonourestth. 

3.  24  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
3.  25  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his 
3.  30  shall  justify.,  uncircumcision  through  fa. 

3.  31  Do  we  then  make  void  thelaw  through  fa. 

4. 13  through  the  law,  but  through  the  righte. 

5.  1  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lo. 
5.    9  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him 

5. 11  we  also  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jes. 
5.  21  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteousn. 

7.  25  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  L. 

8.  3  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  G. 
8.  37  we  are  more  than  conquerors,  through  him 

11.  36  For  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him 

12.  3  I  say,  through  the  grace  given  unto  me 

15.  4  we  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the 

16.  27  To  God  only  wise,  (be)  glory  through  Jesus 

1  Co.   1.    1  ca!led(to  be)anapostle.  .throughthe  will 

4.  15  I  have  begotten  you  through  the  Gospel 

10.  1  all  our  fathers,  .passed  through  the  sea 
13. 12  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly;  but  then 
15.  57  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our 

2  Co.  3.   4  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God 

4. 15  the  abundant  grace  might  through  the 

8.  18  whose  praise  (is)  in  the  Gospel,  through. 

9.  1 1  which  causeth  through  us  thanksgiving 

11.  33  through  a  window  in  a  basket  was  I  let 
Gal.    2.  19  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that 

3.  14  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through 

4.  7  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Ch. 
Eph.    1.    7  Inwhomwehaveredemption  through  his 

2.    8  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith  ;  and 

2.  18  through  him  we  both  have  access  by  one 
4.    6  who  (is)  above  all,  and  through  all,  and 

Phil.    1.  19  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation  through 

3.  9  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ 
Col.     1.  i4[Inwhomwehaveredemptionthroughhis] 

1.  20  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of 
r.  22  In  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death,  to 

2.  8  lestanymanspoil  you  through  philosophy 

2.  12  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God 
2  Ti.    1.  10  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the 

3.  15  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith  which 
Titus  3.    6  Which  he  shed  on  11s  abundantly  through 
rhm.      22  I  trust  that  through  your  prayers  I  shall 
Heb.   2.  10  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  thr. 

2.  14  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that 

6. 12  follow-ers  of  them  who  through  faith  and 

9. 14  whothroughtheeternalspiritofleredhim. 
10. 10  we  are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of 

10.  20  a  new  and  living  way.,  through  the  veil,  t.. 

11.  33  Who  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms 
11.  39  having  obtained  a  good  report  through  fa. 

13.  21  that  which  is  well  pleasing,  .through  Jes. 

1  Pe.   1.    5  keptbythepowerofGodthroughfaithun. 

1.  22  obeying  the  truth  [through  the  Spirit]  unto 

4.  11  that  God.  .may  be  glorified  through  Jesus 

2  Pe.   1.    3  through  the  knowledge  of  him  that  hath 

1  Jo.  4.    9  into  the  world,  that  we  might  live  through 

li.  Through,  on  account  of,  Sid  (ace.)  dia. 

Luke  1.  78  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God 
Johni5.   3  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I  ha. 
Rom  2.  24  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  through 
Gal.    4.  13  Ye  know  how  through  infirmity  of  the  fl. 
Eph.   4.  18  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the 

15.  Into,  to,  els  eis. 

Matt.  4.  24  his  fame  went  throughout  all  Syria ;  and 

Mark  1.  28  his  fame  spread  abroad  throughout  all  the 

1.  39  preached  hi  their  synagogues  throughout 

14.  9  this  gospel  shall  be  preached  throughout 
Acts  26.  20  [throughout]  all  the  coasts  of  Judea,  and 
Eph.    3.21  Unto  him  (be)  glory . .  throughout  all  ages 

16.  Out  of,  e'/c  el:  e£  ex, 

2  Co.  13.  4  though  he  was  crucified  through  weakn. 
Gal.  3.  8  God  would  justify  the  heathen  through 
Rev.  18.    3  through  the  abundance  of  her  delicacies 


THROUGHLY 


986 


THUS 


17.1n,  by,  with,  among,  iv  en. 

Matt.  9.  34  He  casteth  out  devils  through  the  prince 

Luke  1.  65  these  sayings  were  noised  abroad  throug. 

7,  17  this  ruraourof  him  went  forth  throughout 

7.  17  and  [throughout]  all  the  region  round  ab. 

10.  17  the  devils  are  subject  unto  us  through  thy 

11. 15  He  casteth  out  devils  through  Beelzebub 

11. 18  ye  say  that  I  cast  out  devils  through  Be. 

Johni7.  11  keep  through  thine  own  name  those  whom 

17.  17  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth:  thy  wo. 

17.  19  they  also  might  be  sanctified  through  the 

20.  31  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through 

Acts   4.    2  preached  through  Jesus  the  resurrection 

ftom.  1.    8  yourfaithis  spoken  of  thro  ugh  out;the  \vh. 

1.  24  gave  them  up  to  uncleanuess  through  the 
3.  7  hath  more  abounded  through  my  lie  unto 
3.  25  through  the  forbearance  of  God 

6,  11  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
6.  23  the  gift  of  God  (is)  eternal  life  through  Je. 

9. 17  my  name  might  be  declared  throughout 
15. 13  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of  the 
15.  17  whereof  I  may  glory  through  Jesus  Christ 
15.  19  Through  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  by 

2  Co.  11.    3  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  his 
Gal.     3.  14  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Chr. 
5. 10  I  have  confidence  in  you  through  the  L. 
Eph.    2.    7  in  (his)  kindness  toward  us  through  Cnrist 

2.  22  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  spi. 
Phil.  4.  7  keep  your  hearts  and  mind  sthrough  Chr. 
2  Th.  2,  13  through  sanctification  of  the  spirit  and 

2. 16  consolation  and  good  hope  through  gra. 
Titus  1.  3  manifested  his  word  through  preaching 
Heb.  13.  20  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  cov. 

1  Pe.  1.    2  through  sanctification  of  the  spirit,  unto 

i.    6  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptat. 

2  Pe.   1.    1  through  the  righteousness  of  God  and  our 

1 ,   2  Grace  and  peace  be  multiplied . .  through 

1.  4  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through 

2.  3  through  covetousness  shall  they  with  fei. 

2. 18  they  allure  through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 
2.  20  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and 

Rev.    8.  13  heard  an  angel  flying  through  the  midst 

18.  Upon,  over,  M  (dot.)  epi. 

Acts    3.  16  his  name  through  faith  in  his  name  hath 
1  Co.    8.  n  [through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak  b.] 

19. Upon,  over,  M  (ace.)  epi. 

Luke  4.  25  great  famine  was  throughout  all  the  land 
Acts  n.  28  there  should  be  a  great  dearth  throughout 

20.  Down  from,  towards,  Kara  {gen)  kata. 

Luke  4.  14  there  went  out  a  fame  of  him  through  all 

23.  5  teaching  throughout  all  Jewry,  beginning 
Acts   9.  31  Then  had  the  churches  rest  throughout  all 

9.  42  it  was  known  throughout  all  Joppa  ;  and 
10.  37  which  was  published  throughout  all  Jud. 
Vl.Down  to,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Luke  8.    1  he  went  throughout  every  city  and  village 

8.  39  published  throughout  the  whole  city  how 

9.  6  they  departed,  and  went  through  the  to. 
13.  22  he  went  through  the  cities  and  villages 

Acts    3.  17  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  (it) 
8.    1  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  through. 

24.  5  among  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  world 
Phil.   2.    3  (Let)  nothing  (be  done)  through  strife  or 

22.  All  through,  hi  o\ou  di>  holou. 

Johuiq.  23  coat  was.  .woven  from  the  top  throughout 
Sec  also  Break,  bring,  dig,  drop,  go,  march,  number, 
pass,  pierce,  run,  smite,  stricken,  strike,  thrust,  walk. 
THROUGHLY  — 
1.7b  do  good  or  well,  3:?;  yatab,  5. 

Jer.     7.    5  if  ye  throughly  amend  your  ways  and  your 

2.  To  glean,  bby  alal,  Za. 

Jer.    6.   9  They  shall  throughly  glean  the  remuant 

3.  To  do,  rfvy  asah. 

Jer.     7.    5  if  ye  throughly  execute  judgment  betw. 

4.  To  cause  to  multiply, make,  abundant,  run  rabah,5. 

Psa.  51.   2  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity 

5.  To  strive,  plead,  i'~i  rib. 

Jer.  50.  34  he  shall  throughly  plead  then-  cause,  that 

6.  To  weigh  out,  pay,  spend,  Lp~'  shaqal. 

Job     6.   2  0  that  my  grief  were  throughly  weighed 
7. A  burning,  riD"i^  serephah, 

Gen.  11.    3  let  us  make  brick,  and  burn  them  throu. 
THROW  (down),  be  thrown  down,  to  — 
l.To  break  or  throw  down,  cyi  haras. 

Judg.  6.  25  throw  down  the  altar  of  Baal  that  thy  fa. 

1  Ki.iq.  10,  14  thrown  down  thine  altars,  and  slain 
Jer.     1.  10  and  to  throw  down,  to  build,  and  to  plant 

31.  28  to  throw  down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to 
Lam.  2.  ?  he  hath  thrown  down  in  his  wrath  the  st. 
2. 17  he  hath  thrown  down,  and  bath  not  pitied 
Eze.  16.  39  they  shall  throw  down  thine  eminent  pi. 
Mic.  5.  11  And  I  will,  .throw  down  rdl  thy  strongh. 
Mai.    1.    4  They  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down 

2.  T>  be  broken  or  thrown  down,  D^rr  haras,  2. 
Jer.    31.  4c  it  shall  Dot  be  plucked  up,  nor  thrown  do. 
50.  15  her  walls  are  thrown  down;  for  it  (is)  the 
Eze.  38.  20  the- mountains  shall  be  thrown  down,  and 

8.  To  cause  to  fall,  ^5;  naphal,  5. 

2  Sa.20. 15  all.  .battered  the  wall,  to  throw  it  down 
4.2'"  break  down,  poj  natheds. 

Judg.  2.    2  ye  shall  throw  down  their  altars:  but  ye 

6.  32  because  he  hath  thrown  down  his  altar 

Jer.   33.   4  which  are  thrown  down  by  the  mounts 


5.  To  be  broken  down,  yni  nathais,  2. 

Nah.   1.  6  and  the  rocks  are  thrown  down  by  him 

6.  To  break  down,  j'm  nathats,  3. 

2  Ch.31.    1  threw  down  the  high  places  and  the  altars 

7.  To  stone,  "?pD  saqal,  3. 

2  Sa.  16.  i^Shimei.  .threw  stones  at  him,  andcastdust 

8.  To  throw  down  or  forth,  shoot,  ncn  ramah. 
Exod.15.  21  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown 

9.7b  cast  away,  down,  off,  out,  ^by  shoJak,  5. 

Neh.  9.  11  their  persecutors  thou  threwest  into  the 
10.7b  be  cast  atoay,  or  out,  ifjp  shalah,  6. 

2  Sa.  20.  21  his  head  shall  be  thrown  to  thee  over  the 
11. To  release,  let  go,  throw  down,  oc^  shamat. 

2  Ki.  9.  33  throw  her  down.     So  they  threw  her  do. 

12.  To  cast,  throw,  $6,K\w  hallo. 

Marki2.  42  she  threw  in  two  mites,  which  make'a  fa. 
Acts  22.  23  cast 'off  (their)  clothes,  and  threw  dust  into 
Rev.  iS.  21  shall  that  great  city  Babylon  be  thrown  d. 

13.  To  loose  down,  tcaraAvw  katcduo. 

Matt  24.  2  one  stone,  .that  shall  not  he  thrown  down 
Maxki3.  2  one  stone,  .that  shall  not  be  thrown  down 
Luke2i.    6  one  stone,  .that shall  not  be  thrown  down 

14. 7*0  throw,  filTTTQ}  rhipto. 

Luke  4.  35  when  the  devil  had  thrown  him  in  the  mi. 

THROWING  a  stone,  with  — 

With  a  stone  of  the  handy.il  |?X2  beeben  yad. 
Num.35. 17  ^  ne  smite  him  with  throwing  a  stone 

THRUST  (away,  down,  out,  self ,  through,  together),  to — 

l.To  trouble,  hasten,  Vrra  bahal,  5. 

2  CI1.26.  20  they  thrust  him  out  from  thence,  yea,  hi. 

2.  To  thrust  through,  pna  bathaq,  3. 

Eze.  16.  40  and  tlmist  thee  through  with  their  swo. 

3.  To  drive  away,  cast  out,  Eh  a  garash,  3. 
Exodn.    1  he  shall  surely  thrust  you  out  hence  alto. 
Deut  33.  27  he  shall  thrust  out  the  enemy  from  be. 
Judg.  9.  41  Zebul  thrust  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren 

11.    2  thrust  out  Jephthah,  and  said  unto  him 
1  Ki.   2.  27  Solomon  thrust  out  Abiathar  from  being 
i.To  thrust  away  or  down,  ~rn  dachah. 

Psa.  118.  13  Thou  hast  thrust  sore  at  me,  that  I  mig. 

5.  To  thrust  away,  prn  dachaq. 

Joel    2.   8  Neither  shall  one  thrust  another,  they 

6.  To  pierce  through,  "ip*i  daqar. 

Nuni25.   8  he.,  thrust  both  of  them  through,  the  man 
Judg.  9.  54  his  young  man  thrust  him  through,  and 
1  Sa.  31.    4  Draw  thy  sword,  and  thrust  me  through 
31.   4  lest  these,  .come  and  thrust  me  through 

1  Ch.io.    4  Draw  thy  sword,  and  thrust  me  through 
Zech  13.    3  shall  thrust  him  through  when  he  proph. 

7.  To  thrust,  away,  forward,  out,  *pn  hadaph. 
Nuni35.  20  if  he  thrust  him  of  hatred*  or  hurl  at  him 

35. 22  if  he  thrust  him  suddenly  without  eniui. 

2  Ki.  4.  27  but  Gehazi  came  near  to  thrust  her  away 
Eze.  34.  21  ye  have  thrust  with  side  and  with  shoul. 

8.2*0 press,  crush,  yr^  lachats,  2. 

X 1111122.  25  the  ass.  .thrust  herself  unto  the  wall,  and 

9.  To  drive  or  force  away,  rm  nadach,  5. 

Deut  13.   5  to  thrust  thee  out  of  the  way  which  the 
13.  10  to  thrust  thee  away  from  the  Lord  thy 

10.  To  drive  or  thrust  away,  *[\\  nadaph. 

Job  32.  13  Lest  ye  should  say. .  Cod  tlnusteth  him  d. 

11.  To  pick  out,  npj  naaar. 

1  Sa.  11.  2  that  I  may  thrust  out  all  your  right  eyes 
12. 7*o  give,  \tyi  nathan. 

Deut  15.  j  7  thrust  (it)  through  his  ear  unto  the  door 
13.7*0  strike,  clap,  blow,  thrust,  ypJ?  taqa. 

Judg.  3.  21  Ehud.  .took,  .and  thrust  it  into  his  belly 

2  Sa.  18. 14  thrust  them  through  the  heart  of  Absal. 

14.ro  drive  or  push  away,  airuB^ofiai  apdlheomai. 

Acts  7.  27  thrust  him  away,  saying,  Who  madethee 
15.  To  cast,  throw,  &dA\<a  hallo. 

John2o.  25  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not 
20. 27  thrust  (it)  into  my  side  :  and  be  not  fait. 

Acts  16.  24  Who.  .thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison 

16. 7*0  cast  out,  £K&d\Ao>  ekballu. 

Luke  4,  29  rose  up,  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  city 

13.  28  in  the  kingdom  of  God, and  you. . thrust  0. 
Acts  16.  37  now  do  they  thrust  us  out  privily?  nay 

17.  To  lead  up  upon,  launch  out,  eiravdyto  epanago. 

Luke  5.    3  prayed  him  that  he  would  thrust  out  a  li. 
THRUST  from,  in,  to  — 
1,  To  drive  or  push  away,  aTra>6<=ofj.at  apdtheoniai. 

Acts  7.  39  but  thrust. .from  them,  and  in  their  hearts 
9.. To  cast,  throw,  @dh\a  bdllo. 

Rev.  14.  16  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  in  his  si. 

14.  r9  the  angel  thrust  in  his  sickle  into  the  ea. 
3.77<  push  or  drive  out,  &£w8eu  exothed. 

Acts  27.  39  if  it  were  possible,  to  thrust  in  the  ship 
4.7V)  send,  put  forth,  irifiirxc  pempo. 

Rev.  14.  15  Thrust  in  thy  sickle,  and  reap  :  for  the 
14.  iS  Thrust  in  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather 
THRUST  away,  down,  out,  through,  together,  to  be  — 
1.2*0  be  cast  "ft,  rT'  garash,  4. 

Exodia.  39  they  were  thrust  out  of  Egypt,  and  could 


2.  To  be  pierced  through,  "ip?  daqar,  2. 

Isa.   13.  15  Every  one  that 'is  found  shall  he  thrust  t. 

3.  To  be  pierced  through,  *ip"n  daqar,  4. 

Jer.   51.   4  (they  that  are)  thrust  through  in  her  st. 

4.  To  close,  press,  be  closed,  ~m  zur. 

Judg.  6.  38  he  rose  up  early  on  the  morrow,  and  thr. 

5.7\)  be  thrust  through,  fjfla  taan,  4. 

Isa.  14.  19  are  slain,  thrust  through  with  a  sword 

6.  To  be  driven  away,  "n:  nadad,  6. 

2  Sa.  23.    6  all  of  them  as  thorns  thrust  away,  beca. 

7.7*0  cause  to  come  down,  Karapifidfa  katabibazo. 
Lukeio.  15  thou,  Capernaum . .  shalt  be  thrust  down 

8.7*0  shoot  through  with  cm  arrow,  Kararo^va}. 

Heb.  12.  20  [it  shall  be  stoned,  or  thrust  through  with] 
THUMB  — 

1.  Thumb,  great  toe,  jna  bohen. 

Exod29.  20  upon  the  thumb  of  their  right  hand,  and 
Lev.    8.  23  upon  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand,  and  up. 

8.  24  and  upon  the  thumbs  of  their  right  hands 
14. 14,  17,  25,  28  upon  the  thumb  of  hia  right  ha. 

2.  Thumb  (of  the  hand),  ~i;  jn2  behon  yad. 

Judg  1.    6  and  cut  off  his  thumbs  and  his  great  toes 
1.    7  their  thumbs  aud  their  great  toes  cut 

THUM'-MTM,  cepi  tummim,  perfection. 
Symbolic  figures  in  the  high  priest's  breastplate. 

Exod28.  30  thou  shalt  put  in  the  breastplate,  .the  T. 

Lev.    8.    3  also  he  put  in  the  breastplate .  .the  T. 

Deut  33.    8  (Let)  thy  T.  and  thy  Urim  (be)  with  thy  h. 

Ezra   2.  63  stood  up  a  priest  with  Urim  and  with  T. 

Neh.    7.  65  stood  (up)  a  priest  with  Urim  and  T. 
THUNDER  (bolts),  thundering  — 
1.  Voice,  ?Tp  qol. 

Exod  9.  23  Lord  sent  thunder  and  hail,  and  the  fire 

9.  28  there  be  no  (more)  mighty  thunderings 
9.  29  the  thunder  shall  cease,  neither  shall  th. 
g.  33  the  thunders  and  hail  ceased,  and  the  ra. 
9.  34  and  the  hail  and  the  thunders  were  ceas. 

19.  16  there  were  thunders  and  lightnings,  and 

20.  18  the  people  saw  the  thunderings,  and  the 
1  Sa.  7. 10  the  Lord  thundered  with  a  great  thunder 

12.  17  he  shall  send  thunder  and  rain  ;  that  ye 

12. 18  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  rain  that  day 
Job  28.  26  and  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  thethund. 

38.  25  or  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  thunder 

2. Roaring,  thunder,  Djfi  raam. 

Job  26. 14  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  canunders 

39.  25  the  thunder  of  the  captains,  and  the  sho. 
Psa.  77. 18  The  voice  of  thy  thunder  (was)  in  the  he. 

81.   7  answered  thee  in  the  secret  place  of  thu. 
104.   7  at  the  voice  of  thy  thunder  they  hasted 
Isa.  29.   6  visited  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  with  thunder 

3. Thunder,  a  waving  mane,  '"i"j."i  ramah. 

Job  39. 19  hast  thou  clothed  his  neck  with  thunder 

4.  Burning  heat,  coals,  arrow,  r$~\  resheph. 

Psa.  78.  48  He  gave,  .their flocks  to  hot  thunderbolts 

5.  Thunder,  ppovr-i}  bronte. 

Mark  3.  17  Boanerges,  which  is, The  sonsof  thunder 
Rev.  4.    5  out  of  the  throneproceeded.  .thunderings 

6.  1  I  heard,  as  it  were  the  noise  of  thunder 
8.    5  voices,  and  thunderings,  and  lightnings 

10.  3  when  ho  had  cried,  seven  thunders  utter. 
10.  4  when  the  seven  thunders  had  uttered  their 
10.    4  those  things  which  the  seven  thunders  ut. 

11. 19  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  thunderings 
14.    2  I  heard,  .as  the  voice  of  a  great  thunder 
16.  18  there  were  voices,  and  thunders,  and  lig. 
19.   6  as  the  voice  of  mighty  thunderings,  say. 

THUNDER,  to  — 

1.7b  cause  to  roar,  thunder,  cyi  raam,  5. 

1  Sa.   2. 10  out  of  heaven  shall  hethunderuponthem 

7.  10  but  the  Lord  thundered  with  a  great  th. 

2  Sa.  22. 14  The  Lord  thundered  from  heaven,  and  the 
Job  37.    4  he  thundereth  with  the  voice  of  his  excel. 

37.    5  God  thundereth  marvellously  with  his  vo. 

40.  9  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like  him 
Fsa.  iS.  13  The  Lord  also  thundered  in  the  heavens 

29.   3  the  God  of  glory  thundereth  :  the  Lord 
2.  Thunder  came,  yeyove  ppovr-i]  gegone  bronte, 

John  12.  29  The  people.. said  that  it  thundered 
THUS  — 
l.These,  rh)A  elleh. 

Num  10.  2S  Thus  (were)  the  journeyings  of  the  child. 
I.This,  p  den. 

Ezra     5.    7  wherein  was  written  thus;  Unto  Darius 

Jer.   10. 11  Thus  shall  ye  say  unto  them,  The  godsth, 

Z.This,  nxi  zoth. 

Exodi4.  11  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  thus  with  us 
4.  With  this,  nuts  bezoth. 

Lev.  16.   3  Thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  theholy  (pi.) 

5. This,  ni  zeh. 

Gen.  25".  22  why  (am)  I  thus?  And  she  went  to  enq. 

G.Thus,  nb  hoh. 

Gen.  24.  30  saying.  Thus  spake  the  man  unto  me 
Isa.     7.    7  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD,  It  shall  not  sta. 

7. As  thus,  thus.  nr3  kakah. 

Exodiz.  11  thus  shall  ye  cat  it.  .your  loins  girded 


THY 


987 


TILL 


8. Thus,  Sa$7cemo. 

Psa.  73.  15  If  I  say,  I  trill  speak  thus:  behold,  I  sh. 

9.  So,  |3  ken. 

Gen.  42.  25  Joseph  commanded,  .thus  did  he  untoth. 

10. Therefore,  jr1?!?  al  ken. 

Jer.   38.   4  for  thus  he  weakeneth  the  hands  of  the 

ll.jSb,  thus,  \2  ken. 

Ezra    5.    3  said  thus  unto  them,  "Who  hath  comman. 

6.   2  and  therein  (was)  a  record  thus  written 
Dan.    2. 24  he  went  and  said  thus  unto  him,  Destroy 
.2.  25  said  thus  unto  him,  I  have  found  a  man 

4.  14  He  cried  aloud,  and  said  thus,  Hew  down 

6.  6  said  thus  unto  him,  King  Darius,  live  for 

7.  5  said  thusuntoit,  Arise,  devourmuch  flesh 
7.  23  Thus  he  said,  The  fourth  beast  shall  be  the 

12.  Thus,  so,  RD33  kenema. 

Ezra  5.   9  saiduntothem  thus,  Who  commanded  you 

5.  it  thus  they  returned  us  answer,  saying,  We 

IZ.This  thing,  ntn  ™i3^n  haddabar  hazzeh. 

Judg.  S.  1  Why  hast  thou  served  us  thus,  that  thou 
11.  According  to  these  things,  Kara  ravra  kata  ta. 

Lukei7.  30  Even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the  day  when  the 
15. He  she,  it,  thus,  oSe,  Ta5e  hode,  tade. 

Acts  21. 11  Thus  saith  the  Holy  Ghost,  So  shall  the 

16. Thus,  ovrw,  ovrws  houto,  houtos. 

Matt.  2.  5  In  Bethlehem,  .for  thus  it  is  written  by  the 

3. 15  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  right. 

26.  54  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must 
Mark  2.    7  Why  doth  this  (man)  thus  speak  blasph.  ? 
Luke  1.  25  Thus  hath  the  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the 
2. 48  Son,  why  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us? 

19.  31  thus  shall  ye  say  unto  him,  Because  the 

24.  46  Thus  it  is  wi-itteu,fand  thus  it  behoved]  Ch. 
John  4.   6  being  wearied  with  (his)  journey,  sat  thus 

ii.  48  If  we  let  him  thus  alone,  all  (men)  will  be. 
Rom.  9.  20  say.  .Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus? 

1  Co.  14.25  [thus]  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made  ma. 
Heb.   6.    9  accompany  salvation,  though  we  thus  sp. 

9.   6  Nowwhenthesethingswerethusordained 
Rev.   9.  17  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  vision,  and 

18.  21  Thus  with  violence  shall  that  gTeat  city 

17.  These  things,  ravra  tauta. 

Luke  9.  34  While  he  thus  spake,  there  came  a  cloud 
n.  45  Master,  thus  saying  thou  reproachest  us 
18. 11  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  him. 

19.  28  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  went  before 

23.  46  and  having  said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  gh. 

24.  36  as  they  thus  spake,  Jesus  himself  stood 
John  9.    6  When  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  spat  on  the 

11. 43  when  he  thus  had  spoken,  he  cried  with 
13.  21  When  Jesus  had  thus  said,  he  was  troub. 
18.  22  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  one  of  the  offi. 
20. 14  when  she  had  thus  said,  she  turned  hers. 
Acts  19.  41  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  dismissed 

20.  36  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  kneeled  do. 
26.  24  as  he  thus  spake  for  himself,  Festus  said 

26.  30  [when  he  had  thus  spoken,  the  king  rose] 

27.  35  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  took  bread 
"Rev.  16.    5  shalt  be,  because  thou  hast  judged  thus 

IS. This,  rovro  touto. 

Luke24.  40  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  showed  them 

2  Co.    1.  17  When  I  therefore  was  thus  minded,  did 

5. 14  because  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died 
Phil.  3.  15  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be  thus  minded 

19. 0/ this,  rovrov  toutou. 

Luke22.  51  Jesus  answered  and  said,  Suffer  ye  thus 

THY  (friends)  — 

l.To  thine  own,  atavrw  {dat.)  seattto. 

Acts   9.  34  arise,  and  make  thy  bed.    And  he  arose 

2.To  thee,  (xoi  soi. 

Mark  5.  9  he  asked  him,  What  (is)  thy  name?  And 
Luke  8.  30  What  is  thy  name?  And  he  said,  Legion 
Heb.  11.  18  said,  That  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  cal. 

B.Thy,  thine,  cros  sos. 

Matt.  7.  22  in  thy  name?.,  in  thy  name,  .in  thy  name 
See  also  13.  27;  24.  3  ;  Mark  2.  18;  5.  19  ;  6.  30;  John  4. 
42 ;  17.  17 ;  Acts  24.  2,  4  ;  1  Co.  8.  n  ;  14.  16  ;  Phni.  14. 
4.0/ thee,  thy,  thine,  (rod  sou. 

Matt.  1.  20  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife 
See  also  4.  6,  7,  10;  5.  23,  23,  24,  24,24,  29,  29,  29,  30,  30, 
3°i  36,  39>  4°»  43  \  6-  3.  3>  4>  6>  6>  6»  6>  9>  2°>  *°>  17.  18,  18, 
22,  23 ;  7.  3,  4,  5 ;  9.  2,  6, 14,  18,  22 ;  n.  10,  io,  26 ;  12.  2, 

37>  37'  47.  47 ;  15-  2,  M  28;  17. 16  ;  18.  8,  8, 15,  15,  33  ;  19. 
[19,]  19;  20.  [2i,]  21;  21.  5;  22.  37,  37,  37,  37,  39,  44;  23.  37; 
2S-  2*»  23,  25 ;  26.  42,  52,  73 ;  Mark  1.  2.  etc.  etc. 
THT-A-TI'-RA,  ©i/arepia. 

A  city  of  Lydia  in  Asia  Minor,  near  the  river  Lycus, 
twenty  seven  miles  N.W.  of  Sardis,  and  fifty  six  KE.  of 
Smyrna ;  once  called  Pelopia  and  Euhippia,  now  Ak- 
Hissar  ("white  castle");  it  was  famous  for  the  art  of 
dying  purple;  in  a.d.  69  Christ  sent  a  message  to  it 
through  the  apostle  John,  recorded  in  Rev.  n.  18-24; 
in  366  Valeus  the  Eastern  emperor  gained  a  victory 
over  Procopius  here. 

Acts  16.  14  woman .  .seller  of  purple,  of  the  city  of  T. 

Rev.   1. 11  write  in  a  book,  and  send. .unto  T.,  and 
2. 18  unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in  T.  write 
2.  24  unto  you  I  say,  and  unto  the  rest  in  T. 
THTLNE  (wood)  — 
Thya  or  thyme  tree,  96'ivos  ihuinos. 

Rev.  18. 12  The  merchandise  of .  .allthyine  wood,  and 


THYSELF  — 

1.  Thy  soul,  7]t??J  naphshek. 

Esth.  4. 13  Think  not  with  thyself  that  thou  shalt  es. 

2.  Oneself,  kavrSv  heauton. 

Rom.  13.  9  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  [thyself] 
Gal.    5. 14  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  [thyself] 

3.  Of  one's  self,  eavrov  heautou. 

JohniS.  34  Sayest  thou  this  thing  [of  thyself],  or  dido. 

Rom  13.    9  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 

Gal.  5.  14  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself 
l.Ofown  self,  aeavrod,  (ravrov  seautou,  sautou. 

Matt.  4.  6  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  do. 
See  also  8.  4;  19.  19;  22.  [39];  27.  40;  Marki.  44;  12.  31; 
Luke  4.  9,  23;  5.  14;  10.  27;  23.  37,  39;  John  1.  22;  7. 
4;  8.  13,  53;  10.  33;  14.  22;  21.  18;  Acts  16.  28;  26.  1; 
Rom.  2.  1,  5,  19,  21 ;  14.  22 ;  Gal.  6.  1 ;  1  Ti.  4.  7,  16,  16 ; 
5.  22 ;  2  Ti.  2.  15 ;  Titus  2.  7 ;  Jas.  2.  8. 

TTBERIAS,  TifepiAs. 

A  city  at  S.  end  of  W.  side  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  or  Lake 
of  Tiberias ;  it  was  built  B.C.  44  by  Herod  Antipas 
(who  killed  John  the  Baptist)  in  honour  of  the  emperor 
Tiberius.  It  is  noted  for  its  hot  springs  ;  was  destroyed 
by  Vespasian,  but  quickly  recovering  it  became  the 
seat  of  a  Rabbinical  school  till  the  "fourth  century, 
where  the  Mishna,  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  and  the 
Masora  were  composed.  It  is  now  called  Tabarieh 
and  was  almost  destroyed  by  an  earthquake  in  A.D. 
1837 ;  it  is,  after  Jerusalem,  Hebron,  and  Safed,  the 
fourth  most  holy  city  in  Jewish  estimation.  Accord- 
ing to  Jerome,  it  is  the  Chinnereth  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament. 

John  6.    1  sea  of  Galilee,  which  is  (the  sea)  of  T. 

6.  23  there  came  other  boats  from  T.,  nigh  unto 
21.    1  Jesus  showed  himself,  .at  the  sea  of  T. 
TI-BE-RT-TJS,  Tiflepios. 

The  stepson  of  Augustus,  and  third  emperor  of  Rome, 
a.d.  14-37 1  surnamed  Claudius  Nero,  and  born  B.C.  42. 

Luke  3.  1  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  T.  Ca?. 
TIB' -HATH,  nrfSM  extension. 

A  city  in  Aram  Zobah  which  David  spoiled  along  with 
Chun;  comp.  Thaebata  in  the  M"."W.  of  Mesopotamia, 
and  Tkebetha,  S.  of  Hisibis. 

1  Ch.18.  8  Likewise  from  T.,  and  from  Chun,  cities 
TEB'-NI,  ^n  intelligent. 

The  son  of  Ginath,  whom  some  wished  to  be  Icing  after 
Zimri.     B.C.  925. 

1  Ki.  16.  21  half  of  the  people  followed  T.  the  son  of 

16.  22  ag-ainst  the  people  that  followed T...  so T. 

TTD'-AL,  S;nri  splendour,  renown. 
A  king  of  Goyini,   confederate    with    Chedorlaonier, 
Amraphel,  and  Arioch,  who  invaded  the  cities  of  the 
plain  in  the  days  of  Abraham.    B.C.  1913. 

Gen.  14.    1  Chedorlaonier  king  of  Elam,  and  T.  king 
14.    9  T.  king  of  nations,  and  Anirapkel  king  of 
TIDE  — 
Time,  nj?  eth. 

Josh.  8. 29  the  king,  .he  hanged  on  a  tree  until  even. 

2  Sa.  it.  '2  it  came  to  pass  in  an  evening  tide,  that  D. 
Isa.  17.  14  behold  at  evening  tide  trouble ;  (and)  be. 
Jer.  20. 16  let  Mm  hear,  .the  shouting  at  noon  tide 

TIDINGS,   (reward  for)  — 

1.  Tidings,  good  views,  reward  for,  nnifc'3  hesorah. 
2  Sa.   4.  10  have  given  him  a  reward  for  his  tidings 

18.  20  Thou  shalt  not  bear  tidings,  but  thou  shalt 
18.  22  seeing  that  thou  hast  no  tidings  ready? 
18.  25  If  he  be  alone,  (there  is)tidings  in  his  mo. 
18.  27  (is)  a  good  man,  and  cometh  with  good  ti. 
2  Ki.  7.    9  this  day  (is)  a  day  of  good  tidings,  and  we 

2.  Word,  matter,  thing,  131  dabar. 

Exod33.  4  when  the  people  heard  these  evil  tidings 

1  Sa.  11.  4  told  the  tidings  in  the  ears  of  the  people 

11.  5  they  told  him  the  tidings  of  the  men  of  Ja. 

11.  6  came  upon  Saul  when  he  heard  those  tid. 

3.  What  is  heard,  report,  tidings,  n^'D»  shemuah. 

1  Sa.   4. 19  when  she  heard  the  tidings  that  the  ark 

2  Sa.   4.    4  He  was  five  years  old  when  the  tidings  ca. 

13.  30  tidings  came  to  David,  saying,  Absalom 

1  Ki.  2.  28  Then  tidings  came  to  Joab :  for  Joab  had 
Psa.112.  7  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings :  his 
Jer.  49.  23  they  have  heard  evil  tidings :  they  are  fa. 
Eze.  21.  7  thou  shalt  answer,  For  the  tidings,  beca. 
Dan.  1 1.  44  tidings  out  of  the  east  aud  out  of  the  no. 

1. Hearing,  report,  tidings,  V£p  shema. 

Gen.  29. 13  when  Laban  heard  the  tidings  of  Jacob  his 
Jer.  37.   5  when  the  Chaldeans,  .heard  tidings  of  th. 

5. To  let  (good)  tidings  be  proclaimed,  "i^3  basar,7. 

2  Sa.  18.  31  Tidings,  my  lord  the  king :  for  the  Loed 
O.A  word,  matter,  thing,  h6yos  logos. 

Acts  11.  22  tidings  of  these  things  came  unto  the  ears 
7.  A  saying, declaration,  information,<pa,o'is  phasis. 
Acts  21.  31  tidings  came  unto  the  chief  captain  of  the 
TIDINGS,  to  bear,  bring,  carry  — 
To  announce  (good)  tidings,  ik'3  basar,  3. 

2  Sa.  18. 19  Let  me  now  run  and  bear  the  king  tidings 
18.  20  thou  shalt  bear  no  tidings,  because  the' 
18.  20  but  thou  shalt  bear  tidings  another  day 
18.  26  the  king  said,  He  also  bringeth  tidings 
1  Ki.    1.  42  Come  in  ;  for  thou,  .bringest  good  tidiu. 
1  Ch.io.    9  to  carry  tidings  unto  their  idols,  and  to 
Jer.  20.  15  Cursed  (be)  the  man  who  brought  tidings 


TIDINGS,  to  preach  or  bring  good  — 

To  announce  (good)  tidings,  T&3  basar,  3. 

2  Sa.   4.  10  thinking  to  have  brought  good  tidings 
Isa.   40.    9  0  Zion,  that  bringest  good  tidings,  get 

40.  9  0  Jerusalem,  that  bringest  good  tidings 

41.  27  I  will  give,  .one  that  bringeth  good  tidi. 
52.  7  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings 
52.  7  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  good,  that 
61.    1  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  good  tidings 

Nah.  1. 15  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings 
TEE,  to  — 
1.2*0  bind,  direct,  "ipx  asar. 

1  Sa.  6.    7  tie  the  kiue  to  the  cart,  and  bring  their 

6.  10  tied  theni  to  the  cart,  and  shut  up  their 

2  Ki.  7.  10  but  horses  tied,  and  asses  tied,  and  the 
2.To  give,  }ri3  nathan. 

Exods9-  3i  they  tied  unto  it  a  lace  of  blue,  to  fasten 
3. To  lie,  bind,  ~ijjy  anad. 

Prov.  6.  21  Bind  them,  .(and)  tie  them  about  thy  ne. 
l.To  tie,  bind,  oblige,  5 ecu  deo. 

Matt2i.    2  ye  shall  find  an  ass  tied,  and  a  colt  with 

Markn.    2  ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never 
11.   4  found  the  colt  tied  by  the  door  without 

Luke  19.  30  ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  yet  ne. 

TIG-LATH  PIL-E'-SER,  or.  TLL-GATH  PLL-NE'-SER, 

idn^s  n^n  or  idn^s  n>Ln. 
An  Assyrian  king  who  invaded  ISaphtali  in  the  days  of 
Pekah  king  of  Israel.     He  succeeded  Pul,  conquered  the 
N.  of  Palestine  and  Damascus,  and  earned  off  the  people 
to  Kir.    B.C.  742. 

2  Ki.  15. 29  In  the  days  of  Pekah. .came  T.  king  of  A. 
16.  7  Ahaz  sent  messengers  to  T.  king  of  Assyr. 
16. 10  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus  to  meet  T.  king 

1  Ch.  5.    6  Beerah  his  son,  whom  T.,  king  of  Assyria 

5.  26  God.  .stirred  up.  .the  spirit  of  T.  king  of 

2  Ch.28.  20  T.  king  of  Assyria  came  unto  him,  and 
TLK'-VAH,  TIK'-VATH,  rnjjfp,  nnpiri  strength. 

1 .  Father  of  Shallum,  husband  of  Huldah  the  prophetess 
in  the  days  of  Josiah.    B.C.  641. 

2  Ki.22.  14  Huldah ..  the  wife  of  Shallum  the  son  of  T. 
2  Ch.  34.  22  Huldah . .  the  wif e  of  Shallum  the  son  of  T. 

2.  Father  of  Jahaziah  who  was  employed  in  taking 
account  of  those  that  had  married  strange  wives.  B.C. 
445- 

Ezra  10. 15  Jonathan,  .and  Jahaziah  the  son  of  T. 
TILE,  tiling  — 
1.  Brick,  .1337  lebenah. 

Eze.    4.   1  "Thou  also,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  tile 
2. Potter's  clay ,  a  tile,  tcepafios  keramos. 

Luke  5.  19  let  him  down  through  the  tiling  with  (his) 
TILL,  until  (the  time)  — 
l.Till,  up  to,  during,  *iy  ad. 

Gen.    3. 19  shalt  thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return  unto 
8.    5  thewaters  decreased  continually  until  the 
Ezra   4.  21  until  (another)  commandment  shall  be 

5. 16  since  that  time  even  until  now  hath  it  be. 
Dan.  2.  9  to  speak  before  me,  till  the  time  be  chan. 
2.  34  Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out 
4.  23  (let)  his  portion  (be)  with  the  beasts .  .till 
4.  25  till  thou  know  that  the  Most  High  ruleth 
4.  32  until  thou  know  that  the  Most  High  ruleth 

4.  33  till  his  hairs  were  grown  like  eagles'  (fea.) 

5.  21  till  he  knew  that  the  most  high  God  ruled 

6.  14  he  laboured  till  the  goingdown  of  the  sun 

7.  4  I  beheld  till  the  wings  thereof  were  pluc. 
7.  9  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  cast  down 
7.  11  I  beheld  (even)  till  the  beast  was  slain 

7.  22  Until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and  jud. 
7.  25  shall  be  given  into  his  hand  until  a  tune 
-2.  Till  that,  *3  n»  ad  ki. 

Gen.  49. 10  from  between  his  feet,  nntil  Sliiloh  come 
2  Sa.  23.  10  smote  the  Philistines,  until  his  hand  was 
2  Ch.26.  15  he  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was 
3. Before,  \157  liphne. 

2  Sa.  3.  35  if  I  taste  bread,  or  oughtelse,  till  the  sun 

4.  Except,  but  when,  CN  '3  ki  im. 

Ruth  3. 18  until  thou  know  how  the  matter  will  fall 

5.  Till  that,  "1^15  "'V.  ad  asher. 

Gen.  27.  44  tarry . .  until  thy  brother's  fury  turn  away 
28.  15  for  I  will  not  leave  thee,  until  I  have  do. 

6. Till,  up  to,  within,  &XP1>  &XPls  achri,  achris. 

Matt  24.  38  until  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the 
See  also  Luke  1.  20;  17.  25 ;  21.  24  ;  Acts  1.  2;  3.  21 ;  7. 
18 ;  20.  11 ;  23.  1 ;  Rom.  5.  13;  8.  22 ;  n.  25  ;  1  Co.  n. 
26  ;  15.  25 ;  2  Co.  3. 14 ;  Gal.  3.  19 ;  4.  2,  19 ;  Phil.  1.  5,  6; 
Rev.  2.  25 ;  7.  [3] ;  15.  8  ;  17.  17  ;  20.  3. 
7. Till,  up  to,  &xpls  ov  achris  hou. 

Acts    7. 18  ;  Ro.  11.  35  ;  1C0.  n.  26;Ga.  3.  ig  ;Re.  7.  3 

8.  With  a  view  to,  els  eis. 

Eph.   1. 14  Which  is  the  earnest.. until  theredenvpt. 
Phil.    1.  10  sincere  and  without  offence  till  the  day 

9.  Unto,  up  to,  ecu?  heds. 

Matt.  1. 17  from  David  until  the  carrying  away  into 
See  also  v.  25;  2.  9,  13, 15;  5. 18, 18, 26;  10. 11,  23;  11. 12, 13; 
12.  20;  13.  33;  16.  28;  17.  9;  18.  21,  22,  22,  [30, 34];  22. 44;  23. 
39;  24.  34,  39;  26.  29;  27.  64;  Mark  6.  10;  9.  1;  12.  36;  14. 
25;  15.  33;  Luke  1.  80;  9.  27;  12.  50;  59;  13.  8,  21,  35;  15.  4, 
8;  16.  16;  17.  8;  19.  [13];  20.  43;  21  32;  22.  16;  Luke  22.  18; 
23. 44;  24.  49;  John  2.  10;  9.  18;  13.  38;  21.  22,  23;  Acts  2. 
35;  8.  40;  13.  20;  21.  5;  26;  23.  12,  14,  21;  25.  21;  2S.  23; 
1  Co.  4.  5;  16.  8;  2  Th.  2. 7;  1  Ti.  4.  13;  Heb.  1.  13;  10.  13; 
Jas.  5.  7;  2  Pe.  1.  19;  1  Jo.  2.  q;  Rev.  6.  n;  20.  5. 


TILL 


98S 


TIME 


10.  Unto,  until,  p*xph  H-^XPls  'mechri,  mechris. 
Matt.  ii.  23  it  would  have  remained  until  this  day 

13.  30  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest 
28.  15  reported  among  the  Jews  until  this  day 

Mark  13.  30  this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  th. 

Acta  10.  30  Four  days  ago  I  was  fasting  until  this  ho. 
20.    7  and  continued  his  speech  until  midnight 

Eph.   4. 13  Till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith 

1  Ti.    6.  14  until  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C. 
Heb.   9.  10  imposed  (on  them)  until  the  time  of  ref. 

11.  Except  when,  e!  /xr?  '6rav  ei  me  hotan. 

Mark  g.   9  tell  no  man.  .till  the  Son  of  man  were  ri. 

TILL,  be  tilled,  to  — 

l.To  do  service,  labour,  work,  "OJJ  abaci. 

Gen.    2.    5  and  (there  was)  not  a  man  to  till  the  gro. 

3.  23  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  he  was 

4.  12  When  thou  tillest  the  ground,  it  shall  not 

2  Sa.  9.  10  thy  servants,  shall  till  the  laud  for  him 
Provi2.  11  He  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  be  satisfied 

28.  19  He  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  have  plenty 
Jer.  27.  11  and  they  shall  till  it,  and  dwell  therein 

2.  To  be  served,  worked,  1?^  abaci,  2. 

Eze.  36.  9  I  will  turn  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  till. 
36. 34  the  desolate  land  shall  be  tilled,  whereas 

TILLAGE,  tiller  — 

1.  Tillage,  ground  broken  up,  ~n  nir. 

Provi3.  23  Much  food  (is  in)  the  tillage  of  the  poor 

2.  To  serve,  labour,  work,  "QJJ  abaci. 

Gen.    4.    2  sheep,  but  Cain  was  atiller  of  the  ground 

3.  Service,  work,  m"i3j£  abodah. 

1  Ch.27.  26  that  did  the  work  of  the  field  for  tillage 
Neh.  10.  37  have  the  tithes  in  all  the  cities  of  our  til. 

TI'-LON,  jiSiPi,  pS'fi  mockery,  scorn. 

A  son  of  Shimon,  descended  from  Judah  through  Caleb 

son  of  Jephunneh.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  20  the  sons  of  Shimon  (were)  Amnion . .  and  T. 
TIMBER  — 

1.  Wood,  tree,  timber,  1?n  a. 

Ezra  5.  8  timber  is  laid  in  the  walls,  and  this  work 
6.  4  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of  new  timber 
6.  11  let  timber  be  pulled  down  from  his  house 

2.  Wood,  tree,  timber,  j'y  ets. 

Exod3i.    5  carviug  of  timber,  to  work  in  all  manner 
Lev.  14.  45  the  timber  thereof,  and  all  the  mortar  of 

1  Ki.   5.    6  any  that  can  skill  to  hew  timber  like  unto 

5.  8  concerning  timber  of  cedar,  and.  .timber 

5.  18  they  prepared  timber  and  stones  to  build 

6.  10  they  rested  on  the  house  with  timber  of  c. 

15.  22  the  stones  of  Ramah,  and  the  timber  the. 

2  Ki.  12.  12  to  buy  timber  and  hewed  stone  to  repair 

22.    6  to  buy  timber  and  hewn  stone  to  repair 

1  Ch.14.    i  timber  of  cedars,  with  masons  and  carpen. 

22.  14  timber  also  and  stone  have  I  prepared 
22. 15  hewers  and  workers  of  stone  and  timber 

2  Ch.  2.    8  thy  servants  can  skill  to  cut  timber  in  L. 

2.   9  to  prepare  me  timber  in  abundance :  for 
2. 10  I  will  give  to.  .the  hewers  that  cut  timb. 

2.  14  in  timber,  in  purple,  in  blue,  and  in  fine 

16.  6  they  carried  away,  .the  timber  thereof 
34. 11  to  buy  hewn  stone,  and  timber  for  coupl. 

Neb.   2.    8  hemay  giveme  timber  to  make  beamsfor 
Eze.  26.  12  they  shall  lay  thy  stones  and  thy  timber 
Hal).  2. 11  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer 
Zech.  5.   4  shall  consume  it  with  the  timber  thereof 
TIMBREL,  (to  play  with)  — 
l.Tabrct,  timbrel,  *]h  toph. 

Exodis.  20 took  a  timbrel.. with  timbrels  and  with 

.  34  his  daughter  came  out  to  meet  him  with  t. 

5  on  timbrels,  and  on  cornets,  and  on  cyni. 

8  with  timbrels,  and  with  cymbals,  and  with 

12  They  take  the  timbrel  and  harp,  and  rej. 

2  bring  hither  the  timbrel,  the  pleasantha. 

3  let  them  sing,  .with  the  timbrel  and  harp 

4  Praise  him  with  the  timbrel  and  dance 

2.  To  play  on  a  timbrel  or  tabret,  *|5$  taphapli. 
Psa.  68.  25  among,  .the  damsels  playing  with  timb. 

TIME,  times,  (due,  this,  at  that)  — 

l.Time,  season,    jot  zcman. 

Ezra   5.    3  At  the  same  time  came  to  them  Tatnai 
Neh.   2.    6  ifc  pleased  the  king.,  and  I  set  him  a  time 
Esth.  9.  27  keep,  .according  to  their,  .time,  every 

9.  31  confirm  these  days  of  Purim  in  their  tim. 
Dan.   2.  16  desired . .  that  he  would  give  him  time 

3.  7  at  that  time,  when  all  the  people  heard 

3.  8  at  that  time  certain  Chaldeans  came  near 

4.  36  At  the  same  time  my  reason  returned  1111. 

6.  lohe'kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a  day 
6. 13 but  maketh  his  petition  three  timesaday 

7.  22  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed 
7. 25  he  shall,  .think  to  change  times  and  laws 

2. Hands,  n'n;  yadoth. 

Gen.  43,  34  Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  as  much 
Z.Day,  days,  D'p;,  nv  yom,  yamim. 

Gen.  4.  3  in  process  of  time  it  came  to  pass  that  C. 
26.  8  when  he  had  been  there  a  long  time,  that 
30.  33  my  righteousness  answer  for  me  in  time 

38.  12  in  process  of  time  the  daughter  of  Shuah 

39.  ti  it  came  to  pass  about  this  time,  that  (Jo.) 
47.  29  time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die,  aud 

I   2.  23  it  came  to  pass  in  process  of  time,  that  the 
Mini  13.  20  Now  the  time  (was)  the  time  of  the  first 
2©.  15  and  we  have  dwelt  in  Egypt  a  long  time 


Judg 
2Sa.  6. 
1  Ch.13. 
Job 
Psa. 

149. 

150. 


Nuni32. 10  Lord's  anger  was  kindled  the  same  time 
Deutio.  10  stayed,  .according  to  the  first  time,  forty 

20.  19  When  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city  a  long  ti. 
Josh.  3.  15  overfloweth  all  his  banks  all  the  time  of 

11.  18  Joshua  made  war  a  long  time  with  all  th. 

23.  1  a  long  time  after  that  the  LORD  had  given 
Judgi4.    8  after  a  time  he  returned  to  take  her,  and 

15.    1  it  came  to  pass,  .in  the  time  of  wheat  ha. 

18.  31  all  the  time  that  the  house  of  God  was  in 
20. 15  were  numbered  at  that  tune  out  of  theci. 

1  Sa.   1.   4  when  the  time  was  that  Elkanah  offered 

1.  20  when  the  time  was  come  about  after  Ha. 

3.  2  it  came  to  pass  at  that  tune,  when  Eli  (w.) 
7.  2  the  time  was  long ;  for  it  was  twenty  yea. 
9.  13  get  you  up ;  for  about  this  time  ye  shall 

14. 18  the  ark  of  God  was  at  that  time  with  the 
is.  10  played  with  his  hand,  as  at  other  times 

2  Sa.  7.   6  since  the  time  that  I  brought  up  the  chil. 

7.  11  since  the  time  that  I  commanded  judges 
14.  2  be  as  a  woman  that  had  a  longtime  mou. 
23. 20  slew  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  a  pit  in  time  of 

1  Ki.   1.    6  had  not  displeased  him  at  any  time  in  say. 

2. 26 1  will  not  at  this  time  put  thee  to  death 

8.  59  the  cause  of  his  people  Israel  at  all  times 

11.  42  the  time  that  Solomon  reigned  in  Jerusa. 

2  Ki.  3.    6  went  out  of  Samaria  the  same  time,  and 

10.  36  the  time  that  Jehu  reigned  over  Israel  in 

19.  25  (and)  of  ancient  times  that  I  have  formed 

1  Ch.17.  10  since  the  time  that  I  commanded  judges 

29.  27  the  time  that  he  reigned  over  Israel  (was) 

2  Ch.15.  11  they  offered  unto  the  Lord  the  same  time 

30.  26  since  the  time  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David 
Ezra    4.  15  moved  sedition  within  the  same  of  old  ti. 

4.  iq  this  city  of  old  time  hath  made  insurrect. 
Neh.  4.  16  it  came  to  pass  from  that  time  forth,  (th.) 

5.  14  from  the  time  that  I  was  appointed  to  be 

9.  32  since  the  time  of  the  kings  of  Assyria  un. 

1 2.  44  at  that  time  were  some  appointed  over  the 
Job  15.  32  It  shall  be  accomplished  before  his  time 
Psa.  27.    5  in  the  time  of  trouble  he  shall  hide  me  in 

41.    1  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  tro. 
44.    1  (what)  work  thou  didst,  .in  the  times  of 
56.    3  What  time  I  am  afraid,  I  will  trust  in  thee 
Prov25. 13  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest 
25.  19  Confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man  in  time 

31.  25  and  she  shall  rejoice  in  time  to  come 

.    Isa.  30.   8  that  it  may  be  for  the  time  to  come  for  e  v. 

37.  26  of  ancient  times,  that  I  have  formed  it  V 
Jer.  39. 10 and  gave  them  vineyards,  .at  the  same  ti. 
Lam.  5.  20  Wherefore,  .forsake  us  so  long  time? 
Eze.  38.  10  at  the  same  time  shall  things  come  into 

38. 17  of  whom  I  havespoken  in  old  time  by  my 

38.  18  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  the  same  time  wh. 

4. An  appointed  time  or  season,  ijnD  moed. 

Exod34.  18  in  the  time  of  the  month  Abib :  for  in  the 
1  Sa.  9.  24  unto  this  time  hath  it  been  kept  for  thee 
Dan.  12.    7  that  (it  shall  be)  for  a  time,  times,  and  a 

5.J¥umbers,  times,  o\3.b  monim. 

Gen.  31.  7  your  father.,  changed  my  wages  ten  times 
31.  41  and  thou  hast  chauged  my  wages  ten  times 

6. An  appointed  time  or  season,  \ty  idclan. 

Dan.    2.    8  I  know,  .that  ye  would  gain  the  time,  be. 

2.  9  to  speak  before  me,  till  the  time  be  chan. 

2.  21  he  changeth  the  times  and  the  seasons,  he 

3.  5  at  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  co. 

3.  15  if  ye  be  ready  that  at  what  time  ye  hear 

4.  16  changed,  .and  let  seven  times  pass  over 
4.  23  (let)  his  portion  (be).. till  seven  times  pass 
4.  25,  32  seven  times  shall  pass  over  thee,  until 
7.  12  yet  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a.,  time 
7.  25  time  and  times  and  the  dividing  of  time 

7.  Time,  ny  cth. 

Gen.  18.  10  return  unto  thee  according  to  the  time  of 
18.  14  I  will  return,  .accordingtothe  timeof  life 
21.  22  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Abinie. 
24.  11  at  the  time  of  the  evening,  (even)  the  time 
29.    7  neither  (is  it)  time  that  the  cattle  should 

31.  10  it  came  topass  at  the  time  that  the  cattle 
38.  1  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Judah 
38.  27  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  time  of  her  travail 

Exod  9.  18  about  this  time  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  ve. 

Lev.  15.  25  many  days  out  of  the  time  of  her  separat. 

16.    2  that  he  come  not  at  all  times  into  the  ho. 

Nuni22.   4  the  son  of  Zippor  (was)  king,  .atthattime 

23. 23  according  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said  of 

Deut.  1.    5  I  spake  unto  you  at  that  time,  saying,  I 

1. 16  I  charged  your  judges  at  that  time,  say. 

1. 18  I  commanded  you  at  that  time  all  the  th. 

2.  34  we  took  all  his  cities  at  that  time,  and 

3.  4  we  took  all  his  cities  at  that  time,  there 
3.    8  we  took  at  that  time  out  of  the  hand  of 
3.  12  this  land,  (which)  we  possessed  at  that  ti. 
3.  18  I  commanded  you  at  that  time,  saying 

3.  21  I  commanded  Joshua  at  that  time,  saying 

3.  23  I  besought  the  Lord  at  that  time,  saying 

4.  14  the  Lord  commanded  me  at  that  time  to 

5.  5  between1  the  Lord  and  you  at  that  time 
9.  20  and  I  prayed  for  Aaron  also  the  same  ti. 

10.  1  At  that  time  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Hew 

10.  8  Atthattime  the  LORD  separated  the  tribe 

32.  35  their  foot  shall  slide  in  (due)  time:  for  the 
Josh.  5.   2  At  that  time  the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua 

6.  26  Joshua  adjured  (them)  at  that  time,  say. 
10. 27  it  came  to  pass  at  the  time  of  the  going 
11     6  to  morrow,  about  this  time,  will  I  deliver 

11.  10  Joshua  at  that  time  turned  back,  and  to. 
11.  21  at  that  time  came  Joshua,  aud  cut  off  the 

Judg.  3.  29  they  slew  of  Moab  at  that  time  about  ten 
4.   4  a  prophetess,  .judged  Israel  at  that  time 


Judg  10. 


Ruth 
1  Sa.  , 


2Sa.11. 
24 


:  Ch 


>Ch. 


Neh. 


Job  22. 
24, 
3S, 

39' 
39' 

Psa.    4. 

9 


81 
102 
105, 
106, 

119. 

119 

Prov.  5, 

17 
Eccl.  3. 


14  let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of  your, 

26  did  ye  not  recover  (them)  within  thatti. 

6  there  fell  at  that  time  of  the  Ephraimites 

23  nor  would  as  at  this  time  have  told  us  (s. 
4  at  that  time  the  Philistines  had  dominion 

14  Benjamin  came  again  at  that  time  ;  and 

22  ye  did  not  give  unto  them  at  this  time 

24  Israel  departed  thence  atthattime,  every 

14  At  meal  time  come  thou  hither,  and  eat 
20  about  the  time  of  her  death  the  women 
16  about  this  time,  I  will  send  thee  a  man 
19  it  came  to  pass  at  the  time  when  Merab 
12  about  tomorrow  any  time,  (or)  the  third 

1  at  the  time  when  kings  go  forth  (to  bat.) 

15  from  the  morning  even  to  the  time  appo. 
65  at  that  time  Solomon  held  a  feast,  and  all 

29  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time  when  Jerobo. 

1  At  that  time  Abijah  the  son  of  Jeroboam 

23  in  the  time  of  his  old  age  he  was  diseased 

2  if  I  make  not.. by  to  morrow  about  this  t. 
6  I  will  send,  .to  morrow  about  this  time 

16  About  this  season,  according  to  the  time 

17  bare  a  son.  .according  to  the  time  of  life 

26  (Is  it)  a  time  to  receive  money,  and  to  re. 
1  To  morrow,about  this  time,  (shall)a  meas. 

18  shall  be  to  morrow  about  this  time  in  the 
22  Then  Libniah  revolted  at  the  same  time 

6  come,  .to  Jezreel  by  tomorrow  this  time 
6  At  that  time  Rezin  king  of  Syria  recov. 
16  At  that  time  did  Hezekiah  cut  off  (thego. 
12  At  that  time  Berodach-baladau,  the  son 
10  At  that  time  the  servants  nf  Nebuchadn. 

25  to  come  after  seven  days  from  time  to  ti. 

22  at  (that)  time  day  by  day  there  came  to  D. 
32  men)thathad  understaudiugof  the  times 

1  at  the  time  that  kings  go  out  (to  battle) 
28  At  that  time  when  David  saw  that  the  L. 

30  the  times  that  went  over  him,  and  over 

8  at  the  same  time  Solomon  kept  the  feast 

18  were  brought  under  at  that  time,  and  the 

5  in  those  times  (there  was)  nopeace  to  him 
.    7  at  that  time  Hanani  the  seer  came  to  Asa 

10  Asa  oppressed,  .the  people  the  same  time 
34  about  the  time  of  the  sun  going  down  he 
.  10  The  same  time  (also)  did  Libnah  revolt; 

27  after  the  time  that  Amaziah  did  turn  aw. 
,  16  At  that  time  did  king  Ahaz  send  unto  the 
,  22  in  the  time  of  his  distress  did  he  trespass 
,  3  they  could  not  keep  it  at  that  time.beca. 
.  17  Israel,  .kept  the  passover  at  that  time,  and 
.  34  all  the  weight  was  written  at  that  time 

.  13  (it  is)  a  time  of  much  rain,  and  we  are  not 
.  14  let  all  them,  .come  at  appointed  times 
.  22  at  the  same  time  said  I  unto  the  people 
.    1  at  that  time  I  had  not  set  up  the  doors 
.  27  in  the  time  of  their  trouble,  when  they 
.  28  mauy  times  didst  thou  deliver  them  acco. 
.  34  to  being  (it),  .at  times  appointed  year  by 
.  21  From  that  time  forth  came  they  no  (mo.) 
.  31  for  the  wood  offering,  at  times  appointed 
,  13  said  to  the  wise  men,  which  knew  the  ti. 
.  14  if  thou,  .holdest  thy  peace  at  this  time 
.  14  art  come  to  the  kiugdomfor  (such)  a  tim 
.   9  called  at  that  time  in  the  third  month,  th 

16  Which  were  cut  down  out  of  time,  whose 
1  seeing  times  are  not  hidden  from  theAl. 

23  I  have  reserved  against  the  time  of  trou 

1  Knowest  thou  the  time  when  the  wild  go 

2  knowest  thou  the  time  when  they  bring 

7  more  than  in  the  time  (that)  their  corn 

9  The  Lord  also  .vill  be.  .a  refuge  in  times 
1  (why)  hidestthou  (thyself)  in  times  of  tr.  ? 
9  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of 

15  My  times  (are)  in  thy  hand:  deliver  me  fr. 

6  pray  unto  thee  in  a  time  when  thou  may. 
1  I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times :  his  pr. 

19  They  shall  not  be  ashamed  in  the  evil  ti. 
39  (he  is)  their  strength  in  the  time  of  trou. 

8  Trust  iu  him  at  all  times;  ye  people,  pour 
13  my  prayer  (is.  .in)  an  acceptable  time 

9  Cast  me  not  off  in  the  time  of  old  age;  for 
15  their  time  should  have  endured  for  ever 

.  13  for  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea,  the  set 

19  Until  the  time  that  his  word  came :  the 

3  he  that  doeth  righteousness  at  all  times 

20  (it  hath)  unto  thy  judgments  at  all  time? 
126  (It  is)  time  for  (thee).  Lord,  to  work,  (for) 
19  let  her  breasts  satisfy  thee  at  all  times;  and 

17  A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother 
.  1  a  time  to  every  purpuse  under  the  heaven 
.  2  A  timetobeborn.andatimetodie;  a  time 
.  2  a  tune  to  pluck  up  (that  which  is)  planted 
.  3  A  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  heal ;  a  time 
.   3  to  break  down,  and  a  time  to  build  up 

.    4  A  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh 
.   4  a  time  to  mourn,  aud  a  time  to  dance 
.   5  A  time  to  cast  away  stones,  and  a  time  to 
.    5  a  time  to  embrace,  and  a  time  to  refrain 
.    6  A  time  to  get,  and  a  time  to  lose ;  a  time 
.    6  to  keep,  and  a  time  to  cast  away 
.    7  A  time  to  rend,  aud  a  time  to  sew 
.    7  a  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  spe. 
.    8  A  time  to  love,  and  a  time  to  hate 
.    8  a  time  of  war,  and  a  time  of  peace 
.  11  hath  made  every(thing) beautiful  in  hist. 
.  17  (there  is)  a  time  there  for  every  purpose 
.  17  why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time? 
.    5  a  wise  man's  heart  discerneth  both  time 
.    6  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  and  judg. 
.    9  (there  is)  a  time  wherein  one  man  ruleth 
.  11  buttimeand  chancehappeuethtothemall 
.  12  man  also  knoweth  not  his  time:  as  the  fi 


TIME 


TIME 


33-    r  A  M u t  time  Merodach-Ualadan,  the  sou 

6o'  J  I  "he  W"ill  hasten  it  tatat« 

|    ,  U  e mStt.  swallow  observe  the  to 

SlkKSa?K«S 

:   4  I  will  not  hear  (them)  in  the  toj«* 
J,    Uhesaviouvthereo  mtimeofto    >lej  |y 

«■ I9  Wame'Si ^K? ffi™^ 
S  «    e(tK  wth  then,  in  the  time  of  tune 
2  Si  serve  him .  .until  the  very  time  of  his 
II   I  ft)  even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble 
3°'    I  At  tl  e  same  time,  saith  the  LOOT,  Willi 
IV  h  at  that  time,  will  I  cause  the  branch  of  n. 
3/6  21  calamity  was  come .  .(and)  the  time  of  th. 
To     81  will  bring  the  calamity,  .the  time(t  at 
to     4  in  that  time,  saith  the  LORD,  the  children 
to  16  that  handled,  the  sickle  in  the  time  of  ha. 
5So.  20  to that  time,  saith  the  LORD,  the  miqurty 
b         timii-  fi-iv  i=i  rome  the  tune  of  then  visit. 
To  %  try  dayL .corn"   the  time  (that)  I  will  vl. 
<i'  °6  this  (is)  the  time  of  the  Lord's  vengeance 
\  '  ,8  i .  tl  e  time  of  their  visitation  they  shall 
5         1  k-e  a  tbreshin"  lloor,  ( it  is)  time  to  thresh 
|i  3      nd        Sof  her  harvest  shall  come 
Eze     4  io  t  wenty  shekels  a  day  :  from  time  to  tune 
2'   °  from  time  to  time  Shalt  thou  drink 
,'    J  the  time  is  come,  the  day  of  trouble  (is) 
I  jl  The  time  is  come,  the  day  draweth  neai 
12  «  he  prophesieth  of  the  times  (that  are)  fat 
It.   8  ihy  time  (was)  the  time  of  love;  andlsp. 
,6  «  at  the  time  of  (thy)  reproach  of  the  daug. 
*,;  %  sheddeth  blood,  .that  her  time  may  come 
~~7  ,!  In  the  time  (when)  thou  shalt be  broken 
£  Jt  a  cloudy  day;  it  shall  he  the  time  of  the 
It    53  in  the  time  of  their  calamity  to  the  time 
Dan    I  17  for  at  the  time  of  the  end  (shall  be)  the    i. 

0  2i  touched  me  about  the  time  of  the  evening 

1  4  sheet  shall  be  built,  .in  troublous  times 
,?".  I  and  he  that  strengthened  her  in  (these)  ti 
'.  ,4  in  those  times  there  shall  many  stand  up 
,,  21  shall  forecast  his  devices,  .for  a  time 
'V  -i  to  make,  .white,  .to  the  time  of  the  end 

■  4o  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  the  king  of 
\l  °  at  that  time  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the 
IV    t  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as 

'         I  'that  same  time:  and  at  that  time  thy 
)l.   4seanhebook,(even)tothetimeoftheena 

It    n  closed  up  and  sealed  till  the  tune  of  the 
12  H  from  the  time  (that)  the  daily  (sacrifice) 
tr,.     „    n  tike  awav  mv  corn  in  the  time  thereof 
H0S-  ,o  jSkSySS  toseek  the  Lord,,  till  he.come 
Tnel   I'    i  in  that  time,  when  I  shall  bring  again  the 
Amos  ,'  is  silence  in  that  time,  .it  (is)  an  evil  time 
M  c     2    I  neither  shall  ye  go  haughtily:  for  this  to. 
V   4  hide  his  face  from  them  at  that  time,  as 
3!   t       Tl  the  time  (that)  she :  which  travai  eh 
Zeph   i  i2  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  time  ghat)  I 
1      I  ig  at  that  time  I  will  undo  all  that  afflict 
33;  29o  At  that  time  will  I  bring  you  (again),  even 
t  20  in  the  time  thatl  gather  you:  for  I  will 
Has    i    2  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the 

°'   i    4  (Is  it)  time  for  you,  O  ye,  to  dwel  inyoui 
Zech  io    i  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  ram  in  the  tune  of 
14    7  it  shall  come  to  pass,  (that  at  evening  tl. 


2Ch. 

Neh.   4. 

6. 

6. 
Job   19. 


73,  nys  paam.  ,. 

1 3  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times 
,1  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  at  this  tune 
11 1  will  at  this  time  send  all  my  Plag?«sup. 
„  Three  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  sh. 
0  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  tunes  before 
17  sprinkle  (it)  seven  times  before  the  Lord 
he  sprinkled,  .upon  thealtar  seven  times 
,  he  shall  sprinkle  upon  him.  .seven  times 
;  ,6  shall  sprinkle  of  the  oil .  .seven  times  be :f 
„,  shall  sprinkle..the  oil.. seven  times  before 
Z  And  he  shall,  .sprinkle  the  house  seven  ti. 
ii  10  sprinkle  of  the  blood,  .seven  times 
8  thou  sh  alt  number . .  seven  tunes  seven  J  t . 
20  have  tempted  me  now  these  ten  times 
land  sprinkle  of  her  blood,  .seven  times 
10  a  togePtherblessed(them)thesethree times 
°  make  you  a  thousand  times  so  many  mo.  e 
.  I9  the  LORD  hearkened  unto  me  at  that  t  me 
\l  the  Lord  hearkened  unt 0  me  at  thaUime 
,6  Three  times  in  a  year  shall  all  thy  males 
4  ve  shall  compass  the  city  seven  times  an 
,  -  compassed  the  city . .  seven  tunes:  only  01 
■  -  that  to-  they  compassed  the  city  seven  ti. 
x6  i   cameto  pass  at  the  seventh  time,  when 
,0  1°  their  land  did  Joshua  take  at  one  time 
Judg  6.4x5  thou  hast  mocked  me  these  three .times 
,  Sa!2o.  4?  fell  on  his  face,  .and  bowed    three  t unes 
2  Sa.  17.    7  The  counsel,  .(is)  not  good  at  this  tune 


;.  Beat,  sti 

Gen.  33. 

Exod  8. 

9' 

23- 

Lev.    4 

4 

8 

14 


14. 
16. 

Kumi4 

19. 

?4- 

Dent  1. 

9- 

10. 

16. 

Josh.  6. 

6. 

6. 

6. 


,     8  ei'ht  hundred,  whom  he  slew  at  one  time 
\  Ki    0  4  three  times  in  a  year  did  Solomon  offer 
„  tl  he  stretched  himself .  .three  times,  and 
tS  45  And  he  said,  Go  again  seven  times 
22  tl  How  many  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  that 
2  Ki    4  35  the  child  sneezed  seven  times  and  the 
I  10  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times,  and  thy  flesh 
\  14    ipped  himself  seven  times  111  Jordan,  ac. 
,,'  10  sl.ouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six  times 
i3'  I9-  tree  times  did  .loash  heat  him,  and  rec. 
,  CI,    1  h  t  ree    undred,  slain  (by  him)  at  one  time 
I  make  his  people  an  hundred  times  so  ma. 
T!  on  the  solemn  feasts,  three  times  111  the 
5  How  many  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  that 
,1  they  said  unto  us  ten  times,  From  al  pi. 
!  thev  sent  unto  me  four  times  after  this 
t  Then  sent  Sanballat . .  the  fifth  time  with 
,    \  Theseten  times  have  ye  reproached  me,  ye 
Psa.106.  43  Many  tunes  did  he  deliver  them;  bntth. 
Q  Fnnt    feet.  aSr\,  Sn  rerjel,  regalim. 

Exocl2,  14  Three  tines  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  unto 
lumst  28  thou  hast  smitten  me  these  three^ times 
„  ™  Wheref  ore  hast  thou  smitten,  .three  times 
22'.  33  the  ass    turned  from  me  these  three  times 

10  monierofthedaijs,uv:^smmisparhayjjamim. 
1 Sa  27  7  the  time  that  David  dwelt  in  thecountry 
I  It   I.  11  the  time  that  David  was  king  in  Hebron 

11  ttf  r^  *  «n,S  suffered  all  nations  to 
Acts  14. 10  Moseso,  oU  timehath  in  every  city  them 

12..1  day,  period,  7/iiepa  hemera.  „i,„„,,i 

Luke  0  si  when  tlie  time  was  come  that  he  should 
,?'  II  in  the  day  time  he  was  teaching  m  the  te. 
I  '  37     ho    al so  was  at  Jerusalem  at  that  time 
Acts   8.    1  at  that  time  there  was  a  great  persecution 
10  4  fi-rerl  time  or  season,  Koipo's  haivos. 

Matt  8  20  come  hither  to  torment  us  before  the  t.  : 
, ,  «  At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said  I 
V    1  At  that  time  Jesus  went  on  the  sabbath 
it  ,0  to  the  time  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  there 
34:  3i  At  that  time  Herod  the  tctrarch  heard  of 
,fi    -  cau  ye  not  (discern)  the  signs  of  the  times. 
„  ,4  when  the  time  of  the  fruit  drew  near,  he 
It  It  My  time  is  at  hand;  I  will  keep  the  pass 
Mark  1  is  The  time  is  fulfilled,  and  the  kingdom  of 
,0'  io  receive  an  hundred  fold  now  in  this  tune 
,?'  i°  he  found  nothing  but  leaves;  for  the  time 
I!  Take  ve  heed,  .yeknownotwhen the  time 
Luke  8  13  no  root    and  in  time  of  temptation  fall 
i     ,2  is  how  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time? 
,8  -o  receive  manifold  more  in  this  present  ti. 
9.  4°  houknewestnotthetimeof  thy  vis.  at.on 
It   8  the  time  draweth  near:  go  ye  not  there f 
'    21  -4  until  the  timesiof  the  Gentiles  be  fulnllcd 
John  7    6  My  time  is  not  yet  come:  but  your .toe 
I    8  I  go  not  up.  .for  my  time  is  not  yet  full 
Acts   3  19  when  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come 
7'  20  In  which  time  Moses  was  bom,  and  v.  as 
,2    ?  about  that  time  Herod  the  king  stretched 
,•  26  hat    determined  the  times  before appon. 
,0  23  the  same  time  there  arose  no  small  strrab. 
Rom  X  r.1  To  declare,  .at  this  time  his  righteousness 
EOm-  I!  18  the  sufferings  of  this  pivsent tame  arenot 
I     .it  this  time  will  I  come,  and  Sara  shall 
j?'   \  at  this  present  time  also  there  is  a  renin 
'  ,    And  that,  knowing  the  time,  that  now  (it 

1  Co  \  \  radge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the 
J'  e  except  (it  be)  with  consent  for  a  time  th. 
V  ,9  the  time  (is)  short:  it  ren.aineth,  that  both 

r'o    fi  i  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted,  and 

2  g  .  be  old  now  (is)  the  accepted  time;  behold 
8  14  at  this  timevour  abundance  (maybe  a  s.) 

r  il     T    o  Ye  observe  (lays,  and  months,  and  tunes 
Gal.    4- 10  "    1  »t ■  j  :  fulness  of  tunes 

Eph.   ..  10  the :  1 >f |nspatl™. °'e  v.-ithoutChrist, being 
2S;  io  FeSeemtag-tlietinie,  because  Relays  are 
fnl      !    «  Walk  in  wisdom . .  redeeming  the  time 
x  Til   4'  17  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in 

1  Th    2    6  that  lie  might  be  revealed  111  his  time 

2  k"  2.  6  a Sanson,  for  all,  to  be  testified  m  due  ti. 
I  1  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  fi. 
6  is  in  his  times  he  shall  show, (who  is)  the  bl. 

2  Ti  3'  1  to  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come 
I  i  the  time  will  come  when  they  will  not  en. 
1'  6  ami  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand 
Tirrw  t'  3  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  word  th. 
Titus  1.  3»«  , '",  x  an„„re  for  the  time  then  pr. 
He,)-  $  10topo  ed  on  thSm)  until  the  time  of  refer. 
,  Pe    1     5  "lady  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  tune 

V  11  Searching  what,  or  what  manner  of  time 

4  U  the  ti  netis  come)  that  judgment  mraV be. 

Kev    1     3  keep  those  things,  .for  the  time  («)athanQ 

ii  18  thy  wrath  is  come,  and  the  time  of  thede. 

iV  is  he :  kuoweth  that  he  hath  but  a  short  time 

;'.   '4  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time,  22. 10. 

U.NoW,vvi,  Mt.  24.  21  ;  Mr.  13.  19  ;  1  Co.  16. 12. 

15Matt  ^tluired  oniiem  diligently  what  time  tlie 

2-    7  e    M  t,      ti        whlch  he  had  dlllg. 

,-•    0  After  a  long  time  the  lord  of  those  serva 

Luke 1'  i?  E  isabeth's  full  time  came  that  she  should 

i.  57  ^  t0  him  aU    in  a  moment  of  to. 

I'.  27  which  had  devils  long  time,  and  ware  no 
20    a  went  into  a  far  country  for  a  long .time 

John  V    6  knew  that  he  had  been  now  a  long  time 
I45  '  9  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you  and 

Acts    1     6  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  ki. 
'   7  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the 


a    1.  21  have  companied  with  us  all  the  tome rttat 
,.  21  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the  times 
7.  1,  the  time  of  the  promise  drew  mgh.);hnh 
8  1.  because  thatoflongtimehehad  bewitched 
„  is  about  the  time  of  forty  years  suffered  he 
14    3  Long  time  therefore  abode  they  speaking 
il  -s  there  they  abode  long  time  with  the  dis 
£  t  the  times' of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at 
is  0°  they  desired  (him)  to  tarry  longer  time  wi. 
,8  "2°  after  he  had  spent  some  time  (there),  he 
„     9  whir,  much  time  was  spent,  and  when  sa. 
Gal      4     4  when  the  fulness  of  the  tune  was j  come 
?Th    t   1  of  the  times  and  the  seasons,  brethren,  ye 
1  in.  5.    J"1""     after  s0  long  a  time;  as  it  is  said 
neb-  i\  zl  whSrlhYtimlyouEht  to  be  teachers 
ji  11  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell.of  Gedeon 
,  Fe    i'  17  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  (liei  e)  11 
'  20  but  was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for 
4    2  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of  (his) 
t   3  the  time  past  of  (our)  life  may  . suffl .ce  5.6 
Tude       18  there  should  be  mockers  m  the  last  time 
Rev  10.   6  sware .  .that  there  should  be  tune  no  Ion. 

16M  nUr'  fZsfsX'ertplaceTaudthe  time  is  now 
Matt1^  J  At  heSsameLttmPe] camethe  disciples^ unto 
,,  ,:  ti, i»  is  1  desert  place,  and  now  the  time 
Tnke  1  i3o5  wee  prlying  without  at  the  time  of  inc. 
LUkY4-  7  sen  f his  servant  at  supper  time  to  say  to 
t  ,  ?'  JS  n„,e  cometh  that  whosoever  killeth 
J°lmi66  x  tha  when  th  tin  e  shall  come,  ye  may 
«  1 1  c  time  co.neth,  when  I  shall  no  more 
i  1 1 iff  1    childr en  it  is  the  last  time :  and  as 

1  J°-   »'  is  w he rel     w  ■  know  that  it  is  the  last  time 
Rev  14  is  S  e  tome  is  come  for  thee  to  reap ;  for  the 
See  a hn  About,  ancient,  appoint,  appointed    before 

short,  sowing,  spend,  such,  that,  thud,  this. 
TIME,  appointed,  set,  second,  at  any  — 
L  ^Z£fi  S  sCshall  at  any  time  come  with. 
0  4»wo»ita-;  ti»!e,  /esMw?  of  the  new  moon,  nra. 
Fsa   Si!    3  to  the  new  moon,  to  the  time  appointed 

--1'r^sSSbeaSnto  thee  atthisset  time 

8  ii  At i he time 'appointed  I  will  return  unto 

£   2  at  the  sefttme  at  which  God  had  spoken 

-  Sa  »  3    ne  tarried  longer  than  the  set  time  which 

Srt  1  S^rk^^etti  ^appointed  times 

J"  i77  Pharaoh  .hath  passed  the  time  appointed 

Hab. ":  1  the"  ismn  (is]  Jet  for  an  appointed  time 


MsTt^  S^'a^in  his  appointed  times 

5-^fitusesD'm^Xevitesredeematanyti. 

Isa    425:  h  iSlongtimeholdenniypeace;  I  have 

6-^™',f  £  s^lfwehad  returned  this  secondtime 
Xah. 4 .'.  9  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the  second  tune 
7  Wn*t  warfare,  service,  N?S  tsaba. 
'  Job  7  1  (Is  there)  not  an  appointed  tame i  to  man 
i4: 14  All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  w  ill  1 
3  A  seeond  time.  Sevrepov  deuteron.  . 

John        4  can  he  enter  the  second  time  into  us  .1,0. 
2T  16  He  saith  to  him  again  the  second  time,  S. 
2C0  13    2  foretell  you,  as  if .  .present,  the  second  ti. 

Heh.I09.  io  untotoienSaUheappearthesecondti. 

10. At  some  urn    1  time  at ,     own 

1  Th    ?'    i  neither  at  "„v  time  used  wc  flattermgwo. 

ilei,    i'    5  unto  which,  said  he  at  any  time,  Thou 

H        ,  A  to  wh  ch  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time 

I',   l  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  (them)  slip 

1 1    -1  time  or  day  appointed  before,  7rpo9e<ru(a. 

Gal    ".  "  "hder  tutors,  .until  the  time  appointed 
1 0  Riier  vet.  at  any  time,  trdnroTe  popote. 

Tohn  1  18  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  the 
J°       ;  ,7  have  neither  heard  his  voice  at  any  time 
,  Jo.  1 12  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  tome.  If  we 
TIME  of  need,  of  a  long,  in  — 
1.0/ oW  ttme,  anciently,  Ik  tt^oi  a*  joe m. 

-Pe.  2.    3  whose  judgment  now  of  a  long  time  im„. 

2. Seasonable,  timely,  opportune  «.B"«y0&SX& 
Heb.   4. 16  wemay..findgracetohelpintmieotneeci 

TIME,  loss  of,  process  of  — 
l.From  dai/s,  D'P.'P  miyyamim. 


TIME 


9S0 


2.  Cessation,  rest,  rav  shebeth. 

Exod2i.  ,9  only  lie  shall  pay  (for)  the  loss  of  his  time 

TIME,  to  come,  old,  past  — 

1. Behind,  backwards,  -linx  achor. 

Isa.  42.  23  will  hearken,  and  hear  for  the  time  to  co. 

-.Yesterday,  in  time  past,  tartx  ethmol. 

i  Sa.  19.    7  he  was  in  his  presence,  as  in  times  past 
2  ha.    5.   2  in  time  past,  when  Saul  was  king  over  us 

^-Indefinite  lime,  dSi"  olam. 

Josh.24.   2  011  the  other  side  of  the  flood  in  old  time 
Eccl.   1.  10  it  hath  been  already  of  old  time,  which 
Jize.  26.  20  bring  thee . .  with  the  people  of  old  time 

i.Formerly,  before,  d-jd^  lephanim. 

1  Ch    9.  20  Phinehas..  the  ruler  over  them  in  time  p 
Lieut.  2.  10  The  Emiins  dwelt  therein  in  times  past 
h.Yesterday,  third  day,  tinfot  71DF,  temol  shilshom 
JSX0d2i.  29  if  the  ox  were  wont  to  push,  .in  time  past 

r,.„*  2I'  36  ™at  the  ox  hilth  used  to  P'Ish  in  time  past 

Deut  4.  42  unawares,  and  hated  him  not  in  times  pa 

19-   4  neighbour. .  whom  he  hated  not  in  time  n' 

19.   6  inasmuch  as  he  hated  him  not  in  time  p 

1  tea.  19.    7  and  he  was  m  his  presence,  as  in  times  p 

2  8a.   3. 17  Ye  sought  for  David  in  times  past  (to  be) 

5-    =  in  time  past,  when  Saul  was  king  over  us 

1  on.  11.    2  in  time  past,  even  when  Saul  was  king,  th 

G. Time  behind   tomorrow,  yesterday,  iqr,  machar. 

Dent  2  '4  Sf  t^y  son  asketh  tHeeintime  to  come 

Josh    :    e.1 n  thy  s?"a,sketh  thee  in  time  to  come 

Josh.  4.    6  children  ask  (their  fathers)  in  time  to  co. 

4.  21  shall  ask  their  fathers  in  time  to  come 

22.  24  In  time  to  come  your  children  might  sp 

22.  27  not  say  to  our  children  in  time  to  come ' 

22.  28  or  to  our  generations  in  time  to  come 

I.  At  some  time  or  other,  once,  tori  pole 

Kom„.  30  as  ye  in  tjra     past  havenot  Beli      fl  G    , 

Gal.     1.  ,3  je.  .heard  of  my  conversation  intime  past 

Enh    I'   I  ^.,wl"?h  Persecuted  us  in  times  past  now 

Eph.   2.    2  Wherein  111  time  past  ye  walked  aecordins 

o  7T77    J'  3;2-li:  Phm-  «;iPe.2. 10;  3.  5;2Pe.  1  21° 

8.  What  is  about  to  be,  to  i«'AAo*  mellon,  1  Ti.  6   0' 

y.  Of  old,  iraXai  palai. 

TIME  (or  season),  for  a 

Foraseason,  Trp6<rpiaipos,  Mt.  13.  21  :  Mark  a    17 
TIME,  at  which,  that,  this,  what  — 

1.  Then,  ps  edayin. 
Ezra    5. 16  since  that  time  even  until  now  hath  it 

2.  Then,  in  as. 
1  Ch.«>. '  4  at  which  time  Sibbechai  the  Hushathite 

0.  Time,  nv  eth. 

Jobh"26  11  ww  r  timf, the  chest  was  br™sht  unto 
1  w  aJ J  me  t,,ey  wax  wa™.  they  vanish 
39. 18  What  time  she  lifteth  up  herself  on  l.i-h 
4.  Now,  nnj;  altah. 

Psa  t4,8'    %  fl!0W  «  w6  ne]v  t!,in^  from  this  time 
Psa  115.  18  from  this  time  forth  and  for  evermore 
tJ.Beat,  step,  D»s paam. 

Evod  2„9',3+TI.',i,S,tirae  wil,1  A"y  h"sband  be  joined  unto 
Lxod  9-  27  I  have  sinned  this  time:  theiOBD Oniric 

TIMES,  as  at  other  — 

1.  As  clay  by  day,  ci'3  dvs  keyom  beyom. 

1  Sa.  j8.  to  D.  played  with  his  hand,  is  at  other  times 

^  As  step  by  step,  Bus?  D»53  kephaam  bephaam. 

T,  I™*4.'    '  ?e  ■'If11'  no''  as  at  other  times,  to  seek 
Judg.6.  20  I  will  go  out,  as  at  other  times  before,  and 
20. 30  and  put  themselves,  .as  at  other  times 
==-3i  hegan  to  smite „  as  at  other  times,  in  the  hi 
1  Sa.    3.  ,0  called  as  at  other  times,  Samuel,  Samuel 
20. 25  king  sat  upon  his  seat,  as  at  other  times 
TIMES,  two  — 
Two  steps,  CTDSLS  paamayim. 

Gen.  27. 36  for  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  times 
TI-ME'-TfS,  Ti^aToj. 
SXSS1*"  ™an  who  received  his  sigh, 

Markio.  46  the  son  of  T.,  sat  by  the  highway  side 
TIM'-na,  TIM'-NAH,  ym  restraining. 
1.  Concubine  of  Eliphaz  son  of  Esau.    e.g.  1700 

Gen  36.  12  T.  was  concubine  to  Eliphaz,  Esau's  son 
t  Daughter,  of  Seir  the  Horite,  and  sister  of  Lotan.  B.C. 


TITHES 


Gen.  38.  13  Behold  thy  father  in  law  goeth  up  to  T 
38. 14  open  place,  which  (is)  by  the  way  to  T.' 
2.  A  city  in  Dan,  near  Philistia.  See  Thimnathah 
Judgi4.    1  Samson  went,  .to  T.,  and  saw  a  wo  in  T 
14.   2  I  have  seen  a  woman  in  T.  of  the  daugh' 
14-    s  to  T.,  and  came  to  the  vineyards  of  T. 
TIM-NATH  HE'-RES,  tnrrrUM 
The  portion  allotted  to  Joshua  in  Mount  Ephraim  N  E 
W XW  °f  6aaSh'  D0W  CaUed  Tib>'e"'  «'" «5£ 
Judg.  2.    9  they  buried  him.  .in  T.,  in  the  mount  of 
TIM'-NATH  SE'-RAH,  mo  win. 
The  same  as  the  preceding.'' 

Josh  19.  5o  they  gave,  .the  city  which  he  asked    T 
24.  30  they  buried  him.  .in  T.,  which  (is)  in  mo 
TIMNITE,  p.      An  inhabitant  of  Timnath. 

J  udgiS.   6  answered,  Samson,  the  son  in  law  of  the  T. 
TI'-MON,  Tifiuy  honourable. 
theSe0ilychurchWh0  *™  aPP°inted  to  ser™  ^^ 

Acts    6.    5  Nicanor,  and  T.,  and  Parmenas,  and  N 
TI-MO-THE'-TJS,  Tineas  honoured  of  God 
A  young  man  of  Lystra,  son  of  Eunice  a  Jewess  bv  a 
Greek  father;  Paul  circumcised  him,  an  1  to  k  him  as" 
him?°  aT rfV"  traVe1'  and  aatoSaed  two  ^EiSs  to 
Acts  16.    1  a  certain  disciple  was  there,  named  T 
17.  14  but  Silas  and  T.  abode  there  still 
17. 15  receiving  a  commandment  unto.  T  for 


Rom  16. 
i  Co.  4. 

16. 

2  Co.   I. 

Phil. 

Col. 
1  Th. 


2  Th. 
1  Ti. 


2Ti. 

Phm. 


ten.  36.  22  and  Heman  ;  and  Lotan's  sister  (was)  T. 

1  4  S  ,  fr. ,        e,na"  :  ami  T'  (was>  Lota»  s  »l»ter 
i.  A  chief  of  Edom  descended  from  Esau,    n.c  ISoo 
Gen.  36.  40  duke  T.,  duke  Alvah,  duke  Jetheth 
i  Ch.  ,.  5I  duke  T„  duke  Allah,  duke  Jetheth 
i.  A  son  of  Eliphaz  son  of  Esau.    B.o.  1700 

1  Ch.  ,.  36  Gatam,  Kenaz,  and  T„  and  Amalek 
TIM-nah,  r\m  allotment. 

calTed  mnefh  "^^  Ekr0n  a,Kl  Beth-shemesh ;  now 

TOSaif%I?Caer?of1fi'C1,omp¥smed"aildJ?a^<>ntoT. 

2  Ch  'I'  fs  Ti     pi    'e;h'  "'"    '  ;  (""  ' ™«  "-it.il  their 
TIM-NATH^  m-n rhlllstmes-- had  taken.. T.  with  the 

MHiiS11'''"™ callei1  "^  two  ««hi  W.  of 
Gen.  38.  ,2  Judah  was  comforted,  and  went,  .to  T. 


-   s  when  Silas  and  T.  were  come  from  Mac 

19.  22  So  he  sent  into  Macedonia.  .T.  and  Eras 

-    4  and  Gams  of  Derbe,  and  T. ;  and  of  Asia ' 

21  T.  my  work  fellow,  and  Lucius.,  salute  you 

17  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  unto  you  T 

10  .Now  if  T  come,  see  that  he  may  be  with 

1  Paul,  .and  T.  (our)  brother,  unto  the  chu 

.19  who  was  preached  among  you  bv    T    was 

1  ?!ll  iT'  T;'-tht  Servants  of  JesusChrist 
19  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  T 
1  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  .and  T 
1  Paul,  and  Silvauus,  and  T.,  unto  thech 
1 11,"'  s,nnt  T-  °"r  brother,  and  minister  of 

"hen  I.  came  from  you  unto  us,  and  br 
I  TPTaul'  a,K'  Silvanus,  and  T.,  unto  the  chu. 
t  j,n.t0  i-  C™?)  own  son  in  the  faith :  Grace 
, ,  -n3  fharse  I  commit  unto  thee,  son  T 
I-  2°  SJtJ  kee/  that  which  is  committed  to  thy 
p°  T' ' ' dSa^y beloved  son  :  Grace,  mercy 
---       1  Paul . .  and  T.  (our  brother,  unto  Pliilem 
Heb.  13.  23  Know  ye  that,  .brother  T.  is  set  at  liberty 
TIN—  ' 

Tin,  lead  alloy,  <?•-<?.  beclil. 

Num3,.  22  the  brass  the  iron,  the  tin,  and  the  lead 

Eze     '•  \\  ?hU'fm;.t1!yd,'0SS' an? take  awayallthytiu 
J^ze.  22. 18  they  (are)  brass,  and  tin,  and  iron,  and 
22.  20  As  they  gather  silver.. and  tin,  into  thee 
=7.  ,2  with  silver,  iron,  tin,  and  lea.],  they  tra 
TINGLE,  to  — 
To  quiver,  tingle,  ^  tsalal,  3. 

1  Sa    3.  11  ears  of  every  one  that  heareth  it  shall  ti 
%„"■  I2Wh°soever  heareth..  his  ears  shall  tingle 
Jei.    19.    3  whosoever  heareth,  his  ears  shall  tingle 
TINKLE,  make  a  tinkling,  to  — 
l.To  make  a  tinkling,  DDi)  alas,  3. 

Isa.     3.  ,6  walking. .makinga tinklingwith  theirfe. 
■-.To  clash,  clank,  cry  aloud,  a\a\ifa  alalazo. 
1  to.  13.   1  (as)  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal 

l.Tip  (of  ear),  ^w  tenuk. 

E.\od29  20  tip  of  the  right  ear.  .tip  of  the  rieht  ear 

Lev.    8.  =3  put  (it)  upon  the  tip  of 'Aaron's  rig  t  ear 

8.  24  put  of  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of  the ir  r" 

\t  \i  sh'dl  n'M  '"'!  (it)/,pon  thetiP  rf  f' e  rt 
14.  17  shall  the  priest  put  upon  the  tip  of  the  ri 

,„  14'  2|  P"' Ot  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of  him 

Lev.  14.  28  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear  of  him  that 

2. Point,  tip,  '6.Kpov  akrem. 

Luke  16.  24  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  w. 

TIFE  -SAH,  np?n  passage,  ford. 

frm?^ lPyjrhapsacu80ii.toe  W.  bank  of  the  Euphrates  • 

Amp h^olTe         ele"CUS  NiCatOT  "  was  also  cSLd 
i-  4-24  Eor  he  had  dominion . .  from  T.  even  to  A 


TIRE,  to  — 

To  make  good  or  well,  ia<  yatab   5 

2  Ki.  9.  30  tired  her  head,  and  looked  out  at  a  win 
TIR-ha'-KAH,  npmn. 

A  king  of  Ethiopia 'and  Thebais,  same  as  Taral™  th. 
third  and  last  kiug  of  the  twentieth  dynasty  and%uP 

Sp  °ltTm ' he  was  cont-pX  withnaHseL°: 

2  Ki.,g.  9  when  he  heard  say  of  T.  king  of  Ethiopia 
Isa.  37.    9  he  heard  say  concerning  T.  kin- of  Ethi 

TIR-HA'-NAH,  njrpp  kindness 

c\.bine?f  S™  °*  Hea'oa-  tte-  8"  ^aaeahhis  con- 
1  Ch.  2.  48  Caleb's  concubine,  bare  Sheber,  and  T. 

TIR'-IA,  n;t*i  foundation. 

^sf^iisa&i-^^ of  Judal1  through 

1  Ch.  4. 16  sons  of  Jehaleleel.  .Ziphah,  T.   and  Asa 
TIR-SHA'-THA    Kp^H  the  fear,  the  reverence       ' 

7.  70  The  T.  gave  to  the  treasure  a  thousand 

8.  9  Nehennah,  which  (is)  the  T. . .  said  unto 
10.    j  those  that  sealed  (were)  Xehemiah  the  T 

TIR  -ZAH,  nyiH  delight. 

1.  The  youngest  daughter  of  Zelophehad     bc  i4- 
Nuni26.  33  Mahlah,  and  Noah,  Hoglah,  Milcah,  and  T 

i    '  M' ' '  ^"ah.  andHoglah,  and  Milcah  and  T 

36.  n  lor  Mahlah,  T„  and  Hoglah    were  mar ' 

Josh  i7.    3  Mahlah,  and  N. .  .Hoglah,  JHtaSJwS. 

2.  A  city  m  Ephraim,  orManasseh  ;  perhans  Tcrsa  th™. 
hours  E.  of  Samaria;  or  Talma,  six'SSof  NaMu's! 

Josh  12.  24  The  king  of  T.,  one :  all  the  kings  thirty 

t  7  tn  TI"  S,T  fe ' '  "parted,  and  came  to  T- 
15-  21   eft  off  building  of  Eamah,  and  dweltiu  T 

il'  3«  vma'J     Tn  a ' ' t0  reign  over..Israel  in  T 
16.    6  11  itli  Ins  fathers,  and  was  buried  in  T 
16.   8  began  Elah.  .to  reign  over  Israel  in  f 
16.   9  as  he  was  m  T„  drinking  himself  drunk 
16.    9  house  of  Arza,  steward  of  (his)  house  in  T 
16.  15  did  Zimn  reign  seven  days  in  T 
16. 17  0. . .  and  all  Israel  with  him . .  besieged  T 

,  Ki        =3  ?rmn  h°  Vel?n  ■  ■ six  J™™  reiened  he  in  T. 

2  A1.15,  14  Menaheratheson  of  Gadi  wentupfromT 

15.  i6Menahem  smote,  .coasts  thereorfrom  T 

Song  6.    4  Thou  (art)  beautiful,  0  my  love  as  T   co 

TISHBITE,  '3i«BPt.  "     ' 

M^U'o^^I'^:^  ™* to  "a- 

1  K1.17.    ,  Elijah  the  T. (was)  of  the  inhabitantsof 
21.  17,  28  word  of. .  Lord  came  to  Elijah  the  T 

2  El.  1:    3  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  Elijah  the  T 
1.    8  And  he  said,  It  (is)  Elijah  the  T 
9.  30  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  E.  the  T. 

TITHE,  to  give,  have,  pay,  receive,  take  tithes,  to  — 
i.Jo  give  a  tenth,  lay  asar   3 

Neh*  2'  "  t'i,h,tUt,Sllalt  tr"iy  tithe  aU  the  iuorease  of 
Weh.  i0.  37  that  the  same  Levites  might  have  the  ti 

l.To  (jive  a  tenth,  -fyy  asar,  5. 

Neh.  10.  33  the  Levites,  when  the  Levites  take  tithes 

\°i3lVe  aWay  a  tenih<  ™oo«<aT6u  apodekatoo. 

Luke,^'  ?  It  ?a!y  "'^t0'  m,int  and  auise  and  cum. 
Lukeii.  42  yc !  tithe  mint  and  rue,  and  all  manner  of 
18.  12  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of 
Heb.    7.    stotaketithesofthepeopleTccordingto 
i.To  give  a  tenth,  SeKarow  dekatoo. 

Heb.   7.   6  received  tithes  of  Abraham,  and  blessed 

7-   9  Levi . .  who  receiveth . .  payed  tithes  in  A 

TITHES,  tithing  _ 


2.  A  city  in  Judah,  on  the  Jordan ;  perhaps  Tappuah 
2  h.1.15.  16  Then  Menahem  smote  T.,  and  all  that 
TI'-RAS,  D-rn. 
A^sou  of  Japheth  and  his  posterity  in  Thraeia.    b.o. 

Gen  ,0.    2  sons  of  Japheth.  .Tubal.  .Meshech,andT 

iCh.  ,.  s  sons  of  Japheth..  Tubal..  Mcshcch,  and  T 
TDSATHITES   -Wnn      A  family  or  race  of  scribes. 

.  Ch    2.  55  the  T.,  the  Shimeathites,  (and)  Suchathi. 

TIRE,  (round  tires  like  the  moon) 

LBemity,  ornament,  headdress,  ins  peer 

Jize.  24.  ,7  bind  the  tireof  thine  head  upon  thee  and 
24.  23  your  tires,  .upon  your  heads,  and  your  si, 
l.Moon  shaped  ornaments,  a>fw  saharonim 
Isa.     3.  ,S  cauls,  and.  .round  tires  like  the  moon 


1  tenth,  -ijyno  maaser. 

Gen.  14.  20  into  thy  hand.  And  he  gave  him  tithes  of 

Lev.  27.  30  the  tithe  of  the  land,  (whether)  of  the  seed 
27.  31  if  a  man  will .  .redeem  (ought)  of  his  tith 
27.  32  concerning  the  tithe  of  the  herd  or  of  the 

H  mil  18.  24  the  tithes  of  the  children  of  Israel  wbidi 
18.  26  take  of  the  children  of  Israel  the  tithes 
18.  26  shall  offer  up.  .a  tenth  (part)  of  the  tithe 

Deut  a  1  ™; '"  hTe  0,rT»»'»f  all  your  tithes 
USUI  12.    6  your  sacrifices,  and  your  tithes,  and  he 
12.  11  your  sacrifices,  your  tithes,  and  the  heave 
"■  17  ihouniayestnot  eat.,  the  tithe  of  thy  corn 
14.  23  the  tithe  of  thy  corn,  of  thy  wine,  and  of 
14.  28  thou  shalt  bring  forth  all  the  tithe  of  th 
2  Ch  ,     "  J;"1"  °f-  -fie  third  year,  .the year  of  tit. 
3      I  \  le   '  le  °i  a11  <thinSs>  brought  they  in 
31.    6  the  tithe  of  oxen  and  sheep,  and  the  tithe 
Weh  3I"  I2  *iro,Kit  ln  the  offerings  and  the  tithesand 
nen.  10.  37  the  tithes  of  our  ground  unto  the  Levitts 
10.  38  Levites  shall  bring . .  the  tithe  of  the  tith 
12.  44  for  the  first  fruits,  and  for  the  tithes,  to' 
.       i3-   5,  12  the  tithes  of  the  corn,  the  new  wine 
At 'l     4'   4  Jv'J"g  3'0,lr  sacrifices . .  (and)  your  tithes 
mai.    3.    8  Vt  herein  have  we  robbed  thee?  In  tithes 
3. 10  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse 
l.To  give  a  tenth,  -,'c^  asar,  5. 

Deut  26.  12  When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  tithing 
3-1  tenth  (part),  SacaT-n  dekate. 

Heb.   7.   8  here  men  that  die  receive  tithes,  hut  the 
7.   9  Levi  also,  who  receiveth  tithes,  payed    iii 


TITLE 


991 


TITLE  — 

1..-L  sign,  monument,  \rs  tsiyyun. 

2  m.  23. 17  Then  he  said,  What  title  (is)  that  that  I 
2. A  title,  (Lat.  titulus),  t'ltAos  iitlos. 

Johmo.  iq  Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and  put  (it)  on  thecr. 
19.  20  This  title  then  read  many  o£  the  Jews,  for 

TITTLE —  , 

1  horn   {ornamental  curl  of  Heb.  letters),  Kepaia. 
Matt  5. 18  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass 
Lukeil:  S7  to  pass,  than  one  tittle  of  the  law  to  Tail 

TI'-TUS,  Titos.  ,         ,  .  .    . 

A.  Greek  disciple  who  accompanied  Paul  in  several  of 
his  journeys,  was  sent  by  him  to  Dalmatia,  and  le.t  in 
Crete  to  settle  the  churches.    A.D.  65 


ai,  38;  6.  41,  45;  7-  3°,  54;  8.  3.  13,  22;  9-  33-  i°-  3=..33.  46. 
11.  1,  1,  11,  15, 27;  13-  0,  13,  13.  h;  h-  8,  32;  15-  41.  "lKe 
!3,  26,  50,  56;  2.  4,  22,  32,  39,  4i.  [42].  45,  Si!  4-  9.  ™. 


26,  31;  5-    '7.  24. 


;  7.  10;  8.  22,  39;  9.  16,  51,  53, 


*  Co    2. 13  I  had  no  rest,  .because  I  found  not  T.  my 

7  6  God . .  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  1. 
■7.  13  the  more  joyed  we  for  the  joy  of  T. 

7.  14  so  our  boasting,  which  I  (made)  before  T. 

8.  6  Insomuch  that  we  desired  T.,  that  as  he 
S  16  put  the  same.. care  into  the  heart  ot  1. 

8  23  Whether(any  do  enquire)  of  T.,  (he  is)my 
10. 18  I  desired  T.,  and  with  (him)  I  sent. .  .T 

Gal      -     1 1  went  up  again  to  Jerusalem . .  and  took  1 . 
2     -  But  neither  T...was  compelled  to  be  en-. 
7  Ti    i  10  Crescens  to  Galatia,  T.  into  Dalmatia 
Titus  1.    4  To  T.,  (miue)  own  son  after  the  common 

TIZITE,  'X'P. 

Patronymic  of  Joha  one  of  David's  valiant  men.     B.C. 

1Ch.1t.  45  of  Sliimri,  and  Joha  his  brother,  the  T. 
TO,  unto,  (even)  — 
1.  Unto,  to,  toward,  Lx  el. 

Gen     1     0  Letthe waters.. begathered togetherunto 
14.    7  they  returned,  and  came  to  En-mishpat 
%With  a  view  to,  l"'•  lemo. 

Job   38.  40  When  they,  .abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  m 

3  From,  than,  p  min. 

Dan.    2.  39  shall  arise  another  kingdommferiortoth. 

4.1n  order  that,  so  that,  \sd>  lemaan. 

Gen.  50.  20  God  meant,  .to  bring,  .as  (it  is)  this  day 
5.1n  order  that,  "flaya  baabur. 

2  Sa.  10.    3  hath  not  David . .  sent . .  to  search  the  city 
6.  In  order  that,  TMSS^  lebaabur. 

Exod2o.  20  God  is  come  to  prove  you,  and  that  his  f. 

2  Sa.  14.  20  To  fetch  about  this  form  of  speech  hath 

T.Till,  unto,  up,  to,  rj  ad. 

Ezra   4.  -4  So  it  ceased  unto  the  second  year  of  the 
7  77  Unto  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  to 
7  •>•>  to  an  hundred  baths  of  wine,  and  to  an 

Dan    4. 17  to  the  intent  that  the  livingmayknow  th. 

6  26  his  dominion  (shall  lie  even)  unto  the  end 

7  13  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they  b. 
7. 26  consume  and.  .destroy  (it)  unto  the  end 

8.  Ore,  upon,  b'j.  al. 

Gen  18.   5  for  therefore  are  ye  come  to  your  servant 
Ezra    4  11  thev  sent  unto  him,  (even)  unto  Artaxer. 
4  12  that  the  Jews  which  came  up  from  thee  to 
4  17  sent  the  king  an  answer  unto  Rehuin  the 
4  1 S  letter  which  ye  sent  unto  us  hath  been  pi. 
4.  23  they  went  up  in  haste,  .unto  the  Jews,  and 
See  also  5.  1,  1,  3,  6.  7.  17,  17;  7-  18,  18;  Dan.  2.  24;  4. 
27,  34,  36.  36;  °-  6>  'Si  7-  I0- 
S.With,  cy  im. 

Gen  24. 12  show  kindness  unto  my  master  Abraham 
Ezra  6  8  what  ve  shall  do  to  the  elders  of  these  Je. 
Dan.    6.  21  Then  said  Daniel  unto  the  king,  0  king 

XO.From,  with,  cya  mcim. 

Gen.  44.  32  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad  unto 

11.  The  mouth,  na  peh. 

rrova;.  2i(As)thefiningpot..so(is)amantohispraise 

Vl.Btfore,  '3?V  liphne.  ,.,.,.„* 

Gen.  27.  20  Because  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  (it)  to 

IS. At  Hie  hand  of,  T^ri  al-yad. 

2  Ch.  17. 15  next  to  him  was  Jehohanan  the  captain 

li.To  meet,  nx-ip1?  liqrath. 

Isa.   21.  14  brought  water  to  him  that  was  thirsty 
15  Until,  unto,  within,  axpi,  &XP"  achri,  achris. 

Acts   -  29  and  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  this  day 

13.  6  when  thev  had  gone  through  the  isle  unto 
22.   4  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  death,  bind. 
22.  22  they  gave  him  audience  unto  this  word 
26.  22  I  continue  unto  this  day,  witnessing  both 

1  Co.  4. 1 1  Even  unto  this  present  hour  we  both  nun. 

2  Co.  10. 13  us,  a  measure  to  reach  even  unto  you 
Hcb    6  11  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end 
Eev.    2. 10  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  gi. 

2.  ->6  keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end,  to  him 
12. 11  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death 

14.  20  blood  came  out.  .even  unto  the  horse  br. 
18.   s  For  her  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven 

\a.Throurjh,  8101  (gen.)  dia. 

2Pe.   1.   3  him  that  hath  called  us  [to]  glory  and  vir. 

17 .Into,  to,  eh  eis. 

Matt.  2.  1  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  Je. 
2.  8  he  sent  them  to  Bethlehem,  and  said,  Go 
See  also  3.  11;  17.  13,  1418.  18,  34;  9.  6,  7,  [13];  10.  17,  21, 
22;  12.  20;  13.  [52];  14.  22;  15.  24:  16.  5.  21 ;  17-  24,  27;  20. 
17,  iS;  21. 1,  r;  22.  3,  4,  5,  [5],  0;  23.  34;  24.  9,  13;  25.  1, 
6,  10;  26.  2,  3,  8,  36;  27.  7,  33;  Mark  2.  [17];  4-33:  3-  1.  j9. 


10.  7,  30,  34;  II-  24;  14-  8,  31;  15-  17;  16.  27,  34;  18.  14,  31, 
35;iq.  28,  29521.  12,  21;  22.  33,  39;  24.  5,  13,  20,  28,33,  L50J, 
52;  John  1. '11;  2.  2,  12,  13,  13;  4-  5.  8>  36.  45;  5-  1.  24,  29, 
29;  6.  27;  7.  8,  8;  10,  33,  [53];  8.  [1],  26;  9.  11;  11.  31,  38, 
54,  55,  56;  12-  1,  12,  12,  13.  25,  27;  13-  1;  l6-  32;  17-  1.  l!>- 
28;  19.  27;  20.  1,  3,  4,  8. 

Acts  1.  12,  25;  4.  3,  30;  5.  [16],  21,  36;  6.  12;  8.  3,  5,  25, 
26,  27,  40;  9.  2,  2,  [26],  30,  30;  10.  5,  8,  32;  11.  2 ;  13.  ib,  20, 
77,  25,  26,  27;  12.  10,  19;  13-  4,  4,  13.  M>  22,  31,  34,  4°.  47. 
4S,  51;  14.  6,  20, 21,  24,  26;  15.  2,  4,  22,  30,  38,  39;  16.  1,  8, 

11,  11,  12,  16;  17.  i,s,  10,  20;  18.  1,  6,  19,22,24;  19.  i,  3,  3, 
21,  27;  20.  6,  [13],  14, 15.  17.  22,  38;  21.  1,  1,  1,  2,  4.  7>  8, 

12,  15,  17;  22.  s,  5.  7.  17.  21:23.  31,  32,33;  24.  17;  25.  1,3, 

6,  9,  13,  16,  20,  21;  26.  7,  11,  12,  14,  17,  18;  27.  5,  8,  12, 
40;  28.  6,  13,  13,  15,  16. 

Rom.  1.  1,  16,  17,  24,  26,  28;  2.  4;  3.  7,  22,  25,  5.  13, 
16,  16,  18,  18,  21;  6.  [16],  16,  16,  19,19,22;  7.  5,  10,10;  8. 
i5;  o.  21,  21,  22,  23,  31  ;  10.  10,  10,  12,  18;  11.  36;  12.  3. 
10;  13.  [fl,  14;  14-  1;  '5-  7.  25;  i6-  5.  I9»  '9.  26;  ilM. 
o;  2.  7;  4.  6;  8.  10;  10.  2,  31;  11.  22,  33,  34;  14-  8,  30, 
16.  3,  15;  2  Co.  1.  23;  2.  4,  12,  16,  16;  3.  13,  18;  4-  ".  IS! 

7.  3,  q,  10;  8.  2,  4,  24;  9.  1,  5.  8,  11,  13.  !3>  !3;  IO-  5.  Ml 
12  1;  13.  10, 10;  Gal.  1.  6, 17,  17,  18 ;  2.  1,  8,  9,  9,  n ;  3- 
23,  24  ;  4.  24 ;  6.  8,  8 ;  Eph.  1.  5,  5,  6.  14.  15 ;  2-  21 ;  4- 13. 
i|  16,  19,  30,  32;  6.  18;  Phil.  1.  11,  12,  19,  23;  2.  11 ;  3. 
11,  16;  4.  [16],  17;  Col.  1.  4,  6,  10,  11,  12,  20,  29;  2.  2,  2, 
22  ;  3.  o,  15;  4.  11 ;  1  Th.  1.  [5] ;  2.  9,  12,  16,  16;,  3-  2,  3. 
5;  4.  0/15. 17;  5-  0.  9;  2  Th.  2. 13, 14 ;  3-  9;  1T1.  1.  a;  2. 

4, 7",  4.  3;  5-24;  6.  12,  17;  2Ti.  1.  11;  2.  [14],  20  2o,  21, 
*'/'  V  7, 15;  4. 10,  10,  10, 12,  iS;  Titus  3. 12;  Heb.  1.14; 
2. '3,  10,  17  ;  4-  16;  °-  6,  8  ;  7.  25,  25;  8.  3;  9.  14,  26,  28,  28; 
10.  19,  24,  39,  39;  ii-  7,  11.  26;  12.  2;  13.  21;  Jas.  1. 
10,  19,  19;  2.  2;  4.  9,  9;  1  re-  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  7.  10.  22, 
25;  2.  8,  21  ;  3.  9,  12;  4.  4,  7.  9.  10;  5- 10;  2  Pe.  2.  4,  9,  12, 
2-  ■  3.  9 ;  1  Jo.  3.  14 ;  3  John  s,  [5] ;  Jude  4,  6,  21 ;  Eev. 
1.  11,  11,  11,  11,  11,  11.  ii!  °-  13:  9-  1.  7.9;  io-  5;  "•  6. 

12;  12. 4, 13 ;  13-  3 ;  '6- 14;  19-  9.  17".  20.  8. 


IS. In,  among,  h  en. 

Matt  17  12  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they  lis. 
Luke  1  17  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just 
John  1-  35  aremvdisciples.if  ye  have  love  one  to  an. 
Acts  i-.  11  when  Peter  was  come  to  himself,  he  said 
26.  20  showed  first  unto  them  of  Damascus,  and 
Rom  5  ->i  That  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even 

1  Co    7. 15  bondage.,  but  God  hath  called  us  to  peace 

9  15  that  it  should  be  so  done  unto  me  :  for  (it 
14  11  that  speaketh  (shall  lie)  a  barbarian  unto 

2  Co    4    3  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that 

s  19  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  rec. 

8  7  (in)  your  love  to  us,  (see)  that  ye  abound 
Col  1  23  was  preached  to  every  creature  which  is 
1  Th.  4.   7  God  hath  not  called,  .but  unto  holiness 

=  23  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1  Ti     3  16  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  believed  on 

2  Pe    1     5  add  to  your  faith  virtue ;  and  to  virtue 

1     6  to  knowledge . .  to  temperance . .  and  to  pa. 
1     7  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness ;  and  to 
1  Jo.  .;.  16  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us 

19. Before,  ivonriov  cnopion. 

Lukec^.  11  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales 

20.  Out  of  e«  el: 

Matt-8  14  if  this  come  to  the  governor's  ears,  we  will 
Luke23.    7  thathebelongeduntoHerod'sjurisdiction 

21. On,  upon,  itrl  [gen.)  epi. 

John2i.  11  drew  the  net  [to]  land  full  of  great  fishes 
Acts  10. 11  vessel  descending,  .andletdown  to  the  ea. 

ll.Upon,  over,  iiri  (dat.)  epi. 

Matt  o.  16  Uomanputteth  apiece  of  new  cloth  unto 
Gal     5  13  ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty ;  only 
Eph    2.  10  created  in  Christ  J  esus  unto  good  works 
1  T'n    4     7  For  God  bath  called  us  unto  uncleanness 
2Ti    2  14  strive.. (but)  to  the  subverting  of  the  he. 


23.  Upon, 

Matt.  3 

3 


27 
Mark  3 


about,  for,  up  to,  hrt  (ace.)  epi. 
7  when  he  saw  many,  .come  to  his  baptism 
13  Then  cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  .lord. 
23  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  th. 
27  Winch  of  you.,  can  add  one  cubit  untohis 
.  28  then  the  kingdom  of  Godiscomeunto  you 
48  when  it  was  full,  they  drew  to  shore,  and 
10  he  came  to  it,  and  found  nothing  thereon 
-7  fathered  unto  him  the  whole  band  (of  so. 
~-i  much  people  gathered  unto  him  :  and  he 
11  13  when  he  came  to  it,  he  found  nothing  but 
15  ?~  they  bring  him  unto  the  place  Golgotha 

15.  46  rolled  a  stone  unto  the  door  of  the  sepul. 

16.  2  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the  risi. 
Luke  1.  16  And  many,  .shall  he  turn  to  the  Lord  th. 

1. 17  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  ch. 

5.  11  when  they  had  brought  their  ships  to  la. 

6.  35  for  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and 

8.  27  when  he  went  forth  to  land,  there  met 

9.  62  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plo. 
10.    6  if  not.  it  shall  turn  to  you  again 

10. 11  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  nigh  [unto] 
i->.  11  when  they  bring  you  unto  the  synagogues 
12.  25  which  of  you.  .can  add  to  his  statureone 
12.  58  When  thou  goest  with  thine  adversary  to 

4  seven  times  in  a  day  turn  again  [to]  thee 

5  when  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  he  looked 
44  [great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the] 
57  and  the  elders,  which  were  come  to  him 

1  the  whole  multitude . .  led  him  unto  Mat  e 
33  when  they  were  come  to  the  place  which 


17- 
19. 


TO 

Luke23.  48  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sig. 

24.    1  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre,  bringing 

24. 12  Then  arose  Peter,  mid  ran  [unto]  the  sepul. 

24.  24  certain  of  them..weuttothesepulcbre,and 
John  6.  16  Ins  disciples  went  down  unto  the  sea 

19.  33  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  that 
Acts   8.  26  unto  the  way  that  goeth  down  from  Jer. 
8.  32  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter 

8.  36  they  came  unto  a  certain  water,  and  the 
g.  4  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard  a  voice  say. 
a.  21  he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  the  ch. 

9.  35  all  that  dwelt  in  Lydda.  .turned  to  the  L. 

10. 11  a  certain  vessel  descending  [unto]  him,  as 

11.  11  there  were  three  men  alreadycome  unto 
1..  21  and  a  great  number,  .turned  unto  the  L. 
12. 10  they  came  unto  the  iron  gate  that  leadetb 

12.  12  he  came  to  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother 
14.  13  brought  oxen  and  garlands  unto  the  gates 
14. 15  turn  from  these  vanities  unto  the  living 
is  19  trouble  not  them  which..are  turned  to  G. 

16.  19  drew  (them)  into  the  market  place  unto 

17.  6  drew  Jason  and  certain  brethren  unto  tie 
17.  14  sent  away  Paul,  to  goasit  were  to  the  sea 
17. 19  brought  him  unto  Areopagus,  saying,  May 

18. 12  and  brought  him  to  the  judgment  seat 
19. 12  from  his  body  were  brought  unto  the  sick 

20.  13  And  we  went  before  to  ship,  and  sailed 

21.  32  took  soldiers.. and  ran  down  unto  them 
24.    8  [Commanding  his  accusers  to  come  unto] 
•=5. 1-  Hast  thou  appealed. .?  unto  Cesar  Shalt 
26.  18  (from)  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that 

26.  20  that  they  should  repent  and  turn  to  God 

27.  43  cast(themselves)..(iutothesea),andgetto 
27.  44  it  came  to  pass,  that  they  escaped,  .to  la. 

Gal.  4.  9  how  turn  ve  again  to  the  weak  and  begg. 
2  Tb.  2.  1  and  (bv)  our  gathering  together  unto  lnm 
2  Ti.  2. 16  they  will  increase  unto  more  ungodliness 
4.  4  turn  away  (their)  ears,  .turned  unto  fab. 
Heb.  6.  1  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection  ;  not  laying 
Jas      2.    3  ye  have  respect  to  him  that  weareth  the 

1  Pe.   2.25  are  now  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and 

2  Pe     2.  22  The  dog  (is)  turned  to  his  own  vomit  ag. 
Eev.  16.  14  (which)  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  ea. 

21. 10  he  carried  me.  .to  a  great  and  high  mou. 
-2  14  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of 
22. 18  God  shall  add  unto  him  the  plagues  that 
U.Unto,  up  to,  hitherto,  kas  hens. 

Matt.  r.  17  from  Abraham  to  David,  .and.  .unto  Chr. 
11.  23  Capernaum,  which  art  exalted  unto  hea. 
20.  8  hire,  beginning  from  the  last  unto  the  first 
2".  26  Likewise  the  second  also,  unto  the  seve. 

23.  35  from  the  blood  of  righteous  Abel  unto  the 
-4.  -1  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this 

24.  27  as  the  lightning,  .shineth  even  unto  the 
24.  31  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other 

26.  38  Mysoulisexceeding  sorrowful, even  unto 
26  58  followed  Win  afar  off  unto  the  high  priest 
-7.  8  was  called,  The  field  of  blood,  unto  this 
•.7.  45  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth 

27.  51  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bo. 

28.  20  I  am  with  you  alway,  (even)  unto  the  end 
Mark  6.  23  will  give  (it)  thee,  unto  the  half  of  myki. 

13. 19  creation  which  God  created  unto  this  time 

13.  27  from  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  to 

14.  34  Mysoul  is  exceedingsorrowful  unto  death 

15.  38  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bo. 
Luke  2. 15  Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Beth-lehem,  and 

4  29  led  him  unto  the  browol  the  hill  whereon 

4.  41  came  unto  him,  and  stayed  him,  that  he 

10.  15  exalted  to  heaven,  shall  be  thrust  down  to 

11  51  blood  of  Abel,  unto  the  blood  of  Zachar. 

John  S     0  [beginning  at  the  eldest,  (even)  unto  thel 

Acts    1.    S  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth 

1.  7,  unto  that  same  day  that  he  was  taken  up 

7.  45  face  of  our  fathers,  unto  the  days  of  Da. 

8  10  all  gave  heed,  from  the  least  to  the  grea. 

0.  3S  that  he  would  not  delay  to  come  to  them 

13.  47  be  forsalvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth 

17. 15  brought  him  unto  Athens :  and  receiving 

27.  23  go  to  Cesarea,  and  horsemen  threescore 

-6  11I  persecuted  (them)  even  unto  strange  ci. 

Rom  11.    8  that  they  should  not  hear,  unto  tins  day 

1  Co    1     8  Who  shall  confirm  you  unto  the  end,  (that 

4. 13  the  offscouring  of  all  things  untothis  day 
8  7  unto  this  hour  eat  (it)  as  a  thing  offered 
15    6  the  greater  part  remain  uutothis  presei  t 

2  Co    1   istrustyeshallacknowledgeeventotheend 

-  15  But  even  unto  this  day,  when  Moses  is  re. 

12    2  such  an  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven 

Heb    8  11  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to  the  gre. 

Jas.    5.    7  Be  patient.. unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 

25  In  order  that,  so  that,  "va  hina. 

Matt ->6  16  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 

27  26  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered  (him)  to  be 

27  3"  him  thev  compelled  to  bear  his  cross 

Mark  4  ^1  Is  a  candle  brought  to  be  put  under  a  bu. 

4'  21  under  a  bed?  and  not  to  be  set  on  a  can. 

6  41  to  set  before  them ;  and  the  two  fishes  di. 

7  32  they  beseech  him  to  put  his  hand  upon 

8  6  gave,  .to  set  before  (them) ;  and  they  did 
S  22  bring  a  blind  man .  .and  besought  him  to 
a  2-  cast  him  into  the  fire,  .to  destroy  him 

11  28  who  gave  thee  this  authority  to  do  these 
i7.  13  And  they  send .  .to  catchhim  in  (his)  wo. 
17  34  and  commandeth  the  porter  to  watch 
14. 10  Judas  Iscariot.  .went,  .to  betray  him 
15  15  Pilate,  .delivered  Jesus,  .to  be  crucified 
15  20  clothes  on  him,  and  led  him  out  to  cruc. 


Luke 


15  21  they  compel  oue  Simon,  .to  bear  his  cross 
6  74  sinners  also  lend .  .to  receive  as  naich  ag. 
9  40  I  besought  thy  disciples  to  cast  him  out 


TO 


992 


TOBIAH 


Lukeig.  4  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore  tree  to  see 
John  i.    7  The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear  wit. 

i.    8  but  (was  sent)  to  bear  witness  of  that  li. 

i.  ig  sent  priests,  .to  ask  him,  Who  art  thou? 

t.  27  whose  shoe's  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to 

3.  17  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  conde. 

4.  8  his  disciples  were  gone  away,  .to buy  me. 

4.  34.  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 

5.  7  I  have  no  man.  .to  put  me  into  the  pool 

5.  36  which  the  Father  hath  given  me  to  finish 

6.  15  take  him  by  force,  to  make  him  aking.he 

6.  33  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of 

7.  32  the  chief  priests  sent  officers  to  take  him 

8.  56  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my 

8.  59  Then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  him 

10.  31  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to  stone 
n.  19  to  comfort  them  concerning  their  brother 

1 1.  31  She  goeth  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there 

11.  S3  they  took  counsel  together  for  to  put  him 
ii-  55  went,  .before  the  passover,  to  purify  th. 

12.  20  Greeks  among  them  that  came  up  to  wo. 
12  47  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save 

13.  2  now  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas.. to  betray 
1;.  4  finished  the  work,  .thou  gavest  me  to  do 
19. 16  Then  delivered  he  him .  .to  be  crucified 

Acts  16.  30  and  said,  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved 
16.  36  The  magistrates  have  sent  to  let  you  go 
27. 42  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  prisoners 

1  Co.   1.  27  [foolish  things  of  the  world  to  coufound] 

1.  27  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty 

1.  23  (yea),  and  things  which  are  not,  to  bring 

9.  25  they  (do  it)  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown 
13.    3  though  I  give  my  body  [to]  be  burned,  and 

16.  12  greatly  desired  him  to  come  unto  you  with 

16. 12  but  his  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this 

2  Co. 12.    7  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  me,  lest  I 
Gal.    4.    5  To  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law 
Phil.   2.  30  to  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me 

2  Th.  3.    9  Not  because  we  have  not  power,  but  to 

1  Jo.   1.    g  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  (our) 

3.   5  knowthat  he  wasmanifested  to  takeaway 

3  John  4  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that 
Rev.   2.  21  gave  her  space  to  repent  of  herfornicat. 

3.  9  I  will  make  them  [to]  come  and  worship 
6.  2  he  went  forth  conquering,  and  to  conquer 
8.  6  seven  angels . .  prepared  themselves  to  so. 
13.  12  causeth  the  earth,  .to  worship  the  first  be. 
13.  16  to  receive  a  mark  in  their  right  hand,  or 
21. 15  had  a  golden  reed  to  measure  the  city,  and 
21.  23  city  had  no  need  for  the  sun.  .to  shine  in 

2Q.Doum  to,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Acts  16.    7  After  they  were  come  to  Mysia,  they  ass. 

20.  20  taught  you  publicly,  and  from  house  to 
25.  16  have  the  accusers  face  to  face,  and  have 

Horn  14.  22  Hast  thou  faith?  have  (it)  to  thyself  bef. 

2  Co.  8.  3  For  to  (their)  power,  I  bear  record,  yea 
Gal.  2.  11  I  withstood  him  to  the  face,  because  he 
Phil.    1.  12  things  (which  happened)  unto  me  have 

27.  With,  fxeTti  [gen.)  meta. 

Luke  1.  72  perform  the  mercy  (promised)  to  our  fat. 
Rev.  10.   8  voice,  .spake  unto  me  again,  and  said,  Go 

28.  Unto,  until,  /ie'xpi,  MeXPiS  mechri,  mechris. 
Rom.  5.  14  Nevertheless  death  reigned  from  Adam 

15. 19  round  about  unto  Illyricum,  I  have  fully 
Phil.  2.    8  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 

2.  30  he  was  nigh  unto  death,  not  regarding  his 
2  Ti.  2  9  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble,  .unto  bonds,  but 
Heb.  3.    6  [rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end] 

3.  14  beginningof  our  confidence  stedfast  unto 

12.  4  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  uuto  blood,  stri. 

29. How,  to  the  end  that,  Bttuh  hopos. 

Matt  26.  59  sought  false  witness,  .to  put  him  to  death 
Luke  11.  37  a  certain  Pharisee  besought  him  to  dine 
Acts    9.  24  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to  kill 
23.  23  Make  ready  two  hundred  soldiers  to  go 
■)0. Toward,  irp6$  (ace.)  }wos. 

Matt.  2.  12  that  they  should  not  return  to  Herod,  th. 
3.  5  Then  went  out  to  him  Jerusalem,  and  all 
3. 10  theaxe  is  laiduntothe  root  of  the  tree,  th. 
,  3.  13  cometh  Jesus,  .unto  John,  to  be  baptized 
3.  14  baptized  of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  me? 
3.  15  Jesus  answering  said  unto  [him],  Suffer 

5.  28  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust 

6.  1  do  not  your  alms  before  men,  to  be  seen 

7.  15  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing 

10.  6  But  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  theh. 

10. 13  not  worthy,  let  your  peace  return  to  you 

11.  28  Come  unto  me,  all  (ye)  that  labour  and 

13.  2  multitudes  were  gathered  together  unto 

13.  30  and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them 

14.  25  Jesus  went  unto  them,  walking  on  the  sea 
14.  28  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  unto  thee  on 
14.  29  he  walked  on  the  water,  .to  Jesus 

17.  14  when  they  were  come  to  the  multitude,  th. 
19.  14  forbid  them  not,  to  come  unto  me  ;  for  of 

21.  1  when  they.. were  come,  .unto  the  mount 
21.  32  John  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of  right. 
21.  34  he  sent  bis  servants  to  the  husbandmen 
21.  37  last  of  all  lie  sent  unto  them  his  son,  say. 
23.  34  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men 
23.  37  stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto  thee 
25.  9  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for 
25.  36  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  uuto  me 

25.  39  when  saw  we  thee  sick,  .and  came  unto 

26.  14  one  of  the  twelve.,  went  unto  tiie  chief  pr. 
26.  18  Go  into  the  city  to  such  a  man,  and  say  1111, 
26.40  he  cometh  unto  the  disciples,  and  flndeth 

1  hen  cometh  he  to  his  disciples,  and  saith 
2^.  57  led(hlm)awaytoCainphas  the  high  priest 


Matt27.    4  they  said,  What  (is  that)  to  us?  see  thou 

27.  14  he  answered  him  to  never  a  word;  insom. 

27.  19  his  wife  sent  unto  him,  saying,  Have  thou 

27.  62  and  Pharisees  came  together  unto  Pilate 

Mark  1.  5,  32,  40,  45 ;  2.  3,  13 ;  3.  [7],  8,  13,  31 ;  4.   r, 

41 ;  5.  15,  19;  6.    25,  30,    33,  45,  4S,   51  ;  7.   1,  [31];  9.  i4) 

17,  19,  20;  10.  1,  [7],  14,  50;  11.  7,  27;  12.  2,  4,  6,  13,  18 ; 

13.  22;  14.  io,  35;  15.  43;  Luke  1.  13,  18,  19,  27,  28,  34, 

43.  55»  61,  73,  80;  2.  15,  20,  34,  48,  49  ;  3.  9,  12,  13,  [14] ; 
4.  21,  23,  26,  26,  40,  43;  5.  10,  22,  31,  33,  34,  36;  6.  9,  47; 
7-  3»  4»  6>  7>  IO<  2°>  20,  24,  40,  44,  50;  8.  4,  19,  [21],  22,  25, 
35*.  9-  3-  J3>  i4»  23.  33.  43.  50.  57.  59j  [62];  10.  2,  23,  26, 
29;  ti.  i,  5,  5,  6,  39,  [53];  12.  1,  i5j  16,22,41,41,  S8;  13. 
7,  23,  34;  14.  3,  6,  7,  7,  23,  25,  26,  28;  15.  3,  18,  20,  22;  16. 
1,  26,  26,  30;  17.  1,  22     18.  3,  [7],  9,  16,31,40;  19.5,  8,9, 

13.  33>  35>  39>  431  20.  2,  3,  9,  10,  23,  41 ;  21.  38  ;  22.  15,  45, 
52,  70;  23.  4,  7,  14,  15,  22,  28;  24.. 5,  10,  17,  17,  18,25,32, 
44  ;  John  1.  2g,  42,  47;  2.  3 ;  3.  2,  4,  20,  21,  26,  26;  4.  15, 
3°i  33.  35.  40,  47-  48,  49;  5-  33.  4°,  45  5  6-  5.  5.  17.  28,  34, 
35.  37.  37  44.  45.  65,  68;  7.  3,  33,  37,  45,  )5o,  50;  8.  [2,  3, 
7].  3r>  57;  9-  13;  io-  35.  41;  "•  3.  4.  15.  19.  21.  29,  45, 
46;  12.  32;  13.  1,  3,  6;  14.  3,  6,  12,  18,  23,  28,  28;  16.  5, 
7,  7.  io,  [16],  17,  28;  17.  11,  13;  18.  13,  24,  29,  38;  19.  39; 

20.  2,  2,  io,  17,  17,  17;  21.  22,  23. 

Acts  1.  7;  2.  [7],  12,  29,  37,  38;  3.  11,  12,  [22],  22,  25;  4. 

1,  8,  19,  23,  23,  24;  5.  9,  35;  7.    3,  [31];  8.  14,  20,  24,  26;  9. 

2,  [6],  10,  11,  15,  27,  32,  38,  40;  10.  3,  13,^15,  [21,]  21,  28, 
33;  11.  3,  11,  20,  30;  12.  5,  8,   15,  20,  21 ;  13.  15,  31,  32,  36; 

14.  11;  15.  2,  7,  25,  33,  36;  16.  36,  37;  17.  2, 15, 15;  18.  6,  14. 
21;  19.  2,  2,  [3],  31;  20.  6,  18;  21.  11,  18,  37,  39;  22.  1,5,  8, 
10,  13,  15,  21,  25;  23.  3,  [15],  17,  18,  18,  22,  24,  30;  25.  16, 

21,  22;  26.  1,  [6],  9,  14,  28;  27.  3,  12;  28.  8,  17,  21,  23,  25. 
26,  30;  Rom.  1. 10,  1313.  26;  8.  31;  10. 1,  21,  21;  15.  2,  22,  23, 
[24],  29,  30,  32;  1  Co.  2.  1;  4.  18,19,  21;  6.  5;  12.  2,  7;  13.12; 
14.  6,  12,  26;  15.  34;  16.  5,  ir,  12;  2  Co.  1,  15,  16,  20;  2.  153. 
1,  16;  4.  2,  6;  5.  12;  6.  11;  7  3,  12;  8.  17,  10;  10.  4;  11.  8; 
12  14,  17;  13.  1,  7;  Gal.  1.  17;  6.  10,  10;  Eph.  2.  iS;  ?,.  14; 
4.  14,  29;  5  [31];  6.  9,  22;  Phil.  1.  26;2.  25;  4.  6;  Col.  2.  23; 
4.  8,  10;  1  Th.  1.  9,  9;  2.  1,  2,  18;  3.  6,  11;  1  Ti.  3.  14;  4.  7, 
S;  2  Ti.  2.  24;  3.  17;  4.  9;  Titus  1.  16;  3.  i,  2,  12,  12;  Heb. 
1.  8,  13;  2.  17;  5.  1,  5,  7,  14;  6  11;  7.  21;  9.  13,  20;  13.  13; 
Jas.  4.  [5];  1  Pe.  2.  4;  3.  15;  4.  12;  2  Pe.  1.  3;  3. 16;  1  Jo. 
5  16,  16,16,  17;  2  Jo.  10,  12,  12;  3  Jo.  14;  Rev.  3,  20; 
10.  9;  12.  5,  12;  21.  [9];  22  [18]. 

31.  Above,  beyond,  virip  (ace.)  huper. 

2  Co.  1 2. 13  what  is  it  wherein  ye  were  inferior  to 
32. As,  us  hos. 

Rom.  9.  29  we  had  been,  .made  like  unto  Gomorrha 
33.  So  as,  Strre  hoste. 

Mattio.    1  hegave  them  power,  .tocastthemout,  and 
27.    1  elders . .  took  counsel  against  J  esus  to  put 

Luke  9.  52  entered  into  a  village,  .[to]  make  ready  for 
Sec  also  About,  according,  add,  attendance,  bring,  call, 
chargeable,  cleave,  come,  communicate,  conformed, 
contrary,  day,  end,  even,  for,  go,  like,  nail,  put,  run, 
shut,  speak. 
TO  and  fro  — 
I.Here,  hither,  njn  hennah. 

2  Ki.  4  35  returned,  and  walked  in  the  house  to  and  f. 
2. To  go  out,  «v;  yatsa. 

Gen.  8.  7  which wentforth toandfro, until thewaters 

3,  To  move,  shake,  stagger,  wonder,  yu  nua. 

Isa.    24.  20  The  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  dru. 

See  also  Driven,  go,  reel,  removing,  run,  running,  toss, 

tossed,  tossiugs,  walk. 

TO  day  — 

1..I  day,  to  day,  D'rn  liayyom. 

Gen.  30.  32  I  will  pass  through  all  thy  flock  to  day 
Exod.  2.  18  How  (is  it),  .ye  are  come  so  soon  to  day 

5.  14  making  brick  both  yesterday  and  to  day 
14.  i3seethesalvation..hewillshowtoyoutoday 
14.  13  the  Egyptiaus  whom  ye  have  seen  to  day 
16.  25  And  Moses  said, Eat  that  today;  for  today 
16.25  to  day  (is)  a  sabbath  unto  the  Lord:  today 
32.  29  Consecrate  yourselves  today  to  the  Lord 

Deut2g.  13  Thathe  may  establish  thee  to  day  for  a  peo. 
Josh. 22.  18  (seeing)  ye  rebel  to  day  against  the  Lord 

1  Sa.   4.    3  Wherefore  hath  the  Loud  smitten  us  to  d. 

4. 16  the  man  said.  .1  tied  to  day  out  of  the.ar. 
9. 12  haste  now,  for  he  came  to  day  to  the  city 
9.  12  (there  is) a  sacrifice  of  the  people  to  day  in 
9.  io  ye  shall  eat  with  me  to  day;  and  to  morrow 
10.  2  When  thou  art  departed  from  me  to  day 
11. 13  to  day  the  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation 
ia.  17  (Is  it)  not  wheat  harvest  to  day?  I  will  call 

20.  27  cometh  not  the  son  of  Jesse  to  meat.. tod. 
24.  10  that  the  LORD  had  delivered  thee  to  day 
26.  23  delivered  thee  into  (my)  hand  today,  but 
27. 10  said,  Whither  have  ye  made  a  road  to  day? 

2  Sa.  11.  12  Tarry  here  to  day  also,  and  to  morrow  I 

14.  22  To  day  thy  servant  knoweth  that  I  have 
16.    3  To  day  shall  the  house  of  Israel  restore  me 

1  Ki.  8.  28  thy  servant  prayeth  before  thee  to  day 

2  Ki.  4.  23  Wherefore  wilt  thou  goto  him  today?  (it 

6.  28  we  may  eat  him  to  day,  and  we  will  eat  my 
Job  2-;.  2  to  day  (is)  my  complaint  bitter:  my  stroke 
Tsa.  95.    7  he  (is)  our  God.. To  day  if  ye  will  hcarhis 

2. T<>  day,  this  day,  o-f)/A€pov  sSmeron. 

Matt.  6.  30  the  grass  of  the  field,  which  to  day  is,  and 
16.   3  foul  weather  to  day;  for  the  sky  is  red  and 

21.  28  said,  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard 
Luke  5.  26  saying, We  have  seen  strange  things  to  d. 

12.  28  the  grass,  which  is  to  day  in  the  field,  and 

13.  32  I  cast  out  devils,  and  I  do  cures  today  and 
13.  33  I  must  walk  to  day,  and  tomorrow,  and  the 
19.  5  Zaceheus.  .today  I  must  abide  at  thy  ho. 
23.  43  Today  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise 


Luke24.  21  besides  all  this,  [to  day]  is  the  third  day 
Heb.   3.    7  saith,  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice 

3.  13  But  exhort.,  while  it  is  called  To  day ;  lest 

3.  15  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 

4.  7  To  day.  .To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice 

5.  5  Thou  art  my  Son,  to  day  have  I  begotten 

13.  8  same  yesterday,  and  to  day,  and  for  ever 
Jas.     4. 13  To  day  or  to  morrow  we  will  go  into  such  a 

TO  morrow  — 

1.  Time  behind,  to  morrow,  yesterday,  ina  machar. 

Exod.  8. 10  And  he  said,  To  morrow.    And  he  said 
8.  23  a  division . .  to  morrow  shall  this  sign  be 

8.  29  (flies)  may  depart. .from  his  people,  to  mo. 

9.  5  To  morrow  the  Lord  shall  do  this  thing  in 
9.  18  to  morrow  about  this  time  I  will  cause  it 

10.  4  to  morrow  will  I  bring  the  locusts  into  thy 

16.  23  To  morrow  (is)  the  rest  of  the  holy  sabbath 

17.  9  tomorrow  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the 

19.  10  sanctify  them  to  day  and  to  morrow,  and 
32.    5  and  said,  To  morrow  (is)  a  feast  to  the  L. 

Nunin.  18  Sanctify  yourselves  against  to  morrow, and 

14.  25  To  morrow  turn  you,  and  get  you  into  the 
16.  7  put  incense  in  them  before  the  Lord  to  m. 
16.  16  thou,  and  they,  and  Aaron,  to  morrow 

Josh.  3.    5  for  to  morrow  the  Lord  will  do  wonders 
7.  i3Sanctifyyourselves  against  tomorrow:  for 

11.  6  to  morrow,  about  this  time,  will  I  deliver 

22. 18  to  morrow  he  will  be  wroth  with  the  wh. 
Judgig.    9  tomorrowget  you  early  on  your  way.that 

20.  28  to  morrow  I  will  deliver  them  into  thine  h. 

1  Sa.   9.  16  To  morrow,  about  this  time,  I  will  send 

11.  9  To  morrow,  by  (that  time)  the  sun  be  hot 
11. 10  Tomorrow  we  will  come  out  unto  you,  and 

19.  it  save  not  thy  life  to  night,  to  morrow  thou 

20.  5  to  morrow  (is)  the  new  moon,  and  I  should 
20.  12  have  sounded  my  father  about  tomorrow 
20.  18  To  morrow  (is)  the  new  moon :  and  thou 

28. 19  to  morrow  (shalt)  thou  and  thy  sons  (be) 

2  Sa.  1 1.  12  Tarry  ye  here  to  day  also,  and  to  morrow 

1  Ki.19.   2  as  the  life  of  one  of  them  by  tomorrow 

20.    6  send  my  servants  unto  theeto  morrow  ab. 

2  Ki.  6.  28  woman  said. .we  will  eat  my  son  to  morr. 

7.    1  To  morrow,  about  this  time,  (shall)  a  me. 
,     7.  18  shall  be  tomorrow  about  this  time  in  the 

10.  6  come  to  me  to  Jezreel  by  to  morrow  this 
2  Cli.  20.  16  To  morrow  go  ye  down  against  them,  be. 

20. 17  to  morrow  go  out  against  them :  for  the 

Esth.  5.    8  I  will  do  tomorrow  as  the  king  hath  said 

5.  12  to  morrow  am  I  invited  unto  her  also  with 

9.  13  to  morrow  also  according  unto  this  day's 

Trov.  3.  28  Say  not.. to  morrow  I  will  give  ;  when  thou 

27.    1  Boast  not  thyself  of  to  morrow  ;  for  thou 

Isa.    22.  13  let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to  morrow  we  sh. 

56. 12  to  morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  (and)  much 

2.  To  morrow,  avpiov  aurion. 

Matt.  6.  30  whichto  day  is, and  to  morrow  is  castinto 

Lukei2.  28  and  to  morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  how 

13.  32  I  do  cures  to  day  and  to  morrow,  and  the 

13-  33  I  must  walk  to  day,  and  to  morrow,  and 

Acts  23.  15  he  bring  him  down  unto  you  [tomorrow] 

23.  20  thou  wouldest  bring  down -Paul  to  morrow 

25.  22  To  morrow,  said  he,  thou  shalt  hear  him 

1  Co.  15.  32  let  us  eat  and  drink  ;  for  to  morrow  we  die 

Jas.     4.  13  to  morrow  we  will  go  into  sucha  city,  and 

TO  the  end  or  intent  — 

1.  With  a  view  to,  eis  cis. 

Acts    7.  19  cast  out  their  young  children,  to  the  end 
Rom.  1.  11  may  impart,  .to  the  eud  ye  may  be  estab. 
4.  16  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be  sure  to 
1  Co. 10.   6  to  the  intent  we  should  not  lust  after  evil 

1  Th.  3.  13  To  the  end  he  may  stablish  your  hearts 
'2.  In  order  that,  so  that,  'iva  hina. 

John  1 1.  15  And  I  am  glad.. to  the  intent  ye  may  be. 

Eph.    3.  10  To  the  intent  that  now  unto  the  princip. 
TO  wit  — 
As,  how,  is  hos, 

2  Co.  5. 19  To  wit,  that  God  was  in  Christ  reconcil- 
TO  (God  or  you)  ward  — 

Toward,  wpos  (ace.)  pros. 

2  Co.   r.  12  world,  and  more  abundantly  to  you  ward 
3.    4  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God  ward 

1  Th.  1.    8  your  faith  to  Godward  is  spread  abroad 
TO'-AH,  nin  depression,  humility. 
Father  of  Eliel,  and  grandfather  of  Jeroham  the  grand- 
father of  Samuel  the  prophet;  called  also  Nahath  in 
ver.  26 ;  and  Tohu  in  1  Sa.  1.  1.    B.C.  1230. 

1  Ch.  6.  34  Jeroham,  the  son  of  Eliel,  the  son  of  T. 
TOB,  "2^  fruitful,  good. 

A  district  in  Syria  N.E.  of  Gilead,  to  which  Jephthah 
fled,  and  which  sent  out  mercenary  troops,  2  Sa.  10.  6; 
Mace.  5.  13. 

Judg  11.    3  Then  Jephthah.  .dwelt  in  the  land  of  T. 

11.  5  elders.,  went  to  fetch  Jephthah  out  of..T. 

TOB  ADO-HT'-JAH,  n'rnx  aia  the  Lord  Jahisgood. 
A  Levite  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the  people  in  the 
cities  of  Judah.    B.C.  913. 

2  Ch.17.    8  Adonijah,  and  Tobijah,  and  T.,  Levites 
T0-BI'-AH,T0B-I'-JAH,n;5'm,n;rb,n;3iu  J.ih  is  good. 

1.  A  Levite  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the  people  iu 
the  cities  of  Judah.    B.C.  913. 

2  Ch.17.    8  Adonijah,  and  T.,  and  Tob-adonijah,  Lev. 

2.  A  person  whose  descendants  returning  from  exile 
were  unable  to  prove  their  genealogy.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra    2.  60  children  of  Delaiah,  the  children  of  T. 
Neh.    7.62  children  of  Delaiah,  the  children  of  T 


TOCHBN 


993 


TOLD 


3.  An  Ammonite  who  opposed  yehemiah.    B.C.  445. 

Neh,   2. 10  When.  .X.  the  servant,  the  Ammonite,  he. 
2.  19  But  when  Sanballat.  .and  T. .  -heard  (it) 
4.   3  Now  T.  the  Ammonite  (was)  by  him,  and 
4.    7  T. . .  heard  that  the  walls  of  J  erusalem  we. 
6.    1  T. .  .heard  that  I  had  builded  the  wall 
6.  12  for  T.  and  Sanballat  had  hired  him 
6.  14  My  God,  think  thou  upon  T. .  .that  would 
6.  17  sent,  .letters  unto  T. .  .(the  letters)  of  T. 
6. 19  (And)  T.  sent  letters  to  put  me  in  fear 

13.   4  Eliashib  the  priest-  .(was)  allied  unto  T. 

13.    7  the  evil  that  Eliashib  did  for  T.,  in  prep. 

13.  8  I  cast  forth  all  the  household  stuff  of  T. 

4.  A  chief  man  whose  posterity  returned  from  exile. 
B.C.  519. 

Zech.  6.  to  T.,  and.  Jedaiah,  which  are  come  from 
6.  14  the  crowns  shall  be  to  Heleni,  and  to  T. 

TO'-CHEN.  |3H  establishment. 

A  city  in  Simeon,  near  Rinmion  (or  Renrnon);  omitted 

in  Josh.  19.  7. 

1  Ch.  4.  32  And  their  villages  (were).  .T.,  and  Ashan 

TOE  (great)  — 

I. Thumb,  great  toe,  JH2  bohen. 

Exod  29.  20  and  upon  the  great  toe  of  their  righ*  *oot 
Lev.    8. 23  and  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot 

8.  24  and.upon  the  great  toes  of  then'  right  feet 

14.  24,  17,  25,  28  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right 
2.Finger,  y3?K  etsba. 

2  Sa.  21.  20  six  fingers,  and  on  every  foot  six  toes 

1  Ch.20.    6  fingers  and  toes  (were)  four  aud  twenty 
3. Fingers,  toes,  )S>?>*n  etsbean. 

Dan.    2.  41  whereas  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes,  part 

2.  42  the  toesof  the  feet  (were)  part  of  iron,  and 
4. Toes  or  thumbs  oftkefcet,n\hy~i  ni:ri5  behonothrag. 

Judg.  1.   6  and  cut  off  his  thumbs  and  his  great  toes 
1.    7  their  thumbs  and  their  great  toes  cut  off 

TO-GAR'-MAH,  TSDri^  rra-irin. 

A  son  of  Gomer,  son  of  Japheth,  in  the  X.  of  Armenia. 

B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10.    3  And  the  sons  of  Gomer.  .Riphath,  and  T. 

1  Ch.  1.    6  And  the  sons  of  Gomer.  .Riphath,  and  T. 

Eze.  27. 14  They  of  the  house  of  T.  traded  in  thy  fa 
38.   6  the  house  of  T.  of  the  north  quarters," and 
TOGETHER  — 
1.-45  one,  "into  keechad. 

Ezra   2.  64  The  whole  congregation  together  (was)  fo. 

3.  9  sons  of  Judah,  together,  to  set  forward 
6.  20  priests]and  the  Levites  were  purified  tog. 

Neh.    7.  66  The  whole  congregation  together  (was)  fo. 
Isa.  65.  25  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together 
2.Sister,  another,  ninx  achoth. 

Exod  26.    6  couple  the  curtains  together  with  the  ta. 
Z.As  one,  rvin3  kachadah. 

Dan.   2.  35  broken  in  pieces  together,  and  became  like 
4.  Together,  130!,  "in!  yachad,  yacfulav. 

Gen.  13.    6  mightdwelltogether..couldnotd\veUtog. 

22.    6,  8  they  went  both  of  them  together 

22. 19  they  rose  up  and  went  together  to  Beer-s. 

36.    7  more  than  that  they  might  dwell  together 
Exodi9.   8  all  the  people  answered  together,  and  said 

26.  24  they  shall  be  coupled  together  above  the 

36.  29  coupled  together  at  the  head  thereof,  to 
Deut  22.  10  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  together 

22.  11  divers  sorts,  (as)of  woollen  and  linen  tog. 

25.    5  If  brethren  dwell  together,  and  one  of  th. 

25.  11  When  men  strive  together  one  with  ano. 

33.  5  the  tribes  of  Israel  weregatheredtogether 
33. 17  with  them  he  shall  push  the  people  toge. 

Josh.  9.    2  they  gathered  themselves  together,  to  fight 

11.  5  they  came  and  pitched  together  at  the 
Judg.  6.  33  children  of  the  east  were  gathered  toget. 

19.   6  did  eat  and  drink  both  of  them  together 

1  Sa.  11.  it  so  that  two  of  them  were  not  left  together 

1 7. 10  give  me  a  man,  that  we  may  fight  together 
31.    6  and  all  his  men,  that  same  day  together 

2  Sa.   2.  13  met  together  by  the  pool  of  Gibeon  :  and 

2. 16  so  they  fell  down  together  :  wherefore  th. 

10. 15  Israel,  they  gathered  themselves  together 

12.  3  it  grew  up  together  with  him,  and  with  his 

14. 16  destroy  me  and  my  son  togetherout  of  the 
21.   9  they  fell  fall)  seven  together,  and  were  put 

1  Ki.  3.  18  we  (were)  together;  (there  was)nostran. 
1  Ch.io.    6  Saul  died,  .and  all  his  house  together 
Ezra   4.    3  but  we  ourselves  together  will  build  unto 
Neh.  4.    8  conspired  all  of  them  together  to  come 
6.  2  Come,  let  us  meet  together  in  (some  one 
6.   7  Come,  .and  let  us  take  counsel  together 
Job     2. 11  they  had  made  an  appointment  together 
3.  18  prisoners  rest  together ;  they  hear  not  the 
6.   2  my  calamity  laid  in  the  balances  together 

9.  32  (and)  we  should  come  together  in  judgni. 
10.   8  and  fashioned  me  together  round  about 
16. 10  they  have  gathered  themselves  together 
17. 16  when  (our)  rest  together  (is)  in  the  dust 

19. 12  His  troops  come  together,  andraiseup  th. 
24.   4  poorof  theearthhidethemselvestogether 
34. 15  All  flesh  shall  perish  together,  and  man 
38.   7  Whenthemorningstarssangtogether,  and 

40. 13  Hide  them  in  the  dust  together ;  (and)bi. 
Psa.    2.   2  rulers  take  counsel  together,  against  the 

14-    3  they  are  (all)  together  become  filthy ;  (th. 
31.  13  while  they  took  counsel  together  against 

34.  3  magnify .  .and  let  us  exalt  his  name  toge. 

35.  26  brought  to  confusion  together  that  rejoice 

125 


Psa.  37.  38  transgressors  shall  be  destroyed  together 

40.  14  be  ashamed  and  confounded  together  that 
40. 14  be  ashamed  and  confounded  together  that 

41.  7  All  that  hate  me  whisper  together  against 

48.  4  For,  lo,  the  kings,  .passed  by  together 

49.  2  Both  low  and  high,  rich  and  poor,  together 
55.  14  We  took  sweet  counsel  together,  (and)  wa. 
71.  10  they  that  lay  wait.,  take  counsel  together 
74.  8  Let  us  destroy  them  together :  they  have 
83.  5  Eortheyhave  consulted  together  with  one 
88.  17  water;  they  compassed  me  about  together 
98.    8  (their)  hands :  let  the  hills  be  joyful  toge. 

102.  22  "When  the  people  are  gathered  together 
122.   3  builded  as  a  city  that  is  compact  together 
133.    1  pleasant  (it  is)  for  brethren  todwell  toge. 
Isa.     1.  28  destruction,  .of  the  sinners  (shall  be)  tog. 

1.  31  they  shall  both  burn  together,  and  none 
9.  21  they  together  (shall  be)  against  Judah 

11.    6  the  young  lion  and  the  fatling  together 
11.    7  their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together 
11. 14  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the  east  together 
18.    6  Theyshallbeleft  together  unto  the  fowls 
22.    3  All  thy  rulers  are  fled  together,  they  are 
22.   3  all  that  are  found  in  thee  are  bound  toget. 
27.    4  I  would  burn  them  together 
31.    3  fall  down,  and  they  all  shallfail  together 

40.  5  all  flesh  shall  see  (it)  together  :  for  the 

41.  1  let  us  come  near  together  to  judgment 
41. 19  (and)  the  pine,  and  the  box  tree  together 
41.  20  know,  and  consider,  and  understand  tog. 
41.  23  we  maybe  dismayed,  and  behold  (it)  toge. 
43.   9  Let  all  the  nations  be  gathered  together 
43.  17  they  shall  lie  down  together,  they  shall 
43.  26  let  us  plead  together:  declare  thou,  that 
44. 11  they  shall  fear.. they  shall  be  ashamed  to. 
45.    8  let  righteousnessspringuptogether;  I  the 
45.  16  they  shall  go  to  confusion  together  (that 
45.  20  draw  near  together,  ye  (that  are)  escaped 

45.  21  let  them  take  counsel  together:  who  hath 

46.  2  Theystoop,  theybowdowntogether,  they 
48.  13  (when)  I  call  unto  them,  they  stand  up  tog. 
so.    8  let  us  stand  together :  who  (is)  mine  adv. 
52.    8  with  the  voice  together  shall  they  sing 
52.    9  sing  together,  ye  waste  places  of  Jerusal. 

60. 13  the  pine  tree,  and  the  box  together,  to  bea. 
65.  7  the  iniquities  of  your  fathers  together,  sa. 
66. 17  shall  be  consumed  together,  saith  the  Lord 

Jer.    3. 18  they  shall  come  together  out  of  the  land 

6. 11  upoD  the  assembly  of  yoiing  men  together 

6. 12  others,(with  their)  fields  and  wives  togeth. 
6.  21  the  fathers  and  the  sons  together  shall  fall 

13. 14  will  dash,  .the  fathers  and  the  sons  toge. 
31.  8  and  her  that  travaileth  with  child  togeth. 
31. 13  rejoice,  .both  young  men  and  old  togeth. 
31.  24  and  in  all  the  cities  thereof  together 

41.  1  there  they  did  eat  bread  together  in  Miz. 
46.  12  stumbled,  .they  are  fallen  both  together 
46.  21  turned  back,  (and)  are  fled  away  together 

48.  7  (with)  his  priests  and  his  princes  together 

49.  3  (and)  his  priests  and  his  princes  together 

50.  4  they  and  the  children  of  Judah  together 

50.  33  the  children  of  Judah(were)oppressed  to. 

51.  38  They  shall  roar  together  like  lions;  they 
Lam.  2.  S  rampart  and  the  wall.  .languished  toget. 
Hos.    1.  ii  the  children  of  Israel  be  gathered  toget. 

11.    8  is  turned,  .my  repentings  are  kindled  to. 

Amos. 1.  15  he  and  his  princes  together,  saith  the  Lo. 
3.   3  Can  two  walk  together,  except  they  be  ag. 

Mic.   2.  12  I  will  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of 

Zech.  10.    4  Out  of  him  came . .  every  oppressor  toget. 
5. Couple,  team,  poke,  together,  "is*  tsemed. 

2  Ki.  9.  25  when  I  and  thou  rode  together  after  Ah. 
Q.A  gathering,  n3px  asephah. 

Isa.   24.  22  AJid  they  shall  be  gathered  together 
7.0/ one  (mother,  a\\-f]\coi/  allelwi. 

1  Th.  5. 11  Wherefore  comfort  yourselves  together 

8.  Toxoard  each  other,  irp6$  aWyAovs  prosallelou.s. 

Luke24- 14  they  talked  together  of  all  these  things 

9.  Together  with,  dfia  hama. 

Rom.  3. 12  they  are  together  become  unprofitable 
1  Th.  4.  17  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  in 
5. 10  died  for  us,  that.,  we  should  live  together 

10.  TogetJier,  upon  or  about  tlie  same,  iitl  to  o.vto. 
Matt 22.  34  the  Pharisees,  .were  gathered  together 
Luke  17. 35  Two  (women)  shall  be  grinding  together 
Acts    1. 15  the  number  of  the  names  together  were 

2.  44  all  that  believed  were  together,  and  had 

3.  1  Peter  and  John  went  up  together  into  the 

4.  26  the  rulers  were  gathered  together  against 
1  Co.  7.    5  come  together  again,  thatSatantemptyou 

11.  Together,  down  to  the  same,  Kara  to  clvto. 
Acts  14.    1  they  went  both  together  into  the  synag. 

12.  With  one  another,  /xer   aW^Aoji'  met1  allelon. 
Luke23- 12  Pilate  and  Herod  were  made  friends  tog. 

13.  Together,  Sptov  homou.  ' 

John  4.  36  and  he  that  reapeth  may  rejoice  together 

20.  4  So  they  ran  both  together :  and  the  other 

21.  2  There  were  together  Simon  Peter,  and  T. 
See  also  Agree,  assemble,  assembled,  assembling,  band, 
bow,  bring,  builded,  call,  called,  cleave  fast,  come, 
comforted,  consult,  counsel,  coupled,  flow,  folden,  fol- 
lower, framed,  gather,  gathered,  gathering,  glorified, 
grow,  join,  joined,  knit,  meet,  met,  planted,  put,  raise 
up,  reason,  rise  up,  rolled,  run,  shake,  shut  up,  smite, 
sow,  stick,  strive,  struggle,  take,  temper,  tempered, 
travail  in  pain,  thrust,  whisper,  work,  wrap,  wrapped, 


yoke.    Also  sing  together  by  course,  gather  together 

in  one.     Together  with,  see  elected,  labour,  quicken, 

sit. 

TO'-HTJ,  )rin  humility,  dejrression. 

A  Kohathite,   ancestor  of  Samuel;  called  Xahadh  in 

1  Ch.  6.  26,  and  Toak  in  1  Ch.  6.  34.    B.C.  1230. 

1  Sa.    1.    1  EHhu,  the  son  of  T.,  the  son  of  Zuph 

TO'-I,  TO'-TT,  »jfo  ij'B  error,  wandering. 

A  king  of  Haiuath  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1040. 

2  Sa.    8.    9  T. .  .heard  that  David  had  smitten  all  the 

8.  10  Then  T.  sent  Joram  Iris  son  unto  king  D. 

8.  10  fought,  .for  Hadadezer  had  wars  with  T. 

1  Ch.18.    9  T. .  .heard  how  David  had  smitten  all  the 

18. 10  fought,  .for  Hadarezer  had  wars  with  T. 

TOIL,  (to)  — 

1. Labour,  7£jj  amal. 

Gen.  41.  51  God.. hathmade  me  forget  allmy  toil,  and 

2.Grievous  thing,  labour,  payy  itstsabon. 

Gen.    5.  29  concerning  our  work  and  toil  of  our  hands 

Z.To  try,  fZaa-avifa  basanizo. 

Hark  6.  48  he  saw  them  toiling  in  rowing;  for  the 

4.  To  labour,  be  weary,  fatigued,  Koirtdu  kopiao. 
Matt.  6.  28  Consider  the  lilies,  .they  toil  not,  neither 
Luke   5.    5  we  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and  have  ta. 
12.  27  [they  toil  not,  they  spin  not ;  and  yet  I  say] 

TOKEN  (evident,  manifest)  — 
l.A  sign,  token,  ii'ik  oth. 

Gen.    9.  12,  17  This  (is)  the  token  of  the  covenant  wh. 

9.  13  be  for  a  token  of  a  covenant  between  me 

17. 11  it  shall  be  a  token  of  the  covenant  betw.} 
■Exod.  3.  12  a  token  unto  thee  that  I  have  sent  thee 

12.  13  blood  shall  be  to  you  for  a  token  upon  the 
13. 16  it  shall  be  for  a  token  upon  thine  hand. 
>Tumi7.  10  to  be  kept  for  a  token  against  the  rebels 
Josh.  2.  12  show  kindness.. and  give  me  a  true  token 
Job   21.  29  the  way?  and  do  ye  not  know  their  tokens 
Psa.  65.    8  They  also.,  are  afraid  at  thy  tokens:  thou 
86.  17  Show  me  a  token  for  good;  that  they  wh. 
135.    9  sent  tokens  and  wonders  into  the  midst 
Isa.   44.  25  That  frustrateth  the  tokens  of  the  liars 
2.  Proof,  manifest  token,  evSeiy/xa  endeigma. 

2  Th.  1.    5  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgm. 
3.-4  showing  in,  indication,  *vdei£is  endeixis. 

Phil.    1.  23  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition 

4.  A  sign,  signal,  mark,  o-t)jj.*?ov  semeion. 

2  Th.  3.  17  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  ev. 

5.  A  joint  sign,  signal,  o-vtranp-ov  sussemon. 

\Earki4.  44  had  given  them  a  token,  saying,  Whom  so. 
TO'-LA,  y?ifl  warm,  crimson. 

1.  A  son  of  Issachar.    B.C.  1690. 

Gen.  46.  13  And  the  sons  of  Issachar ;  T.,  and  Phuv. 
Num26.  23  (of)  T.,  the  family  of  the  Tolaites :  of  Pua 
1  Ch.  7.    1  the  sons  of  Issachar  (were)  T.,  and  Puah 
7.   2  the  sons  of  T.;  Uzzi,  and  Rephaiah,  and 

7.  2  heads  of  their  father's  house . .  of  T. 

•2.  A  judge  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar.      B.C. 
1 206-1 183. 

Judg  10.    1  there  arose  to  defend  Israel,  T.  the  son  of 
TO'-LAD,  ~h\Fi  begetter. 

A  city  in  Simeon  near  Ezem;  same  of  El-toladin.  Josh. 
15-  3°- 

1  Ch.  4.  29  And  at  Bilhah,  and  at  Ezem,  and  at  T. 

TOLAITES,  'J^fon. 

Family  of  Tola'  son  of  Issachar. 

Num.  26.  23  (of)  Tola,  the  family  of  the  T. :  of  Pua,  the 

TOLD,  to  he  — 

X.To  be  said,  idn  amor,  2. 

Josh.  2.   2  it  was  told  the  king  of  Jericho,  saying 
Dan.  8.  26  And  the  vision,  .which was  told  (is) true 

2.  To  be  put  before,  declared,  "ua  nagad,  6. 

Gen.  22.  20  it  was  told  Abraham,  saying,  Behold,  ML 
27.  42  words  of  Esau  her  elder  son  were  told  to 
31.  22  it  was  told  Labanon  on  the  third  day  that  J. 
38.  13  it  was  told  Tamar,  saying,  Behold,  thy  fa. 
38.  24  it  was  told  Judah,  saying,  Tamar  thy  da. 

Exodi4.    5  it  was  told  the  king  of  Egypt  that  the  pe. 

Deut.  17.   4  it  be  told  thee,  and  thou  hast  heard  (of  it) 

Josh.  9.  24  Because  it  was  certainly  told  thy  servants 
10.  17  it  was  told  Joshua,  saying,  The  five  kings 

Judg.  9.  25  they  robbed  all.  .and  it  was  told  Abimel. 
9.  47  it  was  told  Abimelech,  that  all  the  men 

1  Sa.  15. 12  it  was  told  Samuel,  saying,  Saul  came  to 

19.  19  was  told  Saul,  saying,  Behold,  David  (is) 
23.  7,  13  And  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was 
27.    4  it  was  told  Saul  that  David  was  fled  to  G. 

2  Sa.  6. 12  it  was  told  king  David,  saying,  The  Lord 

10.  17  when  it  was  told  David,  he  gathered  all 
19.    1  it  wastoldJoab,  Behold,  the  king  weepeth 
2i.  11  it  was  told  David  what  Rizpah  the  daug. 

1  Ki.   1.  51  it  was  told  Solomon,  saying,  Behold,  Ad. 

2.  29  it  was  told  king  Solomon  that  Joab  was 
2.  41  it  was  told  Solomon  that  Shimei  had  gone 
10.    7  the  half  was  not  told  me:  thy  wisdom  and 
18.  13  Was  it  not  told  my  lord  what  I  did  when 

2  Ki.  6.  13  it  was  told  him,  saying,  Behold,  (he  is)  in 

8.  7  it  was  told  him,  saying,  The  man  of  God 

1  Ch.19. 17  it  was  told  David;  and  he  gathered  all  Is. 

2  Ch.  9.    6  the  one  half,  .was  not  told  me:  (for)  thou 
Isa.      7.   2  it  was  told  the  house  of  David,  saying,  S. 

40.  21  hath  it  not  been  told  you  from  the  begin. 


TOLERABLE 


994 


TOP 


&.To  be  numbered,  recounted,  190  saphar,  2. 

1  Ki.    S.    5  that  could  not  be  told  nor  numbered  for 

2  Ch.  5.    6  which  could  not  be  told  uor  numbered 

4. To  be  numbered^  recounted,  ")?p  saphar,  4. 

Job  37.  20  Shall  it  be  told  him  that  I  speak?  if  a  man 
Isa.  52.  15  which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they 
Hab.   1.    5  ye  will  not  believe,  though  it  be  told  (y.) 

5.  To  be  weighed,  ]3P  takan,  4. 

2  Ki.12.  11  they  gave  the  money,  beingtold,  into  the  h. 
TOLERABLE,  more  — 
More  t  '!>  eable,  avtKTi!iT£pov  anektoteron. 

Matt  10.  15  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of 

11.  22  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  S. 

11.  24  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of 

Mark  6.  1 1  [It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and] 

Lukeio.  12  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  in  that  day  for 

10. 14  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  S. 

TOLL  — 

1. Measured  thing,  tribute,  toll,  n?p  mid'dafi. 

Ezra  4.  20  toll,  and  tribute,  and  custom,  was  paid 
%  Measured  thing,  tribute,  toll,  nya  mindah. 

Ezra    4. 13  will  they  not  pay  toll,  tribute,  andcustom 
7.  24  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll,  tribute 
TOMB  — 
l.A  stack,  heap,  tomb,  0*i!j  gadish. 

Job    2i.  32  the  grave,  and  "shall  remain  in  the  tomb 
2.  A  monument,  tonib,  p.vr\p.a  mnema. 

Mark  5.    5  he  was  in  the  mountains,  and  in  the  torn. 

Luke  S.  27  neither  abode  in .  .house,  but  iu  the  tombs 
%.A  monument,  tomb,  ftvriiie'iov  mnemeion. 

Matt.  8.  28  coming  out  of  the  tombs,  exceeding  fierce 
27.  60  laid  it  in  his  own  new  tomb,  which  he  had 

Mark  5.    2  there  met  him  out  of  the  tombs  a  man  wi. 

5.  3  Who  had  (Ids)  dwelling  among  the  [tombs] 

6.  29  took  up  his  corpse,  and  laid  it  iu  a  tomb 
4.-4  burying  place,  sepulchre,  ratyos  taphos. 

Matt  23. 29  ye  build  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and 
TONGS  — 
\. Tongs,  snuffers,  wn$b&  malqachayinu 

Exod25.  38  the  tongs  thereof/and  the  snuff  dishes  th. 

Num.4.    9  "is  tongs,  and  his  snuff  dishes,  and  all  the 
2.  Tongs,  snuffers,  Djnp^a  melqachayi/n. 

1  Ki.   7.  49  the  flowers,  and  the  lamps,  and  the  tongs 

2  Ch,  4.  21  the  tongs,  (made  he  of),  gold,  (and)  that 
Isa.     6.   6  (which)  he  had  taken  with  the  tongs  from 

o.Axe,  tongs,  "ryy.D  maatsad. 

Isa.  44. 12  The  smith  with  the  tongs  both  worketh 
TONGUE  — 
I.Tongue,  language,  J"ib6  lashon. 

Gen.  10.    5  every  one  after  his  tongue,  after  their  fa. 
10.  20  after  their  families,  after  their  tongues 

10.  31  after  their  families,  after  their  tongues 
Exod  4.  10  I  (am)  slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow  ton. 

11.  7  against  any.  .shall  not  a  dog  move  his  to. 
Deut28.  49  a  nation  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  un. 
Josh. 10.  21  none  moved  his  tongue  against  any  of  the 
Judg.  7.  5  Every  one  that  lappeth.  .with  his  tongue 
2  Sa.  23.  2  spake  by  me,  and  his  word  (was)  in  my  t. 
Job     5.  21  be  hid  from  the  scourge  of  the  tongue 

6.  30  Is  there  iniquity  in  my.tongue?  cannotmy 
15.  s  and  thou  choosest  the  tongue  of  the  crat. 
20. 12  (though)  he  hide  it  under  his  tongue 

20. 16  suck  the  poison,  .the  viper's  tongue  shall 
27.  4  not  speak  wickedness,  nor  my  tongue  ut. 
29. 10  their  tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their 

33.  2  Behold,  .my  tongue  hath  spoken  in  my 
41.    1  his  tongue  with  a  cord  (which)  thou  lett. 

Psa.     5.    9  sepulchre;  they  flatter  with  their  tongue 
10.    7  under  his  tongue  (is)  mischief  and  vanity 

12.  3  Lord  shall  cut  of.,  the  tongue  that  speak. 
12.  4  Who  have  said,  With  our  tongue  will  we 
15.    3  (He  that)backbitethnot  withhis  tongue 

22. 15  my  tongue  cleaveth  to  my  jaws,  and  thou 
31.  20  keep  them,  .from  the  strife  of  tongues 

34.  13  Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips 

35.  28  my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  righteousn. 
37.  30  speaketh  wisdom,  and  his  tongue  talketh 
39.  1  take  heed,  .that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue 
39.  3  fire  burned:  (then) spake  I  with  my  tong. 
45.  1  my  tongue  (is)  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer 
50. 19  givest  thy  mouth  to  evil,  and  thy  tongue 
51. 14  my  tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  thy  righteo. 
52.  2  Thy  tongue  deviseth  mischiefs,  like  a  sh. 
52.  4  lovest  all  devouring  words,  .deceitful  to. 
55.  9  Destroy,  OLord,  (and)  divide  their  tong. 
57.  4  and  arrows,  and  then*  tongue  a  sharp  sw. 
64.  3  Who  whet  their  tongue  likeasword,  (and) 
64.    8  they  shall  make  their  own  tongue  to  fall 

66. 17  I  cried .  .he  was  extolled  with  my  tongue 
68.  23  (and)  the  tongue  of  thy  dogs  in  the  same 
71.  24  My  tongue  also  shall  talk  of  thy  righteo. 
73.  9  and  their  tongue  walketh  through  the  ea. 
78.  36  and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongues 

109.   2  spoken  against  me  with  a  lying  tongue 

119.  172  My  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  word :  for 

120.  2  Deliver  my  soul . .  from  a  deceitful  tongue 
120.    3  what  shall  be  done,  .thou  false  tongue  ? 
126.    2  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue  with 
137.    6  let  my  tongne  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mo. 

139.  4  (there  is)  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  (but) 

140.  3  They  have  sharpened  their  tongues  like  a 
Prov.  6.  17  A  proud  look,  a  lying  tongue,  and  hands 

6.  24  the  flattery  of  the  tongue  of  a  strange  wo. 


Prov  10. 


25- 

25- 

26. 
28. 

3I- 

Song   4. 
Isa.     3, 


Jer. 


Lam.  4 
Eze.  3 
Dan.  1 
Hos.  7 
Mic.  6 
Zeph.  3 
Zech  14. 


20  The  tongue  of  the  just  (is  as)  choice  silver 
31  but  the  froward  tongue  shall  be  cut  out 

18  but  the  tongue  of  the  wise  (is)  health 

19  but  a  lying  tongue  (is)  but  for  a  moment 

2  The  tongue  of  the  wise  usetli  knowledge 
4  A  wholesome  tongue  (is)  a  tree  of  life,  but 
1  the  answer  of  the  tongue,  (is)  from  the  L. 
4  (and)a  liar  givethear  to  anaughtytougue 

20  he  that  hatha  perverse  tongue  fallethin. 

21  Death  and  life.,  in  the  power  of  the  tong. 
6  The  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue 

23  Whoso  keepeth.  .Ins  tongue  keepeth  his 
15  and  a  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  bone 
23  an  angry  countenance  a  backbiting  tongue 
28  A  lyiug  tongue  hateth  (those  that  are)  aftl. 
23  than  he  that  flattereth  with  the  tongue 

26  and  in  her  tongue  (is)  the  law  of  kindness 
11  honey  and  milk  (arej  under  thy  tongue 

8  their  tongue  and  their  doings  (are)  again. 

15  the  Lord  shall  utterly  destroy  the  tongue 

11  For  with,  .another  tongue  will  he  speak 

27  full  of  indignation,  and  his  tongue  as  a 

4  the  tougue  of  the  stammerers  shall  be  re. 
19  a  stammering  tongue,  that  thou  canst  not 

6  Then  shall .  .the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing 
17  (there  is)  none,  and  their  tongue  faileth 
23  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall 

4  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of  the  lea. 
17  every  tongue  (that)  shall  rise  against  thee 

4  against  whom.,  draw  out  the  tongue?  (are) 

3  your  tongue  hath  muttered  perverseness 
iS  I  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues;  and 

3  they  bend  their  tongues  (like)  their  bow 

5  they  have  taught  their  tongue  to  speak 
8  Their  tongue  (is  as)  an  arrow  shot  out.it 

iS  let  us  smite  liim  with  the  tongue,  and  let 
31  the  prophets,  that  use  their  tongues,  and 

4  The  tongue  of  the  sucking  child  cleaveth 
26  I  will  make  thy  tongu*.  cleave  to  the  roof 

4  the  learning  and  the  tongue  of  the  Chal. 

16  shall  fall,  .fur  the  rage  of  their  tongue 

12  their  tongue  (is)  deceitful  in  their  mouth 

13  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found 
12  their  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their 


2.  A  tongue,  language,  yXaxxaa  glossa. 

Mark  7.  33  took  him . .  and  he  spit,  and  touched  his  to. 
7.  35  the  string  of  his  tongue  was  loosed,  and 

16. 17  [cast  out  devils,  .speak  with  new  tongues] 
Luke  1.  64  his  tongue  (loosed),  and  he  spake,  and  pr. 

16.  24  and  cool  my  tongue;  for  I  am  tormented 
Acts    2.    3  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues 
2.    4  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the 
2. 11  we  do  hear  them  speak  iu  our  tongues 

2.  26  my  tongue  was  glad ;  moreover  also  my 

10.  46  they  heard  them  speak  with  tongues,  and 
19.   6  and  they  spake  with  tongues,  and  proph. 

Ptom.  3.  13  with  their  tongues  they  have  used  deceit 

14.  11  and  every  tongue  shall  confess  to  God 
1  Co.  12. 10  to  another  (divers)  kinds  of  tongues;  to 

12. 10  to  another  the  interpretation  of  tongues 
12. 28  helps,  governments,  diversities  of  tongues 

12.  30  do  all  speak  with  tongues?  do  all  interp. 

13.  1  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men 

13.  8  whether  (there  be)  tongues,  they  shall  ce. 

14.  2  he  that  speaketh  in  anVunknown)  tongue 
14.  4  He  that  speaketh  in  an  (unknown)  tongue 
14.  5  I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues,  but 
14.  5  greater,  than  he  that  speaketh  with  tong. 
14.  6  if  I  come  unto  you  speaking  with  tongues 
14.    9  except  ye  utter  by  the  tongue  words  easy 

14. 13  let  him  that  speaketh  in  an  (unknown)  to. 
14.  14  if  I  pray  in  an  (unknown)  tongue,  my  Bp. 

14. 18  I  speak  with  tongues  more  than  ye  all 
14.  19  ten  thousand  words  iu  an  (unknown)  ton. 
14.  22  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to  them  that 
14.  23  all  speak  with  tongues,  and  there  come 
14.  26  hath  a  doctrine,  hath  a  tongue,  hath  are. 
14.  27  If  any  man  speak  in  an  (unknown)  tongue 
14.  3c,  and  forbid  not  to  speak  witli  tongues 

Phil.    2.  11  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus 
Jas.     1  26  If  any  man.  .bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but 

3     5  the  tongue  is  a  littlo  member,  and  boast. 

3    6  And  the  tongue  (is)  a  fire,  a  world  of  ini. 

3    6  so  is  the  tongue  among  our  members,  that 

3.  8  tho  tongue  can  no  man  tame ;  (it  is)  an 

1  Pe.   3  re  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and 

1  Jo.   3. 18  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue 

Rev.    5.    9  out  of  every  kindred .  and  tongue,  andpe. 

7.    9  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,  stood 

10. 11  many  peoples,  and  nations,  and  tongues 

11.  y  they  of  the  people,  and  kindreds,  and  to. 

13.  7  over  all  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nati. 

14.  6  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  pe. 

16.  ic  and  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain 

17.  15  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and  tongues 

3.  Dialect,  5mAe*cTo?  dialektos. 

Acts  1. 19  as  that  field  is  called  iu  their  proper  ton. 
2.  8  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue,  wh. 
21.40  he  spake  unto  (them)  in  the  Hebrew  ton. 
22.   2  heard  that  lie  spake  in  the  Hebrew  tong. 

26. 14  saying  iu  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Saul,  Saul 

TONGUES,  (other,  Hebrew)— 

I.  One  of  another  or  different  tongue  jTep6yKasaao$. 
1  C0.14.  21  With.. other  tongues  and  other  lips  will 

%Hcbraically,  in  the  Hebrew,  kfipotio-ri  hebraisti. 
John  5.    ?  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  B. 
Key.   9.  11  whose  name  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  (is) 
16.  16  into  a  place  called  iu  the  Hebrew  tongue 


1  Sa. 
Job 


Psa. 


13- 
16. 
19. 
29. 
41. 
3- 


TONGUE,  to  hold  the  — 

I.TVj  still,  silence,  non  hasah,  3. 

Amos  6.  10  Hold  thy  tongue ;  for  we  may  not  make 
2.  To  keep  or  remain  silent,  u5!?  charash,  5. 

Esth.  7.    4  if  we  had  been  sold .  .1  had  held  my  ton. 

Job  6.  24  Teach  me,  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue,  and 
13.  19  if  I  hold  my  tongue,  I  shall  give  up  the 

Hab.  1. 13  holdest  thy  tongue  when  the  wicked  de. 
TOO  — 
[Sec  Par,  hard,  heavy,  high,  much,  strong,  superstitious]. 

TOO  much  — 
Sufficiency,  *3  dai. 

Esth.  1. 18  Thus,  .too  much  contempt  and  WTath 

TOOK  in  hunting,  that  which  he  — 
Hunting,  jwovision,  venison,  TjS  tsayid. 

Provi2.  27  roasteth  not  that  which  he  took  in  hunt. 
TOOL  — 
1. Destroying  weapon,  sword,  axe,  Tin  chereb. 

Exod2o.  25  if  thou  lift  up  thy  tool  upon  it,  thou  hast 
2.  Vessel,  73  keli. 

1  Ki.  6.    7  nor  ax  (nor)  any  tool  of  iron  heardin  the 

TOOTH,  teeth  — 

1,  A  tooth,  ]&  shen. 

Gen. 49.  12  Hiseyes.  .red  with  wine,  andhis  teeth  wh. 
Exod  21.  24  Eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for 
21.  27  tooth,  or  his  maid  servant's  tooth;  he  sh. 

21.  27  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his  tooth's  sake 
Lev.  24.  20  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth :  as  he  hath 
Numn.  33  the  flesh  (was)  yet  between  their  teeth 
Deut.19.  21  tooth  for  tooth  ,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for 

32.  24  will  alsosend  the  teethofbeasts  upon  them 

2.  13  with  a  flesh  hook  of  three  teeth  in  his  ha. 
4.  io  and  the  teeth  of  the  young  lions,  arebro. 

14  Wherefore  do  I  take  my  flesh  in  my  teeth 
9  he  gnasheth  upon  me  withhis  teeth,  infue 
to  and  I  am  escaped  with  the  skin  of  my  tee. 
17  and  plucked  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth 
14  his  face?  his  teeth  (are)  terrible  round  ab. 
7  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly 
35.  16  they  gnashed  upon  me  with  their  teeth 
37.  12  and  gnasheth  upon  him  with  his  teeth 

57.  4  whose  teeth  (are)  spears  and  arrows,  and 

58.  6  Break  their  teeth,  O  God,  in  their  mouth 
112. 10  shall  gnash  with  his  teeth,  and  meltaway 
124.   6  hath  not  given  us  (as)  a  prey  to  their  teetli 

Prov.  10.  26  As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to 
25.  19  (is  like)  a  broken  tooth,  and  a  foot  out  of 
30. 14  a  generation  whose  teeth  (are  as)  swords 

Song.  4.   2  Thy  teeth,  .like  a  flock,  .shorn,  which  ca. 

6.  6  Thy  teeth  (are)  as  a  flock  of  sheep  which 
Jer.  31.  29  and  the  cbildren's  teeth  are  set  on  edge 

31.  30  eateth  the  sour  grape,  his  teeth  shall  be 
Lam.  2.  16  they  hiss  and  gnash  the  teeth  ;  they  say 

3.  16  He  hath  also  broken  my  teeth  with  gravel 
Eze.  18.  2  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge  ? 
Dan.    7.    5  three  ribs,  .between  the  teeth  of  it,  and 

7.  7  fourth  beast,  .and  it  had  great  iron  teeth 

7.  19  whose  teeth  (were  of)  iron,  and  his  nails 
Joel     1.    0  whose  teeth  (are)  the  teetli  of  a  lion,  and 
Arnos  4.    6  I  also  have  given  yon  cleanness  of  teeth 
Mic.    3.    5  that  bite  with  then-  teeth,  and  cry,  Peace 
Zech.  9.    7  his  abominations  from  between  his  teeth 

2.A  tooth,  6Bovs  odous. 

Matt  5.  38  An.eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth 

8.  12  there  shall.be  weeping  andgnashing  of  te. 
13.  42,  50  shall  be  wailing  and  guashiug  of  teeth 

22.  13  there  shall  beiweeping' and  gnashing  of  te. 

24.  51  there  shall.be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  te. 

25.  30  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  te. 
Mark  9.18  gnasheth  with  his  teetli,  and  pineth  away 
Lukei3.  28  Thereshall be  weepingaud gnashing  of  te. 
Acts  7.  54  and  they  gnashed  on  him  with  (their)  teeth 
Eev.  9.    8  and  their  teeth  were  as(the  teeth)  of  lions 

TOP  — 

I. Roof,  top,  p»innacle,  33  gag. 
Exod.  30.    3  the  top  thereof,  and  the  sides  thereof  ro. 
37.  26  the  top  of  it,  and  the  sides  thereof  round 
Judg  9.  51  and  gat  them  up  to  the  top  of  the  tower 

2  Ki.23. 12  altars  that  (were)  on  the  top  of  the  upper 

Z.Bone,  substance,  CQ^gerem, 

2  Ki.  9.  13  put  (it)  under  him  on  the  top  of  the  stairs 

%,A  cleft,  *pp5  seiph. 

Judg.15.   8  he  went  down  and  dwelt  in  the  top  of  the 

15. 11  went  to  the  top  of  the  rock  Etam,  and  sa. 

Isa.     2.  21  into  the  tops  of  the  ragged  'rocks,  for  fear 

LClear  or  dry  place,  rrr^  tseehiaeh. 

Eze.  24.    7  blood,  .she  set  it  upon  the  top  of  a  rock 

24.  8  I  have  set  her  blood  upon  the  top  of  a  ro. 

26.  4  I  will  also,  .make  her  like  the  top  of  a  ro. 
26.  14  I  will  make  thee  like  the  top  of  a  rock 

5. Foliage,  highest  branch,  rfTBS  tsammerefh. 

Eze.  31.  3  and  his  top  was  among  the  thick  boughs 
31.  10  hath  shot  up  his  top  among  the  thick  bo. 
31. 14  neither  shoot  up  their  top  among  the  th. 

6.  Head,  top,  vvh  rosh. 

Gen.  S.,  5  first  (day)  of  the  month,  were  the  tops  of 
11.   4  build  us'acity.and  a  tower  whose  top  (may 

25.  12  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven :  and  behold 
28.  18  a  pillar,  and  poured  oil  upon  the  top  of 

Exodi7.  9  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the 
17. 10  Aaron, 'and  Hur,  went  up  to  the  top  of  the 
19.  20  upon  mount  Sinai,  on  the  top  of  the  mo. 


TOP 


995 


TOUCH 


Exodip.  20  Lord  called  Moses  (up)  to  the  top  of  the 

24.  1.7  devouring  live  011  the  top  of  the  mount  in 

25.  32  there  shall  be  an  hole  in  the  top  of  it,  iu 
34.    2  present  thyself  there  to  me  in  the  top  of 

Num.  14.  40  gat  them  up  into  the  top  of  the  mountain 

14.  44  they  presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top 
20. 28  Aaron  died  there  in  the  top  of  the  mount 
21.  20  to  the  top  of  Pisgah,  which  looketh  toward 
23.    9  For  from  the  top  of  the  rocks  I  see  htm 
23. 14  the  field  of  Zophim,  to  the  top  of  Pisgah 
23.  28  Balak  brought  Balaam  unto  the  top  of  P. 

Deuir.  3.  27  Get  thee  up  into  the  top  of  Pisgah,  and 

34.  1  to  the  top  of  Pisgah,  that  (is)  over  against 
Josh. 15.    8  the  border  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  mo. 

15.  9  border  was  drawn  from  the  top  of  the  hill 
Judg.  6.  26  build  an  ?.ltar.  .upon  the  top  of  this  rock 

9.  7  stood  in  the  top  of  mount  Gerizim,  and  li. 
9.  25  set  liars  in  wait  for  him  in  the  top  of  the 
9.  36  there  came  people  down  from  the  top  of 

16.  3  carried  them  up  to  the  top  of  an  hill,  that 

1  Sa.  25. 13  stood  on  the  top  of  an  hill  afarolT,  a  great 

2  Sa.   2.  25  became  one  troop,  and  stood  on  the  top  of 

5.  24  sound  of  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulb. 

15.  32  (when)  David  was  come  to  the  top.  .where 

16.  1  when  David  was  a  little  past  the  top  (of 

1  Ki.  7.  16  to  set  upon  the  tops  of  the  pillars:  the  he. 

7. 17, 19  chapiters  which  (were)  upon  the  top  of 
7. 18  coverthe  chapiters  that(were)  upon  the  t. 
7.  22  upon  the  top  of  the  pillars  (was)lilywork 
7.  35  in  the  top  of  the  base,  .on  the  top  of  the 
7.  41  chapiters  that(were)  on  the  top  of  the  two 
7.  41  chapiters  which  (were)  upon  the  top  of  the 
10.  19  the  top  of  the  throne  (was)  round  behind 
iS.  42  and  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel 

2  Ki.    1.    9  and,  behold,  he  sat  on  the  top  of  an  hill 

1  Ch.14.  15  of  going  iu  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees 

2  Ch.  3.  15  chapiter  that  (was)  ou  the  top  of  each  of 

4. 12,  12  chapiters  which  (were)  on  the  top  of 

25. 12  brought  them  unto  the  top  of  the  rock 

25. 12  cast  them  down  from  the  top  of  the  rock 

Esth.  5.    2  Esther  drew  near,  and  touched  the  top  of 

Joh   24.  24  and  cut  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  corn 

Psa.  72.  i6anhandful.  .upon  the  top  of  the  mountains 

Prov.  3.    2  She  standeth  in  the  top  of  high  places,  by 

23.  34  or  as  he  that  lieth  upon  the  top  of  a  mast 

Song  4.    S  look  from  the  top  of  Amaua,  from  the  top 

Isa.     2.    2  be  established  iu  thetopof  the  mountains 

17.  6  two  (or)  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  up. 
30.  17  as  a  beacon  upon  the  top  of  a  mountain 

42. 11  let  them  shout  from  the  top  of  the  moun. 
Lam.  2.  19  that  faint  for  hunger  in  the  top  of  every 

4.    1  are  poured  out  in  the  top  of  every  street 
Eze.     6.  13  in  all  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and  under 
17.    4  He  cropped  off  the  top  of  his  young  twigs 
17.  22  will  crop  off  from  thetopof  his  youngtw, 

43. 12  Upon  the  top  of  the  mountain  the  whole 
Hos.  4. 13  They  sacrifice  upon  the  tops  of  the  mouu. 
Joel.  2,  5  Like  the  noise  of  chariots  on  the  tops  of 
Amos  1.    2  mourn,  and  the  top  of  Carmel  shall  wither 

g.   3  though  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top 
Mic.    4.    1  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mo. 
IS  ah.  3. 10  were  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  top  of  all  the 
Zech.  4.    2  with  a  howl  upon  the  top  of  it,  and  his  se. 

4.    2  seven  lamps,  which  (are)  upon  the  top  th. 

7.  A  point,  tip,  aKpov  akron. 

Heb.n.  21  aud  worshipped.,  upon  the  top  of  Ins  staff 

8. From  above,  top,  upper  part,  &vo:9ev  anothcn. 
Matt  27.  51  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bo. 
Marki5.  38  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom 
Johni;.  23  without  seam,  woven  from  the  top  tlirou. 

TOP  of  head  or  house  — 
l.Roof,  top,  pinnacles  11  gag. 

1  Sa.  9.  25  communed  with  Saul  upon  thetopof  the  h. 

9.  26  Samuel  called  Saul  to  thetopof  the  house 

2  Sa.  16.  22  spread,  .a  tent  upon  thetopof  the  house 
Isa.   15.    3  on  the  tops  of  their  houses,  and  in  their 

2.  Top  or  Grown  oftliehead,  pate,  "Yp-13  qodqod. 
Deut  28.  35  from .  .thy  foot  unto  the  top  of  thy  head 
33. 16  and  upon  the  top  of  the  head  of  hhn(that 
TOPAZ  — 

1.  Topaz,  emerald,  ht?3  pitdah. 

Exod23. 17  a  sardiusj  a  topaz,  and  a  carhuncle:  (this 
39.  10  a  sardius,  a  topaz,  and  a  carbuncle  :  this 
Joh    28.  19  The  topaz  of  Ethiopia  shall  not  equal  it 
Eze.  28. 13  topaz,  and  the  diamond,  the  beryl,  the  on. 

2.  Topaz,{yem  of  a  yellowish  green  colour),  r  on  d£tov. 
Rev.  21.  20  the  eighth,  beryl;  the  ninth,  a  topaz;  the 

TO'-PHEL,  ten  -mortar. 

A  place  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  over  against  Paran; 

now  called  Tu/ileh,  S.  E.  of  Salt  Sea. 

Deut.  1.    1  between  Paran,  and  T.,  and  Laban,  and 
TOPH'-ET,  .-n?n  altar. 

A  place  in  the  Valley  of  Hinnom  where  sacrifices  were 
offered  and  the  dead  bodies  buried  or  consumed. 

Isa.  30.  33  T.  (is)  ordained  of  old;  yea,  for  the  king 

TO'-PHETH,  TO'-PHET,  nprirr,  ngh; 
The  same  as  the  preceding. " 

2  Ki.23.  10  he  defiled  T.,  which  (is)  in  the  valley  of 
Jer.    7.  31  And  they  have  built  the  high  places  of  T. 
7.  32  Therefore,  .it  shall  no  more  be  called  T. 
7.  32  they  shall  bury  in  T.,  till  there  be  no  pi. 
19.    6  that  this  plaoe  shall  no  more  be  called  T. 

19. 11  they  shall  bury  (them)  in  T.,  till  (there  be) 

19. 12  Thus  will  I.  .(even)  make  this  city  as  T. 


Jer.  19.  1 3  house . .  shall  be  defiled  as  the  place  of  T. 

19. 14  Then  came  Jeremiah  from  T.,  whither  the 
TORCH  — 

X.A  torch,  flame,  Tshlappid, 

Nah.  2.    3  with  flaming  torches  in  the  day  of  his  pr. 
Zech.  12.   6  will  I  make . .  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf 

2.-4  torch,  flashing  fire,  rn^$  peladah. 

Nah.    2.    4  they  shall  seem  like  torches,  they  shall 
3.-4  lamp,  torch,  shining  light,  \afj.irds  lampas. 

John  i3.    3  with  lanterns,  and  torches,  and  weapons 
TORMENT,  tormentor  — 

l.A  trial,  testing,  torment,  ^ao-avia^osbasanismos. 

Rev.   9.    5  their  torment.,  as  the  torment  of  a  scorp. 

14. 11  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up 

iS.   7  so  much  torment  and  sorrow  give  her,  for 

iS.  10  Standing  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  torm. 

18. 15  stand  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  torment 

2.  One  who  tries  or  tests,  inquisitor,  fiaaavto-TTis. 

Matt  18.  34  delivered  him  to  the  tormentors,  till  lie 

3. A  test,  trial,inqui$ition,torme}it,&do-avos  basanos. 

Matt.  4. 24  were  taken  witli  divers  diseases  and  torm. 

Lukeio.  23  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments,  and 

16.  28  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  tor. 

4..1  pruning,  restraining,  restraint,  K6\ao-i$. 

t  Jo.  4.  iS  casteth  out  fear :  because  fearhath  torm. 
TORMENT,  be  tormented,  to  — 
l.To  try,  test,  torment,  fiacravifa  basanizo. 

Matt.  S.    6  sick  of  the  palsy,  grievously  tormented 

8.  29  art  thou  come  hither  to tormentus  before 

Mark  5.    7  adjure  thee  by  God,  that  thou  torment  me 

Luke  8.  28  cried  out.. I  beseech  thee, tonuentmenot 

Rev.    9.    5  that  they  should  be  tormented  five  months 

11. 10  because  these  two  prophets  tormented  th. 

14. 10  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brim. 

20. 10  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever 

2.Haeing  or  sufi cring  evil,  ill  used,  KaKovxov^ievo?. 
Heb.  11.  37  wandered,  .being  destitute,  afflicted,  tor. 

3.  To  be  joined,  bbwdofxai  odunaomai. 

Lukei6.  24  have  mercy.  .1  am  tormented  in  this  flame 

16.  25  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented 

TORN  (in  pieces,  of  or  with  beasts)  — 

1. Something  torn,  nsna  terephah. 

Gen.  31.  39  That  which  was  torn. . I  brought  not  unto 
Exod22. 13  shall  not  make  good  that  which  was  torn 

22.  31  eat  (any)  flesh  (that  is)  torn  of  beasts  in 
Lev.    7.  24  fat  of  that  which  is  torn  with  beasts,  may 

17.  15  torn  (with  beasts,  whether  it  be)  one  of 
22.   8  That  which  dieth  of  itself,  or  is  torn  (with 

Eze.    4.  14  which  dieth  of  itself,  or  is  torn  in  pieces 
44.  31  dead  of  itself,  or  torn,  whether  it  be  fowl 

2.  Filth,  sweepings,  scrapings,  "mo  such  ah.  , 

Isa.     5.  25  their  carcases,  .torn  in  the  midst  of  the 

TORN  in  pieces,  to  be  — 

l.To  be  torn,  trig  tara})h,  2. 

Exod22. 13  If  it  be  torn  in  pieces,  .let  him  bring  it 
Jer.    5.   6  that  goeth  out  thence  shall  be  torn  in  pi. 

2.  To  be  torn,  Fpa  iaraph,  4. 

Gen.  44.  28  I  said,  Surely  lie  is  torn  in  pieces,  and  I 
TORTOISE  — 
Tortoise,  a  species  of  Lybian  lizard,  3>"  tsab. 

Lev.  11.  29  the  weasel,  and  the  mouse,  and  the  tort. 
TORTURED,  to  be  — 
To  be  beaten  toith  clubs,  bastinaded,  rvixiravi^ofiai. 

Heb.  1 1.  35  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance 
TOSS  (self),  be  tossed,  to  — 
l.To  shake  self,  e'i'a  gaash,  7. 

Jer.    5.  22  though  the  waves  thereof  toss  themselves 
2.A  wrapping,  rtsiy  tsenephah. 

Isa.   22. 18  He  will  surely  violently  turn  and  toss  th. 
Z.To  try,  test,  toss,  &ao~avi£u  basanizo. 
"  Matti  4.  24  tossed  with  winds :  for  the  wind  was  con. 

4.  To  be  agitated,  pnri^ofxai  rhipizomai. 

Jas.     1.    6  a  wave . .  driven  with  the  wind,  and  tossed 
TOSSED  to  and  fro,  up  and  down,  to  be  — 
1.7*0  be  driven  away,  ^33  nadaph,  2. 

Prov  21.   6  a  vanity  tossed  to  and  fro  of  them  that  se. 

2.  To  be  shaken,  "i**:  naar,  2. 

Psa.  109.  23  I  am  tossed  up  and  down  as  the  locust 

3.  To  be  tossed,  agitated,  K\vd(ovi£ofj.ai  hluddnizom. 

Eph.    4. 14  be  no  more  children,  tossed  to  andfro,  and 

TOSSLNGS  to  and  fro  — 

Movings,  tossings,  0*7*13  nedudim. 

Job     7.    4  I  am  full  of  tossings  to  and  fro  unto  the 

TOTTER,  to  — 

To  thrust  away,  dovm,  over,  nrn  dachah. 

Psa.  62.    3  ye  shall  be . .  as  a  bowing  wall . .  a  tottering 

TOUCH,  be  touched,  to  — 

l.To  touch,  come  up&n,  plague,  yjj  naga. 

Gen.    3.    3  Ye  shall  not  eat.. neither  shall  ye  touch 
20.    6  therefore  suffered  I  thee  not  to  touch  her 

26. 11  He  thattoucheth  this  man  or  his  wife  sh. 
26.  29  as  we  have  not  touched  thee,  and  as  we 
32.  25  he  touched  the  hollow  of  his  thigh,  and 
32.  32  he  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  in 


Exod  19. 
19. 


Lev. 


Num.  4. 
16. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 

3r- 

Deut  14. 
Josh.  9. 
Judg.  6. 
Ruth  2. 

1  Sa.  10. 

2  Sa.  14. 

„    23- 

1  Ki.   6. 

6. 

19. 

^-  I9' 

2  K1.13. 

1  Ch.16. 
Esth.  5. 
Job     1. 

4- 

5- 
6. 

„  I9* 
Psa.  104. 

105. 

144. 
Prov.  6. 
Isa.     6. 

Jer.  12. 
Lam.  4. 

4- 

Eze.  17. 
Dan.  8. 


Hos.  4. 
Amos  9. 
Hag.   2. 

Zech.  2. 


12  or  touch  the  border.,  whosoever  toucheth 

13  There  shall  not  an  hand  touch  it,  but  he 
37  whatsoever  toucheth  the  altar  shall  be  holy 
29  whatsoever  toucheth  them  shall  be  holy 

2  if  a  soul  touch  any  unclean  thing,  whether 

3  if  he  touch  the  uncleanuessof  man,  what. 

18  every  one  that  toucheth  them  shall  be  ho. 
27  ^Tiatsoever  shall  touch  the  flesh  thereof 

19  the  flesh  that  toucheth  any  unclean  (th.) 
21  the  soul  that  shall  touch  any  unclean  (th.) 

3  their  carcaseshallye  not  touch,  they  (are) 
24  whosoever  toucheth  the  carcase  of  them 

26  every  one  that  toucheth  them  shall  be  un, 

27  whoso  toucheth  their  carcase  shall  be  un^ 

31  whosoever  doth  touch  them,  when  they 
36  that  which  toucheth  their  carcase  shall  be 
39  he  that  toucheth  the  carcase  thereof  shall 

4  she  shall  touch  no  hallowed  thing,  nor  co. 

5  whosoever  toucheth  his  bed  shall  wash  his 

7  he  thattoucheth  the  flesh  of  him  that  hath 

10  whosoever  toucheth  any  thing  that  was 

1 1  whomsoever  he  toucheth  that  hath  the  is. 

12  the  vessel  of  earth  that  he  toucheth  which 
19  whosoever  toucheth  her  shall  be  unclean 

21  whosoever  toucheth  herbed  shall  washhis 

22  whosoever  toucheth  anythingthat  shesat 

23  when  he  toucheth  it,  he  shall  be  unclean. 
27  whosoever  toucheth  those  things  shall  be 

4  whoso  toucheth  any  thing  (that  is)  uncL 

5  whosoever  toucheth  any  creeping  thing 

6  The  soul  which  hath  touched  any  such  sh. 
15  they  shall  not  touch(any)  holy  thing,  lest 
26  touch  nothing  of  theirs,  lest  ye  be  consu. 
11  He  that  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any 

13  Whosoever  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any 
"16  whosoever  toucheth  one  that  is  slain  with 
iS  him  that  touched  a  bone,  or  one  slain,  or 

21  he  that  toucheth  the  water  of  separation. 

22  whatsoever  the  unclean  (person)  toucheth 
22  the  soul  that  toucheth  (it)  shall  be  uncle, 
19  whosoever  hath  touched  any  slain,  purify 

8  not  eat  of  their  flesh,  nor  touch  their  dead 
19  now  therefore  we  may  not  touch  them 
21  touched  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  ca. 

9  the  young  men  that  they  shall  not  touch 

26  a  baud  of  men,  whose  hearts  God  had  to. 

10  and  he  shall  not  touch  thee  any  mora 

7  the  man  (that)  shall  touch  them  niust  be 

27  the  wing  of  the  one  touched  thei^-je)wall 
27  touched  the  other,  .touched  one  another 

5  an  angel  touched  him,  andsaid  unto  him 
7  and  touched  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Ar. 

21  the  man  was  let  down,  and  touched  the 

22  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my  pro. 
2  Esther  drew  near,  and  touched  the  top 

11  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch  all 
5  put  forth  thiue  hand  now,  and  touch  his 
5  it  toucheth  thee,  and  thou  art  troubled 

19  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee 
7  The  things(that)my  soul  refused  to  touch. 
21  for  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me 

32  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they  smoke 

15  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my  pr. 

5  touch  the  mountains,  and  they  shall  sm. 

29  whosoever  toucheth  her  shall  not  be  inn. 

7  tills  hath  touched  thy  lips;  and  thine  in. 

11  go  ye  out  from  thence,  touch  no  unclean 

14  that  touch  the  inheritance  which  I  have 

14  so  that  men  could  not  touch  their  garment 

15  (it  is)  unclean  ;  depart,  depart,  touch  not 
10  wither  when  the  east  wind  toucheth  it? 

5  came  from  the  west,  .and  touched  not  the 
18  but  he  touched  me,  and  set  me  upright 
21  Gabriel,  .touched  me  about  the  time  of 
10  an  hand  touched  me,  which  set  me  upon 

16  (one)  like .  .the  sons  of  men  touched  my 
18  there  came  again  and  touched  me  (one) 

2  they  break  out,  and  blood  toucheth  blood 
5  the  Lord,  .(is)  he  that  toucheth  the  land 

12  with  his  skirt  do  touch  bread,  or  pottage 

13  If  (one  that  is)  unclean,  .touch  any  of  th. 

8  he  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple 


2.  To  (cause  to)  touch,  yji  naga,  5. 

Jer.     1.    9  LORD  put  forth  his  hand,  and  touched  my 

3.  .To  hiss,  touch,  pwy  nashaq,  5. 

Eze.    3.  13  the  noise  of  the  wings,  .that  touched  one 

4.  To  smell,  refresh,  touch,  rni  ruach,  5. 

Judgi6.    9  as  a  thread,  .is  broken  when  it  toucheth 

5.  To  touch,  hold  on,  embrace,  airro^ai  haptomai. 

Matt. 3.    3  Jesus  put  forth  (his)  hand,  and  touched 

8.  15  he  touched  her  hand,  and  the  fever  left' 

9.  20  came  behind  (him),  and  touched  the  hem 
9.  21  If  I  may  but  touch  his  garment,  I  shall 
9.  29  Then  touched  he  their  eyes,  saying,  Ace. 

j4.  36  that  they  might  only  touch  the  hem  ofhis. 
14.  36  as  many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly 
17.    7  Jesus  came  aud  touched  them,  and  said 
20.  34  had  compassion  (on  them),  and  touched 
Mark  1.  41  putforthOds)hand,andtouthedhim,and 
3. 10  they  pressed  upon  him  for  to  touch  him 
5.  27  came  in  the  press  behind,  and  touched 
5.  28  If  I  may  but  touch  his  clothes,  I  shall  be 
5. 30  turned,  .and  said,  Who  touched  my  clo.? 

5.  31  thronging  thee,  andsayest  thou,  Who  to. 

6.  56  besought  him  that  they  might  touch  if  it 

6.  56  as  many  as  touched  him  were  made  whole 

7.  33  and  he  spit,  and  touched  his  tongue 

8.  22  bring  a  blind  man. .and  besought  him  to  t. 
to.  13  brought  young  children.. that  he  should  t. 


TOUCHED 


996 


TOWN 


Luke  5.  13  he  put  forth  (his)  hand,  and  touched  him 

6.  19  the  whole  multitude  soughtto  touch  him 
7. 14  he  came  and  touched  the  bier:  and  theythat 

7.  39  what  manner  of  woman  (this  is)  toucheth 

8.  44  and  touched  the  border  of  his  garment 
8.  45  Jesus  said,  Who  touched  me?  When  all 
8.  45  [press  (thee),  and  sayest  thou,  Who  touch.] 
8.  46  Somebody  hath  touched  me :  for  I  perce. 
8. 47  for  what  cause  she  had  touched  him,  and 

18.  15  brought. infants,  that  he  would  touch  th. 
22.  51  And  he  touched  his  ear,  and  healed  him 

John2o.  17  Touch  me  not;  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended 

1  Co    7     1  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman 

2  Co.  6. 17  touch  not  the  unclean  (thing);  and  I  will 
Col     2  21  Touch  not ;  taste  not ;  handle  not 

1  Jo.  5. 18  and  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not 

6.  To  touch,  arrive  at,  come  to,  diyco  thigo. 

Heb.  11.28  kept  the  passover . .  lest  he . .  should  touch 
12.  20  if  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain 

7.  To  lead  down  to  {land),  Kardyca  katago. 

Acts  27.    3  And  the  next  (day)  we  touched  at  Sidon 

8.  To  touch,  touch  lightly,  irpovtyavw  prospsauO. 

Luke  1 1.  46  ye  yourselves  touch  not  the  burdens  with 

9.  To  feel,  handle,  grope  after,  ^/y}\a(pdw  pselaphad. 
Heb.12. 18  the  mount  that  might  be  touched,  and 

TOUCHED  with  the  feeling  of,  to  be  — 
To  feel  with,  o-v/j.ira84cd  sumpatheo. 

Heb.  4. 15  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
TOUCHING,  (as)  — 
1.  Unto,  concerning,  in  reference  to,  bi<  el. 

Jer.  22. 11  For  thus  saiththe  Lord  touching  Shallum 

2.0n,  over,  concerning,  iy_  al. 

Jer.     1. 16  I  will  utter  my  judgments,  .touching  all 

3.  Upon,  over,  eirl  (ace.)  epi. 

2  Th.  3.   4  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  touching 

4.  Down  to,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Kom.11.  28  as  touching  the  election .  .beloved  for  the 
Phil.   3.    5  Hebrews  ;  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharis. 
3.    6  touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in 

^.Concerning,  irepi  (gen.)  peri. 

Acts  24.  21  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  I 

26.    2  answer  for  myself . .  touching  all  the  thin. 
Col.    4. 10  touching  whom  ye  received  commandme. 

TOW  — 

l.Tow,  refuse  of  flax,  Tciyi  neoreth. 

Judg  16.   9  as  a  thread  of  tow  is  broken  when  it  ton. 

Isa.     1.  31  the  strong  shall  be  as  tow.  and  themaker 

2. Flax,  r\r\v?5  pishtah. 

Isa.  43.  17  they  are  extinct,  they  are  quenched  as  tow 
TOWARD  — 
1.  Unto,  toward,  bxel. 

Gen.  30.  40  toward  the  ring  straked,  and  all  the  bro. 
%At  the  side  of,  S*n  etsel. 

1  Sa.  20.  41  David  arose  out  of  (a  place)  toward  the 

3.  The  way  of,  7)"vi  derek. 

1  Ki.  8. 44  shall  pray  unto  the  Lord  toward  the  city 

8.  48  pray  unto  thee  toward  their  land  which 
18. 43  Go  up  now,  look  toward  the  sea.     And 

2  Ki.25.   4  and  (the  king)  went  the  way  toward  the 

2  Ch.  6. 34  they  pray  unto  thee  toward  this  city  wh. 
6.  38  pray  toward  their  land,  which  thou  gav. 

Eze.  20.  46  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south 
40.  6  unto  the  gate  which  looketh  toward  the 
40. 20  outward  court  that  looked  toward  the  no. 
40.  22  measure  of  the  gate  that  looketh  toward 
40.  24  toward  the  south,  .a  gate  toward  the  so. 
40.  27  a  gate  in  the  inner  court  toward  the  south 
40. 27  measured,  .toward  the  south  an  hundred 
40.  32  brought  me  into  the  inner  court  toward 
40.  44  and  their  prospect  (was)toward  the  south 
40.  44  one.. (having)  the  prospect  toward  the  no. 
40.  45,  46  chamber,  whose  prospect  (is)  toward 

41. 11  one  door  toward  the  north,  and  another 

41. 12  at  the  end  toward  the  west  (was)  seventy 
42.  1  [brought  me  forth.,  the  way  toward  the  n. 
42.  7  toward  the  outer  court  on  the  fore  part 
42. 10  the  wall  of  the  court  toward  the  east,  over 
42.  11  the  chambers  which  (were)  toward  the 
42.  12  doors  of  thechambers  that  (were)  toward 
42. 12  directly  before  the  wall  toward  the  east 

42.  15  toward  the  gate  whose  prospect  (is)  towa. 

43.  1  (even)  the  gate  that  looketh  toward  the 
43.    4  way  of  the  gate  whose  prospect  (is)  toward 

4.  Over  against,  bxo  mul. 

Exodi8.  19  Be  thou  for  the  people  to  God  ward,  that 
28.  27  toward  the  fore  part  thereof,  over  against 
39.  20  toward  the  fore  part  of  it,  over  against 
0.  Before,  133  neged. 

Dan.  6. 10  his  windows  being  open .  .toward  Jerusa. 
G.Unlo,  up  to,  "iy  ad. 

Gen.  13. 12  and  Lot.,  pitched  (his)  tent  toward  Sodom 

7.  With,  oy  im. 

Dan.   4.    2  that  the  high  God  hath  wrought  toward 

8.  On  the  face  of,  'jg-'jy  al-pene. 

Gen.  18.  16  the  men  roseup..aud  looked  toward  Sod. 

19.  28  towardSodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  toward 
Nuni2i.  20  Pisgah,  which  looketh  toward  Jeshimon 

23.  28  top  of  Peor,  that  looketh  toward  Jeshim. 
2  Sa.  15.  23  passed  over,  toward  the  way  of  the  wild. 


9. To,  unto,  toward,  els  eis. 

Matt28.  1  as  it  began  to  dawn  toward  the  first  (day) 
Lukex?,  21  layethup treasure,  .and  is  not  rich  towa. 

13.  22  teaching  aud  journeying  toward  Jerusal. 
John  6. 17  went  over  the  sea  toward  Capernaum.  And 
Acts    1. 10  while  they  looked  stedfastly  toward  hea. 

20.  21  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward 

24. 15  have  hope  toward  God,  which  they  them. 

27.  40  hoised  up  the  mainsail,  .and  made  towa. 

28. 14  desired  to  tarry,  .so  we  went  toward  Rome 

Rom.  1.  27  burned  in  their  Inst  one  toward  another 

5.    8  But  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us 

12.  16  (Be)  of  the  same  mind  one  toward  14.  19. 
2  Co.  1.  16  of  you  to  be  brought  on  my  way  toward. 

2.  8  that  ye  would  confirm  (your)  love  toward 
7,  15  inward  affection  is  more  abundant  towa. 
9.    8  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  toward  you 

10.    1  myself,  .being  absent  am  bold  toward  you 

13.  4  live  with  him  by  the  power  of  God  toward 
Gal.  2.  8  same  was  mighty  in  me  toward  the  Gent. 
Eph.    1.    8  Wherein  he  hath  abounded  toward  us  in 

1  Th.  3.  12  in  love  one  toward  another,  and  toward 

4. 10  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren 

2  Th.  1.  3  charity  of  every  one  of  you  all  toward  ea. 
Phm.  5  faith,  which  thou  hast,  .toward  all  saints 
Heb.   6.  10  love,  which  ye  have  showed  toward  his 

1  Pe.   3.  21  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward 

2  Pe.    3.    9  in  long  suffering  [to]  us  ward,  not  willing 

10. In,  among,  even. 

Luke  2.  14  andonearth peace,  good  will  towardmen 
Rom.  15.    5  like  minded  one  toward  another  according 
1  Jo.    4.    9  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  toward 

W.Upon,  over,  eirl  (dat)  epi. 

Mark  6.  34  and  was  moved  with  compassion  [toward] 
12.  Upon,  over,  up  to,  eiri  (ace.)  epi. 

Matti2.  49  he  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  his  d. 

14.  14  and  was  moved  with  compassion  toward 
Rom.  11.  22  but  toward  thee,  goodness,  if  thou  conti. 

1  Co.  7.  36  behaveth  himself  uncomely  toward  his  vi. 
Eph.  2.  7  in  (his)  kindness  toward  us  through  Christ 
Heb.    6.    1  from  dead  works,  and  of  faith  toward  G. 

13. Down  to,  Kara  (ace.)  kata. 

Acts    8.  26  Arise,  and  go  toward  to  the  south,  unto 

27. 12  lieth  toward  the  south  west  and  north  we. 

Phil.    3.  14  I  press  toward  the  mark  forthe  prize  of 

14.  Toward,  Trp6s  (ace.)  pros. 

Luke24.  29  Abide  with  us  ;  for  it  is  toward  evening 
Acts  24.  16  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towa. 

2  Co.   1.  12  conversation. . more  abundantly  to  you  wa. 

1.  18  our  word  toward  you  was  not  yea  and  nay 

3.  4  And  such  trust  have  we.  .to  God  ward 
7.    4  Great  (is)  my  boldness  of  speech  toward 

Phil.    2.  30  to  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me 

Col.    4.    5  Walk  iu  wisdom  toward  them  that  arewi. 

1  Th.  1.  8  your  faith  to  God  ward  is  spread  abroad 
4. 12  That  ye  may  walk  honestly  toward  them 
5. 14  support  the  weak,  be  patient  toward  all 

Phm.        5  faith,  which  thou  hast  [toward]  the  Lord 

1  Jo.   3.  21  (then)  have  we  confidence  toward  God 

15.  Over,  for,  in  behalf  of ,  virep  (gen.)  huper. 

2  Co.   7.    7  when  he  told,  .your  fervent  mind  toward 
TOWEL  — 

Linen  towel,  (Lat.  linteum),  Xevriov  lention. 
Johni3    4  He  riseth  from  supper,  .and  took  a  towel 
13.   5  to  wipe,  .with  the  towel  wherewith  he 

TOWER,  (high)  — 

l.A  watch  tower,  fina  bachon. 

Jer.     6.  27  I  have  set  thee,  .a  tower,  .a  fortress  am. 
%A  watch  tower,  pns  bachun. 

Isa.  23. 13  they  set  up  the  towers  thereof;  they  rais. 
3.-4  watch  tower,  jna  bachan. 

Isa.    32.  14  the  forts  and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  fo. 

4.7*0  cause  to  be  great,  Vij  gadal,  5. 

2  Sa.  22.  51  the  tower  of  salvation  for  his  king,  and 

5. A  great  tower,  Vu?  migdal. 

Gen.  11.   4  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city,  and  a  tower 

ti.    5  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the 

35.  21  spread  his  tent  beyond  the  tower  of  Edar 

Judg.  8.   9  When  I  come.  .1  will  break  down  this  to. 

8. 17  beat  down  the  tower  of  Penuel,  and  slew 

9.  46,  47,  49  all  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shech. 

o.  51  there  was  a  strong  tower  within  the  city 

9.  51  and  gat  them  up  to  the  top  of  the  tower 

9.  52  unto  the  tower,  .the  door  of  the  tower 

2  Ki.  9.  17  there  stood  a  watchman  on  the  tower  in 

17.  9  from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the 

18.  8  from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the 

2  Ch.  14.  7  walls  and  towers,  gates  and  bars,  (while) 
26.  9  Moreover  TJzziah  built  towers  in  Jerusal. 
26.  10  Also  he  built  towers  in  the  desert,  and 

26,  15  to  be  on  the  towers  and  upon  the  bulwark 

27.  4  in  the  forests  he  built  castles  and  towers 
32.   5  raised  (it)  up  to  the  towers,  and  another 

N©h.    3.    1  unto  the  tower  of  Meah..unto  the  tower 
3.  11  repaired  the  otherpiece,  and  the  tower  of 

3. 25  tower  which  lieth  out  from  the  king's  hi. 

3. 26  toward  the  east,  and  the  tower  that  lieth 
3.  27  over  against  the  great  tower  that  lieth  out 

12.  38  from  beyond  the  tower  of  tho  furnaces 

12.  39  the  tower  of  Hananeel,  and  the  tower  of 

Psa.  48.  12  go  round  about  her :  tell  the  towers  tlte. 

61.    3  a  shelter,  .(and)  a  strong  tower  from  the 

Provj8.  10  The  name  of  the  Lord  (is)  a  strong  tower 

Song  4.    4  Thy  neck  (is)  like  the  tower  of  David  buil. 


Song  7.    4  as  a  tower  of  ivory . .  thy  nose  (is)  as  the  to. 

8.  10  I  (am)  a  wall,  and  my  breasts  like  towers 

Isa.     2. 15  upon  every  high  tower,  and  upon  every 

5.    2  built  a  tower  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  also 

30.  25  the  great  slaughter,  when  the  towers  fall 

33.  18  where  (is)  he  that  counted  the  towers? 

Jer.   31.  38  from  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  gate 

Eze.  26.    4  shall  destroy . .  and  break  down  her  towers 

26.  9  with  his  axes  he  shall  break  down  thy  to. 

27.  11  and  the  Gammaddims  were  in  thy  towers 
Mic.  4.  8  thou,  O  tower  of  the  flock,  the  strong  hold 
Zech  14.  10  (from)  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  ki. 

6.  A  great  tower,  VijD  migdol. 

2  Sa.  22.  51  (He  is)  the  tower  of  salvation  for  his  king 

Eze.  29.  10  from  the  tower  of  Syene  even  unto  the  bo. 

30.   6  from  the  tower  of  Syene  shall  they  fall  in 

7. Bulwark,  *v^o  matsor. 

Hab.    2.    1  I  wilL.setmeup  on  the  tower,  and  will  wa. 

8.  High  place,  h$y  ophel. 

2  Ki.  5.  24  And  when  he  came  to  the  tower,  he  took 

^.Corner,  ngs pinnah. 

Zeph.  1.  16  Aday  of.  .alarm,  .against  the  high  towers 
3.    6  I  have  cut  off  the  nations :  their  tower 

10. High  place,  tower,  3tyz>  misgab. 

1  Sa.  22.    3  my  high  tower,  and  my  refuge,  my  savi. 

Psa.  18.    2  horn  of  my  salvation,  (and)  my  high  tow. 

144.    2  my  high  tower,  and  my  deliverer ;  my  sh. 

W.A  tower,  castle,  irvpyos  purgos. 

Matt2i-33  digged  a  winepress  in  it,  and  built  a  tow. 
Marki2.  1  built  a  tower,  and  let  it  out  to  husband. 
Luke  13.    4  those  eighteen,  upon  whom  the  tower  in 

14.  28  which  of  you,  intending  to  build  a  tower 

TOWER  OF  DAVID,  itl  V3J9  migdal  David. 
Part  of  the  castle  in  Zion. 

Song.  4.    4  Thy  neck(is)like  the  tower  of  David  buil. 
TOWER  OF  EDAR,  Tiy  r?3D  migdal  Eder, 
Between  Bethlehem  and  Hebron. 

Gen.  35.  21  spread  his  tent  beyond  the  tower  of  Edar 
TOWER  OF  THE  FLOCK,  *ny  S"i3p  migdal  Eder. 
Same  as  the  preceding,  or  in  Zion. 

Mic.  4.  8  0  tower  of  the  flock . .  unto  thee  shall  it  co. 
TOWER  OF  THE  FURNACES,  Dn^nn  Vup    migdal 

hattannurim. 
On  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  near  the  valley  gate. 

Neh.  3.  11  Hashub.  .repaired,  .the  tower  of  the  fur. 
12.  38  from  beyond  the  tower  of  the  furnaces  even 

TOWER  OF  HANANEEL,  Sx3jn  blJB  migdal  Hananeel. 
On  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  near  the  sheep  gate. 

Neh.   3.    1  they  sanctified  it. .unto  the  tower  of  Han. 
12.  39  And  from  above,  .the  tower  of  Hananeel 

Jer.  31.  38  from  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  gate 

Zech.  14.  10  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  king's  wine 
TOWER  OF  LEBANON,  fn^R  Sxp  migdal  hal-leban. 
On  the  E.  of  Lebanon. 

Song.  7.    4  thy  nose  (is)as  thetower  of  Lebanon  whi. 
TOWER  OF  MEAH,  nxen  "rn;c  migdal  ham-meah. 
On  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  between  the  sheep  gate  and 
the  tower  of  Hananeel. 

Neh.    3.    1  even  unto  the  tower  of  Meahthey  sancti. 
12.  39  from  above.,  the  tower  of  Meah,  even  unto 

TOWER  OF  PENTJEL,  ^xu?  hftfi  migdal  Penuel. 
In  Penuel,  a  city  of  Gilead. 

Judg.  8. 17  he  beat  down  the  tower  of  Penuel,  and 
TOWER  OF  SHECHEM,  D33>  ^3Q  migdal  Shechem. 
In  Shechem,   a  city  of  Ephraim. 

Judg.  9.  46  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  heard 
9. 47,  49  ithat  all  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shec. 
TOWER  OF  SYENE,  nrip  Vwo  migdal  Seveneh. 
In  Syene,  a  city  in  the  S.  of  Egypt. 

Eze.  29.  10  from  the  tower  of  Syene  even  unto  the  bo. 
30.    6  from  the  tower  of  Syene  shall  they  fall  in 
TOWN,  (small,  without  walls)  — 
1. Daughter,  ns  bath- 

Josh  15.  45  Ekron,  with  her  towns  and  her  villages 

15.  47,  47  with  her  towns  and  her  villages 

17. 11.  11,  11,  11,  11,  11  and  her  towns,  and  the 

17.  16  of  Beth-shean  and  hertowns,  and.  .of  the 

Judg  11.  26  Heshbou  and  hertowns.  .Aroer  and  her  t. 

1  Ch.  2.  23  and  the  towns  thereof .  .threescore  cities 

7.  28  Beth-el  and  the  towns . .  towns . .  towns . .  t. 

8.  12  built  Ono  and  Lod,  with  the  towns  there. 

2  Ch.i3>  19*  *9>  J9  "with  the  towns  thereof 

2.  Hamlets,  rvnn  chavvoth. 

Nums".  41  went  and  took  the  small  towns  thereof 
Josh  13.  30  the  towns  of  Jair,  which  (are)  in  Bashan 
1  Ki.   4.  13  to  him  (pertained)  the  towns  of  Jair  the 
1  Ch.  2.  23  took  Geshur,  and  Aram,  with  the  towns 

3.  Court,  village,  "isn  chatser. 

Gen.  25. 16  their  names,  by  their  towns,  and  by  their 

4.  A  city,  (place  of  stir),  TJJ  ir. 

Deut.  3.    5  cities. . besides  unwalled  towns  a  great  ma. 

1  Sa.  16.   4  the  elders  of  the  town  trembled  at  his  co. 
23.    7  by  entering  into  a  town  that  hath  gates 
27.    5  let  them  give  me  a  place  in  some  town  iu 

Esth.  9.  19  Jews,  .that  dwelt  in  the  unwalled  towns 

Jer.    19.  15  bring  upon  this  city  and  upon  all  her  to. 

Hab.    2.  12  Woe  tn  him  that  buildetha  town  with 


TOWN 


997 


TRANSGRESSION 


5.^4  city  {with  waits),  Tp  qir. 

Josh.  2.  15  her  house  (was)  upon  the  town  wall,  and 
6.  Open  villages.,  niTi?  perazoth. 

Zech.  2.    4  shall  be  inhabited  (as)  towns  without  wa. 

7. A  town  {without  walls),  K&fxt)  home. 

Matt  10.  ii  into  whatsoever  city  or  town  ye  shall  en. 

Mark  8.  23  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  out  of  the  town 

8.  26  Neither  go  into . .  town,  nor  tell . .  in  the  to. 

8.  27  Jesus  went,  .into  the  towns  of  Cesarea  P. 
Luke  5.  17  which  were  come  out  of  every  town  of  G. 

9.  6  went  through  the  towns,  preaching  the 
9.  12  they  may  go  into  the  towns  and  country 

John  7.  42  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  where  Da. 
11.    1  Bethany,  the  town  of  Mary  and  her  sister 
11.  30  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into  the  town,  but 
S.A  small  town  or  village,  ku>p.qtto\is  kGmopolis. 

Mark  1.  38  Let  us  go  into  the  next  towns,  that  I  may 
TOWN  clerk  — 

A  writer,  scribe,  clerk,  ypafifiarev?  grammateus. 
Acts  19.  35  when  the  town  clerk  had  appeased  the  p. 

TRA-CHO-Nl'-TIS,  Tpaxortris. 

A  small  rocky  part  of  the  tetrarehy  of  Philip,  on  the  E. 
of  the  Jordan,  having  the  Arabian  desert  on  the  E.  and 
Auranitis  and  Gaulonitis  on  the  S.W.,  and  extending 
from  the  territory  of  Damascus  on  the  N.  to  near  Bostra 
on  the  S.;  now  called  Lejah,  anciently  Argob,  and  is 
nearly  in  the  centre  of  ancient  Bashau. 

Luke  3.    1  Philip  tetrarch.. of  the  region  of  T.,  and 
TRADE,  (by,  to)  — 
l.To  be  men  of  cattle,  nipo  'ty^N  vn  hay  it,  anslie  miq. 

Gen.  46.  32  for  their  trade  hath  been  to  feed  cattle 
46.  34  Thy  servants'  trade  hath  been  about  cat. 

'l.To  give,  jm  nathan. 

Eze.  27.  12  with  silver.,  and  lead,  they  traded  in  thy 
27. 13  they  traded  the  persons  of  men  and  ves. 
27.  14  They  of  the  house  of  Togarmah  traded  in 

27.  17  they  traded  in  thy  market  wheat  of  Min. 

3.  To  go  about,  trade,  "nD  sachar. 

Gen.  34.  10  dwell  and  trade  ye  therein,  and  get  you 
34.  21  let  them  dwell  in  the  land,  and  trade  th. 

4.  To  work,  toil,  labour,  ipyd£o/j.cu  ergazomai. 

Matt25.  16  wentand  traded  with  the  same,  and  made 
Rev.  iS.  17  as  many  as  trade  by  sea,  stood  afar  off 

TRADITION  — 

A  giving  over,  handing  down,wapdSo<rtsp>c(,radosis- 
Mattis.   2  Why  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  trad- 
1  q.   3  Why  do  ye  also  transgress . .  by  your  trad. 
6  commandment.,  of  none  effect  by  your  tr. 
3  eat  not,  holding  the  tradition  of  the  elders 
5  according  to  the  tradition  of  the  elders 

8  ye  hold  the  tradition  of  men,  (as)  the  wa. 

9  reject,  .that  ye  may  keep  your  own  tradi. 
13  of  none  effect  through  your  tradition,  wh. 

1.  14  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  traditions 
8  after  the  tradition  of  men,  after  therudi. 
15  hold  the  traditions  which  ye  have  been 
3.   6  not  after  the  tradition  which  he  received 

TRAITOR  — 

One  who  gives  over,  forth,  or  up,  wpoBoTTjs  prodotes. 

Luke  6.  16  and  Judas  Iscariot,  which  also  was  thetr. 

2  Ti.    3.   4  Traitors .  .high  minded,  lovers  of  pleasures 

TRAFFIC,  trafficker,  (to)  — 

l.A  pedlar,  hawker,  a  Canaanite,  JJ233  kenaan. 
Isa.   23.    8  whose  traffickers  (are)  the  honourable  of 
Eze.  17.    4  cropped  off.  .and  carried  it  into  aland  of  t. 

2.  Traffic,  "in-P  mischar. 

1  Ki.  10.  15  of  the  merchantmen,  and  of  the  traffic 

3.  To  go  about,  trade,  i~D  sachar. 

Gen.  42.  34  deliver  you.,  and  ye  shall  traffic  in  the  land 
4. Merchandise,  traffic,  n^ri  rekullah. 

Eze.  28.    5  By  thy  great  wisdom.,  by  thy  traffic  hast 

28.  18  hast  defiled. .by  the  iniquity  of  thy  traffic 
TRAIN  — 

I. Force,  b:n  chayil. 

1  Ki.10.    2  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  very  great  train 
2. Hem,  skirt,  train,  bw  shut. 

Isa.    6.    1  the  Lord  sitting,  .and  his  train  filled  the 
TRAIN  up,  trained,  to  — 
1. Trained,,  instructed,  ^in  chant k. 

Gen.  14.  14  when  Abram  heard,  .he  armed  his  trained 
2,  To  train,  dedicate,  give  instruction,  ^:n  clutnak. 

Prov22.    6  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go 
TRAMPLE  (under  foot),  to  — 
1.  To  tread  or  trample  down,  D3"\  ramas. 

Psa.  91.  13  the  dragon  shalt  thou  trample  under  feet 

Isa.  63.    3  I  will.,  trample  them  in  my  fury;  and  their 

2,To  tread  or  trample  down,  Kara-iraTea  katapateo. 

Matt  7.    6  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet 
TRANCE  — 
Ecstasy,  trance,  a  standing  out,  ^Kcraa-ts  ekstasis. 

Acts  10.  10  while  they  made  ready,  he  fell  into  atra. 
11.    5  in  a  trance  I  saw  a  vision,  A  certain  vessel 
22. 17  I  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a  trance 
TRANaDTLLITY  — 
Rest,  ease,  security,  rn|?B>  shelevah. 

Dan.    4.  27  may  be  a  lengthening  of  thy  tranquillity 


15- 
Mark  7. 

7- 

7- 
7- 
7- 

Gal. 

Col. 

2TI1. 


TRANSFER  in  a  figure,  to  — 

To  transfer  in  a  figure, ^raax'0^aT'iiu>  inetaschema. 

1  Co.   4.    6  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  to  myself 
TRANSFIGURED,  to  be  — 

To  be  trails  formed,  fX€ra/j.op(p6ofj.ai  metamorphoom. 
Matt  1 7.  2  was  transfigured  before  them ;  and  his  face 
Mark  9.  2  taketh..andhe  was  transfigured  before  them 

TRANSFORM  self,  be  transformed,  to  — 

1.  To  be  transformed,  p.erap.op(p6o/j.ai  inetamorp>hoo. 

Rom  12.    2  be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  yo. 

2.  To  transfer  in  a  figure,  juerao-x^MaTi^w  metccsclte. 

2  Co.  11.  13  transforming  themselves  into  the  apostles 

11.  14  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel 
11. 15  if  his  ministers  also  be  transformed  as 

TRANSGRESS  (the  law),  to  — 

l.To  deal  treacherously,  deceive,  "U3  hagad. 

1  Sa.  14.  33  Ye  have  transgressed :  roll  a  great  stone 
Psa.  25.  3  let  them  be  ashamed  which  transgress  wi. 
Hab.  2.    5  he  transgresseth  by  wine,  (he  is)  a  proud 

2.  To  trespass,  b%0  maal. 

1  Ch.  2.    7  Achar.. transgressed  in  the  thing  accursed 

5.  25  they  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their 

2  Ch.12.    2  because  they  had  transgressed  against  the 

26.  16  for  he  transgressed  against  the  LORD  his 
28.  19  made  Judah  naked,  and  transgressed  sore 
36.  14  people  transgressed  very  much  after  all 

Ezra  10.  10  Ye  have  transgressed,  and  have  taken  st. 

Neh.  1.  8  (If)  ye  transgress,  I  will  scatter  you  abro. 
13.  27  transgress  against  our  God  in  marrying 

Prov  16. 10  his  mouth  transgresseth  not  in  judgment 

3.  To  do,  15^  abad. 

Jer.     2.  20  and  thou  saidst,  I  will  not  transgress 
i.To pass  over,  T3»  abar. 

Nunii4.  41  Wherefore  now  do  ye  transgress  the  com. 
Deut26.  13  have  not  transgressed  thy  commandments 
Josh.  7. 11  they  have  also  transgressed  my  covenant 

7.  15  because  he  hath  transgressed  the  covenant 
23.  16  When  ye  have  transgressed  the  covenant 

Judg.  2.  20  this  people  hath  transgressed  my  coven. 

1  Sa.  15.  24  I  have  transgressed  the  commandment  of 

2  Ki.  18.  12  transgressed  his  covenant,  (and)  all  that 
2  Ch.24.  20  Why  transgress  ye  the  commandments  of 
Esth.  3.  3  Why  trausgressest  thou  the  king's  comm. 
Psa.  17.  3  purposed  (that)  my  mouth  shall  nottran. 
Isa.  24.  5  they  have  transgressed  the  laws,  changed 
Jer.  34.  18  I  will  give  the  men  that  have  transgressed 
Dan.  9.  11  all  Israel  have  transgressed  thy  law,  even 
Hos.    6.    7  they,  like  men,  have  transgressed  the  co. 

8.  1  because  they  have  transgressed  my  cove. 

5.  To  step  over,  transgress,  rebel,  revolt,  yws  pasha. 

1  Ki.  8.  50  wherein  they  have  transgressed  against 
Ezra  10.  13  we  are  many  that  have  transgressed  in 
Prov  28.  21  for  a  piece  of  bread  (that)  man  will  trail. 
Isa.  43.  27  thy  teachers  have  transgressed  against 

66.  24  the  men  that  have  transgressed  against 

Jer.     2.    8  the  pastors  also  transgressed  against  me 

2.29  ye  all  have  transgressed  against  me,  saith 

3. 13  thou  hast  transgressed  against  the  Lord 

33.    8  whereby  they  have  transgressed  against 

Lam.  3.  42  We  have  transgressed  and  have  rebelled 

Eze.     2.    3  they  and  their  fathers  have  transgressed 

18.  31  Cast  away.  .all.  .whereby ye  have  transg. 

20.  38  I  will  purge  out . .  them  that  transgress  ag. 
Hos.    7.  13  because  they  have  transgressed  against 
Amos  4.    4  Come  to  Bethel,  and  transgress;  atGilgal 
Zeph.  3.  11  wherein  thou  hast  transgressed  against 

Q.To  go  beyond,  transgress,  t?'espass,  irapafSaivu). 
Matt  13.    2  Why  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  trad. 
*5     3  Why  do  ye  also  transgress  the  command. 

2  John    9  Whosoever  [transgresseth],  and  abideth 

7. A  transgressor,  trespasser,  irapa.$a.T-qs  parabates. 
Rom.  2.  27  by.  .circumcision  dost  transgress  the  law? 

8.  To  come  or  go  over,  or  beyond,  irapepxo/j.at  parer. 

Lukeis.  29  neither  transgressed  I  at  any  time  thy  co. 

9.  To  do  lawlessness,  iroieu  avop.iav  poied  anomian. 

1  Jo.   3.    4  Whosoever  committeth  sin  transgresseth 
TRANSGRESS,  to  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  go  over,  -ay  abar,  5. 

1  Sa.   2.  24  ye  make  the  Lord's  people  to  transgress 
TRANSGRESSING,  transgression,  transgressor  — 
l.To  deal  treacherously,  deceive,  "IJ3  bagad. 

Psa.  59.  s  be  not  merciful  to  any  wicked,  transgress. 
119.  158  I  beheld  the  transgressors,  and  was  grie. 
Prov.  2.  22  the  transgressors  shall  be  rooted  out  of 
11.  3  the  perverseness  of  transgressors  shall  d. 
11.  6  transgressors  shall  be  taken  hi  (their  own) 
13.  2  but  the  soul  of  the  transgressors.. violence 
13.  15  but  the  way  of  transgressors  (is)  hard 

21.  18  a  ransom  for  the  righteous,  and  the  tran. 
22. 12  he  overthroweth  the  words  of  the  transg. 
23.  28  and  increaseth  the  transgressors  among 

2.  Trespass,  7;_D  maal. 

Josh.22.  22  or  if  in  transgression  against  the  Lord 

1  Ch.  9.    1  were  carried  away,  .for  their  transgression 

10.  13  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  which  he 

2  Ch.29.  19  Ahaz.  .did  cast  away  in  his  transgression 
Ezra   9.    4  the  transgression  of  those  that  had  been 

10.   6  he  mourned  because  of  the  transgression 

3.  To  go  over,  -ny  abar. 

T>tWiy.  2  wrought  wickedness.. in  transgressing  his 
Prov  26.  10  The  great  (God). .  re  wardeth  transgressors 


4.  To  step  over,  transgress,  rebel,  revolt,  Vw%  pasha* 


Isa. 


Ban 
Hos. 


37.  38  the  transgressors  shall  be  destroyed  tog. 
51.  13  (Then)  will  I  teach  transgressors  thy  ways 
1.  28  the  destruction  of  the  transgressors  and 
46.  8  bring  (it)  again  to  mind,  O  ye  transgress. 
48.  8  wast  called  a  transgressor  from  the  womb 
53.  12  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors 

53. 12  and  made  intercession  for  the  transgres. 

59. 13  In  transgressing  and  lying  against  the  L. 
8.  23  the  transgressors  are  come  to  the  full,  a 

9  but  the  transgressors  shall  fall  therein 


Amos  4.    4  at  Gilgal  multiply  transgression ;  andbr. 

5.  Transgression,  rebellion,  y^?^J^sAa. 

Exod23.  21  for  he  wiH  not  pardon  your  transgressions 

34.    7  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and. 

Lev.  16. 16  because  uf  their  transgressions  in  all  their 

16.  21  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sins 
Nunii4.  18  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression,  and 
Josh  24. 19  he  will  not  forgive  your  transgressions 
1  Sa.  24.  11  (there  is)  neither  evil  nor  transgression  in 
1  Ki.  8.  50  all  their  transgressions  wherein  they  have 
Job  7.  21  why  dost  thou  not  pardon  my  transgress. 
8.   4  he  have  cast  them  away  for  their  transg. 

13.  23  make  me  to  know  my  transgression  and 

14.  17  My  transgression  (is)  sealed  up  in  a  bag 
31.  33  If  I  covered  my  transgressions  as  Adam 

33.  9  I  am  clean  without  transgression,  I  (am) 

34.  6  my  wound  (is)  incurable  without  transg. 

35.  6  (if)  thy  transgressions  be  multiplied,  what 

36.  9  their  transgressions  that  they  have  exce. 
Psa.     5.  10  in  the  multitude  of  their  transgressions 

19.  13  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great  transg. 
2=,.    7  Remember  not.  .my  transgressions,  ace. 
1  Blessed  (is  he  whose)  transgression  (is)  fo. 

5  I  will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the 
1  The  transgression  of  the  wicked  saith  wi. 

8  Deliver  me  from  all  my  transgressions 

1  Have  mercy  upon  me.  .blot  out  my  trans. 
3  I  acknowledge  my  transgressions  :  and 
3  not  (for)  my  transgression,  nor  (for)  my  sin 

3  (as  for)  our  transgressions,  thou  shalt  pu. 
32  Then  will  I  visit  their  transgression  with 

12  (so)  far  hath  he  removed  our  transgressions 
17  Fools,  because  of  their  transgression  and 

13  The  wicked  is  snared  by  the  transgression 

9  He  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh 

19  He  loveth  transgression  that  loveth  strife 

11  (it  is)  his  glory  to  pass  over  a  transgress. 

2  For  the  transgression  of  a  land  many  (are) 

24  Whoso.. saith,  (It  is) no  transgression,  the 

6  In  the  transgression  of  an  evil  man  (there) 
16  When  the  wicked  are  multiplied,  transg. 
22  a  furious  man  aboundeth  in  transgression 

20  transgression  thereof  shall  be  heavy  upon 

25  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions. 
22  I  have  blotted  out.  .thy  transgressions 

1  for  your  transgressions  is  your  mother 
5  But  he  (was)  wounded  for  our  transgress. 

5  for  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he 

4  children  of  transgression,  a  seed  of  false. 
1  show  my  people  then- transgression,  and 

12  our  transgressions  are  multiplied,  .our 
20  unto  them  that  turn  from  transgression 

6  because  their  transgressions  are  many 

5  afflicted  her  for  the  multitude  of  her  tra. 

14  The  yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  bound 
22  done  unto  me  for  all  my  transgressions 

11  polluted  any  more  with  all  their  transgr. 

22  All  his  transgressions  that  he  hath  com. 
2S  turneth  away  from  all  his  transgressions 

30  Repent,  and  turn,  .from  all  your  transg. 

31  Cast  away  from  you  all  your  transgressi. 
24  in  that  your  transgressions  are  discovered 
10  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins  (be) 

1 2  deliver  him  in  the  day  of  his  transgression 

23  nor  with  any  of  their  transgressions,  but 

24  according  to  their  transgressions,  have  I 
12  the  daily  (sacrifice)  by  reason  of  transgr. 

8.  13  transgression  of  desolation,  to  give  botli 

9.  24  finish  the  transgression,  and  to  make  an 
Amos  1.    3,  6,  9,  11,  13  For  three  transgressions,  .and 

2.  i,  4,  6  For  three  transgressions,  .and  forfo. 

3.  14  day  that  I  shall  visit  the  transgressions 

5.  12  For  I  know  your  manifold  transgressions 
Mic     t.    5  For  the  transgression.  .What  (is)  the  tra. 

1. 13  for  the  transgressions  of  Israel  were  found 
3.    8  to  declare  unto  Jacob  his  transgression 

6.  7  shall  I  give  my  first  born  (for)  my  transg. 

7.  18  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  renin. 

6.  Lawless,  &vo/xos  anomos. 

Markis.  28  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors 
Luke22.  37  lie  was  reckoned  among  the  transgressors 

7 .Transgression,  trespass,  ■napafia.ais  parabasis. 
Rom.  4.  15  for  where  no  law  is.  .no  transgression 

5.  14  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgres. 
Gal.     3. 19  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions 
1  Ti.    2.  14  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  transg. 
Heb.  2.    2  every  transgression  and  disobedience  rec. 

9. 15  for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions 

8.  Transgressor,  trespass,  irapa^drns  p>arabates. 
Gal.     2.  18  if  I  build  again.. I  make  myself  a  transg. 
Jas.     2.    9  are  convinced  of  the  law  as  transgressors 
2. 11  thou  art  become  a  transgressor  of  the  law 

TRANSGRESSION  of  the  law,  to  fall  by  — 
1.  Lawlessness,  avofiia  anomia. 

1  Jo.    3.   4  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law 


32- 
32- 

36- 

39- 
SI- 
S'- 

59- 
65. 
89. 

103. 

107. 
Prov  12. 


Jer. 
Lam 


Dan. 


33- 
33- 
37- 
39- 


TRANSLATE 


998 


TREASURE 


2.  To  transgress,  trespass,  irapa&alvu  parabaino. 
Acts    i.  25  from  which  Judas  hy  transgression  fell 

TRANSLATE,  translation,  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  pass  over,  T5J/  abar,  5. 

2  Sa.    3.  10  To  translate  the  kingdom  from  the  house 

2.  A  putting  over,  translation,  fierddetrts  metathesis. 

Heb.  11.    5  before  his  translation  he  had  this  testim. 

Z.  To  put  over,  translate,  fj.e6i<rrn/j.t  methistemi. 
Col.     1.  13  translated  (us)  into  the  kingdom  of  his 

4.To  transpose,  translate,  (xerariBrgxt  metatithemi. 

Heb.  11.    5  Enoch  was  translated . .  God  had  transla. 
TRANSPARENT  — 
Appearing  through,  transparent,  Statyaviis  diaph. 

Rev.  21.  21  (was)  pure  gold,  as  it  were[transparent] 

TRAP  — 

1.  Snare,  E^fiD  moqesh. 

Josh. 23. 13  they  shall  be  snares  and  traps  unto  you 
Psa.  69.  22  for  (their)  welfare,  (let  it  become)  a  trap 

2.Trap,  rns^D  malkodeth. 

Job   18.10  The  snare  (is)  laid  for  him.  .and  a  trap 

Z.Corruption,  destruction,  trap,  T\*np V  nucshchith. 

Jer.     5.  26  wicked . .  they  set  a  trap,  they  catch  men 
A.Hunting,  trap,  snare,  6r}pa  thera. 

Romn.    g  Let  their  table  be  made  asnare,andatrap 
TRAVAIL  — 
l.To  bear,  bring  forth,  it,  yalad. 

Gen.  38.  27  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  time  of  her  travail 

Jer.  13.  21  sorrows  take  thee,  asawoman  in  travail? 

^.Labour,  toil,  LEj/  amal. 

Eccl.  4.    4  I  considered  all  travail,  and  every  right 
4.   6  than  both  the  hands  full  (with)  travail 
Isa.    53. 11  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul 
Z.Business,  travail,  |;jj/  inyan. 

Eccl.  1. 13  this  sore  travail  hath  God  given  to  the 

2.  23  his  days  (are)  sorrows,  and  his  travail  gr. 

2.  26  but  to  the  sinner  he  giveth  travail,  to  ga. 

3.  10  I  have  seen  the  travail  which  God  hath 

4.  8  (is)  also  vanity,  yea,  it  (is)  a  sore  travail 
5. 14  But  those  riches  perish  by  evil  travail 

4.  Weariness,  travail,  n^fl  telaah. 

Exodi8.   8  all  the  travail  that  had  come  upon  them 
Nuni  20.  14  Thou  knowest  all  the  travail  that  hath 
Lam.  3.    5  and  compassed  (me)  withgalland  travail 

6.7V/,  labour,  weariness,  /j.6xQos  mochthos. 

1  Th.  2.    9  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  tra. 

2  Th.  3.   8  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night 
*].Pain,  labour,  sorrow,  whiv  odin. 

1  Til.  5.    3  cometh.  .as  travail  upon  a  woman  with 
TRAVAIL  (in  or  with  pain  together),  to  — 
l.To  travail  in  birth,  S^n  chabal,  3. 

Psa.    7. 14  he  travaileth  with  iniquity,  and  hath  co. 

2.  To  be  pained,  bring  forth,  'rn,  hm  chul,  chil. 

Isa.   23.  4  I  travail  not,  nor  bring  forth  children 

54.  1  thou  (that)  didst  not  travail  with  child 

66.  7  Before  she  travailed,  she  brought  forth 

66.  8  for  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought 

3.7*0  be  pawned,  Sin  chul,  la. 

Job    15.  20  The  wicked  man  travaileth  with  pain  all 
4.2*0  bear,  bring  forth,  17;  yalad. 

Gen.  3s-  16  and  Rachel  travailed,  and  she  had  hard 
38.  28  it  came  to  pass,  when  she  travailed,  that 

1  Sa.    4.  19  she  bowed  herself  and  travailed  ;  for  her 

Mic.    5.    3  until  the  time  (that)  she  whicli  travaileth 
5.7*0  be  in  pxiin,  a^ivcj  0,1  inn. 

Gal.     4.  27  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travailest 
B.Tofeelpain  together,  travail,  trwa^ivto  suno&ino. 

Rom.  8.  22  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together 
TRAVAIL,  (in  birth),  to  he  in  — 
1.7*0  bring  forth,  t'iktco  tijeto. 

John  16.  21  A  woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sor. 
2.7*0  be  in  pain,  w5it/u  Sdmd, 

Gal.    4.  19  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth  again  until  C. 

Rev.  12.   2  being  with  child  cried,  travailing  in  birth 

TRAVAIL,  woman  in,  travailing  woman  — ' 
1.7*0  be  sick,  weak,  nhn  chalah. 

Jer.    4.  31 1  have  heard  a  voice  as  of  a  woman  in  tr. 
2.7*0  bear,  bring  forth,  nS;  yalad. 

Psa.  48.  6  Fear  took  hold . .  as  of  a  woman  in  travail 
Isa.  13.  8  be  in  pain  as  a  woman  that  travaileth,  th. 
2i.  3  as  the  pangs  of  a  woman  that  travaileth 
42.  14  will  I  cry  like  a  travailing  woman;  I  will 
Jer.  6.  24  hath  taken  hold,  .as  of  a  woman  in  travail 
22.  23  upon  thee,  the  pain  as  of  a  woman  in  tra. 
30.    6  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail  with  eh.? 

30.  6  hands  on  his  loins,  as  a  woman  in  travail 

31.  8  and  her  that  travaileth  with  child  together 

49.  24  sorrows  have  taken  her  as  of  a  woman  in  t. 

50.  43  (and)  pangs  as  of  a  woman  in  travail 
Hob.  13. 13  sorrows  of  a  travailing  woman  shall  come 
Mic.    4.    g  pangs  have  taken  thee  as  a  woman  in  tr. 

4. 10  Be  in  pain . .  like  a  woman  in  travail,  for 
TRAVEL,  companions  in  — 

^^''''■''"srti/rr.t'r  traveller, <rvv€K$'nfj.ossu7iekdemos. 
Acts  19.  29  having  caught.  .Paul's  companions  in  tr. 


TRAVEL  (with,  into  a  far  country)  to  — 
1.7*0  go  on,  walk,  TjVn  halak,  3. 

Prov.  6.  11  So  shall  thy  poverty  corneas  one  that  tr. 

2.7*0  go  up  and  down,  "nSn  halak,  7. 

Prov  24.  34  So  shall,  .poverty  come  (as)  one  that  tra. 

3. 7*o  be  from  home,  absent,  airo5nfj.e<a  apodemed. 
Matt  25.  14  Eor..as  a  man  travelling  into  a  farcouu. 

4.7*0  come  or  go  through,  Btepxof.iai  dierchomai. 
Acts  11.  19  travelled  as  far  as  Phenice,  and  Cyprus 

5. Fellow  absentee  or  traveller,  owe /c 877^0$  sunek.- 
2  Co.  8. 19  chosen  of  the  churches  to  travel  with  us 

TRAVELLER,  travelling  (company)  — 
1.7*0  travel,  go  on  one^s  way,  tin  arach. 

Isa.   2i.  13  O  ye  travelling  companies  of  Dedanim 

2.  Traveller,  wayfarer,  rnx  arach. 

Job   31.  32  (but)  I  opened  my  doors  to  the  traveller 

3. 7*o  go  on  the  path,  nrpru  "rprr  ludak  nethibah. 
Judg.  5.    6  the  travellers  walked  through  by  ways 

4.  A  traveller,  one  going  on,  tqti  helek. 

2  Sa.  12.   4  there  cams  a  traveller  unto  the  rich  man 

5.7*0  wander,  lay  down,  7\'%i  tsaah. 

Isa.  63.    1  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength 

TRAVERSING  — 

7*o  traverse,  wound  about,  ^1'^  sarak,  3. 

Jer.     2.  23  a  swift  dromedary  traversing  her  ways 

TREACHEROUS  (dealer,  man)  — 

1.7*0  deal  treacherously,  deceive,  152  ba.gad. 

Isa.   2i.    2  the  treacherous  dealer  dealeth  treachero. 

24.  16  the  treacherous  dealers,  .the  treacherous 

Jer.    3.   8  yet  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  feared 

3. 11  justified  herself  more  than  treacherous  J. 

9.    2  adulterers,  an  assembly  of  treacherous  m. 

2.Ti'eac/ieries,  ni"U3  bogedotk. 

Zeph.  3.    4  Her  prophets  (are)  light. .  treacherous  pe. 

3.  Treacherous,  "1U3  bagod. 

Jer.    3.   7  And  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  saw  (it) 
3. 10  yet  for  all  this  her  treacherous  sister  Ju. 

TREACHEROUSLY,  to  deal  or  depart  — 
7*o  deal  treacherously,  deceive,  "na  bagad. 

Judg.  9.  23  the  men  of  Shechem  dealt  treacherously 
Isa.   21.    2  dealer  dealeth  treacherously,  audthe  sp. 
24.  16  dealt  treacherously,  .dealt  very  treacher. 
33.    1  dealesttreacherously,andtheydealtnott. 
33     1  shalt  make  an  end  to  deal  treacherously 
33.    1  they  shall  deal  treacherously  with  thee 
48.    8  knew  that  thou  wouldest  deal  very  treac. 
Jer.     3.  20  Surely  (as)  a  wife  treacherously  departeth 
3.  20  so  have  ye  dealt  treacherously  with  me 

5.  11  have  dealt  very  treacherously  against  me 
12.  1  are  all  they  happy  that  deal  very  treache. 
12.   6  even  they  have  dealt  treacherously  with 

Lam.  1.    2  all  her  friends  have  dealt  treacherously 
Hos.   5.    7  They  have  dealt  treacherously  against  the 

6.  7  there  have  they  dealt  treacherously  agai. 
Hab.  1.  13  lookest.  .upou  them  that  deal  treachero. 
Mai.    2. 10  why  do  we  deal  treacherously  every  man 

2.  11  Judah  hath  dealt  treacherously,  and  an 
2. 14  against  whom  thou  hast  dealt  treachero. 
2.  15  let  none  deal  treacherously  against  the 
2. 16  take  heed,  .that  ye  deal  not  treacherously 
TREACHERY  — 
Deceit,  ncrjp  mirmah. 

2  Ki.  9.  23  Joram..said  to  Ahaziah.. treachery, .  Aha. 
TREAD  (down,  out,  under,  upon),  to  — 
1.7*0  tread  down,  Dia  bus. 

Psa.  44.    5  through  thy  name  will  we  tread  them  un. 

60. 12  he  fit  is  that)  shall  tread  down  our  enem. 

108.  13  he  (it  is  that)  shall  tread  down  our  enem. 

Isa.    14.  25  upon  my  mountains  tread  him  under  foot 

63.    6  I  will  tread  down  the  people  in  mine  an. 

Zech  10.    5  which  tread  down  (their  enemies)  in  the 

3.7*0  tread  down,  Dia  bus,  da. 

Isa.   63.  18  our  adversaries  have  trodden  down  thy  s. 
Jer.   12.  10  they  have  trodden  my  portion  under  foot 

4. 7*o  tread  on,  ot^a  bashas. 

Amos  5. 11  Forasmuch  therefore  as  your  treading  (is) 

5.7*o  tread  down,  thresh,  B>M  dusli. 

Hos.  10. 1 1  And  Ephraim . .  loveth  to  tread  out  (the 
Dan.  7.  23  and  shall  tread  it  down,  and  break  it  in 

6. To  tread,  thresh,  0**!  dish, 

Deut25.   4  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  treadeth  out 
7.  To  tread  on,  2^'oceed,  TT?  darak. 

Deut.  1.  36  give  the  land  that  lie  hath  trodden  upon 

11.  24  Every  place  whereon . .  your  feet  shall  tre. 

11.  25  upon  all  the  land  that  ye  shall  tread  upon 

33.  29  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon  their  high  pla. 
Josh.  1 .   3  Every  place . .  your  foot  shall  tread  upon 

14.   9  the  land  whereon  thy  feet  have  trodden 
Judg  5.  21  O  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  stre. 

9.  27  trode  (the  grapes),  and  made  merry,  and 

20.43  trode  them  down  with  ease  over  against 
1  Sa.   5.    5  tread  on  the  threshhold  of  Dagon  in  Ash. 
■  Job     9.    8  and  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  6ea 

22. 15  the  old  way  which  wicked  men  have  trod. 

24.  n  tread  (their)  wine  presses,  and  suffer  thi. 


Psa.  91.  13  Thou  shalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder 
Isa.    16.  10  treaders  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in  (their) 

63.    2  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wi. 

63.  3  I  have  trodden.. I  will  tread  them  in  mi. 
Jer.   25.  30  he  shall  give  a  shout,  as  they  that  tread 

4S.  33  none  shall  tread  with  shouting;  (their)  sh. 

Lam.   1.  15  hath  trodden  the  virgin,  the  daughter  of 

Amos  4. 13  treadeth  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth 

Mic.    1.    3  and  tread  upon  the  high  places  of  the  ea. 

5.  5  when  he  shall  tread  in  our  palaces,  then 

5.  6  and  when  he  treadeth  within  our  borders 

6.  15  thou  shalt  tread  the  olives,  but  thou  shalt 
8.7*0  cause  to  tread  on  or  proceed,  tit?  darak,  5. 

Judg 20.  43  trode  them  down  with  ease  over  against 

Job   23.    8  The  lion's  whelps  have  not  trodden  it,  nor 
9.7*0  tread  on,  r\in  hadak. 

Job  40. 12  and  tread  down  the  wicked  in  their  place 
10.7*0  tread  down,  n"?p  salah. 

Psa.119. 118  Thou  hast  trodden  down  all  them  that 
11.7*0  tread  down,  Dpj;  asas. 

Mai.    4.    3  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked ;  for  they 
12.7*0  tread,  trample  down ,  ton  ramas. 

2  Ki.  7.  17,  20  the  people  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate 
9.  33  threw  her  down.. and  he  trode  her  under 
14.    9  passed  by  a  wild  beast,  .and  trode  dovm 

2  Ch.25. 18  passed  by  a  wild  beast,  .and  trode  down 

Psa.     7.    5  let  him  tread  down  my  life  upon  the  earth 

Isa.  1.  12  required  this  at  your  hand,  to  tread  my 
26.  6  The  foot  shall  tread  it  down,  (eveu)  the 
41.  25  (upon)  mortar,  and  as  the  potter  treadeth 

Eze.  26. 11  With  the  hoofs,  .shall  he  tread  down  all 
34.  18  but  ye  must  tread  down  with  your  feet 

Mic.    5.    8  who,  if  he  go  through,  both  treadeth  do. 

Nah.  3. 14  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  brick 
13.7*0  make  a  treading,  DC-19  D-b"  sum  onirmas. 

Isa.    10.   6  to  tread  them  down  like  the  mire  of  the 
14.  7*o  tread  or  trample  down,  Karawar^a:  katapteo. 

Lukei2.    1  insomuch  that  they  trode  8.  5.  Mt.5.  13. 
15.7*0  tread,  trample,  iraTcw  pateo. 

Luke  10.  19  I  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  serpents 

Rev.  19.  15  he  treadeth  the  wine  press  of  the  fierceness 
TREAD  out  the  corn,  under  foot,  to  — 
1.7*0  tread  down  or  out,  n?p  salah,  3. 

Lam.  1.  15  Lord  hath  trodden  under  foot  all  my  niigh. 
2.  To  tread  down  or  out,  aAoctw  aload. 

1  Co.    9.    9  muzale.  .the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn 

1  Ti.    5.  18  not  muzzle  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  thee. 

3.7*0  tread  or  trample  down,  KarairaTeco  ktttapateo. 
Heb.  10.  29  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  G. 

4.7*0  tread,  trample,  irarea)  pateo. 

Rev.  11.    2  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot 

TREADER,  treading  (down)  — 

1.7*0  tread  on,  proceed,  go  on  the  way,  373  darak. 
Neh.  13.  15  treading  wine  presses  on  the  sabbath,  and 
Isa.    16. 10  the  treaders  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in 
Amos  9.  13  the  treader  of  grapes  him  that  soweth  se. 

2.  Treading  down,  npUT?  melntsah. 

Isa.  22.   5  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  treading  down 
3. A  treading,  C!p~>D  mirmas. 

Isa.     7.  25  it  shall  be.  .for  the  treading  of  lesser  cat. 
TREASON  — 
A  bond,  conspiracy,  ~W\)  qeslier. 

1  Ki.16.  20  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Zimri,  and  his  tre. 

2  Ki.  11.  14  rent  her  clothes,  and  cried,  Treason,  treas. 
2  Ch.23.  13  rentherclothes.and  said, Treason,  treason 

TREASURE,  (hid)  — 

l.-A  treasure,  thing  laid  up,  "i^\x  otsar. 

Deut. 28.  12  Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  his  good  trea. 
32.  34  (Is) not  this,  .sealed  up  among  my  treas. 

1  Ki.  7.  51  did  he  put  among  the  treasures  of  the  ho. 

14.  26  he  took  away  the  treasures  of  the  house 

14.  26  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  he 

15.  18  (that  were)  left  in  the  treasures  of  the  ho. 

15.  18  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 

2  Ki.12.  18  the  gold  (that  was)  found  in  the  treasures 

14.  14  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 

16.  8  gold  (that  was)  found,  .in  the  treasures  of 
iS.  15  found,  .in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  hou. 
20.  13  and  all  that  was  found  in  his  treasures 
20.  15  there  is  nothing  among  my  treasures  that 

24.  13  he  carried  out  thence  all  the  treasures  of 
24. 13  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  aud 

1  Ch.26.  20  Ahijah  (was)  over  the  treasures  of  the  ho. 

26.  20  and  over  the  treasures  of  the  dedicated 
26.  22  (which  were)  over  the  treasures  of  the  ho. 

26.  24  the  son  of  Moses,  (was)  ruler  of  the  treas. 
26.26  over  all  the  treasures  of  the  dedicated  th. 

27.  25  over  the  king's  treasures  (was)  Azmaveth 
29.    8  gave  (them)  to  the  treasure  of  the  house 

2  Ch.  5.    1  put  he  among  the  treasures  of  the  house 

8.  15  concerning  any  matter,  or  concerning,  .t. 
12.   9  took  away  the  treasures  of  the  house  of 
12.    9  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house;  ho 
16.    2  out  of  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  L. 

25.  24  thetreasuresoftheking'shouse.thehosta. 
36.  18  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  LORD,  and 
36.  iS  the  treasures  of  the  king,  and  of  his  pri. 

Ezra    2. 69  gave  after  their  ability  unto  the  treasure 
Neh.    7.  70  The  Tirshatha  gave  to  the  treasure  a  th. 

7.  71  gave  to  the  treasure  of  the  work  twenty 
Neh.  10.  38  to  the  chambers,  into  the  treasure  house 

12.  44  appointed  over  the  chambers  for  the  treas. 


TREASURE 


999 


TREES 


Job  38. 
Prov.  s. 


Isa. 


3°- 

33- 

39- 

39- 

4S- 

Jer. 

10. 

15- 

17- 

20. 

48. 

49. 

.■JO- 

S'- 

si- 

Eze. 

2«. 

Dan 

I. 

Eos 

IS- 

Mic 

6. 

2.  Treasur 

Ezra 

■>• 

6. 

7- 

22  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  treasures  of  the 
22  or  hast  thou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  hail 
21  substance  ;  and  I  will  fill  their  treasures 
2  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing 
16  thangreat  treasure,  and  trouble  therewith 

6  The  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue 
20  (There  is)  treasure  to  be  desired  and  oil 

7  neither  (is  there  any)  end  of  their  treasu. 
6  their  treasures  upon  the  bunches  of  cam. 

6  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  Iris  treasure 

2  and  all  that  was  found  in  lus  treasures 

4  there  is  nothing  among  my  treasures  that 

3  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness 
13  bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of  his  treasu. 
13  thy  treasures  will  I  give  to  the  spoil  wit. 

3  I  will  give  thy  substance  (and)  all  thy  tre. 

5  the  treasures  of  the  kings  of  Judah  will  I 

7  trusted  in  thy  works  and  in  thy  treasures 

4  that  trusted  in  her  treasures,  (saying),  Who 
37  a  sword  (is)  upon  her  treasures;  and  they 
13  0  thou,  .abundant  in  treasures,  thine  end 

16  bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of  his  treasu. 
4  gotten  gold  and  silver  into  thy  treasures 
2  brought  the  vessels  into  the  treasure  ho. 

15  he  shall  spoil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant 
10  Are  there  yet  the  treasures  of  wickedness 

ies,  pp3  ginzin. 

17  let  there  be  search  made  in  the  king's  tr. 
1  the  house  of  the  rolls,  where  the  treasures 

20  bestow  (it)  out  of  the  king's  treasure  ho. 

0.  Strength,  riches,  jon  chosen. 

Prov  15.  6  In  the  house  of  the  righteous  (is)  much  tr. 
Eze.  22.  25  they  have  taken  the  treasure  and  precious 

4.  Hidden  0?  secret  thing,  Jis^o  matmon. 

Gen.  43.  23  God . .  hath  given  you  treasure  in  your  sa. 
Job  3.  21  and  dig  for  it  more  than  for  hid  treasures 
Prov.  2.  4  and  searchest  for  her  as  (for)  hid  treasur. 
Jer.  41.   8  we  have  treasures  in  the  field,  of  wheat 

5.  Treasures,  Q^md  mikmannim. 

Dan.  1 1.  43  he  shall  have  power  over  the  treasures  of 

6.  Treasures,  stores,  r03|pp  miskenoth. 

Exod.  1. 11  And  they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure  cit. 

7.  Ready,  prepared,  chief,  ~y\w,  athud. 

Isa.   10. 13  I.  .have  robbed  their  treasures,  and  I  ha. 

8.  To  cover,  ]$y  saphan. 

Deut  33.  19  they  shall  suck . .  treasures  hid  in  the  sand 

9.  Treasury,  treasure,  6no~a.vp6s  thesauros. 

ilatt,  2. 11  when  they  had  opened  their  treasures,  th. 

6. 19  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon 

6. 20  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven 
6.  21  where  your  treasure  is,  there  willyourhe. 

12.  35  A  good  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of 

12.  35  an  evil  man,  out  of  the  evil  treasure,  bri. 

13.  44  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  imto  treas. 
13.  52  which  bringeth  forth  out  of  his  treasure 
19.  21  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven;  and 

Mark ro.  21  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven,  and 
Luke  6.  45  A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of 

6.  45  [an  evil  man  out  of  the  evil  treasure  of  his] 
12.  33  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not 
12.  34  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  he. 
iS.  22  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven 

2  Co.  4.    7  we  have  this  treasure  hi  earthen  vessels 

Col.     2.    3  In  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wis. 

Heb.  11.  26  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  Egy. 
lO.Treasure,  (from  the  Persian),  yafa  gaze. 

Acts    8.  27  who  had  the  charge  of  all  her  treasure 
TREASURE  (lay  up,  heap  together,  be  treasured),  to  — 
l.To  be  treasured  up,  is*;  atsar,  2. 

Isa.  23. 18  it  shall  not  be  treasured  nor  laid  up,  for 
2. To  treasure  up,  Bwvavplfa  thesaurizo. 

Luke  12.  21  So  (is)  he  that  layeth  up  treasure  for  him. 

Rom.  2.    5  treasurest  up  unto  thyself  wrath  against 

Jas.     5.    3  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together  for  the 
TREASURER  (to  make)  — 
l.To  treasure  up,  "ixn  atsar. 

Neh.  13. 13  And  I  made  treasurers  over  the  treasuries 
2.Treasures,  pian?  gedabrin. 

Dan.   3.    2,  3  the  treasurers,  the  counsellors,  the  she. 

3.  Treasurer,  "an  gizbar. 

'Ezra.   1.    8  by  the  hand  of  Mithredath  the  treasurer 

7.  21  do  make  a  decree  to  all  the  treasurers 

4.  To  'profit,  be  useful,  |?p  sakan. 

Isa.  22.  15  Go,  get  thee  unto  this  treasurer,  .unto  S. 
TREASURY  — 

1 .  Treasure,  treasury,  "ftiN  otsar, 

Josh.  6. 19  they  shall  come  into  the  treasury  of  the  L. 
6.  24  they  put  into  the  treasury  of  the  house  of 

1  Ch.  9.  26  over  the  chambers  and  treasuries  of  the 

28.  12  of  the  treasuries  of  the  house  of  God,  and 

28. 12  of  the  treasuries  of  the  dedicated  things 

2  Ch.32.  27  he  made  himself  treasuries  for  silver,  and 
Neh.  13. 12  the  new  wine,  and  the  oil,  unto  the  trea. 

13. 13  I  made  treasurers  over  the  treasuries,  S. 
Psa.135.  7  he  bringeth  the  wind  out  of  his  treasuries 
Jer.  38.  11  the  house  of  the  king  under  the  treasury 

2.  Treasuries,  D*na  genazim. 

Esth.  3.    9  silver,  .to  bring  (it)  into  the  king's  treas. 
4.    7  had  promised  to  pay  to  the  king's  treasu. 

3.  Treasury,  ~\\}%  ganzak. 

1  Ch.28. 11  the  pattern .  .of  the  treasuries  thereof,  and 


4.  Treasury,  ya£o<pv\a.Kiov  gazophulakion. 

Marki2.  41  over  against  the  treasury,  .into  the  trea. 

12.  43  than  all  they  which  have  cast  into  the  tr. 

Lukes  1.    1  saw.  .rich  men  casting,  .gifts  into  the  tre. 

John  8.  20  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  treasury 

5. Place  of  offerings,  Kopfravas  korbanasx  Heb.  I^HjJ. 

Matt. 27.    6  not  lawful  for  to  put  them  into  the  treas. 
TREATISE  — 
A  word,  discourse,  \6yos  logos. 

Acts    1.    1  The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  OTheo. 
TREE  — 
1,  Trees,  mighty  ones,  D*?1*!  elim. 

Isa.  61.   3  that  they  might  be  called  trees  of  righte. 

Eze.  31. 14  neither  their  trees  stand  up  in  their  height 

2.A  tree,  \f%  ilan. 

Dan.   4.  10  behold  atree  in  the  midst  of  the  earth, and 

4. 11  tree  grew,  and  was  strong,  and  the  height 
4. 14  Hew  down  the  tree,  and  cut  off  his  branc. 
4.  20  tree  that  thou  sawest,  which  grew,  and 
4.  23  Hew  the  tree  down,  and  destroy  it ;  yet 

4.  26  commanded  to  leave  the  stump  of  the  tr. 

3.-4  tamarisk,  grove,  Wx  eshel. 

t  Sa.  22.  6  now  Saul  abode  in  Gibeah  under  a  tree  in 
31. 13  buried  (them)  under  a  tree  in  Jabesh,  and 

4.  A  tree,  wood,  timber,  stick,  j'y.  ets. 

Gen.    1.  11  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  kind 

1. 12  tree  yielding  fruit,  whose  seed  (was)  in  it. 

1.  29  tree,  in  the  which  (is)  the  fruit  of  a  tree 

2.  9  to  grow  every  tree,  .the  tree  of  life  also 
2.  9  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 

2. 16  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest 

2.  17  Eut  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good 

3.  1  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  gard. 
3.  2  We  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the 
3.  3  But  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  which  (is)  in  the 
3.  6  saw  that  the  tree  (was),  .a  tree  to  be  des. 
3.  8  hid  themselves.,  amongst  the  trees  of  the 

3. 11  Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree,,  whereof  I  co. 

3. 12  woman . .  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat 

3. 17  hast  eaten  of  the  tree,  of  winch  I  comma. 
3.  22  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat,  and 
3.  24  every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of 

18.    4  I  pray  you.  .rest  yourselves  under  the  tr. 

18.  8  stood  by  them  under  the  tree,  and  they 
23. 17  and  all  the  trees  that  (were)  in  the  field 
40. 19  shall  hang  thee  on  a  tree;  and  the  birds 

Exod.  9.  25  And  the  hail,  .brake  every  tree  of  the  field 
10.  5  shall  eat  every  tree  which  groweth  for  you 
10.  15  they  did  eat . .  all  the  fruit  of  the  trees  wh. 
10. 15  remained  not  anygreen  thing  in  the  trees 

15.  23  showed  him  a  tree,  (which)  when  he  had 
Lev.  19.  23  shall  have  planted  all  manner  of  trees  for 

23.  40  boughs  of  goodly  trees. .  troughs  of  thick  tr. 
26.   4  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield  their  fru. 

26.  20  neither  shall  the  trees  of  the  laud  yield 

27.  30  all  the  tithe,  .of  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  (is) 
Deut. 12.    2  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tr. 

16.  21  shalt  not  plant  thee  a  grove  of  any  trees 

19.  5  fetchetha  stroke,  .to  cut  down  the  tree 
20. 19  not  destroy  the  trees,  .for  the  tree  of  the 

20.  20  trees  which,  .(be)  not  trees  for  meat,  thou 
2i.  22  put  to  death,  and  thou  hang  him  on  atree 
2i,  23  shall  not  remain  all  night  upon  the  tree 
22.   6  to  be  before  thee  hi  the  way  in  any  tree 

28.  42  All  thy  trees  and  fruit  of  thy  land  shall 
Josh.  8.  29  king  of  Ai  he  hanged  on  a  tree  until  even. 

8.  29  should  take  his  carcase  down  from  the  tree 
10.  26  trees:  and  they,  .hauging  upon  the  trees 
10.  27  they  took  them  down  off  the  trees,  and 

Judg.  9.  8  The  trees  went  forth  (on  a  time)  to  anoint 
9. 10  trees  said  to  the  fig  tree,  Come  thou,  (and) 

9.  11  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  trees? 

9.  i2  Then  said  the  trees  unto  the  vine,  Come 

9. 14  Then  said  a'l  the  trees  unto  the  bramble 

9. 15  bramble  said  unto  the  trees,  If  in  truth  ye 
g.  48  cut  down  a  bough  from  the  trees,  and  to. 

2  Sa.  5. 11  and  cedar  trees,  and  carpenters,  and  ma. 

1  Ki.  4.  33  spake  of  trees,  .spake  also  of  beasts,  and 

5.  10  gave  Solomon  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees,  (ac.) 

6.  23  two  cherubim  (of)  olive  tree,  (each)  ten  cu. 
6.  31  he  made  doors  (of)  olive  tree:  the  lintel 
6.  32  The  two  doors  also  (were  of)  olive  tree 

6.  33  the  door  of  the  temple  posts  (of)  olive  tr. 
6.  34  two  doors  (were  of)  fir  tree:  the  two  leaves 
9.  11  furnished,  .with  cedar  trees  and  fir  trees 

10. 11  brought. .  great  plenty  of  almug  trees,  and 

10. 12  lung  made  of  the  almug  trees  pillars  for 
10.  12  there  came  no  such  almug  trees,  nor  were 
14.  23  every  high  hill,  and  under  every  green  tr. 

2  Ki.  3.  19  shall  fell  every  good  tree,  and  stop  all  we. 

3.  25  felled  all  the  good  trees:  only  in  Kir-har. 

16.  4  on  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree 

17.  10  set  them  up  images.. under  every  green  t. 

1  Ch.16.  33  Then  shall  the  trees  of  the  wood  singout 

22.    4  Also  cedar  trees  in  abundance :  fur  the  Z. 

2  Ch.  2.    8  Send  me  also  cedar  trees . .  out  of  Lebanon 

3.    s  the  greater  house  he  ceiled  with  fir  tree 
9.  10  brought  algum  trees  and  precious  stones 
9.  11  the  king  made  (of)  the  algum  trees  terra. 
28.    4  on  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree 
Ezra   3.    7  to  bring  cedar  trees  from  Lebanon  to  the 
Nell.  8.  15  branches  of  thick  trees,  to  make  booths 
9.  25  olive  yards,  and  fruit  trees  in  abundance 
10.  35  the  first  fruits  of  all  fruit  of  all  trees,  ye. 
10.  37  the  fruit  of  all  manner  of  trees,  of  wine 
Esth.  2.  23  they  were  both  hanged  on  a  tree :  and  it 
Job  14.    7  there  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down 


Job  19, 
24. 
Psa.  1. 
74- 
96. 
104. 
105. 
148. 
Prov.  3. 


Eccl. 


Song  2. 
Isa.     7. 

IO. 

40. 
41. 

44- 
44- 
44- 
55- 
56. 
57- 

Jer.  2. 
3- 
3- 
7- 


*7- 

Eze.  6. 
15- 
iS- 
iS- 

17. 
17- 
17- 


3i 
3i 
3i 

.31 
3i 
3i 
3* 
3i 
34 
36. 
47' 

Joel    1, 


Hag. 


10  and  mine  hope  hath  he  removed  like  a  tr. 
20  and  wickedness  shall  be  broken  as  a  tree 

3  he  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  riv. 
5  he  had  lifted  up  axes  upon  the  thick  trees 

12  then  shall  all  the  trees  of  the  wood  re  jo. 
16  The  trees  of  the  Lord  are  full  (of  sap);  the 
33  smote  their  vines,  .and  brake  the  trees  of 

9  and  all  hills;  fruitful  trees,  and  all  cedars 

18  She  (is)  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  lay  ho. 
30  The  fruit  of  the  righteous  (is)  a  tree  of  li. 
12  but . .  the  desire  conieth,  (it  is)  a  tree  of  li. 

4  A  wholesome  tongue(is)  a  tree  of  life:  but 

5  I  planted  trees  in  them  of  all  (kinds  of)fr. 

6  water,  .the  wood  that  bringeth  forth  tre. 
3  if  the  tree  fall  toward  the  south,  or  tow. 
3  in  the  place  where  the  tree  faileth,  there 
3  As  the  apple . .  among  the  trees  of  the  wo. 

14  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of  frankincense 

2  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with 

19  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  his  forest  shall  be 

20  He  that  (is)  so . .  chooseth  a  tree  (that)  will 
19  I  will  plant,  .the  myrtle,  and  the  oil  tree 
14  for  himself  among  the  trees  of  the  forest 

19  shall  I  fall  down  to  the  stock  of  a  tree? 

23  break  forth.  .0  forest,  and  every  tree  th. 

12  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap  (their)  ha. 

3  neither,  .say,  Behold,  I  (am)  a  dry  tree 

5  Enflaming  yourselves,  .underevery.  .tree 
22  as  the  days  of  a  tree  (are)  the  days  of  my 

20  under  every  green  tree  thou  wanderest 

6  she  is  gone  up.  .under  every  green  tree 

13  ways  to  the  strangers  under  every  green  t. 
20  upon  the  trees  of  the  field,  and  upon  the 

3  (one)  cutteth  a  tree  out  of  the  forest  the 
19  Let  us  destroy  the  tree  with  the  fruit  th. 

2  their  groves  by  the  green  trees  upon  the 
8  he  shall  be  as  a.  tree  planted'by  the  waters 

13  under  every  green  tree,  and  under  every 
2  What  is  the  vine  tree  more  than  any  tree 
2  a  branch  which  is  among  the  trees  of  the 

6  As  the  vine  tree  among  the  trees  of  the 

24  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know.that  I  the 

24  the  high  tree,  have  exalted  the  low  tree 

24  dried  up  the  green  tree,  .made  the  dry  tr. 

28  every  high  hill,  and  all  the  thick  trees 

47  devour  every  green  tree,  .and  every  dry  t. 

10  contemneththerod  of  my  sou,  (as)  every  t. 

4  sent  out  her  little  rivers  unto  all  the  tre. 

5  was  exalted  above  all  the  trees  of  the  fie. 

8  nor  any  tree  in  the  garden  of  God  was  like 

9  the  trees  of  Eden,  that  (were)  in  the  gar. 

14  To  the  end  that  none  of  all  the  trees  by 

15  all  the  trees  of  the  field  fainted  for  him 

16  the  trees  of  Eden,  the  choice  and  best  of 

18  and  in  greatness  among  the  trees  of  Eden 
iS  be  brought  down  with  the  trees  of  Eden 
27  the  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  her  fruit 
30  I  will  multiply  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  and 

7  many  trees  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  ot. 
12  shall  grow  all  trees  for  meat,  whose  leaf 
12  (even)  all  the  trees  of  the  field,  are  with. 

19  the  flame  hath  burnt  all  the  trees  of  the 
22  Be  not  afraid,  .forthetree  bearethher  fr. 
19  and  the  olive  tree,  hath  not  brought  forth 


5.  A  tree,  n^y  etsah. 

Jer.     6.   6  Hew  ye  down  trees,  and  cast  a  mount  ag. 

6. A  tree,  SevSpov  dendron. 

Matt.  3.  10  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees . .  every  tree 
7.  17  good  tree,  .good  fruit;  but  a  corrupt  tree 
7. 18  Agood  tree  cannot. . neither  (can) a  corr.t. 
7.  19  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 

12.  33  make  the  tree,  .makethetree.  .forthetree 

13.  22  it  is  thegreatest . .  and  becometh  a  tree,  so 
21.   8  others  cut  down  branches  from  the  trees 

Mark  8.  24  looked  up,  and  said,  I  see  men  as  trees 
11.   8  others  cut  down  branches  off  [the  trees] 
Luke  3.   9  unto  the  root  of  the  trees:  every  tree  th. 
6.  43  a  good  tree,  .neither doth  a  corrupt  tree 

6.  44  every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit.  For 
13. 19  it  grew,  and  waxed  a  great  tree ;  and  the 

21.  29  he  spake .  .Behold  the  fig.  .and  all  the  tr. 
Jude       12  trees  whose  fruit  withereth,  without  fr. 
Rev.   7.    1  that  the  wind  should  not  blow . .  on  any  tr.. 

7.  3  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither . .  the  trees 

8.  7  the  third  part  of  trees  was  burnt  up,  and 

9.  4  neither  any  green  thing,  neither  any  tree 

7.  Wood,  tiwiber,  tree,  lv\ov  xulon. 

Luke23-  31  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree,  wh. 

Acts   5.  30  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew  and  hanged  on  atree 
10.  39  whom  they  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree 
13.  29  they  took  (him)  down  from  the  tree,  and 

Gal.     3.  13  Cursed  (is)  every  one  that hangeth  on  atr. 

t  Pe.  2.  24  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins,  .on  the  tr. 

Rev.    2.    7  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which 

22.  2  In  the  midst,  .(was  there)  the  tree  of  life 
22.  2  the  leaves  of  the  tree  (were)  for  the  heal. 
22. 14  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of 

See  also  Almond,  apple,  bay,  box,  cedar,  chestnut,  figs, 
fir,  juniper,  mulberry,  myrtle,  olive,  palm,  pine,  pome- 
granate, shittah,  sycamore,  vine,  willow. 

TREES  (of  lign  aloes),  shady  — 
l.Alloes,  alloc  trees,  Dsi?riN  ahalim. 

Num24.    6  as  the  trees  of  lign  aloes,  which  the  Lord 

2. Shades,  shady  trees,  D'.n^  tseelim. 

Job  40.  21  He  lieth  under  the  shady  trees,  in  the  co. 
40,  22  The  shady  trees  cover  him  (with)  their  sh. 


TREMBLE 


1000 


TRIBE 


TREMBLE,  (to  make  to,  come  trembling),  to  — 
1.2*0  tremble,  move,  J^J  zua. 

Eccl.12.    3  when  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall  tie. 

Dan.  5.  19  all  people,  .trembled  and  feared  before 
6.  26  that,  .men  tremble  and  fear  before  the 

2,  To  be  pained,  *?'n,  ^in  chul,  chil. 

Psa.  114.    7  Tremble,  thou  earth,  at  the  presence  of 

3,  To  pain,  S'n,  Sin  chul,  chil,  5. 

Psa.  97.  4  His  lightnings,  .the  earth  saw,  and  fcre. 
.Ter.  5.  22  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  presence,  wh. 
flab.  3.  10  The  mountains  saw  thee,  .they  trembled 

4.  To  make  haste,  isn  chaphaz. 

Deut  20.    3  do  not  tremble,  neither  be  ye  terrified 

6.  To  tremble,  trouble,  Tin  charad. 

Gen.  27.  33  Isaac  trembled  very  exceedingly,  and  said 

Exod  19.  16  the  people  that  (was)  in  the  camp  tremb. 

1  Sa.  13.    7  and  all  the  people  followed  him  trembling 

14.  15  the  spoilers,  they  also  trembled,  and  the 

16.    4  the  elders  of  the  town  trembled  at  his  co. 

28.    5  he  was  afraid,  and  his  heart  greatly  trem. 

Job  37.    1  At  this  also  my  heart  trembleth,  and  is 

Isa.  32.  11  Tremble,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease ;  be 

Eze.  26.  16  shall  tremble  at  (every)  moment,  and  be 

26.  18  Now  shall  the  isles  tremble  in  the  day  of 

32.  10  they  shall  tremble  at  (every)  moment,  ev. 

IIos.  11.  10  the  children  shall  tremble  from  the  west 

11.  11  They  shall  tremble  as  a  bird  out  of  Egypt 

5.  Trembling,  troubling  self,  Tin  chared. 

1  Sa.  4.  13  for  his  heart  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God 
Ezra    9.    4  every  one  that  trembled  at  the  words  of 

10.   3  of  those  that  tremble  at  the  commandment 

Isa.   65.    2  poor,  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  tremb. 

66.    5  Hear  the  word  of  the  LORD,  ye  that  trem. 

7.  To  stand  up,  tremble,  TOD  samar. 

Psa.119. 120  My  flesh  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee,  and 

3.  To  show  self  trembling,  f'V?  pedals,  7. 

Job    9.   6  shaketh  the  earth .  .the  pillars  thereof  tr. 

9.2*0  be  angry,  troicbled,  to  tremble,  irj  ragaz. 

Deut.  2.  25  shall  hear  report  of  thee,  and  shall  trem. 
Psa.  77. 18  lightnings  lightened  the  world,  .earth tr. 
99.    1  The  Lord  reign eth  ;  let  the  people  trem. 
Isa.     5.  25  the  hills  did  tremble,  and  their  carcases 
64.    2  the  natious  may  tremble  at  thy  presence 
Jer.   33.    9  they  shall  fear  and  tremble  for  all  the  go. 
Joel    2.    1  let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  tremb. 
Amos  8.    8  Shall  not  the  land  tremble  for  this,  and 
Hab.   3.   7  curtains  of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremb. 
3.  16  When  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled;  my 
3. 16  I  trembled  in  myself,  that  I  might  rest 
10.  TV  cause  to  tremble  or  be  angry,  13"J  ragaz,  5. 
Isa.   14. 16  (Is)  this  the  man  that  made,  .earth  to  tr. 

11. 2*0  tremble,  fjii  ruph,  Sa. 

Job  26. 11  The  pillars  of  heaven  tremble  and  areas. 

12.  To  tremble,  "1JH  road. 

Psa.  104.  32  He.looketh  on  the  earth,  and  it  trembleth 

33.  2*o  (cause  to)  tremble,  *iyi  raad,  5. 

Ezra  10.  9  all  the  people  sat.  .trembling  because  of 
Dan.  10. 11  had  spoken  this  word  unto  me,  I  stood  tr. 

1 4. 2*0  shake,  tremble,  t!>sn,  raash. 

Judg.  5.   4  the  earth  trembled,  and  the  heavens  dro. 

2  Sa.  22.  8  Then  the  earth  shook  and  trembled,  the 
Psa.  18.  7  Then  the  earth  shook  and  trembled,  the 
Jer.     4.  24  they  trembled,  and  all  the  hills  moved  lig. 

8. 16  whole  land  trembled  at  the  sound  of  the 

10.  10  at  his  wrath  the  earth  shall  tremble,  and 

51.  29  land  shall  tremble  and  sorrow :  for  every 

Joel    2. 10  heavens  shall  tremble  :  the  sun  and  the  m. 

15.  2*o  (cause  to)  shake  or  tremble,  tyjri  raash,  5. 

Psa.  60.    2  Thou  hast  made  the  earth  to  tremble 
16.2*0  became  afraid,  yivotiat  *fx<po$os  ginomai  em. 

Acts  24.  25  as  he  reasoned. .  Felix  trembled,  and  an. 

17.  To  become  trembling,  frightened,yivo(j.mevTpofj.os 

Acts    7.  32  Then  Moses  trembled,  and  durst  not  be. 
16.  29  came  trembling,  and  fell  down  before 

18.2*') have  troubling orfea r, e^w  rp6/j.ov echo tromon. 

Mark  1 6.    8  they.  .fled,  .for  they  trembled  and  were 
19.2*0  tremble,  fear,  be  afraid,  rp4^.m  tremo. 

Mark  5.  33  the  woman  fearing  and  trembling,  know. 

Luke  8.  47  came  trembling,  and  falling  down  before 

Acts    9.   6  [he,  trembling  and  astonished,  said,  Lord] 
20.  7*o  shudder,  have  the  hair  on  end,  tppico-w. 

.Tas.    2. 19TI10U  belie  vest.,  devils.. believe,  and  trem. 

TREMBLING,  trembled  — 

1.-4  trembling,  fear,  trouble,  nyin  charadah. 

1  Sa.14. 15  there  was  trembling,  .a 'very  great  tremb. 
Jer.  30.    5  We  have  heard  a  voice  of  trembling,  of 
Eze.  26.  16  they  shall  clothe  themselves  with  "trem. 

%A  trembling,  horror,  fright,  mx^9 paltcttSttifa. 

Job   21.   (i  and  trembling  taketh  hold  on  my  flesh 
8.  Trembling,  *ai  raggaz. 

Deut.28.  65  shall  give  thee  there  a  trembling  heart 
4./1  trembling,  trouble,  anger,  rage,  man  rogzah. 

Eze.  12.  18  drink  thy  water  with  trembling  and  with 
f'..l  trembling,  ljn  raad. 

Exod  1 5.  15  men.  .trembling  shall  take  hold  upon  th. 

Psa,  55.    5  tearfulness  and  tremblingare  come  upon 


Q.A  trembling,  nyjn  readah. 

Job  4.  14  Fear  came  upon  me,  and  trembling,  whi. 
Psa.    2. 11  Serve  the  Lord,  .and  rejoice  with  tremb. 

7.  A  reeling,  hyzraal. 

Zechi2.    2  1  will  make  Jerusalema  cup  of  trembling 

8.  .A  reeling,  trembling,  n?$HPi  tarelah. 

Isa.   51. 17  thou  hast  drunken,  .of  the  cup  of  tremb. 
51.  22  taken  out  of  thine  hand  the  cup  of  trem. 

9.  A  trembling,  nrq  retheth. 

Hos.13.    1  When  Ephraim  spake  trembling,  he  exal. 
10.-4  trembling,  fear,  rpS/xos  tromos. 

1  Co.  2.    3  I  was  with  you.  .in  fear,  and  in  much  tr. 

2  Co.  7. 15  how  with  fear  and  trembling  ye  received 
Eph.  6.  5  be  obedient  to.  .with  fear  and  trembling 
Phil.  2.  12  work  out  your,  .with  fear  and  trembling 

TRENCH  — 

1.  A  bulwark,  hn,  'rn  cliel. 

2  Sa.20. 1 5  they  cast  up  a  bank . .  and  it  stood  in  the  tr. 
%A  round  rampart,  73JJO  magal. 

1  Sa.26.    5  Saul  lay  in  the  trench,  and  the  people  pi. 
26.    7  Saul  lay  sleeping  with  the  trench,  and 
S.A  round  rampart,  rnayp  magalah. 

1  Sa.17.  20  he  came  to 'the  trench,  as  the  host  was 
i.A  trench,  conduit,  <T?»ri  tealah. 

1  Ki.18.  32  he  made  a  trench  about  the  altar,  asgreat 

18.  35  and  lie  filled  the  trench  also  with  water 
18. 38  licked  up  the  water  that  (was)  in  the  tre. 

5.-4  stake'qf 'wood, palisade,rampart,xdpa£  charax. 

Lukeig.  43  thine  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench  about 
TRESPASS,  (offering,  cause  of,)  trespassing  — 
\. Guilty,  guilt  offering,  c^x  asham. 

Lev.    5.   6  he  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering  unto 
5.   7  he  shall  bring  for  his  trespass,  which  he 

5. 15  bring  for  his  trespass,  .a trespass  offering 

5. 16  with  the  ram  of  the  trespass  offering,  and 
5.  18  he  shall  bring  a  ram.  .for  a  trespass  offe. 

5.  19  It  (is)  a  trespass  offering  :  he  hath  certa. 

6.  6  bring  his  trespass  offering . .  for  a  tres.  offe. 

6. 17  the  sin  offering,  and  as  the  trespass  offer. 

7.  1,  37  this  (is)  the  law  of.  .the  trespass  offe. 
7.  2  the  place  where  they  kill  the . .  trespass  0. 
7.  5  shall  burn  them . .  it  (is)  a  trespass  offering 
7.  7  As  the  sin  offering,  .so.  .the  trespass  off. 

14. 12  he  lamb,  and  offer  him  for  a  trespass  off. 
14.  13  (so  is)  the  trespass  offering  :  it  (is)  most 
14.  14,  17,  25,  28  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offer. 
14.  21  shall  take  one  lamb  (for)  a  trespass  offer. 
14.  24,  25  the  lamb  of  the  trespass  offering,  and 
19. 21  trespass  offering . .  a  ram  for  a  trespass  off. 

19.  22  with  the  ram  of  the  trespass  offering  bef. 
Num.  5.    7  he  shall  recompense  his  trespass  with  the 

5.  8  the  trespass,  .let  the  trespass  be  recomp. 
6. 12  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  for  a  trespass  off'. 

18.    9  every  trespass  offering  of  theirs,  which 

1  Sa.    6.    3  in  any  wise  return  him  a  trespass  offering 

6.  4  What . .  the  trespass  offering  that  we  shall 
6.  8  which  ye  return  him  (for)  a  trespass  offe. 
6.  17  returned  (for)  a  trespass  offering  unto  the 

2  Ki.  12.  16  The  trespass  money  and  sin  money  was 
Psa.  68.  21  such  an  one  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  tresp. 
Eze.  40.  39  slay,  .the  sin  offering  and  the  trespass  off. 

42.  13  lay.  .the  sin  offering  and  the  trespass  off. 
44.  29  eat.  .the  sin  offering  and  the  trespass  off. 

2.  Guilt,  (cause  of,  or  offering  for),  np^N  ashmah. 

Lev.   6.    5  appeii;aineth,  in  the  day  of  his  trespass  off. 
6.    7  any  thing  of  all  that  he  hath  done  in  tres. 

22. 16  sufferthem  to  bearthe  iniquity  of  trespass 

1  Ch.21.    3  why  will  he  be  a  cause  of  trespass  to  Is.? 

2  Ch.24.  18  antl  wrath  came,  .for  this  their  trespass 

28.  13  and  toour  trespass :  forourtrespass  is  gr. 

33.  23  but  Amon  trespassed  more  and  more 
Ezra.  9.    6  our  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens 
9.   7  in  a  great  trespass  unto  this  day;  and  for 
g.  13  forourgreattrespass,  seeing  that  thou  our 
9. 15  we  (are)before  thee  in  our  trespasses,  for 

10. 10  have  transgressed . .  to  increase  the  tresp. 

10. 19  offered)  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  tresp. 

Z.A  transgression,  trespass,  b'&  maal. 

Lev.    5. 15  If  a  soul  commit  a  trespass,  and  sin  thro. 

6.    2  If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  a  trespass  aga. 

26.  40  with  their  trespass  which  they  trespassed 
Num.  5.    6  to  do  a  trespass  against  the  Lord,  and  th. 

5.  12  go  aside,  and  commit  a  trespass  against 
5.  27  and  have  done  trespass  against  her  husb. 

31.  16  to  commit  trespass  against  the  Lord  in 
Josh.  7.    1  children  of  Israel  committed  a  trespass  in 

22.  16  What  trespass  (is)  this  that  ye  have  com. 

22.  20  Did  not  Achan . .  commit  a  trespass  in  the 

22.  31  because  ye  have  not  committed  tins  tres. 
2  Ch.33. 19  all  his  sins,  and  his  trespass,  and  the  pi. 
Ezra  9.  2  and  rulers  hath  been  chief  in  this  trespass 
Eze.  15.    8  because  they  have  committed  a  trespass 

17.  20  plead  with  him  there  for  his  trespass  that 

18.  24  in  his  trespass  that  he  hath  trespassed,  and 

20.  27  that  they  have  committed  a  trespass  aga. 
39.  26  all  their  trespasses  whereby  they  have  tr. 

Dan.  9.   7  because  of  their  trespass  that  they  have  tr. 

4.  To  transgress,  trespass,  7>\p  maal. 

Eze.  14.  13  when  the  land  sinneth . .  by  trespassing  gr. 

5.  Transgression,  slipping  aside,  yys  pesha. 
Gen.  31.  36  What  (is)  my  trespass?  what  (is)  my  sin 

50. 17  Forgive,  .the  trespass,  .forgive  the  trespass 
Exodza.  9  For  all  manner  of  trespass,  (whether  itbe) 
1  Sa.  25.  28  forgive  the  trespass  of  thine  handmaid,  for 


Q.A  trespass,  falling  aside, it apdit t ■&» ua paraptuma. 
Matt.  6.  14  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your 
6.  15  if.. not. .[their  trespasses],  neither. .your  t. 

18.  35  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not.  .[their  tr.] 
Markn.  25  your  Father,  .may  forgive  you  your  tresp. 

11.  26  [ueither  will  your  Father.. forgive  yourtr.] 
2  Co.  5.  19  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them 
Eph.  2.  1  you.  .who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  si. 
Col.     2. 13  quickened .  .having  forgiven  you  all  tres. 

TRESPASS,  to  — 

1.2*0  be  or  become  guilty,  d^n  asham. 

Lev.  5.  19  he  hath  certainly  trespassed  against  the 
Num.  5.  7  unto  (him)  against  whom  he  hath  trespa. 
2  Ch.i9.  10  even  warn  them  that  they  trespass  notag. 

19.  10  brethren :  this  do,  and  ye  shall  not  tresp. 
2. 2*o  sin,  err,  miss  the  mark,  Nan  chata. 

1  Ki.  8.  31  If  any  man  trespass  against  his  neighbour 
3.2*o  transgress,  trespass,  Sys  maal. 

Lev.  26.  40  which  they  trespassed  against  me,  and  th. 
Deut  32.  51  Because  ye  trespassed  against  me  among 

2  Ch.26.  18  go  out  of  the  sanctuary;  for  thou  hast  tr. 

28.  22  in  the  time  of  his  distress  did  he  trespass 

29.  6  For  our  fathers  have  trespassed,  and  done 

30.  7  your  brethren,  which  trespassed  against 
Ezra  10.  2  We  have  trespassed  against  our  God,  and 
Eze.  14.  13  the  land  sinneth  againstmebytrespassing 

17.  20  trespass  that  he  hath  trespassed  against 

18.  24  in  his  trespass  that  he  hath  trespassed,  and 
39.  23  because  they  trespassed  against  me,  there. 
39.  26  whereby  they  have  trespassed  against  me 

Dan.    9.    7  because,  .that  they  have  trespassed  agai. 
4.2*0  miss  the  mark,  not  attain,  afxapravw  hamar. 

MattiS.  15  if  thy  brother  shall  trespass  against  thee 

Lukei7.    3  If  thy  brother  trespass  against  thee,  reb. 
17.   4  if  he  trespass  against  thee  seven  times  in 
TRIAL,  (fiery)  — 
1. 2*o  be  tried,  proved,  tested,  jna  bachan,  4. 

Eze.  21. 13  Because  (it  is)  a  trial,  and  what  if  (the  s.) 

1.A  trial,  proving,  testing,  hdd  massah. 

Job     9.  23  he  will  laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  innocent 
3. A  trial,  proof ,  Hoki^i)  dokime. 

2  Co.  8.    2  How  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction  the 

4.  A  trial,  test,  Soicifitov  dokimion. 

1  Pe.  1.   7  That  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much 

5.^4  piercing  through,  experience,  wtipa peira 
Heb.  11.  36  others  had  trial  of.  .mockings  and  scour. 

trial  by  fire,  ■jrvpwa'is  jmrosis. 
concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 

tribe,  ntoSmatteh. 

TJri,  the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
the  son  of  Ahisamach,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan 
Uri,  the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
the  son  of  Ahisamach,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan 
the  son  of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  ma. 
Aholiab,  son  of  Ahisamach,  of  the  tribe 
the  daughter  of  Dibri,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan 
there  shall  be  a  man  of  every  tribe,  every 
princes  of  the  tribes  of  their  fathers,  hea. 
23,  25,  27,  29,31,  33,  35,  37, 39, 41,  43  tribe 
the  Levites  after  the  tribe  of  their  fathers 
thou  shalt  not  number  the  tribe  of  Levi 
next  unto  him  (shall  be)  the  tribe  of  Issa. 
the  tribe  of  Zebulun  :  and  Eliab  the  son 
those  which  pitch  by  him . .  the  tribe  of  S. 
Then  the  tribe  of  Gad  :  and  the  captain 
by  him  (shall  be)  the  tribe  of  Manasseh 
Then  the  tribe  of  Benjamin :  and  the  ca. 
those  that  encamp.. (shall be) the  tribe  of 
the  tribe  of  Naphtali :  and  the  captain  of 
Bring  the  tribe  of  Levi  near,  and  present 
princes,  .who  (were)  the  princes  of  thetr. 
the  son  of  Auiminadab,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 
,  16,  19,  20,  23,  24,  26,  27  the  tribe  of  the 
of  every  tribe  of  their  fathers  shall  ye  se. 
5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15  of  the  tri. 
And  thy  brethren  also  of  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
according  to  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  th. 
spake  unto  the  heads  of  the  tribes  conce. 
every  tribe,  .throughout  all  the  tribes  of 
a  thousand  of  (every)  tribe,  twelve  thou. 
Moses  sent,  .a  thousand  of  (every)  tribe 
the  chief  fathers  of  the  tribes  of  the  chil. 
according  to  the  tribes  of  your  fathers  ye 
unto  the  nine  tribes,  and  to  the  half  tribe 
For  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Reuben 
the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Gad  according 
half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  have  received 
The  two  tribes  and  the  half  tribe  have  re. 
ye  shall  take  one  prince  of  every  tribe,  to 
20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28  of  the  tribe 
the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  whereunto 
be  put  unto  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe 
from  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  our  fat. 
The  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said 
only  to  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  their  fa. 
the  inheritance.,  remove  from  tribe  to  tri. 
the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  his  fathers 
that  possesseth  an  inheritance  in  any  tri. 
unto  one  of  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  her 
remove  from  (one)  tribe  to  another  tribe 
every  one  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of 
their  inheritance  remained  in  the  tribe  of 
1  18  the  son  of  Zerah,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 


6.^4  burning, 

1  Pe 

4- 

12 

TKXBE 

l.Eod, 

staff. 

Exod 3 t 

2 

31- 

6 

35- 

3° 

3S- 

34 

■■ 

22 

IB- 

23 

Lev. 

24 

IT 

Nun 

.  1. 

4 

16 

1. 

21 

1 

47 

X 

49 

2. 

5 

2 

7 

34- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 

3«- 

36. 

J09I1.  7. 


2.  20 
2.  22 

2.  27 
2.  29 

3-  6 
7.  2 
7.  12 

10.  15, 
'3-  2 
13-  4. 
18.  2 
26.55 

30.  1 

31.  4 

31-    5 

31.  6 
32.28 

33-  54 

34-  '3 
34.  14 
34.  14 
34-  14 
34-  15 
34.18 

19. 
3 
4 
4 
5 
6 
7 
7 


TRIBES 


1001 


TRIUMPH 


Josh.  1 3 
*3- 
*3- 
14. 
14. 
14. 
*4- 
15- 
16. 

17- 
18. 
19. 
19. 


15  Moses  gave  unto  the  tribe  of  the  children 

24  Moses  gave  (inheritance)  uuto  the  tribe  of 

29  Moses  gave  (inheritance)  unto  the  halftri. 

1  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes  of 

2  for  the  nine  tribes,  and  (for)  the  half  tribe 

3  two  tribes  and  an  half  tribe  on  the  other 

4  For  the  children  of  Joseph  were  two  tribes 
1,  20,  21  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of 

5  This(is)theinheritanceof  the  tribe  of  the 
1  There  was  also  a  lot  for  the  tribe  of  Man. 

11,  21  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Benjamin 
1,  S  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Simeon  ac. 

23.  24,  31,  39,  40,  48,  51  the  tribe  of  the  chil. 
8  upon  the  plain  out  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben 
8  Ramoth  in  Gilead  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad 

8  Golan  in  Bashan  out  of  the  tribe  of  Mana. 
1  unto  the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes 
4  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  out  of  the  tribe 

4  out  of  the  tribe  of  BenjamiD,  thirteen  ci. 

5  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  aud  out  of  the  tribe 

5  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Mauasseh,  ten  cities 

6  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  and  out  of  the  tribe 

6  tribe  of  Naphtali,  and  out  of  the  half  tribe 

7  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  aud  out  of  the  tribe 
7  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  twelve  cities 

9  they  gave  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children 
9  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Simeon 

17  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  Gibeon  with 
20  the  cities  of  their  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of 
23  out  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  Eltekeh  with  her 

25  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Mauasseh,  Taana. 

27  out  of  the  (other)  half  tribe  of  Mauasseh 

28  out  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  Kishon  with 

30  out  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  Mishal  with  her 
32  out  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  Kedesh  in 
34  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  Jokneani  with 
38  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad,  Ramoth  in  Gilead 

1  Then  Joshua  called . .  the  half  tribe  of  M. 
14  a  prince  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  Isr. 
14  He  (was)  a  widow's  son  of  the  tribe  of  N. 

1  Solomon  assembled,  .the  heads  of  the  tr. 

60  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin;  Geba  with 

61  family  of  that  tribe . .  out  of  the  half  tribe 

62  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  and  out  of  the  tribe 

62  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  and  out  of  the  tri. 

63  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  and  out  of  the  tribe 
63  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  twelve  cities 
65  they  gave  by  lot  out  of  the  tribe  of  the 
65  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Simeon 

65  out  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Benja. 

66  had  cities  of  their  coasts  out  of  the  tribe 

70  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Mauasseh  ;  Aner 

71  out  of  the  family  of  the  half  tribe  of  Mana. 

72  out  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar;  Kedesh  with 
74  out  of  the  tribe  of  Asher;  Mashal  with  her 

76  out  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali;  Kedesh  in 

77  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  Rimmon  with 
70  out  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  Bezer  in  the 
So  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad;  Ramoth  in  Gilead 

31  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  eighteen  th. 

2  Solomon  assembled,  .the  heads  of  the  tr. 
9  to  the  oaths  of  the  tribes,  (even  thy)  word 

2".  A  rod,  sceptre,  tribe,  1::?;?,  a^jp  shebet. 

Gen.  49.  16  shall  judge  his  people,  asone  of  the  tribes 
49.  28  these(are)the  twelvetribesof  Israel:  and 
Exod  24.    4  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel 

28.  21  shall  they  be  according  to .  .twelve  tribes 
39.  14  his  name,  according  to  the  twelve  tribes 

Num.  4.  18  Cut  ye  not  off  the  tribe  of  the  families  of 
18.    2  the  tribe  of  thy  father,  bring  thou  with 
24.   2  Israel  abiding,  .according  to  their  tribes 

32.  33  unto  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  the  son 
36.   3  the  sons  of  the  (other)  tribes  of  the  child. 

Deut.  1. 13  Take. .wise  men.  .known  among  your  tri. 
1. 15  I  took  the  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise  men 

1. 15  captains,  .and  officers  among  your  tribes 
1. 23  I  took  twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe 

3. 13  gave  I  unto  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 

5.  23  alltheheadsofyourtribes.andyourelders 
10.  8  the  Lord  separated  the  tribe  of  Levi,  to 
12.  5  out  of  all  your  tribes  to  put  his  name  th. 
12. 14  the  LORDshall  choose  in  one  of  thy  tribes 
16.  18  thy  God  giveth  thee,  throughout  thy  tri. 
18.  1  the  tribe  of  Levi,  shall  have  no  part  nor 
18.    5  God  hath  chosen  him  out  of  all  thy  tribes 

29.  8  inheritance,  .to  the  half  tribe  of  Manass. 
29. 10  your  captains  of  your  tribes,  your  elders 
29.  18  Lest  there  should  be . .  family,  or  tribe,  wh. 
29.  21  shall  separate  him .  .out  of  all  the  tribes 
31.  28  Gather  unto  me  all  the  elders  of  your  tri. 

33.  s  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  gathered  toget. 
Josh.  1.  12  to  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  spake  Jos. 

3.  12  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  out  of  every  tribe 

4.  2  Take  you  twelve  men.  .out  of  every  tribe 
4.  4  whom  he  had  prepared .  .out  of  every  tri. 
4.  5,  S,  according  unto  the  number  of  the  tri. 
4.  12  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  passed  overar. 
7.  14  shall  be  brought  according  to  your  tribes 

7. 14  the  tribe  which  the  Lord  taketh  shall  co. 

7. 16  by  their  tribes,  and  the  tribe  of  Judah  was 
it.  23  according  to  their  divisions  bytheir  tribes 
12.  6  the  Gadites,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manas. 
22.    7  which  Joshua  gave  unto  the  tribes  of  Is. 

7  unto  the  nine  tribes  and  the  half  tribe  of 

.  14  Only  unto  the  tribe  of  Levi  he  gave  none 

.  29  gave  (inheritance)  unto  the  half  tribe  of 

.  33  But  unto  the  tribe  of  Levi  Moses  gave  not 

2  seven  tribes,  which  had  not  yet  received 

4  Give  out.  .three  men  for  (each)  tribe:  and 

7  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  have  received 

21. 16  suburbs;  nine  cities  out  of  those  two  trib. 

126 


22. 

1  Ki.    7. 
8. 

1  Ch.  6. 

6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
*  6. 
C. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
6. 
12. 

2  Ch.  5. 
Hab.   3. 


*3- 

13- 


*3- 


18. 


Josh.  22. 


23. 
24. 
Judgi8. 
18. 
t8. 
18. 


sSa.   5. 

7- 


1  Ki.  S. 


14. 

iS. 

2  Ki.  1 7. 

21. 

1  Ch.  5. 

5 

12, 

23' 

26, 

27, 
27 
27. 
28 
29, 

2  Ch.  6. 


78. 

78. 

105. 

122. 

Isa.   19, 

49. 

63. 

Eze.  37, 

45- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
48. 


48 


Hos.  5. 
Zech.  9. 


7  Now  to  the.  .half  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh 
9,  10,  11,  13,  15,21  the  half  tribe  of  Manass. 

4  to  be  an  inheritance  for  your  tribes,  from 
1  Joshua  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 

1  in  those  days  the  tribe  of  the  Danites  so. 

1  had  not  fallen  unto  them  among  the  trib. 
19  that  thou  be  a  priest  unto  a  tribe  and  a  f. 

30  were  priests  to  the  tribe  of  Dan  until  the 

2  chief,  .of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  presented 
10  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and 

12  tribes  of  Israel  sent  men  through  all  the 

3  there  should  be  to  day  one  tribe  lacking 

5  Who  (is  there)  among  all  the  tribes  of  Is. 

6  There  is  one  tribe  cutoff  from  Israel  this 

8  What  one  (is  there)  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 

15  Lord  had  made  a  breach  in  the  tribes  of 
17  thatatribe  be  not  destroyed  out  of  Israel 
24  every  man  to  his  tribe  aud  to  his  family 

28  did  I  choose  him  out  of  all  the  tribes  of 
21  a  Benjamite,  of  the  smallest  of  the  tribes 
21  least  of  all  the  families  of  the  tribe  of  Be. 

19  before  the  Lord  by  your  tribes,  and  by 

20  when  Samuel  had  caused  all  the  tribes  of 

20  come  near,  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,was  ta. 

21  When  he  had  caused  the  tribe  of  Benjarn. 

17  (wast)  thou  not.  .the  head  of  the  tribes  of 

1  Then  came  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  Dav. 

7  spake  I  a  word  with  any  of  the  tribes  of 

2  Thy  servant  (is)  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  Is. 
10  sent  spies  throughout  all  the  tribes  of  Is. 

9  were  at  strife  throughout  all  the  tribes  of 
14  he  went  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 

2  Go  now  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 

16  I  chose  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Is. 

13  will  give  one  tribe  to  thy  son  for  David 

31  Behold,  I  will,  .give  ten  trioes  to  thee 

32  he  shall  have  one  tribe  for  my  servant  D. 
32  which  I  have  choseu  out  of  all  the  tribes 

35  and  will  give  it  unto  thee,  (even)  ten  tribes 

36  unto  his  son  will  I  give  one  tribe,  that  D. 

20  there  was  none  that  followed .  .but  the  tr. 

21  with  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  an  hundred 

21  the  Lord  did  choose  out  of  all  the  tribes 

31  according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes  of 

18  there  was  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  Judah 
7  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  tribes  of  I. 

18,  26  the  Gadites,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Ma. 
23  the  children  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manass. 

37  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  with  all  mau. 

14  his  sons  were  named  of  the  tribe  of  Levi 

32  the  Gadites,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manas. 
16  Furthermore  over  the  tribes  of  Israel,  the 

20  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh;  Joel  the  son 

22  These  (were)  the  princes  of  the  tribes  of  Is. 
1  the  princes  of  the  tribes,  and  the  captains 

6  and  princes  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  the 

5  I  chose  no  city  among  all  the  tribes  of  Is. 

16  after  them  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 
13  the  Lord  had  chosen  out  of  all  the  tribes 

7  which  I  have  chosen  before  all  the  tribes 
55  made  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  dwell  in  their 

67  Moreover  he . .  chose  not  the  tribe  of  Eph. 

68  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  mount  Zion 
37  not  one  feeble  (person)  among  their  tri. 

4  Whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of 
13  (they  that  are)  the  stay  of  the  tribes  the. 

6  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob,  and  to  re. 

17  Return  for  thy  servants'  sake,  the  tribes 
ig  I  will  take,  .the  tribes  of  Israel  his  fellows 

8  shall  they  give,  .according  to  their  tribes 
13  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel 

21  divide  this  laud,  .according  to  the  tribes 

22  inheritance  with  you  among  the  tribes  of 

23  in  what  tribe  the  stranger  sojourneth,  th. 
1  Now  these  (are)  the  names  of  the  tribes 

19  shall  serve  it  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Isra. 
23  As  for  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  from  the  east 

29  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  unto  the  tribes  of  Is. 
31  (shall  be)  after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of 

9  among  the  tribes  of  Israel  have  I  made 
1  the  eyes  of  man,  as  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 


3.  A  rod,  staff,  tribe,  a?;?  shebat. 

Ezra  6.  17  according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes  of 

4.-4  tribe,  <pv\-q  pliule. 

Matt  19.  28  shall  sit.  .judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Is. 
24.  30  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mo. 
Luke  2.  36  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of 

22.  30  sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 

Acts  13.  21  Saul  the  son  of  Cis,  a  man  of  the  tribe  of 

Rom. 11.    1  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  (of)  the  tribe  of 

Phil.  3.    5  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  (of)  the  tribe  of  Be. 

Heb.   7. 13  pertaineth  to  another  tribe,  of  which  no 

7.  14  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake  nothing  con. 

Jas.     1.    i  to  the  twelve  tribes  which  are  scattered 

Rev.    5.    5  the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda,  the  root  of 

7.    4  forty  (and)  four  thousand  of  all  the  tribes 

7-    5.  5.  5.  6,  6,  6,  7,  7,  7,  8,  8,  8  of  the  tribe  of 

21.  12  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Is. 

TRIBES,  twelve  — 

The  twelve  tribes,  5w5eKa^>i/\o^  dodekaphulon. 

Acts  26.    7  Unto  which,  .our  twelve  tribes,  instantly 
TREBTTLATION,  (to  suffer)  — 
l.Straiiness,  distress.  "K,  "is  tsar, 

Deut.  4.  30  When  thou  art  in  tribulation,  and  all  th. 

%Straitnes$,  distress,  rry$  tsarah. 

Judg.io.  14  let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of.,  trib. 

1  Sa.  10.  19  out  of  all  your  adversities  and  your  tribu. 

26.  24  let  him  deliver  me  out  of  all  tribulation 


Rom. 


2  Co. 

Eph. 
2  Th. 

Rev. 


3.To2>ress,  squeeze,  afflict,  dXifZv  tldibO. 

1  Th.  3.    4  we  told  you.  .that  we  should  suffer  tribu. 
4. Pressure,  affliction,  0Atyis  thlipsis. 

Matt.13.  21  for  when  tribulation  or  persecution  arise. 

24.  21  Forjhen  shall  be  great  tribulation,  such 

24.  29  Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those 

Marki3-  24  in  those  days,  after  that  tribulation,  the 

John  16.  33  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but 

Acts  14.  22  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter 

9  Tribulation  and  anguish,  upou  every  soul 

3  we  glory  in  tribulations  also:  knowing. .  .t. 
35  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or 
12  Rejoicing  in  hope ;  patient  in  tribulation 

4  Who  comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribulation 
7.    4  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  tribulation 

3.  13  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  tribulations 

1.  4  in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations 
6  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  tro. 
9  your  brother,  and  companion  in  tribulat. 
9  know  thy  works,  and  tribulation,  andpo. 

2. 10  ye  shaU  have  tribulation  ten  days:  be  thou 

2.  22  I  will  cast.  .them,  .into great  tribulation 
7. 14  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribula 

TRIBUTE,  tributary  — 

1.  Custom,  tribute,  1S5  belo. 

Ezra  4. 13  will  they  not  pay  toll,  tribute,  and  custom 

4.  20  toll,  tribute,  and  custom,  was  paid  unto 
7.  24  to  impose  toll,  tribute,  or  custom,  upon 

2.  .4  measured  thing,  tribute,  told,  rnp  middah. 

Ezra  6.    8  of  the  tribute  beyond  the  river,  forthwith 
Neh.  5.   4  We  have  borrowed  money  for  the  king's  tr. 

3. A  tribute,  D3£  inches. 

Nunisi.  28  levy  a  tribute  unto  the  Lord  of  the  men 
31.  37  tribute  of  the  sheep  was  six  hundred  and 
31-  38,  39,  40  of  which  the  Lord's  tribute  (was) 
31.  41  Moses  gave  the  tribute,  .unto  Eleazarthe 

■i.Tribute,  burden,  levy,  CO  mas. 

Gen.  49.  15  bowed,  .and  became  a  servant  unto  tri. 
Deut2o.  11  people,  .found therein  shall  be  tributaries 
Joshi6.  10  but  the  Canaanites.  .serve  under  tribute 
17.  13  that  they  put  the  Canaanites  to  tribute 
udg.  1.  28  that  they  put  the  Canaanites  to  tribute 
1.  30  dwelt  among  them,  and  became  tributar. 
1.  33  the  inhabitants,  .became tributaries  unto 
1.  35  prevailed,  so  that  they  became  tributaries 
2  Sa.  20.  24  Adoram  (was)  over  the  tribute  ;  and  Je. 

1  Ki.  4.   6Adoniramthe  son  of  Abda  (was)  over  the  tr. 

9.  21  upon  those  did  Solomon  levy  a  tribute  of 

12.  iS  sent  Adoram,  who  (was)  over  the  tribute 

2  Ch.  8.    8  them  did  Solomon  make  to  paytribute  until 

10. 18  sent  Hadoram  that  (was)  over  the  tribute 
Esth  10.    1  king  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the 
Provi2.  24  but  the  slothful  shall  be  under  tribute 
Lam.  1.    1  princess,  .(how)  is  she  become  tributary 

5. Burden,  tribute,  Pica  missah. 

Deuti6.  10  with  a  tribute  of  a  freewill  offering  of 

6.^4  burden,  tribute,  Nivb  massa. 

2  Ch.17. 11  brought  Jehoshaphat  presentsand  tribute 

7. Fine,  punishment,  confiscation,  viy  onesh. 
2  Ki.23.  33  put  the  land  to  a  tribute  of  an  hundred 

8.^4  double  drachma,  (i.e.  15  pence),  b&paxpov. 
Matti7.  24  theythat  received  tribute,  .came  to  Peter 
17.  24  said,  Doth  not  your  master  pay  tribute? 

9.-4  census,  tax,  (Lat.  ce?isus),  Krjvaos  kensos. 
Matti7-  25  of  whom  do.  .kings  of  the  earth  take,  .t.'? 
22. 17  Is  it  lawful  to  pay  tribute  unto  Cesar,  or 

22. 19  Show  me  the  tribute  mouey.  And  theybr. 
Markiz.  14  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or 

10.-4  tribute,  tax,  burden,  <popos  j^horos. 

Lukezo.  22  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to  give  tribute  unto  C. 
23.    2  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  say. 
Rom  13.    6  for  this  cause  pay  ye  tribute  also  :  forth. 

13.  7  tribute  to  whom  tribute,  .custom  to  whom 

TRICKLE  down,  to  — 

To  be  poured  or  spread  out,  1JJ  nagar,  2. 

Lam.  3.  49  Mine  eye  triekleth  down,  and  ceasethnot 

TREED,  (to  be)  — 

\  .Trial,  proof ,  test,  \ryibochan. 

Isa.  28. 16  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation . .  a  tried  st. 
2.To  be  tested,  JPJ3  bachein,  2. 

Job   34.36  My  desire. .Job  may  be  tried  unto  the  end 

3.  To  be  refined,  tried,  purified,  vp$  tsaraph,  2. 

Dan.  12.  10  shall  be  purified,  and  made  white,  and  tr. 
i.Ajpproved,  tried,  tested,  86ictfxos  dokimos. 

Jas.    1. 12  for  when  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the 
TRIM,  to  — 
I. To  make  good,  do  well,  sa;  yatab,  5. 

Jer.    2.  33  Why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  seek  love  ? 
2.  To  do,  nmke,  ripv,  asah. 

2  Sa.19.  24  trimmed  his  beard,  nor  washed  his  clothes 
Z.To  adorn,  trim,  set  in  order,,  Koa/xeo}  kosmed. 

Matt25.    7  Then  all  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed 
TRIUMPH,  triumphing  — 
l.Loud  erg,  singing,  n|"i  rinnah. 

Psa.  47.    1  shout  unto  God  with  the  voice  of  triumph 
2.  Singing,  n:ri  renanah. 

Job  20.    5  That  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  (is) 


TRIUMPH 


1002 


TROUBLED 


TRIUMPH  (over,  to  cause  to),  to  — 
l.To  triumph,  rise,  hn3  gaah. 

Exodis.    i,  21  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously,  the  ho. 

2.  To  rejoice,  exult,  hy  alaz. 

2  Sa.    i.2o  the  daughters  of  the  uncircumcised  triu. 
Psa.  94.    3  LORD,  .how  long  shall  the  wicked  trium.? 

3.7*0  rejoice,  exult,  p#  alats. 

Psa.  25.   2  God.,  let  not  mine  enemies  triumph  over 

4.  To  sliout,  jp*i  rua,  5. 

Psa.  41. 11  mine  enemy  doth  not  triumph  over  me 

5.  To  shout,  fin  rua,  7  a. 

Psa.  60.    8  Philistia,  triumph  thou  because  of  me 
10S.    9  over  Edom . .  over  Philistia  will  I  triumph 

6.  To  sing,  cry  aloud,  ]Y]  ranan,  3. 

Psa.  92.   4  I  will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  hands 

7.  To  glorify  self,  nni?  shabach,  7. 

Psa. 106.  47  to  give  thanks,  .to  triumph  in  thy  praise 

8.  To  lead  in  triumph,  cause  to  triumph,  Spiafx^evca. 

2  Co.  2.  14  which  always  causeth  us  to  triumph  in 
Col.    2.  15  he  made  a  show,  .triumphing  over  them 

TRO'-AS,  Tpads. 

Strictly  Alexandria-Troas,  a  seaport  of  Phrygia  Minor, 
inMysia,  on  the  shores  of  the  Archipelago,  a  little  S.W. 
of  the  Hellespont,  twenty  five  mile3  N.  of  Asso,  and  a 
little  S.  of  ancient  Troy;  now  called  EsJci-Stamboid. 
Acts  16.    8  they  passing  by  Mysia  came  down  to  T. 

16.  11  loosing  from  T.,  we  came,  .to  Samothra. 

20.    5  These  going  before  tarried  for  us  at  T. 

20.  6  And  we . .  came  unto  them  to  T.  in  five  da. 
2  Co.  2.  12  when  I  came  to  T.  to  (preach)  Christ's  go. 
2  Ti.  4. 13  The  cloke  that  I  left  at  T.  with  Carpus 

TRODDEN  (down),  to  be  — 

l.To  be  trodden  down,  e£n  dush,  2. 

Isa.   25.  10  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  dunghill 
25. 10  shall  be  trodden  down  under  him 

%A  treading  down,  npnp  mebusah. 

Isa.   18.    2  to . .  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden  down 
3. A  treading,  cnip  mirmas. 

Isa.     5.   s  And  now  go  to.  .it  shall  be  trodden  down 
28.  18  scourge  shall  pass . .  ye  shall  be  trod,  down 

Mic.    7.  10  be  trodden  down  as  the  mire  of  the  street 
4.To  be  trodden,  cdi  ramas,  2. 

Isa.  28.    3  The  crown  of  pride . .  shall  be  trodden  un. 
TRODDEN  under  foot,  (to  be)  — 
l.A  trodden  down  thing,  rrpnp  mebusah. 

Isa.    iS.    7  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden  under  f. 
2.A  treading,  0D"|p  mirmas. 

Dan.    8.  13  to  give.,  the  host  to  be  trodden  under  foot 
TRO-GYL-LI'-UH,  Tpa>yvh\iov. 
A  city  and  promontory  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Mycale,  in 
Caria  (the  S.  W.  province  of  Asia  Minor),  nearly  opposite 
to  Samos,  and  not  far  from  Miletus. 

Acts 20.  15  [wearrivedatSamos,andtarriedatT.,and] 
TROOP  (cf  robbers)  — 
l.A  troop,  band,  rrcJK  aguddah. 

2  8a.    2.  25  the  children  of  Benjamin . .  became  one  tr. 

Amos  9.    6  and  hath  founded  his  troop  in  the  earth 

2.  Wayfarer,  traveller,  IT1N  orach. 

Job     6. 19  The  troops  of  Tenia  looked,  the  compan. 
Z.A  troop,  invading  fore,  izgad. 

Gen.  30.  11  Leah  said,  A  troop  cometh :  and  she  cal. 

Isa.   65.  11  that  prepare  a  table  for  that  troop,  and 
4.  A  troop,  invading  force,  "OT|  gedud. 

Gen.  49.  19  Gad,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him  :  but  he 

1  Sa.  30.    8  Shall  I  pursue  after  this  troop?  shall  I 

2  Sa.    3.  22  Joab  came  from . .  a  troop,  and  brought  in 

22.  30  For  by  thee  I  have  run  through  a  troop 
Job  19. 12  His  troops  come  together,  and  raise  up  th. 
Psa.  18.  29  For  by  thee  I  have  run  through  a  troop 
Jer.  18.  22  when  thou  shalt  bring  a  troop  suddenly 
Hos.    6.    9  And  as  troops  of  robbers  wait  for  a  man 

7.    1  the  troop  of  robbers  spoileth  without 
Mic.    5.    1  0  daughter  of  troops :  he  hath  laid  siege 
^.Company,  n;n,  'n  chai,  chayyah. 

2  Sa.  23.  11  were  gathered  together  into  a  troop,  wh. 

23.  13  the  tronp  of  the  Philistines  pitched  in  the 

[See  Gather  self  in  troops.] 

TRO-PHI'-MUS,  Tp6(ptfxos. 

A  believer  in  Ephesus  who  accompanied  Paul  to  Jeru- 
salem when  he  returned  from  Greece. 

Acts  20.   4  there  accompanied  him .  .Tychicus  and  T. 

21.  29  they  had  seen,  .in  the  city  T.  an  Ephes. 
2  Ti.    4.  20  but  T.  have  I  left  at  Miletum  sick 

TROUBLE,  troubling  — 
l.Trouble,  nhriz  behalah. 

Psa.  78.  33  consume  in  vanity,  and  their  years  in  t. 

Isa.   65.  23  They  shall  not.  .bring  forth  for  trouble 
2.  Terror,  worn  out  thing,  Frnfej  ballahah. 

Isa.    17.  14  behold  at  evening'tide  trouble.. before  the 
$.Terror,  any?  beathah. 

Jer.     8.  15  for  a  time  of  health,  and  behold  trouble 
14. 19  for  the  time  of  healing,  and  behold  trouble 
4. Rem  oval,  trembling,  nwj,  rm  zevaah,  zaavah. 

2  Ch.29.    8  he  hath  delivered  them  to  trouble,  to 


5. Burden,  pressure,  nib  torach. 

Isa.     1.  14  they  are  a  trouble  unto  me ;  I  am  weary 

6.  Trouble,  destruction,  njDWP  mehumah. 

Prov  15.  16  than  great  treasure,  and  trouble  there w. 
Isa.  22.  5  day  of  trouble,  and  of  treading  down,  and 
Eze.    7.    7  the  day  of  trouble  (is)near,audnottheso. 

7.  Labour,  toil,  hzy  amed. 

Job     5.    6  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  gr. 
5.   7  m  in  is  born  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly 
1>sa'  73-    5  They  (are)  not  in  trouble  (as  other)  men 
^.Affliction,  cry,  ?ju,  oni. 

1  Ch.22.  14  in  my  trouble  I  have  prepared  for  the 
Psa.    9.  13  Have  mercy  upon  me.  .consider  my  tro. 

31.    7  thou  hast  considered  my  trouble,  thou 

9  .Straitness,  distress,  lg,  iy  tsar. 

2  Ch.15.  4  when  they  in  their  trouble  did  turn  unto 
Job    15.  24  Trouble  and  anguish  shall  make  him 

38.  23  have  reserved  against  the  time  of  trouble 
Psa.  32.    7  thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble,  th. 

59.  16  defence  and  refuge  in  the  day  of  my  tro. 

60.  11  Give  us  help  from  trouble  :  for  vain  (is) 
66. 14  mouth  hath  spoken,  when  I  was  in  trou. 

102.   2  I  am  in  trouble ;  incline  thine  ear  unto 
107.    6,  13  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble 

107.  19,  28  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trou. 

108.  12  Give  us  help  from  trouble :  for  vain  (is) 
119.  143  Trouble  and  anguish  have  taken  hold  on 

Isa.   26. 16  Lord,  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee 

10. Straitness,  distress,  rrjy  tsarah. 

Deut3i.  17  manyevils  and  troubles  shall  befall  them 

31.  21  many  evils  and  troubles  are  befallen  them 
2  Ki.  19.    3  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  reb. 
Neh.   9.  27  in  the  time  of  their  trouble,  when  they 
Job     5.  19  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  troubles ;  yea 

27.    9  Will  God  hear  his  cry  when  trouble  com. 
Psa.    9.    9  also  will  be.  .a  refuge  in  times  of  trouble 

10.  1  (why)  hidest  thou  (thyself)  in  times  of  tr.? 

20.  1  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble,  the 
22.  11  Be  not  far  from  me,  for  trouble  (is)  near 
25.  17  The  troubles  of  my  heart  are  enlarged,  O 
25.  22  Redeem  Israel,  0  God,  out  of  all  his  tro. 
34.  6  the  Lord,  .saved  him  out  of  all  his  trou. 
34.  17  and  delivereth  them  out  of  all  their  tro. 
37.  39  (he  is)  their  strength  in  the  time  of  trou. 
46.    1  God  (is),  .a  very  present  help  in  trouble 

50.  15  And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble 
54.    7  For  he  hath  delivered  me  out  of  all  trou. 
71.  20  which  hast  showed  me  great  and  sore  tr. 

77.  2  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  sought  the  L. 

78.  49  wrath,  and  indignation,  and  trouble,  by 
81.  7  Thou  calledst  in  trouble,  and  I  delivered 
86.  7  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  will  call  upon 
91.  15  I  (will  be)  with  him  in  trouble ;  I  will  de. 

116.    3  gat  hold  upon  me  :  I  found  trouble  and 
138.    7  Though  I  walk  in  the  midst  of  trouble,  th. 

142.  2  before  him ;  I  showed  before  him  my  tr. 

143.  11  for  thy.  .sake  bring  my  soul  out  of  trou. 
Prov  11.    8  The  righteous  is  delivered  out  of  trouble 

12. 13  but  the  just  shall  come  out  of  trouble 

21.  23  keepeth  his  mouth. .keepeth.. from  troub. 
25.  19  Confidence. .in  time  of  trouble  (is  like)  a 

Isa.     8.  22  behold  trouble  and  darkness,  dimness  of 
30.    6  Into  the  land  of  trouble  and  anguish,  fr. 
33.    2  our  salvation  also  in  the  time  of  trouble 
37.    3  This  day  (is)  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  re. 
46.    7  not  answer,  nor  save  Mm  out  of  his  trou. 
65.  16  because  the  former  troubles  are  forgotten 
Jer.  14.    8  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble,  why 
30.    7  it  (is)  even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble 
Dan.  i2.    1  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as 
Nah.    1.    7  stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  he 
Hab.    3.  16  that  I  might  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble 
Zeph.  1.  15  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of  trouble  and  dis. 

1 1 .  Trembling,  trouble,  anger,  Ul  rogez. 

Job     3. 17  There  the  wicked  cease  (from)  troubling 
3.  26  neither  was  I  quiet ;  yet  trouble  came 
14.    1  Man. .(is)  of  few  days,  and  full  of  trouble 

12.Evil,  m  ra. 

Psa.  27.    5  in  the  time  of  trouble  he  shall  hide  me 
41.    1  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  tro. 
88.    3  For  my  soul  is  full  of  troubles,  and  my 
107.  26  their  soul  is  melted  because  of  trouble 
Jer.     2.  27  but  in  the  time  of  their  trouble  they  will 
2.  28  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  time  of  thy  t. 

11.  12  save  them  at  all  in  the  time  of  their  tro. 

11. 14  time  that  they  cry  unto  me  for  their  tro. 

51.  2  for  in  the  day  of  trouble  they  shall  be  ag. 
Lam.  r.  21  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  trouble 

13.  Travail,  weariness,  n^pp  telaah. 

Neb.   9.  32  let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  little  before 
14. Pressure,  affliction,  6\iipi$  thlvpsis. 

1  Co.   7.  28  Nevertheless  such  shall  have  trouble  in 

2  Co.    1.   4  to  comfort  them  which  are  in  any  trouble 

1.    8  have  you  ignorant  of  our  trouble  which 

15.  Trembling,  agitation,  disturbance,  rapaxv  tar- 
Mark  13,  8  and  there  shall  be  famines  [and  troubles] 
John  5.    4  after  the  troubling  of  the  water  stepped  in 

TROUBLE,  self,  exceedingly,  to  make  or  suffer  — 

l.To  press,  compel,  d:n  anas. 

Dan.   4.   9  because  I  know.,  no  secret  trouble  th  thee 

2.  To  trouble,  hasten,  Sna  bahel,  3. 

2  Ch.32.  18  to  affright  them,  and  to  trouble  them,  that 
Ezra  4,  4  weakened.. and  troubled  them  in  build. 
Job  22.  10  snares,  .and  sudden  fear  troubleth  thee 
Dan.  11.  44  tidings.,  out  of  the  north  shall  trouble  him 


3.  To  trouble,  hasten,  Viia  bahel,  5. 

Job  23.  16  God  maketh.  .the  Almighty  troubleth  me 
4.To  be  troubled,  hastened,  bra  behal,  2. 

Dan.  4,  5  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me 
4.  19  astonied.  .and  his  thoughts  troubled  him 

4.  19  Belteshazzar,  let  not  the  dream,  .trouble 

5.  6  his  thoughts  troubled  him,  so  that  the  jo. 
5.  10  let  not  thy  thoughts  trouble  thee,  nor  let 
7.  15  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me 
7.  28  my  cogitations  much  troubled  me,  and 

5.  To  wear  out,  make  old,  nba  balah,  3. 

Ezra   4.    4  weakened . .  and  troubled  them  in  building 

6.  To  affright,  terrify,  nya  baath,  3. 

1  Sa.  16.  14  an  evil  spirit  from  the  LORD  troubled  him 

16.  15  an  evil  spirit  from  God  troubleth  thee 

7.  To  trouble,  make  muddy,  rh%  dalach. 

Eze.  32.   2  thou . .  troubledst  the  waters  with  thy  feet 
32, 13  foot  of  man  trouble,  .hoofs  of  beasts  tro. 
Z.To  trouble,  crush,  destroy,  Dan  hamam. 

Exodi4.  24  looked.. and  troubled  the  host  of  the  Eg. 

9.  To  trouble,  iaj>  akar. 

Gen.  34.  30  Ye  have  troubled  me  to  make  me  to  stink 
Josh.  6.  18  when  ye. .make  the  camp. .a  curse,  and  tr. 

7.  25  Why  hast  thou  troubled  us?.. Lord  shall  t. 
Judgi  1.  35  and  thou  art  one  of  them  that  trouble  me 
1  Sa.  14.  29  My  father  hath  troubled  the  land :  see 

1  Ki.  i3.  17  said. .(Art)  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel? 

18.  18  I  have  not  troubled  Israel ;  but  thou,  and 
Prov  11.  17  (he  that  is)  cruel  troubleth  his  own  flesh 
11.  29  He  that  troubleth  his  own  house  shallin. 
15.  27  He  that  is  greedy  of  gain  troubleth  hi3 

10.  Straitness,  distress,  ">¥,  "iy  tsar. 

Psa.  3.  1  Lord,  how  are  they  increased  that  trou. 
13.   4  that  trouble  me  rejoice  when  I  am  moved 

11.  To  do  wickedly,  y^h  rasha,  5. 

Job  34.  29  "When. .quietness,  who  then  can  make  tr.? 
12. To  set  up,  excite,  avaffrrar6a>  anastatoo. 

Gal.  5. 12  I  would  they  were. .cut  off  which  trouble 
13.  To  disturb  exceedingly,  iKTapaccrw  ektarrasso. 

Acts  16.  20  These  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedinglytr. 
14. To  excite  tumult  in,  eVovAea)  enochleo. 

Heb.  12. 15  lest,  .root  of  bitterness  sprinking  up  tro. 
15.  To  press,  squeeze,  afflict,  B\i$a  thlibo. 

2  Th.  1.  6  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  tro. 
16.7*0  be  disturbed,  Bopv&eoftat  thorubeomai. 

Acts  20. 10  Trouble  not  yourselves ;  for  his  life  is  in 
17.7*0  suffer  evil,  KaKOTradeco  kakopatheo. 

2  Ti.  2.  9  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble,  as  an  evil  doer 
18. 7*0  hold  out  or  give  vexation,  irap^x^  k6ttov. 
Matt  26.  10  Why  trouble  ye  the  woman?  for  she  hath 
Marki4-  6  Let  her  alone;  why  trouble  ye  her?  she 
Luken.  7  Troublemenot:  thedoorisnowshut.and 
iS.  5  Yet  because  this  widow  troubleth  me,  I 
Gal.    6. 17  Prom  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me 

19.  To  excite  tumtdthesides^apevox^ewparenochled. 
Acts  15. 19  Wherefore  my  sentence  is,  that  we  troub. 

20.  To  flay,  trouble,  harass,  aKv^Kv  skullo. 

Mark  5.  35  why  troublest  thou  the  Master  any  furt.? 
Luke  7.    6  trouble  not  thyself;  for  I  am  not  worthy 

8.  49  Thy  daughter  is  dead ;  trouble  not  the  M. 

21.  To  trouble,  disturb,  agitate,  Tapaacrw  tarasso. 
John  5.  4  [an  angel  went  down. .and  troubled  the] 
Acts  15.  24  have  troubled  you  with  words,  subverting 

17.  8  they  troubled  the  people  and  the  rulers  of 
Gal.     1.    7  there  be  some  that  trouble  you,  and  wo. 

5. 10  he  that  troubleth  you  shall  bear  his  judg. 

TROUBLE,  (to  be)  in  — 

1.  Sharp  or  Itarel  of  the  day,  DV-ngtp  qesheh  yom. 

Job    30.  25  Did  not  I  weep  for  him  that  was  in  trou. 

2.  To  2>ress,  distress,  be  distressed,  *ny  tsarar. 

Psa.  31.  9  LORD  have  mercy  upon  me . .  for  I'am  in  tr. 
69. 17  hide  not  thy  face.  .1  am  in  trouble  :  hear 

TROUBLED,  to  be  (sore)  — 

l.To  be  troubled,  hastened,  bra  bahel,  2. 

Gen.  45.    3  could  not  answer.,  for  they  were  troubled 

1  Sa.  28.  21  saw  that  he  was  sore  troubled,  and  said 

2  Sa.   4.    1  feeble,  and  all  the  Israelites  were  troubled 
Job     4.    5  it  toucheth  thee,  and  thou  art  troubled 

23.  15  Therefore  am  I  troubled  at  his  presence 
Psa.  30.    7  thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  (and)  I  was  tro. 
48.    5  they  were  troubled,  (and)  hasted  away 
83.  17  Let  them  beconfoundedand  troubled  for 
90.    7  anger,  and  by  thy  wrath  are  we  troubled 
104.  29  Thou  hidest  thy  face,  they  are  troubled 
Eze.     7.  27  the  people  of  the  land  shall  be  troubled 
26.  18  isles  that  (are)  in  the  sea  shall  be  troubled 

2.7b  be  troubled,  hastened,  bra  behal,  2. 

Dan.  5.  9  Then  was  king  Beishazzar  greatly  troub. 
Z.To  be  shaken,  run  gaash,  4. 

Job  34.  20  the  people  shall  be  troubled  at  midnight 
4.T0  be  cast  out,  troubled,  ria  garash,  2. 

Isa.  57.  20  the  wicked  (are)  like  the  troubled  sea,  w. 
5.7*0  roar,  move,  sound,  make  a  noise,  n^nhamah. 

Jer.   31.  20  therefore  my  boweUare  troubled  for  him 

Psa.  77.  3  I  remembered  God,  and  was  troubled ;  I 
6.7*o  daub,  be  troubled,  adulterated,  ion  chamar. 

Psa.  4*.    3  the  waters  thereof  war  (and)  be  troubled 


TROUBLER 


1003 


TRUMP 


7.  To  befoul,  -en  ckamar,  36. 

Lam.   i.  20  my  bowels  are  troubled ;  mine  heart  is 
2.  ii  my  bowels  are  troubled,  my  liver  is  pou. 

8.  To  beco7)ie  bent  down,  perverse,  niy  avah,  2. 

Psa.  38.    6  I  am  troubled ;  I  am  bowed  down  greatly 

9.  To  be  troubled,  excited,  T33J  akar,  2. 

Prov  15.   6  but  in  the  revenues  of  the  wicked  is  tro. 

10.  To  be  humbled,  afflicted,  n:i>  anah. 

Zech.io.   2  they  were  troubled,  because,  .no  sheph. 

11.  To  be  moved,  troubled,  Dys  paam,  2. 

Gen.  41.    8  it  came  to  pass,  .that  his  spirit  was  trou. 
Psa.  77.    4  I  am  so  troubled  that  I  cannot  speak 
Dan.    2.    3  myspiritwas  troubled  to  know  the  dream 

12.  To  move  self,  dj/s  paam,  7. 

Dan.   2.    1  dreams,  wherewith  his  spirit  was  troubled 
13.ro  be  oi'  become  shortened,  grieved,  "^  qatsar. 

Job  21.   4  why  should  not  my  spirit  be  troubled  ? 
14. To  be  angry,  troubled,  trj  ragaz. 

Psa.  77.  16  were  afraid :  the  depths  also  were  troub. 

Isa.    32.  10  Many  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled 
32.  it  be  troubled,  ye  careless  ones ;  strip  you 

15.  To  befouled,  troubled,  bsn  raphas,  2. 

Prov25.  26  a  troubled  fountain,  and  a  corrupt  spring 
16:  To  be  tempestuous,  tossed  about,  nyD  saar,  2. 

2  Ki.  6.  11  heart  of  the  king  of  Syria  was  sore  troub. 

17.  To  be  troubled,  roar,  Djri  raam. 

Eze.  27.  35  they  shall  be  troubled  in.  .countenance 

18.  To  trouble  thoroughly,  ZiarapaTTw  diataratto. 
Luke   1.  29  when  she  saw  (him),  she  was  troubled  at 

19.  To  press,  squeeze,  afflict,  QxifSv  thlibo. 

2  Co.  4.    S  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  distressed 

7.   5  we  were  troubled  on  every  side ;  without 

2  Tli.  1.    7  And  to  you  who  are  troubled  rest  with  us 

20.  To  be  tumultuous,  Qpoeofxat  throeomai. 
Matt24.    6  see  that  ye  be  not  troubled:  for  all.  .mu. 
Marki3.    7  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  .be  ye  nottr. 
2  Th.  2.    2  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  iu  mind,  or  be  tr. 

21.  To  trouble,  disturb,  agitate,  Tapa<rcaj  tarasso. 
Matt-  2.    3  he  was  troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with 

14.  26  they  were  troubled,  saying,  It  is  a  spirit 

Mark  6.  50  For  they  all  saw  him,  and  were  troubled 

Luke  1.  12  when  Zacharias  saw  (hini),  he  was  troub. 

24.  38  he  said  unto  them,  "Why  are  ye  troub  led  ? 

John  5.    7  have  no  man,  when  the  water  is  troubled 

12.  27  Now  is  my  soul  troubled ;  and  what  shall 

13. 21  he  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  testified,  and 

14.    1  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  ye  believe 

14. 27  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither 

1  Pe.  3. 14  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither  be  troubled 

22.  To  trouble  self ',  Tapaaattv  kavTovtarasseinheaut. 
Johnn.  33  he  groaned  inthespirit,  and  was  troubled 

23.  To  be  in  a  tumult,  tumultuous,  Tvp&d(ofj,ai  tur. 
Lukeio.  41  thou  art  careful  and  [troubled]  about  many 

TR0U3LER,  troublous  — 
1  To  trouble,  ~QVr  akar. 

1  Ch.  2.    7  Achar,  the  troubler  of  Israel,  who  trans. 
2.  Distress,  pSxtsoq; 

Dan.   9.  25  the  street  shall  be  built,  .in  troublous  ti. 
TROUGH  — 
1. Trough,  gutter,  torn  rahat. 

Exod.  2. 16  filled  the  troughs  to  water  their  father's 

2.  Watering  trough,  n^tr  shoqeth. 

Gen.  24.  20  she . .  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  trough 
30.  38  in  the  gutters  in  the  watering  troughs  wh. 
TROW,  to  — 
To  think,  So/cew  dokeo. 

Lukei7.   9  Doth  he  thank  that  servant..  [I  trow  notj 

TRUCE  BREAKERS  — 

Implacable,  irreconcileable,  aa-rrovdos  aspondos. 

2  Ti.    3.   3  Without  natural  affection,  truce  breakers 
TRUE,  truly,  in  or  of  a  truth,  it  is  — 

l.Truly,  yet,  but,  d^n  ulam. 

Gen.  4S.  19  truly  his  younger  brother  shall  be  greater 
Nunii4.  21  But  (as)  truly  (as)  I  live,  all  the  earth  sh. 
1  Sa.  20.   3  but  truly,  (as)  the  Lord  liveth,  and  (as) 
Mic.    3.    8  But  truly  I  am  full  of  power  bythe  spirit 

2,Only,  7JN  ah. 

Jer.  '10. 19  Truly  this  (is)  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it 

3.  Surely,  but,  yet,  |3N  aken. 

Jer.    3,  23  Truly  in  vain . .  truly  in  the  Lord  our  God 
4. But  rather,  uh  *3  ki  im. 

1  Sa.21.   5  Of  a  truth  women.,  kept  from  us  about  th. 
5. If  not,  N7  dn  im  to. 

Nunii4.  28  (As  truly  as)  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  as  ye 
Isa.     5.    9  Of  a  truth,  many  houses  shall  be  desolate 

6.  Stability,  faithfulness,  ptmdn  emunah. 

Psa.  33.    4  For  the  word.,  andallhisworks.-intruth 
Prov  12.  22  the  Lord  . .  they  that  deal  truly  (are)  his 

7.  Surely,  truly,  c:Dn  omnam. 

Ruth  3.  12  now  it  is  true  that  I  (am  thy)  near  kins. 

2  Ki.  19. 17  Of  a  truth,  Lord,  the  kings  cf  Assyria 
Job     9.   2  I  know  (it  is)  so  of  a  truth :  but  how  sho. 

36.  4  For  truly  my  words  (shall)not  (be)  false 
Isa.   37. 18  Of  a  truth,  Lord,  the  kings  of  Assyria 


8.  Truth,  faithfulness,  n£is*  emeth. 

Gen.  24. 49  now  if  ye  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with 

47.  29  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  me ;  bury  me 

Deut.iy.   4  behold,  (it  be)  true,  (and)  the  thing  cert. 

22.  20  But  if  this  thing  be  true,  (and  the  tokens 

Josh.  2. 12  show  kindness.,  and  give  me  a  true  token 

2. 14  that  we  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with 
Judg.  9. 16  if  ye  have  done  truly  and  sincerely,  in 

9.  19  If  ye  then  have  dealt  truly  and  sincerely 
2  Sa.   7.  2S  thy  words  be  true,  and  thou  hast  promised 

1  Ki."io.   6  It  was  a  true  report  that  I  heard  in  mine 

22.  16  tell  me  nothing  but  (that  which  is)  true 

2  Ch.  9.    5  a  true  report  which  I  heard  in  mine  own 

15.  3  Israel  (hath  been)  without  the  true  God 
Neh.  9.  13  gavest  them  right  judgments,  and  true 
Psa.  19.    9  judgments  of  the  LORD  (are)  true  (and) 

119.  160  Thy  word  (is)  true  (from)  the  beginning 

Prov  14.  25  A  true  witness  delivereth  souls:  but  ade. 

Jer.  10.  10  But  the  Lord  (is)  the  true  God,  he  (is)  the 

26. 15  for  of  a  truth  the  LORD  hath  sent  me  unto 

28.   9  known,  that  the  Lord  hath  truly  sent  him 

42.   5  The  Lord  be  a  true  and  faithful  witness 

Eze.  18.    8  hath  executed  true  judgment  between 

18.  9  and  hath  keptmyjudgments,  todeal  truly 
Dan.  8.  26  vision  .which  was  told  (is)  true:  where. 

10.  1  thing  (was)  true,  but  the  time  appointed 
Zech.  7.    9  Execute  true  judgment,  and  show  mercy 

9. Set  up,  certain,  certainty,  3TP  yatstsib. 

Dan.   3.  24  They  answered  and  said  unto  the  king, True 

6. 12  king  answered  and  said,  The  tiling  (is)  true 

10.  That,  because,  "3  ki. 

Josh.  2.  24  Truly  the  Lord  hath  delivered  into  our 

11.  Might,  established,  n^ikenim. 

Gen.  42.  n  we  (are)  true  (men),  thy  servants  are  no 
42. 19  If  ye  (be)  true  (men),  let  one  of  your  br. 
42.  31  we  said.  .We  (are)  true  (men) ;  we  are  no 
42.  33  Hereby  shall  I  know  that  ye  (are)  true  men 
42.  34  ye  (are)  no  spies,  but  (that)  ye  (are)  true 

12.  Truth,  laid  plan,  vcv$tseda. 

Dan.  3.  14  true, OShadrach,Meshach, and  Abed-nego 

13.  To  tithe,  -ray  asar,  3. 

Deut.14.  22  Thou  shalt  truly  tithe  all  the  increase  of 

14.  Upon  {or  of)  truth,  (eV)  aAvOslas  (epi)  alethei. 
Luke2o.  2i  thou,  .teachest  the  way  of  God  truly 

15. True,  genuine,  honest,  sincere,  a\n8r)s  alethes. 
Matt  22. 16  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and  teachest 
Marki2.  14  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and  carest  for 
John  3.  33  He.  .hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true 

4.  18  not  thy  husband:  in  that  saidst  thou  truly 

5.  31  witness  of  myself,  my  "witness  is  not  true 

5.  32  witness  which  he  witnesseth  of  me  is  true 

7.  18  same  is  true,  and  no  unrighteousness  is  in 

8. 13  Pharisees  therefore  said . .  record  is  not  tr. 

8. 14  my  record  is  true  :  for  I  know  whence  I  ca. 
8. 16  yet  if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  [true],  for 

8.  17  that  the  testimony  of  two  men  is  true 

8.  26  but  he  that  sent  me  is  true  ;  aud  I  speak  to 
10. 41  things  that  John  spake  of  this  man  were  t. 

19.  35  and  he  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye 
21.  24  and  we  know  that  his  testimony  is  true 

■    Acts  12.    9  wist  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  done 
Rom.  3.  4  yea,  let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar 
2  Co.  6.    8  good  report :  as  deceivers,  and  (yet)  true 
Phil.  4.    8  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever 
Titus  1. 13  This  witness  is  true.   Wherefore  rebuke 

1  Pe.  5.  12  testifyingthatthisis  the  true  graceof  God 

2  Pe.  2.  22  happened,  .according  to  the  true  proverb 
1  Jo.  2.    8  which  thing  is  true  in  him  and  in  you,  be. 

3  John  12  record ;  and  ye  know  that  our  record  is  tr. 

16. True,  real,  sincere,  veracious,  aXnQivos  alethinor. 
Lukeio.  11  who  will  commit  to  your  trust  the  true 
John  1.    9  was  the  true  light,  which  lighteth  every 
4.  23  when  the  true  worshippers  shall  worship 

4.  37  herein  is  that  saying  true,  Onesoweth.and 

6.  32  my  Father  givetli  you  the  true  bread  from 
7. 28  he  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  know  not 

15.  1 1  am  the  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the 
17.  3  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God 
19.  35  bare  record,  and  his  record  is  true  :  and 

1  Tli.  1.   9  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  G. 

Heb.    8.    2  minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  of  the  true 

9.  24  hands,  (which  are)  the  figures  of  the  true 
10.  22  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  in  full 

1  Jo.   2.    8  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now 

5.  20  that  is  true ;  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true 
5  20  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life 

Rev.    3.    7  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of 
3. 14  saith  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  wi. 
6. 10  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and 

15.  3  just  and  true  (are)  thy  ways,  thou  king  of 

16.  7  Lord  God  Almighty,  true  and  righteous 
19.  2  For  true  and  righteous  (are)  his  judgments 
19.    9  saith  unto  me,  These  are  the  true  sayings 
19. 11  sat  upon  him.  .called  Faithful  and  True 

21.  5  Write ;  for  these  words  are  true  and  fai. 

22.  6  These  sayings  (are)  faithful  and  true,  and 

17.  Truly,  really,  certainly,  aKndws  alethos. 

Matti4.  33  saying,  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God 

27.  54  feared  greatly,  saying,  Truly  this  was  the 
Markis.  39  said,  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God 
Luke  9.  27  But  I  tell  j'ou  of  a  truth,  There  he  some 

12. 44  Of  a  truth  I  say  unto  you,  that  he  will  ma. 

21.  3  Of  a  truth  I  say  unto  you,  that  this  poor 
John  6.  14  This  is  of  a  truth  that  prophet  that  should 

7.  40  Many . .  said ,  Of  a  truth  this  is  the  prophet 
1  Th.  2. 13  but,  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  word  of  God,  wh. 


IS. In  deed,  in  truth,  then,  therefore,  &pa  ara. 
Luken.  48  Truly  ye  bear  witness  that  ye  allow  the 

19.  Genuine,  legitimate,  yviivios  gnesios. 

Phil.  4.    3  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  yoke  fellow,  help 

20.  Truly,  indeed,  fiev  men. 

Matt.  9.  37  The  harvest  truly  (is)  plenteous,  but  the 

17.  11  Elias  truly  shall  first  come,  and  restore  all 

Marki4.  38  spirit  truly(is)  ready,  but  the  flesh  (is)  we. 

Lukeio.    2  harvest  truly  (is)  great,  but  the  labourers 

22.  22  truly  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it  was  de. 
Acts    1.    5  For  John  truly  baptized  with  water;  but 

3.  22  For  Moses  truly  said  unto  the  fathers,  A 

5.  23  prison  [truly]  found  we  shut  with  all  saf. 
2  Co. 12.  12  Truly  the  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought 
Heb.  7.  23  they  truly  were  many  priests,  because  th. 

11. 15  truly,  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that 

21.  Therefore,  fxiv  ovv  men  oun. 

Johnzo.  30  many  other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the 

22.  Actually,  6vtq>s  ontOs. 

1  Co.  14.  25  and  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth 

23.  Steady,  faithful,  mo-Tos  pistos. 

2  Co.    1. 18  But.  .God  (is)  true,  our  word  toward  you 

1  Ti.    3.    1  This  (is)  a  true  saying,  If  a  man  desire  the 
TRUMP,  trumpet,  trumpeter  — 

l.Toblow  a  trumpet,  iku,  -issn  chatsotser,chatsar,^. 

2  Ch.   5. 13  It  came  even  to  pass,  as  the  trumpeters 
2,Trumpet,  rrjxiq  chatsotserah. 

Nuniio.    2  Make  thee  two  trumpets  of  silver  ;  of  a 
10.   8  priests,  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets :  and 
10.   9  ye  shall  blow  an  alarm  with  the  trumpets 
10.  10  ye  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets  over  your 
31.    6  and  the  trumpets  to  blow  in  his  hand 

2  Ki.n.  14  the  princes  and  the  trumpeters  by  the  ki. 
ti.  14  the  land  rejoiced,  and  blew  with  trumpets 
.  12.  13  snuffers,  basins,  trumpets,  any  vessels  of 

1  Ch.13.    8  timbrels,  and  with  cymbals,  and  with  tru. 

15.  24  did  blow  with  the  trumpets  before  the  ark 

15.  28  with  trumpets,  and  with  cymbals,  making 

16.  6  with  trumpets  continually  before  the  ark 
16.  42  with  trumpets  and  cymbals  for  those  that 

2  Ch.  5.  12  with  them,  .priests  sounding  with  trump. 

5. 13  as  the  trumpeters  and  singers  (were)  as  one 

13. 12  priests  with  sounding  trumpets  to  cry  al. 
13. 14  and  thepriests  sounded  with  thetrumpets 
15.  14  with  shouting,  and  with  trumpets,  and 
20.  28  harps  and  trumpets  unto  the  house  of  the 

23. 13  sounded  with  trumpets,  also  the  singers 

23.  13  and  the  princes  and  the  trumpets  by  the 
29.  26  Levites  stood,  .priests  with  the  trumpets 
29.  27  song,  .began (also)  with  the  trumpets,  and 
2g.  28  singers  sang,  aud  the  trumpeters  sounded 

Ezra  3. 10  the  priests  in  their  apparel  with  trumpets 
Neh.12.  35  (certain) of  thepriests'  sons  with  trumpets 
12.  41  Zechariah,  (and)Hananiah,  with  trumpets 
Psa.  98.  6  With  trumpets  and  sound  of  cornet  make 
Hos.    5.    8  Blow  ye.  .the  trumpet  in  Ramah:  cry  al. 

3.  Jubilee,  cornet,  rartis  horn,  73A'  yobel. 

Exodig.  13  when  the  trumpet  souncleth  long,  they 
i.Trumpet,  laiB"  shophar. 

Exodig.  16  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud 

19.  19  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  sounded 
20. 18  noise  of  the  trumpet,  and  the  mountain 

Lev.  25.    9  Then  shalt  thou  cause  the  trumpet  of  the 
25.   9  make  the  trumpet  sound  throughout  all 
Josh.  6.    4  before  the  ark  seven  trumpets  of  rams' 
6.   4  the  priests  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets 

6.  5  when  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 
6.    6  let  seven  priests  bear  seven  trumpets  of 
6.    8  seven  priests  bearing  the  seven  trumpets 
6.   8  blew  with  the  trumpets :  and  the  ark  of 
6.   9  the  priests  that  blew  with  the  trumpets 
6.    9  going  on,  and  blowing  with  the  trumpets 
6.  13  seven  priests  bearing  seven  trumpets  of 
6.  13  blew  with  the  trumpets..  blowmgwith..tr. 
6. 16  when  the  priests  blew  with  the  trumpets 
6.  20  blew  with  the  trumpets  :  and  it  came  to 
6.  20  people  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

Judg.  3.  27  that  he  blew  a  trumpet  in  the  mountain 

6.  34  blew  a  trumpet;  and  Abi-ezerwas  gathe. 

7.  8  took  victuals  in  their  hand,  and  their  tru. 
7.  16  he  put  a  trumpet  in  every  man's  hand 

7.  18  blow  with  a  trumpet,  .blow  ye  the  trum. 
7.  19  blew  the  trumpets,  and  brake  the  pitchers 
7.  20  blew  the  trumpets,  .aud  the  trumpets  in 
7.  22  three  hundred  blew  the  trumpets,  and  the 

1  Sa.  13.    3  blew  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the  land 

2  Sa.  2.  28  So  Joab  blew  a  trumpet,  and  all  the  people 

6.  15  shouting,  and  with  the  sound  of  the  tru. 
15.  10  soon  as  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

18. 16  Joab  blew  the  trumpet,  and  the  people  re. 

20.  1  blew  a  trumpet,  and  said,  We  have  no 
20.  22  blewatrumpet,  and  they  retired  from  the 

1  Ki.  1.  34  blow  ye  with  the  trumpet,  and  say,  God 

1.  39  blew  ye  the  trumpet ;  and  all  the  people 
1.  41  when  Joab  heard  the  sound  of  the  trum. 

2  Ki.  9.  13  blew  with  trumpets,  saying,  Jehu  is  king 
Neh.  4.  18  he  that  sounded  the  trumpet  (was)  by  me 

4.  20  what  place,  .ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  tr. 
Job    39.  24  believethhethat(it  is)  the  sound  of  thetr. 

39.  25  He  saith  among  the  trumpets,  Ha,  ha  I  and 
Psa.  47.    5  shout, the  LoRDwiththe  sound  of  atrum. 

81.   3  Blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  moon,  in 

150.   3  Praise  him  with  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

Isa.    18.    3  and  when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet,  hear  ye 

27. 13  great  trumpet  shall  be  blown,  and  they 

58.    1  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show 


TRUST 


1004 


TRUTH 


Jer. 


6. 

6. 

42. 

Eze. 

51- 

33- 

33- 

33- 

Hos 

33- 
8. 

Joel 

2. 

2. 

Amos  2. 

Zepl 
Zech 

3- 
.  i. 
■  9- 

5  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  the  land  :  cry,  gat. 
19  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  alarm  of 
21  standard,  (and)  hear  the  sound  of  the  tru. 

1  blow  the  trumpet  in  Tekoa,  and  set  up  a 
1 7  Hearken  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.    But 

14  nor  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  nor 
27  blow  the  trumpet  among  the  nations,  pr. 

3  he  blow  the  trumpet,  and  warn  the  people 

4  whosoever  heareth  the  sound  of  the  tru. 

5  He  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and 

6  blow  not  the  trumpet,  and  the  people  be 
1  (Set)  the  trumpet  to  thy  mouth.  (He  shall 

1  blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  and  sound 

15  Blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  sanctify  a  fast 

2  shall  die.  .with  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 
6  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  city  and 

16  A  day  of  the  trumpet  and  alarm  against 
14  Gop  shall  blow  the  trumpet,  and  shall  go 

5.A  trumpet,  K'lpJ?  taqoa, 

Eze.    7.  14  They  have  blown  the  trumpet,  even  to  m. 

6.-4  trumpet,  adkwiy%  salpigx. 

Matt24.  31  his  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trump. 
1  Co.  14.    8  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound 
15,  52  In  a  moment,  .at  the  last  trump:  for  the  t. 

1  Th.  4.  16  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God 
Heb.  12.  19  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of 
Rev.    1.  10  heard,  .a  great  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet 

4.    1  as  it  were  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  me 
8.   2  and  to  them  were  given  seven  trumpets 

8.  6  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  tru. 

8. 13  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  tram. 

9. 14  Saying  to.  .sixth  angel  which  had  the  tru. 

7. A  trumpeter,  (ra\TriaTi)s  salpistes. 

Rev.  18.  22  voice  of  harpers.,  musicians.,  trumpeters 
TRUST  — 
I. Refuge j  trust,  mon  chasuth. 

Isa.  30.  3  therefore  shall  the.  .trust  in  the  shadow 
2.  Confidence,  trust,  nan"?  mibtach. 

Job     8.  14  and  whose  trust  (shall  be)  a  spider's  web 

Psa.  40.    4  that  man  that  maketh  the  Lord  his  trust 
71.    5  0  Lord  God,  .my  trust  from  my  youth 

Prov.22.  19  That  thy  trust  may  be  in  the  Lord,  I  have 
Z.A  refuge,  nprio  machseh. 

Psa.  73.  28  I  have  put  my  trust  in  the  Lord  God,  that 
4.  Trust,  confidence,  Treiroidnais  pizpoUhesis. 

2  Co.  3.  4*  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God 
TRUST,  to  (commit  to,  first,  make  to,  put  in,  have)  — 
l.To  remain  stedfast,  give  credence,  jcx  avian,  5. 

Judgn.  20  Sihon  trusted  not  Israel  to  pass  through 

Job     4. 18  Behold,  he  put  no  trust  in  his  servants 

15.  15  Behold,  he  puttoth  no  trust  in  his  saints 

15.  31  Let  not  him  that  is  deceived  trust  in  van. 

Mic.    7.    5  Trust  ye  not  in  a  friend,  put  ye  not  conf. 

■l.To  Icon  on,  trust,  be  confident,  noa  batach. 

Deut28.  52  thy.  .walls  come  down,  wherein  thou  tru. 
Judg^o.  36  they  trusted  unto  the  liers  in  wait  which 
2  Ki.tS.  5  He  trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel;  so 
18.  19  What  confidence  (is)  this  wherein  thou  tr. 
18.  20  on  whom  dost  thou  trust,  that  thou  rebe. 
i3.  21  thou  trustest  upon  the  staff  of  this  bruised 
18.  21  so(is) Pharaoh,  .unto  all  that  trust  in  him 
iS.  22  if  ye  say  unto  me,  We  trust  in  the  LORD 

18.  24  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for  chariots  and 

19.  10  Let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou  trustest 

1  Ch.  5.  20  entreated,  .because  they  put  their  trust 

2  Ch.32.  10  Whereondo  ye  trust,  that  ye  abide  iu  the 
Job  39.  11  Wilt  thou  trust  him,  because  his  strength 

40.  23  he  trusteth  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan 
Tsa.    4.    5  Offer,  .and  put  your  trust  in  the  Lord 

9.  10  they  that  know  thy  name  will  put  their  t. 
13.    5  I  have  trusted  in  thy  mercy;  my  heart 

21.  7  the  king  trusteth  in  the  Lord;  and  thro 

22.  4  Our  fathers  trusted  in  thee ;  they  trusted 
22.    5  they  trusted  in  thee,  and  were  not  confo. 

25.  2  0  my  God,  I  trust  iu  thee  :  let  me  not  lie 

26.  1  Judgeme..I  have  trusted  also  iu  the  Lord 
28.    7  my  heart  trusted  in  him,  and  I  am  helped 

31.  6  I  have  hated  them,  .but  I  trust  in  the  Lo. 
31. 14  I  trusted  in  thee,  O  Lord  :  I  said,  Thou 

32.  10  he  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  mercy  shall 
33. 21  because  we  have  trusted  in  his  holy  name 
37.  3  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good ;  so  shalt 
37.    5  trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  (it) 

40.  3  many  shall  see  (it),  .and  shall  trust  in  the 

41.  9  mine  own  familiar  friend,  iu  whom  I  true. 
44.    6  I  will  not  trust  in  my  bow,  neither  shall 
49.    6  They  that  trust  iu  their  wealth,  and  boast 
52.   7  trusted  in  the  abundance  of  bis  riches 
52.   8  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and 
55. 23  shall  not  live,  .but  I  will  trust  in  thee 
56.    3  What  time  I  am  afraid,  I  will  trust  in  thee 
56.   4  iu  God  I  have  put  my  trust ;  Iwill  not  re 
56.  11  In  God  have  I  put  my  trust:  Iwillnot  be 
62.   8  Trust  in  him  at  all  times ;  ye  people,  pour 
62. 10  Trust  not  in  oppression,  and  become  not 
78.  22  they  believed  not  in  God,  and  trusted  not 
84.  12  blessed  (is)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  thee 
86.    2  save  thy  servant  that  trusteth  in  thee 
91.   2  my  fortress  :  my  God  ;  in  him  will  I  trust 

112.    7  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  LORD 
115.   8  (so  is)  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them 
115.    9  O  Israel,  trust  thou  in  the  Lord:  he(is)th. 
115. 10  O  house  of  Aaron,  trust  in  the  Lord:  he 
115.  11  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  trust  in  the  LORD 
119.42  wherewith  to  answer.. for  I  trust  in  thy 
125.    1  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  (shall  be)  as 


Psa.135.  iS  (so  is)  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them  ■ 

143.  8  Cause  me  to  hear,  .for  in  thee  do  I  trust 
146.    3  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  (nor)  in  the 

Prov.  3.    5  Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart ;  and 

11.  28  He  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  fall:  but 

16.  20  whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  happy  (is)  he 
28.  25  he  that  puttetli  his  trust  iu  the  Lord  shall 

28.  26  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool 

29.  25  whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall 
31.  11  The  heart  of  her  husband  doth,  .trust  in 

Isa.  12.  2  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid :  for  the  L. 
26.  3  wilt  keep  (him),  .because  he  trusteth  in  th. 
26.    4  Trust  ye  iu  the  Lord  for  ever:  for  in  the 

30.  12  trust  in  oppression  and  perverseness,  and 

31.  1  stay  on  horses,  and  trust  in  chariots,  bee. 
36.  4  What  confidence  (is)  this  wherein  thou  tr.? 
36.  5  on  whom  dost  thou  trust,  that  thou  rebe. 
36.  6  thou  trustest  in  the  start' of  this  broken  le. 
36.  6  so  (is)  Pharaoh,  .to  all  that  trust  in  him 
36.    7  if  thou  say  to  me,  We  trust  in  the  Lord 

36.  9  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for  chariots  and  for 

37.  10  Let  not  thy  Godiuwhom  thoutrustestde. 
42.  17  they  shall  be  greatly  ashamed,  that  trust 

47.  10  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  wickedness :  thou 
50. 10  let  him  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and 
59.    4  they  trust  in  vanity,  and  speak  lies ;  they 

Jer.  5. 17  thy  fenced  cities,  wherein  thou  trustedst 
7.  4  Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,  saying,  The 
7.  8  ye  trust  in  lying  words,  that  cannot  profit 
7.  14  will  I  do  unto  (this)  house.,  wherein  ye  tr. 
9.    4  Take  ye  heed . .  and  trust  ye  not  in  any  br. 

12.  5  (if)  in  the  land  of  peace,  (wherein)  thoutr. 

13.  25  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  trusted  in  fa. 

17.  5  Cursed  (be)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man 
17.  7  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  trusteth  in  the 
39.  18  because  thou  hast  put  thy  trust  in  me,  sa. 
46.  25  even  Pharaoh,  and  (all)  them  that  trust 

48.  7  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  works  and  in  thy 

49.  4  that  trusted  in  her  treasures,  (saying),  Who 
49.  11  I  will  preserve,  .and  let  thy  widows  trust 

Eze.  10.  15  thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  beauty,  and 

33.  13  if  he  trust  to  his  own  righteousness,  and 
Hos.  10. 13  because  thou  didst  trustinthy  way,  in  the 
Amos  6.  1  Woe  to  them  (that),  .trust  in  the  mount. 
Hab.  2.  1 8  that  the  maker  of  his  work  trusteth  ther. 
Zeph.  3.    2  she  trusted  not  in  the  Lord;  she  drew  not 

3.7*0  (cause  to)  trust,  be  confident,  ns'zbatach,  5. 
2  Ki.18.  30  Neither  let  Hezekiah  make  you  trust  in 
Isa.  36.  15  Neither  let  Hezekiah  make  you  trust  iu 
Jer.  28.  15  thou  makest  this  people  to  trust  in  a  lie 

29.  31  Shemaiah.  .caused  you  to  trust  in  a  lie 

4.  To  roll  on,  devolve,  ?^a  galal. 

Psa.  22.    8  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  (that)  he  would 

5.  To  stay  self,  S'n,  "?in  chul,  chil,  3a. 

Job  35.  14  judgment  (is)  before  him ;  therefore  trust 

6.7*0  take  refuge,  trust,  non  chasah. 

Deut32.  37  Where,  .their  gods.  .rock  in  whom  they  tr. 
Judg.  9.  15  come.. put  your  trust  in  my  shadow,  and 
Ruth  2.  12  under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  trust 
2  Sa.  22.    3  The  God  of  my  rock  ;  in  him  will  I  trust 
22.  31  he  (is)  a  buckler  to  all  them  that  trust  in 
Psa.    2.  12  Blessed  (are)  all  they  that  put  their  trust 
5.  11  let  all  those  that  put  their  trust  in  thee 
7.    1  0  Lord.. in  thee  do  I  put  my  trust:  save 
11.    1  In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust:  how  say  ye 

16.  1  Preserve  me.  .in  thee  do  I  put  my  trust 

17.  7  savest  them  which  put  their  trust  (in  thee) 

18.  2  my  strength,  in  whom  I  will  trust ;  my  bu. 
18.  30  he  (is)  a  buckler  to  all  those  that  trust  in 
25.  20  let  me  not  be  ashamed,  for  I  put  my  trust 
31.    1  In  thee,  O  LORD,  do  I  put  my  trust;  let 
31.  19  thou  hast  wrought  for  them  that  trust  in 

34.  8  blessed  (is)  the  man  (that)  trusteth  in  him 
34. 22  none  of  them  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  de. 

36.  7  the  children  of  men  put  their  trust  under 

37.  40  and  save  them,  because  they  trust  in  him 
57.  1  my  soul  trusteth  iu  thee  :  yea,  in  the  sha. 
6:.  4  I  will  abide.  .1  will  trust  in  the  covert  of 
64.  10  The  righteous,  .shall  trust  in  him  ;  and  all 
71.  1  In  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  put  my  trust ;  let 
91.   4  underhis  wings  shalt  thou  trust:  his  truth 

11S.  8,  9  (It  is)  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than 
141.    8  in  thee  is  my  trust;  leavenot  my  soul  de. 

144.  2  my  shield,  and  (he)  in  whom  I  trust;  who 
Prov  30.  5  a  shield  unto  them  that  put  their  trust  in 
Isa.    14.  32  and  the  poor  of  his  people  shall  trust  hi 

30.  2  go  down.. to  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Esrypt? 
57. 13  he  that  putteth  his  trust  in  me  shall  pes. 

Nab.   1.    7  and  he  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  him 
Zeph.  3.  12  they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

7.  To  (make  to)  wait  with  hope,  bn-r  yachal,  3. 

Job   13. 15  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him 
Isa.   51.    5  the  isles,  .on  mine  arm  shall  they  trust 

S.  To  trust  one's  self  on,  jth  reclmts,  7. 

Dan.    3.  28  delivered  his  servants  that  trusted  in  him 

9.7*0  hope,  eA7ri£oj  elpixo. 

Matt  12.  21  And  in  his  name  shall  the  Gentiles  trust 
Luke24-  21  we  trusted  that  it  had  been  he  which  sh. 
John  5.  45  there  is  (one),  .even  Moses,  in  whom  yetr. 
Rom. 15.  12  Esaias  saith.  .in  him  shall  the  Gentiles  tr. 
15.  24  I  trust  to  see  you  in  my  journey,  and  to 

1  Co.  16.   7  I  trust  to  tan'y  a  while  with  you,  if  the 

2  Co.   1. 10  in  whom  we  trust  that  he  will  yet  deliver 

1. 13  I  trust  ye  shall  acknowledge  even  to  the 

5.  11  I  trust  also  are  made  manifest  in  yourco. 

13.   6  I  trust  that  ye  shall  know  that  we*  are  not 

Phil.  2.  19  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timoth. 


1  Ti.    4.  to  we  trust  in  the  living  God,  who  is  the  sa. 

5.  5  trusteth  in  God,  and  continueth  in  supp. 

6.  17  nor  trust  iu  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the 
Phm.      22  I  trust  that  through  your  prayers  I  shall 

1  Pe.  3.    5  the  holy  women  also,  who  trusted  in  God 

2  John   12  I  trust  to  come  unto  you,  and  speak  face 

3  John  14  I  trust  I  shall  shortly  sec  thee,  and  we  sh. 

10.  To  persuade,  ireiOw  ptitho. 

Matt 27. 43  He  trusted  in  God;  let  him  deliver  him 
.Markio.  24  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches 
Luken.  22  he  taketh.  .his  armourwherein  he  trusted 

18.  9  certain  which  trusted  in  themselves  that 
2  Co.   1.    9  should  not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in  God 

10.  7  If  any  man  trust  to  himself  that  he  is  Ch. 
Phil.    2.  24  1  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also  myself  sh. 

3.   4  that  he  hath  whereof  he  might  trust  in 
Heb.    2. 13  And  again,  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him.  And 

13.  18  we  trust  we  have  a  good  conscience,  in  all 

11.  To  trust,  have  confidence,  believe,  Trio-rev" (0  piste. 
Lukei6.  11  who  will  commit  to  your  trust  the  true 

1  Th.  2.   4  allowed. .to  be  put  in  trust  withiTi.i.n 

12.7*0  hope  first  or  before  others,  irpoe\Tri^a>  prod. 
Eph.   1.  is  beto  the  praise  of  his  glory,  who  first  trust. 
TRUSTY  — 
To  be  steady,  J£N  a/man,  2. 

Job   12. 20  He  removeth  away  the  speech  of  the  tru. 
TRUTH,  (of  a)  — 
l.Steo fastness,  pes  emun. 

Isa.  26.   2  that  the . .  nation  which  kecpeth  the  truth 
2.  Stedfastness,  stability,  .tjidm  emunah. 

Deut.32.    4  a  God  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity,  just 

Psa.  89.  49  thou  swarest  unto  David  in  thy  truth? 

96.  13  he  shall  judge,  .the  people  with  his  truth 

98.    3  hath  remembered  his  mercy  and  liis  truth 

100.    5  and  his  truth  (enduretb)  to  all  generations 

119.  30  I  have  chosen  the  way  of  truth;  thy  judg. 

Prov.  12.  17  (He  that)  speaketh  truth  showeth  forth  ri. 

Isa.  59.    4  None  calleth.  .nor  (any)  pleadeth  for  truth 

Jer.     5.    1  if  there  be  (any),  .that  seeketh  the  truth 

5.   3  0  Lord,  (are)  not  thine  eyes  upon  the  tr.? 

7.  28  truth  is  perished,  and  is  cut  off  from  their 
9.   3  they  are  not  valiant  forthe  truth  upon  the 

3.^1  men,  so  it  is,  so  be  it,  jcx  amen. 

Isa.   65. 16  in  the  God  of  truth . .  by  the  God  of  truth 
<±.  Stedfast,  ]dn  omen. 

Isa.   25.    1  counsels  of  old  (are)  faithfulness  (and)  tr. 

5.  Stedfastness,  truth,  ncx  emeth. 

Gen.  24.  27  left  destitute!  .of  his  mercy  and  his  truth 
32.  10  I  am  not  worthy,  .of  all  the  truth,  which 
42. 16  proved,  whether  (there  be  any)  truth  in 
ExodiS.  21  such  as  fear  God,  men  of  truth,  hating  co. 

34.    6  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth 
Deut.13.  14  (if  it  be)  truth,  and  the  thing  certain,  (th.) 
Josh. 24.  14  and  serve  him  in  sincerity  and  in  truth 
Judg.  9.  15  If  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  over  you 

1  Sa.  12.  24  and  serve  him  in  truth  with  all  your  he. 

2  Sa.    2.    6  now  the  Lord  show  kindness  and  truth 

15. 20  return  thou . .  mercy  and  truth  (lie)  with 

1  Ki.   2.    4  to  walk  before  me  in  truth  with  all  their 

3.  6  he  walked  before  thee  in  truth,  and  In  ri. 
17.  24  the  word  of  the  Lorj>  in  thy  mouth  (is)  tr. 

2  Ki.20.    3  I  have  walked  before  thee  iu  truth  and 

20. 19  (Is  it)  not  (good),  if  peace  and  truth  be  in 
2  Ch.  18.  15  that  thou  say  nothing  but  the  truth  to  me 

31.  20  wrought,  .good  and  right  and  truth  before 
Esth.  9.  30  he  sent,  .(with)  words  of  peace  and  truth 
Psa.  15.    2  He  that,  .speaketh  the  truth  in  his  heart 

25.  5  Lead  me  in  thy  truth,  and  teach  me,  for 
25. 10  the  paths  of  the  Lord  (are)  mercy  aud  tr. 

26.  3  and  I  have  walked  in  thy  truth 

30.  9  dust  praise  thee?  shall  it  declare  thy  truth? 

31.  5  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God  oft. 
40. 10  I  have  not  concealed,  .thy  truth  from  the 
40.  1 1  let  thy  loving  kindness  and  thy  truth  con. 
43.  3  0  send  out  thy  light  and  thy  truth :  let 
45.  4  because  of  truth  and  meekness  (and)  rig. 
51.  6  thou  desirest  truth  in  the  inward  parts 
54.  5  mine  enemies :  cut  them  off  in  thy  truth 
57.  3  God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  his  tr. 
57.  10  unto  the  heavens,  and  thy  truth  uuto  the 
61.  7  prepare  mercy  and  truth,  which  (may)  pre. 
69.  13  0  God.  .hear  me,  in  the  truth  of  thy  salv. 
71.  22  I  will  also  praise,  .thy  truth,  0  my  God 

85. 10  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together;  right. 

85. 11  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth  ;  and 
86. 11  I  will  walk  in  thy  truth :  unite  my  heart 
S6.  15  (art)  a  God.  .plenteous  in  mercy  and  truth 
Sg.  14  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face 
91.   4  his  truth  (shall  be  thy)  shield  and  buckler 

108.  4  aud  thy  truth  (reaeheth)  unto  the  clouds 
in.  8  (and  are)  done  in  truth  and  uprightness 
115.  t  for  thy  mercy,  (and)  for  thy  truth's  sake 
117.  2  and  the  truth  of  the  Lord  (enduretb)  for 
119.  43  take  not  the  word  of  truth  utterly  out  of 
119. 142  Thy  righteousness,  thy  law  (is)  the  tru  tn 
119. 151  Thou  (art)  near .  .all  thy  commandments 
132.  11  The  Lord  hath  sworn  (in)  truth  unto  Da, 
138.    2  for  thy  loving  kindness  and  for  thy  truth 

145.  iS  nigh,  .to  all  that  call  upon  him  in  truth 

146.  6  Which  made  heaven  . .  which  keepeth  tru. 
Prov.  3.    3  Let  not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee. bind 

8.  7  my  mouth  shall  speak  truth ;  and  wicked. 
12.  19  The  lip  of  truth  shall  be  established  for 
14.  22  mercy  and  truth  (shall  be)  to  them  that  de. 
;6.    6  By  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is  purged 
20.28  Mercy  and  truth  preserve  the  king;  and 


TRUTH 


1005 


TURN 


Eccl.  12 

Isa.   10 

16. 

38. 
38, 
38. 
39' 
42. 

43 
48. 

59- 

59> 

61. 

4 

9 

33 

Dan.   8 

9 


Hos.  4. 
Mic.  7. 
Zeoh.  8 


Jer. 


Mai. 


21  know  the  certainty  of  the  words  of  truth 
zi  mightest  answer  the  words  of  truth  to  th. 
23  Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  (it)  not ;  (also)  wi. 
10  (that  which  was)  written  (was),  .wordsoft. 
20  stay  upon. .the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  in  truth 

5  he  shall  sit  upon  it  in  truth  in  the  tabern. 

3  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth  and 

18  they  that  go . .  cannot  hope  for  thy  truth 

19  to  the  children  shall  make  known  thy  tr. 

8  there  shall  he  peace  and  truth  in  my  days 
3  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth 

9  or  let  them  hear,  and  say,  (It  is)  truth 

1  (but)  not  in  truth,  nor  in  righteousness 

14  truth  is  fallen  in  the  street,  and  equity 

15  Yea,  truth  faileth;  and  he  (that)  depart. 
8  I  will  direct  their  work  in  truth,  and  I 

2  The  Lord  liveth,  in  truth,  in  judgment 

5  will  deceive . .  and  will  not  speak  the  truth 

6  reveal,  .the  abundance  of  peace  and  truth 

12  it  cast  down  the  truth  to  the  ground ;  and 

13  we  might  turn . .  and  understand  thy  truth 
2r  which  is  noted  in  the  scripture  of  truth 

2  now  will  I  show  thee  the  truth.  Behold 
1  (there  is)  no  truth,  nor  mercy,  nor  kuowl. 

20  Thou  wilt  perform  the  truth  to  Jacob, (and) 

3  Jerusalem  shall  he  called,  A  city  of  truth 
8  I  will  be  their  God,  in  truth  and  in  right. 

16  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neig. 
16  execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace 
19  cheerful  feasts ;  therefore  love  the  truth 

6  The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth,  and 


6.  To  be  set  up,  certain,  trite,  2y:  yetseb,  3. 

Dan.   7.  19  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the  fourth  be. 

7.  Set  up,  certain,  true,  3'V!  yaistsib. 

Dan.   7. 16  I  came,  .and  asked  him  the  truth  of  all 

8.  Truth,  m\vp  qeslwt. 

Dan.   4.  37  king' of  heaven,  all  whose  works'(are)  truth 
2.  47  Of  a  truth  (it  is),  that  your  God  (is)  a  God 

9. Truth,  to&p  qpshet. 

Psa.  60.   4  that  it  maybe  displayed  because  of  the  t. 

10.  Truth,  toyp  qoskt. 

Pro v  22.  21  know  the  certainty  of  the  words  of  truth 


U.  Truth, 

Matt  22. 

Mark  5. 

12. 

12. 

Luke  4. 

22. 

John  1. 

1. 

3- 

4- 

4- 

5- 


14. 
14. 
15- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
17- 
18. 
18. 
18. 
Acts  4. 
10. 


26. 


Kom. 


3- 
9- 
15- 

1  Co.  5. 

„    13' 

2  CO.   4- 

6. 
7- 
7- 


Gal. 


Eph.  1. 


Phil. 
Col. 


2  Th.  2. 


iTi. 


akwQeta  alethia. 

16  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth,  neither 
33  came  and  fell .  .and  told  him  all  the  truth 
14  but  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth 

32  thou  hast  said  the  truth ;  for  there  is  one 

25  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  many  widows  were 
59  Of  a  truth  this  (fellow)  also  was  with  him 
14  beheld  his  glory,  .full  of  grace  and  truth 

17  (but)  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Chr. 
21  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light 

23  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth 

24  they,  .must  worship,  .in  spirit  and  in  tr. 

33  John,  and  he  bare  witness  unto  the  truth 
32  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shah 
40  a  man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth,  wh. 

44  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  tru. 

45  because  I  tell  (you)  the  truth,  ye  believe 

46  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe 

6  I  am  the  way, and  the  truth,  and  the  life,  no 
17  (Even)  the  spirit  of  truth;  whom  the  wor. 

26  the  spirit  of  truth,  which  proceedeth  from 

7  I  tell  you  the  truth  ;  It  is  expedient  for 
13  Howbeit  when  he,  the  spirit  of  truth,  is 

13  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth:  for  lie 

17  Sanctify .  .thy  truth  :  thy  word  is  truth 
ig  also  might  be  sanctified  through  the  truth 
37  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth 

37  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my 

38  Pilate  saith  unto  him,  What  is  truth?  And 

27  For  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  Jes. 

34  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  resp. 

25  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  sober. 

18  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness 
25  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 

2  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth 

8  unto  them  that,  .do  not  obey  the  truth 

20  which  hast  the  form  of  knowledge,  .truth 

7  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  more  abounded 

1  I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  c. 

8  minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth 
8  the  unleavened  (bread)  of  sincerity  and  tr. 

6  Rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but.  .in  the  tr. 

2  by  manifestiou  of  the  truth  commending 

7  By  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of  G. 

14  as  we  spake  all  things  to  you  in  truth,  ev. 
14  which  (I  made)  before  Titus,  isfounda  tr. 
10  As  the  truth  of  Christ  is  in  me,  no  man 

6  I  will  say  the  truth  :  but  (now)  I  forbear 

8  nothingagainst  the  truth,  but  for  the  trut. 
5  that  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  might  conti. 

14  walked  not.  .according  to  the  truth  of  the 
1  [that  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth,  before] 

7  that  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth 

13  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the 

21  have  been  taught  by  him,  as  the  truth  is 
25  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour 

9  all  goodness  and  righteousness  and  truth 

14  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth 

.  18  whether  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,  Christ 

5  ye  heard  before  in  the  word  of  the  truth 

6  heard . .  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  tru. 
10  because  they  received  not.  .love  of  the  t. 

12  might  be  damned  who  believed  not  thetr. 

13  chosen  you.  .through,  .belief  of  the  truth 
4  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 


[Ti. 


2TL 

3- 

3- 

4- 

Titus  1. 

Heb. 

Jas. 

3- 

5- 

1  Pe. 

2  Pe.  1. 


3- 
3- 
4- 

5- 

2  John 


3  John 


7  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ,  (and)  he  not 
15  church ..  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth 

3  them  which  believe  and  know  the  truth 
5  disputings  of  men.  .destitute  of  the  truth 

15  workman.. rightly  dividing  the  word  of  t. 
18  Who  concerning  the  truth  have  erred,  sa. 

25  repentance  to.  .acknowledging  of  the  tru. 

7  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  tru. 

5  so  do  these  also  resist  the  truth  :  men  of 

4  shall  turn  away  (their)  ears  from  the  tru. 

1  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth  which  is 
14  fables,  .of  men,  that  turn  from  the  truth 

26  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 

18  begat  he  us  with  the  word  of  truth,  that 
14  glory  not,  and  he  not  against  the  truth 

19  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and 
22  in  obeying  the  truth  through  the  spirit 
12  and  be  established  in  the  present  truth 

2  by  reason  of  whom  the  way  of  truth  shall 

6  walk  in  darkness,  we.  .do  not  the  truth 

8  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not 
4  He  that  saith.  .is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is 

21  not  written,  .because  ye  know  not  the  tr. 
21  ye  know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is  of  the  truth 

18  let  us  not  love  in  word.. but.. in  truth 

19  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  sh. 
6  Hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  truth,  and 
6  beareth  witness,  because  the  spirit  is  tr. 
1  her  children,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth 

1  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  truth 

2  For  the  truth's  sake,  which  dwelleth  in 

3  Grace  be  with  you.  .in  truth  and  love 

4  I  found  of  thychildren  walking  intruth,  as 
1  well  beloved  Gaius,  whom  I  love  in  the  tr. 
3  testified  of  the  truth,  .walkest  in  the  tru. 
4.  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth 

8  we  might  he  fellow  helpers  to.  .tr.  v.  10. 
1%.  Indeed,  ovtcos  ontos,  1  Co.  14.  25. 

IS.  True,  genuine,  hottest,  sincere,  ahndrjs  alethes. 
1  Jo.  2.  27  is  truth,  and  is  no  he,  and  even  as  it  hath 

Ik.Verily,  indeed,  truly,  vai  nai. 

Mattis.  27  Truth,  Lord:  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  cru. 

TRUTH,  to  tell  or  speak  the  — 

To  speak  truly,  or  tlie  truth,  aKvBeuco  aletheuo. 
Gal.    4.  16  your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  truth 
Eph.  4. 15  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  may  grow  up 

TRY,  be  tried,  to  — 

l.To  try,  prove,  test,  Jn3  bach  an. 

1  Ch.29.  17  I  know  also,  my  God,  that  thou  triestthe 
Job     7.  18  visit  him  everymorning,  (and)  try  him  e  v. 

12.  11  Doth  not  the  ear  try  words?  and  the  mc. 

23. 10  he  hath  tried  me,  I  shall  come  forth  as 

34.   3  For  the  ear  trieth  words,  as  the  mouth  ta. 

Psa.     7.    9  the  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts  and 

11.    4  behold,  hiseyelids  try,  the  children  of  men 

11.   5  Lord  trieth  the  righteous ;  but  the  wicked 

139.  23  Search  me . .  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts 

Prov.17.   3  for  gold  :  but  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts 

Jer.    6.  27  that  thou  mayest  know  and  try  their  way 

9.    7  I  will  melt  them,  and  try  them,  for  how 

1 1.  20  that  triest  the  reins  and  the  heart,  let  me 

12.  3  hast  seen  me,  and  tried  mine  heart  toward 
17. 10  try  the  reins,  even  to  give  every  man  ace. 
20. 12  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triest  the  righteous 

Zech.13.   9  will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried,  they  shall 

2.  To  search,  investigate,  ipn  chaqar. 

Lam.   3.  40  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn 

S.To  try,  prove,  npj  nasah,  3. 

2  Ch.32. 31  God  left  him,  to  try  him,  that  he  might 

4.  To  refine,  try,  purify,  *yyi  tsaraph. 

Judg  7.    4  bring  them  down,  .and  I  will  try  them  for 

Psa.  17.    3  thou  hast  tried  me,  (and)  shalt  find  nothi. 

26.    2  Examine  me . .  try  my  reins  and  my  heart 

66. 10  thou,  O  God.,  hast  tried  us,  as  silver  istr. 

105. 19  word  came :  the  word  of  the  LORD  tried 

Dan.  11.  35  to  try  them,  and  to  purge,  and  to  make 

5.  To  try,  assay,  prove,  SoKL/j.d(w  dokimazd. 

1  Co.  3. 13  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what 
1  Th.  2.    4  pleasing.  .God,  which  trieth  our  hearts 
1  Pe.   1.  7  of  your  faith . .  though  it  be  tried  with  fire 
1  Jo.  4.    1  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God 

Q.To  try,  tempt,  pierce  through,  ireipd£a  peirazd. 
Heb.  11.  i7By  faith  Abraham,  when  be  was  tried,  off. 
Rev.    2.    2  thou  hast  tried  them  which  say  they  are 

2. 10  cast,  .you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be  tr. 

3.  10  come,  .to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  ea. 

7.  For  a  trial, proving,  temptation,  it 06s  Treipa<r/j.6v. 
1  Pe.    4.  12  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 

S.  To  be  set  on  fire,  -nvpoop-ai  puroomai. 

Rev.    3. 18  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in 

TRYING  — 

A  proof,  tes&t  ^oKifxtov  dokimion. 

Jas.    1.    3  the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh  patience 

TRY-PHE'-NA,  Tpixpaiva. 

A  female  in  Rome,  to  whom  Paid  sends  a  salutation. 
Rom  16.  12  Salute  T.  and  Tryphosa,  who  labour  in  the 

TRY-PHO'-SA,  Tpvcpwo-a. 

A  female  in  Rome,  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 
Rom  16. 13  Salute  Tryphena  and  T.,  who  labour  in  the 


TU'-BAL,   bin,  ^ffl. 

1.  A  son  of  Japheth.     B.C.  2300. 

Gen.  10.  2  and  Javan,andT.,  and  Meshech,  audTiras 
1  Ch.  1.    5  and  Javan,  and  T.,  and  Meshech,  and  Tiras 

2.  The  Tibarenes,  S.  of  Black  Sea,  and  W.  of  Colchis, 
whence  they  went  to  Spain,  Sicily,  &c. 

Isa.  66.  19  I  will  send  those  that  escape .  .(to)  T.  and 
Eze.  27.  13  Javan,  T.,  and  Meshech,  they  (were)  thy 
32.  26  There  (is)  Meshech,  T.,  and  all  her  mult. 

38.  2,  3  Gog.the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  T. 

39.  1  Gog,  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  T. 

TTJ-BAL  CA'-LN,  }*p  few. 

Son  of  Zillah,  one  of  Lamech's  wives,  and  sister  of 

Naamah,  of  the  race  of  Cain.     B.C.  3800. 

Gen.    4.  22  T.,  an  instructor,  .and  the  sister  of  T. 
TUMBLE,  to  — 
To  turn  self,  tumble,  ~?n  haphak,  7. 

Judg.  7.  13  a  cake  of  barley  bread  tumbled  into  the 
TUMULT,  (to  make  a),  tumultuous  — 
l.Sons  of  desolation,  wasting,  noise,  y\try  'la&ene. 

Jer.  48.  45  crown  of  the  head  of  the  tumultuous  ones 

2.  To  roar,  move,  sound,  make  a  noise,  rtprj  hemah. 

Psa.  83.   2  For,  lo,  thine  enemies  make  a  tumult 
Isa.   22.    2  Thou  that  art  full  of  stirs,  a  tumultuous 

3.  Multitude,  noise,  stone,  ]ion  hamon. 

1  Sa.    4. 14  What  (meaneth)  the  noise  of  this  tumult  ? 

2  Sa.  18.  29  I  saw  a  great  tumult,  but  I  knew  not  wh. 
Psa.  65.  7  Which  stilleth  the  noise,  .and  the  tumult 
Isa.  33.   3  At  the  noise  of  the  tumult  the  people  fled 

^.Tumult,  'iS^r?  hamullah. 

Jer.  11.  1 6*  with  the  noise  of  a  great  tumult  he  hath 

5.  Trouble,  destruction,  rDinp  mehumah. 

Amos  3.  9  and  behold  the  great  tumults  in  the  midst 
Zech  14. 13  a  great  tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be 

6.  Desolation,  toasting,  noise,  fitty  shaon. 

Psa.  74.  23  the  tumult  of  those  that  rise  up  against 
Isa.    13.    4  a  tumultuous  noise  of  the  kingdoms  of 
Hos.  10.  14  Therefore  shall  a  tumult  arise  among  thy 
Amos  2.    2  Moab  shall  die  with  tumult,  with  shout. 

7. At  ease,  quiet,  insolent*,  ]ikw  shaanan. 

2  Ki.  19.  28  Because  thy  rage  against  me  and  thy  tu. 
Isa.     37.  29  Because  thy  rage  against  me,  and  thy  tu. 

8. Instability,  hKarao-r  atria  o.katastasia. 

2  Co.  6.    5  In  stripes,  in  imprisonments,  in  tumults 

12.  20  backbitings,  whisperings,  swellings,  turn. 

9.^4  tumidt,iumultuous  assembly,  Qopv&os  thoritbos. 
Matt27-  24  When  Pilate  saw  that,  .rather  a  tumult 
Mark  5.  38  seeth  the  tumult,  and  them  that  wept 
Acts  2i.  34  could  not  know  the  certainty  for  the  turn. 
24. 18  neither  with  multitude,  nor  with  tumult 

TURN,  turning  — 

1.  Corner,  angle,  turning,  usj?o  miqtsoa. 

2  Ch.26.  9  Uzziah  built  towers,  .at  the  turning  (of 
Keh.  3.  19,  20,  24,  25  the  turning  (of  the  wall) 

l.To  be  turned  round  about,  259  sabab,  6. 

Eze.  41.  24  the  doors  had  two  leaves,  .two  turning 
Z.To  turn  back,  3W»  shub. 

2  Ch.36.  13  hardened  his  heart  from  turning  unto 
b.Turn,  row,  garland,  "iin  tor. 

Esth.  2. 12  when  every  maid's  turn  was  come  to  go 
2. 15  when  the  turn  of  Esther,  the  daughter  of 

5.A  turning,  rpoirt)  trope. 

Jas.     1.  17  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turn. 
TURN  (to,  unto,  back),  be  turned,  to  — 
l.To  exult,  ywduts. 

Job    41.  22  and  sorrow  is  turned  into  joy  before  him 
2. To  turn,  be  turned,  overturn,  "?n  haphak. 

Exodio.  19  the  Lord  turned  a  mighty  strong  west  wi. 

Lev.  13.    3  the  hah- in  the  plague  is  turned  white,  and 

13.  4  hair  thereof  be  not  turned  white ;  then 
13.  10  it  have  turned  the  hair  white,  and  (there 
13.  13  plague :  it  is  all  turned  white :  he  (is)  cl. 
13.  20  hair  thereof  be  turned  white ;  the  priest 

Deut23-    5  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing  unto  thee 
Josh.  7.   8  when  Israel  turneth  their  backs  before 
1  Sa.25.  12  So  David's  young  men  turned  their  way 

1  Ki.22.  34  Turn  thine  hand,  and  carry  meout  of  the 

2  Ki.  9. 23  Joram  turned  his  hands,  and  fled,  and  sa. 

zi.  13  wiping  (it),  and  turning  (it)  upside  down 
2  Ch.  9. 12  So  she  turned,  and  went  away  to  her  own 
18.  33  Turn  thine  hand,  that  thou  mayest  cany 
Xeh.  13.    2  howbeit  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a 
Psa.  30.  11  Thouhastturnedformemymourninginto 
66.    6  He  tinned  the  sea  into  dry  (land):  they 
78.  44  had  turned  their  rivers  into  blood ;  and 
105.  25  He  turned  their  heart  to  hate  his  people 
105.  29  He  turned  their  waters  into  blood,  and 
114.   8  Which  turned  the  rock  (into)a  standing 
Jer.  31.  13  for  I  will  turn  their  mourning  into  joy 
Lam.  3.    3  he  turneth  his  hand  (against  me)  all  the 
Amos  5.    7  Ye  who  turn  judgment  to  wormwood,  and 
5.    8  turneth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  mo. 
6. 12  for  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall,  and 
8.  10  I  will  turn  yourfeastslnto  mourning,  and 
Zeph.  3.  9  For  then  will  I  turn  to  the  people  a  pure 
Hos.    7.    8  Ephraim..Ephraimis  a  cake  not  turned 

S.To  be  turned,  overturned,  ~9n  haphak,  2. 

Exod  7.  15  the  rod  which  was  turned  to  a  serpent 
7. 17  smite,  .and  they  shall  be  turned  to  blood 


TUB  & 


100G 


TURN 


5- 

Eze.    4. 
Dan.  10. 

11  OS. 

Joel 


Exod.  7.  20  waters  that  (were)  in  the  river  were  turned 
14.  5  heart  of  Pharaoh,  .was  turned  against  the 
Lev.  13. 17  the  plague  be  turned  into  white;  then  the 
13.  25  (if)  the  hair  in  the  bright  spot  be  turned 
1  Sa.  10.  6  and  shalt  lie  turned  into  another  mau 
Esth.  9.  22  month  which  was  turned  unto  them  from 
Job  10.  19  they  whom  I  loved  are  turned  against  me 

20.  14  his  meatin  his  bowels  is  turned,  .the  gall 
41.  2S  sling  stones  are  turned  with  him  into  st. 

Ps*  32.    4  my  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought 
Efifl.    34.    9  streams  thereof  shall  be  turned  into  pitch 
63. 10  therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  then-  enemy 
Jer.     2.  21  how  then  art  thou  turned  into  the  degen. 

30.    6  and  all  faces  are  turned  into  paleness? 

Lam.  1. 20  mine  heart  is  turned  witlun  me,  for  I  ha. 

.    2  Ourinheritance  is  turned  to  strangers,  our 

,  15  ceased  ;  our  dance  is  turned  into  mourn. 

8  thou  shalt  not  turn  thee  from  one  side  to 

8  for  my  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into 

.  16  by  the  vision  my  sorrows  are  turned  upon 

.   8  Mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  rep. 

.  31  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and 

4.  To  be  turned,  overturned,  Tisn  haphak,  6. 

Job  30. 15  Terrors  are  turned  upon  me,  they  pursue 

5.  To  turn  or  overturn  self,  ~sn  hapJmk,  7. 

Job    37. 12  it  is  turned  round  about  by  his  counsels 
38.  14  It  is  turned  as  clay  (to)  the  seal;  and  they 

G.To  incline,  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  naj  natali. 
Gen.  38.  1  Judah.  .turned  into  a  certain Adullamite 
38.  16  he  turned  unto  her  by  the  way,  and  said 
.Numso,  17  we  will  not  turn  to  the  right  hand  nor  to 
20. 21  wherefore  Israel  turned  away  from  him 

21.  22  we  will  not  turn  into  the  fields,  or  into 

22.  26  no  way  to  turn  either  to  the  right  band 
22. 33  the  ass  saw  me,  and  turned  from  me  th. 
22.  33  unless  she  had  turned  from  me,  surely 

1  Sa.14.   7  Do  all  that  (is)  in  thine  heart :  turn  thee 

2  Sa.  2.  19  turned  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the 

1  Ki.  2.  28 had  turned  after  Adonijah,  though  hetu. 

11.  9  because  his  heart  was  turned  from  theL. 
Job  31.  7  If  mystepbath  turned  out  of  the  way,  and 
Frov.  4. 27  Turnnot  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left 

7. To  stretchout,  turn  aside,  incline,  rreu  natah,  5. 
Nuni22.  23  Balaam  smote  the  ass,  to  turn  her  into 
Job   24.   4  They  turn  the  needy  out  of  the  way,  the 
ProV2i.    1  he  turneth  it  whithersoever  he  will 
Isa,  30. 11  turn  aside  out  of  the  path,  cause  the  Holy 

S. To  {/ive,  jnj  nathan, 

Deuti4.  25  Then  shalt  thou  turn  (it)  into  money,  and 

2  Ch.29.    6  For  our  fathers  have,  .turned  (their)  bac. 

9.  To  go,  turn,  or  bring  round  about,  330  sabab. 

1  Sa.  22. 17  Turn,  and  slay  the  priests  of  the  Lokd 

22.  18  Turn  thou,  and  fall  upon  the  priests 

2  Ki.  9.  i3,  19  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace?  turn 
Song  2.  17  turn,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe 

10.  To  be,  go,  turn  or  bring  round  about,  333  sabab,'2. 
Nam  34.   4  your  border  shall  turn  from  the  south  to 

1  Sa.  17.  30  he  turned  from  him  toward  another,  and 

22.  18  Doeg  the  Edomite  turned,  and  he  fell  upon 

2  Sa.  14.  24  Lethimturntohisownhouse.andlethim 
TroV2D.  14  (As)  the  door  turneth  upon  his  hinges,  so 
Jer.  6.  12  their  houses  shall  be  turned  unto  others 
Eze.     1.   9  they  turned  not  when  they  went;  they 

1.  i2,  17  (and)  they  turned  not  when  they  went 

10.  11,  11  they  turned  not  as  they  went 

10.  16  wheels  also  turned  not  from  beside  them 

26.    2  she  is  turned  unto  me;  I  shall  be  repleni. 

Hah.   2.  16  shall  be  turned  unto  thee,  and  shameful 

Zech.14.  10  All  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  fr. 

11. To  go,  turn  orbring  round  about,  33D  sabab,  5. 
Judgi8.  23  they  turned  their  faces,  and  said  unto  51. 

1  Ki.   8.  14  king  turned  his  face  about,  and  blessed 

18.  37  thou  hast  turned  their  heart  hack  again 

2  Ki.16.  i3  turned  he  from  the  house  of  the  LORDfor 

20.    2  Then  he  turned  his  face  to  the  wall,  and 

23.  34  turned  his  name  to  Jehoiakim,  and  took 

1  Ch.  10.  14  turned  the  kingdom  unto  David  the  son 

12.  23  came,  .to  turn  the  kingdom  of  Saulto  him 

2  Ch.  6.    3  king  turned  his  face,  and  blessed  the  wh. 

35.  22  Josiah  would  not  turn  his  face  from  him 

36.  4  turned  his  name  to  Jehoiakim.  And  Ne. 
Ezra   6.  22  turned  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria 
Isa.    38.    2  Then  Hezekiah  turned  his  face  toward  the 
Eze.    7.  22  My  face  will  I  turn  also  from  them,  and 

12.7V  be  turn'-,},  back,  MO  sug,  2. 

Psa.  35.   4  let  them  be  turned  hack  aud  brought  to 
44.  18  Ourheartis  notturned  back, neither  have 
70.    2  let  them  be  turned  backward,  and  put  to 
129.    5  Let  them  all  be.  .turned  back  that  hate  Z. 
Isa.  42. 17  they  shall  be  turned  back,  they  shall 

13. To  turn  (or  be  turned)  aside,  TID  $ur. 

Deut.  2.  27  I  willneitherturnuntn  theri-ht  hand  nor 
Josh.  1.  7  turn  not  from  it  (t<>Hhe  right  hand  or(to) 
Judg.  r.  17  they  turned  quickly  onto!  the  way  which 

20.    8  neither  will  we  any  (of  us)  turn  into  his 
2  Ki.   4. 11  he  turned  into  the  chamber,  and  lay  th. 
2  Ch.20.  10  turned  from  them,  and  destroyed  them 
14.  To  face,  front,  r,:p  panah. 

Gen.  24.  49  that  I  may  turn  to  the  right  hand,  or  to 
Exod.  7.  23  Pharaoh  turned  and  went  into  his  house 

10.    6  turned  himself,  and  went  out  from  Phar. 

32.  15  Moses  turned,  and  went  down  from  the 
Lev.  19,    4  Turn  ye  not  unto  idols,  nor  make  to  you. 

20.  6  soul  that  turneth  after  such  as  have  fain. 
Num  14.  25  turn  you,  and  get  you  into  the  wilderne. 

21.  33  turned,  and  went  up  by  the  way  of  Bash. 


Deut.  1.    7  Turn  you,  and  take  your  journey,  and  go 

1.  24  they  turned  and  went  up»  into  the  moun. 
t.  40  turn  you,  and  take  your  journey  into  the 

2.  1  Then  we  turned,  and  took  our  journey 
2.    3  Ye  have  compassed,  .turn  you  northward 

2.  8  we  turned  and  passed  by  the  way  of  the 

3.  1  Then  we  turned,  and  went  up  the  way  to 

9.  15  So  I  turned,  and  came  down  from  the  mo. 
10.   5  turned  myself,  and  came  down  from  the 

16.  7  thou  shalt  turn  in  the  morning,  and  go 
31.  18  in  that  they  are  turned  unto  other  gods 

31.  20  then  will  they  turn  unto  other  gods,  and 
Josh.  7.  12  turned  (their)  backs  before  their  enemies 
Judg  iS.  21  So  they  turned  and  departed,  and  put  the 

18.  26  he  turned  and  went  back  unto  his  house 
20. 42  Therefore  they  turned  (then-  backs)  before 
20.  45  they  turned  and  fled  toward  thewildern. 
20.  47  six  hundred  men  turned  and  fled  to  the 
1  Sa.  13.  17  one  company  turned  unto  the  way  (that 

13.  18  another  company  turned  the  way  (to)  B. 
13. 18  another  company  turned  (to)  the  way  of 

1  Ki.  10.  13  so  she  turned,  and  went  to  her  own  cou. 

17.  3  Get  thee  hence,  and  turn  thee  eastward 

2  Ki.   2.  24  turned  back,  and  looked  on  them,  and 

5.  12  So  he  turned,  and  went  away  in  a  rage 
Job     5.    i  and  to  which  of  the  saints  wilt  thou  turn 
Psa.  25. 16  Turn  thee  unto  me,  and  have  mercy  upon 
69.  16  turn  unto  me  according  to  the  multitude 
86.  16  0  turn  unto  me,  and  have  mercy  upon  me 
Prov  17.    8  whithersoever  it  turneth,  it  prospereth 
Eccl.  2.  12  And  I  turned  myself  to  behold  wisdom 
Isa.    13.  14  they  shall  every  man  turn  to  his  own  pe. 
53.   6  we  have  turned  everyone  to  his  own  way 
Jer.     2.  27  for  they  have  turned  (their)  back  unto  me 

32.  33  they  have  turned  unto  me  the  back,  and 
50.  16  they  shall  turn  every  one  to  his  people,  and 

Eze.  17.    6  whose  branches  turned  toward  him,  and 

36.    9  will  turn  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  tilled 

15.  To  cause  to  (face,  or)  turn  the  face,  r\£panaht5> 

Judgi5.    4  turned  tail  to  tail,  and  put  a  firebrand  in 

1  Sa.  10.    9  he  had  turned  his  back  to  go  from  Samu. 

Jer.  48.  39  how  hath  Moab  turned  the  back  with  sh. 
16.ro  set,  place,  put,  D'b-,  D'i?  sum,  sim. 

Psa.107.  33  He  turneth  rivers  into  a  wilderness,  and 
107.  35  He  turneth  the  wilderness  into  a  standing 

Isa.   21.    4  the  night,  .hath  he  turned  into  fear  unto 
17.ro  turn  aside,  ntp^y  satah. 

Prov.  4.  15  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it 
IS.  To  turn  back,  1\w  snub. 

Exod.  4.    7  behold,  it  was  turned  again  as  his.  .flesh 

14.  2  Speak,  .that  they  turn  and  encamp  before 
32.  12  Turn  from  thy  fierce  wrath,  and  repent  of 

Deut.  4.  30  if  thou  turn  to  the  Lord  thy  God 

13. 17  that  the  Lokd  may  turn  from  the  fierce. 
30.  3  God  will  turn  thy  captivity,  and  haveco. 
30. 10  if  thou  turn  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  with 

J03I1.  7.  26  the  Lord  turned  from  the  fierceness  of  bis 

19. 12  turned  from  Sarid  eastward  toward  the 

10.  27  turneth  toward  the  sun  rising  to  Beth-da. 
19.  29  the  coast  turneth  to  Ramah,  and  to  the 
19.  29  the  coast  turneth  to  Hosah;  and  the  out. 
19.  34  the  coast  turneth  westward  to  Aznoth  ta. 
22.  23  we  have  built  ua  an  altar  to  turn  from 

22.  29  turn  this  day  from  following  the  Lord,  to 
24.  20  he  will  turn  and  do  you  hurt,  and  consu. 

1  Ki.   8.  33  shall  turn  again  to  thee,  and  confess  thy 

8.  35  turn  from  their  sin,  when  thou  afflictest 

9.  6  if  ye  shall  at  all  turn  from  following  me 
22. 33  that  they  turned  back  from  pursuing  him 

2  Ki.  17.  13  Turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways,  and  keep 

23.  25  that  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  bis  heart 

23.  26  the  Lord  turned  not  from  the  fierceness 

24.  1  then  lie  turned  and  rebelled  against  him 
2  Ch.  6. 16  turn  from  their  sin,  when  thou  dost  afflict 

6.  37  turn  and  pray  unto  thee  in  the  land  of  th. 

7.  14  seek  my  face,  and  turn  from  their  wicked 
12.  12  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  turned  from  him 

15.  4  they  in  their  trouble  did  turn  unto  the  L. 

36. 13  hardened  his  heart  froni  turning  unto  the 
Job    15.  13  That  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  against  God 

23. 13  he  (is)  in  one  (mind),  and  who  can  turn 
Ezra  10.  14  until  the  fierce  wrath .  .be  turned  from  us 
Neh.    1.   9  (if)  ye  turn  unto  me,  and  keep  raycemm. 
4.    4  turn  their  reproach  upon  their  own  head 
9.  26  testified  against  them  to  turn  them  to  th. 
9.  35  neitherturned  they  from  their  wicked  wo. 
Job    42.  10  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job,  when 
Psa.     7.  12  If  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword;  he 
9.  17  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  (and) 
22.  27  the  ends  of  the  world  shall,  .turn  unto 
56.   9  then  shall  mine  enemies  turn  back:  this 
81.  14  turned  my  hand  against  their  adversaries 
85.   3  thou  hast'turned . .  from  the  fierceness  of 
85.    4  Turn  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and  ca. 

89.  43  Thou  bast  also  turned  the  edge  of  his 

90.  3  Thou  turnest  man  to  destruction,  and  sa. 
119.  56  aud  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  testimonies 
119. 79  Let  those  that  fear  thee  turn  unto  me,  and 
132.  11  he  will  not  turn  from  it;  Of  the  fruit  of 

Prov.  1.  23  Turn  you  at  my  reproof:  behold,  I  will 
Isa.    1.  25  I  will  turn  my  hand  upon  thee,  and  pur. 


Jer. 


8. 
18. 
23- 


Eze. 


33- 
33- 

33- 
33- 
33- 
33- 
38. 
Dan.   9. 


iios.    5. 

12. 

14. 

Joel    2. 

2. 

Amos  1. 

Jon.    3. 

3- 

Zech.  1. 
1. 

5- 
6. 

9- 

13- 

Mai.    4. 


29 


Jer. 


13  the  people  turneth  not  unto  him  that  am. 

17  she  shall  turn  to  her  hire,  and  shall  com. 
6  for  strength  to  them  that  turn  the  battle 

17  Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful 
31.   6  Turn  ye  unto(him  from) whom  the  child. 
44.  25  turneth  wise  (men)backward,  andmaketh 
59. 20  unto  them  that  turn  from  transgression 

2.  35  surely  his  anger  shall  turn  from  me:  beh. 

3.  7  Turn  thou  unto  me:  but  she  returned  not 


10  Judah  hath  not  turned  unto  me  with  her 

14  Turn,  O  backsliding  children,  saith  the 

4  saith  the  Lord,  .shall  he  turn  away  and 
6  every  one  turned  to  his  course,  as  the  ho. 

8  If  that  nation . .  turn  from  their  evil,  I  will 
22  they  should  have  turned  them  from  their 

3  If  so  be  they  will  hearkeu,  and  turn  every 
iS  I  shall  be  turned;  for  thou  (art)  the  LORD 

19  Surely  after  that  I  was  turned,  I  repented 

11  But  afterward  they  turned,  and  caused  the 

15  ye  were  now  turned,  and  had  done  right 

16  ye  turned,  and  polluted  myname,  andca. 

5  nor  inclined  their  ear  to  turn  from  their 

13  he  hath  turned  me  back;  he  hath  made 

3  Surely  against  me  is  he  turned .  -  all  the  day 
21  Turn  thou  us.  .and  we  shall  be  turned 
ig  he  turn  not  from  his  wickedness,  nor  from 

20  When  a  righteous  (man)  doth  turn  from 

6  Repent,  and  turn,  .from  your  idols,  and 

21  if  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  sins 
30  Repent,  and  turn,  .from  all  your  transg. 

9  to  turn  from  it;  if  he  do  not  turn  from  his 
32  I  have  no  pleasure . .  wherefore  turn . .  and 
11  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way 

11  turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways,  for 

12  in  the  day  that  he  turneth  from  his  wick. 

14  if  he  turn  from  Ms  sin,  and  do  that  which 

18  When  the  righteous  turneth  from  his  rig. 

19  if  the  wicked  turn  from  liis  wickedness 

12  to  turn  thine  hand  upon  the  desolate  pi. 

13  we  might  turn  from  our  iniquities,  and 

18  After  this  shall  he  turn  his  face  unto  the 

19  lie  shall  turn  his  face  toward  the  fort  of 

4  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn  unto 

6  turn  thou  to  thy  God:  keep  mercy  and  ju. 

2  Take  with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the  L. 

12  Turn  ye  (even)  to  me  with  all  your  heart 

13  rend  your  heart,  .and  turn  unto  the  Lord 
8  and  I  will  turn  mine  hand  against  Ekron 

8  let  them  turn  every  one  from  his  evil  way 

9  Who  can  tell  (if)  God  will  turn  and  repent 
10  saw . .  that  they  turned  from  their  evil  way 

3  Turn  ye  unto  me.  .and  I  will  turn  unto 

4  Turn  ye  now  from  your  evil  ways,  and 
1  Then  T  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes 
1  And  1  turned,  andliftcdupmine  eyes, and 

12  Turn  you  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners 

7  will  turn  mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones 
6  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to 

19.ro  look,  glance,  be  dazzled,  n^v  shaah. 

Job   14.   6  Turn  from  him,  that  he  may  rest,  till  he 

20.  To  pervert,  turn,  make  crooked,  nij;  avah,  3. 
Isa.   24.    1  maketh  it  waste,  and  turneth  it  upside 

21.  To  come  or  go  away  or  off,  a.Trofialva>  apobainv. 
Luke2i.  13  And  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony 
Phil.    1.  19  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvat. 

22.  To  become,  yivofiai  ginoiriai. 

Johiu6.  20  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy 

23.7*0  be  turned  out,  ixTpciropai  eMrep&maia. 

2  Ti.  4.4  from  the  truth,  and  shall  be  turned  unto  fa. 
24.  To  turn  over,  upon,  unto,  &rt<rrpc'4>a>  epistrepho. 

Luke  1.  16  many  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  he  tu. 
1.  17  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the 

Acts    9.  35  all  that  dwelt  in  Lydda .  .turned  to  the  L 

9.  40  turning,  .to  the  body  said,  Tabitha,  arise 
11.  21  number  believed,  and  turned  unto  the  L. 

14.  15  preach  unto  you  that  ye  should  turn  from 

15.  19  from  among  the  Gentiles  are  turned  unto 

16.  18  turned  and  said  to  the  spirit,  I  command 
26.  18  to  turn  (them)  from  darkness  to  light,  and 
26.  20  that  they  should  repent  and  turn  to  God 

2  Co.  3.  16  Nevertheless  when  it  shall  turn  to  the  L. 
Gal.     4.    9  how  turned  yeagain  totheweakandbegg. 

1  Th.  1.   9  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve 

2  Pe.   2.  21  [turn  from  the  holy  commandment  deliv.] 
Rev.    1.  12  I  turned.  .And  being  turned  I  saw  seven 

25. Tn  turn  afterward  or  over,  /.teraaTp^m  metas. 
Acta  2.  20  Thesun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness, and 
Jas.    4.   9  let  your  laughter  be  turned  to  mourning 

26.ro  put  or  place  vnlh  or  apart,  [xeraTl6n/J.i  ineta. 
Jude        4  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lascivi. 

11. To  turn,  arrp^(pco  strrpho. 

Matt.  5.  39  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek,  turn 

16.  23  he  turned,  and  said  unto  Peter,  Git  thee 

Luke  7.  44  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  unto  S. 

9.  55  he  turned,  andrcbuked  them,  and  said,  Ye 

10.  23  [he  turned  him  unto  (his)  disciples,  and]  , 
14.  25  and  he  turned,  and  said  unto  them 

22.  61  the  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon  Peter 

23.  28  Jesus,  turning  unto  them  said,  Daughters 
John  1.  38  Then  Jesus  turned,  and  saw  them  follow. 
Acts    7.  42  God  turned,  and  gave  them  up  to  worship 

13.  46  everlasting  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Genti. 

Rev.  11.    6  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them  to 

2S.7*o  turn  under,  by  degrees,  viroffTp(<pu>  hupostre. 

Lukei7.  15  turned  backhand  withaloudvoiceglorified 

TURN,  be  turned  about,  to  — 

1.7V)  170,  turn  or  bring  round  about,  33?  sabab. 
Eocl.  r.    6  The  wind,  .turneth  about  unto  the  north 
E2e.  42.  19  He  turned  about  to  the  west  side,  (and)  me. 

2.  To  be  turned  round  about,  33?  sabab,  2. 

Gen.  \2.  24  he  turned  himself  about  from  them,  and 
1  Sa.15.  27  And  as  Samuel  turned  about  to  go  away 
1  Ki.  2. 15  the  kingdom  is  turned  about,  and  is  bee. 


TURN 


1007 


TURN 


3.7"o  be  turned  round  about,  nzu  sabab,  6. 

Isa.  28.  27  neither  is  a  cart  wheel  turned  about  upon 

4.  To  turn  over, upon, toward*  iiriffTpefpw  epistrepho. 
Matt. 9.  22  Jesus  [turned  him  about];  and  when  lie 
Mark  5. 30  turned  him  about  in  the  press,  and  said 

8.  33  when  lie  had  turned  about,  and  looked  on 
John2i.  20  Then  Peter,  turning  about,  seeth  the  dis. 

5.7*0  lead  along  with,  after,  bach,  away,  /lerdyw. 

Jas.    3.  3  bits.,  and  we  turn  about  their  whole  body 

"3.   4yetare  they  turned  about  with  a  very  sm. 

6.7*0  turn,  change,  arpecpw  strepho. 

Luke  7.  9  he  marvelled  at  him,  and  turned  him  ab. 

TURN  again,  to  — 

1.7*0  turn,  be  turned,  ~5rr  haphak. 

Judg2o.  41  when  the  men  of  Israel  turned  again,  the 
2  Ki.  5.  26  when  the  man  turned  again  from  his  char. 

2.7b  turn  bad;  Dv  shub. 

Exod33- 11  he  turned  again  into  the  camp :  but  his 
Lev.  13.  16  Or  if  the  raw  flesh  turn  again,  and  be  eh. 
lSTum33.    7  turned  agaiu  unto  Pi-hahiroth,  which(is) 
Josh.  8.  21  they  turned  again,  and  slew  the  men  of 
Judg.3.  19  he  lumself  turned  again  from  the  quar. 
8. 33  the  children  of  Israel  turned  again,  and 
11.    8  Therefore  we  turn  again  to  thee  now,  that 
20. 48  men  of  Israel  turned  again  upon  the  ch. 
Ruth  1.  11  Turn  again,  my  daughters;  why  will  ye 
1. 12  Turn  again,  my  daughters,  go  (your  way) 

1  Sa.15.  25  turn  again  with  me,  that  I  may  worship 

15. 30  turn  agaiu  with  me,  that  I  may  worship 
15.  31  So  Samuel  turned  again  after  Saul,  and 

2  Sa.22.  38  turned  not  again  until  I  had  consumed 

1  Ki.12.  27  then  shall  the  heart  of  this  people  turn  a. 

13.  9  nor  turn  again  by  the  same  way  that  thou 
13. 17  nor  turn  again  to  go  by  the  way  that  thou 

2  Ki.  1.   6  Go,  turn  again  unto  the  king  that  sent  you 

20.    5  Turn  agaiu,  and  tell  Hezekiah  the  captain 

2  Ch.18.  32  they  turned  back  again  from  pursuiug  him 

30.   6  turn  again  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Abrah. 

30.  9  For  if  ye  turn  again  unto  the  Lord,  your 
Job  34.  15  perish  together,  and  man  shall  turn  aga. 
Psa.  1 8.  37  neither  did  I  turn  again  till  they  were  co. 

80.    3,  7.  19  Turn  us  again . .  cause  thy  face  to 

85.   8  to  his  saints  :  but  let  them  not  turn  aga. 

104.   9  that  they  turn  not  agaiu  to  cover  the  ea. 

126.    1  When  the  Lord  turned  again  the  captivity 

126.   4  Turn  again  our  captivity,  0  Lord,  as  the 

Eccl.  3.  20  are  of  the  dust,  and  all  turn  to  dust  ag. 

Jer.  25.    5  Turn  ye  again  now  every  one  from  his  evil 

31.  21  turn  again,  0  virgin  of  Israel,  turn  again 
Lam.  3.  40  search  and  try  our  ways,  and  tnrn  again 
Eze.    8.   6,  13,  15  turn  thee  yet  again,  (and)  thou  sh 
Mic.   7.  19  He  will  turn  again,  he  will  have  compas. 
Zechio.   9  live  with  their  children,  and  turn  again 

0.T0  bend  back  or  up,  ai/and/A-xTO!  anakampto. 
Luke  10.    6  shall  rest,  .if  not,  it  shall  turn  to  you  ag. 

4.  7*o  turn  over,  upon,  toivard,  iirio-Tpe4>a>  epistre. 
Marki3. 16  let  hirathat  is  in  the  field  not  turn,  .again 
Luke  1 7.  4  and  seven  times  in  a  day  turn  again  to  thee 
2  Pe.  2.  22  The  dog  (is)  turned  to  his  own  vomit  ag. 

5.7*0  turn,  o-rp4<pw  strepho. 

Matt.  7.    6  lest  they  trample  them . .  and  turn  again 

6.7*0  turn  under,  by  degrees,  viroarpefpco  huposlre. 
Luke  2.  45  they  turned  back  again  to  Jerusalem,  se. 

TURN  (be  turned)  aside,  to  — 

i .  To  turn,  be  turned,  overturned,  Tjsn  kapha!;,  2. 

Psa.  78.  57  they  were  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful 
2.  To  turn  aside,  lay  hold  of,  n?^  laphath,  2. 

Job     6.  iS  The  paths  of  their  way  are  turned  aside 

3.7*0  stretch  out,  turn  aside  or  away,  raa  natah. 
Nil  1122.  23  the  ass  turned  aside  out  of  the  way,  and 

1  Sa.  8.    3  turned  aside  after  lucre,  and  took  bribes 

2  Sa.  2.  21  Turn  thee  aside  to  thy  right  hand  or  to 
Jer.  14.   8  as  a  wayfaring  man  (that)  turneth  aside 

4.7*0  stretchout,  turn  aside  or  away,  nt?j  natah,  5. 

Psa.125.    5  As  for  such  as  turn  aside  unto  their  croo. 

Isa.  10.   2  To  turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment 
29.  21  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought 
30. 11  Get  you  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out  of 
44.  20  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside 

Lam.  3.  35  To  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before 

Amos  2.  7  That  pant . .  and  turn  aside  the  way  of  the 
5. 12  and  they  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate 

Mai.   3.    5  that  turn  aside  the  stranger.,  and  fear  uot 

5.  7*o  go,  turn,  bring  round  about,  snp  sabab. 

2  Sa.  18.  30  And  the  king  said..  Turn  aside.,  stand  he. 

6.7*0  be  brought  or  turned  round  about,  2?d  sabab,2. 
2  Sa.  18.  30  And  he  turned  aside,  and  stood  still 

7.  To  turn  or  be  turned  aside,  td  sur. 

Exod.3.  3  I  will  now  turn  aside,  and  see  this  great 
3.  4  when  the  Lord  saw  that  he  turned  aside 
32.  8  They  have  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the 

Deut.  5.  32  ye  shall  not  turn  aside  to  the  right  hand 

9.  12  they  are  quickly  turned  aside  out  of  the 
9.  16  ye  had  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the  way 

11. 16  ye  turn  aside,  and  serve  other  gods,  and 
11.  28  turn  aside  out  of  the  way  which  I  coram. 
17.  20  turn  not  aside  from  the  commandment 
31.  29  turn  aside  from  the  way  which  I  have  co. 
josh  23.    6  turn  not  aside  therefrom  (to)  the  right  ha. 


Judg  14.    S  he  turned  aside  to  see  the  carcase  of  the 

19.  12  We  will  not  turn  aside  hither  into  the  city 

10.  15  they  turned  aside  thither,  to  go  in  (and) 
Ruth  4.    1  turn  aside.  .And  he  turned  aside,  and  sat 

1  Sa.  6. 12  turned  not  aside  (to)  the  right  hand  or(to) 

12.  20  yet  turn  not  aside  from  following  the  Lo. 
12.  21  turn  ye  not  aside  :  for  (then  should  ye  go) 

2  Sa.    2.  21  Asahel  would  not  turn  aside  from  follow. 

2.  22  Turn  thee  aside  from  following  me :  whe. 
2.  23  Howbeit  he  refused  to  turn  aside :  wher. 

1  Ki.15.    5  turned  not  aside  from  any  (thing)  that  he 

20.  39  turned  aside,  and  brought  a  man  unto  me 
22.  32  And  they  turned  aside  to  fight  against  him 
22.  43  he  turned  not  aside  from  it,  doing  (that 

2  Ki.  22.    2  turned  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to 

8.7b  turn  aside,  TDsur,  Sa. 

Lam.  3.  11  He  hath  turnedasidemyways.andpulled 

9.  Those  turning  ccside,  D't?D  sethn. 

Psa.101.    3  I  hate  the  work  of  them  that  turn  aside 

10.  To  cover,  wrap  up,  veil,  na^  atah. 

Song  1.  7  as  one  that  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of 
11.7*0  turn  tlie  face,  front,  look,  r\^pa?iah. 

Song  6.  1  whither  is  thy  beloved  turned  aside?  that 
12.  7*o  turn  aside,  BIB?  sut. 

Psa.  40.   4  not  the  proud,  nor  such  as  turn  aside  to 

13. 7*o  give  space  again,  withdraw,  avax(*>p*o>  ana. 
Matt.  2.  22  he  turned  aside  into  the  parts  of  Galilee 

14.7*0  be  turned  out  or  off,  ifCTpe-rropat  ektreponxai. 

1  Ti.    1.    6  some  having  swerved  have  turned  aside 
5. 15  some  are  already  turned  aside  after  Satan 
TURN  (be  turned)  away,  to  — 
1.7*0  stretch  out,  turn  aside,  incline,  naj  natah,  5. 

1  Ei.rr,   2  they  will  turn  away  your  heart  after  their 

11.  3  and  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart 

11.  4  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  ot. 
Jer.     5.  25  Your  inquitieshaveturnedaway  these (th. 

2.7*0  be  caused  to  remove,  Jp3  nasag,  6. 

Isa.  59. 14  judgment  is  turned  away  backward,  and 
3.7b  cause  to  go,  turn,  orbring  round,  2^0  sabab, 5. 

1  Ki.21.   4  turned  away  his  face,  and  would  eat  no  Tor. 

1  CI414.  14  Go  not  up  after  them ;  turn  away  from  th. 

2  Ch.29.    6  have  forsaken  him, and  have  turned  away 
Song  6.    5  Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they 

4.7b  be  turned  back,  y-D  sug,  2. 

Isa.   50.   5  not  rebellious,  neither  turned  away  back 

Jer.  38.  22  thy  feet  are  sunk . .  are  turned  away  back 

46.    5  have  I  seen  them  dismayed .  .turned away 

5.7*o  turn  aside,  td  sur. 

2  Ch.25.  27  after  the  time  that  Amaziah  did  turn  away 
6.7*0  cause  to  turn  aside,  Ta  sur,  5. 

Deut.  7.    4  they  will  turn  away  thy  son  from  following 

17.  17  that  his  heart  turn  not  away :  neither  sh. 
2  Ch.30.  9  will  not  turu  away  (his)  face  from  you,  if 
Psa.  66.  20  Blessed(be)God,  which  hath  not  turned  a. 
Prov28.   9  He  that  turnethawayhisearfromheariug 

7.  A  turning  aside,  n*iD  sarah. 

Deuti3.  5  he  hath  spoken  to  turn(you)away  from  the 
8.7*o  cause  to  pass  over,  inj;  abar,  5. 

Psa.119.  37  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding 
119.  39  Turn  away  my  reproach  which  I  fear,  for 

9.7*o  cause  to  turn  the  face,  ft^fpanah'. 

Deut  29.  iS  whose  heart  turneth  away  this  day  from 

30. 17  if  thine  heart  turn  away,  so  that  thou  wilt 

10.7b  turn  back,  35b!  shub. 

Gen.  27.  44  tarry,  .until  thy  brother's  fury  turn  away 

27.  45  Until  thy  brother's  anger  turn  away  from 
Numi4.  43  because  ye  are  turned  away  from  the  Lo. 

25.    4  fierce  anger,  .maybeturnedawayfromls. 

32. 15  if  ye  turn  away  from  after  him,  he  will 
Deut  23.  14  see  no  unclean  thing,  .and  turn  away  fr. 
Josh. 22.  16  to  turn  away  this  day  from  following  the 

22. 18  that  ye  must  turn  away  this  day  from  fol. 
2  Ch.  7. 19  if  ye  turn  away,  and  forsake  my  statutes 

29.  10  his  fierce  wrath  may  turn  away  from  us 

30.  8  fierceness  of  his  wrath  may  turn  away  fr. 
Prov  25. 10  to  shame,  and  thine  infamy  turn  notaway 

30.  30  A  lion,  (which).. turneth  not  away  for  any 

Isa.     5  25  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  ha. 

9.  12,  17,  21  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but 

10.    4  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  ha. 

12.  1  thine  auger  is  turned  away,  and  thou  co. 
Jer.    3. 19  My  father;  and  shalt  not  turn  away  from 

29. 14  I  will  turn  away  your  captivity,  and  I  will 

32.  40  I  will  not  turn  away  from  thein,  to  do  th. 

50.    6  they  have  turned  them  away  (ou)  the  mo. 

Eze.  18.  24  when  the  righteous  turneth  away  from  his 

18.  26  "When  a  righteous  (man)  turneth  away  fr. 
iS.  27  when  the  wicked  (man)  turneth  away  fr. 
18.  28  turneth  away  from  all  his  transgressions 

Dan.   9.  16  let  thine  anger,  .be  turned  away  from  thy 
Hos.  14.    4  for  mine  anger  is  turned  away  from  him 
Jon.    3.   9  repent,  ami  turn  away  from  his  fierce  an. 
Nan".  2.   2  Lord  hath  turned  away  the  excellency  of 
Zeph.  2.    7  shall  visit  them,  and  turn  away  their  cap. 

11.7*0  cause  to  turn  back,  2'v  shub,  5. 

Nuni  25.  11  hath  turned  my  wrath  away  from  the  ch. 
2  Ki.iS.  24  How  then  wilt  thou  turn  away  the  face 
2  Ch.  6.  42  turn  not  away  the  face  of  thiue  anointed 
Psa.  78.  38  many  a  time  turned  he  his  anger  away,  and 

106.  23  to  turn  away  his  wrath,  lest  he  should  de. 

132.  10  turn  not  away  the  face  of  thiue  anointed 


Prov  15.  1  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath :  but 
24. 18  Lest  the  Lord,  .turn  away  his  wrath  froin 
29.    8  into  a  snare :  but  wise  (men)  turn  away 

Isa.   36.   9  How  then  wilt  thou  turn  away  the  face  of 
58.  13  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  sab. 

Jer.     2. 24  in  her  occasion  who  can  turn  her  away? 
1 8.  20  (and)  to  turn  away  thy  wrath  from  them 

Lam.  2. 14  discovered  thine  iniquity,  to  turn  away 

Eze.  14.   6  turn  away  your  faces  from  all  your  abom. 

Amos.  1.    3,  6,  9,  11,  13  I  will  not  turn  away  (the  pu.) 
2.   1,  4, 6, 1  will  not  turn  away  (the  punishment) 

Mai,    2.    6  and  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity 

12.  7b  turn  or  bring  back,  DiE  shub,  da. 

Jer.  50.  6  they  have  turned  them  away  (on)  the  mo. 

1-3.7*0  turn  off  or  away,  airoarpetpw  'apostrepho. 
Matt.  5.  42  would  borrow  of  thee  turn  not  thou  away 
Acts  3.  26  in  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his 
Rom. 11.  26  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Ja. 
2  Ti.  1. 15  all  they  which  are  in  Asia  be  turned  away 
4.  4  they  shall  turn  away  (their)  ears  from  the 
Heb.  12.  25  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  (speaketh) 

14.7*o  be  turned  off  or  away,  aTrorpdiroixai  apotrepo. 

2  Ti.  3.  5  denying  the  power,  .from  such  turn  away 
15.  7*o  turn  thoroughly  or  diversely,  Staarpe^w  dia. 

Acts  13.    8  seeking  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  the 

16.7*0  set  or  put  away,  fj.e6iaTn/J.t  methistimi. 
Acts  19.  26  Paul  hath  persuaded  and  turned  away  m. 

TURN,  (be  turned)  back,  back  again,  backward,  to  — 

1.7*0  turn,  be  turned,  "^rt  haphak. 

Psa.  78.   9  The  children  of  Ephraim .  .turned  back  in 
Josh.  8.  20  the  people.,  turned  back  upon  their  purs. 

2.7b  cause  to  go  round  about,  nnc  sabab,  5. 

Jer.  21  4  I  will  turn  back  the  weapons  of  war  that 
3. 7b  be  turned  back,  rz  sug,  2. 

Psa.  78.  57  turned  back,  and  deaH  unfaithfully  like 

Zeph.  1.  6  them  that  are  turned  back  from. the  Lord 
4. 7b  turn  aside,  td  sur. 

Job  34.  27  Because  they  turned  back  from  hun,  and 

5.7b  cause  to  turn  the  face,  rrj3  panah,  5. 

Jer.  46.  21  they  also  are  turned  back. .are  fled  away 

6.7b  be  caused  to  turn  the  face,  n:s  panah,  6. 

Jer.  49.  8  Flee  ye,  turn  back, dwell  deep,  0  inhabi 
7.  7*o  turn  back,  3&  sug,  2. 

2  Sa.  1.  22  the  bow  of  Jonathan  turned  not  back,and 
8.7*o  turn  back,  saff  shub. 

Deut  23.  13  turn  back  and  cover  that  which  conieth 

Josh.11. 10  Joshua  at  that  time  turned  back,  and  to. 

1  Sa.  15.  11  for  he  has  turned  back  from  following  me 

2  Sa.  19.  37  Let  thy  servant,  .turn  back  again,  that  I 
2  Ki.  1.    5  when  the  messengers  turned  back  unto 

1.    5  said  unto  them,  Why  are  ye  now  turned 
15.  20  so  the  king  of  Assyria  turned  back,  and 

1  Ch.21.  20  Oman  turned  back,  and  saw  the  angel 

2  Ch.18.  32  they  turned  back  again  from  pursuing 
Keh..  2. 15  turned  back,  aud  entered  by  the  gate  of 
Job  39.  22  neither  turneth  he  back  from  the  sword 
Psa.    9.   3  When  mine  enemies  are  turned  back,  th. 

70.   3  Let  them  be  turned  back  for  a  reward  of 

78.  41  they  turned  back,  and  tempted  God,  and 

Jer.     4.   8  anger  of  the  Lord  is  not  turned  back  from 

4.  28  not  repent,  neither  will  I  turn  back  from 

11. 10  They  are  turned  back  to  the  iniquities  of 
Lam.  1.   8  yea,  she  sinneth,  and  turneth  backward 
Zeph.  3.  20  when  I  turn  back  your  captivity  before 
9.7*o  turn  or  bring  back,  3n?  shub,  Sa. 

Eze.  38.   4 1  will  turn  thee  backhand  put  hooks  into 

39.   2  I  will  turn  thee  back,  and  leave  but  the 

10.7*0  cause  to  turn  back,  2'ti  shub,  5. 

2  Ivi.19.  2S  I  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which 

Isa.   14.  27  stretched  out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back 
37.  29  I  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which 

Jer.  6.  9  turn  back  thine  hand  as  a  grape  gatherer 
11,7*0  turn,  o-rp4<pm  strepho. 

.     Acts    7.  39  in  their  hearts  turned  back  again  into  Eg, 
\'2.Toturn  by  degrees,  quietly,  viroaTpetpic  hupostr. 

Luke  2.  45  they  turned  back  again  to  Jerusalem,  se. 

TURN  every  way,  face,  far  away,  to  — 
1.7*0  turn  self,  :j5in  haphak,  7. 

Gen.  3.  24  a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way 
2.7b  cast  off  or  away,  rnj  zanach,  5. 

Isa.  19. '  6  they  shall  turn  the  rivers  far  away,  .the 
3.7*0  turn  the  face,  look,  n:s  panah. 

Gen.  18.  22  the  men  turned  their  faces  from  thence 

TURN  from,  upside  down,  to  — 

1.7b  turn  upside  down,  mjj  avath,  3. 

Psa.  146.  9  way  of  the  wicked  he  turneth  upside  down 
2. 7*o  turn  back,  3W?  shub. 

Isa.   59.  20  uuto  them  that  turn  from  transgression 

3.  7*o  turn  away  or  off,  airoo-rptipiD  apostrepho. 
Titus  1. 14  commandments  of  men,  that  turn  from 

4. 7*o  set  up,  excite,  avaararScc  anastatoo. 

Acts  17.  6  These  that.,  turned  the  world  upside  do. 

TURN  in,   over,  violently,  to  — 

1.7*0  turn  over,  be  perverse,  vrvyarat. 

Job  16. 11  God  hath.,  turned  me  over  into  the  hands 


TURN 


1008 


TWENTIETH 


2.  To  turn  aside,  t*d  sur. 

Gen.  19.    2  turn  in,  I  pray  you.  into  your  servants"  h. 

19.    3  turned  in  unto  him,  and  entered  into  his 

Judg.  4.  18  Turn  in,  my  lord,  turn  in  to  me;  fear  not 

4.  18  when  he  had  turned  in  unto  her  into  the 

18,  3  turned  in  thither,  and  said  unto  him,  YV. 
18. 15  turned  thitherward,  and  came  to  the  ho. 

19.  11  let  us  turn  in  into  this  city  of  the  Jebusi. 
2  Ki.  4.    8  as  oft  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned  in  thith. 

4. 10  when  he  cometh.  .he  shall  turn  in  thither 
Prov.  9.    4,  16  Whoso  (is)  simple,  let  him  turn  in  hi. 

3.  To  wrap  round,  *]jy  tsanaph. 

Isa.  22. 18  He  will  surely  violently  turn  and  toss  thee? 
TTTRN  self  (about  or  again),  to  — 
l.To  be  turned,  ns^  laphath,  2. 

Ruth  3.  8  that  the  man  was  afraid,  and  turned  him. 
2.To  go,  or  turn  round  about,  3?rj  sabab. 

Gen.  42.  24  he  turned  himself  about  from  them,  and 
S.  To  turn  the  face,  niQpandfo. 

1  Sa.  14.  47  whithersoever  he  turned  himself,  he  vex. 

1  Ki.  2.    3  prosper,  .whithersoever thou  turnest thy. 

2  Ki.23. 16  as  Josiah  turned  himself,  he  spied  the  se. 

4.  To  cause  to  turn  the  face,  pus  panah,  5. 

Jer.  49.  24  Damascus  is  waxed  feeble,  .turneth  hers. 
5.7*0  turn  back,  bring  back,  DX&  shub,  Sa. 

Psa.  60.  1  been  displeased  ;  0  turn  thyself  to  us  ag. 
6. To  turn,  aTp4(fxa  strepho. 

John2o.  14  she  had  thus  said,  she  turned  herself  ba. 
20.  16  She  turned  herself,  and  saith  unto  him 

TURN  to  flight,  to  — 

To  incline,  put  to  flight,  kkIvoj  Mind. 

Heb.  11.  34  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens 
TTJRN,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 
To  cause  to  turn  back,  2W  shub,  5. 

Psa.  44.  10  Thou  makest  us  to  turn  back  from  the  e. 

Dan.  11. 18  reproach.,  he  shall  cause  (it)  to  turn  upon 

TURNED  to  the  contrary,  up,  to  be  — 

To  be  turned,  "n?n  haphak,  2. 

Esth.  9.    1  though  it  was  turned  to  the  contrary 
Job  28.  5  and  under  it  is  turned  up  as  it  were  fire 

TURNING  away  — 

1.  Turning  back,  n^lBto  rneskubah. 

Prov.  1.  32  the  turning  away  of  the  simple  shall  slay 

2.  To  turn  or  bring  back,  3W  shub,  Sa. 

Mic.     2.    4  turning  away  he  hath  divided  our  fields 
TURNING  of  things  upside  down  — 
To  turn,  "5?  haphak. 

Isa.  29. 16  Surely  your  turning  of  things  upside  do. 
See  also  Ashes,  foolishness,  left,  right,  right  hand, 
righteousness,  way. 

TURTLE  (dove)  — 

l.A  turtle  dove,  lin  tor. 

Gen. 15.   9  and  a  turtle  dove,  and  a  young  pigeon 
Lev.    1.  14  shall  bring  his  offering  of  turtle  doves,  or 
5.    7  he  shall  bring,  .two  turtle  doves,  or  two 

5.  11  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  two  turtle  do  v. 
12.    6  she  shall  bring,  .a  turtle  dove,  for  a  sin 
is.    8  she  shall  bring  two  turtle  doves,  or  two 
14.  22  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pigeons 

14.  30  he  shall  offer  the  one  of  the  turtle  doves 
15. 14  he  shall  take  to  him  two  turtle  doves,  or 

15.  29  she  shall  take  unto  her  two  turtles,  or  two 
Num.  6.  10  he  shall  bring  two  turtles,  or  two  young 
Psa.  74.  19  deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle  dove  un. 
Song  2.  12  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  la. 
Jer.     8.   7  the  turtle  and  the  crane  and  the  swallow 

'2.  A  turtle  dove,  rpvywv  trugon. 

Luke  2.  24  A  pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pig. 
TUTOR  — 
One  on  whom  a  thing  is  devolved,  ^ir'npoTros  epitro. 

Gal.    4.    2  is  under  tutops  and  governors  until  the 
TWAIN,  twice  — 
l.Two,  0*$?  shenayim. 

1  Sa.  18.  21  be  my  son  in  law  in  (the  one  of)  the  tw. 

2  Ki.  4.  33  shut  the  door  upon  them  twain,  and  pra. 
Isa.     6.    2  six  wings;  with  twain  he  covered  his  face 

6.  2  with  twain  he  covered  his  feet,  and  with  t. 
Jer.  34. 18  they  cut  the  calf  in  twain,  and  passed  be. 
Eze.  21. 19  both  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  one 

2.  Two,  Suo,  duo. 

Matt.  5.  41  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  tw. 
19.    5  shall  cleave . .  they  twain  shall  be  one  fie. 
19.   6  Wherefore  they  are  no  more  twain,  but 
21.  31  Whether  of  them  twain  did  the  will  of 
27.  21  Whether  of  the  twain  will  ye  that  I  rele. 
27.  51  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 

Markio.  8  they  twain,  .they  are  no  more  twain,  but 
15.  38  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 

Eph.    2.  15  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man 

TWELFTH,  twelve  — 

1.7Vn  (and)  ten,  i;'j;  ay  shenem  asar. 

Gen.  g.  8  days  of  Seth  were  nine  hundred  and  tw. 
14.  4  Twelve  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer 
17.  20  twelve  princes  shall  he  beget,  and  I  will 
25.  16  twelve  princes  according  to  their  nations 
35.  22  i  t  came  to  pass.,  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  tw, 
42.  13  Thy  servants  (are)  twelve  brethren,  the 
43. 32  We  (he)  twelve  brethren,  sons  of  our  fat. 


Gen.  49.  2S  these  (are)the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel :  and 

Exodi5-  27  they  came  to  Elim,  where  (were)  twelve 

24.    4  twelve  pillars,  according  to  the  twelve  tr. 

28.  21  the  stones  shall  be.  .twelve,  according  to 

28.  21  shall  they  be  according  to  the  twelve  tr. 

39. 14  the  stones  (were),  .twelve,  according  to 
39.  14  every  one.  .according  to  the  twelve  tribes 

Lev.  24.    5  take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve  cakes  th. 

Num.  1.  44  and  the  princes  of  Israel,  (being)  twelve 
7.  3  brought,  .six  covered  wagons,  and  twelve 
7.  78  On  the  twelfth  day  Ahira  the  son  of  Enan 
7.  84  twelve  chargers.. twelve  silver  bowls,  tw. 
7.  86  The  golden  spoons  (were)  twelve,  full  of 
7.  87  oxen,  .(were)  twelve  bullocks,  .rams  twe. 
7.  87  the  lambs  of  the  first  year  twelve,  with 

7.  87  kids  of  the  goats  for  sin  offering  twelve 
17.    2  take  of  every  one  of  them,  .twelve  rods 

17.  6  according  to  their  fathers'  houses.,  twel. 
29. 17  (ye  shall  offer)  twelve  young  bullocks,  two 
31.  5  a  thousand  of  (every)  tribe,  twelve  thou. 
33.   9  in  Elim  (were)  twelve  fountains  of  water 

Dent.  1.  23  I  took  twelve  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe 
Josh.  3. 12  take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  tribes  of 
4.  2  Take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  people 
4.  3  Take  you . .  out  of  the  place . .  twelve  ston . 
4.  4  Joshua  called  the  twelve  men,  whom  he 
4.  8  took  up  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of 
4.  9  Joshua  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  midst 
4.  20  those  twelve  stones,  which  they  took  out 

8.  25  all  that  fell  that  day .  .(were)  twelve  tho. 

18.  24  and  Gaba,  twelve  cities  with  their  villag. 

19. 15  Beth-leheru:  twelve  cities  with  their  vil. 
21.  7  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  twelvecities 
21. 40  the  cities,  .were (by) their  lot  twelves  cit. 

Judgi9.  29  divided  her.. into  twelve  pieces,  andseut 
21.  10  the  congregation  sent  thither  twelve  tho. 

2  Sa.  2  15  there  arose,  .twelve  of  Benjamin,  .andtw. 
10.  6  sent  and  hired,  .of  Ish-tob  twelve thousa. 
17.    1  Let  me  now  choose  out  twelve  thousand 

1  Ki.  4.    7  Solomon  had  twelve  officers  over  all  Isr. 

4.  26  Solomon  had.,  twelve  thousand  horsemen 
7. 15  a  line  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  either 
7.  25  It  stood  upon  twelve  oxen,  three  looking 

7.  44  one  sea,  and  twelve  oxen  under  the  sea 
10.  20  twelve  lions  stood  there  on  the  one  side 

10.  26  chariots,  and  twelve  thousand  horsemen 

11.  30  Ahijah  caught,  .and  rent  it  (in)  tvjelve 

16.  23  began  Omri  to  reign  over  Israel,  twelve 
18. 31  Elijah  took  twelve  stones,  according  to 

_  19. 19  twelve  yoke  (of  oxen),  .he  with  the  twel. 

2  Ki.  3.    1  Jehoram.  .the  son  of  Ahab.  .reigned  twe. 

8.25  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Joram  theson  of  Ah. 

17.  1  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Ahazking  of  Judah 
21.    1  Mauasseh  (was)  twelve  years  old  when  he 

1  Cli.  6.  63  out  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  twelve  cities 

9.  32  chosen  to  be  porters,  .two  hundred  and  t. 
15.  10  and  his  brethren  an  hundred  and  twelve 

24.  12  The  eleventh  to  Eliashib,  the  twelfth  to 

25.  g  who  with  his brethrenand  sons  (were)tw. 
25.  10  his  sons,  and  his  brethren,  (were)  twelve 

[So  in  verse  u,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23, 

24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31.] 

25. 19  The  twelfth  to  Hashabiah,  (lie),  his  sons 
27.  15  The  twelfth  (captain)  for  the  twelfth  mo. 

2  Ch.  1. 14  four  hundred  chariots,  and  twelve  thous. 

4.    4  It  stood  upon  twelve  oxen,  three  looking 
4.  15  One  sea,  and  twelve  oxen  under  it 
9. 19  twelve  lions  stood  there  on  the  one  side 
9.  25  Solomon  had.  .twelve thousandhorsemen 

33.  1  Mauasseh  was  twelve  years  old  when  he 

34.  3  in  the  twelfth  year  he  began  to  purge  Ju. 
Ezra   2.   6  two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twelve 

2.  18  The  children  of  Jorah,  an  hundred  and  t. 

8.  24  I  separated  twelve  of  the  chief  priests,  S. 
8.  31  we  departed . .  on  the  twelfth  (day)  of  the 
8.  35  twelve  bullocks  for  all  Israel,  ninety  and 

8.  35  seventy  and  seven  lambs,  twelve  he  goats 
Nell.  5. 14  twelve  years,  I  and  my  brethren  have  not 

7.  24  children  of  Hariph,  an  hundred  and  twel. 
Esth.  2. 12  after  that  she  had  been  twelve  months 

3.  7  in  the  twelfthyear  of  kingAhasuerus,  th. 
3.   7  from  month  to  mouth,  (to)  the  twelfth 
3.  13  upon  the  thirteenth  (day)  of  the  twelfth 
8. 12  upon  the  thirteenth  (day)  of  the  twelfth 

9.  1  in  the  twelfth  month,  that(is),  the  month 
Psa.  60.  title,  smote  of  Edom  in  the  valley.. twelve 
Jer.  52.  20  twelve  brasen  bulls  that(were)  under  the 

52.  21  a  fillet  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  it 
52.  31  in  the  twelfth  month,  in  the  five  and  tw. 
Eze.  29.    1  in  the  twelfth  (day)of  themonth,  thewo. 
32.    1  in  the  twelfth  year,  in  the  twelfth  month 
32. 17  It  came  to  pass  also  in  the  twelfth  year 
33. 21  it  came  to  pass  in  the  twelfth  year  of  our 

43. 16  altar  (shall  be)  twelve  (cubits)  long,  twel. 
47. 13  inherit  the  land,  accordiugto  the  twelve  tr. 

2.  Two  (and)  ten,  nb'j?.  nn  tere  asar. 

Ezra    6. 17  for  a  sin'offering  for  all  Israel,  twelve  he 
Dan.    4.  29  At  the  end  of  twelve  months  he  walked 

3.  Ten  (and)  two,  heKaBvo  dekaduo. 

Acts  19.    7  And  all  the  men  were  about  [twelve] 
24.  11  there  are  yet  but[twelvej  days  since  I  we. 

i.Two  (and)  ten,  Sw5e«ra  dodeka. 

Matt.  9.  20  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood  twe. 
10.    1  he  had  called  unto  (him)  his  twelve  disc. 

10.  2  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  are  these 
io.   5  These  twelve  Jesus  sent  forth,  and  comm. 

11.  1  an  end  of  commanding  his  twelve  discip. 
74.  20  took  up  of  the  fragments,  .twelve baskets 

19.  28  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve 

20. 17  took  the  twelve  discroles  apart  in  the  way 


Matt  26.  14  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Judas  Iscariot 
26.  20  even  was  come,  he  sat  down  with  the  tw. 
26.  47  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  came,  and  with 
26.  53  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  ang. 

Mark  3.  14  he  ordained  twelve,  that  they  should  be 

4.  10  they  that  were  about  him  with  the  twelve 

5.  25  which  had  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  years 

5.  42  for  she  was  (of  the  age)  of  twelve  years 

6.  7  he  called  (unto  him)  the  twelve,  and  began 
6.  43  they  tookuptwelve  baskets  full  of  thefr. 

8.  19  howmany.  .tookyeup?  Theysay.  .Twelve 

9.  35  he  sat  down,  and  called  the  twelve,  and 

10.  32  he  took  again  the  twelve, audbegan  to  tell 

11.  11  hewentoutunto  Bethany  with  the  twelve 
14.  10  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve,  went 
14.  17  Arid  in  the  evening  he  cometh  with  the  tw. 
14.  20  (It  is)  one  of  the  twelve,  that  dippeth  with 
14.  43  cometh  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  and  with 

Luke  2.  42  when  he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went 
6. 13  of  them  he  chose  twelve,  whom  also  he 
8.    1  he  went,  .and  the  twelve  (were)  with  him 
8.  42  he  had  one  only  daughter,  about  twelve 

8.  43  a  woman,  having  an  issue  of  blood  twelve 

9.  1  hecalled  his  twelve  disciples  together,  und 
9.  12  then  came  the  twelve,  and  said  unto  him 
9.  17  and  there  was  taken  up.  .twelve  baskets 

iS.  31  he  took  (unto  Mm)  the  twelve,  and  said 

22.    3  Iscariot,  being  of  the  number  of  the  twelve 

22.  14  he  sat  down,  and  the  [twelve]  apostles  wi. 

22.  30  sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 

22.  47  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  went  before  them 

John  6.  13  filled  twelve  baskets  with  the  fragments 

6.  67  Then  said  Jesus  unto  the  twelve,  Will  ye 

6.  70  Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of 

6.  71  for  he  it  was.  .being  one  of  the  twelve 

11.  9  Are  there  not  twelve  hours  in  the  day? 

20.  24  Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Didymus 
Acts    6.    2  the  twelve  called  the  multitude  of  the  di. 

7.  8  Isaac  begat  Jacob;  and  Jacob,  .the  twelve 
1  Co.  15.  s  he  was  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve 
Jas.  1.  1  to  the  twelve  tribes  that  are  scattered  ab. 
Rev.  7.  5,  5,  5,  6,  6,  6,  7,  7,  7,  8,  8,  8  sealed  twelve  th. 

12.  1  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars 

21.  i2twelvegates.  .[twelve angels].. twelve  trib. 
21. 14  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundati. 
21.  14  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles 
21. 16  he  measured  the  city.. twelve  thousand 

21.  21  the  twelve  gates  (were)  twelve  pearls,  ev. 

22.  2  the  tree  of  life, which  bare  t  welve(manner 

5. Twelfth,  5a>5eKctTos  dodekalos. 

Rev.  21.  20  the  eleventh,  a  jacinth,  tketwelfth.anam. 

TWELVE  tribes  — 

Twelve  tribes,  Sw^iKonpuXov  dOdekaphulon. 

Acts  26.    7  Unto  which,  .our  twelve  tribes,  instantly 

TWENTIETH,  twenty  — 
1.  Twenty,  D*~i!:*jy  esrim. 

Gen.  6.   3  his  days  shall  be  an  hundred  and  twenty 

8.  14  on  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  the  mo. 
11.  24  Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and 
18.31  Perad venture  there  shall  be  twenty  found 
18.  31  said,  I  will  not  destroy  (it)  for  twenty's  sa. 

23.  1  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  years 
31.  38  This  twenty  years  (have  I  been)  with  thee 

31.  41  Thus  have  I  been  twenty  years  in  thy  ho. 

32.  14  Two  hundred  she  goats, and  twenty  he  go. 
32. 14  two  hundred  ewes,  and  twenty  rams 

32.  15  forty  kine.and  ten  bulls,  twentysheasses 

37.  28  sold  Joseph,  .for  twenty  (pieces)  of  silver 
Exod.12.  18  until  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  mo. 

26.  2  The  length,  .(shall  be)  eight  and  twenty 
26. 18  twenty  boards  on  the  south  side  southw. 
26.  19  forty  sockets  of  silver  under  the  twenty 

26.  20  the  north  side,  (there  shall  be)  twenty  bo. 

27. 10  twenty  pillars  thereof,  and  their  twenty 

27. 11  twenty  pillars  and  their  twenty  sockets 
27. 16  an  hanging  of  twentycubits,(of)blue,  and 
30.  13  a  shekel  (is)twenty  gerahs:  an  half  shekel 
30.  14  Everyone,  .from  twenty  years  old  and  ab. 
36.  9  The  length  of  one  curtain  (was)  twenty 
36.  23  twenty  boards  for  the  south  side  southw. 
36.  24  forty  sockets . .  he  made  under  the  twenty 
36.  25  for  the  other  side,  .he  made  twenty  boar. 

38. 10  (were)  twenty,  and  their  brasen  sockets  t. 
3S.  11  twenty,  and  their  sockets  of  brass  twenty 
38. 18  twenty  cubits  (was)  the  length,  and  the 
3S.  24  twenty  and  nine  talents,  and  seven  hund. 

38.  26  from  twenty  years  old  and  upwards,  for 
Lev.  27.    3  from  twenty  years  old  even  unto  sixty  ye. 

27.  5  from  five  years  old  even  unto  twenty  years 
27.   5  thy  estimation  shall  be . .  twenty  shekels 
27. 25  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary :  twenty  ger. 

Num.  1.  3  From  twenty  years  old  and  upward 
[So  in  verse  18,  20,  22,  245  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40, 

42,  45-] 

3.  39  all  the  males.,  (were)  twenty  and  two  tho. 
3.  43  twenty  and  two  thousand  two  hundred 
3.  47  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  .(is)  twenty 
7.  85  the  gold,  .(was)  an  hundred  and  twenty 
7.  88  twenty  and  four  bullocks,  the  rams  sixty 
S.  24  from  twenty  and  five  years  old  and  upw. 

10. 11  on  the  twentieth  (day) of  the  second  mon. 
11.  19  five  days,  neither  ten  days,  nor  twenty 
14.  29  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  which 
18. 16  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary .  .(is)  twenty 

25.  9  those  that  died . .  were  twenty  and  four 

26.  2,  4  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward 
26.  14  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  two  hund. 
26.  62  twenty  and  three  thousand, all  malesfrom 
32.  11  Surely  none,  .from  twenty  years  old  and 


TWENTY 


1009 


TWO 


19. 


24. 


Num  33.  30  Aaron  (was)  an  hundred  and  twenty  and 

Deut3i.    2  I  (am)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  old 

34.    7  Moses  (was)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years 

Josh.  1 5.  32  all  the  cities . .  twenty  and  nine,  with  their 

19.  30  twenty  and  two  cities  with  their  villages 
Judg.  4.    3  twenty  years  he  mightily  oppressed  the 

7.  3  there  returned  of  the  people  twenty  and 

8.  10  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men  th. 
10.   2  he  judged  Israel  twenty  and  three  years 

10.  3  and  judged  Israel  twenty  and  two  years 

11.  33  till  thou  come  to  Minuith,  (even)  twenty 

15.  20  And  he  judged  Israel  .  .twenty  years 

16.  31  buried  him.. he  judged  Israel  twenty  ye. 
20. 15  twenty  and  six  thousand  men  that  drew 

20.  21  destroyed.,  that  day  twenty  and  two  tho. 
20. 35  destroyed . .  twenty  and  five  thousand  and 
20.  46  twenty  and  five  thousand  men  that  drew 

1  Sa.   7.    2  the  time  was  long ;  for  it  was  twenty  ye. 

14. 14  that  first  slaughter,  .was  about  twenty 

2  Sa.   3.  20  Abner  came  to  David,  .and  twenty  men 

8.    4  seven  hundred  horsemen,  and  twenty  th. 

8.  5  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty 

9.  10  Now  Zibahad  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  ser. 
10.  6  the  Syrians  of  Zoba,  twenty  thousand  fo. 
18.    7  a  great  slaughter  that  day  of  twenty  tho. 

,  17  his  fifteen  sons  and  his  twenty  servants 

.  20  on  every  foot  six  toes,  four  and  twenty  in 

8  at  the  end  of  nine  months  and  twenty  da. 

1  Ki.  4.  23  Ten  fat  oxen,  and  twenty  oxen  out  of  the 

5. 11  twenty  thousand  measures  ..and  twenty 
6.  2  the  breadth  thereof  twenty  (cubits),  and 
6.  3  twenty  cubits  (was)  the  length  thereof 
6. 16  he  built  twenty  cubits  on  the  sides  of  the 
6.  20  twenty  cubits  in  length,  and  twenty  cub. 
6.  20  and  twenty  cubits  in  the  height  thereof 

8.  63  twenty  thousand,  .and  an  hundred  and 

9. 10  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty  years 

9. 11  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  cities  in  the 

9.  28  gold,  four  hundred  and  twenty  talents 
10.  10  an  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold 

14.  20  the  days.. (were)  two  and  twenty  years:  and 

15.  9  in  the  twentieth,  year  of  Jeroboam  king  of 
'5-  33  *°  reign  over  all  Israel,  .twenty  and  four 

16.  8  In  the  twenty  and  sixth  year  of  Asa  king 
16.  10,  15  in  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of 
16.  29  reigned  over  Israelin  Samaria  twenty  and 

20.  30  a  wall  fell  upon  twenty  and  seven  thous. 

22.  42  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jem. 

2  Ki.  4.  42  twenty  loaves  of  barley,  and  full  ears  of 

8.  26  Two  and  twenty  years  old  (was)  Ahaziah 
10.  36  Jehu  reigned  over  Israel,  .twenty  and  ei. 

12.  6  iu  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  king 

13.  1  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Joash 

14.  2  He  was  twenty  and  five  years  old  when  he 

14.  2  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerusa. 

15.  1  In  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Jerob. 
15.  27  the  son  of  Remaliah.  .(reigned)  twenty 
15.  30  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Jothani  the  sou 

15.  33  Five  and  twenty  years  old  was  he  when 

16.  2  Twenty  years  old  (was)  Ahaz  when  he  be. 
18.  2  Twenty  and  five  years  old  was  he  when  he 
18.    2  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jer. 

21.  19  Anion  (was)  twenty  and  two  years  old  wh. 

23.  31  Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years 
23.  36  Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
24. 18  Zedekiah  (was)  twenty  and  one  years  old 
25.  27  ontheseven  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the  1110. 

1  Ch.  2.  22  Jair,  who  had  three  and  twenty  cities  in 

7.    2  two  and  twenty  thousand  and  six  hundred 

7.    7  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  thirty  and 

7.   9  the  number,  .(was)  twenty  thousand  and 

7.  40  the  number,  (was)  twenty  and  six  thousa. 

12.  28  of  his  father's  house  twenty  and  two  cap. 

12.  30  of  the  children  of  Ephraim  twenty  thous. 

12.  35  twenty  and  eight  thousand  and  six  hund 

12.  37  on  the  other  side,  .an  hundred  and  twenty 

15.    5  and  his  brethren  an  hundred  and  twenty 

6  and  his  brethren  two  hundred  and  twenty 

4  David  took  from  him.  .twenty  thousand 

5  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty  thou. 

6  whose  fingers  and  toes  (were)  four  aud  tw. 
4  twenty  and  four  thousand  (were)  to  set 

23.  24  from  the  age  of  twenty  years  and  upward 

23.  27  (were)  numbered  from  twenty  years  old 

24.  16  nineteenth  to  Pethahiah,  the  twentieth  to 

24. 17  The  one  and  twentieth,  .the  two  and  tw. 

24. 18  The  three  and  twentieth. .the  four  and  tw. 

25.  27  The  twentieth  to  Eliathah,  (he),  his  sons 
25.  28  Theoneandtwentieth  to  Hothir,(he),  his 
25.  29  The  two  and  twentieth  to  Gidalti,  (he),  his 
25.  30  The  three  and  twentieth  to  Mahazioth 
25.  31  The  four  and  twentieth  to  Romamti-ezer 
27.  1  of  every  course  were  twenty  and  four  th. 
27.    2  in  his  course  (were)  twenty  and  four  tho. 

So  in  v.  5,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12, 13,  14,  15. 
27.  4  in  his  course  likewise  (were)  twenty  and 
27.  23  took  not  the  number  of  them  from  twenty 
1  Ch.  z.  10,  10  twenty  thousand.,  and  twenty  thousa. 
3.  3  three  score  cubits, and  the  breadth  twenty 
3.  4  twenty  cubits,  and.  .an  hundred  and  tw. 
3.    8  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth,  .twenty 

3.  11  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  (were)  twenty 
3. 13  spread  themselves  forth  twenty  cubits 

4.  1  twenty  cubits  the  length  thereof,  and  tw. 

5.  12  an  hundred  and  twenty  priests  sounding 
7.  5  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  twenty  and 
7.    5  and  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sh. 

7.  10  on  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the  se. 

8.  1  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty  yea. 

9.  9  gave  the  king  an  hundred  and  twenty  tal. 
11,  21  begat  twenty  and  eight  sons,  and  threes. 
13.  21  begat  twenty  and  two  sons,  and  sixteen 

127 


15- 


23- 


2  Ch.20.  31  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jem. 
25.    1  Aniaziah  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
25.    1  he  reigned  twenty  aud  nine  years  in  Jer. 
25.    5  numbered  them  from  twenty  years  old 
27.   1  Jotham  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old  w. 

27.  8  He  was  five  and  twenty  years  old  when 

28.  1  Ahaz(was)  twenty  years  old  when  he  began 

28.  6  slew  in  Judah  an  hundred  and  twenty  th. 

29.  1  to  reign  (when  he  was)  five  and  twenty 
19.  1  he  reigned  nine  and  twenty  years  in  Jer. 
31. 17  the  Levites  from  twenty  years  old  and  tip. 
33.  21  Anion  (was)  two  and  twenty  years  old  wli. 
36.  2  Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years 
36.  5  Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
36.  11  Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 

Ezra  1.  9  chargers  ofsilver,  nine  and  twenty,  knives 
2.  1 1  The  children  of  Bebai,  six  hundred  twenty 
2. 12  a  thousand  two  hundred  twenty  and  two 
2.  17  children  of  Bezai,  three  hundred  twenty 
2. 19  children  of  Hashum,  two  hundred  twenty 
2.  21  of  Beth-lehem,  an  hundred  twenty  and 
2. 23  The  men  of  Anathoth,  an  hundred  twen. 
2.  26  children  of  Ramah.  .six  hundred  twenty 
2.  27  The  men  of  Michmas,  an  hundred  twenty 
2.  28  The  men  of  Beth-el.,  two  hundred  twenty 
2.  32  of  Harim,  three  hundred  and  twenty 
2.  33  The  children  of  Lod . .  seven  hundred  twe. 
2.  41  the  children  of  Asaph,  an  hundred  twen. 

2.  67  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty 

3.  8  Levites,  from  twenty  years  old  and  upw. 
8.  11  the  sons  of  Bebai,  and  with  him  twenty 
8. 19  Merari,  his  brethren,  and  their  sons,  tw. 

8.  20  two  hundred  and  twenty  Nethinims,  all 
8. 27  twenty  basins  of  gold  of  a  thousand  dra 

10.  9  the  ninth  month,  and  the  twentieth  (day) 
Nell.    1.    1  in  the  month  Chisleu,  in  the  twentieth  ye. 

2.  1  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  ki. 
5. 14  from  the  twentieth  year  even  unto  the 

6.  15  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  twenty  and 

7.  16  The  children  of  Bebai,  six  hundred  twen. 
7. 17  two  thousand  three  hundred  twenty  and 
7.  22  children  of  Hashum,  three  hundred  twe. 
7.  23  children  of  Bezai,  three  hundred  twenty 
7.  27  The  men  of  Anathoth,  an  hundred  twenty 
7.  30  The  men  of  Ramah.  .six  hundred  twenty 
7.  31  men  of  Michmas,  an  hundred  and  twenty 
7.  32  The  men  of  Beth-el.  .an  hundred  twenty 
7. 35  of  Harim,  three  hundred  and  twenty 

7.  37  The  children  of  Lod.  .seven  hundred  twe. 

7.  69  six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty 

9.  1  in  the  twenty  and  fourth  day  of  this  mo. 

11.  8  after  him  Gabbai.  .nine  hundred  twenty 
11. 12  their  brethren,  .(were)  eight  hundred  tw. 
11.  14  their  brethren,  .an  hundred  twenty  and 

Esth.  1.    1  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  provi. 

8.  9  the  month  Sivan,  on  the  three  and  twen. 

8.  9  an  hundred  twenty  and  seven  provinces 

9.  30  sent  the  letters,  .to  the  hundred  twenty 
Jer.  25.   3  unto  this  day,  that  (is)  the  three  and  twe. 

52.   1  Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 
52.  28  three  thousand  Jews,  and  three  and  twe. 
52.  30  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Nebu. 
52,  31  in  the  five  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the  mo. 
Eze.    4.  10  (shall  be)  by  weight,  twenty  shekels  a  day 
8.  16  five  and  twenty  men,  with  their  backs  to. 
11.    1  at  the  door  of  the  gate  five  and  twenty 
29. 17  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seven  and  twentieth 
40.   1  In  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  our  cap 
40.  13  the  breadth  (was)  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  21,  25  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  29,  30,  33  five  and  twenty  cubits 
40.  36  and  the  breadth  five  and  twenty  cubits 

40.  49  The  length  of  the  porch  (was)  twenty  cu. 

41.  2  forty  cubits,  and  the  breadth,  twenty  cu. 

41.  4  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth,  twenty 
41. 10  the  wideness  of  twenty  cubits  round  abo. 

42.  3  Over  against  the  twenty  (cubits)  which 
45.    1  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  thousand 
45.   3  measure  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  th. 
45.   5  five  and  twenty  thousand,  .for  twenty  ch. 
45.   6  five  and  twenty  thousand  long,  over  agai. 
45.  w  twenty  gerahs  :  twenty  shekels,  five  and 
48.    8  five  and  twenty  thousand  (reeds  in)  brea. 
48.   9  five  and  twenty  thousand  in  length,  and 
48.  10, 10  five  and  twenty  thousand  in  length 
48.  13  the  Levites  (shall  have)  five  and  twenty 
48.  13  the  length  (shall  be)  five  and  twenty  tho. 
48.  15  over  against  the  five  and  twenty  thousa. 
48.  20  twenty  thousand  by  five  and  twenty  tho. 
48.  21,  21   over  against  the  five  and  twenty  tho. 

Dan.  10.  4  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  first 
10.  13  the  prince,  .withstood  me  one  and  twenty 

Hag.  1. 15  In  the  four  and  twentieth  clay  of  the  six 
2.  1  in  the  one  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the  mo. 
2. 10  In  the  four  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the  ni. 
2. 16  when  (one)  came  to  an  heap  of  twenty(me.) 
2. 16  to  draw  out  fifty,  .there  were  (but)  twenty 
2.  18  from  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the 
2.  20  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  01  the  mo. 

Zech.  1.    7  Upon  the  four  and  twentieth  (day)  of  the 
5.   2  the  length  thereof  (is)  twenty  cubits,  and 
.Tioenty,  }*"WH  esrin. 

Dan.    6.    1  an  hundred  and  twenty  princes,  which  sh.. 
.  Twenty,  etKocri  cikosi. 

Lukei4.  31  that  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  th. 

John  6.  19  when  they  bad  rowed  about  five  and  twe. 

Acts    1.  15  together  were  about  an  hundred  and  tw. 
27.  28  sounded,  and  found  (it)  twenty  fathoms 

1  Co.  10.    8  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand 

Rev.    4.    4  round  about,  .(were)  four  and  twenty  se. 
4.   4  four  and  twenty  elders  sitting,  clothed  in 


Rev.  4.  10  The  four  and  twenty  "elders  fall  down  bef. 
5.  8  four  (and)  twenty  elders  fell  down  before 
5.  14  the  [four  (and)  twenty]  elders  fell  down 
11.  16  the  four  and  twenty  elders  which  sat  be. 
19.  4  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  and  tlie  four 
TWENTY  thousand  — 

Two  myriad)  ErfjSn  or  Mian  *w  shelter  ibbo  orribboth. 
Neh.  7.  71,  72  twenty  thousand  drams  of  gold,  and 
Psa.  68.  17  The  chariots  of  God  (are)  twenty  thousa. 
TWICE  (as  much)  — 
l.A  beat,  step,  cys  paam. 

Gen.  41.  32  for  that  the  dream  was  doubled,  .twice 
Nuni2Q.  11  and  with  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock  twice 
1  Sa.  18.  11  David  avoided  out  of  his  presence  twice 

1  Ki.  11.  9  God.  .which  had  appeared  unto  him  twiae 
Eccl.  6.    6  though  he  live  a  thousand  years  twice  (to. ) 

2.  Two,  DJ39  shcnayim. 

2  Ki.  6. 10  saved  himself  there,  not  once  nor  twice 
Neh.  13.  20  lodged  without  Jerusalem  once  or  twloe 
Job  33.  14  God  speaketh  once,  yea  twice,  (yet  man) 

40.  5  spoken;  but  I  will  not  answer :  yea,  twice 
Psa.  62.  11  twice  have  I  heard  this,  that  power  (be.; 
Eccl.  6.  6  though  he  live  a  thousand  years  twice  (to.) 

3. Second,  double,  copy,  college,  niys  mishneh. 
Exodi6.    5  it  shall  be  twice  as  much  as  they  gather 
16.  22  on  the  sixth  clay  they  gathered  twice  as  m. 
Job    42.  10  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had 

4.  Twice,  5i'y  dis. 

Marki4.  30,  72  before  the  cock  crow  twiee,  thou  shalt 
Luke  18.  12  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of 
Jude       12  trees,  .twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  ro. 

TWIG,  young  — 

1.  Suckling,  npav  yoneqeth. 

Eze.  17. 22  I  will  crop  off  from,  .hisyoungtwigsate. 

2.  Sucklings,  nip'::  yeniqoth. 

Eze.  17.   4  He  cropped  off  the  top  of  his  young  twigs 
TWILIGHT  — 

1.  Twilight,  *$}  nesheph. 

1  Sa.  30.  17  David  smote  them  from  the  twilight  even 

2  Ki.   7.   5  they  rose  up  in  the  twilight,  to  go  unto 

7.    7  they  arose,  and  fled  in  the  twilight,  and 
Job     3.    9  Let  the  stars  of  the  twilight  thereof  be 

24.  15  The  eye  also.,  waiteth  for  the  twilight,  sa. 
Pi-ov.  7.    9  In  the  twilight,  in  the  evening,  in  the  bl. 

2.  Darkness,  nsby_  alatah. 

Eze.  ie.    6  In  their  sight . .  carry  (it)  forth  in  the  tw. 
12.    7I  brought  (it)  forth  in  the  twilight..  I  bare 
12. 12  shall  bear  upon  (his)  shoulder  in  the  twi. 
TWINED  — 
To  be  twined,  11^  shazar,  6. 

Exod26.    1  ten  curtains  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  and 

26.  31.  36  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined- 

27.  9  hangings  for  the  court  (of)  fine  twined  li. 

27.  16  fine  twined  linen,  wrought  with  needle 
27. 18  the  height  five  cubits  (of)  fine  twined  lin. 

28.  6  and  fine  twined  linen,  with  cunning  work 
28.  8  purple,  and  scarlet,  aud  fine  twined  linen 
28.  15  and  (of)  fine  twined  linen,  shalt  thou  ma. 
36.  8  made  ten  curtains  (of)  fine  twined  linen 
36.  35  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen 
36.  37  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  of  needlew. 
^S.  9  the  hangings,  .(were  of)  fine  twined  linen 
38.  16  All  the  hangings,  .(were) of  fine  twined  li. 

38.  18  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen 

39.  2,  5,  8  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined 
39.  24  and  purpffe,  and  scarlet,  (and)  twined  (li.) 
39.  28  and  linen  breeches  (of)  fine  twined  linen 
39.  29  a  girdle  (of)  flue  twined  linen,  and  blue 

TWINS,  (to  bear)  — 

l.To  bear  twins,  dni-i  taam,  5. 

Song  4.    2  whereof  every  one  bear  twins,  and  none 
6>    6  whereof  every  one  beareth  twins,  and  (th. 

2.  Twins,  cpixn  teoinim. 

Gen.  25.  24  when  herdays..were  fulfilled,  behold. .tw. 

38.  27  it  came  to  pa*s.  .twins  (were)  in  her  womb 

Song  4.    5  like  two  young  roes  that  are  twins,  which 

7.    3  two  breasts,  .like  two  young  roes,  .twins 

TWINKLING  — 

A  sudden  motion,  twinkling,  &nrr)  rlripe. 

1  Co.  15.  52  In  a  moment,  in  the  [twinkling]  &  r.n  eye 
TWO  (a  piece) — 
\.A  pair,  yoke.  *i£ir  tsemed. 

Judg  19.  10  two  asses  saddled ;  his  concubine  also 

2.  Two  damsels,  D'.rcrn  rachamathayim. 

Judg.  5.  30  to  every  man  a  damsel  (or)  two;  toSisera 

3.  Two,  D^if*  shenayim. 

Gen.    1.  16  God  made  two  great  lights ;  the  greater 

4.  19  Lamech  took  unto  him  two  wives :  the  na. 

5.  18  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two  ye. 
5.  20  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  two  years 
5.  26  lived,  .seven  hundred  eighty  and  two  ye. 

5.  28  Lamech  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two 

6.  19  two  of  every  (sort)  shalt  thou  bring  into 

6.  20  two  of  every  (sort)  shall  come  unto  thee 

7.  2  of  beasts  that  (are)  not  clean  by  two,  the 
7.    9  There  went  in  two  and  two  unto  Noah  into 
7. 15  two  and  two  of  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the 
9.  22  saw  the  nakedness . .  told  his  two  brethren 

10.  25  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons :  the  name 

11.  20  Reu  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and  begat 


Geu.  19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
19. 
22. 
=4- 
25- 
=7- 
29. 
3'- 
3i- 
32. 

32- 
32- 
32- 
33- 

34- 


44- 
46. 
48. 

43. 

Exod.  2. 


18. 
25- 
25- 
25- 
25- 
=5- 
26. 
26. 
=6. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
=7- 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
28, 
28. 
29. 
29, 
29. 
29. 


Lev 


TWO 


I  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  even 

8  I  have  two  (laughters  which  have  notkn. 

15  take  thy  wife,  and  thy  two  daughters,  wh. 

16  upon  the  hand  of  his  two  daughters;  the 
30  dwelt  in  the  mountain,  and  his  two  dau. 
30  he  dwelt  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two  daug. 

3  took  two  of  his  young  men  with  him,  and 

22  two  bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten  (shek.) 

23  Two  nations  (are)  in  thy  womb,  and  two 

9  fetch  me  from  thence  two  good  kids  of  the 

16  Laban  had  two  daughters :  the  name  of 
33  Laban  went.,  into  the  two  maid  servants' 
41  I  served  thee  fourteen  years  for  thy  two 

7  he  divided  the  people,  .into  two  bands 
10  I  passed  over,  .now  I  am  become  two  ba. 
22  rose  up  that  night,  and  took  his  two  wiv. 
22  two  women  servants,  and  his  eleven  sons 

1  unto  Rachel,  and  unto  the  two  hand  ma. 
25  two  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  Simeon  and  Levi 

2  Pharaoh  was  wroth  against  two  (of)  his 
50  unto  Joseph  were  born  two  sons  before 

37  Slay  my  two  sons,  if  I  bring  him  not  to 
27  Ye  know  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  (sons) 
27  the  sons  of  Joseph,  .(were)  two  souls,  all 

1  he  took  with  him  his  two  sons,  Manasseh 

5  now  thy  two  sons,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh 

13  behold,  two  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove 
9  if  they  will  not  believe  also  these  two  sig. 
7  strike  (it)  on  the  two  side  posts  and  on  the 

22  strike  thelinteland  thetwoside  posts  wi. 

23  blood  upon  the  lintel,  and  upon  the  two 
22  they  gathered  twice  as  much  bread,  two 

3  her  two  sons ;  of  which  the  name  of  the  one 

6  and  thy  wife,  and  her  two  sons  with  her 
12  two  rings,  .in  the  one  side  of  it,  and  two 

18  make  two  cherubim .  .in  the  two  ends  of 

19  make  the  cherubim  on  the  two  ends  ther. 

22  the  two  cherubim  which  (are)  upon  the  ark 
35j  35.  35  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the 

17  Two  tenons  (shall  there  be)  in  one  board 
19,  19  two  sockets  under,  .board  for  his  two 

21  two  sockets  under  one  board,  and  two  so. 

23  two  boards  shalt  thou  make  for  the  corn. 

24  thus,  .they  shall  be  for  the  two  corners 

25  two  sockets  underoneboard,  and  twosoe. 

7  the  staves  shall  be  upon  the  two  sides  of 
7  two  shoulder  pieces. .joined  at  the  two  ed. 
9  thou  shalt  take  two  onyx  stones,  and  gra. 

II  shalt  thou  engrave  the  two  stones  with 
12  thou  shalt  put  the  two  stones  upon  the  sli. 
12  bear  their  names,  .upon  his  two  shoulders 

14  two  chains  (of)  pure  gold  at  the  ends;  (of) 

23  two  rings  of  gold,  and  shalt  put  the  two 

24  two  wreathen  (chains)  of  gold  in  the  two 
2  5  two  ends  of  the  two  wreathen . .  in  the  two 

26  thou  shalt  make  two  rings  of  gold,  and 
.  26  thou  shalt  put  them  upon  the  two  ends 

27  two  (other)  rings  of  gold  thou  shalt  make 

27  shalt  put  them  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ep. 
1  Take  one  youiigbullock,and  two  rams  wi. 

3  bring,  .with  the  bullock  ami  the  two  rams 
13,  22  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is) 

38  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  day  by  day  co. 

4  two  golden  rings  shalt  thou  make  to  it 
4  by  the  two  corners  thereof,  upon  the  two 

iS  two  tables  of  testimony,  tables  of  stone 

15  the  two  tables  of  testimony  (were)  in  his 

1  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 
4  he  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 
4  and  took  in  his  hand  the  two  tables  of  st. 

29  the  two  tables  of  testimony  in  Moses'  ha. 

22  One  board  had  two  tenon3,  equally  dista. 
24  two  sockets  under  one  board  for  his  two 
24  twosockets  under  another,  .for  his  two  te. 

26  two  sockets  under  one  board,  and  two  so. 

28  two  boards  made  he  for  the  corners  of  the 

30  their  sockets,  .under  every  board  two  so. 

3  two  rings  upon  the  one  side  of  it,  ami  two 

7  two  cherubim,  .on  the  two  ends  of  them. 

8  made  he  the  cherubim  on  thetwo  endsth. 
21,  21,  21  a  knop  under  two  branches  of  the 

27  two  rings  of  gold,  .by  the  two  corners  of 

4  by  the  two  edges  was  it  coupled  together 

16  made  two  ouches  (of)  gold,  and  two  gold 

16  put  the  two  rings  in  the  two  ends  of  the 

17  two  wreathen  chains  of  gold  in  the  two 

18  the  two  ends  of  the  two  wreathen  chains 

18  they  fastened  in  the  two  ouches,  and  put 

19  two  rings  of  gold,  and  put  (them)  on  the 

20  two  (other)  golden  rings . .  on  the  two  sides 
4,  10,  15  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that 

9  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  irpon 
7,  11  two  turtle  do  ves.'or  two  young  pigeons 
4  the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  (is)  on 

2  two  rams,  and  a  basket  of  unleavened  br. 
8. 16,  25  the  caul  (above)  the  liver,  and  the  two 

12.  8  she  shall  bring  two  turtles,  or  two  young 
14.  4  two  birds  alive  (and)  clean,  and  oedar  wo. 
14.  10  he  shall  take  two  he  lambs  without  blemish 
14.  22  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pigeons 

14.  49  two  birds,  and  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet 

15.  14  take  to  him  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  yo. 
25.  29  take  unto  her  two  turtles,  or  two  young 

16.  1  after  the  death  of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron 
16.  5  two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  ottering,  and 
16.  7  be  shall  take  the  two  goats,  and  present 
16.  8  Aai'on  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goats 
23. 13  two  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  mingled  with 
23.  17  bring  two  wave  loaves  of  two  tenth  deals 
23.  18  offer,  .one  young  bullock,  and  two  rams 
23.  19  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  sacrifice 
23. 20  (for)  a  wave  ottering.,  with  the  two  lambs 


1010 


Lev.  24.    5  bake . .  two  tenth  deals  shall  be  in  one  cake 

24.    6  thou  shalt  set  them  in  two  rows,  six  on  a 

Num.  1.  ^5  Manasseh,  (were)  thirty  and  two  thousand 

1.  39  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 

2.  21  those  that  werenumbered.  .thirty  and  two 

2.  26  threescore  and  two  thousand  and  seven 

3.  39  all  the  males,  .(were)  twenty  and  two  th. 

3.  43  those  that  werenumbered.  .twenty  and  t. 

6.  10  bring  two  turtles,  or  two  young  pigeons 

7.  3  a  wagon  for  two  of  the  princes,  and  for 
7.    7  Two  wagons  and  four  oxen  he  gave  unto 
7.  17,  23  two  oxen,  five  rams,  five  he  goats,  five 

So  in  verse  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83. 
7.  89  speaking,  .from  between  the  two  cherub. 

10.  2  Make  thee  two  trumpets  of  silver;  of  a 

11.  26  there  remained  two  (of  the)  men  in  the  ca. 

13.  23  and  they  bare  it  between  two  upon  a  staff 
15.  6  two  tenth  deals  of  flour  mingled  with  the 
22. 22  he  was  riding,  .and  his  two  servants  (were) 
26.  14  These  (are)  the  families,  .twenty  and  two 
26.  34  fifty  and  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred 
26.  37  thirty  and  two  thousand  and  five  hundred 
28.  3,  9  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 
28.  9,  12  two  tenth  deals  of  flour  (for)  a  meat  off. 
28.  11,  19,  27  two  young  bullocks,  and  one  ram 
28.  20  three,  .for  a  bullock,  and  two  tenth  deals 

28.  28  their  meatoffering,  .two  tenth  deals  unto 

29.  3  for  a  bullock,  (and)  two  tenth  deals  for  a 
29.  9  to  a  bullock,  (and)  two  tenth  deals  to  one 
29. 13,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32  two  rams.,  four  teen  1. 
29.  14  two  tenth  deals  to  each  ram  of  the  two  ra. 
31.  35  thirty  and  two  thousand  persons  in  all,  of 

31.  40  the  Lord's  tribute  (was)  thirty  and  twop. 

34.  15  The  two  tribes  and  the  half  tribe  have 

35.  6  to  them  ye  shall  add  forty  and  two  cities 
Deut.  3.    8  took  at  that  timeout  of  the  hand  of  the  two 

3. 21  your  God  hath  done  unto  these  two  kings 

4.  13  and  he  wrote  them  upon  two  tables  of  st. 

4.  47  two  kings  of  the  Amorites,  which  (were) 

5.  22  he  wrote  them  in  two  tables  of  stone,  and 
g.  10  the  Lord  delivered  unto  me  two  tables  of 
9.  11  the  Lord  gave  me  the  two  tables  of  stone 
9. 15  two  tables  of  the  covenant  (were)  in  my 

9.  17  two  tables,  and  cast  them  out  of  my  two 
10.  1  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 
10.    3  hewed  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the 

10.  3  went  up.  .having  the  two  tables  in  mine 

14.  6  cleaveth  the  cleft  unto  two  claws,  (and) 
17.  6  At  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses,  or  three 
19.  15  at  the  month  of  two  witnesses,  or  at  the 

21. 15  If  a  man  have  two  wives,  one  beloved,  and 

32.  30  How  should,  .two  put  ten  thousand  to  fli. 
Josh.  2.    1  sent  out  of  Shittim  two  men  to  spy  secret. 

2.  4  the  woman  took  the  two  men,  and  hid  th. 
2. 10  what  ye  did  unto  the  two  kings  of  the  A. 
2.  23  So  the  two  men  returned,  and  descended 

6.  22  Joshua  had  said  unto  the  two  men  that 
9.  10  all  that  he  did  to  thetwo  kings  of  the  Am. 

14.    3  Moses  had  given  the  inheritance  of  two  tr. 

14.  4  For  the  children  of  Joseph  were  two  trib. 

15.  60  Kabbah;  two  cities  with  their  villages 

19.  30  twenty  and  two  cities  with  their  villages 

21. 16  suburbs,  nine  cities  out  of  those  two  tribes 
21.  25  Gath-rimmon  with  her  suburbs;  two  cit. 
21.  27  and  Beeshterah  with  her  suburbs;  twoc. 
24.  12  drave  them  out.  .the  two  kings  of  the  A. 

Judg.  3.  16  made  him  a  dagger  which  had  two  edges 

7.  3  there  returned,  .twentyand  two  thousand 

7.  25  they  took  two  princes  of  the  Midianites 

8.  12  took  the  two  kings  of  Midian,  Zebah  aud 

9.  44  the  two  (other)  companies  ran  upon  all 

10.  3  and  judged  Israel  twenty  and  two  years 
n.  37  let  me  alone  two  months,  that  I  may  go 

11.  38  he  sent  her  away  (for)  two  months:  and. 

11.  39  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  two  months 

12.  6  fell  at  that  time.. forty  and  two  thousand 
15.    4  put  a  firebrand,  in  the  midst  between  two 

15.  13  they  bound  him  with  two  new  cords,  and 

16.  3  took  the  doors,  .and  the  two  posts,  and 
16.  28  avenged  of  the  Philistines  for  my  two  ey. 
16.  29  Samson  took  hold  of  the  two  middle  pill. 

20.  21  destroyed,  .twentyand  two  thousand  men 
Ruth.  1.    1  sojourn,  .he,  and  his  wife,  and  his  two  sons 

1.  2  the  name  of  his  two  sons  Mahlonand  Ch. 
1.  3  died;  and  she  was  left,  and  her  two  sons 
1.  5  the  woman  was  left  of  her  two  sons  and 
1.  7  she  went,  .and  her  two  daughters  in  law 
1.  8  Naomi  said  unto  her  two  daughters  in  law 
1.  19  they  two  went  until  the}  came  to  Beth-1. 
4.  11  which  two  did  build  the  house  of  Israel 

1  Sa.    1.    2  hehad  two  wives;  thenameof  theonewas 

1.  3  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phinehas 
2. 21  conceived,  and  bare  three  sons  and  two 

2.  34  that  shall  come  upon  thy  two  sons,  on  H. 
4.  4,  11  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phin. 
4.  17  thy  two  sons  also,  Hophni  and  Phinehas 
6.  7  take  two  milch  kine,  on  which  there  hath 
6.  10  took  two  milch  kine,  and  tied  them  to 

10.  2  thou  shalt  find  two  men  by  Rachel's  sepul. 
10.  4  will  salute  thee,  and  give  thee  two  (loaves) 
11. 11  so  that  twoof  them  were  not  left  together 

13.  1  when  he  had  reigned  two  years  over  Isr. 

14.  45  the  names  of  the  two  daughters  (were  th.) 
23.  18  they  two  made  a  covenant  before  the  Lo. 
25. 18  and.  .two  bottles,  .of  wine,  and  five  sheep 

27.  3  David  with  his  two  wives,  Ahinoam  the 

28.  8  he  went,  and  two  men  with  him,  and  they 
30.    5  David's  two  wives  were  taken  captives 
30.  12  a  cake  of  figs,  and  two  clusters  of  raisins 
30.  18  David  recovered.,  and  rescued  his  twowiv. 

2  Sa.    1.    1  and  David  had  abode  two  days  in  Ziklag 

2.   2  David  went  up  thither,  and  his  two  wives 


TWO 


b  Sa.  3.  ioIsh-bosheth.Saul'sson.  .reigned  two  years 

4.  2  Saul's  son  had  two  men  (that  were)  capta. 
8.  2  with  two  lines  measured  he  to  put  to  death 
8.    5  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty 

12.    1  There  were  two  men  in  one  city;  the  one 

14.  6  had  two  sons,  and  they  two  strove  together 

15.  27  return  intothecity,  andyour  two  sonswi. 

15.  36  (they  haveHhere  with  them  their  two  sons 
18.  24  David  sat  between  the  two  gates:  and  the 

21.  8  the  king  took  the  two  sons  of  Rizpah  the 

23.  20  he  slew  two  lion  like  men  of  Moab:  he  we. 

1  Ki.  2.    5  what  he  did  to  the  two  captains  of  the  ho. 

2.  32  who  fell  upon  two  men  more  righteous 

2.  39  two  of  the  servants  of  Shimei  ran  away 

3.  16  Then  came  there  two  women  (that  were) 
3.  18  (there  was)  no  stranger,  .save  we  two  in 

3.  25  Divide  the  living  child  in  two,  and  give 

5.  12  there  was  peace,  .and  they  two  made  ale. 

5.  14  a  month  they  were  in  Lebanon,  (and)  two 

6.  23  witliin  the  oracle  he  made  two  cherubim 
6. 32  The  two  doors  also  (were  of)  olive  tree,  and 
6.  34  the  two  doors  (were  of)  fir  tree:  the  two  1. 

6.  34  the  two  leaves  of  the  other  door  (were)  fo. 

7.  15  he  cast  two  pillars  of  brass,  of  eighteen 
7.  16  he  made  two  chapiters  (of)  molten  brass 
7.  18  he  made  the  pillars,  and  two  rows  round 
7.  20  thechapitersuponthetwopdlars(hadpo.) 
7.  24  the  knops  (were)  cast  in  two  rows  when  it 
7.  41  The  two  pillars,  and  the.  .bowls  of  the  ch. 
7. 41  the  top  of  thetwo  pillars;  and  the  two  net 
7.  41  to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 
7.  42  for  the  two  net  works,  (even)  two  rows  of 

7.  42  to  cover  the  two  bowls  of  the  chapiters 

8.  9  the  two  tables  of  stone,  which  Moses  put 

8.  63  two  and  twenty  thousand  oxen,  and  anhu. 

9.  10  Solomon  had  built  the  two  houses,  the  ho. 

10.  19  (there  were)  stays,  .and  two  lions  stood  b. 

11.  29  and  they  two  (were)  alone  in  the  field 
12. 28  the  king  took  counsel,  and  made  two  cal. 

14.  20  the  days,  .(were)  two  and  twenty  years 

16.  29  the  son  of  Omri  reigned.,  twenty  and  two 

17.  12  I  (am)  gathering  two  sticks,  that  I  may  go 

18.  21  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opiuions? 
18.  23  Let  them  therefore  give  us  two  bullocks 
ro.    1  (there  were)  thirty  and  two  kings  with  him 

20.  15  they  were,  .hundred  and  thirty  two,  and 

20. 16  the  thirty  and  two  kings  that  helped  him 

20. 27  Israel  pitched  before  them  like  two  little 
21. 10  set  two  men,  sons  of  Belial,  before  him,  to 
ci.  13  thciecame  in  two  men,  children  of  Belial 

22.  31  commanded  his  thirty  and  two  captains 

2  Ki.   1.  14  burnt  up  the  two  captains  of  the  former 

z.  6  I  will  not  leave  thee.  And  they  two  went 
2.  7  stood  to  view  afar  off:  and  they  two  stood 
2.  8  so  that  they  two  went  over  on  dry  ground 
2. 12  he  took  hold,  .and  rent  them  in  two  piec. 
2.  24  there  came  forth  two  she  bears  out  of  the 

2.  22  and  tare  forty  and  two  children  of  them 

4.  1  is  come  to  take  unto  him  my  two  sons  to 

5.  22  two  young  men  of  the  sons  of  the  proph. 
5  22  a  talent  of  silver,  and  two  changes  of  gar. 
5.  23  in  two  bags,  with  two  changes,  .upon  two 
7. 14  They  took  therefore  two  chariot  horses 

8.  17  Thirty  and  two  years  old  was  he  when  he 
8. 26  Two  and  twenty  years  old  (was)  Ahaziah 

9.  32  there  looked  out  to  him  two  (or)  three  en. 
10.   4  Behold,  two  kings  stood  not  before  him 
10.    8  Lay  ye  them  in  two  heaps  at  the  entering 

10.  14  slew  them  at  the  pit.  .two  and  forty  men 

11.  7  two  parts  of  all  you  that  go  forth  on  the 

15.  2  he  reigned  two  and  fifty  years  in  Jerusa. 
15.  27  In  thetwo  and  fiftieth  year  of  Azariahki. 

17.  16  made  them  molten  images,  (even)  two  ca. 

21.  5  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lo 
21.  tg  Anion  (was)twenty  and  two  years  old  wh. 
21.  19  and  he  reigned  two  years  in  Jerusalem 
23. 12  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
25.  16  The  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  the  bases 

1  Ch.  j.  19  untoEber  were  born  two  sons:  the  name 

4.  5  the  father  of  Tekoa  had  two  wives,  Helali 
7.  2  two  and  twenty  thousand  and  six  huudr. 
7.  7  twenty  and  two  thousand  and  thirty  and 
11.  21  he  wasmorehonourablethan  the  two,  for 
11.  22  he  slew  two  lion  like  men  of  Moab,  also 

12. 28  of  his  father's  house  twenty  and  two  cap. 

18.  5  slew  of  the  Syrians  two  and  twenty  thou. 

19.  7  they  hired  thirty  and  two  thousand  char. 

24. 17  The  one  and  twentieth  to  Jachin,  the  two 

25.  29  The  two  and  twentietli  to  Gidalti,  (he),  his 
26.    8  (were)  threescore  and  two  of  Obed-edom 

26.  17  four  a  day.. and  toward  Asuppim  two.. two 

26. 18  four  at  the  causeway,  .two  at  Parbar 

2  Ch.  3.  10  he  made  two  cherubim  of  image  work,  and 

3.  15  he  made  before  the  house  two  pillars  of 

4.  3  Two  rows  of  oxen  (were)  cast,  when  it  was 

4. 12  the  twopillars,  and  thepommels,  and  the 
4.  12  the  top  of  the  two  pillars,  and  the  two  w. 

4.  12  to  cover  the  two  pommels  of  the  chapiters 

4. 13  pomegrantes  on  the  two  wreaths;  two  ro. 
4. 13  to  cover  the  two  pommels  of  the  chapiters 

5.  10  nothing  in  the  ark  save  thetwo  tables  wh. 
7.  5  offered  a  sacrifice  of  twenty  and  two  tho. 
9.  18  stays  on  each  side,  .and  two  lions  standing 

13. 21  begat  twenty  and  two  sons,  and  sixteen 
21.  5  Jehoram  (was)  thirty  and  two  years  old 
21.  19  after  the  end  of  two  years,  his  bowels  fell 

21.  20  Thirty  and  two  years  old  was  he  when  he 

22.  2  Forty  and  twoyearsold  (was)  Ahaziah  wh. 

24.  3  Jehoiada  took  for  him  two  wives;  and  ho 
26.  3  he  reigned  fifty  and  two  years  in  Jerusal. 
33.  5  in  the  twocourtsof  the  houseof  the  LORD 
33.  21  Amon  (was)  two  and  twenty  years  oldwh. 


TWO 


1011 


TYRE 


2  Ch.33.  21  began  to  reign,  and  reigned  two  years  in  J. 

Ezra    2.   3  thousand  au  hundred  seventy  and  two 
2.   4  Shephatiah,  three  hundred  seventy  and 
2.  10  children  of  B.,  six  hundred  forty  and  two 
2.  12  a  thousand .  .hundred  twenty  and  two 
2.  24  The  children  of  Azmaveth,  forty  and  two 
2. 27  of  Michmas,  an  hundred  twenty  and  two 
2.  29  The  children  of  ^Nebo,  fifty  and  two 
2.  37  children  of  Immer,  a  thousand  fifty  and 

2.  58  Nethiuims . .  three  hundred  ninety  and  two 
2. 60  The  children  . .  six  hundred  fifty  and  two 

8.  27  two  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  gold 
10. 13  neither  (is  this)  a  work  of  one  day  or  two 

JJeli.  5. 14  even  unto  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of 

6.  15  wall  was  finished .  .in  fifty  and  two  days 
7»   8  thousand  an  hundred  seventy  and  two 

7.  g  Shephatiah,  three  hundred  seventy  and  t. 
7.  10  The  children . .  six  hundred  fifty  and  two 
7.  17  thousand  three  hundred  twenty  and  two 
7.  28  The  men  of  Beth-azmavetb,  forty  and  two 
7.  31  Michmas,  anhundred  and  twenty  andtwo 
7. 33  The  men  of  the  other  Nebo,  fifty  and  two 
7.  40  children  of  Immer,  a  thousand  fifty  and  t. 
7.  60  Nethiuims.  .three hundredninety  andtwo 
7.  62  The  children,  .six  hundred  forty  and  two 

11.  12  brethren.. eight  hundred  twenty  andtwo 

11.  13  his  brethren,  .hundred  forty  and  two:  and 

11. 19  their  brethren. . anhundred  seventyandt. 

12.  31  Then  I.  .appointed  two  great  (companies 

12.  40  So  stood  the  two  (companies  of  them  that 

13.  6  in  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxer. 
Esth.  2.  21  two  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  Bigthan 

6.  2  two  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  the  keep. 

9.  27  they  would  keep  these  two  days  according 
Job    13.  20  do  not  two  (things)  unto  me  ;  then  will 

42.  7  against  thee,  and  against  thy  two  friends 
Provjo.    7  Two  (things)  have  I  required  of  thee;  de. 

30.  15  The  horse  leach  hath  two  daughters,  (cr.) 

Eccl.  4.   9  Two  (are)  better  than  one;  because  they 

4.  11  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  heat 

4. 12  if  one  prevail  against  him,  two  shall  with. 

Song  4.    5  Thy  two  breasts  (are)  like  two  young  roes 

7.  3  Thy  two  breasts  (are)  like  two  young  roes 
Isa.     7.    4  neither  be  faint  hearted  for  the  two  tails 

7.  21  a  man  shall  nourish  a  young  oowand  two 

17.  6  two  (or)  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  up. 
47.    9  these  two  (things)  shall  come  to  thee  in 

51.  19  These  two  (things)  are  come  unto  thee;  who 
Jer.     2. 13  my  people  have  committed  two  evils,  th. 

3.  14  I  will  take  you  one  of  acity,  and  two  of  a 
24.    1  two  baskets  of  figs  (were)  set  before  the 
33.  24  The  two  families  which  the  Lord  hath  ch. 

52.  20  The  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  twelve  bra. 
52.  29  eight  hundred  thirty  and  two  persons 

Eze.  1.  1 1  two.  .(were)joinedoneto  another, andtwo 
1.  23  everyone  had  two .  .and  every  one  had  two 
zi.  19  appoint  thee  two  ways,  that  the  sword  of 
21.  21  stood,  .at  the  head  of  thetwoways,  to  use 
23.  2  there  were  two  women,  the  daughters  of 
35.  10  These  two  nations  and  these  two  countries 
37. 22  and  they  shall  be  no  more  two  nations 
37.  22  neither  shall  they  be  divided  into  two  king. 
40.  9  the  posts  thereof,  two  cubits;  andthe  po. 
40.  39  two  tables  on  this  side,  and  two  tables  on 
40.  40  And  at  the  side  without,  .(were)  two  tab. 

40.  40  at  the  porch  of  the  gate,  (were)  two  tables 

41.  3  measured  the  post  of  the  door  two  cubits 
41.  18  made  with  cherubim .  .(every)  cherub  had 
41.  22  the  length  thereof  two  cubits ;  and  the  co. 
4T.  23  the  temple  and  the  sanctuary  had  two  do. 
41.  24  the  doors  had  two  leaves  (apiece),  two  tu. 
41.  24  two  (leaves)  for  the  one  door,  and  two  le. 

43.  14  (even)to  the  lower  settle  (shall  be)twocu. 
~    7  and  smote  the  ram,  and  brake  his  two  ho. 

25  seveu  weeks,  and  threescore  and  two  we. 

26  after  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall  Me. 
5  there  stood  other  two,  the  one  on  this  side 

10  shall  bind  themselves  intheirtwo  furrows 
3  Can  two  walk  together,  except  they  be  ag. 

12  taketh  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion  two 
S  two  (or)  three  cities  wandered  unto  one  ci. 
3  two  olive  trees  by  it,  one  upon  the  right 

11  What  (are)  these  two  olive  trees  upon  the 

4.  12  two  olive  branches  which  through  the  two 
4. 14  These  (are)  the  two  anointed  ones,  that  st. 

5.  9  there  came  out  two  women,  and  the  wind 

6.  1  four  chariots  out  from  between  two  mou. 
11.    7  I  took  unto  me  two  staves  ;  the  one  I  ca. 

13.  8  two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  (and)  die 

4.  Two,  ]!$  teren. 

Dan.   5.  31  Darius . .  about  threescore  and  two  years 

5.  Two,  $uo  duo. 

Matt.  4. 18  Jesus,  walking . .  saw  two  brethren,  Simon 
4.  21  hesawothertwo brethren,  Jamesfthe son) 
6.  24  No  man  can  serve  two  masters  :  for  either 

8.  28  there  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils 

9.  27  two  blind  men  followed  him,  crying,  and 
10. 10  neither  two  coats,  neither  shoes,  nor  yet 
jo.  29  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  fora  farthing? 
ir.   2  when  John  had  heard,  .he  sent  [two  of]  his 

14.  17  We  have  here  but  five  loaves,  and  twofis. 
14.  19  took  the  five  loaves,  and  the  two  fishes,  and 

18.  8  than  having  two  hands  or  two  feet  to  be 
18.  9  ratherthau  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into 
18.  16  or  two  more,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or 
18.  19  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth  as  tou. 

18. 20  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together 
20.  21  Grant  that  these  my  twosons  may  sit,  the 
20.  24  moved  with  indignation  against  the  two 
20. 30  two  blind  men  sitting  by  the  way  side,  w. 


Dan.  8. 
9 
9 
12. 

Hos.  10, 

Amos  3. 
3 
4 

Zech.  4. 


Hatt?i.    1  diew  nigh,  .then  sent  Jesus  two  disciples 

21.  28  A(eertain)man  had  two  sons;  andhecame 

22.  40  On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the 
24. 40  Then  shall  two  be  in  the  field ;  the  one  sh. 

24.  41  Two  (women  shall  be)  grinding  at  the  mill 

25.  15  one  he  gave  five  talents,  to  another  two 
25. 17  (had received)two,healso gained othertwo 
25.  22  He  also  that  had  received  two  talents  ca. 
25.  22  Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two  tale. 

25.  22  I  have  gained  two  other  talents  besides  th. 

26.  2  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  (the  feast 
26.  37  he  took  with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons 

26.  60  At  the  last  came  two  false  witnesses 

27.  38  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified  wi. 
Mark  6.    7  began  to  send  them  forth  by  two  and  two 

6.  9  shod  with  sandals ;  and  not  put  on  two  co. 
6.  38  when  they  knew,  they  say,  Five,  and  two 
6.  41  had  taken  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fis. 

6.  41  the  two  fishes  divided  he  among  them  all 
9.  43  than  having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell,  in. 
9.  45  than  having  two  feet  to  be  cast  into  hell 

9.  47  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell 

11.  1  when  they  came,  .lie  sendeth  forth  two  of 

12.  42  she  threw  in  two  mites,  which  make  a  fa. 
14.    1  After  two  days  was  (the  feast  of)  the  pas. 

14.  13  he  sendeth  forth  two  of  his  disciples,  and 

15.  27  with  him  they  crucify  two  thieves;  the  one 

16. 12  [he  appeared  in  another  form  unto  two  of] 
Luke  2.  24  A  pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pig. 

3.  ir  He  that  hath  two  coats,  let  him  impart  to 

5.  2  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the  lake :  but 

7.  19  John  calling  (unto  him)  two  of  his  disci. 
7.  41  a  certain  creditor  which  had  two  debtors 
9.  3  neither  money;neither  have  two  coats  ap. 
9.  13  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two  fishes 

9.  16  he  took  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes 
9.  30  there  talked  with  him  two  men,  which  we. 

9.  32  they  saw.  .the  two  men  that  stood  with 

10.  1  sent  them  two  and  two  {lit.  two  a  pice) 
10. 35  he  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  (them) 
12.    6  Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  farth.? 
12.  52  divided,  three  against  two,  and  two  agai. 

15. 11  And  he  said,  A  certain  man  had  two  sons 

16. 13  No  servant  can  serve  two  masters  :  forei. 
17.  34  in  that  night  there  shall  be  two  (men)  in 
*7-  35  Two  (women)  shall  be  grinding  together 
17.  36  Two  (men)  shall  be  in  the  field ;  the  one 
18. 10  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray 
19.  29  when  he  was  come,  .he  sent  two  of  lusd. 
21.  2  a  certain  poor  widow  casting  in.,  two  mi. 
22. 38  they  said,  Lord,  behold,  here  (are)  two  sw. 

23.  32  there  were  also  two  others,  malefactors 

24.  4  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining  garm. 
24.  13  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  vil. 

John  1.  35  the  next  day  after,  John  stood,  and  two 

1.  37  the  two  disciples  heard  h'.m  speak,  and 
1. 40  One  of  the  two  which  heard  him  (speak) 

2.  6  containing  two  or  three  firkins  apiece 

4.  40  besought  him.  .and  he  abode  there  two 
4.  43  after  two  days  he  departed  thence,  and 

6.  9  hath  fivebarleyloaves,  and  two  small  fish. 
8. 17  that  the  testimony  of  two  men  is  true 

11.  6  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same  place 
19. 18  they  crucified  him,  and  two  other  with 

20. 12  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting,  the  one 
21.    2  the  (sons)  of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  of 

Acts  1.  10  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white  apparel 
1.  23  they  appointed  two,  Joseph  called  Barsa. 
1.  24  show  whether  of  these  two  thou  hast  ch. 

7.  29  the  land  of  Madian,  where  he  begat  two 
9.  38  they  sent  unto  him  [two]  men,  desiring 

10.  7  he  called  two  of  his  household  servants 

12.  6  between  two  soldiers,  bound  with  two 
19.  10  this  continued  by  the  space  of  two  years 

19. 22  he  sent  into  Macedonia  two  of  them  that 
19. 34  all.  .about  the  space  of  two  hours  cried 
21.  33  commanded  (him)  to  be  bound  with  two 

23. 23  he  called  unto  (him)  two  centurions,  sa. 

1  Co.  6.  16  for  two,  saith  he,  shall  be  one  flesh 

14.  27  (let  it  be)  by  two,  or  at  the  most  (by)  thr. 
14.  29  Let  the  prophets  speak  two  or  three,  and 

2  Co.  1 3.    1  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
Gal.    4.  22  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  two  sons 

4.  24  theseare  the  two  covenants  ;  the  one  from 
EpK  5-  31  joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall 
Phil.  1.  23  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  de. 
1  Ti.  5.  19  receive  not  anaccusation,  but  before  two 
Heb.  6.  18  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which 

10.  28  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three 
Rev.   9. 12  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  here. 

9. 16  the  horsemen  (were)  two  hundred  thous. 

11.  2  they  tread  underfoot  forty  (and)  two  mo. 
11.  3  I  will  give  (power)  unto  my  two  witnes. 
11.   4  the  two  olive  trees,  and  the  two  candles. 

11.  10  these  two  prophets  tormented  them  that 

12.  14  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  a 

13.  5  power,  .to  continue  forty  (and)  two  mon. 
13.  11  he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  hesp. 

TWO  hundred,  two  thousand  — 
l.Two  hundred,  8iatc6<rtoL  diakosioi, 

Mark  6.  37  Shall  we  go  and  buytwo  hundred  penny. 

John  6.    7  Two  huudred  pennyworth  of  bread  isnot 

21.    8  not  far  from  land,  but  as  it  were  two  him. 

Acts  23.  23  two  hundred  soldiers,  .spearmen two lm. 

27. 37  two  hundred  threescore  and  sixteen  sou. 

Rev.  11.    3  athousandtwohundred.  .threescore days 

12.   6  a  thousand  two  hundred . .  threescore  da. 

%Two  thousand,  dtery'1^101  dischilioi. 

Mark  5.  13  the  herd,  .they were  about  two  thousand 


TWO  parts,  two  edged  — 

I. Half,  middle,  pan,  'srr,  'xn  chatsi,  chetsi. 

1  Ki.16.21  Then  were  the  people.,  divided  iuto  two  p. 
2.Mouth,  n$peh. 

Prov.  5.   4  her  end  is.  .sharp  as  a  two  edged  sword 
3.  Edges,  ni'3'3  jnphiyyoth. 

Psa.149.   6  and  a  two  edged  sword  in  their  hand 
4. Double  edged,  S(crrofj,os  distomos. 

Heb.  4.  12  sharper  than  any  two  edged  sword,  pierc. 

Rev.  1.  16  out  of  Ms  mouth  went  a  sharp  two  edged 

2. 12  which  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  twoed. 
TWOFOLD  more  — 

Doubly,  twice  as  much,  Snr\6repov  diploteron. 
Matt23.  15  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of 

TY-CHl'-Cu'S,  Tvxik6s  fortunate. 
A  believer  in  Asia  Minor,  who  accompanied  Paul  to  Jeru- 
salem, when  he  left  Greece,  and  was  sent  by  him  first 
to  Ephesus,  and  then  to  Colosse. 

Acts  20.    4  there  accompanied  him..  T.  andTrophim. 
Eph.  6.  21  T. .  .shall  make  known  to  you  all  things 
Col.     4.    7  All  my  state  shall  T.  declare  unto  you 

2  Ti.   4. 12  And  T.  have  I  sent  to  Ephesus 
Titus  3.  12  I  shall  send  Artemas  unto  thee,  or  T. 

TY-RAN'-NTJS,  Tvpavvos. 

A  person  in  Ephesus,  in  whose  school  Paul  disputed 

daily  for  two  years. 

Acts  19.    9  disputing  daily  in  the  school  of  one  T. 

TYRE,  TYRTTS,  "lW,  IX  rock,  Tvpos. 
A  city  in  the  centre  of  Phoenicia,  on  the  coast  of  the 
Mediterranean  Sea,  five  miles  S.  of  the  Leontes  River, 
and  midway  between  Acho  and  Sidon,  and  three  miles 
W.  of  Raamah.  Said  to  have  been  founded  B.C.  2750; 
in  1443  it  was  assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Asher,  but  was 
never  occupied  by  them  ;  in  1210  it  received  many  fugi- 
tives from  Sidon;  in  1014  Hiram  its  king  helped  Solo- 
mon in  his  great  works;  in  721-716  it  successfully  re- 
sisted Shalmaneser  king  of  Assyria ;  in  585-572  it  did  the 
same  to  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon,  when  the  in- 
habitants founded  insular  Tyre,  which  in  332  was  taken 
by  Alexander  the  Great  (after  a  siege  of  seven  months), 
by  his  constructing  a  mole  connecting  it  with  the  main- 
land ;  in  315  it  was  taken  by  Autigonus  of  Syria  after  a 
siege  of  fifteen  months;  in  24S  it  was  treacherously 
surrendered  to  Antiochus  the  Great  by  Theodotus, lieu- 
tenant of  Ptolemy  Philopater;  in  A.D.  1124  it  was  taken 
by  the  Crusaders  from  the  Saracens,  after  a  siege  of  five 
and  a  half  months,  when  a  third  of  it  was  assigned  to 
Venice  ;  in  1 187  it  successfully  resisted  Saladin ;  in  1391 
it  was  taken  by  the  Turks;  in  1766  the  Metalwilch,  a 
sect  of  the  Shiites,  settled  at  it,  and  established  a  trade 
in  grain  and  tobacco  ;  in  1841  it  was  taken  by  the  allied 
fleet.  Councils  were  held  here,  A.D.  335  and  518.  Eze. 
37.  1-32  contains  a  glowing  account  of  its  ancient  riches 
and  extensive  traffic,  from  Spain  to  India,  including 
Greece,  Cyprus,  Egypt,  Palestine,  Syria,  Arabia,  and 
Persia,  in  gold,  silver,  iron,  lead,  tin,  copper;  wheat, 
cereals,  honey,  oil,  balm;  wools  and  linen  fabrics; 
ivory  and  ebony ;  jewellery,  and  dyes  of  all  kinds.  It 
has  now  about  4000  of  a  population.  Jos.  19. 29. 

2  Sa.    5. 11  Hiram  king  of  T.  sent  messengers  to  Da. 
24.   7  came  to  the  strong  hold  of  T.,  and  to  all 

1  Ki.  5.    1  Hiram  king  of  T.  sent  his  servants  unto 

7. 13  Solomon  sent,  .fetched  Hiram  out  of  T. 
9.  11  the  king  of  T.  had  furnished  Solomon  wi. 
9. 12  Hiram  came  out  from  T.  to  see  the  cities 

1  Ch.14.    1  Hiramkiugof  T.  sent  messengers  to  David 
2Ch. 


Psa.  45. 

83- 

87. 

Isa.   23. 

=3- 


Jer 


Eze. 


3  Solomon  sent  to  Huram  the  king  of  T.,  sa. 

1  Huram  the  king  of  T.  answered  in  writing 

2  the  daughter  of  T.  (shall  be  there)  with  a 
7  the  Philistines  with  the  inhabitants  of  T. 

4  behold  Philistia,  and  T.,  with  Ethiopia 
1  burden  of  T.    Howl,  ye  ships  of.Tarshish 

5  shall  they  be.  .pained  at  the  report  of  T. 
23.  8  Who  hath  taken  this  counsel  against  T. 
23.  15  that  T.  shall  be  forgotten  seventy  years 
23. 15  after  the  end  of  seventy  years  shall  T.  sing 

23. 17  the  Lord  will  visit  T.,  and  she  shall  turn 

25.  22  all  the  kings  of  T.,  and  all  the  kings  of  Z. 
27.  3  send  them,  .to  the  king  of  T. .  .by  the  ha. 
47.    4  to  cut  off  from  T.  and  Zidon  every  helper 

26.  2  T.  hath  said..  Aha  sheisbroken(thatwas) 
26.  3  Behold,  I  (am)  against  thee,  O  T.,  and  wi. 
26.    4  they  shall  destroy  the  walls  of  P.,  and  br. 

26.  7  I  will  bring  upon  T.  Nebuchadrezzar  king 
26. 15  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  T. ;  Shall  not 
27  2  son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  T. 
27-    3  say  unto  T.,  O  thou  that  art  situate  at  the 

27.  3  0  T.,  thou  hast  said,  I  (am)  of  perfect  be. 
27.    8  thy  wise  (men),  O  T. .  .were  thy  pilots 

27.  32  What  (city  is)  like  T.,  like  the  destroyed 

28.  2  Son  of  man,  say  unto  the  prince  of  T.,  Th. 

28.  12  take  up  a  lamentation  upon  the  king  of  T. 

29.  18  N. . .  caused  Ins  army  to  serve . .  against  T. 

29. 18  yet  had  he  no  wages,  nor  his  army,  for  T. 
9.  13  Ephraim,  as  I  saw  T.,(is)  planted  in  a  pi. 
3.   4  Yea.  .what  have  ye  to  do  with  me,  O  T. 

Amosi.  9  For  three  transgressions  of  T...I  will  not 
1.  10  But  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  of  T. 

Zech.  0.  2  Hamath  also  shall  border  thereby;  T.,and 
9.    3  And  T.  did  build  herself  a  strong  hold 

1  Ki.  7.  14  his  father  (was)  a  man  of  T.,  a  worker  in 

1  Ch.22.   4  they  of  T.,  brought  much  cedar  wood  to  D. 

2  Ch.  2. 14  hisfather(was)  aman  of  T.,  skilful  to  wo. 
Ezra   3.    7  They  gave . .  meat . .  drink . .  to  them  of  T. 
Neh.13.  16  There  dwelt  men  of  T.  also  therein,  which 
Matt  n.  21  if  the  mighty  works.,  had  been  done  in  T- 


Hos. 
Joel 


UCAL 


1012 


UNCLEAN 


Matti  i.  22  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  fer  T.  and  Sidon 

15.  21  Jesus,  .departed  into  the  coasts  of  T.  and 

Mark  3.    8  they  about  T.  and  Sidon.  .came  unto  him 

7.  24  he  arose,  and  went  into  the  bordei's  of  T. 

7.  31  departing  from  the  coasts  of  T. .  .he  came 

Luke  6. 1 7  people . .  from  the  sea  coast  of  T. . .  came  to 

10.  13  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in  T. 

10. 14  But  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  T.  and 
Acts  12.  20  H.  was  highly  displeased  with  them  of  T. 

21.    3  we.  .sailed  into  Syria,  and  landed  at  T. 

21.    7  when  we  had  finished  (our)  course  from  T. 


TJC'-AL,  ^3X. 

A  person  unknown,  mentioned  along  with  Ithiel. 

Prov.  30.    1  the  man  spake  unto  Ithiel,  even  unto . .  V. 

U'-EL,  ^MK. 

A  son  of  Bani,  thab  had  taken  a  strange  wife  during  the 

exile.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  34  the  sons  of  Bani ;  Maadai,  Amram,  and  IT. 

UL'-AI,  ^K. 

A  river  surrounding  Susa,  falling  into  the  Euphrates 
below  its  junction  with  the  Tigris  ;  called  by  the  Greeks 
Eulams  or  Choaspes ;  and  now  Kerah,  or  Kerkhak. 
Dan.   8.    2  and  I  saw . .  and  I  was  by  the  river  of  F. 
8.  16  heai'd  a.  .voice  between  (.the  batiks  of)  U. 

tt'-t.aw    c^ix  solitary. 

1.  A  son  of  Sheresh,  grandson  of  Manasseh.    B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  7. 16  and  his  sons  (were)  U.  and  Rakem 

7. 17  And  the  sons  of  U. ;  Bedan.  These  (were) 

2.  A  son  of  Eshek,  a  Benjamite,  of  the  family  of  Saul. 
B.C.  840. 

1  Ch.  8.  39  the  sons  of  Eshek  his  brother  (were)  IT. 
8.  40  the  sons  of  U.  were  mighty  men  of  valour 

TJL'-LA,  K?JJ  burden. 

An  Asheri'te,   father  of  Arab,  and.  Haniel  aud  Rezia. 

B.C.  1452. 

1  Ch.  7.  39  the  sons  of  Cilia ;  Arab,  and  Hanniel,  and 

UM'-MAH,  n-sj;  union,  kindred. 

A  city  in  Asher,  near  Aphek  or  Rehob ;   now  called 

Alma,  near  lias  JSakhura. 

Josh.19.  30  IT.  also,  and  Aphek,  and  Rehob:  twenty 
UNACCUSTOMED  — 
Not  taught,  is1?  nS  lo  lummad,  4. 

Jer.   31.  iS  I  was  chastised,  as  a  bullock  unaccustom. 

UNAWARES,  (to  have)  — 

1.  Without  knowledge,  n$n  »V?  bell  daath. 

Deut.  4.42  which  should  kill  his  neighbour  unawares 

Q.Not  to  know,  yv  x*?  lo  yada. 

Psa.  35.  8  Let  destruction  come  upon  him  at  unaw. 
3.  The  heart,  i}b,  lh  leb,  lebab. 

Gen.  31.  20  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to  Labau  the 
31.  26  that  thou  hast  stolen  away  unawares  to 

4. Error,  ignorance,  r\}$  shegagah. 

Nuni35.  11  flee,  .which  killeth  any  person  at  unawa. 

35. 15  that  killeth  any  person  unawares  may 
Josh.20.    3  That. .slayer  that  killeth.. person  unawa. 
20.    9  that  whosoever  killeth.  .person  at  unawa. 

5.1'uforseen,  unexpected,  alcpvlStos  aiphnidhs. 

Luke2i.  34  and  (so)  that  day  come  upon  you  unawa. 
6.  To  be  or  lie  hid,  concealed,  Ka.vQa.vw  lanthano. 

Heb.  13.   2  some  have  entertained  angels  unawares 

UNBELIEF  — 

\. Unbelief,  disobedience,  airetOeta  a2yeitheia. 

Rom  1 1.  30  have  now  obtained  mercy  through .  .unb. 

11.  32  For  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unb. 

Heb.   4.    6  and  they . .  entered  not  in  because  of  unb. 

4.  11  lest  any.  .fall  after  the.  .example  of  unb. 

■J.  Unbelief,  distrust,  airicrria  apistia. 

Matt  1 3.  58  not  many,  .works  there,  because  of.  .unb. 

17.  20  Because  of  your  [unbelief]  :  for  verily  I 
Mark  6.    6  Aud  he  marvelled  because  of  their  uiibe. 
9.  24  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief 
16.  14  [upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief  and] 
Horn.  3.    3  shall  their  unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God 
4.  20  He  staggered  not . .  through  unbelief ;  but 
11.  20  because  of  unbelief  they  were  broken  off 
1 1.  23  they  also,  if  they  abide  not  still  in  unbelief 
1  Ti.    1.  13  because  I  did  (it)  ignorantly  in  unbelief 
Heb.  3.  12  iest  there  be.  .an  evil  heart  of  unbelief 
3. 19  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbel. 

UNBELIEVER,  unbelieving  — 

I.  To  disbelieve,  disobey t  atmBiw  apeitlieo. 

Acts. 14.  s  the  unbelieving  Jews  stirred  up  the  Gen. 
2. Disbelieving,  disobedient,  &tti<ttos  apistos. 

Lukei2.  46  will  appoint  him  Ma  portion  with  the  un. 

1  Co.  6.    6  to  law.  .and  Chat  before  the  unbelievers 

7.  14  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by 
7.  14  the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  the 
7.  15  if  the  unbelieving  depart,  let  him  depart 
14-  23  (those  that  are)  unlearned,  or  unbelievers 

2  Co.  6.  14  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked.. with  unbeliev. 
Titus  i.  ix,  unto  them  that  are.  .unbelieving  (is)  not. 
Kev.ai.   s  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and  the  ab. 


UNBLAlttEABLE,  unblameably  — 
1. Blameless,  Hnblameablc,  6.fXGfxirTos  amemptos. 
1  Th.  2.  10  how  holily  and  justly  and  unblameably 
3.  13  the  end  he  may  establish  your  hearts  uu. 

"l.Unhlcmish^dy  without  blemish,  &fiw/j.os  amdmos. 

Col.     1.  22  to  present  you  holy  and  unblameable  aud 
UNCERTAIN,  uncertainly  — 
l.Xot  manifest,  uncertain,  &§y\os  adelos. 

1  Co.   9.  26  I  therefore  so  rum,  not  as  uncertainly,  so 
14.   8  For  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  so. 

2.  Uncertainty,  a.Bn\6r7is  adelotes. 

1  Ti.  6.  17  nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the 
UNCHANGEABLE  — 
Not  jntssiug  over,  tenchanging,  airapd^aros  apara. 

Heb.  7.  24  this  (man),  .hath  an  unchangeable  priest. 

UNCERCUMCISED  (person)  — 
l.One  uncircumcisedj  7"!JJ  arel. 

Gen.  17.  14  the  uncircumcised  man  child,  whose  fle. 

Exod.  6.  12  hear  me,  who  (am)  of  uncircumcised  lips? 

6.  30  I  (am)  of  uncircumcised  lips,  and  how  sb. 

12.  48  no  uncircumcised  person  shall  eat  theseof 

Lev.  19.  23  three  years  shall  it  be  as  uncircumcised 

26.  41  if  then  their  uncircumcised  hearts  be  hu. 

Josh.  5.   7  they  were  uncircumcised,  because  they 

Judg  14.    3  thou  goest  to  take  a  wife  of  the  uncircu. 

15. 18  and  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  uncircumci. 

1  Sa.  14.    6  let  us  go  over  unto  the  garrison  of  these 

17.  26  who  (is)  this  uncircumcised  Philistine,  th. 
17.  36  this  uncircumcised  Philistine  shall  be  as 
31.    4  lest  these  uncircumcisedcome  and  thrust 

2  Sa.    1.  20  lest  the  daughters  of  the  uncircumcised 

1  Ch.io.    4  lest  these  uncircumcised  come  and  abuse 

Isa.   52.    1  there  shall  no  more  come . .  the  uncircum . 

Jer.     6.  10  their  ear  (is)  uncircumcised,  and  they  ca. 

9.  26  for  all  (these)  nations  (are)  uncircurueised 

9.  26  the  house  of  Israel  (are)  uncircumcised 
Eze.  28. 10  Thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  of  the  uncircu. 

31.  18  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  uncirc. 

32.  19  and  be  thou  laid  with  the  uncircumcised 
32.  21  they  lie  uncircumcised,  slaiu  by  the  sword 
32.  24  which  are  gone  down  uncircumcised  into 
32.  25,  26  all  of  them  uncircumcised,  slain  by  the 
32.  27  the  mighty  (that  are)  fallen  of  the  uncir. 
32.  28  be  broken  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircum. 
32.  29  they  shall  lie  with  the  uncircumcised,  and 
32.  30  they  lie  uncircumcised  with  (them  that  be) 
32.  32  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircumcised  with 
44.   7,  9  uncircumcised  in  heart,  and  uncircum. 

2.  Uncircumcision,  rhy^  orlah. 

Gen.  34.  14  to  give  our  sister  to  one  that  is  uncircu. 
Jer.    9.  25  that  I  wUl  punish  all.  .with  the  uncircu. 

3.  Uncircumcised,  air^pirfinros  aperitmetos. 

Acts    7.  51  Ye  stiff  necked  and  uncircunicised  in  he. 

4.  To  have  uncircumcision,  ex^  aKpo^variav. 
Acts  11.    3  Saying,  Thou  wentest  in  to  men  uncircu. 

5. In  the  xmcircumdsion,  iv  ttj  aKpofivaria. 

rtoni.  4.  11  of  the  faith  which'  (he  had  yet)  being  un. 
4.  12  (he  had)  being  (yet)  uncircumcised 

UNCIRCUMCISED,  to  become  or  count  — 
l.To  be  reckoned  uncircumcised,  yju  arel. 

Lev.  19.  23  ye  shall  count  the  fruit  thereof  as  uncir. 
2.  To  become  micircumcised,  iTrto-rrdotxat  epispaomai. 

1  Co.    7.  18  let  him  not  become  uncircumcised.  Is  any 

UNCIRCUTKICISION  — 

Uneircumcision,  a.Kpo$varia  akrobustia. 

Rom.  2.  25  thy  circumcision  is  made  uncircumcision 

2.  26  if  the  uncircumcision  keep  the  righteous. 

2.  26  shall  not  his  uncircumcision  be  counted 

2.  27  shall  not  his  uncircumcision  which  is  by 

3.  30  justify  the. .  uncircumcision  through  faith 

4.  9  (Cometh)  this,  .upon  the  uncircumcision 

4.  10  when  he  was  in  circumcision,  or  in  uncir. 
4. 10  Not  in  circumcision,  but  in  uncircumcis. 

1  Co.   7.  18  Is  any  called  in  uncircumcision?  let  him 

7.  19  uncircumcision  is  nothing,  but  the  keep. 

Gal.     2.    7  the  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision  was  co. 

5.  6  neithercircumcision..  nor  uncircumcision 

6.  15  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature 
Eph.  2.  11  whoarecalled  uncircumcision  by  that  wh. 
Col.    2.  13  being  dead  in  your  sins  and  the  uncircu. 

3.  n  circumcisou  nor  uncircumcision,  Barbar. 

UNCLE  — 

Beh'i-ed,  uncle,  relation,  Til  dod. 

Lev.  10.    4  Moses  called,  .the  sons  of  t'zziel  the  un. 

20.  20  he  hath  uncovered  his  uncle's  nakedness 

25.  49  Either  his  uncle,  or  his  uncle's  son,  may 

1  Sa.  10.  14  Saul's  uncle  said  unto  him  and  to  his  ser. 

10.  15  Saul's  uncle  said,  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee 
10.  16  Saul  said  unto  his  uncle,  He  told  us  plain. 
14.  50  (was)  Abner,  the  son  of  Ner,  Saul's  uncle 

1  Ch.37.  32  David's  unele,  was  a  counsellor^  wise  man 

Esth.  2.  7  he  brought  up  Hadassah.  .his  uncle's  da. 
2.  15  the  daughter  of  Abihailtheuncleof  Mor. 

Jer.  32.  7  Hanameel  the  son  of  Shallum  thine  uncle 
32.  8  Hanameel,  mine  uncle's  son,  came  to  me 
32.  9  I  bought  the  field  of  Hanameel,  my  uuc. 
32.  12  in  the  sight  of  Hanameel  mine  uncle's 

Amos  6.  10  a  man's  uncle  shall  take  him  up,  and  he 

UNCLEAN  (thing),  uncleanness  — 

1.-4  thing,  matter,  ~i;n  mo  ervath  dabar. 

Deut  24.    1  because  he  hath  found  some  uncleanness 


2.  Unclean,  defiled,  N?Q  tame. 

Lev.  5.  2  touch  any  unclean  thing . .  an  unclean  be.? 
5.  2  unclean  cattle,  or.  .unclean  creeping  th. 
5.  2  (if)  it  be  hidden,  .he  also  shall  be  unclean 
7.  19  the  flesh  that  toucheth  any  unclean  (th.) 
7.  21  the  soul  that  shall  touch  any  unclean  (th.) 
7.  21  unclean  beast,  or  any  abominable  unclean 

10.  10  put  difference,  .between  unclean  and  cl. 

11.  4,  5,  6  he  cheweth  the  cud.  .he  (is) unclean 
11.  7  he  cheweth  not  the  cud;  he  (is)  unclean 
1 1.  8  shall  ye  not  touch ;  they  (are)  unclean  to 
11.  26  (The  carcases)  of  every  beast,  .(are)  unci. 
11.  27  that  go  on  (all)  four,  those  (are)  unclean 
11.28  wash  his  ch  ithes . .  they  (are)  unclean  unto 
n.  29  These  also  (shall  be)  unclean  unto  you  am. 
11.  31  These  (are)unelean  to  youamong  all  that 
11.  35  they  (are)  unclean,  and  shall  be  unclean 
11.  38  fall  thereon,  it  (shall  be)  unclean  unto  you 
11.  47  To  make  a  difference  between  the  unclean 
13.  11  shall  not  shut  him  up;  for  he  (is)  unclean 
13.  15  (for)  the  raw  flesh  (is)  unclean;  it  (is)  a  le. 
13.  36  the  priest  shall  not  seek,  .he  (is)  unclean 
13.  44  He  is  a  leprous  man,  he  (is)  unclean,  the 
13.  45  And  the  leper . .  shall  cry,  Unclean,  unci. 
13.  46  he  (is)  unclean:  he  shall  dwell  alone,  wit. 
13-  51  plague  (is)  a  fretting  leprosy;  it  (is)  unci. 

13.  55  it  (is)  unclean;  thou  shalt  burn  it  in  the 

14.  40  they  shall  cast  them  into  an  unclean  pla. 
14.  41  pour  out  the  dust,  .into  an  unclean  place 
14.  44  a  fretting  leprosy  in  the  house:  it  (is)  un. 
14.  45  carry  them  forth .  .into  an  unclean  place 

14.  57  ;To  teach  when  (it  is)  unclean,  and  when 

15.  2  (because  of)  his  issue  he  (is)  unclean 
15.  25  all  the  days,  .she  (shall  be)  unclean 

15.  26  whatsoever  she  sitteth  upon  shall  be  un. 
15.  33  of  him  that  lieth  with  her  that  is  unclean 
20.  25  between  clean.. and  unclean,  and  betwe. 
22.  4  whoso  toucheth  any  thing  (that  is)  uncle. 
27. 11  if  (it  be)  any  unclean  beast,  of  which  they 
27.  27  if  (it  be)  of  an  unclean  beast,  then  he  shall 
Num.  9.  10  If  any  man  of  you.  .shall  be  unclean  by 

18.  15  the  firstling  of  unclean  beasts  shalt  thou 

19.  13  he  shall  be  unclean;  his  uncleanness  (is) 
19.  15  vessel,  which  hath  no  covering,  .(is)  unc. 
19. 17  for  an  unclean  (person)  they  shall  take  of 
19.  19  shall  sprinkle  upon  the  uncleau  on  the  tlii. 
19.  20  hath  defiled  the  sanctuary,  .he  (is)  uncle. 
19.  22  whatsoever  the  unclean  (person)  toucheth 

Deut  12.  15  the  unclean  and  the  clean  may  eat  there. 
12.  22  the  unclean  and  the  clean  shall  eat  (of)  th. 
14.   7  they  chew  the  cud.  .they  (are)  unclean  un. 
14.    8  yet  cheweth  not  the  cud,  it  (is)  unclean 
14.  10  ye  may  not  eat;  it  (is)  unclean  unto  you 

14.  19  every  creeping  thing,  .(is)  unclean  unto 

15.  22  the  unclean  and  the  clean  (person  shall 
26.  14  neither  have  I  taken  away,  .for  (any)  un. 

Josh. 22.  19  if  the  land  of  your  possess  ion  (be)uuclean 

Judgi3.    4  drink  not  wine,  .and  eat  not  any  unclean 

2  Ch.23.  19  none  (which  was)  unclean  in  any  tiling 

Job  14.    4  Who  can  bring  a  clean  (thing)  out  of  an  un. 

Eccl.  9.    2  to  the  clean,  and  to  the  unclean;  to  him 

Isa.     6.    5  because  I  (am)  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and 

6.    5  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean 

35.    8  the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it;  but  it 

52.    1  no  more  come  into  thee,  .the  unclean 

52.  11  go  ye  out  from  thence,  touch  no  unclean 

64.    6  we  are  all  as  an  unclean'(thing),  and  all  our 

Lam.  4.  15  Depart  ye;  (it  is)  unclean;  depart,  depart 

Eze.  22. 26  showed  (difference)  between  the  unclean. 

44.  23  cause  them  to  discern  between  the  unclean 

Hos.   9.    3  they  shall  eat  unclean  (things)  in  Assyria 

Hag.   2.  13  If  (one  that  is)unclean  by  a  dead  body  to. 

2. 14  and  that  which  they  offer  there  (is)  unci. 

3. To  make  or  declare  unclean,  neq  tame,  3. 

Lev.  20.  25  which  I  have  separated  from  you  as  unci. 

ness,  defilement,  nxsa  tumah. 
3  the  uncleanness  of  man,  whatsoever  unc. 

20  having  his  uncleanness  upon  him,  eveu 

21  any  unclean  (thing,  as)  the  uncleanness 
19  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed  from  hia  unci. 

3  this  shall  be  his  uncleanness  in  his  issue 
3  be  stopped  from  his  issue,  it  (is)  his  unci. 

25  the  days  of  the  issue  of  her  uncleanness 

26  And . .  as  the  uncleanness  of  her  separation 

30  atonement,  .for  the  issue  of  her  unclean. 

31  uncleanness;  that  they  die  not  in  their  un. 
16  uncleanness.  .in  the  midst  of  their  uncle. 
19  hallow  it  from  the  uncleanness  of  the  ch. 
19  as  long  as  she  is  put  apart  for  her  uncle. 

3  havinghis  uncleanness  upon  him,  that  so. 
5  or  a  man.  .whatsoever  uncleanness  he  ha. 

ig  if  thou  hast  not  gone  aside  to  uncleanness 

13  he  shall  be.,  his  uncleanness  (is)  yet  upon 
7  neither  eat  any  unclean  (thing):  for  the  ch. 

14  neither  let  her . .  eat  any  unclean  (thing) 

4  she  was  purified  from  heruneleannese:  and 

16  brought  out  all  the  uncleanness  that  they 
11  which  have  filled  it.. with  their  unclean. 

17  as  the  uncleanness  of  a  removed  woman 
29  I  will  also  save  you  from  all  your  unclea. 
24  According  to  their  uncleanness,  and  ace. 

2  aud  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the 

5. Separation,  impurity,  rru  niddah. 

Lev.  20.  21  it  (is)  an  unclean  thing;  he  hath  uncover. 
Ezra   o.  11  is  an  unclean  land  with  the  fllthiness  of 
Zech.  13.    1  a  fountain  opened . .  for  sin  and  for  uncle. 

ti.Xnked/icss,  disgracefvZness,  nn;;  ei-vali. 

Deut.  23.  14  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  in  thee,  an  1 


Unclean 

Lev. 

S- 

7- 

7- 

14. 

IS- 

'S- 

15- 

IS- 

IS- 

IS- 

16. 

16. 

18. 

22. 

22. 

Nun 

•5- 

Judj 

19. 
'3- 

M- 

aSa 

XX. 

aCh 

2Q. 

Ezra 

Q. 

Eze. 

v. 

3t>- 

39- 

Zech 

13- 

UNCLEAN 


1013 


UNDERSTAND 


7 .Separate,  consecrated,  en[3  qadesh. 

Job  36. 14  They  die . .  and  their  life  (is)  among  the  un. 

8. An  accident,  .TjiJ  qareh. 

Deut.23.  10  by  reason  of  uncleanness  that  chanceth 

9.  Uncleanness,  impurity,  aKadapaia  aJcatharsia. 
Matt  23.  27  full  of  dead,  .bones,  and  of  all  uncleanness 
Horn.  1.  24  God  also  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness  th. 

6.  19  yielded  your  members  servants  to  unclea. 
2  C0.12.  21  have  not  repented  of  the  uncleanness,  and 
Gal.  5. 19  Adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness,  lasci. 
Eph.    4.  19  to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness 

5.  3  all  uncleanness,  orcovetousness,  let  it  not 
Col.  3.  5  uncleanness,  inordinate  affection,  evil  co. 
1  Th.  2.   3  our  exhortation  (was)  not . .  of  uncleanness 

4.  7  God  hath  not  called  us  unto  uncleanness 

10. Unclean,  impure,  atcddapros  akatJiartos. 

Matt.  10.  1  he  gave  them  power  (against)  unclean  sp. 
12.  43  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 
Mark  1.  23  in  their  sjnagogue  a  man  with  an  unclean 
1.  26  when  the  unclean  spirit  had  torn  him,  and 
1.  27  commandeth  he  even  the  unclean  spirits 
3.  11  unclean  spirits,  when  they  saw  him,  fell 

3.  30  Because  they  said,  He  hath  an  unclean  sp. 

5.  2  met  him.  .a  man  with  an  unclean  spirit 
5.   8  Come  out  of  the  man,  (thou)  unclean  spi. 

5.  13  the  unclean  spirits  went  out,  and  entered 

6.  7  and  gave  them  power  over  unclean  spirits 
7. 25  whose  young  daughter  had  an  unclean  sp. 

Luke  4.  33  a  man  which  had  a  spirit  of  an  unclean 

4.  36  he  commandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and 
6. 18  they  that  were  vexed  with  unclean  spirits 

8.  29  he  had  commanded  the  unclean  spirit  to 

9.  42  Jesus  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and  he. 
11.  24  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a 

Acts  5.  16  them  which  were  vexed  with  unclean  sp. 
8.  7  unclean  spirits,  crying  with  a  loud  voice 
10.  14  never  eaten  any  thing  that  is.  .unclean 

10.  2S  I  should  not  call  any  man  common  or  un. 

11.  8  nothing  common  or  unclean  hath  at  any 

1  Co.  7. 14  else  were  your  children  unclean,  but  now 

2  Co.  6.  17  touch  not  the  unclean  (thing);  and  I  will 
Eph.  5.  5  no  whoremonger,  nor  unclean  person,  nor 
Rev.  16. 13 1  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs(come) 

18.  2  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird 

11. Common,  profane,  polluted,  koiv6$  koinos. 
Horn.  14.  14  I  know.  .that,  .nothing  unclean  of  itself 
14.  14  anything  to  be  unclean,  to  him  (it  is)  un. 

12.2*0  make  common,  profane,  pollute,  kolvoqi. 
Heb.   9.  13  For  if  th«  blood,  .sprinkling  the  unclean 

13. Pollution,  defilement,  fj.Laa-^6s  miasmos. 

2  Pe.  2.  10  that  walk  after  the  flesh  in  the  lust  of  un. 

UNCLEAN,  to  (be  made),  make  self,  pronounce  — 

1.  Unclean,  defiled,  Npa  tame. 

Lev.  11.  24,  27,  31,  32,  39  unclean  until  the  even 
11.  25,  28,  40,  40  be  unclean  until  the  even 
1 1.  26  every  one  that  toucheth . .  shall  be  unclean 
11.  32  whatsoever  (any),  .doth  fall,  it  shall  be  un. 
11.  33  whatsoever  (is)  in  it  shall  be  unclean,  and 
11.  34  (that)  on  which  (such).,  cometh  shall  be  u. 
11.  34  drunk . .  in  every  (such)  vessel  shall  be  un. 
11.  35  every  (thing).,  shall  be  unclean;  (whether 

1 1.  36  that  which  toucheth . .  shall  be  unclean 

12.  2  she  shall  be  unclean  seven  days,  according 
12.   2  for  her  infirmity  shall  she  be  unclean 

12.  5  she  shall  be  unclean  two  weeks,  as  in  her 
13  14  raw  flesh  appeareth . .  he  shall  be  unclean 
14.  36  that  all  that  (is)  in . .  be  not  made  unclean 

14.  46  he  that  goeth.  .shall  be  unclean  until  the 

15.  4  Every  bed  whereon  he  lieth.  .is  unclean 
15.    4  whereon  he  sitteth  shall  be  unclean 

J5-    5>  6,  7,  8,  10,  10,  11,  16  be  unclean  until  the 
15.    9  what  saddle . .  he  rideth . .  shall  be  unclean 
15.  18,  21,  22,  27  be  unclean  until  the  even 
15.  24  he  shall  be  unclean  seven  days;  and  all 
15. 24  the  bed  whereon  he  lieth  shall  be  unclean 
1 5.  27  whosoever  toucheth  those . .  shall  be  unci. 
17.  15  bathe  (himself)  in  water,  and  be  unclean 
22.   5  whereby  he  may  be  made  unclean,  or 
22.    6  which  hath  touched  any  such  shall  be  un. 
Num.  19.    7  the  priest  shall  be  unclean  until  the  even 

19.  8  he  that  buraeth  her . .  shall  be  uncleau  un. 
19. 10  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  unclean  un. 
19.  11  He  that  toucheth . .  shall  be  unclean  seven 
19.  14  all  that  (is)  in  the  tent,  shall  be  unclean 
19.  16  whosoever  toucheth ..  a  grave,  shall  be  un. 
19.  20  the  man  that  shall  be  unclean,  and  shall 
19.  21  he  that  toucheth. .  shall  be  unclean  until 
19.  22  shall  be  unclean. .  shall  be  unclean  until 

Hag.    2.  13  shall  it  be  unclean . .  It  shall  be  unclean 

2.To  make  or  declare  unclean,  defile,  xptp  tame,  3. 
Lev.  13.    3  priest  shall  look,  .and  pronounce  him  un. 

13.  8,  11  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  unclean 
13.  15  the  priest  shall,  .pronounce  him  to  be  un. 
13.  20,  22,  25,  27,  30  priest  shall  pronounce,  .un. 
13.  44  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him .  .unclean 
13.  59  This  (is)  the  law . .  to  pronounce  it  unclean 

3.  To  defile  self,  make  self  unclean,  NDM  tame,  7. 
Lev.  11.  24  for  these  ye  shall  be  unclean :  whosoever 
11. 43  neither  shall  ye  make  yourselves  unclean 
Num.  6.   7  He  shall  not  make  himself  unclean  for 

UNCLEANNESS,  to  taie— 
To  be  unclean,  xce  tame. 

Lev.  22.    5  or  a  man  of  whom  he  may  take  unclean. 


TTNCLE'S  wife  — 

Beloved,  uncle's  wife,  mYn  dodah. 

Lev.  20.  20  if  a  man  shall  lie  with  his  uncle's  wife,  he 
UNCLOTHED  — 
To  lead  out,  unclothe,  4kS6co  ekduo. 

2  Co.   5.   4  not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed,  but 
UNCOMELY  (parts)  — 
Unseemly,  aaxh^v  aschemon, 

1  Co.  12.  23  our  uncomely  (parts)  have  more  abundant 
UNCONDEMNED  — 

Uncondemned,  not  judged  down,  aKa.rd.Kp it os  aha. 

Acts  16.  37  They  have  beaten  us  openly  uncondemned 
22.  25  a  man  that  is  a  Roman,  and  uncondemned? 
UNCORRUPTIBLE,   uncorruptness  — 
l.Incorruption,  adia<p6opla  adiaphthoria. 

Titus  2.    7  in  doctrkie..[uncoiTUptness], gravity, sine. 

2. Incorruptible,  incorrupted,  dtyQapros  aphthartos. 

Rom.  1.  23  changed  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible 
UNCOVER,  (self,  be  uncovered),  to  — 

1.  To  be  removed,  uncovered,  revealed,  n^3  galah,  2. 

2  Sa.    6.  20  uncovered  himself,  .as  one.  .uncovereth 
Isa.  47.   3  Thy  nakedness  shall  be  uncovered,  yea 

2.  To  remove,  uncover,  reveal,  n?a  galah,  3. 

Lev.  18.   6  to  uncover,  .nakedness :  I  (am)  the  Lord 
18.   7  shalt  thou  not  uncover . .  thou  shalt  not  un. 
So  in  v.  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  15,  16,  17. 

18. 17  to  uncover  her  nakedness,  .they  (are)  her 

18. 18  to  uncover  her  nakedness,  besides  the  ot. 
18.  19  to  uncover  her  nakedness  as  long  as  she 
20.  11  hath  uncovered  his  father's  nakedness 
20. 17  he  hath  uncovered  his  sister's  nakedness 
20.  18  shall  uncover  her.  .she  hath  uncovered 
20.  19  thou  shalt  not  uncover  the  nakedness  of 
20. 20,  21  he  hath  uncovered  his.  .nakedness 

Deut27.  20  because  he  uncovereth  his  father's  skirt 
Ruth  3.    4  and  uncover  his  feet,  and  lay  thee  down 
3.    7  and  uncovered  his  feet,  and  laid  her  do. 
Isa.   47.    2  uncover  thy  locks,  .uncover  the  thigh 
Jer.  49. 10  I  have  uncovered  bis  secret  places,  and 

2. To  uncover  or  reveal  self,  nhs  galah,  7. 

Gen.    9.  21  and  he  was  uncovered  within  his  tent 

i.To  make  bare,  draw  or  out,  ^rt  chasaph. 

Isa.   20.   4  with,  .buttocks  uncovered,  to  the  shame 
Eze.    4.    7  thine  arm.  .uncovered,  and  thou  shalt 

5. To  make  bare,  htjj  arah,  3. 

Isa.   22.   6  Elam  bare  the  quiver . .  Kir  uncovered  the 
Zeph.  2.  14  desolation,  .he  shaU  uncover  the  cedar 

6.  To  make  bare,  rriH  arah,  5. 

Lev.  20. 19  he  uncovereth  his  near  kin  :  they  shall 

7.  To  free,  keep  or  make  bare,  jns  para. 

Lev.  10.   6  Uncover  not  your  heads,  neither  rend  yo. 

ax.  10  shall  not  uncover  his  head,  nor  rend  his 

Num.  5. 18  the  priest  shall,  .uncover  the  woman's  he. 

8.  Uncovered,  unveiled,  a.KaTaKd\vwTos  akatakalup. 

x  Co.11.    5  or  prophesieth  with  (her)  head  uncovered 
11.  13  comely  that  a  woman  pray  unto  God  un. 

9.  To  uncover,  unroof,  airo(TTeyd£to  apostegazo. 

Mark  2.    4  they  uncovered  the  roof  where  he  was 

UNCTION  — 

Anointing,  unction,  xP'-O'^achHsma. 

1  Jo.   2. 20  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One 
UNDEITLED  — 
1. Perfect,  finished,  plain,  Dn  tam^ 

Song  5.   2  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove,  my  undeflied 
6.   9  My  dove,  my  undeflied  is  (but)  one ;  she 

2.  Perfect,  whole,  complete,  D'CJ?  tamim. 

Psa.119.    1  Rlessed(are)the undeflied  in  the  way,  who 

3.  Undefiled,  unpolluted,  immaculate,  apLtavros. 
Heb.    7.  26  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 

13.    4  Marriage  (is)  honourable . .  the  bed  undefi. 
Jas.     1.  27  Pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  God 

1  Pe.   1.    4  To  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  und. 
UNDER,  underneath  — 

1.  Unto,  ^x  el. 

2  Sa.  2. 23  smote  him  under  the  fifth  (rib),  that  the 

2.  Beneath,  below,  ntao  mattah. 

Exod28.  27  the  two  sides  of  the  ephod  underneath 

39.  20  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ephod  underneath 
1  Ch.27.  23  took  not.  .from  twenty  years  old  and  un. 

3.  Under,  beneath,  ninp  techoth. 

Jer.  10.  ti  they  shall  perish,  .from  under  these  hea. 
Dan.    4.  12  the  beasts  of  the  field  had  shadow  under 

4.  21  under  which  the  beasts  of  the  fields  dwe. 

7. 27  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the 

4.  Under,  beneath,  nnn  tachath. 

Gen.    1.    7  underthefirmaroentfrom  the  waters  wh. 
6.  17  flood,  .to  destroy  all  flesh,  .from  under 
7. 19  all  the  high  hills  that  (were)  under  the 

Dan.    4.  14  let  the  beasts  get  away  from  under  it 

5.  Unto  the  place  of,  under,  nrn~7x  el  tachath. 
Jer.     3.    6  upon  every  high  mountain  and  under 

6.  Under,  beneath,  nrnp?  lemittachath. 

1  Ki.  7.  32  And  under  the  borders  (were)  four  whe. 


7. In,  among,  with,  by,  ev  en. 

Matt.  7.    6  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet 
Rom.  3.  19  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law 

8.  On,  upon,  over,  eVi  (dat. )  epi. 

Heb.  7.  11  for  [under]  it  the  people  received  the  law 
9.  15  of  the  transgressions,  .under  the  first  tes. 

10.  28  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three 

Q.Down  beneath,  below,  under,  KaTwrepw  katotero. 
Matt.  2.  16  slew  all.  .from  two  years  old  ami  under 

10.  Under,  vtt6  {ace.)  hupo. 

Matt.  5.  15  Neither  do  men . .  put  it  under  a  bushel 
8.    8  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  come  un. 

8.  9  man  under  authority,  having  soldiers  un. 
23.  37  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  un. 

Mark  4.  21  to  be  put  under  a  bushel,  or  under-abed? 
4.  32  the  fowls  of  the  air  may  lodge  under  the 

Luke  7.  6  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  enter  un. 
7.  8  For  I  also  am  a  man  set  under  authority 
7.    8  having  under  me  soldiers ;  and  I  say  un. 

11.  33  neither  under  a  bushel,  but  on  a  candle. 
13.  34  as  a  hen.  .her  brood  under  (her)  wings 
17.  24  under  heaven .  .unto  the  other  (part)  und. 

John  1.  48  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree,  I  saw 
Acts    2.    5  devout  men  out  of  every  nation  under 

4. 12  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven 
Rom.  3.    9  before  proved .  .thatthey  are  all  under  sin 

3. 13  the  poison  of  asps  (is)  under  their  lips 

6. 14,  15  are  not  under  the  law,  butundergrace 

7.  14  spiritual:  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin 

16. 20  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under 

1  Co.  9.  20  them  that  are  under  the  law,  as  under  the 

9.  20  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  under  the 
10.  1  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud,  and 
15.  25  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet 
15.  27  For  he  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet 

Gal.     3.  10  as  many,  .are  under  the  curse  :  for  it  is 
3.  22  the  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin 
3.  23  we  were  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto 

3.  25  we  are  no  longer  under  a  schoolmaster 

4.  2  But  is  under  tutors  and  governors  until 
4.  3  were  in  bondage  under  the  elements  of 
4.  4  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law 
4.  5  To  redeem  them  that  were  under  thelaw 

4.  21  Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law 

5.  18  led  by  the  spirit,  ye  arenotunder  thelaw 
Eph.    1.  22  hath  put  all  (things)  under  his  feet,  and 
Col.     1.  23  to  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven 
1  Ti.   6.    1  Let  as  many  servants  as  are  under  theyo. 
Jas.     2.   3  Stand  thou  there,  or  sit  here  under  my 

1  Pe.  5.    6  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the 
Jude         6  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the 

11.  Underneath,  WoKarw  hupokato. 

Mark  6. 11  shake  off  the  dust  under  your  feet  for  a 
7.  28  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the  chil. 
Luke  8.  16  No  man.  .putteth  (it)  under  a  bed,  but 
John  1.  50  I  said  unto  thee,  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig 
Heb.  2.    8  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet 
Rev.   5.   3  no  man  in  heaven . .  neither  under  the  ea. 

5.  13  on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and 

6.  9  I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them 

12.  1  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  upon  her 

12.Smaller,  inferior,  younger,  iKdo-acou  classdn. 

1  Ti.  5.  9  be  taken  into  the  number  under  threescore 
[See  also  Bondage,  brought,  curse,  earth,  foot,  keep, 
obedience,  persecution,  put,  run,  sail,  tread,  trodden.] 

UNDER  the  law  — 

In  or  under  law,  zvvo{jlos  ennomos. 

1  Co.  9.  21  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law 
UNDERGIRD,  to  — 
To  undergird,  vTro£wvvvfj.L  hupozonnumi. 

Acts  27.  17  they  used  helps,  undergirding  the  ship 
UNDERSETTER  — 
Shoulder,  corner,  side,  *\r\%  Tcatkeph. 

1  Ki.  7.  30  hadundersetters.  .undersetters  molten,  at 

7.  30  under  the  laverx  were)  undersetters  molten 
7.  34  four  undersetters.  .the  undersetters  (we.) 

UNDERSTAND,  to  (cause,  give  or  make  to)  — 
] .  To  understand,  consider,  yzbin. 

Neh.   8.    8  and  caused,  .to  understand  the  reading 

13.  7  understood  of  the  evil  that  Eliashib  did 
Job   13.    1  mine  ear  hath  heard  and  understood  it 

15.  9  (what)  understandest  thou,  which  (is)  not 
23.  5  and  understand  what  he  would  say  unto 
32.  9  neither  do  the  aged  understand  judgment 
36.  29  can(any)understand  the  spreadings  of  the 
42.   3  therefore  have  I  uttered  that  I  understood 

Psa.  19.  12  Who  can  understand  (his)  errors  ?  cleanse 
49. 20  Man  (that  is)  in  honour,  and  understand. 
73. 17  Until  I  went,  .(then)  understood  I  their 
82.  5  They  know  not,  neither  will  they  unders. 
92.  6  knoweth  not ;  neither  doth  a  fool  unders. 
94.  8  Understand,  ye  brutish  among  the  people 
139.    2  thou  understandest  my  thought  afar  off 

Prov.  2.    5  Then  shaltthouunderstandfchefearof  the 
2.    9  Then  shalt  thou  understand  righteousness 

19.  25  reprove,  .(and)  he  will  understand  know. 

20.  24  how  can  a  man  then  understand  his  own 
28.    5  Evil  men  understand  not  judgment:  but 

28.  5  they  that  seek  the  Lord  understand  all 

29.  19  though  he  understand  he  will  not  answer 
Isa.     6.   9  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  irnderstandnot;  and 

6.  10  hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand  with 
28.  9  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  doct. 
32.  4  The  heart  also  of  the  rash  shall  understand 
43. 10  believe  me,  and  understand  that  I  (am)  he 


UNDERSTANDING 


1014 


UNDERSTANDING 


Isa.  44.  iS  They  have  not  known  nor  understand,  for 

Jer.     9.  12  Who  (is)  the  wise  man,  that  may  unders. 

Dan.   9.    2  I  Daniel  understood  by  books  the  number 

9.  23  understand  the  matter,  and  consider  the 

10.    1  and  he  understood  the  thing,  and  had 

12.    8  I  heard,  but  I  understood  not :  then  said 

12.  10  understand  ;  but  the  wise  shall  understand 

Hos.   4.  14  the  people(that)doth  not  understand  shall 
14.    9  Who  (is)  wise,  and  he  shall  understand  th. 

2.To  have  understanding,  be  intelligent,  [*?  bin,  2. 
Prov  14.    6  knowledge's)  easy  unto  him  that  underst. 

3.  To  cause  to  understand,  attend,  |\p  bin,  5. 

1  Ch.23-  9  understandeth,  all  the  imaginations  of  the 

Is'eh.   8.    3  read,  .before. .  those  that  could  uudersta. 

8.    7  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law 

8. 12  they  had  understood  the  words  that  were 

Job     6.  24  cause  me  to  understand  wherein  I  have 

28.  23  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and 

Psa.119.  27  Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy 

Prov.  1.   6  To  understand  a  proverb,  and  the  interp. 

8.    5  O  ye  simple,  understand  wisdom ;  and,  ye 

8.    9  They  (are)  all  plain  to  him  that  underst. 

14.    8  The  wisdom  of  the  prudent  (is)  to  under. 

Isa.    28. 19  it  shall  be  a  vexation  only(  to)  understand 

40.  2t  have  ye  not  understood  from  the  founda. 
56. 11  they  (are)  shepherds  (that)  cannot  under. 

Dan.    8. 16  make  this  (man)  to  understand  the  vision 
8.  17  Understand,  0  son  of  man;  for  at  the  time 

8.  27  I  was  astonished,  .but  none  understood 
10. 11  understand  the  words  that  I  speak  unto 
10.  12  set  thine  heart  to  understand,  and  to  ch. 
10.  14  I  am  come  to  make  thee  understand  what 

Mie.    4. 12  they  know  not.  .neither  understand  they 

A.  To  understand,  consider,  f»3  bin,  7". 

Job   26.  14  the-thunder  of  his  power  who  can  unders. 

Psa.  107.  43  they  shall  understand  the  loving  kindness 

1 19. 100 1  understand  more  than  the  ancients,  be. 

5.  Understanding,  pg'a  hinah. 

Isa.  33.  19  tongue,  (that  thou  canst)  not  understand 

6.  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  yv  yada. 

Num  16.  30  ye  shall  understand  that  these  men  have 

9.  3  Understand  therefore  this  day,  that  the 
Dent  9.   6  Understand  therefore,  that  the  Lord  thy 

1  5a.   4.   6  they  understood  that  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

26.   4  understood  that  Saul  was  come  in  very  de. 

2  Sa.  3.  37  all  Israel,  understood  that  day,  that  it  was 
Psa.  81.    5  I  heard  a  language  (that)  I  understood  not 

7.  To  {cause  to  act)  wise!}/,  *?$p  sakal,  5. 

Deut32.  29  (that)  they  understood  this,  (that)  they 

1  Ch.28. 19  the  Lord  made  me  understand  in  writing 
Neli.  8. 13  even  to  understand  the  words  of  the  law 
Psa.  14.    2  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  did  underst. 

53.    2  to  see  if  there  were  (any)  that  dirt  under. 
106.   7  Our  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders 
Isa.  41.  20  consider,  and  understand  together,  that 

44.  18  their  hearts,  that  they  cannot  understand 
Jer.    9.  24  that  he  understandeth  and  knoweth  me 
Dan.    9. 13  turn  from  our  iniquities,  and  understand 
9.  25  Know  therefore  and  understand. .from  the 
xi.  33  they  that  understand  among  the  people 

S.To  hear,  hearken,  £"7  shaviea. 

Gen.  11.    7  that  they  may  not  understand  one  anot. 

41.  15  thou  canst  understand  a  dream  to  interpr. 

42.  23  they  knew  not  that  Joseph  understood(th.) 
Dent.28.  49  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  understand 

2  Ki.  18.  26  the  Syrian  language;  for  we  understand 
Isa.  36.  11  the  Syrian  language  ;  for  we  understand 
Jer.  3  5.  15  neither  understaudest  what  they  say 
Eze.    3.   6  whose  words  thou  canst  not  understand 

9.7*0  hear,  hearken,  aKovw  akouo. 

1  Co  14.    2  speaketh  not  unto  men.  .forno  man  unde. 

10.  To  /  .     ■„  ,7  of,  yiv&a-Ka}  gimosko. 
Matt  26.  1 3  When  Jesus  understood  (it),  he  said  unto 
John  8.  27  They  understood  not  that  he  spake  to  them 

8. 43  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech? 

jo.   6  they  understood  not  what  things  they  we. 

12.  16  These  things  understood  not  his  disciples 
Acts    8.  30  said,  Understandest  thou  what  thou  read! 

24. 11  Because  [that  thou  mayest  understand], 
Phil.  1.  12  But  I  would  ye  should  understand,  breth. 

11.  To  make  known,  yvevpifa  gnarizo. 

1  Co.  12.   3  I  give  you  to  understand,  that  no  man 

12.  77j  see,  know,  be  acquainted  with,  tf5oj  eido. 

1  Co.  13.    2  understand  all  mysteries,  and  all  knowled. 
14. 16  he  understandeth  not  what  thou  gayest  ? 

13.7b  know  about,  be  acquainted  with,  fvla-rafxat. 
Marki4.  68  neither  understand  I  what  thou  sayest 

14. 2*0  learn,  jiavQavw  mathano. 

Acts  23.  27  came,  .having  understood  that  he  was  a 

15.2*0 ponder,  think,  understand,  vSew  noeo. 

Matt  15.  17  Donotyeyetunderstand,  that  whatsoever 

16.   9  Do  ye  not  yet  understand,  neither  remem. 

16.  11  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  that 

24-15  Daniel  .  .whosn  readeth,  let  him  underst. 

M»Ri3.  14  Daniel  ..let  him  that  readeth  understand 

Johni2.  40  nor  understand  n  ith  (their)  heart,  and  be 

Rom.  1.  20  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are 

fcpn.   3.   4  when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  kn. 

ill.    1.   7  understanding  neither  whatthey  say,  nor 

Heo.ii.    3  Through  faith  we  understand  that  the  w. 

^'P*J  '■  vvveivouatj'ifiith 

Acts  23. 34  when  he  understood  that  the  was)  of  Cil 


17.  To  send  together,  consider,  understand,  trwi-n/xt. 
Matt  13.  13  hearing,  they  hear  not ;  neither  do  they 
13.  14  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  understand 
13.  15  should  understand  with  (their)  heart,  and 
13. 19  When  any  one  heareth. .and  understand. 
13.  23  he  that  heareth  the  word,  and  understa. 
13.  51  Jesus  saith.  .Have  ye  understood  all  the. 
15.  10  said  unto  them,  Hear,  and  understand 
16. 12  Then  understood  they  how  that  he  bade 

17.  13  the  disciples  understood  that  he  spake 
Mark  4.  12  hearing  they  may  hear,  and  not  underst. 

7.  14  Hearken,  .every  one  (of  you),  and  under. 

8.  17  perceive  ye  not  yet,  neither  understand:1 
8.  21  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand? 

Luke  2.  50  they  understood  not  the  saying  which  he 
8. 10  and  hearing  they  might  not  understand 

18.  34  they  understood  none  of  these  things,  and 
24. 45  that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptu. 

Acts  7.  25  have  understood  .  .but  they  understood 
28.  26  Hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  und. 
28.  27  hear  with  (their)  ears,  and  understand  wi. 

Rom.  3.  11  There  is  none  that  understandeth,  there 
15. 21  they  that  have  not  heard  shall  understand 

Eph.    5.  17  understanding  what  the  will  of  the  Lord 

18.7b  set  the  mind  or  affections  on,  <ppov4u> phroneo. 

1  Co.  13.  11  When  I  was  a  child..  I  understood  as  a  c. 
■UNDERSTAND  not,  to  — 
jYot  to  know,  to  be  ignorant,  ayvoeoo  agnoeo. 

Mark  9.  32  they  understood  not  that  saying,  and  we. 

Luke  9.  45  they  understood  not  this  saying,  and  it 

2Pe.   2.  12  speakeviiof.  .things. .they understand n. 
UNDERSTANDING,  (man  of)  — 
l.To  be  intelligent,  have  understanding,  pa  bin,  2. 

Deut.  1.  13  Take  you  wise  men,  and  understanding 
4.   6  nation  (is)  a  wise  and  understanding  peo. 

1  Ki.   3.  12  given,  .a  wise  and  an  understanding  he. 

Prov.  1.    5  a  man  of  understandingshallattain  unto 
8.    5  fools,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  heart 
17.  28  (and)  he.  .(is  esteemed)  a  man  of  unders. 

Eccl.  9. 11  nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  understanding 

2. To  cause  to  understand,  pa  bin,  5. 

1  Ki.  3.  11  but  hast  asked  for  thyself  understanding 
Ezra    8.  16  Then  sent  I  for.  .men  of  understanding 
Neh.    8.    2  all  that  could  hear  with  understanding 

10.  28  having  knowledge,  and  having  understa. 
Prov  28.  2  by  a  man  of  understanding  (and)  knowl. 
Dan.    1.    4  cunning  in  knowledge,  and  understanding 

8.  23  a  king.. understandingdark sentences,  sh. 

3.  Understanding,  intelligence,  nr3  binah. 

Deut.  4.   6  this  fis)  your  wisdom  andyourunderstan. 

1  Ch.12.  32  (men)that  had  understanding  of  the  times 

22. 12  the  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  land  underst. 

2  Ch.  2.  12  endued  with  prudence  and  understanding 
2.  13  a  cunning  man,  endued  with  understand. 

20.  3  the  spirit  of  my  understanding  cause  th 
28.  12,  20  where  (is)  the-place  of  understanding? 

28.  28  and  to  depart  from  evil  (is)  understanding 
34.  16  If  now.  .understanding,  hear  this  ;  hear. 
38.   4  declare,  if  thou  hast  understanding? 

38.  36  who  hath  given  understanding  to  the  he. 

39.  17  neither  hath  he  imparted  to  her  unders. 
2  to  perceive  the  words  of  understanding 
5  and  lean  not  unto  thine  own  understand. 

4.  1  Hear,  .and  attend  to  know  understanding 
4.  5  get  understanding:  forget  (it)  not;  neit. 
4.  7  and  with  all  thy  gettingget  understanding 
.7.   4  and  call  understanding  (thy)  kinswoman 

8.  14  Counsel  (is)  mine.. I  (am)  understanding 

9.  6  and  live;  and  go  in  the  way  of  understan. 
9.  10  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  (is)  understan. 

16.  16  to  get  understanding  rather  to  be  chosen 

23.  23  wisdom,  and  instruction,  and  understan. 
30.    2  and  have  not  the  understanding  of  a  man 

11.  2  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding 
27.  11  it  (is)a  people  of  no  understanding,  there. 

29.  14  the  understanding  of  their  prudent  (men) 
29.  24  that  erred  in  spirit  shall  come  to  under. 

1.  20  in  all  matters  of  wisdom  (and)  understa. 
9.  22  come,  .to  give  thee  skill  and  understand. 
10.    1  and  had  understanding  of  the  vision 

4.  Taste,  perception,  cj;e  taam. 

Job   12.  20  taketh  away  the  understanding  of'the  ag. 
5. Heart,  2b  leb. 

Prov.  6.  32  whoso  committeth  adultery,  .lacketh  un. 
7.  7  beheld,  .a  young  man  void  of  understan. 
9.   4,  16  (as  for)  him  that  wanteth  understan. 

10. 13  a  rod  (is)  for.  .him  that  is  void  of  under. 
12. 11  he  that  folio  weth..  (is)  void  of  understan. 
15.  32  he  that  heareth  reproof  getteth  underst. 

17.  18  A  man  void  of  understanding  striketh 

24.  30  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  underst. 
Jer.    5.  21  0  foolish  people,  and  without  understan. 

6. Heart,  aaS  lebab. 

Job   12.    3  But  I  have  understanding  as  well  as  you 
34.  10  hearken  unto  me,  ye  men  of  understand. 
34.  34  Let  men  of  understanding  tell  me,  and  let 
7. Knowledge*  Jhj£  manda. 

Dan.  4. 34  mine  understanding  returned  unto  me 
8.7b  cause  to  act  wisely,  7&y  sakal,  5. 

Psa.  47.    7  sing  ye  praises  with  understanding 

Prov.21.  16  man  thatwanderethoutof  the  wayofun. 

Jer.     3.  15  shall  feed  you  with  knowledge  and  unde. 

Dan.  11.  35  (some)  of  them  of  understanding  shall  fall 

9.  Understanding,  wisdom,  meaning,  bai7, ^3|p sekel. 

1  Sa.  25.    3  a  woman  of  good  understanding,"  and  of 


Job 


Prov. 


Isa. 


Dan. 


Ezra  8.  iS  they  brought  us  a  man  of  understanding 
Job  17.  4  thou  hast  hid  their  heart  from  understa. 
Psa.-in.  10  a  good  understanding  have  all  they  that 
Prov.  3.  4  So  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  good  unde. 
13.  15  Good  understanding giveth  favour:  but 
16.  22  Understanding^;  a  well  spring  of  life  un. 

10.  Understanding,  M$?3t?  soklethanu. 

Dan.  5.  11  light  and  understanding:  and  wisdom,like 
5.  12  anexcelIentspirit,andknowledge,and  un. 
5. 14  light  and  understanding  and  excellent 

11.  To  hear,  hearken,  EC^  shamea. 

1  Ki.   3.   9  Give,  .thy  servant  an  understanding  hea. 

l'l.Understanding,  pan  tahun. 

Hos.  13.    2  idols  according  to  their  own  understand. 

13.  Understanding,  njiaj-i  tebunah. 

E.xod  31.    3  in  understanding,  and  in  knowledge,  and 

35.  31  with  the  spirit  of  God,  in  wisdom,  in  un. 

36.  1  in  whom  the  Lord  put  wisdom  and  unde. 
Deut  32.  2S  neither  (is  there  any  understanding)  in 

1  Ki.  4.  29  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  understa. 

7.  14  he  was  filled  with  wisdom  and  understa. 
Job    12.  12  wisdom ;  and  in  length  of  days  uudersta. 

12.  13  he  hath  counsel  and  understanding 
26.  12  by  his  understanding  hesmiteth  through 
Psa.  49.   3  meditation  of  my  heart  (shall  be)  of  unci. 

147.   5  Great  (is)  our  Lord.. his  understanding 
Prov.  2.    2  (and)  apply  thine  heart  to  understanding 
2.    3  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understanding 
2.    6  out  of  his  mouth  (cometh).  .understand. 

2.  11  preserve  thee,  understanding  shall  keep 

3.  13  and  the  man  (that)  getteth  understanding 

3.  19  by  understanding  hath  he  established  the 
5.    1  (and)  bow  thine  ear  to  my  understanding 

8.  1  and  understanding  put  forth  her  voice? 
10.  23  but  a  man  of  understanding  hath  wisdom 
ir.  12  a  man  of  understanding  holdeth  his  pea. 

14.  29  (He  that  is)  slow  to  wrath  (is)  of  great  un. 

15.  21  a  man  of  understanding  walketh  uprigh. 

17.  27  a  man  of  understanding  is  of  an  excellent 

18.  2  A  fool  hath  no  delight  in  understanding 

19.  8  he  that  keepeth  understanding  shall  find 

20.  5  a  man  of  understanding  will  draw  it  out 

21.  30  (There  is)  no  wisdom  nor  understanding 
24.    3  and  by  understanding  it  is  established 
28.  16  The  prince  that  wanteth  understanding 

Isa.  40.  14  showed  to  him  the  way  of  understanding 
40.  28  (there  is)  no  searching  of  his  understand. 
44.  19  neither  (is  there)  knowledge  nor  underst. 

Jer.  51.  15  hath  stretched  out  the  heaven  by  his  un. 

Eze.  28.    4  With  thy  wisdom  and  with  thine  unders. 

Hos.  13.    2  idols  according  to  their  own  understand. 

Obad.       7  (their  is)  none  understanding  in  him 

8  and  understanding  out  of  the  mount  of  E. 

14.  Understanding,  ffl3W  tubnah. 

Job   26.  12  by  his  understanding  he  smiteth  through 

15.  Whole  mind,  intellect,  understanding,  Bidvota. 
Eph.   1.  18  The  eyes  of  your  [understanding]  being 

4.  18  Having  the  understanding  darkened 

1  Jo.   5.  20  the  Son.  .hath  given  us  an  understanding 

16. Mind,  understanding,  vovs  nous. 

Luke  24.  45  Then  opened  he  their  understanding,  th. 

1  Co.  14.  14  my  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  understanding 
14.  15  I  will  pray  with  the  understanding  also 
14. 15  I  will  sing  with  the  understanding  also 
14. 19  rather  speak  five  words  with  my  underst. 

Phil.    4.    7  the  peace. .which  passeth  all  understand. 

Rev.  13.  iS  Let  him  that  hath  understanding  count 

17  .A  sending  together,  intelligence,  trvvzats  sunesis. 
Marki2.  33  with  all  the  understanding,  and  with  all 
Luke  2.  47  were  astonished  at  his  understanding  and 

1  Co.  1.  19  will  bring  to  nothing  the  understanding 
Col.     1.    9  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding 

2.    2  richesof  the  full  assurance  of  understand. 

2  Ti.    2.    7  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding  in  all 

18.  Heart,  mind,  understanding,  (ppj)tr  phren. 

1  Co. 14.  20  not  children  in  understanding.. in  under. 

UNDERSTANDING,  without  — 

Not  sent  together,  unintelligent,  avvveros  asunelos. 
Matti'5.  16  Are  ye  also  yet  without  understanding 
Mark  7.  18  Are  ye  so  without  understanding  also? 
Rom.  1.  31  Withoutunderstauding,covenant breakers 

UNDERSTANDING,  to  be  of,  get,  give,  have  perfect— 
1.7b  be  intelligent,  j'3  bin,  2. 

Frov  10.  13  In  the  lips  of  him  that  hath  understand. 

14.  ^3  resteth  in  the  heart  of  him  that  hath  un. 

15.  14  The  heart  of  him  that  hath  understanding 
19.  25  and  reprove  one  that  hath  understanding 

Jer.     4. 22  my  people,  .they  have  none  understand. 

2.  To  cause  to  understand,  pa  bin,  5. 

2  Ch.26.  5  who  had  understanding  in  the  visions  of 
Job  37.  8  the  Almighty  giveth  them  understanding 
Psa.  32.   9  (which)  have  no  understanding,  whose 

119.  34,  m,  125,  144,  169  Give  me  understanding 
119.  130  it  giveth  understanding  unto  the  simple 
Trov.  S.    5  and,  ye  fools,  be  ye  of  au  understanding 
17.  24  Wisdom  (is)  before  him  that  hath  under. 
28.  11  the  poorthat  hath  understanding  search. 
Tsa.    29.  16  say  at  him.  .He  had  no  understanding 
Dan.    1.  17  Daniel  had  understanding  in  all  visions 

0.T0  understand,  consider,  attend,  j*2  bin,  7a. 
Psa.119. 1Q4  Through  thy  precepts  I  get  understand. 


UNDERSTANDING 


1015 


UNPROFITABLE 


4.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  S^b-  sakal,  5. 

Psa.119.  99  I  nave  more  understanding  than  all  my 
Dan.  11.  35  (some)  of  them  of  understanding  shall  f. 

5.  To  folloic  alongside  ofirapaKo\ovdta>  parakolou. 

Luke  1.    3  having  had  perfect  understanding  of  all 
UNDERSTANDING,  to  make  of  quick  — 
To  refresh,  nn  roach,  5. 

Isa.   11.    3  shall  make  himof  quick  understanding  in 
UNDERSTOOD,  easy  or  hard,  to  be  — 
l.Hard  to  be  understood,  bwuSriTos  dusnoetos. 

2  Pe.  3. 16  in  which  are  some  things  hard  to  be  und. 

2. Easily  noted,  evtm/xos  eusemos. 

1  Co.  14.   9  by  the  tongue  words  easy  to  be  understo. 
UNDERTAKE,  to  — 
1.7*0  mix,  traffic,  negotiate,  pledge,  3"lj/  arab. 

Isa.   38.  14  0  LOKD,  I  am  oppressed  :  undertake  for 

2.  To  accept,  take,  receive,  undertake,  bl\)  qabal,  3. 

Esth.  9.  23  the  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  be. 
UNDO,  be  or  leave  undone,  to  — 
1.7*0  be  parted,  lost,  sejmrated,  ")3N  ahad. 

Nuni2i.  29  thou  art  undone,  0  people  of  Chemosh 

2.7*0  be  cut  off,  dumb,  nzii  damah,  2. 

Isa.     6.    5  Then  said  I,  Woe  (is)  me  !  forlamundone 
3.7*0  move,  loose,  sliakeoff,  "tm  nathar,  5. 

Isa.  58.  6  to  undo  the  heavy  burdens,  and  to  let  the 
4.7*0  turn  asidej  hid  sur,  5. 

Josh'n.  15  he  left  nothing  undone  of  all  that  the  Lo. 
5. 7*o  do,  make,  n'pl?  asah. 

Zeph.  3.  19  at  that  time  I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  th. 
UNDRESSED,  vine  — 
Separated  thing  or  person,  "VU  nazir. 

Lev.  25.   5  neither  gather  the  grapes  of  thy  vine  un. 
25. 11  nor  gather,  .in  it  of  thy  -vine  undressed 
UNEaUAL  — 
Not  to  be  weighed or  pondered,  |?ri  n?  lo  thakan,  2. 

Eze.  18.25,  29  house  of  Israel.,  are  not  your  ways  un.? 

UNFAITHFUL  man,  to  deal  unfaithfully  — 

7*o  deal  treacherously,  deceive,  133  bagad. 

Psa.  78.  57  But  turned  back,  and  dealt  unfaithfully 
Prov25. 19  Confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man  in  time 

UNFEIGNED  — 

Undisguised,  unfeigned,  avvirSfcpiros  anupokritos. 
2  Co..  6.    6  by  kindness,  by  the  holy  ghost,  by  love  un. 

1  Ti.   1.   5  (of)  a  good  conscience,  and  (of)  faith  unf. 

2  Ti.    1.    5  When  I  call  to  remembrance  the  unfeign. 
1  Pe.    1.  22  obeying,  .unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  bre. 

UNFRUITFUL  — 

Unfruitful,  without  fruit,  &Kapwos  akarpos. 

i\latti3.  22  choke  the  word,  and  he  becometh  unfru. 

Mark  4.  19  choke  the  word,  and  it  becometh  unfrui. 

1  Co.  14.  14  prayeth,  but  my  understanding  is  unfru. 
Eph.    5.  11  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful 
Titus  3.  14  good  works,  .that  they  be  not  unfruitful 

2  Pe.   1.   8  ye  shall)  neither  (be)  barren  nor  unfruit. 
UNGLRD,  to  — 

To  open  up,  nnp  pathach,  3. 

Gen.  24.  32  he  ungirded  his  camels,  and  gave  straw 
UNGODLINESS  — 
Irreverence,  impiety,  aaejUeia  asebeia. 

Rom.  1.  18  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteous. 
11.  26  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob 

2  Ti.   2.  16  for  they  will  increase  unto  more  ungodh". 

Titus  2. 12  Teaching  us,  that  denying  ungodliness 

UNGODLY  (men)  — 

1.  Belial,  worthless,  without  value,  fe^3  beliyyaal. 

2  Sa.  22.    5  the  floods  of  ungodly  men  made  me  afra. 
Psa.  18.    4  the  floods  of  ungodly  men  made  me  afra. 
Prov  16.  27  An  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  evil,  and  in 
19.  28  An  ungodly  witness  scorneth  judgment 

2.  Unkind,  not  pious,  Tpn  N?  lo  chasid. 

Psa.  43.    1  plead  my  cause  against  an  ungodly  nation 
3. Perverse,  b')li  avil. 

Job   16. 11  God  hath  delivered  me  to  the  ungodly 

4.  Wrong,  wicked,  yah  rasha. 

2  Ch.19.    2  Shouldest  thou  help  the  ungodly,  and  lo. 

Job   34.  18  (Is  it  fit)  to  say.  .to  princes,  (Ye  are)  un. 

Psa.     1.    1  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungod. 
1.    4  The  ungodly  (are)  not  so  :  but  (are)  like 
1.    5  the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  the  judg. 
1.    6  but  the  way  of  the  ungodly  shall  perish 
3.    7  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  of  the  ungod. 
73.  12  these  (are)  the  ungodly,  who  prosper  in 

5.  Irreverence,  impiety,  aat&eta  asebeia. 

Jude       15  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  ha. 
18  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lu. 

6.  Irreverent,  impious,  aaefi'fjs  asebes. 

Rom.  4.    5  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the  ung. 

5.    6  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly 
1  Ti.    1.   g  for  the  ungodly  and  for  sinners,  fur  unh. 

1  Pe.   4. 18  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner 

2  Pe.  2.   5  the  flood  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly 

3.   7  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men 

Jude         4  ungodlymen,  turningthegraceofourGod 

15  all  that  are  ungodly. .  which  [ungodly]  si. 


UNGODLY,  commit  or  live,  to  — 

To  be  or  act  irreverently,  hasfSiay  asebeo. 

2  Pe.   2.   6  eusampleunto  those  that,  .should  live  un. 

Jude      15  deeds  which  they  have  ungodly  commit. 
UNHOLY  — 
I. Pierced,  common,  Vin  cliol. 

Lev.  10.  10  between  holy  and  unholy,and  between  un. 

2.  Unholy,  unkind,  avoatos  anosios. 

1  Ti.    1.    9  for  unholy  and  profane,  for  murderers  of 

2  Ti.    3.    2  disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unh. 

Z.Common,  koiv6s  koinos. 

Heb.  10.  29  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  .unh. 
UNICORN  — 

A  reem,  buffalo,  wild  ox,  roaring  animal,  D*n  reem. 

Xuni23.  22  he  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  un. 

24.    8  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  unico. 

Deut  33.  17  and  his  horns  (are  like)  the  horns  of  uni. 

Job   39.    9  Will  the  unicorn  be  willing  to  serve  thee 

39.  10  Canst  thou  bind  the  unicorn  with  his  ba. 

Psa.  22.  21  heard  me  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorns 

29.    6  Lebanon  and  Sirion  like  a  young  unicorn 

92.  10  shalt  thou  exalt  like  (the  horn  of)  an  unic. 

Isa.  34.   7  the  unicorns  shall  come  down  with  them 

UNITE,  be  united,  to  — 

1.7*o  be  united,  "in;  yachad. 

Gen.  49.   6  unto  their  assembly,  .be  not  thou  united 

2. 7*o  unite,  "io;  yachad,  3. 

Psa.  86. 11  0  Lord,  .unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name 
UNITY,  (together  in)  — 
l.At  one,  together,  "iniyachad. 

Psa.133.    1  good,  .forbrethrentodwelltogetherinun. 

2.  Unity,  ev6rvs  henotes. 

Eph.   4.    3  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  sp. 
4.  13  Till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith 

UNJUST  (gain),  to  be  unjust  — 
1. Iniquity,  vanity,  fix  aven. 

Provn.   7  and  the  hope  of  unjust  (men)  perisheth 
2.Perverse,  *?$  avval. 

Zeph.  3.  5  not  do  iniquity,  .the  unjust  knoweth  no 
S.Perverseness,  perversity,  Siy,  7iyr  avel,  evel. 

Prov.29.  27  An  unjust  man  (is)  an  abomination  to  the 
i.Perverseness,  perversity,  rnij?  avlah. 

Psa.  43.  1  deliver  me  from  the  deceitful  and  unjust 
5.  Increase,  usury,  rT3~)Pt  tarbith. 

Prov.28.  8  He  thai;  by  usury  and  unjust  gain  increa. 
6. Injustice,  unrighteousness,  dSifcto  adikia, 

Lukei6.  8  the  Lord  commended  the  unjust  steward 
18.   6  the  Lord  saith,  Hear  what  the  unjust  ju. 

7.7*0  be  unjust,  unrighteous,  aStK^oi  adikeo. 

Rev.  22.  11  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still 
8.  Unjust,  unrighteous,  aoucos  adikos. 

Matt.  5.  45  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unj. 

Luke  16.  10  he  that  is  unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also 
18.  11  extortioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even 

Acts  24.  15  a  resurrection,  .of  the  just  and  unjust 

1  Co.;  6.    1  go  to  law  before  the  unjust,  and  notbef. 

1  Pe.  3. 18  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust 

2  Pe.  2.  9  to  reserve  the  unjust  unto  the  day  of  ju. 
UNJUSTLY,  (to  deal)  — 

1.7*0  do  perversely,  Siy  aval,  3. 

Isa.  26. 10  in  the  land  of  uprightness  will  he  deal  un. 
2.  Perverseness,  perversity,  Vijj,  ?t^  avel,  evel. 

Psa.  82.    2  How  long  will  ye  judge  unjustly,  and  ac. 
UNKNOWN  — 
l.Xot  to  know,  to  be  ignorant,  ayvo4<a  agnoeo. 

2  Co.   6.    9  As  unknown,  and.  .yet  known;  as  dying 

Gal.  1.  22  was  unknown  by  face  unto  the  churches 
2.  Unknown,  &yvwaros  agndstos. 

Acts  17.  23  with  this  inscription,  To  the  unknown  G. 
UNLADE,  to  — 
7*o  put  away  a  load  or  burden,  atr  o<popri^o^ai. 

Acts  21.  3  there  the  ship  was  to  unlade  her  burden 
UNLAWFUL  (thing): — 

1.  Unlawful,  not  appointed,  &B4(j.nos  athemitos. 
Acts  10.  28  Ye  know  how  that  it  is  an  unlawful  thing 

2.  Lawless,  unlawful,  &vop.os  anomos. 

2  Pe.   2.    8  vexed. .from  day  to  day  with. . unlawful  d. 
UNLEARNED,  (to  be)  — 
1.  Untaught,  illiterate,  ay pd/ifiar os  agrammatos. 

Acts  4. 13  perceived  that  they  were  unlearned  and 
I.Untaught,  unlearned,  &fia&7}s  amathes. 

2  Pe.  3. 16  which  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unst. 

3.  Uninstructed,U7ieducated,  &TraiBevTosapaidcutos. 

2  Ti.    2.  23  foolish  and  unlearned  questions  avoid 

4.  A  private  person ,  idiwrns  idiotes. 

1  Co.  14.  i6shallhethat  occupieth  the  room  of  theun. 
14.  23  there  come  in . .  unlearned,  or  unbelievers 
14.  24  one  that  believeth  not,  or.  .unlearned,  he 

UNLEAVENED  (bread,  cakes)  — 

1,  Unleavened  cake,  food,  trsa  matstsah. 

Gen.  19.  3  did  bake  unleavened  bread,  and  they  did 
Exodi2.  8  roast  with  fire  and  unleavened  bread;  (and) 


Exodi2.  15  Seven  days  shall  ye  eat  unleavened  bread 
12.  17  ye  shall  observe  (the  feast  of)  unleavened 
12. 18  ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread,  until  the 

12. 20  in . .  habitations  shall  ye  eat  unleavened 

12.  39  they  baked  unleavened  cakes  of  the  dou  rh 

13.  6Seven  days  thou  shalteat  unleavened  bread 

13.  7  Unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten  seven 
23.  15  unleavened  bread,  .eat  unleavened  bread 
29.   2  unleavened  bread,  and  cakes  unleavened 

29.  23  the  basket  of  the  unleavened  bread  that 

34.  18  unleavened  bread,  .eat  unleavened  bread 
Lev.    2.   4  unleavened  cakes . .  or  unleavened  wafers 

2.   5  it  shall  be  (of)  fine  flour  unleavened,  min. 

6.  16  with  unleavened  bread  shall  it  be  eaten 

7.  12  unleavened  cakes. .and  unleavened  wafers 

8.  2  rams,  and  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
8.  26  unleavened  bread,  .one  unleavened  cake 

23.   6  unleavened  bread . .  must  eat  unleavened 
Nuni  6. 15  unleavened  bread . .  wafers  of  unleavened 
6. 17  offer,  .with  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
6. 19  one  unleavened  cake . .  one  unleavened  wa. 
g.  11  eat  it  with  unleavened  bread  and  bitter 
28.  17  seven  days  shall  unleavened  bread  be  eat. 
Deut  16.    3  seven  days  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened  br. 
16.    8  Six  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread 
16.  16  in  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  and  in 
Josh.  5. 11  unleavened  cakes,  and  parched  (corn)  in 
Judg.  6. 19  and  unleavened  cakesof  an  ephahof  flour 
20,  21,  21.  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes 

1  Sa.  28.  24  and  did  bake  unleavened  bread  thereof 

2  Ki.23.    9  they  did  eat  of  the  unleavened  bread  am. 

1  Ch.23.  2qforthe  unleavened  cakes,  and  for  (that  wh. 

2  Ch.  8.  13  in  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  and  in 

30.  13  to  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  in 

30. 21  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 

35.  17  and  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 
Ezra  6.  22  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven 
Eze.  45.  21  seven  days ;  unleavened  bread  shall  be 

2.  Unleavened  cake  or  food,  &£v/j.os  azumos. 

Matt26.  17  the  first  (day)  of  the  (feast  of)  unleavened 
Marki4-   1  the  passover,  and  of  unleavened  bread 

14.  12  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread,  when 
Luke22.    1  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  drew  nigh 

2.    7  Then  came  the  day  of  unleavened  bread 


Acts  i 

20. 

1  Co.  5. 

5- 

UNLESS  - 

1.  Unless, 


3  Then  were  the  days  of  unleavened  bread 

6  after  the  days  of  unleavened  bread,  and 

7  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  unleav. 

8  with  the  unleavened  (bread)  of  sincerity 


hi<,  *^!N  ulai. 
Nuni22.  33  unless  she  had  turned  from  me,  surely  now 

2.But  rather,  except,  DX  '3  hi  im. 

Lev.  22.    6  not  eat . .  unless  he  wash  his  flesh  with  wa. 

3.  Unless,  if  not,  ah^h,  fyi  lule. 

2  Sa.    2.  27  unless  thou  hadst  spoken,  surely  then  in 

Psa.  27.  13  unless  I  had  believed  to  see  thegoodness 

94. 17  Unless  the  Lokd  (had  been)  my  help,  my 

4.  Unless,  ekto's  et  /xtj  ektos  ei  me. 

1  Co.  15.    2  are  saved . .  unless  ye  have  believed  in  va. 
UNLOOSE,  to  — 
7*o  loose,  Kvw  luo. 

Mark  1.    7  I  am  not  worthy  to  stoop  down  and  unl. 

Luke  3.  16  of  whose  shoesl  amnotworthy  to  unloose 

John   1.  27  shoe's  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to  unloose 

UNMARRIED  — 

Umvedded,  not  wedded,  &yay.os  agamos. 

1  Co.   7.    8  I  say  therefore  to  the  unmarried  and  wi. 
7. 11  if  she  depart,  let  her  remain  unmarried 
7.  32  He  that  is  unmarried  careth  for  the  thi. 
7.  34  The  unmarried  woman  careth  for  the  th. 

UNMERCIFUL  — 

Unmerciful,  without  kindness,  aveAe-qfiav  analee. 
E,om.  1.  31  withoutnatural  affection, implacable,  un. 

UNMINDFUL  — 

7*o  leave,  forget,  n$  shayah. 

Deut  32.  18  Of  the  Rock,  .thou  art  unmindful,  and  h. 
UNMOVEAELE  — 

1.  Unmoved,  immoveable,  dfieTaKivnTos  ametakine. 
1  Co.  15.  58  be  ye  stedfast,  immoveable,  always  abo. 

2.  Unshaken,  immoveable,  daaXevros  asaleutos. 
Acts  27.  41  the  forepart  stuck  fast,  and  remained  un. 

UN'-NI,  '3J?  answering  is  with  Jah. 

1.  A  Levite  over  the  choral  services  in  the  tabernacle  in 
the  days  of  David.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  18  Shemiramoth,  and  Jehiel,  andU.,  Eliab 

15.  20  Shemiramoth,  and  Jehiel,  and  U.,  and  E. 

2.  A  Levite  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Neh.  12.   9  Also  Bakbukiah  and  U.,  their  brethren 
UNOCCUPIED,  to  be  — 
To  cease,  leave  off,  forbear,  ?nn  chadal. 

Judg.  5.    6  in  thedays  of  Jael,  the  highways  were  un. 
UNPREPARED  — 
Unprepared,  dirapao-KevaffTos  aparaskeuastos. 

2  Co.  9.    4  come  with  me,  and  find  you  unprepared 
UNPROFITABLE,  (to  be,  become)  — 

1. To  prof  t,  be  useful,  |3D  sakan. 

Job    15.    3  Should  he  reason  with  unprofitable  talk? 
2.  Unprofitable,  hurtful,  dKvrtreX'fjs  alusiteles. 

Heb.  13.  17  joy,  and  not  with  grief ;  for  that  (is)  un. 


UNPROFITABLENESS 


1016 


UPON 


3.  Unprofitable,  dww<pe\r}s  anopheles. 

Titus  3.   9  questions,  .for  ttiey  are  unprofitable  and 

4.  Useless,  worthless,  dxpe-JS  achreios. 

Matt  25.  30  cast  ye  the  unprofitable  servant  into  ou. 
Luke  17. 10  We  are  unprofitable  servants:  we  have 

5.  Tobecomcuseless,worthless,  axpstoofiatachreioom. 

Rom.  3. 12  they  are  together  become  unprofitable 

6.  Useless,  worthless,  &xP7}(Tros  oichrestos. 

Phm.      11  Which  in  time  past  was  to  thee  unprofit. 

UNPROFITABLENESS  — 

Unprofitable,  useless,  hurtful,  ava><pe\7}s  anopheles. 
Heb.   7.  18  for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  th. 
UNPUNISHED,  to  be  or  leave  — 
\.To  he  or  become  innocent,  free,  n[jj  naqah,  2. 
Prov.n.  21  the  wicked  shall  not  lie  unpunished:  but 
16.   5  (join)  in  hand,  he  shall  not  be  unpunished 
17-   5  glad  at  calamities  sharl  not  be  unpunished 
19.    5,  9  A  false  witness  shall  not  be  unpunished 
Jer.   25.  29  utterly  unpunished?   Ye  shall  not  be  un. 
49. 12  go  unpunished?  thoushaltnotgounpunis. 

2.  To  make  or  declare  innocent,  free,  njj}  naqah,  3. 

Jer.  30. 11  will  not  leave  thee  altogether  unpunished 

46. 28  yet  will  I  not  leave  thee  wholly  unpunis. 

UNaiTENCHABLE— 

Unquenchable,  unquenched,  6:o"j8eo-Tos  asbestos. 
Matt.  3.  12  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenc. 
Luke  3.  17  the  chaff  he  will  burn  with  fire  unquenc. 

UNREASONABLE  — 

1.  Irrational,  unreasonable,  &\oyos  alogos. 

Acts  25.  27  it  seemeth  to  me  unreasonable  to  send  a 

2.  Unsuitable,  improper,  &tottos  atopos. 

2  Th.  3.    2  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  unreason. 
UNREBUKEABLE  — 
Irreprehensible,  not  to  be  caught,  aifeirlKnTrros. 

1  11.  6.  14  unrebukeable,  until  the  appearing  of  our 
UNREPROVEABLE  — 

yot  to  be  called  in,  ■unchallengeable,  h.v4yK\nros. 

Col.  1.  22  holy  andunblameable  and  unreproveable 
"UNRIGHTEOUS,  unrighteously,  unrighteousness  — 

1.  Iniquity,  vanity,  jis  oven. 

Isa.   jo.    1  Woe  unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous. 
55.   7  Let  the  wicked . .  and  the  unrighteous  man 

2.  Violence,  D£n  chamas. 

Exod23.   1  put  not  thine  hand . .  to  be  an  unrighteous 

3.  To  do  perversely,  ty  aval,  3. 

Psa.  71.  4  Deliver  me.  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  unri. 
A. Perverse,  *?jy  avval. 

Job  27.  7  he  that  riseth  up  against  me  as  the  unri. 
5.Perverseness,  perversity,  *?y?,  Siy  avel,  evel. 

Lev.  19.  15,35  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  jud. 

Deut.25.  16  all  that  do  unrighteously,  (are)  an  abom. 

6.  Perverseness,  perversity,  n?iy,  n?iy  olah,  avlah. 

Psa.  92. 15  Lord  .  .(there  is)  no  unrighteousness  in  h. 

7.  Not  justice,  not  righteousness,  pis  vb  to  tsedeq. 

Jer. ;  22.  13  Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth.  .by  unrigh. 

8.  Injustice,  unrighteousness,  abuda  adikia. 

Lukei6.  9  Make,  .friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrigh, 
John  7.  18  the  same  is  true,  and  no  unrighteousness 
Rom.  1.  18  unrighteousness,  .the  truth  inunrighteo. 

1.  29  Being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  for. 

2.  8  obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and 

3.  5  if  our  unrighteousness  commend  the  rig. 
6.  13  your  members  (as)  instruments  of  unrigh. 
9.  14  (Is  there)  unrighteousness  with  God?  God 

2  Th.  2.  10  with  all  deceivableness  of  unrighteouane. 

2.  12  believednot.  .buthad  pleasure  in  unright. 
Heb.  8. 12  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  unrighteousn. 
2  Pe.  2.  13  shall  receive  the  reward  of  unrighteous. 

2. 15  who  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness 
1  Jo.  1.    9  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousn. 

5.  17  All  unrighteousness  is  sin;  and  there  is  a 

9.  Unjust,  unrighteous,  h8iK6s  adikos. 

Luke  1 6.  11  If.  .ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  unri. 
Rom.  3.    5  (Is)  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  venge.? 

1  Co.  6.   9  Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall 
Heb.  6. 10  God  (is)  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  w. 

10.  Lawlessness,  avofxia  anomia. 

2  Co.  6.  14  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  unri. 
UNRIPE  grape  — 

Unripe  fruit,  "JD3  beser. 

Job  15.  33  He  shall  shake  off  his  unripe  grape  as  the 
UNRULY  — 
1.  Unrestrained,  a.Karda'xcTos  akalaschetos. 

Jas.    3.   8  the  tongue,  .an  [unruly]  evil,  full  of  dea. 
%Notin  array,  not  obedient,  auwuraKTos  anupot, 

Titus  1.   6  faithful  children,  not  accused  of  riot,  or  u. 
1. 10  there  are  many  unruly  and  vain  talkers 
3. Not  in  array,  disarranged,  6.raKros  ataktos. 

1  Th    5.  14  warn  them  that  are  unruly,  comfort  the 
UNSATIABLE  — 

Without  satiety,  TQ$p  7^3  bilti  sobah. 

Eze.  16.  28  played  the  whore.,  because  thou  wastun. 
UNSAVOURY,  (to  shew  self)  — 
1.  To  show  self  a  wrestler,  "?n^  pathal,  7. 

2  Sa.  22.  27  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself  unsa. 


2. Insipid,  untempered,  ??fi  taphel. 

Job    6.   6  Can  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  wi. 
UNSEARCHABLE  — 
1.  There  is  no  searching,  ign  j*N  en  clieqer. 

Job.    5.    9  Which  doeth  great  things  and  unsearch. 

Psa.  145.   3  Great  (is)  the  Lord  . .  his  greatness  (is)  un. 

Prov25.   3  earth. .andtheheartofkings(is)unsearc. 

2.Not  searched  out,  ave^epevvriTos  ancxereunetos. 
Rom.  1 1.  33  how  unsearchable  (are)bisjudgnients,and 

Z.Xot  traced  out,  dj/e£<xt'1'ao"roy  o.ne-vichniastos. 
Eph.    3.    8  preach,  .the  unsearchable  riches  of  Chr. 

UNSEEMLY,  (that  which  is),  to  behave  self  — 
Unseemliness,  iLaxv^oavvn  aschemosune. 

Rom.  1.  27  men  with  men  working  that  which  is  uu. 
UNSHOD,  being  — 
Barefoot,  unshod,  *]n;  yacheph. 

Jer.     2.  25  Withhold  thy  foot  from  beingunshod.and 

UNSKILFUL  — 

Inexperienced,  unskilfid,  &,7C€ipos  apeiros. 

Heb.   5. 13  every  one  that  useth  milk  (is)  unskilful 
UNSPEAKABLE  — 
l.Not  led  out,  inexpressible,  aveKBi-hynros  anekdi. 

2  Co.   9.  15  Thanks  (be)  unto  God  for  his  unspeakab. 
%Not  told  out,unspeakol>le,  avenXaX-QT os  antkl alt. 

1  Pe.    1.    8  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
S.yot  uttered,  unutterable,  &ppnros  arrhetos. 

2  Co.  12.    4  heard  unspeakable  words,  which  itis  not 

UNSPOTTED  — 

Unspotted,  &o-m\os  asjrilos. 

Jas.     1.  27  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world 

UNSTABLE  — 

1.  Instability,  uncertainty,  ln5  pachaz. 

Gen.  49.    4  Unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel 

2.  Unstable,  unsettled,  dKardaTaros  akatastatos. 

Jas.     1.    8  A  double  minded  man  (is)  unstable  in 

3.  Unconfirmed,  unsteady,  aoT^ptKros  asteriktos. 

2  Pe.   2. 14  eyes  full  of  adultery,  .beguiling  unstable 
3. 16  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  we. 

UNSTOPPED,  to  be  — 

To  be  opened,  nrj3 pathach,  2. 

Isa.  35.    5  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstop. 
UNTAKEN  away  — 
yot  uncovered,  fx-fj  avaKa\wrrT6/x€vov  me  anakaluptO. 

2  Co.    3.  14  remaineth  the  same  veil  untaken  away 
UNTEMPERED  — 
Insipid,  untempered,  "?2n  taphel. 

Eze.  13.  10  and,  lo,  others  daubed  it  with  untemper. 
13. 11  Say  unto  them  which  daub  (it)  with  untem. 
13.  14  the  wall  that  ye  have  daubed  with  unte. 
13-  15  upon  them  that  have  daubed  it  with  unt. 
22. 28  her  prophets  have  daubed  them  with  un. 

UNTHANKFUL  — 

Ungrateful,  unthankful,  axapurros  acharistos. 
Luke  6.  35  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and.  .the 
2  Ti.    3.    2  disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unh. 

UNTIL— See  TELL. 

UNTIMELY  birth,  figs  — 

1.  A  fallen  thing,  untimely  birth,  *?3i,  *?zs  nephel. 
Job     3. 16  Or  as  an  hidden  untimely  birth  I  had 
Psa.  58.    8  (like)  the  untimely  birth  of  awoman,  (th.) 
Eccl.  6.    3  (that)  an  untimely  birth  (is)  better  than  he 

%An  untimely  jig,  u\vv8os  olunthos. 

Rev.    6.  13  as  a  figtree  casteth  her  untimely  figs,  wh. 
UNTO  —See  TO. 
UNTOWARD  — 
Crooked,  perverse,  untoward,  o-ko\l6s  skolios. 

Acts    2.  40  Save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  gene. 
UN  WALLED  (town,  village)  — 

1.  Open  villages,  runs  perazoth. 

Esth.  9.  19  the  Jews,  .that  dwelt  in  the  un  walled  to. 
Eze.  38.  11I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  unwalled  vill. 

2.  Inhabitant  of  an  open  village,  'n?  perazi. 

Deut.  3.    5  besides  unwalled  towns  a  great  many 

UNW  ASHEN  — 

Unwaslied,  &vnrros  aniptos. 

Mattis.  20  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not 

Mark  7.    2  with  defiled  that  is  to  say,  with  unwashen 

7.   5  walk  not.  .but  eat  bread  with  [unwashen] 

UNWISE  — 

l.Not  wise,  unwise,  crfl  a*?  lo  chakam. 

Deut. 32.   6  O  foolish  people  and  unwise?  (is)  not  he 
Hos.  13. 13  he  (is)  an  unwise  son;  for  he  should  not 

2.  Thoughtless,  inconsiderate,  avonros  anoetos. 

Rom.  1.  14  I  am  debtor,  .to  the  wise  and  to  theunw. 

3.  Without  a  mind  or  common  sense ,  tuppwvojihrdn, 
Eph.   5.  17  be  ye  not  unwise,  but  understanding  what 

UNWITTINGLY  — 

1.  Without  knowledge,  nyi  '73  beli  daath. 

Josh. 20.    3  that  killeth.  .person  unawares  (and)  un. 
20.    5  because  he  smote  his  neighbour  unwitti. 


2.  Error,  nix?  sliegagah. 

Lev.  22. 14  if  a  man  eat  (of)  the  holy  thing  unwittin. 
UNWORTHILY,  unworthy  — 
l.Unworthy,  dW|ios  anaxios. 

1  Co.  6.    2  unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  matters? 

2.  Unworthily,  &va£iws  anaxios. 

1  Co.  11.  27  and  drink  (this)  cup  of  the  Lord  .unworthily 
11.  29  For  he  that  eatethand  drinketh  [unwort.] 

Z.yot  worthy,  ovk  &£tos  ouk  cxios. 

Acts  13.  46  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting 
UP,  up  to  — 
I.Up,  over,  after,  "ij,'2  bead. 

1  Sa.   1.  6  because  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her  womb 
%  Above,  upward,  onward,  rnyo?  lemalah. 

Psa.  74.   5  was  famous  according  as  he  had  lifted  up 

3.  Upward,  above,  avus  and. 

Johnn.  41  Jesus  lifted  up  (his)eyes,  and  said,  Father 
Heb.  12.  15  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  tr. 

4.  Up  to,  unto,  until,  e«s  heds. 

John  2.  7  And  they  filled  them  up  to  the  brim 
[See  also  Arise,  arms,  ascend,  banners,  bear,  beforehand, 
bind,  borne,  bound,  break,  breaking, .  bring,  bringer, 
broken,  brought,  build,  burn,  burned,  carry,  cast, 
casting,  caught,  cheer,  climb,  close,  closed,  come,  cut, 
deliver,  devour,  draw,  dried,  drink,  driven,  dry,  early, 
eat,  ensign,  fence,  fetch,  fill,  fold,  from,  gather, 
gathered,  gaze,  get,  gird,  give,  given,  giving,  go,  going, 
grow,  grown,  hang,  heap,  heaved,  hedge,  help,  hold, 
laid,  lay,  lead,  leap,  lick,  lift,  lift  self,  lifted,  lifter, 
lifting,  look,  made,  make,  mound,  mounting,  nourisb, 
offer,  order,  pluck,  plucked,  pulled,  put,  raise,  raised, 
reach,  rear,  reared,  receive,  rip,  rise,  risen,  rising,  root, 
rooted,  rouse,  set,  sew,  shoot,  shut,  sit,  snuff,  sought, 
spring,  springeth,  stand,  stayed,  stir,  store,  suck,  sup, 
swallow,  swallowed,  take,  taken,  train,  turned,  vomit, " 
wake,  walled,  wrap,  wrapped,  yield.] 

UP,  to  be  — 

l.To  rise,  burst  forth,  rnj  zarach. 

Judg.g.  33  in  the  morning,  as  soon  as  the  sun  is  up 

2.  To  rise  up,  stand  still,  Dip  gum. 

Gen.  19.  14  Up,  get  you  out  of  this  place;  for  the  Lo. 
44.  4  Up,  follow  after  the  men;  and  when  thou 
Exod32.  1  Up,  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before 
Josh.  7.  13  Dp,  sanctify  the  people,  and  say,  Sanctify 
Judg  4.  14  Up;  for  this  (is)  the  day  in  which  the  Lo. 

8.  20  Up,  (and)  slay  them:  but  the  youth  drew 

9.  32  Now  therefore  up  by  night,  tnou  and  the 
19.  28  he  said  unto  her,  Up,  and  let  us  be  going 

1  Sa.    9.  26  saying,  Up,  that  I  may  send  thee  away 

2  Sa.  24.  11  For  when  David  was  up  in  the  morning 

3.  To  rise  up,  avareWu  anatello. 

Matt  1 3.    6  when  the  sun  was  up,  they  were  scorched 
Mark  4.    6  when  the  sun  was  up,  it  was  scorched,  and 
UPBRAID,  to  — 

1.  To  reproach,  expose,  F\in  charaph,  3. 

Judg.  S.  15  Zalniunna,  with  whom  ye  did  upbraid 
2. To  upbraid,  reproach,  revile,  dveih'ifa  oneidizo. 
Matt  1 1 .  20  Then  began  he  to  upbraid  the  cities  whe. 
Markio".  14  [upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief  and] 
Jas.     1.    5  God,  that  giveth  to  all.  .liberally,  and  up. 

U-PHAR'-SLN,  j'p-)Si  and  divided. 

Dan.    5.  25  this  (is}  the  writing,.  Mene,  Mene,Tekel,U. 
U'-PHAZ,  I3W. 
A  place  in  S.  Arabia ;  or  a  corruption  of  Ophir. 

Jer.   10.    9  Silver . .  is  brought . .  and  gold  from  U. 

Dan.  10.    5  whose  loins,  .girded  with  fine  gold  of  U. 

UPHOLD,  be  upholden,  to  — 

l.To  sustain,  support,  lean,  tj^d  samak. 

Psa.  37.  17  but  the  Lord  upholdeth  the  righteous 
37.  24  for  the  Lord  upholdeth  .his  hand 
51.  12  Restore. .and  uphold  me  (with  thy)  free  S. 
54.   4  the  Lord  (is)  with  them  that  uphold  my 
119.  116  Uphold ineaccording unto  thy  word,  that 
145.  14  The  Lord  upholdeth  all  that  fall,  and 
Isa.    63.    5  I  wondered  that(there  was)  none  to  uph. 

63.    5  therefore  mine  own  arm . .  it  upheld  me 
Eze.  30.    6  TheyalsothatupholdEgyptshallfall.and 

2.  To  support,  refresh,  "lyp  saad. 

Prov2o.  28  the  king,  .his  throne  is  upholden  by  mercy 

3.  To  inse  up,  sta7id  still,  Dip  qmn. 

Job     4.   4  Thy  words  have  upholden  him  that  wasfa. 

4.7V>  hold  up,  retain,  "CJ?  tamak. 

Psa.  41.  12  as  forme,  thou  upholdest  me  in  mine  int. 

63.    8  My  soul,  .thy  right  hand  upholdeth  me 
Ptovsq.  23  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit 
Isa.   41.  10 1  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of 

42.    1  Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold,  mine 

5.7*0  bear,  carry,  <p4pw  phero. 

Heb.   1.    3  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
UPON  — 
1.  Unto,  Vn  el. 

Gen.  22. 12  Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither 

^.Behind,  after,  nfi3  bead. 

Judg.  3.  22  the  fat  closed  upon  the  blade,  so  that  he 

2  Ki.  4.    4  shut  the  door  upon  thee  and  upon  thy  son 

4.   5  shut  the  door  upon  her  and  upon  her  sons 

3.  To,  ioS  lemo. 

Job  40.    4  Behold.  .1  will  lay  my  hand  upon  my  mo. 


UPPER 


1017 


UPWARD 


4.  From,  \Q>  min. 

Ezra  7.  26  let  judgment  be  executed  speedily  upon 

5.  Above,  Sy§9  mvmmaal. 

Gen.  22.  g  and  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the  wood 
Jer.  43.  10  will  set  his  throne  upon  these  stones  that 
Dam  12.    6,  7  which  (was)  upon  the  waters  of  the  ri. 

6.0n,  upon,  above,  over,  ?]l  al. 

Gen.    1.   2  darkness  (was)  upon  the  face  of  the  deep 

1.  2  spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 

7-  From  on,  from  above,  ?yp  meal. 

Gen.  40. 17  birds  did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket  upon 

Ezra    5.    5  the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  elders 

7.  17  offer  them  upon  the  altar  of  the  house  of 

7. 24  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll,  .upon  them 

Dan.  2.  10  There  is  not  a  man  upon  the  earth  that  can 

2.  28  the  visions  of  thy  head  upon  thy  bed,  are 
2. 29  thy  thoughts  came  (into  thy  mind)  upon 
2.  34  stone.,  which  smote  the  image  upon  his  fe. 
2.  46  Nebuchadnezzar  fell  upon  his  face,  and  wo. 
4.  5  the  thoughts  upon  my  bed  and  the  visions 
4. 13  I  saw  in  the  visions  of  my  head  upon  my 
4.  24  which  is  come  upon  my  lord  the  king 

4.  28  All  this  came  upon  the  king  Nebuchadn. 

4.  33  The  same  hour  was  the  thing  fulfilled  upon 

5.  5  upon  the  plaster  of  the  wall  of  the  king's 

6.  17  a  stone  was  brought,  and  laid  upon  the 

7.  1  a  dream  and  visions  of  his  head  upon  his 
7.  4  made  stand  upon  the  feet  as  a  man,  and 
7.    6  which  had  upon  the  back  of  it  four  wings 

8.  With,  "iQJJ  immad. 

Job  10.*  1 7  and  increasest  thine  indignation  upon  me 

9.  On  the  face  of,  *i?"^H  al  pene. 

Lev.  i6\  14  sprinkle  (it)  with  his  finger  upon  the  me. 

10.  From,  aird  apo. 

Acts  n.  19  scattered  abroad  upon  the  persecution  th 

ll,7w  regard  to,  with  a  view  to,  toward,  at,  eh  eis. 

Matt26.  10  she  hath  wrought  a  good  work  upon  me 
27.  30  they  spituponhim,  and  tookthe  reed,  and 

Mark  1 3.    3  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount  of  Olives,  over 

Luke  8. 43  which  had  spent  all  her  living  [upon]  ph. 
iS.  i3!smote  [upon]  his  breast,  saying,  God  heme. 

Acts  3.  4  Peter,  fastening  his  eyes  upon  him  with 
11.  6  Upon  the  which  when  I  had  fastened  mine 
22.  13  And  the  samehour  I  looked  up  upon  him 
27.  26  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain  island 

27.  29  fearing  lest  we  should  have  fallen  [upon] 
Rom.  5. 12  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all 

5.  18  (judgment  came)  upon  all  men  to  conde. 
5. 18  (the  free  sift  came)  upon  all  men  unto  ju. 
13.    6  attending  continually  upon  this  very  th. 

1  Co.'io.  11  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  co. 

15.  10  his  grace  which  (was  bestowed)  upon  me 

2  Co.   1.  11  that  for  the  gift  (bestowed)  upon  us  by 
Gal.     4.  11  lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you  labour  in 
Rev.    8.    7  they  were  cast  upon  the  earth:  and  the 

9.  3  there  came  out  of  the  smoke  locusts  upon 

i5.  1  pour,  .the  vials  of  the  wrath  of  God  upon 

16.  2  grievous  sore  [upon]  the  men  which  had 
16.  3  the  second  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon 
16.  4  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  rivers  and 

12.  In,  during,  among,  iv  en. 

Matt  12.  2  that  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  upon  the 
Luke2i.  23  distress  in  the  land,  and  wrath  [upon]  this 
Acts  20.  7  upon  the  first,  .of  the  week,  when  the  di. 
Jas.     4.   3  Ye  ask.  .that  ye  may  consume  (it)  upon 

15.  Above,  upon,  over,  iirdvaj  epcmo. 

Iiatt23. 18  whosoever  sweareth  by  the  gift,  .upon  it 

28.  2  and  rolled  back  the  stone,  .and  sat  upon 
Rev.  20.    3  shut  him  up,  and  set  a  seal  upon  him,  that 

11. On,  upon,  eirl  (gen.)  epi. 

Matt.  6.  19  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon 
See  also  10.  27;  23.  9,  35;  24.  3;  25.  31;  Mark  6.  48,  49;  7. 
30;  Luke  5.  24;  12.  3;  17,  31;  21.  25;  Jo.  19.  31;  Acts  12. 
21  ;  Rom.  9.  28  ;  Col.  3.  5;  Heb.  6.  7;  Rev.  3.  10,  10; 
5-  7i  J3  \  7-  lo>  IO-  jj  5'  5»  8*  8 ;   n.  10 ;  12.  1  ;  13.  18  ; 

16.  18  ;  17.  1 ;  iS.  2j  ;  19.  21 ;  21.  5. 
15.  On,  upon,  over,  kiri  (dat.)  epi. 

Matt  16.  18  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church 
See  also  Mark  6.  39  ;  11.  7 ;  13.  2  ;  Luke  19.  44 ;  21.  6  ; 
John  4.  27  ;  11.  38 ;  Acts  8.  16;  Eph.  2.  20;  4.  26  ;  Phil. 
:.  3  ;  2.  17,  27  ;  Heb.  8.  6  ;  Rev.  19.  14. 

lQ.On,  upon,  over,  up  to,  iiri  (ace.)  epi. 

Matt.  3.  16  descending  like  adove,  andlightingupon 
See  also  7.  24,  25,  26;  9.  18;  10.  13;  n.  29;  12.  18;  13. 
5;  ig.  28;  21.  5;  23.  35,  36;  24.  2;  27.  29,  [35];  Mark  r. 
[10];  S.  25;  10.  16;  15.  24;  Luke  1.  12,  35;  2.  25,  40;  3. 
22;  4.  18;  5.  19,  36;  6.  48,  [49];  8.  6;  9.  38;  10.  6;  n. 
20;  13.  4;  19.  35 ;  19.  43;  20.  18;,  21.  34;  24.  49;  John  1. 
32.  33i  5*:  9-  I55  18.  4;  Acts  1.  8,  26;  2.  3,  17;  4.  33;  5. 

11.  11,  28;  7.  57;  8.  24;  10.  9;  13.  11,  [40];  15.  10,  17;  18. 
6;  21.  35;  26.  16;  Rom.  2.  9;  3.  [22];  4.  9,  9;  15.  20; 
1  Co.  3.  12;  2  Co.  1.  23;  3.  15;  12.  9;  Gal.  6.  16;  Eph.  5. 
6;  1  Th.  2.  16;  Heb.  11.  21;  Jas.  2.  21;  1  Pe.  4.  14;  5. 
7  ;  Rev.  1.  17 ;  2.  24 ;  3.  3,  12 ;  4.  4  ;  8.  3,  10,  10  ;  10.  2  ; 
11.  11, 11,  16  ;  12. 3  ;  13.  1,  1  ;  14.  14  ;  16.  [2],  8, 10,  12,  21 ; 
17-  3.  5.  [16];  19.  11 ;  20.  4,  4. 

~l7J><>i(m  from,  against,  toward,  Kara  (gen.)  hata. 

Jude  15  To  execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  co. 
18. Down  to,  over  against,  Kara  (ace.)  hata. 

1  Co.  16.  2  Upon  the  first,  .of  the  week  let  everyone 
19.  With,  fierd  (gen.)  meta. 

Luke  1.  58  how  the  Lord  had  showed,  .mercy  upon 

1*8 


[See  also  Attend,  beat,  bestow,  blow,  bring,  burn,  burn 
incense,  build,  call,  cast,  clothed,  come,  compassion, 
fall,  get  hold,  grew,  hold,  lay,  light,  look,  mercy,  pity, 
press,  put,  rained,  rest,  run,  seize,  sit,  spread,  spit, 
stamp,  take,  think,  tread,  wait,  waiting.] 

UPPER,  (room  or  chamber),  uppermost  — 

1.  Upper,  ty  illi. 

Josh  15.  19  hegavehertheupper'springs,  and  the  ne. 
Judg.  1.  15  gave  her  the  upper  springs  and  the  nether 

2.  Upper,  up2^ermost,  highest,  ji'Vy  elyon. 

Gen.  40.  17  in  the  uppermost  basket,  .of  all  manner 
Josh  16.    s  Ataroth-adar,  unto  Beth-horon  the  upper 
2  Ki.  18. 17  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool 

1  Ch.  7.  24  Beth-horon  the  nether,  and  the  upper,  and 

2  Ch.  8.    5  he  built  Beth-horon  the  upper,  and  Beth. 

32.  30  Hezekiah  also  stopped  the  upper  water 
Isa.     7.    3  at  the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  upper  po. 

36.  2  stood  by  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool 
Eze.  42.    5  the  upper  chambers  (were)  shorter,  for 

3.  Upper  chamber,  above  the  ground,  avwyeov  anog. 

Marki4.  15  he  shall  show  you  a  large  upper  room  fu. 
Luke  22.  12  he  shall  show  you  a  large  upper  room  fu. 

•I. Above,  higher,  avwrepiKos  anoterikos. 

Acts  19.    1  Paul  having  passed  through  the  upper  co. 

5. An  upper  chamber,  i/Trepcpov  hvperoon. 

Acts  1.  13  they  went  up  into  an  upper  room,  where 
9.  37  had  washed, they  laid. .in  an  upper  chain. 
9.  39  they  brought  him  into  the  upper  chamber 

20.  8  there  were  many  lights  in  the  upper  cha. 
[See  also  Chamber,  doorpost,  lintel,  lip,  millstone,  room, 
seat.] 

UPRIGHT  (most),  uprightly,  uprightness  — 

1.  Upright,  i^;  yashar. 

1  Sa.  29.    6  the  LORD  liveth,  thou  hast  been  upright 

2  Ch.29.  34  the  Levites  (were)  more  upright  in  heart 
Job     1.    1  that  man  was  perfect  and  upright,  and  one 

1.  8  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that 

2.  3  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that 
S.    6  If  thou  (wert)  pure  and  upright,  surely 

17.  8  Upright(men)shallbeastoniedatthis,and 
Psa.  7.  10  defence  (is)  of  God,  which  saveth  the  up. 
1 1.  2  they  may  privily  shoot  at  the  upright  in 
11.  7  his  countenance  doth  behold  the  upright 
25.    8  Good  and  upright  (is)  the  LORD :  therefore 

32.  11  shout  for  joy,  all  (ye  that  are)  upright  in 

33.  1  Rejoice.,  praise  is  comely  for  the  upright 

36. 10  thy  righteousness  to  the  upright  in  heart 

37.  14  to  slay  such  as  be  of  upright  conversation 
37.  37  Mark  the  perfect  (man),  and  behold  the  u. 

49. 14  the  upright  shall  have  dominion  over  th. 
64.  10  and  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  glory 
92.  15  To  show  that  the  Lord  (is)  upright,  (lie 
94.  15  and  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  follow 

97. 11  Light  (is)  sown,  .and  gladness  for  the  up. 
in.  1  in  the  assembly  of  the  upright,  and  (in) 
in.  8  (and  are)  done  in  truth  and  uprightness 
112.  2  the  generation  of  the  upright  shall  bebl. 
112.  4  Unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the 
119.  137  Righteous  (art)  thou,  0  Lord,  and  upri. 
125.  4  to  (them  that  are)  upright  in  their  heart 
140.  13  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  thy  presence 

Pi'ov.  2.  21  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  the  land,  and 
11.  3  The  integrity  of  the  upright  shall  guide 
11.    6  The  righteousness  of  the  upright  shall  de. 

11.  11  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city  is 

12.  6  the  mouth  of  the  upright  shall  deliver  th. 

14.  ti  the  tabernacle  of  the  upright  shall  flour. 

15.  8  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  (is)  his  del. 

16.  17  The  highway  of  the  upright  (is)  to  depart 
21. 18  and  the  transgressor  for  the  upright 

21.  29  (as  for)  the  upright,  he  directeth  his  way 
29.  27  (he  that  is)  upright  in  the  way  (is)  abomi. 

Eccl.    7.  29  God  hath  made  man  upright;  but  they 
Isa.   26.   7  thou,  most  upright,  dost  weigh  the  path 
Dan.  11.  17  to  enter.. and  upright  ones  with  him 
Mic.    2.    7  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly 
7.    2  (there  is)  none  upright  among  men :  they 
7.    4  the  most  upright  (is  sharper)  than  a  thorn 

2.  Uprightness,  i^'  yoslier. 

Deut.  9.  5  Not.  .for  the  uprightness  of  thine  heart 
1  Ki.  9.  4  in  integrity  of  heart,  and  in  uprightness 
1  Ch.29.  J7  that  thou,  .hast  pleasure  in  uprightness 
Job  33.  3  My  words  (shall  be  of)  the  uprightness  of 
33.  23  one. .  to  show  unto  man  his  uprightness 
Psa.  25.  21  Let  integrity  and  uprightness  preserve 

119.    7  I  will  praise  thee  with  uprightness  of  he. 
Prov.  2.  13  Who  leave  the  paths  of  uprightness,  to 

14.    2  He  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness  fear. 
Eccl.  12.  10  (that  which  was)  written  (was)  upright 

3.  Uprightness,  Tr$\  yishrah. 

1  Ki.   3.    6  walked,  .in  uprightness  of  heart  with  thee 

4.  Uprightness,  liE?\p  mislwr. 

Psa.  143. 10  God.  .lead  me  into  the  land  of  uprightn. 

5.  Upright  thing  or  persons,  uprightness,  □■'"i^'p. 

1  Ch.29.  T7  triest  the  heart,  and  hast  pleasure  in  up. 
Psa.     9.   8  shall  minister,  .to  the  people  in  upright. 

58.    1  do  ye  judge  uprightly,  O  ye  sons  of  men? 

75.    2  I  shall  receive.  .1  will  judge  uprightly 
Song.  1.   4  we  will  remember  thy  love,  .the  upright 
Isa.   26.    7  The  way  of  the  just  (is)  uprightness 

33. 15  walketh  righteously,  and  speaketh  uprig. 

6. Straightforward,  iVoj  nakoach. 

Isa,   26.  10  in  the  land  of  uprightness  will  he  deal 
57.    2  He  shall  enter,  .walking  (in)  his  upright. 


7. Standing,  "isy  omed. 

Dan.   8.  18  sleep.,  but  he  touched  me,  and  set  me  up. 
10. 11  understand  the  words.,  stand  upright,  for 
8.  Upright,  erect,  nvpp'ip  qomemiyyuth. 

Lev.  26.  13  broken  the. .yoke,  and  made  you  go  upri. 
9. Stiffness,  beaten  work,  r\y$o  miqshah. 

Jer.   10.    5  They  (are)  upright  as  the  palm  tree,  but 
10.  Perfect,  plain,  en  tarn. 

Prov.29. 10  The  blood  thirsty  hate  the  upright,  but 
11. Perfection,  integrity,  un  torn. 

Job     4.   6  thy  hope,  and  the  uprightness  of  th}' ways 
Prov.  2.7  a  buckler  to  them  that  walk  uprightly 
10.   9  He  that  walketh  uprightly  walketh  surely 
10.  29  way  of  the  Lord  (is)  strength  to  the  upri. 

13.  6  Righteousness  keepeth  (him  that  is)  upr. 
28.    6  Better. .  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  upr. 

l'2.Perfect,  complete,  plain,  O'pn  tamim. 

2  Sa.  22.  24  I  was  also  upright  before  him,  and  have 

22.  26  with  the  upright  man  thou  wilt  show  th. 
Job  12.  4  the  just  upright  (man  is)laughed  to  scorn 
Psa.  15.    2  He  that  walketh  uprightly,  and  worketh 

18.  23  I  was  also  upright  before  him,  and  I  kept 
18.  25  with  an  upright  man.  .wilt  show  thyself 
37. 18  The  Lord  knoweth  the  days  of  the  upri. 
84. 11  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly 

Prov. 11.  20  (such  as  are)  upright  in  their  way  (are) 
28. 10  the  upright  shall  have  good  (things)  in  po. 
28.  18  Whoso  walketh  uprightly  shall  be  saved 

Amos  5.  10  they  abhor  him  thatVpeaketh  uprightly 

13. To  mate  right  or  straight,  "ie*;  yashar,  3. 

Prov.15,  21  amauof  uuderstandiug  walketh  uprightly 
14.  Upright,  erect,  straight,  bpdos  orthos. 

Acts  14.  10  Said  with  a  loud  voice,  Stand  upright  on 
UPRIGHT,  to  be  or  show  one  self  — 
l.To  be  upright,  "1^;  yashar. 

Hab.   2.    4  his  soul  (which)  is  lifted  up  is  not  upright 
2.3*0  be  perfect,  cpn  tamam. 

Psa.  19. 13  then  shall  I  be  upright,  and  I  shall  be  in 
3.  To  shoio  self  perfect,  D"?i?  tamam,  7. 

2  Sa.  22.  26  with,  .man  thou  wilt  show  thyself  uprig. 

Psa.  18.  25  with,  .man  thou  wilt  show  thyself  upright 
UPRISING  — 
To  rise  up,  stand  still,  D?p  qum. 

Psa.  139.    2  Thou  knowest . .  mine  up  rising,  thou  und. 
UPROAR,  to  be  in,  make,  set  on  an  — 
l.To  roar,  make  a  noise,  nrprt  hamah. 

1  Ki.    1.  41  (this)  noise  of  the  city  being  in  an  uproar 

2.  To  set  up,  excite,  ai/aa-rardw  anastatoo, 

Acts  21.  38  which  before  these  days  madest  an  uproar 

3.  Tumult,  tumultuous  assembly,  dupv&os  thorubos. 
Matt.  26.    5  lest  there  be  an  uproar  among  the  peop. 
Mark  14.    2  Not.  .lest  there  be  an  upr  oar  of  the  people 
Acts  20.    1  after  the  uproar  was  ceased,  Paul  called 

4.  To  be  tumultuous,  QopvfS4ofj.a.i  thorubeomai. 

Acts  17.    5  set  all  the  city  on  au  uproar,  and  assaulted 

5.  To  pour  out  or  mix  logetlier,  avyxvvti)  sugchuno. 

Acts  21.31  came.,  that  all  Jerusalem  was  in  an  uproar 
8.  Standing  up,  upstanding,  erao-is  stasis. 

Acts  19.  40  called  in  question  for  this  day's  uproar 
UPSIDE  (down)  — 
On  the  face  of  it,  ii'iB'T^  al-paneha. 

1  Ki.21.  13  wiping  (it),  and  turning  (it)  upside  down 
Isa.  24.    1  turneth  it  upside  down,  and  scattereth 

UPWARD  — 

1.  To  cause  to  go  up  high,  run  gabah,  5. 

Job     5.    7  born  uuto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upw. 

2.  Above,  from  above, upivard,  rnyc?:?,  ntyzhlemalah. 

Gen.   7.  20  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  pr. 

Exod3S.  26  numbered,  from  twenty  years  old  and  up. 

Num.  1.    3  From  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  all  that 

So  in  verse  1 8, 20, 22, 24, 26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42,  45. 

3. 15, 22, 28, 34, 39, 40,  43  month  old  and  upward 

4-  3»  23,  30,  35, 39, 43,  47  years  old  and  upward 

8.  24  from  twenty  and  five  years  old  and  upwa. 

14.  29  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  winch 
26.  2,  4  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward 

26. 62  all  males  from  a  mouth  old  and  upward 
32.  11  none,  .from twenty  years  old  and  upward 
Judg.  1.  36  to  Akrabbinvfroni  the  rock,  and  upward 
i  Sa.   o.   2  from  his  shoulders  and  upward  (he  was) 
10.  23  higher,  .from  Ins  shoulders  and  upward 

2  Ki.  3.  21  able  to  put  on  armour,  and  upward  and 

1  Ch.  23.   3  from  the  age  of  thirty  years  and  upward 

23.  24  from  the  age  of  twenty  years  and  upward 

2  Ch.  31.  16  from  three  years  old  and  upward,  (even) 

31.  17  Levites  from  twenty  years  old  and  upwa. 
Ezra  3.  8  Levites,  from  twenty  years  old  and  upwa. 
Eccl.  3.  21  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth  upward,  and 
Isa.      8.  21  and  curse  their  king,  .and  look  upward 

37.  31  take  root  downward,  and  bear  fruit  upw. 
Eze.    1.  1 1  their  wings  (were)  stretched  upward,  two 

1.  27  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins  even  up. 
8.    2  from  his  loins  even  upward,  as  the  appea. 

41.   7  still  upward,  .went  stillupward.  .upward 

43.  15  from  the  altar  and  upward(shall  be)  four 

Hag.    2.  15  consider  from  this  day  and  upward,  from 

2.  18  Consider  now  from  this  day  and  upward 

3. High  place,  on  high,  D'nD  marom. 

Isa.   38. 14  mine  eyes  fail  (with  looking)  upward,  0 


UR 


1018 


UTMOST 


UR,  -ax  light,  brightness. 

1.  A  city  or  district  in  N.  Mesopotamia;  perhaps  Mu- 
ghcir,  six  miles  W,  of  the  Euphrates,  midway  between 
Babylon  and  the  Persian  Gulf.    (Or/a?  Warkaht). 

Gen.  ii.  28  And  Haran  died,  .in  U.  of  the  Chaldees 
11.  31  they  went  forthwith  them  from  U.  of  the 

15.  7  Lord,  .brought  thee  out  of  U.  of  the  Ch. 
Xeh.   9.    7  God.  .broughtest  him  forth  out  of  U.  of 

2.  Father  of  Eliphal,  one  of  David's  valiant  men.  B.C. 
1070. 

1  Ch.11.  35  Sacar  the  Hararite,  Eliphal  the  son  of  U. 

UR'-BANE,  Oup$av6s.     (Latin,  Urbanus.) 

A  believer  in  Rome  to  whom  Paul  sends  a  salutation. 

Rom  16.   9  Salute  IT.  our  helper  in  Christ,  and  Stac. 
URGE,  be  urgent,  to  — 
1.7*0  urge,  f^H  alats,  3. 

Judgio.  16  urged  him.  -that  his  soul  was  vexed  unto 
2.To  be  strong,  firm,  pin  chazaq. 

Exod  12.  33  the  Egyptians  were  urgent  upon  the  peo. 
Z.To  be  urgent,  f|£n  chatsaph,  5. 

Dan."  3.  22  because thekiug'scommandmentwasurg. 
4.  To  press,  "is?  patsar. 

Gen.  33.  11  Take,  I  pray  thee.  .And  he  urged  him,  and 

Jmlg  19.    7  rose  up  to  depart,  his  father  in  law  urged 

2  Ki.   2.  17  when  they  urged  him  till  he  was  ashamed 

5. 16  he  urged  him  to  take  (it):  but  he  refused 

D.Tobreak,  spread,burst  forth,  down,  in,  }"\5parats. 
2  Ki.  5.  23  he  urged  him,  and  bound  two  talents  of 

6.  To  hold  in,  eVe'xw  enecho. 

Luken.  53  the  Pharisees  began  to  urge  (him)  vehem. 

TJR'-I,  nut,  *1N  enlightened. 

1.  Son  of  Hur,  and  father  of  Bezaleel,  who  was  filled 
with  the  spirit  of  wisdom  to  prepare  the  tabernacle. 
B.C.  1525. 

Exod3i.  2  See,  I  have  called.. the  son  of  TJ.,  the  son 
35.  30  Lord  hath  called,  .the  son  of  IT.,  the  son 
38.  22  Bezaleel  the  son  of  U. .  .made  all  that  the 

1  Ch.  2.  20  And  Hur  begat  U.,  and  U.  begat  Bezaleel 

2  Ch.  1.    5  brasen  altar,  that,  .the  son  of  U..  .had  ma. 

2.  Father  of  Geber,  one  of  Solomon's  officers  in  Gilead. 

B.C.  1040. 

1  Ki.  4. 19  Geber  the  son  of  U.  (was)  in  the  country 

3.  A  gatekeeper  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife  during 
the  exile.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  24  the  porters;  Shallum,  and  Telem,  andU. 

TJ-RI'-AH,  U-RI'-JAH,  inpltf,  'VPH  /°^  I*  KflW. 

1.  A  Hittite,  husband  of  Bath-sheba,  and  one  of  David's 
valiant  men.     B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  11.    3  (Is)  not  this  Bath-sheba.. the  wife  of  U. 

11.  6  Send  me  U. . .  And  Joab  sent  U.  to  David 
11.  7  when  U.  was  come  unto  him,  David  dem. 
11.  8  David  said  to  U.,  Go  down  to  thy  house 
11.  8  And  U.  departed  out  of  the  king's  house 
11.  9  But  U.  slept  at  the  door  of  the  king's  ho. 
11.  10  saying,  U.  went  not  down  unto  his  house 
11.  10  David  said  unto  U.,  Camestthou  not  from 
11.  11  U.  said  unto  David,  The  ark,  and  Israel 
11.  12  David  said  to  U.,  Tarry  here  to  day  also 
11.  12  So  U.  abode  in  Jerusalem  that  day,  and 

11. 14  David  wrote,  .and  sent,  .by  the  hand  of  U. 

11. 15  Set  ye  U.  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest 
11.  16  he  assigned  U.  unto  a  place  where  he  kn. 
11.  17  there  fell  (some),  .and  U.  the  Hittite  died 
11.  21,  24  Thy  servant  U.  the  Hittite  is  deadalso 

11.  26  the  wife  of  U.  heard  that  U.  her  husband 

12.  9  thou  hast  killed  U.  the  Hittite  with  the 
12.  10  thou.. hast  taken  the  wifeofU.  ..to  be  thy 
12.  15  the  Lord  struck  the  child  that  U.'s  wife 
23.  39  U.  the  Hittite :  thirty  and  seven  in  all 

1  Ki.  15.    5  save  only  in  the  matter  of  U.  the  Hittite 
1  Ch.n.  41  TJ.  the  Hittite,  Zabad  the  son  of  Ahlai 

2.  A  priest  in  Jerusalem,  who  built  an  altar  according 
to  the  pattern  sent  him  by  king  Ahaz.     B.C.  740. 

a  Ki.  16.  10  Ahaz  sent  to  U.  the  priest  the  fashion  of 

16.  11  U.  the  priest  built  an  altar  according  to 
16.  11  so  U.  the  priest  made  (it)  against  king  A. 
16.  15  king  Ahaz  commanded  U.  the  priest,  sa. 
16.  16  Thus  did  U.  the  priest,  according  to  all 

3.  A  priest,  father  of  Meremoth,  who  rebuilt  part  of  the 
wall  of  Jerusalem  at  the  instance  of  Nehemiah.  B.C. 
445- 

Ezra    8.  33  by  the  hand  of  Meremoth  the  son  of  U. 
Neh.    3.    4,  21  them  repaired  Meremoth  the  son  of  IT. 

4.  A  priest,  Levite,  or  ruler  who  stood  beside  Ezra  when 
he  read  the  book  of  the  law  to  the  people.     B.C.  470. 

Neh.  8.  4  beside  him  stood. .U.,  and  Hilkiah,  and 
6.  A  priest  whom  Isaiah  took  as  a  witness.     B.C.  740. 

Isa.  8.  2  I  took  unto  me.  .IT.  the  priest,  and  Zech. 
G.  A  prophet,  son  of  Shemaiah,  whom  Jehoiakim  sent 
fur  into  Egypt  and  slew  him.     B.C.  609. 

Jer.  26.  20  U..  .prophesied  against  this  city  and  ng. 
26.  21  when  U.  heard  it,  he  was  afraid,  and  fled 
26.  23  they  fetched  forth  U.  out  of  Egypt,  and 
U-RI'-AS,  Obplas.       See   Uriah. 
The  husband  of  Bath-sheba,  Solomon's  mother. 

Matt.  1.    6  and  David,  .begat  Solomon  of  her.. of  U. 
TJ-RI'-EL,  ^'-rN  Qod  is  light. 
1.  A  Kohathite,  son  of  Tahath.    b.c.  1460. 

1  Ch.  6.24  Tahath  his  son,  U.his  son  Uzziahhisson 


1  Ch.  15.    5  U.  the  chief,  and  his  brethren  an  hundr. 

15.  11  David  called,  .for  the  Levites,  for  U.,  As. 
2.  Father  of  Michaiah,  one  of  Rehoboam's  wives;  a 
Gibeathite.    B.C.  1010. 

2  Ch.13.    2  Michaiah  the  daughter  of  U.  of  Gibeah 
TJ'-RLM,  D'l'N  lights. 

Mentioned  along  with  Thummim,  as  something  in  the 
high  priest's  breastplate  that  gave  an  oracular  response. 
Exod23.  30  thou  shalt  put  in  the  breastplate,  .the  U. 
Lev.  8.  8  he  put  in  the  breastplate  the  U.  and  the 
Nura  27.  21  after  the  judgment  of  U.  before  the  Lord 
Deut.33.    8  (Let)  thy  Thummim  and  thy  U.  (be)  with 

1  Sa.  28.   6  Lord  answered  him  not,  neither.,  by  U.nor 
Ezra   2.  63  till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with  U.  and 
Neh.   7.  65  till  there  stood  (up)  a  priest  with  U.  and 

US  — 

1.  We,  we  ourselves,  ui^x  anachnu. 

Deut.  5.    3  (even)  us,  who  (are)  all.  .here  alive  this 
Neh.  4.  23  none  of  us  put  off  our  clothes,  .every  one 

2.  Into  our  hand,  lyv?  beyadenu. 

Exodio.  25  Thou  must  give  us  also  sacrifices  and  bu. 

3.  Our  eyes,  uvy  enenu. 

2  Sa.  20.    6  lest,  .get  him  fenced  cities,  and  escape  us 

4.  Us,  y/xas  hemas. 

Matt.  6.  13  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  hut  deliverus 
See  also  8.  [25],  29,  31;  9.  27;  13.  56;  17.  4;  20.  7,  30, 
31 ;  27.   4,  25  ;  Mark   1.  24 ;  5.  12 ;  6.   3 ;  9.  5,  22 ;  Luke 

1.  71,  78  ;  4.  34;  7.  20;  9.  33;  11.  1,  4,  [4],  45;  12.  41 ;  16. 
26;  17,  13;  19.  14;  20.  6;  23.  30,  30,  39;  24.  22;  John  1. 
22;  9.  34  ;  Acts  1.  21 ;  3.  4;  5.  28  ;  7.  [27],  40 ;  11.  15  ;  14. 
11  ;  16.  io,  15,  37,  37,  37;  20.  5;  21.  5,  11,  17;  27.  6,  7; 
28.  2,  7,  10 ;  Rom.  4.  24 ;  5.  8 ;  8. 18,  35,  37,  39 ;  9.  24 ;  15. 
[7];  16.  [6];  1  Co.  4.  t,  9 ;  6.  14;  7.  [15];  8.  8;  2  Co.  1.  4, 

5.  10,  11,  14,  21,  21,  22 ;  2.  14 ;  3.  6 ;  4.  14;  5.  5,  14,  18 ; 

7.  2,  6  ;  8.  20;  10.  2;  Gal.  1.  4,  23 ;  2.  4 ;  3.  13  ;  5.  1 ;  Eph. 
i-  3>  4>  5i  6,  8,  19;  2.  4,  7;  5.  [2];  Phil.  3.  17;  Col.  1.  12, 
13;  1  Th.  1.  10;  2.  [15],  16,  18;  3.  6,  6;  4.  7,  [8];  5.  9; 

2  Th.  2.  16;  3.  7,  9 ;  2  Ti.  1.  9 ;  2.  12 ;  Titus  2.  12,  14;  3. 
5,  6,  15;  Heb  2.  3;  Jas.  1.  18;  1  Pe.  1.  3:3.  [18,  21];  5. 
[10] ;  2  Pe.  1.  3 ;  3.  [9] ;  1  Jo.  1.  7,  9;  3.  1 ;  4.  10,  11,  19; 

3  Jo.  9,  10;  Rev,  1.  5,  5,  [6];  5.  [9,  10J;  6.  16,  16. 

5.  ire,  we  ourselves,  t}(x£ls  hemeis. 

Johun.  16  Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  He.  1?.  1. 
6.7b  us,  yfxtv  hemin. 

Matt.  3.  15  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteou. 
See  also  6.  11,  12;  8.  [31];  13.  36;  15.  15;  20.  12;  .21.  25;  22. 
17,  25;  24,  3;  25.  8,  9,  n ;  26.63,68;  Mark  9.  22,  [38,38];  10. 
35>  37!  12.  19;  13.  4;  14. 15;  16.  3;  Luke  1.  1,  2,  69,  74;  2.  15, 
48;  7.  5,  16;  10.  11,  17;  n.  3,  4,  4;  13.  25;  20. 2,  [22I,  28;  22. 

8.  67;  23.  18;  24.  24,  [32],  32,  32;  John  i.  14;  2.  18;  4.  12, 
25;  6.  34,  52;  8.  [5];  10.  24;  11.  [50];  14.  8,  8,  22;  16.  17;  17. 
21;  18.  31;  Acts  1.  17,  21,  22;  2.  29;  3.  12;  6.  14;  7.  38,  40; 
10.  41,  42;  11.  13,  17;  13.  [33],  47;  14.  [17];  15.  7,  8,  25,  28; 
16.  9,  16,  17,  [17],  21;  20.  14;  21.  16,  iS;  25.  24;  27.  2;  28. 

2,  15;  Rom.  5.  5;  8.  4,  32;  9.  29;  12.  6;  1  Co.  1.  18,  30;  2. 
10,  12;  4.  6;  8.  6;  15.  57;  2  Co.  1.  [8};  4. 12,  17;  5.  5,  18,  19; 

6.  12;  7.  7;  10.  [8],  13;  Eph.  1.  9;  3.  20;  Col.  1.  8;  2.  14;  4. 
3;  1  Th.  2.  8;  3.  6;  1  Ti.  6.  i7;zTi.  1.  7,  9,  14;  Heb.   1.  2; 

7.  26;  10.  15,  20;  12.  1;  Jas.  3.  3;  4.  5;  1  Pe.  1.  [12];  2.  [21]; 
4.  [3];  2  Pe.  1.  1,  3,  4;  1  Jo.  1.  2,  8,  9,  10;  2.  25;  3.  1, 
[23],  24,  24;  4.  9,  12,  12,  13,  13,  16;  5.  11,  20;  2  Jo.  2. 

7 .Of  its,  rjfxwv  hemon. 

Matt.  1.  23  which  being  interpreted  is,  God  with  us 
See  also  Matt.  15.  23;  Mark  9.  [40];  Luke  9.  49,  [50,  50]; 
16.  26;  24.  29;  Acts  1.  22;  7.  40;  15.  9,  24;  17.  27;  24.  4; 
28.  15 ;  Rom.  4.  16 ;  5.  8 ;  8.  [26],  31,  31,  32,  34 ;  14.  7,  12 ; 

15.  2;  1  Co.  4.  8 ;  5.  [7] ;  2  Co.  1,  n,  19,  20;  2.  14;  3.  3; 
4-7  1  5>  20,  21 ;  7.  9  ;  8.  4,  Tg,  19,  20;  9.  11  ;  Gal,  3.  13 ; 
4.  26 ;  Eph.  4.  7 ;  5.  [2] ;  Col.  2.  14 ;  4.  3  ;  1  Th.  1.  6,  9 ;  2. 
13  ;  3.  6 ;  4>  1 ;  5-  10,  25  ;  2  Th.  r.  7 ;  a.  2 ;  3. 1,  6 ;  Titus 
2.  14;  Heb.  6.  20;  9.  24  ;  11.  40,  40 ;  13.  18 ;  1  Pe.  2.  [21]; 

4.  [1],  17 ;  2  Pe.  3.  [2] ;  1  Jo.  1.3;  2.  19,  19,  19,  19,  19 ;  3. 

16,  20,  21 ;  4.  6,  6;  5.  [14],  15 ;  2  John  2. 

8. Our  soul,  tt\v  tyvxhv  7]fxu>v  ten  psuchen  hemon. 
Johnio.  24  How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt? 

USE  (he  used,  to),  using-  — 
1.7*o  say,  ")£n  amar. 

Jer.  31.  23  As  yet  they  shall  use  this  speech  in  the 
2.  To  speak,  ~:n  dabar,  3, 

Prov.18.  23  The  pooruseth  entreaties;  but  the  rich 
3.TT'or/v,  occupation,  npx^D  melakah. 

Lev.    7.  24  and  the  fat.  .may  be.  .in  any  other  use 

4. Taught,  lis1?  limmud. 

Jer.    2.  24  A  wild  ass  used  to  the  wilderness,  (that) 

5.  To  take,  receive,  np?  laqach. 

Jer.  23.  31  that  use  {heir  tongues,  and  say,  He  saith 
6.7*0  speak  2^roverbially,  7g»l3  mashal. 

Eze.  18.    2  What  mean  ye,  that  ye  use  this  proverb 
18.    3  ye  shall  not  have,  .any  more  to  use  this 

7.7*0  do,  make,  Tfyil  asah. 

Eze.  35.  11  which  thou  hast  used  out  of  thy  hatred 
8.7*0  be  done,  made,  Pfyfjjj  asah,  2. 

Lev.   7.  24  and  the  fat.  .may  be  used  in  any  other 

9.  Service,  niiajr  abodah. 

1  Ch.28.  15  according  to  the  use  of  every  candlestick 
10.7*0  oppress,  pgty  ashaq. 

Eze.  22.  29  The  people  of  the  land  have  used  oppre. 
11.7*o  divine,  use  divination,  D03  qasam. 

Deut  18.  10  that  useth  divination,  (or)  an  observer  of 


2  Ki.  17.  17  they,  .used  divination  and  enchantments 

Eze.  21.  21  the  king  of  Babylon  stood . .  to  use  divina. 
12.  Judgment,  a5^p  mishpat. 

Psa.119  132  as  thou  usest  to  do  unto  those  that  love 
13.7*0  turn  up,  a.faarp4(pco  anastrephu. 

Heb.  10.  33  companions  of  them  that  were  so  used 

14.  Use,  consumption  by  use,  airoxpnens  apochresis. 
Col.    2.  22  Which  are  all  to  perish  with  the  using 

15.  7*o  came  in  or  with,  ylvopai  eV  ginomai  en. 

1  Th.  2.   5  For  neither  at  any  time  used  we  flattering 

16.  Habit,  use,  e£i$  heeds. 

Heb.    5. 14  those  who  by  reason  of  use  have  their  se. 

17.  To  have,  exw    echo. 

1  Pe.  2.  16  As  free,  and  not  using,  .liberty  for  a  clo. 
18.7*o  be,  flul  eimi. 

Mark  2.  18  the  disciples,  .of  the  Pharisees  used  to  f. 
19.7*0  hold  with,  fxerexM  metecho. 

Heb.    5.  13  every  one  that  useth  milk  (is)  unskilful 
20. 7*o  use,  make  use  of,  xpaop.ai  chraomai. 

Acts  27. 17  Which,  when  they  had  taken  up,  they  us. 

1  Co.   7.  21  if  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  use  (it)  rat. 

7.  31  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing 
9.  12  Nevertheless  we  have  not  used  this  pow. 
9.  15  But  I  have  used  none  of  these  things 

2  Co.  1, 17  When  I.. was  thus  minded,  did  Iuse  lig.? 

3.  12  Seeing,  .we  have  such  hope,  we  use  great 
13.  10  lest  being  present  I  should  use  sharpness 
1  Ti.    1.    8  the  law  (is)  good,  if  a  man  use  it  lawfully 
5. 23  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake 

21.  JVecessary  business,  use,  need,  xpefa  chreia. 
Eph.  4.  29  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying 
Titus  3.  14  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses 

22.  Use,  manner  of  using,  xpv{riS  chresis. 

Rom.  1.  26  did  change  the  natural  use  into  that  v.  27. 

23.  7*o  practise,  irpdo-aco  prasso,  Acts  19.  19. 
USE  deceit,  despitefully,  to  — 

1.7*0  deceive,  So\t6co  doliop. 

Rom.  3.  13  with  their  tongues  they  have  used  deceit 

2.7*0  injure,  harass,  criminate,  eirnpedfa  epereazo. 
Matt.  5.  44  which  despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute 
Luke  6.  28  pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you 

3. 7*o  insult,  injure,  v&pifa  hubrizo. 

Acts  14.    5  to  use.  .despitefully,  and  to  stone  them 

[See  also  Aright,  arts,  enchantment,  hospitality,  many, 

proverb,  right  hand,  service,  sorcery.] 

USURP  authority  over,  to  — 

7*o  exercise  power  of  one's  self  abQevriw  authenteo. 
1  Ti.    2.  12  not  to  usurp  authority  over  the  man,  but 
USURY,  to  give,  lend  on,  take,  be  lent  upon  — 

1.  7*0  exact,  ti<p$  nasha. 

Isa.   24.   2  as  with,  .so  with  the  giver  of  usury  to  him 

2.  An  exaction,  nu;d  mashsha, 

Neh.   5.    7  Ye  exact  usury,  every  one  of  his  brother 
5.  10  I  pray  you,  let  us  leave  off  this  usury 

3.  7*o  exact,  r\%'\  nashah. 

Exod22.  25  thou  shalt  not  be  to  him  as  an  usurer 
Isa.   24.   2  as  with  the  taker  of  usury,  so  with  the  gi. 
Jer.  15. 10  neither  lent  on  usury,  nor.,  lent.,  me  on  u. 

4.7*0  bite,  lend  on  usury,  ~pi  nashak. 

Deut  23.  19  of  any  thing  that  is  lent  upon  usury 
5.7*0  (cause  to)  bite,  lend  on  usury,  ?$?i  nashak,  5. 
Deut  23.  19  Thou  shall  not  lend  upon  usury  to  thy 
23.  20  Unto  a  stranger  tliou  mayest  lend  upon  us. 
23.  20  thy  brother  thou  shalt  not  lend  upon  us. 

6. Biting,  usury,  ^l  neshek. 

Exod22.  25  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  usury 
Lev.  25.  36  Take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase 

25.  37  Thou  shalt  not  give  him.,  upon  usury,  nor 
Deut23.  19  usury  of  money,  usury  of  victuals,  usury 
Psa.  15.  5  putteth  not  out  his  money  to  usury,  nor 
Proves.  8  He  that  by  usury  and  unjust  gain  increa. 
Eze.   18.    8  He  (that)  hath  not  given  forth  upon  usu. 

18.  13  Hath  given  forth  upon  usury,  and  hath  t. 

18.  17 hath  not  received  usury  norincrease,  hath 

22. 12  thou  hast  taken  usury  and  increase,  and 

7.  Offspring,  usury,  tokos  tokos. 

Matt 25.  27  I  should  have  received  mine  own  with  u. 
Lukeig.  23  I  might  have  required  mine  own  with  u.? 

U'-THAI,  \rnj>  Jah  is  help. 

1.  Son  of  Ammihud,  a  descendant  of  Pharez,  son  of 
Judah,  dwelling  in  Jerusalem.    B.C.  536. 

1  Ch.   9.   4  U.  the  son  of  Ammihud,  the  son  of  Omri 

2.  A  chief  man,  of  the  sons  of  Bigvai,  that  returned 
from  exile  with  Ezra  in  the  time  of  Artaxerxes.  B.C. 
457- 

Ezra    S.  14  Of  the  sons  also  of  Bigvai;  U.,  and  Zabb. 

UTMOST  (border,  part),  uttermost  — 

\.  Behind,  last,  furthest,  j'nnN  acharon. 

Deut  11.  24  unto  the  uttermost  sea,  shall  your  border 
34.    2  the  land  of  Judah,  unto  the  utmost  sea 

Joel    2.  20  his  hinder  part  toward  the  utmost  sea 
2.  Latter  end,  furthest  part,  n*-)nN  acharith. 

Psa.  139.    9  dwell  iu  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea 

3. End,  cessation,  ddx  cphes. 

Psa.    2.   8  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.  .thyposseB. 


UTTER 


1019 


UZZIBL 


4.  Wing,  ^3  kanapk. 

Isa.  24. 16  From  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  have 

5.End,  extremity,  j'p  qcts. 

Jer.  50.  26  Come  against  her  from  the  utmost  border 

6.  End,  extremity,  nyjj  qatsah. 

1  Ki.  6.  24  the  uttermost  part.  .unto,  .uttermost  part 

7.  AW,  extremity,  n^tjs  qatseh. 

Nunin.    1  consumed,  .in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
20.  16  Kadesh,  a  city  in  the  uttermost  of  thy  bo. 
22.  36  border  of  Arnon,  which  (is)  in  the  utmost 
22.  41  he  might  see  the  utmost,  .of  the  people 
23. 13  Thou  shalt  see  but  the  utmost  part  of  th. 
34.   3  your  south  border  shall  be  the  utmost  co. 
Deut;3o.   4  be  driven  out  uuto  the  utmost . .  of  heaven 
Josh.15.    1  Zin  southward  (was)  the  uttermost  part 
15.    5  the  sea  at  the  uttermost  part  of  Jordan 
15.  21  the  uttermost  cities  of  the  tribe  of  the  ch. 

1  Sa.  14.    2  Saul  tarried  in  the  uttermost  part  of  Gib. 

2  Ki.   7.    s  when  they  were  come  to  the  uttermost 

7.    8  when  these  lepers  came  to  the  uttermost 
Neh.  1.    9  cast  out  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the 
Isa.     7.  18  the  fly  that  (is)  in  the  uttermost  part  of 

8.  Extreme,  outward,  fivp  qitson. 

Exodgfi.  4  shalt  thou  make  in  the  uttermost  edge  of 
36.  11  likewise  be  made  in  the  uttez'iwist  side  of 
36. 17  he  made  fifty  loops  upon  the  uppermost 

9.  End,  extremity,  ny^p  qitsvah. 

Psa.  65.   8  They  also  that  dwell  in  the  uttermost  pa. 

10.  To  cut  off  or  asunder,  I'VI?  qatsats. 

Jer.  9.  26  all.  .in  the  utmost  corners,  that  dwell  in 
25.  23  and  Buz,  and  all.  .in  the  utmost  corners 
49.  32  I  will  scatter,  .them.. iu  the  utmost  corn 

11.  Last,  most  distant,  extreme,  icrx&Tos  eschatos. 
Matt.  5.  26  come  out. .till  thou  hast  paid  the  utterm. 
Acts    1.    8  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth 

12.  The  things  down  to,  rd  Kara  ta  kata. 

Acts  24.  22  I  will  know  the  uttermost  of  your  matter 
13. Perfect,  complete,  TravreX-fjs  panteles. 

Heb.    7.  25  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come 

14.  Bound,  limit,  end,  irepas  peras. 

Matt  12.  42  she  came  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 

Luke  11. 31  she  came  from  the  utmost  parts  of  the 
15. End,  event,  consequence,  ri\os  telos. 

1  Th.   2. 16  wrath  is  come  upon  them  to  the  utterm. 
lG.Point,  extremity,  &Kpov  (ace.)  aJcron. 

Marki3.  27  the  uttermost  part,  .to the  uttermost  part 

UTTER,  outer,  utterly  — 
l.To  gather,  Fps  asaph. 

Zeph.  1.    2  I  will  utterly  consume  all.  .from  off  the 

2.  Drought,  heat,  waste,  destruction,  2~ft  chorcb. 

Eze.  29.  10  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  utterly  wa. 

3.  To  devote  (to  God  or  to  destruction),  tolft  charam,5. 

Deut.  7.  2  thou  shalt  smite  them,  .utterly  destroy 
20.  17  But  thou  shalt  utterly  destroy  them 

^.Complete,  completely,  V?3  kalil. 

Isa.     2.  18  And  the  idols  he  shall  utterly  abolish 

5.  Might,  very,  exceedingly,  ind  mcod. 

Psa.119.  8  I  will  keep  thy  statutes,  .forsake.. not  ut. 
119.  43  take  not  the  word  of  truth  utterly  out  of 

^.Corruption,  destruction,  n'n^D  mashchith. 

Eze.     9.    6  Slay  utterly  old  (and)  young,  both  maids 
7.  Baldness,  nrj"ij3  gorchah. 

Eze.  27.  31  they  shall  make  themselves  utterly  bald 

S.  Wholly,  o\ws  holds. 

1  Co.    6.    7  there  is  utterly  a  fault  among  you,  beca. 

UTTER  (abundantly),  he  uttered,  to  — 
l.To  teach,  rjfo  alaph,  3. 

Job    15.    5  thy  mouth  uttereth  thine  iniquity,  and 

2.  To  say,  7QK  amar. 

Prov.*  1.  21  in  the  city  she  uttereth  her  words,  (saying) 

3.  To  speak,  w  dabar. 

Mic.    7.    3  he  uttereth  his  mischievous  desire :  so  th. 

4.  To  speak  irn  dabar,  3. 

Judg.  5.  12  Awake,  awake, Deborah. .utterasong,  ar. 
11. 11  Jephthah  uttered  all  his  words  before  the 
Prov  23.  33  thine  heart  shall  utter  perverse  things 
Isa.   32.    6  to  utter  error  against  the  Lord,  to  make 
Jer.     1.  16  I  will  utter  my  judgments  against  them 

5.  To  meditate,  mutter,  utter,  7\in  Jiagah. 

Job   27.    4  shall  not  speak,  .nor  my  tongue  utter  de. 

6.  To  meditate,  utter,  mutter,  n\n  hagah,  3«. 

Isa.   59.  13  conceiving  and  uttering  from  the  heart 

7.7*0  cause  to  go  forth,  n>*;  yaisa,  5. 

Neh.    6.  19  Also  they,  .uttered  my  words  to  him 
Job     8.  10  Shall  not  they,  .utter  words  out  of  their 
Prov  10.  18  and  he  that  uttereth  a  slander,  (is)  a  fool 
29.  11  A  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  :  hut  a  wise 
Eccl.  5.    2  and  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter 
Isa.  48. 20  tell  this,  utter  it.  .to  the  end  of  the  earth 

S.To  speak,  say,  bbs  malal  3. 

Job   33.    3  and  my  lips  shall  utter  knowledge  clearly 
Psa.  106.    2  Who  can  utter  the  mighty  acts  of  the  Lo. 

9.7b  use  similitudes,  hto  mashal. 

Eze.  24.    3  utter  a  parable  unto  the  rebellious  house 


10.  To  utter,  send  forth,  belch  out,  P3J  naba,  5. 
Psa.  19.   2  Day  unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night 

78.    2  I  will  open  my  mouth.. I  will  utter  dark 
94.    4  shall  they  utter  (and)  speak  hard  things? 

119.  171  My  lips  shall  utter  praise,  when  thou  h. 

145,    7  They  shall  abundantly  utter  the  memory 

11.  To  cause  to  go  before,bring  forward,^  nagad,b. 
Lev.  5.  1  if  he  do  not  utter  (it),  then  he  shall  bear 
Josh  2.  14  Our  life  for  your's,  if  ye  utter  not  this  our 

2.  20  if  thou  utter  this  our  business,  then  we 
Job  26.   4  To  whom  hast  thou  uttered  words?  and 
42.   3  therefore  have  I  uttered  that  I  understood 

12.2*0  give,  jru  nathan. 

2  Sa.22.  14  The  LORD,  .the  Most  High  uttered  his  vo. 

Psa.  46.    6  he  uttered  his  voice,  the  earth  melted 

Prov.  1.  20  Wisdom.,  uttereth  her  voice  in  the  streets 

Jer.  10.  13  When  he  uttereth  his  voice.,  a  multitude 
25.  30  and  utter  his  voice  from  his  holy  habita. 
48.  34  unto  Jahaz,  have  they  uttered  then*  voice 
51.  16  Wnen  he  uttereth  (his)  voice,  .amultitude 

Joel  2.  11  the  Lord  shall  utter  his  voice  before  his 
3. 16  The  Lord  also  shall . .  utter  his  voice  from 

Amos  1.   2  The  Lord  will,  .utter  his  voice  from  Jer. 

Hab.  3. 10  the  deep  uttered  his  voice .  .lifted  up  his 

13.  To  be  given,  |m  nathan,  2. 

Jer.  51.  55  her  waves.,  a  noise  of  their  voice  is  uttered 
14.7*0  answer,  respiond,  n;j;  anah. 

Job  15.   2  Should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  knowledge 

15.  To  breathe  forth,  utter*  WB  puach,  5. 

Prov  14.    5  will  not  lie.,  a  false  witness  will  utter  lies 

16.  To  open,  gape,  free,  utter,  nye  patsah. 

Psa.  66.  14  Winch  my  lips  have  uttered,  and  my  mo. 

17.  To  give,  Slda/ii  didomi. 

1  Co.  14.   9  except  ye  utter  by  the  tongue  words  easy 

18.  To  belch  out,  utter  copioicsly,  iptvyofxai  ereugo. 
Matt  13.  35  I  will  utter  things  which  have  been  kept 

19.  To  talk,  \a\4ot  Idled. 

2  Co.  12.    4  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter 
Pev.  10.    3  whenhehad  cried,  seven  thunders  uttered 

10.    4  when  the  seven  thunders  had  uttered  th. 
10.   4  things  wliich  the  seven  thunders  uttered 

20.  To  lay  out,  say,  \4yto  lego. 

Heb.  5.  11  many  things  to  say,  and  hard  to  he  uttered 

TJTTER  destruction,  (to  appoint  to)  — 

Any  thing  devoted,  onn,  D"in  cherem. 

1  Ki.20.  42  a  man  whom  I  appointed  to  utl 
Zechi4. 11  there  shall  be  no  more  utter  destruction 

UTTERANCE  — 

l.To  speak  sententiously,  a.tro<p&eyyofj.a.t  apojihthetf. 
Acts    2.    4  speak,  .as  the  spirit  gave  them  utterance 

2.M.  word,  discourse,  Xoyos  logos. 

1  Co.   1.    5  ye  are  enriched  by  him,  in  all  utterance 

2  Co.  8,    7  Eph.  6.  19  ;  Col.  4.  3. 
UTTERED,  aught  out  of,  (that  which  is)  — 
Thing  uttered  wrongfully  or  rashly,  NCOp  mibta. 

Nuni3o.  6  when  she  vowed,  or  uttered  aught  out  of 
30.   8  and  that  which  she  uttered  with  her  lips 

UTTERED,  which  cannot  be  — 
Unspeakable,  unutterable,  a\d\T}Tos  alaletos. 
Rom.  8.  26  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered 

UTTERLY,  to  be  — 
To  be  ended,  t^o  suph. 

Psa.  73.  19  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors 
[See  also  Burn,  cast  down,  consume,  destroy,  destroyed, 
perish,  slay,  take.] 

UZ,  pN  firmness. 

1.  A  son  of  Aram,  son  of  Shem.    B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10.  23  the  children  of  Aram;  TJ.,  and  Hul,  and 
1  Ch,  1. 17  sons  of  Shem . .  U.,  and  Hul,  and  Gother 

2.  A  son  of  Dishon,  of  the  family  of  Seir,  and  ancestor 
of  the  Horim.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  28  children  of  Dishan  (are)  these;  U.,  and  A. 
1  Ch.   1.  42  The  sons  of  Dishan;  U.,  and  Aran 

3.  A  region  at  the  S.  of  Edom  and  W.  of  the  great 
Arabian  desert  which  runs  into  Chaldea. 

Job      1.    1  There  was  a  man  in  the  land  of  TJ.,  whose 
Jer.  25.  20  all  the  kings  of  the  land  of  TJ.,  and  all  the 
Lam.  4.  21  0  daughter  of  Edom,  that  dwellest  in . .  U. 
U'-ZAI,  *HN  hoped  for. 

Father  of  Palal  who  repaired  part  of  the  wall  of  Jeru- 
salem.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  25  Palal  the  son  of  TJ.,  over  against  the  tur- 

U'-ZAX,  W. 

The  sixth  son  of  Joktan,  of  the  family  of  Shem,  who 
settled  in  S.   Arabia,   in  Zanaa,  where  the    kings   of 
Yemen  dwelt.    Comp.  Eze.  27.  19.    B.C.  2200. 
Gen.  10.  27  And  Hadoram,  and  TJ.,  and  Diklah 

1  Ch.  1.  21  Hadoram  also,  and  TJ.,  and  Diklah 

UZ'-ZA,  UZ'-ZAH,  ttrj,  rwjJ  strength. 

1.  A  son  of  Abinadab  who' died  for  touching  the  ark. 

B.C.  1042. 

2  Sa.  6.   3  and  TJ.  and  Ahio..drave  the  new  cart 

6.  6  U.  put  forth  (his  hand)  to  the  ark  of  God 

6.  7  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  TJ. 

6.  8  because  the  Lord  . . made  ahreach upon  TJ. 

1  Ch.13.  7  and  TJ.  and  Ahio  drave  the  cart 


1  Ch.  13.   9  TJ.  put  forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  ark 

13.  10  auger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  TJ. 
13. 11  because  the  Lord,  .made  a  breach  upon  TJ. 

2.  A  person  In  whose  garden  Manasseh  and  Amon,  kings 
of  Judah,  were  buried. 

2  EX21.  18  Manasseh.  .was  buried.,  in  the  garden.  .TJ. 

21.  26  buried  in  his  sepulchre  in.  .garden  of  TJ. 

3.  Son  of  Shimei,  a  Merarite. 

1  Ch.  6.  29  Libui  his  son,  Shimei  his  son,  U.  his  son 

4.  A  Benjamin,  brother  of  Alihud.     B.C.  1400. 

i  Ch.   8.    7  he  removed  them,  and  begat  TJ.  and  Ahi: 

5.  Ancestor  of  a  family  of  the  Nethinim  that  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.  49  children  of  I".,  the  children  of  Taseah 
Neh.   7.  51  children  of  TJ.,  the  children  of  Phaseah 

UZ-ZEN-SHE'-RAH,  rn«arj:»«  point,  top  of  Sherah. 
A  city  in  Ephraim,  near  the  two  Beth-horons ;  now 
called  Beit  Sira. 

1  Ch.  7.  24  his  daughter  (was)  Sherah,  who  built.  .TJ. 
UZ'-ZI,  'l^  Jah  is  strong. 

1.  A  son  of  Bukki  and  father  of  Zerahiah,  a  descendant 
of  Phinehas  grandson  of  Aaron.     B.C.  1350. 

1  Ch.  6.    5  Abishua  begat  Bukki,  and  Bukki  begat  TJ. 
6.   o  tT.  begat  Zerahiah,  and  Zerahiah  begat 

6.  51  Bukki  his  son,  U.  his  son,  Zerahiah  his  so 
Ezra  7.    4  The  son  of  Zerahiah,  the  son  of  TJ.,  the 

2.  Grandson  of  Issachar,  and  father  of  Izrahiah.  B.C. 
1600. 

1  Ch.  7.    2  And  the  sons  of  Tola:  TJ.,  and  Rephaiah 

7.  3  the  sons  of  TJ.;  Izrahiah:  and  the  sons  of 

3.  Son  of  Bela,  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.    7  sons  of  Bela;  Ezbon,  and  TJ.,  and  LTzziel 

4.  Father  of  Elah,  a  Benjamite,  whose  descendants  dwelt 
in  Jerusalem  after  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

1  Ch.  9.    8  And  Ibneiah.  .and  Elah  the  son  of  U. 

5.  An  overseer  of  the  Levites  in  Jerusalem  after  the 
exile.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.  22  The  overseer  also,  .(was)  TJ.  the  son  of  B. 

6.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Jedaiah  in  the  days  of  Joia- 
kini,  grandson  of  Jozadah.     B.C.  500. 

Neh.  12.  19  And  of  Joiarib,  Mattenai ;  of  Jedaiah,  TT. 
12.  42  IJ.,  and  Jehohanan,  and  Malchijah,  and 

UZ-ZI'-A,  N;*y  Jah  is  strong. 

An  Ashterathite,  one  of  David's   valiant  men.    B.C. 

104S. 

1  Ch.11.  44  TJ.  the  Ashterathite,  Shama  and  Jehiel 
UZ-ZI'-AH,  n;»j?,  4,730  Jah  is  strong.i 

1.  Son  of  Amaziah  and  father  of  Jotham,  kings  of  Judah : 
called  also  Azariah.    B.C.  810-758. 

2  Ki.  15. 13  in  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  TJ.  king 

15.  30  twentieth  year  of  Jotham  the  son  of  TJ. 
15.  32  began  Jotham  the  son  of  TJ.  king  of  Jud. 
15.  34  he  did  according  to  all  that.  .TJ.  had  done 
2  Ch.26.  1  Then  all  the  people  of  Judah  took  U.,  who 
26.  3  Sixteen  years  old  (was)  TJ.  when  he  began 
26.  8  the  Ammonites  gave  gifts  to  TJ. :  and  his 
26.  9  TJ.  built  towers  in  Jerusalem  at  the  corner 
26.  11  Moreover  TJ.  had  an  host  of  fighting  men 
26.  14  U.  prepared  for  them  throughout  all  the 

25.  18  And  they  withstood  TJ.  the  king,  and  said 
26. 18  (It  appertaineth)  not  unto  thee,  TJ.,  to  bu. 

26.  19  Then  TJ.  was  wroth,  and  (had)  a  censer  in 
26.  21  TJ. .  .was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death 
26.  22  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  TJ. . .  did  Isaiah . .  wr. 

26.  23  U.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  they  buried 

27.  2  according  to  all  that  his  father  TJ.  did 
Isa.     1.    1  vision,  .winch  he  saw.  .in  the  days  of  TJ. 

6.  1  In  the  year  that  king  TJ.  died  I  saw  also 

7.  1  Ahaz  the  son  of  Jotham,  the  son  of  TJ. 
Hos.    1.    1  in  the  days  of  TJ.,  Jotliam,  Ahaz, (and)  H. 
Amos  1.    1  which  he  saw.  .in  the  days  of  U.  king  of 
Zech  14.    5  from,  .the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  TJ. 

2.  Son  of  Uriel,  a  Kohathite.    B.C.  1100. 

1  Ch.  6.  24  Tahath  his  son,  Uriel  his  son,  TJ.  his  son 

3.  Father  of  Jehonathan,  keeper  of  the  storehouses  in 
the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1060. 

1  Ch.27.  25  overthe storehouses,  .(was),  .the  sonofU. 

4.  A  priest  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  21  Elijah,  and  Shemaiah,  and  Jehiel,  andU. 

5.  Father  of  Athaiah  who  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  after  the 
exile.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11.    4  Athaiah  the  son  of  V.,  the  son  of  Zecha. 

UZ-ZI'-EL,  bwfy  God  is  strong. 

1.  A  son  of  Kohath,  son  of  Levi.     B.C.  1600. 

Exod.  6.  18  And  the  sons  of  Kohath . .  Hebron,  and  U. 

6.  22  the  sons  of  U. ;  Mishael,  and  Elzaphan 

Lev.  10.    4  Moses  called,  .the  sons  of  U.  the  uncle  of 

Num.  3.  19  Andthesons  of  Kohath.  .Hebron,  and  U. 

3.  30  chief,  .(shall  be)  Elizaphan  the  son  of  V. 

1  Ch.  6.    2,  i8sonsofKohath(were).  .Hebron, andU. 

15.  10  Of  the  sons  of  U. ;  Amminadab  the  chief 

23.  12  sons  of  Kohath.  .Izhar,  Hebron,  and  U. 

23.  20  Of  the  sons  of  TJ.  ;  Micah  the  first,  and  J. 

24.  24  the  sons  of  U. ;  Michah :  of  the  sons  of  M. 

2.  A  Simeonite,  son  of  Ishi,  who  with  Pelatiah  and  Nea- 
riah  and  Rephaiah  and  five  hundred  men  went  to  Mount 
Seir,  and  smote  the  Amalekites,  and  dwelt  there.  B.O. 
715- 

1  Ch.  4.  42  Neariah,  and  Rephaiah,  and  TJ.,  the  sons 


UZZIELITES 


}020 


VALE 


3.  A  son  of  Eela,  son  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  7.    7  the  sons  of  Eela;  Ezbon.andUzzi,  andU. 

4.  A  son  of  Heman,  set  by  David  over  the  service  of  song. 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.    4  Mattaniah,  L".,  Shebuel,  and  Jerimoth 

5.  A  Levite  who  helped  to  cleanse  the  temple  in  the 
days  of  Hezekiah.     B.C.  724. 

2  Ch.29. 14  the  sons  of  Jeduthun;  Shemariah,  and  U. 

6.  Son  of  Hashaiah,  a  goldsmith  who  repaired  part  of 
the  wall  of  Jerusalem.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.    8  Next  unto  him  repaired  TJ.  the  son  of  H. 

TTZZIELITES,  ,!?>H>\ 

The  family  of  Uzziel'son  of  Kohath. 

Num.  3.  27  of  Kohath  (was),  .the  family  of  the  TJ. 

1  Ch.26.  33  the  Izharites,  the  Hebronites,  (and)  the  IT. 


VAGABOND,  (to  be  a)  — 

1.7*0  move,  wander %  bemoan,  *ii3  nud. 

Gen.   4.  12  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  shall  thou  be  in 
4.  14  I  shall  be  a  fugitive  and  avagabondinthe 
2.7*0  move,  shake,  stagger,  wander,  yu  nua. 

Psa  iog.  10  Let  his  children  be  continually  vagabonds 
3.7*0  come  or  go  round  about,  irepttpxofiat  perierc. 

Acts  19.  13  certain  of  the  vagabond  Jews,  exorcists 
VAIL,  veil  — 
I. A  covering,  n~220  mitpachath. 

Ruth  3.  15  Bring  the  veil  (thou  hast)  upon  thee,  and 
2. A  veil j  '"npo  inasveh. 

Exod34.  33  Closes  had  done  speaking,  .he  put  a  veil 
34.  34  But.  .he  took  the  veil  off,  until  he  came 

34.  35  Moses  put  the  veil  upon  his  face  again,  un. 

3.  A  covering,  H3D0  massekah. 

Isa.  25.   7  and  the  veil  that  is  spread  over  all  nations 

4.  Separation,  curtain,  T\2~\$  paroketh. 

Exod26.  31  thou  shalt  make  a  veil  (of)  blue,  and  pur. 
26.  33  thou  shalt  hang  up  the  veil,  .and  the  veil 
26. 33  bring  in  thither  within  the  veil  the  ark  of 

26.  35  thou  shalt  set  the  table  without  the  veil 

27.  2t  without  the  veil,  which  is  before  the  test. 
30.    6  thou  shalt  put  it  before  the  veil  that  (is) 

35.  i2  the  mercy  seat,  and  the  veil  of  the  coveri. 

36.  35  he  made  a  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and 

38.  27  of  silver  were  cast,  .the  sockets  of  the  veil 

39.  34  the  covering. .  and  the  veil  of  the  covering 

40.  3  A  nd  thou  shalt . .  cover  the  ark  with  the  ve. 
40.  21  set  up  the  veil  of  the  covering,  and  cove. 
40.  22  And  he  put  the  table,  .without  the  veil 
40.  26  he  put  the  golden  altar,  .before  the  veil 

Lev.  4.  6  sprinkle,  .before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary 
4.  17  sprinkle  (it)  seven  times,  .before  the  veil 
16.  2  into  the  holy  (place)  within  the  veil  before 
16.  72  take  a  censer.. and  bring  (it)  within  the  v. 
16.  15  bring  his  blood  within  the  veil,  and  do 
21.  23  Only  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  veil,  nor 
24.    3  Without  the  veil  of  the  testimony,  in  the 

Num.  4.    5  they  shall  take  down  the  covering  veil 
18.   7  keep  your  priest's  office. .within  the  veil 

2  Ch.  3. 14  he  made  the  veil  (of)  blue,  and  purple,  and 
5.-4  veil,  wrapping,  *]'j;y  tsaiph. 

Gen.  24. 65  therefore  she  took  a  veil,  and  covered  he. 
38.  14  covered  her  with  a  veil,  and  wrapped  he. 
38.  19  went  away,  and  laid  by  her  veil  from  her 

6.  A  veil,  wltat  hangs  down,  sign  of  authority,  VTj. 

Song  5.    7  the  keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my  v. 
Isa.     3. 23  the  fine  linen,  and  the  hoods,  and  the  veils 

7.  A  covering,  veil,  KaKv^uakalumma. 

2  Co.  3.  13  not  as  Moses,  (which)  put  a  veil  over  his 
3.  14  for  until  this  dayremaineth  the  sameveil 
3.  15  when  Mosesis  read,  the  veil  is  upon  their 
3. 16  when  it  shall  turn  to  the  Lord,  the  veil 

8.  An  extension,  large  veil,  tear  air  frao~[j.a  katapeta. 

Matt  27.  51  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 
Mark  15.  38  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 
Luke  23. 45  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  mi. 
Heb.  6.  19  which  entereth  unto  that  within  the  veil 
9.  3  afterthe  second  veil,  the  tabernacle  which 
10.  20  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh 

VAIN'  (babbling,  fellow,  glory,  men,  thing,  in)  vainly  — 
1. Iniquity,  vanity,  fix  alien. 

Jer.     4.  14  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  thee 

2.  Vanity,  San  hebel. 

Job     9.  29  (If)  I  be  wicked,  why  thenlabourlin  vain? 
21.  34  How  then  comfort  ye  me  in  vain,  seeing 
35.  16  doth  Job  open  his  mouth  in  vain;  he  mu. 

Psa.  39.    6  surely  they  are  disquieted  in  vain:  he  he. 

Pruv.31.  30  Favour  (is)  deceitful,  and  beauty  (ia)  vain 

Eccl.  6.  12  all  the  days  of  hi3  vain  life  which  he  spe. 

Isa.  30.  7  the  Egyptians  shall  help  in  vain,  and  to 
49.   4  I  have  spent  my  strength,  .and  in  vain 

Jer.   10.    3  the  customs  of  the  people  (are)  vain,  for 

Lam.  4.  17  our  eyes  as  yet  failed  for  our  vain  help 

Zech.  10.    2  they  comfort  in  vain :  therefore  they  went 
Z.Oratis,  for  nought,  njn  chinnam. 

Prov.  i.  17  Surely  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  si. 

Eze.    6.  10  I  have  not  said  in  vain  that  I  would  do 


4.7*0  be  holloic,  231  nalab. 

Job  ii.  12  Forvain  man  would  be  wise,  though  man 

5.  TVind,  nn  ruach. 

Job    15.    2  Should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  knowledge 
16.   3  Shall  vain  words  have  anendror  whatem. 

6.  Empty,  vain,  vanity,  p"i  riq. 

Lev.  26.  16  ye  shall  sow  your  seed  in  vain,  for  your 
26.  20  And  your  strength  shall  be  spent  in  vain 

Job   39.  16  She  is  hardened,  .her  labour  is  in  vain  wi. 

Psa.    2.    1  Why  do  the . .  people  imagine  a  vain  thing? 
73.  13  Verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  (in)  vain 

Isa.   49.   4  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my 
65.  23  They  shall  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  bring 

Jer.   51.  58  the  people  shall  labour  in  vain,  and  the 

7. Empty,  vain,  vanity,  pi,  p"i  req. 

Deut.32.  47  Forit  (is)not  a  vain  thing  for  you;  because 
Judg.  9.    4  wherewith  Abimelech  hired  light  and  vain 

11.  3  there  were  gathered  vain  men  to  Jephthah 
2  Sa.  6.  20  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  shamelessly  un. 
2  Ch.13.  7  there  are  gathered  unto  him  vain  men,  the 
Prov.  12.  11  he  that  f  olloweth  vain  (persons  is)  void  of 

28. 19  he  that  followeth  after  vain  (persons)  sh. 

8.Emptily,  vainly,  for  nought,  cn,-i  rekam. 

Jer.   50.   9  their  arrows,  .none  shall  return  in  vain 

9.  Vanity,  falsehood,  xrj  shav. 

Exod2o.    7  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of.  .God  in  v. 

20.    7  uot . .  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain 

Deut.  5.  11  shalt  not  take  the  name  of.  .God  in  vain 

5.  11  not.. guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain 
Job  11.  11  he  knoweth  vain  men:  he  seeth  wickedn. 
Psa.  26.    4  I  have  not  sat  with  vain  persons,  neither 

60.  11  Give  us  help,  .for  vain  (is)the  helpof  man 

89.  47  wherefore  hast  thou  made  all  men  in  vain 

108.  12  Give  us  help,  .for  vain  (is)the  helpof  man 

127.   1  Except,  .the  Lord  build  they  labour  in  vain 

127.    1  keep,  .the  watchman  waketh(but)  in  vain 

127.    2  (It  is)  vain  for  you  to  rise  up  early,  to  sit 

139.  20  thine  enemies  take  (thy  name)  in  vain 

Isa.     1.  13  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations;  incense  is 

Jer.    2.  30  In  vain  have  I  smitten  your  children,  th. 

4.  30  in  vain  shalt  thou  make  thyself  fair;  (.thy) 

6.  29  the  founder  melteth  in  vain;  for  the  wic. 
46.  11  in  vain  shalt  thou  use  many  medicines 

Lam.  2.  14  Thy  prophets  have  seen  vain  and  foolish 

Eze.  12.  24  there  shall  be  no  more  any  vain  nor  flatt. 

13.    7  Have  ye  not  seen  a  vain  vision,  aud  have 

Mai.   3.  14  Ye  have  said.  It  (is)  vain  to  serve  God;  and 

10.  Falsehood,  lie,  np^  slieqer. 

Exod.5.    9  the  men . .  let  them  not  regard  vain  words 
1  Sa.  25.  21  Surely  in  vain  have  I  kept  all  that  this 
Psa.  33.  17  An  horse  (is)  a  vain  thing  for  safety:  nei. 
Jer.     3.  23  Truly  in  vain,  .from  the  hills.. the  multi. 
8.    8  in  vain  made  he  (it);  the  pen . .  (is)  in  vain 

W.Ruin,  vacancy,  vanity,  >Tintohu. 

1  Sa.  12.  21  after  vain  (things),  .for  they  (are)  vain 
Isa.  45.  18  he  created  it  not  in  vain,  he  formed  it  to 
45.  19  I  said  not.  .Seek  ye  me  in  vain:  I  the  Lo. 

12. Lip,  np"^  saphah. 

Isa.  36.'  5  vain  words,  I  (have)  counsel  and  strength 

13. Freely,  Swpedv  d&rean. 

Gal.    2.  21  if  ..by  the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain 

14.  Easily,  at  random,  €t«J)  etke. 

Rom. 13.    4  he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain;  for  he 
1  Co.  15.    2  unto  you,  unless  ye  have  believed  in  vain 
Gal.    3.    4  Have  yesuffered.  .in vain?  if.  .yet  in  vain? 
4.  11  I  have  bestowed  upon  you  labour  in  vain 
Col.     2.  i3  man.,  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind 

15.  Vainly,  emptily,  kzv&s  kenos. 

Jas.    4.   5  Do  ye  think,  .the  scripture  saith  in  vain 

16.  Vain,  empty,  K€v6s  kenos. 

Acts   4.  25  Why  did.  .thepeople  imaginevain  things? 

1  C0.15.  10  grace,  .(bestowed)  upon  me  was  notinva. 

15.  i4preaching  vain,  anil  your  faith  (is)also  vain 
15-  58  ye  know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain 

2  Co.  6.  1  ye  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain 
Gal.  2.  2  lest  by  any  means  I  should  run.  .in  vain 
Eph.  5.  6  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words 
Phil.  2.  16  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain 
Col.  2.  8  spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain  de. 
1  Th.  2.    1  yourselves.. know,  .that  it  was  not  in  vain 

3.   5  tempted  you,  and  our  labour  be  in  vain 
Jas.     2.  20  wilt  thou  know,  O  vain  man,  that  faith 

17.  Vain,  empty  sound,  Ktvocptuvia  kenophonia. 

1  Ti.    6.  20  avoiding  profane,  .vain  babblings,  and 

2  Ti.    2.  16  But  shun  profane,  .vain  babblings;  for 

IS.  Vain,  unprofitable,  useless,  pdraios  mataios. 

1  Co.   3.  20  the  thoughts  of  the  wise,  that  they  are  va. 

15.  17  if  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith  (is)  vain 

Titus  3.    9  strivings. . for  they  are  unprofitable  and  va. 

Ja3.     1.  26  butdeceiveth.  .this  man's  religion  is  vain 

1  Pe.    1.  18  redeemed,  .from  your  vain  conversation 

19.  In  vain,  fidrnv  maten. 

Matt  15.   9  But  in  vain  they  do  worship  me,  teaching 
Mark  7.    7  Howbeit  iu  vain  do  they  worship  me,  tea. 

VAIN,  to  be  (in),  become,  make  — 
1.  To  be  or  become  vain.  ?2n  habal. 

2  Ki.17.  15  they  followed  vanity,  and  became  vain 
Job  27.  12  why  then  are  ye  thus  altogether  vain  ? 
Psa.  62.  10  become  not  vain  in  robbery:  if  riches  in. 
Jer,    2.    5  that  they  are  gone,  .and  are  become  vain? 


2.To  make  vain,  *?jn  Imhal,  5. 

Jer.  23.  16  they  make  you  vain:  they  speak  a  vision 
Z.T>t  be  found  false,  a  liar,  2]|  kazab,  2. 

Job  41.    9  Behold,  the  hope  of  him  is  in  vain:  shall 

4.7*0  empty,  make  vain,  ksvow  kenoo. 

2  Co.  9.    3  lest  our  boasting  of  you  should  be  in  vain 

5.7*0  6c  or  become  vain,  paraioofiai  mataioomai. 
Bom.  1.  21  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and 

VAIN  glory,  (desirous  off  — 

1.  Vain  glory,  KevoSo^ia  kenodoxia. 

Phil.    2.    3  nothing,  .throughstrifeorvainglory;  but 

2.  Vain  glorious,  Kev6do^oske}iodo:cos, 

Gal.    5.  26  Let  us  not  be  desirous  of  vain  glory,  pro. 

VA- JE-ZA'-THA,  xrin  torn  of  Ized. 

The  tenth  son  of  Haman  the  Agagite  in  the  days  of 

Esther  aud  Ahasuerus.    B.C.  510. 

Esth.  9.    9  Parmashta,  and  Arisai,  and  Aridai,  and  V. 
VALE,  VALLEY,  OR  DALE  — 
l.Biqah,  njfj?5  a  cleft  place,  valley. 
Valley  of  Jericho,  StVV  n+ps. 
Between  Jericho  and  the  Salt  Sea. 

Deut. 34.   3  the  plain  of  the  valley  of  Jericho,  the  city 

Valley  of  Lebanon,  p2^n  Di'P?.   W.  of  Ilermon. 
Josh. 11.  17  unto  Baal-gad  in  the  valley  of  Lebanon 

Valley  of  Megiddo,  ""Hp  nyp?. 

Throughwhiuh  the  Kishon  flows,  in  Issacharor  Manasseb. 

2  Ch.35.  22  Josiah.  .came  to  fight  in  the  valley  of  M. 

Zech. 12.  11  mourning  of  Hadadri.  in  the  valley  of  M. 

Valley  of  Mizpeh,  nfsp  nfp?.      In  Dan. 

Josh. 11.  8  Israel..chasedthem..unto  the  valley  of  M. 

2.Emeq,  ppj:  a  deep  difficult  place. 

Valley  of  Achor,  "ii2j/  ppy.     Near  Jericho. 

Josh.  7.  24  they  brought  them  into  the  valley  of  A. 
7.  26  that  place  was  called,  The  valley  of  A.  to 
15.    7  the  border  went  up.  .from  the  valley  of  A. 
Isa.  65.  10  the  valley  of  A.  a  place  for  the  herds  to  lie 
Hos.  2. 15  I  will  give. .the  valley  of  A.foradoorof  h. 

Valley  of  Ajalon,  pS;x  pojg.     In  Dan. 

Josh.  10.  12  stand.. thou,  Moon,  in  the  valley  of  A. 
Valley  of  Baca,  Npsn  pay.      Near  Jerusalem, 

Psa.   84.    6  passing  through  the  valley  of  B.  make  it 
Valley  of  Berachah,  .ipT2  PCjr.      West  of  Tekoa. 

2  Ch.20.  26  assembled  themselves  in  the  valley  of  Be. 

20.  26  was  called,  The  valley  of  B.,  unto  this  day 

Valley  of  Decision,  pinn  Pf>K-      At  Jerusalem. 

Joel    3.  14  M  altitudes,  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  D. 
3.  14  the  day  of  the  LoRI>.  .in  the  valley  of  D. 

Valley  of  Elah,  n^xrr  ppj.*.     Near  Shocah. 

1  Sa.  17.    2  and  the  men.  .pitched  by  the  valley  of  E. 

17.  19  the  men  of  Israel,  (were)in  the  valley  of  E. 

21.  9  whom  thou  slewest  in  the  valley  of  E.  beh. 

Valley  of  the  Giants,  C'X?"l  pOJf.      S.  of  Jerusalem. 
See  the  valley  of  liephaim  (below.) 

Josh.  15.    8  which  (is)  at  the  end  of  the  valley  of  the  gi. 
18. 16  which  (is)  in  the  valley  of  the  giants  on 
Valley  of  Gib  eon,  fU'2;2  pD&      In  Benjamin. 

Isa.   28.  21  shall  be  wroth  as  (iu)  the  valley  of  G.  that 

Valley  of  Hebron,  p~crr  peg.      S.  of  Judah. 

Gen.  37.  14  So  he  sent  him  out  of  the  vale  of  H.,  and  he 
Valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  or^ir^  p£>'. 
Between  Jerusalem  and  the  mount  of  Olives. 

Joel    3.    2  I.  .will  bring  them,  .into  the  valley  of  J. 
3.  12  Let . .  heathen . .  come  up  to  the  valley  of  J. 

Valley  of  Jezreel,  Sx;;-)!'  pDJ/.      In  Issachar. 

Josh. 17. 16  and  (they;  who(are)  of  the  valley  of  J. 
Judg.  6.  33  the  Amalekites.. pitched  in  the  valley  of  J. 
Hus.   1 .    5  I  will  break  the  bow . .  in  the  valley  of  J. 

Valley  of  Keziz,  \'"Sp  '■">■•      In  Benjamin. 

Josh.  1 3.  21  the  cities!  .Jericho,  .and  the  valley  of  K. 
Valley  of  the  King,  or  the  King's  Dale,  T^rt  p£g. 
The  S.  part  of  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat. 

Gen.  14.  17  at  the  valley  of  Shaveh.  .the  king's  dale 

2  Sa.  18.  iS  reared. .apillar,whkh(is)fn the king'sdale 

Valley  of  Rephaim,  CTN9"i  p»& 

X.  part  of  the  valley  of  Hinuom,  on  the  W.  of  Jerusalem. 
2  Sa.  5.  iS,  22  spread  themselves  in  the  valley  of  R. 

23.  13  The  Philistines  pitched  in  the  valley  of  R. 
1  Ch.i:.  15  Philistines  encamped  in  the  valley  of  R. 
14.    9  and  spread  themselves  in  the  valley  of  R. 
Isa.   17.    5  he  that  gathereth  ears  in  the  valley  of  R. 

Valley  of  Shaveh,  niy  pC& 
See  the  King's  Dale. 

Gen.  14. 17  at  the  valley  of  Shaveh..  the  king's  dale 
Valley  of  Siddim,  C^irn  pOjr.      S.  TI".  of  Salt  Sea. 
Gen.  14.    3  were  joined  together  in  the  vale  of  S. 
14.    8  joined  battle  with  them  in  the  vale  of  S. 
14.  10  thevaleofS.(wasfuU)ofslimepits,andth9 

Valley  of  Succoth,  rn~p  p£y.      In  Gad. 

Psa.  Co.   6  Iwilldivide'..andmeteoutthevalleyofS. 
108.   7  Iwilldivide.  .and  mete  out  the  valley  of  S. 


VALLEY 


1021 


VANISH 


S.Ge,  %  N'a  a  low,  flat  place. 

Valley  of  Charasim,  C'pnn  N'3.      In  Judah. 

j  Oh.  4.  14  begat  Joab,  the  father  of  the  valley  of  C. 
Valley  of  Craftsmen,  D'cnn  n'3.      Same  as  preceding. 

Neh.  11.  35  Loil,  and  Ono,  the  valley  of  Craftsmen 
Valley  of  Hamon-Gog,    313  |iDq  N'3. 
E.  of  Chinnereth.     See  the  Valley  of  the  Passengers. 

Eze.  39.  11  they  shall  call  (it),  The  valley  of  H.  G. 

39. 15  buriers  have  buried  it  in  the  valley  of  H.  G. 

Valley  of  Hinnom,  D3rr  '3.      S.  of  Jerusalem. 

Josh.15.    8  mountain . .  (lieth)  before  the  valley  of  H. 

18. 16  the  border . .  descended  to  the  valley  of  H. 
Neh.  n.  30  dwelt  from  Beer-sheba  to  the  valley  of  H. 

Valley  of  Jiphthah-el,  Vi<~nna;  '3  N~.JS.of  Zebulun. 
Josh.  19.  14  outgoings  thereof  are  in  the  valley  of  J. 
19.  27  reacheth . .  to  the  valley  of  J.  toward  the  n. 

Valley  of  the  Mountains,   Hfrioa.    Near  Jerusalem. 
Zech.14.    5  ye  shall  flee  (to)  the  valley  of  the  mount. 
14.    5  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach 

Valley  of  the  Passengers,  D'"oyn  '3. 
In  E.  of  Chinnereth.    See  Valley  of  Hamon-Gog. 
Eze.  39.  11  the  valley  of  the  passengers  on  the  east 

Valley  of  Salt,  rfe  x*3.      S.  end  of  Salt  Sea. 

2  Sa.  8. 13  smiting  of  the  Syrians  in  the  valley  of  sal  t 
2  Ki.14.    7  He  slew  of  Edom  in  the  valley  of  salt  ten 

1  Ch.18.  12  Abishai.  .slew,  .in the  valley  of  salt  eigh. 

2  Ch.25. 11  And  Amaziah.  .went  to  the  valley  of  salt 
Psa.  60.  title,  smote  of  Edom  in  the  valley  of  salt  tw. 

Valley  of  Slaughter,  fT3"inri  n%3.      A  symbolic  name. 

Jer.     7.  32  it  shall.  !be  called,  .the  valley  of  slaugh. 
19.    6  place  shall,  .be  called.. The  valley  of  sla. 
Valley  of  the  Son  of  Hinnom,   DJrrjS  *3. 
See  the  Valley  of  Hinnom. 

Josh.15.    8  the  border,  .by  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

18.  16  (lieth)  before  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
2  EX  23.  10  (is)  in  the  valley  of  the  children  of  H. 

2  CI1.2S.   3  he  burnt,  .in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

33.  6  the  fire  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
Jer.     7.  31  which  (is)  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

7.  32  be  called .  .the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

19.  2  go  forth  unto  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 
19.  6  nor,  The  valley  of  the  son  of  H.,  but  the 
32.  35  which  (are)  in  the  valley  of  the  sou  of  H. 

Vailey  of  Vision,  Ji'jn  n'3. 

A  symbolic  name  for  the  lower  part  of  Jerusalem. 
Isa.   22.    1  The burdenof thevalleyof Vision.    What 
22.    5  a  day  of  trouble . .  in  the  valley  of  Vision 
Valley  of  Zeboim,  D'jPVl1  '3-      In  Benjamin. 

1  Sa.  13.  iS  border  that  looketh  to  the  valley  of  Z. 
Valley  of  Zephathah,  nps?  tCi.     In  Simeon. 

2  Ch.14.  10  set  the  battle  in  array  in  the  valley  of  Z. 
A.Xachal,  ?rg  a  ravine,  gorge,  watercourse. 
Valley  of  Eschol,  Sisif-X  Sru.      S.  of  Jndah. 

>"uni32.   9  when  they  went  up  unto  the  valley  of  ¥.. 

Deut.  1.  24  And  they,  .came unto  the  valley  of  E.,  and 
Valley  of  Gerar,  TJ3  ^ru.      S.  W.  of  Palestine. 

Gen.  26. 17  Isaac . .  pitched  his  tent  in  the  valley  of  G. 
Valley  of  Shittim,  D'asSi  Snj.     Valley  of  the  Acacias. 

Joel     3.  1 8  a  fountain,  .shall  water  the  valley  of  S. 
Valley  of  Sorek,  plii?  hm.     In  Dan. 

Judg.  16.    4  that  he  loved  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  S. 
Valley  of  Zared,  tit  *7ni.    E.  of  Salt  Sea. 

Num  21. 12  removed,  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Z. 
5.Sh<,'phelah,  n^st?  a  low,  flat  place. 
The  low  country  generally,  from  Joppa  southward  to 
the  river  of  Egypt. 

Deut.  1.    7  Turn  you.  .and  go.  .unto  all.  .in  the  vale 

Josh  10.  40  Joshua  smote  all  the  country,  .of  the  vale 
11. 16  So  Joshua  took  all  that  land,  .and  the  va. 
11.  16  the  mountain  of  Israel,  and  the  valley  of 
VALE,  valley  — 
l.A  cleft,  vale,  nj/p?  Uqah. 

Deut.  S.    7  depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hi. 
11. 11  the  land.. (is)  a  laud  of  bills  and  valleys 

Psa.  104.    8  they  go  down  by  the  valleys  unto  the  pi. 

Isa.   41. 18  and  fountains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys 
63.  14  As  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the  valley 

Eze.  37.    1  set  me  down  in  the  midst  of  the  valley 
37.   2  (there  were)  very  many  in  the  open  vail. 
See  also  Deut.  34.  3;  Josh.  n.  8,  17;  12.  7;  2  Ch.  35.  22; 
Zech.  12.  11. 

2.  Valley,  low  plain,  a  gorge,  N*3  gay. 

Nuni2i.  20  from  Bamoth  (in)  the  valley,  that  (is)  in 
Deut.  3.  29  we  abode  in  the  valley  over"  against  Beth. 
4.  46  in  the  valley  over  against  Beth-peor,  in 

34.  6  he  buried  him  in  the  valley  in  the  land 
Josh.  8.  11  (there  was)  a  valley  between  them  and  Ai 

1  Sa.  17.  3  and  (there  was)  a  valley  between  them 

ty.  52  until  thou  come  to  the  valley,  and  to  the 

2  Ki.  2.  16  upon  some  mountain,  or  into  some  valley 
1  Ch.  4.  39  they  went. .  unto  the  east  side  of  the  vail. 
2Ch.26.  9  at  the  corner  gate,  and  at  the  valley  gate 
.Nell.    2. 13  I  went,  .by  the  gate  of  the  valley,  even 

2. 15  entered  by  the  gate  of  the  valley,  and  (so) 

3. 13  The  valley  gate  repaired  Hanun,  and  the 

Psa.  23.    4  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the 

Isa.   28.    1  which  (are)  on  the  head  of  the  fat  valleys 

28.   4  which  (is)  on  the  head  of  the  fat  valley 

40.    4  Every  valley  shall  be  exalted,  and  every 

Jer.     2.  23  See  thy  way  in  the  valley,  know  what  th. 


Eze.    6.    3  to  the  hills,  tc  the  rivers,  and  to  the  val. 
7.  16  on  the  mountains  like  doves  of  the  valley 

31.  12  in  all  the  valleys  his  branches  are  fallen 

32.  5  And  I  will,  .till the  valleys  with  thy  heig. 

35.  8  in  thy  valleys,  and  in  all  thy  rivers,  shall 

36.  4,  6  to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers,  and  to  the  va. 
Mic  1.  6  pour  down  the  stones  thereof  into  the  va. 
Zech.14.    4  (and  there  shall  be)  a  very  great  valley 

See  also  Josh.  15.  8,  8;  18.  16,  16;  19.  14,  27;  1  Sa.  13. 
18  ;  2  Sa.  8.  13 ;  2  Ki.  14.  7 ;  23.  10;  1  Ch.  4.  14 ;  18.  12 ; 
2  Ch.  14.  10;  25.  11;  28.3;  33.6;  Neh.  11.  30,  35;  Psa. 
60  ;  Isa.  22.  1,  5 ;  Jer.  7.  31,  32,  32 ;  19.  2,  6,  6;  32.  35; 
Eze.  39.  11,  ii,  15;  Zech.  14.  5,  5. 

3.^-1  vale  with  a  brook,  a  ravine,  deep  gorge,  Snj. 

Gen.  26.  19  Isaac's  servants  digged  in  the  valley,  and 

Num  24.    6  As  the  valleys  are  they  spread  forth,  as 

Deut.  3. 16  even  unto  the  river  Anion  half  the  valley 

21.    4  bring  down  the  heifer  unto  a  rough  vail. 

21.   4  strike  oft"  the  heifer's  neck,  .in  the  valley 

21.    6  the  heifer  that  is  beheaded  in  the  valley 

1  Sa.  15.    5  And  Saul  came . .  and  laid  wait  in  the  va. 

2  Ki.  3. 16  he  said,  .Make  this  valley  full  of  ditches 

3. 17  yet  that  valley  shall  be  filled  with  water 
2  Ch.33.  14  on  the  west  side  of  Gihon,  in  the  valley 
Job  21.  33  The  clods  of  the  valley  shall  be  sweet  unto 

30.  6  to  dwell  in  the  cliffs  of  the  valleys.,  caves 
Psa.  104.  10  He  sendeth  the  springs  into  the  valleys 
Prov3o.  17  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out 
Song  6.  11  I  went  down.,  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  val. 
Isa.     7.  19  shall  rest  all  of  them  in  the  desolate  val. 

57.  5  slaying  the  children  in  the  valleys  under 
See  also  Gen.  26.  17;  Sura.  21.  12;  32.9;  Deut.  1.  24; 
Judg.  16.  4. 

4.A  deep  or  difficult  place,   psj;  emeq. 

Num  14.  25  the  A.  and  the  Canaanites  dwell  in  the  va. 

Josh.  S.  13  went  that  night  into  the  midst  of  the  va. 

13.  19  Zareth-shahar  in  the  mount  of  the  valley 

13.  27  in  the  valley,  Beth-aram,  and  Beth-nimrah 

17.  16  all.  .that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  valley 
Judg.  1.  19  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley 

1.  34  not  suffer  them  to  come  down  to  the  val. 
5.  15  Barak:  he  was  senton  footinto  the  valley 
7.  1  were,  .by  the  hill  of  Moreh,  in  the  valley 
7.  8  host  of  Midian  was  beneath  him  in  the  va. 
7.  12  lay  along  in  the  valley  like  grasshoppers 

18.  28  and  it  was  in  the  valley,  .by  Beth-rehob 

1  Sa.    6.  13  reaping  their  wheat  harvest  in  the  valley 

31.  7  that  (were)  on  the  other  side  of  the  valley 
1  Ki.20.  28  he  (is)  not  God  of  the  valleys,  therefore 

1  Ch.io.    7  when  all  the  men  of  Israel,  .in  the  valley 
12.  15  they  put  to  flight  all  (them)  of  the  valleys 

14.  13  again  spread  themselves  abroad  in  the  va. 
27.  29  over  the  herds  (that  were)  in  the  valleys 

Job   39. 10  or  will  he  harrow  the  valleys  after  thee? 

39.  21  He  paweth  in  the  valley,  and  rejoiceth 
Psa.  65.  13  valleys  also  are  covered  over  with  corn 
Song  2.    1  I  (am)  the  rose  of  S. . .  the  lily  of  the  valleys 
Isa.  22.    7  thy  choicest  valleys  shall  be  full  of  char. 
Jer.  21.  13  0  inhabitant  of  the  valley. .rock ofthe  pi. 

31.  40  the  whole  valley  of  the  dead  bodies,  and 

47.  5  A.  iscutoff(with)theremuautof  their  va. 

48.  8  the  valley  also  shall  perish,  and  the  plain 

49.  4  gloriest  thou  in  thy  valleys,  thy  flowing  va. 
Mic.    1.   4  the  valleys  shall  be  cleft,  as  wax  before  the 

See  also  Gen.  14. 3,  8, 10, 17;  37.  14 ;  Josh.  7.  24,  26;  10.  12; 
15.  7,  8;  17.  16  ;  iS.  16, 21 ;  Judg.  6.  33;  1  Sa.  17.  2,  19;  21. 
9 ;  2  Sa.  5.  18,  22 ;  23.  13 ;  1  Ch.  11.  15 ;  14.  9;  2  Ch.  20. 
26,  26;  Psa.  60.  6;  84.  6;  108.  7;  Isa.  17.  5;  28.  21;  65. 
10;  Hos.  1.  5  ;  2.  15;  Joel  3.  2,  12,  14,  14. 

5. Low  land,  plaAn,  slope  or  flat,  n^s;?  shephrfah. 
Josh.  9.    1  in  the  hills,  and  in  the  valleys,  and  in  all 

10.  40  the  hills,  and  of  the  south,  and  of  the  va. 

11.  2  in  the  valley,  and  in  the  borders  of  Dor 
11. 16  took  all.  .the  valley,  .the  valley  of  the  sa. 

12.  8  In  the  mountains,  and  in  the  valleys,  and 

15.  33  in  the  valley,  Eshtaol,  andZoreah,  and  As. 
Judg.  1.    9  that  dwelt,  .in  the  south,  and  inthevalley 

1  Ki.10.  27  the  sycamore  trees  that  (are)  in  the  vale 

2  Ch.  1.  15  as  the  sycamore  trees  that  (are)  in  the  vale 
Jer.  32.  44  in  the  cities  of  the  valley,  and  in  the  cit. 

33. 13  in  the  cities  of  the  vale,  and  in  the  cities 

Q.A  precipice,  precipitous  valley,  (pdpay£ piharagx. 

Luke  3.    5  Every  valley  shall  be  filled,  and  every  m. 
VALIANT,  (man,  one,  to  be)  valiantest,  valour  — 
l.A  mighty  one,  T^abbvr. 

Jer.  46. 15  Why  are  thy  valiant,  .swept  away?  they 
2.A  hero,  Snin  erel. 

Isa.  33.   7  Behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall  cry  with. 

3.^-1  son  of  force  or  might,  V'rrjii  ben  chayil. 

Judg 21.  10  sent,  .twelve  thousand  of  the  valiantest 

1  Sa.  18.  17  only  be  thou  valiant  for  me,  and  fight  the 

2  Sa.    2.    7  now.  .be  strengthened,  and  be  ye  valiant 

13.  28  fear  not.  .be  courageous,  and  be  valiant 
17. 10  he  also  (that  is)  valiant,  whose  heart  (is) 

1  Ch.  5.  18  of  valiant  men,  men  able  to  bear  buckler 

2  Ch.28.    6  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand,  .valiant 

4. A  mighty  man,  *ri33  gibbor. 

1  Ch.  7.    2  valiant  men  of  might  in  their  generations 

7.  5  valiant  men  of  might,  reckoned  in  all  by 
1  [.  26  Also  the  valiant  men  of  the  armies  (were) 

2  Ch.13.    3  with  an  army  of  valiant  men  of  war.  .four 
Song  3.    7  threescore  valiant  men . .  of  the  valiant  of 

5.  To  be  mighty,  133  gabar. 

Jer.    9.    3  they  are  not  valiant  for  the  truth  upon 
6. Force,  strength,  Tn  chayil. 

Josh.  1. 14 ye  shall  pass,  .all  the  mighty  men  of  val. 


Josh.  6.   2  the  king  thereof,  .the  mighty  men  of  val. 
8.    3  chose,  .thirty  thousand  mighty  men  of  va. 

10.  7  Joshua . .  and  all  the  mighty  men  of  valoiu- 
Judg.  3.29  ten  thousand  men.,  and  all  men  of  valour 

6.  12  The  Lord  (is)  with  thee;  thou.,  man  of  va. 

11.  1  Jephthah  the  G.  was  a  mighty  man  of  va. 
18.  2  five  men  from  their  coasts,  men  of  valour 
20.  44  eighteen  thousand  men:  all.  .men  of  valo. 
20.  46  twenty  and  five  thousand. .all.  .men  of  val. 

1  Sa.  14.  52  when  Saul  saw  any  strong,  .or  valiant  man 

16. 18  a  mighty  valiant  man,  anda  man  of  war 
31. 12  All  the  valiant  men  arose,  and  went  all 

2  Sa.  11.  16  a  place  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men 

17.  10  (they)  which  (be)  with  him  (are)  valiant  m. 

23.  20  Benaiah.  .son  of  avaliantman.of  Kabzeel 

24.  9  eight  hundred  thousand  valiant  men  that 

1  Ki.   1 .  42  thou  (art)  a  valiant  man,  and  briugest  go. 

11.  28  Jeroboam  (was)  a  mighty  man  of  valour 

2  Ki.  5.    1  Naaman.  .was  also  a  mighty  man  in  valo. 

24.  14  the  princes,  and  all  the  mighty  men  of  va. 

1  Ch.  5.  24  mighty  men  of  valour,  famous  men.  .he. 

7.  7  the  sons  of  Bela.  .mighty  men  of  valour 
7.    9  the  number  of  them . .  mightymen  of  val. 

7.  11  mighty  men  of  valour,  .seventeen  thous. 
7. 40  mighty  men  of  valour . .  chief  of  the  prin. 

8.  40  were  mighty  men  of  valour,  archers,  and 

10.  12  They  arose,  all  the  valiant  men,  and  took 

11.  22  Benaiah.  .son  of  a  valiant  man  of  Kabzeel 

12.  21  mighty  men  of  valour,  and  were  captains 
12.  25  of  the  children  of  S.,  mighty  men  of  val. 
12.28  Zadok,  a  young  man  mighty  of  valour,  and 
12.  30  mighty  men  of  valour,  famous  throughout 
26.  6  ruled . .  for  they  (were)  mighty  men  of  val.. 
26.  30  Hashabiah  and  his  brethren,  men  of  val. 
26.  31  mighty  men  of  valour  at  Jazar  of  Gilead 
26.  32  his  brethren,  men  of  valour.. two  thousand 
28.    1  assembled,  .all  the  valiant  men,  unto  Je. 

2  Ch.13.   3  chosen  men,  (being)  mighty  men  of  valour 

14.  8  army,  .all  these  (were)  mighty  men  of  va. 
17.  13  and  the  men  of  war,  mighty  men  of  valo. 
17.  14  with  him  mighty  men  of  valour  three  hu. 
17.  16  two  hundred  thousand  mighty  men  of  va. 
17.  17  Eliada  a  mighty  man  of  valour,  and  with 

25.  6  He  hired .  .mighty  men  of  valour  out  of 

26.  12  of  the  fathers  of  the  mighty  men  of  valo. 
26.  17  fourscore  priests  of  theLuRr>..valiantmen 
32.  21  which  cut  off  all  the  mighty  men  of  valo. 

]^eh.  11.    6  four  hundred  threescore  and  eight  valia 

11.  14  their  brethren,  mightymen  of  valour,  an 

Nah.  2.    3  the  valiant  men  (are)  in  scarlet,  the  char. 

7. Abundant,  great,  mighty,  Y23  kabbir. 

Isa.   10. 13  I  have  put  down  the  inhabitants  like  a  va. 

8,  Strong,  stout,  laxvpos  ischuros. 

Heb.  11.  34  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight 
VALIANTLY,  (to  behave  self)  — 
1.2b  strengthen  self,  show  self  strong,  p\r\chazaq,7 . 

1  Ch.19.  13  let  us  behave  ourselves  valiantly  for  our 

2.  Force,  strength,  "?:n  chayil. 

XUIU24.  18  his  enemies:  and  Israel  shall  do  valiantly 

Psa.  60.  12  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly:  for  he 

108.  13  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly:  for  he 

118. 15,  16  the  right  hand  of  the  Loud  doeth  val. 

VALUE,  (be  of  more),  be  valued,  to  — 
\. Nought,  an  idol,  S'Sn  elil. 

Job   13.    4  forgers,  .ye  (are)  all  physicians  of  no  value 

2.  To  be  weighed,  n^D  salah,  4. 

Job  28.  16  It  cannot  be  valued  with  the  gold  of  Op. 
28.  19  neither  shall  it  be  valued  with  pure  gold 

3.  To  value,  set  in  array,  XS}  arak,  5. 

Lev.  27.    8  shall  value  him.  .shall  the  priest  value h, 
27. 12  the  priest  shall  value  it,  whether  it  be  g. 

'i. Array,  valuation,  ^"jy  ereh. 

Lev.  27.  12  as  thou  valuest  it.  .the  priest,  so  shall  it 

v.  To  carry  different  ways,  excel,  5ia(p€pa>  diaphero. 

Matt  10.  31  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 

Luke  12.    7  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 
6.  To  honour,  rtfxdu  timad. 

Matt  27.    9  that  was  valued,  whom  they . .  did  value 
VATJ'-TAtT  ,-ryi  Jah  is  fJrais0. 

One    of   the    sons  of  Bani  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  456. 

Ezra  10.  36  V.,  Meremoth,  Eliashib 
VANISH  (away,  out  of  sight),  be  vanished,  to  — 
l.To  go  on,  "?;  yalak. 

Job     7.   9  the  cloud  is  consumed,  and  vanisheth  aw. 
2.To  vanish,  n?D  malach,  2. 

Isa.   51.   6  the  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  smoke 
3. To  bespread  out,  nip  sarach,  2. 

Jer.  49.    7  Concerning  Edom.  .is  their  wisdom  vani.? 
i.To  be  cut  off,  roy  tsamath,  2. 

Job     6. 17  What  time  they  wax  warm,  they  vanish 
5.  To  disappear,  vanish,  acpaviCofxat  aiihanizomai. 

Jas.     4.  14  appeareth  for  a  little.,  and.,  vanisheth  a*. 
6.Tobecomeim-isible,yhofiat  u<pavros  gin  .ophantos. 

Luke24.  31  they  knew  him ;  and  he  vanished  outofs. 
7. A  disappiearing,  vanishing,  afyavia^saphanisin. 

Heb.    8. 13  which . .  waxeth  old  (is)  ready  to  vanish  a. 
8. To  make  idle,  inactive,  useless,  tcarapyeco  katar, 

1  Co.  13.   8  whether,  .knowledge,  it  shall  vanish  aw. 


VANITY 


1022 


VERILY 


VANITY,  vanities  — 

1. Iniquity,  vanity,  prN  aven. 

Job  15.  35  They,  .bring  forth  vanity,  and  their  belly 
Psa,  10.  7  under  his  tongue  (is)  mischief  and  vanity 
Prov22.  8  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap  vanity 
Isa.  41.  29  Behold,  they  (are)  all  vanity  ;  their  works 
58.  9  the  putting  forth  of  the  finger,  and.  .van. 
Zech.io.   2  the  idola  have  spoken  vanity,  and  the  di. 

^.Vanity,  ^3q  habel. 

Ecel.  1.    2  Vanity,  .saith  the  Preacher,  .vanity,  .all 
12.    8  Vanity . .  saith  the  Preacher ;  all  (is) 

3.  Vanity,  ^n  hebel. 

Deut  32.  21  provoked  me  to  anger  with  their  vanities 

1  Ki.  16.  13  in  provoking  the  Lokd..  with  their  vanit. 

16.  26  to  provoke  the  Lord  . .  with  their  vanities 

2  Ki.17.  15  they  followed  vanity,  and  became  vain 
Job  7. 16  let  me  alone;  for  my  days  (are)  vanity 
Psa.  31.   £  I  have  hated  them  that  regard  lying  van. 

39.  5  man  at  his  best  state  (is)  altogether  van. 
39. 11  like  a  moth  :  surely  every  man  (is)  vanity 
62.  9  Surely  men  of  low  degree  (are)  vanity, (and) 
62.  g  they  (are)  altogether  (lighter)  than  vanity 
78.  33  their  days  did  he  consume  in  vanity,  and 
94.  11  knoweth  the  thoughts,  .that  they(are)  va. 
144.  4  Man  is  like  to  vanity  :  his  days  (are)  as  a 
Provi3.  11  Wealth  (gotten)  by  vanity  shall  bedimin. 

21.  6  The  getting  of  treasures,  .(is)  a  vanity  to. 
Eccl.  1.    2  vanities,  .vanities  ;  all  (is)  vanity 

1.  14  behold,  all  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  sp. 

2.  1  enjoy  pleasure,  .behold,  this  also  (is)  van. 
2. 11  all  (was)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  and 
2. 15  I  said  in  my  heart,  that  this  also  (is)  van. 
2.  17  for  all  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 
2. 19  wise  under  the  sun.  This  (is)  also  vanity 
2.  21  This  also  (is)  vanity  and  a  great  evil 

2.  23  heart  taketh  not  rest . .  This  is  also  vanity 

2.  26  This  also  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

3.  19  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence,  .all  (is)  va. 

4.  4  This  (is)  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 
4.    7  I  returned,  and  I  saw  vanity  under  the 
4.    8  This  (is)  also  vanity,  yea,  it  (is)  a  sore  tr. 

4.  16  this  also  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

5.  7  in .  .words  (there  are)  also  divers  vanities 
5. 10  not  be  satisfied.  .This  (is)  also  vanity 

6.  2  this  (is)  vanity,  and  it  (is)  an  evil  disease 
6.  4  he  cometh  in  with  vanity,  and  deparjeth 
6.    9  this  (is)  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

6.  1 1  there  be  many  things  that  increase  vanity 

7.  6  the  laughter  of  the  fool.  This  also  (is)  va. 

7.  15  All.  .have  I  seen  in  the  days  of  my  vanity 

8.  10  they  were  forgotten .  .This  (is)  also  vanity 

8.  14  There  is  a  vanity  which  is  done  upon  the 
8. 14  according  to  the  work,  .this  also  (is)  van. 

9.  9  the  days. of  thy  vanity.. the  days  of  thy  v. 

11.  8  shall  be  many.  All  that  cometh  (is)  vanity 
11. 10  evil.  ;f or  childhood  and  youth  (are)vanity 

12.  8  vanities,  saith  the  Preacher;  all  (is)  vanity 
Isa.  57.  13  vanity  shall  take  (them):  but  he  thatpu. 
Jer.     2.    5  have  walked  after  vanity,  and  are  become 

8.  19  graven  images,  (and)  with  strange  vanitie. 

"  10.    8  foolish ;  the  stock  (is)  a  doctrine  of  vanities 

10.  15  They  (are)  vanity,  (and)  the  work  of  erro. 

14.  22  Are  there  (any)  among  the  vanities  of  the 
16.  19  ourfathers  have  inherited  lies,  vanity,  and 
51.  18  They  (are)  vanity,  the  work  of  errors  :  in 

Jon.    2.    8  They  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake 

-1.  Empty,  vain,  vanity,  p"i  riq. 

Psa.     4.    2  will  ye  loVe  vanity?,  .seek  after  leasing? 
liah.  21.    3  shall  weary  themselves  for  very  vanity 

0.  Vanity,  ivJ  shav. 

Job    15.  31  Let  not  him  that  is  deceived  trust  in  va. 
G.  Vanity,  ttyy  shav. 

Job.    7.    3  So  am  I  made  to  possess  months  of  vanity 

15.  31  trust  in  vanity ;  for  vanity  shall  be  his  re. 
31.  5  If  I  have  walked  with  vanity,  or  if  myfo. 
35.  13  God  will  not  hear  vanity ;  neither  will  the 

1'ia.  12.  2  They  speak  vanity  every  one  with  his  ne. 
24.  4  who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity 
41.  6  if  he  come  to  see  (me),  he  speaketh  vanity 
119.  37  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  van. 
141.    8  Whose  mouth  speaketh  vanity,  and  their 

I'rnv.jo.    8  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies,  give 

Isa.     5.  iS  that  draw  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity 
30.  28  to  sift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  vanity 

Jer.   1 3.  is  they  have  burnt  incense  to  vanity,  andth. 

Eze.   15.    6  They  have  seen  vanity  and  lying  divinati. 

13.  8  ye  have  spoken  vanity,  and  seen  lies,  the. 
13.   9  shall  lie  upon  the  prophets  that  see  vanity 
13.  23  ye  shall  see  no  more  vanity,  nor  divine 
2t.  29  Whiles  they  see  vanity  unto  thee,  whiles 

22.  28  seeing  vanity,  and  divining  lies  unto  them 
IIos.  12.  11  surely  they  are  vanity:  they  sacrifice  bull. 

7. Ruin,  vacancy,  vanity^  ink  tohu. 

Isa.   40.  17  counted  to  him  less  than  nothing,  and  va. 

40.  23  he  maketh  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  van. 

44.   9  they  that  make  a  graven  image  (are),  .van. 

59.   4  they  trust  In  vanity,  and  speak  lies;  they 

B.Vain,  unprofitable,  useless,  ftdratov  mataion, 

Acta  14.  15  that  ye  should  turn  from  these  vanities 
9,  Vanity,  uselessness,  fxaraUrns  mataiotes. 

Rom.  3. 20  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity 
Eph,    4.17  w;iii,  nut  us  other  Gentiles  walk,  in  the  va. 
2  J'e.  2.  iS  when  they  speak greatswelling.  .of  vanity 
VAPOUR  — 

1.  favour,  IK  cd. 

Job  36.  27  they  pour  down  rain  according  to  the  va. 


2.  What  is  lifted  up,  cloud,  vapour,  n'c'3  nasi. 
Psa.  1 35.    7  He  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from  the 
Jer.   10.  13  he  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from  the 

51. 16  he  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from  the 

3.  Ta  go  up,  rr?y  alah. 

Job  36.  33  the  cattle  also  concerning  the  vapour 

4.  Smoke,  vapour,  "litt'p  qitor. 

Psa.148.    8  Fire,  and  hail;  snow,  and  vapour;  stormy 
5. Breath,  vapour,  smoke,  ar/xts  atmis. 

Acts    2.  19  signs,  .blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  sm. 

Jas.     4. 14  It  is  even  a  vapour,  that  appeareth  for 
VARIABLENESS  — 
Change,  variableness,  irapaKKayr)  parallage. 

Jas.     1.  17  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turn. 
VARIANCE,  (to  set  at)  — 
1.7*0  make  two,  divide  into  two,  Stxafw  dichazo. 

Matt  10.  35  For  I  am  come  to  set  a  man  at  variance 
2.  Contention,  strife,  quarrel,  tpis  eris. 

Gal.    5.  20  Idolatry,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  em. 
VASH'-NI,  *jfcfc  Jah  is  strong. 

First  born  of  Samuel  the  prophet ;  perhaps  the  same 
with  Joel  in  Ch.  6.  33.    B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch,  6.  28  the  sons  of  Samuel;  the  firstborn  V.,aud 
VASH'-TI,  *t$\. 

A  queen    whom   Ahasuerus   repudiated,    and    whom 
Esther  succeeded.     B.C.  519. 

Esth.  1.  9  V.  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  the  women 
1.  1 1  To  bring  V.  the  queen  hefore  the  king  wi. 
1. 12  the  queen  V.  refused  to  come  at  the  kin. 
1.  15  What  shall  we  do  unto  the  queen  V.  ace 
1.  16  V.  the  queen  hath  not  done  wrong  to  the 
1.  17  The  king,  .commanded  V.  the  queen  to  be 

1.  19  That  V.  come  no  more  before  king  Ahas. 

2.  1  he  remembered  V.(  and  what  she  had  do. 
2.    4  let  the  maiden,  .be  queen  instead  of  V. 

2. 17  so  that  he.  .made  her  queen  instead  of  V. 
VAUNT  self,  to  — 
1,2*0  beautify  self ,  1x9  poor,  7. 

Judg.  7.    2  lest  Israel  vaunt  themselves  against  me 
2.  To  vaunt,  boast,  brag  self,  irebit€pc6ou.al perper. 

1  Co.  13.    4  charity  vauuteth  not  itself,  is  not  pulfed 
VEHEMENT,  (desire)  — 

1. Cutting,  still,  sultry,  "ti'in  charishi. 

Jon.    4.    8  that  God  prepared  a  vehement  east  wind 
2.Great  desire,  £TMr6dw<ris  ejnpothesis. 

2  (Jo.  7.  11  (what) vehement  desire,  yea. .zeal,  yea., re. 
VEHEMENTLY,  (to  beat)  — 

"[.Terribly,  Setvws  deinos. 

Luken.  53  the  Pharisees  began  to  urge,  .vehemently 
2. Abundantly ',  4k  TTiptaaov  ek  perissou. 

Marki4.  31  hespakethemore[vehemently],IfIshould 
3. Intensely,  strenuously,  svtovws  eut07ios. 

Luke23. 10  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  stoodandve. 
4.  To  break  or  dash  toward,  ■jrpoo-p-tyypv/xi  prosrheg. 

Luke  6.  48  the  stream  beat  vehemently  upon  that  ho. 
6.  49  against  which  the  stream  did  beat  vehem. 
VEIN  — 
Outgoing,  outlet,  MyiD  motsa. 

Job    28.  -I  Surely  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  and 
VENGEANCE,  (to  take,  be  taken)  — 
I.To  avenge,  take  vengeance,  cpj  naqam. 

Tsa.  99.    8  thoutookestvengeanceoftheirinventions 

Nah.   1.   2  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  adversa. 

2.  To  be  avenged,  Dpi  naqam,  2. 

Jer.  50.  15  take  vengeance  upon  her;  asshehathdone 
Z.To  be  avenged,  u$}naqam,  6. 

Gen.    4.  15  vengeance  shall  be  taken  on  him  sevenfo. 

4.  Vengeance,  033  naqam. 

Deut  32.  35  To  me  (belongeth)  vengeance  and  recom. 

32.  41  I  will  render  vengeance  to  mine  enemies 

32.  43  will  render  vengeance  to  his  adversaries 

Psa.  58. 10  shall  rejoice  when  he  seeth  the  vengeance 

Prov.  6.  34  he  will  not  spare  in  the  day  of  vengeance 

Isa.    34.   8  (it  is)the  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance, (and) 

35.    4  God  will  come  (with)  vengeance, (even)God 

47.    3  I  will  take  vengeance,  and  I  will  not  meet 

5g.  17  heput  on  the  garments  of  vengeance  (for) 

61.    2  To  proclaim,  .the  day  of  vengeance  of  our 

63.    4  the  day  of  vengeance  (is)  in  mine  heart 

Eze.  24.   8  cause  fury  to  come  up  to  take  vengeance 

25.  12  hath  dealt  against.  .Judah  by  taking  ven. 

25. 15  have  taken  vengeance  with  a  despiteful 

Mic.    5. 15  I  will  execute  vengeance  in  anger  andfury 

5.  Vengeance,  nrppi  neqamah. 

Judg  11.  36  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  taken  venge. 
Tsa.  94.  1,  1  God,  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth 
149.  7  To  execute  vengeance  upon  the  heathen 
Jer.  xi.  20  let  me  see  thy  vengeance  on  them:  for  un. 
20.  12  let  me  see  thy  vengeance  on  them;  forun. 
46.  10  this  (is)  the  day.  .a  day  of  vengeance,  that 
50.  15  for  it  (is)  the  vengeance  of  the  LORD:  take 

50.  28  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord  our  God.  the 

51.  6  this  (is)  the  time  of  the  Lord's  vengeance 
51.  11  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord,  the  vengeance 
51.  36  plead  thy  cause,  and  take  vengeance  for 

Lam.  3.  60  Thou  hast  seen  all  their  vengeance  (and) 
Eze.  25.  14  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edoni  by 


Eze.  25.  14  they  shall  know  my  vengeance,  saith  the 
25.  17  I  will  execute  great  vengeance  upon  them 
25.  17  when  I  shall  lay  my  vengeance  upon  them 

6.  Justice,  vengeance,  B'lkti  dike. 

Acts  20.    4  whom.. vengeance  suffereth  not  to  live 
Jude        7  Sodom.,  suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal 

7. Full  vengeance,  zKOiKnvis  ckdikesis. 

Luke2i.  22  these  be  the  days  of  vengeance,  that  all 
Eora.12.  19  Vengeance  (is)  mine;  I  will  repay,  saith 
2  Th.    1.    S  In  flaming  fire  taking  vengeance  on  them 
Heb.  10.  30  Vengeance.  .1  will  recompense,  saith  the 

8. Anger,  wrath,  bpyh  orge. 

Rom.  3.    5  (Is)  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  vengea. 

VENISON  — 

1. Hunting,  venison,  "T.8  tsayid. 

Gen.  25.  28  loved  Esau,  because  he  did  eat  of  (his)  v. 
27.  5  Esau  went  to  the  field  to  hunt  (for)  venison 
27.  7  Bring  me  venison,  and  make  me  savoury 
27.  19  arise,  Ipray  thee,  sit  and  eat  of  my  venisoa 
27.  «5  Bring . .  and  I  will  eat  of  my  son's  venison 
27.  31  Let  myfather.  .eatof  hisson's  venison,  th. 
27.  33  where  (is)  he  that  hath  taken  venison,  and 

2.  Hunting,  venison,  nr*  tsedah. 

Gen.  27.   3  go  out  to  the  field,  and  take  me.  .venison 
VENOM  — 
Venom,  poisonous  herb,  E>(0  rosh. 

Deut  32.  33  Their  wine  (is),  .the  cruel  venom  of  asps 
VENT,  to  have  — 
To  be  opened,  nrjs  pathach,  2. 

Job  32. 19  my  belly  (is)  as  wine(which)  hath  no  vent 
VENTURE,  at  a  — 
Perfection,  simplicity,  ch  torn. 

1  Ki.  22.  34  And  a . .  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  and 

2  Ch.18.  33  And  a.,  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,  and 

VERIFIED,  to  be- 
To  be  or  become  stedfast,  jp$  amah,  2. 

Gen.  42.  20  so  shall  your  words  be  verified,  and  ye  sh. 

1  Ki.   8,  26  let  thy  word,  I  pray  thee,  be  verified,  wh. 

2  Ch.  6.  17  let  thy  word  be  verified,  which  thou  hast 

VERILY,  verity  — 
l.But,  verily,  12K  abal. 

Gen.  42.  21  We  (are)  verily  guilty  concerning  our  bro. 

1  Ki.  1. 43  Verily  our  lord  king  David  hath  made  S. 

2  Ki.  4. 14  Verily  she  hath  no  child,  and  her  husband 

2.0nly,  ?&  ak. 

Exod^x.  13  Verily  my  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep:  for  it 

3.  Surely,  }2V,  aken. 

Psa.  66.  19  verily  God  hatb  heard,  .he  hath  atteuded 
Isa.   45.  15  Verily  thou  (art)  a  God  that  liidest thyself 

4.  If  not,  xS>  DX  im  lo. 

Jer.  15.  11  Verily'it  shall  be  well  with  thy  remuaut 

b.Stcdfastness,  stability,  ^£X  emunah. 

Psa.  37.    3  Trust  in  the  Lord!",  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed 

6. To  say,  nax  amor. 

Judgis.   2  I  verily  thought  that  thou  hadst  utterly 

7. Truth,  stedfastness,  n^x  emeth. 

Psa.  1 11.    7  The  works  of  his  hands  (are)  verity  and  ju. 

8.  To  acquire,  get,  set  up,  n3f?  qanah. 

1  Ch.21.  24  but  I  will  verily  buy  it  for  the  full  price 

9.  Truth,  reality,  certainty,  a\7)d€ta  cdetheia. 

1  Ti.   2.   7  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  verity 

10.  Truly,  really,  certainly,  aXwdws  alethos. 

1  Jo.   2.    5  whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in  him  verily  is 

ll. Amen,  so  be  it,  so  it  is,  afx-qu  amen. 

Matt.  5.  18  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and  ea 

5.  26  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Thou  shalt  by  no 

6.  2,  5,  16  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  They  have 
See  also  8.  10;  10.  15,  23,  42;  n.  n ;  13.  17 ;  16.  28;  17. 
20;  18.  3,  13,  18;  19.  23,  28;  21.  21,  31;  23.  36;  24.  2,  34, 
47 ;  25.  12,  40,  45 ;  26.  13,  21,  34 ;  Mark  3.  28;  6.  [n];  8. 
12;  9,  1,  41  ;  10.  15,  29;  11.  23;  12.  43;  13.  30;  14.  9,  18, 
25,  30;  Luke  4.  24;  12.  37;  13.  [35];  18.  17,  29;  21.  32; 

23.  43  ;  John  1.  51,  51 ;  3.  3,  3,  5,  5,  n,  xi ;  5-  *9>  l9>  24» 

24,  25,  25  ;  6.  25,  26,  32,  32,  47,  47,  53,  53  ;  8.  34,  34,  51, 
51,  58,  58  ;  10.  x,  1,  7,  7 ;  12.  24,  24 ;  13.  16,  16,  20,  20, 
21,  21,  38,  38 ;  14.  12,  12 ;  x6. 20,  20,  23,  23;  21.  18,  18. 

\2.For,  yap  gar. 

Acts  16.  37  do  they  thrust  us  out  privily?  nay  verily 
Rom  15.  27  It  hath  pleased  them  verily;  and  their  de. 

1Z.  Truly,  S^irou  depou. 

Heb.  z.  16  For  verily  he  took  not  on . .  angels ;  but  he 

14.  Truly,  indeed,  fxev  (5e)  mm  (de). 

Mark  9. 12  Elias  [verily]  cometh  first,  and  restoreth 
Acts  19.    4  John  [verily]  baptized  with  the  baptism 

22.  3  I  am  [verily)  a  man.  .a  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus 
Rom.  2.  25  For  circumcision  verily  profiteth,  if  thou 
1  Co.  5.    3  For  I  verily,  as  absent  in  body,  but  pres. 

14.  17  For  thou  veriiy  givest  thanks  well,  but 
Heb.   t,.    5  Closes  verily  (was)  faithful  in  all  hishouse 

6.  16  Formen  [verily]  swear  by  the  greater,  and 

7.  5  verily  they  that  are  of  the  sons  of  Levi 
7.  18  For  there  is  verily  a  disannulling  of  the 
9.    1  verily  the  first,  .had  also  ordinances  of 

12.  10  For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened 
1  Te.    1.  20  Who  verily  was  foreordained  before  the 


VEEMILION 


1023 


VESSEL 


15.  Verily,  indeed,' truly,  vainai. 

Luken.  51  verily  I  say  unto  you,  It  shall  be  required 
16. Really,  actually,  6vrws  ontos. 

Gal.    3.  21  verily  righteousness  should  have  been  by 
17.  Therefore,  (xdu  ovv  men  ov.n. 

Acts  26.   9  I  verily  thought  with  myself,  that  I  ought 
VERMILION  — 
Red  lead,  red  ochre,  red  colour,  ~i£'V  shashar. 

Jer.  22.  14  cieled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with  ver. 

Eze.  23. 14  images  of..  Chaldeans  pourtrayed  withve. 

VERT  (much,  sore)  — 

1.  To  deal  treacherously,  deceive,  "us  bagad. 

Isa.  48.   4  I  knew  that  thou  wouldest  deal  very  ire. 
1.{\VLth)  treacliery,  ~U3  beged. 

Isa.   24.  16  treacherous  dealers  have  dealt  very  trea. 

Jer.  12.    1  are  all  they  happy  that  deal  very  treach. 

3.  Great,  ?na  gadol. 

Gen.  27.  33^  Isaac  trembled  very  exceedingly,  and  said 

4.  Sufficient,  "idai. 

Hab.  2.  1 3  shall  labour  in  the  very  fire,  .for  very  vanity 

5.  This,  nj  zeh. 

Gen.  27,  21  whether  thou  (be)  my  very  son  Esau  or 
G.Jfight,  very,  "IXD  meod. 

Gen.    1.  31  God  saw  every  thing,  .and,  behold,  .very 
4.    5  Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  countenance 

12.  14  beheld  the  woman,  that  she  (was)  very  fair 

13.  2  Abram  (was)  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver 
18.  20  and  because  their  sin  is  very  grievous 
21.  11  the  thing  was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's 

24.  16  the  damsel  (was)  very  fair  to  look  upon,  a 
26.  13  and  grew  until  he  became  very  great 

34    7  they  were  very  wroth,  because  he  had  wr. 

41. 19  seven  other  kine.  .poor  and  very  ill  favo. 
41.  31  not  be  known,  .it  (shall  be)  very  grievous 
41.  49  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  very 
47.  13  the  famine  (was)  very  sore,  so  that  the  la. 
50.  9  horsemen :  and  it  was  a  very  great  camp. 
50. 10  they  mourned  with  a  great  and  very  sore 

Exod.  1.20  the  people  multiplied, and  waxed  very  mi. 

9.   3  (there  shall  be)  a  very  grievous  murrain 

9.  18  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  very  grievous  hail 

9.  24  fire  mingled  with  the  hail,  very  grievous 

■to.  14  very  gi'ievous  (were  they);  before  them  th. 

11.  3  Moses  (was)  very  great  in  the  land  of  Eg. 

12.  38  and  flocks  and  herds,  (even)  very  much 
Xumn.33  the  Lord  smote  the  people  with  a  very 

12.  3  Moses  (was)  very  meek,  above  all  the  men 

13.  28  and  the  cities  (are)  walled,  (and)  very  gr. 
16.  15  Moses  was  very  wroth,  and  said  unto  the 
22. 17  I  will  promote  thee  unto  very  great  hou. 
32.    1  the  children  of  Gad  had  a  very  great  mul. 

Deut.  9.  20  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  Aaron  to  ha. 
20. 15  all  the  cities  (which  are)  very  far  off  from 

25.  54  the  man  (that  is)  tender . .  and  very  delic. 
30.  14  the  word  (is)  very  nigh  unto  thee,  in  thy 

Josh.  1.    7  be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous,  that 

3. 16  rose  up  upon  an  heap  very  far  from  the  ci. 

8.  4  go  not  very  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ye 

9.  9  From  a  very  far  country  thy  servants  are 
9.  13  are  become  old  by  reason  of  the  very  long 
9.  22  We  (are)  very  far  from  you  ;  when  ye  dw. 

10. 20  slaying  them  with  a  very  great  slaughter 
11.  4  went,  .with  horses  and  chariots  very  many 
13.    1  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  j 

22.  8  with  very  much  cattle . .  with  very  much    | 

23.  6  Be  ye  therefore  very  courageous  to  keep 
Judg.  3.  17  untoEglon..andEglon(was)averyfatman 

11.  33  he  smote  them . .  with  a  very  great  slaugh. 

13.  6  aud  his  countenance  (was),  .very  terrible 
18.    9  for  we  have  seen  the  land . .  it  (is)  very  go. 

Ruth  1.  20  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly  wi. 

1  Sa.  2. 17  the  sin  of  the  young  men  was  very  great 

2. 22  Eli  was  very  old,  and  heard  all  that  his  so. 
4. 10  there  was  a  very  great  slaughter ;  for  th 
5.    9  was  against  the  city  with  a  very  great  de. 
5.  11  the  hand  of  God  was  yery  heavy  there 
14. 20  (and  there  was)  a  very  great  discomfiture 

14.  31  to  Aijalon  :  and  the  people  were  very  fai. 

18.  8  Saul  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  dis. 
18. 15  Saul  saw  that  he  behaved  himself  very  wi. 

19.  4  works  (have  been)  to  thee  ward  very  good 
25.  2  the  man(was)  very  great,  and  he  had  three 
25. 15  the  men  (were)  very  good  unto  us,  and  we 

2  Sa.    1.  26  verypleasant  hast  thou  been  uutome,  thy 

2. 17  there  was  a  very  sore  battle  that  day:  and 
3.   8  Then  was  Abner  very  wroth  for  the  words 

11.    2  the  woman  (was)  very  beautiful  to  look  up. 
13.   3  and  Jonadab  (was)  a  very  subtil  man 
13.  21  when  king  David  heard,  .he  was  very  wr. 
13. 36  kingalso  and  all  his  servants  wept  very  so. 

18.  17  laid  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  upon  him 
19. 32  Barzillai  was  a  very  aged  man,  (even)  fou. 

19.  32  had  provided,  .for  he  (was)  a  very  great 
24.  10  take  away  the  iniquity.  .1  have  done  very 

1  Ki.  1.   4  the  damsel  (was)  very  fair,  and  cherished 

1.   6  he  also  (was  a)  very  goodly  (man);  and  (his 
1. 15  the  king  was  very  old  ;  and  Abishag  the 
10.   2  she  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  very  great 
10.    2  with  camels  that  bare  spices,  and  very  mu. 
10.  10  of  spices  very  great  store,  and  precious 
2i.  26  he  did  very  abominably  in  following  idols 

2  Ki.14.  26  the  Lord  saw .  .(that  it  was)  very  bitter 

17. 18  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  Israel,  and 

21.  16  Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood  very  much 

1  Ch.18.    8  brought  David  very  much  brass,  wherew. 

21.   8  doawaytheiniquity..Ihavedoneveryfoo 


1  Ch.21. 13  let  me  fall  now. .for  very  great(are)hism. 

2  Ch.  7.   8  all  Israel  with  him,  a  very  great  congreg. 

9.    1  with  a  very  great  company,  and  camels  th. 
14. 13  and  they  carried  away  very  much  spoil 
16.    8  a  huge  host,  with  very  many  chariots  and 
24.  24  the  Lord  delivered  a  very  great  host  into 

30.  13  there  assembled.. a  verygreat  congregat. 

32.  29  God  had  given  him  substance  very  much 

33.  14  raised  it  up  a  very  great  height,  and  put 
Ezra  10.  1  a  very  great  congregation  of  meu  and  wo. 
l\'eh.  2.    2  this  (is)  nothing.  .1  was  very  sore  afraid 

4.  7  to  be  stopped,  then  they  were  very  wro. 

5.  6  I  was  very  angry  when  I  heard  their  cry 
8. 17  And  there  was  very  great  gladness 

Esth.  1.  12  therefore  was  the  king  very  wroth,  and  his 
Job     1.    3  five  hundred  she  asses,  aud  a  very  great 
2. 13  for  they  saw  that  (his)  grief  was  very  great 
Paa.  46.    1  God  (is),  .a  very  present  help  in  trouble 

50.  3  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about  h. 

79.    8  prevent  us  ;  for  we  are  brought  very  low 

92.  5  O  Lord,  .thy  thoughts  are  very  deep 

93.  5  Thy  testimonies  are  very  sure :  holiness 
T04.  1  O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  very  great,  thou 
119.  138  testimonies,  .(are)  righteous  and  very  fa. 
119. 140  Thy  word  (is)  very  pure :  therefore  thy  s. 
142.   6  Attend  unto  my  cry ;  fori  am  brought  ve. 

Isa    16.    6  he  (is)  very  proud  :  (even)  of  his  haughti. 

31.  1  horsemen,  because  they  are  very  strong 
47.   6  upon  the  ancient  hast  thou  very  heavily 
52. 13  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be  very  high 
64.   9  Be  not  wroth  very  sore,  O  Lord,  neither 
64.  12  hold  thy  peace,  and  afflict  us  very  sore? 

Jer.  2.  12  be  horribly  afraid,  be  ye  very  desolate,  sa. 
14. 17  with  a  great  breach,  with  a  very  grievous 
18. 13  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  very  hor. 
24.  2  One  basket  (had)  very  good  figs,  (even)li. 
24.  2  the  other  basket  (had)  very  naughty  figs 
24.  3  the  good  figs,  very  good ;  and  the  evil,  ve. 
40.  12  gathered  wine  and  summer  fruits  very  mu. 

Eze.  27.  25  made  very  glorious  iu  the  midst  of  the  seas 
37.    2  (there  were)  very  many .  .(they  were)  very 
40.    2  set  me  upon  a  very  high  mountain,  by  wh. 
47.    7  at  the  bank,  .(were)  very  many  trees  on 
47.   9  there  shall  be  a  verygreat  multitude  of  fi. 

Joel    2.  11  his  camp  (is)  very  great :  for  (he  is)  strong 
2.  11  the  day  of  the  Lord  (is)  great  and  very  te. 

Zech.  9.  2  Tyrus,  and  Zidou,  though  it  be  very  wise 
9.  5  Gaza  also  (shall  see  it),  and  be  very  sorr. 
14.   4  (and  there  shall  be)  a  very  great  valley 

7.  Unto  might,  exceedingly,  isti?7~iy,  iN?"iy  ad  meod. 

1  Sa.  25.36  merry  within  him,  for  he(was)verydrunk. 

2  Ch.16. 14  they  made  a  very  great  burning  for  him 
Psa.119.107  I  am  afflicted  very  much;  quicken  me,  0 
Lam.  5.  22  But  thou,  .thou  art  very  wroth  against 
Dan.    8.    8  Therefore  the  he  goat  waxed  very  great 

11.  25  shall  be  stirred  up  to  battle  with  a  very 

8.  Little,  small,  few,  "i^ip  mizar. 

Isa.  10.  25  For  yet  a  very  little  while,  and  the  indig. 
16.  14  and  the  remnant . .  very  small  (and)  feeble 
29.  17  (Is)  it  not  yet  a  very  little  while,  and  Le. 

9.  Above,  upward,  onward,  Sj/s,  n^y^S  lemalah. 

Deut28.  43  Thestranger.. shall  getiipabove  thee  very 
1  CI1.23. 17  but  the  sons  of  Rehabiah  were  very  many 

10.  Bone,  substance,  c;;y  etsem. 

Josh.  10.  27  stones  in  the  cave's  month,  .until  this  very 
Eze.    2.   3  transgressed  against  me.  .unto  this  very 

11.  In,  an  instant,  j.Ti£3  bephetha. 

Num.  6.   9  if  any  man  die  very  suddenly  by  him,  and 

12.  Very  loathsome,  fcp,  mp  qut,  qat. 

Eze.  16.  47  but,  as.  .a  very  little  (tiling),  thou  wast  co. 

13.  Wall,  side,  roof,  Tp  qir. 

Jer.     4.  19  my  bowels !  I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart 

14.  Great,  much,  many,  very,  K'nt1  saggi. 

Dan.    2.  12  For  this  cause  the  king  was  angry  and  very 

15.  Truly,  really,  certainly,  aAnOcos  alethos. 

John  7.  26  Do  the  rulers  know,  .this  is  the  [very]  Ch. 
lQ.IIe  (she,  it)  himself,  abr6s  aittos. 

Ronii3.  6  attending  continually  upon  this  very  thi. 
1  Th.  5.  23  the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly 
Heb.io.    1  nut  the  very  image  of  the  things,  can  no. 

17.  And,  also,  even,  Kai  hai. 

Luke  g.   5  shake  off  the  [very]  dust  from  your  feet 

18.  Very,  xiav  Han,  or  (3a64os  batlieos. 

Marki6.    2  And  very  early  in  the  morning,  Lu.  24.  1. 

19.  Vehemently,  impetuously,  tr(poSpd  sjjhodra. 
Matt  18.  31  they  were  very  sorry,  and  came  and  told 
Markt6.    4  stone  was  rolled  away:  for  it  was  very  gr. 
LukeiS.  23  he  was.  .sorrowful,  for  he  was  very  rich 

20. ^foiv?,  viT€p  hvper. 

1  Th.  5. 13  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for 
[See  also  Act,  aged  men,  attentive,  bold,  costly,  dark, 
diligently,  early,  fair,  far  off,  frowardness,  fruitful, 
great,  greatthings,  heavy,  high,  little,  lovely,  low,  much, 
old,  pitiful,  precious,  rainy,  small,  sorrowful,  that,  well, 
wickedness.] 

VERT  chiefest,  deed,  great,  many,  small,  well  — 
I. But,  truly,  yet,  abut  ulmn. 

Exod  q.  16  in  very 'deed  for  this,  .have  I  raised  thee 

1  Sa.  25.  34  in  very  deed . .  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liv. 

2. Truly,  indeed,  DjON  umnam. 

2  Ch,  6. 18  will  God'in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on 


3.(0/)  God,  dt/>n  elohim. 

1  Sa.  14. 15  trembling,  .it  was  a  very  great  trembling 

i.Abundance,  multitude,  greatness,  3**1  rob. 

Zech  8.   4  and  every  man  with  his  staff . .  for  very  age 

5. Better,  KaXXiov  kallion. 

Acts  25. 10  done  no  wrong,  as  thou  very  well  know. 

Q.More,  greater,  more  excellent,  TrXslwv,  ttX^o-tos. 
Matt  21.    8  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their  gar. 

2  Co.    9.  2  and  your  zeal  hath  provoked  very  many 

7.  Very  chiefest,  exceedingly,  virip  Xiav  huper  Han. 

2  Co.  11.    5  I  was  not  a  whit  behind  the.  very  chiefest 

12. 11  in  nothing  am  I  behind  the  very  chiefest 

VERY  deed,  small  — 

l.To  beat  small,  ppn  daqaq,  5. 

Exod3o.  36  thou  snalt  beat,  .of  it  very  small,  and 

2.  To  be  found,  prepared,  established,  p3  Jcun,  2. 
1  Sa.  26.  4  understood  that  Saul  was  come  in  very 

VESSEL — 

1.  Vessel,  instrument,  ^3  keli. 

Gen.  43.  11  take  of  the.  .fruits  in  the  land  in  yourve. 
Exod25.  39  shall  he  make  it,  with  all  these  vessels 
27.  3  all  the  vessels  thereof  thou  shalt  make 
27. 19  All  the  vessels  of  the  tabernacle  in  all  the 
30.  27  vessels,  and  the  candlestick  and  his  vess. 
30.  28  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  all  his  ve. 
35.  13  The  table,  and  his  staves,  and  all  his  ve. 
35. 16  and  all  his  vessels,  the  laver  and  his  foot 
37.  16  he  made  the  vessels  which  (were)  upon 

37.  24  of  pure  gold  made  he  it,  and  all  the  vess. 

38.  3  he  made  all  the  vessels,  .all  the  vessels 

38.  30  therewith  he  made . .  all  the  vessels  of  the 

39.  36  The  table. .all  the  vessels  thereof,  and  the 
39.  37  all  the  vessels  thereof,  and  the  oil  for  li. 
39.  39  and  all  his  vessels,  the  laver  and  his  foot 

39.  40  all  the  vessels  of  the  service  of  the  tabe. 

40.  9  thou  shalt  take,  .and  anoint,  .all  the  ves. 
40. 10  thou  shalt  anoint  the  altar,  .all  his  ves. 

Lev.  6.  28  the  earthen  vessel  wherein  it  is  sodden 
8. 11  anointed  the  altar  and  all  his  vessels,  both 
1 1.  32  any  vessel  of  wood . .  whatsoever  vessel  (it 
11.33  every  earthen  vessel  whereinto(any)of  th. 
11.  34  drink  that  may  be  drunk  in  eveiy.  .vessel 
14.    5  in  an  earthen  vessel  over  running  water 

14.  50  in  an  earthen  vessel  over  running  water 

15.  12  the  vessel  of  earth,  .every  vessel  of  wood 
Num.  1.  50  over  all  the  vessels  thereof,  .all  the  vess. 

3.  31  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  wherewith 

3.  36  all  the  vessels  thereof,  and  all  that  serve. 

4.  9  all  the  oil  vesselsthereof,  wherewith  they 
4.  10  they  shall  put  it  and  all  the  vessels  ther. 
4.  14  all  the  vessels  thereof,  .all  the  vessels  of 
4. 15  of  covering.. all  thevesselsofthesauctuary 
4.  16  in  the  sanctuary,  and  in  the  vessels  ther. 
5. 17  shall  take  holy  water  in  an  earthen  vessel 
7.    1  both  the  altar  and  all  the  vessels  thereof 

7.  85  all  the  silver  vessels,  .two  thousand  and 

18.  3  only  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  vessels 
ig.  15  eveiy  open  vessel,  which  hath  no  covering 

19.  17  running  water  shall  be  put  thereto  in  a  v. 
19. 18  upon  all  the  vessels,  and  upon  the  persons 

Deut  23.  24  but  thou  shalt  not  put  (any)  in  thy  vessel 
Josh.  6. 19,  24  the  silver,  and  gold,  and  vessels 
Ruth  2.  y  when  thou  art  athirst,  go  unto  thevessels 
1  Sa.  9.  7  for  the  bread  is  spent  in  our  vessels,  and 
21.  5  the  vessels  of  theyoungmen  are  huly,  and 
21.    5  though  it  were  sanctified  this  day  in  the  v. 

8.  10  vessels  of  silver,  .vessels  of  gold,  .vessels 
17.  28  Brought  beds,  and  basins,  and  earthen  v. 

1  Ki.  7.  45  all  these  vessels,  which  Hiram  made  to 

7.  47  Solomon  left  all  the  vessels,  .because  they 
7.  48  And  Solomon  made  all  the  vessels  that 

7.  51  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  -.essels 

8.  4  all  the  holy  vessels  that  (were)  in  the  tab. 
10.  21  drinking  vessels . .  all  the  vessels  of  the  ho. 
10.  25  vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of  gold  and 
15.  15  be  brought  in.  .silver,  and  gold,  and  vessels 

17.  10  Fetch  me.  .a  little  water  in  a  vessel,  that 

2  Ki.  4.   3  Go,  borrow  thee  vessels. . empty  vessels 

4.    4  and  shall  pour  out  into  all  those  vessels 
4.    6  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  vessels  were  full 
4.    6  she  said  unto  her  son.  Bring  me  yet  a  ves. 
4.    6  And  he  said  unto  her.  .not  a  vessel  more 
7. 15  all  the  way  (was)  full  of  garments  and  ves. 

12. 13  any  vessels  of  gold,  or  vessels  of  silver,  of 
14.  14  all  the  vessels,  .found  in  the  house  of  the 

23.  4  to  bring  forth,  all  the  vessels  that  were 

24.  13  cut  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold  which 

25. 14  all  the  vessels  of  brass  wherewith  they 

25.  16  the  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without 

1  Ch.  9.  28  had  the  charge  of  the  ministering  vessels 

9.  29  to  oversee  the  vessels,  and  all  the  instrti. 

18.  8  and  the  pillars,  and  the  vessels  of  brass 
18.  10  all  manner  of  vessels  of  gold  and  silver 
22.  19  to  bring,  .the  holy  vessels  of  God,  into  the 
2^.  26  nor  any  vessels  of  it  for  the  service  there. 
28.  13  for  all  the  vessels  of  service  in  the  house 

2  Ch.  4.  18  Solomon  made  all  these  vessels  in  great 

4.  19  And  Solomon  made  all  the  vessels  that 

5.  5  all  the  holy  vessels  that  (were)  in  the  tab. 
9.  20  the  drinking  vessels . .  all  the  vessels  of  the 
9.  24  brought,  .vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of 

15.  18  had  dedicated,  silver,  and  gold,  and  vess. 
24. 14  whereof  were  made  vessels  for  the  house 
24.  14  vessels  to  minister,  .vessels  of  gold  and 


VESTMENT 


1024 


VILE 


Estl 

.  i. 

Psa. 

2 

V 

1'ro' 

21 

Isa. 

18 

22 

22 

S2. 

6s 

<     • 

Jer. 

'4- 

24  all  the  vessels  that  were  found  in  the  ho. 

24  the  vessels . .  and  cut  in  pieces  the  vessels 

18  with  all  the  vessels,  all  the  vessels  there. 

19  all  the  vessels,  which  king  Ahaz  in  his 
7  N.  also  carried  off  the  vessels  of  the  hou. 

10  brought  him  to  B.,  with  the  goodly  vesse. 

18  all  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  great 

19  and  destroyed  all  the  goodly  vessels  the. 
Ezra    1.    6  strengthened  their  hands  with  vessels  of 

7  the  king  brought  forth  the  vessels  of  the 

10  silver  basons . .  (and)  other  vessels  a  thou. 

11  the  vessels  of  gold  aud  of  silver  (were)  five 

25  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels 

26  silver  vessels  an  hundred  talents,  (and)  of 

27  two  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  go. 
aS'Ye  (are)  holy  unto  the  Lokd ;  the  vessels 
30  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels 
33  the  silver  and  the  gold  and  the  vessels  w. 
39  where  (are)  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary 

5  the  vessels,  and  the  tithes  of  the  corn,  the 
9  thither  brought  I  again  the  vessels  of  the 
7  in  vessels  of  gold,  the  vessels  being  dive. 
9  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel 

12  I  am  forgotten.  .1  am  like  a  broken  vess. 
4  there  shall  come  forth  a  vessel  for  the  fi. 

2  in  vessels  of  bulrushes  upon  the  waters 
24  vessels  of  small  quantity,  from  the  vessels 
24  of  cups.even  to  all  the  vessels  of  flagons 
11  be  ye  clean,  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 

4  of  abominable  (things  is  in)  their  vessels 

20  bring  an  offering  in  a  clean  vessel  into 

3  they  returned  with  their  vessels  empty 

4  the  vessel  that  he  made  of  clay  was  mar. 
j  8.    4  he  made  it  again  another  vessel,  as  seem. 

39.  11  as  (one)  breaketh  a  potter's  vessel,  that 
22.  28  (is  he)  a  vessel  wherein  (is)  no  pleasure  ? 
25.  34  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  pleasant  vessel 
2.7. 16  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  now 

27. 18  the  vessels  which  are  left  in  the  house  of 

27. 19  concerning  the  residue  of  the  vessels  that 

27.  2i  concerning  the  vessels  that  remain  (in)  the 

28.  3  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house  that  Ne. 
28.  6  to  bring  again  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's 
32. 14  put  them  in  an  earthen  vessel,  that  they 

40.  10  put  (them)  in  your  vessels,  and  dwell  in 
48. 11  not  been  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel 
48.  12  shall  empty  his  vessels,  and  break  their 

48.  38  I  have  broken  .Moab  like  a  vessel  wherein 

49.  29  their  curtains,  and  all  their  vessels,  and 

51.  34  he  hath  made  me  an  empty  vessel,  he  ha. 
52. 18  all  the  vessels  of  brass  wherewith  they 

52.  20  the  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without 
Eze.    4.   9  put  them  in  one  vessel,  and  make  thee 

15.    3  will  (men)  take  a  pin.  .to  hang  any  vessel 

27.  13  they  traded  the  persons  of  men  and  ves. 

l>au.    1.    2  with  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 

1.  2  he  brought  the  vessels  into  the  treasure 
it.    8  with  their  precious  vessels  of  silver  aud 

Hos.    8.    8  Israel .  .as  a  vessel  wherein  (is)  no  pleas. 
13.  15  shall  spuil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant  ve. 

2..1  vessel,  utensil,  Jns  man. 

Ezra    5.  14  the  vessels  also  of  gold  and  silver  of  the 

5.  15  Take  these  vessels,  go,  carry  them  into  the 

6.  5  let  the  golden  and  silver  vessels  of  the  ho. 

7.  19  The  vessels  also  that  are  given  thee  for  the 
Dan.    5.    2  to  bring  the  golden  and  silver  vessels  wh. 

5.    3  Then  tliey  brought  the  golden  vessels 
5.  23  they  have  brought  the  vessels  of  his  ho. 

3.^1  bottle,  hi),  S53  nebel 

Isa.   30. 14  as  the  breaking  of  the  potter's  vessel  that 

4.  A  vessel,  utensil,  ayytiov  afjgeion. 

JIatti3.  48  gathered  the  good  into  [vessels],  but  cast 
25.    4  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  th. 

5- A  vessel,  utensil,  instrument,  o-kgvos  skeuos. 
Mark  n.  16  that  any  man  should  carry  (any)  vessel 
Luke  8.  16  eovereth  it  with  a  vessel,  or  putteth  (it) 
John  19.  29  Now  there  was  set  a  vessel  full  of  vinegar 
Acts    9.  15  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear  my 
10.  11  a  certain  vessel  descending  unto  him,  as 

10.  16  the  vessel  was  received  up  again  into  he. 

11.  5  A  certain  vessel  descend,  as  it  had  been 
Horn.  9.  21  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honour,  and  an. 

g.  22  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction 
9.  23  the  riches  of  his  glory  on  the  vessels  of 
2  Co.    4.    7  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels 

1  Th.  4.    4  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  sanctiflcation 

2  Ti.    2.  20  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of 

2.  21  he  shall  he  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sancti. 
Ib-b.  9.  21  the  tabernacle  and  all  the  vessels  of  the 
1  Pe.  3.  7  giving  honour,  .as  unto  the  weaker  vessel 
Rev.    2.  27  as  the  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  they  be  br. 

18.  12  vessels  of  ivory,  and  all  manner  vessels  of 
VESTMENT,  vestry,  vesture  — 

1. Cloak,  garment,  coverinff%  "us  beged. 

Gen.  41.  42  arrayed  him  in  vestures  of  fine  linen,  and 

2..1  covering,  r*?i  Jcesuth, 

Deut  2?.  12  fringes  upon  the  four  quarters  of  thy  ve. 

Z.Clothing,  dress,  attire,  v-z*?  lebush. 

?  Ki.  10.  2?  Bring  forth  vestments  for  all  the  worship. 

Psa,  a  \  18  They  pari    .and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture 

102.  26  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  change  them,  and 

i.Clothing,  Bha^D  matbush. 

1  Ki.  10.  22  And  he  brought  them  forth  vestments 

C.  Wardrobe,  vestry,  rrpjsfoa  mrltaehah. 

2  Ki.  10.  22  he  said  unto  him  that  (was)  over  the  ves. 


6.  What  is  put  on,  garment,  mantle,  ifxariov  hima. 

Rev.  19.  13  he  {was)  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in 

19. 16  he  hath  on  (his)  vesture,  and  on  his  thigh 

7. Dress,  raiment,  apparel,  lfxari.o-p.6s  himatismos. 
Hatt27-  35  [and  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots] 
John  19.  24  and  for  my  vesture  they  did  cast  lots 

S.What  is  thrown  roimd  one,  irepifioAaiov  peribol. 
Heb.    1.  12  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them  up,  anil 
VEX,  be  vexed  (with,  a  devil),  to  — 
l.To  be  troubled,  hastened,  ^n?  bahel,  2. 

Psa.  6.  2  0  Lord,  heal  me;  for  my  bones  are  vexed 
6.  3  My  soul  is  also  sore  vexed :  but  thou,  O  L. 
6.  10  Let  all  mine  enemies  be.  .sore  vexed  :  let 

2.  To  trouble,  hapten,  Sn3  bahel,  3. 

Psa.    2. .  5  shall  he.  .vex  them  in  his  sore  displeasure 

3.  To  thrust  away,  prn  dachaq. 

Judg.  2.  18  of  them  that  oppressed  them  and  vexed 

4.  To  trouble,  crush,  destroy,  D&n  hamam. 

2  Ch.15.    6  for  God  did  vex  them  with  all  adversity 

5.  To  make  to  tremble,  shake,  y*i  zua,  3a. 

Hab.   2.    7  Shall  they  not.  .awake  that  shall  vex  thee 

6.  To  afflict,  grieve,  nyr  yagah,  5. 

Job  19.  2  How  long  will  ye  vex  my  soul,  and  break 
7 -To press,  thrust  out,  rn;  yanah,  5. 

Exod22.  21  Thou  shalt  neither  vex  a  stranger  nor  op. 
Lev.  19.  33  And  if  a  stranger,  .ye  shall  not  vex  him 
Eze.  22.    7  in  thee  have  they  vexed  the  fatherless  and 
22.  29  have  vexed  the  poor  and  needy ;  yea,  they 

8.  To  be  distressed,  straitened,  ~WT  yatsar. 

2  Sa.  13.   2  Amnon  was  so  vexed,  that  he  fell  sick  for 

9.  To  be  angry,  seed,  Dya  kaas. 

Eze.  32.   9  I  will  also  vex  the  hearts  of  many  people 

10.  To  be  bitter,  to  marar. 

2  Ki.  4.  27  Let  her  alone ;  for  her  soul  is  vexed  with 
11.2V?  cause  to  be  bitter,  "Pip  marar,  5. 

Job  27.  2  the  Almighty,  (who)  hath  vexed  my  soul 
12.  To  grieve,  wrest,  take  pains,  labour,  Dyjj  atsab,3. 

Isa.   63.  10  they  rebelled,  and  vexed  his  holy  spirit 

13.ro  do  evil,  y±  nyy  asah  ra. 

2  Sa.12.  18  how  will  he  then  vex  himself,  if  we  tell 

1 4.  To  bind  up,  distress,  be  distressed,  T]y  tsarar. 
Lev.  18.  18  to  vex  (her),  to  uncover  her  nakedness 
NUU125. 17  Vex  the  Midianites,  and  smite  them 

25.  18  For  they  vex  you  with  their  wiles  where. 

33-  55  shall  vex  you  in  the  land  wherein  ye  dw. 

Isa.    11.  13  not  envy  Judah,  and  Judah  shall  not  .vex 

15.  To  cause  to  be  distressed,  ~ny  tsarar,  5. 

Neh.    9.  27  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  who  vex. 

16.  To  cause  to  be  vexed,  wearied,  pp  quts,  5. 
Isa.     7.    6  Let  us  go  up  against  Judah,  and  vex  it 

17.ro  be  or  become  short  or  grieved,  1¥[3  gatsar. 
Judg.  16. 16  it  came  to  pass,  .his  soul  was  vexed  unto 

18. To  cause  evil,  treat  ill,  Vlll  raa,  5. 

NU11120.  15  the  Egyptians  vexed  us  and  our  fathers 

19.  To  crush,  y\n,  raats. 

Judg.  10.    S  they  vexed  and  oppressed  the  children 
22.To  do  wickedly,  vex,  yyh  rasha,  5. 

1  Sa.  14.  47  whithersoever  he  turned  himself,  he  ve. 

21.  To  try,  test,  $a<rav{fa  basanizo. 

2  Pe.    2.    8  [vexed  (his)  righteous  soul  from  day  to] 

22.  To  do  evil,  HatcSta  kakoo. 

Acts  12.    1  king  stretched  forth  (his)  hands  to  vex 

23.  To  have  or  act  as  a  demon,  Zaifxovi^ofiai  claim. 
Matt  15.  22  my  daughter  is  grievously  veved  with  a 

24.  To  be  worn  down,  uaraivovioiiai  kataponeomai. 
2  Pe.    2.    7  delivered  just  Lot,  vexed  with  the  filthy 

25.2*0  be  crowded,  harassed,  dx^ofiai  ochleomai. 
Luke  6.  18  [they  that  were  vexed]  with  unclean  spi. 
Acts    5.  16  them  which  were  vexed  with  unclean  sp. 

26. 7*0  experience,  suffer,  endure,  7rriVxw  paschfi. 

Matt  1 7.  15  he  is  lunatic,  and  sore  [vexed] :  for  oft  ti. 
VEXATION,  vexed  — 

1.  Trembling,  removal,  nyi]  zevaah. 

Isa.  28.  19  it  shall  be  a  vexation  only  (to)  understa. 

2.  Trouble,  destruction,  nDirp  mehumah. 

PeutaS. 20  Lord  shall  send  upon  thee  cursing,  vexa. 
2  Ch.15.  5  great  vexations,  .upon  all  the  inhabitants 
Eze.  22.    5  thee,  (which  art)  infamous,  .much  vexed 

3. Sadness,  wrong.,  vexation,  rojri  reuth. 

Eccl.  1. 14  behold,  all  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  sp. 
2.  11  ell  (was)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  and 
2.  T7for  all  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 
2.  26  This  also  (is)  vanity  and  vexation  of  spir. 
4.  4  This  (is)  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spir. 
4.  6  full  (with)  travail  and  vexation  of  spirit 
6.    9  this  (is)  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

&. Sadness,  wrong,  vexation,  fvyi  rayon. 

Eccl.  1  17  I  perceived,  that  this  also  is  vexation  of 
2.  22  what  hath  man.  .of  the  vexation  of  his  h. 
4.  16  Surely  this  also  (is)  vanity  and  vexation 

5.  A  breaking,  breach,  destruction,  12B\  TJ0  sheber. 
Isa.    65.  14  but  ye.  .shall  howl  for  vexation  of  spirit 


VIAL  — 

l.A  vial,  cruet,  flask,  l{5pak. 

1  Sa.  to.    1  Then  Samuel  took  a  vial  of  oil,  and  pour. 

2.^-1  vial,  bowl,  basin,  <pid\n  phiale. 

Rev.  5.  8  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which  are  the 
15.-  7  seven  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  G. 
16.  1  pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath  of  God  up. 
16.  2  went  aud  found  out  his  vial  upon  the  ea. 
16.    3,  4,  8,  10,  12  angel  poured  out  his  vial  up. 

16.  17  the  seventh  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into 

17.  1  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  vi. 
si.    9  the  seven  angels,  which  had  the  seven  vi. 

VICTORY,  (to  get)  — 

1.7*y  give  ease  or  security,  j#;  yasha,  5. 

Psa.  98.    1  his  holy  arm,  hath  gotten  him  the  victory 
2. Prominence,  pre-eminence,   nyj,  nsJ  netsach. 

1  Ch.29.  11  the  glory,  and  the  victory,  and  the  majes. 
Isa.  25.    8  He  wiU  swallow  up  death  in  victory,and  the 

Z.Ease,  security,  njne;J?i  teshuah. 

2  Sa.  19.    2  the  victory  that  day  was.  .into  mourning 

23.  10  the  Lord  wroughtagreatvictory  that  day 
23. 12  and  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  victory 

4.  To  get  victory,  be  invincible, conquer,  viko.q>  nikaO. 
Rev.  15.    2  them  that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the 

5.  Victory,  vIkw  nike. 

1  Jo.   5.    4  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  wo. 

6.  Victory,  vIkos  nikos. 

Matt,i2.  20  till  he  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory 

1  C0.15.  54  saying.  .Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory 

15-  55  O  death.  .0  grave,  where  (is)  thy  victory! 
15.  57  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through 

VICTUALS,  (to  provide)  — 

1. Eating,  food,  SpN  okel. 

Gen.  14.  ii  took.'. all  their  victuals,  and  went  theirw. 
Lev.  25.  37  Thou  shalt  not . .  lend  him  thy  victuals  for 
Deut  23.  19  usury  of  victuals,  usury  of  any  thing  that 

2.  Usual  allowance  or  diet,  nrn«  aruchah. 

Jer.  40.    5  gave.,  victuals,  and  a  reward,  and  let  him 

3.  Eating,  food,  SpKO  maakal. 

2  Ch.ii.  11  and  store  of  victuals,  and  of  oil  and  wine 

4.Food,  p!D  mazon. 

2  Ch.n.  23  and  he  gave  them  victual  in  abundance 
5. Life  preserver,  quickening,  sustenance,  n;ric. 

Judg!i7.  10  I  will  give,  .a  suit  of  apparel,  and  thy  vi. 

6.  To  contain,  provide,  nourish,  sustain,  ?13  kul,  Sa. 

1  Ki.  4.    7  which  provided  victuals  for  the  king  and 
4.  27  those  officers  provided  victuals  for  kingS, 

7.  Bread,  food,  nnb  lechem. 

1  Ki.11.  18  appointed  him  victuals,  and  gave  him  la. 
Jer.   44.  17  had  we  plenty  of  victuals,  and  were  well 

8.  Hunting,  venison,  Tx  tsayid. 

Josh   9.  14  the  men  took  of  their  victuals,  and  asked 
Neh,  13.  15  testified,  .in  the  day  wherein  they  sold  vie. 
9. Hunting,  venison,  UTS  tsedah. 

Exodi2.  39  neither  had  they  prepared,  .any  victual 
Josh.   1.  1 1  Prepare  you  victuals;  for  within  three  days 

9.  11  Take  victuals  with  you  for  the  journey 
Judg.  7.    S  So  the  people  took  victuals  in  their  hand 
20. 10  to  fetch  victual  for  the  people,  that  they 

1  Sa.  22.  10  gave  him  victuals,  and  gave  liim  the  sword 

10.  Ground  corn,  victuals,  "13^  sheber. 

Neh.  10.  31  bring  ware  or  any  victuals  on  the  sabbath 

11.  Eating,  food,  f3p£>fj.a  bro/na. 

Matt  14.  15  may  go  into  the  villages,  and  buy.  .victu. 

12.  Corn,  provisions,  €wtaiTto-/j.6s  episiUsmos. 
Lukeg.  12  they  may  go  into  the  towns,  .and  get  vict. 

VIEW,  to  — 

l.To  understand,  consider,  j'3  bin,  1,  5. 

Ezra    8.  15  I  viewed  the  people  and  the  priests,  and 

2.  From  before,  "i33p  niinneged. 

2  Ki.  2.    7  fifty  men.  .went,  and  stood  to  view  afar  off 

3.  To  see,  ma  raah. 

Josh.  2.  'i  saying,  Go,  view  the  land,  even  Jericho 

4.  To  travel  on  foot,  traverse,  Vfl  ragal,  3. 

Josh.  7.    2  Go  up  and  view.  .And  the  men.,  viewed  Ai. 

5.  To  view,  look  fur,  T3^  sabar. 

Neh.    2.  13  And  I.  .viewed  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 

2.  15  Then  went  I  up.  .and  viewed  the  wall,  and 

VIGILANT,  (to  be)  — 

To  be  vigilant,  wakeful,  yp-nyopeu  gregcrreo. 

1  Pe.  5.    8  Be  sober,  be  vigilant;  because  your  adver. 
VILE,  (person),  vilest  — 
l.To  be  despised,  despicable,  nja  bazah,  2. 

Dan.  11.  21  in  his  estate  shall  stand  up  a  vile  person 
2,Vilt-ncss,  depression,  M3?1  zulluth. 

Psa.  i2.   8  The  wicked  walk.,  when  the  vilest  men 
3.7V)  be  gluttonous,  vile,  lightly  esteemed,  ¥?}  zalaL 

Jer.    15.  19  if  thou  take,  .the  precious  from  the  vile 

Lam.   1.  11  see.  .and  consider,  for  I  am  become  vile 
4. To  fade,  wear  away,  be  cm] >ty,  foolish,  S3:  nabu.l. 

Isa.  32.  5  The  vile  person  shall  be  no  more  called  1. 
32.   6  For  the  vile  person  will  speak  villany,  and 

5. Emptiness,  folly ;  n^33  nebedah. 
Judg.  19.  24  but  unto  tins  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 


VILE 


1025 


VINEYARD 


6.  mat  is  despised,  nppj  nemibzah. 

i  Sa.  15.   9  vile  and  refuse,  that  they  destroyed  utte. 

7.  Vile,  i>iv  shoar. 

Jer.  29.  17  will  make  them  like  vile  figs,  that  cannot 

8. Dishonour,  arifiia  atimia. 

Roni.  1. 26  For  this.  .God  gave  them  up  unto  vile  afl. 

9.  Filth,  dirt,  fivirapos  rhuparos. 

Jas.    2.    2  if  there  come,  .in  also  a  poor  man  in  vile 

10.  Low  estate,  humiliation,  abasement,  TaireiVoxns. 
Phil.   3.  21  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it 

VILE,  to  be  (more,  reputed,  viler)  — 

1.  To  be  defiled,  .193  tamah,  2. 

Job   18.    3  Wherefore  are  we.  .reputed  vile  in  your  si. 

2.  To  be  pained,  vile,  rma  kaah,  2. 

Job  30.   8  children  of  base  men;  they  were  viler  than 
S.To  be  light,  lightly  esteemed,  ^3  qalal. 

Job   40.   4  Behold,  I  am  vile;  what  shall  I  answer 

Nan.  1.  14  I  will  make  thy  grave;  for  thou  art  vile 
4.  To  be  or  become  light,  lightly  esteemed,  ??j3  qalal,  2. 

2  Sa.  6.  22 1  will  yet  be  more  vile  than  thus,  and  will  be 
VILE,  to  make  or  seem  — 

1.  To  dishonour,  *?3J  nabel,  3. 

Nah.  3.    6  I  will,  .make  thee  vile,  and  will  set  thee 

2.  To  be  lightly  esteemed,  n^g  qalah,  2. 
Deut.25.    3  then  thy  brother  should  seem  vile  unto 

S.To  lightly  esteem,  hh$  qalal,  3. 

1  Sa.   3.  13  because  liis  sons  made  themselves  vile 
VILELY  cast  away,  to  he  — 

To  become  loathsome,  cast  away,  75H  gaol,  2. 

2  Sa.    1.  21  for  there  the  shield,  .is  vilely  cast  away 
VILLAGE  — 

1. Daughter,  na  bath. 

Num.21.  25  in  Heshbon,  and  in  all  the  villages  thereof 
21.  32  they  took  the  villages  thereof,  and  drove 
32.  42  took  Kenath,  and  the  villages  thereof,  and 

2  Ch.28. 18  with  the  villages.,  the  villages,  .the  villa. 

Neh.  11.  25  the  villages  thereof,  .the  villages  thereof 
11.  27  at  Beer-sheba,  and(in)the villages  thereof 
11.  30  at  Azekah,  and  (in)  the  villages  thereof 
11.  28  at  Mekonah,  and  in  the  villages  thereof 
11.  31  and  Aija,  and  Beth-el,  and  (in)  their  vill. 

2.  Court,  milage,  Tsn  chatser. 

Exod.  8.13  died  out  of  the  houses,  out  of  the  villages 
Lev.  25.  31  But  the  houses  of  the  villages  which  have 
Josh  13.  23  inheritance,  .the  cities  and  the  villages 
13.  28  inheritance,  .the  cities  and  their  villages 
15.  32  cities,  .twenty  and  nine,  with  their  villa. 
15.  36  Sharaim .  .fourtee  cities  with  their  villa. 
15.41  Gederoth . .  sixteen  cities  with  their  villa. 
15.  44  Mareshah;  nine  cities  with  their  villages 
15.  45  Ekron,  with  her  towns  and  her  villages 
15.  46  all  that  (lay)  near  Ashdod,  with  their  vi. 
15.  47  towns  and  her  villages. .towns  and  herlvil. 

15.  51,  54,  57,  59,  60,  62  cities  with  their  villages 

16.  9  separate,  .all  the  cities  with  their  villages 
18.  24  Gaba;  twelve  cities  with  their  villages 

18.  28  Zelah.  .fourteen  cities  with  their  villages 

19.  6  Sharuhen;  thirteen  cities  aud  their  villag. 
19.   7  Ashan;  four  cities  and  their  villages 

19.   8  all  the  villages  that  (were)  round  about 

19. 15,  16,  22,  30,  31,  38  cities  with  their  villages 

19.  23,  39  inheritance,  -the  cities  and  their  villa. 

19.  48  inheritance .  .these  cities  with  their  villa. 

21. 12  the  fields  of  the  city,  and  the  villages  th. 

1  Ch.  4.  32  their  villages  (were)  Etam,  and  Ain,  Rim. 

4.  33  all  their  villages  that  (were)  round  about 

6.  56  the  fields  of  the  city,  and  the  villages  th. 

9. 16  dwelt  in  the  villages  of  the  Netophathites 

9.  22  reckoned  by  their  genealogy  in  their  vill. 

9.  25  their  brethren,  .in  their  villages,  (were)  to 

Neh.  11.  25  for  the  villages. .and  (in)  the  villages  the. 

11.  30  Zanoah,  Adullam,  and  (in)  their  villages 

12.  28  gathered  themselves,  .from  the  villages 
12.  29  builded  them  villages  round  about  Jeru. 

Tsa.  10.    8  He  sitteth  in.  .lurking  places  of  the  vill. 
Isa.  42. 1 1  the  villages. .  Kedar  doth  inhabit :  let  the 

3.  Hamlet,  village,  v?s  kephir. 

Neh.   6.    2  let  us  meet  together  in.  .the  villages  in 
i.  Hamlet,  village,  iss  kaphar. 

1  Ch.27.  23  in  the  cities,  and  in  the  villages,  and  in 

Song  7. 11  Come,  my  beloved,  .let  us  lodge  in  thevi. 
5. Hamlet,  village,  nsa  kopJier. 

1  Sa.   6. 18  of  fenced  cities,  and  of  country  villages 

6.  Open  village,  V}9  paraz. 

Hab.   3. 14  Thou  didst  strike,  .the  head  of  his  villag. 

7.  Open  village,  ;ins  perazon. 

Judg.  5.    7  the  villages  ceased,  they  ceased  in  Israel 
5. 11  the  righteous  acts,  .of  his  villages  in  Isr. 

8.  Inhabitant  of  open  villages,  TJ9,  cms  perozim. 

Esth.  9. 19  the  Jews  of  the  villages,  that  dwelt  in  the 

9.. 4  village,  Kap.-n  koine. 

Matt.  9.  35  Jesus  went  about  all  the  cities  and  villa. 

14. 15  that  theymay  go  into  the  villages, and  buy 

21.   2  Go  into  the  village  over  against  you,  and 

Mark  6.    6  he  went  round  about  the  villages,  teach. 

6.  36  that  they  may  go.  .into  the  villages,  and 

6.  56  whithersoever  he  entered,  into  villages 

11.   2  Go  your  way  into  the  village  over  against 

Luke  S.    1  he  went  throughout  every  city  aud  villa. 

120 


Luke  9.  52  entered  into  a  village  of  the  Samaritans 

9.  56  And  they  went  to  another  village 

10.  38  he  entered  into  a  certain  village,  and  ac. 
13.  22  he  went  through  the  cities  and  villages 

17.  12  as  he  entered  into  a  certain  village,  there 
19.  30  Go  ye  into  the  village  over  against  (you) 
24.  13  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  vil. 
24.  28  they  drew  nigh  unto  the  village  whither 

Acts    8.  25  preached  the  gospel  in  many  villages  of 

VILLANY  — 

Emptiness,  folly,  rnn?  nebalah. 

Isa.   32.    6  For  the  vile  person  will  speak  villany 
Jer.  29.  23  Because  they  have  committed  villany  in 

VINE  (branch,  choice,  cluster,  noble,  tree)  — 
It  A  vine,  ]sa  gephen. 

Gen.  40.    9  In  my  dream,  behold,  a  vine,  .before  me 

40.  10  in  the  vine  (were)  three  branches,  and  it 

49.  11  Binding  his  foal  unto  the  vine,  and  his 

Num2o.    5  no  place  of  seed,  or  of  figs,  or  of  vines,  or 

TJeut.  8.    8  A  land  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines,  and 

32.  32  For  their  vine  (is)  of  the  vine  of  Sodom 
Judg.  9.  12  Then  said  the  trees  unto  the  vine,  Come 
9.  13  the  vine  said  unto  them,  Should  I  leave 

13.  14  may  not  eat  of  any.  .that  cometh  of  the  v. 

1  Ki.  4.  25  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  Ins 

2  Ki.   4.  39  found  a  wild  vine,  aud  gathered  thereof 

18.  31  eat  ye  every  man  of  his  own  vine,  and  ev. 
Job  15.  33  shall  shake  off  his  unripe  grape  as  the  vi. 
Psa.  78.  47  He  destroyed  their  vines  with  hail,  and 

80.    8  Thou  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  Egypt 
80.  14  look  down,  .and  behold,  and  visit  this  vi. 

105.  33  He  smote  their  vines  also  and  their  fig  tr. 

128.    3  Thy  wife,  .as  a  fruitful  vine  by  the  sides 
Song   2.  13  the  vines,  .the  tender  grape  give  a.  .smell 

6. 11  went.,  to  see  whether  the  vine  flourished 
7.    8  breasts  shall  be  as  clusters  of  the  vine 

7.  12  let  us  see  if  the  vine  flourish,  .the  tender 
Isa.     7.  23  a  thousand  vines  at  a  thousand  silverlings 

16.    8  the  fields  of  Heshbon  languish,  .the  vine 

16.  9  Therefore  I  will  bewail,  .the  vine  of  Sib. 
24.    7  The  new  wine  mourneth,  the  vine  langn. 
32.  12  They  shall  lament,  .for  the  fruitful  vine 
34.   4  fall,  .as  the  leaf  falleth  off  from  the  vine 
36.  16  eat  ye  every  one  of  his  vine,  and  every  one 

Jer.     2.  21  the  degenerate  plant  of  a  strange  vine 

5.  17  they  shall  eat  up  thy  vines  aud  thy  fig  tr. 

6.  9  shall,  .glean  the  remnant  of  I.  as  a  vine 
8. 13  no  grapes  on  the  vine,  nor  figs  on  the  fig 

48.  32  O  vine  of  Sibmah,  I  will  weep  for  thee  wi. 
Eze.  15.    2  What  is  the  vine  tree  more  than  any  tree 
15.    6  As  the  vine  tree  among  the  trees  of  the 

17.  6  became  a  spreading  vine  of  low  stature 
17.   6  so  it  became  a  vine,  and  brought  forth 
17.    7  this  vine  did  bend  her  roots  toward  him 
17.    8  planted,  .that  it  might  be  a  goodly  vine 

19.  10  Thy  mother  (is)  like  a  vine  in  thy  blood 
Hos.    2.  12  I  will  destroy  her  vines  and  her  flg  trees 

10.  1  Israel  (is)  an  empty  vine,  he  bringeth  fo. 

14.  7  they  shall,  .grow  as  the  vine :  the  scent 
Joel    1.    7  He  hath  laid  my  vine  waste,  and  barked 

1. 12  The  vine  is  dried  up,  and  the  fig  tree  Ian. 
2.  22  the  fig  tree  and  the  vine  do  yield  then"  s. 

Mic.  4.  4  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine  and 
Hab.  3.  17  neither,  .fruit,  .in  the  vine ;  the  labour  of 
Hag.  2.  19  as  yet  the  vine,  and  the  fig  tree,  and  the 
Zech.  3.  10  call,  .under  the  vine  and  underthe  figtr. 

8.  12  the  vine  shall  give  her  fruit,  and  the  gro. 
Mai.    3. 11  neither  shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  be. 

2.  Branch,  slip,  niict  zemorah. 

Nah.    2.    2  the  emptiers  have . .  marred  their  vine  br. 

Z.Grape  juice,  wine,  }".  yayin. 

Num.  6.   4  nothing  that  is  made  of  the  vine  tree 
Judgi3-  14  eat  of  any  (thing)  thatconieth  of  the  vine 

4.  An  enclosed  place,  olive  or  vineyard,  D"i3  herein-. 
Song  2.  15  foxes,  that  spoil  the  vines:  for  our  vines 
Jer.   31.    5  Thou  shalt  yet  plant  vines  upon  the  mo. 

5.A  choice  or  interUoining  vine,  plfc*  sorek, 

Isa.  5.  2  planted  it  with  the  choicest  vine,  and  bu. 
Jer.     2.  21  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly 

6.^4  choice  or  intertwining  vine,  n^rfp  soreqah. 
Gen.  49. 11  and  his  ass's  colt  unto  the  choice  vine 

7. A  vine,  vine  fruit,  ^/xweXos  ampelos. 

Matt 26.  29  I  will  not  drink,  .of  this  fruit  of  the  vine 
Marki4-  25  I  will  drink  no  more  of  the  fruit  of  the  v. 
Luke22.  18  I  will  not  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine 
J0IUI15.    1 1  am  the  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  tho 

15.  4  cannot  bear,  .except  it  abide  in  the  vine 
1=;.    5  I  am  the  vine,  ye  (are)  the  branches 

Jas.  3. 12  Can  the  fig.  .bear  olive  berries?  either  a  v. 
Rev.  14.  19  gathered  the  vine  of  the  earth,  and  cast 

$.  Clusters  of  the  vineyard,  fivrpvas  vr^s  a/j.w<;kov. 

Rev.  14. 18  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  ea. 
VINE  undressed,  vine  dressers,  dresser  of  vineyard  — 
1.  Vineyard  dressers,  D*D-]3  koremim. 

2  Ki.  25. 12  left  of  the  poor  of  the  land,  .vinedressers 

2  Ch.26.  10  vine  dressers  in  the  mountains,  and  in  C. 

Isa.   61.   5  and  the  sons  of  the  alien,  .your  vine  dre. 

Jer.   52.  16  left,  .of  the  poor  of  the  land  for  vine  dre. 

Joel    1. 11  howl,  O  ye  vine  dressers,  for  the  wheat 

^.Separated,  vu  nazir. 

Lev.  25.   5  neither  gather,  .grapes  of  thy  vine  undr. 
25. 11  nor  gather,  .in  it  of  thy  vine  undressed 

Z.A  vine  dresser,  afxireXovpyos  ampelourgos. 

Lukei3-   7  Then  said  he  unto  the  dresser  of  his  vin. 


VINEGAR  — 

1.  Vinegar,  sour  or  unripe  grapes,  f'.ph  chomets. 

Num.  6.  3  no  vinegar  of  wine,  or  vinegar  of  strong 
Ruth  2.  14  come  thousand  dip  thy  morsel  in  the  vi. 
Psa.  69.  21  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  dri. 
Prov  10.  26  As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to 
25.  20  vinegar  upou  nitre,  so  (is)  he  that  singeth 

2.  Vinegar,  6^os  oxos. 

Matt 27.  34  They  gave  him  [vinegar] to  drinkmingled 

27.  48  took  a  sponge,  and  filled  (it)  with  vinegar 
Markis.  36  one  ran  aud  filled  a  sponge  full  of  vinegar 
Luke  23.  36  comingto  him,  and  offering  him  vinegar 
John  19.  29  vessel . .  of  vinegar . .  filled  a  sponge  with  v. 

19.  30  When  Jesus,  .had  received  the  vinegar 
VINEYARD.  (Plain  of  the)  —  DVT13  Snx. 
On  the  E.  of  the  Jordan;  perhaps  Bcit-d-Kerm,  N.  of 
Kerak. 

Judg  11.  33  he  smote  them,  .unto  the  plain  of  the  vi. 
VINEYARD,  (increase  of  the,  dresser  of  the)  — 
l.A  slwot,  plant,  stock,  nas  fatnnah. 

Psa.  80.  15  the  vineyard,  which  thy  right  hand  hath 
%An  enclosed  place,  olive  or  vineyard,  tns  kerem. 

Gen.    9.  20  Noah  began,  .and  he  planted  a  vineyard 

Exod22.    5  or  vineyard.,  of  the  best  of  his  own  \iney. 
23. 11  In  like  manner,  .deal  with  thy  vineyard 

Lev.  19. 10  And  thou  shalt  not  glean  thy  vineyard 

19.  10  neither  shalt  thou  gather . .  of  thy  vineya. 
25.    3  six  years  thou  shalt  prune  thy  vineyard 
25.    4  sow  thy  field,  nor  prune  thy  vineyard 

Nunii6. 14  given  usinheritanceoffields  and  vineyards 

20.  17  we  will  not  pass.,  through  the  vineyards 

21.  22  we  will  not  turn,  .into  the  vineyards,  we 

22.  24  the  angel.,  stood  in  a  path  of  the  vineyards 
Deut.  6.  11  vineyards  and  olive  trees,  which  thou  pi. 

20.  6  what  man.  .that  hath  planted  a  vineyard 
22.    9  Thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  vineyard  with  di. 

22.  9  and  the  fruit  of  thy  vineyard,  be  defiled 

23.  24  thou  comest  into  thy  neighbour's  vineya. 

24.  21  thou  gatherest  the  grapesof  thy  vineyard 

28.  30  thou  shalt  plant  avineyard,  andshalt  not 
28.  39  Thou  shalt  plant  vineyards,  and  dress  (th.) 

Josh. 24.  13  of  the  vineyards  and  oliveyards  which  ye 
Judg  9.  27  gathered  their  vineyards,  and  trode  (the 
11.33  unt,°  tne  plain  of  the  vineyards,  with  a 

14.  5  and  came  to  the  vineyards  of  Timnath 

15.  5  the  standing  corn,  with  the  vineyards  (and) 

21.  20  saying,  Go  and  lie  in  wait  in  the  vineyards 

21.  21  come  ye  out  of  the  vineyards,  and  catch 
1  Sa.    8.  14  he  will  take  your  fields,  and  your  vineya. 

8. 15  he  will  take  the  tenth,  .of  your  vineyards 

22.  7  give  every  one  of  you  fields  andvineyards 

1  Ki.21 .  1  Naboththe  Jezreelite  had  a  vineyard,  wh. 

21.  2  Give  me  thy  vineyard,  that  I  may  have  it 
21.  2  I  will  give  thee  for  it  a  better  vineyard 
21.  6  Give  me  thy  vineyard  for  money,  or  else 
21.  6  I  will  give  thee  (another)  vineyard  for  it 
21.  6  answered,  I  will  not  give  thee  my  vineya. 
21.  7  I  will  give  thee  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 
21. 15  take  possession  of  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 
21.  16  Ahab  rose  up  to  go  down  to  the  vineyard 
21.  18  (he  is)  in  the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  whither 

2  Ki.  5.  26  vineyards,  and  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men 

18.  32  a  land  of  bread  and  vineyards,  a  land  of 

19.  29  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruits  there. 
1  Ch.27.  27  tne  vineyards,  .the  increase  of  the  viney. 
Neh.   5.    3  We  have  mortgaged  our  lands,  vineyards 

5.   4  (and  that  upon)  our  lands  and  vineyards 
5.   5  other  men  have  our  lands  and  vineyards 

5. 11  Restore,  1  pray  you.  .then'  vineyards,  th. 
9.  25  vineyards,  and  oliveyards,  andfruittreea 

Job  24.  18  he  beholdeth  not  the  way  of  the  vineyar. 
Psa. 107.  37  sow  the  fields,  and  plant  vineyards,  which 
Prov.24.  30  I  went,  .by  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void 

31.  16  with  the  fruit,  .she  planteth  a  vineyard 
Eccl.   2.    4  I  builded  me  houses;  I  planted  me  vine. 
Song  1.   6  keeper  of  the  vineyards,  .mine  own  vine. 

1. 14  a  cluster  of  caniphire  in  the  vineyards  of 

7.  12  Let  us  get  up  early  to  the  vineyards  ;  let 

8.  11  Solomon  had.  a  vineyard,  .let  out  the  vin. 

8. 12  My  vineyard,  which  (is)  mine,  (is)  before 
Isa.     1.   8  as  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard,  as  a  lodge  in  a 

3. 14  ye  have  eaten  up  the  vineyard ;  the  spoil 
5.  1  touching  his  vineyard,  .hath  a  vineyard 
5.  3  judge,  .betwixt  me  and  my  vineyard 
5.  4  could  have  been  done  more  to  my  vineya. 
5.  5  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  viney. 
5.  7  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  (is)  the 
5.  10  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath 

16.  10  in  the  vineyards  there  shall  be  no  singing 
27.    2  sing  ye  unto  her,  A  vineyard  of  red  wine 

36.  17  a  land  of  corn . .  of  bread  and  vineyards 

37.  30  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  thereof 
65.  21  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fr. 

Jer.  12. 10  Many  pastors  have  destroyed  my  vineyard 

32.  15  vineyards  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this 
35.   7  sow  seed,  nor  plant  vineyard,  nor  have 
35.   9  neither  have  we  vineyard,  nor  field,  nor 
39. 10  gave  them  vineyards  and  fields  at  the  same 

Eze.  28.  26  shall  build  houses,  and  plant  vineyards 
Hos.    2.  15  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  thence 
Ainos  4.   9  your  vineyards  and  your  fig  trees  and  your 
5.  11  ye  have  planted  pleasant  vineyards,  but  ye 
5. 17  in  all  vineyards  (shall  be)  wailing  :  for  I 

9.  14  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the 
Mic.  1.  6  make  Samaria.,  as  plantings  of  avineyard 
Zeph.  1.  13  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  but  not  drink 

3.-4  vineyard,  afiireXwv  ampelon. 

Matt  20.    1  went . .  to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard 


VINTAGE 


1026 


VISION 


Matt  20.  2  had  agreed,  .he  sent  them  into  his  viney. 
20.  4  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and  whatso. 
20.   7  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and  whatso. 

20.  8  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  saith  unto  his  st. 

21.  28  said  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard 
Si.  33  planted  a  vineyard,  and  hedged  it  round 
21. 39  cast  (him)  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew 
21.  40  the  lord  therefore  of  the  vineyard  conieth 
21.  41  will  let  out  (his)  vineyard  unto  other  hus. 

Marki2.    1  A  (certain)  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
12.    2  might  receive . .  the  fruit  of  the  vineyard 
12.    8  killed  (him),  and  cast  him  out  of  the  vine. 
12.    9  What  shall,  .the lord  of  the  vineyard  do? 
12.    9  come,  .and  will  give  the  vineyard  unto 
Lukei3.    6  (man)  had  a  fig  tree  planted  in  his  viney. 
20.    9  A  certain  (man)  planted  a  vineyard,  and  let 
20.  10  they  should  give  him  of  the  fruit  of  thevi. 
20.  13  Then  said  the  lord  of  the  vineyard,  What 
20. 15  So  they  cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and 
20.  15  What,  .shall  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  do 
20,  16  He  shall,  .give  the  vineyard  to  others 
1  Co.  g.   7  who  planteth  a  vineyard,  and  eateth  not 
4.  Vineyard-worker,  a/xircKovpyos  ampelourgos. 

Lukei3-   7  Then  said  he  unto  the  dresser  of  his  viney. 
VINTAGE — 

1.  Reaping,  harvest,  *vita  batsir. 

Lev.  26.  5  shall  reach  unto  the  vintage,  and  the  vin. 
Judg.  3.  2  the  gleaning,  .better  than  the  vintage  of 
Isa.  24.  13  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  the  vintage 
32.  10  the  vintage  shall  fail,  the  gathering  shall 
Jer.  48.  32  upon  thy  summer  fruits  and  upon  thy  vi. 
Mic.    7.    1  Iam..asthegrapegleaningsoftheviutage 

2.  To  cut  off,  reap,  "i^3  batsar. 

Zech  11.   2  for  the  forest  of  the  vintage  is  come  down 

3.  Olive  or  vineyard,  Di3  kerem. 

Job  24.  Ji  and  they  gather  the  vintage  of  the  wicked 
VIOL  — 
A  lyre,  h^i,  V35  nebel. 

Isa.  5. 12  the  harp  and  the  viol,  the  tabret  and  pipe 
14,  11  to  the  grave,  (and)  the  noise  of  thy  viols 

Amos  5.  23  for  I  will  not  hear  the  melody  of  thy  viols 
6.    5  That  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  (and) 
VIOLATE,  to  — 
To  use  violence,  dcij  chamas. 

Eze.  22.  26  Her  priests  have  violated  my  law,  and  ha. 
VIOLENCE,  (against  or  done),  taken  away  by  — 
l.To  snatch  away,  7T3  gazel. 

Lev.    6.    2  or  in  a  thing  taken  away  by  violence,  or 

2.  What  is  snatched  away,  hn  gezel. 

Eze.  18. 18  because  he.  .spoiled  his  brother  by  viol. 

3.  What  is  snatched  away,  nVja  gezelah. 

Eze.  18.  7  hath  spoiled  none  by  violence,  hath  given 
18.  12  hath  spoiled  by  violence,  hath  not  resto. 
18. 16  neither  hath  spoiled  by  violence,  (but)  h. 

4.  Violence,  DDri  chamas. 

Gen.    6.  11  corrupt,  .andthe earth was'filled with vio. 

6.  13  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through 
2  Sa.  22.  3  my  saviour,  thousavest  me  from  violence 
Psa.  11.    5  him  that  loveth  violence  his  soul  hateth 

55.    9  for  I  have  seen  violence  and  strife  in  the 

58.  2  ye  weigh  the  violence  of  your  hands  in 
72. 14  redeem  their  soul  from  deceit  and  violen. 
73.   6  Therefore,  .violence  covereth  them  (as)  a 

Prov.  4. 17  For  they .  .drink  the  wine  of  violence 
10.   6,  11  violence  covereth  the  mouth  of  the 
13.    2  soul  of  the  transgressors  (shall  eat)  viole. 

Isa.    53.    9  he  haddone  no  violence,  neither  (was  any) 

59.  6  and  the  act  of  violence  (is)in  their  hands 

60.  18  Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy 
Jer.     6.  7  violence  and  spoil  is  heard  in  her ;  before 

20.    8  I  cried  violence  and  spoil ;  because  the 
51.  35  The  violence  done  to  me  and  to  my  flesh 
51.  46  violence  in  the  land,  ruler  against  ruler 
Eze.     7. 11  Violence  is  risen  up  into  a  rod  of  wicked. 

7.  23  crimes,  and  the  city  is  full  of  violence 

8.  17  they  have  filled  the  land  with  violence 
12. 19  because  of  the  violence  of  all  them  that 
28.  16  have  filled  the  midst  of  thee  with  violen. 
45.   9  remove  violence  and  spoil,  and  execute 

Joel    3. 19  for  the  violence  (against)  the  children  of 
Amos  3.  10  who  store  up  violence  and  robbery  in  th. 

6.    3  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  come  near 
Obad.      10  For  (thy)  violence  agaiust  thy  brother  J. 
Jon.    3-    8  from  the  violence  that(is)  in  their  hands 
Mic.    6.  12  the  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  violence 
Hal),    1.    2  cry  outunto  thee  (of)  violence,  and  thou 

1.   3  for  spoiling  and  violence  (are)  before  me 

1.  9  They  shall  come  all  for  violence  :  their    - 

2.  8  (for)  the  violence  of  the  land,  of  the  city 
2.  17  the  violence  of  Lebanon  shall  cover  thee 
2.  17  the  violence  of  the  land,  of  the  city,  and 

Zeph,  1.   9  fill  then1  masters' houses  with  violence  and 
Mai.    2.  16  (one)  covereth  violence  with  his  garment 
5./1  running,  course,  oppression,  7V$>-\n  meruUah. 

Jer.  22. 17  for  oppression,  and  for  violence,  to  do  (ifj 
6. Force,  violence,  jiia  bia. 

Acts    5.  26  went,  .and  brought  them  without  violen, 
si.  35  he  was  borne  of  the  soldiers  for  the  viol. 
24.    7  [with  great  violence  took,  .away  out  of] 
27. 41  the  hinder  part  was  broken  with  the  via 
7 .Power,  Svpafiis  chonamis. 

Heb.  11.  34  Quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped 
8.^1  rushing,  impetuosity,  '6pfxn^a  hormema. 
Rev.  iS.  21  Tims  with  violence  shall  that  great  city 


VIOLENCE,  to  do,  suffer,  take  by  — 

1.  To  snatch  away,  7l|  gazal. 

Mic.    2.    2  they  covet  fields,  and  take,  .by  violence 

2.  To  use  violence,  0?n  chamas. 

Jer.  22.    3  do  no  violence  to  the  stranger,  the  fath. 
Zeph.  3.    4  her  priests,  .have  done  violence  to  the 

3.  To  oppress,  use  oppression,  ptvy  ashaa. 

Prov  28,  17  A  man  that  doeth  violence  to  the  blood 

i.To  be  forced  or  urged,  fiiafafxai  biazomai. 

Matt.  1 1.  12  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence 

5.  To  shake  thoroughly,  Ziaaeiw  diaseio. 

Luke  3. 14  Do  violence  to  no  man,  neither  accuse .  .fa. 

VIOLENT  (dealing,  perverting)  — 

1.  What  is  snatched  away,  hn  gezel. 

Eccl.  5.    8  If  thou  seest.  .violent  perverting  of  judg. 

2.  Violence,  D2n  chamas. 

2  Sa.  22.  49  thou  hast  delivered  me  from  the  violent 

Psa.     7.  16  his  violent  dealing  shall  come  down  upon 

18.  48  thou  hast  delivered  me  from  the  violent 

140.  1,  4  0  Lord  .  .preserve  me  from  the  violent 

140. 11  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  overth. 

Prov.  16.  29  A  violent  man  enticethhis  neighbour,  and 

3.  Terrible,  fTBJ  writs. 

Psa.  86. 14  the  assemblies  of  violent  (men)  have  sou. 

A. Forcible,  violent,  fHiao-r-qs  Hastes. 

Matt.  11.  12  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  .the  violent  take 

VIOLENTLY,  to  take  away  — 
l.To  snatch  away,  Via  gazal. 

Gen.  21.25  which  A. 's  servants  had  violently  taken  a. 

Deut.28.  31  thine  ass.  .violently  taken  away  from  be. 

Job  20.  19  he  hath  violently  taken  away  an  house 
24.    2  they  violently  take  away  flocks,  and  feed 

2.  To  take  violently,  Di?n  chamas. 

Lam.   2.    6  he  hath  violently  taken  away  his  tabern. 
VIPER  — 
l.A  viper,  T\y$#,  ejrfieh. 

Job  20. 16  He  shall  suck  the  poison  of  asps:  the  vip. 

Isa.   30.    6  whence . .  the  viper  and  fiery  flying  serpent 
59.    5  which  is  crushed  breaketh  out  into  a  vip. 

2. ,4  female  viper,  exicVa  echidna. 

Matt.  3.    7  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned  you 

12.  34  generation  of  vipers,  how  can  ye,  being 
23-  33  serpents,  .generation  of  vipers,  how  can 

Luke  3.    7  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned 
Aots  28.    3  there  came  a  viper  out  of  the  heat,  and  fas. 

VIRGIN,  virginity  — 

1, Separation,  virginity,  virgin,  njprv|  bethulah. 
Gen.  24.  16  a  virgin,  neither  had  any  man  known  her 
Exod22. 17  pay  money  according  to  the  dowry  of  vir. 
Lev.  21.    3  for  his  sister  a  virgin,  that  is  nigh  unto 
21. 14  he  shall  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  people 
Deut  22. 19  hath  brought  up  an  evil  name  upon  avir. 
22.  23  If  a  damsel . .  a  virgin  be  betrothed  unto 

22.  28  If  a  man  find  a  damsel,  .a  virgin,  which 
32.  25  destroy  both  the  young  man  and  the  vir. 

Judg. 21.  12  they  found,  .four  hundred  young  virgins 
2  Sa.  13.   2  for  his  sister  Tamar;  for  she  (was)  a  virgin 

13.  18  were  the  king's  daughters,  .virgins  appa. 

1  Ki.   1.    2  sought  for  my  lord  the  king  a  young  virg. 

2  Ki.  19.  21  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hathde. 
Esth.  2.    2  Let  there  be  fair  young  virgins  sought  for 

2.    3  may  gather  together  all  the  fair  young  vi. 

2. 17  favour  in  bis  sight  more  than  all  the  vir. 

2.  19  when  the  virgins  were  gathered  together 
Psa.  45.  14  the  virgins  her  companions  that  follow 
Isa.    23.    4  nourish  up  young  men.  .bring  up  virgins 

23.  12  0  thou  oppressed  virgin,  daughter  of  Zi. 
37.  22  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  de. 
47.  1  0  virgin  daughter  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the 
62.    5  For  (as)  a  young  man  marrieth  a  virgin 

Jer.  14.  17  for  the  virgin  daughter  of  my  people  is 
18.  13  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  very  hor. 
31.  4  Again.,  thou  shalt  be  built,  O  virgin  of  Is. 
31. 13  Then  shall  the  virgin  rejoice  in  the  dance 
31.  21  0  virgin  of  Israel,  turn  again  to  these  thy 
46.  11  Go  up  unto  Gilead,  and  take  balm,  O  vir. 

Lam.  1.    4  her  priests  sigh,  her  virgins  are  afflicted 
1.  15  Lord  hath  trodden  the  virgin,  thedaugh. 

1.  iB  my  virgins  and  my  young  men  are  gone 

2.  10  the  virgins  of  Jerusalem  hang  down  their 
2.  13  that  I  may  comfort  thee,  O  virgin  daugh. 
2.  21  my  virgins  and  my  young  men  are  fallen 

Joel    1.    8  Lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcl. 
Amos  5.    2  The  virgin  of  Israel  is  fallen;  she  shall  no 
8. 13  In  that  day  shall  the  fair  virgins  and  yo. 

%{Tokcns  of)  virginity,  O'^ns  bethuUm. 

Lev.  21. 13  And  he  shall  take  a  wife  in  her  virginity 
Deut 22.  15  take  and  bring  forth,  .the  damsel's  virgi. 
22.  17  and  yet  these,  .my  daughter's  virginity 

22.  20  if.  .virginity  be  not  found  for  the  damsel 
Judg.  1 1.  37  and  bewail  my  virginity,  land  my  fellows 

11.  38  bewailed  her  virginity  upon  the  mountains 
Eze.  23.    3  there  they  bruised  the  teats  of  their  virg. 

23.  8  they  bruised  the  breasts  of  her  virginity 

3. Concealment,  unmarried  female,  fis^y  almah. 

Gen.  24.  43  that  when  the  virgin  cometh  forth  to  dr. 

Sung  1 .    3  ointment . .  therefore  do  the  virgins  love  t. 

6.    8  fourscore  concubines,  and  virgins  wit  hi  mi  t 

Isa.     7. 14  a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,  and 


i.State  of  seclusion,  virginity,  irapQevia  parthenia. 
Luke  2.  36  had  lived,  .seven  years  from  her  virginity 

5. A  virgin,  one  put  aside,  irapOtvos  parthenos. 

Matt.  1.  23  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and 
25.    1  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins,  which  took 
25.   7  Then  all  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed 
25.  11  Afterward  came  also  the  other  virgins 

Luke  1.  27  To  a  virgin  espoused . .  and  the  virgin's  na. 

Acts  21.    9  the  same  man  had  four  daughters,  virgins 

1  Co.    7.  25  concerning  virgins  I  have  no  commandm. 

7.  28  and  if  a  virgin  marry,  she  hath  not  sinned 
7.  34  difference  (also)  between  a  wife  and  [a vi.] 
7.  36  he  behaveth.  .uncomely  toward  his  virgin 

7.  37  so  decreed,  .that  he  will  keep  his  virgin 

2  Co.  11.  2  I  may  present  (you  as)  a  chaste  virgin  to 
Rev.  14.    4  defiled  with  women;  for  they  are  virgins 

VLKTUE,  virtuous,  virtuously  — 

1. Force,  strength  {of  mind  or  body),  h*n  chayil. 

Ruth  3. 11  doth  know  that  thou  (art)  a  virtuous  wo. 

Prov.  12.    4  A  virtuous  woman  (is)  a  crown  to  her  hu. 

31. 10  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman?  for  her 
3 1 .  29  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously,  but 

2.  Force,  strength  {of  mind  or  body),  aperJi  arete. 

Phil.  4.  8  if .  .any  virtue,  and  if.  .any  praise,  think 
2  Pe.  1.    3  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  vir. 

1.  5  add  to  your  faith  virtue:  and  to  virtue  k. 

3. Power,  5vva/j.is  dunamis. 

Mark  5.  30  knowing  in  himself  that  virtue  had  gone 
Luke  6.  19  there  went  virtue  out  of  him,  and  healed 

8.  46  for  I  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of 
VISAGE,  visible  — 

l.Face,  lineaments,  ]*$4§  anp>in.   ■ 

Dan.    3. 19  the  form  of  his  visage  was  changed  agai. 

%  Appearance,  sight,  nyriQ  march. 

Isa.    52. 14  his  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any 

Z.Form.,  ixn  toar. 

Lam.  4.    8  Their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  coal;  they 

4.  What  may  be  seen,  visible,  Spares  horatos. 

Col.     1. 16  all  things,  .visible  and  invisible,  whether 
VISION  — 
1.  Visumt  aspect,  lin  cliezev. 

Dan.  2. 19  was.  .revealed  unto  Daniel  in  a  night  vis. 

2.  28  Thy  dream,  and  the  visions  of  thy  head 
4.   5  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me 
4.   9  tell  me  the  visions  of  my  dream  that  I  ha. 
4.  10  Thus,  .the  visions  of  mine  head  in  my  bed 
4. 13  I  saw  in  the  visions  of  my  head  upon  my 
7.    1  Daniel  had  a  dream  and  visions  of  his  he. 
7.    2  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night,  and  behold 
7.    7  After  this  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and 
7. 13  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and,  behold 
7.  15  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me 

2.Vision,  |iTn  chazon. 

1  Sa.   3.    1  And  the  word. .  was  precious .  .no  open  vi. 

1  Ch.17.  15  according  to  all  this  vision,  so  did  Nathan 

2  Ch.32.  32  they  (are)  written  in  the  vision  of  Isaiah 
Psa.  89. 19  thou  speakest  in  vision  to  thy  Holy  One 
Prov29.  18  Where  (there  is)  no  vision,  the  people  pe. 
Isa.     1.    1  The  vision  of  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz,  wh. 

29.    7  even  all . .  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  a  night  v. 
Jer.   14. 14  they  prophesyuntoyou  a  false  vision  and 

23.  16  they  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  heart 
Lam.  2.    g  her  prophets  also  find  no  vision  from  the 
Eze.    7.  13  the  vision  (is)  touching  the  whole  multit. 

7.  26  then  shall  they  seek  a  vision  of  the  prop. 
12.  22  The  days  are  prolonged,  and  every  vision 
12.  23  are  at  hand,  and  the  effect  of  every  vision 
12.  24  there  shall  be  no  more  any  vain  vision  nor 

12.  27  The  vision  that  he  seeth  (is)  for  many  da. 

13.  16  which  see  no  visions  of  peace  for  her,  and 
Dan.    1.  17  Daniel  had  understanding  in  all  visions 

8.  1  a  vision  appeared  unto  me,  (even  unto)me 
8.  2  I  saw  in  a  vision.  .1  saw  in  a  vision,  and 
8.  13  How  long  (shall  be)  the  vision  (concerning^ 
8.  15  I  Daniel,  had  seen  the  vision,  and  sought 
8.  17  at  the  time  of  the  end(shallbe)the  vision 

8.  26  wherefore  shut  thou  up  the  vision,  for  it 

9.  21  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  be. 
9.  24  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and 

10.  14  in  the  latter  days:  for  yet  the  vision  (is) 

11.  14  exalt  themselves  to  establish  the  vision 
IIos.  12.  10  I  have  multiplied  visions,  and  used  sim. 
Obad.        1  The  vision  of  Obadiah.  Thus  saith  the  L. 
Mic.    3.    6  ye  shall  not  have  avision;  and  it  shall  be 
Nah.  1.    1  The  book  of  the  vision  of  Nahum  the  Elk. 
Hal),    s.    2  Write  the  vision,  and  make  (it)  plain  up. 

2.    3  the  vision  (is)  yet  for  an  appointed  time 

3.  Vision,  n'lTp  chazoth, 

2  Ch.    9.  29  written,  .in  the  visions  of  Iddo  the  seer 

4.  Vision,  rmn  chazuth. 

Isa.   2i.    2  A  grievous  vision  is  declared  unto  me 

29. 11  the  vision  of  all  is  become  unto  you  as  th« 

^.Vision,  }Wn  chizzayon. 

2  Sa.    7.  17  according  to  all  this  vision,  so  did  Nath. 

Job     4.  13  In  thoughts  from  the  visions  of  the  night 
7.  14  Then  thou,  .terrifiest  me  through  visions 
20.   8  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  of  the  night 
33.  15  In  a  dream,  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  wh. 

Isa.   22.    1  The  burden  of  the  valley  of  vision.  What 
22.    5  Lord  God  of  hosts  in  the  valley  of  vision 

Joel    2.  28  afterward,  .your  young  men  shall  see  vi. 

Zech  13.    4  shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of  his  vision 


VISIT 


1027 


VOICE 


6.  Vision,  niqD  macJiazeh. 

Gen.  15.  Y  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Abram  in  a  vision 
KU11124.  4,  16  He.  .which  saw  the  vision  of  the  Aim. 
Eze.  13.    7  Have  ye  not  seen  a  vain  vision,  and  have 

7. Appearance,  sight,  nxnn  marah. 

Gen.  46.    2  God  spake  unto  Israel  iu  the  visions  of  the 

Kum  12.    6  will  make  myself  known  unto  him  in  a  v. 

r  Sa.    3. 15  And  Samuel  feared  to  show  Eli  the  vision 

Eze.     1.    1  the  heavens  were  opened,  and  I  saw  vis. 

8.    3  brought  me  in  the  visions  of  God  to  Jeru. 

40.    2  In  the  visions  of  God  brought  he  me  into 

43.    3  and  the  visions  (were)  like.,  that  I  saw  by 

Dan.  ro.    7  And  I  Daniel  alone  saw  the  vision,  for  the 

10.   7  men  that  were  with  me  saw  not  the  vision 

10.  8  I  was  left  alone,  and  saw  this  great  vision 
10. 16  by  the  vision  my  sorrows  are  turned  up. 

B.Appearance,  sight,  n^-p  mareh. 

Eze.    8.    4  according  to  the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the 

11.  24  brought  mein  a  vision  by  the  spirit  of  God 
11.  24  the  vision  that  I  had  seen  went  up  from 
43.  3  according  to  the  appearance  of  the  vision 
43.    3  the  vision  that  I  saw.  .like  the  \ision  that 

Dan.    8.  16  make  this(man)  to  understandthe  vision 
8.  26  the  vision  of  the  evening  and  the  morning 

8.  27 1  was  astonished  at  the  vision,  but  none 

9.  23  therefore  understand,  .and  consider  the  v. 
10.    1  and  had  understanding  of  the  vision 

9. Seeing,  vision,  nxi  roeh. 

Isa.  28.   7  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  (in)  judg. 
10.  To  see,  nxn  raah. 

2  Ch.26.   5  who  had  understanding  in  the  visions  of 

11.-4  sight,  apparition,  vision,  owraata  optasia. 

Luke  1.  22  they  perceived  that  he  had  seen  a  vision 

24.  23  that  they  had  also  seen  a  vision  of  angels 

Acta  26.  19  was  not  disobedient  unto  the  heavenly  v. 

2  Co.  12.    1 1  will  come  to  visions  and  revelations  of 

12.^4  sight,  vision,  '6pa/j.a  horama. 

Matt  17.    9  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man,  until  the  Son 
Acts    9.  10  to  him  said  the  Lord  in  a  vision,  Ananias 
9.  12  hath  seeu  [in  a  vision]  a  man  named  Ana. 
10.    3  He  saw  in  a  vision  evidently,  about  the 

10.  17  Peter  doubted  iu  himself  what  this  vision 
"10. 19  While  Peter  thought  on  thevision,  the  sp. 

11.  5  in  a  trance  I  saw  a  vision,  A  certain  vess. 

12.  9  and  wist  not.  .but  thought  he  saw  a  vision 
16.   9  a  vision  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  night 
16.  10  after  he  had  seen  the  vision,  immediately 
18.   9  Then  spake  the  Lord,  .by  a  vision,  Be  not 

1Z.  Act  of  seeing,  sight,  vision,  Spaais  horasis. 
Acts    2.  17  your  yomig  men  shall  see  visions,  and 
Rev.   9. 17  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  vision,  and 

VISIT,  be 

1.  To  look 

Gen.  21. 

50. 

5°- 
Exod.  3. 

4- 
13- 


visited,  to  — 

over,  or  after,  inspect,  "ips  paqad. 
1  Lord  visited  Sarah  as  he  had  said,  and  the 

24  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  bring  you 

25  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  ye  shall  ca. 
16  I  have  surely  visited  you,  and  (seen)  that 
31  they  heard  that  the  Lord  had  visited  the 
19  God  will  surely  visit  you ;  and  ye  shall 

20.  5  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
32.  34  in  the  day  when  I  visit  I  will  visit  their  sin 

34.  7  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
Lev.  18.  25  therefore  I  do  visit  the  iniquity  thereof 
Numi4.  iS  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
Deut.  5.  9  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon 
Judg  1 5.  1  that  Samson  visited  his  wife  with  a  kid 
Ruth  1.  6  the  Lord  had  visited  his  people  in  giving 
1  Sa.  2.  21  the  Lord  visited  Hannah,  so  that  she  co. 
Job     5.  24  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habitation,  and  shalt 

7.  18  thou  shouldest  visit  him  every  morning 

31.  14  when  he  visiteth,  what  shall  I  answer  him 

35.  15  he  hath  visited  in  his  anger;  yet  he  kno. 
Psa.     8.    4  and  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  hini 

17.    3  thou  hast  visited  (me)  in  the  night;  thou 
59.    5  O  LORD,  .awake  to  visit  all  the  heathen 
65.    9  Thou  visitest  the  earth,  and  waterest  it 
80.  14  Return .  .and  behold,  and  visit  this  vine 
89.  32  Then  will  I  visit  their  transgression  with 
106.    4  O  Lord,  .visit  me  with  thy  salvation 

Isa.  23.  17  Lord  will  visit  Tyre,  and  she  shall  turn 
26. 14  therefore  hast  thou  visited  and  destroyed 
26. 16  Lord,  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee 

Jer.     3.  16  neither  shall  they  visit  (it),  neither  shall 

5.  9,  29  Shall  I  not  \isit  for  these  (things)?  sa. 

6.  15  at  the  time .  .1  visit  them  they  shall  be  ca. 
9.   9  Shall  I  not  visit  them  for  these  (things)?! 

14.  10  remember  their  iniquity,  and  visit  their 

15.  15  remember  me,  and  visit  me,  and  revenue 
23.  2  Ye..havenotvisitedthem..Iwillvisitupon 
27.  22  there  shall  they  be  until  the  day.  .1  visit 
29.  10  after  seventy  years . .  I  will  visit  you,  and 

32.  5  there  shall  he  be  until  I  visit  him,  saith 

49.  8  I  will  bring . .  the  time . .  I  will  visit  him 

50.  31  thy  day  is  come,  the  time.  .1  will  visit  thee 
Lam.  4. 22  he  will  visit  thine  iniquity,  0  daughter  of 
Hos.   2.  13  I  will  visit  upon  her  the  days  of  Baalim 

8.  13  remember  their  iniquity,  and  visit  their 
g.    9  remembertheiriniquity,  he  will  visit  their 

Amos  3.  14  That  in  the  day  that  I  shall  visit  the  tra. 

3.  14  I  will  also  visit  the  altars  of  Beth-el 
Zeph.  2.    7  for  the  Lord  their  God  shall  visit  them 
Zech  10.   3  for  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited  his  fi. 
11.  16  shall  not  visit  those  that  be  cut  off,  neit. 

2.  To  he  inspected,  missed,  *ips  paqad,  2. 

Num  16.  29  or  if  they  be  visited  after  the  visitation  of 


Jer. 


Hos. 
Mic. 


Prov  19. 23  abide . .  he  shall  not  be  visited  with  evil 
Isa.   24.  22  and  after  many  days  shall  they  be  visited 
29.    6  Thou  shalt  be  visited  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
Eze.  38.    8  After  many  days  thou  shalt  be  visited 

3.  To  be  inspected,  missed,  ips  paqad,  6. 

Jer.    6.    6  Jerusalem :  this  (is)  the  city  to  be  visited 

4.  To  be  inspected,  looked  over,  *wio'K€TrTO}j.ai  episk. 
Matt  25.  36  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me :  I  was  in  pr. 

25.  43  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me  not 
Luke  1. 68  he  hath  visited  and  redeemed  his  people 

1. 78  the  dayspring  from  on  high  hath  visited 
7.  16  saying.  .That  Gud  hath  visited  his  people 
Acts    7.  23  to  visit  his  brethren  the  children  of  Israel 
15.  14  how  God  at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles 

15.  36  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren  in 
Heb.  2.    6  or  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him 
Jas.    1.  27  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  the. 

VISITATION  — 

1.  Inspection,  a  looking  after,  n^3  pequddah. 

Numi6.  29  or  if  they  be  visited  after  the  visitation  of 
Job    10.  12  thy  visitation  hath  preserved  my  spirit 
Isa.    10.    3  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation 
8. 12  in  the  time  of  their  visitation  they  shall 

10. 15  in  the  time  of  their  visitation  they  shall 
11.  23  for  I  will  bring  evil,  .the  year  of  their  vi. 
23.  12  for  I  will  bring  evil.. the  year  of  their  vis. 
46.  21  because  the  day.  .the  time  of  their  visita. 
48. 44  for  I  will  bring*,  .the  year  of  their  visitat. 
50.  27  their  day  is  come,  the  time  of  their  visit. 

51. 18  in  the  time  of  their  visitation  they  shall 
9.   7  The  days  of  visitation  are  come,  the  days 

7.  4  the  day  of  thy  watchmen,  .thy  visitation 

^.Inspection,  a  looking  over,  ^tthtkottt]  episkope. 

Lukeig.  44  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation 

1  Pe.  2. 12  may.  .glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation 
VOCATION  — 
A  calling,  k\t)(Tl$  klesis. 

Eph.   4.    1  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye 
VOICE  — 
1.-4  voicej  sound,  ?ip  qol. 

Gen.    3.    8  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  wa. 
3.  10 1  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was 

3.  17  Because  thou  hasthearkened  unto  the  vo. 

4.  10  the  voice  of  thy  brother'sbloodcrieth  unto 
4.  23  Adah  and  ZUlah,  hear  my  voice,  ye  wives 

16.  2  And  Abram  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Sa. 
at.  12  hearken  unto  her  voice ;  forin  Isaac  shall 

21. 16  And  she  sat.  .and  lift  up  her  voice,  and 

21. 17  God  heard,  -the  voice  of  the  lad  where 

22. 18  And.  .  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice 

26.  5  Because  that  Abraham  obeyed  my  voice 

27.  8  obey  my  voice  according  to  that  which  I 

27. 13  only  obey  my  voice,  and  go  fetch  me  (th.) 
27.  22  The  voice  (is)  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands 
27.  38  And  Esau  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 
27.  43  Now  therefore,  my  son,  obey  my  voice 

29.  11  Jacob  kissed  Rachel,  and  lifted  up  his  vo. 

30.  6  God . .  hath  also  heard  my  voice,  and  hath 

39. 14  he  came  in.  .and  I  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
39.  15  when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice 
39.  18  it  came  to  pass,  as  I  lifted  up  my  voice 

Exod.  3.  18  they  shall  hearken  to  thy  voice,  and  thou 
4.    1  believe  me,  nor  hearken  unto  my  voice 
4.    8  the  voice  of  the  first,  .the  voice  of  the  la. 

4.  9  if  they  will  not.  .hearken  unto  thy  voice 

5.  2  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  to  let  Israel 
15.  26  If  thou  wilt  diligently  hearken  to  the  vo. 

18. 19  Hearken  now  unto  my  voice,  I  will  give 

18.  24  So  Moses  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  his  fa. 

19.  .5  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep 
19. 16  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud 

19. 19  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  sounded 
19.  19  Moses  spake,  and  God  answered,  .by  a  v. 
23. 21  Beware  of  him,  and  obey  his  voice,  prov. 

23.  22  if  thou  shalt  indeed  obey  his  voice,  and 

24.  3  all  the  people  answered  with  one  voice 
32.  18  the  voice  of  (them  that)  shout,  .the  voice 

Lev.    5.    1  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swear. 

Num.  7.  89  he  heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking  iinto 

14.    1  all  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  voice 

14.  22  those  men.  .have  not  hearkened  to  my  v. 
20. 16  he  heard  our  voice,  and  sent  an  angel,  and 
21.   3  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Isra. 

Deut.  1.  34  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  words 
1.  45  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  to  your  vo. 
4. 12  heard  the  voice  of  the  words,  .only,  .a  vo. 
4.  30  if  thou . .  shalt  be  obedient  unto  his  voice 
4.  33  Did.  .people  hear  the  voice  of  God  speak. 

4.  36  he  made  thee  to  hear  his  voice,  that  he 

5.  22  of.  .the  thick  darkness,  with  a  great  voi. 
5. 23  when  ye  heard  the  voice  out  of  the  midst 
5.  24  we  have  heard  his  voice  out  of  the  midst 
5.  25  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God 
5.  26  that  hath  heard  the  voice  of  theliving  God 
5.  28  the  voice  of  your  words,  .the  voice  of  the 

8.  20  ye  would  not  be  obedient  unto  the  voice 

9.  23  believed  hininot,  nor  hearkened  to  his  vo. 
13.  4  keep  his  commandments,  and  obey  his  vo. 
13.  18  When  thou  shalt  hearken  to  the  voice  of 

15.  5  if  thou  carefully  hearken  unto  the  voice 

18. 16  Let  me  not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the 
21. 18  obey  the  voice  of  Ms  father,  or  the  voice 
21.  20  he  will  not  obey  our  voice . .  a  glutton  and 
e6.   7  Lord  heard  our  voice,  and  looked  on  our 
26. 14  I  have  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  the  LORD 

26. 17  to  keep . .  and  to  hearken  unto  his  voice 
27. 10  Thou  shalt  therefore  obey  the  voice  of  the 
e?.  14  say  unto  all  themen  of  1.  with  a  loud 


Deut  28.    1  shalt  hearken  diligently  unto  the  voice 
28.   2  if  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  oi  the 
28.  15  if  thou  wilt  not  hearken  unto  the  vuice 
28.  45  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
28.  62  thou  wouldest  not  obey  the  voice  of  the 
30.   2  shalt  return,  .and  shalt  obey  his  voice 
30.    8  thou  shalt  return,  and  obey  the  voice  of 
30.  10  If  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  of 
30.  20  that  thou  mayest  obeyhisvoice,  and  that 
33.   7  Hear,  Lord,  the  voice  of  Judah,  and  bri. 

Josh.  5.   6  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

6.  10  shall  not.  .make  any  noise  with  your  voi. 

10. 14  that  the  Lord  hearkened  unto  the  voice 
22.    2  Ye.  .have  obeyed  my  voice  in  all  that  I 
24.  24  The  Lord  our  God.  .his  voice  will  we  ob. 

Judg.  2.  2  ye  have  not  obeyed  my  voice :  why  have 
2,  4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 
2.  20  and  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  voice 

6.  10  fear  not.  .but  ye  have  not  obeyed  my  vo. 
9.    7  lifted  up  his  voice  and  cried,  and  said 

13.   9  God  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Manoah 
18.    3  they  knew  the  voice'of  the  young  man  the 

18.  25  Let  not  thy  voice  be  heard  among  us,  lest 

20.  13  would  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  their 

21.  2  and  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept  sore 
Ruth  1.    9  and  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 

1. 14  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept  again 

1  Sa.    1.  13  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not  he. 

2.  25  they  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice  of  their 
8.    7  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  people  in 
8.   9  Now  therefore  hearken  unto  their  voice 
8.  19  the  people  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  S. 

8.  22  Hearken  unto  their  voice,  and  make  them 

11.  4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  we. 

12.  1 1  have  hearkened  unto  your  voice  in  all 
12.  14  If  ye  will  fear  the  LORD,  .and  obey  his  v. 

12. 15  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
15.  1  hearken  thou  uuto  the  voice  of  the  words 
15.  19  Wherefore,  .didst  thou  not  obey  the  voi. 
15.  20  Yea,  I  have  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
15.  22  as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord? 

15.  24  I  feared  the  people,  and  obeyed  their  vo. 

19.  6  Saul  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  Jonath. 

24.  16  (Is)  this  thy  voice.  .S.  Lifted  up  his  voice 

25.  35  I  have  hearkened  to  thy  voice,  and  have 
26. 17  And  Saul  knew  David's  voice,  and  said 

26.  17  (Is)  tins  thy  voice.  .(Itis)  my  voice,  my  1. 
28.  12  saw  Samuel,  she  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
28.  18  Because  thou  obeyedst  not  the  voice  of 
28.  21  thine handmaidhath obeyed thyvoice.and 
28.  22  hearken  thou  also  unto  the  voice  of  thine 
28.  23  hearkened  unto  their  voice.  So  he  arose 
30.   4  the  people,  .lifted  up  their  voice  and.  we. 

2  Sa.    3.  32  the  king  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept  at 

12.  18  and  he  would  not  hearken  unto  our  voice 

13.  14  he  would  not  hearken  unto  her  voice,  but 
13.  36  king's  sons  came,  and  lifted  up  their  vo. 
15.  23  all  the  country  wept  with  a  loud  voice,  and 
19.    4  the  king  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  O  my 

19.  35  can  I  hear  any  more  the  voice  of  singing 

22.  7  he  did  hear  my  voice  out  of  his  temple 
22. 14  The  Lord,  .the  most  High  uttered  his  vo. 

Ki.   8.  55  blessed,  .the  congregation,  .with  a  loud  v. 

17.  22  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  Elijah,  and  the 

18.  26  (there  was)  no  voice,  nor  any  that  answ. 
18.  29  neither  voice,  nor  any  to  answer,  nor  any 
ig.  12  and  after  the  fire  a  still  small  voice 

19. 13  a  voice.. said,  What  doest  thou  here,  Eli.? 

20.  25  he  hearkened  unto  their  voice,  and  did  so 
20.  36  thou  hast  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  L. 

2  Ki.   4.  31  but.  .neither  voice  nor  hearing :  wheref. 

7.  10  no  man  there,  neither  voice  of  man,  but 
10.    6  If  ye.  .will  hearken  unto  my  voice,  take 

18.  12  Because  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the 
18. 28  Rab-shakeh  stood,  and  cried  with  a  loud 

19.  22  against  whom  hast  thou  exalted  (thy)  v.? 

1  Ch.15.  16  sounding,  by  lifting  up  the  voice  with  joy 

2  Ch.  5. 13  when  they  lifted  up  (their)  voice  with  the 

15.  14  they  sware  unto  the  Lord  with  a  loud  vo. 
20. 19  to  praise  the  Lord,  .with  a  loud  voice  on 
30.  27  their  voice  was  heard,  and  their  prayer 

32.  18  Then  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the 
Ezra   3. 12  many.. ancient  men.,  wept  with  a  loud  vo. 

10.  12  answered  and  said  with  a  loud  voice,  As 

Neh.    9.   4  cried  with  a  loud  voice  unto  the  Lord  th. 

Job     2. 12  knew  him  not,  they  lifted  up  their  voice 

3. 18  prisoners,  .hear  not  the  voice  of  the  opp. 

4. 10  the  voice  of  the  fierce  lion,  and  the  teeth 

4.  16  It  stood  still,  .and  I  heard  a  voice,  (saying) 

9.  16  not  believe.. had  hearkened  unto  my  voi. 
30.  31  my  organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  weep 

33.  8  and  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  (thy)  words 

34.  16  hear  this ;  hearken  to  the  voice  of  my  wo. 
37.  2  Hearattentively  the  noise  of  hisvoice,  and 
37.  4  After  it  a  voice.,  the  voice  of  hisexcellen. 
37.    4  not  stay  them  when  his  voice  is  heard 

37.  5  God  thundereth  marvellously  with  his  vo. 

38.  34  Canst  thou  lift  up  thy  voice  to  the  clouds 
40.    9  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like  him  ? 

Psa.    3.   4  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice,  and 

5.  2  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry,  my  ki. 

5.  3  My  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  morning' 

6.  8  Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  weeping 
18.    6  he  heard  my  voice  out  of  his  temple,  a 
18. 13  The  Lord,  .the  Highest  gave  his  voicend 
ig.    3  no  speech  nor  language,  .their  voice  is  not 

26.  7  That  I  may  publish  with  the  voice  of  th. 

27.  7  Hear,  O  Lord,  (when)  I  cry  with  my  voi. 

28.  2  Hear  the  voice  of  my  supplications  when 

28.  6  he  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  supplicat 

29.  3,  4,  4,  5,  7,  8,  9  The  voice  of  the  Lord  (is) 
31.  22  thou  heardest  the  voice  of  my  supplicat. 


VOICE 


1028 


VOID 


Psa.  42. 

44 

46. 

47 

■is- 

55- 
58. 
64. 
66. 
66. 
68. 
74- 

n- 

77- 

81, 
86. 
93 
95 


102. 
103 
104 
106 
116. 
118. 
119 
130 
130, 
140. 
141. 
142, 
Prov.  1. 


27. 

Eccl.  5. 

5- 


Song  2. 


Isa. 


Jer. 


6 
6. 
10. 

*3- 
15^ 
24. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
3o- 
30- 
3*- 
32- 
36. 
37- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
42. 
48. 
5°- 
5i- 
52- 
58. 
58. 
65. 
66. 

3- 
3- 
3 
4- 
4- 
4- 
6. 
7- 
7- 
7* 
7- 
8. 
9- 
9- 
9- 


4  with  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  with  a 

16  For  the  voice  of  himthatreproachethand 
C  he  uttered  his  voice,  the  earth  melted 

1  shout  unto  God  with  the  voice  of  triumph 
■2  Because  of  the  voice  of  the  enemy,  beca. 

17  will  I  pray,  .and  he  shall  hear  my  voice 

s  Which  will  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  ch. 
1  Hear  my  voice,  0  God,  in  my  prayer 
8  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  heard 

19  he  hath  attended  to  the  voice  of  my  pra. 

33  he  doth  send  out  his  voice.. a  mighty  vo. 
23  Forget  not  the  voice  of  thine  enemies,  the 

1  I  cried  unto  God  with  my  voice.. my  voi. 

18  The  voice  of  thy  thunder  (was)  in  the  he. 

11  my  people  would  not  hearken  to  my  voice 

6  Give  ear.  .attend  to  the  voice  of  my  sup. 
3  The  floods,  .floods  have  lifted  up  their  v. 

7  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice 

5  Sing  unto  the  Lord  with,  .the  voice  of  a 

5  By  reason  of  the  voice  of  my  groaning  my 

20  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word 

7  at  the  voice  of  thy  thunder  they  hasted 
25  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

1  because  he  hath  heard  my  voice,  .my  su. 
15  The  voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  (is) 
149  Hear  my  voice  according  unto  thy  lo. 

2  Lord,  hear  my  voice ;  let  thine  ears  be  at. 

2  attentive  to  the  voice  of  my  supplications 

6  hear  the  voice  of  my  supplications,  O  L. 
1  give  ear  unto  my  voice,  when  I  cry  unto 

I  I  cried,  .with  my  voice ;  with  my  voice  unto 
20  Wisdom  crieth.  .she  uttereth  her  voice 

3  (and)  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understand. 

13  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers 

1  and  understanding  put  forth  her  voice 

4  I  call;  and  my  voice  (is)  to  the  sons  of  man 

14  that  blesseth  his  friend  with  a  loud  voice 

3  a  fool's  voice  (is  known)  by  the  multitude 
6  wherefore  should  God  be  angry  at  thyvo. 

20  a  bird  of  the  airshall  carry  the  voice,  and 

4  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  the  bird 

8  The  voice  of  my  beloved !  behold,  he  co. 

12  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  la. 

14  let  me  hear  thyvoice.  .sweet  (is)thy  voice 
?  (it  is)  the  voice  of  my  beloved  that  knoc. 

13  the  companions  hearken  to  thyvoice:  ca. 
4  the  posts  of  the  door  moved  at  the  voice 

8  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Wh. 
30  Lift  up  thy  voice,  0  daughter  of  Gallini,  ca. 

2  exalt  the  voice  unto  them,  shake  the  hand 
4  their  voice  shall  be  heard  (even)  unto  Ja. 

*4  They  shall  lift  up  their  voice,  they  shall 

23  Give  ye  ear,  and  hear  my  voice ;  hearken 

4  thy  voice  shall  be,  as  of  one  that  hath  a  fa. 

19  will  be  very  gracious,  .at  the  voice  of  thy 

30  the  Lord  shall  cause  his  glorious  voice  to 

31  through  the  voice  of  the  Lord  shall  the  A. 
4  (he)  will  not  be  afraid  of  their  voice,  nor 

9  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters;  give 
13  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in  the  Jews'  Ian. 
23  against  whom  hast  thou  exalted  (thy)  vo. 

3  The  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  wild. 
6  The  voice  said,  Cry.  And  he  said,  What 

9  lift  up  thy  voice  with  strength ;  lift  (it) 

2  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  st. 

20  with  a  voice  of  singing  declare  ye,  tell  this 
10  that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  his  servant,  that 

3  thanksgiving,  and  the  voice  of  melody 

8  shall  lift  up  the  voice ;  with  the  voice  to. 
1  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show 

4  to  make  your  voice  to  be  heard  on  high 
19  the  voice  of  weeping,  .nor  the  voice  of  cr. 

6  A  voice  of  noise,  .a  voice  from,  .a  voice  of 
13  ye  have  not  obeyed  my  voice,  saith  the  L. 

21  A  voice  was  heard  upon  the  high  places 
J25  have  nofobeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 

15  a  voice  declareth  from  Dan,  and  publis. 

16  give  out  their  voice  against  the  cities  of 
31  I  have  heard  a  voice,  .the  voice  of  the  da. 
23  their  voice  roareth  like  the  sea,  and  they 
23  Obey  my  voice,  and  I  will  be  your  God,  and 
28  a  nation  that  obeyeth  not  the  voice  of  the 

34  the  voice  of  mirth,  and  the  voice  of  glad. 
34  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voi. 
19  Behold  the  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  daught. 
10  neither  can  (men)  hear  the  voice  of  the  ca. 
13  have  not  obeyed  my  voice,  neither  walked 
19  a  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  out  of  Zion,  Ho. 
1 3  When  he  uttereth  his  voice,  (thereis)  a  rau. 

4  Obey  my  voice,  and  do  them,  according 

7  and  protesting,  saying,  Obey  my  voice 

9  the  voice  of  mirth,  and  the  voice  of  glad. 
9  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voi. 

10  that  it  obey  not  my  voice,  then  I  will  re. 

19  hearken  to  the  voice  of  them  that  conte. 

20  lift  up  thy  voice  in  Bashan,  and  cry  from 

21  thy  manner,  .thou  obeyedst  not  my  voice 

10  the  voice  of  mirth,  and  the  voice  of  glad. 

10  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voi. 
30  utter  his  voice  from  his  holy  habitation 
36  A  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  shepherds,  and 
13  and  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God 

5  We  have  heard  a  voice  of  trembling,  of 

19  and  the  voice  of  them  that  make  merry 

15  A  voice  was  heard  in  Raman,  lamentation 

16  Refrain  thy  voice  from  weeping,  and  thi. 
23  they  obeyed  not  thyvoice,  neither  walked 

II  The  voice  of  joy,  and  the  voice  of  gladness 

11  the  voice  of  thebridegroom,  and  the  voice 
11  the  voice  of  them  that  shall  say,  Praise 

8  Thus  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  Jonad. 

20  Obey,  I  beseech  thee,  the  voice  of  the  Lord 


Jer. 

40. 

42. 

42. 

42. 

43- 

43- 

44. 

46. 

48. 

48. 

50. 

50. 

51- 

5i- 

SI- 

J, nn 

•  1- 

Eze 

I. 

23- 

27. 

33- 

43- 

Dan.   8. 
9- 

9- 
9- 


Joel    2. 

3- 

Amos  1. 
Jon.    2. 


Mic.  6 
6. 

Nah.  2 
2 

Hab.  3. 

Zeph.  1, 
2 

Hag.    1 
Zech.  6. 


2.  A  voice, 

Dan.  4. 
6. 
7- 

3.  A  voice, 

Matt.  2. 
3- 
3- 
12. 

T7- 
27. 
27. 


5< 
9' 
i5< 
i5- 
Luke  1 


3- 
3- 
4- 
8. 
9- 
9- 
11. 

17- 
17- 
19. 

23- 
23- 

23. 

John  1. 
3' 

5> 
5< 
5< 

10. 

10. 


3  have  not  obeyed  his  voice,  therefore  this 

6  obey  the  voice .  .the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 
13  neither  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your 
2i  ye  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

4  the  people,  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  L. 

7  for  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

23  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
22  The  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  serpent 

3  A  voice  of  crying  (shall  be)  from  Horona. 
34  unto  Jahaz,  have  they  uttered  their  voice 
28  The  voice  of  them  that  flee  and  escape 
42  their  voice  shall  roar  like  the  sea,  and  th. 
16  When  he  uttereth  (Iris)  voice,  (there  is)  a 
55  had  destroyed  out  of  her  the  great  voice 

55  her  waves.,  a  noise  of  their  voice  is  uttered 

56  Thou  hast  heard  my  voice;  hide  not  thine 

24  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty,  the  voice  of 

25  there  was  a  voice  from  the  firmament  that 
28  and  I  heard  a  voice  of  one  that  spake 

12  I  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  a  great  rus. 

18  though  they  cry.,  with  a  loud  voice,  (yet) 

1  He  cried  also,  .with  a  loud  voice,  saying 

5  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty  God  when 

13  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said,  Ah  Lord 
9  his  voice  should  no  more  be  heard  upon 

22  to  lift  up  the  voice  with  shouting,  toapp. 
42  a  voice  of  a  multitude  being  at  ease  (was) 

30  shall  cause  their  voice  tobeheard  against 

32  song  of  one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice 

2  and  his  voice  (was)  like  a  noise  of  many 
t6  I  heard  aman's  voice  between  (the  banks) 

10  Neither  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the 

11  that  they  might  not  obey  thy  voice,  the. 

14  (is)  righteous,  .for  we  obeyed  nothisvoice 

6  the  voice  of  his  words  like  the  voice  of  a 
9  Yet  heard  I  the  voice .  .the  voice  of  his 

11  the  Lord  shall  utter  his  voice  before  his 
16  The  Lord  also  shall .  .utter  his  voice  from 

2  Lord  will,  .utter  his  voice  from  Jerusalem 
2  cried  I,  (and)  thou  heardest  my  voice 
9  I  will  sacrifice  unto  thee  with  the  voice 

1  contend  thou .  .let  the  hills  hear  thyvoice 
9  The  Lord's  voice  crieth  unto  the  city,  and 

7  maids  shall  lead  (her)  as  with  the  voice  of 

13  the  voice  of  thy  messengers  shall  no  more 
10  the  deep  uttered  his  voice,  (and)  lifted  up 

16  my  lips  quivered  at  the  voice:  rotteness 

14  (even)  the  voice  of  the  day  of  the  Lord 

14  (their)  voice  shall  sing  in  the  windows;  de. 

2  She  obeyed  not  the  voice;  she  received  not 

12  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God 

15  if  ye  will  diligently  obey  the  voice  of  the 

3  (There  is) . .  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young 

sound,  *?f3  qal. 

3 1  there  fell  a  voice  from  heaven . .  O  king  N. 
20  cried  with  a  lamentable  voice  unto  Daniel 
11I  beheld  then  because  of  the  voice  of  the 
sound,  <p<avt)  phone. 
iS  In  Rama  was  there  a  voice  heard,  lamen. 

3  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

17  And  lo  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  Th. 

19  neither  shall  any  man  hear  his  voice  in 
5  behold  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  which  sa. 

46  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli! 
50  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice 

3  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 
11  there  came  a  voice  from  heaven,  (saying) 

26  had  torn  him,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice 

7  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said,  Wliat 

7  a  voice  came  out  of  the  cloud,  saying,  Th. 

34  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eloi 
37  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  gave  up 
42  she  spake  out  with  a  loud  [voice],  and  said 
44  as  soon  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  so. 

4  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

22  a  voice  came  from  heaven,  which  said,  Th. 

33  a  man  which,  .cried  out  with  a  loud  voice 

23  and  with  a  loud  voice  said,  What  have  I  to 

35  there  camea  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  saying 

36  when  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found 

27  a  certain  woman,  .lifted  up  her  voice,  and 

13  they  lifted  up  (their)  voices,  and  said,  Je. 
15  turned  back,  and  with  a  loud  voice  glori. 

37  praise  God  with  a  loud  voice  for  all  the 
23  they  were  instant  with  loud  voices,  requi. 
23  the  voices  of  them  and  of  the  chief  priests 
46  when  Jesus  had  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
23  I  (am)  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wil. 
29rejoiceth . .  because  of . .  bridegroom's  voice 
25  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 

28  all.  .in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice 
37  Ye  have  neither  heard  his  voice  at  any  ti. 

3  the  sheep  hear  his  voice:  and  he  calleth 

4  sheep  follow  him:  for  they  know  his  voice 
.    5  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers 

.  16  they  shall  hear  my  voice;  and  there  shall 
.  27  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them 
.  43  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come 
.  28  Then  came  thereavoice  from  heaven,  (sa.) 
.  30  This  voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but 
•  37  Every  one . .  of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice 
.  14  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  said  unto  them 
.  24  they  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one 
.  31  the  voice  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him 
.  57  they  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  sto 
.  60  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lord,  lay  not  this 
.    7  unclean  spirits,  crying  with  a  loud  voice 
.   4  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul,  Saul 
.    7  stood  speechless,  hearing  a  voice,  but  se. 
.  13  there  came  a  voice  to  him,  Rise,  Peter 
>.  15  the  voice  (spake)  unto  him  again  the  sec. 


Acts  11.    7  I  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  me,  Arise,  P. 

11.  9  the  voice  answered  me  again  from  heaven 
i2.  14  when  she  knew  Peter's  voice,  she  opened 

1 2.  22  (It  is)  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man 

13.  27  nor  yet  the  voices  of  the  Prophets  which 

14.  10  Said  with  a  loud  voice,  Stand  upright  on 
14.  11  they  lifted  up  their  voices,  saying  in  the 
16.  28  Paul  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Do 
19.  34  all  with  one  voice  about  the  space  of  two 
22.  7  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  me,  Saul,  Saul 
22.  9  they  heard  not  the  voice  of  him  that  spa. 
22.  14  and  shouldest  hear  the  voice  of  his  mouth 
22.  22  (then)  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  said,  A. 
24.  21  Except  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that!  cried 
26.  14  I  heard  a  voice  speaking  unto  me,  and  sa. 
26.  24  Festus  said  with  a  loud  voice,  Paul,  thou 

1  Co.  14.  10  There  are,  it  may  be,  so  many  kinds  of  vo. 

14.  n  if  I  know  not  the  meaning  of  the  voice,  I 

Gal.     4.  20  I  desire .  .to  change  my  voice ;  for  I  stand 

1  Th.  4.  16  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with 
Heb.    3.  7,  15  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice 

4.    7  To  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 
12.  19  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  aud  the  voice  of 
12,  26  Whose  voice  then  shook  the  earth,  but 

2  Pe.  1. 17  when  there  came  such  a  voice  to  him  from 

1.  18  this  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we  he. 

2.  16  the  dumb  ass  speaking  with  man's  voice 
Rev.    1. 10  heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  tr, 

1.  12  I  turned  to  see  the  voice  that  spake  with 

I.  15  and  his  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters 

3.  20  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the 

4.  1  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  (was)  as  it 

4.  5  lightnings  and  thuuderings  and  voices 

5.  2  angel  proclaiming  with  a  loud  voice 

5.  11  I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  round 

5.  12  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Worthy  is  the 

6.  6  I  heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four 
6.    7  I  heard  [the  voice  of]  the  fourth  beast  say 

6.  10  they  cried  with  aloud  voice,  saying,  How 

7.  2  he  cried  with  a  lpud  voice  to  the  four  an. 
7. 10  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  sayiug,  Salvation 

8.  5  there  -were  voices,  and  thuuderings,  aud 
8.  13  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Woe,  woe,  woe 

8.  13  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  trum. 

9.  13  I  heard  a  voice  from  thefour  horns  ofthe 
10.  3  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  (when)  a  lion 
10.  3  cried,  seven  thunders  uttered  their  voices 
10.  4  seven  thunders  had  uttered  [their  voices] 
10.  4  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto 
10.    7  in  the  day  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  an. 

10.  8  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven  spa. 

11.  12  they  heard  a  great  voice  from  heaven  say. 
11.  15  there  were  great  voices  in  heaven,  saying 

1 1.  19  there  were  lightnings  and  voices,  and  th. 

12.  10  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  heaven,  N". 
14.  2  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  as  the  voice 
14.  2  asthe  voice.  .Iheard  the  voice  of  harpers 
14.  7  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Fear  God,  and 
14.  9  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  If  auy  man  wo. 
14.  13  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto 
14.  15  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  sat 
16.  1  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple 
16.  17  there  came  a  great  voice  out  of  the  tern. 

16.  18  there  were  voices,  and  thunders,  and  lig. 

18.  2  [he  cried  mightily  with  a  strong  voice,  say.] 
iS.  4  I  heard  another  voice  from  heaven,  saying 
iS.  22  the  voice  of  harpers,  and  musicians,  and 
iS.  23  the  voice  of  thebridegroom  and  ofthebr. 

19.  1 1  heard  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in 
19.    5  a  voice  came  out  ofthe  throne,  saying,  P. 
19.    6  the  voice,  .as  the  voice,  .and  as  the  voice 
19. 17  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all 
21.  z  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  say. 

LA  small  pebble,  vote,  $t}<Pos  psephos. 

Acts  26.  10  they  were  put  to  death,  I  gave  my  voice 

VOID,  (place,  to  be  or  make)  — 
I.7/0  be  parted,  lost,  13$  abad. 

Deut.32.  28  For  they  (are)  a  nation  void  of  counsel 

2.Emptiness,  *nSl  bohu. 

Gen.  1.    2  And  the  earth  was  without  form,  and  void 
Jer.    4.  23  I  beheld  the  earth. .  without  form  and  vo. 

3.  To  empty,  make  void,  pp3  baqnq. 

Jer.  19.  7  I  will  make  void  the  counstl  of  Judah  and 

4.  Threshing  floor,  forum,  V$  goren. 

1  Ki.  22.  10  in  a  void  place  in  the  entrance  of  the  gate 

2  Ch.  1 8.  9  in  a  void  place  at  the  entering  in  of  the 

o.Lacki?ig,  ipr;  chaser. 

Prov.  7.    7  beheld,  .a  young  man  void  of  understau. 
10.  13  a  rod  (is)  for  the  back  of  him  that  is  void 

I I.  J2  He  that  is  void  of  wisdom  despiseth  his  n. 
12.  11  he  that  followeth  vain,  .is  void  of  under. 

17.  18  A  mau  void  of  understanding  striketh  h. 
24.  30  by  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  unde. 

(y.  Emptiness,  n[^D0  mebuqah. 

Nah.  2.  10  She  is' empty,  aud  void,  and  waste;  and 

7.  To  reject,  inj  naar,  3. 

Psa.  89.  39  Thou  hast  made  void  the  covenant  of  thy 

S.To  break,  make  void,  ~n%parar,  5. 

Num.  30.  12  if  her  husband  hath,  .made  them  void  on 
30.  12  her  husband  hath  made  them  void,  and 
30.  13  may  establish  it  or.  .may  make  it  void 
30  15  if  he  shall  any  ways  make  them  void  aft. 

Psa.  119.  126  to  work  .  .they  have  made  void  fchy-law 

d.Ejnptih/,  vain?}/,  without  care,  Djjn  reqam. 
Isa.  55.  11  it  shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it 


VOLUME 


1029 


WAIT 


10.7b  make  thoroughly  useless  or  idle,  Karapyew. 

Roni.  3.  31  Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  f. 
11.  To  make  vain,  useless,  ksv6w  kenoo. 

Rom.  4.  14  faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promise  made 

1  Co.  9.  15  any  man  should  make  my  glorying  void 
VOLUME  — 

\.A  roll,  volume,  n^ap  megillah. 

Psa.  40.   7  in  the  volume  of  the  book  (it  is)  written 
%Head  of  a  pillar,  a  scroll  rolled  up,  Ke<pa\is. 

Heb.  10.    7  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 
"VOLUNTARY  (offering,  will),  voluntarily  — 

1.  Willing  or  liberal  offering,  nyij  nedabah. 

Lev.    7.  16  if  the  sacrifice  of  his  offering  (be),  .a  v.  of. 
Eze.  46. 12  prepare  a  voluntary  burnt  offering,  or.,  v. 

2.  Good  will  or  pleasure,  |is*i  ratson. 

Lev.    1.    3  he  shall  offer  it  of  his  oivn  voluntary  will 

"VOMIT  (out,  up,  up  again,  to)  — 

1.  Vomit,  thing  vomited,  Xj3  qe. 

Prov26.  ir  As  a  dog  returneth  to  his  vomit,  .a  fool 

2.To  {cause  to)  vomit,  spread  out,  Hip  qo,  5. 

Lev.  18.  25  land  itself  vomiteth  out  her  inhabitants 
Job   20. 15  he  shall  vomit  them  up  again :  God  shall 
Prov  23.    8  The  morsel . .  shalt  thou  vomit  up,  and  lo. 

25. 16  lest  thou  be  filled  therewith,  and  vomit 
Jon.    2. 10  and  it  vomited  out  Jonah  upon  the  dry 

3.  Vomit,  k'P  qi. 

Isa.   19.  14  as  a  drunken  (man)  staggereth  in  his  vo. 

28.  8  For  all  tables  are  full  of  vomit . .  filthiness 
Jer.  48.  26  Moab  also  shall  wallow  in  his  vomit,  and 

i.  Vomit,  i^€pa/j.a  exerama. 

2  Pe.    2. 22  The  dog  (is)  turned  to  his  own  vomit  ag. 

VOPH'-SI,  'p5i  rich. 

Father  of  Nahbi  of  the  tribe  of  Napthali ;  one  of  those 

sent  to  spy  out  the  land.     B.C.  1515. 

Num  13.  14  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  Nahbi  the  son  of  V. 

VOW,  (vowed,  to)  — 
l.To  vow,  i~\i  nadar. 

Gen.  28.  20  Jacob  vowed.,  saying,  If  God  will  be  with 
31. 13  the  God  of  Beth-el.  .where  thou  vowedst 
Lev.  27.    8  according  to  liis  ability  that  vowed  shall 
Nuni.  6.    2  to  vow.  .to  separate,  .unto  the  Lord 

6. 21  Nazarite  who  hath  vowed,  .which  he  vo. 
21.   2  Israel  vowed,  .unto  the  Lord,  and  said 
30.   2  If  a  man  vow.  .unto  the  Lord,  or  swear 
30.   3  If  a  woman  also  vow.  .unto  the  Lord,  anil 

30. 10  if  she  vowed  in  her  husband's  house,  or 
Deuti2.  11  shall  ye  bring  all.,  which  ye  vow  unto  the 

12. 17  nor  any.. which  thou  vowest,  nor  thy  fr. 
23.  21  When  thou  shalt  vow.  .unto  the  Lord 
23.  22  if  thou  shalt  forbear  to  vow,  it  shall  be 
23.  23  as  thou  hast  vowed  unto  the  Lord  thy 

Judgn.  30  Jephthah  vowed,  .unto the  Lord,  andsa. 

11.  39  did.,  (according)  to.  .which  he  had  vowed 

1  Sa.   1. 11  she  vowed,  .and  said,  0  Lord  of  hosts,  if 

2  Sa.  15.    7  let  me  go  and  pay . .  which  I  have  vowed 

15.   8  For  thy  servant  vowed,  .while  I  abode  at 
Psa.  76.  11  Vow,  and  pay  unto  the  Lord  your  God 

132.    2  How  he.,  vowed  unto  the  mighty,  .of  Jac. 

Eccl.  5.    4  When  thou  vowest. .pay  that,  .hast  vow. 

5.    5  Better  (is  it)  that  thou  shouldest  not  vow 

5.  5  than  that  thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  pay 
Isa.  19.  21  they  shall  vow.  .unto  the  Lord,  and  per. 
Jer.  44.  25  We  will  surely  perform. .that  we  have  vo. 
Jon.  2.  9  I  will  pay.  .that  I  have  vowed.  Salvation 
Mai.    1. 14  which  hath  in  his  Hock  a  male,  and  vow. 

zl.A  vow,  "na,  tu  neder. 

Gen.  28.  20  a  vow,  saying,  If  God  will  be  with  me 

31. 13  a  vow  unto  me :  now  arise,  get  thee  out 
Lev.    7.  16  if  the  sacrifice  of  his  offering  (be)  a  vow 

22. 18  that  will  offer  an  oblationfor  allhis  vows 
22. 21  to  accomplish  (his)  vow,  or  a  free  will  of. 
B2. 23  but  for  a  vow  it  shall  not  be  accepted 

23.  38  beside  all  your  vows,  and  beside  all  your 
27.    2  When  a  man  shall  make  a  singular  vow 
Hum.  6.2  a  vow  of  a  Nazarite,  to  separate . . unto  the 

6.  5  All  the  days  of  the  vow  of  his  separation 
6. 21  according  to  the  vow.  .so  must  he  do  after 

15.   3,  8  a  sacrifice  in  performing  a  vow,  or 
21.    2  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  If  thou 

29.  39  beside  your  vows,  and  your  free  will  off. 

30.  2  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  or  swear  an  oath 
30.  3  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  bind .  .by  a  bo. 
30.  4  hear  her  vow.  .all  her  vows  shall  stand 
30.  5  not  any  of  her  vows,  or  of  her  bonds  where. 
30.  6  if  she  had  at  all  an  husband  when  she  vo. 
30.  7  then  her  vows  shall  stand,  and  her  bonds 
30.  8  then  lie  shall  make  her  vow  which  she 
30.  9  every  vow  of  a  widow,  or  of  her  that  is 

30. 11  all  her  vows  shall  stand,  and  every  bond 

30. 12  concerning  her  vows,  or  concerning  the 
30.  13  Every  vow,  and  every  binding  oath  to 

30. 14  he  establisheth  all  hervows,  or  all  her  bo. 
Deuti2.    6  your  vows,  and  your  free  will  offerings,  and 

12. 11  and  all  your  choice  vows,  .unto  the  Lord 

12.  17  Thou  mayest  not  eat.  .any  of  thy  vows 
12.  26  Only  thy  holy  things . .  and  thy  vows,  thou 
23.  18  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  .for  any  vow 
23.  21  a  vow  unto  the  LORD  thy  God,  thou  shalt 

Judgn.  30  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  If  thoush. 
11. 39  who  did  with  her  (according)  to  his  vow 

1  Sa.    1. 11  a  vow,  and  said,  O  Lord  of  hosts,  if  thou 

1. 21  to  offer.. the  yearly  sacrifice,  and  his  vow 

2  Sa.  15.    7  I  pray  thee,  let  me  go  and  pay  my  vow 

15.    8  a  vow  while  I  abode  at  Geshur  in  Syria 


Job  22.  27  shall  hear  thee,  .thou  shalt  pay  thy  vows 
Psa.  22.  25  I  will  pay  my  vows  before  them  that  fear 

50.  14  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the  Most  High 

56.  12  Thy  vows  (are)  upon  me,  O  God,  I  will  re. 

61.    5  For  thou,  O  God,  hast  heard  my  vows,  th. 

61.   8  sing,  .that  I  may  daily  perform  my  vows 

65.  1  and  unto  thee  shall  the  vow  be  performed 

66.  13  I  will  go  into.  .1  will  pay  thee  my  vows 
116. 14,  18  I  will  pay  my  vows  unto  the  Lord  uow 

Prov.  7.  14  peace  offerings,  .this  day.  .1  paid  my  vows 

20.  25  (It  is)  a  snare,  .after  vows  to  make  enquiry 

31.    2  What,  my  sou?.. and  what,  the  son  of  my  v. 

Eccl.  5.   4  When,  .a  vow  unto  God,  defer  not  to  pay 

Isa.  19.  21  yea. .a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  perform 

Jer.  44.  25  We  will  surely  perform  our  vows  that  we 

44.  25  ye  will,  .accomplish  your  vows,  .your  vows 

Jon.    1. 16  offered,  .unto  the  Lord,  and  made  vows 

Nah.  1. 15  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  vows 

3..<4  vow,  tvx?)  euclie. 

Acts  iS.  18  having  shorn  (his)  head.. for  he  had  avow 
21. 23  We  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on 
VOYAGE  — 
Sailing,  ttX6os  ploos. 

Acts  27. 10  I  perceive  that  this  voyage  will  be  with 
VULTURE — 
l.A  kite,  vulture,  rvx  ayyah. 

Job  28.    7  path. .which  the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  se. 
2.  A  vulture,  hni  daah. 

Lev.  11. 14  the  vulture,  and  the  kite  after  his  kind 
Z.A  vulture,  n;i  dayyah. 

Deut  14.  13  the  glede,  and  the  kite,  and  the  vulture 

Isa.  34. 15  there  shall  the  vultures  also  be  gathered 


w 

WAFER  — 

l.A  cake,  nrr£s*  tsappichith. 

Exodi6.  31  the  taste  of  it.  .like  wafers,  .with  honey 
2. Thin  cake,  wafer,  p'jrj  raqiq. 

Exod29-  2  and  wafers  unleavened  anointed  with  oil 
29.  23  one  wafer  out  of  the  basket  of  the  unlea. 

Lev.    2.    4  or  unleavened  wafers  anointed  with  oil 

7.  12  unleavened  wafers  anointed  with  oil,  and 

8.  26  took,  .a  cake  of  oiled  bread,  and  one  wafer 
Num.  6. 15  wafers  of  unleavened  bread  anointed  with 

6.  19  the  priest  shall  take,  .one  unleavened  wa. 

WAG,  to  — 

l.To  cause  to  move,  11J  nud,  5. 

Jer.  18. 16  one.  .shall  be  astonished,  and  wag  hishead 
2.  To  cause  to  move,  shake,  yu  nua,  5. 

Lam.  2. 15  they  hiss  and  wag  the  head  at  the  daugh. 

Zeph.  2.  15  every  one.  .shall  hiss,  (and)  wag  his  hand 

3. To  move,  agitate,  shake,  Kivica  kineo. 

Matt  27.  39  they,  .reviled  him,  wagging  their  heads 
Marki5.  29  they,  .railed  on  him,  wagging  their  heads 

WAGES,  (without)  — 

l.ffire,  wages,  rrvatyn  maskoreth. 

Gen.  29.  15  said .  .tell  me,  what  (shall)  thy  wages  (be)? 
31.  7  your  father  hath . .  changed  my  wages  ten 
31.  41  and  thou  hast  changed  my  wages  ten  tim. 

2.  Gratis,  in  vain,  for  nought,  D3n  chi?inam. 

Jer.  22. 13  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wa. 

3.  Work,  wage,  nty$  pevllah. 

Lev.  19. 13  the  wages  of  him  that  is  hired  shall  not 

4.  To  hire  self  out,  ~D?  sakar,  7. 

Hag.   1.   6*he  that  earneth  wages,  earneth  wages  (to 
o.Hire,  reward,  wage,  i2{p  sakar. 

Gen.  30.  28  Appoint  me  thy  wages,  and  I  will  give  (it) 
31.    8  If  he  said . .  The  speckled  shall  be  thy  wag. 

Exod.  2.    9  nurse  it  for  me,  and  I  will  give .  .thy  wag. 

Eze.  29.  18  yet  had  he  no  wages,  nor  his  army,  for 
29.  19  Egypt,  .it  shall  be  the  wages  for  his  army 

Mai.    3.    5  that  oppress  the  hireling  in  (his)  wages 
Q.Hire,  reward,  /xiados  misthos. 

John  4.  36  he  thatreapeth  receiveth  wages,  and  ga. 

2  Pet.  2.  15  who  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness 

7.  A  soldier  s  rations,  allowance,  b-ty&viov  opsonion. 
Luke  3.  14  And  he  said,  .be  content  with  your  wag. 
Rom.  6.  23  the  wages  of  sin  (is)  death ;  but  the  gift 
2  Co.  11.   8  I  robbed  other  churches,  taking  wages 

WAGON  — 

1.  Wagon,  cart,  chariot,  TOl$L  agalah. 

Gen.  45.  19  take  you  wagon's  but  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
45.  21  Joseph  gave  them  wagons,  according  to 

45.  27  when  he  saw  the  wagons  which  Joseph 

46.  5  in  the  wagons  which  Pharaoh  had  sent  to 
Num.  7.  3  six  covered  wagons . .  a  wagon  for  two  of 

7.  6  Moses  took  the  wagons  and  the  oxen,  and 
7.  7,  8  wagons  and . .  oxen  he  gave  unto  the  sous 

2.  Rider,  chariot,  33*i  rekzb. 

Eze.  23.  24  come. !  with  chariots,  wagons,  and  wheels 
WAIL,  wailing,  to  — 
l.A  smiting  or  beating  of  Vie  breast,  "iscp  misped. 

Esth.  4.    3  great  mourning,  .and  weeping,  and  wail. 


Eze.  27.  31  with  bitterness  of  heart,  .bitter  wailing 
Amos  5.  16  Wailing. .and  they  shall  call,  .to  wailing 
5.  17  in  all  vineyards,  .wailing:  for  I  will  pass 
Mic.    1.   S  I  will  make  a  wailing  like  the  dragons,  and 

2.  Wailing,  ru  noah. 

Eze.    7.  11  neither  (shall  there  be)  waning  for  them 

3.  To  wail,  nni  nahah. 

Eze.  32. 18  Son  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  Eg. 

4.-4  wailing,  "ni  nehi. 

Jer.  9. 10  For  the  mountains  will  I  take  up.  .waili. 
9.  18  let  them  make  haste,  and  take  up  a  wail. 
9.  19  For  a  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  out  of  Zion 
9.  20  teach  your  daughters  wailing,  and  every 

5.  Wailing,  \2  ni. 

Eze.  27.  32  in  then-  wailing  they  shall  take  up  a  lam, 

6.  To  smite  or  beat  the  breast,  "159  saphad. 

Mic.    1.   S  I  will  wail  and  howl,  I  will  go  stripped 

7 .To  cry  aloud,  yell,  aXaXafa  alalazo. 

Mark  5.  38  seeth . .  them  that  wept  and  wailed  greatly 

S.  Wailing,  lamentation,  K\avdfios  klauthmos. 

Matt  13.  42,  50  shall  be  wailingand  gnashingof  teeth 
9.  To  cut,  smite  or  beat  the  breast,  Koirro/j-at  koptomai. 

Rev.  1.  7  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  beca. 
10.77)  sorroiv,  mourn,  grieve,  Trej/decc  pentheo. 

Rev.  18.  15  shall  stand  afar  off.  .weeping  and  wailing 
18.  19  and  cried,  weeping  and  wailing,  saying 

WAIT  at,  for,  on,  upon,  continually,  to  - 
1.  Silence,  njow  dumiyyah. 

Psa.  62.    1  Truly  my  soul  waiteth  upon  God:  from 
65.    1  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  0  God,  in  Zion 
2.Tobe  silent,  cease,  stand  still,  dot  damam. 

Psa.  62.    5  My  soul,  wait  thou  onlyupon  God,  for 
3.7*0  wait  earnestly,  rwn  chakah. 

Isa.   30. 18  blessed  (are)  all  they  that  wait  for  him 

4.  To  ivait  earnestly,  nan  chakah,  3. 

Job  32.    4  Now  Elihu  had  waited  till  Job  had  spoken 

Psa.  33.  20  Our  soul  waitethforthe  Lord:  he  (is) our 

106.  13  They  soon  forgat  his  works;  they  waited 

Isa.     S.  17  I  will  waitupou  the  Lord,  that  hideth  his 

30. 18  therefore  will  the  Lord  wait,  that  he  may 

64.    4  he  hath  prepared  for  hini  that  waiteth 

Dan.  12.  12  Blessed  (is)  he  that  waiteth,  and  cometh 

Hos.  6.    9  And  as  troops  of  robbers  wait  for  a  man 

Hab.  2.    3  though  it  tarry,  wait  forit;  because  it  will 

Zeph.  3.    8  Therefore  wait  ye  upon  me,  saith  the  Lo. 

5.  At  the  hand  of,  t?  leyad. 

1  Ch.23.  28  their  office  (was)  to  wait  on  the  sons  of  A. 

6.  To  wait  with  hope,  stay,  7n;  yachal,  2. 

Eze.  19.  5  Now  when  she  saw  that  she  had  waited 
7. To  make  to  wait  with  hope,  ?n;  yachal,  3. 

Job  14. 14  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait 
29.  21  gave  ear,  and  waited,  and  kept  silence  at 

29.  23  they  waited  for  me  as  for  the  rain,  and  th. 

30.  26  when  I  waited  for  light,  then  came  dark. 
Psa.  69.    3  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait  for  my  God 
Isa.   42.    4  He  shall  not  fail,  .isles  shall  wait  for  his 
Mic.    5.    7  tarrieth  not.  .nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of 

8.  To  cause  to  wait  with  hope,  ?n;  yachal,  5. 

2  Ki.   6.  33  what  should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  Ion. 
Job  32.  11  I  waited  for  your  words;  I  gave  ear  to  yo. 

32.  16  When  I  had  waited,  for  they  spake  not 
Mic.    7.    7  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my  salvation 

9.  To  stand  still  or  fast,  IpJJ  amad. 

1  Fu.20.  38  So  the  prophet  departed,  and  waited  for 

1  Ch.  6.  32  they  waited  on  their  office  according  to 

6.33  these  (are)  they  that  waited  with  their  ch. 

2  Ch.  7.    6  And  the  priests  waited  on  their  offices 
Neh.  12.  44  Judah  rejoiced,  .for  the  Levites  that  wa. 

10.  To  serve  the  host,  #y$  tsaba. 

Num.  8.  24  they  shall  go  in  to  wait  upon  the  service 
ll.TAe  service  of  tlie  liost,  N2>*  tsaba. 

Num.  8.  25  they  shall  cease  waiting  upon  the  service 
V2.The  watch,  look  out,  ns>'  tsaphah. 

Job  15.  22  Hebelievethn*otthat..heis  waited  for  of 

13.  To  wait,  expect,  look  for,  hope,  nig  qavah. 
Psa.  25.    3  Yea,  let  none  that  wait  on  thee  be  asha. 

37.  9  those  that  wait  upon  the  Lord,  they  shall 
69.    6  Let  not  them  that  wait  on  thee,  O  Lord 

Isa.  40.  31  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew 
49.  23  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for 

Lam.  3.  25  The  Lord  (is)  good  unto  them  that  wait 

14.  To  wait,  expect,  nip  qavah,  3. 

Gen.  49.  18  I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  0  Lord 
Job     6. 19  the  companies  of  Sheba  waited  for  them 
17.  13  If  I  wait,  the  grave  (is)  mine  house,  I  have 
Psa.  25.    5  Lead  me.  .on  thee  do  I  wait  all  the  day 

25.  21  Let  integrity .  .preserve  me ;  for  I  waiton 
27.  14  Wait  on  the  Lord,  .wait,  I  say,  on  the 
-7.  34  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  keep  his  way,  and 

39.  7  now,  Lord,  what  wait  I  for?  my  hope  (is) 

40.  1  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord;  aud  he 
52.  9  I  will  wait  on  thy  name  ;  for  (it  is)  good 
56.  6  they  mark  my  steps,  when  they  wait  for 

119.95  The  wicked  have  waited  for  me  to  destroy 

130.   5  I  wait  for  the  Lord,  my  soul  doth  wait,  and 

Prov.  20.  22  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  save  thee 

Isa.   25.    9  we  have  waited  for  him.  .we  have  waited 

26.  8  Yea,  in  the  way .  .have  we  waited  for  thee 

33.  2  be  gracious  unto  ns ;  we  have  waited  for 


WAIT 


1030 


WALK 


Isa.  51.    5  isles  shall  wait  upon  me,  and  onmine  arm 

59.  9  we  wait  for  light,  hut  behold  obscurity 

60.  9  Surely  the  isles  shall  wait  forme,  and  the 
Jer.  14.  22  we  will  wait  upon  thee  ;  for  thou  hast  m. 
Hos.  12.    6  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on 

15.  To  Hope,  trait,  look  for,  13jf  sabar,  3. 
Psa.104.  27  These  wait  all  upon  thee,  that  thou  may. 

145. 15  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  thee ;  and  thou 

16.  To  observe,  watch,  take  heed,  ia?>  shamar. 
Num.  3.  10  and  they  shall  wait  on  their  priest's  office 
2  Ch.  5.  1 1  for  all  the  priests . .  did  not.  .wait  by  cour. 
Job  24.  15  the  eye  also  of  the  adulterer  waiteth  for 
Psa.  59.  9  (Because  of)  his  strength  will  I  wait  upon 
Prov.  8.  34  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at 

27.  18  he  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  h. 
Zech.n.  11  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  me 

17. To  serve j  minister,  Ttyp  sharath,  3. 

2  Ch,  17.  19  These  waited  on  the  king,  besides  (those) 
18.2*0  remain  tip  or  back,  h.vap.ivw  anameno. 

1  Th.  1.   10  to  wait  for  his  Sou  from  heaven,  when  he 

19.  To  wait  long  for,  expect  earnestly,  arreKdexofxai. 
Koni.  8.  15  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons 

8.  23  waiting  for  the  adoption,  .the  redemption 

8.  25  But  if  we  hope . .  we  with  patience  wait  for 

1  Co.    1.    7  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

Gal.     5.    5  we  through  the  spirit  wait  for  the  hope  of 

20.  To  wait  long,  expect  earnestly,  eK$4xo/j.at  electee. 
John  5.  3  lay . .  [waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  wat.] 
Acts  17.  16  Now  while  Paul  waited  for  them  at  Ath. 
Jas.  5.  7  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious 
1  Pe.  3.  20  [when  once  the  long  suffering]  of  God  [wa.] 

21.  To  remain  around,  ireptfiiva  periineno. 
Acts    1.    4  but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father 

22.  To  wait  on  or  towards,  ■xpo(T§€X0tJ-aL  prosdecho. 
_\larki5.  43  which  also  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
Luke  2.  25  man.  .waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Isr. 

12.  36  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  wait  for 
23.  51  who  also  himself  waited  for  the  kingdom 

23.  To  look  to  or  toward,  Trpoo~5oKda>  prosdokao. 
Luke   1.  21  the  people  waited  for  Zacharias,  and  ma. 

8.  40  received  him :  for  they  were  all  waiting 
Acts  10. 24  Cornelius  waited  for  them,  and  had  called 

24.  To  sit  by  or  neetr,  attend  to  or  on,  irpoo-eSpevw. 
1  Co.   9.  13  they  which  [wait  at]  the  altar  are  partak. 

25.  To  persevere  on,  irpoa-Kaprepeco  jiroskartereo. 
Mark  3.    9  that  a  small  ship  should  wait  on  him,  be. 
Acts  10.    7  a  devout  soldier  of  tliem  that  waited  on 

"WAIT  carefully,  patiently,  quietly,  to  — 

1.  Silently,  D£n  dumam. 

Lam.  3.  26  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  the 

2.  2*o  stay,  ^n,  "wn  chid,  chil. 

Hie.    1.  12  the  inhabitant  of  Maroth  waited  carefully 

3. 2*o  stay  self,  h<n,  Sm  chul,  chil,  7a. 

Psa.  37.    7  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for 
[See  also  Patient. 1 
"WATT,  (lying  in,  that  lay)  — 
l.A  lying  in  wait,  yi$  ereb. 

Job  38.  40  When  they.. abide  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  w. 
%A  lying  in  wait,  ambush3y}k  oreb. 

Jer.    9,    8  peaceably,  .but  in  heart  he  layeth  his  wa. 

3.  A  lying  in  wait,  (men  or  place),  3"ix!?  maarab. 

Judg.  9.  35  Abimelech  rose  up.  .from  lying  in  wait 

4.  To  observe,  watch,  TO^  shamar. 

Psa.  71.  10  they  that  lay  wait  for  my  soul  take  coun. 
[See  also  Lay,  laying,  lie  in,  lier  in,  liers,  lying,  lying 
in.] 

"WAKE  (up,  waken,  be  wakened),  to  — 

1.  7*o  awake  or  stir  up,  "ity  ttr. 

Song   5.   2  I  sleep,  but  my  heart  wakcth.  .the  voice 

2.  To  be  awaked  or  rotisedup,  "ny  ur,  2. 

Joel     3.  12  Let  the  heathen  be  wakened,  and  come 
Zech.  4.    1  as  a  man  that  is  wakened  out  of  his  sleep 

3. 2*o  awake  up,  ~i>y  ur,  5. 

Isa.  50.  4  he  wakeneth.  .he  wakeneth  mine  ear  to 
Joel  3.  9  Prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  men 
Zech.  4.    1  the  angel,  .came  again,  and  waked  me,  as 

4.  7*o  awake,  rise,  be  early,  pp  quts,  5. 

Jer.  51.  39,  57  sleep  a  perpetual  sleep,  and  not  wake 

5.  Watches,  eye  lids,  nnD?>  shemuroth. 

Psa.  77.    4  Thou  holdest  mine  eyes  waking :  I  am  so 

6.  To  watch,  ip^  shaqad. 

Psa.  127.    1  except  the  Lord  keep,  .the  watchman  wa. 

7.  To  be  vigilant,  tcakefid,  yprjyoptct}  gregoreo. 

1  Th.   5.  10  Who  died  for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake 
"WALK  — 
l.A  going,  company,  rry?n  halikdh. 

Nah.    2.    5  they  shall  stumble  in  their  walk ;  they 
2.A  walk,  journey,  t^hd  mahalak, 

Eze.  42.  4  beforethechambers(was)awalkoftencu. 
WALK  (about,  in,  orderly,  through,  uprightly)  to — 

1.7""  <j<>  on  the  way,  bread,  ~n~  darak. 

Hah.  3.  1 5  Thou  didst  walk  through  the  sea  with  th. 
2.7*0  go  on,  ^n  halak. 

Gen.  24.  6S  What  man  (is)  this  that  walketh  in  the  fl. 


Exod.  2.    5  maidens  walked  along  by  the  river's  side 

14.  29  the  childreu  of  Israel  walked  upon  dry 
Lev.  26.  23  if  ye  will  not  be  reformed,  .but  will  walk 

26.  24  Then  will  I  also  walk  contrary  unto  you 

26.  27  if  ye  will  not.  .hearken  ynto  me,  but  walk 

26.  28  Then  I  will  walk  contrary  unto  you  also 

26.  40  confess,  .they  have  walked  eoutrary  unto 

Deut.  8.  19  if  thou,  .walk  after  other  gods,  and  serve 

28.    9  if  thou  shalt  keep,  .and  walk  in  his  ways 

Josh.  5.    6  the  children  of  Israel  walked  forty  years 

Judg  2.  17  out  of  the  way.  .their  fathers  walked  in 

5.  10  Speak,  .ye  that  sit  in  judgment,  and  walk 

1  Sa.    8.    3  his  sons  walked  not  in  his  ways,  but  tur. 

8.    5  thou  art  old,  and  thy  sons  walk  not  in  thy 

2  Sa.    2.  29  walked  all  that  night  through  the  plain 

1  Ki.   2.  42  on  the  day.  .thou  walkest  abroad  anywh. 

3.  6  according  as  he  walked  before  thee  in  tr. 
3. 14  in  my  ways.,  as  thy  father  David  did  walk 
8.  23  that  walk  before  thee  with  all  their  heart 

8.  25  before  me  as  thou  hast  walked  before  me 

9.  4  if  thou  wilt,  .as  David  thy  father  walked 
11.  33  Because  that  they,  .have  not  walked  in  my 
11.  38  if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto,  .and  wilt  walk 

2  KJ.  13.    6  departed  not  from  the  sons,  .(but)  walked 

13. 11  he  departed  not.  .(but)  he  walked  therein 
21. 21  in  all  the  way  that  his  father  walked  in 

21.  22  and  walked  not  in  the  way  of  the  Lord 

1  Ch.17.   8  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  hast  walked 

2  Ch.  6.  14  that  walk  before  thee  with  all  their  heart 

6. 16  in  my  law,  as  thou  hast  walked  before  me 
7.  17  if  thou  wilt,  .as  David  thy  father  walked 
11. 17  for  three  years  they  walked  in  the  way  of 
17.    3  he  walked  in  the  first  ways  of  his  father 
17.    4  walked  in  his  commandments,  and  notaf. 

21. 12  Because  thou  hast  not  walked  in  the  ways 

22.  3  He  also  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  house 

22.  5  He  walked  also  after  their  counsel,  and 
Job    31.    5  If  I  have  walked  with  vanity,  or  if  my  foot 

31.  7  If.  .mine  heart  walked  after  mine  eyes 
31. 26  If  I  beheld,  .the  moon  walking  (in)  brig. 

Psa.     1.    1  Blessed  (is)  the  man  that  walketh  not  in 

15.  2  He  that  walketh  uprightly,  and  worketh 
26.    1  Judge  me.  .for  I  have  walked  in  mine  in. 
73.  9  then-  tongue  walketh  through  the  earth 
84.  11  will  he  withhold  from  them  that  walketh 
91.    6  for  the  pestilence  (that)  walketh  in  dark. 

101.   6  he  that  walketh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  shall 
ng.    1  undeflled.  .who  walk  in  the  law  of  the  L. 
1 19.    3  They  also  do  no  iniquity :  they  walk  in  his 
128.    1  that  feareth  the  Lord  :  that  walketh  in 
Prov.  2.    7  (he  is)  a  buckler  to  them  that  walk  upri. 

6.  12  A  naughty  person,  a  wicked  man,  walketh 
10.    9  He  that  walketh  uprightly,  .he  that  perv. 

13.  20  He  that  walketh  with  wise  (men)  shall  be 

14.  2  He  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness  fear. 

19.  1  Better  (is)  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his 
28.    6  Better  (is)  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  up. 
28.  18  Whoso  walketh  uprightly  shall  be  saved 
28. 26  whoso  walketh  wisely,  he  shall  be  deliv. 

Eccl.  2.  14  the  fool  walketh  in  darkness  :  and  I  my. 
6.  8  what  hath  the  poor,  that  knoweth  to  walk 
10.    3  when  he  that  is  a  fool  walketh  by  the  way 

10.  7  I  have  seen,  .princes  walking  as  servants 
Isa.     3.  16  walking  and  mincing(as)  they  go,  and  mak. 

9.    2  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have 

20.  2  And  he  did  so,  walking  naked  and  baref. 
20.  3  Like  as  my  servant  Isaiah  hatlV walked  na. 
30.  2  That  walk  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  and  ha. 
33. 15  He  that  walketh  righteously,  and  speake. 
35.  9  No  lion  shall  be . .  the  redeemed  shall  walk 
42.  5  that  giveth.  .spirit  to  them  that  walk  th. 
42.  24  they  would  not  walk  in  his  ways,  neither 
50.  10  that  walketh  (in)  darkness,  and  hath  no 
57.  2  they  shall  rest.,  walking  (in)  his  uprightn. 
65.   2  a  rebellious  people,  which  walketh  in  a  w. 

Jer.     2.   8  and  walked  after  (things  that)  do  not  pr 

6.  28  They  (are)all  grievous  revoJters ;  walking 

7.  9  Will  ye.  .walk  after  other  gods  whom  ye 

7.  23  walk  ye  in  all  the' ways  that  I  have  corum. 

8.  2  the  host,  .after  whom  they  have  walked 

9.  4  every  neighbour  will  walk  with  slanders 
9.  13  have  not  obeyed  my  voice  neither  walked 

10. 23  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  ste. 
13. 10  which  walk  in  the  imagination  of  their  he. 

16.  12  ye  walk  every  one  after  the  imagination 

23.  14  prophets,  .commit  adultery,  and  walk  in 
23.  17  they  say  unto  everyone  that  walketh  after 

32.  23  they  obeyed  not  thy  voice,  neither  walked 
44.  10  neither  have  they  feared,  nor  walked  in 
44.  23  nor  walked  in  his  law,  nor  in  his  statutes 

Eze.  5.  6  my  statutes,  they  have  not  walked  in  th. 
5.    7  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  neither 

11.  12  ye  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  neit. 
11.  21  whose  heart  walketh  after  the  heart  of 
16.  47  Yet  hast  thou  not  walked  after  their  ways 
18. 17  hath  executed  my  judgments,  hath  walked 
20.  13  they  walked  not  in  my  statutes,  and  they 
20.  16  Because  they,  .walked  not  in  my  statutes 
20.  21  they  walkednotinmy  statutes, neitherke. 
23.  31  Thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  thy  sister 
33-  15  giye  again  that  he  hath  robbed,  walk  in 

Hos.  5.  11  he  willingly  walked  after  the  commandm. 
Amos  2.  4  after  the  which  their  fathers  have  walked 
Mie.    2.    7  my  words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  up. 

2. 1 1  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  falseh. 
Kah.  2. 11  where  the  lion,  (even)  theold  lion,  walked 
Zeph.  1.  17  that  they  shall  walk  like  blind  men,  bee. 
Mai.  2.    6  he  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  equity 

3.  14  that  we  have  walked  mournfully  before 

3.  To  go  071,  ^n  halak,  3. 

Psa.  55. 14  walked  unto  the  house  of  God  in  company 


Psa.  81.  13  0  that.  .Israel  had  walked  in  my  ways 

86.  11  I  wdl  walk  in  thy  truth  :  unite  my  heart 

89.  15  they  shall  walk.,  in  the  light  of  thy  count. 

115.    7  feet  have  they,  but  they  walk  not,  neither 

142.    3  In  the  way  wherein  I  walked  have  they 

Eccl.  4.  15  I  considered  all  the  living  which  walkun. 

11.   9  walk  in  the  ways  of  thine  heart,  and  in 
Isa.   59.    9  for  brightness,  (but)  we  walk  in  darkness 
Lam.  5.  18  which  is  desolate,  the  foxes  walk  upon  it 
Eze.  18.    9  Hath  walked  in  my  statutes,  and  hath  k. 
Psa.104.  3  W*10  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  mind 

4.  To  go  on,  }Vrr  halak. 

Dan.   4.  29  walked  in  the  palace  of  the  kingdom  of  Ba. 
5.7*0  cause  to  go  on,  rfcn  halak,  5. 

Dan.   3.  25  walking  in  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  they 

4.  37  those  that  walk  in  pride  he  is  able  to  abase 

6.7o  go  on,  Tp£  yalak. 

Exodi6.    4  whether  they  will  walk  in  my  law,  or  no 

18.  20  show  them  the  way  wherein  they  must  w. 

Lev.  18.   3  neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  ordinances 

18.  4  keep  mine  ordinances,  to  walk  therein 

20.  73  ye  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the 
26.    3  If  ye  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  keep  my 
26.  21  if  ye  walk  contrary  unto  me,  and  will  not 
26.  41  I  also  have  walked  contrary  unto  them 

Dent.  2.    7  he  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  gr. 

5.  33  Ye  shall  walk  in  all  the  ways  which  the 

6.  7  when  thou  walkest  by  the  way,  and  when, 
8.    6  Keep,  .to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  fear 

10.  12  but  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in 
1 1. 19  speaking  of  them . .  when  thou  walkest  by 

1 1.  22  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  cleave  unto 
13.    4  Ye  shall  walk  after  the  Lord  your  God 
13.    5  which,  .thy  God  commanded  thee  to  walk* 

19.  9  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  to  walk 
26. 17  to  be  thy  God,  and  to  walk  in  his  ways 

29.  19  though  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine 

30.  16  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  com. 
Josh.  22.  5  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  c. 
Judg.  2.  22  they  will  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord  to  wa. 

5.  6  the  travellers  walked  through  byways 
11.  16  Israel,  .walked  through  the  wilderness 

1  Ki.  2.    3  to  walk  in  his  ways,  to  keep  his  statutes 

2.  4  to  walk  before  me  in  truth  with  all  their 

3.  3  walkingin  the  statutes  of  David  his  father 
3. 14  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  to  keep  my 

6.  12  if  thou  will  walk  in  my  statutes,  .to  walk 
8.  25  take  heed  to  their  way,  that  they  walk  be. 
8.  36  the  good  way  wherein  they  should  walk 

8.  58  may  incline  our  hearts  unto  him,  to  walk 
B.  61  to  walk  in  his  statutes,  and  to  keep  hisc. 

9.  4  if  thou  wilt  walk  before  me,  as  David  thy 

15.  3  he  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father,  wh. 
"•5-  26,  34  walked  in  the  way  of.  .and  in  his  sin 

16.  2  thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam 
16.  19  sins,  .in  walking  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam 
16.  26  he  walked  in  all  the  way  of  Jeroboam 
16.  31  to  walk  in  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son 
22.  43  he  walked  in  all  the  ways  of  Asahisfath. 
22.  52  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in 

2  Ki.  4.  35  he  returned,  and  walked  in  the  house  to 

3.  18  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Isr. 
8.  27  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  house  of  Ah. 
10.  31  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of 

16.  3  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel 

17.  8  walked  in  the  statutes  of  theheathen,  wh. 
17.  19  walked  in  the  statutes  of  Israel  which  th. 
17.  22  the  children  of  Israel  walked  in  all  the 

21.  21  he  walked  in  all  the  way  that  his  father 

22.  2  walked  in  all  the  way  of  David  his  father 

23.  3  to  walk  after  the  Lord,  and  to  keep  his 

2  Ch.  6.  16  take  heed  to  their  way,  to  walk  in  my  law 
6-  27  the  good  way  wherein  they  should  walk 

6.  31  to  walk  in  thy  ways,  so  long  as  they  live 

7.  17  if  thou  wilt  walk  before  me,  as  David  thy 

20.  32  he  walked  in  the  way  of  Asa  his  father 

21.  6  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Isr. 
21.  13  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Is. 
28.    2  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of  Is. 
34.    2  walked  in  the  ways  of  David  his  father 
34.  31  to  walk  after  the  Lord,  and  to  keep  his 

K"eh.    5.    9  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  our 

10.  29  to  walk  in  God's  law,  which  was  given  by 
Job    29.    3  When . .  by  his  light  I  walked  (through) 
34.    8  Which  goeth.  .and  walketh  with  wicked 
I'.sa.  23.   4  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the 
26.  11  But  as  for  me,  I  will  walk  in  mine  integ. 
78.  10  They  kept  not. .  and  refused  to  walk  in 
8t.  12  I  gave  them  up.  .they  walked  injtheir  own 
89.  30  If  his  children .  .walk  not  in  my  judgment 
138.    7  Though  I  walk  in  the  midst  of  trouble 
143.    8  cause  me  to  know,  .wherein  I  should  walk 
Prov.  1.  15  My  son,  walk  not  thou  in  the  way  with 
2. 13  Who  leave,  .to  walk  in  the  ways  of  dark. 

2.  20  That  thou  mayest  walk  in  the  ways  of  g. 

3.  23  Then  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  way  safely 
10.  9  walketh  surely;  but  he  that  perverteth 
15.  21  a  man  of  understanding  walketh  uprigh. 

Isa.     2     3  he  will  teach  us . .  and  we  will  walk  in  his 

2.  5  come,  .let  us  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lo. 

3.  16  walk  with  stretched  forth  necks,  and  wa. 
8.  11  that  I  should  not'  tvalk  in  the  way  of  this 

30.  21  This  (is)  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye 
40.  31  they  that  wait,  .shall  walk,  and  not  faint 
43.  2  when  thou  walkest  though  the  fire,  thou 
50.  11  walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire,  and  in  the 
Jer.  2.  5  that  they,  .have  walked  after  vanity,  and 
3.  17  neithershnll  they  walk  any  mure  after  the 
3.  18  In  those  days  the  house  of  Judah  shall  w. 
6.  16  walk  therein . .  But  they  said,  We  will  not 


WALK 


1031 


"WALL 


Jer.    6.  25  Go  not  forth  into  the  field,  nor  walk  by 
7.    6  neither  walk  after  other  gods  to  your  hurt 
7.  24  walked  in  the  counsels,  .in  the  imaguoat. 
9. 14  have  walked  after  the  imagination  of 
11.    8  walked  every  one  in  the  imagination  of 

13. 10  and  walk  after  other  gods,  to  serve  them 

16. 11  have  walked  after  other  gods,  and  have 
iS.  12  we  will  walk  after  our  own  devices,  and 
18. 15  they  have  caused  them  to  stumble .  .to  wa. 
26.   4  If  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me,  to  walk 
42.   3  show  us  the  way  wherein  we  may  walk,  and 

Eze.  11.  20  That  they  may  walk  in  my  statutes,  and 
20.  iS  Walk  ye  not  in  thestatutesof  yourfathers 
20. 19  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  keep  mj  judgm. 

36.  27  I  will,  .cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes 

37.  24  they  shall  also  walk  in  my  judgments 
Ban.   9. 10  to  walk  in  his  law,  which  he  set  before  us 
Hos.  11.  10  They  shall  walk  after  the  LORD:  he  shall 

14.  9  the  just  shall  walk  in  them :  but  the  tran. 
Joel  2.  8  they  shall  walk  every'  one  in  his  path,  and 
Amos  3.  3  Can  two  walk  together,  except  they  be  a. 
Mic.    4.   2  we  will  walk  in  his  paths  :  for  the  law  sh. 

4.  5  all  people  will  walk.. and  we  will  walk  in 
6.  8  require  of  thee.. but. .  to  walk  humbly  with 
6.  16  ye  walk  in  their  counsels  ;  that  I  should 

Zech.  3.    7  If  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  if  thou 

7.  To  be  or  go  round  about,  2zp  sabab. 

Psa.  48. 12  Walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round  about  her 

8.2*o  walkabout  among,  ^/j.7T€pnraTew  emperipateo. 

2  Co.  6. 16  hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk 
§.  To  come  or  go  through.,  hi4pxofj-ai  dierchomai. 

Matt  12.  43  he  walketn through  dryplaces,  seekingre. 

Luken.  24  he  walketn  through  dry  places,  seekingre. 

10.7*0  step  rightly,  op0o7ro5ew  orthopodeo. 

Gal.    2. 14  when.Isaw  that  they  walked  not  uprightly 
11.2*0  walk  around,  TrepiiraTeco  jyeripateo. 

Matt.  4. 18  Jesus,  walking  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,  saw 

9.  s  whether  is  easier. .to  say,  Arise,  and  walk? 
11.  5  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and 
14.  25  Jesus  went  unto  them,  walking  on  the  sea 
14.  26  when  the  disciplessawhim  walking  on  the 

14.  29  Peter.. walked  on  the  water,  to  go  to  Jesus 

15.  31  wondered,  when  they  saw.  .the  lame  to  w. 
Mark  1. 16  Now  as  [he  walked]  by  the  sea  of  Galilee 

2.  9  Arise,  and  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk? 

5. 42  straightway  the  damsel  arose,  and  walked 
6.  48  cometh  unto  them,  walking  upon  the  sea 

6.  49  when  they  saw  him  walking  upon  the  sea 

7.  5  Why  walk  not  thy  disciples" according  to 

8.  24  looked. .and  said,  I  see  men  as  trees,  walk. 
11.  27  as  he  was  walking  in  the  temple,  there  co. 

16. 12  [as  they  walked,  and  went  into  the  coun.] 
Luke  5.  23  Whether  is  easier,  to  say.. Rise  up  andw.? 

7. 22  tell. .how  that  the  blind  see,  the  lame  wa. 
11.  44  the  men  that  walk  over.,  are  not  aware 

20.  46  scribes,  which  desire  to  walk  in  long  robes 
24.  17  these  that  ye  have. .as  ye  walk,  and  are  s.? 

John  1.  36  looking  upon  Jesus  as  he  walked,  he  saith 

5.  8  Jesus  saith.. Rise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  w. 
5.    9  immediately.. took  up  his  bed,  and  walked 

5.  11  the  same  said.. Take  up  thybed,and  walk 
5. 12  What  maD..  said..  Take  up  thy  bed,  and  w.? 

6.  19  they  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and  dr. 

6.  66  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  him 

7.  1  walked  in  Galilee  :  for  he  would  not  walk 

8.  12  he  that  f olloweth  me  shall  not  walk  in  da. 

10.  23  Jesus  walked  in  the  temple,  in  Solomon's 

11.  9  If  any  man  walk  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth 
11.  10  if  any  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth 

11.  54  Jesus  therefore  walked  no  more  openly 

12.  35  Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkn. 
12.  35  he  that  walketh  in  darkness  knowethnot 

21.  18  When  thou  wast  young,  .thou  walkedst 
Acts    3.   6  In  thenameof  Jesus  Christ,  .rise up. .walk 

3.  8  he  leaping  up  stood,  and  walked.. walking 

3.  9  all  the  people  saw  him  walking  and  prais. 
3  12  as  though. .we  had  made  this  man  to  wa.? 

14.    8  sat  a  certain  man.. who  never  had  walked 

14. 10  Stand  upright..  And  he  leaped  and  walked 

21. 21  ought  not  to  circumcise.. neither  to  walk 

Rom.  6.    4  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life 

S.  [1],  4  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after 

13. 13  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day,  not 
14. 15  grieved.. now  walkest  thou  not  charitably 

1  Co.  3.    3  For.,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  as  men? 

7. 17  as  the  Lord  hath  called.. so  let  him  walk 

2  Co.  4.    2  not  walking  in  craftiness,  nor  handling 

5.    7  For  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight 
10.    2  think,  .as  if  we  walked  according  to  the  fl. 
10.    3  though  we  walk  in  the  flesh,  we  do  not 
12. 18  (walked  we)  not  in  the  same  spirit?.. not  in 
Gal.    5.  16  Walk  in  the  spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil 
Eph.   2.    2  Wherein  in-time  past  ye  walked  according 
2. 10  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them 

4.  1 1 . .  beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the 
4. 17  henceforth  walknotasotherGentiles walk 

5.  2  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us 
5.  8  but  now.  .light  in  the  Lord,  .walk  as  ch. 
5. 15  See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not 

Phil.   3. 17  mark  them  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us 

3.  18  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told  you 
Col.     1. 10  That  ye  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord 

2.  6  As  ye  have,  .received  Christ,  .walk  ye  in 

3.  7  In  the  which  ye  also  walked  sometime 

4-    5  Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  wi. 

1  Th.  2.  12  That  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 

4.  1  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  God 
4. 12  That  ye  may  walk  honestly  toward  them 

2  Th.  3.    6  withdraw,  .from  every  brother  that  walk. 


2  Th.  3.  11  there  are  some  which  walk  among  you  di. 
1  Pe.  5.  8  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking 

1  Jo.    1.    6  If  we  say.  .and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie 

1.  7  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  lig. 

2.  6  ought.,  also  so  to  walk,  even  as  he  walked 
2. 1 1  walketh  in  darkness,  and  knoweth  not  wh. 

2  John     4  that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in 

6  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his  comm. 
6  That,  as  ye  have  heard,  .ye  should  walk 

3  John     3  truth . .  even  as  thou  walkest  in  the  truth 

4  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  tr. 
Rev.    2     1  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 

3.  4  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white:  for  th. 
9.  20  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk 

16.  15  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his  sha. 
21.  24  nations . .  saved  shall  walk  in  the  light  of 

12.  To  2)ass  over  or  through,  -Koptvofj.cn  poreuomai. 

Luke  1.   6  walking  in  all  the  commandments  and  or. 

13.  33 1  must  walkto  day,  andto  morrow,  and  the 

Acts    9.  3 1  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the 

14. 16  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own 

1  Pe.  4.    3  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousness,  lusts 

2  Pe.  2. 10  chiefly  them  that  walk  afterthe  flesh  in 

3.    3  there  shall  come . .  scoffers,  walking  after 

Jude      16  complainers,  walking  aftertheirownlusts 

18  who  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly 

13.2*0  walk,  proceed  or  step  in  order,  aroix^  slo. 

Acts  21.  24  thou  thyself  also  walkest  orderly,  and  ke. 

Rom.  4. 12  who  also  walk  in  the  steps  of  that  faith 

Gal.    5.  25  If  we  live  in  the  spirit,  let  us  also  walk 
6.  16  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule 

Phil.  3.  16  let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  us  mind 
"WALK  abroad,  on,  to  and  fro,  up  and  down,  to  — 
2*0  go  on  habitually  or  tip  and  down,  ~}?yhalak,  7. 

Gen.   3.    8  walking  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the 
5.22  Enoch  walked  with  God  after  he  begat 

5.  24  Enoch  walked  with  God:  and  he  (was)  not 

6.  9  Xoah  was  a  just  man . .  Noah  walked  with 

13. 17  walk  through  the  land,  in  the  length  of 

17.  1  said . .  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perf . 
24. 40  Lord,  before  whom  I  walk,  will  send  his 
48. 15  God,  before  whom  my  fathers,  .did  walk 

Esod2i.  19  If  he  rise  again,  and  walk  abroad  upon 
Lev.  26. 12  I  will  walklimong  you,  and  will  be  your 
Deut23. 14  the  Lord  thy  God  walketh  in  the  midst 
Josh.iS.    S  Go  and  walk  through  the  land,  anddescr. 

1  Sa.   2.  30  thy  house,  .should  walkbeforemeforever 

2.  35  he  shall  walk  before  mine  anointed  fore. 
12.    2  the  king  walketh  before  you.  .1  have  wa. 

2  Sa.  7.   6  have  walked  in  a  tent  apd  in  a  tabernacle 

7.  7  In  all  (the  places)  wherein  I  have  walked 
11.   2  walked  upon  the  roof  of  the  king's  house 

2  Ki.20.    3  remember  now  how  I  have  walked  before 
1  Ch.17.    6  Wheresoever  I  have  walked  with  all  Israel 
Esth.  2. 11  Mordecai  walked  every  day  before  the  co. 
Job     1.    7  From  going,  .and  from  walking  up  and 
2.  2  From  going . .  and  from  walking  up  and 

18.  8  he  is  cast,  .and  he  walketh  upon  a  snare 
22. 14  and  he  walketh  in  the  circuit  of  heaven 

38.  16  hast  thou  walked  in  the  search  of  the  de. 
Psa.  12.    8  The  wicked  walk  on  every  side,  when  the 

26.   3  (is)  before  mine  eyes;  and  I  have  walked 

39.  6  Surely  every  man  walketh  in  a  vain  show 
56.  13  that  I  may  walk  before  God  in  the  light 
82.    5  neither  will  they  understand;  they  walk 

101.    2  I  will  walk  within  my  house  with  a  perf. 
116.    9 1  will  walk  before  the  LORD  in  the  land 
119.  45  I  will  walk  at  liberty:  for  I  seek  thy  pre. 
Prov  20.   7  The  just . .  walketh  in  his  integrity:  his  ch. 
Isa.   38.   3  how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth 
Eze.  28.  14  thou  hast  walked  up  and  down  in  the  mi. 
Zech.  1. 10  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 
1. 11  We  have  walked  to  and  fro  through  the 
6.    7  they  might  walk  to  and  fro  tlirough  the 
6.   7  Get  you  hence,  walk  to  and  fro  tlirough 
6.   7  they  walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth 
10. 12  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  his  name 

WALK,  to  cause  or  make  to  — 

1.  2*o  cause  to  tread,  •jl'j  darak,  5. 

Hab.    3.  19  he  will  make  me  to  walkupon  mine  high 

2.2b  cause  to  go  on,  ~*?:  yalak,  5. 

Eze.  36.  12  Yea,  I  will  cause  men  to  walk  upon  you 
Jer.  31.   9  I  will  cause  them  to  walk  by  the  rivers 

WALK,  places  to  — 

2*o  cause  to  go  on,  ^n  halak,  5. 

Zech.  3.    7  I  will  give,  .places  to  walk  among  these 
WALL  (walled  up,  to  he)  — 
l.A  wall,  t*y}&x  usJishama. 

Ezra    5.   3  hath  commanded,  .to  make  up  this  wall? 
5.   9  commanded  you.  .to  make  up  these  walls? 

2. 2*o  cut  off,  fence,  t*$  batsar. 

Xum  13.  2S  and  the  cities  (are)  walled,  (and)  very  gr. 
Deut.  1.  28  the  cities  (are)  great  and  walled  up  to  h. 

Z.A  v:all,  hedge,  Tja  gader. 

Xuni22.  24  a  wall,  .on  this  side,  and  a  wall  on  that  si. 
Ezra  9.  0  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Judah  and  in  Jerusa. 
Isa.  5.  5  break  down  the  wall  thereof,  and  it  shall 
Eze.  42.  7  the  wall  that  (was)  without  over  against 
Hos.  2.  6  make  a  wall,  that  she  shall  not  find  her  p. 
Mic.    7.  11  the  daythat  thy  walls  are  to  be  built.,  that 

4.  WtxB,  liedge,  "ns  geder. 

Prov  24.  31  the  stone  wall  thereof  was  broken  down 
Eze.  42. 10  in  the  thickness  of  the  wall  of  the  court 

5.  Wall,  hedge,  n~nz  gederak. 

"Eze.  42. 12  the  way  directly  before  the  wall  toward 


.Bulwark,  7%  inchel. 

1  Ki.  21.  23  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the  wall  of  Jez. 
Psa.122.    7  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  .prosperity  w. 

.  Outside,  a  wall,  y*.?  chayits. 
Eze.  13. 10  one  built  up  a  wall,  and,  lo,  others  daub. 

.^■1  woUl,  enclosure,  ncn  chomah, 

Exodi4.  22,  29  the  waters  (were)  a  wall  unto  them  on 

Lev.  25.  29  if  a  man  sell  a  dwelling  house  in  a  walled 

25.  30  the  huuse  that  (is)  in  the  walled  city  shall 

25.  31  houses  of  the  villages  which  have  no  wall 

Deut.  3.    5  these  cities  (were)  fenced  with  high  walls 

28.  52  until  thy  high  and  fenced  walls  come  do. 

Josh.  2.  15  the  town  wall,  and  she  dwelt  upon  the  w. 

6.    5  the  wall  ofthecityshallfalldown  flat, and 

6.  20  the  wall  fell  down  flat,  so  that  the  people 

1  Sa.  25.  16  They  were  a  wall  unto  us,  both  by  night 

31.  10  they  fastened  his  body  to  the  wall  of  Beth. 

31. 12  took  the  body,  .from  the  wall  of  Beth-sh. 

2  Sa,  11.  20  knew  ye  notthatthey.  .shoot  from  the  w.? 

11.  21  did  not  awoman  cast,  .from  the  wall,  that 
11.  21  why  went  ye  nigh  the  wall?  then  say  thou 
11.  24  the  shooters  shot  from  off  the  wall  upon 
1 S.  24  to  the  roof  over  the  gate  unto  the  wall 
20. 15  all.  .battered  the  wall,  to  throw  it  down 
20.  21  head  shall  be  thrown  to  thee  over  the  wall 

1  KL  3.    1  and  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  round  about 

4. 13  threescore  great  cities  with  walls  and  br. 
9.  "15  to  build,  .the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and  Ha. 
20.  30  a  wall  fell  upon  twenty  and  seven  thous. 

2  Ki.  3.  27  offered  him . .  a  burnt  offering  upon  the  w. 

6.  26  as  the  king . .  was  passing  by  upon  the  wall 
6.  30  he  passed  by  upon  the  wall,  and  the  peo. 

14. 13  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  from 
iS.  26  in  the  ears  of  the  people  that,  .on  the  wall 
iS.  27  sent  me.  .to  the  men  which  sit  on  the  wall 
25.    4  by  the  way  of  the  gate  between  two  walls 
25. 10  brake  down  the  wallsof  Jerusalem  round 

2  Ch.  8.    5  fenced  cities,  with  walls,  gates,  and  bars 
14.   7  Let  us  build  these  cities,  and  make,  .walls 

25.  23  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  from 

26.  6  wall  of  Gath.  .wall  of  Jabneh.  .wall  of  As. 

27.  3  and  on  the  wall  of  Ophel  he  built  much 
32.    5  built  up  all  the  wall  that  was  broken,  and 
32.    5  and  another  wall  without,  and  repaired 
32.  iS  people  of  Jerusalem  that(were)on  the  wall 

33. 14  after  this  he  built  a  wall  without  the  city 
36.  19  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and 

Neh.  1.  3  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  also  (is)  broken  do. 
2.  8  for  the  wall  of  the  city,  and  for  the  house 
2.  13  went  out.  .and  viewed  the  walls  of  Jerus. 
2. 15  Then  went  I  up.  .and  viewed  the  wall,  and 

2.  17  let  us  build  up  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  that 

3.  8  tneyfortified  Jerusalem  unto  the  broad  w. 
3. 13  a  thousand  cubits  on  the  wall  unto  the 

3. 15  the  wall  of  the  pool  of  Siloah  by  the  king's. 

3.  27  another  piece,  .even  unto  the  wall  of  Op. 

4.  1  when  Sanballat  heard,  .we  builded  the  w. 
4.  3  a  fox.. shall.. break  down  their  stone  wall 
4.  6  So  built  we  the  wall ;  and  all  the  wall  was 
4.  7  heard  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were 
4.  10  so  that  we  are  not  able  to  build  the  wall 
4.  13  set  I  in  the  lower  places  behind  the  wall 

4. 15  returned  all  of  us  to  the  wall,  every  one 

4.  17  They  which  builded  on  the  wall,  and  they 
4. 19  separated  upon  the  wall,  one  far  from  an. 

5. 16  also  I  continued  in  the  work  of  this  wall 
6.    1  Sanballat.  .heard thatlhadbuildedthew. 

6.  6  for  which  cause  thou  buildest  the  wall ,  th . 
6. 15  So  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  twenty  and 

7.  1  when  the  wall  was  built,  and  I  had  set  up 
12.  27  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem 
12.  30  purified  the  people.. the  gates,  and  the  wall 
12.  31  Drought  up  theprincesof  Judah  upon  the 
12.  31  went  on  the  right  hand  upon  the  wall  to. 
12.  37  at  the  going  up  of  the  wall,  above  the  ho. 
12.  38  half  of  the  people  upon  the  wall,  from  be. 
12.  3S  tower  of  the  furnaces  even  to  the  broad  w. 
13. 21  Why  lodge  ye  about  the  wall?  if  ye  do  (so) 

Psa.  51.  iS  Do  good,  .build  thou  the  wallsof  Jerusa. 

55. 10  Day  and  night  they  go  about  it  upon  the 
Prov  18.  11  his  strong  city,  and  as  an  high  wall  in  his 

25.  28  a  city  (that  is)  broken  down,  (and)  witho. 
Song  5.   7  keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my  veil  fr. 

5.  9  If  she  (be)  a  wall,  we  will  build  upon  her 
S.  10  I  (am)  a  wall,  and  my  breasts  like  towers 

Isa.  2. 15  every  high  tower,  .upon  every  fenced  wall 
22.  10  houses.. broken  down  to  fortify  the  wall 

22. 11  Ye  made  also  a  ditch  between  the  two  w. 

25.  12  fortress  of  the  high  fort  of  thy  walls  shall 

26.  1  salvation  will  (God)  appoint  (for)  walls 
30. 13  swelling  out  in  a  high  wall,  whose  break. 

36. 1 1  the  ears  of  the  people  that  (are)  on  the  w. 
36.  1 2  not  (sent  me)  to  the  men  th  at  sit  upon  the 
49. 16  I  have  graven  thee,  thy  walls  (are)  cont. 
56.  5  within  my  walls  a  place  and  a  name  better 
60.  10  the  sons  of  strangers  sballbuildup  thy  w. 
60.  18  shalt  call  thy  walls  Salvation,  and  thyga. 
62    61  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  0  J. 

Jer.  1.  15  against  all  the  walls  thereof  round  about 
1.  iS  brasen  walls  against  the  whole  land,  aga. 
15.  20  make  thee  unto  this  people  a  fenced. .wall 
21.  4  which  besiege  you  without  the  walls,  and 
39.  4  by  the  gate  betwixt  the  two  walls:  and  he 
39.  8  the  Chaldeans,  .brake  duwn  the  walls  of 
49.  27  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  Danias. 
50. 15  foundations  are  fallen,  her  walls  are  thr. 

51. 12  Set  up  the  standard  upon  the  walls  of  B. 
51. 44  will  punish  Bel.  .the  wall  of  Babylon  sh. 
51.  58  The  broad  walls  of  Babylon  shall  be  utt. 
■52.   7  by  the  way  of  the  gate  between  the  two  w. 


WALLOW 


1032 


WAR 


Jer.  52 
Lam.  2 


Zecli. 


■  M 

■  7 

■  5 
3-    8 


brake  down  all  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  ro. 
he  hath  given  up . .  the  walls  of  her  palaces 
Lord  hath  purposed  to  destroy  the  wall 
therefore  he  made  the  rampart  and  the  w. 
O  wall  of  the  daughter  of  Ziou,  let  tears 
they  shall  destroy  the  walls  of  Tyrus,  and 
he  shall  set  engines  of  war  against  thy  wa. 
thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the 
break  down  thy  walls,  and  destroy  thy 
,  11  upon  thy  walls  round  about 
all  of  them  dwelling  without  walls,  and 
shall  fall,  and  every  wall  shall  fall  to  the 
behold  a  wall  on  the  outside  of  the  house 
it  had  a  wall  round  about,  five  hundred 
they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  men  of  war 
they  shall  run  upon  the  wall,  they  shall 
,  10  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall,  .which  sh. 
But  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  Ra. 
Lord  stood  upon  a  wall  (made)  by  a  plumb 
they  shall  make  haste  to  the  wall  thereof 
whose  rampart  (was)  the  sea,  (and)  her  w. 
For  I . .  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round 


9.^4  rampart,  |'nn  charuts. 

Dam  9.  25  street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the  wall 

10.  .1  wall,  bnh  hothel. 

Song   2.    g  he  standeth  behind  our  wall,  he  looketh 

11.  A  wall,  "?ri3  kcthal. 

Ezra   5.    S  timber  is  laid  in  the  walls,  and  this  work 
Dan.  5.    5  upou  the  plaster  of  the  wall  of  the  king's 

12.^4  wall,  beam  {of  roof  and  floor),  Tp  air. 

Lev.  14.  37  (if)  the  plague  (be)  in  the  walls  of  the  ho. 
14.  37  which  in  sight  (are)  lower  than  the  wall 
14.  39  behold,  (if)  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  w. 

N111022.  25  the  ass.  .thrust  herself  unto  the  wall,  and 

22.  25  crushed  Balaams  foot  against  the  wall 
35.    4  from  the  wall  of  the  city  and  outward  a 

1  Sa.  18. 11  he  said,  I  will  smite  David  even  to  the  wall 

19.  10  Saul  sought  to  smite  David  even  to  the"w. 
19. 10  smote  the  javelin  into  the  wall:  and  Da. 

20.  25  king  sat.  .upon  a  seat  by  the  wall :  and  I 
25.  22  if  I  leave,  .any  that  pisseth  against  the  w. 
25.  34  been  left . .  any  that  pisseth  against  the  w. 

1  Ki.   4.  33  the  hyssop  that  springe th  out  of  the  wall 

6.  5  against  the  wall,  .the  walls  of  the  house 
6.  6  should  not  be  fastened  in  the  walls  of  the 
6.  15  built  the  walls  of  the  house  within  with 
6.  15  both  the  floor  of  the  house  and  the  walls 
6.  16  both  the  floor  and  the  walls  with  boards 
6.  27  that  the  wing  of  the  one  touched  the.  ,w. 
6.  27  wing  of  the  other  cherub  touched  the.  .w. 
6.  29  he  carvedall  the  walls  of  thehouseround 

24.  10  cut  off.  .him  that  pisseth  against  the  wall 
16.  11  left  him  not  onethat  pisseth  against  awall 

21.  21  cut  off.  .him  that  pisseth  against  the  wa. 

2  Ki.   4.  10  a  little  chamber,  I  pray  thee,  on  the  wa. 

g.    8  cut  off.  .him  that  pisseth  against  the  wa. 
9.  33  of  her  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  wall 
20.    2  Then  he  turned  his  face  to  the  wall,  and 

1  Ch.29.    4  refined  silver,  to  overlay  the  walls  of  the 

2  Ch.  3.    7  He  overlaid,  .the  walls  thereof,  and  the 

3.    7  gold ;  and  graved  cherubim  on  the  walls 

3.  11,  12  five  cubits,  reaching  to  the  wall  of  the 
Psa.  62.    3  as  a  bowing  wall  (shall  ye  be,  and  as)  a 
Isa.   22.    s  breaking  down  the  walls,  and  of  cryiug  to 

25.  4  terrible  ones  (is)  as  astorm(against)the  w. 
38.  2  Hezekiah  turned  his  face  toward  the  wall 
59.  10  We  grope  for  the  wall  like  the  blind,  and 

Eze.  4.  3  set  it  (for)  a  wall  of  iron  between  thee  and 
8.  7  when  I  looked,  behold,  a  hole  in  the  wall 
8.  8  Son  of  man,  dig  thou^in  the  wall :  and 
8.  8  when  I  had  digged  in  the  wall,  behold,  a 
8.  10  idols,  .pourtrayed  upon  the  wall  round 
12.  5  Dig  thou  through  the  wall  in  their  sight 
12.    7  In  the  even  I  digged  through  the  wall  wi. 

12.  12  shall  dig  through  the  wall  to  carry  out 
13. 12  when  the  wall  is  fallen,  shall  it  not  be  sa. 
13. 14  So  will  I  break  down  the  wall  that  ye  ha. 

13.  15  will  I  accomplish  my  wrath  upon  the  wa. 
13.  15  wall  (is)  no(more),  neither  they  that  have 

23.  14  she  saw  men  pourtrayed  upon  the  wall 
33.  30  still  are  talking  against  thee  by  the  walls 
41.    5  After  he  measured  the  wall  of  the  house 
41.    6  entered  into  the  wall  which  (was)  of  the 
41.    6  but  they  had  not  hold  in  the  wall  of  the 
41.   9  thickness  of  the  wall,  which  (was)  for  the 
41. 12  wall  of  the  building  (was)five  cubits  rou. 
41.  13  with  the  walls  thereof,  anhundred  cubits 
41.  17  by  all  the  wall  round  about,  within  and 
41.  50  palm  trees  made,  and  (on)  the  wall  of  the 
41.  22  the  length  thereof,  and  the  walls  thereof 
41.  25  trees,  like  as  (were)  made  upon  the  walls 
43.    8  post  by  my  posts,  and  on  the  wall  betwe. 

Amos  5.  19  leaned  his  hand  on  the  wall,  and  a  serp. 
Hab.    2. 11  For  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall 

13.  A  wall,  Tltf  shur. 

Gen,  49.  22  bough.. (whose)branchesrunoverthe  wall 
2  Sa.  22.  30  troops,  .by.  .God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wa. 
Ezra   4.  12  have  set  up  the  walls  (thereof),  and  join. 
4. 13  if  this  city  be  builded,  and  the  walls  set 

4.  16  city  be  builded  (again),  and  the  walls  th. 
Job  24.  11  make  nil  within  their  walls,  (and)  tread 
Psa,  iS.  29  and  by  my  Gud  have  I  Leaped  over  a  wall 

11..  1  prvnce,  ox,  tip  shor. 

Gen.  49.    6  in  their  self  will  they  digged  down  a  wall 

15.WaUst  rhiy  sharolh. 

Jer.     5.  to  Go  ye  up  upon  her  walls,  and  destroy,  but 


16. An  outer  volt,  reTx0*  teichos. 

Acts    9.  25  disciples,  .let  him  down  by  the  wall  in  a 
2  Co.  n.  33  a  window,  .was  I  let  down  by  the  wall 
Heb.11.  30  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down 
Rev.  21.  12  had  a  wall  great  and  high,  (and)  had  tw. 
21.  14  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundations 
21. 15  and  the  gates  thereof,  and  the  wall  ther. 
21.  17  measured  the  wall  thereof,  an  hundred 
21.  18  building  of  the  wall  of  it  was  of  jasper 
21.  19  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  (were) 

17. An  inner  wall,  to?x°s  toichos. 

Acts  23.    3  God  shall  smite  thee,  (thou)  whited  wall 
WALLOW  (self),to  — 
l.To  roll  self,  bha  galal,  7a. 

2  Sa.  20.  12  Amasa  wallowed  in  blood  in  the  midst  of 

2.  To  reel,  totter  to  and  fro,  p?D  saphaq. 

Jer.  48.  26  Moab  shall  wallow  in  his  vomit,  and  he 

3.  To  roll  self,  2>ress  self  on,  tfc%  ^«Z«s/i,  7. 

Jer.     6.  26  wallow  thyself  in  ashes  ;  make  thee  mou. 

25. 34  wallow  yourselves  (in  the  ashes),  ye  prin. 

Eze.  27. 30  they  shall  wallow  themselves  in  the  ash. 

4.  To  roll,  wallow,  KuXtofxai  kuliomai. 

Mark  9.  20  and  he  fell  on  the  ground,  and  wallowed 
5. A  rolling,  wallowing,  KvXtafxa  kulisma. 

2  Pe.  2.  22  sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in 
WANDER  (about,  abroad,  up  and  down),  to  — 

1.  To  go  on,  r^n  halak. 

Josh.  14.  10  while  (the  children  of)  Israel  wandered 
Eccl.   6.   9  Better  (is)  the . .  than  the  wandering  of  the 

2.  To  fee  away,  move,  wander,  111  nadad. 

Job    15.  23  He  wandered  abroad  for  bread,  (saying) 
Prov  27.    8  As  a  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest 

27.  8  (is)  a  man  that  waudereth  from  his  place 
Isa.  16.  3  hide  the  outcasts;  bewraynothimthatwa. 
Jer.  49.    5  and  none  shall  gather  up  him  that  wand. 

Z.To  move,  shake,  stagger,  wander,  JHJ  nua, 

Jer.   14.  10  Thus  have  they  loved  to  wander,  they  have 
Lam.  4.  14  They  have  wandered  (as)  blind  (men)  in 

4.  15  when  they  fled  away  and  wandered,  they 
Amos  4.    8  So  two  (or)  three  cities  wandered  unto  one 

8.  12  they  shall  wander  from  sea  to  sea,  and  fr. 

4.7*0  cause  to  move,  shake,  wander,  yu  nua,  5. 

Psa.  59.  15  Let  them  wander  up  and  down  for  meat 
5.To  wander,  cast  down,  dex>ress,  ny$  tsaah. 

Jer.     2.  20  under  every  greeu  tree  thou  wanderest 
6.Tofeed,  rt%-\  raah. 

Numi4.  33  your  children  shall  wander  in  the  wilder. 
7.7^  err,  go  astr<>y,  r\y6  shagah. 

Eze.  34.    6  My  sheep  "wandered  tlirough  all  the  mou. 

8.  To  err,  wander,  go  astray,  nyn  taak. 

Gen.  21.  14  and  wandered  in  the  wilderness  of  Beer. 

37.  15  behold,  (he  was)  wandering  in  the  field 
Job   38.  4 1  young  ones  cry  unto  G  od,  they  wander  for 
Psa.  107.    4  They  wandered  in  the  wilderness  in  a  sol. 
FT0V21.  16  The  man  that  wandereth  out  of  the  way 
Isa.  16.    8  wandered  (through)  the  wilderness,  her 

47. 15  they  shall  wander  every  oneto  his  quart. 

9.  To  go  or  comearound,  7T€piepxo/j.ai perierchomai. 

1  Ti.    5.  13  learn  (to  be)  idle,  wandering  about  from 
Heb.'n.  37  they  wandered  about  in  sheep  skins  and 

10.  To  lead  astray,  TrXavdcu  planao. 

Heb.  11.38  they  wandered  in  deserts,  and  (in)  moun. 
WANDER,  to  cause,  let  or  make  to  — 

1.  To  cause  to  wander,  yia  nua,  5. 

lS'uni32.  13  made  them  wander  in  the  wilderness  forty 

2.  To  make  to  bend,  or  icandcr,  n%y  tsaah,  3. 
Jer.  43.  12  that  shall  cause  him  to  wander 

3.  To  cause  to  err,  or  go  astray,  n$  shagah,  5. 

Deut  27.  18  (be)  he  that  maketh  the  blind  to  wander 
Psa.119.  10  let  me  not  wander  from  thy  commandm. 

4.  To  cause  to  err,  wander,  go  astray,  nyntaah,  5. 
Gen.  20.  13  when  God  caused  me  to  wander  from  my 
Job  12.  24  causeth  them  to  wander  in  a  wilderness 
Psa.107.  40  causeth  them  to  wander  in  the  wilderness 

WANDERER,  wandering  — 

l.To  fee  away,  move,  wander,  TU  'nadad. 

Isa.   16.    2  as  a  wandering  bird  cast  out  of  the  nest 

Hos.  9.  17  they  shall  be  wanderersamongthenations 
l.To  move,  fee,  wander,  bemoan,  f\i  nud. 

ProV26.  2  As  the  bird  by  wandering,  as  the  swallow 
Z.A  moving  or  wandering  about,  113  nod. 

Psa.  56.  8  Thou  tellest  my  wanderings :  put  thou  my 
i.To  bend,  wander,  njjs  tsaah. 

Jer.   48.  12  I  will  send  untohimwanderers,  thatshall 

5.  Wondering,  irXav^r-qs  phoittes. 

Jude  13  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is  reserved  the 
WANT,  (for,  in  want  of,  to)  — 

l.Endj  cessation,  crx  epJies. 

Prov.14.  28  but  in  the  want  of  people  (is)  the  destru. 
■2.  Without}  in  not  [having),  k1??  belo. 

Prov  13.  23  there  is.. destroyed  for  want  of  judgment 
3.  To  cease,  bin  chadal. 

Prov  10.  19  In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth 
i.  Lacking,  iprj  chaser. 

Prov.  9,    4,  16  him  that  wanteth  understanding,  she 


Prov  10.  21  feed  many:  but  fools  die  for  want  of  wis. 

28.  16  prince  that  wanteth  understanding  (is) 
Eccl.  6.    2  so  that  he  wanteth  nothing  for  his  soul  of 

5.  To  lack,  be  lacking,  ~iDn  chaser. 

Deut  1 5.    8  sufficient  for  his  need,  (in  that) . .  he  want. 
Psa.  23.    1  The  Loud  (is)  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  w. 

34.  10  they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  want 
Prov  13.  25  but  the  belly  of  the  wicked  shall  want 
Song  7.    2  navel  (is  like)  a  round  goblet,  (which)  w. 
Jer.  44.  18  we  have  wanted  all  (things),  aud  have  be. 
Eze.    4.  17  That  they  may  want  bread  and  water,  and 

6. Lack,  icij  cheser. 

Job  30.    3  For  want  and  famine  (they  were)  solitary 
7.  Lack,  "tDh  choser. 

Deut  28.  48  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness,  and  in  want 
28.  57  for  she  shall  eat  them  for  want  of  all(th.) 
Ajuos  4.   6  have  given  you . .  want  of  bread  in  all  yo. 
8. Lack,  "liono  machsor. 

JudgiS.  10  place  where  (there  is)  no  want  of  any  th. 
19.  19  there  is  bread  and.  .no  want  of  any  thing 

19.  20  howsoever  (let)  all  thy  wants  (lie)  upon 
Psa.  34.  9  fear  the  LORix  .for  (there  is)  no  want  to 
Prov.  6.  11  come  as  one  that  travelleth,  and  thy  wa. 

21.  5  but  of  every  one  (that  is)  hasty,  only  to  wa. 

22.  16  givethtotherich,(shall)surely(come)tow. 
24.  34  come  (as)  one  that  travelleth,  and  thy  wa. 

9.  To  be  cut  of,  rns  karath,  2. 

Jer.  33.  17  David  shall  never  want  a  man  to  sit  upon 
33. 18  Neither  shall  the  priests  the  Levites  want 

35.  19  shall  not  want  a  man  to  stand  before  me 

10.  To  look  into,  after  or  over,  miss,  n$5  2iaqad. 
Isa.   34. 16  none  shall  waut  her  mate  :  for  my  mouth 

11.  What  is  behind,  want,  deficiency,  vo-rtprina. 

2  Co.  8.  14  abundance  (may  be  a  supply)  for  their  wa. 

8.  14  abundance  also  may  be(a  supply)  for..wa. 

9.  12  not  only  supplieth  the  want  of  the  saints 

1'2.A  being  behind,  want,  deficiency,  vcrepvaL^. 
Marki2.  44  but  she  of  her  want  did  east  in  all  that 
Phil.   4.  11  Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want:  for 

13, Necessary  business,  necessity,  need,  use,  xPet'a- 

Phil.   2.  25  messenger,  and. .  that  ministered  to  my  w. 
1 4.  To  be  behind,  inferior,  in  want,  varepzw  huster. 

John  2.    3  when  they  wanted  wine,  the  mother  of  J 

2  Co.  11.    9  when  I  was  present  with  you,  and  wanted 
WANT,  to  be  in ;   {to  be)  wanting  — 
l.Lacking,  "I'pij  chassir. 

Dan.    5.  27  Thou  art  weighed,  .and  art  found  want 
2. Lack,  want,  jvifo  chesron. 

Eccl.  1.  15  that  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  numbc. 
3.  To  be  looked  after,  inspected,  missed,  ijlppac/ad,  2. 

2  Ki.  10. 19  none  be  wanting,  .whosoever  shall  be  w. 
A.Tobebehind,  inferior,  vo-Tzpsw  hustereo. 

Lukei5-  14  a  mighty  famine.,  and  he  began  to  be  in  w. 
5.  To  leave,  fail,  be  wanting,  Xiiirta  leipo. 

Titus  1.    5  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting 
3.  13  diligently,  that  nothing  be  wanting  unto 

Jas,     1.    4  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  noth. 
WANTON  (against,  to  begin  to  wax),  wantonness  — 
1.  To  deal  falsely,  deceive,  ogle  with  the  eyes,  ip'y,  3. 

Isa.     3.  16  walk  with  stretched  forth  necks,  and  wa. 
2.Lascivioitsness,  lewdness,  daeKyeia  aselgeia. 

Rom  13.  13  not  in  chambering  and  wantouuess,  not 

2  Pe.   2.  18  they  allure  through.  .  wantonness,  those 

3.  To  grow  very  wanton,  KaTaarpr)Pid(u}  katastrenia. 

1  Ti.   5. 11  they  have  begun  to  wax  wanton  against 
WAR,  (against,  men  of  to  make,  to)  — 

1.  Force,  army,  bulwark,  bin  chayil. 

Deut.  3. 18  pass  over,  .all (that  are)  meet  for  the  war 

2  Ch.33.  14  put  captains  of  war  in  all  the  fenced  cit. 

2.  To  fight,  devour  one  another,  crb  lacham,  2. 

Deut  20.  19  in  making  war  against  it  to  take  it,  thou 
Josh.io.    5  encamped  before  Gibeon,  and  made  war 

24.   9  warred  against  Israel,  and  sent  and  call. 
Judgn.   4  children  of  Amnion  made  war  against  la. 

11.    5  when  the  children  of  Amnion  made  war  a. 

11.  27  but  thou  doest  me  wrong  to  war  against 
1  Sa.  28.  15  for  the  Philistines  make  war  against  me 

1  Ki.:4.  19  how  he  warred,  and  how  he  reigned,  be. 

20.  1  and  he  went  up.  .and  warred  against  it 
22.  45  his  might  that  he  showed,  and  how  he  wa. 

2  Ki.   6.   8  Then  the  king  of  Syria  warred  against  Is. 

14.  28  how  he  warred,  and  how  he  recovered  D. 
19.    8  found  thekingof  Assyria  warring  against 

2  Ch.17.  10  so  that  they  made  no  war  against  Jehosh. 

26.    6  went  forth  and  warred  against  the  Phili. 

Isa.   37.    8  found  the  king  of  Assyria  warring  against 

37.   9  He  is  come  forth  to  make  war  with  thee 

Jer.  21.   2  king  of  Babylon  maketh  war  against  us 

3. Fighting,  cn^,  orr;  lachem. 

Judg.  5.    8  They  chose  new  gods;  then  (was)  war  in 

4.  A  fighting,  war,  battle,  neppp  miWiamah. 

Gen.  14.    2  made  war  with  Bera  king  of  Sodom,  and 

E.vod.  1.  10  when  there  falleth  out  any  war.  they  join 

13.  17  people  repent  wheu  they  see  war,  and  th. 

15.  3  The  Lour>  (is)  a  man  of  war :  the  LORD  (is) 
17.  16  war  ■with  Amalek  from  generation  to  gen. 
32.  17  said.  .(There  is)  a  noise  of  war  in  the  ca, 

Xumio.    9  if  ye  go  to  war  in  your  land  against  the 

21.  14  therefore  it  is  said  in  the  book  of  the  w. 
31,  27  betwoen  them  that  took  the  war  upon  th. 


WAR 


1033 


WARN 


N111U31,  23  tribute,  .of  the  men  of  war  which  went 

31.  49  taken  the  sum  of  the  men  of  war  which 

32.  6  Shall  your  brethren  go  to  war,  and  shall 
32.  20  if  ye  will  go  armed  before  the  Lord  to  war 

Deut.  1.  41  girded  on  every  man  his  weapons  of  war 
2.  14  generation  of  the  men  of  war  were  wasted 

2.  16  when  all  the  men  of  war  were  consumed 

4.  34  and  by  war,  and  by  a  mighty  hand,  and 
20.  12  but  will  make  war  against  thee,  then  thou 

20.  20  against  the  city  that  maketh  war  with 

21.  10  When  thou  goest  forth  to  war  against  th. 
Josh.  5.    4  all  the  men  of  war,  died  in  the  wilderness 

5.  6  till  all  the  people  (that  were)  men  of  war 

6.  3  shall  compass  the  city,  all  (ye)menof  war 
8.  1  take  all  the  people  of  war  with  thee,  and 
8.  3  So  Joshua  arose,  and  all  the  people  of  war 
8. 11  all  the  people. .of  war  that  (were)  with 

10.    7  all  the  people  of  warwithhim,  andallthe 

10.  24  said  unto  the  captains  of  the  men  of  war 

11.  7  So  Joshua  came,  and  all  thepeopleof  war 
1 1.  iS  Joshua  made  war  a  long  time  with  all  th. 
1 1 .  23  by  their  tribes . .  the  land  rested  from  war 
14.  11  even  so  (is)  my  strength  now,  for  war,  bo. 
14. 15  Anakims.  And  the  land  had  rest  from  war 

17.  1  because  he  was  a  man  of  war,  therefore 
Judg.  3.    1  as  many,  .as  had  not  known  all  the  wars 

3.  2  might  know  to  teach  them  war,  at  the  le. 
3.  10  hejudgedlsrael,  and  wentoutto  war :  and 

18.  11  hun.  men  appointed  with  weapons  of  war 
18.  16  men  appointed  with  theirweapons  of  war 

18.  17  men  (that  were)  appointed  "with  weapons 
20. 17  drew  sword :  all  these  (were)  men  of  war 
21.  22  reserved  not  to  each  man  Ins  wife  in  the  w. 

1  Sa.  8.  12  to  make  his  instruments  of  war,  and  inst. 

14.  52  there  was  sore  war  against  the  Philistines 

16.  iS  mightyvaliantman.andamanof  war,  and 
*7-  33  a  youth,  and  he  a  man  of  war  from  hisyo. 
38.    5  Saul  set  him  over  the  men  of  war ;  and  he 

19.  8  there  was  war  again  :  and  David  went  out 

23.  8  Saul  called  all  the  people  together  to  war 

2  Sa.    1 .  27  How  are . .  the  weapons  of  war  perished ! 

3.  1  Now  there  was  long  war  between  the  ho. 
3.    6  while  there  was  war  between  the  house  of 

8.  10  for  Hadadezer  had  wars  with  Toi.  And  (J.) 
11.  7  how  the  people  did,  and  how  the  war  pr. 
11.  18  David  all  the  things  concerning  the  war 

11.  19  an  end  of  telling  the  matters  of  the  war 

17.  8  thy  father  (is)  a  man  of  war,  and  will  not 

21.  15  Moreover  the  Philistines  had  yet  war  ag. 

22.  35  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war ;  so  that  a 

1  Ki.  2.    5  whom  he  slew,  and  shed  the  blood  of  war 

2.  5  put  the  blood  of  war  upon  his  girdle  that 
5.    3  for  the  wai3  which  were  about  him  on  ev. 

9.  22  but  they  (were  )men  of  war,  and  hisserva. 

14.  30  there  was  war  between  Kehoboam  and  Je. 

15.  6  there  was  warbetweenRehoboam  and  Je. 
15.    7  there  was  war  between  Abijam  and  Jero. 

15.  16,  32  there  was  war  between  Asa  and  Baas. 

20.  18  whether  they  be  come  out  for  war,  take 
22.    1  they  continued'three  years  without  war 

2  Ki.  8.  28  with  Joram  the  son  of  Ahabto  the  war  ag. 

13.  25  out  of  the  hand  of  Jehoahazhis  father  by 

14.  7  took  Selali  by  war,  and  called  the  name 

16.  5  Then  Rezin . .  came  up  to  Jerusalem  to  war 

18.  20  (I  have)  counsel  and  strength  for  the  war 

24.  16  all  (that  were)  strong  (and)  apt  for  war 

25.  4  all  the  men  of  war  (tied)  by  night  by  the 
25. 19  took  an  officer  that  was  set  over  the  men 

-*  Ch.  5.  10  in  the  days  of  Saul  they  made  war  with 
5.  18  and  to  shoot  with  bow,  and  skilful  in  war 
5.  19  they  made  war  with  the  Hagarites,  with 
5.  22  there  fell,  .many  slain,  because  the  war 

7.  4  hands  of  soldiers  for  war,  six  and  thirty 

12.  1  among  the  mighty  men,  helpers  of  the  war 
T2.  33  expert  in  war,  with  all  instruments  of  war 
12.  35  of  the  Danites  expert  in  war  twenty  aud 
12.  36  such  as  went  forth  to  battle,  expert  in  war 

12.  38  All  these  men  of  war,  that  could  keep  ra. 
18.  10  for  Hadarezerhad  war  with Tou  ;  and.  .all 
20.  4  that  there  arose  war  at  Gezer  with  the  Ph. 
20.  5  there  was  war  again  with  the  Philistines 
20.  6  yet  again  there  was  war  at  Gath,  where 
22.  8  hast  made  great  wars :  thou  shalt  not  bu. 
28.   3  because  thou  (hast  been)  a  man  of  war,  and 

c  Ch.   6.  34  If  thy  people  go  out  to  war  against  their 

8.  9  but  they  (were)  men  of  war,  and  chief  of 
12. 15  wars  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam 

13.  2  there  was  war  between  Abijah  and  Jero. 

13.  3  array  with  an  army  of  valiant  men  of  war 

14.  6  land  had  rest,  and  he  had  no  war  in  those 
15. 19  there  was  no  (more)  war  unto  the  five  and 
16.  9 therefore.. henceforth  thou  sbalthave  wars 
17. 13  men  of  war,  mighty  men  of  valour,  (were) 
18.  3  answered .  .(we  will  be)  with  thee  in  the  w. 
22.   5  went  with  Jeboram .  .to  war  against  Had. 

26.  13  that  made  war  with  mighty  power,  to  help 

27.  7  rest  of  the  acts  uf  Jotham,  and  all  his  wars 
32.  6  set  captains  of  war  over  the  people,  and 
35.  21  against  the  house  wherewith  I  have  war 

Job     5.  20  and  in  war  from  the  power  of  the  sword 
3S.  23  reserved.,  against  the  day  of  battle  and  w.? 
Psa.  iS.  34  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  so  that  a 
27.    3  though  war  should  rise  against  me,  in  this 
46.    9  He  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  end  of 
120.    7  peace :  but  when  I  speak,  they  (are)  for 
140.    2  continually  are  they  gathered,  .(for)  war 
144.    1  which  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  (and) 
Prov  20.  iS  counsel;  and  with  good  advice  makewar 
24.   6  by  wise  counsel  thou  shalt  make  thy  war 
Eccl.  3.    8  time  to  hate ;  a  time  of  war,  and  a  time 
8.    8  (there  is)  no  discharge  in  (that)  war,  nei. 
Song  3.   STheyallholdswordSjOjeingiexpertiuwar 

130 


Isa.     2.    4  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more 
3.    2  The  mighty  man,  and  the  man  of  war 
3.  25  by  the  sword,  and  thy  mighty  in  the  war 
7.    1  went  up  toward  Jerusalem  to  war  against 

21. 15  bow,  aud  from  the  grievousness  of  war 
36.    5  counsel  and  strength  for  war :  now,  on 

41. 12  they  that  war  against  thee  shall  be  as  no. 

42. 13  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war 
Jer.     4. 19  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  alarm  of  w. 

6.    4  Prepare  ye  war  against  her ;  arise,  and  let 

6.  23  set  in  array  as  men  for  war,  against  thee 
21.  4  I  will  turn  back  the  weapons  of  war  that 
28.    8  prophesied . .  of  war,  and  of  evil,  and  of 

38.  4  weakeneth  the  hands  of  the  men  of  war 

39.  4  saw  them,  and  all  the  men  of  war,  then 

41.  3  were  found  there,  (and)  the  men  of  war 

41. 16  mighty  men  of  war,  and  the  women,  and 

42.  14  where  we  shall  see  no  war,  nor  hear  the 

48.  14  (are)  mighty  and  strongmen  for  the  war? 

49.  2  that  I  will  cause  an  alarm  of  war  to  be 

49.  26  all  the  men  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  in  that 

50.  30  all  her  men  of  war  shall  be  cut  off  in  that 

51.  20  (art)  my  battle  ax  (and)  weapons  of  war 

51.  32  burned  with  fire,  and  the  men  of  war  are 

52.  7  all  the  men  of  war  fled,  and  went  forth 
52.  25  which  had  the  charge  of  the  men  of  war 

Eze.  17.  17  make  for  him  in  the  war,  by  casting  up 
27.  10  thy  men  of  war :  they  hanged  the  shield 

27.  27  all  thy  men  of  war,  that  (are)  in  thee,  and 
32.  27  down  to  hell  with  their  weapons  of  war 
39.  20  and  with  all  men  of  war,  saith  the  Lord 

Dan.   9. 26  unto  the  end  of  the  war  desolations  are 
Joel    2.   7  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  men  of  war 
3.    9  Prepare  war.  .let  all  the  men  of  war  draw 
Mic.    2.    8  pass  by  securely  as  men  averse  from  war 

3.  5  mouths,  they  even  prepare  war  against 

4.  3  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  inure 

5.  To  assemble,  serve  the  host,  N'ns  tsaba. 

Nunvji.    7  they  warred  against  the  Midianites,  as  the 
31.  42  Moses  divided  from  the  men  that  warred 

Q.A  host,  assembly,  warfare,  service,  N3JE  tsaba. 
Num.  1.   3  all  that  are  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in  Isr. 
1.  20  all  that  were  able  to  go  forth  to  war 
So  in  verse  22,  24,  26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42,  45. 
26.    2  all  that  are  able  to  go  to  war  in  Israel 
31.    3  Arm  someof  yourselves  unto  the  war,  and 
31.    4  tribes  of  Israel,  shall  ye  send  to  the  war 
31.    s  of  (eveiy)  tribe,  twelve  thousand  armed 
31.   6  Moses  sent  them  to  the  war,  a  thousand 
31.    6  son  of  Eleazar  the  priest,  to  the  war,  with 
31.  21  said  unto  the  men  of  war  which  went  to 
31.  32  rest  of  the  prey  which  the  men  of  war  had 
31.  36  portion  of  them  which  went  out  to  war 
31.  53  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil,  every  man 
32. 27  pass  over,  every  man  armed  for  war,  bef. 
Deut  24.   s  he  shall  not  go  out  to  war,  neither  shall 
Josh.  4. 13  About  forty  thousand  prepared  for  war 
22. 12  together  at  Shiloh,  to  go  up  to  war  agai. 

1  Ch.  5.  18  four  and  forty  thousand  seven,  .to  the  w. 

7. 11  hundred  (soldiers),  fit  to  go  out  for  war 

7.  40  them  that  were  apt  to  the  war(and)  to  ba. 
12.  8  men  of  war  (fit)  for  the  battle,  that  could 
12.  23  bands  (that  were)  ready  armed  to  the  war 
12.  24  (were)  six  thousand,  .ready  armed  to.  .w. 
12.  25  mighty  men  of  valour  for  the  war,  seven 
12. 37  with  allmanner  of  instruments  of  war  for 

2Ch.i7.  18  fourscore  thousand  ready  prepared,  .war 

25.  5  to  go  forth  to  war,  that  could  handle  spe. 

26.  11  that  went  out  to  war  by  bands,  according 

28.  12  stood  up  against  them  that  came  from..w. 
Job    10.  17  upon  me ;  changes  and  war  (are)  against 

7 .Before,  over  against,  battering  ram,  73'p  gobel. 
Eze.  26.    9  he  shall  set  engines  of  war  against  thy 

S.A  drawing  near,  conflict,  war,  3"ip  qerafi. 

Psa.  55.  21  war  (was)  in  his  heart :  his  words  were  s. 

68.  30  scatter  thou  the  people  (that)  delight  in 

144.    1  which  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  (and) 

Eccl.  9.  18  Wisdom  (is)  better  than  weapons  of  war 

Dan.   7.  21  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints,  and 

9.  To  war  against,  avrKTrparevoixat  antistrateuom. 

Rom.  7.  23  another  law  in  my  members,  warring  ag. 

10.  War,  battle,  strife,  contention,  7r6\e/j.os p>olemos. 
Matt  24.  6  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wais 
Marki3-  7  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars 
Lukei4-  31  what  king,  going  to  make  war  against  an. 

21.  9  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  commoti. 
Jas.  4.  1  From  whence,  .wars and  fightings  among 
licv.  11.    7  beast,  .shall  make  war  against  them,  and 

12.  7  there  was  war  in  heaven  :  Michael  and 

12. 17  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her 

13.  7  [it  was  given  unto  him  to  make  war  with] 
19.  ig  gathered  together  to  make  war  against 

11.7*0  wage  war,  fight,  iroX^fxico  polemeo. 

Jas.    4.   2  ye  fight  and  war,  yet  ye  have  not,  because 
Rev.  13.   4  the  beast?  who  is  able  to  make  war  with 

17. 14  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and 
19. 11  in  righteousn.  he  doth  judge  and  make  w. 

12.  Warlike  force,  army,  arpdrevfj.a  strateuma. 
Luke23. 11  Herod  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at  no. 

13.  To  war,  wage  war,  aTparevojj.a.1  strateuomai. 

2  Co.  10.    3  though  we  walk  in  the  flesh,  we  do  not  w. 

1  Ti.    1.  18  that  thou  by  them  mightest  war  a  good 

2  Ti.    2.    4  No  man  that  warreth  entangleth  himself 
Jas.     4.    1  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  members 

i  Pe.  2.  n  abstainfromfieshly lusts,  which waragai. 


WARD  — 

l.A  ward,  guard,  charge,  "iDJpD  misKmar. 

Gen.  40.  3  he  put  them  in  ward  in  the  house  of  the 
40.    4  and  they  continued  a  season  in  ward 

40.  7  with  him  in  the  ward  of  his  Lord's  house 

41.  10  put  me  in  ward  in  the  captaiu  of  the  gua. 

42.  17  he  put  them  altogether  into  ward  three 
Lev.  24.  12  they  put  him  in  ward,  that  the  mind  of 
Num.15.  34  they  put  him  in  ward,  because  it  was  not 
1  Ch.  26.  16  causeway  of  the  going  up,  ward  againstw. 
Neh.  12.  24  to  give  thanks,  .ward  over  against  ward 

12.  25  keeping  the  ward  at  the  thresholds  of  the 
2.  A  ward,  charge,  guard,  nnip^p  mishmereth. 

1  Ch.  9.  23  the  house  of  the  tabernacle,  by  wards 

12.  29  greatest  part  of  them  had  kept  the  ward 

25.  8  they  cast  lots,  ward  against  (ward),  as  w. 

26.  12  wards  one  against  another,  to  minister  in 
Neh.  12.  45  kept  the  ward  of  their  God,  and  the  ward 

13.  30  appointed  the  wards  of  the  priests  and  the 
Isa.   21.    8  day  time,  and  I  am  set  in  my  ward  whole 

3. House  of  ward,  TTiCipD  n"5  beth  mishmereth. 

2  Sa.  20.    3  put  them  in  ward,  and  fed  them,  but  went 
4.  A  i^rison,  "ijid  sugar. 

Eze.  19.    9  theyput  him  hi  wardin  chains,  and  brou. 
^.Inspection,  supervision,  rnps  peqiduth. 

Jer.   37.  13  captain  of  the  ward  (was)  there,  whose 
Q.A  guarding,  guard,  ward,  <pv\aK7]  phulalce. 

Acts  12.  10  they  were  past  the  firstandthe  second  w. 

WARDROBE  — 

Cloaks,  garments,  coverings,  enja  begadim. 

2  Ki.22.  14  son  of  Harhas,  keeper  of  the  wardrobe,  n. 

2  Ch.34.  22  son  of  Hasrah,  keeper  of  the  wardrobe,  n. 
WARE,  to  be— 
To  be  conscious  of,  know  together,  a-vyotda.  sunoida. 

Acts  14.   6  They  were  ware  of  (it),  aud  fled  unto  Ly. 
WARE,  wares — 

1.  Vessel,  utensil,  instrument,  y?s  keli. 

Jon.    1.   5  cast  forth  the  wares  that  (were)  in  the  sh. 

2.  Thing  for  sale,  price,  irp  meker. 

Neh.  13. 16  which  brought  fish,  and  all  manner  of  w. 
B.Sale,  thing  for  s«Ze,"i|P?  minikar. 

Neh.  13.  20  sellers  of  all  kind  of  ware,  lodged  without 
4.  Wares,  what  are  brought,  rnnjsc  maqqachoth. 

Neh.  10. 31  peopleof  the  land  bringware  or  any  vie. 
5. Merchandise,  ^3  kinah. 

Jer.  10. 17  Gather  up  thy  wares  out  of  the  land,  O 
(^.Traffic,  exchange,  remnant,  jUiy  izzabon. 

Eze.  27.  33  When  thy  wares  went  forth  out  of  the  se. 
7.  Work,  r\&)}  d  maaseh. 

Eze.  27.  16  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  the  wares 
WARFARE,  (to  go  a)  — 
l.A  host,  X2X  tsaba. 

1  Sa.  28.    1  gathered  their  armies  together  forwarfa. 

2.  Warfare,  military  service,  (rrpareia  strateia. 

2  Co. 10.    4  For  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  (are)not 
1  Ti.    1.  1 8  that  thou  by  them  mightest  war  agood  w. 

3.  To  wage  war,  0-Tparevofj.ai  strateuomai. 

1  Co.  9.    7  Who  goeth  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own 
WARM  (at,  self,  to)  — 

l.Hot,  warm,  nn  cham. 

Job  37.  17  How  thy  garments  (are)  warm,  when  he 

2.  To  be  or  become  bold  or  warm,  DEn  chamam. 

Isa.  44.  15  for  he  will  take  thereof,  and  warm  him. 
44.  16  yea,  he  warmeth  (himself),  and  saith,  Alia 
47.  14  (there  shall)  not  (be)  a  coal  to  warm  at 

3.  To  warm,  c^n  chamam,  3. 

Job  39.  14  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the  earth,  and  warm. 

4.  To  heat,  vxirm,  Qepfxaivoi  thermaino. 

Marki4.  54  sat  with  the  servants,  and  warmed  him. 

14.  67  when  she  saw  Peter  warming  himself,  she 
JohniS.  iS  warmed  themselves:  and  Peter,  .warm.  h. 

18.  25  And  Simon  Peter  stood  and  warmed  hini. 

WARM,  to  be,  wax,  be  warmed  — 
l.IIeat,  warmth,  Di  chom. 

Hag.   1.    6  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  nonewarm,and 

2.  To  heat,  warm,  DDn  chamam. 

2  Ki.  4.  34  child,  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  waxed  w; 
Isa.   44.  16  and  saith,  Aha,  I  am  warm,  I  have  seen 

3.  To  heat  or  warm  self  opn  chamam,  7. 

Job   31.  20  (if)  he  were  (not)  warmed  with  the  fleece 
i.To  be  hot,  warm,  dit  yacham. 

Eccl.  4. 1 1  they  have  heat ;  but  how  can  one  be  warm  ? 

5.  To  be  heated,  warmed,  6€p/.iaiyofj.ai  thermainomai. 

Jas.     2.  16  Depart  in  peace,  be  (ye)  warmed  and  fill. 

WARN,  be  warned,  give  warning,  to  — 

l.To  bewarned,takeorreceivett'arning,~>i\lzahari  2. 

Psa.  19.  11  Moreover  by  them  is  thy  servant  warned 

Eze.     3.  21  he  shall  surely  live,  because  he  is  warned 

33.   4  heareth  the  sound . .  and  taketh  not  warn. 

33.    5  heard  the  sound . .  aud  took  not  warning 

33.    5  he  that  taketh  warning  shall  deliver  his 

33.   6  blow  not.  .and  the  people  be  not  warned 

2.7*0  warn,  (cause  to)  shine,  "im  zahar,  5. 

2  Ki.  6. 10  which  the  man  of  God  told  him  and  war. 


WARNED 


1034 


WASTE 


2  Ch.19.  10  ye  shall  even  warn  them  that  they  tresp. 

Eze.     3.  17  hear  the  word,  .and  give  them  warning 

3.  i3  givest  him  not  warning,  .speakestto  warn 

3.  19  Vet  if  thou  warn  the  wicked,  and  he  turn 

3.  20  because  thou  hast  not  given  him  warning 

3.  21  if  thou  warn  the  righteous  (man),  that  the 

33.    3  he  blow  the  trumpet,  and  warn  the  people 

33.    7  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and  warnth. 

33.    8  if  thou  dost  not  speak  to  warn  the  wicked 

33.    9  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  of  hiswaytoturn 

3.  To  cause  to  testify,  protest,  iiy  ud,  5. 

Jer.     6.  10  To  whom  shall  I  speak,  and  give  warning 

4.  To  put  in  before  the  mind,  warn,  i/ovdereo)  nou. 
Acts  20.  31  I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and 
1  Co.  4.  14  shame  you,  but,  as  my  beloved  sons,  I  wa. 
Col.     1.  28  warning  every  man,  and  teaching  every 

i  Th.   s-  14  warn  them  that  are  unruly,  comfort  the 

5.  To  skoiv  secretly,  partly,  viro^elKvvfj.t  hupodeikn. 

Matt.  3.   7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wr. 
Luke  3.    7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wr. 
WARNED  of  God,  to  be  — 
To  warn  by  an  oracle,  xp^MBT'fc  chrematizo. 

Matt.  2.  12  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream  that  they 
2.  22  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream,  he  turned 
Acts  10.  22  Cornelius,  .was  warned  from  God  by  an 
Heb.  11.    7  By  faith  Noah,  being  warned  of  God  of  th. 
WARP  — 
Web,  woven  stuff",  warp,  "TV?  shethi. 

Lev.  13. 48  Whether  (it  be)  in  the  warp,  or  woof,  of  li. 
13.  49,  51,  53,  57  either  in  the  warp,  or  in  the  w. 
13.  52  whether  warp  or  woof,  in  woollen  or  in  li. 
13.  56  out  of  the  skin,  or  out  of  the  warp,  or  out 
13. 58  either  warp  or  woof,  or  whatsoever  thing 
13.  59  either  in  the  warp,  or  woof,  or  any  thing 
WARRIOR,  (to  be  a)  — 
I.To  do  war  or  battle,  "Drpp  n'jfjj  asah  milchamah. 

1  Ki.  12.  21  chosen  men,  which  were  warriors,  to  fight 

2  Ch.  11.    1  chosen  (men),  which  were  warriors,  to  fi. 

2. To  equip,  shoe  or  prepare  self,  }Np  saan. 

Isa.     9.    5  For  every  battle  of  the  warrior  (is)  with 
WASH  (away,  self,  throughly,  be  washed),  to  — 

1.  To  cast  out,  purge,  force  away,  nil  duach,  5. 

>2  Ch.  4.  6  such  things  as  they  offered .  .they  washed 
Eze.  40.  38  gates,  where  they  washed  the  burnt  offer. 

2.  To  wash,  D?3  kabas,  3. 

Gen.  49.  11  washed  his  garments  in  wine,  and  his  cl. 
Esod  19.  10  said  unto  Moses,  .let  them  wash  their  cl. 

19.  14  sanctified  the  people;  and  they  washed  th. 
Lev.    6. 27  thou  shalt  wash  that  whereon  it  was  spri. 

1 1.  25,  28,  40, 40  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  unclean 

13.  6,  34  and  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  cl. 

13. 54  Then  the  priest  shall  command  that  they 

13.  58  the  garment,  .which  thou  sbalt  wash,  if 

14.  8  he  that  is  to  be  cleansed  shall  wash  his  cl. 
14.  9  and  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  also  he  sh. 
14.  47  shall  wash  his  clothes,  .shall  wash  his  cl. 
'5-  5>  6»  7,  8, 10,  11,  13,  21,  22,  27  wash  his  clothes 

16.  26,  28  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  his  flesh  in 

17.  15  both  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  (himself) 
17.  16  But  if  he  wash  (them)  not,  nor  bathe  his 

Nam.  8.    7  wash  their  clothes,  and  (so)  make  themse. 
8.  21  were  purified,  and  they  washed  their  clo. 
19.    7  Then  the  priest  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and 
19.   8  wash  his  clothes  in  water,  and  bathe  his  fl. 
19.  10  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  unclean  until  the 
19. 19  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  himself  in  wa. 
19.  21  he  that  sprinkleth.  .shall  wash  Ms  clothes 
31.  24  ye  shall  wash  your  clothes  on  the  seventh 
Sa.  19.  24  nor  trimmed  his  beard,  nor  washed  his  cl. 
sa.  51.    2  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity 
51.    7  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  .wash  me,  and  I 
Jer.    2.  22  For  though  thou  wash  thee  withnitre, and 
4. 14  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness,  that 

3.  To  be  washed,  D35  kab"s.  4. 

Lev.  13.  58  then  it  shall  be  washed  the  second  time 
15. 17  shall  be  washed  with  water,  and  be  unci. 

4.  To  wash  self,  D33  kabas,  7. 

Lev.  13.  55  look  on  the  plague,  after  that  it  is  washed 

5.  To  washy  bathe,  |'rn  rachats. 

Gen.  18.    4  wash  your  feet,  and  rest  yourselves  under 
19.    2  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet,  and 
24.  32  water  to  wash  his  feet,  and  the  men's  feet 
43.  24  gave  (them)  water,  and  they  washed  their 
43.  31  washed  his  face,  and  went  out,  and  refr. 

Exod.  2.    5  daughter  of  Pharaoh  came  down  to  wash 

29.  4  congregation,  .shalt  wash  them  with  wa. 
29. 17  wash  the  inwards  of  him,  and  his  legs,  and 

30.  18  and  his  foot  (also  of)  brass,  to  wash  (wi.) 
30. 19  shall  wash  their  hands  and  their  feet  th. 
30.  20  they  shall  wash  with  water,  that  they  die 
30.  21  So  they  shall  wash  their  hands  and  their 
40.  12  bring  Aaron  and  his  sons,  .and  wash  them 
40.  30  and  the  altar,  and  put  water  there,  to  wa. 
40.  31  Moses  and  Aaron  and  his  sons  washed  th. 
40.  32  they  washed ;  as  the  Lord  commanded  M. 

Lev.  1.  9  inwards  and  Ids  legs  shall  he  wash  in  wa. 
1. 13  Buthe  shall  wash  theinwards  and  the  legs 
8.    6  brought  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  washed 

8.  21  he  washed  the  inwards  and  the  legs  in  wa. 

9.  14  he  did  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs,  and 
14.  8  shave  off  all  bis  hair,  and  wash  himself  in 
14.  9  also  be  shall  wash  his  Been  in  water,  and 
15  16  then  he  shall  wash  all  bis  llesh  in  water 
16.  4  therefore  shall  he  wash  his  flesh  in  water 
16.  24  he  shall  wash  his  Mesh  with  water  in  the 
22.   6  not  eat.,  unless  lie  wash  his  flesh  with  wa. 


Deut2i.    6  shall  wash  their  hands  over  the  heifer  th. 
23.  1 1  he  shall  wash  (himself)  with  water,  and 
Judgip.  21  they  washed  their  feet,  and  did  eat  and 
Ruth  3.    3  Wash  thyself  therefore,  aud  anoint  thee 

1  Sa.  25.  41  servant  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  servants 

2  Sa.  11.    2  from  the  roof  he  saw  a  woman  washing 

11.  8  Go  down  to  thy  house,  and  wash  thy  feet 

12.  20  David  arose  from  the  earth,  and  washed 

1  Ki.  22.  38  they  washed  his  armour ;  according  unto 

2  Ki.   5. 10  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times,  and 

5.  12  may  I  not  wash  in  them,  and  be  clean? 
5. 13  whenhesaith  to  thee,  Wash,  and  be  clean 
2  Ch.  4.    6  lavers.  .to  wash  in.  .the  sea.  .to  wash  in 
Job   29.    6  When  I  washed  my  steps  with  butter,  and 
Psa.  26.    6  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency:  so 
58.  10  shall  wash  his  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  wi. 
73.  13  cleansed  my  heart  (in)  vain,  and  washed 
Song   5.    3  I  have  washed  my  feet;  how  shall  I  defile 
5.  12  rivers  of  waters,  washed  with  milk,  (and) 
Isa.     1.  16  Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;  putawaythe 
4.    4  When  the  Lord  shall  have  washed  away 
Eze.  16.    9  Then  washed  I  thee  with  water ;  yea,  I 
23.  40  for  whom  thou  didst  wash  thyself,  paint. 

6.  To  be  washed,  bathed,  }*rn  rachats,  4. 

Prov3o.  12  a  generation,  .not  washed  from  their  filt. 
Eze.  16.   4  neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water  to  su. 

7.  To  wash  or  bathe  self,  yrp,  rachats,  7. 

Job     9.  30  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and 

8.  To  overffoio,  rinse,  \oash  axcay,  *]c^  shaiaph. 

1  Ki.22.  38  washed  the  chariot  in  the  pool  of  Samaria 
Job  14.  19  thouwashest  away  the  things  which  grow 
Eze.  16.    9  I  throughly  washed  away  thy  blood  from 

9.  To  wash  offer  away,  airoXovu  apolouo. 

Acts  22.  16  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name 

1  Co.  6.  11  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified 

10.  To  wash  off  or  fully,  Q.Tvov'nrTOfj.aiaponiptomai. 
Matt.  27.  24  washed  (his)  hands  before  the  multitude 

11.  To  wash  or  rinse  off  or  away,  airoTr\vvu>  apqp. 
Luke  5.    2  were  gone  out  of  them,  and  [were  wash.] 

12. To  baptize,  pour  out  (water),  fSaTrrifa  bo.ptizo. 
Mark  7.  4  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not.  And  ma 
Luken.  38  marvelled  that  he  had  not  first  washed 

13.  To  wet,  send  rain,  jSpe^w  brecho. 

Luke  7.  3S  began  to  wash  his  feet  with  tears,  and  did 
7.  44  but  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with  tears 

li.To  wash,  cleanse,  loosen,  bathe,  Xovw  loud. 
John  13.  10  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to 
Acts    9.  37  whom  when  they  had  washed,  they  laid 

16.  33  took  them,  .and  washed  (their)  stripes 
Heb.  10.  22  having,  .our  bodies  washed  with  purewa. 

2  Pe.  2.  22  sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in 
Rev.    1.    5  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 

15. To  wash  or  wet  (the  hands  or  feet),  vItttu  m'pto. 
Matt.  6.  17  But  thou,  when  thou  fastest,  .wash  thy 

15.    2  they  wash  not  their  hands  when  theyeat 

Mark  7.    3  all  the  Jews,  except  they  wash  (their)  h. 

John  9.   7  Go,  [wash].  .He  went,  .and  washed,  and 

9.  n  wash:  and  I  went  and  washed,  and  I  rec. 

9. 15  He  put  clay  uponmine  eyes, andl  washed 

13.  5  began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to 
13.  6  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  dost  thou  wash  my 
13.  8  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet.  .If  I  wash 
13.  10  He.  .needeth  not  save  to  wash  (his)  feet 
13.  12  So  after  he  had  washed  their  feet,  and  had 
13. 14  washed  your  feet,  ye  also  ought  to  wash 

1  Ti.    5.  10  if  she  have  washed  the  saints'  feet,  if  she 

16.  To  wash  clean,  ttKvvw  pluno. 

Rev.    7.  14  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them 
WASHING,  washpot  — 

1.  To  wash  self,  oas  kabas,  7. 

Lev.  13.  56  plague*  (be)  somewhat  dark  after  the  wa. 

2.  The  waters,  D^on  hammayim, 

Neh.   4.  23  every  one  put  them  off  for  washing 
3. Pot  for  washing  or  bathing,  frn  *rp  sir  rachats. 
Psa.  60.    8  Moab  (is)  my  washpot;  over  Edom  will  I 
108.   9  Moab  (is)  my  washpot;  over  Edom  will  I 

4.  Washing,  bathing,  ny~n  rachtsah. 

Song  6.   6  flock  of  sheep  which  go  up  from  the  wash. 
4.    2  a  flock . .  which  came  up  from  the  washing 

5.  Washing,  pouring  on  (of  water),  (ZairrifTfios. 
Mark  7.   4  washing  of  cups,  and  pots,  brasen  vessels 

7.    8  [washing  of  pots  and  cups:  and  many  ot.] 
Heb.  9.  10  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  wa. 

G..-I  lover,  hath,  washing  vessel,  Xovrp6t>  loutron. 
Eph.  5.  26  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by 
Titus  3.    5  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  ren. 

WASTE  (place\  wasteness,  waster,  wasting,  wasted  — 
l.To  be  wasted,  p*?3  balaq,  4. 

Nali.  2. 10  She  is  empty,  and  void,  and  waste;  and 
2.  Waste,  desolation,  nn^  bathah. 

Isa.     5.    6  I  will  lay  it  waste:  it  shall  not  be  pruned 
Z.Dry,  waste,  3"irj  chareb. 

Nt.li.  2.   3  place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres,  (lieth)  w. 
2. 17  how  Jerusalem  (lieth)  waste,  and  the  ga. 
Eze.   36.  35  and  the  waste  and  desolate  and  ruined 

36.  38  so  shall  the  waste  citiesbe  filled  with  Ho. 
Hag.    1. "  4  in  your  ceiled  houses,  andthis  house  (lie) 
1.   9  Because  of  mine  house  that  (is)  waste,  and 
4. Drought.  u-ast>;  2"in  choreb. 

Isa.  61.    4  they  shall  repair  the  waste  cities,  the  de. 


5.  A  waste,  place  0/ drought,  n^pn  chorbah. 

Lev.  26.  31  I  will  make  your  cities  waste,  and  bring 

26.  33  land  shall  be  desolate,  and  your  cities  wa. 

Isa.     5. 17  the  waste  places  of  the  fat  ones  shall  str. 

49.  19  For  thy  waste  and  thy  desolate  places,  and 

51.  3  he  will  comfort  all  her  waste  places ;  and 

52.  9  sing  together,  ye  waste  places  of  Jerusal. 
58.  12  shall  build  the  old  waste  places :  thou  sh. 
61.   4  they  shall  build  the  old  wastes,  they  shall 

Jer.  44.  6  they  are  wasted  (and)  desolate,  as  at  this 
49. 13  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  perpetual  was. 

Eze.  5.  14  Moreover  I  will  make  thee  waste,  and  a 
29.  9  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  desolate  and  wa. 
29.  10  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  utterly  waste 
33.  24  they  that  inhabit  those  wastes  of  the  land 

33.  27  surely  they  that  (are)  in  the  wastes  shall 

35.  4  I  will  lay  thy  cities  waste,  and  thou  shalt 

36.  4  to  the  desolate  wastes,  and  to  the  cities 
36.  10  cities  shall  be  inhabited,  and  the  wastes 
36.  33  dwell  in  the  cities,  and  the  wastes  shall 
38.    8  mountains,  .which  have  been  always  wa. 

6. A  waste,  desolation,  nxitrp  meshoah. 

Job  30.    3  wilderness  informer  time  desolate  and  w. 
38.  27  To  satisfy  the  desolate  and  waste  (ground) 
7.  .1  waste,  desolatio?i,  HNity  shoah. 

Zeph.  1.  15  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation,  a  day 
S.  Destruction,  spoiling,  it'  shod. 

Isa.  59.  7  wasting  and  destruction  (are)  in  their  pa. 
60.  18  wasting  nor  destruction  within  thy  bord. 

9.  To  corrupt,  destroy,  nnijj  shachath,  5. 

Prov  iS.    q  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster 
Isa.   54. 16  and  I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy 

10. Desolation,  astonishment,  frey  shammah. 

Jer.     2.  15  they  made  his  land  waste:  his  cities  are 
46.  19  Noph  shall  be  waste  and  desolate  without 
Joel    1.    7  He  hath  laid  my  vine  waste,  and  barked 

11.  To  be  or  become  astonislied,  W2&  shamem,  2. 
Amos  9. 14  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and  in. 

12.  Astonishment,  desolation,  ncci?  shemamah. 
Mai.    1.    3  laid  his  mountains  and  his  heritage  waste 

\o.Ruin,  vacancy,  vanity,  inn  tohu. 

Deut32.  10  He  found  him.  .in  the  waste  howling  wil. 

14.  Destruction,  lose,  loosing  away,  a.irw\eia  apoleia. 
Matt26.  8  saying,  To  what  purpose  (is)  this  waste? 
Marki4.    4  Why  was  this  waste  of  the  ointment  ma.? 

WASTE  (away,  laid  be  laid,  lay   he,  make),  to  — 

1.  To  wear  out,  make  old,  npa  balah,  3. 

1  Ch.17.    9  neither,  .waste  them  any  more,  as  at  the 

2.  To  waste,  pSn  balaq. 

Isa.  24.    i  makeththecarth  empty,  .maketh  it  waste 

3.  To  burn,  consume,  TJE!  boar,  3. 

Num  24.  22  the  Kenite  shall  be  wasted,  until  Asshur 

4.  To  weaken,  become  weak,  vnn  chalash 

Job    14. 10  man  dieth,  and  wasteth  away :  yea,  man 

5.  To  be  or  dry  up,  waste,  2~>n  chareb. 

Isa.    19.    5  and  the  river  shall  be  wasted  and  dried  up 

34.  10  generation  to  generation  it  shall  lie  waste 
60.  12  yea,  (those)  nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted 

Jer.  50.  21  waste  and  utterly  destroy  after  them,  sa. 

Eze.    6.   6  shall  be  laid  waste . .  altars  may  be  laid  w. 

12.  20  the  cities,  .inhabited  shall  be  laid  waste 

Amos  7.   9  the  sanctuaries  of  Israel  shall  be  laid  wa. 

6. To  cause  to  dry  up,  lay  waste,  2"\n  chareb,  5. 
Isa.   37.  18  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  laid  waste  all 
42.  15  I  will  make  wastemountainsandhills.and 
49.  17  they  that  made  thee  waste  shall  go  forth 
Eze.  19.    7  he  laid  waste  their  cities  ;  and  the  land 
Zeph.  3.    6  I  made  their  streets  waste,  that  none  pa. 

7.  To  be  dried  up,  laid  waste,  n~\n  chareb,  6. 

Eze.  26.  2  I  shall  be  replenished,  .she  is  laid  waste 
29. 12  her  cities  among  the  cities,  .laid  waste  sh. 

8.  A  waste,  place  of  drought,  destruction,  n;nn  chorb. 

Isa.  64.  11  and  all  our  pleasant  things  are  laid  waste 
Jer.  27.  17  wherefore  should  this  city  be  laid  waste 

9.  To  be  completed,  consigned,  rr?3  kalah. 

1  Ki.  17.  14  Thebarrelof  meal  shall  not  waste,  neither 

17.  16  the  barrel  of  meal  wasted  not,  neither  did 
10. To  brouse,  crop  off,  cp")3  kirsem. 

Psa.  80.  13  The  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it,  and 

11.  To  feed,  eat  up,  consume,  Ttjf]  raah. 

Mic.    5.    6  they  shall  waste  the  land  of  Assyria  with 

12.  To  lay  tcaste,  desolate,  ns-f  shaah,  5. 

2  Ki.  19.  25  that  thou  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste  fenc. 
Isa.    37.  26  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste  defenced  cities 

13.  To  destroy,  spoil,  T$  shadad,  3. 

Prov.19.  26  He  that  wasteth  (his)  father,  (and)  chase. 
14., 4  spoiler,  causing  howling,  ^top  total. 

Psa. 137.    3  they  that  wasted  us  (required  of  us)mirth 

15.  To  destroy,  spoil,  "i*tr  shud. 

Psa.  91.    6  for  the  destruction  (that)  wasteth  at  noon 

16.  To  corrupt,  act  corruptly,  nop  shachath,  5. 

1  Ch.co.    1  and  wasted  the  country  of  the  children  of 
17.To  be  astonished,  desolate,  DE$  shamem,  2. 

Isa.   33.    8  The  highways  lie  waste,  the  wayfaring 
18. To  astonish,  desolate.  Dp^ shamem,  5. 

Num  21.  30  we  have  had  them  waste  even  unto  Noph. 

Psa.  79.    7  For  they  have  devoured  Jacob,  and  laid  w. 

Eze.  30.  12  I  will  make  the  land  waste,  and  all  that 


WASTED 


1035 


WATER 


19.  To  scatter  abroad,  disperse,  BtacrKopirL^cc  diaskor. 

Lukeis.  13  there  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  li. 

16.    1  accused  unto  him  that  he  had  wasted  his 

20.ro  lay  waste,  vopOdw  portheo. 

Gal.     1.  13  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God,  and  was. 

WASTED,  to  be  — 

l.To  he  dried  up,  waste,  110  chareb. 

Isa.    19.    5  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the  river  shall  be  w. 
60. 12  yea,  (those)  nations  shall  be  utterly  was. 

2.  To  be  waste,  desolate,  nx^:  shaah. 

■     Isa.     6.  11  Until  the  cities  be  wasted  without  inhab. 

B.To  be  destroyed,  spotted,  ~iyj  shadad,  4. 

Isa.    15.    1  Ar  of  Moab  is  laid  waste,  (and)  brought 
15.    1  hecause  in  the  night  Kir  of  Moab  is  laid  w. 
23.    1  for  it  is  laid  waste,  so  that  there  is  no  ho. 
23.  14  Howl,  ye  ships,  .your  strength  is  laid  wa. 
Joel    1.  10  The  field  is  wasted,  .the  com  is  wasted 
Nah.  3 .    7  Nineveh  is  laid  waste :  who  will  bemoan 
4.  To  be  perfected,  consumed,  0CJ?  tamam. 

Num.14.  33  until  your  carcases  be  wasted  in  the  wild. 
Deut.  2.  14  were  wasted  out  from  among  the  host,  as 

"WATCH,  watchtower,  watching  — 

I.  Watch,  guard,  rrjWK,  nn^s*  ashmurah. 
Exod  14.  24  in  the  morning  watch  the  Lord  looked 
Judg.  7.  19  came. .in  the  beginning  of  themiddlewat. 

1  Sa.  11.  11  into  the  midst  ofthe  host  in  the  niomingw. 
Psa.  63.   6  "When  I . .  meditate  on  thee  in  the  (night)w. 

go.   4  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past,  and  (as)awa. 
ng.  148  Mine  eyes  prevent  the  (night)  watches 
Lam.  2.  19  in  the  beginning  of  the  watches  pour  out 
2.-4  watch  tower,  resp  mitspeh. 

Isa.  .21.    S  I  stand  continually  upon  the  watchtower 

2  Ch.20.  24  when  Judahcanietoward  the  watch  tower 
3. ..4  watch,  guard,  charge,  ivard,  iD^p  mishmar. 

Neh.    4.    9  set  a  watch  against  them  day  and  night 

7.    3  every  one  inhis  watch,  and  every  one  (to 

Job     7.  12  or  a  whale,  that  thou  settest  a  watch  over 

Jer.  51.  12  Set  up.,  make  the  watch  strong,  setup  the 

4. A  watch,  guard,  charge,  ward,  rpci^p  mishmer. 

2  Ki.  11.   5  even  be  keepersof  the  watch  of  the  king's 

11.    6  so  shall  ye  keep  the  watch  of  the  house 

11.  7  they  shall  keep  the  watch  of  the  house  of 
Ch.23.   6  but  all  the  people  shall  keep  the  watch  of 

Neh.   7.    3  appoint  watches  of  the  inhabitants  of  Je 

12.  9  brethren,  (were)over  against  them  in  the  w. 
Hab.  2.    1 1  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and^set  me 

5.A  looldng  out,  watching,  rra^  tscphiyyah. 

Lam.  4. 17  in  our  watching,  .for  anation  (that)could 
f>.A  watch  tower,  place  of  outlook,  n"1?^  tsaphith. 

Isa.   21.   5  in  the  watch  tower,  eat,  drink:  arise,  ye  pr. 
7. A  watch,  guard,  rnpiy  sho-mrah. 

Psa.  141.   3  Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  mouth 
8.  To  watch,  be  awake,  "W  shaqad. 

Prov.  8.  34  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at  the 

9.A  guard  of  soldiers  {Lat.  custodia),  KovtrrccBia. 
Matt.27.  65  Yehaveawatch:  go  your  way,  make(it)as 

27.  66  went,  .sealing the  stone,  and  setting  a  wa. 

28.  11  some  of  the  watch  came  into  the  city,  and 

10.^4  guarding,  time  of  watching,  (pvKanri  phulakis. 
Matt  14.  25  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  Jesus 

24. 43  had  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  would 
Mark  6.  48  about  the  fourth  watch  ofthe  night  he 
Luke  2.    8  shepherds . .  keeping  watch  over  their  floe. 

12.  38  in  thesecoud[watch,orcorue]in  theth.w. 

II.  Watchfulness,  wakefulness,  aypvirvia  agrupri  ia '. 
2  Co.  6.    5  in  tumults,  in  labours,  in  watchings,  infa. 

11.  27  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst 

WATCH  (for),  keepfhe;  be  watchful,  to  — 

1.  To  look  out,  watch,  nay  tsaphah. 

Gen.  31.  49  The  Lord  watch  between  me  and  thee,  wh. 
2  Sa.  13.  34  young  man  that  kept  the  watch  lifted  up 
Psa.  37.  32  The  wicked  watch eth  the  righteous,  and 
Isa.  21.    5  Prepare  the  table,  watch,  .arise,  ye  prin. 

2.  To  look  out,  watch,  n?y  tsaphah,  3. 

1  Sa.  4.  13  Eli  satupona  seat  by  the  wayside  watch. 
Lam.  4. 17  we  have  watched  for  a  nation  (that) could 
Nah.  2.  1  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  way,  make 
Hab.  2.    1  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  unto 

3.  To  awake,  rise,  pp  guts,  5. 

Eze.    7.    6  the  end  is  come :  it  watcheth  for  thee 

4.  To  observe,  watch,  take  heed,  "iQy  shamar. 
Judg.  7. 19  and  they  had  but  newly  set  the  watch 

1  Sa.  19. 11  to  watch  him,  and  to  slay  him  in  the  mo. 
Job  14.  16  numberest  my  steps  :  dost  thou  not  wat. 
Psa.  59.  title.  Saul  sent,  and  they  watched  the  house 
130.  6,  6  than  they  that  watch  for  the  morning 
Jer.  20.  10  All  my  familiars  watched  for  my  halting 

5. To  watch,  awake,  ip^  shaqad. 

Ezra    8.  29  Watch  ye,  and  keep  (them),  until  ye  wei. 
Psa.  102.    7  I  watch,  and  am  as  a  sparrow  alone  upon 
Prov.  8.  34  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at 
Isa.  29.  20  and  all  that  watch  foriniquity  are  cut  off 
Jer.    5.    6  a  leopard  shall  watch  over  their  cities,  ev. 
31. 28  like  as  1  have  watched,  .so  will  I  watch 
44.  27  I  will  watch  over  them  for  evil,  and  not 
Dan.  9. 14  Therefore  hath  the  Lord  watched  upon 

6.  To  watch,  keep  guard,  be  wakeful,  aypwrrvew. 
3Iarki3.  33  Take  ye  heed,. watch  and  pray:  for  ye  kn. 


Luke2i.  36  Watch  ye  therefore,  and  pray  always,  th. 
Eph.  6.  18  watching  thereunto  with  all  perseverance 
Heb.  13. 17  for  they  watch  for  your  souls,  as  they  th. 

7. To  watch,  be  awake,  vigilant,  ypnyopeo*  greg&reO. 
Matt 24.  42  Watch  therefore;  for  ye  know  not  what 

24.  43  he  would  have  watched,  and  would  not 

25.  13  Watch  therefore;  for  ye  know  neither  the 

26.  38  Then  said  he.  .tarry  ye  here,  and  watch 
26.  40  What!  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one 

26.  41  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into 
Marki3.  34  left . .  and  commanded  the  porter  to  watch 

13.  35  Watch  ye  therefore;  for  ye  know  not  wh. 

13.  37  what  I  say  unto  you  I  sayunto  all, Watch 

14.  34  saith  unto  them .  .tarry  ye  here,  and  wat. 
14.  37  sleepest  thou  ?  couldest  thou  not  watch 
14.  38  Watch  ye  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  te. 

Lukeis.  37  the  lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  watc. 
12.  39  he  would  have  watched,  and  not  have  su. 
Acts  20.  31  Therefore  watch,  and  remember,  that  by 
1  Co.  16.  13  Watch  ye,  stand  fastin  the  faith,  quit  you 
Col.    4.    2  Continue  in  prayer,  and  watch  in  the  sa. 

1  Th.  5.  6  let  us  not  sleep .  .but  let  us  watch  and  he 
Rev.    3.    2  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  tilings 

3.  3  If  therefore  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will 
16.  15  Blessed  (is)  he  that  watcheth,  and  keep. 

8.  To  be  sober,  watchful,  v4\<pw  nepho. 

2  Ti.    4.    5  But  watch  thou  in  all  things,  endure  affl. 

1  Pe.  4.    7  be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  pr. 

9.7'owatch  alongside  of,  or  narrowly,  irapcLrnpza*. 

Mark  3.    2  they  watched  him,  whether  he  would  heal 

Luke  6.    7  Pharisees  watched  him,  whether  he  wou. 

14.    1  as  he  went  into  the  house.. they  watched 

20. 20  they  watched  (him),  and  sent  forth  spies 

Acts    9.  24  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to  kill 

10.  To  keep  watch,  preserve,  guard,  T7?pe'a>  tereo. 
Matt  27.  36  And  sitting  down  they  watched  him  there 

27.  54  they  that  were  with  him  watching  Jesus 

WATCHER,  watchman  — 

l.To  keep,  watch,  reserve,  besiege,  "»¥J  natsar. 

2  EL  17.    9  from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  th 

18.    8  from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the 

Jer.     4.  16  watchers  come  from  a  far  country,  and 

31.   6  watclmien  upon  the  mount  Ephraim  sh 

2.  To  stir  up,  ry  ir. 

Dan.    4.  13  watcher  and  an  holy  one  came  down  from 

4.  17  This  matter  (is)  by  the  decree  of  the  wat. 

4.  23  whereas  the  king  saw  a  watcher  and  an 

Z.To  look  out,  watch,  n§y  tsaphah. 

1  Sa.  14. 16  watchmen  of  Saul  in  Gibeah  of  Benjamin 

2  Sa.  18.  24  watchman  went  up  to  the  roof  over  the 

iS.  25  watchman  cried,  and  told  the  king.  And 

18.  26  watchman  saw  another,  .and  the  watch. 

iS.  27  watchman  said,  Me  thinketk  the  running 
Ei.  9.  17  there  stood  a  watchman  on  the  tower  in 
9. 18  watchman  told,  saying,  The  messenger 
9.  20  watchmantold.saying.Hecameevenunto 
Isa.   52.    8  watchmen  shall  lift  up  the  voice;  with 

56. 10  His  watchmen  (are)  blind :  they  are  all 
Jer.     6.  17  AlsoIsetwatchmenoveryou,(saying),He. 
Eze.     3.  17  have  made  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  ho. 

33.    2  take  a  man . .  and  set  him  for  their  watch. 

33.    6  if  the  watchman  see  the  sword  come,  and 

33.    6  his  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchma. 

33.    7  have  set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house 
Hos.   9.    8  watchman  of  Ephraim  (was)  with  my  God 

4.  To  look  out,  watch,  hex  tsaphah,  3. 

Isa.  21.  6  Go,  set  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what 
Mic.    7.   4  day  of  thy  watchmen  (and)  thy  visitation 

5.  To  observe,  watch,  take  heed,  TDip  shamar. 

Psa.127.  1  except  the  LORD  keep  the  city,  the  watc. 
Song  3.    3  The  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city  fo. 

5.  7  The  watchmen  that  went  about  the  city 
Isa.   21.  11  Watchman, whatofthenight? Watchman 

12  watchman  said,  The  morning  cometh,  and 
6  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  O  J. 
12  set  up  the  watchmen,  prepare  the  ambu. 


62. 
Jer.  51 

"WATER  - 

1.  Waters, 

Gen.   1. 


water,  n?p  mayim. 

2  spirit  of  God  moved  on  the  face  of  thew. 
j.  6  midst  of  the  waters,  .let  it  divide  the  w. 
1.  7  divided  the  waters,  .from  the  waters  wh. 
1.  9  Let  the  waters  under  the  heaven  be  gath. 
1.  10  gathering  together  of  the  waters  called 
1.  20  Let  the  waters  bringforth  abundantly  the 
1.  21  which  the  waters  brought  forth  ahundan. 
1.  22  fill  the  waters  in  the  seas,  and  let  fowl  mu. 

6. 17  I,  do  hringa  flood  of  waters  upon  the  ea. 
7.  6  hundred  years  old  when  the  flood  of  wat. 
7.  7  into  the  ark,  because  of  the  waters  of  the 
7.  10  that  the  waters  of  the  flood  were  upon  the 
7.  17  waters  increased,  and  bare  up  the  ark,  and 

7. 18  waters  prevailed,  and  were  increased  gr. 
7.  18  and  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the  wa. 
7.  19  waters  prevailed  exceedingly  upon  theea. 
7.  20  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  pr. 

7.  24  waters  prevailed  upon  theearthanhund. 

8.  1  to  pass  over  the  earth,  and  the  waters  as. 
8.  3  the  waters  returned . .  the  waters  were  ah. 
8.  5  waters  decreased  continually  until  the  te. 
8.  7,  13  the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the 
8.  8  to  see  if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off 
8.  9  for  the  waters  (were)  on  the  face  of  the 
8.  11  so  Noah  knew  that  the  waters  were  abated 
8.  11  flesh  be  cut  off  any  more  by  the  waters  of 


Gen.  9. 

16. 
18. 


24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
24. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
37- 
<3- 
^       ,49- 

Exod.  2. 
4- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 


16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
22. 

Num.  5, 

5- 
5- 
5- 
5- 
5' 
5- 
5- 
8. 

19. 

ig. 

19. 

ig. 

19. 

19. 

ig. 

19. 

ig. 


15  waters  shall  no  more  hecome  a  flood  tode. 

7  found  her  by  a  fountain  of  water  in  the  wi. 
4  Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched 

14  took  bread  and  a  bottleof  water,  and  gave 

15  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and  she  ca. 
19  a  well  of  water . .  filled  the  bottle  with  wa. 

25  repro.  Abimelech  because  of  awellof  wa 

11  kneel  down.. by  a  well  of  water  atthe  time 
13  Behold,  I  stand  (here)  by  the  well  of  wa. 
13  the  daughters. .come  out  to  draw  water 
17  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  drink  a  little  water 
32  water  to  wash  his  feet,  and  the  men's  feet 
43  Behold,  I  stand  by  the  well  of  water;  and 
43  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  of  thy 
iS  Isaac  digged  again  the  wells  of  water  wh. 

19  and  found  there  a  well  of  springing  water 

20  The  water  (is)  ours  :  and  he  called  the  na. 
32  and  said  unto  him,  We  have  found  water 
24  the  pit  (was)  empty,  (there  was)  no  water 
24  gave  (them)  water,  and  they  washed  their 

4  Unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel 
10  said,  Because  I  drew  him  out  of  the  water 

9  take  of  the  water.,  and  the  water  which 
15  he  goethout  unto  the  water ;  and  thou  sh. 
17  smite.,  upon  the  waters  that  (are)  in  theri. 
18, 21  Egyptians,  to  drink  of  the  water  of  the 

19  the  waters  of  Egypt,  .all  their  pools  of  wa. 

20  smote the^vaters.  .and  all  the  waters  that 

24  water,  .they  could  not  drink  of  the  water 
6  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  waters  of 

20  lo,  he  cometh  forth  to  the  water;  and  say 

9  nor  sodden  at  all  with  water,  but  roast 

21  made  the  sea  dry  (land)  and  the  waters 
22,  29  the  waters  (were)  a  wall  unto  them  on 

26  that  the  waters  may  come  again  upon  the 
28  the  waters  returned,  and  covered  the  ch. 

8  with  the  blast  of  thy  nostrils  the  waters 

10  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters 

19  the  Lord  brought  again  the  waters  of  the 

22  they  went  three  days . .  and  found  no  wat. 

23  they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of  Ma. 

25  had  cast  into  the  waters,  the  waters  were 

27  twelve  wellsofwater.  .thereby  the  waters 

1  (there  was)  no  water  for  the  people  to  dr. 

2  and  said,  Give  us  water  that  we  may  drink 

3  the  people  thirsted  there  for  water,  and 

6  there  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  the 

4  or  that  (is)  in  the  water  under  the  earth 

25  he  shall  bless  thy  bread,  and  thy  water 

4  shalt  bring . .  and  shalt  wash  them  with  w. 
iS  a  laver.  .and  thou  shalt  put  water  therein 

20  they  shall  wash  with  water,  that  they  die 

20  strawed  (it)  upon  the  water,  and  made  the 

28  he^did  neither  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water 

7  set  the  laver . .  and  shalt  put  water  therein 

12  thoushaltbring. . and  wash  them  with  wa. 
30  he  set  the  laver.  .and  put  water  there,  to 

9  But  his  inwards,  .shall  he  wash  in  water 

13  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs  with  water 

8  shall  be  both  scoured,  and  rinsed  in  water 
6  Moses  brought,  .and  washed  them  with  w. 

21  washed  the  inwards  and  the  legs  in  water 
ginthewaters.  .fiusandscales  in  the  waters 

10  in  the  waters. .  which  (is)  in  the  waters 

12  Whatsoever  hath  no  fins,  .in  the  waters 
32  it  must  be  put  into  water,  and  it  shall  be 
34  (that)  on  which  (such)  water  cometh  shall 
36  or  pit,  (wherein  there  is)  plenty  of  water 
38  if  (any)  water  be  put  upon  the  seed,  and 
46  living  creature-that  nioveth  in  the  waters 

5,  50  an  earthen  vessel  over  running  water 
6  that  (was)  killed  over  the  running  water 

8  wash  himself  in  water,  that  he  may  be 

9  he  shall  wash  his  flesh  in  water,  and  he 

51  dip  them,  .in  the  running  water,and  spri. 

52  cleanse  the  house,  .with  the  running  wa. 
5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  ii,  21,  22,  27  bathe.. in  water 

11  hath  not  rinsed  his  hands  in  water,  he 

12  every  vessel,  .shall  be  rinsed  in  water 

13  bathe  his  flesh  in  running  water,  and  sh. 

16  he  shall  wash  all  his  flesh  in  water,  and 

17  every  skin,  .shall  be  washed  with  water 

18  they  shall  (both)  bathe  themselves  in  wa. 
4  therefore  shall  he  wash  his  flesh  in  water 

24  he  shall  wash  his  flesh  with  water  in  the 

26  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  and  afterward' 
28  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  and  afterward  he 
15  bathe  (himself)  in  water,  and  be  unclean 

6  unclean,  .unlesshe  wash  his  flesh  with  wa. 

17  take  holy  water,  .put  (it)  into  the  water 

18  have  in  his  hand  the  bitter  water  that  ca. 
iq  he  thou  free  from  this  bitter  water  that 

22  this  water  that  causeth  the  curse  shall  go 

23  shall  blot  (them)  out  with  the  bitter  wa. 

24  to  drink  the  bitter  water,  .the  water  that 

26  shall  cause  the  woman  to  drink  the  water 

27  to  diink  the  water,  .the  water  that  caus. 

7  Sprinkle  water  of  purifying  upon  them 

7  he  shall  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  and  aft. 

8  in  water,  and  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  and 

9  it  shall  be  kept . .  for  a  water  of  separation 

13  the  water  of  separation  was  not  sprinkled 

17  running  water  shall  be  put  thereto  in  a 

18  take  hyssop,  and  dip  (it)  in  the  water,  and 

19  bathe  himself  in  water,  and  shall  be  clean 

20  the  water  of  separation  hath  not  heen  sp. 

21  sprinkleth  the  water,  .the  water  of  sepa. 
2  there  was  no  water  for  the  congregation 

.  5  noplace  ofseed. .  neither(is)  there  any  wa. 
.  8  give  forth  his  water . .  water  out  of  the  ro. 
.  10  must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock? 
.  11  the  water  came  out  abundantly,  and  the 


6.28 


WATER 


1036 


WATER 


>Tum  20. 


24. 
24. 
27. 
3i- 
33- 

Deut,  2. 


=3- 

=3- 

29. 

32- 

33- 

2. 

3- 

3- 

3- 

3- 

3- 


Josh. 


Judg 


«     I5' 
1  Sa.   7. 

9- 

zs- 

26. 

26. 

26. 

30- 

«     3°- 
aSa.    5. 

12. 

14. 

17- 
17- 


23- 

~.  23- 
xKi.13. 

*3- 

13- 
13- 
14. 

17 
18. 

18. 
1 8. 
18. 
i3, 
18. 
19. 


13  This  (is)  the  water  of  Meribah;  because 

17  neither  will  we  drink  (of) the  water  of  the 
19  if  I  and  my  cattle  drink  of  thy  water,  th. 
.■  i  because  ye  rebelled,  .at  the  water  of  Me. 

5  no  bread,  neither(is  there  any)  water  and 
16  Gather  the  people.. I  will  give  them  wat. 

22  we  will  not  drink  (of)  the  waters  of  the 

6  as  gardens,  .as  cedar  trees  beside  the  wa. 

7  He  shall  pour  the  water,  .in  many  waters 

14  sanctify  meat  the  water,  .the  water  of  M. 

23  purified  with  the  water. .  through  the  wa. 
9  in  Elini  (were)  twelve  fountains  of  water 

14  Rephidim,  where  was  nowaterfor  the  pe. 

6  ye  shall  also  buy  water  of  them  for  money 
28  give  me  water  for  money,  that  I  may  dri. 

18  the  likeness  of  anylish  that  (is)  in  thewa. 

8  or  that  (is)  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth 

7  a  land  of  brooks  of  water,  of  fountains 

15  no  water;  who  brought  thee  forth  water 

9  I  neither  did  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 

18  I  did  neither  eat  bread  nor  drink  water 

7  from  Gudgodah.  .a  land  of  rivers  of  wat. 
4  lie  made  the  water  of  the  Red  seatoover. 

it  (and)  drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heaven 

16  ye  shall  pour  it  upon  the  earth  as  water 

24  thou  shalt  pour  it  upon  the  earth  as  water 
9  ye  shall  eat  of  all  that  (are)  in  the  waters 

23  shalt  pour  it  upon  the  ground  as  water 

4  met  you  not  with  bread  and  with  water 
11  he  shall  wash  (himself)  with  water;  and 
11  the  hewer,  .unto  the  drawer  of  thy  water 
51  ye  trespassed,  .at  the  waters  of  Meribah 

8  thou  didst  strive  at  the  waters  of  Meribah 

10  heard  how  the  Lord  dried  up  the  water 

8  ye  are  come  to  the  brink  of  the  water  of 
13  the  soles. .  shall  rest  in  the  waters  of  Jordan 

13  waters,  .shall  be  cut  off  (from)  the  waters 

15  feet,  .were  dipped  in  the  brim  of  the  wa. 

16  the  waters  which  came  down  from  above 

7,  7  the  waters  of  Jordan  were  cut  off 

iS  the  waters  of  Jordan  returned  unto  their 
23  God  dried  up  the  waters  of  Jordan  from 
1  the  Lord  had  dried  up  the  waters  of  Jo. 

5  hearts  of  the  people  melted,  .as  water 
21,  23,  27  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  w. 

5  pitched  together  at  the  waters  of  Merom 
7  Joshua  came . .  against  them  by  the  waters 

7  the  border  passed  toward  the  waters  of 

9  unto  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  Nepht. 

19  answered,  .give  me  also  springs  of  water 
1  from  Jordan  by  Jericho  unto  the  water 

15  went  out  to  the  well  of  waters  of  Nepht. 

15  she  said,  .give  me  also  springs  of  water 
19  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  to  dr. 

4  dropped,  the  clouds  also  dropped  water 
19  then  fought  the  kings,  .by  the  waters  of 

25  He  asked  water,  (and)  she  gave  (him)  mi. 
38  dew  out  of  the  fleece,  a  bowl  full  of  water 

4  bring  them  down  unto  the  water,  and  I  w. 

5  unto  the  water,  .lappeth  of  the  water  wi. 

6  bowed  down  upon  their  knees  to  drink  w. 
24,  24  the  waters  unto  Beth-barah  and  Jord. 

19  an  hollow  place.. there  came  water  ther. 
6  drew  water,  and  poured  (it)  out  before  the 

11  young  maidens  going  out  to  draw  water 
11  Shall  I  then  take  my  bread,  and  my  water 

11  take  thou,  .the  cruse  of  water,  and  let  us 

12  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of  water  fr. 

16  and  the  cruse  of  water  that  (was)  at  his 

11  did  eat;  and  they  made  him  drink  water 

12  eaten  no  bread,  nor  drunk  (any)  water,  th. 

20  hath  broken  forth,  .as  the  breach  of  wa. 
27  fought . .  and  have  taken  the  city  of  waters 

14  we  must  needs  die,  and  (are)  as  water  sp. 

20  They  be  gone  over  the  brook  of  water 

21  pass  quickly  over  the  water :  for  thus  hath 
10  until  water  dropped  upon  them  out  of  he. 

12  dark  waters,  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the  sk. 

17  took  me ;  he  drew  me  out  of  many  waters 

15  one  would  give  me  drink  of  the  water  of 

16  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem 

8,  16  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor  drink  wa. 
9  Eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water,  nor  turn 

17  Thou  shalt  eat  no  bread  nor  drink  water 
iS  that  he  may  eat  bread  and  drink  water 
19  did  eat  bread  in  his  house,  and  drank  wa. 

22  drunk  water  in.the  place,  .drink no  water 
15  smite,  .as  a  reed  is  shaken  in  the  water 

10  Fetch  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  in  a 

4  hid.  .and  fed  them  with  bread  aud  water 

5  Go.  .unto  all  fouutains  of  water,  and  unto 

13  how  I. .fed  them  with  bread  and  water 
33  Fill  four  barrels  with  water,  and  pour(it) 
35  water  ran  round  about,  .also  with  water 
38  licked  up  the  water  that  (was)  in  the  tre. 

6  (there  was),  .a  cruse  of  water  at  his  head 
27  feed  him.  .with  water  of  affliction,  until 

8  smote  the  waters,  and  they  were  divided 

14  smote  the  waters.. had  smitten  the  wat. 
19  the  water  (is)  naught,  and  the  grouud  liar. 

21  spring  of  the  waters,  .healed  these  waters 

22  the  waters  were  healed  unto  this  day,  ac. 

9  there  was  no  water  for  the  host,  and  for 

11  which  poured  watemnthehaudsofElijah 
17  that  valley  shall  he  tilled  with  water,  that 

19  stop  all  wells  of  water,  and  mar  every  good 

20  there  came  water,  .was  filled  with  water 
sa  -1111  sin  me  upon  the  water,  .saw  the  water 
25  they  stopped  all  the  wells  of  water,  and 

12  Al'Linaaud  1'liarpar.  hetterthanallthe  w. 
5  the  a\  head  fell  into  the  water:  and  he 

22  .Set  bread  and  water  before  them,  that  they 


2E 

8. 

iS. 

19. 

20. 

it'h 

11. 

11. 

14. 

=  L'h 

18. 

32- 

12- 

Ezra 

TO. 

.Nell. 

1- 

8. 

8. 

9- 

9- 

9- 

12. 

IS- 

Job 

3- 

5- 

Psa. 


93 
104 
104. 
105, 
105 
106. 
106 
107. 
107. 
109, 
114, 
119. 
124. 
124. 
136. 
144, 
147. 


Prov.  5 


21. 

25- 

=5- 

27. 

SO- 
Eccl.   2. 

11. 
Song  4. 

5- 

8. 

Isa.     1. 


15  dipped  (it)  in  water,  and  spread  (it)  on  his 

31  think  yeevery  one  the  watersof  his  ciste. 
24  I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters 
20  how  he  made  a  pool,  .and  brought  water^ 
17  one  would  give  me  drink  of  the  water  of 
iS  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Beth-lehem 
11  broken,  .like  the  breaking  forth  of  waters 
26  feed  him . .  with  water  of  affliction,  until  I 

3  to  stop  the  waters  of  the  fountains  winch 

4  Why  should  the  kings.. find  much  water? 

6  he  did  eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water :  for 

26  unto  (the  xdace)  over  against  the  water 
1,  3  the  street  that  (was)  before  the  water 

16  in  the  street  of  the  water  gate,  and  in  the 
11  threwest..asastone  into  the  mighty  wate. 

15  broughtest  forth  water  for  them  out  of 
20  and  gavest  them  water  for  their  thirst 
37  above  the  house,  .unto  the  Watergate  ea. 

2  metnot.  .Israel  with  bread  and  with  water 

24  my  roarings  are  poured  out  like  the  water 

10  Who  giveth  rain . .  and  sendeth  waters  up. 

11  can  the  rush,  .the  flag  growwithoutwater? 
30  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and 

16  (and)  remember  (it)  as  waters  that  (pass) 

15  he  withholdeth  the  waters,  and  theydry 
9  through  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud,  and 

11  (As)  the  waters  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the 
19  The  waters  wear  the  stones :  thou  washe. 

16  man,  which  drinketh  iniquity  like  water 

7  Thou  hast  not  given  water  to  the  weary 
11  and  abundance  of  waters  cover  thee 

iS  He  (is)  swift  as  the  waters ;  their  portion 

19  Drought  and  heat  consume  the  snow  wat. 

5  Dead  (things)  areformed.  .under  the  wat. 

5  He  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick 
10  He  hath  compassed  the  waters  with  bou. 

20  Terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  waters,  a  te. 

25  and  he  weigheth  the  waters  by  measure 
19  My  root  (was)  spread  out  by  the  waters 

7  Job,  (who)  drinketh  up  scorning  like  wa.? 

27  he  maketh  small  the  drops  ofwatenthey 

10  and  the  breadth  of  the  waters  is  straitened 
30  The  waters  are  hid  as  (with)  a  stone,  and 

34  that  abundance  of  waters  may  cover  thee 

3  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water 

1 1  dark  waters  (and)  thick  clouds  of  the  skies 

15  the  channels  of  waters  were  seen,  andthe 

16  took  me,  he  drew  me  out  of  many  waters 
14  I  am  poured  out  like  water,  and  all  my  bo. 

2  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters 

3  (is)  upon  the  waters,  .(is)  upon  many  wa. 

6  in  the  floods  of  great  waters  they  shall 

7  He  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  sea  toget. 
1  As  the  heart  panteth  after  the  water  broo. 

3  (Though)  the  waters  thereof  roar  (and)  be 
7  Let  them  melt  away  as  waters  (which)  run 
1  a  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where  no  water  is 
9  the  river  of  God,  (which)  is  full  of  water 

12  we  went  through  fire  and  tlirough  water 

1  for  the  waters  are  come  in  unto  (my)  soul 

2  I  am  come  into  deep  waters,  where  the 

14  be  delivered,  .out  of  the  deep  waters 

10  waters  of  a  full  (cup)  are  wrung  out  to 

13  thou  brakest  the  heads,  .in  the  waters 

16  The  waters  saw  thee,  0  God,  the  waters 

17  The  clouds  poured  out  water ;  the  skies 

19  thy  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  thy  fo. 
13'lie  made  the  waters  to  stand  as  an  heap 

16  caused  waters  to  run  down  like  rivers 

20  he  smote  the  rock,  that  the  waters  gush. 
'3  Their  blood  have  they  shed  like  water 

7  I  proved  thee  at  the  waters  of  Meribah 

17  They  came  round  about  me  daily  likewa. 

4  (is)  mightier  than  the  noise  of  many  wat. 

3  Who  layeth  the  beams,  .in  the  waters 
6  the  waters  stood  above  the  mountains 

29  He  turned  their  waters  into  blood,  and 
41  He  opened  the  rock,  and  the  waters  gush. 

11  the  waters  covered  their  enemies;  there 

32  They  angered  (him)  also  at  the  waters  of 

23  They,  .that  do  business  in  great  waters 

35  turneth  the  wilderness  into  a  standing  w. 

18  let  it  come  into  Ins  bowels  like  water,  and 

8  water,  the  flint  into  a  fountain  of  waters 
136  Rivers  of  water  run  down  mine  eyes,  be. 

4  the  waters  had  overwhelmed  us,  the  stre. 

5  Then  the  proud  waters  had  gone  over  our 

6  stretched  out  the  earth  above  the  waters 

7  deliver  me  out  of  great  waters,  from  the 

1 5  he  causeth  his  wind  to  blow,  (and)  the  wa. 
4  ye  waters  that  (be)  above  the  heavens 

15  Drink  waters  out  of  thine  own  cistern,  and 

16  dispersed  abroad,  (and)  rivers  of  waters 

24  (were)  no  fountains  abounding  with  water 

29  the  waters  should  not  pass  his  command. 

17  Stolen  waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  (eaten) 

14  of  strife  (is  as)  when  oneletteth  out  water 

4  The  words,  .(are as) deep  waters,  (and) the 

5  Counsel  in  the  heart,  (like)  deep  water 

1  king's  heart  (is),  .(as)  the  rivers  of  water 

21  if  he  be  thirsty,  give  him  water  to  drink 
25(As)cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul, so  (is)good 

19  As  in  water  face(answereth)toface,sothe 
4  who  hath  bound  the  waters  in  a  garment? 

16  the  earth  (that)  is  not  filled  with  water 

6  I  made  me  pools  of  water,  to  water  there. 
1  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters:  for  thou 

15  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from 

12  (eyes)  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  waters 

7  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither 

22  become  dross,  thy  wine  mixed  with  water 

30  and  as  a  garden  that  hath  no  water 


Isa.  3.  1  stay.of  bread,  andthewhole  stayof  water 
8.  6  this  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah 
8.    7  the  Lord  bringeth  up  upon  them  the  wat. 

11.  9  the  earth  shall  be  full,  .as  the  waters  co. 

12.  3  with  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the 

14.  23  I  will  also  make  it.  .pools  of  water,  and 

15.  6  the  waters  of  Nimrim  shall  be  desolate 

15.  9  the  watersof  Dimon  shall  be  full  of  blood 

17.  i2,  13  like  the  rushing  of.  .waters 

18.  2  in  vessels  of  bulrushes  upon  the  waters 

19.  5  the  waters  shall  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the 
19.    8  they  that  spread  netsupon  the  waters  an. 

21.  14  The  inhabitants,  .brought  water  tohini  t. 

22.  9  ye  gathered  together  the  waters  of  thelo. 
22.  11  between  the  two  walls  for  the  water  of 
23-    3  by  great  waters  the  seed  of  Sihor,  the  ha. 
28.    2  as  a  flood  of  mighty  waters  overflowing 
28.  17  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding  place 

30. 14  a  sherd . .  to  take  water  (withal)  out  of  the 

30. 20  the  bread  of  adversity,  and  the  water  of 

30.  25  streams  of  waters  in  the  day  of  the  great 
32.    2  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place ;  as  the 

32.  20  Blessed  (are)  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters 

33.  16  bread  shall  be  given  him,  his  waters  (sha. 
35.    6  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out 

35.  7  and  the  thirsty  land  springs  of  water 

36.  16  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  own 

37.  25  I  have  digged,  and  drunk  water;  and  wi. 

40. 12  Who  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  ho. 
41.  17  (When)the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,  and 
41. 18  make  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  water,  and 
41. 18  Iwillmake.  .the  dry  landsprings  of  water 
43.  2  W7hen  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  1 
43. 16  which  maketh..  a  path  in  the  mighty  wa. 

43.  20  I  give  waters  in  the  wilderness,  (and)  riv. 

44.  3  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty 
44.  i2Strengthfaileth:  hedrinkethnowater.and 

48.  1  are  come  forth  out  of  the  waters  of  Judah 

48.21  he  caused  the  waters,  .waters  gushed  out 

49.  10  by  the  springs  of  water  shall  he  guide  th. 

50.  2  fish  stinketh,  because  (there  is)  no  water 

51.  10  which  hath  dried  the  sea,  the  waters  of 

54.  9  this  (is  as)  the  waters . .  the  waters  of  Xoah 

55.  1  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath 

57.  20  the  troubled  sea.  .whose  waters  cast  up 

58.  11  and  like  a  spring,  .whose  waters  fad  not 

63.  12  dividing  the  water  before  them,  to  make 

64.  2  the  fire  causeth  the  waters  to  boil,  to  make 
Jer.     2.  13  living  waters,  .that  can  hold  no  water 

2.  18  to  drink  the  waters,  .the  waters  of  theri. 

6.  7  As  a  fountain  casteth  out  her  waters,  so 

8.  14  put  us  to  silence,  and  given  us  water  of 

9.  1  O  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine 
9.  15  I  will  feed,  .and  give  them  water  of  gall 

9. 18  that,  .our  eyelids  gush  out  with  waters 

10. 13  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heavens,  and 

13.  1  get  thee  a  linen  girdle,  .put  it  not  in  wa. 

14.  3  have  sent  their  little  ones  to  the  waters 
14.    3  they  came  to  the  pits,  (and)  found  no  wa. 
15. 18  wilt  thou  be..as;a  liar.. waters  (that) fail 

17.  8  he  shall  be  as  a  tree  planted  by  the  waters 

17. 13  have  forsaken,  .the  fountain  of  living  wa. 

18.  14  shall  the  cold  flowing  waters  that  come 

23. 15  I  will,  .make  them  drink  the  waters  of  g. 

31.  9  I  will  cause  them  to  walk  by.  .waters  in 

38.  6  in  the  dungeon,  .no  water,  but  mire :  so 
41.  12  found [him by  the  great  waters,  .in  Gibeon 
46.   7  this,  .whose  waters  are  moved  as  the  ri.f 

46.  8  and  (his)  waters  are  moved  like  the  rivers 

47.  2  Behold,  waters  rise  up  out  of  the  north 

48.  34  the  waters  also  of  Ximrim  shall  be  desol. 

50.  38  A  drought  (is)  upon  her  waters ;  and  they 

51.  13  0  thou  that  dwellestupon  many  waters 
51.  16  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heavens 

51.  55  when  her  waves  do  roar  like  great  waters 
Lam.  1. 16  mine  eye  runneth  dowu  with  water,  bee. 

2. 19  pour  out  thine  heart  likewaterbeforethe 
3. 48  Mine  eye  runneth  down  with,  .water  for 

3.  54  W'aters  flowed  over  mine  head.  .1  said 
5.    4  We  have  drunken  our  water  for  money 

Eze.     1.  24  like  the  noise  of  great  waters,  as  the  vol 

4.  11  Thou  shalt  drink  also  water  by  measure 
4. 16  they  shall  drink  water  by  measure,  and 

4.  17  That  they  may  want  bread  and  water,  and 

7.  17  hands,  .all  kneesshallbe  weak  (as)  water 
12. 18  drink  thy  water  with  trembling  and  with 
12.  19  drink  their  water  with  astonishment,  that 

16.  4  neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water  to  su. 

16.  9  Then  washed  I  thee  with  water;  yea,  I 

17.  5  placed  (it)  by  great  waters,  .set  it.  .a  wil. 
17.    8  It  was  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  great  wa. 

19.  10  by  the  waters,  .by  reason  of  many  waters 
21.  7  all  kneesshallbe  weak  (as)  water:  behold 
24.  3  Set  on  a  pot.  .and  also  pour  water  into  it 
26. 12  shall  lay.  .thy  dust  in  the  midst  of  thewa 

26.  19  when  I  shall  bring  up  thedeep.. great  wa 

27.  26  rowers  have  brought  thee  into  great  wat 
27.  34  broken  bythe  seas  in  the  depths  of  thewa. 
31.  4  The  waters  made  him  great,  the  deep  set 
31.  5  because  of  the  multitude  of  waters,  when 
31.  7  Thus  was  he  fair,  .his  root  was  by  great  w. 
3r.  14  that  none  of  all  the  trees  by  the  waters 

31. 14  neither  then-  trees,  .all  that  drink  water 

31. 15  the  great  waters  were  stayed ;  and  I  caus. 

31.  16  all  the  trees,  .all  that  drink  water,  shall 

32.  2  thou,  .troubledst  the  waters  with  thy  fe. 
32.  13  I  will  destroy,  .from  beside  the  great  wa 
32.  14  Then  will  I  make  their  waters  deep,  and 

*  34.  18  and  to  have  drunk  of  the  deep  waters 

36. 25  Then  will  I  sprinkleclean  waterupon  you 
43.    2  his  voice  (was)  like  a  noiseof  many  wat. 
47.    1  waters  issued  out.  .the  waters  came  dowu 


WATER 


1037 


WAX 


Eze.  47.  2  behold,  there  ran  out  waters  on  the  right 
47.  3,  4  brought  me  through  the  waters:  the  w. 
47.  4  brought  me  through ;  the  waters(were)  to 
47.  5  the  waters  were  risen,  waters  to  swim  in 
47.  8  These  waters,  .the  waters  shall  be  healed 
47.  9  because  these  waters  shall  come  thither 
47.  12  their  waters  they  issued  out  of  the  sanct. 

47.  19  from  Taniar.  .to  the  waters  of  strife  (in) 

48.  28  fromTamar(unto)  the  waters  of  strife  (in) 
Dan.    1.  12  let  them  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  and  water 

12.  6,  7  which  (was)  upon  the  waters  of  the  ri. 
Hos.     2.    5  lovers,  that  give,  .my  bread  and  my  wa. 

5.  10  will  pour  out  nay  wrath  upon  them..wat. 

10.    7  king  is  cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the  wat. 

Joel    1.  20  the  rivers  of  waters  are  dried  up,  and  the 

3.  18  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters 
Amos  4.    8  three..wandereduntoonecity,todrink  w. 

5.    8  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and 

5.  24  let  judgment  run  dowu  as  waters,  and  ri. 

8.  11  not.  .a  thirst  for  water,  hut  of  hearing 

9.  6  he  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea 
Jon.     2.   5  waters  compassed  me  about.. to  the  soul 

3.    7  Let  neither  man  nor  beast.. drink  water 

Mic.    1.   4  as  the  waters..poured  dowu  a  steep  pla. 

Xah.  2.  8  But  Xineveh  (is)  of  old  like  a  pool  of  wa. 
3.  8  that  was  situate  among  the  rivers,  .water 
3.  14  Drawthee  waters  forthe  siege,  fortify  thy 

Hab.  2. 14  shall  be  filled,  .as  the  waters  cover  the 
3.  10  the  overflowing  of  the  water  passed  by 
3. 15  through  the  sea.  .the  heap  of  great  wate. 

Zech.  9.  11  sent,  .out  of  the  pit  wherein  (is)  no  wat. 
14.    8  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem 

2.  A  filoicing,  flood,  torrent,  iroTa/u.6s  potamos. 

2  Co.  11.  26  journeyings often,  .perilsof  waters. .perils 

3.  Water,  vBtop  hudor. 

Matt.  3.  11  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  re. 
3.  16  Jesus,  .went  up  straightway  out  of  the  wa. 

8.  32  into  the  sea,  and  perished  in  the  waters 
14.  28  Lord.. bid  me  come  unto  thee  on  the  wa. 
14. 29  Peter,  .walked  on  the  water,  to  go  to  Jes. 
17.  15  falleth  into  the  fire,  and  oft  into  the  water 
27.  24  Pilate.. tookwater,and washed (his)hands 

Mark  1.  8  I  indeed  have  baptized  you  with  water 
1. 10  straightway  coming  up  out  of  the  water 

9.  22  cast  him  into  the  fire,  and  into  the  waters 
9. 41  whosoever  shall  give  you  a  cup  of  water 

14.  13  meet  you  a  man  bearing  apitcher  of  water 
Luke  3. 16  saying.. I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water 

7.  44  I  entered,  .thou  gavest  me  no  water  for 

8.  24  rebuked  the  wind,  .the  raging  of  the  water 
8.  25  lie  comman^eth  even  the  windsand water 

16.  24  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  wa. 

22.  10  a  man  meet  you,  bearing  a  pitcher  of  wa. 

John  1.  26  I  baptize  with  water:  but  there  standeth 

1. 31  therefore  am  I  come  baptizing  with  water 

1.  33  but  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize  with  water 

2.  7  Jesussaith  unto  them,  Fill,  .pots  with  wa. 
2.   9  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  made  wine 

2.  9  the  servants  which  drew  the  water  knew 

3.  5  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  (of) 

3.  23  John,  .because  there  was  much  water  th. 

4.  7  There  cometh  a  woman  of  S.  to  draw  wa. 

4. 10  and  he  would  have  given  thee  living  water 

4. 11  whence  then  hast  thou  that  living  water 

4. 13  Whosoeverdrinkethofthiswater  shall  th. 

4. 14  But  whosoever  driukethof  the  water  that 
4.  14  [water],  .shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water 
4.  15  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not 

4.  46  Cana  of  Galilee,  where  he  made  the  water 

5.  3  lay..[waitingforthemovingof  thewater] 
5.   4  [an  angel  went  down. .and  troubled  the  w.] 
5.    4  [thenfirst  after  the  troubling  of  the  water] 
5.    7  I  have  no  mau,  when  the  water  is  troubled 

7.  38  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of.. water 

13.  5  he  poureth  water  into  a  bason,  and  began 
19.  34  forthwith  came  there  out  blood  and  water 

Acts    1.    5  John  truly  baptized  with  water ;  but  ye 

8.  36  as  they  went.,  they  came  unto  a  certain  wa. 
8.  36  and  the  eunuch  said,  See,  (here  is)  water 
8. 38  they  went  down  both  into  the  water,  both 
8.  39  when  they  were  come  up  out  of  the  water 

10.  47  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  sh. 

11. 16  John  indeed  baptized  with  water;  but  ye 
Eph.  5.  26  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by 
Heb.  9. 19  he  took,  .water,  and  scarlet  wool,  and  fry. 

10.  22  having.,  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  wa. 
Jas.    3.  12  so  (can)  no  fountain  both  yield  salt  water 

1  Pe.  3.  20  few,  that  is,  eight  souls,  were  saved  by  wa. 

2  Pe.  3.    5  standing  out  of  the  water  and  in  the  wat. 

3.    6  the  world,  .being  overflowed  with  water 

1  Jo.  5.    6  This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood 

5.   6  not  by  wateronly,  but  by  waterand  blood 

5.    8  the  spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood 

Rev.    1.  15  and  his  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters 

7.  17  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  water 

8.  10  and  it  fell,  .upon  the  fountains  of  waters 
8.  11  the  third  part  of  the  waters  became  wor. 
8.  11  many  men  died  of  the  waters,  because 

11.  6  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them  to 
32.  15  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as 

14.  2  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  .of  many  wat. 
14.  7  that  made,  .the  sea,  and  the  fountainsof 
16.  4  poured,  .upon. the  rivers  and  fountains  of  w. 
16.    s  And  I  heard  the  angel  of  the  waters  say 

16.  12  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,  that  the 

17.  1  the  great  whore  that  sitteth  upon  many  w. 
17. 15  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,  where  the 
19.    6  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 
2r.   6  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely 
22.    1  he  showed  me  a  pure  riverof  water  of  life 

22. 17  whosoever  will,  let  himtake  the  water  of 


"WATER,  with  or  without  — 

1.  With  water  of,  '£?  or  ic?  bemo  or  heme. 

Job     9.  30  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and 

2.  Without  water,  waterless,  &wSpos  anudros. 

2  Pe.  2.  17  These  are  wells  without  water,  clouds 
Jude       12  clouds  (they  are)  without  water,  carried 

WATER,  (abundantly),  be  watered,  to  — 

\.A  sprinkling  or  fertilizing  shower,  fpni  zarziph. 

Psa.  72.   6  the  mown  grass ;  as  showers  (that)  water 
2.  To  cause  to  shoot  or  pour  forth,  N*v  yara,  5. 

Provn.  25  The  liberal  soul,  .shall  be  watered  also 
Z.  To  melt,  waste,  noo,  masah,  5. 

Psa.    6.   6  make  I  my  bed  to  swim ;  I  water  my  co. 

4.  To  fill,  be  filled,  satisfied,  watered,  ny}  ravah,  3. 

Psa.  65.  10  Thouwaterest  the  ridges  thereof  abund. 
Isa.  16.   9  I  will  water  thee  with  my  tears,  0  Hesh. 

5.  To  fill,  satisfy,  water,  n\-±  ravah,  5. 

Prov.n.  25 The  liberal  soul,  .he  that  watereth  shall 
Isa.  55. 10  returnethnotthither,but  watereth  the  ear. 

6.  To  water,  give  to  drink,  p-.w  shuq,  3a. 

Psa.  65.   9  Thou  visitest  the  earth,  and  waterest  it 

7.  To  water,  give  or  cause  to  drink,  njjy  shaqah,  5. 

Gen.  2.  6  and  watered  the  whole  face  of  the  ground 
2. 10  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  ga. 

29.    2  for  out  of  that  well  they  watered  the  flo. 

29.    3  watered  the  sheep,  and  put  the  stone  ag. 

29.    7  water  ye  the  sheep,'and  go  (and)feed(th.) 

29.    8  they  roll  the  stone,  .then  we  water  the  sh. 

29. 10  watered  the  flock  of  Laban  his  mother's  br. 
Exod  2.  16  filled  the  troughs  to  water  their  father's 

2.  17  Moses  stood  up  and  helped  them,  and  w. 
2. 19  drew  (water)  enough  for  us,  and  watered 

Deutn.  10  wateredst  (it)  with  thy  foot,  as  a  garden 
Psa.  104. 13  He  watereth  the  hills  from  his  chambers 
Eccl.  2.  6  to  water  therewith  the  wood  that  bringe. 
Isa.  27.  3  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it;  I  will  water  it  ev. 
Eze.  17.  7  might  water  it  by  the  furrows  of  her  pla. 
32.  6  I  will  also  water  with  thy  blood  the  land 
Joel    3.  i8.a  fountain,  .shall  water  the  valley  of  Shi. 

8.  To  water,  give  to  drink,  iroTtfw  potizo. 

Lukei3. 15  from  the  stall,  and  lead  (Tiini)away  to  w. 
i  Co.  3.  6  I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered;  but  God 

3.  7  planteth  any  thing,  neither  he  that  wate. 

3.  8  Xow  he  that  planteth  and  he  that  water. 

WATER,  to  drink  — 

To  drink  water,  iidpowor^m  hudropoteo. 

1  Ti.    5.  23  Drink  no  longer  water,  but  use  a  little  w. 
WATER  course,  flood,  spout,  spring  — 
l.Flotcing  of  waters,  cd  "?3:  yebal  mayim. 

Isa.  44.  4  spring.. as  willows  by  the  watercourses 
2.  Outlet  of  water,  ov?  NifiD  motsa  mayim. 

2  Ch.32.  30  Hezekiah  also  stopped  the  upper  water  c. 
Psa.107.  33  He  turneth.  .water  springs  into  dry  gro. 

107.  35  He  turneth.  .dry  ground  into  water  spri. 

Isa.   41.  18 1  will  make,  .the  dry  land  springs  of  wa. 

58.  1 1  thou  shalt  be  like . .  a  spring  of  water,  wh. 

Z.A  gutter,  canal,  conduit,  "n3X  tsinnor. 

Psa.  42.   7  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of  thy  water  spouts 
4.  Stream  or  flood  of  water,  u%  rkzv  shibboleth  mayim. 

Psa.  69. 15  Let  not  the  waterflood  overflow  me,  nei. 

5.A  trench,  conduit,  n?^?  tealah. 

Job  38.  25  Who  hath  divided  a  water  course  for  the 
"WATERED,  watering,  well  — 

1.  Water,  of  waters,  d*d  mayim. 

Gen.  30.  38  in  the  guttersin  the  watering  troughs  wh. 

2.  Watering,  ngffc  mashqeh. 

Gen.  13. 10  it  (was)  well  watered  every  where,  before 

3.  Fulness,  satiety,  nyi  raveh. 

Isa.  58. 11  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  garden,  and 
Jer.  31. 12  their  soul  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden 

4.  Watering,  '1  ri. 

Job   37. 11  Also  by  watering  he  wearieth  the  thick  cl. 
WATERPOT  — 
A  water  vessel,  vdpta  hudria. 

John  2.  6  there  were  set  there  six  water  pots  of  stone 
2 .    7  Jesus  saith . .  Fill  the  waterpots  with  water 

4.  28  The  woman  then  left  her  waterpot,  and 

WATERS  OF  MEROM,  D1TO  V?. 

A  lake  ten  miles  X.  of  the  Sea  of  Chinnereth,  and  now 
caUed  el-Ruleh,  through  which  the  Jordan  flows  in  its 
passage  southward. 

Josh  11.   5  came  and  pitched,  .at  the  waters  of  M. 
11.   7  came,  .against  them  by  the  waters  of  M. 

WATERS  OF  STRIFE,  n^np  'D.      See  Meribah. 
Eze.  47.  19  from  Taniar  (even)  to  the  waters  of  strife 
48.  28  from  Tamar  (unto)  the  waters  of  strife  (in) 

WAVE  — 

I. High  place,  height,  n£3  bamah. 

Job     9.   8  and  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea 

2. Rolling  thing,  billow,  wave,  Sa  gal. 

Job   38.  1 1  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed 

Psa,  65.   7  the  noise  of  their  waves,  and  the  tumult 

89.   9  when  the  waves  thereof  arise,  thou  still. 

107.  25  stormy  wind,  which  lifteth  up  the  waves 

107.  29  a  calm,  so  that  the  waves  thereof  are  still 

Isa.   48. 18  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea 


Isa.   51.  15  that  divided  the  sea,  whose  waves  roared 

Jer.     5.  22  though  the  wa\  es  thereof  toss  themselves 

31.  35  divideth  the  sea  when  the  waves  thereof 

51.  42  covered  with  the  multitude  of  the  waves 

51.  55  when  her  waves  do  roar  like  great  waters 

Eze.  26.    3  as  the  sea  causeth  his  waves  to  come  up 

Jon.    2.    3  thy  billows  and  thy  waves  passed  over  me 

Zech  10.  11  shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea,  and  all 

3. A  breaker,  *:n  cloki. 

Psa.  93.   3  their  voice ;  the  floods  lift  up  their  waves 

4.  J.  breaker,  "iSii'D  mishbar. 

2  Sa.  22.   5  "When  the  waves  of  death  compassed  me 

Psa.  42.   7  thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are  gone  over 

88.    7  thou  hast  afflicted  (me)  with  ail  thy  wav. 

93.   4  (is)  mightier,  .(than)  the  mighty  waves  cf 

5. A  washing,  surging,  K\v$a>v  kludon. 

Jas.     1.   6  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea 

Q.A  wave,  billow,  tcvfia  kuma. 

Matt.  8.  24  that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves 
14.  24  iu  the  midst  of  the  sea,  tossed  with  waves 
Mark  4.  37  the  waves  beat  into  the  ship,  so  that  it 
Acts  27.  41  was  broken  with  the  violence  [of  the  wa.] 
Jude       13  Raging  waves  of  the  sea,  foaming  out  th. 

7. Shaking,  agitation,  a-aAos  salos. 

Luke2i.  25  perplexity;  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring: 
WAVE,  be  waved,  waver,  to  — 
l.To  wave,  shake,  *pi  nuph,  5. 

Exod 29.  24  shalt  wave  them  (for)  a.  .offering  before 
29.  26  and  wave  it  (for)  a.,  ottering  before  theL. 

Lev.    7.  30  bring,  that  the  breast  maybe  waved  (for) 

5.  27  waved  them(for)a.  .offeringbefore  the  L. 

8.  29  Moses  took  the  breast,  and  waved  it  (for) 

9.  21  and  the  right  shoulder  Aaron  waved  (for) 
10. 15  to  wave  (it  for)  a.  .offering  before  the  L. 
14.  12  wave  them  (for)  a.  .offering  before  the  L. 
14.  24  the  priest  shall  wave  them  (for)  a.  .offer. 
23.  11  wave  the  sheaf,  .the  priest  shall  wave  it 
23.  12  ye  shall  offer  that  day  when  ye  wave  the 
23.  20  the  priest  shall  wave  them  with  the  bread 

Xum.  5.  25  shall  wave  the  offering  before  the  Lord 

6.  20  the  priest  shall  wave  them  (for)  a.  .otter. 

2.  To  be  waved,  *p  nuph,  6. 

Exod29.  27  which  is  waved,  and  which  is  heaved  up 

3.  Wave  offering,  shaking,  nsuip  tenuphah. 

Lev.  14.  21  he  shall  take  one  lamb,  .to  be  waved,  to 

4.  Tojudge  diversely,  hesitatingly,  BtaKpivco  diakrino. 

Jas.     1.    6  nothing  wavering.  For  he  that  wavereth 
WAVE  (offering^,  without  wavering- — 
l.Wave  offering,  shaking,  n&iB  tenuphah. 

Exod  29.  24  them  (for)  a  wave  offering  before  the  Lo. 
29.  26  wave  it  (for)  a  wave  offering  before  the  L. 
29.  27  sauctify  the  breast  of  the  wave  offering 
Lev.    7.  30  the  breast  may  be.  .(for)  a  wave  offering 

7.  34  the  wave  breast  and  the  heave  shoulder 

8.  27,  29  (for)  a  wave  offering  before  the  Lord 
9. 21  Aaron  waved  (for)  a  wave  offering  before 

10.  14  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder  shall 
10.  15  the  wave  breast,  .a  wave  offering  before 
14. 12,  24  (for)  a  wave  offering  before  the  Lord 
23.  15  ye  brought  the  sheaf  of  the  wave  offering 
23. 17  Ye  shall  bring,  .two  wave  loaves  of  two 
23.  20  (for)  a  wave  offering  before  the  Lord,  with 
Xum.  6.  20  a  wave  offering,  .with the  wave  breast 

18.  11  with  all  the  wave  offerings  of  thechildren 
iS.  iS  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right  shou. 

2.Without  inclining  or  bending,  hfcKwhs  aMim.es. 
Heb.io.  23  hold  fast  the  profession . .  without  waver. 

WAX  — 

Wax,  Jiii  donag. 

Psa.  22. 14  my  heart  is  like  wax;  it  is  melted  in  the 

68.    2  as  wax  melteth  before  the  fire . .  let  the  wi. 

97.   5  The  hills  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence 

Mic.    1.   4  shall  be  cleft,  as  wax  before  the  fire,  (and) 

WAX  (louder,  old,  strong,  warm,  short},  to  — 

1.7b  go  on,  proceed,  ^bn,  ^;  yalak,  halak. 

2  Sa.    3.    1  David  waxed,  .the  house  of  Saul  waxed 

1  Ch.  11.    9  David  waxed  greater  and  greater :  for  the 

2  Ch.17. 12  And  Jehoshaphat  waxed  great  exceeding. 
Esth.  9.    4  this  man  Mordecai  waxed  greater  and  gr. 

2.7b  be  or  become  aged,  \p\  zaqen. 

Josh. 23.    1  that  Joshua  waxed  old  (and)  stricken  in  a. 
2  Ch.24. 15  Jehoiada  waxed  old,  and  was  full  of  days 

3.7b  become  aged,  ]p\  zaqen,  5. 

Job  14.   8  Though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the 

4.  To  be  melted,  to  flow,  mj  zarab,  4. 

Job     6. 17  .What  time  they  wax  warm,  they  vanish 

5.  Strong,  hard,  loud,  pm  clutzeq. 

Exodig.  19  when  the  voice.,  waxed  louder  and  louder 

6.7b  reap,  shorten,  i^qatsar. 

Xunin.  23  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short?  thou  sh. 

7.  7b  become  aged,  ynpao~Ka>  gerasko. 

Heb.   8. 13  Now  that  which  decayeth  audwaxethold 

8. 7b  become,  yivofiat  ginomau 

Luke  13.  19  and  it  grew,  and  waxed  a  great  tree 
Heb.  11.  34  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the 

9.  To  strike  forward,  advance,  irpoKoirrw prokoplO. 
2  Ti.   3. 13  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  ami 


i9 
30. 

Psa. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119, 

142 
Prov.  1 


Isa. 


WAY 

10. To  strengthen,  make  strong,  xpa.Ta.i6u>  krataioO. 
Luke  1.  80  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  inspirit 
2.  40  the  child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  spirit 
[See  also  Bold,  cold,  confident,  dim,  faint,  fat,  feeble, 
great,  gross,  hot,  lean,  mighty,  old,  pale,  rich,  sore, 
strong,  wanton,  warm.] 
■WiT  — 

1.  Customary  or  ordinary  path  or  way,  rnk  orach. 

Job    16.  22  then  I  shall  go  the  way..I  shall  not  retu. 
,    8  He  hath  fenced  up  my  way  that  I  cannot 

1 5  Hast  thou  marked  the  old  way  which  wi. 

!  theyraiseupagainst  me  the  ways  of  their 

.  11  cause.  .mantortndaccordingto(his)ways 

18  neither  have  our  steps  declined  from  thy 
.  9  Wherewithal  shall,  .man  cleanse  his  way' 
.  15  meditate,  .and  have  respect  uuto  thy  w. 
.  101  I  have  refrained  my  feet  from  every,  .w. 
.  104  Through  thy  precepts.. I  hate  everyfa.  w. 

128  (to  be)  right;  (and)  I  hate  every  false  way 
3  in  the  way  wherein  I  walked  have  they 
,  19  So  (are)  the  ways  of  every  one  that  is  gr. 
.  15  Whose  ways  (are)  crooked,  and  (they)  fr. 
.  14  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil 
.  20  I  lead  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  in  the 
.  15  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  ways 
.  17  He  (is  in)  the  way  of  life  that  keepeth  in. 
.  28  In  the  way  of  righteousness  (is)  life,  and 
.  10  grievous  unto  him  that  f  orsaketh  the  way 
.  19  but  the  way  of  the  righteous  (is)  made  pi. 
.  24  The  way  of  life  (is)  above  to  the  wise,  that 
.  23  taketh  a  gift,  .to  pervert  the  ways  of  jud. 
.  25  Lest  thou  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare 
,  7  The  way  of  the  just  (is)  uprightness :  thou 
8  in  thewayofthy  judgnients,OLoKD,  have 

11  Get  you  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out  of 
3  by  the  way . .  he  had  not  gone  with  his  feet 

2.  Customary  path  or  way,  urns  orcha. 

Dan.   4.  37  whose  works  (are)  truth,  and  lus  ways  ju. 
5.  23  the  God.  .whose  (are)  all  thy  ways,  hast 

3. Earth,  land,  ground,  j"ix  erets. 

Gen.  35.  16  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  Ephrath 
48.   7  but  a  little  way  to  come  unto  Ephrath 
2  Ki.  5. 19  Go.. So  he  departed  from  him  a  little  way 

4.  To  go  or  come  in,  «'i3  bo. 

Gen.  24.  62  Isaac  came  from  the  way  of  the  well  La. 

5.  Trodden  path  or  way,  Xll  dereh 

Gen.   3.  24  flaming  sword,  .'to  keep  the  way  of  the 
6. 12  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the 
16.    7  found  her.  .by  the  fountain  in  the  way  to 
18.  19  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  LORD,  to 
10.   2  ye  shall  rise  up  early,  and  go  on  your  w. 
24.  27  I.  .in  the  way,  the  LoRb  led  me  to  the  ho. 
24.  40  his  angel  with  thee,  and  prosper  thy  way 
24. 42  if  now  thou  do  prosper  my  way  which  I 
24.  48  which  had  led  me  in  the  right  way  to  take 
24.  56  seeing  the  Lord  hath  prospered  my  way 
28.  20  If  God.  .will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I 

32.  1  Jacob  went  on  his  way,  and  the  angels  of 

33.  16  Esaureturned  that  dayonhis  way  unto  S. 
35.   3  and  was  with  me  in  the  way  which  I  went 
35. 19  Rachel  died,  and  was  buried  in  the  way 
38. 14  sat  in  an  open  place,  which  (is)  by  the  way 
38.  16  he  turned  unto  her  by  the  way,  and  said 
42.  25  and  to  give  them  provision  for  the  way 
42.  38  if  mischief  befall  liim  by  the  way  in  the 
45.  21  Joseph.,  gave  them  provision  for  the  way 
45.  23  bread  and  meat  for  his  father  by  the  way 
45.  24  said.  .See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way 
48.    7  R.  died . .  in  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the  way 

48.  7  I  buried  her  there  in  the  way  of  Ephrath 

49.  1 7  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way,  an  ad . 
Exod.  4.  24  it  came  to  pass  by  the  way  in  the  inn,  that 

13. 17  God  led  them  not.  .the  way  of  the  laud 
13.  18  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  the  Red  sea 
13.  21  went  before  them,  .to  lead  them  the  way 
18.    8  all.  .that  had  come  upon  them  by  the  way 
18.  20  shalt  show  them  the  way  wherein  they 

23.  20  I  send  an  angel,  .to  keep  thee  in  the  way 

32.  8  They  have  turned  aside,  .out  of  the  way 

33.  3  I  will  not.  .lest  I  consume  thee  in  the  w. 
33. 13  show  me  now  thy  way,  that  I  may  know 

Lev.  26. 22  I  will . .  send  wild  beasts . .  and  your . .  ways 
Num.14.  25  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Red  sea 

20.  17  we  will  go  by  the  king's  (high)  way,  we 

21.  1  that  Israel  came  by  the  way  of  the  spies 
21.  4  way  of  the  Red  sea.  .because  of  the  way 
21.  22  we  will  go  along  by  the  king's  (high)  way 

21.  33  they  turned,  and  went  up  by  the  way  of 
22.22  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  the  way  for 

22.  23,  31  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  in  the  way 
22.  23  the  ass  turned  aside  out  of  the  way,  and 
22.  23  smote  the  ass,  to  turn  her  into  the  way 
22.  26  where  (was)  no  way  to  turn  either  to  the 
22.  32  because  (thy)  way  is  perverse  before  me 
22.  34  that  thou  stoodest  in  the  way  against  me 

24.  25  Baalam  rose  up.  .Ealak  also  went  his  way 
Deut.  1.    2  from  Horebby  the  way  of  Mount  Seir  unto 

1.  19  which  ye  saw  by  the  way  of  the  mouutain 
1.  22  bringus  word  again  by  what  way  we  must 
i.  31  in  all  the  way  that  ye  went,  untilye  came 
1.  33  went  in  the  way.  .by  what  way  ye  should 

1.  40  take  your  journey,  .by  the  way  of  the  Red 

2.  1  took  our  journey,  .by  the  way  of  the  Red 

2.  8  through  the  way .  .passed  by  the  way  of 

3.  1  we  turned,  and  went  up  the  way  to  Bash. 
5.  33  Ye  shall  walk  in  all  the  ways  which  the 
o.    7  when  thou  walkest  by  the  way,  and  when 
8.    2  thou  shalt  remember  all  the  way  which 


1038 


Deut.  8.    6  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  fear  him 

9.  12  quickly  turned  aside  out  of  the  way  which 
9.  16  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the  way  which 

10.  12  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  love  him 

11.  iq  when  thou  walkest  by  the  way,  when 

11.  22  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  cleave  unto 
ii.  28turnasideout  of  the  way  which  I  command 

11.  30  by  the  way  where  the  sun  goethdown,  in 

13.  5  to  thrust  thee  out  of  the  way  which  the  L. 

14.  24  if  the  way  be  too  long  for  thee,  so  thatth. 

17.  16  shall  henceforth  return  nomore  that  way 
19.   3  Thou  shalt  prepare  thee  away,  and  divide 
ig.   6  overtake  him,  because  the  way  is  long,  aud 
19.   9  to  love,  .and  to  walk  ever  in  his  ways 
22.   4  not  see.  .his  ox  fall  down  by  the  way 

22.  6  chance  to  be  before  thee  in  the  way  in  any 

23.  4  met  you  not.  .with  water  in  the  way 

24.  9  Lord  thy  God  did  unto  Miriam  by  the  way 

25.  17  Remember  what  Amalek  did.  .by  the  way 
25. 18  he  met  thee  by  the  way,  and  smote  the 

26.  17  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  stat. 

27.  18  maketh  the  blind  to  wander  out  of  thew. 

28.  7  one  way,  and  flee  before  thee  seven  ways 
28.    9  thou  shalt  keep,  .and  walk  in  his  ways 
28.  25  gooutoneway.  .and  fleeseven  ways  before 
28.  29  thou  shalt  not  prosper  in  thy  ways  :  and 
28.  68  by  the  way  whereof  I  spake  unto  thee,  T. 

30.  16  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  com. 

31.  29  turn  aside  from  the  way  which  I  have  co. 

32.  4  his  work  (is)perfect ;  forall  hisways(are) 
Josh.  1.    8  thou  shalt  make  thy  way  prosperous,  and 

2.   7  the  men  pursued  after  them  the  way  to 
2. 16  and  afterward  may  ye  go  your  way 

2.  22  pursuers  sought  (them),  .all  the  way,  but 

3.  4  know  the  way . .  have  not  passed  (this)  wa. 
5.   4,  5  in  the  wilderness  by  the  way  as  they 

5.  7  had  not  circumcised  them  by  the  way 

8.  15  and  fled  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness 

10. 10  chased  them  along  the  way  thatgoeth  up 

12.  3  the  salt  sea  on  the  east,  the  way  to  Beth. 

22.  5  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his 

23.  14  this  day  I  (am)  going  the  way  of  all  the 

24.  17  preserved  us  in  all  the  way  wherein  we 
Judg.  2.  17  they  turned  quickly  out  of  the  way  which 

2. 19  they  ceased  not.  .from  their  stubborn  way 
2.  22  whether  they  will  keep  the  way  oftheLo. 

5. 10  sit  in  judgment,  and  walk  by  the  way 

8. 11  Gideon  went  up  by  the  way  of  them  that 

9.  25  robbed  all  that  came  along  that  way  by 

18.  5  we  may  know  whether  our  way  which  we 
18.    6  before  the  LoKD  (is)  your  way  wherein  ye 

18.  26  And  the  children  of  Dan  went  then  way 

19.  9  get  you  early  on  your  way,  that  thou  ma. 

19.  27  opened  the  doors . .  to  go  his  way ;  and,  be. 

20.  42  they  turned,  .unto  the  way  of  the  wildern. 
Ruth  1.    7  they  went  on  their  way  to  return  unto  the 

1  Sa.    1. 18  the  woman  went  her  way,  and  did  eat 

6.  9  if  it  goeth  up  by  the  way  of  his  own  coast 

6. 12  the  kine  took  the  straight  way  to  the  way 
8.    3  his  sons  walked  not  in  his  ways,  but  turn. 

8.  5  thy  sons  walk  not  in  thy,  ways :  now  make 

9.  6  he  cau  show  us  our  way  that  we  should 
9.    8  give  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell  us  our  way 

12.  23  will  teach  you  the  good  and  the  right  wa. 

13.  17  one  company  turned  unto  the  way.  .unto 
13.  18  turned  the  way  (to)  B. . .  turned  (to)  the  w. 

15.  2  Amalek.  .how  he  laid,  .for  him  in  the  way 
15.  20  have  gone  the  way  which  the  Lord  sent 

17.  52  wounded,  .fell  down  by  the  way  to  Shaa. 

18.  14  D.  behaved  himself  wisely  in  all  his  ways 
24.    3  he  came  to  the  sheep  cotes  by  the  way 

24.  7  But  Saul  rose  up. .and  went  on  (his)  way 

25.  12  David's  young  men  turned  theirway,  and 

26.  3  which  (is)  before  Jeshimon,  by  the  way 
26.  25  David  went  on  his  way,  and  Saul  returned 
28.  22  have  strength  when  thou  goeston  thy  way 
30.    2  but  carried,  .away,  and  went  on  their  way 

2  Sa.    2.  24  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  Gibeon 

13.  30  it  came  to  pass,  while  they  were  in  thew. 
'  3-  34  by  the  way  of  the  hill  side  behind  him 

15.  2  Absalom .  .stood  beside  the  way  of  the  gate 
15. 23  the  people  passed  over,  toward  the  way  of 

16.  13  And  as  David  and  his  men  went  by  thew. 
18.  23  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  way  of  the  plain,  and 
22.  22  For  I  have  kept  the  ways  of  the  Lord 
22.  31  God,  lus  way  (is)  perfect;  the  word  of  the 
22.  33  God  (is)  my  strength,  .he  maketh  my  way 

1  Ki.  1.  49  all.  .rose  up,  and  went  every  man  his  way 
2.  2  I  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth;  be  thou  str. 
2.    3  to  walk  in  his  ways,  to  keep  his  statutes 

2.  4  If  thy  children  take  heed  to  their  way,  t« 

3.  14  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  to  keep 

8.  25  that  thy  children  take  heed  to  their  way 
8.  32  condemning  the  wicked,  to  bring  his  w. 
8.  36  that  thou  teach  them  the  good  way  whe. 
8.  39  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways 
8.  58  to  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his 
11.  29  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  found  him  in  thew. 
11.  33  and  have  not  walked  in  my  ways,  to  do 
11.  38  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  do.  .right  in 
13.    9  nor  turn  again  by  the  same  way  that  thou 
13.  10  he  went  another  way.  .not  by  the  way 
13.  12  What  way  went  he'.',  .had  seeu  what  way 
13. 17  nor  turn  again  to  go  by  the  way  that  thou 
13.  24  a  lion  met  him  by  the  way,  and  slew  him 
13.  24  his  carcase  (was)  cast  in  the  way,  aud  the 
13.  25  saw  the  carcase  cast  in  the  way,  and  the 
13.  26  that  brought  him  back  from  the  way  hea. 
13.  28  he  went  and  found  his  carcase  in  the  way 
J3-  33  Jeroboam  returned  not  from  his  evil  way 
15.  26  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in 
15.  34  walked  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam,  and  in 


WAT 


1  KL  16.    2  thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam 

16.  19  in  walking  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam,  and 
16.  26  he  walked  in  all  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the 
18.    6  went  one  way..  Obadiah  went  another  w. 

18.  7  as  Obadiah  was  in  the  way,  behold,  Eli. 

19.  15  Go,  return  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness 

20.  38  and  waited  for  the  king  by  the  way,  and 
22.  43  he  walked  in  all  the  ways  of  Asa  his  fath. 
22. 52  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in 
22.  52  the  way  of  his  mother,  and  in  the  way  of 

2  Ki.  2.  23  as  he  was  going  up  by  the  way,  there  came 

3.    8  Which  way.  .he  answered,  The  way  thro. 

3.  20  there  came  water  by  the  way  of  Edom 

6.  19  This  (is)  not  the  way,  neither  (is)  thisthe 

7.  15  all  the  way  (was)  full  of  garments  aud  ve. 

8.  18,  27  And  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the 

9.  27  Ahaziah.  .fled  by  the  way  of  the  garden 

10.  12  he  (was)  at  the  shearing  house  in  the  way 
11. 16  and  she  went  by  the  way  by  the  which 

11.  19  came  by  the  way  of  the  gate  of  the  guard 

16.  3  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Isr. 

17.  13  Turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways,  and  keep 
19.  28  I  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  wh. 

19.  33  By  the  way  that  he  came,  by  the  same 

21.  21  he  walked  in  all  the  way  that  his  father 

21.  22  and  walked  not  in  the  way  of  the  Lord 

22.  2  walked  in  all  the  way  of  David  his  father 
25.  4  by  the  way  of  the  gate  between  two  walls 
25.    4  (the  king)  went  the  way  toward  the  plain 

2  Ch.  6.  16  that  thy  children  take  heed  to  theirway 
6.  23  recompensing  his  way  upon  his  own  head 
6.  27  when  thou  hast  taught  them  the  good  way 
6.  30  unto  every  man  according  unto  all  his  w. 
6.  31  to  walk  in  thy  ways,  so  long  as  they  live 

6.  34  go.  .by  the  way  that  thou  shalt  send  th. 

7.  14  If  my  people,  .turn  from  their  wicked  w. 

11.  17  for  three  years  they  walked  in  the  way  of 
13.  22  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Abijah,  and  his  w. 
17.    3  he  walked  in  the  first  ways  of  his  father 
*7.    6  his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  of  the 
iS.  23  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 

20.  32  he  walked  in  the  way  of  Asa  his  father 

21.  6  he  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  I. 

21.  12  not  walked  in  the  ways,  ,nor  in  the  ways 
21. 13  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Is. 

22.  3  He  also  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  house 
27.   6  he  prepared  his  ways  before  the  Lord  his 

27.  7  all  his  wars,  and  his  ways,  lo,  they  (arel 

28.  2  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of  Is. 

25.  26  the  rest  of  his  acts  and  of  all  his  ways 
34.    2  walked  in  the  ways  of  David  his  father 

Ezra    8.  21  to  seek  of  him  a  right  way  for  us,  and  for 

8.  22  to  help  us  against  the  enemy  in  the  way 
8.  31  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  way 

Neh.   9. 12  to  give  them  light  in  the  way  wherein  th. 

9. 19  lead  them  in  the  way.  .the  way  wherein 
Job     3.  23  (Why  is  light  given)  to  a  man  whose  way 

4.  6  thy  hope,  and  the  uprightness  of  thy  wa. 
6.  i3  The  paths  of  their  way  are  turned  aside 
8. 19  this  (is)  the  joy  of  his  way,  and  out  of  the 

12.  24  in  a  wilderness  (where  there  is)  no  way 
13. 15  I  will  maintain  mine  own  ways  before  him 

17.  9  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way 
19.  12  raise  up  their  way  against  me,  and  encamp 
21. 14.  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways 
21.29  Have  ye  not  asked  them .  .bythe  way?  and 

21.  31  Who  shall  declare  his  way  to  his  face?  and 

22.  3  that  thou  makest  thy  ways  perfect? 
22. 28  and  the  light  shall  shine  upon  thy  ways 

23.  10  he  knoweth  the  way  that  1  take :  (when) 

23.  11  My  foot  hath  held  his  steps,  his  way  have 

24.  4  They  turn  the  needy  out  of  the  way :  the 
24. 13  they  know  not  the  ways  thereof,  nor  abide 

24. 18  he  beholdeth  not  the  way  of  the  vineyards 

24.  23  resteth,  yet  his  eyes  (are)  upon  their  ways 

26.  14  these  (are)  parts  of  his  w,ays  ;  but  how  li. 
28.  23  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and 

28.  26  and  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  the  thun. 

29.  25  I  chose  out  their  way,  and  sat  chief,  and 
31.   4  Doth  not  he  see  my  ways,  and  count  all 

31.  7  If  my  step  hath  turned  out  of  the  way 
34.  21  his  eyes  (are)  upon  the  ways  of  man,  aud 

34.  27  and  would  not  consider  any  of  his  ways 

36.  23  Who  hath  enjoined  him  his  way  ?  or  who 

38. 19  Where  (is)  the  way  (where)  light  dwelle.? 
38. 24  By  what  way  is  the  light  parted,  (which) 

38.  25  or  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  thunder 

40. 19  He  (is)  the  chief  of  the  ways  of  God:  heth. 
Psa.     1.    1  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor 

1.  6  the  way  of  the  righteous :  but  the  way  of 

2.  12  ye  perish  (from)  the  way,  when  lus  wrath 

5.  8  make  thy  way  straight  before  my  face 

10.  5  His  ways  are  always  grievous ;  thy  judg. 

18.  21 1  have  kept  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  ha. 
iS.  30  (As  for) God,  his  way  (isj  perfect:  the  word 
18.  32  (It  is)  God  that.. maketh  my  way  perfect 

25.  4  Show  me  thy  ways,  O  Lord  ;  teach  me  thy 
25.    8  therefore  will  he*  teach.. in  the  way 

25.   9  and  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  way 

25. 12  him  shall  he  teach  in  the  way  (that)  he  sh. 

27.  11  Teach  me  thy  way,  O  Lord,  and  lead  me 

32.  8  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou  shalt  go 

35.  6  Let  their  way  lie  dark  and  slippery :  and 

36.  4  he  setteth  himself  in  a  way  (that  is)  not 

37.  s  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord;  trust  also 

37.  7  because  of  him  who  prospereth  in  his  way 
37.  23  a  (good)  man. .he  deughteth  in  his  way 
37.  34  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  keep  his  way,  and 

39.  1  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not 
49.  1  -i  Tins  their  way  (is)  their  folly :  yet  their 
51.  13  Then  will  I  teach  transgressors  thy  ways 
67.   2  That  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  the  ea. 


WAY 


1039 


WAY 


Psa.  77. 

77 

80. 

81. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

91. 

95- 
101. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
107. 
107. 
107, 
no, 
119, 
119. 
119. 
119, 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
119. 
128. 
138. 
139. 
139- 
143- 
145. 
146. 
Prov.  1. 
1. 


Eccl.' 


=3- 
23. 
26. 
28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
3°- 
3°- 
3°- 
3T- 


13  Thy  way,  O  God,  (is)inthe  sanctuary :  who 

19  Thy  way  (is)  in  the  sea,  and  thy  path  in  the 

12  all  they  which  pass  by  the  way  do  pluck 

13  Oh  that.. Israel  had  walked  iu  my  ways 
13  and  shall  set  (us)  in  the  way  of  his  steps 
ti  Teach  me  thy  way,  0  Lord  ;  I  will  walk 
41  All  that  pass  by  the  way  spoil  him  :  he  is 

11  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in. .thy  ways 
10  do  err.. they  have  not  known  my  ways 

2  will  behave  myself  wisely  in  a  perfect  way 

6  he  that  walketh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  shall 

23  He  weakened  my  strengthiu  the  way ;  he 

7  He  made  known  his  ways  unto  Moses,  his 

4  wandered  in. .wilderness  in  a  solitary  way 
7  he  led  them  forth  by  the  right  way,  that 

40  in  the  wilderness,  where  (there  is)no  way 

7  He  shall  drink  of  the  brook  in  the  way,  the 
1  Blessed  (are)  the  uudetiled  in  the  way,  who 

3  also  do  no  iniquity :  they  walk  in  his  ways 

5  O  that  niyways  were  directed  to  keep  thy 
.  14  I  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of  thy  testim. 

26  I  have  declared  my  ways,  and  thou  heard. 

27  Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  pr. 

29  Remove  from  me  the  way  of  lying ;  and 

30  I  have  chosen  the  way  of  truth ;  thy  jud. 

32  I  will  run  the  way  of  thy  commandments 

33  Teach  me,  O  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  statutes 
37  vanity ;  (and)  quicken  thou  me  in  thy  w. 
59  I  thought  on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  fe. 
168  testimonies;  all  my  ways  (are)  before  thee 

1  that  feareth.  that  walketh  in  his  ways 

5  they  shall  slug  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord 
3  Thou . .  art  acquainted  (with)  all  my  ways 

24  any)  wicked  way.. lead  me  in  the  way  ev. 

8  cause  me  to  know  the  way  wherein  I  should 
17  The  Lord  (is)  righteous  in  all  his  ways,  and 

9  the  way  of  the  wicked  he  turneth  upside 
15  My  son,  walk  not  thou  in  the  way  with 

31  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  and 
8  He  keepeth.  .and  preserveth  the  way  of 
12  To  deliver  thee  from  the  way  of  the  evil 

13  Who  leave,  .to  walk  in  the  ways  of  darkn. 

20  That  thou  mayest  walk  in  the  way  of  good 

6  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  him,  and  he 
17  Her  ways  (are)  ways  of  pleasantness,  and 
23  Then  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  way  safely 

31  Envy  thou  not.. and  choose  none  of  his  w. 
it  I  have  taught  thee  in  the  way  of  wisdom 

14  Enter  uot.  .go  not  into  the  way  of  evil  (men) 

19  The  way  of  the  wicked  (is)  a  s  dr.rkness,  th. 

26  Ponder. . and  let  all  thy  way^'e  established 
8  Remove  thy  way  far  from  Lor,  and  come 

21  the  ways  01  man  (are)  before  the  eyes  of 
6  Go  to  the  ant.  .consider  her  ways,  and  be 

23  reproofs  of  instruction  (are)  the  way  of  life 

8  Passing,  .he  went  the  way  to  her  house 

25  Let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  ways,  go 

27  Her  house  (is)the  way  to  hell,  going  down 

2  She  standeth.  .by  the  way  in  the  places  of 

13  the  evil  way,  and  the  froward  mouth,  do  I 

22  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  his  way 

32  for  blessed  (are  they  that)  keep  my  ways 
6  Forsake  the  foolish,  andlive;  and  go  in..w, 

9  he  that  preserveth  his  ways  shall  be  kno. 
29  The  way  of  the  Lord  (is)  strength  to  the 

5  righteousness,  .shall  direct  his  way,  but 

20  (such  as  are)  upright  in  (their)  way  (are) 

15  The  way  of  a  fool  (is)  right  in  his  own  ey. 

26  but  the  way  of  the  wicked  seduceth  them 

6  keepeth  (him  that  is)  upright  in  the  way 

1 5  giveth  favour :  but  the  way  of  transgressors 
2  (lie  that  is)  perverse  in  his  ways  despiseth 

8  wisdom,  .(is)  to  understand  his  way,  but 

12  There  isaway..the  end.. the  ways  of  death 

14  The  backslider,  .filled  with  his  own  ways 

9  The  way  of  the  wicked  (is)  an  abomination 
19  The  way  of  the  slothful,  .thewayof  the  ri. 

2  All  the  ways  of  a  man  (are)  clean  in  his 

7  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 
9  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way:  but  the 

17  hethatkeepethhiswaypreservethhissoul 

25  There  is  a  way.. the  end.,  the  ways  of  death 
29  leadeth  him  into  the  way  (that  is)  not  go. 
31  (if)  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness 

3  The  foolishness  of  manpervertethhisway 

16  (but)  he  that  despiseth  Iris  ways  shall  die 

24  can  a  man  then  understand  his  own  way  ? 

2  Every  way  of  a  man  (is)  right  in  his  own 

8  The  way  of  man  (is)  froward  and  strange 
16  The  man  that  wandereth  out  of  the  way 
29  (as  for)  the  upright,  he  directeth  his  way 

5  Thorns  (and)  snares  are  in  the  way  of  the 

6  Train  up  a  child  iu  the  way  he  should  go 
19  be  wise,  and  guide  thine  heart  in  the  way 

26  My  son.  .let  thine  eyes  observe  my  ways 

13  (There  is)  a  lion  in  the  way;  a  lion  (is)  in 
6  than  (he  that  is)  perverse  (in  his)ways,  th. 

10  the  righteous  to  go  astray  in  an  evil  way 

18  (he  that  is)  perverse  (in  his)  ways  shall  fa. 

27  (he  that  is)  upright  in  the  way  (is)  abomin. 

19  The  way  of  an  eagle,  .the  way  of  a  serpent 

19  the  way  of  a  ship,  .the  way  of  a  man  with 

20  Such  (is)  the  way  of  an  adulterous  woman 

3  nor  thy  ways  to  that  which  destroyethki. 
3  when  he  that  is  a  fool  walketh  by  the  way 
5  As  thou  kuowest  not  what  (is)  the  way  of 

9  walk  in  the  ways  of  thine  heart,  and  in 

5  fears  (shallbe)in  the  way,  andthe  almond 
3  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will 
12  cause  (thee)  to  err,  and  destroy  the  way 

11  that  I  should  not  walk  iu  the  way  of  this 
1  did  more  grievously  afflict  (her  by)  the  way 


Isa.  15. 

30- 
30- 
35- 
37- 
37- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
42. 
42 
43- 
43- 
45- 


Lam. 


Eze. 


5  in  the  way  of  Horonaim  they  shall  rai?o 

II  Get  you  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out  of 
21  This  (is)  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye 

8  a  way,  and  it  shall  be  called  the  way  of 

29  I  will  turn  thee  back  1  ly  the  way  by  which 
34  By  the  way  that  he  came,  by  the  same  sh. 

3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  st. 

14  showed  to  him  the  way  of  understanding 
27  My  way  is  hid  from  the  LORD,  and  my  ju. 
16  I  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  (that)they 

24  they  would  not  walk  in  his  ways,  neither 

16  Thus  saiththe  Lord,  which  maketh  a  way 
19  I  will  even  make  a  way  in  the  wilderness 

13  I  will  direct  all  his  ways:  he  shall  build 

15  I  have  spoken,  .he  shall  make  his  way  pr. 

17  which  leadeth  thee  by  the  way.  .thoush. 

9  They  shall  feed  in  the  ways,  and  their  pa. 

III  will  make  all  my  mountains  a  way,  and 

10  that  hath  made  the  depth  of  the  sea  a  w. 

6  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way 

7  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 

8  neither  (are)  your  ways  my  ways,  saith 

9  so  aremy  ways  higher  thanyour  ways,  and 

11  they  all  look  to  theirown  way,  every  one 
10  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way 

14  prepare  the  way.  .take  up.  .out  of  the  w. 

1 7  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  Ins  heart 

18  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him 

2  delight  to  know  my  ways,  as  a  nation  that 
13  not  doiug  thine  own  ways,  nor  rinding 

8  The  way  of  peace  they  kuownot,  and  (th. 
10  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  people;  cast  up 
17  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err  from  thy  w. 

5  (those  that)  remember  thee  in  thy  ways 

2  rebellious  people,  which  walketh  in  a  way 

3  they  have  chosen  their  own  ways,  andth. 

17  forsaken.. when  he  led  thee  by  the  way? 

18  in  the  way  of  Egypt,  .in  the  way  of  Assy. 
23  thy  way . .  a  dromedary  traversing  her  ways 
33  Why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  seek  love? 
33  wherefore  hast  thou  also  taught,  .thy  wa.? 
36  Why  gaddest  thou  about,  .to  change  thy  w.? 

2  in  the  ways  hast  thou  satforthem,  as  the 
13  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the  strangers 

21  they  have  perverted  their  way .  .they  have 

18  Thy  way  and  thy  doings  have  procured 

4  for  they  know  not  the  way  of  the  Lord 

5  they  have  known  the  way  of  the  Lord 

16  Stand  ye  in  the  ways,  .the  good  way,  and 

25  Go  not  forth,  .nor  walk  by  the  way,  for 
27  that  thou  mayest  know  and  trytheir  way 

3  Amend  your  ways  and  your  doings,  and 

5  For  if  ye  throughly  amend  your  ways  and 
23  walk  ye  in  all  the  ways  that  I  have  com. 

2  Learn  not  the  way  of  theheathen,  and  be 
23  I  know  that  the  way  of  man  (is)  not  in 

1  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  pr.? 

16  if  they  will  diligently  learn  the  ways  of 

7  (since)  they  return  not  from  their  ways 

17  For  mine  eyes  (are)  upon  all  their  ways 

10  to  give  every  man  according  to  his  ways 

11  from  his  evil  way,  and  make  your  ways 

15  to  stumble  in  their  ways .  .a  way  not  cast 

8  set.  .the  way  of  life,  and  the  way  of  death 

12  Wherefore  their  way  shall  be  unto  them 

22  have  turned  them  from  their  evil  way,  and 
5  Turn  ye  again,  .every  one  from  his  evil  w. 

3  and  turn  every  man  from  his  evil  way 

1 3  Therefore  now  amend  your  ways  and  your 
11  And  the  prophet  Jeremiah  went  his  way 

9  by  the  rivers  of  waters  in  a  straight  way 
21  set  thine  heart,  .the  way  (which)  thou  we. 

19  upon  all  the  ways,  .according  to  his  ways 

39  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and  oue  way 
15  Return  ye.  .every  man  from  his  evil  way 

3  may  return  every  man  from  his  evil  way 
7  will  return  every  one  from  his  evil  way 

4  the  way  of  the  kings  garden,  .the  way  of 

3  That  the  Lord.. may  show  us  the  way  wh. 
19  O  inhabitants  of  Aroer,  stand  by  the  way 

5  They  shall  ask  the  way  to  Zion  with  their 
7  the  way  of  the  gate,  .the  way  of  the  plain 

4  The  ways  of  Zion  do  mourn,  because  none 
9  He  hath  inclosed  my  ways  with  hewn  st. 

11  He  hath  turned  aside  my  ways,  and  pull. 

40  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn 
iS  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his  wicked  way 
19  his  wickedness,  nor  from  his  wicked  ways 

3,  8  will  judge  thee  according  to  thy  ways 

4  I  will  recompense  thy  ways  upon  thee 
9  recompense  thee  according  to  thy  ways 

27  I  will  do  unto  them  after  their  way,  and 

5  lift  up  thine  eyes  now  the  way  toward  the 
5  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  the  way  toward  the 

2  six  men  came,  .the  way  of  the  higher  gate 
10  I  will  recompense  their  way  upon  their  he. 

21  I  will  recompense  their  way  upon  their  h. 

22  he  should  not  return  from  his  wicked  w. 

22  and  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  doings 

23  when  ye  see  their  ways  and  their  doings 
25  thy  high  place  at  every  head  of  the  way 
27  daughters.. which  are  ashamed  of  thy..w. 
31  eminent  place  in  the  head  of  every  way 
43  I  also  will  recompense  thy  way  upon  (th. 
47  Yet  hast  thou  not  walked  after  theii  ways 
47  corrupted  more  than  they  in  all  thy  ways 
61  Then  thou  shalt  remember  thy  ways,  and 
23  not  that  he  should  return  from  his  ways 
25,  29  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 

25,  29  Is  not  my  way  equal  ?  are  not  your  w . 

30  every  one  according  to  his  ways,  saiththe 
43  there  shall  ye  remember  your  ways,  and 


43* 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44. 
46. 
46. 
46. 


Eze.  20.  44  not  according  to  your  wicked  ways,  nor 
21.  19  two  ways,  .at  the  head  of  the  way  to  the 
21.  20  Appoint  a  way,  that  the  sword  may  come 

21.  21  of  the  way,  at  the  head  of  the  two  ways 

22.  31  their  own  way  have  I  recompensed  upon 
23. 13  I  saw  that  she  was  defiled,  .both  oneway 

23.  31  Thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  thy  sister 

24.  1  j  according  to  thy  ways,  and  according  to 
28. 15  Thou  (was)  perfect  in  thy  ways  from  the 
32.    8  not  speak  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his  w. 
32.    9  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  of  his  way  to  tu. 
32.   9  if  he  do  not  turn  from  his  way,  he  shall 
32. 11  turn  from  his  way.  .from  your  evil  ways 
32. 17,  20  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal 
32.  17  but,  as  for  them,  then-  way  is  not  equal 
32.  20  I  will  judge  you  every  one  after  his  ways 
36. 17  defiled  it  by  their  own  way.  .their  way  was 
36.  19  according  to  their  way  and  according  to 
36.  31  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil  w. 
36.  32  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  your.  .w. 
42.    1  the  outer  court,  the  way  toward  the  north 
42.    4  ten  cubits  breadth  inward,  a  way  of  one  c. 
42.  n  the  way  before  them  (was)  like  the  appear. 

42.  12  a  door  in  the  head  of  the  way . .  the  way  di. 

43.  2  the  glory,  .came  from  the  way  of  the  east 
4  the  glory  of  the  Lord  came . .  by  the  way 

1  Then  he  brought  me  back  the  way  of  the 
3  he  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of 

3  and  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  same 

4  Then  brought  he  me  the  way  of  the  north 

2  the  prince  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the 

8  by  the  way  of  the  porch,  .by  the  way  th. 

9  the  way  of  the  north,  .the  way  of  the  so. 
46.    9  the  way  of  the  south,  .the  way  of  the  no. 

46.  9  he  shall  not  return  by  the  way  of  the  gate 

47.  2  thewayof  thegate.  .the way  withoutunto 

47.  2  the  outer  gate  by  the  way  that  looketh  ea, 
47. 15  from  the  great  sea,  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as 

48.  1  From  the  northendtothecoastof  the  way 
6  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns,  and 

4.    9  I  will  punish  them  for  their  ways,  and  re. 

6.  9  company  of  priests  murder  in  the  wayby 
9.    8  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all  his  ways,  .hatred 

10.  13  thou  didst  trust  in  thy  way,  in  the  multi. 

12.  2  and  will  punish  Jacob  according  to  his  w. 

13.  7  as  a  leopard  bythe  way  will  I  observe  (th.) 

14.  9  the  ways  of  the  Lord  (are)  right,  andthe 
2.    7  they  shall  march  every  one  on  his  ways 

Amos  2.    7  That  pant.  ,and  turn  aside  the  way  of  the 
Jon.    3.    8  let  them  turn  every  one  from  his  evil  way 

1.  10  saw.  .that  they  turned  from  their  evil  w. 

2  he  wilt  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will 

3  Lord,  .his  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  in 
1  Keep  the  munition,  watch  the  way,  make 

5  thus  saith  the  Lord  . .  Consider  your  ways 

4  Turn  ye  now  from  your  evil  ways . .  your  e. 

6  according  to  our  ways,  and  according  to 

7  If  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  if  thou 

8  But  ye  are  departed  out  of  the  way,  ye  have 

2.  9  according  as  ye  have  not  kept  my  ways 

3.  1  and  he  shall  prepare  the  way  before  me 

6. A  going,  walk,  nybn,  rty?^  helikah,  halikah. 
Prov  31.  27  She  looketh  well  to  the  ways  of  her  house 
Hab.    3.    6  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow :  his  ways(are) 

7.  A  track,  course,  n^yn  magalah. 

Prov.  5.   6  her  ways  are  moveable . .  thou  canst  not  k. 

8. A  trodden  path  or  way,  Tru  nathib. 

Job   18. 10  The  snare  is  laid  for  him.  .in  the  way 
Psa.  78.  50  He  made  a  way  to  his  anger;  he  spared 

9. Midst,  middle,  ^crov,  fieaos  meson,  mesos. 

Col.    2.  14  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  c. 
2  Th.  2.   7  letteth.  .until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way 

10.  Way,  road,  journey,  custom,  6$6s  Jwdos. 

Matt.  2.  12  departed  into  their,  .country  another  w. 

3.  3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  makehis 

4.  15  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee 

5.  25  Agree .  .whiles  thou  art  in  the  way  with 

7.  13  for  wide  (is)  the  gate,  and  broad  (is)  the  w. 

7.  14  strait  (is)  the  gate,  and  narrow  (is)  the  w. 

8.  28  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way 
10.    5  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
it.  10  which  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee 
13.    4  when  he  sowed,  some,  .fell  by  the  way 
13.  19  This  is  he  which  received  seed  bythe  way 

15.  32  away  fasting,  lest  they  faint  in  the  way 
20.  17  took  the  twelve  disciples  apart  in  the  way 

20.  30  two  blind  men,  sitting  by  the  way  side 

21.  8  spread. .in  the  way . . strawed .  intheway 
21.  19  when  he  saw  a  fig  tree  in  the  way,  he  ca. 

21.  32  For  John  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of  ri. 

22.  16  that  thou,  .teachest  the  way  of  God  in  tr. 
Mark  1.  2  which  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee 

1.   3  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his 
4.   4  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 
4. 15  these  are  they  by  the  way  side,  where  the 
8.   3  If  I  send  them,  .they  willfaintby  theway 

8.  27  by  the  way  he  asked  his  disciples,  saying 

9.  33  "What  was  it  that  ye  disputed,  .by  the  w.? 
9.  34  for  [by  the  way]  they  had  disputed  among 

10. 17  And  when  he  wasgone  forth  into  theway 
10.  32  they  were  in  the  way  going  up  to  Jerusa. 

10.  52  immediately  he.  .followed  Jesusiuthew. 

11.  8  spread,  .in  the  way.  .[strawed.  .in  the  w.] 

12.  14  that  thou,  .teachest  the  ways  of  God  in  t. 
Luke  1.  76  thou  shalt  go  before,  .to  prepare  his  way 

1.  79  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace 
3.  4  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make 
3.  5  the  rough  ways  (shall  be)  made  smooth 
7.  27  which  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee 


Hos. 


Joel 


Mic. 
^ah. 


Hag. 
Zech. 


Mai.   2. 


WAY 


1040 


WEALTH 


Luke  8.    5  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side 

8.  12  Those  by  the  way  side  are  they  that  hear 
g.  57  it  came  to  pass,  .as  they  went  in  the  way 
io.    4  nor  shoes ;  and  salute  no  man  by  the  w. 

10.  31  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that  w. 

12.  58  in  the  way,  give  diligence  that  thou  may. 
iS.  35  a  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  way  side 

19.  36  And.  .they  spread  their  clothes  in  the  w. 

20.  21  that  thou,  .teachest  the  way  of  God  truly 
24.  32  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way,  and 
24.  35  they  told  what  things(were  done)  in. . w. 

John  1.  23  Make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord, as  sa. 
14.  4  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  kn. 
14.  5  know  not.  .and  how  can  we  know  the  way 
14.  6  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the  life 
Acts  2.  28  Thou  hast  made  known  to  me  the  ways 
8.  26  unto  the  way  that  goeth  down  from  Jer. 
8.  36  as  they  went  on  (their)  way,  they  came 

8.  39  the  eunuch,  .went  on  his  way  rejoicing 

9.  2  if  he  found  any  of  this  way,  whether  they 
9/17  Jesus,  that  appeared  unto  thee  in  the  way 
9. "27  how  he  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  way,  and 

13.  10  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the.  .ways 

14.  16  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their,  .wa. 
16. 17  which  show  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation 
18.  25  This  man  was  instructed  in  the  way  of 

18.  26  expounded  unto  him  the  way  of  God  mo 

19.  g  spake  evil  of  that  way  before  the  multit. 
19.  23  there  arose  no  small  stir  about  that  way 
22.  4  And  I  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  death 
24. 14  that  after  the  way  which  they  call  heresy 

24.  22  having,  .perfect  knowledge  of  (that)  way 

25.  3  And.  .laying  wait  in  the  way  to  kill  him 

26.  13  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light  from  heaven,  ab. 
Horn.  3. 16  Destruction  and  misery  (are)  in  their  wa 

3.  17  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known 

11.  33  unsearchable,  .and  his  ways  past  finding 
1  Co.    4.  17  remembrance  of  my  ways  which  be  in  Ch. 

12.  31  yet  show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way 

1  Til.  3.  11  Now.  .Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto 
Heb.   3.  10  I . .  said . .  they  have  not  known  my  ways 

9.    8  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was 
10.  20  By  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he  hath 
Jas.    1.    8  a  double  minded  man.,  unstable  in..hisw. 
2.  25  when  she. .had  sent  (them)  out  another  w. 
5.  20  the  siuuer  from  the  error  of  his  way  shall 

2  Pe.   2.   2  by  reason  of  whom  the  way  of  truth  shall 

2. 15  Which  have  forsaken  the  right  way,  and 
2.  15  are  gone  astray,  following  the  way  of  Ba. 
2.  21  better.. nou  to  have  known  the  wayof  right 
Jude  1 1  for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain,  and 
Rev.  15.  3  just  and  true  (are)  thy  ways,  thou  king  of 
16.  i2  that  the  way  of  the  kings  of  the  east  mig. 

11.  A  passing  ahng,  passage,  TrJ.poo'os  parodos. 

1  Co.  16.    7  For  I  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  way 

12.  A  passage,  passage  way,  iropela  poreia. 

Jas.    1. 11  shall  the  rich  man  fade  away  in  his  ways 
13.-4  turn,  TpoVos  tropos. 

Rom.  3.    2  Much  every  way :  chiefly,  because  that 
Phil.    1.  i3  notwithstanding,  every  way,  whether  in 
[See  also  Bring,  bring  on,  broad,  flee,  go,  other,  perni- 
cious, straight,  taken  out,  tins,  turn  every,  which.] 

WAY  and  that  way,  this  — 

Thus  and  thus,  rbi  na  koh  vakoh. 

Exod.  2. 12  he  looked  this  way  and  that  way,  and  wh. 
WAY  (off),  to  be  a  good  or  great  — 
l.To  be  or  put  far  off,  prrj  racliaq,  5. 

Judg  18.  22  when  they  were  a  good  way  from  the  ho. 

Gen.  21. 16  sat.. down  over  against  (hiin)a  good  way  off 

2. Far  off,  tt6^co  porrho. 

Lukei4.  32  while  the  other  is  yet  a  great  way  off,  he 
3.  Far  off,  fxaKpdv  makran. 

Matt.  8.  30  there  was  a  good  way  off  from  them  an  he. 

Lukeis.  20  when  he  was  jet  a  great  way  off,  his  father 

WAY  to  escape  or  flee,  to  have  no  — 

1.  Flight,  place  of  flight,  DiaD  manos. 

Jer.  25.  35  the  shepherds  shall  have  no  way  to  flee,  nor 

2.  .4  way  or  passage  out,  eKj3a<m  ekbasis. 

1  Co.  10.  13  with  the  temptation . .  make  a  way  to  esc. 
WAY,  to  be  or  turn  out  of  the  — 

l.To  err,  wander,  go  astray,  njjn  taah. 

Isa.  28.    7  are  out  of  the  way.  .are  out  of  the  way 
"l.To  he  turned  out  or  aside,  iKTp€Tro/xatektrepo7nai. 

Heb.  12.  13  which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  way 

3.  To  make  to  err  or  wander,  irXavdw  planao. 
Heb.   5.    2  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way 

WAY  (of),  by  or  in  the — 

1.  To  meet,  N"ji?  qara. 

Exod.  5.  20  Moses  and  Aaron,  who  stood  in  the  way 

2.  In,  iv.en. 

2  Pe.  3.    1  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  rem. 
WAY,  to  be  or  go  on  the  — 

To  remove,  journey,  ypj  nasa. 

Jer.     4.   7  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentilesis  on  his  way 
Zech  10.    2  they  went  their  way  as  a  flock,  they  were 

WAYFARING  man  — 

l.To  use  the  customary  path,  nixarach. 

Judgig.  17  he  saw  a  wayfaring  man  in  the  street  of 

-•  Sa,  12.   4  to  dress  for  the  wayfaring  man  that  was 

Jer.     9.    2  a  lodging  place  of  wayfaring  meu,  that  I 

14.    8  as  a  wayfaring  man  (that)  turneth  aside 


2.  To  go  on  in  the  way,  ?i~n  T^n  halak  derek. 

Isa.  35.    8  the  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall  not 

3.  To  go  or  pass  over  the  path,  rnk  -qjj  abar  orach. 

Isa.  33.   8  the  wayfaring  man  ceaseth :  he  hath  bro. 
WAYMARK,  wayside  — 
l.Bythe  way  or  trodden  path,  ^jiiT/fl  al-had-derck. 

Gen.  38.  21  Where  (is)  the  harlot,  .by  the  way  side? 

2.  The  (hand  or)  side  of  the  ivay,  tj*ii  t  yad  de.rek. 

1  Sa.  4. 13  Eli  sat  upon  a  seat  by  the  way  side  watch. 

3.  The  (hand  or)  side  of  the  course  or  trackpzy'Q  t. 

Psa.  140.   5  they  have  spread  a  net  by  the  way  side,  they 

4.  Sign,  monument,  \VT$  tsiyyun. 

Jer.  31.  21  Set  thee  up  waymarks,  make  thee  high  he. 
WE  — 

1.  We,  we  ourselves,  »n  anu. 

Jer.  42.   6  the  Lord  our  God,  to  whom  we  send  thee 

2.  We,  we  ourselves,  n^rutt,  N:ru«  anachna. 

Ezra  4. 16  We  certify  the  king,  that  if  this  city  be  b. 

5. 11  We  are  the  servantsof  the  God  of  heaven 
Dan.   3. 16  we  (are)  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this 

3.  17  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver  us 

3.  We,  we  ourselves,  ^ruN  anachnu. 

Geu.  19. 13  we  will  destroy  tins  place,  because  the  cry 

2  Ch.20.  12  neither  know  we  what  to  do:  butoureyes 
Jer.  26.  19  Thus  might  we  procure  great  evil  against 

1.1,  I  myself ,  ^«  ami, 

2  Sa.  19.  43  we  nave  also  more  (right)  in  David  than 

5.  We,  we  ourselves,  isru  nachnu. 

Gen.  42.  n  We(are)all  one  mans  sons.,  true  (men),  thy 
Exodi6.    7  what  (are)  we,  that  ye  murmur  against  us 

16.  8  what  (are)  we?  your  murmurings  (are)  not 
Num32.  32  We  will  pass  over  armed  before  the  Lord 
2  Sa.  17.  12  we  will  light  upon  him  as  the  dewfalleth 
Lam,  3.  42  We  have  transgressed  and  have  rebelled 

6.  Vs,  TjfAas  (ace.)  hemas. 

Acts   4. 12  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  besa. 
6.   2  It  is  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the 

14.  22  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter 
21.    1  that  after  we  were  gotten  from  them,  and 
21.    5  And  wheuwe  had  accomplished  those  days 
27.    1  when  it  was  determined  that  we  should 
27.  20  all  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was  then 

27.  26  Howbeit  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain 
Rom.  3.   8  as  some  affirm  that  we  say,  Let  us  do  evil 

6.  6  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin 

7.  6  that  [we]  should  serve  in  newness  of  spi 

1  Co.  10.  6  to  the  intent  we  should  not  lust  after  evil 

2  Co.   1.   4  that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them 

1.   8  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life 
5.  10  For  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judg. 

8.  4  Praying  us  with  much  entreaty  that  [wej 
8.   6  Insomuch  that  we  desired  Titus,  that  as 

Eph.    1.   4  that  we  should  be;holy  and  without  blame 

1.  12  That  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  his  gl. 

2.  5  Even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hathqu. 

1  Th.  1.   8  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any  thing 

2  Th.  1.   4  So  that  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the 
Heb.    2.    1  Therefore  we  ought  to  give  the  more  ear. 

13.  6  So  that  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  (is) 
Jas.    1.  18  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first  fruits 

7.  We,  we  ourselves,  7)/j.e7$  (pi.)  hemeis. 

Matt.  6. 12  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  d. 
g.  14  Why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  oft,  but 

17.  19  and  said.  Why  could  notjwe  cast  him  out? 
19.  27  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed 

28.  14  if  this  come  to  the  governor's  ears,  we  will 
See  also  Mark  9.  28;  10.  28;  14.  58;  Luke  3. 14;  9.  13;  18. 
18;  23. 41;  24.  21;  John  1. 16;  4.  22;  6. 42, 69;  7.  35;  8  41, 
48;  9.  21,  24,  28,  29,  40;  12.  34;  17.  11,22;  19.  7;  21.  3;  Acts 
2.  8,  32;  3.  15;  4.  9,  20;  5.32;  6.  4;  10.33,  39.47J  i3-  32; 
14. 15;  15. 10;  20. 6,  13;  21.  7, 12,  25;  23. 15;  24.  8;  28.  21; 
Rom.  6.  4;  8.  [23];  15.  1;  1  Co.  1.  23;  2.  12, 16;  4.  8, 10,  ro, 
10;  8. 6,  6;  9.  11,  11,  12,  25;  11. 16;  12.  13;  15.  30,  52;  2  Co. 
1.  6;  3.  18;  4. 11,  13;  5. 16,  21;  9.  4;  10.  7,  13;  11.  12,  21;  13. 
4»  6,  7,  7,  9;  Gal.  1.  8;  2.  9,  15,  16;  4.  3,  [28];  5.  5;  Eph.  2. 
3;  Phil.  3.  3;  Col.  1.  9,  28;  1  Th.  2. 13,  17;  3.  6,  12;  4.  15, 
17;  5.  8;  2  Th.  2.  13;  Titus  3.  5;  Heb.  2.  3;  3.  6;  10.  39; 
12.  25;  2  Pe.  1.  18;  1  Jo.  3.  14, 16;  4.  6,  10, 11, 14,  16,  17, 
19;  3  Jo.  8,  12. 

S.  To  us,  rjfi7v  (dat.  pi. )  hemin. 

Matt.  8.  29  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  th. 

15.  33  Whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread 
19.  27  said  unto  him.  .what  shall  we  have  there.? 

Mark  1.  24  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  thou  Jesus 
Luke  4.  34  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee.  .Jesus  of  N. 
9. 13  We  have  no  more  but  five  loaves  and  two 
Acts  21.  23  We  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow 

28.  22  we  know  that  every  where  it  is  spoken  ag. 

Eph.   6. 12  For  [we]  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  bl. 

Heb.   4.  13  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have 

5.  11  of  whom  we  have  many  things  to  say,  and 

12.  1  Wherefore  seeing  we  also  are  compassed 
Jas.    5. 17  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we 

9.  Of  us,  our,  7}fiwu  (gen.pl.)  hemon. 

Matt. 28.  13  His  disciples,  .stole  him.  .while  we  slept 
Acts  16.  16  it  came  to  pass,  as  we  went  to  prayer,  a 
21.  10  as  [we]  tarried,  .many  days,  their  came  do. 
21.  17  when  we  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  thebr. 

26.  14  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth,  I  he. 

27.  18  we  being  exceedingly  tossed  with  a  temp. 
27.  27  as  we  were  driven  up  and  down  in  Adria 

Rom.  5.    6  For  when  we  were  yet  without  strength 
5.    8  while  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for 


2  Co.   4.  iS  While  we  look  not  at  the  things  which  arc 
7.    5  For,  when  we  were  come  into  Macedonia 

Heb.  10.  26  For  if  we  sin  wilfully.. there  remaineth  no 
WE  ourselves  — 
We. ..we  ourselves,  ijfAev...7}/j.^s  emen...  hemeis. 

Titus  3.    3  For  we  ourselves  also  were  sometimes  foul 
WEAK  (thing),  weaker,  weakness  — 
l.To  be  weak,  Sox  amal. 

Eze.  16.  30  How  weak  is  thine  heart,  saith  the  Lord 

2.  Weak,  9?OX  umlal. 

Psa.    6.    2  Havemercyuponme,OLoRD;  fori(am)w 

3.  Lean,  poor,  weak,  hi  dal. 

2  Sa.   3.    1  house  of  Saul  waxed  weaker  and.  weaker 

4.  Weak,  overcome,  v'fn  challash. 

Joel    3.  10  into  spears:  let  the  weak  say,  I  \am)  str. 
^.Tender,  soft,  timid,  sp  rah, 

2  Sa.   3.  39  I  (am)  tin's  day  weak,  though  anointedki. 

6.  Feeble,  remiss,  ns"i  rapheh. 

Num.13.  lS  whether  they  (be)  strong  or  weak,  few  or 
2  Sa.  17.  2  I  will  come  uponhim  while  he  (is),  .weak 
Job  4,  3  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  weak  ha. 
Isa.   35.   3  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  confi. 

7.  Unable,  notable,  ab~vt/a.Tos  adunatos. 

Rom  15.   1  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak 

8.  To  be  without  strength,  acrfleyew  astheneo. 

Acts  20.  35  so  labouringye  ought  to  support  the  weak 

1  Co.   8.  11  through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weakbr 

8. 12  But  wheu  ye.  .wound  their  weak  conscie. 

9.  Without  strength,  haQsvi\s  ctsthenCs. 

Matt  26.  41  spirit.,  (is)  willing,  but  the  flesh  (is)  weak- 
Mark^.  38  spirit,  .(is)  ready,  but  the  flesh  (is)  weak 

1  Co.    1.  25  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men 

1.  27  [God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the] 
4. 10  we  (are)  weak,  but  ye  (are)  strong :  ye  (are) 

8.  7  and  their  conscience  being  weak  is  defiled 
3. 10  shall  not  the  conscience  of  him  which  is  w. 

9.  22  the  weak,  .as  weak,  .might  gain  the  weak 
11.  30  For  this  cause  many  (are)  weak  and  sickly 

2  Co.  10. 10  bodily  presence  (is]  weak,  and  (his)speech 
Gal.  4.  9  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  begg. 
1  Th.  5. 14  support  the  weak,  be  patient  toward  afl 
Heb.    7. 18  for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  th. 

10.  With  less  strength,  aaOtveo-Tepos  asthenesteros. 
1  Pe.  3.    7  honour  unto  the  wife,  as  unto  the  weaker 

W.Strcngthlessness,  autJeVem  astheneia. 

1  Co.  2.    3  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear 

15.  43  it  is  sown  in  weakness;  it  is  raised  in  po. 

2  Co.  12.   9  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness 

13.  4  though  he  was  crucified  through  weakness 
Heb.  11.  34  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed 

WEAK,  to  be,  become,  be  made,  be  weakened  — 
1.7b  be  weak,  rpn  chalah. 

Judg  16.    7.  1 1' then  shall  I  be  weak,  and  be  as  anot. 
16. 17  I  shall  become  weak,  and  be  like  any 

2.7*0  become  weak,  n?n  chalah,  4. 

Isa.   14.  10  Art  thou  also  become  weak  as  we?  art 
3.7*0  weaken,  overcome,  be  weak,  vbn  chalash. 

Isa.  14. 12  cut  down.,  whichdidst  weaken  the  nations 
4.7*0  go  on,  proceed,  7)S;  yalak. 

Eze.    7.  17  All  hands  shall  be  feeble,  and  all.  .weak 
21.    7  cometh.. all  knees  shall  be  weak  (as)  wat. 

5.7*0  stumble,  S?3  kashal. 

Psa.  109.  24  My  knees  are  weak  through  fasting,  and 
6.7*0  humble,  afflict,  nju  anah,  3. 

Psa.T02.  23  He  weakened  my  strength  in  the  way,  be 
7. Feeble,  remiss,  n£n  rapheh. 

2  Ch.15.    7  Be  ye'strong.  .let  not  your  hands  be  weak 

Neb..  6.    9  Their  hands  shall  be  weakened  from  the 

8.7*o  enfeeble,  made  to  fall,  ns-i  raphah,  3. 

Ezra  4.  4  Then  the  people  of  the  laud  weakened  the 
Job  12.  21  and  weakeneththestrengthof  themighty 
Jer.  38.   4  thus  he  weakeneth  the  hands  of  the  men 

9.7*0  be  without  strength,  ho-Qevw  astheneo. 

Rom.  4.  19  beingnot  weak  in  faith,  he  considered  nut 
8.    3  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God 

14.  1  Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith  receive  ye 
14.  2  may  eat  all  things  :  another,  who  is  weak 
14.  21  stumbleth,  [or  is  offended,  or  is  made  w.] 

1  Co.  8.    9  a  stumbling  block  [to  them  that  are  weak] 

2  Co.  11.  21  I  speak,  .as  though  we  had  been  weak 

11.  29  Who  is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weak?  who 
12. 10  for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong 
13.    3  which  to  you  ward  is  not  weak,  but  is 
13.    4  For  we  also  are  weak  in  him,  but  we  shall 
13.   9  we  are  glad  when  we  are  weak,  and  ye  are 

WEALTH,  wealthy  — 

1.  Wealth,  substance,  sufficiency,  fin  hon. 

Psa.  1 1 2.    3  Wealth  and  riches  (shall  be)  in  his  house 

Prov  10.  15  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 

13.  11  Wealth  (gotten)  by  vanity  shall  be  dimin. 

18.  11  The  rich  man's  wealth  (is)  his  strong  city 

19.  4  Wealth  maketh  many  friends :  but  the 

2.Forcc,  might,  strength,  ?I0  chayil. 

Gen.  34.  29  all  their  wealth,  and  all  their  little  ones 
Deut.  8. 17  My  power,  .hath  gotten  me  tins  wealth 
*8.  18  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth 
Ruth  2.    1  a  mighty  mail  of  wealth,  of  the  family  of 
2  Ki.  15.  20  exacted,  .of  all  the  mighty  men  of  wealth 


WEAN 


1041 


WEEP 


Job  31.  25  If  1  rejoiced  because  my 'wealth  (was)great 
Psa.  49.    6  They  that  trust  in  their  wealth,  and  boast 

49.  10  meu  die . .  and  leave  their  wealth  to  others 
Prov  13.  22  the  wealth  of  the  sinner  (is)  laidupforthe 
Zech.14.  ij  the  wealth  of  all  the  heathen  round  about 

3,  Good,  good  thing,  3ia  tob. 

Ezra  9.  12  nor  seek  their  peace  or  their  wealth  for 
Esth.io.  3  seeking  the  wealth  of  his  people,  and  spe. 
Job  21. 13  They  spend  their  days  in  wealth,  and  in 

&.Power,  nb  koach. 

Prov.  5.  10  Lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  wealth 
5.  Wealth,  riches,  things  laid  up,  D'paj  nekasim. 
2  Ch.  1.  1 1  thou  hast  not  asked  riches,  wealth,  or  ho. 
1.  12  I  will  give  thee  riches,  and  wealth,  and 
Eccl.  5.  19  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches  and  wea. 
6.  2  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches,  wealth 
6. Fulness,  satiety,  n;v]  revayah. 

Psa.  66.  12  thoubroughtest  us  out  into  a  wealthy  (pi.) 

7. At  ease,  at  rest,  safe,  vS^,  iby  shalev. 

Jer.  49.  31  get  you  up  unto  the  wealthy  nation,  that 
8. Prosperity,  affluence,  sbiropia  euporia. 

Acts  19.  25  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  our  wea. 
WEAN,  -weaned  child,  be  weaned,  to  — 
l.To  complete,  ripen,  wean,  *?dz  gamut. 

1  Sa.    1.  23  until  thouhave  weaned,  .until  she  weaned 
1.  24  when  she  had  weaned  him,  she  took  him 

1  Ei.11.  20  whom  Tahpenes  weaned  in  Pharaoh's  hou. 

Psa.  131.    2  as  a  child  that  is  weaned,  .a  weaned  child 

Isa.    11.    8  the  weaned  child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the 
28.    9  (them  that  are)  weaned  from . .  milk,  (and) 
-  Hos.    1.    8  when  she  had  weaned  Lo-ruhamah,  she 
2.  To  be  completed,  ripened,  weaned,  Spa  gamal,  2. 

Gen.  21.   8  grew,  and  wasweaned.  .Isaac  was  weaned 

1  Sa.    1.  22  (will  not  go  up)  until  the  child  be  weaned 
WEAPON  — 

I. A  pointed  weapon,  or  staff,  jix  azen. 

Deuts3-  13  thou  shalt  have  a  paddle  upon  thy  weap. 

2.  ..4  vessel,  utensil,  instrument,  ,(?3  Iceli. 

Gen.  27.   3  take,  I  pray  thee,  thy  weapons,  thy  quiver 
Kuni35.  18  (if)  he  smite  him  with  an  hand  weapon 
Deut.  1.  41  ye  had  girded  on  every  man  his  weapons 
JudgiS.  11  six  hundred  menappointed  with  weapons 

18. 16  men  appointed  with  their  weapons  of  war 

18. 17  men  (that  were)  appointed  with  weapons 
t  Sa.  21.    8  brought  my  sword  nor  my  weapons  with 

2  Sa.  1.  27  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the  weapons  of  w 
2  Ki.  11.  8  every  man  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand 
■2  Ch.23.  7  every  man  with  his  weapons  in  Ins  hand 
Eccl.  9.  iS  Wisdom  (is)  better  than  weapons  of  war 
Isa.   13.    5  the  weapons  of  his  indignation,  to  destroy 

54. 17  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee 
Jer.   21.   4  I  will  turn  back  the  weapons  of  war  that 

22.    7  I  will  prepare,  .every  one  with  his  weap. 

50.  25  hath  brought  forth  the  weapons  of  his  in. 

51.  20  Thou  (art)  my  battle  ax  (and)  weapons  of 
Eze.    9.    1  everyman(with)his  destroying  weapon  in 

9.    2  every  man  a  slaughter  weapon  in  his  ha. 
32.  27  are  gone  down  to  hell  with  theirjweapons 

3. Armour,  p&%  p&i  nesheq. 

Job  20.  24  He  shall  flee  from  the  iron  weapon,  (and) 
Eze.  39.    9  shall  set  on  fire  and  burn  the  weapons 
39.  10  for  they  shall  burn  the  weapons  with  fire 

4.  A  missile,  dart,  n1?^  shelach. 

2  Ch.  23. 10  every  man  having  his  weapon  iu  his  hand 
Neh.   4. 17  and  with  the  other  (hand)  held  a  weapon 

5. Arms,  instruments,  '6ir\a  hopla. 

Johni8.  3Conieththitherwith.  .torches  and  weapons 
2  Co.  10.    4  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  (are)  not  car. 

WEAR,  (away,  out,  clothes),  wearing,  to  — 

l.To  wear  out,  trouble,  k^2  beta,  3. 

Dan.  7.  25  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  Hi. 

2.  To  clothe,  put  on  clothing,  w^b  labash. 

Deut  22.  1 1  Thou  shalt  not  wear  a  garment  of  divers 
Esth.  6.  8  be  brought  which  the  king  (useth)  to  we. 
Isa.  4.  1  We  will  eat  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our 
Zech.13.   4  neither  shall  they  wear  a  rough  garment 

3. To  fade,  wear  away,  be  empty,  foolish,^}  nabel. 
ExodiS.  18  Thou  wilt  surely  wear  away,  both  thou 

4.  To  lift  or  take  up,  bear  or  carry  away,  tiy}  nasa. 

1  Sa.  2.  28  to  burn  incense,  to  wear  an  ephod*  before 
14.   3  the  Lord's  priest  in  Shiloh,  wearing  an 

22. 18  slew,  .persons  that  did  wear  a  linen  eph. 

5.  To  beat  or  wear  away,  pry  shachaq. 

Job   14.  19  The  waters  wear  the  stones,  thou  washest 

6.  To  be  or  become  clothed,  evBtBvffKofiatendidusko. 

Luke  8.  27  which  had  devils  long  time,  and  ware  no  c. 
7. To  incline,  decline,  k\Ivqi  klino. 

Luke  g.  12  when  the  day  began  to  wear  away,  then 
8. .4  pulling  around,  TrepiQea-ts  perithesis. 

1  Pe.  3.   3  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of  app. 
9.2*0  bear,  wear,  <popzca  phoreo. 

Matt  11.    8  they  that  wear  soft  (clothing)  are  in  kin. 

Johnig.    5  Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing  the  cro. 

.las.     2.    3  ye  have  respect  to  him  that  weareth  the 
WEARIED,  weary  (self),  to  be,  make  — 
1.  To  press,  make  heavy,  rna  tarach,  5. 

Job  17.  xx  Also  by  watering  he  wearieth  the  thick 

131 


2.  To  labour,  be  wearied,  fatigued,  y:;  yaga. 

2  Sa.  23.  10  until  his  hand  was  weary,  and  his  hand 
Psa.     6.   6  I  am  weary  with  my  groaning ;  all  the 

69.  3  I  am  weary  of  my  crying;  my  throat  is  d. 
Isa.  40.  28  the  creator,  .fainteth  not,  neither  is  wea. 
40.  30  Even  the  youths  shall  faint  and  be  weary 
40.  31  they  that  wait,  .shall  run,  and  not  be  we. 
43.  22  but  thou  hast  been  weary  of  me,  O  Israel 
57. 10  Thou  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy 

3.  To  make  to  labour,  malce  weary,  yj;  yaga,  3 
Eccl.  10.  15  foolish  wearieth  every  one  of  them 

i.To  cause  to  labour,  weary,  be  wearied,  yj;  yaga,  5. 
Isa.   43.  23  I  have  not.  .wearied  thee  with  incense 

43.  24  thou  hast  wearied  me  with  thine  iniquit. 

Mai.    2.  17  Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  "with  your  wo. 

2. 17  yet  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  wearied  (h.)? 

5.  To  be  or  become  faint,  tired,  *]y;  yaaph. 

Jer.     2.  24  all  they  that  seek  her  will  not  weary  the. 

51.  58  people  shall  labour.. and  they  shall  be  we. 

51.  64  they  shall  be  weary.  Thus  far  (are)  the 
Hab.    2. 13  shall  weary  themselves  for  very  vanity? 

6.  To  be  weary,  rwS  laah. 

Gen.  19.  n  they  wearied  themselves  to  find  the  door 

7.  To  be  or  become  weary,  rtifh  laah,  2. 

Psa.  68.    g  confirm  thine  inheritance,  when  it  was  we. 
Isa.     1. 14  are  a  trouble  untc  me  ;  I  am  weary  to  be. 

16. 12  when  it  is  seen  that  Moab  is  weary  on  the 

47. 13  Thou  art  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy 
Jer.     6.  11  I  am  weary  with  holding  in  :  I  will  pour 

9.  5  they,  .weary  themselves  to  commit  iniqu. 
15.  6  will  I.  .destroy  thee ;  I  am  weary  with  re. 
20.  9  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could 

S.  To  cause  to  weary,  nto  laah,  5. 

Job  16.   7  now  he  hath 'made  me  weary :  thou  hast 
Isa.     7.  13  small,  .to  weary  men,  but  will  ye  weary 
Jer.  12.   5  If  thou  hast  run.  .and  they  have  wearied 
Eze.  24.  12  She  hath  wearied  (herself)  with  lies,  and 
Mic.    6.   3  wherein  have  I  wearied  thee?  testify  ag. 

9.  To  be  faint,  ^.y,  ayeph. 

Jer.     4.  31  my  soul  is  wearied  because  of  murderers 

lO.To  be  vexed  or  weary,  \**p  guts. 

Gen.  27.  46  I  am  weary  of  my  life  because  of  the  da. 
Prov.  3.  11  My  son.  .neither  be  weary  of  his  correct. 

11.  Satisfied,  satiated,  yiy  sdbea. 

Prov.25. 17  lest  he  be  weary  of  thee,  and.  .hate  thee 

12.  To  faint,  despond,  be  greatly  harassed,  eVtfaKf'w. 
Gal.  6.  9  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well  doing,  for  in 
2  Th.  3. 13  ye,  brethren,  be  not  weary  in  well  doing 

13.2*0  labour,  be  fatigued,  Ka.fj.via  kamno. 

Heb.  12    3  lest  ye  be  weariedand  faint  in  your  minds 
14.2b  labour,  be  weary  or  fatigued,  Koinda  kopiao. 

John  4.    6  therefore,  being  weary  with  (his)  journey 
15.  To  forceunder,  bcatdown,  weary  out,  vira>wid(to. 

Luke  1 8.    5  lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  weary  nie 
WEARINESS,  wearisome,  weary,  (what  a)  — 
1. Labour,  weariness,  yj;  yagia. 

Job     3. 17  There  the  wicked  cease,  .there  the  weary 
2.  Labour,  weariness,  nyj*  yegiah. 

Eccl.12. 12  and  muchstudy  (is)  aweariness'of  the  fie. 
3. Faint,  xoeary,  tired,  f]y;  yaeph. 

Judg.  8. 15  should  give  bread  unto  thy  men.  .weary 

Isa.   50.    4  how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to.  .weary 

4.  What  a  weariness,  hn^q  mattelaah. 

Mai.    1.  13  Ye  said  also,  Behold,  what  a  weariness 

5.  To  loathe,  be  weary,  Bp:  naqat. 

Job  10.   1  My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life  :  I  will  leave 

6.  To  be  weary,  *)iy  uph. 

Judg.  4.  21  smote,  .for  he  was  fast  asleep  and  weary 
7. Faint,  weary,  tired,  ^  ayeph. 

2  Sa.  16.  14  thepeoplethat(were)withhim,  came  we. 

17.  29  The  people  (is)  hungry,  and  weary,  and 
Job  22.  7  Thou  hast  not  given  water  to  the  weary 
Isa.     5.  27  None  shall  be  weary  nor  stumble  among 

28.  12  This  (is)  the  rest,  .ye  may  cause  the  wea. 

32.   2  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  hi  a  weary 

46.  1  (they  are)  a  burden  to  the  weary  (beast) 
Jer.  31.  25  1  have  satiated  the  weary  soul,  and  I  ha. 

8.  Labour,  perverseness,  misery,  Soy,  amal. 

Job     7.   3  wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me 

9.  Weary,  labouring,  yv  yagea. 

Deut. 25.  i8and smote.  ,whenthou(wast)faintandwe. 

2  Sa.  17.   2  I  will  come  upon  him  while  he  (is)  weary 
10.^4  beating,  toil,  trouble,  vexation,  kottos  kopos. 

2  Co. n.  27  Inwearinessandpainfulness.inwatchings 
WEASEL  — 
A  weasel,  mole,  *i?h  choled. 

Lev.  11.  29  the  weasel,  and  the  mouse,  and  the  tort. 
WEATHER  (fair,  foul)  — 
1.  Golden  brightness,  Dni  zahab. 

Job   37.  22  Fair  weather  cometh  out  of  the  north 
2.^4  day  of,  nv  yom. 

Prov.25.  2°  that  taketh  away  a  garment  in  cold  wea. 
Z.Good  or  fine  heavens  or  sky,  evSta  eudia. 

Matt  16.    2  When  it  is  evening, ye  say.  .fair weather 


4.  Winter  vjeather,  storm,  xeijUaSc  cheimon. 

Matt  16.    3  And  in  the  morning,  .foul  weather  to  day 
WEAVE,  weaver,  weaver's  shuttle,  to  — 
l.To  urave,  plait,  J*in  arag. 

Exod28.  32  it  shall  have  a  binding  of  woven  work  ro. 

35.  35  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the.  .wea. 

39.  22  hemadethe  robeoftheephod.  .woven wo. 

39.  27  they  made  coats  (of) fine  linen,  .wovenw. 

Judg  16. 13  If  thou  weavest  the  seven  locks  of  my  he. 

1  Sa.  17.    7  the  staff  of  his  spear . .  like  a  weaver's  beam 

2  Sa.  21. 19  the  staff  of  whose  spear  (was)  like  a  wea. 
2  Ki.23.    7  the  women  wove  hangings  for  the  grove 

1  Ch.  11.  23  a  spear  like  a  weaver's  beam;  and  he  went 

20.    5  whose  spear's  staff,  .like  a  weaver's  beam 
Isa.    19.   9  that  weave  net  works  shall  be  confounded 
38. 12  I  have  cut  off  like  a  weaver  my  life,  he 
59.    s  They  hatch  cockatrice'  eggs,  and  weave 

2.  Web,  weaving  machine,  3~jk  ereg. 

Job    7.   6  My  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shut. 
WEB  — 
l.House,  JT3  bayith. 

Job     8.  14  and  whose  trust  (shall  be)  a  spider's  web 

2.  Web,  ri3EQ  masseketh. 

Judg  1 6.  13  If  thou  weavest  the  seven  locks  with.. the  w. 

16. 14  with  the  pin  of  the  beam,  and  with  the  w. 

3.  Beams,  webs,  D*"Hp  qurim. 

Isa.  59.  5  They  hatch.. and  weave  the  spider's  web 
59.    6  Their  webs  shall  not  become  garments 

WEDDING  — 

A  rejoicing,  wedding  feast,  yd/ios  gamos. 

Matt  22.    3  to  call  them  that  were  bidden  to  the  wed. 

22.  8  The  wedding  is  ready,  but  they  which  w. 

22. 10  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests 

22. 11  a  man  which  hadnot  on  aweddinggarm. 

22. 12  how  earnest  thou  in.  .not  having  a  wed. 
Lukei2.  36  lord,  when  he  will  return  from  the  wed. 

14.   8  When  thou  art  bidden  of  any.  .to  a  wed. 

WEDGE  — 

A  tongue,  \vtn  lashon. 

Josn.  7.21a  wedge  of  gold  of  fifty  shekels  weight 
7.  24  the  wedge  of  gold,  and  his  sons,  and  his 

WEDLOCK,  women  that  break  — 
To  commit  adultery,  ^xi  naaph. 

Eze.  16.  38  judge  thee,  as  women  that  break  wedlock 
WEED  — 
A  weed,  ^D  suph. 

Jon.    2.  5  the  weeds  were  wrapped  about  my  head 
WEEK  — 
l.A  seven,  a  week,  wny  shabua. 

Gen.  29. 27  Fulfil  her  week,  and  we  will  give  thee  this 

29.  28  And  Jacob  did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week 

Exod34.  22  thou  shalt  observe  the  feast  of  weeks,  of 

Lev.  12.    5  she  shall  be  unclean  two  weeks,  as  in  her 

Num28.  26  afteryour  weeks,  .yeshallhaveanholyeo. 

Deut  16.    9  Seven  weeksshalt  thounumberunto  thee 

16.   9  begin  to  number  the  seven  weeks  from 

16.  10  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  weeks  unto 

16.  16  in  the  feast  of  weeks,  and  in  the  feast  of 

2  Ch.  8.  13  in  the  feast  of  weeks,  and  in  the  feast  of 
Jer.  5.  24  he  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed  weeks 
Dan.   9.  24  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy 

9.  25  seven  weeks,  and  threescore  and  two  we. 
9.  26  after  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall  Mes. 
g.  27  for  one  week:  and  in  the  midst  of  the  we. 
10.    2  I  Daniel  was  mourniug  three  full  weeks 

10.  3  I  ate  no.  .bread,  .till  three  whole  weeks 

2.  A  week,  {from  sabbath  to  sabbath),  o-dp&ara.'* 
Matt  28.  1  dawn  toward  the  first  (day)  of  the  week 
Mark  16.  2  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  they  came  unto 
Luke24-  1  upon  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  very  early 
John2o.  1  The  first  (day)  of  the  week  cometh  Mary  M. 
20.  19  same  day . .  being  the  first  (day)  of  the  we. 
Acts  20.  7  upon  the  first  (day)  of  the  week,  when  the 
1  Co.  16.   2  Upon  the  first  (day)  of  the  week  let  every 

S.A  week,  {from  sabbath  to  sabbath),  o-dfUfiarov. 
Mark  16.    9  [was risen  early  the  first  (day)  of  the  week] 
Luke  18.  12  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of 

WEEP  (sore),  weeping  (continual),  to  — 

l.To  weep,  n^3  bakah. 

Gen.  21.  16  And  she  sat  over  against  (him),  .and  wept 

23.  2  Abraham  came  to  mourn . .  and  to  weep  for 
27.  38  And  Esau  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 
29.  11  And  Jacob,  .lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 

33.  4  And  Esau  ran  to  meet  him. .and  they  wept 
37.  35  mourning.  Thus  Ins  father  wept  for  him 

42.  24  turned  himself  about  from  them,  and  we. 

43.  30  he  sought  (where)  to  weep,  .and  wept  there 

45.  14  and  wept ;  and  Benjamin  wept  upon  his 

45. 15  he  kissed  all  his  brethren,  and  wept  upon 

46.  29  he  fell  on  his  neck,  and  wept  on  his  neck 
50.  1  Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's  face,  and  we. 
50.  17  Joseph  wept  when  they  spake  uuto  him 

Exod.2.   6  saw  the  child  :  and,  behold,  the  babe  we. 

Numn.  4  the  children  of  Israel  also  weptagain,  aud 
n.  10  Moses  heard  the  people  weep  throughout 
n.  13  they  weep  unto  me,  saying,  Give  us  flesh 
11. 18  ye  have  wept  iu  the  ears  of  the  Lord,  say. 

11.  20  have  wept  before  him,  saying,  Why  came 
14.    1  cried;  and  the  people  wept  that  night 
25.   6  who  (were)  weeping(before)  the  door  of  the 

Deut.  1.  45  yereturned  and  wept  before  the  Lord;  but 

34.  8  the  children  of  Israel  wept  for  Moses  m 


WEIGH 


1042 


WELL 


Judg.  2.    4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 
14.  16  Samson's  wife  wept  before  him,  and  said 

14.  17  she  wept  before  him  the  seven  days,  while 
20.  23  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  and  wept 

20.  26  came  unto  the  house  of  God,  and  wept,  and 

21.  2  and  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept  sore 
Ruth  1.    9  and  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept 

1.  14  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept  again 

1  Sa,    1.  7  she  provoked  her;  therefore  she  wept,  and 

1.    8  why  weepest  thou?  and  why  eatest  thou 

1.  10  and  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  wept  sore 

11.    4  the  people  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept 

11.  5  What  (aileth)  the  people  that  they  weep? 
20.  41  they  kissed  oneanother,and  wept  one  with 

24. 16  And  Saul  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept 
30.   4  wept,  until  they  had  no  more  power  to  we. 

2  Sa.    1.  12  they  mourned  and  wept,  and  fasted  until 

t.  24  Ye  daughters  of  Israel,  weep  over  Saul 
3.  16  her  husband  went  with  her  along  weeping 
3.  32  wept  at  the  grave .  .all  the  people  wept 
3.  34  And  all  the  people  wept  again  over  him 
12.21  Thoudidstfastandweepfor  the  child  (wh. 

12.  22  I  fasted  and  wept :  fori  said,  Who  can  tell 

13.  36  the  king's  sons.. wept.. his  servants  wept 

15.  23  the  country  wept  with  a  loud  voice,  and 
15-  30  wept  as  he  went.,  weeping  as  they  went  up 

18.  33  and  went  up  to  the  chamber.. and  wept 

19.  1  the  king  weepeth  and  mourneth  for  Abs. 
2  Ki.  8.  11  was  ashamed :  and  the  man  of  God  wept 

8.  12  Hazael  said,  Why  weepeth  my  lord?  And 
13. 14  wept  over  Ms  face,  and  said,  0  my  father 

20.  3  0  Lord,  remember..  And  Hezekiah  wept 
22. 19  hast  rent  thy  clothes,  and  wept  before  me 

2  Ch.34.  27  didst  rend  thy  clothes,  and  weep  before 
Ezra  3.  12  many  of  the  priests.. wept  with  a  loud  vo. 
jo.    1  confessed,  weeping.. people  wept  very  sore 
Neh.    1.    4  I  sat  down  and  wept,  and  mourned  (cer.) 

8.  9  nor  weep.  For  all  the  people  wept,  when 
Job     2.  12  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept ;  and 

27.  15  in  death;  and  his  widows  shall  not  weep 

30.  25  Did  not  I  weep  for  him  that  was  in  trou. 

30.  31  organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  weep 

Psa.  69.  10  I  wept,  (and  chastened)  my  soul  with  fa. 

136.   6  He  that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing 

137-    1  vea>  we  wept,  when  we  remembered  Zion 

Eccl.  3.    4  A  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh ;  a  t. 

Isa.  30.  19  thou  shalt  weep  no  more  :  he  willbe  very 

33.    7  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  bit. 

38.    3  Remember  now,  O  Lord.. Hezekiah  wept 
Jer.     9.    1  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the 

13. 17  my  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  places  for 
22. 10  Weep  ye  not.  .(but)  weep  sore  for  him  th. 
41.    6  to  meet  them,  weeping  all  along  as  he  we. 
48.  32  0  vine  of  Sibmah,  I  will  weep  for  thee  wi. 
50.    4  going  and  weeping:  they  shall  go,  and  se. 

Lam.  r.    2  She  weepeth  sore  in  the  night,  and  her  te. 

1. 16  For  these  (things)  I  weep;  mine  eye,  mi. 
Eze.  24- 16  neither  shalt  thou  mourn  nor  weep,  nei. 

24.  23  ye  shall  not  mourn  nor  weep ;  but  ye  sh. 

27.  31  they  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitterness 
Hos.  12.  4  he  wept,  and  made  supplication  unto  him 
Joel    1.    5  Awake,  yedrunkards,  and  weep;  andhowl 

2. 17  Let  the  priests,  .weep  between  the  porch 
Mic.    1.  10  Declare  ye  (it)  not  at  Gath,  weep  ye  not 
Zech.  7.   3  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  separ. 

2.To  weep,  np2  bakah,  3. 

Jer.  31. 15  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  refused 
Eze.    8.  14  behold,  there  sat  women  weeping  for  Ta. 

3.  Weeping,  'D?  held. 

Deut34.   8  the  days  of  weeping  (and)  mourning  for 
Ezra    3.  13  from  the  noise  of  the  weeping  of  the  peo. 
Esth.  4.    3  (there  was)  great  mourning,  .andweeping 
Job   16.  16  My  face  is  foul  with  weeping,  and  on  my 
Psa.    6.    8  the  Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  we. 

30.  s  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy 
10?.    9  For  I  have,  .mingled  my  drink  with  wee. 

Isa.   15.    2  He  is  gone  up  to  Bajith..to  weep:  Moab 

15.  3  every  one  shall  howl,  weeping  abundantly 
I5-    5  by  the  mounting  up  of  Luhith  with  weep. 

16.  9  I  will  bewail  with  the  weeping  of  Jazer 

22.  4  I  will  weep  bitterly,  labour  not  to  comf. 
22. 12  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call  to  weeping 
65. 19  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more  he. 

Jer.     3.  21  weeping  (and)  supplications  of  the  child. 

9.  10  For  the  mountains  will  I  take  up  a  weep. 

31.  9  They  shall  come  with  weeping,  and  with 
31.  15  A  voice  was  heard  in  Ramah.  .bitter  we. 
31. 16  Refrain  thy  voice  from  weeping,  and  tlii. 
48.  5  in  the  going  up.  .continual  weeping  shall 
48.  32  O  vine  of  Sibmah.  .with  the  weeping  of 

Joel    2.  12  Turn  ye  (even)  tome,  .with  weeping, and 
Mai.    2.  13  covering  the  altar,  .with  weeping  and 
4.7*0  shed  tears,  jrai  dama. 

Jer.  13. 17  and  mine  eye  shall  weep  sore,  and  run 

5.  To  give  the  voice  in  vjeeping,  ^na  top-ntjl  |m. 
Gen.  45.   2  he  wept  aloud  :  and  the  Egyptians  and  the 

6.  To  shed  tears,  SaKpvoi  dakruo. 
John  1 1.  35  Jesus  wept 

7.  To  hreak  forth,  wail,  K\ai<a  klaio. 

Matt.  2. 18  Rachel  weeping  (for)herchildren,  and  wo. 

26.  75  And  he  went  out,  ami  wept  bitterly 
Mark  5.  38  and  them  that  wept  and  wailed  greatly 

5.  39  Why  make  ye  this  ado, and  weepy  the  da. 

14.  72  And  when  he  thought  thereon,  [he  wept] 
16.  10  [and  told  them.,  as  they  mourned  and  w.] 

Luke  fi.  21  Blessed  (are  ye)  that  weep  now :  for  ye 

6.  25  Woe  unto  you.  .ye  shall  mourn  and  weep 

7.  13  had  compassiou  on  her,  and  said.  .Weep 
7.  32  have  muurnedtoyou.aud  ye  have  notwe. 


Luke  7.  38  stood  at  his  feet  behind  (him)  weeping 
8.  52  all  wept,  .but  he  said,  Weep  not;  she  is 

19.  41  when  he  was  come  near,  he.  .wept  over 

22.  62  And  Peter  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly 

23.  28  weep  not  for  me,  but  weep  for  yourselves 
Johnn.  31  She  goeth  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there 

11.  33  saw  her  weeping,  and  the  Jews  also  weep. 
16.  20  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world 

20.  11  Mary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre  we. 
20.  1 1  and  as  she  wept,  she  stooped  down . .  into 
20.  13  they  say  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest 

20.  15  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weep. 
Acts    9. 39  the  widows  stood  by  him  weeping,  and 

21.  13  Wliatmeanye  to  weep  and  to  break  mine 
Rom  12.  15  and  weep  with  them  that  weep 

1  Co.  7.  3o,And  they  that  weep,  as  though  they  wept 
Phil.  3.  18  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  we. 
Jas.     4.    9  Be  afflicted,  and  mourn,  and  weep:  let 

5.    1  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  sh. 
Rev.   5.   4  I  wept  much,  because  no  man  was  found 

5.   5  one  of  the  elders  saith  unto  me,  Weep  not 
18.  11  the  merchants  of  the  earth  shall  weep 
18.  15  shall  stand  afar  off.  .weepingand  wailing 
18. 19  and  cried,  weeping  and  wailing,  saying 

8. A  breaking  forth,  wailing,  KAavBfios  klauthmos. 
Matt.  2.  18  lamentation,  and  weeping,  and  great  mo. 
8.  12  thereshallbe  weeping  and  gnashing  of  te, 
So  in  22. 13;  24.  51;  25.  30;  Luke  13.  28. 

9.  There  came  a  wailing,  K\av6/j.6s  ytvofiai  klauth. 
Acts  20.  37  they  all  wept  sore  and  fell  on  Paul's  neck 

WEIGH,  be  weighed,  to  — 

l.To  fonder,  dSs  palas. 

Psa.  58.    2  ye  weigh  the  violence  of  your  hands  in 
Isa.   26.    7  thou,  most  upright,  dost  weigh  the  path 

2.To  weigh,  h\?y  shaqal. 

Gen.  23.  16  Abraham  weighed  to  Ephron  the  silver 

2  Sa.  14.  26  he  weighed  the  hair  of  his  head  at  twoliu. 
Ezra   8.  25  weighed  unto  them  the  silver  and  the  go. 

8.  26  I  even  weighed  unto  their  hand  six  him. 

8.  29  until  ye  weigh,  .before  the  chief  of  the 
Job   31.    6  Let  me  be  weighed  in  an  even  balance 
Isa.  40. 12  Who  hath,  .weighed  the  mountains  in  sea. 
46.    6  They,  .weigh  silver  in  the  balance,  (and) 
Jer.  32.    9  weighed  him  the  money,  (even)  seventeen 

32. 10  and  weighed  (him)  the  money  in  thebala. 
Zech. 11.  12  they  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  (pieces) 

3.  To  be  weighed,  hpj  shaqal,  2. 

Ezra    8.  33  on  the  fourth  day  was  the  silver,  .weighed 
Job     6.    2  O  that  my  grief  were  throughly  weighed 
28.  15  neither  shall  silver  be  weighed  (for)  the 

4.  To  weigh,  ponder,  |?n  takan. 

Prov.  16.  2  (are)clean . .  but  the  Lord  weigheth  the  sp. 
5. To  be  weighed,  pondered,  pn  takan,  2. 

1  Sa.   2.    3  for  the  Lord,  .by  him  actions  are  weigh. 

6.  To  weigh,  ponder,  pn  takan,  3. 

Job  28.  25  and  he  weigheth  the  waters  by  measure 

7.  To  weigh,  "?pin  teqal. 

Dan.    5.  27  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art 

WEIGHT,  weighty,  weightier,  (full)  — 

l.il  stone,  \2Keben. 

Lev.  19.  36  just  weights,  a  just  ephah.and  a  just  hin 
Deutss.  13  shalt  not  have  in -thy  bag  divers  weights,  a 

25.  15  thou  shalt  have  a  perfect  and  just  weight 

2  Sa.  14.  26  two  hundred  shekels  after  the  king's  we. 
Prov  11.    1  the  Lord:  but  a  just  weight  (is)  his  deli. 

16. 11  all  the  weights  of  the  bag,  (are)  his  work 
20. 10  Diversweights, (and)  divers  measures.both 

20.  23  Divers  weights  (are)  an  abomination  unto 
Mic.    6.  11  and  with  the  bag  of  deceitful  weights 
Zech,  5.    8  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth 

2. A  weight,  burden,  bft$  netel. 

Prov  27.  3  A  stone  (is)  heavy,  and  the  sand  weighty 
3.  Balance,  beam  of  scales,  sbspeles. 

Prov  16. 11  A  just  weight  and  balance  (are)  the  Lor. 
i.A  weight,  weighing,  Vp^p  mishqol. 

Eze.  4.  10  which  thou  shalt  eat  (shall  be)  by  weight 
5.^1  weight,  weighing,  Sp^o  mishqal. 

Gen.  24.  22  half  a  shekel  weight,  .ten (shekels) weight 
43.  21  and,  behold,  .our  money  in  full  weight 

Lev.  19.  35  do  no  unrighteousness,  .in  weight,  or  in 

26.  26  deliver  (you)  your  bread  again  by  weight 
Num.  7.  13  the  weight  whereof  (was)  an  hundred  and 

So  in  verse  19,  25,  37,  40,  61,  67,  73,  70. 

7-  3*»  43*  55  0I  the  weight  of  an  hundred  and 
Josh.  7.  21  a  wedge  of  gold  of  fifty  shekels  weight 
Judg.  8.  26  the  weight  of  the  golden  ear  rings  that  he 

1  Sa.  17.   5  the  weight  of  the  coat  (was)  five  thousand 

2  Sa.  12.  30  the  weight  whereof  (was)  a  talent  of  gold 

21. 16  the  weight  of  whose  spear,  in  weight 

1  Ki.   7.  47  neither  was  the  weight  of  the  brass  found 

10.  14  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  Solomon 

2  Ki.  25.  16  the  brass  of  all.  .was  without  weight 

1  Ch.20.    2  found  it  to  weigh  a  talent  of  gold,  and 

21.  25  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold  by  weight 

22.  3  and  brass  in  abundance  without  weight 
22.  14  of  brass  and  iron  without  weight;  for  it 
28.  14  gold  by  weight,  .silver  by  weight,  for  all 
28.  15  Even  the  weight,  .by  weight  for  every ea. 
28. 15  for  the  candlesticks  of  silver  by  weight 
28.  16  by  weight  (he  gave)  gold  for  the  tables  of 
28.  17  by  weight,  .by  weight  fur  every  basin  of 
28. 18  forthe  altar  of  incense  refined  gold  by  we. 

2  Ch.  3.   9  weight  of  the  nails  (was)  fifty  shekels  of 


2  Ch.  4.  18  for  the  weight  of  the  brass  could  not  be 

q.  13  Now  the  weight  of  gold  that  came  to  Sol. 
Ezra  8.  30  So  touk  the  priests  and  the  Levites  thew. 

8-  34  by  weightof  every  one :  and  all  the  weight 
Job   28.  25  To  make  the  weight  for  the  winds ;  and 
Jer.  52.  20  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without  we. 
Eze.     4.  16  they  shall  eat  bread  by  weight,  and  with 

5.    1  take  thee  balances  to  weigh,  and  divide 

6..4  xocighi,  burden,  fidpus  baros. 

3  Co.  4.  17  more  exceeding  (and)  eternal  weight  of 

7.  Weighty,  heavy,  f&apvs  barus. 

2  Co.  10.  10  For  (his)  letters,  say  they,  (are)  weighty 

8.  Weightier,  heavier,  papvTtpos  b  truteros. 
Matt23.  23  have  omitted  the  weightier  (matters)  of 

9.  Tumour,  swelling,  encumbering  weight,  oyKos. 

Heb.  12.    1  let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin 
WELFARE  — 
l.Good,  goodness,  prosperity,  welfare1,  aia  tob. 

Neh.   2. 10  there  was  come  a  man  to  seek  the  welfare 
I.Easp,  security,  rtijptF?  yeshuoh. 

Job   30. 15  pursue  my  soul  as  the  wind :  and  my  we. 
3.  Peace,  completeness,  ufy  shalom. 

Gen.  43.  27  he  asked  them  of  (their)  welfare,  and  said 

ExodiS.    7  they  asked  each  other  of  (their)  welfare 

1  Ch.18.  lo.to  enquire  of  his  welfare,  and  to  congrat. 
Psa.  69.  22  (that  which  should  have  been)  for  (their)  w. 
Jer.  38.   4  for  this  man  seeketh  not  the  welfare  of 

WELL  — 

l.A  well,  cistern,  pit,  iso  beer. 

Gen.  16.  14  Wherefore  the  well  was  called  Beer-sheba 
21.  19  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well 
21.  25  reproved  Abimelech  because  of  a  well  of 
21.  30  witnessuntome,thatIhavediggedthisw. 
24. 11  kneel  down  without  the  city  by  a  well  of 
24.  20  ran  again  unto  the  well  to  draw  (water) 
26.  15  For  all  the  wells  which  his  father's  servants 
26.  18  Israel  digged  again  the  wells  of  water  wh. 
26. 19  and  found  there  a  well  of  springing  water 
26.  20  called  the  name  of  the  well  Esek  ;  because 
26.  21  they  digged  another  well,  and  strove  fur 
26.  22  rcniov,  from  thence,  and  digged  another  w. 
26.  25  and  there  Isaac's  servants  digged  a  well 
29.  32  told  him  concerning  the  well  which  they 
29.  2  behold  a  well  in  the  field,  and,  lo,  there 
29.   2  for  outof  that  well  they  watered  the  flocks 

20.  2  and  a  great  stone  (was)  upon  the  well's  mo. 
29.  3,  10  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth 
29.  3  put  the  stoneagain  upon  the  well's  mouth 
29.    8  they  roll  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth 

Exod.  2.  15  But  Moses  fled,  .and  he  sat  down  by  a  well 

Nim.120.  17  neither  will  wedrink(of)thewaterof  thew. 

21. 16  that  (is)  the  well  whereof  the  Lord  spake 

21.  17  Then  Israel  sang  this  song,  Spring  up,  0  w. 
21.  18  princes  digged  the  well,  the  nobles  of  the 
21.  22  we  will  not  drink  (of)  the  waters  of  the  we. 

2  Sa.  17.  18  which  had  a  well  in  his  court ;  whither  th. 

17.  19  took  and  spread  a  covering  over  the  well's 
17.  21  they  came  up  out  of  the  well,  and  went 

Prov,  5.  15  Drink,  .runningwatersout.  .thine  own  we. 

Song.  4.  15  A  fouutain  of  gardens,  a  well  of  living  wat. 

2.  A  well,  cistern,  pit,  *rta  bor. 

Deut.  6.  11  wellsdigged,  which  thou  diggedstnot,  vin. 

1  Sa.  19.  22  came  to  a  great  well  that  (is)  in  Sechu 

2  Sa.   3.  26  which  brought  him  again  from  the  well 

23.  15  would  give  me  drink  of  the  water  of  the 
23. 16  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem 

1  Ch.11. 17  would  give  me  drink  of  the  water  of  the  we. 

11.  18  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Beth-lehem 

2  Ch.26.  10  digged  many  wells:  for  he  had  much  cattle 
Neh.   9.  25  wells  digged,  vineyards,  and  oliveyards 

B.Fountain,  |^£  mayan. 

Josh  18.  15  and  went  out  to  the  well  of  waters  of  Ne. 
2  Ki.   3.  19  stop  all  wells  of  water,  and  mar  every  good 

3.  25  stopped  all  the  wells  of  water,  and  felled 
Psa.  84.  6  passing  through  the  valley.,  make  it  a  well 
Isa.    12.    3  with  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  thew. 

4:.  Source,  spring,  "lips  maqor. 

Prov  10.  11  The  mouth  of  a  righteous  (man  is)  a  well 
§.Eye,  fountain,  J'JJ  ayin. 

Gen.  24.  13  I  stand  (here)  by  the  well  of  water;  and 

24.  16  she  wentdown  to  the  well,  and  filled  her 
24.  29  Labanranout  untotheman.unto  the  well 
24.  30  behold,  he  stood  by  the  camels  at  the  well 
24.  42  I  came  this  day  unto  the  well,  and  said 
24.  43  I  stand  by  the  well  of  water;  and  it  shall 
24.  45  went  down  unto  the  well,  and  drew  (wa.) 
49.  22  fruitful  bough  by  a  weU,  (whose) branches 

Exod  15.  27  where  (were)  twelve  wells  of  water,  and 
Neh.    2. 13  even  before  the  dragon  well,  and  to  the 

6. A  f 01m tain,  spring,  well,  running,  Trvyn  pege. 
John  4.    6  Now  Jacob's  well  was  there.   Jesus  ther. 

4.  6  sat  thus  on  the  well :  (and)  it  was  about 
4.  14  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing 

2  Pe.  2. 17  These  are  wellswithoutwater,  clouds  that 

7.-1  well,  pit,  dungeon,  typ4o.p  ftkrew. 

John  4.  11  hast  nothing  to  draw  with,  and  the  well 
4. 12  Jacob,  which  gave  us  the  well,  and  drank 
WELL,  (full)  — 
X.Qood,  excellent,  y\Q  tvb. 

Judg.  9.  16  if  ye  have  dealt  well  with  Jerubbaal  and 
Ruth  3.  13  perform,  .thee the  part  of  a  kinsman, we. 
1  Sa.    9.  10  Then  said  Saul  to  his  servant,  Well  said 
20.    7  If  he  say  thus,  (It  is  well;  thy  servant 


WELL 


1043 


WHALE 


i  Sa.24.  18  showed  this,  .how  that  thou  hast  dealt  w. 

24.  19  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him  go  well  away? 

?  Sa.   3.  13  he  said,  Well ;  I  will  make  a  league  with 

1  Ki.  2.  18  Well ;  I  will  speak  for  thee  unto  the  king 

18.  24  the  people  answered  and  said,  It  is  well 

2  Ch.12.  12  and  also  in  Judah  things  went  well 
Psa. 119.  65  Thou  hast  dealt  well  with  thy  servant,  0 

128.    2  happy  (shalt)  thou  (be),  and  (it  shall  be)  w. 
Eccl.  8.  12  yet  surely  I  know  that  it  shall  be  well  with 

8.  13  But  it  shall  not  be  well  with  the  wicked 
Isa.  3.  10  ye  to  the  righteous  that  (it  shall  be)  well 
Jer.  15.  11  Verily  it  shall  be  well  with  thy  remnant 

22. 15  do  judgment,  .(and)  then  (it  was)  well  with 

22.  16  then  (it  was)  well  (with  him :  was)  not  this 

44.  17  had  we  plenty  of  victuals,  and  were  well 

Dan.    1.   4  Children  in  whom  (was)  no  blemish,  .well 

'2,  To  do  good  or  well,  nia  tob,  5. 

Prov  30.  29  There  be  three  (things)  wliich  go  -well,  yea 

3.  Fair,  beauteous,  ns;  yapheh. 

Gen.  23.  17  but  Rachel  was  beautiful  and  well  favour. 
39.  6  And  Joseph  was. .goodly,  .and  well  favo. 
41.  2  seven  well  favoured  kiue  aud  fat  fleshed 
41.  4  did  eat  up  the  seven  well  favoured  and  fat 
41.  18  fat  fleshed,  and  well  favoured ;  and  they 

4.  Right,  J3  ken. 

Exod  10.  29  Thou  hast  spoken  well,  I  will  see  thy  face 
Isa.  33.  23  they  could  notwell  strengthen  their  mast 

O.Wight,  exceedingly,  "iNp  meod. 

Psa.  78.  29  So  they  did  eat,  and  were  well  filled :  for 
6.  Peace,  completeness,  D'-S^  shalom. 

Gen.  29.    6  (Is)  he  well?  And  they  said,  (He  is)  well 

43.  27  (Is)  your  father  well,  the  old  man  of  whom 

2  Ki.  4.  23  norsabbath.  Andshesaid,  (It  shall  be)w. 

4.  26  (Is  it)  well  with  thee?  (is  it)  well  with  thy 

4.  26  (is  it)  well  with  the  child.  .(It  is)  well 

5.  21  he  lighted  down,  .and  said,  (Is)  all  well? 
5. 22  Audhesaid,  All(is)well.  My  master  hath 

9.  n  said  unto  him,  (Is)  all  well?  wherefore 

7. To  set  the  heart,  2b  m?  shith  leb. 

Psa.  48. 13  Mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her 
Prov  27.  23  Be  thou  diligent,  .look  well  to  thy  herds 
Eze.*44.   5  Son  of  man,  mark  well,  .mark  well  the 

8.  Work,  n^Q  maaseh. 

Isa.     3.  24  instead  of  well  set  hair  baldness ;  and  in. 

9.  With  perfume  or  spices,  rt$ria  merqachah. 

Eze.  24.  10  consume  the  flesh,  and  spice  it  well,  and 

10.  Well,  happily,  rightly,  well  done,  ev  eu. 

Luke  19.  17  said  unto  him,  [Well],  thou  good  servant 
Acts  15.29  which  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall  do  w. 
Eph.   6.    3  That  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou 

11.  Good,  excellent,  aya96s  agathos. 

Pom.  2.  7  To  them  who  by  patient  continuance  in 
12. Beautiful,  good,  excellent,  benevolent,  kcl\6$. 

Gal.  6.  9  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well  doing:  for  in 
13.  Well,  rightly,  truly,  «a\wj  kalus. 

Matt  12.  12  Wherefore  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the 
15.    7  hypocrites,well  did  Esaias  prophesy  of  you 

Mark  7.    6  Well  hath  Esaias  prophesied  of  you  hypo. 

7.  37  He  hath  done  all  things  well:  he  niaketh 
12.  2S  perceiving  that  he  had  answered  them  w. 

12.  32  scribe  said  unto  him,  Well,  Master,  thou 
Luke  6.  26  Woe  toyonwhen  all  men  shall  speak.well 

20.  39  scribesanswering  said,  Master, thou  hast  w. 
John  4. 17  Jesus  said  unto  her,  Thou  hast  well  said 

8.  48  Say  we  not  well  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan 

13.  13  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord;  and  yesayw. 
18.  23  but  if  well,  why  smitestthou  me  ? 

Acts  10.  33  aud  thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art  co. 
28.  25  Well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by  Esaias  the 
Rom.  1 1.  20  Well;becauseof  unbelief  they  were  broken 
\  Co.   7. 37  he  that  standeth  stedfast.  .doeth  well 

7.  3S  he  thatgiveth(her)  in  marriage  doeth  well 

14.  17  For  thou  verily  givest  thanks  well,  but 

2  Co.  11.    4  which  ye  have  not  accepted,  ye  might  w. 

Gal.    4.  17  They  zealously  affect  you,  (but)  not  well 

5.    7  Ye  did  run  well;  who  did  hinder  you  that 

Phil.   4.  14  Not  withstanding  ye  have  well  done  that 

1  Ti.    3.    4  One  thatruleth  well  his  own  house,  having 

3.  j 2  ruling  their  children  and.  .houses  well 
3. 13  they  that  have  usedthe  office  of  a  deacon  w. 
5.  17  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted 
Jas.     2.    8  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,  ye  do  well 
2.  19  thou doest well:  thedevilsalso  believe, and 

2  Pe.   1.  19  whereunto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed 

3  John  6  if  thou  bring  forward. .  thou  shalt  do  well 
[See  also  Doing,  drink,  full,  know,  look,  mark,  play, 
please,  pleased,  reported,  stricken,  very.] 

WELL,  to  be,  can,  deal,  do,  doing,  entrer.t,  go,  -with  — 
1.  Goodness,  ma  tub. 

Prov.  11.  10  When  itgoeth  well  with  the  righteous,  the 

%Good,  excellent,  3ia  tob. 

Jer.  15.  11  Verily  it  shall  he  well  with  thy  remnant 

3.  To  be  good,  well,  glad,  lis  tob. 

Num.11.  iS  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat?  for(it  was)  well 
Deut.  5.  33  that  ye  may  live,  and  (that  it  may  be)  well 

15.  16  and  thine  house,  because  he  is  well  with 
19. 13  bloodfrom  Israel,  thatit  may  go  well  with 

1  Sa.  16. 16  play  with  hishaud,  and  thou  shalt  be  well 

16.  23  so  Saul  was  refreshed,  and  was  well,  and 

4.  To  do  good  or  well,  3ia  tob,  5. 

1  Ki.  8.  18  thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart 

2  Ki.  10.  30  said.  .Because  thou  hast  done  well  in  ex. 
2  Ch.  6.   8  thou  didst  well  in  that  it  wa3  in  thine  he. 


5.  To  be  or  become  good,  well,  right,  3b;  yatab. 

Gen.  12.  13  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake 
40.  14  But  think  on  me  when  it  shall  be  well  wi. 
Deut.  4.  40  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee,  and  with 
5. 16  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee,  in  the  land 

5.  29  that  it  might  be  well  with  them,  and  with 

6.  3  that  it  may  he  well  with  thee,  and  that 
6.  18  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  that 

12.  25,  2S  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee,  and  wi. 

22.    7  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  (that) 

Ruth  3.    1  shall  I  not  seek . .  that  it  may  be  well  with 

2  Ki.  25.  24  serve  the  king,  .and  it  shall  be  well  with 

Jer.     7.  23  commanded  you,  that  it  may  be  well  unto 

38.  20  so  it  shall  be  well  unto  thee,  and  thy  soul 

40.    9  serve  the  king,  .and  it  shall  be  well  with 

42.    6  thatit  may  be  well  with  us,  when  we  obey 

6.  To  do  good  or  icell,  20;  yatab,  5. 

Gen.  4.  7  If  thou  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  ace. 
4.    7  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  lieth  at  the  do. 

12. 16  he  entreated  Abram  well  forhersake :  and 
32.    9  to  thy  kindred,  and  I  will  deal  well  with 

Exod.  1.  20  Therefore  God  dealt  well  with  the  midw. 
Deut.  5.  28  they  have  well  said  all  that  they  have  sp. 

18. 17  They  have  well  (spoken  that)  which  they 

1  Sa.  16.  17  Provide  me  now  a  man  that  can  play  well 

25.  31  when  the  Lord  shall  have  dealt  well  with 
Psa.  49. 18  praise  thee,  when  thou  doest  well  to  thy. 
Isa.  1. 17  Learn  to  do  well;  seek  judgment,  relieve 
Jer.  1.  12  Thou  hast  well  seen  :  for  I  will  hasten  my 
Jon.  4.  4  Then  said  the  LuRb,  Doest  thou  well  to 
4.    9  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  gourd? 

4.  9  he  said,  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  (even)  unto 
Zech.  8. 15  have  I  thought  in  these  days  to  do  well 

7.  A  boiling,  nrnrethach. 

Eze.  24.   5  make  it  boil  well,  and  let  them  seethe  the 

8. Peace,  completion,  Di^t?  shalom. 

Gen.  37. 14  whether  it  be  well  with  thy  brethren  and 

2  Sa.  18.  28  called,  and  said  unto  the  king,  All  is  well 

9.  To  do  good  or  well,  ayadoiroieco  agathopoieo. 
1  Pe.   2. 15'that  with  well  doing  ye  may  put  to  silence 

2.  20  but  if,  when  ye  do  well  and  suffer  (for  it) 

3.  6  daughters  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do  well,  and 
3.  17  better. .  that  ye  suffer  for  well  doing,  than 

lO.Good  ortvelldoer,  benefactor,  ayaQoirotSs  agath. 
1  Pe.    2.  14  and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well 

11. Good  or  well  doing,  beneficence,  ayaOoTrotia. 

1  Pe.    4. 19  the  keeping  of  their  souls  (to  him)  in  w.d. 

12.  To  make  sound,  heal,  cure,  o-dvfa  sozo. 

John  n.  12  said.  .Lord,  if  he  sleep,  he  shall  do  well 

13.  To  do  well  or  good,,  /caAo7roieoj  katyioieo. 

2  Th.  3. 13  But  ye,  brethren,  he  not  weary  in  well  do. 
WELL  done,  nigh,  known  — 

l.As  nothing,  y.i<3  keayin. 

Psa.  73.  2  almost  gone ;  my  steps  had  well  nigh  sli. 

2.  Well,  happily,  rightly,  well  clone!  eu  eu. 

Matt 25.  21  Well  done,  (thou)good  and  faithful  serv. 
25.  23  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  good  and  fait. 

3.  To  know  thoroughly,  eVcyiW<r*aj  epiginosko. 

2  Co.  6.   g  As  unknown,  and  (yet)  well  known ;  as 
WELL  beloved,  favoursd,  pleasing,  spring  — 
l.Beloved,  th  dod. 

Song  1. 13  A  bundle  of  myrrh  (is)  my  well  beloved 

l.Beloved,  tt •  yedid. 

Isa.     5.    1  Now  will  I  sing  to  my  well  beloved  a  song 

5.  1  My  well  beloved  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very 

3.  The  good,  of  grace,  fri  reps  tobath  chen. 

Nah.  3.  4  multitude  of  the  whoredoms  of  the  well  f. 
i.Source,  spring,  "lips  maqor. 

Provi6. 22  Understanding's)  a  well  spring  of  lifeun. 
18.  4  the  well  spring  of  wisdom  (as)  a  flowing 

5.Loveable,  beloved,  ayainjTOs  ogo.petos. 

Marki2.    6  Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  well  be. 
Rom.:6.    5  Salute  my  well  beloved  Epenetus,  who 

3  John     1  The  elder  unto  the  well  beloved  Gaius 

6.  Well  pleasing,  eudpeffros  euarestos. 

Phil.  4.18a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  God 

Col.    3.  20  obey.,  for  this  is  well  pleasing  unto  theL. 

Heb.  13.21  working  in  you  that  which  is  well  pleasing 
WEN  — 
A  floioing,  festering,  suppurating  sore,  ?|£  yabbal. 

Lev.  22.  22  Blind.,  broken,  or  maimed,  or  having  aw. 
WENCH  — 
Maid  servant,  nn^y  shiphcJmh. 

2  Sa.  17. 17  a  wench  went  and  told  them;  and  they  we. 
WERE,  there  — 
There  is,  there  are,  »:  yesh. 

Nuni22.  29  I  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 

Neh.   5.    2  For  there  were  that  said,  We,  our  sons 
5.    3  also  there  were  that  said,  We  have  mort. 
5.    4  There  were  also  that  said,  We  have  borr. 

Psa.  14.    2  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  did  unders. 
53.    2  to  see  if  there  were  (any)  that  did  under. 
WERE  it  not  that  — 
If  not,  unless,  *Jwk  lule. 

Deut  32.  27  Were  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the 

2  Ki.   3.  14  surely,  were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  pre. 


WEST  (side),  wester,  westward  — 

1. The  sea  (being  the  W.  border  ofCaanan),  d;  yam. 

Gen.  12.   8  pitched  his  tent,  (having)  Beth-el  on  the  w. 

13.  14  look  from  the  place  where  thou  art.  .we. 

*8.  14  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  west,  and 

Exodio.  19  the  Lord  turned  a  mighty  strong  west  w. 

26.  22  for  the  sides  of  the  tabernacle  westward 

26.  27  of  the  tabernacle  for  the  two  sides  west., 

27.  12  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  west  side(sh. 
36.  27  for  the  sides  of  the  tabernacle  westward 
36.  32  of  the  tabernacle  for  the  sides  westward 
3S.  12  for  the  west  side  (were)  hangings  of  fifty 

Num.  2.  iS  On  the  west  side(shall  be)  the  standard  uf 

3.  23  shall  pitch  behind  the  tabernacle  westw. 

34.  6  western  border,  .this  shall  be  your  west 

35.  5  on  the  west  side  two  thousand  cubits,  and 
Deut.  3.  27  lift  up  thine  eyes  westward,  and  northw. 

33-  23  possess  thou  the  west  and  the  south 

Josh.  5.    1  which  (were)  on  the  side  of  Jordan  west. 

8.    9  between  Beth-el  and  Ai,  on  the  west  side 

8.  12  set  them  to  lie.  .on  the  west  side  of  the  c. 

8.  13  their  Hers  in  wait  on  the  west  of  the  city 

11.    2  valley,  and  in  the  borders  of  Dor  on  thew. 

11.  3  the  Canaanite  on  the  east  and  on  the  we. 

12.  7  smote  on  this  side  Jordan  on  the  west,  fr. 
15.    8  that  (lieth)  before  the  valley  of  Hinnom 

15.  10  border  compassed  from  Baalah  westward 
15. 12  west  border  (was)  to  the  great  sea,  and  the 

16.  3  goethdown  westwardtothecoastof  Japh. 
16.  8  border  went  out  from  Tappuuh  westward 
18. 12  and  went  up  through  the  mountains  west. 
iS.  14  children  of  Judah:  this  (was)  the  westqu. 

18. 15  the  border  went  out  on  the  west,  and  went 
19.  26  reacheth  to  Carmel  westward,  and  to  Sh. 
19.  34  coast  turneth  westward  to  Aznoth  tabor 
19.  34  reacheth  to  Asher  on  the  west  side,  and 
22.    7  their  brethren  on  this  side  Jordan  westw. 

1  Ki.   7.  25  three  looking  toward  the  west,  and  three 

1  Ch.   9.  24  porters,  toward  the  east,  west,  north,  and 

2  Ch.  4.    4  three  looking  toward  the  west,  and  three 
Isa.  11. 14  shouldersof  the  Philistines  toward  the  we. 

49.  12  these  from  the  north  and  from  the  west 
Eze.  41. 12  the  building,  .at  the  end  toward  the  west 
42. 19  He  turned  about  to  the  west  side,  (and) 
45.    7  from  the  west  side  westward,  and  from 
45.    7  from  the  west  border  unto  the  east  border 
46. 19  there  (was)  a  place  on  the  two  sides  west. 

47.  20  The  west  side . .  This  (is)  the  west  side 

48.  1  for  these  are  his  sides  east  (and)  west,  a 
48.    2  from  the  east  side  unto  the  west  side 

So  in  verse  4,  5,  8,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27. 
48.    3,  6,  7  from  the  east  side  even  unto  tie  w. 
48.  10  toward  the  west  ten  thousand  in  breadth 
48.  16  the  west  side  four  thousand  and  five  hun. 
48.  17  and  toward  the  west  two  hundred  and  fifty 
48. 18  ten  thousand  westward:  and  it  shall  be 
48.  21  westward  over  agaiustthe  five  and  twenty 
48.  21  toward  the  west  border,  over  against  the 
48.  34  At  the  west  side  four  thousand  and  five 
Dan.   8.   4  I  saw  the  ram  pushing  westward,  and  no. 
Hos.  ii.  10  then  the  children  shall  tremble  from  the  w 
Zech  14.   4  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  toward.. the  w. 

2.Goinginofthe  sunfvcwt}^^mebo  hashshemesh. 
Josh.  23.  4  have  cut  off,  even  unto  the  great  sea  we. 
Zech.  8.    7  from  the  east  country,  and  from  the  west 

3.  Sun  setting,  3TJ£?  maarab. 

1  Ch.  7.  28  westward  Gezer,  with  the  towns  thereof 

12.  15  (both)  toward  the  east  and  toward  thew. 

26. 16  westward,  with  the  gate  Shallecheth,  by 

26. 18  At  Parbar  westward,  four  at  the  causew. 
26.  30  them  of  Israel  on  this  side  Jordan  westw. 

2  Ch.32.  30  brought  it  straight  down  to  the  west  side 

33.  14  on  the  west  side  of  Gihon,  in  the  valley 
Psa.  75.   6  neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the  west 
103.  12  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  (so) 
107.    3  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  from 
Isa.   43.    5  from  the  east,  and  gather  thee  from  thew. 

59. 19  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord  from  the  west 
Dan.   8.   5  an  he  goat  came  from  the  west,  on  the 

4.  Place  of  darkness,  sun  setting,  n^-ji'D  maarabah. 

Isa.  45.   6  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  from  the  w. 

5. Sinking  or  setting  (of  the  sun),  Sva-fi^  dusme. 
Matt.  8.  11  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west 
24.  27  shineth  even  unto  the  west;  so  shall  also 
Lukei2.  54  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  west 

13,  29  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  (from)the  w. 
Rev.  21. 13  on  the  south,  three  gates;  and  on  the  west 

WET,  (to  be)  — 

l.To  wet,  moisten,  V-^f  tseba,  3. 

Dan.    4.  25  they  shall  wet  thee  with  the  dew  of  hea. 

2.  To  be  wet,  moistened,  JOS  tseba,  4. 

Dan.   4. 15,  23  let  it  be  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 

4.  33  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven 

5.  21  and  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of 

3.  To  be  wet,  nan  ratdb. 

Job  24.    8  They  are  wet  with  the  showers  of  the  mo. 
WHALE  — 
\.A  great  sea  monster,  D'an  tannim. 

Eze.  32.   2  thou  (art)  as  a  whale  hi  the  seas;  and  thou 

2.A  great  sea  monster,  i*?n  tannin. 

Gen.    1.  21  God  created  great  whales,  and  every  liv. 
Job    7.  12  (Am)  I  a  sea,  or  a  whale,  that  thou  settest 

3.-4  great  sea  monster,  ktjtos  kctos. 

Matt  12.  40  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's 


WHAT 


1044 


WHEAT 


WHAT  (thing)  — 

1.  Where  this  ?  ni  'N  e  zeh. 

i  Ki.  13. 12  their  father  said  unto  them,  What  way 
Job  38.  24  By  what  way  is  the  light  parted,  (which) 

2.Hoic  ?  how,  TN  ek, 

2  Ch.io.    6  What  counsel  give  ye  (me)  to  return  ans. 

3. Also,  D3  gam. 

Job     2.  10  What !  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand 
A..  A  word,  matter,  thing,  "133  dabar. 

Ezra   8.  17  and  I  told  them  what  they  should  say  un. 

5.  Wfial  that  (is),  *i  ko  toa  efe*. 

Ezra   6.    8  Moreover  I  make  a  decree  what  ye  shall 

6.  What  ?  what t  no  ?>ia/j. 

Gen.  20.  10  What  sawest  thou,  that  thou  hast  done 
1  Sa.  19.    3  and  what  I  see,  that  I  will  tell  thee 
Lam.  2.  13  What  thing  shall  I  take  to  witness  for  th. 

7.  As  or  like  what,  how  much,  naa  kammah. 

Zech.  2.   2  what  (is)  the  breadth  thereof,  and  what  (is) 

8.  For  what  ?  why  ?  wherefore  ?  na?  lavimah. 

Gen.  33. 15  said,  What  needethit?  let  me  find  grace 

9.  What  ?  no,  meh. 

Gen.   4. 10  What  hast  thou  done?  the  voice  of  thy  br. 

10.  What  ?  na  mah. 

Dan.    2.  22  knoweth  what  (is)  in  the  darkness,  and 
2.  28  maketh  known,  .what  shall  be  in  the  lat. 
2. 29  upon  thy  bed  what  should  come  to  pass 
2.  29  maketh  known  to  thee  what  shall  come 
2.  45  made  known  to  the  king  what  shall  come 
4.  35  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  What  do. 

ll.Who?  V?  mi. 

Gen.  24.  65  What  man  (is)  this  that  walketh  Jh  the 
12.  What  ?  jo  man. 

Ezra   5.   4  What  are  the  names  of  the  men  that  ma. 
13. For,  yap  gar. 

1  Co.  11.  22  What !  have  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  to 
14. Such  as,  such,  010s  hoios. 

2  Ti.    3. 11  what  persecutions  I  endured :  but  out  of 
15.^45  much,  as  great,  how much,  how  great,  oaahosa. 

Mark  6.  30  both  what  they  had  done,  and  what  they 
11.  24  What  things  [soever]  ye  desire,  when  ye  pr. 
Acts  15- 12  declaring  what  miracles  and  wonders  God 
Rom.  3. 19  Now  we  know  that  what  things  soeverthe 
Jude      10  but  what  they  know  naturally,  as  brute 

1Q. Whosoever,  whatsoever,  c6<ttls  hostis. 

Phil.   3.    7  But  what  things  were  gaiu  to  me,  those  I 
17, Thus,  in  like  manner,  so,  accordingly,  ovrws. 

Matt  26.  40  What !  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  oue 
IS.  Of  what  sort  or  kind  ?  Trows  poios. 

^  Matt  21.  23  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things? 
21.  24  I  in  likewise  will  tell  you  by  what  auttio. 
21.  27  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I  do 
24.  42  for  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  do 
24.  43  had  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  wou. 
Mark  4.  30  with  [what]  comparison  shall  we  compare 
11.  28  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  thi.? 
11,  29  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do  these  th. 

11.  33  Neither  do  I  tell  you  by  what  authority 
Luke  5.  19  when  they  could  not  find  by  what  (way) 

6.  32,  33,  34  what  thank  have  ye?  for  sinners 

12.  39  had  known  what  hour  the  thief  would  co. 
20.   2  Tell  us,  by  what  authority  doest  thou  th. 

20.  8  Neither  tell  I  yon  by  what  authority  I  do 
24.  ig  said  unto  them,  What  things?    And  they 

John  12.  33  This  he  said,  signifying  what  death  he  sh, 
18.  32  he  spake,  signifying  what  death  he  should 

21.  19  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glor. 
Acts    4.    7  By  what  power,  or  by  what  name,  have  je 

7.  4g  what  house  will  ye  build  me?  saith  the  L. 
23.  34  he  asked  of  what  province  lie  was.    And 

Rom.  3.  27  By  what  law?  of  works?  Nay;  but  by  the 

1  Co.  15.  35  ;  Jas.  4.  14  ;  1  Pe.  2.  20  ;  Rev.  3.  3. 

19.  What  word,  rivi  hoyy  tiui  logo,  1  Co.  15.  2. 

20.  The  things  concerning,  ra  irp6s,  Acts  23.  30. 

21. How  much?  how  great  t  ttocos 2>osos. 

2  C0.7.  11  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you,  yea 
22.0/ what  kind  or  sort  ?  how  great  ?  Trorairos. 

Mark  13.    1  saith  unto  him,  Master,  see.  .whatbuild. 
23. Either,  or  truly,  verily,  tf  e. 

1  Co.  6.  16  [What  !]  know  ye  not  that  he  which  is  jo. 
6.  19  What !  know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the 
14.  36  What !  came  the  word  of  God  out  from 

22.  Who?  what?  ris,  ri  tis,  ti. 

Matt.  5.  46  For  if  ye  love  them  which  love  you,  what 
5.47  what  do  ye  more  (thau  others)?  do  not  even 
*6.  3  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right 
6.  25  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  [what  ye  shall]  drink 
6.  25  nor  yet  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put 

6.  31  What  shall  we  eat,  or  what  shall  we  drink 

7.  9  Or  what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom  if  his 

8.  29  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou 

9.  13  But  go  ye  and  learn  what  (that)  meaneth 
10.  19  take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shallspeak 

10.  19  [giveu  you  in  that  same  hour  what  ye  sh.  ] 

11.  7  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  to 

11.  8,  9  But  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  A 

12.  3  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did,  when 
12.   7  But  if  ye  had  known  what  (this)  meaneth 
12.  n  What  man  shall  there  be  among  you  that 
16.  26  what  is  a  man  profited,  .or  what  shall  a 


Matt  17.  25  What  thinkest  thou,  Simon?  of  whom  do 
19.  16  what  good  things  shall  I  do,  that  I  may 
19.  20  The  young  man  saith . .  what  lack  I  yet  ? 

19.  27  Behold,  .what  shall  we  have  therefore? 

20.  21  said  unto  her,  What  wilt  thou?  She  saith 
20.  22  answered  and  said,  Ye  know  not  what  ye 

20.  32  andsaid,  What  will  ye  that  I  shall  do  unto 
2i.  16  Hearest  thou  what  these  say?  And  Jesus 

21.  28  But  what  think  ye?  A  (certain)  man  had 

21.  40  what  will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen? 

22. 17  Tell  us  therefore,  What  thinkest  thou?  Is 

22.  42  Saying,  What  think  ye  of  Christ?  whose 
24.  3  what  (shall  be)  thesignof  thycoming,and 
26.  8  had  indignation,  saying,  To  what  purpose 
26.  15  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver 
26.  62  what  (is  it  which)  these  witness  against 
26.  65  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses? 
26.  66  What  think  ye?  They  answered  and  said 

26.  70  denied,  .saying,  I  know  not  what  thou  sa. 

27.  4  they  said.  What  (is  that)  to  us  ?  see  thou 
27.  22  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus  which  is 
27.  23  said,  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  doue?  But 

Mark  1.  24,  27,  [27];  2.  25;  4.  24,  4155.  7,9,  14;  6.  2,24; 
8-  36,  37;  9.6, 10, 16,  33;  10.  3, 17,  36,  38,  51;  11.  5;  12.  9;  13. 

4.  11;  14.  36,  36,  40,  60,  63,  64,  68;  15.  12,  14, 24;  Luke  1.  66; 

3.  10, 12, 14;  4.34, 36;  5.  22;  6.  11;  7.  24,  25,26, 31;  8.  9,  25,  28, 
30;  9.  25;  10.  25,  26;  12.  11,  11,  17,  22, 22,  29,  29,49;  r3-  J8; 
14.  31;  15. 4, 8,  26;  16.  3,  4;  18.  6,  18,  36,  41;  19.  48;  20.  13, 15, 
17;  21.  7;  22.  71;  23.  22,  31,  [34];  John  1.  21,  22,  3812.  4,  18, 
25;  4.  27;  5.  12;  6.  6,  9,  28,  30,  30;  7.  36,  51;  8.  [5];  9.  17,  26; 
10.  6;  n.  47,  56;  12.  27,  49,  49;  13.  12,  28;  15. '15;  16.  17, 18, 
18;  18.  21,  29, 35,  38;  21. 21,  22,  23;  Acts  2. 12,  37:4.  9, 16;  5. 
3557.  40,  49;  8.  36;  9.  [6,  6];  10.  4,  [6],  17,  21,  29;  11.  17;  12. 
18;  16.  30;  17.  18,  19,  20;  19.  3,  35;  21.  13,  22,  33;  22. 10,  26; 
23.  19;  Rom.  3. 1,  1,  3,  5,  9;  4. 1,  3;  6.  1,  15, 21;  7.  7;  8.  26,27, 
31;  9. 14/30;  10.  8;  11. 2,  4,  7, 15;  12.  2;  1  Co.  2.  11;  4.  7,  21; 

5.  12;  7.  16;  g.  18;  10.  19;  11.  22;  14.  6, 15,  16;  15.  29,  32;  2 
Co.  6.  14,  14,  15,  15,  16;  12.  13;  Gal.  4.  30;  Eph.  1.  18,  18, 
19;  3-  9>!i8;  4.  g;  5.  10,  17;  Phil.  r.  18,  22;  Col.  1.  27;  1  Th.  2. 
x9-  3-  91  4-  2\  Heb.  2.  6;  7.  n;  11.  32;  12.  7;  13.  6;  Jas.  2.  14, 
16;  1  Pe.  1. 11;  4. 17;  1  Jo.  3.  2;  Rev.  2.  7,  11, 17, 29;  3.  6, 13, 
22;  7.  13;  18.  18. 

WHAT  manner  or  sort  of  (men)  — 
\.Where?  how?  when  ?  ns'l? ephoh. 

Judg.  8. 18  What  manner  of  men  (were  they)  whom 

2, Indeed,  in  truth,  then,  therefore,  tis  apatisara. 
Mark  4. 41  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even  the 
Luke  1.  66  saying,  What  manner  of  child  shall  this 
8.  25  What  manner  of  man  is  this !  for  he  com. 

o.Such  as,  such,  oXos  hois. 

Luke  9.  55  [Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye] 
1  Th.  1.    5  as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  were 

4.  Of  what  kind  or  sort  ?  Swolos  hopoios. 

1  Co.  3. 13  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what'sortit 
1  Th.  1.  g  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto 
Jas.     1.  24  straightway  forgetteth  what  manner  of 

ft.Ofwhal  sort  or  kind,  irolos  pois. 

1  Pe.  1.  n  Searching  what,  or  what  manner  of  time 

6.  Of  what  sort  or  kind  ?  how  great?  woraTrospotapos. 

Matt.  8.  27  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even 
Marki3.    1  Master,  see  what  manner  of  stones  and 
Luke  1.  2g  cast  in  her  mind  what  manner  of  salutat. 
7-  39  would  have  known  who  and  what  manner 

2  Pe.  3. 11  what  manner  (of  persons)  ought  ye  to  be 
1  Jo.   3.    1  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 

7. Who?  what?  rts  tis. 

Luke24.  17  What  manner  of  communications  (are) 

WHAT  end,  good,  purpose,  what  man  soever  — 

1..-1  man,  t^'N  ish. 

Lev.  17.    3  What  man  soever  (there  be)  of  the  house 
22.   4  What  man  soever  of  the  seed  of  Aaron  . 

2.  What  ?  no  mah. 

Gen.  27.  46 said  to  Isaac,  .what  good  shall  my  life  do 
Isa.  1.  11  To  whatpurposefis)themultitudeof  your 
Amos  5.  18  to  what  end  (is)  it  for  you?  the  day  of  the 

WHAT  place  soever,  in  — 

Where,  whether,  where,  whereas,  SVou  hopou. 

Mark  6.  10  [In  what  place]  soever  ye  enter  into  an  h. 
WHATSOEVER  (things)  — 
\.A  man  that,  1B>tj  tf'N  ish  ashcr. 

Lev.  17.    8,  10  Whatsoever  man.  .of  the  house  of  Isr. 
17. 13  whatsoever  man.  .of  the  children  of  Israel 

22. 18  Whatsoever  (lie  be)  of  the  house  of  Israel 
-2. All,  Sa  hoi 

Gen.  8. 19  whatsoever  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  after 

%. All  that,  "r^koldi. 

Ezra    7.  21  whatsoever  Ezra  the  priest,  the  scribe  of 
7.  23  Whatsoever  is  commanded  by  the  God  of 

i.Every  vessel,  ^SD^S  fool  hahkeli. 

Lev.  15.  26  whatsoever  she  sitteth  upon  shall  beun. 

5.  What,  that  which,  "^  no  mah  di. 

Ezra  7. 18  whatsoever  shall  seem  good  to  thee,  aud 
6. Whatsoever,  '6  idv  ho  can. 

Matt  1 4.    7  promised  with  an  oath  to  give  her  [what.] 

15.  5  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited 

16. 19  [whatsoever]  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  sh. 

16.  ig  [whatsoever]  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  sh. 
20.   4,  f7]  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,  and  what. 

Mark  6.  22  Ask  of  me  whatsoever  thou  wilt,  and  I  will 
6. 23  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  ask  of  me,  I  will 
7.  11  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited 
10.  35  that  thou  shouldest  do  for  us  whatsoever 


Markn.  23  come  to  pass;  he  shall  have  [whatsoever] 

13.  11  but  whatsoever  shall  be  given  you  in  that 
Gal.  6.  7  for  [whatsoever]  a  man  soweth,  that  shall 
1  Jo.  3.  22  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  be. 
3  John  ,  5  Beloved,  thou  doest  faithfully  whatsoever 

7.  Whatsoever,  '6  kav  rt  ho  can  ti. 

Eph.   6.    8  Knowing  that  [whatsoever]  good  thing 
8.0/ what  kind  or  sort  ?  6iro7oi  wore,  hopoioi  pote. 

Gal.    2.   6  seemed  to  be  somewhat,  whatsoever  they 
9. As  many  as,  Sera  (neut.  pi,)  hoscc. 

Matt.  17.  12  but  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they 

28.  20  Teaching  them  toobserve  allthingswhat. 
Mark  9. 13  they  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they 

10.  21  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the 
Luke  4.  23  whatsoever  we  have  heard  done  in  Cape. 

12.   3  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken  in  darkness 
Johni5. 14  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  [whatsoever] 

17.    7  they  have  known  that  all  things  whatso. 

Acts    4. 28  For  to  do  whatsoever  thy  hand  and  thy 

Rom. 15.   4  For  whatsoever  things  were  written  afore. 

Phil.    4.    8  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever 

4.    8  whatsoever  things  (are)  just,  whatsoever 

4.    8  whatsoever  things  (are)  lovely,  whatsoever 

10. .-is  many  as,  oaa  &V  [neut.  pi.)  hosa  cm. 

Matt.  7. 12  all  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men 

21.  22  all  things,  [whatsoever]  ye  shall  ask  iupr. 

23.   3  All  therefore  [whatsoever]  they  bid  you 
John  11.  22  whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will 

16.  13  but[whatsoever]heshallhear,(that)shall 

16.  23  [Whatsoever]  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in 
Acts    3.  22  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things  whatsoever 

ll.i4s  many  as,  6Va  eaV  hosa  (neut.  pi.)  ean. 
Matt.  1 8.  18  [Whatsoever]  ye  shall  bind.,  whatsoever 

\%  Whatsoever,  '6  ti  &V  (neut.)  ho  ti  an. 

Lukeio.  35  whatsoever  thou  spendest  more,  when  I 
John  2.    5  mother  saith  unto  the  servants,  Whatso. 

14.  13  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that 
15. 16  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in 

13.  Whatsoever,  irav  r6  ti  &v  (neut.)  pan  ho  ti  an. 

Col.    3. 17  whatsoever  ye  do  hi  word  or  deed,  (do) 

3.  23  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  (it)  heartily,  as  to 

14. All,  whatsoever,  irav  (neut.)  pan. 

Matt  15.  17  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth  go. 

Mark  7.  18  whatsoever  thwig  from  without  entereth 

Rom. 14.  23  not  of  faith :  for  whatsoever  (is)  not  of  fa. 

1  Co.io.  25  Whatsoeveris  sold  in  the  shambles,  (that) 
10.  27  whatsoever  is  set  before  you  eat,  asking 

Eph.  5.  13  for  whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  li. 

1  Jo.    5.    4  For  whatsoever  isbornof  God,  Rev.  18.  22 
15.  Whatsoever,  £>  SniroTe  ho  depote,  John  5-  4- 
16 . Whatsoever,  ri  (neut.)  ti. 

1  Co.  10.  31  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 
WHEAT,  wheaten  — 
\.Com,  grain,  IS,  "13  bar. 

Jer.  23.  28  What  (is)  the  chaff  to  the  wheat?  saith  the 

Joel   2.  24  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and  the  fats 

Amos  5.  11  ye  take  from  him  burdens  of  wheat:  ye 
8.   5  we  may  set  forth  wheat,  making  the  eph. 
8.   6  That  we  may.  .sell  the  refuse  of  the  wh.? 

I.Corn,  ]F}  dagan. 

Num  18/12  all  the  best  of  the  wine,  and  of  the  wheat 

Jer.  31. 12  for  wheat,  and  for  wine,  and  for  oil,  and 
3.  Wheat,  nan  chiltah. 

Gen.  30. 14  Reuben  went  in  the  days  of  wheat  harv. 

Exod.  9.  32  But  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  not  smi. 

29.  2  (of)  wheaten  flour  shalt  thou  make  them 
34.  22  of  the  first  fruits  of  wheat  harvest,  and 

Deut.  8.    8  A  land  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines 

32.  14  and  goats,  with  the  fat  of  kidneys  of  wh. 
Judg.  6. 11  his  son  Gideon  threshed  wheat  by  the  w. 

15.  1  awhile  after,  in  the  time  of  wheat  harvest 
Ruth  2.  23  unto  the  end  of  barley  harvest  and  of  w. 

1  Sa.   6. 13  (were)  reaping  their  wheat  harvest  in  the 

12.  17  (Is  it)  not  wheat  harvest  to  day?  I  will 

2  Sa.    4.  6  (as  though)  they  would  have  fetched  wh. 

17.  28  wheat,  and  barley,  and  flour,  and  parched 
1  Ki.  5.  11  twenty  thousand  measures  of  wheat  (for) 

1  Ch.21.  20  hid.  .Now  Oman  was  threshing  wheat 

21.  23  and  the  wheat  for  the  meat  offering,  I  give 

2  Ch.  2.  10  twenty  thousand  measures  of  beaten  w. 

2.  15  Now  therefore  the  wheat,  and  the  barley 

27.  5  ten  thousand  measures  of  wheat,  and  ten 
Job  31.  40  Let  thistles  grow  instead  of  wheat,  and 
Psa.  81. 16  fed  them  also  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat 
147.  14  (and)  fllleth  thee  with  the  finest  of  thew. 
Song  7.  2  thy  belly  (is  like)  an  heap  of  wheat  set  ab. 
Isa.  28.  25  cast  in  the  principal  wheat,  and  theapp. 
Jer.  12. 1 3  They  have  sown  wheat,  but  shall  reap  th. 

41.  8  forwe  have  treasures  in.the  field,  of  whe. 
Eze.  1  4.   9  Take  thou  also  unto  thee  wheat,  and  ba. 

27.  17  they  traded  in  thy  market  wheat  of  Min. 

45.  13  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer  of  w. 
Joel    1. 11  Be  ye  ashamed.,  for  the  wheat  and  for  the 

i.  Wheat,  grain,  pejn  chintin. 

Ezra   6.    9  burnt  offerings  of  the  God  of  heaven,  wh. 
7.  22  to  an  hundred  measures  of  wheat,  and  to 

^.Ground  corn,  wheat,  grits,  ffisn  riphoth. 

Prov  27.  22  bray  a  fool  in  amortar  among  wheat  with 

Q.Sifted  wheat  or  corn,  <riYos  silos. 

Matt.  3.  12  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner,  but  he 

13.  25  euemycame  and  sowed  tares  among  thejw. 
13.  29  lest,  .ye  root  up  also  the  wheat  with  them 
13.  30  bind  them.,  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my 


WHEEL 


1045 


WHERE 


Luke  3.  17  will  gather  the  wheat  into  his  garner;  but 
16.    7  And  he  said,  An  hundred  measures  of  w. 

22.  31  (to  have)  you,  that  he  may  sift  as  wheat 
Johni2.  24  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  gro. 
Acts  27.  38  lightened  the  ship,  and  cast  out  the  whe 
1  Co. 15.  37  it  may  chance  of  wheat,  or  of  some  other 
Rev.    6.    6  A  measure  of  wheat  for  a  penny,  and  th. 

iS.  13  fine  flour,  and  wheat,  and  beasts,  and  sh. 

WHEEL  — 

l.Turnings,  wheels,  D?J2N  obnayim. 

Jer.   18.  3  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  wheels 

2.  A  wJieel,  \tf\ttophan. 

Exodi4.  25  took  off  their  chariot  wheels,  that  they 

1  Ki.   7.  30  every  base  had  four  brasen  wheels,  and 

7.  32  four  wheels;  and  the  axletrees  of  the  wh 

7.  32  height  of  a  wheel  (was)  a  cubit  aud  half 

1  Ki.  7. 33  the  work  of  the  wheels,  .a  chariot  wheel 
ProV2o.  26  a  wise  king,  .bringeth  the  wheel  over  th. 
Isa.  28.  27  neither  is  a  cart  wheel  turned  about  upon 
Eze.     1.  15  behold  one  wheel  upon  the  earth  by  the 

1. 16  The  appearance  of  the  wheels  and  their 

1.  16  as  it  were  a  wheel  in  the  midstof  a  wheel 

1.  19  the  wheels  went  by  them,  .the  wheels  were 

1.  20,  21  the  wheels  were  lifted  up.  .in  the  wh. 

3.  13  the  noise  of  the  wheels  over  against  them 

10.    6  he  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  wheels 

10.    9  the  four  wheels  by  the  cherubim,  one  wh. 

10.   9  another  wheel.. the  appearance  of  the  wh 

10.  10  a  wheel  had  been  in  the  midst  of  a  wheel 

10.  12  the  wheels,  .(even)  the  wheels  that  they 
10. 13  As  for  the  wheels,  it  was  cried  unto  them 
10. 16  the  wheels  went  by  them,  .the  same  wh. 
10. 19  when  they  went  out,  the  wheels  also  (we.) 

11.  22  lift  up  their  wings,  and  the  wheels  beside 
Nan.  3.    2  the  noise  of  the  rattlingof  the  wheels,  and 

3.A  rolling  thing,  wheel,  ^a??  galgal. 

Psa.  83. 13  make  them  like  a  wheel ;  as  the  stubble 
Eccl.  12.  6  bowl,  .or  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern 
Isa.  5.  28  counted  like  flint,  and  their  wheels  like 
Jer.  47.  3  (at)  the  rumbling  of  his  wheels,  the  fath. 
Eze.  10.  2  Go  in  between  the  wheels,  (even)  under 
10.  6  Take  fire  from  between  the  wheels,  from 
10. 13  cried  unto  them  in  my  hearing,  O  wheel 

23.  24  they  shall  come  against  thee  with . .  wheels 
26.  10  &hallshakeatthenoise..of  the  wheels,  and 

Dan.    7.    9  (was  like)  the  fiery  flame,  (and)  his  wheels 

4.  A  rolling  thing,  wheel,  *?373  gilgal. 

Tsa.  28.  28  nor  break  (it  with)  the  wheel  of  his  cart 
5. Beat,  step,  cys  paam. 

Judg.  5.  2&  cried,  .why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  chariots? 

WHELP  — 

l.A  son,  }?  ben. 

Job     4. 11  the  stout  lion's  whelps  are  scattered  abro. 
28.    8  The  lion's  whelps  have  not  trodden  it,  nor 

2.^4  whelp,  "lia  gor. 

Jer.  51.  38  Theyshall  roar  together  like  lions,  they 
Nah.  2.  12  did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his  whelps 

3.  .4  whelp,  "M  gur. 

Gen.  49.  9  Judah  (is)  a  lion's  whelp  :  from  the  prey 
Deut  33.  22  Dan  is  a  lion's  whelp :  he  shall  leap  from 
Eze.  19.    2  she  nourished  her  whelps  among  young 

"ig.    3  she  brought  up  one  of  her  whelps  :  it  bee. 

19.  5  she  took  nnotherofherwhelps,(and)made 
Nah.   2. 1 1  the  old  lion  walked,  (and)  the  lion's  whelp 

WHEN  — 

I.  After,  "inN  achar. 

Gen,  24.  36  bare  a  son  to  my  master  when  she  was 
%If,  DN  im. 

Gen.  38.    9  when  he  went  in  unto  his  brother's  wife 

3.  That,  in  that,  tip  J?  asher. 

Gen.    6.    4  when  the  sons  of  God  came  in  imtotheda. 

4.  Wlien  as,  "i^N3  kaasher. 

Gen.  12. 11  when  he  was  come  near  toenterinto  Eg. 

5.  From  that  {time)  ^  midde. 

iJSa.    1.    7  when  she  went  up  to  the  house  oftheLo. 

.  1  Ki.  14.  28  when  the  king  went  into  the  house  of  the 

2  Ch.12. 11  when  the  king  entered  into  the  house  of 

6. As  that,  *~)$kedi. 

Dan.    3.   7  when  all  the  people  heard  the  sound  of 
7.  In  the  day,  nra  beyom. 

Lev.  13. 14  when  raw  flesh  appeareth  in  him,  he  shall 
14.  57  To  teach  when  (it  is)  unclean,  aud  when 

Deutzi.  16  when  he  maketh  his  sons  to  inherit  (that) 

2  Sa.  21.  12  when  the  Philistines  had  slain  Saul  in  Gil. 
Eze.  38.  18  when  Gog  shall  come  against  the  land  of 
Zech.  14.    3  fight  against  those  nations,  as  when  lie  fo. 

S.  When,  *3  hi. 

Gen.    4.  12  When  thou  tillestthe  ground,  it  shall  not 
9.  As,  ids  kemo. 

Gen.  19.  15  when  the  morning  arose,  then  the  angels 

10. From  {the  time)  that,  ,T)  jp  mi?i  di. 

Ezra    4.  23  Now  when  the  copy  of  king  Artaxerxes' 

II.  When  ?  712  mathai. 

Gen.  30.  30  when  shall  I  provide  for  mine  own  house 

12.  For  when  ?  "Tn1?  lemathai. 

Exod.  S.    9  when'shall  I  entreat  for  thee,  aud  for  thy 

13.  During,  *ij?  ad. 

Psa.  71.  18  Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  grey  headed 


14.  While  yet,  *uy2  bead. 

Gen.  48.   7  when  yet  (there  was)  but  a  little  way  to 

15. In  or  at  the  time,  ny?  beeth,  nyh  teeth. 

1  Ki.  11.    4  when  Solomon  was  old,  (that)  his  wives 

2  Ch.20.  22  when  they  began  to  singand  to  praise,  the 

29.  27  when  the  burnt  offering  began,  the  song 
Jer.  2. 17  forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God,  when  he  led 
Eze.  21.  25  whose  day  is  come,  when  iniquity  (shall 

2i.  29  whose  day  is  come,  when  their  iniquity 

16.//',  idu  ean. 

1  Co.  14.  16  when  thou  shaltbless  with  the  spirit,  how 

1  Jo.    3.    2  when  he  shall  appeal-,  we  shall  be  like  him 

17.  After  tliat,  when,  iirdv  epan. 

Matt.  2.    8  when  ye  have  found  (him),  bringme  word 

Luken.  22  But  when  a  stronger  than  he  shall  come 

11.  34  when  (thine  eye)  is  evil,  thy  body  also  (is) 

IS. Since,  when,  after  that,  eirei  epei. 

Luke  7.    1  Now  [wdien]  he  had  ended  all  his  sayings 

19.  When,  r\v'\.Ka.  henika. 

2  Co.   3.  15  when  Moses  is  read,  the  veil  is  upon  their 

3.  16  Nevertheless  when  it  shall  turn  to  the  L. 

20. According  as,  tcadcos  kathos. 

Acts    7.  17  But  when  the  tune  of  the  promise  drew 

21.After,  /xeTa  {ace.)  meta. 

Acts    7.    4  when  his  father  was  dead,  he  removed 
1  Co.  11.  25  After  the  same  manner,  .when  he  had 

22.  Wlien,  6tt6t$  hopote* 

Luke  6.    3  what  David  did,  [when]  himself  was  an 

23.  So  that,  oVos  hopos. 

Acts    3.  19  when  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come 

24.  Whenever,  l6rav  hotan. 

Matt.  5.  11  Blessed  are  ye  when  (men)  shall  revile  you 
See  also  6.    2,  5,  6,  16;  9.  15;  10.  19,  23;  12.  43;  13.  32; 

15.  2 ;  19.  28 ;  21.  40 ;  23.  15 ;  24.  15,  32,  33 ;  25-  31 ;  26. 
29;  Mark  2.  20;  3.  11 ;  4. 15, 16,  29,  31,  32 ;  8.  38;  11.  25 ; 
12.  [23],  25 ;  13.  4,  7,  11, 14,  28,  29 ;  Luke  5.  35 ;  6. 22, 22, 26 ; 
8.  13;  9.  26;  11.  2,  21,  24,  34,  36;  12.  11,  54,  55;  13.  28: 
14.8,10,10,12,13;  16.  4,9;  17.10;  21.  7,  9,  20,  30,  31 ;  23.  42; 
John  2.  10 ;  4.  25;  5.  7;  7.  27,  31 ;  8.  28,  44;  10.  4;  13. 
19 ;  14.  29 ;  15.  26 ;  16.  4,  13,  21 ;  21.  18 ;  Acts  23.  35 ;  24. 
22;  Rom.  2.  14;  11.  27;  1  Co.  13.  10;  14.  26;  15.  24,  24, 
27,  28,  54;  16.  2,  3,  5,  12;  2  Co.  10.  6;  12.  10;  13. _o;  Col. 

3.  4;  4.  16;  1  Th.  5.  3;  2  Th.  1.  10;  1  Ti.  5.  11;  Titus  3. 
12 ;  Heb.  1.  6 ;  Jas.  1.  2 ;  1  Jo.  2.  [28] ;  5.  2 ;  Rev.  4.  9 ; 
9-  5i  10*  7!  1J*  7»  I7-  IOJ  IS-  9!  zo-  7- 

25.  When,  oVe  hote. 

Matt.  7.  28  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  sayings,  the 
See  also  9.25;  n.  1;  12.  3;  13.  26,  48,  53;  17.  [25];  19. 
1;  21.  1,  34;  26.  1;  Mark  1.  32;  2.  25;  4.  10;  7.  17;  8.  19, 
20;  11. 1,  [19];  14. 12;  15.  20,  41;  Luke  2.  21,  22,  42;  4. 25; 
6-  13;  i3-  [35];  J7-  22;  22.  14,  35;  23.  33;  John  1.  19;  2.22;  4. 
21,  23,  45;  5.  25;  6.  24;  9.  4,  [14];  12. 16,  [17],  [41];  13.  31;  16. 
25;  19.  6,  8,  23,  30;  20.  24;  21.  15,  18;  Acts  1. 13;  8.  12,  39; 
11.  2;  12.  6;  21.  5,  35;  22.  20;  27.  39;  2S.  16;  Rom.  2.  [16]; 
6.  20;  7.  5;  13.  n;  1  Co.  13.  11,  11;  Gal.  1. 15;  2.  11,  12,  14; 

4.  3,  4;  Phil.  4.  15;  Col.  3.  7;  1  Th.  3.  4;  2  Th.  3.  10;  2  Ti. 
4.  3;  Heb.  7. 10;  1  Pe.  3.  20;  Jude  [9];  Rev.  1.  17;  5.  8;  6. 
i»  3.  5>  7.  9.  12;  8.  [1];  10.  3,  4;  12.  13;  22.  8. 

26.  Where,  ov  hou, 

Heb.  3.   9  When  your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved 

27.  When  ?  vSre  poie. 

Matt. 24.    3  Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be?  and 
25.  37.  44  saying,  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  an  hu. 
25.  38  When  saw  we  thee  a  stranger,  and  took 
25-  39  when  saw  we  thee  sick,  or  in  prison,  and 

Marki3.  4  Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be?  and 
13-  33  watch  and  pray:  for  ye  know  not  when 
13.  35  for  ye  know  not  when  the  master  of  the 

Lukei2.  36  lord,  when  he  will  return  from  the  wedd. 
17.  20  demanded.,  when  the  kingdom  of  God  sh. 
21.    7  saying,  Master,  but  when  shall  these  things 

John  6.  25  said.  .Rabbi,  when  earnest  thou  hither  f 

28.  Once,,  at  some  time  or  other,  ttoripote. 

Luke  22.  32  'when  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy 

29.  As,  when,  ws  hos. 

Luke  1.  41  when  Elisabeth  heard  the  salutation  of 
2.  39  when  they  had  performed  all  things  acco. 

4.  25  when  great  famine  was  throughout  all  the 

5.  4  Now  when  he  had  left  speaking,  he  said 
7. 12  Now  when  he  came  nigh  to  the  gate  of  the 

11.  1  when  he  ceased,  one  of  his  disciples  said 

12.  58  When  thou  goest  with  thine  adversary  to 
19.  5  when  Jesus  came  to  the  plaue,  he  looked 
19.  29  when  he  was  come  nigh  to  Bethphage  and 

19.  41  when  he  was  come  near,  he  beheld  the  ci. 

20.  37  when  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of  Abr. 
John  2.    9  When  the  ruler  of  the  feast  had  tasted 

2.  23  Now  when  he  was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  pa. 
4.    1  When  therefore  the  Lord  knew  how  the 
4.  40  So  when  the  Samaritans  were  come  unto 

6.  12  When  they  were  filled,  he  said  unto  his  di. 

6.  16  when  even  was  (now)  come,  his  disciples 

7.  10  when  his  brethren  were  gone  up,  then  we. 

8.  7  [So  when  they  continued  asking  him,  he] 
1 1 .    6  When  he  had  heard  therefore  that  he  was 
11.  32  Then  when  Mary  was  come  where  Jesus 
n.33  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  her  weeping,a  11  d 
19.  33  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw 

Acts  5.  24  Now  when  thehigh  priest  and  the  captain 
7.  23  when  he  was  full  forty  years  old,  it  came 
10.    7  when  the  angel  which  spake  unto  Cornel. 

13.  29  whentheyhadfulfilledallthatwas  written 

14.  s  when  there  was  an  assault  made  botli  of 


Acts  16.  15  when  she  was  baptized,  and  herhouseho. 

17.  13  when  the  Jews  of  Thessalonicahad  know. 

18.  5  when  Silas  and  Timotheus  werecome  from 

19.  9  when  divers  were  hardened,  and  believed 

20.  14  when  he  met  with  us  at  Assos,  we  took 

20.  1 8  when  they  were  come  to  him,  he  said  unto 

21.  12  when  we  heard  these  things,  both  we,  and 
2i.  27  when  the  seven  days  were  almost  ended 

22.  11  when  I  could  not  see  for  theglory  of  that 
25.  14  when  they  had  been  there  many  days,Fest. 
27.    1  when  it  was  determined  that  we  should 

27.  27  But  when  the  fourteenth  night  was  come 

28.  4  when  the  barbarians  saw  the  (venomous) 
1  Co.ii.  34  And  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  co. 

30.  In  the,  iv  t<£  en  to. 

Matt.13.    4  when  he  sowed,  some  (seeds)  fell  by  the 
27. 12  when  he  was  accused  of  the  chief  priests 
Luke  2.  27  when  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  J. 

3.  21  Now  when  all  the  people  were  baptized 

5.  12  when  he  was  in  a  certain  city,  behold  a 

8.  40  when  Jesus  was  returned,  the  people  (gl.) 

9.  36  when  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found 
9.  51  when  the  time  was  come  that  he  should 

10.  35  whatsoever  thou  spendest  more,  when  I 
19. 15  when  he  was  returned,  having  received 
Acts    2.    1  when  theday  of  Pentecostwas  fully  come 
Rom.  3.    4  and  mightest  overcome  when  thou  art  ju. 
Gal.     4.  18  and  not  only  when  I  am  present  with  you 

1  Pe.  4.  13  when  his  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may 

31. In  the  which,  iv  tJ",  iv  rrj  en  lie,  en  te. 

Luke22.    7  day  of  unleavened  bread,  when  the  pass. 

John  4.  52  Then  enquired  he  of  them  the  hour  when 

Acts  13.  17  exalted  the  people  when  they,  2  Th.  1.  7 
ZI.And,  also,  teal  kai,  Acts  5.  7  ;  Heb.  8.  8. 
WHENCE  ?  (from)  — 
\.From  whence  ?  nia  'n  e  mizzeh. 

Gen.  l6.   8  whence  earnest  thou?  and  whither  wiltth. 

2.  Whence?  ]'XD  mcayin. 

Gen.  29.    4  Mybrethren,  whence  (be)ye?  And  theysa. 

42.    7  said  unto  them, Whence  come  ye?  And  they 

Num  11.  13  Whence  should  1  have  flesh  to  give  unto 

Josh.  2.    4  There  came  men  unto  me,  but  I  wist  not 

9.    8  said  unto  them,  Who  (are)  ye?  and  fromw. 

Judgi  7.   9  M  ieah  said  unto  him,  Whence  comest  thou? 

19. 17  Whither  goest  thou  ?  and  wheuce  comest 

2  Ki.  5-  25  Elisha  said  unto  him,  Whence  (comest  th .) 

6.  27  whence  shall  I  help  thee?  out  of  the  barn 
20.  14  What  said  these  men?  and  from  whence 

Job  1.  7  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Whence  comest  th.? 
28.  20  Wheuce  then  cometh  wisdom?  and  where 
Psa.  121 .  1  unto  the  hills,  from  whence  cometh  my  he. 
Isa.  39.  3  What  said  these  men?  and  from  whence 
Jon.  1.  8  whence  comest  thou?  what  (is)  thy  count. 
Nan.   3.    7  who  willbemoan  her?  whence  shalll  seek 

3.  Whence,  Sdev  hothen. 

Matt  12.  44  I  will  return  into  my  house  from  whence 

Lukeu.  24  I  will  return  unto  my  house  whence  I  ca. 

Acts  14.  26  from  whence  they  had  been  re.  He.  n. 19. 
£.Where,  ov  hou,  Phil.  3.  20. 
6. Whence?  how?    tt6B^v poihen. 

Matti3.  2/  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field?  from  whence 
See  also  v.  54,  56;  15.33;  21.  25;  Mark  6.  2;  8.  4;  12. 
37  ;  Luke  1.  43 ;  13.  25,  27  ;  20.  7 ;  John  1.  48 ;  2.  9 ;  3.  8 ; 
4. 1 1 ;  6.  5 ;  7.  27,  27,  28 ;  8.  14,  14 ;  9.  29,  30 ;  19.  9 ;  Jas. 

4.  1 ;  Rev.  2.  5 ;  7.  13. 

WHENSOEVER  — 

1.  Whensoever,  trav  hotan. 

Marki4.  7  whensoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good 
^.Whensoever,  o>?  idv  hds  ean. 

Rom  15.  24  [Whensoever]  I  take  my  journey  into  Sp. 
WHERE  — 
1. Where?  *N  e. 

Gen.    3.   9  God  called  unto  Adam..  Where  (art)  thou? 

4.  9  said  unto  Cain,  Where  (is)  Abel  thy  bro.  ? 
Job  20.  7  they  which  have  seen  him  shall  say,  Wh. 
Isa.   19. 12  Where  (are)  they?.,  let  them  tell  thee  now 

2.  Where  ?  m  'N  e  zeh. 

1  Sa.   9. 18  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  the  seer's  ho. 
Job  28. 12  and  where  (is)  the  place  of  understanding? 

3.  Where?  n»N  ayyeh. 

Gen.  18.   9  Where  (is)  Sarah  thy  wife?  And  he  said 
Jer.  37.  19  Where  (are)  now  your  prophets  which  pr. 

4.How,  how  ?  np'fc  ekah. 

Song  1.  7  Tell  me.. where  thou  feedest,  where  thou 
5. How,  how?  nb'X  ekoh. 

2  Ki.  6.  13  Go  and  spy  where  he  (is),  that  I  may  send 

6.  Whence  ?  (?*«?  meayin. 

Job  28.  12  But  where  shall  wisdom  be  found?  and  wh. 

7.  Where  ?  riETN  ephoh. 

Gen.  37.  16  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  they  feed  (th 
Ruth  2.  19  Where  hast  thou  gleaned  to  day?  and  wh 

1  Sa.  19.  22  asked  and  said,  Where  (are)  Samuel  aud 

2  Sa.   9.   4  king  said  unto  him,  Where  (is)  he?  And 
Job    4.    7  Remember,  .where  were  the  righteous  cut 

38.  4  Where  wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  found. 
Isa.  49. 21  I  was  left  alone;  these,  where  (had)  they 
Jer.    3.    2  see  where  thou  hast  not  been  lien  with  :in 

36.  19  Go,  hide  thee,  .and  let  no  man  know  wh. 

S.Vnto,  "7N  el. 

Lev.    4.  "12  clean  place,  where  the  ashes  are  poured 
9.  Whither  ?  rux  anah. 

2  Ki.  6.   6  man  of  God  said,  Where  fell  it?  And  he 


WHERE 


1046 


WHEREFORE 


lQ.Wheret  triag,  \b$ \epho. 

Gen.  27.  33  where  (is)  he  that  hath  taken  venison,  and 
Job  9.  24  judges  thereof ;  if  not,  where,  (and)  who 
Isa.  19.  12  where  (are)  thy  wise  (men)?,  .let  them  tell 
Eos.  13.  10  where  (is  any  other)  that  may  save  thee  in 

11. Li  (theplace)  that,  where,  "t^'x?  baaslier. 

Judgs-  27  where  he  bowed,  there  he  fell  down  dead 

12.  Whence,  i^nd  measlier. 

Exod.5.  11  Go  ye,  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find  it 

13.  Where,  whither,  Df  T#%  asher  sham. 

Gen.  2.  11  the  whole  land  of  Havilah,  where  (there 

14..1  hand,  part,  ~\*yad. 

Isa.  57.  8  thou  lovedst  their  bed  where  thou  sawest 
15.  Whither,  nsn,  dp,  tarn,  tammah. 

Ezra  6.  1  where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  Bab. 
16. In  which,  iv  <£  enho. 

Acts  4.  31  place  was  shaken  where  they  were  assem. 
7.  33  for  the  place  [where]  thou  standest  is  ho. 

11. 11  already  come  unto  the  house  where  I  was 

15.  36  where  we  have  preached  the  word  of  the 

17.  Doom  to,  Kard  (ace.)  kata. 

Luke  10.  33  Samaritan,  as  he  journeyed,  came  where 

18.  Whence,  oQsv  hothen. 

>ratts5.  24  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  straw. 
25. 26  and  gather  where  I  have  not  strawed 

19.  Where-,  oirov  hopou. 

MaLt.  6.  ijwhere  moth  and  rust  doth  not  corrupt.  ,wh 
6.  20  where  neither  moth  norrust  doth  corrupt 
6.  20  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  and, 
<5.  21  For  whei-e  your  treasure  is,  there  will 
13.  5  Some  fell  upon  stony  places,  where  they 
25.  24  reaping  where  thou  hast  not  sown,  and 

25.  26  thou  knewest  that  I  reap  where  I  sowed 

26.  57  where  the  scribes  and  the  elders  wereas. 
28.    6  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 

Mark  2.    4  they  uncovered  the  roof  where  he  was 

4.  5  soma  fell  on  stony  ground,  where  it  had 
4. 15  these  are  they  by  the  wayside,  where  the 

5.  40  and  entereth  in  where  the  damsel  was 

6.  55  those  that  were  sick,  where  they  heard  he 
9.  [44,  46],  48  Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 

13.  14  see  the  abomination,  .standing  where  it 

14.  14  where  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my 

16.  6  he  is  not  here  :  behold  the  place  where 
Lukei2.  33  where  nothief  approacheth,  ueithermoth 

12.  34  For  where  your  treasure  is,  there  willyo. 
.22. 11  where  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  my 
John  1.  28  in  Bethabara  beyond  Jordan,  where  John 

3.  8  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and 

4.  20  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where  men  ought 

4.  46  Jesus  came  again  into  Cana  of  Galilee,  w. 
6.  23  unto  the  place  where  they  did  eat  bread 

6.  62  see  the  Sou  of  man  ascend  up  where  he 

7.  34,  36  and  where  I  am,  (thither)  ye  cannot. 
7.  42  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  where  D. 

10.  40  into  the  place  where  John  at  first  bapti. 

11.  30  but  was  in  that  place  where  Martha  met 

11.  32  Then  when  Mary  was  come  where  Jesus 

12.  1  Bethany,  where  Lazarus  was  which  had 
12.  26  and  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  ser. 
14.    3  myself;  that  where  I  am,  (there)  ye  may 

17.  24  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  w. 

18.  1  broo't  Cedron,  where  was  a  garden,  into 

19.  18  Where  they  crucified  him,  and  two  other 
19.  20  for  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified 

19.  41  Now  in  the  place  where  he  was  crucified 

20.  12  at  the  feet,  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had 
20.  19  when  the  doors  were  shut  where  the  dis. 

Acts  17.  1  came  to  Thessalonica,  where  was  a  syna. 
Rom  15.  20  preach  the  gospel,  not  where  Christ  was 
Col.  3.  11  Where  there  is  neither  Greeknor  Jew,ci. 
Heb.   9.  16  For  where  a  testament  (is),  there  must 

ix  1 3  Nov  where  remission  of  these  (is,  there 
Jas.     3. 16  For  where  envying  and  strife  (is),  there 
Rev.    2. 13  (even)  where  Satan's  seat  (is) :  and  thou 
2.  13  was  slain  among  you,  where  Satan  dwell. 

it.    8  and  Egypt,  where  also  our  Lord  was  cru. 

12.    6  wilderness,  where  she  hath  a  place  prep. 

12.  14  [where]  she  is  nourished  for  a  time,  20.  10 
:  0.  II' '], ere... there,  tiirOviicc7,  Mr.  6.  55;  Re.  12.  14. 

21 .  Where,  oj  hou. 

Matt,  2.    9  till  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the  yo. 

i3.  23  For  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  to. 

=3.  16  into  a  mountain  where  Jesus  had  appoi. 

L-ike  4.  16  caine  to  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been  br. 

4-  17  he  found  the  place  where  it  was  written 

22.  10  follow  him  into  the  house  [where]  he  en. 

J  thniii  41  [took  away  the  store  (from  the  place)  whl. 

Acts    1.  13  into  an  upper  room,  where  abode  both  P. 

2.    2  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  si. 

7.  29  stranger  in  the  land  of  Midian,  where  he 

12. 12  where  many  were  gathered  together  pra. 
iO.  13  river  side,  where  prayer  was  wont  to  be 
20.  6  camo  rito  them  to  Troas  in  five  days ;  wh. 
20.  8  upper  chamber,  where  they  were  gathered 
25.  10  judgment  seat,  where  I  ought  to  be  jud. 

.  1  1  Where  we  found  brethren,  and  were  de. 
ft  im    ;.  15  for  where  no  law  is,  (there  is)  no  transg. 

5.  20  But  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much 
9.  25  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them 

j.  17  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  (is),  there 
Col.     3.    1  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
R»-iv,  1/.  15  where  the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and 

22.  Wh  ret  irovpou. 

Mall.  2     2  Where  is-he  t.'uit  is  burn  King  of  the  Jews? 


Matt.  2.   4  he  demanded  of  them  where  Christ  shou. 

8.  20  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay 
26. 17  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  thee 

Marki4.  12  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  go  aud  prepare 

14.  14  The  Master  saith,  Where  is  the  guest  ch. 

15.  47  (the  mother)  of  Joses  beheld  where  he  was 
Luke  8.  25  Where  is  your  faith?  And  they  being  afr. 

9.  58  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay 
12.  17  because  I  have  no  room  where  to  bestow 
17.  17  Were  there  not  ten  cleansed?  but  where 
17.  37  they  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Where 
22.  9  said  unto  him,  Where  wilt  thou  that  we 
22. 11  The  Master  saith.  .Where  is  the  guest  ch. 

John  1.  38  being  interpreted,  Master,  where  dwell. 
1.  39  They  came  and  saw  where  lie  dwelt,  and 

7.  11  sought  him  at  the  feast,  and  said,  Where 
8. 10  [Woman,  where  are  those  thine  accusers?] 

8.  19  Then  said  they  unto  him.  Where  is  thy 

9.  12  Then  said  they  unto  him,  Where  is  he? 

11.  34  Where  have  ye  laid  him?  They  said  unto 
1  r.  57  that,  if  any  man  knew  where  he  were,  he 
20.    2,  13  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him 
20. 15  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  him,  and  I 

Rom,  3.  27  Where  (is)  boasting  then?  It  is  excluded 

i  Co.  1.  20  Where  (is)  the  wise?  where  (is)  the  scribe? 

1.  20  where  is  the  disputer  of  this  world?  hath 

12.  17  where  (were)  the  hearing,  .where  (were) 
12.  19  they  were  all  one  member,  where  (were) 
15.  55  where  (is)  thy  sting?,  .where  ('is)  thy  vi.? 

1  Pe.   4.  18  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner 

2  Pe.   3.    4  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?  for 
Rev.    2. 13  where  thou dwellest,  (even).  .Satan's seat 

2B.What1  rls  t:s. 

Gal.    4.  15  [Where]  is  then  the  blessedness  ye  spake 
24.  Place,  t6ttos  topos. 

1  Ti.   2.    S  I  will  therefore  that  men  pray  every  wh. 
WHERE  no  — 

In  not,  in  the  cessation  of,  DDN3  deephes. 

Prov  26.  20  Where  no  wood  is)  (there)  the  fire  goeth 
"WHEREAS  — 
l.If,  since,  CH  im. 

Job   22.  20  Whereas  our  substance  is  not  cut  down 
2.For,  •?  U. 

Gen.  31.  37  Whereas  thou  hast  searched  all  my  stuff 
S.Koiv,  nriu  attah. 

2  Ch.io.  11  For  whereas  my  father  put  a  heavy  yoke 

4.  Under,  instead  of,  nnn  tachafh. 

Isa.   60.  is  Whereas  thou  hast  been  forsaken  and  ha. 

5.  Because  that,  10&  \W.  yaan  asher. 

1  Ki.   8.  iS  Whereas  it  was  in  mine  heart  to  build  an 
6.1n  that  which,  eV  £  en  ho. 

1  Pe.  2.  12  whereas  they  speak  against  you  asevildo. 
3.  16  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you,  as  of  evil 

7.  Where,  whereas,  '6ttov  hopou. 

1  Co.  3.    3  for  whereas  (there  is)  among  you  envying 

2  Pe.  2. 11  Whereas  angels  which  are  greater  in  po. 

5.  Whoever,  fto-ris  hostis. 

Jas.    4.  14  Whereas  ye  know  not  what  (shall  be)  on 
WHEREBY  — 
l.In,  with,  or  by  what  ?  n^a  oxmmah. 

Gen.  15.    8  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit 
I.The  Minnhn,  musical  instruments,  D?3P  minnim.. 

Psa.  45.    8  palaces,  whereby  they  have  made  thee  g. 
3.  Through  which,  5t'  ys  cW  lies. 

Hob.  12.  20  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably 

2  Pe.    1.   4  Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  gr. 
3.   6  Whereby  the  world  that  then  was,  being 

i.In  which,  eV  §,  si>  ots  en  ho,  en  hois. 

Luke  1.  78  whereby  the  day  spring  from  on' high  hath 

Acta    4.  12  none  other  name,  .whereby  we  must  be 
11. 14  whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be 

Rom.  8.  15  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba 
14.21  whereby  thy  brother  stumbleth,  Ep.  4.  30 
5*.  By  which,  -Kp6s  '6  pros  ho,  Eph.  3.  4. 
b.Down  to  or  by  what  thing  f  kcit&tI  (ace.)  lata  tl. 

Luke  1. 18  Whereby  shall  I  know  this?  for  I  am  an 
G.  Whence,  ofle*  hothen. 

1  Jo.  2.  iS  whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  time 
7 '.Concerning  which,  7rep{  od'peri  (gen.)  hou, 

Acts  19.  40  there  bein.3  no  cause  whereby  we  may  give 
WHEREFORE  — 
l.But,  truly,  yt,  dVin  utam. 

Job  33.    1  Wherefore,  Job,  I  pray  thee,  hear  my  sp. 
^.Therefore,  \rh  lahen. 

Dan.    4.  27  Wherefore,  O  king,  let  my  counsel  beac. 
3.  Wherefore,  xclierefore  ?  jra  maddua. 

Gen.  2(5.  27  Wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate 

Isa.     5.    4  wherefore,  when  I  looked  that  it  "should 

4. For  what,  wher-forel  ?\*fy  lamvfo&h. 

Gen.  18.  13  Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh,  saying,  Shall 
sj.C'iurcrning  wind  1  '"T£"Sy  al  innh. 

Mai.    2. 14  Yet  ye  say,  Wherefore?  Because  the  Lord 

6.  For  this  reason,  because,  Tt^h^r^kolqebeldenah. 

Dan.   3.    8  Wherefore  at  that  time  certain  Chaldeans 
6,    9  Wherefore  king  Darius  signed  the  writing 
7  >'",-.  ly  only,  -n  '3  hi  ah. 

2  Ki.  5.    7  wherefore  consider,  I  pray  you,  and  se2 


^.Therefore,  W^V.  al  /.  n. 

Gen.  10.   9  wherefore  it  is  said,  Even  as  Mmrodthe 

9.  There fore,  |pj>  lahen. 

Exod.  6.    6  Wherefore  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel 

10.  Under  or  instead  of  what  1  nn  nnn  tachafh  meh. 
Jer.     5.  19  Wherefore  doeth  the  Lord  our  God  allth. 

11. In  deed,  in  truth,  then,  therefore,  &pa  ara. 
2  Co.  7.  12  Wherefore,  though  I  wrote  unto  you,  I 

m.Then  truly.,  therefore,  izpaye  arage. 

Matt.  7.  20  Wherefore  by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 

1%. Because  ofwhait  Suxr/ diati. 

Luke  j  9.  23  Wherefore  thengavest  not  thou  my  money 
Rom.  9.  32  Wherefore?  Because  (they  sought  it)  not 
2  Co.  11.  11  Wherefore?  because  I  love  you  not?  God 
Rev.  17.    7  Wherefore  didst  thou  marvel?  I  will  tell 

li.On  account  of  which,  8l6  dio. 

Matt.27.    8  Wherefore  that  field  was  called,  The  field 

Luke  7.    7  Wherefore  neither  thought  I  myself  wort. 

Acts  13.  35  [Where  fore  ]he  saith  also  in  another(psalm) 

15. 19  Wherefore  my  sentence  is,  that  we  trouble 

20. 26  Wherefore  I  take  you  to  record  this  day 

24.  26  wherefore  lie  sent  for  him  theoftener,  and 

25.  26  Wherefore  I  have  brought  him  forth  bef. 

26.  3  wherefore  I  beseech  thee  to  hear  me  pat. 

27.  25  Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer:  for  I 
27.  34  Wherefore  I  pray  you  to  take  (some)  m. 

Rom.  1.  24  Wherefore  God  also  gave  them  up  to  uu. 
13.  s  Wherefore  (ye)mustneedsbesubject,  not 
15.   7  Wherefore  receive  ye  one  another  as  Ch. 

1  Co.  12.    3  Wherefore  I  give  you  to  understand,  that 

2  Co.  2.    8  Wherefore  I  beseech  you  that  ye  would 

5.  9  Wherefore  we  labour,  that,  whether  pres. 

6.  17  Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them 
Eph.   2.  11  Wherefore  remember,  that  ye  (being)  in 

3. 13  Wherefore  I  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at 
4.    8  Wherefore  he  saith,  When  he  ascended 

4.  25  Wherefore,  puttingaway  lying,  speak  ev. 

5.  14  Wherefore  he  saith,  Awake  thou  that  si. 
Phil.    2.    9  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted 

1  Th.  2.  18  [Wherefore] we  wouldhavecomeuntoyou 

3.    1  Wherefore,  when  we  could  no  longer  for. 

5.  it  Wherefore  comfort  yourselves  together 
3'hm.        8  Wherefore,  though  I  might  be  much  bold 
Heb.   3.    7  Wherefore  as  the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  To  d. 

3.  10  Wherefore  I  was  grieved  with  that  gene. 

10.  5  Wherefore,  when  he  cometh  into  the  wo. 

11.  16  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called 

12.  12  Wherefore  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang 

12.  28  Wherefore,  we  receiving  a  kingdom  which 

13.  12  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  the  might  sa. 
Jas.    1.  21  Wherefore  lay  apart  all  filthinessaud  su. 

4.  6  Wherefore  he  saith,  God  resisteth  the  pr. 
t  Pe.    1. 13  Wherefore  gird  up  the  loinsof  your  mind 

2.  6  [Wherefore]  also  it  is  contained  in  the  S. 

2  Pe.   1. 10  Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren,  give  de. 

1.  12  Wherefore  I  will  not  be  negligent  to  put 

3. 14  Wherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look 

loJllierefore  truly,  SioVep  dioper. 

1  Co.  8.  13  Wherefore,  if  meat  make  my  brother  to 
10.  14  Wherefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from 

14.  13  [Wherefore]  let  him  that  speakethin  an 

1G.  Wherefore  ?  why?  'tua  ti  hina  ti. 

Matt.  9.   4  said,  Wherefore  think  ye  evil  in  your  hea. 

17.  Whence,  bOev  hothen. 

Heb.    2.  17  Wherefore  in  all  things  it  behoved  him 

3.  1  Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  partakers  of 

7.  25  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to 

8.  3  wherefore  (it  is)of  necessity  that  this  man 

18.  Therefore,  then,  oZv  oun. 

Matt  24.  26  Wherefore,  if  they  shall  say  unto  you.E. 
Acts    1.  21  Wherefore  of  these  men  which  have  com, 

6.  3  [Wherefore]  brethren,  look  ye  out  among 

1  Co.   4. 16  Wherefore  I  beseech  you,  be  ye  followers 

2  Co.  8.  24  Wherefore  show  ye  to  them,  and  before 
Col.  2.  20  [Wherefore],  if  ye  be  dead  with  Christ  fr. 
1  Pe.  2.    1  Wherefore,  laying  aside  all  malice,  and 

IV.Whattrtti. 

John  9.  27  wherefore  would  ye  hear  (it)  ngahi?will 
Acts  22.  30  known  the  certainty  wherefore  he  was  ac. 
Gal.     3. 19  Wherefore  then  (serveth)  the  law?  It  was 

QQ.Oii  account  of  what  ?  rlvoseueKev  timos-heneken. 
Acts  19.  32  knew  not  wherefore  they  were  come  tog. 

21.0n  account  of  what  ?  x*Pli/  tIvos  charin  linos. 

1  Jo.  3. 12  wherefore  slew  lie  him?  because  his  own 
"2'2.0ii  account  of,  or  because  of  this,  Sid  rovro. 

Matti2.  31  Wherefore  I  say  unto  you,  All  manner  of 
23.  34  Wherefore,  behold,  I  send  unto  you  pro. 

Rom.  5.  12  Wherefore,  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  in. 

Eph.    1.  15  Wherefore  I  also,  after  I  heard  of  your  fa. 

5.  17  Wherefore  be  ye  not  unwise,  but  tinders. 
6. 13  Wherefore  take  unto  you  the  whole  arm. 

3  John  10  Wherefore,  if  I  come,  I  will  re.  2  Ti.  1.  6 

23.  Because  of  which,  SI  fydi  hen,  (alriav). 

Acts  10.  21  what  (is)  the  cause  wherefore  ye  are  co.? 
22.  24;  23.  28;  2  Ti.  1.  6;  Titus  i.  13. 

24.Upon  what,  e0'  $  cpN  hou,  Matt.  26.  50. 

25. For  what,  ou  x^Plv  ?tou  charin,  Luke  7.  47. 

26 .Wherefore  (th ereforc)  truly, roiyapovv  toigaroun. 

Heb.  12.  1  Wherefore,  seeing  we  also  are  compassed 
27. So  that,  &<rre  hoste. 

Matti2.  12  Wherefore  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  tho 


WHEREIN 


1047 


WHICH 


Mattig.    6  Wherefore  they  are  no  more  twain,  but 

23.  31  Wherefore  be  ye  witnesses  untoyoursel. 

Rom.  7.    4  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  ye  also  are  bee. 

7.  12  Wherefore  the  law  (is)  holy,  and  the  co. 

1  Co.  10.  12  Wherefore  let  him  thatthinkethhe  stan. 

11.  27  Wherefore  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread 
"■  33  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  when  ye  come 
14.  22  Wherefore  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to 

14.  39  Wherefore,  brethren,  covet  to  prophesy 

2  Co.  5.  16  Wherefore  henceforth  know  we  no  man 
Gal.     3.  24  Wherefore  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster 

4.  7  Wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but 
Phil.  2.  12  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  alwa. 
1  Th.  4.  i3  Wherefore  eomfort  one  another  with  th. 
Jas.     1.  19  [Wherefore],  my  beloved  brethren,  let  ev. 

1  Pe.   4.  19  Wherefore  let  them  that  suffer  according 

28.  With  a  vieiv  to  what  ?  els  n  eis  ti  (neut.) 
Matt  14.  31  O  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  th. 

29.  Indeed  then,  fxev  oZv   •men  oun. 

Acts  19.  38  Wherefore  if  Demetrius,  andthecraftsmen 

30.  With  a  view  to  which,  els  o  eis  ho. 

2  Th.  1.  11  Wherefore  also  we  pray  always  foryou,th. 
"WHEREIN,  whereinto,  whereinsoever  — 

1.7m  that  -which,  "i^N3  baasher. 

Eccl.  3.  9  Whatprofithathhethat  worketh  in  that  vr. 

2.  In  which,  lit.  which  in  it,  S2  "TOM  asher  bo. 
Gen.    7.  15  two  and  two  of  all  flesh,  wherein  (is)  the 

3.  Which  there,  wliere,  C'J  "l^'N  asher  sham. 
Deut.12.   2  shall  utterly  destroy  alltheplaceswhere. 

A.  In  the  midst  of  133  begav. 

Ezra   5.    7  They  sent  a  letter  unto  him,  wherein  was 
5. In  them,  in  which,  jn3  t^k  aslier  bahen. 

Deut.28.  52  wherein  thou  triistedst,  throughout  all 

6.  In  them,  in  which,  n|n2  ~\Jx  asher  bahennah. 
Jer.    5. 17  theyshallimpoverishthyfenced cities, wh. 

7.  This,  which,  11  zu* 

Psa.  142.    3  In  the  way  wherein  I  walked  have  they 
143.    S  cause  me  to  know  the  way  wherein  I  sh. 

8. In  what,  n^2  bamvuth. 

1  Sa.  14.  38  know  and  see  wherein  this  sin  hath  been 

9.  In  the  midst  of  which,  PDins  itf'X  asher  bethokah. 
Xum.35.  34  laud  which  ye  shall  inhabit,  wherein  I 

10.  Unto  whose  midst,  to'W^N  n^N  asher  el-toko. 
Lev.  11.  33  every  earthen  vessel  whereinto  (any)  of 

ll.Oa  account  of  which,  81  H\v  di  hen. 

2  Pe.  3.  12  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be 

12.  With  a  view  to  which,  els  o  eis  ho. 

John  6.  22  save  that  one  whereinto  his  disciples  were 
Acts    7.    4  removed  him  into  this  land,  wherein  ye 
1  Pe.   3.  20  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls  were  sa. 
5. 12  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye 

13.  In  which,  ev  als,  ev  $,  ev  tc3,  ev  <£,  en  hais,  en  he. 
Matt.  1 1.  20  began  he  to  upbraid  the  cities  wherein 

23.  13  [know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  whe.] 
John  19.  41  new  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man 
Acts    2.    8  every  man  in  our  own  tongue,  wherein  we 

10. 12  Wherein  were  all  manner  of  four  footed 
Rom.  2.    i  for  wherein  thou  judgest  another,  thou  co. 

5.  2  access  by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we 
7.  6that  being  dead  wherein  we  wereheld.th. 

1  Co.   7.  20  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling  w. 

7.  24  let  every  man,  wherein  he  is  called,  the. 

15.  1  which  also  ye  have  received,  and  wherein 

2  Co.  11.  12  wherein  they  glory  they  maybe  found  ev. 
Eph.    1.    6  [wherein]  he  hath  made  lis  accepted  in  the 

2.  2  Wherein  in  time  past  ye  walked  according 

5.  18  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess 

Col.    2. 12;  2  Ti.  2.  9 ;  Heb.  6.  17 ;  9.  2  ;  9.  4 ;  1  Pe. 

1.  6 ;  4.  4 ;  2  Pe.  3.  13 ;  Rev.  2.  13  ;  18.  19. 

lA.Upon  which,  £<$>  yephho,  Lit.  II.  22;  Phil. 4.10 

15-  Whereinsoever,  ev  4  &v  en  a<i  an" 

2  Co.  1  j  21  Howbeit  whereinsoever  any  is  hold,  I  sp. 
16.  Concerning  which,  irepi  wv  peri  hon. 

Luke  1.   4  those  thiugs,  wherein  thou  hast  been  in. 
37.  Where,  whitlter,  ou  hou. 

Luke23-  53  sepulchre  that  was  hewn  iu  stone,  where. 
WHEREOF,  whereon,  wherevpon  — 
1.  Which,  of  which,  T2^  asher. 

Sum.  5.    3  defile  not  their  camps,  in  the  midst  whe. 
2.0ft  which,  lit.  which  on  it,  vb%  ~i$>f$  asher  alav. 

Exod.  3.    5  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  (is) 
3.  Concerning  which,  Kepi  ns  or  <bv  peri  hes  or  hon. 

Acts  24. 13  Neither  can  theyprovethe  things  whereof 

1  Co.   7.    1  Now  concerning  the  thiugs  whereof  ye 

Heb.    2.   5  in  subjection  the  world  to  come,  whereof 
4.Am<>ng  which  things,  ev  oTs  (neu.  pi.)  en  hois. 

Acts  24.  18  Whereupon  certain  Jews  from  Asia  found 
26. 12  Whereupon,  aa  I  went  to  Damascus  with 

^.Whence,  oQev  hothen. 

Matt.  14.    7  Whereupon  he  promised  with  an  oath  to 
Acts  26.  19  Whereupon  O  king  Agrippa,  I  was  not 
Heb.  9.  iS  Whereupon  neither  the  first  (testament) 

G.Outof  which,  i£ov,  or  &v,iTi.  6.  4;  He.  13.  10. 

7.  Upon  which,  «=<£'  oZ  eph  ou,  Luke  4.  29. 

8.  Upon  which,  44?  $  eph  ho,  Lu.  5.  25  ;  Ro.  6.  21. 
9,Up'Vi  which,  e'0'  e6v  hon,  Mr.  12.  2;  Lu.  19.  30. 
10.  Which,  os  hos,  Acts  2.  32  ;  3.  15. 


6. Concerning  what  tilings,  irepi  rivaiv  peri  tinon. 

1  Ti.    1.    7  neither  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they 
WHERESOEVER  — 

l.In  {the place)  which,  i£'N2  baasher. 

2  Eli.  8.    1  sojourn  wheresoever  thou  canst  sojourn 

2.  In  every  (place)  that,  *T^33  bekol-di. 

Dan.    2.  3S  wheresoever  the  children  of  men  dwell 

3.  Where,  oirov  hopou. 

Lukei7-  37  Wheresoever  the  body  (is),  thither  will  the 

4.  Wherever,  oirov  &v  hojiou  an. 

Mark  9.  iS  wheresoever  he  taketh  him,  he  teareth 
24.   9  [Wheresoever]  this  gospel  shall  be  preach, 

5.  'WJieresoever,  '6-kov  idv  hopou  ean. 

Matt  24.  28  For  wheresoever  the  carcase  is,  there  will 

26.  i3Wheresoeverthisgospel  shall  be  preached 
Marki4.  14  [wheresoever]  he  shall  go  in,  say  ye  to  the 

WHERETO,  whereunto  — 

I. For  what,  wherefore  ?  n*J>  lammah. 

Job  30.   2  whereto  (might)  the  strength  of  their  ha. 
2.Tn7/t  a  view  to  which,  els  '6  eis  ho. 

Phil.   3.  16  whereto  we  have  already  attained,  let  us 

Col.     1.  29  Whereunto  I  also  labour,  striving  accord. 

2  Th.  2. 14  Whereunto  he  called  you  by  our  gospel 

1  Ti.    2.    7  Whereunto  I  am  ordained  a  preacher,  and 

6. 12  whereunto  thou  art  also  called,  and  hast 

2  Ti.   1.  11  Whereunto  I  am  appointed  a  preacher 

1  Pe.  2.   8  being  disobedient ;  whereunto  also  they 

Z.To  whatlrivi  tini. 

Matt  1. 16  But  whereuuto  shall  I  liken  this  genera.? 
Mark  4.  30  [Whereunto]  shall  we  liken  the  kingdom 
Luke  7.  31  Whereuuto  then  shall  I  liken  the  men  of 

13. 18  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  like?  and  wh. 

13.  20  Whereunto  shall  I  liken  the  kingdom  of 

4.  What,  ri  ti. 

Acts    5.  24  they  doubted  of  them  whereunto  this  wo. 
WHEREWITH,  wherewithal,  wherewith  soever — 

1.  Which,  with  which,  ig's  asher. 

Gen.  27. 41  because  of  the  blessing  wherewith  his  fa. 

2.  A  word,  IT?  dabar. 

Psa.  1 19.  42  So  shall  I  have  wherewith  to  answer  him 

3.  With  what  ?  nag  bammah. 

Judg.  6. 15  Oh  my  Lord,  wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel  ? 
A.Iri,  with  or  by  which,  ev  3  en  ho, 

Eph.  6.  16  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all 
Heb.  10.  29  wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy 

5.  ^4$  much  or  as  many  as,  Hcas  &v  hosas  an. 

Mark  3.  2S  blasphemies  [wherewith  soever]  they  sh. 

6.  What  ?  ri  ti. 

Matt.  6.  31  What  shall  we  drink?  or,  Wherewithal 
Lukei7.   8  Make  ready  wherewith  I  may  sup,  and 

7.  In,  with  or  by  what  1  ev  rtvt  en  tini. 

Matt.  5.  13  if  the  salthave  lost  his  savour,  wherewith 

Mark  9.  50  if  the  salt  have  lost  his  soilness,  wherew. 

Lukei4-  34  if  the  salt  have  lost  his  saltness,  wherewith 
WHET,  to  — 
l.To  sharpen,  instruct,  vab  latash. 

Psa.     7.  12  Lf  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword ;  he 

2  To  roll,  devolve,  trust,  ?7J3  qalal,  3a. 

Eccl.  10.  10  If  the  iron  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet 

3.  To  sharpen,  repeat,  \xp  shanan. 

Deut32.  41  If  I  whet  my  glittering  sword,  and  mine 
Psa.  64.   3  Who  whet  their  tongue  like  asword,  (and) 

WHETHER,  (any,  yet,  or,  not)  — 
l.Or,  whether,  "in  0. 

Exod2i.  31  Whether  he  havegored  a  son,  or  have  go. 

Lev.    5.    1  whether  he  hath  seen  or  known  (of  it);  if 

2.  Where?  ni  *n  e  zeh. 

Eccl.  11.   6  for  thou  knowest  not  whether  shall  pro. 

Z.If,  D*  im. 

Exod  19. 13  whether  (it  be)  beast  or  man,  it  shall  not 

^..Between,  pg  ben. 

Lev.  27. 12  priest  shall  value  it,  whether  it  be  good 

2  Ch.14. 11  whether  with  many,  or  with  them  that 

5.  Whether,  or,  \r\  hen. 

Ezra    5.  17  whether  it.be  (so),  that  a  decree  was  made 
7.  26  whether  (it  be)  unto  death,  or  to  banish. 

Q.That,  *3ki. 

Job   34.  33  whether  thou  refuse,  or  whether  thou  ch. 
7 .Even  from,  ixhlemin-. 

2  Ch.15. 13  whether  small  or  great,  whether  man  or 

8.  Whether  yet  ?  "npn  haod. 

Exod  4.  iEJ  return . .  and  see  whether  they  be  yet  alive 
9. If  not,  vh  DN  im  lo. 

Exod22.    8  whether  he  have  put  his  hand  unto  his  ne. 

10.  If,  edv  re  ean  tc. 

Rom  14    S  whether  we  live,  .[whether]  we  die.  .whe 

11.  If,  eiei. 

Matt.26.  63  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the  Christ,  the 

27.  49  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save 
Mark  3.    2  whether  he  would  heal  him  on  the  sabba. 

15.  36  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  take 
Luke  6.   7  watched  him,  whether  he  would  heal  ou 


Lukei4.  28  counteththe  cost,  whether  hehave(sufti.) 
14.  31  consulteth  whether  he  be  able  with  tenth. 
?3.    6  he  asked  whether  the  man  were  a  Galile. 
John  9.  25  Whether"  he  be  a  sinner  (or  no),  I  know 
Acts    4.  19  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God 
5.    8  Tell  me  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so 
10.  18  asked  whether  Simon,  which  was  surna. 
17.  11  searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  th. 
19.   2  We  have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether 
25.  20  I  asked  (hini)  whether  he  would  go  to  Je. 

1  Co.  1.  16  besides,  I  know  not  whether  I  baptized 

7.  16  whether  thou  shalt  save  (thy)  husband? 

2  Co.  2.    9  that  I  might  know  the  proof  of  you,  whe. 

13.    5  Examine  yourselves,  whether  ye,  1  Jo.  4*1 

12.  The  one  which,  eva  ov  hena  hon,  Acts  1.  34. 

13.  If  anything,  whatever,  whichever,  efce  eite. 
Rom  12.   6  grace  that  is  given  unto  us,  whether  pro. 

1  Co.  3.  22  Whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or 

8.  5  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  as  there 
10.  31  Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  w. 
12.  13  whether  (we  be)  Jews  or  Gentiles,  wheth. 

12.  26  [whether]  one  member  suffer,  all  the  me. 

13.  8  whether  (there  be)  prophecies,  they  shall 

13.  8  whether  (there  be)  knowledge,  it  shall  va. 

14.  7  whether  pipe  or  harp,  except  they  give  a 
15. 11  Therefore  whether  (it  were)  I  or  they,  so 

2  Co.   1.   6  whetherwe  be  afflicted.,  whether  we  be  co. 

5.    9  whether  present  orabseut,  we  maybe  ac. 

5.  10  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 

5.  13  whether  we  be  beside  ourselves,  .or  whe. 

8.  23  Whether  (any  do  enquire)  of  Titus,  (he  is) 

12.    2  whether  in  thebody,  I  cannot  tell;  or  wh. 

12.   3  whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body 

Eph.    6.   8  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  wh. 

Pliil.    1.  18  whether  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,  Christ 

1.  20  in  my  body,  whether  (it  be)  by  life,  or  by 

1.  27  whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be 
Col.     1.  16  whether  (they  be)  tin-ones,  or  dominions 

1.  20  whether  (they  be)  things  in  earth,  or  thi. 

1  Th.  5.  10  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  li. 

2  Th.  2.  15  traditions  which  ye  have  been  taught,  w. 

1  Pe.  2. 13  whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as  supreme 

14.  Whether;  indeed,  %roi  etoi. 

Rom.  6. 16  whetherof  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience 

15.  Lest  at  any  time,  whether,  if  perhaps,  fir}irore. 
Luke  3.  15  mused.,  whether  he  were  the  Christ,  ornot 

16.  Whether  ?  ivSrepov  poteron. 

"  John  7. 17  shall  knowr  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be 

17.  Both,  re  /cat  te  hai. 

Acts    9.   2  whether  they  were  men  or  women,  he  mig- 

18.  What  ?  ri  ti. 

Matt.  9.    5  For  whether  is  easier,  to  say,  (Thy)  sins 

21.  31  Whether  of  them  twain  did  the  willof(h.) 
23. 17,  19  (Ye)  fools,  and  blind  !  for  whether  is 
27.  21  Whether  of  the  twain  will  ye  that  I  rele. 

Mark  2.   o  Whether  is  it  easier  to  say  to  the  sick  of 
Luke  5.  23  Whether  is  easier,  to  say,  Thy  sins  be  for. 

22.  27  Eor  whether  (is)  greater,  he  that  sitteth 
WHICH  (thing,  the,  on)  — 

I.  Where  ?  'n  e. 

2  Ch.18.  23  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 

2,These,  r£x  elleh. 

1  Ch.23.   4  Of  which,  twenty  and  four  thousand  (we.) 
Z.And  I  myself,  \jfrti  vaani. 

Gen.  18. 13  Shall  I,of  a  surety  bear  a  child,  which. am 
4.  And  I  myself,  '33N1  veanoki. 

Gen.  18.  27  I  have  taken  upon  me.  .which  (am  but) 
b.  Which,  -i$M  asher. 

Gen.    1.    7  from  the  waters  which  (were)  above  the 
Q.Which,  ^  di. 

Ezra   4.  12  that  the  Jews  which  came  up  from  thee 
7. This,  H2i  den  ah. 

Ezra    4V15  for  which  cause  was  this  city  destroyed 

S.IIe,  it,  that,  wn  hu. 

Gen.  14. 17  at  the  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  (is)  theki. 

9.  That  itself,  .x'hq  hahu. 

Deut.  3. 13  all  Bashan,  which  was  called  the  land  of 

10.  They,  on  hem. 

Deut.  2.  11  Which  also  were  accounted  giants,  as  the 

II.  Which  they,  }n  t^  asher  hen. 

Gen.  19.  29  when  he  overthrew  the  cities  in  the  which 

l-2.This,  mzeh. 

Psa.  104.    8  unto  the  place  which  thou  hast  founded 

13.7*14  nz«. 

Exod  15.  13  Thou,  hast  led  forth  the  people  which 

15.  16  till  the  people  pass  over,  which  thou  hast 
Psa.    9.  15  iu  the  net  which  they  hid  is  then'  own  fo. 

32.   8  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou  sh. 

11.  Who,  who?  v?  mi. 

Judg.20.  18  Which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  the  battle 

15.  He,  it,  avros  autos. 

Rev.  17.   9  seven  mountains,  on  which  the  woman  si. 

16.  Such  as,  such,  otos  hows. 

Phil.     1.  30  Having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw 

2  Ti.    3. 11  Persecutions,  afflictions,  which  came  un. 

17.^45  much,  as  great,  oaos  host  s. 

John2i-  25  there  are  also  many  other  things  which  J. 
Acts   9.  39  showing  the  coats  and  garments  which 


"WHICH 


1048 


WHITE 


18.  Whosoever,  whatsoever,  Harts  hostis. 

Matt.  7.  15  Beware  of  false  prophets,  which  come  to 
7.  24  will  liken  him  unto^i  wise  man,  which  bu. 
7.  26  foolish  man,  which  huilt  his  house  upon 

13.  52  an  householder,  which  hringeth  forth  out 
16.  28  There  be  some  standing  here  which  shall 

19.  12  which  were  so  born . .  which  were  made 
19. 12  which  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for 

20.  1  an  householder,  which  went  out  early  in 
21.33  a  certain  householder,  which  planted  a  vi. 
21. 41  other  husbandmen,  which  shall  render 

22.  2  a  certain  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for 
23-.  27  whited  sepulchres,  which  indeed  appear 
25.  1  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps,  and  went 
27.  55  many  women. .which  followed  Jesus  from 

Mark  9.   1  which  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they 

12.  18  Sadducees,  which  say  there  is  no  resurre. 
Luke  1.  20  my  words,,  which  shall  be  fulfilled  in  their 

2.  4  the  city  of  David,  which  is  called  Beth-le. 
2. 10  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be 

7.  37  a  woman  in  the  city,  which  was  a  sinner 

8.  3  Susanna,  and  many  others,  which  minist. 
8.  15  they,  which  in  an  honest  and  good  heart 
8.  26  at  the  country  of  the  Gadareues,  which  is 

8.  43  a  woman,  .which  had  spent  all  her  living 

9.  30  there  talked  with  him  two  men,  which  w. 

10.  42  Mary  hath  chosen  that  good  part,  which 
12.    1  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hyp. 

15.  7  just  persons,  which  need  no  repentance 
23-  55  the  women  also,  which  came  with  him 

John  8.  53  greater  than  our  father  Abraham,  which 

2i.  25  the  which,  if  they  should  be  written  every 

Acts  10.  47  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  which 

11.  20  men  of  Cyprus  and  Gyrene,  which,  when 

11.  28  which  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Claud. 
12. 10 iron  gate.. which  opened  to  them  of  his 
16. 12  Philippi,  which  is  the  chief  city  of  that 

16.  16  a  certain  damsel,  .which  brought  her  ma. 
16. 17  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  which  sh. 

23.  21  forty  men,  which  have  bound  themselves 
Kom.  2.  15  Which  show  the  work  of  the  law  written 

16.  12  [Salute  the  beloved  Persis,  which  laboured] 

1  Co.  3.  17  the  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which,  .ye  are 

6.  20  [in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which] 

7.  13  the  woman  which  hath  an  husband  that 

2  Co.  3.  14  remaineth  the  same  veil,  .which,  .is  done 

9.  11  bouutifulness,  which  causeth  through  us 
Gal.    4.  24  Which  things  are  an  allegory.,  which  is  A. 

4.  26  Jerusalem,  .which  is  the  mother  of  us  all 

5.  19  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which 
Eph.  1.  23  Which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that 

3.  13  my  tribulations  for  you,  which  is  yourgl. 

6.  2  which  is  the  first  commandment  with  pr. 
Ph.*.    1.  28  which  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  per. 

4.  3  help  those  women  which  laboured  with 
Col.     '2.  23  Which  things  have  indeed  a  show  of  wisd. 

3.    5  evil.,  and  covetousness, [which]  is  idolatry 

3.  14  charity,  [which]  is  the  bond  of  perfectness 

4.  11  fellow  workers,  .which  have  been  a  com. 

1  Ti.     1.    4  which  minister  questions  rather  than  god. 

3.  15  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  God,  the 
6.    9  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perd. 

2  Ti.     1.    5  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lo. 
Heb.   2.    3  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by 

8.  6  which  was  established  upon  better  prom. 

9.  2  atabernacle.  .which  is  called  the  sanctuary 
9.    9  Which  (was)  a  figure  for  the  time  then  pr. 

10.  8  burnt  offerings,  .which  are  offered  by  the 
10.  11  sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  away  sin 

10.  35  which  hath  great  recompence  of  reward 

12.  5  the  exhortation  which  speaketh  unto  you 
1  Pe.  2.  11  abstain  from  fleshy  lusts,  which  war  aga. 
1  Jo.  1.  2  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father 
liev.    1.    7  shall  see  him,  and  they  (also)  which  pierc. 

2.  24  which  have  not  known  the  depths  of  Sat. 
9.   4  those  men  which  have  not  the  seal  of  God 

11.  8  ;  12. 13  ;  17: 12 ;  19.  2  ;  20.  4. 

19. Upon  whdch,  b,-nov...£ir   avTwv,  Rev.  17.  9* 
20.  Which,  '6  ho,  Acts  11.  30  ;  26.  10  ;  Gal.  2.  10  ; 
Col.  2.  17,  22 ;  2  Ti.  1.  6  ;  Rev.  21.  8. 

21 ,1V7iosoever,  whatsoever,  8(ms  &i>  hostis  an. 

Acts.  3.  23  everysoul,  which  will  not  hear  that  proph. 
22.  This,  avrt)  haute. 

Acts    8.  26  from  Jerusalem  unto  Gaza,  which  is  desert 

23-  Of  what  sort  or  kind  ?  ttoIos  poios. 

Matt  19.  18  He  saith  uutohim,  Which';  Jesussaid,  Th. 

22.  36  which  (is)  the  great  commandment  in  the 

Marfci2.  28  asked  him,  Which  is  the  first  commandm. 

John  10.  32  for  which  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me  ? 

21  .Who?  which  ?  rls  tis. 

Matt.  6.  27  Which  of  you,  by  taking  thought,  can  add 
Luke  7.  42  Tell  me.  .which  of  them  will  love  him  mo. 
9.  46  there  arose  a  reasoning,  .which  of  them 

10.  36  Which  now  of  these  three,  thiukestthou 

11.  5  Which  of  you  shall  have  a  friend,  and  sh. 

12.  25  which  of  you  with  taking  thought  can  add 

14.  5  Winch  of  you  shall  have  an  ox  or  an  ass 
14.  28  which  of  you,  intending  to  build  a  tower 

17.  7  which  of  you,  having  a  servant  plowing 
22.  23  which  of  them  it  was  that  should  do  this 
22.  24  which  of  them  should  lie  accounted  the 

John  S.  46  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin  ?  And 

2i.  20  Lord,  which  is  he  that  betrayeth  thee? 
Acts    7.  52  Which  of  the  prophets  have  not  your  fat. 
Heb.    1.    5,  13  unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any 
5.  12  teach  you  again  which  (be)  the  first  princ. 
25*7*0  those  which  are,  rats  tais. 

Jas.     1.    t  to  the  twelve  tribes  which  are  scattered 


WHICH  is  or  make  — 
l.He,  it,  that.  Kin  hu. 

Gen.  14.    3  the  vale  of  Siddim,  which  is  the  salt  sea 

2.  She.,  it,  that,  N'n  hi. 

Gen.  14.    2  war  with.,  the  king  of  Bela,  which  is  Zoar 

3.  Which  is,  '6  icrriv  ho  estin. 

Mark  3.  17  Boanerges,  which  is,  The  sons  of  thunder 
12.  42  she  threw  in  two  mites,  which  make  a  fa. 
Eph.  6.  17  the  sword  of  the  spirit,  which  is  the  word 
Col.  1.  24  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church 
Heb.  7.  2  also  king  of  Salem,  which  is,  king  of  pea. 
E-ev.  21.  8  burnetii  with  fire,  .which  is  the  second  de. 
"WHICH  hath,  way  — 

1.  Where  ?  tt]  'N  e  zeh. 

1  Ki.  22.  24  Which  way  weut  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 

2.  There  is,  iliere  are,  &l  yesh. 

Mai.  1. 14  the  deceiver,  which  hath  in  his  flock  a 
WHILE,  a  little,  that,  the,  within  a,  yet,  whiles  — 
l.If,  DN  im. 

1  Sa.  20. 14  thou  shalt  not  only  while  yet  I  live  show 

2.  From  the  day,  the  days,  d*d;,  dvo  miyyom,  yamim. 

1  Sa.    7.    2  it  came  to  pass,  while  the  ark  abode  in  K. 
25.    7  neither.,  ought  missing. .  all  the  while  th. 

25.  16  all  the  while  we  were  with  them  keeping 

1  Ki.  17.   7  it  came  to  pass  after  a  while,  that  the  br. 

3.  Because,  *3  ki. 

Deuti9.   6  pursue  the  slayer,  while  his  heart  is  hot 

4.  Till,  ny  ad. 

Exod33.  22  will  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  I  pass 

5.  While,  *iiy  od. 

Gen.  29.    9  while  he  yet  spake  with  them,  Rachel  ca. 

2  Sa.  3.  35  to  cause  David  to  eat  meat  while  it  was 

6.  In  yet,  while  yet,  "tiya  beod. 

Job  27.    3  All  the  while  my  breath  (is)  in  me,  and  the 
Psa  104,  33  1  will  sing  praise  to  my  God  while  I  have 

7.  When,  "i^ns  kaasher. 

Neh.  6.    3  why  should  the  work  cease,  whilst  I  leave 

8.^4  little,  nys'P  mitsar. 

Isa.  63. 18  Thepeople..possessed(it)butalittle  while 

9.  Until  which,  axpt  ov  achri  hou. 

Acts  27.  33  while  the  day  was  coming  on,  Paul  besou. 
10. Until  which,  &XPIS  "5  achris  hou. 

Heb.  3. 13  exhort  one  another  daily,  while  it  is  called 

11. In,  during,  sv  rq>  en  to. 

Matt  13.  25  while  men  slept,  his  enemy  came  and  so. 

Mark  2.  19  fast  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them? 

Luke  1.    8  while  he  executed  the  priest's  office  before 

5.  34  fast  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them? 

24.  15  while  they  communed  (together)  and  rea. 

24.  51  it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  them,  he 
John  5.  7  while  I  am  coming,  another  steppeth  do. 
Acts  19.  1  while  Apollos  wasat  Corinth,  Paul  having 
Heb.   3.  15  While  it  is  said,  To  day  if  ye.will  hear  his 

12.  Unto,  up  to,  ews  heos. 

Matt  14.  22  to  go.. while  he  sent  the  multitudes  away 

26.  36  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder 
Mark  6.  45  to  go  to  the  other  side . .  while  he  sent  aw. 

14.  32  saith  to  his  disciples,  Sit  ye  here,  while  I 
John  9.    4  I  must  work  the  works,  .while  it  is  day 
12.  35  Walk  [while]  ye  have  the  light,  lest  dark. 
12.  36  [While]  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the  light 

13. -<4  day,  time,  7)y.cpa  hemera. 

Acts  15.    7  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while  ago  God 
18. 18  Paul,  .tarried  (there)  yet  a  good  while,  and 

14.  As  much,  as  great,  fxiKphv  '60-01/  inikron  hoson. 
Heb.  10.  37  yet  a  little  while,  and  he  that  shall  come 

15.  Until,  while,  euis  '6tov  heos  hotou. 

Matt.  5.  25  Agree,  .whiles  thou  art  in  the  way  with 

16.  Whenever,  '6rav  hotan. 

1  Co.  3.    4  while  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and  anot. 

17.  When,  tire  hole. 

Johni7.  12  While  I  was  with  them  in  the  world,  I  ke. 

Heb.   9.  17  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  testa. 
18. ..4  season,  Kaip6s  kairos. 

Luke  8.  13  which  for  a  while  believe,  and  In  tune  of 
19. Little,  small,  short,  fittcp6v  mikron. 

Matt  26.  73  after  a  while  came  unto  (him)  they  that 
20.  A  little,  in  a  small  degree,  bxlyov  oligon. 

Mark  6.  31  Come  ye  yourselves,  .and  rest  a  while,  for 

1  Pe.'  5. 10  after  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while,  make 
21. A  time,  xPot/°s  chronos. 

Luke  18.    4  he  would  not  for  a  while :  but  afterward 

John  7.  33  Yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  you  and(th.) 
12.  35  Yet  a  little  while  is  the  light  1  Co.  16.  7. 
22. .45,  ws  has. 

Luke24.  32  while  he  talked  with  us . .  and  while  he  op. 

Acts    1.  10  while  they  looked  stedfastly  toward  hea. 
10.  17  while  Peter  doubted  in  himself  what  this 
23.-4  certain  time,  xp&vov  nua  chronon  Una. 

1  Co.  16.    7  I  trust  to  tarry  a  while  with  you,  if  the 
WHILE  ago,  to  come,  any  while,  a  great  — 
1. For  <>t]\  p\rr\  rachoq. 

■2  Sa.    ;.  19  hast  spoken,  .for  a  great  while  to  come 


'I.Long  ago,  formerly,  anciently,  ttolKcu palai. 
Mark  1 5.  44  asked,  .whether  he  had  been  [any  while] 
Lukeio.  13  they  had  a  great  while  ago  repented,  sit. 

Z.For  a  season,  trpos  Kcup6s  pros  kairos. 

Matti3.  21  hath  he  not  root,  but  dureth  for  a  while 
WHIP  — 
A  scourge,  whip,  rod,  Bits'  shot. 

1  Ki.  12. 11  my  father  hath  chastised  you  with  whips 

12.  14  my  father  (also)  chastised  you  with  whips 

2  Ch.io.  11,  14  my  father  chastised  you  with  whips 
Prov.26.    3  A  whip  for  the  horse,  a  bridle  for  the  ass 
Nah.  3.    2  The  noise  of  a  whip,  and  the  noise  of  the 

WHIRL  (about, )  to  — 

To  go  round  (and)  go  on,  ;j?n  330  sabab  halak. 

Eccl.  1.  6  The  wind.. it  whirleth about  continually 
WHIRLWIND  (to  come  out  as,  drive  or  scatter  with  a)  — 
1.-4  hurricane,  hqid  suphah. 

Job   37.   9  Out  of  the  south  cometh  the  whirlwind 
Prov.  1.  27  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind 
10.  25  As  the  whirlwind  passeth,  so  (is)  the  wic. 
Isa.      5.  28  like  flint,  and  their  wheels  like  a  whirlw. 
17.  13  like  a  rolling  thing  before  the  whirlwind 
21.    1  As  whirlwinds  in  the  south  pass  through 
66.  15  Lord  will  come.. with  hischariotslikeaw. 
Jer.     4.  13  his  chariots,  .as  a  whirlwind:  his  horses 
Hos.   8.    7  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind:  it  hath  no 
Amos  1.  14  with  a  tempest  in  the  day  of  the  whirlw. 
Kali.  1.    3  way  hi  the  whirlwind  and  in  the  storm 

2.To  be  tossed  about,  tempestuous,  *iyp  saar. 

Hab.  3.  14  they  came  out  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter 

3. To  toss  about,  *iyp  saar,  3. 

Zech.  7. 14  I  scattered  them  with  a  whirlwind  among 

4.  To  be  tossed  about,  tempestuous,  iyp  saar,  4. 
Hos.  13.    3  as  the  chaff .  .is  driven  with  the  whirlwi. 

5.-4  whirlwind,  ~>yp  saar. 

Jer.  23. 19  a  grievous  whirlwind;  it  shall  fall  grievo. 
25.  32  a  great  whirlwind  shall  be  raised  up  from 
30.  23  a  continuing  whirlwind;  it  shall  fall  with 

Q.A  whirlwinds  '"HV1?  searah. 

2  Ki.    2.    1  would  take  upElijahintoheavcnby  awh. 

2.  11  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heav. 

Job   38.    1  Then  the  Loud  answered  Jobout  of  thew. 

40.  6  Then  answered  the  L. . .  Job  out  of  the  wh. 
Isa.   40.  24  the  whirlwind  shall  take  them  away  as  st. 

41.  16  wind  shall  carry  them  away,  and  thewhi. 
Jer.  23. 19  a  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  is  gone  forth  in 

30.  23  the  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  goeth  forth 
Zech.  9. 14  Lord,  .shallgo  with  whirlwinds  of  the  so. 

7.-4  whirling  wind,  rriyp  nn  ruach  searah. 

Eze.    1.    4  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  whirlwind  came 
8.  To  be  whirled  away,  "ij$?  saar. 

Psa.  58.  9  he  shall  take  them  away  as  with  a  whirl. 
9.7*0  shoio  self  temp>estuous,  ny'p*  saar,  7. 

Dan.  11.  40  shall  come  against  him  like  a  whirlwind 
WHISPER  (together),  whisperer,  -whispering,  to  — 
l.To  shoto  self  a  whisjjerer,  unb  lachash,  7. 

2  Sa.  12. 19  when  David  saw  that  his  servants  whisp. 

Psa.  41.  7  All  that  hate  me  whisper  together  against 
2.To  chatter,  whisper,  *\$y  tsaphaph,  Sa. 

Isa.  29.  4  thy  speech  shall  whisper  out  of  the  dust 
3.  Talebearer,  whisperer,  busybody,  \x~\}  nirgan. 

Prov.  16.  28  and  a  whisperer  separateth  chief  friends 
4. A  whispering, muttering,\fytQvpt(rfx6spsithurismos. 

2  Co. 12.  20  hackbitings,  whisperings,  swellings,  turn. 
5.-4  whisperer,  detractor,  \j/i6vpiaT7is  2Js^thuristes, 

Kom.  1.  29  full  of.  .debate,  deceit,  malignity;  whisp. 
WHIT,  (not  a)  — 
l.A  word,  matter,  thing,  "i;ri  dabar. 

1  Sa.  3.  18  Samuel  told  him' every  whit,  and  hid  no, 
2.Co?nplete,  completely,  b^z  kalil. 

Deut.13. 16  shalt  burn,  .allthe  spoil  thereof  every  wh. 
B.No  one,  fi7)b*eis  medeis. 

2  Co.  11.    5  I  suppose  I  was  not  a  whit  behind  the  very 

[See  Every  whit.] 
WHITE,  (linen,  of  an  egg)  — 
l.Fine  linen,  byssus,  ps  buts. 

2  Ch.  5. 12  arrayed  in  white  linen,  having  cymbals 

2.  Whiteness,  mother  of  pearl,  Ti  dar. 

Esth.  1.    6  a  pavement  of  red,  and  blue,  and  white 

3.  White,  n;n  chiwar. 

Dan.    7.   9  whose  garment  (was)  white  as  snow,  and 

4.  Whiteness,  "lin  chur, 

Esth.  1.    6  white,  green,  and  blue,  .fastened  with  co. 
8.  15  in  royal  apparel  of  blue  and  white,  and 
ft.JVhite  bread,  "~>n  chori. 

Gen.  40. 16  and  behold,  .three  white  baskets  on  my 

6.  White,  ]$  labovn. 

Gen.  30.  35  every  one  that  had .  .white  in  it,  and  all 
30.  37  pilled  white strakes.  .and  made  the  white 
Exod  16.  31  it  (was)  like  coriander  seed,  white,  and 
Lev.  13.    3  and .  .the  hair  in  the  plague  is  turned  wh. 

13.  4  If  the  bright  Bpot  (be)  white  in  the  skin 
13.   4  and  the  hair  thereof  be  not  turned  white 
13.  10  behold,  (if)  the  rising(be)  white  in  the  skin 


WHITE 


1049 


WHOLE 


Lev.  13.  10  and  it  have  turned  the  hair  white,  and 
13.  13  plague:  it  is  all  turned  white:  he  (is)  clean 
13. 16  Or  if  the  raw  flesh  .  be  changed  unto  wh. 
13.  17  behold,  (if)  the  plague  be  turned  into  wh. 
1 3. 19  a  white  rising,  or  a  bright  spot,  white 
13.  20  behold,  .the  hair  thereof  be  turned  white 
13.  21  But  if.  .no  white  hairs  therein,  and  (if)  it 
13.  24  a  white  bright  spot,  somewhat  reddish,  or 
13-  25  01)  the  hair  in  the  bright  spot  be  turned  w. 
13.  26  But  if.  .no  white  hair  in  the  bright  spot 
13.  38  If  a  man  also  or  a  woman  have,  .white 
13.  39  (if)  the  bright  spots,  (be)  darkish  white 
13.  42  if  there  be  in  the  bald  head,  .a  white  re. 
13.  43  (if)  the  rising  of  the  sore  (be)  white  redd. 
Keel.  9.   8  Let  thy  garments  be  always  white ;  and 
,Zech.  1.   8  behind  him.  .red  horses,  speckled,  and  w. 
6.    3  in  the  third  chariot  white  horses,  and  in 
6.   6  black  horses . .  the  white  go  forth  after  th. 

7.  White,  ]ib  laben. 

Gen.  49. 12  His  eyes,  .red  with  wine,  .his  teeth  white 

5.  Clear,  dry,  rig  tsach. 

Song  5.  10  My  beloved  (is)  white  and  ruddy,  the  ch. 

9.  Whiteness,  "ins  tsachar. 

Eze.  27.  18  Damascus  (was)  thy  merchant  in.  .white 

10.  White,  nny  tsachor. 

Judg.  5. 10  Speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses,  ye  th. 

11.  Spittle,  drivel,  albumen,  vn  rir. 

Job     6.    6  or  is  there . .  taste  in  the  white  of  an  egg  ? 

12.  Shining,  bright,  resplendent,  \a/xirp6s  lampros. 
Rev.  15.    6  angels,  .clothed  in  pure  and  white  linen 

19.    8  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white 

VI.  White,  \cuk6s  leukos. 

Matt.  5.  36  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  bl. 

17.   2  his  face  did  shine,  .his raiment  was  white 

28.    3  like  lightning,  and  his  raiment  white  as 

Mark  o.   3  his  raiment  became  shining  exceeding  w. 

16.    s  young  man .  .clothed  in  a  long  white  gar. 

Luke  g.  29  and  his  raiment  (was)  white,  .glistering 

John  4.  35  look  on  the  fields ;  for  they  are  white  air. 

20. 12  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting,  the  one 

Acts    1.  10  two  men  stood  by  them  iu  white  apparel 

Rev.    1. 14  hairs  (were)  white  like  wool,  as  white  as 

2. 17  will  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the  st. 

3.    4  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white:  for  th. 

3.   5  the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raime. 

3.  iS  white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  cloth. 

4.  4  I  saw.  .elders  sitting,  clothed  in  white  ra. 
6.   2  I  saw,  and  behold  a  white  horse  :  and  he 

6.  11  white  robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of 

7.  9  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  ha. 

7.  13  What  are  these  which  are  arrayed  in  wh. 
14. 14  I  looked,  and  behold  a  white  cloud,  and 
19.  11  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white 
19.  14  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white 
20. 11  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that 

WHITE,  to  be  as,  be  made,  make,  whited  — 

1.  To  make  white,  ]ib  laben,  5. 

Isa.  1.  18  Though',  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white 
Dan.  11.  35  and  to  purge,  and  to  make  (them)  white 
Joel    1.   7  fig  tree. .the  branches  thereof  are  madew. 

2.  To  become  or  show  self  white,  \ib  laben,  7. 
Dan.  12.  10  Many  shall  be  purified,' and  made  white 

3.  To  make  white,  whiten,  Koviaa  koniao. 

Matt  23.  27  ye  are  like  unto  whited  sepulchres,  which 
Acts  23.    3  God  shall  smite  thee,  (thou)  whited  wall 

A.To  make  white,  whiten,  Aevfcaiva  leukaino. 

Mark  9.    3  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them 

Rev.    7.  14  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  La. 
WHITER,  to  be  — 
l.Z*o  make  white,  whiten,  ]ib  laben,  5. 

Psa.  51.   7  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow 
2.  To  be  clear,  white,  nny  tsachach 

Lam.   4.    7  they  were  whiter  than  milk,  they  were 
WHITHER,  whithersoever  — 
l.Unto,  toward,  ?x  el. 

Jer.  40.   4  whither  it  seemeth  good  and  convenient 

2.  Whither  ?  |N  an. 

1  Sa.  10. 14  Saul's  uncle  said  unto  him.  .Whither  we 

3.  Whither  1  njN  anah. 

Gen.  37.  30  The  child  (is)  not ;  and  I,  whither  shall  I 
Eze.  21. 16  Go  thee. .  whithersoever  thy  face  (is)  set 

4.  Wliich,  i^i*  asher. 

Gen.  28. 15  willkeep  thee  in  all  (places)  whither  thou 
5. In  (the  place)  which,  "i*;N3  baasher. 

1  Sa.  23. 13  departed,  .and  went  whithersoever  they 

6.  Unto  every  {place)  which,  -i^s-^-^x  el  kol  asher. 
Josh.  1.  16  whithersoever  thou  sendest  us  we  will  go 

7. And  tliere,  D^*t  vesham. 

2  Sa.  17. 18  well  in  his  court;  whither  they  went  down 
8. Because  there,  n$&  sheshsham. 

Psa.122.    4  Whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the 
9. In  the  way  which,  i»K  3-333  badderek  asher. 
1  Ki.  8.  44  whithersoever  thou  shalt  send  them,  and 

10.  The  place  which,  t^x  Dip?  meqom  asher. 
Esth.  4.    3  whithersoever  the  king's  commandment 

11.  Where,  whither,  oVou  hopou. 

John  8.  21  I  go  my  way.  .whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  co. 

8.  22  he  saith,  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come 

132 


John  13.  33  I  said.  .Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come 

13.  36  Whither  I  go,  thou  canst  not  follow  me 

14.  4  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  kn. 
18.  20  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always  res. 
21.  18  whither  thou  wouldest.  .carry  (thee)  wh. 

Heb.   6.  20  Whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered 

12.  Wheresoever,  whithersoever,  oirov  &v  hopou  an. 
Mark  6.  56  whithersoever  he  entered,  into  villages 
Luke  9.  57  I  will  follow  thee  [whithersoever]  thou 
Jas.     3.    4  turned,  .whithersoever  the  governor  list. 
Rev.  14.    4  they  which  follow  the  Lamb  whitheKoe. 

13.  Wheresoever,  whithersoever,  '6irov  idv  hopou  can. 
Matt.  8.  19  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  go. 

14.  Where,  whither,  ov  lion. 

Luke  10.    1  intoeverycity.  .whitherhe  himself  would 
24.  28  they  drew  nigh  unto  the  village  whither 

15.  Whithersoever,  ov  4dv  hou  ean. 

1  Co.  16.    6  bring  me  on  my  journey  whithersoever  I 

16.  Where  %  whither  ?  ttov  pou. 

John  3.    8  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  go. 

7.  35  Whither  will  he  go,  that  we  shall  not  find 
8. 14  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go 

8.  14  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go 

12.  35  in  darkness  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth 

13.  36  Peter  said  unto  him,  Lord,  whither  goest 

14.  5  we  know  not  whither  thou  goest ;  and  how 

16.  s  none  of.  .asketh  me,  Whither  goest  thou 
Heb.  11.    8  he  went  out,  not  knowing  wh.  1  Jo.  2.  n 

17.  Toward  which,  els  H\v  eis  hen,  John  6.  21. 
WHO  — 

l.These,  n^M  elleh. 

Deut.  5.    3  (even)  us,  who  (are)  all  of  us  here  alive 

2.  And  I  myself ,  ^ni  vaani. 

Exod.  6.  12  hear  me,  who  (am)  of  uncircumcised  lips 

3.  Which,  that,  -i^'s  asher. 

Gen.  24. 15  Rebekah  came  out,  who  was  born  to  Be. 
4.11c,  N^n  hu. 

Gen.  36.    1  the  generations  of  Esau,  who  (is)  Edom 
5.They,  en  hem. 

2  Ki.  4.  5  her  sons,  who  brought  (the  vessels)  to  her 
6. They,  nan  hemmah. 

1  Ch.  8. 13  who  drove  away  the  inhabitants  of  Gath 
7.  Who,  who  ?  v?  mi. 

Gen.    3.  11  he  said,  Who  told  thee  that  thou  (wast) 
S.  WIw  ?  ]Q  man. 

Ezra    5.    3  Who  hath  commanded  you  to  build  this 
5.    9  Who  commanded  you  to  build  this  house 
Dan.    3.  15  who  (is)  that  God  that  shall  deliver  you 

9. As  much,  as  many,  o<rot  hosoi. 

Heb.    2.  15  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death 

10.  Whosoever,  whatsoever,  oVtis  liostis. 

Markis.  7  who  had  committed  murder  in  the  insur. 
Luke23-  19  Who  for  a  certain  sedition  made  in  the  ci. 
Acts    7.  53  Who  have  received  the  law  by  the  dispo. 

8.  15  Who,  when  they  were  come  down,  prayed 

10.  41  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him  after  he 
13.  31  who  are  his  witnesses  unto  the  people 
13.  43  who,  speaking  to  them,  persuaded  them 

17.  10  who  coming  (thither)  went  into  the  syna. 
21.  4  who  said  to  Paul  through  the  spirit,  that 
23-  33  Who,  when  they  came  to  Cesarea,  and  de. 
24.  1  who  informed  the  governor  against  Paul 
28.  18  Who,  when  they  had  examined  me,  would 

Rom.  1.  25  Who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 

1.  32  Who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that 

9.  4  Who  are  Israelites ;  to  whom  (pertaineth) 

11.  4  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  (the  im.) 
16.  4  Who  have  for  my  life  laid  down  their  own 
16.  6  Greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour 
16.   7  fellow  prisoners,  who  are  of  note  among 

2  Co.  8. 10  who  have  begun  before,  not  only  to  do,  but 
Gal.  2.  4  who  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty 
Eph.  4.  19  Who  being  past  feeling  have  given  them. 
Phil.    2.  20  who  will  naturally  care  for  your  state 

2  Th.  1.    9  Who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting 
2  Ti.    2.    2  men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also 

2.  18  Who  concerning  the  truth  have  erred,  say. 
Titus  1. 11  who  subvert  whole  houses,  teachingthings 
Heb.   S.    5  Who  serve  unto  the  example  and  shadow 

13.  7  who  have  spoken  unto  you  the  word  of  G. 
2  Pe.   2.    i  who  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable  here. 

11.  This,  that,  ovros  houtos. 

Acts  13.  7  who  called  for  Barnabas  and  Saul,  and  de. 
12.TI7zo  %  what  tils  Us. 

Matt.  3.  7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wr. 
See  also  10.  11;  12.  48;  18.  1;  19.25  ;  21.  10,  23;  24.  45; 
26.  68  ;  Mark  1. 24 ;  2.  7 ;  3.  33  ;  5.  30,  31 ;  9.  34  ;  10.  26  ; 
11.  28;  16.  3;  Luke  4.  34;  5.  21,  21;  7.  39,49;  8. 45,  [45]; 
9.  9;  10.  22,  22,  29;  12.  14,  42;  16.  11,  12;  18.  26;  19.  3; 
20.  2 ;  22.  64 ;  John  1.  19,  22  ;  4.  10 ;  5.  13 ;  6.  60,  64,  64  ; 
7.  20;  8.  25;  9.  2,  21,  36;  12.  34,  38;  13.  24,  25;  Acts  7. 
25>  35 '  8.  33 ;  9.  5 ;  rg.  15  ;  21.  23 ;  22.  8 ;  26.  15 ;  Rom. 
7.  24;  8.  31,  33;  8.  34,  35;  9.  19,  20;  10.  6,  7,  16;  11.  34, 
34.  35;  14-4;  1  Co.  2.  16;  3.  5;  4.  7;  9.  7,  7,  7;  14.  8; 
2  Co.  2.  2,  16;  11.  29,  29;  Gal.  3.  1;  5.  7;  Jas.  3.  13;  4. 
12 ;  1  Pe.  3.  13 ;  1  Jo.  2.  22,  55 ;  Rev.  5.  2 ;  6.  17 ;  13  4, 
4;  J5-  4- 

WHOLE,  (piece,  the)  — 
l.Days,  of  days,  D*c;  yamim. 

Kumn.  20  even  a  whole  month,  until  it  come  out  at 
11  21  said,  I  will  give  them  flesh,  .a  whole  mo. 


Judgi9-   2  his  concubine,  .was  there  four  whole  mo. 
Dan. 10.   3  anoint,  .till  three  whole  weeks  were  fulii. 

2. All,  tlie  whole,  entire,  73  kol. 

Exodi2.    6  the  whole  assembly  of  the  congregation 
Isa.     3.    1  the  whole  stay  of  bread,  and  the  whole 
Dan.   2.  35  the  stone  that  smote,  .filled  the  whole  ea. 
2.  48  made  him  ruler  over  the  whole  province 
6.    1  princes,  which  should  be  over  the  whole 

6.  3  the  king  thought  to  set  him  over  the  wh. 

7.  23  shall  devour  the  whole  earth,  and  shall 
7.  27  the  kingdom  under  the  whole,  Zech.  4.  10 

Z.Beaten  work,  ni?pp  miqshah. 

Nunno.   2  trumpets  of  silver ;  of  a  whole  piece  shalt 

^.Finished,  perfect,  whole,  D?^  shalem. 

Deut27.    6  Thou  shalt  build  the  altar,  .of  whole  stone 
Josh.  8.  31  au  altar  of  whole  stones,  over  which  no 
Amos  1.    6  they  carried  away  captive  the  whole  cap. 
1.   9  they  delivered  up  the  whole  captivity  to- 

5. Perfect,  whole,  complete,  plain,  WD^tamim. 
Lev.    3.    9  the  fat  thereof,  .the  whole  rump,  it  shall 
Josh  10. 13  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a  whole  day 
Prov.  1.  12  Let  us  swallow  them  up.. whole,  as  those 

6.  To  be  perfect,  finished,  consumed,  done,  DCJjt. 
Lev.  25.  29  he  may  redeem  it  within  a  whole  year  af. 

7.  All,  universally,  the  whole,  anas  hapas. 

Luke  8.  37  Then  the  whole  multitude  of  the  country 
19.  37  the  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  began 
23.    1  the  whole  multitude  of  them  arose,  and 

S.  Inheriting  the  whole,  entire,  perfect,  SAoKXwpos. 
1  Th.  5.23  (I  pray  God)  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and. 

9.  All,  the 

Matt.  5. 
6. 
13- 
16. 

26. 

27. 

Mark  6. 


Luke 


J3- 

John  4 
11. 

Acts  11. 
iS 

19. 

28. 
Rom.  1, 

16. 
1  Co.  5. 


14 


Gal. 


Titus 
Jas. 


whole,  entire,  ohos  holos. 
20,  30  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  into  hell 
22,  23  if.. thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body 
33  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,  till  the  wh. 

26  what,  .if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world 

1 3  Wheresoever . .  shall  be  preached  in  the  wh . 

27  and  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  band  of 
55  ran  through  that  whole  region  round  ab. 
36  what,  .if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world 

9  shall  be  preached  throughout  the  whole 

1  with  the  elders  and  scribes  and  the  whole 

16  the  soldiers,  .call  together  the  whole  ba. 

33  there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  land 
39  published  throughout  the  whole  city  how 

25  what,  .if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lo. 

34  when  thine  eye  is  single,  thy  whole  body 
36  If  thy  whole  body  therefore  (be)  full  of  li. 
36  the  whole  shall  be  full  of  light,  as  when 

2 1  took  and  hid . .  till  the  whole  was  leavened. 
53  and  himself  believed,  and  his  whole  hou. 
50  expedient,  .that  the  whole  nation  perish 

26  it  came  to  pass,  that  a  whole  year  they 

22  apostles  and  elders,  with  the  whole  church 

29  the  [whole]  city  was  filled  with  confusion 

30  Paul  dwelt  two  whole  years  in  his  own 

8  faith  is  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole 

23  Gaius  mine  host,  and  of  the  whole  church 
6  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole 

1 7  If  the  whole  body . .  if  the  whole  (were)  he. 
^3  If  therefore  the  whole  church  be  come  to. 

3  testify,  .he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law 

9  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump 
11  who  subvert  whole  houses,  teaching  thi. 
10  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and 

2  perfect,  .able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  bo. 

3  Behold.,  we  turn  about  their  whole  body 
6  it  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on 
2  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for.  .the  whole 

19  we  know . .  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wick. 
9  thatold  serpent,  .which  deceiveth  the  wh. 

14  unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  wh. 
cry,  the  whole,  -was  pas. 
.  32  the  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  do. 

34  behold,  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet 
2  the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  shore 
1  the  whole  multitude  was  by  the  sea  on  the 

10  the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  were 
19  the  whole  multitude  sought  to  touch  him 

35  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth 
5  the  saying  pleased  the  whole  multitude 

44  came  almost  the  whole  city  together  to 
22  we  know  that  the  whole  creation groaneth 

15  Of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and 

16  From  whom  the  whole  body  fitly  joined 


Rev. 

10.  All,  er 
Matt. 

8. 

*3- 

Mark  4. 

Luke  1. 

6. 

21. 
Acts    6. 

13- 

Rom.  8. 

Eph.    3. 
4- 

WHOLE,  wholesome  — 
1. Healing,  N|3"]p  marpe. 

Provi5.    4  A  wholesome  tongue  (is)  a  tree  of  life,  but 
2.To  be  sound,  well,  in  health,  vyiaivw  hugiaino. 

Luke  7.  10  found  the  servant  whole  that  had  been  sick 

1  Ti.    6.    3  If  any  man.  .consent  not  to  wholesome 

B.Sound,  whole,  wholesome,  vyL-fjs  hugies. 

Matt  12.  13  it  was  restored  whole,  like  as  the  other 
15.  31  when  they  saw.  .the  maimed  to  be  whole 

Mark  3.    5  his  hand  was  restored  [whole  as  the  other] 
5.  34  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague 

Luke  6.  10  [his  hand  was  restored  whole  as  the  other] 

John  5.    4  [was  made  whole  of  whatsoever  disease] 
5.    6  saith  unto  him,  Wilt  thou  bemade  whole  ? 
5.    9  immediately  the  man  was  made  whole,  and 
5.  11  He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said 
5.  14  thou  art  made  whole  :  sin  no  more,  lest 
5.  15  that  it  was  Jesus  which  had  made  him  wh. 
7.  23  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit  whole  on 

Acts    4. 10  by  him  doth  this  man  stand  here,  .whole 


WHOLE 


1050 


WHOSO 


WHOLE,  to  be,  make,  be  made,  (perfectly;  — 
1-  T '  ■.',-,  :_:  chayah. 

Josh.  5.    3  :h  ~  abode . .  in  the  camp  till  they  were  w. 
i.  To  heel,  N51  r 

Job     5.  18  he  woundeth,  and  his  hands  make  whole 

3.  To  be  liealed,  k%-\  t  >,,!    .  _ 

Jer    19. 11  vessel,  that  cannot  be  made  whole  again 

4.  To  make  thoroughly  sou, id,  oiaatifa  diasvzo. 

Matt  1.;.  36  many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly  w. 
5. To  heal,  cure,  idofiat  iaomai. 

Matt  15.  28  her  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that 
Acts   9.  34  Eneas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole 

6.7*o  ha  strong,  laxiui  ischuo. 

Matt.  9  12  They  that  be  whole  Deed  not  a  physician 
Mark  2. 17  They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the  p. 
7.  To  make  sound,  cuSt'cu  so-.v. 

Matt.  9.  21  If  I.. but  touch  his  garment,  I  shall  bew 

9.  22  Daughter,  .thy  faith  hath  made  thee  wh. 

9.  22  thewomanwasmadewholefromthathour 

Mark  5.  28  If  I.  .touch  but  hiB  clothes,  I  shall  be  w. 

5.  34  Daughter,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole 

6.  56  as  many  as  touched  him  were  made  whole 
10.  52  Go  thy  way ;  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  w. 

Luke  8.  48  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole ;  go  in  p. 

8.  50  believe  only,  and  she  shall  be  made  whole 

17.  19  Go  thy  way  :  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  w. 

Acts    4.    9  examined,  .bywhatmeansheismade  wh. 
8. To  be  sound,  well,  in  health,  iyiaiva  hugiaino. 

Luke  5.  31  They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician 
WHOLE  burnt  offering  or  sacrifice  — 
Whole  burnt  offering.  W|  kalil. 

Deut  33.  10  and  whole  burnt  sacrifice  upon  thine  al. 

Psa.  51.  19  with  burnt  offering,  and  whole  burnt  off. 
WHOLLY,  to  have  or  give  — 
1..-1  whole  burnt  offering,  h-hskalil. 

Lev.    6.  22  a  statute  for  ever*,  .it  shall  be  wholly  bn 
6.  23  everymeatoffering.  .shall  be  wholly  burnt 

H  urn.  4.    6  shall  spread  over(it)  a  cloth  wholly  of  blue 

1  Sa.    7.   9  offered.,  a  burnt  offering  wholly  unto  the 

2.  To  Jill  in  or  up,  xSs  male,  3. 
>"um  32. 11  because  they  have  not  wholly  followed 

33.  12  for  they  have  wholly  followed  the  Lord 

Deut.  1.  36  because  he  hath  wholly  followed  the  Lo 

Josh.  14.    8  but  I  wholly  followed  the  Lord  my  God 

14.   9  thou  hast  wholly  followed  the  Lord  my 

14. 14  he  wholly  followed  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 

3.  "To  declare  or  regard  as  innocent,  --:  naqah,  3. 
Jer.  46.  28  yet  will  I  not  leave  thee  wholly  unpunis. 

4.  To  separate,  sanctify,  a^  qadesh,  5. 
Judg  17.    3  I  had  wholly  dedicated  the  silver  unto  the 

5.  To  put,  s  1.  place,  c  ■:•.  ds'b  sum,  aim. 
Jer.  42. 15  If  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into 

6.Peace,  completeness,  Dftp  shalom. 

Jer.  13.  i9  Judah.  .shall  be  wholly  carried  away  ca. 
7. All,  Vie  complete  whole,  oAoTeA^s  hololeles. 

1  Th.   5.  23  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly 
8.7*0  be  in,  el/ii  iv  eimi  en, 

1  Ti.   4.  i5  give  thyself  wholly  to  them;  that  thy  pr. 
WHOM,  whomsoever  — 
1.  These,  ,-rVx  e'.leh. 

Ezra   2.  65  their  servants  End  their  maids,  of  whom 
i.Thal,  which,  i?x  asher. 

Gen.    2.   8  there  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed 
3'-  32  ">''  i'h  whomsoever  thou  flndest  thy  gods 

Exod.  6.    5  Israel,  whom  the  Egyptians  keep  in  bon. 
35.  21  and  every  one  whom  his  spirit  nude  wi] 
Z.That,  ■-  di. 

E/ra    4.  10  the  restof  thenationswhomthegreatand 
i.Who,  nan  ■»"$  asher  hemrnah, 

Exod  36.    1  in  whom  the  Lord  put  wisdom  and  und 

1  CD.  9.  22  whom  David  and  Samuel  the  seer  did  or. 
5.  Who,  ]r\-riK  asher  hen. 

Gen.  30.  26  for  whom  I  have  served  thee,  and  let  me 
G.This,  -1  zu. 

Isa.   42.  24  Lord,  he  against  whom  we  have  sinned 
'.The,  that,  n;  yath. 

Dan.    3.  12  Jews  whom  thou  hast  set  over  the  affairs 
S.For,  thai,  -i  /.-/. 

Gen.   4.  25  another  seed  instead  of  Abel,  whom  Cain 
9.  Who  1  '-  m  I. 

Josh  24.  15  choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve 
In.  Who,  •■ !,  1 1  1  >hat,  el-:/  I  ;■;  man. 

Dan.   4.  17,  25,  32  giveth  it  to 'whomsoever  he  will 

1 1.  Whom,  that,  -  \ :     an  di. 
Dan.    5.  21  he  appointeth  over  it  whomsoever  he  wi. 

12.  1I7io  if,  '6s  iav  hos  eon. 
Matt  11.  27  (lie)  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal 
'  ike  .4.   f  and  to  whomsoever  I  will  1  ■. 
■  '  --.i6.   3  whomsoever  ye  shaUa  oar'le. 

13.  All  or  crcry  one  who,  t,Zs  0;  pas  has. 
Lukei2.  48  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him 

1  I//  ony  one,  lav  rls  can  /is. 

John  13.  20  lie  that  reoelveth  [whomsoever]  I  send 


15.  Who,  which,  mhatlrl,  -ris  ti,  lis. 

Matt  12.  27  by  whom  do  your  children  cast  (them) 
i5. 13  "A  hom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  man 

16.  13  He  saith  unto  them,  But  whom  sav  ve 

17.  25  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take 
27.  17  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release  unto  yon? 

Mark  8.  27  saying  unto  tliem,  Whom  do  men  say  th 

8.  29  he  saith  unto  them,  But  whom  say  ye  th 

Luke  6.  47  doeth  them,  I  will  show  you  to  whom  he 

9. 18  saying.  Whom  say  the  people  that  I  am  ? 

9. 20  He  said  unto  them,  But  whom  say  ye  th. 

n.  19  if  I.  .castout  devils,  by  whom  doyour  so. 

12.    5  But  I  will  forewarn  you  whom  ye  shall  f. 

John  6.  68  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go?  thou  hast  the 

8.  53  the  prophets  are  dead  :  whom  makest  th. 

12.  38  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been 

13.  22  looked  one  on  another,  doubting  of  v.  1,  ni 

18.  4  went  forth,  and  said  unto  them,  Whom 
18.  7  Then  asked  he  them  again,  Whom  seek 
20. 15  why  weepest  thou »  whom  seekest  thou ? 

Aets   8.  34  of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet  this:-  of 
13.  25  Whom  think  ye  that  lam  ?  I  am  not  (lie) 
2  TL    3.  14  ;  Heb.  3.  17  ;  3.  18  ;  1  Pe.  5.  8. 
16.  Who,  u-horn,  Ss  ou  hos,  hou,  Heb.  5.  11. 
1  /.  Whomsoever,  6Virep  hosper,  Mark  15.  6. 
WHORE,  -whoremonger,  whorish  — 
\.To  commit  fornication,  ~:;  :  inah. 

Lev.  21.  7  They  shall  not  take  a  wife  (that  is)  a  wh. 
Deut23. 18  Thou  shalt  not  bring  the  hire  of  a  whore 
Prov.  6.  26  For  by  means  of  a  whorish  woman  (a  man 
23.  27  a  whore  (is)  a  deep  ditch;  and  a  stranere  w. 
57.  3  the  seed  of  the  adulterer  and  the  whore 
6.  9  Iambroken  with  theirwhorishheart,  wh. 
16.  30  the  work  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman 
16. 33  They  give  gifts  to  all  whores  ;  but  thou 
4. 14  themselves  are  separated  withwhores,and 


Isa. 
Eze. 


Hos. 


2.Separated,consecrated  (to  an  idol),  n?np  qedeshoh. 
Deut.23. 17  There  shall  be  no  whore  of  the  daughters 
3. Fornicatress,  iripvn  porne. 

Eev.  17.  1  the  judgment  of  the  great  whore  that  si. 
17. 15  which  thou  sawest,  where  the  whore  sit. 
17.  16  these  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall  ma. 
19.    2  he  hath  judged  the  great  whore,  which 

i.A  fornicator,  ir6pvos  pornos. 

Eph.    5.    s  no  whoremonger,  nor  unclean  person,  nor 
:  Ti.    1.  10  For  whoremongers,  for  them  that  defile 
Heb.  13.   4  whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will 
Rev.  21.    8  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idola. 
22. 15  whoremongers,  and  murderers,  and  idol. 
WHORE,  to  cause  to  be  a,  play  the  — 
To  commit  fornication,  ry  zanah. 

Lev.  21.   9  she  profane  herself  by  playing  the  w  hore 
Deut  22.  21  to  play  the  whore  in  her  father's  house 
Judg  19.   2  his  concubine  played  the  whore  against 
Jer.     3.    3  thou  hadst  a  whore's  forehead,  thou  n -;'u. 
Eze.  16.  28  Thou  hast  played  the  whore  also  with  the 
Lev.  19.  29  thy  daughters  to  cause  her  to  be  a  win  re 
WHOREDOM,  'to  commit  or  fall  to)  — 
1.7*o  commit  fornication,  rra  zanah. 

Lev.  15.  29  lest  the  land  fall  to  whoredom,  and  the 

20.   5  to  commit  whoredom  with  Molech,  from 

XUB125.    ithepeoplebegantocommit  whoredomwl 

Eze.  16.  17  and  didstcommit  whoredom  with  them 

20.  30  commit  ye  whoredom  offer  their  abomin. 

23.    3  committed  whoredoms. .  committed  who. 

Hos.    1.    2  the  land  hath  committed  great  whoredom 

4. 13  your  daughters  shall  commit  whoredom 

4.  14  your  daughters  wheu  they  commit  whor. 
2.  To  commit  fornication,  nytzanafo,  4. 

Eze.  16.  34 nonefolloweth  th'ee  tocommit  whoredoms 

3  To  cause  or  lead  to  fornication,  nil  zanah,  5. 

2  Ch.21. 13  like  to  the  whoredoms  of'the  house  of  A. 

Hos.    4. 10  they  shall  commit  whoredom,  and  shall" 

4. 18  they  have  committed  whoredom  continu. 

5.  3  thou  conunittest  whoredom,  (and)  Israel 
i.Fornications,  traui  zenunim. 

Gen.  38.  24  behold,  she  (is)  with  child  by  whoredom 
2  Ki.  9.  22  so  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother 
Eze.  23.  11  more  than  her  sister  in  (her)  whoredoms 
23.  29  the  nakedness  of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be 
Hos. 


1  whoredoms  and  children  of  whoredoms 
2.    2  let  her  therefore  put  away  her  whoredoms 

2.  4  for  they  (lie)  the  children  of  whoredoms 
4. 12  the  spiritof  whoredomshathcaused(them) 
5-4  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  (is)  in  the  midst 

>ah.   3.   4  of  the  whoredoms.. through  her  whored. 

n»]  -.-  „„th. 
-\11m14.  33  your  children  shall,  hear  your  whoredo. 
Jer.    3.    2  polluted  the  land  with  thy  whoredoms 

3.  9  it  came  topass  through.,  her  whoredom 
13.  27  I  have  seen.,  the  lewdness  of  thy  whored. 

Eze.  23.  27  thy  whoredom  (brought)  from  the  land  .  f 
43.  7  by  their  whoredom,  nor  by  the  carcases  of 
43.    9  let  them  put  away  their  whoredom,  and 

Hos.    4.  11  Whoredom  and  wine  and  new  wine  take 
6. 10  there  (is)  the  whoredom  of  Ephraim,  Isr. 
6.  Fornication,  rung  tagnuth. 

Eze.  16.  20  (Is  this)  of  thy  whoredoms  a  small  matter 
16.  22  in  all  thine  abominatii  us  and  thy  whore. 
16.  25  Thou  hast.. multiplied  tbv  whoredoms 
16.26  hast  increased  thy  whoredoms,  to  provoke 
16.  33  may  come  unto  thee,  .for  thy  whoredom 
16.  34  the  contrary  is  in  thee,  .in  thy  whoredoms 


Ez 2.  16.  36  discovered  througli  thy  whoredoms  with 
23.    7  she  committed  her  whoredoi 
23.    8  her  whoredoms,  .poure  1  their  whoredom 
23. 11  in  her  whoredoms  more  than  her  sister  in 
23  14  she  increased  her  whoredoms:  for  when 
23. 17  they  defiledherwith  their  whoredom,  and 
23.  iS  she  discovered  her  whoredoms,  an  I  disc. 
-he  multiplied  her  whoredoms,  in  calling 
23.  29  both  thy  lewdness  and  thy  whoredi  ins 
23.  33  therefore  bear  thou  also    thy  whoredoms 
23.  43  \\  ill  they  now  commit  whoredoms  w ith 

WHORING,  (to  make  or  use;  to  go  a  — 
\.To  commit  f  rnicaiic  >.  .-:;  zanah. 

Exod34. 13  they  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods,  and 
34. 16  their  daughters  go  a  whoring  after  then- 
Lev.  17.    7  after  whom  they  have  gone  a  whoring 
20.    5  cut  hint  off.andallthatgoawhoriugafter 
20.    6  after  wizards,  to  go  a  whoring  after  them 
>umi5.  39  eyes,  after  which  ye  use  to  go  a  whoring 
Deut  31.  16  go  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  Strang. 
Judg.  2.  17  they  went  a  whoring  afterother  gods,  and 

8.  27  all  Israel  went  thither  a  whoring  after  it 
S.  33  Israel  turned  again,  and  went  a  whoring 

1  Ch.  5.  25  went  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  peo. 
Psa.  73.  27  destroyedall  them  thatgo  awhoringfrom 
106.  39  went  3  whoring  with  their  own  inventions 
Eze.  6.  9  their  eyes,  which  go  a  whoring  after  ti.iir 
23.  30  becanse  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  after 
Hos.  4.  12  they  have  gone  a  whoringfrom  under  th. 

9.  1  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  from  thy  God 

2.  To  cause  or  lead  to  fornication,  n:;  zanah,  5. 
Exod34. 16  make  thy  sons  go  a  whoring  after  their 

WHCSE  (soever)  — 

\.  Which,  %".x  usher. 

Gen.    1. 11  whose  seed  (is)  in  itself,  upon  the  earth 
Exod35.  29  whose  heart  made  them  willing  to  bring 

■LWhich,  t  di. 

Ezra  7.  1 5  the  God . . whose  habitation(is) in  Jerusa, 

3.  "Hio,  -c  11,!. 

Gen.  24. 23  Whose daughter(art)thou?  tellme,  I  pray 

4.  Who,  of  whom  ?  ti's,  tiVos  [gen.  or  dot.  1  lis,  linos. 
Matt22.  20  Whose  (is)  this  image  and  superscription? 

22.  28  whose  wile  shall  she  be  of  the  seven  ?  for 

22.  42  What  think  ye  of  Christ?  whose  son  ishe? 
Marki2.  16  Whose  (is)  this  image  and  superscription? 

12.  23  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of  them?  for  the 
Lukei2.  20  whose  shall  those  things  be  which  thou 

20.  24  Whose  image  and  superscription  hath  it? 

20.  33  in  the  resurrection  whose  wife  of  them 
Johni9.  24  Let  us  not  rend  it,  but  cast  lots  for  it,  wh. 

5.  II  hose,  ay  nvav  an  tinon. 

John2o.  23  [Whose  soever]  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re. 

20.  23  [whose soever].. yeretain,theyare retained 
WHOSO,  -whosoever  — 

l.Bvery  „  ■  ,  :;  ■/,  ,,  man  that,  r  x.  tSx  c-n  (Sr). 
E.xod3o.  33  Whosoever  compounded] .  .like  it,  or  who 
30.  38  Whosoever  shall  make  like  unto  that,  to 
19.  20  whosoever  lieth  carnally  with  a  woman 

21.  17  Whosoever,  .of  thy  seed  in  their  generat. 

22.  3  Whosoever,  .of  all  your  seed  among  j  our 
22.    5  Or  whosoever  toncheth  any  creeping*  thi. 
22.  21  whosoever  offereth  a  sacrifice  of  peace 
24. 15  Whosoever  curseth  his  God  shall  bear  his 

Deuti8. 19  whosoever  will  not  hearken  unto  mv  Wo. 

Josh.  1. 18  Whosoever,  .doth  rebel  against  thy  comm. 

ProV25. 14  Whoso  boasteth  himself  of  a  false  gift  (is) 
2  /,'< ■■-. ■  v  one,  *?3  hoi. 

Exod35.    5  whosoever  (is)  of  a  w  illing  heart,  let  him 

Ezra   6. 11  whosoever  shall  alter  thisword,  let  timb. 
7.  26  whosoever  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God 

Dan.   5.  7  Whosoever  shallreadthis  writing,  andsh. 
6.    7  whosoever  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  god 
3.  [J'ho,  who  1  '£  mi. 

Isa.  54. 15  whosoever  shall  gather  together  against 
i.Ifany  one,  e?  ris  ei  lis. 

Eev.  14.  1 1  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of  his  na. 
20. 15  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the 
5.As  many  as,  oaoi  &v  hosoi  an. 

Mark  6.  n  [whosoever  shall  not  receive  you,  nor] 

Luke  9.    5  whosoever  will  not  receive  you,  when  ye 

6.  Whoever,  whosoever,  hems  hostis. 

Matt.  5.  39  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right 

5.  41  whosoever  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile 

13.  12  whosoever  hath,  but  whosoever  hath  not 

18.   4  Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble  himself 

23. 12  whosoever  shall  exalthimself  shall  be  ab. 

Mark  8.  34  [Whosoever]  will  come  after  me,  let  him 

Lukei4.  27  w-hosoever  dot  h  not  bear  his  cross,  and  co. 

Cal.    5.   4  whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the  law 

Jas.    2. 10  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  ani 

7.  Jl  hosoever,  oo-tis  av  hostis  an. 

Mattio.  33  [whosoever]  shall  deny  me  before  men 

12.  50  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father 
Gal.    5. 10  shall  bear  his  judgment,  whosoever  he 

8.  Bn  ry  one  that,  -nas  6  or  is  pas  ho  or  hos. 
Matt.  5.  22  whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother  with 

5.  28  whosoever  looketfa  on  a  woman  to  lust 
Luke  6.  47  Whosoever  conieth  to  me,  and  heareth 
12.   8  Whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men 
12.  10  whosoever  shall  speak  -j.  word  acainst  the 
14. 11  whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  aba. 
14. 33  whosoever  he  be  of  you  thalforsaketh  not 
16  iS  'ftnosoeverpultethaw-ay..[whosoeverjni. 


Lev. 


WHOSOEVER 


1051 


WICKED 


Luke2o.  i3  Whosoever  shall  fall  upon  that  stoneshall 
Juhu  3.15,  16  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not 

4. 13  Whosoever  diinkethofthiswatershallth 

8.  34.  Whosoever  comiuitteth  siu  is  the  servant 

11.  26  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me  sh. 

12.  46  whosoever  believeth  on  me  should  not  ab. 
16.  2  whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he 
19.  12  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king  speak. 

Acts    2  21  whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the 

10.  43  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive 
Horn.  2.    1  thou  art  inexcusable,  .whosoever thou  art 

9.  33  [whosoever]  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 
10.  11  Whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 
10.  13  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the 

1  Jo.  2.  23  Whosoever  denieththeSon,  the  same  hath 
3.    4  Whosoever  committeth  sin  transgresseth 
3.   6  Whosoever  abideth.  .whosoever  sinneth 
3.   9  Whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  com. 
3. 10  whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not 
3.  15  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murd. 
5.    1  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  theCh. 
5.  18  whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not,  but 
a  Jo.        9  whosoever  transgresseth,  and  Rev.  22. 15 
9iWko,  whom,  tfs-,  ov  hos,  hou,  Heb.  5.  II. 
10,Every  one  wlw,  -ray  'darts  pas  hostls. 

Matt.  7.  24  whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine 

10.  32  Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me  be. 
WHOSOEVER  would  (or  heareth)  — 

l.He  who  is  willing,  or  desirous,  fa^n  hechaphets. 

1  Ki.13.  33  whosoever  would,  he  consecrated  him,  and 

2.  To  luar,  hearken;  ya$  shamea. 

2  Sa.  17.   g  whosoever  heareth  it  will  say,  There  is  a 
Eze.  33.   4  whosoever  heareth  the  sound  of  the  tru. 

WHY,  (for)  — 

1.  Wherefore,  wherefore  ?  HJ^iD  maddua. 

Exod.  1.  iS  Why  have  ye  done  this  thing,  and  have 
3.   3  I  will  now  turn  aside,  and  see.  .why  the 
Jer.     2. 14  (Is)  Israel  a  servant?,  .why  is  he  spoiled? 

2.  Whatl  TO  mail. 

Judg.  8.   1  Wiry  hast  thou  served  us  thus,  that  thou 

3.  Why?  nth  lamah. 

Gen.  27.  45' why  should  I  be  deprived  alsoof  youbotb 

4.  For  why  2  n$£»  shallamah. 

Song  1.    7  why  should  I  be  as  one  that  turneth  aside 

5.  What  ?  n?  meh. 

Josh.  7. 25  Joshua  said,  Why  hast  thou  troubled  us? 
Ezra  4.  22  why  should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of  the 
7.  23  why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the  re. 
6.0/1  account  of  what  ?  na^y  al  mah. 

Dan.  2.  15  Why(is)thedecree(so)hastyfromtheking'f 

7.  Because  of  what  ?  to  JJ£  yaan  meh. 

Eag.   1.   9  Why?  saith  the  LORD  of  hosts.  Because  of 

8.  For,  yap  gar. 

Matt  27.  23  the  governor  said,  Why,  what  evil  hath 
Markis.  14  Pilate  said  unto  them,  Why,  whatevil  ha. 
Luke23-  22  he  said  unto  them  the  third  time,  Why 
John  9.  30  Why  herein  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  ye 

^.Because  ofvjhat  1  why  1  Ziaridiatl. 

Matt.  9.  11  Why  eateth  your  Master  with  publicans 

9. 14  Why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  oft,  but 
13. 10  Why  speakest  thou  unto  them  in  parab.  ? 
15.    2  Why  do  thy  disciples  trangress  the  tradi. 

15.  3  Why  do  ye  also  transgress  the  command. 
17. 19  and  said,  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out? 

21.  25  he  will  say. . Why  did  ye  not  then  believe 
Mark  2,  iS  Why  do  the  disciples  of  Jolm  and  of  the 

7.  5  Why  walk  not  thy  disciples  according  to 

11.  31  he  will  say,  Why  then  did  ye  not  believe 
Luke  5.  30  Why  do  ye  eat  and  drink  with  publicans 

5-  33  ["Why  do]  the  disciples  of  John  fast  often 

19.  31  if  any  man  ask  you,  Why  do  ye  loose  (h.)? 

20.  5  he  will  say,  Why  then  believed  ye  him  not  ? 
24.  38  and  whydo  thoughtsarise  in  your  hearts? 

John  7.  45  they  said . .  Why  have  ye  not  brought  him? 

8.  43  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech? 

8.  46  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe 

12.  5  Why  was  not  this  ointment  sold  for  three 
I3-  37  said..  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  thee  now? 

Acts    5.    3  why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  to 
1  Co.  6.    7  Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong?  why 

10.  Wherefore  1  why  ?  Ivari  hlnati. 

Matt  27.  46  My  God,  myG  id,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 

Luke  13.    7  cut  it  down  ;  why  cumbereth  it  the  gxo.? 

Acts  4.  25  Why  did  the  heathen  rage,  and  the  peo. 
7.  26  Sins,  ye  are  brethren ;  why  do  ye  wrong 

1  Co.io.  29  for  why  is  my  liberty  judged  of  another 
W.That,  oVi  hotL 

Mark  9.  n  Why  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first 

9.  28  asked.  .[Why]  oouldnot  we  cast  him  out? 

12.  Why  tri(neut)  tl 

Matt.  6.  28  why  take  ye  thought  for  raiment?  Consi. 

7.  3  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in 

8.  26  Why  are  ye  fearful,  0  ye  of  little  faith? 

16.  8  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves,  because 
17. 10  Why  then  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  must 
19.    7  Why  did  Moses  then  command  to  give  a 

19.  17  Why  callest  thou  me  good?,  .none  good 

20.  6  saith..  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle? 

22.  18  Jesus,  .said,  "Why  tempt  ye  me.  .hypocr.? 
26. 10  Why  trouble  ye  the  woman  ?  for  she  hath 

Mark  2.  7  Why  doth  this . .  thus  speak  blasphemies  ? 
2.  8  Why  reason  ye  these  things  in  your  hearts? 
2.  24  why  do  they  on  the  sabbath  day  that  wh 


John 


Mark  4.  40  Why  are  ye  so  fearful?  how  is  it  that  ye 
5-  35  why  troublest  thou  the  Master  any  furt.? 
5.  39  Why  make  ye  tliis  ado,  and  weep?  the  da. 
8.  12  Whydoththisgenerationseekafterasign? 
8.  17  Why  reason  ye  because  ye  have  no  bread? 
10. 18  Why  callest  thou  me  good?,  .none  good 
11.  3  if  any  man  say  unto  you>  Whydo  ye  this? 
15  Why  tempt  ye  me?  bring  me  a  penny,  that 

4  Why  was  this  waste  of  the  ointment  made? 

6  why  trouble  ye  her?  she  hath  wrought  a 
34  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 

Luke  2.  48  Son,  why  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us? 
2  Why  do  ye  that  which  is  not  lawful  to  do 
41  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in 
46  why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not 

26  If  ye  then  be  not  able . .  why  take  ye  tho. 
57  why  even  of  yourselves  judge  ye  not  wh. 
19  Why  callest  thou  me  good?  none  (is)  good 
33  the  owners . .  said . .  Why  loose  ye  the  colt  ? 
23  [and  said  unto  them,  Why  tempt  ye  me?] 
46  Why  sleep  ye?  rise  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter 

5  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead? 
38  he  said  uuto  them,  Why  are  ye  troubled? 
25  Why  baptizest  thou  then,  if  thou  be  not 

27  yet  no  man  said.  .Why  talkest  thou  with 

19  Did  not  Moses.  .Why  go  ye  about  to  kill 

20  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad ;  why  hear  ye 

21  Why  askest  thou  me?  ask  them  which  he. 

23  If  I  have  spoken.,  well,  why  smi  test  thou 

13  they  say  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest 
15  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weep. 

11  said,  .why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven? 

12  why  marvel  ye  at  this?  or  why  look  ye  so 
4  why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in  th. 
4  sayiDg.  .Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou 

15  Sins,  why  do  ye  these  things?  We  also  are 
10  Now  therefore  why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put 

7  saying.  .Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou 

16  why  tarriest  thou?  arise,  and  be  baptized 

8  Why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incred. 

14  saying.  .Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou 
7  why  yet  am  I  also  judged  as  a  sinner? 

24  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope 

19  Why  doth  he  yet  find  fault?  for  who  hath 

20  say  to  him..  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus? 
10  why  dost  thou  judge  thy  brother  ?  or  why 

7  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadstnot 
to.  29  for  why  is  my  liberty  judged  of  another 
to.  30  why  am  I  evil  spoken  of  for  that  for  wh. 
[5.  29  why  are  they  then  baptized  for  the  dead? 
[5.  30  And  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  hour  1 
2.  14  [why]  compellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  li. 
5. 11  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution?  then  is 
2.  20  why,  as..liviugiuthe  world,  are  ye  subje. 


Acts 


26 

26 

Kom.  3 

8. 

9 

9 

M 

1  Co.  4, 


Gal. 
Col. 


13.  With  a  view  to  what  ?  els  rl  eis  ti. 

Mark  14.  4  Why  was  this  waste  of  the  ointment  ma.? 
15.  34  My  God,  my  God,  why  hasi  thou  forsaken 

WICKED  (doer,  man,  one,  thing,  woman,  more)  — 
1. Iniquity,  vanity,  jiN;  aven. 

Job    22. 15  the  old  way  whieh  wicked  men  have  tro.? 

34.36  tried.,  because  of. .  answers  for  wicked  m. 

Psa.  59.    5  be  not  merciful  to  any  wicked  transgres. 

101.    8  that  I  may  cut  off  all  wicked  doers  from 

Prov.  6. 12  A  naughty  person,  a  wicked  man,  walketh 

6.  18  An  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  imaginati. 

2.  Worthless,  without  utility  or  value,  ?X£73  beliyy. 
Deut  15.  9  that  there  be  not  a  thought  in  thy  wicked 
Job  34.  18  to  say  to  a  king. .  wicked . .  to  princes.,  mi.? 
Psa.  101.  3  I  will  set  no  wicked  tiling  before  mine  ey. 
N  ah.   1 . 1 1  There  is  - .  come  out  of  thee . .  a  wicked  co. 

1.  15  the  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  th. 

3.  Kindness,  unhindness,  "rprr  c/tesed. 

Lev.  20.  17  it  (is)  a  wicked  thing;  and  they  shall  be 

4.  Wickedness,  wicked  woman,  nr^-]?  mirshaath. 

2  Ch.24.    7  the  suns  of  Athaliah,  that  wicked  woman 
d.Ververse,  W&  avval. 

Job  18.  21  Surely  such  (are)  the  dwellings  of  the  wic. 
29.  17 1  brake  the  jaws  of  the  wicked,  andplu. 
31.    3  (Is)  not  destruction  to  the  wicked?  and  a 

6.  Perverseness,  perversity,  n?iy.  avluh. 

2  Sa.  3.  34  as  a  man  falleth  before  wicked  me  1.  .fel. 

7. Labouring,  perverse,  miserable,  bzy  amel. 

Job  20.  22  every  hand  of  the  wicked  shall  come  upon 

S.A  grievous  thing,  2~fj  otseb. 

Psa.  139.  24  see  if.  .wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in 
Q.Fvil,  jn  ra. 

Gen.  13. 13  the  men  of  Sodom  (were)  wicked  and  sin. 

38.    7  Er,  Judah's  first  born,  was  wicked  in  the 

Deut  17.    5  which  have  committed  that  wicked  thing 

23.  9  then  keep  thee  from  every  wicked  thing 

1  Sa.  30.  22  Then  answered  all  the  wicked  men  and 

2  Ki.17.  11  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  L. 
2  Ch.  7.  14  If  my  people,  .turn  from  thcirwicked  wa. 
iseh.  9.  35  neither  turned  they  from  their  wicked 
Esth.  9.  25  he  commanded  by  letters,  that  his  wicked 
Job  21.  30  That  the  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of 
Esth.  7.  6  The  adversary  and  enemy  (is)  this  wicked 
Psa.101.  4  I  will  not  know  a  wicked  (person) 
Prov.  2.  14  Who.,  delight  in  the  fro  wardness  of  the  wi. 

11.  21  hand,  .in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be 

12.  13  The  wicked  is  snared  by  the  transgression 
15.  26  The  thoughts  of  the  wicked  (are)  an  abo. 
26.  23  Burning  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  (are  like) 

Jer.     2.  33  therefore  hast  thou .  .taught  the  wicked 
5.  28  yea,  they  overpass  the  deeds  of  the  wicked 


Jer.     6.  29  the  founder  melteth  in  vain;  for  the  wic. 

15.  21  I  will  deliver,  .out  of  the  hand  of  the  wi. 
Eze.     8.    9  Go  in, 'and  behold  the  wicked  abominations 

11.    2  these  (are)  the  men  that,  .give  wicked  co. 

13.  22  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that 

20. 44  not  according  to  yum*  wicked  ways,  nor 

30.  12  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

10.7b  do  or  suffer  evil,  treat  ill,  VSTl  raa,  5. 

Psa.  22.  16  the  assembly  of  the  wicked  have  enclosed 

27.    2  When  the  wicked,  .mine  enemies  and  my 

64.    2  Hide  me  from  the . .  counsel  of  the  wicked 

92.  11  mine  ears  shall  hear,  .of  the  wicked  that 

Prov.17.    4  A  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  lips 

11.  Wrong,  wicked,  ySnrasha. 

Gen.  18.23  Wilt  thou. .destroy.. righteous  with  thew. 
iS.  25  far.  .to  slay  the  righteous  with  the  wicked 
i3.  25  that  the  righteous  should  be  as  the  wicked 

Exod.  9.  27  Lori>  (is)iighteous.  .andtny  people  (are)  w. 
23  '  1  put  not  thine  hand  with  the  wicked  to  be  an 

23.  7  Keep  thee  far.. I  will  not  justify  the  wicked 
Numi6.  26  from  the  tents  of  these  wicked  men,  and 
Deut25.    1  justify  the  righteous,  and  condemn  thew. 

25.  2  if  the  wicked  man  (be)  worthy  to  be  beaten 

1  Sa.    2.   9  the  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  darkness,  for 

24. 13  Wickedness  prcceedeth  from  the  wicked 

2  Sa.   4.  11  How  much  more,  when  wicked  men  have 

1  Ki.  8.  32  condemning  the  wicked,  to  bring  his  way 

2  Ch.  6.  23  requiting  the  wicked,  by  recompensing 
Job     3. 17  There  the  wicked  cease  (from)  troubling 

8.  22  the  dwellingplace  of  the  wicked  shall  come 

9.  22  He  destroyeth  the  perfect  and  the  wicked 
9.  24  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

10.  3  and  shine  upon  the  counsel  of  the  wicked? 

11.  20  the  eyes  of  the  wicked  shall  fail,  and  they 
15.  20  The  wicked  man  travaileth  with  pain  all 
16. 11  turned  me  over  into  the  hand  of  the  wic. 
18,    s  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 
20.    s  That  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  (is)  sh. 

20.  29  This(is)  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  from 

21.  7  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live,  become  old 
21.  16  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me 
21.  17  How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the  wicked  put 

21.  28  where  (are) the  dwelling  places  of  the  wi.? 

22.  18  but  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from 

24.  6  and  they  gather  the  vintage  of  the  wicked 
27.  7  Let  mine  enemy  be  as  the  wicked,  and  he 
27. 13  This  (is)  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  with 
34.  26  He  striketh  them  as  wicked  men  in  the 
36.  6  He  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the  wicked 
36. 17  host  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the  wicked 
38.  13  that  the  wicked  might  be  shaken  out  of  it 

38.  15  from  the  wicked  their  light  is  withhulden 
40.  12  and  tread  down  the  wicked  in  their  place 

Psa.  7.  9  let  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  come  to 
9.  5  thou  hast  destroyed  the  wicked,  thou  hast 
9.  16  the  wicked  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his 
9.  17  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  in  to  hell,  (and) 
to.  2  The  wicked  in  (his)  pride  doth  persecute 
10.  3  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  heart's  desire 
10.  4  The  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  his  cou. 
10. 13  Wherefore  doth  the  wicked  contemn  God 

10.  15  Break  thou  the  arm  of  the  wicked  and  the 

11.  2  the  wicked  bend  (their)  bow,  they  make 
11.    5  the  wicked  and  him  that  loveth  violence 

6  Upon  the  wicked  he  shall  rain  snares,  fire 

8  The  wicked  walk  on  every  side,  when  the 

9  From  the  wicked  that  oppress  me, (from)  m. 
17. 13  deliver  my  soul  from  the  wicked,  (which 

26.  5  hated,  .and  will  not  sit  with  the  wicked 

23.  3  Draw  me  not  away  with  the  wicked,  and 

31.  17  let  the  wicked  be  ashamed,  (and)  let  them 
32. 10  Many  sorrows  (shall  be)  to  the  wicked,  but 
34.  21  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked  ;  and  they  that 
36.    1  The  transgression  of  the  wicked  saith  wit. 

36.  n  let  not  the  hand  of  the  wicked  remove  me 

37.  10  a  little  while,  and  the  wicked  (shall)  not 
37.  12  The  wicked  plotteth  against  the  just,  and 
37.  14  The  wickedhavedrawnoutthe sword, and 
37. 16  better  than  the  riches  of  many  wicked 
37.  17  the  arms  of  the  wicked  shall  be  broken 
37.  20  the  wicked  shall  perish,  and  the  enemies 
37.  21  The  wicked  borroweth,  and  payeth  not 
37.  28  but  the  seed  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut 
37. 32  The  wicked  watcheth  the  righteous,  and 
37.  34  when  the  wicked  are  cut  off,  thou  shalt 
37.  35  I  have  seen  the  wicked  ingreatpower,  and 
37.  38  the  end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off 
37.  40  he  shall  deliver  them  from  the  wicked 

39.  j  I  will  keep  my  mouth,  .wlrile  the  wicked 
50.  16  unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  What  hast  th, 
55.   3  because  of  the  oppression  of  the  wicked 
58.    3  The  wicked  are  estranged  from  the" womb 
58.  10  wash  his  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked 
68.    2  let  the  wicked  perish  at  the  presence  of 
71.    4  Deliver,  .out  of  the  band  of  the  wicked 
73.    3  (when)  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
75.    4  and  to  the  wicked,  Lift  not  up  the  horn 
75.    8  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall  wTing(theni) 
75. 10  the  horns  of  the  wicked  also  will  I  cut  otf 
82.    2  and  accept  the  persons  of  the  wickedl? 
82.   4  rid  (them)  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

91.  8  behold  and  see  the  reward  of  the  wicked 

92.  7  When,  the  wicked  spring  as  the  grass,  and 
94.    3  the  wicked,  how  long  shall  the  wicked  tr. 
94.  13  until  the  pit  be  digged  for  the  wicked 
97.  10  delivereth . .  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

101.  8  I  will  early  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the 
104.  35  Let  the  sinners,  .let  the  wicked  be  no  m. 
106.  18  was  kindled,  .the  flame  burnt  up  the  wi. 
109.    2  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  and  the  mouth 


ir. 
12. 
17- 


WICKED 


1052 


WICKEDNESS 


Psa.  109.  6  Set  thou  a  wicked  man  over  him;  and  let 
112.  io  The  wicked  shall  see  (it),  .the  wicked  sh. 
1 19.  53  because  of  the  wicked  that  forsake  my  law 
ug.  61  The  bands  of  the  wicked  have  robbed  me 
119. 95  The  wicked  have  waited  for  me  to  destroy 
119.  no  The  wicked  have  laidasnare  forme,  yet 
1 19.  1 19  Thou  puttest  away  all  the  wicked  of  the 
119.  155  Salvation  (is)far  from  the-Vicked:  forth. 
129.    4  he  hath  cut  asunder  the  cords  of  the  wic. 

139.  19  Surely  thou  wilt  slay  the  wicked,  OGod 

140.  4  Keep  me.  .from  the  hands  of  the  wicked 

140.  8  Grant  not,  O  Lord,  the  desires  of  the  wi. 

141.  10  Let  the  wicked  fall  into  their  own  nets 
145. 20  the  Lord,  .all  the  wicked  will  he  destroy 

146.  9  the  way  of  the  wicked  he  turneth  upside 

147.  6  he  casteth  the  wicked  down  to  the  ground 
Prov.  2. 22  the  wicked  shall  be  cutoff  from  the  earth 

3.  25  neither  of  the  desolation  of  the  wicked 
3.  33  The  curse,  .(is)  in  the  house  of  the  wicked 
4. 14  Enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked,  and 
4. 19  The  way  of  the  wicked  (is)as  darkness,  th. 
5.  22  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked 
9.  7  he  that  rebuketh  a  wicked  (man  getteth) 
10.  3  casteth  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked 
10.  6  violence  covereth  the  mouth  of  the  wick, 
io.   7  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot 

10. 16  (tendeth)  to  life :  the  fruit  of  the  wicked 
10.  20  the  heart  of  the  wicked  (is)  little  worth 
10.  24  The  fear  of  the  wicked,  it  shall  come  up. 
10.  25  As  the  whirlwind  passeth,  so  (is)  the  wic. 
10.  27  the  years  of  the  wicked  shall  be  shorten. 
10  28  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  shall  perish 
10.  30  the  wicked  shall  not  inhabit  the  earth 

10.  32  mouth  of  the  wicked  (speaketh)  froward. 

11.  5  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  by  his  own  wick. 
11.  7  When  a  wicked  man  dieth,  (his)  expecta. 
11.  8  is  delivered,  .the  wicked  cometh  in  his 
ir.  10  when  the  wicked  perish,  (there  is)  shout, 
n.  11  overthrown  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked 
11.  18  The  wicked  worketh  a  deceitful  work,  but 

11.  23  (but)the  expectation  of  the  wicked  (is)wr. 
n.  31  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  sinner 

12.  5  (but)  the  counsels  of  the  wicked  (are)  de. 
12.  6  Thewordsofthe  wicked(are)  to  lie  in  wa. 
12.  7  The  wicked  are  overthrown,  and  (are)  not 
12. 10  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  (are)cr. 
12. 12  The  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  evil  (men) 
12.  21  but  the  wicked  shall  be  filled  with  misc. 

12.  26  but  the  way  of  the  wicked  seduceth  them 

13.  5  a  wicked  (man)  is  loathsome,  and  cometh 
13.  9  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 

13. 17  A  wicked  messenger  falleth  into  mischief 

13.  25  but  the  belly  of  the  wicked  shall  want 

14.  n  The  house  of  the  wicked  shall  be  overth 
14. 19  the  wicked  at  the  gates  of  the  righteous 
14. 32  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wicked. 

15.  6  in  the  revenues  of  the  wicked  is  trouble 
15.    8  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  (is)  an  abom. 
15.   9  The  way  of  the  wicked  (is)  an  abominat. 
15.  28  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  poureth  out  ev. 

15.  29  The  Lord  (is)  far  from  the  wicked,  but  he 

16.  4  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil 
17. 15  He  that  justifieth  the  wicked,  and  he  th. 

17.  23  A  wicked  (man)  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the 

18.  3  When  the  wicked  cometh,  (then)  cometh 

18.  5  good  to  accept  the  person  of  the  wicked 

19.  28  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  devoureth  iniq. 
20. 26  A  wise  king  scattereth  the  wicked,  and 
21.   4  (and)  the  plowing  of  the  wicked,  (is)  sin 
21.    7  The  robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  destroy 
2i.  to  The  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  evil,  his 
21. 12  of  the  wicked.  .(God)overthroweththe  w. 

21. 18  The  wicked  (shall  be)  a  ransom  for  the 
21.  27  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  (is)  abominat. 
21. 29  A  wicked  man  hardeneth  his  face,  but 
24.  15  Lay  not  wait,  O  wicked  (man),  against  the 
24.  16  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  mischief 

24. 19  neither  be  thou  envious  at  the  wicked 
24.  20  the  candle  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 

24.  24  He  that  saith  unto  the  wicked,  Thou  (art) 

25.  5  Take  away  the  wicked  (from)  before  the 
25.  26  falling  down  before  the  wicked  (is  as)  a  tr. 
28.  1  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth 
2?.  4  They  that  forsake  the  law  praise  the  wi. 
28.  12  but  when  the  wicked  rise,  a  man  is  hidd. 
28. 15  (so  is)  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  peop. 

28.  28  When  the  wicked  rise,  men  hide  themselv. 

29.  2  when  the  wicked  beareth  rule,  the  people 
29.   7  (but)  the  wicked  regardeth  not  to  know 
29.  12  hearken  to  lies,  all  his  servants  (are)  wic. 
29.  16  When  the  wicked  are  multiplied,  transg. 
29.  27  and  (he),  .(is)  abomination  to  the  wicked 

Eecl.  3.  17  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the  wicked 
7.  15  there  is  a  wicked  (man)  that  prolongeth 
?.  10  I  saw  the  wicked  buried,  who  had  come 

8. 13  it  shall  not  be  well  with  the  wicked,  nei. 

8. 14  work  of  the  wicked.,  there  be  wicked  (m.) 
9.   2  (there  is)  one  event.  ,tothewicked;to  the 

Isa.  3.  n  Woe  unto  the  wicked!  (it  shall  be)  ill(wi.) 
5.  23  Which  justify  the  wicked  for  reward,  and 
11.    4  with  the  breath,  .shall  heslay  the  wicked 

13.  n  I  will  punish,  .the  wicked  for  their  iniq. 

14.  5  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked,  (and) 
26. 10  Let  favour  be  showed  to  the  wicked,  (yet) 
4S.  22  no  peace,  saith  the  Lord,  unto  the  wick 
53.  9  he  made  his  grave  with  the  wicked,  and 
55.  7  Let  the  wicked  f»rsake  his  way,  and  the 
57-  20  the  wicked  (are)  like  the  troubled  sea 
57.  21  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked 

Jer.     5.  26  among  my  people  are  found  wicked  (m.) 
12.   1  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked 
23. 19  shall  fall,  .upon  the  head  of  the  wicked 


Jer.   25.  31  he  will  give  them  (that  are)  wicked  to  the 
30.  23  fall  with  pain  upon  the  head  of  the  wic. 
Eze.    3. 18  When  I  say  unto  the  wicked,  Thou  shalt 
3.  18  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his  wicked  way 
3. 18  the  same  wicked  (man)  shall  die  in  his 
3.  19  warn  the  wicked,  .from  his  wicked  way 
7. 21  and  to  the  wicked  of  the  earth  fora  spoil 
13.  22  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked 
18.  2othewickednessofthewicked  shall  beupon 
18.  21  if  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  sins 
18. 23  Have  I  any  pleasure,  that  the  wicked  sh. 
18.  24  the  abominations  that  the  wicked  (man) 
18.  27  when  the  wicked  (man)  turneth  away  ft. 
21.   3,  4  cut  off.  .the  righteous  and  the  wicked 
21.  25  thou,  profane  wicked  prince  of  Israel,  w. 
21.  29  the  wicked,  whose  day  is  come,  when  th. 
33.    8  When  I  say  unto  the  wicked,  O  wicked 
33.   8  warn  the  wicked  from  his  way,  that  wic. 
33.    9  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  of  his  way  to  tu. 
33.  11  the  wicked;  but  that  the  wicked  turn  fr. 
33. 12  as  for  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked,  he 
33. 14  when  I  say  unto  the  wicked,  Thou  shalt 
33.  15  (If)  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge,  give 
33.  19  if  the  wicked  turn  from  his  wickedness 
Dan.  12. 10  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly.. the  wicked 
Mic.  6. 10  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked 
Hab.  1.   4  the  wicked  doth  compass  about  the  righ. 
1. 13  holdest  thy  tongue  when  the  wicked  de. 

3.  13  out  of  the  house  of  the  wicked,  by  discov. 
Zeph.  1.  3  and  the  stumbling  blocks  with  the  wick. 
Mai.    3.  18  between  the  righteousand  the  wicked,  be. 

4.  3  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked ;  for  they 

12.  Wrong,  wickedness,  y?Q  resha. 

Job  34.  8  Which  goeth . .  and  walketh  with  wicked  m. 
Psa. 125.    3  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon 

141.   4  to  practise  wicked  works  with  men  that 
Mic.  6.  11  Shall  I  count  (them)  pure  with  the  wicked 

13.  Unsettled)  lawless,  £0e<nxos  athesmos. 

2  Pe.   2.    7  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wick. 
3. 17  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked 

11. Lawless,  without  law,  &vofios  anomos. 

Acts  2.  23  and  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and 
2  Th.  2.    8  then  shall  that  wicked  he  revealed,  whom 

15.  Evil,  kokos  kakos. 

Mattel.  41  He  will  miserably  destroy  those  nicked  m. 

16. Bad,  malignant,  miserable,  irownpos poneros. 
Matti2.  45  Even  so  shall  it  be  also  unto  this  wicked 
13. 19  then  cometh  the  wicked  (one),  and  catch. 
13.  38  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked 
13.  49  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  the  just 
16.    4  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  se. 
18.  32  O  thou  wicked  servant,  I  forgave  thee  all 
25.  26  (Thou)  wicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou 
Lukeig.  22  will  I  judge  thee,  (thou)  wicked  servant 
Acts  18. 14  a  matter  of  wrong  or  wicked  lewdness,  O 

1  Co.  5.  13  Therefore  put  away,  .that  wicked  person 
Eph.  6.  16  to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wick. 
Col.    1.  21  enemies  in  (your)  mind  by  wicked  works 

2  Th.  3.    2  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wick.  m. 

1  Jo.  2. 13,  14  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked  one 

3. 12  Cain,  (who)  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and 

5.  18  and  the  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not 
17. More  malignant,  miserable,  wotrrjpoTepos  poner. 

Matti2.  45  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  hi. 

Luken.  26  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  hi. 
WICKED,  to  be  '^desperately)  — 
l.To  be  sickly,  mortal,  incurable,  e?jk  anash. 

Jer.  17.   9  The  heart  (is).,  desperately  wicked:  who 
2.  To  do  wrong,  wickedly,  Sfcn  rosha. 

Job  9.  29(11)  I  be  wicked,  why  then  labour  I  in  vain 
10.  7  Thou  knowest  that  I  am  not  wicked  ;  and 
10. 15  If  I  be  wicked,  woe  unto  me ;  and  (if)  I  be 

Eccl.  7. 17  Be  not  overmuch  wicked,  neither  be  thou 
WICKED  device,  mind  — 

1.  Wicked  thought  or  device,  hst  zimmah. 

Prov2i.  27  (when)  he  bringeth  it  with  a  wicked  mind? 
Isa.  32.   7  he  deviseth  wicked  devices  to  destroy  the 

2.  To  devise,  design,  CD]  zamam. 

Psa.  140.    8  further  not  his  wicked  device,  (lest)  they 

Z.A  wicked  thought,  or  device,  nsm  mezimmo.h. 

Psa.  37.    7  the  man  who  bringeth  wicked  devices  to 

Provi2.    2  a  man  of  wicked  devices  will  he  condemn 

14. 17  and  a  man  of  wicked  devices  is  hated 

WICKEDLY,  (to  deal,  depart,  do)  — 
1..1  wicked  thought  or  device,  rrcip  mezimmo.h. 
Psa.  1 39.  20  For  they  speak  against  thee  wickedly 

2.  To  pervert,  make  croc-Iced,  njg  avah,  5. 

2  Sa.  24. 17  I  have  sinned,  and  I  have  done  wickedly 

3.  /'    versify,  *ftw  " 

Job  13.   7  Will  ye  speak  wickedlyfor  God?  and  talk 

i.Ect'l,  bad,  in  ra. 

Deut.  9. 18  in  doing  wickedly  in  the  sight  of  the  Lo. 
Psa.  73.    8  They  are  corrupt,  and  speak  wickedly 

5.7*0  do  or  suffer  evil,  treat  ill,  VJt}  *'"'•  5. 

Gen.  19.  7  said,  I  pray  you,  brethren,  do  not  so  wic. 
Judg  19.  23  I  pray  you,  do  not.  .wickedly;  seeing  th. 

1  Sa.  12.  25  if  ye  shall  still  do  wickedly,  ye  shall  be 

2  Ki.  21.  11  hath  done  wickedly  above  all  that  the  A. 
Psa.  74.    3  the  enemy  hath  done  wickedly  in  the  sa. 

6.  To  do  wrong  or  wickedly,  pEn  rasha. 

22.  22  have  not  wickedly  departed  from  my  God 
2  Ch,  6.  37  we  have  done  amiss,  and  have  dealt  wic. 


Psa.  18.  21  have  not  wickedly  departed  from  my  God 
Dan.   9. 15  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  wickedly 

7. To  do  wrong  or  wickedly,  yah  rasha,  5. 

2  t'h.20. 35  Ahaziah  king  of  Israel,  who  did  very  wic. 
22.    3  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do  wick. 

Seh.    9.  33  thuu  hast  done  right,  but  we  have  done  w. 

Job  34.  12  Surely  God  will  not  do  wickedly,  neither 

Psa.  106.   6  have  committed  iniquity,  we  have  done  w. 

Dan.    9.    5  committed  iniquity,  aud  have  done  wick. 
11.  32  such  as  do  wickedly  against  the  covenant 
12. 10  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly,  and  none 
8.  Wickedness,  nj;?n  rishah. 

MaL    4.   1  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly 

WICKEDNESS,  i'to  commit,  very)  — 
1. Iniquity,  vanity,  j)N  area. 

Job  11. 11  he  knoweth  vain  men:  he  seeth  wickedn. 

Prov  30.  20  and  saith,  I  have  done  no  wickedness 

2.  Mischief,  calamity,  rnrt  hawah. 

Psa.    5.    9  their  inward  part  (is)  very  wickedness 
52.    7  strengthened  hiruself  in  his  wickedness 
55.  11  Wickedness  (is)  in  the  midst  thereof,  dec. 

o.A  wicked  thought  or  device,  rrsi  zimmah. 

Lev.  18. 17  they  (are)  her  near  kinswomen:  it  (is)  wi. 

19.  29  lest,  .the  land  become  full  of  wickedness 

20. 14  it  (is)  wickedness,  .that  there  be  no  wick. 

4. Perverseness,  perversity,  njny  avlah. 

2  Sa.  7.  10  neither  shall  the* children  of  wickedness 
1  Ch.17.  9  neither  shall  the  children  of  wickedness 
Job  11.  14  let  not  wickedness  dwell  in  thy  tabernac. 
24. 20  and  wickedness  shall  be  broken  as  a  tree 
27.  4  My  lips  shall  not  speak  wickedness,  nor 
Psa.  89.  22  not  exact  upon  him;  nor  the  son  of  wick. 

5.  Perverseness,  perversity,  -iTy  olah. 

Psa.  58.    2  in  heart  ye  work  wickedness ;  ye  weigh 

6.  Labour,  toil,  misery,  Vcy,  amal. 

Job    4.   8  they  that  plow  iniquity,  and  sow  wicked. 
7. Evil,  bad,  y"!  ra. 

Gen.   6.    5  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  (was) 

39  9  how  then  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness 
Deut  13.  1 1  shall  do  no  more  any  such  wickedness  as 

17.  2  that  hath  wrought  wickedness  in  the  sig. 
Judg.  9.  56  God  rendered  the  wickedness  of  Abimel. 

20.  3  said . .  Tell  (us),  how  was  this  wickedness? 
20. 12  What  wickedness  (is)  this  that  is  done 

1  Sa.  12. 17  ye  may  perceive  and  see  that  your  wick. 

12.  20  ye  have  done  all  this  wickedness :  yet  tu. 

25.  39  for  the  Lord  hath  returned  the  wickedn. 

2  Sa.    3.  39  reward  the  doer  of  evil  ace.  to  his  wick. 

1  Ki.   1.  52  if  wickedness  shall  be  found  in  him,  he 

2.  44  all  the  wickedness.. return  thy  wickedn. 

21.  25  Ahab,  which  did  sell  himself  to  work  wi. 

2  Ki.21.  6  he  wTOUght  much  wickedness  inthesight 
Job  20. 12  Though  wickedness  be  sweet  in  his  mouth 

22.  5  (Is)  not  thy  wickedness  great?  and  thine 
Psa.    7.   9  O  let  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  come 

55. 15  wickedness  (is)intheirdwellings.  .among 
04.  23  shall  cut  them  off  in  their  own  wickedn. 

107.  34  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  there. 
Prov  14.  32  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wicked. 

21.  12  overthroweth the  wickedfor.  .wickedness 

26.  26  his  wickedness  shall  be  showed  before  the 
Eccl.  7.  15  that  prolongeth  (his  life)  in  his  wickedn. 
Isa.  47.  10  For  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  wickedness 
Jer.     1.  16  touching  all  their  wickedness,  who  have 

2. 19  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee 

3.  2  with  thy  whoredoms  and  with  thy  wicked. 

4.  14  O  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  wic. 
4. 18  this  (is)  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is  bitt. 

6.  7  As  a  fountain,  .so  she  casteth  out  herwi. 
7. 12  see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  of 

8.  6  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wickedness 
12.   4  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein 
14.  16  forlwillpourtheirwickedness  upon  them 

22.  22  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  all  thy  w. 
23. 11  in  my  house  have  I  found  their  wickedness 
23. 14  that  none  doth  return  from  his  wickedness 

Jer.  33.    5  for  all  whose  wickedness  I  have  hid  myf. 
44.    3  Because  of  their  wickedness  which  they 
44.    5  inclined  their  ear  to  turn  from  their  wic. 
44.    9  the  wickedness  of  your  fathers,  and  the 
44.   9  the  wickedness  of  their  wives,  and  your 
44.   9  wickedness,  and  the  wickedness  of  your 

Lam.  1.  22  Let  all  their  wickedness  come  before  thee 

Eze.  16.  23  it  came  to  pass,  after  all  thy  wickedness 
16.  57  Before  thy  wickedness  was  discovered,  as 

Hos.    7.    1  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim . .  and  the  wicked. 

7.  2  theyconsidernot. .  I  remember  all  theirw. 
7.    3  They  make  the  king  glad  with  their  wick. 

9.  13  All  their  wickedness  (is)in  Gilgal ;  for  th. 
10.  15  do  unto  you  because  of  your  greatwicke. 

Joel.  3.  1 3  Put  ye  in  the  sickle . .  for  their  wickedness 
Jon.  1.  2  for  theirwickedness  iscomeup  beforeme 
Nab.  3.  19  for  upon  whom  hath  not  thy  wickedness 

S.Evil,  badness,  sad?iess,  jp  roa. 

Deut  28.  20  because  of  the  wickedness  of  thy  doings 
Psa.  28.  4  according  to  the  wickedness  of  their  end. 
Hos.    9.  15  for  the  wickedness  of  their  doings  I  will 

9.  To  do  wickedly  or  wrong,  y#i  rasha. 

1  Ki.  8.  47  We  have  sinned ..  we  have  committed  wic. 

10.  Wickedness,  wrong,  iT"3  resha. 

Deut.  9.  27  looknot..to  their  wickedness,  nor  to  their 
1  Sa.  24. 13  wickedness  proceedeth  from  the  wicked 
Job  34.  ioFarbeitfromGod.  .wickedness;  and(fro.) 
35.   S  Thy  wickedness  (may  hurt)  a  man  as  th*.  u 


WIDE 


1053 


WIPE 


Psa.     5.   4  (art)  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wic. 

10.  15  seek  out  his  wickedness  (till)  thou  find    . 

45.    7  Thou  lovest  righteousness,  and  hatest  wi. 

84.  10  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness 

Frov.  4.  17  For  they  eat  the  bread  of  wickedness,  and 

8.    7  wickedness  (is)  an  abomination  to  my  lips 

10.    2  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing 

12.  3  A  man  shall  not  be  established  by  wicked. 
16.  12  an  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  wick. 

Eccl.  3.  16  the  place  of  judgment,  .wickedness  (was) 

7.  25  to  know  the  wickedness  of  folly,  even  of 

8.  8  neither  shall  wickedness  deliver  those  th. 
Isa.   58.   4  and  to  smite  with  the  fist  of  wickedness 

58.    6  to  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness,  to  undo 

Jer.  14.  20  We  acknowledge,  O  Lord,  ourwickedness 

Eze.     3. 19  and  he  turn  not  from  his  wickedness,  nor 

7.  11  Violence  is  risen  up  iuto  a  rod  of  wicked. 

31.  11  I  have  driven  hini  out  for  his  wickedness 

33.  12  in  the  day  that  he  turneth  from  his  wick. 

Hos.  10.  13  Ye  have  ploughed  wickedness,  ye  have  re. 

Mic.    6. 10  Are  there  yet  the  treasures  of  wickedness 

11.  Wrong,  wickedness,  nstfl  rishah. 

Deut.  9.  4,  5  but  for  the  wickedness  of  these  nations 
Prov.11.    5  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  by  Iris  own  wic. 

13.  6  but  wickedness  overthroweth  the  sinner 
Isa.  9. 18  For  wickedness  burnetii  as  the  fire,  it  sh. 
Eze.     5.   6  she  hath  changed  my  judgments  into  wi. 

18. 20  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon 
18.  27  when  the  wicked,  .turneth  away  from  his 

33. 12  as  for  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked,  he 
33.  19  But  if  the  wicked  turn  from  his  wickedn. 

Zech.  5.  8  he  said,  This  (is)  wickedness.  And  he  cast 
Mai.    1.   4  they  shall  call  them  The  border  of  wicked. 

12.  Out  of  place,  &tottos  atopos,  Acts  25.  5. 
IB. Evil,  badness,  wickedness,  kclkio.  kalcia. 

Acts    8.  22  Repent  therefore  of  this  thy  wickedness 
34.  Malignity,  evil,  Tvovnpia. poneri-a. 

Matt  22.  18  Jesusperceivedtheir  wickedness,  and  said 
Mark  7.22  Thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit 
Lukeu.  39  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and  wicked. 
Rom.  1.  29  Being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness . .  wi. 
1  Co.  5.  8  neither  with  the  leaven  of  nialice  and  w. 
Eph.  6. 12  For  we  wrestle ..  against  spiritual  wicke. 

15.  Malignant,  evil,  irov7)p6s  poneros. 

1  Jo.   5. 19  we  know  that,  .the  whole  world  lieth  in  w. 

16.  In  this  (man),  toutgj  Undo. 

Acts  25.    5  accuse  this  man,  if  there  be  any  (wicked.) 
WIDE,  wideness,  to  make  or  open  — 

1.  Companionship,  society,  "on  cheber. 

Prov.21.    9  than  with  a  brawling  woman  in  a  wide 

25.  24  than  with  a  brawling  woman,  .in  a  wide 

2.  Wide  of  hands,  EFV  srri  rechab  yadayim. 

1  Ch.  4.  40  they  found  fat  pasture,  .and the  laud.  .w. 
Psa.  104.  25  this  great  and  wide  sea,  wherein  (are)  thi. 
Job   30.  14  They  came,  .as  a  wide  breaking  in.  .in  the 

Z.  Measure,  stature,  fTjtta  middah. 

Jer.  22. 14  That  saith,  I  will  build  me  a  wide  house 

4.  To  open,  n?)3 patliach. 

Deut  15.  8,  11  thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  unto 
Nah.  3. 13  the  gates  of  thy  land  shall  be  set  wide  open 

5.  To  make  wide,  broad,  nn"j  raclwb,  5. 

Psa.  35.  21  Yea,  they  opened  their  mouth  wide  agai. 
81.  10  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it 
-    Isa.  57.   4  againstwhommakeyeawidemouth,(and) 

6, Breadth,  broad  place,  nrp  rochab. 

Eze.  41. 10  between  the  chambers  (was)  the  wideness 
7.  Wide,  broad,  ample,  -irXarus  platus. 

Matt.  7.  13  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate,  for  wide 
WIDOW,  widowhood  — 

1.  Widowhood,  silence,  ]bbx  almon. 

Isa.  47.   9  in  one  day,  the  loss  of  children,  and  wid. 

2.  Widow,  silent  one,  td^1  almanah. 

Gen.  38. 11  Remain  a  widow- at  thy  father's  house,  till 

Exod22.  22  Ye  shall  not  afflict  auy  widow,  or  father. 

22.  24  your  wives  shall  be  widows,  and  your  ch. 

Lev.  21.  14  A  widow,  or  adivorced woman,  orprofane 

22. 13  if  the  priest's  daughter  be  a  widow,  or  di. 
Num  30.  9  every  vow  of  a  widow,  and  of  her  that  is 
Deut  10. 18  He  doth  execute  the  judgment  of  the.  .wi. 

14.  29  stranger,  and  the  fatherless,  and  the  wi. 

16.  11,  14  stranger,  and.  .fatherless, and  thewi. 
24.  17  Thou  shalt  not.  .take  a  widow's  raiment 
24.  19,  20,  21  for  the  fatherless,  and  for  the  wi. 

26.  12  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  wid. 
26. 13  stranger,  to  the  fatherless,  and  to  the  wi. 

27.  19  that  perverteth  the  judgment  of  the.  .w. 

2  Sa.  14.  5  she  answered,  I  (am)  indeed  a  widow  wo. 
1  Ki.  7. 14  He  (was)  a  widow's  son  of  the  tribe  of  N. 

11.  26  whose  mother's  name  (was)  Zeruah,  a  wi. 

17.  9  I  have  commanded  a  widow  woman  there 
17.  10  the  widow  woman  (was)  there  gathering 
17. 20  hast  thou  also  brought  evil  upon  the  wid. 

Job  22.  9  Thou  hast  sent  widows  away  empty,  and 
24.  3  They  drive  away,  .they  take  the  widow's 
24.  21  beareth  not,  and  doeth  not  good  to  the  w. 
27. 15  shall  be  buried  in  death ;  and  his  widows 
29. 13  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy 
31.  16  have  caused  the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  fail 

Psa.  63.    5  a  judge  of  the  widows,  (is)  God  in  his  holy 
78. 64  and  their  widows  made  no  lamentation 
94.    6  Theyslay  the  widow  and  the  stranger,  and 
109.   9  his  children  be  fatherless,  .his  wife  a  wi. 
146.    9  The  Lord,  .relieveth  the  fatherless  and  w. 

Prov  15.  25  but  he  will  establish  the  border  of  the  w. 


Isa.     1.  17  judge  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow 

I.  23  neither  doth  the  cause  of  the  widow  come 
9.  17  neither  shall  have  mercy  on  their,  .wido. 

10.  2  that  widows  maybe  their  prey,  and  (that) 
47.    8  I  shall  not  sit.  .a  widow,  neither  shall  I 

Jer.  7.  6  (If) ye  oppress  net  the  stranger,  .the  wid. 
15.  8  Their  widows  ar~  inci-eased  to  me  above 
iS.  21  be  bereaved  of  their  children,  and  (be)  w. 
22.  3  do  no  violence  to  the  stranger . .  nor  the  w. 
49.  11  I  will  preserve,  .and  let  thy  widows  trust 

Lam.  1.  1  (how)  is  she  become  as  awidow,  she  (that 
5.    3  We  are  orphans,  .our  mothers  (are)  as  w. 

Eze.  22.  7  they  vexed  the  fatherless  and  the  widow 
22.  25  they  have  made  her  many  widows  in  the 
44.  22  Neither,  .a  widow,  .or  a  widow  that  had 

Zech.  7. 10  oppress  not  the  widow,  nor  the  fatherless 

Mai.    3.    5  oppress  the  hireling  in.  .wages,  the  wid. 

3.  Widoiohood,  silence,  mappx  almenuth. 

Gen.  38.  14  she  put  her  widow's  garments  off  from  her 

38.  19  and  put  on  the  garments  of  her  widowh. 

2  Sa.  20.    3  unto  the  day  of  their  death,  living  in  wi. 

Isa.  54.   4  shalt.  .remember  the  reproach  of  thy  wi. 

4. .4  widoio,  one  bereaved,  xhpa  clwra. 

Matt 23.  14  [Woe  unto,  .hypocrites,  for  ye  devour  w.] 

Marki2.  40  Which  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a 

12.  42  there  came  a  certain  poor  widow,  and  she 

12.  43  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  That  this  poor  wi. 

Luke  2.  37  she  (was)  a  widow  of  about  fourscore  and 

4.  25  But  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  many  widows 

4.  26  was  Eliassent.  .save,  .a  woman,  .awidow 

7.12  only  son  of  his  mother,  and  she  was  a  w. 
18.  3  there  wras  a  widow  in  that  city,  and  she 
18.    5  Yet  because  this  widow  troubleth  me,  I 

20.  47  Which  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a 

21.  2  he  saw  also  a  certain  poor  widow  casting 
21.    3  Of  a  truth  I  say  unto  you.  .this  poor  wid. 

Acts   6.    1  because  their  widows  were  neglected  in 
9.  39  all  the  widows  stood  by  him  weeping,  and 
9.  41  when  he  had  called  the  saints  and  widows 

1  Co.  7.   8  I  say  therefore  to  the  unmarried  and  wi. 

1  Ti.    5.   3  Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed 

5.  4  But  if  any  widow  have  children  or  neph. 
5.  5  Now  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed,  aud  de. 
5.  9  Let  not  a  widow  be  taken  into  the  numb. 
5.  11  But  the  younger  widow's  refuse:  for  when 

5.  16  If  any  man.  .that  believeth  have  widows 

5. 16  that  it  may  relieve  them  that  are  widows 
Jas.  1.  27  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  th. 
Rev.  18.    7  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  sha. 

WIFE,  wives  — 

1.  Woman,  a  wife,  female,  ns:x  ishshah. 

Gen.   2.24  Therefore  shall  a  man.,  cleave  unto  his  w. 

2.  25  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his  w. 

3.  8  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from 

3. 17  hast  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  thy  wife 
3.  20  Adam  called  his  wife'snameEve;because 

3.  21  L'nto  Adam  also  and  to  his  wife  did  the 

4.  1  Adam  knew  Eve  his  wife;  and  she  conce. 

4. 17  Cain  knew  his  wife;  and  she  conceived 
4.  25  Adam  knew  his  wife  again;  and  she  bare 

6.  18  thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy 

7.  7  Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons,  and  his  wife 

7. 13  the  sons  of  Noah,  and  Noah's  wife,  and  the 

8.  16  thou,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy 

8. 18  Noah  went  forth,  and  his  sons,  and  his  w. 

II.  29  took,  .wives.  .Abram'swife.  .Nahor'swife 

11.  3iTerahtookAbram.  .son  Abram'swife,  and 

12.  5  Abrani  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and  Lot  his  b. 

12. 11  he  said  unto  Sarai  his  wife,  Behold  now 

12. 12  the  Egyptians,  .shall  say,  This  (is)  his  w. 

12. 17  plagues  because  of  Sarai,  Abram's  wife 

12. 18  why  didst  thou  not  tell,  .she(was)  thy  w.? 
12.  19  her.  .to  wife:  now  therefore  behold  thy  w. 

12.  20  they  sent  him  away,  and  his  wife,  and  all 

13.  1  he,  and  his  wife  and  all  that  he  had,  and 
16.    1  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  bare  him  no  children 
16.    3  Abram's  wife,  .gave  her  to  be  his  wife 
17. 15  As  for  Sarai  thy  wife,  thou  shalt  not  call 

17. 19  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son  hid, 

18.  9  they  said  unto  him,  Where  (is)  Sarah  thy  w. 

18. 10  and,  Io,  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son 

19.  15  Arise,  take  thy  wife,  aud  thy  two  daughters 
19.  16  men  laid  hold,  .upon  the  hand  of  his  wife 

19.  26  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind  him 

20.  2  Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his  wife,  She  (is) 
20.    7  restore  the  man  (his)  wife;  for  he  (is)  a  pr. 

20. 11  and  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife's  sake 
20.  12  yet.  .my  sister,  .and  she  became  my  wife 
20. 14  Abimelech.. restored  him  Sarah  his  wife 
20.  17  God  healed  Abimelech,  and  his  wife,  and 

20.  18  closed  up.. because  of  Sarah,  Abraham's  w. 

21.  21  his  mother  tookhim  awife  outof  the  land 

23.  19  Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  ca. 

24.  3  that  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto  my 
24.  4  shalt  go.. to  my  kindred,  and  take  a  wife 
24.  7  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  from 
24.  15  Milcah,  the  wife  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  br. 
24.  36  Sarah  my  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my 
24.  37  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  to  my  son  of 
24. 38  thou  shalt  go. .and  take  a  wife  unto niy  son 
24.  40  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  for  my  sou  of  my 
24.  51  Rebekah..let  her  be  thy  master's  son's  w. 

24.  67  took  Rebekah,  aud  she  became  his  wife 

25.  1  again  Abraham  took  a  wife,  and  her  name 
25. 10  was  Abraham  buried,  and  Sarah  his  wife 

25. 20  Isaac  was.. when  he  took  Rebekah  to  wife 

25.  21  entreated. .for  his  wife. .and.. his  wife  con. 

26.  7  themenof  theplaceasked..ofhiswife,and 
26.  7  for  he  feared  to  say,  (She  is)  my  wife,  lest 
26.   8  Isaac  (was)  sporting  with  Rebekah  his  w. 


Gen.  26.  9  said,  Behold,  of  a  surety  she  (is)  thy  wife 
26. 10  one.. might  lightly  have  lien  with  thy  wife 
26.  11  He  that  toucheth  this  man  or  his  wife  sh. 

26.  34  E.  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took  to  w. 

27.  46  if  Jacob  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of 

28.  1,  6  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  dau. 
28.  2  take  thee  a  wife  from  thence  of  the  daug. 
28.    6  Isaac,  sent  him  away. .to  take  him  a  wife 

28.  9  took  unto  the  wives.. Mahalath.. to.. wife 

29.  21  Give. .my  wife,  for  my  days  are  fulfilled 

29,  28  he  gave  him  Rachel  his  daughter  to  wife 

30.  4  she  gavehiniBilhah  her  handmaid  to  wife 
30.   9  she  took  Zilpah..and  gave  her  Jacob  to  w. 
34.   4  spake.. saying,  Get  me  this  damsel  to  wife 
34.    8  saying.. I  pray  you  give  her  him  to  wife 
34.  12  ask.. dowry.. but  give  me  the  damsel  tow. 
36. 10  Adah  the  wife  of  Esau..B.  the  wife  of  £s. 
36.  12  these  (were)  the  sons  of  Adah,  Esau's  wile 
36.  13,  17  the  sons  of  Bashemath,  Esau's  wife 
36.  14  Anah  the  daughter  of  Zibeon,  Esau's  wife 
36.  18  wife,  .the  daughter  of  Anah,  Esau's  wife 
36.  39  his  wife's  name  (was)  Mehetabel,  the  da. 
38.    6  Judah  took  a  wife  for  Er  his  first  born 
38.    3  Go  in  unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry 
38.   9  when  he  went  in  unto  his  brother's  wife 

38.  12  the  daughter  of  Shuah,  Judah's  wife,  died 
38. 14  and  she  was  not  given  unto  him  to  wife 

39.  7  his  master's  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  Joseph 
39.    8  refused,  and  said  unto  his  master's  wife 
39.    9  but  thee,  because  thou  (art)  his  wife 

39.  19  his  master  heard  the  words  of  his  wife,  wh. 

41.  45  he  gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  the  daughter 

44.  27  Ye  know  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  (sons) 

46.  19  The  sons  of  Rachel,  Jacob's  wife;  Joseph 

49.  31  Sarah  Iris  wife..  Isaac  and  Rebekah  hisw. 

Exod.  4.  20  SI oses  took  his  wife  and  Ins  sons,  and  set 

6.  20  Amram  took,  .his  father's  sister  to  wife 

6.  23  Aaron  took  him  Elisheba.  .to  wife 

6.  25  (one)  of  the  daughters  of  Putiel  to  wife 

18.    2  Jethro.  .took  Zipporah,  Moses' wife,  after 

18.    5  Jethro.  .came  with  his  sons  and  his  wife 

18.  6  and  thy  wife,  and  her  two  sons  with  her 

19.  15  Be  ready,  .come  not  at  (your)  wives 

20.  17  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife 

21.  3  if  he  were  married,  then  his  wife  shall  go 
21.    4  given  him  a  wife,  .the  wife  and  her  chil. 

21.  5  I  love  my  master,  my  wife,  and  my  child. 

22.  16  he  shall  surely  endow  her  to  be  his  wife 
Lev.  18.    8  The  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife  shalt 

18.  11  The  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife's  dau. 
18.  14  thou  shalt  not  approach  to  his  wife,  she 
18.  15  she  (is)  thy  son's  wife;  thou  shalt  not  unc. 
18.  16  the  nakedness  of  thy  brother's  wife:  it  (is) 

18. 18  Neither  shalt  thou  take  a  wife  to  hersist. 
18.  20  not  lie  carnally  with  thy  neighbour's  wife 
20.  10  (another)  man's  wife,  .his  neighbour's  wife 
20. 11  the  man  that  lieth  with  his  father's  wife 
20. 14  if  a  man  take  a  wife  and  her  mother,  it 

20.  21  if  a  man  shall  take  his  brother's  wife,  it 

21.  7  They  shall  not  take  a  wife  (that  is$  a  who. 

21. 13  And  he  shall  take  a  wife  in  her  virginity 

21. 14  but  he  shall  take  a  virgin,  .to  wife 
Num.  5. 12  If  any  man's  wife  go  aside,  and  commit 

5.  14  jealous  of  his  wife,  .jealous  of  his  wife 
5.  15  Then  shall  the  man  bring  his  wife  unto 
5.  29  when  a  wife  goeth  aside  (to  another)  ins 
5.  30  he  be  jealous  over  his  wife,  and  shall  set 

26.  59  the  name  of  Aniram's  wife  (was)  Jochebed 
30. 16  between  a  man  and  his  wife,  between  the 
36.    8  shall  be  wife  unto  one  of.  the  family  of  the 

Deut.  5.  21  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's  wife,  ne. 
13.    6  thy  daughter,  or  the  wife  of  thy  bosom,  or 

20.  7  what  man.,  hath  betrothed  awife,  and  ha. 

21.  11  that  thou  wouldest  have  her  to  thy  wife 
21. 13  her  husband,  and  she  shall  be  thy  wife 

22.  13  If  any  man  take  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto  her 
22.  16  I  gave  my  daughter  unto  this  man  to  wife 
22.  19  she  shall  be  his  wife;  he  may  not  put  her 
22.  24  he  hath  humbled  his  neighbour's  wife 
22.  29  she  shall  be  his  wife ;  because  he  hath  hu. 
22.  30  A  man  shall  not  take  his  father's  wife,  nor 
24.  1  When  a  man  hath  taken  a  wife,  and  mar. 
24.  3  husband  die,  which  took  her  (to  be)  hisw. 
24.    4  may  not  take  her  again  to  be  his  wife,  af. 

24.  5  hath  taken  a  new  wife,  .cheer  up  his  wife 

25.  5  wife  of  the  dead,  .take  her.  .to  wife 

25.  11  the  wife  of  the  onedrawethnearfortode. 

27.  20  Cursed,  .that  lieth  with  his  father's  wife 

28.  30  Thou  shalt  betroth  a  wife,  and  another  m. 
2S.  54  towrard  the  wife  of  his  bosom,  and  toward 

Josh  15.  16  to  him  will  I  give  Achsah.  .to  wife 
15.  17  gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife 

Judg.  1.  12  to  him  will  I  give  Achsah.  .to  wife 

1.  13  gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife 
4.    4  the  wife  of  Lapidoth,  she  judged  Israel  aft 
4.  17  to  the  tent  of  Jael  the  wife  of  Heber  the 

4.  21  Jael,  Heber's  wife,  took  a  nail  of  the  tent 

5.  24  Blessed  above  women  shall  Jael  the  wife 
11.   2  Gilead's  wife  bare  him  sons  :  and  his  wif. 
13.   2  and  his  wife  (was)  barren,  and  bare  not 
13. 11  Manoah  arose,  and  wentafter  his  wife,  and 

13. 19  and  Manoah  and  his  wife  looked  on 

13.  20  Manoah  and  his  wife  looked  on  (it),  and 
13.  2i  angel,  .did  no  more  appear,  .to  his  wife 
13.  22  Manoah  said  unto  his  wife,  We  shall  sur. 

13.  23  his  wife  said  unto  him,  If  the  Lord  were 

14.  2  now  therefore  get  her  for  me  to  wife 
T4.   3  thou  goest  to  take  a  wife  of  the  uncircu 
14.  15  they  said  unto  Samson's  wife,  Entice  thy 
14. 16  Samson's  wife  wept  before  him,  and  said 

14.  20  Samson's  wife  was  (given)  to  hiscompan. 

15.  1  visited  his  wife,  .will  go  in  to  my  wife 


WIFE 


1054 


WILD 


Judg  15.   6  he  had  taken  his  wife,  and  given  her  to 
ax.    1  give  his  daughter  unto  Benjamin  to  wife 
21.  18  Cursed  (be)  he  that  giveth  a  wife  to  Benj. 
21.  21  catch  you  every  man  his  wife  of  the  dan. 
21.  22  we  reserved  nut  to  each  man  his  wife  in 

Ruth  1.    1  went  to  sojourn.. he,  and  his  wife,  and  his 

1.  2  the  name  of  his  wife  Naomi,  and  the  na. 
4.  5  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  the  wife  of  the  dead 
4.  10  the  wife  of  Mahlou.  .to  be  my  wife,  to  ra. 
4.  13  Boaz  took  Ruth,  and  she  was  his  wife,  and 

1  Sa.  1.   4  he  gave  to  Penninah  his  wife,  and  to  all 

1. 19  Elkanah  knew  Hannah  his  wife;  and  the 

2.  20  Eh  blessed  Elkanah  and  his  wife,  and  said 
4.  19  Phinehas'  wife,  was  with  child,  (uear)tobe 

14.  50  the  name  of  Saul's  wife  (was)  Ahinoani 

18. 17  her  will  I  give  thee  to  wife;  only  be  thou 
18.  19  given  unto  Adriel  the  Meholathite  to  wi. 

18.  27  Saul  gave  him  Michal  his  daughter  to  wi. 

19.  n  David's  wife,  told  him,  saying,  If  thou  s. 
25.  3  Nabal,  and  the  name  of  his  wife  Abigail 
25.  14  one  of  the  young  men  told.  .Nabal's  wife 
25.  37  his  wife  had  told  him  these  things,  that 
25.  39  David  sent,  .to  take  her  to  him  to  wife 
25.  40  David  sent,  .to  take  thee  to  him  to  wife 
25.  42  she  went  after,  .and  became  his  wife 

25.  44  Saul  had  given . .  David's  wife,  to  Phalti 
27.    3  and  Abigail  the  Carmelitess,  Nabal's  wife 
30.    5  Abigail  the  wife  of  Nabal  the  Carmelite 

30.  22  save  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  child. 

2  Sa.    2.   2  and  Abigail,  Nabal's  wife,  the  Carmelite 

3.  3  Chileab,  of  Abigail  the  wife  of  Nabal  the 
3.    5  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  Eglah,  David's  wife 

3.  14  Deliver  (me)  my  wife  Michal,  which  I  es. 
11.  3  (Is)  not  this  Bath-sheba.  .the  wife  of  Uri. 
11. 11  and  to  drink,  and  to  lie  with  my  wife 
11.  26  the  wife  of  Uriah  heard  that  Uriah  her 

11.  27  she  became  his  wife,  and  bare  him  a  son 

12.  9  hast  taken  his  wife  (to  be)  thy  wife,  and 
12.  10  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  Hittiteto  be  thy  w. 
12. 15  the  child  that  Uriah's  wife  bare  unto  Da. 
12.  24  David  comforted  Bath-sheba  his  wife,  and 

1  Ki.  2.  17  give  me  Abishag  theShunammite  to  wife 

2. 21  be  given  to  Adonijah  thy  brother  to  wife 
4. 11  had .  .the  daughter  of  Solomon  to  wife 

4.  15  Basmath  the  daughter  of  Solomon  to  wife 
9.  16  a  present  unto  his  daughter,  Solomon's  w. 

11. 19  gave  him  to  wife  the  sister  of  his  own  w. 
14.  2  saidtohiswife. . the wifeof  Jeroboam,  and 
14.  4  Jeroboam's  wife  did  so,  and  arose,  and 
14.  5  the  wife  of  Jeroboam  cometh  to  ask  a  th. 
14,  6  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam ;  why  fe. 
14.  17  Jeroboam's  wife  arose, and  departed, and 
16.  31  he  took  to  wife  Jezebel,  the  daughter  of 
2i.  5  his  wife  came  to  him,  and  said  unto  him 
21.    7  his  wife  said  unto  him,  Dost  thou  now  go. 

21.  25  Ahab.  .whom  Jezebel  his  wife  stirred  up 

2  Ki.   5.    2  and  she  waited  on  Naaman's  wife 

8.  18  the  daughter  of  Ahab  was  his  wife :  and 
14.    9  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife :  and 

22.  14  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of  Shallum  the 

1  Ch.  1.  50  lus  wife's  name  (was)  Mehetabel,  the  da. 

2. 18  Caleb. .  begat  (children)  of  Azubah  (his) 
2.  24  Hezron's  wife,  bare  him  Ashur  the  father 
2.  26  Jerahmeel  had  also  another  wife,  whose 
2.  29  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Abishur  (was)  A. 

2.  35  Sheshan  .  his  daughter  to  Jarha . .  to  wif e 

3.  3  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  Eglah  his  wife 

4. 18  his  wife  Jehudijah  bare  Jered  the  father 

4. 19  the  sons  of  (his)  wife  Hodiah,  the  sister  of 
7.  15  Machir  took  to  wife  (the  sister)  of  Hupp. 
7.  16  the  wife  of  Machir  bare  a  son,  and  she  ca. 

7.  23  he  went  in  to  his  wife,  she  conceived  and 

8.  9  begat  of  Hodesh  his  wife,  Jobah,  and  Zi. 

8.  29  the  father  of  Gibeon ;  whose  wife's  name 

9.  35  Jehiel,  whose  wife's  name  (was)  Maacah 

2  Ch    8.  11  My  wife  shall  not  dwell  in  the  house  of 

11. 18  Rehoboam  touk  him  Mahalath.  .to  wife 

21.  6  he  had  the  daughter  of  Ahab  to  wife,  and 

22.  11  the  wife  of  Jehoiada.  .hid  him  from  Ath 
25.  18  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife,  and 
34.  22  went  to  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife 

Ezra  2.  61  which  took  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  B. 
Neh.  7.  63  which  took  (one)  of  the  daughters,  .tow. 
Esth.  5.  10  called  for  his  friends,  and  Zeresh  his  wi. 

5.  14  Then  said  Zeresh  his  wife  and  all  his  fri. 
6. 13  told  Zeresh  his  wife.  .Zeresh  his  wife 

Job     2.   9  Then  said  his  wife  unto  him,  Dost  thou 
19.  17  My  breath  is  strange  to  my  wife,  though 

31.  10  let  my  wife  grind  unto  another,  and  let 
Psa.109.   9  children  be  fatherless,  and  his  wife  a  wi. 

128.    3  Thy  wife  (shall  be)  as  a  fruitful  vine  by 
Prov.  5. 18  and  rejoice  with  the  wife  of  thy  youth 

6.  29  he  that  goeth  in  to  his  neighbour's  wife 
18. 22  (Whoso)  flndeth  a  wife  flndeth  a  good 

19. 13  the  contentions  of  a  wife  (are)  a  continual 
ig.  14  and  a  prudent  wife  (is)  from  the  Lord 
Eccl.  9.    9  Live  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lo. 
Iaa.   54.    6  a  wife  of  youth,  when  thou  wast  refused 
Jer.     3.    1  If  a  man  put  away  his  wife,  and  she  go 
3.  20  (as)  a  wife  treacherously  departeth  from 
5.    8  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's  wife 
6. 11  the  husband  with  the  wife  shall  be  taken 
16.   2  Thou  shalt  not  take  thee  a  wife,  neither 
Eze.  16.  32  (as)  a  wife  that  committeth  adultery,  (w.) 
18.    6  neither  hath  defiled  his  neighbour's  wife 
18.  11  but  even,  .defiled  his  neighbour's  wife 
18.  15  hath  not  defiled  his  neighbour's  wife 
22.  11  abomination  with  his  neighbour's  wife 
24.  iS  at  even  my  wife  died:  and  I  did  in  the  mo. 
33.  26  ye  defile  every  one  his  neighbour's  wife 
Hog.    1.    2  take  unto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms  and 
2.   2  she  (is)  not  my  wife,  neither  (am)  I  her  h. 


Hos.  12.  12  Israel  served  for  a  wife,  and  for  a  wife  he 

Amos  7.  17  Thy  wife  shall  be  an  harlot  inthecity.and 

Mai.    2.  14  the  wife  of  thy  youth,  .the  wife  of  thy  co. 

2.  15  deal  treacherously  against  the  wife  of  his 

2.-4  wife,  queen,  Syw  shegal. 

Dan.    5.    2,  3  his  pri  Jces,  his  wives,  and  his  concub. 
5.  23  thy  wives,  and  thy  concubines,  have  drunk 

Z.  Lady,  mistress,  married  woman,  rhyibeulah. 
Gen.  20.    3  for  tlrt?  woman,  .for  she  (is) 'a  man's  wife 


4.  Women, 
Gen.   4. 

4- 
6. 
6. 
7- 

7- 


28. 
30- 
3** 
3*- 
32- 
34- 
34. 
36. 
36. 
37' 
45- 
46. 
46. 
Exod22, 

NU11114. 

16, 

32. 

Deut.  3 


Josh.  1 
Judg.  3. 


Ruth 
iSa. 


■Sa. 


:Ki. 


1  Ki.  4. 
24. 

i  Ch.  4. 

7 


iCh.] 


14 


Ezra  : 


Neh. 


5- 


]3 
13 

Esth. 
Isa.    13 

Jer.  6, 
8, 
14, 

18, 
29. 
29 
35 
33 
44 


wives,  Dfljfy  no.shim. 

19  Lamech  took  unto  him  two  wives:  the  na. 

23  said  unto  his  wives,  .ye  wives  of  Lamech 
2  they  took  them  wives  of  all  which  they 

i3  thy  sons,  .and  thy  sons'  wives  with  thee 
7  Noah  went  in.  .his  suns'  wives  with  him 

1 3  the  three  wives  of  his  sons  with  them,  into 

16  andjthy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  wives  with  thee 
iS  Noah  went,  .and  his  sons'  wives  with  Mm 
29  Abram  and  Nahor  took  them  wives,  the 

9  took  unto  the  wives  which  he  had  Maha. 
26  Give  (me)  my  wives  and  my  children,  for 

17  set  his  sons  and  his  wives  upon  camels 
50  shalt  take  (other)  wives  besides  my  dang. 

22  took  his  two  wives,  and  his  two  women 
21  let  us  take  their  daughters  to  us  for  wives 

29  their  wives  took  they  captive,  and  spoiled 
2  Esau  took  his  wives  of  the  daughters  of  C. 
6  Esau  took  his  wives,  and  his  sons,  and  his 
2  with  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  his  father's  wives 

19  take  you  wagons.,  for  your  wives,  andbri. 

5  their  wives,  in  the  wagons  which  Pharaoh 

26  besides  Jacob's  sons'  wives,  all  the  souls 

24  your  wives  shall  be  widows,  and  your  chi. 

2  golden  earrings,  .in  the  ears  of  your  wives 

3  that  our  wives  and  our  children  should  be 

27  their  wives,  and  their  sons,  and  their  little 

26  Our  little  ones,  our  wives,  our  flocks,  and 
19  your  wives,  and  your  little  ones,  and  your 

17  Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself 

15  If  a  man  have  two  wives,  one  beloved,  and 
11  Your  little  ones,  your  wives,  and  thy  str. 

14  Your  wives,  your  little  ones,  and  your  ca. 

6  they  took  their  daughters  to  be  their  wi. 

30  threescore  and  ten.  .he  had  many  wives 

14  they  gave  them  wives  which  they  had  sa. 

16  How  shall  we  do  for  wives  for  them  that 

18  we  may  not  give  them  wives  of  ourdaug. 

23  took  (tlfem)  wives,  according  to  then-  nu. 

4  they  took  them  wives  of  the  women  of  M. 

2  he  had  two  wives;  the  name  of  the  one 

43  they  were  also  both  of  them  his  wives 

3  David  with  his  two  wives,  Ahinoam  the 
3  their  wives,  and  their  sons,  .were  taken 

5  David's  two  wives  were  taken  captives.  Ah. 
iS  and  David  rescued  his  two  wives 

2  David  went  up  thither,  and  his  two  wives 
13  David  took  (him)  more,  .wives  out  of  Jer. 

S  I  gave  thee,  .thy  master's  wives  into  thy 
11  take  thy  wives,  .shall  lie  with  thy  wives 
5  the  lives  of  thy  wives,  and  the  lives  of  thy 

3  seven  hundred  wives,  .his  wives  turned 

4  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  ot. 

5  likewise  did  he  for  all  his  strange  wives 

3  thy  wives  also  and  thy  children,  .the  go. 
5  Thou  shalt  deliver  me  thy.  .wives,  and  thy 

7  he  sent  unto  me  for  my  wives,  and  for  my 

1  there  cried  a  certain  woman  of  the  wives 

15  he  carried  away,  .the  king's  wives,  and 

5  Ashur  the  father  of  Tekoa  had  two  wives 

4  with  them,  .for  they  had  many  wives  and 

8  Shaharaim.-Hushim  andBaara(were)his 
3  David  took  more  wives  at  Jerusalem,  and 

21  loved,  .above  all  his  wives,  .eighteen  wiv. 
23  dispersed.  .And  he  desired  many  wives 
21  Abijah  waxed  mighty,  and  married,  .wiv. 

13  Judah.  .with  their  little  ones,  their  wives 

14  will  the  Lord  smite,  .thy  wives,  and  all 

17  carried  away,  .his  sons  also,  and  his  wives 
3  Jehoiada  took  for  him  two  wives,  and  he 

9  and  our  wives  (are)  in  captivity  for  this 

18  genealogy  of  all  then'  little  ones,  their  w. 

2  "We  have,  .taken  strange  wives  of  the  pe. 

3  make  a  covenant,  .to  put  away  all  the  w. 

10  Ye  have,  .takenstrange  wives,  to  increase 

11  separate  yourselves,  .from  the  strange  w. 

14  let  all  them  which  have  taken  strange  w. 
17  all  the  men  that  had  taken  strange  wives 

1 5  there  were  found  that  had  taken  strange  w. 

19  that  they  would  put  away  their  wives,  and 

44  had  taken  strange  wives,  .(some),  .had  w. 
14  your  sons,  and  your  daughters,  your  wives 

1  a  great  cry  of  the  people,  and  of  their  wi. 

25  their  wives,  their  sons,  and  then'  daught. 
43  the  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced 
23  Jews  (that)  had  married  wives  of  Ashdod 

27  to  transgress,  .in  marrying  strange  wives 
.  20  all  the  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands 

16  their  houses  shall  be  spoiled,  and  their  w. 

12  (with  their)  fields  and  wives  together,  for 

10  Therefore  will  I  give  their  wives  unto  ot. 
16  them,  their  wives,  nor  their  sous,  nor  th. 
21  let  their  wives  be  bereaved  of  their  chil. 

6  Take  ye  wives,  and.. take  wives  for  your 
23  adultery  with  their  neighbours'  wives  and 

8  to  drink  no  wine  all  our  days,  we,  our  w. 
23  So  they  shall  bring  out  all  thy  wives  and 

9  the  wickedness  of  their  wives. .of  your  w. 
15  all  the  men  which  knew  that  their  wives 
25  Ye  and  your  wives  have  both  spoken  with 


Eze.  44.  22  Neither,  .they  take  for  their  wives  a  wid. 
Zech.12. 12,  12,  13,  13,  14  and  their  wives  apart 

5.  Jfome?i)  wives,  J'trj  nashin. 

Dan.    6.  24  cast,  .them,  their  children,  and  their  wi. 
^.Belonging  to  a  women,  yvmiKzTos  gimaikeios. 

1  Pe.    3.    7  giving  honour  unto  the  wife,  as  unto  the 
7.  A  woman,  wife,  ywrj  gune. 

Matt.  1.  20  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife 
1.  24  Joseph, beingraised.  .tookuntohimhisw. 
5-  3T>  32  whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife 
14.    3  Herodias'  sake,  his  brother  Philip's  wife 

18.  25  commanded  him  to  be  sold,  and  his  wife 

19.  3  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife 
19.  5  For  this,  .shall  a  man.  .cleave  to  his  wife 
ig.  8  Moses. .  suffered  you  to  put  away  your w. 
19.  9  whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  exce. 

19. 10  If  the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  (his)  w. 

19.  29  every  one  that  hath  forsaken,  .[wife],  or 
22.  24  his  brother  shall  marry  his  wife,  and  raise 
22.  25  deceased,  and,  having  no  issue,  left  his  w. 
22.  28  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of  the  seven?  for 
27.  19  "When he  was  set  down,  .his  wife  sent  unto 

Mark  6.  17  for  Herodias"  sake,  his  brother  Philip's  w. 

6.  18  It  is  not  lawful .  .to  have  thy  brother's  w. 
10.  2  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  (his)  w\? 
10.    7  For  this,  .shall  a  man.  .cleave  to  his  wife 

10. 11  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  and 
10.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left,  .[wife],  or 
12.  19  If  a  man's  brother  die,  and  leave  (his)  w. 
12.  19  his  brother  should  take  his  wife,  and  rahe 
12.  20  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  d3'ing  left  no  seed 
12.  23  whose  wife,  -for  the  seven  had  herto  wife? 

Luke  1.    5  his  wife  (was)  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron 

1. 13  thy  wife  Elizabeth  shall  bear  thee  a  son 

1.  18  I  am  an  old  man,  and  my  wife  well  stric. " 

1.  24  after  those  days  his  wife  Elizabeth  cone. 

2.  5  To  be  taxed  with  Mary  his  espoused  [wife] 

3.  19  for  Herodias  his  brother  Philip's  wife,  and 
8.    3  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza  Herod's  steward 

14.  20  Ihavemarriedawife,  and.  .1  cannot  come 
14.  26  any.  .come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his.  .wife 

16.  18  Whosoeverputtethawayhiswife,andma. 

17.  32  Remember  Lot's  wife 

18.  29  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left,  .wife,  or 

20.  28  die,  having  a  wife,  .should  take  his  wife 
20.  29  the  first,  took  a  wife,  and  died  without  ch. 
20.  30  [the  second  took  her  to  wife,  and  he  died] 

20.  33  wife,  .is  she?  for  seven  had  her  to  wife 
Acts    5.1a  certain  man . .  with  Sapphira  lus  wife 

5.  2  kept  back,  .of  the  price,  his  wife  also  be. 
5.  7  his  wife,  not  knowing  what  was  done,  ca. 
18.    2  a  certain  Jew  named  Aquila.  .with his  w. 

21.  5  they  all  brought  us  on  our  way,  with  wives 
24.  24  when  Felix  came  with  his  wife  Drusilla 

r  Co.  5.    1  that  one  should  have  his  father's  wife 

7.  2  let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  let 
7,  3  render  unto  the  wife,  .likewise  also  the  w. 
7.  4  The  wife  hath  notpower  of  her  own  body 
7.  4  not  power  of  lus  own  body,  but  the  wife 
7. 10  Let  not  the  wife  depart  from  (her)husbaii'  { 
7.  11  let  not  the  husband  put  away  (his)  wife 
7.  12  If  any  brother  hath  a  wife  that  believeth 

7. 14  sanctified  by  the  wife,  and  the.  .wife  is 
16  wife,  .whether  thou  shalt  save  (thy)  wife? 

7  Art  thou  bound  unto  a  wife?  seek  not  to 
27  Art  thou  loosed  from  a  wife?  seek,  .a  wi. 
29  that  both  they  that  have  wives  be  as  tin. 

33  married  careth.  .how  he  may  please,  .wi. 

34  There  is  a  difference,  .between  a  wife  and 
39  The  wife  is  bound  by  the  law  as  long  as 

_,.    5  Have  we  not  power  to  lead  about,  .a  wife 
Eph.    5.  22  Wives,  submit  yourselves  unto  your  bus. 
5.  73  For  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife 
5.  24  so  (let)  the  wives  (be)  to  their  own  husb. 
5.  25  Husbands, iove  your  wives,  even  as  Ohr. 
5.  28  So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their 
5.  28  He  that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself 
5.  31  shall  be  joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they 
5.  33  let  every  one.  .so  love  his  wife  even  as 
5.  33  the  wife,  .that  she  reverence  (her)  husband 


Col. 


r  Ti. 


Titus 
1  Pe.   3. 
Rev.  19. 


.  i3  Wives,  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own 
.  19  Husbands,  love  (your)  wives,  and  be  not 
.    2  bishop,  .must  be.  .the  husband  uf  one  w. 
.  11  Even  so  (must  their)  wives  (be) grave,  not 
.  12  the  deacons  be  the  husbands  of  one  wife 
.    9  awidow.  .having  been  the  wife  of  one  man 
.    6  the  husband  of  one  "wife,  having  faithfi;l 
1  wives,  .by  the  conversation  of  the  wives 
7  the  Lamb,  .his  wife  hath  made  herself  re. 
9  I  will  show  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife 
[See  also  Brother's  wife,  married  wife,  uncle's  wife  ] 

WIFE'S  mother  — 

-4  wife's  mother,  -jrevdtpd  penthem. 

Matt.  8.  14  he  saw  his  wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  of 
Mark  r.  30  Simon's  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fever 
Luke  4.  38  Simon's  wife's  mother  was  taken  with  a 

WIVES'  (old)  — 

Belonging  to  an  old  v:onuni,  ypa&Z-ns  graOdes. 

1  Ti.   4.    7  refuse  profane  and  old  wives'  fables,  and 

"WILD  — 

l.A  wild  ass,  free,  K")?  pan. 

Gen.  16.  12  he  will  be  a  wild  man  ;  his  hand. .against 

I.Lnrl  place,  field,  land,  rr:-;- $■>,?,  h. 

Lev.  26.  22  I  will  also  send  wild  beasts  amongyon,whi. 

2  Sa.  2.  iS  and  Asahel. .light  of  foot  as  a  wild  roe 

2  Ki.  4.  39  found  a  wild  vine,  and  gathered.. wild  go. 


"WILD 


1055 


WILDERNESS 


2  Ki.  14.   9  there  passed  by  a  wild  beast  that  (was)  in 
2  Ch.25.  18  there  passed  by  a  wild  beast  that  (was) in 

Job   39.  15  forgetteth..that  the  wild  beast  may  break 
Hos.  13.    8  I  will  meet  them.. the  wild  beast  shall  to. 

3. Belonging  to  the  field,  6.yptos  ayrios.' 

Matt.  3.    4  John..hismeatwaslocustsand  wildhoney 
Mark  1.   6  John. .he  did  eat  locusts  and  wild  honey 
[See  also  Ass,  beast,  bull,  goats,  grapes,  olive  tree,  ox.] 
"WILD  beast  (of  the  desert  or  islands^  goat — 
1. Inhabitants  oj  the  islands  or  sea  shores,  c*!^. 
Isa.   13.  22  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands  shall  cry 

34.  14  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands,  and  the  satyr 
Jer.  50.  39  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands 

2.  Wild  goat  or  roe,  ipN  aqqo. 

Deut  14.    5  The  hart,  and  the  roebuck. .and  the  wild  g. 

3.  Wild  beast,  1*1  ziz. 

Psa.  50. 11  and  thewild  beasts  of  the  field  (are)mine 
80.  13  the  wild  beast  of  the  field  doth  devour  it 

4. Inhabitants  of  the  dry  jjlaces,  D**¥  tsiyyini. 

Isa.    13.  21  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie  there 
34.  14  The  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  also 

Jer.   50.  39  Therefore  the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert 
WILDERNESS  — 
1  A  wilderness  or  pasture  land,  ill?  fix  erets  mid. 

Prov  21.  19  better  to  dwell  in.the  wilderness,  thanwi. 
2,Jeshi?non,  a  desolate  place,  pD%')  yeshimon. 

Deut  32.  10  found  him.  .in  the  waste  howling  wilde. 

Psa.  68.    7  when  thou  didst  march  through  the  wil. 

Z,A  loilderness  desert,  pasture  land,  13*70  midbar. 
Gen.  14.  6  unto  El-paran,  which  (is)  by  the  wildern. 
16.  7  found  her  by  a  fountain  of  water  in  the  w. 
21.  14  departed,  and  wandered  in  the  wilderness 
21.  20  dwelt  in  the  wilderness,  and  became  an 
21.  21  And  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 

36.  24  Anah  that  found  the  mules  in  the  wilde. 

37.  22  cast  him  into  this  pit  that  (is)  in  the  wil. 
Exod.  3.  18  three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness 

4.-27  into  the  wilderness  to  meet  Moses.    And 
5.    1  may  hold  a  feast  unto  me  in  the  wildern. 

7.  16  that  they  may  serve  me  in  the  wilderness 

8.  27  will  go  three  days'  journey  into  the  wild. 

8.  28  sacrifice  to  the  Loud  your  God  in  the  wi. 
13, 18  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  the  fled  sea 

13.  20  encamped  in  Etham,  in  the  edge  of  the  w. 

14.  3  They  (are)  entangled  io  the  land,  the  wi. 

14.  11  hast  thou  taken  us  away  to  die  in  the  wi. 
14. 12  than  that  we  should  die  in  the  wilderness 

15.  22  into  the  wilderness,  .three  days  in  the  w. 

16.  1  came  unto  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  which 
16.   2  murmured  against  Moses,  .in  the  wilder. 
16.    3  ye  have  brought  us  forth  into  this  wilde. 
16.  10  that  they  looked  toward  the  wilderness 
16. 14  upon  the  face  of  the  wilderness  (there  lay) 

16.  32  bread  wherewith  I  have  fed  you  in  the  w. 

17.  1  journeyed  from  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  after 

18.  5  came  with  his  sons.  4"to  the  wilderness 

19.  1  same  day  came  they  (into)  the  wilderness 

19.  2  had  pitched  in  the  wilderness :  and  there 
lev.    7.  38  to  offer  their  oblations . .  in  the  wilderness 

16.  10  let  Mm  go  for  a  scape  goat  into  the  wild. 

16. 21  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilder. 

16.  22  and  he  shall  let  go  the  goat  in  the  wilde. 

Num  1.    1  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 

1.  19  so  he  numbered  them  in  the  wilderness 

3.    4  offered  strange  fire,  .in  the  wilderness  of 

3. 14  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  wilderness 

9.  1  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  in  the  wilderness 
9.    5  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai :  according  to 

10. 12  their  journeys  out  of  the  wilderness  of  S. 
10.  12  the  cloud  rested  in  the  wilderness  of  Par. 
10.  31  knowest  how  we  are  to  encamp  in  the  w. 
12. 16  people,  .pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  Par. 
13.  3  sent  them  fruni  the  wilderness  of  Paran 
13.  21  searched  the  land  from  the  wilderness  of 

13.  26  unto  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  to  Kadesh 

14.  2  or  would  God  we  had  died  in  this  wilder. 
14.  16  therefore  he  hath  slain  them  in  the  wild. 
14.  22  my  miracles  which  I  did.  .in  the  wilder. 
14.  25  get  you  into  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of 
14.  29  Your  carcases  shall  fall  in  tills  wilderness 
14.  32  your  carcases,  they  shall  fall  in  this  wild. 
14.  33  your  children  shall  wander  in  the  wilder. 
14.  33  until  your  carcases  be  wasted  in  the  wil. 

14.  35  in  this  wilderness  they  shall  be  consumed 

1 5.  32  while  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  the  w. 

16. 13  to  kill  us  in  the  wilderness,  except  thou 

20.  4  congregation  of  the  Lord  into  this  wild. 

21.  5  brought,  .out  of  Egypt  to  die  in  the  wi.? 
21.  11  in  the  wilderness  which  (is)  before  Moab 
21.  13  which  (is)  in  the  wilderness  that  cometh 
2r.  18  Aud  from  the  wilderness  (they  went)  to 
21.  23  and  went  out  against  Israel  into  the  wil. 
24.  1  but  he  set  his  face  toward  the  wilderness 
26.  64  they  numbered  the  children.. in  the  wild. 

26.  65  They  shall  surely  die  in  the  wilderness 

27.  3  Our  father  died  in  the  wilderness,  and  he 

27. 14  water  of  Meribah  in  Kadesh  in  the  wild. 
32.  13  made  them  wanderin  the  wilderness  forty 

32.  15  he  will  yet  again  leave  them  in  the  wild. 

33.  6  pitched  in  Etham.  .in  the  edge  of  the  w. 
33.  8  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  into  the  w. 
33.    8  went  three  days' journey  in  the  wilderness 

33. 11  removed.. and  encamped  in  the  wilderness 

33. 12  took  their  journey  out  of  the  wilderness 
33.  15  departed,  .and  pitched  iu  the  wilderness 

33.  36  pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  Zin,  winch 

34.  3  south  quarter  shall  be  from  the  wildern. 


Deut. 


Josh." 


Judg 


26. 
26. 
26. 
26. 
*Sa.  2. 


1  Ei.  2. 

19. 

v  19' 

2  Ki.  3. 

1  Ch.  5. 
6. 


•Ch. 


24. 
Nell.   9. 

9- 

Job     1. 

38. 

Psa.  29. 

55- 

63. 

6S- 

78. 

78. 

78. 

78. 

95- 

102. 

106. 

106. 

106. 

107. 

107, 

107. 

136. 

Prov.  2 1 

Song  3. 

8. 

Isa.   14. 

16. 

16. 

27. 

32- 

35- 


1  all  Israel  on  this  side  Jordan  in  the  wild. 

19  through  all  that  great  and  terrible  wilde. 
31  in  the  wilderness,  where  thou  hast  seen 
40  take  your  journey  into  the  wilderness  by 

1  took  our  journey  into  the  wilderness  by 

7  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great  w. 

8  passed  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  Mo. 
26  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wilderness  of 
43  Eezer  iu  the  wilderness,  in  the  plain  con. 

2  God  led  thee  these  forty  years  in  the  wil. 

15  led  thee  through  thatgreat.. terrible  wil. 

16  Who  fed  thee  in  the  wilderness  with  ma. 

7  provokedsttheLORD..to  wrath  in  the  wil. 
28  brought  them  out  to  slay  them  iu  the  wi. 

5  what  he  did  unto  you  in  the  wilderness 
24  from  the  wilderness  and  Lebanon,  from 
5  I  have  led  you  forty  years  in  the  wildern. 

51  waters  of  Meribah-Kadesh,  in  the  wilder. 
4  From  the  wilderness  and  thisLebanon,  ev. 

4  died  in  the  wilderness  by  the  way,  after 

5  all  the  people  (that  were)  born  in  the  wil. 

6  walked  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  till 

15  before  them,  and  fled  by  the  way  of  the  w. 

20  people  that  fled  to  the  wilderness  turned 
24  hi  tliewilderness  wherein  they  chased  them 

8  and  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  the  south 
10  wandered  in  the  wilderness  :  and  now,  lo 

1  to  the  border  of  Edom  the  wilderness  of 
61  In  the  wilderness,  Beth-arabah,  Middin 

1  to  the  wilderness  that  goeth  up  from  Jer. 
12  goings  out  thereof  were  at  the  wilderness 

8  they  assigned  Bezerin  the  wilderness  upon 

7  and  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long  sea. 

16  with  the  children  of  Judah  into  the  wild. 

7  tear  your  flesh  with  the  thorns  of  the  wi. 
16  thorns  of  the  wilderness  and  briers,  and 
16  walked  through  the  wilderness  unto  the 
18  Then  they  went  along  through  the  wilde. 

22  and  from  the  wilderness  even  unto  Jord. 
42  unto  the  way  of  the  wilderness ;  but  the 
45  turned  and  fled  toward  tliewilderness  un. 
47  turned  and  fled  to  the  wilderness  unto  the 

8  that  smote  the  Egyptians,  .in  the  wildern. 
18  to  the  valley  of  Zeboim  toward  the  wilde. 
28  hast  thou  left  those  few  sheep  in  the  wil. 
14  David  abode  in  the  wilderness  in  strong 

14  remained  in  a  mountain  in  tliewilderness 

15  David  (was)  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph  in 

24  David  and  his  men  (were)  in  the  wilderness 

25  camedown intoarock,andabode  inthew. 

25  pursued  after  David  in  the  wilderness  of 
1  Behold,  David  (is)  in  the  wilderness  of  E. 

1  aud  went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  Paran 
4  David  heard  in  the  wilderness  that  Nabal 

14  David  sent  messengers  out  of  the  wildern. 

21  kept  all  tliat  this  (fellow)hath  in  the  wil. 

2  Saul  arose,  and  went  down  to  the  wilder. 

2  with  him,  to  seek  David  in  the  wilderness 

3  but  Davidabode  hi  the  wilderness;  and  he 

3  that  Saul  came  after  him  into  the  wilder. 
24  before  Giah  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness 

23  passed  over,  toward  the  way  of  the  wild. 

28  See,  I  will  tarry  in  the  plain  of  the  wild. 

2  such  as  be  faint  in  the  wilderness  may  dr. 

16  Lodge  not  this  night  in  the  plains  of  the 

29  hungry,  and  weary,  and  thirsty,  in  the  wi. 

34  he  was  buried  in  his  own  house  in  the  wi. 

18  Baalath,  and  Tadmor  in  the  wilderness 

4  he  himself  went  aday's  journey  into  the  w. 

15  return  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness  of  D. 

8  The  way  through  the  wilderness  of  Edom 

9  unto  the  entering  in  of  the  wilderness  from 
78  Bezer  in  the  wilderness  with  her  suburbs 

8  into  the  hold  to  the  wilderness  men  of  m. 
29  which  Moses  made  in  the  wilderness,  and 

3  servant  of  the  Lord  had  made  in  the  wil. 

4  built  Tadmor  in  the  wilderness,  and  all 

16  end  of  the  brook,  before  the  wilderness 

20  went  forth  into  the  wilderness  of  Tekoa 

24  came  toward  the  watch  tower  in  the  wil. 

9  servant  of  God  (laid)upon  Israel  in  the  w. 

19  forsookest  them  not  in  the  wilderness,  the 

2 1  forty  years  didst . .  sustain  them  in  the  wi. 
19  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the  wilder. 

26  (on)  the  wilderness,  wherein  (there  is)  no 
8  wilderness;  the  Lord  shaketh  the  wilder. 

7  wander  far  off,  (and)  remain  in  the  wild. 
title.  Psalm  of  David,  when  he  was  in  the  wi. 
12  They  drop  (upon)  the  pastures  of  the  wi. 

15  He  clave  the  rocks  in  the  wilderness,  and 
19  said,  Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  the  wild.? 
40  How  oft  did  they  provoke  him  in  the  wi. 

52  and  guided  them  in  the  wilderness  like  a 

8  as  (in)  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wild. 
6  I  am  like  a  pelican  of  the  wilderness,  I 

9  through  the  depths,  as  through  the  wild. 

14  lusted  exceedingly  in  the  wilderness,  and 
26  against  them,  to  overthrow  them  in  the  w. 

4  They  wandered  in  the  wilderness  in  a  sol. 
^^  He  turneth  rivers  into  a  wilderness,  and 

35  He  turneth  the  wilderness  into  a  standing 

16  him  which  led  his  people  through  the  w. 
19  better  to  dwell  iu  the  wilderness,  than  w. 

6  Who  (is)  this  that  cometh  out  of  the  wil. 

5  Who  (is)  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  w. 

17  made  the  world  as  a  wilderness,  anddes. 
1  ruler  of  the  land  from  Sela  to  the  wilde. 
8  they  wandered  (through)  the  wilderness 

10  habitation  forsaken,  and  left  like  a  wild. 

15  wilderness  be  a  fruitful  field,  and  the  fr. 

16  Then  judgment  shall  dwell  in  the  wilder. 
1  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  sh. 


23 


50 
Lam.  4. 


Eze. 


Isa.    35.   6  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break 

40.  3  The  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  wild. 

41.  18  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  wa, 

41.  19  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  cedar 

42.  11  Let  the  wilderness  and  the  cities  thereof 

43.  19  I  will  even  make  a  way  in  the  wilderness 
43.  20  becausel  give  waters  iu  the  wilderness 

50.  2  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make  the  rivers  a  wild. 

51.  3  will  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden,  and 
63.  13  through  the  deep,  as  an  horse  in  the  wil. 
64. 10  holy  cities  are  a  wilderness,  Zion  is  a  wi. 

Jer.  2.  2  when  thou  wentest  after  me  in  the  wild. 
2.  6  led  us  through  the  wilderness,  through  a 
2.  24  A  wild  ass  used  to  the  wilderness,  (that)sn. 

2.  31  Have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel?  a 

3.  2  sat  for  them,  as  the  Arabian  in  the  wilde. 

4.  1 1  A  dry  wind  of  the  high  places  in  the  wild. 

4.  26  fruitful  place  (was)  a  wilderness,  and  all 
9.  2  Oh  that  I  had  in  the  wilderness  a  lodging 
9. 10  for  the  habitations  of  the  wilderness  a  la. 
g.  12  land  perisheth  (and)  is  burnt  up  like  a  w. 
9.  26  utmost  corners,  that  dwell  in  the  wilder. 

12.  iomade  my  pleasant  portiona  desolate  wil. 
12. 12  come  upon  all  high  places  through  the  w. 

13.  24  that  passeth  away  by  the  wind  of  the  wil. 
17.    6  inhabit  the  parched  places  iu  the  wilder, 

22.  6  surely  I  will  make  thee  a  wilderness,  (and) 
10  pleasant  places  of  the  wilderness  are  dri. 

2  the  people,  .found gracein  the  wilderness 
6  Flee,  .and  be  like  the  heath  in  the  wilder. 

12  hindermost  of  the  nations  (shall  be)  a  wi. 

3  cruel,  like  the  ostriches  in  the  wilderness 
4. 19  mountains,  they  laid  wait  for  us  in  thew. 

5.  9  our  lives  because  of  the  sword  of  the  wil. 
6. 14  more  desolate  than  tliewilderness  toward 

19.  13  now  she  (is)  planted  in  the  wilderness,  in 

20.  10  Wherefore  I. .brought  them  into  the  wil. 
20.  1 3  rebelled  against  me  in  the  wilderness,  the. 
20.  13  pour  out  my  fury  upon  them  in  the  wild. 
20.  15  lifted  up  my  hand  unto  them  in  the  wild. 
20.  17  did  I  make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilder. 
20.  18  But  I  said  unto  their  children  in  the  wil. 
20.  21  my  anger  against  them  in  the  wilderness 
20.  23  liftedup  mine  hand. .in  tliewilderness,  th. 
20.  35  I  will  bringyou  into  the  wilderness  of  the 
20.  36  I  pleaded  with  your  fathers  in  the  wilde. 

23.  42  brought Sabeans  from  tliewilderness,  wh. 
29.  5  I  will  leave  thee  (thrown)  into  the  wilder. 
34.  25  and  they  shall  dwell  safely  in  the  wilder. 

Hos.  2.  3  make  her  as  a  wilderness,  and  set  her  like 
2.  14  briug  her  into  the  wilderness,  and  speak 
9. 10  I  found  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  wildern. 
13.  5  I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness,  in  the 
13. 15  of  the  Lord  shall  come  up  from  the  wild. 
Joel  1.  19,  20  hath  devoured  the  pastures  of  the  wi. 
2.   3  behind  them  a  desolate  wilderness ;  yea 

2.  22  for  the  pastures  of  tliewilderness  do  spr. 

3.  19  Edom  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness,  fur 
Amos  2.  10  ledyou  fortyyears  through  the  wilderness 

5.  25  sacrifices  and  offerings  in  the  wilderness 
Zeph.  2.  13  Nineveh  a  desolation,  (and)  dry  like  a  wi. 
Mai.    1.    3  heritage  waste  fur  the  dragons  of  the  wil. 

4. A  plain,  obscure  or  unknoum  place,  '"n"]j/.  arabah. 
Job  24.  5  wilderness  (yieldeth)  food  for  them  (and) 
39.  6  Whose  house  I  have  made  the  wilderness 
Isa.  33.  9  Sharon  is  like  a  wilderness ;  and  Bashan 
Jer.  51.  43  Her  cities  are  a  desolation.. and  a  wilder. 
Amos.6.  14  entering  im.uuto  the  river  of  the  wilder, 

5.  A  dry  place,  irx  tsiyyah. 

Job  30.  3  fleeing  into  the  wilderness  in  former  time 
Psa.  78.  17  by  provoking  the  Most  High  in  the  wild. 

6.  Ruin,  desert,  *nh  tohu. 

Job   12.  24  causeth  them  to  wander  in  a  wilderness 
Psa.107.  40  causeth  them  to  wander  in  the  wilderness 
1.A  desert,  desolate  place,  ep-nixla  ereniia. 

Mattis.  33  we  have  so  much  bread  in  the  wilderness 
Mark  8.  4  these  (men)  with  bread  here  in  the  wild.? 
2  Co. 11.  26  perils  in  the  wilderness,  (in)  perils  in  the 

8. Deserted,  desolate  {place),  €pr}fj.os  eremos. 

Matt.  3.    1  John  the  Baptist,  preaching  in  the  wild. 

3.  3  The  voice  of  one  cryingin  tliewilderness 

4.  1  Jesus  led  up  of  the  spirit  into  the  wilder. 
11.    7  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  to 

Mark  1.    3  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  Tr. 
1.    4  John  did  baptize  in  the  wilderness,  and 
1. 12  the  spirit  driveth  him  into  tliewilderness 
1.  13  he  was  there  in  the  wilderness  forty  days 

Luke  3.    2  unto  John  the  son  of  Zacharias  in  the  wi. 

3.  4  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness 

4.  1  was  led  by  the  spirit  into  the  wilderness 

5.  16  he  withdrew  himself  into  the  wilderness 

7.  24  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  for 

8.  29  and  was  driven  of  the  devil  into  the  wil. 
15.    4  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wil. 

John  1.  23  I  (am)  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wil. 
3.  14  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wil. 

6.  49  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  wilde. 
11.  54  thence  unto  a  country  near  to  the  wilde. 

Acts    7.  30  there  appeared  to  him  in  the  wilderness 

7.  36  in  the  Bed  sea, and  in  the  wilderness  forty 
7.  38  is  he  that  was  in  the  church  in  the  wilde. 
7.  42  (by  the  space  of)  forty  years  in  the  wild. 
7.  44  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness  in  the  wil. 

13.  18  suffered  he  their  manners  iu  the  wildern. 

21. 38  leddest  out  into  the  wilderness  four  thou. 

1  Co.  10.   5  for  they  were  overthrown  in  the  wilder. 

Heb.   3.    8  in  the  day  of  temptatiou  in  the  wildern. 

3. 17  sinned,  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilder. 

Rev.  12.  6  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where 


WILDERNESS 


1056 


WILL 


Bev,  12.  14  that  she  might  fly  into  the  wilderness 
17.    3  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  into  the  w. 

WILDERNESS,  that  dwell  in,  inhabiting  the  — 
inhabitants  of  the  dry  places,  n**s  tsiyyim. 

Psa.  72.   9  They  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness  shall 
74.  14  meat  to  the  people  inhabiting  the  wilder. 

Isa.   23. 13  founded  it  for  them  that  dwell  in  the  wi. 
Wilderness  of  Beer-Sheba,  yny  1X3  n3"]p. 
At  the  S.  of  Simeon. 

Gen.  2i.  14  she.,  wandered  in  the  wilderness  of  Beer-s. 

Wilderness  of  Beth-Aven,  JIN  n'3  *13>?. 
At  the  E.  of  Bethel  and  N.  of  Benjamin. 

Josh  iS.  x2  goings  out. .were  at  the  wilderness  of  B.  A. 

Wilderness  of  Damascus,  p£J"S1J  13">1?. 
Xear  Damascus,  in  Syria. 

1  Ki.  19. 15  return  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness  of  D. 
Wilderness  of  Edom,  D'ng  ")31p. 

At  the  S.  end  and  E.  side  of  Salt  sea. 

2  Ki.   3.    8  The  way  through  the  wilderness  of  E. 
Wilderness  of  En-gedi,  H3  py  1310. 

At  the  W.  of  Salt  Sea,  in  Judah.  ' 

1  Sa.  24.  1  Behold,  David  (is)  in  the  wilderness  of  E. 
Wilderness  of  Etham  or  of  Red   Sea,  f]lD  Dl   "l3"p  or 

oriN  -)?"!?. 
At  the  E.  side  of  W.  Gulf  of  Red  Sea. 

Exodi3.  18  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  the  Red  Sea 

Kum  33.    8  three  days'  journey  in  the  wilderness  of  E. 
Wilderness  of  Gibeon,  Jiyn?  "1310. 
At  the  W.  of  Gibeon  in  Benjamin. 

z  Sa.    2.  24  hills,  .by  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  G. 
Wilderness  of  Jeruel,   7N1Y  "l*pD. 
At  the  S.  of  Judah. 

2  Ch.20.  16  ye  shall  find. .  before  the  wilderness  of  J. 
Wilderness  of  Judah,  rnirr  "13*15. 

On  the  extreme  S.  of  Judah. 

Judg.  1. 16  intothe  wildernessof  J., whichOieth)iu  the 

Psa.  63.  title,  when  he  was  in  the  wilderness  of  J. 
Wilderness  of  Kadesh,  W~x$  *13"]5. 
Near  Kadesh-barnea. 

Psa.  29.    8  the  Lord  shaketh  the  wilderness  of  K. 
Wilderness  of  Kedemoth,  n'imp  **3"]2. 
On  the  E.  of  Salt  Sea,  and  N.  of  Amon. 

Deut.  2.  26  messengers  out  of  the  wildernessof  Ked. 
Wilderness  of  Maon,  pJ/D  TaiC. 
On  the  S.W.  of  Salt  Sea.' 

1  Sa.  23.  24  his  men  (were)  in  the  wilderness  of  M.,  in 
23.  25  whereforehe..abodeinthewildernessof  M. 
23-  25  pursued  after  Davidin  the  wilderness  of  M. 

Wilderness  of  Moab,  3*00  1310. 
On  the  E.  of  Salt  Sea.  * 

Deut.  2.    8  passed  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness  of  M. 
Wilderness  of  Paran,  pKSi  l-HD. 
At  the  S.  of  Kadesh-barnea. 

Gen.  21.  21  And  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  P.,  and 

ISum.io.  12  and  the  cloud  rested  in  the  wildernessof  P. 

12. 16  the  people,  .pitched  in  the  wildernessof  P. 

13.    3  Moses. .  sent  them  from  the  wilderness  of  P. 

13.  26  went  and  came.,  into  the  wilderness  of  P. 

1  Sa.  25.    1  David,  .went  down  to  the  wildernessof  P. 

Wilderness  of  Shur,  THS*  "I310. 

On  the  E.  side  of  W.  Gulf  of  Red  Sea. 

Exod.15.  22  they  went  out  into  the  wilderness  of  S. 
Wilderness  of  Sin,  J'p  13-10.      J\r.  W.  of  Sinai. 

Exodi6.    1  they . .  came  into  the  wilderness  of  S. ,  which 
17.    1  Israel  journeyed  from  the  wildernessof  S. 
\um33.  n  they,  .encamped  in  the  wilderness  of  8. 
33. 12  took  their  journey  outof  the  wilder,  of  S. 
Wilderness  of  Sinai,  »j»p  "13-10.      N.  of  Sinai. 

Exodig.    1  same  day  came  they  (into)  the  wilder.of  S. 

ig.    2  they . .  were  come  (to)  the  desert  of  S. ,  and 

Lev.    7.  38  to  offer.,  unto  the  Lord,  in  the  wild,  of  S. 

Num.  1.    1  the  Lord  spake,  .in  the  wilderness  of  Sin. 

1.  19  he  numbered  them  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 

3.    4  Nadab  and  Abihu  died . .  in  the  wilder,  of  S. 

3.  14  the  Lord  spake.,  in  the  wildernessof  Sin. 

9.    1  the  Lord  spake,  .in  the  wildernessof  Sin. 

9.   5  kept  the  passover.  .in  the  wilderness  of  Sin. 

10.  12  took  their  journey  outof  the  wilder,  of  S. 

26.  64  numbered.  .Israel  in  the  wilderness  of  S. 
33.  15  And  they,  .pitched  in  the  wildernessof  S. 
33. 16  And  they  removed  from  the  desert  of  Sin. 

Wilderness  of  Zin,  }*  13-30.      S.  of  Sail  Sea. 

Num.13.  21  from  the  wilderness  of  Z.  untoRehob,  as 
20.    1  Then  came.  .Israel,  .into  the  desert  of  Z. 

27.  14  For  ye  rebelled,  .in  the  desert  of  Z. 

27.  14  water  of  Meribah.  .in  the  wildernessof  Z. 

33.  36  And  they,  .pitched  in  the  wilderness  of  Z. 

34.  3  from  the  wilderness  of  Z.  along  by  the  co. 
Deut.32.  51  ye  trespassedagainstme.  .in  tb'.-wild.of  Z. 
Josh  15.    1  the  wilderness  of  Z.  southward  (was)  the 

Wdderness  of  Ziph,  "p  13-113. 

Between  Hebron  and  the  Salt  Sea. 

1  Sa.  23.  14  David.,  remained.. in  the  wilderness  of  Z. 
23.  15  David  (was)  in  the  wilderness  of  Z.  in  a 
26.    2  Saul,  .went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  Z. 
26.    2  to  seek  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Z. 


WILE,  wilily — 
l.Fravd3  deceit,  733  nekel. 

Num  25.  iS  For  tliey  vex  you  with  their  wiles,  where. 

^.Craftiness,  subtilty,  prudence,,  nan];  ormah. 

Josh.  9.    4  They  did  work  wilily,  and  went  and  made 

3..-1  method,  artifice,  cunning,  fraud,  fxe9obeia,-hla 
Eph.    6.  ii  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  wiles 

WILE  TJLLY  — 

IFilUngly,  voluntarily,  eKovaiws  hekousios. 

Heb.  10.  26  For  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have 

WILL,  (would),  be  willing — 
I. Soul,  desire,  vsi  nephesh. 

Psa.  27.  12  Deliver  me  not  over  unto  the  will  of  mine 
41.    2  wilt  not  deliver  him  unto  the  will  of  his 

Eze.  16.  27  delivered  thee  unto  the  will  of  them  that 

2.  To  will  or  wish,  N3^  tseba. 

Dan.    4.  35  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  army  of 

3.  Thought,  desire,  will,  n*yi  reuth. 

Ezra    7. 18  with.,  the  gold,  that  do  after  the  will  o€ 

A.Goodwill,  good  pleasure,  pH"i  ratson. 

Gen.  49.    6  and  in  their  self  will  they  digged  down  a 
Lev.    1.    3  he  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  will 

19.    5  the  Lord,  ye  shall  offer  it  at  your  own  w. 

22. 19  at  your  own  will  a  male  without  blemish 

22.  29  offer  a  sacrifice,  .offer  (it)  at  your  own  w. 
Neb.  9.  24  that  they  might  do  with  them  as  they  wo. 
Esth.  9.    5  did  what  they  would  unto  those  that  ha. 
Psa.  40.    8  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God,  yea 
143.  10  Teach  me  to  do  thy  will ;  for  thou  (art) 
Dan.    8.    4  but  he  did  according  to  his  will,  and  be. 

11.    3  greatdominion,  anddoaccordingtohisw. 

11. 16  shall  do  according  to  his  own  will,  and 

11.  36  And  the  king  shall  do  accordiugto  his  w. 

i>.  Counsel,  purpose,  (5ov\4)  boule. 

Acts  13.  36  had  served  his  own  generation  by  the  w. 

^.Counsel,  purpose,  $ov\rj/j.a  boulema. 

Rom.  9.  19  find  fault?  for  who  hath  resisted  his  will? 

7. Mind,  judgment,  decision,  yvcv/j.7]  gnome. 

Rev.  17. 17  G.  hath  put  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his  w. 

8.  Will,  wish,  8ek7)jj,a  thelema. 

Matt.  6.  10  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  (it  is)  in  he. 
7.  21  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
12. 50  Forwhosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Fa. 
18.  14  Even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father 

21.  31  Whetherof  themtwain  did  the  will  of  (his) 
26.  42  may  not  pass,  .except  I  drink  it,  thy  will 

Mark  3.  35  For  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  God 
Luken.    2  [Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in  ea.] 

12.  47  that  servant,  which  knew  his  lord's  will 
12.  47  neither  did  according  to  his  will,  shall  be 

22.  42  nevertheless  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be 

23.  25  desired;  but  he  delivered  Jesus  to  their  w. 
John  1. 13  norof  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 

4.  34  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 

5.  30  seek  not  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the 

6.  38  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of 
6.  39  this  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent 

6.  40  this  is  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  that 

7.  17  If  any.,  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the 
9.  31  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  and  doeth  his  w. 

Acts  13.  22  a  man.  .which  shall  fulfil  all  my  will 

21.  14  we  ceased,  saying,  The  will  of  the  Lord 

22.  14  that  thou  shouldest  know  his  will,  and 
Rom.  1.  10  might  have  a  prosperous  journey  by  the  w. 

2.  18  knowest(his)will,andapprovest  the  things 

12.  2  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of 

15.  32  That  I  may  come  to  you  with  joy  by  the  w. 

1  Co.    1.    1  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  through  the  will  of 

7.  37  hath  power  over  his  own  will,  and  hath  so 

16.  12  but  his  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this 

2  Co.   1.    1  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  God 

8.  5  to  the  Lord,  and  unto  us  by  the  will  of  G. 
Gal.  1.  4  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Fat. 
Eph.'  1.    1  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  God 

1.  5  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will 
1.  9  made  known  unto  us  the  mystery  of  his  w. 
1.  11  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  w. 

5.  17  but  understandingwhat  the  will  of  the  L. 

6.  6  but  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  w. 
Col.     1.    1  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  God 

1.  9  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will 

4.  12  stand  perfect  and  complete  in  all  the  will 

1  Th.  4.    3  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  (even)  your  sa. 

5.  18  for  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus 

2  Ti.    1.    1  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  God 

2.  26  who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will 
Heb.  10.    7  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come,  .to  do  thy  will 

10.   9  Then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will 
10.  10  By  the  which  will  we  are  sanctified  thro. 
10.  36  after  ye  have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  mi. 

13.  21  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  Ins  will 

1  Pe.  2. 15  For  so  is  the  will  of  God,  that  with  well 

3.  17  For  (it  is)  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  so 

4.  2  the  flesh  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the  w. 
4.  3  suffice  us  to  have  wrought  [the  will]  of  the 
4. 19  let  them  that  suffer  according  to  the  will 

2  Pe.  1.  21  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will 
1  Jo.  2. 17  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for 

5. 14  that  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  hisw. 

9.  Will,  wish,  inclination,  OzKno-is  thelesis. 

IIeb.  2.   4  diversmiracles.  .according  to  his  Own  W.? 
[See  also  Good,  own,  self,  voluntary.] 


WILL  (be  or  make)  willing,  willingly,  to  — 
l.To  be  tvilling,  n3N  abah. 

Gen.  24.    5  Peradventure  the  woman  will  not  be  wil. 

24.  8  if  the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow 
Exodio.  27  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  and  he  would 
Lev.  26.  21  if  ye  walk  contrary  to  me,  and  will  not  he. 
Deut.  1.  26  Notwithstanding  ye  would  not  go  up,  but 

2.  30  But  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon  would  not  let 
10. 10  time  also,  (and)  the  Lord  would  not  dest. 
23.    5  Nevertheless  the  Lord  thy  God  would  not 

25.  7  he  will  not  perform  the  duty  of  my  husb. 

29.  20  Lord  will  not  spare  him,  but  theu  the  an. 
Josh. 24.  10  But  I  would  not  hearken  unto  Balaam, the. 
Judgn.  17  unto  the  king  of  Moab:  buthe  would  not 

19.  10  But  the  man  would  not  tarry  that  night 

19.  25  But  the  men  would  nothearken  to  him,  so 

20.  13  would  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  their 

1  Sa.  15.   9  would  not  utterly  destroy  them:  butevery 

22. 17  servants  of  the  king  would  not  put  forth 

26.  23  would  not  stretch  forth  mine  hand  agai. 
31.    4  But  his  armour  bearer  would  not;  for  he 

2  Sa.    2.  21  But  Asahel  would  not  turn  aside  from  fo. 

6.  10  So  David  would  not  remove  the  ark  of  the 
12. 17  but  he  woidd  not,  neither  did  he  eat  bre. 
13. 14  Howbeit  he  would  not  hearken  unto  her 
13.  16  But  he  would  not  hearken  unto  her 

13.  25  howbeit  he  would  not  go,  but  blessed  him 

14.  29  but  he  would  not  come  to  him:  and  when 
14. 29  again  the  second  time,  he  wouldnot  come 
33. 16  nevertheless  he  would  not  drink  thereof 

23.  17  therefore  he  would  not  drink  it.     These 

1  Ki.22.  49  Let  my  servants  go.,  but  Jehoshaphat  wo. 

2  Ki.  8. 19  Yet  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  Judah 

13.  23  would  not  destroy  them,  neither  cast  he 

24.  4  innocent  blood,  which  the  Lord  would 
Ch.io.    4  But  his  armour  bearer  would  not;  for  he 

11.  18  but  David  would  not  drink(of)it,  but  po. 
11. 19  Therefore  he  would  not  drink  it.     These 

19.  19  neither  would  the  Syrians  help  the  child. 
2  Ch.21.  7  Howbeit  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  the 
Job  39.  9  Will  the  unicorn  be  willing  to  serve  thee 
Psa.  81.  11  But  my  people.  .Israel  would  none  of  me 
Prov.  1.  25  all  my  counsel,  and  would  none  of  my  re. 

1.  30  They  would  none  of  my  counsel;  they  de. 
1. 19  If  ye  be  willing  and  obedient,  yeshall  eat 
28.  12  this  (is)  the  refreshing :  yet  they  would 

30.  9  children  (that)  will  not  hear  the  law  of 
30.  15  shall  be  your  strength ;  and  ye  would  not 
42.  24  for  they  would  not  walk  in  his  ways,  nei. 

Eze.    3.    7  the  house  of  Israel  will  not  hearken  unto 

3.  7  they  will  not  hearken  unto  me ;  for  all  the 

20.  8  rebelled  against  me,  and  would  not  hear. 

2.  /  will  be,  or  where  1  *nt?  ehi. 

Hos.  13.  10  I  will  be  thyking:  where  (is  any  other) 
13.  14  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues.  .1  will  lie 

3.  To  have  delight,  please,  desire,  f?n  chaphets. 
Ruth  3.  13  if  he  will  not  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman  to 
1  Sa.    2.  25  hearkened  not.  .because  the  Lord  would 
Job     9.    3  If  he  will  contend  with  him,  he  cannot 
Prov  21.    1  water :  he  turneth  it  whithersoever  he  w. 

4.  One  delighting,  will,  desirous,  {'217  chaphets. 

1  Ki.  13.  33  whosoeverwould.heconsecratedhim.and 
1  Ch.28.    9  serve  him.  .with  a  willing  mind  ;  for  the 

5.  Delight,  pleasure,  business,  pan  chephets. 

Prov  31.  13  seeketh  wool  and  flax,  and  worketh  will. 

6.  To  be  pleased,  desirous,  ?n;  yaal,  5. 

Josh  17.  12  but  the  Canaauites  would  dwell  in  that 
Judg.  1.  27  but  the  Canaanites  woidd  dwell  in  that 
1.  35  But  the  Amorites  would  dwell  in  mount 
Hos.    5. 11  because  he  willingly  walked  after  the  co. 

7.  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  in;  yada. 

Eccl.  4. 13  foolish  king,  who  will  no  more  be  admo. 
S.From  his  heart,  tepp  millibbo. 

Lam.  3.  33  For  he  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve 

9.  To  offer  willingly,  make  willing,  211  nadab. 

Exod25-   2  of  every  man  that  giveth  it  willingly  with 
35. 21  every  one  whom  his  spirit  made  willing 
35. 29  whose  heart  made  them  williug  to  bring,  for 

10.  To  offer  (self)  willingly,  211  nadab,  7. 

1  Ch.29.    5  who  (then)  is  willing  to  consecrate  his  se. 

11.  Willing  offering  or  guilt,  .131^  neddbah. 

2  Ch.35.    8  his  princes  gave  willingly  unto  the  people 
Psa.  1 10.    3  Thy  people  (shall  be)  williug  in  the  day  ot 

12.  JJ'illing,  noble,  liberal,  nni  hadib. 

Exod35.    5  whosoever  (is)  of  a  willing  heart,  let  him 
35.  22  both  men  and  women,  as  many  as  were  w. 
1  Ch.28.  21  every  willing  skilful  man,  for  any  manner 
\Z.Sonl,  desire,  c;3J  nephesh. 

Deut^i.  14  then  thou  shalt  let  her  go  whither  she  will 

14.  To  wish,  will,  N3y  tseba. 

Dan.    4.  17,  25,  32  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  will 
5.  21  he  appointethover  it  whomsoever  he  will 

15.  To  give,  jm  nathan. 

Judg.  8.  25  And  they  answered,  We  will  willingly  give 

16.  To  wish,  will,  $ou\o/iai  boulomai. 

Matt  11.  27  and  (lie)  to  whomsoever  the  son  [will]  re. 
Markis.  15  Pilate,  willing  to  content  the  people,  rel. 
Luke  10.  22  but  the  Son,  and  (he)  to  whom  the  Son  w. 
22.  42  Saying,  Father,  if  thou  be  willing,  remove 
John  18.  39  will  ye  therefore  that  I  release  unto  you 
Acts  18.  15  lookye(toit);  fori  will  lie  no  judge  of  such 

27.  43  But  the  centurion,  williug  to  save  Paul 

1  Co.  12.  it  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will 
1  Ti.    2.    8  I  will  therefore  that  men  pray  everywhere 


WILL 


1057 


WINDOW 


i  Ti.  5.  14  I  will  therefore  that  the  younger  women 
6.  9  But  they  that  will  he  rich  fall  into  temp. 
Titus  3.  8  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  const. 
Heb.  6. 17  willing  more  abundantly  to  show  unto  the 
Jas.  4.  4  whosoever  therefore  will  be  a  friend  of 
2  Pe.  3.  9  not  willing  that  auy  should  perish,  but 
Jude        5  I  will  therefore  put  you  in  remembrance 

17.  To  become,  happen,  yivo/xat  ginomai. 

Acts  20. 16  because  he  would  not  spend  the  time  in 

18. To  think  well,  be  pleased,  tvdotcew  eudokcd. 
2  Co.  5.    8  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body 
1  Th.  2.    8  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto 

19.  Will  ingly, voluntarily,  na&y sKovaiovkathhekous. 
Phm.       14  not  be  as  it  were  of  necessity,  but  willing, 

20.  Willingly,  voluntarily,  zteovaius  hekousios. 

1  Pe.  5.   2  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly;  not  for 

21.  Willing,  voluntary,  eKovtra  hekousa, 

Rom.  8  20  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  but  willing. 
1  Co.  9.  17  For  if  I  do  this  thing  willingly,  I  have  a 

22.  To  wish,  will,  mean,  6e\aj  thelo. 

Matt.  1.  19  willing  to  make  her  a  public  example,  was 

5.  40  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  law,  and 
8.   2  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  cl. 

8.  3  touehed  him,  saying,  I  will ;  be  thou  clean 

9.  13  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice :  for  I 

11.  14  if  ye  will  receive  (it),  this  is  Elias,  which 

13.  28  Wilt  thou  then  that  we  go  and  gather  th. 
15.  28  be  itunto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt.  And  her 

15.  32  will  not  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they 

16.  24  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let  him 

16.  25  For  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose 

17.  4  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  here  three  taber. 
jg.  17  but  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the 

19.  21  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  go  (and)  sell  that 

20. 14  I  will  give  unto  this  last  even  as  unto  th. 

20. 15  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will 

20.  21  said  unto  her,  What  wilt  thou?  Shesaith 

20. 26  whosoever  will  be  great  amoug  you,  let 
20.  27  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you,  let 

20.  32  and  said,  What  will  ye  that  I  shall  do  unto 

21.  29  said,  I  will  not :  but  afterward  he  repen. 
23.    4  will  not  move  them  with  one  of  their  fin. 
26.  15  and  said . .  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I 
26. 17  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  forthee 

26.  39  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  (w.) 

27. 17  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you  ?  B. 

27.  43  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have 
Mark  1.  40  saying  unto  bini,  If  thou  wilt,  thou  canst 

1.  41  touched  him,  and  saith  unto  him,  I  will 

6.  22  Ask  of  me  whatsoever  thou  wilt,  and  I 
6.  25  I  will  that  thougivemebyandby  in  ach. 
S.  34  Whosoever  will  come  after  me,  let  him  de. 

8.  35  For  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose 
10.  43  whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,  shall 
10.  44  whosoever  of  you  will  be  the  chiefest,  sh. 
10.  51  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should dounto  th.? 

14.  7  whensoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good 
14. 12  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  prepare 

14.  36  nevertheless  not  what  I  will,  but  what  th. 

15.  9  Will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you  the  King 
15. 12  What  [will  ye  then  that]  I  shall  do  (unto 

Luke  4.    6  delivereduutome;andtowhomsoeverIw. 

5. 12  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 

5. 13  touched  him,  saying,  I  will;  bethou  clean 

9.  23  If  any  (man)  will  come  after  me,  let  him 
9.  24  :For  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose 
9.  54  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to 

10.  29  But  he,  willing  to  justify  himself,  said 

12.  49  and  what  will  I,  if  it  be  already  kindled? 

13.  31  Get  thee  out,  and  depart  hence:  for  Herod 

18.  41  What  wilt  thou  that  I  shall  do  unto  thee? 
19. 14  We  will  not  have  this  (man)  to  reign  over 

22.  9  said  unto  him,  Where  wiltthou  that  we 

23.  20  Pilate  therefore,  willing  to  release  Jesus 
John  5.   6  he  saith  uuto  him, Wilt  thou  be  made  wh.? 

5. 21  even  so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  w. 
5.  35  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to  rejoice  in 

5.  40  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  mightha. 

6.  21  Then  they  willingly  received  him  unto 

6.  67  Then  said  Jesus  unto  the  twelve,  Will  ye 

7.  17  If  auy  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know 

8.  44  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do.    He 

9.  27  wherefore  would  ye  hear  (it)  again?  will 
15     7  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be 

17.  24  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou  hast  giv. 
21.  22  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what 
21.  23  if  I  vn\l  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  (is 

Acts  7.  28  Wilt  thou  kill  me,  as  thou  diddest  the  E. 
9.    6  [Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?  And] 

17. 18  What  will  this  babbler  say?  other  some 

18.  21  but  I.,  return  agaiuunto  you,  if  God  will 

24. 27  Felix,  willing  to  show  the  Jews  a  pleasure 
25.  9  willing  to  do.  .pleasure,  .said,  Wilt  thou 

Horn.  7.  18  for  to  will  is  present  with  me;  but  (how) 
9. 16  So  then  (it  is)  not  of  himthat|willeth,  nor 
9.  18  on  whom  he  will  (havemercy).  .whom he 
9.  22  if  God,  willing  to  show  (his)  wrath,  and 

13.  3  Wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the  pow.? 

1  Co.  4.  19  But  I . .  come  to  you  shortly,  if  the  Lord  w. 

4.  21  What  will  ye?  shall  I  come  unto  you  with 
7.  36  let  him  do  what  he  will,  he  sinneth  not 
7.  39  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom  she  will 

14.  35  if  they  will  learn  any  thing,  let  them  ask 

16.  7  For  I  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  way,  but 

2  Co.  8.  11  that  as  (there  was)  a  readiness  to  will,  so 
Phil.  2.  13  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both 
1  Ti.    2.    4  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to 

5.  i]  to  wax  wanton  against  Christ,  they  will 

133 


2  Ti.    3. 12  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  sh. 

Heb.  13.  iS  good  conscience,  iu  all  things  willing  to 

Jas.     2.  20  But  wilt  thou  know,  0  vain  man,  that  fa. 

4.  15  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do  this 

2  Pe.   3.    5  For  this  they  willingly  are  ignorant  of 

3  John    13  but  I  will  not  with  ink  and  pen  write  unto 
Rev.  it.    5,  5  And  if  any  man  will  hurt  them 

11.    6  to  smite  the  earth,  .as  often  as  they  will 
22.  17  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of 

23.  To  be  about  to,  u.eAAw  niello. 

Matt.  2.  13  Herod  will  seek  the  young  child  to  dest. 
John  7.  35  Whither  will  he  go.  .will  he  go  unto  the 
14.  22  ;  Acts  17.  31 ;  27.  10;  Rev.  3.  16. 

"M.Forwardly,  -Kpodvfxojs  prothumos,  I  Pe.  5-  2- 

25.  Yieldingly,  ent&vhekon,  Ro.  8.  20  ;  1  Co.  9.  17 

2Q. Forward,  prompt,  ready,  irp66vixos  prothumos. 

Matt  26. 41  the  spirit  indeed  (is)  willing,  but  the  flesh 
[See  also  Would,] 
WILL  worship  — 
Worship  springing  from  self  will,  efleAoOpTjovteia. 

Col.     2.  23  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will  worship  and  hu. 
WILL,  against  the,  of  his  own  — 
l.JVot  willing,  unwilling,  &kcw  akon. 

1  Co.  9. 17  but  if  against  my  will,  a  dispensation.,  is 
2.  To  will,  wish,  fiovkS/xai  boulomai. 

Jas.    1. 18  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word 
WILLING  of... self  — 
Choosing  of  one's  self,  avQaiperos  authairetos. 

2  Co.  8.    3  beyond,  .power,  (they  were)  willing  of  th. 
WILLING  mind,  offering  — 

1.  Willing  offering,  gift,  or  mind,  n:m  nedabah. 
Exod.35.  29  children  of  Israel  brought  a  willing  offe. 

I.Forioardness,  promptitude,  readiness,  Trpo8v/u.la. 
2  Co.  8.  12  For  if  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  (it  is) 

"WILLOW  (tree)  — 

l.A  willow,  salix  tree,  2~$i  ereb. 

Lev.  23.  40  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and  willows  of„the 
Job  40.  22  the  willows  of  the  brook  compasshim  ab. 
Psa.137.   2  We  hanged  our  harps  upon  the  willows 
Isa.   15.    7  they  carry  away  to  the  brook  of  the  will. 
44.  4  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  water 

2.  A  water  willow,  osier,  ngycg  tsaphtsaphah. 

Eze.  17.  5bygreatwaters,(and)6etit(as)awillowtree 
WIMPLE  — 
A  wide  covering,  mantle,  nnsaa  mitpachath. 

Isa.     3.  22  mantles,  and  the  wimples,  and  the  crisp. 
"WIN,  ha  won,  to  — 
l.To  cleave,  rend,  ypa  baqa. 

2  Ch.32.    1  encamped,  .and  thought  to  win  them  for 

2.  To  take,  receive,  np£  laqach. 

Prov  11.  30  a  tree  of  life  ;  and  he  that  winneth  souls 

3.  To  gain,  Kspdaivw  kerdaind. 

Phil.    3.    8  do  count  them  (but)  diing,  that  I  may  w. 

1  Pe.   3.    1  they  also  may  without  the  word  be  won 
WIND,  windy  — 

l.Wind,  nn  ruach. 

Gen.    8.    1  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth 

Exodio.  13  brought  an  east  wind,  .the  east  wind  br. 

10. 19  turned  a  mighty  strong  west  wind,  which 

14.  21  the  sea  to  go  (back)  by  a  strongeast  wind 

15.  10  Thou  didst  blow  with  thy  wind,  the  sea 
Nuni  11.  31  there  went  forth  a  wind  from  the  Lord 

2  Sa.  22.  11  and  he  was  seen  upon  the  wings  of  the  w. 

1  Ki.  18.  45  the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds  and  wi. 

19.  11  a  great  and  strong  wind  rent  the  mount. 
19.  11  not  in  the  wind :  and  after  the  wind  an 

2  Ki.   3  17  Ye  shall  not  see  wind,  neither  shall  ye 
Job     1. 19  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the 'wilder. 

6.  26  speeches  of  one  that  is  desperate,  .as  wi. 

7.  7  remember  that  my  life  (is)  wind :  mine 

8.  2  words  of  thy  mouth  (be  like)  a  strong  wi 
15.  2  knowledge,  .fill  his  belly  with  the.  .wind 
21. 18  They  are  as  stubble  before  the  wind,  and 
28.  25  To  make  the  weight  for  the  winds,  and  my 
30.  15  they  pursue  my  soul  as  the  wind,  and  my 
30.  22  Thou  liftest  me  up  to  the  wind  ;  thou  ca. 
37.  21  but  the  wind  passeth,andcleanseth  them 

Psa.     1.   4  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind  drivethaw. 

18.  10  yea,  he  did  fly  upon  the  wings  of  the  wi. 

18.  42  beat  them  small  as  the  dust  before  the  w. 

35.   s  Let  them  be  as  chaff  before  the  wind,  and 

48.   7  breakest  the  ships  of  Tarshish..an  east  w. 

7S.  39  wind  thatpasseth  away,  and  cometh  not 

83.  13  a  wheel ;  as  the  stubble  before  the  wind 

103. 16  For  the  wind  passeth  over  it,  and  itis  go. 

104.    3  who  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind 

107.  25  raiseth  the  stormy  wind,  which  lifteth  up 

r35-   7  ne  bringeth  the  wind  out  of  his  treasuries 

147. 18  causeth  his  wind  to  blow,  (and)  the  wate. 

148.    8  and  vapours ;  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his 

Prov  11.  29  troubleth  his.  .house  shall  inherit  the  wi. 

25. 14  Whoso  boasteth.  .(is  like)  clouds  and  wi. 
25.  23  north  wind  driveth  away  rain ;  so  (doth) 
27.  16  Whosoever  hideth  her  hideth  the  wind 
30.    4  who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in  his  fists  ? 

Eccl.  1.   6  wind  goeth  toward  the  south. .and  the  w. 

5. 16  profit  hath  he  that,  .laboured  for  the  wind 

11.    4  He  that  observeth  the  wind  shall  not  sow 

Isa.     7.    2  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with  the  wi 

11. 15  with  his  mighty  wind  shall  he  shake  his    I 


Isa.    17. 13  the  chaff  of  the  mountains  before  the  w. 

26.  18  we  have  as  it  were  brought  forth  wind 

27.  8  stayeth  his  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the 
32.  2  shall  be  as  an  hiding  place  from  the  wind 
41.  16  Thou  shalt  fan  them,  and  the  wind  shall 
41.  29  their  molten  images  (are)  wind  andconfu. 
57.  13  but  the  wind  shall  carry  them  all  away 
64.    6  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us 

Jer.     2.  24  snuff eth  up  the  wind  at  her  pleasure,  in 
4.  11  A  dry  wind  of  the  high  places  in  the  wiL 

4.  12  full  wind  from  those  (places)  shall  come 
5. 13  prophets  shall  become  wind,  and  the  wo. 

10.  13  bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of  his  treas. 

13.  24  stubble  that  passeth  away  by  the  wind  of 

14.  6  they  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  dragons 
t8.  17 1  will  scatter  them  as  with  an  east  wind 
22.  22  wind  shall  eat  up  all  thy  pastors,  and  thy 
49.  32  will  scatter  into  all  winds  them  (that  are) 
49.  36  upon  Elam  will  I  bring  the  four  winds 
49.  36  and  will  scatter  them  toward  all  those  w. 
51.  1  raise  up  against  Babylon. .  a  destroying  w. 
51.  16  and  bringeth  forth  the  wind  out  of  his 

Eze.    5.    2  third  part  thou  shalt  scatter  in  the  wind 

5.  10  remnant  of  thee  will  I  scatter  into  allthe 
5.  12  I  will  scatter  a  third  part  into  all  the  wi. 

12.  14  will  scatter  toward  every  wind  all  that 

13.  n  greathailstones,shallfall;andastormyw. 

13. 13  I  will  even  rend  (it)  with  a  stormy  wind 
17.  10  utterly  wither  when  theeast  wind  touch. 
17.  21  that  remain  shall  be  scattered  toward  all  w 
19. 12  east  wind  dried  up  her  fruit ;  her  strong 
27.  26  east  mnd  hath  broken  thee  in  the  midst 
37.  9  Prophesyuntothewind..andsayto  the w. 
37.    9  Come  from  the  four  winds,  O  breath,  and 

Dan.    2.  35  wiud  carried  them  away,  that  no  place 

7.  2  four  winds  of  the  heaven,  strove  upon  the 

8.  8  four  notable  ones,  toward  the  four  winds 

11.  4  shall  be  divided  toward  the  four  winds 
Hos.    4.  19  The  wind  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  wings 

8.    7  For  they  have  sown  the  wind,  and  they 

12.  1  Ephraini  feedeth  on  wind,  and  followeth 

13.  15  windshallconie,thewindofithe  Lord  shall 
Amos  4. 13  createth  the  wind, and  decla'reth  unto  man 
Jon.    1.    4  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea 

4.  8  God  prepared  a  vehement  east  wind,  and 
Zech.  2.  6  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  win. 

5.  9  wind  (was)  iu  their  wings ;  for  they  had 

2.  Wind,  avefxos  anemos. 

Matt.  7.  25,  27  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon  that  house 

5.  26  Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds 
8.  27  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even 

11.    7  went,  .tosee?  A  reed  shaken  with  the  w.? 

14.  24  tossed  with  waves :  for  the  wind  was  con. 

14.  30  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,  he  was 
14.  32  when  they  were  come  into  the  ship,  the  w. 
24.  31  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  fourwi. 

Mark  4.  37  there  arose  a  great  storm  of  wiud,  and  the 
4.  39  rebuked  the  wind.  .And  the  wind  ceased 
4.  41  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even.  .w. 

6.  48  forthe  wiud  was  contrary  unto  them :  and 

6.  51  went  up  unto  them  into  the  ship  ;  and  .  .w. 
*3-  27  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four  wi. 

Luke  7.  24  went,  .tosee?  A  reed  shaken  with  the  wi.? 

8.  23  there  came  down  a  storm  of  wind  on  the 

8.  24  rebukedthe  wind  and  theragingofthewa. 

8.  25  for  he  commandeth  even  the  winds  and 

John  6.  18  sea  arose,  by  reason  of  a  great  wind  that 

Acts  27.    4  sailed  under  Cyprus,  because  the  winds 

27.   7  wind  not  suffering  us,  we  sailed  uuder  C. 

27. 14  there  arose  against  it  a  tempestuous  wind 

27. 15  was  caught,  and  could  notbearupiutothe 
Eph.  4. 14  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine 
Jas.  3.  4  driven  of  fierce  winds,  yet  are  they  turned 
Jude  12  carried  about  of  winds;  trees  whose  fruit 
Rev.   6.  13  fig  tree,  .she  is  shaken  of  a  mighty  wind 

7.  1  four  winds  of  the  earth,  that  the  wiud  sh. 

3.  Spirit,  irvevfj.a  pneuma. 

John  3.   S  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou 

4.  To  blow,  breathe,  irveai  pneo. 

Acts  27.  40  hoised  up  the  mainsail  to  the  wind,  and 

5.  Wind,  ttvot}  pnoe. 

Acts    2.    2  a  sound.,  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and 
WIND,  (about),  or  up,  to  be  driven  with  the  — 
l.To  be  or  go  round  about,  3?d  sabab,  2. 

Eze.  41.   7  a  winding  about  still  upward  to  the  side 
2.A  winding  about,  circuit,  3D50  musab. 

Eze.  41.    7  for  the  winding  about  of  the  house  went 

3.  To  bind,  tie,  Sea?  deo. 

John  ig.  40  wound  it  in  linen  clothes  with  the  spices 

4.  To  swathe,  wrap  together,  o-vo-t4\\q>  sustello. 
Acts    5.    6  young  men  arose,  wound  him  up,  and  ca. 

5. To  be  driven  by  the  wind,  aveixl^ofxat  anemizomai. 

Jas.    1.   6  like  a  wave  of  the  sea  driven  with  the  wi. 
WINDOW  — 
l.A  windoio,  woven  wor&,n3"}N  arubbah. 

Gen.    7. 11  broken  up,  and  the  windows  of  heaven 

8.  2  fountains  also  of  the  deep  and  the  wind. 
2  Ki.  7.  2,  19  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  he. 
Eccl.  12.  3  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  be  d. 
Isa.   24,  18  forthewindowsfromonhighareopen.and 

60.  8  as  a  cloud,  and  as  the  doves  to  their  wi.? 
Mai.   3. 10  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of  he. 

%A  window,  perforated  place,  j'iSi  challon. 

Gen.   8.   6  Noah  opened  the  window  of  the  ark  which 
26.    8  looked  out  at  a  window,  and  saw,  and,  be 


"WINDY 


1058 


WING- 


Josh.  2. 15  let  them  down  by  a  cord  through  the  wi. 

2. 18  bind  this  line  of  scarlet  thread  in  the  wi. 

2.  21  and  she  bound  the  scarlet  line  in  the  wi. 
Judg.  5.  2S  mother  of  Sisera  looked  out  at  a  window 

1  Sa.  19.  12  So  Michal  let  David  down  through  a  wi. 

2  Sa.    6.  16  looked  through  a  window,  and  saw  king 

1  Ki.   6.    4  for  the  house  he  made  windows  of  narrow 

2  Ki.  9.  30  and  tired  her  head,  and  looked  out  at  a  w. 

9.  32  lifted  up  his  face  to  the  window,  and  said 
*3-  17  Open  the  window  eastward :  and  he  open. 
1  Ch.15.  29  looking  out  at  a  window,  saw  king  David 
Prov.  7.  6  For  at  the  window  of  my  house  I  looked 
Song  2.  9  looketh  forth  at  the  windows,  showing 
Jer.     9.  21  For  death  is  come  up  into  our  windows 

22.  14  cutteth  him  out  windows ;  and  (it  is)  ciel. 
Eze.  40.  16  narrow  windows,  .windows  (were)  round 

40.  23  their  windows,  and  their  arches,  and  their 
40.  25  windows  in  it.  .like  those  windows:  the 
40.  29  windows  in  it  and  in  the  arches  thereof 
40.  33  windows  therein,  andin  the  archesthereof 

40.  36  windows  to  it  round  about :  the  length 
41  16  narrow  windows,  .up  to  the  windows,  .and 

41.  26  narrow  windows  and  palm  trees  on  the 
Joel    2.    9  they  shall  enter  in  at  the  windows  like  a 
Zeph.  2.  14  voice  shall  siug  in  the  windows;  desolat. 

3.  Windows,  pg  kavvin. 

Dan.    6.  10  his  windows  being  open  in  his  chamber 

4.  Bright  object,  ini*  tsohar. 

Gen.    6.  16  Awiudowshaltthou  make  to  the  ark,  and 

5.  Suns,  openings  for  sun's  rUys,  rn»DB»-  shemasJioth. 

Isa.   54. 12  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  agates,  and 
6. An  outlook,  F]j3»  sheqepk. 

1  Ki.  7.  5  doors  and  posts  (were)  square,  with  the  w. 
7. Outlooks,  O'Sj^  shequphim. 

1  Ki.  7.  4  windows  (in)  three  rows,  and  light  (was) 
8.  A  little  door  or  window,  Bvpis  thuris. 

Acts  20.    9  there  sat  in  a  window  a  certain  young  man 

2  Co.  11.  33  through  a  window  in  a  basket  was  I  let 
WINDY  — 

Wind,  r\r\  ruach. 

Psa.  55.  8  would  hasten  my  escape  from  the  windy 
WINE,  (mixed,  new,  red,  strong,  sweet,  on  the  lees) — 
l.A  thick,  sticky  syrup,  iDn  chemer. 

Isa.   27.   2  In  that  day  sing  ye..  A  vineyard  of  red  w. 

2.  A  thick,  sticky  (mixed)  syrup,  npn  chamar. 

Ezra   6.   9  wheat,  salt,  wine,  and  oil,  according  to 
7.  22  to  an  hundred  baths  of  wine,  and  to  an 

Dan.  5.  1  Belshazzar.  .drank  wine  before  the  thou. 
5.  2  Belshazzar,  whiles  he  tasted  the  wine,  co. 
5.   4  They  drank  wine,  and  praised  the  gods  of 

5.  23  thy  concubines,  have  drunk  wine  in  them 

3.  What  is  pressed  out,  grape  juice,  )*!  yayin. 
Gen.    9.  21  he  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drunken 

9.  24  Noah  awoke  from  Ms  wine/and  knew  what 
14. 18  Melchizedek..  brought  forth  bread  and  w. 
19.  32  Come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine 
*9-  33>  35  they  made  their  father  drink  wiue  that 
lg.  34  let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this  night  also 

27.  25  and  he  brought  him  wine,  and  he  drank 

49. 11  he  washed  his  garments  in  wine,  and  his 

49. 12  His  eyes  (shall  be)  red  with  wine,  and  his 
Exod  29.  40  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  wine . .  a  drink  off. 
Lev.  10.    9  Do  not  drink  wine  nor  strong  drink,  thou 

23.  13  the  drink  offering  thereof,  .of  wine,  the 
Num.  6.    3  He  shall  separate  (himself)  from  wine  and 

6.  3  shall  drink  no  vinegar  of  wine,  or  vinegar 

6.  20  and  after  that  the  Nazarite  may  drink  w. 
15.  5  fourth,  .of  an  hin  of  wine  for  a  drink  off. 
15.    7  thou  shalt  offer  the  third . .  of  an  bin  of  w. 

15.  10  for  a  drink  offering  half  of  an  hin  of  wine 
28. 14  offerings  shall  be  half  an  hin  of  wine  unto 

Deuti4.  26  thou  shalt  bestow  that  money,  .for  wine 

28.  39  but  shalt  neither  drink  (of)  the  wine,  nor 

29.  6  n  ither  have  ye  chunk  wine  or  strong  dri. 
32.  33  Their  wine  (is)  the  poison  of  dragons,  and 
32.  38  Which„drankthe  wineoftheir drink offe.? 

Josh.  9.    4  took  old  sacks  upon  their  asses,  and  wine 

9. 13  these  bottles  of  wine  which  we  tilled  (were) 

Judg  13.   4  drink  not  wine  nor  strong  drink,  and  eat 

13.    7  and  now  drink  no  wine  nor  strong  drink 

13.  34  neither  let  her  drink  wine  or  strong  drink 

-  ._.  19.  19  there  is  bread  and  wine  also  for  me,  and 

1  Sa.    1.  14  Elisaid  unto  her. .putawaythywinefrom 

1. 15  I  have  drunk  neither  wine  nor  strong  dr. 

1.  24  one  ephah  of  flour,  and  a  bottle  of  wine 
10.    3  meet,  .another  carrying  a  bottle  of  wine 

16.  20  with  bread,  and  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  a 
25. 18  two  bottles  of  wine,  and  five  sheep  ready 
•25.  37  when  the  wine  was  gone  out  of  Nabal,  and 

2  Sa.  13.  28  when  Amnon's  heart  is  merry  with  wine 

t6.  i  hundred  of  summer  fruits . .  a  bottle  of  wi. 
16.    2  the  wine,  that  such  as  be  faint  in  the  wi 

1  Ch.  9.  29  fine  flour,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  and 

12. 40  wine,  and  oil,  and  oxen,  and  sheep  abund. 
27.  27  over. .  the  wine  cellars  (was)  Zabdi  the 

2  Ch,  2. 10  twenty  thousand  baths  of  wiue,  and  twe. 

2.  15  the  barley,  the  oil,  and  the  wine,  which 
it.  11  put.,  store  of  victual,  and  of  oil  and  wine 

Neh.  2.  1  wiue.  .before  him:  and  I  took  up  the  wi. 
5.  15  had  taken  of  them  bread  and  wine,  besides 
5.  18  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  sorts  of  wine 
13.  15  as  also  wine,  grapes,  and  figs,  and  all.,  bu. 

Esth.  1.  7  royal  wine  in  abundance,  according  to  the 
1. 10  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with  wine 
5.    6  the  khiLrsaid..at  the  bauquet  of  wine.  What 

7.  2  theldngsaid..afcthebanyuetof  wine/Wnat 


Esth.  7.    7  arisingfrom  the  banquet  of  wine  in  his  wr. 

7.    S  returned,  .into  the  place  of.  .banquet  of  w. 

Job      1. 13, 18  eating  and  drinking  wine  in  their  elder 

32.  19  Behold,  my  belly  (is)  as  wine  (which)  hath 
Psa.  60.   3  thou  hast  made  us  to  drink  the  wiue  of 

75.    8  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red;  it  is  full  of  m. 

78.  65  like  a. .  man  that  shouteth  by  reason  of  wi. 

104. 15  wine  (that)  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man 

Prov.  4.  17  eat  the  bread . .  and  drink  the  wine  of  vio. 

9.   2  she  hath  mingled  her  wine ;  she  hath  also 

9.    s  come . .  drink  of  the  wine . .  I  have  mingled 

20.    1  Wiue(is)amocker,strongdiink(is)raging 

21. 17  he  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  be 

23.  30  They  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine ;  they 

23.  31  Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  is 
31.   4  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine,  nor  for  prin. 
31.   6  Give,  .wine  unto  those  that  be  of  heavy 

Eccl.  2.    3  I  sought  in . .  heart  to  give  myself  unto  w. 

9.    7  Go.  .and  drink  thy  wine  with  arnerry  he. 

10. 19  A  feast  is . .  for  laughter,  and  wine  maketh 

Song  1.    2  Let  him  kiss  me.  .love  (is) better  than  wi. 

1.    4  we  will  remember  thy  love  more  than  wi. 

4. 10  how  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine 

5.    1  I  have  drunk  my  wine  with  my  milk :  eat 

7.  9  the  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  best  wine 

8.  2  of  spiced  wine  of  the  juice  of  my  pomeg. 
Isa.     5.  11  continue  until  night,  (till)  wine  inflame 

5.  12  tabret  and  pipe,  and  wine,  are  in  their 
5.  22  "Woe  unto,  .mighty  to  drink  wine,  and 
t6.  10  the  treaders  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in 

22. 13  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh,  .drinking  wine 

24.  9  They  shall  not  drink  wine  with  a  song 

24. 11  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  streets ;  all  joy 
28.    1  valleys  of  them  that  are  overcomewithwine 

28.  7  they  also  have  erred  through  wine,  and 

25.  7  they  are  swallowed  up  of  wine,  they  are 

29.  9  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  wine  ;  they 
51.  21  thou  afflicted,  .drunken,  but  not  with  w. 
55.    1  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money,  and 

56. 12  Come  ye.  .1  will  fetch  wine,  and  we  will 
Jer.  13.  12,  12  Every  bottle  shall  be  filled  with  wine 

23.  9  I  am.  .lite  a  man  whom  wine  hath  over 
25.  15  Take  the  winecup  of  this  furyat  my  hand 
35.  2  bring  them . .  and  give  them  wine  to  drink 
35-  5  Pots  ftill  of  wine . .  and  I  said . .  Diink  ye  w. 
35.  6  will  drink  no  wine.  .Ye  shall  drinkno  wi. 
35.   8  to  drink  no  wine  all  our  days,  we,  ourwi, 

35. 14  he  commanded  his  sons  not  to  drink  wine 
40. 10  gather  ye  wine,  and  summer  fruits,  and 
40.  12  gathered  wine  and  summer  fruits  very 
48.  33  I  have  caused  wine  to  fail  from  the  wine. 
51.  "7  the  nations  have  drunken  of  her  wine 

Lam.  2.  12  to  their  mothers,  Where  (is)  corn  and  w.? 

Eze.  27.  18  Damascus(was)thy  merchant,  .in the  wine 

44.  21  Neither  shall  any  priest  drink  wine  when 

Dan.  1.    5  of  the  king's  meat,  and  of  the  wine  which 

1.    8  would  not  defile  himself,  .with  the  wine 

1.  16  took  away,  .the  wine  that  they  should  dr. 

10.    3  neither  came  flesh  nor  wine  in  my  mouth 

Hos.    4.  11  Whoredom  and  wine,  .take  away  the  he. 

7.  5  princes  have  made . .  sick  withbottles  of  w. 

9.  4  They  shall  not  offer  wine(offerings)tothe 
14.    7  the  scent  thereof,  .as  the  wine  of  Leban. 

Joel  1 .  5  howl, all  ye  drinkers  of  wine.because  of  new 
3.    3  sold  a  girl  for  wine,  that  theymight  drink 

Amos  2.  8  theydrinkthe  wineof  the  condemned  (in) 
2. 12  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to  drink,  and 

5.  11  vineyards,  but  ye  shall  not  drink  wine  of 

6.  6  That  drink  wine  in  bowls,  and  anoint  th. 
9.  14  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the  wine 

Mic.  2. 11  I  will  prophesy  unto  thee  of  wine  and  of 
6. 15  thou  shalt  tread,  .but  shalt  not  drink  wi. 
Hab.  2.  5  Yea  also,  because  he  transgresseth  by  wi. 
Zeph.  1.  13  plant  vineyards,  but  not  drink  the  wine 
Hag.  2. 12  with  his  skirt  do  touch,  .wine,  or  oil,  or 
Zech.  9.  15  shall  drink,  .make  a  noise  as  through  wi. 

10.  7  their  heart  shall  rejoice  as  through  wiue 
4.  A  vat  or  trough,  an*  yeqeb. 

Deut  16. 13  after  that  thou  hast  gathered  in . .  thy  wi, 
5. Any  thing  mixed-,  ^-CD?  mimsalc. 

Prov 23.  30  They  that  tarry,  .that go  toseekmixed w. 
6. Aiiy  thing  sucked  in  or  up,  K?b  sobe. 

Isa.  1.  22  Thy  silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  mix. 
7. A  (ripe  or  round)  grape,  grape  cake,  3:y  enab. 

Hos.  3.  1  look  to  other  gods,  and  love  flagons  of  wi. 
S.Any  thing  pressed  on,  mead,  D*pjj  asis. 

Isa.   49.  26  they  shall  be  drunken,  .as  with  sweet  wi. 

Joel  1.  5  howl,  all  ye  drinkers,  .because  of.  .neww. 
3.  18  the  mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine 

Amos  9. 13  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and 

9A\'h'it  satiates,  pleases,  12&  shekar. 

Nirm  28.    7  cause  the  strong  wine  to  be  poured  unto 

10.  What  ispreserved,dregs,sediment)'n'"!i2iz}slti  mar, 
Isa.   25.    6  wines  on  the  lees,  .wines  on  the  lees  well 

11.  What  is  possessed,  mead,  new  wine,  t'l-rn  tirosh. 
Gen.  27.  28  God  give  thee,  .-plenty  of  corn  and  wine 

27.  37  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  sustained  him 
Num  18.  12  all  the  best  of  the  wine,  and  of  the  wheat 
Deut.  7.  13  he  will  also  bless,  .thy  corn,  and  thy  wine 

11.  14  mayest  gather  in  thy  corn,  and  thy  wine 

12.  17  Thou  mayest  not  eat.  .the  tithe,  .of  thy  wi. 
14.  23  the  tithe,  .of  thy  wine,  and  of  thine  oil 
18.    4  The  first  fruit,  .of  thy  corn,  of  thy  wine 

28.  51  shall  not  leave  thee,  .corn,  wine,  or  oil 

33.  28  fountain,  .upon  a  land  of  corn  and  wine 
Judg.  9.  13  Should  I  leave  my  wine,  which  cheecebh 
2  Ki.  iS.  32  a  land  of  corn  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread 


2  Ch.31.  5  brought  in  abundance,  .first  fruits  of .  .w. 
32.  28  for  the  increase  of  corn,  and  wine,  and 

Neh.  5.  11  of  the  corn,  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  that  ye 
10.  37  fruit  of  all  manner  of  trees,  of  wine,  and 
10.  39  the  offering  of  the  corn,  of  the  new  wine 

13.  5  tithes  of  the  corn,  the  new  wine,  and  the 
13. 12  brought  all  Judah  the  tithe  of.,  the  neww. 

Psa.     4.    7  time . .  their  corn  and  their  wine  increased 

Prov.  3. 10  thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  new  wine 

Isa.   24.    7  The  new  wine  mournetli,  the  vine  langui. 

36. 17  a  land  of  corn  and  wiue,  a  land  of  bread 

62.    8  sons  of.  .stranger  shall  not  drinkthywine 

65.    8  As  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster 

Jer.   31.  12  for  wheat,  aud  for  wine,  and  for  oil,  and 

Hos.   2.    8  she  did  not  know..  I  gave  hercoru,andw. 

2.   9  take  away,  .my  wine  in  the  season  thereof 

2.  22  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine 

4.  11  Whoreaoni.  .and  new  wine  take  away  the 
7.  14  they  assemble  themselves  for  corn  andw. 
9.    2  shall  not  feed  them,  and  the  new  wine 

Joel    1.  10  new  wine  is  dried  up,  the  oil  languisheth 
2.  19  I  will  send  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil 
2.  24  the  fats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil 
Mic.    6.  15  shalt  not  anoint,  .with  oil;  and  sweet  wine 
Hag.    1.  11  I  called  for  a  drought,  .upon  the  new  wine 
Zech.  9. 17  Corn  shall  make,  .cheerful,  and  new  wine 

12. Sweet  or  new  xoine,  yhevnos  gleukos. 

Acts   2. 13  mocking  said,  These  men  are  fullofhew  w, 

IZ.Wine,  grape  juice,  olvos  oinos. 

Matt.  9. 17  Neither,  .put  new  wine.  .else,  .thewineru. 

g.  17  but  they  put  new  wine  into  new  bottles 
Mark  2.  22  nomanputtethnewwine. .  else  the  new  w.  ■ 

2.  22  the  wine  is  spilled,  .[but  new  wine  mustj 

15.  23  they  gave  himtu  driuk  wine  mingled  with 
Luke  1. 15  shall  drink  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink 

5.  37  nomanputtethnewwine.  .else  the  new  w. 
5.  38  But  new  wine  must  be  put  into  new  bott. 
7.  33  neither  eating  bread  nor  drinking  [wine] 

10.  34  bound,  .wounds,  pouring  in  oil  and  wine 
John  2.  3  they  wanted  wine.,  saith..  They  have  no  wi. 
2.  9  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  made  wine 
2. 10  at  the  beginning  doth  set  forth  good  wine 
2.  10  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now 

4.  46  of  Galilee,  where  he  made  the  water  wine 
Horn  14.  21  good  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  wi. 
Eph.    5. 18  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wiierein  is  excess 

1  Ti.    3.    8  not  given  to  much  wine,  not  greedy  of  fil. 

5.  23  Drink  no  longer  water,  but  use  a  little  wi. 
Titus  2.  3  not  given  to  much  wiue,  teachers  of  good 
Bev.    6.    6  and  (see)  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  wi. 

14.  8  she  made  all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of 
14.  10  The  same  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the 

16.  19  to  give  unto  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  the 

17.  2  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  f  ornica. 

18.  3  For  all  nations  have  drunk  [of  the  wine] 

18.  13  frankincense,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  fine 

19.  15  he  treadeth  the  wine  press  of  theflercen, 

WINE  bibber  — 

1.  Wme  sucker,  }«  Nib  sobe  yayin. 

Prov  23. 20  Be  not  among  wine  bibbers ;  among  riot. 

2.  Wine  drinker,  otvowSrris  oinopotes. 

Mattn.  19  Behold  a  man  gluttonous,  and  a  wine  bib. 
Luke  7.  34  Behold  a  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine  bib* 

WINE  fat,  wine  press  — 

l.A  trough,  wine  or  wheat  press,  D3  gath. 

Judg.  6.  11  Gideon  threshed  wheat  by  the  winepress 
Neh.  13.  15  treading  winepresses  on  the  sabbatb,  and 
Isa.  63.  2  and.  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wine  fat 
Lam.  1.  15  hath  trodden  the  virgin. .(as)  in  a  winepr. 

l.A  vat  or  trough,  up;  yeqeb. 

NuniiS.  27  as  though. .the  fulness  of  the  wine  press 

18.  30  counted. .as  theincrease  of  the  wine  press 
Deut  1 5.  14  shalt  furnish  him. .out  of  thy  wine  press 
Judg.  7.  25  Zeeb  they  slew  at  the  wine  press  of  Zeeb 

2  Ki.  6.  27  out  of  the  barn  floor,  or  out  of  the  wine  p.? 
Job  24. 11  (and)tread..  wine  presses,  and  suffer  thirst 
Isa.  5.  2  also  made  a  wine  press  therein:  and  he  lo. 
Jer.  48.  33  I  have  caused,  .to  fail  from  the  wine  pre. 
Hos.  9.  2  The  floor  and  the  wine  press  shall  not  feed 
Zech  14.  10  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  kings  wine  p. 

Z.A  vat  or  trough,  -tjis  purah. 

Isa.  63.    3  I  have  trodden  the  wine  press  alone,  and 

4..1  vft  or  wine  press,  \i)v6s  lenos. 

Matt2i.  33  hedged  it  round  about,  and  digged  a  wine 
Kev.  14.  19  cast  (it)  into  the  great  wine  press  of  the 
14.  20  the  wine  press  was  trodden  without  the 
14.  20  blood  came  out  of  the  wine  press,  even 

5. Press  of  the  vine,  Xnvos  tov  oivov  lenos  ton  oinou. 

Kev.  19.  15  he  treadeth  the  wine  press  of  the  fiercen. 
6. An  under  vat,  vtto\i)vlou  hupolenion. 

Marki2.    1  digged,  .the  wine  fat,  and  built  a  tower 

WINE,  excess  of,  given  to  — 

l.An  over/towing  of  wine,  ohocpXvyia  oinophlugia. 
1  Pe.  4.    3  excess  of  wine,  revellings,  banquetings 

2.07*<?  alongside  of  wine,  irdpoiyos  paroinos. 

1  Ti.  3.  3  Not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  greedy 
Titus  1.    7  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to 

WING,  (winged)  — 

l.A  wing,  (from,  its  strength),  ~i?N  eber. 

Tsa.  55.  6  Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove  !  (for  th.) 
Isa.   40.  31  they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles 


WINK 


1059 


WISDOM 


2.  A  wing,  (from  its  strength),  rrpx  ebrah. 

Detit32.  ii  taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings 
Job  39.  13  or  wings  and  feathers  unto  the  ostrich? 

3.-4.  wing,  {from  its  arched  appearance),  ^5  gaph. 
Dan.   7.    4  had  eagle's  wings ;  I  beheld  till  the  wings 

7.  6  which  had  upon  the  back  of  it  four  wings 

4.-4  icing,  {from  its  covering  and  protecting),  *$$. 

Gen.   1.  21  every  winged  fowl  afterhiskind:  and  God 

Exodicj.   4  bare  you 011  eagle's  wings,  and  brought  you 

25,  20  cherubim  shall  stretch  forth  (their)wings 

25.  20  covering  the  mercy  seat  with  their  wings 

37.   g  cherubim  spread  out  (their)  wings  on  high 

37.   9  covered  with  their  wings  over  the  meivy 

Lev.    1. 17  he  shall  cleave  it  with  the  wings  thereof 

Deut.  4. 17  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that  flieth  in 

32. 11  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,  taketh  them 
Ruth  2.  12  under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  trust 
2  Sa.  22. 11  and  he  was  seen  upon  the  wings  of  the  wi. 

1  Ki.  6.  24  one  wing  of  the  cherub,  .other  wing  of  the 

6.  24  from  the  uttermost  part  of  the  one  wing 
6.  27  stretched  forth  the  wings,  .that  the  wing 
6.  27  wing  of  the  other  cherub  touched  the  ot. 
6.  27  their  wings  touched  one  another  in  the 

8.  6  even)  under  the  wings  of  the  cherubim 
8.    7  cherubim  spread  forth  (their)  two  wings 

2  Ch.  3.  11  wings  of  the  cherubim  (were)  twenty  cu. 

3.  11  one  wing,  .and  the  other  wing,  .five  cub. 
3.  11  reaching  to  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub 

3. 12  wing  of  the  other  cherub  (was)  five  cubits 
3.  12  other  wing,  .joining  to  the  wing  of  the  ot. 

3. 13  wings  of  these  cherubim  spread  themsel. 
5.    7  even)  under  the  wings  of  the  cherubim 

5.    8  cherubim  spread  forth  (their)  wings  over 

Job    39.  13  (Gavest  thou)  the  goodly  wings  unto  the 

39.  26  fly  by  wisdom,  (and)  stretch  her  wings  to. 

Psa.  17.    8  hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings 

18. 10  yea,  he  did  fly  upon  the  wingsof  the  wind 

36.    7  put  their  trust  under  the  shadow  of  thyw. 

57.    1  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  make 

-  61.    4  ever :  I  will  trust  in  the  covert  of  thy  wi. 

63.   7  therefore  m  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will 

6S.  13  wings  of  a  dove  covered  with  silver,  and 

91.    4  under  his  wings  shalt  thou  trust :  his  tr. 

104.    3  who  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind 

139.    9  (If)  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  (and) 

"Prov  23.    5  for  (riches)  certainly  make  themselves  wi. 

Eccl.  10.  20  that  which  hath  wings  shall  tell  the  mat. 

Isa.     6.    2  each  one  had  six  wings;  with  twain  he  co. 

8.  8  stretching  out  of  his  wings  shall  fill  the 
10.  14  there  was  none  that  moved  the  wing,  or 
18.    1  Woe  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings 

Jer.  48. 40  fly  as  an  eagle,  and  shall  spread  his  wings 

49.  22  fly  as  the  eagle,  and  spread  his  wings  over 

Eze.    1.    6  had  four  faces,  and  everyone  had  four  wi. 

1.   8  hands  of  a  man  under  their  wings  on  th. 

1.    8  and  they  four  had  their  faces  and  their  w. 

1.    9  Their  wings  (were)  joined  one  to  another 

1. 11  their  wings  (were)stretched  upward,  two 

1.  23  under  the  flrmament  (were)  their  wings 

1.  24  heard  the  noise!of  their  wings,  like  the  no. 

1.  24  when  they  stood,  they  letdown  their  wi. 

1.  25  when  they  stood,  (and),  let  down  their  w. 

3. 13  the  noise  of  the  wings  of  the  living  creat. 

10.    5  the  sound  of  the  cherubim's  wings  was 

10.    8  the  form  of  a  man's  hand  under  their  w. 

10. 12  their  hands,  and  their  wings,  and  the  w. 
10.  16  when  the  cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings 
10. 19  cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings,  and  mou. 
10.  21  four  faces  apiece,  .every  one  had  four  wi. 

10.  21  the  hands  of  a  man  (was)  under  their  wi. 

11.  22  Then  did  the  cherubim  lift  up  their  wings 
17.  3  A  great  eagle  with  great  wings,  long  win. 
17.  7  another  great  eagle  with  great  wings  and 
17.  23  andunder  itshalldwellallfowlofeveryw. 

Hos.    4. 19  The  wind  hath  bound  hemp  in  her  wings 

Zech.  5.    9  two  women,  and  the  wind  (was).in  their  w. 

5.   9  for  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  st. 

Mai.   4.    2  arise  with  healing  iiihis  wings;  and  ye  sh. 

5.  A  wing,  (from  its  feathers),  flower,  f"¥  tsits. 

Jer.   48.    9  Give  wings  unto  Moab,  that  it  may  flee 

6.  A  wing,  {from  its  power  of flying),  -n-repv^. 

Matt  23.  37  alien  gathereth  her  chickens  under  (her)  w. 
Lukei3.  34  hen  (doth  gather)  her  brood  under  (her)w. 
.Rev.    4.    8  four  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  wings 

9.  9  sound  of  their  wings  (was)  as  the  sound 
12. 14  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  a 

WINK  (at),  to  — 

l.To  move,  wink,  pf?  qarats. 

Psa.  35.  19  wink  with  the  eye  that  hate  me  without 

Prov.  6.  13  He  winketh  with  his  eyes,  he  speaketh  wi. 

10. 10  He  that  w  inketh  with  the  eye  causeth  sor. 

2.To  wink  at,  roll,  move  to  and  fro,  cr\  razam. 
Job  15.  12  heart  carry.,  and  what  do  thy  eyes  wink  a. 

3. To  overlook,  connive  at,  inrepeth'Q)  hujiereido. 
Acts  17.  30  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  a. 

WINNOW,  to  — 

To  scatter,  unnnoiv,  spread,  n*ii  zarah. 

Puith  3.  2  he  winnoweth  barley  to  night  in  the  thr. 
Isa.  30.  24  which  hath  been  winnowed  with  the  sho. 

WINTER,  (in,  to)  — 

I.  Winter  or  autumn,  youth  or  maturity,  ^h  choreph. 
Gen.   8.  22  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night 
Psa.  74. 17  the  earth:  thou  hast  made  summer  and 
Jer.   36.  22  Now  the  king  sat  in  the  winterhouse,  in 
Amos  3.  15  will  smite  the  wiuterhouse  with  the  sum. 
Zech.  14.    8  hinder  sea:  in  summer  and  in  whiter  sh. 


2.  To  pass  the  winter  or  autumn,  *pij  charaph. 
Isa.    18.    6  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  winter  upon 

3.  Winter  or  autumn,  vnp,  inp  sethav. 

Song  2. 11  For,  lo,  the  winter  is  past,  the rainis over 

4.-4  wintering  at, passing  the  winter, irapax^t/J-aaia. 

Acts  27. 12  haven  was  not  commodious  to  winter  in 

5.  To  pass. the  winter  at  or  near,  irapaxetp-dfa  pa. 

Acts  27.  12  if  by  any  means theymightattain.  .to  wi. 
28.  11  ship  of  Alexandria,  which  had  wintered 
i  Co.  16.    6  winter  with  you,  that  ye  may  bring  me 
Titus  3.  12  for  I  have  determined  there  to  winter  in 

6.  Winters  storm,  tempest,  xf-fi&v  cheimon. 

Matt  24.  20  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  wi. 
Marki3. 18  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  wi. 
John  10.  22  the  feast  of  the  dedication,  and  it  was  w, 
2  Ti.    4. 21  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter 

WIPE  (away,  off,  out>,  be  wiped,  to  — 
1.  To  wipe  away,  blot  out,  nnn  machah. 

1  Ki.  21. 13  wipe  Jerusalem  as  (a  man)  wipeth  a  dish 
Prov. 30.  20  she  eateth,  and  wipeth  her  mouth,  and 
Isa.   25.    8  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  fa. 

"l.To  be  wiped  away,  blotted  out,  nrro  machah,  2. 
Prov.  6.  33  and  his  reproach  shall  notbe  wiped  away 

3.  To  {cause  to)  wipe  away,  blot  out,  nnn  machah,  5. 

Neh.  13.  14  wipe  not  out  my  good  deeds  that  I  have 

4.  To  wipe  away  or  off,  airofxdo~(rai  apomasso. 
Lukeio.  11  which  cleaveth  on  us,  we  do  wipe  off  ag. 

5.  To  wipe  out,  eKfido-cru  ekmasso. 

Luke  7.  3S  did  wipe  (them)  with  the  hairs  of  her  head 

7.  44  and  wiped  (them)  with  the  hairs  of  her 
John  1 1.    2  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair,  whose  brot. 

12.  3  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  wiped  his 

13.  5  to  wipe  (them)  with  the  towel  wherewith 

Q.To  smear  out,  4£ak€Kpw  eoxdeipho. 

Rev.    7. 17  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
21.   4  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
WIRE  — 
Wire,  ribbon,  thread,  "?"ns  pathil. 

Exod  39.    3  cut  (it  into)  w'ires,  to  work  (it)  in  the  blue 

WISDOM,  (to  teach)  — 

1.  Understanding,  intelligence,  nr?  binah. 

Job  39.  26  Doth  the  hawk  fly  by  thy  wisdom,  (and) 
Prov  23.    4  not  to  be  rich;  cease  from  thine  own  wi. 

2.  To  make  wise,  teach,  orfl  chakam,  3. 

Psa.  105.  22  at  his  pleasure,  and  teach  his  senators  w. 

3.  Wisdom,  skill,  >TD3rj  chokmah. 

Exod  28.    3  whom'l  have  filled  with  the  spirit  of  wi. 
31.    3  filled  him.  .in  wisdom,  and  in  understan. 

31.  6"  in  the  hearts  of  all . .  I  have  put  wisdom 
35.  26  women  whose  heart  stirred  them  up  in  w. 
35.  31  filled  him.  .in  wisdom,  and  in  understan. 

35.  35  Them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  of  heart 

36.  1  in  whom  the  Lord  put  wisdom  and  und. 
36.    2  in  whose  heart  the  LORD  had  put  wisdom 

Deut.  4.    6  this  (is)  your  wisdom  and  your  understa. 
34.    9  Joshua,  .was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom 

2  Sa.  14.  20  according  to  the  wisdom  of  an  angel  of  God 

20.  22  woman  went  unto  all  the  people  in  her  w. 

1  Ki.   2.    6  Dothereforeaccordingtothy wisdom, and 

3.  28  for  they  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  (was) 

4.  29  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  understa. 
4.  30  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled  the  wisdom 

4.  34  wisdom,  .which.had  heard  of  hiswisdoni 

5.  12  Lord  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  as  he  prom. 
7. 14  he  was  filled  with  wisdom  and  understa. 

10.  4  the  queen,  .had  seen  all  Solomon's  wisd. 
10.  6  a  true  report  that  I  heard . .  of  thy  wisdom 
10.  7  thy  wisdom  and  prosperity  exceedeth  the 
10.  8  Happy  (are)  thy  men.  .that  hear  thy  wis. 
10.  23  Solomon  exceeded .  .for  riches  and  for  w, 

10.  24  all  the  earth  sought,  .to  hear  hiswisdoni 

11.  41  Solomon,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  his  wi. 

2  Ch.  1.  10  Give  menow  wisdom  and  knowledge,  that 

1. 1 1  hast  asked  wisdom  and  knowledge  for  th. 

1,  12  Wisdom  and  knowledge  (is)granted  unto 

9.    3  queen . .  had  seen  the  wisdom  of  Solomon 

9.    5  a  true  report  which  I  heard . .  of  thy  wis. 

9.   6  the  one  half  of  the  greatness  of  thy  wisd. 

9.    7  Happy  (are)  thy  men.  .which,  .heartily  w. 

9.  22  king  Solomon  passed  all . .  in  riches  and  w. 

9.  23  all . .  sought . .  Solomon,  to  hear  his  wisdom 
Ezra  7.  25  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God  that  (is)  in  th. 
Job     4.  21^0  away?  they  die,  even  without  wisdom 

11.  6*that  he  would  show  thee  the  secrets  of  w. 

12.  2  No  doubt,  .ye  (are)  the  people,  and  wisd. 

12.  12  With  the  ancient  (is)  wisdom  ;  and  in  leu. 
12. 13  With  him  (is)  wisdom  and  strength,  he  ha. 

13.  5  hold  your  peace,  and  it  should  be  yourw. 
15.  8  and  dost  thou  restrain  wisdom  to  thyself? 
26.  3  How  hast  thou  counselled,  .no  wisdom? 
28.  12  where  shall  wisdom  be  found?  and  where 
28.  18  for  the  price  of  wisdom  (is)  above  rubies 
28.  20  Whence  then  cometh  wisdom?  and  where 
28.  28  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  (is)  w. 

32.  7  and  multitude  of  years  should  teach  wi. 

32.  13  Lest  ye.  .say,  We  have  found  out  wisdom 

33.  33  hold  thy  peace,  and  I  shall  teach  thee  w, 
38.  36  Who  can  number  the  clouds  in  wisdom 
38.  37  Whohathput wisdom  intheinward parts? 
39. 17  God  hath  deprived  her  of  wisdom,  neither 

Psa,  37.  30  The  mouth  of  the  righteous  speaketh  wi. 
51.   6  Behold .  .thou  shalt  make  me  to  know  \v. 


Psa.  90.  12  that  we  mayapply  (our)  hearts  unto  wis 
104.  24  Lord,  .in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them 
in.  10  fear  of  the  Lord  (is)  the  beginning  of  w. 

Prov.  1.    2  To  know  wisdom  and  instruction,  to  per. 

1 .  7  (but)  fools  despise  wisdom  and  instruction 

2.  2  So  that  thou  incline  thine  ear  unto  wisdom 
2.    6  For  the  LORD  giveth  wisdom :  out  of  his 

2.  10  Wrhen  wisdom  entereth  into  thine  heart 

3.  13  Happy  (is)  the  man  (that)  findetb  wisdom 

3.  19  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the  earth 

4.  5  Get  wisdom,  get  understanding;  forget 

4.  7  Wisdom  (is)  the  principal  thing.,  get  wis. 

4. 11  I  have  taught  thee  in  the  wayof  wisdom 

5.  1  My  son,  attend  unto  my  wisdom . .  bow  th. 

7,  4  Sayuntowisdom,  Thou  (art)  my  sister,  and 

8.  1  Doth  not  wisdom  cry?  and  understanding 
8.  11  For  wisdom  (is)  better  than  rubies,  and  all 
8.  12  I  wisdom  dwell  with  prudence,  and  find 

9. 10  The  fear,  .(is)  the  beginning  of  wisdom 
10.  13  In  the  lips  of  him.  .wisdom  is  found 
10.  23  a  man  of  understanding  hath  wisdom 

10.  31  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth  forth  wisdom 

11.  2  cometh  shame :  but  with  the  lowly  (is)  w. 
13. 10  but  with  the  well  advised  (is)  wisdom 
14.    6  A  scorner  seeketh  wisdom,  and  findeth 
14.    8  The  wisdom  of  the  prudent  (is)  to  under. 

14.  33  Wisdom  resteth  in  the  heart  of  him  that 

15.  33  The  fear,  .(is)  the  instruction  of  wisdom 

16.  16  How  much  better  (is  it)  to  get  wisdom 
17. 16  apricein  thehandof  a  fool  to  get  wisdom 

17.  24  Wisdom  (is)  before  him  that  hath  under. 

18.  4  the  well  spring  of  wisdom  (as)  a  flowing 
21.  30  (There  is)  no  wisdom  nor  understanding 

23.  23  Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  (it)  not ;  (also)  wi. 

24.  3  Through  wisdom  is  an  house  builded.and 
24.  14  So  (shall)  the  knowledge  of  wisdom  (be) 
29.    3  Whoso  loveth  wisdom  rejoicethhis  father 

29.  15  The  rod  and  reproof  give  wisdom,  but  a 

30.  3  I  neither  learned  wisdom,  nor  have  the 

31.  26  Sheopeneth  her  mouth  with  wisdom,  and 
Eccl.  1.  13  to  seek  and  search  out  by  wisdom  eonce. 

1.  16 gotten  more  wisdom,  .experience  of  wis. 
1.  17 1  gave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom,  and  to 

1.  18  in  much  wisdom  (is)  much  grief ;  and  he 

2.  3  yet  acquainting  mine  heart  with  wisdom 
2.    9  I  was  great,  .my  wisdom  remained  with 

2. 12  I  turned  myself  to  behold  wisdom,  and 

2. 13  I  saw  that  "wisdom  excelleth  folly,  as  far 
2.  21  there  is  a  man  whose  labour' (is)  in  wisdom 
2.  26  (God)  giveth  to  a  man  that  (is)  good. .wis. 
7.  11  Wisdom  Asjgood  with  an  inheritance;  and 
7. 12  wisdom  (is)a  defence.,  wisdom  giveth  life 
7. 19  Wisdom  strengthened  the  wise  more  than 
7.  23  All  this  have  I  proved  by  wisdom :  I  said 

7.  25  to  seek  out  wisdom,  and  the  reason  (of 

8.  1  a  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine 

8.  16 1  applied  mine  heart  to  know  wisdom,  and 

9.  to  there  is  no.  .wisdom,  in  the  grave,  whith. 
9.  13  This  wisdom  have  I  seen  also  under  the 
9.  15  and  he  by  his  wisdom  delivered  the  city 
9. 16  Wisdom  (is)  better  than  strength  :  never. 
9.  i6the  poor  man's  wisdom  (is)despised,  and  his 
9. 18  Wisdom  (is)  better  than  weapons  of  war 

10.  1  him  that  is  in  reputation  for  wisdom  (and) 
10. 10  put  to  more  strength  :  but  wisdom  (is)  pr. 

Isa.   10.  13  I  have  done  (it),  and  by  my  wisdom,  for 

11.  2  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding 
29.  14  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  (men)  shall  per. 
33.  6  wisdom  and  knowledge  shall  be  thestabi. 
47.  10  Thy  wisdom  and  thy  knowledge,  it  hath 

Jer.  8.  9  rejected,  .and  what  wisdom  (is)  in  them 
9.  23  Letnotthewise  (man)  glory  in  his  wisdom 
10.  12  hath  established  the  world  by  his  wisdom 
49.  7  (Is) wisdom  no  more,  .is  counsel  perished 
49.  7  concerning  Edoni. .  is  their  wisdom  vanis.  ? 
51. 15  hath  established  the  world  by  his  wisdom 

Eze.  28.   4  With  thy  wisdom  and  with  thine  traders. 
28.    5  By  thy  great  wisdom  (and)by  thy  traffic  ha. 
28.    7  swords  against  the  beauty  of  thy  wisdom 
28.  12  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  full  of  wisdom 
28.  17  thou  hast  corrupted  thy  wisdom  by  reason 

Dan.    1.    4  skilful  in  all  wisdom,  and  cunning  in  kn. 
1.  17  and  skill  in  all  learning  and  wisdom 

1.  20  in  all  matters  of  wisdom  (and)  understand. 

2.  20  Blessed  be  the  name  of  God .  .for  wisdom 
2.  21  he  giveth  wisdom  unto  the  wise,  and  kno. 
2.  23  who  hast  given  me  wisdom  and  might,  and 
2.  30  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me  for  (any)  wisd. 

5. 11  understanding  and  wisdom,  like  the  wisd. 

5. 14  understanding  and  excellent  wisdom  is  f  0. 

4.  Wisdom,  skill,  niD?g  chokmoth. 

Psa.  49.   3  My  mouth  shall  speak  of  wisdom;  and  the 

Prov.  1.  20  Wisdom  crieth  without;  she  uttereth  her 

9.    1  Wisdom  hath  builded  her  house,  she  hath 

24.    7  Wisdom(is)toohighforafool,heopeneth 

5.  Taste,  reason,  discretion,  oya  teem. 

Dan.    2. 14  Daniel  answered  with  counsel  and  wisdom 
6. Heart,  21?  leb. 

Job    36.    5  God  (is) . .  mighty  in  strength  (and)  wisdom 
Prov  10.  21  feed  many :  but  fools  die  for  want  of  wis. 
11. 12  He  that  is  void  of  wisdom  despiseth  his 
15.  21  Folly(is)  joy  to  (him  thatis)destituteof  w. 

19.  8  He  that  getteth  wisdom  loveth  his  own 
Eccl.  10.   3  his  wisdom  faileth  (him),  and  he  saith  to 

7.  Craftiness,  subtilty,  prudence,  "£iy  ormah. 
Prov.  8.   5  0  ye  simple,  understand  wisdom ;  and,  ye 

S.  To  bereave,  miscarry,  "w'p*  sakal,  5. 

Job  34.  35  knowledge,  and  his  words  (were)  without 
Prov.  1.    3  To  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom,  jus. 


WISDOM 


1060 


WISELY 


9.  Understanding,  wisdom,  meaning,  ?3^,  ^-?  sehel, 

,  Ch  22.  12  Only  the  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  and  un. 

Prov  i2.   8  shall  be  commended  according  to  his  wi. 

23.   9  for  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  wo. 

10.  lrn<l-rs{ou<lln'i,slilfulness,reason,r}i^tebunah 
rsa.136.    5  To  him  that  by  wisdom  made  the  heavens 

11.  Substance,  wisdom,  n*pw  tushiyyak. 

Job     6.  13  and  is  wisdom  driven  quite  from  me  ? 

12  16  With  him  (is)  strength  and  wisdom:  the 
Prov  18.  1  scL-ketb  (and)  inteiineddleth  with  all  wis. 
Mic.   6.    9  (the  man  of)  wisdom  shall  see  thy  name 

12.  Thoughtful  ness,  tppovqais  2^hronesis. 

Luke  1.  17  and  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the 

XS.Wisdom,  skill,  a-otpla  sophia. 

\l.ittii.  19  sinners  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  ch, 

12.  42  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  :  and,  be. 

13.  54  Whence  hath  this  (man)  this  wisdom,  and 
Mark  6.  2  what  wisdom  (is)  this  which  is  given  unto 
Luke  2.  40  waxed  strong  in  spirit,  filled  with  wisdom 

2.52  Jesusiucreased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and 

7.  35  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children 

11.  31  she  came. .to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon 

11.  49  Therefore  also  said  the  wisdom  of  God,  I 
21.  15  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  wh. 

Acts    6.    3  seven  men.,  full  of  the  holy  ghost  audwi. 

6.  10  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom  and 

7.  10  gave  him  favour  and  wisdom  in  the  sight 
7.  22  Moses  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the 

Rom  11.  33  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  G. 

1  Co.  1. 17  not  with  wisdom  of  words,  lest  the  cross 

1.  19  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and 
1.  20  hath  not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of 
1.  21  in  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world  by  wisd. 
1.  22  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom 
1.  24  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom 

1.  30  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisd. 

2.  1  come  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of  w. 
2.  4  not  with  enticing  words  of  mau's  wisdom 
a.  5  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom 
2.  6  we  speak  wisdom,  .yet  not  the  wisdom  of 

2.  7.  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery 
2. 13  not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  te. 

3.  19  For  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness 

12.  8  For  to  one  is  given .  ."the  word  of  wisdom 
a  Co.  1.  12  not  with  fleshly  wisdom,  but  by  the  grace 
Eph.   1.    8  he  hath  abounded  toward  usin  all  wisdom 

1.  17  may  give  unto  youthespiritof  wisdomand 

3. 10  might  be  known,  .the  manifold  wisdom  of 

Col.     1.  9  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will  in  all  wis. 

1.  28  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  wisdom 

2.  3  In  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wis. 
2. 23  Which  things  have  indeed  a  show  of  wis. 
3. 16  Let  the  word,  .dwell  in  yon  richlyiu  all  w. 

4.  5  Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are 
Jas.     1.    5  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of 

3.  13  show,  .his  works  with  meekness  of  wisdom 
3.  15  This  wisdom  descendeth  not  from  above 
3.  17  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  firstpure 

2  Pe.  3.  15  Paul  also,  according  to  the  wisdom  given 
r^ev.   5.  12  to  receive  power,  aud  riches,  and  wisdom 

7.  12  Blessing,  aud  glory,  aud  wisdom,  and  th. 

13.  iS  Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  under. 
17.   9  And  here  (is)  the  mind  that  hath  wisdom 

WISDOM,  sound  — 

Substance,  wisdom,  rvphn  tushiyyah. 

Prov.  2.  7  He  layeth  up  sound  wisdom  for  the  righ. 
^.  21  My  son.  .keep  sound  wisdom  and  discre. 

8.  14  Counsel(is)mine,andsound  wisdom,  I  (am) 

WISE  (hearted,  man,  woman)  — 

l.To  cause  to  understand, give  intelligence,]^  bin,  5. 

1  Ch.27.  32  was  a  counsellor,  a  wise  man,  and  a  scribe 

LY0Y17.  10  reproof  entereth  more  into  a  wise  man  th. 

28.   7  Whoso  keepeth  the  law  (is)  a  wise  son  :  but 

2.  Wise,  skilful,  D*?rj  chakJtim. 

han.  2.  12  commanded  to  destroy  all  the  wise  (men) 
2. 13  decree  went  forth  that  the  wise  (men)sh. 
2.  14  which  was  gone  forth  to  slay  the  wise  (m.) 
2.  18  perish  with  the  rest  of  the  wise  (men)  of 
2.  21  he  giveth  wisdom  unto  the  wise,  and  kn. 
2.  24  king  had  ordained  to  destroy  thewise(ni.) 
2. 24  De8troynbtthewise(men)ofBabylon :  br. 
2.  27  cannot  the  wise  (men),  .show  unto  the  ki. 
2.  48  chief  of  thegovernorB  over  all  the  wise(m.) 
4.    6  made  I  a  decree  to  bring  in  all  the  wise(m.) 

4.  18  forasmuch  as  all  the  wise  (men) of  my  k. 

5.  7  king  spake,  and  said  to  the  wise  (men)  of 
5.    8  Then  came  in  all  the  kind's  wise  (men) 

5.  15  now  the  wise  (men),  the  astrologers,  have 

S.Wise,  .skilful,  c:n  chakam. 

Gen.  41.  8  sent  and  called  for  all.  .the  wise  men  th. 
41.  ;j  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  discreet  and  wise 
4t.  39  (there  is)  none  so  decreet  and  wise  as  thou 
Bxod.  7.  11  Pharaoh  also  called  the  wise  men  and  the 
28.  3  Bhalt  speak  unto  all  (that  are)  wise  hear. 
31.   6  in  the  nearta  <>f  all  that  are  wise  hearted 

35.  xo every  w  lae hearted  among  you  shall  come 
35.25  the  women  that  were  wise  hearted  did  sp. 

36.  1,  a  iholiab,  and  every  wise  hearted  man 

.    1  the  wise  men,  that  wrought  all  the  work 
36.  8  every  wlBe  hearted  man  among  them  that 

Dent.  1. 1 ;  'lake  you  wise  men,  aud  understanding 
1.  15  I  took  the  elrief  of  your  tribes,  wise  men 
4.   6  nation  (is)  a  wise  and  understanding  pen. 
16.  19  a  gift  doth  blind  the  eyes  of  the  wise,  and 

Juog.5, :(  Hoe  w\k  Ladiw^nswered  her,  yea,  shore. 

-•  3a.  1 1    2  fetched  thence  a  wise  woman,  and  said  un. 


2  Sa.  14.  20  my  lord  (is)  wise,  according  to  the  wisdom 

20.  16  Then  cried  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  city 

i  Ki.  2.  9  thou  (art)  a  wise  man,  and  kuowest  what 

3. 12  I  have  given  thee  a  wise  and  an  understa. 

5.  7  which  hath  given  unto  David  a  wise  son 
2  Ch.  2.  12  hath  given  to  David  the  king  a  wise  son 
Esth.  1.  13  the  king  saidto  the  wise  men,  whiehkuew 

6.  13  Then  said  his  wise  men  and  Zeresh  his 
Job     5.  13  He  takeththe  wisein  their  own  craftiness 

9.  4  (He  is)  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  stren. 
.  15.  2  Should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  knowledge 
15.  18  Which  wise  men  have  told  from  their  fat. 
17.  10  I  cannot  find  (one)  wise  (man)  amougyou 
34.  2  Hear  my  words,  Oye  wise  (men);  and  give 
34.  34  and  let  a  wise  man  hearken  unto  me 
37.  24  he  respecteth  not  any  (that  are)  wise  of 
Psa.  49.  10  he  seeth  (that)  wise  men  die,  likewise  the 

107.  43  Whoso  (is)  wise,  and  will  observe  these 
Prov.  1.    5  A  wise  (man)  will  hear,  and  will  increase 
1.    6  the  words  of  the  wise,  and  their  dark  sa. 
3.    7  Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes :  fear  the 
3.  35  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory  :  but  shame 
9.   8  rebuke  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee 

9.  9  Give  (instruction)  to  a  wise  (man),  aud  he 
10.    1  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father :  but  a 
10.    8  The  wise  in  heart  will  receive  command. 

10.  14  Wise  (men)  lay  up  knowledge :  but  the 

11.  29  the  fool  (shall  be)  servant  to  the  wise  of 

11.  30  and  he  that  winneth  souls  (is)  wise 

12. 15  he  that  hearkeneth  unto  couusel  (is)  wise 

12.  iS  but  the  tongue  of  the  wise  (is)  health 

13.  1  A  wise  son  (heareth)  his  father's  instruc. 
13.  14  The  law  of  the  wise  (is)  a  fountain  of  life 

13.  20  He  that  walketh  with  wise  (men)  shall  be 

14.  3  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  th. 
14.  16  A  wise(man)  feareth.and  departethfrom 

14.  24  The  crown  of  the  wise  (is)  their  riches 

15.  2  The  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge 
15.  7  The  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  knowledge 
15.  12  neither  will  he  go  unto  the  wise 

15.  20  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father :  but  a 

15.  31  The  ear  that . .  abideth  among  the  wise 

16.  14  wrath  of  a  king,  .a  wise  man  will  pacify 
16.  21  The  wise  in  heart  shall  be  called  prudent 

16.  23  The  heart  of  the  wise  teachethhis  mouth 

17.  28  when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  w. 
18. 15  and  the  ear  of  the  wise  seeketh  knowled. 

20.  26  A  wise  king  scattereth  the  wicked,  aud 

21.  11  when  the  wise  is  instructed,  he  receiveth 
21.  20  treasure-.andoiliuthedwellingofthe wise 
21.  22  A  wise  (man)  scaleth  the  city  of  the  mig. 
22. 17  hear  the  words  of  the  wise,  and  apply  th. 

23.  24  he  thatbegetteth  a  wise  (child)  shall  have 

24.  5  A  wise  man  (is)  strong ;  yea,  a  man  of  k. 

24.  23  These  (things)  also  (belong)  to  the  wise 

25.  12  (so  is)  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obedient 

26.  5  Answer  a  fool,  .lest  he  be  wise  iuhis  own 
26. 12  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit? 
26.  16  The  sluggard  (is)  wiser  in  his  own  conce. 

28.  11  The  rich  man  (is)wise  iu  his  own  conceit 

29.  8  into  a  snare  :  but  wise  (men)  turn  away 
29.    9  (If)  a  wise  mancontendeth  with  a  foolish 

29.  1 1  but  a  wise  (man)  keepeth  it  in  till  af  terw. 

30.  24  four  (things),  .but  they  (are) exceeding  w. 
Eccl.  2. 14  The  wise  man's  eyes(are)  in  his  head,  but 

2. 16  remembrance  of  thewise.  .the  wise(man) 
2. 19  who  knoweth  whether  he  shall  be  a  wise 
4. 13  Better  (is)  a  poor  and  a  wise  child  than 

6.  8  what  hath  the  wise  more  than  the  fool? 

7.  4  The  heart  of  the  wise  (is)  in  the  houseof 
7.  5  better  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  wise,  than 
7.    7  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad,  and 

7.  19  Wisdom  strengtheneth  the  wise  moreth. 

8.  1  Who  (is)  as  the  wise  (man)?  aud  who  kn. 
8.    5  a  wise  man's  heart  discerneth  both  time 

8.  17  though  a  wise  (man)  think  to  know  (it) 

9.  1  the  wise,  and  their  works,  (are)  in  the  ha. 
9. 11  neither  yet  bread  to  the  wise,  nor  yet  ri. 
9.  15  there  was  found  in  it  a  poor  wise  man 

9.  17  The  words  of  wise  (men  are)  heard  iu  qu. 

10.  2  A  wise  man's  heart  (is)  at  liis  right  hand 
10.  12  The  words  of  a  wise  man's  mouth  (are) 
12.   9  moreover,  because  the  Preacher  was  wise 

12. 11  The  words  of  the  wise  (are)  as  goads,  and 
Isa.     5.  21  Woe  unto. .wise  in  their  own  eyes,  aud 

rg.  11  of  the  wise  counsellors,  ."the son  of  the  w. 

19. 12  Where  (are)  they?  where  (are),  .wise(m.'r) 
25.  14  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  (men)  shall  per. 

31.  2  Yet  he  also  (is)  wise,  and  will  bring  evil 
44.  25  that  turneth  wise  (men)  backward,  and 

Jer.     4.  22  they  (are)  wise  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good 
8.    8  How  do  ye  say,  We  (are)  wise,  and  the  law 

8.  9  The  wise  (men)  are  ashamed,  they  aredi. 

9.  12  Who  (is)  the  wise  man,  that  may  unders. 
9.  23  Let  not  the  wise  (man)  glory  in  his  wisd. 

10.  7  among  all  the  wise  (men)  of  the  nations 
18.  18  nor  counsel  from  the  wise,  nor  the  word 
50-  35  upon  her  princes,  and  upon  her  wise(m.) 
51.  57  I  will  make  drunk,  .her  wise  (men),  her 

Eze.  27.    8  thy  wise  (men),  0  Tyrus,  (that)  were  iu  th. 
27.    9  The  ancients  of  Gebal  and  the  wise  (men) 
Hos.  14.    9  Wlio  (is)  wise,  and  he  shall  understand 
Obad.       8  even  destroy  the  wise  (men)  out  of  Edom 

A.  Wisdomj  ni^n  chakmoth. 

Prov.14.    1  Every  wise  womau  buildeth  her  house 
5.0pen,  seeing,  rips  piqgeach. 

Exod  23.    8  for  the  gift  blindeth  the  wise,  and  perv. 
6. To  cause  to  understand,  hty  sakal,  5. 

Job    22.    2  as  he  that  is  wise  may  be  profitable  unto 

Prov.  10.    5  He  that  gathereth  in  summer  (is)  a  wise 


Prov  10.  19  sin;buthethatrefraineth  hislips  (is)  wise 

14.  35  The  king's  favour  (is)  toward  a  wise  serv. 

15.  24  The  way  of  life  (is)  above  to  the  wise,  that 
17.    2  A  wise  servant  shall  have  rule  over  a  son 

Dan.  12.    3  they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brig. 
12.  10  wicked  shall  understand;  but  the  wise  sh. 
7.  Understanding,  wisdom,  ?3p,  h^v  sehel. 

1  Ch.26.  14  Then  for  Zechariah  his'son,  a  wise  coun. 

S.Magian,  {a  Persian  astronomer  or priest),  fxayos. 

Matt  2.    1  there  came  wise  men  from  the  east  to  Je. 

2.    7  when  he  had  privily  called  the  wise  men 

2.  16  he  saw  that  he  was  mocked  of  the  wise  m. 
2. 16  hehad  diligently  enipuired  of  the  wise  men 

9.  Wise,  skilful,  tro<p6s  sophos. 

Matt  n.25  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 

23.  34  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men 
Lukeio.  21  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent 
Rom.  1.  14  I  am  debtor.,  both  to  the  wise  andto  the 

1. 22  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise,they  he. 

16.  19  I  would  have  you  wise  unto  that  whichis 
16.  27  To  God  only  wise,  (be)  glory  through  Jes. 

1  Co.    1.  19  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and 
1.  20  Where  (is)  thewise?  where  (is)  the  scribe? 
1.  26  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not 
1.  27  [chosen  the  foolish,  .to  confound  the  wise] 

3.  10  as  a  wise  master  builder,  I  have  laid  the 
3.  18  If  any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  be  w. 
3.18  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be -wise 
3.  19  He  taketh  the  wisein  their  own  craftiness 
3.  20  The  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  the  w. 
6.    5  Is  it  so,  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  am. 

Eph.  5.  15  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  asw. 
1  Tl  1. 17  unto  the  king  eternal,  .the  only  [wise]  G. 
Jas.  3.  13  Who  (is)  a  wise  man  and  endued  with  kn. 
Jude  25  To  the  only  [wise]  God  our  Saviour,  (be)  g. 
\Q.Mindful,2rrudent,2yrovident,<pp6vifios2^hronimos 
Matt.  7.  24  I  will  liken  him  unto  a  wise  man,  which 
10.  :6  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents,  and  ha. 

24.  45  Who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant 

25.  2  And  five  of  them  were  wise,  and  five  (we.) 
25.  4  But  the  wise  took  oil  in  theirvesselswith 
25.  8  foolish  said  unto  thewise,  Give  us  of  your 
25.  9  But  the  wise  answered,  saying,  (Not  so) 

Lukei2.  42  Who  then  is  that  faithful  and  wise  stew. 

Horn  11.  25  lest  ye  should  be  wise  hi  your  own  cone. 

12. 16  low  estate.  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  con. 

1  Co.  4. 10  We  (are)  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  but  ye  (are) 

io.  15  I  speak  as  to  wise  men;  judge  ye  what  I 

2  Co.  1 1. 19  Ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye.,  are  wise 
WISE,  in  any,  in  no,  or  on  this  — 

l.To  reason,  reprove,  decide,  rn;  yakach,  5. 

Lev.  19.  17  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neigh. 
2.To  afflict,  humble,  ruj;  anah,  3. 

Exo'd22.  23  If  thou  afflict  them  in  any  wise,  and  they 
3.  Thus,  so,  accordingly,  ovrco,  ovtqjs  houto,  houtos. 

Matt.  1.  18  Now  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  w. 

John  21.    1  at  the  sea  of  Tiberias;  and  on  this  wise  sh. 

Acts  7.  6  God  spake  on  this  wise,  That  his  seed  sh. 
13.  34  said  on  this  wise,  I  will  give  you  the  sure 

Rom.  10.    6  speaketh  on  this  wise,  Say  not  in  thine  he. 

Heb.  4.  4  For  he  spake,  .on  this  wise,  And  God  did 
4,y^ot  co/n2->lctely,  not  at  all,  fx-t]  els  to  iravrtXt';. 

Lukei3.  11  was  bowed  together,  and  could  in  no  wise 

5.iVot  at  all,  ov  Travrais  ou  pantos. 

Rom.  3.    9  No,  in  no  wise :  for  we  have  before  proved 
WISE,  to  be,  make,  show  self  — 
l.To  be  or  become  wise,  act  wisely,  D?n  chaham. 

Deut.32.  29  Oh  that  they  were  wise,  (that)  they  unde. 

1  Ki.  4.  31  Forhe  was  wiser  than  all  men;  than  Ethan 
Job  32.  9  Great  men  are  not  (always)  wise;  neither 
Prov.  6.    6  thou  sluggard;  consider  her  ways,  aud  lie 

8.  33  Hear  instruction,  and  be  wise,  and  refuse 

9.  9  and  he  will  be  yet  wiser;  teacha  just(man) 
9.  12  If  thou  he  wise,  thou  shalt  be  wise  forth. 

13.  20  He  that  walketh  with  wise  (men)  shall  be 
19. 20  that  thou  mayest  bewise  in  thy  latter  end 

20.  1  and  whosoever  is  deceived  thereby  is  not 

21.  11  the  scorneris  punished, the  sirnpleismade 
23-  15  My  son,  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  my  heart 
23. 19  Hear  thou,  my  son,  and  be  wise,  and  guide 
27.  11  My  son,  be  wise,  and  make  my  heart  glad 

Eccl.  2.  15  why  was  I  then  more  wise?  Then  I  said  in 
2.  19  wherein  I  have  showed  myself  wise  under 
7.  23  I  said,  I  will  be  wise;  but  it(was)far  from 

Zech.  9.  2  Tyrus,  and  Zidon,  though  it  be  very  wise 
l.To  make  wise,  nin  chakam,  5. 

Psa.  19.    7  testimony  of  the  Lokp  (is)  sure,  making  w. 

3.  To  shoio  self  wise,  D?n  chakam,  7. 

Eccl.  7. 16  neither  make  thyself  over  wise:  why  sin-. 

4.  To  take  heart,  be  bold,  33^  labab,  2. 

Job  11. 13  For  vain  man  would  be  wise,  though  man 

5.  To  cause  to  act  wisely,  hyy  sakal,  5. 

Gen.  3.    6  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  (one)  wise 
Psa.     2.  10  Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings,  be  w. 
36.    3  he  hath  left  off  to  be  wise,  (and)  to  do  good 
94.    8  the  people:  and  (ye)  fools,  when  will..w.?. 

6.  To  make  wise,  <ro(frl£a)  S02^ihiz0. 

2  Ti.   3.  15  which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  sa. 

7.  To  send  together,  consider,  <rwiyfj.i  suniemi. 

2  Co.  10.  12  and  comparing  themselves,  .are  not  wisq 
WISELY,  to  behave  self,  consider,  deal  — 
l.To  understand,  attend  to,  pa  bin, 

2  Ch.xi.  23  he  dealt  wisely,  and  dispersed  of  all  his 


WISELY 


1061 


WITH 


2  Tc  show  self  wise,  Drn  chakam,  7. 

Exod.  1. 10  Come  on,  let  us  deal  wisely  with  them;  lest 

3.  To  act  wisely,  ?3^  sakal. 

i  Sa.  18. 30  David  behaved  himself  more  wisely  than 

4.  To  act  wisely,  or  to  understand,  Vsb-  sakal,  5. 

1  Sa.  18.    5  David  went  out.  .(and)  behaved  himself  wi. 

18.  14  David  behaved  himself  wisely  in  all  his  w. 

18.  15  saw  that  he  behaved  himself  very  wisely 

Psa.  64.   9  for  theyshallwiselyconsiderof  his  domes 

ior.    2  I  will  behave  myself  wisely  in  a  perfect 
Prov.zi.  12  The  righteous  (man)  wisely  considereth 
WISELY,  (never  so)  — 
l.To  be  made  wise,  D?n  chakam,  4. 

Psa.  58.   5  voice  of  charmers,  charming  never  so  wis. 

2.  Wisdom,  nzin  chokmah. 

Pro  v.  28.  26  but  whoso  walketh  wisely,  he  shall  be  de. 
Eccl.  7.  10  thou  dost  not  enquire  wisely  concerning 

3.  To  cause  to  act  wisely  or  understand,  hty  sakal,  5. 

Prov.16.  20  He  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall 
A. Mindful,  prudent,  provident,  tppovifxws  phroni. 

Luke  1 6.    8  because  he  had  done  wisely:  for  the  cliil. 
WISER,  (to  make)  — 
l.To  make  wise,  Din  chakam,  3. 

Job  35. 11  and  maketh  us  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  he.? 

Psa.119.  98  Thou,  .hast  made  me  wiser  than  mine  en. 

2.  Wiser  than,  Jp  can  chakam  min. 

Eze.  28.  3  Behold,  thou  (art)  wiser  than  Daniel;  the. 
S, Wiser,  more  skilful,  o~o4>u>repov  sophoteron. 

1  Co.  i.  25  Because  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser 
4. More  mindful,  prudent,  tppovip&repos  pfwonim. 

Lukei6.  8  in  their  generation  wiser  than  the  child. 
WISH,  -wishing  — 

1.  Willing,  desirous,  delighting,  \'$n  chaphets. 

Psa.  40. 14  driven  backward  and  put  to  shame  that  w. 

2.  Mouth,  speech,  napeh. 

Job  33.  6  I  (am)  according  to  thy  wish  in  God's  ste. 
3. To  ask,  demand,  bxp  shaal. 

Job  31.  30  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  sin  by  wish. 
Jon.    4.    8  that  he  fainted,  and  wished  in  himself  to 

A. Imagery,  imagination,  rva'P?  maskith. 

Psa.  73.    7  they  have  more  than  heart  could  wish 

5.  To  xoish,  desire,  solicit,  ev\ofiat  euchomai. 

Acts  27.  29  cast  four  anchor's  out  of  the  stern,  and  w. 
Horn.  9.    3  For  I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accur. 

2  Co.  13.    9  and  this  also  we  wish,  (even)  your  perfe. 

3  J  ohn      2  I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest 

WIST,  wit,  (do  to  wit.)  to  — 

1.  Wisdom,  npD0  chokmah. 

Psa.  107.  27  like  a  drunken  man,  and  are  at  their  wit's 

2.  To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  yi;  yada. 

Gen.  24.  21  to  wit  whether  the  Lord  had  made  his 

Exod.  2.    4  his  sister  stood  afar  off,  to  wit  what  wou. 

16.  15  It  (is)  manna  :  for  they  wist  not  what  it 

34.  29  Moses  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face 

Lev.    5. 17  though  he  wist  (it)  not,  yet  is  he  guilty 

5.  18  Iris  ignorance  wherein  he  erred  and  wist 

Josh.  2.   4  There  came  men  unto  me,  but  I  wist  not 

8.  14  but  he  wist  not  that  (there  were)  liers  in 

Judg  16.  20  wist  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed  from 

Z.To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  see,  olda  oida. 
Mark  9.  6  For  he  wist  not  what  to  say  for  they  we. 
14.  40  heavy,  neither  wist  they  what  to  answer 
Luke  2.  49  wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Eat. 
John  5.  13  he  that  was  healed  wist  not  who  it  was 
Acts  12.  9  wist  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  done 
23.    5  I  wist  not,  brethren,  that  he  was  the  high 

A.As,  how,  6is  has. 

2  Co.  5. 19  To  wit,  that  God  was  in  Christ,  reconcil. 
5. To  make  known,  yvwptfa  gnorizo. 

2  Co.  8.  1  we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  of  God  bes. 
[See  also  Wot,] 

WITCH,  (to  use)  witchcraft  — 

l.To  use  witchcraft  or  sorcery,  *$$  kashaph,  3. 
Exod22. 18  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a' witch  to  live 
Deuti8. 10  observer  of  times,  or  an  enchanter,  or  aw. 
2  Ch.33.    6  used  witchcraft,  and  dealt  with  a  familiar 

^..Witchcrafts,  sorceries,  D'?^3  keshaphim. 

2  Ki.  9.  22  whoredoms,  .and  her  witchcrafts  (are  so) 

Mic.    5.  12  I  will  cut  off  witchcrafts  out  of  thine  ha. 

Xah.    3.    4  well  favoured  harlot,  the  mistress  of  wi. 

3.    4  selleth  nations . .  through  her  witchcrafts 

3.  Divination,  oath,  npg  qesem. 

1  Sa.  15.  23  For  rebellion  (is  as)  the  sin  of  witchcraft 
4.A  charm,  remedy,  (papfiaKeiapharmakeia. 

Gal.  5.  20  Idolatry, witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  em. 
WITH  — 

1.  After,  TvJf  achar. 

Lev.  20.    5  that  go.. to  commit  whoredom  with  Molech 

2.  Unto,  hx  el. 

Gen.    4/  8  And  Cain  talked  with  Abel  his  brother 
o.Also,  ^|X  aph. 

I)eut33.  20  teareth  the  arm  with  the  crown  of  the 

4.  Near,  bxx  etsel. 

Gen.  39. 15  he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled,  and 

39.  18  he  left  nis  garment  with  me,  and  fled  out 

Dan.  to.  13  I  remained  there  with  the  kings  of  Persia 


5.  With,  r\a  eth. 
Gen. 


22  Enoch  walked  with  God  after  he  begat  3MC. 
13  behold,  I  will  destroy  them  with  the  earth 

13.  5  Lot  also,  which  went  with  Abram,  had 

14.  2  made  war  with  Bera . .  and  with  Birsha  ki. 
Josh  14.  12  if  so  be  the  Lord  (will  be)  with  me,  then 
Eze.    3.  27  when  I  speak  with  thee,  I  will  open  thy 

6.  With,  in,  '1E5  bemo. 

Job     9.  30  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and 

16.  5  I  would  strengthen  you  with  my  mouth 
19. 16  my  servant.  .1  entreated  him  with  my  m. 

7.  Also,  ca  gam. 

2  Ch.20. 13  all  Judah  stood  before  the  Lord,  with 
S.Ovtr  against,  Sid  imd. 

Mic.  2.  8  ye  pull  off  the  robe  with  the  garment  from 
9. From,  jD  min. 

Gen.  25.  30  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee,  with  that  same  red 
10. Against,  besides,  in  addition  to,  ?y  al. 

Gen.  32.  11  God  hath  dealt  graciously  with  me,  and 

Dan.    6.  14  the  king,  .was  sore  displeased  with  hinis. 

11.  With,  ny  im. 

Gen.  1S.23  Wilt  thou.,  destroy  the  righteous  with  the 
Ezra  5.  2  and  with  them,  .the  prophets  of  God  he. 
7.  13  I  make  a  decree,  that  all.  .go  with  thee 
7.  16  with  the  free  will  offering  01  the  people 
Dan.  2.  1 1  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  flesh 
2.  18  should  not  perish  with  the  rest  of  the  wi. 
2.  22  he  knoweth.  .and  the  light  dwelleth  with 
2.  43  not  cleave . .  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay 
4.  15,  23  and  (let)  his  portion  (be)  with  the 

4.  25,  32  andthydwelling(shallbe)withthe  be. 

5.  21  and  his  dwelling  (was)  with  the  mid  asses 
7.  13  (one)  like  the  sou  of  man  came  with  the 

7.  21  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  saints 

12.  With,  by,  "ray  immacl. 

Gen.  3. 12  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest.  .with  me 
IS. Face,  u%}5  panim. 

1  Sa.  10.    5  with  a  psaltery,  and  a  tabret,  and  a  pipe 

14.  Under,  beneath,  nrn  tachath. 

Psa.  66. 17  I  cried,  .he  was  extolled  with  my  tongue 

15.  In  the  hand,  *V2  bey  ad. 

Gen.  44.  16  and  (he)  also  with  whom  the  cup  is  found 
Josh.  9.  11  Take  victuals  with  you  for  the  journey 

16.  In  tlie  midst  of,  Tpn?  bethok. 

Exod.  9.  24  there  was  hail,  and  fire  mingled  with  the 
17 '.Together  with,  d/xa  hama. 

Matt  13.  29  lest,  .ye  root  up  also  the  wheat  with  them 
18. From,  wk6  apo. 

Luke  14.  18  they  all  with  one  (consent)  began  to  make 

15.  16  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with 

16.  21  desiring  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which 
Acts  20.   9  he  sunk  down  with  sleep,  and  fell  down 

19.  Through,  by,  did  {gen.)  dia. 

Marki6.  20  [confirmingthe  word  with  signs  following] 
Acts    8.  20  the  gift  of  God  may  be  purchased  with 
15.  32  exhorted  the  brethren  with  many  words 
tg.  26  they  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with  ha. 
20.  28  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own 
Rom  14.  20  evil  for  that  man  wTho  eateth  with  8.  25. 

1  Co.  14.  19  I  had  rather  speak  five  words  [with]  my 

2  Co.    2.    4  I  wrote  unto  you  with  many  tears ;  not 
Eph.    6.  iS  Praying  always  wi  hall  prayer  and  supp. 
1  Ti.    2.  10  But,  which  becometh  women,  .with  good 
Heb.  12.    1  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is 

13.  12  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his 

1  Pe.   1.    7  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire 

2  John    12  I  would  not.  .with  paper  and  ink,  but  I 

3  John    13  I  will  not  with  ink  and  pen  write  unto 

20.  Through,  on  account  of,  dtd  (ace)  dia. 

Bom  14. 15  But  if  thy  brother  be  grieved  with,  .meat 

21.  With  a  view  to,  els  eis. 

Eph.    3. 19  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God 

22.  Out  of,  e/c  ek. 

Matt  27.    7  bought  with  them  the  potter's  field,  to 
Marki2. 30  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul 

12.  30  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  stren. 

12.  33  with  all  the  heart,  and  with  all  the  mid. 

12.  33  with  all  the  soul,  [and  with  all  the  stren.] 
Lukeio.  27  with  all  thy  heart,  and  [with]  all  thy  soul 

10.  27  [with]  all  thy  strength,  and  [with]  all  thy 
John  4.  6  therefore  being  wearied  with(his)jo.  12.  3. 
Acts    1.  18  this  man  purchased  a  field  with  the  rew. 

8.  37  [If  thou  believestwith  all  thine  heart,  th.] 
1  Co.  7.  5  except.. with  consent  for  a  time,  that  ye 
1  Pe.  1.  22  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  ferv. 
Rev.    8.    5  took  the  censer,  and  filled  it  with  fire  of 

17.  2  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornica. 

17.  6  with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with  the 
iS.  1  and  theearth  was  lightened  withhis  glory 
19  21  all  the  fowls  were  filled  with  their  flesh 

15.  In,  among,  by,  with,  even. 

Matt.  3.  11  baptize  you  with  water,  .baptize  you  with 
7.    2  with  what  judgment,  .with what  measure 
20. 15  Is  it  not  lawful,  .to  do  what  I  will  with 
22.  37  with  all  thy.  .with  all  thy.  .with  all  thy 

25.  16  went  and  traded  with  the  same,  and  made 

26.  52  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with 
Mark  1.  [8,  8],  23;  4.  24,  30;  5.  2;  9.  1,  50;  Luke  1.  51; 

3.  16;  4.  32,  36;  8. 15;  11.  20;  14.  31;  21.  25,  34;  22.49;  John 
1.  26,  31,  33,  33;  Acts  1.  5;  2.  29,  46;  5.  23;  11.  16,  26; 
Rom.  1.  4,  9,  12,  27;  9.  22;  10.  9;  12.  8,  8,  8,  21;  15.  32; 

16.  16;  1  Co.  1.  17;  2.  4;  4.  21;  5.  8,  8,  8;  10.  5;  14.  21;  16. 


14,  20;  2  Co.  1.  12;  7.  8;  13.  12;  Eph.  1.  3;  Col.  1.  n;  2. 
4,  7;  3.  16,  22;  4.  2,  6;  1  Tn.  2.  2,  17;  4.  16,  16,  16,  18;  5. 
26;  2  Th.  1.  11;  2.  9,  10;  3.  8;  1  Ti.  2.  9,  n;  5.  2;  2  Ti.  1- 
3;  4.  2;  Heb.  9.  22,  25;  11.  37;  Jas.  1.  21;  2.  1;  3.  13;  1  Pe. 
1.  [12];  2.  18;  3.  2;  5.  14;  2  Pe.  2.  7,  13,  \6;  Jude  14,  23, 
24;  Rev.  2.  16,  23,  27;  6.  8,  8,  8;  9.  19;  12.  5;  13.  10,  10; 
14.  2,  [7],  9,  10,  15;  16.  8;  17.  16;  18.  8,  [16];  19.  2,  15,  15, 
20,  20,  21. 


24.  On,  upon,  over,  hri  (dat)  epi. 

Matt.  18.  26,  20  have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay 
Lukei8.  7  avenge.,  tht  ugh  he  bear  long  with  them? 
Acts  21.  24  Them  take,  .and  be  at  charges  with  them 
28.  i4weredesired  to  tarry  [with]  them  seven  da. 
Rev.  12.  17  the  dragon  was  wroth  [with]  the  woman 

25.  Upon,  over,  for,  iiri  (ace.)  epi. 

Heb.  8.  8  with  the  house  of  Israel,  and  with  the  ho. 
26. Down  to,  in,  by,  according  to,  Kara  (ace)  kata. 
Mark  1.  27  for  with  authority  commandeth  he  even 
1  Co.  2.  1  came  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of 
Eph.   6.    6  Not  with  eye  service  as  men  pleasers,  but 

27.  With,  in  common  with,  nerd  (gen.)  meta. 

Matt.  1.23  which,  being  interpreted,  is,  God  with  us 
2.  3  he  was  troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with 
2. 11  they  saw  the  young  child  with  Mary  his 

4.  21  in  a  ship  with  Zebedee  their  father,  men. 
5. 25  whiles  thou  art  in  the  way  with  him,  lest 

5.  41  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  tw. 
8. 11  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac 
9. 11  Why  eateth  your  Master  with  publicans 
9.  15  as  long  as  the  bridegroom  is  with  them 

See  also  12.  3,  4,  30,  30,  41,  42, 45;  13.  20;  14.  7;  15.  30;  16. 
27;  17.  3,  17;  18.  16;  19.  10;  20.  2,  20;  21.  2;  22.  16;  24.  30, 
31,49,  51 ;  25.  3,4, 10,  19,  31 ;  26. 11, 18,  20,  23,  29,  36,  38, 
40,  47. 47>  51.  55,  58,  69,  71,  72  ;  27.  34,  41,  54 ;  28.  8, 12, 20 ; 
Mark  1.  13,20,  29,  36;  2.  16,  16, 19,  [19],  25;  3.  5,  6,  7,  14; 
4.  16,  36;  5.  18,  24,  40;  6.  25,  50;  8.  io,  14,  38;  9.  8,  [24]; 

10.  30;  11.  11;  13.  26;  14.  7,  14,  17,  18,  20,33,43,  43,  48,54, 
67;  15.  17,  [28],  31;  16.  [10];  Luke  1.  28,  39,  66;  2.  36,  51; 
5-  29,  3i.  34;  6.  3,  4,  17;  7.  36;  8.  13,  [45];  9.  49;  10.  17; 

11.  7,  23,  23,  31,  32;  12.  13,  46,  58;  13.  1;  14.  9,  31;  15.  29, 
3°>  3*;  17-  151  20;  21.  27;  22.  11,  15,  21,  28,  33,  52,  53,  59; 
23.  43;  24.  29,  30,52;  John  3.  2,  22,  26;  4.  27,  27;  6.  3,  66; 
7-  33;  8.  29;  9.  37,  40;  11.  16,  31,  54;  12.  8,  17,  [35];  13.  8, 
[*8,]  33;  14.  9,  16,  30;  15.  27;  16.  4,  32;  17.  12,  24;  18.  2,  3,  5, 
[18],  26  ;  ig.  18,  40;  20.  7,  24,  26 ;  Ac.  1.  [4,]  26  ;  2.  28;  4.  29, 
31;  7.  9,  38,  45;  9.  19,  28,  39;  10.  38;  11.  21;  13.  17;  14.  23, 
27;  I5-  4>  35;  17-  «J  18.  10;  20.  18,  19,  [24],  31,  34;  24.  i, 
3.  [7],  18,  18;  25.  12,  23;  26.  12;  27. 10,  24;  28.  31;  Rom.  12. 

15,  *5>  iS;  15.  to,  33;  16.  20,  [24];  1  Co.  6.  6,  7;  7.  12,  13; 

16.  11,  12,  23,  24;  2  Co.  6.  15,  16;  7.  15;  8.  4,  18;  13.  11,  14; 
Gal.  2.  1,  12;  4.  25,  30;  6.  18;  Eph.  4.  2,  2,  25;  6.  5,  7,  23, 
24;  Phil.  1.  4;  2.  12,  29;  4.  3,  6,  9,  23;  Col.  1.  11;  4.  18; 
1  Th.  1.  6;  3.  13;  5.  28;  2  Th.  1.  7,  7;  3.  12,  16,  18;  1  Ti.  1. 
14;  2.  9,  15;  3.  4;  4.  3,  4,  14;  6.  6,  21;  2  Ti.  2.  10,  22;  4.  11, 
ii,  22,  [22];  Titus  2.  15;  3.  15,  15;  Phm.  25;  fleb.  5.  7;  7. 
21;  9.  19;  10.  22;  11.  9,  31;  12.  14,  17,  28;  13.  17,  23,  25; 
1  Pe.  3.  15;  1  Jo.  1.  3,  3,  3,  6,  7;  2.  19;  2  Jo.  2,  3;  Rev.  1. 
7.  12 ;  2.  22  ;  3.  4, 20,  20,  21,  21 ;  4.  1 ;  6.  [8] ;  9.  8;  12.  9, 
17;  13-  4.  [7];  14-  1.  4;  17-  1,  2,  12,  14,  14;  i3.  3,  9; 
19.  20;  20.  4,  [6] ;  21.  3,  3,  3,  9,  15 ;  22.  12,  21. 

2S.Alcng  side  of,  with,  among,  irapd  (dat.) para. 
Mattig.  26  "With  men  this  is  impossible;  but  with  G. 

21.  25  they  reasoned  [with]  themselves,  saying 

22.  25  there  were  with  us  seven  brethren :  and 
Markio.  27  With  men.  .but  not  with  God:  [for  with] 
Luke  1.  30  Fear  not.,  thou  hast  found  favour  with  G. 

1.  37  with  God  nothing  shall  be  impossible 
2. 52  Jesus  increased .  .in  favour  with  God  and 
11.  37  Pharisee  besought  him  to  dine  with  him 

18.  27  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God 

19.  7  he  was  gone  to  be  guest  with  a  man  that 
John  1.  39  They  came,  .and  abode  with  him  that  day 

4.  40  besought  him  that  he  would  tarry  with 

8.  38  seen  with  my  Father,  .seen  with  your  fa. 
14.  17  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you 
14.  23  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with 
14.  25  have  I  spoken,  .being,  .present  with  you 

17.  5  with  thine  own  self,  .with  thee  before  the 
Acts    9. 43  he  tarried  many  days  in  Joppa  with  one 

10.   6  He  lodgethwith  one  Simon  a  tanner,  wh 

18.  3  of  thesamecraft,heabodewiththem,and 
iS.  20  they  desired(him)totarry  longer  time  [w.] 
21.  7  we . .  saluted  the  brethren,  and  abode  with 
21.  8  entered  into  the  house,  .and  abode  with 
21.  16  an  old  disciple,  with  whom  we  should  lo. 
26.   8  Why.  .incredible  with  you,  that  God  sho. 

Rom.  2. 11  For  there  isno  respect  of  persons  with  God 
9. 14  unrighteousness  with  God?  God  forbid 

1  Co.   3. 19  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness 

7.  24  every  man,  wherein  he  is  called,  .abide  w. 

2  Co.  1. 17  that  with  me  there  should  be  yea  yea,  and 
Eph.    6.   9  neither  is  there  respect  of  persons  with 

2  Th.  1.  6  Seeing,  .a  righteous  thing  with  God  tore. 
2  Ti.  4.  13  The  cloak  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus 
Jas.     1. 17  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  isno  variabL 

1  Pe.  2.  20  ye  take  it  patiently,  tins  (is)  acceptable 

2  Pe.  3.    8  one  day  (is)  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 

'29. About,  concerning,  trepi  (gen.)  peri. 

Markio.  41  they  began  to  be  much  displeased  with 
SO. The  thing^  concerning  me,  rd  Trepi  e/ie  to,  peri. 

Phil.  2.  23  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with 

Sl.Toward,  by,  near,  irpos  (ace.) pros. 

Matt  13.  56  And  his  sisters,  are  they  not  all  with  us  ? 

26.  55  I  sat  daily  [with]  you  teaching  in  the  tern. 

Mark  6.    3  are  not  his  sisters  here  with  us?  Andthey 

9  10  they  kept  that  saying  with  themselves,  qu. 

9.  16  asked  the  scribes,  What  question  ye  with 
9  19  0  faithless,  .how  long  shall  I  be  wit*i  you? 


WITH 


1062 


WITHIN 


Marku.  31  they  reasoned  with  themselves,  saying,  If 

14.  4    I  was  daily  with  you  iu  the  temple  teac. 
Luke  6.  1 1  communed  one  with  another  what  they 

9.41  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you,  and  sutler 
i3.  11  The  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thus  with 

20.  5  they  reasoned  with  themselves  saying,  If 
John  1.    1  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word 

1.  2  The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God 
Acts   2  47  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all 

3.  25  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  our 
11.   2  they,  .of  the  circumcision  contended  with 

15.  2  had . .  dissension  and  disputation  with  th. 
17  17  disputed  he.  .with  them  thatmet  with  him 
24.  12  thev  neither  found  me.  .disputing  with 

Kom.  5.    1  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  L  ml 

8.  18  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in 

j  Co-    2.   3  I  was  with  you  iu  weakness,  and  in  fear 

16.  6  that  I  will  abide,  yea,  and  winter  with 

16.  7  I  trust  to  tarry  a  while  with  you,  if  the 
16. 10  see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear 

2  Co.  5.  8  Wo  are.. willing.. to  be  present  with  the 
6. 14  what  communion  hath  light  with  darku. 

6.  15  what  concord  hath  Christ  with  Belial?  or 
11.   9  when  I  was  present  with  you,  and  wanted 

Gal.     1. 18  to  see  Peter,  and  abode  with  him  fifteen 

2.  5  that  the  truth . .  might  continue  with  you 

4.  18  and  not  only  when  lam  present  with  you 
4.  20  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you  now,  and 

1  Tii.  3.    4  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  bet 

2  Tii.  2.    5  when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these 

3.  1  word.. may.. be  glorified,  even  as.. with 
3. 10  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we 

Phm.      13  Whom  I  would  have  retained  with  me,  th. 

Hob.  4.  13  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have 

10,  16  This  (is)  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  w. 

1  Jo.  1.   2  thateternallife  which  was  with  the  Father 

2.   1  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  J. 

%%.Wiihj  along  with,  avv  sun. 

Matt  25.  27  I  should  have  received  mine  own  with  us 

26.  35  Though  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet  will  1 

27.  38  Then  were  there  two  thieves  crucified  w. 
Mark  2.  26  and  gave  also  to  them  which  were  with 

4. 10  they  that  were  about  him  with  the  twelve 

8.  34  when  he  had  called  the  people,  .with  his 

9.  4  there  appeared  unto  them  Eiias  with  M. 
15.  27  with  him  they  crucify  two  thieves;  the 

See  also  Luke  1.  56;  2.  5,  13;  5.  9, 19;  7.  6, 12;  8.  1,  38; 

9.  32;  19.  23;  20.  1;  22.  14,  56;  23.  11,  32,  [35];  24.  [1], 

10,  24,  29,  33,  44;  John  18.  1 ;  21.  3;  Acts  1.  14,  [14,  17], 
22;  2  14;  3.  4,  S ;  4.  13,  14,  27;  5.  i,  17,  21,  26 ;  8.  20,  31 ; 
10.  2,  20,  23;  13.  7;  14.  4,  4,  5,  13,  20,  28;  15.  22,  22,  25; 
r6.  3;  17.  34;  18.  8,  18;  19.  38;  20.  36;  21.  ^  16,  18,  24, 
26,  2)',  2c  9;  23.  15,  27,  32;  24.  24;  25.  23;  26.  13;  27. 

.  .  1  ■■'. ;  Kuiii.  6.  3;  8.  32;  16.  14,  15;  1  Co.  1.  2;  5.  4; 
10.  13;  11.  32;  15.  10;  16.  4,  19;  2  Co.  i  1,  21 ;  4.  14;  S. 
[19);  a.  4;  13.  4;  Gal.  1.  2;  2.  3;  3.  9;  5.  24;  Eph.  3.  18; 
4.  11 ;  Phil.  1.  1,  23;  2.  22;  4.  21 ;  Col.  2.  5,  13,  20;  3.  3, 
4,  9;  4.  9;  1  Th.  4.  14,  17,  17;  5.  10;  Jas.  1.  n;  2  Pe.  1. 
iS. 
SZ.From  under,  by,  from,  uwo  ((/en.)  Jwpo. 

Matt.  8.  24  that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves 
11.  7  went,  .to  see?  A  reed  shaken  with  the  w. 
14.  24  tossed  with  waves:  for  the  wind  was  co. 

Luke  C.  iS  they  that  were  vexed  [with]  unclean  spi. 

7.  24  went,  .to  see?  A  reed  shaken  with  the  w.? 
8. 14  are  choked  with  cares,  aud  riches,  and  pi. 

21.  20  when  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed 
Acts    5.  16  them  which  were  vexed  with  unclean  sp. 

17.  25  Neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands 
27.  41  was  broken  with  the  violence  of  the  wav. 

Jas.     3.   4 ;  2  Pe.  2.  7  ;  2.  17  ;  Rev.  6.  8. 
34. Tu  you,  v/.l7v  humin,  Jo.  14.  27  ;  Acts  14.  15. 

■" ■■'■'■'',  €x<a  echo,  Acts  27.  39. 
<  Abide,  abounding,  accord,  affliction,  agree, 
away,  be,  bear,  beasts,  bound,  brought,  buried,  charge, 
child,  cieled,  clothe,  clothed,  cloud,  come,  commune, 
communicate,  company,  compare,  compassed,  compas- 
sion, confer,  consent,  consort,  consume  continue,  cru- 
cify,  deal,  drink,  dwellers,  entangle,  feast,  feed,  filled, 
friendship,  go,  gird,  indignation,  labour,  lie,  lien,  lieth, 
Lying,  meddle,  meddled,  meet,  mixed,  occupy,  pleased, 
1  '  1  1,  rejoice,  rise,  run,  satisfied  satisfy,  send,  sit,  sit 
:  m  1  ;ii.  smite,  upi  'k,  speed,  spring  up,  strmd,  suffer, 
I  ike,  take  away,  talk,  travel,  work,  young.] 
"vTITH  child  — 

Saving  vn  tJie  womb,  ivyao-Tpi  exowa  en  gastri. 
Mat.  1.  18  she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Gh. 
1.  23  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and  shall  bl\ 
24. 19  wot  unto  them  that  arc  with  child,  and 
Mark  1 3.  t?  woe  bo  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to 
Luke 21.  23  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and 
1  lb.  -.    ( cometh..  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  c. 
Rey.  ia.    2  she  being  with  child  cried,  travailing  in 
WITHAL  — 

fl     ■  them,  ~"~-  bah  mmah. 
]'■  id  to.   4  be  for  places  for  the  stares  to  hear  it  wi. 
2.T1  %  m$  bahen. 

1       1  15,  2  1  Shalt  make,  .bowls  thereof,  to  cover  with 

37. 16  his  covers  tu  cover  withal,  (of)  pure  gold 

Lev.  ii.  21  which  have  legs. .to  leap  withal  upon  the 

,  i-in;,  171;  ~,n\  yachad,  yachdav. 
Psft.141.  10  into  their  own  oets,  whilst  that  I  withal 
Provaa.  iB  For.. they  shall  withal  be  fitted  la  thy  lips 
4.  With,  cv  im. 

1  S:i   ,r»  1..  \ow  he  (was)  ruddy,  .withal  of  a  beauti. 
With,  aua  ■''■■',■■■■■'. 

CoL     j.   1,  Withal  praying  also  for  us  that  God  wo. 


1  Ti.    5. 13  withal  they  learn  (to  be)  idle,  wa.  Phm.  22 
6.And,  also,  nai  kai,  Acts  25.  27  ;   1  Ti.  5.  13. 
WITHDRAW  (far,  self),  to  — 
l.To  gather  up  or  together,  f]DK  asaph. 

1  Sa.  14.  19  Saul  said  unto  the  priest,  Withdraw  thine 
Joel    2.  10  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shini. 

3.  15  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shini. 

2.  To  be  gathered  up  or  together,  f]PN  asaph,  2. 
Isa.  60.  20  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself 

3.  To  diminish,  withdraw,  jfja  gara. 

Job  36.   7  He  withdraweth  not  his  eyes  from  the  ri. 

i.Tu  arm,  withdraw,  draw  away,  j'^n  chalats. 
Hos.    5.   6  Lord,  .hath  withdrawn  himself  from  them 

5.  To  withdraw,  peg  chamaq. 

Song  5.   6  but  my  beloved  had  withdrawn  himself 

6. To  leave,  withdraw,  let  alone,  rrj;  yanach,  5. 

Eccl.  7.  iS  yea,  also  from  this  withdraw  not  thine  ha. 
7.  To  make  rare  or  precious,  ip;  yaqar,  5. 

PT0V25. 17  Withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour's 
S.To  drive  or  force  away,  rm  nadach,  5. 

Deuti3. 13  have  withdrawn  the  inhabitants  of  their 
§T<>  give  a  refractory  shoulder,  rrfjta  fjris  ]ru. 

Neh.   9.  29  withdrewtheshoulder.andhardenedthe. 

10.  To  (cause  to)  turn  aside,  "VD  sur,  5. 

Job    33.  17  that  he  may  withdraw  man  (from  his)  pur. 

11.  7b  put  far  off,  prn  rachaq,  5. 

Job  13.  21  Withdraw  thine  hand  far  from  me,  and 

12.ro  cause  to  turn  back,  31V  shub,  5. 

Job  9. 13  (If)  God  will  not  withdraw  his  anger,  the 
Psa.  74. 11  Whywithdrawest  thou  thy  hand,  even  thy 
Lam.  2.  8  he  hath  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  do. 
Eze.  18.    8  hath  withdrawn  his  hand  from  iniquity 

20.  22  I  withdrew  mine  hand,  and  wrought  for 

13.  To  give  place  again,  withdraw,  aeavajpea). 
Matt.12.  15  when  Jesus  knew,  .he  withdrew  himself 
Mark  3.    7  Jesus  withdrew  himself  with  his  disciples 

14.  To  draw  away,  airoo-rrdu>  apospao. 

Luke22.  41  he  was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a  sto. 

15.  To  set,  put  or  place  away,  acplo-rn/J-i  aphistemi. 

1  Ti.    6.   5  [corrupt  minds,  .from  such  withdraw  th.] 

16.  To  withdraw  self,  avoid,  beware  of ,  n-reWopai. 

2  Th.  3.   6  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every 

17.  To  send  under, xoitlulr aw,  vnoo'r4KXu}hupost^llo. 
Gal     2.  12  withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fearing 

l&.Togiveplace  under,  secretly,  quietly,  uTroxwpew. 
Luke.  5. 16  withdrew  himself  into  the  wilderness,  and 

WITHER,  be  withered  (away),  to  — 

1.  To  be  dry,  dried  up,  tia;  yabesh. 

Job     8. 12  Whilst,  .not  cut  down,  it  withereth  bef. 

Psa.  90.    6  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down,  and  wither. 

102.    4  My  heart  is  smitten,  and  withered  likegr. 

102.  11  My  days  (are)  like  a  shadow.  .1  am  with. 

129.   6  grass,  .which  withereth  afore  it  groweth 

Isa.    15.    6  the  nay  is  withered  away,  the  grass  faileth 

19.    7  every  thing  sown  by  the  brooks,  shall  wi. 

27.  11  When  the boughsthereof  are  withered,  th. 

40.    7,  8  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth 

40.  24  they  shall  wither,  and  the  whirlwind  sha. 

Jer.  12.    4  How  long  shall,  .the  herbs  of.  .field  wither 

Lam.  4.   8  their  skin,  .it  is  withered,  it  is  become  like 

Eze.  17.    9  shall  he  not. .cut  off  the  fruit. .that  it  wi.? 

17.    9  it  shall  wither  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  sp. 

17. 10  shall  it  not  utterly  wither,  it  shall  wither 

19.  12  her  strong  rods  were  broken  and  withered 

Joel    i  12  all  the  trees  of  the  field  are  withered,  bee. 

1.  17  barns  are  broken  down.. corn  is  withered 

Amos  1.   2  And  he  said. .the  top  of  Carmel  shall  wit. 

4.  7  the  piece  whereupon  itrained  not  withered 
«    Jon.    4.    7  a  worm.. smote  the  ground  that  it  withered 

2.  To  {cause  to)  dry  up,  u!3;  yabesh,  5. 

Joel    1   12  joy  is  withered  away  from  the  sons  of  men 
1.  17  broken  down;  for  the  corn  is  withered 

Z.Tofade,  wear  away,  S53  nabel. 

Tsa.    1.   3  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither;  and  what. 
37.    2  cut  down,  .and  wither  as  the  green  herb 

4.  To  be  hard,  dry,  withered,  lean,  Djy  tsanam. 
Gen.  41.  23  And,  behold,  seven  ears,  withered,  thin 

5.  To  wither,  pine,  be  weak,  Sop  qamal. 

Isa.    19.    6  dried  up :  the  reeds  aud  flags  shall  wither 

6.  Todry  up,  wither,  typaivia  merai/no. 

Matt  13.    6  because  they  had  no  root ;  they' withered  a. 

21.  19  And  presently  the  fig  tree  withered  away 
si.  20  How  soon  is  the  fig  tree  withered  away 

Mark  3.    1  there  was  a  man  there  which  had  a  with. 

3.  3  he  saith  unto  the  man  [Which  had  the  wi.] 

4.  6  and  because  it  had  no  root,  it  withered 
11.  21  fig  tree  which  thou  oursedst  is  with,  away 

Luke  8.  6  as  soon  as  it  was  sprung  up,  it  withered 
,1  •  <li in  5.  6  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  ia  with. 
Jas.  1. 11  risen  with  a  burning  heat,  hut  it  withereth 
1  Pe.  1.  2 4 The  grass  withereth,  and  the  ilower  thereof 

7* Dry,  withered,  £yp6s  zeros. 

Matti2.  10  there  was  a  man  whichhad  Otis) hand  wi. 
Luke  6.    6  a  man  whose  right  hand  was  withered 

6.   8  said  to  the  man  which  had  the  withered 
John  5.    3  of  impotent  folk,  of  blind,  halt,  withered 


WITHERETH,  whose  fruit  — 

Withering  autumnal  fruit,  (pdivoircoptvos  phihinop, 
Jude      12  trees  whose  fruit  withereth,  without  fruit 

WITHHOLD  (self),  be  withholden,  to  — 
l.To  be  cut  of,  IS?  batsar,  2. 

Job  42.  2  no  thought  can  be  withholden  from  thee 

2,To  takt 'a pledge,  bind  on,  by)  chabal, 

Eze.  18.  16  hath  not  withholden  the  pledge,  neither 

3.  To  darken,  keep  back,  spare,  withhold,  ^n. 
Gen.  20.   6  I  also  withheld  thee  from  sinning  against 

22.  12,  16  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only 
Prov.n.  24  (there  is)  that  withholdeth  more  than  is 

4. To  leave,  let  alone,  withdraw,  rn;  yanach,  5. 
Eccl. 11.   6  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thine  hand 

5.  To  shut,  restrain,  ttb$  keda. 

Gen.  23.  6  none  of  us'  shall  withhold  from  thee  his  se. 
Psa.  40. 11  Withhold  not  thou  thy  tender  mercies  from 

6, To  withhold,  keep  back,  y:p  mana. 

Gen.  30.    2  who  hath  withheld  from  thee  the  fruit  of 

1  Sa.  25.  26  the  Lord  hath  withholden  thee  from  com. 

2  Sa.  13. 13  for  he  will  not  withhold  me  from  thee 
^Neh.  9.  20  withheldestnot  thy  manna  from  their  mo. 
Job   22.    7  thou  hast  withholden  bread  from  the  hu. 

31.  16  If  I  have  withheldthepoorfrom(their)de. 
Tsa.  21.    2  hast  not  withholden  therequestof  his  lips 

84. 1 1  no  good  (thing)  will  he  withhold  from  them 
Prov.  3.  27  Withhold  not  good  from  them  to  whom 

11.  26  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall 

23.  13  Withhold  not  correction  from  the  child 
Eccl.  2.  10  I  withheld  not  my  heart  from  any  joy,  for 
Jer.     2.25  Withhold  thy  foot  from  being  unshod,  and 

5.  25  your  sins  have  withholdengood(thiugs)fr. 
Amos  4.   7 1  have  witlmolden  the  rain  from  you,  when 

7. To  be  withheld,  kept  lack,  pi®  mana,  2. 

Job    38. 15  and  from  the  wicked  their  light  is  withho. 
Jer.     3.   3  the  showers  have  been  withholden,  and 
Joel    1. 13  the  drink  offering  is  withholden  from  the 

8.7*0  keep  in,  restrain,  detain,  retain,  Ti'>l  atsar. 
Job     4.    2  who  can  withhold  himself  from  speaking 

12.  15  he  withholdeth  the  waters,  and  they  dry 

9.2*0  hold  down  or  fast,  Kare'xw  katecho. 

2  Th.  2.    6  ye  know  what  withholdeth  that  he  might 
WITHIN  (me,  self,  thee),  from  — 

I.  Unto,  bxcl. 

Lev.  26.  25  when  ye  aregathered  together  within  yo. 
2. Between,  pa  ben. 

Job   24. 11  (Which)  make  oil  within  their  walls,  (and) 

%Jn  the  belly,  |D55  bebeten. 

Job  32. 18  I  am  full.,  the  spirit  within  me  constrain. 
Prov  22.  18  a  pleasant  thing  if  thou  keep  them  within 

4. From  within,  rV3D  mibbayith. 

Gen.   6. 14  shall  pitch  it  within  and  without  with  pi. 

39.  ti  none  of  the  men  of  the  house  there  with. 
Exod25.  11  within  and  without  sbalt  thou  overlay  it 

26.  33  thou  mayest  bring  in  thither  within  the 
37.    2  he  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold  within  and 
Lev   14.  41  cause  the  house  to  be  scraped  withiu  round 
16.    2  into  the  holy  (place)within  the  veil  before 

16. 12  take  a  censer,  .and  bring  (it)  within  the 
16.  15  bring  his  blood  within  the  veil,  and  do 

Num  18.  7  every  thing  of  the  altar,  and  within  the 
1  Ki.  6.  15  he  built  the  walls  of  the  house  within  wi. 

6.  16  he  even  built  (them)  for  it  within,  (even) 

7.  8  his  house.. (had)  another  court  within  the 
7.  9  sawed  with  saws,  within  and  without,  ev. 
7.  31  the  mouth  of  it  within  the  chapiter  and 

2Ki.  6.  30  behold,  (lie  had)  sackcloth  within  upon  his 

Eze.    1.  27  the  appearance  of  fire  round  about  with. 

7. 15  and  the  pestilence  and  the  famine  within 

40.  7  by  the  porch  of  the  gate  within,  (was)  one 
40.    8  measured . .  the  porch  of  the  gate  within 

40.  43  within  (were)  hooks,  an  hand  broad,  f  aste. 

41.  9  place  of  the  side  chambers  that  (were)  wit. 
44. 17  in  the  gates  of  the  inner  court,  and  within 

5. From  behind,  from  through,  1$3X?  mibbead. 
Song  4.    1  thou  (hast)  doves'  eyes'  within  thy  locks 
4.   3  a  piece  of  apomegranate  within  thy  locks 
6.    7  As  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate,  .within  thy 

6.  From  inner  chambers,  D"HDp  mcchadarim. 

Deut.32.  25  The  sword  without,  and  terror  within,  sh. 

7.  In  the  bosom,  p'na  becheq. 

Job  19.  27  (though)  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me 

8. During,  until,  iu  ad. 

Dan.   6. 12  shall  ask  (a  petition),  .within  thirty  days 

9.  With,  law  immad. 

Job     6.   4  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  (are)  within 

10.(0n  the)  face,  D"1S  pauim. 

Eze.    2.  10  and  it  (was)  written  within  and  without 

II.  Within,  inner  part,  Q'jf  pewim. 

Lev.  10.  1 8  the  blood  of  it  was  not  brought  within  the 

1  Ki.    6.  18  the  cedar  of  the  house  within  (was)  carv. 

6.  19  the  oracle  he  prepared  in  the  house  with. 
6.  21  Solomon  overlaid  the  house  within  with 
6.  29  palm  trees  and  open  flowers,  within  and 
6.  30  he  overlaid  with  gold,  within  and  without 

2  Kl.  7. 11  and  they  told  (it)  to  tlif  king's  house  wit. 
2  Ch.  3.  4  Aud  he  overlaid  it  within  with  pure  gold 
Psa.  45.  13  The  king's  daughter  (is)  all  glorious  with. 
Eze.  40.  i*6  to  their  posts  within  the  gate  round  aba 


WITHOUT 


1063 


WITHSTAND 


12. Inner  part,  within,  'PV3 pendmi. 

Eze.  41. 17  by  all  the  wall  "round  about,  within  and 
1B.I?i  the  heart,  midst,  centre  of,  Xjjg?  beqereb. 

Gen.  18.  12  Sarah  laughed  within  herself,  saying,  Af. 
25.  22  the  children  struggled  together  within 

Dent  28.  43  The  stranger  that  (is)  within  thee  shall  get 

1  Sa.  25.  37  his  heart  died  within  him,  amine  became 
Job  20.  14  (Yet)  his  meat.,  (is)  the  gall  of  asps  within 
Psa.  36.    1  transgression  of  the  wicked  saith  within 

39.    3  My  heart  was  hot  within  me;  while  I  was 

51.  10  Create,  .and  renew  a  right  spirit  within 

55.   4  My  heart  is  sore  pained  within  me,  and 

94.  19  Iu  the  multitude  of  my  thoughts  within 

101.   2  I  will  walk  within  my  house  with  a  pert. 

101.    7  that  worketh  deceit  shall  not  dwell  within 

103.    1  all  that  is  within  me,  (bless)  his  holy  na 

109.  22  I  (am)  poor . .  my  heart  is  wounded  within 

147. 13  he  hath  blessed  thy  children  within  thee 

Prov  26.  24  He  that  hateth . .  layeth  up  deceit  within 

Isa.   26.   9  with  my  spirit  witliin  me  will  I  seek  thee 

63. 11  where  (is)  he  that  put  his  Holy  Spirit  wi. 

Jer.    4. 14  long  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge  within 

23.  9  Mine  heart  within  me  is  broken  because 
Lam.  1.  20  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me;  fori  ha. 
Eze.  11.  19  I  will  put  a  new  spirit  witliin  you;  and  I 

36.  26  anew  spirit  will  I  put  within  you;  and  I 

36.  27  I  will  put  my  spirit  witliin  you,  and  cause 

Zeph.  3.    3  Her  princes  within  her  (are)  roaring  lions 

Zech.12.    1  and  forme th  the  spirit  of  man  within  him 

14.  In  the  midst  of,  Tin?  bcthok. 

Gen.   9.  21  and  lie  was  uncovered  witliin  his  tent 
18.  24  Peradventure  there  be  fifty  righteous  wi. 

18.  26  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  within 
Deut  23.  10  he  shall  not  come  within  the  camp 
Josh.19,    1  their  inheritance  was  within  the  inherit. 

19.  9  had  their  inheritance  within  the  inherit. 
21.41  All  the  cities  of  the  Levites  within  the  p. 

Judg.  7. 16  empty  pitchers,  and  lamps  within  the  pi. 
9.  51  there  was  a  strong  tower  witliin  the  city 

2  Sa.  7.  2  the  ark  of  God  dwelleth  within  curtains 
1  Ki.  6.  27  he  set  the  cherubiiu  within  the  inner  hou. 
Keh.   4.  22  Let  every  one  with  his  servant  lodge  wit. 

6.  10  Let  us  meet  together,  .within  the  temple 
Job  20.  13  forsake  it  not,  but  keep  it  still  within  his 
Psa.  40.   8  Idelighttodo  thy  will.,  thy  law  (is)  within 

40. 10  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within 
143.    4  Therefore,  .my  heart  witliin  me  is  desol. 
Eze.     3.  24  said  unto  me,  Go,  shut  thyself  witlun  thine 
12.  24  nor  flattering  divination  within  the  house 

15.  Through,  during,  5ia  (gen.)  dia. 

Marki4. 58  within  three  days  I  will  build  another 
16. In,  among,  iv  en. 

Matt.  3.   9  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  "We 

g.    3  certain  of  the  scribes  said  within  themse. 

9.  21  she  said  within  herself,  If  I  may  but  to. 
Mark  2.  8  that  they  so  reasoned  within  themselves 
Luke  3.    8  begin  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  We 

7.  39  he  spake  within  himself,  saying,  This  m. 
7.  49  began  to  say  within  themselves,  Who  is 

i2. 17  he  thought  within  himself,  saying,  What 
16.   3  the  steward  said  within  himself,  What 

18.  4  afterward  he  said  within  himself,  Though 

19.  44  lay  thee  even. > and  thy  children  within 

24.  32  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us,  while 
Horn.  8.  23  even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves 

17.  Within,  evros  entos. 

Matt23-  26  cleanse  first  that,  .within the  cup  and  pi. 
Lukei7.  21  behold,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you 

IS.Into,  in,  within,  teia  eso. 

John  20.  26  aftereight  days,  ngain  his  disciples  were  w. 
Acts  5.  23  when  we  had  opened,  we  found  no  man  wi. 

1  Co.  5.  12  For.  .donot  ye  judge  them  that  are  within? 

19.  From  within,  iaui&tv  esotlien. 

Matt.23.  25  within  they  are  full  cl  extortion  and  exc. 
23.  27  but  are  within  full  of  dead  (men's)  bones 
23.  28  within  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniqu. 

Mark  7.  21  For  from  within,  out  of  the  heart  of  men 
7.  23  All  these  evil  things  come  from  within 

Luken.  7  And  he  from  within  shall  answer  and  say 
11.  40  did  not  he.  .make  that  which  is  within 

2  Co.  7.    5  without  (were)  fightings,  within  (were) 
Be  v.   4.   8  the  four  beasts . .  (were)  full  of  eyes  within 

5.    1 1  saw.  .a  book  written  within  and  on  the 

20.  Inner,  interior,  io-wrepos  esoteros. 

Heb.  6.  19  which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil 
2\. Toward,  among,  irpos  (ace.)  pros. 

Marki4.   4  there  were  some  that  had  indignation  wi. 
WITHOUT,  from)— 
1. Behind,  "lin^  achor. 

Eze.    2. 10  and  it  (was)  written  within  and  without 

2.  Tliere  is  not,  j;n  ayin. 

Gen.41.  49  untiiiie  left  numbering :  for  (it  was)  wit. 

3.  In  cessation  of  D?N5  beephes. 

Job     7.    6  than  a  weaver's  shuttle,  and  are  spent  w. 

Dan.  8.  25  stand  up.  .but  he  shall  be  broken  without 
A. Unto  from  the  place  of,  rr?a"Vs  el-mibbeth. 

2  Ki.11. 15  said.  .Have  her  forth  without  the  ranges 
5.  Without,  *bf  beli. 

Job  8.  1 1  Can  the  rush . .  can  the  flag  grow  without 
6.1n  not,  without,  "h^  bibli. 

Job  35. 16  he  multipiieth  words  without  knowledge 
7. So  cts  not,  without,  ^h  libli. 

Job  41. 33  there  is  not  his  like,  who  is  made  without 


8.  Except,  without,  save,  besides,  n^."*?  bilade. 

Gen.41.  44  I  (am)  Pharaoh,  and  without  thee  shall 
2  Ki.18.  25  Am  I.  .come  up  without  the  Lord  against 
Isa.  36. 10  am  I . .  come  up  without  the  LORD  against 
Jer.  44.  19  did  we  make  her  cakes.,  without  our  men? 

9.  Without,  save,  not,  besides,  *p??  bilti. 

Isa.  10.   4  Without  me  they  shall  bow  down  under 
Dan.  11. 18  without  his  own  reproach  he  shall  cause 

IQ.Soasnot,  *&&  lebilti. 

Judg/.2.  23  Lord  left  those  nations,  without  driving 

11.  Outside,  without,  pn  chuts. 

Gen.  6.  14  shall  pitch  it  within  and  without  with  pi. 
9.  22  Ham . .  saw . .  and  told  his  two  brethren  w. 

19. 16  they  brought  him  forth,  and  set  him  wit. 

24. 11  he  made  Ms  camels  to  kneel  down  with. 

24.  31  Come  in.  .wherefore  standest  thou  with.? 
Exod25-  11  within  and  without  shalt  thou  overlay  it 

26.  35  thou  shalt  set  the  table  without  the  veil 

27.  21  In  the  tabernacle,  .without  the  veil,  wh. 
29.  14  shalt  thou  burn  with  fire  without  the  ca. 
33.  7  pitched  it  without  the  camp,  .without  the 
37.  2  overlaid  it  with  pure  gold  within  and  wi. 
40.  22  he  put  the  table  in  the  tent,  .without  the 

Lev.    4.  i2  the  whole  bullock  shall  he  carry  forth  wi. 

4.  21  he  shall  carry  forth  the  bullock  without 
6. 11  carry  forth  the  ashes  without  the  camp 
8. 17  the  bullock,  .he  burnt  with  fire  without 
9.  11  the  hide  he  burnt  with  fire  without  the 

13.  46  without  the  camp  (shall)  his  habitation 

14.  40  cast  them  into  an  unclean  place  without 

14.  41  pour  out  the  dust  that  they  scrape  off  wi. 
16.  27  shall  (one)  carry  forth  without  the  camp 
24.   3  Without  the  veil  of  the  testimony,  in  the 

24.  14  Bring  forth  him  that  hath  cursed  without 
Kuni.  5.    3  without  the  camp  shall  ye  put  them  that 

5.  4  Israel  did  so,  and  put  them  out  without 

15.  35  shall  stone  him  with  stones  without  the 
15.  36  all  the  congregation  brought  him  without 
19.  3  that  he  may  bring  her  forth  without  the 
19.    9  lay.  .up  without  the  camp  in  a  clean  place 

31.  13  went  forth  to  meet  them  without  the  ca. 
31. 19  And  do  ye  abide  without  the  camp  seven 
35-  5  Ye  shall  measure  from  without  the  city  on 
35.  27  And  the  revenger  of  blood  find  him  with. 

Deut  23.  12  Thou  shalt  have  a  place  also  without  the 

25.  5  the  wife  of  the  dead  shall  not  marry  wit. 

32.  25  The  sword  without,  and  terror  within,  sh. 
Josh.  6.  23  and  left  them  without  the  camp  of  Israel 

1  Ei.  6.    6  for  without  (in  the  wall)  of  the  house  he 

7.  9  sawedwith  saws,  within  and  without,  even 

8.  8  they  were  not  seen  without :  and  there 

2  Ki.  10.  24  Jehu  appointed  fourscore  men  without 

23.   4  he  burned  them  without  Jerusalem,  in  the 

23.  6  he  brought  out  the  grove,  .without  Jeru. 
2  Ch.  5.    9  the  ends  of  the  staves.. were  not  seen  wi. 

24.  8  set  it  without  at  the  gate  of  the  house  of 
32.  3  waters  of  the  fountains  which  (were)  wit. 
32.    5  built,  .all  the  wall,  .and  another  wall  wi. 

Ezra  10.  13  we  are  not  able  to  stand  without,  neither 
5eh.  13.  20  lodged  without  Jerusalem  once  or  twice 
Psa.  31. 11  they  that  did  see  me  without  fled  from  me 
Prov.  1.  20  Wisdom  crieth  without;  she  uttereth  her 
7.  12  Xow.  .without,  now  in  the  street,  and  li. 

22.  13  a  lion  without,  I  shall  be  slain  in  the  str. 

24.  27  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and  make  it 
Song  a.    1  I  should  find  thee  without,  I  would  kiss 
Isa.   33.   7  Behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall  cry  with. 
Jer.     9.  21  entered,  .to  cut  off  the  children  from  wi. 

21.    4  which  besiege  you  without  the  walls,  and 
•     Eze.    7.  1 5  The  sword  (is)  without,  and  the  pestilence 

40.  19  unto  the  fore  front  of  the  inner  court  wi. 

40.  40  at  the  side  without,  as  onegoethuptothe 

40.  44  without  the  inner  gate  (were)  the  chamb. 

41.  9  which  (was)  for  the  side  chamber  without 
41.  17  even  unto  the  inner  house,  and  without 

41.  25  planks  upon  the  face  of  the  porch  without 

42.  7  the  wall  that  (was)  without  over  against 

43.  21  he  shall  burn  it.  .without  the  sanctuary 

46.  2  by  the  way  of  the  porch  of  (that)  gate  w. 

47.  2  led  me  about  the  way  without  unto  the 
Hos.    7.    1  (and)  the  troop  of  robbers  spoileth  without 

12.  Outward,  without,  fiirn  chitson. 

1  Ki.  6.  29  the  walls  of  the  house,  .within  and  with. 

6.  30  the  floor  of  the  house,  .within  and  without 

2  Ki.  16.  iS  the  king's  entry  without,  turned  he  from 
2  Ch.33.  14  Now  after  this  he  built  a  wall  without  the 
Eze.  41. 17  all  the  wall  round  about,  within  and  wit. 

13.  Baldness  in  the  front,  nn23  gabbachath. 

Lev.  13.  55  inward,  (whether)  it  (be)  bare  within  or  w. 

14.  That  (is)  not,  nV^  di  la. 

Ezra   7.  22  baths  of  oil,  and  salt  without  prescribing 

15.  Not,  vk.lo. 

2  Sa.  23.  4  a  morning  without  clouds;  (as)  the  tend. 
2  Ki.  25.  16  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without  we. 

lQ.In  not.,  without,  abs.  belo. 

Num.35.  22  if  he  thrust  him  suddenly  without  enmity 
Job     8.  1 1  Can  the  rush  grow  without  mire  ?  can  the 

17.5b  that  not,  without,  s&h  lelo. 

2  Ch.15.  3  without,  .true  God.  .without,  .priest.  ,w. 
Job    26.    2  How  hast  thou  helped  (him  that  is)  with. 

IS.  Without,  away  from,  avev  anev. 

Matt  10.  29  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  wit. 
1  Pe.  3.    1  they  also  may  without  the  word  be  won 
4.   9  L'se  hospitality  one  to  another  without 


19. /h  the  absence  of,  &rep  ater. 

Luke  22.  35  When  I  sent  you  without  purse,  and  scrip. 
20.  Out  of  i*  eh. 

Jas.  2.  18  show  me  thy  faith  without  thy  works,  and 
21. Outside,  without,  except,  besides,  4kt6s  elctos. 

1  Co.  6. 18  Every  sin  that  a  mandoeth  is  without  the 

22.  Outside,  without,  e|w  exo. 

Matt  12.  46  (his)  mother  and  his  brethren  stood  with. 

12.  47  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  with. 
26.  69  Now  Peter  sat  without  in  the  palace,  and 

Hark  1.  45  but  was  without  in  desert  places;  and  they 
3.  31  and,  standing  without,  sent  unto  him 
3.  32  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  without  seek 
4  11  but  unto  them  that  are  without,  all  (these) 
11.    4  found  the  colt  tied  by  the  door  without 

Luke  1.  to  the  whole  multitude.. were  praying  with. 

13.  25  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  and  to  k.8.  30. 
John  iS.  16  But  Peter  stood  at  the  door  without 

20.  11  Mary  stood  [without]  at  the  sepulchre  we. 

Acts  5.  23  the  keepers  standing  [without]  before  the 

1  Co.  5.  12  have  I  to  do  to  judge  them. .that  are  wi.? 

5. 13  But  them  that  are  without  God  judgeth 

Col.    4.    5  Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  arewi. 

1  Th.  4. 12  walk  honestly  toward  them  that  are  wit. 
Heb.  13. 11  the  bodies.,  are  burnt  without  the  camp 

13. 12  Wherefore  Jesus.. suffered  without  the  g. 
13.  13  Let  us  go  forth. .unto  him  without  the  ca. 
Rev.  14.  20  the  wine  press  was  trodden  without  the 
22.  15  For  [without]  (are)  dogs,  and  sorcerers,  and 

23.  From  without,  externally,  Qwdev  exothen. 
Mark  7. 15  There  is  nothing  from  without  a  man 

7.  18  whotsoever  thing  from  without  entereth 
Luken.  40  did  not  he  that  made  that  which  is  with. 

2  Co.   7.    5  without  (were)  fightings,  within  (were)  fe. 

1  Ti.    3.    7  have  a  good  report  of  them  which  are  wi. 
.Rev.  11.   2  the  court  [which  is  without]  the  temple 

24..yot  with,  oh  fierd  (gen.)  ou  meta. 

Acts   5.  26  the  captain.. brought  them  without  viole. 

25.  Not,  fiTj  me. 

Acts   9.    9  he  was  three  days  without  sight,  and  ne. 

26.  Outside,  except,  without,  irapcKros  pareHos. 

2  Co.11.  28  Besides  those  things  t:  at  are  without,  that 

27.  Apart,  apart  from,  xapfc  choris. 

Matt  13.  34  without  a  parable  spake  he  not  unto  them 
Mark  4.  34  without  a  parable  spake  he  notuntothem 
Luke  6.  49  is  like  a  man  that  without  a  foundation 
John  1.    3  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made  that 

15.  5  I  am  the  vine.. without  me  ye  can  do  not. 
Horn.  3.  21  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  law 

3.  28  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  d 

4.  6  unto  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  w. 
7.    8  For  without  the  law  sin  (was)  dead 

7.   9  For  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once,  but 
10. 14  how  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher? 
1  Co.  4.   8  ye  have  reigned  as  kings  without  us,  and 
11.  11  neither  is  the  man  without  the  woman 
11.  ti  neither  the  woman  without  the  man 
Eph.    2.  12  That  at  that  time  ye  were  without  Christ 
Phil.    2.  14  Do  all  things  without  murmurings  and 

1  Ti.    2.    8  lifting  up  holy  bauds,  without  wrath  and 

3.  21  that  thou  observe  these  things  without  pr. 
Phm.      14  But  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing 
Heb.  4.  15  but  was  in  all  points  tempted,  .without  sin 
7.  7  without.. contradiction,  the  less  is  blessed 
7.  20  And  inasmuch  as  not  without  an  oath 
7.  21  For  those  priests  were  made  without  an 
9.    7  priest  alone  once  every  year,  not  without 
9.  18  neither  the  first. .was  dedicated  without 
9.  22  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 
9.  28  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvat. 

10.  28  He  that,despised  Moses'  law  died  without 

11.  6  But  without  faith  (it  is)  impossible  to  pi. 

11.  40  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made 

12.  8  if  ye  be  without  chastisement,  whereof  all 
12.  14  holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see 

Jas.  2.  20  thou  know.O  vain  man,  that  faith  without 
2.  26  For  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead 
2.  26  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also 
[See  also  Affection,  blame,  blemish,  cause,  care,  ceasing, 
charge,  children,  come,  controversy,  coast  covetous- 
ness,  descent,  dissimulation,  destruction,  doubt,  effect, 
end,  excuse,  fail,  father,  fear,  fonu,  from,  fruit,  gain 
saying,  god,  hands,  honour,  hypocrisy,  leaven,  life, 
measure,  mercy,  mixture,  mother,  offence,  partiality 
rebuke,  repentance,  signification,  sin,  spot,  strength 
towns,  understanding,  wages,  water,  wavering,  witnes?. 
WITHOUT  cause,  any  delay,  a  seam  (to  be)  — 
l.In  cessation  of  dsn?.  beephes. 

Isa.   52.   4  Assyrian  oppressed  them  without  cause 
2. To  turn  aside,  "no  sur. 

Prov  11. 22  a  fair  woman  which  is  without  discretion 
Z.To  make  no  delay,  ava$o\i]v  {x^efilav  woiiea* 

Acts  25.  17  without  any  delay  on  the  morrow  I  sat  on 
4.  Without  a  seam,  &p^a<pos  arrhaphos. 

John  19.  23  the  coat  was  without  seam ;  woven  from 
WTTHS  — 
A  cord,  string,  in»  yether. 

Judgifi.    7  If  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  withs 

16.  8  seven  green  witl  s  which  had  not  been 
16.   9  he  brake  the  withs,  as  a  thread  of  tow  is 

WITHSTAND,  to  — 

l.To  strengthen  self  p}$  chazaq,  7. 

2  Ch.13.   7  when  Itehoboam .  .could  not  withstand  tit. 

13    8  ye  think  to  withstand  the  k;ngdoiu  of  th. 


WITNESS 


1064 


WOE 


2.  To  set  up  self  withstand,  ns;  yatsab,  7. 

2  Ch.20.    6  so  that  none  is  able  to  withstand  thee 

3.  To  stand  up  or  still,  ~i?#  amad. 

2  Ch.26.  18  they  withstood  Uzziah  the  king,  and  said 
Esth.  g.    2  no  man  could  withstand  them;  for  the 
Eccl.  4.  12  if  one  prevail,  .two  shall  withstand  him 
Dan.  10.  13  prince  of  >the  kingdom  of  Persia  withstood 

11.  15  shall  not  withstand,  .neither  strength  tow. 
4. One  opposing,  an  opponent,  \iffi  satan. 

Num.22.  32  I  wentoutto  withstand  thee,  because(thy) 
5.  To  set  or  plaee  against,  avBiarrigi  anthistemi. 
Acts  1 3.    8  Elymas  - .  withstood  them,  seeking  to  turn 
Gal,     2.  n  I  withstood  him  to  the  face,  because  he 
Eph.  6. 13  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the 
2  XI.    3.   8  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses 
4.  15  for  he  hath  greatly  withstood  our  words 

6.7b  kinder,  withhold,  forbid,  /co>\uoj  kuluo. 

Acts  ix.  17  what  was  I,  that  I  could  withstand  God 

WITNESS,   (false,  without)  — 

1.  Witness,  ~iy  ed. 

Gen.  31.  44  let  it  be  fora witnessbetween  me  and  th. 
31.  48  This  heap  (is)  a  witness  between  me  and 
31.  50  see,  God  (is)  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee 
31.  52  This  heap  (be)  witness,  and  this  pillar 

Exodzo.  16  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against 

22.  13  let  him  bring  it  (for)  witness,  (and)  he  sh. 

23.  1  the  wicked  to  be  an  unrighteous  witness 
Levi  5.  1  (is)  a  witness,  whether  he  hath  seen  or  kno. 
JNiun.  5.  13  (there  be)  no  witness  against  her,  neither 

35.  30  the  mouth  of  witnesses:  but  one  witness 
Deut!  5.  20  Neither  shalt  thou  bear  false  witness  aga. 
17.  6  two  witnesses,  or  three  witnesses,  shall  he 
17.  6  at  the  mouth  of  one  witness  he  shall  not 
17.  7  The  hands  of  the  witnesses  shall  be  first  up. 
19.  15  One  witness,  .two  witnesses,  .three  witn. 
19.  16  If  a  false  witness  rise  up  against  any  man 
19.  18  behold,  (if)  the  witness  (be)  a  false  witness 
31.  19  that  this  song  may  be  a  witness  for  me 
31.  21  song  shall  testify  against  them  as  a  witn. 

31.  26  it  may  be  there  for  a  witness  against  thee 
Josh. 22. 27  it  (may  be)  a  witness  between  us  and  you 

22.  28  but  it  (is)  a  witness  between  us  and  you 
22.  34  it  (shall  be)  a  witness  between  us  that  the 

24.  22  Ye  (are)  witnesses.  .(We  are)  witnesses 
Ruth  4.   9  Ye  (are)  witnesses  this  day,  that  I  have  bo. 

4. 10  to  raise  up  the  name,  .ye  (are)  witnesses 
4.  11  and  the  elders,  said,  (We  are)  witnesses 
:  Sa.  12.    5  The  LORD(is)witness.  .hisanointed(is)  w. 

12.  5  And  they  answered,  (He  is)  witness 

Job    10. 17  Thou  renewest  thy  witnesses  against  me 

16.  8  wrinkles,  (which)  is  a  witness  (against  me) 
16. 19  my  witness  (is)  in  heaven,  and  my  record 

Psa.  27.  i2false witnessesare risen upagainstme, and 
35. 11  False  witnesses  did  rise  up:  they  laid  to 
89.  37  be  established .  .(as)  a  faithful  witness  in 

Prov.  6.  19  A  false  witness  (that)  speaketh  lies,  and 
12. 17  showeth.  .righteousness:  but  a  false  wit. 
14.    5  witness  will  not  lie:  but  a  false  witness 
14.  25  A  true  witness  delivereth  souls:  but  a  de. 
19.    5,  9  A  false  witness  shall  not  be  unpunished 
19.  2S  An  ungodly  witness  scorneth  judgment 
21.  28  A  false  witness  shall  perish:  but  the  man 

24.  28  Benotawitnessagainst  thy  neighbour  wi. 

25.  18  A  man  that  beareth  false  witness  against 
Isa.      8.    2  I  took  unto  me  faithful  witnesses  to  rec. 

19.  20  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  and  for  a  witness  unto 
43.  9  let  them  bring  forth  their  witnesses,  that 

43.  10,  12  Ye  (are)  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord 

44.  8  have  declared  (it)?  ye  (are)  even  my  witn. 
44.   9  they  (are)  their  own  witnesses;  they  see 
55.    4  I  have  given  him  (for)  awitness  tothepe. 

Jer.  29.  23  Iknow,  and  (am)  a  witness,  saith  the  Lord 
32.10  took  witnesses,  and  weighed  (him)  the  mn. 

32.  12  in  the  presence  of  the  witnesses  that  sub. 
32.  25  Buy  thee  the  field,  .and  take  witnesses 
32. 44  seal  (them),  and  take  witnesses  in  the  land 
42.   5  The  Lord  be  a  true  and  faithful  witness 

Mic.    1.    2  let  the  Lord  God  be  witness  against  you 
Mai.   3.    5  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  the  sore. 

2.  Witness,  m«  edah. 

Gen.  21.  >>  they  may  be  a  witnessuntome.that  I  ha 
31.  5*2  and  (this)  pillar  (be)  witness,  that  I  will 

Josh.  24.  27  Behold,  this  stone  shall  be  a  witness  un. 
24,  27  it  shall  be  therefore  a  witness  uuto  you 

3.  Wifon  $$,  testimony,  rnty  edulh. 

XU11117.    7  Moses  laid  up.in  the  tabernacle  of  witness 

17.  8  Moses  went  into  the  tabernacle  of  witness 

18.  2  (minister)  before  the  tabernacle  of  witness 
2  Ch.24.    6  collection,  .fur  the  tabernacle  of  witness 

i.  To  h-  ar,  hearken,  %D$  shamea. 

Judgn.  10  The  Lord  be  witness  between  us,  if  we  do 
5.  Witness,  martyr,  gdpTvs  martus. 

Matt  18.  16  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
26.  6s  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses? 

Mark  14.  63  saith,  What  need  we  any  further  witnes. 

LUK624.  48  And  ye  are  witnessses  of  these  things 

&s  I  \    1.    B  ye  shall  be  witnesses  untome  both  in  Je. 

1.  22  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  awitness  with 

2,  32  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  all  are  witne. 
3. 15  raised  from  the  dead;  whereof  we  are  wi. 

5.  32  we  are  Ms  witnesses  of  these  things,  and 

6.  13  set  Up  false  witnesses,  wbieh  said.  This 

7.  58  the  witnesses  laid  down  their  clothes  at 
10.  39  we  are  witnesses  of  all  things  which  he 
10.  41  Not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses 
13.  31  who  aro  bis  witnesses  unto  the  people 


Acts  22. 15  thou  shalt  be  his  witness  unto  all  men  of 
26. 16  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a  witness  bo. 
Rom.  1.  9  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with  my 
2  Co.  13.  1  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  tliree  witnesses 
1  Th.  2.  5  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness;  God  (is)  wit. 
2. 10  Ye  (are)  witnesses,  and  God  (also),  how 

1  Ti.    5.  19  receive  not.  .but  before  two  or  three  wit. 

6.  12  a  good  profession  before  many  witnesses 

2  Ti.  2.  2  hast  heard  of  me  among  many  witnesses 
Heb.  10.  28  without  mercy  under  two  or  three  witne. 

12.    1  compassed,  .with  so  great  a  cloud  of  wit. 

1  Pe.  5.    1  and  a  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ 

Rev.   1.    5  Jesus  Christ,  (who  is)  the  faithful  witness 

3.  14  the  faithful  and  true  witness,  the  begiun. 

11.   3 1  will  give  (power)  unto  my  two  witnesses 

6.  Witness,  testimony,  gaprvpia  mctrturia. 
Marki*.  55  the  council  sought  for  witness  against  J. 

14.  56  but  their  witness  agreed  not  together 

14.  59  neither  so  did  their  witness  agree  toget. 
Luke22.  71  What  need  we  any  further  witness?  for 
John  1.    7  The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear 

3.  11  have  seen:  and  ye  receive  not  ourwitness 
5.  31  I  bear,  .of  myself,  my  witnesses  not  true 
5.  32  and  I  know  that  the  witness  which  he 
5.  36  I  have  greater  witness  than  (that)  of  John 
Titus  i.  13  This  witness  is  true.    Wherefore  rebuke 
1  Jo.  5.    9  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness 
5.   9  this  is  the  witness  of  God  which  he  hath 
5. 10  He  that  believeth.  .hath  the  witness  in 
Rev.  20.  4  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness 

7.  Witness,  testimony,  gaptvpiov  martuHon. 
Matt  24.  14  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness 
Acts   4.  33  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles  witne. 

7.  44  Our  fathers  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness 
Jas.     5.    3  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  again. 

8.  Without  a  witness,  not  testified  to,  agdprvpos. 
Acts  14.  17  he  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that 

9.  A  false  or  lying  witness,  xpevSogapTvp  pseudom. 

Matt26.  60  [many  false  witnesses,  .two  false  witnes  ] 
1  Co.  15.  15  and  we  are  found  false  wituesses  of  God 

10.  False  or  lying  testimony ,  i^ev^ogaprvp'ta. 
Matti5.  19  fornications,  thefts,  false  witness,  basph 

26.  59  the  council,  sought  false  witness  agaiust 

WITNESS,  (to  be,  bear,  call  to,  give,  take  to), obtain  — 
1.7*0  be  a  witness,  bear  testimony,  TJJ  ud. 

Lam.  2.  13  What  thingshallltake  to  witness  forthee 
2.7*0  cause  to  bear  toitness,  ~ny  ud,  5. 

Deut.  4.  26 1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  again. 

1  Ki.21. 10  set  two  men.  .before  him, to  bear  witness 

21.  13  the  men  of  Belial  witnessed  against  him 
Job  29.  11  when  the  eye  saw  (me),  it  gave  witness  to 
Mai.   2.  14  the  Lord  hath  been  witness  between  th. 

3.7*0  respond,  answer,  rujj  anah. 

1  Sa.  12.  3  witness  against  me  before  the  Lord,  and 
Job  16.  8  my  leanness  rising  up  in  me  beareth  wit. 
Prov.25.  18  A  man  that  beareth  false  witness  against 
Isa.     3.    9  show  of  their  countenance  doth  witness 

4. 7*o  be  a  witness,  bear  testimony,  gaprvpiw  mart. 
Matt  23.  31  ye  be  witnesses  unto  yourselves,  that  ye 
Luke  4.22  all  bare  him  witness,  and  wondered  at 

11. 48  Truly  [ye  bear  witness]  that  ye  allow  the 
John  1.    7  came,  .to  bear  witness  of  the  Light,  that 
1.    8  but  (was  sent)  to  bear  witness  of  that  Li. 
1   15  John  bare  witness  of  him,  and  cried,  say. 
3.  26  he.  .to  whom  thou  barest  witness,  behold 
3.  28  Ye  yourselves  bear  me  witness,  that  I  sa. 
5.  31  If  I  bear  witness  of  myself,  my.  .is  not 
5.  32  There  is  another  that  beareth  witness  of 
5.  32  I  know  that  the  witness  which  he  witne. 
5.  33  Ye  sent  unto  John,  and  he  bare  witness 
5.  36  same  works  that  I  do,  bear  witness  of  me 
5.  37  the  Father  himself,  .hath  borne  witness 
8. 18  I  am  one  that  bear  witness  of  myself,  and 

8.  18  the  Father  that  sent  me  beareth  witness 
10.  25  the  works  that  I  do.  .they  bear  witness  of 

15.  27  ye  also  shall  bear  witness,  because  ye  ha. 
18.  23  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the 
18.  37  thatl  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth 

Acts  10.  43  To  him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness,  th. 
15.    8  God,  which  knoweth  the  hearts,  bare. . wi. 

22.  5  As  also  the  high  priest  doth  bear  me  wit. 

23.  11  so  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Rome 
26. 22  wituessingboth  to  small  and  great,  saying 

Rom.  3.  21  being  witnessed  by  the  Law  and  the  Pro. 
1  Ti.  6.  13  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  a  go. 
Heb.  7.    8  he.  .of  whom  it  is  witnessed  that  he  live. 

10.  15  the  Holy  Ghost  also  is  awitness  to  us,  for 

11.  4  by  which  he  attained  witness  that  he  was 
1  Jo.   1.    2  we  have  seen,  .and  bear  witness,  and  sho. 

5.    6  And  it  is  the  spirit  that  beareth  witness 
5.    8  [there  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  earth] 

3  John     6  Which  have  borne  witness  of  thy  charity 

5.7*0  bear  thorough  witness,  8tafxa.pTvpog.at  diamar. 

Acts  20.  23  Save  that  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in 
WITNESS,  against,  also,  -with,  to  bear  — 
1.7*0  bear  witness  against,  Karagaprvpew  Tcotamar. 

Matta6.  62  what  (is  it  which)  these  witness  against 

27.  13  how  many  things  they  witness  agaiust 
Mark  14.  60  what  (is  it  which)  these  witness  against 

15.    4  how  many  things  [they  witness  against] 

2. 7*o  hear  witness  with,  a-uggaprvpecc  summarturco. 
Rom.  2. 15  their  conscience  also  bearing  witness,  and 

8.  16  The  spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our 

9.  1  my  conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in 


3.7*0  oear  witness  with,  avvt-TrtgapTupiw  sunepimar. 

Heb.   2.    4  God  also  bearing,  .witness,  both  with  signs 
WITNESS,  to  bear  false  — 
7*0  bear  a  false  or  lying  witness,  \l/€v8ogaprvp€w. 

Matt  19.  18  He  saith.  .thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witne. 

Markio.  19  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bear  false  witness,  De. 
14.  56  For  many  bare  false  witness  against  him 

14.  57  there  arose  certain,  aud  bare  false  witness 
Luke  1 8.  20  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bare  false  witness 
Rom  13.    9  this .  .[thou  shalt  not  bare  false  witness] 

WITTINGLY,  to  guide  — 

7*o  act  wisely,  intelligently,  ?3ty  salcal,  3. 

Gen.  48.  14  guiding  his  hands  wittingly  :  forManass. 
WIZARD  —     . 
A  hnowing  one,  a  wizard,  ujn?  yiddeoni. 

Lev.  19.  31  neither  seek  after  wizards,  to  be  defiled  by 

20.    6  the  soul  that  turneth  after . .  wizards,  to  go 

20.  27  hath  a  familiar  spirit,  or  that  is  a  wizard 

Deut  18.  11  Or  a  charmer.. or  a  wizard,  .or a  necrom. 

1  Sa.  28.    3  Saul  had  put  away.  .thewizards,outof  the 

28.   9  how  he  hath  cut  off.  .the  wizards,  out  of 

2  Ki.21.    6  and  dealt  with  familiar  spirits  and  wizar. 

23.  24  familiar  spirits,  and  the  wizards,  and  the 
2  Oh. 33.  6  dealt  with  a  familiar  spirit,  and  with  wia. 
Isa.      8. 19  Seek,  .unto  wizards  that  peep  and  that  m. 

19.    3  they  shall  seek  to  the  idols,  and.  .wizards 
WOE  (worth),  woeful  — 
1.0  !  (interj.  of  sorrow)  ^n  oy. 

!Num2i.  29  Woe  to  thee  Mbab  !  thou  art  undone,  O 
1  Sa.   4.    7  Woe  unto  us !  for  there  hath  not  been  such 
4.    8  Woe  unto  us  !  who  shall  deliver  us  out  of 
Ptov.23.  29  Who  hath  woe?  who  hath  sorrow?  who  hath 
Isa.     3.   9  Woe  unto  their  soul,  for  they  have  reward. 

3.  11  Woe  uuto  the  wicked  !  (it  shall  be)  ill  (with 
6.    5  Woe  (is)  me  !  for  I  am  undone  ;  because 

24.  16  My  leanness,  my  leanness,  woe  unto  me 
Jer.     4,  13  Behold.  .Woe  unto  us  !  for  we  are  spoiled 

4.  31  Woe  (is)  me  now,  for  my  soul  is  wearied,  be. 
6.   4  Woe  unto  us  !  for  the  day  goeth  away,  for 

10.  19  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt !  my  woundisgriev. 
13.  27  Woe  unto  thee,  0  Jerusalem  !  wilt  thou 

15.  10  Woe  is  me,  my  mother,  that  thou  hast 
45.   3  Woe  is  me  now !  for  the  Lord  fiath  added 
48.  46  Woe  be  unto  thee,  O  Moab  !  the  people  of 

Lam.  5.  16  The  crown  is  fallen,  .woe  unto  us,  that  we 

Eze.  16.  23  woe,  woe  unto  thee  !  saith  the  Lord  God 

24.   6  Woe  to  the  bloody  city,  to  the  pot  whose 

24.   9  Woe  to  the  bloody  city!  I  will  even  make 

Hos.    7.  13  Woe  unto  them  !  for  they  have  fled  from 

9.  T2  woe  also  to  them  when.  I  depart  from  th. 

2.0/  oyah!  (interj.  of  sorrow),  rrix  oyah. 

Psa.  120.   s  Woe  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,(that) 
3.0/  (interj.  of  sorroiv),  *N  i. 

Eccl.  4,  10  woe  to  him  (that  is)  alone  when  he  falleth 
10.  16  Woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  (is)  a 

4.0  /  (intety.  of  'sorrow),  't^n  allai. 

Job   10. 15  If  I  be  wicked,  woe  unto  me  ;  and  (if)  I 
Mic.    7.    1  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  as  when  they  have 

5.  Ha/  [interj.  of  sorrow),  Pin  hah. 

Eze.  30.    2  Thussaith.theLord..Woeworth'thedryr 

6.  Ho  !  {int.  of  exhortation,  warning,  sorrow),^  ho. 

Isa.     5.    8  Woe  unto  them  that  join  house  to  house 

5.  j  1  Woe  unto  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the 
5.  18  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  iniquity  with 
5.  20  Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and 

5.  21  Woe  unto  (them  that  are)  wise  in  their 
5. 22  Woe  unto  (them  that  are)  mighty  to  drink 

10.    1  Woe  unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous 

17.  12  Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many  people 

18.  1  Woe  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings 

28.  1  Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride,  to  the  drunk. 

29.  1  Woe  to  Ariel,  to  Ariel,  the  city  (where) 

29.  15  Woe  unto  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide 

30.  1  Woe  to  the  rebellious  children,  saith  the 

31.  1  Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for 

33.  1  Woe  totheethat  spoilest,  and  thou  (wast) 
45.  9  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  ma. 
45.  10  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  unto  (his)  father 

Jer.  22. 13  Woe  unto  him  that  build eth  his  house  by 
23.  1  Woe  be  unto  the  pastors  that  destroy  and 
48.  1  Woe  unto  Nebo,  for  it  is  spoiled,  Kiriath. 
50.  27  woe  unto  them!  fortheirday  is  come,  the 

Eze.  13.  3  Woe  unto  the  foolish  shepherds,  that  fo. 
13.  18  Woe  to  the  (women)  that  sew  pillows  to 

34.  2  Woe  (be)  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel  that 
Amos  5.  18  Woe  unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  the 

6.  1  Woe  to  them  (that  are)  at  ease  in  Zion 
Mic.    2.    1  Woe  to  them  that  desire  iniquity,  and  w. 
Nah.  3.    1  Woe  to  the  bloody  city !  it  is  all  full  of 
Hab.  2.    6  Woe  to  him  that  inereaseth  (that  which 

2.   9  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  coveto. 

2.  12  Woe  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with  b. 
2. 15  Woe  unto  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour 
2. 19  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,  Aw. 

Zeph.  2.    5  Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  coast 

3.  1  Woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  polluted,  to 
Zech.u.  17  Woeto  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the. 

7.11c  /  (interj.  of  sorrow),  *ii  hi. 

Eze.    2.  jo  lamentations,  and  mourning,  and  woe 
8.7*0  be  sickly,  mortal,  incurable,  vs$  anash. 

Jer.  17. 16  neither  have  I  desired  the  woeful  day,  th. 
9.  Wo,  (interj.  of  sorrow),  oval  oua.i. 

Matt  11.  21  Woe  onto  thee,  Chorazin  !  woe  unto  thee 
18.  7  Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  offences ! 
18.    7  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence  co. 


WOLF 


1065 


WOMAN 


Matt 23. 13,  [14],  15,  23,  25,  27,  29  woe  unto  you,  scrib. 

23. 16  Woe  unto  you.  .blind  guides,  which  say 

24.  19  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and 

26.  24  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of 

Mark  13.  17  woe  to  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to 

14.  21  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  man 

Luke  6.  24  woe  unto  you  that  are  rich !  for  ye  have 

6.  25  "Woe  uuto  you  that.  .Woe  unto  you  that 

6.  26  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak 

10.  13  Woe  unto  thee  Chorazin  !  woe  unto  thee 

11.  42,  43  woe  unto  you,  Pharisees!  for  ye 

it.  44  Wue  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hyp. 
11.  46  Woe  unto  you  also .  .lawyers!  for  ye  lade 
11.  47  Woe  unto  you !  for  ye  build  the  sepulch. 
11.  52  Woe  unto  you,  lawyers!  forye  have  taken 
17.    1  but  woe  (unto  him)  through  whom  they 

21.  23  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and 

22.  22  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  he  is  betray. 
1  Co.  9.  16  woe  is  unto  me,  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel 
Jude  1 1  Woe  luito  them!  for  they  have  gone  in  the 
Rev.    8.  13  Woe,  woe,  woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the 

9. 12  One  woe  is  past,  .there  come  two  woes 
11.  14  The  second  woe  is  past,  .the  third  woe  co. 
12. 12  Woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth  and  of 
WOLF  — 
l.A  wolf  or  jackal,  3N1  zeeb. 

Gen.  49.  27  Benjamin  shall  raven  (as)  a  wolf:  in  the 
Isa.  11.  6  The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb 
65.  25  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together 
Jer.  5.  6  a  wolf  of  the  evenings  shall  spoil  them 
Eze.  22.  27  Her  princes,  .like  wolves  ravening  the 
Hab.  1.  8  and  are  more  fierce  than  the  evening  wo. 
Zeph.  3.    3  her  judges  (are)  evening  wolves;  they  gn. 

2.^4  Wolf,  \vkos  lukos. 

Matt.  7.  15  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves 
10.  16  I  send  you.  .as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wo. 

Lukeio.    3  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  wolves 

John  10.  12  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  .and  the  wolf  ca. 

Acts  20.  29  shall  grievous  wolves  enter  in  among  you 
"WOMAN,  {silly,  every,  this)  — 
l.A  woman,  wife,  n^x  ishshah. 


Gen. 


.  22  the  rib .  .made  he  a  woman,  and  brought 

2.  23  she  shall  be  called  Woman,  because  she 

3.  1  the  serpent,  .said  unto  the  woman,  Yea 
3.    2  the  woman  said  unto  the  serpent,  We  may 
3.    4  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman.  Ye  sh. 
3.    6  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  (was) 

3. 12  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest.  .with  me 

3. 13  said  unto  the  woman.  .And  the  woman 
3.  15  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  w. 
3.  16  Unto  the  woman  he  said,  I  will  greatly 

12. 11  I  know  that  thou  (art)  a  fair  woman  to 

12.  14  theEgyptiansbeheld  the  woman,  that  she 
12. 15  the  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's  ho. 

20.  3  a  dead  man,  for  the  woman  which  thou 
24.  5,  8  the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow 
24.  39  Peradventure  the  woman  will  not  follow 
24.  44  (let)tbe  same  (be)  the  woman  whom  the  L. 
38.  20  sent . .  to  receive  (his)  pledge  from  the  wo. 

Exod.  2.    2  the  woman  conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and 

2.  9  And  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  nur. 

3.  22  every  woman  shall  borrow  of  her  neigh. 

11.  2  and  let.  .every  woman  borrow  of  her  ne. 

21.  22  If  men  strive,  and  hurt  a  woman  with  ch. 
■21.  22  as  the  woman's  husband  will  lay  upon  him 
21.  28  If  anox  gorea  man  orawoman,that  they 
21. 2g  but  that  he  hath  killed  a  man  or  a  woman 
35.  25  all  the  women  that  were  wise  hearted  did 

35.  29  every  man  and  woman,  whose  heart  made 

36.  6  Let  neither  man  nor  woman  make  any 
Lev.  12.    2  If  a  woman  have  conceived  seed,  and  bom 

13.  29  If  a  man  or  woman  have  a  plague  upon 
13.  38  If  a  man  also  or  a  womanhaveln  the  skin 
15.  18  The  woman  also  with  whom  man  shall  lie 
35.  19  if  a  woman  have  an  issue,  (and)  her  issue 
15.  25  if  a  woman  have  an  issue  of  blood  many 
iS.  17  Thou  shalt  not  uncover,  .a  woman  and 
18.  19  thou  shalt  not  approach  unto  a  woman 

18.  22  Thou  shalt  not  lie.  .as  with  woman  kind 
tS.  23  neither  shall  any  woman  stand  before  a 

19.  20  whosoever  lieth  carnally  with  a  woman 

20.  13  If  a  man  also  lie.  .as  he  lieth  with  a  wo. 
20.  16  if  a  woman  approach . . kill  thewoman  and 
20.  18  if  a  man  shall  lie  with  a  woman  having 

20.  27  A  man  also  or  woman  that  hath  a  famil. 

21.  7  neither  shall  they  take  a  woman  put  away 
24,  10  the  son  of  an  Israelitish  woman,  whose 

24.  11  the  Israelitish  woman's  son  blasphemed 
Xum.  5.    6  When  a  man  or  woman  shall  commit  any 

5. 18  shall  set  the  woman . .  and  uncover  the  w. 
5.  19  And  the  priest  shall,  .say  unto  the  woman 
5.  21  shall  charge  the  woman . .  say  unto  the  w. 
5.  22  And  the  womau  shall  say,  Amen,  Amen 
5.  24  he  shall  cause  the  woman  to  drink  the  hi. 
5.  25  take  the  jealousy  offering  out  of  the  wat. 
5.  26  shall  cause  the  woman  to  drink  the  water 
5.  27  the  woman  shall  be  a  curse  amoDg  her  pe. 
5.  28  if  the  woman  be  not  defiled,  but  be  clean 
5.  30  and  shall  set  the  woman  before  the  Lord 

5.  31  guiltless,  .this  woman  shall  bear  her  ini. 

6.  2  When  eitherman  or  woman  shall  separate 

12.  1  of  the  Ethiopian  woman,  .an  Ethiopian  w. 

25.  8  and  thrust . .  the  woman  through  her  belly 
25.  15  the  name  of  the  Midianitish  woman  that 
30.  3  If  a  woman  also  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord 
31-  17  kill  every  woman  that  hath  known  man 

Deut  17.  2  If  there  be  found  among  you . .  man  or  wo. 
17.  5  manor  that  woman.,  that  man  or  that  wo. 
21. 11  seest  among  the  captives  a  beautiful  wo. 

22.  5  The  woman  shall  not  wear  that  which  per. 

134 


Deut  22. 


29. 

Josh.  2 
6. 
6. 
8. 

Judg.  4. 
J- 
9- 
9- 
11. 

13- 
13- 
13, 

13- 
13- 


Faith 


.  Ki. 


*7  • 

*7 
37 
17. 

>  Ki.  4, 

4 
4 
6. 
6 
6 
S. 


1  Ch.16. 

2  Ch.  2. 

15 
Xeh.  8. 
Esth.  4. 
Job   14. 

15 

25 
31 

Psa.  5S 


5  neither  shall  a  man  put  on  a  woman's  gar. 
14  I  took  this  woman,  and  when  I  came  to 
22  If  a  man  be  found  lying  with  a  woman 
22  man  that  lay  with  thewoman,  and  the  wo. 
18  Lest  there  should  be  among  you . .  woman 

4  the  woman  took  the  two  men,  and  hid  th. 

21  destroyed,  .both  man  and  woman,  young 

22  bring  out  thence  the  woman,  and  all  that 

25  all  that  fell  that  day,  both  of  men  and  w. 
9  shall  sell  Sisera  into  the  hand  of  a  woman 

49  died  also,  about  a  thousand  men  and  wo. 

53  a  certain  woman  cast  a  piece  of  a  millstone 

54  that  men  say  not  of  me,  A  woman  slew  him 

2  for  thou  (art)  the  sou  of  a  strange  woman 

3  the  angel .  .appeared  unto  the  woman,  and 

6  Theu  the  woman  came  and  told  herhusb. 
9  the  angel  of  God  came  again  unto  the  wo. 

10  the  woman  made  haste,  and  ran,  and  sh. 

1 1  thou  the  man  that  spakest  unto  the  woman 

13  Of  all  that  I  said  unto  the  woman  let  her 
24  the  woman  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  na. 

1  Samson  went  down  to  Timnath.  .saw  a  w. 

2  I  have  seen  a  woman  in  Timnath  of  the 

3  never  a  woman  among  the  daughters  of  thy 

7  And  he  wentdownand  talked  with  the w. 

10  So  his  father  went  down  uuto  the  woman 

4  he  loved  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  Sorek 
27  roof  about  three  thousand  men  and  wto. 

26  Then  came  the  woman  in  the  dawning  of 

27  the  woman  his  concubine  was  fallen  down 

4  the  Levite,  the  husband  of  the  woman  th. 

11  destroy,  .every  woman  that  hath  lain  by 

16  seeing  the  women  are  destroyed  otit  of  B. 

5  the  woman  was  left  of  her  two  sons  and 

8  it  came  to  pass  at  midnight,  .a  woman  lay 
11  doth  know  that  thou  (art)  a  virtuous  wo. 

14  Let  it  not  be  known  that  a  woman  came 
11  Lord  make  the  woman  that  is  come  into 

15  I  (am)  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit :  I 

18  So  the  woman  went  her  way,  and  did  eat 

23  So  the  woman  abode,  and  gave  her  son  su. 

26  I  (am)  the  womau  that  stood  by  thee  here 

20  Lord  give  thee  seed  of  this  woman,  for  the 

3  slay  both  man  and  woman,  infant  and  su. 

4  have  kept  themselves  at  least  from  women 

5  Of  a  truth  women,  .kept  from  us  about  th. 

19  Nob.  .smote  he.. both  men  and  women 

3  Abigail,  .a  woman  of  good  understanding 

9  Dav:^  .  .left  neither  man  nor  womau  alive 
11  David  saved  neither  man  nor  woman  alive 

7  Seek  me  a  woman . .  a  woman  that  hath  a 

8  they  came  to  the  woman  by  night,  and  he 

9  the  woman  said  unto  him,  Behold,  thou 

11  Then  said  the  woman,  Whom  shall  I  bri. 

12  when  the  woman  saw.  .the  woman  spake 

13  the  woman  said  unto  Saul.  I  saw  gods  asc. 

21  the  woman  came  unto  Saul,  and  saw  that 

23  But  his  servants,  together  with  the  woman 

24  the  woman  hadafatcalf  inthehouse,  and 
8  thou  chargest  me . .  concerning  this  woman 

19  he  dealt.  Tas  well  to  the  women  as  men,  to 

2  he  saw  a  woman,  .and  the  woman  (was) 

3  David  sent  and  enquired  after  thewoman 
5  the  woman  conceived,  and  sent  and  told 

21  did  not  a  woman  cast  apiece  of  a  millstone 
2  a  wise  woman,  .and  said,  .be  asa  woman 

4  when  the  woman  of  Tekoah  came  to  the 

5  I  (am)  indeed  a  widow  woman,  and  mine 

8  the  king  said  unto  the  woman,  Go  to  thine 

9  the  woman  of  Tekoah  said  unto  the  king 

12  Then  the  woman  said,  Let  thine  handm. 

13  the  woman  said,  Wherefore  then  hast  th. 
i8  said  unto  the  woman. .And  the  woman  sa. 
19  the  womau  answered  and  said. .thy  soul 

27  Tamar..was  a  woman  of  a  faircountenan. 

19  the  woman  tookand  spread  acoveringov. 

20  came  to  the  woman. .And  the  woman  said 

16  Then  cried  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  city 

17  when  he  was  come  near  unto  her,  the  wo. 

21  the  woman  said  unto  Joab,  Behold,  hishe. 

22  Then  the  woman  went  unto  all  the  people 

17  the  one  woman  said.. I  and  this  woman dw. 

18  it  came  to  pass  the  third  day.. this  woman 

19  this  woman's  child  died  in  the  night,  be. 
22  the  other  woman  said,  Nay ;  but  the  liv. 
26  Theu  spake  thewoman  whose  the  living 
26  whose  mother's  name.. Zeruiah, a  widow*  w. 

9  I  have  commanded  a  widow  woman  there 

10  the  widow  woman  (was)  there  gathering 
17  the  son  of  the  woman,  the  mistressof  the 

24  the  woman  said  unto  Elijah,  Now  by  this 
1  there  cried  a  certain  woman  of  the  wives 

8  passed  to  Shuneni,  where  (was)  a  great  w. 
17  the  woman  conceived,  and  bare  a  son  at 
26  there  cried  a  woman  unto  him,  saying 

25  This  woman  said  unto  me,  Give  thy  son 
30  when  the  king  heard  the  words  of  the  w. 

1  Then  spake  Etisha  unto  the  woman,  wh. 

2  the  woman  arose,  and  did  after  the  say. 

3  the  woman  returned  out  of  the  land  of 

5  behold,  the  woman,  .this (is)  the  woman 

6  when  the  king  asked  the  woman,  she  told 

3  he  dealt  to  every  one.  .both  man  and  wo. 

14  The  son  of  a  woman  of  the  daughters  of 

13  whether  small  or  great,  whether  man  or  w. 
2  before  the  congregation . .  of  men  and  wo. 

11  know,  .whosoever,  whether  man  or  worn. 
1  Man.  .born  of  a  woman  (is) of  few  days 

14  What  (is)  man .  .born  of  a  woman,  that 

4  or  how  carihe  be  clean.,  born  of  a  woman? 

9  If  mine  heart  have  been  deceived  by  aw. 
8  the  untimely  birth  of  a  woman,  .they  may 


Prov.  2.  16  To  deliver  thee  from  the  strange  woman 
6.  24  To  keep  thee  from  the  evil  woman,  from 
6.  26  For  by  means  of  a  whorish  woman  (a  man 

6.  32  whoso  committethadultery  with  a  woman 

7.  5  they  may  keep  thee  from  the  strauge  wo. 
7.  10  there  met  him  a  woman,  .the  attire  of  an 
9. 13  A  foolish  woman  (is)  clamorous,  .simple 

1 1.  16  A  gracious  woman  retaineth  honour,  and 

11.  22  a  fair  woman  which  is  without  discretion 

12.  4  A  virtuous  woman  (is)  a  crown  to  her  hu. 
21.  9  than  with  a  brawling  womanin  a  widen. 
21.  19  than  with  a  contentious  and  an  angry  w. 
25.  24  than  with  a  brawling  woman  and  in  a  w. 
27.  15  continual  dropping,  .and  a  contentious  w. 

30.  20  Such  (is)  the  way  of  an  adulterous  woman 
31. 10  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman?  for  her 

31.  30  a  woman  (that)  feareth  the  Lord,  she  sh. 
Eccl.  7.  26  I  find  more  bitter  than  death  the  woman 

7.  28  a  woman  among  all  these  have  I  not  found 
Isa.   45.  10  Woe  unto  bun  that  saith.  .to  the  woman 

49.  15  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  th. 

54.  6  For  the  Lord  hath  called  tliee  as  a  worn. 
Jer.   13.  21  shall  not  sorrows  take  thee,  as  a  womau 

44.   7  to  cutoff  from  you  man  and  woman,  child 

48.  41  shall  be  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her  p. 

49.  22  shall,  .be  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her 
51. 22  With  thee.  .1  break  in  piecesman  and  wo. 
16.  30  the  work  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman 

1 3.  6  ueitherhathcome  near  toamenstruousw. 
23.  44  as  they  go  in  unto  a  woman,  .the  lewd  wo. 

3.  1  Goyet,love  a  woman  beloved  of  (her)  friend 
5.    7  tins  (is)  a  woman  that  sitteth  in  the  midst 


Eze. 


Eos. 
Zech. 


2.  .4  female,  n^pj  neqebah. 

Lev.  15.  33  of  the  man,  and  of  thewoman,  and  of  him 
Num.  31.  15  said.  .Have  ye  saved  all  the  women  alive? 
Jer.  31.  22  created  a  newthing. .  A  woman  shall  com. 

3.  Women,  D"£;3  nashim. 

Gen.  18. 11  it  ceased  to  be.  .after  the  manner  of  wo. 

31.  35  for  the  custom  of  women  (is)  upon  me 
Exod.  1.  19  the  Hebrew,  .are  not  as  the  Egyptian  wo. 

15.  20  the  women  went  out  after  her  with  tini. 

35.  22  they  came,  both  men  and  women,  as  many 

«.  26  the  women  whose  heart  stirred  them  up 

26  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one 
9  the  children  of  Israeltook(all)the  women 

iS  all  the  women  children,  that  have  not  k. 
35  women  that  had  not  known  man  by  lying 

34  destroyed  the  men,  and  the  women,  and 
6  utterly  destroying  the  men,  women,  and 

14  the  women,  and  the  little  ones,  and  the 
T2  Gather  the  people.,  men,  and  women,  and 

35  with  the  women,  and  the  little  ones,  and 
24  Blessed  above  women,  .above  women  in 
51  thither  fled  all  the  men  and  women,  and 

27  the  house  was  full  of  men  and  women, and 

10  inhabitants,  .with  the  women  and  the  ch. 
14  which  they  had  saved  alive  of  the  women 

14  the  women  said  unto  Naomi,  Blessed  (be) 
22  they  lay  with  the  women  that  assembled 
33  made  women  childless. .childless  among  w. 

6  the  women  came  out  of  all  cities  of  Israel 

7  the  women  answered  (one  another)  as  they 

2  had  taken  the  women  captives  that  (were) 
26  wonderful,  passing  the  love  of  women 
16  the  king  left  ten  women,  (which  were)  co. 

3  the  king  took  the  ten  women  (his)  concu. 

16  Then  came  there  two  women  (that  were) 
1  Solomon  loved  many  strange  women,  tog. 

7  where  the  women  wove  hangings  for  the 

8  two  hundred  thousand,  women,  sons,  and 
1  congregation  of  men  and  women  and  ch. 
3  before  the  men  and  the  women,  and  those 

26  even  him  did  outlandish  women  cause  to 

9  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  the  women 

17  shall  come  abroad  unto  all  women,  so  that 
3  the  house  of  the  women.,  keeper  of  the  w. 

8  the  custody  of  Hegai,  keeper  of  thewom. 

9  the  best  (place)  of  the  house  of  the  women 

11  before  the  court  of  the  women's  house,  to 

12  (other)  tilings  for  the  purifying  of  the  w. 

13  go  with  her  out  of  the  house  of  the  women 

14  she  returned  into  the.,  house  of  thewom. 

15  Hegai.  .the  keeper  of  the  women,  appoi. 
13  young  and  old,  little  children  and  women 

11  assault  them,  (both)  little  ones  and  worn. 

15  in  all  the  land  were  no  womenfound  (so) 
1  Every  wise  woman  buildeth  her  house:  h. 
3  Give  not  thy  strength  unto  women, north y 

5  0  thou  fairest  among  women,  go  thy  way 
9  0  thou  fairest  among  women?  what  (is) 
1  Whither.  .0  thou  fairest  among  women  ? 

12  children  (are)  their  oppressors.and  women 
1  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  man 

16  that  day  shall  Egypt  be  like  unto  women 
11  the  women  come,  (and)  set  them  on  fire 

9  Rise  up,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease;  hear 

18  the  women  knead  (their)  dough,  to  make 
20  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  ye  women 
22  the  women  that  are  left  in  the  king  of  J. 

7  had  committed  unto  him  men,  and  women 
16  the  women,  and  the  children,  and  the  eu. 

6  women,  and  children,  and  the  king's  da. 
15  all  the  women  that  stood  by,  agTeat  mu. 
20  to  the  women,  and  to  all  the  people  whi. 
24  Jeremiah  said,  .to  all  the  women,  Hear 
37  they  shall  become  as  women:  a  sword  is 
30  they  became  as  women:  they  have  burned 
20  Shall  the  women  eat  their  fruit,  (and)chil. 

10  The  hands  of  the  pitiful  women  have  so. 

11  They  ravished  the  women  in  Ziou,  (and) 


Lev.  26. 

XUIU31. 

31- 

31- 
Deut.  2. 


Josh.  S 

Judg.  5. 

9 

16. 


Faith  4 

1  Sa.    2 

15 
iS 

iS 

2  Sa.   1. 


iKi. 
i 
2  Ki. : 
2  Ch.2 
Ezra  ] 
Nell. 

Esth. 


Job  42 
Prov  14. 


Song 


Jer. 


Lam.  2. 
4 


WOMAN 


1066 


WONDER 


Eze     8.  14  there  sat  women  weeping  for  Tammuz 
o.    6  both  maids,  ami  little  children,  ami  wo. 
16.  3t  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from(other)  worn. 
16. 41  upon  thee  in  the  sight  of  many  women 
?3.    2  there  were  two  women,  the  daughters  of 
23.  10  she  became  famous  among  women,  for 
23.  48  that  all  women  may  be  taught  not  to  do 

Dan  11.  17  he  shall  give  him  the  daughterof  women 
11.  37  nor  the  desire  of  women,  nor  regard  any 

Mic     2.   9  The  women  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out 

Kali    3  13  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  thee  (are)  worn. 

Zech  5  9  there  came  out  two  women/and  the  wind 
14.   2  the  houses  rilled,  aud  the  women  ravished 

4.A  woman,  wife,  yvtrfi  gvme. 

Matt.  5.  28  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  af. 
9.  20  a  woman,  which  was  diseased  with  an  iss. 
9.  22  the  woman  was  made  whole  from  that  ho. 

11.  11  Among  them  that  are  born  of  women  the. 

13.  33  is  like  unto  leaven,  which  a  woman  took  a. 

14.  21  about  five  thousand  men,  besides  women 

15.  22  a  woman  of  Canaan  came  out  of  the  same 
15.  28  said  unto  her,  O  woman,  great  (is)  thy  fa. 
15.  38  four  thousand  men,  besides  women  andch. 
22.  27  And  last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

26.   7  There  came  unto  him  a  woman  having  an 

26. 10  said  unto  them,  Why  trouble  ye  the  wo.? 
27. 55  many  women  were  there,  beholding  afar 
28.   5  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  the  wo. 

Mark  5.  25  a  certain  woman,  which  had  an  issue  of 
5.  33  the  woman,  fearing  and  trembling,  know. 
7.  25  a.  .woman,  whose  young  daughter  had  an 
7.  26  The  woman  was  a  Greek,  a  Syropheniciau 
10. 12  if  [a  woman]  shall  put  away  her  husband 

12.  22  and  left  no  seed:  last  of  all  the  woman  died 

14.  3  there  came  a  woman  having  an  alabaster 

15.  40  There  were  also  women  looking  on  afar  off 
Luke  1.  [28],  42  blessed  (art)  thou  among  women  ! 

4. 26  sent,  save  unto . .  a  woman  (that  was)  a  wi. 
7. 28  Among  those  that  are  born  of  women  th. 
7.  37  behold,  a  woman  in  the  city,  which  was 
7.  39  who  aud  what  manner  of  woman  (this  is) 

7.  44  turned  to  the  woman.  .Seest  thou  this  w. 
7  50  he  said  to  the  woman.  Thy  faith  hathsa. 

8.  2  certain  women,  which  had  been  healed 
8.  43  a  woman,  having  an  issue  of  blood  twelve 
8.  47  when  the  woman  saw  that  she  was  not  hid 

10.  38  a  certain  woman  named  Martha  received 

11.  27  a  certain  woman  of  the  company  lifted  up 

13. 11  there  was  a  woman  which  had  a  spirit  of 

13. 12  Woman,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  infir. 

13.  21  It  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman  took  and 

15.  8  what  woman,  having  ten  pieces  of  silver 
20.  32  Last  of  all  the  woman  died  also 

22.  57  denied  him,  saying,  Woman,  I  know  him 

23.  27  great  company  of  people,  and  of  women 
23.  49  the  women  that  followed  him  from  Gali. 

23.  55  the  women  also,  which  came  with  him 

24.  22  certain  women  also  of  our  company  made 
24.  24  found  (it)  even  so  as  the  women  had  said 

John  2.  4  Woman,  what  have  I  to  die  with  thee? 
4.  7  There  cometh  a  woman  of  Samaria  to  draw 
4.  9  Then  saith  thewomanuf  Samaria  untohim 
4.  9  askest  drink  of  me,  which  am  a  woman  of 
4.  11  The  woman  saith  unto  him,  Sir,  thou  hast 
4.  15  The  woman  saith  unto  him, Sir,  give  me  th. 
4.  17  The  woman  answered  and  said,  I  have  no 
4.  19  The  woman  saith  untohim,  Sir,  I  perceive 
4.  21  Woman,  believe  me,  thehourcometh,  wh. 
4.  25  The  woman  saith  unto  him,  I  know  that 
4.  27  marvelled  that  he  talked  with  the  woman 
4.  28  The  woman  then  left  her  water  pot,  and 
4.  39  believed,  .for  the  saying  of  the  woman 

4.  42  said  unto  the  woman,  Now  we  believe,  not 
8.    3  [brought  unto  him  a  woman  taken  iu  ad.] 
8.    4  [this  woman  was  taken  in  adultery,  in] 
8.    9  [and  the  woman  standing  in  the  midst] 
8.  10  [saw  none  but  the  woman,  he  said.  .Wo.] 

16.  21  A  woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  so. 
19.  26  he  saith  unto  his  mother,  Woman,  behold 
20. 13,  15  unto  her,  Woman,  why  weepest  thou? 

Acts    1. 14  iu  prayer  and  supplication,  with  the  wo. 

5.  14  added. .multitudes  both  of  men  and  worn. 
8.   3  Saul,  .haling  men  and  women,  committed 

8.  12  they  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women 

9.  2  if  he  found . .  whether  they  were  men  or  w. 

13.  50  stirred  up  the  devout  and  honourable  w. 
16.  1  of  a  certain  woman,  which  was  a  Jewess 
16.  13  we  sat  down,  and  spake  unto  the  women 

16.  14  a  certain  woman  named  Lydia,  a  seller  of 

17.  4  believed,  .of  the  chief  women  not  a  few 
17.  12  also  of  honourable  women  which  were  G. 
17.  34  a  womannamed  Damans,  and  others  with 
22.   4  delivering  into  prisons  both  men  and  wo, 

Rom.  7.  2  For  the  woman  which  hath  an  husband 
1  Co.  7.  1  (It  is)  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  wo. 
7.  13  the  woman  which  hath  an  husband  that 
11.  3  the  head  of  the  woman  (is)  the  man,  and 
11.  5  every  woman  that  prayethorprophesietu 
11.  6  if  the  woman  be  not  covered,  let  her  also 
xi.  6  if  it  lie  a  limine  for  a  woman  to  be  shorn 
11.  7  but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  man 
n.  8  the  man  is  not  of  the  woman;  but  the  w. 
11.  9  Neither,  treated  for.  .woman,  but  the  w. 
11. 10  For  this  cause  ought  the  woman  to  have 
11.  ii  man  without  the  woman,  neither  the  wo. 
11. 12  For  as  the  woman.. even  ><-..\>y  the  worn. 
11.  13  is  it  comely  thai  a  woman  pray  unto  God 
11. 15  if  a  woman  have  Longhair,  it  is  a  glory  to 

14.  34  Let  your  women  keep  Silence  in  the  chu. 
M-  35  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  the 

Gal,    4.   4  God  sent  forth  Ids  Sun,  made  of  a  woman 


14. 

17- 
17- 


1  Ti.    2.    9  In  like  manner  also,  that  women  adorn  t. 

2.  10  which  becometh  women  professing  godl. 

2.  11  Let  the  woman  learn  in  silence  with  all 

2.  12  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  us. 

2.  14  the  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  tr. 
Heb.  it.  35  Women  received  their  dead  raised  to  life 
1  Pe.  3.  5  hi  the  old  time  the  holy  women  also,  who 
Rev.    2.  20  because  thou  sutferest  that  woman  Jeze. 

9.  8  they  had  hair  as  the  hair  of  women,  and 
12.  1  a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the 
12.  4  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman  which 
12.  6  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where 
12.  13  he  persecuted  the  woman  which  brought 
12.  14  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  a 
12.  15  cast  out.  .water  as  aflood  after  the  worn. 
12.  16  the  earth  helped  the  woman :  and  the  ea. 
12.  17  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and 

4  These . .  which  were  not  defiled  with  worn. 

3  I  saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a  scarlet  coloured 

4  the  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  sc. 

6  I  saw  the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood 

7  I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  ofthe  woman 
9  are  seven  mountains  on  which  the  woman 

17.  18  the  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  that  gr. 

5. This  one,  avTt)  luiute. 

Matt26.  13  shall  also  this,  that  this  woman  hath  done 
Luke  7.  45  this  woman  since  the  time  I  came  in  hath 
7.  46  this  woman  hath  anointed  my  feet  with 
Acts    9.  36  this  woman  was  full  of  good  works  and 

6.  Each  or  every  one,  eicdaTT)  hekaste. 

1  Co.  7.    2  let  every  woman  have  her  own  husband 

7.  A  female*  6rj\€ta  thelcia. 

Horn.  1.  26  even  their  women  did  change  the  natural 
1. 27  the  men,  leaving  the  natural  use  of  the  w. 

8.-4  little  silly  woman,  yvvaiKapiov  gunaikarion. 

2  Ti.    3.    6  lead  captive  silly  women  laden  with  sins 

WOMAN  servant  — 

Maid  servant,  ~n?v'  shiphchah. 

Gen.  20. 14  oxen,  and  men  servants,  and  women  serv. 
32.  5  I  have,  .men  servants,  and  women  serv. 
32.  22  took  his  two  wives,  and  his  two  women  s. 

WOMB  — 

1.  Belly,  womb,  body,  |B3  beten. 

Gen.  25.  23  Two  nations  (are)  in  thy  womb,  and  two 
25.  24  And.,  behold,  (there  were)  twins  in  her  w. 

30.  2  withheld  from  thee  the  fruit  of  the  womb? 
38.  27  it  came  to  pass . .  twins  (were)  in  her  womb 

Dcut.  7.  13  he  will  also  bless  the  fruit  of  thy  womb 
Judgi3.    5,  7  be  a  Nazarite  to  God  from  the  womb 

16.  17  aNazarite  unto  God  from  ruy  mother's  wo. 
Job     1.  21  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb 
3. 10  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my.  .womb 

10.  19  I  should  have  been  carried  from  the  wo. 
31. 15  Did  not  he  that  made  me  in  the  womb 

31.  18  I  have  guided  her  from  my  mother'swo. 
38.  29  Out  of  whose  womb  came  the  ice  ?  and 

Psa.  22.  9  thou  (art)  he  that  took  me  out  of  the  wo. 
71.  6  By  thee  have  I  been  holden  up  from  the  w. 
127.  3  Lo.  .the  fruit  of  the  womb  (is  his)  reward 
139.  13  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  mother's  w. 

Provsi.    2  What,  my  son?  and  what,  the  son  of  my  w.? 

Eccl.  5.  15  As  he  came  forth  of  his  mother's  womb 

11.  5  how  the  bones,  .in  the  womb  of  her  that 
Isa.  13.  18  shall  have  no  pity  on  the  fruit  of  the  wo. 

44.   2  made  thee,  and  formed  thee  from  the  w. 
44.  24  and  he  that  formed  thee  from  the  womb 

48.  8  wast  called  a  transgressor  from  the  womb 

49.  1  Lord  hath  called  thee  from  the  womb 
49.    5  the  Lord  that  formed  me  from  the  womb 
49.  15  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  ofherw.? 

Hos.   9.  11  from  the  birth,  from  the  womb,  and  from 
9. 16  yet  will  I  slay,  .the  beloved,  .of  their  wo. 

12.  3  He  took  his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the  \\. 
2. Bowels,  D'VD  vieim. 

Ruth  1 . 1 1  Turn  again . .  (are)  there  yet . .  sons  in  my  w. 
Z.A  womb,  female,  crn  racham. 

Gen. 49.  25  blessings  of  the  breasts  and  of  the  womb 
Prov3o.  16  The  grave;  and  the  barren  womb  ;  the  e. 
Isa.  46.  3  which  are  borne . .  carried  from  the  womb 
Eze.  20.  26  pass  through,  .all  that  openeth  the  womb 

4.  A  womb,  female,  nrn  rechem. 

Gen. 20. 18  Lord  had!  fast  closed  up  all  the  wombs 

29. 31  when  the  Lord  saw.. he  opened  herwomb 

30. 22  God  hearkened  to  her,  and  opened  herw. 
Exodi3.  2  Sanctify,  .whatsoever  openeth  the  womb 
Num.  S.  16  they.. instead  of  such  as  open  every  womb 

12.  12  when  he  cometh  out  of  his  mother's  womb 
•1  Sa.  1.   5,  6  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her  womb 
Job     3.  11  Why  died  I  not  from  the  womb?,  .did  I 

10.  18  hast  thou  brought  me  forth  out  of  the  w.? 

24.  20  The  womb  shall  forget  him  :  the  worm 

31. 15  and  did  not  one  fashion  us  in  the  womb? 

38.  8  brake  forth. .it  had  issued  out  of  the  wo.  ? 
Psa.  22.  10  I  was  cast  upon  thee  from  the  womb,  th. 

58.    3  The  wicked  are  estranged  from  the  womb 

no.  3  in  the  beauties  of  holiness  from  the  womb 
Jer.     1.    5  before  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  womb 

20.  17  slew  me  not  from  the  womb,  .and  her  wo. 

20.  18  Wherefore  came  I  forth  out  of  the  womb 
Hos.  9.  14  give  them  a  miscarrying  womb  and  dry  b. 
5. Belly,  womb,  yaar^p  gaster. 

Luke  1.  31  thou  shalt  conceive  in  thy  womb,  andbr. 
§. Belly,  womb,  hollow  place,  KoiXia  koilia. 

Abut  ].-).  12 which wereso bora  Erom( their) mother's  w. 
Luke  i.  15  shall  be  filled,  .even  from  his  mother's  w. 


Luke  1.  41  it  came  to  pass,  .the  babe  leaped  in  her  w. 
1.  42  and  said. .blessed  (is)  the  fruitof  thy  womb 

1.  44  lo.  .the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy 

2.  21  named,  .before  he  was  conceived  in  the  w. 
n.  27  Blessed  (is)  the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and 
23.  29  Blessed,  .the  wombs  that  never  bare,  and 

John  3.  4  can  he  enter,  .into  his  mother's  womb,  and 
Acts    3.2  a  certain  man,  lame  from  his  mother's  w. 

14.    S  being  a  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb 
Gal.     1. 15  whoseparatedmefrommyniother's  womb 

7. A  womb,  matrix,  pA]Tpa.  metra. 

Luke  2.  23  Every  male  that  openeth  the  womb  shall 
Rom.  4.  19  neither  yet  the  deadness  of  Sara's  womb 

"WONDER,  (great),  wondered  at  — 
\.  Wonder,  miracle,  nsiD  mqpheth. 

Exod.  4.  21  see  that  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before 
7.    3  I  will. .multiply  my  signs  and  my  wonders 

11.  9  that  my  wonders  may  be  multiplied  in  the 
11.  10  Moses  and  Aaron  did  all  these  wonders  be. 

Deut.  4.  34  to  go.  .take  him  a  nation,  .by  wonders,  and 

6.  22  LORD  showed  signs  and  wonders,  great  and 

7.  19  the  signs,  and  the  wonders,  and  the  mighty 
13.  1  If.. a  prophet.. giveth  thee  a  sign  or  a  wo. 
13.  2  And  the  sign  or  the  wonder  come  to  pass 
26.  8  the  Lord  brought  us  forth,  .with  wonders 
28.  46  they  shall  be  upon  thee  for.  .a  wonder,  and 
34.  11  In  all  the  signs  and  the  wonders  which  the 

1  Ch.16.  12  Remember  his  marvellous  works,  .his  wo. 

2  Gil.  32.  31  who  sent  unto  him  to  enquire  of  the  won. 
Neh.  9.  10  showedst  signs  and  wonders  upon  Phara. 
Psa.  71.   7  I  am  as  a  wonder  unto  many  :  but  thou 

78.  43  How  he  had  wrought,  .his  wonders  in  the 
105.    5  Remember  his  marvellous  works . .  his  wo. 

105.  27  They  showed  his.  .wonders  in  the  land  of 

135.  9  (Who)  sent  tokens  and  wondersinto  them. 
Isa.     S.  18  I  and  the  children,  .(are),  .for  wonders  iu 

20.    3  Isaiah  hath  walked,  .a  sign  and  wonder 
Jer.  32.  20  Which  hast  set  signs  and  wonders  in  the 

32.  21  hast  brought  forth  thy  people,  .with  wo. 
Joel    2.  30  I  will  show  wonders  iu  the  heavens  and 
Zech.  3.    8  men  wondered  at:  for,  behold,  I  will  bring 

2.  To  show  self  wonderful  or  singular,  ttbspala,  2. 

Exod.  3.  20  I  will,  .smite  Egypt  with  all  my  wonders 
Josh.  3.  5  to  morrow  the  Lord  will  do  wonders  amo. 
Neh,  9.  17  neither  were  mindful  of  thy  wonders  that 
Job  9.  to  Which  doeth  great  things,  .and  wonders 
Psa.  78.  11  forgat  his  works,  and  his  wonders  that  he 
96.    3  Declare,  .his  wonders  among  all  people 

106.  7  Our  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders 

107.  24  These  see  the  works  of  the  Lord,  .his  wo. 

136.  4  To  him  who  alone  doeth  great  wonders 

3..4  wonder,  singular  thing,  n"?2  pcle. 

Exodi5.  11  Who  (is) like  unto  thee,  0  LORD,  .doing w. 
Psa.  77.  11  surely  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old 

77.  14  Thou  (art)  the  God  thatdoest  wonders,  th. 

88.  10  Wilt  thou  show  wonders  to  the  dead?  shall 

88.  12  Shall  thy  wonders  be  known  in  the  dark? 

89.  5  the  heavens  shall  praise  thy  wonders,  O 
Isa.  29. 14  I  will.  .do.  .a  marvellous  work  and  a  wo. 
Dan.  12.   6  (one)  said. .  How  long.,  the  end  of  these  w.? 

4.  To  be  astonished,  wonder,  ptci^i  lemah. 

Dan.  4.  2  I  thought  it  good  to  show,  .the  wonders 
4.  3  how  mighty . .  his  wonders!  his  kingdom 
6.  27  he  worketh  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven 

5. Astonishment,  amazement,  Bdfx&os  thambos. 
Acts    3.  10  they  were  tilled  with  wonder  and  amaze. 

Q.A  sign,  <T7)/j.e?ov  seme  ton. 

Rev.  12.    1  And  fchereappeared  a  great  wonder  in  he. 

12.  3  there  appeared  another  wonder  in  heaven 

13.  13  And  he  doeth  great  wonders,  so  that  he 

7. A  prodigy,  wonder,  repas  teras. 

Matt  24.  24  false  Christs.. shall  show,  .signs  and  won. 
Mark.13.  —  false  Christs.  .shall  show  signs  and  wond. 
John  4.  48  Except  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,  ye  will 
Acts    2.  19  I  will  show  wonders  in  heaven  above,  and 

2.  22  a  man  approved  of  God.  .by  miracles  and  w. 

2.  43  many  wonders  and  signs  were  done  by  the 

4.  30  that  signs  and  wonders  may  be  done  by 

5.  12  were  many  signs  and  wonders  wrought 

6.  8  Stephen,  .did  great  wonders  and  miracles 

7.  36  after  that  he  had  showed  wonders  and  si. 

14.  3  granted  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  by 

15.  12  declaring  what  miracles  and  wonders  God 
Rom.  15.  19  Through  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  by  the 

2  Co. 12. 12  in  signs,  and  wonders,  and  mighty  deeds 
2  Th.  2.  9  with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying  won. 
Heb.    2.    4  God.  .bearing,  .witness,  .with signs,  .wo. 

"WONDER,  greatly,  wondering,  to  — 
I  .To  show  self  astonish  ed,  nj??  shamem,  7«. 
Isa.   59.  16  he  saw  that,  .no  man,  and  wondered 

63.    5  I  wondered  that,  .none  to  uphold :  there. 

2.To  be  astonished,  wonder,  nzntamah. 

Isa.  29.  9  Stay  yourselves,  and  wonder ;  cry  ye  out 
Jer.     4.   9  be  astonished,  and  the  prophets  shall  wo. 

3.  To  show  self  astonished,  nog  tamah,  7. 

Hab.   1.    5  Behold  ye.  .regard,  and  wonder  marvell. 

i.  Greatly  astonished  or  amazed,  tKQapfios  ektham. 

Acts    3.  11  the  people  ran  together,  .greatly  wonder. 

5.  To  put  out,  startle,  perplex,  igbmifti  exislemi. 
Acts   8. 13  Simon.,  continued  with  Philip,  and  won. 

0.7"--  be  astonished,  amazed,  6avpd£u  thavmam. 
Matt  1 5.  31  Insomuch  that  the  multitude  wondered 
Mark  6.  51  amazed,  .beyond  measure,  [and  wonder.] 
Luke  2.  18  all  they  that  heard(it)  wondered  at  those 


WONDERFUL 


1067 


WORD 


Luke  4.  22  all  bare  him  witness,  and  wondered  at 

8.  25  they  being  afraid,  wondered,  saying  one 

9.  43  while  they  wondered  every  one  at  all  th. 
11. 14  the  dumb  spake ;  and  the  people  wonde. 
24.  12  [wondering  in  himself  at  that  which  was] 

24.  41  while  they.,  believed  not  for  joy,  and  wo. 
Acts    7.  31  When  Moses  saw.  .he  wondered  at  the  s. 

13.  41  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and  pe. 
Rev.  13.   3  and  all  the  world  wondered  after  the  be. 
17.    6  when  I  saw  her,  I  wondered  with  great 
17.    8  and  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  w. 

"WONDERFUL  thing,  work,  to  be  or  make  — 

l.To  be  or  become  wonderful,  singular,  ttbppala,  2. 

2  Sa.    1.  26  thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful,  passing 

Job  42.    3  too  wonderful  for  me,  which  I  knew  not 

Psa.  40.    5  Many,  0  Lord.  .God.  .thy  wonderful  wo. 

78.    4  and  his  wonderful  works  that  he  hath  do. 

107.   8,  15,  2i,  31  Ills  wonderful  works  to  the  eh. 

in.    4  He  hath  made  his  wonderful  works  to  be 

Prov3o.  iS  There  be  three,  .are too  wonderful  forme 

2.  To  make  wonderful,  singular,  vh^pala,  5. 
Deut2S.  59  Then  the  LORD  will  make  thy  plagues  w. 
2  Ch.  2.    9  for  the  house . .  (shall  be)  wonderful  great 
Isa.  28.  29  Lord  of  hosts;  (which)  is  wonderful  in  c. 

3.  Any  thing  wonderful  or  singular,  K75  pele. 

Psa.  1 19.  129  Thy  testimonies  (are)  wonderful :  there. 
Isa.     9.   6  and  his  name  shall  be  called  "Wonderful 

25.  1 1  will  praise,  .for  thou  hast  done  wonder. 

4.  "Wonderful,  singular,  'N??  pili. 

Psa.  1 39.   6  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me  ;  it  is 

5.  Astonishment,  amazement,  new  shammah. 

Jer.     5.  30  A  wouder.ol  and  horrible  thing  is  com. 

6.  Wonderful,  6avy.d<rios  thaumasios. 

Matt  21.  15  saw  the  wonderful  things  that  he  did,  and 

7.  Great  doings  or  deeds,  fxeyaAe?a  megaleia. 

Acts    2.  n  we  do  hear  them  speak,  .the  wonderful 
WONDERFULLY  (made,  to  be)  — 

1.  Tobeor  become  wonderful  or  singular,  lOSpala,  2. 

Dan.    S.  24  he  shall  destroy  wonderfully,  and  shall  p. 
2. Any  thing  wonderful  or  singular,  n^ppele. 

Lam.  1.   g  therefore  she  came  down  woriderfull 
3.  To  be  or  become  wonderful,  nbp  palah,  2. 

Psa.139.  14  for  I  am  fearfully  (and)  wonderfully  made 
"WONDERING  — 
To  show  self  astonished,  rsxy  shaali,  7. 

Gen.  24.  21  the  man  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace 
WONDROUS  things,  -works,  wondrously — 
l.A  wonderfid  or  singular  thing,  mthzzmiphlaah. 

Joh  37. 16  the  wondrous  works  of  him  which  is  perfect 

2.  To  be  or  become  wonderful,  n)>2  pala,  2. 

1  Ch.16.  9  Siug.  .talk  ye  of  all  his  wondrous  works 
Job  37.  14  stand  still,  and  consider  the  wondrous  w. 
Psa.  26.    7  That  I  may.  .tell  of  all  thy  wondrous  wo. 

71.  17  hitherto  have  I  declared  thy  wondrous  w. 

72.  18  Lord  God.  .who  only  doeth  wondrous  th. 
75.    1  thy  name  (is)  near  thy  wondrous  works 
78.  32  and  believed  not  for  his  wondrous  works 
86.  10  For  thou  (art)  great,  and  doest  wondrous 

105.  2  Sing,  .talk  ye  of  all  his  wondrous  works 

106.  22  Wondrous  works  in  the  land  of  Ham,  (and) 
119.  18  that  Imay  behold  wondrous  things  out  of 
119. 27  so  shall  I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works 
145.    5  I  will  speak . .  of  thy  majesty,  and . .  w.  w. 

Jer.  21.   2  deal,  .according  to  all  his  wondrous  wor. 

3.  To  make  wonderful  or  singidar,  ti*?3  pala,  5. 
Judgr3.  19  did  wondrously;  and  Manoali  and  his  wi. 
Joel    2.  26  God,  that  hath  dealt  wondrously  with 

"WONT  (to  be)  — 

l.To  speak,  -\y*  debar,  3. 

2  Sa.  20. 18  They  were  wont  to  speak  in  old  time,  say. 
2.  To  see,  mrj  chazah. 

Dan.    3. 19  one  seven  times  more  than  it  was  wont  to 
Z.To  accustom,  jap  sakan,  5. 

Num  22.  30  said . .  was  I  ever  wont  to  do  so  unto  thee  ? 

4.  To  be  customary,  edeo  etho  eicoda  eiotha. 

Matt  27. 15  at  (that)  feast  the  governor  was  wont  to 

Markio.    1  and,  as  he  was  wont,  he  taught  them  ag. 
5. According  to  custom,  Kara  to  eQos  kata  to  ethos. 

Luke22. 39  he  came  out,  and  went,  as  he  was  wout 
6. To  make  or  reckon  legator  customary,  vo^ii^a. 

Acts  16. 13  liver  side,  where  prayer  was  wont  to  be 
WOOD,  (of)  — 

1.  Wood,  a  tree,  yx  a. 

Dan.   5.   4,  23  praised  the  gods  of.,  wood,  and  of  sto. 

2.  A  bough,  forest,  enn  choresh. 

1  Sa.  23.  15  (was)  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph  in  a  wood 

23. 16  arose,  and  went  to  David  in  the  wood 
23.  18  David  abode  in  the  wood,  and  Jonathan 
23. 19  Doth  not  David  hide  himself,  .in  the  wood 

3.  A  forest,  loood,  ij£  yaar. 

Deutig.  5  As  when  a  man  goeth  into  the  wood  with 
Josh.17.  15  get  thee  up  to  the  wood,  .and  cut  down 

17.  18  mountain  shall  be  thine :  for  it  (is)  a  wood 

1  Sa.  14.  25  And  allXthey  of)  the  landcameto  a  wood 

14.  26  when  the  people  werecomeinto  the  wood 

2  Sa.  t8.    6  and  the  battle  was  in  the  wood  of  Ephra. 

18.  8  the  wood  devoured  more  people  that  day 

18. 17  and  cast  him  into  a  great  j>it  in  the  wood 


2  Ki.    2.  24  there  came,  .two  she  bears  out  of  the  wo. 

1  Ch.16.  33  Then  shall  the  trees  of  the  wood  siug  out 

Psa.  80. 13  The  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it 
83.  14  As  the  fire  burnetii  a  wood,  and  as  thefl. 
96.  12  then  shall  all  the  trees  of  the  wood  rejoice 
132.    6  we  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood 

Eccl.  2.    6  to  water  therewith  the  wood  that  bring. 

Song    2.   3  apple  tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood 

Isa.     7.    2  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with 

Mic.    7.  14  which  dwell  solitarily  (in)  the  wood,  in 
4.  Woods,  forests,  D,-}iJ/:  yeorim. 

Eze.  34.  25  dwell  safely,  .and  sleep  in  the  woods 
5. A  tree,  wood,  j'#  ets. 

Gen.  6. 14  Make  thee  an  ark  of  gopher  wood;  rooms 
22.  3  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt  offering,  and 
22.  6  Abraham  took  the  wood  of  the  burnt  off. 
22.  7  Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood ;  but  where 
22.    9  laid  the  wood  in  order,  .upon  the  wood 

Exod  7. 19  both  iu  (vessels  of)  wood,  and  in  (vessels 
25.    5  and  badgers'  skins,  and  shittim  wood 
25.  10  they  shall  make  an  ark  (of)  shittim  wood 
25. 13  thou  shalt  make  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 
25.  23  shalt  also  make  a  table  (of)  shittim  wood 

25.  28  shalt  make  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 

26.  15  shalt  make  boards,  .(of)  shittim  wood  st. 

26.  26  thou  shalt  make  bars  (of)  shittim  wood 

27.  1  shalt  make  an  altar  of  shittim  wood,  five 

27.  6  staves  for  the  altar,  staves  (of)  shittim  w. 
30.    1  (of)  shittim  wood  shalt  thou  make  it 

30.  5  thou  shalt  make  the  staves(of)  shittim  w. 
35.   7  and  badgers'  skins,  and  shittim  wood 
35.  24  with  whom  was  found  shittim  wood,  for 

35.  33  in  carving  of  wood,  to  make  any  manner 

36.  20 he  made  boards,  .(of)  shittim  wood,  stan. 

36.  31  he  made  bars  of  shittim  wood;  five  for  the 

37.  1  made  the  ark  (of)  shittim  wood:  two  cub. 
37.  4  lie  made  staves  (of)  shittim  wood,  and  ov. 
37.  10  he  made  the  table  (of)  shittim  wood,  two 
37. 15,  28  he  made  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wood 

37.  25  made  the  incense  altar  (of)  shittim  wood 

38.  1  he  made  the  altar. .  of  shittim  wood,  five 

38.  6  he  made  the  staves  (of)  shittim  wood,  and 
Lev.    1.    7  and  lay  the  wood  in  order  upon  the  fire 

1.    8  the  fat  in  order  upon  the  wood  that  (is) 

1. 12  shall  lay  them  in  order  on  the  wood  that 

1.  17  burn  it  upon  the  altar,  upouthewood  th. 

3.    5  which  (is)  upon  the  wood  that  (is)  on  the 

4. 12  and  burn  him  on  the  wood  with  fire 

6. 12  the  priest  shall  burn  wood  on  it  every  mo. 

11.  32  whether,  .any  vessel  of  wood,  or  raiment 

14.   4  and  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and  hyssop 

14.    6  he  shall  take  it,  and  the  ce<lar  wood,  and 

14.  49  two  birds,  and  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet 

14.  51  lie  shall  take  the  cedar  wood,  and  the  hy. 

14.  52  cleanse  the  house,  .with  the  cedar  wood 

15.  12  every  vessel  of  wood  shall  berinsedinwa. 
Nunii3.  20  the  land.,  whether  there  be  wood  therein 

19.    6  the  priest  shall  take  cedar  wood,  and  hy. 

31.  20  of  goats'  (hair),  and  all  thiugs  made  of  w. 
35.  t8  he  smite  him  with  an  hand  weapon  of  wo. 

Deut.  4.  28  serve  gods,  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood 
10.  1  Hew  thee,  .and  make  thee  an  ark  of  wood 
to.  3  I  made  an  ark  (of)  shittim  wood,  and  he. 
19.    5  goeth.  .with  his  neighbour  to  hew  wood 

28.  36  there  shalt  thou  serve  other  gods,  wood 

28.  64  then  shaltthouscrveother  gods.. wood  and 
29. 11  from  the  hewer  of  thy  wood  unto  the  dra. 

29.  17  ye  have  seen. .their  idols,  wood  and  stone- 
Josh.  9.  21,  23,  27  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  wa. 
Judg.  6.  26  otter  a  burnt  offering  with  the  wood  of  the 

1  Sa.   6.  14  they  clave  the  wood  of  the  cart,  and  offe. 

2  Sa,   6.   5  manner  (of  instruments  made  of)  fir  wood  [ 

24.  22  behold. .instruments  of  theoxen  for  wood 

1  Ki.  6.  15  he  covered  (them)  on  the  inside  with  wood 

18.  23  and  lay  (it)  on  wood. .and  lay  (it)  on  wood 
iS.  33  he  put  the  wood  in  order,  and  cut  the  bu. 
18.  33  laid  (him)  on  the  wood,  and  said,  Fill  four 
l8-  33  pour  (it)  on  the. .sacrifice,  and  on  the  wo. 

18.  38  consumed  the  burnt  sacrifice,  and  the  wo. 

2  Ki.  5.   4  they  came  to  Jordan ,  they  cut  down  wood 

19.  18  no  gods,  but  the  wrorkof  men's  hand,  wo. 

1  Oh. 21.  23  I  give. .the  threshing  instruments  for  wo. 

22.   4  they  of  Tyre,  brought  much  cedar  wood 

29.  2  I  have  prepared. .wood  for  (things)  of  wo. 

2  Ch.  2.  16  we  will  cut  wood  out  of  Lebanon,  as  much 
Neh.   8.    4  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  w. 

10.  34  for  the  wood  offering,  to  bring  (it)  into  the 
13.  31  for  the  wood  offering,  at  times  appointed 

Job  41.  27  esteemetlr.as  straw. .brass  as  rotten  wood 

Prov26.  20  Where  no  wood  is.. the  fire  goth  out,  so 
26.  21  (As)  coals.. to  burning  coals,  and  wood  to 

Eccl.  10.    9  lie  that  cleaveth  wood  shall  be  endange. 

Song   3.    9  Solomon  made  himself  a  chariot  of  the  w. 

Isa.  10. 15  as  if  the  staff  should  lift  up.. no  wood 

30.  33  the  pile  thereof  (is)  fire  and  much  wood 
37.  19  no  gods,  but  the  work  of  men's  hands,  w. 

45.  20  have  no  knowledge  that  set  up  the  wood 
60.  17  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold. .and  for  wood 

Jer.     5. 14  I  will  make,  .this  people  wood,  and  it  sh. 

7.  18  The  children  gather  wood,  and  the  fath. 

28. 13  Thou  hast  broken  the  yokes  of  wood,  but 

46.  22  and  come. .with  axes,  as  hewers  of  wood 
Lara.  5.    4  have  drunken. .for  money;  our  wood  is  s. 

5.  13  and  the  children  fell  under  the  wood 
Eze.  15.    3  Shall  wood  be  taken  thereof  to  do  any  w. 

20.  32  We  will  be  as  the  heathen. .to  serve  wood 
24.  10  Heap  on  wood,  kindle  the  fire,  consume 

39.  10  So  that  they  shall  take  no  wood  out  of  the 
41.  16  cieled  with  wood  round  about,  and  from 
41.  22  The  altar  of  wood. .and  the  walls. .wood 

Eab,  2. 19  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  unto  the  wood    1 


Hag.   1.    S  Go  up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood 
Zech  12.    6  like  an  hearth  of  fire  among  the  wood,  and 

Q. Wooden,  made  of  wood,  %6hivos  xu  linos. 

2  Ti.    2.  20  not  only  vessels  of  gold,  .but  also  of  wood 
Rev.   9.  20  they  should  not  worship,  .idols.. of  wood 

7.  Wood,  tree,  Z,vXov  xulon. 

1  Co.  3. 12  any  man  build  upon  this  foundation. .wo. 
Rev.  iS.  12  thyiue  wood. .vessels  of  most  precious  wo. 

WOOF  — 

Mixture,  woof,  y$  ereb. 

Lev.  13.  48  Whether.. in  the  warp,  or  woof,  of  linen 
13-  49»  5r>  53.  57.  59  in  the  warp,  or  in  the  woof 
13.  52  whether  warp  or  woof,  in  woollen  or  in  li. 
13.  56  rend.. out  of  the  warp,  or  out  of  the  woof 
13.  58  the  garment,  either  warp  or  woof,  or  wh. 

WOOL,  woollen  — 

1.  Wool,  icy.  muter, 

Dan.   7.   9  and  the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  pure  wo. 

2.  Wool,  "ISS  tsemer. 

Lev.  13.  47  a  woollen  garment,  or  a  linen  garment 
13.  48  in  the  warp,  or  woof,  of  linen,  or  of  wool. 
13.  52  in  woollen  or  in  linen,  or  any  thing  of 
13.  59  in  a  garment  of  woollen  or  linen,  either 

Deut 22.  11  Thou  shalt  not  wear  a  garment,  .of  woo. 

Judg.  6.  ^7  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  wool  in  the  floor 

2  Ki.  3.    4  an  hundred  thousand  rams,  with  the  w. 
Psa.147.  16  He  giveth  snow  like  wool :  he  scattereth 
PT0V31.  13  She  seeketh  wool  and  flax,  and  worketh 
isa.     1.  18  though .  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  w. 

5T.    8  and  the  worm  shall  eat  them  like  wool 
Eze.  27.  iS  riches  .the  wine  of  Helbon,  and  white  w. 

34.    3  Ye  eat  the  fat.  .ye  clothe  you  with  the  w. 

44. 17  no  wool  shall  come  upon  them  whiles  they 
Hos.    2.    5  will  go  after  my  lovers,  that  give . .  my  w. 
2.    9  and  will  recover  my  wool  and  my  flax 

Z.A  mixed  cloth  of  wool  and  linen,  uipyp  shaatnez. 
Lev.  19. 19  neither  shall  a  garment,  .woollen  come 

4,  Wool,  ipiov  erion. 

Heb.   9.  19  he  took  the  blood,  .and  scarlet  wool, and 
Rev.    1. 14  His  head  and.  .hairs,  .white  like  wool,  as 

WORD  — 

l.A  saying,  speech,  idn  enier. 

Gen.  49.  21  Naphtali. .let  loose;  he  giveth  goodly  w. 
Num24.  4,  16  He  hath  said,  which  heard  the  words 
Deut  32.  1  and  hear,  O  earth,  the  words  of  my  mouth 
Josh  24.  27  this  stone,  .hath  heard  all  the  words  of 
Job  6.  10  I  have  not  concealed  the  words  of  the  H. 
6.  25  How  forcible  are  right  words!  but  what 
8.    2  and.  .the  words  of  thy  mouth .  .a  strong 

22.  22  Receive,  .lay  up  his  words  in  thine  heart 

23.  12  I  have  esteemed  the  words  of  his  mouth 

32.  12  convinced  Job,  (or)  that  answered  his  w. 

33.  3  My  words,  .the  uprightness  of  my  heart 

34.  37  and  multiplieth  his  words  against  God 
Psa.    5.   1  Give  ear  to  my  words,  0  Lord  ;  consider 

19.  14  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  me. 
54.  2  Hear,  .give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  mouth 
78.  1  incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my  mo. 
107.  11  Eecause  they  rebelled  against  the  words 
13S.  4  when  they  hear  the  words  of  thy  mouth 
14  1.  6  they  shall  hear  my  words :  for  they  are 
Prov.  1.    2  to  perceive  the  words  of  understanding 

1.  21  She  crieth . .  iu  the  city  she  uttereth  her  w. 

2.  1  My  son,  if  thou  wilt  receive  my  words,  and 
2. 16  stranger  (which)  flattereth  with  her  words 

5.  7  and  depart  not  from  the  words  of  my  mo. 

6.  2  snared  with  the  words,  .the  words  of  thy 

7.  1  My  son,  keep  my  words,  and  lay  up  my 
7.  5  stranger(which)  flattereth  with  her  words 

7.  24  Hearken,  .attend  to  the  words  of  my  mo. 

8.  8  All  the  words  of  my  mouth  (are)  in  righ. 

15.  26  (the  wrords)  of  the  pure  (are)  pleasant  w. 

16.  24  Pleasant  words  (are  as)  a  honey  comb 

17.  27  He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  words 
19.  7  he  pursueth  (them  with)  words,  .they  are 
19.  27  instruction,  .to  err  from  the  words  of  kn. 

22.  21  know,  .words  of  truth,  .answer  the  words 

23.  12  Apply,  .thine  ears  to  the  words  of  know. 
Isa.  32.    7  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words,  even 

41.  26  (there  is)  none  that  heareth  your  words 
Hos.   6.    5  I  have  slain  them  by  the  words  of  my  m. 
2.A  sayin-g,  speech,  icn  omer. 

Psa.  68.  11  The  Lord  gave  the  word;  great  (was)  the 
Hab.   3.   9  the  oaths  of  the  tribes,  (even  thy)  word. 

Z.A  saying,  speech,  nipx  emrah. 

Lam.  2.  17  he  hath  fulfilled  his  word  that  he  had  co. 

4. A  saying,  speech,  n~p>s  imrah. 

Deut  33.    9  they  have  observed  thy  word,  and  kept 
2  Sa.  22.  31  the  word  of  the  LORD  (is)  tried ;  he  (is)  a 
Psa.  12.    6  The  words  of  the  Lord  (are)  pure  words 

18.  30  the  word  of  the  LORD  is  tried ;  he  (is)  a 
105.  19  the  word  of  the  Lord  tried  him 

119. 11  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  that 
119.  38  Stablish  thy  word  unto  thy  servant,  who 
119.  41  Letthynierciescome..accordingtothyw. 
119.  50  This  (is)  my  comfort,  .thy  word  hath  qu. 
119.  58  be  merciful  unto  me  according  to  thy  w. 
119.  67  I  wentnstray;  butnowhavelkept  thyw. 
119.  76  according  to  thy  word  unto  thy  servant 
1 19.  82  Mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  word,  saying.  When 
119.  103  How  sweet  are  thy  words  unto  my  taste 
119.  116  Uphold  me  according  to  thy  word  that 
119.  123  Mine  eyes  fail,  .for  the  word  of  thy  rig. 
119. 133  Order  my  steps  iu  thy  word;  and  letnot 


"WORD 


1068 


WORD 


Psa.119.  140  Thy  word  (is)  very  pure;  therefore  thy 
119.  148  prevent-that  I  might  meditate  in  thy  wo. 
119. 154  deliver,  .quicken  me  according  to  thy  w. 
1(9.  158  was  grieved;  because  they  kept  not  thy  w. 
119.  162  I  rejoice  at  thy  word,  as  one  that  findeth 
119.  170  deliver  me  according  to  thy  word 
119.  172  My  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  word,  for 
138.    2  thou  hast  magnified  thy  word  above  all 

Prov.30.    5  Every  word  of  God  (is)  pure:  be  (is)  a  sh. 

Isa.     5. 24  despised  the  word  of  the  Holy  Oneoflsr. 

5. A  word,  matter,  thing,  "on  dabar. 

Gen.  15.  1  After  these  things  the  word  of  the  Lord 
15.  4  the  wordoftheLORD(came)untohim,say. 
24.  30  when  he  heard  the  words  of  Rebekah  his 
24.  52  when  Abraham's  servant  heard  their  wo. 
27.  34  when  Esau  heard  the  words  of  his  father 
27.  42  these  words  of  Esau  her  elder  son  were  told 

30.  34  I  would  it  might  be  according  to  thy  wo. 

31.  1  be  beard  the  words  of  Laban's  sons,  saying 
34.  18  their  wordspleased  Hamor,  and  Shechem 
37.    8  And  they  bated  him.  .for  his  words 

37. 14  Go,  I  pray  thee,  .bring  me  word  again 
39.  17  spake  unto  him  according  to  these  words 
39.  19  when  bis  master  beard  the  words  of  his 
42.  16  that  your  words  may  be  proved,  whether 

42.  20  so  shall  your  words  be  verified,  and  ye  sh. 

43.  7  told,  .according  to  the  tenor  of  these  wo. 

44.  2  he  did  according  to  the  word  that  Joseph 
44.  6  and  be  spake  unto  them  these  same  words 
44.  7  Wherefore  saith  my  lord  these  words?  God 
44.  10  also  (let)  it(be)accordinguntoyourwords 
44.  18  let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee,  speak  a  word 

44.  24  when  we  came,  .we  told  him  the  words  of 

45.  27  they  told  him  all  the  words  of  Joseph,  wh. 
Exod.  4.  1 5  thou  shalt  speak  unto  him,  and  put  words 

4.  28  Moses  told  Aaron  all  the  words  of  the  L. 

4.  30  Aaron  spake  all  the  words  which  the  Lo. 

5.  9  and  let  them  not  regard  vain  words 

8. 10  (Be  it)  according  to  thy  word;  that  thou 

8.  13  the  Lord  did  according  to  the  word  of  M. 

9.  20  He  that  feared  the  word  of  the  Lord  am. 
o.  21  he  that  regarded  not  the  word  of  the  Lord 

12.  35  did  according  to  the  word  of  Moses 
14.  12  (Is)  not  this  the  word  that  we  did  tell  thee 
19.  6  These  (are)  the  words  which  thou  shalt  sp. 
19.    7  laid  before  their  faces  all  these  words  wh. 
19.    8  Moses  returned  the  words  of  the  people 

19.  9  Moses  told  the  words  of  the  people  unto 

20.  1  And  God  spake  all  these  words,  saying 

23.  8  and  perverteth  the  words  of  the  righteo. 

24.  3  all  the  words,  .the  words  which  the  Lord 
24.   4  Moses  wrote  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 
24.    8  made  with  you  concerning  all  these  wor. 

32.  28  the  children,  .did  according  to  the  word 
34.  1  I  will  write  upon  (these)  tables  the  words 
34.  27  Write  thou  these  words,  .these  words  I 

34.  28  He  wrote  upon  the  tables  the  words  of  the 

35.  1  These  (are)  the  words  which  the  Lord  ha. 
Lev.  10.  7  they  did  according  to  the  word  of  Moses 
Num  11.23  thou  shalt  see  now  whether  my  word  sh. 

11.  24  told  the  people  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and 

12.  6  he  said,  Hear  now  my  words  :  If  there  be 

13.  26  brought  back  word  unto  them,  and  unto 

14.  2c  I  have  pardoned,  according  to  thy  word 

15.  31  he  hath  despised  the  word  of  the  Lord 

16.  31  made  an  end  of  speaking  all  these  words 
22.   7  and  spake  unto  him  the  words  of  Balak 
22.    8  I  will  bring  you  word  again,  as  the  Lord 
22.  20  the  word  which  I  shall  say  unto  thee,  tb. 
22.  3s  the  word  that  I  shall  speak  unto  thee,  th. 

22.  38  the  word  that  God  putteth  in  my  mouth 

23.  5  the  Lord  put  a  word  in  Baalam's  mouth 
23.  16  put  a  word  in  his  mouth,  and  said,  Go  ag. 
30.    2  he  shall  not  break  his  word,  he  shall  do 

DeuC  1.    1  These  (be)  the  words  which  Moses  spake 
1.  22  bring  lis  word  again  by  what  way  we  rau. 

1.25  brought  us  word  again,  and  said,  (It  is)  a 
1.  34  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  words 

2. 26  I  sent  messengers,  .with  words  of  peace 
4.  2  Ye  shall  not  add  unto  the  word  which  I 
4.  10  I  will  make  them  hear  my  words,  that 
4. 12  ye  heard  the  voice  of  the  words,  but  saw 

4.  36  thou  heardest  his  words  out  of  the  midst 

5.  5  I  stood .  .to  show  you  the  word  of  the  Lo. 
5.  22  These  words  the  Lord  spake  unto  all  your 

5.  28  the  voice  of  your  words,  .the  words  of  tb. 

6.  6  these  words,  which  I  command  thee  this 
9.  5  that  be  may  perform  the  word  which  the 
9.  10  the  words  which  the  Lord  spake  with  you 

10.  2  I  will  write  011  the  tables  the  words  that 

11. 18  Therefore  shall  ye  lay  up  these  my  words 

12.  28  hear  all  these  words  which  I  command 

13.  3  Thou  shalt  not  hearken  unto  the  words 

16. 19  and  pervert  the  words  of  the  righteous 

17.  19  to  keep  all  the  words  of  this  law  and  these 

18.  18  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth,  and  be 
18.  19  whosoever  will  nut  hearken  unto  my  wo. 
18.  20  which  shall  presume  to  speak  a  word  in 
18.  21  HOW  shall  we  know  the  word  which  the 
27.    3  thou  shalt  write  upon  them  all  the  Words 

27.  8  write  upon  the  stones  all  the  words  of  tb. 
27.26  that  conflrmeth  not(aU)  the  words  of  this 

28.  14  shalt  not  go  aside  from  any  of  the  words 

28.  58  will  not  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  tb. 

29.  1  These  fare)  the  words  of  the  covenant  w. 
29.  9  Keep  therefore  the  words  of  this  covena. 
29. 19  when  he  heareth  the  words  of  this  curse 

29.  29  that  (we}  may  do  all  thewordsof  this  law 
I  1  1  the  word  (is)  very  oigh  unto  thee,  in  thy 
31.  1  Moses  went  and  spake  these  words  unto 
31.  12  and  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this 


Deut  31.  24  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  writing  the  w. 
31.  28  that  I  may  speak  these  words  in  their  ears 

31.  30  Moses  spake,  .the  words  of  this  song,  un. 

32.  44  Moses  came  and  spake  all  the  words  of 
32.  45  made  an  end  of  speaking  all  these  words 
32.  46  the  words  which  I  testify  among  you  this 
32.  46  to  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 

Josh.  1. 13  Remember  the  word  whichMoses  the  se. 

1.  18  will  not  hearken  unto  thy  words  in  all  th. 

2.  21  she  said,  According  unto  your  words,  so 

3.  9  and  hear  the  words  of  the  Lord  your  God 
6.  10  neither  shall  (any)  word  proceed  out  of 
8. 27  according  unto  the  word  of  the  Lord  wh. 
8.  34  he  read  all  the  words  of  the  law,  the  ble. 

8.  35  There  was  not  a  word  of  all  that  Moses 

14.  7  I  brought  him  word  again  as  (it  was)in  m. 
14. 10  the  Lord  spake  this  word  unto  Moses 
22.  30  heard . .  words  that  the  children  of  Reuben 
22.  32  returned,  .and  brought  them  word  again 
24.  26  Joshua  wrote  these  words  in  the  book  of 

Judg.  2.    4  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  these  words  unto 

9.  3  his  mother's  brethren  spake,  .these  words 

9.  30  when  Zebul.  .heard  the  words  of  Gaalthe 
11. 10  if  we  do  not  so  according  to  thy  words 
11.  11  Jephthah uttered  alibis  wordsbefore  the 
11.  28  hearkened  not  unto  the  words  of  Jephth. 
13. 12  Manoab  said.  Now  let  thy  words  come  to 

16.  16  she  pressed  him  daily  with  her  words,  and 

1  Sa.    1.  23  tarry,  .only  the  Lord  establish  bis  word 

3.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  precious  in  th. 
3.  7  neither  was  the  word  of  the  Lord  yet  re. 
3.  19  did  let  none  of  his  words  fall  to  the  gro. 

3.  21  the  Lord  revealed  himself,  .by  the  word 

4.  1  the  word  of  Samuel  came  to  all  Israel 

8. 10  Samuel  told  all  the  words  of  the  Lord  un. 
8.  21  Samuel  heard  all  the  words  of  the  people 
9. 27  that  I  may  show  thee  the  word  of  God 

15.  1  hearken  thou  unto  the  voice  of  the  words 

15. 10  Then  came  the  word  of  the  LORD  unto  S. 
15.  23  thou  hast  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord 
15.  24  for  I  have  transgressed,  .thy  words,  beca. 
15.  26  thou  bast  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord 

17. 11  Israel  heard  those  wordsof  the  Philistine 

17.  23  and  spake  according  to  the  same  words 

17.  31  when  the  words  were  heard  which  David 

18.  23  Saul's  servants  spake  those  words  in  the 

18.  26  when  his  servants  told  David  these  words 

21.  12  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his  heart 
24.    7  David  stayed  his  servants  with  these  wo. 

24.  9  Wherefore  hearest  thouhnen's  words,  say. 

24. 16  had  made  an  end  of  speakingthese  words 

25.  9  according  to  all  those  words  in  the  name 
25.  24.  and  hear  the  words  of  thine  handmaid 
26. 19  let  my  lord  the  king  hear  the  words  of  bis 
28.  20  was  sore  afraid,  because  of  the  words  of 
28.  21  have  hearkened  unto  thy  words  which  th. 

2  Sa.  3.    8  Then  was  Abner  very  wroth  for  the  words 

3.  11  he  could  not  answer  Abner  a  word  again 
7.  4  the  word  of  the  LoRDcameto  Nathan,  sa. 
7.  7  spake  I  a  word  with  any  of  the  tribes  of 
7.  17  According  to  all  these  words,  and  accor. 
7.  21  Forthyword'ssake.andaccordingto thine 
7.  25  the  word  that  thou  hast  spoken  concern. 

7.  28  thou  (art)  that  God,  and  thy  words  be  tr. 
14.    3  So  Joab  put  the  words  in  her  mouth 

14.12  I  pray  thee,  speak  (one)  word  unto  my  lord 
14.  17  The  word  of  my  lord  the  king  shall  now 

14.  19  he  put  all  these  words  in  the  mouth  of  th. 

15.  28  until  there  come  word  from  you  to  certify 

19.  43  the  words,  .were  fiercer  than  the  words 

20. 17  she  said  unto  him,  Hear  the  words  of  thi. 

22.  1  spake  unto  the  Lord  the  wordsof  this  so. 

23.  1  these  (be)  the  last  wordsof  David.   David 

24.  4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab 
24.  Ti  the  word  of  the  LORD  came  unto  the  pro. 

1  Ki.  1.  14  come  in  afterthee,  and  confirm  thy  words 
2.   4  the  Lord  may  continue  his  word  which  he 
2.  23  if  Adonijah  have  not  spoken  this  word 
2.  27  that  be  might  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord 
2.  30  Beuaiah  brought  the  king  word  again,  say. 

2.  42  saidst.  .The  word.  .1  have  heard  (is) good 

3.  12  I  have  done  according  to  thy  words;  lo,  I 
5.   7  when  Hiram  heard  the  words  of  Solomon 

6. 11  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Solomon 

6. 12  then  will  I  perform  my  word  with  thee 

8.  20  the  Lord  hath  performed  his  word  that 
8.  26  let  thy  word,  I  pray  thee,  be  verified,  wh. 
8.  56  there  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  his 
8.  59  let  these  my  words,  wherewith  I  have  ma. 

10.  7  I  believed  not  the  words,  until  I  came 
12.    7  If  thou  wilt,  .speak  good  words  to  them 
12.  22  the  word  of  God  came  unto  Shemaiah  the 

12.  24  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  .to  the  word  of 

13.  1  there  came  a  man  of  God.  .by  the  word  of 
13.  2  he  cried  against  the  altar  in  the  word  of 
13.  5  which  the  man.  .had  given  by  the  word  of 
13.  9  For  so  was  it  charged  me  by  the  word  of 
13. 11  the  words  which  he  bad  spoken  unto  the 
13.  17  For  it  was  said  to  me  by  the  word  of  the 
13.  18  an  angel  spake  unto  me  by  the  word  of  the 
13.  20  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  the  pro. 
13.  26  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

13.  32  For  the  saying  which  he  cried  by  the  wo. 

14.  18  according  to  the  word, of  the  Lord,  which 

16.  1  Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jehu 
1 6.    7  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  against  Baasha 

16.  12,  34  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  wh, 

17.  1  there  shall  not.  .but  according  to  my  wo. 
17.    2,  8  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him 
17.   5,  16  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

17.  24  I  know,  .that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy 

18.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Elijah  iii 


1  Ki.iS.  21  And  the  people  answered  him  not  a  word 

18.  31  unto  whom  the  word  of  the  LORD  came 

18.  36  I  have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  word 

19.  9  the  word  of  the  Lord  (came)  to  him,  and 

20.  9  departed  and  brought  him  word  again 

20.  35  said  unto  his  neighbour  in  the  word  of  the 

21.  4  heavy  and  displeased  because  of  the  word 
21. 17,  28  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Elijah 

21.  27  came  to  pass,  when  Ahab  heard  those  w. 

22.  5  Enquire,  .at  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  day 
22.  13  Behold,  now,  the  words  of  the  prophets 
22.  13  let  thy  word,  .be  like  the  word  of  one  of  t. 
22.  19  Hear  thou  therefore  the  word  of  the  Lord 
22.  38  according  unto  the  word  of  the  Lord  wh. 

2  Ki.  i.    7  What  mannerof  man.  .told  you  these  wo.? 

1.  16  no  God  in  Israel  to  enquire  of  his  word? 

I.  17  So  he  died  according  to  the  word  of  the 

3.  12  said,  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  him  J 

4.  44  left,  .according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 
6.  12  telleth  the  king  of  Israel  the  words  that 
6.  18  smote,  .with blindness accordingto the  w. 

6.  30  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  heard  the  w. 

7.  1  Then  Elisha  said,  Hear  ye  the  word  of 
7. 16  So.  .according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

9.  26  cast,  .according  to  the  word  of  the  LORD 

9.  36  he  said,  This  (is)  the  word  of  the  LORD 
10.  10  there  shall  fall,  .nothing  of  the  word  of 

14.  25  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  God 
15.12  This  (was)  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  he 
18.  20  Thou  sayest,but  (they  are  but)  vain  words 
18.  27  sent  me.. to  thee,  to  speak  these  words 
18.  28  Hear  the  word  of  the  greatking,  the  king 
18.  36  the  people  answered  him  not  a  word,  for 

18.  37  and  told  him  the  words  of  Rab-shakah 

19.  4  hear  all  the  words,  .will  reprove  the  words 
19.   6  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  which  thou 

19.  16  hear  the  words  of  Sennacherib,  which 
1-9.  21  This  (is)  the  word  that  the  LORD  hath  sp. 

20.  4  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying 

20.  16  Isaiah  said  untoHezekiah,  Hear  the  word 
20. 19  Good  (is)  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  thou 
22.  9  Shaphan.. brought  the  king  word  agaiu 
22.  11  when  the  king  had  heard  the  wordsof  the 
22.  13  the  wordsof  this  book,  .wordsof  this  book 
22. 16  all  the  words  of  the  book  which  the  king 
22. 18  touching  the  words  which  thou  hast  heard 

22.  20  And  they  brought  the  king  word  again 

23.  2  he  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of  the 
23.  3  to  perform  the  words  of  this  covenant  that 
23.  16  took,  .accordingto the  word,  .these  words 

23.  24  that  he  might  perform  the  words  of  the 

24.  2  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which 

1  Ch.io.  13  against  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which  he 

II.  3, 10  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

15.  15  commanded  according  tothe  word  of  the 

16.  15  the  word  which  he  commanded  to  athous. 

17.  3  the  word  of  God  came  to  Nathan,  saying 
17.    6  spake  I  a  word  to  any  of  the  judges  of  Is. 

17.  15  According  to  all  these  words,  and  accor. 

21.  4  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab 
21.    6  the  king's  word  was  abominable  to  Joab 

21.  12  advise  thyself  what  word  I  shall  bring 

22.  8  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying 
23. 27  by  the  last  words  of  David  the  Levites 

25.  5  in  the  words  of  God,  to  lift  up  the  horn 

2  Ch.  6. 10  The  Lord  therefore  hath  performed  bis 

6.  17  let  thy  word  be  verified,  which  thou  hast 

9.  6  I  believed  not  their  words,  until  I  came 

10.  7  please  them,  and  speak  good  words  to 

10.  15  the  Lord  might  perform  his  word,  which 

11.  2  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Shemaiah 

11.  4  they  obeyed  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and 

12.  7  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Shemaiah 

13.  8  when  Asa  heard  these  words,  and  thepr. 

18.  4  Enquire,  I  pray  thee,  at  the  word  of  the 
j8.  12  the  words  of  the  prophets,  .let  thy  word 
iS.  18  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  ;  I  saw  the  L. 
-9- 15  by  the  words  of  the  Lord,  to  cleanse  the 

29.  30  sing  praise  unto  the  Lord  with  the  words 

30.  12  to  do  the  commandment,  .by  the  word  of 
32.    8  people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words 
33. 18  the  words  of  the  seers  that  spake  to  him 
34.  16  brought  the  king  word  back  again,  say. 
34.  19  when  the  king  bad  heard  the  words  of 
34.  21  the  words  of  the  book,  .the  word  of  the 
34.  26  (concerning)  the  words  which  thou  hast 
34.  27  thou  heardest  his  words  against  this  place 
34.  28  So  they  brought  the  king  word  again 

34.  30  he  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of  the 

34.  31  to  perform  the  words  of  the  covenant  wh. 

35.  6"  (they)  may  do  according  to  the  word  of 

35.  22  hearkened  not  unto  the  words  of  Necho 
36. 16  despised  his  words,  and  misused  bis  pro. 

36.  21  To  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  m. 
36. 22  the  word  of  the  LoRD(spokeu)  by  the  mo. 

Ezra  1.    1  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  J. 

7.  11  a  scribe  of  the  words  of  the  command. 
9.    4  every  one  that  trembled  at  the  words  of 

10.  5  they  should  do  according  to  this  word 
Neh.  1.    1  The  words  of  Nehcmiah  the  son  of  Hach. 

1.    4  it  came  to  pass,  when  I  heard  these  words 

1.  8  the  word  that  thou  commandedst  they 

2.  18  the  king's  words  that  he  had  spoken  unto 

5.  6  when  I  beard  their  cry  and  these  words 

6.  6  be  their  king,  according  to  these  words 
6.    7  be  reported,  .according  to  these  words 

6.  19  they  reported,  .and  uttered  my  words  to 

8.  9  people  wept,  when  they  heard  the  words 

8.  12  they  had  understood  the  words  that  were 
8. 13  even  to  understand  the  words  of  the  law 

9.  8  performed  thywnrds;  for  thou  (art)  righ. 
Esth.  1.  21  the  king  did  according  to  the  word  of  Mo. 


WORD 


10G9 


WORD 


Job 


33- 
33- 
36- 
5°- 
52. 
55- 
56. 
56. 
56. 
59- 
64. 

103. 

105. 

105. 

105. 

106. 

106. 

107. 

109. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

Tig. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

119. 

130. 

147. 

147. 

147. 

148. 

Prov.  1. 

1. 

4- 
4- 


14. 
IS- 

J5- 
18. 
18. 


23- 

25- 

26. 
29. 
29. 
30. 
30. 
31" 


Eccl. 


Isa. 


9  Hatach  came  and  told  Esther  the  words 

12  And  they  told  to  Mordecai  Esther's  wo. 
8  As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  mou. 

26  for  all  the  words  of  this  letter,  and  (of 
30  sent  the  letters,  .(with)  words  of  peace  and 

13  they  sat  down,  .and  none  spake  a  word 
3  therefore  ray  words  are  swallowed  up 

14  choose  out  ray  words  (to  reason)  with  hira 

2  Should  not  the  multitude  of  words  be  an. 

3  Shall  vain  words  have  an  end  ?  or  what 

22  After  my  words  they  spake  not  again,  aud 
40  The  words  of  Job  are  ended 

11  I  waited  for  your  words ;  I  gave  ear  to 
1  I  pray  thee,  .hearken  to  all  my  words 

35  and  his  words  (were)  without  wisdom 

7  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  these  words 
title,  sang  unto  the  Lord,  concerning  the  w. 

4  by  the  word  of  thy  lips  I  have  kept  (me 
title,  who  spake  unto  the  Lord  the  words  of 

1  (why  art  thou  so)  far.  .(from) the  words  of 
4  the  word  of  the  Lord  (is)  right ;  and  all 
6  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heave. 

3  The  words  of  hismouth(are)  iniquity  aud 
17  Seeing  thou,  .castest  ray  words  behind  th. 

4  Thou  lovest  all  devouring  words,  O  thou 

21  his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet  (were) 

4  In  God  I  will  praise  his  word :  in  God  I 

5  Every  day  they  wrest  ray  words:  all  their 

10  I  praise  (his)  word.  .1  praise  (his)  word 

12  the  siu  of  their  (mouth)  and  the  words  of 
3  (to  shoot)  their  arrows,  (even)  bitter  wo. 

20  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word 

8  the  word  (which)  he  comraauded  to  a  th. 

19  Until  the  tirae'that  his  word  came ;  the 
28  and  they  rebelled  not  against  his  word 

12  Then  believed  they  his  words;  they  sang 

24  they  despised .  .they  believed  not  his  wo. 

20  He  sent  his  word,  and  healed  them,  and 

3  They  compassed  me  about. .  with  words  of 

9  By  taking  heed,  .according  to  thy  word 

16  I  "ill  delight . .  I  will  not  forget  thy  word 

17  Deal,  .(that)  I  may  live,  and  keep  thy  w. 

25  quicken  thou  me  according  to  thy  word 
28  strengthen  thoumeaccordingunto  thy  w. 

42  have . .  to  answer . .  f or  I  trust  in  thy  word 

43  take  not  the  word  of  truth  utterly  out  of 
49  Kemember  the  word  unto  thy  servant 

57  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words 
65  Thou  hast  dealt,  .according  unto  thy  wo. 
74  be  glad,  .because  I  have  hoped  in  thy  w. 
Si  ily  soul  faiuteth.  .(but)  I  hope  in  thy  w. 
89  For  ever,  .thy  word  is  settled  in  heaven 
ior  have  refrained . .  that  I  might  keep  thy  w. 
105  Thy  word  (is)  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and 
107  quicken  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  thy  w. 
114  Thou  (art),  .my  shield :  I  hope  in  thy  w. 
130  The  entrance  of  thy  words  giveth  light 
139  mine  enemies  have  forgotten  thy  words 
147  I  prevented,  .cried  :  Ihoped  in  thy  word 

160  Thy  word  (is)  true  (from)  the  beginning 

161  my  heart  staudeth  in  awe  of  thy  word 
169  give,  .understanding  according  to  thy  w. 

5  I  wait  for  the  Lord,  .and  in  his  word  do 

15  He  sendeth  forth,  .his  word  runneth  very 

18  He  sendeth  out  his  word,  and  raeltethth. 

19  He  showeth  his  word  unto  Jacob,  his  sta. 
8  Fire  and.  .stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  word 

6  the  words  of  the  wise,  and  their  dark  sa. 

23  I  will  make  known  my  words  unto  you 

4  Let  thine  heart  retain  my  words;  keep  my 

20  My  son,  attend  to  my  words ;  incline  thi. 
19  In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wauteth 

6  The  words  of  the  wicked  (are)  to  lie  in  w. 
25  Heaviness.,  maketh  it  stoop;  but  a  good  w. 

13  Whoso  despiseth  the  word  shall  be  destr. 

15  The  simple  belie veth  every  word :  but  the 
1  soft  answer  turneth.  .wrath,  .grievous  w. 

23  anda  word,  .in  dueseason.howgood(isit) 

4  The  words  of  a  man's  mouth  (are  as)  deep 

5  The  words  of  a  talebearer  (are)  as  wounds 

12  he  overthroweth  the  words  of  the  trausg. 
17  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the  words 

8  shalt  thou  vomit  up,  and  lose  thy  sweet  w. 

11  A  word  fitly  spoken  (is  like)  apples  of 

22  The  words  of  a  talebearer  (are)  as  wounds 

19  A  servant  will  not  be  corrected  by  words 

20  Seest  thou  a  man.  .hasty  in  his  words? 
1  The  words  of  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh,  (even) 

6  Add  not  thou  uuto  his  word,  lest  he  rep. 
1  The  words  of  king  Lemuel,  the  prophecy 

1  The  words  of  the  Preacher,  the  son  of  D. 

2  God  (is)  in  heaven,  .let  thy  words  be  few 

3  and  a  fool's  voice,  .by  multitude  of  words 

7  in  the  multitude  of  dreams  and  many  w. 

21  Also  take  no  heed  unto  all  words  that  are 

4  When  the  word  of  a  king  (is,  there  is)  po. 

16  the  poor  man .  .his  words  are  not  heard. 

17  The  words  of  wise  (men  are)  heard  in  qu. 

12  The  words  of  a  wise  man's  mouth  are  gr. 

13  The  beginning  of  the  words  of  his  mouth 

14  A  fool  also  is  full  of  words ;  a  man  cannot 
to  sought,  .acceptable words,  .wordsoftruth 
11  The  words  of  the  wise  (are)  as  goads,  and 
10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  ruler  of  S. 

1  The  word  that  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  saw 
3  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  frum  Jerusalem 
10  speak  the  word,  and  it  shall  not  stand;  for 
20  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word 

8  The  Lord  sent  a  word  into  Jacob,  and  it 

13  This  (is)  the  word  that  the  Lord  hath  sp. 
3  spoiled;  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  this  w. 

13  But  the  word  of  the  LORD  was  upon  them 


Isa.   28. 14  Wherefore  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye 
29.  11  the  vision  of  all  is  become,  .as  the  words 
29.  18  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words 

29.  21  That  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a  word 

30.  12  Because  ye  despise  this  word,  aud  trust 

30.  21  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee 

31.  2  Yet  he  also,  .will  not  call  back  his  words 
36.   5  I  say.  .but  (they  are  but)  vaiu  words,  I 

36. 12  Hath,  .seut  rae.  .to  speak  these  words? 
36.  13  Hear  ye  the  words  of  the  great  king,  the 

36.  21  But  they,  .answered  hira  not  a  word :  for 
36. 22  came,  .and  told  him  the  words  of  Rabsh. 

37.  4  will  hear  the  words,  .will  reprove  the  w. 
37.  6  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  that  thou  hast 
37. 17  and  hear  all  the  words  of  Sennacherib 

37.  22  This  (is)  the  word  which  the  Lord  hath 

38.  4  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Isaiah 

39.  5  Then  said  Isaiah.  .Hear  the  word  of  the 

39.  8  Good  (is)  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  th. 

40.  8  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever 

41.  28  no.  .counsellor,  .could  answer  a  word 

44.  26  That  confinneth  the  word  of  his  servant 

45.  23  the  word  is  gone  out  of  ray  mouth  (in)  right. 
50.    4  I  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  se. 

51. 16  I  have  put  ray  words  in  thy  mouth,  and 

55. 11  So  shall  ray  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out 
5S.  13  nor  finding,  .nor  speaking  (thine  own)  wo. 

59. 13  utteringfrom  the  heartwords  of  falsehood 
59.  21  my  words  which  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth 
66.  2  contrite  spirit,  andtrembleth  at  my  word 
66.    5  Hear  the  word,  .that  tremble  at  his  word 

Jer.  1.  1  The  words  of  Jeremiah  the  son  of  Hilkiah 
1.  2  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
So  in  v.  4,  11,  13  ;  2.  1 ;  n.  1 ;  13.  3,  8 ;  16.  1 ;  18.  5  ;  24. 
4;  28.  12;  32.  6;  33.  1,  19,23;  34.  12;  36.  27;  39.  15;  49. 
34;  Eze.  1.  3  ;  3.  16 ;  6.  1 ;  7.  1 ;  n.  14;  12.  1,  17,  21,  26; 
13.  1 ;  14.  2,  12  ;  15.  1 ;  16.  1 ;  17.  1 ;  18.  1 ;  20.  45  ;  21. 1, 
8,  18 ;  22.  1,  17,  23 ;  23.  1 ;  24.  1,  15,  20 ;  25.  1 ;  26.  1 ;  27. 
1 ;  2S.  1,  11,  20;  29.  1,  17 ;  30.  1,  20 ;  31.  1 ;  32.  1,  17 ;  33. 
z>  23 »  34-  *  I  33-  *  i  36.  16 ;  37.  15 ;  38.  1 ;  Jon.  1. 1 ;  3.  1 ; 
Hag.  2.  20;  Zech.  4.  8;  6.  9;  7.  1,  8. 

Jer.     1.    9  Behold,  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mou. 

1.  12  for  I  will  hasten  my  word  to  perform  it 

2.  4  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  house  of 
2. 31  O  generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 
3. 12  proclaim  these  words  toward  the  north 
5. 14  saith,  Because  ye  speak  this  word,  behold 
5. 14  I  will  make  my  words  hi  thy  mouth  fire 
6. 10  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  unto  them  a  rep. 

6. 19  they  have  not  hearkened  unto  ray  words 
7.  1  The  word  that  came  to  Jeremiah  from  the 
7.  2  proclaim  there  this  word..  Hear  the  word 
7.  4  Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,  saying,  The 
7.    8  ye  trust  in  lying  words,  that  cannot  profit 

7.  27  thou  shalt  speak  all  these  words  unto  th. 

8.  9  they  have  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord 

9. 20  Yet  hear  the  word . .  the  word  of  his  mouth 
10."  1  Hear  ye  the  word  which  the  Lord  speak. 
11.  1  The  word  thatcame  to  J  eremiali  from  the 
11.  2,  6  Hear  ye  the  words  of  tin's  covenant,  and 
11.  3  the  man  that  obeyeth  not  the  words  of  th. 
11.  6  Proclaim  all  these  words  in  the  cities  of 
ii.  8  bring  upon  them  all  the  words  of  this  co. 
11.  10  forefathers,  which  refused  to  hearmy  wo. 
13.  2  I  got  a  girdle,  according  to  the  word  of 
13.  10  which  refuse  to  hear  my  words,  which  w. 
13.  12  thou  shalt  speak  nnto  them  this  word,  Th. 

13. 17  thou  shalt  say  this  word  unto  them ;  Let 
15. 16  Thy  words  were  found . .  thy  word  was  un. 
16. 10  thou  shalt  show  this  people  all  these  wo. 

17. 15  Where  (is)  the  word  of  the  Lord?  let  it 

17.  20  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  kings  of 

18.  1  The  word  which  came  to  Jeremiah  from 

18.  2  there  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear  my  words 

18. 18  word  from  the  prophet,  .any  of  his  words 

19.  2  proclaim  there  the  words  that  I  shall  tell 
19.   3  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  kings  of 

19.  15  that  they  might  not  hear  my  words 

20.  8  thewordof  the  Lord  was  made  areproach 

21.  1  The  word  which  came  unto  Jeremiah  from 

21.  11  touching  the  house,  (say),  Heai'3Te  the  w. 

22.  1  Go  down.. and  speak  there  this  word 

22.  2  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  king  of  Ju. 
22.    5  if  ye  will  not  hear  these  words,  I  swear  by 

22.  29  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 

23.  9  and  because  of  the  words  of  his  holiness 
23.  16  Hearken  not  unto  the  words  of  the  prop. 
23.  18  heard  his  word  ?  who  hath  marked  his  w. 
23.  22  had  caused  my  people  to  hear  ray  words 
23.  28  hath  my  word,  let  him  speak  ray  word  fa. 
23.  29  (Is)  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire?  saith  the 
23.  30  that  steal  my  words  every  one  from  his 
23.  36  every  man*s  word,  .thewordsof  the  living 
23.  38  Because  ye  say  this  word,  The  burden  of 
25.  1  The  word  that  came  to  Jeremiah  concer. 
25.  3  the  word  of  the  Lord  hath  come  unto  me 
25.    8  Because  ye  have  not  heard  my  words 

25. 13  I  will  bring  upon  that  land  all  my  words 

25.  30  prophesy  thou  against  them  all  these  wo. 

26.  1  came  this  word  from  the  Lord,  saying 
26.   2  speak,  .all  the  words.. diminish  not  a  word 
26.    5  To  hearken  to  the  words  of  my  servants 
26.    7  heard  Jeremiah  speaking  these  words  in 

26. 12  to  prophesy,  .all  the  words  that  ye  have 
26.  15  sent  me.,  to  speak  all  these  words  in  your 

26.  20  according  to  all  the  words  of  Jeremiah 
26. 21  all  the  princes,  heard  his  words,  the  king 

27.  1  came  this  word  unto  Jeremiah  from  the 
27.  12 1  spake,  .according  to  all  these  words,  sa. 

27. 14  hearken  not  unto  the  words  of  the  proph. 

27. 16  Hearken  not  to  the  words  of  your  proph. 
27. 18  if  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  with  them,  let 


Jer.  28. 
28. 
28. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
30- 
30 
3° 
3*- 


34- 
34- 
34- 
34- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
35- 
36. 
36. 
■ 
36. 
36. 
36. 
30. 
36. 
36- 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
36. 
37- 
37- 
37- 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
38. 
39- 
40. 
40. 
40. 
43- 
43- 
44. 
44. 
44. 
44- 
44. 
44. 
45- 
46. 
46. 
47- 
5°- 
51- 
5*- 
5*- 
5r- 


Eze. 


33 
33' 
34' 
35- 
36. 
^        37, 

Dan.  9, 
9- 
10. 
10. 


Hos. 


Joel 


Amos  1. 
3- 


6  the  Lord  perform  thy  words  which  thou 

7  hear  thou  now  this  word  that  I  speak  in 

9  the  word  of  the  prophet  shall  come  to  pa. 
1  these  (are)  the  words  of  the  letter  that 

10  perform  ray  good  word  toward  you,  in  ca. 

19  they  have  not  hearkened  to  ray  words,  sa. 

20  Hear  ye  therefore  the  word  of  the  Lord 

23  have  spoken  lying  words  in  myname,  wh. 
30  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  untoJe. 

1  The  word  that  came  to  Jeremiah  from  the 

2  Write  thee  all  the  words  that  I  have  spo. 
4  these  (are)  the  words  that  the  Lord  spake 

10  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  nations 
1  The  word  that  came  to  Jeremiah  from  the 

8  according  to  the  word,  .the  word  of  the 

26  Then  came  the  word  of  the  LORD  unto  Jer. 
1  The  word  winch  came  unto  Jeremiah  from 

4  hear  the  word  of  the  Loud,  0  Zedekiah 

5  for  I  have  pronounced  the  word,  saith  the 

6  the  prophet  spake  all  these  words  unto 

5  (This  is)  the  word  that  came  unto  Jerera. 
iS  which  have  not  performed  the  words  of 

1  The  word  which  came  unto  Jeremiah  from 

12  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Jer. 

13  receive  instruction  to  hearken  to  my  words 

14  The  words  of  Jonadab  the  son  of  Kechab 

1  this  word  came  unto  Jeremiah  from  the 

2  write  therein  all  the  words  that  I  have  sp. 
4  Baruch  wrote . .  all  the  words  of  the  LORD 

6  read  in  the  roll,  .the  words  of  the  Lord 

8  reading  in  the  book  the  words  of  the  Lord 

10  Then  read  Baruch  in  the  book  the  words 
13  Michaiah  declared  unto  them  all  the  wo. 

16  had  heard  all  the  words,  .all  these  words 

17  How  didst  thou  write  all  these  words  at 
iS  He  pronounced  all  these  words  unto  me 

20  told  all  the  words  in  the  ears  of  the  king 

24  of  his  servants  that  heard  all  these  words 

27  the  words  which  Baruch  wrote  at  the  mo. 

28  write  in  it  all  the  former  words  that  were 
32  the  words  of  the  book,  .many  like  words 

2  did  hearken  uuto  the  words  of  the  Lord 
6  Theu  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto 

17  and  said,  Is  there  (any)  word  from  the  Lo. 
1  heard  the  words  that  Jeremiah  had  spoken 
4  weakeneth.  .hands,  .in  speaking  such  w. 

21  this  (is)  the  word  that  the  Lord  hath  sh. 
24  Let  no  man  know  of  these  words,  andth. 

27  he  told  them  according  to  all  these  words 
16  I  will  bring  ray  words  upon  this  city  for 

1  The  word  which  came  to  Jeremiah  from 

4  I  will  pray.,  according  to  your  words,  and 

15  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  reranaut  of 
1  the  words  of  the  Lord,  .all  those  words 

5  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  J. 
1  The  word  that  came  to  Jeremiah  concer. 

16  As  for  the  word  that  thou  hastspoken  un. 

24  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  Judah  th. 
26  hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  Judah 
20  shall  know  whose  words  shall  stand,  mine 

29  ye  may  know  that  my  words  shall  surely 
1  The  word,  .he  had  written  these  words  in 
1  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  to  Je. 

13  The  word  that  the  Lord  spake  to  Jerem. 
1  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Jere. 

1  The  word  that  the  Lord  spake  against!'. 

59  The  word  which  J  eremiali  the  prophet  co. 

60  these  words  (that  are)  written  against  Eli 

61  and  shalt  see,  and  rhalt  read  all  these  w. 
64  Thus  far  (are)  the  words  of  Jeremiah 

6  afraid  of  their  words,  .afraid  of  their  wo. 

7  thou  shalt  speak  my  words  unto  them 

4  go.  .and  speak  with  ray  words  unto  them 
6  whose  words  thou  canst  not  understand 

10  all  my  words  that  I  shall  speak  unto  thee 

17  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and  give  th. 

3  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  the 

5  in  the  morning  came  the  word  of  the  Lo. 
17,  2i,  26  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me 

25  and  the  word,  .will  I  say  the  word,  and 

28  none  of  my  words,  .the  word  whichl  ha. 

2  say  thou..  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 

6  hope  that  they  would  confirm  the  word 
35  0  harlot,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 

2  Then  came  the  word  of  the  LoRDuntome 
47  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord;  Thus  saith 

3  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  God,  Thus  sa. 

7  thou  shalt  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and 

30  hear  what  is  the  word  that  cometh  forth 

31  they  hear  thywords,  but  they  will  not  do 

32  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them 

7,  9  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lo. 
13  have  multiplied  your  words  against  me 
1,  4  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of 

4  0  ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lo. 
2  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah 

12  he  hath  confirmed  his  words,  which  he  sp. 
6  the  voice  of  his  words  like  the  voice  of  a 

9  the  voice  of  his  words . .  voice  of  his  words 

11  understand  the  words,  .spoken  this  word 

12  words  were  heard.  .1  am  come  for  thy  w. 
15  when  he  had  spoken  such  words  unto  me 

4  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the 
9  the  words  (are)  closed  up  and  sealed  till 
1  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  unto  H. 

1  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children 

4  They  have  spoken  words,  swearing  falsely 

2  Take  with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the  L. 
1  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Joel 

11  for  (lie  is)  strong  that  executeth  his  word 
1  The  words  of  Amos,  who  was  among  the 
1  Hearthisword  that  the  LoRDhath  spoken 


WORD 


1070 


WORD 


Amos  4. 

5- 
7- 
7- 
3. 
8. 

Jon.  3, 
3- 

Mic.    i. 

2. 

4- 

Zeph.  i. 
Hag.   x. 


Zecli.  i. 


Mai. 


i  Hear  this  word,  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  that 
i  Hear  ye  this  word  which  I  take  up  again. 
io  the  land  is  nut  ahle  to  bear  all  his  words 

16  hear  thou  the  word  of  the  Lord  :  Thou 

1 1  a  famine,  .of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord 

12  run  to  and  fro  to  seek  the  word  of  the  L. 
3  went,  .according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

6  word  came  unto  the  king  of  Nineveh,  and 
i  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Micah 

7  do  not  my  words  do  good  to  him  that  wa. 

2  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem 
i  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  unto 
5  the  word  of  the  Lord  (is)  against  you,  0 
i  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai 

3  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Hag. 

12  the  words  of  Haggai  the  prophet,  as  the 
i  came  the  word  of  the  LORD  by  the  proph. 

5  (According  to)  the  word  that  I  covenanted 
io  came  the  word  of  the  LORD  by  Haggai  the 

i,  7  came  the  word  of  the  LORD  unto  Zech. 

6  my  words  and  my  statutes,  which  I  com. 

13  (with)  good  words  (and)  comfortable  wo. 
fi  This  (is)  the  word  of  the  LORD  unto  Zero. 

4  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hos. 

7  (Should  ye)  not  (hear)  the  words  which 
12  the  words  which  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath 

i  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  (to 
9  ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words 

18  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  unto 
1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  in 

11  knew  that  it  (was)  the  word  of  the  Lord 
1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  LORD  for 
1  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to 

17  Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with  your  wo. 
3.  13  Your  words  have  been  stout  against  me 

6.  Words}  speeches,  utterances,  nil^n  dabberoth. 
Deui.33.    3  and  they,  .shall  receive  of  thy  words 

7.  A  saying,  speech,  TDND  memar. 

Dan,   4.  17  the  demand  by  the  word  of  the  holy  ones 

8.  A  word,  speech^  matter,  rr^p  inillah. 

2  Sa.  23.    2  The  spirit,  .spake  by  me,  and  his  word 
Job     4.    4  Thy  words  have  upholden  him  that  was 

6.  26  Do  ye  imagine  to  reprove  words,  and  the 
8. 10  tell  thee,  and  utter  words  out  of  their  he. 

12.  11  Doth  not  the  ear  try  words?  and  the  mo. 

15.  13  and  lettest  (such)  words  go  out  of  thy  m. 

16.  4  I  could  heap  up  words  against  you,  and 

18.  2  How  long,  .(ere)  ye  make  an  end  of  words 

19.  2  will  ye.  .break  me  in  pieces  with  words? 

19.  23  0  that  my  words  were  now  written !  oh 

23.  5  I  would  know  the  words  (which)  he  won. 

26.  4  To  whom  hast  thou  uttered  words?  and 
32. 14  he  hath  not  directed  (his)  words  against 

33.  8  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  (thy)  words, (say.) 

34.  2  Hear  my  words,  O  ye  wise  (men),  and  gi. 
34.  3  the  ear  trie th  words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth 
34. 16  hear  this  ;  hearken  to  the  voice  of  my  w. 
35. 16  he  multiplieth  words  without  knowledge 
36.  4  my  words  (shall)  not  (be)  false  :  he  that 
38.    2  (is)  this  that  darken eth  counsel  by  words 

Psa.  19.   4  and  their  words  to  the  end  of  the  world 
139.   4  (there  is)  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  (but) 
Prov  23.    9  for  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  wo. 
Dan.    2.    9  have  prepared  lying  and  corrupt  words 

3.  28  have  changed  the  king's  word,  and  yield. 

4.  31  While  the  word  (was)  in  the  Icing's  mouth 

5.  10  by  reason  of  the  words  of  the  king  and 
6. 14  the  king,  when  he  heard  (these)  words 

7.  \  1  the  voice  of  the  great  words  which  the 

7.  25  he  shall  speak  (great)  words  against  the 

9. Mouth,  ns  peh. 

Gen.  41.  40  according  unto  thy  word  shall  all  my  peo. 
Num.  3.  16  numbered  them,  according  to  the  word 

3.  51  to  his  sons,  according  to  the  word  of  the 

4.  45  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the 

20.  24  ye  rebelled  against  my  word  at  the  water 
22. 18  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord 

27.  21  at  his  word,  .they  go  out,  and  at  his  wo. 
36.    5  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  say. 

Deutsi.  5  by  their  word  shall  every  controversy  and 
34.    5  died,  .according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

Josh.  19.  50  According  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  they 
22.   9  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the 

1  Ki.13.  26  who  was  disobedient  unto  the  word  of  the 

1  I'll.  12.  23  turn  the  kingdom. .according  to  the  word 

XQ. Matter,  sentence,  njriB  piihgam. 

Ezra   6. 11  whosoever' shall  alter  this  word,  let  tun, 

11.. 1  word,  speech,  matter,  reason,  \6yos  logos. 
Matt.  8.    8  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  servant  sli. 

8.  16  he  cast  out  the  spirits  with  (his)  word 
10.  14  whosoever  shall  not.  .hear  your  words 
12.  32  whosoever  speaketh  a  word  against  the 

12.  37  by  thy  words  thou.. by  thy  words  thou 

13.  19  When  any  one  heareth  the  word  of  the 
13.  20  the  same  is  he  thatheareth  the  word,  and 
13.  21  or  persecution  ariseth  because  of  the  wo. 
13.  22  heareth  the  word  .choke  the  word,  and 
13.  23 that  received.. is  he  thatheareth  the  wo. 
15.  23  he  answered  her  not  a  word.    And  ins 
22.  46  And  DO  man  was  aide  to  answer  him  a  w. 

24.  35  Heaven  ami  earth  shall  pass,  .but  my  w. 
26.44  and  prayed  the  third  time,  .the  same  wo. 

Mark  2.    2  straightway,  he  preached  the  word  unto 
: .  .  1  1  he  sower  Boweth  the  word 
4.  15  "here  the  word  ls..takethaway  the  word 
4. 16  who,  when  they  have  heard  the  word,im. 
4-  17  when,  .persecution  ariseth  for  the  word's 


Mark  4. 
4< 

4 
4 

5' 
7 
.8, 


13' 
14. 
16. 

Luke  1, 


John 


Acts 


Eom.  9, 

9- 

«    I5- 
1  Co.  1, 


18  And  these  are  they. .such  as  hear  the  wo. 

19  choke  the  word,  and  itbecometh  unfruit. 

20  such  as  hear  the  word,  and  receive  (it) 
33  with  many  such  parables  spake  he  the  w. 
36  As  soon  as  Jesus  heard  the  word  that 

13  Making  the  word  of  God  of  none  effect 

38  Whosoever,  .shall  be  ashamed,  .of  myw. 
24  the  disciples  were  astonished  at  his  wor. 
13  send..  Hero  dians,  to  catch  him  in  (his)w. 

31  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass,  .but  my  wo. 

39  again  he.  .prayed,  and  spake  the  same  w. 
20  [confirming the wordwith  signs  following] 

2  eye  witnesses,  and  ministers  of  the  word 

20  because  thou  believestnot  my  words,  wh. 
4  As  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  words 

22  wondered  at  the  gracious  words  which 

32  were  astonished,  .for  his  word  was  with 

36  What  a  word  (is)  this !  for  with  authority 
1  people  pressed  upon  hini  to  hear  the  wo. 
7  say  in  a  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be  he. 

11  the  parable  is  this:  The  seed  is  the  word 

12  taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts 

13  which,  when  they  hear,  receive  the  word 
15  having  heard  the  word,  keep  (it),  and  br. 

21  are  these  which  hear  the  word  of  God 
26  whosoever  shall  be  ashamed,  .of  [my  w] 

39  which1,  .sat  at  Jesus',  .and  heard  his  wor. 

28  blessed  (are)  they  that  hear  the  word  of 

10  whosoever  shall  speak  a  word  against 
20  that  they  might  take  hold  of  his  words 

33  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass,  .but  my  w. 
61  Peter  remembered  the  word  of  the  Lord 

9  Then  he  questioned  with  him  in  many  w. 

19  Jesus,  .a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  wo. 
44  These  (are)  the  words  which  I  spake  unto 

1  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the 

1  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was 

14  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  amo. 

22  believed,  .the  word  that  Jesus  had  said 
41  many  more  believed  beeause  ofhis  own  w. 
50  the  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus  had 

24  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth 
38  ye  have  not  his  word  abiding  in  you,  for 
31  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  (then)  are  ye 

37  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  because  my  word  hath 

43  Why.  .(even)  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  w. 

35  If  he  called  them  gods  unto  whom  the  w. 
48  the  word  that  I  have  spoken,  the  same 

23  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words 

24  the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not  mine,  but 

3  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  whi. 

20  Remember  the  word  that  I  saiduntoyou 

25  that  the  word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is 

6  thine  they  were,  .they  have  kept  thy  wo. 

14  I  have  given  them  thy  word ;  and  the  wo. 

17  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth;  thy  wo. 
20  which  shallbelieveonmethroughtheirw. 
22  Ye  men  of  Israel,  hear  these  words :  Jesus 

40  with  many  other  words  did  he  testify  and 

41  Then  they  that  gladly  received  his  word 

4  Howbeitmany  of  them  which  heard  the  w. 

29  with  all  boldness  they  may  speak  thy  wo. 

31  they  spake  the  word  of  God  with  boldness 

5  Ananias  hearing  these  words  fell  down 

2  It  is  not  reason,  .we  should  leave  the  wo. 
4  give  ourselves .  to  the  ministry  of  the  wo. 

7  the  word  of  God  increased ;  and  the  num. 
22  Moses.,  was  mighty  in  words  andin  deeds 

4  they,  .went  every  where preachingthew. 
i4heard  thatSamariahadreceivedthe  word 

25  when  they,  .testified  and  preached  the  w. 

36  The  word  which  (God)  sent  unto  the  chi. 

44  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all . .  which  heard  the  w. 
1  Gentiles  had  also  receivedthe  word  of  G. 

19  preaching  the  words  to  none  but  unto  the 

24  But  theword  of  God  grew  and  multiplied 

5  they  preached  the  word  of  God  in  the  sy. 
7  Sergius . .  desired  to  hear  the  word  of  God 

1 5  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation  for  the 

26  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent 
44  whole  city  together  to  hear  theword  of  G. 
46  It  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  God  sh. 

48  they  were  glad,  and  glorified  the  word  of 

49  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  published  the 

3  Lord,  which  gave  testimony  unto  the  w. 

25  when  they  had  preached  the  word  in  Fe. 
7  by  my  mouth  should  hear  the  word  of  the 

15  And  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the  proph. 
24  that  certain . .  have  troubled  you  with  wo. 

32  exhorted  the  brethren  with  many  words 

35  teaching  and  preaching  the  word  of  the 

36  where  we  have  preached  the  word  of  the 

6  forbidden,  .to  preach  the  word  in  Asia 

32  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the  Lo. 

11  in  that  they  received  the  word  with  all  re. 
1 3  when  the  Jews,  .had  knowledge  that  the  w. 
11  teaching  the  word  of  God  among  them 
15  But  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  nam. 
10  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  word 

20  So  mightily  grew  the'word  of  God  and  pr. 
32  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the  word 
35  to  remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

38  Sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  words  which 
22  they  gave  him  audience  unto  this  word 

6  Not  as  though  the  word  of  God  had  taken 
9  For  this  (is)  the  word  of  promise,  At  this 

18  to  make  the  Gentiles  obedient,  by  word 
17  not  with  wisdom  of  words,  lest  the  cross 

4  not  with  enticing  [words  of]  man's  wisd. 
13  not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  te. 
bo  For  the  kingdom  of  God  (is)  not  in  word 

5  theword  of  wisdom.. the  word  of  knowle. 


1  Co.  14.   9  except  ye  utter  by  the  tongue  words  easy 

14.  19  rathej*.  .five  words,  .than  ten  thousand  w. 
14.  36  What,  came  the  word  of  God  out  from  y.? 

2  Co.   1.  18  But.  .God  (is)  true,  our  word  toward  you 

2.  17  we  are  not  as  many,  which  corrupt  the  w. 

4.  2  nor  handling  the  word  of  God  deceitfully 
5. 19  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  ree. 
6.    7  By  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of  G. 

10. 11  such  as  we  are  in  word  by  letters  when 
Gal.     5.  14  For  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word 

6.   6  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  com. 
Eph.    1.  13  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the 

5.  6  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words 
Phil.    1.  14  are  much  more  bold  to  speak  the  word 

2.  16  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life,  that  I  may 
Col.     1.    5  whereof  ye  heard  before  in  the  word  of 

1.  25  is  given  to  me  for  you,  to  fulfil  the  word 

3.  16  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly 
3. 17  And  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed 

1  Th.  1.   5  For  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word 

1.   6  having  received  the  word  in  much  afflict. 

1.  8  For  from  you  sounded  forth  the  word  of 

2.  5  neither  at  any  time  used  we  flattering  w. 
2.  13  the  word  of  God.  .word  of  men.  .word  of 

4.  15  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of 
4.  18  Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with.  .w. 

2  Th.  2.   2  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  w. 

2. 15  which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  w. 

2.  17  stablish  you  hi  every  good  word  and  work 

3.  1  pray  for  us,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord 

3. 14  if  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  ep. 

1  Ti.    4.    5  it  is  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  p. 

4.  6  nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of 

4.  12  be  thou  an  example  of.  .believers,  in  word 

5.  17  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word 

6.  3  consent  not  to  wholesome  words,  (even) 

2  Tl.    1.  13  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  word,  which 

2.  9  I  suffer,  .but  the  word  of  God  is  not  bou. 
2.  15  a  workman,  .rightly  dividing  the  word  of 
2. 17  And  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker 
4.  2  Preach  theword;  be  instant  in  season,  out 
4.  15  for  he  hath  greatly  withstood  our  words 
Titus  1.   3  But  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  wo. 

1.  9  Holding  fast  the  faithful  word  as  he  hath 

2.  5  that  the  word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed 
Heb.   2.    2  For  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  st. 

4.   2  but  the  word  preached  did  not  profit  them 

4.  12  For  the  word  of  God  (is)  quick,  and  pow. 

5. 13  (is)  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteousness 

7.  28  but  the  word  of  theoath,  which  wassince 

12.  19  that  the  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  th. 

13.  7  who  have  spoken  unto  you  the  word  of  God 

13.  22  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  for  I  have 
Jas.     1.  18  Of  Ins  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word 

1.  21  receive  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  word 
1.  22  But  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  he. 

1.  23  For  if  any  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not 

3.  2  If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same 

1  Pe.  1. 23  Being  born  again,  .by  the  word  of  God 

2.  8  which  stumble  at  the  word,  being  disobe. 

3.  1  obey  not  the  word,  .may  without  theword 

2  Pe.   1.  19  We  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of  proph. 

2.  3  shall  they  with  feigned  words  make  mer. 

3.  5  by  the  word  of  God  the  heavens  were  of 
3.    7  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,  reser. 

1  Jo.   1.    1  hands  have  handled,  of  the  word  of  life 

1.  10  we  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not 

2.  s  But  whoso  keepethhis  word,  in  him  verily 

2.  7  The  old  commandment  is  the  word  which 

2. 14  because  ye  are  strong,  and  the  word  of  G. 

3.  18  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neitherin tongue 

5.  7  [the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Gh.] 

3  John   10  prating  against  us  with  malicious  words 
Eev.    1.   2  Who  bare  record  of  the  word  of  God,  and 

1.    3  they  that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy 

1.  9  for  the  wordof  God,  andforthe testimony 
3.  8  kept  myword,  and  hast  not  deniedmyna. 
3. 10  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  p. 

6.  9  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the  word 
12. 11  overcame,  .by  the  word  of  their  testimony 

19.  13  and  his  name  is  called,  The  Word  of  God 

20.  4  that  were  beheaded,  .for  the  word  of  God 

21.  5  Write:  for  these  words  are  true  and  faith. 

22.  18  testify  unto  every  man  that  heareth  the  w. 
22. 19  if  any  man  shall  take  away  from  the  words 

12.-4  saying,  speech,  matter,  thing,  ffifia  rhema. 
Matt.  4.   4  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  wo. 

12.  36  That  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak 

18. 16  that,  .in  the  mouth  of . .  witnesses  every  w. 

26.  75  Peter  remembered  the  wordof  Jesus,  wh. 

27. 14  And  he  answered  him  to  never  a  word 
Marki4.  72  Peter  called  to  mind  the  word  that  Jesus 
Luke  1.  38  6aid.  .be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy  word 

2.  29  lettest  thou . .  depart . .  according  to  thy  w. 

3.  2  the  word  of  God  came  unto  John  the  sou 

4.  4  [not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  w".] 

5.  5  nevertheless  at  thy  word  I  will  let  down 
20.  26  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  words  be. 
24.    8  And  they  remembered  his  words 

24.  11  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales 
John  3.  34  he  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the  wo. 

5.  47  believe  not.  .how  shall  ye  believe  my  wo.? 
6. 63  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you.  .are  sp. 

6.  68  Lord,  .thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life 

8.  20  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  treasury 
8. 47  He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God's  words 

10.  21  These  are  not  the  words  of  him  that  hath 
12.  47  if  rny  man  hear  my  words,  and  believe 
12.  48  He  that,  .receiveth  not  my  words,  hath 

14.  10  the  words  that  I  spake  unto  you  I  speak 

15.  7  Lf  he  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in 


WORDS 


1071 


WORK 


JolmI7. 

8 

Acts 

2. 

14 

■;• 

20 

6 

11 

6. 

13 

10 

22 

10 

37 

10 

44 

11 
11. 

14 
16 

ii 

42 

16. 

38 

26. 

21 

28. 

2S 

Koiu 

10. 

b 

10. 

17 

10. 

iS 

2  Co 

12. 

4 

1 

±)ph. 

■;• 

26 

6. 

17 

He!}. 

1 

3 

6. 

5 

11. 

3 

12. 

IQ 

1  Ye 

1. 

21; 

■?  Ye.. 

^. 

w 

Jude 

'7 

Kev. 

n- 

17 

Eor  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words  wh. 
be  this  knowu  unto  you. .  hearken  to  my  w. 
speak,  .to  the  people  all  the  words  of  this 
We  have  heard  him  speak  blasphemous  w. 
blasphemous  words  against  this  holy  place 
to  send  for  thee . .  and  to  hear  words  of  thee 
That  word . .  ye  know,  winch  waspublished 
While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the 
Who  shall  tell  thee  words,  whereby  thou 
Then  remembered  I  the  word  of  the  Lord 
the  Gentiles  besought  that  these  words 
the  Serjeants  told  these  words  unto  the 
but  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and 
departed,  after. .  Paul  had  spoken  one  wo. 
The  word  is  nigh  thee,  .the  word  of  faith 
faith,  .by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  wo. 
and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  wo. 
How  that  he.  .heard  unspeakable  words 
lu  the  mouth  of.  .witnesses  shall  every  w. 
it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word 
the  sword  of  the  spirit,  which  is  the  word 
upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and 
that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word 
sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of  words 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  .thisis  the  word  wh. 
That  ye  may  be  mindful  of  the  words  which 
remember  ye  the  words  which  were  spok. 
until  [the  words]  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled 

WORDS,  of  the  word,  a  few  — 

1.  Logical,  reasonable,  verbal,  \ojik6s  logikos. 

1  Pe.   2.    2  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word 

2.  Concisely,  briefly,  <tvvt6{M(i)s  suntomos. 

Acts  24.   4  pray,  .hearusof  thy  clemency  a  few  words 
WORD  (ag'ain),  to  bring  or  strive  about  words  — 
I.To  tell  off,  away,  again,  airayj^KKw  apaggello. 

Matt.  2.    8  bring  me  word  again,  that  I  may  come  and 
28.    S  and  did  run  to  bring  his  disciples  word 

2.To  say,  speak,  elirov  eipon. 

Matt.  2.  13  and  be  thou  there  until  I  bring  thee  word 

3.  To  fight  about  words,  \oyofxax$w  logomacheo. 

2  Ti.   2.  14  that  they  strive  not  about  words  to  no  pr. 

^.  A  fighting  aboitt  words,  Xoyopax'^  logomachia. 
1  Ti.   6.    4  doting  about  questions  and  strifes  of  wo. 
WORK  (effectual)  working,  workmanship  — 

1.  A  word,  matter,  thing,  *i;n  dabar. 

1  Ch.16.  37  continually,  as  every  day's  work  required 
Psa.145.    5  of  thy  majesty,  and  of  thy  wondrous  wo. 

2.  Labour,  %'}]  yegia. 

Job   10.    3  that  thou  shouldest  despise  the  work  of 
Z.Uand,  2>ower,  t  yad. 

Exod  14.  31  Israel  saw  that  great  work  which  the  L. 
A, Formation,  fra,me,  "is*  yetser. 

Hab.   2.  i3  that  the  maker  of  his  work  trusteth  the. 
5.  Work,  ripK^n  melakah. 

Gen.    2.    2  God  ended  his  work,  .all  his  work  which 
2.    3  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all  his  work  wh. 

Exodi2.  16  no  manner  of  work  shall  be  done  in  them 
20.    9  Six  days  shalt  thou,  .do  all  thy  work 
20.  10  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy 
31.    3  spirit,  .in  all  manner  of  workmanship 
31.    5  to  work  in  all  manner  of  workmanship 
31.  14  for  whosoever  doeth  (any)  work  therein 
31. 15  Six  days  may  work  be  done ;  but  in  the 
31.  15  whosoever  doeth(any)workinthesabbath 
35.    2  Six  days  shall  work  be  done,  but  on  the 
35.   2  whosoever  doeth  work  therein  shall  be 
35.  21  brought  the  Lord's  offering  to  the  work 
35.  24  every  man  with  whom  was  found . .  any  w, 
35.  29  for  all  manner  of  work  which  the  Lord 
35.  31  the  spirit,  .in  all  manner  of  workmanship 
35.  33  And.  .to  make  any  manner  of  cunning  w. 
35.  35  manner  of  work,  .of  them  that  do  any  w. 

35.  1  to  know  how  to  work  all  manner  of  work 

36.  2  stirred  him  up  to  come  unto  the  work  to 
36.  3  had  brought  for  the  work  of  the  service 
36.  4  the  wise  men,  that  wrought  all  the  work 
36.  4  cameeveryman  from  his  work  which  they 
36.  5  for  the  service  of  the  work  which  the  L. 
36.  6  Let  neither  man  nor  woman  make,  .work 
36.  7  the  stuff,  .was  sufficient  for  all  the  work 
30.  8  among  them  that  wrought  the  work  of  the 
3S.  24  for  the  work  in  all  the  work  of  the  holy 

39.  43  Moses  did  look  upon  all  the  work,  and 

40.  33  court  gate.  So  Moses  finished  the  work 
Lev.  11.  32  whatsoever  vessel.. wherein  (any)  work 

13.  51  be  spread,  .in  any  work  that  is  made  of 
16.  29  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls,  and  do  no  work 
23.  3  Six  days  shall  work  be  done :  hut  the  se. 
23.  3  the  seventh  day . .  ye  shall  do  no  work  (th.) 
23.  7,  8,  21,  25,  35,  36  ye  shall  do  no  servile  wo. 
23.  28  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  that  same  day,  for 
23.  30  whatsoever  soul,  .doeth  any  work  in  that 
23.  31  Yeshalldo  no  manner  of  work,  .a  statute 
Num.  4.  3  to  do  the  work  in  the  tabernacle  of  the 
28.  iS  ye  shall  do  no  manner  of  servile  work  (th.) 

28.  25,  26  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work 

29.  1,  12,  33  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work 

29.    7  afflict  your  souls :  ye  shall  not  do  any  w. 

Deut.  5.  13  Six  days  thou  shalt  labour,  and  do.,  work 

5.  14  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy 

16.    8  a  solemn  assembly,  .thou  shalt  do  no  w. 

1  Sa.    8.  16  shall  take . .  your  asses,  and  put . .  to  his  w. 

1  Ki.   5.  16  over  the  work.. over  the  people,  .hi  the  w. 

7.  14  all  works  in  brass,  .and  wrought,  .his  w. 


29. 

29. 

:Ch.  4. 

S- 


:  Ki.  7.  22  And.  .so  was  the  work  of  the  pillars  flni. 
7.  40  Hiram  made  an  end  of  doing  all  the  work 

7.  51  So  was  ended  all  the  work  that  king  Sol. 
9.  23  overS.'s  work,  .over  the  people,  .in  the  w. 

;  Ki.  12.  11  into  the  hands  of  them  that  did  the  work 
22.   5  doers  of  the  work.,  to  the  doers  of  the  w. 
22.   9  into  the  hand  of  them  that  do  the  work 
:  Ch.  4. 23  they  dwelt  with  the  king  for  his  w^ork 
6.  49  for  all  the  work  of  the  (place)  most  holy 
9. 13  very  able  men  for  the  work  of  the  service 
9.  19  over  the  work  of  the  service,  keepers  of 
g.  33  they  were  employed  in . .  work  day  and  ni. 

22.  15  cunning  men  for  every  manner  of  work 

23.  4  to  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the 
23.  24  that  did  the  work  for  the  service  of  the  ho. 

27.  26  over  them  that  did  the  work  of  the  field 

28.  13  and  for  all  the  work  of  the  service  of  the 
28.  19  Lord  made  me  understand,  .all  the  works 

28.  20  until  thou  hast  finished  all  the  work  for 
28. 21  with  thee  for  all  manner  of  workmanship 

29.  1  the  work  (is)  great;  for  the  palace  (is)  not 

5  for  all  manner  of  work,  .by  the  hands  of 

6  with  the  rulers  of  the  king's  work,  offered 
1  Huram  finished  the  work  that  he  was  to 
1  Thus  all  the  work  that  Solomon  made  for 
9  Solomon  made  no  servants  for  his  work 

8.  16  all  the  work  of  Solomon  was  prepared  unto 

16.  5  he  left  off  building,  .and  let  his  work  cea. 

24. 12  gave  it  to  such  as  did  the  work  of  the  ser. 

24. 13  So  the  workmen  wrought,  and  the  work 
29.  34  the  Levites  did  help  them,  till  the  work 
34.  12  the  men  did  the  work  faithfully,  and  the 
34.  13  overseers  of  all  that  wrought  the  work  in 

Ezra   2.  69  They  gave,  .unto  the  treasure  of  the  work 

3.    8  to  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of 

6.  22  to  strengthen  their  hands  in  the  work  of 

10.  13  neither  (is  this)  a  work  of  one  day  or  two 

Nell.  2.  16  neither,  .told  (it).. the  rest  that  did  the  w. 

11  and  slay  them,  and  cause  the  work  to  ce. 

15  wre  returned  all. .every  one  unto  his  work 

16  half  of  my  servants  wrought  in  the  work 

17  with  one  of  his  hands  wrought  in  Ms  work 
19  The  work  (is)  great  and  large,  and  we  are 

1  So  we  laboured  in  the  work :  and  half  of 
6  also  I  continued  in  the  work  of  this  wall 
16  my  servants. -gathered  thither  unto  the  w. 

6.    3  I  (am)  doing  a  great  work.. should,  the  w. 

6.    g  hands  shall  be  weakened  from  the  work 

6.  16  they  perceived  that  this  workwaswrought 

7.  70,  71  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  unto  the.. wo. 
10.  33  (for)  all  the  work  of  the  house  of  our  God 
11. 12  their  brethren  that  did  the  work  of  the 
13. 10  Levites  and  the  singers,  that  did  the  work 

Psa.  73.  28  my  trust.. that  I  may  declare  all  thy  works 

Prov  1 8.    9  He.. that  is  slothful  in  his  work  is  brother 

24. 27  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and  make  it  fit 

Jer.  17.  22  neither  do  ye  any  work;  but  hallow  ye  the 

17.  24  but  hallow  the  sabbath  day,  to  do  no  wo. 

18.  3  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  wheels 
48. 10  Cursed  (be)  he  that  doeth  the  work  of  the 
50.  25  this  (is)  the  work  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 

Eze.  15.  3  Shall  wood  be  taken  thereof  to  do  any  w.? 
15.  4  is  cast  into  the  fire.. Is  it  meet  for.. work? 
15.   5  when  it  was  whole,  it  was  meet  for  no  w. 

15.  5  shall  it  be  meet  yet  for..work,  when  the 
20.  13  the  workmanship  of  thy  tabretsandof  thy 

Hag.   1. 14  they  came  and  did  work  in  the  house  of 

6.  Deed,  act,  doing,  13JJ0  mabad. 

Job  34.  25  Therefore  he  knoweth  then1  works,  and  he 
Dan.   4.  37  all  whose  works  (are)  truth,  and  his  ways 

7. An  act,  deed,  tylio  maalal. 

]Sreh.   9.  35  neither  turned  they  from  their  wicked  w. 
Psa.  77.  11  I  will  remember  the  works  of  the  Lord 
78.    7  Thatthey  might.. not  forget  the  works  of 
S.Deed,  doing,  act,  work,  n??j?0  maasch. 

Gen.    5.  29  concerning  our  W'oi'k  and  toil  of  ourhands 

Exod.  5.    4  do  ye.  .let  the  people  from  their  works? 

5. 13  Fulfil  your  works,  .daily  tasks,  as  when 

iS.  20  show  them,  .the  work  that  they  must  do 

23.  r2  Six  days  thou  shalt  do  thy  work,  and  on 

23.  24  nor  serve  them,  nor  do  after  their  works 

24. 10  under  his  feet  as  it  were  a  paved  work 
26.    1  cherubim  of  cunning  work  shalt  thou  m. 
26.  31  and  fine  twined  linen,  of  cunning  work 
28.    6  and  fine  twined  linen,  with  cunning  work 
28.   8  shall  be  of  the  same,  according  to  the  w. 

28. 11  With  the  work  of  an  engraver  in  stone 

28. 14  wreathen  work  shalt  thou  make  them,  and 
28.  15  with  cunning  work ;  after  the  work  of  the 
28.  22  chains  at  the  ends  (of)  wreathen  work  (of) 
28.  32  it  shall  have  a  binding  of  woven  work  ro. 
32. 16  the  tables,  .the  work  of  God,  and  the  wr. 
34.  10  all  the  people,  .shall  see  the  work  of  the 
36.    8  cherubim  of  cunning  work  madehethem 

36.  35  cherubim  made  he  it  of  cunning  work 

37.  29  according  to  the  work  of  the  apothecary 
39.  3  and  in  the  fine  linen,  (with)  cunning  work 
39.  5  the  same,  according  to  the  work  thereof 
39.    8  cunning  work,  like  the  work  of  the  ephod 

39. 15  chains  at  the  ends,  (of)  wreathen  work  (of) 
39.  22  made  the  robe  of  the  ephod  (of)  woven  w. 
39.  27  made  coats  (of)  fine  linen,  (of)  woven  work 
39. 29  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,(of)needlew. 

Num.  8.    4  this  work  of  the  candlestick,  .beaten  gold 

16.  28  the  LORD  hath  sent  me  to  do  all  these  wo. 
31.  20  allwork  of  goat's  (hair)iand  all  things  ma. 

Deut."2.    7  God  hath  blessed  thee  in  all  the  works  of 

3.  24  what  God . .  can  do  according  to  thy  works 

4.  28  ye  shall  serve  gods,  the  work  of  men's  ha. 
14.  29  God  may  bless  thee  in  all  the  work  of  thi. 


Deut  15.  10  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thy  works,  and 
16.  15  God  shall  bless  thee,  .in  all  the  works  of 
24.  19  God  may  bless  thee  in  all  the  work  of  th. 
27.  15  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  craftsman 
28. 12  and  to  bless  all  the  work  of  thine  hand 

30.  9  will  make  thee  jjlenteous  in  every  work 

31.  29  to  provoke  him  to  anger  through  the  wo. 
Josh. 24.  31  which  had  known  all  the  works  of  the  Lo. 
Judg.  2.    7  had  seen  all  the  great  works;  of  the  LORD 

2.  10  knew  not  the  Lord,  nor  yet  the  works  wh. 
iq.  i5  there  came  an  old  man  from  his  work  out 
,   8  According  to  all  the  works  which  they  ha. 

4  his  works  (have  been)  to  thee  ward  very 

5  another  court,  .(which)  was  of  the  like  w. 

17  checker  wurk,  and  wreaths  of  chain  work 
19  the  chapiters,  .(were)  of  lily  work  in  the 
22  upon  the  top  of  the  pillars  (was)  lily  work 

28  the  work  of  the  bases  (was)  on  this  (man.) 

29  (were)  certain  additions  made  of  thin  wo. 
'31  (after)  the  work  of  the  base,  a  cubit  and 
33  the  work  of  the  wheels  (was)  like  the  wo. 

1 1  sons  came  and  told  him  all  the  works  that 
7  in  provoking  him  to  anger  with  the  work 

10  according  to  all  the  workmanship  thereof 

18  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone 
17  provoke  me  to  anger  with  all  the  works 
28  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of 
10  he  made  two  cherubim  of  inage  work,  and 

5  the  brim  of  it  like  the  w  ork  of  the  brim 
37  the  Lord  hath  broken  thy  works.  And  the 

21  in  every  work  that  he  begun  in  the  servi. 

19  (which  were)  the  work  of  the  hands  of  in. 

30  And  Hezekiah  prospered  in  all  his  works 
25  provoke  me  to  anger  with  all  the  works 

.  14  think  thou,  .according  to  these  their  wo. 
10  Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands 
15  thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of  th. 
19  for  they  all  (are)  the  work  of  his  hands? 
7  sealeth . .  that  all  men  may  know  his  work 

3  I  consider  thy  heavens,  the  work  of  thy 

6  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  thy 

1  and  the  firmament  showeth  hishandy  wo. 

4  give  them  after  the  work  of  their  hands 
4  right;  and  all  his  works  (are  done)  in  tru. 

15  fashioneth.  .he  considereth  all  their  work 

12  renderest to  every  manaccordingtohisw 

3  now  terrible  (art  thou  in)  thy  works!  thr. 
.  8  neither  (are  there),  .like  unto  thy  works 
,  17  established  thou  the  work,  .the  work  of 

4  I  will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  hands 

5  0  Lord,  how  great  are  tby  works !  (and) 
25  and  the  heavens  (are)  the  work  of  thy  ha. 

22  Bless  the  Lord,  all  his  works  in  all  places 

13  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works 

24  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  works !  hi 

31  the  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  his  works 
.  13  They  soon  forgat  Ins  works  ;  they  waited 

35  were  mingled,  .and  learned  their  works 
39  Thus  were  they  defiled  with  their,  .works 
22  letthem.  .declarehis  works  with  rejoicing 
,  24  These  see  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  his 

2  The  works  of  the  Lord  (are)great,  sought 

6  showed  his  people  the  power  of  his  works 

7  The  works  of  his  hands  (are)  verity  and 

4  Their  idols(are)  silver  and  gold,  the  work 
17  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the  L. 
15  silver  and  gold,  the  work  of  men's  hands 

.   8  forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands 

14  marvellous  (are)  thy  works;  and  (that)  my 

5  I  meditate.  .1  muse  on  the  work  of  thy  ha. 
4  One  generation  shall  praise  thy  works  to 
9  his  tender  mercies  (are)  over  all  his  works 

10  All  thy  works  shall  praise  thee,  0  LORD 
17  The  Lord  (is)  righteous .  .in  all  his  works 

3  Commit  thy  works  unto  the  Lord,  and 

11  all  the  weights  of  the  bag  (are)  his  work 
31  let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  gates 

.  14  I  have  seen  all  the  works  that  are  done 

4  I  made  me  great  works;  I  builded  me  ho. 
11  Then  I  looked  on  all  the  works  that  my 
17  the  work  that  is  wrought  under  the  sun 
11  so  that  no  man  can  find  out  the  work  that 
17  time,  .for  every  purpose  and  for  every  w. 

22  that  a  man  should  rejoice  in  his  own  wo. 

3  who  hath  not  seen  the  evil  work  that  is 

4  I  consideredall travail, and  every  rightw. 

6  wherefore  should  God . .  destroy  the  work 

13  Consider  the  work  of  God;  forwhocanma. 
9  applied  my  heart  unto  every  work  that  is 

11  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is 

14  according  to  the  work . .  according  to  the  w. 
17  Then  I  beheld  all  the  work  of  God,  that 
17  a  man  cannot  find  out  the  work  that  is 

7  Go  thy  way.  .God  now  accepteth  thy  wo. 
10  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor 

5  even  so  thou  kno west  not  the  works  of  God 
14  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment 

1  the  work  of  the  hands  of  a  cunning  wor. 
S  they  worship  the  work  of  then-  own  hands 
19  Let  him  make  speedr(and)hasten  his  work 

12  the  LoRDhath  performed  his  whole  work 

8  he  shall  not  look  to  the  altars,  the  work 

14  have  caused  Egypt  to  err  in  every  work  th. 

15  Neither  shall  "there  be.  .work  for  Egypt 

25  Blessed  (be).  .Assyria  the  work  of  my  ha. 
12  for  thou  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us 
21  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work 

15  their  works  are  in  the  dark  and  they  say 

16  for  shall  the  work  say  of  him  that  made 

23  when  he  seeth  his  children,  the  work  of 

17  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace 
19  no  gods,  but  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wo. 


iSa.    8 
19. 

1  Ki.  7. 

7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 
7 
13' 
16, 

2  Ki.16. 


1  Ch.  23 

2  Ch.   3. 

4- 

20. 
31- 
32- 

32. 

Neh.    6. 

Job     1. 

14. 

34- 

37- 

P3a.     8. 

8. 

39. 

28, 

33' 

33' 

62. 

66, 

86, 

90 

92. 

92. 

102, 

103. 

134. 

104, 

104. 

106. 

106. 

106. 

107. 

107. 

in. 

in, 

in. 

115 

118. 

*3S' 

138' 

^39' 

143- 

145- 

*45- 

I45< 

Prov  16. 
16. 

Eccl.   1. 


Song  7 
Isa.     2, 


WORK 


1072 


■WORK 


[sa.  41  *j  they  (are)  all  vanity;  their  works  (are)  no. 
- ;  1  bringeth  forth  an  instrument  tor  his  work 
57.  12  I  will  declare,  thy  works;  for  they  shall 

59.  6  with  their  works:  their  works  (are)  works 

60.  21  the  work  of  my  hands,  that  I  may  be  do. 
64.    S  But  now.  .we  all  (are)  the  work  of  thy  ha. 

63,  w  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  vi 

For  I  (know)  their  works  and  their  thou. 
Jer.  1.  16  worshipped  the  works  of  their  own  hands 
7. 13  because  ye  have  done  all  these  works,  sa. 
10.  3  (the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  workman) 
10.  9  work  of  the  workman .  .the  work  of  cunu. 
10.  15  They  tare)  vanity  . .  the  work  of  errors:  in 
25.  6,  7  provoke  me . .  with  the  works  of  your 
25. 14  according  to  the  works  of  them  own  hands 
32.  30  provoked  me.  .with  the  work  of  their  ha. 
44.    S  provoke  me. .with  the  worksof  your  hands 

48.  7  For  because  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  wo. 

51. 10  let  us  declare  in  Ziou  the  work  of  the  Lo. 
51.  18  They(are)  vanity,  the  work  of  errors:  in 

Lam.~ :;.  64  Render,  .according  to  the  work  of  their 

4.  .•  esteemed    the  work  of  the  hands  of  the 
Eze.     1.  16  their  work  (was)  like.,  their  work  (was)  as 

6.   6  cut  down,  and  your  works  may  he  abolish. 

16.  30  the  work  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman 

46.    1  The  gate,  .shall  be  shut  the  six  working 

T>:vn.  q.  14  righteous  in  all  his  works  which  hedoeth 

Hos,  13.    2  idols,  .all  of  it  the  work  of  the  craftsmen 

14.    ;  neither  will  we  say  anymore  to  the  work 

\:im..c.   7  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  wo. 

.Ton.    3.  10  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned  fr. 

Mic.    5.  13  thou  shalt  no  more  worship  the  work  of 

6.  16  and  all  the  works  of  the  house  of  Ahab 
Hag.  2.  14  so  (is)  every  work  of  their  hands;  and  that 

9.  Work*  doing,  act,  7JJ?D  miphal. 

Prov.  8.  22  The  LORD  possessed  me.  .before  his  works 
lO.Work,  doing,  act%  fl7j|9l?  miphaldh. 

l'sa.  46.  S  Come,  behold  the  works  of  the  Lord,  wh, 
66.    5  Come,  and  see  the  works  of  God:  (he  is) 

ll.il  deed,  doing,  service,  i^SL  al 

Eccl.  9.    1  righteous,  and  the  wise,  and  their  works 
1  J.  >         .        -'.  "'3jJ  abodah. 

Exod.  5.    9  Let  there  more  work  be  laid  upon  the  men 

5.  11  yet  not  ought  of  your  work  shall  be  dim. 
39. 32  Thus  was  all  the  work  of  the  tabernacle 
30.  42  so  the  children  of  Israel  made  all  the  wo. 

Xum.  4.  30  to  do  the  work  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  eo. 

4*  35>  39>  43  f°r  the  work  in  the  tabernacle  of 
Xeh.    3.    5  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  the  work 
L3.(S  '.  ""-;;.  abidah. 

Ezra   4.  24  Then  ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  God 

5.  8  work  goeth  fast  on,  and  prospereth  in  th. 

6.  7  Let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  alone 
W.Aet,  action,  jA^b;  alilah. 

Psa.  14.  1  they  have  done  abominable  works;  (the. 
7S.  11  forgat  his  works,  and  his  wonders  that  he 
141.    4  practise  wicked  works  with  men  that  wo. 

15. Act,  action,  n;?vK  o.liliyyah. 

Jer.  32. 19  Great  in  counsel,  aud  mighty  in  work :  for 

IQ.Workj  d  .  ?&poal. 

Dent  32.    4  his  work  (is)  perfect;  for  all  his  ways  (are) 

33. 11  Lord,  his  substance,  aud  accept  the  work 
Ruth  2.  12  Lord  recompense  thy  work,  aud  a  full  re. 
Job     7,    2  hireling  looketh  for(the  reward  of)  his  w. 

24.    5  (as)  wild  asses,  .go  they  forth  to  their  w. 
34;  11  For  the  work  of  a  man  shall  he  render  on. 
36.   9  Then  he  showeth  them  their  work,  and 
36.  24  Remember  that  thou  magnify  his  work 
l'sa.    9.  16  the  wicked  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his 

44.  1  (what)  work  thou  didst  in  their  days,  in 

64.  9  men  shall  fear,  and  shall  declare  the  work 
77.  12  I  will  meditate  also  of  all  thy  work,  aud 
90.  16  Letthyworkappearuntotbyservants.and 
92.  4  hast  made  me  glad  through  thy  work  :  I 
95.   9  tempted  me,  proved  me,  and  saw  my  wo. 

104.  23  Man  goeth  forth  unto  his  work  and  to  his 
in.    3  Hiswork(is)houourableandglorious;  and 
143.    5  meditate  on  all  thy  works;  I  muse  on  the 
Prov  20.  11  whether  his  work  (lie)  pure,  aud  whether 
ai.   8  strange :  but  (as  for)  the  pure,  his  work 

24.  12  render  to  (every)  man  according  to  Ids  w. 

will  render  to  the  man  according  to  his  w. 

Isa.     5.  1:  but  they  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord 

41.  24  Behold,  ye  (are)  of  nothing,  and  your  w. 

45.  9  What  makest  thou  ?  or  thy  work,  He  hath 
45.  11  concerning,  .work  of  my  hands,  command 

Jer.  22.  13  without  wages,  .giveth  him  uot  for  hia  \\ . 

50.  29  recompense  her  according  to  her  work 
Hnb.    1.    5  for(I)will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  (wh.) 
3.   2  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years 

1 7.  Work,  &  ed,  d  'fog,  n^wg  p 

1  Ch.15.    7  let  not  your  bands  be  weak  :  for  your  w. 
L'sa.  17.    4  Concerning  the  works  of  men,  by  the  wo. 

25.  5  Because  they  regard  n  >t  the  works  of  the 
Prov  11.  is  The  wicked  worketh  a  deceitful  work:  but 
1    '     jo.  10  his  reward  (is)  with  him.  and  his  work 

49,  4  judgment  (is)  with  the  Lord,  and  my  wo. 
6i.    8  will  direct  their  work  in  truth,  and  I  will 

1  his  reward  (is)  with  him,  and  his  work  be. 

t  ..    7  therefore  will  I  measure  then  former  w. 

Jer.  31.  16  for  thy  work  shall  be  rewarded,  saith  the 

'  v  .  ~;-;"-  tushiyyah. 

Isa.  28,  2  j  wonderful  in  counBel,  (and)  eicelleijtiuw, 

1'\/;.  working,  frtpyeia  mn-geia. 

kph.   1. 1  j  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty 


Eph. 

Phil. 
Col. 
2TI1. 


3.  7  given  unto  me  by  the  effectual  working  of 

4.  16  according  to  the  effectual  working  in  the 
3.  21  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is 

1.  29  striving  according  to  his  working,  which 

2.  9  whose  eomiug  is  after  the  working  of  Sa. 

'20.  An  energy*  inworking,  ivspyitfia  energema. 

1  Co.  12. 10  To  another  the  working  of  miracles ;  to 

21.  Work,  business,  gain,  epyaaia  erga 

Eph.    4. 19  unto  lasciviousuess,  to  work  all  unclean. 

22.  Work,  deed,  business,  tpyov  ergon. 

Matt.  5.  16  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify 
11.  2  when  John  had  heard  in  the  prison  thew. 
23.  3  but  do  not  ye  after  their  works :  for  they 
23.  5  But  all  their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen 
26. 10  for  she  hath  wrought  a  good  work  upon 

Markij.  34  to  every  man  his  work,  and  commanded 
14.   6  Jesus  said,  .she  hath  wrought  a  good  w. 

John  4.  34  saith  unto  them.  My  meat,  .finish  his  w. 

5.  20  will  show  him  greater  works  than  these 

5.  36  for  the  works,  .the  same  works  that  I  do 

6.  2S  shall  we  do  that  we  might  work  the  woiks 

6.  29  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe 

7.  3  that  thy  disciples  also  may  see  the  works 
7.    7  because  I  testify  of  it,  that  the  works  th. 

7.  21  said  unto  them,  I  have  done  one  work,  and 

8.  39  Abraham's  children,  ye  would  do  the  wo. 

9.  3  but  thattheworks  ofGodshouldbe  made 
9.    4  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  seut 

10.  25  worksthat  Ido  in  my  Eat her'sname,  they 
10.  32  Many  good  works  havelshowed  you  from 
10.  32  for  which  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me? 
10.  33  for  a  good  work  we  stone  thee  not;  but 
10.  37  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  beli. 
10.  38  though  ye  believe  not  me,  believe  the  w. 
14.  ;o  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeththe  works 
14.  11  or  else  believe  me  for  the  very  work's  sa. 

14.  12  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also;  and  gr. 

15.  24  If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works 
17.    4  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest 

Acts  5.  3S  for  if  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men 
7.41  and  rejoiced  in  the  works  of  their  own  ha. 
9.  36  this  woman  was  full  of  good  works  and 

2  for  the  work  whereuuto  I  have  called  th, 
41  a  work  in  your  days,  [a  work]  which,  ye  sh, 
26  recommended  to.  .grace  of  God  for  thew. 
18  [Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from] 

,5.  3S  But  Paul,  .went  not  with  them  to  the  wo. 

26.  20  repent,  and  turn  to  God,  and  do  works m. 

Horn.  2. 15  "Winch  show  the  work  of  the  law  written 

3.  27  It  is  excluded.    By  what  law?  of  works? 

4.  2  For  if  Abraham  were  justified  by  works 

4.  6  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  wo. 

9. 11  according  to  election  might  stand.,  works 
9.  32  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works 
.1.   6  no  more  of  works.  .[But  if  (it  be)  of  works] 

1.  6  [no  more  grace;  otherwise  work  is  no  in.  ] 

3  For  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works 

12  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  dar. 
20  For  meat  destroy  not  the  workof  God.  A. 

13  Every  man's  work,  .try  every  man's  work 
3. 14  If  any  man's  work  abide  which  he  hath 
3.  15  If  any  man's  work  shall  be  burnt,  he  sh. 
9.    1  Christ  our  Lord?  are  not  ye  my  work  in 

15.  58  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord 

16.  10  for  he  worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as 

2  Co.  9.   S  (things),  may  abound  to  every  good  work 

11. 15  whose  end  shall  be  according  to  their  w. 

Gal.     2.  i6worksofthelaw.  .works ofthe law.  .works 

3.   2  Received  ye  the  spirit  by  the  works  of  the 

3.    5  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing 

3. 10  For  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law 

5.  19  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest 

6.  4  But  let  every  man  prove  hisowhwork,  aud 
Eph.    2.   9  Xot  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast 

2.  10  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works 

4. 12  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edi. 

5. 11  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  w. 
Phil.    1.   6  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in 

2. 30  Because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  wasni. 

Col.     1.  10  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  in. 

t.  21  enemies  in  (your)  mind  by  wicked  works 

1  Th.  1.    3  Remembering  without  ceasing  your  work 

g.  13  esteem  them  very  highly,  for  their  work's 

2  Th.  1. 11  goodness,  and  the  work  of  faith  with  po. 

2.  17  stablish  you  in  every  good  word  and  work 

1  Ti.   2.  10  women  professing  godliness  with  good  wo. 

3.  1  If  a  man  desire.,  he  desireth  a  good  work 
5.  10  Well  reported  of  for  good  works;  if  she  h. 
5.  10  have  diligently  followed  every  good  work 
5.  25  Likewise  also  the  good  works  (of  some) 
6. 18  that  they  may  be  rich  in  good  works,  re. 

2  Ti.    1.   9  not  according  to  our  works,  but  according 

2.  21  (and)  prepared  unto  every  good  work 
3. 17  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works 

4.  5  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  make  full 
4.  14  the  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  w. 
4.  iS  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  good  w. 

Titus  1.  16  iu  works  they  deny,  .unto  every  good  w. 
•j.   7  showing  thyself  a  pattern  of  good  works 

2.  14  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works 

3.  1  magistrates,  to  be  ready  to  every  good  w. 
3.  5  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we 
3.  8  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works 
3.  14  let  ones  also  learn  to  maintain  good  works 

Ileb.    1. 10  and  the  heavens  are  the  Works  of  thine 

2.  7  [and  didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy] 

3.  9  tempted  me,  proved  me,  and  saw  my  wo. 

4.  3  works  were  finished  from  the  foundation 
4.  4  God  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from.,  works 
4.  10  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  works 


:  Co. 


Ileb. 


Jas. 


Rev. 


.    :  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  w. 
6.  10  God  (is)  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  w. 

0.  14  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works 
10.  24  to  provoke  unto  love  aud  to  good  works 

13.  21  Make  you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to 

1.  4  But  let  patience  have  (her)  perfect  work 

1.  25  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of  the  work 
j.  14  a  man  say  he  hath  faith, and  have  not  w.v 

2.  17  Eveu  so  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  de. 
2.  iS  works:  show  me  thy  faith  without  thy  w. 
2. 18  and  I  will  show  thee  my  faith  by  my  wo. 
2. 20  wilt  thou  know,  .that  faith  without  works 
2.  21  was  not  Abraham.. justified  by  works,  w. 
2.  22  Seest  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  bis  w. 
2,  22  Seest  thou  how.  .by  works  was  faith  ma. 
z.  24  Ye  see  then  how  that  by  works  a  man  is 
2.  25  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by  w. 
2.  26  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith  without  works  is 
3. 13  show  out  of  a  good  conversation  his  wor. 
1. 17  indgeth  according  to  every  man's  work 

2.  12  they  may  by  (your)  good  works,  which  th. 
3. 10  earth  also  and  the  works  that  are  therein 

3.  S  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the 
3.  12  because  Ids  own  works  were  evil,  and  his 
2.  2  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy 
2.  5  do  the  first  works;  or  else  I  will  come  un. 
2.  9  kuow  thy  [works,  aud]  tribulation,  and 
2. 13  [I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  dwel.] 
2.  19 1  know  [thy  works],  .and  thy  works  ;  aud 
2.  23  unto  every  one  of  you  according  to  your  w. 

2.  26  keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end,  to  him 

3.  1 1  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name 
3.    2  for  I  haveuot  found  thy  works  perfect 
3.    8  I  know  thy  works :  behold,  I  have  set  be. 
3. 15  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither 
9. 20  yet  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  h. 

14.  13  rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works 

15.  3  Great  and  marvellous  (are)  thy  works,  L. 
iS.    6  doub.  unto  her  double  according  to  her  w. 

20. 12  written  in  the  books,  according  to  theirw. 

20. 13  judged  every  man  accordiug  to  their  wo. 
22. 12  to  give  every  man  according  as  his  work 

•ord,  matter,  \6yos  logos. 
9.  28  For  he  will  finish  the  work,  and  cut  (it) 
9.  2S  because  a  short  work  will  the  Lord  make 

thing  done,  affair,  it pay pa. pragma. 
3.  16  strife  (is),  there  (is)  confusion,  .evil  work 
orkj  action,  irpa^is  praxis. 

16.  27  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his  w. 


23.. 1  v: 
Rom. 

2A.Any 

Jas. 
25.  A  w 

Matt 

"US. Any  thing  made,  workmanship,  iroitifiapoietna. 
Eph.  2.  10  For  we  are  liis  workmanship,  created  in 
iSce  also  Beaten,  broidered,  carved,  cedar,  cunniug, 
curious,  handy,  marvellous,  mighty,  needle,  net, 
wonderful,  wondrous,  wreatheu.] 

"WORK,  be  wrought,  to  — 

1.7*0  go  on,  proceed,  Tt*?ri  halak. 

Jon.    1. 11,  13  for  the  sea  wrought,  and  was  tempo. 

2.  To  do,  130;  dbad. 

Exod.  5.  iS  Go  therefore  now  (and)  work  :  for  there 

34.  21  Six  days  thou  shalt  work ;  but  on  the  sc. 
Beut  15.  19  thou  shalt  do  no  work  with  the  firstling 
Isa.   19.    9  Moreover,  they  that  work  in  fine  flax,  and 

o.  To  do,  iz&abad. 

Dan.    4.    2  wonders  that  the  high  God  hath  wrought 

6.  27  worketh  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven  and 

4.  To  cause  to  go  up,  n^j;  alah,  5. 

2  Ch.  3. 14  and  fine  linen,  and  wrought  cherubim  th. 

5.  To  do  repeatedly,  ?ty  alal,  7. 

Exodio.    2  what  things  I  have  wrought  in  Egypt,  and 

6.  To  do,  tty%  asah. 

Gen.  34.    7  because  he  had  wrought  folly  in  Israel,  in 
Exod3i.    4  To  devise  cunuingworks,  to  work  in  gold 
31.    5  to  work  in  all  manner  of  workmanship 

35.  32  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  br. 

35.  35  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the  engra. 

36.  1  Then  wrought  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  and 
36.  1  to  know  how  to  work  all  manner  of  work 
36.  4  wise  men,  that  wrought  all  the  work  of 
y'.K  S  them  that  wrought  the  work  of  the  tabe. 
39.  3  to  work  (it)  in  the  blue,  and  in  the  purple 
39.  6  they  wrought  onyx  stones  inclosed  in  ou. 

Lev.  20.  12  they  have  wrought  confusion  ;  their  bio. 
Deut  17.   2  that  hath  wrought  wickedness  in  the  sight 

22.  21  because  she  hath  wrought  folly  iu  Israel 
31.  iS  for  all  the  evils  which  they  shall  have  w. 

Josh.  7.  15  and  because  he  hath  wrought  folly  in  1*. 

9.  4  They  did  work  wilily,  aud  went  aud  made 
Judg2o.  10  all  the  folly  that  they  have  wrought  in  I. 
Ruth  2.  19  where  wroughtest  thou?  blessed  be  he 

2.  19  with  whom  she  had  wrought . .  with  whom 

1  Sa.  11.  13  to  day  the  Lori>  hath  wrought  salvation 

14.    6  it  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  work  for  us 
14.  45  Shall  Jonathan  die,  who  hath  wrought 
14.  45  for  he  hath  wrought  with  God  this  day 
19.   s  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  salvatiou  for 

2  Sa.  iS.  13  Otherwise  I  should  have  wrought  falseh. 

23. 10  and  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  victory  th. 

23.  12  slew  the  Philistines  :  aud  the  Lord  wro. 
1  Hi.   s-  16  which  ruled  over  the  people  that  wrought 

7.  14  understanding,  and  cunning  to  work  all  w. 
7.  14  to  king  Solomon,  and  wrought  all  his  wo. 
9.  23  which  Ijare  rule  over  the  people  that  wr. 

16.  25  But  Omri  wrought  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the 
21.  20  thyself  to  work  evil  in  the  sight  ofthe  L. 
2i.  25  wluch  did  sell  himself  to  work  wickedness 


WORK 


1073 


WORLD 


2  Ki.  3.   2  he  wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

12.  11  builders  that  wrought  upon  the  house  of 

17. 11  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  L. 
2i.    6  wrought  much  wickedness  in  the  sight  of 

2  Cli.  2.   7  me  now  therefore  a  man  cunning  to  work 

2. 14  skilful  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  in 

21.    6  wrought  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the. .  L. 

24.  13  So  the  workmen  wrought,  and  the  work 

31.  20  wrought  (that  which  was)  good  and  right 

33.  6  wrought  much  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 

34.  10  workmen . .  wrought  in  the  house  of  the  L 
34.  13  overseers  of  all  that  wrought  the  work  in 

>*eh.   4.   6  thereof :  for  the  people  had  a  mind  to  w. 
/.  16  the  half  of  my  servants  wrought  in  the  w. 
■4.  17  with  one  of  his  hands  wrought  in  the  w. 
9.  18  brought  thee  up  out  of  Egypt,  and  had  w. 
9.  26  and  they  wrought  great  pro-vocations 
Job   12.   9  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought 
23.    9  On  the  left  hand,  where  he  doth  work,  but 
Psa.  52.    2  mischiefs :  like  a  sharp  razor,  working  de. 
101.   3  hate  the  work  of  them  that  turn  aside,  (it) 
101.    7  He  that  worketh  deceit  shall  not  dwell 
119.  126  (Itis)timefor(thee),  Lord, to  work,  (for) 
Prov  11.  18  The  wicked  worketh  a  deceitful  work,  but 
26.  28  and  a  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin 

31.  13  seeketh  wool  and  flax,  and  worketh  will. 
Eccl.    2.  11  on  all  the  works  that  my  hands  hadwro. 

3.  g  What  profit  hath  he  that  worketh  in  that 
Isa.   26. 18  have  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the 

32.  6  his  heart  will  work  iniquity,  to  practise 
64.    5  Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  and  wo. 

Jer.  11.  15  she  hathwrought  lewdness  with  many,  and 

18.    3  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  wheels 

Eze.  20.   9,  14,  22  I  wrought  for  my  name's  sake,  that 

20.  44  when  I  have  wrought  with  you  for  my  ua. 
29.  20  because  they  wrought  for  me,  saith  the  L. 

33.  26  Ye  stand  upon  your  sword,  ye  work  abo. 
Dan.  1 1.  23  after  the  league . .  with  him  he  shall  work 
Hag.  2.  4  work :  for  I  (am)  with  you,  saith  the  Lo. 
Mai.    3.  15  yea,  they  that  work  wickedness  are  setup 

7.  To  act,  work,  make,  do,  Sj-'S  paal. 

Nura  23.  23  said,  .of  Israel  .What  hath  God  wrought ! 
Job   33.  29  allthese  (things)  worketh  God  oftentimes 

36.  23  or  who  can  say,  Thou  hast  wrought  iniq. 
Psa.  15.    2  worketh  righteousness,  and  speaketh  the 

31. 19  thou  hast  wrought  for  them  that  trust  in 

58.   2  Yea,  in  heart  ye  work  wickedness;  ye  w. 

68.  28  strengthen.,  thatwhich  thou  hastwrought 

74. 12  working  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  ea. 
141.    4  practise  wicked  works  with  men  that  w. 

Isa.   26. 12  for  thou  also  hast  wrought  all  our  works 
41.    4  Who  hath  wrought  and  done  (it),  calling 

43.  13  none  that  can  deliver.  .1  will  work,  and 
44. 12  smith  with  the  tongs  both  worketh  in  the 

44.  12  worketh  it  with  the  strength  of  his  anus 
Hos.  6.  8  Gilead  (is)  a  city  of  them  that  work  iniq. 
Mic.  2.  1  devise  iniquity,  and  work  evil  upon  their 
Hab.  1.  5  (I)  will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  (which) 
Zeph.  2.    3  yemeekof  the  earth,  which  have  wrought 

S.  To  set,  put,  place,  cii1,  U)i?  sum,  sim. 

.  Psa.  78.  43  How  lie.  had  wrought  his  signs  in  Egypt 
9.7b  work  in,  evepyeco  energeo. 

Rom.  7.    5  did- work  in  our  members  to  bring  forth 

1  Co.  12.    6  but  it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all 

12. 11  But  all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the 

2  Co.   4.  12  So  then  death  worketh  in  us,  but  life  in 
Gal.     3.    5  He  therefore  that . .  worketh  miracles  am. 

5.  6  uncircumcision ;  but  faith  workethby love 
Eph.    1.  11  purpose  of  him  who  worketh  all  things 

1.  20  Which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  hera. 

2.  2  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children 

3.  20  according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in 
Phil.  2.  13  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both 
Col.  1.  29  working,  which  worketh  in  me  mightily 
2  Til.  2.    7Forthemysteryofiniquitydothalready  w. 

10.7V)  work,  toil,  labour,  epyd£ofj.at  ergazomai. 
Matt.  7.  23  knew  you,  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work 

21.  28  and  said,  Son,  go  work  today  in  my  vine. 
26.  10  for  she  hath  wrought  a  good  work  upon 

Marki4.    6  why  trouble  ye  her?  she  hath  wrought  a 

Lukei3.  14  six  days  in  which  men  ought  to  work,  in 

John  3.  21  made  manifest,  that  they  are  wrought  in 

5. 17  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work 

6.  28  What  shall  we  do,  that  we  might  work 
6.  30 What,  .showestthou.  .whatdostthou  wo. 
9.   4  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent 
9.   4  day :  the  night  cometh,  when  no . .  can  w. 

Acts  10.  35  he  that  feareth  him,  and  worketh  righte. 

13.  41  for  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  a  work 
18.    3  he  abode  with  them,  and  wrought :  for  by 

Roni.  2.  10  to  every  man  that  worketh  good,  to  the 

4.  4  Now  to  him  that  worketh  is  the  reward 

4.  5  But  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believ. 
13.  10  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour,  the. 

1  Co.  4.  12  labour,  working  with  our  hands :  being 
9.   6  have  not  we  power  to  forbear  working  ? 
16.  10  for  he  worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I 
Eph.  4.  28  working  with  (his)hands  the  thing  which 

1  Th.  4.  11  work  with  your  own  hands,  as  we  coram. 

2  Th.  3.    8  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night 

3. 10  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he 
3.  11  disorderly,  working  not  at  all,  but  are 
3.  12  with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat  their 
IIeb.11.  33  wronght  righteousness,  obtained  promises 
2  John     8  lose  not  those  tilings  which  we  have  vvrou. 
11.  To  work  down,  thoroughly,  Karcpyd^o/xat. 

Rom.  1.  27  men  with  men  working  thatwhich  is  unk. 
4. 15  Because  the  law  worketh  wrath:  for  wh. 

5.  3  knowiug  that  tribulation  worketh  patien. 

135 


Rom.  7.    8  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  concupisce. 

7.  13  working  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  go. 

15.  18  thosethings  which  Christ  hath  not  wrou. 

2  Co.  4.  17  worketh  for  us  a  farmore  exceeding  (and) 

5.  5  Now  he  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self 
7.  10  For  godly  sorrow  [worketh]  repentance 
7.  10  but  the  soitow  of  the  world  worketh  de. 
7.  11  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you,  yea 

12.  12  Truly  the  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wr«m. 
Jas.     1.    3  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh  pa. 

I.  20  For  the  wrath  of  man  [worketh]  not  the 

1  Pe.  4.    3  may  suffice  us  to  have  wrought  the  will 
12.  To  do,  make,  ttoUqj  poieo. 

Matt2o.  12  Saying,  These  last  have  wrought  (but)  one 
Acts  15.  12  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by 

19.  11  God  wrought  special  miracles  by  the  hand 

21.  19  what  things  God  had  wrought  among  the 
Heb.  13.  21  workingin  you  that  which  is  well  pleasing 
Rev.  16.  14  working  miracles,  (which)  go  forth  unto 

19.  20  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles  bef. 

21.  27  neither  (whatsoever)  worketh  abomination 
WORK,  to  set  a,  have  much  — 
l.To  cause  to  do,  or  serve,  "DJJ  ahaxl,  5. 

2  Ch.  2. 18  hundred  overseers  to  set  the  people  a  w. 
1. To  prevail  with  difficulty,  p.6\ts  <Vx^w  molis  isc. 

Acts  27. 16  we  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  boat 
WORK  effectually  in,  wonderfully  — 
l.To  do  repeatedly,  ^h'j,  alal,  7. 

1  Sa.  6.  6  when  he  had  wrought  wonderfully  among 
2.  To  work  i'li,  £i/€py4a>  energeo. 

Gal.     2.    8  For  he  that  wrought  effectually  in  Peter 

1  Th.  2. 13  which  effectually  worketh  also  in  you  th. 
WORK  out,  together,  with,  to  — 
l.To  workdoum,  against,  thoroughly,  Karepyd.Cofj.ai. 

Phil.  2. 12  work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
2.  To  vjork  with,  trwepyeu  sunergeo. 

Marki6.  20  the  Lord  working  with  (them),  and  confi. 

Rom.  8.  28  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  go. 

Jas.     2.  22  Seest  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  his  w. 

WORKER,  workfellow,  workman,  fellow  — 
l.To  grave,  plough,  work,  c;in  charash. 

1  ELL  7.  14  his  father  (was)  a  man  of  Tyre,  a  worker 

2.  Graver,  artificer,  tcorker,  K^rt  charash. 

1  Ch.22.  15  hewers  and  workers  of  stone  and  timber 
Isa.    40.  20  seeketh  unto  him  a  cunning  workman  to 

44. 11  and  the  workman,  they  (are)  of  men  :  let 
Jer.  10.   3  work  of  the  hands  of  the  workman  with 

10.  9  work  of  the  workman,  and  of  the  hands 
Hos.   8.    6  workman  made  it,  therefore  it  (is)  not  G. 

3.  Men  of  work,  npxta  -e^n  anshc  melakah. 

1  Ch.25.    1  the  number  of  the  workmen  according  to 

4.  To  do  work,  xzxhq  n^"  asah  melakah. 

2  Ki.12.  14  But  they  gave  that  to  the  workmen,  and 

12. 15  delivered  the  money  to  be  bestowed  onw. 

1  Ch.2c.  15  Moreover  (there  are)  workmen  with  thee 

2  Ch.24.  13  So  the  workmen  wrought,  and  the  work 

34.  10  they  put  (it)  in  the  hand  of  the  workmen 

34. 10  gave  it  to  the  workmen  that  wrought  in 

34.  17  the  overseers,  and  to  the  hand  of  the  wo. 

Ezra    3.    9  to  set  forward  the  workmen  in  the  house 

Psa.  37.    1  neither  be  thou  envious  against  the  wor. 

5.  To  act,  work,  do,  make,  S^s  paal. 

Job  31.  3  strange  (punishment)  to  the  workers  of 

34.  8  Which  goeth  in  company  with  the  work. 
34. 22  where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide 

Psa.     5.  5  in  thy  sight :  thou  hatest  all  workers  of 

6.  8  Depart  fromme,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity 
14.  4  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  kno.? 
28.  3  with. the  workersof  iniquity,  whichspeak 
36.  12  There  are  the  workers  of  iniquity  fallen 
53.  4  Have  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowl.  ? 
59.  2  Deliver  me  from  the  workersof  iniquity 
64.  2  from  the  insurrection  of  the  workers  of 
02.  7  when  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  do  flour. 
92.  9  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  shall  be  scatt. 
94.  4  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  boast  themse. 

94. 16  who  will  stand  up  for  me  the  workers  of 
125.  5  lead  them  forth  with  the  workers  of  iniq. 
141.    9  Keep  me  from,  .the  gins  of  the  workers 

Prov  10.  29  destruction  (shall  be)  to  the  workers  of  in. 
21. 15  but  destruction  (shall  be)  to  the  workers 
6.Labouri?ig,  toiling,  Spy  amel. 

Judg.  5.  26  put.  .herright  hand  to  the  workmen's  ha. 
7-  Worker,  workman,  epyarys  ergates. 

Mattio.  10  for  the  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat 

Lukei3.  27  depart  from  me,  all  (ye)  workers  of  iniq. 

Acts  19.  25  Whom  he  called  together  with  the  work. 

2  Co.  11.  13  deceitful  workers,  transforming  themsel. 

Phil.   3.    2  Beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil  workers 

2  Ti.    2. 15  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  asha. 

S.Fellmo  or  joint  worker,  ffvvepyos  sunergos. 

Rom  16.  21  Timotheus  my  work  fellow,  and  Col.  4.  n 
WORKER  together,  of  miracles  — 

1.  Power,  Svuafxts  dunamis. 

1  C0.12.  29  (are)  all  teachers?  (are)  all  workers  of  mi. 

2.  To  work  with  or  together,  cvvepyea}  sunergeo. 

2  Co.  6.  1  We  then,  (as)  workers  together  (with  him) 
WORKS,  mighty,  wonderful  — 

1. Power,  hvva}ns  dunamis. 

Matt.  7.  22  in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful  wo.  ? 

II.  20  wherein  most  of  his  mighty  works  were 


Matt  1 1.  21  for  if  the  mighty  works  which  were  done 
11.  23  for  if  the  mighty  works,  which  have  been 
13.  54  Whence  hath  this  (man),  .these  mighty  w.t 

13.  58  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there  bee. 

14.  2  therefore  mighty  works  do  show  forth 
Mark  6.    2  that  even  such  mighty  works  are  wrought 

6.    5  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  save 
6.  14  therefore  mighty  works  do  show  forth  th. 
Lukeio.  13  for  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in 
19.  37  for  all  the  mighty  works  that  they  had  se. 

2.Great  doings  or  deeds,  p.€ya\^a  megaleia. 

Acts   2. 11  speak  in  our  tongues  the  wonderful  works 
WORLD  — 
l.Land,  earth,  fix  erets. 

Psa.  22.  27  All  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember 

Isa.  23.  17  fornication  with  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  w. 
62. 11  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  eud  of  the  world 

Jer.  25. 26  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  which  (are) 

2.  Cessation,  Tin  chedel. 

Isa.   38.  11  no  more  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
3. Lifetime,  age,  175  cheled. 

Psa.  17.  14  from  men  of  the  world,  (which  have)  their 

49.  1  give  ear,  all  (ye)  inhabitants  of  the  world 

4.  Indefinite  time,  or  its  love,  cViy  olam. 

Psa.  73.  12  these  (are)  the  ungodly,  who  prosper  in  the 
Eccl.  3.  11  also  he  hath  set  the  world  in  their  heart 

5. Fruit  bearing  or  habitable  earth,  T^n  tebel. 

1  Sa.   2.    8  the  Lord's,  and  he  hath  set  the  world  np 

2  Sa.  22.  16  foundations  of  the  world  were  discovered 
1  Ch.  16.  30  world  also  shall  be  stable,  that  it  be  not 
Job    18.  iS  into  darkness,  and  chased  out  of  the  wor. 

34. 13  or  who  hath  disposed  the  whole  world  ? 
37.  12  commandeth  them  upon  the  face  of  the 
Psa.    9.    8  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness 
iS.  15  foundations  of  the  world  were  discovered 

19.  4  their  words  to  the  end  of  the  world.  In  th. 
24.    1  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein 

33.  8  let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  stand 

50.  12  for  the  world  (is)  mine,  and  the  fulness  th. 
77.  18  lightnings  lightened  the  world  ;  the  earth 
89. 11  the  world  and  the  fulness  thereof  thou  ha. 
90.  2  oreverthouhadstformed the.  .world,  ev. 
93.    1  world  also  is  established,  that  it  cannot 

96.  10  world  also  shall  be  establishad  that  it  sh. 
96. 13  he  shall  judge  the  world  withrighteousn. 

97.  4  His  lightnings  eulightened  the  world :  the 

98.  7  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein 
98.    9  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  wo. 

Prov.  8.  26  nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  wo. 

Isa.   13.  11  I  wiU  punish  the  world  for  (their)  evil 
14.  17  made  the  world  as  a  wilderness,  and  des. 
14.  21  nor  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  cities 
18.    3  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world,  anddwe. 
24.    4  the  world  languisheth  (and)  fadeth  away 
26.   9  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  right. 

26.  18  neither  have  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 

27.  6  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of  the  w. 

34.  1  the  world,  and  all  things  that  come  forth 
Jer.  10. 12  he  hath  established  the  world  by  his  wis 

51.  15  he  hath  established  the  world  by  his  wisd. 
Lam.  4.  12  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  would 
Nah.  1.    5  yea,  the  world,  and  all  that  dwell  therein 

Q.Age,  indefinite  time,  dispensation,  alwv  aion. 
Matti2.  32  neitherin  this  world,  neither  in  the  (wor). 
13.  22  care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness 
13.  39  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world  ;  and 
13.  40  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  tins  world 
13.  49  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world :  the 
24.   3  sign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of  the  w. 

28.  20  with  you  alway . .  unto  the  end  of  the  wor. 
Mark  4. 19  cares  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness 

10.  30  persecutions ;  and  in  the  world  to  come 
Luke  16.   8  children  of  this  world  are  in  their  genera. 

18.  30  and  in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting 

20.  34  children  of  this  world  many,  and  are  given 
20.  35  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world 

Rom  12.   2  be  notconformed  to  this  world,  but  be  ye 

1  Co.  1.  20  where  (is)  the  disputerof  this  world?  hath 

2.  6  of  this  world,  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  w. 
2.  8  Which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world 
3. 18  seemeth  to  be  wise  in  this  world,  let  him 

2  Co.  4.  4  In  whom  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blin. 
Gal.  1.  4  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evilw. 
Eph.   1. 21  not  only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that  wh. 

6.  12  against,  .rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  [w.] 

1  Ti.    6.  17  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  tins  world 

2  Ti.  4.  10  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  w. 
Titus  2. 12  should  live  soberly.,  in  this  present  world 
Heb.   1.    2  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  wo. 

6.    5  word  of  God,  aDd  the  powers  of  the  world 

11.  3  Through  faith  we  understand  that  the  wo. 

7. Ages,  dispensations,  alwvtav  {gen.  2)1.)  aionon. 
1  Co.  2.    7  which  God  ordained  before  the  world  unto 
10. 11  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  to 
Heb.  9.  26  have  suffered  since  the  foundation  of  the  w. 

8,Land,  earth,  yrj  ge. 

Rev.  13.  3  and  all  the  world  wondered  after  the  be. 
9. Arrangement,  beauty,  world,  Koap-os  kosmos. 
Matt.  4.  8  showeth  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  wor. 
5.  14  Ye  are  the  light  of  tke  world.  A  city  that 
13.  35  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  [of  the  w.] 
13,  38  The  field  is  the  world;  the  good  seed  are 
16.  26  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
18.    7  Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  offences ! 

24.  21  as  was  not  since  the  beginningof  the  wo. 

25.  34  prepared,  .from  the  foundation  of  the  wo. 


WORLD 


1074 


WORSHIP 


Matt.26. 13  this  gospel  shall  be  preached .  .whole  wor. 

Mark  8.  36  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
14.  9  be  preached  throughout  the  whole  world 
16.  15  [Go  ye  unto  all  the  world,  and  preach  the] 

Luke  9.  25  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  him. 

11.  50  wasshed  from  the  foundation  of  the  world 

12.  30  these  things  do  the  nations  of  the  world 
John  1.   9  lighted  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  w. 

1.  10  lie  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was 
1 .  10  made  by  him,  and  the  world  knew  him  not 
i.  29  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world 
3.  16  For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave 
3  17  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  toco. 
3.  17  the  world;  but  that  the  world  through 
3.  19  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  lo. 
4!  42  is  indeed  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  w. 
6. 14  Prophet  that  should  come  into  the  world 
6.  33  from  heaven,  and  giveth  life  unto  the  w. 

6.  51  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world 

7.  4  do  these  things,  show  thyself  to  the  world 

7.  7  The  world  cannot  hate  you ;  but  me  it  ha. 

8.  12  I  am  the  light  of  the  world :  he  that  foil. 

8.  23  ye  are  of  this  world ;  I  am  not  of  this  w\  > 
6.  26  speak  to  the  world  those  things  which  I 

9.  5  am  in  the  world,  I  am  the  light  of  the  w. 
9.  39  For  judgment  I  am  come  into  this  world 

10.  36  whom  the  Father,  .sent  into  the  world 

11.  9  because  he  seeth  the  light  of  this  world 

11.  27  the  Christ,  .which  should  come  into  the  w. 

12.  19  prevail  nothing?  behold,  the  world  isgone 
12.  25  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall 
12.  31  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world :  now 
12.  31  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out 
12.  46  I  am  come  a  light  into  the  world,  that  w. 

12.  47  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  w. 

13.  1  should  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the 

13.  1  havinglovedhis  own  which  were  in  the  w. 

14.  17  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because 
14.  19  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no 
14.  22  wilt  manifest  thyself.,  not  unto  the  world? 
74.  27  uot  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you 
14.  30  for  the  prince  of  [this]  world  cometh,  and 

14.  31  But  that  the  world  may  know  thatl  love 
15. 18  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  ha. 

15.  19  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would 
15.  19  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but 

15.  19  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  ha. 

16.  8  when  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the  wo. 

16. 11  Of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this  w. 
16.  20  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world 
16.  21  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world 
16.  28  come  into  the  world:  again,  I  leave  the  w. 
16.  33  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation :  but 

16.  33  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  w. 

17.  5  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  w. 
17.   6  men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the  wo. 
17.    9  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them 
17.  11  more  in  the  world,  but  these  are  in  the  w. 

17. 12  While  I  was  with  them  [in  the  world]  I 

17. 13  these  things  I  speak  in  the  world,  that 

17. 14  world  hath  hated  them,  because  they  are 
17.  14,  16  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  w. 
17.  15  thou  shouldest  take  them  outof  the  world 
17. 18  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even 
17.  18  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into  the  world 
17.  21  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent 
17.  23  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent 
17.  24  lovedstme  before  the  foundation  of  the  w. 

17.  25  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not  kn. 

18.  20  answered  him,  I  spake  openly  to  the  wo. 
18.  36  answered,  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  wo. 
18.  36  If  my  kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then 
18.  37  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that 
21.  25  suppose  that  even  the  world  itself  could 

Acts  17.  24  God  that  made  the  world  and  all  things 
Horn.  1.    S  is  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world 
1.  20  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly 

3.  6  forbid :  for.  .how  shall  God  judge  the  w. 
3. 19  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  be. 

4.  13  promise,  that  he  should  be  the  heir  of .  .w. 

5.  12  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world 
5.  13  For  until  thelawsinwas  in  the  world  :  but 

11.  12  if  the  fall  of  them  (be)  the  riches  of  the  w. 

11.  15  casting  away,  .the  reconciling  of  the  wo. 
1  Co.    1.  20  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  wo. 
1.  21  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it 
1.  27  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  wo. 
1.  27  [hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world] 

1.  28  basethingsof  the  world,  and  things  which 

2.  12  we  have  received,  not  the  spirit  of  the  w. 
3. 19  For  thcwisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness 

3.  22  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world 

4.  9  for  we  are  made  a  spectacle  unto  the  w. 

4.  13  we aremade Bathe  filth  of  the  world,  (and 
5. 10  altogether  with  the  fornicators  of  this  w. 

5.  10  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  wo. 

6.  2  judge  the  world?  and  if  the  world  shall 
7. 31  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing 

7.  31  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passethaway 
7.  33  careth  forthe  things  that  are  of  the  world 

7.  34  careth  for  the  things  of  the  world,  how 

8.  4  we  know  that  an  idol  (is)  nothing  in  thew 
11.  32  we  should  uot  be  condemned  with  the  w. 
14.  10  so  many  kinds  of  voices  in  the  world,  and 

7  Co.  1. 12  we  hare  had  our  conversation  in  the  world 

5.  19  reconciling  the  world  unto  Irimself,  1 1*  ■  t 
7.  10  but  the  sorrow  oi  the  world  worketh  de. 

Gal,    4.   3  in  bondage  under  the  elements  of  the  w. 

6.  14  world  [s cruoifled  onto  me,  and  I,. thew. 
Bph,    1.   .j  1..  row  the  foundation  at  the  world,  thai 

2.  2  walked  according  to  the  course  of  this  v. 
2. 12  havingnohope.  .without  Godin  the  world 


Phil.   2.  15  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  w. 

Col.  1.  6  is  come  unto  you,  as  (it  is)ih  all  the  world 
2.  8  after  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not 
2.  20  dead,  .from  the  rudiments  of  the  world 

2.  20  though  living  in  the  world,  are  ye  subject 
1  Ti.    1.  15  Christ  Jesuscame  into  the  world  to  save 

3.  16  believed  on  in  the  world,  receivedup  into 
6.    7  For  we  brought  nothing  into  (this)  world 

Heb.  4.  3  finished  from  the  foundation  of  the  world 
9.  26  suffered  since  the  foundation  of  the  world 

10.  5  when  he  cometh  into  the  world,  he  saith 

11.  7  by  the  which  he  condemned  the  world 

11.  38  Of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy:  they 
Jas.    1.  27  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world 

2.  5  Hath  uot  God  chosen  the  poor  of  [this]  w. 

3.  6  the  tongue  (is)  a  fire,  a  world  of  iniquity 

4.  4  know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the  w. 

4.  4  will  be  a  f  rieud  of  the  world  is  the  enemy 

1  Pe.  1.  20  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but 

5.  9  in  your  brethren  that  are  in  the  world 

2  Pe.  1.    4  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  wo. 

2.  5  spared  not  the  old  world,  but  saved  Xoah 
2.   5  bringing  in  the  flood  upon  the  world  of 

2.  20  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  thr. 

3.  6  Whereby  the  world  that  then  was,  being 

1  Jo.   2.   2  but  also  for  (the  sins  of)  the  whole  world 

2. 15  world,  neither  the  things,  .in  the  world 
2.  15  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the 

2. 16  For  all  that  (is)  in  the  world .  .is  of  the  w. 

2.  17  world,  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof 

3.  1  world  kuoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew 
3.  13  Marvel  uot  mybrethren,  if theworldhate 

3.  17  But  whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and  se. 

4.  1  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world 
4.    3  and  even  now  already  it  is  in  the  world 

4.  4  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  wo. 
4.  5  They  are  of  the  world:  therefore  speak  th. 
4.  5  of  the  world,  and  the  world  heareth  them 
4.  9  God  sent  hisonlybegottenSonintothe  w. 
4. 14  Father.  .Son  (to  be)the  Saviour  of  the  w. 

4.  17  because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world 

5.  4  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world:  and 
5.  4  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  thew. 
5.  5  'Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but 
5.  19  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world 

2  John     7  many  deceivers  areenteredintotheworld 
Rev.  11. 15  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become 

13.   8  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  w. 
17.    8  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  when 

10.  Habitable  earth  or  land,  oiKovfxzvq  oikoumene. 
Matt  24.  14  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness 
Luke  2.1a  decree . .  that  all  the  world  should  be  ta. 
4.   5  showed,  .liim  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  w. 
Acts  11.  2S  be  great  dearth  throughout  all  the  world 
17.   6  These  that  have  turned  the  world  upside 
17.  31  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in 
19.  27  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth 
24.    5  among  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  world 
Rom  10.  iS  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  wo. 
Heb.    1.    6  bringeth  in  the  first  begotten  into  the  w. 
2.    5  hath  he  uot  put  in  subjection  the  world 
Rev.    3.  10  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world,  to 

12.  9  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world 
16. 14  kings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole  world 

WORLD,  (standeth,  beginning  of  the,  without  end)  — 
l.Unto  ages  of  duration,  i*'  'rf^""^;  ad-olme  ad. 
Isa.  45.  17  be  ashamed  nor  confounded  world  witho. 

2.  From  the  age,  cSiyp  meolam. 

Isa.   64.   4  For  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  (men) 

%.From  the  age,  av   alwvos  op'  aionos. 

Luke  1.  70  prophets,  which  have  been  since  the  wo. 
Acts    3.  21  all  his  holy  prophets  [since  the  world  b.j 
15. 18  all  his  works  from  the  begmuingof  the  w. 
Eph.  3.  9  which  from  the  beginning  of  the  world 

i.To  the  age,  els  rbu  alwva  eis  ton  aidna. 

1  Co.  8. 13  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  stand. 
5.0/  the  age  of  the  ages,  tov  aiwvos  t&v  cd&vwv. 

Eph.  3.  21  throughout  all  ages,  [world  without  end] 
6.  Of  or  from  the  age,  e/c  to  alwvos  ek  to  aionos. 

jolin  9.  32  Since  the  world  began  was  it  not  heard  th. 
7. To  the  times,  to  the  ages,  xpo^ois  alwviois. 

Rom. 16.  25  which  was  kept  secret  since  the  world  be. 
%.Before  the  times  of  theages,  irp6  xp6vwv  vXwviuv. 

2  Ti.    1.    9  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  since  the  world  b. 
Titus  1.   2  which  God . .  promised  before  the  world  be. 

"WORLDLY  — 

J'j  ion-ting  to  the  world,  worldly,  ko(tiaik6s  kosmikos. 
'Jit  us  2.  12  denyiugimgodlinessand  worldly  lusts,  we 
Heb.    9.    1  ordinancesofdivineservice,  auda worldly 

WORM,  eaten  of  worms  — 

l.To  be  afraid,  creep,  ?m  zachol. 

Hie.  7.  17  move  out  of  their  holes  like  worms  of  the 
2. A  moth,  wood  lous-\  CD  sas* 

Isa.  51.  8  worm  shall  eat  them  like  wool:  but  my  ri. 
B,  J   wormi  wan  rimmah. 

Exodi6.  24  did  not  stink,  neither  was  there  any  wor. 

Job  7.  5  My  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods 
17. 14  to  the  worm,  (Thou  art)  my  mother,  and 
21.  26  lie  down  alike  in  the  dust,  and  the  worms 

24.  20  worm  shall  feed  sweetly  on  him;  he  shall 

25.  6  How  much  less  man,  (that  is)  a  worm;  and 
Isa.    14.  11  the  worm  is  spread  under  thee,  and  the 


4,-rl  coccus  worm,  fcyV»fl3  no?ifl  toleah,  tolaath. 

Deut.28.  39  nor  gather  (the  grapes);  for  the  worms  sh. 

Job   25.    6  and  the  son  of  man,  (which  is)  a  worm 

Psa.  22.    6  But  I  (am)  a  worm,  and  no  man;  a  reproach 

Isa.  14.  11  spread  under  thee,  and  the  worms  cover 
41. 14  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  (and)  ye  men 
66.  24  for  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall 

Jon.    4.    7  But  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  mor. 
5.-1  worm,  maggot,  o-/cwA7?£  slcolex. 

Mark  o.  [44,  46],  48  Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 
6. Eaten  by  worms,  o-KcakrjuSfipccTos  skolekobrOtos. 

Acts  12.  23  he  was  eaten  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the 
WORMS,  to  breed  — 
To  c raid  forth,  breed  worms,  en  rum. 

Exod.16.  20  it  bred  worms,  and  stank:  and  Moses  was 

WORMWOOD  — 

1.  Wormwood)  rftjj.7  laanah. 

Deut  29.  iS  be.  .a  root  that  beareth  gall  and  wormwood 
Prov.  5.  4  But  her  end  is  bitter  as  wormwood,  sharp 
Jer.    9.  15  feed  them,  (even)  this  people,  with  worm. 

23.  15  Behold,  I  will  feed  them  with  wormwood 
Lam.  3. 15  he  hath  made  me  drunken  with  worm  wo. 

3. 19  Remembering,  .the  wormwood  and  the  g. 
Amos  5.    7  Ye  who  turn  judgment  to  wormwood,  and 

2.  Wormwood,  undrinkahle,  &-tytvdos  apsinthos. 
Rev.    8. 11  the  name  of  the -star  is  called  wormwood 

8.  nthirdpartofthewatersbecame wormwood 
WORSE  thing,  (to  be,  deal,  do,  bs  put  to  the)  — 
l.To  be  smitten,  ^53  nagaph,  2. 
-  2  Ki.  14.  12  Judah  was  put  to  the  worse  before  Israel 

1  Ch.  19.  16,  19  saw  that  they  were  put  to  the  worse 

2  Ch.   6.  24  if  thy  people  Israel  be  put  to  the  worse 

25.  22  Judah  was  put  to  the  worse  before  Israel 
2.To  be  evil,  JJJTi  raa. 

2  Sa.  19.    7  that  will  be  worse  imto  thee  than  all  the 

3.  To  do  evil,  treat  ill,  VVt]  raa,  5. 

Gen.  19.   9  now  will  we  deal  worse  with  thee  than 

1  Ki.  16.  25  and  did  worse  than  all  that  (were)  before 
Jer.    7.  26  hardened  their  neck:  they  did  worse  than 

16.  12  ye  have  done  worse  than  your  fathers,  for 

i.Evil,  Ti  ra. 

2  Ch.33.  9  made  Judah.  .to  do  worse  than  the  heat. 
£ze.     7.  24  Wherefore  I  will  bring  the  worst  of  the 

5.  Smaller,  inferior,  younger,  ikdacraiv  elasson. 

John  2. 10  then  that  which  is  worse:  (but)  thou  hast 
6. Less,  inferior,  worse,  tjttcov  hetton. 

1  Co.11. 17  together. .for  the  better,  but  for  the  worse 
7.1Vorse,  inferior,  xeipav  die  iron. 

Matt.  9.  16  from  the  garment,  and  the  rentismadew. 

12.  45  the  last  (state)  of  that  man  is  worse  than 

27.  64  so  the  last  error  shall  be  worse  than  the 

Mark  2.  21  away  from  the  old,  and  the  rent  is  made  w. 

5.  26  was  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  greww. 

Lukei  1.  26  the  last  (state)  of  that  man  is  worse  than 

John  5.  14  sin  no  more,  lest  aworse  thing  come  uuto 

1  Ti.   5.    8  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than 

2  Ti.  3. 13  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  andw. 
2  Pe.  2.  20  latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than  theb. 

S.To  be  behind,  inferior,  var€p4w  hustereo. 

1  Co.  8.  8  [neither,  if  we  eat  not,  are  we  the  worse] 
"WORSE  liking  — 

To  be  displeasing,  f]j.*j  zciaph. 

Dan.  1. 10  Why  should  he  see  your  faces  worse  lik. 
WORSHIP,  worshipper,  worshipping,  to  — 

1.  To  bow  down,  do  obeisance,  iJp  segad. 

Dan.  2.  46  worshipped  Baniel,  and  commanded  that 
3.  5  ye  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden  im. 
3.  6  whoso  falleth  uot  down  and  worshippeth 
3.  7  fell  down  (and)worshippedthegoldenim. 
3.  10  shall  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden 
3.  11  whoso  falleth  not  down  and  worshippeth 
3.  12  nor  worship  the  golden  image  which  thou 

3. 14  nor  worship  the  golden  image  which  I  ha. 

3. 15  worship  the  image,  .but  if  ye  worship  not 

3. 18  worship  the  golden  image  which  thou  h. 
3.  28  nor  worship  any  god,  except  their  own  G. 

2.  To  make  an  idol,  asj/  atsab,  5. 

Jer.  44.  19  did  we  make  her  cakes  to  worship  her,  and 

3.  To  do,  serve,  "13"  abad. 

2  EX10.  19  that  he  might  destroy  the  worshippers  of 

10.  21  all  the  worshippers  of  Baal  came,  so  that 
10.  22  Bring  forth  vestments  for  all  the  worship, 
10.  23  said  unto  the  worshippers  of  Baal,  Search 

10.  23  servants  of  the  LORD,  but  the  worshippers 

4.  To  bow  self  down,  nny  shachah,  7. 

Gen. 22.   5  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship 

24.  26,  48  bowed  down,  .and  worshipped  the  L. 
24.  52  heard  their  words,  he  worshipped  the  L. 

Exod.  4.  31  then  they  bowed  their  heads  and  worshi. 
12.  27  And  the  people  bowed  the  head  and  wor. 
24.    1  Come  up  uuto  the  LORD,  .and  worship  ye 

32.  8  have  worshipped  it,  and  have  sacrificed 

33.  10  all  the  people  rose  up,  and  worshipped 

34.  8  bowed  his  head  toward  the  earth,  andw. 
34,  14  For  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  god,  for 

Deut.  4.  iq  shouldest  be  driven  to  worship  them,  and 

8. 19  serve  them,  and  worship  them,  I  testify 

11.  16  turn  aside,  and  serve  other  gods,  and  wo. 

17.  3  hath  gone  and  served  other  gods,  and  w. 
26. 19  set  it  before  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  wor. 


WORSHIPPEB 


1075 


WOULD 


Deut  29.  26  served  other  gods,  and  worshipped  them 
30.  17  shalt  be  drawn  away,  and  worship  other 
Josh.  5.  14  did  worship,  and  said  unto  him,  What 
Judg.  7.  15  worshipped,  and  returned  into  the  host 

1  Sa.    1.   3  to  worsldp  and  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Loitb 

1. 19  -worshipped  before  the  Lord,  and  return. 

1. 28  And  he  worshipped  the  Lord  there 
15-  25>  3°  turn  again  with  iue,  that  I  may  worsh. 
15.  31  turned  again  after  Saul ;  and  Saul  worsh. 

2  Sa.12.  20  came  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  w. 

15.  32  top  (of  the  mount),  where  he  worshipped 

1  Ki.  9.    6  but  go  and  serve  other  gods  and  worship 

9.  9  worshipped  them,  and  served  them ;  there. 
11.  33  have  worshipped  Ashtoreth  the  goddess 

16.  31  and  went  and  served  Baal,  and  worship. 
22.  53  For  he  served  Baal,  and  worshipped  him 

2  Ki.  5.  18  goeth  into  the  house  of  Simmon  to  wot. 

17.  16  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 

17.  36  him  shall  ye  worship,  and  to  him  shall  ye 

18.  22  Ye  shall  worship  before  this  altar  in  Jer. 

19.  37  as  he  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of 
21.    3  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 

21.  21  served  the  idols,  .and  worshipped  them 
t  CI1.16.  29  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holin. 

29.  20  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  worshipped 
2  Ch.  7.    3  worshipped,  and  praised  the  Lord,  (say.) 

7. 19  shall  go  and  serve  other  gods,  and  wors. 

7.  22  worshipped  them,  and  served  them  :  the. 
20. 18  fell  before  the  Lord,  worshipping  the  L. 
29. 28  all  the  congregation  worshipped,  and  the 
29.  29  king  and  all  that  were  present,  .worship. 
2g.  30  and  they  bowed  their  heads  and  worship. 

32.  12  Ye  shall  worship  before  one  altar,  and 

33.  3  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 
Nell.  8.    6  worshipped  the  Lord  with  (their)  faces 

9.    3  fourth  part  they  confessed,  and  worship. 

9.  6  and  the  host  of  heaven  worshippeththee 
Job  1.  20  and  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  and  wor. 
Psa.    5.    7  in  thy  fear  will  I  worship  toward  thy  holy 

22.  27  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  wor. 
22.  29  fat  upon  earth  shall  eat  and  worship,  all 
29.   2  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holin. 

45.  n  for  he  (is)  thy  Lord  ;  and  worship  thou 
65.    4  All  the  earth  shall  worship  thee,  and  sh. 
81.   9  neither  shalt  thou  worship  any  strange 
86.    9  All  nations . .  shall  come  and  worship  be. 

95.  6  0  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down,  let 

96.  9  O  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  hoi. 

97.  7  boast  themselves  of  idols :  worship  him 
99.   5  Exalt  ye  the  LORD  our  God,  aud  worship 
99.   9  Exalt  the  LORD  our  God,  and  worship  at 

106.  19  They  made  a  calf  in  Horeb,  and  worship. 

132.    7  will  go  into  his  tabernacles ;  we  will  wo. 

138.   2  I  will  worship  toward  thy  holy  temple 

Isa.     2.    G  they  worship  the  work  of  their  own  ban, 

2.  20  which  they  made,  .for  himself  to  worship 

27. 13  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at 

36.  7  said  to  Judah.  .Ye  shall  worship  before 

37.  38  as  he  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of  N. 
44.  15  yea,  he  maketh  a  god,  and  worshippeth 
44. 17  he  falleth  down  unto  it,  and  worshippeth 

46.  6  it  a  god :  they  fall  down,  yea,  they  wors. 
49.  7  princes  also  shall  worship,  because  of  the 
66. 23  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before  me 

Jer.     1. 16  and  worshipped  the  works  of  their  own 

7.  2  euter  in  at  these  gates  to  worship  the  L. 

8.  2  whom  they  have  worshipped:  they  shall 

13.  10  to  serve  them,  and  to  worship  them,  sha. 
16.  11  have  worshipped  them,  and  have  forsak. 
22.    9  and  worshipped  other  gods,  and  served 

25.  6  to  worship  them,  and  provoke  me  not  to 

26.  2  which  come  to  worship  in  the  Lord's  ho. 
Eze.     8. 16  and  they  worshipped  the  sun  toward  the 

46.   2  he  shall  worship  at  the  thz'eshhold  of  the 

46.    3  Likewise  the  people  of  the  land  shall  wo. 

46.   9  he  that  entereth  in.  .to  worship  shall  go 

Mic.    5.  13  shalt  no  more  worship  the  work  of  thine 

Zeph.  1.    5  them  that  worship . .  and  them  that  wors. 

2.  11  shall  worship  him,  every  one  from  his  pi. 

Zech.14.  16  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship  the 

14. 17  whoso  will  not  come . .  to  worship  the  king 

5.  Glory,  esteem,  8o£a  doxa. 

Lukei4. 10  shalt  thou  have  worship  in  the  rjresence 

6, To  be  reverential,  pious,  euffefle'&i  eusebeo. 

Acts  17.  23  Whom  therefore  ye  ignorantly  worship 
7.  To  serve,  cure,  heal,  Bepaircvu  therapeuo. 

Acts  17. 25  Neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands 
8. Religious  observance,  dpr/aiceiathreskeia. 

Col.    2. 18  in  a  voluntary  humility  and  worshipping 

9.  To  worship  publicly,  Xarpevo)  latreuo. 

Acts    7.  42  Then  God  turned,  and  gave  them  up  to  w. 

24. 14  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  beli. 
Phil.  3.  3  which  worship  God  in  the  spirit,  and  re. 
Heb.  10.  2  because  that  the  worshippers  once  purg. 

10.  A  temple  sweeper,  veeonopos  neokoros. 

Acts  19.  35  city  of  the  Ephesians  is  a  worshipper  of 

11.  To  kiss  (the  hand)  toward,  irpoaKvvlw  proskun. 
Matt.  2.    2  star  in  the  east,  and  are  come  to  worship 

2.  8  me  word  again,  that  I  may  come  and  wo. 
2.  11  fell  down  and  worshipped  him  :  and  wh. 
4.  9  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  wor. 
4. 10  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

8.  2  there  came  a  leper  and  worshipped  him 

9.  18  there  came  a  certain  ruler,  and  worship. 

14.  33  worshipped  him,  saying.  Of  a  truth  thou 

15.  25  Then  came  she  and  worshipped  him,  say. 
18.  26  worshipped  him,  saying,  Lord,  have  pati. 

20.  20  worshipping  (hirn),  and  desiring  a  certain 


JVIatt2S.   9  came  and  held  him  by  the  feet,  and  wors. 

28. 17  when  they  saw  him,  they  worshipped  him 

Mark  5.    6  saw  Jesus  afar  off,  he  ran  and  worshipped 

15.  19  and  bowing  (their)  knees  worshipped  him 

Luke  4.    7  If  thou  therefore  wilt  worship  me,  all  sh. 

4.    8  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 

24.  52  [worshipped  him,  and  returned  to  Jems.] 

John  4.  20  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mountain 

4.  20  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to  worship 

4. 21  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father 

4. 22  Ye  worship . .  we  know  what  we  worship 
4.  23  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in 
4.  23  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship 

4.  24  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  (him) 
9.  38  said,  Lord,  I  believe.  And  he  worshipped 

12.  20  Greeks,  .that  came  up  to  worship  at  the 
Acts    7.  43  figures  which  ye  made  to  worship  them 

5.  27  and  had  come  to  Jerusalem  for  to  worsh. 
10.25  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  worshipped  (h.) 
24.  11  since  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  for  to  wor. 

1  Co.  14.  25  falling  down  on  (his)  face  he  will  worship 
Heb.    1.    6  And  let  all  the  augelsof  God  worship  him 

11.  21  worshipped,  (leaning)  upon  the  top  of  his 
Rev.  3.  -9  will  make  them  to  come  and  worship  be. 
4. 10  worship  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever 
5.  14  fell  down  and  worshipped  Mm  that  liveth 
7.  11  fell  before  the  throne,  .and  worshipped 
9.  20  that  they  should  not  worship  devils,  and 

11.    1  and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship  th. 

11.  16  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  worshipped  God 

13.  4  worshipped  the  dragon  which  gave  power 
13.    4  and  they  worshipped  the  beast;  saying 
13.    8  all  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worsh. 
13. 12  causeth.  .to  worship  the  first  beast,  whose 

13.  15  cause  that  as  many  as  would  not  worship 

14.  7  worship  him  that  made  heaven,  and  earth 
14.    9  If  any  man  worship  the  beast  and  the  im. 

14.  11  they  have  no  rest.,  who  worship  the  beast 

15.  4  for  all  nations  shall  come  and  worship  be. 

16.  2  and  (upon)  them  which  worshipped  his 
19.    4  fell  down  and  worshipped  God  that  sat  on 
19.  10  I  fell  at  his  feet  to  worship  him.  And  he 
19.  10  worsliip  God  :  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus 

19.  20  deceived,  .them  that  worshipped  his  im. 

20.  4  which  had  not  worshipped  the  beast,  ne. 
22.  8  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  the 
22.   9  keep  the  sayings  of  this  book :  worship  G. 

12.  A  worshipper,  Trpoa'KvpTj'rfjs  proskwnetes. 

John  4.  23  now  is,  when  the  true  worshippers  shall 

13.  To  venerate,  reckon  venerable,  creBd^o/xat  sebazo. 
Rom.  1.  25  worshipped  and  served  the  creature  more 

14.  To  venerate,  ae^oixai  sebomai. 

Matt  15.    9  But  in  vain  they  do  worship  me,  teaching 

Mark  7.    7  Howbeit  in  vain  do  they  worship  me,  te. 

Acts  16.  14  a  certain  woman,  .which  worshipped  God 

iS.    7  that  worshipped  God,  whose  house  joined 

18.  13  persuadeth  men  to  worship  God  contrary 

19.  27  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth 

lo.An  object  of  veneration,  o-e&ao-pa  sebasma. 

2  Tli.   2.   4  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worship. 
WORSHIPPER  of  God  — 

One  who  venerates  God,  deoaefi-tis  theosebes. 

John  9.  31  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  and 
WORTH,  (as  is)  — 
l.As,  like,  in?  kemo. 

2  Sa.  18.    3  but  now  (thou  art)  worth  ten  thousand 

2.  Price,  hire,  T05  mechir. 

1  Ki.  21.    2  I  will  give  thee  the  worth  of  it  in  money 
3. Number,  amount,  frtpp  miksah. 

Lev.  27.  23  priest  shall  reckon  unto  liim  the  worth  of 
i.Full,  N.Sp  male. 

Gen.  23.   9  for  as  much  money  as  it  is  worth  he  shall 
5.  Hire,  wage,  price,  reward,  fare,  "?p&  sakar. 

Deut  15.  18  for  he  hath  been  worth  a  double  hired 
WORTHY,  worthily,  worthies  — 
1. Honourable,  "V^N  addir. 

Nah.   2.    5  He  shall  recount  his  worthies :  they  shall 
2.-4  man,  ir'N  ish. 

1  EI.  2.  26  for  thou  (art)  worthy  of  death :  hut  I  will 
3. (Of)  faces,  E'SN  appayim. 

1  Sa.    1.    5  But  unto  Hannah  he  gave  a  worthy  port, 
4.^1  son  of,  "i?  ben. 

Deut  25*.    2  if  the  wicked  man  (be)  worthy  to  he.beat. 

1  Sa.  26.  16  ye  (are)  worthy  to  die,  because  ye  have 

5.{With)  strength  or  might,  ?;n  chayil. 

Ruth    4. 11  do  thou  worthily  in  Ephratah,  and  be 
6.^1  son  of  strength  (of  body  or  mind),  7VT]%  ben  ch. 

1  Ki.   1.  52  If  ne  will  show  himself  a  worthy  man,  th. 

7.  Judgment,  bsb*P  mishpat. 

Deut  19.    6  whereas  he  (was)  not  worthy  of  death,  in. 

2i.  22  if  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of 
Jer.  26.  11  This  man  (is)  worthy  to  die;  for  he  hath 

26. 16  This  man  (is)  not  worthy  to  die :  for  he 

8.  Worthy,  deserving,  merited,  &£ios  axios. 
jUattio.  10  for  the  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat 

10.  11  enquire  who  in  it  is  worthy;  and  there 
10.  13  if  :the  house  be  worthy,  .if  it  be  not  worthy 
10.  37  is  uot  worthy  of  me .  .is  not  worthy  of  me 
10.  38  taketh  not  his  cross,  .is  not  worthy  of  me 
22.  8  but  they  which  were  bidden  were  not  w. 
Luke  3.  8  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  worthy  of  re. 
7.   4  That  he  was  worthy  for  whom  he  should 


Luke  10.  7  for  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  Go 
12.  48  knew  not,  and  did  commit  things  worthy 
15.  19  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son 

15.  21  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
23.  15  lo,  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  unto 

John  1.  27  whose  shoe's  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to 
Acts.13.  25  whose  shoes  of  (his)  feet  I  am  not  worthy 
23.  29  nothing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy  of  death 
25.  11  or  have  committed  anything  worthy  of 

25.  25  found  that  he  had  commited  nothing  wor. 

26.  31  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds 
Rom.  1.  32  which  commit  such  things  are  worthy  of 

8.  18  sufferings  of  this  present  time  (are)notw. 
1  Ti.    1.  15  Tins  (is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

4.  q  This  (is)  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

5.  iS  And,  The  labourer  (is)  worthy  of  his  rewa. 

6.  1  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  ho. 
Heb.  11.  38  Of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy :  they 
Rev.    3.    4  walk  with  me  in  white :  for  they  are  wor. 

4. 11  Thou  art  worthy,  OLord,  to  receive  glory 
5.   2  Who  is  worthy  to  open  the  book,  and  to 
5.    4  because  no  man  was  found  worthy  to  open 
5.   9  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  to 
5.  12  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  red. 

16.  6  given  them  blood  to  drink  ;  for  they  are  w. 

9.  Worthily,  a|i'ws  axios. 

Eph.   4.    1  beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  v. 
Col.     1.  10  That  ye  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord 

1  Th.  2.  12  That  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 

10. Sufficient,  Ikclvos  hikanos. 

Matt.  3. 11  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear:  he 
8.    3  1  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  come 
Mark  1.    7  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy 
Luke  3.  16  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy 

7.  6  for  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest 

11. Beautifd,  good,  excellent,  tca\6s  kalos. 

Jas.     2.    7  Do  not  they  blaspheme  that  worthy  name 
WORTHY,  to  be  (not,  count,  think)  — 

1.  Little,  small,  young,  jittj?  qaton. 

Gen.  32. 10  I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all  the 
2.To  reckon  worthy,  a^iuw  axioo. 

Luke  7.    7  Wherefore  neither  thought  I  myself  wor. 

2  Th.  1.  11  that  our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of 

1  Ti.   5.  17  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted  w. 
Heb.   3.    3  For  this  (man)  was  counted  worthy  of  mo. 

10.  29  shall  he  be  thought  worthy,  whu  hath  tr. 

3.7b  be  reckoned  very  worthy,  Kara^ioo/j.at  kataxio. 
Lnke2o.  35  But  they  which  shall  be  accounted  worthy 

21.  36  that  [ye  may  be  accounted  worthy]  to  esc. 
Acts    5.  41  rejoicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy 

2  Th.  1.    5  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  ki. 
WORTHY  deeds,  very  — 

A  very  right  or  straightforward  action,  KarupQw/xa. 
Acts  24.   2  very  worthy  deeds  are  done  unto  this  na. 

WOT,  to  — 

l.To  know,  be  acquainted  with,  jn;  yada. 

Gen.  21.  26  I  wot  not  who  hath  done  this  thing;  neit. 
39.  8  my  master  wotteth  not  what  (is)  with  me 
44.  15  wot  ye  not  that  such  a  man  as  I  can  cert. 
Exod.32.  1,  23  we  wot  not  what  is  become  of  him 
Num.22.  6  for  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou  blessest  (is) 
Josh.  2.   5  whither  the  men  went  I  wot  not:  pursue 

2.  To  see,  know,  be  acquainted  with,  oTSa  oida. 

Acts    3.  17  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  (it) 

7.  40  we  wot  not  what  is  become  of  him 
Rom.  11.   2  Wot  ye  not  what  the  scripture  saith  of  E.? 

3.  To  make  known,  yycopi(o>  gnorizo. 

Phil.    1.  22  my  labour:  yet  what  I  shall  choose  I  wot 
WOULD  (to  God,  have  it)  — 
1.0  that,  *7nx,  -huH  achate,  achalai. 

2  Ki.   5.    3  Would  God  my  lord  (were)  with  the  pro. 
2.  Willing,  desiring,  delighting,  f'?n  chaphets. 

1  Sa.  2. 25  their  father,  because  the  Lord  would  slay 
3.To  desire,  h^\  yaal,  5. 

Josh. 17.  12  but  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that 
Judg.  1 .  27  but  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that  la. 
1.  35  But  the  Amorites  would  dwell  in  mount 

4.  To  will,  wish,  N3y  tseba. 

Dan.   5.  19,  19,  19,  19  and  whom  he  would  he 

7. 19  Then  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the  fourth 

5.  There  is,  there  are,  tr:  yesh. 

2  Ki.  4. 13  wouldest  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  king 
6.0  that,  if,  6  lu. 

Gen.  30.  34  I  would  it  might  be  according  to  thy  word 
Numi4-    2  Would  God  that  we  had  died.,  or  would  G. 
20.    3  Would  God  that  we  had  died  when  our 

22.  29  I  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 
Josh.  7.   7  would  to  God  we  had  been  content,  and 

7.  Our  soul  or  desire,  3JB?D3  naphshenu. 

Psa.  35.  25  Ah!  so  would  we  have  it:  letthemnotsay 

S.  THio  doth  (or  will)  give  ?  |ffi  \?  nii  yitten. 

Exodi6.    3  Would  to  God  we  had  died  by  the  hand  of 
Numn.  29  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  w. 
Deut28.  67  Would  God  it  were  even.  .Would  God  it 
Judg.  9.  29  would  to  God  this  people  were  under  my 
2  Sa.  18.  33  would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom 

9.  To  become,  come  to  pass,  ylvo/iat  gvnomai. 

Acts  20.  16  because  he  would  not  spend  the  time  in 

\Q.To  will,  wish,  0eAw  tlielo. 

Matt.  2.  18  would  not  be  comforted,  because  they  are 
5.  42  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  thee  turn 


WOUND 


1076 


"WRATH 


Matt.  7.  12  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do 

12.  38  saying,  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from 

14.  5  when  he  would  have  put  him  to  death,  he 
18.  23  king,  which  would  take  account  of  his  se. 
iS.  30  he  would  not ;  hut  went  and  cast  him  into 

22.  3  bidden  to  the  wedding :  and  they  would 

23.  37  how  often  would  I  have  gathered,  .ye  w. 
27.  15  unto  the  people  a  prisoner,  whom  they  w. 
27.  34  when  he  had  tasted  (thereof),  he  would 

Mark  3.  13  calleth  (unto  him)  whom  he  would :  and 

6.  19  [would  have]  killed  him ;  but  she  could 

6.  26  for  their  sakes  which  sat  with  him,  he  w. 

6.  48  walking  upon  the  sea,  and  would  have  pa. 

7. 24  would  have  no  man  know  (it) :  but  he  co. 

9.  30  and  he  would  not  that  any  man  should  k. 

10.  35  would  that  thou  shouldest  do  for  us  wha. 

10.  36  said  unto  them,  What  would  ye  that  I  sh. 

Luke  1.  62  made  signs  to  his  father,  how  he  would 

6.  31  as  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do 

13.  34  how  often  would  I.  .and  ye  would  not  ! 

15.  28  he  was  angry,  and  would  not  go  in ;  there. 

16.  26  so  that  they  which  would  pass  from  hence 
18.   4'would  not  for  a  while  :  but  afterward  he 

18.  13  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  (his)  eyes  un. 

19.  27  which  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over 
John  1.  43  The  day  following  Jesus  would  go  forth 

6. 11  likewise  of  the  fishes  as  much  as  they  wo. 

7.  1  for  he  would  not  walk  in  Jewry,  because 
7.  44  some  of  them  would  have  taken  him ;  but 
9.  27  wherefore  would  ye  hear  (it)  again?  will 

12.  21  desired  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see  .T. 
21.  18  walkedst  whither  thou  wouldest :  but  w. 
21.  18  and  carry  (thee)  whither  thou  wouldest 
Acts  7.  39  To  whom  our  fathers  would  not  obey,  but 
10.  10  he  became  very  hungry,  and  would  have 
14. 13  would  have  done  sacrifice  with  the  people 
16.  3  Him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth -with  him 
19.  33  would  have  made  his  defence  unto  the  pe. 

24.  6  whom  we  took,  aud  would  have  judged 

26.  5  if  they  would  testify,  that  after  the  most 
Rom.  1.  13  Now  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant,  bre. 

7. 15  for  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not ;  but  wh. 

7.  16  If  then  I  do  that  which  I  would  not,  I  co. 

7. 19  would  I  do  not :  but  the  evil  which  I  wo. 

7.  20  Now  if  I  do  that  I  would  not,  it  isno  more 

7.  21  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  w. 
11.25  For  I  would  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should 
16.  19  yet  I  would  have  you  wise  unto  that  win. 

1  Co.  7.   7  For  I  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I 

7.  32  But  I  would  have  you  without  carefulness 
10.    1  I  would  not  that  ye  should  be  ignorant 
10.  20  would  not  that  ye  should  have  fellowship 
it.    3  But  I  would  have  you  know,  that  the  he. 
12.    1  concerning  spiritual  (gifts),  brethren,  I  w. 

14.  5  I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues 

2  Co.  1.   8  For  we  would  not,  brethren,  have  you  ig. 

5.    4  not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed,  but 

12.  20  when  I  come,  I  shall  not  find  you . .  as  I  w. 

12.  20  shall  befound  unto  you  such  as  ye  would 

Gal.     1.    7  some  that  trouble  you,  and  would  pervert 

3.  2  This  only  would  I  learn  of  you,  Received 

4.  17  theywouldexcludeyou,  that  ye  might  aff. 

5.  17  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  wou. 
Col.      1. 27  To  whom  God  would  make  known  what 

2.    1  For  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  co. 
i  Th.  2. 18  Wherefore  we  would  have  come  unto  you 
4.  13  But  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant 
2  Th.  3.  10  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he 
Fhm.      14  But  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing 
Heb.  10.    5  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not 
10.    8  thou  wouldest  not,  neither  hadst,  12.  17 
11. According  to,  Kara,  (ace.)  kata,  Acts  iS.  14. 
l'2.To  wish,  desire,  solicit,  euxofiai  euchomai. 

Acts  26.  29  I  would  to  God,  that  not  only  thou,  hut 
1 3 .  To  be  about  to,  ficKhu  niello. 

Lukeio.    1  every  city  and  place  whither  he  himself 
John  6.    6  him:  for  he  himself  knew  what  he  would 

6.  15  Jesus  therefore  perceived  that  they  would 
Acts  12.   6  when  Herod  would  have  brought  him  forth 

16.  27  would  have  killed  himself,  supposing  that 
23.  15  as  though  ye  would  enquire  something 
23.  20  as  though  they  would  enquire  somewhat 

25.  4  and  that  he  himself  would  depart  shortly 

27.  30  under  colour  as  though  they  woidd  have 
14./  wish,  would,  o<ps\ov  ophelon. 

1  Co.  4.    8  I  would  to  God  ye  did  reign,  that  we  also 

2  Co.  11.  1  Would  to  God  ye  could  bear  with  me  a  lit. 
Gal.  5. 12  I  would  they  were  even  cut  off  which  tro. 
Rev.    3.  15  neither  cold  nor  hot;  I  would  thou  wert 

WOUND,  wounding  — 

\. Bruise,  bandage,  scar,  rnisn  ckabburah. 

Psa.  38.   s  My  wounds  stink  (aud)  are  corrupt  beca. 
%An  arrow,  handle,  j'rr  diets. 

Job    34.   6  my  wound  (is)  incurable  without  feransgr. 
3.7*0  wound  self,  cnS  laham,  7. 

I'rov.iS.   8  Tho  words  of  a  talebearer  (are)  as  wounds 

26.  22  The  words  of  a  talebearer  (are)  as  wounds 
1  -I  wound,  binding,  iitp  mazor. 

II"";'    5-  13  Judah..  his  wound.,  cure  you'of  your  wou. 
I  >baa.       7  have  laid  a  wound  under  thee:  (there  is) 
5.  1  waiting,  stroke,  blow,  n$5  makkah. 

1  K1.32.  35  the  blood  ran  out  of  the  wound  into  the 

2  M.  8.  29  went  back  to  be  healed. .of  the  wounds 

9.  15  to  be  healed  in  Jezreel  of  the  wounds  wh. 
a  *  li  aa.  6  because  of  the  wounds  which  were  given 
wa.  30.  26  people,  and  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  w. 
Jcr.    6.   7  before  me  continually  (is)  grief  and  wou. 


Jer.  10. 19  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt!  my  wound  is  gir. 
15.  18  Why  is  my  pain  perpetual,  and  my  wound 
30.  12  bruise  (is)  incurable,  (and)  thy  wound  (is) 
30.  14  for  I  have  wounded  thee  with  the  wound 
30.  17  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the 

Mic.    1.   9  For  her  wound  (is)  incurable;  foritiscome 

Nah.  3.  19  healing  of  thy  bruise;  thy  wound  isgriev. 

Zech.13.   6  What  (are)  these  wounds  in  thine  hands 

6.  A  stroke,  plague,  v^  nega. 

Prov.  6.,33  A  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he  get,  and 

7.  A  grievous  thing,  labour,  rnifj>  atstseheth. 

Psa.  147. 3  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up  their  wo. 

Z.A  wound,  wounding,  yxBpetsa. 

Gen.   4.  23  for  I  have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding 
Exod2i.  25  Burning  for  burning,  wound  for  wound 
Job     9.  17  and  multiplieth  my  wounds  without  cau. 
Prov.20.  30  The  blueness  of  a  wound  cleanseth  away 
23.  29  who  hath  wounds  without  cause?  who  ha. 

27.  6  Faithful  (are)  the  wounds  of  a  friend:  but 
Isa.     1.    6  wounds,  and  bruises,  aud  putrifying sores 

9. A  stroke,  stripe,  wound,  wKiryf]  plege. 

Rev.  13.    3  his  deadly  wound  was  healed:  and  all  the 
13.  12  the  first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  was 
13.  14  which  had  the  wound  by  a  sword,  and  did 
10.  A  wound,  Tpavfxa  trauma. 

Lukeio.  34  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in  oil  and 

WOUND,  he  (deadly)  wounded,  to  — 
l.To  cutoff,  yss  batsa. 

Joel    2.   8  fall  upon  the  sword,  they  shall  not  be  wo. 

2.  A  bruising,  H3i  dakkah. 

Deut.23.    1  He  that  is  wounded  in  the  stones,  or  hath 

3.  To  be  pierced  through,  "ip^  daqar,  4. 

Jer.  37.  10  there  remained  (but)  wounded  men  among 

4.  To  be  pained,  b"n,  Sm  chid,  chil,  1,  5. 

1  Sa.  31.    3  hit  him;  and  he  was  sore  -wounded  of  the 
1  Ch.io.    3  hit  him,  and  he  was  wounded  of  the  arc. 

5.  To  pierce,  T?J)  chalal. 

Psa.  109.  22  poor  aud  needy,  and  my  heart  is  wounded 

6.  To  pierce,  SVn  chalal,  Sa. 

Isa.  51.    9  (Art)  thou  not  it  that  hath . .  wounded  the 

7.  To  bepierced,  *?hn  chalal,  4. 

Isa.   53.   5  Buthe  (was)wounded  for  our  transgress. 

8.  Pierced,  7713  chalal. 

Judg.  9.  40  many  were  overthrown  (aud)  wounded 
t  Sa.  17.  52  wounded  of  the  Philistines  fell  down  by 
Job    24.  12  soul  of  the  wounded  crieth  out:  yet  God 
Psa.  69.  26  to  the  grief  of  those  whom  thou  hast  wo. 
Prov.  7.  26  For  she  hath  cast  down  many  wounded 
Jer.   51.  52  through  all  her  land  the  wounded  shall 
Lara.  2.  12  when  they  swooned  as  the  wounded  in 
Eze.  26.  15  when  the  wounded  cry,  when  the  slaug. 

28.  23  wounded  shall  be  judged  in  the  midst  of 
30.  24  with  the  groanings  of  a  deadly  wounded 

9.  To  be  or  become  sick  or  pierced,  rhn  chalah,  6. 

1  Ki.22.  34  carry  me  out  of  the  host:  for  I  am  woun. 

2  Ch.18.  33  carry  me  out  of  the  host;  for  I  am  woun. 

35.  23  said.  .Have  me  away:  for  I  am  sore  wou. 

10.  To  smite,  dash,  }'n£  machats. 

Deut  32. 39 1  kill,  and  I  make  alive;  I  wound,  and  I 
2  Sa.  22.  39 1  have  consumed  them,  and  wounded  th. 
Job  5.  18  maketh  sore,  and  bindeth  up;  he  wound. 
Psa.  18.  38  I  have  wounded  them,  that  they  were  not 
68.  21  But  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  his  ene. 
no.  6  he  shall  wound  the  heads  over  manycou. 
Hab.   3. 13  Thou  woundedst  the  head  out  of  the  ho. 

11.  Smitten,  N3J  nake. 

Prov.  18. 14  infirmity:  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can 

12.  To  smite,  strike  forth,  nil  nakah,  5. 

2  Ki.  S.  28  Ramoth-giIead;andthe  Syrians  wounded 
Jer.  30. 14  for  I  have  wounded  thee  with  the  wound 

13.  To  be  smitten,  ns  nakah,  6. 

Zech.13.  6  with  which  I  was  wounded  (in)  the  house 
14..1  smiting,  blow,  stroke,  nio  makkah. 

Psa.  64.  7  an  arrow;  suddenly  shall  they  be  wounded 
15.7*0  wound,    i's?  patsa. 

Deut  23.    1  He  that  is  wounded  in  the  stones,  or  hath 

1  Ki.  20.  37  man  smote  him,  so  that  in  smiting  he  wo. 

Song  5^  7  they  sraote  me,  they  wounded  me;  the  k. 
16.ro  put  stripes  on,  iirtridrjfxi  TrXrjyds  epitithemi. 

Lukeio.  30  wounded  (him),  and  departed,  leaving 

17.  To  kill,  slay,  o-^ctTTw  sphatto. 

Rev.  13.   3  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  asit  were  wounded 

18.  To  wound,  lacerate,  rpav/xari^u  traumatizo. 
Luke  20.  12  and  they  wounded  him  also,  and  cast  (h.) 
Acts  19.  16  they  fled  out  of  that  house  naked  and  w. 

19.70  strike,  smite,  Tvirrco  tup  to. 

1  Co.  8.  12  wound  their  weak  conscience,  ye  sin  aga. 
WOVEN  — 

Woven,  i)(pavr6s  huphantos. 

Johuig.  23  now  the  coat  was  without  seam,  woven 

WRAP  (in  self,  together,  up)  to  — 
l.To  tcrap  together,  c^a  galam. 

2  Ki.  2.  8  Elijah  took  his  mantle,  and  wrapped  (it) 
2.  To  wrap  up,  taiS  lut,  5. 

1  Ki.  19.  13  that  he  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle 


3.  To  gather,  heap  up,  djs  kanas,  7. 

Isa.  28.  20  narrower  than  that  he  can  wrap  himself 
i.To  wrap  top,  hide,  confirm,  nja,  abath,  3. 

Mic.  7.  3  his  mischievous  desire;  so  they  wrap  it  up 
5. To  cover  or  wrap  self  up,  *]?j/  alaph,  7. 

Gen.  38.  14  covered  her  with  a  veil,  and  wrapped  he. 
6.  To  roll  up  in,  eVeiAew  eneileo. 

Marki5.  46  took  him  down,  and  wrapped  him  in  the 

7. To  roll  or  wrap  up  or  in,  4vrv\irrto  entulitio. 
Matt. 27.  59  taken  the  body,  he  wrapped  it  in  a  clean 
Luke  23.  53  he  took  it  down,  and  wrapped  it  in  linen 
John  20.    7  but  wrapped  together  in  a  place  by  itself 

WRAPPED  (about,  together,  up),  to  be  — 

l.To  bind,  bind  up,  gird,  e^n  chabash. 

Jon.     2.    5  about,  the  weeds  were  wrapped  about  my 

l.To  wrap  up,  W?  lut. 

1  Sa.  21.    9  it  (is  here)  wrapped  in  a  cloth  behind  the 

3.  Covered,  oyo  maot. 

Eze.  21.  15  made  bright,  (it  is)  wrapped  up  for  the  si. 

4.  To  be  folded,  wrapped  together,  spD  sabak,  4. 

Job     8.  17  His  roots  are  wrapped  about  the  heap 

5.  To  be  wrapped  together,  Tty  sarag,  4. 

Job  40.  17  the  sinews  of  his  stones  are  wrapped  tog. 

WRATH,  (fierce),  wrathful  — 

l.Face,  anger,  temper,  *]i<  aph. 

Gen.  39. 19  came  to  pass,  .that  his  wrath  was  kindled 
Exod22.  24  my  wrath  shall  wax  hot,  and  I  will  kill 

32. 10  let  me  alone,  that  ray  wrath  may  wax  hot 
32.  11  why  doth  thy  wrath  wax  hot  against  thy 
32.  12  Turn  from  thy  fierce  wrath,  and  repent 

Nunin.  33  wrath  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  the 
Deut  11. 17  Lord's  wrath  be  kindled  against  you,  and 

1  Sa.  28.  18  nor  executedst  his  fierce  wrath  upon  Am. 

2  Ki.  23.  26  uot  from  the  fierceness  of  his  great  wrath 
2  Ch.12.  12  wrath  of  the  Lord  turned  from  him,  that 

28.  11  for  the  fierce  wrath  of  the  Lord  (is)  upon 

28.  13  tresspass  is  great,  and  (there  is)  fierce  w. 

29.  10  that  his  fierce  wrath  may  turn  away  from 

30.  8  that  the  fierceness  of  his  wratn  may  turn 
Ezra    S.  22  his  wrath  (is)  against  all  them  that  forsa. 

10. 14  until  the  fierce  wrath  of  our  God  for  this 

Job  14. 13  wouldest  keep  me  secret,  until  thy  wrath 

16.   9  He  teareth  (me)  in  his  wrath,  who  hateth 

19.  11  He  hath  also  kindled  his  wrath  against 

20.  23  shall  cast  the  fury  of  his  wrath  upon  him 

20.  28  goods)  shall  flow  away  in  the  day  of  hisw. 
32.  2  Then  was  kindled  the  wrath  of  Elihu  the 
32.  2  against  Job  was  his  wrath  kindled,  beca. 
32.  3  Also  against  his  three  friends  wras  his  w. 
32.  5  no  answer,  .then  his  wrath  was  kindled 
36.  13  But  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heap  up  wra. 

40. 11  Cast  abroad  the  rage  of  thy  wrath  :  and 
42.    7  My  wrath  is  kindled  against  thee,  and 

Psa.    2.   5  Then  shall  he  speak  unto  them  in  his  wr. 

2.  12  when  Ins  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.  Bl. 

21.  9  the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in  his  w. 
55.    3  cast  iniquity  upon  me,  and  in  wrath  they 
78.  31  The  wrath  of  God  came  upon  them,  and 
95.  11  Unto  whom  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  that  th. 

io6.  40  Therefore  was  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  kin. 
no.  5  strike  through  kings  in  the  day  of  hisw. 
124.  3  when  their  wrath  was  kindled  against  us 
138.  7  stretch  forth  thine  hand  against  the  wra. 
Prov  14.  29  (He  that  is)  slow  to  wrath  (is)  of  great  un. 

24. 1 3  displease  him,  and  he  turn  away  his  wra. 

29.  8  a  snare :  but  wise  (men)  turn  away  wrath 

30.  33  so  the  forcing  of  wrath  briugeth  forth  st. 

%Wrath,  rage,  raging,  *jy]  zaaph. 

Prov  19.  12  The  king's  wrath  (is)  as  the  roaring  of  a 

3.  Heat,  fury,  nori  chemah. 

Nuni25.  ij  hath  turned  my  wrath  away  from  th e  ch. 
Deut  29.  23  overthrew  in  his  anger,  aud  in  his  wrath 
29.  28  Lord  rooted  them  out.  .In  wrath,  and  in 
2  Sa.  n.  20  if  so  be  that  the  king's  wrath  arise,  and 
2  Ki.  22. 13  for  great  (is)  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that 

22. 17  therefore  my  wrath  shall  be  kindled  aga. 
2  Ch.12.    7  ray  wrath  shall  not  be  poured  out  upon 

34.  21  for  great  (is)  the  wrath  of  the  LORD  that 
34.  25  therefore  my  wrath  shall  be  poured  out 
36. 16  until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose  against 
Estli.  2.    1  when  the  wrath  of  king  Ahasuerus  was 

3.  5  reverence,  then  was  Hainan  full  of  wrath 
7.  7  arising  from  the  banquet  of  wine  in  his  w. 
7.  10  Mordecai.  Then  was  the  king's  wrath  pa. 

Job   19.  29  wrath  (bringeth)  the  punishments  of  the 
21.  20  and  he  shall  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  A. 

36. 18  Because  (there  is)  wrath,  (beware)  lest  he 
Psa.  37.   8  Cease  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath 

59.  13  Consume  (them)in  wrath,  consume  (them) 
76.  10  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee 
76.  10  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain 

78.  38  auger  away,  and  did  not  stir  up  all  his  w. 

79.  6  Pour  out  thy  wrath  upon  the  heathen  th. 

88.  7  Thy  wrath  lieth  hard  upon  me,  and  thou 

89.  46  thou  hide  thyself  for  ever?  shall  thy  wr. 

90.  7  consumed  by  thine  anger,  and  by  thy  w. 
106.  23  to  turn  away  his  wrath ;  lest  he  should 

Prov  15.    1  A  soft  answer turneth  away  wrath  :  but; 

15. 18  A  wrathful  man  stirreth  up  strife :  hut 

16. 14  The  wrath  of  a  king  (is  as)  messengers  of 

19. 19  A  man  of  great  wrath  shall  suffer  punish. 
21. 14  and  a  reward  in  the  bosom  strong  wrath 
27.    4  Wrath  (is)  cruel,  and  anger  (is)  outrage. 

Jer.  18.  20  (and)  to  turn  away  thy  wrath  from  them 
Eze.  13.  15  Thus  will  I  accomplish  my  wrath  upou 


WRATH 


1077 


WRITE 


4.  Fierceness,  heat,  wrath,  jVnj  charon. 

Exodi5.    7  thou  sentest  forth  thy  wrath,  (which)  co. 

Neil.  13.  iS  ye  bring  more  wrath  upon  Israel  by  pro. 

Psa.  58.   9  with  a  whirlwind,  bothliving.  .in  (his)  w. 
69.  24  and  let  thy  wrathful  anger  take  hold  of 
88.  16  l'hy  fierce  wrath  goeth  over  me  ;  thy  ter. 

Eze.   7.  12,  14  wrath  (is)  upon  all  the  multitude  the. 

5.  A  nger,  provocation,  sadness,  cys  kaas. 

Deutj2.  27  Were  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the 

Provi2.  16  A  fool's  wrath  is  presently  known  :  but  a 

27.   3  but  a  fool's  wrath  (is)  heavier  than  them 

6.  Anger,  provocation,  sadness,  iyyi?  kaas. 

Job     5.   2  For  wrath  killeth  the  foolish  man,  and 

7.  Transgression,  wrath,  n")?".  ebrah. 

Gen.49.  7  Cursed  (be),  .their  wrath,  for  it  was  cruel 
Job  21.  30  they  shall  be  brought  forth  to  the  day  of  w. 
Psa.  78.  49  cast  upon  them  the  fierceness  of  his.  .wr. 

85.   3  Thou  hast  taken  away  all  thy  wrath :  thou 

90.  9  For  all  our  days  are  passedaway  inthy  w. 

90.  it  even  according  to  thy  fear,  (so  is)  thy  wr. 
Provn.   4  Riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath  :  but 

11.  23  (but)  the  expectation  of  the  wicked(is)  w. 

14.  35  his  wrath  is  (against)  him  that  causeth  sh. 

21.  24  scoruer  (is)  his  name  who  dealeth  in.  ,w. 
Isa.    9.  19  Through  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 

10.   6  against  the  people  of  my  wrath  will  I  give 

13.  9  cruel  both  with  wrath  and  fierce  anger 
13. 13  shall  remove  out  of  her  place,  in  the  wra. 

14.  6  He  who  smote  the  people  in  wrath  with 
16.   6  haughtiness,  and  his  pride,  and  his  wrath 

Jer.    7.  29  and  forsaken  the  generation  of  his  wrath 

48.  30  I  know  his  wrath,  saith  the  Lord  ;  but 
Lam.  2.    2  he  hath  thrown  down  in  his  wrath  the 

3.    1  hath  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  his  wra. 
Eze.    7. 19  deliver  them  in  the  day  of  the  wrath  of 

21.  31  blow  against  thee  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath 

22.  21  blow  upon  you  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath 
22.  31  consumed  them  with  the  fire  of  my  wrath 
38.  19  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath  have  I  spoken,  Su. 

JIos.  5. 10  I  will  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them  like 
13. 11 1  gave,  .and  took  (him)  away  in  my  wrath 
Amos  1.  11  hisanger  did  tear.,  and  lie  kept  his  wrath 
Hab.  3.  8  (was)  thy  wrath  against  the  sea,  that  thou 
Zeph.  1.  15  That  day  (is)  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of  tro. 
1. 18  deliver  them  in  the  day  of  the  LoED's  w. 

8.  To  be  wroth,  >]¥P  qetsaph. 

Ezra  7.  23  why  should  there  be  wrath  against  there. 

9.  Wrath,  *|Xj3  qetseph. 

Num.  1.  53  there  be  no  wrath  upon  the  congregation 
16.  46  there  is  wrath  gone  out  from  the  Lord 
18.   5  that  there  be  no  wrath  any  more  upon 

Josh.  9.  20  let  them  live,  lest  wrath  be  upon  us,  bee. 
22.  20  wrath  fell  on  all  the  congregation  of  Isra. 

1  Ch.27.  24  because  there  fell  wrath  for  it  against  Is. 

2  Ch.  19.   2  therefore  (is)  wrath  upon  thee  from  before 

19. 10  (so)  wrath  come  upon  you,  and  upon  your 
24. 18  wrath  came  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
29.   8  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  was  upon  Judah 
32.  25  there  was  wrath  upon  him,  and  upon  Ju. 
32.  26  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  came  not  uponth. 
Esth.  1.  18  Thus  (shall  there  arise)  too  much,  .wrath 
Psa.  38.    1  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thy  wrath,  neit. 
102.  10  Because  of  thine  indignation  and  thy  wr. 
Eccl.  5.  17  (he  hath)  much  sorrow  and  WTath  with 
Isa.  54.   8  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 
60. 10  in  my  wrath  I  smote  thee,  but  in  my  fav. 
Jer.  10. 10  at  his  wrath  the  earth  shall  tremble,  and 
21.   5  in  anger,  and  in  fury,  and  in  great  wrath 
32.  37  whither  I  have  driven  them,  .in  great  w. 
50. 13  Because  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  it  shall 
Zech.  7. 12  therefore  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  L. 
10. Anger,  trembling,  trouble,  m  rogez. 

Hab.  3.    2  O  Lord.,  in  wrath  remember  mercy 
11. Mind,  wrath,  8vfx6s  thumos. 

Luke  4.  28  when  they  heard,  .were  filled  with  wrath 
Acts  19.  2S  they  were  full  of  wrath,  and  cried  out,  sa. 
2  C0.12.  20  lest  (there  be)  debates,  envyings,  wraths 
Gal.  5.  20  emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions,  heres. 
Eph.  4.  31  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger 
Col.  3.  8  put  off  all  these ;  anger,  wrath,  malice 
Heb.n.  27  he  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing  the  wrath 
Rev.12. 12  having  great  wrath,  because  he  kuoweth 

14.  8  drink  of  the  wine  of  [the  wrath  of]  her 
14. 10  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of 
14. 19  into  the  great  wine  press  of  the  wratli  of 

15.  1  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God 

15.  7  seven  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God 

16.  1  pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath  of  God  upon 
18.    3  have  drunk  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her 

12. Anger,  wrath,  opyr}  orge. 

Matt.  3.    7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wra. 

Luke  3.   7  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wr. 

2 1 .  23  for  there  shall  be . .  wrath  upon  this  people 

John  3  .  36  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him 

Rom.  1. 18  the  WTath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven 

2.    5  WTath  against  the  day  of  wrath  and  reve. 

2.   8  obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  andw. 

4. 15  Because  the  law  worketh  wrath  :forwhere 

5.   9  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him 

9. 22  willing  to  show  his  wrath . .  vessels  of  wra. 

12. 19  Dearly  beloved,  .give  place  unto  wrath 

13.   4  a  revenger  to  (execute)  [wrath]  upon  him 

13.   5  not  only  for  wrath,  but  also  for  conscience 

Eph.    2.   3  were  bynature  the  children  of  wrath,  even 

5.    6  because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath 

Col.     3.   6  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children 

1  Th.  1.  10  which  delivered  us  from  the  wratli  to  co. 


1  Th.  2. 16  the  wratli  is  come  upon  them  totheutte. 

5.  9  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but 
1  Ti.  2.  8  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  wrath  and 
Heb.    3.  11  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  They  shall  not  enter 

4.    3  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath,  If  they  shall 
Jas.     1.  19  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  slow  to  WTath 

1.  20  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  therigllte. 
Rev.   6. 16  and  hide  us.  .from  the  wrath  of  the  lamb 

6. 17  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come,  and  w. 

11.  18  thy  wrath  is  come,  aud  the  time  of  the  de. 

16.  19  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath 

19.  15  the  fierceness  aud  wrath  of  Almighty  God 

13.  A  provoking  to  anger,  iro.pnpyuxp.6s parorgismos. 

Eph.  4.  26  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath 

WRATH,  to  provoke  to,  to  come,  be  wroth  — 

\.To  be  wroth,  f]SI3  qatsaph. 

Gen.  40.    2  Pharaoh  was  wroth  against  two  (of) his  offi. 

41. 10  Pharaoh  was  wroth  with  hisservants,  and 

Exodio.  20  it  bred  worms,  .and  Moses  was  wroth  with 

Lev.  10.   6  lest  ye  die,  and  lest  wrath  come  upon  all 

Num  16.  22  will  thou  be  wroth  with  all  the  congreg. 

31.  14  Moses  was  wroth  with  the  officers  of  the 

Dent.  1 .  34  the  Lord  heard  the  voice . .  and  was  wroth 

9.  19  the  Lord  was  wroth  against  you  to  dest. 

Josh.  22. 18  he  will  be  wroth  with  thewdiole  congreg. 

1  Sa.  29.   4  the  princes  of  the  Philistines  were  wroth 

2  Ki.  5. 11  Naaman  was  wroth,  and  went  away,  and 

13. 19  the  man  of  God  was  wroth  with  him,  and 
Esth.  1. 12  therefore  was  the  king  very  wroth,  aud 

2.  21  Bigthan  and  Teresh.  .were wroth,  and  so. 
Isa.  47.    6  I  was  wroth  with  my  people,  I  have  poll. 

54.  9  I  would  not  be  wroth  with  thee,  nor  reb. 

57.  16  neither  willl  be  always  wroth:  forthe  sp. 

57. 17  was  I  wroth,  .and  was  wroth,  aud  he  we. 

64.   s  thou  art  wroth;  forwe  have  sinned:  in  th. 

64.   9  Be  not  wroth  very  sore,  O  Lord,  neither 
Jer.  37. 15  the  princes  were  wroth  with  Jeremiah 
Lam.  5.  22  rejected  us;  thou  art  very  wroth  against 

2.  To  cause  wrath,  *]SfJ  qatsaph,  5. 

Deut.  9.  7  provokedst  the  Lord  thy  God  to  wrath  in 
9.  8  ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath,  so  that 
9.  22  at  Massah.  .ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wr. 

Zech.  8.14  when  your  fathers  provoked  me  to  wrath 

3.  To  cause  to  tremble  or  be  angry,  n"!  regaz,  5. 

Ezra   5. 12  provoked  the  God  of  heaven  unto  wrath 

4.  To  be  wroth,  sad,  morose,  *]"!  zaaph. 

2  Ch.26. 19  Uzziah  was  wroth,  and(had)acenserinhis 
26.  10  and  while  he  was  wroth  with  the  priests 

5.  To  be  healed,  wroth,  rnn  charah. 

Gen.  4.  5  Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  countenance 
4.  6  Why  art  tlwu  wroth?  and  why  is  thy  cou. 
31.  36  Jacob  was  wroth,  and  chode  with  Laban 
34.   7  they  were  very  wroth,  because  he  had  w. 

Num  16.  15  Moses  was  very  wroth,  and  said  unto  the 

1  Sa.  18.    S  Saul  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  disp. 

20.   7  if  he  be  very  wroth,  (then)  be  sure  that 

2  Sa.  3.    8  Then  was  Abner  very  wroth  for  the  words 

13.  21  when  king  David  heard,  .he  was  very  wr. 

22.    8  moved  and  shook,  because  he  was  wroth 

Neh.  4.    1  he  was  wroth,  and  took  great  indignation 

4.    7  to  be  stopped,  then  they  were  very  wroth 

Psa.  18.    7  and  were  shaken,  because  he  was  wroth 

6.  To  be  angry,  sad,  Dy;3  kaas. 

2  Ch.16. 10  Asa  was  wroth  with  the  seer,  and  put  him 

7.  To  shmo  self  wroth,  na"  abar,  7. 

Deut.  3.  26  the  Lord  was  wroth  with  me  for  your  sa. 

Psa.  78.  21  Therefore  the  Lord  heard,  .and  was  wroth 
78.  59  When  God  heard . .  he  was  wroth,  and  gr. 
78.  62  He  gave  his  people  over,  .and  was  wroth 
89.  38  thou  hast  been  wroth  with  thine  anointed 

8.  To  be  angry,  trembU,  t?-i  ragaz. 

Isa.   28.  21  he  shall  be  wroth  as  (in)  the  valley  of  Gi. 

9.  To  be  or  become  angry,  opyifr/iai  orgizomai. 
Matt.18.  34  his  lord  was  wroth,  aud  delivered  him  to 

22.  7  But  when  the  king  heard . .  he  was  wroth 
Rev.  12. 17  the  dragonwas  wroth  with  the  woman, and 

10.  To  anger  beyond  measure,  irapopyL^oi  parorgizu. 
Eph.   6.    4  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  wr. 

11. 7*0  be  wroth,  Bufioouai  thumoomai. 

Matt.  2.  16  Herod,  .was  exceeding  wroth,  and  sent 
WREATH,  wreathen  (work),  to  be  wreathed  — 

1.  Fringes,  vireaihes,  D71?  gedilim. 

1  Ki.   7. 17  wreaths  of  chain  work,  for  the  chapiters 

2.  Thick  band,  wreath,  branch,  rail,  aboth. 
Exod.28.  14  chains,  .(of)  wreathen  work,  .the  wreathen 

28.  22  chains . .  (of)  wreathen  work  (of)  pure  gold 
28.  24  And  thou  shalt  put  the  two  wreathen 
2S.  25  two  ends  of  the  two  wreathen  (chains)  th. 
39.  13  chains,  .(of)  wreathen  work  (of)  pure  gold 
39.  17  they  put  the  two  wreathen  chains  of  gold 
39.  18  the  two  ends  of  the  two  wreathen  chaius 
3,N~et  or  wreathed  toork,  lattice,  npn^  sebakah. 

2  Ki.25.  17  the  wTeatheu  work,  .with'wreathen  work 
2  Ch.  4.  12  two  wreaths  to  cover  the  two  pommels  of 

4. 13  on  the  two  wreaths,  .rows,  .on  each  wre. 

4.  To  wrap  self  together,  rip  sarag,  7. 

Lam.  1. 14  they  are  wreathed,  (aud)  come  up  upon 

WREST  — 

1.  To  stretch  out,  turn  aside  or  away,  nan  natah,  5. 

Exod  23.  2  speakinacausetodeclineaftermanytow. 
23.   6  Thou  shalt  not  wrest  the  judgment  of  thy 

Deut  16.  19  Thou  shalt  not  wrest  judgment;  thou  sh. 


2.  To  take2>ains,  grieve,  wrest,  35"  atsab,  3. 

Psa.  56.  5  Every  day  they  wrest  my  words:  all  their 

Z.To  distort,  pervert,  arptfiKou)  strebloo. 

2  Pe.  3.  16  they  that  are  unlearned  aud  unstable  wr. 
WRESTLE,  wrestlings,  to  — 
l.To  wrestle,  clasp  round,  p3x  abaq,  2. 

Gen.  32.  24  there  wrestled  a  man  with  him  uutil  the 
32.  25  thigh  was  out  of  joint  as  he  wrestled  with 

2.  Wrestlings,  D'bwDn  naphtulim. 

Gen.  30.    8  AndRachelsaid.Withgi'eatwrestlingsha. 

3.To  wrestle,  hns pathal,  2. 

Gen.  30.  8  have  I  wrestled  with  my  sister,  and  I  ha. 
4.  The  wrestling  is,  ri  iraAn  iariv  he  pale  estin. 

Eph.  6.  12  For  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood 
WRETCHED,  wretchedness  — 

1.  Evil,  bad,  m  ra. 

Num.11.  15  and  let  me  not  see  my  wretchedness 

2.  Miserable,  wretched,  raXaiimpos  talaiporos. 

Rom.  7.  24  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who  shall  de. 
Rev.    3. 17  knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  and 

WRING  (off,  out, )  wringing,  to  — 

1.  Wringing  out,  forcing,  churning,  J"?  mils. 
Prov.30.   3  The  wringing  of  the  nose  briugeth  forth 

2.  To  wring  of,  break,  phi}  malaq. 

Lev.    1.  15  wring  off  his  head,  and  burn  (it)  on  the 
5.    8  wring  off  his  head  from  his  neck,  but  sh. 

3.  To  wring  out,  drain  out,  nyip  malsah. 

Judg.  6.  38  wringed  the  dew  out  of  the  fleece,  a  bowl 
Psa.  75.  8  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall  wring  (th.) 
Isa.   51.  17  drunken  the  dregs,  .(and)  wrung  (them)o. 

i.To  be  wrung  or  drained  out,  njn  matsah,  2. 
Lev.    1. 15  blood  thereof  shall  be  wrungoutat  the  si. 
5.    9  rest  of  the  blood  shall  be  wrung  out  at  the 
Psa.  73.10  waters  of  a  full  (cup)  are  wrung  out  to  th. 

WRINKLE,  to  fill  with  wrinkles  — 

1.  To  lay  hold  on,  wrinkle,  a;p,  qamat. 

Job  16.   8  thou  hast  filled  me  with  wrinkles,  (which) 

2.„4  wrinkle,  bi/ris  rhutis. 

Eph.   5.  27  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 

WRITE  (afore,  unto,  up),  to  — 
1.  To  write,  inscribe,  describe,  3ns  kathab. 
Exod.  17.  14  Write  this  (for)  a  memorial  inabook,  and 
24.   4  Moses  wrote  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 
24. 12  aud  commandments  which  I  have  written 

32.  32  blot . .  out  of  thy  book  which  thou  hast  w. 
34.    1  will  write  upon  (these)  tables  the  words 
34.  27  Write  thou  these  words:  for  after  the  te. 
34.  28  wrote  upon  the  tables  the  words  of  the 
39.  30  wrote  upon  it  a  writing,  (like  to)  the  eng. 

Num  5.23  the  priest  shall  write  these  curses  in  a  bo. 
17.  2  write  thou  every  man's  name  upon  his  rod 
17.    3  shalt  write  Aaron's  name  upon  the  rod  of 

33.  2  Moses  wrote  their  goings  out  according 
Deut.  4. 13  and  he  wrote  them  upon  two  tables  of  st. 

5.  22  wTOte  them  in  two  tables  of  stone,  and 

6.  9  thou  shalt  write  them  upon  the  posts  of 
10.    2  I  will  write  on  the  tables  the  words  that 

10.  4  WTOte  on  the  tables  according  to  the  first 

11.  20  thou  shalt  write  them  upon  the  door  po. 
17.  18  he  shall  write  him  a  copy  of  this  law  in  a 
24.  1  then  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  divorcem. 
24.  3  write  her  a  bill  of  divorcement,  and  giveth 
27.  3  shalt  write  upon  them  all  the  words  of 
27.  8  thou  shalt  write  upon,  .stones all  the  wo. 
31.  9  Moses  wrote  this  law,  and  delivered  it 
31.  19  Now  therefore  write  ye  this  song  for  you 
31.  22  Moses  therefore  wrote  this  song  the  same 

Josh.  8.  32  wrote  there,  .a  copy,  .which  he  wrote  in 
24.  26  Joshua  wrote  these  words  in  the  book  of 

1  Sa.  10.  25  wrote  (it)  in  a  book,  and  laid  (it)  up  before 

2  Sa.  11. 14  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab,  and  sent  (it)  by 
11. 15  wrote  in  the  letter,  saying,  Set  ye  Uriah 

1  Ki.21.    8  So  she  wrote  letters  in  Ahab's  name,  and 

21.  9  she  wrote  hi  the  letters,  saying,  Proclaim 

2  Ki.  10.    1  Jehu  wrote  letters,  and  sent  to  Samaria 
10.    6  Then  he  wrote  a  letter  the  second  time  to 
17.  37  commandment,  which  he  wrote  for  you 

1  Ch.  24.   6  wrote  them  before  the  king,  and  the  pri. 

2  Ch.26.  22  Isaiah  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz,  wr. 

30.  1  wrote  letters  also  to  Ephraim  and  Manas. 
32. 17  He  wrote  also  letters  to  rail  on  the  LORD 

Ezra    4.    6  wrote  they  (unto  him)  an  accusation  aga. 

4.   7  wrote  Bishlani.  .written  in  the  Syrian  to. 

Neh.   9. 38  we  make  asure  (covenant),  and  write  (it) 

Esth.  8.    5  which  he  wrote  to  destroy  the  Jews  which 

8.  8  Write  ye  also  for  the  Jews,  as  it  liketh 
8. 10  wrote  in  the  king  Ahasuerus'  name,  and 

9.  20  Mordecai  wrote  these  things,  and  sent  le. 
9.  23  and  as  Mordecai  had  written  unto  them 
9.  29  wrote  with  all  authority,  to  confirm  this 

Job   13.  26  Forthou  writest  bitter  tilings  against  me 

31.  35  and  (that)  mine  adversary  had  written  a 
Psa.  87.  6  Lord  shall  count,  when  he  writethup  the 
Prov.  3.    3  write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart 

7.    3  Bind  them  upon  thy  fingers,  write  them 

22.  20  Have  not  I  written  to  thee  excellent  thi. 
Isa.     8.    1  write  in  it  with  a  man's  pen  concerning 

10. 19  shall  be  few,  that  a  child  may  write  them 

30.    8  write  it  before  them  in  a  table,  and  note 

Jer.  22.  30  Write  ye  this  man  childless,  a  man  (that) 

30.  2  Write  thee  all  the  words  that  I  have  spo. 

31.  33  write  it  in  their  hearts,  and  will  be  their 


WRITE 


107S 


"WRITTEN 


Jer.  36.  2  write  therein  all  the  words  that  I  have 
36.  4  Earueh  wrote  from  the  mouth  of  Jerem. 
36.  6  which  thou  hast  written  from  my  mouth 
36.  17  How  didst  thou  write  all  these  words  at 
36.  18  and  I  wrote  (them)  with  ink  in  the  book 
36.  27  words  which  Baruch  wrote  at  the  mouth 
36.  28  write  in  it  all  the  former  words  that  were 
36.  29  Why  hast  thou  written  therein,  saying 

36.  32  who  wi  ote  thereiu,  from  the  mouth  of  J. 
45.  1  when  he  had  written  these  words  in  alio. 
51.  60  So  Jeremiah  wrote  iu  a  book  all  the  evil 

Eze.  24.    2  Write  thee  the  name  of  the  day,  (even)  of 
37.i6write  upon  it.  .write  upon  it,  For  Joseph 

37.  20  sticks  whereon  thou  writest  shall  beiuth. 
43.  1 1  write  (it)  in  their  sight,  that  they  may  ke. 

Hos.  8.  12  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of 
Hab.    2.   2  Write  the  vision,  and  make  (it)  plain  up. 

2.  To  write,  prescribe,  nns  kathab,  3. 

Isa.   10.    1  write  grievousness  (which)  they  have  pres 

3.  To  Write,  nns  kcthab. 

Ezra    4.    8  wrote  a  letter  against  Jerusalem  to  Arta. 

5. 10  write  the  names  of  the  men  that  (were) 
Dan.   5.  5  wrote  over  against  the  candlestick  upon 

5.  5  the  king  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that  w. 

6.  25  Then  king  Darius  wrote  unto  all  people 

7.  1  then  he  wrote  the  dream,  (and)  told  the 

4.  To  write,  inscribe,  ypdcpw  grapho. 

Mark:o.  4  Moses  suffered  to  write  a  bill  of  divorce. 
10.  5  For  the  hardness  of  your  heart  he  wrote 
12. 19  Moses  wrote  unto  us,  If  a  man's  brother 

Luke  1.    3  write  unto  thee  in  order,  most  excellent 

r.63  asked.. and  wrote,  saying,  His  name  is  John 

16.   6  thy  bill,  and  sit  down  quickly,  and  write 

16,    7  said  unto  him,  Take  thy  bill,  and  write  fo. 

20.  28  Moses  wrote  unto  us,  If  any  man's  brother 
John  1.  45  found  him  of  whom  Moses,  .did  write,  Je. 

5.  46  ye  would  have  believed  me  ;  for  he  wrote 

8.  6  [with  (his)  finger  wrote  on  the  ground,  (as] 

8.  8  [again  he  stooped  down,  and  wrote  on  the] 
ig.  19  Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and  put  (it)  on  the  cr. 
19.  21  Write  not,  The  king  of  the  Jews ;  but  that 
19.  22  answered,  What  I  have  written  I  have  wr. 

21.  24  wrote  these  things;  and  we  know  that  his 
Acts  15.  23  they  wrote  (letters)  by  them  after  this  m. 

18.  27  brethren  wrote,  exhorting  the  disciples  to 
23.  25  And  he  wrote  a  letter  after  this  manner 
25.  26  Of  whom  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  write 
25.  26  that  after. .  I  might  have  somewhat  to  wr. 

Rom  15.  15  I  have  written  the  more  boldly  unto  you 
16.  22  I  Tertius,  who  wrote  (this)  epistle,  salute 

1  Co.  4. 14  I  write  not  these  things  to  shame  you,  but 

5.  9  wrote  unto  you  in  an  epistle  not  to  comp. 
5. 11 1  have  written  uuto  you  not  to  keep  com. 
7.    1  concerning  the  things  whereof  ye  wrote 
9. 15  neither  have  I  written  these  things,  that 

14.  37  that  the  things  that  I  write  unto  you  are 

2  Co.  1.  13  For  we  write  none  other  things  unto  you 

2.    3  I  wrote  this  same  unto  you,  lest,  when  I 
2.    4  I  wrote  unto  you  with  many  tears;  not 
2.   9  For  to  this  end  also  did  I  write,  that  I  mi. 
7.  12  Wherefore,  though  I  wrote  unto  you,  (I 

9.  1  saints,  it  is  superfluous  for  me  to  write  to 
13.    2  being  absent  now  [I  write]  to  them  which 

13.  10  Therefore  I  write  these  things  being  abs. 
Gal.     1.  20  Now  the  things  which  I  write  unto  you 

6.  11  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written 
Phil.    3.    1  To  write  the  same  things  to  you,  to  me 

1  Th.  4.    9  need  not  that  I  write  unto  you ;  foryeyo. 

5.    1  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto  you 

2  Th.  3.  17  which  is  the  token  in  every  epistle.  .1  wr. 
1  Ti.  3.  14  These  things  write  I  uuto  thee,  hoping  to 
Phm.      19  I  Paul  have  written  (it)  with  mine  own  h. 

ci  wrote  unto  thee,  knowing  that  thou  wilt 

1  Pe.   3.  15  as.  .Paul  also,  .hath  written  unto  you 

5. 12  I  have  written  shortly,  exhorting  andtes. 

2  Pe.   3.    1  second  epistle,  beloved,  I  now  write  unto 

1  Jo.  1.    4  these  things  write  we  unto  you,  that  your 

2.    1  these  things  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin 
2.    7  I  write  no  new  commandment  unto  you 
2.   8  anew  commandment  I  write  unto  you,  wh. 
2.  12  I  write  unto  you,  little  children,  because 

2. 13  I  write  unto  you . .  I  write  unto  you . .  I  wr. 
2.  14  I  have  written  unto  you,  fathers,  because 
2.  14  I  have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  be. 
2.  21  I  have  not  written  unto  you  because  ye 
2.  26  These,  .have  I  written  unto  you  concern. 

2  John     5  not  as  though  I  wrote  a  new  comnumdm. 

12  Having  many  tilings  to  write  unto  you,  I 

3  John     9  I  wrote  unto  the  church  :  but  Diotrephes 

13  to  write, but  I  willnot  with  ink  and  penw. 
Judc        3  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to  writeunto  you 

3  it  was  needful  for  me  to  write  unto  you 
Rev.    1.  11  Whntthou  seeat,  write  inabook,  andsend 
1. 19  Write thethings which thouhastseen, and 
2.    t  Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesusw. 

2.  8,  18  unto  the  angel  of  the  church,  .write 
2. 12  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Pergamos  w. 

3.  1,  14  unto  the  angel  of  the  church,  .write 
3.    7  write ;  These  things  saith  he  that  is  holy 
3. 12  I  will  write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  G. 

10.  4  I  was  about  to  write :  and  I  beard  a  voice 
10,    4  Seal  up  these  things,  .and  write  them  not 

14.  13  voire  from  heaven  saying  unto  mc,  Write 

19.  9  Write,  Blessed  (are)  they  which  are  called 
21.    5  said  unto  me,  Write :  for  these  words  arc 

5. To  write  upon  orover^  4iriypd<pa  epigraphs, 
Heb.  8. 10  write  them  in  their  hearts  ;  and  I  will  be 

10.  16  hearts,  and  in  their  minds  will  I  write  th. 


6.  To  send  to,  or  upon,  e-7no-TeAAa>  epistello. 

Acts  15.  20  But  that  we  write  unto  them,  that  they 
21.  25  [we  have  written]  (and)  concluded  that 

WRITE  a  letter  unto,  to  — 

To  send  to,  eVttrTeAAw  epistello. 

Heb.  13.  22  I  have  written  a  letter  unto  you  in  few 
WHITER,  writing  — 
l.To  write,  sns  kathab. 

Deut3i.  24  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  writing  the  w. 
2.  To  write,  nri?  kethab. 

Dan.  5.  7  Whosoever  shall  read  this  writing,  and  sh. 
5.  8  but  they  could  not  read  the  writing,  nor 
5.  15  that  they  should  read  this  writing,  and  m. 
5.  16  now  if  thou  canst  read  the  writing,  and 
5.  17  yet  I  will  read  the  writing  unto  the  king 
5.  24  sent  from  him  ;  and  this  writing  was  wri. 

5.  25  this  (is)  the  writing  that  was  written,  Me. 

6.  8  sign  the  writing,  that  it  be  not  changed 
6.    9  Wherefore  king  Darius  signed  the  writing 
6.  10  when  Daniel  knew  that  the  writing  was 

S.A  writing,  register,  2$$  kethab. 

1  Ch.28. 19  made  me  understand  in  writing  by  (his)h. 

2  Ch.  2.  iijBiu*am  the  king  of  Tyre  answered  in  wri. 

35.  4  according  to  the  writing  of  David  king  of 
Ezra  4.  7  and  the  writing  of  the  letter  (wras)  written 
Esth.  1.  22  every  province  according  to  the  writing 

3. 12  every  province  according  to  the  writing 

3.  14  The  copy  of  the  writing,  for  a  command. 

4.  8  Also  he  gave  him  the  copy  of  the  writing 
8.  8  the  writing  which  is  written  in  the  king's 
8.    9  every  province  according  to  the  writing 

8.  9  and  to  the  Jews  according  to  their  writing 

8. 13  The  copy  of  the  writing  for  a  command. 

9.  27  keep  these  two  days  according  to  their  w. 
Eze.  13.   9  neither  shall  they  be  written  hi  the  writ. 

4.  A  writing,  aj-ipt?  miktab. 

Exod  32.  16  and  the  writing  (was)  the  writing  of  God 

39.  30  wrote  upon  it  a  writing,  (like  to)  the  eng. 

Deut  10.    4  according  to  the  first  writing,  the  ten  co. 

2  Ch.21.  12  there  came  a  writing  to  him  from  Elijah 

35.  4  and  according  to  the  writing  of  Solomon 

36.  22  made  a  proclamation,  .in  writing,  saying 
Ezra  1.  1  made  a  proclamation,  .in  writing,  saying 
Isa.   38.    9  The  writing  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah 

5.  To  number,  write,  cypher,  ")£?  saplutr. 

Judg  5.  14  and.  .they  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  wr. 
Psa.  45.    1 1  speak,  .ray  tongue  (is),  .of  a  ready  wri. 
Eze.    9.    2  one  man.  .with  a  writer's  inkhorn  by  his 
9.    3  which  (had)  the  writer's  inkhorn  by  his 

6.  A  little  book,  roll,  scroll,  $i$\Iqv  biblion. 

Matt  19.    7  Wrhy  did  Moses  then  command  to  give  aw. 

7.  A  letter,  character,  any  thing  v:ritten,  ypdfxp.a. 

John  5.  47  But  if  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how 
S.To  write,  inscribe,  ypd<pa>  grapho. 

John  19.  19  writing  was,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  king 
WRITING  table  — 
A  small  writing  table,  irtvani^iov  pinakidion. 

Luke  1.  63  he  asked  for  a  writing  table,  and  wrote 

WRITTEN,  (aforetime,  in,  over,  on),  to  be  — 
l.To  write,  3ns  kathab. 

Exod3i.  18  tables  of  stone,  written  with  the  fingerof 

32.  15  the  tables  (were)  written  on  both  their 

32.  15  one  side  and  on  the  other  (were)  they  w. 

iN'umn.  26  they  (were)  of  them  that  were  written,  but 

Deut.  9. 10  written  with  the  finger  of  God:  and  onth. 

28.  58  words  of  this  law  that  are  written  in  this 

28.  61  which  (is)  not  written  in  the  book  of  this 

29.  20  all  the  curses  that  are  written  in  this  book 
29.  21  curses  of  the  covenant  that  are  written 

29.  27  bring  upon  it  all  the  curses  that  are  wri. 

30.  10  statutes  (which  are)  written  in  this  book 
Josh.  1.    8  observe  to  do  according  to  all  that  is  wri. 

8.  31  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  M. 

8.  34  according  to  all  that  is  written  in  the  book 

10. 13  (Is)not  this  written  in  the  book  of  Jasher? 

23.    6  to  keep  and  to  do  all  that  is  written  iu  the 

2  Sa,    1.  18  behold,  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  Jas. 

1  Ki.   2.    3  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  that 

11.  41  (are)  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
14.  19  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of 

So  in  verse  29;  15.  7,  23,  31 ;  16.  5,  14,  20,  27;  22.  39,  45 ; 

2  Ki.  1.  18;  8-  23 ;  10.  34;  12.  19;  13.  8,  12;  14.  15,  28;  15. 

6,  11,  15,  21,  26,  31,  36;  16. 19;  20.  20;  21. 17,  25 ;  23.  28  ; 

24.  5;  1  Ch.  9.  t ;  29.  29;  2  Ch.  9.  29;  12.  15;  16.  11;  20. 

34 ;  25.  26 ;  27.  7 ;  28.  26 ;  34.  24 ;  35.  12,  27 ;  36.  8 ;  Esth. 

10.  2. 

2  Ki.  14.   6  according  to  that  which  is  written  in  the 

22.  13  to  do  according  unto  all  that  which  is  w. 

23.  3  words  of  this  covenant  that  were  written 
23.  21  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  this  cove. 
23.  24  the  words  of  the  law  which  were  written 

1  Ch.  4.  41  these  written  by  name  came  in  the  days 

16.  40  according  to  all  that  is  written  in  the  law 

2  CI1.13.  22  (are)  written  in  the  story  of  the  prophet  I. 

23.  18  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  with 

24.  27  written  in  the  story  of  the  book  oftheki. 

25.  4  written  in  the  law  in  the  book  of  Moses 
30.    5  of  a  long  (time  in  such  sort)  as  it  is  writ. 

30.  18  eat  the  passover  otherwise  than  it  was  w. 

31.  3  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  the  Loud 

32.  32  they  (are)  written  in  the  vision  of  Isaiah 

33.  19  they  (are)  written  among  the  sayings  of 

34.  21  to  do  after  all  that  is  written  in  this  book 
34.  31  words  of  the  covenant  which  are  written 


2  Ch.35.  12  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  book  of  Moses,  and 
35.  25  behold,  they  (are)  written  in  the  Lamen. 
35.  26  according  to  (that  which  was)  written  in 

Ezra    3.    2  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the 

3.  4  as  (it  is)  written,  and  (offered)  the  daily 

4.  7  was  written  in  the  Syrian  tongue,  and  in. 
Neh.   6.    6  Wherein  Cwas)  written,  It  is  reported  am. 

7.  s  came  up  at  the  first,  and  found  written 
8. 14  they  found  written  in  the  law  which  the 

8.  15  of  thick  trees,  to  make  booths,  as  it  is  w. 
10.  34  burn  upon  the  altar,  .as  (it  is)  written  in  the 
10.  36  as  (it  is)  written  in  the  law,  and  the  first. 
12.  23  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles,  even 

1  found  written,  that  the  Ammonite  and  the 

2  found  written,  that  Mordecai  had  told 
7  in  the  volume  of  the  book  (it  is)  written 
9  To  execute  upon  them  the  judgment  wr. 

10  (that  which  was)  written  (was)  upright 

3  every  onethatis  written  among  the  living: 
6  Behold,  (it  is)  written  before  me ;  I  will 
1  The  sin  of  Judah  (is)  written  with  a  pen 

13  all  that  is  written  in  this  book,  which  Je. 
60  all  these  words  that  are  written  against 

10  written  within  and  without:  and..writt. 

11  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  servant 
13  As  (it  is)  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  all 

1  every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in 

written,  sns  kathab,  2. 
8.  34  and  all  the  weight  was  written  at  that  ti. 
19  let  it  be  written  among  the  laws  of  the 

2.  23  it  was  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronic. 

3.  9  let  it  be  written  that  they  may  be  destro. 
3. 12  there  was  written,  according  to  all  that 
3.  12  in  the  name  of  king  Ahasuerus  was  it  wr. 
8.    5  let  it  be  written  to  reverse  the  letters  de. 
8.   8  for  the  writing  which  is  written  in  the 

8.  9  it  was  written  according  to  all  that  Mor. 

9.  32  matters  of  Purim ;  and  it  was  written  in 
Job  19.  23  Oh  that  my  words  were  now  written  !  oh 
Psa.  69.  28  book  of  the  living,  and  not  be  written  wi. 

"  This  shall  be  written  for  the  generation 


n 

Estli 

6. 

Psa. 

40 

49 

Eccl 

T? 

Isa. 

4 

61 

Jer. 

17 

25 

Si 

Eze. 

? 

Dan. 

q 

9- 

12 

I.Tohe 

WI 

Ezra 

R 

Esth 

1 

Jer. 
Eze. 
Mai. 
Z.A  wr 
Ezra 


16  and  in  thy  book-all  (my  members)  were  w. 
13  they  that  depart  from  me  shall  be  writt. 


9  neither  shall  they  be  written  in  the  writ 

3.  16  book  of  remembrance  was  written  before- 
iting,  nnp  kethab. 

6.  18  at  Jerusalem  ;  as  it  is  written  in  the  book 

4.  To  ivrite,  sn?  kethab. 

Ezra    5.    7  sent  a  letter  unto  him,  wherein  was  wri. 

6.  2  fouud.  .a  roll,  and  therein,  .thus  written 

5.  To  note  doivn,  sign,  Dtri  resham. 

Dan.    5.  24  sent  from  him  ;  and  this  writing  was  wr. 

5.  25  this  (is)  the  writing  that  was  written,  M. 

6.  To  write  off,  enrol,  airoypdcpco  apographs. 

Heb.  12.  23  church  of  the  first  born,  which  are  writ. 
7 .Written,  inscribed,  ypairr6s  graptos. 

Rom.  2.  15  show  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their 
8.  To  be  written,  ypd<pop.at  graphomai. 

Matt.  2.    s  In  Beth-lehem  of  J  udea :  for  thus  it  is  w. 

4.  4  It  is  written,  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread 
4.  6  for  it  is  written,  He  shall  give  his  angels 
4.  7  It  is  written  again,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt 
4.  10  for  it  is  written,  Thou  shalt  worship  the 

11.  10  For  this  is  (he),  of  whom  it  is  written,  Be. 
21.  13  It  is  written,  My  house  shall  be  called  the 
26.  24  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  is  written  of  him 

26.  31  for  it  is  written,  I  will  smite  the  shepherd 

27.  37  set  up  over  his  head  his  accusation  writ. 
Mark  1.    2  As  it  is  written  in  the  prophets,  Behold 

7.  6  as  itis  written,  This  people  honourethme 
9.  12  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  that 
9.  13  whatsoever  they  listed,  as  it  is  written  of 

1  r.  17  Is  it  not  written,  My  house  shall  be  called 

14.  21  Son  of  man  indeed  goeth,  as  it  is  written 

14.  27  for  it  is  writteu,  I  will  smite  the  shepherd 

Luke  2.  23  As  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  Ev. 

3.  4  As  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  words 

4.  4  It  is  written,  That  man  shall  not  live  by 
4.  8  for  it  is  written,  Thou  shalt  worship  the 
4.  10  For  it  is  written,  He  shall  give  his  angels 
4.  17  he  found  the  place  where  it  was  written 

7.  27  This  is  (he)  of  whom  it  is  written,  Behold 
10.  20  rejoice,  because  your  names  [are  written] 
10.  26  What  is  written  in  the  law  ?  how  readest 

18.  31  all  things  that  are  written  by  the  proph. 

19.  46  Itis  written,  My  house  is  the  house  of  pr. 

20.  17  What  is  this  then  that  is  written,  The  st. 

21.  22  all  things  which  are  written  may  be  ful. 

22.  37  this  that  is  written  must  yet  be  accomp. 

23.  38  superscription  also  [was-w  ratten]  over  him 

24.  44  which  were  written  in  the  law  of  Moses 
24.  46  Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it  behoved 

John  2.  17  his  disciples  remembered  that  it  was  wr. 

6.  31  as  it  is  written,  He  gave  them  bread  from 
6.  45  It  is  written  in  the  pro]  hets.    And  they 

8.  17  It  is  also  written  in  your  law ;  that  the 
10.  34  Is  it  not  written  in  your  law,  I  said,  Ye 

12.  14  found  a  young  ass,  sat  thereon;  as  it  is  w. 

12.  16  ren  emb.  they  that  these  things  were  wr. 
15:  25  word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is  written  in 
ig.  20  it  was  written  in  Hebrew,  (and)  Greek 
20.  30  other  signs,  .which  arenotwiittenin  this 

20.  31  But  these  are  written,  that  3  e  might  bel. 

21.  25  if  they  should  be  written  every  one,  I  su. 
21.  25  could  not  contain  the  books  that  should 

Acts    1.  20  For  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Psalms 
7. 42  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  proph. 

13.  29  when  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was  writ. 


WRONG 


1079 


YEA 


Acts  13.  33  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second  psalm 
15.  15  the  words  of  .the  prophets;  as  it  is  writt. 

23.  5  for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt  not  speak 

24.  14  believing  all  tilings  which  are  written  in 
Rom.  1.  17  as  it  is  written,  The  just  shall  live  by  fai. 

2.  24  among  the  Gentiles  through  you,  asitis  w. 

3.  4  as  it  is  written,  That  thou  mightest  be 

3.  10  As  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous 
4. 17  As  it  is  written,  I  have  made  thee  a  fath. 

4.  23  Now  it  was  not  written  for  his  sake  alone 

8.  36  As  it  is  written,  For  thy  sake  we  are  kill. 
9. 13  As  it  is  written,  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but 

9.  33  As  it  is  written,  Behold,  I  lay  inZion  a 

10. 15  as  it  is  written,  Howbeautiful  are  thefe, 
11.  8  According  as  it  is  written,  God  hath  given 
11.  26  as  it  is  written,  There  shall  come  out  of 
12. 19  for  it  is  written,  Vengeance  (is)  mine,  I 

14.  11  For  it  is  written,  (As)  I  live,  saith  the  L. 

15.  3  as  it  is  written,  The  reproaches  of  them 
15.  9  as  it  is  written,  For  this  cause  I  will  cou. 
15.  21  But  as  it  is  written,  To  whom  he  was  not 

1  Co.  1.  19  For  it  is  written,  I  will  destroy  the  wisd. 

1.  31  That,  according  as  it  is  written,  He  that 

2.  9  But  as  it  is  written,  Eye  hatli  not  seen 

3.  19  For  it  is  written,  He  taketh  the  wise  in 

4.  6  to  think  (of  men)  above  that  which  is  wr. 
9.  9  For  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  Thou 
9. 10  For  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  (this)  is  written 

10.    7  as  it  is  written,  The  people  sat  down  to 
10.  11  they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon 
14. 21  In  the  law  it  is  written,  With  (men  of) 
15.  45  so  it  is  written,  The  first  man  Adam  was 
15.  54  the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swall. 

2  Co.  4. 13  same  spirit  of  faith,  according  as  it  is  w. 

8. 15  As  it  is  written,  He  that  (had  gathered) 
9.    9  As  it  is  written,  He  hath  dispersed  abroad 
Gal.    3. 10  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  (is)  everyone  that 
3. 10  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 

3.  13  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  (is)  every  oneth. 

4.  22  For  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  two 

4.  27  For  it  is  written ;  Rejoice,  (thou)  barren 
Heb.  10.    7  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 

1  Pe.  1 .  16  Because  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am 
Rev.    1.   3  keep  those  things  which  are  written  ther. 

2.  17  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which 

5.  1  a  book  written  within  and  on  the  back 

13.  8  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book 

14.  1  having  his  Father's  name  written  in  their 
17.    5  upon  her  forehead  (was)  a  name  written 
17.   8  whose  names  were  not  written  in  the  book 
19. 12  name  written  that  no  man  knew  but  he 

19. 16  on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  King  of  kings 
20. 12  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their 
20. 15  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the 

21.  27  They  which  are  written  in  the  lamb's  book 

22.  iS  add  unto  him  the  plagues  that  are  written 
22. 19  (from)  the  things  which  are  written  in  this 

9.  To  write  in,  iyypdcpw  eggrapho. 

2  Co.  3.   2  Ye  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts 

3.  3  written  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  spirit 

10.  In  letters,  iv  ypdfx/u.a<riv  en  grammasin. 

2  Co.    3.    7  if  the  ministration  of  death,  written  (and 

11.  To  write  upon  or  over,  £iriypd<pci>  epigrapho. 
Mark  15.  26  superscription  of  his  accusation  was  writ. 
Rev.  21.  12  names  written  thereon,  which  are  (the  na. 

12.ro  write  before  or  publicly,  irpoypd<pco  prographo. 

Rom  15.    4  things  were  written  aforetime  were  writ. 

Eph.  3.  3  made  known,  .asl  wrote  afore  infew  wor. 
"WRONG  (matter  of),  wrongfully  — 

1.  Violence,  DDn  chamo.s. 

Gen.  16.    s  My  wrong  (be) upon  thee:  I  have  given  my 

1  Ch.12.  17  seeing  (there  is)  no  wrong  in  mine  hands 
Job    19.   7  I  cry  out  of  wrong,  but  I  am  not  heard:  I 

2.Xo  judgment,  as^p  to  lo  mishpat. 

Jer.  22.  i3hmithatbuildeth..hischambersbywTong 
Eze.  22.  29  they  have  oppressed  the  stranger  wrongf. 

3.  A  turning  aside,  nip  sarah. 

Deut.19.  16  to  testify  against  him  (that  which  is)  wr. 
A. An  overthrow,  n$»H  awathah. 

Lain.  3.  59  O  Lord,  thou  hast  seen  my  wrong:  judge 
5.7*0  be  wrong,  crooked,  ^  aqal,  4. 

Hab.   1.   4  therefore  wrong  judgment  proceedeth 

6.  Evil,  bad,  VI  ra, 

Judgii.  27  but  thou  doest  me  wrong  to  war  against 

7.  Falsehood,  lie,  ig^  sheqer. 

Psa.  35.  19  Let  not  them . .  wrongfully  rejoice  over 
38. 19  they  that  hate  me  wrongfully  are  multip. 
65.   4  destroy  me,  (being)  mine  enemies  wrong. 
119.  86  they  persecute  me  wrongfully;  help  thou 
8. An  act  of  injustice,  aS tK77.ua  adikema. 

Acts  18. 14  If  it  were  a  matter  of  wrong  or  wicked  Ie. 
9. Injustice,  unrighteousness,  afiiicia  adikia. 

2  Co. 12.  13  not  burdensome  to  you?  forgive  me  this  w. 
10.  Unjust,  unrighteous,  a5(Ko?s  adihJs. 

1  Pe.   2.  19  for  conscience  toward  God.  .suffering  wr. 

WRONG,  to  (go,  suffer,  take)  — 
l.To  do  violence,  Drrt  chamas. 

Prov.  8.  36  But  he  that  sinneth  against  me  wTongeth 
2. To  oppress,  cause  oppression,  nr  yanah,  5. 

Jer.  22.  3  do  no  wrong,  do  no  violence  to  the  stran. 
3.  To  do  perversely,  rriu  avah. 

Esth.  1. 16  Vashti  the  queen  hath  not  done  wrong  to 


4.  To  press  on,  oppress,  p&jt  ashaq. 

1  Ch.  16.21  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong;  yea 
Psa.  105. 14  He  sintered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong;  yea 

5.2*b  do  wickedly,  or  wrong,  y&i  raslut. 

Exod.2.  i3saidtohim  thatdid  the  wrong,  "Wherefore 

6.  To  do  injustice,  or  unrighteousness,  aSiKeoj. 

Matt. 20.  13  Friend,  I  do  thee  no  wrong:  didst  not  th. 

Acts   7.  24  seeing  one  (of  them)  suffer  wrong,  he  de. 

7.  26  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren ;  why  do  ye  wrong  one 

7.  27  But  he  that  cUd  Ms  neighbour  wrong  thrust 

25.  10  to  the  Jews  have  I  done  no  wrong,  as  th. 

1  Co.   6.    7  Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong  ?  why  do 

6.  8  Nay,  ye  do  wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that 

2  Co.  7.    2  we  have  wronged  no  man,  we  have  comi. 

7.  12  not  for  his  cause  that  had  done  the  wrong 
7.  12  nor  for  his  cause  that  suffered  wrong,  but 

Col.    3. 25  But  he  that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for 
3.  25  wrong  which  he  hath  done:  and  there  is 

Phm.      18  If  he  hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  (thee) 
WRONGFULLY,  to  imagine  — 
To  do  violence,  D"n  chainas. 

Job    21.  27  devices  (which)  ye  wrongfully  imagine  ag. 
WROUGHT,  to  be  — 
l.IIewn  work,  rna  gazith. 

1  Ch.22.    2  set  masons  to  hew  wrought  stones  to  build 
2.  Work,  niyjgfi  maasek. 

1  Ki.  7.  26  brim  thereof  was  wrought  like  the  brim 
3. Settings,  brocade,  wrought  cloth,  nis^a  mishoet. 

Psa.  45. 13  glorious  within ;  her  clothing '(is)  of  wrou. 
^.Service,  rnwH.  abodah. 

t  Ch.  4.  21  families  of  thehouseofthem  that  wrought 

5.  To  be  served,  tilled,  ~>2'4  abad,  4. 

Deut.21.    3  heifer,  which  hath  not  been  wrought  wi. 
6. Artificer,  graver,  carver,  cng  charash. 

2  Ch.24. 12  also  such  as  wrought  iron  and  brass  to  m. 
l.To  be  done,  n'^jj  asah,  2. 

Deut.13. 14  (that)such  abomination  is  wrought  among 
17.    4  (that)  such  abomination  is  wrought  in  Is. 
Xeh.  6.  16  perceived  that  this  work  was  wrought  of 
Eccl.  2.  17  because  the  work  that  is  wrought  under 

8.  To  do,  n"$pj£  asah. 

Exod  36.    1  Theu  wrought  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  and 

36.    4  wrought  all  the  work  of  the  sanctuary,  ca 

36.   8  man  among  them  that  wrought  the  work 

39.   6  they  wrought  onyx  stones  inclosed  iu  ou. 

Lev.  20. 12  They  have  wrought  confusion;  their  blood 

Dent 32.  21  because  she  hath  wrought  folly  in  Israel 

Josh.  7. 15  and  because  he  hath  wrought  folly  in  Isr. 

Ruth  2.  19  where  wroughtest  thou?  blessed  be  he  th. 

2. 19  showed  her . .  with  whom  she  had  wrought 

2. 19  man's  name  with  whom  I  wrought  to  day 

1  Sa.  11. 13  for  to  day  the  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation 

14.  45  who  hath  wrought  tMs  great  salvation  in 
14. 45  for  he  hath  wrought  with  God  this  day 

19.  5  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  salvation  for 

2  Sa.18.  13  I  should  have  wrought  falsehood  against 

23.  10,  12  and  the  LORD  wrought  a  great  victory 
iKL    5. 16  ruled.,  the  people  that  wrought  in  the  w. 

7.  14  came  to  king  Solomon,  and  wrought  all 

16.  25  But  Omri  wrought  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the 
2  Ki.  3.    2  And  he  wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 

12.  ti  builders  that  wrought  upon  the  house  of 

17.  11  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  Lo. 
21.   6  wrought  much  wickedness  in  the  sight  of 

2  Ch.21,   6  wrought  (that  which  was)  evil  in  the  sight 

24.  13  So  the  workmen  wrought,  and  the  work 
31.  20  wrought  (that  which  was)  good  and  right 
33.  6  wrought  much  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  L. 
34. 10  workmen  that  wrought  in  the  house  of 
34. 13  overseers  of  all  that  wrought  the  work  in 

Xeh.  4. 16  the  half  of  my  servants  wrought  in  thew. 
4. 17  with  one  of  his  hands  wrought  in  the  wo. 
Isa.  26. 18  we  have  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in 
Jer.  11.  15  she  hath  wrought  lewdness  with  many 

18.  3  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  in  the  wheels 
Eze.  20.   9,  14,  22  I  wrought  for  my  name's  sake,  that 

20.  44  when  I  have  wrought  with  you  formyna. 

9.  To  become,  ytvofxat  ginomai. 

Mark  6.   2  such  mighty  works  are  wrought,  Ac.  5.  12 

10.  To  be  wrought  out,  Karepyd^ofiai,  2  Co.  12.  12. 
Y/RTJNG— See  Wring. 


l.Ye,  ye  yourselves,  |WW<  antun. 

Dan.   2.   8  of  certainty  that  ye  would  gain  the  time 

2.  Ye,  ye  yourselves,  cnx  attem. 

Gen.  29.  4  said  to  them,  My  brethren,  whence  (be)  ye 
42.  9  Ye  (are)  spies;  to  see  the  nakedness  of  the 
42. 19  If  ye  (be)  true  (men),  .go.  .carry  corn  for 

3.  Ye,  ye  yourselves,  n:nK,  jpix  altcn,  attenah. 
Gen.  31.   6  ye  know  that  with  all  my  power  I  have 
Eze.  13.  11  and  ye,  O  great  hailstones,  shall  fall,  and 

13.  20  wherewith  ye  there  hunt  the  souls  to  ma. 
34.  31  ye  my  flock,  the  flock  of  my  pasture,  (are) 

i.Tliey,  they  themselves,  nsrj  hemmah. 

Zeph  2.  12  Ethiopians  also,  ye  (shall  be)  slain  by  my 


5.  Faces,  Wispanim. 

Gen.  40.    7  Wherefore  look  ye  (so)  sadly  to  day? 
6. You,  ye,  u/xas  (ace.)  humas. 

Matt.  6.    8  For  your  Father  knoweth.  .before  ye  ask 

John  3.    7  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Yemu. 

Acts  14. 15  preach  unto  you  that  ye  should  turn  from 

17.  22  perceive  that  in  allithings  ye  are  too  sup. 

19.  36  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing 

Eom.  1.  11  spiritual  gift,  to  the  end  ye  may  be  esta. 

7.   4  dead.,  that  ye  should  be  married  to  anot. 

11. 25  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of  this  myste. 

12.  2  that  ye  may  prove  what  (is)  that  g.  15. 13. 

1  Co.  1.   7  So  that  ye  come  behind  in  nogiftrio.  1. 

10. 13  a  way  to  escape,  that  [ye]  may  be  able  to 
10. 20  would  not  that  ye  should  have  fellowship 
14.   5  I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues 

2  Co.  2.    7  So  that  contrariwise  ye  (ought)  rather  to 

6.  1  also  that  ye  receive  not  the  grace  13.  7. 

7.  11  For  behold  this  self  same  thing,  that  [ye] 
Eph.    4. 17  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  ot.  1.  1?. 

4.  22  That  ye  put  off,  concerning  the  former  co. 

6.  11  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  Hie 

Phil.    r.    7  of  the  gospel,  ye  all  are  partakers  of  my 

1.  10  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  exe. 

1.  12  But  I  would  ye  should  understand,  brefe. 
Col.     1.  10  That  [ye]  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lad 

2.  1  For  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  co. 
4.   6  Know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every  man 

1  Th.  1.    7  So  that  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that  be. 

2. 12  That  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 
4.    1  have  received  of  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk 
4.    3  that  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication 

2  Th.  1.   5  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  w. 

2    2  That  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be 

3."  6  That  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every 

Jas.     2.   7  that  worthy  name  by  the  which  ye  are  ca. 

4.    2  desire . .  yet . .  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not 

4.  15  For  that  ye  (ought)  to  say,  If  the  Lord  will 
2  Pe.    1.  15  endeavour  that  ye  may  be  able  after  my 

3. 11  what  manner  (of  persons)  ought  ye  to  be 
Jude        5  though  [ye]  once  knew  this,  how  that  the 

7.  Ye,  ye  yourselves,  v/xe7s  humeis. 

Matt.  5.  13  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth :  but  if  the 

5.  14  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world.  A  city  that 

5.  4S  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Fa. 

6.  9  After  this  manner  therefore  pray"  ye :  Our 

6.  26  Fathe"  feedeth  them.  Are  ye  not  much 
7. 11  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 

7.  12  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so 
9.    4  Wherefore  think  [ye]  evil  in  your  heart  2 

10.  20  For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit 

10.  31  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows 
See  also  13.  iS;  14.  16;  15.  3,  5, 16;  16.  15;  19.  28,  [28J;  20. 

4,  7 ;  ai.  13,  32  ;  23.  8,  8,  13,  28,  32 ;  24.  33,  44 ;  26.  31 ;  27. 
24;  28.  5;  Mark  6.  31,  37;  7.  11,  18;  8.  29;  11.  17,  [26]; 
12.  [27];  13.  ii,  23,  29;  Luke 6.  [31];  g.  13,  20;  9.  [55];  10. 
23,  24;  11.  13,  39,  48;  12.  24,  29,  36,  40;  16.  15;  17.  10^ 

19.  46;  21.  31;  22.  26,  28,  70;  24.  48,  49;  John  1.  26;  3. 
28;  4.  20,  22,  32,  35,  38,  38;  5.  20,  23,  34,  35,  3S,  39,  44, 
45;  6-  67;  7.  8,  28,  34,  36,  47;  8.  14,  is,  21,  22,  23,23,  31, 
38,  41,  44,  46,  47,  49,  34 ;  9.  19,  27,  30 ;  10.  26,  36 ;  11.  49 ; 
*3*  to,  13,  14,  15,  33,  34;  14.  3,  17,  19,  19,  [20],  20;  15.  3.  4. 

5,  14,  16,  16,  27;  16.  20,  20,  22,  27;  18.  31;  19.  6,  35; 
Acts  1.  5;  2.  15,  33,  36;  3.  13,  14,  25;  4.  7,  10;  5.  30;  7. 

4,  [26],  51,  51,  52;  8.  24 ;  10.  28,  37;  11.  16;  15.  7;  19   15 ; 

20.  18,  25 ;  22.  3;  23.  15;  27.  31 ;  Rom.  1.  6;  6.-11;  7.  4; 

8.  9;  9.  26;  11.  30;  16.  17;  1  Co.  i.  30;  3.  17,  23;  4.  10, 
10,  10;  5.  2,  12;  6.  8;  9.  i,  2;  10.  15 ;  12.  27 ;  14.  9,  12 ; 
16.  1,  6,  16;  2  Co.  1.  14;  3.2;  6. 13,  [16],  18;  8.  9;  9.  4;  it. 
7 ;  12.  11 ;  13.  7,  9 ;  Gal.  3.  28,  29 ;  4. 12 ;  5. 13 ;  6.  1 ;  Eph 
1.  13;  2.  11,  13,  22;  4.  20;  5. 33 ;  6.  21 ;  Phil.  2.  iS;  4. 15, 
15 ;  Col.  3.  4,  7,  8,  13;  4.  1,  16;  1  Th.  1.  6;  2.  10,  14,  14, 
19,  20 ;  3.8;  4.  9 ;  5.  4,  s ;  2  Th.  1.  12 ;  3,  13 ;  Jas.  2.  6 ; 

5.  8;  1  Pe.  2.  9;  2  Pe.  3.  17;  1  Jo.  1.  3;  2.  20,  24;  4.  4 ; 
Jude  17,  20. 

8. To  you,  vfjup  (dat.)  humin. 

Matt  18. 12  How  think  ye?  If  a  man  have  an  hundr. 

zi.  28  But  what  think  ye?  A  (certain),  22.  41. 

26. 66  What  think  ye  ?  They  answered  and  said 
Mark  14.  64  the  blasphemy  ;  what  tliink  ye  ?  n.  24. 
Luke  6.  32  them  which  love  you,  what  thank  have  ye 
6.  33  winch  do  good  to  you, what  thank  have  ye 

6.  34  whom..hope  to  receive,  what  thaukhaveye 
John  11.  56  What  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  iS.  33. 
Acts    5.   9  How  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to 

13.  15  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhort.  2  Co.  8.  13. 

9. Of  you,  your,  yours,  6/xwi/  (gen.)  hum>~n. 

Luke  12.  33  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms ;  provide 
22.  10  when  ye  are  entered  into  the  city,  there 
1  Co.  5.   4  when  ye  are  gathered  together,  and  my 
11. 18  first  of  all,  when  ye  come  together  in  the 

11.  20  When  ye  come  together  therefore  into  one 
Gal.  4.  15  Whereis  then  the  blessedness  ye  spake  of? 
1  Pe.  4.   4  Wherein  they  tliink  it  strange  that  ye  run 

YE  will  — 

There  is,  there  are,  &  yesh. 

Gen.  24.  49  now  if  ye  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with 
YE  yourselves  — 
Ye  yourselves,  vfj.e7s  humeis. 

Luke  12.  36  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  wait  for 
YEA  (doubtless,  rather,  though)  — 
l.Also,  even,  but,  yea,  though,  *]N  aph. 

Deut  33.    3  Yea,  he  loved  the  people ;  all  his  saints 
l.Also,  (is  it  true)  that,  *?  f\H  aph  ki. 

Gen.    3.    1  Yea,  hath  God  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of 

Z.Tf,  though,  Am  illu, 

Eccl.  6.    6  Y'ea,  though  he  live  a  thousand  years  tw. 


YEAR 


1080 


YEAR 


4  Even,  also,  yea,  yet,  na  gam. 

Gen.  20.    6  Yea,  I  know  that  thou  didst  this  in  the 
Kcli.   5.  15  yea,  even  their  servants  bare  rule  over  the 

5.  Thai,  *3  ki. 

Isa.     5.  10  Yea,  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one 

0.  A'"/,  except,  unless,  aKAa  alia. 

Luke  24.  22  Yea,  and  certain  women  also  of  our  comp. 
John  16.  2  yea,  the  time  cometh,  that  whusoever  ki. 
Rom.  3.  31  through  faith?  God  forbid  :  yea,  we  esta. 

1  Co.   4.    3  or  of  man's  judgment :  yea,  I  judge  uot 

2  Co.    7.  11  yea,  (what)  clearing  of  yourselves,  yea 

7.  11  yea,  (what)  fear,  yea,  (what)  vehement  de. 

7. 11  yea,  (what)  revenge !  In  all  (things)  ye 
Gat.     4.  17  yea,  they  would  exclude  you,  that  ye  mi. 
Phil.    1.  iS  and  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  re. 

2.  17  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice 

3.  8  [Yea]  doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things 
Jas.     2.  18  Yea,  a  man  may  say,  Thou  hast  faith,  and 

7. Or,  either,  even,  ij  e. 

1  Co.  16.   6  it  may  be  that  I  will  abide,  yea,  and  win. 

8.  Indeed  then,  yea  rather,  yea  verily,  ftti/ovvye. 
Luken.  28  Yea  rather,  blessed  (are)  they  that  hear 
Phil.  3.    8  yea  doubtless,  audi  count  all  things  (but) 

9.  Verily,  indeed,  truly,  pray,  vat  nai. 

Matt.  5.  37  But  let  your  communication  be,  Yea,  yea 
9.  28  Believe  ye.  .They  said  unto  him,  Yea,  Lo. 

1 1.  9  yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and  more  than  a  pr. 
13.  51  all  these  things?  They  say  unto  him,  Yea 
2i.  16  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Yea;,  have  ye  nev. 

Luke  7.  26  Yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and  much  more  than 

12.  5  power  to  cast  into  hell ;  yea,  I  say  unto 
Johiin.  27  She  saith  unto  him,  Yea,  Lord  :  I  believe 

21.  15,  16  Yea,  Lord  :  thou  knowest  that  I  love 
Acts    5.    8  Tell  me..  And  she  said,  Yea,  for  so  much 

22.  27  Tell  me,  art  thou  a  Roman?  He  said,  Yea 

2  Co.  1. 17  that  with  me  there  should  be  yea  yea,  and 

1.  18  our  word  toward  youwasnot  yea  andnay 

1. 19  was  not  yea  and  nay,  but  in  him  was  yea 

1.  20  all  the  promises  of  God  in  him  (are)  yea 

Thm.      20  Yea,  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in 

.las.     5.  12  but  let  your  yea  be  yea ;  and  (your)  nay 

Rev.  14.  13  Yea,  saith  the  spirit,  that  they  may  rest 

YEAR,  yearly  — 

l.Days,  D''?;  yamim. 

Exodi3-  io  this  ordinance  in  his  season  from  year  toy. 
Lev.  25.  29  then,  .(within)  a  full  year  may  he  redeem 
Mum.  9.  22  two  days,  or  a  month,  or  a  year,  that  the 
Jush.1'3.    1  Now  Joshua  was  old  (and)  stricken  in  ye. 

13.  1  Thou  art  old  (and)  stricken  in  years,  and 
Jiulg  1 1 .  40  daughters  of  Israel  went  yearly  to  lament 

17. 10  give  thee  ten  (shekels)  of  silver  by  the  ye. 
21. 19  (there  is)  a  feast  of  the  Lord  inShilohye. 

1  Sa.   1.    3  this  man  weut  up  out  of  his  city  yearly 

1.  21  went  up  to  offer  unto  the  Lord  the  year. 

2. 19  brought  (it)  to  him  from  year  to  year,  wh. 

2. 19  with  her  husband  to  offer  the  yearly  sac. 
20.   6  (there  is)  a  yearly  sacrifice  there  for  all 
27.    7  time  that  David  dwelt,  .was  a  full  year 

2  Sa.  14.  26  it  was  at  every  year's  end  that  he  polled 
1  Ki.  1.  1  king  David  was  old  (and)  stricken  in  years 
Amos  4.   4  and  bring,  .your  tithes  after  three  years 

2.  A  year,  a  repetition,  n$  shenah. 

Ezra   4.  24  So  it  ceased  unto  the  second  year  of  the 
5.  ii  the  house  that  wasbuilded  these  many  y. 

5.  13  But  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king  of 

6.  3  In  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king,  (the 

6.  15  which  was  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  reign 
Dan.    5.  31  (being)  about  threescore  and  two  years 

7.  1  In  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar  king  of  B. 

3./1  year,  a  repetition,  nyy  shanah. 

Gen.  1. 14  let  them  be.  .for  seasons,  and  for.  .years 
5.  3  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years 
5.  4  days  of  Adam . .  were  eight  hundred  years 
5.  5  days,  .were  nine  hundred  and  thirty  yea. 
5.  6  Seth  lived  an  hundred  and  five  years,  and 
5.  7  eight  hundred  and  seven  years,  and  begat 
5.  8  were  nine  hundred  and  twelve  years :  and 
5.  9  And  Enos  lived  ninety  years,  and  begat 
5. 10  eight  hundred  and  fifteen  years. and  beg. 
5.  11  of  Enos  were  nine  hundred  and  five  years 

5. 12  Cainan  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  M. 
5.  13  eight  hundred  and  forty  years,  and  begat 
5.  14  were  nine  hundred  and  ten  years:  and  lie 
5.  15  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and 
5.  16  eight  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  beg. 
5. 17  were  eight  hundred  ninety  and  five  years 
5.  18  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two  ye. 
5. 19  after  he  begat  Enoch  eight  hundred  years 
5  20  nine  hundred  sixty  and  two  years;  andl). 
5.  21  Enoch  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  beg. 

5.22  he  begal  Methuselah  three  hundredyeara 

5. 23  days,  .were  three  hundred  sixty  and  five  y. 
5.25  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  seven  years 
5.  26  lived,  .seven  hundred  eighty  and  two  ye. 
5.  27  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  nine  years 

i.iuie.li  lived  an  hundred  eighty.. two y. 
5.  30  Ave  hundred  ninety  and  live  years,  and 
5-  31  |ven  seven  hundred  seventyandsevenye. 
s.  32  Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old:  and 

Ins  days  shall  lie  an  hundred  and  twenty 
7.    6  Noah  (was)  six  hundred  years  old  when 

7.  .1  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life 

8.  i3  in  thesis  hundredth  and  flrstyear,  in  the 

9.  28  after  the  flood  three  hundred  and  liftvv. 
9-  29  days  uf  Noah  were  nine  hundredand  til  t  % 

ix.  10  years  old,  and  begat  Arphaxad  two  years 


Gen. 


35- 

37- 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
41. 
45- 
45- 
47- 
47- 
47' 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
47- 
50. 
50. 

Exod.6. 

6, 


Lev 


11  five  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  aud 

12  Arphaxad  lived  five  and  thirty  years 

13,  15  four  hundred  and  three  years,  and  be. 
14  And  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 

16  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  be. 

17  four  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  begat 

18  And  Peleg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 

19  two  hundred  and  nine  years,  and  begat 

20  Reu  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and  beg. 

21  two  hundred  and  seven  years,  and  begat 
■11  And  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 

23  two  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and 

24  Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and 

25  an  hundred  and  nineteen  years,  and  beg. 

26  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  A. 
32  days  of  Terah  were  two  hundred  aud  five 

4  Abram  (was)  seventy  and  five  years  old 

4  Twelve  years,  .in  the  thirteenth  year  they 

5  in  the  fourteenth  year  came  Chedorlaom. 

13  they  shall  afflict  them  four  hundred  years 
3  after  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the 

16  Abram  (was)  fourscore  and  six  years  old 
1  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and 

17  be  born  unto  him  that  is  an  hundred  ye. 
17  aud  shall  .Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old 

21  unto  thee  at  this  set  tune  in  the  next  ye. 

24  Abraham  (was)  ninety  years  old  and  nine 

25  Ishmael  his  son  (was)  thirteen  years  old 

5  hundred  years  old  when  his  son  Isaac  was 
1  Sarah  was  an  hundred  and  seven  and  tw. 

1  (these  were)  the  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah 
7  these  (are)  the  days  of  the  years  of  Abra. 
7  lived,  an  hundred  threescore  and  fifteen  y. 

17  these  (are)  the  years  of  the  life  of  Ishmael 
j  7  hundred  aud  thirty  and  seven  years :  aud 
20  Isaac  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took 

26  Isaac  (was)  threescore  years  old  when  she 
12  received  in  the  same  year  an  hundredfold 

34  Esau  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took 
iS  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel 
20  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  Rachel,  and 

27  thoushaltserve  with  me  yet  seven  other  y. 
30  and  served  with  him  yet  seveu  other  ye. 

35  This  twenty  years  (have)  I  (been)  with 

41  Thus  have  I  been  twenty  years  in  thy  ho. 
41  served  thee  fourteen  years,  .and  six  ye. 

28  days,  .were  an  hundred  and  fourscore  y. 

2  Joseph,  (being)  seventeen  years  old,  was 

1  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  two  full  ye. 

26  years;  and  thesevengoodears(are)sev.y. 

27  that  came  up  after  them  (are)  seven  ye. 

27  with  the  east  wind,  shall  be  seven  years 

29  there  come  seven  years  of  great  plenty 

30  there  shall  arise  after  them  seven  years 

34  the  fifth  part,  .in  the  seven  plenteous  ye. 

35  let  them  gather  all  the  food  of .  .good  ye. 

36  for  store  to  the  land  against  the  seven  y. 

46  Joseph  (was)  thirty  years  old  when  he  st. 

47  in  the  seven  plenteous  years  the  earth 

48  he  gathered  up  all  the  food  of  the  seven  y. 
50  born  two  sons  before  the  years  of  famine 

53  seven  years  of  plenteousness  that  was  in 

54  seven  years  of  dearth  begau  to  come,  ace. 

6  For  these  two  years,  .five  years,  in  the 

11  for  yet  (there  are)  five  years  of  famine 
9  The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage 

9  years:  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  they. 
9  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the  y. 

1 7  with  1  tread  for  all  their  cattle  for  that  year 

18  "When  that  year  was  ended,  they  came 

1 8  the  second  year,  aud  said  unto  him,  We 

28  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen  ye. 

28  age.  .was  an  hundred  forty  and  seven  ye. 

22  aud  Joseph  lived  an  hundred  and  ten  ye. 
26  Joseph  died,  (beiug)an  hundred  and  ten  ye. 
16  years,  .(were)  an  hundred,  .and  seven  ye. 
18  years,  .(were)  an  hundred  thirty  aud  tlir. 
20  years . .  an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  y. 

7  Aud  Moses  (was)  fourscore  years  old,  and 
7  fourscore  and  three  years  old,  when  they 

2  it  (shall  be)  the  first  month  of  the  yearto 

5  be  without  blemish,  a  male  of  the  first y. 

40  sojourning,  .(was)  four,  .and  thirty  years 

41  end  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 
35  children  of  Israel  did  eat  manna  forty  yea. 

2  six  years  he  shall  serve ;  aud  in  the  seve. 
10  six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  laud,  andsh. 

14  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  unto  me  in  the  ye. 

16  in  the  end  of  the  year,  when  thou  hast  ga. 

17  Three  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  sh. 

29  drive  them  out  from  before  thee  in  one  year 
38  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  day  by  day  co. 
10  atonement  upon  the  horns  of  it  once  in  a 
10  once  in  the  year  shall  he  make  atonement 
14  from  twenty  years  old  and  above,  shall 

22  and  the  feast  of  ingathering  at  the  year's 

23  Thrice  in  the  year  shall  yourmen  children 

24  appear  before  the  Loud.. thrice  in  the  ye. 
26  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  for  six 

17  in  the  first  month  in  the  second  year,  on 

3  a  calf  and  a  lamb,  (both)  of  the  first  year 

6  she  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  for 
10  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  bl. 
34  to  make  an  atonement,  .once  a  year.  Aud 

23  three  years  shall  it  be  as  unci  re  u  incised 

24  in  the  fourth  year  all  the  fruit  thereof  sh. 

25  in  the  fifth  year  shall  ye  eat  of  the  fruit 

12  of  the  first  year  for  a  burnt  offering  unto 

18  seven  lambs  without  blemish  of  the  first  y. 

19  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  fur  a  sacrifice 
41  a  feast  unto  the  LORD  seven daysin  they. 

3  Six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  field,  aud  six 


Lev.  25.  4  But  in  the  seventhyearshallbeasabbath 
25.  5  undressed  :  (for)  it  is  a  year  of  rest  unto 
25.  H  sabbaths  of  years.. seven  times  seven  ye. 
25.  8  years  shall  be  unto  thee  forty  and  nine  y. 
25.  10  ye  shall  hallow  the  fiftieth  year,  and  pro. 
25.  11  A  jubilee  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  unto 
25.  13  In  the  year  of  this  jubilee  ye  shall  return 
25. 15  According  to  the  number  of  years  after  the 
25.  15  according  unto  the  number  of  years  of  the 
25.  16  According  to  the  multitude  of  years  thou 
25.  16  according  to  the  fewness  of  years  thou  sh. 
25.  20  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year?  beh. 
25.  21  my  blessing  upon  you  in  the  sixth  year 
25.  21  and  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  three  ye. 
25.  22  year,  aud  eat.  .of  old  fruit  until  the  year 
25.  27  Then  let  him  count  the  years  of  the  sale 
25.  28  hand  of  him  thathath  bought  it  until  they. 
25.  29  whole  year  after  it  is  sold  ;  (within)  a  full 
25.  30  not  redeemed  within  the  space  of  a  full  y, 
25.  40  (and)shall  serve  thee  unto  the  year  of  ju. 
25.  50  from  the  year,  .unto  the  year  of  jubilee 
25.  50  shall  be  according  unto  the  number  of  ye. 
25.  51  If  (there  be)  yet  many  years  (behind),  ace. 
25.  52  if  there  remain  but  few  years  unto  the  ye. 
25.  52  according  unto  his  years  shall  he  give  him 
25.  53  as  a  yearly  hired  servantshall  he  be  with 

25.  54  then  he  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of  jubilee 
27.  3  from  twenty  years  old  even  uuto  sixty  ye. 
27.  5  from  five  years  old  even  unto  twenty  yea. 
27.  6  from  a  month  old  even  unto  five  years  old 
27.  7  if  (it  be)  from  sixty  yearsold  and  above 
27.  17  If  he  sanctify  his  field  from  the  year  of  ju. 
27.  18  years  that  remain,  even  unto  the  year  of 
27.  23  thyestimation,  (even)  unto  the  year  of  the 

27.  24  In  the  year  of  the  jubilee  the  field  shall 
Num.  1.    1  in  the  second  year  after  they  were  come 

1.  3  From  twenty  years  old  and  upward 

So  in  v.  18,  20,  22,  24,  26,  28,30,32,  34,36,38,40,42,  45. 
4.   3  thirty  years  old  and  upward  even  until 

So  in  v.  23,  30,35,  39,  43,  47. 
6. 12  bring  a  lamb  of  the  first  yearfor  a  trespass 

6. 14  one  he  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  ble. 

6.  14  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  first  year  without  ble. 

7. 15  one  lamb  of  the  first  year,  for  a  burnt 
So  in  v.  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81. 

7.  17  five  lambs  of  the  first  year:  This  (was)  the 
So  in  v.  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  65,  71,  77,  83. 

7.  87  the  lambs  of  the  first  year  twelve,  with 

7.  88  he  goats  sixty,  the  lambs  of  the  first  year 

8.  24  from  twenty  and  five  years  old  and  upw. 

8.  25  from  the  age  of  fifty  years  they  shall  cease 

9.  1  in  the  first  month  of  the  second  year  after 
jo.  11  second  month,  in  the  second  year,  that  th. 

13.  22  Now  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before 

14.  29  whole  number,  from  twenty  years  old  and 
14.  33  shall  wander  in  the  wilderness  forty  years 

14.  34  each  day  for  a  year,  .(even)  forty  years 

1 5.  27  then  he  shall  bring  a  she  goat  of  the  first  y 

26.  2,  4  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward 

28.  3,  9,  11  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  spot 
28. 14  everymonth throughout  the  monthsof  the 

28.  19  seveu  lambs  of  the  first  year  :  they  shall 
?8.  27  ye  shall  offer,  .seven  lambs  of  the  first  y. 

29.  2  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  bl. 
29.  8  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year ;  they  shall 
29.  13,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32  lambs  of  the  first  ye. 
29.  36  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year,  without  bl. 

32. 11  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  shall 
32. 13  wander  in  the  wilderness  forty  years,  un. 
33.  38  died  there,  in  the  fortieth  year  after  the 

33.  39  an  hundred  and  twenty  and  three  years 
Deut.  1.    3  came  to  pass  iu  the  fortieth  year,  in  the 

2.  7  these  forty  years  the  Lord  thy  God  (hath 

2.  14  thirty  and  eight  years  ;  uutil  all  the  gen. 
8.   2  God  led  thee  these  forty  years  in  the  wil. 

8.  4  neither  did  thy  foot  swell,  these  forty  ye. 

11. 12  of  the  year  even  unto  the  end  of  the  year 
14.  22  that  the  field  briugeth  forth  year  by  year 
14.  28  At  the  end  of  three  years  thou  shalt  briug 

14.  28  all  the  tithe  of  thine  increase  the  same  ye. 

15.  1  At  the  end  of  (every)  seven  years  thou  sh. 
15.    9 The  seventh,  .year  of  release,  is  at  hand 
15.  12  serve  thee  six  years,  then  in  the  seventh  y. 
15.  18  in  serving  thee  six  years :  and  the  Lord 

15.  20  year  by  year  in  the  place  which  the  Lord 

16.  16  Three  tunes  in  a  year  shall  all  thy  males 
24.  5  he  shall  be  free  at  home  one  year,  andsh. 
26. 12  the  tithes  of  thine  increase  the  third  year 
29.    5  I  have  led  you  forty  years  in  the  wilder. 

31.  2  I  (am)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  old 
31. 10  seven  years,  in  the  solemnity  of  the  year 

32.  7  consider  the  years  of  many  generations 

34.  7  Moses  (was)  an  hundred  and  twenty  years 
Josh.  5.    6  Fur  the  children  of  Israel  walked  forty  y. 

5. 12  eatof  the  fruit  of  thelandof  Canaan  thaty. 
14.  7  Forty  years  old  (was)  I  when  Moses  the  se. 
14. 10  kept  me  alive,  .these  forty  and  five  years 
14. 10  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  and  five  years 
24.  29  died,  (being)  an  hundred  and  ten  yearsold 
Judg.  2.    8  died,  (being)  an  hundredand  ten  yearsold 

3.  8  children,  .served  Chushan-ris  eight  years 
3. 11  land  had  rest  forty  years.  And  Othniel  the 
3. 14  served Eglon the  kingof  Moab eighteen  y. 

3.  30  And  the  land  had  rest  fourscore  years 

4.  3  twenty  years  be  mightily  oppressed  the 

5.  31  his  might.  And  the  land  had  rest  forty  y. 

6.  1  them  into  the  hand  of  Midian  seven  years 
6.  25  even  the  second  bullock  of  seven  years  old 

■  S.  28  country  was  in  quietness  forty  years  in  the 

9.  22  When  Abimeleeh  had  reigned  three  years 
10.  2  judged  Israel  twenty  and  three  years, and 
10.    3  arose,  .and  judged  Israel  twenty. .  twoy. 


YEAR 


10S1 


YEAR 


13' 

16. 
Ruth  i. 
i  Sa.    i 

4' 
4 
7 
7- 


:  Sa. 


:  Ki. 


Judgio.  S  that  year  they  vexed  ami  oppressed  the 
jo.  8  eighteen  years,  all  the  children  of  Israel 
ii.  26  by  the  coasts  of  Arnon,  three  hundred  y. 

11.  40  went,  .to  lament,  .four  days  in'a  year 

12.  7  Jephthah  judged  Israel  six  years.  Then 
12.  9  for  his  sons:  andhe  judged  Israelseveny. 
12.  11  judged  Israel;  and  he-judged  Israel  ten  y. 
12.  14  ten  ass  eoltsiandhejudged  Israel  eighty. 

1  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines  forty  ye. 
20  in  thedaysof  the  Philistines  twenty  years 

31  his  father:  andhejudgedlsraeltwentyy. 
4  Ruth :  and  they  dwelt  there  about  ten  ye. 
7  he  did  so  year  by  year,  when  she  went  up 

15  Now  Eli  was  ninety  and  eight  years  old 
18  died.  .And  he  had  judged  Israel  forty  ye. 

2  the  time  was  long;  for  it  was  twenty  years 

16  went  from  year  to  year  in  circuit  to  Beth. 
1  one  year;  and  when  he  had  reigned  two  y. 

3  hath  been  with  me  these  days,  or  these  y. 

10  forty  years  old . .  and  reigned  two  years 

11  the  time,  .was  seven  years  and  six  months 

4  He  was  five  years  old  when  the  tidings 

4  thirty  years  old . .  (and)  he  reigned  forty  y. 

5  reigned  over  Judah  seven  years  and  six 
5  in  Jerusalemhereigued  thirty  and  three 
1  came  to  pass,  after  the  year  was  expired 

23  came  to  pass  after  two  full  years,  that  A. 

38  and  went  to  Geshur,  and  was  there  three  y. 
28  So  Absalom  dwelt  two  full  years  in  Jem. 

7  came  to  pass  after  forty  years,  that  Abs. 

32  was  a  very  aged  man,  (even)  fourscore  y. 
35  I  (am)  this  day  fourscore  years  old;  (and) 

1  three  years,  year  after  year;  and  David 

13  Shall  seven  years  of  famine  come  unto 
11  forty  years:  seven  years  reigned  he  in  H. 
11  thirty  and  three  years  reigned  he  in  Jer. 

39  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  three  years,  th. 

7  each  man  his  mouth  iu  a  year  made  pro. 
11  thus  gave  Solomon  to  Hiram  year  by  year 

1  in  the  four  hundred  and  eightieth  year  af. 

1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign  ov. 

37  In  the  fourth  year  was  the  foundation  of 

33  in  the  eleventh  year.  .So  w7ashe  seven  ye. 
1  was  building  his  own  house  thirteen  years 

10  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty  years 
25  three  times  in  a  year  did  Solomon  offer 

14  gold  that  came  to  Solomon  in  one  year 

22  once  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of  Tar. 
25  spices,  horses,  and  mules,  a  rate  year  by 
42  the  time  that  Solomon  reigned,  .forty  ye. 

20  two  and  twenty  years :  and  he  slept  with 

21  Rehoboam  (was)  forty  and  one  years  old 

21  reigned  seventeen  years  in  Jerusalem,  the 
25  came  to  pass,  in  the  fifth  year  of  king  Re. 

1  2s  ow  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Jer. 

2  Three  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem,  and 
9  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Jeroboam  king  of 

10  forty  and  one  years  reigned  he  in  Jerus. 
25  second  year,  .and  reigned  over  Israel  two 

28  Even  in  the  third  year  of  Asa  king  of  Ju. 
33  In  the  third  year  of  Asa  king  of  Judah  be. 
33  son  of  Ahijah  to  reign . .  twenty  and  four  y. 

S  In  the  twenty  and  sixth  year  of  Asa  king 

8  to  reign  over  Israel  in  Tirzah,  two  years 
10  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Asa  king  of  J. 

15  In  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Asa  ki. 

23  In  the  thirty  and  first  year  of  Asa  king  of 
23  twelve  years:  six  years  reigned  he  in  Tir. 

29  iu  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of  Asa  king 
29  reigned  over  Israel . .  twenty  and  two  yea. 

1  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  yea. 
1  came  to  Elijah  in  the  third  year,  saying 

22  for  at  the  return  of  the  year  the  king  of  S. 
20. 26  it  came  to  pass  at  the  return  of  the  year 
22.  1  continued  three  years  without  war  betw. 
22.    2  came  to  pass  in  the  third  year,  that  Jeh. 

22. 41  to  reign  over  Judah  in  the  fourth  year  of 
22.  42  Jehoshaphat  (was)  thirty  and  five  years 

22. 42  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jeru. 
22.  51  over  Israel  in  Samaria  the  seventeenth  ye. 
22.  51  of  Judah,  and  reigned  two  years  over  Is. 

;  XL  1.  17  in  the  second  year  of  Jehoram  the  son  of 
3.  1  over  Israel  in  Samaria  the  eighteenth  ye. 
3.  1  king  of  Judah,  and  reigned  twelve  years 
8.  1  it  shall  also  come  upon  the  land  seven  ye. 
S.  2  woman,  .sojourned  in  the  land,  .seven  ye. 
S.  3  it  came  to  pass  at  the  seven  years'  end 
8.  16  in  the  fifth  year  of  Jorani  the  son  of  Ahab 
S.  17  Thirty  and  two  years  old.,  reigned  eighty. 
S.  25  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Joram  the  son  of  A. 

8.  26  Two  aud  twenty  years  old.  .reigned  one  y. 

9.  25  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Joram  the  son  of 

10.  36  And  the  time . .  (was)  twenty  and  eight  ye. 

11.  3  withherhid  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  sixy. 
11.    4  seventh  year  Jehoiada  sent  and  fetched 

11.  21  Seven yearsold(was)  Jehoashwhenhe be. 

12.  1  In  the  seventh  year  of  Jehu,  Jehoash  be. 

12.  1  forty  years  reigned  he  in  Jerusalem.  And 
is,    6  in  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  king  J. 

13.  1  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Joash 
15.    1  Isr.  in  Samaria,  (and  reigned)  seventeen  y. 

33.  10  In  the  thirty  and  seventh  year  of  Joash 
13. 10  began  to  reign,  and  (reigned)  sixteen  years 

13.  20  invaded  the  land  at  the  coming  iu  of  they. 

14.  1  In  the  second  year  of  Joash  son  of  Jehoa. 

34.  2  He  was  twenty  and  five  years  old  when 
14.   2  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerusa. 
14.  17  son  of  Jehoahaz  king  of  Israel,  fifteen  ye. 
14.  21  sixteen  years  old,  and  made  him  king  in 
14.  23  In  the  fifteenth  year  of  Amaziah  the  son 

14.  23  in  Samaria,  (and  reigned)  forty  and  one  ye. 

15.  1  In  the  twenty  and  seventh  year  of  Azariah 

136 


*5- 
15- 
16. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
t6. 
16. 
16. 
16. 
17- 
18. 


sKi. 


23- 
23- 


[Ch. 


2CI1. 


2  Sixteen  years  old  was  he  when  he  began 
2  and  lie  reigned  two  and  fifty  years  in  Jer. 

8  In  the  thiftyandeighthyearof  Azariah 
13  began  to  reign  in  the  nine  and  thirtieth  y. 
17  In  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year  of  Azariah 

17  reign  over  Israel,  (and  reigned)  ten  years 
23  In  the  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  king  of  Ju. 
23  Israel  in  Samaria,  (and  reigned)  two  yea. 
27  In  the  two  and  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah  ki. 
27  over  Israel  in  Samaria,  (and  reigned)  tw. 

30  reigned  in  his  stead,  in  the  twentieth  ye. 

32  In  the  second  year  of  Pekah  the  son  of  R. 

33  Five  and  twenty  years  old  was  he  when 
33  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem.  And 

1  In  the  seventeenth  year  of  Pekaltthe  son 

2  Twenty  years  old  was  Ahaz  when  he  beg. 
2  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem,  and 

1  In  the  twelfth  yearof  Ahaz  king  of  Judah 
1  Elah  to  reign  in  Samaria  over  Israel  nine  y. 

4  no  present . .  as  (lie  had  done)  year  by  year 

5  went.,  to  Samaria,  and  besieged  it  three  y. 

6  In  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  the  king  of  A. 

1  in  the  third  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah 

2  Twenty  and  five  years  old  was  he  when  he 

2  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jer. 

9  fourth  year,  .which  was  the  seventh  year 
10  at  the  end  of  three  years,  .in  the  sixth  ye. 
10  that  (is)  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  king  of 
13  Now  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  king  Hez. 
29  eat  this  year,  .in  the  second  year  that  wh. 

29  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and  reap,  and 

6  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years,  and 
1  Manasseh  (was)  twelve  years  old  when  he 
1  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jerusalem 
19  Anion(was) twenty  andtwoyearsold  when 
19  reigned  two  years  in  Jerusalem.  And  his 
1  Josiah  (was)  eight  years  old  when  lie  beg. 
1  he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in  Jerus. 

3  came  to  pass  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king 

23  But  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Josiah 

31  Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years  old 
36  Jehoiakim(was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
36  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 

1  andJehoiakimbecamehisservant  threey. 

8  Jehoiachin  (was)  eighteen  years  old  when 

12  king  of  Babylon  took  him  in  the  eighthy. 

18  Zedekiah  (was)  twenty  and  one  years  old 

18  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem.  And 

1  came  to  pass  in  the  ninthyear  of  his  reign 

2  city  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh  year 
8  which  (is)  the  ninteenth  year  of  king  Wfe. 

27  came  to  pass  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth  y. 
27  in  the  year  that  he  began  to  reign,  did  lift 
21  he  married  when  he  (was)  threescore  ye. 

4  there  he  reigned  seven  years  and  six  mo. 

4  Jerusalem  he  reigned  thirty  and  three  y. 
1  came  to  pass,  that  after  the  year  was  ex. 

12  Either  three  years  famine ;  or  three  mon. 

3  numbered  from  the  age  of  thirty  years  and 

24  from  the  age  of  twenty  years  and  upward 
27  numbered  from  twenty  years  old  and  ab. 
31  In  the  fortieth  year  of  the  reign  of  David 

1  throughout  all  the  months  of  the  year,  of 

23  number  of  them  from  twenty  years  old 
27  time,  .(was)  forty  years;  seven  years  reig. 

2  second  month,  in  the  fourth  year  of  his 

1  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  twenty  years 

13  three  times  in  the  year,  (even)  in  the  fe. 
13  gold  that  came  to  Solomon  in  one  year  was 
21  every  three  years  once  came  the  ships  of 

24  spices,  horses . .  mules,  a  rate  year  by  year 

30  reigned  in  Jerusalem  over . .  Israel  forty  y. 
17  three  years :  for  three  years  they  walked 

2  in  the  fifth  year  of  king  Rehoboam,  Shis. 
13  Rehoboam  (was)  one  and  forty  years  old 
13  reigned  seventeen  years  in  Jerusalem,  the 

1  Now  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  king  Jero. 

2  He  reigned  three  years  in  Jerusalem.  His 
1  In  Ins  days  the  land  was  quiet  ten  years 

6  land  had  rest.,  he  had  no  war  in  those  ye. 
10  month,  in  the  fifteenth  y7ear  of  the  reign 

19  no  (more)  war  unto  the  five  and  thirtieth  y. 

1  In  the  six  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign 

12  Asa  in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  his  re. 

13  died  in  the  one  and  fortieth  year  of  his 

7  Also  in  the  third  year  of  his  reign  he  sent 

2  after  (certain)  years  he  went  down  to  A. 

31  thirty  and  five  years  old  when  he  began 
31  he  reigned  twenty  and  five  years  in  Jeru. 

5  Jehoram  (was)  tlurty  and  two  years  old 

5  to  reign,  and  he  reigned  eight  years  in  J. 

20  thirty  and  two  years  old  was  he  when  he 
20  and  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  eight  years 

2  Forty  and  twoyears  old(was)Ahaziah  when 

2  he  reigned  one  year  in  Jerusalem.  His  in. 
12  with  them  hid  in  the  house  of  God  six  y. 

1  in  the  seventh  year  Jehoiada  strengthen. 

1  Joash  (was)  seven  years  old  when  he  be. 

1  reigned  forty  years  in  Jerusalem.  His  mo. 

5  the  house  of  your  God  from  year  to  year 
15  hundred  and  thirty  years  old  (was  he)wh. 
23  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  year,  (that) 

1  Amaziah  (was)  twenty  and  five  3'ears  old 

1  reigned  twenty  and  nine  years  in  Jerusa. 

5  numbered  them  from  twentyyearsoldand 

25  lived  after  the  death  of  Joash.  .fifteen  y. 
1  who  (was)  sixteen  years  old,  and  made 

3  Sixteen  years  old  (was)  TJzziah  when  he 

3  lie  reigned  fifty  and  two  years  in  Jerusa. 
1  Jotham  (was)  twenty  and  five  years  old 
1  and  he  reigned  sixteenyears  in  Jerusalem 
5  children  of  Amnion  gave  him  the  same  y. 


2CI1.27. 
27. 
27. 


33- 

33* 
33- 


34- 
34- 


36. 
36. 


36. 

36. 


3D- 

36. 
36. 

Ezra   1. 


Neh. 


Esth. 


36. 
36. 
42. 
Psa.  31. 
61. 
65. 

77- 

77- 

78. 

90. 

90. 

50. 

90. 

90. 

95- 

102. 

102. 

Prov.  4. 

5- 

9- 

10. 

Eccl.  6. 


Jer. 


=3- 

15 

■-  ■■ 

I 

10 

34- 

8 

3"- 

1 

37- 

3° 

37- 

^0 

3»- 

S 

3»- 

10 

,8. 

i* 

f)l. 

2 

63. 

4 

6,. 

20 

f>5. 

20 

I. 

2 

I. 

II. 

23 

17- 

8 

23. 

12 

25. 

1 

25- 

1 

25- 

3 

25- 

3 

pay  unto  him,  both  the  second  year  and 
He  was  five  and  twenty  years  old  when  he 
to  reign,  and  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Je. 
Ahaz  (was)  twenty  years  old  when  he  be. 
reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem,  but 
five  and  twenty  years  old,  and  he  reigned 
nine  and  twenty  years  in  Jerusalem.  And 
He,  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  in  the 
from  three  yeai-s  old  and  upward,  (even) 
from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  in  th. 
Mauasseh  (was)  twelve  years  old  when  he 
and  he  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jer. 
Anion  (was)  two  and  twentyyears  old  wh. 
began  to  reign,  and  reigned  two  years  in 
Josiah  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he  beg. 
he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  one  and  thirty  y. 
For  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,  while 
in  the  twelfth  year  he  began  to  purge  Ju. 
Now  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign 
In  the  eighteenth  yearof  the  reign  of  Jo. 
Jehoahaz  (was)  twenty  and  three  years  old 
Jehoiakim  (was)  twenty  aud  five  years  old 
reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem,  and 
Jehoiachin  (was)  eight  years  old  when  he 
when  the  year  was  expired,  king  Nebuch. 
Zedekiah  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old 
to  reign,  and  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jer. 
sabbath,  to  fulfil  threescore  and  ten  years 
Now  in  the  first  yearof  Cyrus  king  of  Pe. 
Now  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Pe. 
Now  in  the  second  year  of  their  coming 
from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  to  set 
in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  king 
month,  which  (was)  in  the  seventh  yearof 
in  the  twentieth  year,  as  I  \i  as  in  Shushan 
in  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  k. 
year  even  unto  the  two  and  thirtieth  year 
twelve  years,  I  and  my  brethren  have  not 
Yea,  forty  years  didst  thou  sustain  them 
Yet  many  years  didst  thou  forbear  them 
we  should  leave  the  seventh  year,  and  the 
to  charge  ourselves  yearly  with  the  third 
at  times  appointed  year  by  year,  to  burn 
fruit  of  all  trees,  year  by  year,  unto  the  ho. 
for  in  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  Art  a. 
In  the  third  year  of  his  reign  he  made  a 
month  Tebeth,  in  the  seventh  year  of  his 
in  the  twelfth  yearof  king  Ahasuerus,  they 
and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same,  yearly 
ace.  to  their  (appointed)  time,  every  year 
let  it  not  be  joined  unto  the  days  of  the  ye. 
days  as  the  days  of  man?  (are)  thy  years 
the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  op. 
When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall 
and  multitude  of  years  should  teach  wis. 
spend  their  days  in  prosperity,  and  their  y. 
neither  can  the  number  of  his  years  be  se. 
this  lived  Job  an  hundred  and' forty  years 
For  my  life  is  spent  with  grief,  and  my  y. 
prolong  the  king's  life ;  (and)  his  years  as 
Thou  crownestthe  yearwiththygoodness 
I  have  considered  the  days  of  old,  the  ye. 
the  years  of  the  right  handof  the  mosthi. 
consume  in  vanity,  and  their  years  in  tr. 
For  a  thousand  years  in  thy sight(are butt 
we  spend  our  years  as  a  tale  (that  is  told) 
The  days  of  our  years  are  threescore  years 
by  reason  of  strength  (they  be)  fourscore  y. 
(and)  the  years  (wherein)  we  have  seen  evil 
Forty  years  long  was  I  grieved  with  (this) 
thy  years  (are)  throughout  all  generations 
'  (art)  the  same,  and  thy  yeais  shall  have 
sayings ;  and  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be 
1  Lest  thou  give,  .thy  years  unto  the  cruel 
and  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be  increased 
but  the  years  of  the  wicked  shall  be  sho. 
so  that  the  days  of  his  years  be  many,  and 
though  he  live  a  thousand  years  twice  (t.) 
But  if  a  man  live  many  years,  (and)  rejo. 
years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt  say,  I 
In  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  died  I  saw 
;  within  threescore  and  five  years  shall  Ep. 
In  the  year  that  king  Ahaz  died  was  this 
Within  three  years,  as  the  years  of  an  hir. 
In  the  year  that  Tartan  came  unto  Ashdod 
walked  naked  and  barefoot  three  years 
Within  a  year,  according  to  the  years  of 
Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  seventy  years,  ace. 
,  17  after  the  end  of  seventy  years 
add  ye  year  to  year;  let  them  kill  sacrifi. 
3Iany  days  and  years  shall  be  troubled,  ye 
year  of  recompences  for  the  controversy 
Now  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourteenth  ye. 
Ye  shall  eat  (this) year  that  which  spring, 
the  second  year,  .and  in  the  third  year 
behold,  I  will  add  unto  thy  days,  .years 
I  am  deprived  of  the  residue  of  my  years 
I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years  in  the  bitter. 
To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
mine  heart,  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed 
for  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years 
sinner,  (being)  an  hundred  years  old,  sh. 
king  of  Judah,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of 
unto  the  end  of  the  eleventh  year  of  Zed. 
men  of  Anathoth,  (even)  the  year  of  their 
shall  not  be  careful  in  the  yearof  drought 
evil  upon  them,  (even)  the  year  of  their 
fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son  of  Jos. 
first  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Bab. 
From  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  the 
that  is  the  three  aud  twentieth  year  the 
shall  serve  the  king  of  Babyloutwenty  y. 


^EAR 


10S2 


YET 


Jer.  25. 
28, 
28, 
28. 
28, 
28. 
28, 
29, 
32 
32. 
34 
34 
36. 
36. 
39' 
39< 
45' 
46. 
48. 
5i- 
51- 
5r- 
52- 
52- 
52. 
52. 
52- 
52. 
52- 
52. 
52. 

Eze.    1. 

1. 

4- 

4- 
8. 


24. 
26. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
29. 
3°- 
3i' 
32. 
32- 
33' 
38. 
38. 
39- 
40. 
40. 
46. 
46. 

Dan.  1. 


Joel   2. 

2. 

Amos  1 


Mic.  6, 
Hab.  3 
Hag.  1 
2 
Zccli.  1. 


7- 

7- 

7- 

14. 

Mai.    3. 
4.^4  year y 

Luke  4. 
John  11. 

11. 

18. 
Acts  11. 

18. 

Gal.     4. 

Heb.  9. 

9- 

10. 

10. 
Jas.    4. 

Rev.  9. 

5..I  year 3 

Matt,  a 

-Mark  5. 

Luke  2. 


1 2  when  twenty  years  are  accomplished, (that) 
1  came  to  pass  the  same  year,  in  the  begin. 
1  in  the  fourth  year,  (and)  in  the  fifth  nion. 

3  Within  two  full  years  will  I  bring  again 

11  nations  within  the  space  of  fwcfull  years 

16  this  year  thou  shalt  die,  because  thou  ha. 

17  So  Hanauiah  the  prophet  died  the  samey. 

10  That  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished 
.    1  in  the  tenth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Ju. 

1  which  (was)  the  eighteenth  yearof  Nebuc. 
.  14  At  the  end  of  seven  years  let  ye  go  every 

14  when  he  hath  served  thee  six  years,  thou 
1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  son 
9- came  to  pass  in  the  fifthyear  of  Jehoiakim 

1  In  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  Ju. 

2  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah,  in  the 

1  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  the  sou 

2  smote  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim 
44  upon  Moab,  the  year  of  their  visitation 
46  rumour  shall  both  come  (one)  year,  and 
46  in  (another)  year  (shall  come)  a  rumour 
59  into  Babylon  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  re. 

1  Zedekiah  was  one  and  twenty  years  old 
1  and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 

4  it  came  to  pass  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  re. 

5  So  the  city  was  besieged  unto  the.,  year 

12  which  was  the  nineteenth  year  of  Nebuc. 

28  In  the  seventh  year  three  thousand  Jews 

29  In  the  eighteenth  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar 

30  In  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  Neon. 

31  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth  year  of  the  ca. 
31  king  of  Babylon  in  the  (first)  year  of  his 

1  Now  it  came  to  pass  in  the  thirtieth  year 

2  which  (was)  the.- fifth  year  of  king  Jehoia. 

5  I  have  laid  upon  thee  the  years  of  their 

6  I  have  appointed  thee  each  day  for  a  ye. 
1  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth  year,  in  the  six. 
1  came  to  pass  iu  the  seventh  year,  in  the 

4  art  come  (even)  unto  thy  years ;  therefore 
1  Again,  in  the  ninth  year,  in  the  tenth  m. 
1  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the 
1  In  the  tenth  year,  in  the  tenth  (month) 

11  neither  shall  it  be  inhabited  forty  years 

12  laid  waste  shall  be  desolate  forty  years 

13  At  the  end  of  forty  years  will  I  gather  the 
17  came  to  pass  hi  the  seven  and  twentieth  y. 

20  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the 
1  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the 
1  came  to  pass  in  the  twelfth  year,  in  the 

17  It  came  to  pass  also  in  the  twelfth  year 

21  came  to  pass  in  the  twelfth  year  of  our 

8  in  the  latter  years  thou  shalt  come  into 
17  prophesied  in  those  days  (many)  years 

9  and  they  shall  burn  them  with  fire.,  years 
1  In  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  our  cap. 
1  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  .fourteenth 

13  a  Iamb  of  the  first  year  without  blemish 
17  then  it  shall  be  his  to  the  year  of  liberty 
i  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim 

5  so  nourishing  them  three  years,  that  at 
21  Daniel  continued(even)untothefirstyear 

r  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Nebuc. 
1  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  king  Be. 

1  In  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  son  of  Ah. 

2  In  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  I  Daniel  un. 
2  by  books  the  number  of  the  years,  where. 
2  would  accomplish  seventy  years  in  the 

1  In  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 

1  Also  I,  in  the  first  year  of  Darius  theM. 

6  in  the  end  of  years  they  shall  join  them. 
8  continue  (more)  years  than  the  king  of 

13  certainly  come  after  certain  years  with 

2  after  it,  (even)  to  the  years  of  many  gen. 
25  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the  lo. 

1  king  of  Israel,  two  years  before  the  eart. 
10  led  you  forty  years  through  the  wilderness 

25  and  offerings  in  the  wilderness  forty  years 

6  with  burnt  offerings,  with  calves  of  a  ye. 

2  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  makekn. 
1,  15  In  the  second  year  of  Darius  the  king 

10  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the  w. 
1  In  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year 

7  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the 

12  indignation  these  threescore  and  ten  ye. 
1  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of  king  D. 

3  myself,  as  I  have  done  these  so  many  y.? 
5  even  those  seventy  years,  did  ye  at  all 

16  even  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship 

4  as  in  the  days  of  old,  and  as  in  former  y. 

repetition-)  revolution^  tviavrSs  eniautos. 
19  To  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lo. 
49  <  loiaphas,  1  leing  the  high  priest  that,  .year 
51  but  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prop. 

13  which  was  the  high  priest  that  same  yea. 

26  that  a  whole  year  they  assembled  thems. 
n  continued  (there)  a  year  and  six  months 
10  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times,  and 

7  (went)  the  high  priest  alone  once  every  y. 
25  cntereth  into  the  holy  place  every  year 

1  which  they  offei-ed  year  by  year  continu. 

3  remembrance  again  (made)  of  sin  every  y. 
13  continue  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell 

17  rained  not.  .by  the  space  of  three  years 

15  were  prepared  for.  .a  year,  for  to  slay  the 
eroy  etos, 

so  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  y. 
25  which  had  an  isaue  of  blood  twelve  years 
42  for  she  was  (of  the  age)  of  twelve  years 
3'i  had  lived  witli  an  husband  seven  years 
;,?  widow  of  about  fourscore  and  four  years 
41  went  to  Jerusalem  every  year  at  the  1.  asl 


Luke  2.  42  when  he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went 
3.    1  Now  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of 

3.  23  Jesus  himself  began  to  be  about  thirty  y. 

4.  25  when  the  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years 
8.  42  only  daughter,  about  twelve  years  of  age 
8.  43  woman,  having  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  y. 

12.  19  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years 

13.  7  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on 
13.    8  let  it  alone  this  year  also,  till  I  shall  dig 
13.  11  had  a  spirit  of  infirmity  eighteen  years 
13. 16  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen  years 

.  15.  29  Lo,  these  many  years  and  served  thee,  ne. 
John  2.  20  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  in  bu. 

5.  5  which  had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eighty. 

8.  57  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast 
Acts    4.  22  For  the  man  was  above  forty  years  old  or 

7.    6  and  entreat  (them)  evil  four  hundred  yea. 
7.  30  when  forty  years  were  expired,  there  ap. 
7.  36  wonders,  .in  the  wilderness  forty  years 
7. 42  (by  the  space  of)  fortyyear  iu  the  wilder.? 

9.  33  which  had  kept  his  bed  eight  years,  and 
13.  20  the  space  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  years 
13.  21  tribe  of  Benjamin,  by  the  space  of  forty  y. 

19.  10  this  continued  by  the  space  of  two  years 
24. 10  know  that  thou  hast  been  of  many  years 
24.  17  Now  after  many  years  I  came  to  bring 

Bom.  15.  23  having  a  great  desire  these  many  years 
2  Co.  12.    2  knew  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen  ye. 
Gal.     1.  18  Then  after  three  years  I  went  up  to  Jer. 

2.  1  Then  fourteen  years  after  I  went  up  to 

3.  17  which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 

1  Ti.   5.   9  into  the  number  under  threescore  years 
Heb.  1.  12  Thou  art  the  same,  and  thy  years  shall 

3.  9  proved  me,  and  saw  my  works  fortyyears 
3.  17  But  with  whom  was  he  grieved  forty  yea. 

2  Pe.  3.  8  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years 
Rev.  20.    2  and  Satan,  aud  bound  him  a  thousand  y. 

20.  3  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled 
20.  4  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years 
20.  5  lived  not  agaiu  until  the  thousand  years 
20.  6  and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand  yea. 
20.    7  when  the  thousand  years  are  expired,  Sa. 

6.  Days,  i]fi4pai  hemerai. 

Luke  1.   7  they  both  were  (now)  well  stricken  in  ye. 
1.  iS  old  man,  and  my  wife  well  stricken  iu  ye. 

YEAR  ago,  two  years  (old)  — 
l.Two  years  old,  Ster-fisdietes. 

Matt.  2. 16  from  two  years  old  aud  under,  according 
2, Space  of  two  years,  dterta   dietia. 

Acts  24.  27  But  after  two  years  Porcius  Festus  came 
28.  30  Paul  dwelt  two  whole  years  in  his  own 

3. From  last  year,  air6  irepvo-i  apo  pernsi. 

2  Co.  8. 10  only  to  do,  but  also  to  be  forward  a  year  a. 
9.    2  that  Achaia  was  ready  a  year  ago ;  and 

YEARS,  to  be  come  to  — 

To  become  great,  yivofiai  fj.4yas  ginomai  megas. 

Heb.  11.  24  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  come  to  ye. 
YEARN,  to  — 
To  be  burning,  yearning,  "C3  kamar,  2. 

Gen.  43.  30  for  his  bowels  did  yearn  upon- his  brother 

1  Ki.  3.  26  for  her  bowels  yearned  upon  her  sou,  and 

YELL,  to  — 

{.To  growl,  shake,  ijjj  naar, 

Jer.  51.  38  roar  together  like  lions;  they  shall  yell 
2.  To  give  forth  the  voice,  Vip  jm  nathan  qol. 

Jer.     2.  15  The  young  lions  roared  upon  him,  (and) y. 
YELLOW  — 
X.Green  or  yellow,  Plf>Tm  i/eraqraq. 

Psa.  68. 13  with  silver,  and  her  feathers  with  yellow 
^.Shining,  ?ny  tsahob. 

Lev.  13.  30  in  it  a  yellow  thin  hair;  then  the  pv4est 

13.  32  there  be  in  it  no  yellow  hair,  and  the  sc. 

13.  36  priest  shall  not  look  for  yellow  hair;  he 

YES  (verily)  — 

1. Indeed  then,yea,  yea,  verily,  fievovvye  menounge. 

Bom  10.  18  Yes  verily,  their  sound  went  into  all  the 
2.  Verily,  indeed,  truly,  pray,  vai  nai. 

Matt  17.  25  He  saith,  Yes.  And  when  he  was  come 

Mark  7.  ?8  Yes,  Lord  ;  yet  the  dogs  under  the  table 

Rom.  3.  29  not  also  of  the  Gentiles?  Yes,  of  the  Gen. 

YESTERDAY,  yesternight  — 

1.  Yesternight,  former  time,  vv$  emesh. 

Gen.  19.  34  I  lay  yesternight  with  my  father:  let  us 
31.  29  God  of  your  father  spake  unto  me  yester. 
31.  42  of  my  hands,  and  rebuked  (thee)  yesterd. 

2  Ki.  9.  26  Siu*ely  I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of 

2.  Yesterday,  former  time,  Vicr^',  b^nit,  ethmol. 
Psa.  90.   4  thousand  years  in  thy  sight. .as  yester. 

3. Yesterday }  third  day,  Dfcoif'  ViDp  temol  shil shorn. 
Exod.  5.  14  in  making  brick  both  yesterday  and  to  day 

1  Sa.  20.  27  cometh not.  .neitheryesterdaynortoday? 

2  Sa.  15.  20  Whereas  thou  earnest  (but)  yesterday,  sh. 
Job     8.   9  For  we  (are  but  of)  yesterday,  and  know 

\.  Yesterday,  yesternight,  x^'s  chthes  ex^'s* 

John  4.  52  Yesterday  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever 
Acts  7.  28  kill  me,  as  thou  diddest  the  Egyptian  y.? 
Heb.  13.    8  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to 

YET  (as  but  so,  within)  more  and  more,  to  be-- 

l.Then,  tk  az. 

Job     9.  31  Yet  shaltthouplungcme  in  the  ditch,  and 


2.0nly,  7]N  ah. 

Gen.  18.  32  will  speak  yet  but  this  once :  Peradven. 

27.  30  Jacob  was  yet  scarce  gone  out  from  the 

N11D122.  20  but  yet  the  word  which  I  shall  say  unto 

Z.But,  dx  '3  Him. 

Judg  15.    7  yet  will  I  be  avenged  of  you,  and  after 
4.2*0  say,  "Dx  amar. 

Eze.  28.   9  Wilt  thou  yet  say  before  him  that  slayeth 
5. But,  certainly,  D"]2  beram. 

Dan.   4.  23  ytt  leave  the  stump  of  the  roots  thereof 
5.  17  yet  I  will  read  the  writing  uuto  the  king 

6.  To  {cause  to)  add,  increase,  continue,  f|ti;  yasaph,  5. 

Exod.  9.  34  sinned  yet  more,  and  hardened  his  heart 

1  Sa.  18.  29  Saulwasyetth  mon  afraid  of  David,  and 

2  Ki.  19.  30  And  the  remnant,  .shall  yet  again  take 
Psa.  71.  14  hope  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  thee 

7.  That,  but,  '*  ki. 

Exod.  5.  11  yet  not  ought  of  your  work  shall  be  dim. 

8.  Unto,  up  to,  during,  "ij?  ad. 

Lev.  26. 18  if  ye  will  not  yet  for  all  this  hearken  uuto 
9. Till  now,  hitherto,  hrj;  iy  ad  attah. 

2  Ki.  13.  23  neither  cast  he  them  from  his  presence 

10. Yet,  hitherto,  njn^,  ]~}.)l.aden,  adennah. 

Eccl.  4.    2  dead,  more  than  the  living  which  are  yet 

4.  3  than  both  they  which  hath  not  yet  been 

11.  Again,  yet,  while,  any  more,  liy  od. 

Gen.    7.    4  For  yet  seveu  days,  and  f  will  cause  it  to 

18.  22  but  Abraham  stood  yet  before  the  Lord 

29.    9  while  he  yet  spake  with  them,  Rachel  ca. 

40. 13  Yet  within  three  days  shall  Pharaoh  lift 

Exod  4. 18  Let  me  go.. and  see  whether  they  be  yet 

2  Ki.  14.   4  as  yet  the  people  did  sacrifice  aud  burnt  in. 

12.  Unto  here,  hitherto,  n^rj  ij;  ad  hennah. 

Gen.  15.  16  for  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  (is)  not  y. 

13.  Only,  sure,  nevertheless,  plrccq. 

2  Ki.  14.  3  yet  not  like  David  his  father:  he  did  ace. 
.  2  Ch.  6. 16  yet  so  that  thy  children  take  heed  to  th. 

14.  Up  to  this  point,  still,  ctK^v  akmen. 

Matt.15.  16  Jesus  said,  Are  ye  also  yet  without  und.? 

15.  But,  except,  iinless,  a,\Ka  alia. 

Marki4.  29  Although  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  (will) 

1  Co.  4.    4  kuow  nothing  by  myself;  yet  am  I  not  he. 

4. 15  yet (have  ye)  not  many  fathers:  foriuCh. 
9.    2  yet  doubtless  I  am  to  you:  for  the  seal  of 

14. 19  Yet  in  the  church  I  had  rather  speakfive 

2  Co.  4.    8  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  distressed 

4. 16  yet  the  inward  (man)  is  renewed  day  by 
5. 16  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  (him)  no  more 

11.  6  though  (I  be)  rude  in  speech,  yet  not  m 

13.  4  yet  he  liveth  by  the  power  of  God.  Forwe 
Col.     2.    5  For  though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet 

lQ.For,  yap  gar. 

Matt  15.  27  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall 
Mark  7.  28  [yet]  the  dogs  underthe  tableeatof  the  ch. 
Rom.  5.    7  yet  peradventure  for  a  good  man  some 

17.  Verily,  truly,  y4  ge. 

Luken.    8  yet  because  of  his  Importunity  he  will  rise 

18.  s  Yet  because  this  widow  troubleth  me,  I 

IS.  Still,  yet,  hitherto,  ert  eti. 

Matt  12.  46  While  he  yet  talked  to  the  people,  behold 

17.  5  Whileheyet  spake, behold, abright  cloud 

19.  20  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up:  what  lack 

26.  47  while  he  yet  spake,  lo,  Judas,  one  of  the 

27.  63  said  while  he  was  yet  alive,  After  three 
Mark  5.  35  While  he  yet  spake,  there  came  from  the 

8.  17  understand?  have  ye  yourheart  [yetjhard. 

12,  6  Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  well  be. 

14.  43  while  he  yet  spake,  cometh  Judas,  one  of 
Luke  8.  49  While  he  yet  spake,  there  cometh  one  fr. 

9.  42  as  he  was  yet  a  coming,  the  devil  threw 
14.  22  as  thou  hast  commanded,  and  yet  there 

14.  32  while  the  other  is  yet  a  great  way  off,  he 

15.  20  when  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  fat. 

18.  22  Yet  lackest  thou  one  thiug:  sell  all  that 
22. 37  this  that  is  written  must  [yet]  be  accompl. 
22.  47  while  he  yet  spake,  behold  a  multitude 
22.  60  immediately,  while  he  yet  spake,  the  cock 
24.  6  how  he  spake  unto  you  when  he  was  yet 
24.  41  while  they  yet  believed  not  for  joy,  and 
24.  44  while  I  was  yet  with  you,  that  all  things 

John  4.  35  There  are  [yet]  four  months,  and  (then)  c. 
7.  33  Yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  you,  and  (th.) 

12.  35  said  unto  them,  Yet  a  little  while  is  the 

13.  33  yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  you.     Ye  sh. 

14.  19  Vet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth 

16.  12  I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you 

20.  1  while  it  was  yet  dark,  unto  the  sepulchre 
Acts    9.    1  Saul,  yet  hreathiug  out  threatenings  and 

10. 44  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the 
iS.  18  Paul  (after  this)tarried  (there)yet  a  good 
Rom.  3.    7  why  yet  am  I  also  judged  as  a  sinner  ? 

5.  6  For  when  we  were  yet  without  strength 
5.    8  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for 
9.  19  Why  doth  he  yet  find  fault,  for  who  hath 

1  Co.  3.   2  not  able  (to  bear  it),'neither[yet]now  are 

3.    3  For  ye  are  yet  carnal:  for  whereas  (there 
12.  31  and  yet  show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent 

15.  17  your  faith  (is)  vain;  yeare  yet  in  your  sins 

2  Co.  1.  10  in  whom  we  trust  that  he  will  [yet]  deliver 
Gal.     1.  10  for  if  I  yet  pleased  men,  I  should  not  be 

2  20  yet  not  I,  but  Christliveth  in  me:  and  the 
5.  11  if  I  yet  preach  cireumcisiou,  why  do  I  yet 


YET 

Phil.   t.   9  that  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and 

2  Th.  2.    5  when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these 

Heb.  7.  10  For  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  father 

7. 15  it  is  yet  far  more  evident:  for  that  after 

g.    8  while  as  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  stan. 

10. 37  For  yet  a  little  while,  and  he  that  shall 

11.   4  ;  11.  26;  12.  27  ;  Kev,  6.  11. 

19.  Or,  %  e,  Acts  24.  1 1. 

20.  And,  also,  naikai,  Lu.  3.  20;  Jo.  8.  16;  Ga.  3,  4. 
21JVbw,  already,  jjdn  ede. 

Matt  24. 32  When  his  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  putt. 
Marki3.  2S  When  her  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  putt. 

22.  Yet  even,  k&v  kan. 

2  Co. 11. 16  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me,  that 

23.  To  he  about  to,  fieKXu  mdlo. 

Rev.   S.  13  trumpet  of  the  three  angels,  which  are  yet 

24.  Truly,  indeed,  p.4vroi  mentoi. 

John  4.  27  yet  no  man  said,  What  seekest  thou?  or 
20.    5  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying ;  yet  went  he 

2o.'2Vo2  more,  ov  wXeiovs  ou  plewits. 

Acts  24.  iiThereare[yet]buttwelvedayssinceIwent 
YET  (nor,  not)  never,  as— 
l.Nb  one  at  any  time,  ouSei?  7roj7roTe  oudeis  popote. 

Luke  19.  30  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  where  on  yet  never 

2. Not  yet,  ovoeTrco  oudepo. 

John  7.  39  for  the  Holy  Ghost  wasnot  [yet]  (given).be. 

19.  41  new  sepulchre,  wherein  wasnevermanyet 

20.  9  For  as  yet  they  knew  not  the  scripture,  th. 

1  Co.   8.    2  he  kno weth  nothing  [yet]  as  he  ought  to  k. 

Z.Xot  yet,  no  more,  no  longer,  ovKert  ouketi. 

Mark  15.    5  But  Jesus  yet  answered  nothing ;  so  that 

2  Co.    1.  23  that  to  spare  you  I  came  not  as  yet  unto 
Gal.     2.  20  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  livethinme  :  and  the 

4.  And  not,  neither,  nor,  o&re  oute. 

Lukei4.  35  It  is  neither  fit  for  the  land,  nor  yet  for 
John  4.  21  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  ye  tat  Jeru. 
Acts  19. 37  neither  robbers  of  churches,  noryet  bias. 

25.  8  nor  yet  againstCesar,  have  I  offended  auy 
Rev.    9.  20  [yet]  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  ha. 

YIELD  unto,  to  (cause  to)  — 
l.To  do,  ripen,  ^na  gamal. 

Xunii7.   S  and  bloomed  blossoms,  and  yielded  almo. 
%To  sow,  Jnj  zara. 

Gen.    1.  29  in  the  which  (is)  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding 
3. To  (cause  to)  sow,  vi}  mra,  5. 

Gen.    1.  11  the  herb  yielding  seed  (and)  the  fruit  tree 
1. 12  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  kind,  and  the 

4. To  give,  in]  yehdb. 

Dan.  3.  28  yielded  their  bodies,  that  they  might  not 
5.7b  (cause  to)  add,  increase,  *]□;  yosaph,  5. 

Lev.  19.  25  that  it  may  yield  unto  you  the  increase  th. 

6.  To  (cause  to)  turn  aside,  incline,  nos  natah,  5. 

Prov.  7.  21  she  caused  him  to  yield,  with  the  flatter. 

7.  To  lift  up,  nV'j  nasa. 

Eze.  36.    8  yield  your  fruit  to  my  people  of  Israel,  for 

5.  To  do,  ?nake,  n'^  asah. 

Gen.    1.  11  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  kind 
1. 12  the  tree  yielding  fruit,  whose  seed  (was) 
Psa.107.  37  plant  vineyards,  which  may  yield  fruits 
Isa.     5.  10  Yea,  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one 

5.  10  and  the  seed  of  an  homer  shall  yield  an 
Jer.  17.  8  drought,  neither  shall  cease  from  yield. 
Hos.    8.    7  bud  shall  yield  no  meal :  if  so  be  it  yield 

9.  To  give,  |5J  nathan. 

Gen.    4.  12  it  shall  not  henceforth  yield  unto  thee 

49.  20  bread  (shall  be)  fat,  and  he  shall  yield  ro. 
Lev.  25.  19  land  shall  yield  her  fruit,  and  ye  shall  eat 

26.  4  land  shall  yield . .  trees  of  the  field  shall  yi. 
26. 20  for  your  land  shall  not  yield  her  increase 
26.  20  neither  shall  the  trees  of  the  land  yield 

Deutn.  17  that  the  land  yield  not  her  fruit;  and 
Psa.  67.    6  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase ;  (and) 

85. 12  and  our  land  shall  yield  her  increase 
Prov  12.  12  but  the  root  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  (fr.) 
Eze.  34.  27  yield  her  fruit,  and  the  earth  shall  yield 
Joel   2.  22  the  fig  tree  and.  the  vine  do  yield  their  st. 

10.  To  give  the  hand,  i;  \T}i  nathan  y ad. 

2  Ch.30.    8  yield  yourselves  unto  the  Lord,  and  enter 

11.  To  cause  to  be  many,  multiply,  n:n  rabah,  5. 
Neh.   9.  37  it  yieldeth  much  increase  unto  the  kings 

l'l.Healing,  N310  mnrpe. 

Eccl.  10.   4  leave  not  thy  place ;  for  yieldingpacifieth 

13.  To  give  off,  away,  or  back,  airodi^aifxt  apodidomi. 
Heb.  12.  11  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit 
Rev.  22.    2  yielded  her  fruit  every  month:  and  the 

14.  To  give,  StSw/u  didomi. 

Maxk  4.    7  thorns  grew  up,  and  choked  it,  and  it  yi. 
4.    8  did  yield  fruit  that  sprang  up  and  incre. 

15. To  set  or  place  alongside,  irapLo'Tduaj  paristano. 
Rom.  6. 13  Neither  yield  ye  your  members  (as)instr. 

6.  16  Know  ye  not,  that  to  whom  ye  yield  you. 

16.  To  set  or  place  alongside,  irapiffrnfxiparisteifii. 
Rom.  6.  13  but  yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as  those 

9. 19  as  ye  have  yielded,  .even  so  now  yield  yo. 

17.  To  persuade,  ire(9co  peitho. 

Acts  23.  21  But  do  not  thou  yield  unto  them  ;  for  th. 


1083 

IS.  To  do,  make,  irotia  poien. 

Jas.     3.  12  so  (can)  no  fountain  both  yield  salt  water 
YIELD  up  [the  ghost)  — 
l.To  send  away,  atpinixi  aphiemi. 

.Matt 27.  50  cried,  .with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the 
2.7*0  breathe  out,  ^k^i>x<^  ekpsuchd. 

Acts   5. 10  yielded  up  the  ghost :  and  the  young  men 
YOKE  (of  oxen),  yokefellow  — 
\.A  bar,  Bio  mot. 

Xah.  1.  13  For  now  will  I  break  his  yoke  from  off  thee 
2.^1  bar,  n»iD  motah. 

Isa.    58.    6  go  free,  and  that  ye  break  every  yoke? 
58.    9  take  away  from  the  midst  of  thee  the  yoke 

Jer.  27.   2  Make  thee  bonds  and  yokes,  and  put  them 
28.  10  Then  Hananiah  the  prophet  took  the  yoke 

28. 12  Hananiah  the  prophet  had  broken  theyo. 

28. 13  saith  the  Lord,  Thou  hast  broken  the  yo. 

28. 13  but  thou  shalt  make  for  them  yokes  of  iron 
Eze.  30. 18  when  I  shall  break  there  the  yokes  of  E. 

Z.A  yoke,  )v,  ^y  oT. 

Gen.  27.  40  thoushalt  break  his  yokefrom  off  thy  neck 
Lev.  26.  13  have  broken  the  bands  of  your  yoke,  and 
Xumig.  2  no  blemish,  (and)  upon  which  never  came 
Deut2i.  3  heifer.,  which  hath  not  drawn  in  the  yoke 
28. 48  he  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  neck 
1  Sa.  6.    7  kine,  on  which  there  hath  come  no  yoke 

1  Ki.12.    4  Thy  father  make  our  yoke  grievous :  now 

12.  4  heavy  yoke  which  he  put  upon  us,  lighter 
12.  9  Make  the  yoke  which  thy  father  did  put 
12. 10  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  but  m. 
12.  11  my  father  did  lade  you  witha  heavy  yoke 
12.  11  will  add  to  your  yoke :  my  father  hath 
12.  14  yoke  heavy,  and  I  will  add  to  your  yoke 

2  Ch.io.   4  made  our  yoke  grievous,  .yoke  that  he  put 

10.   9  Ease  somewhat  the  yoke  that  thy  father 

10. 10  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  heavy,  but  m. 

10. 11  yoke  upon  you,  I  will  put  more  to  your  y. 

10. 14  My  father  made  your  yoke  heavy,  but  I 
Isa.     9.    4  For  thou  hast  broken  the  yoke  of  his  bur. 

10.  27  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck,  and  the  yoke 
14.  25  then  shall  his  yoke  depart  from  off  them 
47.    6  ancient  hast  thou  very  heavily  laid  thy  y. 

Jer.     2.  20  For  of  old  time  I  have  broken  thy  yoke 
5.    5  these  have  altogether  broken  the  yoke 

27.  8,  11,  12  under  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  Bab. 

28.  2  I  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  Ba. 
28.  4  for  I  will  break  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B. 
28. 11  Even  so  will  I  break  the  yoke  of  Nelrach. 
28. 14  I  have  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  the  neck 
30.    8  I  will  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck,  and 

Lam.  1.  14  The  yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  bound 
3.  27  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in 
Eze.  34. 27  when  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  their  yo. 
Hos.  11.   4  was  to  them  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke 
4.  A  couple,  team,  yoke  of  oxen,  *i£*  tsemed. 

1  Sa.  11.    7  he  took  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  hewed  them 

14. 14  were  an  half  acre  of  land,  (which)  a  yoke 
1  Ki.  19.  19  who  (was)  plowing  (with)  twelve  yoke  (of 

19.  21  returned  back  from  him,  and  took  a  yoke 
Job     1.    3  five  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  and  five  hun. 

42.  12  thousand  yoke  of  oxen,  and  a  thousand 
Jer.  51.  23  the  husbandman  and  hisyoke  of  oxen,  and 

5.A  yoke,  pair,  (evyos  zeugos. 

Lukei4. 19  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go 
6.  A  yoke,  beam,  balance,  £vy6s  zugos. 

Mattn.  29  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 

11.  30  For  my  yoke  (is)  easy,  and  my  burden  is 
Acts  15. 10  why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put  a  yoke  upon  the 
Gal.     5.    1  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  b. 

1  Ti.   6.    1  as  many  servants  as  are  under  the  yoke  co. 

7. A  yoke  fellow,  trvfayos  sitzugos. 

Phil.   4.    3  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow,  help 
YOKE  together  unequally  with,  to  — 
To  be  yoked  with  one  of  another  kind,  erepo^vyew. 

2  Co.   6. 14  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with 
YONDER  (place)  — 

1.  Yonder,  beyond,  henceforth,  HN?n  halah. 

yum. 16.  37  scatter  thou  the  fire  yonder;  for  they  are 
2. Thus,  so,  here,  now,  7)3  koh. 

Num.23. 15  Stand  here.,  while  I  meet  (the  Lord)  yon. 

3.  Unto  thus,  up  to  yonder,  nb  "iy  ad  koh. 

Gen.  22.    5  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship 

4.  There,  thither,  £kel  ekei. 

Matt.  17.  20  say.  .Remove  hence  to  yonder  place,  and 
26.  36  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder 
YOTT  — 
l.You,  you  loursehes,  nrnx,  }ni$  atten,  atlcnnah. 

Eze.  34. 17  (as  for)  you,  0  my  flock,  thus  saith  the  L. 

l.To  you,  you,  therefore,  \"ih  taken. 

Zech.  11.    7  I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  (even)  y. 

3.  Your  eyes,  DTry  encchem. 

Josh.24. 15  if  it  seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord 

4.  Your  face,  CDV13  pcnechem. 

Josh  2.    9,  11  the  inhabitants,  .faint  because  of  you 
2. 10  the  Lord  dried  up  the  water,  .for  you 
2.  11  ourheartsdidmelt..becauseofyou;forthe 

5.  Of  yourselves,  eavrcov  (gen.)  heauton. 
Matt.26. 11  Forye  havethepoor  always  with  you;  but 
Marki4.    7  For  ye  have  the  poor  with  you  always,  and 
John  12.    S  poor,  .ye  have  with  you  ;  5.42;  6.  53. 


you 

G.  I  ou,  vfj.as  (ace.)  human. 

Matt.  3.  11  indeed  baptize  you.  .he  shall  baptize  you 

4.  19  Follow  me,  and  I  will  make  you  fishers 
5. 11  Blessed  are  ye  when(nrcn)shall  revile  you 
5. 44  [curse  you.  .hate  you .  .use you.  perse,  y.j 

5.  46  For  if  ye  love  them  which  love  you,  what 
See  also  6.30;  7.  6,  15,  23;  10.  13,  14,  16,  17,  17,  19,  23, 
40;  11.  28,  29;  12.  28;  21.  24,  31,  32;  23.  34,  35;  24.  4,  9, 
9;  25.  12;  26.  32,  [55];  28.  7,  14;  Mark  1.  8,  8,  17;  6.  n;  9. 

19,  41;  11.  29;  13.  5,  9,  11,  36;  14.  28,  49;  16.  7;  Luke  3.  i6„ 
16;  6.  9,  22,  22,  26,  27,  28,  32,  33;  9.  5,  41;  io.  3,  6,  8,  o, 
:o,  [ii,]  16,  10;  11.  20;  12. 11,  12,  14,  28;  13.  25,  [27,]  28;  16. 

9,  26;  19.  31;  20.  3;  2i.  12,  34;  22.  31,  35;  23.  [15];  24.  44, 
40;  John  4.  3S;  5.  42;  6.  61,  70;  7.  7;  8.  32,  36;  12.  35;  13. 
34;  14.  3>  18,  18,  26,  2S;  15.  9, 12,  15,  15,  16, 16, 18,  19, 10, 
20;  16.  2,  2,  7,  7,  13,  22,  27;  20.  21;  Acts  1.  8;  2.  22,  20; 

3.  22,  26;  7.  43;  13.  32,  [40];  15.  24,  25;  iS.  21;  19.  13;  20. 

20,  28,  29,  32;  22.  1;  23.  15;  27.  22,  34;  28.  20;  Rom.  1. 10. 
-1.  '3.  J3i  2.  24;  io-  19,  19;  12.  1,  [14];  15.  13,  15,  22, 
23-  t24>]  24,  29,  30,  32;  16.  16,  17, 10,  21,  22,  23,  23,  25;  1  Co. 
1.  8,  10;  2.  1,  3;  3.  2;  4.  14,  15,  16,'  17,  18,  19,  21;  7.  5,  32; 

10.  13,  13,  27;  11.  2,  3,  14,  22;  12.  1;  14.  6,  6,  36;  16.  5,  6, 
7,  7,  10,  12,  15,  19,  19,  20;  2  Co.  1.  8,  12,  15,  16,  18;  2.  1, 
s>  3>  4j  5.  2;  3-  J>  6.  11,  17;  7.  4,  8,  8,  12,  15;  8.  6,  17,  22, 
23!  9*  4)  5.  8,  14;  10.  1,  1,  9,  14;  11.  2,  2,  6,  9,  11,  20,  20; 

12.  14,  14,  15,  16,  16,  17,  17,  18,  20,  21;  13.  1,  3,  4,  13;  Gal. 

1.  6,  7,  9;  2.  5;  3.  1;  4.  ii?  11,  17,  [i7)]  iS,  20;  5.  2,  7,  8,  ic, 
10,  12;  6.  12,  13;  Eph.  2.  1;  3.  2;  4.  1;  5.  6;  6.  22;  Phil.  1. 
7,  S,  24,  26,  27;  2.  25,  26;  4.  21,  22;  Col.  1.  6,  21,  22,  25;  2. 

4,  8,  13,  16,  18;  4.  6,  8,  10,  10,  12,  14;  1  Th.  1.  5,  9;  2.  1, 

2,  9,  11,  12,  iS;  3.  2,  [2,]  4,  5,  6,  11,  12,  12;  4.  1,  10,  13;  5. 
4,  12,  12,  14,  iS,  23,  24,  27;  2  Th.  1.  6,  10,  11;  2.  1,  3,  5, 

13,  14,  [17];  3.  1,  3,  4, 10;  Heb.  5.  12;  9.  20;  13.  21,  22,  23, 
24;  Jas.  2.  6;  4.  10;  1  Pe.  1.  [4,]  10,  12,  15,  20,  25;  2.  9;  3. 

13,  15;  4.  14;  5.  6,  [10,]  13;  2  Pe.  1.  12,  13;  2.  3;  1  Jo.  2. 
26,  27,  27,  27;  3.  7,  13;  2  Jo,  10,  12;  Jude  5,  [24];  Rev.  2. 
24;  12.  12. 

7.  You,  you  yourselves,  vfjLe?s  humeis. 

EPn-    5-  33  Nevertheless  let  every  one  of  you  in  part. 

S.To  you,  vp.lv  (dot.)  humin. 

Matt.  3.    7  who  hath  warned  you  tofleefroni  thewr. 

3.    9  for  I  say  unto  you,  that  God  is  able  of  th. 

5. 18  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and 

5.  20  For  I  say  unto  you,  That  except  your  ri. 

5.  22,  28,  32  But  I  say  unto  you,  That  whosoe. 

5.  34  But  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all;  nei. 

5.  39  But  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye  resist  not  ev. 

5.  44  But  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your  enemies 
See  also  6.    2,  5,  14,  16,  25, 20,  33;  7.  2,  7,  7,  12;  8. 10, 11; 

9,  29;  IO.  15,  [lO,j  20,  23,  27,  42;  II.  9,  II,  Zy,  [l7,]  21,  22,  22, 
24;    12.   6,   31,   36;    13.    IT,   17;    l6.  II,   28;    17.    12,   20,   20j    l8. 

3,  10,  13,  iS,  19,  35;  19.  8, 10,  23,  24,  28;  20.  4,  26,  26,  27,  32; 

21,  3,  21,  24,  27,  31,  43;  22.  31;  23.  3,  13,  [14,]  15,  16,  23,  25, 
27'  29,  36,   38,   39;    24.   2,   23,   25,   20,   34,  47;  25.  9,  12,   34,  40, 

45;  26.  13,  15,  21,  29,  64;  27.  17,  21;  28.  7,  20;  Mark  3.  28; 

4.  11,  [24,]  24;  6.  [11];  8.  12;  9.  1, 13, 41;  10.  3,  5,  15,  29,  36, 
43. 431  "■  3>  23>  24,  25, 29,  33;  12.  43;  13.  11,  21,  23,  30, 37; 

14.  9,  13,  15,  18,  25;  15.  9  16.  7;  Luke  2.  10,  11,  12;  3. 
7,  8,13;  4.  24.  25;  6.  24,  25,  [25,26,]  27,  [28,131,  38,  38,  47; 

7.  9,  26,  28,  [32,]  32;  8.  10;  9.  27,  48;  10.  8,  11,  12,  13,  14, 

10,  20,  24;  11.  8,  9,  9,  9,  41,  42,  43,  44,  46,  47,  51,  52;  12. 
4.  5,  5.  8,  22,  27,  31,  32,  37,  44,  51 ;  13.  3,  5,  24,  25,  27,  35, 
35;  14.  24;  15.  7,  10;  16.  9,  11,  12;  17.  6,  10,  23,  34;  iS. 

8.  14,  17,  29;  19.  26,  40;  20.  8;  21.  3,  13,  15,  32;  22.  10, 
12,  16,  18,  26,  29,  37,  67;  24.  6,  [36,  44];  Jchn  1.  51;  2.  5; 
.3.  12,  12;  4.  35;  5.  19,  24,  25,  38;  6.  26,  27,  32,  32,  32,36, 
47.53.63,65;  7.  19,  22;  8.  24,  25,34,37,40,51,58;  9.27;  10. 
1.  7)  25,  [26,]  32;  12.  24;  13.  12,  15,  15,  16,  19,  20,  21,  33,  34; 
14.  2,  2,  3,  10,  12,  16,  17,  17,  20,  25,  26,  27,  27,  27,  28,  29; 
15-  3.  4>  7.  7.  14.  15.  16,  17,  20,  21,  26;  16.  1,  [3,]  4,  4,  4 
6,  7,  7,  12,  13,  14,  15,  20,  23,  53,  25,  25,  25,  26,  33;  18.  8, 
39,  39;  19.  4;  20.  io,  21,  26;  Acts  2.  14,  39;  3.  14,  20,  22, 
26;  4.  10;  5.  28,  3S  ;  7.  37;  13.  26,  26,  34,  38,  38,  41,  4^ ; 
14.  15 ;  15.  28 ;  17.  3,  23 ;  20.  20,  26,  27,  [32,]  35 ;  22.  25  ; 
25.  5;  26.  8;  28.  28;  Rom.  1.  7,  11,  12,  13,  15;  8.  9,  io, 

11,  11 ;  11. 13 ;  12.  3 ;  15.  5,  15,  [32] ;  16.  1,  19 ;  1  Co.  1.  3, 

4,  6,  10,  11 ;  2. 1,  2  ;  3.  1,  3,  16,  iS;  4.  8,  17  ;  5.  1,  9,  n  ; 
6-  2,  5,  7,  19 ;  7.  35 ;  9.  2,  11 ;  10.  27,  28 ;  n.  2,  18,  19, 

19,  22,  23,  30;  12.  3,  31;  14.  6,  25,  37;  15.  1,  1,  2,  3,  12, 
51  ;  2  Co.  1.  2,  13,  19,  21  ;  2.  [3,]  4 ;  4.  12,  14 ;  5.  12,  12, 
13 ;  6.  18;  7.  7,  11, 12,  14,  16;  8. 1,  10 ;  g.  1,  14 ;  10.  1, 
15  ;  11.  7,  9;  12.  12,  19,  20 ;  13.  3,  5 ;  Gal.  1.  3,  8,  8,  11, 
2°J  3-  [*>]  5.  5  J  4-  13.  15.  *6,  *9>  20  ;  5.  2,  21 ;  6.  n  ;  Eph. 
1.  2,  17  ;  2.  17  ;  3.  16;  4.  [6,  32] ;  5.  3  ;  6.  21  ;  Phil.  1.  2,  6, 

25,  [2S,]  29 ;  2.  5,  13,  17,  19 ;  3.  1,  1,  15,  18 ;  Col.  1.  2,  5, 
6,  27  ;  2.  5,  [13] ;  3.  13,  16  ;  4.  7,  9,  16 ;  1  Th.  1.  1,  5  ;  2.  8, 
10,  13 ;  3.  4,  7 ;  4.  2,  6,  9, 11,  15  ;  5.  1, 12 ;  2  Th.  1.  2,  4,  7, 
12;  2.  5;  3.  [4,]  6,  7,  9,  10,  11,  16;  Phni.  3,  [6,]  22;  Heb.  12. 

5,  7 ;  13-  7.  J7.  10.  21,  22 ;  Jas  1.  [26] ;  3.  13;  4.  1,  8 ;  5.  3, 

6,  13,  14,  19;  1  Pe.  1.  2,  12,  13;  2.  7;  3.  15;  4.  12,  12;  5. 
1,  2,  12,  14;  2  Pe.  1.  2,  8,  11,  16 ;  2.  1,  13 ;  3.  1,  15;  1  Jo. 
i-  2,  3,  U,]5'>  2.  i,  7.  [8,] 8,  12, 12,  13,  13, 13,  14, 14,  14,  2r, 
24,  24,  26,  27;  4.  4;  5.  13;  2  Jo.  12;  Jude  2,  3,  3, 18;  Rev. 
1.  4;  2.  13,  23,  24;  18.  [6];  22.  16. 

9.  Of  you,  vfAtov  (gen.)  humon. 

Matt.  5.  11  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  yon 
5.  12  persecuted,  .prophets  which  were  bef.  y. 
6  27  Which  of  you,  by  taking  thought,  car.  adr\ 
See  also  7.  9;  12.  11;  15.  7;  17. 17, 17;  21.  2,  43 ;  23.  n ; 

26.  21, 29;  28.  20 ;  Mark  6.  n  ;  7.  6 ;  9. 19;  11.  2;  14.  18; 
Luke  9.  41 ;  10. 16  ;  11.  5  ;  12.  25  ;  14.  28,  33 ;  15.  4 ;  16. 
26 ;  17.  7,  21 ;  21. 16 ;  22. 15, 19,  20, 27,  53 ;  23.  14 ;  John  1. 
26 ;  5.  45,  45  J  6-  64.  7°  J  7-  T9.  33  5  8.  [7,]  26,  46,  [55] ;  12. 
[35]  >  x3-  x8.  21,  33 ;  14.  9,  16,  30  ;  15.  18  ;  16.  4,  5,  22,  26  ; 
Acts  1.  7 ;  2.  22,  38  ;  3.  16  ;  4.  10,  n,  19  ;  6.  3  ;  18.  14 ; 

20.  18 ;  24.  21 ;  25.  26 ;  27.  22,  34 ;  Rom.  1.  8,  9,  12 ;  6. 
14 ;  12.  18 ;  15.  14,  24,  2S,  33 ;  16.  2,  20,  [24] ;  1  Co.  1.  n, 

12,  13,  14 ;  4.  3 ;  5.  2 ;  6.  1 ;  7.  28  ;  9.  12 ;  n.  24 ;  12.  21 ; 
14.  26,  36;  16.  2,  23,  24 ;  2  Co.  1.  7,  16,  16,  23 ;  2.  3,  9 ;  3. 


YOUNG 


10S4 


YOUR 


i  ;   7.  4,  U-J  1?.  M.  *5  I   8.    16;  9.  2,  3,  14;    10.  13,  14,  16; 

xx.  3;  12.  ii»  131  [i4il  15;  T3-  *>•  14;  Gal.  3.  2;  4.  i2;Eph. 

1. 16,  16 ;  3.  1, 13 ;  4-  32 ;  p]lil-  *■  3, 4.  7 ;  4-  9.  i8<  23 ; 

Col.  1.  3,  [7.]  9.  =4 ;  2-1  ;  4-  9.  12,  12,  13,  18;  1  Th.  1.  2,  2, 

S;  2.  6,  7,  8,  9,  ii,  17;  3-  6,  9;  4-  4;  5-  12,  23,  28;  2  in. 

1.  3,  3,  11;  2.  13;  3.  8,  16,  18;  2TL  4.  [22];  Titus  2.  [8];  3. 

15 ;  fleb.  3.  12,  13 ;  4-  1  ;  6.  9,  n  ;  13.  7,  17-  24>  25  I  Jas- 

1.  5;  2.  6,  16;  4.  7;  5.  4;  1  Pe.  2.  12  ;  3.  [10 J;  4.  15;  5-  7; 

2  Jo.  [3];  Rev.  2.  10;  18.  20;  22.  2i. 

10.  Yintr  souls,  $vx&v  tfxwv psuchon  humou. 

2  Co.  12.  15  I  will,  .gladly  spend  and  lie  spent  for  you 

YOUNG  (children,  maiden,  man,  one,  woman),  younger — 

l.Brood,  young  birds,  crns^  ephrochim. 

Deut.22.  6  youngones..audthedamsittinguponthe 
Job.  39.  30  Her  young  ones  also  suck  up  blood  :  and 
Psa.  84.    3  where  she  may  lay  her  young . .  thine  altar 

I.Choice,  young,  unmarried  man,  "una  bachur. 
Dent  32.  25  shall  destroy  both  the  young  man  and  the 
Judg  14.  10  there  a  feast ;  for  so  used  the  youn^  men 
Ruth  3. 10  as  thou  followed  st  not  youug  men,  wheth. 

1  Sa.   8.  16  he  will  take.,  your  goodliest  young  men 

9.    2  Saul,  a  choice  young  man,  and  a  goodly 

2  Ki.  8.  12  their  young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  the 
2  Ch.36.  17  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword 

36.  17  had  no  compassion  upon  young  man  or 
Psa.  78.  63  fire  consumed  their  young  men  :  and  their 
148.  12  Both  young  men  and  maidens ;  old  men 
Prov.20.  29  glory  of  young  men  (is)  their  strength 
Eccl  11.    9  Rejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth,  and 
Isa.     9.  17  the  Lord  shall  have  no  joy  in  their  young 
23.    4  neither  do  I  nourish  up  young  men,  (nor) 
31.    8  flee  from  the  sword,  and  his  young  men 
40.  30  faint  and  be  weary,  and  the  young  men 
62.    5  For  (as)  a  young  man  marrieth  a  virgin 
Jer.     6.  11  and  upon  the  assembly  of  young  men  tog. 
9.  21  children  from  without,  (and)  the  young 

11.  22  young  men  shall  die  by  thesword  ;  their 
15.    8  against  the  mother  of  the  young  men  a 
18.  21  their  young  men  (be)  slain  by  the  sword 
31. 13  rejoice  in  the  dance,  both  young  men  and 

48.  15  chosen  young  men  are  gone  down  to  the 

49.  26  Therefore  her  young  men  shall  fall  in  the 

50.  30  Therefore  shall  her  youug  men  fall  in  the 

51.  3  spare  ye  not  her  young  men  ;  destroy  ye 
51.  22  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  young  man  and 

Lam.   1.  15  assembly  against  me  to  crush  my  young 
1. 18  virgins  and  my  young  men  are  gone  into 
2.  21  my  young  men  are  fallen  by  the  sword 
5.  13  They  took  the  young  men  to  grind,  and 
5.  14  ceased  from  thegate.theyoungmen  from 

Eze.     9.    6  Slay  utterly  old  (and)  young,  both  maids 
23.    6;  12,  23  all  of  them  desirable  young  men 
30.  17  The  young  men  of  Aven  and  of  Phibeseth 

Joel    2.  28  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see 

Amos  2.  11  I  raised  up.  .of  your  young  men  for  Naz. 
4.  10  your  young  men  have  1  slain  with  the  sw. 

8.  13  the  fair  virgins  and  young  men  faint  for 
Zeeh.  9.  17  Corn  shall  make  the  yoimg  men  cheerful 

Z.Choice  young  unmarried  men,  □"in?  beehurim. 

Num  11.  28  (one)  of  hisyoungmen,  answered  and  said 
4.  A  son  o/,"||  ben. 

Lev.     1.  14  his  offering  of  turtle  doves,  or  of  young 
4.    3  young  bullock  without  blemish  unto  the 

4.  14  congregation  shall  otter  a  young  bullock 

5.  7  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pigeons 
5.  11  bring  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pig. 

9.  2  Take  thee  a  young  calf  for  a  sin  offering 

12.  6  young  pigeon,  or  a  turtle  dove,  for  a  sin 
12.  8  she  shall  bring  two  turtles,  or  two  young 
14.  22  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pigeons 

14.  30  one  of  the  turtle  doves,  or  of  the  young 

15.  14  two  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pigeons 

15.  29  take  unto  her  two  turtles,  or  two  young 

16.  3  withayoungbullockforasinoffering.and 

22.  28  ye  shall  not  kill  it  and  her  young  both  in 

23.  18  one  young  bullock,  and  two  rams:  they 
Num.  6.  10  shall  bring  two  turtles,  or  two  young  pig. 

7. 15  One  young  bullock,  one  ram,  one  lamb  of 
So  in  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81. 

8.   8  take  a young ;  bullock,  .ana  another  young 

15.  24  congregation  shall  offer  one  young  bull. 

2S.  11,  19,  27  two  young  bullocks,  and  one  ram 

29.    2,  8  one  young  bullock,  one  ram,  (and)  sev. 

29.  13  thirteen  young  bullocks,  two  rams,  (and) 

29.  17  twelve  young  bullocks,  two  rams,  fourte. 

Dcut22.   6  thou  shalt  not  take  the  dam  with  the  yo. 

22.    7  let  the  dam  go,  and  take  the  young  toth. 

Ezra   6.   9  both  young  bullocks,  and  rams,  and  lam. 

Eath.  S.  10  riders  on  mules,  camels,  (and)  young  dr. 

Job   39.    4  Their  young  ones  are  in  good  liking,  they 

39. 16  She  is  hardened  against  her  young  ones.as 

Psa    29.   6  Lebanon  and  Sirion  like  a  young  unicorn 

M7-    9  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  (and)  to  the 

Prov  30. 17  pick  it  out,  and  the  young  eagles  shall  eat 

Jer.     r    ia  for  the  young  of  the  flock  and  of  the  herd 

laze.  43.  19  thou  shaltgive.  .  a  yourig  bullock  for  asm 

43.  23  thou  shalt  offer  a  young  bullock  without 

43. 25  they  shall  also  prepares  young  bullock 

45. 18  shall  take  a  young  bullock  without  blem. 

46.   6  a  young  bullock  without  blemish,  and  six 

1  bird,  hft  'jozal. 

Gen.  is.   o  Take  me,  a  turtle  dove,  and  a  young  pi. 

Dcut32. 11  Btirrethuphernest,  fiutterethover  hery. 

<i..l  lion's  whelp,  "na  (jur, 

bam.  4.   3  they  give  suck  to  their  young  ones :  the 
1. Little  for  days,  D'pA  rsty  tsavr  leyamim. 

Job  30.   1  hut  now  (they  that  are)  younger  than  1 
32-   t  said  I  (am)  young,  and  ye  (arc)  very  old 


S.Child,  young  of  man  or  beast,  ih^  yelecl. 

Gen.    4.  23  slain  a  man  to  my  womiding,  and  a  young 

1  Ki.  12.    8  consulted  with  the  young  men  that  were 

12.  10  young  men  that  were  grown  up  with  him 

12.  14  after  the  counsel  of  the  young  men,  say. 

2  Ch.10.    8  took  counsel  with  the  young  men  that  we. 

10.  10  young  men  that  were  brought  up  with  him 

10.  14  after  the  advice  of  the  youug  men,  saying 
Job   38.  41  wheu  his  young  ones  cry  unto  God,  they 

39.  3  they  bring  forth  their  young  ones,  they 
Isa.   11.    7  their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together 

9.  A  ivhelp  or  young  lion,*?-}!  kephir. 

Judg  14.   5  behold,  a  youug  "lion  roared  agaiust  him 

10.  Young  person,  lit.  growing,  -$3  naar. 

Gen.  14.  24  Save  only  that  which  the  young  men  have 

18.  7  gave  (it)  unto  a  young  man ;  and  he  hast. 

19.  4  both  old  and  young,  all  the  people  from 
22.  3  took  two  of  his  young  men  with  him,  and 
22.  5  Abraham  said  unto  his  young  men,  Abide 
22.  19  So  Abraham  returned  unto  hisyoungmen 
34.  19  the  young  man  deferred  not  to  do  the  th. 
41. 12  a  young  man,  an  Hebrew,  servant  to  the 

Exodio.    9  We  will  go  with  our  young  and  with  our 

24.  5  sent  young  men  of  the  children  of  Israel 

33.  11  young  man,  departed  not  out  of  the  tabe. 
Nunin,  27  there  ran  a  young  man,  and  told  Moses 
Deut28.  50  which  shall  not.  .show  favour  to  the  you. 
Josh.  6.  21  young  and  old,  and  ox,  and  sheep,  and 

6.  23  young  men  that  were  spies  went  in,  and 
Judg.  8.  14  caught  a  young  man  of  the  men  of  Succ. 

9.  54  Then  he  called  hastily  unto  the  young 
9.  54  his  young  man  thrust  him  through,  and 
17.    7  there  was  a  young  man  out  of  Beth-lehem 
17. 11  the  young  man  was  unto  him  as  one  of 

17.  12  young  man  became  his  priest,  and  was  in 

18.  3  they  knew  the  voice  of  the  youug  man  the 
18.  15  came  to  the  house  of  the  young  man  the 
19. 19  for  the  young  man  (which  is)  with  thy  se. 

Ruth  2.   9  have  I  not  charged  the  young  men  that 
2.   9  drink  of  (that)  which  the  young  men  have 
2. 15  Boaz  commanded  his  young  men,  saying 
2.  21  Thou  shalt  keep  fast  by  my  young  men 

1  Sa.   1.24  TheLoRDinShiloh:  and  the  child  (was)  y. 

2.  17  Wherefore  the  sin  of  the  young  men  was 
14.  1  said  unto  his  young  man  that  bare  hisar. 
14.  6  Jonathan  said  to  the  young  man  that  bare 

17.  s8  Whose  son  (art)  thou,  (thou)  young  man? 
21.    4  if  the  young  men  have  kept  themselves 

21.  5  and  the  vessels  of  the  young  men  are  holy 

25.  5  young  men,  and  David  said  uuto  the  yo. 
25.  8  Ask  thy  young  men,  and  they  will  show 
25.  8  Wherefore  let  the  young  men  find  favour 
25.  9  when  David's  young  men  came,  they  spake 
25.  12  So  David's  young  men  turned  their  way 
25.  14  one  of  the  young  men  told  Abigail,  Nab. 
25.  25  but  I  thine  handmaid  saw  not  the  young 

25,  27  let  it  even  be  given  unto  the  young  men 

26.  22  let  one  of  the  young  men  come  over  and 
30.  13  I  (am)  a  young  man  of  Egypt,  servant  to 
30. 17  save  four  hundred  young  men,  which  rode 

2  Sa.   1.    5  David  said  unto  the  young  man  that  told 

1.    6  young  man  that  told  him  said,  As  I  hap. 

1. 13  David  said  unto  the  young  man  that  told 

1.  15  David  called  one  of  the  young  men,  and 

2. 14  Let  the  young  men  now  arise  and  play  be. 

2.  21  lay  thee  hold  on  one  of  the  young  men 
4. 12  David  commanded  his  young  men,  and 

13.  32  they  have  slain  all  the  young  men  the  ki. 

13.  34  young  man  that  kept  the  watch  lifted  up 

14.  21  go  therefore,brmgtheyoung  man  Absalom 
16.   2  bread  and  summer  fruit  for  the  young  men 

18.  5  gently  for  my  sake  with  the  young  man 
18.  12  Beware  that  none  (touch)  the  young  man 
18.  15  ten  young  men  that  bare  Joab's  armour 
18.  29,  32  Is  the  young  man  Absalom  safe?  And 
18.  32  answered,  The  enemies..  beas(that)yo.  m. 

1  Ki.11.  28  Solomou  seeing  the  young  man  that  he 

20. 14,  15,  17,  19  youug  men  of  the  princes  of  the 

2  KI.  4.  22  Send  me,  I  pray  thee,  one  of  the  young 

5.  22  twoyoungmenof  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
6. 17  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the  young  man 
9.   4  So  the  young  man,  (even)  the  young  man 

1  Ch.12.  28  Zadok  a  young  man  mighty  of  valour,  and 

22.  s  Solomon  my  son  (is)  young  and  tender 
29.    1  Solomon,  .(is  yet)  young  and  tender,  and 

2  Ch.13.    7  when  Kehoboam  was  young  and  tender 

34.  3  while  he  was  yet  young,  lie  began  to  seek 
TCsth.  3.  13  both  young  and  old,  little  children  and 
Job     1.  19  it  fell  upon  the  young  men,  and  they  are 

29.    8  The  young  men  saw  me,  and  hid  themse. 
Psa.  37.  25  I  have  been  young,  aud(now)amold,  yet 

119.    9  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse 
Prov.  1.    4  to  the  young  man  knowledge  and  discre. 

7.  7  among  the  youths,  a  young  man  void  of 
Isa.   13. 1 8  bows  also  shall  dash  the  young  to  pieces 

20.  4  young  and  old,  naked  and  barefoot,  even 

40.  30  be  weary,  and  the  young  men  shall  utte. 
Jer.  51.  22  will  I  break  iu  pieces  old  and  young 
Lam,  2.21  The  young  and  the  old  lie  on  the  gn  mud  in 
Zech.  2.   4  Run.  speak  to  this  young  man,  savin-,  Je. 

11.  16  neither  shall  seek  the  youug  one,  uor  he. 
11..  1  young  female,  rriyj  naarah, 

Judg2i.  12  four  hundred  young  virgins,  that  had  kn. 
Ruth  4.  12  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  of  this  young  w. 
1  Sa.  9.  11  found  young  maidens  going  out  to  draw 
1  Ki.  1.  2  Let  there  be  sought  formy  lord,  .a  young 
Esth.  2.    2  Let  there  be  fair  young  virgins  sought 

2.    3  gather  together  all  the  fair  young  virgins 

1:2.. 1  young  person,  lit.  hidden  01  growing,  D^efero. 

1  Sa.  20.  22  But  if  I  say  thus  to  the  young  man,  bch. 


13.  A  young  roe,  "i?y  qpher. 

Song  2.    9  Sly  beloved  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 

2.  17  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon 

4.  5  Thy  two  breasts(are)  like  two  young  roes 
7.    3  Thy  two  breasts  (are)  like  two  young  roes 

5.  14  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart 

lLSmall,  T#y  tsair. 

Gen.  19.  31,  34  the  first  born  said  unto  the  younger 
19-  35  younger  arose,  and  lay  with  him,  and  he 
ig.  38  younger,  she  also  bare  a  son,  and  called 
25.  23  people ;  and  the  elder  shall  serve  the  you. 
29.  26  to  give  the  younger  before  the  first  born. 
43-  33  youngest  according  to  his  youth,  and  the 
48.  14  who  (was)  the  younger,  and  his  left  hand 
Josh.  6.  26  his  youngest  (sou)  shall  he  set  up  the  gates 
1  Ki.16.  34  set  up  the  gates  thereof  in  his  youngest 

15.  Little,  J»i2  qtbtan. 

Gen.  9.  24  knew  what  his  younger  son  had  done  unto 
27.  15  and  put  them  upon  Jacob  her  younger  son 
27.  42  she  sent  and  called  Jacob  her  younger  sou 
2g.  16  and  the  name  of  theyounger(was)Rachel 
29.  18  seven  years  for  Rachel  thy  younger  daug. 

Judg  15.   2  (is)  not  her  younger  sister  fairer  than  she? 

1  Sa.  14.  49  Merab,  and  the  uame  of  the  younger  Mic. 

16.  11  There  remaineth  yet  the  youngest,  and 

17. 14  David  (was)  the  youngest :  and  the  three 

2  Sa.    9.  12  Mephibosheth  had  a  youngson,  whose  na 

1  Ch.  24.  31  fathers  overagainst.their  younger  bretbr 
Eze.  16.  46  thy  younger  sister,  that  dwelleth  at  thy 

16.  61  receive  thy  sisters,  thine  elder  and  thy  y. 

16.  Little,  |t3f5  qaton. 

Gen.  42.  13,  32  the  youngest  (is)  this  day  with  our  fa. 

42. 15  go  forth  hence,  except  your  youngest  bro. 
42.  20  But  bring  your  youngest  brother  uuto  me 

42.  34  bring  your  youngest  brother  unto  me,  then 

43.  29  this  your  younger  brother,  of  whom  ye  sp. 

44.  2  in  the  sack's  mouth  of  the  youngest,  and 
44.  12  left  at  the  youngest :  and  the  cup  wasfo. 
44.  23  Except  your  youngest  brother  comedown 
44.  26  if  our  youngest  brother  be  with  us,  then 
44.  26  except  our  youngest  brother  (be)  with  us 
48.  19  but  truly  bis  younger  brother  shall  be  gr. 

Judg.  j.  13  son  of  Kenaz,  Caleb's  younger  brother,  to 

3.  9  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz,  Caleb's  younger 
9.    5  youngest  son  of  Jerubbaal  was  left ;  for 

2  Ch.21.  17  save  Jehoahaz  the  youngest  of  his  sons 

22.  1  his  youngest  son  king  in  his  stead :  for  the 

17.-4  seed,  progeny,  fl^by  skilyah. 

Deut  28.  57  toward  her  young  one  that  cometh  out  fr. 
18.^4  babe,  infant,  child,  0pe<pos  brephos* 

Acts  7. 19  so  that  they  cast  out  their  young  children 
19.  Small,  inferior,  £x6.<T<ru>v  elasson. 

Rom.  9.  12  said  unto  her,  The  elder  shall  serve  the  yo, 
20.^4  young  person,  veavtas  neanias. 

Acts  7.  58  laid  down  then*  clothes  at  a  young  man's 
20.    9  there  satin  a  window  a  certain  young  man 

23.  17  Bring  this  young  man  unto  the  chief  cap. 
23.  18  prayed  me  to  bring  this  [young  man]  unto 
23.  22  So  the  chief  captain,  .let  the  [young  man] 

21.. 'I  young  man  in  the  prime  of  life,  veavtaKos. 
Matt. 19.  20  young  man  saith  unto  him,  All  these  thi. 
19.  22  But  when  the  young  man  heard  that  saying 
Marki4.  51  there  followed  him  a  certain  young  man 
14.  51  cast  about  (his)  naked  (body);  and  Ithe  y.] 
x6.    5  they  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right 
Luke  7.  14  Aud  he  said,  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee 
Acts    2.  17  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  yo. 
5.  10  young  men  came  in,  and  found  her  dead 
i  Jo.   2.  13  I  write  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye 
2.  14  I  have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  be. 
22.  Xew,  young,  vsos  ncos,  veutrepos  neoteros. 

Lukeis.  12  younger  of  them  said  to  (his)  father,  Fat. 
15-  13  younger  son  gathered  all  together,  and  to- 
22.  26  greatest  among  you,  let  him  be  as  the  yo. 
1  Ti.  5.  1  as  a  father,  (and)  the  younger  men  as  br. 
5.  2  The  elder  women  as  mothers;  the  younger 
5.  11  But  the  younger  widows  refuse:  for  when 
5. 14  I  will  therefore  that  the  younger  women 
Titus  2.    4  That  they  may  teach  the  young  women  to 

1  Pe.  5.  5  Likewise,  ye  younger,  submit  yourselves 

23.-4  young  bird,  chicken,  j/eoa(r6s  neossos)vo<r<r6s. 

Luke  2.  24  A  pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pig. 
m.Newer,  younger,  vewrepos  neoteros. 

Johmn.  18  When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdestthy. 

Acts    5.    6  young  men  arose,  wound  him  up,  and  ca. 

Titus  2.    6  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober 

25. A  child,  boy.servant,  nais pais. 

Acts  20.  12  brought  the  youug  man  alive,  and  were 
YOUNG,  with  — 
To  give  sue/.;  ,*y  ul. 

Geu.  33,  13  flocks  and  herds  with  young  (are)  with  me 
Isa.  40.  *  1  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young 
[See  also  Ass,  asses,  bring  forth,  bullock,  calf,  cast, 
child,  daughter,  ewes,  lion,  man,  pigeon,  roe,  twigs.] 
YOUR,  your  own  (business),  yourselves  — 

1.  Your  hand,  qjv  yedfo  m. 

2  Ch.  29. 31  ye  have  consecrated  yourselves  uuto  the 

2.  In  your  eyes,  D3\P«3  be-enckem. 

Gen.  45.  5  be  not  grieved  nor  angry  with  yourselves 
$. Animal  soul,  B>33  nephesh. 

Lev.  11.  43  Ye  shall  not  make  yourselves  abominable 
Josh.23.  11  Take  good  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves 
Jer.   37.   9  Deceive  not  yourselves,  saying,  The  cha. 


YOUTH 


10S5 


ZACGUR 


4.0/  selves,  livrov  heautou. 

Matt.  3.    9  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  "We 
16.   8  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves,  because 
23.  31  Wherefore  ye  be  witnesses  unto  yourselv. 
25.    9  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for  yo. 

Mark  9.  33  What  was  it  that  ye  disputed  [among  yo.] 
g.  50  Have  salt  in  yourselves,  and  have  peace 
13.   9  But  take  heed  to  yourselves:  for  they  sh. 

Luke  3.    8  begin  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  We 
12.  33  provide  yourselves  bags  which  wax  not 
12.  57  why  even  of  yourselves  judge  ye  not  what 
16.    9  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  manuno;i 

16.  15  Ye  are  they  which  justify  yourselves  bef. 

17.  3  Take  heed  to  yourselves :  If  thy  brother 
17. 14  he  said  unto  them,  Go  showyourselvesun. 
21.  34  take  heed  to  yourselves,  lest  at  any  21.  30. 
22. 17  Take  this, anddivide(it)[amongyourselv.] 

23.  28  weep  for  yourselves,  and  for  your  childr. 
Acts    5.  35  take  heed  to  yourselves  what  ye  intend  to 

13.46  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting 
1 5.  29  from  which  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall 
20.  28  Take  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves,  and 
Rom.  6.  11  reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  ind. 
6.  i3#yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as  those  that 
6.  16  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves  serv.  n.  25. 

12.  xg  avengenotyourselves,but(rather)givepl. 
2  Co.   7.  11  ye  have  approved  yourselvestoi  Co.  6. 19. 

13.  s  Examine  yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the 
13-    5  prove  your  own  selves:  Know  ye  not  your 

Eph.    5.  19  Speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  v.  25. 
1  Th.  5.  13  (And)  be  at  peace  among  [yourselvesj 
Heb.  10.  34  knowing  in  yourselves  that  ye  have  in  lie. 
Jas.     2.   4  Are  ye  not  then  partial  in  yourseL  1.  22. 
1  Pe.    4.    8  have  fervent  charity  among  yourselves 

1  Jo.    5.  21  Little  children,  keep  [yourselves]  from  id 

2  John      8  Look  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not  those 
Jude       20  building  up  yourselves  on  yourmost  holy 

21  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  look. 
5. One's  own,  private,  peculiar,  tdtos  idios. 

Col.      3.  18  Wives, submit yourselvesunto  [yourownl 

1  Th.   2. 14  have  suffered  like  things  of  your  own  co. 

4  11  to  do  your  own  business,  .with  [your own] 

Q.You,  vfxas  (ace.)  kumas. 

John  14.  26  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  wh 
Acts  18.  15  if  it  he  a  question  of  words,  .and  (of)  your 

24.  22  I  will  know  the  uttermost  of  your  matter 
Horn  1 1.  28  (they  are)  enemies  for  your  sakes :  but  as 

1  Co.    4.    6  for  your  sakes ;  that  ye  might  learn  in  us 

2  Co.   2.  10  for  your  sakes  (forgave  I  it)  in  the  person 

4.  15  For  all  things  (are)  for  your  sakes,  that  the 
8.   9  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that 

Eph.  1  15  I  also,  after  I  heard  of  your  faith  in  the 
1  Th.  3.  9  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sa 
1  Pe.    4.  14  [evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your  part  he  is] 

7.  Your,  yours,  your  own,  vfitTzpas  humeteros. 
Luke  6.  20  Blessed  (be  ye)  poor;  for  yours  is  the  ki 

16. 12  who  shall  give  you  that  which  is  your  own 
John  7.   6  My  time  is  not  yet  come  ;  but  your  time 

5.  17  It  is  also  written  in  your  law,  that  the  te 
15.  20  have  kept  my  saying,  they  will  keep  your 

Acts  27.  34  pray  you  to  take  (some)  meat ;  for  this  is 
Rom  it.  31  through  your  mercy  they  also  may  obtain 

1  Co.  15.  31  I  protest  by  your  rejoicing  which  I  have 

2  Co.   8.    8  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your  love 
Gal.     6.  13  circumcised,  that  they  maj  glory  in  your 

8. To  you,  vfxlv  [dot.)  humin. 

Matt.  6.  19  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon 

6.  20  But  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  he. 
Luke  16.  11  who  will  commit  to  your  trust  the  true 

2i.  15  which  all  your  adversaries  shall  not  be 
Rom  16.  19  I  am  glad  therefore  on  your  behalf,  but 

1  Co.    6.    5  I  speak  to  your  shame.  Is  it  so,  that  there 

11.  13  Judge  in  yourselves:  is  it  comely  that  a 
15.  34  knowledge  of  God :  I  speak  (this)  to  your 

2  Co.   5. 13  or  whether  we  he  sober,  (it  is)  for  your 

9.0/ you,  your,  v^lwv  [gen.)  humon. 

Matt.  5. 12  he  exceeding  glad;  for  great  (is)  your  rew. 

5. 16  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that 

5. 16  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  fa. 

5.  20  say  unto  you,  That  except  your  righteou. 

5.  37  But  let  your  communication  be,  yea,  yea 

5.  44  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse 

5.  45  That  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your  Fat. 

5.  47  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do 

5.  48  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Fat. 

See  also  9. 1,1, 8, 14, 15,  [21,  2 11,25,25, 26, 3217. 6,  n,  n;  g.  4, 

11/29;  10.  g,  13,  13,  14,  14,  20,  29,  30;  11.  29;  12.  27,  27; 

13.  16,  [16] ;  15.  3, 6;  17.  20,  24;  18.  [14],  35  ;  19.  8,  8;  20. 26, 

27  ;  23.  8,  9, 9,  [id],  11,  15, 32,  34,  38 ;  24.  20,  42 ;  25. 8 ;  Mark 

2.  8 ;  6. 11 ;  7. 9,  13;  8.  17;  10.  5,  43 ;  n.  25,  25,  [26,  26] ;  13. 

[18] ;  Luke  3. 14 ;  4. 21 ;  5.  4,  22 ;  6.  22,  23,  24,  27,  35,  35,  36, 

38  ;  8.  25 ;  9.  5,  44  ;  10.  6,  11,  20 ;  11.  13,  19,  19,  39,  46,  47, 

48 ;  12.  7,  [22],  30,  32,  34,  34,  35  ;  13.  35  ;  16.  15  ;  21.  14,  18, 

19,  28,  28,  34 ;  22.  53 ;  23.  28 ;  24.  38  ;  John  4.  35 ;  6.  49, 

[58];  8. 2i,  24, 24,  [38],  41,  42,  44,  [54],  56 ;  9.  19,  41 ;  10.  34 ; 

13.  14;  14.  1,  27;  15.  11,  16;  16.  6,20,  22,  22,  24;  18.  31  ; 

19.  14,  15 ;  20. 17,  17  ;  Acts  2.  17,  17,  17,  17,  39 ;  3.  17,  19, 

22,22;  5.28;  7. 37, [37, 43], 51, 52 ;  13.41;  15-24;  *7-23;  18. 

6 ;  ig.  37 ;  20.  30 ;  Rom.  1.  8  ;  6.  12, 13,  13,  19,  19,  ig,  22; 

8.  11 ;  12.  i,  1,  [2] ;  14.  16 ;  15.  24  ;  16.  19,  20 ;  1  Co.  1.  4, 
26 ;  2.  5:3. 31,  22  ;  5.  6,  13  ;  6.  15,  19,  20,  [20] ;  7.  5,  14,  35; 
8.  9;  g.  xi ;  14.  [34] ;  15.  14,  17,  17,  58;  16.  3, 14,  [17],  18; 
2  Co.  1.  6,  6,  14,  24,  24;  4.  5 ;  5.  11 ;  6.  12 ;  7.  7,  7,  7,  [13] ; 
8.  7, 14, 14,  [19],  24,  24  ;  9.  2,  2,  5,  10,  10,  13  ;  10.  6,  8,  15  ;  1 1. 
3 ;  12.  14,  19;  13.  9;  Gal.  4.  [6],  15,  16;  6.  18 ;  Eph.  1.  13, 

lS  '  di8-i'  3"  13,  1? '  4'  4'  23,  26,  29'  5*  Ig '  6*  x' 4'  s'  W'  I4' 
'  -22 ;  Phil.  1.  5,  g,  ig,  25,  26,  27  ;  2.  17,  19,  20,  25,  30 ;  4,  5, 

6,  7,  17,  19 ;  Col.  1.  4,  8 ;  2.  5,  5,  13 ;  3.  3,  5,  8,  15,  16,  21 ; 

4.  6,  8,  [8] ;  1  Th.  1.  4,  8 ;  2.  17  ;  3.  2,  5.  6.  7,  10,  10,  13  ;  4. 


3,  11  ;  2  Th.  1.  3,  4,  4;  2.  17;  3.  5  ;  Phm.  22,  25 ;  Heb.  3. 
8,  g,  15 ;  4.  7 ;  0.  iq  ;  9.  [14] ;  10.  34,  35 ;  12.  3,  13  ;  13.  17; 
Jas.  1.  3,  21 ;  2.  2 ;  3.  14 ;  4.  1,  3,  9,  14,  16 ;  5.  1,  2,  2,  3, 
3,  4,  5,  8,  12  ;  1  Pe.  1.  7,[g],  13,  14,  17,  iS,  21,  22  ;  2.  12,  25; 
3.  2,  7,  15,  16 ;  5.  7,  8,  g  ;  2  l*e.  1.  5,  10,  19 ;  3.  1 ;  1  Jo.  1 . 
[4] ;  Jude  12,  20;  Rev.  1.  9;  2.  23 ;  22.  [21]. 

YOUTH,  youthful  — 

1. youth,  n'mn?  bechuroth. 

Eccl.11.   g  0  young  man  .  .in  the  days  of  thy  youth 
12.    1  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  while  the  evil 

%A  son  0/,  "2'ben. 

Prov.  7.    7  discerned  amongthe  youths,  a  young  man 
3.  Youth,  maturity,  Fph  choreph. 

Job   29.   4  As  I  was  in  the  days  of  my  youth,  when 
i.Youth,  childhood,  finbl  yaldulh. 

Psa.  no.    3  the  morning  :  thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  y. 

Eccl.n.   g  Rejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth,  and. 

5.  Youth,  n'ntyj  neuroth. 

Jer.  32.  30  have  only  done  evil  before  me  from  their  y. 

6.  Youth,  Qv^y?  neurim. 

Gen.    8.  21  (is)  evil  from  his  youth  ;  neither  will  I  ag. 
46  34  hath  been  about  cattle  from  our  youth  ev. 
Lev.  22. 13  unto  her  father's  house,  as  in  her  youth 
.Num3o.    3  (being)  in  her  father's  house  in  her  youth 

30. 16  (being  yet)  in  her  youth  in  her  father'sho. 

1  Sa.  17. 33  a  youth,  and  he  a  man  of  war  from  his  y 

2  Sa.  ig.  7  evil  that  befell  thee  from  thy  youth  until 
1  Ki.  18. 12  I  thy  servant  fearthe  Lord  from  ray  you. 
Job    13.  26  makest  me  to  possess,  .iniquities  of  myy. 

31. 18  For  from  my  youth  he  was  brought  up  wi. 
Psa.  25.'  7  Remember  not  the  sins  of  my  youth,  nor 

71.    5  Lord  GOI) :  (thou  art)  my  trust  from  my  y, 

71. 17  O  God,  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  yo. 
103.  5  (so  that)  thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the  ea. 
127.  4  As  arrows,  .so  (are)  children  of  the  youth 
129.  1.  2  Many  a  time,  .afflicted me  from  my  yo. 
144.  12  (may  be)  as  plants  grown  up  in  their  you. 

Prov.  2. 17  Which  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  youth 
5.  18  blessed.. rejoice  with  the  wife  of  thy  youth 
Isa.  47.  12  wherein  thou  hast  laboured  from  thy  yo. 
47.  15  (even)  thy  merchants. from  thy  youth,  they 
54.   6  a  wife  of  youth,  when  thou  wast  refused 
Jer.     2.    2  I  remember  thee,  the  kindness  of  thy  yo. 
3.   4  My  father,  thou  (art)  the  guide  of  my  yo. 
3.  24  the  labour  of  our  fathers  from  our  youth 
3.  25  from  our  youth  even  unto  this  day,  and 

22.  21  this  (hath  been)  thy  manner  from  thy  yo. 

31. 19  because  I  did  bear  the  reproach  of  myyo. 
48. 11  Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth 

Lam.  3.  27  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  yo. 
Eze.     4.  14  for  from  my  youth  up,  even  till  now.  ha. 

16  22,  43  not  remembered  the  days  of  thy  youth 

16.  60  covenant  with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  yo. 

23.  3  they  committed  whoredoms  in  their  you. 
23.    8  for  in  her  youth  they  lay  with  her,  ami 
23. 19  calling  to  remembrance  the  days  of  her  y. 
23.  21  lewdness  of  thy  youth,  in  bruising  thy 
23.  2i  by  the  Egyptians  for  the  paps  of  thy  yo. 

FTos,   2. 15  shall  sing  there,  as  in  the  days  of  her  yo. 
Joel    1.    8  sackcloth  for  the  husband  of  her  youth 
Zech.13     5  man  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  myy. 
Mai.    2.  14  between  thee  and  the  wife  of  thy  youth 
2.  1 5  treacherously  against  the  wife  of  his  yo. 

7.  A  young  person,  iltinaar. 

Judg  8.  20  hut  the  youth,  .because  he  (was)  yet  a  y. 
1  Sa.  17.  33  for  thou,  .a  youth,  and  he  a  man  of  war 

17  42  for  he  was.  .a  youth,  and  ruddy,  and  of  a 

17.  55  he  said..  Aimer,  whose  son  (is)  this  youth? 

8.  Youth,  1$  noar. 

Job  36.  14  They  die  in  youth,  and  their  life  (is)  am. 
Psa.  88.  15  afflicted  and' ready  to  die  from  (my)  youth 

9.  Youth,  n*pv?ii  aluvvim. 

Job  20.  11  His  bones  are  full  (of  the  sin)  of  his  youth 

33.  25  he  shall  return  to  the  days  of  his  youth 
Psa.  89.  45  The  days  of  his  youth  hast  thou  shorten. 
Isa.   54.    4  for  thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  yo. 

10.  A  brood,  rtr}-\*>  pirchah. 

Job  30.  12  Upon  (my)  right  (hand)  rise  the'youth,  th. 

11.  Littleness,  youth,  n"Vj;*s  tseirah. 

Gen.  43.  33  youngest  according  to  his  youth :  and  the 

12.Daum,  youth,  TAirw  shaeharuth.    ■ 

Eccl.n.  10  thy  flesh  :  for  childhood  and  youth  (are) 

lo.  Youth,  v^orns  neotes. 

Matt  19.  20  All  these  things  have  I  kept  [from  my  yo.] 
Markio.  20  all  these  have  I  observed  from  my  youth 
Luke  1 8.  21  said,  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
Acts  26.   4  My  manner  of  life  from  my  youth,  which 

1  Ti.    4.  12  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth  ;  but  be  th. 

14.  Youthful,  I'ewTeptKo'y  neoierikos. 

2  Ti.    2.  22  Flee  also  youthful  lusts:  but  follow  righ. 


Z 


ZA-A-NA'-IM,  CJj/>',  D'ajyx  double  migratory  tent. 
A  plain  (or  oak)  near  Kedesii,  in  Napthali.  See  Zaanan- 
11  i  hi. 

Judg.  4.  11  and  pitched  his  tent  unto  the  plain  of  Z. 
ZA-A'-NAK,  i^xy  rich  in  flocks.     See  Zenan. 
A  city  in  Judah  or  Benjamin. 

Mic.    1.  11  the  inhabitant  of  Z.  came  not  forth  in  the 


ZA-A-ITAIT'-IJI^J,  D^jBs.      Same  as  Zaanm.ni. 

Josh. 19. 33  their  coast  was. .from  Allou  to  Z.,  and  A. 

ZA-A'-VAN,  ZA'-VAN,  fig.]  causing  fear. 

A  son  of  Ezer,  son  of  Seir  the  Horite.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen  36.  27  children  of  Ezer(are)these;  Bilhan,  andZ. 

1  Oh.  1.  42  sons  of  Ezer;  Bilhan,  and  Z.,  (and)  Jakau 

ZA'-BAD,  ~2]  cndoiver. 

1  A  son  of  Nathan,  a  descendant  of  Jerahmeel,  grand- 
sou  of  Tharez  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  2.  36  Attai  begat  Nathan,  and  Nathan  hegatZ. 
2  37  Z.  begat  Ephlal,  and  Ephlal  begat  ObcJ 

2.  Son  of  Tahath.  and  father  of  Shuthelah,  an 
Ephraimite.     B.C.  1650. 

1  Ch.    7.  21  And  Z.  his  son,  and  Shuthelah  his  son 

3.  A  son  of  Alai,  one  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  104S- 

i~Ch.  11.  41  Uriah  the  Hittite,  Z.  the  son  of  Ahlai 

4.  The  son  of  Shimeath,  an  Ammonitess,  who  joined  with 
Jehozabad  in  slaying  Joash  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  839. 

2  Ch.24.  26  Z  the  son  of  Shimeath  an  Ammonitess 

5.  One  of  the  sons  of  Zattu  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.     B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  27  Mattaniah,  and  Jeremoth,  and  Z.,  and  A. 

6.  One  of  the  sons  of  Hashum  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  33  Of  the  sons  of  Hashum. .Z.,  Eliphelet,  Je. 

7.  One  of  the  sons  of  Nebo  that  had  done  the  same. 

Ezra  10.  43  Of  the  sons  of  Nebo..  Z.,Zebina,  Jadan,  and 

ZAB'-BAI,  '?T  roving  about,  pure. 

1.  One  of  the  sons  of  Bebai  that  had  taken  a  strange 
wife.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  28  Of  the  sons  also  of  Bebai.  .Z  ,  (and)  Ath. 

2.  Father  of  Baruch  who  helped  to  repair  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem  after  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.  20  After  him  Baruch  the  son  of  Z.  earnestly 

ZAB'-BTJD,  "rtSj,  T31  well  remembered,  endowed. 
One  of  the  sons  of  Bigvai  who  returned  from  exile  with 
Ezra.     B.C.  457. 

Ezra    S.  14  Of  the  sons  also  of  Bigvai;  Uthai,  and  Z 

ZAB'-DI,  ^31  Jah  is  endower. 

1.  Father  of  Carmi  father  of  Achan.     B  C.  1500. 

Josh.  7.  1  Achan,  the  son  of  Carmi,  the  son  of  Z. ,  the 
7.  17  and  he  brought  the  family.  .Z.  was  taken 
7.  18  Achan,  the  son  of  Carmi,  the  son  of  Z.,  the 

2.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Shimhi.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  19  And  Jakim,  and  Zichri,  and  Z. 

3.  One  of  David's  storekeepers,  a  Shiplimite  from  She- 
pham  in  Judah.     B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.27.  27  the  increase  of  the  vineyards,  .(was)  Z. 

4.  A  Levite,  father  of  Micha,  and  grandfather  of  Mat- 
taniah who  led  the  thanksgiving  in  prayer  in  the  days 
of  Nehemiah.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11. 17  Mattaniah  the  son  of  Micha,  the  son  of  Z. 

ZAB-DI'-EL,  ?N^3l  God  is  endower. 

1.  Father  of  Jashobeam,  one  of  David's  captains.  B.C. 
1070. 

1  Ch.27.    -  0ver  tae  first.  .Jashobeam  the  son  of  Z. 

2.  An  overseer  of  the  priests  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.  11. 14  their  overseer  (was)  Z.,  the  son  of  (oueof) 

ZA'-BTO,  TOJ  endowed. 

Son  of  Nathan,  and  friend  of  Solomon,  and  his  princi- 
pal officer.    B.C.  1000. 

1  Ki.   4.    5  Z.  the  son  of  Nathan  (was)  principal  offi. 

ZA-BTJ'-LON,  Za$ov\<,')v.    See  Zebulun. 

Matt.  4.  13  Capernaum .  .is.  .in  the  borders  of  Z.  and 

4.  15  The  land  of  Z.,  and  the  land  of  Nephtha. 

Rev.    7.    8  Of  the  tribe  of  Z.  (were)  sealed  twelve  th. 

ZAC'-CAI,  y3}pitre. 

One  whose  descendants  returned  from  exile  with  Zerub- 

babel.    B.C.  536. 

Ezra   2.    9  children  of  Z.,  seven  hundred  and  three. 

Neh.   7. 14  children  of  Z.;  seven  hundred  and  three. 

ZAC'-CHEUS,  Zafcxa'os,  /rom  Hch.  *3]  pure. 
A  chief  taxgatherer  whom  Jesus  called  on  when  pass- 
ing through  Jericho. 

Luke  19.  2  And.  behold,  (there  was)  a  man  named  Z. 
19.  5  Jesus,  .said  unto  him,  Z,  make  haste,  and 
19.   8  And  Z.  stood,  and  said  unto  the  Lord 

ZAC'-CTJR,  ZAC'-CHTTR,  113]  well  remembered. 

1.  A  Reubenite,  father  of  Shammuah,  one  of  those  sent 

by  Moses  to  spy  the  laud.     B.C.  1515. 

Num  13.   4  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  Shammua.  .son of  Z. 

3.  A  Simeonite,  son  of  Hamuel,  and  father  of  Shimei 
who  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  daughters.     B.C.  1170. 

1  Ch.  4.  26  Hamuel  his  son,  Z.  his  son,  Shimei  his  son 

3.  A  Merarite.    B.C  1015. 

1  Ch.24.  27  Beno,  and  Shoham,  and  Z.,  and  Ibri 

4.  A  son  of  Asaph,  and  father  of  Michaiah,  set  over  the 
service  of  song  by  David.    B.C   1015. 

1  Ch.25.   2  Of  the  sons  of  Asaph;  Z.,  and  Joseph,  and 

25. 10  The  third  to  Z.,  (he),  his  sons,  and  hisbr. 

Neh.  11.  35  Michaiah,  the  son  of  Z.,the  sou  of  Asaph 

5.  A  son  of  Imri,  who  rebuilt  part  of  the  wall  of  Jerusa- 
lem after  Nehemiah  came  from  Shushan.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.   3.    2  next  to  them  builded  Z.  the  son  of  Inn  i 


^=T^ 


ZACHARIAH 


10SG 


ZBBADIAH 


(..  A  Levite  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed  the  covenant. 

B.C.  445- 

Neh.  10. 12  Z.,  Sherebiah,  Shebaniah 
7.  Father  of  Hanan  whom  Nehemiah  made  one  of  the 
treasurers  of  the  Lord's  house.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  13-  13  next  tu  them  (was)  Hanan  the  son  of  Z. 
ZA-CHAR'-IAH,  n;i:i,  ^nprj  Jah  is  renowned. 
1.  Son  of  Jeroboam  II.,  king  of  Israel.    B.C.  773 

2  Ki.  14.  29  and  Z.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 

ic.    s  did  Z.  the  Bon  of  Jeroboam  reiguoyer  Is. 
13.11  And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Z.,  behold,  th. 
2  Father  of  Abi  or  Abijah,  wife  of  Ahaz  and  mother  of 
Hezekiab  kings  of  Judah.    b  c.  750.    See  Zechariah. 

2  Ki.iS.    2  mother's  name.  .Abi,  the  daughter  of  Z. 

a.Ch  29.    1  mother's  name.. Abijah.. daughter  of  Z. 

ZA-CHA-RI'-AS,  Zaxapias.     See  Zechariah. 

1.  The  sou  of  Barachias  (or  Jehoiada,  2  Ch.  24.  20-22) 
whom  the  Jews  stoned  for  rebuking  them.     B.C.  840. 

Mattsq.  35  Z.  the  son  of  Barachias,  whom  ye  slew  be. 
Luken.  51  the  blood  of  Abel  uuto  the  blood  of  Z. 

2.  A  priest  of  the  course  of  Abia  (the  eighth),  father  of 
John  the  Baptist. 

Luke  1.    5  a  certain  priest  named  Z.,  of  the  course  of 
1.  12  when  Z.  saw.  .he  was  troubled,  and  fear 
1. 13  the  angel  said  unto  him,  Fear  not,  Z.,  for 
1.  iS  Z.  said  unto  the  angel,  'Whereby  shall  I 
1.  21  the  people  waited  for  Z.,  and  marvelled 
1.  40  entered  iuto  the  house  of  Z.,  and  saluted 
1.  67  his  father  Z.  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Gh. 

3.  2  word  of  G6d  came  uuto  John  the  sou  of  Z. 
S,  The  name  proposed  to  be  given  to  John  the  Baptist 
by  his  friends. 

Luke  1.  59  they  called  him  Z.,  after  the  name  of  his 

ZA'-CHER,  "\2ifame. 

A  sod  of  Jeiel  father  of.  Gibeon,  a  Benjamite ;  called 

Zechariah  in  1  Ch.  9.  37.    B.C.  11S0. 

1  Ch.  8.  31  And  Gedor,  and  Ahio,  and  Z. 

ZA'-DOK,  fi-iy  righteous, 

1.  Son  of  Ahituh,  and  father  of  Ahimaaz,  a  priest  in  the 

days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

2  Sa.  8  17  Z.  the  sun  of  Ahituh,  and  Ahimelech  the 

15.  24  lo  Z.  also,  .bearing  the  ark  of  the  covena. 
15  25  the  king  said  unto  Z.,  Carry  hack  the  ark 
15.  27  The  king  said  also  uuto  Z.  the  priest,  (Art 
15.  29  Z.  therefore  aud  Abiathar  carried  the  ark 
15.  35  (hast  thou)  not  there  with  thee  Z.  and  Abi. 
15.  35  thou  shalt  tell  (it)  to  Z.  and  Abiathar  the 
15.  36  Ahimaaz,  Z.'sfson),  and  Jonathan,  Abiat. 

17.  15  Then  said  Hushai  unto  Z.  and  to  Abiath. 
18. 19,  22  Then  said  Ahhnaaz  the  son  of  Z.  yet 

18.  27  like  the  running  of  Ahimaaz  the  son  of  Z. 

19.  11  king  David  sent  to  Z.  and  to  Abiathar  the 
20. 25  aud  Z.  and  Abiathar  (were)  the  priests 

1  Ki.  1.  8  J?,  the  priest,  and  Benaiah.  .were  not  with 
1.  26  and  Z  the  priest,  .hath  he  not  called 
1.  32  king  David  said,  Call  Z.  the  priest,  and  N. 
1.  34  let  Z. .  .anoint  him  there  king  over  Israel 
j.  38  So  Z.  the  priest,  .caused  Solomon  to  ride 
1.  39  Z.  the  priest  took  an  horn  of  oil  out  of  the 
1.  44  the  king  hath  sent  with  him  Z.  the  priest 

1.  45  Z.  the  priest,  .anointed  him  king  inGihou 

2.  35  Z...  did  the  king  put  in  the  room  of  Abia. 

4.  2  princes  which  lie  had  ;Azariah  the  son  of  Z. 
4.    4  and  Z.  and  Abiathar  (were)  the  priests 

1  Ch.  6.    8  Ahitub  begat  Z.,  and  Z.  begat  Ahimaaz 
6.  53  Z.  his  sou,  Ahimaaz  his  son 

15.  11  David  called  for  Z.  aud  Abiathar  the  pri. 

16.  3)  Z,  the  priest,  and  his  brethren  the  priests 
18.  16  Z.  theson  of  Ahituh,  and  Ahimelech.  .(w.) 
24.    3  David  distributed  tliem,  both  Z.  of  the 
24.    6  Shemaiah . .  wrote  them  before . .  Z.  the  pr. 
24.  31  likewise  cast  lots . .  in  the'presence  of . .  Z. 
27.  17  the  son  of  Kemuel :  of  the  Aarouites,  Z. 
29. 22  And  they  made .  .Z.  (to  be)  priest 

Ch.31.  10  Azariah  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of  Z. 

Ezra    7.    2  The  son  of  Shallum,  the  son  of  Z.,  the 

Eze.  40.  46  these  (are)  the  sons  of  Z.  among  the  sons 

43. 19  give.,  the  Levites  that  be  of  the  seed  of  Z. 

44.  15  the  sons  of  Z.,  that  kept  the  charge  of  my 

48.  11  priests  that  are  sanctified  of.. sons  of  Z. 

1  ather  of  Jerusha,  wife  of  Uzziah  and  mother  of 
rol  ham  kings  of  Judah. 

2  Ki.  15.  33  mother's  name..  Jerusha..  daughter  of  Z. 
2  Ch.27.    1  mother'sname..Jerushah.. daughter ufZ. 

.;.  Son  of  Ahituh,  grandson  of  Azariah,  high  priest  in 
Solomon's  temple. 

1  Ch.  6. 12  And  Ahitub  begat  Z.,  aud  Z.  begat  Shall. 
9. 11  Hilklah..BOD  of  Mcshullam,  the  son  of  Z. 

4.  A  young  man  mighty  of  valour,  that  came  to  David 
to  Hebron  to  help  mm. 

1  Ch.12.  28  And  Z.,  a  young  man  mighty  of  valour 

5.  The  son  of  Baana  who  repaired  a  portion  of  the  wall 
<>f  Jerusalem.     B.C.  445. 

Neh.    3.    4  next  unto  them  repaired  Z.  the  son  of  B. 
C A  priest,  sun  «>f  Emmer,  that  did  the  same. 

j,  2g  After  them  repaired  Z.  the  son  of  Immer 

7.  A  person  that  with  tfebarniah  sealed  the  covenant 

B.C    445. 

Neh.  10.  21  Meahezabeel,  z  ,  Jaddua 

8.  As.. n  ,,f  Meraloth,  anoeetorol  one  of  the  priests  that 
dwell  in  derate]  \m,  b.ol  7.1  >. 

Nflb.11,  11  M^hulkmi,  the  sun  of  Z.,  the  sou  of  Me. 


9.  A  Bcribe  whom  Nehemiah  put  iu  charge  over  the 
treasuries  of  the  Lord's  house.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.13.  13  I  have  made  treasurers. .Z.  the  scribe,  and 

ZA'-HAM,  orn  fatness, 

A  son  of  Rehoboam,  son  of  Solomou.     B.C.  960. 

2  Ch.  1 1.  19  Which  bare . .  children . .  Shamariah,  and  Z. 
ZA'-IR,  TJ,'>'  little. 

A  city  or  place  mEdom;  or  perhaps  a  scribe's  mistake  for 
Seir. 

2EX    8.  21  Jorum  went  overtoZ.,  and  all  the  chariots 

ZA'-LAPH,  tf?y  purification. 

Father  of  Hahun  who  repaired  a  part  of  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem  after  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

Neh.  3.  30  After  1dm  repaired . .  Hauun  the . .  son  of  Z. 

ZAL'-MON,  SAL'-MON,  jiD^s  terrace,  ascent. 

1.  A  hill  nearEbal  or  Shechem  in  Samaria. 

Judg.  9.  4S  Ahimelech  gat  him  up  to  mount  Z.,  he  and 
Psa."  68.  14  it  was  (white)  as  suow  in  S. 

2.  An  Ahohite,  one  of  David's  valiant  men.  It  is  llai 
iu  1  Ch.  9.  29.    B.C.  1048. 

2  Sa.  23.  28  Z.  the  Ahohite,  Maharai  the  Netophath. 

ZAL-MO'-NAH,  n:bh?  terrace,  ascent. 
The   thirty-fourth' station  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  the 
twenty-third  from  Sinai,  and  the  third  from  Ezion- 
geber;  near  the  S.  of  the  Salt  Sea. 

Num. 33.  41  And  they  departed,  .and  pitched  in  Z. 
33.  42  they  departed  from  Z.,  and  pitched  in  P. 

ZAL-JffTJN'-NA,  vjdts  withdrawn  from  protection. 

A  king  of  Midian  defeated  aud  slain  by  Gideon.    B.C. 

1240. 

Judg.  8.    5  I  am  pursuing  after  Zebah  and  Z.,  kings 
8.   6,  15  (Are)  the  hands  of  Zebah  aud  Z.  now 
8.    7  when  the  Lord  hath  delivered.  .Z.  into 
8.  10  Now  Zebah  and  Z.  (were)  in  Karkor,  and 
8.  12  when  Zebah  and  Z.  fled,  he  pursued  after 
8.  12  and  took.. Zebah  and  Z.,  and  discomfited 
8.  15  Behold  Zebah  and  Z.,  with  whom  ye  did 
8. 18  Then  said  he  unto  Zebah  and  Z.,  What 
8.  21  Then  Zebah  and  Z.  said,  Rise  thou,  and 

8.  21  Gideon  arose,  and  slew  Zebah  and  Z.,  and 
Psa.  S3.  11  Make.,  all  their  princes  as  Zebah  and  as  Z. 

ZAM-ZTJM'-MTM,  n^lp^r  powerful,  vigorous. 
A  tribe  of  the  Rephaim  dwelling  in  the  region  after- 
wards occupied  by  the  Ammonites;    called  Zuzim  in 
Gen.  14.  5. 

Deut.  2.  20  giants,  .therein.  .Ammonites  call  them  Z. 
ZA-NO'-AH,  nz]  broken  district. 

1.  A  city  in  W;  of  the  plain  of  Judah;  near  Adullam  and 
Dan;  now  calbd  Zanua,  on  the  )Vadtf  Ismail. 

Josh  15.  34  And  Z.,  and  En-gannim,  Tappuah.'and  E. 

Neh.   3.  13  The  valley  gate  repaired,  .the  inhabit,  of  Z. 

11.  30  Z.,  Adullam,  and  (in)  their  villages,  at  L. 

2.  A  city  on  the  E.  of  the  hill  country  of  Judah,  near 
Jezreel  or  Yokdeam;  now  Januta,  ten  miles  S.  of 
Hebron. 

Josh.15. 56  And  Jezreel,  aud  Jokdeam,  and  Z. 

3.  One  of  the  family  of  Caleb  son  of  Jephunneh. 

1  Ch.  4.  iS  his  wife.  .bare. .  Jekuthiel  thefatherofZ. 
ZAPH-NATH  PAA'-NRAH,-ry*  r:;-;^  saviour  of  world. 
Name  given  to  Joseph  by  Pharaoh.     B.C.  1745-1635. 

Gen.  41.45  Pharaoh  called  Joseph's  name  Z.,  and  he 
ZA'-PHON,  [is$  concealed. 

A  city  in  Gad,  a  little  E.  of  Sea  of  Galilee,  near  Succoth 
or  Beth-uimrah ;  called  Shophan  in  Num.  32.  35. 

Josh. 13.  27  iu  the  valley,  .and  Succoth,  and  Z.,  the 
ZA'-EA,  Zap*.     See  Zarah. 
The  sou  of  Judah  and  Thamar.     B.C.  1700. 

Matt.  1.    3  And  Judashegat  PharesandZ.  of  Thamar 
ZA'-RAH,  ZE'-RAH,rnt,  rni  sprout. 
A  son  of  Judah  by  his  daughter  in  law  Tamar.    B.C. 
1700. 

Gen.  38. 30  Iris  brother,  .and  his  name  was  called  Z. 
46.  12  And  the  sons  of  Judah.  .Pharez,  aud  Z. 

Num  26.  20  of  Z.,  the  family  of  the  Zarhites 

Josh.  7.  1,  18  Zabdi,  the  son  of  Z.,  of  the  tribe  of  Ju. 

7.  24  Joshua,  .took  Aehau  the  son  of  Z.,  and  the 

22.  20  Did  not  Achan  the  son  of  Z.  commit  a  tr. 

1  Ch.  2.    4  Tamar  his  daughter  in  law  bare  him.  .Z: 
2.   6  the  sons  of  Z. ;  Zimri,  and  Ethan,  and  H, 

9.  6  of  the  sons  of  Z. ;  Jeuel,  and  their  hreth. 
Neh.  11.  24  of  the  children  of  Z,  the  son  of  Judah 

ZA-RE'-AH,  n^ny  stinging,  wasp.     See  Zarah. 
A  city  in   the  plain  of  Judah  near  Dan :  now  called 
Zarah  or  Surah,  two  and  a  half  miles  N.  of  Beth-she- 
mesh. 

Neh.  1 1  29  at  En-rimmon,  and  at  Z.,  and  at  Jarmuth 
ZAREATHTTES,  "rrjjy. 

Family  of  Shobal,  a  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Hur;  the 
same  as  the  Zorathites  in  1  Ch.  4.  2. 

1  Ch.  2.  53  of  them  came  the  Z.,  and  the  Eshtaulites 
ZA'-RED,  ZE'-RED,  tm,  TTJ  icillow  bush. 
A  brook  (and  valley)  running  into  the  Salt  Sea:  the 
boundary  line  between  Moab  aud  Edom  ;  it  is  called  the 
"brook  <d  the  willows"  in  Isa.  15.  7;  and  the  "riverof 
the  wilderness,"  in  Amos  6.  14;  perhaps  the  Wadii  el- 

Ah. si). 

Num  21.  12  removed,  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Z. 

Deut.  2.  13  iivcr../, ;  and  we  went  over  the  brook  Z. 

2.  14  space. .until  we  were. .over  the  brook  Z. 


ZA-RE'-PHATH,  n^  place  of  refining. 
A  city  of  the  Phoenicians,  betweeu  Tyre  and  Sidon, 
where  EUjah  lodged  with  a  widow  ;  in  Luke  4.  26  it  is 
called  Sarepta,  and  now  Sura/cud. 

1  Xi.17.  9  Arise, gettheeto  Z..  and  dwell  there.be 
17.  10  So  he  arose  and  went  to  Z.  And  when  he 

Obad.     20  that  of  the  Canaanites,  (even)  unto  Z.;  and 

ZA-RE'-TAN,  ZARTANAH,  ZARTHAN,  }rn?  cooling. 
A  city  or  district  in  Ephraini  or  Manasseh,  near  Reth- 
shean  and  Succoth :  here  the  waters  of  Jordan  rose  in 
a  heap.  See  Zereda,  Zeredathafi,  Zererath. 

Josh.  3.  16  far  from  the  city  Adam.that(is)  besideZ. 

1  Ki.  4.  12  Beth-shean,  which  (is)  by  Z.  beneath  Jez. 
7.  46  the  clay  ground  betweeu  Succoth  and  Z. 

ZA-RETH  SHA'-HAR,  -nrn  rrvxliyht  of  the  dawn. 
A  city  in  Reuben,  s.  of  Heshbori,  and  three  miles  S.  of 
the  mouth  of  the  Zerka  Ma'in  ;  now  called  Zara. 

Josh  13. 19  Sibmah,  and  Z.  in  the  mount  of  the  valley 

ZARHITES,  *n-]T. 

1.  The  family  of  Zerah  a  Simeonite. 

Num  26. 13  Of  Zerah,  the  family  of  the  Z. 

2,  The  family  of  Zarah  or  Zerah,  son  of  Judah. 

Num26.  20  of  Zerah,  the  family  of  the  Z. 
Josh.  7.  17  and  he  took  the  family  of  the  Z. 

7.  17  he  brought  the  family  of  tlieZ.  man  by  m. 

1  Ch.27.  11  eighth.  .SibbecaitheHushathite,of  the  Z. 

27.  13  Maharai  the  Netophathite,  of  the  Z.;  and 

ZAT'-TTJ,  ZAT'-THTJ,  N  ni  lovely,  pleasant 

1.  One  whose  descendants  returned  with  Zeruhbabel. 

B.C.  536. 

Ezra  2.    8  children  of  Z.,  nine  hundred  forty  and  five 

10.  27  of  the  sous  of  Z. ;  Elioenai,  Eliashib,  Mat. 

Neh.   7.  13  children  of  Z.,  eight  lmndred  forty  aud  live 

2.  One  who  sealed  with  Nehemiah  the  covenant.  B.C. 
445- 

Neh.  10.  14  Parosh,  Pahathmoah,  Elam,  Z.,  Bani 

ZA'-ZA,  kjj  projection. 

A  son  of  Jonathan,  and  descendant  of  Jerahmeel  great 
grandson  of  Judah.    B.C.  1340. 

1  Ch.  2.  33  Aud  the  sons  of  Jonathan  ;  Peleth,  and  Z. 
ZEAL,  (to  be)  zealous,  to  zealously  affect  — 

1.7*0  be  or  make  zealous,  n:^  qana,  3. 

N11U125.  11  while  he  was  zealous  for  my  sake  among 
25. 13  because  he  was  zealous  for  his  God,  and 

2  Sa.  21.  2  sought  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal  to  the  ch. 
2.Zeal,  rtii;p  qinah. 

2  Ki.io.  16  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  their. 
19.  31  the  zeal  of  the  Loan  (of  hosts)  shall  do 

Psa.  69.  9  For  the  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me 
119.  139  My  zeal  hath  consumed  me;  because  mi. 

Isa.  9.  7  The  zeal  of  the  Lokd  of  hosts  will  perform 
37. 32  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  do  this 
59.  17  (for)  clothing,  and  was  clad  with  zeal  aud 
63.  15  where  (is)  thy  zeal  and  thy  strength,  the  s. 

Eze.    5. 13  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  (it)  in  my  ze. 

Z.Zeal,  C^\os  zelos. 

John  2.  17  The  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up 
Rornio.  2  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal  of 
2  Co.  7.  11  yea,  (what)  zeal,  yea,  what  revenge.  Iuall 

9.   2  ago  ;  and  your  zeal  hath  provoked  very 
Pliil.   3.   6  Concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  church 
Col.    4.  13  bear  him  record,  that  he  hath  a  great  [z.] 

A.A  zealot,  zealous,  fnAwT^r  ^lotes. 

Acts  si.  20  which  believe ;  and  they  are  all  zealous 

22.   3  was  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all  are  this 
1  Co.  14. 12  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual 
Gal.     1.  14  being  most  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  tr. 
Titus  2. 14  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  ze. 

5.  To  be  zealous  for,  fahSw  zeloo. 

Gal.     4.  17  They  zealously  affect  you,  (but)  not  well 

4.  18  But  (it  is)  good  to  he  zealously  affected 
Rev.    3.  19  I  rebuke,  and  chasten :  [he  zealous]  there. 

ZE-SAD'-IAH,  nj-j3t,  WtTP]  Jah  *»  endower. 

1.  Grandson  of  Elpael,  a  Benjamite.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8. 15  And  Z.,  and  Arad,  and  Ader 

2.  A  son  of  Elpael.     B.C.  1280. 

1  Ch.  8. 17  Z.,  aud  Meshullam,  and  Hezeki,  and  Heh. 

3.  One  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag.     B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.  7  Joelah,  and  Z.,  the  sous  of  Jeroham  of  G. 
i.  A  Kohathite,  son  of  Meshelemiah,  a  gatekeeper  of 
the  tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.26.  2  Jediael  the  second,  Z.  the  third,  Jathniel 
5.  A  son  of  Asahel  son  of  Zeruiah.     B.C.  1025. 

1  Ch.27.  7  The  fourth.  .Asahel.  .and  Z.  his  son  after 
G.  A  Levite  sent  by  Jehoshaphat  to  teach  the  people  in 
the  cities  of  Judah.    B.C.  912. 

2  Ch.17.  STvith  them.. Levites,  (even)..Z.,and  Azahel 
7.  Son  of  Ishmael.and  ruler  of  the  house  of  Judah  in  the 
days  of  Jehoshaphat.    B.C.  912. 

2  Ch.  19. 11  Z.  the  son  of  Ishmael.  .for  all  the  king's 
S.  Son  of  Shephaniah,  and  head  of  a  family  which 
returned  with  Ezra  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes.  B.C. 
457- 

Ezra  S.  8  Z.  the  son  of  Michael,  and  with  him  four. 
9.  A  priest  that  had  takeu  a  strange  wife  during  the 
exile.    B.C.  445. 

Ezra  10.  20  And  of  the  sons  of  Immer ;  Hanaui,  and  Z. 


ZBBAH 


1087 


2ELOPHEHAD 


ZE'-BAH,  nni  slaughter,  sacrifice. 

A  king  of  Midian  defeated  and  slain  by  Gideon.    B.C. 

1249. 

Judg.  S.    5  I  am  pursuing  after  Z.  and  Zalmunna,  ki. 
8.    6,  i5.(Ai-e)  the  hands  of  Z.  and  Zalmunna 
8.    7  Lord  hath  delivered  Z.  and  Zalmunna 
8.  10  Now  Z.  and  Zalmunna  (were)  in  Karkor 
8. 12  when  Z.  and  Zalmunna  fled,  he  pursued 
8.  12  and  took.  ,Z.  and  Zalmunna,  and  discom. 
8.  15  Behold  Z.  and  Zalmunna,  with  whom  ye 
8.  18  Then  said  he  unto  Z.  and  Zalmunna 
8.  21  Then  Z.  and  Zalmunna  said,  Rise  thou 

8.  21  And  Gideon  arose,  and  slew  Z.  and  Zalm. 
Psa.  83. 11  Make,  .all  their  princes  asZ.,  and  as  Zal. 

ZE-BA'-IM,  D^y,  D"5^  gazelles. 

Place   unknown;  perhaps  Zeboim;  the  residence  of 

Pochereth  whose  descendants  returned  from  exile  with 

Zerubhabel.    b.c.  536. 

Ezra   2.  57  children  of  Pochereth  of  Z.,  the  children 
Neh.   7.  59  children  of  Pochereth  of  Z.,  the  children 

ZE-BE'-DEE,  Ze/3e5a?os  (from  Hcb.  n^pl)  Jah  is  gift. 
Husband  of  Salome,  and  father  of  James  and  John,  two 
of  the  apostles  of  Jesus ;  a  fisherman  by  trade. 

Matt.  4,  21  he  saw..  James.,  of  Z.,  and  John  his  brot. 
4.  21  in  a  ship  with  Z.  their  father,  mending 
10.    2  James  (the  son)  of  Z.,  and  John  his  broth. 

20.  20  Then  came  to  him  the  mother  of  Z.'s  chi. 

26.  37  took  with  Mm  Peter  and  the.  .sons of  Z. 

27.  56  Among  which  was . .  the  mother  of  Z.  *s  ch. 
Mark  1.  19  he  saw  James  the  (son)  of  Z.,  and  John  his 

1.  20  they  left  their  father  Z.  in  the  ship  with 

3.  17  James  the  (son)  of  Z.,  and  John  the  brot. 
10.  35  Janiesand  John,  the  sons  ofZ.,  come  unto 

Luke  5. 10  the  sous  of  Z. .  .were  partners  with  Simon 
John2i.  2  There  were  together,  .the(sons)  of  Z.,  and 

ZE-BI'-NA,  KV2]  ■purchase. 

One  of  the  sons  of  Nebo  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife 

during  the  exile.    B.C.  445. 

Ezraio.  43  the  sons  of  Nebo ;  Jeiel,  Mattithiah.  .Z. 
ZE-EO'-LTS,  ZEBOLTM  D;:iy,  DMh¥,  D'sov  wild  place. 
One  of  the  five  cities  in  tlie  valley  of  Siddim,  and  de- 
stroyed with  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.    B.C.  1S98. 

Gen.  10. 19  as  thou  goest, unto..Admah,  andZ.,  even 
14.  2  made  war  with..  Shemeber  king  of  Z.,  and 
14.    8  And  there  went  out.  .the  king  of  Z.,  and 

Deut  29.  23  and  Z.,  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  his 

Hos.  ti.   8  shall  I  set  thee  as  Z.?  mine  heart  is  turned 

ZE-BO'-IM,  D'yi^  wild  place. 

A  city  and  valley  in  Benjamin  sloping  eastward  to  the 

Jordan  plain;  perhaps  the  Shv.g  ed  Dubba'  or  Wady 

Abu-l-Dda-baa. 

1  Sa.13.  18  border  that  looketh  to  the  valley  of  Z.  to. 
Neh.n.  34  Hadid,  Z.,  Neballat 

ZE-BTJ'-DAH,  rnUJ  endowed. 

Daughter  "of  Pedaiah  of  Rumah,  wife  of  Josiah  and 

mother  of  Eliakiin  (or  Johoiakim)  kings  of  Judah.   B.C. 

640. 

2  Ki.23.  36  And  his  mother's  name  (was)  Z.  ..of  Bum. 

ZE'-BTJL,  ^2}  gift,  dwelling. 

An  officer  of  Abimelech  and  governor  of  Shechem.  B.C. 

1206. 

Judg.  9.  28  (is)  not . .  Z.  his  officer  ?  Serve  the  men  of 

9.  30  Z. .  .heard  the  words  of  Gaal  the  son  of 
9.  36  when  Gaal  saw  the  people,  he  said  to  Z. 
9.  36  Z.  said  unto  him,  Thou  seest  the  shadow 
9.  38  Then  said  Z.  unto  him,  Where  (is)  now 
9.  41  and  Z.  thrust  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren 

ZE3TJL0NTTES  'iS^T. 

The  descendants  of  Zebulun. 

Nuni26.  27  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Z.  accord. 

Judgi2.  11  And  after  him  Elon,  a  Z.,  judged  Israel 
12.  12  And  Elon  the  Z.  died,  and  was  buried  in 
ZE-BTJ'-LTJN,  p^T,  jSidt.  j^n;  dwelling. 

1.  Tenth  son  of  Jacob,  and  sixth'  of  Leah.    B.C.  1740. 

Gen.  30. 20 1  have,  .sons ;  and.  .called  his  name  Z. 

35.  23  Levi,  and  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  Z. 

46. 14  the  sons  of  Z.;  Sered,  and  Elon,  and  Jah. 

49.  13  Z.  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  sea 
Exod.  1.   3  Issachar,  Z.,  and  Benjamin 
1  Ch.  2.    1  Simeon,  Levi.  .Judah,  Issachar,  and  Z. 

2.  His  x>osterity. 

Num.  1.    9  Of  Z.;  Eliab  the  son  of  Helon 

1.  30  Of  the  children  of  Z. .  .all  that  were  able 

1.  31  Those  that  were  numbered,  .of. .  tribe  of  Z. 

2.  7  tribe  of  Z. .  .captain  of  the  children  of  Z. 
7.  24  Eliab.  .prince  of  the  children  of  Z.,  (did 

10.  16  over  the  host.. of  Z. ..Eliab  the  son  of  H. 

13. 10  Of  the  tribe  of  Z.,  Gaddiel  the  son  of  Sodi 

26.  26  (Of)  the  sons  of  Z.  after  their  families 

34.  25  prince  of  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  Z. 
Deut  27.  13  Reuben,  Gad,  and  Asher,  and  Z.,  Dan,  and 

33.  18  of  Z.  he  said,  Rejoice,  Z.,  in  thy  going  out 
Josh.  19.  10  third  lot  came  up  for  the  children  of  Z. 

19.  16  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  Z.  ace. 

19.  27  reacheth  to  Z.,  and  to  the  valley  of  Jiph. 

19.  34  the  coast,  .reacheth  to  Z.  on  the  south 

21.  7  Merari..(had)..outof  the  tribeofZ., twelve 
21.  34  out  of  the  tribe  of  Z.,  Jokneam  with  her 

Judg.  1.  30  Neither  did  Z.  drive  out  the  inhabitants 

4.  6  take  with  thee . .  men . .  of  the  children  of  Z. 

4.  10  Barak  called  Z.  and  Naphtali  to  Kedesh 

5.  T4  out  of  Z.  they  that  haudle  the  pen  of  the 

5.  18  Z. .  .a  people  (that)  jeoparded  their  lives 

6.  35  he  sent  messengers,  .unto  Z.,aud  uuto  Xa. 


Judgi2.  12  was  buried  in  Aijalon  in  the  country  of  Z. 

1  Ch.  6.  63  and  out  of  the  tribe  of  Z.,  twelve  cities 

6.  77  out  of  the  tribe  of  Z.,  Rimmou  with  her 
12.  33  Of  Z.,  such  as  went  forth  to  battle,  expert 
12.  40  they  that  were  nigh.. unto.. Z. . .brought 
27.  19  Of  Z  ,  Ishmaiah  the  son  of  Obadiah 

2  Ch.30.  10  So  the  posts  passed.  .evenuntoZ.;butthey 

30. 11  Nevertheless  divers,  .of  Z.  humbled  them. 
30.  18  many  of.  .Z.,  had  not  cleansed  themselves 
Psa.  63.  27  the  princes  of  Z. .  .the  prince  of  Naphtali 
Isa.     9.    1  he  lightly  aniicted  the  laud  of  Z.  and  the 
Eze.  48.  26  And  by  the  border  of  Issachar..  Z.  a  (por.) 
48.  27  And  by  the  border  of  Z. .  .Gad  a  (portion) 
48.  33  Simeon,  one  gate  of  Issachar,  one.  .of  Z. 
The  following  localities  were  in  the  territory  of  Zebu- 
Ion:— Ajalon,  Bethlehem,   Cabul,  Chisloth-tabor,   Da- 
bareh  or  Daberath,  Dabasheth,  Dirauah,  Gath  (or  Git- 
tah),  Hepher,  Haunathon,  Hepher,  Idalah,  Ittah-kazin, 
Japhia,  Jiphtah-el,  Jokneam,  Kartah,  Kattuh,  Kitron, 
Maralah,  Nahalul,  Neah,  Remmon-methoar,  Riininon, 
Sarid,  Shimron,  Tabor,  &c. 

ZE-CHAR'-IAH,  nn?!,  *n;-ir?  Jah  is  renowned. 

1.  A  chief  Reubenite  when  the  genealogy  was  reckoned. 

B.C.  740. 

1  Ch.  5.    7  his  brethren,  .(were),  .chief,  Jeiel,  and  Z. 

2.  A  Levite,  son  of  Meshelemiah,  a  gatekeeper  of  the 
tabernacle  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.  9.  21  Z.  the  son  of  Meshelemiah  (was)  porter 
26.   2  the  sons  of  Meshelemiah . .  Z.  the  first  born 
26. 14  for  Z.  his  son,  a  wise  counsellor,  they  cast 

3.  A  Benjamite,  in  Gibeon;  called  Z  acker  iiii  Ch.  S.  31. 
B.C.  1 1 80. 

1  Ch.  9.  37  And  Gedor,  and  Ahio,  and  Z.,  and  Mikl. 

4.  A  Levite  set  over  the  service  of  song  in  the  days  of 
David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.15.  18  Z.,  Ben,  and  Jaaziel,  and  Shemiramoth 

15.  20  Z.,  and  Aziel,  and  Shemiramoth,  and  Je. 

16.  5  Asaph  the  chief,  and  next  to  him  Z.,  Je. 

5.  A  priest  in  the  tabernacle,  at  the  same  time. 

1  Ch.15.  24  2.,  and  Benaiah,  and  Eliezer,  the  priests 

6.  A  Kohathite,  son  of  Isshiah,  at  the  same  time. 

1  Ch.24.  25  Isshiah  ;  of  the  sons  of  Isshiah ;  Z. 

7.  A  Merarite,  son  of  Hosah,  a  gatekeeper  of  the  taber- 
nacle at  the  same  time. 

1  Ch.26.  11  Hilkiah  the  second,  Tebaliah  the  third,  Z. 

8.  Father  of  Iddo,  the  chief  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manas- 
seh  E.  of  Jordan  in  the  days  of  David.    B.C.  10407 

1  Ch.27.  21  of  Manasseh  in  Gilead,  Iddo  the  son  of  Z. 

9.  A  prince  whom  Jehoshaphat  sent  to  teach  the  people 
in  the  cities  of  Judah.    B.C.  913. 

2  Ch.17.    7  he  sent  to..  Z...  to  teach  in  the  cities  of  J. 

10.  A  Levite,  father  of  Jehaziel  who  encouraged  Je- 
hoshaphat's  army  against  Moab.    B.C.  896.  . 

2  Ch.20. 14  Then  upon  Jehaziel  the  son  of  Z. .  .came 

11.  Third  son  of  Jehoshaphat.    B.C.  880. 

2  Ch.21.    2  he  had  brethren  the  sons  of.  .Z.,  and  Az. 

12.  Son  of  Jehoida  the  priest,  and  stoned  for  rebuking 
the  people.    B.C.  840. 

2  Ch.24.  2°  *ne  spirit  of  God  came  upon  Z.  the  son 

13.  A  person  having  understanding  in  the  visions  of  God 
in  the  days  of  Uzziah.    B.C.  810. 

2  Ch.26.   5  he  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Z.,  who  had 

14.  A  Levite,  son  of  Asaph,  who  helped  to  cleanse  the 
temple  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.    B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29. 13  of  the  sons  of  Asaph ;  Z.,  and  Mattaniah 

15.  A  Kohathite,  one  of  the  overseers  of  the  repairs  of 
the  temple  in  the  days  of  Josiah.     B.C.  624. 

2  Ch.  34.  12  Z.  and  Meshullam,  of  the  sons  of  the  Koh. 

16.  A  prince  of  Judah  in  the  days  of  Josiah.    B.C.  624. 
2  Ch.  35.   8  Hilkiah  and  Z.  and  Jehiel,  rulers  of  the 

17.  A  prophet  in  Judah,  whose  Book  still  remains.    B.C. 
520. 

Ezra    5.    1  Z.  the  son  of  Iddo,  prophesied  unto  the  J. 

6.  14  Z.  the  son  of  Iddo :  and  they  builded,  and 
Zech.  1.  1,  7  came  the  word -of  the  Lord  unto  Z.,  the 

7.  1  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Z.  in  the 
7.    8  word  of  the  LORD  came  unto  Z.,  saying 

IS.  A  chief  man  that  returned  with  Ezra.    B.C.  457. 
•  Ezra  8.   3  of  the  sons  of  Pharosh ;  Z. :  and  with  him 

19.  Another  that  did  the  same.    B.C.  457. 

Ezra  8.  n  Z.  the  son  of  Bebai,  and  with  him  twenty 
8. 16  Then  sent  I  for.  .Z.,  and  for  Meshullam* 

20.  One  that  had  taken  a  strange  wife. 

Ezraio.  26  Mattaniah,  Z.,  and  Jehiel,  and  Abdi,  and 

21.  A  prince  that  stood  beside  Ezra.    B.C.  457. 

Neh.  8.   4  Hashum,  and  Eashbadana,  Z.,(and)Mes. 

22.  A  descendant  of  Pharez,  some  of  whose  descendants 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem.     B.C.  457. 

Neh.  11.   4  Z.,  the  son  of  Amariah,  theson  of  Shepha. 

23.  Another,  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  Jerusalem. 
Neh.'n.  5  sou  of  Joiarib,  the  son  of  Z.,  the  son  of  Sh. 

24.  A  priest,  some  of  whose  descendants  dwelt  in  Jeru- 
salem. 

Neh  11. 12  son  of  Amzi,  the  son  of  Z.,  the  son  of  Pa, 

25.  A  priest  in  the  time  of  Joiakim  son  of  Jeshua. 
Neh.  12. 16  Of  Iddo,  Z.  ;  of  Ginnethon,  Meshullam 


20.  A  priest  of  the  family  of  Asaph,  who  officiated  in 
the  ceremony  of  purifying  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  B.C. 
457- 

Neh.  12.  35  Z.  the  son  of  Jonathan,  the  son  of  Shem. 
12.  41  Michaiah,  Elioenai,  Z.,  (and)  Hananiah 
27.  One  whom  Isaiah  took  as  a  witness ;  perhaps  the 
same  as  No.  13. 

Isa.     8.    2  Uriah  the  priest,  and  Z.  the  son  of  Jeber. 
ZE'-DAD,  ni-iy  sloping  place. 

A  place  in  the  N.  of  Palestine,  near  Hamath ;  perhaps 
Sadad  between  Hums  and  Baalbec,  now  in  ruins.  The 
Sept.  and  Vulg.  read  Zeradah. 

NU11134.   S  goings  forth  of  the  border  shall  be  to  Z. 

Eze.  47. 15  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as  men  go  to  Z. 
ZE-DE-EI'-AH,  -Tp-.x,  ;n;p-r>*  Jah  is  might. 

1.  A  false  prophet,  son  of  Chenaauah,  who  encouraged 
Ahab  to  attack  the  Syrians  at  Eanioth-Gilead.  B.C.  S97. 

1  Ki.  22. 11  Z..  .made  him  horns  of  iron  :  and  he  said 

22.  24  Z. .  .went  near,  and  smote  Micaiali  on  the 

2  Ch.18.  10  Z. .  .made  him  horns  of  iron,  and  said 

18.  23  Z. .  .came  near,  and  smote  Micaiah  upon 

2.  The  name  given  by  Nebuchadnezzar  to  Mattaniah 
whom  he  made  king  instead  of  Jehoiachin.    B.C.  588. 

2  Ki.24.  17  And  the  king,  .changed  his  name  to  Z. 
24.  iS  Z.  (was)  twenty  and  one  years  old  when 

24.  20  Z.  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Babylon 

25.  2  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh  year  of . .  Z. 
25.    7  they  slew  the  sons  of  Z.  before  his  eyes 
25.   7  they,  .put  out  the  eyes  of  Z.,  and  bound 

1  Ch.  3.  15  the  sons  of  Josiah  (were).  .Z. .  .Shallum 

2  Ch.36.  10  N.  sent.. and  made  Z. ..king  over  Judah 

36.  11  Z.  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old  when 
Jer.     1.    3  unto  the  endof  the  eleventh  year  of  Z.  the 

21.    1  when  king  Z.  sent  unto  him  Pashur  the 
21.    3  Then  said  Jerem... Thus  shall  ye  say  to  Z. 
21.    7  I  will  deliver  Z.  king  of  Judah,  and  hisse. 
24.    8  So  will  I  give  Z.  the  king  of  Judah,  and 
27.   3  messengers  which  come,  .unto  Z.  king  of 

27.  12  I  spake  also  to  Z.  king  of  Judah  according 

28.  1  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Z.  king  of 

29.  3  whom  Z.  king  of  Judah  sentunto  Babylon 
32.    1  word  that  came,  .in  the  tenth  year  of  Z. 
32.   3  For  Z.  king  of  Judah  had  shut  him  up 
32.  4  Z.  king  of  Judah  shall  not  escape  out  of 
32.    5  he  shall  lead  Z.  to  Babylon,  and  there  sh. 
34.    2  Go  and  speak  to  Z.  king  of  Judah,  and  tell 
34.  4  Yet  hear  the  word  of  the  LORD,  0  Z.  king 
34.    6  Jeremiah,  .spake  all  these  words  unto  Z. 
34.   8  Z.  had  made  a  covenant  with  all  the  peo. 
34.  21  Z..  .and his  princes,  will  I  give  into  the  ha. 

37.  1  Z.  the  son  of  Josiah  reigned  instead  of  Co. 
37.  3  Z.  the  king  sent  Jehucal.  .to  the  prophet 
37. 17  Then  Z.  the  king  sent,  and  took  him  out 
37.  iS  Moreover  Jeremiah  said  unto  king  Z. 

37.  21  Z. . .  commanded  that  they  should  commit 

38.  5  Z.  the  king  said,  Behold,  he  (is)  in  your 
38.  14  Then  Z.  the  king  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah 
38.  15  Jeremiah  said  unto  Z.,  If  I  declare  (it)  un. 
38.  16  So  Z  the  king  sware  secretly  unto  Jerem. 
38. 17  Then  said  Jeremiah  unto  Z.,  Thus  saith 

38.  19  Z.  the  king  said  unto  Jeremiah,  I  am  af. 
38. 24  Then  said  Z.  unto  Jeremiah,  Let  no  man 

39.  1  In  the  ninth  year  of  Z.  king  of  Judah,  in 
39.  2  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Z. .  .the  city  was 
39.  4  when  Z.  the  king  of  Judah  saw  them,  and 
39.  5  the  Chaldean's  army,  .overtook  Z.  in  the 
39.  6  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Z. 
39.  7  Moreover  he  put  out  Z.'s  eyes,  and  bound 
44.  30  as  I  gave  Z.  king  of  Judah  into  the  hand 
49.  34  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Z.  king  of 

51.  59  when  he  went  with  Z.  the  king  of  Judah 

52.  1  Z.  (was)  one  and  twenty  years  old  when 
52.    3  Z.  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Babylon 
52.   5  was  besieged  unto  the  eleventh  year  of .  .Z. 
52.    8  the  Chaldeans,  .overtook  Z.  in  the  plains 
52.  10  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Z. 
52. 11  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  Z. .  .and  put  him  in 

3.  Grandson  of  Jehoiakim.    B.C.  530. 

1  Ch.  3. 16  sons  of  Jehoiakim ;  Jeconiah  his  son,  Z. 

4.  A  false  prophet,  son  of  Maaseiah. 

Jer.  29.  21  Thus  saith  the  LORD,  .of  Z.  the  sou  of  M. 
29.  22  The  Lord  make  thee  like  Z.  and  like  Ahab 

5.  A  prince  of  Judah,  son  of  Hananiah,  in  the  days  of 
Jehoiakim.    B.C.  600. 

Jer.  36. 12  Z.  the  son  of  Hananiah,  andall  the  princes 

ZE'-EB,  3NT  wolf. 

A  prince  of  Midian  defeated  and  slain  by  Gideon.    B.C. 

1249. 

Judg.  7.  25  And  they  took  two  princes.  .Oreb  and  Z. 
7.  25  and  Z.  they  slew  at  the  winepress  of  Z. 

7.  25  they,  .brought  the  heads  of  Oreb  and  Z.  to 

8.  3  God.,  delivered  into  your  hands..  Oreb.  .Z. 
Psa.  83. 11  Make  their  nobles  like  Oreb,  and  like  Z. 

ZE'-LAH,  y1?*  slope. 

A  city  in  Benjamin  (near  Eleph  or  Jebusi),  where  Saul 

and  his  sons  were  buried.    B.C.  1056. 

Josh  18.  28  AndZ.,  Eleph,  and  Jebusi,  which  (is)  Jeru. 

2  Sa.  21. 14  the  bones  of  Saul.,  buried  they.,  in  Z.,  in 
ZE'-LEK,  p&X  split,  rent. 

An  Ammonite,  one  of  David's  valiant  men.    B.C.  1048. 
2  Sa.  23.  37  Z.  the  Ammonite,  Naharai  the  Beerothite 
1  Ch.n.  39  Z.  the  Ammonite,  Nahari  the  Eerothite 

ZE-LOPH-E'-HAD,  irj^y. 

Grandson  of  Gilead,  son  of  Manasseh.    B.C.  1402. 

Num  26.  33  Z.  the  son  of  Hepher  had  no  sons,  but  da. 


ZBLOTBS 


1088 


ZICHEI 


Nuni26.  33  names  of  the  daughters  of  Z.  (were)  Mali. 
27.    1  Then  came  the  daughters  of  Z.,  the  son 
27.    7  The  daughters  of  Z.  speak  right;  thoush. 
36.   2  to  give  the  inheritance  of  Z. . .  unto  his  da. 
36.    6  command  concerning,  .daughters  of  Z. 
36.  10  commanded,  .so  did  the  daughters  of  Z. 

36.  11  Mileah,  and  Noah,  the  daughters  of  Z. 
Josh.  17.    3  Z.,  the  son  of  Hepher.  .had  no  sons,  but 
1  Cli.  7. 15  and  the  name  of  the  second  ( was)  Z.;  an  dZ. 

ZE-LO'-TES,  Zn\uT-iis  zealous.     See  Simon. 
A  surname  of  Simon,  one  of  the  twelve  apostles,  else- 
where called  the  Canaanite  by  mistake  for  Cananite, 
or  Kananite. 

Luke  6. 15  James,  .of  Alpheus,  and  Simon  called  Z. 

Acts    1.  13  James  (the  son)  of  Alpheus,  and  Simon  Z. 

ZEL'-ZAH,  ny^v  sun  protection. 
A  city  in  Benjamin  on  the  border. 

1  Sa.io.  2  then  thou  shalt  find  two  men.  .at  Z.,  and 
ZE-MA-RA'-IM,  Q'1?y  double  mount  forest. 

1.  A  city  in  the  N,  of  Benjamin,  near  Bethel;  now  called 
Siuiirah,  five  miles  N.  of  Jericho. 

Josh. 18.  22  And  Beth-arabah,  and  Z.,  and  Beth-el 

2.  A  part  of  Ephraim. 

2  Ch.13.   4  Abijah  stood  up  upon  mount  Z.,  which  (is) 

ZE-MA-RITE,-^. 

A  tribe  at  the  Eleiitherus,  at  the  W.  foot  of  Lebanon, 

where  there  are  still  ruins  called  Sumra. 

Gen.  10.  18  the  Arvadite,  and  the  Z.,  and  the  Hama. 

1  Ch.  1.  16  the  Arvadite,  and  the  Z.,  and  the  Hama. 
ZE-MI'-RA,  rrvp]  song. 
A  son  of  Becher,  son  of  Benjamin.    B.C.  1630. 

1  Ch.  7.    8  the  sons  of  Becher;  Z.,  and  Joash,  and  E. 

ZE'-NAN",  }Jy  rich  in  flocks. 

A  city  in  Judah,  E.  of  Askelon ;  same  as  Zaanan. 

Josh. 15.  37  Z.,  and  Hadashah,  and  Migdal-gad 
ZE'-NAS,  Zyvas. 

A  believer  who  was  a  "  lawyer,"  or  one  skilled  in  the 
law  of  Moses,  whom  Paul  desired  Titus  to  bring  or  send 
to  him  with  Apollos  to  Nicopolis,  whither  Paul  pro- 
posed going  to  winter. 

Titus  3.  13  Bring  Z.  the  lawyer  and  Apollos  on  their 

ZE-PHAN'-IAH,  n;a5y,  *n;j5?  Jah  is  darkness. 
l.The  "second"  priest  whom  the  captain  of  the  king  of 
Babylon's  guard  took  with  him  to  Kiblah  after  he  had 
plundered  Jerusalem.    B.C.  5g8. 

2  Ki,  25.  18  the  captain  of  the  guard  took..Z.  the  se. 
Jer.   21.    1  Zedekiah  sent  unto  him.  .Z.  the  son  of  11. 

29.  25  Because  thou  hast  sent  letters,  .to  Z.,  the 
29.  29  Z. .  .read  this  letter  in  the  ears  of  Jerem. 

37.  3  the  king  sent . .  Z.  the  son  of  Maaseiah  the 
52.  24  the  captain  of  the  guard  took.  .Z.  the  se. 

2.  A  Kohathite,  ancestor  of  the  prophet  Samuel.     B.C. 

1  Ch.  6.  36  Joel,  the  sou  of  Azariah,  the  son  of  Z. 

3.  Son  of  Cushij  a  prophet  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  whose 
Book  of  Prophecies  still  remain.     B.C.  640-609. 

Zeph.  1.  1  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  unto  Z. 
1.  Son  of  Josiah  the  priest  who  dwelt  in  Jerusalem 
when  Darius  gave  a  decree  to  lebuild  the  temple.   B.C. 

Zech.  6.  10  go  into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Z. 
6. 14  the  crowns  shall  be . .  to  Heu  the  son  of  Z. 

ZE'-PHATH,  nsy  mountain  ivatch. 
A  city  in  Simeon,  at  the  S.  border  of  Edom  and  in 
.1  udah,  called  also  llormah;  now  called  Sebalta;  twenty- 
four  miles  N.  of  Kadesh. 

Judg.  1.  17  slew  the  Cauaanites  that  inhabited  Z. 
ZE-PHA'-THAH,  nrisy. 

A  valley  in  the  YV.  of  Judah,  near  Mareshah;  perhaps 
the  same  as  the  preceding. 

2  Ch.14. 10  set  the  battle  in  array  iu  the  valley  of  Z. 
ZE'-PHO,  ZE'-PHI,  is>\  '?y  watch. 

A  son  of  Eliphaz,  son  of  Esau.     B.C.  1650. 

Gen.  36.  11  sons  of  Eliphaz  were  Teman.  .Z.,  and  G. 
36.  15  duke  Teman,  duke  Omar,  duke  Z.,  duke 
1  Ch.  1.  36  Teman,  and  Omar,  Z.,  and  Gatam,  Kenaz 

ZE'-PHON,  pDs  dark,  wintry. 
\  Gadite.    B.C.'  1680. 

Nmn/i.  15  of  Z.,  the  family  of  the  Zephonites 
ZEPHONITES,  ^BVn. 
The  descendants  of  Zephon. 

Xum-6.  15  of  Zcphon,  the  family  of  the  Z 
ZER,  1*  rock. 
A  city  in  Naphtali,  near  the  lake  of  Genesareth. 

Josh.  19.  35  the  fenced  cities  (are)Ziddim,  Z,,  and  H. 
ZE'-RAH,  ZA'-RAH,  nij,  TT)}  sprout. 
I.  A  son  (if  Raul,  son  of  Esau.     B.C.  1700. 

Gen.  36.  13  these.. the  sonsof  Kcucl;  Nahath,  andZ. 

36.  17  duke  Nahath,  duke  Z.,  duke  Shammah 
t  ih.   1.  37  The  sons  of  Reuel;  Nahath,  Z.,  Shammah 
r  mi  .lubab,  second  of  the  early  kings  of  Edom. 
B.O.  1670. 

Gen,  36.  ;,i  Jobah  the  SOD  of  Z.  of  Bozrah  reigned  in 
1  Ch.  1.  44  Jobah  the  son  of  Z.  of  Bozrah  reigned  in 

\     m  Of  Judah  by  bis  daughter  in  law  Tamar.     B.C. 
1 

Gen.  38.  30  And  .his  brother,  .his  name  was  called  Z. 


XuiU26.  20  of  Z.,  the  family  of  the  Zarhites 
Josh.  7.    1,  18  Zabdi,  the  son  of  Z.,  of  the  tribe  of  J. 
7.  24  Joshua,  .took  Aehan  the  son  of  Z.,  and 
22.  20  Did  uot  Achan  the  son  of  Z.  commit  a  tr. 
1  Ch.  2.    4  Tamar  his  daughter  in  law  bare  him.  .Z. 

2.  6  the  sons  of  Z. ;  Zimri,  and  Ethan,  and  H. 
9.   6  of  the  sons  of  Z. ;  Jeuel,  and  their  breth. 

Neh.  11.  24  of  the  children  of  Z.  the  sou  of  Judah 

4.  A  son  of  Simeon.     B.C.  1700. 

N1UU26.  13  Of  Z.,  the  family  of  the  Zarhites:  of  Shaul 
1  Ch.  4.  24  The  sons  of  Simeon . .  Jarib,  Z. ,  (and)  Sha. 

5.  A  Gershonite.     B.C.  1250. 

1  Ch.  6.  21  Joah  his  son,  Iddo  his  son,  Z.  his  son 
G.  Father  of  Ethni,  a  Levite.    B.C.  1250. 

1  Ch.  6.  41  The  sou  of  Ethni,  the  son  of  Z.,  the  son  of 
7.  A  king  of  Ethiopia,  who  warred  with  Asa.    B.C.  941. 

2  Ch.  14.   9  there  came  out  against  them  Z.  the  Ethiop. 

ZE-RAH'-IAH,  n;rni  Jah  is  appearing. 

1.  A  descendant  of  Phiuehas,  an  ancestor  of  Ezra.    B.C. 
1 1 16. 

1  Ch.  6.    6  Uzzi  begat  Z.,  and  Z.  begat  Meraioth 
6.  51  Bukki  his  son,  Uzzi  his  son,  Z.  his  son 
Ezra    7.    4  son  of  Z.,  the  son  of  Uzzi,  the  son  of  Bu, 

2.  Father  of  Elihoenai  (a  descendant  of  Pahath-Moab) 
who  returned  with  Ezra.    B.C.  480. 

Ezra    8.    4  Elihoenai  the  son  of  Z.,  and  with  him  two 
ZE-RE'-DA,  rn-iyrr  the  fortress,  toivn. 
A    city   or  district  on  N.  of  Mount  Ephraim,  but  in 
Manasseh,  and  birthplace  of  Jeroboam;  same  as  Zcre- 
rath,  Zaretan,  Zarthan,  and  Zartaimh. 

1  Ki.  11.  26  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  au  Ephrathite  of  Z. 
ZE-RE-DA'-THAH.  nniiy. 

In  Manasseh,  near  Succoth. 

2  Ch.  4,  17  the  clay  ground  between  Succoth  and  Z. 
ZE-RE'-RATH,  rrTif 

A  district  in  Manasseh,  near  Abelmeholah  and  Beth- 
shittah. 

Judg.  7.  22  and  the  host  fled  to  Beth-shittah  and  Z 

ZE'-RESH,  Bqi. 

Wife  of  Hamai'i  the  Agagite,  enemy  of  the  Jews  in  the 

days  of  Ahasuerus  and  Esther.    B.C.  510. 

Esth.   5.  10  sent  and  called  for  his  friends,  and  Z.  his 

5.  14  Then  said  Z.  his  wife  and  all  his  friends 

6.  13  And  Haman  told  Z.  his  wife  and  all  his  fr. 
6. 13  Then  said  his  wise  men  and  Z.  his  wife 

ZE'-RETH,  rm  splendour,  brightness. 

A  son  of  Helah  son  of  Ashur,  descendant  of  Judah, 

through  Caleb  son  of  Hur.    B.C.  1470. 

1  Ch.  4.    7  the  sons  of  Helah  (were)  Z.,  and  Jezoar 
ZE'-RI,  ,_!^  balm. 

A  son  of  Jeduthun  set  over  the  service  of  song  in  the 
days  of  David.    B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.25.  3  sons  of  Jeduthun ;  Gedaliah,  and  Z.,  and 
ZE'-ROR,  ml*  bundle. 

Father  of  Abiel  a  Benjamite,  and  ancestor  of  Saul  the 
first  king  of  Israel.    B.C.  1160. 

1  Sa.  9.  i  Kish,  the  son  of  Abiel,  the  son  of  Zeror,  the 
ZE-RU'-AH,  7^X1%  full  breasted. 

A  widow,  mother  of  Jeroboam  first  king  of  the  ten  tribes 
of  Israel.    B.C.  1000. 

1  Ki.n.  26  whose  mother's  name  (was)  Z.,  a  widow  w. 

ZE-RTJ-BA'-BEL,  b^l)  shoot  of  Babylon. 
A    descendant    of  Salathiel  or  Shealtiel  grandson  of 
Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah;  he  led  back  the  first  band  of 
exiles.    B.C.  536. 

1  Ch.  3.  19  the  sonsof  Pedaiah  (were)  Z.,  and  Shimei 
3. 19  the  sons  of  Z.;  Meshullam,  and  Hananiah 

Ezra   2.    2  Which  came  with  Z.:  Jeshua,  Nehemiah 

3.  2Then  stood  up.  .Z.  thesonof  Shealtiel, and 

3.  8  in  the  second  year,  .began  Z.  the  son  of 

4.  2  they  came  to  Z.,  and  to  the  chief  of  the 

4.  3  Z. .  .said  unto  them,  Ye  have  nothing  to 

5.  2  Then  rose  up  Z.,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and 
Neh.   7,    7  Who  came  with  Z.,  Jeshua,  Nehemiah 

12.    1  these,  .the  priests,  .that  went  up  with  Z. 

12.  47  all  Israel  in  the  days  of  Z., .  .gave  the  po. 

Hag.   1.    1  came  the  word  of  the  Lord,  .unto  Z.  the 

1. 12  Then  Z. .  .with  all  the.  .people,  obeyed  the 

1.  14  And  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  ol  Z. 

2.  2  Speaknow  toZ.  thesonof  Shealtiel,  gover. 
2.  4  Yet  now  be  strong,  0  Z.,  saith  the  LORD 
2.  21  Speak  to  Z.,  governor  of  Judah,  saying 

2.  23  In  that  day.  .will  I  take  thee,  0  Z.,  my  se. 
Zech.  4.  6  This  (is)  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Z.,  sa. 
4.  7  before  Z  (thou  shalt heeome)a  plain :  and 
4.  9  The  hands  of  Z.  have  laid  the  foundation 
4. 10  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the  hand  of  Z. 

ZE-RU'-XAH,  rn-i^  balm. 

A  daughter  of  Jesse  father  of  David,  whose  three  sons 

were  officers  orer  David's  army,  viz.,  Joab,  Abishai,  and 

A6ahel.     B.C.  1070. 

1  Sa.  26,   6  Then  answered  David . .  Abishai . .  sou  of  Z. 

2  Sa.    2. 13  And  Joab  the  son  of  Z. .  .went  out,  and 

2.  t8  there  were  three  sons  of  Z.  there,  Joah 

3.  39  these  men  the  sons  of  Z.  (be)  too  hard  for 
8.  16  Joab  the  son  of  Z.  (was)  over  the  host 

14.    1  Now  Joab  the  son  of  Z.  perceived  that  the 
16.    9  Then  said  Abishai  the  son  of  Z.  unto  the 

16.  10  What  have  I  to  do  with  you,  ye  sons  of  Z.? 

17.  25  daughter  of  Nahash,  sister  to  Z. ,  Juab's  mo. 


2  Sa.  18.  2  under  the  hand  of  Abishai  the  son  of  Z. 
19.  21  Abishai  the  son  of  Z.  answered  aud  said 
19.  22  What  have  I  to  do  with  you,  ye  sous  of  Z. 
21.  17  But  Abishai  the  son  of  Z.  succoured  him 
23.  18  the  sou  of  Z.,  was  chief  among  three;  and 
23.  37  Zelek.. armour  bearer  to  Joab  the  son  pfZ. 

1  Ki.  1.  7  he  conferred  with  Joab  the  son  of  Z.,  and 
2.  5  thou  knowest  also  what  Joabthe  son  of  Z. 
2.  22  even  for  him.  .and  for  Joab  the  son  of  Z. 

1  Ch.  2. 16  WThosesisters(-were)Z..  .Andthesonsof  7. 
11.    6  Joab  the  son  of  Z.  went  up  first,  and  was 
ir.  39  the  armour  bearer  of  Joab  the  son  of  Z. 
iS.  12  the  son  of  Z.  slew  of  the  Edomites.  .eigh. 

18.  15  And  Joab  the  son  of  Z.  (was)  over  the  ho. 

26.  28  all  that.  .Joab  the  son  of  Z.,  had  dedicat. 

27.  24  Joab  the  son  of  Z.  began  to  number,  but 

ZE'-THAM,  Dm  shining. 

A  son  or  grandson  of  Laddana  Gushonite.     B.C.  1015. 
1  Ch.23.    8  the  chief  (was)  Jehiel,  and  Z.,  and  Joel 
26. 22  sons  of  Jehieli;  Z.,  and  Joel  his  brother 

ZE'-THAN,  |n*T  shining. 

A  son  of  Bilthan,  grandson  of  Benjamin.     B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.    7.  10  Chenaanah,  and  Z.,  and  Tharshish,  and 
ZE'-THAR,  iriJ  sacriflce. 

One  of  the  seven  chamberlains  of  the  king  of  Persia 
that  saw  the  king's  face  at  pleasure.    B.C.  519. 

Esth.  1.  10  Z. .  .served  in  the  presence  of  Ahasuerus 
ZI'-A,  XH  terrified. 
A  Gadite,  head  of  a  family.     B.C.  1070. 

1  Ch.  5.  13  Sheba,  and  Jorai,  and  Jachan,  and  Z.,aud 
ZI'-BA,  tiTX  plantation. 

A  servant  of  Saul  who  served  Mephibosheth,  and  after- 
wards obtained  half  of  his  property  from  David  by 
ascribing  treachery  to  his  master.    B.C.  1025. 

2  Sa.   9.   2 (therejwas).  .a servant, whose name(was)/!. 

9.    2  (Art)  thou  Z.?  And  he  said,  Thy  servant 
9.    3  Z.  said  unto  the  king,  Jonathan  hath  yet  a 
9.   4  Z.  said  unto  the  king,  Behold,  he  (is)  in 
9.    9  Then  the  king  called  to  Z.,  Saul's  servant 
9.  10  Z.  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  servants 
9.  11  Then  said  Z.  unto  the  king,  According  to 
9.  12  all  that  dwelt  in  the  house  of  Z.  (were)£e. 
16.    1  Z.  the  servant  of  Mephibosheth  met  him 
16.    2  the  king  said  unto  Z.,  What  meanest  th. 
16.  2  Z.  said,  The  asses  (be)  for  the  long's  hous. 
16.   3  Z.  said  unto  the  king,  Behold,  he  abide!  h 
16.   4  Then  said  the  king  to  Z.,  Behold,  thine 
16.    4  Z.  said,  I  humbly  beseech  thee  (that)  I 

19.  17  Z.  the  servant  of  the  house  of  Saul,  and 
19.  29  I  have  said,  Thou  and  Z.  divide  the  land 

ZI-BE'-ON,  |ijns  wild  robber. 

1.  AHivite,  grandfather  of  Adah  one  of  Esau's  wives. 

B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  36.    2  the  daughterof  Auahthe  daughter  of  Z. 
36.  14  the  daughter  of  Anah  the  daughter  of  Z. 

2.  A  son  of  Seir  the  Horite.    B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  36.  20  Lotan,  and  Shobal,  and  Z.,  and  Anah 
36.  24  these  (are)  the  children  of  Z.;*both  Ajah 
36.  24  found,  .as  he  fed  the  asses  of  Z.  his  father 
36.  29  duke  Lotan,  duke  Shobal,  duke  Z.,  duke 

1  Ch.  1.  38  sons  of  Seir;  Lotan,  and  Shobal,  and  Z. 
1.  40  And  the  sons  of  Z.,  Aiah,  and  Anah 

ZTB'-IA,  n;?v  gazelle. 

A  Benjamite,  son  of  Hodesh.     B.C.  1320. 

1  Ch.  3.  9  he  begat  of  Hodesh  his_wife,  Jobab,  and  7.. 
ZLB'-IAH,  .ray. 

The  wife  of  Ahaziah  and  mother  of  Jehoash  or  Joash, 
kings  of  Judah;  from  the  city  of  Beer-sheba.    B.C.  890. 

2  Ki.  12.    1  his  mother's  name  (was)  Z.  of  Beer-sheba 
2  Ch.24.    1  His  mother's  name  also(was)Z.  ofBeer-s. 

ZICH'-RI,  *"pl  renowned. 

1.  A  son  of  Izhar,  grandson  of  Levi.    B.C.  1490. 

Exod.  6.  21  sons  of  Izhar;  Korah,  and  Nepheg,  and  r6. 

2.  A  Benjamite  of  the  family  of  Shimhi.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  19  And  Jakim,  and  Z.,  and  Zabdi 

3.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Shishak.    B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  23  And  Abdon,  and  Z.,  and  Hanan 

4.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Jeroham.     B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  27  Jaresiah,  and  Eliah,  and  Z.,  the  sons  of  J. 

5.  A  Levite,  son  of  Asaph.    B.C.  500. 

1  Ch.  9. 15  Mattaniahtheson  of  Micah,  the  son  ofZ. 
G.  A  descendant  of  Eliezer,  son  of  Moses,  in  the  days  of 
David.    B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.  26.  25  Joram  his  son,  and  Z.  his  son,  and  Shelo. 
7. Father  of  Eliezer,a  chief  Reubenite  in  the  days  of  David . 
B.C.  1040. 

1  Ch.27. 16  ruler  of  the  Reubenites..the  son  of  Z. 

8.  Father  of  Amaziah,  a  captain  of  Jehoshaphat.  B.C. 
960. 

2  Ch.17.  16  And  next  him  (was)  Amasiah  thesonof  Z. 
E).  Father  of -:  Elishaphat,  a  captain  of  hundreds,  who 
helped  Jehoiada  the  priest  to  make  Joash  king  of  Israel. 
B.C.  900. 

2  Ch.23.    J  Jehoiada.  .took.  .Elishaphat the  son  of  Z. 

10.  An  Ephraimite,  a  mighty  man  of  valour,  that  slew 
the  son  of  Ahaz  king  of  Judah.    B.C.  741. 

2  Ch.28.  7  Z.,  a  mighty  man  of  Ephraim,  slew  Maase 

11.  Father  of  Joel,  overseer  of  theBenjamites  in  Jerusa- 
lem after  the  exile.    B.C.  470. 

Neh. 11.    9  Joel  the  son  of  Z.  (was)  their  overseer 


ZIDDIM 


1089 


ZIPH 


12  Apriest  of  the  sons  of  Abijaliiii  the  days  of  Neheniiah. 

B.O.  445. 

Neh.12.  17 of  Abijah,  Z.;of  Miniamin, of  Moadiah,Pi. 
ZID'-DIM,  D'^sn  the  mountain  sides. 
A  fenced  city  in  Naphtali ;  now  called  Hattvn. 

Josh.19.  35  the  fenced  cities  (are)  Z.,  Zer,  and  Ham. 
ZTD-KI'-JAH,  n;p*is  Jah  is  might. 
A  chief  prince  of  the  Jews  that  with  Nehemiah  sealed 
the  covenant.     B.C.  445.    See  Zedelckih. 

Neh.io.    1  those  that  sealed  (were)  Nehemiah.  .Z. 
ZI'-DON,  SEDON,  pTX,  p'V  fortress. 
1. Eldest  son  of  Canaan,  son  of  Ham.     B.C.  2200. 

Gen.  10.  15  Canaan  begat  S.  his  first  born,  and  Heth 
1  Ch.  1. 13  Canaan  begat  S.  his  first  born,  and  Heth. 
2.  A  city  in  Asher,  now  called  Saida;  its  authority  ex- 
tended S.  to  Carmel  and  Dor,  and  E.  towards  Damascus. 
Gen.  10.  19  the  border  of  the  Canaanites  was  from  S. 
49.  13  shall  dwell,  .his  border  (shall  be)  unto  Z. 
Josh  11.    8  smote  them,  and  chased  them  unto  great[Z. 
19.  28  and  Hamnion,  and  Kanah.  .unto  great  Z. 
Judg.  1.  31  Neither  did  Asher  drive  out.  .inhab.  of  Z. 
jo.    6  children  of  Israel . .  served . .  the  gods  of  Z. 
18.  28  no  deliverer,  because  it  (was)  far  from  Z. 
?  Sa.  24.  "6  they  came  to  Dan-jaan,  and  about  to  Z. 
1  Ki.  17.   9  Arise, getthee  toZarephath,  which.  .toZ. 
Ezra   3.    7  They  gave,  .meat,  and  drink,  .unto.  .Z. 
Isa.    23.    2  thou  whom  the  merchants  of  Z. .  .have  re. 
23.    4  Be  thou  ashamed,  O  Z. :  for  the  sea  hath 
23.  12  Thou  shalt  no  more  rejoice.,  daughter.  .Z. 
Jer.  25.  22  all  the  kings  of  Tyrus.  .all  the  kings  of  Z. 

27.  3  send  them,  .to  the  king  of  Z.,  by  the  hand 
47.    4  to  cut  off  from  Tyrus  and  Z.  every  helper 

Eze.  27.    8  The  inhabitants  of  Z.  and  Arvad  were  thy 

28.  21  set  thy  face  against  Z.,  and  prophesy  aga. 
28.  22  Behold,  I  (am)  against  thee,  O  Z.;  and  I 

Joel     3.   4  whathave  yeto  do  with  me,  0  Tyre,  and  Z. 
Zech.  9.    2  Hamath  also  shall  border  thereby,  .and  Z. 

ZLDONIANS,  SEDONIANS,  0'XT\%  }'2T?,  %fVft  nk;"]S. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  preceding  city  and  state. 

Judg  10.  12  The  Z.  also,  .did  oppress  you;  and  ye  cr. 
18.    7  dwelt  careless,  after  the  manner  of  the  Z. 

18.  7  they  (were)  far  from  the  Z.,  and  had  no 

1  Ki.  11.    1  Moabites,  Ammonites,  Edomites,Z., (and) 

11.  5,  33  Ashtoreth  the  goddess  of  the  Z. 

16.  31  Jezebel  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal.  .the  Z. 

2  Ki.23.  13  for  Ashtoreth  the  abomination  of  the  S. 

1  Ch.22.   4  the  Z. .  .brought  much  cedar  wood  to  Da. 
Eze.  32.  30  all  the  Z.,  which  are  gone  down  with  the 

ZIF,  it  blossom  or  flower  month.. 

The  second  month  of  the  Hebrew  year;  from  the  new 

moon  of  Hay  to  that  of  June. 

1  Ki.  6.  1  in  the  month  Z.,  which  (is)  the  second  mo. 
6.37  was  the  foundation.,  laid,  in  the  month  Z. 

ZI'-HA,  Nn% 

1.  One  of  the  Nethinim,  whose  descendants  returned 
with  Zerubbabel.     B.C.  536. 

Ezra    2.. 43  The  Nethiuims :  the  children  of  Z.,  the  c. 
Neh.   7.  46  The  Nethinims :  the  children  of  Z.,  the  c. 

2.  A  ruler  of  the  Nethinim  in  Jerusalem.     B.o.  536. 

Neh.  11.  21  and  Z.  and  Gispa  (were)  over  the  Nethin. 
ZTK'-LAG,  a*?p¥,  ^P'V  winding,  bending. 
A  city  in  the  S.  of  Judah,  afterwards  given  to  Simeon. 

Josh  15.  31  And  Z.,  and  Madmannah,  and  Sansannah 

19.  5  And  Z.,andBeth-marcaboth,  and  Hazar. 

1  Sa.  27.    6  Then  Achish  gave  him  Z.  that  day 

27.    6  wherefore  Z.  pertaineth  unto  the  kings  of 
30.    1  when  David  and  his  men  were  come  to  Z. 
30.    1  Amalekites.. invaded.  .Z.,  and  smitten  Z. 
30. 14  We  made  an  invasion . .  and  we  burnt  Z. 
30.  26  when  David  came  to  Z.,  he  sent  of  the  sp. 

2  Sa.    1.    1  and  David  had  abode  two  days  in  Z. 

4.  10  I  took  hold  of  him,  and  slew  him  in  Z. 
1  Ch.  4.  30  And  at  Bethuel,  and  at  Hormah,  and  at  Z. 

12.  1  these  (are)  they  that  came  to  David  to  Z. 
12.  20  As  he  went  to  Z.,  there  fell  to  him  of  M. 

Neh.  11.  28  at  Z.,  and  Mekouah,  and  in  the  villages 

ZIL'-LAH,  ty?"*  protection,  screen. 

One  of  the  wives  of  Lamech,  son  of  Methuselah  of  the 

family  of  Cain.     B.O.  3874. 

Gen.  4. 19  one . .  Adah,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Z. 
4.  22  Z.,  she  also  bare  Tubal-cain,  an  instructor 
4.  23  Lamech  said  unto  his  wives  Adah  and  Z. 

ZTL'-l   1H,  nshx  myrrh  dropping. 

Hand    aid    of"  Leah,  eldest  daughter  of  Labau.    B.C. 

I73°- 

Gen.  29.  24  Laban  gave  unto  his  daughter  Leah  Z.  his 
30.    9  she  took  Z.  her  maid,  and  gave  her  Jacob 
301  10,  12  And  Z.,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  a 
35.  26  Andthesonsof  Z.,  Leah's  handmaid;  Gad 
37.    2  and  the  lad  (was),  .with  the  sons  of  Z. 
46.  18  These  (are)  the  sons  of  Z.,  whom  Laban 

ZTL'-THAI,  "rh,'i. 

1.  A  Benjamite,  son  of  Shimhi.     B.C.  1300. 

1  Ch.  8.  20  And  Elienai,  and  Z.,  and  EUel   . 

2.  A  captain  of  Manasseh  who  joined  David  in  Zikiag. 
B.C.  1058. 

1  Ch.12.  20  Eliliu,  and  Z.,  captains  of  the  thousands 
ZLTtt'-MAH,  nsi  counsel,  consideration. 
1.  A  son  of  Jahath,  grandson  of  Gershom  son  of  Levi. 
B.C.  1370. 

1  Ch.  6.  20  Libni  his  son/Jahath  his  son,  Z.  his  son 

137 


2.  A    Gershonite    in  the  fourth  or  fifth  degree.    B.C. 
1600. 

1  Ch.  6.  42  The  son  of  Ethan,  the  son  of  Z.,  the  son 

3.  A  Gershonite,  father  of  Joah  who  assisted  in  cleans- 
ing the  temple  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.     B.C.  726. 

2  Ch.29. 12  of  the  Gershonite s ;  Joah  theBonof  Z.,  and 
ZIM'-EAK,  jnpi  celebrated. 

A  son  of  Abraham  by  Keturah.     B.C.  1800. 

Gen.  25.    2  And  she  bare  him  Z.,  and  Jokshan,  and 
1  Ch.  1. 32  she  bareZ.,  and  Jokshan,  and  iledan,  and 

ZTM'-BI,  'it??  celebrated. 

1.  Son  of  a  chief  Simeonite,  slain  along  with  Cozbi  a 
Midianitess,  by  Phinehas  son  of  Aaron.    B.C.  1452. 

Num  25.  14  Now  the  name  of  the  Israelite,  .(was)  Z. 

2.  A  captain  who  slew-Elah,  and  was  himself  slain  by 
Oniri.    B.C.  929. 

1  Ki.  16.    9  Andhis  servant  Z. . .  conspired  againsthim 

16. 10  Z.  went  in  and  smote  him,  and  killed  him 
16.  12  Thus  did  Z.  destroy  all  the  house  of  Baa. 
16.  15  did  Z.  reign  seven  days  in  Tirzah.  And  the 
16.  16  Z.  hath  conspired, 'and  hath  also  slain  the 
16.  18  it  came  to  pass,  when  Z.  saw  that  the  city 
t6.  20  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Z. .  .(are)  they  not 

2  Ki.   9.  31  she  said,  (Had)  Z.  peace,  who  slew  his  mas. 

3.  A  son  of  Zerah,  son  of  Judah.     B.C.  1600. 

1  Ch.  2.   6  the  sons  of  Zerah ;  Z.,  and  Ethan,  and  H 

4.  A  Benjamite.    B.C.  940. 

1  Ch.  8.  36  Jehoadah  begat  Alemeth . .  and  Z. ;  and  Z. 
9.  42  Jarah  begat  Alemeth,  and.  .Z.,  andZ.  be. 

5.  An  unknown  place. 

Jer.  25.  25  all  the  kings  of  Z.,  and  all  the  kings  of  E. 

ZTN,  \-ilow  land. 

A  desert  on  the  S.  of  Judah,  and  W.  of  the  S.  end  Of 

Salt  Sea. 

Num  13.  21  they. .searched. .the  wilderness  of  Z. un. 

20.    1  Then  came.  .Israel,  .into  the  desert  of  Z. 

27.  14  ye  rebelled,  .in  the  desert  of  Z.,  in  the 

33.  36  And  they.,  pitched  in  the  wilderness  ofZ. 
34-    3  y°ur  south  quarter  shall  be  from . .  Z.  along 

34.  4  And  your  border  shall,  .pass  on  to  Z. :  and 
Deut32.  51  ye  trespassed,  .in  the  wilderness  of  Z. 
Josh.15.    1  the  wilderness  of  Z. .  .(was)  the  uttermost 

15.    3  And  it  went  out.  .and  passed  along  to  Z. 

ZI'-NA,  KV1. 

A  son  of  Shirnei,      Gershonite;  in  ver.  11  it  is  Zizah. 

B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  10  the  sons  of  Shimei  (were)  Jahath,  Z.,  and 
ZT'-ON,  |"vs  fortress.      See  Sion. 

The  S.W.  hill  of  Jerusalem,  the  older  and  higher  part 
of  the  city ;  it  is  often  called  the  city  of  David. 

2  Sa.  5.    7  Nevertheless  D.  took  the  stronghold  of  Z. 

1  Ki.  8.    1  they  might  bring  up  the  ark.  .out  of.  .Z. 

2  Ki.19.  21  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Z.,  hath  despi. 

19.  31  and  they  that  escape  out  of  mount  Z. 

1  Ch.11.    5  Nevertheless  David  took  the  castle  of  Z. 

2  Ch.  5.    2  assembled,  .to  bring  up  the  ark.  .out  of.-Z. 
Psa.    2.    6  Yet.  .set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Z. 

9.  11  Sing,  .to  the  Lord,  which  dwelleth  in  Z. 
9.  14  in  the  gates  of  the  daughter  of  Z.:  I  will 
14.    7  salvation  of  Israel  (were  come)  out  of  Z. 

20.  2  Send.  .help,  .andstrengthentheeoutof  Z. 
48.   2  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  (is)  mount  Z. 

48. 11  Let  mount  Z,  rejoice,  let  the  daughters  of 

48. 12  Walk  about  Z.,  and  go  round  about  her 

50.  2  Out  of  Z.,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God 

51.  18  Do  good  in  thy  goodpleasure  unto  Z.  :bu. 
53.    6  salvation  of  Israel  (were  come)  out  of  Z.! 
65.    1  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  S. :  and 
69. 35  For  Gud  will  save  Z.,  and  wilt  build  the 
74.   2  Remember,  .this  mount  Z.,  wherein  thou 

2  tabernacle,  and  his  dwelling  place  in  Z. 
18  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  mount  Z. 

7  (every  one  of  them)  in  Z.  appeareth  before 
2  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Z.  more  than  all 
5  of  Z.  it  shall  be  said,  This  and  that  man 

8  Z.  heard,  and  was  glad;  and  the  daughters 

2  Lord  (is)  great  in  Z.;  and  he  (is)  high  ab. 
102.  13  Thou  shalt  arise,  (and)  have  mercy  upon  Z. 
702.  16  When  the  LORD  shall  build  up  Z.,  he  sha. 
102.  21  To  declare  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  Z. 
no.   2  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Z. 

1  trust  in  the  Lord  (shall  be)  as  mount  Z. 
1  the  Lord  turned,  .the  captivity  of  Z. 
5  LORD  shall  bless  thee  out  of  Z.:  and  thou 
5  Let  them  all  be  confounded . .  that  hate  Z. 
13  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Z.;  he  hathdesired 

3  that  descended  upon  the  mountains  of  Z. 
3  Lord  that  made  heaven . .  bless . .  out  of  Z. 

135.  21  Blessed  be  the  Lord  out  of  Z.,  which  dw. 
137.    1  yea,  we  wept,  when  we  remembered  Z. 
137.    3  (saying),  Sing  us  (one)  of  the  songs  of  Z. 

146.  10  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever,  .thy  God,  O  Z. 

147.  12  Praise  the  Lord,  0  Jerusalem.  .God,  0  Z. 
149.    2  let  the  children  of  Z.  be  joyful  in  their  k. 

Song  3.  n  Go  forth,  O  ye  daughters  of  Z.,  and  beho. 

Isa.     1.    8  And  the  daughter  of  Z.  is  left  as  a  cottage 

1, 27  Z.  shall  be  redeemed  with  judgment,  and 

2.  3  for  out  of  Z.  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and 

3.  16  Because  the  daughters  of  Z.  are  haughty 
3. 17  the  Lord  will  smite,  .the  daughters  of  Z. 

4.  3  (he  that  is)  left  in  Z. . .  shall  be  called  holy 
4.    4  washed,  .the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Z. 
4.    5  Lord  shall  create  upon . .  mount  Z. . .  a  cl. 
8.  18  LO.  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth  in  mount  Z. 

10. 12  L. .  .performed  his.  .work  upon  mount  Z. 


76. 
78. 
84. 
87. 
87. 

97- 
99. 


125. 
126. 
128. 
129. 
132- 
133- 
i34- 


Isa.  10. 24  0  my  people  that  dwellest  in  Z.,  be  not 
10.  32  he  shall  shake  his  hand  (against)  the.  .Z. 
12.  6  Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Z. 
14.  32  the  Lord  hath  founded  Z.,  and  the  poor 
16.  1  unto  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Z. 
18.  7  be  brought . .  to  the  place  of . .  the  mount  Z. 
24.  23  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  mount  Z. 
28. 16  Behold,  I  lay  in  Z.  for  a  foundation  a  st. 

29.  8  multitude  of.  .nations,  .fight  against.  .Z. 
30. 19  the  people  shall  dwell  in  Z.  at  Jerusalem 
31.  4  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts . .  fight  for  mount  Z. 
31.  9  saith  the  Lord,  whose  fire  (is)  in  Z.,  and 
33.  5  he  hath  filled  Z.  with  judgment  and  righ. 
33.  14  The  sinners  in  Z.  are  afraid ;  fearfulness 

33.  20  Look  upon  Z.,  the  city  of  our  solemnities 

34.  8  of  recompences  for  the  controversy  of  Z. 

35.  10  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall,  .come  to  Z. 
37.  22  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Z.,  hath  des. 
37.  32  and  they  that  escape  out  of  mount  Z. 

40.  9  O  Z. .  .get  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain 

41.  27  The  first  (shall  ..ay)  to  Z.,  Behold,  behold 
46.  13  I  will  place  salvation  in  Z.  for  Israel  my 
49. 14  But  Z.  said,  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me 
51.   3  (the  Lord  shall  comfort  Z. :  he  will  comf. 
51. 11  redeemed  of.  .Lord  shall,  .come,  .unto  Z. 

51.  16  that  I  may .  .say  unto  Z.,  Thou  (art)my  p. 

52.  1  Awake,  awake  ;  put  on  thy  strength,  O  Z. 
52.   2  thyself  from  the  bands,  .daughter  of  Z. 
52.   7  that  saith  unto  Z.,  Thy  God  reigneth ! 
52.    8  see .  .when  the  Lord  shall  bring  again  Z. 
59.  20  the  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Z.,  and  unto 
60. 14  The  city  of  the  Lord,  The  Z.  of  the  Holy 

61.  3  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Z. 

62.  1  For  Z.'s  sake  willl  not  hold  my  peace,  and 

62. 11  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Z. .  .thy  salvat. 
64.  10  Z.  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desolation 
66.    8  as  soon  as  Z.  travailed,  she  brought  forth. 

Jer.     3. 14  two  of  a  family . .  I  will  bring  you  to  Z. 

4.  6  Set  up  the  standard  toward  Z. :  retire,  stay 
4.  31  the  voice  of  the  daughter  of  Z.,  (that)  be. 
6.  2  I  have  likened  the  daughter  of  Z.  to  aco. 
6.  23  they  ride  upon  horses.  .0  daughter  of  Z. 

8.  19  (Is)  not  the  Lord  in  Z.  ?  (is)  not  her  king 

9.  19  For  a  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  out  of  Z. 
14.  19  hath  thy  soul  loathed  Z.  ?  why  hast  thou 
26.  18  Z.  shall  be  plowed  (like)  afield,  and  Jeru. 

30.  17  Tins  (is)  Z.,  whom  no  man  seeketh  after 

31.  6  let  us  go  up  to  Z.  unto  the  Lord  our  God 

31. 12  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Z. 
50.    5  They  shall  ask  the  way  to  Z. ,  with  their  fa. 

50.  28  to  declare  in  Z.  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord 

51.  10  let  us  declare  in  Z.  the  work  of  the  Lord 
51.  24  evil  that  they  have  done  in  Z.  in  your  si. 
51.  35  violence.. (be)  upon  Babylon,  shall.  .Z.  say 

Lam.  1.   4  The  ways  of  Z.  do  mourn,  because  none 
1.    6  from  the  daughter  of  Z.  all  her  beauty  is 

1.  17  Z.  spreadeth  forth  her  hands,  (and  there 

2.  1  Lord  covered  the  daughter  of  Z.  with  a  , 
2.    4  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  daughter  of  Z. 

2.  6  caused  the . .  sabbaths  to  be  forgotten  in  Z. 
2.  8  hath  purposed  to  destroy  the  wall,  .of  Z. 
2.  10  The  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Z.  sit  upon 
2. 13  what  shall  I  equal  to  thee . .  daughter  of  Z.? 

2.  18     [See  also  2.  18 ;  4.  2,  11,  22  ;  5.  n,  iS.] 

1  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Z.,  and  sound  an 

15  Blow  the  trumpet  in  Z.,  sanctify  a  fast 
23  Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Z.,  and  rejo. 
32  in  mount  Z. .  .shall  be  deliverance,  as  the 

16  Lord  also  shall  roar  out  of  Z.,  and  utter 

17  I  (am)  the  Lord  your  God  dwelling  in  Z. 
21  will  cleanse,  .for,  the  Lord  dwelleth  in  Z. 

2  And  he  said,  The  Lord  will  roar  from  Z. 
1  Woe  to  them  (that  are)  at  ease  in  Z.,  and 

17  But  upon  mount  Z.  shall  be  deliverance 
21  saviours  shall  come  upon  mount  Z.  to  ju. 
Mic.    1.  13  beginning  of .  .sin  to  the  daughter  of  Z. 

3.  10  They  build  up  Z.  with  blood,  and  Jerusa. 

3.  12  Therefore  shall  Z. .  .be  plowed  (as)  a  field 

4.  2  the  law  shall  go  forth  of  Z.,  and  the  word 
4.  7  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Z. 
4.  8  thou . .  the  stronghold  of  the  daughter  of  Z. 
4. 10  labour  to  bring  forth,  0  daughter  of  Z. 

4.  n  Let  her  be  defiled.,  let  our  eye  look'upou  Z. 

4.  13  Arise  and  thresh,  O  daughter  of  Z. :  for  I 
Zeph.  3.  14  Sing,  O  daughter  of  Z. ;  shout,  O  Israel 

3.  16  (and  to)  Z.,  Let  not  thine  hands  be  slack 
Zech.  1.  14  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  andfor  Z.  with 

1.  17  the  Lord  shall  yet  comfort  Z.,  and  shall 

2.  7  Deliver  thyself,  0  Z.,  that  dwellest  (with) 
2.  10  Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Z. ;  for,  lo 
8.    2  I  was  jealous  for  Z.  with  great  jealousy 

8.  3  saith  the  LORD ;  I  am  returned  unto  Z. 

9.  9  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Z. ;  shout 
9. 13  When  I  have,  .raised  up  thysons,OZ.,  ag. 

Zl'-OR,  "i'y^  smalhiess. 

A  city  in  Judah,  near  Hebron ;  now  called  Sair. 

Josh  15.  54  Kirjath-arba,  which  (is)  Hebron,  and  Z. 

ZIPH,  f|"| \  refining  place. 

1.  A  city  in  the  S.E.  of  Judah. 

Josh. 15.  24  Z.,  and  Telem,  and  Bealoth 

1  Sa.  23.  14  David  abode,  .inamountaininthe  w.  ofZ. 

23.  15  David  (was)  in  the  wilderness  of  Z.  hi  a 
23.  24  And  they  arose,  and  went  to  Z.  before  S. 
26.   2  Saul,  .went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  Z. 
26.    2  to  seek  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Z. 

2  Ch.n.    8  And  Gath,  and  ilareshah,  and  Z. 

2.  Another  in  Judah,  near  Carmel  or  Juttah ;  now  called 
Ziph. 

Josh.15.  55  Maon,  Carmel,  and  Z.,  and  .Xuttah 


Joel 


3' 

3' 

3' 

Amos  1 


Obad. 


ZIPHAH 


1090 


ZUZIM 


3.  A  patronymic  of  a  grandson  of  Caleb  son  of  Hezron. 
B.C.  1500. 

1  Ch.  2.  42  his  first  born,  which  (was)  the  father  of  Z. 

4.  A  son  of  Jehaleleel.    B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  4. 16  Z.,  and  Ziphah,  Tiria,  and  Asareel 

ZI'-PHAH,  n^M  lent. 

A  son  of  Jehaleleel,  a  descendant  of  Caleb  son  of  Je- 
phunneh.    B.C.  1380. 

1  Ch.  4. 16  Ziph,  and  Z.,  Tiria,  and  Asareel 

ZIPH'-ION,  ri'fflf  looking  out,  serpent,  dark. 
A  sou  of  Gad,  called  Zephon  in  Num.  26. 15.    B.C.  1680. 
Gen.  46.  16  the  sons  cf  Gad ;  Z.,  and  Haggi,  Shuni 

ZTPHITES,  D'BT,  D'S'T. 
The  inhabitants  of  Ziph. 

1  Sa  23.  19  Then  came  up  the  Z.  to  Saul  to  Gibeah 

26.    1  And  the  Z.  came  unto  Saul  to  Gibeah 
Psa.  54.  title,  when  the  Z.  came  and  said  to  Saul 

ZIPH'-RON,  pBl  beautiful  top. 
A  place  at  the  N.  of  Palestine. 

Num.34.   9  tlle  border  shall  go  on  to  Z.,  and  the  go. 

ZIP'-POR,  lis?  sparrow,  bird. 

Father  of  Bolak  king  of  Moab,  who  hired  Baalam  to 

curse  Israel.    B.C.  1490. 

Numaa.    2  the  son  of  Z.  saw  all  that  Israel  had  done 

22.   4  Balak  the  son  of  Z.  (was)  king  of  the  Moa. 

22. 10  Balak  the  son  of  Z. .  .hath  sent  unto  me 

22.  16  Thus  saith  Balak  the  son  of  Z.,  Let  noth. 

23.  18  Rise,  .hearken  unto  me,  thou  sou  of  Z. 
Josh. 24.   o  Balak  the  son  of  Z. . .  warred  against  Isra. 
Judgn.  25  thou  anything  better  than,  .the  son  of  Z. 

ZIP  -PO'-RAH,  rris*  little  bird. 

The  wife  of  Moses  and  daughter  of  Reuel,  Jetliro  or 

Jether,  priest  of  Midian.    B.C.  1500. 

Exod.  2.  21  and  he  gave  Moses  Z.  his  daughter 

4.  25  Z.  took  a  sharp  stone,  and  cut  off  the  fo. 
18.   2  Then  Jethro,  Moses' father  in  law,  tookZ. 

ZITH'-RI,  njrip  Jah  is  protection. 

A  son  of  Uzziel,  son  of  Kohath.     B.C.  1530. 

Exod.  6.  22  And  the  sons  of  Uzziel . .  Elzaphan,  and  Z. 

ZIZ,  |"V  protection. 

A  place  in  S.E.  of  Judah,  near  which  Jehoshaphat  de- 
feated the  Moabites  and  Ammonites.  Husasah?  Ain- 
Jidy? 

2  Ch.20. 16  behold,  they  come  up  by  the  cliff  of  Z. 

ZI'-ZA,  ZI'-ZAH,  kh,  ny\  shining,  brightness. 

1.  A  Simeonite,  son  of  Ziplii.     B.C.  800. 

1  Ch.  4.  37  And  Z.  the  son  of  Shiphi,  the  son  of  Allon 

2.  A  Gershonite,  son  of  Shimei ;  in  verse  10  it  is  Zina. 
B.C.  1015. 

1  Ch.23.  11  Jahath  was  the  chief,  and  Z.  the  second 

3.  A  son  of  Rehoboam,  and  grandson  of  Solomon.  B.C. 
960. 

2  Ch.11.  20  winch  bare  him  Abijah,  and  Attai.  .Z. 

ZO'-AN,  jui\ 

The  capital  of  Egypt  on  the  E.  bank  of  the  Tanitic 
arm  of  the  Nile,  the  seat  of  a  dynastyin  the  days  of 
Psammetichus,  quoted  by  Manetho  as  the  twenty-first 
and  twenty-third,  built  seven  years  after  Hebron;  now 
called  San,  a  small  village  by  the  lake  Mcnzeleh. 

Num  13.  22  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before  Z.  in 

Psa.  78.  12  Marvellous  things  did  he.  .(in).,  field  of  Z. 

78.43  How  he.  .wrought.,  wonders  in  the.. of  Z. 

Isa.   19.  11  Surely  the  princes  of  Z.  (are)  fools,  the 

19. 13  The  princes  of  Z.  are  become  fools,  the 

30.    4  his  princes  were  at  Z.,  and  his  ambassnd. 

Eze.  30. 14  I.  .will  set  fire  inZ.,  and  will  execute  jud. 

ZO'-AR,  -\*JX  ijjis  little. 

A  small  city  (once  called  Bela)  at  the  S.E.  corner  of 


Salt  Sea,  afterwards  reckoned  to  Moab,  into  which  Lot 
and  his  two  daughters  fled  when  Sodom  was  destroyed ; 
now  called  Ziara. 

Gen.  13.  10  the  land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  earnest  unto  Z. 

14.    2  and  the  king  of  Bela,  which  is  Z. 

14.    8  aud  the  king  of  Bela,  the  same  (is)  Z. 

19.  22  Therefore  the  name  of  the  city  was.  .Z. 

19.  23  sun  was  risen,  .when  Lot  entered  into  Z. 

19.  30  Lot  went  up  out  of  Z.,  and  dwelt  in  the 

19.  30  he  feared  to  dwell  inZ.:  and  he  dweltin 
Deut34.  3  the  plain  of  the  valley  of  Jericho . .  unto  Z. 
Isa.  15.  5  hisfugitives  (shall  flee)  untoZ.,  an  heifer 
Jer.  48.  34  they  uttered  their  voice,  from  Z. . .  uuto  H. 

ZO'-BAH,  ZO'-BA,  nn^y,  rni*,  ntis. 

A  district  and  kingdom  in^jTia,  N.E.of  Damascus  and 

S.  of  Hamath,  or  the  land  oet ween  the  Orontes  and  the 

Euphrates. 

1  Sa.  14.  47  So  Saul,  .fought  against,  .the  kings  of  Z. 

2  Sa.    8.    3  David  smote.. the  son  of  Rehob,  kingofZ. 

8.  5  Syrians,  .came  to  succour  Hadadezer.  ,Z. 
8.  12  spoil  of  Hadadezer,  son  of  Rehob,  ki.  of  Z. 
10.  6  children  of  Amnion . .  hired . .  Syrians  of  Z. 
10.  8"and  the  Syrians  of  Z.,  and  of  Rehob,  and 
23.  36  Igal  the  son  of  Nathan  of  Z.,  Bani  the  G. 
1  Ki,  11.  23  which  fled  from  his  lord  Hadadezer.  .of  Z. 

1  Ch.18.    3  And  David  smote  Hadarezer  king  of  Z. 

18.    5  Syrians,  .came  to..  Hadarezer  king  of  Z. 
18.    9  smitten  all  the  host  of  Hadarezer  king  of  Z. 
ig.    6  and  out  of  Syria-maachah,  and  out  of  Z. 

2  Ch.  8.    3  Solomon  went  to  Hamath-z.,  and  prevail. 
Psa.  60.  tWe.  when  he  strove  with . .  Aram  Z.  when  Jo. 

ZO-BE'-BAH,  niiisrt  the  affable. 

A  daughter  of  Coz,  a  descendant  of  Judah  through 

Caleb  son  of  Hur.     B.C.  1430. 

1  Ch.  4.    8  Coz  begat  Anub,  and  Z.,  and  the  families 

ZO'-HAR,  "ins  nobility,  distinction. 

1.  Father  of  Ephron  the  Hittite,  from  whom  Abraham 
purchased  the  cave  of  Maehpelah.     B.C.  1880. 

Gen.  23.    8  and  entreat  for  me  to  Ephron  the  son  of  Z. 
25.   9  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the  son  of  Z.  the  H. 

2.  A  son  of  Simeon,  second  son  of  Judah.    B.C.  1690. 

Gen.  46.  10  Jamin,  and  Ohad,  and  Jachin,  and  Z.,  and 
Exod.  6. 15  Jamin,  and  Ohad,  and  Jachin,  and  Z.,and 

ZO-HE'-LETH,  nbn'i  serpent. 

A  stone  near  En-rogel,  S.E.  of  Jerusalem. 

1  Ki.  1.   9  Adonijah  slew  sheep,  .by  the  stone  of  Z. 

ZO'-HETH,  nniT  corpulent,  strong. 

A  son  of  Ishi,  descendant  from  Judah  through  Caleb 

son  of  Jephuuueh.     B.C.  1400. 

1  Ch.  4.  20  and  the  sons  of  Ishi  (were)  Z.,  and  Ben-Z. 

ZO'-PHAH,  njiy  watch. 

A  son  of  Helem,  grandson  of  Beriah  son  of  Asher.    B.C. 

1570. 

iCh.  7.  35  the  sons  of  his  brother  Helem;  Z.,  and 
7.  36  The  sons  of  Z.;  Suah,  and  Harnepher,  and 

ZO'-PHAI,  'Si*  watcher. 

A  son  of  Elkanah,  father  of  Samuel  the  prophet ;  called 
Zuph  in  1  Sa.  1.  1,  aud  Ziph  in  1  Ch.  6.  35.     B.C.  1120. 
1  Ch.  6.  26  sons  of  Elkanah  ;  Z.  his  son,  and  Nahath 

ZO'-PHAR,  TEfts  hairy,  rough. 

A  Naamathite,  and  friend  of  Job;  probablyfromEdom. 

B.C.  1520. 

Job     2.  11  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  and  Z.  the  Naamath. 
11.    1  Then  answered  Z.  the  Naamathite,  and 

20.  1  Then  answered  Z.  the  Naamathite,  and 
42.   9  Bildad  the  Shuhite.  .Z.  the  Naamathite 

ZO'-PHTM,  D'£x  watchers. 

1.  a  place  on  the  top  of  Pisgah  to  which  Balak  brought 

Baalam.    B.C.  1452. 

Num  23.  14  And  he  brought  him  into  the  field  of  Z. 


2.  A  city  on  Mount  Ephraim,  the  birthplace  of  Samuel; 
generally  called  Rama. 

1  Sa.    1.    1  Now  there  was  a  certain  man  of  R.  Z. 

ZO'-RAH,  ZAREAH,  ZOREAH,  n'jpy  prominent,  ivasp>. 

A  city  in  W.  of  Judah,  reckoned  to  Dan,  near  Eshtaol ; 

now  called  Surah,  near  Wady  Surar.     SeeZarcathites. 

Josh  15.  33  in  the  valley,  Eshtaol,  and  Z.,  and  Ashnah 

19.  41  And  the  coast  of  their  inheritance  wasZ. 
Judgi3.    2  And  there  was  a  certain  man  of  Z.,of  the 

13.  25  in  the  camp  of  Dan  between  Z.  and  Esht. 

16.  31  his  brethren,  .buried  him  between  Z.  and 

iS.    2  children  of  Dan  sent.. five  men.  .from  Z. 

18.    8  And  they  came  unto  their  brethren  to  Z. 

18.  11  there  went. .out  of  Z...six  hundred  men 

2  Ch.ii.  10  And  Z.,  and  Aijalon,  and  Hebron,  which 
Neh.  11.  29  And  at  En-rimmon,  and  at  Z.,  and  at  Ja. 

ZORATHITES,  *njriy. 

A  family  sprung  from  Shobal  son  of  Judah;  or  the 

Zareathites  of  1  Ch.  2.  53. 

1  Ch.  4.   2  These  (are)  the  families  of  the  Z , 

ZORITES,  *JHV- 

A  family  of  Judah,  of  the  posterity  of  Salma. 
1  Ch.  2.  54  and  half  of  the  Manahethites  the  Z. 

Z0  R0  BA'-BEL,  Zopaj3a0eA.      See  Zerubbabel. 
An  ancestor  of  Jesus. 

Matt.  1.  12  begat  Salathiel ;  and  Salathiel  begat  Z. 

1.  13  Z.  begat  Abiud  ;  and  Abiud  begat  Eliak. 
Luke  3. 27  Rhesa,  which  was  (the  sou)  of  Z.,  which 

ZTJ'-AR  TjfW  Utile. 

Father  of  Nethaneel,  a  chief  of  Issachar,  chosen  to  aid 

Moses  to  number  the  people.    B.C.  1520. 

Num.  1.    8  Of  Issachar ;  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Z. 

2.  5  and  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Z.  (shall  be)  ca. 
7. 18  On  the  second  day  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Z. 
7. 23  the  offering  of  Nethaneel  the  son  of  Z. 

10. 15  over  the  host.  .Nethaneel  the  son  of  Z. 

ZTJPH,  ips  honey  comb.     See  Zophai. 

1.  A  Kohathite,  ancestor  of  Samuel  the  prophet.    B.C. 
1280. 

1  Sa.  1.    1  Elihu,  the  son  of  Tohu,  the  son  of  Z.,  an 
1  Ch.  6.  35  The  son  of  Z.,  the  son  of  Elkanah,  the  son 

2.  A  district  N.W.   of  Jerusalem.      See  Ma  ma  tit  aim- 
Zophim. 

1  Sa.   9.   5  when  they  were  come  to  the  land  of  Z. 

ZUR,  -na  rock. 

1.  A  prince  of  Midian,  and  father  of  Cozbi  who  was 
slain  by  Phinehas.    B.C.  1480. 

Num.25.  15  woman.. (was)  Cozbi,  the  daughter  of  Z. 

31.    8  Evi,  and  Rekem,  aud  Z.,  and  Hur,  and  R. 

Josh. 13.  21  Evi,  and  Rekem,  and  Z.,  and  Hur,  andR. 

2.  A  Benjamite,  brother  of  Ner  the  grandfather  of  Saul 
the  first  king  of  Israel.     B.C.  1250. 

1  Ch.  8.  30  his  first  born  son  Ahdon,  and  Z.,  and  Kish 
9.  36  his  first  born  son  Abdou,  then  Z.,  and  K. 

ZTJR-I'-El.  Sxnii;  God  is  a  rock. 

A  Merarite,  son  of  Abihail,  and  head  of  the  families. 

B.C.  1490. 

Num.  3.  35  And  the  chief,  .(was)  Z.  the  son  of  Abih. 

ZTJ-RI-SHAD'-DAI,  ^£*"i«  the  Almighty  is  a  rock. 
Father  of  Shelumiel,  a  chief  of  Simeon,  chosen  to  aid 
Moses  to  number  the  people.    B.C.  1510. 

Num.  1.    6  Of  Simeon;  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Z. 

2.  12  captain,  .(shall  be)  Shelumiel.  .son  of  Z. 
7.  36  On  the  fifth  day  Shelumiel  the  son  cf  Z. 
7.  41  the  offering  of  Shelumiel  the  son  of  Z. 
10. 19  over  the  host.  .Shelumiel  the  son  of  Z. 

ZU'-ZTM,  cni  promment,  strong,  giant. 

A  primitive  race  in  the  country  afterwards  possessed 

by  the  children  of  Amnion. 

Gen.  14.   5  the  Z.  in  Ham,  and  the  Emims  in  Shaveh 


BIBLICAL  WORKS  BY  ROBERT  YOUNG,  LL.D. 


APPENDIXES  TO  THE  ANALYTICAL  CONCORDANE,  for  the  use  of 
Sabbath  School  Teachers,  Divinity  Students,  Clergymen,  &c, 
in  parts  : 

1.  Sabbath  School  Teacheus'  Appendix,  contains  Analytical  Surveys  (1) 

of  all  ill.-  BOOKS  of  the  Bible,  (2)  of  all  the  Facts  of  the  Bible,  (3)  of 
:>ll  Hie  Idioms  of  the  Bible,  &c.,  together  with  Sixteen  Scripture  Maps, 
Twenty-three  Pictorial  Fiewsot  Palestine,  and  Twenty-five  Facsimiles 
of  the  most  Ancient  Biblical  MSS.     4to. 

2.  Divinity  Students'  Appendix,  containing  a  Hebrew  Lexicon  to  the  Old 

Testament,  and  a  Greek  Lexicon  to  the   New,  with  the  number  of 
ccurences  of  each  word,  the  various  Readings,  &c.    4to. 

[These  may  be  had  bound  in  one  volume,  or  separate.  ] 


NEW  LITERAL  VERSION  OF  THE  BIBLE,  translated  according  to  the 
Letter  and  Idioms  of  the  Original  Languages,  second  edition.     8vo. 

Concise  Critical  Comments  on  the  Above.    Crown  8vo. 

GRAMMATICAL  ANALYSIS  of  the  Hebrew  Text  of  the  Minor  Prophets. 
Crown  8vo. 

ROOT  BOOKS  and  Paradigms  of  the  Hebrew,  Chaldee,  Sa*laritan, 
Striac,  Greek,  and  Latin  Languages.     12mo. 

BIBLICAL  NOTES  AND  QUERIES.     Royal  8vo. 

Analytical  Concordance  to  the  Greek  New  Testament,  to  the  Hebrew  Old 
Testament,  to  the  Septuagint,  and  to  the  Vulgate.     (In  preparation.) 

Critical  Annotations  on  the  Holy  Bible,  or  a  Synopsis  of  the  Critics. 
(In  preparation.) 


PRINTED   BY   NEILL  AND  COMl'ANY,   EDINBURGH. 


HINTS  AND  HELPS  TO  BIBLE  INTERPRETATION. 


Illustrations  of  13iblc  Bioras. 

1.  Human  feelings,  actions,  and  parts  are  ascribed  to  God,  not  that 
they  are  really  in  Him,  but  because  such  effects  proceed  from  Him  as  are  like 
those  that  flow  from  such  things  in  Men,  see — Gen.  6.  3,  6 ;  11.  7 ;  18.  33  ;  Psa.  60. 
S ;  78.  65 ;  Isa.  1.  24 ;  Jer.  7.  13 ;  Heb.  10.  12 ;  12.  6 ;  Jas.  5.  4 ;  2  Pe.  2.  9 ;  Deut. 
8.  2;  Heb.  4.  13;  Luke  1.  66;  Psa.  4.  6;  Josh.  7.  26;  lev.  26.  28. 

(b.)  God  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  dealing  with  men  as  they  deal 
with  Hra,  see — Josh.  7.  12 ;  Judg.  2.  20,  21 ;  2  Sa.  22.  26,  27 ;  2  Ch.  15.  2 ;  Matt.  6. 
r5 1  J8-  35;  John  15.  14. 

2.  Abstract  and  inanimate  things  are  frequently  personified,  e.g. 
■  —Ears  are  attributed  to  the  heavens,  the  earth,  death,  and  destruction ;  hands 
to  the  deep ;  eyes  to  the  sea  and  the  mountains ;  a  voice  to  the  deep,  wisdom,  and 
understanding ;  a  will  to  the  flesh  and  mind ;  zcitnessing  to  an  altar,  a  song,  a 
stone,  blood,  and  water ;  speaking  to  the  ear,  eye,  foot,  days,  years,  blood,  law, 
righteousness,  and  blood  of  sprinkling ;  knowing,  rejoicing,  rising,  and  going 
down  to  the  sun ;  being  roused  from  sleep  to  the  sword  and  arm  of  Jehovah  ;  skip- 
ping and  leaping  to  mountains  and  hills;  crying  out  to  the  heart  and  flesh,  wis- 
dom and  understanding;  seeing  and  preaching  to  the  Scripture;  judging  to  the 
word  ;  teaching  to  grace,  the  heaven,  and  the  earth  ;  leading  and  guiding  to  light, 
truth,  and  the  commandments  ;  dominion  and  enmity  to  death  ;  mastery  to  sin  ; 
comforting  to  a  rod  and  staff ;  carrying  a  message  to  anger,  fear,  mercy,  light, 
and  truth ;  and  every  Christian  virtue  to  charity  or  love. 

3.  Opposite  statements  are  to  be  carefully  compared,  e.g. — Gen.  2.  2 
and  John  5.  17 ;  Exod.  24.  10  and  John  1.  18;  1  Sa.  15.  n  and  29 ;  1  Ki.  22.  20 
and  Isa.  40.  14;  Psa.  51.  10  and  Ezek.  18.  31;  Prov.  6.  1  and  Phile.  18,  19;  Prov. 
26.  4  and  5 ;  Isa.  9.  21  and  Luke  i3.  1 ;  Ezek.  18.  32  and  Rom.  9.  iS ;  Matt.  5.  1 1 
and  John  16.  4 ;  Matt.  5.  16  and  6.  1 ;   5.  34  and  Rev.  10.  6  and  Rom.  9.  1 ;   Matt. 

6.  34  and  1  Ti.  5.  8;  Matt.  7.  7,  8  and  John  8.  21 ;  Matt.  10.  9  and  Mark  6.  g; 
Matt.  10.  37  and  Luke  14.  26  and  Eph.  5.  29  ;  Matt.  12.  30  and  Mark  9.  40 ;  Matt. 
20.  29  and  Mark  10.  46  and  Luke  18.  35  ;  Matt.  26.  52  and  Luke  22.  36  ;  Luke  1.  33 
and  1  Co.  15.  24 ;  Luke  22.  36  and  2  Co.  10.  4 ;  Luke  16.  8  and  Mark  10.  19 ;  Luke 

18.  1  and  John  9.  31 ;  Jolui  5.  23  and  41 ;  8.  51  and  Heb.  9.  27 ;  John  9.  39  and  12. 
47;  10.  30  and  14.  28;  Acts  16.  3  and  Gal.  5.  2  ;  Rom.  3.  28  and  Jas.  2.  24;  Col.  2. 
20  and  1  Pe.  2.  13. 

4.  General  statements  are  frequently  to  be  limited,  see — Prov.  3. 
16 ;  9.  11 ;  10.  27 ;  n.  14,  15 ;  12.  28 ;  16.  7,  10;  17.  6;  18.  22 ;  22.  6,  29 ;  Mark  16. 
17,  18;  John  3.  22 ;  11.  9;  Rom.  3.  10,  n  ;  9.  30;  1  Co.  7.  32. 

5.  Positive  statements  are  frequently  to  be  understood  compara- 
tively, see— Gen.  45.  8;  Exod.  16.  8;  1  Sa.  8.  7;  Prov.  8.  10;  Jer.  7.  22,  23;  Joel 
2.  13 ;  Hos.  6.  6  ;  Matt.  9.  13  ;  n.  18,  ig ;  15.  24 ;  23.  2  ;  Luke  14.  12 ;  John  5.  22, 
30 ;  6.  27 ;  Kom.  9.  21 ;  1  Co.  1.  17 ;  3.  7 ;  Col.  3.  -z ;  1  Ti.  1.  9 ;  6.  8. 

6.  General  Reasonings,  of  various  kinds,  are  sometimes  employed, 
e.g. — From  the  nature,  attributes,  and  actions  of  God,  the  nature  and  social  rela- 
tions of  Man,  for  analogy,  contrast,  cause  and  effect,  the  greater  and  the  less,  the 
less  and  the  greater,  the  truthfulness  of  the  senses,  self  consciousness,  the  truths 
of  testimony,  the  works  of  nature  and  providence,  from  experience,  &c. 

7.  The  language  of  the  messenger  frequently  glides  into  that  of  the 
SENDER,  e.g.—  Gen.  16.  10;  iS.  14;  Exod.  7.  16,  17 ;  15.25,26;  Deut.  n.  13-15 ; 
2Q.  2-6 ;  31.  22,  23 ;  Isa.  10.  4,  7,  25,  26 ;  50.  3,  4 ;  Jer.  4.  19-27  ;  6.  22-30 ;  9.  1-3 ; 
Zech.  2.  8-1 1. 

8.  What  a  servant  says  or  does  is  ascribed  to  the  master,  e.g. — 
Matt.  19.  4,  5. 

9.  Persons  and  things  are  spoken  of  according  to  what  they  once 
were,  or  rROFESSED  (or  are  presently  thought)  to  be,  though  not  really  so,  either 
formerly  or  at  present,  e.g.—  x  Sa.  13.  14 ;  1  Ki.  13.  n ;  Jer.  28.  1,  5,  10;  Ezek.  21. 
4 ;  Matt.  5.  13  ;  9.  12,  13 ;  10.  3 ;  12.  42 ;  26.  6  ;  Luke  2.  1,  48 ;  15.  7,  24,  29  ;  16.  15  ; 

19.  22 ;  Acts  28.  2 ;  Rom.  6.  2 ;  1  Co.  1.  21 ;  2.  6 ;  Titus  1.  12 ;  2  Pe.  2.  1. 

10.  "Words  are  frequently  used  in  an  ironical  manner,  e.g. — Judg. 
10.  14;   1  Ki.  18.  27;  22.  15;  Job  12.  2;  Eccl.  11.  9;  Matt.  25.  26;  Mark  7.  9; 

1  Co.  4.  8. 

11.  Transposition  of  clauses  is  frequently  necessary,  e.g. — Matt. 

7.  6 ;  Mark  9.  13 ;  n.  13  ;  15.  21 ;  16.  3,  4 ;  Luke  4.  5:5.  15,  17 ;  Acts  4.  27,  28  ;  5. 
12,  15,  38,  39;  28.  18 ;  1  Ti.  1.  13,  14;  Rev.  13.  8. 

12.  Hebraisms,  Latinisms,  Syriacisms,  &c,  are  frequently  used, 
e.g. — Abba,  aceldama,  amen,  corban,  ephphatha,  eloi,  hallelujah,  &c— centurion, 
census,  colony,  legion,  libertine,  mile,  prrctorium,  tavern,  title,  forum,  &c;  to 
accept,  i.e.,  lift  up  the  face  of  any  one ;  to  have  compassion,  i.e.,  have  the  bowels 
moved  for  any  one;  flesh  and  blood,  i.e.,  a  human  being;  to  confess  (in,  with) 
one;  one  for  first,  &c,  &c. 

13.  The  same  persons  and  places  have  frequently  different  names, 
e.g.—  Abiathar  and  Ahimelech;  Ahiud  and  Meshallum;  Abram  and  Abraham; 
Adah  and  Bashemath  ;  Ahaziah,  Azariah,  and  Jehoahaz  ;  Amiel  and  Eliam  ;  Aza- 
riah  and  Uzziah  ;  Barachias,  Jehoiada,  and  Johanan  ;  Barnabas  and  Joses ;  Bar- 
sabas,  Joseph,  and  Justus ;  Bartholomew  and  Nathaniel ;  Czesarea,  Dan,  and 
Laish ;  Cephas,  Peter,  Simon,  Simeon  ;  Dalmanutha  and  Magdala ;  Didvmus  and 
Tbomas ;  Eleseus  and  Elisha  ;  Elias  and  Elijah ;  En-Mishpat  and  Kadesh  ;  Gada- 
renes  and  Gergasenes ;  Gideon  and  Jerubbaal;  Hadadezar  and  Hadarezar ;  Her- 
mon,  Shenir,  and  S Irion ;  Hobab  and  Jethro ;  Horeb  and  Sinai;  Jebus  and  Jeru- 
salem ;  Jedidiah  and  Solomon ;  Jehoahaz,  Johanan,  and  Shallum ;  Jesus  and 
Joshua;  Judah,  Judas,  and  Jude;  Lebbaeus  and  Thaddeus ;  Levi  and  Matthew; 
Lukas  and  Luke ;  Sheshbazzar  and  Zerubabbel ;  Silas  and  Silvanus  ;  Tiniotheus 
and  Timothy  ;  Nebuchadnezzar  is  spelt  in  seven  different  ways. 

There  were  also  two  places  named  Bethlehem,  Cana,  &c;  three  persons  named 
Herod,  and  several  named  Abimelech,  Agag,  Artaxerxes  James,  John,  Mary, 
Moses,  Pharaoh,  Zaulmiiah,  &c. 


14.  The  same  word  has  frequently  a  different  meaning  even  iu 
the  same  verse,  e.g. — Lev.  16.  8;  Matt.  8.  22;  13.  12;  Rom.  4.  25;  14.  13;  1  Co. 
10.  2 ;  15.  51 ;  2  Co.  5.  21 ;  1  Jo.  5.  20. 

15.  The  name  of  a  book  or  its  writer  is  frequently  omitted,  e.g. — 
Acts  1.  4 ;  Rom.  9.  7 ;  Gal.  3.  n,  12 ;  Heb.  1.  6 ;  2.  6. 

{b.)  The  name  of  the  writer  is  frequently  put  for  his  writings, 
e.g. — Luke  16.  29,  31 ;  24.  27  ;  Acts  15.  21 ;  21.  21 ;  2  Co.  3.  15. 

(c.)  The  stjbject  treated  of  is  frequently  put  for  the  rook  or 
WRITER,  e.g. — Mark  2.  26;  12.  26;  Rom.  n.  2. 

16.  Parentheses  are  to  be  carefully  attended  to,  e.g. — Gen.  13. 
10 ;  Isa.  52.  14  ;  Mark  9.  13,  38,  39,  40 ;  Luke  1.  27,  55,  70 ;  Acts  1.  19,  25  ;  4.  27 ; 

14.  2 ;  Rom.  1.  2-6 ;  2.  13-16 ;  5.  7,  S,  12-18 ;  8.  20,  21 ;  1  Co.  8.  1-4 ;  15.  52 ;  2  Co. 
5.  6-8. 

17.  A  negative  and  an  affirmative  statement  imply  certainty, 
e.g. — 2  Ki.  18.  36 ;  Psa.  118.  17  ;  Isa.  38.  1 ;  Luke  i.  20 ;  John  1.  3,  20 ;  Rom.  4. 17 ; 

9.  1 ;  1  Jo.  2.  27. 

18.  The  repetition  of  a  word  denotes  the  superlative  degree, 
e.g. — Gen.  9.  25  ;  Exod.  36.  33  ;  Deut.  10.  17  ;  1  Sa.  2.  3  ;  2  Ki.  10.  15  ;  Psa.  79.  13 ; 
Eccl.  1.  1 ;  7.  24 ;  Isa.  6.  3 ;  Ezek,  32.  28 ;  Mic.  2.  4. 

19.  Some  words  (nouns,  pronouns,  verbs,  &c.)  are  expletive,  e.g., 
account,  begin,  find,  seem,  &c.  See  Mat.  3. 9 ;  20.  25 ;  Mark  10.  42 ;  Luke  3.  8 ;  22 
24;  John  5.  35;  7-  17;  Acts  n.  15;  R0.5.  7;  1  Co.  3.  18;  7.  40;  10.  12  ;  11.  16;  14. 
37;  Phil.  3.  4;  Heb.  4.  r;  12.  11. 

20.  The  denial  of  the  act  frequently  implies  denial  of  the  power 
of  acting,  e.g. — Gen.  13.  6;  Isa;  43.  13;  Matt.  12.  25  (Mark  3.  25);  Matt.  17.  21 
(Mark  9.  29) ;  Rom.  9.  19. 

21.  References — are  sometimes  made  to  Non-Canonical  Books, 
which  yet  were  true  and  contemporary  histories,  e.g.,  Num.  21.  14;  Josh.  10.  12, 
13;  1  Sa.  10.  25;  2  Sa.  1.  18;  1  Ki.  4.  32;  n.  41 ;  14.  19;  15.  7;  16.  5,  20,  27;  22. 
39;  1  Ch.  29.  29;  2  Ch.  9.  29;  12.  15;  20.  34;  26.  22;  28.  26;  33.  18,  19;  35.  25,  27; 
36.  8. 

22.  God's  promises  and  threats  are  frequently  conditional, 
e.g. — Gen.  2.  17;  15.  18;  17.  7 ;  1  Sa.  2.  30;  Prov.  22.  6;  Isa.  38.  1;  Jon.  3.  4; 
Matt.  1.  21 ;  18.  32 ;  19.  28 ;  John  3.  36 ;  Acts  27.  24,  31. 

(b.)  Promises  and  threats  are  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  the 
present  condition  of  man,  e.g.— John  3.  18 ;  1  Co.  6.  9, 10. 

23.  Distribv/tion — is  expressed  in  a  variety  of  ways,  e.g. — by  re- 
peating the  cardinal  number  "tico,  two"  as  in  Gen.  7.  9,  15;  Mark  6.  7;  or  by 
repeating  the  noun  "heaps,  heaps,"  as  in  Exod.  8.  14;  "companies,  companies," 
Mark  6.  39.  Compare  also  Mark  14.  19;  John  8.  9;  Rom.  12.  5;  2  Co.  4.  16; 
Rev.  21.  21. 

24.  Various  Readings — are  to  be  duly  studied  and  weighed,  e.g. — 
Matt.  1.  25;  2.  18;  6.  4,  6,  18,  34;  23.  8;  Mark  6.  20;  n.  13;  Luke  2.  14;  10.  6; 
12.  49;  14.  5;  16.  9;  18.  7;  21.  34,  35 ;  John  1.  18;  5.  3;  13.  2;  Acts  4.  25;  9.  31 ; 

10.  30;  13.  19,  20;  18.  5 ;  Rom.  4.  19;  5.  1 ;  8.  t;  i  Co.  3.  4 ;  6.  20;  9.  23;   n.  29; 

15.  29;  2  Co.  5.  17;  Gal.  4.  14;  Eph.  1.  18;  Phil.  3.  n;  Col.  2.  18;  1  Ti.  3.  16;  6. 
*3»  19;  2  Ti.  4.  1,  14;  Heb.  4.  2;  Jas.  5.  9;  1  Pet.  3.  15,  21;  2  Pet.  1.  3;  2.  iS;  1  Jo. 
5-  7j  8,  13 ;  2  Jo.  9 ;  Jude  1 ;  Rev.  1.  5,  6 ;  2.  9,  13 ;  17.  8 ;  20.  14,  &c. 

25.  Interpolations — are  never  to  be  adduced  as  proof  texts,  e.g. — 
Matt.  6.  13;  10.  8;   17.  n;  21.  44;   23.  14;  Mark  7.  16;  9.  44,  46;   n.  26;  15.  28; 

16.  9-20;  Luke  17.  36;  23.  17;  24.  12,  40;  John  5. 4;  7.  53-8.  11 ;  Acts  8.  37;  15.34; 
24.  7;  28.  29;  1  John  5.  7,  &c. 

26.  The  order  of  events  is  frequently  disregarded,  e.g. — John  2. 13 
when  compared  with  Matt.  21.  12 ;  Gen.  37.  1-30  with  36.  21 ;  Judg.  17.  1  with  iS. 
31 ;  also  19.  1-21,  25  with  1.  34. 

27.  The  Scripture  writers  frequently  use  round  and  common  num- 
bers, e.g. — Gen.  15.  13;  Exod.  12.  40;  Acts  7.  6;  Exod.  1.  5;  Acts  7.  14;  Matt.  17. 
1 ;  Mark  9.  2  ;  Luke  9.  28. 

28.  A  part  of  a  thing  is  frequently  put  for  the  wrHOLE,  e.g. — Gen. 
1.  5  ;  12.  5  ;  Matt.  6.  11 ;  Luke  14.  14 ;  Acts  2.  41 ;  Rom.  1.  16 ;  10.  9,  13  ;  13.  1 ; 
Heb.  2.  16. 

29.  The  whole  is  frequently  put  for  a  part,  e.g. — The  "world" 
for  the  Roman  Empire  or  Palestine,  Matt.  4.  8 ;  24.  14 ;  Luke  2.  1 ;  4.  5 ;  Acts  u. 
28 ;  17.  6,  31 ;  19.  27 ;  24.  5 ;  Rom.  10.  iS ;  Rev.  3.  10 ;  12.  9 ;  16.  14. 

"  Every  creature  "  for  the  human  race,  Mark  16.  15 ;  Col.  1.  15,  23 ;  Rev.  5.  13 ; 
8.  9.  As  also  "  all  flesh,"  Gen.  6.  12 ;  Psa.  145.  21 ;  Isa.  40.  5,  6  ;  66.  23 ;  Matt.  24. 
22 ;  Luke  3.  6 ;  Rom.  3.  20. 

30.  A  definite  number  is  frequently  used  for  an  indefinite,  e.g. — 
Gen.  4.  15;  31.  7;  Exod.  20.  6;  Lev.  26.  18;  1  Sa.  18.  7;  Eccl.  6.  3;  Psa.  62.  n; 
Isa.  4.  1 ;  40.2;  Dan.  7.  10;  Matt.  12.  45 ;  18.21;  19.29;  Mark  16.  9;  1  Co.  14. 
19 ;  Rev.  1.5;  2.  10 ;  3.  1 ;  4.  5 ;  5.6;  20.  2,  7. 

31.  Supplements  (from  other  passages,  &c.)  are  frequently  neces- 
sary, e.g. — Num.  14.  30;  Prov.  16.  13;  Matt,  5.  34;  Mark  16.  16;  Luke  16.  18  t 
John  4.  14 ;  6.  44 ;  9.  3;  Rom.  9.  22-24  J  J3-  2  >  1  Co.  7.  19;  Gal.  3.  17 ;  Eph.  4.  20; 
1  Jo.  2.  18. 

32.  The  Definite  Article — is  sometimes  injuriously  omitted, 
e.g. — Matt.  1.  23,  the  virgin;  4.  5,  the  pinnacle;  4.  21,  the  ship;  5.  1,  the  moun- 
tain; 5.  15,  the  bushel,  the  candlestick;  7.  17,  the  corrupt;  7.  24,  the  rock;  8.  23, 
the  ship;  8.  32,  the  steep;  9.  1,  the  ship;  10.  12,  the  house;  12.  35,  the  good,  the 
evil;  12.  43,  the  man;  15.  20,  the  man,  the. man;  iS.  17,  the  heathen,  the  publi- 
can ;  23.  24,  the  gnat,  the  camel ;  24.  32,  the  parable ;  25.  32,  the  shepherd ;  26. 51, 
the  servant;  28.  16,  the  mountain,  &c.  &c. 


1092 


HINTS  AND  HELPS  TO  BIBLE  INTERPBETATION. 


«.«.— Matt,  i.  20;  2.  13;  28.  2;  Luke  2.  9;  Acts  5.  19;  7.  35 '»  8-  ^  «■  7.  =3.  f 
angel-  Matt.  3.  3,  a  voice;  8.  8,  a  word;  15.  9,  commandments ;  22.  30,  angel: 
Mark  1   45,  a  city;  2.1,  a  house;  7.  7,  commandments;  12.  25,  angels;  Luke  1.7 


«.  The    Definite  Article— is   sometimes   injuriously  inserted, 

Is; 

78, 
dayspringV  2.  12*  a  babe;  7.  3.  ekiew;  22.  17,  a  cup;  22.  37,  transgressors;  Acts 
7.  38,  lively;  9.  5,  pricks,  &c.  &c. 

34.  The  COMING  of  God  (or  of  Christ)  frequently  means  a  mani- 
festation to  assist,  deliver,  reward,  or  punish,  e.g.— Psa.  50.  3 ;  Hos.  6.  3 ;  Matt. 
16.  27;  Luke  18.  8;  Bom.  9.  9;  Eph.  2.  17;  Seb.  10.  37;  Jas.  5.  8;  Rev.  2.  5. 


only 
Jer. 


35.  Things  are  spoken  of  as  given,  done,  or  possessed,  which  are 
ly  promise?)  and  proposed,  e.g.— Gen.  15.  18  ;  27.  37 ;  37.  21 ;  Josh.  1.  3 ;  24.  9; 
r.  1.  10 ;  Ezek.  24.  13 ;  1  Co.  10.  33 ;  Eph.  1.  3,  4 ;  2  Ti.  1.  9 ;  Rev.  13.  8. 


e.g. 


36.  That  which  is  difficult  is  frequently  spoken  of  as  impossible, 
.—Matt.  17.  20;  19.  24  (Mark  10.  25;  Luke  18.  25);  Luke  17.  1;  Heb.  6.  4. 

37.  The  relative  pronoun  frequently  refers  to  a  more  remote  ante- 
cedent, e.g.—  Psa.  99.  8;  Matt.  n.  1 ;  12.  g;  Luke  5.  17,  26;  John  6.  50;  Acts  4. 
xi ;  7.  19;  10.  6;  15.  11;  2  Th.  2.  9;  Heb.  12.  17;  1  Johu  5.  20;  2  John  7. 

38.  Persons  and  things  are  reckoned  children  of  that  which  they 
imitate,  or  to  which  they  are  attached,  e.g.—i  Sa.  18.  17  ;  20.  30 ;  25. 17 ;  1  Ki  20. 
35;  2  Ki.  6.  32;  Psa.  89.  22;  Isa.  57.  3;  Eze.  16.  3;  Mark  3.  17;  Luke  10.  6;  John 
17.  12;  Acts  4.  36;  13.  10;  2  Th.  2.  3;  1  Pe.  3.  6. 

And  iu  such  expressions  as  "Children— of  God,  Abraham,  Jacob,  Israel;  of 
faith,  wisdom,  wrath,  disobedience,  Satan,  hell;  the  devil,  the  promise,  the 
resurrection,  the  day,  the  light,  the  bridechamber,  the  bondswoman,  the  king- 
dom," &c 

39.  The  verb  to  hate  is  frequently  used  for  to  love  less,  e.g. — 
Gen.  29.  31;  Deut.  21.  15;  Mai.  1.  3;  Matt.  6.  24;  Luke  14.  26;  John  12.25;  Rom. 
9-  i3- 

40.  A  people  is  frequently  called  by  the  name  of  its  founder, 
e.g.—Geu.  9.  25,  27;  49.  7;  Num.  20.  21;  Deut.  32.  9;  2  Ch.  25.  24;  Psa.  14.  7;  24. 
6;  83.  8;  Amos  7.  9;  1C0.  12.  12;  Gal.  3.  16. 

41.  When  two  nouns  are  coupled  by  a  conjunction,  the  second  is 
frequently  equal  to  an  adjective,  e.g. — Jer.  29.  ti;  Luke  21.  15;  John  3.  5; 
14.  6 ;  Acts  1.  25 ;  23.  6 ;  Col.  2.  8 ;  2  Ti.  1.  10 ;  2  Pe.  1.  3. 

42.  The  name  Christ  i^  frequently  used  to  denote  the  doctrine, 
subject,  or  spirit  of  His  religion,  e.g.—  Acts  5.  42;  8.  5,  35;  Rom.  3.  26;  8.  10; 

1  Co.  1.  24;  2  Co.  r.  19,  21  ;  4.  5 ;  5.  17;  11.  4.;  Gal.  1.  16;  4.  19;  Eph.  3.  17;  4.  20; 
Phil.  1.  15,  16,  18;  Col.  1.  27,  28;  2.  6,  7;  2  Ti.  3.  12. 

43.  The  verb  to  have  is  frequently  used  for  to  hold  fast,  use, 
cg.—'Mntt.  13.  12;  21.  26;  Luke  19.  20;  Rom.  x.  28;  Phil.  2.  29;  1  Ti.  1.  19;  3.9; 

2  Ti.  1.  13;  1  Pe.  2.  16;  Rev.  6.  9. 

44.  The  name  of  a  person  is  himself  or  his  character,  e.g. — Ps. 
5.  11;  75.  1 ;  Matt.  10.  22;  12.  21;  John  1.  12;  12.  28;  17.  6;  Rev.  22.  4. 

45.  To  be  in  Christ  is  frequently  simply  to  be  a  Christian,  e.g. — 
Rom.  9.  1 ;  12.  5  ;  16.  7,  9,  10;  1  Co.  3.  r;  4.  10,  15,  17;  15.  18,  19;  2  Co.  2.  17;  3. 
14;  5.  17,  19;  12.  2,  19;  Gal.  1.  22;  Eph.  1.  3;  Phil.  1.  13;  2.  1;  Col.  1.  2;  2.  5; 
1  Th.  4.  16 ;  1  Ti.  2.  7 ;  Phm.  8. 

46.  The  word  answered  is  frequently  used  when  no  preceding 
statement  appears,  e.g.—  Matt.  n.  25;  12.  38;  15.  15;  22.  1;  26.  63;  Mark  9.  19; 

10.  24. 

47.  The  cause  or  source  is  frequently  used  for  the  effects,  e.g. — ■ 
The  Sjririt  for  his  operations,  Matt.  1.  18,  20 ;  Mark  1.  8 ;  Luke  1.  35 ;  4.  1 ;  John 
3.  34;  Acts  10.  38;  Rom.  5.  5;  1  Co.  2.  13;  2  Co.  6.  6;  Eph.  1.  13;  1  Th.  1.  5;  2  Ti. 
1.  14;  Titus  3.  5;  Heb.  2.  4;  1  Pe.  1.  12;  2  Pe.  1.  21;  Jude  20. 

48.  Abstract  words  are  frequently  used  for  concrete  ones,  e.g. — 
Gen.  15.  1 ;  46.  34;  Judg.  5.  12;   1Sa.15.29;  Psa.35.3;  Luke  2.30;  John  4.22; 

11.  25;  17.  3;  Rom.  3.  30;  8.  7;  11.  7;  1  Co.  1.  30;  2  Co.  5.  21;  Gal.  3.  13;  Eph. 
5-8. 

49.  The  phrase  to  be  called  frequently  indicates  actual  being, 
eg. — Isa.  1.  26;  56.  7;  60.  18;  Matt.  1.  23;  2.  23;  5.  9,  19;  21.  13;  Mark  n.  17; 
Luke  19.  46;  Rom.  9.  26;  1  Jo.  3.  1 ;  Jas.  2.  23. 

50.  Plural  nouns,  pronouns,  and  verbs  are  frequently  used  for  the 
singular,  e.g. — Gen.  1.  1,  26;  3.  22 ;  8.  4  ;  11.  7;  19.  29 ;  21.  7 ;  46.  7;  Judg.  12.  7; 
2  Ch.  24.  25;  Neh.  3.  8;  Prov.  9.  10;  Hos.  12.  8;  Isa.  6.  8;  Amos  6.  10;  Jon.  1.  5; 
Zecb.  9.  9;  Matt.  2.  20;  12.  20;  21.  7;  26.  8 ;  27.  44;  Mark  1.  2 ;  4.  30;  15.  32; 
John  3.  2,  11 ;  6.  45 ;  12.  4 ;  21.  24;  Acts  13.  40;  Rom.  7.  14 ;  1  Co.  15.  29;  2  Co.  10. 
2;  1  Th.  2.  18;  Heb,  9.  23;  xi.  37;  1  Ti.  1.  8,  9;  1  Jo.  1.  i,  3,  4;  2.  1;  3  Jo.  12. 

51.  The  word  God  is  frequently  used  to  denote  greatness,  e.g. — 
Gen.  1.  2;  13.  10;  23.  6;  30.  8;  35.  5;  Exod.  9.  28;  Deut.  33.  1 ;  1  Sa.  14.  15;  2  Sa. 
o.  3;  23.  20;  Job  1.  16;  4.  9;  Psa.  36.  6;  65.  9;  80.  2,  10;  Song  8.  6;  Jon.  3.  3; 
Mark  11.  22;  Luke  2.  40;  John  9.  3;  Acts  7.  20;  Rom.  1.  16,  18 ;  10.  2;  1  Co.  1.  18, 
24 ;  2  Co.  i.  12 ;  10.  4 ;  Col.  2.  19 ;  1  Th.  4.  16 ;  Rev.  15.  2 ;  21.  n. 

52.  Cannot,  in  Scripture  idiom,  frequently  means  will  not,  e.g. — 
Gen.  19.  22;  24.  50;  37.  4;  43.  32;  44.  22,  26;  Exod.  7.  21,  24;  Num.  22.  18;  Deut. 
12.  17;  16.  5 ;  17.  15 ;  22.  4;  24.  4 ;  Josh.  9.  19 ;  Judg.  21.  18;  Neh.  6.  3;  Psa.  78. 
19,  20 ;  Isa.  56.  10 ;  Jer.  3.  5 ;  6.  10 ;  38.  5 ;  Lam.  4.  14 ;  Matt.  9.  15  (Mark  2.  19) ; 
12.  34 ;  16.  3  ;  Mark  3.  23  ;  6.  5  ;  9.  29,  39;  10.  38,  39 ;  Lnke  6.  42  ;  n.  7 ;  14.  20,  26 ; 
16.  13 ;  John  5.  19,  30,  44 ;  6.  44,  60,  65 ;  7.  7 ;  8.  43  ;  9.  4,  16;  10.  21 ;  13.  36;  14.  7  ; 
Acts  4.  30;  10.  47  ;  Rom.  4.  21 ;  8.  7,  8 ;  11.  23;  14.  4;  16.  25 ;  1  Co.  2.  14;  12.  3 ; 
2  Co.  9.  8 ;  13.  8;  2  Ti.  1.  12 ;  2.  13 ;  Heb.  2.  18 ;  5.  2;  n.  19 ;  1  Jo.  3.  9;  4.  20 ;  Rev. 

2.  2. 

53.  Nouns  are  frequently  used  for  personal  pronouns,  e.g. — Gen. 
2.  3 ;  4.  23 ;  5.  1 ;  16.  16;  17.  23;  19.  24 ;  Exod.  16.  7  ;  34.  35  ;  Num.  6.  24-26 ;  Josh. 
9.  21 ;  1  Sa.  3.  21 ;  1  Ki.  2.  19 ;  8.  1 ;  10.  13 ;  12.  21 ;  2  Ki.  16.  n  ;  2  Ch.  7.  2 ;  Neh. 
8.  5,  6 ;  Estb.  8.  8 ;  Eccl.  8.  8 ;  Isa.  14.  22 ;  Ezek.  11.  24 ;  Dan.  9.  17 ;  Luke  n,  17 ; 
John  4.  1  ;  Rom.  1.  28 ;  2  Ti.  1.  18 ;  1  Jo.  4.  7-9. 

54.  Some  particles,  such  as  all,  are  frequently  used  for  some  or 
most,  e.g.— Exod.  9.  6,  20 ;  Matt.  3.  5 ;  26.  52;  Luke  11.  41 ;  23.  48  ;  John  15.  15  ; 
16.  13;  1  Co.  6.  12;  8.  1;  11.  2;  15.  51;  Col.  3.  22;  2  Th.  3.  2;  Titus  1.  12,  13,  15; 
1  Jo.  2.  20. 

55.  The  word  some  is  frequently  used  for  all,  e.g. — Rom.  3.  3  ; 
11.  17  ;  1  Ti.  4.  1  ;  Heb.  3.  16. 


56.  The  word  many  is  frequently  used  for  all,  e.g. — Dan.  13.  2  ; 
Matt.  20.  28. 

57.  The  active  voice  in  Greek  is  frequently  used  for  the  causative, 
e.g.—  Matt.  5.  25,  45;  Mark  14.  54;  Luke  11.  53;  1  Co.  6.  4 ;  2  Co.  2.  14;  9.  8; 
2  Pe.  3.  12. 

58.  Neuter  gender  is  frequently  used  for  masculine,  e.g. — Matt. 
11.  27;  18.  11,  14;  Heb.  7.  19;  12.  13;  1  Jo.  5.  4;  Rev.  21.  27. 

59.  The  present  tense  is  frequently  used  to  express  habitual  or 
immediately  future  action,  e.g. — Matt.  2.  4 ;  3.  10;  17.  n  ;  26.  2;  Luke  12.  54; 
John  4.  21 ;  7.  42,  52;  10.  32 ;  12.  26;  13  6,  27 ;  14.  3;  16.  2,  17;  17.  n,  24;  21.  3; 
Rom.  15.  25;  1  Co.  3.  13 ;  12.  31 ;  15.  2,  35;  2  Co.  5.  1 ;  13.  1 ;  Eph.  5.  5;  Col.  3.  6; 
Heb.  4.  3. 

60.  The  past  tense  is  frequently  used  to  express  the  certainty  of  a 
future  action,  e.g. — John  13.  31;  15.  6;  17   18;  Jude  14;  Rev.  10.  7. 

61.  The  positive  degree  is  frequently  put  for  the  comparative  or 
superlative,  e.g.—  Luke  9.  48. 

62.  Son  and  daughter  are  frequently  used  for  a  descendant,  e.g. 
— Gen.  29.  5;  46.  21,  22;  2  Sa.  19.  24;  Eccl.  1.  1 ;  Matt.  1.  1  ;  Luke  x.  5;  3.  23 ; 
13.  16. 

63.  Father  and  mother  are  frequently  used  for  an  ancestor,  e.g. 
— Gen.  37.  10;  1  Ki.  15.  10;  Matt.  3.  9;  Mark  n.  10;  Luke  1.  31,  73;  John  4.  12; 
Acts  7.  2;  Rom.  4.  11. 

64.  Brother  and  sister  are  frequently  used  for  a  relative  or 
companion,  e.g.— Gen.  14.  14;  2  Ki.  8:  26;  Matt.  5.  22,  23,  24,  47;  7.  5;  12.  46; 
23.  8 ;  25.  40;  John  7.  3;  Acts  i.  14 ;  3.  22 ;  9.  30;  n.  29;  1  Co.  1.  1 ;  5.  n  ;  Gal.  1. 
19;  Heb.  2.  11,  12,  17;  7.  5;  8.  11 ;  2  Co.  1.  1 ;  2.  13;  Rev.  6.  11 ;  19.  10;  22.  g. 

65.  God — is  used  of  any  one  (professedly)  mighty,  whether  truly  so 
or  not,  and  is  applied  not  only  to  the  true  God,  but  to  false  gods,  magistrates, 
judges,  augels,  prophets,  &c,  e.g. — Exod.  7.  1  ;  15.  n  ;  21.  6;  22.  8,  9 ;  32.  8,  22, 
31 ;  Deut.  10.  17  ;  Judg.  8.  33 ;  9.  9,  13 ;  13.  21,  22 ;  16.  23 ;  1  Sa.  2.  25 ;  28.  13 ; 
1  Ki.  1 1.  33  ;  2  Ki.  1.  2,  3 ;  19.  37 ;  Psa.  8.  5 ;  45.  6 ;  82.  1,  6 ;  97.  7,  9 ;  136.  2 ;  Matt. 
1.  23;  John  1.  1;  10.  33,  34,  35;  20.  28;  Acts  7.  40,  43,  59;  12.  22;  14.  n ;  17.  18, 
23 ;  19.  26 ;  20.  28  ;  28.  6 ;  Rom.  9.  5  ;  1  Co.  8.  5  ;  Phil.  3.  19 ;  2  Th.  2.  4  ;  1  Ti.  3. 
16 ;  Titus  2.  13  ;  Heb.  1.  8  ;  2  Pe.  1.  1 ;  1  Jo.  3.  16 ;  5.  20. 

66.  Spirit — is  used  of  God  himself,  or  the  Divine  Mind,  His  energy, 
influence,  gifts ;  of  the  vital  principle  of  animals,  and  cf  breath,  wind,  or  air  in 
motion,  &c,  e.g. — Gen.  1.  1 ;  3.  8;  6.  3,  17 ;  8.  1 ;  26.  35,  <fec. 

67.  Angel — is  used  of  a  messenger  (good  or  bad)  from  heaven  or 
from  men,  and  applied  to  spiritual  intelligences,  to  the  pillar  of  cloud  aud  fire, 
to  the  (pestilential)  winds,  to  priests,  prophets,  ministers,  disembodied  spirits, 
&c.,  e.g. — Gen.  16.  7 ;  32.  1,  3,  6 ;  Ex.  14.  19 ;  Judg  2.  1 ;  Psa.  97.  7 ;  104.  4 ;  Eccl.  5. 
6 ;  Hag.  1.  13 ;  Mai.  2.  7 ;  Matt.  4.  6;  11.  10;  13.  39,  41,  49;  16.27;  18.  10;  24.  31 ; 
Mark  1.  2 ;  13.  27;  Luke  7,  24,  27 ;  9.  52 ;  Acts  7.  53 ;  12.  15 ;  1  Co.  4.  9;  6.  3;  11. 
10;  Gal.  3.  19;  Col.  2.  18;  2  Thess.  1.  17;  1  Ti.  3.  16;  5.  21;  Heb.  1.  7;  Jas.  2.  25; 
1  Pe.  1.  12;  Rev.  1.  20;  2.  1,  3,  8,  12;  3.  1,  7,  14;  14.  6. 

68.  Prophet — is  used  of  one  who  (professedly)  announces  the  will 
or  celebrates  the  works  of  God,  whether  these  relate  to  things  past,  present,  or 
future,  aud  it  is  applied  to  patriarchs,  orators,  singers,  and  songstresses,  priests, 
and  preachers,  e.g. — Gen.  20.  7;  Ex.  7.  1;  15.  20;  .Num.  11.  29;  1  Sa.  10.  5;  Matt. 
10.  41 ;  23.  34;  Luke  4.  24;  7.  28 ;  John  4.  19;  Acts  n.  27;  13.  1 ;  15.  32;  1  Co.  12. 
28,  29;  14.  29,  32,  37 ;  Eph.  2.  20;  3.  5;  4.  11 ;  also  Matt.  7.  22 ;  26.  68;  Mark  14.  65; 
Luke  22.  64;  Acts  2.  17;  21.  19;  1  Co.  11.  4,  5;  13.  9;  14.  1-6,  24,  31,  39;  1  Ti.  1.  18; 
4.  14,  &c. 

69.  Nouns  are  frequently  (in  Hebrew  generally)  used  for  adjectives, 
e.g.— John  6.  63;  Rom.  3.  30;  Eph.  5.  8. 

70.  Active  verbs  frequently  express  only  an  attempt  to  do  the  action, 
e.g.— Deut.  28.  68  ;  Eze.  22.  13;  Matt.  10.  39;  17.  11 ;  John  1.  9,  29;  12.  32;  Rom. 
2.  4;  1  Co.  10.  33;  Gal.  5.  4;  Phil.  3.  15;  1  John  1.  10;  2.  26;  5.  4,  10;  Rev.  12.  9. 

(b)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  a  permission  of  it,  e.g. — Exod.  4. 
21;  5.  22;  2  Sa.  24.  1;  Jer.  4.  10.;  20.  7;  Eze.  14.  9;  Matt.  6.  13;  11.  25;  23.  32; 
Mark  5.  12;  Johu  13.  27;  Acts  13.  29;  Rom.  9.  18;  11.  7;  2  Th.  2.  n. 

{c)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  an  announcement  of  it,  e.g. — Gen. 

41.  13;  Lev.  13.  6,  13;  2  Ki.  2.  24;  Isa.  6.  10;  Jer.  1.  10;  Eze.  32.  2;  43.  3;  Hos. 
6.  5;  Matt.  16.  19;  John  8.  10,  n;  Acts  10.  15;  1  Co.  6.  2. 

(d)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  giving  an  occasion  for  it,  e.g. — Gen. 

42.  38;  1  Sa.  23.  7;  2  Sa.  16.  10;  1  Ki.  14.  16;  Jer.  38.  23;  Amos  3.  6;  Matt.  5.  32; 
10.  21;  Acts  1.  18;  Rom.  2.  5;  14.  15 ;  1  Co.  7.  16;  Jas.  5.  20. 

(e)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  a  direction  or  sanction  to  it,  e.g. — 
Gen.  3.  21 ;  John  4.  1,  &c. 

(/)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  a  promise  to  do  it,  e.g. — Ezek.  13. 
22,  &c. 

{g)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  a  continuation  of  it,  e.g. — 1  John  5. 
13,  &c. 

(h)  Active  verbs  frequently  express  what  is  done  by  a  deputy,  e.g. — Gen. 
16.  13,  &c. 

71.  Paronomasia,  or  a  play  upon  words,  to  excite  attention,  is  often 
observable  in  the  original,  e.g.—  Gen.  9.  6,  27 ;  18.  27 ;  27.  36 ;  2g.  34,  35 ;  31.  20,  52 ; 
32.  24;  41.  51,  52;  42.  35;  48.  22;  49.  8,  16,  19;  Exod.  23.  2;  32.  18;  Num.  5.  18; 
18.  2;  20.  1 ;  24.  21 ;  27.  14;  Judg.  10.  4 ;  15.  16;  Ruth  1.  20 ;  1  Sa.  1.  27,  28 ;  6.  14, 
15;  6.  18,  19;  25.  25 ;  2  Sa.  22.  11,  42;  1  Ki.  8.  66  (2  Ch.  7.  10);  iS.  21,  26;  Neh.  q. 
24 ;  Job  11.  12 ;  24.  18 ;  29.  16 ;  30.  3,  19 ;  38.  27 ;  Psa.  18.  7,  41 ;  25.  16 ;  32.  7 ;  39. 
11;  40.  3;  52.  6;  56.  8;  64.  4;  68.  28;  96.  5;  Prov.  6.23;  12.  21;  13.  12;  Eccl.  t.  2, 
13;  7-  i>  6;  Isa.  1.  23;  2.  19,  21 ;  5.  7;  7.  9;  10.  18,  30;  13.  4,  6  (Joel  1.  15);  14.  4; 
15.  8,  9;  17.  1,  2;  21.  2;  22.  18;  24.  3,  4,  17,  18;  25.  6;  29.  g;  30.  16;  32.  6,  7,  8,  19; 
41.  5;  54.  8;  56.  10 ;  57.  6;  61.  3;  65.  11,  12 ;  Jer.  1.  n,  12,  17 ;  2.  5;  3.  23 ;  6.  1,  28; 

L13 ;  10.  11 ;  19.  1,  2,  7;  22.  22;  23.  33,  36,  37,  38,  39;  30.  3;  48.  2 ;  49.  9;  51.  2, 20; 
am,  3.  47;  Eze.  7. 6;  12.  10;  24.  21 ;  25.  18 ;  39.  9;  Dan.  5.  26-28 ;  Hos.  2.  23;  8.  7; 
9.  15,  16;  10.  1;  12.  11;  13.  15;  Amos  5.  5;  8.  1,  2;  Jon.  4.  6;  Mic.  1.  10,  13,  14; 
Nah.  2.  10;  Hab.  2.  18;  Zeph.  1.  2;  2.  4;  3.  1;  Zech.  9.  3,  5;  Matt.  16.  18;  21.  41; 
Luke  21.  11 ;  John  2.  23 ;  Acts  8.  30;  24.  3 ;  Rom.  1.  20,  28,  29-31 ;  3.  3;  5. 19;  8.  23'; 
11.  17 ;  12.  3;  16.  2 ;  1  Co.  2.  13;  3.  17 ;  6.  2 ;  10.  12;  xi.  29,  31 ;  14.  10;  2  Co.  3. 
2;  4.  8 ;  5.  4,  21  ;  8.  22 ;  9.  8;  10.  3 ;  Gal.  4.  17;  5.  7 ;  Eph.  1.  23;  3.  14,  19;  Phil. 
1.  4;  3.  2,  12;  aJTh.  3.  11;  1  Ti.  1.  8;  2  Ti.  3.  4;  4.  7;  Thin,  n;  3  John  7. 


10550 


c 


= 


lyHrWwwvw 


BBEHBl 


'■•V—-.'- 


•-"-•' 


||£f 


•■•;■■   N 


sift 


■smea&» 


;■■■■-.:•.. 


SSSBB1 


RMkw 


mSm> 


as**!? 


